pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLOS One1932-6203PLOSPMC12306744PMC12306744.112306744123067444072934910.1371/journal.pone.0329025PONE-D-25-112781Research ArticleMedicine and Health SciencesGastroenterology and HepatologyGastrointestinal CancersMedicine and Health SciencesClinical MedicineSigns and SymptomsHemorrhageMedicine and Health SciencesVascular MedicineHemorrhageMedicine and Health SciencesVascular MedicineThromboembolismVenous ThromboembolismMedicine and Health SciencesNephrologyRenal CancerMedicine and Health SciencesEpidemiologyMedical Risk FactorsCancer Risk FactorsMedicine and Health SciencesOncologyCancer Risk FactorsMedicine and Health SciencesPharmaceuticsDrug TherapyCardiovascular TherapyAnticoagulant TherapyMedicine and Health SciencesOncologyCancers and NeoplasmsColorectal CancerMedicine and Health SciencesOncologyCancer TreatmentRisk of recurrence and bleeding in patients with cancer-associated venous thromboembolism in the direct oral anticoagulants era: Findings from the TULIPE registry
Recurrence and bleeding risks in cancer-related VTE with DOACsIshizukaYukiFormal analysisInvestigationVisualizationWriting – original draft https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9759-1008TajiriKazukoConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationWriting – review & editing NaitoHiroyukiData curationInvestigationMethodologyWriting – review & editing MurataMomokoData curationInvestigationWriting – review & editing HattoriMasayukiFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1901-7112Machino-OhtsukaTomokoSupervisionWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3794-899XIshizuTomokoSupervisionWriting – review & editing 1
Department of Cardiology, Tokyo Metropolitan Bokutoh Hospital, Tokyo, Japan2
Department of Cardiology, Institute of Medicine, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan3
Department of Cardiology, National Cancer Center Hospital East, Kashiwa, Japan4
Tsukuba Life Science Innovation Program (T-LSI), School of Integrative and Global Majors (SIGMA), University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan5
Clinical Laboratory, Hidaka Hospital, Takasaki, Japan6
Department of Clinical Laboratories, National Cancer Center Hospital East, Kashiwa, JapanBhaskarSonuEditor , ].
Managing cancer-associated VTE presents significant clinical challenges, including elevated bleeding risk, patient frailty, and potential drug–drug interactions. Recent guidelines recommend direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs) as the first-line anticoagulant therapy for CAT, except in cases involving luminal gastrointestinal and genitourinary cancers [ – ]. However, these recommendations are primarily based on randomized clinical trials (RCTs) conducted in highly selected patient populations under controlled conditions, and may not accurately represent real-world clinical practice. Although a recent large-scale observational study from the DOAC era found that patients with CAT had a higher risk of major bleeding but no increased long-term risk of VTE recurrence after adjusting for the competing risk of death [ ], real-world data on CAT in the DOAC era remain limited. In particular, existing studies, such as the COMMAND VTE Registry and COMMAND VTE Registry-2, primarily focused on symptomatic VTE and did not include asymptomatic DVT [ , ], which is increasingly detected through routine ultrasonography in patients with cancer. However, previous studies have shown that asymptomatic DVT is associated with poor survival in ambulatory patients with cancer [ ], and even asymptomatic isolated distal DVT carries a non-negligible risk of recurrence, especially after discontinuation of anticoagulation therapy [ ]. These findings underscore the clinical importance of asymptomatic DVT in the field of oncology. Therefore, it is essential to evaluate both symptomatic and asymptomatic DVT in real-world practice to better understand its prognostic implications and inform anticoagulation decisions in patients with cancer.
This study aimed to evaluate the clinical characteristics and long-term outcomes of patients with cancer- and non-cancer-associated VTE in real-world settings, including both symptomatic and asymptomatic patients. The primary outcomes of this study were the incidence of VTE recurrence, major bleeding, and overall survival, each of which was compared between the active cancer and non-cancer groups. Secondary outcomes included the impact of anticoagulation discontinuation, particularly because of bleeding, VTE recurrence, major bleeding, overall survival, and cancer-type-specific risks of VTE recurrence and major bleeding. These were evaluated using multivariable Fine–Gray and Cox proportional hazards models, as appropriate.

## Materials and methods

## Study design
The Tsukuba Ultrasound for Lower-Extremity Deep Vein Thrombosis (TULIPE) registry is a single-center, retrospective cohort study that included consecutive patients who underwent lower-extremity venous ultrasound between September 1, 2011, and August 31, 2020, at the University of Tsukuba Hospital, a tertiary academic referral center in Japan. To facilitate a structured analysis, data extracted from the TULIPE registry were systematically categorized into predefined domains, including demographics, clinical characteristics, laboratory investigations, treatment information (e.g., anticoagulant type and duration), and clinical outcomes (e.g., VTE recurrence, major bleeding, and overall survival). Demographic data included age, sex, and body mass index (BMI). The clinical characteristics included comorbidities (e.g., hypertension and diabetes), type and location of DVT (proximal or distal), presence of pulmonary embolism (PE), cancer type, and metastatic status. Laboratory findings included hemoglobin, platelet count, D-dimer, and C-reactive protein (CRP) levels, which were selected based on prior evidence of their relevance to VTE recurrence and bleeding risk [ , ]. Treatment-related variables included the type of anticoagulant used (e.g., DOACs or warfarin), duration of therapy, and reasons for discontinuation. Anticoagulation therapy beyond the acute phase was defined as continuation beyond 10 days after VTE diagnosis, in accordance with the literature [ ]. The study was conducted in accordance with the principles outlined in the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the Institutional Review Board of the University of Tsukuba Hospital (approval number: R02-183). The requirement for informed consent was waived owing to the retrospective nature of the study. We did not have access to information that could identify the individual participants during or after data collection. We accessed the data for research purposes on January 7, 2021, and October 2, 2022.

## Study population
A total of 17,188 lower-extremity venous ultrasound examinations were performed in the TULIPE registry, involving 10,303 patients. As this study aimed to investigate VTE recurrence and bleeding events in the DOAC era, 4,234 examinations were excluded because the ultrasound was performed before January 1, 2015. Additional exclusion criteria were patients without DVT, those undergoing ultrasonography for DVT follow-up, and those evaluated for lower-extremity varicose veins. The final study cohort comprised 2,281 patients who were divided into two groups based on the presence or absence of cancer at the time of VTE diagnosis: 1,152 patients with active cancer (cancer group) and 1,129 patients without active cancer (non-cancer group) ( ). Our registry did not impose an age limit on patient registration; patients aged 3–101 years were enrolled. However, only patients aged 20–98 years met the inclusion criteria. Consequently, all the eligible patients were adults. The cancer group was defined as patients with a cancer diagnosis within 6 months prior to ultrasound; recurrent, regionally advanced, or metastatic cancer; cancer treatment within the previous 6 months; or hematologic cancer not in complete remission (as previously described) [ ].
 

## Clinical outcomes
The primary outcomes were recurrent VTE, major bleeding, and overall survival. Recurrent VTE was defined as new-onset lower-extremity venous thrombosis, PE, or Trousseau syndrome confirmed by imaging (e.g., venous ultrasound or contrast-enhanced computed tomography [CT]), regardless of symptoms, based on previously published criteria [ ]. Major bleeding was defined according to the International Society on Thrombosis and Hemostasis [ , , ], including hemoglobin loss >2 g/dL, transfusion of more than 2 units of blood, bleeding in critical sites (intracranial, intraspinal, intraocular, pericardial, intraarticular, intramuscular with compartment syndrome, and retroperitoneal), and bleeding that required surgical intervention or led to death. Discontinuation of anticoagulation therapy was defined as an interruption of therapy for > 14 days. Overall survival (OS) was defined as the number of days from the DVT diagnosis to death from any cause. For patients who were transferred to other hospitals or received home-based care, we attempted to collect outcome data by obtaining referral letters or discharge summaries from the treatment institutions.

## Statistical analysis
Continuous variables were assessed for normal distribution using the Shapiro–Wilk test and are presented as mean ± standard deviation for normally distributed data or median (interquartile range [IQR]) for non-normally distributed data. Comparisons were made using one-way analysis of variance or Kruskal–Wallis test, as appropriate. Categorical variables are presented as numbers or percentages, and comparisons were performed using the chi-square test or Fisher’s exact test, as appropriate. The Kaplan–Meier method was used to estimate the cumulative incidence, and differences between groups were evaluated using the log-rank test. The Cox proportional hazards model was used to estimate the hazard ratios (HRs) and corresponding 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for patients with cancer compared to those without. Given the potential impact of mortality as a competing risk, the Fine–Gray subdistribution hazard model was applied to estimate the subdistribution hazard ratios (sHRs) for VTE recurrence and major bleeding. In these models, death from other causes was treated as a competing event, whereas in the Cox model, it was treated as a censored event for comparison. Multivariate models were adjusted for age, sex, BMI, comorbidities as a whole, baseline PE, hemoglobin level, anticoagulation beyond the acute phase, and discontinuation of anticoagulant therapy. Notably, discontinuation was excluded from the adjustment in the major bleeding model because bleeding events occurring after discontinuation were not systematically captured in our registry. Subgroup analyses for VTE recurrence and major bleeding were conducted using Fine–Gray subdistribution hazard models, adjusting for the same covariates in the primary analyses. To evaluate the impact of VTE recurrence and major bleeding on OS, additional subgroup analyses were performed using Cox proportional hazards models, incorporating VTE recurrence or major bleeding as covariates along with the previously described variables. All statistical analyses were conducted using R version 4.3.2 (R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria; www.r-project.org). All P-values were two-tailed, and statistical significance was defined as P < 0.05. The proportion of missing data was very low (<5%) across all assessed variables: BMI (1.4%), hemoglobin level (0.4%), platelet count (0.5%), D-dimer level (1.0%), and CRP level (0.7%). To address these missing values, multiple imputations were performed using chained equations (MICE) to generate five imputed datasets.

## Results

## Baseline characteristics

## Demographic data.
The patient characteristics are summarized in . Several significant differences were observed between the cancer and non-cancer groups. Patients in the cancer group were younger (71 years vs. 72 years, P = 0.018) and had a lower BMI (22.0 kg/m2 vs. 22.8 kg/m2, P < 0.001).
 

## Clinical data.
The cancer group had lower hemoglobin levels (10.7 g/dL vs. 11.1 g/dL, P < 0.001), and higher CRP levels (1.0 mg/dL vs. 0.8 mg/dL, P = 0.002) compared with the non-cancer group. The prevalence of comorbidities, including hypertension (45.7% vs. 55.4%, P < 0.001), dyslipidemia (25.7% vs. 33.1%, P < 0.001), diabetes mellitus (19.0% vs. 25.6%, P < 0.001), and history of VTE (4.1% vs. 8.0%, P < 0.001), was lower in the cancer group. The incidence of PE was higher in the cancer group than in the non-cancer group (10.9% vs. 6.0%, P < 0.001). However, PE severity was lower in the cancer group, as indicated by reduced rates of cardiac arrest or collapse (8.7% vs. 35.3%, P < 0.001), shock, and hypoxemia (19.0% vs. 32.4%, P = 0.038). No significant difference was observed in the DVT location between the two groups, with distal DVT being the most common presentation.
 shows the characteristics of the patients in the cancer group. Cervical or uterine cancer was the most frequently observed malignancy (15.5%), followed by ovarian or peritoneal cancer (10.8%); kidney, ureter, or bladder cancer (9.7%); central nervous system (CNS) cancer (9.5%); and lung cancer (9.5%). Among the patients with cancer, 33.9% had distant metastases.
 

## Treatment strategies.
Anticoagulation strategies varied significantly between the two groups ( ). Initial parenteral anticoagulation therapy was administered more frequently in the cancer group than in the non-cancer group (26.0% vs. 21.9%, P = 0.023). Anticoagulation therapy beyond the acute phase was also more frequently implemented in patients with cancer than in those without (78.8% vs. 70.6%, P < 0.001). Warfarin use was more frequent in the non-cancer group (7.3% vs. 18.7%, P < 0.001), whereas DOACs were more commonly prescribed in the cancer group (86.6% vs. 75.8%, P < 0.001). The trends in anticoagulant use during the study period are presented in . In both the cancer and non-cancer groups, the percentage of DOAC prescriptions increased over time, whereas the percentage of prescriptions for warfarin and other anticoagulants decreased. Among patients receiving anticoagulation therapy beyond the acute phase, the cumulative discontinuation rates were similar between the two groups (P = 0.444) ( ). However, discontinuation because of bleeding events was significantly more frequent in the cancer group (28.5% vs. 13.9%, P < 0.001) ( ). There was no significant difference in the annual rate of anticoagulation therapy discontinuation during the study period ( ).
 

## Clinical outcomes

## VTE recurrence.
During a median follow-up of 594 days (IQR: 117–1,125), VTE recurrence occurred in 132 (11.5%) and 60 (5.3%) patients in the cancer and non-cancer groups, respectively (P < 0.001) ( ). As illustrated in , the cumulative incidence of recurrent VTE was significantly higher in the cancer group at 1 (8.6% vs. 3.7%), 3 (18% vs. 6.7%), and 5 years (25% vs. 10%) (log-rank P < 0.001). A similar trend was observed in the analysis restricted to patients who received anticoagulation therapy ( ). We further stratified the patients into three groups—non-cancer, cancer without distant metastasis, and cancer with distant metastasis—to explore the differences in clinical outcomes. We found that VTE recurrence was lowest in the non-cancer group, with no significant differences between the cancer groups with and without metastasis ( ). We evaluated the year-by-year trends in VTE recurrence ( ). In the cancer group, the cumulative incidence of VTE recurrence varied significantly by year, with notably higher recurrence rates observed in the latter part of the study period (2019–2020). In contrast, no significant differences in VTE recurrence by year were observed in the non-cancer group. To explore the factors contributing to these annual differences within the cancer group, we conducted Kaplan–Meier analyses, stratifying cases into symptomatic and asymptomatic VTE recurrences ( ). The results showed no significant variation by year in symptomatic VTE recurrence ( ); however, significant differences were noted in asymptomatic VTE recurrence, with a marked increase from 2019 to 2020 ( ). The precise reason for the increase in asymptomatic VTE recurrence during the latter part of the study period remains unclear. One plausible explanation is the change in follow-up practices after DVT diagnosis, leading to more frequent use of lower limb ultrasonography at earlier time points. compares the number of days from the initial DVT diagnosis to the first post-diagnosis ultrasonography, which was evaluated annually. The median interval was notably shortened in 2019 and 2020, suggesting that earlier follow-up may have contributed to the increased detection of asymptomatic VTE in these years.
 Cancer was significantly associated with an increased risk of VTE recurrence (HR: 2.61; 95% CI: 1.93–3.55; P < 0.001) ( ). Considering that mortality may occur before VTE recurrence, mortality was accounted for using the Fine–Gray subdistribution hazard model. After adjusting for confounders, cancer remained an independent predictor of VTE recurrence (adjusted sHR: 2.00; 95% CI: 1.46–2.74; P < 0.001) ( ). For the sensitivity analysis, we applied a Cox proportional hazards model to treat death as a censored event. Cancer remained significantly associated with VTE recurrence (adjusted HR: 2.47; 95% CI: 1.78–3.42; P < 0.001), supporting the robustness of the findings obtained from the Fine–Gray model.
 Subgroup analyses using multivariable Fine–Gray models showed a consistent trend toward a higher risk of VTE recurrence in patients with cancer than in those without cancer ( ). Further stratification by cancer type revealed that hematological malignancies, head/neck, cervical/uterine, ovarian/peritoneal, pancreatic, colorectal, and CNS cancers were significantly associated with a higher risk of VTE recurrence ( ). Among patients in the cancer group, those who discontinued anticoagulation therapy because of bleeding events had a significantly higher risk of recurrent VTE than those who discontinued anticoagulation therapy for other reasons (P < 0.001) ( ). Conversely, in the non-cancer group, there was no significant difference in VTE recurrence between those who discontinued treatment because of bleeding events and those who discontinued treatment for other reasons (P = 0.716) ( ).
 

## Major bleeding.
During the follow-up period, 142 patients (12.3%) in the cancer group experienced major bleeding events compared with 48 patients (4.3%) in the non-cancer group (P < 0.001) ( ). No temporal differences were observed in major bleeding events between the groups ( ). We further stratified the patients into three groups—non-cancer, cancer without distant metastasis, and cancer with distant metastasis—to explore differences in clinical outcomes. Major bleeding events occurred most frequently in patients with cancer with distant metastasis, followed by patients with cancer without metastasis and patients without cancer ( ). The gastrointestinal tract was the most common site of major bleeding in both groups, whereas the urinary tract was a more frequent site of major bleeding in the cancer group compared to the non-cancer group ( ). The cumulative incidence of major bleeding was significantly higher in the cancer group at 1 (15% vs. 4.8%), 3 (24% vs. 7.2%), and 5 years (30% vs. 9.6%) (log-rank P < 0.001) ( ). Cancer was significantly associated with a greater risk of major bleeding (HR: 3.21; 95% CI: 2.31–4.47; P < 0.001) ( ). Even after adjusting for confounders and considering the competing risk of all-cause death, cancer remained an independent predictor of major bleeding (adjusted sHR: 2.69; 95% CI: 1.90–3.81; P < 0.001), as determined by a Fine–Gray competing risk regression model ( ). For sensitivity analysis, we applied a Cox proportional hazards model to treat death as a censored event. Cancer remained significantly associated with major bleeding risk (adjusted HR: 2.71; 95% CI: 1.52–3.83; P < 0.001), supporting the results obtained from the Fine–Gray model.
 Subgroup analyses using multivariable Fine–Gray models showed a consistent trend toward a higher risk of major bleeding events in patients with cancer than in patients without cancer ( ). Further stratification according to cancer type revealed that pancreatic, cervical/uterine, colorectal, kidney/ureter/bladder, and ovarian/peritoneal cancers were associated with a higher risk of major bleeding ( ).
 

## Overall survival.
During the follow-up period, 447 patients (38.8%) in the cancer group died compared with 70 patients (6.2%) in the non-cancer group (P < 0.001). We also evaluated year-by-year trends in OS and found no temporal differences in either group ( ). The causes of death are detailed in , with cancer progression being the most common cause in the cancer group (34.8%). The incidence of fatal PE was one in both the groups. Notably, six fatal bleeding events occurred in the active cancer group, whereas none occurred in the non-cancer group. These included intracranial hemorrhage (n = 2), gastrointestinal bleeding (n = 2), tumor-associated intraperitoneal bleeding (n = 1), and traumatic head injury (n = 1); all patients receiving anticoagulation at the time of death. Survival rates were significantly lower in the cancer group than in the non-cancer group at 1 (70% vs. 96%), 3 (54% vs. 92%), and 5 years (47% vs. 90%) (log-rank P < 0.001) ( ). Interestingly, in both groups, patients who experienced major bleeding had significantly lower survival rates than those who did not. The estimated 5-year survival probability was 24% in the cancer group with major bleeding compared to 50% in those without major bleeding (P < 0.001), and 56% in the non-cancer group with major bleeding compared to 91% in those without (P < 0.001) ( ). We further investigated the impact of VTE recurrence and major bleeding on the OS of patients with and without cancer ( ). Among the cancer group, major bleeding was significantly associated with poorer survival (adjusted HR: 1.71; 95% CI: 1.33–2.19; P < 0.001), whereas VTE recurrence was not (adjusted HR: 1.06; 95% CI: 0.80–1.40; P = 0.696). In contrast, in the non-cancer group, both VTE recurrence (adjusted HR: 2.42; 95% CI: 1.16–5.05; P = 0.020), and major bleeding (adjusted HR: 5.24; 95% CI: 2.72–10.1; P = 0.043) were significantly associated with worse survival. Furthermore, we performed stratified analyses according to the cancer type. VTE recurrence was significantly associated with decreased survival in ovarian/peritoneal cancer (adjusted HR: 2.91; 95% CI: 1.52–5.59; P < 0.001), and major bleeding was strongly associated with poorer survival in kidney/ureter/bladder cancer (adjusted HR: 2.77; 95% CI: 1.07–7.19; P = 0.037), and upper gastrointestinal tract cancer (adjusted HR: 3.88; 95% CI: 1.08–13.9; P = 0.039) ( ).
 

## Discussion
The main findings of this study were as follows: (1) Patients with cancer-associated VTE had a significantly higher risk of VTE recurrence and major bleeding than those without cancer, even after adjusting for confounders and accounting for the competing risk of all-cause mortality; (2) OS was worse in VTE patients with cancer compared to those without cancer; (3) The discontinuation rate of anticoagulation therapy during follow-up was similar between the cancer and non-cancer groups; however, the reasons for discontinuation differed, with a higher proportion of discontinuations because of bleeding in the cancer group; (4) Among patients in the cancer group, those who discontinued anticoagulation because of bleeding had a significantly higher risk of recurrent VTE compared to those who discontinued for other reasons; (5) VTE patients with or without cancer who experienced major bleeding had poorer OS.
In this study, we demonstrated that even in the DOAC era, patients with cancer remain at a higher risk for VTE recurrence than patients without cancer, a finding consistent with previous reports from the warfarin era [ , – ]. However, real-world data on CAT use in the context of DOAC use remain limited. A recent large-scale registry study by Chatani et al. reported that the unadjusted risk of VTE recurrence is slightly higher in patients with cancer. However, after adjusting for confounders and accounting for competing mortality risks, the long-term recurrence risk was similar between patients with and without cancer [ ]. This contradicts our findings, and the discrepancy may stem from the differences in the patient selection criteria between the two studies. Chatani et al.‘s study included only patients with acute symptomatic VTE, whereas our study enrolled patients diagnosed with DVT using ultrasonography, including asymptomatic patients [ ]. Consequently, our cohort included fewer cases of PE and proximal DVT than other studies. Moreover, ultrasound in patients without cancer was likely performed based on symptoms and not routine screening, possibly leading to more clinically relevant VTE. Furthermore, in the study by Chatani et al. [ ], patients were classified into cancer and non-cancer groups solely based on the presence of active cancer at the time of VTE diagnosis. Therefore, the non-cancer group likely included patients without any history of malignancy and those with a prior history of non-active cancer. In contrast, our non-cancer group was defined strictly as patients without a known history of cancer. This difference in group definitions may have influenced the baseline characteristics and clinical outcomes, and should be considered when comparing the two studies.
Furthermore, in our registry, 75% of patients continued anticoagulation therapy beyond the acute phase, whereas in Chatani et al.’s study, this proportion was higher (92%). Nevertheless, our subgroup analysis restricted to patients who received anticoagulation therapy still showed a higher recurrence rate of VTE in patients with cancer. Although our study focused on the DOAC era, 9.4% of the patients were still treated with warfarin. Notably, this proportion is consistent with real-world data from the COMMAND VTE Registry-2, which reported that 10.9% of patients with cancer-associated VTE received warfarin during the same period (2015–2020) [ ]. Therefore, we believe that our treatment distribution accurately reflects the contemporary prescription patterns in Japan. However, the inclusion of a minority of warfarin users may limit the generalizability of our findings to a purely DOAC–treated population. In this context, our results support the view that patients with cancer remain at an increased risk of VTE recurrence, regardless of the anticoagulant type. These findings highlight the need for continued vigilance in managing VTE recurrence in patients with cancer, even in the era of DOAC therapy.
This study also demonstrated a higher risk of major bleeding in patients with cancer than in those without cancer, which is consistent with previous findings from both the warfarin and DOAC eras [ , , , , , ]. Although cancer-related deaths accounted for the majority of mortalities in the active cancer group, six patients experienced fatal bleeding during anticoagulation therapy. These included intracranial hemorrhage, gastrointestinal bleeding, and tumor-associated vascular rupture. These findings highlight the complex clinical dilemma of balancing thrombosis and bleeding risks in patients with advanced malignancy and underscore the importance of individualized anticoagulation strategies in this vulnerable population. Current guidelines recommend the use of low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) or DOACs to manage CAT [ – ]. Previous studies comparing DOACs with LMWH have shown that DOACs are not inferior to dalteparin in preventing VTE recurrence in patients with cancer, without a significantly increased risk of major bleeding [ , – ]. However, caution is advised in patients with gastrointestinal and urological cancers because of the increased bleeding risk associated with DOAC therapy. In this study, patients with gynecological, gastrointestinal, and urological cancers had a particularly high-risk of bleeding, with a significantly higher incidence of urinary tract bleeding in the cancer group than in the non-cancer group. In cases of malignant tumors in the pelvic region, radiotherapy can lead to mucosal damage and the development of hemorrhagic cystitis (HC). Radiation-induced HC primarily results from bladder mucosal injury, leading to edema and inflammation. Although most cases resolve spontaneously with a favorable prognosis, severe cases may require treatment interruption [ ]. The incidence of post-radiotherapy HC in patients with prostate cancer was 11.1%, with 52% of patients requiring blood transfusions. Fatal outcomes have also been reported [ ]. Similarly, pelvic irradiation for gynecological cancers poses a significant risk of HC, with severe cases leading to substantial therapeutic challenges, prolonged hospitalization, or mortality [ ]. Given that pelvic radiotherapy is a recognized risk factor for HC, clinicians must carefully evaluate bleeding risk before initiating anticoagulant therapy. To minimize the risk of severe hemorrhagic complications, patients with cancer receiving anticoagulants and scheduled for pelvic irradiation should undergo a thorough bleeding risk assessment, including the use of validated bleeding risk scores [ ]. However, in our retrospective study, the application of validated bleeding risk scores, such as the HAS-BLED, was not feasible owing to missing data.
In this study, the discontinuation rate of anticoagulation therapy at one year was high, although no significant difference was observed between the cancer and non-cancer groups (52% vs. 53%, P = 0.444). However, these findings should be interpreted with caution. In the non-cancer group, discontinuation at 3–6 months may be appropriate and consistent with the clinical guidelines for provoked VTE. In contrast, CAT often requires extended or indefinite anticoagulation therapy because of ongoing risk factors. Therefore, comparable discontinuation rates may reflect differences in treatment strategies, rather than true similarities in early termination. This limitation should be considered when interpreting these findings. In addition, the reasons for discontinuation varied significantly, with a higher proportion of discontinuations owing to bleeding in the cancer group than in the non-cancer group (29% vs. 14%, P < 0.001), which is consistent with previous findings from both the warfarin and DOAC eras [ , ]. This finding underscores the need for improved bleeding risk stratification in patients with cancer receiving anticoagulation therapy. Recent studies have shown that pharmacokinetic interactions between DOACs and anticancer agents exist, but most are mild, and treatment modifications are generally recommended only in clinically significant cases [ ]. In contrast, certain anticancer drugs have been associated with an increased risk of bleeding when co-administered with DOACs [ ], highlighting the importance of individualized assessment that considers factors such as renal dysfunction, weight loss, potential drug–drug interactions with anticancer agents, and appropriate dose adjustment in patients with cancer. Notably, patients with cancer who discontinued anticoagulation therapy owing to bleeding had a significantly higher risk of recurrent VTE than those who discontinued anticoagulation therapy for other reasons; this pattern was not observed in patients without cancer. These findings suggest the presence of shared risk factors for VTE recurrence and bleeding events in patients with cancer. The risk of bleeding may increase as cancer progresses. Previous studies examining risk factors for major bleeding in patients with VTE have identified terminal cancer and a life expectancy of ≤ 6 months as independent predictors of major bleeding [ , , ]. In contrast, patients with terminal cancer also have an elevated risk of thrombosis because of disease progression, reduced mobility, dehydration, and infection [ ]. Therefore, patients who discontinue anticoagulation therapy because of bleeding should be closely monitored to recognize their heightened vulnerability to VTE recurrence. In such cases, alternative management strategies, such as resuming anticoagulation with a reduced DOAC dose or considering non-pharmacological interventions, such as inferior vena cava filters, may be required. Clinicians should carefully consider each patient’s underlying condition, renal function, personal preferences, and lifestyle when determining the most appropriate treatment approach [ ].
Our study demonstrated that patients who discontinued anticoagulants because of bleeding experienced frequent VTE recurrence, and that those who had major bleeding events had poorer OS. Additionally, a recent RCT (CANVAS trial), which aimed to address the variability in drug selection and included flexible enrolment criteria, reported a high incidence of major bleeding, with rates of 5.2% in the DOAC group and 5.6% in the LMWH group [ ]. Current guidelines recommend a minimum of 6 months of anticoagulation for CAT, with extended therapy advised in the presence of persistent risk factors, such as active cancer, metastasis, or ongoing chemotherapy [ ]. As outlined in the 2023 ASCO guideline, LMWH or direct oral factor Xa inhibitors are recommended for the treatment of CAT [ ]. However, careful assessment of the bleeding risk is essential in patients with gastrointestinal or genitourinary malignancies. Clinicians are increasingly challenged to maintain effective anticoagulation therapy while minimizing bleeding complications in high-risk populations.
Therefore, the development of anticoagulants with a lower bleeding risk and improved adherence is essential. Factor XI (FXI) has emerged as a promising therapeutic target for CAT because it plays a crucial role in clot formation and has a minimal impact on overall coagulation and hemostasis [ , ]. Currently, FXI inhibitors are being investigated in various clinical settings, including total knee arthroplasty, atrial fibrillation, non-cardioembolic stroke, end-stage renal disease, myocardial infarction, coronavirus disease 2019, and cancer-associated VTE [ ]. For the treatment of cancer-associated VTE, two ongoing phase III multicenter randomized controlled trials (RCTs) have evaluated abelacimab, a fully human monoclonal antibody: the ASTER trial (comparing abelacimab to apixaban; NCT05171049) and the MAGNOLIA trial (comparing abelacimab to dalteparin; NCT05171075). The results of these trials may help address the unmet needs in the current management of CAT.

## Study strength and limitation
This study had several notable strengths. First, it leveraged a large real-world cohort from a tertiary academic center in Japan to provide a contemporary data on cancer-associated VTE during the DOAC era. Second, unlike previous studies that primarily focused on symptomatic VTE, our cohort included both symptomatic and asymptomatic patients, particularly those with isolated distal DVT, which is frequently encountered in oncology settings. Third, we used competing risk models (Fine–Gray) to adjust for the high mortality in patients with cancer, improving the accuracy of VTE and bleeding risk estimates. Fourth, we analyzed the reasons for anticoagulant discontinuation in detail and identified bleeding-related discontinuation as a key predictor of VTE recurrence. Finally, cancer-type–specific risks for both VTE recurrence and major bleeding were explored, offering insights into personalized anticoagulation strategies in patients with cancer.
This study had some limitations. First, as a single-center study, the prevalence of the disease may have been influenced by regional and institutional factors, potentially introducing a bias. Additionally, the retrospective nature of our study and the inclusion of both symptomatic and asymptomatic DVT cases, some of which were detected incidentally during routine ultrasonography, may have limited the generalizability of our findings to populations with acute symptomatic VTE. Furthermore, owing to the retrospective design, follow-up practices after the initial DVT diagnosis were at the discretion of individual physicians, and no standardized protocol was employed, which may have influenced the outcomes of this study. Second, the implementation and duration of anticoagulation therapy were determined at the discretion of the treating physicians, indicating that individual clinical judgment and experience may have affected the outcomes. Third, although this study was conducted in the post-DOAC era, 9.4% of the overall cohort received warfarin, which may have affected the generalizability of the findings. Fourth, as the study included patients diagnosed with DVT using ultrasonography, it included asymptomatic cases and a relatively high proportion of patients with isolated distal DVT. Fifth, although we obtained referral letters and discharge summaries from patients who experienced major clinical events outside our institution, we did not conduct telephone- or letter-based follow-ups. This may have resulted in the incomplete ascertainment of clinical outcomes. Finally, although we collected information on cancer type and the presence or absence of distant metastasis at baseline, we did not have access to detailed information regarding cancer stage or treatment. Consequently, we were unable to assess the influence of these factors on clinical outcomes.

## Conclusion
A real-world registry study in the DOAC era demonstrated a higher risk of VTE recurrence and major bleeding in patients with active cancer than in those without cancer, highlighting that these remain significant clinical challenges. Targeted efforts are necessary to mitigate the risks of VTE recurrence and bleeding, particularly in patients with cancer. These findings underscore the need for novel anticoagulant agents with improved safety profiles for CAT management.

## Supporting information
S1 Fig

## Annual trends in anticoagulation therapy beyond the acute phase.
Cancer (A) and non-cancer (B) groups. DOAC, direct oral anticoagulant; LMWH, low-molecularweight heparin; UFH, unfractionated heparin.
(TIF)
S2 Fig

## Kaplan–Meier curves for the discontinuation of anticoagulation therapy.
(TIF)
S3 Fig

## Kaplan–Meier curves for the discontinuation of anticoagulation therapy by year.
Cancer (A) and non-cancer (B) groups.
(TIF)
S4 Fig

## Kaplan–Meier curves for VTE recurrence among patients receiving anticoagulation therapy.
VTE, venous thromboembolism.
(TIF)
S5 Fig

## Kaplan–Meier curves for VTE recurrence in non-cancer, cancer with distant metastasis, and cancer without distant metastasis.
VTE, venous thromboembolism.
(TIF)
S6 Fig

## Kaplan–Meier curves for VTE recurrence by year.
Cancer (A) and non-cancer (B) groups. VTE, venous thromboembolism.
(TIF)
S7 Fig

## Kaplan–Meier curves for VTE recurrence by year in the cancer group.
Symptomatic (A) and asymptomatic (B) VTE. VTE, venous thromboembolism.
(TIF)
S8 Fig

## Timing of follow-up venous ultrasound after the initial DVT diagnosis.
DVT, deep vein thrombosis.
(TIF)
S9 Fig

## Multivariable Fine–Gray model for VTE recurrence risk by cancer type.
The Fine–Gray models were adjusted for age, sex, body mass index, comorbidities as a whole, baseline pulmonary embolism, hemoglobin level, anticoagulation beyond the acute phase, and discontinuation of anticoagulants. CI, confidence interval; CNS, central nervous system; sHR, subdistribution hazard ratio; UGI, upper gastrointestinal; VTE, venous thromboembolism.
(TIF)
S10 Fig

## Kaplan–Meier event curves for VTE recurrence based on the reason for anticoagulation discontinuation.
Cancer (A) and non-cancer (B) groups. VTE, venous thromboembolism.
(TIF)
S11 Fig

## Kaplan–Meier curves for major bleeding by year.
Cancer (A) and non-cancer (B) groups.
(TIF)
S12 Fig

## Kaplan–Meier curves for major bleeding in non-cancer, cancer with distant metastasis, and cancer without distant metastasis.
(TIF)
S13 Fig

## Multivariable Fine–Gray model for major bleeding risk by cancer type.
The Cox models were adjusted for age, sex, body mass index, comorbidities as a whole, baseline pulmonary embolism, hemoglobin level, and anticoagulation beyond the acute phase. CI, confidence interval; CNS, central nervous system; HR, hazard ratio; UGI, upper gastrointestinal.
(TIF)
S14 Fig

## Kaplan–Meier curves for overall survival by year.
Cancer (A) and non-cancer (B) groups.
(TIF)
S15 Fig

## Kaplan–Meier curves for overall survival based on major bleeding events.
Cancer (A) and non-cancer (B) groups.
(TIF)
S16 Fig

## Impact of VTE recurrence and major bleeding on overall survival in patients with and without cancer.
The Cox models were adjusted for age, sex, body mass index, comorbidities as a whole, baseline pulmonary embolism, hemoglobin level, anticoagulation beyond the acute phase, and discontinuation of anticoagulants, with either VTE recurrence or major bleeding included as an additional covariate in each model. CI, confidence interval; HR, hazard ratio; VTE, venous thromboembolism.
(TIF)
S17 Fig

## Impact of VTE recurrence and major bleeding on overall survival in patients with cancer, stratified by cancer type.
The Cox models were adjusted for age, sex, body mass index, comorbidities as a whole, baseline pulmonary embolism, hemoglobin level, anticoagulation beyond the acute phase, and discontinuation of anticoagulants, with either VTE recurrence or major bleeding included as an additional covariate in each model. CI, confidence interval; CNS, central nervous system; HR, hazard ratio; UGI, upper gastrointestinal; VTE, venous thromboembolism.
(TIF)

The authors would like to thank Editage (www.editage.jp) for the English language editing.
 10.1371/journal.pone.0329025.r001Decision Letter 0
BhaskarSonuAcademic Editor© 2025 Sonu Bhaskar2025Sonu Bhaskarhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0Dear Dr. Tajiri,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
==============================
ACADEMIC EDITOR:

Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS One. This study addresses an important clinical issue in cancer-associated thrombosis (CAT) management by providing real-world data on the risks of VTE recurrence and bleeding in the DOAC era. While interesting, based on review of your work and taking into account the feedback from reviewers, a major revision is required. I invite you to provide a point-by-point rebuttal addressing the points raised. Some additional feedback have been outlined below:
Major concerns:
The temporal trends in anticoagulation use or outcomes over the study period (2015–2020) are not examined. For example, did DOAC adoption increase over time, and were outcomes better in more recent years?
The authors do not analyse the role of cancer stage or treatment type (e.g., chemotherapy vs. radiation) in VTE recurrence or bleeding risks. These factors likely contribute to the observed differences in outcomes.
The subgroup analyses of cancer type lack adjustments for multiple comparisons. This undermines the reliability of some findings, such as the higher recurrence risk in CNS cancer patients.
The survival analyses focus primarily on differences between cancer and non-cancer groups but do not explore predictors of survival within the cancer group. For example, how does the presence of major bleeding or VTE recurrence impact survival in different cancer subtypes?
Besides, some specific comments are outlined below for authors to consider:
1. In the abstract, details on subgroup findings or the implications of anticoagulation discontinuation, which are important outcomes, are lacking. Please include.
2. The introduction does not clearly differentiate how the study builds upon existing literature, such as the COMMAND VTE Registry studies. The rationale for focusing on cancer patients with DVT diagnosed via ultrasound is not sufficiently justified. A discussion of why asymptomatic cases are important to study would provide more clarity.
3. The study excludes patients with DVT diagnosed before 2015 to focus on the DOAC era but does not clarify whether warfarin use in 9.4% of the cohort is representative of contemporary practice. This could bias the findings. Please explain.
4. While the Fine-Gray subdistribution hazard model accounts for competing risks, the authors does not report sensitivity analyses to test the robustness of its findings. This is critical given the high mortality rate in the cancer group.
5. The study does not mention whether validated bleeding risk scores were used to adjust for bleeding risk in the cancer cohort. This could affect the accuracy of the hazard ratios.
6. Subgroups based on cancer type are analyzed but not adjusted for multiple comparisons. This raises the risk of type I error. This should be addressed.
7. Table 1: While the baseline characteristics are comprehensive, the authors do not report p-values for all comparisons, such as DVT location. Any non-significant findings should still be reported.
8. Table 4: The all-cause mortality data is significant, but the breakdown of causes of death is underexplored in the discussion. For example, the higher rate of cancer-related deaths in the cancer group is expected, but the significance of fatal bleeding events in cancer patients warrants further elaboration.
9. Figure 3 and 5: Subgroup analyses are presented without adjustments for multiple comparisons. The authors should clarify this limitation in the results section.
10. The similar rates of anticoagulation discontinuation between groups are reported without sufficient discussion of the clinical implications. For example, the higher rate of discontinuation due to bleeding in the cancer group suggests a need for better bleeding risk stratification.
11. The discussion does not adequately address the limitations of the study design, particularly the retrospective nature, single-center setting, and the inclusion of asymptomatic DVT cases. Besides, the potential impact of warfarin use in a minority of patients is not discussed in detail. How might this affect the generalizability of the results to a purely DOAC-treated population?
The discussion could expand on the implications of VTE recurrence in patients who discontinued anticoagulation due to bleeding. For instance, should alternative anticoagulants (e.g., low-dose DOACs) or non-pharmacologic strategies be considered in these patients?
Authors should also consider expanding on the VTE/DVT management (see Sun et al PMID: 37175686)
==============================
Please submit your revised manuscript by May 19 2025 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org . When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols . Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols .
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Sonu Bhaskar, MD PhD
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE

Journal Requirements:

1. When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.-->--> -->-->Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at -->-->https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and -->-->https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf-->--> -->-->2. Thank you for stating the following in the Competing Interests section: -->-->I have read the journal's policy and the authors of this manuscript have the following competing interests: KT has received honoraria from Bristol Myers Squibb, Pfizer, Bayer, and Daiichi Sankyo. The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.-->--> -->-->We note that one or more of the authors are employed by a commercial company. -->--> -->-->a. Please provide an amended Funding Statement declaring this commercial affiliation, as well as a statement regarding the Role of Funders in your study. If the funding organization did not play a role in the study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript and only provided financial support in the form of authors' salaries and/or research materials, please review your statements relating to the author contributions, and ensure you have specifically and accurately indicated the role(s) that these authors had in your study. You can update author roles in the Author Contributions section of the online submission form.-->--> -->-->Please also include the following statement within your amended Funding Statement. -->-->“The funder provided support in the form of salaries for authors [insert relevant initials], but did not have any additional role in the study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. The specific roles of these authors are articulated in the ‘author contributions’ section.”-->-->If your commercial affiliation did play a role in your study, please state and explain this role within your updated Funding Statement. -->--> -->-->b. Please also provide an updated Competing Interests Statement declaring this commercial affiliation along with any other relevant declarations relating to employment, consultancy, patents, products in development, or marketed products, etc.  -->--> -->-->Within your Competing Interests Statement, please confirm that this commercial affiliation does not alter your adherence to all PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials by including the following statement: "This does not alter our adherence to  PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.” (as detailed online in our guide for authors http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/competing-interests) . If this adherence statement is not accurate and  there are restrictions on sharing of data and/or materials, please state these. Please note that we cannot proceed with consideration of your article until this information has been declared.-->--> -->-->Please include both an updated Funding Statement and Competing Interests Statement in your cover letter. We will change the online submission form on your behalf.-->--> -->-->3. In the online submission form, you indicated that The data underlying the results presented in the study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.-->--> -->-->All PLOS journals now require all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript to be freely available to other researchers, either a. In a public repository, b. Within the manuscript itself, or c. Uploaded as supplementary information.-->-->This policy applies to all data except where public deposition would breach compliance with the protocol approved by your research ethics board. If your data cannot be made publicly available for ethical or legal reasons (e.g., public availability would compromise patient privacy), please explain your reasons on resubmission and your exemption request will be escalated for approval.-->?>
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? -->?>
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available??>
The PLOS Data policy
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English??>
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
Reviewer #1:  Thank you very much for providing the opportunity to review the manuscript. It is written in a straight forward manner, with a clear research question, a suitable method and statistics and a clear result. There is littele to discuss or to amend. Results seems reasonable. It would have been interesting to compare the 4 DOAC among each other regarding thrombosis and bleeding. Manybe a follow-up project?
There are very few typos, which can be corrected upon processing.
Reviewer #2:  Introduction:
Problem statement: Not clear. Please spell it out in a stand-alone paragraph.
Study objectives: Not clear. Please spell it out in a stand-alone paragraph. Please spell out the primary and secondary objectives.
Methods:
Line 62 – 63: The registry is a single-center, retrospective cohort study.
Naturally when we do a registry, we either enter data on the spot or later, some may have a follow-up. Therefore, please explain why this registry is retrospective, or otherwise.
Line 74: Among the 17,188 patients enrolled in the TULIPE registry.
These are adult patients only or include children. If adults only, please define the cut-off age.
Line 76 – 78: all the exclusion criteria.
Do all samples have complete data that are required for the study? If yes, then ignore my comment. If no, please add it as an exclusion criteria.
Please specify in methodology that the study data was extracted from the TULIPE registry and divided into different sections: Demographic, clinical, investigations, treatment, outcomes… This corresponds to the results reported latter.
The variables for the study were not stated in the methodology. Please spell it out.
Example: Patient demographic, clinical, laboratory, and treatment data was collected from the registry.
The demographic data include age, gender, BMI…The clinical data include comorbidity, types of DVT, presence of PE… For investigations, it will be better to highlight parameters associated with VTE are selected (this explains why CRP included).
Line 80 – 83: The cancer group was defined as patients with a cancer diagnosis within 6 months prior to the ultrasound; recurrent, regionally advanced, or metastatic cancer; cancer treatment within the previous 6 months; or hematologic cancer not in complete remission (as previously described) [7]
The above definition refers to ‘active cancer’ by Raskob et al. However, they also include cancer within 2 years ‘Patients had to have cancer other than basal-cell or squamous-cell skin cancer that was active or had been diagnosed within the previous 2 years and was objectively confirmed’. Therefore, the cancer group in this study is better renamed as active cancer group.
Line 90 – 91: VTE was defined as new-onset lower extremity venous thrombosis, pulmonary embolism (PE), or Trousseau syndrome, confirmed by imaging.
Please cite the articles to support this definition.
Overall survival was not defined. Let's say patients die at home or transfer care to another centre and die, does this data capture in your study?
Table 3: Anticoagulation therapy beyond the acute phase.
Please define the acute phase in methodology.
Results:
It will be more organized to divide the results into 2 main sections:
1. Baseline: Demographic, clinical, and treatments.
2. Outcomes: VTE recurrence, Bleed, Mortality
So overall results flow is better.
Line 118 – 126: Please specify the value (%) followed by p for the variables with significant differences. It was not stated for this part but mentioned for the remaining parts of the result. Please standardise it.
Line 164 – 165, and Line 202 – 204: The adjusted ratio for VTE recurrence and major bleed was based on age, gender, and BMI.
By right, the adjusted ratio should be based on covariates with p < 0.05 and deemed significant in other studies. Therefore, in my opinion, it should be:
Age, BMI (continuous variables, not BMI as the number is too small), comorbid as a whole, baseline PE, HB level, anticoagulant beyond acute phase, and discontinuation of anticoagulant (even though p not significant, I believe must be related to recurrence of VTE and major bleed in other studies)
Please do the same correction for OS, it was not mentioned in the result.
Discussion:
Line 261 – 264: Chatani et al.'s study included only patients with acute symptomatic VTE, whereas our study enrolled patients diagnosed with DVT via ultrasonography, including asymptomatic cases and those with an unknown onset time. Consequently, our cohort had fewer patients with PE or proximal DVT compared to Chatani et al.’s study.
By right, Chatani et al cancer + acute vs acute compared to current study cancer + scan vs scan (those non-cancer groups unlikely have a routine scan, they scan most likely something going on). The outcome should be worse in Chatani. I would rather argue that Chatani et al include active cancer + cancer 6-24 months vs the current study that includes active cancer, leading to dilution of differences in the former. Please read Chatani et al again and see if justifiable. If so, please write the discussion again.
Line 292 – 294: In this study, the discontinuation rate of anticoagulation therapy at one year was high,
although no significant difference was observed between the cancer and non-cancer groups (52%
vs. 53%, P = 0.444).
I would rather argue that discontinuation for non-cancer is falsely high and leads to no different in result. In the non-cancer group, some patients may have discontinuation at 3 to 6 months due to standard practice, while cancer is often life-long. If the number of patients in non-cancer only takes into those who discontinued prematurely before the appropriate period, the exact number may be smaller.
Line 315 – 325: The development of anticoagulants with a lower bleeding risk and improved
316 adherence is essential. Factor XI (FXI) has emerged as a promising therapeutic target for CAT…
This is the clinical implication of this study, please put in a stand alone paragraph.
Study strength: Not mentioned. Please highlight.
Conclusion:
Maybe mentioned a newer agent to address these issues is required?
Tables:
Table 1:
A BMI of more than 35 can remove as the number too small.
Comorbidities as overall, the p should be presented.
For diseases that cannot recover, like chronic lung, heart disease… Please remove the history of, as the disease is still present. Maybe for VTE only is suitable.
Presentation: DVT should be put above, and PE below.
Table 3:
Ventilator support to be removed. It is irrelevant.
Table 4:
DVT should be above PE. Why DVT only, PE with or without DVT? It is rather confusing.
Could it be divided into DVT and PE? Or DVT, PE, DVT + PE?
Tables 5 and 7: Suggest to correct, including relevant covariates as mentioned in the comment above.
Figures:
Figure 3 and 5: Why these parameters are selected?
TWC and creatinine clearance were not even mentioned in Table 1. Some don’t have between-group significance like gender, or platelet. The cut-off point of these parameters is also not justified.
I would suggest using the parameters selected for the adjusted ratio as mentioned above, such as:
Age, BMI (continuous variables, not BMI as the number is too small), comorbid as a whole, baseline PE, HB level, anticoagulant beyond acute phase, and discontinuation of anticoagulant (even though p not significant, I believe must be related to recurrence of VTE and major bleed in other studies)\
**********
what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy
Reviewer #1: Yes:  Olaf Rose
Reviewer #2: Yes:  Diana-Leh-Ching Ng
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/ . PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org . Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0329025.r002Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version1
15 Jun 2025

Dear Editors and Reviewers
We sincerely appreciate the time and effort spent reviewing and providing valuable comments on our manuscript. We are grateful to the reviewers for their favorable comments and valuable suggestions, which have helped us significantly improve our manuscript. As indicated in the following responses, we have carefully considered all the comments and suggestions in the revised version of our paper. These changes are highlighted in yellow in the revised manuscript. We have incorporated all the suggestions and believe that they have significantly improved the scientific content of the manuscript. Thank you once again.
Response to the Academic Editor
Major comment #1:
The temporal trends in anticoagulation use or outcomes over the study period (2015–2020) are not examined. For example, did DOAC adoption increase over time, and were outcomes better in more recent years?
Reply:
As suggested, we have analyzed the temporal trends in anticoagulant use during the study period. DOAC use increased from 2015 to 2020 in both the cancer and non-cancer groups (S1A Fig and S1B Fig), whereas the use of warfarin and other anticoagulants declined during the same period. We have added this information to the “Treatment strategies” section, as follows:
The trends in anticoagulant use during the study period are presented in S1 Fig. In both the cancer and non-cancer groups, the percentage of DOAC prescriptions increased over time, whereas the percentage of prescriptions for warfarin and other anticoagulants decreased. (page 13, lines 203-205)
We also performed Kaplan–Meier analyses to evaluate the temporal trends in the discontinuation of anticoagulation therapy, VTE recurrence, major bleeding, and overall survival. There were no significant differences in the rate of anticoagulation discontinuation across calendar years in either group (S3 Fig). We have added this information to the “Treatment strategies” section of the revised manuscript as follows:
There was no significant difference in the annual rate of anticoagulation therapy discontinuation during the study period. (S3 Fig). (page 14, lines 209-210)
We conducted Kaplan–Meier analyses of VTE recurrence by year (S6 Fig). In the cancer group, the cumulative incidence of VTE recurrence varied significantly by year, with notably higher recurrence rates observed in the latter part of the study period (2019–2020). No significant differences were observed in the VTE recurrence by year in the non-cancer group. To explore the factors contributing to these annual differences within the cancer group, we conducted Kaplan–Meier analyses, stratifying cases into symptomatic and asymptomatic VTE recurrences (S7 Fig). There was no significant difference in symptomatic VTE recurrence by year (S7A Fig); however, there were significant differences in asymptomatic VTE recurrence, with a marked increase from 2019 to 2020 (S7B Fig).
The precise reason for the increased recurrence of asymptomatic VTE during the latter part of the study period remains unclear. One plausible explanation is a change in follow-up practices after DVT diagnosis, leading to the more frequent use of lower-limb ultrasonography at earlier time points. S7 Fig shows a comparison of the number of days from the initial DVT diagnosis to the first post-diagnosis ultrasonography evaluation annually. The median interval was notably shortened in 2019 and 2020, suggesting that earlier follow-up may have contributed to the increased detection of asymptomatic VTE.
However, the exact reason for these shorter follow-up intervals remains unclear and is a limitation of our retrospective, single-center study. Changes in hospital policies or practices among physicians or departments may have influenced the results. These findings have been added to the “Results” section of the revised manuscript and the “Limitations” section has been expanded accordingly.
We evaluated the year-by-year trends in VTE recurrence (S6 Fig). In the cancer group, the cumulative incidence of VTE recurrence varied significantly by year, with notably higher recurrence rates observed in the latter part of the study period (2019–2020). In contrast, no significant differences in VTE recurrence by year were observed in the non-cancer group. To explore the factors contributing to these annual differences within the cancer group, we conducted Kaplan–Meier analyses, stratifying cases into symptomatic and asymptomatic VTE recurrences (S7 Fig). The results showed no significant variation by year in symptomatic VTE recurrence (S7A Fig); however, significant differences were noted in asymptomatic VTE recurrence, with a marked increase from 2019 to 2020 (S7B Fig). The precise reason for the increase in asymptomatic VTE recurrence during the latter part of the study period remains unclear. One plausible explanation is the change in follow-up practices after DVT diagnosis, leading to more frequent use of lower limb ultrasonography at earlier time points. S8 Fig compares the number of days from the initial DVT diagnosis to the first post-diagnosis ultrasonography, which was evaluated annually. The median interval was notably shortened in 2019 and 2020, suggesting that earlier follow-up may have contributed to the increased detection of asymptomatic VTE in these years. (pages 15-16, lines 226-240)
Furthermore, owing to the retrospective design, follow-up practices after the initial DVT diagnosis were at the discretion of individual physicians, and no standardized protocol was employed, which may have influenced the outcomes of this study. (pages 30-31, lines 506-508)
We also evaluated the Kaplan–Meier curves for major bleeding by year and found no temporal differences between the groups (S11 Fig). We have added this information to the “Major Bleeding” section of the revised manuscript as follows:
No temporal differences were observed in major bleeding events between the groups (S11 Fig). (page 19, lines 286-287)
We additionally evaluated the Kaplan–Meier curves for overall survival by year and found no temporal differences in either group (S14 Fig). We have added this information to the “Overall Survival” section and “Supporting information” in the revised manuscript as follows:
We also evaluated year-by-year trends in OS and found no temporal differences in either group (S14 Fig). (page 21, lines 333-334)
Major comment #2:
The authors do not analyse the role of cancer stage or treatment type (e.g., chemotherapy vs. radiation) in VTE recurrence or bleeding risks. These factors likely contribute to the observed differences in outcomes.
Reply:
We agree that the cancer stage and treatment type are important factors that may influence the risk of VTE recurrence and bleeding. Unfortunately, our dataset did not include information on cancer stage; however, it did include data on the presence or absence of distant metastases at the time of DVT diagnosis. We further stratified the patients into three groups—non-cancer, cancer without distant metastasis, and cancer with distant metastasis—to explore the differences in clinical outcomes. Kaplan–Meier curves were constructed to compare the cumulative incidence of VTE recurrence and major bleeding among the three groups. We found that VTE recurrence was lowest in the non-cancer group, with no significant differences between the cancer with and without metastasis groups (S5 Fig). However, major bleeding events occurred most frequently in patients with cancer and distant metastasis, followed by patients with cancer without metastasis and patients without cancer (S12 Fig). We have added this information to the “Results” section as follows:
Among the patients with cancer, 33.9% had distant metastases. (page 12, line 191)
We further stratified the patients into three groups—non-cancer, cancer without distant metastasis, and cancer with distant metastasis—to explore the differences in clinical outcomes. We found that VTE recurrence was lowest in the non-cancer group, with no significant differences between the cancer groups with and without metastasis (S5 Fig). (page 15, lines 222-226)
We further stratified the patients into three groups—non-cancer, cancer without distant metastasis, and cancer with distant metastasis—to explore differences in clinical outcomes. Major bleeding events occurred most frequently in patients with cancer with distant metastasis, followed by patients with cancer without metastasis and patients without cancer (S12 Fig). (page 19, lines 287-291)
Unfortunately, our registry did not comprehensively capture specific treatment types (e.g., chemotherapy or radiotherapy). Consequently, stratified or adjusted analyses based on these variables could not be performed. We have added this limitation to the “Limitations” section, as follows:
Finally, although we collected information on cancer type and the presence or absence of distant metastasis at baseline, we did not have access to detailed information regarding cancer stage or treatment. Consequently, we were unable to assess the influence of these factors on clinical outcomes. (page 31, lines 517-520)
Major comment #3:
The subgroup analyses of cancer type lack adjustments for multiple comparisons. This undermines the reliability of some findings, such as the higher recurrence risk in CNS cancer patients.
Reply:
As you correctly pointed out, the initial subgroup analyses by cancer type were not adjusted for multiple comparisons, which may have increased the risk of type I errors. In response, we reanalyzed the data using multivariate Fine-Gray models to adjust for potential confounders. For VTE recurrence, the model was adjusted for age, sex, body mass index, comorbidities as a whole, baseline pulmonary embolism, hemoglobin level, anticoagulation beyond the acute phase, and discontinuation of anticoagulants (S9 Fig). For major bleeding, the model was similarly adjusted, excluding the discontinuation of anticoagulants (S13 Fig). Based on these analyses, the descriptions in the revised manuscript have been updated as follows:
Further stratification by cancer type revealed that hematological malignancies, head/neck, cervical/uterine, ovarian/peritoneal, pancreatic, colorectal, and CNS cancers were significantly associated with a higher risk of VTE recurrence (S9 Fig). (page 18, lines 266-268)
Further stratification according to cancer type revealed that pancreatic, cervical/uterine, colorectal, kidney/ureter/bladder, and ovarian/peritoneal cancers were associated with a higher risk of major bleeding (S13 Fig). (page 21, lines 318-320)
Additionally, details of the analytical methods and covariates are provided in the “Statistical Analysis” section, as follows:
Given the potential impact of mortality as a competing risk, the Fine–Gray subdistribution hazard model was applied to estimate the subdistribution hazard ratios (sHRs) for VTE recurrence and major bleeding. In these models, death from other causes was treated as a competing event, whereas in the Cox model, it was treated as a censored event for comparison. Multivariate models were adjusted for age, sex, BMI, comorbidities as a whole, baseline PE, hemoglobin level, anticoagulation beyond the acute phase, and discontinuation of anticoagulant therapy. Notably, discontinuation was excluded from the adjustment in the major bleeding model because bleeding events occurring after discontinuation were not systematically captured in our registry. Subgroup analyses for VTE recurrence and major bleeding were conducted using Fine–Gray subdistribution hazard models, adjusting for the same covariates in the primary analyses. To evaluate the impact of VTE recurrence and major bleeding on OS, additional subgroup analyses were performed using Cox proportional hazards models, incorporating VTE recurrence or major bleeding as covariates along with the previously described variables. (page 9, lines 144-157)
Major comment #4:
The survival analyses focus primarily on differences between cancer and non-cancer groups but do not explore predictors of survival within the cancer group. For example, how does the presence of major bleeding or VTE recurrence impact survival in different cancer subtypes?
Reply:
We conducted multivariate analyses using the Cox proportional hazards model to evaluate the impact of VTE recurrence and major bleeding on overall survival in patients with and without cancer (S16 Fig). Among the cancer group, major bleeding was significantly associated with poorer survival (adjusted HR: 1.71; 95% CI: 1.33–2.19; P < 0.001), whereas VTE recurrence was not (adjusted HR: 1.06; 95% CI: 0.80–1.40; P = 0.696). In contrast, in the non-cancer group, both VTE recurrence (adjusted HR: 2.42; 95% CI: 1.16–5.05; P = 0.020) and major bleeding (adjusted HR: 5.24; 95% CI: 2.72–10.1; P = 0.043) were significantly associated with worse survival. Furthermore, we performed stratified analyses according to cancer type (S17 Fig). We found that VTE recurrence was significantly associated with decreased survival in ovarian/peritoneal cancer (adjusted HR: 2.91; 95% CI: 1.52–5.59; P < 0.001), while major bleeding was associated with poorer survival in kidney/ureter/bladder cancer (adjusted HR: 2.77; 95% CI: 1.07–7.19; P = 0.037), and upper gastrointestinal tract cancers (adjusted HR: 3.88; 95% CI: 1.08–13.9; P = 0.039). These results have been included in the "Overall survival" subsection of the Results section as follows:
We further investigated the impact of VTE recurrence and major bleeding on the OS of patients with and without cancer (S16 Fig). Among the cancer group, major bleeding was significantly associated with poorer survival (adjusted HR: 1.71; 95% CI: 1.33–2.19; P < 0.001), whereas VTE recurrence was not (adjusted HR: 1.06; 95% CI: 0.80–1.40; P = 0.696). In contrast, in the non-cancer group, both VTE recurrence (adjusted HR: 2.42; 95% CI: 1.16–5.05; P = 0.020), and major bleeding (adjusted HR: 5.24; 95% CI: 2.72–10.1; P = 0.043) were significantly associated with worse survival. Furthermore, we performed stratified analyses according to the cancer type. VTE recurrence was significantly associated with decreased survival in ovarian/peritoneal cancer (adjusted HR: 2.91; 95% CI: 1.52–5.59; P < 0.001), and major bleeding was strongly associated with poorer survival in kidney/ureter/bladder cancer (adjusted HR: 2.77; 95% CI: 1.07–7.19; P = 0.037), and upper gastrointestinal tract cancer (adjusted HR: 3.88; 95% CI: 1.08–13.9; P = 0.039) (S17 Fig). (pages 22-23, lines 346-357)
Specific comment #1:
In the abstract, details on subgroup findings or the implications of anticoagulation discontinuation, which are important outcomes, are lacking. Please include.
Reply:
As suggested, we have revised the Abstract to include the impact of anticoagulation discontinuation on VTE recurrence, which is one of the key findings of our study, as follows:
In the cancer group, discontinuation of bleeding-related anticoagulation therapy was associated with increased VTE recurrence (P < 0.001), whereas no such association was observed in the non-cancer group (P = 0.716). (page 3, lines 38-41)
Specific comment #2:
The introduction does not clearly differentiate how the study builds upon existing literature, such as the COMMAND VTE Registry studies. The rationale for focusing on cancer patients with DVT diagnosed via ultrasound is not sufficiently justified. A discussion of why asymptomatic cases are important to study would provide more clarity.
Reply:
As suggested, we have revised the Introduction section to clarify how our study differs from previous reports, such as the COMMAND VTE Registry (Sakamoto J, et al. Circ J 2019, PMID: 31548438) and COMMAND VTE Registry-2 (Chatani R, et al. Thromb Res 2024, PMID: 38190788), which primarily included patients with symptomatic VTE. Our study included both symptomatic and asymptomatic VTE cases, reflecting real-world cancer care. We have also cited recent studies suggesting that asymptomatic VTE may be associated with recurrence and poor prognosis in patients with cancer. This revision has been added to the “Introduction” section as follows:
In particular, existing studies, such as the COMMAND VTE Registry and COMMAND VTE Registry-2, primarily focused on symptomatic VTE and did not include asympt
AttachmentSubmitted filename: 250602_Response_to_Reviewers.docx
10.1371/journal.pone.0329025.r003Decision Letter 1
BhaskarSonuAcademic Editor© 2025 Sonu Bhaskar2025Sonu Bhaskarhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1<p>Risk of recurrence and bleeding in patients with cancer-associated venous thromboembolism in the direct oral anticoagulants era: Findings from the TULIPE registry
PONE-D-25-11278R1
Dear Dr. Tajiri,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice will be generated when your article is formally accepted. Please note, if your institution has a publishing partnership with PLOS and your article meets the relevant criteria, all or part of your publication costs will be covered. Please make sure your user information is up-to-date by logging into Editorial Manager at Editorial Manager®  and clicking the ‘Update My Information' link at the top of the page. If you have any questions relating to publication charges, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Sonu Bhaskar, MD PhD
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Thank you for submitting a revised version of your manuscript.
I am pleased to accept the manuscript in its current form. Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS One.
Reviewers' comments:
10.1371/journal.pone.0329025.r004Acceptance letter
BhaskarSonuAcademic Editor© 2025 Sonu Bhaskar2025Sonu Bhaskarhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.PONE-D-25-11278R1
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Tajiri,
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now being handed over to our production team.
At this stage, our production department will prepare your paper for publication. This includes ensuring the following:
* All references, tables, and figures are properly cited
* All relevant supporting information is included in the manuscript submission,
* There are no issues that prevent the paper from being properly typeset
You will receive further instructions from the production team, including instructions on how to review your proof when it is ready. Please keep in mind that we are working through a large volume of accepted articles, so please give us a few days to review your paper and let you know the next and final steps.
Lastly, if your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at customercare@plos.org.
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access.
Kind regards,
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Sonu Bhaskar
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE