4655jvsvldJournal of Vascular Surgery: Venous and Lymphatic DisordersJ Vasc Surg Venous Lymphat DisordElsevierPMC1314176313141763131417634178067210.1016/j.jvsv.2026.102461The American Venous Forum clinical practice guideline on the care of patients with upper extremity deep venous thrombosis
MalgorRafael DMD, MBA EtkinYanaMD MouawadNicolas JMD, MPH, MBA LeLindaMD SullivanLeoMD XenosEleftheriosMD RodriguezLimaelMD VemuriChanduMD, MBA FukayaEriMD, PhD LalBrajesh KMBBS Furtado NevesPedro JMD AzizFaisalMD, MBA SadekMikelMD TomitaNathanDO, MPH PuggioniAlessandraMD aDivision of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery, University of Colorado, Aurora, CObDivision of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery, Department of Surgery, Northwell Health, Manhasset, NYcDivision of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery, McLaren Health, Bay City, MIdDivision of Vascular Surgery, Houston Methodist, Houston, TXeMohawk Valley Health System, Utica, NYfDivision of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KYgTexas Vascular and Imaging, Houston, TXhSection of Vascular Surgery, Michigan Medicine, Ann Arbor, MIiDivision of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery, Stanford Medicine, Stanford, CAjDivision of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery, University of Maryland, College Park, MDkDivision of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery, Penn State, State College, PAlDivision of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery, New York University Langone Health, New York, NYmPacific Vascular Institute, Aiea, HInEast Vein and Lymphatic Center, New York, NY∗Correspondence: Rafael D. Malgor, MD, MBA, Professor of Surgery, Division of Vascular Surgery and Endovascular Therapy, Anschutz Medical Center, The University of Colorado, 12631 East 17th Ave, MS C312, Aurora, CO 80045 rafael.malgor@cuanschutz.edu
232026144102461102461652026© 2026 The Author(s)This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
The American Venous Forum has formulated evidence-based clinical practice guidelines to provide recommendations on the care of patients with upper extremity deep venous thrombosis. All recommendations follow a systematic review of workup and therapy options for patients with upper extremity deep venous thrombosis. Potential limitations of these guidelines are due to the lack of evidence on some specific subareas, such as risk stratification and long-term outcomes.
Keywords: Deep vein thrombosis, Upper extremity, Endovenous, Venous thrombectomy, Guidelines

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2026 Feb 11; Accepted 2026 Feb 13; Collection date 2026 Jul.

## Introduction and rationale
Upper extremity deep venous thrombosis (UEDVT) is defined as a venous thrombosis occurring in the deep veins of upper extremities, which include the innominate, internal jugular, subclavian, axillary, brachial, ulnar, and radial veins ( ). UEDVT accounts for 5% to 10% of all cases of DVT. Anatomical distribution of UEDVT is depicted in . Owing to the low prevalence of UEDVT management strategies have been derived from insights on treatment of lower extremity DVT (LEDVT). However, significant differences between the two exist in terms of pathophysiology, comorbid conditions, outcomes, and complications. The prevalence and incidence of UEDVT is shown in .
 The pathophysiology and implications of UEDVT warrant unique guidelines and not an extension of those for LEDVT because there are differences between the two pathologies and etiologies. This has become due to the rising use of central venous catheters (CVCs), pacemakers, and implantable defibrillators. In addition, the greater awareness of thrombophilia and hypercoagulable states has resulted in increased diagnostic evaluation, which has increased the incidence of UEDVT over the past decades.
Unlike LEDVT, UEDVT presents unique challenges in diagnosis, management, and prevention owing to its distinct anatomical and physiological characteristics. UEDVT can also lead to serious complications, including recurrent thromboembolism, pulmonary embolism (PE), and post-thrombotic syndrome (PTS). These complications significantly affect patient morbidity, quality of life, and health care resource utilization. Despite its clinical significance, the management of UEDVT remains under-represented in the literature compared with LEDVT. Variations in clinical practice, a lack of consensus on diagnostic criteria, and inconsistent use of anticoagulation therapy highlight the need for clear, evidence-based guidelines. Although the outcomes of UEDVT are outside the scope of this document, summarizes the literature regarding UEDVT clinical outcomes.
 The aim of these guidelines is to provide a comprehensive framework for the diagnosis, management, and prevention of UEDVT, thereby improving patient outcomes and standardizing care across health care settings. This document addresses key aspects of UEDVT management, including etiology, risk stratification, clinical presentation, diagnostic modalities, and therapeutic approaches. Special considerations are given to higher risk individuals, such as patients with catheter-associated thrombosis, cancer-associated thrombosis, and thrombophilia. The AVF has developed the following guidelines as a tool for the practicing physician who treats patients with UEDVT to simplify and standardize the treatment and terminology for UEDVT in clinical scenarios, as well as to provide background on the most important information relevant to this clinical entity. This guideline seeks to fill the gaps in current practice and support clinicians in making informed decisions, ultimately contributing to safer and more effective patient care for those at risk of or diagnosed with UEDVT.

## Methods
The following guidelines are an initiative of The AVF’s guidelines committee and were prepared in accordance with the modified GRADE framework and guideline methodology endorsed by the Society for Vascular Surgery. A diverse panel was convened, including experts in deep venous disease within the AVF guidelines and research committees. The panel identified key clinical questions related to UEDVT, focusing on diagnosis, treatment, and prevention. These questions were formulated using the PICO format (Population, Intervention, Comparator, Outcome) to ensure clarity and relevance. A systematic review of the literature to gather evidence addressing the PICO questions was performed.
Evidence was gathered without restrictions related to study design pertaining to UEDVT. Risk of bias was assessed for methodological quality using standardized tools. The panel addressed consistency and precision considering agreement among data published on the direction and magnitude of outcomes while gauging reliability of outcome measurements and their estimates.
For each recommendation, the Grade (I or II) is based on the perceived risk/benefit ratio of an intervention or process. The words “We recommend” are used for Grade I (strong) statements and the words “We suggest” are used for Grade II (weak) statements. Grade I recommendations are those in which the benefits clearly outweigh the risks or that the risk is minimal and is justified by the potential existing benefits. Grade II recommendations are those in which the distinction is less clear, and the risks and benefits are more closely balanced; therefore, other individual, institutional, and clinical factors must be considered, as well as conducting a comprehensive discussion with the patient regarding risks, potential benefits, and alternative therapies. This framework was used to gauge the quality of published evidence and to rank the strength of recommendations.
The Level of Evidence of evidence is described as A, B, or Cin accordance with the GRADE system. Statements with a Level of Evidence of evidence A are unlikely to change, either owing to the high Level of Evidence already available, or because this has been established as the standard of care and new research is exceedingly unlikely to change this. Statements with a Level of Evidence of B might change, depending on what new research may show, given that the available evidence is of a lower quality or has risk of bias. Statements with a Level of Evidence of C are very likely to change once more definitive research has been conducted in an appropriate manner to address these questions.
The statements contained within these guidelines have been prepared after a supportive systematic review was performed in partnership with the University of Maryland. After the systematic review had been performed and the evidence synthesized and interpreted, the statements were drafted. These were then presented to the guidelines committee for several rounds of review, until consensus was achieved. The statements that the committee had agreed upon were then sent for external review and returned with suggestions for improvement which have been incorporated into the final version. Owing to the relative paucity of high-quality data regarding UEDVT, many of the statements here have been influenced by the current standard of care that is accepted for LEDVT. When these differ, this is explicitly mentioned within the text. Additionally, the recommendations have been divided based on etiology of the UEDVT, given that the committee understands that the underlying pathophysiology is markedly different when comparing the three main groups of UEDVT discussed in this document. The recommendations for diagnosis, treatment, and prophylaxis therefore reflect these differences. The risk factors, clinical presentation, anatomical distribution, and the outcomes also differ significantly among these groups. Each section is then divided based on these groups and dedicated to describing their unique characteristics and management.
Recommendations were developed based on the balance of benefits and harms, patient values, and resource availability. Extensive AVF panel group discussions using consensus-building techniques with formal voting were carried out. Disagreements were documented and addressed through further evidence review or expert consultation. Draft guidelines underwent peer review by external experts and stakeholders. Feedback was incorporated to ensure accuracy, clarity, and applicability.

## Summary of Recommendations

## Guideline 1: Gradeification of UEDVT

## Guideline 1.1: Gradeification system for UEDVT
We suggest the use of a Gradeification based on etiology instead of an anatomic system to standardize the reporting and treatment of UEDVT. [BEST PRACTICE]

## Guideline 1.2: Gradeification system based on etiology
We suggest Gradeifying UEDVT into venous thoracic outlet syndrome (vTOS)-associated UEDVT, cancer-related UEDVT, and noncancer UEDVT. [GRADE - 2; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE OF EVIDENCE - B]

## Guideline 2: Epidemiology and risk factors

## Guideline 2.1: vTOS-associated UEDVT
vTOS-associated UEDVT is more common in patients who are younger, have fewer comorbid conditions, and are outpatients. [GRADE - 1; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE OF EVIDENCE - B]

## Guideline 2.2: Secondary catheter-associated UEDVT or noncatheter-associated UEDVT
Secondary catheter-associated (CA) UEDVT or noncatheter-associated (NCA) UEDVT is more common in inpatient populations, who are older, and have more comorbid conditions. [GRADE - 1; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE OF EVIDENCE - B]

## Guideline 2.3: Risk factors for UEDVT
Some common risk factors of UEDVT are costoclavicular compression, the presence of an intravenous device, active malignancy, and surgery or trauma of the upper extremity. [GRADE - 1; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE OF EVIDENCE - B]

## Guideline 3: Risk prediction models and laboratorial markers

## Guideline 3.1: Clinical probability tool and scoring system for UEDVT diagnosis
We suggest that the clinical probability of UEDVT using either the Constans or Extended Constans score should be preferred over the modified Wells score, and it should guide subsequent investigation. [GRADE - 2; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE OF EVIDENCE - B]

## Guideline 3.2: Clinical probability of UEDVT
For patients unlikely to have UEDVT based on clinical probability scores, we suggest that further testing with D-dimer should not be performed unless all other potential causes of acute upper extremity edema have been excluded. [GRADE - 2; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE OF EVIDENCE - B]

## Guideline 3.3: D-dimer for patients with UEDVT and cancer
We suggest that D-dimer testing should NOT be used to rule out CA-UEDVT. [GRADE - 2; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE OF EVIDENCE - B]

## Guideline 3.4: D-dimer for patients with noncancer-associated UEDVT
We recommend that D-dimer testing with a cutoff value of 500 μg/L may be used as a cost-effective initial test for ruling out NCA-UEDVT in patients with low pretest probability. [GRADE - 1; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE OF EVIDENCE - B]

## Guideline 4: Diagnosis and workup

## Guideline 4.1: Duplex ultrasound for UEDVT
For patients with clinically suspected UEDVT, we recommend that an upper extremity duplex ultrasound (DUS) should be the first diagnostic imaging examination . [GRADE - 1; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE OF EVIDENCE - B]

## Guideline 4.2: DUS for UEDVT in central veins
If proximal UEDVT involving central veins is suspected, we recommend considering that upper extremity DUS in this case may have low sensitivity and specificity [GRADE - 1; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE OF EVIDENCE - B]

## Guideline 4.3: Screening for UEDVT in patients with indwelling catheters and cancer with DUS
We recommend that screening for CA-UEDVT in patients with long-term indwelling catheters be based on institutional policies starting with DUS, but should not be routinely performed in asymptomatic patients. [GRADE - 1; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE OF EVIDENCE - B]

## Guideline 4.4: Additional imaging tests after negative DUS
If the initial upper extremity DUS is negative, but clinical suspicion remains high, we recommend additional investigation with either magnetic resonance venography (MRV) or computed tomography venography (CTV) to avoid delaying treatment. [GRADE - 1; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE OF EVIDENCE - B]

## Guideline 4.5: MR as a second testing modality for UEDVT
Owing to lack of current evidence regarding CTV, we suggest that MRV should be the preferred advanced imaging modality when available for diagnosing UEDVT. [GRADE - 2; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE OF EVIDENCE - B]

## Guideline 4.6: Catheter-based venography for the diagnosis of UEDVT
If noninvasive studies remain inconclusive and the index of suspicion remains high, we suggest that venography may be considered as the next step to diagnose and treat UEDVT in one setting when the patient is a candidate for endovascular thrombus removal after a comprehensive discussion of risks and benefits. [GRADE - 2; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE OF EVIDENCE - B]

## Guideline 4.7: Catheter-based venography for the diagnosis of UEDVT
We recommend that catheter-based venography may be considered to reevaluate the degree of stenosis or compression of the upper extremity veins after thrombus removal if symptoms persist and with intention to treat. [GRADE - 1; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE OF EVIDENCE - B]

## Guideline 4.8: Intravascular ultrasound for the diagnosis and therapy guidance for UEDVT
We recommend considering that intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) outperforms venography in evaluating the degree of stenosis and should used, when possible, to guide treatment and rule out residual stenosis during endovascular interventions for UEDVT. [GRADE - 1; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE OF EVIDENCE - B]

## Guideline 5: Prophylaxis

## Guideline 5.1: Intermittent mechanical compression devices for prophylaxis of UEDVT
We recommend against mechanical devices with intermittent compression as a sole prophylaxis maneuver for the prevention of UEDVT. [GRADE - 1; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE OF EVIDENCE - A]

## Guideline 5.2: Pharmacochemical prophylaxis for vTOS-associated UEDVT
We recommend against the use of pharmacomechanical prophylaxis when vTOS-associated UEDVT has been confirmed. [GRADE - 1; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE OF EVIDENCE - B]

## Guideline 5.3: Intermittent mechanical compression devices for patients with CA-UEDVT
We recommend avoiding mechanical prophylaxis with intermittent compression devices for CA-UEDVT. [GRADE - 1; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE OF EVIDENCE - B]

## Guidelines 5.4: Routine chemical prophylaxis for patients with CA-UEDVT
We recommend against routine prophylaxis with anticoagulants for CA-UEDVT for prevention of UEDVT in patients with long-term CVCs. [GRADE - 1; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE OF EVIDENCE - A]

## Guideline 5.5: Prophylaxis with anticoagulation in patients with CA-UEDVT and CVCs
We recommend prophylaxis with anticoagulants for CA-UEDVT in patients with moderate-to high-risk venous thromboembolism (VTE) and long-term CVCs. We also recommend that a risk/benefit analysis should be performed based on risk of VTE and risk of bleeding to support decision-making. [GRADE - 1; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE OF EVIDENCE - B]

## Guideline 6: Treatment

## Guideline 6.1: Anticoagulation for the treatment of UEDVT
We recommend that UEDVT be treated with oral Xa inhibitors over vitamin K antagonists for ≥3 months in patients with low bleeding risk. [GRADE - 1; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE OF EVIDENCE - B]

## Guideline 6.2: Anticoagulation for the treatment of UEDVT
We recommend that underlying causes such as malignancy and hypercoagulability disorders should be considered and investigated for in patients with a first, unprovoked episode of UEDVT. [GRADE - 1; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE OF EVIDENCE - B]

## Guideline 6.3: Early thrombus removal for UEDVT
We suggest that acute extensive UEDVT (<21 days) may be treated with early thrombus removal strategies in severely symptomatic patients with a life expectancy of >1 year to reduce the incidence of PTS. [GRADE - 2; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE OF EVIDENCE - B]

## Guideline 6.4: vTOS-associated with UEDVT
We recommend that vTOS-associated UEDVT with compatible imaging findings should be treated with first rib resection as the initial operative management. [GRADE - 1; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE OF EVIDENCE - B]

## Guideline 6.5: Cancer-associated UEDVT treatment
We recommend that CA-UEDVT should be treated with anticoagulation and, if the indwelling catheter is no longer necessary or alternative access is feasible, catheter removal is indicated; otherwise, the catheter can remain in place. [GRADE - 1; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE OF EVIDENCE - B]

## Guideline 6.6: Noncancer-associated UEDVT treatment
We recommend that NCA-UEDVT should be treated with anticoagulation for ≥3 months in patients with an acceptably low bleeding risk. [GRADE - 1; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE OF EVIDENCE - B]

## Guideline 6.7: Noncancer-associated UEDVT treatment
We suggest that invasive interventions for NCA-UEDVT can be considered if the patient is highly symptomatic, has low surgical risk, and has a life expectancy of >1 year. [GRADE - 2; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE OF EVIDENCE - C]

## Guideline 6.8: Superior vena cava filter for patients with UEDVT
We suggest that, in highly selected patients with absolute contraindication to anticoagulation and elevated risk of life-threatening PE, temporary superior vena cava (SVC) filter placement could be considered. [GRADE - 2; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE OF EVIDENCE - C]

## Gradeification of UEDVT

## Gradeification system for UEDVT
No validated Gradeification system exists for UEDVT. A distinction between proximal and distal DVT similar to lower extremity Gradeification is lacking. Therefore, the best practice has been to report UEDVT based on etiology or inciting mechanism.

## Guideline 1.1
We suggest the use of a Gradeification based on etiology instead of an anatomic system to standardize the reporting and treatment of UEDVT. [BEST PRACTICE]

## Gradeification system based on etiology
The first step in successfully managing UEDVT is to understand the underlying process that led to its occurrence. Although UEDVT, like LEDVT, is a result of the triad of endothelial damage, hypercoagulability, and blood stasis, specific anatomical considerations peculiar to the upper extremity influence treatment considerably. Therefore, for the correct treatment of UEDVT, the first step is an accurate etiologic Gradeification as vTOS-associated UEDVT, catheter-associated UEDVT (CA-UEDVT), and noncatheter-associated UEDVT (NCA-UEDVT). Subsequent recommendations are based on this initial etiology Gradeification.

## Guideline 1.2
We suggest Gradeifying UEDVT into vTOS-associated (vTOS), CA-UEDVT, or NCA-UEDVT for management. [GRADE - 1; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE - B5-7].

## Risk factors

## vTOS-associated UEDVT
vTOS-associated UEDVT is defined as occurring in the absence of any other underlying conditions and is also known as unprovoked UEDVT. The most common cause is vTOS, a type of vascular compression syndrome of the subclavian vein in which upper extremity effort induces venous thrombosis, also known as Paget-Schroetter syndrome. When this is associated with intermittent upper extremity swelling in the absence of venous thrombosis, it is termed McCleery syndrome. vTOS-associated UEDVT also includes the subgroup of idiopathic UEDVT, which is exceedingly rare.
In Paget-Schroetter syndrome, as the subclavian vein exits the thoracic cavity and courses toward the upper extremity, it traverses the costoclavicular space—which contains the clavicle, costoclavicular ligament, subclavius muscle, subclavian vein, and first rib ( ). This space has the anterior border of the clavicle and the inferior border of the first rib as anterior-inferior boundaries. The subclavian vein is most frequently compressed here; and with elevation of the upper extremity above the shoulder, this space is further narrowed. The repetitive nature of this compression may lead to inflammation and eventually development of thrombus in the subclavian vein, which may extend distally.
 Factors that may lead to costoclavicular space narrowing include clavicular/first rib fracture, congenital narrowing or subclavius muscle hypertrophy and increase the risk of vTOS-associated UEDVT. Causes are often repetitive narrowing of costoclavicular space from overhead use of the upper extremity, whether owing to sports or occupation. , This results in significant differences in the characteristics of the patients who have UEDVT, who are usually younger, athletic, with fewer comorbidities, and are unlikely to have other concomitant predisposing factors.

## Secondary UEDVT
Secondary UEDVT, in contrast, is defined as occurring in patients with an underlying condition that directly led to the UEDVT. These causes include intravenous devices (IVDs) such as catheters, implantable cardiac devices or cannulas, malignancies, hypercoagulable disorders, or trauma. Within secondary UEDVT, there is a further subdivision of catheter-associated UEDVT (CA-UEDVT) and noncatheter-associated UEDVT (NCA-UEDVT).
Catheter-associated UEDVT is the best studied subgroup owing to its higher prevalence and need for more active treatment, often requiring catheter removal. These CA-UEDVTs can be associated with the presence of common CVCs, or peripherally inserted central catheters (PICCs), or other intravenous devices (IVDs) such as extracorporeal membrane oxygenation cannulas, cardiac pacemaker wires, or implantable defibrillators ( ). CA-UEDVT is the most common type of UEDVT in the inpatient population, because the use of IVDs is more prevalent in this group of patients. The incidence of CA-UEDVT is often correlated with the of number of catheter-days and varies depending on intrinsic patient characteristics (reason for catheter placement, comorbidities, hypercoagulable disorders, etc) and catheter-related factors (bore size, number of lumens, coatings, infusate, catheter care).
 Noncatheter-associated UEDVT is a large category of secondary UEDVT, which occurs owing to other underlying risk factors and predisposing conditions. These patients in general are older, with more comorbidities and greater frailty.

## Epidemiology
UEDVT is less common than LEDVT and thus larger trials and higher-quality data are more difficult to obtain. This has resulted in UEDVT management frequently being based on data extrapolated from LEDVT and comparative studies.
Additionally, the prevalence of UEDVT among all of the venous thromboembolic events varies according to whether the population is a sample of outpatients or inpatients. The prevalence of UEDVT of all DVTs ranges from 3% to 5% of all VTEs in outpatients and is mainly made up of vTOS-associated UEDVT, who are younger patients, or NCA-UEDVT, more frequently seen in older patients with several comorbidities.
Inpatient samples have a much greater proportion of UEDVT of all the VTEs, at around 30.4% to 36.5%. , This occurs owing to the absolute increase in secondary UEDVT because the risk factors for secondary UEDVT are more commonly present in inpatient populations—venous access in the upper extremity and comorbid conditions.
The yearly incidence of vTOS-associated UEDVT is estimated to be between 2/100,000 and 6/100,00 ; however, populations that have a greater proportion of athletes in sports that elicit upper extremity muscular hypertrophy may have higher rates of vTOS-associated UEDVT. Conversely, in already hospitalized patients, vTOS-associated UEDVT is to be considered a true exception. One single-center study that reviewed all patients who under DUS study of the upper extremity with 172 diagnosed UEDVTs and 74.1% were inpatients, reported only 2 (1.1%) had vTOS-associated UEDVT. 

## Guideline 2.1
vTOS-associated UEDVT is more common in patients who are younger, have less comorbid conditions. [GRADE - 1; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE - B , , , , ]
Secondary UEDVT is a disease of older patients, who have more comorbidities. The main risk factor is IVD use (eg, CVCs, peripherally inserted CVCs, cannulas). In an outpatient population, the incidence is estimated at 1/100,000; however, in inpatients, secondary UEDVT is the most common, whether a CA-UEDVT or NCA-UEDVT (owing to malignancy, recent surgery or trauma, hypercoagulability, bed rest). For inpatients, incidence is often expressed in relation to patient-days or catheter-days, and the incidence of secondary UEDVT has been estimated to be 0.32/10,000 patient-days. For CA-UEDVT, the incidence is higher, estimated at 0.10/1000 to 9.5/1000 catheter-days. This is variable depending on the population studied and the hospital catheter care protocols.
Additionally, the incidence of asymptomatic secondary UEDVT is much higher than symptomatic CA-UEDVT; therefore, prevalence and incidence studies show significant variability depending on whether asymptomatic patients were screened and/or included. CA-UEDVT prevalence and incidence is shown in .
 

## Guideline 2.2
Secondary CA-UEDVT or NCA-UEDVT is more common in inpatient populations, who are older, and have more comorbid conditions. [Grade - 1; Level Of Evidence - B , , , , ]

## Known risk factors for vTOS-associated UEDVT
The risk factors are considered indirect, because they are associated with narrowed costoclavicular space, in presence of scalene or subclavius muscle hypertrophy, costoclavicular ligament hypertrophy, clavicular or first rib callus formation, and repetitive exercise involving the upper extremity, especially with over-the-head movements. For secondary UEDVT, the known risk factors can be divided into patient-related factors, treatment-related factors, and venous access-related factors.
Common patient-related risk factors include race, a prior history of thrombosis, hypercoagulable disorders, hematological or oncologic disease, and gastrointestinal/liver disease. For treatment-related factors, the characteristics that have been linked to a higher risk of UEDVT include hemodialysis status, total parenteral nutrition, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation and cardiac catheterization. For CA-UEDVT, details such as catheter size, multiple lumens, type of coating, type of catheter used, location of catheterization, and presence of other catheter complications have been strongly associated with the development of UEDVT. The most consistent risk factors with the highest estimated effect are the presence of an intravenous device, active malignancy, and surgery or trauma of the upper extremity. A comprehensive review of all the known risk factors for secondary UEDVT are included in .
 

## Guideline 2.3
The most consistent and common risk factors for UEDVT are the presence of an intravenous device, active malignancy, and surgery or trauma of the upper extremity. [GRADE - 1; Level Of Evidence - B , , , ]

## Risk prediction models and laboratory markers
UEDVT is rare, comprising only 10% of thrombotic events and occurs owing to factors like indwelling lines, trauma, surgery, immobilization, or hypercoagulable states including malignancy, infection, and drug effects. , Unlike LEDVT, risk assessment scores, such as the Wells score, are not widely accepted. Moreover, it is currently unclear if risk modeling reduces can help to prevent UEDVT. 
Most of the available publications related to risk assessment in UEDVT are focused on catheter-associated DVT. The Michigan Risk Score was developed to identify factors associated with PICC-DVT. It is based on five predictor variables: history of DVT, active cancer, the number of PICC lumens, white cell count >12 000 at the time of PICC insertion, and presence of another CVC. It stratifies patients into four risk grades: Grade I (0 points), Grade II (1-2 points), Grade III (3-4 points), and Grade IV (>4 points). The Michigan Risk Score further distinguishes those at low vs high risk, with a five-fold greater risk of thrombosis for those in the risk Grade IV when compared with Grade I. The Michigan Risk Assessment Score for PICC-associated UEDVT is displayed in .
 The Caprini risk model is widely used in the assessment of venous thrombosis embolism, but few studies have applied it to UEDVT. In a prospective observational study that aimed to use the Caprini thrombosis risk model in patients receiving chemotherapy via a PICC line, the risk assessment model had 74.1% sensitivity and 44.1% specificity. Receiver operating characteristic analysis indicated that the area under the curve for the Caprini score risk model was 0.615 (95% confidence interval [CI], 0.537-0.693), suggesting at least moderate effectiveness as a prediction model for PICC-associated DVT. The authors propose a Caprini score of ≥7 as the threshold for higher risk status in the setting of PICC-related UEDVT. Notable limitations of the study were a small sample size (n = 201) and limited follow-up of 4 weeks.
In a retrospective cohort study, Sharp et al examined 2437 PICC insertion patients with cancer to determine the effect of the catheter-to-vein ratio (CVR) on rates of symptomatic thrombosis and identify the optimal CVR cut-off point. They analyzed the risk of thrombosis associated with a 45% CVR, which is the cut-off recommendation commonly used in clinical practice for PICC insertion. The key finding was that a 45% cut-off (≤45% vs ≥46%) was predictive, with the higher ratio associated with more than twice the risk of thrombosis (relative risk, 2.30; 95% CI, 1.202-4.373; P = .01). Of note, the cut-off was specific to patients with cancer and was not associated with the risk of thrombosis for those with an infection and other noncancer diagnoses.
In a large real-world registry from Japan, the researchers compared 74 patients with UEDVT vs 2424 with LEDVT. The prevalence of patients with UEDVT was 3.0% and patients with UEDVT more frequently had active cancer and CVC use. The cumulative 3-year incidence of recurrent VTE was not different between the two groups (9.7% and 7.4%; P = .43) and there was no significant difference in the risk of recurrent VTE between the groups (hazard ratio, 0.94; 95% CI, 0.36-2.01; P = .79). Interestingly, the latter results were found despite higher frequency of discontinuation of anticoagulation therapy in patients with UEDVT (63.7% and 29.7% at 1 year; P < .001).
Hong et al examined all cases (n = 260) of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) over a 17-year period at four Canadian academic centers. Overall, 14 of 260 patients (5.4%) with HIT developed UEDVT. The key finding was that the presence of a CVC in the setting of HIT was associated with an odds ratio of 17.1 (95% CI, 4.9-60.5; P < .0001) for UEDVT when compared with the control group that did not have a CVC. One study examined the utility of biomarkers in prospectively predicting CVC-related VTE. These biomarkers are circulating procoagulant microparticles, which are microvesicles largely derived from activated platelet and endothelium, indirect markers of thrombin generation, and factor VIII. Of the 42 inpatient children with a CVC, three CVC-related VTE events were reported. Apart from circulating procoagulant microparticles, these biomarkers were significantly different in patients who developed CVC-related thrombosis in comparison with those who did not develop a CVC-related thrombosis.
For patients with clinically suspected UEDVT, Constans and colleges developed a clinical decision score in a derivation cohort of 140 patients with suspected UEDVT of whom 50 patients (36%) had the diagnosis confirmed by ultrasound (the Constans and extended Constans can be found in ). The score combines clinical presentation (signs and symptoms) with risk factors for UEDVT. The Constans Clinical Decision Score consists of four factors: intravascular foreign material presents such as CVC or pacemaker (plus 1 point); localized pain (plus 1 point); unilateral edema (plus1 point); and other plausible diagnoses (minus 1 point). If the score is ≤1, upper extremity thrombosis is unlikely; if the score is ≥2, upper extremity thrombosis is likely. The Constans score was internally validated in a cohort of 103 patients and externally validated in a cohort of 214 patients with clinically suspected UEDVT. The area under the curve for the three cohorts (derivation, internal, and external, respectively) ranged from 0.67 in the derivation cohort to 0.77 in the external validation cohort. Taken in the appropriate context, the Constans score may help to identify higher risk patients, but it should not be used as a stand-alone tool. UEDVT risk-predicting models' performance are summarized in .
 

## Guideline 3.1
We suggest that determining the clinical probability of UEDVT using either the Constans or extended Constans score is preferred over the modified Wells score, and it should guide subsequent investigation. [GRADE - 2; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE - B , ]
The clinical decision-making process for diagnosing UEDVT integrates clinical prediction scores and diagnostic assays to stratify patients and guide further testing. In clinical practice, patients with a low Constans score and a negative D-dimer test can often forgo further testing, whereas those with a high Constans score or a positive D-dimer test should undergo confirmatory imaging, typically with compression ultrasonography. This combined approach minimizes unnecessary imaging and optimizes resource utilization while maintaining diagnostic accuracy. Further, predictive scoring offers a structured, evidence-based method to stratify risk and guide diagnostic pathways. The use of D-dimer in the workup of UEDVT is shown in .
 

## Guideline 3.2
For patients unlikely to have UEDVT based on clinical probability scores, we suggest that further testing with D-dimer should not be performed, unless all other diagnoses have been excluded. [GRADE - 2; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE - B; CONSENSUS]

## Guideline 3.3
We suggest that D-dimer testing should NOT be used to rule out CA-UEDVT. [GRADE - 2; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE - B ]

## Guideline 3.4
We recommend that D-dimer testing with a cutoff value of 500 μg/L may be used as a cost-effective initial test for ruling out NCA-UEDVT in patients with low pretest probability. [GRADE - 1; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE - B ]

## Diagnosis and workup
Diagnosing UEDVT relies on a combination of clinical evaluation and imaging modalities. Advanced diagnostic tools such as DUS, MRV, and catheter-based venography play critical roles in confirming the diagnosis, particularly in high-risk or complex patients. The lack of evidence on CTV for UEDVT diagnosis limits our ability to recommend this method of imaging. A comprehensive evaluation of imaging modalities utilized in the diagnosis of UEDVT is detailed in .
 DUS remains the first-line imaging modality for evaluating suspected UEDVT owing to its noninvasive nature, widespread availability, reproducibility, low cost, and high diagnostic accuracy. It can combine B-mode imaging to visualize thrombi and Doppler flow analysis to assess blood flow dynamics.
Ultrasound diagnostic criteria include absence of vein compressibility, visualization of thrombus echogenicity, and abnormal venous flow patterns. A significant limitation of Duplex ultrasound (DUS), which is highly effective in detecting thrombosis in distal veins such as the distal subclavian, axillary, and brachial veins, is its reduced efficacy in identifying thrombosis in the proximal subclavian vein owing to the shadowing effect caused by the clavicle. Therefore, a negative duplex scan does not definitively exclude UEDVT in patients with a high pretest probability. In such cases, additional imaging, preferably MRV or CTV is warranted to avoid delays in diagnosis and treatment. This approach ensures that clinically significant thrombi in anatomically challenging regions are not missed, thereby reducing the risk of preventable complications such as PE or PTS.

## Guideline 4.1
In patients with clinically suspected UEDVT, we recommend that an upper extremity DUS be the first diagnostic imaging examination. [GRADE - 1; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE - B ]

## Guideline 4.2
If more proximal UEDVT is suspected, upper extremity DUS may have a lower sensitivity and specificity. [GRADE - 1; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE - B , ]

## Guideline 4.3
We recommend that screening for CA-UEDVT in patients with long-term indwelling catheters be guided by institutional policies, beginning with DUS, but it should not be routinely conducted in asymptomatic patients. [GRADE - 1; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE - B; CONSENSUS]

## Guideline 4.4
If the initial DUS of the upper extremity is negative but clinical suspicion remains high, we recommend further investigation with MRV or, if MR is contraindicated, CTV to prevent treatment delays. [GRADE - 1; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE - B ]
MRV offers superior visualization of venous anatomy and pathology, particularly in cases where DUS results are inconclusive or when deeper structures need evaluation. This modality provides high-resolution, three-dimensional images without ionizing radiation, making it ideal for patients requiring more detailed anatomical assessment, such as those with TOS or central venous stenosis. MRV is particularly useful in evaluating thrombosis in the SVC and other central veins. However, its limited availability, higher cost, and potential contraindications, such as implanted metallic devices, may restrict its routine use.

## Guideline 4.5
Owing to lack of current evidence regarding CTV, we suggest that MRV should be preferred when available for diagnosing UEDVT. [GRADE - 2; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE - B ]
Catheter-based venography remains the gold standard for diagnosing UEDVT, offering unparalleled accuracy in visualizing venous structures and identifying thrombi. It can be combined with IVUS to reduce the amount of media contrast dye required. The drawbacks of this technique are its invasiveness, and potential complications such as contrast-induced nephropathy and radiation exposure. It is typically reserved for cases where noninvasive imaging is inconclusive, or intervention is planned.

## Guideline 4.6
If noninvasive studies are inconclusive in patients with high index of suspicion of UEDVT, and invasive endovascular therapy is to be sought, we suggest that initial venography be considered to diagnose and document the extent of thrombus after discussing risks and benefits with the patient. [GRADE - 2; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE - B; CONSENSUS]

## Guideline 4.7
We recommend that catheter-based venography be considered to better evaluate the degree of stenosis or compression of the upper extremity veins following thrombus removal if symptoms persist and with the intention to treat. [GRADE - 1; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE - B; CONSENSUS]
IVUS is an adjunct invasive imaging modality that can be used in the evaluation and management of UEDVT, particularly in complex cases. IVUS has gained acceptance in deep venous disease because it provides detailed visualization of venous anatomy, and it can assist in ruling out venous compression. It can also provide information on thrombus characteristics, which can guide interventional procedures such as catheter-directed thrombolysis or thrombectomy. Although IVUS is not routinely used in all UEDVT cases, it can be valuable in assessing the extent of thrombosis, identifying underlying anatomical abnormalities, and facilitating precise delivery of therapeutic interventions. Its use should be considered on a case-by-case basis, especially in patients with severe symptoms or those who may benefit from interventional therapies.

## Guideline 4.8
We recommend IVUS over venography in evaluating degree of stenosis, and for evaluation of technical success when performing endovascular interventions for UEDVT. It may also be performed at case completion to rule out or to document the presence of residual hemodynamically significant stenosis. [GRADE - 1; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE - B , , ]

## Prophylaxis
The three main prophylactic strategies for UEDVT are mechanical, chemical (pharmacological), and mechanochemical approaches. Mechanical methods, such as intermittent pneumatic compression devices, are often indicated in patients with LEDVT and their use has been extended to patients at high risk for UEDVT who have contraindications to anticoagulation, although infrequently.
Low-molecular-weight heparin and unfractionated heparin continue to be commonly used for DVT prophylaxis. Routine prophylaxis of UEDVT in patients with long-term indwelling central lines remains controversial based on limited data. Mechanochemical approaches combining mechanical and chemical methods are also based on a paucity of evidence. Although various prophylactic strategies exist for UEDVT, the supporting evidence is limited, and recommendations are often extrapolated from LEDVT studies. Clinical decisions regarding prophylaxis should be individualized. The use of prophylaxis and its related outcomes on UEDVT are shown in .
 

## Guideline 5.1
We recommend against mechanical devices with intermittent compression as a sole prophylaxis maneuver for the prevention of UEDVT. [GRADE - 1; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE - A ]

## Guideline 5.2
We recommend against the use of pharmacomechanical prophylaxis after vTOS-associated UEDVT has been already confirmed. [GRADE - 1; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE - B; CONSENSUS]

## Guideline 5.3
We recommend avoiding mechanical prophylaxis with intermittent compression devices for CA-UEDVT. [GRADE - 1; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE - B ]

## Guideline 5.4
We recommend against routine prophylaxis with anticoagulants for CA-UEDVT for prevention of UEDVT in patients with long-term CVCs. [GRADE - 1; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE - A , , , ]

## Guideline 5.5
We recommend prophylaxis with anticoagulants for CA-UEDVT in patients with moderate- to high risk of VTE and long-term CVCs. We also recommend that a risk/benefit analysis be performed based on risk of VTE and risk of bleeding to support decision-making. [GRADE - 1; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE - B ]

## Treatment
UEDVT is typically managed with anticoagulation therapy, which serves as the cornerstone of treatment. , The recommended standard regimen involves administration of oral Xa inhibitor preferably over vitamin K antagonists, with a total treatment duration of ≥3 months, as recommended by other consensus documents. , In cases where a CVC is implicated and remains necessary, anticoagulation should continue for the duration the catheter is in place and extend for 3 months after its removal. For patients with cancer-associated UEDVT, extended anticoagulation is recommended as long as the malignancy remains active. , 
The evidence supporting catheter-based interventions for UEDVT is primarily derived from studies on LEDVT, with limited direct research focusing on UEDVT. The feasibility of these invasive therapies to manage UEDVT may differ from treating LEDVT because of the unique anatomical and clinical considerations of the upper extremity. Catheter-based thrombus removal with either mechanical or thrombolytic techniques or both should be individualized owing to its limited evidence. The patient's clinical status, risk factors, and the expertise and resources available must be considered. Treatment modalities and related outcomes are summarized in .
 The use of SVC filters in UEDVT management is generally limited to specific scenarios. These devices may be considered for patients who have contraindications to anticoagulation therapy and are at significant risk for PE. However, the risks of SVC filters have been described as filter migration, cardiac tamponade, and the development of SVC syndrome secondary to thrombosis of the filter. Therefore, based on scarce evidence, temporary SVC filters should only be placed in highly selected patients who have absolute contraindication to anticoagulation and a high risk of life-threatening PE. 

## Guideline 6.1
We recommend that UEDVT be treated with oral Xa inhibitors over vitamin K antagonists for ≥3 months in patients with low bleeding risk. [GRADE - 1; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE - B; CONSENSUS]

## Guideline 6.2
We recommend that underlying causes such as malignancy and hypercoagulability disorders should be considered and investigated for patients with a first, unprovoked, episode of secondary UEDVT. [GRADE - 1; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE - B; CONSENSUS]

## Guideline 6.3
We suggest that extensive acute UEDVT (<21 days) may be treated with early thrombus removal strategies in severely symptomatic patients with expected life expectancy >1 year to reduce the incidence of PTS. [GRADE - 2; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE - B , ]

## Guideline 6.4
We recommend that management of vTOS-associated UEDVT with findings compatible with vTOS should include first rib resection. [GRADE - 1; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE - B , , , ]

## Guideline 6.5
We recommend that CA-UEDVT be treated with anticoagulation and, if the catheter is no longer necessary or alternative access is feasible to remove the catheter. [GRADE - 1; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE - B; CONSENSUS]

## Guideline 6.6
We recommend that CA-UEDVT be treated with anticoagulation and, if the catheter is no longer necessary or alternative access is feasible to remove the catheter. [GRADE - 1; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE - B; CONSENSUS]

## Guideline 6.6
We recommend that NCA-UEDVT be treated with anticoagulation for ≥3 months in patients with acceptable bleeding risk. [GRADE - 1; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE - B; CONSENSUS]

## Guideline 6.7
We suggest that interventions for NCA-UEDVT be considered if the patient is highly symptomatic, has low surgical risk, and has life expectancy >1 year. [GRADE - 2; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE - C; CONSENSUS]

## Guideline 6.8
We suggest that in highly selected patients with absolute contraindication to anticoagulation and high risk of life-threatening PE, temporary SVC filter placement be considered. [GRADE - 2; LEVEL OF EVIDENCE - C , , ]

## Author Contributions
Conception and design: RM, NM, BL
Analysis and interpretation: RM, YE, NM, LL, LS, EX, LR, CV, EF, BL, PFN, FA, MS, NT, AP
Data collection: RM, BL, PFN
Writing the article: RM, YE, NM, LL, LS, EX, LR, CV, EF, BL, PFN, FA, MS, NT, AP
Critical revision of the article: RM, YE, NM, LL, LS, EX, LR, CV, EF, BL, PFN, FA, MS, NT, AP
Final approval of the article: RM, YE, NM, LL, LS, EX, LR, CV, EF, BL, PFN, FA, MS, NT, AP
Statistical analysis: Not applicable
Obtained funding: Not applicable
Overall responsibility: RM

## Funding
The American Venous Forum has provided financial support for the initial portion of this project to B.K.L.’s research group at the University of Maryland.

## Disclosures
R.D.M. serves as a consultant for Inari Medical, Boston Scientific, and Penumbra. Y.E. serves as a consultant for Cook Medical and Inari Medical. N.J.M. is a consultant for Inari Medical, Medtronic, W. L. Gore & Associates, Philips, BD Bard, and Boston Scientific. E.F. serves as a consultant for Medtronic, Boston Scientific, and Koya Medical. N.T. serves as a consultant for Boston Scientific.

From the American Venous Forum

## Footnotes
The editors and reviewers of this article have no relevant financial relationships to disclose per the Journal policy that requires reviewers to decline review of any manuscript for which they may have a conflict of interest.
Disclaimer: The American Venous Forum (AVF) develops evidenced-based clinical practice guidelines as a resource to assist medical providers in the treatment of venous disease. The guideline recommendations contained herein are based on a recent review of available body of evidence. However, it must be noted that their applicability needs to reflect the limitations of those data, as they are subject to reassessment and revision when new knowledge emerges. Given these limitations, clinical practice guidelines are not intended to represent a statement of the standard of care, nor do they substitute for clinician judgment, nor supplant patient preference or shared decision-making. The AVF recognizes that departure from guidelines may be warranted when, in the reasonable judgment of the treating clinician, such course of action is indicated by the clinical presentation of the patient, limitations of available resources, new advances in knowledge or technology, or patient preference. The reader must rely solely on their own judgment to determine what practices and procedures, whether included in this practice guideline or not, are appropriate for them, their patient, their institution, or their practice.

## References