2276gsjGlobal Spine JournalGlobal Spine JSAGE PublicationsPMC10226053102260531022605310.1177/21925682231166109E-Posters
2452023132 Suppl215S215S–567S3052023© The Author(s) 2023This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 4.0 License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/) which
permits non-commercial use, reproduction and distribution of the work as
published without adaptation or alteration, without further permission
provided the original work is attributed as specified on the SAGE and Open
Access pages (https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoIssue date 2023 May.

## Arthroplasty-Cervical

## 77

## P001: Anterior cervical hybrid constructs reduce upper adjacent segment
hypermobility compared to anterior cervical discectomy and fusion

Fenil Bhatt

1

, Lindsay Orosz

2

, Tarek Yamout

1

, Christopher Good

1

, Anthony Bucci

2

, Brandon Allen

2

, Thomas Schuler

1

, Ehsan Jazini

1

, and Colin Haines

1

1

The Virginia Spine Institute, Reston, United States

2

National Spine Health Foundation, Reston, United States

Introduction: The traditional surgical treatment for symptomatic
cervical degenerative disc disease is anterior cervical discectomy and
fusion (ACDF). Despite its effectiveness, one long-term consequence of
fusion may be an increased risk of adjacent segment degeneration resulting
in the need for additional surgery. Cervical disc arthroplasty has been
shown to preserve physiologic range of motion (ROM) and decrease the need
for adjacent segment surgery. For patients with multilevel pathology
requiring at least one level of fusion, there is growing interest in
combining anterior cervical fusion with arthroplasty to maintain as much
motion as possible with a partial motion-preserving procedure. This study
primarily aims to compare postoperative adjacent segment motion between
anterior cervical hybrid surgery (ACH) and ACDF. Secondarily, total global
(C2-7) motion, construct motion, and alignment parameters will be compared
between groups. Material and Methods: In this retrospective
cohort study at a multi-surgeon spine practice, 2- and 3-level ACH and ACDF
cases were identified between 2013 and 2021. Patients with incomplete
records, imaging, or less than 6 months of follow-up were excluded.
Demographic and radiographic data were obtained from medical and imaging
records. Motion detection in degrees was analyzed on flexion/extension views
using Cobb angles to measure lordosis at C2-C7 (global), the construct, and
upper and lower adjacent segments. Pre- and post-operative neutral lateral
x-rays were analyzed for alignment parameters: C2-C7 global lordosis,
cervical sagittal vertical axis (cSVA), and T1 slope (T1S). Differences
between ACH and ACDF cohorts were determined using independent t-tests for
continuous variables and Fisher’s exact test for categorical variables.
Results: There were 50 patients in each cohort (2-level
cases: 18 ACH, 20 ACDF) (3-level cases: 32 ACH, 30 ACDF). Hybrid patients
were overall younger in age, (51 ACH, 59 ACDF, p < 0.001) with lower CCI
scores (0.8 ACH, 1.7 ACDF, p < 0.001). Postoperatively, total ROM across
the construct was significantly greater in the ACH cohort (16.3° ACH, 4.7°
ACDF, p < 0.001) as was total global ROM (38.0° ACH, 28.0°, p <
0.001). The degrees of motion that decreased at the level of the construct
(postoperative minus preoperative construct motion) were significantly less
in the ACH cohort (-10.0° ACH, -18.1° ACDF, p < 0.001). Postoperatively,
the degrees of motion at the upper adjacent segment were significantly
increased compared to preoperatively in the ACDF cohort (-1.3° ACH, 1.6°
ACDF, p < 0.005). Conclusion: In this study, 2- and 3-level
ACH constructs partially preserved motion across the operative levels
compared to ACDF constructs. As a result, postoperative total global ROM was
better in the ACH cohort and postoperative upper adjacent segment
hypermobility was seen only in the ACDF cohort. This supports the
consideration of combining fusion with arthroplasty in patients with
multilevel cervical pathology that require at least 1 level of fusion.

## 423

## P002: To accomplish laminoplasty cross tightening and C3 laminectomy for
laminoplasty

Takahiro Iizuka

1

, Tokuji Kashiro

1

, Tetsuro Takai

1

, and Hiroshige Debata

1

1

Kouseikai Takai Hospital, Orthopaedic Spine Surgery, Nara,
Japan

Introduction: Neck pain following cervical laminoplasty and loss
of kinematic ROM are still the major concerns as well as neurological
recovery. We reported Cross Tightening for laminoplasty at Global Spine
Congress 2023 in Las Vegas. This procedure dramatically reduces
postoperative neck pain. Considering ROM of cervical motion, kinematic ROM
is limited by laminoplasty because enlarged lamina may interrupt the
cervical extension. From a kinematic point of view, the upper cervical spine
C0-1-2 is more flexible in extension and flexion of the cervical spine. We
arranged the procedure for the next step to make it a cutting-edge method
for cervical laminoplasty. We combined Cross Tightening and C3 laminectomy
for postoperative axial neck pain and also postoperative neck motion
preservation. We report the preliminary results of cervical laminoplasty
with Cross Tightening and C3 laminectomy regarding axial pain and
kinematical ROM after surgery. Aim: We aimed to report the
results of Cross Tightening and C3 laminectomy (combined laminoplasty)
regarding postoperative neck pain (axial pain) and kinematic ROM of the
cervical spine. Materials and Methods: We introduce the
preliminary results of 5 patients who had Cross Tightening and C3
laminectomy compared with 21 patients who had C3-7 laminoplasty with Cross
Tightening. Techniques of Cross Tightening Muscle and C3 laminectomy. 1.
Patients positioned in the prone position with Mayfield. 2. Skin incision
was made in the midline over C2-Th1. 3. Multifidus Muscles attached to C2
were ligated with 5 Ethbond before detaching. 4. Multifidus Muscles attached
to C7 were also ligated with 5 Ethbond before detaching. 5. Laminoplasty
C4-7 and C3 laminectomy was performed with the left side open using spacers
Camber from NuVasive. 6. Muscles were reconstructed in anatomical direction
tightening to the opposite fascia. We evaluated the cervical vertebral
alignment (C1-Th1) for each patient and neck pain (VAS) and ROM on lateral
X-rays at 12 weeks after surgery. Results: Laminoplasty with C3
laminectomy improved ROM of the cervical spine compared with C3-7
laminoplasty. Neck Pain was also significantly reduced at 12 weeks after
surgery in all of them. Conclusion: CSM often requires C3 to C7
laminoplasty, but post-operative neck pain is the major concern though many
reports suggest us the preservation of C7 muscle structures. In preparing
laminoplasty we require the removal of muscle attachment from the laminae.
We often observe Multifidus Muscles attached to spinous processes are
shortened as if they were gum bands. Besides C2 and C7 have a larger spinous
process which seems to have a major role in cervical motion. Enlargement of
the laminae would interrupt the extension motion. We focused on muscle
function restoration to reduce postoperative neck pain and ROM. We report
the preliminary restoration methods for cervical motor function with Cross
Tightening Multifidus Muscles. This procedure which is combined with Cross
Tightening and C3 laminectomy may restore the muscular function in cervical
motion in the normal anatomical direction and may be superior to the
conventional procedure in terms of postoperative neck pain and ROM.

## 566

## P003: Comparison of relative value units per operative time between
anterior cervical discectomy and fusion (ACDF) vs cervical disc replacement
(CDR)

Amanda Faust

1

, Don Moore

1

, and Mathew Resnick

1

1

Missouri Orthopedic Institute, Orthopedic Surgery, Columbia, United
States

Introduction: Anterior cervical discectomy and fusion (ACDF) has
been the gold standard for surgical treatment of cervical radiculopathy for
many years. Recently however, cervical disc replacement (CDR) has become an
alternative to treat cervical radiculopathy and myelopathy. Data supports
favorable outcomes for both myelopathy and non-myelopathy use of disc
arthroplasty (Samuel). It is important to assess and contrast all aspects of
the two procedures to compare their strengths and weaknesses and assist
surgeons in procedure selection. Material and Methods:
Retrospective study including patients treated at the University of Missouri
Hospital and the Missouri Orthopaedic Institute from 2019-2022. Patients
will be identified via CPT codes used for 1-level ACDF and CDR and data will
be extracted via chart review. Results: The total patient
cohort consisted of 361 patients. 124 patients met inclusion criteria, but
of these patients only 33 underwent a CDR. Due to the relatively smaller CDR
patient population, data analysis was collected on the most recent 33 ACDF
operations to keep the two groups of comparable size. The mean RVU per hour
for ACDF was 24.21 (p < 0.001) while the mean RVU per hour for CDR was
14.83 (p < 0.001). Patients who had a pre-op diagnosis of myelopathy
and/or stenosis were more likely to receive an ACDF than a CDR. Older age,
hypertension, and an ASA score of greater than 3 were more common in the
ACDF group. Pre-operatively ACDF patients had higher PROMIS Pain Intensity
scores (67.59 vs. 62.55 p < 0.03) as well as higher Neck Disability Index
(NDI) scores (47.43 for ACDF vs. 34.33 for CDR p < 0.01). Post-op length
of stay was significantly longer for patients who underwent an ACDF than
those in the CDR group (0.89 vs. 0.49 days p < 0.05). Post-operatively
ACDF patients had higher NDI scores within the 6-12 week follow up window
than patients who underwent CDR (27.75 vs 16.15 p < 0.03). There were not
significant differences in NDI scores between the two groups within the 6-12
month follow up period. Conclusion: ACDF was associated with
significantly higher RVUs per minute compared to CDR. The difference in
pre-operative pain and disability scores shows that patients with more
severe symptoms are more likely to undergo an ACDF than a CDR. Despite the
difference in patient population, patients in both groups had similar
6-12-month NDI and PROMIS scores post-operatively. These findings highlight
the importance of considering physician reimbursement and patient reported
outcomes in selecting surgical treatment options for patients with cervical
spinal problems.

## 1101

## P004: Wear-related osteolysis after implantation of the M6-C artificial
cervical disc: first longterm follow-up results

Sonja Häckel

1,2,3

, Jessica Gaff

2

, Andrew Miles

2,4

, Paul Taylor

2,4

, Michael Kern

2,4

, and Gregory Cunningham

1,2,4

1

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Fiona Stanley Hospital, Murdoch,
Australia

2

NeuroSpine Institute, Murdoch, Australia

3

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery and Traumatology, Inselspital,
Bern University Hospital, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland

4

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, St John of God Hospital, Murdoch,
Australia

Introduction: The M6-C™ artificial cervical disc (Orthofix,
Lewisville, Texas) is a routinely used cervical total disc replacement
(CTDR) implant. In June 2020 Australian Therapeutic and Goods Administration
published an implant hazard report because the Instructions for Use
contained insufficient information regarding the potential consequences of
peri-prosthetic osteolysis associated with the use of the M6-CTM. In a
recent study, it was reported that after mid-term follow-up, 34% of patients
implanted with the M6-C™ required revision surgery for wear-related
osteolysis with an average of 5.5 years postop. However, their study did not
report on the incidence and grade of osteolysis, as well as indication for
revision surgery. Methods: We retrospectively analysed the
radiographic and clinical outcomes (EuroQuol-5D, Neck Disability Index,
Visual analogue scale for neck and arm pain) of data collected during
long-term follow-up of patients who underwent CTDR with the
M6-CTM implant at a multi-centre between 2011 and 2015. All
patients were followed up with radiographic imaging (conventional X-ray, CT
scan) of the cervical spine to detect osteolysis. Clinical outcome was
determined by collecting patient-related questionnaires (EuroQuol-5D, Neck
Disability Index, Visual analogue scale for neck and arm pain). Ethical
approval was obtained from the local Institutional Review Board.
Results: A total of 86 patients underwent CTDR with the
M6-C™. Follow-up was completed in 40 patients with a mean age of 44 years
(53% women). The mean follow-up time was 8.6 years (7.5-11 years). Prior to
our follow-up, only 4 patients (10 %) had revision surgery, but not due to
osteolysis. Radiographs showed abnormal findings in 33/40 patients (83 %):
17/40 patients (40 %) had osteolysis. Three patients had mild, 8 patients
had moderate, and 5 patients had severe osteolysis. In addition, 16/40
patients (40 %) had various degrees of heterotopic ossification which led to
a fused and immobile disc in 13 of these patients. There was no significant
correlation between osteolysis and clinical outcome.
Conclusion: In our cohort, we see a lower reoperation rate
of the M6-C™ implant compared to the literature. However, osteolysis can be
asymptomatic. Additional revision surgeries might have to be done after
imaging and clinical follow-up will be completed. Our study has some
limitations. The study design is retrospective, and we do not have a control
group. Furthermore, 20% of patients refused to follow up which is a
potential bias. The long-term radiographic follow-up results of the M6-C™ in
this cohort are not favourable. Patients with this implant should undergo
interval monitoring for major osteolysis or implant failure.

## 1257

## P005: The position of the cervical prosthesis in hybrid surgery for
two-level cervical degenerative disc disease and its effect on cervical
range of motion

Matjaz Vorsic

1

, Rok Koncnik

1

, and Valentin Rokavec

1

1

Neurosurgery, University Hospital Maribor, Maribor,
Slovenia

Background: There are no clear indications at which level the
cervical disc arthroplasty (CDA) should be performed in the Hybrid surgery
(HS), involving the combination of ACDF and CDA. Retrospective analysis
comparing the clinical and radiographic results in the treatment of
two-level cervical degenerative disease was performed comparing the patients
who underwent the HS and had the artificial disc implanted at different
levels. Materials and Methods: After applying the inclusion
criteria, 34 patients with two-level cervical degenerative disc disease
where conservative treatment failed were included in the study. All the
patients had been operated with the hybrid procedure. The CDAs in 18
patients were implanted above and in 16 patients bellow the ACDF level.
Clinical outcomes were assessed before and at regular intervals until one
year after the procedure using neurological examination, the Neck Disability
Index (NDI) and Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) for neck and arm pain, with 15%
improvement in NDI and 20% in VAS defined as a clinically significant. The
cervical range of motion was evaluated using flexion-extension parameters.
Results: The groups were similar at baseline both
clinically and statistically. Both groups had a statistically significant
improvement in NDI and VAS for neck and arm pain (p > .05) and there was
no statistically significant difference between groups at any point of
investigation. There was no statistically significant difference in the
C2-C7 ROM between the two groups at 12 and 24 months postoperatively (p >
.05). The location of the arthroplasty at the level C5/6 or C4/5 provided
better ROM compared to the level C6/7. Conclusions: Both groups
resulted in significant pain reduction and functional outcome for the
patients in short and long term period. The combination of fusion and
arthroplasty can be adjusted to each level allowing segmental motion
preservation at the affected levels and minimizing hypermobility at adjacent
levels. The ROM was more affected by the level of the artificial disc
implantation than relationship of the CDA towards ACDF.

## 1288

## P006: Static finite element method analysis of 3D printed compressible
non-articulating cervical disc prosthesis

Samuel Brehm

1

, Miguel Ruiz Cardozo

1

, Hau-Ju Ting

2

, Aspen Chadderdon

2

, Aneesh Syal,

2

, Gabriel Trevino Verastegui

1

, Abby Carey-Ewend

1

, Matthew De la Paz

1

, Ahmed Hanafy

1

, Julio Jauregui

3

, Magalie Cadieux

1

, and Camilo Molina

1

1

Neurosurgery

2

Biomedical Engineering

3

Orthopaedic Surgery, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis,
United States

Introduction: Non-articulating disc prothesis were created to
mimic the compressive and flexural stiffness of natural discs. These discs
are designed with two metallic endplates with a homogeneous elastic core or
a mobile central core with peripheral fibers. However, these
non-articulating discs have a variety of issues including an unstable center
of rotation, friction of fibers on endplates, endplate to elastomeric core
binding failure, and anteroposterior shift of one endplate relative to the
other. In order to solve some of these problems, we designed a unibody, all
metal, compressible, non-articulating cervical disc arthroplasty (CDA). We
quantified the theoretical elastic stiffness of the design in compression,
flexion-extension bending, lateral bending, and axial rotation and compared
the numbers to that of natural cervical discs. A prototype was also produced
to check manufacturability. Material and Methods: We ran finite
element analysis (FEA) using Fusion 360 for the novel disc prosthesis in
compression, lateral bending, and axial rotation. In all simulations the
material choice was Ti-6Al-4V the inferior endplate was rigidly fixed, and
the superior endplate had the external force/moment distributed evenly over
its superior surface. For compression, lateral bending, and axial rotation
the applied force/moment was 1 N, 1 Nm, and 1 Nm respectively. Stiffness was
calculated by dividing the resultant displacements by the applied
force/moment. The prototype of the novel disc prothesis was 3D printed out
of Ti-6Al-4V alloy by a direct metal laser sintering service.
Manufacturability was assessed by gross examination of the geometry of the
delivered prototype. Results: The artificial disc and natural
cervical discs have a compressive stiffness of 513 N/mm and 492 N/mm
respectively (4.4% error). Due to symmetry, the artificial disc had equal
flexion-extension and lateral bending stiffnesses. The artificial disc and
natural cervical discs have a lateral bending stiffness of 0.12 Nm/deg and
0.9 Nm/deg respectively (87% error). The artificial disc and natural
cervical discs have a axial rotation stiffness of 5 Nm/deg and 0.8 Nm/deg
respectively (525% error). The gross examination of the printed prototype
revealed correct geometrical features with no missing or additional
features. Additionally, the prototype length, width, and height were all
within 0.5 mm error. Conclusion: The novel device produced
overall similar mechanics to natural discs in terms of elastic stiffness.
The disc was the worst at matching axial stiffness rotation, which would
mean loss of axial rotation range of motion when implanted. The gross
examination of the prototype showed that the device was manufacturable and
had no feature size errors or overhang errors common to 3D prints. The 3D
printable nature of the device means it has the potential to be easily
individualized to each patient. This is good because optimizing disc height
would minimize over or under distraction and optimizing endplate convexity
and size would minimize bone preparation and lower heterotopic ossification.
The next steps would be static and dynamic mechanical testing of the
prototype as a further proof of concept.

## 2020

## P007: How does the type of multilevel anterior cervical constructs
influence cervical sagittal parameters and adjacent disk measurements? A
retrospective analysis

Diogo Morgado

1

, João Paulo Andrade

1

, and Mário Vale Campos

1

1

Neurosurgery, Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Ocidental, Lisbon,
Portugal

Introduction: Cervical sagittal parameters are related with
clinical outcomes after multilevel anterior cervical discectomy and fusion.
However, there is no comparison of these parameters after fusion (cage or
cage plus plate), total disc replacement (TDR) or hybrid constructs. The aim
of this work was to assess the impact of the type of multilevel anterior
cervical constructs in the cervical sagittal parameters and adjacent levels.
Material and Methods: The authors performed a retrospective
analysis of all the multilevel (more than one) anterior cervical spine
surgeries performed between 2015 and 2021 due to degenerative disease.
Cervical sagittal parameters included: superior and inferior level disk
height and angle, cervical lordosis using the Jackson physiological stress
line method, C2-C7 Sagittal Vertical Axis (SVA), Thoracic Inlet Angle (TIA),
neck tilt, T1 Slope and cervical tilt. Then a delta of the pre- and
postoperative of the superior and inferior disk height and angle, and
cervical lordosis was performed. Clinical data was evaluated by
IBM® SPSS Statistics (version 27.0). Quantitative data was
first tested for its normality and homogeneity of variance and according to
different situations, they were tested by Student’s t test or Mann–Whitney U
test. Qualitative data was tested by Chi-square test. p value < 0.05 was
considered statistically significant. Results: There were 140
patients analysed with a mean age of 57.7 (± 11.6). From these 54.3% were
female and 36.5% were smokers. Myelopathy was present in 52.7% and
radiculopathy in 63%. Longer constructs were associated with myelopathy (p
< 0.05). In 83.6% a 2-level construct was performed, in 15.7% a 3-level
and in 0.7% a 4-level. In 81.4% fusion was performed, in 5.7% a TDR and in
12.9% a hybrid construct. Operative complications were described in three
cases (all fusion) and four patients underwent second surgery (three after
fusion procedures and one after TDR). The following values are organized
respectively according to the sequence - cage, cage plus plate, TDR and
hybrid construct. The mean superior level disc height delta was 0.64, 0.18,
0.74, and 0.08, the mean superior level disc angle was 0.34°, 1.00°, -1.90°
and -1.13°. The mean preoperative cervical lordosis was 9.52°, 13.48°, 7.42°
and 7.74°. The mean cervical lordosis delta was 4.84°, 4.06°, 7.02° and
6.98°. The mean TIA was 79.21°, 81.98°, 81.68° and 73.86°. The correlation
between the mean preoperative cervical lordosis and the mean TIA was
statistically significant (p < 0.01). Conclusion: There was
no significant difference in the type of construct and the rate of
reoperation or complications, rendering them all equally safe. There was a
significant association between the TIA and pre-operative cervical lordosis,
providing support that there’s a compensating increase in cervical lordosis
with higher TIA. While the TIA was lower in hybrid constructs, both these
and TDR were associated with a greater increase in cervical lordosis.
Further studies, namely prospective randomized studies are needed to
evaluate the impact of TDR and hybrid constructs in cervical sagittal
parameters and adjacent segment disease.

## Arthroplasty-Lumbar

## 485

## P008: Efficacy and safety of the ultrasound bone scalpel in lumbar
laminectomies

Anthony Steinle

1

, Jeffrey Chen

1

, Alexander O'Brien

1

, Wilson Vaughan

1

, Andrew Croft

1

, William Waddell

1

, Justin Vickery

1

, Robert Elrod

1

, Hani Chanbour

2

, Julian Lugo-Pico

1

, Scott Lawrence Zuckerman

1,2

, Amir Abtahi

1,2,3

, and Byron Stephens

1,2,3

1

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery

2

Department of Neurological Surgery

3

Center for Musculoskeletal Research, Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, Nashville, TN, United States

Introduction: Lumbar laminectomy is commonly performed to
address complaints of neurogenic claudication or radicular leg pain. Despite
recent advances in applied instruments and surgical techniques, the
incidence of inadvertent dural injuries caused by traditional laminectomy
techniques is still considerable. The ultrasonic bone scalpel (UBS) uses
high-frequency oscillation to create localized tissue disruption and
preferentially cut through hard surfaces such as bone. It has been shown to
improve speed and reduce intraoperative complications in laminectomies for
cervical and thoracic spondylotic myelopathy when compared to traditional
methods using a high-speed burr, punch forceps, rongeurs, etc. We sought to
evaluate whether the use of the UBS in lumbar laminectomies would result in
equivalent safety, efficacy, and PROs compared to traditional methods. We
hypothesize that using the UBS will demonstrate equivalent safety, efficacy
and PROs while decreasing rates of durotomies compared to traditional
methods. Material and Methods: Data from a prospectively
collected, single-institution registry was queried between 01/01/2019 -
09/01/2021 for patients with a primary diagnosis of lumbar stenosis who
underwent an isolated laminectomy, laminectomy and fusion, or laminectomy
and fusion with an interbody. Two patient groups included: laminectomies
using traditional methods vs UBS method. Outcomes included 3-month values
for all PROMIS subdomains, NRS pain scores, ODI percentage, and PHQ-9
scores, as well as complications, reoperations, or readmissions within 3
months. Patients who received a lumbar laminectomy by traditional methods
were propensity matched against patients who received a lumbar laminectomy
by the UBS in 2:1 fashion. Covariates selected for matching included age,
operation type, and number of levels. A variety of statistical tests were
used to compare groups. Results: 231 patients who received a
laminectomy with traditional methods were propensity matched against 32
patients treated with the ultrasound bone scalpel, resulting in 64
“traditional group” patients and 32 “UBS group” patients. Analysis found no
differences between groups for demographic and baseline measures except for
race and ethnicity. There were no differences between groups at 3 months for
all PROMIS subdomain scores, NRS back/leg pain scores, %ODI or PHQ-9.
Additionally, there were no significant differences for any PROs at 12
months. There was a significant difference in rates of durotomies between
the traditional and UBS groups (12.5% vs 0.0%, p = 0.049). Among those
experiencing intraoperative durotomy, 16.67% required re-operation. There
were no significant differences between groups in any other complication
rate as well as reoperation and readmission rates. Conclusion:
Laminectomies are commonly performed on the lumbar spine to remedy a variety
of spine pathologies, with the most common complication being an iatrogenic
durotomy. We sought to compare outcomes between patients who received a
lumbar laminectomy through traditional methods versus the UBS. Our results
suggest the UBS helps decrease the rate of injury to the dura, thus reducing
the incidence of durotomies. We believe this data provides valuable
information to surgeons and patients about the safety and efficacy of the
UBS in lumbar laminectomies. Further studies should investigate if the UBS
decreases operative time for lumbar laminectomies compared to traditional
methods.

## 656

## P009: Patterns of opioid use prior to single-level lumbar fusion are
associated with postoperative opioid use and adverse events

Jayme Koltsov

1

, Tanmaya Sambare

2

, John Kleimeyer

1

, Eugene Carragee

1

, Kirkham Wood

1

, Todd Alamin

1

, and Serena Hu

1

1
Orthopaedic Surgery, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Palo Alto, United States

2
Orthopaedic Surgery, Harbor-UCLA Medical
Center, West Carson, United States
Introduction: Opioid pain medication use is common among lumbar
spine surgery patients and has been related to increased rates of chronic
dependence, poorer surgical outcomes, and increased surgical costs. We
hypothesize that it is possible to identify phenotypes of patients based on
their patterns of pain medication use preoperatively, and that these
phenotypes will relate to postoperative opioid use, complications, discharge
disposition, length of stay, costs and healthcare resource utilization.
Materials and Methods: Adult patients undergoing primary
single level lumbar fusion with a diagnosis of stenosis were identified from
the IBM® Marketscan® databases (2007-2015). Patients
were required to have at least 1 year of continuous health plan enrollment
pre and postoperatively in a plan providing outpatient pharmacy data. Group
based trajectory modeling was used to identify distinct patient phenotypes
based on their preoperative patterns of opioid usage. Multivariable logistic
regression was used to assess relationships between these phenotypes and
postoperative outcomes after adjusting for patient and surgical factors.
Results: The final analysis comprised 9,464 patients (age
58 ± 12 years, 58.6% female). 60% of patients used opioids within the 3
months preceding their fusion procedure. 5 distinct phenotypes of
preoperative opioid use were identified: A 
high
 dose phenotype (17.1% of patients), using on average 60 morphine
milligram equivalents (MME) per day 1 year prior to surgery and increasing
linearly to > 80 MME per day preoperatively; a 
medium
 dose phenotype (16.4%), using 10 MME per day 1 year prior to
surgery and increasing linearly to 25 MME per day preoperatively, a
phenotype with no use 1 year prior to surgery who began using increasing
amounts of opioids ∼6 months preoperatively, increasing to > 30 MME per
day (
steep 6m rise
 phenotype, 11.6%); a phenotype with very low opioid use 1 year
preoperatively (likely those taking intermittently only as needed) who began
increasing 3 months prior to surgery, reaching 15 MME per day (
intermittent to 3m
 phenotype, 19.8%); and a group using no opioids until 3 months
prior to surgery, who began increasing 3 months prior to surgery, reaching
15 MME per day (
naïve to 3m
 phenotype, 35.0%). These phenotypes were related in a
dose-response manner (based on duration and maximum preoperative dosage) to
postoperative opioid use at 3m, 6m, 1yr, and 2 years, and complications and
all-cause readmissions within 90-days (p < 0.001 for all). For example,
patients in the intermittent to 3m phenotype had 8.3 (4.7,
14.6) times the odds for opioid use 3m postoperatively, those in the
medium phenotype had 16.7 (7.4, 38.1) times the odds
for use 3m postoperatively, and those in the high phenotype
had 90.7 (12.6, 653.1) times the odds for opioid use 3 months
postoperatively relative to patients not taking opioids prior to surgery (p
< 0.001 for each). Interestingly, patients in the naïve to
3m phenotype did not have increased odds for opioid use at 3m
postoperatively relative to those who did not use opioids preoperatively.
Conclusion: Distinct phenotypes of preoperative opioid use
can be identified and are associated with postoperative opioid use,
complications, and readmissions. Analysis of LOS, discharge disposition,
costs and HCRU are ongoing.

## 1379

## P010: Spondylolysis with vertebral listhesis: choice of the surgical
technique according to the injury degree

Carlos Mariano Nirino

1

1

Orthopedics and Traumatology, Hospital Santamarina, Monte Grande,
Argentina

Introduction: The aim of this paper is to describe the correct
choice of the surgical technique depending on the injury degree in diagnosis
of spondylolysis with listhesis grade 1, 2 and 3 according to Meyerding
classification and the results obtained. 31 patients were evaluated between
2010 and 2021; all operated by the Orthopedics and Traumatology department
of the Santamarina Hospital of Monte Grande in Buenos Aires, Argentina. As
service criteria for listhesis grade 1 and 2 we use the “smile” technique
due to the great postoperative reduction achieved; this consists of fixing
the lysis with total or partial reduction of the listhesis with
transpedicular screws and a subspinous bar. For grade 3, we performed a two
level arthrodesis with screws and bars because of the great risk of injury
with a great reduction and the complexity of the previous technique in this
grade. Surgical treatment was indicated in all cases for low back and/or
sciatic pain. Postoperative follow-up is 10 months to 3 years.
Materials and methods: 31 patients were evaluated. 18 men
and 13 women. All studied by Rx and CT and treated by the same surgeon. All
lysis and listhesis were at L4-L5 (11 cases) and L5-S1 (20 cases) level,
only patients with grades 1, 2 and 3 were included. Higher grades and
patients older than 45 years old were excluded from this study. Surgical
technique: Smile technique (grade 1-2): Remove the periostium of the lamina;
locate of the lysis, clean it until leaving two facing bone surfaces.
Placement of two transpedicular screws in the lytic vertebra and a “U” bar
under its spinous process. Reduction of the listhesis using an approximator
which grasps the bar under the spinous and above the tulip transpedicular
screw, upon placing in the lysis a bone graft taken from the spiny overlying
vertebra. Arthrodesis (grade 3): Posterior fixation of two levels with 4
screws and 2 bars. Arthrodesis was made by performing a decortication of the
lamina, imbrication of the spinous and using blood from the posterior
superior iliac crest pulled out through an abbocath and chipped local bone.
Results: The results were uniformly good with total or
partial remission of the symptoms, consolidation of the lysis and total or
partial reduction of listhesis in grades 1 and 2 with recovery of the
ability of flexion extension of the lumbar spine in all grades. Only in one
case we had a postoperative complication with the smile technique (listhesis
grade 2) with partial deficit of the peroneal muscles which was fully
recovered after 3 months; we attribute this to a root compression during the
reduction of the listhesis with this technique. The rest of the patients did
not present postoperative complications. Conclusions: We
consider that the correct choice of surgical technique is imperative to
obtain good results and to avoid possible injuries and secuelas. We have
used this selection of surgical techniques for years with great results; the
patients do not present postoperative complications with a good remission of
their symptoms.

## Basic Science

## 90

## P011: Pin fracture in magnetically controlled growing rods: influence of
the year of manufacture

Martina Tognini

1

, Harry Hothi

1

, Elisabetta Dal Gal

1

, Johann Henckel

1

, Masood Shafafy

2

, Stewart Tucker

3

, Edel Broomfield

3

, John Skinner

1

, and Alister Hart

1

1

University College London, The Royal National Orthopaedic Hospital
and Institute of Orthopaedics and Musculoskeletal Science, Stanmore,
United Kingdom

2

Department of Trauma and Orthopaedics, Nottingham University
Hospitals NHS Trust, Nottingham, United Kingdom

3

Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Foundation Trust,
London, United Kingdom

Introduction: In 2019 the manufacturer released a field safety
notice, indicating that rods manufactured prior to 26th March
2015 had a 5% risk of post-implantation pin fracture occurring. Rods made
after this date have locking pins that are thicker in diameter and of a
tougher stainless-steel alloy; the FSN indicated that these rods did not
exhibit the same fracture issue based on post-market surveillance data
available at the time. A previous retrieval study reported evidence of
locking pin fractures in 62 out of 105 (59%) and 6 out of 29 (21%) of rods
collected at their centre that had been manufactured before and after this
date, respectively. The aim of this retrieval study was to better understand
the impact of the design changes on the performance of MCGRs collected at
our retrieval centre. To achieve this, we compared the prevalence of locking
pin fractures between MAGEC rods manufactured before and after
26th March of 2015. Material and Methods: This
was a retrieval study investigating 86 MCGRs that were consecutively
received at our centre after having been removed from fifty-two patients.
The implants were explanted by 11 different surgeons across 8 different
hospitals. The implants were divided into two groups: those manufactured
before 26th March 2015 (n = 54) and those that were manufactured
on or after this date (n = 32). Clinical and implant data was collected for
all MCGRs. Retrieval analysis comprised plain radiographs evaluations, force
and elongation testing, disassembly and scanning electron microscopy (SEM)
of 5 pin surfaces. Results: The two patient groups were
statistically comparable. We found that 15 out of 31 patients belonging
implanted with rods manufactured before 26th March 2015 had a
fracture of their locking pins. 3 of the 18 (7%) patients with rods
manufactured after this date were also found to have a fractured pin. Rods
with a pin fracture had been implanted for a significantly longer period of
time than those with an intact pin (39 months versus 30.5 months). Analysis
of the fracture sites of the pins showed that all examined had failed due to
brittle fractures. Conclusion: We found that 21 out of 54
retrieved rods at our centre that had been manufactured before
26th March 2015 had a fracture of their locking pins. 3 of
the 32 rods manufactured after this date were also found to have a fractured
pin. Rods with a fractured pin had been implanted for significantly more
time than those with an intact pin (median 39 versus 32 months). Whilst the
mechanisms and risk factors for failure are multifactorial, our retrieval
evidence and clinical experience to date suggests that the use of thicker,
tougher locking pins in newer designs have had a beneficial impact on their
performance.

## 107

## P012: Blood titanium levels in patients with large and sliding titanium
implants

Martina Tognini

1

, Harry Hithi

1

, Stewart Tucker

2

, Edel Broomfield

2

, Masood Shafafy

3

, Panos Gikas

1

, Anna Di Laura

1

, Johann Henckel

1

, and Alister Hart

1

1

University College London, The Royal National Orthopaedic Hospital
and Institute of Orthopaedics and Musculoskeletal Science, Stanmore,
United Kingdom

2

Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Foundation Trust,
London, United Kingdom

3

Department of Trauma and Orthopaedics, Nottingham University
Hospitals NHS Trust, Nottingham, United Kingdom

Introduction: Titanium, which is known to be a highly
biologically inert, is one of the most commonly used metals in orthopaedic
implants. While cobalt and chromium blood metal ion testing is routinely
used in the clinical monitoring of patients with metal-on-metal hip
implants, much less is known about the levels of titanium in patients with
other implant types. A better understanding is required about the levels of
titanium in these patients, and the potential for using blood titanium tests
as a biomarker for function, in particular those that are susceptible to
generating greater titanium particles or ions. In the current study, we
investigated these levels in three such titanium-based implant groups: (1)
MCGRs, (2) massive acetabular implants, and (3) long bone tumour implants.
The aim of this study was to better understand the normal ranges of blood
titanium levels in patients implanted with large and sliding titanium
constructs by comparison with reference levels from conventional titanium
hips. Material and Methods: This study examined data collected
from 136 patients. Over a period of 24 months, whole blood samples were
collected from 41 patients implanted with large titanium implants:
Magnetically Controlled Growing Rods (MCGRs, n = 18), long bone tumour
implants (n=13) and 3D-printed customised massive acetabular defect implants
(n = 10). Blood samples were collected during routine outpatient visit
(tumour and massive acetabular implants) or before surgery (MCGRs). Whole
blood samples were quantified for titanium content on an Element 2 high
resolution ICP-MS instrument. This data was compared with previously
established reference levels in well-functioning, conventional titanium hip
implants (n=95). Clinical, imaging and blood titanium levels data were
collected for all patients and compared statistically between the different
groups. Results: The median (range) follow-up time of the
standard hips, MCGRs, tumour implants and massive acetabular implants were
102 months (64-143), 30 months (12-57), 60 months (28-221) and 36.5 (14-200)
respectively. The median (range) of blood titanium levels of the standard
hip, MCGRs, tumour implants and massive acetabular implants were 1.2 ppb
(0.6-4.9), 9.7 ppb (4.0-25.4), 2.6 ppb (0.4-104.4) and 5.7 ppb (1.6-31.5)
respectively. Age at first implantation was significantly different between
each of the large/sliding implants groups and the titanium hips reference
group. Follow-up time differed significantly between the MCGRs vs. both the
standard hips and the long bone tumour implants, also between the massive
acetabular implants vs. the standard hips group. Both MCGRs and the massive
acetabular implants groups blood titanium levels were significantly higher
than the standard hip implants group (p < 0.001). No correlation between
follow-up time and blood titanium levels was found. Conclusion:
This study showed that larger constructs and/or the presence of sliding
mechanisms leads to increased blood titanium levels, compared to
well-functioning standard titanium unilateral hip constructs. Reassuringly,
these increased levels did not appear to induce adverse metal reactions. The
relationship between implant failure and titanium release remains unclear
and threshold levels for the different construct types should be determined,
in order to understand the role of blood titanium testing as a biomarker for
function.

## 108

## P013: Rod fracture in magnetically controlled growing rods

Martina Tognini

1

, Harry Hithi

1

, Sean Bergiers

1

, Johann Henckel

1

, Edel Broomfield

2

, Stewart Tucker

2

, and Alister Hart

1

1

University College London, The Royal National Orthopaedic Hospital
and Institute of Orthopaedics and Musculoskeletal Science, Stanmore,
United Kingdom

2

Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Foundation Trust,
London, United Kingdom

Introduction: Magnetically Controlled Growing Rods (MCGRs) have
been shown to experience implant failure in several ways, including an
inability to distract due to corrosion or internal pin fracture issues. A
fracture of the MCGR itself is estimated occur in 10.6% of the total number
of complications however the risk factors for this are poorly understood.
The mechanisms of fracture in Magnetically Controlled Growing Rods (MCGRs)
and the risk factors associated with this are poorly understood. The aim of
this study was to identify the mechanisms of fracture of explanted fracture
MCGRs and assess the risk factors for this by 1) assessing the implant’s
state at retrieval (by means of retrieval analysis) 2) analysing the
fracture surface (fractographic analysis) and 3) using imaging analysis to
evaluate eventual patient or surgical risk factors for rod fracture, through
comparison with a control group of intact rods. Material and
Methods: From our cohort of over 120 retrieved MCGRs, we
identified seven rods that had fractured; all were single rod constructs,
retrieved from six patients. These were examined and compared with fifteen
intact single rod constructs. Clinical data (age at implantation surgery,
gender, time to removal, aetiology, and eventual prior surgeries) and
implant data (rod configuration, rod size, rod generation) were recorded for
all implants. Retrieval and fractographic analysis were used to determine
the failure mode at the fracture site and the implants functionality. Cobb
angle, degree of rod contouring and the distance between anchoring points
were computed on antero- posterior (AP) and lateral radiographs.
Results: Age at insertion surgery was higher in the
fractured rod group (5 vs 9 years old in the control and fractured groups,
respectively) without reaching statistical significance (p = 0.0954). Time
to removal was significantly lower in the fractured rods group (p = 0.0143).
Five of the fractured rods had been inserted following removal of a
previously inserted rod (Figure 4), while in the control group 3 constructs
were revisions. 5/7 vs 3/15 rods had been inserted following removal of a
previously inserted rod, in the fractured vs control groups. All fractured
rods failed due to bending fatigue. Fractured rods had greater rod
contouring angles in the frontal plane (p = 0.0407) and lateral plane (p =
0.0306), and greater distances between anchoring points in both AP and
lateral planes (p = 0.0061 and p = 0.0074 respectively).
Conclusion: This is the first study to investigate the
mechanisms of failure of explanted, fractured MCGRs and to assess eventual
risk factors. We found fatigue failure as the failure mode for all fractured
implants, with the crack initiation point in correspondence with mechanical
indentation marks on the rod, probably induced during implantation surgery.
We also found that fractured constructs, usually revisions of previous
implants, had a significantly greater distance between anchoring points and
more pronounced contouring compared to the control group. These results
suggest the use of double rod constructs when proceeding with rod exchange
if the patient’s characteristics allow it.

## 110

## P014: The performance of the latest generation of magnetically controlled
growing spine rods: a comparative retrieval study
Martina Tognini
1
, Harry Hothi
1
, Sean Bergiers
1
, Masood Shafafy
2
, Edel Broomfield
3
, Stewart Tucker
3
, Johann Henckel
1
, and Alister Hart
1

1

University College London, The Royal National Orthopaedic Hospital
and Institute of Orthopaedics and Musculoskeletal Science, Stanmore,
United Kingdom

2

Department of Trauma and Orthopaedics, Nottingham University
Hospitals NHS Trust, Nottingham, United Kingdom

3

Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Foundation Trust,
London, United Kingdom

Introduction: Magnetically Controlled Growing Rods (MCGRs) are
distraction-based systems that use an external magnetic distraction system
aimed at avoiding repeated surgery for rod lengthening used for the
treatment of severe early-onset scoliosis. Recently, concerns regarding the
risks associated with the use of MCGRs have been raised. The latest design
iteration (MAGEC X) was recalled in 2020 following an Urgent Field Safety
Notice (FSN) describing a .5% probability of post-implantation separation of
an actuator end cap component. On 1st April 2020, a second FSN was issued by
the manufacturer, voluntarily suspending the supply of all MAGEC rods to the
UK. The Medicines & Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA, UK) on
the same day released an Medical Device Alert (MDA) advising surgeons not to
implant MAGEC rods until further notice in the UK and Republic of Ireland.
Currently, the supply of all MCGRs was temporarily suspended in the UK.
Objective of this study is to compare the performance of MAGEC X to the
earlier design iteration MAGEC 1.3, by means of retrieval analysis.
Material and Methods: Fifteen of both latest and earlier
rods were consecutively collected from five different hospitals following
removal surgery and matched by time to removal. Clinical data (age at
implantation surgery, gender, time to removal, reason for revision) and
implant data (rod generation, length size, diameter size, configuration)
were recorded for all MCGRs. Analysis comprised visual assessments of
external damage, plain radiograph evaluations, force and elongation testing,
MAGEC X end-cap torque testing and disassembly. Mann-Whitney U tests were
used to statistically compare groups. Results: Rod distraction
reached in vivo was significantly higher in the MAGEC 1.3 group (p = 0.002).
There was no statistically significant difference in the total external
damage score (p = 0.870), maximum force produced (p = 0.695) or distraction
reached during force test (p = 0.880). No pin fracture was detected.
Elongation of stroke was mildly higher (p = 0.051) for the MAGEC X group.
One MAGEC X implant had evident end cap component loosening, yet it did not
show any evident sign of internal wear or corrosion. Internal damage scores
were mildly lower in the MAGEC X group. Conclusion: This is one
of the first studies to present comparative retrieval findings of the latest
generation of MCGRs (MAGEC X). We found no evidence of pin fracture in MAGEC
X rods nor in the control group, MAGEC 1.3. There was comparatively less
evidence of internal damage in the MAGEC X designs, de- spite a variability
in the measured loosening torque of the end- cap component. One MAGEC X was
revised due to evident end-cap component loosening, however the implant was
found to be functional at mechanical testing and there was no greater sign
of internal damage at disassembly.

## 309

## P015: A novel "Yadav-Kunal" reflex for UMN lesion spasticity

Sandeep Yadav

1

and Kishor Kunal

1

1

Orthopaedics, AIIMS, Jodhpur, India

Introduction: Various reflexes have been described as
modification to Babinski sign in UMN lesion, though rarely has been a reflex
described other than these, which is independent to extensor plantar
response in some sort. Mostly these reflexes form a polysynaptic arc with a
nociceptive stimulus as afferent. Here we present a novel reflex which is
different from above in many ways- it’s response in independent of extensor
plantar response and thus cannot be classified as a modification of
Babinski’s sign and its afferent is forced motor afferent in a spastic
muscle. Material and Methods: The reflex was demonstrated
incidentally in patients suffering from UMN lesion spasticity and followed
up until loss of spasticity after surgery and was validated in patients
admitted in the centre with spastic and flaccid paraplegia.
Results: It was found that this reflex was present in
patients having spastic paraparesis and resolved once spasticity resolved.
Also, it was absent in patients suffering from flaccid paraplegia
Yadav-Kunal reflex. The reflex can be stated as, “a forced plantarflexion of
toes in spastic parparesis shall lead to sudden jerky knee flexion in the
same limb”. Conclusion: Spasticity is a stretch reflex
disorder, manifested clinically as an increase in muscle tone that becomes
more apparent with more rapid stretching movement, commonly caused by upper
motor neuron lesion. The muscle spindle of toe dorsiflexors (predominantly
by L5) gets activated when they are forcefully stretched. In this case, due
to UMN lesion above L5, these inhibitions have been dropped off and the
response is flexion of knee joint due to action of hamstrings (supplied by
L5-S2 predominantly).

## 402

## P016: Characteristics of baseline frequency data in spinal RCTs do not
suggest widespread fraud

Manon Levayer

1

, Gem Chew

2

, Kyle Sheldrick

2

, and Ashish Diwan

3,4

1

School of Biomedical Engineering, The University of Sydney,
Darlington, Australia

2

Faculty of Medicine

3

Spine Labs, University of New South Wales, Kensington,
Australia

4

Spine Service, St George Private Hospital, Koagarah,
Australia

Introduction: Fraud in clinical research is a reality. A recent
scandal identified apparent non-genuine data in a set of randomised clinical
trials investigating cognitive therapy in back pain. This has highlighted
the risk of fraud impacting the assessment of treatment effects. In this
case, fraudulent data appears to have exaggerated treatment efficacy in
recent meta-analyses. Clinical treatment of spinal conditions is guided by
such influential RCT evidence, so it is urgent to understand whether the
conclusions of other RCTs published in spine journals are genuine or
infected with fraud. We sought to investigate whether evidence of non-random
baseline data in purportedly randomized studies in spine was a widespread
problem or if the previously identified case was an anomaly. Material
and Methods: We performed a PubMed search to identify all papers
published in 4 major spine journals (Spine, The Spine Journal, the Journal
of Neurosurgery Spine, and the European Spine Journal) classified by the
journal as RCTs between 2016 and 2020. We extracted all baseline covariates
which were reported as frequencies and calculated p values using a Pearson
Chi Square test of independence. Individual variable p-values were combined
into a study wise p-value using the Stouffer method. We calculated the
proportion of studies with a study wise p-value of < 0.01, < 0.05,
> 0.95 and > 0.99. All studies with p values > 0.99 or < 0.01
were examined for possible explanations. Results: Our
literature search returned 228 studies, of which 169 were included. In
total, we extracted 938 variables. After calculating all study wise p-values
and calculating the proportions that presented a study wise p-value of <
0.01, < 0.05, > 0.95 or > 0.99. The distribution of variable wise
p-values follows the expected distribution for genuine trial data without
any signs of fraud. We observed the expected number of trials with p-values
< 0.01, < 0.05 and > 0.95. There were three more trials with a
p-value of > 0.99 than expected, however, these had either obvious
innocent explanations or had already been identified as fraudulent.
Conclusion: We conclude that the overall distribution of
frequency baseline similarities between study arms in RCTs published in
major spine journals is not suspicious. No evidence of systemic presentation
of false data was found. While research fraud is a threat requiring
vigilance, we did not find any evidence that it is common in spinal RCTs.
However, these results were derived from major spine journals and may not be
applicable to research published in non-spine journals or predatory
journals. We will examine continuous variables in future work.

## 414

## P017: Functional recovery in relation to the posttraumatic restitution of
the blood-spinal-cord-barrier after experimental spinal cord injury in the
mouse

Lea Meyer

1

, Lilly Waldmann

1

, Laurens Roolfs

1

, Nima Taheri

1

, Katharina Kersting

1

, Melina Nieminen-Kelhä

1

, Irina Kremenetskaia

1

, Adnan Ghori

1

, Andre Rex

2

, Michael Fehlings

3

, Peter Vajkoczy

1

, and Vanessa Hubertus

1

1

Neurosurgery

2

Experimental Neurology, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin and
Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany

3

Division of Spine Surgery, Toronto Western Hospital, University
Health Network, Toronto, Canada

Introduction: Spinal Cord Injury (SCI) is a devastating
condition that presents a major socioeconomic burden for healthcare systems.
The posttraumatic disruption of the Blood-Spinal-Cord-Barrier (BSCB) is a
leading pathophysiology in SCI and its restitution plays a crucial role in
structural spinal cord regeneration. A deeper understanding of the
pathophysiology and its timeframe will enhance the search for restorative
therapies facilitating functional regeneration. With this study we
characterize the posttraumatic BSCB disruption and restitution in relation
to functional recovery in a mouse model up to 28 days post SCI.
Material and Methods: Adult C57BL/6J mice (m/f, n = 55)
underwent mid-thoracic (Th6/7) clip-compression SCI using a modified
aneurysm clip (5g, 60s) or sham injury (two-level-laminectomy).
Perioperative antibiotic therapy with amoxicillin and postoperative pain
medication with buprenorphine was applied. Longitudinal
neurobehavioral analysis was performed (n = 23) using Catwalk® automated
gait analysis and Basso Mouse Scale with Tally sub-score at days 1, 3, 7, 14
and 28 post SCI. Additionally, in vivo imaging with 7T MRI
was performed for tissue morphology analysis. Individual specimens were
sacrificed at each time point for qualitative histological analysis
(Luxol-Fast-Blue + H&E, CD31+Evans-Blue, n = 5). BSCB disruption was
quantified by measuring Evans-Blue (EVB)–extravasation via fluorescence
microplate reader (Tecan, n = 50). Results: As the
posttraumatic disruption of the BSCB is most severe up to day 7 post SCI,
histological analysis up to this point showed vast structural damage and
edema to the spinal cord with considerable EVB-leakage, supported by MRI
findings, with an increasing restitution in the chronic phase (14d, 28d).
Quantitative assessment of EVB-extravasation displayed a significant
disruption of the BSCB up to 14 days post SCI (14d: p = 0.001), with
restitution after 28 days (p = 0.096). Neurological recovery started between
days 7 and 14 post SCI, with most specimens having regained hindlimb
function by day 28 (p = 0.552). Conclusion: Functional recovery
following SCI is associated with the restitution of the BSCB, which remains
significantly disrupted up to 14d post SCI, revealing a potential time frame
for therapy application. Further detailed examinations of the regenerative
capacities and the molecular players involved in BSCB regeneration are
necessary for the development of restorative therapies targeting the
neurovascular unit.

## 417

## P018: Posttraumatic disruption of the blood-spinal-cord-barrier is
aggravated in the acute and subacute phase by the endothelial cell-specific
knock-out of Ephrin-B2 signaling after experimental spinal cord
injury

Katharina Kersting

1

, Laurens Roolfs

1

, Lilly Waldmann

1

, Lea Meyer

1

, Melina Nieminen-Kelhä

1

, Irina Kremenetskaia

1

, Adnan Ghori

1

, Andre Rex

1

, Frank Heppner

2

, Michael Fehlings

3

, Peter Vajkoczy

1

, and Vanessa Hubertus

1

1

Neurosurgery

2

Neuropathology, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin and Berlin
Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany

3

Division of Spine Surgery, Toronto Western Hospital, University
Health Network, Toronto, Canada

Introduction: The disruption of the Blood-Spinal-Cord-Barrier
(BSCB) is a leading pathophysiology in traumatic Spinal Cord Injury (SCI),
and its restitution plays a crucial role in spinal cord regeneration. The
guidance molecule Ephrin-B2 promotes cell-cell-contacts in the neurovascular
unit. However, its specific role in endothelial cells following SCI is
unknown. With this study, we characterize the posttraumatic BSCB disruption
and restitution dependent on the endothelial cell-specific knock-out (KO) of
Ephrin-B2 in a mouse model up to 7d post SCI. Material and
Methods: Adult CDH5-CreERT2-Efnb2lox/lox (KO) and
littermate wildtype (WT) mice (m/f, n = 66) underwent mid-thoracic (Th6/7)
clip-compression SCI via modified aneurysm clip (5g, 60s) or sham-injury
(two-level laminectomy). Endothelial cell-specific Ephrin-B2 KO was induced
via the promotor CDH5 in a cre-lox-system with consecutive injections of
tamoxifen (5d period). Neurobehavioral analysis was performed (n = 16) using
Catwalk® gait analysis and Basso Mouse Scale at 1, 3, and 7d
post SCI. Additionally, in vivo 7Tesla-MRI was performed,
and individual specimens were sacrificed for qualitative histological
analysis at each time point (LFB+H&E; CD31+Evans-Blue, n = 31). BSCB
disruption was quantified using Evans-Blue fluorescence assay (Tecan, n =
35). Results: Quantitative assessment of EVB-extravasation
displayed a significant BSCB disruption in KO SCI animals compared to WT SCI
animals at 1d and 3d but not at 7d post SCI (1d:p = 0.0107, 3d:p = 0.0002,
7d:p = 0.1785). Neurobehavioral analyses showed no differences between KO
SCI and WT SCI animals, with no significant regaining of hindlimb function
in the course up to 7d post SCI in both groups (1-7d:p > 0.05).
Conclusion: Ephrin-B2 signaling plays a significant role in
BSCB maintenance and repair, as the posttraumatic BSCB disruption is
aggravated by the endothelial cell-specific KO of Ephrin-B2, leading to
aggravated secondary injury. Whilst no significant recovery of hindlimb
function is achieved post SCI up to 7d, analyses of longer recovery periods
are necessary to evaluate the impact on functional recovery.

## 418

## P019: An implanted spinal window chamber allows for chronic longitudinal
in vivo microscopy following experimental spinal cord injury in the
mouse

Laurens Roolfs

1

, Katharina Kersting

1

, Lilly Waldmann

1

, Lea Meyer

1

, Nima Taheri

1

, Melina Nieminen-Kelhä

1

, Irina Kremenetskaia

1

, Jan-Erik Ode

2

, Andre Rex

3

, Christian Uhl

1

, Asylkhan Rakhymzan

4

, Anja Hauser

4

, Raluca Niesner

4

, Michael Fehlings

5

, Peter Vajkoczy

1

, and Vanessa Hubertus

1

1

Neurosurgery

2

Scientific Workshops

3

Experimental Neurology, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin and
Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany

4

DRFZ (German Rheumatism Research Center), Berlin, Germany

5

Division of Spine Surgery, Toronto Western Hospital, University
Health Network, Toronto, Canada

Introduction: Longitudinal in vivo microscopy
allows for a direct real-time insight into pathophysiological processes in
the living organism. After experimental Spinal Cord Injury (SCI) it can
contribute to a deeper understanding of pathophysiological processes and
potential therapeutic approaches. The implantation of a spinal window
chamber enables longitudinal in vivo imaging of the spinal
cord without the necessity for repeated surgery. With this study, we show
the modification of an established spinal window chamber for chronic
longitudinal in vivo imaging after experimental SCI in the
mouse. Material and Methods: Adult C57BL/6J mice (m/f, n=8)
underwent low-thoracic (Th11/12) clip-compression SCI using a modified
aneurysm clip (5g, 60s) or sham-injury (two-level-laminectomy), followed by
the implantation of a spinal window chamber for later in
vivo microscopy. Perioperative antibiotic therapy with
amoxicillin and postoperative pain medication with buprenorphine was
applied. In vivo white light and fluorescence microscopy to
image blood flow (FITC) and inflammation (Rhodamine-dextran) was performed
at postoperative days 1, 3, 7, 14 and 28. Additionally, neurobehavioral
assessment (Catwalk® automated gait analysis and Basso Mouse
Scale) was performed at the given time points. Neurobehavioral analysis was
compared to specimens (C57BL/6J mice, m/f, n = 12) with SCI or sham-injury
without spinal window chamber implantation. Histological analysis for tissue
integrity assessment (Luxol-Fast-Blue + H&E) was performed after 7 and
28 days follow-up. Results: Chronic longitudinal in
vivo white light and fluorescence microscopy was possible up to
28 days postoperatively after both SCI and sham injury. Only mild
inflammation was observed in individual specimens at early timepoints (up to
7d). Specimens with an implanted spinal window chamber did not show any
differences in automated gait analysis (Catwalk®), Basso Mouse
Scale, postoperative body weight development or histologically assessed
spinal cord integrity compared with specimens which received the same
surgery without spinal window chamber implantation. Conclusion:
The implantation of a spinal window chamber after clip compression SCI in
the mouse is feasible and allows for longitudinal in vivo
imaging up to the chronic injury phase without modifying neurological
function or spinal cord integrity compared to specimens without chamber
implantation. To achieve more detailed in vivo imaging at a
greater depth, longitudinal two-photon microscopy can be integrated in the
setup.

## 655

## P020: Nanomechanical properties of native human ligamentum flavum

Jakub Jezek

1

, Jiri Skala-Rosenbaum

1

, Josef Sepitka

2

, and Vaclav Tolar

1

1

Department of Orthopedics and Traumatology, Third Medical Faculty of
Charles University and University Hospital Kralovske Vinohrady, Prague,
Czech Republic

2

Division of Biomechanics, Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, Czech
Technical University in Prague, Czech Republic

Introduction: Degenerative changes of ligamentum flavum (LF)
significantly contribute to the development of lumbar spinal stenosis (LSS),
which is a serious and relatively common disease in the aging population.
LSS often leads to disability. There is no prophylaxis of this disease in
current knowledge yet. Although it is natural to consider that the
mechanical properties of ligamentum flavum can be altered due to ligamentous
hypertrophy, only few studies have mentioned on this point. Only one study
shows significantly inferior stiffness of LF in cases with LSS. However, to
date, there are no reports describing local nanomechanical properties of
ligamentum flavum depending on anatomical localization. The aim of this
study was (1) to quantify and compare nanomechanical properties of the
insertion part with central part of LF and (2) to compare nanomechanical
properties of each ligamentum flavum regardless of spinal segment levels
(L3-4, L4-5 and L5-S1). Design of study: measurement of micromechanical
properties of degenerated and healthy human ligamentum flavum.
Materials and Methods: The study involved patients who
underwent surgery for lumbar spinal stenosis. The tissues used for analysis
of nanomechanical properties from 12 patients were sectioned into 1-2 mm
thick sections using microtome blade and glued using Epiglu on the Petri
dishes. All testing was performed submerged in 1x Phosphate buffered saline
(PBS) containing 1% (v/v) Protease Inhibitors. Quasistatic nanoindentation
of samples was performed to obtain loading curves from the cuts on the
cranial, medial, and caudal part of each ligamentum flavum.
Results: Average elastic moduli were in the range from 3
kPa up to 178 kPa. We described the local nanomechanical properties of
ligamentum flavum depending on anatomical localization. We found the
gradients of the mechanical properties across the cranial, medial, and
caudal cuts of native ligamentum flavum. Conclusion: This study
showed that: (1) medial part of ligamentum is significantly stiffer than
cranial and caudal, (2) central region of cranial, medial, and caudal cut is
significantly stiffer than outer region.
Acknowledgment: This work has been supported by the Czech Health
Research Council [Project number NU21-06-00356].

## 686

## P021: Comparison of bone density between traditional pedicle screw,
cortical bone screw and modified cortical bone screw tract of lumbar
spine

Dipak Shrestha

1

, Bikash Parajuli

1

, Sabik Kayastha

1

, and Suman Lamichhane

1

1

Orthopedics, Dhulikhel Hospital, Kathmandu University Hospital,
KUSMS, Dhulikhel, Nepal

Introduction: Cortical bone trajectory (CBT) has better pullout
strength, insertional torque, and toggle test performance. However,
divergent oblique caudo-cranial trajectory and shorter screws are limiting
factors. The Dhulikhel Hospital modification in CBT (CBT-DH) has been
proposed with straight caudo-cranial trajectory without divergence which
allows longer screw placement with technical ease. The aim of this study is
to compare bone density of CBT, CBT-DH, and traditional pedicle screw (TPS)
tract of lumbar vertebrae by using CT Hounsfield Unit (HU) as surrogate
marker of bone density. Material and Methods: Abdomen CT scan
with non-spinal pathologies of 200 patients (1000 lumbar vertebrae) were
selected (Male :112 and Female: 88). Axial slices of each lumbar vertebra
(L1 to L5) were cut into three planes representing TPS (parallel to the
pedicle in sagittal section), CBT (caudo-cranial plane parallel to inferior
pedicle boarder targeting midpoint of superior endplate) and CBT-DH
(caudo-cranial plane along the inferior pedicle boarder targeting
anterio-superior margin of vertebral body) representing tract for the
pedicle screw in each technique. For each trajectory, CT HU at four points,
namely near cortex, mid pedicle, mid-body, and far cortex was measured.
Inter and Intra observer variation was analyzed in 40 vertebrae separately.
Results: The mean age of the patients was 40.4 ± 13 years.
The difference of mean value of CT HU of TPT, CBT-DH and CBT were 354.2 ±
70, 457.3 ± 90, and 529.9 ± 75 respectively were statistically significant
(p < 0.05). The difference was highly significant for near cortex. The CT
HU value of the near cortex in CBT-DH was 65.6% higher compared to TPS but
14.9% lesser compared to CBT. The difference in density between CBT-DH (305
HU) and CBT (302 HU) in mid pedicle was not significantly different. The
average specific value SV1 (mean value CT HU of CBT-DH/ mean CT HU of TPS)
and SV2 (mean value CT HU of CBT/ mean CT HU of TPS) was 1.31 ± 0.25 and
1.53 ± 0.29 respectively with significant positive correlation with age
(Pearson coefficient: 0.2, p < 0.01 for SV1 and age, Pearson coefficient:
0.3, p < 0.01 for SV2 and age). Conclusion: CBT-DH has
significantly higher bone density compared to traditional pedicle screw
(TPS) tract but lesser than CBT for lumbar vertebrae.

## 863

## P022: Is facet tropism associated with recurrent herniated disc after
full-endoscopic discectomy? A nested case control study

Kanthika Wasinpongwanich

1,2

, Verapan Kuansongtham

1

, Khin Myat Myat Lwin

1

, and Krit Pongpirul

3

1

Spine, Spine, Bangkok, Thailand

2

Spine, Orthopedics, Nakhon Ratchasima, Thailand

3

Research, Bangkok, Thailand

Background: Lumbar herniated disc recurrence is not uncommon and
might be related to the facet tropism. This study aims to explore if
recurrent herniated disc patients have different facet angle or tropism.
Methods: This case-control study was nested in the
Bumrungrad Spine Cohort containing data of 545 patients underwent full
endoscopic discectomy during 2011-2015. A patient was considered a case if
he/she experience a recurrent herniated disc. An age and gender matched
controls were randomly selected from the non-case group. Facet angle were
measured on both group. Facet tropism is indicated by difference of facet
angles more than 10 degree. Results: Of 545, 60 cases with
recurrent herniated disc and another 60 age-and-gender matched controls were
reviewed. The overall mean age of the patients was 47.38 years and 30.83%
were female. Mean facet angle was 14.59 with no significant difference
between case and control (14.93 vs 14.25 mm; p = 0.5021). Both group had
similar facet tropism (p = 0.543). Conclusion: Facet angle and
facet tropism were not associated with the herniated disc recurrence in
patient who underwent full-endoscopic discectomy.

## 920

## P023: A large animal in vitro model to study nerve ingrowth in the
intervertebral disc

Junxuan Ma

1

, Janick Eglauf

1,2

, Riccardo Tognato

1

, Sibylle Grad

1,2

, Mauro Alini

1

, and Tiziano Serra

1

1

AO Research Institute Davos, Davos, Switzerland

2

ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland

Introduction: Low back pain (LBP) is one leading cause of
disability worldwide. In many cases LBP is discogenic in origin. The painful
intervertebral disc (IVD) is associated with a deep ingrowth of axons, or
nerve fibers, which express neuropeptides such as substance P and calcitonin
gene-related peptide (CGRP). For basic investigation of this pathology,
clinically relevant models are needed. Commonly used LBP models are based on
rodents which cannot always predict human condition. In addition, the
experimental manipulation and optical observation in vivo
are challenging. Animal models investigating pain conditions also raise
ethical concerns. To address these problems, an in vitro
IVD-nerve co-culture model was created using large animal tissues. We
furthermore hypothesized that IVD inflammation would trigger axon growth.
Material and Methods: Bovine dorsal root ganglion (DRG) and
caudal IVD tissues were obtained from a local abattoir. Explants of the
outer annulus fibrosus (AF) (1.5x1.5x1.5 mm3) were treated with
IL-1β and TNF-α (each 10 ng/mL) for 24h to induce an inflammatory condition.
AF explants without cytokine treatment served as control. After a wash-out,
each AF tissue was placed in the center of a tissue culture frame. DRG were
enzymatically disintegrated into micro-tissue units and then re-assembled at
predetermined distances to the AF explant using "Sound Induced
Morphogenesis" (SIM). SIM also formed a dense cell-packing multicellular
system to recapitulate the native DRG tissue architecture. The viability and
the morphology of the multicellular system were evaluated by live-dead
staining and immunofluorescence, respectively. The multicellular system was
functionally evaluated using calcium imaging (Fluo4). In the AF-DRG
co-culture system, axons were labelled by CGRP and neurofilament
immunofluorescence. The axons in the immunofluorescent images were segmented
and statistically evaluated. Results: The SIM assembling did
not influence DRG cell viability (92.8%). Neurons in the DRG multicellular
system could be potassium depolarized, confirming their functionality. The
multicellular system supported spontaneous calcium signal transmitting from
one cell to its close counterparts at day 4. Satellite cells self-organized
to an oriented structure at day 8. The cytokine-treated AF tissue increased
the axon length of CGRP(+) neurons by 52% compared to non-cytokine control
at day 2. The axons had a turning angle pointing towards AF in 86.7% and
50.0% of CGRP(+) neurons in cytokine-treated AF and non-cytokine control,
respectively. There was no obvious turning angle for non-cytokine control
(-0.4°), while the turning angle was averaged to be 4.3° towards the
cytokine-treated AF. These axons were influenced only when neurons were
positioned within 1.3 mm from AF explants (n = 27 neurons and 355 axons).
Conclusion: Large animal AF and DRG can be cultured in a
physiologically relevant multicellular system recapitulating native tissue
architecture and supporting tissue-level functions. The AF-DRG communication
depends on their distance which can be controlled by SIM. The axon of
CGRP(+) neurons is elongated and attracted by the cytokine-treated AF
tissue. This pioneering study demonstrates the AF's influence on guided axon
sprouting can be reproduced in vitro. This model will be
instrumental to test new treatments targeting nerve ingrowth mechanisms,
replacing animal models in line with 3Rs principles.

## 927

## P024: Prevalence of low back pain in nurses at Santa Marcelina
Hospital

Luiz Claudio Rodrigues

1

, Fernanda Andrea Navarro

2

, Rodrigo Nakao

1

, and Nathalia Adelina Pereira

1

1

Spine Surgery, Santa Marcelina College of Medicine, São Paulo,
Brazil
2Spine Surgery, Hospital Santa Marcelina, São Paulo,
Brazil

The present work is a study on the prevalence of low back pain in nurses at
Santa Marcelina Hospital. The survey was applied in the form of a
questionnaire containing social issues such as weight, age, height, work
sector, workload, physical activity, presence and frequency of low back
pain, in addition to the Oswestry questionnaire, which is a tool used to
quantify the degree of disability of low back pain in daily activities. This
research has the general objective of determining the prevalence of low back
pain in nurses at Santa Marcelina Hospital and establishing a relationship
with social aspects. According to the bibliographic study developed, it is
possible to show the high prevalence of low back pain in nurses and how much
work is affected due to the high rate of disability in activities caused by
low back pain. The method used in the research was an epidemiological
cross-sectional cohort. From the results of this work, it is concluded that
there is a high prevalence of low back pain in nurses at Santa Marcelina
Hospital. It was not possible to determine a direct risk factor for low back
pain. Therefore, it is assumed that several factors such as sex, age, BMI,
sedentary lifestyle, working time, work sector, posture and work activities
addressed in the research such as psychological factors, musculoskeletal
changes and socioeconomic conditions not addressed in the research can be in
set predisposing to low back pain.

## 1108

## P025: Matching sub-groups of neck pain patients and best fit specific
functional PROMs

Julia Szita

1

, Istvan Klemencsics

1

, Balazs Szollosi

1

, Zoltan Hoffer

1

, and Aron Lazary

1,2

1

National Center for Spinal Disorders, Hungary

2

Department of Spine Surgery, Semmelweis University, Hungary

Neck pain is one of the leading causes of days lived with disability by
generating an immense burden of an individual’s quality of life. To
objectively measure the impact of musculoskeletal diseases patient reported
outcome measures (PROMs) have been developed which now are considered as
gold standard tools in research and everyday practice in spinal care.
The primary aim of our study was the cross-cultural language adaptation into
Hungarian language and the evaluation of the psychometric properties for the
NDI, NPAD and COMI-neck. Secondly, we focused on forming a recommendation of
appliance by investigating how well the PROMs perform in specific subgroups
of neck pain related symptoms.
At the outpatient clinic of the National Center for Spinal Disorders, 110
neck pain (with or without irradiating pain to the upper extremity) patients
were prospectively recruited. Internal consistency, construct validity,
reliability and responsiveness were explored for each questionnaire.
Subgroups were generated based on pain localization, radicular pain, type of
therapy and neurological deficit.
The COMI- neck, NDI and NPAD showed excellent reliability (ICC > 0.7),
construct validity and adequate responsiveness (AUC > 0.7) in relation of
global treatment outcome at 6 months follow up. All investigated PROMs had a
comparable factor structure as the original version and Cronbach α proved to
be < 0.70 thus adequate internal consistency was found. Based on our
results, the COMI neck proved to be superior compared to the NDI and NPAD in
most of the subgroups. Considering the available evidence which shows that
musculoskeletal neck pain should be considered as a multifactorial disease
where several non-biomedical factors play an immense role thus in our
opinion the multidimensional COMI-neck should be advocated in clinical
research as it is a short questionnaire and covers a wide aspect of the
disease.

## 1151

## P026: Multimodal evaluation of physiological ovine cervical
intervertebral disc from a tissue-engineering perspective

Nikolaos Gkantsinikoudis

1,2

, Savvas Koltsakidis

3

, Panagiotis Prodromou

1,2

, Eleni Aggelidou

1,2

, Stylianos Kapetanakis

1,2

, Eleftherios Tsiridis

4

, Ioannis Magras

5

, Dimitra Psalla

6

, Georgios Kazakos

7

, Dimitrios Tzetzis

3

, and Aristeidis Kritis

1,2

1

Department of Physiology and Pharmacology

2

cGMP Regenerative Medicine Facility, Department of Physiology and
Pharmacology

3

School of Science and Technology, International Hellenic University,
Digital Manufacturing and Materials Characterization Laboratory,
Thessaloniki, Greece

4

Papageorgiou General Hospital, Aristotle University Medical School,
Nea Efkarpia, Academic Orthopaedic Department, Thessaloniki,
Greece

5

Department of Neurosurgery, Hippokration General Hospital, School of
Medicine

6

Laboratory of Pathology

7

Companion Animal Clinic, School of Veterinary Medicine, Faculty of
Health Sciences, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki (A.U.Th.),
Thessaloniki, Greece

Introduction: Degenerative Disc Disease (DDD) constitutes the
major etiology of low back pain in current years, being unfavorably
associated with disability and morbidity. Despite the ever-growing incidence
of DDD, existent therapeutic selections exhibit remarkably limited efficacy,
being practically not capable of reversing natural course of underlying
disease. In this framework, Tissue-Engineering (TE), a novel and
multidisciplinary field of Regenerative Medicine, has been demonstrated to
render the de novo development of a Tissue-Engineered
Intervertebral Disc (TE-IVD) construct feasible in recent years. Considering
the relative adequacy of literature data regarding in vitro
evaluation of TE-IVD constructs, the respective necessity for in
vivo assessment in large homolog animal models remains
imperative. Hence, we hereby present our results from multifaceted
assessment of physiological ovine cervical intervertebral discs, an animal
model that is increasingly utilized in cervical spine TE applications, from
a TE perspective. Material and Methods: Ovine cervical
intervertebral discs (n = 9) were dissected from fresh-frozen specimens of
5-months aged sheep of Greek origin (“Chiotikon” species). Harvested
specimens were subjected to morphometric, mechanical and microscopic
evaluation according to a standard protocol. Morphometric evaluation was
conducted with dimensions measurement with digital caliber, whereas
mechanical assessment via compressive and tensile testing in conjunction
with investigation of critical failure point in controlled laboratory
conditions. Microscopic evaluation was conducted with hematoxylin-eosin,
Alcian Blue and Masson’s trichrome staining under optical microscope.
Results: Maximal dimensions of harvested discs in
antero-posterior and transverse diameter as well as mean of measured
thickness were analytically recorded. Furthermore, results of mechanical
evaluation regarding compressibility, tensility and failure point of
specimens were evaluated to be in concordance with current literature.
Microscopic assessment demonstrated anticipated spatial arrangement of
proteoglycans, collagen and cellular population inside intervertebral disc
physiological architecture. Conclusion: Morphological data of
ovine cervical intervertebral disc are rendered for the first time in
current literature analytically available. Furthermore, results of
biomechanical behavior and microscopic architecture of cervical
intervertebral disc of the predominant Greek ovine species provide valuable
information for construction of TE-IVD constructs for in
vivo application in future relative studies.

## 1514

## P027: Comparison of two methods between saline injection model and
external fixator model in rat tail disc degeneration

Jae-Hoon Kim

1

, Jong-Beom Park

2

, Abdul Khaleque

1

, and Young-Yul Kim

1

1

Orthopedics, Daejeon St. Mary's Hospital, Deajeon, South
Korea

2

Orthopedics, Eijeonbu St. Mary's Hospital, South Korea

Purpose: The degeneration of the intervertebral disc of the
spine causes many diseases. Apoptosis has been raised as the cause of this,
and many animal models have been developed and used. However, comparisons of
animal models associated with autophagy have become necessary. The purpose
of this study is to find out which animal models are suitable for this study
in the mechanical model and the structural model. Methods:
Sixteen 9-week-old male Sprague–Dawley rat tails were treated with 0.9%
saline and external fixator (two-cross Kirschner wires) for 6 weeks and 12
weeks as well. Treated discs were dissected for checking out the mechanical
force can induce the involvement of autophagy and apoptosis mediated
intervertebral disc degradation where we performed H&E staining,
Masson’s trichrome staining, IHC staining for LC3, Beclin-1and P62 as well
as for MMP-2, MMP-3 and TIMP-1, besides, we performed qPCR for beclin-1, LC3
and P62 and for MMP-2, MMP-3 and TIMP-1 respectively. Results:
More insidious nucleus pulposus cell degeneration was observed in external
fixator group than control group as well as injection saline group. The rate
of degradation was inclined with inclining the duration of compression
whereas injection groups cannot distinguish the margin between annulus
fibrosus and central nucleus pulposus. Immuno positive cells for LC3,
Beclin-1, P62 as well as MMP-2, MMP-3 and TIMP-1 was advanced and expressed
sideways for both group than control. But external fixator group showed more
laterally than saline injection group while saline injection group cannot
distinguish the margin between nucleus pulposus and annulus. Highest
autophagy related gene expression was observed in external fixator group
than saline injection group even if the autophagy beginning gene expression
was elevated in both external fixator group and saline injection group but
it condensed after 12 weeks. In addition to, utmost autophagy accumulating
materials was found in external fixator group than saline injection group
and it was amplified along with increasing the duration of compression and
maximum amount of apoptotic related gene expressed in saline injection group
whereas external fixator group showed lowest expression.
Conclusion: Intervertebral disc degradation after mounting
the mechanical force which is actively associated with autophagy and
apoptosis but there may not have autophagy and apoptosis mediated central
nucleus pulposus cell degradation. However, further extensive investigation
is to be needed for more clarification.
Keywords: Intervertebral disc degeneration; nucleus pulposus; autophagy;
apoptosis; external fixator; saline injection.

## 1913

## P028: The effect of mini-open thoracotomy on pulmonary function in Lenke
type 1 adolescent idiopathic scoliosis patients treated with nonfusion
anterior scoliosis correction (NFASC): is it detrimental

Umesh P. Kanade

1

, Sharan Achar T

1

, keyur Akbari

1

, Vignesh Badikillaya

1

, and DR Sajan Hegde

1

1

Orthopaedics, Apollo Hospitals, Chennai, India

Introduction: Existing literature is teeming with studies that
have evaluated pulmonary function test (PF) after spinal fusion and have
shown conflicting results. There is paucity of literature on the effect of
non fusion anterior scoliosis correction (NFASC) surgery over PF in Lenke 1
Adolescent Idiopathic Scoliosis (AIS) patients. The current study aims to
find the effect of mini-open thoracotomy approach for NFASC on PF in AIS
patients. Material and Methods: 16 Lenke type 1 AIS patient
with a minimum follow up of 2 years were evaluated. Absolute and
percent-predicted values of forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1),
forced vital capacity (FVC), and total lung capacity (TLC) were evaluated
preoperatively and at follow ups at 6 months, 1 year and 2 years. An
improvement or detriment of more than 10% was considered significant. Paired
t test was used for statistical analysis. Results: The cohort
included 15 female and 1 male with a mean age of 13.5 at the time of
surgery. Mean Sanders score was 7.1 ± 0.6 and mean Risser score was 4.2 ±
0.5. Mean pre op main thoracic (MT) cobbs was 52.1° ± 6.7° Baseline.
Conclusion: Our study showed improving trend in PF up to 1
year post-surgery and thereafter PF remained stable at 2 years post-surgery.
NFASC via mini-open thoracotomy does not have detrimental effect on PF in
AIS patients at 2 years follow up.

## 287

## P028.1: Epigenetic and genetic factors related to curve progression in
adolescent idiopathic scoliosis: a systematic scoping review of the current
literature

Marco Manzetti

1

, Francesca Barile

1

, Giovanni Viroli

1

, matteo traversari

1

, Marco Ialuna

1

, fabio vita

1

, azzurra paolucci

1

, Simona Neri

2

, Francesco Ursini

2

, Alberto Ruffilli

1

, and Cesare Faldini

1

1

Clinica Ortopedica e TraumatologicaI

2

Medicine and Rheumatology Unit, IRCCS - Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli,
Bologna, Italy

Introduction: Adolescent idiopathic scoliosis (AIS) is a progressive
three-dimensional deformity of the spine, with different grade of involvement of
the frontal, sagittal and axial planes. Scoliotic curves progress until skeletal
maturity, causing important aesthetic problems, such as humps, with
psychological issues and loss of self-esteem, coronal and\or sagittal imbalance
and muscle fatigue. In rare cases, the curve may progress to develop a severe
deformity. While the Cobb angle is a straightforward tool in initial curve
magnitude measurement, assessing the risk of curve progression at the time of
diagnosis may be more challenging. Epidemiological and genetic studies indicated
AIS as a polygenic disease and several studies investigated genetic and
epigenetic factors associated with an increased risk of onset of the scoliotic
curve. Less information is available regarding candidate genetic and epigenetic
factors related to scoliotic curve progression and its prediction. Thus,
epigenetic and genetic markers could represent potential prognostic tools to
predict curve progression. The aim of this study is to review the available
literature regarding the epigenetic and genetic factors associated with the risk
of AIS curve progression. Material and Methods: Pubmed-MEDLINE, The
Cochrane Central Registry of Controlled Trials, Google Scholar and Embase
Biomedical Database were searched over the years 1990-2022 to identify eligible
studies in the English literature describing the epigenetic and genetic factors
associated to AIS curve progression. Inclusion criteria considered papers
describing genetic and epigenetic factors associated with AIS curve progression
published in English peer-reviewed journals. Isolated case reports\series with
less than 5 patients, literature reviews and meta-analyses were excluded. The
study selection was carried out in accordance with Preferential Reporting Items
for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses (PRISMA) guidelines and has been
accepted for registration in PROSPERO database for systematic reviews. The
search was carried out in January 2022. Results: Forty studies were
included; 15 genes were reported as having SNPs with significant association
with progressive AIS, but none showed sufficient power to sustain clinical
application. Therefore, available data on genetic factors correlated to AIS
evolution did not allow the prediction of disease progression only based on
genetic information. In contrast, 9 studies reporting epigenetic modifications
showed promising results in terms of reliable markers. Epigenetic marks
principally included DNA methylation, histone post-translational modifications
and regulation by non-coding RNAs, such as microRNA. Conclusion: In
conclusion, prognostic testing for AIS has the potential to significantly modify
disease management. This will be achieved only after the identification of
reliable markers and an understanding of the underlying biologic pathways.
Genetic studies identified a series of loci associated with disease progression,
whose power appears, however, insufficient to guide clinical choices. More
recent evidence suggests epigenetics as a more promising field for the
identification of factors associated with AIS progression, offering a rationale
for further investigation in this field. More data are needed, and studies on
tissues involved in the pathology, rather than peripheral blood, are
necessary.

## Biomechanics

## 134

## P029: Are augmented lumbar soft tissue properties indicative of
physiological stress shielding as a potential biomarker for female low back
pain patients? An in vivo study

Emily Newell

1

, Jean Ouellet

2

, and Mark Driscoll

1

1

Department of Mechanical Engineering

2

Department of Paediatic Surgery & Surgery, McGill University
Health Centre, Montreal, Canada

Introduction: Despite 85% of low back pain (LBP) cases being
considered idiopathic, few biomarkers are available to diagnose LBP.
Previous clinical studies have correlated LBP with changes to
spine-stabilizing lumbar soft tissues, including atrophy in the multifidus
(MF) and erector spinae (ES), and increased thoracolumbar fascia (TLF)
thickness. Tissue morphology augmentation of the quadratus lumborum (QL) and
psoas major (PM) within LBP patients has been inconsistent. Collectively,
these tissue property modifications suggest a load allocation bias within
the lumbar soft tissues with the potential for physiological stress
shielding. Thus, this study seeks to analyze changes within tissue
properties of LBP and healthy subjects to investigate the potential for
physiological stress shielding as a contributor to LBP. Materials and
Methods: MRI data of 100 female subjects was obtained from the
Mayo Clinic following ethical approval. Exclusion criteria included subjects
with spinal pathology, prior musculoskeletal surgical intervention, and
pregnancy. Healthy control subjects had no known LBP at the time of the MRI
scan. A total of 36 subjects (16 control, 20 LBP) were included in this
study. Using T2-weighted axial images the total and functional
cross-sectional areas (tCSA, fCSA) and fatty infiltration of the MF, ES, QL,
and PM were measured from the midline of the L1/L2 to L5/S1 intervertebral
discs (IVDs). The TLF tCSA was measured at the L3/L4 and L4/L5 IVD levels.
ANCOVA was conducted to compare the tCSA, fCSA, and fatty infiltration of
the soft tissues at each IVD level between control and LBP subjects. Results
obtained were adjusted for age and BMI during statistical analysis. P-values
< 0.05 were deemed statistically significant. Results: The
tCSA and fCSA demonstrated no significant differences between control and
LBP subjects regardless of IVD level. However, LBP subjects demonstrated
significantly larger average fatty infiltration within the L1/L2 MF (p =
0.034), L2/L3 MF (p = 0.040) and ES (p = 0.016), and L4/L5 QL (p = 0.013).
Increased fatty infiltration within the L3/L4 PM of LBP subjects approached
significance (p = 0.080). Conclusion: Results suggest
degenerative tissue property modification of the LBP MF, ES, and PM at the
L3/L4 IVD level due to increased fatty infiltration coupled with minimal
change in the tissues’ tCSA and fCSA. Additionally, the LBP TLF tCSA at
L3/L4 increased by 7.86% (p = 0.183) and may be clinically significant. This
increase in TLF tCSA may suggest tissue hypertrophy consequential of
elevated loading, while increased muscle fatty infiltration may suggest
muscle disuse. As such, LBP may result in physiological stress shielding
wherein the TLF withstands the majority of stress due to physiological
motion, preventing the ES, MF, and PM from receiving regular loading. In
turn, the muscles may undergo elevated fatty infiltration and eventual
muscle atrophy. These muscles may become unable to withstand normal stress,
resulting in LBP subjects subconsciously recruiting other muscles to
accommodate the desired motion, further distorting stress distributions and
leading to degenerative stress shielding. Therefore, this study suggests
that the progression of LBP may be due to stress shielding caused by
mechanical property changes to the lumbar soft tissues.

## 299

## P030: A biomechanical analysis of sex-specific differences between load
distribution and intersegmental motion in the thoracolumbar spine: a finite
element study

Brittany Stott

1,2

 and Mark Driscoll

1,2

1

McGill University, Montreal, Canada

2

Montreal General Hospital, Montreal, Canada

Introduction: Musculoskeletal disorders and low back pain (LBP)
are a leading cause of global disability, but despite this, many LBP cases
are idiopathic. Further, female patients tend to experience a higher
occurrence of LBP and musculoskeletal disorders compared to males. Finite
element models (FEM) provide a means to objectively study the biomechanics
of the spine. While there is a growing interest in the influence of
biological sex on pain, current biomechanical modelling approaches seldom
consider the differences between male and female spines. Hence, utilizing
FEM to study important differences between biological sexes with respect to
physiological motion and load distribution may better guide targeted
treatments in clinical settings. Thus, this study aimed to compare the load
distribution between male and female spines through FEM. Material and
Methods: A male thoracolumbar spine model was developed,
consisting of the vertebrae and adjacent intervertebral discs (IVDs)
(T1-S1), tendons, thoracolumbar fascia, and surrounding muscles. From this
model, the cross-sectional area of the geometry and the material properties
of the tendons and IVDs were adapted to represent female anatomy, resulting
in two FEMs (one male and one female). The lumbar portion of the models
(L1-S1) were subjected to a 1175N follower load with 7.5Nm moment, as well
as pure moments from -10 to 10Nm applied at L1. The full thoracolumbar spine
models were subjected to pure moments from -7.5 to 7.5Nm applied at T1. The
models underwent extensive validation against in silico,
ex vivo, and in vivo comparators from
previously published literature. Following validation, intersegmental
rotation, IVD stress, and vertebral body stress were assessed.
Results: Model validation was successfully completed
through comparison of published literature for IVD stress and intersegmental
rotation. Under the follower load scenario, the lumbar FEMs demonstrated
negligible change in intersegmental rotation, however, the female model was
subjected to a 23% increase in IVD stress. When subjected to pure moments
inducing flexion and extension, the female lumbar and thoracolumbar spine
models exhibited a larger range of motion relative to the male model. Under
pure moments inducing flexion, the female lumbar model demonstrated an 18%
and 51% increase IVD stress and vertebral body stress, respectively,
meanwhile the female thoracolumbar spine model experienced a 36% and 55%
increase in IVD and vertebral body stress, respectively, when compared to
the male model. Conclusion: Sex-specific lumbar and
thoracolumbar spine FEMs were successfully developed and validated,
demonstrating substantial differences in load sharing and stress
distribution between biological sexes. The female model was subjected to
augmented stresses; these differences maybe be attributed to the reduced
bone volume and cross-sectional area in females, as well as the changes in
tissue material properties. The observed higher stresses may contribute to
the greater occurrences of LBP and musculoskeletal disorders observed in
female patients as the female body may be subjected to augmented loading on
a daily basis. This study highlights the importance of utilizing
biologically accurate models for each sex, as the resultant stress
distribution, and consequently the patient outcomes and suggested treatment
approaches, may differ significantly.

## 312

## P031: Comparison of dynamic spinal cord stress for single and multi-level
anterior cervical discectomy and fusion using a 3D patient-specific finite
element spinal cord model

Aditya Vedantam

1

, Yuvaraj Purushothaman

1

, Balaji Harinathan

1

, Matthew Budde

1

, and Narayan Yoganandan

1

1

Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, United States

Introduction: Dynamic spinal cord stress is a known contributor
to the pathophysiology of degenerative cervical myelopathy (DCM). Although
the goal of surgery is to eliminate static spinal cord compression in DCM,
its impact on dynamic spinal cord stress is unclear. The effect of surgery
on dynamic spinal cord stress is expected to change with the number of
surgical levels as well as patient-specific anatomy. The aim of this study
was to use patient-specific 3D finite element model (FEM) of the cervical
spinal cord to model single- and multi-level anterior cervical diskectomy
and fusion (ACDF) to determine differences in post-surgical spinal cord
stress patterns. Material and Methods: A 3D patient-specific
FEM of the cervical spine and spinal cord was created using MRI-derived
geometries from a single patient with mild DCM (modified Japanese
Orthopedics score = 16). Using a MRI-derived patient-specific finite element
model, we simulated one-, two- and three-level anterior cervical diskectomy
and fusion surgery for DCM. The model uses material properties from human
spinal cord tissue that have been reported previously. The single-level ACDF
procedure was simulated by inserting a bone graft centrally at C5-C6 and a
titanium plate with variable angle screws. A similar procedure was performed
for 2-level ACDF at C5-C6 and C6-C7, and 3-level ACDF at C4-C5, C5-C6 and
C6-C7. The model was constrained at the inferior surface of the T1 vertebra
in all degrees-of-freedom, and the sagittal moment loads were applied at the
superior vertebra. The pure moment load level was 2 Nm each in flexion and
extension modes. An additional follower force of 75N to simulate the head
mass and muscle force was applied. Von Mises stress of the spinal cord was
calculated at each segment during flexion and extension, and compared to
segmental range of motion and intradiscal pressures. Results:
Decrease in spinal cord stress at the level of surgical decompression was
equivalent in all simulations (-62% [1-level] vs 61.5% [2-level] vs 59%
[3-level]). There was an increase in spinal cord stress rostral to the
surgical level, and the change in spinal cord stress at the superior
adjacent segment during neck flexion was greater in multi-level surgery
compared to single-level surgery (160% [3-level] vs 56% [2-level] vs 20%
[1-level]). Increased segmental spinal cord stress after surgery correlated
with a corresponding increase in segmental range of motion (r = 0.69, p =
0.002) and disk pressure (r = 0.57, p = 0.05). Conclusion: This
is the first study to use a patient-specific cervical spinal cord model to
simulate surgical intervention and measure post-surgical spinal cord stress
specific to the patient. Our results indicate that ACDF for DCM does not
completely eliminate dynamic spinal cord stress, and adverse stress patterns
are seen adjacent to the fusion construct. Further research is needed to
determine if the altered spinal cord stress is associated with the
pathogenesis of clinical adjacent segment disease in DCM.

## 366

## P032: Rotational stiffness in a fully 3D printed biomechanical analogue
of the lumbar spine

Siril Teja Dukkipati

1,2

 and Mark Driscoll

1,2

1

Musculoskeletal Biomechanics Research Lab, Department of Mechanical
Engineering, McGill University, Montréal, Canada

2

Orthopaedic Research Laboratory, Research Institute MUHC, Montreal
General Hospital, Montréal, Canada

Introduction: Conventional spine biomechanical studies deal with
cadavers and finite element models, both of which have their respective
limitation in cost and time. Cadaveric studies introduce high variability in
measurements across patients due to their dependency in patient medical
history. Finite element models are constrained by the quality of patient
data available and are computationally demanding. Validated analogue spine
models can aid and compliment these conventional methods with low cost and
increased fidelity. Materials and Methods: A 3D printed L1-S1
analogue model of the spine was developed which consisted of vertebral
bodies, intervertebral discs along with intertransverse, interspinous
ligaments. Stereolithography 3D printing was used to manufacture these
models and assembled post printing. The soft tissues and the vertebrae were
3D printed using Flexible 80A and Durable resins on Form 3L printer
(Formlabs, MA, USA). The model was then subjected to load-controlled pure
bending loading up to a cyclic amplitude of 7.5Nm at 1/60Hz in
flexion-extension, lateral bending, and axial rotation along with a custom
bending jig (Instron Electroplus E10000, MA, USA). The resulting rotation of
motion (ROM) was recorded and plotted against applied load to calculate
model rotational stiffness. The performance of the model was compared to
that of existing in vitro and in silico models in literature.
Results: Due to the viscoelastic nature of the materials
used in the model, a hysteretic response was exhibited while loading and
unloading much like the human lumbar spine. At +7.5Nm flexion, the model ROM
was 12.92 ± 0.11° (in vitro: 16.58°[1] and in silico: 14.92°[1]; 12.96°[2]).
In lateral bending and axial rotation, the model exhibited left-right
symmetry owing to its superior manufacturing process. The model ROM in
lateral bending was found to be 13.55 ± 0.11° at +7.5Nm (in vitro: 13.32°[1]
and in silico: 16.1°[1]; 15.26°[2]) and -13.79 ± 0.19° at -7.5Nm (in vitro:
-17.1°[1] and in silico: -16.45°[1]; -15.73°[2]). In axial rotation, the
model ROM was recorded as 19.82 ± 0.19° at +7.5Nm (in vitro: 14.44°[1] and
in silico: 16.21°[1]; 15.63°[2]) and -15.57 ± 0.12° at -7.5Nm (in vitro:
-13.81°[1] and in silico: -16°[1]; -16.2°[2]). In extension, the model
exhibited approximately twice the stiffness compared to its human
counterpart. But in all the other five bending modes, the model stiffness
response is strongly comparable to that of in vitro and in silico
literature. Conclusion: This custom 3D printed analogue model
of the lumbar spine has rotational stiffness comparable to existing
cadaveric, finite element models in flexion, lateral bending, and axial
rotation motions and offers high degree of reproducibility. More material
choices and testing is needed to statistically quantify the model. Within
the context of use, such analogue experimental models can be effective tools
in upcoming spinal biomechanics research.

## References
1. Rao M. Explicit Finite Element Modeling of the Human Lumbar Spine.
University of Denver, Denver, CO, 2012.
2. Campbell JQ, Coombs DJ, Rao M, Rullkoetter P J, Petrella AJ. Automated
finite element meshing of the lumbar spine: Verification and validation with
18 specimen-specific models. J Biomech 2016; 49: 2669-76, doi:
10.1016/J.JBIOMECH.2016.05.025.

## 526

## P033: Changes of the biomechanical environment during intervertebral
fusion process after anterior cervical discectomy and fusion: a finite
element study

Yi-Wei Shen

1

, Yi Yang

1

, and Hao Liu

1

1

Department of Orthopedics, Orthopedic Research Institute, West China
Hospital, Sichuan University, Department of Orthopedics, Chengdu,
China

Introduction: Anterior cervical discectomy and fusion (ACDF) is
a widely-accepted surgical procedure in the treatment of cervical
radiculopathy and myelopathy. A solid interbody fusion is of critical
significance in achieving satisfactory outcomes after ACDF. However, the
current radiographic techniques to determine the degree of fusion are
inaccurate and radiative. Several animal experiments suggested that the
mechanical load on the spinal instrumentation could reflect the fusion
process and evaluate the stability of the implant. This study aims to
investigate the changes in the biomechanical environment during the fusion
process and explore the feasibility of reflecting the fusion status after
ACDF through the load changes borne by the interbody fusion cage.
Material and Methods: The computed tomography (CT) scans
preoperatively, immediately after surgery, at 3 months, and 6 months
follow-up of a patient who underwent ACDF at C5/6 were used to construct the
C2-C7 finite element (FE) models representing the different course of fusion
stages. A 75-N follower load with 1.0 N·m moments was applied to the top of
the C2 vertebra in the models to simulate flexion, extension, lateral
bending, and axial rotation with the C7 vertebra fixed. The Von Mises stress
at the surfaces of instrumentation and the adjacent intervertebral disc and
force at the facet joints were analyzed. Results: The facet
contact force at C5/6 suggested a significantly stepwise reduction as the
fusion proceeded while the intradiscal pressure and facet contact force of
adjacent levels changed slightly. The stress on the surfaces of the titanium
plate and screws significantly decreased at 3 months and 6 months follow-up.
A markedly changed stress distribution in extension among the three models
was noted in different fusion stages. After solid fusion is achieved, the
stress was more uniformly distributed interbody fusion in all loading
conditions. Conclusion: Through a follow-up study of 6 months,
the stress on the surfaces of cervical instrumentation remarkably decreased
in all loading conditions. After solid intervertebral fusion formed, the
stress distributions on the surfaces of the interbody cage and screws were
more uniform. The stress distribution in extension altered significantly in
different fusion statuses. Future studies are needed to develop the
interbody fusion device with wireless sensors to achieve longitudinal
real-time monitoring of the stress distribution during the course of
fusion.

## 598

## P034: Titanium mesh cage placement after corpectomy. Does the anatomical
location have an effect on stability? A biomechanical comparison of three
different cage localizations. A finite element analysis

Tuna Pehlivanoglu

1

, Bahadir Gokcen

2

, Tugrul Ergun

3

, O. Nuri Eroglu

1

, Ufuk Aydinli

2

, and Cagatay Ozturk

1

1

Dept. of Orthopaedic Surgery and Traumatology, Liv Hospital Ulus,
Liv Spine Center certified by AOSpine, Istanbul, Turkey

2

Dept. of Orthopaedic Surgery and Traumatology, Liv Hospital Vadi,
Liv Spine Center certified by AOSpine, Istanbul, Turkey

3

Dept. of Orthopaedic Surgery and Traumatology, Istinye University
Liv Hospital, Liv Spine Center certified by AOSpine, Istanbul,
Turkey

Introduction: Anterior column restoration following corpectomy
is paramount to restore the vertebral body height and to reconstruct the
corpectomy defect, in order to have a stable spinal segment yielding a
balanced spine in coronal and sagittal planes. The aim of this study based
on a finite element analysis was to compare the biomechanical properties of
three different titanium mesh cage localizations (anterior/middle/posterior)
in the vertebral body simulated to reconstruct the corpectomy defect to
question the ideal localization providing the highest stability.
Materials and Methods: A three-dimensional, non-linear
finite element model (FEM) of L4-L6 segment combined with corpectomy at the
level of L5 was constructed. It was modified to test the titanium mesh cage
(1 cm in diameter) placed on L6’s vertebral body’s upper endplate centrally
to reconstruct the L5-corpectomy defect under three conditions: (Group 1)
the cage is placed centrally on anterior 1/3rd of vertebral body,
(Group 2) the cage is placed centrally in the middle of the vertebral body,
(Group 3) the cage is placed centrally on posterior 1/3rd of
vertebral body. Finite element analyses were performed to investigate the
effect of axial compressive loadings, while average tensions recorded from
the surface of cages were recorded and assessed for distal force
transmission and segmental stability. Results: Average surface
tension (AST) in Group 1 was 320 MPa. AST in Group 2 was 124 MPa. AST in
Group 3 was 45 MPa. Intergroup comparison yielded the superiority of cages
in Group 3 (p < 0.001 for all), indicating the lowest axial compressive
load transmission to cages placed centrally on posterior 1/3rd of
the vertebral body providing least amount of force transmission to distal
segments accompanied with highest segmental stability.
Conclusion: The present study based on finite element
analysis concluded, that following corpectomy, titanium mesh cages placed
centrally on the posterior 1/3rd of the lower vertebral endplate
to reconstruct the corpectomy defect in order to restore the vertebral
height and restore the spinal balance together with spinal stability, was
subjected to least axial compressive loading resulting in the least amount
of force transmitted to distal segments and was therefore detected to yield
highest stability against axial loading.

## 761

## P035: Influence of the iliolumbar ligament on the lumbar segmental range
of motion in the sagittal plane: a finite element approach

Adi Mithani

1

, Ahmed Aoude

2

, and Mark Driscoll

3

1

Biological and Biomedical Engineering

2

Department of Surgery, McGill University Health Centre,
Canada

3

Mechanical Engineering, McGill University, Canada

Introduction: The iliolumbar ligament (ILL) is a major
lumbopelvic ligament that has been implicated in the stability of the
sacroiliac and lumbosacral joints, particularly in cases with increasing
disc degeneration or L5 spondylolysis. While the ILL plays a role in lower
lumbar dysfunction, no biomechanical modelling has been conducted to
evaluate the relationship between changes in the material properties of the
ILL and the lumbar range of motion (ROM). The primary objective of this
research was to develop a validated and representative finite element (FE)
spine model to evaluate the influence of the ILL on the lumbar segmental ROM
in the sagittal plane under flexion-extension conditions. Material and
Methods: In this study, a FE spine model was developed and
validated against in-vivo published findings of intervertebral rotations
(IVR) at lumbar spine levels L2-S1. The model included the thoracolumbar
vertebrae, rib cage, intervertebral disc, facet cartilage, joint capsule,
pelvis, and spinal ligaments (ILL, supraspinous, intertransverse, and
interspinous ligaments). The ILL was modelled as a tension-only spring
element, originating at the transverse process of the 5th vertebra and
inserted onto the ilia of the pelvis, anteriorly and posteriorly. A follower
load of 1000N was applied perpendicularly to the surface of the T1
vertebra’s superior endplate to S1 using pre-loaded springs, increasing by
2.4% at each vertebral level. The perpendicular orientation of loading
ensured the resultant forces remained tangential to the spinal profile. A
60˚ and -55˚ remote rotation was applied to the body of the T1 vertebra to
simulate forward flexion and maximum extension, respectively, with the
pelvis as the fixed support. Case scenarios were executed and IVRs were
calculated based on the intersection between lines running parallel to the
superior and inferior endplate at an intervertebral level.
Results: The application of flexion and extension generated
IVRs that fell within a 20% margin of the mean values acquired from in-vivo
studies by Breen et al. (2021) and Lin et al. (1994), respectively,
remaining within the standard deviation associated with each intervertebral
segment. Flexion-extension rotation following bilateral ILL removal
increased IVR at L5-S1 and decreased it at L4-L5, by 23.37% and 12.33%,
respectively. Sensitivity analysis relating ILL stiffness to lumbar
segmental IVRs in the sagittal plane found that as stiffness increased from
50 N/mm to 3000 N/mm, IVR decreased at L5-S1 and increased at L4-L5 by
21.94% and 15.53%, respectively. Lumbar ROM varied by a maximum of 2.5%
across all stiffness values tested. Conclusion: Removal of the
ILL or changes to its material properties alters the IVRs at L5-S1,
producing a compensatory rotation at L4-L5 in the sagittal plane. Decreasing
the magnitude of support at L5-S1 increases the amount of flexion-extension
rotation imparted at this level, which reduces rotation at adjacent levels
until the maximum allowable rotation is achieved. This permits the lumbar
spine to retain its normal ROM. Clinically, in patients with iliolumbar
syndrome, the inflammation of the ILL may not directly contribute to lumbar
dysfunction as adjacent vertebral levels could alter their segmental
rotation to preserve some degree of lumbar ROM.

## 853

## P036: There is significant variability in segmental lumbar motion

Emily Mills

1

, Jennifer Wang

1

, Brian Chung

1

, Lucas Mayer

1

, Mary Richardson

1

, Andy Ton

1

, Raymond Hah

1

, and Nathanael Heckmann

1

1

Orthopaedic Surgery, Keck School of Medicine of USC, Los Angeles,
United States

Introduction: The variability in change of lordosis throughout
common positions has not been well-studied. Additionally, the relationship
between lumbar and hip motion has not been established. Here, we sought to
establish 1) normative values for lumbar segmental motion and 2) the
relationship between hip and lumbar flexion. Material and
Methods: Fifty subjects, 25 male and 25 female, without prior hip
or spine disease were prospectively recruited to participate in this study.
Three lateral radiographs were obtained: standing, relaxed seated, and
flexed-forward seated. Radiographic variables measured included lumbar
lordosis (LL), motion at each lumbar level (L1-L2, L2-L3, L3-L4, L4-L5,
L5-S1), and pelvic-femoral angle (PFA), an established measure of hip motion
used in the arthroplasty literature. The motion through each lumbar segment
was calculated as the change in angle between a standing position and the
target motion (i.e. seated or flexed-forward seated). Each segment’s
contribution to overall lumbar motion was calculated as the ratio of the
individual segment to the overall lumbar lordosis. The correlation between
hip flexion and lumbar flexion between the standing and seated positions was
evaluated. Results: Subjects had an average age of 25.70 ± 2.34
years and body mass index (BMI) of 24.10 ± 3.02 kg/m2. From
standing to relaxed seated, the most mobile segment was L4-L5 (10.92 ±
3.95°) and from standing to a seated flexed-forward position was L4-L5
(16.42 ± 4.22°). The largest percentage contribution to lordosis was L4-L5
while standing (26.81 ± 5.78%) and was L1-L2 while seated (28.12 ± 25.42%).
During the standing to relaxed seated position, maximal motion occurred at
L4-L5 (25/50, 50.0%) followed by L5-S1 (13/50, 26.0%), L3-L4 (10/50, 20.0%),
and L2-L3 (2/50, 4.0%). During the standing to flexed-forward seated
position, maximal motion occurred at L4-L5 in 26/50, (52.0%), L3-L4 in 11/50
(22.0%), L5-S1 in 10/50 (20.0%), and L2-L3 in 3/50 (6.0%). Hip flexion
(ΔPFA) was strongly negatively correlated with lumbar flexion (ΔLL). For
every degree increase of hip flexion, the lumbar flexion decreased 0.86° (R
= -0.75, p < 0.001). Conclusion: The greatest contribution
to segmental motion and lumbar lordosis was L4-L5; however, there was
significant variability, with some subjects having the greatest contribution
from upper lumbar segments. Additionally, hip flexion was found to be
strongly negatively correlated with lumbar flexion.

## 867

## P037: Biomechanical evaluation of different fixation strategies for S1
pedicle subtraction osteotomy (PSO); A finite element analysis

Niloufar Shekouhi

1

, Sudharshan Tripathi

1

, Vijay Goel

1

, and Alekos Theologis

2

1

Departments of Bioengineering, Engineering Center for Orthopaedic
Research Excellence (E-CORE), University of Toledo, Toledo, United
States

2

Orthopaedic Surgery, UCSF, San Francisco, United States

Introduction: While pedicle subtraction osteotomies (PSO) are
most commonly performed in the middle/low lumbar spine, sacral PSOs are
ideal for correcting sacral deformities. As sacral PSOs raise unique
challenges for stabilization given relatively limited fixation caudal to the
PSO, this study’s purpose is to compare biomechanics of different
instrumentation configurations used to stabilize a S1-PSO. Material
and Methods: A validated spinopelvic finite element model was
used to create a 300 PSO in S1. Fixation cranial to the PSO was T11-L5
pedicle screws and distal to the PSO was dual iliac screws. The PSO was
stabilized with a combination of the following rods to create different
multi-rod (4-,5-,6-) constructs: (1) main midline rods (10R) engaging the
T11-L5 pedicle screws; (2) a horizontal rod (HR) connecting the two distal
iliac screws; (3) lateral accessory rods (LR) connected to the cranial iliac
screws and 10R proximally; (4) medial accessory rods (MR) connected to the
HR and 10R proximally. Five different instrumentation strategies were
evaluated: (A) 4-Rod(LR): 10R + bilateral LR; (B) 4-Rod(MR+HR): 10R combined
with a MR connected to a HR; (C) 4-Rod(LR+HR): 10R connected to a HR
combined with bilateral LR; (D) 5-Rod(LR+HR+1MR): 10R connected to a HR
combined with bilateral LR and one MR; 6-Rod(LR+HR+2MR): 10R connected to a
HR combined with bilateral LR and two MR. After loadings of 300N, 400N, and
400N were applied to the thoracic, lumbar, and sacrum, respectively, pure
moments (7.5Nm) were applied to the top endplate (T10) in all anatomic
directions. The L5-S1 ranges of motion (PSO-ROM) were recorded. PSO-force
and maximum von Mises stresses on 10R, LR, and HR were recorded.
Results: Maximum PSO-ROM was noted for 4-Rod(MR+HR) in
flexion, extension, and lateral-bendin. Compared to 4-Rod(MR+HR), 4-Rod(LR),
4-Rod(LR+HR), 5-Rod, and 6-Rod showed up to 49%, 41%, 35%, and 36% lower
PSO-ROMs, respectively. Von Mises stresses were lowest on 10Rs in 5- and
6-Rod constructs. Of the 4-Rod techniques, 4-Rod(LR+HR) had the lowest von
Mises stresses. 4-Rod(MR+HR) showed lowest von Mises stresses on accessory
rods and horizontal rods in all directions. 5-Rod and 6-Rod configurations
demonstrated greatest von Mises stresses on HR. Maximum PSO-force was
observed in 4-Rod(MR+HR) in all motions except extension.
Conclusion: In this finite element analysis of various
multi-rod (4-,5-,6-) constructs stabilizing a S1 PSO, the construct
consisting of primary midline rods connected to cranial iliac bolts
supplemented with medial accessory rods connected vertically to a horizontal
rod connecting distal iliac screws [4-Rod(MR+HR)] demonstrated highest
PSO-ROMs and greatest PSO forces.
Acknowledgement: Work supported by NSF Industry/University Cooperative
Research Center, UCSF, UT, and Ohio State University.

## 940

## P038: Influence of the rib cage on the lumbar segmental range of motion
in the sagittal plane: a finite element approach

Adi Mithani

1

, Ahmed Aoude

2

, and Mark Driscoll

3

1

Biological and Biomedical Engineering

2

Department of Surgery

3

Mechanical Engineering, McGill University, Montreal, Canada

Introduction: Local and distant tissues influence the degree of
lumbar range of motion (ROM), eluding to multiple causes of spinal
dysfunction. A recent systematic review further supports that rib cage
removal leads to reduced thoracic stiffness and increased ROM at the
thoracic spine level. However, no biomechanical studies have evaluated the
impact of the rib cage on the lumbar ROM. The primary objective of this
research was to develop a validated and representative finite element (FE)
spine model to evaluate the contribution of the rib cage to the lumbar
segmental ROM in the sagittal plane under flexion-extension conditions.
Material and Methods: In this study, a FE spine model was
developed and validated against in-vivo published findings of intervertebral
rotations (IVR) at the lumbar spine levels L2-S1. The model included the
thoracolumbar vertebrae, rib cage, intervertebral disc, facet cartilage,
joint capsule, pelvis, and spinal ligaments (iliolumbar, supraspinous,
intertransverse, and interspinous ligaments). Rib-vertebrae contact was
modelled as a fixed joint with zero degrees of freedom. A follower load of
1000N was applied perpendicularly to the surface of the T1 vertebra’s
superior endplate to S1 using pre-loaded springs, increasing by 2.4% at each
vertebral level. The perpendicular orientation of loading ensured the
resultant forces remained tangential to the spinal profile. A 60˚ and -55˚
remote rotation was applied to the body of the T1 vertebra to simulate
forward flexion and maximum extension, respectively, with the pelvis as the
fixed support. Different components of the rib cage were removed and IVRs
were calculated based on the intersection between lines running parallel to
the superior and inferior endplate at a given intervertebral level.
Results: The application of flexion and extension generated
IVRs that fell within a 20% margin of the mean values acquired from in-vivo
studies by Breen et al. (2021) and Lin et al. (1994), respectively,
remaining within the standard deviation associated with each intervertebral
segment. Flexion-extension rotation during removal of the rib cage decreased
IVR at L4-L5 and L5-S1 by -20.81% and -15.48%, respectively, with lumbar ROM
dropping by 10.12% compared to the validated model. Removal of the true ribs
bilaterally decreased IVR at L4-L5 and L5-S1 by -18.29% and -19.26%,
respectively. However, no significant change in ROM was observed after the
removal of the sternum and the false and floating ribs. Flexion-extension
rotation following the sternal release with non-in-tact ribs reduced IVR at
L4-L5 and L5-S1 by 14.63% and 15.48%, respectively, and was associated with
a 7.46% reduction in lumbar ROM. Conclusion: The findings
reveal the importance of the rib cage, specifically the true ribs, in
contributing to the lumbar ROM in the sagittal plane during
flexion-extension conditions. The sternal release, a potential treatment for
spinal sagittal plane deformity, increased segmental ROM in the lower lumbar
levels but only in the case when the ribs were removed. Therefore, unless
another method is implemented to account for the rib cage’s stiffness
contribution, the inclusion of ribs may be necessary to produce a
representative FE spinal model that reflects the lumbar spine’s ROM.

## 984

## P039: Effect of ligaments on spinal stiffness by systematic construction
of an L1-S1 analogue spine model

Siril Teja Dukkipati

1,2

 and Mark Driscoll

1,2

1

Department of Mechanical Engineering, Musculoskeletal Biomechanics
Research Lab, McGill University, Montréal, Canada

2

Orthopaedic Research Laboratory, Research Institute MUHC, Montreal
General Hospital, Montréal, Canada

Introduction: Conventional spine biomechanical studies deal with
cadavers and finite element models, both of which have their respective
limitation in cost and time. These can be overcome by incorporating
validated analogue models of the spine for biomechanical testing. To develop
such models, it is important to quantify the effects of all the underlying
soft tissues on the model biomechanical response. This study considered the
effect of intertransverse and interspinous ligaments on the overall
rotational stiffness of the lumbar spine by sequential construction of an
analogue lumbar spine. Materials and Methods: A 3D printed
L1-S1 analogue model of the spine was developed which consisted of vertebral
bodies, intervertebral discs (IVDs) along with intertransverse, interspinous
ligaments. Stereolithography 3D printing was used to manufacture the
individual tissues. The soft tissues and the vertebrae were 3D printed using
Flexible 80A and Durable resins on Form 3L printer (Formlabs, MA, USA). The
model construction had three phases (P1, P2, P3) and after each phase, the
corresponding model rotational stiffness was estimated by subjecting it to
load-controlled pure bending load up to a cyclic amplitude of 5Nm at 1/60Hz
in flexion-extension, lateral bending, and axial rotation along with a
custom bending jig (Instron Electroplus E10000, MA, USA). Five cycles of
loading is applied and the resulting rotation of motion (ROM) was recorded
and plotted against applied load to calculate rotational stiffness. P1
consisted of the assembly of vertebral bodies and the corresponding IVDs. P2
consisted of adding the interspinous ligament to the P1 model. P3 completed
the model construction by adding the intertransverse ligaments on both sides
of the P2 model. Results: The analogue spine model exhibited
hysteretic behavior during load-unload cycles very much like the human spine
due to the viscoelastic elastomers used in its construction. In
flexion-extension motion, addition of ligaments considerably increased model
rotational stiffness (flexion – P1 = 9.87 ± 0.05°; P2 = 9.41 ± 0.1°; P3 =
8.33 ± 0.11° and extension – P1 = 8.99 ± 0.09°; P2 = 6.7 ± 0.05°; P3 = 7.12
± 0.04°). In lateral bending motion, there was no noticeable change in
rotational stiffness from P1 to P2 but an increase from P2 to P3 on both
directions (left – P1 = 9.01 ± 0.07°; P2 = 8.93 ± 0.1°; P3 = 8.66 ± 0.09°
and right – P1 = 9.11 ± 0.09°; P2 = 9.18 ± 0.06°; P3 = 8.5 6± 0.05°). In
axial rotation, there was no noticeable trends in the stiffness as
construction progressed on either direction (left – P1 = 12.8 ± 0.11°; P2 =
14.3 ± 0.2°; P3 = 12.56 ± 0.14° and right - P1 = 12.08 ± 0.24°; P2 = 10.75 ±
0.04°; P3 = 11.41 ± 0.15°). The model exhibited noticeable left-right
symmetry in lateral bending and axial rotation motions.
Conclusion: The presence of interspinous and
intertransverse ligaments increases the flexion and lateral bending
stiffnesses respectively in the model. This observation agrees with the
consensus of the current understanding of lumbar spine biomechanics. In
extension and axial rotation motions, the model stiffness does not follow
any trends with the addition of ligaments. Further testing with more
material choices is needed to statistically quantify the results. The
developed L1-S1 analogue spine model can be an effective research and
educational tool in studying dependency of ligaments and any of their damage
modes on the lumbar spine structure.

## 986

## P040: On the effect of thoracolumbar fascia on lumbar spine stiffness
under loading in an analogue spine setup

Siril Teja Dukkipati

1,2

 and Mark Driscoll

1,2

1

Department of Mechanical Engineering, Musculoskeletal Biomechanics
Research Lab, McGill University, Montréal, Canada

2

Orthopaedic Research Laboratory, Research Institute MUHC, Montreal
General Hospital, Montréal, Canada

Introduction: Analogue biomechanical models serve as fast and
reliable alternatives to conventional spine biomechanical studies which
involve cadaveric and finite element studies. Both these methods have their
respective limitations in cost and time as opposed to analogue models. To
develop and validate such models, it is important to characterize the
dependency of all the underlying soft tissues on model performance. An
analogue model of the thoracolumbar fascia (TLF) was developed and
integrated with a previously validated L1-S1 analogue lumbar spine model and
its effect on spinal stiffness was characterized. Materials and
Methods: A 3D model of the TLF based on patient MRI data was
constructed from L1 to S1 level. Stereolithography 3D printing was used to
manufacture the model with Flexible 80A resin and printed on Form 3L
(Formlabs, MA, USA). A custom jig was developed to anchor the model along
the iliac arch. Prior to integrating with the analogue lumbar spine, the TLF
model was tested in tension and its mechanical hysteresis and stress
relaxation were determined. Then the model was attached to the analogue
lumbar spine and the combined model was subjected to pure bending loading in
all three axes (Instron Electroplus E10000, MA, USA). Five cycles of
load-controlled moments up to 7.5Nm at 1/60Hz were applied in
flexion-extension, lateral bending, and axial rotation. The rotational
stiffness of the TLF integrated analogue lumbar spine was determined by
plotting the resultant rotation of motion against applied moment.
Results: The analogue TLF model exhibited viscoelastic
properties much like its human counterpart. The TLF model hysteresis was
estimated to be 34.3 ± 0.68% as compared to 28.3 ± 7.4% in a porcine TLF
model (Nelson-Wong et al., 2018). Force-time curve at a constant deformation
of 10mm revealed that there was a 40.1 ± 3.0% drop in resisting force after
500 sec. This is comparable to 42.3% drop in human TLF samples according to
(Yahia et al., 1993). When the TLF model was attached to the L1-S1 analogue
lumbar spine, its rotational stiffness significantly increased in
flexion-extension and axial rotation motions under pure bending loading. The
combined model recorded 9.95 ± 0.05° and 7.1 ± 0.08° in flexion and
extension as opposed to 12.92 ± 0.11° and 10.15 ± 0.1° respectively in the
original L1-S1 analogue spine model. Similarly in axial rotation, the
combined model recorded 16.3 ± 0.18° and 12.25 ± 0.12° in left and right
directions as opposed to 19.82 ± 0.19° and 15.5 ± 0.12° respectively in the
original model. In lateral bending, no significant impact of TLF on spinal
stiffness was noticed. The combined model recorded 12.6 ± 0.1° and 13.37 ±
0.17° in left and right as compared to 13.55 ± 0.11° and 13.79 ± 0.19°
respectively in the original model. Conclusion: The developed
TLF model mechanical response is comparable to that of the human tissue. The
combined model stiffness response suggests that the presence of TLF aids in
restricting the lumbar spine in flexion-extension and axial rotation
motions. Further testing with more material choices is warranted to increase
model accuracy. The developed TLF model along with the L1-S1 analogue spine
model can act as cost effective spinal biomechanics educational and research
tools in future research.

## 1293

## P041: Biomechanics of the spine while wearing different types of
orthopedic braces

Justyna Fercho

1

, Michal Krakowiak

1

, Rami Yuser

1

, Tomasz Szmuda

1

, Grzegorz Mi´kisiak

2

, and Piotr Zieliński

1

1

Neurosurgery Department, Medical University of Gdansk, Gdańsk,
Poland

2

Department of Neurosurgery, Institute of Medicine, Opole,
Poland

Aim: Despite the frequent use of orthopedic braces or spine
stabilizers in diseases such as kyphosis, lordosis, and scoliosis, as well
as in the case of injuries and rehabilitation and after surgeries, there is
no clear evidence of their proper stabilization of the spine while
performing day-to-day activities. This study sought to assess the spine's
mobility while wearing three different types of orthopedic braces while
performing certain basic activities. Methods: Ten healthy
subjects were enrolled. Three inertial measuring units were attached
superficially along the spine at the T2, T12, and sacrum. The angle between
sensors was monitored to provide data on the sagittal profile. In addition,
the displacement along the longitudinal axis of the spine was measured
(rotation). Three types of orthopedic braces: the semi-rigid LSO orthosis,
Jewett brace, and TLSO orthosis. Three tasks were monitored: when standing,
sitting, walking, and picking up an item from the floor with one hand.
Results: When performing a dynamic task of lifting an item
all braces provide a similar level of stability in both the sagittal plane
and rotational axis. On the other hand during walking and sitting the TLSO
was the only orthosis providing a statistically significant rigidity in the
sagittal plane. The findings from this study currently provide the most
precise understanding of the biomechanics behind the spine parameters while
wearing orthopedic braces. Conclusion: Despite various levels
of perceived rigidity the three orthoses performed similarly during
deliberate dynamic testing (pick up an item). This is likely caused by the
increased kinesthetic effect of all devices. On the other hand, when
performing rather involuntary postures when walking and standing the
superiority of the most rigid TLSO brace was apparent.
Keywords: spine, motion analysis, wearable sensors, biomechanics, braces

## 1539

## P042: Differences across various ideal lumbar lordosis measurement
formulas for patient-specific sagittal alignment goals

David Polly

1

, Paul Soriano

1

, Jason Haselhuhn

1

, Gurmit Singh

1

, Kenneth Holton

1

, Kristen Jones

1

, and Jonathan N. Sembrano

1

1

University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, United States

Introduction: Multiple studies in the past have developed
differing equations to determine the ideal lumbar lordosis (ILL) in the
sagittal plane. These equations differ slightly, but all look to accomplish
the same goal of providing the surgeon with specific alignment targets
during surgery. However, to the authors’ knowledge, no study has compared
the different equations of ILL against each other. This study aims to
compare five different target alignment formulas in high, normal, and low
pelvic incidence (PI) patients. Methods: We conducted a
retrospective chart review from January 2015 through April 2022 and reviewed
available full-standing spine radiographs. We classified patients by PI:
high (65-95°), normal (50-60°), and low (30-45°), and included five patients
for each classification. A single faculty member performed all PI
measurements. We calculated ILL based on the measured PI using five
different formulas: Hamamatsu University (2016), ESSG-GAP score (2017),
Abelin-Genevois et al. (2018), Hyun et al. (2019), and Dial et al. (2022).
We employed Tukey’s HSD post hoc pair-wise comparison of homogenous groups
of means (α=0.05) to determine if there were significant differences. We
considered any measurement ±3° as equivalent to account for measurement
variability. Results: Fifteen patients were included in the
data analysis, five in each PI cohort. The GAP score, Hyun, and Dial
equations differ statistically from Hamamatsu University and Abelin-Genevois
(p<0.001). At high and normal PI classification, GAP score, Hyun, and
Dial significantly differ from Hamamatsu University and Abelin-Genevois
(p<0.05). At low PI classification, only the GAP score and Dial
significantly differ from Hamamatsu University and Abelin-Genevois
(p<0.05); Hyun does not differ significantly from all the other formulas.
Conclusion: Variation exists among the five different ILL
equations, with three formulas being statistically different from the other
two. The equations for high and low PI patients predict differing ideal
lumbar lordosis. One must take note of these differences when considering
patient-specific sagittal alignment goals. Further study is needed to refine
the understanding of ideal lumbar alignment.

## 1749

## P043: Biomechanical analysis of cortical bone trajectory screwcombined
with pedicle screw fixation in lumbar spine: in-vitro experiments and finite
element validation

Zihao Ding

1

, Hongtao Ding

1

, Yuzeng Liu

1

, and Yong Hai

1

1

Spine Surgery, Beijing Chaoyang Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing, China

Introduction: To compare the mechanical characteristics of
pedicle screw fixation (PS), cortical bone trajectory screw (CBTS) fixation
and the combination use of PS and CBTS (PS-CBTS) in L4/5 fixation.
Material and Methods: A three-dimensional finite element
(FE) analysis model (T12-Sacral) based on a patient with osteoporosis was
developed to analyze the range of motion (RoM) and internal fixation stress
of three different groups, which were PS fixation (group A), CBTS fixation
(group B), and hybrid fixation (L4-CBTS and L5-PS) (group C). And six human
cadaveric lumbar spine specimens (L1-Sacral) were used for the biomechanical
experiment to further compare the different fixations’ strengths and
weaknesses. Results: In the cadaveric specimen study, group C
had the highest stiffness, followed by groups B and A. The range of motion
(RoM) of the cranial adjacent segment was significantly higher in group C
than in groups A and B. In the FE model, group C had the highest screws and
connecting rod fixation stress in the six-dimensional motion of the lumbar
spine, followed by Groups B and A. The stresses of interbody cage in the
three groups were 318.8 Mpa (group A), 319.6 Mpa (group B), and 311.4 Mpa
(group C), respectively. Group B had the smallest RoM in flexion and
extension, and the largest RoM in lateral flexion and rotation.
Conclusion: The combined application of CBTS and PS can
increase the stress of internal fixation, improve lumbar stiffness, and
decrease stress on the interbody cage. However, the impact on the adjacent
segments requires further research.

## 1817

## P044: Elasticity change of the paravertebral fascia and muscle in
adolescent idiopathic scoliosis after posterior selective fusion
surgery

Aixing Pan

1

 and Yong Hai

1

1

Orthopedic, Beijing Chaoyang Hospital, Capital Medical University,
Beijing, China

Introduction: We sought to assess the elasticity change of the
paravertebral fascia and muscle in adolescent idiopathic scoliosis patients
with Lenke Type 1, 2, or 3 curves after posterior selective fusion surgery.
Material and Methods: The shear wave elasticity imaging
system was used to assess the elasticity of the thoracic paravertebral
muscles and fascia both on the concave and convex sides. Three regions of
interest, including the apex, upper end, and lower end of the main curve,
were tested. Results: Ten female patients, with an average age
of 16.6 ± 2.7 years old, were included. The average post-operation follow-up
period was 9.0 ± 2.4 months. The Cobb angle was significantly corrected from
63.6 ± 12.0° to 10.7 ± 5.4° (p < 0.05). The length of the trunk increased
from 40.4 ± 2.5 cm to 46.0 ± 2.8 cm (p < 0.05). The elasticity of deep
fascia didn't show a significant change post-operation (p > 0.05). The
elasticity of the paravertebral muscle on the concave side had a significant
increase at the final follow-up (p < 0.05). The elasticity of the
paravertebral muscle on the convex side also increased at the upper end (p
< 0.05). The elasticity asymmetry of the deep fascia decreased, but the
elasticity asymmetry of the paravertebral muscle increased at the upper end
of the curve (p < 0.05). Conclusion: The paravertebral
muscle on the concave side is stiffer after surgery. Elastic asymmetry of
paravertebral muscle increased and elastic asymmetry of the deep fascia
decreased at the upper end of the curvature. Further study is needed to
elucidate the mechanism by which the paravertebral soft tissue responds
after surgery.

## Deformity-Cervical

## 208

## P045: Extracranial dural venous sinus: a rare vascular anomaly in a a
case of atlantoaxial instability

Umang Sheth

1

, Tushar Rathod

2

, and Punith K

3

1

Orthopaedics, Dr. R.N. Cooper Municipal Hospital, Mumbai,
India

2

Orthopaedics, Seth G.S. Medical College and K.E.M. Hospital, Mumbai,
India

3

Orthopaedics, Grant Government Medical College, Mumbai,
India

Background: Cases of atlatonaxial instability usually are
accompanied with bonyt and vascular abberations which make the management of
these cases challenging. Case Description: We report a rare and
challenging case of an 8 year old boy with atlantoaxial instability
presenting with features of cervical myelopathy and CT angiograpm revealing
an extracranial course of the dural venous sinus which is a first of it’s
kind to be present in cases of atlantoaxial instability along with an
aberrant vertebral artery course in the V3 segment, occipitalisation of
atlas and facet malalignment. The patient was managed with intraoperative
reduction by traction and posterior occipitocervical fusion.
Conclusion: It is of utmost importance to actively look for
venous and arterial anomalies while planning surgery on the supraaxial
cervical spine as damage to these structures can have catastrophic
consequences.

## 213

## P046: Ideal surgical strategy for dropped head syndrome (DHS)

Takahiro Iizuka

1

, Tetsuro Takai

1

, Tokuji Kashiro

1

, and Hiroshige Debata

1

1

Orthopedic Surgery, Takai Hospital, Nara, Japan

Background of Data: Dropped Head Syndrome (DHS) is little known
in Spine Community. Patients complain of difficulties in forwarding gaze.
Some reports on these clinical symptoms are reported in the literatures as a
case report. Most DHS surgeries report posterior cervical reconstruction
with posterior cervical long fusions. We report four patients with DHS who
underwent anterior segmental correction of cervical vertebrae as possible as
short. And the patients are enabled to gaze forward after surgery.
Patients and Methods: Four patients are enrolled in this
report (Average age: 74.5, female 3, male1). They complained of difficulties
in forwarding gaze and posterior neck stiffness preoperatively. All patients
had no other pathologies ie Parkinson’s syndrome. They were evaluated by
MRI, myelography, and CT myelography for making surgical strategies.
Cervical alignment (C3-C7 cervical kyphosis angle) and Cervico-Thoracic
Inlet Angle (between C2-Th1 line and clavicle line) were recorded by lateral
X-ray at upright position preoperatively and postoperatively. Clinical
complaints were also documented on gazing forward and neck pain/stiffness.
All patients performed anterior segmental reconstruction for correction of
cervical kyphosis. Results: All patients are enabled to gaze
forward. No apparent neurological deficit and complications associated with
surgery were not reported in those patients. Cervical kyphosis C3-7 angle
was improved. Conclusion: Dropped Head Syndrome is little-known
pathology in the Spine community. In this report, patients complained of
difficulties in forwarding gaze and swallowing foods and neck stiffness
preoperatively. Anterior segmental reconstruction spinal fusion (ASR-SF) is
less invasive than posterior cervical correction with instruments because of
less damage to PVM, mechanical reduction with instruments, and possible
short segmental fusions. We conclude that ASR-SF is the most suitable
surgical strategy for DHS as less invasive surgery.

## 302

## P047: Endoscopic endonasal odontoidectomy: a long-term follow-up for a
cohort of 21 patients

Federica Penner

1

, Raffaele De Marco

1

, giuseppe di perna

1

, irene portonero

1

, Diego Garbossa

1

, Bianca Baldassarre

1

, and francesco zenga

1

1

Neuroscience, University of Turin, Turin, Italy

Introduction: Endoscopic endonasal odontoidectomy (EEO) has been
described as a potential approach for craniovertebral junction (CVJ)
diseases that could cause anterior bulbomedullary compression and
encroaching. Due to the atlantoaxial junction’s uniqueness and complex
biomechanics, treating CVJ pathologies uncovers the challenge of preventing
C1–C2 instability. A large series of patients treated with endonasal
odontoidectomy is reported, analyzing the feasibility and necessity of
whether or not to perform a posterior stabilization. Furthermore, the focus
is on the long-term follow-up of both posteriorly fixed patients, especially
those who only underwent partial C1 arch preservation without posterior
fixation. Material and Methods: This study is a retrospective
analysis of patients with ventral spinal cord compression for non-reducible
CVJ malformation, consecutively treated with EEO from July 2011 to March
2019. Postoperative dynamic X-ray and CT scans were obtained in each case in
order to document CVJ decompression and to exclude instability. The anterior
atlas‐dens interval, posterior atlas‐dens interval and C1-C2 total lateral
overhang were measured as morphological criteria to determine the upper
cervical spine stability. Results: Twenty-one patients (11:10
F:M) with a mean age at surgery of 60.6 years (range 34 - 84 years),
encountered the inclusion criteria. For all 21 patients a successful
decompression was achieved at the first surgery. In 11 patients the partial
C1 arch integrity did not require a posterior cervical instrumentation on
the bases of post-operative and constant follow up radiological examination.
In 13 cases, an improvement of motor function was recorded at discharge.
Only one patient had further motor function improvement at follow-up. Among
the patients that did not show any significant motor change at discharge, 4
patients showed an improvement at the last follow-up.
Conclusion: The outcomes, even in C1 arch preservation
without posterior fixation, are promising and it could be said that the
endonasal route potentially represents a valid option to treat lesions above
the nasopalatine line.

## 479

## P048: Concomitant atlantoaxial and atlanto-occipital rotatory dislocation
in children: radiological features, diagnostic pitfalls, and long-term
outcome

Paul Koljonen

1

 and Kenneth Man Chee Cheung

1

1

Department of Orthopaedics and Traumatology, The University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong

Introduction: While the pathological manifestation of
atlantoaxial rotatory dislocation has been well described in the medical
literature, the combined dislocation of the atlantoaxial and
atlanto-occipital joints, or OAARD - short for occipital-atlantoaxial
rotatory dislocation - is a condition which has been poorly elucidated and
probably underdiagnosed. We believe that the pathogenesis of combined
atlantoaxial and atlanto-occipital dislocation is most likely a result of
untreated atlantoaxial rotatory dislocation leading to chronic secondary
compensation measures occurring at the occiput-C1 joints. Unique clinical
and radiological features lead to difficulty in diagnosis, and conventional
treatment algorithms may not apply. This paper describes a combination of
clinical and radiological features which can help clinicians correctly
diagnose and treat OAARD. Material and Methods: A case series
of paediatric occipital atlantoaxial rotatory dislocation is presented in
this abstract. 3D-reconstructed computer tomography images and 3D printed
models of the cervical spine are used to illustrate the deformity as well as
dysplastic changes occurring in the dislocated occipital condyles, C1 and C2
facet surfaces. Xray and Dynamic CT scans for rotational deformity are
discussed in detail, including the introduction of 2 novel radiological
signs termed the “trapezoidal anterior C1 shadow” and “isolated C1 spin-out”
sign, which are pathognomonic of dislocation of the C1 ring. Diagnostic
pitfalls, surgical technique, and long-term outcome are presented.
Conclusion: Concomitant occiput-atlantoaxial dislocation is
a unique condition that is probably underdiagnosed in common daily practice.
We emphasize the need for clinicians to exercise a high index of suspicion
in children presenting with neck pain and torticollis. Early diagnosis and
aggressive treatment of isolated atlantoaxial dislocation may help prevent
chronic secondary dislocation at the occiput-C1 level. This paper describes
a combination of clinical and radiological features which can help
clinicians correctly diagnose and treat OAARD. More research is required on
the long-term outcome following upper cervical spinal fusion in
children.

## 690

## P049: Diffuse idopathic skeletal hyperostosis with dysphagia: surgical
treatment

Adnene Benammou

1

, Sofiene Kallel

2

, Cherif Kamoun

1

, Balti Walid

1

 and Mohamed Ben Salah

1

1

Charles Nicolle Hospital, Orthopedic Surgery Department, Tunis,
Tunisia

2

Maghreb Medical, Tunis, Tunisia

Introduction: Diffuse Idiopathic Skeletal Hyperostosis (DISH) is
an ossification of spinal entheses and tendons. Its cervical location can
lead to dysphagia. We report a case report of a patient treated for
dysphagia caused by cervical DISH. Material and Methods: A
65-year-old male was addressed for cervical DISH. Symptoms were dysphagia
with neck pain and limitation of spinal mobility. Esophago-gastro-duodenal
transit showed brutal stop of contrast agent at the level of C4. Surgery was
decided mainly on dysphagia not on pain. Computed Tomography (CT) scan
showed anterior osteophytes and reduction of the diameter of the trachea.
Osteophytes were removed from an anterior cervical approach.
Results: At day one postoperative, swallowing was
significantly improved with reduction of local pain. At 6 months
postoperative, the patient reported a significant improvement in swallowing,
breathing and range of motion. Conclusion: Although rare,
dysphagia in DISH patient is a rising problem. Surgical treatment with
removal of osteophytes is effective for treating it. Surgery can be decided
mainly on dysphagia with no other signs.

## 733

## P050: A case report: C1-C2 rotatory dislocation with C1 arch defect
managed with modified Harms-Goel technique

Ziad Mohamed

1

 and Antony Michael

1

1

Neuro Spinal Hospital, Dubai, United Arab Emirates

Atlantoaxial rotatory dislocation represents a rare presentation, although
more common in paediatric patients. The management of this condition is not
well defined in the current literature due to the limited number of cases
described in the literature. Here, we describe a case of C1-2 rotatory
dislocation in a female adolescent patient following acute onset of neck
pain that was corrected with C1-C2 fusion using the modified Harms-Goel
technique after skull traction and closed reduction failed to offer
long-term management.

## 879

## P051: Comparison of the efficacy of anterior combined with posterior
approach and posterior-only approach in the treatment of basilar
invagination with irreducible atlantoaxial dislocation: minimum 5-year
follow-up outcomes

Xiaoyu Cai

1

 and Tao Xu

1

1

Department of Spine Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Xinjiang
Medical University, Urumqi, China

Introduction: To compare the clinical efficacy of anterior
combined with posterior (A-P) approach and posterior-only (P-O) approach
release, reduction, and internal fixation in the treatment of BI with
irreducible AAD. Material and Methods: The clinical records of
49 patients diagnosed with BI with irreducible AAD from July 2000 to June
2017 were analyzed retrospectively. The patients were divided into the A-P
group (n = 24) and P-O group (n = 25) according to the operation modes. The
primary outcome measures included Chamberlain line (CL), Wackenheim line
(WL), McRae line (ML), atlanto-dens interval (ADI), cervicomedullary angle
(CMA), clivus-canal angle (CCA), Japanese Orthopaedic Association (JOA)
score, and Ranawat grade. Results: The follow-up periods were
68.7 ± 11.2 months in the A-P group and 64.4 ± 13.2 months in the P-O group.
The JOA score of the A-P group was 8.25 ± 2.74 before operation and 14.96 ±
1.09 at the last follow-up. The improvement rate was 77.32 ± 11.31%. The JOA
score of the P-O group was 8.10 ± 2.48 before operation and 14.69 ± 0.60 at
the last follow-up. The improvement rate was 74.32 ± 10.42%. The
preoperative CL, WL, ML, ADI, CMA, and CCA of the A-P group were 13.14 ±
5.72 mm, 6.91 ± 3.52 mm, 7.12 ± 4.51 mm, 9.78 ± 2.10 mm, 110.79°± 13.2°,
95.28° ± 18.1°. At the last follow-up, the CL, WL, ML, ADI, CMA, and CCA
were 1.69 ± 2.51 mm, -2.71 ± 2.19 mm, -1.50 ± 2.41 mm, 1.13 ± 1.52 mm,
149.16° ± 12.5°, 141.38° ± 13.6° with significant difference compared with
the preoperative results. The preoperative CL, WL, ML, ADI, CMA, and CCA of
the P-O group were 12.50 ± 5.09 mm, 6.54 ± 3.12 mm, 6.88 ± 4.28 mm, 9.81 ±
1.89 mm, 115.29° ± 12.3°, 97.21° ± 16.6°. At the last follow-up, the CL, WL,
ML, ADI, CMA, and CCA were 2.04 ± 3.61 mm, -3.12 ±1.81 mm, -1.72 ± 2.79 mm,
1.15 ± 1.20 mm, 146.69 °± 11.2 °, 137.49° ± 10.3°, which were statistically
significant compared with the preoperative results. The bone graft fusion
time was 9.1 ± 5.0 months in the A-P group and 9.4 ± 4.8 months in the P-O
group. A total of 8 patients presented postoperative complications,
including 6 patients in the A-P group (25.0%) and 2 patients in the P-O
group (8.0%). The incidence of postoperative complications in the P-O was
significantly lower than that in the A-P group. Conclusion: The
clinical efficacy of the P-O approach release, reduction, and internal
fixation in the treatment of BI with irreducible AAD is basically the same
as that of the A-P approach. However, the incidence of complications of the
P-O approach is significantly lower than that of the A-P approach.

## 1093

## P052: Hybrid surgery for the treatment of cervical myelopathy and
adjacent level radiculopathy

David Felzensztein

1

, Eilat Sapirstein

1

, and Eyal Itshayek

1

1

Neurosurgery, Rabin Medical Center, Holon, Israel

Introduction: Patients with multilevel degenerative disc disease
suffering from cervical myelopathy and adjacent foraminal stenosis, tend to
be managed with multilevel anterior cervical discectomy and fusion (ACDF) or
cervical laminectomy and fusion. Fusion sparing techniques have been used in
an attempt to decrease the number of fused levels. The combination of ACDF
and Transvertebral Foraminotomy could reduce the need for adjacent segment
fusion, reduce costs and decrease the number of fused levels in such cases.
We present our experience and preliminary results with patients undergoing
ACDF and skip level transvertebral foraminotomy. Material and Methods:
We retrospectively evaluated prospectively collected clinical and
radiological data from January 2017. Currently a total of 15 patients have
been assessed. All procedures included single level ACDF and unilateral
transvertebral foraminotomy at an adjacent disc space. The Modified Japanese
Orthopedic Association (mJOA) score and Odom’s criteria were analyzed.
Radiological assessment included the C2-7 Cobb angle and disc height of
segments adjacent to the ACDF. Adjacent segment degeneration, which includes
disc degeneration, was evaluated. All surgeries were performed at two
adjacent segments. Results: The JOA scores significantly
improved. There were no significant differences in the C2-7 Cobb angle and
DH of the adjacent segment to ACDF. Conclusion: Combination of
ACDF and transvertebral foraminotomy provides a safe and effective method in
reducing the number of levels fused with good clinical outcome.

## 1094

## P053: Unilateral spacer distraction (USD) of the subaxial cervical facet
joint for the treatment of fixed coronal malalignment of the craniovertebral
junction

Juan P. Cabrera

1

, Igor Ebert Cechin

2

, Alderico Girão Campos de Barros

2

, and Luis Eduardo Carelli Texeira da Silva

2

1

University of Concepción, Concepcion, Chile

2

Instituto Nacional de Traumatologia e Ortopedia Jammil Haddad
(INTO), ARCOL, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil

Introduction: The standard treatment for a fixed coronal
malalignment of the craniovertebral junction is an anterior and/or posterior
column osteotomy plus instrumentation. However, the procedure is very
challenging, carrying an inherently high risk of complications even in
experienced hands. This study aims to demonstrate the usefulness of a novel
alternative treatment by adding a unilateral spacer distraction (USD) to the
subaxial cervical facet joint to promote coronal realignment and fusion.
This technique allows the achievement of coronal correction performing the
surgery in the subaxial cervical spine, which can decrease the associated
morbidity of an osteotomy at the craniovertebral junction, a challenging
location. Material and Methods: Single-center retrospective
study of the patients with fixed coronal malalignment of the craniovertebral
junction caused by different etiologies treated with USD in the concavity
side with posterior column osteotomy (PCO) in the convexity side of the
subaxial cervical spine. Demographic and radiological characteristics were
collected with special emphasis on clinical and radiological measurements of
coronal alignment of the cervical spine. Results: During
2012-2019 four patients were treated with USD of the subaxial cervical spine
complementing an asymmetrical PCO at the same level. The causes of coronal
imbalance were congenital, tuberculosis, post-traumatic, and ankylosing
spondylitis. The level of USD was C2-3 in three patients and C3–4 in one
patient. A substantial coronal realignment was achieved in all four. All the
patients haves at least two years of follow-up. One had an iatrogenic
vertebral artery injury during the dissection and facet distraction, with
partial recovery on follow-up. Conclusion: USD of the concave
side with unilateral PCO of the convexity side in the subaxial cervical
spine is an alternative treatment for fixed coronal malalignment of the
craniovertebral junction from different causes.

## 1252

## P054: Cross-sectional area of the longus colli and cervical degenerative
spondylolisthesis: a retrospective review evaluating this anatomic
consideration

Aditya Mazmudar

1

, Khoa Tran

1

, Taylor Paziuk

1

, Mark Lambrechts

1

, Eric Tecce

1

, Olivia Blaber

1

, Daniel Habbal

1

, Kamil Okroj

1

, Brian Karamian

1

, Jose Canseco

1

, Jeffrey Rihn

1

, Alan Hilibrand

1

, Christopher Kepler

1

, Alexander Vaccaro

1

, and Gregory Schroeder

1

1

Rothman Orthopedic Institute at Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, United States

Introduction: Limited literature is available to define the
impact of the longus colli muscle, a deep flexor of the spine, on cervical
spine stability despite its close proximity to the vertebrae. No studies
have investigated longus colli cross-sectional area (CSA) in patients with
cervical spondylolisthesis. The purpose of this study was to determine if
longus colli CSA is associated with the severity preoperative cervical
degenerative spondylolisthesis. Material and Methods: A
retrospective cohort study was conducted on patients who underwent one- to
five-level ACDF between 2010 and 2021 at a single, academic center for
clinical symptoms of radiculopathy, myelopathy, or mixed radiculomyelopathy
in the setting of cervical spondylolisthesis. Patient data was obtained
using a Structured Query Language search and manual chart review. Patients
who lacked a preoperative cervical spine MRI or radiograph or had surgical
intervention to address infection, trauma, tumor, or revision of a prior
instrumented cervical fusion surgery were excluded from analysis. Longus
colli cross-sectional areas (CSA) were measured from preoperative MRI images
at the C5 level. Preoperative spondylolisthesis measurements were recorded
with cervical radiographs. For each patient, the highest degree of
spondylolisthesis measured among levels fused was determined as the “maximum
spondylolisthesis measured.” Patients were grouped by quartiles respectively
according to longus colli CSAs. Statistical tests compared patient
demographics, surgical characteristics, and surgical outcomes between
groups. Multiple linear regression analysis was utilized to assess if longus
colli CSA predicted cervical spondylolisthesis. Results: A
total of 157 patients met inclusion criteria. Group 1 (first quartile) was
the oldest (60.4 ± 12.0 years, p = 0.024) and was predominantly female
(59.0%, p = 0.001). Group 1 also had the highest maximum spondylolisthesis
(0.19 mm, p = 0.031) and highest proportion of grade 2 spondylolisthesis
(23.1%, p = 0.003). On regression analysis, lowest quartile of longus colli
CSA was an independent predictor of larger measured maximum
spondylolisthesis (β: 0.04, p = 0.012). There were no differences for levels
fused, revisions, readmissions, or surgical complications between groups (p
> 0.05). Conclusion: Smaller longus colli CSA is
independently associated with a higher grade and degree of preoperative
cervical spondylolisthesis, but this finding does not result in adverse
postsurgical outcomes. Further research targeted at improving our
understanding of how longus colli strengthening affects cervical
spondylolisthesis is indicated given our findings.

## 1281

## P055: Lower hounsfield units at the planned lowest instrumented vertebra
is an independent risk factor for distal junctional kyphosis following adult
cervical deformity surgery

Peter Passias

1

, Tyler Williamson

1

, Rachel Joujon-Roche

1

, Peter Tretiakov

1

, Bailey Imbo

1

, Pooja Dave

1

, Kimberly McFarland

1

, Jamshaid Mir

1

, Stephane owusu-saprong

1

, Jordan Lebovic

1

, Bassel Diebo

2

, Shaleen Vira

3

, Andrew Schoenfeld

4

, Heiko Koller

5

, Renaud Lafage

6

, Virginie Lafage

6

, and Themistocles Protopsaltis

1

1

NYU Langone Medical Center, New York, United States

2

SUNY Downstate Medical Center, New York, United States

3

UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, United States

4

Brigham and Women’s Hospital/Harvard Medical Center, Boston, United
States

5

University of Munchen, Germany

6

Lenox Hill Hospital, New York, United States

Introduction: The association of Hounsfield units (HU) and
junctional pathologies has emerged as a topic of interest in thoracolumbar
surgery. The relationships between HUs and complications like distal
junctional kyphosis (DJK) in cervical deformity (CD) surgery have not been
elucidated. The objective of this study is to assess whether bone mineral
density of the LIV, as assessed by HUs, is prognostic for the risk of DJK
after CD surgery. Methods: CD patients with 2-year (2Y) data
included. HUs were measured at the LIV, LIV+1, C3 and C7 on all preoperative
CT scans, averaging the widest region of interest (ROI) ellipse within
sub-cortical bone across three axial slices for each vertebra. The primary
outcome measure was complications, including DJK, defined radiographically
as ≥10° change between the end plates of a vertebra and vertebra+2. Means
comparison test assessed differences in HUs based on occurrence of
complications, linear regression assessed correlation of HUs with risk
factors, and multivariable logistic regression followed by conditional
inference tree (CIT) run machine learning derived HU thresholds based on
developing complications. Results: Included: 107 CD patients.
HU means- LIV: 272 ± 79, LIV+1: 252 ± 71, C3: 338 ± 109, C7: 294 ± 97. By
two years, 20.6% developed DJK and 6.3% developed DJF. There was a
significant correlation between more distal LIVs and lower HUs (r = .351, p
= .01), as well as age and HUs at the LIV (r = .364, p <. 001). Both age
and HUs did not correlate with change in the DJK angle (both p > .1). HUs
were lower at the LIV for patients who developed DJK (219 vs 286, p = .018).
Upon CIT analysis, an LIV threshold of 245 HUs was predictive of DJK (OR:
5.0, [1.2-17.7]; p = .023). Conclusion: Low bone mineral
density at the lowest instrumented vertebra, as assessed by a threshold
lower than 245 Hounsfield units, may be a crucial risk factor for the
development of distal junctional kyphosis after cervical deformity surgery.
Preoperative CT scans should routinely be performed in at-risk patients to
mitigate this modifiable risk factor.

## 1328

## P056: Are we getting better at optimizing surgery for high risk adult
cervical deformity patients over time? A retrospective multicenter
analysis

Peter Passias

1

, Peter Tretiakov

1

, Justin Smith

2

, Breton Line

3

, Bassel Diebo

4

, Alan Daniels

4

, Jeffrey Gum

5

, Themistocles Protopsaltis

1

, D. Kojo Hamilton

6

, Alex Soroceanu

7

, Justin Scheer

8

, Robert Eastlack

9

, Gregory Mundis

9

, Michael Kelly

10

, Nitin Agarwal

11

, Pierce Nunley

12

, Khoi Than

13

, Richard Fessler

14

, Robert Hart

15

, Douglas Burton

16

, Christopher Shaffrey

13

, Frank Schwab

17

, Shay Bess

3

, Virginie Lafage

17

, and Christopher Ames

8

1

Neurological and Orthopaedic Surgery, NYU Langone Health, New York
City, United States

2

Department of Neurosurgery, University of Virginia Medical Center,
Charlottesville, United States

3

Department of Spine Surgery, Denver International Spine Center,
Presbyterian St. Luke's/Rocky Mountain Hospital for Children, Denver,
United States

4

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Warren Alpert School of Medicine,
Providence, United States

5

Norton Leatherman Spine Center, Louisville, United States

6

Department of Neurological Surgery, University of Pittsburgh School
of Medicine, Pittsburgh, United States

7

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Calgary, Calgary,
Canada

8

Department of Neurological Surgery, University of California, San
Francisco, United States

9

Division of Orthopaedic Surgery, Scripps Clinic, La Jolla, United
States

10

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Rady Children's Hospital, San
Diego, United States

11

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Washington University, St. Louis,
United States

12

Spine Institute of Louisiana, Shreveport, United States

13

Department of Neurosurgery, Duke University Medical Center, Durham,
United States

14

Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, United States

15

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Swedish Neuroscience Institute,
Seattle, United States

16

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Kansas Medical
Center, Kansas City, United States

17

Department of Orthopaedics, Lenox Hill Hospital, Northwell Health,
New York City, United States

Introduction: Surgical correction of adult cervical deformity
(CD) has high rates of complication. However, patients often derive
significant benefits in functional status and quality of life from surgical
intervention despite being deemed at high risk of complication. It has yet
to be investigated whether spine surgeons are improving surgery for high
risk patients and minimizing poor outcomes. Material and
Methods: Operative CD patients ≥ 18yrs with complete pre-(BL) and
2-year(2Y) multi-center data were stratified by year of surgery from 2013 to
2018. Patients were categorized as 2013 to 2014[Early] or 2015 to
2018[Recent]. High risk [HR] patients were defined as meeting ≥ 2 of the
following criteria: 1) Baseline C2-C7 Cobb > 15° or T1S-CL ≥ 35° or C2-C7
cSVA > 4 cm or CBVA > 25° 2) being elderly [≥ 70 years], 3) severe BL
frailty [Miller frailty index], 4) CCI ≥ 1 SD above the cohort mean, 5)
undergoing 3-column osteotomy (3CO), and 6) fusion of > 10 levels, or
> 7 levels for elderly patient. Means comparison analysis assessed
differences in demographics, HRQLs, radiographic alignment, and
complications between groups. Stepwise multivariable linear regression
described associations between increasing year of surgery and complication
rates. Results: 82 CD pts met high-risk inclusion criteria
(62.11 ± 10.87 yrs, 63.7%F, BMI:29.70 ± 8.16 kg/m2, CCI: 1.07 ±
1.45), and underwent surgery (levels fused 9.4 ± 3.9, EBL: 866.51 mL). 39.0%
of HR patients underwent 3CO. The proportion of HR patients increased with
time, with 41.8% of Early patients classified as HR compared to 47.6% of
Recent patients. Recent HR patients were more likely to be female (p = .008)
and have a lower BMI (p = .038), but also presented with higher baseline CCI
(p = .024). Surgically, Recent HR patients were more likely to undergo a
partial facet joint osteotomy (p = .042), though less likely to undergo a
PSO (p = .003). In terms of HRQLs, at 1Y Recent HR patients were more likely
to improve in SWAL-QOL – Communication (p = .035) and 2Y Eating Duration
domains (p = .038). By post-op complications, Recent HR patients were
significantly less likely to experience bladder incontinence at 1Y (p =
.024). Furthermore, Recent HR patients were significantly less likely to
experience any post-operative adverse events overall (p = .020), or
complications such as dysphagia (p = .045). Regression revealed increasing
year of surgery to be correlated with decreasing minor complication rates (β
= -0.166, p = .030), as well as lowered rates of DJK by 2Y (β = -0.152, p =
.048). Kaplan-Meier 2Y survival analysis revealed that of 9 Early (15.25%)
and 1 Recent (4.35%) HR patients had expired, with mean survival time was
71.56 weeks for Early HR patients, and 70.00 weeks for Recent HR patients (p
= .636). Conclusion: Over time, high-risk cervical deformity
patients have increased in frequency and comorbidity rates, yet have
demonstrated improved clinical, radiographic, and post-operative outcomes.
These findings suggest that spine surgeons have improved over time in
optimizing outcomes and patient selection, and reducing potential adverse
events associated for high-risk patients.

## 1613

## P057: Redefining cervical spinal deformity - When are sagittal plan
realignment procedures necessary?

Venu Nemani

1

, Philip Louie

1

, Caroline Drolet

1

, and John Rhee

2

1

Neurosurgery, Virginia Mason Franciscan Health, Seattle, United
States

2

Orthopaedic Surgery and Neurosurgery, Emory University, Atlanta,
United States

Introduction: Cervical sagittal deformity (CSD) is an extremely
disabling condition and can be associated with concomitant myelopathy,
radiculopathy, or both. While there are radiographic parameters that define
the presence of CSD, the question remains as to whether these criteria are
sufficient to warrant a diagnosis of CSD. Further, it is unclear when a CSD
realignment procedure is warranted versus a less invasive procedure only to
address cervical myelopathy or radiculopathy, given the increased complexity
and risk of CSD realignment surgery. Material and Methods: With
these questions in mind, we conducted a REDCap survey of cervical spine
surgeons to determine if there is a consensus as to 1) the definition of a
cervical sagittal plane deformity, and 2) when a cervical sagittal plane
deformity merits a sagittal realignment procedure with its associated risks.
The survey was distributed to 82 surgeons with differing experience,
training background (neurosurgery vs orthopaedic surgery), and practice
environment (University setting vs private or hospital employed). The
questions were designed to determine whether the current published
radiographic criteria were sufficient alone to establish a diagnosis of CSD
or whether other clinical and physical exam factors were also thought to be
necessary in the diagnosis of CSD. We presented clinical vignettes to
determine which radiographic parameters would require correction in the
setting of clinical signs and symptoms such as radiculopathy, myelopathy,
axial neck pain, and difficulty holding head upright, and when a more
extensive “deformity” procedure was warranted. Results: We
received responses from 41 surgeons (33 orthopaedic surgeons, 8
neurosurgeons) with 93% working in an academic environment. 41% of surgeons
had 6-15 years of experience and 59% had 16+ years of experience. 80% of the
surgeons devote greater than 50% of their surgical practice to treating
patients with cervical spine disorders. 93% of the surgeons perform a
realignment procedure for CSD at least once every three months. There was no
consensus on whether isolated radiographic abnormalities previously defined
as associated with the need for cervical deformity surgery or a history of
difficulty holding one’s head upright was sufficient to establish a
diagnosis of CSD. However, when one or more of these radiographic criteria
were also associated with a clinical history of difficulty holding one’s
head upright, 29% of surgeons felt this was sufficient establish a diagnosis
of CSD. Surgeons generally felt that a CSD realignment procedure was more
necessary in patients presenting with cervical myelopathy compared to
cervical radiculopathy. While there was no clear consensus on what
radiographic criteria needed CSD correction in patients with myelopathy, the
most common parameters deemed important were C2-C7 SVA and C2-C7 kyphosis.
Conclusion: Despite numerous published studies, there is no
consensus amongst a diverse group of cervical spine surgeons as to what
radiographic and/or clinical criteria are necessary to define the presence
of CSD. Surgeons are more apt to perform CSD realignment procedures in
patients with myelopathy versus those with radiculopathy alone. More work is
necessary to refine the definition of CSD and what patients will benefit
from a sagittal plane realignment procedure.

## 1650

## P058: Are two surgeries necessary for correction of one deformity -
Cervical kyphosis in neurofibromatosis? A rare case report

Jayprakash Modi

1,2

 and Pratikkumar Prajapati

2

1

Orthopaedic, Nutan Medical College, Mehsansa, India

2

Orthopaedic, B J Medical College, Ahmedabad, India

Introduction: Dystrophic neurofibromatosis type I, involving
upper cervical spines, is rare, which can cause serious complications.
Myelopathy develops due to compression of the cord posteriorly. Surgical
correction has its inherent risks and difficulties because of poor bone
quality, difficult anterior approach because of bizarre deformities, and the
necessary manipulation, which might cause more cord damage and ischemia.
Anterior decompression with alignment correction was an early popular
choice. But without posterior shortening, the technique proved
unsatisfactory in restoring normal alignment. It tended to expose the graft
bone at increased risk of insufficient union or extruding. So a combination
of anterior decompression and posterior correction was generally
recommended. Materials and Methods: This is a rare case study
of a patient operated at tertiary care centre having non-traumatic
involvement of spinal cord affecting neurology with history, clinical and
radiological features suggesting Cervical Nuerofibromatosis as the cause of
compression. This report describes surgical technique applicable to cases of
severe cervical kyphosis using only anterior approach. Result:
A 13-year-old boy, a case of neurofibromatosis type 1 presented with neck
pain, and bilateral upper limb radiculopathy for 2 months with affected
daily living, with intact neurology. Imaging demonstrated 46° kyphosis
(C3-C5),marked dystrophic changes of the C4 and C5, extreme dorsal
angulation indenting the cord. Anterior surgery was planned for the patient
with neuro-monitoring. Through left anterior approach, total C3, C4 and C5
corpectomy was accomplished, keeping the PLL intact. The defect was filled
with a fibular cortical graft which was stabilized with 48 mm cervical screw
plate, showing full correction of kyphosis postoperatively. At the follow-up
6 months postoperatively, lateral plain radiograph showed stability of the
cervical spine fusion without correction loss. The patient had full relief
from tingling and numbness with no neurological deficit and could resume his
daily duties. Patient is asymptomatic at 2 years follow up.
Conclusion: Only anterior decompression and fusion are
effective in satisfactorily correcting cervical kyphosis in cases of
neurofibromatosis without neurologic compromise and avoids the risk of
damage to vital neurovascular structures because of pedicle or lateral mass
screw fixation.

## 1918

## P059: Cervical medullary compression due to a retro- odontoid pseudotumor
in 65 year-old patient with Forrestier's disease: a case report and
literature review

Zohra Souei

1

, Maher Hadhri

1

, Mohamed Boukhit

1

, Asma Elmir

1

, Kais Maamri

1

, Atef Ben Nsir

1

, and Mehdi Darmoul

1

1

Neurosurgery, Fattouma Bourguiba University Hospital, Monastir,
Tunisia

Introduction: The retro-odontoid pseudotumor or pannus is often
associated with inflammatory diseases. It is typically located between the
dens and the anterior arch of the atlas. It can also be due to
noninflammatory causes such as chronic atlantoaxial instability. Only a few
cases have reported an association between retro-odontoid pannus,
craniocervical chronic instability, and Forestier’s disease. Material
and Methods: We report the case of a 65-year-old male who
presented with impaired ambulation and neck pain following minor trauma.
Detailed neurologic exam showed weakness in all four limbs, with hypoglossal
nerve palsy, dysphagia, and bladder dysfunction. The CT and MR studies
showed cervical ankylosis with a retro-odontoid pannus and craniocervical
stenosis with myelopathy associated with diffuse idiopathic skeletal
hyperostosis. Results: The patient underwent an urgent
occipitocervical fixation with occipital craniotomy and C1 laminectomy. The
postoperative course was uneventful and the neurological symptoms improved
rapidly with the normalization of strength in four limbs. Within 2 weeks, he
was able to walk independently. Postoperative imaging showed excellent
craniocervical decompression with pannus regression and adequate fusion.
Conclusion: Retro-odontoid pseudotumor not associated with
an inflammatory disease is a rare condition and may lead to cervicomedullary
compression or myelopathy. To date, transoral spinal cord decompression
followed by posterior stabilization has been a widely accepted treatment. In
the past years, however, several authors have reported a pannus reduction
and even regression after a posterior atlantoaxial stabilization only.

## Deformity-Thoracolumbar (Adolescent)

## 137

## P060: Comparison of adolescent idiopathic scoliosis (AIS) correction-open
vs. minimally invasive cohorts: a 2 years radiographic and surgical outcome
study

Matthew Geck

1

, Devender Singh

1

, Ashley Duncan

1

, John Stokes

1

, and Eeric Truumees

1

1

Spine, Ascension Texas Spine and Scoliosis, Austin, United
States

Introduction: Both open and minimally invasive surgery (MIS)
techniques are used to surgically address AIS. MIS techniques are purported
to preserve the midline spinal musculature and to decrease estimated blood
loss (EBL) and hospital length of stay (LOS). Aim: We report
the surgical and deformity corrections outcomes in matched cohorts of
Adolescent Idiopathic Scoliosis (AIS) patients with similar Lenke types that
had undergone either open or MIS at 2 years follow-up at one institution.
Materials and Methods: From a single surgeon’s practice, 21
patients who underwent MIS correction were case matched with 19 patients
that had open surgical correction. All were idiopathic Lenke 1A and 5C
types. Age, surgery duration, estimated blood loss (EBL), length of hospital
stays (LOS), preoperative (pre-op) and postoperative (post-op) Cobb angles,
Oswestry Disability Index (ODI), Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) and Scoliosis
Research Society-22r (SRS-22r) were evaluated. MIS technique was uniform in
all patients using two or three para-midline incisions.
Results: Mean patient age was 16.5 years (11-47 years) in
MIS group and 18 years (12-39 years) in open group. Mean pre-op Cobb angles
for MIS and open were 53.7° (±3.1°) and 51.7° (±3.6°), respectively. The
main curve’s mean flexibility index was 55.4% and 56.1% for MIS and open
group, respectively. Mean surgical time for MIS and open group were 343 and
393 minutes, respectively (p < 0.05). Mean EBL were 156 mls (±89.4 mls)
and 275 mls (±75.2 mls) for MIS and open group, respectively (p < 0.05).
Mean LOS for MIS was 3.0 days (±1.2 days) and 5.1 (±1.8 days) for open group
(p < 0.05). Mean corrections for MIS at post-op 1 and 2 years were 75.6%
(±8.2%) and 77.4 % (±6.8%) respectively. For open group, these corrections
were 76.4% (±8.1%) and 76.8% (±7.4%) respectively. The differences in
correction did not reach statistical significance. Mean 1- and 2-years
post-op VAS scores for MIS and open groups were 3.3 and 3.6, and 3.3 and
3.8, respectively (p > 0.05). For MIS and open group, mean 1- and 2-years
post-op ODI scores were 6.4 and 10, and 4 and 8, respectively (p > 0.05).
Mean 1- and 2-years post-op SRS scores for MIS and open groups were 4.3 and
4.1, and 4.6 and 4.2, respectively (p > 0.05). Conclusions:
In these specific curve types, our cohort data indicates that MIS technique
for scoliosis correction is a viable option and can attain corrections
equivalent to open surgery with lower EBL and shorter LOS. Additionally,
patient reported outcomes over 2 years follow up, as indicated by VAS, ODI
and SRS were comparatively better in the MIS over the open group.

## 139

## P061: Does a minimally invasive surgical technique affect intraoperative
and post-operative blood glucose levels in adolescent idiopathic scoliosis
correction?

Matthew Geck

1

, Devender Singh

1

, Ashley Duncan

1

, John Stokes

1

, and Eeric Truumees

1

1

Spine, Ascension Texas Spine and Scoliosis, Austin, United
States

Introduction: Surgical intervention induces trauma and
stimulates the neuroendocrine stress response, releasing a cascade of
hormones ultimately resulting in hyperglycemia. Uncontrolled hyperglycemia
has long been associated with increased risk of surgical site infections and
complications with wound healing. Aim: To examine if a
minimally invasive surgical (MIS) technique influences perioperative blood
glucose levels of patients undergoing surgical correction for Adolescent
Idiopathic Scoliosis (AIS). Materials and Methods: The charts
of 35 patients undergoing surgical correction for AIS were reviewed.
Patients were divided into two cohorts based on surgical approach, open or
MIS. Variables including blood glucose levels at preoperative,
intraoperative, and post-operative day three were collected. Average
Intraoperative Blood Glucose was the mean of three blood glucose levels
taken from intraoperative blood gases. The presence of endocrine pathology
was defined broadly but included diabetes as well as abnormal vitamin D
levels (< 30 nmol/L). Results: The open cohort was comprised
of 18 patients, and the MIS included 17. 24% of the open were male, in
comparison to 6% of the MIS. Mean age and Body Mass Index were similar in
both groups. Overall presence of an endocrine issue was 60%. Of these, 95%
were abnormal vitamin D levels (8 deficiency, 12 insufficiency) and one
patient had a diagnosis of hypothyroidism. The incidence of endocrine issues
varied significantly in the open (n = 14) versus the MIS (n = 7). Mean
preoperative glucose was 89.3 ± 13.1 mg/dL, with no significant difference
between MIS and Open. Three blood glucose levels were averaged from blood
gases samples taken intraoperatively, with a mean of 90.7 ± 7.9 mg/dL. There
was no significant difference in mean intraoperative blood glucose levels
between MIS (89.7 ± 8 mg/dL) and Open (90.4 ± 11.8 mg/dL). Blood glucose
levels were highest on postoperative day 1 (POD1), mean 117.1 ± 12.5 mg/dL,
and consistently decreased over postoperative days 2 and 3, 106.6 ± 16.3
mg/dL and 99.3 ± 8.4 mg/dL respectively. There was no significant difference
in postoperative blood glucose levels between the two groups.
Conclusion: Though there was a significantly higher
incidence of endocrine issues in the open, there was no statistical
difference in blood glucose levels at any of the defined intervals between
the two groups. Blood glucose was the highest on POD1 in both groups and
tapered down each subsequent postoperative day in alignment with literature.
Though this sample population did not demonstrate significant differences
between groups, a larger prospective study to better understand the role of
endocrine issues and glucose levels on the risks and outcomes of AIS
correction is still warranted.

## 140

## P062: Pre-operative fibrinogen testing is not associated with total blood
loss in mini open correction and fusion for adolescent idiopathic scoliosis
(AIS) correction: a single center analysis

Matthew Geck

1

, Devender Singh

1

, Ashley Duncan

1

, John Stokes

1

, and Eeric Truumees

1

1

Spine, Ascension Texas Spine and Scoliosis, Austin, United
States

Introduction: Intra- and post-operative bleeding is associated
with higher operative morbidity and greater costs of care. Aim:
This study sought to investigate the potential association between
fibrinogen, bleeding and transfusion requirements in patients undergoing
adolescent idiopathic scoliosis (AIS) reconstruction using minimally
invasive surgical (MIS) technique. Materials and Methods: 64
consecutive AIS patients over 2 years undergoing scoliosis corrections were
reviewed. Age, gender, operative time (OR), pre-operative (pre-op)
hemoglobin (Hb), platelet count, prothrombin time [PT], activated partial
thromboplastin time [aPTT], Prothrombin time (INR), pre-op fibrinogen,
thromboelastography (TEG: G, K, angle), total bleeding volume and
transfusions were collected. Pearson’s test was used to investigate the
correlation between bleeding and clinical variables with level of
significance set at α = 0.05. Results: In this cohort, mean
patient age was 17 years (11-48 years) with 94% of female patients. Mean BMI
was found to be 19.8 (±3.2). Curves were classified as: 42 Lenke 1A, 13
Lenke 1B, 4 Lenke 1C; 8 Lenke 5C. Mean TEG values were within normal range
in both males and females. Mean Hb, platelet count and fibrinogen
concentration were 11.12 (±1.3) g/L, 238.24 (±72.18) (x109/L) and
216.4 (±33.6) g/dL, respectively. Mean total bleeding was 152 ± 75 ml.
Pre-op fibrinogen did not correlate significantly with the total bleeding (r
= 0.34, p > 0.05). Other variables such as OR, PT, aPTT, INR, TEG and
platelet count did not correlate significantly with fibrinogen (p >
0.05). Total bleeding volume correlated significantly with cell saver (r =
0.687, p < 0.05). None of the other variables correlated significantly
with total bleeding volume (p > 0.05). Conclusions: Our
cohort analysis indicates that pre-op fibrinogen concentration does not
correlate significantly with the total bleeding volume in patients
undergoing AIS reconstruction using MIS technique. However, there was a
strong positive relationship between the total bleeding volume and
transfusion requirements.

## 142

## P063: Does Cobb angle correlate with self-reported outcomes of patients
undergoing adolescent idiopathic scoliosis (AIS) reconstruction?

Matthew Geck

1

, Devender Singh

1

, Ashley Duncan

1

, John Stokes

1

, and Eeric Truumees

1

1

Spine, Ascension Texas Spine and Scoliosis, Austin, United
States

Introduction: Cobb Angle is widely used to quantify the
magnitude of spinal deformity. Clinicians use this tool to track the degree
of scoliosis correction following surgical interventions. Aim:
This study investigates the correlation between Cobb angles and
self-reported outcomes of patients undergoing minimally invasive surgical
(MIS) stabilization of adolescent idiopathic scoliosis (AIS).
Materials/Methods: 67 consecutive patients undergoing MIS
correction of AIS were prospectively studied. Age, Body mass index (BMI),
Lenke curve, preoperative (pre-op) and postoperative (post-op) Cobb angles,
Scoliosis Research Society-22r (SRS-22r), Oswestry Disability Index (ODI)
and Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) were evaluated. Mean (standard deviations)
were calculated. Surgical technique was uniform in all patients using two or
three para-midline incisions. At different pre-op and post-op time periods,
linear regressions were conducted in which the Cobb angle was the
independent variable and outcome scores were the dependent variables.
Results: Mean patient age was 16.5 years (11 - 47 years).
Mean BMI was found to be 21.5 (±1.9) Curves were classified as: 42 Lenke 1A,
13 Lenke 1B, 4 Lenke 1C; 8 Lenke 5C. Mean flexibility index of main curve
was 54.46% (±10.43%). Pre-op VAS and ODI were weakly correlated with pre-op
Cobb Angles with r2 = 0.05 and 0.110, respectively. At 2 weeks, 6
months, 1 year and 2 years post-op, the correlation between post-op Cobb
angles and VAS gradually improved from weak to moderate with r2 =
0.0027, 0.0067, 0.085 and 0.404, respectively. Similarly, post-op Cobb
angles and ODI at 2 weeks, 6 months, 1 year and 2 years follow-ups were
consistently correlated weakly with r2 = 0.118, 0.112, 0.091 and
0.118, respectively. SRS-22r and post-op Cobb angles at 1- and 2-years
follow-ups were weakly correlated with r2 = 0.028 and 0.035,
respectively. Conclusions: Our cohort’s data indicate that Cobb
angle and self-reported patient outcomes are weakly correlated. There is no
gold standard to measure the surgical outcomes in MIS; rather clinicians
should rely on combination of tools varying from radiographic evaluations,
patient reported outcome measures to their own clinical judgments.

## 145

## P064: Posterior vertebral tethering as an outpatient surgical option for
select cases of pediatric scoliosis: a case series

Kira Furie

1

, Hao-Hua Wu

2

, and Mohammad Diab

3

1

School of Medicine

2

Orthopaedic Spine Surgery, Harvard Medical School/ Massachusetts
General Hospital & Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, United
States

3

Orthopaedic Surgery, University of California, San Francisco, United
States

Introduction: Surgical treatment for scoliosis is typically an
inpatient procedure. Posterior vertebral tethering (PVT) is a novel
fusionless surgery that can be performed as an outpatient procedure in
select patients. The purpose of this case series is to describe outpatient
PVT and to report on minimum 12-month follow-up. Material and
Methods: In this retrospective case series, skeletally immature
patients diagnosed with idiopathic scoliosis who underwent outpatient PVT
performed by a single surgeon at an academic medical center from 2018-2022
were included. The primary outcome was no significant progression of Cobb
angle ± 5° for measurement error. Cobb angles were measured and recorded for
the most recent preoperative visit and all postoperative visits. Surveys
were administered via phone to assess for pain, satisfaction, and return to
activities. Pain ratings were given on a visual analogue scale (VAAS) from
0-10. Results: Four patients (mean age 12 ± 1.2 years) were
enrolled with mean 24.3 ± 10.2 months follow-up. Patients had a 17.8 ± 5.4°
reduction in Cobb angle that was significant at most recent postoperative
visit (p = 0.03). Patients reported lower current pain compared to
preoperative pain (1.5 ± 1.91 vs. 6.0 ± 0.82, p = 0.005). There were no
complications, revisions, or readmissions. All four patients discharged on
the same day of index operation. Additionally, all patients (100%) reported
their back feeling normal during both daily life and sports. Patients took
on average 2.8 ± 1.0 weeks to return to school and 14.0 ± 6.9 weeks to fully
return to sports. All patients (100%) reported having no stiffness,
instability, or decreased range of motion. All four patients (100%) reported
they were satisfied with the operative treatment and would elect to have the
procedure again. Conclusion: This is the first paper to
describe outpatient PVT. At minimum 12 months postoperatively, PVT patients
had significantly reduced Cobb angles, no complications, no revisions, and
reported being able to return to both daily life and sport. This may be a
less morbid surgical approach to pediatric scoliosis.

## 165

## P065: Posterior scoliosis surgery method that preserves motion by curve
correction and fusion within the major curve(s) and by posterior vertebral
tethering

Saechin Kim

1

1

Orthopedic Surgery, Harvard Medical School - Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, United States

Introduction: The surgical goals for pediatric scoliosis are to
arrest curve progression, create a balanced/stable spine, and preserve
spinal motion by fusing fewer levels, especially in the lumbar spine. In
standard posterior surgery, spinal fixation is applied above, within, and
below the curve and after corrective maneuvers, the levels are fused. In
doing so, levels where the disc angle fully corrects or reverses on side
bending are also fused. We describe a posterior scoliosis surgical method
that can change the disc angle at each individual level and allow the
surgeon to either capture the change with rod for fusion or with polyester
fiber for non-fusion or tethering. Our hypothesis is that this method is
safe and effective and can preserve motion. Material and
Methods: The novel technique is based on the observation that
manipulation of rods placed intravertebral interpedicle (IVIP) in two
adjacent vertebrae can directly change the disc angle between the vertebrae.
In this IVIP method, IVIP constructs with open lateral offset connectors
correct the deformity at the apex of the major curve(s) and the correction
is captured by placing rods into the open tulips of the constructs. IVIP
constructs with closed lateral offset connectors correct the deformity along
the convexity of the major curve(s) above or below the apical fusion or of
the minor compensatory curve and the correction is captured by polyester
fiber bands for IVIP tethering. This prospective study presents the first
ten consecutive cases by a single surgeon using this IVIP method (min 1 yr
f/u). The number of levels fused is compared to matched standard posterior
surgery controls. Radiographic measurements from xrays at first and final
f/u assess for adding on phenomenon (AO) and from side bending xrays at
preop and 1 year f/u determine lateral range of motion (ROM) at the tethered
lumbar levels. Results: The IVIP group included 8 patients with
adolescent idiopathic scoliosis (Lenke classification: 1 1A, 1 1B, 2 1C, 2
3C, 1 4C, and 1 5C), 1 with tethered cord syndrome and 1 with tuberous
sclerosis (female:male 9:1, avg age = 16 yrs, range 13-19). 4 to 10 fewer
levels were fused in the IVIP cases compared to the control cases (p =<
0.0001). There was no adding on phenomenon and no reoperation. 4 patients
had at least 2 lumbar levels with IVIP tethering that would have been fused
in standard posterior surgery and side bending xrays showed increase in the
lateral lumbar ROM post op compared to preop by 18%, 22%, 43%, and 50%; in
standard posterior surgery, these lumbar levels would have been fused
resulting in significantly decreased lumbar lateral ROM.
Conclusion: IVIP method is safe and effective and can
preserve motion by fusing fewer levels at 1 year f/u. A concern with fusing
fewer levels is the risk for spinal decompensation (SD) such as AO that may
lead to worse outcome. IVIP tethering may prevent SD while preserving motion
even in skeletally mature adolescents. Further studies are needed to show
the long-term effectiveness of this IVIP method.

## 265

## P066: Changes in curve between 40 degrees and 50 degrees in adolescent
idiopathic scoliosis after skeletal maturity: over 5-year follow-up

Yunjin Nam

1

, Young Bin Lee

1

, Young Ha Kim

1

, Jungwook Lim

1

, Seong Chul Park

2

, Hong Jin Kim

3

, Dong-Gune Chang

3

, Jae Hyuk Yang

2

, and Seung Woo Suh

1

1

Department of Orthopaedics, Korea University Guro Hospital, Seoul,
South Korea

2

Department of Orthopaedics, Korea University Anam Hospital, Seoul,
South Korea

3

Department of Orthopaedics, Inje University Sanggye Paik Hospital,
Seoul

Introduction: Although adolescent idiopathic scoliosis rarely
causes clinical symptoms, it causes cosmetic and emotional effects and can
cause pulmonary complication with severe deformity. Female, large magnitude
of curvature, and skeletal immaturity are known to be the risk factors for
progression of curve. Surgical treatment is recommended if curvature is
larger than 50 degrees even after skeletal maturity or if curvature is
larger than 40 degrees with remaining growth potential. However, few
articles have reported on progression of curve between 40 and 50 degrees
after skeletal maturation. Material and Methods: This study is
a single center, retrospective study using medical record. From 1999 to
2016, 87 patients were included. The inclusion criteria were as follows: (i)
skeletally matured patients who diagnosed with adolescent idiopathic
scoliosis, (ii) who have curve between 40 and 50 degrees, and (iii) who
followed up more than 5 years after initial period without surgical
treatment. Skeletal maturation was defined as Risser stages 4 and 5. The
initial period was defined as the first time point that satisfies both (i)
and (ii). The sex, age, magnitude of curve, location of apex, Risser stage,
height and weight were measured at initial period. The age, magnitude of
curve, height and weight were also measured at end of follow-up. A change in
the magnitude of curve, magnitude of curve per a year, height and weight
were measured. More than 5 degrees of progression in curve was defined as
significant curve progression. Results: A total of 97 curves
were observed in 87 patients (19 male, 69 female). Mean follow-up period was
97 months. The mean age was 14.6 years at initial period and 22.6 years at
the end of follow-up. Initially, 65 patients had Risser stage 4 and 32
patients had Risser stage 5. The mean magnitude of curve was 42.6 degrees at
initial period and 45.1 degrees at the final follow-up. The mean change in
curve was 2.7 degree and the annual change was 0.35 degrees. Progression in
curve more than 5 degrees were observed in 38 cases (39.2%). In 24 cases
(24.7%), the magnitude of curve reached 50 degrees at the end of follow-up.
There was a difference only in the age (13.9 vs. 15.0 years, p = 0.004) and
Risser stage (stage 4: 47.7% vs. stage 5: 5.21%, p = 0.014) between the
group with a significant curve progression or not. Risser stage (p = 0.05)
and magnitude of curve at initial period (p = 0.045) showed significant
difference between the group of curve size reached 50 degrees or not.
Conclusion: In patients with AIS, significant curve
progression was observed at 39.2% even after skeletal maturation. Younger
age and Risser stage 4 were risk factors of curve progression. Larger
initial curve and Risser stage 4 were risk factors of curve progression over
50 degrees.

## 267

## P067: The accuracy and safety of a pedicle screw using the freehand
technique in minimally invasive scoliosis surgery

Yunjin Nam

1

, Dong-Gune Chang

2

, Sangmin Lee

1

, Young Ha Kim

1

, Jungwook Lim

1

, Seong Chul Park

3

, Hong Jin Kim

2

, Jae Hyuk Yang

3

, and Seung Woo Suh

1

1

Department of Orthopaedics, Korea University Guro Hospital, Seoul,
South Korea

2

Department of Orthopaedics, Inje University Sanggye Paik Hospital,
Seoul, South Korea

3

Department of Orthopaedics, Korea University Anam Hospital, Seoul,
South Korea

Introduction: The safety and clinical usefulness of minimally
invasive scoliosis surgery (MISS) has been reported in various studies.
However, freehand pedicle screwing in MISS remains technically challenging.
The purpose of this study is to evaluate the accuracy and safety of pedicle
screw placement using the freehand technique in adolescent idiopathic
scoliosis (AIS) patients treated with MISS compared to conventional open
scoliosis surgery (COSS). Material and Methods: We included 76
patients who underwent deformity correction for AIS. CT scans were used to
assess screw violations divided into two groups according to the surgical
technique: MISS or COSS. Anterior violations were classified into Grade 0, 1
(no contact with internal organs), and 2 (contact with internal organs).
Medial and lateral violations were classified into Grade 0, 1 (< 2 mm),
and 3 (≥ 2 mm). Grade 2 were considered critical violations.
Results: A total of 630 and 634 pedicle screws were
inserted in the MISS and COSS groups, respectively. The overall critical
violation rates of the MISS and COSS groups were 16.8% (106 screws) and
14.0% (165 screws) (p = 0.116). Medial critical violations on the left side
in the middle thoracic region frequently occurred in the MISS group compared
to the COSS group (p = 0.003). There were no statistical differences in the
complications. Conclusion: Pedicle screw placement using the
freehand technique in MISS for AIS patients provided similar accuracy and
safety compared to COSS. Pedicle screws inserted on the left side of the
middle thoracic region, exhibited more medial critical violations in the
MISS group.

## 401

## P068: Substantial mismatch of skeletal maturity assessment between Risser
sign and Simplified Skeletal Maturity Scale (SSMS) / Thumb Ossification
Composite Index (TOCI) in patients with adolescent idiopathic
scoliosis

Masaaki Chazono

1

, Takashi Inoue

2

, and Shintaro Obata

2

1

Orthopaedic Surgery, Utsunoimya National Hospital, Utsunomiya,
Tochigi, Japan

2

Orthopaedic Surgery, Jikei University School of Medicine, Minato-ku,
Tokyo, Japan

Introduction: The Risser sign (RS) has been used as a primary
skeletal maturity marker in patients with adolescent idiopathic scoliosis
(AIS) for more than half a century. However, there is considerable argument
about the ambiguous visibility of iliac apophyseal ossification, decreased
intra- and inter-rater reliability, and the insensitivity of the Risser sign
in predicting the timing of peak height velocity (PHV) and estimating the
remaining growth potential. Additionally, PHV and two-thirds of pubertal
growth typically have passed before the first stage of RS. Nevertheless, it
is still commonly used to manage the evaluation of skeletal maturity of AIS
patients in clinical practice. Currently, there are several radiograph-based
skeletal maturity scoring systems used to gauge the amount of childhood
growth and determine the timing of PHV. In particular, hand skeletal
maturity systems such as the Simplified Skeletal Maturity Scale (SSMS) or
the Thumb Ossification Composite Index (TOCI) are popular in the attempt to
predict the occurrence of PHV in adolescents. This study aims to compare the
frequency of the mismatch in estimation of HV between Risser sign (RS) and
SSMS/TOCI stages in adolescent idiopathic scoliosis (AIS) patients.
Material and Methods: One hundred twenty-six female
patients with AIS were included. The mean age of the patients was 12.9
years. A whole spine and hand X-rays were obtained to establish skeletal
maturity stage according to RS, SSMS, and TOCI systems. A mismatch resulting
in overestimation (MOE) with RS compared to SSMS/TOCI was defined as the
combination of RS 2-4/SSMS 3-5 or RS 2-4/TOCI 4-6, whereas a mismatch
resulting in underestimation (MUE) with RS and SSMS/TOCI was defined as RS
0-1/SSMS 6-7 or RS 0-1/TOCI 7-8. Height velocity (HV) was compared between
MOE/non-MOE and MUE/non-MUE groups. Results: Between RS and
SSMS, the rates of the MOE and MUE groups were 9.3% and 1.6%, respectively.
Between RS and TOCI, rates were 7.1% and 1.6%, respectively. With the
combination of RS and SSMS stages, an estimate of HV of 5.6 cm/year in the
MOE group was significantly larger than that of 2.9 cm/year in the non-MOE
group, and 3.7 cm/year in the MUE group was significantly smaller than 6.7
cm/year in the non-MUE group. Likewise, with the combination of RS and TOCI
stages, an estimate of HV of 5.6 cm/year in the MOE group was significantly
greater that of 2.8 cm/year in the non-MOE group, and 3.7 cm/year in the MUE
group was significantly smaller than 6.7 cm/year in the non-MUE group.
Conclusion: The present study showed that approximately 10%
of mismatch of those skeletal maturity assessments in RS/SSMS and RS/TOCI
groups occurred. Given those results, the authors advocate that either SSMS
or TOCI classification rather than RS should be used for managing patients
with AIS.

## 465

## P069: Quality of life and satisfaction in patients with adolescent
idiopatic scoliosis surgically managed in a third-level hospital in
Mexico

Cristian Yiovanny Pinzón Largo

1

, and Hugo Vilchis Samano

1

1

Hospital de Traumatologia y Ortopedia Lomas Verdes, Estado de
Mexico, Naucalpan de Juarez, Mexico

Introduction: Deciding on the management of adolescent
idiopathic scoliosis is not always easy, it requires a joint decision
between the medical team, family members and the patient. Patient-reported
outcome measures have gained interest in recent years to assess treatment
outcomes, and could help us have tools to decide the best option for each
patient. Objective: Evaluate the quality of life and
satisfaction with the spinal fusion arthrodesis treatment by filling out a
questionnaire of results filled out by the patient (SRS-22). Material
and Methods: Cross-sectional, descriptive, retrospective design,
patients diagnosed with adolescent idiopathic scoliosis surgically managed
between 2016 and 2021 at Lomas Verdes Hospital in Naucalpan, Mexico were
included. The patient filled out the SRS-22 questionnaire before the
surgical procedure and at least 12 months later. Results: Data
were obtained from 54 patients, 44 (74%) women and 10 (18%) men, with an age
range at the time of surgery between 10 and 17 years (mean 14.5 years), Cobb
angles between 45 and 94 degrees in its main curvature (average 63.2
degrees). Time elapsed between the procedure and the completion of the
questionnaire 1-5 years (average 2.5 years). Scores were obtained before the
procedure (total score 3.6 function 4.1, pain 3.7, body image 2.3, mental
health 3.8), after the surgical procedure total score 4.4, function 4.4,
pain 4.5, body image 4.2, mental health 4.3, Significance was obtained
statistics both in total score and in each of the individual topics of the
questionnaire in the following order: body image (1.1E-27), total score
(9.0668E-17), pain (2.8E-09) mental health (1.2E-05), function (8.3 E-4).
With a satisfaction with the surgical treatment of 4.8.
Conclusions: Patients diagnosed with adolescent idiopathic
scoliosis managed with posterior instrumented arthrodesis show improvement
in both the total score and the individual items of the SRS-22 questionnaire
after the surgical procedure, all with statistical significance, with more
strength in the imaging component. body and pain, in addition to a high
degree of satisfaction reported by patients.

## 487

## P070: Hybrid posterior instrumentation and mini-open anterior release for
treatment of adolescent idiopathic scoliosis: a retrospective
analysis

Vijay Kumar Loya

1

 and Charanjit Singh Dhillon

2

1

MRMCW, Orthopaedics & Spine, Hyderabad, India

2

MIOT International, Spine, Chennai, India

Objective: A retrospective analysis of the role of hybrid
instrumentation, mini-open anterior release in the treatment of adolescent
idiopathic scoliosis. Methods: Medical records and imaging of
43 patients operated between January 2008 to June 2014 were retrospectively
analyzed. Subgroup analysis was done for patients managed with mini-open
anterior release+ posterior instrumentation [APSF](13 patients) vs. all
posterior approach [PSF] (30 patients). Hybrid instrumentation was used
involving the use of hooks and sublaminar wires in conjunction with pedicle
screws. A mini open thoracotomy (< 10 cm incision) was used for anterior
release. The free-hand technique was used to insert all the pedicle screws.
Stagnara wake up test was used after correction maneuvers. Appearance scores
were collected before and after the surgery. Results: The mean
age of operated cases was 15.2 (range 10-28) years, and majority cases were
females (86.05%). The average follow-up time was 46.86 months. Lenke 1 was
the most common curve pattern [74.42%]. Significant correction was achieved
and maintained at the end of the follow-up period for all the curve patterns
[PT 66.67%, MT 75.20%, DL/L – 70.83%]. The sagittal plane alignment was
maintained in all but one patient. Mean [81.25° vs. 49.16°] and bending
[66.89° vs. 32°] Cobb angles were significantly higher in the APSF group.
Improvement in the appearance scores was significant for both the groups
[APSF - 25 vs. 10.78, PSF - 18.9 vs. 9.03]. Two of the APSF patients had
prolonged ICU stay. Two patients required secondary suturing for wound
dehiscence. One case had chylothorax, which was medically managed. One
patient required revision surgery for hook pull-out after 34 months of index
surgery. There were no neurological deficits, vascular or visceral injuries.
Conclusion: Adolescent idiopathic scoliosis represents a
different set of challenges in developing nations with limited re- sources.
Hybrid instrumentation with the use of sublaminar wires is still an
effective and valid strategy to reduce the cost of spinal deformity
surgeries. A mini-open anterior release, along with the use of posterior
hybrid instrumentation, helps achieve optimal coronal and sagittal
correction, especially in bigger and stiffer curves, compared to all
posterior hybrid constructs. A decision tree is provided to guide the
treatment selection for the adolescent idiopathic scoliosis cases.

## 504

## P071: Medium term outcomes in early onset scoliosis patients who have
graduated from magnetically controlled growing rods to final fusion

Henry Turner

1

, Robin McManus

1

, Flavia Alberghina

1

, Jim Kennedy

1

, Jacques Noel

1

, and Patrick Kiely

1

1

Trauma and Orthopaedic Surgery, Children's Health Ireland (CHI) at
Crumlin, Dublin, Ireland

Introduction: There is paucity in the literature regarding
outcomes in patients with early onset scoliosis (EOS) who have graduated
from magnetically controlled growing rods (MCGR) to final fusion (FF). We
present our findings analyzing EOS patients who graduated to FF from MCGR.
Material and Methods: All EOS patients who had FF after
MCGR treatment and had a minimum follow-up time of 1 year were included. The
outcomes included additional unplanned surgeries (AUS), pre-and
post-operative Scoliosis Major Cobb (MCA) and Major Kyphosis (MKA) angles,
space available for lung ratios (SALR), T1- T12 and T1-S1 heights. Results
are presented as means with standard deviation (SD) and 95% Confidence
interval (CI). Results: 16 patients (9 Females and 7 Males)
were included. C-EOS classification breakdown was as follows: 1 Congenital,
6 Idiopathic, 4 Syndromic and 5 Neuromuscular patients. 14 patients were
excluded due to insufficient follow-up time. The mean age at index MCGR
surgery was 9.8 years (SD ±2.2, CI 8.6 - 10.9) and the mean implant time of
MCGR instrumentation was 38 months (SD ± 15, CI 30 - 46). The mean follow-up
after FF was 27 months (SD ±15, CI 20 - 37). Two (12.5%) patients needed
unplanned additional surgery after FF complications. All complications were
related to wound breakdown and infection. The preoperative and latest MCAs
post MCGR insertion were 73° (SD ±13, CI 66-80) and 51° (SD ±14, CI 44 -
59), respectively. The final MCA after FF was 30° (SD ±12, CI 25 - 38). The
preoperative and latest MKAs post MCGR insertion were 37° (SD ±25, CI 24 -
50) and 33° (SD ±25, CI 24 - 42) respectively. The final MKA after FF was
38° (SD ±19, CI 29 - 50). This is a significant final decrease of 59% (p
< 0.001) in the MCA but not in the MKA (p = 0.54). The preoperative and
latest SALRs post MCGR insertion were 90% (SD ± 113, CI 83-96) and 98% (SD
±5, CI 96-101), respectively. The final SALR after FF was 99% (SD ±7, CI
94-103): a final significant increase of 9% (p < 0.001). The preoperative
and latest T1- T12 heights post MCGR insertion were 184mm (SD ±22, CI 169 -
199) and 224 mm (SD ±35, CI 205-243) respectively. The final T1- T12 height
is 245 mm (SD ±33, CI 224-264), indicating a final increase of 33% (p <
0.001). The preoperative and latest T1-S1 heights post MCGR insertion were
291 mm (SD ±54, CI 262-320) and 354 mm (SD ±62, CI 321 - 387), respectively.
The final T1- S1 height after FF is 378mm (SD ±60, CI 343 - 413), showing a
total increase of 30 % (p < 0.001). Conclusion: Our findings
show that EOS patients who have graduated to final definitive fusion (FF)
from magnetically controlled growing rods (MCGR) can achieve satisfactory
outcomes over the short to medium term. Our study also shows that there is
potential for further deformity correction when progressing to FF from MCGR.
It must be noted that additional surgery may be required after FF in some
cases.

## 593

## P072: Nonunion and implant failure following kyphectomy for severe
khyphosis secondary to myelodysplasia - A case report

Rohan Parihar

1

, Samir Dalvie

1

, Kshitij Chaudhary

1

, and Pramod NK

1

1

Spine, P.D. Hinduja Hospital, Mumbai, India

Introduction: 15% of patients with open neural tube defects
develop severe kyphosis requiring kyphectomy, a high-risk surgery .50% cases
develop non-union and implant failure. We presented an unreported cause of
non-union at the rudimentary L5-S1 disc following a kyphectomy. Also, we
describe preoperative planning using 3D printed spine model of patient.
Materials and Methods: 10-year-old girl, previously
operated for meningomyelocele closure at age 6 months, presented with a non
healing ulcer that the apex of lumbar kyphosis. She has no neurological
function below T9 since birth. She underwent a cordectomy at T9 level, and
one month later she underwent a kyphectomy from L1-L4, with docking of T12
over L5 with posterior fusion from T7 to pelvis. The surgery planned on her
real-size 3D printed model. Results: At 3 months, postoperative
CT scan showed union at the kyphectomy site. At 6 months after surgery, she
had kyphosis recurrence and failure of bilateral iliac screws. Progressive
widening of the rudimentary L5-S1 disc was identified as the cause of the
failure. The pseudarthrosis was repaired and revised iliac screws were
augmented with modified Dunn-McCarthy rods. The rods for this fixation were
precontoured on the 3D printed model and autoclaved preoperatively for use
during the surgery. 2-year follow up CT scan shows complete fusion at the
nonunion site without any wound problems. Conclusion: Nonunion
at adjacent disc levels is known following kyphectomy, we present an unusual
cause of nonunion at the rudimentary L5-S1 disc (S1 sacralized). During
surgery, special attention should be given to fusion of all disc levels,
including rudimentary disc that lie within the fixation levels. 3D printed
model are of enormous help in planning this complex surgery.

## 616

## P073: Interobserver findings in the validation process of an smartphone
application as a tool for screening patients with scoliosis

Andre Castilho

1

, Pedro Torres

1

, Asdrubal Falavigna

2

, Henrique Darmstadter

1

, Orlando Righesso

2

, and Kamila Rayane Campos Lopes

1

1

Spine Surgery, Hospital Unimed, Belo Horizonte, Brazil

2

Health Science Postgraduate Program, Universidade de Caxias do Sul
(UCS), Caxias do Sul, Brazil

Introduction: Scoliosis is a spinal condition that is common
among children, adolescents, and young adults, affecting approximately 1%-4%
of children and adolescents worldwide. Most patients with scoliosis have a
mild abnormal curvature of the spine and the curvature does not progress in
adulthood. However, a more pronounced curvature and a late diagnosis can
lead to reduced quality of life of patients. Early diagnosis of scoliosis
allows treatment in its initial stages and avoids surgical treatment and
deformity progression. The present study aims to analyze the best correlated
clinical parameters among examiners using an application for smartphone
developed for screening of idiopathic scoliosis and to evaluate the friendly
use of this application. Material and Methods: This study
assesses a smartphone mobile application that analyzes several clinical
parameters related to the changes observed in scoliosis. Comparative
analyses between medical and non-medical examiners were performed to define
parameters with the greatest inter- observer correlation.
Results: 89 participants. None of the parameters between
ExL and Ex1 achieved almost perfect concordance. Substantial concordance was
noted in reduced lordosis and mid-thoracic scoliometer. Fair agreement was
achieved in increased kyphosis, presence of a hump and waist asymmetry. All
the other parameters had slight or poor agreement. The presence of a hump,
scapular asymmetry, and waist asymmetry were statistically significant
changes found between examiners. In subjects diagnosed with shoulder
asymmetry, scapular, waist and pelvic, ribcage asymmetry was found between
ExL and Ex1 with statistical difference. None of the parameters between Ex1
and Ex2 achieved almost perfect and substantial concordance. Moderate
concordance was noted in pelvic asymmetry. Ribcage asymmetry and pelvic
asymmetry had fair concordance. In subjects diagnosed with shoulder
asymmetry, scapular, waist and pelvic, ribcage asymmetry had statistically
significant concordance between them. The results of the app friendly use
evaluation showed complete satisfaction of users in effectiveness, easiness
to learn, productive possibility and system interface satisfaction. The
worst results in the evaluation were easiness to use and capacity of solving
problems by the system and the user. Conclusion: This study is
the first to evaluate almost all the parameters in the physical examination
between medical and nonmedical examiners to improve the screening of
adolescent idiopathic scoliosis. Our findings showed that reduced lordosis,
mid thoracic scoliometer, presence of hump, waist asymmetry, increased
kyphosis, ribcage asymmetry and pelvic asymmetry had substantial to fair
concordance. Shoulder asymmetry, one the parameters used as an alert in the
app showed a poor interobserver correlation. The inclusion of several
physical examination parameters of a patient with scoliosis will allow an
evaluation of which parameters present the greatest agreement, while
outpatient assessment by a spine specialist will permit the validation of
the application as a screening tool. In our initial results reduced
lordosis, mid-thoracic scoliometer and pelvic asymmetry had better agreement
between examiners. These parameters needed to be checked in outpatient
assessment to be validated. The main objective of the study is to create a
simple and effective tool for the screening of adolescent idiopathic
scoliosis by non-medical professionals, especially in the school
environment.

## 621

## P074: Is shoulder imbalance a useful parameter in the screening of
idiopathic scoliosis? A preliminary study

Pedro Torres

1

, Andre Castilho

1

, Asdrubal Falavigna

2

, Orlando Righesso

2

, David Israel

1

, and Kamila Rayane Campos Lopes

1

1

Spine Surgery, Hospital Unimed, Belo Horizonte, Brazil

2

Health Science Postgraduate Program, Universidade de Caxias do Sul
(UCS), Caxias do Sul, Brazil

Introduction: Adolescent idiopathic scoliosis is a structural,
lateral, rotated curvature of the spine that arises in otherwise healthy
children at or around puberty. It is the most common spinal disorder in
adolescents, with a prevalence of 1-4%. Early diagnosis of scoliosis allows
timely treatment of the condition in its initial stages, further avoiding
surgical treatment and deformity progression. Consequently, scoliosis
screening has been advocated for early detection of reversible spinal curves
before their progression. Screening of idiopathic scoliosis is widely
discussed in medical literature. It involves different types of assessment
methods, including appearance inspection, forward bending tests, scoliometer
measurements, and individual Moiré topography, which are direct and easily
accessible. Main findings of scoliosis on physical examination are asymmetry
of the shoulders, scapulae, pelvis, trunk, and ribcage. Adam's forward bend
test is used to assess the presence of a hump and quantify the lateral
curvature; it is considered essential for the screening of scoliosis in
schools. In The Netherlands and Singapore, countries with strong scoliosis
screening program, the most frequent parameter are the Adam’s forward
bending test and the measuring of trunk rotation using a scoliometer.
Between all parameters on physical examination, shoulder imbalance has
received a great deal of attention among spine surgeons and researchers. The
normal healthy population is considered to have level shoulders. In any
measured biological parameter, it is of prime importance that the
variability of what is classified as ‘normal’ is known, especially if
surgery is planned to correct that parameter from what is judged as
‘abnormal’ back to being ‘normal’. To define what is normal, Kuklo et al.
proposed shoulder balance as a less than 1 cm side-to-side difference
between the shoulders on clinical examination in adolescent idiopathic
scoliosis patients. The deficiencies of traditional assessment methods in
screening scoliosis remain unresolved. Regardless, a most effective method
is still crucial for reducing morbidities associated with scoliosis. The
present study aims to analyze the use of shoulder imbalance as a parameter
for scoliosis screening and its relationship with other parameters of
physical examination. Material and Methods: This study assesses
a smartphone application that analyzes several parameters of the physical
examination in adolescent idiopathic scoliosis. Medical and non-medical
examiners applied the screening tool in students in a public school and in a
sports club. After data collection, interobserver correlation was done to
verify shoulder imbalance and to compare shoulder imbalance with Adam’s
bending test and with trunk rotation. Results: 89 participants
were examined, 18 women and 71 men. The mean age of subjects from the public
school was 11.30 years and from the sports club was 11.92 years. The
examiners had poor to slight interobserver concordance on shoulder asymmetry
in the anterior and posterior view. No significant statistical correlation
was found between shoulder asymmetry and positive Adam’s forward bending
test. Conclusion: Our preliminary study shows that the shoulder
asymmetry has a poor correlation with Adam’s forward bending test and
measuring trunk rotation using a scoliometer. Therefore, the use of shoulder
imbalance might not be useful for idiopathic scoliosis screening.

## 628

## P075: Surgical treatment of severe adolescent idiopathic scoliosis
through one-stage posterior-only approach: systematic review and
meta-analysis

Giovanni Viroli

1

, Matteo Traversari

1

, Marco Manzetti

1

, Francesca Barile

1

, Fabio Vita

1

, Tosca Cerasoli

1

, Azzurra Paolucci

1

, Alberto Ruffilli

1

, and Cesare Faldini

1

1

1

st

Orthopaedic and Traumatologic Clinic, IRCCS Istituto Ortopedico
Rizzoli, Bologna, Italy

Introduction: Severe adolescent idiopathic scoliosis (AIS) is a
complex, stiff, three-dimensional spinal deformity whose treatment remains
controversial. Historically, severe AIS has often been treated with combined
anterior release, followed by posterior correction and instrumentation,
resulting in good three-dimensional curve correction, but with high risk of
pulmonary complications. Some authors have also used preoperative traction
or internal distraction as a part of a staged correction, in order to
achieve better correction and shorter fusion. However, pre-operative
traction implies an increased risk of perioperative complications such as
pin loosening, pin tract infection and cranial nerve palsies. Combined
anterior and posterior or all-posterior vertebral column resection has also
been used to treat severe and rigid scoliosis, but this demanding procedure
is affected by a considerably high rate of perioperative complications.
Then, the introduction of all pedicle screws constructs allowed the
all-posterior procedures to gradually gain popularity due to the high
reliability of three-columnar fixation systems. In fact, powerful corrective
forces were exerted and spine mobilization through anterior release was not
necessarily needed. Aim of this metanalysis is to systematically review the
literature and analyse the results of one-stage all posterior fusion for
severe adolescent idiopathic scoliosis. Material and Methods: A
systematic search of articles about one stage posterior spinal fusion for
severe adolescent idiopathic scoliosis was conducted according to the PRISMA
guidelines. Studies were included if they involved patients affected by
severe adolescent idiopathic scoliosis who underwent surgical correction
through one stage posterior-only approach [variably combined with posterior
column osteotomies (PCOs), maximum grade 2 S] and if they described
perioperative outcomes including correction rate and complications. Only
articles in English who met the PICO (Population, Intervention, Comparison
and Outcomes) criteria on systematic reviews were included. Randomized
controlled trials (RCTs), prospective and retrospective cohort studies (PCS
and RCS) and case series (CS) were considered for inclusion. Data about
population, pre and postoperative radiographical data, surgical procedure
details and complications were extracted. Metanalyses were performed with
the application of a random effect model. Results: Thirteen
studies (613 patients) were included. The mean Cobb angle of the major curve
varied from 80.0° ± 7.3 to 110.8° ± 12.1. Meta-analysis showed a
comprehensive coronal correction rate of the major curve of 58.6%, a
comprehensive operative time of 252.1 min and a comprehensive EBL of 866.5
mL (95% CI 659.3 - 1073.6, I2≈0%). A total of 47 complications
(5.4%) were reported. Overall metanalysis showed a major complication rate
of 4%. In 6 cases revision surgery was needed. Conclusion: Our
results suggest that posterior-only approach (eventually combined with PCOs)
offers enough corrective power to effectively treat severe scoliosis curves,
with acceptable blood loss and complications rate. Further, it allows to
avoid possible adverse events and pulmonary function impairment related to
anterior approaches. Moreover, it is not burdened by the high complications
rate of VCR.

## 671

## P076: Correlation between single pulse and pulse train stimulation during
neuromonitoring of thoracic pedicle screws in scoliosis surgery

Luiz Eduardo Almeida

1

 and Luis Eduardo Carelli Texeira da Silva

2

1

Spine Surgery, Children’s State Hospital, Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil

2

Spine Surgery, National Institute of Traumatology and Orthopedics,
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil

Introduction: The use of thoracic pedicle screws (TPSs) during
scoliosis surgery entails an inherent risk of neurological deficit.
Triggered electromyography (t-EMG) is an accurate neuromonitoring test for
detection of malpositioned TPSs. However, single-pulse (SP) t-EMG
stimulation has shown variable capability for detecting medial
pediclebreaches, while pulse-train (PT) t-EMG could be more accurate. The
aim of this study was to analyze the correlation between SP t-EMG and PT
t-EMG. Material and Methods: This retrospective study included
20 patients who underwent scoliosis correction with 294 TPSs placed. A total
of 588 tests with both SP t-EMG and PT t-EMG were performed, analyzed, and
compared. The results of both t-EMG techniques were stratified into 3
different groups according to threshold obtained: group 1 (≤ 6 mA), group 2
(6.1–11.9 mA), and group 3 (12 mA). A generalized linear modelwas used to
analyze the correlation between the methods. Results: SP t-EMG
elicited response in 5 screws (1.7%) at ≤ 6 mA, 28 screws (9.5%) at 6.1-11.9
mA, and 261 screws (88.8%) at 12 mA. PT t-EMG elicited response in 16 screws
(5.4%) at ≤ 6 mA, 30 screws (10.2%) at 6.1-11.9 mA, and 248 screws (84.4%)
at 12 mA. There is a strong positive and significant association between SP
t-EMG and PT t-EMG with a decrease ratio of 2% (95% confidence interval 1%
to 3%). Conclusion: SP t-EMG and PT t-EMG stimulation
techniques had similar results when the stimuli were applied to TPSs, but PT
t-EMG may have better efficacy in low-threshold group.

## 706

## P077: Minimally invasive surgery vs standard posterior approach in the
treatment of adolescent idiopathic scoliosis: a two years follow up
retrospective study

Giovanni Ciani

1

, Francesco Vommaro

1

, Chiara Cini

1

, Bruna Maccaferri

1

, Luca Boriani

1

, Elisa Carretta

2

, and Alessandro Gasbarrini

1

1

Spine Surgery

2

Medical Statistics, Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli, Bologna,
Italy

Study Design: Monocenter retrospective control study.
Purpose: To compare the safety and efficacy of posterior
minimally invasive surgery (MIS) to standard posterior spinal fusion (PSF)
surgery in adolescent idiopathic scoliosis (AIS). Methods: We
retrospective collected 111 patients with Lenke type 1-6 AIS with Cobb angle
curve ≤ 70° who treated with MIS (n = 47) or PSF (n = 64) between February
2018 and February 2020. All of them attempted an outpatient follow-up
consisting of clinical and radiological evaluation for at least two years
from surgery. We collected values of Cobb angles degrees to study the
correction rate of the structural major curve. MIS technique was applied via
2 midline noncontiguous skin incisions. Smaller incisions and
muscle-spearing approach could reduce the blood loss significantly. We
obtained an RD maneuver that takes advantages of the flexibility resulting
from the rising of the level arm and the consequent force exerted at the
caudocranial edges using MIS. Level of apical and distal fusion, operative
time, preoperative hemoglobin and second postoperative day hemoglobin, full
length of hospitalization and time to accomplish verticalization were
recorded. NRS medium score was assessed immediately after surgery and during
the whole physiotherapeutic treatment. Complications recorded included:
temporary or permanent nerve lesions, intraoperative or postoperative nerve
lesions, fever, surgical wound dehiscence and infection, mechanical
complication and postoperative pain assessment. Results: There
was no significant difference between the 2 groups in terms of radiographic
and clinical features. The correction rates of the structural curve were not
observed to be significantly different between group 1 (MIS) and 2 (PSF)
(64.6% ± 11.7 vs 60.9% ± 13.2) as for the correction rate of secondary curve
(59.1 ± 13.2 vs 59.2 ± 12.4). The two groups had non significantly longer
operative time (209.9 ± 34.8 min vs 215.2 ± 45.2). The MIS group had a
significantly lower decrease of postoperative hemoglobin in comparison to
PSF group (2.8 ± 1.3 vs 4.3 ± 1.5) (p < 0.001). The evaluation of pain
using NRS score showed a lower score in MIS group (1.8 ± 0.8 vs 2.8 ± 0.9).
PSF group was observed to have significantly lengthier time of
hospitalization (5.2 ± 1.4 vs 6.3 ± 2.9) (p = 0.02) than MFS group.
Complications were more frequent in PSF group rather than in MFS group (11
vs 3), with no infectious complication in MIS group and 6 events of post
operatory infections in PSF group. Only one mechanical complication
(breakage of rod) was observed in MSF group. The mechanical complication
recorded was successfully treated with a surgical approach.
Conclusion: Posterior MIS is a safe and capable alternative
to standard open approach for Lenke Type 1-6 AIS patients with curves <
70°, with analogue capacity of scoliosis correction. The average number of
fusion segments in MIS group was lower than in PSF group (9.1 vs 10.2). For
these reasons MIS technique could reduce the risk of post-operative
adding-on and permits to spare motion segments. Even though there were no
difference in term of operative time between MIS and PSF, our results showed
that MIS had the advantages of less blood loss, length of stay and pain.

## 786

## P078: Experience using internal distraction systems for scoliosis
correction between surgical stages

Andres Reinoso

1

, Fernando Alvarado Gómez

1

, Nahala Aborashed-Amador

1

, Martha Cecilia Santos-Barros

1

, Maria Garcia-Rueda

1

, Maria Camila Giraldo Bernal

1

, Mario Herrera Méndez

1

, and Carlos Montero-Silva

1

1

Instituto Roosevelt, Bogota, Colombia

Introduction: In the surgical treatment of severe scoliosis, the
risk of neurological injury increases when definitive correction is
attempted in a single stage. For this reason, devices like the gravitational
traction halo have been widely used over the years to partially and
progressively correct the deformity between surgical stages in an attempt at
improving lung capacity and reducing the risk of spinal cord ischemia.
However, this treatment is not risk-free. Complications have been described,
including transient nystagmus, osteitis, upper limb paresthesia and
myelopathy progression in up to 27% of cases. In 2006, Buchowski et al.
described the use of internal distraction as a method for temporary
correction in order to reduce deformities on the coronal and sagittal planes
before definitive fusion. Material and Methods: Retrospective
case series including 9 patients in total, with 7 patients requiring a
two-stage procedure and 2 requiring three stages. Patients considered for
more than one surgical stage in whom the internal distraction system was
used between surgeries were included. Demographic, clinical, radiological,
and surgical variables, as well as associated complications, were assessed.
Results: Average blood loss at the time of definitive
fusion was 911 ml, approximately. The mean number of osteotomies was 4.1,
the most frequently used being Ponte osteotomy. Additional techniques
included oblique osteotomy and corpectomy. The distraction system was used
during a mean of 11,11 days. Pre-operatively, average Cobb angle was 88°;
with the distraction system, the size of the curvature diminished by 30.6%
in average, with a residual deformity of 32° (36.4% of the initial curve).
Complications included one catheter-associated bacteremia, one urinary tract
infection, two cases of durotomy, and one case of phlebitis. No surgical
site infection complications occurred and there was no loss of somatosensory
evoked potentials. Conclusion: The use of internal distraction
systems in the intervening time between surgical procedures for the
correction of severe scoliosis has been shown to diminish the complexity and
number of osteotomies required to restore coronal balance. This technique is
associated with lower bleeding rates and a lower risk of nerve damage.

## 833

## P079: Tranexamic acid reduces preoperative blood loss in pediatric spinal
deformity surgery - a retrospective analysis in non-idiopathic scoliosis
patients

Anna Bichmann

1

, Ali Güven

2

, Edda Klotz

1

, Thomas Ocker

1

, Pumberger Matthias

2

, and Friederike Schömig

2

1

Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care Medicine

2

Center for Musculoskeletal Surgery, Charité - Universitätsmedizin
Berlin, Berlin, Germany

Introduction: Posterior spinal fusion in scoliosis patients is
associated with high volumes of perioperative blood loss and transfusion
requirements. Even though it has previously been shown that patients with
non-idiopathic scoliosis tend to lose higher blood volumes and more often
require allogenic blood transfusions perioperatively compared with
idiopathic scoliosis patients, there is a lack of studies investigating the
effect of tranexamic acid (TXA) in this patient group. We therefore analyzed
the efficacy of TXA in reducing perioperative blood loss and blood
transfusion requirements in non-idiopathic scoliosis patients undergoing
primary posterior spinal fusion. Material and Methods: We
retrospectively included patients who underwent primary posterior fusion for
non-idiopathic scoliosis between November 2014 and December 2020. Patients
were assigned to the TXA- or No-TXA-group depending on intraoperative
administration of TXA. Perioperative data including demographic and
laboratory data, spinal levels operated on, surgical duration, hemodynamic
parameters, administration of blood products, crystalloid fluids, and
catecholamines as well as radiographs were reviewed. Descriptive summaries
for the TXA- and No-TXA-groups were analyzed using Pearson Chi-squared test,
Student t-test, or Mann-Whitney-U-test. Changes in laboratory data were
compared using the two-way repeated-measures analysis of variance (ANOVA).
The influence of different variables on the estimated blood loss was
calculated by multiple linear regression. The association of various
parameters with surgery duration was analyzed by calculating Spearman’s rank
correlation. Results: Sixty-six patients were included, 35 of
which received intravenous TXA intraoperatively. Demographic and
preoperative laboratory data did not show significant differences between
the two groups. Surgical duration (p = 0.009) and number of levels fused (p
= 0.004) were significantly higher in the TXA-group. Estimated blood loss (p
= 0.531) and administration of allogenic packed erythrocytes (p = 0.508) did
not differ significantly. TXA administration had a significant negative
effect on estimated blood loss (B = -510.98, p = 0.020). Postoperative
Hb-levels were significantly higher in the TXA-group (9.13 ± 1.27 g/dL)
compared with the No-TXA-group (8.41 ± 1.47 g/dL) on the first postoperative
day (p = 0.038). There were no postoperative thromboembolic events prior to
patient discharge in either group. Other postoperative complications
including systemic inflammatory response syndrome (p = 0.818), hypovolemia
(p = 0.177), pneumonia (p = 0.628), pleural effusion (p = 0.177), urinary
tract infection (p = 0.628), and gastrointestinal complications (p = 0.209)
did not differ significantly between the two groups.
Conclusion: Despite longer surgical durations and more
spinal levels fused, patients receiving TXA when undergoing primary
posterior spinal fusion for non-idiopathic scoliosis had similar estimated
perioperative blood loss and allogenic transfusion rates as patients who did
not receive TXA. We show that TXA has a significant negative effect on
estimated blood loss in non-idiopathic scoliosis patients. Thus, as already
practiced in idiopathic scoliosis surgery, TXA should be considered to be
part of blood management strategies in non-idiopathic scoliosis surgery as
well.

## 852

## P080: The etiological understanding of spine deformities in patients with
neuromuscular disorders

Egor Filatov

1

, Olga Sergeenko

1

, and Polina Ochirova

1

1

Iizarov Centre, Kurgan, Russian Federation

Introduction: The etiology understanding is the corner stone for
proper management of the spine deformities in patients with neuromuscular
disorders. Material and Methods: Progressive spine deformities
have been encountered in 71 patients. All showed different forms of
neuromuscular disorders. We proceeded with applying prompt evaluation
criteria which was mainly based on the etiological diagnosis of each type of
NMS (clinical phenotype and genotype). Assessing the Functional Independence
Measure (FIM), we observed deterioration in some aspects. The Cobb’s angle
was assessed in two occasion’s i.e prior to corrective surgeries plus the
post-surgery results. Followed by one year postoperative re-assessment.
Surgical corrections have been performed via posterior pedicle screw
fixation. Results: Surgical correction to re-align the C-shaped
thoracolumbar scoliosis. Lumbar hyper lordosis were common in cerebral palsy
patients, though decreased thoracic kyphosis or even thoracic lordosis
occurs more frequently in Duchenne Muscular atrophy patients. There was
noticeable improvement in functional status according to Functional
Independence Measure (FIM). Conclusion: Etiology understanding
is the paramount element in re-aligning corrective surgeries of the spine in
patients with progressive spine deformities. We concluded that rigid hyper
lordosis has been and still the key problem encountered in patients with
neuromuscular disorders.

## 858

## P081: Congenital lordosis: a systematic review

Egor Filatov

1

, Alex Evsukov

1

, Dmitriy Savin

1

, and Dmitry Klyuchnikov

1

1

Iizarov Centre, Kurgan, Russian Federation

Introduction: Study Design - Systematic review. The
paper provides a systematic review of literature data on treatment of
congenital thoracic lordosis. Material and Methods: The
literature data on the subject were collected in the PubMed, GoogleScholar
and eLibrary databases using the following keywords: congenital lordosis and
congenital lordoscoliosis. The search depth was maximized to comprise 100
years (1916-2020). The inclusion criteria were as follows:
• Patients with congenital thoracic lordosis or lorsoscoliosis;
• Surgical correction of the deformity;
• Catamnesis with a follow-up period of at least 12 months.
The exclusion criteria were as follows:
• Verified acquired etiology of the primary disease.
The review methodology followed the PRISMA guidelines.
Results: In total, information on 18 patients was obtained,
their age varying from 3 to 16 years, (mean 9.3 yrs). The level of sclerotic
deformation before correction varied from 16 to 105 degrees (mean 51.2) at
the thoracic level, and their thoracic kyphosis – from -94 to -10 degrees
(mean -31.4). In the postoperative period, the sclerosis degree changed from
0 to 60 degrees (mean 25.5), and thoracic kyphosis – from -42 to 30 degrees
(mean 6.4). The correction degree comprised from 60 to -9 degrees, and from
97 to 4 – for the thoracic kyphosis. The follow-up duration varied from 1 to
11.3 years (mean 5.4 yrs). Conclusion: Congenital thoracic
lordosis is a rare pathology, which explains its insufficient state of
knowledge. The treatment mainly aims to eliminate hypoventilation by
restoration of a proper thoracic kyphosis through increasing the
retrosternal distance, reduction of airway compression, improving pulmonary
artery perfusion and extending the thoracic spine.

## 881

## P082: Factors associated with incorrect placement of pedicle screw in
adolescent idiophatic scoliosis instrumentation surgery with free-hands
technique

Kaori Guadalupe Honda Partida

1

, Hugo Vilchis Samano

1

, and José Alfonso Corona De la Torre

1

1

Spine Surgery Department, UMAE Hospital de Traumatología y Ortopedia
Lomas VerdesMexico City, Mexico

Objective: To analyze the factors associated with incorrect
placement of pedicle screw in adolescent idiopatic scoliosis instrumentation
surgery with the hands-free technique. Material and Methods:
Descriptive, retrospective study was carried out by reviewing the
postoperative tomographic control of patients with idiopathic scoliosis less
than 80 degrees who underwent scoliosis corrective surgery with the
hands-free technique, in a period of four years. Patient data was collected
through clinical records, pre-surgical and post-surgical tomography. It was
assessed Cobb coronal angle, Lenke type curvature, pedicle dysplasia
(Watannabe classification), screw placement by Gertzbein classification and
Heary classification. Results: A total of 172 patients was
obtained. As a result, 43 idiopathic scoliosis in total, of which 28 of
them, had a Cobb angle less than 80 degrees. 100% of the patients were
female with an average age of 15 years old. 666 pedicles was assessed, of
which the majority was classified as Watanabe B (41.74% n=), Watanabe A
(33.33% n=), Watanabe C (21.32% n=) and Watanabe D (3.60% n=). Accuracy of
pedicle screw was defined as Grade 0 and 1 in Gertzbein classification, in
our study resulted a 91.9% of “perfect trajectory” (n = 467 screws).
Incorrect pedicle trajectory was defined as grade 3 in the Gertzbein
classification, according to the magnitude of pedicle violation, associated
with a higher incidence of neurological deficit. A total of 3 screws were
found in grade 3, which represents 0.59% of incorrect trajectory placement
screw. These screws were located according to Heary classification with
grade 3 (lateral localization). According to Heary classification grade 4
locate medial placement of the screw, in which our cases were obtained 63.8%
(n = 30) grade 1 of Gertzbein classification and 36.1% (n = 17) grade 2 of
Gertzbein classification. There was not a pedicle violation higher than 4
mm. Conclusions: The freehand technique is a safe and effective
method of instrumentation of pedicle screws for the correction of AIS,
having a high rate of precision in screw placement, however the factors that
modify the success results such as the Cobb angle, pedicle dysplasia must be
taken into consideration for the success of surgery.

## 894

## P083: Outcome of surgical treatment of scoliosis with navigation and
neuromonitoring description of surgical technique

Ziad Mohamed

1

, Mohamed Zayan

1

, Loay Abukwedar

1

, and Antony Michael

1

1

Neuro Spinal Hospital, Dubai, United Arab Emirates

Introduction: Scoliosis is a spinal deformity that comprises a
lateral curvature and rotation of the patient’s vertebrae .The most
prevalently employed method of scoliosis correction surgery is posterior
fusion with instrumentation, representing the current gold standard
approach. Novel adaptations to this method have been made in recent years
resulted in enhanced correction and a reduced number of complications.
Improved intraoperative navigation permits a higher surgical accuracy during
spinal surgery and addresses limitations. Navigation and intraoperative
neuromonitoring represent novel technologies that can be employed in
scoliosis correction surgeries to optimize surgical outcomes due to enhanced
patient safety and improved surgical accuracy. In this study we evaluated
the clinical and radiologic outcome of using navigation and intraoperative
neuro-monitoring in scoliosis correction surgeries. Methods: In
this retrospective study, 24 patients with scoliosis who underwent scoliosis
correction surgery under navigation and intraoperative neuromonitoring. The
procedure in these patients was after positioning the patient in prone,
pressure areas padded, warming and calf pumps applied, a baseline spinal
multimodal monitoring recorded. Followed by Level check with x-ray to
identify the upper instrumented vertebrae(UIV) and lower instrumented
vertebrae (LIV). Posterior midline incision, bilateral sub-periosteal
dissection from transverse process. Furthermore, X-ray to confirm levels of
UIV and LIV. Followed by O-arm run in 2 stages for navigation installing,
pedicle screws inserted under navigation guidance. Screws stimulation are
carried out at this stage to check the screws insertion at 15mA and Checking
the insertion by X-ray. Then spinal releases done by inferior facetectomy
and superficial flavectomy, spinous processes and transverse processes
harvested for bone graft. In the correction stage rods inserted after
cutting and contouring via dual rod reduction technique. Checking the
correction achieved by final x-ray and final spinal multimodal monitoring
recorded. Results: In all 24 patients, the mean age was 16
(range,10-35). The mean preoperative Cobb angle of major curve in coronal
plane was 61.4° (range, 50°-92°) changed post operatively to 17.2° (range,
5°-50°) with mean correction rate of 72.5% (range, 45.6% – 90.9%). The total
number of screws inserted was 413 screws with mean of 17.2 (range, 10-21)
and the total number of instrumented segments was 283 segments with mean of
11.7 (range, 5-15). The mean operation time was 336 minutes (range, 240 m -
453 m), while the mean hospital stay was 9 days, (range, 4 d-32 d). In the
all patients there was no intraoperative complications inform of alerts in
INM, Dural tear and bleeding. There were no perioperative neurologic
deficits or mal-positioned screws requiring reoperation. The percentage of
other post-operative complications was 8.33% (2 patients).
Conclusion: Combinations using of navigation and
intraoperative neuromonitoring can provide better safety for the patients,
however, long-term data are needed.

## 947

## P084: Selective anterior scoliosis fusion is comparable to vertebral body
tethering

Edward King

1

, Priyanshu Saha

1

, Zion Hwang

1

, Emily Tsang

1

, Bisola Ajayi

1

, Darren Lui

1

, Jason Bernard

1

, and Timothy Bishop

1

1

St George's, University of London, United Kingdom

Introduction: Selective Anterior Thoracic Fusion (SATF) or
Selective Lumbar Anterior Fusion (SLAF) have been proven to reduce fusion
levels compared to posterior surgery for similar curve types in the past.
Vertebral body tethering (VBT) is a novel type of spinal surgery which can
preserve range of spinal motion compared to fusion. VBT can be used in
similar anatomic fashion in the thoracic or thoracolumbar regions similar to
SATF or SLAF. The aim of this study is to observe how VBT compares to
anterior fusion and identify any differences between them.
Methods: Retrospective review of Operation data was
obtained for 82 patients who have had scoliosis surgery between 2014 - 2021.
We analysed the British Spinal Registry, digital clinical notes and
radiology. Anterior fusion data was then compared with VBT.
Results: 52 patients had Adolescent Idiopathic Scoliosis
(AIS). There were 56 Anterior Fusions SATF (70% n = 40) SLAF 15% n = 8 Two
Stage SLAF + PSF 15% n = 8. 26 VBT cases. 14 Lumbar and 12 Thoracic VBT
surgeries. 6 cases of Double VBT. Anterior Fusion vs VBT operation length
(334.5 vs 368.5 minutes). Pre-operative Cobb angle STAF was 53⁰ and SLAF
mean 52⁰, VBT 46⁰. Preoperative fulcrum Cobb angle major Anterior vs VBT
(26.5⁰ vs 25.7⁰), pre-operative SRS22 scores (3.4 vs 2.8). Mean levels
instrumented: SATF (7.6), SLAF (3.8), VBT Thoracic (8.2) and VBT Lumbar
(5.5) blood loss (413.6 ml vs 192.4 ml). Postoperative Cobb angles were
(10.8⁰ Fusion vs 21⁰ VBT). 3% of VBT patients (n = 1) went on to have a
fusion. There were 4 over corrections and 2 releases. 1 patient in the
Anterior group required return to theatre for chest drain re-insertion.
Conclusions: Selective anterior fusion and VBT of both
thoracic and lumbar spine have satisfactory outcome and are safe procedures.
VBT closely matches anterior fusion for screw density and fusion levels,
average length of operation. VBT has lower blood loss than anterior and has
higher screw use and levels instrumented in the lumbar spine. Anterior
Fusion Surgeries as expected since there are no endplate to endplate
discectomies. Fusion surgery had less unplanned return to surgeries than
VBT. Further evaluation of patient outcomes and comparison of range of
movement are required. Anterior Fusion surgery can be considered in cases
where the patient may not be eligible for VBT.

## 957

## P085: A comparative study of anterior thoracic and anterior thoraco
columbar surgeries

Edward King

1

, Priyanshu Saha

1

, Zion Hwang

1

, Bisola Ajayi

1

, Emily Tsang

1

, Darren Lui

1

, Jason Bernard

1

, and Timothy Bishop

1

1

St George's, University of London, United Kingdom

Introduction: Five decades ago Anterior Scoliosis Surgery was
the favoured approach compared to posterior. Limitations in instrumentation
for posterior surgery meant that limited derotation control was possible.
Harrington Rod surgery utilised level selection based on vertebra in the
midline with parallel discs to the floor. Anterior instrumentation allowed
shorter fusions and improved derotation and correction of kyphosis. They
also had their limitations with hardware failure and large incisional
approaches. With the advent of pedicle screw technology both monoblock and
then polyaxial, control of scoliosis improved and posterior surgery became
the modern gold standard. Vertebral body tethering (VBT) has ushered in a
return to the era of Anterior Screw placement and VBT has limited scope in
limited patient groups. Further improved hardware such as staples and HA
coated screws straight inner shanks and techniques have improved the failure
rates. We examined our group of Selective Anterior Thoracic Fusion (SATF)
and Selective lumbar-thoracic Anterior Fusion (SLAF). Methods:
Retrospective review of Anterior scoliosis fusion cases between 2017 and
2020. Analysis of radiographs and electronic patient records were conducted
as well as British spinal registry. Results: There were 56
anterior fusions. 71.4% were SATF and 28.6% were SLAF. The mean levels for
SATF were 7.6 and 3.8 for SLAF. Screw density was segmental in each group.
The average blood loss was 400ml per case. The Hospital length of stay was
5.8 days for SATF vs 6.1 days for SLAF, the mean stay in PICU was 1.4 days
for SATF vs 1.5 days for SLAF. Conclusion: SATF and SLAF in our
instituion are in vogue again. In patients that are not suitable for VBT an
anterior fusion may have advantages for cosmesis and smaller fusion levels
compared to posterior surgery. There is a mean blood loss of 400mls. Fusion
levels are low compared to posterior surgery in the literature but similar
to VBT. HLOS is 5.8 days for SATF and 6.1 for SLAF and is comparable to our
previously reported posterior cases. There were no unplanned return to
theatre incidents. We conclude that anterior fusions can play a safe role
again in the correction of scoliosis with advantages over other techniques
particularly in lower fusion levels preserving more mobile segments.

## 959

## P086: The rate of major complications after Lenke 5 and 6 adolescent
idiopathic scoliosis deformity correction is low, but back pain is
common

Josephine Coury

1

, Zeeshan Sardar

1

, Yong Shen

1

, Mark Ren

1

, Michael Vitale

1

, and Lawrence Lenke

1

1

Och Spine Hospital, Columbia University Medical Center, New York,
United States

Introduction: Lenke Type 5 and 6 adolescent idiopathic scoliosis
(AIS) curves are less common than the main thoracic curve subtypes. Few
studies have outlined the long-term outcomes and complications after
surgical correction of major thoracolumbar curves. In this study, we
investigated the incidence and type of complications associated with all
posterior deformity correction for Lenke type 5 and 6 curves. Material
and Methods: A retrospective review of prospectively collected
multicenter data was performed. 193 patients were identified, 191 with
2-year and 93 with 5-year follow up were included in the final analysis. All
radiographic and clinical complications were recorded at 1, 2, and 5 years
postoperatively. All analyses were performed with SAS and alpha was set at p
< 0.05 to declare significance. Results: Lenke type 5CN (n =
147) was the most common curve type. T10 to L4 were the most frequently
fused levels (n = 54) followed by T11 to L3 (n = 38) and T9 to L3 (n = 34).
Patients underwent an average 5-level fusion (range 3-9). 4 patients
developed symptomatic proximal junctional kyphosis (PJK) of which 1
underwent revisions surgery. 7 patients (3.6%) had revision surgery: 4 for
pseudarthrosis, 1 hardware prominence, 1 for distal adding on, and 1 for
PJK. 18 patients (9.4%) had persistent low back pain that was managed
nonoperatively. Other complications included surgical site infection (n =
2), thigh numbness which resolved (n = 7), hardware prominence (n = 4), and
other neurologic complaints (n = 6). Conclusion: The rate of
revision surgery was low at 3.6% after posterior based surgery for Lenke
type 5 and 6 curves. Persistent low back pain after surgery was the most
common complication at 9.4%. The rate of symptomatic PJK within 2 years was
only 2.1%.

## 961

## P087: Upper instrumented vertebra within 3 levels of the thoracic apex is
the most significant risk factor for proximal junctional kyphosis in Lenke
type 5 and 6 adolescent idiopathic scoliosis patients

Josephine Coury

1

, Zeeshan Sardar

1

, Yong Shen

1

, Mark Ren

1

, Michael Vitale

1

, and Lawrence Lenke

1

1

Och Spine Hospital, Columbia University Medical Center, New York,
United States

Introduction: Proximal junctional kyphosis (PJK) is a known
complication of adolescent idiopathic scoliosis (AIS) deformity correction
surgery. In specifically Lenke type 5 and 6 curves, the rates of PJK are
reported as high as 18 to 50%. Previous smaller studies have identified high
pelvic incidence, elevated preoperative proximal junctional angle (PJA), and
increased thoracic kyphosis (TK) as possible risk factors for developing PJK
in Lenke type 5 and 6 curves. In this study, we investigated multiple
factors for PJK in a multicenter cohort of patients following surgical
correction for Lenke type 5 and 6 AIS patients. Material and
Methods: A retrospective review of prospectively collected
multicenter data was performed. 193 patients were identified, 191 with
2-year and 93 with 5-year follow up were included in the final analysis.
Radiographic clinical parameters were measured preoperatively and at
postoperative year 1, 2, and 5. Radiographic measurements were performed and
confirmed by three authors. PJK was defined as the proximal junctional angle
from the UIV and 2 levels cephalad to the UIV of at least 10° and 10°
greater than preoperative measurement. All analyses were performed with SAS
and alpha was set at P < 0.05 to declare significance.
Results: Lenke type 5CN (n = 147) was the most common curve
type. T10 to L4 were the most frequently fused levels (n = 54) followed by
T11 to L3 (n = 38) and T9 to L3 (n = 34). 17 patients (8.9%) developed
radiographic PJK; 1 at 1 year, 7 at 2 years, and another 9 at 5 years. All
17 patients had an upper instrumented vertebra (UIV) within 3 levels or less
caudal of the thoracic kyphosis apex (the most horizontal vertebra on the
sagittal); no patient with a UIV 4 or more levels from the thoracic apex (n
= 96) developed PJK (X2 = 13.03, p < 0.001). Higher preoperative PJA,
pelvic incidence, thoracic kyphosis, hooks, BMI, and the Roussouly
classification were all not found to be significant predictors of PJK. Total
SRS-22 scores were significantly worse at postoperative years 2 and 5 in
patients who developed PJK (2 years: PJK 4.16 ± 0.58 vs. 4.45 ± 0.43, p =
0.018; 5 years: 3.96 ± 0.42 vs. 4.37 ± 0.48, p = 0.021). At 2 years, SRS-22
pain and general function categories were significantly lower in PJK
patients. At 5 years, SRS-22 pain, self-image, and general function
categories were significantly lower in PJK patients. Between postoperative
years 2 and 5, the PJK patients overall had lower scores, in particular
self-image significantly lowered (p = 0.0499). Conclusion: In
Lenke 5/6 Curve Types, UIV selection 4 or more levels caudal to the apex of
the thoracic kyphosis resulted in no PJK up to 5 years postop. UIV within 3
or more levels caudal to the thoracic apex was the most significant factor
leading to development of radiographic PJK. This is the first study to
demonstrate significantly worse SRS-22 scores in AIS patients with
radiographic PJK.

## 966

## P088: The spinal appearance quetionnare is a valid instrument for the
evaluation of congenital scoliosis patients over 10 yeras old

Mohammad Fanid

1

, Dilek YAPAR

2

, Aliekber Yapar

3

, İsmail Daldal

4

, Mehmet Cetinkaya

5

, Alim Can Baymurat

1

, and Alpaslan Senkoylu

1

1

Department of Orthopedics and Traumatology, Gazi University Faculty
of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey

2

Gazi University Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey

3

Department of Orthopedics and Traumatology, Health Sciences
University, Antalya Education and Research Hospital, Antalya,
Turkey

4

Department of Orthopedics and Traumatology, Ankara Lokman Hekim Akay
Hospital, Ankara, Turkey

5

Department of Orthopedics and Traumatology, Istanbul Basaksehir Pine
and Sakura City Training and Research Hospital, Istanbul,
Turkey

Introduction: The spinal appearance questionnaire (SAQ) was
developed by Sanders in 2007 out of the Walter Reed Visual Assessment Scale,
a visual test consisting of seven questions on spinal deformity, and its
validity and reliability were tested. When the overall literature was
reviewed, no disease-specific scale/questionnaire was developed to evaluate
body perception and the expectations of congenital scoliosis patients. We
aimed to evaluate the validity and the reliability of the Turkish version of
the SAQ questionnaire in Turkish patients over 10 years of age with
congenital scoliosis by assessing construct and convergent validity,
analyzing internal consistency, and test-retest validity. Hypothesis:
Evaluating the validity and reliability of the spinal appearance
questionnaire (SAQ) for congenital scoliosis patients. Study
Design: Prospective questionnaire validation study.
Material and Methods: Applied to 52 patients with
congenital scoliosis, the SAQ was applied to the same patients for the
second time with an average interval of 14.9 ± 0.9 days. Construct validity
was evaluated using factor analysis. SRS-22 was used to test the convergent
validity of SAQ. Internal consistency analysis and test-retest reliability
was evaluated to show the reliability of SAQ. Results: A
two-factor structure with eigenvalues greater than one, namely “6.1” and
“2.6” belonging to the SAQ, was obtained. The total variance of the factors
is 62.1%. The factor load of each item in the first-factor ‘Appearance’
domain varies between 0.7 and 0.8. The second-factor ‘Expectations’ consists
of four items. The factor load of each item varies between 0.7 and 0.8. A
significant negative correlation was found between the SAQ appearance score
and the self-image/appearance score of SRS-22 (r = -0.5; p < 0.001).
Cronbach alpha for SAQ was found to be 0.9. The intraclass correlation
coefficient (ICC) calculated for test-retest reliability was 0.991.
Conclusion: Previous validity and reliability studies of
SAQ have been performed in idiopathic scoliosis patients. This is the first
study containing patients diagnosed with congenital scoliosis. In this piece
of work, the 2-factor structure of the SAQ consisting of 14 items was found
to be valid and reliable in patients over 10 years of age with a diagnosis
of congenital scoliosis.

## 970

## P089: Decreasing the rate of unnecessary pediatric deformity surgery
allogenic blood transfusions

Josephine Coury

1

, Taylor Paskey

1

, Lawrence Lenke

1

, and Michael Vitale

1

1

Columbia University Medical Center, Morgan Stanley Children's
Hospital, New York

Introduction: Spinal deformity surgery is associated with a high
perioperative blood loss and risk for allogenic blood transfusion (ABT).
Previous studies have shown ABT has an increased risk of surgical site
infection, acute hemolytic reaction, and transfusion-related lung injury.
During our yearly review, our institution was noted to have a high rate of
ABT compared to others in the United States. In this study, we examined the
strategies taken to decrease our transfusion rate. Material and
Methods: Patients included had a diagnosis of AIS, underwent
posterior instrumentation and fusion (PSIF), were between ages 10-18, and
had a major cobb angle between 45 to 70 degrees. Interventions to reduce ABT
included a meeting with the postoperative care units where scoliosis
patients recovered, a change in our protocol template stating “notify spine
surgery team if transfusion is considered”, and a review of transfusions
that occurred. Results: A total of 197 patients met criteria
over 3 years. The rate of ABT from January 2019 to 2020 was 19.5% (15/77)
and from January 2020 to 2021 13.3% (8/60). The interventions to reduce ABT
rates were implemented between November 2020 to January 2021. From January
2021 to November 2021 only 5% (3/60) of patients received an ABT,
representing a significant decrease from 2020 to 2021 (p < 0.01). No
significant difference in demographics between groups existed including
gender or age. Conclusion: The rate of ABT at our institution
was significantly lowered from 13.1% to 5% by increasing scrutiny prior to
transfusion, including meeting with the postoperative care units and change
in our protocol template, and after transfusion, including a review of
transfusions that occurred.

## 1026

## P090: Risk factors associated with intraoperative blood transfusion in
adolescent idiopathic scoliosis

Robert Koucheki

1,2

, Andrew Howard

3,4

, Mark McVey

5

, David Levin

5

, Conor McDonnell

5

, and David Lebel

3,4

1

Temerty Faculty of Medicine - University of Toronto, Toronto,
Canada

2

Biomedical Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Canada

3

Division of Orthopaedic Surgery, The Hospital for Sick Children,
Toronto, Canada

4

Division of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Canada

5

Department of Anesthesia and Pain Medicine, The Hospital for Sick
Children, Toronto, Canada

Introduction: Adolescents Idiopathic Scoliosis (AIS) surgeries
are associated with significant blood loss requiring high rates of blood
transfusion. This study aimed to identify factors associated with increased
allogenic blood transfusion (ABT) rates in patients with adolescent
idiopathic scoliosis (AIS) treated with posterior spinal fusion. We
hypothesized that in addition to patient and scoliosis characteristics,
non-patient factors, including peri-operative practices, influence
transfusion rates in AIS surgery. Material and Methods: A
retrospective case-control study was performed for AIS patients treated at a
large children’s hospital between August 2018 and December 2020. All
patients who underwent surgical repair for AIS were evaluated. Data on
patient demographics, AIS, and transfusion parameters were collected. We
conducted multivariate logistic modelling and calculated odds ratio (OR) and
confidence intervals (CI) to identify risk factors associated with requiring
transfusion. Results: A total of 157 AIS patients were
included, of whom 56 (35.7%) were transfused RBC units (cases), and 101
(64.3%) did not receive any RBC transfusion (controls). Intraoperative care
was provided by three surgeons and thirty anesthesiologists. Multivariate
logistic regression demonstrated pre-operative hemoglobin of 130-139 g/L (OR
0.18), pre-operative hemoglobin of > 140g/L (OR 0.04), number of
scoliosis cases done by the attending anesthesiologist (OR 9.1), and
influence from individual surgeons (OR 3.8) as significant contributors to
ABT (p < 0.0001). Conclusion: In this cohort, we
demonstrated that higher pre-operative hemoglobin was protective against
ABT. Patients with hemoglobin of more than 140, had a lower odds of
receiving ABT (approximately 95% less likely). In addition, we identified
contributions from individual provider practice preferences. Although
further studies are required to better understand non-patient factors
contributing to transfusion in AIS patients, we suggest standardized,
peri-operative evidence-based strategies to potentially help reduce
variations due to individual provider preferences.

## 1079

## P091: Congenital failure of formation of the anterior column: is a VCR
always needed?

Alfredo Guiroy

1

, and Jahangir Asghar

1

1

Spine Surgery, Elite Spine Health and Wellness Center, Fort
Lauderdale, United States

Introduction: Congenital failure of formation of the anterior
column of the spine is uncommon pathology but often leads to focal deformity
of the vertebrae and severe neurological deficits. The objective of this
study is to describe and analyze the author’s experience treating this
infrequent pathology and to evaluate if a Vertebral Column Resection (VCR)
is always needed for the treatment. Material and Methods: We
reviewed the charts and imaging of patients treated for the deformity from
2010 to 2020. Demographic data, neurological status, type of deformity
(sagittal, coronal or both), kyphosis angle, scoliosis angle, defect
location operative treatment performed and complications were recorded. A
descriptive statistical analysis of the variables was done and the results
were expressed as mean and percentages. Results: We analyzed 13
patients who were operated on for congenital failures of the anterior spine
(8 male, 5 female). Mean age of diagnosis was 19 months. Three were thoracic
(from T1-T10), 6 were thoracolumbar (from T10-L2) and 4 were lumbar
dislocations. Ten had some neurological impairment pre-operatively and 5 of
those had shown progression of their impairment. Seven patients had evidence
of low lying conus and 4 underwent detethering prior to surgical
intervention. The mean age at surgery was 6 years (range: 24 months to 12
years). All the patients were treated posterior only with decompression,
deformity correction and instrumented fusion. Five had vertebral column
resection for kyphosis and the remaining 8 had posterior column osteotomies
(PCO) only. The percent correction of kyphosis for VCR patients was 42% and
for PCO it was only 44%. In 2 cases there was acute worsening of
neurological status in the immediate postoperative setting with 1 returning
to baseline and the other showing continued improvement greater than
baseline; 10 patients showed significant improvement postoperatively.
Complications involved 3 incidental durotomies and 3 cases returned to OR in
a 90-day time period: 1 for hardware revision, 1 for progression of
neurology and 1 for Irrigations and debridement. Mean follow up was 38
months (range: 11-72 months). Conclusion: Congenital failure of
formations of the anterior spine has a high rate of intraspinal pathology,
neurological deficit, and deformity progression. In certain cases
decompression and posterior only fusion may be sufficient for a good
neurological outcome.

## 1083

## P092: Evaluation of complications related to prolonged use of
halo-gravitational traction in spinal deformity surgeries

Igor Ebert Cechin

1

, Gabriel Alves

1

, Luis Eduardo Carelli Texeira da Silva

1

, and Alderico Girão Campos de Barros

1

1

Instituto Nacional de Traumatologia e Ortopedia Jammil Haddad
(INTO), Coluna, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil

Introduction: To evaluate the complications related to the
prolonged pre and interoperative use of halo-gravitational traction (HGT) as
an adjuvant method in the treatment of severe spinal deformities.
Material and Methods: We evaluated 27 patients who
underwent surgical treatment using pre- or interoperative HGT, between May
2014 and August 2020, through a database consultation. Inclusion criteria
were the presence of severe deformity (>100 degrees) in the coronal
and/or sagittal plane and permanence with HGT for a minimum period of 7
days. A division into 2 subgroups was performed: patients with severe
deformity in the sagittal plane accompanied by coronal deformity (11);
patients with severe deformity only in the coronal plane (16). Clinical data
were analyzed retrospectively by consulting medical records, incorporating
the variables: age, sex, diagnosis, traction time and Cobb angle. The
radiographic evaluation was retrospective by visualization in a specific
program. Results: Among the 27 patients, 13 (48%) were male and
14 (52%) were female. The age at the time of surgery ranged from 6-47 years,
with a mean of 19.6 years. The initial diagnosis was idiopathic scoliosis in
14 patients, syndromic scoliosis in 5, neuromuscular scoliosis in 3,
congenital scoliosis in 3 and 2 cases of neurofibromatosis. In the subgroup
of patients with severe deformity only in the coronal plane, the mean Cobb
angle was 123.4 degrees (100-153). The subgroup of patients with combined
deformity had a mean value of the Cobb angle for the coronal deformity of
123.6 degrees (71-159), and in the sagittal plane a mean value of 125.3
degrees (100-178). In 26 cases, 4 pins were used for cranial fixation, and
in only 1 case, 6 pins. Patients remained under traction for an average of
27 days (7-108). The mean percent correction was 17.8% in the coronal plane
and 18.4% in the sagittal plane in the subgroup with deformity in both
planes, and 23.6% in the subgroup with coronal deformity. The overall
complication rate was 37%. The incidence of complications in the subgroup
with severe sagittal deformity was 54.5%, while in the subgroup with severe
coronal deformity it was 12.5%. There were 5 complications related to the
pins, with 4 loosening treated with retightening, and 1 case of local
infection. Three patients developed less severe neurological conditions
attributed to the use of traction – two cases of diffuse paresthesia in the
limbs and one patient with blurred vision, which resolved after decreasing
the load. Two patients complained of neck pain in which traction had to be
provisionally discontinued, with complete improvement. No serious
complications related to pins and traction were identified.
Conclusion: Halo-gravitational traction has been shown to
be an important adjunctive method in the treatment of severe spinal
deformities. Despite having a considerable complication rate, there were no
serious events.

## 1087

## P093: Neural arch posterior vertebral column resection (NA-PVCR): a new
technique for angular kyphotic deformity treatment

Francisco Del Pont

1

, Igor Ebert Cechin

2

, Alderico Girão Campos de Barros

2

, and Luis Eduardo Carelli Texeira da Silva

2

1

Department of Neurosurgery, Fleni, Buenos Aires, Argentina

2

Instituto Nacional de Traumatologia e Ortopedia Jammil Haddad
(INTO), ARCOL, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil

Introduction: Posterior Vertebrectomy is a highly complex and
helpful tool used in the treatment of severe and rigid spine deformities,
but neurological complications are not infrequent. Changes in the position
of the spinal cord during bone resection, throughout correction maneuvers
and even after correction can generate neurological deficits.
Meningovertebral ligaments (MVL) and its biomechanical properties has been
increasingly studied in the last years, being tensioned in kypshosis and
keeping the attachment of the dural sac to the posterior arch. We believe
that the partial preservation of the neural arch (supra and interspinous
ligaments, ligamentum flavum, laminae, spinal process and part of facet
joints) in the Neural Arch Posterior Vertebrectomy (NA-PVCR) technique
maintains the MVL functions preventing spinal cord shift, with other
theoretical advantages: mechanical protection of the posterior aspect of the
spinal cord, additional surface for bone fusion and less bleeding from the
epidural space. The objective of this paper is to describe the NA-PVCR
technique and analyze the results of a initial cohort of kyphotic patients.
Material and Methods: Neural Arch Posterior Vertebrectomy
technique description. Retrospective analysis and presentation of
10 patients with acute sagittal spine deformity treated
with this technique. Results: Between February 2020 - July
2022, 10 patients underwent correction of acute sagittal spine deformity
with the use of NA-PVCR technique. Seven patients were adults and the other
three ranged from 11 to 16 years old. The diagnosis was active infection in
three patients, sequelae tuberculosis in two patients and congenital
kyphosis in the other five. Two patients were submitted to removal of one
vertebral segment, and one had an asymmetrical resection of one segment. In
five patients two vertebral segments were removed, in one three segments and
another case five segments were removed. There were no postoperative new
neurological alterations and two patients with preoperative neurological
deficits partially recovered during follow-up assessments. Pseudoarthrosis,
loss of correction, titanium mesh cage collapses, dural tear or implant
failures were not detected. Conclusion: NA-PVCR showed to be an
effective and safe technique for the treatment of angular kyphotic
deformities. Even though there was no circumferential decompression of the
spinal cord, there was no limitation to the correction or neurological
damage. This is a description of an initial cohort of kyphotic patients,
therefore, future studies will be necessary for a better evaluation.

## 1197

## P094: Effect of non-fusion anterior scoliosis correction (NFASC) on
thoracic and lumbar sagittal parameters in adolescent idiopathic scoliosis
(AIS): is it detrimental?

Umesh P. Kanade

1

, keyur Akbari

1

, Vignesh Badikillaya

1

, and Sajan Hegde

1

1

Orthopaedics, Apollo Hospitals, Chennai, India

Introduction: The gold standard for surgical management
Adolescent idiopathic scoliosis patients remains spinal fusion. Surgical
treatment of Adolescent idiopathic scoliosis (AIS) has experienced some
innovations in recent years particularly with regard to treatment of growing
spine. Non-fusion anterior scoliosis correction (NFASC) is a new, fusionless
revolutionary motion preserving treatment method for surgical management of
Adolescent idiopathic scoliosis. Non-fusion anterior scoliosis correction
(NFASC) has been successful in correcting coronal deformity in patients with
Adolescent idiopathic scoliosis, there is paucity of literature on its
effect on sagittal parameters. We present our series of 40 patients with a
minimum follow up of 2 years. 72.5% of patients had a physiological sagittal
profile after NFASC, while 27.5% had physiological profile before NFASC. Age
and curve magnitude did not influence postoperative thoracic kyphosis (TK)
and lumbar lordosis (LL). This study evaluates the effects of non-fusion
anterior scoliosis correction on sagittal parameters of spine.
Material and Methods: It is a retrospective cohort study.
Data of 40 Adolescent idiopathic scoliosis patients treated with NFASC at a
single Centre with a minimum of 2 years of follow up were analysed. Coronal
cobbs’ angle, Thoracic kyphosis (TK), Lumbar Lordosis (LL), Pelvic Tilt (PT)
and Pelvic Incidence (PI) preoperatively, immediate post op and at final
follow up were measured. A Post hoc analysis following repeated measures
ANOVA test was used to examine statistically significant trends.
Results: 40 AIS patients (39 female,1 male). The mean age
was 14.57 ± 1.98 years (Range 13-18 years). The mean Risser score and
Sanders’s score was noted to be 4.22 ± 0.6 and 7.15 ± 0.59 respectively. The
cohort included 14 Lenke type 1, 3 type 3, 18 type 5, and 5 type 6. On
average 7.3 vertebrae were instrumented. Mean pre operative (pre-op)
thoracic and thoracolumbar/lumbar cobbs were 51.05 ± 7.1 °and 50.96 ± 12.07°
respectively. Mean pre-op, immediate post-operative(post-op), and at 2 years
Thoracic kyphosis were 27.20 ± 8.20, 30.83 ± 5.85 and 31.09 ± 6.06
respectively. Mean pre-op, immediate post-op, and at 2 years lumbar lordosis
were 48.92 ± 8.41, 47.23 ± 7.58 and 48.32 ± 6.06 (p > 0.05) respectively.
There was no significant change in Pelvic incidence and Pelvic tilt
preoperatively and at 2 years follow up. (p > 0.05).
Conclusion: Non-fusion anterior scoliosis correction
surgery offers fusionless correction with a positive influence on thoracic
kyphosis without having any detrimental effect on lumbar lordosis. As a
result, most of the patients achieved normal physiologic kyphosis, where as
some maintained their pre-operative alignment. There was no kyphotic effect
on lumbar spine. Non-fusion anterior scoliosis correction surgery offers
fusionless correction of deformity with positive effect on sagittal
parameters.

## 1400

## P095: Deformity correction of congenital thoracolumbar kyphoscoliosis
presenting with neurological deficit

Kang Kai Lim

1

1

Orthopaedic Spine Unit, Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia

A 10-year old male presented to our outpatient clinic with spine deformity
which was first detected when he was 8-year old. The thoracolumbar deformity
gradually worsened as he grew, and he subsequently developed bilateral lower
limb neurological deficit during his clinic surveillance visit at age
14-year old. Radiographic examination showed T12 hemivertebra with conus
medullaris effacement. An urgent T6 to L3 Posterior Spinal Instrumented
Fusion with 4-rod technique, T11 to L1 decompressive laminectomy, and T12
hemivertebrectomy and Harm’s cage insertion was performed. Post-operatively
his neurological deficit gradually improved and at 5 year follow up he had
good fusion mass and normal daily function with no neurological deficit.

## 1480

## P096: Vertebral body tethering for immature adolescent idiopathic
scoliosis: a retrospective review of 2 to 5 years postoperative
follow-up

Meric Enercan

1

, Hamisi Mraja

1

, Celaleddin Bildik

1

, Halil Gok

1

, Ayhan Mutlu

1

, Onur Levent Ulusoy

1

, Tunay Sanli

1

, Selhan Karadereler

1

, and Azmi Hamzaoglu

1

1

Scoliosis-Spine Center Istanbul, Istanbul, Turkey

Introduction: Anterior vertebral body tethering (VBT) has become
a popular growth modulation technique that allows spontaneous curve
correction with spinal growth in skeletally immature AIS patients.
Overcorrection and cord rupture have been reported as the most common
mechanical complications in the previous series. The aim of this study was
to evaluate the curve behaviors, mechanical complications and assess the
efficacy of vertebral body tethering technique in patients who had more than
2 years f/up. Methods: Skeletally immature patients AIS
patients with Sanders score < 4 who underwent VBT and had min. 2 years
f/up were included. Preop, first erect and latest follow-up radiographs were
reviewed and correction rates were noted. SRS-22r was used for clinical
assessment. Results: 15 patients (14F, 1M) with mean age 12,1
(10-14) and f/up 37,2 (24-62) months. There were 10 patients with Sanders
score 3 and 5 patients with Sanders score 2. A mean of 9,2 (6-13) level was
tethered. 8 patients had undergone thoracic-VBT, 2 patients had undergone
TL/L-VBT and 5 patients had undergone double VBT for both MT and TL/L
curves. Mean MT curve 58° was corrected to 22° at first erect (64%
correction rates) and 16° at latest f/up with 72% correction rates. Mean
TL/L curve 61° was corrected to 20° at first erect (68% correction rates)
and 12° at last f/up with 80% correction rates. Mechanical complications
were observed in 3 (19%) patients (2 tether breakage with a single cord, 1
overcorrection). All 3 patients had > 75% correction rates at the first
erect. None of the patients require revision surgery for tether breakage or
overcorrection. On the latest f/up, 93% of the MT curves and all (100%) of
the TL/L curves were below 30°. SRS-22r subtotal score increased from a mean
of 3.8 to 4.39 with a mean satisfaction score of 4.75 over 5 at the latest
f/up. Conclusion: Vertebral body tethering is an effective
growth modulation technique that provided satisfactory clinical and
radiological results at the end of a mean 3 years f/up. The success rate was
93% for MT and 100% for TL/L curves. Tether breakage (13%) and
overcorrection (6%) rates were lower than the previous series. Estimation of
the remaining growth is challenging, curve correction should not be more
than 60-70% at the index surgery in immature AIS to avoid overcorrection.
Double cord fixation can minimize tether breakage. Patient satisfaction
(4.75/5) was high at the latest f/up.

## 1481

## P097: Restoration of ideal sagittal alignment in AIS with thoracic
hypokyphosis/lordosis with hybrid technique: combination of posterior
thoracic fusion with non-fusion thoracolumbar/lumbar vertebral body
tethering

Meric Enercan

1

, Hamisi Mraja

1

, Tunay Sanli

1

, Onur Levent Ulusoy

1

, Halil Gok

1

, Celaleddin Bildik

1

, Ayhan Mutlu

1

, Selhan Karadereler

1

, and Azmi Hamzaoglu

1

1

Scoliosis-Spine Center Istanbul, Istanbul, Turkey

Introduction: Restoration of the ideal sagittal alignment is
essential in AIS deformity correction. We introduced Hybrid technique
including posterior surgery with or without Ponte osteotomy in order to
restore sagittal alignment better and thoracolumbar/lumbar (TL/L) vertebral
body tethering (VBT) with Double Screw-Double Cord fixation in order to
preserve lumbar flexibility and motion. The aim of this study to evaluate
the efficacy of hybrid technique for the restoration ideal sagittal
alignment in patients with double major curves with thoracic
hypokyphosis/lordosis. Methods: 24 AIS patients who had double
major curves with thoracic hypokyphosis/lordosis treated with hybrid
technique were included. Coronal and sagittal parameters were measured on
preop, first erect and f/up x-rays and lumbar ROM were compared. SRS-22r was
used for clinical assessment. Results: Mean age 14 (11-18)
years and f/up was 28(24-62) months. Mean MT 48° was corrected to 8° at f/up
(84%). Mean TL/L of 52° was corrected to 8.5° at f/up (83.5%). 20 patients
with thoracic hypokyphosis of 13° restored to 33°. 4 patients with thoracic
lordosis of -7° restored to 25° thoracic kyphosis. Ponte osteotomy was
performed in 11 (45%) patients (7 patients with thoracic hypokyphosis, 4
patients with thoracic lordosis). 17 (70%) patients with preop. cervical
kyphosis had improved cervical alignment postoperatively (11 patients
straight, 6 patients cervical lordosis). ROC analysis showed thoracic
kyphosis restoration > 30° and T1 slope > 25° was correlated with
improved cervical lordosis restoration (area = 0.77). According to TL/L
sagittal alignment, ant or post cord was tightened first to restore TL/L
alignment. 12 patients with thoracolumbar kyphosis of 16° were restored to
2.3°. There was no cord rupture. Preop lumbar ROM was preserved at f/up.
Conclusion: Hybrid technique provided satisfactory
corrections on both planes. Posterior surgery w/o Ponte osteotomy enables
restoration of the thoracic kyphosis. Cervical alignment improved better
when thoracic kyphosis was restored > 30° and T1 slope > 25°. TL/L
vertebral body tethering with Double Screw-Double Cord fixation provided
deformity correction, restored TL/L alignment, preserved flexibility and
motion of lumbar spine without cord rupture.

## 1502

## P098: Severe kyphoscoliosis in non-ambulatory patients with type II
spinal muscular atrophy and concomitant serious respiratory restriction: a
novel surgical strategy to correct spinal deformity and pelvic
obliquity

Tianyuan Zhang

1

, Wenyuan Sui

1

, Jingfan Yang

1

, Yaolong Deng

1

 and Junlin Yang

1

1

Spine Center, Xinhua Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School
of Medicine, Shanghai, China

Introduction: To propose a novel surgical strategy to correct
severe kyphoscoliosis and pelvic obliquity in non-ambulatory patients with
type II spinal muscular atrophy and concomitant serious respiratory
restriction. Material and Methods: Type II SMA patients with
severe kyphoscoliosis and concomitant serious respiratory restriction who
underwent posterior spinal fusion in our center from January 2019 to
December 2021 were retrospectively reviewed. A novel surgical strategy based
on alternate distraction on the concave side between a Domino connector and
distal screws was proposed to correct spinal deformity and pelvic obliquity.
Patients’ demographics and clinical data were detailed, including
anthropometric parameters, nutrition status, pulmonary function and surgical
outcomes. The scoliosis curve, kyphosis curve and pelvic obliquity were
measured before and after surgery. The ability of sitting balance was
evaluated during follow-up. Complications were also recorded.
Results: 20 patients (9 males and 11 females) with type II
SMA were included in this study. The average age at surgery was 18.7 ± 6.1
years (range, 11-30 years). Average body mass index (BMI) was 18.47 ± 4.68
kg/m2 and 60% (12/20) patients were with poor nutrition. The
mean percentage forced vital capacity (FVC%) and forced expiratory volume in
one second (FEV1%) was 35.3% ± 12.8% and 37.3% ± 13.8%,
respectively, indicating serious respiratory restriction. Severe
kyphoscoliosis was developed for all patients with highly rotated vertebra,
deformed chest wall and pelvic imbalance. No one was able to sit
independently without hands supporting and six patients was bound to bed
preoperatively. All patients underwent one-stage posterior spinal fusion,
instrumented from the upper thoracic vertebra to the pelvis. Multiple rods
construct with a Domino connector was installed on the concave side to
alternately distract collapsed trunk and achieve pelvic balance. The main
scoliotic curve, kyphotic curve and pelvic obliquity averaged 120.6° ±
17.0°, 116.8° ± 25.6° and 36.5° ± 13.6° respectively before surgery. After
surgery, it decreased to 57.7° ± 19.5°, 47.0° ± 15.0° and 15.5° ± 7.3°
respectively. The mean operation time was 351.3 ± 64.5 mins (range, 240 to
525 mins). The mean blood loss was 1377.5 ± 1107.9 ml (range, 300 to 4500
ml). 13 (65%) patients were extubated in the operating room postoperatively
and the average extubation time was 6.75 ± 11.2 hours for all. After
surgery, they stayed in ICU for mean 2.5 ± 1.6 days (range, 1 to 7 days).
The mean duration of hospital stay was 22.3 ± 9.4 days. As for postoperative
complications, only 3 patients happened pneumonia and no one needed
re-intubation due to respiratory problems. The sitting ability was recovered
with balanced pelvis and all patients could sit independently during
follow-up. Conclusions: This article presented the
characteristics of non-ambulatory type II SMA patients with severe
kyphoscoliosis and seriously restricted pulmonary function. Our novel
surgical strategy could provide substantial correction and recover patients’
sitting balance, while limited the risks of respiratory complications. Its
safety and effectiveness needed to be evaluated for severe neuromuscular
scoliosis in the future.

## 1591

## P099: Scoliosis in cerebral palsy patients. Fusion to the fifth lumbar
vertebra, the sacrum or the ilia?

Ib Green Petersen

1

, Luigi Magnano

2

, Anastasios Charalampidis

3

, and Paul Gerdhem

4

1

Karolinska University Hospital, Dep of Surgery, Sweden

2

Enna Hospital, Sicily, Italy, Department of Trauma and Orthopaedics,
Italy

3

Karolinska University Hospital, Dep of Acute Surgery, Trauma and
Orthopaedics, Sweden

4

Uppsala University, Dep of Surgical Sciences, Uppsala,
Sweden

Introduction: There is no consensus on the lowest level of
fusion in patients with cerebral palsy treated surgically for scoliosis,
although some previous studies have suggested a better radiological outcome
after fusion to the pelvis in individuals with various types of
neuromuscular scoliosis. We compared complications, reoperations and
radiological outcome in individuals with cerebral palsy fused to the fifth
lumbar vertebra (L5), the sacrum, or the ilia. Material and
Methods: 208 individuals with cerebral palsy undergoing surgery
for scoliosis aged 10 through 25 years were identified in the national
quality registry Swespine. Lowest level of fusion was L5 in 58, the sacrum
in 92, and the ilia in 58 individuals. The Cobb method was used for curve
size analysis and the Maloney method for pelvic obliquity analysis.
Reoperations were collected from the registry. An analysis on 58 matched
pairs operated to L5 or the pelvis (sacrum = 42, ilia = 16) with similar
pelvic obliquity (± 5°) was also performed. Statistics was performed with
the Mann-Whitney, Kruskal-Wallis, Chi-square or Fisher’s exact tests.
Results: The median (interquartile range) follow-up for the
last radiograph was 1.7 (1.7) years and for reoperations 6.0 (5.9) years.
Preoperatively, the median Cobb angle of the major curve was 65° (23°) in
the L5 group, 68° (28°) in the sacrum group, and 78° (25°) in the ilia group
(p = 0.006). Preoperative median pelvic obliquity was 16° (19°), 21° (13°),
and 27° (28°), respectively (p = 0.004). Immediate postoperative Cobb angles
were 28° (18°), 28° (16°), and 32° (25°), respectively (p = 0.11). Immediate
postoperative pelvic obliquity was 7° (10°), 7° (8°), and 8° (10°),
respectively (p = 0.28). The median change in pelvic obliquity from the
first to the last postoperative radiograph was -5° (7°), -3° (6°), -3° (6°),
respectively (p = 0.55). 7 (12%), 11 (12%), and 7 (12%) patients required at
least one reoperation (p = 1.0), respectively. In the matched analysis based
on pelvic obliquity, no significant differences in the radiological outcomes
were found (all p > 0.38).
Conclusion: Both fusion to L5, the sacrum, and the ilia
results in sustained curve and pelvic obliquity correction, with no
significant difference in reoperation rates. This indicates that choice of
distal fusion level can be individualized in individuals with cerebral
palsy.

## 1616

## P100: The intervention effect of serial growing rod procedure on shoulder
balance in EOS patients and analysis of risk factors for final shoulder
imbalance

Ziyang Liu

1

 and Yong Hai

1

1

Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Beijing Chaoyang Hospital, Capital
Medical University, Beijing, China

Introduction: To analyze the risk factors for final shoulder
imbalance, observe shoulder balance changes during growing rod (GR)
treatments in early-onset scoliosis (EOS) patients, and evaluate the
satisfaction of families of patients with shoulder balance after GR
treatment. Material and Methods: 24 consecutive EOS patients
treated with GR at our institution from March 2008 to August 2018 were
studied. Demographic data, surgical-related factors, and radiographic
parameters were analyzed to identify the risk factors for final shoulder
imbalance in 'growing-rod graduates', and the shoulder balance changes from
GR implantation to the last follow-up after fusion were analyzed. The
radiographic shoulder balance parameters included the radiographic shoulder
height (RSH), clavicle angle (CA), and T1 tilt angle (T1T). The satisfaction
of EOS patients' parents was evaluated by an adapted questionnaire.
Results: Early postoperative shoulder imbalance (p = 0.015;
odds ratio (OR): 19.500; 95% confidence interval (CI) = 1.777-213.949) was
an independent risk factor for shoulder imbalance at the last follow-up.
Radiographic shoulder height (RSH) was significantly improved after GR
implantation (p = 0.036), further improved during the post-fusion period (p
= 0.021), and through the whole treatment period (p = 0.011). The changing
trend of CA was similar. RSH of patients with prefusion shoulder imbalance
was significantly improved after final fusion (p = 0.045), and there was no
significant difference in the RSH value at the early after fusion and the
last follow-up compared with that of the prefusion shoulder balance group.
The parents (100%) were satisfied with the final shoulder condition and the
entire serial GR treatment. Conclusion: Growing rod surgery
improved shoulder balance. However, shoulder balance status after GR
implantation did not determine the final status. Final fusion could further
adjust the shoulder balance of patients with prefusion shoulder imbalance.
For patients with early shoulder imbalance after final fusion, there was a
high probability of shoulder imbalance at the final follow-up.

## 1633

## P101: Hoursfield unit for assessing asymmetric loss of vertebral bone
mineral density and its correlation with curve serverity in AIS

Yunzhong Cheng

1

, Honghao Yang

1

, and Yong Hai

1

1

Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Beijing Chaoyang Hospital, Capital
Medical University, Beijing, China

Introduction: Low bone mass concomitantly occurs in patients
with adolescent idiopathic scoliosis (AIS) and can persist until skeletal
maturity. The purpose of this study was to assess the asymmetrical loss of
vertebral bone mineral density (vBMD) and its correlation with curve
severity in patients with AIS using Hounsfield unit (HU) values were
measured from computed tomography scans. Methods: A total of 93
AIS patients were retrospectively recruited. The HU values of the vertebral
body (VB-HU) and pedicle screw trajectory (PST-HU) were measured from four
vertebrae above (Apex − 4) to four below (Apex + 4) the apical vertebra
(Apex) of the major curve. The VB-HU and PST-HU at the upper-end vertebra,
Apex, and lower-end vertebra within the concave and convex sides of the
major and minor curves and stable vertebrae were obtained.
Results: A significant correlation was found between the
Cobb angle and VB-HU at the periapical levels of the major curve. VB-HU and
PST-HU at periapical levels were significantly greater within the concavity
than the convexity of both major and minor curves. The asymmetric ratios of
VB-HU and PST-HU were significantly correlated with the major curve Cobb
angle, peaked at the apex, and gradually diminished from the apex to the end
vertebrae. The asymmetrical loss of vBMD aggravated with the progression of
curve severity, presenting as VB-HU, significantly decreased within the
convexity and insignificantly decreased within the concavity of the major
curve. Conclusion: The asymmetrical loss of vBMD was associated
with the progression of curve severity in AIS. For patients with severe AIS,
the distraction of the pedicle screws at the concave side should be a
priority in correcting the major curve, and supplemental anchors and
larger-sized screws should be placed within the convex side around the apex
of the major curve to reduce the risk of screw loosening after surgery.

## 1638

## P102: Halo-pelvic traction combined with staged correction surgery for
the treatment of extrem severe and rigid kyphoscoliosis

Lijin Zhou

1

 and Yong Hai

1

1

Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Beijing Chaoyang Hospital, Capital
Medical University, Beijing, China

Introduction: Severe and rigid spinal deformities are real
challenges for us with unfavorable correction and a high rate of
complications. To evaluate the efficacy and safety of halo-pelvic traction
(HPT) combined with staged corrective surgery in the treatment of extremely
severe and rigid scoliosis (Cobb’s angle > 140°), a retrospective study
was conducted. Materials and Methods: Twelve consecutive cases
of extremely severe rigid kyphoscoliosis were treated with one-stage HPT
traction and a staged posterior procedure was included in the study. There
were five males and seven females with an average age of 24.3 years. All
underwent staged correction surgery. The patient had a major coronal curve
or kyphosis > 140° and flexibility < 30%. The patient’s height, main
curve, the height difference between the two shoulders, the height
difference between the two iliac, and C7PL-CSVL distance were evaluated
before traction, after HPT, as well as after correction surgery.
Results: All patients underwent HPT traction and posterior
surgery safely. The average time for HPT traction was 13.2 weeks. None of
the patients underwent high-grade osteotomy. The main curve or kyphosis was
improved from (162.5 ± 17.3)° before the operation to (75.7 ± 14.3)° after
HPT, and to (57.7 ± 16.1)° after correction surgery. The corrective rate was
64.5%. The height, shoulder height difference and C7PL-CSVL distance of
patients after HPT and correction surgery were also significantly improved
compared with those before traction. One patient developed C5 root palsy
during traction, one patient developed skin ulceration infection, one
patient developed cerebrospinal fluid leakage during correction surgery, and
one patient developed transient lower extremity paralysis. Complications in
all patients were relieved after treatment. Conclusions: The
combination of HPT and correction surgery is a safe and effective method for
the treatment of extremely severe rigid scoliosis with Cobb’s angle >
140°, with less severe complications, and can avoid high-grade osteotomy
during the procedure.
Key words: Traction; Scoliosis; Orthopedic procedures

## 1641

## P103: The efficacy of pre-operative halo-gravity traction for severe
kyphoscoliosis surgery on radiographic outcme and pulmonry function

Jianqiang Wang

1

, Yong Hai

1

, and Lijin Zhou

1

1

Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Beijing Chaoyang Hospital, Capital
Medical University, Beijing, China

Introduction: Halo-gravity traction (HGT) has been proven that
can decrease the severity of the curve in the process of correction before
surgery. Currently, few studies have evaluated the efficacy of HGT on the
pulmonary function of the patient. Our study was to evaluate the efficacy of
preoperative Halo-gravity traction in treating severe spinal deformity on
both radiographic outcome and pulmonary function. Materials and
Methods: This study retrospectively included 30 consecutive
patients (male 8, female 22) with severe kyphoscoliosis who were admitted to
our department from April 2018 to January 2022 and underwent HGT before the
correction surgery. The average age of patients was 17.79 ± 7.96 years old
and the average of the pre-operative main curve was 120.66 ± 3.89°. There
were 17 patients with AIS, 11 with congenital and 2 with NF-I. The change of
radiographic outcome of deformity and pulmonary function tests (PFTs) were
analyzed before and after HGT. Results: After an average of 122
± 58 days traction, with 44.2 ± 12.7% of body weight, the main curve was
corrected from an average of 112.42 ± 34.53° to 87.15 ± 27.77° (22.5%, p
< 0.05); PFTs also showed a significant increase in FVC%, FEV1%, and MEF%
after traction [42.82 ± 15.03% VS. 45.75 ± 15.82%;40.71 ± 13.77% VS. 44.21 ±
15.20%; 40.78 ± 17.15% VS. 45.49 ± 19.14%, p < 0.05]. No significant
difference was found in deformity correction and lung function improvement
between patients with traction for more or less than three months (p >
0.05). Two patients developed brachial plexus palsy during traction and
recovered after decreasing of the traction weight. No other complication
occurred during the traction period. Conclusions: Halo gravity
traction can partially correct spinal deformity and improve pulmonary
function. It could be used as a preoperative adjuvant treatment for severe
spinal deformity. But traction for more than three months might not be
necessary, according to the present study.

## 1670

## P104: Clincal application of individualized digital surgical planning and
precised execution for severe complex spinal deformity correction

Hongtao Ding

1

, Yong Hai

1

, Chaofan Han

1

, and Yangpu Zhang

1

1

Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Beijing Chaoyang Hospital, Capital
Medical University, Beijing, China

Introduction: Severe rigid adult deformities are composed of the
characteristics of the complexity of anatomy, rigidity, and severe kyphosis
or scoliosis, with or without neurological dysfunction, which may lead to
physical disability or even death. The treatment strategy for such severe
deformities is comprehensive. Different levels of spinal osteotomy have been
developed and applied rapidly with good correction outcomes. However, due to
the complex anatomy of spine structure, the screw insertion, vertebrae
osteotomy, correction, and decompression procedures increase the incidence
of intra- or postoperative neurological complications significantly. This
study is to report the preliminary outcomes utilizing of Individualized
pre-operative digital planning and three-dimensional printing (3DP) guidance
template in the treatment of severe and complex spinal deformity.
Materials and Methods: After being approved by the
Institutional Review Board of our hospital, 8 adult patients with severe
rigid kyphoscoliosis were included. Based on the preoperative radiological
data, the surgery planning was simulated by software, and screw insertion
and osteotomy guidance templates were designed and manufactured utilizing 3D
printing techniques. The designed osteotomy and correction surgeries were
performed utilizing the guidance templates. The perioperative, and
radiological parameters and complications were collected and analyzed,
including surgery duration, estimated blood loss, pre-and post-operative
cobb angle, trunk balance, the ratio of osteotomy simulation and execution,
screw accuracy, etc. Results: Of the 8 patients, the primary
pathology consisted of 2 adult idiopathic scoliosis (ADIS), 4 congenital
scoliosis (CS), 1 ankylosing spondylitis (AS), and 1 kyphosis secondary to
tuberculosis (TB). There are 5 kyphoscoliosis and 2 kyphosis regarding
deformity characteristics. The pedicle subtraction osteotomy (PSO) in 3
patients and vertebral column resection (VCR) osteotomies in 5 patients were
performed with the application of the guidance templates. The average
surgical duration is 361.25 mins, average blood loss of 800 ml, and no
surgery and instrument-related complications occurred. The main cobb angle
was corrected from 99.33° to 34.17°, the kyphosis was corrected from 110.00°
to 42.00°. The match ratio of osteotomy simulation and execution was 94.67%.
The average screw accuracy rate was 93.04% in the cohort.
Conclusions: The clinical application of individualized
digital surgical planning and precise execution and 3D printing guidance
templates in the treatment of severe adult rigid deformity is feasible,
effective, and easy to promote. The preoperative osteotomy simulation is
executed with high precision by utilizing the described guidance templates.
It could be used to reduce the surgical risk and difficulty of screw
placement and high-level osteotomy.

## 1698

## P105: Operative considerations for surgical management of scoliosis in
GGPS1, a rare muscular dystrophy: a rare disease operative case
report

Matt Bellamy

1

, Raveen Jayasuriya

1

, Edward Bayley

1

, Ian Scivill

2

, and Robert John

3

1

Paediatric Orthopaedics and Trauma

2

Department of Neurophysiology

3

Department of Anaesthetics, Sheffield Children's Hospital,
Sheffield, United Kingdom

Background: GGPS1 is a rare variant of the geranylgeranyl
diphosphate synthase gene. GGPS1 causes a genetic muscular dystrophy which
is associated with progressive scoliosis, osteoporosis, and hearing loss.
This commonly results in early wheelchair dependence by the 2nd
decile of life. Of the 21 globally reported cases, 15 have undergone spinal
fusion surgery at a mean age of 14 years. There is no published literature
on spinal management or surgical considerations to guide preoperative
planning. Methods: A rare disease case study of an 8-year-old
girl with GGPS1 and rapidly progressing left thoracic scoliosis who failed
full time rigid bracing, and subsequently underwent T2-L3 posterior spinal
fusion. This report focuses on intra operative learning points to optimise
surgical management and early post-operative results. Results:
Preoperatively this patient mobilised independently, with no history of low
energy mechanism fractures, and required nocturnal non-invasive ventilatory
(NIV). Due to her early onset of rapid curve progression and curve size,
early onset scoliosis deformity correction and fusion was considered with
the aim to protect her ambulatory status and pulmonary function. Prior to
surgery the patient had normal motor function, thus full sensory-motor
neuromonitoring was expected prior to proceeding with surgery.
Intraoperative monitoring was adjusted from 1mS (standard for adolescent
idiopathic scoliosis) to 4mS interstimulus interval to achieve adequate,
repeatable, morphology and amplitude of MEP waveforms. Sub cortical and
cortical responses for SEPs were obtained. No indications of metabolic bone
abnormalities had been identified prior to surgery. However very poor bone
quality was clinically evident intraoperatively, prompting a change to a
higher instrumentation density (1.5) construct that originally planned. Full
correction was not attempted due to risk of screw displacement. This
achieved acceptable coronal plane correction from 65 degrees to 29 degrees.
Probing pedicle screw holes was highly haemorrhagic, resulting in estimated
blood loss of 750 mls (80% of circulating volume), with 303ml returned by
cell salvage and 166mls of donor blood. Surgical progress was paused whilst
fluid resuscitation with blood products reinstated haemodynamic stability.
Neurological function was normal postoperatively and no further blood
products required. Length of stay was 13 days due to slow wean off daytime
NIV on the critical care unit. Discussion: Learning points:1)
Fusion surgery may be necessary at a younger age due to rapidly progressing
scoliosis neuromuscular scoliosis. 2) Neuromonitoring needs adapting in view
of GGPS1 neuromuscular pathology. 3) Consider DEXA scan and metabolic bone
specialist involvement preoperatively 4) High implant density required, 5)
Prepare for high volume blood loss with pause for resuscitation and
cross-matched donor blood.

## 1771

## P106: A single surgeon's experience of thoracoscopic VBT: 5 50 8 years
follow-up results

Ahmet Alanay

1

, Altug Yucekul

1

, Kadir Abul

2

, Ilkay Karaman

3

, Atahan Durbas

3

, Tais Zulemyan

4

, Gokhan Ergene

5

, Sahin Senay

6

, Sule Turgut Balci

7

, Yasemin Yavuz

8

, and Caglar Yilgor

1

1

Department of Orthopaedics and Traumatology

2

Istanbul Basaksehir Pine and Sakura City Training and Research
Hospital, Department of Orthopaedics and Traumatology, Istanbul,
Turkey

3

Acibadem Mehmet Ali Aydinlar University School of Medicine,
Istanbul, Turkey

4

Comprehensive Spine Center

5

Department of Operating Room Services, Acibadem Mehmet Ali Aydinlar
University Vocational School of Health Sciences, Istanbul,
Turkey

6

Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Acibadem Mehmet Ali Aydinlar
University School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey

7

Anesthesiology Service, Acibadem Mehmet Ali Aydinlar University
Maslak Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey

8

Department of Biostatistics, Ankara University School of Medicine,
Ankara, Turkey

Introduction: Previously described growth-sparing techniques
typically have a definitive fusion planned at the end of growth. Vertebral
body tethering has emerged as the first promising definitive non-fusion
surgical technique that has the theoretical advantages of achieving curve
stabilization, preservation of functional motion and continued spinal and
chest cage growth. Although experimental and clinical evidence has been
growing for the last two decades, there still is a paucity of information on
mid to long term clinical and radiographical outcomes of VBT surgery. Aim
was to report mid-term outcomes of thoracoscopic thoracic-only anterior VBT
surgery. Materials and Methods: Data were collected
preoperatively, at 6-weeks, 1-year, 2-years and ≥ 5-years follow-up.
Demographic, perioperative, clinical, radiographic data and complications
were analyzed. Curve sizes at each follow-up were compared using repeated
measures ANOVA. Clinical outcome was assessed by using SRS-22.
Results: 23 AIS patients (22F, 1M; 12.1 ± 1.5 years) with a
mean follow-up of 63 (60-92) months were included. 96% were Lenke 1 (11A,
2Ar, 9B and 1C) and 4% were Lenke 2. Preoperatively, 14 (64%) patients were
premenarchal (median Sanders: 3 (1-7), median Risser: 0 (0-5)). A median of
7 (7-9) levels were tethered. Mean surgical time was 245 ± 75 (123-360)
minutes. Patients grew 7 cm on average; height measurements showing
significant increase at each follow-up timepoint (p < 0.001). All
patients reached skeletal maturity at final follow-up. Upper Thoracic (UT),
Main Thoracic (MT) and Thoracolumbar/lumbar (TLL) curves showed significant
decrease in each follow-up timepoint. No significant changes were noted in
kyphosis and lordosis (p < 0.05). Pulmonary, mechanical and curve
behavior complications rates were 13%, 22% and 35%, respectively. 2 (8.7%)
patients were converted to fusion. At final follow-up, 91% patients had ≤ 3
0° residual curve. SRS-22 MH, SI and subtotal scores increased
significantly. Conclusions: This study reports a single
European center experience on 23 consecutive patients with ≥5-years
follow-up who had undergone thoracic-only VBT surgery. Surgical correction
was followed by growth-dependent correction attained during follow-up.
Spontaneous correction in the non-operated upper thoracic and thoracolumbar
levels were also noted. Thoracoscopic VBT surgery prevented fusion following
≥5-years after surgery in 91% of the patients. 90% of patients that are not
converted to fusion had good radiographic and clinical outcomes at latest
follow-up; however, it is not without complications. Some complications may
be avoided with a better understanding of the growth modulation and
advancement of technical skills and technology.

## 1773

## P107: The effectiveness & safety of scoliosis surgery: experience of
161 cases in the tertiary level hospital

Shah Alam

1

, Sarwar Jahan

2

, Dr Sharif Ahmed Jonayed

2

, and Abdullah Al Mamun

2

1

Orthopedics & Spine Surgery, Bangladesh Spine & Orthopedic
Hospital (BSOH), Dhaka, Bangladesh

2

Orthopedics & Spine Surgery,National Institute of Traumatology
& Orthopedic Rehabilitation (NITOR), Dhaka, Bangladesh

Introduction: A significant number of Scoliosis needs surgical
intervention. Revolutionary design & capability of spinal instruments
have drastically changed the principle of scoliosis correction.
Material and Methods: From February 2009-July 2022, 161
cases underwent surgery. 93 were female and 68 were male and age ranged
14-38 years. The pedicle is a power nucleus of the vertebra and offers a
secure grip of all 3 columns. Pedicle screw instrumentation ensures rigid
fixation with improved 3D correction. Accurate placement of screws is
important to reduce possible irreversible complication. All cases were
corrected by transpedicular screws and rods and 1 case stabilized by sub
laminar wring. 152 cases were managed by only posterior approach and 9 cases
required both anterior releases, costoplasty, posterior stabilization as
well. Fusion was done in selected segments. Total follow up time was about
10 years (6 months-7 yrs). All patients were assessed by deformity
correction, cosmesis, and functional outcome. Use of Neuromonitor is an
excellent & effective method for prevention of post operative neuro
deficit. Results: 71 patients had average coronal plane cobb’s
angle measuring about 700 pre-operatively and 17.120
immediate post-operative period. 8 patients (5%) developed neurodeficit. 3
regained completely but other regaining her neurological deficit very
slowly. There were malposition of screws in 21 (13.04%), painful prominence
of screws in 17 (10.56%), superficial infection in 7(4.35%). 80% patients
improved cosmetically. Conclusion: Overall outcome in surgical
treatment of Scoliosis by transpedicular screws and rods system was
satisfactory.

## 1774

## P108: Comparison of patient-reported outcomes after vertebral body
tethering and posterior spinal fusion

Altug Yucekul

1

, Gokhan Ergene

2

, Sahin Senay

3

, Sule Turgut Balci

4

, Pinar Yalinay Dikmen

5

, Caglar Yilgor

1

, and Ahmet Alanay

1

1

Department of Orthopaedics and Traumatology

2

Acibadem Mehmet Ali Aydinlar University Vocational School of Health
Sciences, Department of Operating Room Services, Istanbul,
Turkey

3

Department of Cardiovascular Surgery

4

Anesthesiology Service, Acibadem Mehmet Ali Aydinlar University
Maslak Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey

5

Department of Neurology, Acibadem Mehmet Ali Aydinlar University
School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey

Introduction: Posterior spinal fusion (PSF) is the standard
surgical approach in the treatment of adolescent idiopathic scoliosis.
Vertebral body tethering (VBT) emerged as an alternative minimally invasive,
non-fusion, growth modulating technique. The aim of this study was to
compare the patient-reported outcomes of patients who had undergone PSF and
VBT. Materials and Methods: Matched cohorts were created among
patients having main thoracic curves ranged between 40⁰-70⁰ and having ≥ 2
years follow-up. Double-curve VBT and thoracolumbar PSF surgeries where
lumbar curves were also instrumented were excluded. Demographic data, and
preoperative radiographic measurements were compared to confirm matching.
Early and latest follow-up radiographic measurements and SRS-22r scores were
used as outcome measures. Results: 16 PSF and 18 VBT patients
(30F, 4M) were included. The mean age and the follow-up were 13.4 (10-17)
years and 25.7 (24-32) months. Preoperative proximal thoracic (28.6° vs
29.6°), main thoracic (MT) (56.8° vs 51°), and thoracolumbar (TL) curves
(32.5° vs 37°) were similar among groups (p = 0.732, p = 0.126 and p =
0.088). The surgical correction percentage in the MT curve was greater in
the PSF group (84% vs 53%, p < 0.001), while the overall correction
percentages at 2-years were similar (80 vs 76%, p = 0.616). For both PSF and
VBT groups, self-image and subtotal scores significantly increased at
2-years compared to preoperative values (p < 0.001, p = 0.037 and p <
0.001, p = 0.016), while pain, function and mental-health did not show
significant pre-to-post changes (p > 0.05 for all comparisons).
Self-image scores were improved at 6-months and were maintained in PSF
group, while they incrementally increased in the VBT cohort. SRS function
scores were higher in VBT group both at 6-months and 2-years (p = 0.027, p =
0.027) compared to PSF group. SRS pain and subtotal scores were found to be
worse in PSF group at 2-years (p = 0.020, p = 0.036) in comparison to VBT
group. Conclusions: PSF and VBT resulted in similar main
thoracic and thoracolumbar curve correction rates 2-years after surgery. PSF
resulted in earlier improvement in self-image scores while latest follow-up
scores were similar. VBT resulted in better patient-reported function and
pain scores. Further studies in larger patient cohorts with longer follow-up
are warranted.

## 1783

## P109: Overcoming the challenges in management of neglected and severe
spine deformities: our case series and strategies

Harvinder Singh Chhabra

1

, and Anuj Gupta

2

1

Spine Service, Indian Spinal Injuries Centre, New Delhi,
India

2

Spine Service, Max Super Speciality Hospital, Noida, India

Introduction: Severe deformity of the spine is defined as Cobb
angle more than 90 degrees. The term neglected spinal deformity has not
formally defined but most surgeons consider it if age is more than 16 years
and no treatment has been sought till then Patients with neglected severe
scoliosis may have very low pulmonary reserve along with cosmetic deformity.
Moreover, there can be neurological compromise due to compression on spinal
cord. The challenges associated with the surgery in these patients are
rigidity of the curve, poor pulmonary reserve and compromised spinal cord in
patients with neurological deficit. The objective of our study was to assess
the outcomes of correction of severe deformities in our series and to
compile the strategies to overcome the challenges in management of neglected
and severe spine deformities. Materials and Methods: This is a
single centre retrospective study. Patients with Cobb angle >
900, flexibility on bending radiographs < 30% and age >
16 years were included in the study. 14 patients were managed in single
stage (vertebral column resection with posterior instrumentation and fusion)
and 06 in two stages (Halo-pelvic distractor application and later posterior
instrumentation and fusion). We collected data for all patients which
include age, sex, type of surgery, pre and post-op Cobb angle, T1-T12, T1-S1
length, Sagittal & Coronal alignment, Apical vertebral translation and
SRS-22 score. Results: Total of 20 patients were included in
the study. The aetiology included Congenital (12), Neuromuscular (5),
Idiopathic (2) and syndromic (1). The mean duration of follow-up was 38.6
months. The mean pre-op Cobb angle was 99.75 (50-180) in coronal plane and
60.8 (10-93) in sagittal plane. The mean post-op Cobb angle was 46.85
(22-66) in coronal plane and 35.9 (10-48) in sagittal plane (p < 0.005).
The mean pre-op and post op coronal and sagittal alignment were +4.96 cms
& +4.35 cms +2.52 cms and +2.06 cms respectively (p < 0.005). The
mean pre- and post-op apical vertebrae translation was 7.38 cms and 3.33 cms
respectively (p < 0.005). The mean pre- and post-op T1-T12 length was
15.8 cms and 21 cms respectively (p < 0.0001). Similarly, the mean pre-
and post-op T1-S1 length was 31.1 cms and 37.7 cms respectively (p <
0.0001). In our patients, there was significant improvement in all aspects
of functional scores with p value < 0.001. There were 6 patients with
pulmonary compromise pre-op and after surgery there was significant
improvement in both FVC and FEV1. We experienced no major complications like
implant failure, infection or neurological deficit. 7 patients had
incomplete neurological deficit pre-op which improved after surgery. We also
have compiled 10 strategies which can be used for management of such
deformities. Conclusion: The management of Neglected Severe
Spinal deformities may be very challenging. However, the successful outcome
after planned surgical treatment is a life changing event with improvement
in thoracic height, pulmonary function, and a profound effect on cosmesis
and self-image.

## 1895

## P110: Structural scoliosis secondary to thoracic osteoid osteoma: a case
report of delayed diagnosis

Nessrine Nessib

1

, Mohamed Zairi

2

, Eya Chahed

1

, Sofiene Bouali

1

, Ahmed Msakni

3

, Mohsni Ahmed Amine

2

, Rim Boussetta

2

, and Nessib Mohamed Nabil

2

1

Neurosurgery, Mongi ben Hamida Institute of Neurology, Tunis,
Tunisia

2

Orthopedics

3

Neurosurgery, Bechir Hamza Children's Hospital, Tunis,
Tunisia

Introduction: Osteoid osteoma (OO) is a small benign bone tumor
that is primarily localized in long bone; lumbar osteoid osteoma combined
with scoliosis has rarely been reported. The aim of this case report is to
show that a late diagnosis of vertebral osteoid osteoma gives rise to
structural scoliosis, which can require long-term management.
Materials and Methods: We report a case of an osteoid
osteoma in the thoracic spine associated with structural scoliosis. We
describe a 14-year-old boy who complained chronic nightly left back pain and
scoliosis. Spine’s X-ray reported thoraco-lumbar scoliosis without bone
lesion. Results: MRI as well as technetium-99m total body bone
scan and a computed tomography scan revealed a bony lesion in the left
superior articular process of T11 vertebra consistent with the diagnosis of
Osteoid Osteoma. Anatomopathological study of the resection piece confirmed
the diagnosis. Surgical excision of the tumor resolved pains, but scoliosis
needed a non-operative treatment for one year. Conclusion:
Through this case, it has been demonstrated that late diagnosed vertebral
Osteoid osteoma can be the cause of structural scoliosis. Clinical and
radiological results indicate that OO resection is an effective and safe
method of treatment.

## 1927

## P111: Single centre experience of intraoperative neuromonitoring (IONM)
in pediatric scoliosis deformity correction surgeries

Umesh P. Kanade

1

, Sharan Achar T

1

, Harith Reddy

1

, Keyur Akbari

1

, Vignesh Badikillaya

1

, Appaji Krishnan

2

, and Dr Sajan Hegde

1

1

Orthopaedics, Apollo Hospitals, Chennai, India

2

Orthopaedics, SIMS Hospitals, Chennai, India

Introduction: Neurological deficit following surgical correction
of spinal deformity is a major concern for any surgeon. Intraoperative
neuromonitoring (IONM) in the form of Somatosensory evoked potential (SSEP)
and Transcranial motor evoked potential (TcMEP) are real-time assessment
tools to decrease the likelihood of iatrogenic neurological injuries. We aim
to present our experience of multimodal IONM in pediatric scoliosis surgery.
Methods: Prospective analysis of 121 consecutive scoliosis
patients who underwent posterior scoliosis correction with IONM at our
institute between January 2015 to July 2018. All surgeries were monitored by
an experienced neuromonitoring specialist and were performed under total
intravenous anesthesia. Alerts were described as a decrease in amplitude by
50% or greater in SSEP, TcMEP, or both. Results: There were 91
females and 30 males with a mean age of 15 years 5 months. 11 patients (9%)
had positive neuro alerts of which 7 (63%) of alerts were due to
intraoperative traction, 2 (18%) were due to mean arterial pressure, 1 was
due to screw placement and 1 was due to correction of the curve. We observed
10 true positives, 1 false-positive, and 1 false-negative alert for TcMEPs
with sensitivity of 90.9% and specificity of 99%. The sensitivity and
specificity of SSEP was 18% and 100% respectively. 2 cases had postoperative
neurological deficit which recovered over time. Conclusion: Our
results support the use of IONM as a standard of care during pediatric
deformity correction surgery. The combined use of TcMEP and SSEP is a
valuable tool for improving intraoperative safety and postoperative
outcomes.

## 2021

## P112: Clinical impact of apical gliding screws in the management of early
onset scoliosis

Saleh Alfaisali

1

, and Abdullah Alshammari

1

, Rodrigo Navarro- Ramirez

2

, Neil Saran

1

 and Jean Ouellet

1

1

Orthopedic, Division of Orthopedic Surgery, McGill Scoliosis and
Spine Centre, McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, Canada

2

Department of Neurological Surgery, Weill Cornell Medicine - New
York Presbyterian, New York, United States

Introduction: Management of early onset scoliosis (EOS) carries
significant challenges. The key to successful management is the prevention
of curve progression while maintaining spinal growth with the least number
of complications. Few spinal implants have been designed to allow vertebral
capture while still allowing vertebrae to glide along a rod or construct.
Over the last 7 years, our centre has been involved in the assessment of a
pedicle screw based gliding anchor that captures one or two rods with a PEEK
cable tie lined with a polyethylene spacer allowing for maximal gliding
properties. Method: We carried out a retrospective analysis of
the first 36 patients with Early Onset scoliosis treated with at least one
TGV in combination with a growing rod construct (Modern Luque Trolley
Growing Rods (MLTGR); Traditional Growing Rods (TGR); Magnetically
Controlled Growing Rods (MCGR); Shilla Growing Rods (SGR). Chart and imaging
were reviewed at our institution between Dec. 2014 and Jan. 2020 for all
patient that had a minimum of two year follow up. We recorded: age at
initial surgery; diagnosis; spinal deformity parameters; surgical technique;
complications as per implant, alignment, wound and medically related.
Planned and unplanned surgeries (UPROR) were also tabulated.
Results: A total of 228 gliding screws (average of 6 screws
(1-10) per pts) were implanted at and around the apex in 36 pts who had
growth sparing surgeries. Average age at implantation was 8.2 (4-11) yrs.
Diagnoses were as follows: 17 pts. had neuromuscular EOS, 15 pts had a
syndromic EOS, while only 4 pts had an idiopathic EOS. The mean follow up
was 3.5 yr (2-7) yr. Surgical technique: 24 patients had MLTGR, 8 pts TGR, 3
MCGR, 1 SGR. Constructs spanned10 vertebrae (7-13). Average growth for self
growing systems (MLTGR) was 0.6 mm/seg/yr while for active distraction
(MCGR, TGR) was 0.8 mm/seg/yr. The number of UPROR in self growing
constructs per patient per category prior to expected skeletal maturity a)
wound: 1 pt; b) implant related: 3 pts (c) alignment issues: 4pts for a
total of 32% (8 UPROR out of 25pt). Number complications requiring UPROR in
active distraction construct per category a) wound: 1pt b) implant related
3pts c) alignment issues: 2 pts for a total of 55% (6 out of 11 pts). Number
of planned returns to OR in self growing construct: 3 pts final fusion av
age 13 yr. old. Number of planned return to surgery in active distraction
construct: 32pts. Discussion / Conclusion: Drawing conclusions
with the current data set is too early as the cohort is too small and lacks
a control group. However, the following trends were found: Overall deformity
correction and maintenance may be slightly better with the addition of
apical gliding screws: our 60% vs 38% for TGR&MGR (SRS 2022 abstract 85)
Average complication rate remains high in EOS with 40% of our patients
having a major complication. Self-guided growth surgery appears to have less
spinal growth but also less planned and unplanned surgery.

## Deformity-Thoracolumbar (Adult)

## 116

## P113: Type 3 bone-disc-bone osteotomy combined with pre-surgical
halo-traction: a safe and effective solution to correct severe angular-like
kyphoscoliosis

Tianyuan Zhang

1

, Wenyuan Sui

1

, Jingfan Yang

1

, Yaolong Deng

1

, and Junlin Yang

1

1

Spine Center, Xinhua Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School
of Medicine, Shanghai, China

Introduction: Treatment of severe angular-like kyphoscoliosis is
a technically demanding surgical challenge and often requires high-risk
vertebral column resection (VCR). Bone-disc-bone osteotomy (BDBO) refers to
the resection of disc and adjacent vertebral endplates and has 3 different
types according to different ranges of resection. The resection ranges of
type 3 BDBO contains three parts: (i) partial vertebral body (includes
pedicles); (ii) superior intervertebral disc; (iii) superior partial
vertebral body (not includes pedicles). For the first time, this study
proposes a novel method that combines type 3 BDBO with pre-surgical
halo-pelvic traction (HPT) and evaluates its safety and effectiveness to
correct severe angular-like kyphoscoliosis. Material and
Methods: Patients with severe angular-like kyphoscoliosis who
underwent pre-surgical HPT and type 3 BDBO from 2017 to 2019 were
retrospectively reviewed. Patients’ demographics and clinical data were
recorded. The coronal Cobb angle and sagittal Cobb angle were measured in
the pre-operation, post-traction, post-operation, and final follow-up.
Complications were also recorded. Patients’ health-related quality of life
was compared by SRS-22 questionnaire. Results: Thirty patients
(18 females and 12 males) were included with an average age of 20.2 years
(range, 13–33 years). The mean preoperative coronal and sagittal Cobb angle
was 123.1° ± 16.4° (range, 90°-155°) and 120.3° ± 19.9° (range, 90°-156°).
After 2.9 ± 0.7 months of (range, 2-4 months) HPT, the coronal and sagittal
Cobb angle decreased significantly to 81.9° ± 13.2° and 76.0° ± 12.6°.
Postoperatively, the scoliotic and kyphotic angle further decreased to 42.4°
± 12.2° and 33.9° ± 8.8°. After mean follow-up of 2.93 ± 1.05 years, the
correction rates maintained at 64.3% ± 10.6% and 70.5% ± 6.3%, respectively,
without obvious correction loss. The mean operative time was 410.8 ± 126.2
minutes (range, 220-660 min), and average estimated blood loss was 1364.2 ±
619.8 mL (range, 600-3000 mL). There were nine patients encountering
positive evoked potential events during surgery. After surgery, five
patients demonstrated different degrees of transient neurological deficits,
including two with lower limbs numbness and three with lower limbs weakness.
All of them recovered within 1 to 6 months of rehabilitation. Respiratory
complications, including 4 pneumonia and 6 pleural effusions, happened. One
patient had surgical site infection postoperatively and we performed
irrigation and debridement. One patient encountered leakage of cerebrospinal
fluid and we performed dural repair. During follow-up, two patients had
unilateral rod fracture but no obvious correction loss, so revision surgery
was not performed. The SRS-22 scores were calculated and compared between
pre-operation and last follow-up. The scores of self-images were
significantly improved from 2.66 ± 0.27 to 3.36 ± 0.23 (p < 0.001). Other
scores showed slightly improvement but with no statistical significance.
Conclusion: This study proposed a novel strategy to correct
severe angular-like spinal deformities. The combination of pre-surgical HPT
and type 3 BDBO achieved substantial correction and satisfactory aesthetic
outcomes. No permanent neurological deficits and serious complications
happened postoperatively. Comparison of this technique with VCR was needed
to further evaluate its efficiency in the future.

## 154

## P114: Clinical and radiographic outcomes in the treatment of patients
with Scheuermann kyphosis using posterior instrumented fusion

Matthew Geck

1

, Devender Singh

1

, John Stokes

1

, Ashley Duncan

1

, and Eeric Truumees

1

1

Spine, Ascension Texas Spine and Scoliosis, Austin, United
States

Introduction: Scheuermann Kyphosis (SK) is one the leading
causes of deformity and back pain in adolescents. Its prevalence is
approximated to be between 0.4% -10%. Several factors may contribute to the
etiology of this disease including genetics, mechanical and growth
abnormalities, poor bone quality etc. Aim: This study reports
the clinical and radiographic outcomes of patients with SK who underwent
posterior instrumented fusion at a single institution. Materials and
Methods: Medical records on 30 patients with SK were reviewed.
Patients ≤ 30 years were included in the study. Age, sex, body mass index
(BMI), operative time, estimated blood loss (EBL), length of hospital stays
(LOS), levels treated, sanders score, preoperative (pre-op) and
postoperative (post-op) thoracic kyphosis (TK) , cobb angle (in case of
scoliosis correction), lumbar lordosis (LL), pelvic incidence (PI), pelvic
tilt (PT), sacral slope (SS), tibial plateau angle (TPA), Scoliosis Research
Society-22r (SRS-22r), Oswestry Disability Index (ODI), Visual Analogue
Scale (VAS) and complications were evaluated. Matched pair t-tests were
conducted for statistical significance (α = 0.05). Results:
Mean patient age was 18.7 years (12-30 yrs.) with 58% being female. Mean BMI
was 24.7 (± 5.3). Mean sanders score was 7.5 (± 1.0). Most treated spinal
level was T3-L3. Post-op follow-up landmarks of our cohort were 21 patients
with less than 2 years and 9 with 2-6 years follow ups. Mean operative time
was 312 (± 35.5) minutes with mean EBL of 406 (± 216 mls). Mean LOS was 5.1
(± 1.4 days). Mean pre-op and the last post-op follow-up TK were 83.7° (±
8.2°), and 43.8 º (± 9.6°), respectively (p < 0.05). Mean correction at
the last visit was 47.1% (± 13%). Similarly, LL were 69.3° (± 7.8°) and
50.2° (± 7.4°), respectively (p < 0.05) with mean correction of 26.9° (±
9.2°). Mean pre-op PI, PT and SS were 37.2° (± 12.6°), 8.6° (± 13.8°) and
27.3° (10.9°), respectively. Post-op last visit mean PI, PT and SS were
38.7° (± 8.4°), 9.7° (± 8.4°), respectively. Nine patients underwent
additional scoliosis correction with mean pre-op and the last visit of 27.5°
(± 10.1°) and 8.4° (± 4.5°), respectively. Mean TPA were 0.9° (± 8.3°) and
8.3° (± 4.2°), respectively. Pre-op mean VAS and ODI scores were 3.4 and
18.1 and 1.9 and 11.3 at the last visit post-op. The mean SRS-22r scores
were 3.7 (± 0.47) and 4.3 (± 0.7), respectively. One patient developed acute
hypercapnic respiratory failure post-op which was associated with
anesthesia/narcotics. Two patients underwent revision: one due to distal
segment breakdown and other developed proximal junction kyphosis/ligamentous
injury. No other complications or revisions were observed in our cohort.
Conclusions: Our cohort data showed that adequate
correction with well-balanced spine can be achieved while preserving the
motion segments and reducing the risk of junctional failure with posterior
instrumented fusion. Patient reported outcomes improved over long run as
indicated by VAS, ODI and SRS scores.

## 259

## P115: Predictive models to assess risk of extended length of stay in
adults with spinal deformity and lumbar degenerative pathology: development
and internal validation

Ayush Arora

1

, Joshua Demb

2

, Daniel Cummins

1

, and Alekos Theologis

1

1

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of California, San
Francisco, United States

2

Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, University of
California, San Diego, United States

Introduction: Post-operative recovery after adult spinal
deformity (ASD) operations is arduous, frought with complications, and often
requires extended hospital stays. A need exists for a method to rapidly
predict patients at risk for extended length of stay (eLOS) in the
preoperative setting. The purpose of this study is to develop a machine
learning model to preoperatively estimate the likelihood of eLOS following
elective multi-level lumbar/thoracolumbar spinal instrumented fusions (≥ 3
segments) for ASD. Material and Methods: Data were collected
retrospectively from a state-level inpatient database hosted by the
Healthcare cost and Utilization Project (HCUP). Included for analysis were
patients of age ≥ 50 with ASD undergoing elective lumbar or thoracolumbar
multi-level instrumented fusions. Predictive variables consisted of
demographics, comorbidities, and operative information. The primary outcome
was eLOS (> 7 days). Significant variables from univariate and
multivariate analyses were used to develop a logistic regression-based
predictive model that utilized six predictors. Model accuracy was assessed
through area under the curve (AUC), sensitivity, and specificity.
Results: 8,866 patients met inclusion criteria. A saturated
logistic model with all significant variables from multivariate analysis was
developed (AUC = 0.77), followed by generation of a simplified logistic
model through stepwise logistic regression (AUC = 0.76). Peak AUC was
reached with inclusion of six selected predictors (combined anterior and
posterior approach, surgery to both lumbar and thoracic regions, ≥ 8 level
fusion, malnutrition, congestive heart failure, and academic institution). A
cutoff of 0.18 for eLOS yielded a sensitivity of 77% and specificity of 68%.
Conclusion: This predictive model can facilitate
identification of adults at risk for eLOS following elective multi-level
lumbar/thoracolumbar spinal instrumented fusions for ASD. With a fair
diagnostic accuracy, the predictive calculator will ideally enable
clinicians to improve preoperative planning, guide patient expectations,
enable optimization of modifiable risk factors, facilitate appropriate
discharge planning, stratify financial risk, and accurately identify
patients who may represent high-cost outliers.

## 263

## P116: Risk factors for extended length of stay and non-home discharge in
adults treated with multi-level fusion for lumbar degenerative pathology and
deformity

Ayush Arora

1

, Aboubacar Wague

1

, Matt Callahan

1

, Thomas Peterson

1

, Alekos Theologis

1

, and Sigurd Berven

1

1

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of California, San
Francisco, United States

Introduction: Surgical intervention for adult spinal deformity
(ASD) patients often necessitates considerable time for recovery in the
hospital and after discharge. Extended length of stay(eLOS) and discharge to
a rehabilitation center following operations for multi-level instrumented
spinal fusions are important outcomes that are significantly associated with
complications and higher costs. There is thus a need to accurately identify
granular risk factors pre-operatively associated with eLOS and non-home
discharges for patients undergoing multi-level fusions for ASD and lumbar
degenerative pathology. The purpose of this study is to identify independent
risk factors, including the Risk Assessment and Prediction Tool (RAPT)
score, associated with eLOS and non-home discharge following elective
multi-level instrumented spine fusion operations for diagnosis of adult
spinal deformity and lumbar degenerative pathology. Material and
Methods: Adults who underwent multi-level (≥3 segments)
instrumented spine fusions for ASD and lumbar degenerative pathology at a
single institution (2016-2021) were reviewed. Presence of a pre-operative
RAPT score was used as an inclusion criterion. Excluded were patients who
underwent non-elective operations, revisions, operations for trauma,
malignancy, and/or infections. Outcomes were eLOS (>7 days) and discharge
location (home vs. non-home). Predictor variables included demographics,
comorbidities, operative information, Surgical Invasiveness Index (SII), and
RAPT score. Fisher’s exact test was used for univariate analysis, and
significant variables were implemented in multivariate binary logistic
regression, with generation of 95% percent confidence intervals (CI), odds
ratios (OR), and p-values. Results: Included for analysis were
355 patients. Post-operatively, 36.6% (n = 130) had eLOS and 53.2% (n = 189)
had a non-home discharge. Risk factors significant for a non-home discharge
were older age (> 70 years), SII > 36, pre-op RAPT < 10, DMII,
diagnosis of depression or anxiety, and eLOS. Risk factors significant for
an eLOS were SII > 20, RAPT < 6, and an ASA score of 3.
Conclusion: The RAPT score and SII were most important
significant predictors of eLOS and non-home discharges following multi-level
instrumented fusions for lumbar spinal pathology and deformity. Preoperative
identification of patients with the significant risk factors identified in
this study is important for financial risk minimization, patient informed
choice, preemptive administration action, and better shared decision-making
ability. Preoperative optimization of the RAPT’s individual components may
provide a useful strategy for decreasing LOS and modifying discharge
disposition.

## 466

## P117: Prospective enrollment of primary vs. revision adult spinal
deformity patients: are they different in their preoperative
characteristics, intraoperative techniques utilized, and early postoperative
complications?

Lawrence Lenke

1

, Fthimnir Hassan

1

, Douglas Burton

2

, Alan Daniels

3

, Munish Gupta

4

, Richard Hostin

5

, Khaled Kebaish

6

, Michael Kelly

4

, Han Jo Kim

7

, Eric Klineberg

8

, Stephen Lewis

9

, Peter Passias

10

, Themistocles Protopsaltis

10

, Frank Schwab

11

, Christopher Shaffrey

12

, Justin Smith

12

, Renaud Lafage

13

, Virginie Lafage

13

, Shay Bess

14

, and International Spine Study Group (ISSG)

15

1

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Columbia University Medical
Center, The Och Spine Hospital at New York-Presbyterian, New York,
United States

2

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Kansas Medical
Center, Kansas City, United States

3

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University Orthopedics,
Providence, United States

4

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Washington University, SOM St.
Louis, United States

5

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Southwest Scoliosis Institute,
Dallas, United States

6

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Johns Hopkins Medical Institute,
Baltimora, United States

7

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Hospital for Special Surgery, New
York, United States

8

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of California, Davis,
United States

9

Department of Surgery and Spine Program, University of Toronto,
Canada

10

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, NYU Hospital for Joint Diseases -
Langone Medical Center, New York, United States

11

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Lenox Hill Hospital, New York,
United States

12

Department of Neurosurgery, University of Virginia Medical Center,
Charlottesville, United States

13

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Northwell Health

14

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Denver International Spine
Center/Presbyterian St. Luke's Medical Center, Denver, United
States

15

International Spine Study Group

Introduction: Adult spinal deformity (ASD) is highly
heterogeneous especially in the setting of Primary (P) versus Revision (R)
surgical patients, but a thorough preoperative, intraoperative and early
postoperative comparison of both groups has not been performed.
Methods: Complex surgical ASD patients were dichotomized as
either P or R if they had a prior thoracolumbar/lumbar (TL/L) surgery. These
outcome domains were evaluated at preop: demographics, radiographs and
health-related quality of life (HRQoL); intraop: surgical techniques and
periop complications; early postop (6 week) complications and interventions
were compared using standard statistical tests. Results: Of the
301 patients enrolled, 164 (55%) were P and 137 (45%) were R. Preoperative
demographics showed the 2 groups differed significantly in BMI (P:26.4 vs
R:28.6; p = 0.006); preoperative morphine mg equivalent (P:15mg vs R:35 mg;
p < 0.0001), and Edmonton Frailty Score (P:2 vs R:4; p < 0.0001).
Radiographic parameters differed significantly in 11/15 (73%) measurements
with P patients having larger coronal curves while R patients had worse
sagittal parameters (eg PI-LL P:12 vs R:26; p < 0.0001). 13/16 (81%)
HRQOL domains were statistically superior in P patients (eg ODI P:37 vs
R:48; p < 0.0000). Intraoperatively, P and R patients all underwent
posterior procedures covering the similar total levels (P:12.8 levels vs
R:12.2 levels; p = 0.66. P patients had more interbody fusions (2.4 levels
vs 1.8 levels; p < 0.001); more PCOs (5.7 vs 2.9, p < 0.0000), more
levels decompressed levels (3.3 vs 2.6, p = 0.006). However, more PSOs were
performed in R patients (p = 0.029). Intraoperative data showed similar OR
times (P:431min vs R:427 min; p = 0.866), EBL (P:1472cc vs R:1623cc; p =
0.163), and PRBC units transfused (P:1.4 vs R:1.7; p = 0.461) between P vs R
groups. 6 week postop complications were similar between both P and R for
all medical and surgical complications except for a higher rate of
implant-related issues in P patients (6/164 = 3.66% vs 0/137 = 0%; p =
0.0334). Conclusion: Preoperatively, Revision ASD patients are
frailer, take more narcotics, have greater sagittal and sacropelvic
radiographic malalignment, and have inferior HRQoL measures compared to
Primary patients. However, perioperative morbidity and early postop
complications are similar between these 2 groups. These findings suggest
that primary and revision ASD patients may need to be investigated
separately with respect to surgical outcome research.

## 553

## P118: Effect of transverse process hook of UIV instruments on prevention
of re-operation associated myelopathy following adult spinal deformity
surgery

Sun Joon Yoo

1

, Kyung-Hyun Kim

1

, Jeong-Yoon Park

1

, Dongkyu Chin

1

, Keun-Su Kim

1

, and Yong-Eun Cho

1

1

Department of Neurosurgery, Gangnam Severance Hospital, Yonsei
University, Seoul, South Korea

Introduction: Proximal junctional kyphosis (PJK) is widely known
as complication after adult spinal deformity (ASD) surgery, and myelopathy
with PJK is the factor that causes re-operation. Less-rigid fixation using
transverse process hooks in UIV is thought to best prevent myelopathy in ASD
surgery. The aim of this study was to compare the incidence of reoperation
associated myelopathy between pedicle screws (PS) and transverse process
hooks (TPH) at uppermost instrumented vertebra (UIV) following ASD surgery.
Material and Methods: We retrospectively reviewed
radiographic and clinical data of 90 consecutive patients (mean age, 68.8
years; mean follow-up period, 24.5 months) who underwent instrumented fusion
from sacrum to thoracic spine for the treatment of ASD with a minimum
24months follow-up. Radiologic outcomes including the incidence of PJK and
clinical outcomes including the presence of postoperative myelopathy were
compared between 33 patients with TPH group and 57 patients with PS group.
Results: The myelopathy did not occur in the TPH group but
occurred 38.6% in the PS group (p < 0.001). In the TPH group, UIV hook
dislodgement in one patient, sacral fracture in one patient, and rod
fracture in one patient. In the PS group, reoperation was performed in
sixteen patients. The change in proximal junctional angle (PJA) pre- and
post-operation were lower in the TPH group (0.2 ± 6.7) than in the PS group
(6.6 ± 10.0, p = 0.002). The surgical outcome was almost same results at
each groups, except back VAS and SRS-22 domains including pain and
satisfaction. The post-operative VAS in the TPH and PS groups were 3.5 and
4.1, respectively (p = 0.010). The pain domain and the satisfaction domain
in SRS-22 were significantly difference in the TPH and PS groups (3.3 vs.
2.9; p = 0.033, 3.7 vs. 3.3; p = 0.041). There was no intergroup difference
in the SF-36. Conclusion: Our results show that using TPH as a
UIV implant can prevent the progress of PJK, reduce the pain, and increase
the patient satisfaction after surgery. The TPH of UIV level can prevent
post-operative myelopathy and prevent the accompanying re-operation.

## 751

## P119: Retrospective case series of expandable meshed bag for vertebral
osteomyelitis interbody fusion and vertebral compression fractures

Zachary Crawford

1

, Brian Johnson

1

, Kellsa Mbah-Feng

1

, Nihar Shah

1

, and Anthony Guanciale

1

1

Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine,
Cincinnati, United States

Introduction: There are multiple techniques and approaches for
insertion of interbody cages to promote fusion, restore alignment, and
support posterior instrumentation. Patients with history of osteoporosis,
end plate injury, or irregular end plates, all of which may limit implant
contact area and stress, are at risk for subsidence and failure of fusion.
OptiMesh deployable grafting system (Spineology Inc., Saint Paul, MN, USA)
has been previously used for interbody fusion, traumatic injuries, and
vertebral compression fracture without subsidence of graft. The objective of
this retrospective case series is to evaluate the need for revision surgery
and post-operative outcomes associated with use of the OptiMesh grafting
system in the setting of vertebral osteomyelitis and traumatic vertebral
compression fractures. Methods: Electronic health record was
queried for patients with OptiMesh implant by orthopaedic spine surgeon.
Patients were included if they underwent vertebroplasty or interbody fusion
with OptiMesh at our institution by an orthopaedic spine surgeon. General
demographic information including age, gender, medical comorbidities,
smoking status, and infectious disease information were collected from
retrospective chart review. The primary outcome was revision surgery.
Secondary outcomes included post-operative infection, any return to the
operating room, and any post-operative complications. Results:
Twenty-five patients underwent vertebroplasty or interbody fusion with
OptiMesh during the study period. The average age was 61.3 years (range
31.7-87.6 years) with 16 males (64%) and 9 females (36%). Nineteen patients
were current or former smokers and 7 patients had diabetes with a hemoglobin
A1c of 7.61% (range 5.7-13.2). The most common indication was infection (12
cases), followed by fracture (8 cases), proximal junctional kyphosis (4
cases), and thoracolumbar scoliosis (2 cases). There were no patients in our
cohort that required a return to the operating room for graft failure or
revision. There were 3 patients with complications of post operative
surgical site infection requiring 4 operative irrigation and debridement.
There were no additional complications. Conclusion: The use of
OptiMesh has previously been studied for vertebral compression fractures and
interbody fusion for degenerative spondylolisthesis. Our limited, case
series retrospective review utilizing this product for vertebral compression
fracture and interbody fusion in the setting of vertebral osteomyelitis has
shown to be a valuable option with limited complications and no revision for
graft subsidence.

## 774

## P120: Is sexual dysfunction an issue after undergoing a C2-sacrum
posterior spinal fusion?

Justin Mathew

1

, Joseph Lombardi

1

, Hannah Lin

1

, Nathan Lee

1

, Venkat Boddapati

1

, Zeeshan Sardar

1

, Lawrence Lenke

1

, and Ronald A. Lehman

1

1

Columbia University, Irving Medical Center, New York, United
States

Summary: Patients who have undergone C2-sacrum posterior spinal
fusion (PSF) generally continue to be sexually active, though nearly all
note some physical limitations during sexual activity.
Hypothesis: Patients who have undergone C2-sacrum PSF
experience postoperative sexual dysfunction. Study Design:
Consecutive case series of open posterior spinal instrumented fusion from
C2-sacrum. Introduction: Patient who have undergone C2-sacrum
posterior spinal fusion (PSF) comprise a poorly studied population.
Limitations in sexual function are unreported in the literature among those
with any major spinal reconstruction. While many of these patients resume
hobbies and activities, they will often query surgeons preoperatively about
their postoperative sexual function. The ability to adequately counsel this
patient population is hampered by the dearth of literature on this subject.
Methods: 25 patients who had undergone C2-sacrum PSF at a
single institution were contacted by email and telephone. A standardized,
validated questionnaire (ASEX) was administered, as well as specific
questions addressing arousal, physical limitations during sex, and sexual
satisfaction. Responses were assigned numerical values and assessed using
descriptive statistics and student’s t test. Sexual dysfunction was defined
as an ASEX score > 19. Results: Of 25 patients who had
undergone C2-sacrum PSF, 60% (15/25) responded. 48% (12/25) were able to
complete to the questionnaire. 8% (2/25) had never had sex (before or after
surgery) and were excluded. 4% (1/25) had an underlying medical condition
and felt unable to answer the questionnaire. The average follow up time was
3.3 ± 1.2 years. Over 90% of respondents had more than two years follow up
since their C2-sacrum PSF. Of those who responded, 33% (4/12) experience
sexual dysfunction as defined by ASEX > 19. Though the ASEX questionnaire
generally addresses arousal, the responses did not differ significantly from
the responses to our tailored questions (p = 0.28). Of the patients who
reported being in the upper quartile of difficulty with physical limitations
(discomfort, muscle tightness, or motion restriction), only one had sexual
dysfunction. 92% of the respondents report return to sexual activity
following C2-sacrum PSF. Conclusion: This is the first study to
evaluate sexual dysfunction after a C2-sacrum fusion. Interestingly, 92% of
those who underwent C2-sacrum PSF report a return to sexual activity, with
only 33% demonstrating sexual dysfunction.
Take Home Message: Nearly all patients who have undergone C2-sacrum PSF
remain sexually active, though with limitations and changes in their sex
lives.

## 816

## P121: Skin adhesive tapes are an effective wound closure method for
percutaneous vertebral body stenting: a retrospective cohort study

Cassie Yang

1

, Theophilus Qiu

2

, Reuben Soh

1

, and Youheng Ou Yang

1

1

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Singapore General Hospital,
Singapore, Singapore

2

Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore,
Singapore, Singapore

Introduction: Percutaneous Vertebral Body Stenting (VBS) is
performed via a balloon-expandable metallic stent introduced through a stab
incision. It aims to reduce and maintain the reduction of vertebral body
fractures, as well as minimise bone cement extravasation. The delivery of
the balloon and stent implant requires the insertion of a larger access kit
as compared to traditional vertebroplasty (PVP) systems (4.7 vs 2.59mm
diameter, 330% increase in surface area). The larger skin incision, soft
tissue disruption and pedicle bore tract with exposed raw bone increases the
risk of bleeding and wound complications. Skin Adhesive Tapes (SATs) are
effective in treating small non-gaping wounds and have been used as a method
of wound closure for PVP. This study aims to evaluate the use of SATs in
closure of larger VBS wounds. Methods: A retrospective cohort
of patients who underwent percutaneous VBS (DePuy Synthes, USA) was obtained
from electronic medical records of patients treated at a tertiary hospital
from May 2019 to March 2021. Data was collected for wound closure method
(conventional non-absorbable suture closure, SAT closure), number of
operative levels and postoperative skin-related wound complications, wound
dehiscence, wound infection, postoperative bleeding, symptomatic haematomas
and return to operating theatre. At clinic follow-up post-discharge, the
wounds were also reviewed for complete healing and unsightly scarring
requiring wound revision. SAT closure was performed by applying 3 strips of
SATs to loosely oppose the wound edges. Results: 36 patients
were identified with 45 levels of VBS performed. 3 (8.3%) patients received
conventional suture closure, 33 (91.6%) received SAT closure. Conventional
suture closure was performed in view of ongoing bleeding at the wound site
for 2 patients who had coagulopathy. The remaining patient received a
planned suture closure in view of surgical expediency as part of a staged
procedure. 32 (97.0%) of SAT closures were uneventful. 1 (3.0%) patient
developed blood soaked dressings that required early removal and
reapplication of the SATs at the ward a day later with uneventful recovery
thereafter. No patient with SAT closure developed any surgical site
infection, wound dehiscence, symptomatic haematoma or required return to
theatre. All SAT closure patients had complete wound healing at outpatient
follow up with no wound revision for cosmesis. Conclusion: SATs
are a simple, safe and effective means of wound closure for the majority of
percutaneous VBS procedures. Patients who could not undergo SAT closure had
pre-existing coagulopathy or had been planned for additional procedures.

## 874

## P122: No significant radiological signs of adult spinal deformity
progression after a mean of 11 years of follow-up following Harrington rod
instrumentation removal: a single-institution case series

Peter Brumat

1

, Janez Mohar

1

, Dejan Čeleš

1

, Nikša Hero

1

, and Matevž Topolovec

1

1

Department of Spine Surgery, Valdoltra Orthopaedic Hospital,
Ankaran, Slovenia

Introduction: Instrumentation with Harrington rod used to be the
standard of care for scoliosis treatment in children. Such a method of
spinal instrumentation is frequently associated with residual deformity and
sagittal malalignment in adults. The adult spinal deformity can be managed
with nonsurgical methods or surgical treatment. Surgical correction for
Harrington rod instrumentation sequelae presents a challenge in adult spinal
deformity surgery due to complex conditions involving residual structural
alterations and technically demanding procedures frequently needing
osteotomies, with the high surgical risk involved. Although surgical
treatment may be better than nonsurgical methods for improving the function
of patients with adult spinal deformity and achieving good pain improvement
and deformity correction, the surgical treatment of adult spine deformity
correlates with frequent complications, substantial financial burden, and
resource utilization. Our study aimed to assess radiological outcomes in
patients from our institution who were treated primarily for adolescent
idiopathic scoliosis with surgical correction using Harrington rod
instrumentation and secondarily with conservative management of residual
spinal deformity after Harrington rod removal, whereby no patient consented
to adult spinal deformity correction. Material and Methods: We
evaluated single-institution case series of 12 adult patients after a mean
of 11 years of follow-up following Harrington rod instrumentation removal,
with a minimum 1 year of follow-up. Preoperative and most recent
post-instrumentation removal radiographic measurements were obtained and
compared, along with baseline demographics. Results: The
average age of patients (all females) at the time of instrumentation removal
was 38 ± 10 years, the average BMI was 25 ± 6, and the average ASA physical
status score was 2 ± 1. The mean follow-up from the Harrington rod
instrumentation implantation to the Harrington rod instrumentation removal
was 21 ± 10 years, with a further mean of 11 ± 10 years following
instrumentation removal. No significant change in radiological
parameters was observed.: LL (p = 0.433), TK (p = 0.173), PT (p = 0.260), SS
(p = 0.076), PI (p = 0.210), PI-LL mismatch (p = 0.504), SVA (p = 0.218),
C7-CSVL (p = 0.370), SSA (p = 1.000), C7 ratio (p = 0.099), and coronal Cobb
angle (proximal (p = 0.488), main thoracic (p = 0.130) and lumbar (p =
0.317)). Conclusion: This study suggests that adults with no
significant change in coronal or sagittal parameters following Harrington
rod instrumentation removal may be amenable to conservative management of
residual spinal deformity if surgical correction of spinal deformity is not
consented to.

## 946

## P123: Using proximal hooks as a soft-landing strategy for prevention of
proximal junctional kyphosis in the surgical treatment of Scheuermann's
kyphosis

Alim Can Baymurat

1

, Aliekber Yapar

2

, Mehmet Tokgoz

1

, İsmail Daldal

3

, Yagiz Akcan

1

, and Alpaslan Senkoylu

1

1

Department of Orthopedics and Traumatology, Gazi University Faculty
of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey

2

Department of Orthopedics and Traumatology, Health Sciences
University, Antalya Education and Research Hospital, x Antalya,
Turkey

3

Department of Orthopedics and Traumatology, Ankara Lokman Hekim Akay
Hospital, Ankara, Turkey

Introduction: PJK after surgical treatment of SK still remains a
serious problem, although good results have been reported in the literature.
For preventing the PJK in SK surgery, some spine surgeons use hook fixation
in the upper end as a soft-landing strategy. The current study mainly
focused on PJK development and aimed to compare the clinical and
radiological outcomes of only pedicle screw constructs and hybrid constructs
with hooks for the treatment of SK. Hypothesis: There is no
difference in long-term results between only pedicle screw constructs, and
hybrid fixation with hooks in terms of proximal junctional kyphosis (PJK)
development after Scheuermann's kyphosis (SK) surgery. Study
Design: A retrospective case series with a minimum of 2 years of
follow-up. Material and Methods: The data of 22 only pedicle
screws (14 men and 8 women; mean age: 26.58 ± 7.55 years) and 15 hybrid
constructs with hooks and pedicle screws (8 men and 7 women; mean age: 25.46
± 9.04 years) implanted patients who underwent corrective surgery for SK
between January 2005 and December 2019 were reviewed. The preoperative,
early postoperative, and minimum 24-month follow-up radiographs and the
Scoliosis Research Society-22 (SRS-22) scores were evaluated. The C7
sagittal vertical axis (C7-SVA), T2-T12 kyphosis angle, proximal and distal
junctional angles were measured. The radiological differences between
preoperative, early postoperative, and last follow-up X-Ray evaluations were
compared. Results: While the mean follow-up period of the
pedicle screw group was 94.7 ± 53.1 months, it was 103 ± 64.4 months in the
hybrid group. As a result of the analyzes performed, no statistically
significant result was observed in the measurements made in the SRS-22 total
score and subscores, preoperative, postoperative, and last follow-up
radiographs (p>0.05). The change in proximal and distal junctional
kyphosis angles (p: 0.045, p: 0.03, respectively) increased more than hybrid
structures in patients who only used pedicle screws.
Conclusion: Although there was no significant difference
between the two groups, the PJK angle was found higher in patients with
pedicle screw fixation. Therefore, PJK development should be carefully
followed when pedicle screw fixation is used in the upper segment.
Furthermore, using hooks at the upper end seems to prevent PJK.

## 962

## P124: Effect of the brace on apical vertebra in adolescent idiopathic
scoliosis

Alim Can Baymurat

1

, Mehmet Tokgoz

1

, İsmail Daldal

2

, and Alpaslan Senkoylu

1

1

Department of Orthopedics and Traumatology, Gazi University Faculty
of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey

2

Department of Orthopedics and Traumatology, Ankara Lokman Hekim Akay
Hospital, Ankara, Turkey

Introduction: Scoliosis is a three-dimensional spinal deformity.
The brace application is widely used in the control of spinal curvatures in
the coronal plane in suitable scoliosis patients. In the current study, it
was aimed to evaluate the effect of corset (Boston type) use on the apical
vertebra in patients treated conservatively for Adolescent Idiopathic
Scoliosis (AIS) and to evaluate the effect of the Scoliosis Research
Society's Health-Related Quality of Life-22 (SRS-22) questionnaire.
Material and Methods: The current study was conducted in
Gazi University Faculty of Medicine - Department of Orthopedics and
Traumatology between 2010-2020 and conservatively treated patients with a
Boston type brace for at least 2 years with the diagnosis of AIS were
included in the study (Mean age: 12.2 ± 1.3, – 43 Female, 8 male). Before
the brace, early in-brace, and at the last follow-up whole spinal
radiographs of the patients were evaluated. Apical vertebral rotation (AVR)
was evaluated according to the Nash Moe classification. Besides, the apical
vertebral translation (AVT), which is the distance between the apical
vertebra to the central sacral perpendicular line, was measured. The SRS-22
questionnaire was performed to evaluate the patients' quality of life and
their perception of deformity. Results: The mean follow-up
period was 32.4 ± 8.7 (24-52) months, the AVR before the brace was 2.1 ±
0.6, while it was 1.14 ± 0.5 in the brace. At the last control, AVR was
measured as 1.3 ± 0.5 (p < 0.001). While the AVT before the brace was
36.4 ± 9.6, it was measured as 16.7 ± 7.3 with the brace (p < 0.001). At
the last follow-up, the AVT was determined as 19.8 ± 8.1 (p < 0.001). A
significant improvement was observed in cobb angles in thoracic,
thoracolumbar, and lumbar curvatures compared to pre-corset period (p <
0.001). Pain, function, and satisfaction domains of the patients reached
satisfying levels according to normative data of SRS-22. On the other hand,
the means of mental health and self-image domains were fall short of the
mark. Conclusion: In the study, it was observed that the use of
a brace in the conservative treatment of AIS was effective in controlling
the coronal curve of thoracic, thoracolumbar, and lumbar curves, as well as
in correcting the rotation and translation of the apical vertebrae. There
was no corrective effect on upper thoracic curvatures.

## 1029

## P125: Comparison of posterior vs double appoach in the treatment of adult
degenerative scoliosis

Clauio Mauricio Uribe Alpizar

1

, Alejandro Reyes-Sánchez

1

, and Carla Garcia Ramos

1

1

Orthopedic, National Institute of Rehabilitation, Mexico City,
Mexico

Introduction: An increase in the adult population is currently
occurring worldwide. World literature has identified that the prevalence of
scoliosis increases with age and that curvatures may appear in a previously
aligned spine, unlike idiopathic scoliosis in young people, it presents with
pain and disability in adults. Currently, a prevalence in the population of
2 to 32% is reported in those over 50 years of age and up to 60% in those
over 60 years of age. Given that its main symptom is pain, this condition
has an impact on the quality of life of those who suffer it, limiting their
personal and work activities, becoming disabling. It is most frequently
observed in adult patients of productive age, progressing with disability.
Previous studies have shown that scoliotic curvature correction is over 70%
with a double approach vs. 44% with a posterior approach. Controversy exists
regarding lordosis, complications, pseudoarthrosis and complication rate.
This research proposes to carry out a comparative study between the
clinical, radiological and functional results of two surgical techniques and
their variants, as well as to establish if there is correspondence between
the radiographic changes and the clinical situation of the patient. The
number of studies comparing the posterior approach with a dual approach for
management of adult degenerative scoliosis is minimal. When searching with
the search terms: "surgery" + "degenerative scoliosis" + "double approach"
search in PubMed, Google Scholar, Ovid, Cochrane we obtained a total of 11
references, however, when we searched the Mexican literature, we did not
find any reference to the subject. Therefore, we conclude that there is no
precedent where the results of double surgical treatment in patients with
this disease are analyzed in our country. Material and Methods:
Prospective, longitudinal, comparative controlled study with two-year
follow-up, In adult degenerative scoliosis, divided into two groups Group I
treated with posterior approach and Group 2 treated with double approach. 43
patients with an average age of 63.2 years, 30 women (69.76%), with curves
with magnitude from 10 to 42°. 35 were subjected to a posterior approach,
while 8 were treated with a double approach (ALPA + posterior).
Results: The Roland-Morris scale in group 1 was 13.17
(0-22), and at 2 years 9.75 (0-22) for group 2 with a preoperative mean of
14.71 (8-20) and 7.28 (0-14) at 2 years. No statistical significance between
groups (p = 0.356). The Oswestry in preoperative group 2 patients was 49.71
(26-74); 2 years in 21.85 (2-44). For group 1 in 54.27 (18-82), and 35.51
(2-82) in 2 years. Pelvic parameters have no difference and only correction
of scoliosis and sagittal balance was better in the double-approach group.
Conclusions: The ALPA + posterior approaches, compared to
only the posterior approach, have an advantage in reducing the magnitude of
scoliosis and restoring sagittal balance. In terms of quality of life and
perception of pain, both approaches show to be equally effective.

## 1078

## P126: Surgical treatment of ankylosing spondylitis complicated with
thoracolumbar sagittal-coronal deformity

Tao Xu

1

, Xiaoyu Cai

1

, Jarkenay Abudulayi

2

, and Weibin Sheng

1

1

Department of Spine Surgery, Urumqi, China

2

Department of Breast Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Xinjiang
Medical University, Urumqi, China

Introduction: To investigate the incidence and clinical
characteristics of coronal imbalance in patients with ankylosing spondylitis
(AS) complicated with thoracolumbar sagittal coronal deformity, and to
explore the surgical methods and clinical efficacy in patients with AS
complicated with thoracolumbar sagittal coronal deformity. Material
and Methods: The case data of 22 patients (17 males and 5
females) with AS complicated with kyphosis from January 2010 to January 2021
were retrospectively analyzed. The average age was 40.3 ± 6.5 years (range,
27-61 years). All patients were measured coronal parameters: coronal balance
distance (CBD); coronal imbalance angle (CIA) and sagittal parameters:
C7-SVA, global kyphosis (GK), thoracolumbar kyphosis (TLK), thoracic
kyphosis (TK), lumbar lordosis (LL), pelvic incidence (PI), pelvic
inclination (PT), sacral inclination (SS). Paired t-test was used for
statistical analysis. Results: Ten patients (45.5%) were type A
and 12 patients (54.5%) were type B. All patients underwent PSO osteotomy to
correct sagittal and coronal deformities. All 22 cases were successfully
operated, including 19 cases of one-stage operation and 3 cases of staged
operation. The operation time ranged from 185 to 405 minutes (mean 215
minutes). The intraoperative blood loss was 450-1200ml (mean 550 ml). There
were 8-16 fixed fusion segments, with an average of 10.8 segments. The mean
follow-up time was 39.0 ± 13.8 months (range: 12-131 months). CBD was
corrected from 10.07 ± 6.68 cm to 3.21 ± 2.01 cm and 3.33 ± 2.0 cm. CIA
improved from 18.16 ± 5.23° to 6.11 ± 3.78° and 5.99 ± 3.74°. C7-SVA was
corrected from 24.38 ± 8.65 cm to 10.7 ± 5.15 cm. GK was corrected from
61.52 ± 15.38° to 24.66 ± 13.24°. TLK was corrected from 54.99 ± 11.73° to
19.68 ± 12.19°. TK was corrected from 56.64 ± 6.54° to 41.51 ± 9.9°. LL was
corrected from 12.56 ± 8.57° to -32.64 ± 18.21°. PI was corrected from 44.64
± 8.57° preoperatively to 45.56 ± 9.5°. PT was corrected from 35.39 ± 9.59°
to 27.65 ± 6.98°. SS was corrected from 14.12 ± 8.63° to 17.97 ± 9.36°.
Significant differences were observed between the postoperative and
preoperative deformities except for PI and SS. At the last follow-up, the
correction rates of CBD, CIA, C7-SVA and GK were 80.2%, 76.2%, 76.1% and
58.9%, respectively. The mean VAS score of 22 patients was (7.42 ± 1.37)
preoperative and (4.22 ± 0.98) at the last follow-up with significant
difference (t = 20.249, P = 0.000). The average ODI was 58.68% ± 7.45%
preoperative and 26.52% ± 4.21% at the last follow-up significantly (t =
42.543, P = 0.000). The mean score of SRS⁃22 was 9.62 ± 3.06 preoperatively,
which was improved to 22.84 ± 3.15 at the last follow-up significantly (t =
25.023, p = 0.000). Perioperative complications occurred in 7 patients
(32%). Conclusion: A distance of more than 3cm between the C7
plumb line and the sacral midline was used as a diagnostic criterion for
coronal disequilibrium. Asymmetrical PSO osteotomy was used to correct
coronal imbalance at the apex of coronal imbalance, and CWO osteotomy was
used to correct kyphosis at the apex of sagittal kyphosis. For type A
patients with single-segment PSO osteotomy, asymmetrical COWO osteotomy was
used to correct both sagittal and coronal imbalance at the apex of sagittal
and coronal imbalance. The evaluation of intraoperative coronal balance by
point-line method can effectively reduce the incidence of postoperative
coronal imbalance in patients with AS complicated with sagittal and coronal
imbalance.

## 1109

## P127: Physiotherapy scoliosis specific exercise improves pelvic obliquity
in adults with idiopathic scoliosis

Charles Impey

1

, Georgina Frere

1

, Erika Maude

1

, Zion Hwang

1

, Emily Tsang

1

, Priyanshu Saha

1

, Bisola Ajayi

1

, Timothy Bishop

1

, Jason Bernard

1

, and Darren Lui

1

1

St George's University Hospital, London, United Kingdom

Introduction: Pelvic obliquity (PO) contributes to altered gait
patterns, causing asymmetrical loading, increased muscular work, and
prolonged activation of lumbar muscles. It can cause waistline asymmetry
which is a well-documented complaint in scoliosis. This study aimed to
determine the effects of an intensive course of Physiotherapy Scoliosis
Specific Exercise (PSSE) on PO in patients with idiopathic scoliosis (IS).
Method: Consecutive patients with IS with primary
thoraco-lumbar or lumbar curvatures completing an intensive course of PSSE
over a 4-week timeframe between April 2019 and December 2021 were recruited.
Patients who had undergone bracing treatment or surgery for scoliosis were
excluded. All patients were routinely scanned using a Formetric Scanner pre-
and post-treatment. The PO, expressed in millimetres, was documented. Adults
(>17 years old) (group 1) and children (group 2) were analysed
separately. Results: In Group 1 (n = 19) the ages ranged from
18 to 73 with a median age of 25. 89.5% were female. The average Cobb angle
was 36.3°. There was a 35% improvement in PO from 6.63mm (SD = 4.3)
pre-treatment to 4.32mm (SD = 10.23) post-treatment (p < 0.05). In Group
2 (n = 31) the ages ranged from 8 to 16 with a median age of 14. 90% were
female. The average Cobb angle was 31.3°. There was a 23% improvement in PO
from 4.68mm (SD = 4.14) pre-treatment to 3.58mm (SD = 2.51) post-treatment
(p = 0.09). Conclusion and Significance: An intensive course of
PSSE has shown to improve PO in adult patients with IS. This can contribute
to improving the patients’ biomechanics and self-image and therefore
health-related quality of life.

## 1114

## P128: Physiotherapy scoliosis specific exercise improves truncal shift in
idiopathic scoliosis

Charles Impey

1

, Georgina Frere

1

, Erika Maude

1

, Zion Hwang

1

, Emily Tsang

1

, Priyanshu Saha

1

, Jason Bernard

1

, Timothy Bishop

1

, and Darren Lui

1

1

St George's University Hospital, London, United Kingdom

Introduction: Truncal shift caused by scoliosis can be measured
with a Formetric Scanner using the Maximal Thoracic Apical Deviation (MTAD)
measurement. It is an important measure in pre-operative assessment and
post-operative outcomes. The aim of this retrospective cohort study was to
determine the effectiveness of Physiotherapy Scoliosis Specific Exercise in
improving MTAD in patients with idiopathic scoliosis (IS).
Methods: Consecutive patients with IS with right-sided
thoracic major curvatures, completing an intensive course of PSSE over a
4-week timeframe between April 2019 and December 2021 were recruited.
Patients who had undergone bracing treatment or surgery for scoliosis were
excluded. All patients were routinely scanned using a Formetric Scanner pre-
and post-treatment. MTAD, measured in millimetres was documented. Adults
(>17 years old) (group 1) and children (group 2) were analysed
separately. Results: In Group 1 (n = 20) the ages ranged from
20 to 79 with a median age of 29.5. 84% were female. The average Cobb angle
was 44.1°. There was a 19.1% improvement in MTAD from 40.05mm (SD = 17.67)
pre-treatment to 32.42mm (SD = 13.46) post-treatment (p < 0.05). In Group
2 (n = 20) the ages ranged from 8 to 16 with a median age of 13. 95% were
female. The average Cobb angle was 42.6°. There was an 18.2% improvement in
MTAD from 35.65mm (SD = 10.10) pre-treatment to 29.15mm (SD = 12.87)
post-treatment (p < 0.005). Significance and Conclusion:
PSSE significantly improves MTAD in both adults and children with IS and
therefore may aid in enhancing surgical outcomes.

## 1133

## P129: Analysis of the difference in sitting ability based on fusion level
in patients with adult spinal deformity corrective surgery

Jaeyoung So

1

 and Kyung-Hyun Kim

1

1

Department of Neurosurgery, Spine and Spinal Cord Institute, Gangnam
Severance Hospital, Seoul, South Korea

Introduction: There is still debate how surgeons could decide
treatment methods for adult spinal deformity, operatively or not. There was
lack of information how long level fusion impacts daily activities,
especially sitting ability. The primary goal of surgical arthrodesis is to
eliminate the motion of spinal segments in an effort to alleviate pain,
improve deformity, and reduce disability. However, decreased spinal mobility
may impair performance of activities of daily living due to the resulting
stiffness or the lack of mobility of the fused segment. We aimed to assess
the sitting ability in patients undergoing adult spinal deformity corrective
surgery, comparing L4-5 or L3-4-5 fusion, L4-5 or L4-5-S1 lumbar fusion
surgeries through a patient-reported outcome questionnaire measuring the
impact of lumbar stiffness. Materials and Methods: A total 113
patients, who underwent adult spinal deformity corrective surgery, 1 or 2
levels of fusion including L4 and L5 without sacropelvic fixation (L4-5 or
L3-4-5 fusion), and 1 or 2 levels of fusion including L5 and S1 with
sacropelvic fixation (L5-S1 or L4-5-S1 fusion) in our neurosurgery clinic.
Data of the patients were obtained from electronic patients records and
Sitting ability questionnaire. Patients were divided into three groups, each
consisting of 47 patients, who underwent L4-5 fusion or L3-4-5 fusion (L4-5
Group), 33 patients who underwent L5-S1 fusion or L4-5-S1 fusion (L5-S1
Group) and, 33 patients who underwent adult spinal deformity corrective
surgery (Deformity Group). We investigate the basic demographics (age,
gender, follow duration, etc.), Sitting ability score and Lifestyle through
Sitting ability questionnaire. The factors affecting sitting ability were
also investigated. Results: The average sitting ability score
was 80.67 ± 14.28 for L4-5 Group, 79.48 ± 16.25 for L5-S1 Group, 60.70 ±
19.75 for Deformity Group, respectively. There was no significant difference
between L4-5 Group and L5-S1 Group (p = 0.753). There were significant
differences between L4-5 Group and Deformity Group (p < 0.0001), between
L5-S1 Group and Deformity Group (p < 0.0001). The mean follow-up duration
was 70.25 ± 38.80 months for L4-5 Group, 75.27 ± 59.53 months for L5-S1
Group, 40.86 ± 20.80 months for Deformity Group, respectively and there was
significant difference among these groups. (p < 0.0001).
Conclusion: Multilevel lumbar fusion significantly limits
the lumbar mobility and affects the ability to compensate postural changes.
Reducing the fusion segments as much as possible is of particular value in
preserving lumbar mobility and maintaining the compensatory mechanism of
spinopelvis. Not only the fusion level, but also the sitting ability will be
different with the difference of UIV and LIV level, so this should be
considered during lumbar fusion surgery.

## 1196

## P130: Unplanned reoperation and readmission following adult spinal
deformity surgery: an analysis over 8,500 spinal deformity patients

Daniel Gallagher

1

, William Huffman

2

, Jacob Harris

2

, Rex Marco

3

, Paul Holman

3

, and Comron Saifi

4

1

Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Rutgers University, New
Brunswick, United States

2

Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, United States

3

Department of Orthopedics and Sports Medicine

4

Spine Surgery, Houston Methodist Hospital, Houston, United
States

Introduction: It was estimated that 30-day readmissions across
all specialties resulted in $41.3 billion in hospital costs in 2011.
Unplanned reoperations require additional resources and add further
financial strain on the healthcare system and patients. The utilization of
Adult Spinal Deformity (ASD) surgery has been rapidly growing but, the
complication rate remains high. Although prior research has identified
factors associated with adverse outcomes of spinal deformity surgery, the
few studies that have evaluated factors predictive of reoperation and
readmission rates included fewer than 800 patients, limiting their
statistical power to detect infrequent predictors. The purpose of this study
is to use the American College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality
Improvement Program (ACS NSQIP) to identify risk factors associated with
unplanned reoperation and readmission within 30 days following surgical
correction of ASD with ≥ 7 levels of correction. A reoperation rate of 5%
and a readmission rate of 10% were hypothesized based on prior literature.
Materials and Methods: A retrospective observational study
was conducted using the ACS-NSQIP database for patients undergoing ASD
surgery from 2010 to 2019. The NSQIP database collects more than 150
variables from over 600 participating hospitals in the United States. Each
participating site has a trained and certified surgical clinical reviewer to
extract preoperative to 30-day postoperative data for randomly assigned
patients. The NSQIP has developed multiple processes to optimize accuracy
and reliability of data collection, including an inter-rater reliability
audit of selected sites. Using the ACS-NSQIP participant user file, patients
from participating institutions, aged 18 years and older having surgical
correction of ASD with ≥ 7 levels of correction, were identified using
Current Procedural Terminology (CPT) codes 22843 and 22844. Methods were
conducted in accordance with the Strengthening the Reporting of
Observational Studies in Epidemiology (STROBE) guidelines.
Results: 8,533 patients met the inclusion criteria, with a
mean age of 62 years and a female predominance (55%). The 30-day unplanned
reoperation and readmission rates were 7.55% and 9.72%, with 13.43% having
either an unplanned reoperation or readmission. Independent predictors of
both reoperation and readmission were African American race, bleeding
disorders, and chronic steroid use. Independent predictors of unplanned
reoperation alone included >10% loss of body weight in last 6 months and
emergency cases. Independent predictors of readmission alone included
disseminated cancer, partially dependent functional status, and totally
dependent functional status. The most frequent reoperation was incision and
drainage (8.07%). The most common causes of readmission were surgical site
infection (SSI) (16.89%) and wound disruption (4.70%).
Conclusion: Patients undergoing spine surgery for adult
spinal deformity with >6 levels of instrumentation had an 8% and 10% rate
of unplanned reoperation and readmission, respectively. There was a 13% rate
of either unplanned reoperation or readmission. African American race,
bleeding disorders, disseminated cancer, immunosuppressant use for a chronic
condition, and lower functional status were the most significant predictors
of 30-day unplanned reoperation or readmission. These individual factors
were associated with increases in the rates of reoperation or readmission of
36-152%. SSI was the most common reason for both reoperation and
readmission.

## 1263

## P131: The summit versus the base: which aspect of the construct has more
influence on the development of proximal junctional kyphosis following adult
spinal deformity surgery?

Peter Passias

1

, Tyler Williamson

1

, Bailey Imbo

1

, Pooja Dave

1

, Peter Tretiakov

1

, Kimberly McFarland

1

, Jamshaid Mir

1

, Andrew Schoenfeld

2

, Stephane owusu-saprong

1

, Jordan Lebovic

1

, Shaleen Vira

3

, Bassel Diebo

4

, Justin Smith

5

, Virginie Lafage

6

, and Renaud Lafage

6

1

NYU Langone Medical Center, New York, United States

2

Brigham and Women’s Hospital/Harvard Medical Center, Boston, United
States

3

UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, United States

4

SUNY Downstate Medical Center, New York, United States

5

University of Virginia, Charlottesville, United States

6

Lenox Hill Hospital, New York, United States

Purpose: Evaluate the surgical technique that has greatest
influence on the rate of junctional failure following ASD surgery.
Introduction: Due to the severity and complexity of adult
spinal deformity (ASD), differing presentations may influence the extent of
surgical intervention and use of prophylaxis at the base or the summit of a
fusion construct to influence junctional failure rates. It is unclear
whether interventions at the base, summit or both are needed to effectively
mitigate junctional failure. Methods: ASD patients with 2Y data
and at least 5-level fusion to pelvis were included. Patients were divided
based on UIV: [Longer Construct: T1-T4; Shorter Construct: T8-T12].
Parameters assessed included matching in age-adjusted PI-LL or PT, aligning
in GAP-Relative Pelvic Version or Lordosis Distribution Index. Combination
of realigning the two parameters with the greatest minimizing effect of PJF
constituted a Good Base. Good Summit defined as having all 3: 1) prophylaxis
at UIV (tethers, hooks, cement), 2) no lordotic change (under-contouring)
greater than 10° of the UIV during surgery, 3) preoperative UIV inclination
angle < 30°. Multivariable regression analysis assessed effects of
junction characteristics and radiographic correction individually and
collectively on development of PJK and PJF in differing construct lengths,
adjusting for confounders. Results: 261 patients were included,
with 38% developing PJK, 10% developing PJF. The cohort that had summit and
base addressed had lower odds of PJK (OR: 0.5, [0.2-0.9]) and PJF was less
likely (OR: 0.1, [0.0-0.7]; p = .014) in the presence of a Good Summit.
Normalizing pelvic compensation had the greatest radiographic effect on
preventing PJF overall (OR: 0.6, [0.3-1.0]; p = .044). Stratifying by UIV,
114 were Longer Constructs, 147 Shorter Constructs. In Shorter Constructs,
realignment had greater effect on decreasing the odds of PJF (OR: 0.2,
[0.02-0.9]; p = .036). With Longer Constructs, a Good Summit lowered
likelihood of PJK (OR: 0.3, [0.1-0.9]; p = .027). Good Base had reducing
effects on PJF (0% vs. 20%, p < .001). In patients with severe
frailty/osteoporosis, a Good Summit lowered rates of PJK (20.0% vs. 39.3%, p
= .017) and PJF (4.0% vs. 13.4%, p = .020). Conclusion: To
mitigate junctional failure, our study demonstrated the utility of
individualizing surgical approaches to emphasize an optimal basal construct.
Achievement of tailored goals at the cranial end of the surgical construct
may be equally important, especially for higher risk patients with longer
fusions.

## 1316

## P132: Maintenance of pelvic tilt normalization following adult spinal
deformity corrective surgery: analysis of prevalence, timing, and predictors
influencing occurrence

Peter Passias

1

, Pooja Dave

1

, Peter Tretiakov

1

, Jamshaid Mir

1

, Kimberly McFarland

1

, Andrew Schoenfeld

2

, Bassel Diebo

3

, Renaud Lafage

4

, Virginie Lafage

4

, and Shaleen Vira

5

1

NYU Langone Medical Center, New York, United States

2

Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, United States

3

Warren Alpert Medical School, Providence, United States

4

Lenox Hill Hospital, New York, United States

5

UT Southwestern, Dallas, TX, United States

Introduction: Increasing pelvic tilt (PT) is a primary
compensatory mechanism in adult spinal deformity (ASD). Some ASD patients
improve their PT following ASD correction, while others do not. The driving
forces behind this lack of PT-response are not well defined.
Hypothesis: To determine the surgical and
radiographic parameters associated with and predict maintaining PT
normalization after ASD corrective surgery.
Methods: ASD patients fused to S1/pelvis with
full preoperative data as well as preoperative (BL), 6-week (6W), and 2-year
(2Y) post-op PT measurements were included. Patients were stratified into
four groups based on PT measurements at 6 week and 2 year follow-up: Early
Normalization with PT < 20° by 6 weeks (PTNorm6w); Delayed Normalization
with PT < 20° by 2 years (PTNorm2y); Non-normalized with PT >20° by 2
years (Non); Reversal Normalization with PT < 20° by 6 weeks and PT
>20° by 2 years (RevNorm). Univariate analyses were used to compare
normalized (PTNorm6w and PTNorm2Y) and non-normalized (Non and RevNorm) in
terms of postoperative alignment (PI-LL, SVA, and GAP score) and clinical
outcomes (complication rates, HRQL). Multivariable logistic regression were
used to develop a model consisting of significant predictors for 6 week and
2 year normalization. Results: 253 ASD patients met inclusion
criteria (64.6 ± 9.06 years, 79% female, BMI 27.9 ± 5.57 kg/m2, CCI: 1.9 ±
1.6, levels fused 11.8 ± 4.4, EBL: 1841.6 mL, op time: 449.6 min). Mean PT
was as follows: BL: 30.5°, 6W: 22.5°, and 2Y: 25°. By SRS-Schwab criteria
(Normal: PT < 20°; Moderate: PT 20-30°; Severe: PT > 30°), 56.5% (n =
143) had a moderate pelvic tilt at baseline and 43.5% (n = 110) had severe
pelvic tilt at baseline. 37.9% (n = 96) were normalized at 6 weeks and 6.3%
(n = 16) normalized between 6 weeks and 2 years, with a total of 43.1% (n =
109) normalized by 2 years. 33 (13%) had reversal of normalization at 2
years. PT6WNorm and PT2YNorm groups were more likely to be overcorrected in
radiographic goals including PI-LL, SVA, and PT at 6 weeks (p < .05). GAP
score at 6 weeks (.55 vs 1.34, p = 0.08) was greater for non-normalized
patients. RevNorm patients had significantly lower PI (56.5 vs 61.6, p <
.05) and GAP score (1 vs 1.5, p < .05) compared those achieving
normalization at 2 years. Compared to non-normalized patients, those
achieving normalization by 2 years had lower rates of implant failure (8.9%
vs 19.5%, p < .05), rod breakage (1.3% vs 13.8%, p < .05) and
pseudoarthrosis (0% vs 4.6%, p < .05). Total complication rate was
significantly lower for those achieving normalization (56.7% vs 66.1%, p =
.02). No significant difference in ODI, EQ5D, or SRS22 Pain scores.
Multivariate regressions used to create a model for normalization showed 88%
of patients achieved significantly greater normalization with lower baseline
and 6 week PI-LL (OR .82 [.7 - .95], p < .05).
Conclusion: PT normalization following ASD
correction occurred in almost 40% of patients by 6 weeks and 43% by 2 years
after surgery. Normalization was more likely to occur in patients where
reconstruction addressed lumbopelvic mismatch and extended above the apex of
the thoracic kyphosis. PT normalization and maintenance remains an important
factor for improved post-surgical outcomes.

## 1327

## P133: Incremental benefit of revision surgery after adult spinal
deformity corrective surgery: at what point does the value of multiple
revisions diminish in ASD corrective surgery and does it depend on
etiology

Peter Passias

1

, Pooja Dave

1

, Peter Tretiakov

1

, Kimberly McFarland

1

, and Jamshaid Mir

1

1

NYU Langone Medical Center, New York, Unitede States

Introduction: Incidence of revision surgery after
surgical correction of ASD remains high. However, the benefits of multiple
revision surgery on patient outcomes are not well-defined.
Hypothesis: To assess impact of revision
surgery on surgical outcomes, alignment, and HRQLs.
Methods: ASD patients with BL, 2Y data, and ≥
1 revisions included. Patients were stratified by number of revisions (R1,
R2, or R3 defined as > 2 revisions). Baseline demographic and surgical
details were taken from visit prior to revision surgery. Differences between
groups were assessed using ANOVA. Follow-up was based on timepoint 2Y after
final revision. 3 revision groups were propensity score matched (PSM) using
many-to-one matching, while adjusting for differences at baseline.
Radiographic parameters SVA, PI-LL, and PT were used to assess alignment
post-revision via ANOVA. MVA assessed differences in outcomes after final
revision surgery while controlling for relevant covariates.
Results: 252 patients included (R1: 108; R2:
108; R3: 36). Baseline demographic and surgical differences found no
significant differences between cohorts. Revision baseline
deformity (as defined by radiographic alignment measures SVA, PI-LL, PT)
showed no significant differences between groups (all
p>.05). 2 years after final revision surgery, ANOVA
showed significant differences between R1 and R3, and R2 and R3, with those
undergoing greatest number of revisions R3 demonstrating less improvement in
deformity measures (all p < .001). Pre-revision ODI scores for each group
showed a decline with increasing revision number. Of note, R1 and R2, as
compared to R3, had greater difference between baseline and 2 year ODI
scores, indicating a sustained benefit to revision surgery (-13.0 vs -13.9
vs -9.7). Percentage of those reaching SCB in ODI from pre-revision baseline
to years were R1 71.3%, R2 60.2%, and R3 38.9%, with significant difference
found between R1 and R3, and R2 and R3 (all p < .05). The percentage of
patients reaching MCID in ODI for each cohort was 35.2% R1, 25.9% R2, and
13.9% R3. MVA demonstrated a significantly lower odds of reaching MCID in
ODI for R2 and R3 compared to R1. Overall, patients undergoing
multiple revision surgery were 25% less likely to reach MCID in ODI as
compared to R1 group. Despite the inferior functional outcomes as measured
by ODI scores, patient satisfaction measured by SRS scores were maintained
from baseline to 2 years between revision groups. The rates of complications
increased with revisions, with R3 having the greatest overall complication
rate compared to R1 and R2. Overall, surgical indications for revisal
increased with number of revisions: R3 had significantly greater percentage
of surgical and mechanical complications leading to revision as compared to
R2 and R1. Conclusion: This study attempted to
quantify the impact of multiple revision surgeries by comparing patient
alignment and outcomes after each revision. Patients requiring multiple
revision surgeries had lower odds of reaching minimal clinically important
difference in ODI scores as well as maintaining clinical benefit. Despite
inferior functional outcomes, alignment improved, and patient satisfaction
was maintained across revision groups. These results suggest that surgical
correction may still maintain benefit with the appropriate indication.

## 1343

## P134: Disparities in recovery and survival rates in cervical versus
thoracolumbar spinal deformity patients are attributable to frailty status
at presentation

Peter Passias

1

, Peter Tretiakov

1

, Jamshaid Mir

1

, Bailey Imbo

1

, Tyler Williamson

1

, Zach Thomas

1

, Pooja Dave

1

, and Kimberly McFarland

1

, Rachel Joujon-Roche

1

, Shaleen Vira

2

 and Bassel Diebo

3

1

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, NYU Langone Orthopedic Hospital,
New York, United States

2

UT Southwestern, Dallas, United States

3

SUNY Downstate, New York, United States

Introduction: Previous studies have demonstrated relatively
higher risk of death in CD surgeries, yet there remains a paucity of
literature comparing and contrasting the comorbidities and predictive
factors associated with death in ASD vs CD surgery. Methods:
Operative CD patients ≥ 18yrs with pre-(BL) and up to two-year (2Y) data
were included. Group differences were assessed via means comparison
analysis. Backstep logistic regression identified mortality predictors.
Kaplan-Meier analysis assessed survivorship of expired patients. Cox
regression assessed survivability adjusting for BL frailty status. Log rank
analysis determined differences in survival distribution groups.
Results: 625 total patients were included (417 ASD, 208
CD). Within 5Y, 12 ASD patients (2.88% of ASD cohort) and 16 CD patients
(7.69% of CD cohort) expired (p = 0.004). At baseline, ASD and CD patients
differed significantly in BL Frailty score (0.29 vs 0.41, p < .001),
though not in age, gender, nor BMI (all p > .05). The most common
self-reported comorbidities in ASD patients were: arthritis (46%),
hypertension (31%), and anemia (23%); in CD patients: osteoporosis (50%),
previous myocardial infarction (17%), and any cancer (17%). No significant
differences in major, minor, nor intraoperative complications between living
or expired ASD or CD patients were observed (all p > .05). Accounting for
age, BMI, and gender, regression revealed only frailty status remained a
significant predictor of death overall (p = .047). Mean survival time for
ASD was 84.11 weeks versus 65.17 in CD patients (χ2(1) = .748, p = .387).
Conclusion: Total two-year all-cause mortality in adult
spinal deformity and cervical deformity patients remains below 3% despite
high rates of comorbidities, suggesting rigorous patient selection criteria
plays an important role in maintaining patient safety. While cervical
deformity patients demonstrate greater incidence of death post-operatively,
increased baseline frailty status may be the principle cause of such results
and should be considered when assessing surgical risks versus benefits.

## 1361

## P135: Calibration of comprehensive predictive model for the development
of proximal junctional failure in adult spinal deformity patients with
consideration of contemporary goals and techniques

Peter Tretiakov

1

, Kimberly McFarland

1

, Renaud Lafage

2

, Justin Smith

3

, Breton Line

1

, Alan Daniels

4

, Jeffrey Gum

5

, Themistocles Protopsaltis

1

, D. Kojo Hamilton

6

, Alex Soroceanu

1

, Justin Scheer

7

, Robert Eastlack

8

, Gregory Mundis

8

, Pierce Nunley

9

, Eric Klineberg

7

, Richard Hostin

10

, Munish Gupta

11

, Christopher Ames

12

, Robert Hart

13

, Douglas Burton

14

, Christopher Shaffrey

15

, Frank Schwab

16

, Shay Bess

17

, Han Jo Kim

2

, Virginie Lafage

16

, and Peter Passias

1

1

Orthopaedic and Neurological Surgery, NYU Langone Medical Center,
New York, United States

2

Department of Orthopedics, Hospital for Special Surgery, New York,
United States

3

Department of Neurosurgery, University of Virginia, Charlottesville,
United States

4

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Brown University, Providence,
United States

5

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Norton Leatherman Spine Center,
Louisville, United States

6

Department of Neurosurgery, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center,
Pittsburgh, United States

7

University of California Davis, Department of Orthopedic Surgery,
Sacramento, United States

8

Scripps Clinic, Division of Orthopaedic Surgery, La Jolla, United
States

9

Louisiana, Spine Institute of Louisiana, United States

10

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Baylor Scoliosis Center, Dallas,
United States

11

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Washington University of St.
Louis, St. Louis, United States

12

Department of Neurosurgery, University of California, San Francisco,
San Francisco, United States

13

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Swedish Neuroscience Institute,
Seattle, United States

14

Department of Orthopedic Surgery, University of Kansas Medical
Center, Kansas City, United States

15

Departments of Neurosurgery and Orthopaedic Surgery, Duke University
School of Medicine, Durham, United States

16

Department of Orthopaedics, Lenox Hill Hospital, Northwell Health,
New York, United States

17

Department of Spine Surgery, Denver International Spine Clinic,
Presbyterian St. Luke's/Rocky Mountain Hospital for Children, Denver,
United States

Introduction: Proximal junctional kyphosis (PJK) and failure
(PJF) development remains a major concern after adult spinal deformity (ASD)
corrective surgery. There remains a paucity of literature utilizing
contemporary alignment metrics and novel prophylaxis measures to predict
occurrence of PJK and PJF. Material and Methods: Operative ASD
patients with complete baseline (BL) and 2-year (2Y) postoperative
radiographic data were included. PJK was defined as ≥ 10° measure for the
sagittal Cobb angle between the inferior endplate of the UIV and the
superior endplate of the UIV+2. PJF was defined as meeting Lafage et al. PJF
criteria by 2Y. Baseline demographic, clinical and surgical information were
used to predict the occurrence of PJK and PJF using backstep binary logistic
regression analysis. Internal cross validation of the model was performed.
Receiver operating characteristic curve determined area-under-curve (AUC).
Conditional inference tree (CIT) analysis determined thresholds at (α =
.05). Odds ratio (OR) < 1.0 represents protection against PJK/PJF.
Results: 779 ASD patients (59.87 ± 14.24 years, 78% female,
27.78 ± 6.02kg/m2, mean CCI: 1.74 ± 1.71) were included. 60.5% of
patients (n = 471) developed PJK, and 10.5% (n = 82) developed PJF by their
last recorded visit. Significant predictors assessed at BL included: age,
osteoporosis, arthritis, lower extremity paresthesia, Passias et al. frailty
categorization, TS-CL, PI-LL, sagittal age-adjusted score (SAAS) modifiers,
BL maximal kyphosis at thoracic apex (MaxTK), levels fused, upper
instrumented vertebra (UIV), and PJK prophylaxis techniques: cement, hooks,
percutaneous screw fixation, or hybrid measures (hybrid), rod diameter, and
rod composition (all p < .05). The six most significant demographic,
radiographic, surgical, and post-operative predictors of PJK/PJF were: BL
age ≥ 74 (OR: 1.06 [1.014 – 1.107], p = .005), BL SAAS T1PA modifier >1
(OR: 0.352 [0.169 - 0.733], p = .004), BL SAAS PT modifier > 0 (OR: 0.547
[0.344 – 0.870], p = .008, levels fused > 16 (OR: 1.139 [1.022 – 1.269],
p = .015), use of prophylactic hooks (OR: 0.122 [0.040 – 0.372], p <
.001), and 6W SAAS PI-LL modifier > 1 (OR: 3.604 [1.840 – 7.061], p <
.001). Overall, the predictive model was deemed significant (p < .001),
and internally validated ROC analysis returned an AUC of .923, indicating
robust model fit. Conclusion: Proximal junctional kyphosis and
failure remain critical concerns in adult spinal deformity surgery, and
efforts to reduce the occurrence of PJK and PJF have resulted in the
development of novel prophylactic techniques and enhanced clinical and
radiographic selection criteria. This study demonstrates a validated model
incorporating such techniques that may allow for the prediction of
clinically significant PJK and PJF, and thus assist in optimizing patient
selection, enhance intraoperative decision making, and reduce post-operative
complications in ASD surgery.

## 1404

## P136: Effects of bone cement augmentation for uppermost instrumented
vertebra on adjacent segment degeneration in lumbar fusions

Young-Hoon Kim

1

, Sang-Il Kim

1

, and Hyung Youl Park

2

1

Orthopedic Surgery, Seoul St. Mary's Hospital, The Catholic
University of Korea, Seoul, South Korea

2

Orthopedic Surgery, Eunpyong St. Mary's Hospital, The Catholic
University of Korea, Seoul, South Korea

Introduction: Bone cement-augmented screw is one of the
techniques used to reduce early mechanical failure in multilevel lumbar
fusions, especially in the elderly. However, there is little information
regarding the long-term effects. This retrospective study is designed to
investigate the effects of bone cemented augmentation on adjacent level
degeneration. Material and Methods: Fifty one patients who
underwent more than three levels of lumbar fusion were divided into two
groups according to bone cement-augmented screw fixation involving the upper
instrumented vertebra (UIV): 22 patients (cemented group, group I) and 29
patients (non-cemented group, group II). The analysis of radiographic
adjacent segment degeneration (ASD) involved patients with lumbosacral
fusion showing a similar degree of osteoporosis. Radiologic ASD was defined
as more than two UCLA grades of progression at 2 years postoperatively.
Other radiographic parameters including sagittal profiled and preoperative
MR Pfirrmann grades for adjacent level were analyzed. Results:
Even when no significant differences existed in preoperative demographic and
radiographic parameters between the two groups, the postoperative kyphotic
changes at 3 months were higher in the non-cemented group. In terms of
long-term effects, radiologic ASD (20 patients (95.2%) in group I; 15
(53.6%) in group II) was significantly higher in the cemented group.
Logistic regression analysis of radiologic ASD including other clinical and
radiological parameters, postoperative PI-LL mismatch (OR 5.201, 95% CI
1.123-24.090, p = 0.035) and cement augmentation (OR 20.193, 95% CI
2.195-185.729, p = 0.008) showed a significant correlation with the
development of radiologic ASD at postoperative 2 years.
Conclusion: Although bone cement-augmented screw
implantation can prevent kyphotic deformation at the proximal junction of
UIV in early postoperative stages of multi-level lumbar fusion, a discreet
selection of patients is required due to possible accelerated degeneration
of adjacent segments.
Keywords: adjacent segment degeneration; bone cement
augmentation; spinal fusion; sagittal alignment

## 1477

## P137: Distal junctional failure after corrective surgery without pelvic
fixation for thoracolumbar junctional kyphosis due to osteoporotic vertebral
fracture

Yoshifumi Kudo

1

, Ichiro Okano

1

, Hiroshi Maruyama

1

, Ryo Yamamura

1

, Chikara Hayakawa

1

, Yushi Hoshino

2

, and koutaro tsuchiya

1

1

Orthopedic Surgery, Showa University, Shinagawa-ku, Tokyo,
Japan

2

Orthopedic Surgery, Asahi University Hospital, Japan

Objective: Thoracolumbar junctional kyphosis (TLJK) due to
osteoporotic vertebral fracture (OVF) had a substantially negative impact on
quality of life. The necessity of pelvic fixation in correction surgery for
TLJK due to OVF remains controversial. The aims of this study are: 1) to
evaluate the surgical outcomes of major corrective surgery for TLJK due to
OVF, and 2) to identify the risk factors for distal junctional failure (DJF)
to identify potential candidates for pelvic fixation. Methods:
The records of patients with TLJK due to OVF who underwent surgical
correction (fixed kyphotic deformity >40°, OVF located at T11–L2, the
lowermost instrumented vertebra (LIV) at or above L5) were retrospectively
reviewed. Spinopelvic parameters such as sagittal vertical axis (SVA),
pelvic tilt (PT), pelvic incidence (PI), thoracic kyphosis (TK), lumbar
lordosis (LL: L1-S1), local kyphosis (LK) and lower lumbar lordosis (LLL:
L4-S1) were assessed. Proximal and distal junctional kyphosis (PJK/DJK), and
proximal and distal junctional failure (P/DJF) were evaluated. Demographic
data and pre/postoperative spinopelvic parameters were compared between DJF
and non-DJF patients. Results: Thirty-one patients (the mean
age 72.3 ± 7.9) were included in the final analysis. PJK was observed in
five patients (16.1%), while DJK was observed in 11 (35.5%). The main cause
(15/16 cases, 93.8%) of PJK/DJK was vertebral fracture. 12 cases (38.7%)
were categorized as failure. Among the patients with PJK, there was only one
patient (20%) categorized as PJF and required an additional surgery.
Contrary, all of eleven patients (100%) with DJK were categorized as DJF,
among whom six (54.5%) required additional surgery for pelvic fixation. In
comparisons between DJF and non-DJF patients, there was no significant
difference in pre/postoperative LK (pre/post, p = 0.725, p = 0.950).
However, statistically significant differences were observed in the
following preoperative alignment parameters: SVA (p = 0.014), LL (p =
0.001), LLL (p = 0.006), PT (p = 0.003), and PI-LL (p < 0.001).
Conclusions: Spinopelvic parameters, which represent the
compensatory function of lumbar hyperlordosis and pelvic retroversion, have
notable impacts on surgical outcomes in correction surgery for TLJK due to
OVF. To recognize the potential risks of DJF and revision surgery, surgeons
should pay attention not only to the local angles but also to the whole
spinopelvic alignment and consider each patient’s compensatory function when
choosing a surgical approach.

## 1484

## P138: Where is the point of inflection from thoracic kyphosis to lumbar
lordosis in a multi-ethnic population of asymptomatic volunteers

Zeeshan Sardar

1

, Matan Malka

2

, Meghan Cerpa

2

, Jean Charles Le Huec

3

, Stephane Bourret

3

, Kazuhiro Hasegawa

4

, Wong Hee Kit

5

, Gabriel Liu

5

, Denni Hey

5

, Hend Riahi

6

, Michael Kelly

7

, and Lawrence Lenke

1

1

Spine Unit, Och Spine Hospital at New York Presbyterian/Allen, New
York, United States

2

Orthopaedic Surgery, Columbia University Medical Center, New York,
United States

3

CHU de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France

4

Niigata Spine Surgery Center, Niigata, Japan

5

NUH University Spine Center, Singapore

6

Kassab Institute, Manouba, Tunisia

7

Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, United
States

Introduction: The point of inflection (POI) between the Thoracic
Kyphosis (TK) and the Lumbar Lordosis (LL) is an important consideration for
treatment of spinal deformity. Previous literature has shown that the
classically accepted POI of L1 is not constant among the population. The
purpose of this study is to show the population variance in POI and its role
in defining the maximum TK and LL. Material and Methods:
Asymptomatic adult volunteers between the ages of 18-80 years were enrolled
prospectively across 5 different countries/centers (France, Japan,
Singapore, Tunisia, and United States) forming the MEANS cohort. Volunteers
included in the study reported no significant neck or back pain (Visual
Analog Scale≤2), nor any known spinal disorder(s), and had no history of
prior surgical or non-surgical treatment for a spine related disorder. All
volunteers underwent a standing full body or full spine low dose
stereoradiograph (EOS imaging, Paris, France) for enrollment in the study.
Following exclusion, a total of 468 volunteers were included in MEANS. Basic
demographic data included age, sex, body mass index (BMI), and ethnicity.
One more patient was removed from the data analysis because the POI was
missing. The data from the 467 patients was then evaluated. In order to find
parameters that correlate with the location of the POI as well as a possible
linear regression model predicting the POI, a new numbering system of the
vertebrae and discs was created in the following manner: C7 was given the
numerical value of 0, T1 was 1, with T1T2 being 1.5, etc.
Results: The overall mean POI was found to be 12.44
approximately corresponding to T12L1 with the median being 12.50 (also
T12L1). The patient population was then stratified by sex and ethnicity but
no significant difference was found in POI between all the groups. Though
the ranges of the POI are different among the population stratifications,
the mean and median POI’s remain relatively around T12L1. The mode POI was
L1. However, the POI varied from T8 to L4. No strong correlation was found
between POI and age, LL, Sacral Slope, or PI. Conclusion: The
most common POI was L1. However, POI ranged from T8 to L4 with the mean
being around T12-L1. A strong correlation between POI and any of the
demographic or radiographic parameters was not found. The variation in POI
should be taken into account when planning a reconstructive surgery.

## 1511

## P139: Diastematomyelia: a study of 15 cases

Sliti Firas

1

, Khalil Ghedira

1

, Abdelhafidh Slimane

1

, Nessrine Nessib

1

, Alaa Belhadj

1

, Sofiene Bouali

1

, and Jalel Kallel

1

1

Neurosurgery, National Institute of Neurology, Tunis,
Tunisia

Introduction: Diastematomyelia is a rare congenital spinal
malformation consisting of two spinal cords separated by a bony,
cartilaginous or fibrous septum on one or more segments. It has a good
prognosis when diagnosed and treated early. Material and
Methods: We collected the cases of diastematomyelia operated
between 2009 and 2019 at the neurosurgery departments of the National
Institute of Neurology and the Center of Traumatology of Ben Arous Tunisia.
Results: Our series consisted of 13 patients, including 9
children and 4 adults. The mean age in children was 6 years, and in adults
58 years. The sex ratio was 0.44. Clinical signs were represented by
scoliosis (7 cases), motor deficit (7 cases), skin signs (6 cases) including
hairy patch (hypertrichosis) (4 cases), urinary disorders (4 cases) and
spinal and radicular pain (4 cases). All patients underwent a radiological
study by spinal MRI and CT scan. We identified 10 cases of type I
diastematomyelia and 3 cases of type II. Associated dysraphic disorders were
present in 10 cases. There were 4 cases of postoperative complications: 1
case of anemia due to intraoperative hemorrhage, 1 case of CSF leakage, 1
case of wound infection and 1 case of transient motor deficit. Motor deficit
and pain improved in all patients. Two patients recovered completely from
their deficit. Sphincter disorders improved in only one case.
Conclusion: Diastematomyelia, also known as a split cord
malformation, is a rare occult spinal dysraphism, which is easy to diagnose
given the frequent cutaneous signs and neuro-orthopaedic syndrome. Surgery
is indicated to avoid irreversible neurological sequelae.

## 1567

## P140: Melorheostosis of thoracic spine: a rare clinical entity managed
surgically

Jayprakash Modi

1,2

, and Pratikkumar Prajapati

1

1

Orthopaedic, B J Medical College, Ahmedabad, India

2

Orthopaedic, Nutan Medical College, Mehsana, India

Introduction: Melorheostosis is a medical developmental disorder
and mesenchymal dysplasia in which bone cortex widens and becomes hyperdense
in a sclerotomal distribution. Most of the cases reported till now are
confined to appendicular skeleton, rarely affecting spine. It is well known
by its characteristic appearance of “melting wax flowing down a candle” on
radiographs. Materials and Method: This is a rare case study of
a patient operated at tertiary care centre having non-traumatic involvement
of spinal cord affecting neurology with history, clinical and radiological
features suggesting melorheostosis as the cause of compression.
Result: Here we report a rare case of melorheostosis of
thoracic spine in a middle‐aged male patient with features of myelopathy
treated by early decompression surgery, leading to complete relief of
symptoms postoperatively. Final follow‐up was of 2 years. It is a very rare,
benign and disabling entity, and the diagnosis Is primarily a radiological
one. Conclusion: Early diagnosis and decompression surgery
leads to dramatic improvement in clinical outcome and prevents unwarranted
biopsy.
Keywords: Laminectomy, melorheostosis, sclerotomal

## 1629

## P141: Factors affecting opioid use of European adult spinal deformity
patients: minimum 5 years follow-up study

Kadir Abul

1

, Nezih Arin Alanay

2

, Caglar Yilgor

3

, Altug Yucekul

3

, Yasemin Yavuz

4

, Louis Boissiere

5

, Anouar Bourghli

6

, Ibrahim Obeid

5

, Javier Pizones

7

, Frank Kleinstuck

8

, Francisco J. Sanchez Perez-Grueso

9

, Ferran Pellisé

10

, Ahmet Alanay

3

, and European Spine Study Group ESSG

11

1

Department of Orthopedics and Traumatology, Istanbul Basaksehir Pine
and Sakura City Training and Research Hospital, Istanbul,
Turkey

2

Lycee Français Notre Dame de Sion, Istanbul, Turkey

3

Department of Orthopedics and Traumatology, Acibadem Mehmet Ali
Aydinlar University School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey

4

Department of Biostatistics, Ankara University School of Medicine,
Ankara, Turkey

5

Department of Spinal Surgery Unit 1, Bordeaux University Hospital,
C.H.U Tripode Pellegrin, Bordeaux, France

6

Spine Surgery Department, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and
Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia

7

Spine Surgery Unit, La Paz University Hospital, Madrid,
Spain

8

Spine Center, Schulthess Klinik, Zurich, Switzerland

9

Spine Surgery Unit, La Paz University Hospital, Madrid

10

Spine Surgery Unit, Hospital Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona,
Spain

11

Spine Research Unite, Vall d'Hebron Institute of Research,
Barcelona, Spain

Introduction: Although appropriate pain control is a critical
aspect of patient management, past few decades have been associated with
major increases in opioid-related overdoses and addiction treatment. Current
literature focuses on chronic back pain and degenerative conditions and
information regarding long-term opioid use following adult spinal deformity
surgery is limited. This study aims to analyze factors associated with
minimum 5-year postoperative continued opioid use in patients who underwent
surgical treatment for adult spinal deformity. Materials and
Methods: This was a retrospective analysis of a prospectively
collected data of patients undergoing elective spinal deformity surgery.
Patients with ≥ 4-levels fusion and ≥ 5y follow-up were included. Analgesic
use was divided into 4 groups: No Analgesics; Non-Opioid Analgesics; Weak
Opioids and Strong Opioids. Clinically-relevant 6 scenarios were
investigated: Pre-op use; 6 weeks use; Continued use at 6 months and beyond;
Opioid cessation; Restart on opioids and Persistent use at 5 years and
beyond. A total of 37 factors comprising patient characteristics,
radiographic measurements, operative details, preoperative and early
postoperative opioid use, and mechanical complications and revisions were
analysed in a univariate-multivariate setup to determine risk factors for
pre-op, 6-months and ≥ 5-years post-op usage. Results: 265
patients (215 F, 50 M) from five sites were included. The mean follow-up
duration was 68.4 ± 11.7 (60-102) months. On average, 10.6 ± 3.5 levels were
fused. Preoperatively, 64 (24.2%) patients were using opioids. The rate of
opioid users increased to 33.6% at 6 weeks and decreased to 21.5% at 6
months. During follow-up, there were patients who discontinued opioids,
while others have started and/or restarted using opioids. As a result, 59
(22.3%) patients were still on opioids at the latest follow-up. Multivariate
analyses showed that factors independently affecting opioid use at an
average of 68 months postoperatively, in order of significance, were opioid
use at sixth weeks, preoperative opioid use and opioid use at sixth months
with the odds ratios of 2.88, 2.51 and 2.38 respectively. At these time
points, factors such as age, number of comorbidities, tobacco use, the time
of the last prior spine surgery and postoperative sagittal plane alignment
affected opioid usage rates. Conclusions: Approximately 15% of
patients who received no preop opioids ended up receiving long-term (5+
years) postop opioids. Of the preop opioid users, only 56% could quit.
Opioid usage at six weeks was found to be more predictive of long-term
opioid use compared to preoperative use. Among identified risk factors,
sagittal plane correction seems to be the only parameter that is directly at
the surgeon’s discretion. Observed differences among sites can point towards
a room for improvement. Identifying patients at higher risk for opioid use
at different time points and discussing their long-term expectations may be
beneficial in the shared decision-making process. Current global efforts on
preventing chronic opioid use warrants further research to better understand
the cascade of events in order to determine actionable items.

## 1636

## P142: Loads at adjacent segment level before and after surgery: combined
clinical and simulation study of 205 adult spinal deformity patients

Dominika Ignasiak

1

, Pascal Behm

1

, Mannion Anne

2

, Frank Kleinstuck

3

, Tamas Fekete

4

, Daniel Haschtmann

5

, Dezsö Jeszenszky

3

, Laura Zimmermann

3

, Sarah Richner-Wunderlin

3

, Alba Vila-Casademunt

6

, Ferran Pellisé

6

, Ibrahim Obeid

7

, Francisco J. Sanchez Perez-Grueso

8

, Ahmet Alanay

9

, Caglar Yilgor

9

, Stephen Ferguson

1

, and Markus Loibl

5

1

Institute for Biomechanics, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland

2

Department of Teaching, Research and Development

3

Spine Center

4

Department of Orthopedics and Neurosurgery

5

Department of Spine and Neurosurgery,Schulthess Clinic, Spine
Center, Zurich, Switzerland

6

Spine Unit, Hospital Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona, Spain

7

Department of Spinal Surgery Unit 1, Bordeaux University Hospital,
C.H.U Tripode Pellegrin, Bordeux, France

8

Spine Surgery Unit, La Paz University Hospital, Madrid,
Spain

9

Department of Orthopaedics and Traumatology, Acibadem Mehmet Ali
Aydinlar University School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey

Introduction: Sagittal malalignment is a risk factor for
mechanical complications after surgery for adult spinal deformity (ASD).
Mechanical complications – caused by continuous or repetitive mechanical
stress – are estimated to affect 28-61% of ASD patients with longer fusion
constructs. Spinal loads, modulated by sagittal alignment, may explain this
relationship. The aims of this study were to investigate the relationships
between: (1) postoperative changes in loads at the proximal segment and
realignment, and (2) absolute postoperative loads and postoperative
alignment measures. Materials and Methods: A previously
validated musculoskeletal (AnyBody) model of the whole spine, including
articulated thorax with ribcage, was applied to study a clinical sample of
205 ASD patients. The data were collected within a multicenter study group.
The dataset included patient demographic parameters, surgical treatment
details, prior fusion, occurrence and type of mechanical complications, as
well as sagittal alignment measures obtained from preoperative and 6 weeks
postoperative long lateral radiographs. Based on clinical and radiographic
data, patient-specific sagittal spinopelvic alignment profiles were
represented in the musculoskeletal spine model. Pre- and postoperative
patient-specific alignments were simulated to predict loads at the proximal
segment adjacent to the spinal fusion. To allow between-subjects
comparability, the loads were normalized to individual body mass.
Results: The mean age (and standard deviation) was 52.1 ±
19.2 years (range 18-84 years), mean BMI was 25.7 ± 5.1 kg/m2
(range, 13.4-44.6 kg/m2). The sample included both primary (72%)
and revision (28%) surgery cases, representing a variety of fusion lengths
(median number of fused motion segments = 9, range 3-16), and upper (T2-L3)
and lower (T12- pelvis) instrumented levels, with T10-pelvis fusion being
the most common (13%). Weak-to-moderate associations were found between
pre-to-postop changes in lumbar lordosis, LL (r = -0.23, r = -0.43; p <
0.001), global tilt, GT (r = 0.26, r = 0.38; p < 0.001) and the Global
Alignment and Proportion score, GAP (r = 0.26, r = 0.37; p < 0.001), and
changes in compressive and shear forces at the proximal segment. GAP score
parameters, thoracic kyphosis measurements and the slope of upper
instrumented vertebra were associated with changes in shear. In patients
with T10-pelvis fusion, moderate-to-strong associations were found between
several postoperative sagittal alignment measures and compressive and shear
loads, with GT showing the strongest correlations (r = 0.75, r = 0.73, p
< 0.001). Conclusions: Spinal loads were estimated for
patient-specific full spinal alignment profiles in a large cohort of
patients with ASD pre- and postoperatively. Loads on the proximal segments
correlated with sagittal alignment measures. In a subset of T10-pelvis
fusion cases, postoperative GT, UIV slope, GAP, and T10-L2 angles were
associated with both postoperative compressive and shear loads. Broader
analysis of larger clinical samples should be performed in the future to
unravel whether or not (or to what degree) spinal loads provide a causal
mechanism explaining the previously reported association between sagittal
alignment and mechanical complications.

## 1644

## P143: The reliability of computer-assisted 3D surgical simulation of
posterior osteotomies in

Yiqi Zhang

1

 and Yong Hai

1

1

Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Beijing Chaoyang Hospital, Capital
Medical University, Beijing, China

Background: Correction surgery for patients with thoracolumbar
kyphosis secondary to ankylosing spondylitis (TLKAS) is desired with the aim
to restore the normal sagittal balance and generally performed with
posterior osteotomies including pedicle subtraction osteotomy,
Smith-Petersen osteotomy (SPO), and Ponte osteotomy. A precise and flexible
surgical planning is required for osteotomy strategy. The study was aimed at
investigating the reliability of computer-assisted three-dimensional
surgical simulation (CA3DSS) of posterior osteotomies in TLKAS patients.
Methods: Eligible TLKAS patients who underwent posterior
correction surgery with posterior osteotomies were consecutively included.
Simulated posterior osteotomies were performed in Mimics and 3-Matic Medical
software. Coronal and sagittal angle and alignment parameters were measured
in preoperative full-length X-ray, preoperative original 3D spine (Pre-OS),
simulated 3D spine (SS), and postoperative original 3D spine (Post-OS).
Reliability was tested by both intraclass correlation coefficients (ICCs)
and Bland-Altman analysis. Results: A total of 30 TLKAS
patients were included. Excellent consistency of radiological parameters was
shown between preoperative X-ray and Pre-OS model. In SS and Post-OS models,
excellent reliabilities were shown in global kyphosis (ICC 0.832, 95% CI
0.677-0.916), thoracic kyphosis (ICC 0.773, 95% CI 0.577-0.885), and lumbar
lordosis (ICC 0.896, 95% CI 0.794-0.949) and good reliabilities were
exhibited in the main curve (ICC 0.680, 95% CI 0.428- 0.834) and sagittal
vertical axis (ICC 0.619, 95% CI 0.338-0.798). ICCs of correction angle
achieved by pedicle subtraction osteotomy (PSO) was 0.754 (95% CI
0.487-0.892), and that of posterior column osteotomies (PCO) was 0.703 (95%
CI 0.511- 0.829). Bland-Altman analysis also showed good agreement for both
Cobb angle and distance measurements in Pre-OS and SS models, and good
reliabilities were shown in PCO and PSO in real spine and SS models.
Conclusions: CA3DSS can provide an accurate measurement,
and it is a reliable and effective method to conduct proper simulation for
correction surgery with posterior osteotomies in TLKAS patients.

## 1654

## P144: Human recombinant bone morphogenetic protein-2 (rhBMP-2) injection
into the uppermost instrumented vertebra (UIV) reduced the acute bony
failure type proximal junctional kyphosis (PJK) in adult spinal deformity
(ASD) correction

Ho-Joong Kim

1

, Ohsang Kwon

1

, and Junyoung Choi

1

1

Orthopedic Surgery, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital,
South Korea

Introduction: Numerous attempts on reducing the proximal
junctional kyphosis (PJK) and thus proximal junctional failure (PJF) have
resulted in substantial but yet not complete resolution of the troublesome
complication. We attempted local transpedicular injection of human
recombinant bone morphogenetic protein-2 (rhBMP-2) into the uppermost
instrumented vertebra (UIV) for prevention of bony failure type PJK in adult
spinal deformity (ASD) correction surgery. Material and
Methods: A mixture of 1mg rhBMP-2 and 0.5g β-tricalcium phosphate
were injected intraoperatively into the body of UIV through the predrilled
transpedicular corridor in 25 consecutive patients from August 2021 to
January 2022. Age and sex matched 25 patients who received ASD correction
surgery just before the study period were set as control group. The primary
outcome was the PJK and PJF incidence rates at 6 months after surgery. And
the radiographic evidence of new bone formation at the UIV was also studied.
Results: The baseline patient characteristics and patient
reported outcome measurements (PROM) were similar between the two groups
while the pelvic incidence – lumbar lordosis mismatch was greater in the
study group. PJK occurred in 2 patients (8%) of the study group while it
occurred in 7 patients (28%) in the control group (p-value = 0.138). PJF
occurred in 1 patient (4%) of the study group while it occurred in 3
patients (12%) in the control group and all of them were bony failures. PROM
at 6 months after surgery were significantly better in the study group. The
Hounsfield unit of the UIV significantly increased at 6 months after surgery
than the preoperative scan and the increment at the UIV was also
significantly greater than that of the UIV-1. Conclusion:
Intraoperative transpedicular injection of rhBMP-2 into the UIV reduces the
PJK and PJF rate at 6 months after surgery, by diminishing the occurrence of
bony failure. The Hounsfield unit at the UIV increased significantly which
might be interpreted as a sign of new bone formation.

## 1725

## P145: Intradiscal osteotomy (IDO): high resolution cadaveric technique
guide and single institute experiences using expandable interbody devices in
complex spinal pathology

Jerry Robinson

1

, Abraham Schlauderaff

2

, Yevgeniy Freyvert

3

, Jared Cooke

2

, Amir Abdul-Jabbar

2

, Jens Chapman

2

, and Rod Oskouian

2

1

Department of Orthopedics, Cedars Sinai Medical Center, United
States

2

Department of Spine Surgery, Swedish Neuroscience Institute, United
States

3

Department of Neurosurgery, Houston Methodist, Houston, TX, United
States

Introduction: As the number of spinal fusion procedures has
risen over the past few decades there has also been a reported decrease in
the utilization of three column osteotomies. Many surgeons are familiar with
the traditional posterior spinal osteotomy classification; however, a
lesser-known osteotomy, the bone-disc-bone osteotomy, exists outside of this
classification. We present the “intradiscal osteotomy” (IDO) technique, a
type of bone-disc-bone osteotomy that utilizes expandable interbody devices
to achieve all-posterior correction of complex spinal pathology.
Materials and Methods: A fresh-frozen cadaver was prepared
for demonstration of the IDO technique in the mid-lumbar spine. The
procedure was documented through serial, high-resolution photographs in
stepwise progression. Standard fluoroscopy was used to document the
procedure’s corrective ability. Additionally, a narrative case series was
chosen from within a single institute to demonstrate the procedure’s utility
and feasibility in a variety of complex spinal clinical scenarios.
Results: Intradiscal osteotomy with the use of expandable
interbody devices was successfully demonstrated on a cadaveric model. A
high-resolution technique guide was produced through serial photographs. Our
narrative case series demonstrates the IDO’s utility and feasibility in
complex spinal pathology; specifically, correction of cervicothoracic and
thoracolumbar adult spinal deformity (ASD), proximal junctional failure
(PJF), distal junctional failure (DJF), isthmic spondylolisthesis, and
pseudarthrosis. We additionally demonstrate its feasibility in iatrogenic
flat-back syndrome through an all-posterior, attritional release of the
anterior longitudinal ligament (ALL). Conclusions: The
intradiscal osteotomy combined with expandable interbody devices can achieve
powerful correction without the use of conventional three column
osteotomies. Surgeons may find this technique desirable and rapidly
adoptable due to its similarity to a traditional transforaminal interbody
fusion. Our technique guide and narrative case series is meant to assist
surgeons looking for alternatives to traditional three column
osteotomies.

## 1803

## P146: Postoperative complications of Schwab-Grade-I versus
Schwab-Grade-II posterior column osteotomies (PCOs) in treating severe rigid
kyphoscoliosis patients: a minimum 2-year follow-up comparative
outcome

Nicholas Van Halm-Lutterodt

1,2,3

, Aixin Pan

3

, Ziyang Ye

2,4

, Yangpu Zhang

3

, Tie Liu

3

, Lijin Zhou

3

, Sunny Kim

2

, Yuzeng Liu

3

, Jincai Yang

3

, and Yong Hai

3

1

School of Professional Studies, Brown University, Providence, United
States

2

Department of Orthopedic and Neurosurgery, Inspired Spine Health,
Burnsville, United States

3

Department of Orthopedics Surgery, Beijing Chaoyang Hospital
Affiliated-Capital Medical University, Beijing, China

4

Department of Data Science and Analytics, University of Chicago,
Chicago, United States

Background: Smith-Petersen osteotomy, [SPO], (Schwab-grade-I)
and Ponte osteotomy, [PO], (Schwab-grade-II) are narrowly akin and
collectively appreciated as posterior column shortening osteotomies (PCOs).
The former is considered as a more gentler osteotomy grade than the latter.
In the spine literature, little information is provided on their comparison
regarding perioperative complications and major curve correction rates. A
clinical study to evaluate the perioperative complication incidence and
major curve corrective rates between these two osteotomy techniques would be
pragmatic in highlighting their safety and efficacy outcomes and inform the
spine practice of their value-based impacts in indicated deformity patients.
Methods: Following approval by the institutional review
board (IRB) of Beijing Chaoyang Hospital-Affiliated Capital Medical
University in Beijing, a pool of 38 propensity-matched adult (≥ 18 years)
severe rigid scoliosis or kyphoscoliosis patients (curved ≥ 80o)
who underwent spinal deformity primary corrective surgery were
retrospectively evaluated. The patients were dichotomized into two (2)
osteotomy technique groups: Smith-Petersen osteotomy (SPO-treated), (i.e.,
Schwab-grade-I PCO) and Ponte osteotomy, (PO-treated), (i.e.,
Schwab-grade-II PCO). The minimum follow-up period was 2 years. Primary
outcomes included baseline and clinical features between the two osteotomy
groups. Secondary outcomes included perioperative [intraoperative,
immediate, and within 2-year postoperative] complication rates between the
two types of osteotomies. Tertiary outcomes included preoperative and final
follow-up ODI and SRS-22 scores. Statistical analyses were carried out by
Student t-test and Pearson’s Chi-squared test (Fisher’s Exact Test), through
Python statistical software package. Statistical significance was set at p
< 0.05. Results: Of the 38 matched severe rigid scoliosis or
kyphoscoliosis patients, 55.30% (n = 21) were SPO-treated and 44.70% (n =
17) were PO-treated patients, respectively. The overall average age of
patients was 23.97 years, with a female incidence of 76.32%. Major curve
correction rates were 49.19% and 57.40% in SPO-treated and PO-treated
patients, respectively, (p > 0.05). Immediately following surgery,
comparable overall complication rates of 28.57% (n = 6/21) vs 29.41% (n =
5/17) were observed in the SPO-treated and PO-treated patients,
respectively, (p = 0.726). We observed 9.52%, (n = 2/21) vs 5.88%, (n =
1/17) incidence of surgical intensive care unit (SICU) admission and 4.76%,
(n = 1/21) vs 5.88%, (n = 1/17) incidence of cardiopulmonary events in
SPO-treated and PO-treated patients after surgery, respectively, (p =
0.679). Neurological deficits incidence in the SPO-treated and PO-treated
patients were respectively, 14.29%, (n = 3/21) vs 17.65%, (n = 3/17)
immediately following surgery, (p > 0.05) and 0.00%, (n = 0/21) vs
17.65%, (n = 3/17) at ≥ 2 years postoperative, (p < 0.05), but there was
only 5.88% (n = 1/17) new incidence of neurological deficits in the
PO-treated patients at ≥ 2 years postoperative, ( p > 0.05). The ODI
score in the PO-treated group was significantly inferior at minimum 2-year
follow-up, (p < 0.05), while preoperative and postoperative SRS-22 scores
were comparable in both patient groups, (p > 0.05).
Conclusion: In the current study, both SPO-treated and
PO-treated patients demonstrated comparable surgical complication rates
immediately following corrective surgery whereas PO-treated patients showed
an increased tendency of accruing postoperative neurological sequela. To
achieve value-based and effective outcomes in these severe rigid scoliosis
or kyphoscoliosis patients, prudence in patient selection, enhanced patient
management protocols and technical sophistication are profoundly critical to
maximizing safety outcomes with Schwab-grade-I or -II PCO.

## 1821

## P148: Questionnaires from AO spine members performing adult spinal
deformity surgery on wound closure and antibiotic use by specialty and by
developing and developed countries

Shin Oe

1

, Yukihiro Matsuyama

1

, Kenneth Man Chee Cheung

2

, Kenny Yat Hong Kwan

2

, So Kato

3

, Stephen Lewis

4

, Christopher Shaffrey

5

, Lawrence Lenke

6

, and AO Spine KF Deformity

7

1

Orthopedic Surgery, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine,
Hamamatsu, Japan

2

Orthopaedics and Traumatology, The University of Hong Kong,
China

3

Orthopaedic Surgery, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan

4

Surgery and Spine Program, University of Toronto, Canada

5

Orthopaedic Surgery, Duke University, United States

6
Orthopedic Surgery, The Spine Hospital, Columbia University
Medical Center, United States,

7

AO spine KF deformity, Switzerland

Introduction: Wound closure and perioperative antibiotic use are
practiced by all surgeons involved in surgery, but methods can vary widely
depending on surgeon preference, country, and social context. The purpose of
this study is to conduct a survey of AO spine members involved in Adult
Spinal Deformity (ASD) surgery in two categories: 1. developing and
developed countries, 2. orthopedic surgeons and neurosurgeons.
Material and Methods: One hundred and sixty-four members
from 49 countries were included. The evaluation items included method of
skin closure, method of dressing, type of drain, type and duration of
prophylactic antibiotics, and the presence or absence of intra-wound
application of vancomycin powder. Results: 1. There were 133
doctors in the developed country group and 31 doctors in the developing
country group. The most common responses for each endpoint were subcuticular
absorbable suture for skin closure (38% vs. 35%), dry dressing for dressing
(74% vs. 63%), Cephalosporins for antibiotics (91% vs. 100%), and 24 hours
for the duration of postoperative antibiotics (40% vs. 42%), but there were
no significant differences. The use of vancomycin powder was 68% in
developed countries and 42% in developing countries, it was not
significantly different but higher in developed countries (p = 0.077).
Closed suction type was the most common type of drain (81% vs. 63%), but
respondents in developing countries were more likely to report not using a
drain (6% vs. 12%, p = 0.047). 2. There were 130 orthopedic surgeons and 34
neurosurgeons. The most common responses were skin closure with subcuticular
absorbable suture (40% vs. 29%), dressing with dry dressing (52% vs. 47%),
type of drain with closed suction type (86% vs. 90%), antibiotics with
Cephalosporins (91% vs. 100%) and the duration of antibiotics with 24 hours
(35% vs. 42%). However, 90% of neurosurgeons use vancomycin powder, whereas
those of orthopedic surgeons were 67%. (p = 0.021). Conclusion:
There was significant difference the way of setting the drain between
developed and developing countries. But there was no difference in the
method of wound closure or use of antibiotics. On the other hand, there was
no significant difference between orthopedic surgeons and neurosurgeons, but
the intraoperative use of vancomycin powder was significantly higher among
neurosurgeons.

## 1977

## P149: Treatment of a thoracic fracture-dislocation with a posterior only
approach

Joana Tavares

1

, Ana Luís

1

, and Diogo Morgado

1

1

Neurosurgery, Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Ocidental, Lisboa,
Portugal

Introduction: Fracture-dislocations of the thoracic and lumbar
spine are highly unstable injuries, frequently resulting in neurologic
injuries. The primary goals in its surgical treatment when there is complete
spinal cord transection are the reduction of deformity and rigid spine
stabilization with fusion. The current treatment of vertebral
fracture-dislocation when there is partial or total telescoping of the
involved vertebrae is combined anterior-posterior approach with corpectomy,
anterior support implant and further posterior instrumentation. These
procedures may require two surgical teams, longer operating times and
greater risk of surgical complications related to the anterior approach, and
commonly entail longer postoperative care before discharge. A viable
alternative is opting for treatment from a posterior approach alone: with
partial vertebrectomy shortening (resection of the upper part of the lower
vertebra involved, the posterior arch and the disc), which results in
apposition of two flat surfaces of healthy bone; reduction and fixation
using long segment posterior transpedicular constructs. Material and
Methods: The authors report a case of a low thoracic
fracture-dislocation (T-11/T-12) treated with a partial vertebrectomy from a
posterior approach. Results: A 26 year-old male presented to
our emergency room after being evacuated from Cape Verde, with a complete
thoracic spinal cord section as a result of a car accident 1 month earlier.
Computed tomography scan revealed an AOSpine T11-T12: C (B3) with severe
antero-posterior dislocation. Briefly: Through an open posterior approach
pedicle screws were inserted, under fluoroscopic guidance, in
T9-T10-T11-L1-L2-L3 bilaterally; posterior arches of T11 and T12 (including
bilateral locked facets), were removed. Right laminectomy of T10, bilateral
laminectomy of L1 and partial laminectomy of L2 were preformed The dura
mater was surrounded by a dense fibrous tissue but no CSF leak was observed.
Total discectomy of T11-T12 disc was done, as well as partial T12’s
corpectomy (using an ultrasonic device), reducing to half the height of
T12’s body. Titanium bars were place to allow compression and apposition of
T11 with the rest of T12’s body. After this, the patient was repositioned to
promote additional reduction (both on the sagittal and coronal axes), the
rods were fixed and a cross-link was applied. Autologus bone was used for
postero-lateral fusion. The immediate postoperative image showed adequate
realignment of the thoracic spine. Conclusion: To date, there
is no conclusive clinical studies available to help spine surgeons decide on
the optimal surgical treatment of thoracic fracture-dislocations.
Nonetheless, a posterior-only approach may be used safely and effectively
minimizing the disadvantages associated with the anterior approach.

## 2022

## P150: External validation of the global alignment and proportion (GAP)
score as a prognostic tool for corrective surgery in adult spinal deformity:
a systematic review and meta-analysis

Julian Gendreau

1

, Nolan Brown

1

, Andrew Nguyen

1

, Neal Patel

1

, Alexander Lopez

1

, Chenyi Yang

1

, Noah Pierzchajlo

1

, Shane Shahrestani

1

, Gaston Camino-Willhuber

1

, Stephen Albano

1

, Michael Oh

1

, and Martin Pham

2

1
Neurosurgery, UC Irvine, United
States
2
Neurosurgery, UC San Diego, United
States
Introduction: The Global Alignment and Proportion (GAP) score
has been previously touted as an improved method for predicting mechanical
complications following adult spinal deformity (ASD) correction surgery when
compared to pelvic incidence-lumbar lordosis (PI-LL) mismatch parameters.
Since its proposal, the GAP score has been the topic of several external
validation studies, which have yielded conflicting results. Given the lack
of consensus regarding this prognostic tool, the authors aim to assess the
accuracy of GAP scores in predicting mechanical complications following ASD
correction surgery by reviewing all evidence in the published literature to
date. Materials and Methods: A systematic search was performed
using PubMed, Embase and Cochrane Library for the purpose of identifying all
trials evaluating the GAP score as a predictive tool for mechanical
complications. Study quality was assessed according to Newcastle-Ottawa
criteria. GAP scores were pooled using a random-effects model to compare
patients reporting mechanical complications after surgery versus those
reporting no mechanical complications. Where receiver operator curves (ROC)
were provided, the area under the curve (AUC) was pooled. All statistical
analyses was performed using R software. Results: A total of 15
studies featuring 2,092 patients were selected for inclusion in the
analysis. Qualitative analysis using Newcastle-Ottawa criteria revealed
moderate quality among all included studies (5.99/9). With respect to sex,
the cohort was predominantly female (82%). The pooled mean age among all
patients in the cohort was 58.55 years, with a mean follow-up of 33.86
months after surgery. Upon pooled analysis, we found that mechanical
complications were associated with higher mean GAP scores, albeit minimal
(mean difference = 0.571 [ 95% CI: 0.163-0.979]; p = 0.006, n = 864).
Additionally, age (p = 0.136, n = 202), levels of fusion (p = 0.207, n =
358) and body mass index (BMI) (p = 0.616, n = 350) were similar among all
patients, irrespective of complication status. Pooled AUC revealed poor
discrimination overall (AUC = 0.69; n = 1206). There was no indication of
publication bias. Conclusion: GAP scores may have a
minimal-to-moderate predictive capability for mechanical complications
associated with ASD correction.

## 2037

## P151: Whole-transcriptome sequencing identifies key differentially
expressed circRNAs/IncRNAs/mRNAs and linked ceRNA networks in adult
degenerative scoliosis

Xin Shi

1,2

, Panpan Li

1,2

, Xiang Wu

1

, Zhihua Wang

1

, Gang Zhao

1

, Yinglan Wang

3

, and Jun Shu

1

1

The Second Affiliated Hospital of Kunming Medical University,
Kunming, China

2

Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital of Cologne, University
of Cologne, Cologne, Germany

3

Shangqiu First People's Hospital, Shangqiu, China

Background: With an increasing elderly population, adult
degenerative scoliosis (ADS), is forecast to be a prevalent disabling
condition in an aging society. Universally, its pathogenesis is perceived as
intervertebral disc degeneration (IDD), which does not differ from other
degenerative spinal disorders. However, a thought-provoking issue is why
precisely a subset of patients with disc degeneration develop ADS. Exploring
the diversities between common disc degeneration and ADS would contribute to
unraveling the etiological mechanisms of ADS. Although the function of
ncRNAs in ADS has been proposed, crosstalk between the various transcripts
has not been systematically investigated. Therefore, we aimed to integrate
the circRNA, lncRNA, miRNA, and mRNA expression profiles from normal adults
(Normal), patients with disc herniation (LDH), and ADS by whole
transcriptome sequencing, which identifies key functional ncRNA and ceRNA
networks. Methods: The fresh whole blood samples (n = 3/group)
were collected from ADS patients (asymmetric disc degeneration, ADS group),
LDH patients (symmetric disc degeneration, LDH group), and healthy
volunteers (non-degenerative changes, Normal group), which were examined for
mRNA, miRNA, lncRNA, and circRNA expression and screened for differentially
expressed (DE) RNAs. Then, Gene Ontology (GO) and KEGG analyses were
performed for gene annotation and enrichment pathways on the DE RNAs, which
were constructed as a lncRNA-miRNA-mRNA network. Eventually, DE RNAs were
validated by qRT-PCR targeting disc nucleus pulposus tissue in ADS and LDH
group (n = 10 / group). Results: Compared to the LDH group, we
identified 3322 DE mRNAs, 221 DE lncRNAs, 20 DE miRNAs, and 15 DE circRNAs
in the ADS. In contrast to Normal, 21 miRNAs and 19 circRNAs were
differentially expressed in the ADS. The expression of multiple
differentially expressed ncRNAs was confirmed by qRT-PCR analysis to be
consistent with the sequencing results. In addition, GO and KEGG analysis
demonstrated that most DE mRNAs and ncRNAs target genes are involved in
various biological processes, including Endocytosis, Apoptosis, Rap1
signaling pathway, Notch signaling pathway, and others. The constructed
lncRNA-miRNA-mRNA co-expression network was primarily related to
angiogenesis and regulation. Conclusion: By focusing on
comparing asymmetric and symmetric disc degeneration, whole-transcriptome
sequencing and bioinformatics analysis systematically screened for key
ncRNAs in the development of ADS, which provided an abundance of valuable
candidates for the elucidation of regulatory mechanisms. The DE ncRNAs and
the lncRNA-miRNA-mRNA network are intrinsically involved in the regulation
of mediator and angiogenesis, which may contribute to the insight into the
pathogenesis of ADS.

## 916

## P151.1: What is the value of measuring intraoperative coronal alignment for
adult spinal deformity patients with coronal malalignment?

Nathan Lee

1

, Michael Fields

1

, Fthimnir Hassan

1

, Christopher Mikhail

1

, Stephen Stephan

1

, Joshua Baksheshian

1

, Andrew Platt

1

, Joseph Lombardi

1

, Zeeshan Sardar

1

, Ronald A. Lehman

1

, Lawrence Lenke

1

1

Orthopedic Surgery, Columbia University, Och Spine Hospital, New York,
United States

Introduction: Optimizing coronal alignment is an important goal for
adult spinal deformity (ASD) surgery. Recently, the horizontal distance from C7
to the Central Sacral Pelvic Line (CSPL = line bisecting the sacrum and
perpendicular to the line touching the acetabular sourcils) measured on
intraoperative prone radiographs was introduced as an accurate target for
postoperative coronal alignment, particularly for patients without leg length
discrepancy. However, the clinical utility of this intraoperative measure in
predicting patient reported outcomes and postoperative lower extremity (LE)
compensatory changes have not yet been described. Material and
Methods: ASD patients with minimum 6 level fusion (including pelvic
fixation), preoperative coronal malalignment (CVA≥3cm), no LLD (<1 cm), and
minimum 2 year follow up were reviewed. Patient demographics, comorbidities,
baseline PROs, surgical factors, and radiographic factors (both coronal and
sagittal) were collected. The intraoperative distance (cm) from C7 to CSPL was
measured for each patient. The outcome of interests included the minimum
clinically important difference (MCID) for ODI/SRS and postoperative LE changes
(pelvic obliquity>1deg, asymmetric knee bending, LE mechanical axis
difference (LMAD)>2deg) at 2 years postop. Bivariate and multivariate
logistic regression were performed to determine the independent factors for the
outcomes of interest. Results: 76 patients (age 58.3 ± 13.7, female
77.6%, levels fused 14.1 ± 3.9) with preop/2yr CVA 5.0 ± 1.9/2.1 ± 1.8 cm and
SVA 5.7 ± 6.0/3.0 ± 3.9 cm were reviewed. Preop/2yr ODI 39.3 ± 17.5/18 ± 17, SRS
function 3.2 ± 0.9/3.8 ± 0.8, SRS pain 2.7 ± .9/3.8 ± 1.1, and SRS appearance
2.4 ± 0.8/4.0 ± 0.9. The rate of preop LE changes was 57.9% (pelvic obliquity PO
= 2.4⁰, LMAD = 4.2⁰, and 27% had asymmetric knee bending). The rate of 2yr LE
changes was 26.3% (pelvic obliquity PO = 2.0⁰, LMAD = 3.9⁰, and 42.9% had
asymmetric knee bending). The mean error between intraop C7-iCSPL and 2yr CVA
was 0.5 ± 1.3 cm. Worse C7-iCSPL was associated with higher risk for LE changes
(2.9 vs. 1.9 cm, p = 0.04) and remained significant in the multivariate (OR 3.0,
p < 0.01). Lower C7-iCSPL was associated with improved 2 year ODI MCID (1.8
vs. 3.2cm, p = 0.03), but did not remain significant in the multivariate.
Instead, patients with LE changes was the strongest independent predictor for
worse ODI MCID (OR 15.9, p < 0.01). Conclusion: For ASD patients
with coronal malalignment, optimizing intraoperative coronal correction may
reduce iatrogenic LE compensation, which was found to significantly contribute
to worse patient reported outcomes at 2 years.

## Degenerative Cervical

## 28

## P152: Laminoplasty for the treatment of multi-level cervical
radiculopathy; clinical outcome

Min-gu Jang

1

 and Woo-jin Shin

1

1

Orthopaedic Surgery, Konyang University Hospital, Seo-gu, Daejeon,
South Korea

Introduction: To evaluate the improvement of surgical outcome of
open-door laminoplasty for multilevel cervical radiculopathy. Material
and Methods: This study was conducted on 36 patients who
underwent laminoplasty surgery from January 2014 to December 2020. As
inclusion criteria, only patients with multilevel cervical radiculopathy
symptoms were included, patients with a modified JOA of 16 or higher and
Nurick grade 1 or lower were included, and patients with multilevel spinal
stenosis confirmed by MRI were included. All patients had mild to moderate
central stenosis, with or without neural foraminal stenosis. Patients who
also had myelopathy symptoms such as hand clumsiness, numbness, gait
disturbance, dysdiadokinesia, imbalance, hyperreflexia, or positive
Hoffman's reflex were excluded. To confirm the surgical outcome, the pain
severity, patient satisfaction, neurologic outcome, functional status, and
ADL, VAS and NDI were measured. As a surgical technique, a double-bent
mini-plate fixation after open-door laminoplasty was used through a
posterior approach. Results: The average age of the patients
was 62 years old. There were 25 men and 11 women. The average follow-up
period after surgery was 13 months. There were 13 cases with symptoms on the
right side, 14 cases with symptoms on the left, and 9 cases on both sides.
The level where the patient complained the most was C3456, and the level
that showed the most spinal stenosis in MRI was C34567. Considering the
patient's pain symptoms and MRI, the most frequently performed laminoplasty
level was C3456. Additional surgeries were C2 domeplasty (6 cases), C6
domeplasty (1 case), C7 domeplasty (5 cases), and unilateral foraminotomy (4
cases). VAS, pain severity, satisfaction, neurologic outcomes, functional
status, ADL, and NDI all showed statistically significant improvement
immediately after laminoplasty surgery and final follow-up compared to
before surgery. Conclusion: Open-door laminoplasty may be a
useful treatment option for patients who have multilevel radiculopathy with
mild to moderate spinal stenosis on MRI without myelopathy symptoms.

## 127

## P153: Incidence and risk factors for dysphagia following anterior or
posterior cervical spine surgery: a prospective study - interim
analysis

Vache Hambardzumyan

1

, Ryan Smith

1

, Tyler Pease

1

, Alexandra Thomson

1

, Ivan Ye

1

, Eugene Koh

1

, Daniel Gelb

1

, Steven Ludwig

1

, and Daniel Cavanaugh

1

1

Orthopaedics, University of Maryland, Spine Division, Baltimore,
United States

Introduction: Postoperative dysphagia is a well-known
complication following anterior cervical spine surgery, which includes
anterior cervical diskectomy and fusion (ACDF) and cervical disc replacement
(CDR). The reported incidence varies widely from 4-71% with an estimated
12-14% of patients experiencing persistent dysphagia after 1 year. Dysphagia
after posterior cervical decompression with or without fusions has been
reported to range in incidence from 9-11%. This study compares the incidence
of dysphagia following anterior and posterior cervical spine surgery.
Materials and Methods: Consecutive adult patients
undergoing primary, elective anterior or posterior cervical spine surgery
were included in this prospective observational study. The incidence of
dysphagia was determined by the Bazaz Dysphagia Scoring System and HSS
Dysphagia and Dysphonia Inventory (HSS-DDI) preoperatively, and at 2 weeks,
6 weeks, and 12 weeks postoperatively. The incidence of new onset
postoperative dysphagia was compared between the anterior and posterior
cervical spine surgery cohorts. Results: Currently 54 patients
have been enrolled in this study. A total of 46 patients underwent anterior
cervical spine surgery and 8 underwent posterior cervical spine surgery. The
mean age of all patients enrolled is 56.5 years old with 48.1% female. Using
the Bazaz grading, at the two-week follow-up 14 patients (35.0%) of the
anterior cohort and 1 patient (20.0%) in the posterior cohort experienced
moderate dysphagia. At the six-week follow-up, 9 patients (25.7%) in the
anterior cohort and 1 patient (14.3%) in the posterior cohort had moderate
dysphagia. At the twelve-week follow-up, 4 patients (16.0%) in the anterior
cohort and no patients in the posterior cohort reported moderate dysphagia.
There was no significant difference between the two cohorts using the Bazaz
grading. Using HSS-DDI, at the two-week follow-up, the anterior and
posterior cohorts experienced equivalent declines in HSS-DDI scores (101.7
vs. 105.6, p = 0.600). At six-week follow-up, the anterior and posterior
cohorts recovered to similar HSS-DDI scores (110.2 vs. 115.0, p = 0.825). At
twelve-week follow-up, there was no difference in the average HSS-DDI score
between the anterior and posterior cohorts (108.2 vs. 117.6, p = 0.351).
Conclusions: The preliminary results of this study suggest
there is no difference in the incidence of postoperative dysphagia between
patients undergoing anterior and posterior cervical surgery.

## 143

## P154: Using machine learning to identify patients likely to choose
surgery for one level anterior cervical disc herniations

Eeric Truumees

1

, Devender Singh

1

, Jeremiah Alexander

2

, Calvin Chandler

2

, Ashley Duncan

1

, Matthew Geck

2

, and John Stokes

1

1

Spine, Ascension Texas Spine and Scoliosis, Austin, United
States

2

Orthopedics, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, United
States

Introduction: While machine learning has shown great value in
medical diagnostics, its potential in assisting treatment decision making
continues to be explored. Aim: This study aims to investigate
if machine learning can identify factors associated with the likelihood of a
patient will ultimately choose surgical intervention for one level cervical
disc herniation? Materials/Methods: 130 retrospective chart
reviews were conducted on patients who presented with cervical disc
herniations causing radiculopathy to non-operative spine care providers at
an interdisciplinary clinic between 2015-2021. A course of non-operative
care was undertaken, however, if significant symptoms remains, surgical
consultation was offered. 88 patients were ultimately included in the
analysis, and 18 independent variables were collected across demographic,
clinical and patient reported outcome domains. Values were encoded using
one-hot encoding techniques, analyzed and subject to logistic regression
using SKLean, StatsModel and Logit models, with a focus on the recall
metric. By focusing on the recall metric, we aim to reduce the number of
false positives, or Type II errors in the model. Models were further
optimized by assessing multicollinearity of independent variables and
employing Area Under the Curve/Receiver Operating Characteristic (AUC-ROC)
and Precision-Recall threshold techniques. Results: Overall,
27.3% of the patients eventually choose surgical intervention with median
time to surgery 17 weeks from intake appointment. Sex was the only
demographic factor to have a significant impact on surgical intervention.
While the ratio of male to female patients was almost equal, 51% to 49%, 38%
of males underwent surgery compared to 16% of females. Body Mass Index
(BMI), smoking status and comorbidities did not significantly influence the
decision to have surgery, nor did any specific non-operative treatment
modality (physical therapy, prescriptions, epidural steroid injections). The
final optimized model yielded a test recall of 0.73. Three variables
significantly impacted the odds of surgical intervention. Male sex increased
the odds ratio of surgical intervention by 3.2 (p = 0.003); left symptom
laterality increased the odds ratio of surgical intervention by 3.2 (p =
0.01); and, interestingly, an increase in baseline Oswestry Disability Index
(ODI) score decreased the odds of surgical intervention marginally by 0.4 (p
= 0.02), although mean ODI scores were slightly higher in surgical patients
compared to non-operative patients(30 and 28, respectively).
Conclusions: Male gender and left symptom laterality
increased the odds of surgical intervention, while increase in baseline ODI
decreased the odds of surgical intervention in this data set. This may be
due in part to the use of ODI, which is typically used to determine
disability for low back pain, instead of the Neck Disability Index, which is
tailored to cervical spine symptoms. Sample size and variability between
physicians’ treatment protocols for acute cervical radiculopathy are
limitations of this study. A larger, prospective study would be the next
step in utilizing machine learning to predict which patients are most likely
to report satisfaction and a successful outcome.

## 345

## P155: An evaluation of the effects of surgical approach for cervical
degenerative disease on postoperative opioid use

Tariq Issa

1

, Yunsoo Lee

1

, Gregory Toci

1

, Parker Brush

1

, Yashas Reddy

1

, Sebastian Fras

1

, Skylar Nahi

1

, Delano Trenchfield

1

, Jeremy Heard

1

, Jose Canseco

1

, Alan Hilibrand

1

, Alexander Vaccaro

1

, Christopher Kepler

1

, and Gregory Schroeder

1

1

Division of Spine Surgery, Rothman Orthopaedic Institute,
Philadelphia, United States

Introduction: Posterior cervical fusion (PCF) and anterior
cervical discectomy and fusion (ACDF) are two main surgical management
options for the treatment of cervical spondylotic myelopathy. While ACDF is
less invasive than PCF which should theoretically reduce post-operative
pain, it is still unknown whether this leads to reduce opioid use in
patients with similar construct lengths. Therefore, the primary objective of
this study was to evaluate whether PCF increases post-operative opioid use
compared to ACDF for patients undergoing 2-4-level fusion. Material
and Methods: A retrospective review was conducted of all patients
who underwent 2- to 4-level ACDF or PCF at an urban academic medical center
and our affiliated sites from January 2017 to August 2021. Our state’s
prescription drug monitoring program (PDMP) was queried for filled opioid
prescriptions, using milligrams morphine equivalents (MME). Prescriptions
filled up to two months prior to surgery were identified to determine the
number of patients taking opioids pre-operatively. Post-operative opioid
prescriptions were evaluated for 1-year post-operatively. Univariate
analysis was utilized to compare PCF and ACDF cohorts. Multivariate linear
regression was performed to assess independent predictors of short-term
(0-30 days), subacute (30-90 days), and long-term (3-12 months) opioid
prescription habits. Results: A total of 239 patients
undergoing ACDF and 101 patients undergoing PCF who could be identified in
the PDMP were included in this analysis. Patients undergoing PCF were older
(61.5 vs. 57.8 years, p = 0.0049) and more likely to have more levels fused
(3.08 vs. 2.45, p < 0.001). While a similar percent of patients were
using opioids both 1-2 months and 0-30 days pre-operatively, patients
undergoing PCF refilled greater MMEs during both time periods.
Post-operatively, patients undergoing PCF refilled more MMEs in the first 30
days (127.4 vs 86.4, p = 0.0001) and refilled a non-significantly greater
quantity from 30-90 days (39.3 vs 23.7, p = 0.086) and 3-12 months (105.3 vs
60.2, p = 0.059). A similar percent of patients in both groups had refilled
at least one prescription after 90 days (42.6% vs 36.0%, p = 0.252). On
multivariate linear regression, PCF (β = 33.9, p = 0.003), 30-day
preoperative MMEs (β = 0.17, p = 0.029) and a history of depression (β =
39.4, p = 0.001) predicted increased 30-day post-operative MMEs. Only 30-day
preoperative MMEs predicted opioid prescriptions filled from 30-90 days (β =
0.31, p < 0.001) and 3-12 months (β = 1.15, p < 0.001).
Conclusion: Posterior cervical fusion independently
predicted increased short-term opioid usage up to 30-days post-operatively
irrespective of other patient risk factors, but these effects did not
persist. However, short-term pre-operative opioid prescription MMEs were
independently predictive of the quantity of opioids refilled and persistent
long-term opioid use up to 1 year post-operatively. Providers should
carefully consider prescribing opioids pre-operatively as it may impact
long-term patient reliance on opioids for pain relief.

## 434

## P156: Retro-odontoid pseudotumor in tourette Syndrome a case
report

Felipe Mourao

1

, Juan Aquino

1

, and Felipe Sanchez Ribeiro

1

1

Neurosurgery, Nova Neuro, Nova Iguaçu, Brazil

Introduction: A retro-odontoid pseudotumour compressing the
spinal cord and causing myelopathy is often associated with an inflammatory
condition such as rheumatoid arthritis. A degenerative non-inflammatory
retro-odontoid pseudotumour responsible for clinically relevant spinal cord
compression is a rare condition described in small clinical series and is
likely associated with craniovertebral junction hypermobility or instability
– like conditions. Tourette syndrome is a disorder that involves repetitive
movements or unwanted sounds (tics), including offensive words, that can be
difficult to be controlled. Males are about four times more likely than
females to develop this disorder. Tics are sudden, brief and intermittent
movements and the hallmark sign of Tourette Syndrome. The head jerking is a
common motor tic of patient that have the Tourette Syndrome. Patient that
have repetitive movement of the head like in the Tourette Syndrome have a
higher risk to develop chronic atlanto-axial instability and form retro
odontoid non-neoplasic mass (pseudotumor) that can cause myelopathy.
Material and Methods: A 63 year old male with more than 40
years of head jerking tics caused by Tourette Syndrome, began in 2019
feeling numbness in upper extremity and difficult to walk. Examination
showed that he had marked spastic tetraparesis, with muscle power of at
least Grade 4 in the right upper and lower extremities. Sensory disturbance
in a distal (stocking-glove) distribution and bilateral clumsiness of the
hands were observed. There was hyperreflexia throughout the upper and lower
extremities. He did not show any evidences of rheumatoid arthritis that met
the criteria of the American Rheumatism Association and bone scintigraphy
study was negative for any malignancy disorder. Magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) showed a large and smooth mass behind the odontoid process compressing
the spinal cord. The density of the mass was intermediate on T1-weighted
images and low on T2-weighted images with a intramedullary T2 hyperintense
signal in the same level. Results: A posterior surgical
approach was used, the patient was undergone to a Goel and Harms technique
of stabilizing C1C2 and the posterior arch of atlas was resected. In a
segment MRI in five months after the surgery the retro odontoid mass have
reduced and have no more compression of the spinal cord at that level.
Conclusion: For several years, direct removal of the lesion
through an anterior or lateral approach has been advocated as the best
surgical option. However, in the last decade the posterior approach to the
craniovertebral junction, to perform C1-C2 fixation and C1 laminectomy
without removal of the retro-odontoid tissue, has demonstrated its efficacy
in reducing retro-odontoid pannus as well as in obtaining improvement of
myelopathy.

## 459

## P157: Is there an association between rotator cuff tear and cervical
spine pathology? A single-center retrospective study

Filipa Cordeiro

1

, Sérgio Pita

2

, Ana Ribau

1

, Sara Diniz

1

, and Pedro Neves

3

1

Ortopedia, Centro Hospitalar Universitário do Porto, Porto,
Portugal

2

Ortopedia, Centro Hospitalar Baixo Vouga, Aveiro, Portugal

3

Hôpital Privé Arnault Tzanck Mougins-Sophia Antipolis, Mougins,
France

Introduction: Patients with rotator cuff tendinopathy normally
present shoulder pain and weakness. These symptoms are similar to those
presented by some patients with cervical radiculopathy, making the
differential diagnosis sometimes difficult. Since the innervation of
shoulder girdle musculature is provided by cervical roots (C4, C5 and C6),
the aim of this study was to investigate if there is a correlation between
cervical neurological compression and rotator cuff degenerative pathology.
Material and Methods: It was conducted a single center
retrospective study through the analysis of all shoulder Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (MRI) performed between 2017 and 2021, in a total of 1129 patients.
Patients with non-degenerative rotator cuff pathology were excluded (285
patients). In 175 of the remaining 844 patients, a cervical MRI was
performed in relation to cervical and/or radicular symptoms. Patients were
grouped in 6 categories based on shoulder MRI findings: no injuries,
calcifying tendinopathy, tendinosis, partial tear, complete tear and massive
rotator cuff tear. With regards to cervical MRI, patients were grouped in
seven categories: no degenerative changes, C3-C4 central compression, C4
foraminal compression, C4-C5 central compression, C5 foraminal compression,
C5-C6 central compression and C6 foraminal compression. A statistical
analysis was performed to study the correlation between rotator cuff
pathology and cervical radiculopathy. Results: A total of 175
patients were included in this study, 121 females (69%) and 54 males (31%).
The mean age was 56 years-old (SD 11.5). Sixty-six of these patients
presented with tendinosis (38%), 49 with partial tear (28%), 32 with
complete tear (18%), 9 with calcifying tendinopathy (5%) and 9 with massive
tear (5%). The remaining patients had no rotator cuff lesions (6%).
Concerning the cervical MRIs, 54 patients (31%) had no radicular or cord
compression. The most affected levels were C5 and C6, with 14 patients with
foraminal compression of C6 (8%), 11 with C5-C6 central compression (6%) and
9 with foraminal compression of C5 (5%). From the statistical analysis, it
was found that men presented with a significant higher cervical pathology -
88,9% (p < 0.01). Advanced age was also associated with more cervical
lesions – mean age with lesions was 58 years (SD 10.6) vs. mean age with no
lesions was 49 years (SD 12), p < 0.01. There was no statistically
significant correlation between degenerative findings in cervical MRI and
shoulder MRI (p = 0.870), namely the association between C4, C5 and C6 and
rotator cuff pathology. Conclusion: Despite the anatomical
relationship between shoulder musculature and cervical roots, it was not
possible to establish a correlation between rotator cuff injury patterns and
cervical neurological compression.
Based on this study, we cannot affirm that central or foraminal compression
predispose or potentiate rotator cuff tears.

## 489

## P158: Myoarchitectonic spinolaminoplasty using hydroxyapatite spacer
versus new titanium plate

Seishi Matsui

1,2

 and Naoki Shinohara

2

1

Neurosurgery, Kajiura Hospital, Matsuyama City, Japan

2

Neurosurgery, HITO Hospital, Shikokuchuo City, Japan

Introduction: Myoarchitectonic spinolaminoplasty (MSLP) is an
effective spinous process-splitting double door laminoplasty for compressive
cervical myelopathy. It preserves all musculoskeletal attachments of the
posterior neck, so that it could prevent postoperative neck pain and loss of
cervical lordosis. In the procedure of MSLP, an original hydroxyapatite (HA)
spacer is usually utilized as a substitute for the spinous process, which is
fixed to the laminar flaps and the spinous process flaps with surgical
sutures. The authors, however, have used a newly designed titanium plate
(Baslet2) instead of the original HA spacer since 2018. The Basket2 is fixed
to the laminar flaps with titanium screws and to the spinous process flaps
with surgical sutures. The fixation with the titanium screw must be more
rigid and technically easier than the fixation with the surgical suture.
This study aimed to compare the operative time, the clinical and
radiological outcomes of MSLP using the HA spacer and the Basket2 in
patients with compressive cervical myelopathy. Material and
Methods: 52 patients with compressive cervical myelopathy who
underwent MSLP in three or four laminae were enrolled. 28 patients (19 males
and 9 females, a mean age of 65.8 years) with the use of the HA spacer were
classified as HA group and 24 patients (12 males and 12 females, a mean age
of 63.6 years) with the Basket2 were as B2 group. The operation time was
assessed. Preoperative and two-year follow-up evaluations included the
Neurosurgical Cervical Spine Scale (NCSS, full score 14 points) for
neurological condition and radiological analysis including C2-C7 lordotic
angle in neutral position (LA), flexion-extension range of motion for C2-C7
(ROM) and C2-C7 sagittal vertical axis (SVA). Results: The mean
operative time was 150 minutes in HA group and 112 minutes in B2 group,
while the mean number of treated laminae was 3.6 in both groups. Mean NCSS
was improved from 8.5 to 12.5 in HA group and from 9.5 to 12.9 in B2 group.
Mean LA increased from 4.8° to 8.2° in HA group and from 6.0° to 10.1° in B2
group. Mean ROM decreased from 31.5° to 20.5° in HA group and from 35.0° to
26.1° in B2 group. Mean SVA extended from 18.5 mm to 21.6 mm in HA group and
from 23.4 mm to 24.7 mm in B2 group. As a result, significant differences
between the two groups were observed in operative time and ROM at two-year
follow-up. Conclusion: In MSLP, the Basket2 was more useful
than the HA spacer in terms of shorter operative time and less postoperative
ROM loss. It was speculated that the differences of material, profile,
fixation method between these two spacers were involved in the results.

## 653

## P159: Is plating necessary in two-level ACDF surgery? Prospective
controlled study

Velmurugan Kandasamy

1

 and Sathish Muthu

2

1

Department of Orthopaedics, Government Royapettah Hospital, Chennai,
India

2

Department of Orthopaedics, Government Medical College, Dindigul,
India

Introduction: Anterior cervical decompression and fusion (ACDF)
surgeries are one of the most commonly performed spinal procedures. Despite
its frequent usage, there is no consensus among surgeons on the usage of
implants to achieve fusion when performed at two levels. We aim to
investigate the necessity of an additional anterior cervical plate over the
cages used in two-level ACDF surgery concerning the clinical and
radiological outcomes. Methods: We performed a prospective
comparative controlled clinical trial among 48 patients who underwent
two-level ACDF surgery for degenerative conditions of the spine with a
minimum follow-up of 1 year. The patients received either standalone cages
(SAC) or cage with plate (CP) constructs to achieve fusion at the two levels
operated. Clinical outcomes such as neck disability index (NDI) and visual
analog scale (VAS) score for pain were assessed at preoperative, 3,6, and 12
months post-operative period along with complications. During the
above-mentioned visits, radiological parameters such as fusion status,
subsidence, C2-C7 lordosis angle, fusion segment angle, and adjacent segment
disc space narrowing were analyzed. Results: The mean age of
the population included in the study was 49.4 ± 4.5 years with 14 females in
each group. In comparison to the CP construct for two-level ACDF surgery,
the SAC group demonstrated better NDI scores at 3, 6, and 12 months
follow-up but the difference was not statistically significant (p = 0.070).
We did not note any significant difference in the VAS scores between the two
groups (p = 0.208). At 1 year follow-up, we noted significant cage
subsidence in 33% of patients in the SAC group and while subsidence was
noted only in 16.6% of patients in the CP group (p = 0.021). However, none
of the patients with subsidence reported any symptoms that required revision
surgery. We noted a significant increase in post-operative dysphagia in the
CP group compared to the SAC group (p < 0.001). We also did not note any
significant difference in the other radiological parameters such as C2-C7
lordosis or fusion segment angle or adjacent segment disc space narrowing.
We did not note any significant difference in the fusion rate at one year
for both SAC (91.6%) and CP (95.8%) constructs of two-level ACDF surgery (p
= 0.32). Conclusion: The use of plating in two-level ACDF
surgery significantly reduced the incidence of asymptomatic cage subsidence
compared to the SAC group along with a significant increase in the incidence
of postoperative dysphagia. We did not find any other additive advantage
with the use of an anterior cervical plate over a cage construct in
two-level ACDF surgeries to recommend its routine use.

## 721

## P160: Laminectomy alone for cervical spondylotic myelopathy: a CSORN
study

Mathieu Laflamme

1

, Nicolas Dea

2

, and Greg McIntosh

3

1

Division of Neurosurgery, CHU de Québec - Université Laval, Québec
City, Canada

2

Neurosurgery, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
Canada

3

Canadian Spine Outcomes and Research Network, Markdale,
Canada

Introduction: Most posterior cervical decompression is
supplemented by instrumentation and fusion in North America. However,
laminectomy alone remains a common procedure in certain parts of the world,
including Europe. Results comparing these two interventions are
contradictory in the literature. Our objectives were 1) to better defined
the cervical myelopathy population who are treated with a decompression
alone; 2) to assess the outcome of patient treated with a decompression
alone and 3) to compare their outcomes to a cohort of posterior
decompression and fusion patients. Methods: The Canadian Spine
Outcomes and Research Network (CSORN) is a multicenter national prospective
registry. Patients with CSM who underwent laminectomy without
instrumentation as their index surgery were identified from this registry.
Clinical, surgical and radiological data were extracted at baseline and
post-operatively. A propensity match analyses was conducted with patients
from the same registry who underwent decompression and instrumentation.
Groups were matched according to age, mJOA, C2-7 Cobb angle and number of
levels decompressed on 1:1 ratio. Primary outcome was the Neck Disability
Index (NDI) at 1 year post-operatively. Secondary outcomes included
reoperation, SF-36, post-operative cervical alignment, neck and arm pain and
satisfaction at 1 year. Results: From the 274 patients enrolled
in the registry, 34 met inclusion criteria. The mean age was 66.12 years and
28 (82.4%) were males. The mean mJOA at baseline was 13.15 and the mean Cobb
angle (C2-7) was -7.70° (lordotic). These two baseline parameters were
significantly different from the rest of the cohort (240 patients) who
underwent posterior instrumentation with a mJOA of 11.82 and a Cobb angle of
2.57°. There was no significant difference at baseline between the cohorts
for PROs (Neck pain, NDI, SF-36). The number of levels involved (3.77 vs
2.06), the operative time (174 vs 102 min) and the estimated blood loss (330
vs 184 ml) were significantly higher in the instrumented group, but length
of stay (6.42 vs 4.67 days) was similar. At 12 months, there was no
significant difference for NDI mean change between the laminectomy alone
(-14.07) and the laminectomy with fusion (-11.90). There was also no
difference at one year for mean change in mJOA and SF-36.
Conclusions: In this population of Canadian patients who
underwent posterior surgery for CSM, patients selected for a laminectomy
alone had a better mJOA score and a more lordotic alignment at baseline.
Laminectomy alone involved less decompressed levels, shorter operative time
and decreased blood loss. The improvement in mJOA and PROs was not different
at one year post-operatively between the laminectomy alone group and the
laminectomy with fusion. In a carefully selected population, a simple
decompression is a good treatment alternative.

## 727

## P161: Application of posterior endoscopic cervical foraminotomy (PECF)
for recurrent radiculopathy after anterior cervical discectomy and fusion
(ACDF) surgery

Se-yi Chen

1

1

Neurosurgery, Chung Shan Medical University Hospital, Taiwan,
Taichung, Taiwan

Introduction: Anterior cervical discectomy and fusion (ACDF)
surgery is a standard treatment for cervical spondylosis myelopathy or
radiculopathy disease. Though the outcome of ACDF is quite satisfactory,
recurrent radiculopathy due to re-stenosis or adjacent degeneration are
inevitable. We applied posterior endoscopic cervical foraminotomy (PECF) as
salvage surgery after ACDF in 10 patients (14 levels). Material and
Method: We performed PECF in 10 patients (14 levels) in the past
5 years for recurrent radiculopathy after ACDF. The time to developing
recurrent radiculopathy ranges from 8 months to 3 years. Mostly were
unilateral radiculopathy and single level. Before surgery intervention, all
patients were treated with adequate medication and rehabilitation. Routine
image study include bilateral oblique view X-ray, computed tomography (CT)
and magnetic resonance image (MRI) of cervical spine. Result:
Only one of the 10 patients didn’t response immediately but showed gradual
subtle recovery after decompression surgery in the following 6 months.
There’s another 1 patient showed good sensory function recovery, but
transient motor palsy for 2 weeks. Otherwise, all the other patients showed
motor or sensory function recovery, without symptom deterioration. None of
these patients presented instability or mechanical pain after operation.
None of these patient need repeat anterior surgery. Conclusion:
PECF, a minimal invasive posterior cervical surgery, serves as an efficient
and effective salvage surgery for re-stenosis after ACDF. This procedure
prevents the patients and surgeons suffering from scarring trajectory and
longer fusion levels.

## 891

## P162: Forestier's disease presenting as dysphagia and Dysphonia - a rare
case report

Dr Sajan Hegde

1

, Sharan Achar T

1

, Vigneshwara Badikkilaya

1

, and Umesh Kanade P

1

1

Orthopaedics, Apollo Hospitals Chennai India, Chennai,
India

Introduction: Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH) or
Forestier’s disease is a common, but under reported disease affecting the
elderly population. It is characterized by the ossification of soft tissues,
primarily of ligament, tendon, or joint capsule insertion, and can cause
back pain and spinal stiffness. Exuberant osteophyte formation of the
anterior longitudinal ligament of the cervical spine can cause dysphagia,
most frequently and dysphonia very rarely. In this study we report one such
rare case. Material and Method: A 77 years old male K/C/O DM,
HTN, BPH, CAD, suffering from progressive dysphagia since 1 year and acute
onset dysphonia since 10 days. Semi-solid as well as liquid diet caused
aspiration necessitating ryle’s tube usage. After thorough evaluation by
otolaryngologist, neurologist, Large anterior cervical osteophytic spur at
C6 vertebrae level was detected on x-ray and computed tomography (CT)
compressing oesophagus with impingement of right recurrent laryngeal nerve.
Results: Patient was operated for DISH through anterior
Smith Robinson’s approach and the C6-7 osteophyte complex was excised. The
patient’s symptoms gradually improved and the same was confirmed by
resolution of the protruding submucosal mass, edema and inflammation along
the posterior pharyngeal wall by fiberscope examination.
Conclusions: Forestier’s disease is currently a growing
source of complications in elderly, mostly dysphagia and less commonly upper
respiratory airway obstruction and dysphonia. Surgical intervention is a
good way to relieve these symptoms. We rarely see the symptoms of dysphonia,
and the management of this complication requires a multidisciplinary team
and thorough approach, with spine surgeons, otolaryngologist and
dieticians.

## 904

## P163: Endoscopic transforaminal cervical foraminoplasty after anterior
cervical arthrodesis: case report

Filipa Adan e Silva

1

, Melanie Ribau da Costa

1

, Pedro Neves

2

, Arnaldo Sousa

1

, and Paulo Costa

1

1

Centro Hospitalar Universitário do Porto, Porto, Portugal

2

Hôpital Privé Arnault Tzanck, Mougins-Sophia Antipolis,
France

Introduction: Percutaneous Endoscopic Spine Surgery is a
minimally invasive surgical technique with good clinical results, and in the
last decades it has been a widely used procedure and in constant
development, mainly in its use at the lumbar spine level. In fact, its use
to treat cases of degenerative cervical pathology refractory to conservative
treatment has been increasing and following this paradigm in recent years.
Material and Methods: Case report of a patient submitted to
C6-C7 left Posterior Cervical Foraminoplasty via endoscopic transforaminal
approach after C6-C7 Anterior Cervical Arthrodesis. Results: A
41-year-old patient referred because of neck pain with irradiation to the
left upper limb with ipsilateral paresthesia, no other changes in the
neurological examination. In the CT and MRI study, C6-C7
spondylodyscarthrosis with bilateral foraminal disc-osteophitary protrusions
more pronounced on the left was observed, with radicular compromise. Thus,
in January 2020, he underwent Discectomy and Anterior Cervical Arthrodesis
C6-C7 without intercurrences, with improvement of the complaints in the
postoperative period. However, after the fourth month of postoperative
follow-up, there was a recurrence of complaints of left brachialgia, without
paresthesias or other changes in the neurological examination. A new CT and
MRI imaging study was performed, which revealed residual left foraminal
stenosis at the same level. In November 2021, he underwent C6-C7 left
Posterior Cervical Foraminoplasty via endoscopic transforaminal route under
general anesthesia, with consequent verification of C7 root release, without
any complication. In the postoperative period, the patient had a good
clinical evolution, being asymptomatic at 6 months of postoperative
follow-up. Conclusion: Percutaneous Endoscopic Spine Surgery
has numerous advantages well reported in the literature, such as less damage
to the surrounding tissues, less postoperative pain, shorter hospital stay
and faster recovery, among others. Indeed, among the various indications for
this technique, degenerative foraminal stenosis has been increasingly taken
into account for the use of it, namely in the lumbar region, using
endoscopic drill for foraminoplasty. However, the use of this technique for
cervical pathology is still scarce and little reported in the literature,
and the clinical advantages that can arise from its development are
notorious. In fact, this technique has very gratifying clinical results that
have encouraged investment and development, particularly in the cervical
region, with promising prospects for the future.

## 907

## P164: Predisposing factors for dysphagia after anterior cervical
discectomy and fusion (ACDF): a retrospective review of 461 patients

Tuna Pehlivanoglu

1

, Bahadir Gokcen

2

, Kursat Kara

1

, Tugay Yagci

1

, O. Nuri Eroglu

1

, and Cagatay Ozturk

1

1

Dept. of Orthopaedic Surgery, Liv Hospital Ulus, Liv Spine Center
certified by AOSpine, Istanbul, Turkey

2

Dept. of Orthopaedic Surgery, Liv Hospital Vadi, Liv Spine Center
certified by AOSpine, Istanbul, Turkey

Introduction: Dsyphagia as a common problem following ACDF
procedure, was reported to deteriorate patient’s quality of life with
significance. However, no certain data exists regarding the prevalence and
predisposing factors in terms of dysphagia. The aim of the present study was
to assess the predisposing factors on the development of dysphagia after
single to double level ACDF surgery on a large, homogenous group of
patients, while reporting about the prevalence. Materials and
Methods: 507 consecutive patients with cervical degenerative disc
disease (DDD), who underwent 1 to 2 levels of ACDF between 2015-2020 in a
single institution were analyzed. Patients with myelopathy (21), history of
trauma (14), history of previous cervical spine surgery (11) were excluded.
Remaining 461 patients (238F, 223M) with a mean age at surgery of 51.4 and
mean follow-up duration of 68.4 months were included. Patients were
evaluated with NDI scores, JOA scores, dysphagia handicap index DHI, and
SF-36 scores. Subgroup analyses were conducted to assess the possible
relation between high DHI scores and possible predisposing factors of
dysphagia. Results: Patients had a mean duration of operation
of 102.7mins. 18 patients were detected to have pre-operative dysphagia.
Early post-operative transient dysphagia and persistent (> 6 months)
dysphagia were detected in 146 (31.7%) - 52 patients (11.2%). All patients
with persistent dysphagia were detected to have complete recovery at the
latest follow-up. Mean NDI and JOA scores were detected to be improved from
35.4-11.1 to 10.6-16.2 (all Grade I) at the final follow-up (p < 0.001
for both). SF-36 PCS (from 44.1 to 52.8) and MCS scores (from 45.3 to 53
showed significant improvements at the last FU. Subgroup analysis yielded
significantly higher DHI scores in: smokers, in patients with 2-level ACDF,
in single level ACDF involving C2-3 and/or C3-4, longer duration of
operations (> 90 mins), pre-op NDI-score > 36 and history of
pre-operative dysphagia. Conclusion: The present study shed a
light to the multivariate etiology of dysphagia following 1 to 2 level ACDF
procedures. It was concluded, that being a smoker, having a pre-operative
history of dysphagia, having a high pre-operative NDI-score, having 2 levels
of fusion, having single level ACDF procedure comprising upper cervical
levels (C2-3 or C3-4) were predisposing factors to dysphagia after ACDF.
However, even persisting dysphagia was noted to be resolved at the last
follow-up. It was also reported that, ACDF procedure was providing
successful clinical and functional outcomes, together with significantly
improved quality of life underlining its safety and efficacy in cervical
DDD.

## 926

## P165: Posterior cervical decompression and fusion - is there an advantage
of going to C2? - a retrospective data base review

Anna Rienmueller

1,2

, Thorsten Jentzsch

2,3

, Jamie Wilson

2,4

, Armaan Malhotra

2

, and Eric Massicotte

2

1

Orthopaedic Surgery, Medical University Vienna, Vienna,
Austria

2

Department of Neurosurgery, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Canada

3

Department of Orthopedics, University Hospital Balgrist, Zurich,
Switzerland

4

Department of Neurosurgery, University of Nebraska, Omaha, United
States

Introduction: Posterior cervical decompression and fusion (PCDF)
is a common procedure to treat patients with multilevel degenerative
cervical myelopathy (CM). Standard of care includes decompression and fusion
of spinal levels involved, which is most often C3-6. Adjacent segment
deterioration at the upper instrumented vertebra (UIV) C3 due to construct
failure and loss of deformity correction might lead to increased strain on
the spinal cord and its clinical implications within follow-up time. We
hypothesize that loss of deformity correction and revision surgery in
patients undergoing PCDF can be avoided with inclusion of C2 in comparison
to ending the fusion at C3. Methods: In a retrospective
database review, we included all patients who underwent multilevel (minimum
3 level) primary PCDF for CM with an UIV of C3 or C2 between July 2005 and
December 2018. Patients with incomplete clinical and radiological data as
well as follow up < 1 year were excluded. Intraoperative parameters such
as surgical time, blood loss and complications as well as follow up and
revision surgeries were compared. C2-C7 lordosis, T1 slope, proximal and
distal lordosis, as well as proximal and distal anterolisthesis were
measured on pre-, post-op and follow-up radiographs and compared. To compare
between groups the Wilcoxon rank sum and chi-square tests were used. A
logistic regression model accounted for the a priori confounder age and the
confounder levels fused. Results: A total of 91 patients were
included, 33 with an UIV of C2 and 58 ending at C3. Although no difference
in number of levels fused the surgical time (215 min versus 185 min, p =
0.017) and blood loss (650ml versus 500 ml, p = 0-042) was significantly
higher in the UIV C2 group, no difference was found for complications.
Clinical outcome represented by the neck disability index (NDI), number of
revisions, and reason for revision showed no difference between the two
groups. Post-op proximal lordosis was significantly greater in the UIV C2
group (p = 0.001), change of overall lordosis was significantly higher in
the UIV C2 group (0.020). Discussion: We didn’t find a
statistically significant difference in clinical outcome between PCDF UIV C2
and UIV C3. Surgical time and blood loos very significantly higher. Ending
the fusion construct at C2 lead to higher proximal lordosis as well as
significantly higher change in overall lordosis in the UIV C2 group. Further
prospective studies including longer follow-ups will have to prove if better
biomechanical alignment is necessary to avoid clinically relevant adjacent
segment degeneration at C2/3.

## 950

## P166: Anomalous vertebral artery course causing radiculopathy: a case
report and review of relevant literature

Hussam Jabri

1

, Kuo-Tai Chen

2

, Sagar Sharma

3

, Yanting Liu

4

, and Jin-Sung Luke Kim

4

1

Neurosurgery/Spine, Prince Sultan Military Medical City, Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia

2

Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Chia-Yi, Taiwan

3

Smt. SCL General Hospital, Smt NHL Municipal Medical College,
Ahmedabad, India

4

Seoul St. Mary Hospital, Seoul, South Korea

We present a case of cervical radiculopathy caused by an abnormal vertebral
artery course. Ectatic vertebral artery course remains one of the rare
causes of cervical radiculopathy. Therefore, overlooking this anomaly might
lead to vertebral artery injury during cervical radiculopathy surgery. We
include a review of all 18 surgically treated cases present in literature to
date; and their relevant clinical course.
Discussion: Cervical radiculopathy is commonly caused by
degenerative/discogenic herniated disc. However, other rare causes like
ectatic vertebral artery course, congenital lesions, arteriovenous
malformation, and tumors should be ruled out, especially when no disc
herniation is identified on imaging. Most surgeons should continue to locate
the vertebral artery and its course during the preoperative evaluation for
anterior or posterior cervical spine surgery, as this is a crucial step to
avoid iatrogenic injury to these vessels. As previously mentioned, the
prevalence of vertebral artery loop formation (VALF) in a cadaveric study of
222 cervical spines was 2.7%.In another series of cervicobrachial pain
without disc pathology, 13 out of 173 patients had VALF, suggesting that the
incidence is around 7.51%.The etiology of this loop formation remains
unknown but congenital abnormality, or as postulated degenerative theory,
might be implicated. Oga et al., concluded after reviewing 22 cases that the
extent of tortuosity is correlated with the severity of cervical
spondylosis. This degenerative theory was also backed by Sakiadia et al.,
who postulated that the initial step in a process which is flowed by
pulsatile pressure leads to migration and erosion of the adjacent
structures. This theory might be supported by the higher occurrence of this
pathology in older population. Clinical presentation of cases with VALF
varies based on pain, radiculopathy, myelopathy or a combination of
symptoms. Most patients may be asymptomatic and only diagnosed incidentally
during imaging for trauma or other purposes. In neurologically symptomatic
cases, X-ray demonstrates an enlargement of the foramen transversarium with
an erosion of the adjacent bone and sclerotic margins related to pulsatile
arterial pressure. These bony details are better appreciated in axial and
reconstructed CT images. Contrasted CT and MRI show signal void in the
foramen with nerve compression. Other radiologic examinations such as CT,
MRI, and MRA might also be equally informative in demonstrating the course
and exact location of tortuosity. Furthermore, Doppler ultrasonography can
help intraoperatively in confirming the location of artery. Intraoperative
indocyanine green video angiography could be utilized; however,
interpretation of the signal intensity should be carefully monitored, which
varies with bolus timing, artery distance from the periosteal sheath, and
presence of robustious venous plexus. The ultimate surgical goal is freeing
the compressed neural structure. Although, the anterior approach that
exposes and frees the vertebral artery carries the risk of recurrent
laryngeal nerve and carotid artery injuries. Exposure carried out using
laterally passed longus colli to expose the transverse process might damage
the sympathetic nerves and may lead to Horner’s syndrome. The vessel loop
can also be relocated, but the anterior approach is not possible above C3
level.

## 974

## P167: Anterior cervical surgery for non-contiguous, "skip-level" cervical
degeneration: a PRISMA systematic review

Jerry Robinson

1

, Kortnie Broschinsky

2

, David Gendelberg

3

, Andrew Chung

4

, Jose Jimenez-Almonte

5

, Babak Khandehroo

1

, Sheila Kahwaty

1

, Neel Anand

1

, Rod Oskouian

6

, and Jens Chapman

6

1

Department of Orthopedics, Cedars Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles,
United States

2

Department of Orthopedics, Summa Health System, Akron, United
States

3

Department of Orthopedics, San Francisco Orthopedics Trauma
Institute, University of California, San Francisco, United
States

4

Banner Health, Department of Orthopedics, Pheonix, AZ, United
States

5

Department of Orthopedics, Central Florida Bone & Joint
Institute, Orange City, FL, United States

6

Department of Spine Surgery, Swedish Neuroscience Institute,
Seattle, WA, United States

Introduction: Non-contiguous, “skip-level” cervical degeneration
is a phenomenon where two degenerative cervical discs are separated by a
normal, intermediate cervical disc. Skip-level degeneration presents an
interesting challenge to the spine surgeon because there is not a clear
consensus regarding optimal treatment. To date, no systematic review has
assessed the literature for guidance on this condition. Materials and
Methods: We conducted a search of the PubMed, Cochran, and OVID
databases through February 2022 using the Preferred Reporting Items for
Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines. We limited the
search to include full-text, English language publications that had any
reference to “non-contiguous” or “skip-level” cervical pathology to answer
the following questions: (1) What is the incidence of non-contiguous,
“skip-level” cervical degeneration? (2) What biomechanical data exists
regarding anterior cervical ‘skip-level” constructs? (3) What does the
clinical data suggest regarding outcomes for anterior cervical “skip-level”
surgery? Results: Our initial PRISMA search yielded 861
publications, which resulted in 21 unique publications after application of
inclusion/exclusion criteria. The first question resulted in one unique
publication describing the incidence of non-contiguous, “skip level”
cervical degeneration ranging from 1.6% to 22% depending on the number of
cervical levels involved. For question two, the biomechanical data is
conflicting. Cadaveric models may indicate that skip-level constructs result
in an equal distribution of forces to the remaining cervical segments, while
finite element analyses indicate that the distribution of forces may depend
on the specific “skip-level” construct. For the last question, the clinical
data suggests that any anterior surgical construct alters the normal
biomechanics of the cervical spine and can lead to adjacent/intermediate
degeneration; however, constructs including arthroplasty might alter the
normal biomechanics to a lesser degree. Conclusions: There
remains a significant deficit of quality publications regarding
non-contiguous, “skip-level” cervical degeneration. Spine researchers may
benefit from radiographic reports that specifically name and innumerate the
incidence of non-contiguous, “skip-level” cervical degeneration. Due to
discrepancy in biomechanical data, further publications regarding the
biomechanics of skip-level anterior cervical constructs are necessary. The
literature may benefit from non-contiguous anterior cervical clinical
studies that differentiate post-operative intermediate disc degeneration
rates from adjacent level degeneration rates.

## 1059

## P168: Diagnosis of C4 radiculopathy

Yasuhisa Tanaka

1

1

Orthopaedics, Tohoku Central Hospital, Yamagata, Japan

Introduction: Cervical nerve root compression causes neck and
scapular pain, and its location indicates the affected root. Furthermore, C5
to C8 radiculopathy is usually accompanied by specific neurologies. However,
features of C4 radiculopathy are not well-known. Material and
Methods: We retrospectively studied patients who underwent
posterior foraminotomy of the unilateral C3-4 intervertebral level between
2012 and 2018 and showed improvements within 1 month after surgery. We
collected data on symptom duration, site of neck pain, Spurling test,
imaging findings, selective root block (SRB) effect, and surgical results
using a cervical radiculopathy scoring system (normal = 20 points).
Results: In total, eight patients were included, with mean
age of 73 (range, 52-83) years, and mean follow-up of 2 years. Symptom
durations were 3 months to 5 years and exceeded 1 year in five patients. All
patients reported unilateral nape pain of the suboccipital and upper
trapezius region. Spurling test elicited reproduction or increase of nape
pain in every patient. Plain radiographs showed facet joint hypertrophy and
foraminal stenosis at C3-4 level on the symptomatic side in every case.
Those findings were also clear on magnetic resonance imaging and computed
tomography scans. In five patients who underwent SRB, pain reproduction and
its temporary relief were obtained. Cervical radiculopathy scores ranged
from 9 to 15 points before surgery, and from 16 to 20 after surgery. Mean
improvement rate was 90%. Conclusion: Elderly patients
suffering for long time from unilateral nape pain with positive Spurling
test may have C4 radiculopathy.

## 1060

## P169: Translation and validation of a Hindi version of Japanese
Orthopedic Association Score for cervical myelopathy and radiculopathy -
Cross sectional Study

Varun Agarwal

1

1

Orthopedics, Rohilkhand Medical College and Hospital, Bareilly,
India

Introduction: Objective is to evaluate the validity and
cross-cultural adaptation of the translated Hindi version with Indian
modification of the Japanese Orthopedic Association
(In-mJOA-H score) for Cervical Myelopathy and compare
Nurick scale with JOA scores. A translated Hindi version of the Indian
modification of Japanese Orthopedic Association (In-mJOA-H)
score has never been studied. This is one of the biggest limitations
especially in Northern part of India where majority are Hindi speaking and
surgeons have difficulty in assessing disease severity. Material and
Methods: The study included a cross-sectional study of 193
patients, from November 2020 to May 2021 with cervical myelopathy or neck
pain with radiculopathy. The acceptability, validity, responsiveness,
reproducibility, and cross-cultural adaptation were evaluated for the Hindi
version (In-mJOA-H). Results: The evaluation
of In-mJOA-H score on one ninety-three patient exhibited
strong correlation with modified Nurick scale with English version and its
individual component of English version Indian modification of JOA scale
(In-mJOA-E). Conclusion: Our study shows
good correlation between Nurick scale, Hindi version
(In-mJOA-H) and English version of JOA scores with
Indian modification (In-mJOA-E). The acceptability,
validity, responsiveness, and reproducibility were established for the Hindi
version with Indian modification.

## 1106

## P170: Predictors of patient satisfaction following laminoplasty and
posterior cervical fusion for degenerative cervical myelopathy

Justin Vickery

1

, Mitchell Bowers

1

, Andrew Croft

1

, Anthony Steinle

1

, Wilson Vaughan

1

, Jacquelyn Pennings

2

, Claudia Davidson

2

, Raymond Gardocki

1

, Scott Lawrence Zuckerman

1,3

, Amir Abtahi

1,2,3

, and Byron Stephens

1,2,3

1

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery

2

Center for Musculoskeletal Research

3

Department of Neurological Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, Nashville, TN, United States

Introduction: Degenerative cervical myelopathy (DCM) is the most
common cause of spinal cord dysfunction. Symptom onset is usually insidious
in nature and can vary widely in clinical severity. Surgical management
options include decompression through either an anterior or posterior
approach. The two most common posterior operations are laminectomy and
fusion (LF) and laminoplasty (LP). While both LF and LP are appropriate
treatments for DCM, there is a paucity of data to identify patient
characteristics associated with patient satisfaction following these
procedures. To improve this knowledge gap, we conducted a retrospective
review of a large multi-center prospective spine outcomes registry
investigating which patient characteristics accurately predict patient
satisfaction following either LF or LP for DCM. Material and
Methods: The Quality Outcomes Database, a national prospective
spine surgery registry, was queried for patients who underwent LF or LP for
DCM. Included were 88 LP and 976 LF patients who received surgery between
04/2013 and 07/2019. The primary outcome was the North American Spine
Surgery patient satisfaction ordinal questionnaire, which is measured on a
4-point scale (1 = surgery met my expectations and 4 = I am the same or
worse as compared to before surgery), but we converted it to a dichotomous
outcome of being satisfied (1 or 2) or not (3 or 4). Pearson chi-square
tests, unpaired t-test, and Mann Whitney U test were used to assess initial
differences in demographics, clinical characteristics and satisfaction based
on surgical technique. A multivariate logistic regression model was
conducted to assess the association of surgical technique (LF vs LP) with
patient satisfaction, controlling for baseline demographics and clinical
characteristics. Results: No statistically significant
differences in patient satisfaction were found between LF and LP (78.3% vs
76.1%, p = 0.642) at 12-month follow-up. LP patients had significantly
higher proportions of advanced education, worse myelopathic symptoms,
private insurance, absence of depression/anxiety, and absence of adjacent
segment disease. Length of stay (LOS), neck disability index (NDI), and
baseline arm/neck pain were significantly worse in LF patients. In the
regression model, procedure type was not significantly associated with
patient satisfaction when adjusting for demographic and clinical
characteristics. Symptom duration > 3 months, increasing LOS, and race
(non-white) were significant predictors of decreased patient satisfaction in
both groups. Conclusion: Our present study found that patients
achieve equal satisfaction following either procedure at 12-month follow-up.
Symptom duration of less than 3 months, decreased length of hospital stay,
and identifying as white race were all significant positive predictors of
patient satisfaction. LP patients were better educated, less
anxious/depressed, and were more commonly privately insured than LF
patients, which highlights an important inequity in the socioeconomic access
to LP. Additionally, further research investigating the satisfaction
disparity between white and non-white patients is a critical area of future
research. As with all elective spine surgeries, proper surgical indication
and establishing post operative expectations is critical to successful
outcomes. The data from our study will aid surgeons when counseling patients
regarding satisfaction following LP and LF.

## 1155

## P171: Comparative effectiveness of laminoplasty and laminectomy and
fusion for the treatment of cervical myeloradiculopathy

Justin Vickery

1

, Mitchell Bowers

1

, Anthony Steinle

1

, Wilson Vaughan

1

, Andrew Croft

1

, Jacquelyn Pennings

2

, Claudia Davidson

2

, Raymond Gardocki

1

, Scott Lawrence Zuckerman

1,3

, Amir Abtahi

1,2,3

, and Byron Stephens

1,2,3

1

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery

2

Center for Musculoskeletal Research

3

Department of Neurological Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, Nashville, TN, United States

Introduction: Cervical myeloradiculopathy is the clinical
manifestation of degenerative cervical spine disease resulting in
concomitant central and foraminal stenosis. Surgical treatment options
include both anterior and posterior approaches. The most commonly utilized
posterior surgical option is laminectomy and fusion (LF). While laminoplasty
(LP) is commonly utilized to treat myelopathy alone, debate exists regarding
the efficacy of LP with respect to adequate treatment of radicular
complaints in patients with myeloradiculopathy. To improve this clinical
knowledge gap, our study investigated the efficacy of LP in improving
radicular symptoms and how that change compares to the improvement seen with
posterior cervical fusion. Additionally, we investigated which patient and
operative characteristics were associated with arm pain scores at 12 months.
Material and Methods: The Quality Outcomes Database, a
multi-center national prospective spine surgery registry, was
retrospectively queried for patients with myeloradiculopathy who underwent
LF or LP from 4/2013 and 07/2019. The primary outcome was Numeric Rating
Scale (NRS) arm pain, which asks the patient to rate their arm pain on a
scale of 0-10 in the past seven days. Patients who reported a preoperative
NRS arm pain score of 0 (no pain) were excluded. Differences in patient
demographics, clinical characteristics, and PROs were assessed between the
LP and LF groups (chi square/parametric and nonparametric t-tests). Changes
in NRS arm pain from preop to 12 months postop were assessed for both groups
(nonparametric paired t-tests). Linear regression was used to model
predictors of 12-month arm pain based on type of procedure (LP vs LF),
controlling for baseline arm pain and other demographic and clinical
variables. Results: There were no significant differences in
arm pain scores at 12 months between LF and LP (2.9 vs 2.0, p = 0.100), and
both demonstrated similar significant improvements in arm pain over that
time period (p < 0.001). Patients undergoing LF had significantly higher
levels of preoperative arm pain compared to LP (p = 0.003). Type of
procedure (LP vs LF) was not a significant predictor of arm pain at 12
months when adjusting for preoperative arm pain. Higher preoperative arm
pain, increased hospital length of stay, and increased neck disability index
were all significant predictors of increased arm pain at 12 months, even
when controlling for other factors. No factors were found to be significant
in predicting the change in arm pain from baseline to 12 months in LP or LF
patients. Conclusion: Laminoplasty has been questioned as an
appropriate treatment for patients with myeloradiculopathy. While
laminoplasty has been shown to adequately decompress the central canal in
myelopathic patients, uncertainty exists regarding its ability to provide
adequate decompression of the neural foramen and therefore relief of
concomitant radicular pain. These data demonstrate that patients with
myeloradiculopathy undergoing posterior cervical fusion or laminoplasty
experienced similar levels of arm pain improvement. Additionally, the type
of decompression performed was not a predictor of arm pain at 12 months.
These findings demonstrate that in patients with myeloradiculopathy,
laminoplasty is a viable treatment option for both the myelopathic and
radicular complaints.

## 1161

## P172: Comparison of cross-sectional area of lumbar and cervical muscle
mass in degenerative cervical myelopathy

Hyunjun Jang

1

, Kyung-Hyun Kim

1

, Jeong-Yoon Park

1

, Keun-Su Kim

1

, Yong-Eun Cho

1

, and Dongkyu Chin

1

1

Spine and Spinal Cord Institute, Gangnam Severance Hospital, Yonsei
University College of Medicine, Department of Neurosurgery, Seoul, South
Korea

Introduction: Degenerative cervical myelopathy (DCM) could
causes muscle weakness due to damage to neurons below the injury site of
spinal cord. The purpose of this study was to investigate the ratio of
lumbar and cervical cross-sectional area (CSA) according to myelopathic
symptoms. Material and Methods: We reviewed medical records of
90 patients retrospectively. The patients were divided in three groups;
Group A, who had both cervical and lumbar MRIs for the purpose of health
check-up, Group B with signal change in cord on MRI without symptoms
(Asymptomatic DCM), and Group C, who underwent surgery for symptomatic
cervical myelopathy. CSA of cervical extensor muscle and lumbar muscle
(psoas, extensor muscles) of three groups were measured using Image J (Image
J 1.53, NIH, USA) program. Results: Each group of 30 people was
investigated. There were no significant differences in basic demographics
between each group. The lumbar CSA to cervical CSA ratios of B and C showed
significantly lower values than those of group A (p < 0.05).
Conclusion: The lumbar CSA to cervical CSA ratios was lower
in not only the patients of degenerative cervical myelopathy, but also in
those with no symptoms who had cord signal change in MRI, than normal
people. The ratio could be a helpful predictor of detecting degenerative
cervical myelopathy.

## 1215

## P173: Comparison of anterior and posterior approaches for cervical
spondylotic myelopathy in terms of clinical and radiological outcome

Usama Muhammad

1

, Ammar Dogar

1

, Haseeb Hussain

1

, and Ahsan Atta

1

1

Orthopedics, Ghurki Trust Teaching Hospital, Lahore,
Pakistan

Background: With higher life expectancy because of better
healthcare facilities around the globe, chronic diseases like cervical
spondylotic myelopathy are at rise. In cases of severe myelopathy surgical
intervention is the only management option. Since cervical spine is
approachable from both anterior and posterior aspect, both approaches have
been used previously with overlapping indication. Thus, here comparison
between anterior and posterior approach in terms of outcome and
complications is the objective. Methodology: A total of 53
patients that were treated with either approach at GTTH Lahore after June
2018 were retrospectively assessed, both radiologically and clinically. In
this non-randomized comparative study, the patient that underwent anterior
decompression, instrumentation and fusion constituted group A (n = 32) and
those that were treated with posterior decompression and instrumentation
were added in group B (n = 21). Japanese Orthopedic Association (JOA) score,
Nurick grading and cervical alignment on follow-up was assessed to compare
the outcome. Results: Mean age was 53.2 ± 8.1 & 54.9 ± 7.2
years, follow-up period was 17.2 ± 4.1 & 16.1 ± 7.2 months and segments
operated upon were 2.1 ± 0.8 & 2.7 ± 0.7 in group A and B respectively:
that were comparable. Preoperative JOA scores in both the study groups were
significantly alike (group A = 8.91 ± 2.6 and group B = 8.79 ± 2.8, p >
0.05) but on last follow-up anterior approach showed better clinical results
than the posterior approach (JOA score group A = 13.35 ± 2.3 and group B =
12.51 ± 2.1, p < 0.05). However, Nurick grading of both the categories
showed no statistically significant difference in either preop or final
follow-up grading (Preop group A = 3.01 ± 0.6, group B = 2.89 ± 0.8, p >
0.05: Postop group A = 2.06 ± 0.8, group B = 1.99 ± 0.7, p > 0,05). Cobbs
angle in both the groups were alike preoperatively (group A = -1.2 ± 8.2,
group B = -1.8 ± 9.6, p > 0.05), but better restoration on last follow up
was evident on radiology for anterior approach in comparison (group A =
13.9-4.2, group B = 9.1-3.6, p < 0.05). Postoperatively, anterior
approach was associated with temporary dysphonia and dysphagia in a few
cases whereas posterior approach cases reported persistent axial symptoms.
Conclusion: Both the approaches are effective in treatment
of cervical myelopathy symptoms and are associated with good radiological
outcome as well. Though, anterior approach was more effective as per JOA
score improvement and restoration in Cobb’s angle.
Keywords: cervical spondylotic myelopathy, anterior approach, posterior
approach.

## 1250

## P174: Anterior cervical discectomy and fusions are associated with
greater subsidence when compared to anterior cervical corpectomies for
degenerative pathology

Spencer Raub

1,2

, Caroline Drolet

1

, Jesse Shen

1,3

, Nicole Vivelo

1

, Michelle Gilbert

1

, Kellen Nold

1

, Venu Nemani

1

, Jean Christophe Leveque

1

, and Philip Louie

1

1

Neurosurgery, Virginia Mason Franciscan Health, Seattle, United
States

2
School of Medicine, University of Washington,
Seattle, USA

3

Université de Montréal, Canada

Introduction: Anterior cervical discectomy and fusion (ACDF) or
anterior cervical corpectomy and fusion (ACCF) surgery has been demonstrated
to be an effective surgical treatment for degenerative cervical conditions.
ACCF, when directly compared to ACDF, has been described as the more
invasive of the two procedures, but may be more effective to improve
anterior-based stenosis that is present posterior to a vertebral body,
rather than at the disc spaces themselves. Graft subsidence is a known
complication of both procedures, but no study has compared the subsidence
rates and risk factors between these two procedures performed for
degenerative pathology utilizing the same surgical techniques. We sought to
compare subsidence, based on interscrew distance and height between ACCF and
ACDF, with a specific focus on the impact of screw-to-vertebral body ratio
and change in angle of variable screws placed at the cephalad and caudal
aspects of the construct. Material and Methods: A retrospective
cohort analysis was performed on consecutive patients who underwent a
2-level ACDF (allograft) or 1-level ACCF (titanium expandable cage) for
degenerative pathology between January 2017 and June 2021 with 6 months
follow-up. Procedures were performed by 3 spine-fellowship trained surgeons
who perform both procedures with the same surgical technique. Pre- and
6-month post-operative radiographic assessment included height
(ant/mid/post), intervertebral screw distance, and screw-vertebral body
ratio of the cephalad and caudal screws. Demographic information, operative
times, complications, and re-operation data was obtained. All analyses
predict subsidence change scores (ant/mid/post height, interscrew distance)
from screw angle change (cephalad or caudal depending on top or bottom),
postop screw angle, screw-to-vertebral body ratio, ACDF vs ACCF, postop
subsidence measurement and demographic variables (age, sex, BMI, CCI). Screw
angle change was included as an intermediate variable and was predicted by
postop screw angle, screw to vertebral body ratio, and demographic
variables. Results: In total, 65 ACDF patients and 13 ACCF
patients fulfilled inclusion criteria. There were no significant differences
between the demographics of both groups. Dysphagia requiring consultation
were similar between both groups (15.4% ACDF, 17.6% ACCF; p > 0.05).
Across all 4 measurements of subsidence, ACDF procedures resulted in greater
subsidence than ACCF (p < 0.05). Additionally, greater screw-to-vertebral
body ratio was associated with less subsidence (p < 0.05). Overall, no
re-operations were performed for subsidence-related pathology. Three ACDF
patients underwent re-operation for pseudarthrosis. One ACCF underwent
re-operation for early-onset adjacent segment pathology.
Conclusion: At a single center with similar surgical
techniques, ACDF procedures were associated with greater subsidence when
compared to ACCFs when performed for degenerative pathology. Greater
screw-to-vertebral body ratio may be protective against radiographic
subsidence. The clinical impact of these subsidence differences require
further evaluation.

## 1317

## P175: Dysphagia in the anterior approach in spinal surgery

Marcos Joaquin Robles Ortiz

1

1

Spine Surgery, Instituto Nacional de Rehabilitacion, Mexico City,
Mexico

Dysphagia after the anterior cervical approach has been reported in up to 60%
in the literature. These symptoms affect the well-being of patients during
their postoperative period. The anterior cervical approach is used to treat
multiple disorders including degenerative, traumatic, oncological,
inflammatory, congenital, vascular, and infectious,with the goal of
restoring nerve function, relieving pain, numbness, tingling, and weakness.
Of the anterior approaches, the Smith-Robinson approach is the most commonly
used for access to the cervical spine, as it allows the surgeon access to
the discs, bony structures, and anterior lesions without directly affecting
the spinal cord. Its use has increased , because anterior discectomies and
fusions are performed more frequently. Surgery to the anterior cervical
spine requires dissection in the vicinity of the laryngeal and pharyngeal
muscles, as well as traction and manipulation of the esophagus, trachea, and
pharynx. Subsequently, there is a risk of nerve disruption, tissue damage,
hematoma formation, or edema, which can result in dysphonia and dysphagia,
these being the most common complications of this procedure. Prospective
analytical descriptive observational study to measure the immediate
postoperative prevalence of dysphagia in patients with a diagnosis of narrow
cervical canal undergoing an anterior cervical approach.

Inclusion criteria

Patients between 40 and 80 years old
Candidates for surgical management with anterior cervical approach.
They have signed informed consent.

Exclusion criteria

History of previous cervical surgery.
ASA III and IV.
BMI > 30.
Presence of dysphagia prior to surgery
History of diseases in the esophagus and/or laryn
Results: The values showed a normal distribution according to
the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. A sample of 52 patients who met the inclusion
criteria was obtained, the average age was 63.17 ± 9.57 years old, 40.4%
(21/52) of the sample were male and 59.6% (31/52) The sample had homogeneous
anthropometric variables, with height 1.60 ± 0.085, weight 69.79 ± 10.62kg,
BMI 27.31 ± 3.68 kg/m2. The patients presented a history of symptoms of
38.87 ± 41.62 months, the number of affected levels was 1.88 ± 0.74.
Clinical Scales: The symptomatology evaluated in clinical
scales was pain measured in VAS in the cervical region of 7.31 ± 1.59 points
and in the extremities of 6.77 ± 2.02 points, disability according to the
mJOA in 9.56 ± 3.22, IDC 54.73 ± 21.56%, quality of according to the SF-36
in the physical field of 26.87 ± 8.02, mental 38.54 ± 13.32, the average
Nurick was 2.40 ± 1.63, regarding the evaluation of dysphagia according to
the preoperative scales Bazaz 0, EAT-10 2.60 ± 4.55, HIV-10 3.77 ± 4.95,
HIV-30 14.90 ± 21.05. Within the surgical variables we take into account the
anesthetic time 192.48 ± 58.97min, intubation attempts with an average of
1.06 ± 0.32, number of probe 7.76 ± 0.43Fr, Aldrete classification 8.16 ±
2.15 points , surgical time 147.56 ± 56.11min, mean bleeding 107.21 ±
85.55cc, no complications were reported during surgery. The days of hospital
were 5.87 ± 3.42 days. Conclusions: In patients undergoing
spinal surgery using the anterior cervical approach, 55.7% immediate
dysphagia was reported. Previous dysphagia patiens (30.8%), no changes were
observed after surgical treatment.
Limitations Pandemic. Limited number of patients. Intubation variables were
not taken into account.

## 1339

## P176: Pack years of tobacco cigarette smoking as a predictor of bony
fusion following anterior cervical discectomy and fusion surgery

Marissa Kruk

1

, Mohamed Soliman

1,2

, Alexander Aguirre

1

, Cathleen Kuo

1

, Nicco Ruggiero

1

, Andrea Kassay

1

, Asham Khan

1

, Moleca Ghannam

1

, David Smolar

1

, John Pollina

1

, and Jeffrey Mullin

1

1

Neurosurgery, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, United States

2

Neurosurgery, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt

Introduction: Smoking tobacco cigarettes negatively impacts the
process of bone healing after spinal fusion surgery. Patient smoking history
is often assessed based on current smoker, former smoker, and nonsmoker
status. However, few studies quantify smoking history in terms of pack years
to estimate lifetime exposure and assess its effects. This study aimed to
investigate the influence that smoking history quantified in terms of pack
years has on bony fusion following anterior cervical discectomy and fusion
(ACDF) surgery. Material and Methods: A retrospective chart
review was conducted to identify patients who had undergone prior ACDF
surgery. Data collection for analysis included patient demographics,
procedural variables, and postoperative outcomes. Multivariate linear
regression analysis was performed to identify predictive factors of bony
fusion and cage subsidence after ACDF surgery. Results: A total
of 97 patients were identified with 162 levels fused. Of the 97 patients, 90
(92.7%) demonstrated bony fusion on postoperative imaging. The mean number
of pack years for the fusion and non-fusion groups were 6.06 ± 12.66 and
16.14 ± 20.70 respectively. On multivariate linear regression analysis, a
greater number of pack years of tobacco cigarette smoking was a significant
predictor of non-fusion (b-coefficient, -0.00424; 95% Confidence Interval,
[0.991,0.999], p < 0.05). Conclusion: A greater estimated
lifetime exposure to tobacco smoking, quantified in terms of pack years,
increases the risk of non-fusion following ACDF surgery.

## 1411

## P177: A randomised controlled trial comparing the effectiveness of
surgical and nonsurgical treatment for cervical radiculopathy

Mirad Taso

1,2

, Håvard Sommernes

3

, Frode Kolstad

3

, Jarle Sundseth

3

, Siri Bjorland

1

, Are Pripp

2,4

, John Anker Zwart

1,2

, and Jens Ivar Brox

2,4

1

Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation

2

Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway

3

Department of Neurosurgery

4

Oslo Centre of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, Oslo University
Hospital, Oslo, Norway

Background: Cervical radiculopathy is usually caused by disc
herniation or spondylosis. The prognosis is expected to be good
in most patients, but there is limited scientific evidence on the
indications for nonsurgical and surgical treatments. Research
question: The aim of the present study is to evaluate and compare
the effectiveness of surgical and nonsurgical treatment in two trials -
including disc herniation and spondylosis, respectively, and to evaluate
factors that contribute to better decision making. Design: RCT.
Patients with disabling radicular arm pain and MRI proven cervical disc
herniation or spondylosis will be randomised to receive nonsurgical or
surgical treatment. Methods: The follow-up period is 1-year and
the sample size is estimated to 50 for each arm in the two trials, giving a
total of 200 patients. The primary outcomes are the Neck Disability Index
and arm pain. Secondary outcomes include neck pain; EQ-5D and costs to
evaluate cost-effectiveness; prognostic factors; CT and MRI to estimate
intervertebral foraminal area and nerve root compression; and the expected
minimal improvement for willingness to undergo treatment.
Discussion: The outcomes of this study will contribute to
better decision making in the treatment of cervical radiculopathy.

## 1463

## P178: Anterior cervical discectomy and fusion with ventral plate:
Influence of preoperative and postoperative sagittal balance on re-operation
rate

Magnus Michaelis

1,2

, Martin Erhard

1

, Anna C. Rienmüller

3

, Bernhard Mayer

4

, and Yu-Mi Ryang

5

1

Department for Neurosurgery, Klinikum rechts der Isar (TUM), Munich,
Germany

2

Department for Orthopedics, Sportsmedicine and Traumasurgery,
München Klinik Bogenhausen, Munich, Germany

3

Department for Orthopedic Surgery and Trauma Surgery, Medical
University Vienna, Vienna, Austria

4

Department for Neurosurgery, Klinikum Rechts der Isar der
Technischen Universität München, Munich, Germany

5

Neurosurgery, Helios Klinikum Berlin Buch, Berlin, Germany

Introduction: Anterior cervical discectomy and fusion (ACDF)
with ventral plate is a common way to treat several cervical degenerations.
Adjacent segment disease (ASD) and instability are frequent postoperative
complications, that lead to re-operation. We therefore investigated if
parameters of the cervical sagittal balance correlate with the number of
re-operations caused by ASD and instability. Material and
Methods: All Patients who underwent ACDF with ventral plate
between 2010-2016 at our institution were included and a retrospective
analysis to evaluate reoperation-rate due to ASD and instability was
performed. Cervical lordosis, k-line, segmental lordosis, T1-slope, C2
sagittal vertical axis (SVA), C7 SVA and Center of gravity (COG) SVA were
measured on preoperative and postoperative x-ray images. A binary logistic
regression analysis was performed to evaluate possible mechanical and osseus
risk factors for re-operation. Results: 155 patients were
included (86 men, 69 women; mean age: 68.8 ± 14.4). 25 out of 155 patients
(16.1%) underwent re-operation. 17 (68%) due to ASD, 8 patients (32%) due to
instability. On preoperative x-ray images correlation was found for T1-slope
(OR = 0.920; p = 0.067). Re-operated patients had a smaller T1-slope
preoperative. On postoperative x-ray images correlation was found for
segmental lordosis (OR = 1.074; p = 0.063) and C2 SVA (OR = 1.169; p =
0.115). Re-operated patients had a larger segmental lordosis and a larger C2
SVA after the first surgery. Conclusion: A smaller T1-slope
preoperative seems to increase the risk of re-operation caused by ASD and
instability after ACDF with ventral plate. A larger segmental lordosis and a
larger C2 SVA after first surgery seem to increase the risk of re-operation
as well. Although none of these correlations was significant, the direction
of our results matches with common literature. Further investigations are
necessary in order to verify our results and to find out more about the
influence of the sagittal balance on re-operation-rate.

## 1490

## P179: Autologous clavicle graft for anterior cervical discectomy and
fusion

Mandar Borde

1

, K Venugopal Menon

1

, Akash Mane

1

, and Sangram Rajale

1

1

Spine Surgery, Bharati Vidyapeeth (deemed to be University) Medical
College and Hospital, Pune, India

Introduction: Iliac crest has been the most common source of
autologous bone grafting for anterior cervical discectomy and fusion (ACDF).
Donor site complications like postoperative persistent pain and
paraesthesia, hematoma, infection, lateral femoral cutaneous nerve injury,
peritoneal perforations, iliac fractures and pelvic instability have been
reported with an incidence of 10-39%. To avoid occurrence of such
morbidities, alternative sources for autologous bone graft like sternum,
patella, fibula and rib have been tried but haven’t become popular. We
present a series of 25 cases with anterior cervical discectomy and fusion
using autologous cancellous graft from medial end of the clavicle and
polyetheretherketone (PEEK) cage. Material and Methods: Between
January 2020 and January 2021, 25 patients and 33 levels (21 males and 4
females), ranging in age from 31 to 65 years underwent single-level (17
patients) or two-level (8 patients) anterior cervical discectomy and fusion
using this technique. Nine patients presented with radiculopathy, 6 had
myelopathy, 5 presented with myeloradiculopathy and 5 patients had traumatic
disc herniations with varying degrees of neurological deficit (4 patients
were ASIA A; 1 patient was ASIA B). Surgical decision was made after
thorough assessment of the preoperative clinical and radiological
examinations. The cervical discectomy was performed using the standard
Smith- Robinson technique. The bone graft was obtained by doing a small
corticotomy at the medial end of clavicle about 2.5 cm lateral to the
sternoclavicular joint and scooping out the cancellous bone with a curette.
A PEEK cage filled with the cancellous bone graft was fit in the discectomy
defect. Results: Clinical and radiological evaluation of all
the patients was done at 6 weeks, 3 months, 6 months, and 12 months after
the surgery. All patients showed significant improvement in their clinical
symptoms and showed radiographic evidence of solid bony fusion between 6-9
months. The mean Visual Analogue Score (VAS) at the end of 1-year was 0.2.
Radiological assessment involved anteroposterior and lateral radiographs and
lateral view radiographs in flexion and extension. Amongst the 5 patients
with neurological deficit, at the end of 1 year, 4 patients improved from
ASIA A to ASIA C while patient with ASIA B improved to ASIA D. Twenty-four
patients were highly satisfied by the cosmetic appearance of the scar at 1-
year follow up. One patient developed a keloid-like scar but was not
concerned by the cosmetic appearance. Conclusion: Cancellous
bone from the medial end clavicle is a safe, reliable, and technically easy
source of autologous bone graft that yields optimal fusion rates and patient
satisfaction with ACDF surgery. The advantages are easy access as the medial
end of clavicle lies in close proximity to the surgical field and does not
require any additional preparation or draping, no donor site pain and a
cosmetic scar; its disadvantages being the less volume of available graft
and a lack of structural support.

## 1574

## P180: Degenerative cervical pathologies on magnetic resonance imaging:
retrospective analysis of prevalence in a single centre

Arkaprabha Banerjee

1

, Oliver Mowforth

2

, Mark Kotter

2

, Virginia Newcombe

3

, and Benjamin Davies

2

1

School of Clinical Medicine

2

Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Cambridge,
United Kingdom

3

Addenbrooke's Hospital, Division of Anaesthesia, United
Kingdom

Introduction: Degenerative cervical myelopathy (DCM) is a
condition of symptomatic spinal cord compression secondary to various
cervical spine degenerative pathologies. A diagnosis of DCM requires
degenerative cervical pathology, cord compression and myelopathic symptoms.
We studied the prevalence of degenerative pathologies in a cohort of 133
patients with asymptomatic cord compression. The objective was to compare
this cohort to previously studied asymptomatic cord compression and DCM
cohorts to identify if previously determined trends of DCM pathology applied
to our cohort. Methods: Radiological reports of cervical MRI
scans conducted at a tertiary neurosciences centre between January and
December 2015 were screened for degenerative cervical spinal changes. Of the
total 1123 cervical MRI scans screened, 133 met the inclusion criteria.
Degenerative pathology was classified into key categories. Prevalence of
each category and accompanying 95% confidence interval was calculated and
compared to asymptomatic cord compression and DCM cohorts. Within the
cohort, age and gender were used for subgroup analysis. Mean age (55.69
years) was used to dichotomise the cohort into two age-based subgroups;
patients < 55 years old and patients
> 56 years old to allow for effective
comparison of relatively younger and relatively older patients. 95%
Confidence Intervals were calculated and a Fisher’s Exact Test was carried
out for sub-group analysis. Results: The most prevalent
pathology was degenerative multilevel disc pathology (73.7%, 95% CI
66.2-81.2%), followed by degenerative single level disc pathology (23.3%,
95% CI 15.9-30.1%). Enlargement of ligamentum flavum (ELF) had a prevalence
of 9.8% (95% CI 4.7-14.8%) and spondylolisthesis/subluxation had a
prevalence of 9.8% as well (95% CI 4.7-14.8%). Congenital stenosis was the
fifth most prevalent pathology (3.8%, 95% CI 0.5-7.0%). Cranio-cervical
joint abnormalities and KFS both had prevalence values of 2.3% (95% CI
0.0-4.8%). OPLL had a prevalence of 0% (95% CI 0.0-2.7%). Non-lordotic
cervical alignment in our cohort was found to have a prevalence of 30.1%
(95% CI 22.3-37.9%). Comparison to the asymptomatic cohort revealed the
local cohort to have greater prevalence of single-level disc pathology.
Comparison to the symptomatic cohort revealed a significant increased
prevalence in multilevel disc pathology, OPLL and ELF in symptomatic
patients compared to our cohort, while our cohort at a greater prevalence of
single-level disc pathology. Given the high baseline prevalence of
multilevel disc pathology, however, this is most striking for OPLL and ELF.
Conclusion: OPLL and ELF are rare in asymptomatic
populations. Their further targeted investigation may have relevance to
exploring the natural history of DCM, a global research priority.

## 1577

## P181: Respiratory dysfunction in degenerative cervical myelopathy: a
systematic review

Lorcan Elliott

1

, Oliver Mowforth

1

, Aref-Ali Gharooni

1

, Mark Kotter

1

, and Benjamin Davies

1

1

Neurosurgery, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom

Introduction:
Degenerative cervical myelopathy is a condition of
symptomatic cervical spinal cord compression secondary to a
range of degenerative spinal pathology. Respiratory dysfunction has been
described in several cohort studies and shortness of breath is not
uncommonly reported by people with DCM. The objective of this systematic
review was therefore to synthesise current evidence on the relationship
between DCM and respiratory function. Material and Methods: The
review was registered on PROSPERO and followed PRISMA guidelines. Ovid
MEDLINE, and Embase were searched to 24th September 2022. DCM
studies reporting any respiratory measure, including spirometry and outcomes
relating to respiratory disease were eligible. Reference lists were hand
searched. Title and abstract and full text screening, risk of bias and GRADE
assessments was completed in duplicate. A quantitative synthesis is
presented. Results: A total of 517 studies identified by
literature searching; 14 met inclusion criteria, including 3 cohort studies,
5 case control studies and 6 case studies. There was conflicting evidence
across 2 cohort studies and 5 case/control studies as to whether surgical
decompression for DCM was associated with improvements in spirometric
measures such as FEV1 and FVC. Similarly, there was inconsistency in
differences in FEV1 reported between DCM patients and controls. FVC, vital
capacity and peak expiratory flow rate were consistently reported to be
lower in patients than controls. Higher spinal compression was associated
with more significant respiratory impairments than more caudal lesions. One
cohort study reported a higher prevalence of cervical spondylosis in
patients with obstructive sleep apnoea. All case reports described
respiratory dysfunction in DCM patients, some of which showed improvements
following management of ventilation or diaphragmatic function.
Conclusion: DCM may be associated with respiratory
dysfunction; however the current quality of evidence is poor. Further work
should address aetiology, such as disruption to diaphragmatic innervation by
cervical spine nerve roots or projections from brainstem respiratory
centres.

## 1685

## P182: How do patient comorbidities affect the choice of osteobiologics
for anterior cervical discectomy and fusion?

Stipe Corluka

1

, Michael Collins

2

, Aidin Abedi

2

, Timothy S. Yoon

3

, Meisel Hans-Jorg

4

, Jeffrey C. Wang

2

, Zorica Buser

5

, and AO Spine Knowledge Forum Degenerative

6

1

Spinal Surgery Division, Traumatology Department, University
Hospital Centre Sestre Milosrdnice, Zagreb, Croatia

2

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Southern
California, Keck School of Medicine, United States

3

Department of Orthopaedics, Emory University, Atlanta, United
States

4

Department of Neurosurgery, Bergmannstrost Hospital, Halle,
Germany

5

Gerling Institute, New York, United States

6

AO Foundation, AO Spine, Davos, Switzerland

Introduction: Anterior cervical discectomy and fusion (ACDF) is
a well-known, effective, and frequently performed surgical technique in the
treatment of cervical spine degenerative conditions. Fusion can be promoted
and achieved by several biomaterials with the autologous bone graft (ABG)
still being the gold standard because of its osteogenic, osteoinductive and
osteoconductive properties. The acute and chronic donor-site complications
have been reported as a postoperative complication. Therefore, utilization
of allogenic graft materials has gained interest. Although ACDF commonly
necessitates short hospital admission and is well-tolerated by most
patients, surgical delays, complications, and increased length of stay can
be influenced by identifiable risk factors, but long-term impact on fusion
rate is not observed. Pseudoarthrosis after ACDF surgery represents a
challenging complication and the aim of the current study was to determine
the impact of patient comorbidities on choice of osteobiologic use.
Material and Methods: This systematic review was designed
based on the PRISMA methodology by electronic literature searches on MeSH
terms. The search phrases were formulated to capture the studies on
‘anterior cervical spine’ AND ‘decompression/fusion’. To be included in the
final review, studies needed assess the factors affecting the choice of
osteobiologics in adult patients undergoing a one- to four-level ACDF.
Results: Search string resulted in 5012 records which were
screened based on title/abstract sections. At the end 68 studies were
included for full-text assessment and finally, 0 studies evaluated how
patient comorbidities (osteoporosis, smoking, history of RA, history of
steroid use, obesity, etc.) affected the choice of osteobiologics used in
elective ACDF surgery. Conclusion: Lack of studies meeting the
criteria of the review reflect the paucity of the literature on patient
comorbidities. This is particularly critical given the increased choice of
available osteobiologics and very limited evidence to support their
extensive use.

## 1695

## P183: Pretic-I was a safe and effective artificial cervical disc
prothesis-a retrospective and comparative study with 5-year
follow-up

Chengyi Huang

1

 and Hao Liu

1

1

Department of Orthopedics, West China Hospital, Sichuan University,
Chengdu, China

Introduction: The newly designed cervical disc prosthesis,
Pretic-I, had been finished its limited clinical use for over 5 years. At a
short-term follow-up of 2 years, we obtained satisfactory clinical results.
The long-term clinical efficacy and safety of Pretic-I will now be analyzed.
Material and Methods: Peri-operative parameters included
intra-operative blood loss, operation time, of-bed time. Clinical parameters
included visual analogue scale (VAS) for arm and neck, neck disability index
(NDI), and Japanese Orthopaedic Association (JOA) score. Radiological
parameters included C2–7 Cobb angle, Shell angle, and the range of motion
(ROM) of C2–7, functional segment unit (FSU), and adjacent FSU. The
CDA-related complications included adjacent segment degeneration (ASDeg),
adjacent segment disease (ASDis), heterotopic ossifcation (HO), prosthesis
subsidence, prosthesis displacement, and dysphagia. Results: A
total 64 patients from two independent centers received a single-level CDA
with Discover (n = 32) and Pretic-I (n = 32), and all of patients finished a
5-year follow-up. There are no significant differences between two groups in
peri-operative parameters. The clinical parameters improved greatly in
Pretic-I group (p < 0.0001), and there’s no statistical difference from
Discover group. Furthermore, Pretic-I could slightly improve the cervical
curvature (15.08 ± 11.75 to 18.00 ± 10.61, p = 0.3079) and perfectly
maintain the Shell angle (3.03 ± 3.68 to 2.23 ± 4.10, p = 0.1988), cervical
ROM (52.48 ± 14.31 to 53.30 ± 11.71, p = 0.8062) and FSU ROM (12.20 ± 4.52
to 10.73 ± 4.45, p = 0.2002). The incidence of high-grade HO (Grade III-IV)
at the fnal follow-up was significantly lower in Pretic-I group than in
Discover group (12.50% vs. 34.38%, p = 0.0389, Statistical Power = 95.36%).
The incidences of other CDArelated complications in Pretic-I group were also
well-accepted, comparable to the Discover group, without significant
differences. Conclusion: CDA with Pretic-I demonstrated a
well-accepted and sustained clinical outcome, with a significantly lower
incidence of high-grade HO. This newly designed prosthesis is expected to
become an alternative choice for cervical disc prosthesis in the future.
Keywords: Cervical disc arthroplasty, Pretic-I, Discover, Adjacent segment
disease, Heterotopic ossifcation

## 1721

## P184: Acute quadriplegia and death following a routine MRI for
undiagnosed degenerative cervical myelopathy

Cylene Yang

1

, Oliver Mowforth

1

, Benjamin Davies

1

, and Rodney Laing

1

1

Neurosurgery, Addenbrookes, Cambridge, United Kingdom

Bilateral upper limb paraesthesia and pain are common symptoms of
degenerative cervical myelopathy (DCM). Such symptoms instigate
investigation by cervical spine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). This was
the case for patient AB, who was an otherwise fit male in his early
seventies. During the scan AB unfortunately developed sudden onset
quadriplegia secondary to an intervertebral disc prolapse. This necessitated
intubation due to respiratory failure and urgent transfer to the
neurosciences critical care unit at a tertiary neurosciences centre. Despite
prompt surgical decompression, AB did not regain function. Extubation was
unsuccessful on three occasions. Following discussion between AB and his
family, ventilation was withdrawn, and AB died the following day. This case
highlights the potentially devastating consequences of DCM and poses
questions about the aetiology of DCM.

## 1726

## P185: 23 hour stay anterior cervical discectomy and intervertebral
fusion

Kathryn Kneale

1

 and Timothy Woodacre

1

1

Neurosurgery, University Hospitals Plymouth NHS Trust, Plymouth,
United Kingdom

Introduction: Anterior cervical discectomy and interbody fusion
(ACDF) is a commonly performed operation, with a mean length of stay of two
days. There has been a drive to increase Day Case surgery within the NHS to
increase efficiency, reduce costs and improve the patient experience. Our
Trust introduced a new 23 hour stay pathway for suitable ACDF patients, to
be discharged from the Day Case Unit by 9am (thus avoiding impacting the
functioning of the Unit), following the successful implementation of a Day
Case pathway for lumbar microdiscectomy patients. We modified practice by
introducing specific patient selection criteria, educating patients
preoperatively, changing operative scheduling and standardising the
postoperative management including analgesia. We aimed to ascertain if this
was a feasible pathway, if patients were satisfied with their experience and
how we could improve it. We also wanted to see what is required to move to
same day ACDF surgery. Material and Methods: All patients who
had undergone ACDF on this pathway under a single surgeon cohort were
identified and demographics and operation details recorded. They were
contacted to complete a telephone survey about their experience, including
the quality/quantity of information given pre and postoperatively, adequacy
of analgesia on discharge, and their overall experience. Results were
analysed. Results: A total of 17 patients underwent ACDF on
this pathway between July 2021 to September 2022. Of these, 13 were
contactable, and completed the survey. There were eight males and five
females. The average age was 48 years (39-64 years). All patients rated it
as a positive experience, with six (46%) rating it very good, and the
remaining seven (54%) good. Three patients (25%) felt there was a lack of
information on the postoperative course/poor communication postoperatively,
and two patients (15%) reported inadequate analgesia. There were two
complications with one patient requiring a washout at two weeks and another
patient who represented with neck swelling which resolved spontaneously.
Conclusion: Overall patients in this small cohort reported
a positive experience. This suggests it is feasible to adopt this pathway
for suitable patients, and we encourage other surgeons in the Trust to use
it. Ways of improving it would be to do a more detailed patient information
leaflet on the postoperative course, and an educational video for those who
cannot read well. Limitations of this study are a small sample size and
recall bias when answering questions. We plan to develop this to offer same
day ACDF surgery to selected patients.

## 1847

## P186: Cage subsidence prevalence between different cervical self-locking
cages and it´s impact in cervical lordosis and clinical outcomes in a cohort
of 111 patients after anterior cervical discectomy and fusion for cervical
degenerative disease in two hospitals of mexico city: a multicenter
comparative study

Anabel Euán Gutiérrez

1

, Alejandro Reyes-Sánchez

1

, Juan Nicasio Arriada Mendicoa

2

, Serio Ramirez Aragon

2

, Luis Miguel Rosales Olivarez

1

, Armando Alpizar Aguirre

1

, Baron Zarate Kalfopulos

1

, and Carla García-Ramos

1

1
Spine Surgery, Instituto Nacional de Rehabilitacion, Spine
Surgery, Mexico City, Mexico, Spine Surgery, Instituto
Nacional de Neurologia Y Neurocirugia, Mexico City, Mexico
Introduction: To assess the rate of subsidence, it's relation
with cervical lordosis and clinical outcomes, in postoperative patients who
underwent multilevel anterior cervical decompression and fusion with the use
of different types of self-locking cervical cages, minimum follow-up of 12
months. Material and Methods: Retrospective study. Patients
with diagnosis of cervical spinal stenosis, who underwent multilevel
anterior cervical discectomy and fusion at the National Institute of
Rehabilitation “Luis Guillermo Ibarra Ibarra” and National Institute of
Neurology and Neurosurgery “Manuel Velasco Suarez” in Mexico City. Clinical
outcome was assessed using the Visual Analogue Scale (VAS), Neck Disability
Index (NDI), modified Japanese Orthopaedic Association (JOAm), Nurick scale
and SF-36 scale. The radiographic evaluation included cervical lordosis,
disc height and self-locking cervical cage subsidence. Descriptive
statistics were carried out for quantitative variables through measurements
of central tendency and dispersion, the Cohen's kappa coefficient was used
to measure the Interobserver variation of 0.84. Results:
Records of 111 patients (70 females and 41 males), average age of 62 years
old. A total of 239 intervened levels, the most frequent intervened level
was C5 -C6. After 12 months of follow-up, the mean IDC, JOA, EVA, SF-36
(PCS, MCS) and Nurick improved (p = 0.000). The radiographic follow-up
after12 months showed an improvement in cervical lordosis as well as in disc
height (p = 0.000). A correlation of r = 0.169 (p = 0.076) was obtained
between the number of intervened levels and subsidence at 12 months of
follow-up, the height of the self-locking cervical cage was associated with
subsidence with a value of r = 0.228 (p = 0.0001) and the subsidence was
negatively associated with the number of screws per level r = -0.346 (p =
0.0001). Conclusion: An improvement was showed in clinical
scales as well as an improvement in postoperative lordosis and disc height.
The subsidence was associated with the self- locking cervical cage height
and a poor relation with the subsidence and the type of self-locking
cervical cage and intervened levels was found, therefore more research is
needed in order to find the best characteristics for the ideal implant. Even
though our patients presented postoperative subsidence, they showed
significant decrease in pain and an improvement in the quality of life.

## Degenerative Lumbar

## 121

## P187: Pelvic incidence-lumbar lordosis mismatch and early reoperation for
adjacent segment disease after lumbar fusion

Manaf Younis

1

, Ivan Ye

1

, Alexandra Thomson

1

, Aneesh Patankar

1

, Ryan Smith

1

, Tyler Pease

1

, Brittany Oster

1

, Daniel Cavanaugh

1

, Eugene Koh

1

, Daniel Gelb

1

, Steven Ludwig

1

, and Vache Hambardzumyan

1

1

Spine Surgery Division, Orthopaedics, University of Maryland School
of Medicine, Baltimore, United States

Introduction: To compare the 2-year reoperation rates for
adjacent segment disease between patients with PI-LL mismatch
postoperatively to patients with normal PI-LL measurements. Materials
and Methods: Patients undergoing elective 1-to-2 level lumbar
fusion for degenerative conditions between 2016-2018 were retrospectively
reviewed. Spinopelvic radiographs immediately post-operation were measured
and PI-LL mismatch was determined using the age adjusted thresholds defined
in Lafage et al. Following propensity score matching, early reoperation
rates were compared between the PI-LL mismatch and normal PI-LL cohorts.
Early reoperation was defined as symptomatic adjacent segment disease (ASD)
requiring reoperation within 2 years of the index surgery.
Results: A total of 219 patients were identified. The
average age was 59 years old with 59.8% female. The PI-LL mismatch cohort (N
= 148) were younger (57.5 vs. 63.5, p < 0.001) and had a higher
proportion of black patients (31.8% vs. 11.3%, p = 0.001) compared to the
normal PI-LL cohort. A total of 100 patients in the PI-LL mismatch cohort
were propensity score matched to 66 patients in the normal PI-LL cohort,
resulting in no difference in age (p = 0.177), sex (p = 0.302), race (p =
0.727), or BMI (p = 0.892). Using these matched cohorts, the rate of early
reoperation for ASD was 8.0 % in the PI-LL mismatch cohort and 9.1% in the
normal PI-LL cohort (p = 0.805) with a mean time to reoperation of 1.28 and
1.33 years, respectively. Conclusions: After propensity score
matching, PI-LL mismatch was not associated with early reoperation for ASD
in patients undergoing 1-to-2 level lumbar fusions for degenerative
conditions.

## 152

## P188: The role of machine learning in surgical decision making for lumbar
disc herniation

Devender Singh

1

, Eeric Truumees

1

, Jeremiah Alexander

2

, Calvin Chandler

2

, Ashley Duncan

1

, Matthew Geck

1

, and John Stokes

1

1

Spine, Ascension Texas Spine and Scoliosis, Austin, United
States

2

Orthopedics, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, United
States

Introduction: Current care pathways recommend exhausting all
non-operative measures for at least six weeks in patients presenting with
uncomplicated lumbar disc herniation. Intent to treat analyses suggest that
overtime, the advantages of surgical intervention decline relative to
non-operative care, further complicating surgical decision making.
Aim: Using machine learning identify factors associated
with the likelihood of a patient will choose surgical intervention for
lumbar disc herniation. Materials and Methods: 300
retrospective chart reviews were conducted on patients who presented from
January 2019 to January 2021 with lumbar disc herniation. 27 independent
variables were collected across various domains including demographic,
medical history, clinical presentation, patient-reported outcomes, and
encoded using one-hot encoding techniques. The encoded data was analyzed and
subject to logistic regression using SKLean, StatsModel and Logit models,
with a focus on the recall metric. By focusing on recall, we aim to reduce
the number of false positives, or Type II errors in the model. Models were
further optimized by assessing multicollinearity of independent variables
and employing Area Under the Curve/Receiver Operating Characteristic
(AUC-ROC) and Precision-Recall techniques. Results: Overall
surgical rate was 25.3%, with median time to surgery eight weeks from intake
appointment. Demographic factors did not have a statistical impact on
surgical intervention, although men chose surgery at a higher rate than
women (29% vs 21.2%) Comorbidities and clinical presentation were not found
to have an effect on odds of surgical intervention. The median patient
reported back/leg pain and disability scores were higher in patients that
did have surgery (38 vs 34 and 7 vs 6, respectively), but this was not
statistically significant. The final optimized model yielded a test recall
of 0.4. In the end, only three variables were found to impact the odds of
surgical intervention. Patients who received a prescription for non-narcotic
medication and had at least one epidural injection, increased the odds of
surgical intervention by 3.4 and 2.6, respectively. Prescribing opioids
decreased odds of surgical intervention by 0.37. Conclusion:
Non-narcotic medication and injections increased the odds of later surgical
intervention. Given the current standard of care, this is not surprising as
one should exhaust all non-operative measures before culminating in surgical
intervention. Prescribing opioid medications during this minimal six-week
time frame lowered the odds of surgical intervention. This could be due to
the fact that opioids were prescribed to patients that had comorbidities or
other factors that do not lend themselves to the preferred physical
rehabilitation plan of care. These patients would already be unlikely
surgical candidates due to increased risk associated with medical
comorbidities. Limitations include variability between physicians’ practice
and sample size. A larger, prospective study would be the next step in
utilizing machine learning to predict which patients are most likely to
report satisfaction and a successful outcome.

## 178

## P189: Perioperative and radiographic outcomes between single position
surgery (lateral decubitus) and dual position surgery for lateral lumbar
interbody fusion and percutaneous pedicle screw fixation:
meta-analysis

Gun Keorochana

1

 and Jatupon Kongtharvonskul

2

1

Orthopedics Department

2

Department of Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Faculty of
Medicine Ramathibodi Hospital, Bangkok, Thailand

Introduction: Lateral Lumbar Interbody Fusion (LLIF) and
percutaneous posterior screw fixation (PPSF) techniques is used to treat
degenerative lumbar pathologies. Dual position (DP) lumbar surgery involves
repositioning the patient from the supine or lateral decubitus position to
prone for posterior fixation. Single-position (SP) lumbar surgery (LS) is
commonly performed nowadays, minimally invasive alternative performed
entirely from the lateral decubitus position. However, there is still
controversial. This meta-analysis aimed to compare peri-operative outcomes
between SPLS and DPLS for LLIF and PPSF. Material and Methods:
We conducted this meta-analysis according to the PRISMA guidelines and
searched Medline and Scopus from inception to November 11, 2021 for relevant
studies. Results: Six studies were identified, which contained
totals of 502 and 447 patients in the SP and DP groups, respectively. The
unstandardized mean difference in operative time, length of hospital stay,
intraoperative blood loss, radiation doses, lumbar lordosis, and PI-LL
mismatch were -86.1 (95%CI: -149.2 to -23.1) minutes, -1.6 (95%CI: -2.4 to
-0.9) days, -55.6 (95%CI: -127.5 to 16.2) ml, -30.3 (95%CI: -80.5 to 19.8)
mGy, 1.34 (95%CI: -1.17 to 3.86) degree, and -4.06 (95%CI: -5.65 to -2.47)
lower in SP when compared to DP. The chances of having complications and
reoperations in SP were 0.75 (95%CI: 0.49 to 1.14) and 0.77 (95%CI: 0.44 to
1.36) times, respectively, compared to DP group. No significant differences
were found for intraoperative blood loss, radiation dose, lumbar lordosis,
complications and re-operations between two groups.
Conclusions: This meta-analysis found that SP have lower
operative time and length of hospital stay compared to DP LLIF and PPSF.
However, no differences in intraoperative blood loss, radiation dose,
radiographic change, complications, and re-operation rates were found.

## 184

## P190: Intravenous corticosteroid therapy for acute lumbar radicular
pain

Oded Hershkovich

1

 and Raphael Lotan

1

1

Edith Wolfson Medical Center, Holon, Israel

Introduction: The efficacy of pharmacological interventions for
acute lumbar radicular pain (ALRP) is limited, and systemic steroid use
remains controversial. We evaluated the effectiveness and tolerance of
systemic steroid use in a cohort of patients with ALRP.
Methods: A retrospective cohort of 56 patients (24 females)
admitted with intractable ALRP resistance to conservative treatment of
NSAIDs and opiates between the years 2016-2018. Medical records were studied
for demographics, physical examination findings, Visual Analogue Score
(VAS), IV steroids side effects, and recent imaging findings. All patients
received a daily dose of IV 24 mg Dexamethasone until discharge, SNRB or
Surgery. Results: The average IV Steroid treatment was 3.9 (±
2.8) days, with most patients showing significant pain relief to allow
discharge (69.7%). SNRB was required in 19.6% and surgical intervention in
10.7% within the same admission. Multivariate analysis did not find any
parameter to predict treatment failure (Age, gender, motor/sensory deficit,
CT/MRI findings). The motor deficit, positive Straight leg raising (SLR) and
dural sac compression on CT were higher in the intervention group but did
not reach statistical significance. One patient required discontinuation of
IV steroids due to elevated blood pressure. Conclusion: Despite
the insufficient evidence in the literature, IV steroid treatment is still a
viable option in ALRP treatment, with pain relief allowing discharge in 70%
of patients and a low complication rate. Our study found daily 24mg IV
dexamethasone for ALRP to be an effective treatment and helpful in most
patients admitted. This study supports the common practice used by spine
units.
Keywords: Sciatica; Radiculopathy; Herniated disc; Steroid treatment;
Pharmacotherapy
Synonyms: ALRP = Acute lumbar radicular pain, SNRB = Selective nerve root
block, SLR = Straight leg raising

## 194

## P191: Is stabilisation of contralateral side necessary while using
unilateral approach in lumbar fusion surgery at 2 adjacent levels?

Sathish Muthu

1,2

 and Girinivasan Chellamuthu

2

1

Department of Orthopaedics, Government Medical College, Dindigul,
India

2

Department of Spine Surgery, Orthopaedic Research Group, Coimbatore,
India

Introduction: Generally, fusion supplemented with bilateral
pedicle screw fixation is the widely accepted method of stabilisation to
create an ideal environment for fusion of the unstable and the degenerated
disc area. Rigid internal fixation by bilateral pedicle screw fixation has
its shortcomings in the form of adjacent lumbar segment degeneration and
implant-related osteoporosis. Moreover, bilateral fixation was associated
with longer surgical time, greater blood loss and involving greater costs. A
relatively less rigid fixation in the form of unilateral pedicle screw
fixation could reduce the stress shielding and adjacent intervertebral disc
degeneration caused by bilateral pedicle screw fixation. Biomechanical
studies supported his concept stating that unilateral pedicle screw fixation
was sufficient to maintain the stability of the spine. We performed this
meta-analysis to compare the safety of unilateral with bilateral
instrumented fusion in two-level degenerative disorders of lumbar spine.
Materials and Methods: We conducted independent and
duplicate electronic database search including PubMed, Embase and Cochrane
Library till January 2020 for Randomised Controlled Trials(RCTs) comparing
unilateral pedicle screw fixation with bilateral pedicle screw fixation for
multi-level lumbar degenerative disorders. Fusion and complication rates
were the primary outcomes analysed. Analysis was performed in R platform
using OpenMeta[Analyst] software. Results: 5 RCTs including 215
patients (Unilateral/Bilateral = 106/109) were included in meta-analysis.
There was no significant difference between the two groups regarding fusion
rate, complication rate, blood loss, duration of hospital stay, functional
outcome scores like Visual Analog Scale (VAS), Oswestry Disability Index
(ODI) and Short-Form health survey (SF-36) at final follow-up. Unilateral
pedicle screw fixation was associated with a significant reduction in
operation time (p < 0.001). Compared to open approach, minimally invasive
approach showed significant difference in terms of factors like operative
time, blood loss, hospital stay, VAS and ODI (p = 0.004).
Conclusion: Our meta-analysis establishes the immediate
safety and significant lesser operative period of unilateral pedicle screw
fixation in lumbar fusion. However, due to lack of evidence on complications
like cage subsidence and adjacent segment disease, unilateral pedicle screw
fixation cannot be recommended as an alternative to bilateral pedicle screw
fixation for two-level degenerative spinal disease. Our analysis established
the lacunae in literature for high-quality evidence on the subject hence we
recommend further large multicentre studies with longer follow-up to arrive
at a conclusion.

## 246

## P192: Management of discal cyst: case report and narrative review

Pedro Torres

1

, Andre Castilho

1

, Rodrigo Cruzeiro

1

, and Henrique Darmstadter

1

1

Spine Surgery, Hospital Unimed, Brazil

Introduction: Lumbar discal cyst (LDC) is a rare clinical entity
with unclear etiology. First described by Chiba et al. in
2001, is believed to be originated from the disc material and as a result of
previous disc injury. LDC is defined as an intraspinal extradural cyst with
distinct communication with the corresponding intervertebral disc. Clinical
history is similar to patients with disc herniation, manifesting as a
unilateral single nerve root lesion with neurologic deficits corresponding
to the involved nerve root. Discal cyst is one of the different types of
cysts that can exist extradurally in the lumbar spine, specifically in the
spinal canal and neuroforamen. Imaging nuances such as the location of the
cyst, bony changes on CT, contrast filling with discography or myelography,
and MRI characteristics can be useful to differentiate between different
types of cysts. LDC is almost always located behind the posterior vertebral
body, which is also a typical location for herniated discs. On MRI, LDC
appears as hypointense on T1-weighted image and hyperintense on T2-weighted
image and enhances homogenously after gadolinium. There are no guidelines
regarding the best treatment option for LDC. Therefore, we present a case of
LDC who underwent surgical treatment and try to identify evidence-based
treatment strategies for patients diagnosed with discal cyst. Material
and Methods: We report a case of a 21-year-old man with
radiculopathy of L5 root in the left side. The MRI showed a left-sided
extradural cyst at the level of L4/5. The cyst was hypointense and
hyperintense on T1- and T2-weighted images, respectively. After 4 weeks of
conservative treatment without good outcomes, the patient underwent
microscopic surgery. The literature listed in MEDLINE/PubMed was reviewed to
identify related articles using the terms “Disc cyst AND treatment NOT disc
herniation”. We also made a manual search, and 15 papers were included in
this review. Results: At the first appointment the VAS was 9
and the L5 motor grade was 5. The patient was submitted initially to
conservative treatment with physical therapy and analgesic drugs. After 04
weeks of treatment the pain increased (VAS 10), ODI was 40% and L5 motor
grade was 3. During surgery, the cist capsule was at intimate contact with
the L5 root and with a hemorrhagic content. After surgery, patient sciatica
had a great reduction (VAS 3). After 6 months of surgery the ODI score was
0% and the motor grade of strength was 5. The histopathologic analysis
described simple fibrous tissue corresponding to capsule. No atypia was
found. Conclusion: Despite numerous reports, the explicit
pathophysiology of intraspinal discal cysts remains obscure. MRI is both
noninvasive and sensitive in diagnosing discal cysts and identifying
surrounding structures. For patients with mild to moderate symptoms,
conservative treatment can be successful, even inducing spontaneous
regression. Low grade evidence suggest that surgical treatment is the best
option for discal cysts. Excision of the cyst alone without excision of the
corresponding intervertebral disc could be considered as an option for
surgical treatment. Endoscopic surgery could also be a safe and promising
treatment.

## 268

## P193: Stand-alone lateral lumbar interbody fusion (LLIF) in patients with
aborted second-stage procedures: a case series

Benjamin Catoe

1,2

, David Barnes

3

, Cameron Kersey

2

, Sohrab Vatsia

2

, L. Erik Westerlund

2

, and Douglas Pahl

2

1

Orthopedic Surgery Residency Program, Jack Hughston Memorial
Hospital Phenix City, AL, United States

2

Hughston Clinic, Columbus, GA, United States

3

St. George Orthopedic Spine, St. George, UT, United States

Introduction: Lateral lumbar interbody fusion (LLIF), has gained
significant popularity over the last decade. LLIF is typically supplemented
with posterior or lateral fixation and decompression when necessary. We
hereby report a case series of patients who underwent stand-alone LLIF as
part of the first of a two-stage procedure whose second stage was
subsequently aborted due to risks of anesthesia or patient preference.
Material and Methods: Patients who had an aborted second
stage with a resulting stand-alone LLIF between 2014-2020 at our institution
were retrospectively identified. Chart and radiograph review were utilized
to evaluate for evidence of fusion, implant migration, implant subsidence,
minor and major complications, revisions, and symptom resolution. Oswestry
Disability Index (ODI) and Visual Analog Score (VAS) were assessed at the
initial and one-year interval follow-up visits postoperatively.
Results: Seventeen cases, involving 31 levels, were
identified with at least 12 months of follow up. At final follow up, 28
levels (90.3%) have shown radiographic evidence of fusion with evidence of
cage migration in one case (3.2%). The average disc height increased by
25.6%. Twenty-four levels (77.4%) demonstrated Grade 0 (0-24%) subsidence
and four levels (12.9%) had Grade I (25-49%) subsidence. There were no
revisions, no major complications, and no additional procedures were
recommended. Pre- and post-operative VAS and ODI were 6.4/3.5 (p <
0.0001) and 39.9/24.8 (p < 0.032). Conclusion: Stand-alone
LLIF is a viable option in patients with refractory back and leg pain due to
a lumbar spine condition and should be considered for patients with
significant risk factors to decrease anesthetic time and perioperative
complications.

## 315

## P194: Analysis of risk factors for early adjacent segment disease who
underwent revision surgery within 5 years after lumbar spinal fusion

Jaewan Soh

1

1

Orthopaedic Surgery, Sahmyook Seoul Medical Center, Seoul, South
Korea

Introduction: There are many concerns about adjacent segment
disease after lumbar spinal fusion. Of them, we analyze the risk factors
about early adjacent segment disease (EASD) in patients who underwent
revision surgery within 5 years from first operation. Material and
Methods: 657 patients underwent lumbar spinal fusion of 3 and
less segment to treat degenerative lumbar disease. Among them, 137 patients
underwent revision surgery within 5 years due to adjacent segment disease or
previously followed more than 5 years were included in this study. Gender,
age, fusion method, preoperative diagnosis, number of fusion segments and
radiological measurements were analyzed. In radiological measurement,
pre-& post-operative lumbar lordotic angle (LLA), pre-&
post-operative fusion segment lordotic angle (FSLA), pre-&
post-operative FSLA per level, correction of LLA, correction of FSLA, and
correction of FSLA per level were estimated. Statistical univariate analysis
was performed with the Chi-square test and multivariate logistic regression
analysis was done by using SPSS 14.0. Results: There were 13
patients with revision surgery due to EASD. In univatiate analysis, the
frequency of EASD was significantly high in cases where PLIF was more than
PLF (p = 0.023), correction of LLA was > 15° (p = 0.021) and correction
of FSLA per level was > 5° (p = 0.049). In multivariate logistic
regression analysis, the frequency of ESAD was significantly high in case
where PLIF was more than PLF (odd ratio = 17.866) and correction of LLA was
> 15° (odd ratio = 19.282). Conclusion: There was no
statistical significance between EASD and all other factors except fusion
method and correction of LLA. PLIF and correction of LLA more than 15 degree
increased risk of EASD.

## 319

## P195: The impact of coccgectomy in chronic coccygodynia cases on sexual
and social function, in females

Albert Gellert

1

, Leah Carreon

1

, Mikkel Østerheden Andersen

1

, and Ane Simony

1

1

Center for Spine Surgery & Research, Middelfart Hospital,
Middelfart, Denmark

Objective: To investigate the effect of coccygectomy on sexual
and social function in female patients with persistent coccydynia.
Design: Retrospective longitudinal cohort study.
Setting: Single-center secondary care in the region of
southern Denmark. Participants: 91 female patients from the
Dane Spine Database with persistent coccydynia who had coccygectomy between
2011 and 2022 and had pre-op, one- and two-year post-operative Oswestry
Disability Index (ODI) available. A majority of patients presented with pain
during coitus, which has not previously been examined. Main outcome
measure: ODI item 8 (ODI8) regarding Sex Life, and item 9 (ODI9)
regarding Social Function. Methods: A total of 91 patients were
included in this study, all had coccygectomy performed by a single surgeon
due to persistent pain, and had prior to surgery a history of 12 months
conservative treatment including repeated steroid blocks. All patients had
pre op and post op ODI available in the Danespine database.
Results: All patients were female (91) with a mean age of
40.4 years. A significant improvement (< 0.001) in their ODI8 one-year
after surgery was seen from pre-op of 2.01 ± 1.3 to 0.85 ± 1.3 after one
year. The ODI9 score for social function also showed a significant
improvement from 2.12 ± 1.0 preoperative to 0.99 ± 1.2 postoperative (<
0.001). No significant change in ODI8 or ODI9 was observed between one and
two years after surgery. Conclusion: In female patients with
persistent coccydynia and impaired sexual function, coccygectomy improves
their sexual function. An improvement of social function is also
observed.

## 426

## P196: An analysis of out of hours referrals for cauda equina syndrome in
Ireland: emergency physicians versus surgeons

Michael Kelly

1

, Nic Christodoulou

1

, Iain Feeley

2

, and Marcus TImlin

1

1

National Spinal Injuries Unit, Mater Misericordiae University
Hospital, Dublin, Ireland

2

Trauma & Orthopaedic Surgery, Tullamore University Hospital,
Tullamore, Ireland

Introduction: Cauda equina syndrome (CES) is an orthopaedic and
neurosurgical emergency that warrants emergent evaluation and treatment. In
Ireland out of hours MRI of the lumbosacral spine is performed in the
national spine injuries unit in the Mater hospital, Dublin. This represents
a significant clincal and logistical challenge. Patients from the
institutions emergency department are referred directly for MRI by emergency
physicians whilst external referrals are assessed by orthopaedic surgical
teams and referred accordingly for radiogicical investigation for suspected
CES. Methods: A prospective database was collated of all
referrals to our radiology department for out of hours MRI over a period for
January to July 2022. Out of hours was defined as all hours outside of
0900-1700 Monday to Friday. The clinical outcome – surgery or no surgery,
was recorded as well as time of surgery. Results: 112 patients
underwent out of hours MRI. 32% were external referrals. 14% of patients
required surgical management for CES. Internal emergency department
referrals were as likely to require surgical management as those assessed by
surgical teams prior to MRI (external referrals). 44% of surgically managed
patients underwent out of hours surgery. Conclusions: Out of
hours MRI represents a significant challenge for resource management. 86% of
patients undergoing emergent out of hours MRI did not require surgery.
Specialist referrals can be avoided by direct referral from appropriately
trained emergency physicians for MRI. This is particularly relevant for
health care systems where inter hospital transfer is required for specialist
assessment or for radiological investigation.

## 438

## P197: Radiographic robustness of lumbar interbody fusion
techniques

Alice Bouchard

1

, Jeffrey Mun

1

, Frank Vazquez

1

, Alex Tang

2

, Edward DelSole

3

, Russell Strom

4

, and Tan Chen

3

1

Geisinger Commonwealth School of Medicine, Scranton, United
States

2

Orthopaedic Surgery, Geisinger, Northeast Residency, Wilkes-Barre,
United States

3

Orthopaedic Surgery

4

Neurosurgery, Geisinger Medical Center, Danville, United
States

Introduction: Lumbar interbody fusion (LIF) can be achieved with
various techniques, each with its own advantages and disadvantages.
Differences in long-term radiographic outcomes remain unclear. The purpose
of this study was to (1) evaluate the changes in sagittal parameters in the
preoperative, immediate post-operative, and latest follow-up phase, and (2)
to evaluate the radiographic maintenance of these parameters over time.
Material and Methods: Patients who had undergone single
level anterior (ALIF), lateral (LLIF), posterior (PLIF), or transforaminal
(TLIF) lumbar interbody fusion in an integrated health system from 2007 to
2022 were identified. Orthopaedic spine and neurosurgical patients were
included. Exclusion criteria included a non-degenerative diagnosis,
inadequate radiographs, multilevel and revision surgery, and postoperative
follow-up less than one month. Retrospective chart review was conducted to
collect patient demographics and diagnosis at time of surgery. Upright
lumbar radiographs taken prior to surgery, at the time of surgery, and at
most recent follow-up were analyzed. Each radiograph was measured for pelvic
incidence (PI), lumbar lordosis (LL), segmental lordosis (SL), posterior
disc height (PDH), and foraminal height
(FH).Results: A total of 158 patients met
inclusion criteria. There were 24 ALIFs (follow-up = 27.2 mon), 14 LLIFs
(follow-up = 14.0 mon), 74 TLIFs (follow-up = 12.8 mon) and 46 PLIFs
(follow-up = 26.4 mon). Differences were found in patient age, gender, and
BMI between cohorts. PDH and FH spinal parameters increased immediately
following ALIF (ΔPDH = +5.3 mm ΔFH = +3.7 mm p < 0.0001), LLIF (ΔPDH =
+4.1 mm ΔFH = +4.2 mm p < 0.01), TLIF (ΔPDH = +3.5 mm ΔFH = +3.6 mm p
< 0.001), and PLIF (ΔPDH = +4.7 mm ΔFH = +4.2 mm p < 0.0001). SL
changed immediately only for ALIF (ΔSL = +5.7deg, p = 0.002) and LLIF (ΔSL =
+4.4deg, p = 0.0002). Compared to the immediate post-operative phase, PDH
and FH decreased at latest follow-up for ALIF (ΔPDH = -1.9 mm p = 0.005, ΔFH
= -1.2 mm p = 0.16), LLIF (ΔPDH = -0.9 mm ΔFH = -1.9 mm p < 0.05), TLIF
(ΔPDH = -1.1 mm ΔFH = -2.3 mm p < 0.001), and PLIF (ΔPDH = -1.0 mm ΔFH =
-1.8 mm p < 0.01). SL decreased for ALIF (ΔSL = -5.4deg, p = 0.0005),
LLIF (ΔSL = -0.8deg, p = 0.34), TLIF (ΔSL = -1.1deg, p = 0.04), and PLIF
(ΔSL = -1.5deg, p = 0.07). LL did not change at any time point
postoperatively across techniques. Accounting for interobserver reliability,
no significant differences in the change in radiographic parameters was
noted across all techniques at final follow up (p > 0.05).
Conclusion: Lumbar interbody fusion, regardless of
technique, was shown to provide significant radiographic changes in
posterior disc height and foraminal height. Techniques utilizing larger
intervertebral cage sizes (ALIF and LLIF) improved segmental lordosis.
Single level LIF did not affect overall lumbar lordosis. Over time, all LIF
techniques demonstrated a degree of loss of correction and radiographic
settling. No LIF technique demonstrated superior radiographic robustness
over time. A limitation of this study was that ALIF and LLIF were not
subdivided into standalone LIF versus LIF supplemented with posterior
instrumentation. Further studies are warranted to study the relationship of
these parameters to the degree of indirect decompression, as well as its
relationship to clinical outcomes.

## 513

## P198: Preliminary results of our first 10 cases of ALIF in degenerative
disc disease - A prospective unicenter study

Filipa Adan e Silva

1

, Diogo Rocha Carvalho

1

, João Francisco Lemos

1

, Bianca Sousa Barros

1

, Pedro Neves

2

, Arnaldo Sousa

1

, and Paulo Costa

1

1

Centro Hospitalar Universitário do Porto, Portugal

2

Hôpital Privé Arnault Tzanck, Mougins-Sophia Antipolis,
France

Introduction: Lumbar degenerative pathology is an increasing
health problem with a widely prevalence among the elderly population. In
many cases it fails to respond to conservative treatment, therefore surgical
procedures must be taken in account. Anterior Lumbar Interbody Fusion (ALIF)
is a well-established procedure to be considered for the lower lumbar
levels. From a vast number of degenerative diseases that can be addressed by
this surgical technique, this study focuses on single-level Degenerative
Disc Disease (DDD) with lower back pain as the major indication. The aim is
to assess the clinical and radiological efficacy of ALIF and its
complications. Material and Methods: This is a prospective
study involving the first 10 patients who underwent ALIF performed by the
same surgeon in one institution, in a period from July 2019 and March 2022
for L5-S1 DDD. The minimum follow up time was 6 months. Time of symptoms’
duration before surgery, operative time, intraoperative blood loss, length
of hospital stay and complications were determined. Clinical results were
assessed by preoperative and postoperative (2 weeks, 3 months, 6 months and
1 year) Visual Analog Scale (VAS) leg and back pain and Oswestry Disability
Index (ODI) of all the patients. Disc Height Index (DHI), Segmental Lordosis
Angle (SLA) and Lumbar Lordosis Angle (LLA) were obtained on preoperative
and postoperative (2 weeks, 3 months, 6 months and 1 year) plain
radiographs. Results: A total of 10 patients (3 men and 7
women) were included in this study with a mean age of 48 years (BMI from 25
to 28 kg/m2). The duration of symptoms range from 1 to 10 years
(mean 51 months). The mean operative time was 140 minutes (115-160 minutes),
most cases with negligible intraoperative blood losses (maximum of 300mL).
The average length of hospital stay was 3 days. No early or late
complications were observed and there was no need of reintervention in any
patient. There was a significative improvement (p < 0.01) in VAS leg and
back pain (from a mean of 9 preoperative to a mean of 3 at 6 months
postoperative) and ODI (from 31 to 7 in the same period). In terms of
radiological measurements, it was observed an improvement in all the
variables (DHI from 0,226 to 0,369; SLA from 19,6º to 25,5º; LLA from 53,5º
to 61º). Maximum upgrading was registered in the first 2 weeks
postoperative, maintaining this significant improvement 6 months after
surgery. Conclusion: Regarding the results of this preliminary
study, ALIF seems to be a surgical technique with excellent clinical and
imaging results, in selected patients, with isolated DDD at the L5-S1 level
and pain that is refractory to conservative treatment. It also seems to be a
procedure associated with low risk (not only of iatrogenic injury but also
of complications associated with the need for reintervention) mild
postoperative pain, reduced hospital stay and rapid recovery.

## 543

## P199: Decompression with fusion versus decompression alone in patients
with degenerative spondylolisthesis. A systematic review and
meta-analysis

Pravesh Gadjradj

1

, Fabian Sommer

1

, Jake Goldberg

1

, and Roger Hartl

1

1

Neurological Surgery, Weill Cornell, New York, United
States

Introduction: Surgical decompression is standard care in the
treatment of degenerative spondylolisthesis in patients with symptomatic
stenosis, but there remains controversy over the benefits of adding fusion.
The persistent lack of consensus on this matter and the availability of new
data warrants a contemporary systematic review and meta-analysis of the
literature. Material and Methods: Multiple online databases
were systematically searched up to August 2022 for randomized controlled
trials (RCTs) and prospective studies comparing outcomes of decompression
alone versus decompression with fusion for lumbar spinal stenosis in
patients with degenerative spondylolisthesis. Primary outcome was the
Oswestry Disability Index (ODI). Secondary outcomes included leg and back
pain, surgical outcomes, and radiological outcomes. Pooled effect estimates
were calculated and presented as standard mean differences (SMD) with their
95% confidence intervals (CI) at two-year follow-up. Results:
Of the identified 2403 studies, eventually five RCTs and two prospective
studies were included. Overall, most studies had a low or unclear risk of
selection bias and most studies were focused on low grade degenerative
spondylolisthesis. All patient-reported outcomes showed low statistical
heterogeneity. Overall, there was high quality evidence suggesting no
difference in functionality at two years of follow-up (SMD -0.02, 95% CI
-0.22 to 0.18). Furthermore, there was high quality evidence of no
difference in leg pain (SMD -0.11, 95% CI -0.30 to 0.07) or back pain (SMD
-0.11, 95% CI -0.30 to 0.07) between patients undergoing decompression vs.
decompression with fusion. Pooled surgical outcomes showed less blood loss
after decompression only, and similar length of hospital stay and
reoperations compared to decompression with fusion. Conclusion:
Based on the current literature, there is high quality evidence of no
difference in functionality after decompression alone compared to
decompression with fusion in patients with degenerative lumbar
spondylolisthesis at 2 years of follow-up. Further studies should focus on
long-term comparative outcomes, health economic evaluations, and identifying
those patients that may benefit more from decompression with fusion instead
of decompression alone.
This review was registered at Prospero (CRD42021291603).

## 577

## P200: Risk factors for ambulatory surgery conversion to extended stay
among patients undergoing posterior lumbar decompression

Yusuke Dodo

1,2

, Ichiro Okano

2

, Neil Kelly

3

, Leonardo Sanchez

3

, Haffer Henryk

1

, Maximilian Muellner

1

, Erika Chiapparelli

1

, Lisa Oezel

1

, Jennifer Shue

1

, Darren Lebl

1

, Frank Cammisa

1

, Federico Girardi

1

, Alexander Hughes

1

, Gbolabo Sokunbi

1

, and Andrew Sama

1

1

Spine Care Institute, Hospital for Special Surgery, New York, United
States

2

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Showa University Hospital,
Shinagawa, Japan

3

Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, United States

Introduction: Ambulatory surgery (AMS) is becoming increasingly
common in the U.S. because it is associated with a similar or even higher
quality of care compared to inpatient surgery, significant cost reduction,
and patients’ desire to recuperate at home. However, there are instances
when AMS patients may be subjected to extended hospital stays. Unanticipated
extension of hospitalization stays can be a great burden not only to
patients, but to medical providers and insurance companies alike. Our study
aimed to investigate the factors associated with the conversion of patient
status from AMS to observation service (OS) (fewer than 48 hours) or
Inpatient (greater than 48 hours). Material and Methods: One
thousand and ninety-six patients underwent one- or two-level lumbar
decompression AMS at a single orthopedic specialized hospital between
January 1, 2019 to March 16, 2020 were retrospectively reviewed. Patients
were categorized in three groups based on length of stay: 1) AMS, 2) OS, or
3) Inpatient. Demographics, comorbidities, surgical information, and
administrative information such as operation start time were collected.
Simple and multivariable logistic regression analyses were conducted
comparing AMS patients and OS/Inpatient as well as OS and Inpatients.
Results: Of the 1,096 patients, 641 (58%) patients were
converted to either OS (n = 486; 44%) or Inpatient (n = 155; 14%) status.
The multivariable analysis demonstrated that age (> 80 years old), high
ASA grade, history of sleep apnea, drain use, high estimated blood loss,
long operation, a high pain score in the acute care unit, late operation
start time, drain use, and laminectomy for spinal stenosis were considered
independent risk factors for AMS conversion to OS/Inpatient status. The risk
factors for OS conversion to Inpatient were an ASA Class 3 or higher, CAD,
DM, hypothyroidism, steroid use, dural tear, drain use, and laminectomy for
spinal stenosis. Conclusion: Several surgical factors along
with patient specific factors were significantly associated with AMS
conversion. Addressing modifiable surgical factors, such as blood loss,
surgery duration time, post-operative pain management, operation start time,
and drain use, might reduce the AMS conversion rate and be beneficial to
patients and facilities.

## 581

## P201: Management of osteoporotic vertebral fractures adjacent to
degenerative lumbar canal stenosis

Ahmed Shawky Abdelgawaad

1,2

, Hamdan Abdelrahman

1,2

, Drazen Prsa

1

, and Ali Ezzati

1

1

Spine Center, Helios Klinikum Erfurt, Erfurt, Germany

2

Department of Orthopaedics and Trauma, Assiut University Hospitals,
Assiut, Egypt

Introduction: Osteoporotic vertebral fractures adjacent or
subjacent to degenerative lumbar spinal canal stenosis or spondylolisthesis
represents a clinical challenge. Patients commonly present with combined
symptoms of low back pain as well as radicular or claudication pain. The
main options for treatment include conservative treatment, cement
augmentation (kyphoplasty/vertebroplasty), or cement augmentation and
decompression fusion surgery. Patients and Methods: Between
January 2018 and December 2021, ten patients with acute or subacute
osteoporotic vertebral fractures adjacent or subjacent to lumbar spinal
canal stenosis or degenerative spondylolisthesis were operated upon in our
center. Six patients were operated upon after failure of the conservative
treatment: two patients with kyphoplasty and decompression, four patients
with interbody fusion surgery and cement-augmentation of the screws.
Results: Of total ten patient, 4 women and 2 men were
operated upon. The mean age was 79.2 years. Two patients received
Kyphoplasty with decompression (mean operative time 75 minutes, mean blood
loss 100 ml). Four patients were operated upon with instrumented fusion
using cemented screws and interbody cages (mean operative time 150 minutes,
mean blood loss 450 ml). No intraoperative complications were detected. The
mean VAS of back pain improved from 7.2 ± 2 preoperatively to 2 ± 1.8, VAS
for leg pain from 7 ± 1 to 1 ± 1 at the last follow-up. The mean ODI
preoperatively was 52.3 that improved to 10.4 postoperatively.
Conclusion: Combined kyphoplasty with microsurgical
decompression is a valid treatment option for acute or subacute osteoporotic
vertebral fractures adjacent to lumbar spinal canal stenosis. In cases with
spondylolisthesis, fusion surgery with cement augmentation of the screws is
recommended. Both achieved good clinical and radiographic outcomes.

## 583

## P202: Modified pedicle screw insertion technique at the lumbosacral
junction

Hamdan Abdelrahman

1

, Ali Ezzati

1

, and Ahmed Shawky Abdelgawaad

1,2

1

Spine Center, Helios Klinikum Erfurt, Erfurt, Germany

2

Orthopaedics and Trauma, Assiut University Hospitals, Egypt

Introduction: Instrumented fusion of or extended to the
lumbosacral junction is a common surgical procedure indicated for different
pathological conditions affecting the lumbar and lumbo-sacral junction. A
high incidence of pseudoarthrosis and screw loosening is well described in
this junctional zone. Given the specific anatomical and biomechanical
characters of the L5 and S1 pedicles, optimal positioning of pedicle screws
is sometimes challenging due to the wide interpedicular distance and the
need to medialize the tip of the screw to get optimal projection of the S1
screw. We modified L5 and S1 screw insertion technique to get the optimal
trajectory and length of the screw aiming to reduce the incidence of screw
loosening. Materials and Methods: In patients indicated for
instrumented fusion including L5 and S1, a modified technique was used.
After standard posterior approach to the lumbosacral junction, the L5 or S1
entry points were identified. Excessive soft tissue dissection was avoided
though doing an extra postero-lateral 1.5 cm skin incision. The site of the
incision was usually about 5 cm from the midline and about 3 cm cranial to
S1. The paravertebral muscles were bluntly separated to allow for the
introduction of the awl and then the cannulated pedicle finder. The pedicle
was prepared, then the trocar of the pedicle finder was removed, and a guide
wire was inserted. 3D image intensifier scan was then conducted, and the
position of the wires was controlled. Once the wires position is accepted,
the screw was then inserted over the wire. Results: We operated
450 patients. In 350 cases instrumentation was extended to S1, most of the
cases were operated due to degenerative spine diseases. In all cases,
bi-cortical purchase was achieved. The mean screw diameter was 7 mm and the
length varied between 50 to 60 mm. There were no re-operations due to screw
malposition in these patients. Six Patients had wound healing problems; four
needed wound revisions. Conclusion: The modified pedicle screw
insertion through additional postero-latero-cranial skin incision achieved
optimal screw trajectory and longer screws aiming to reduce screw loosening
in area with high incidence of pseudoarthrosis. It avoids excessive soft
tissue dissection especially in muscular and fatty patients.

## 626

## P203: Randomized clinical trial evaluating 2 closure techniques in lumbar
spine surgery (SCAR - Spinal Closure Aesthetic Reconstruction Trial) - Pilot
study

Juan Del Castillo-Calcáneo

1,2

, Ezequel Rodriguez-Talavera

1

, and Guy Gilbert Broc - Haro

1,2

1

Neurosurgery, ISSSTE - Hospital Regional Adolfo Lopez Mateos, Mexico
City, Mexico

2

Neurosurgery, ABC Medical Center, Mexico City, Mexico

Introduction: Low back pain is the main cause of loss of years
due to disability throughout the world. The global rate of lumbar spine
surgery increased by 54% from 1999 to 2013, from 78 to 120 per 100,000
population. Various methods of closing surgical wounds in the lumbar spinal
region have been used finding that there is no increased incidence of
complications between them. Currently, there is no consensus on which method
of skin closure is the most appropriate for patients undergoing lumbar spine
surgery using the posterior approach. One of the main complaints of patients
in the postoperative period is the notoriety of the scar caused by this type
of surgery. In this study we made a comparison between two closure
techniques, evaluating the aesthetic result and the rate of complications in
each group. Material and Methods: In this pilot study, we
evaluated the aesthetic result between two types of skin closure for
posterior lumbar spine surgery (subcuticular suture (group 1) and simple
running suture (group 2)), randomly assigned, using the Patient and Observer
Scar Assessment Scale (POSAS) at 24 hours, 2 weeks, 1 month and 3 months.
Likewise, the rate of complications in each group was determined as well as
their general information. Results: A total of 10 patients
undergoing lumbar spine surgery by posterior approach were randomized (5 men
and 5 women), with an average age of 60.7 years (40-73 years). Of all the
cases, only one had a complication by the presence of seroma but did not
required additional intervention, this subject belonged to group 2. The
result on the POSAS scale at 24 hours was 120 in group 1 and 241 in group 2.
2 weeks: group 1 of 107 and group 2 of 244. At one month: group 1 of 107 and
group 2 of 188. At 3 months: group 1 of 90 and group 2 of 159. The average
time for closure with subcuticular technique it was 10.4 minutes and 8.8
minutes for the simple running suture group. The average time for removal of
the suture material was 10 seconds for group 1 and 72 seconds for group 2.
No subjects with cerebrospinal fluid leak were identified.
Conclusion: Our pilot study suggests that subcuticular
closure in posterior lumbar surgery, in addition to being accompanied by a
better aesthetic result, does not increase the rate of complications
compared to the simple running suture technique. The time for removal of
suture material is significantly shorter in the subcuticular closure
group.

## 652

## P204: A retrospective observational study to evaluate adjacent segmental
degenerative change with the dynesys-transition-optima instrumentation
system

Chiruei Li

1

, Hsi-Kai Tsou

2,3,4

, Shih-Hao Chen

5

, Chung-Yuh Tzeng

6

, and Wen-Hsien Chen

7

1

Department of Neurosurgery, Neurological Institute

2

Functional Neurosurgery Division, Neurological Institute

3

College of Medicine, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung City,
Taiwan

4

Nursing and Management, Department of Rehabilitation, Jen-Teh Junior
College of Medicine, Taiwan

5

Department of Orthopaedics, Tzu Chi General Hospital at Dalin and
Tzu Chi University, Taiwan

6

Department of Orthopaedics

7

Department of Radiology, Taichung Veterans General Hospital,
Taiwan

Introduction: In clinical scenarios, adjacent segmental disease
(ASD) is problematic because further surgical management might be necessary
and adverse effects on functional outcomes might be encountered in those
patients who received lumbar spine operation. Hybrid dynamic stabilization
technique with Dynesys-Transition-Optima (DTO) seems to be a practicable
answer for ASD. The purpose of this retrospective observational study was to
evaluate the adjacent segmental degenerative change with instrumentation
method of DTO system. Material and Methods: One hundred and
fourteen lumbar spinal stenosis patients complicated with spondylolisthesis
that refractory to nonsurgical management were recruited. These patients
received dynamic stabilization with DTO system in a single medical center by
a single neurosurgeon between 2012 to 2020. Initially 33 patients were
excluded that received more than 1 segment fusion or additional
decompression at other segments. Among the remaining 81 cases, we analyzed
patients that received rigid fixations applied at the L4-5 segment only with
complete postoperative data. Finally, 32 patients were enrolled into our
study. Follow-up visit was planned after 6, 12, and 24 months
postoperatively. Radiologic assessment included disc height, listhesis
distance and angular change while in motion. Implant failure and screw
loosening sign were both documented. All radiologic assessments were applied
at the L2-3, L3-4 and L5-S1 segments separately which reviewed by two
neurosurgeons and one neuro-radiologist independently. Results:
Our study showed that takes longer time interval to see a significant
reduction in disc height at L3-4 segment than other. For the L3-4 segment,
the significant disc height reduction appears a year after the operation,
however, the alteration on other segments showed in merely half a year after
the surgery. For the 2-year change in listhesis distance, the L3-4 segment
showed significantly less increase comparing with the L2-3 and L5-S1
segments. In the assessment of motion angular change, only the L3-4 segment
revealed significant decrease between the preoperative and 2-year
postoperative data. Conclusion: Regarding our study, disc
height decreased and listhesis distance revealed the minor trend and later
ASD change in the index level compared to the L2-3 and L5-S1 levels. Less
angular change occurred at the index level while in motion is also noted in
our study. Although evidence in ASD prevention did not show significant
differences compared with other clinical studies, the minor and delayed
index level degeneration still showed optimistic results. As mentioned
above, this dynamic stabilization technique could be a promising surgical
strategy for delaying ASD.
Keywords: adjacent-segment disease, dynamic stabilization,
dynesys-transition-optima, lumbar spinal fusion, motion preservation,
degenerative disc disease, loading force sharing

## 694

## P205: Clinical outcomes of lumbar interbody fusion combined with cortical
bone trajectory screw fixation technique

Jong Tae Kim

1

1

Neurosurgery, The Catholic University of Korea, Incheon Saint Mary's
Hospital, Incheon, South Korea

Introduction: Cortical bone trajectory (CBT) pedicle screw
fixation is alternative new technique, and some biomechanical or anatomical
studies, which demonstrate the priority of pullout strength of CBT screws
comparing to the conventional pedicle screws, especially in osteoporotic
patients have been reported. And also several clinical reports have been
published recently in terms of the benefit as well as lessening of the
complications of the CBT screw method. We report, the clinical and
radiological results of the short level lumbar interbody fusion with CBT
pedicle screw insertion. Material and Methods: 21 patients (8
males and 13 females) with at least 6months follow-up were enrolled, who
were underwent single or two levels lumbar interbody fusion using PLIF or
TLIF using CBT screw fixation method in single hospital, between October
2014 and August, 2015. All CBT screws were inserted by one surgeon under
intraoperative C-arm fluoroscopic guidance. The medical records and pre- and
postoperative imaging studies were reviewed retrospectively. Mean age of the
patients was 63 (range: 49-81) and the mean follow-up period was 28.9 months
(range 7-69 months). The 9 cases (42.9%) were revisional surgery. All
patients was underwent interbody fusion, and the total number of interbody
fusion level was 21 (12 single level, 9 two levels). Interbody fusion
methods were PLIF, TLIF, or OLIF (16, 12 and 1, respectively). A total
number of 104 CBT screws were analyzed radiologically. Results:
Average T-score of BMD was -2.0 SD. Preoperatively mean VAS score was 7.5(SD
± 1.12), and postoperative mean VAS score was 2.8 (SD ± 0.93). Mean
operation time for the single level fusion and two level fusion was 209 (SD
± 45.5) and 267 (SD ± 35) minutes respectively, and the estimated blood loss
was 496ml (SD ± 150) and 722ml (SD ± 380). Postoperative CT was conducted
immediately after surgery, except for two patients among the 21 patients. In
the 96 screws analyzed, 14 screws (14.6%) were not inserted correctly, but
there was no case of the violation or compromise of the neural foramen. In
one patient, intraoperative dura injury was developed. Postoperative screw
loosening or halo was detected in the 3 patients (6 screws). In the
follow-up period, the posterior displacement of the interbody cage was
detected just 4 weeks after surgery, in a case of severe osteoporosis
patient (T-score -5.0). Nevertheless, in most of patients (17/21), favorable
surgical results were achieved. Conclusion: The CBT screw
fixation is a good alternative method, especially in the case of
osteoporosis, and this technique has several advantages that minimize
paraspinal muscle disruption and decrease operation time, as well as that
allows to avoid exposure or injury of the adjacent facet joint. However,
some limitations and possible disadvantages reside simultaneously.
Comparative or controlled study and larger numbers of patients with longer
durations of follow-up will be need for the universal use of the CBT screw
method.

## 715

## P206: Comparative evaluation of transforaminal lumbar endoscopic
discectomy versus open microdiscectomy for lumbar disc herniation: a
retrospective analysis of 885 cases

Nikolaos Gkantsinikoudis

1

, Christos Siopis

1

, and Stylianos Kapetanakis

1,2

1

Spine Department and Deformities, Interbalkan European Medical
Center, Thessaloniki, Greece

2

Department of Minimally Invasive and Endoscopic Spine Surgery,
Athens Medical Center, Athens, Greece

Introduction: Lumbar Disc Herniation (LDH) represents a
frequently encountered clinical entity and the leading etiology of low back
pain in young and middle-aged individuals in recent years, being unfavorably
associated with considerable morbidity and mortality. Open Microdiscectomy
(MD) represents the current gold standard for surgical management of LDH.
Transforaminal Lumbar Endoscopic Discectomy (TLED) constitutes a novel,
full-endoscopic, minimally invasive technique that is increasingly recruited
for surgical management of LDH in a worldwide basis in recent years.
Published data regarding comparison of these two techniques remain limited
in current literature. Hence, we hereby present our experience from
conduction of TLED versus MD for surgical treatment of patients with LDH.
Material and Methods: Eight-hundred and eighty-five (885)
patients with symptomatic LDH according to clinical and radiologic criteria
were retrospectively evaluated. All patients fulfilled established
indications for surgical treatment. Enrolled individuals underwent surgical
management either with TLED (TLED group) or with MD (MD group) from the same
experienced spine surgeon in two distinct tertiary centers in the period
2013-2019. Medical archives were searched for predetermined demographical
and clinical data as well as for assortment of values of standard primary
and secondary outcome measures. Primary outcome measures were operation
time, length of incision, timing of postoperative mobilization,
hospitalization duration and specific patient-reported outcome measures as
Visual Analogue Scale (VAS), Oswestry Disability Index (ODI) and Short-Form
36 (SF-36) Medical Health Survey Questionnaire. Secondary outcome measures
were recorded complications and recurrence rates. Retrieved data were
derived from conducted evaluation on an outpatient basis at specific
intervals preoperatively and at 6 weeks, 3, 6, 12 months and at 2 and 5
years postoperatively. Results: All patients were subjected to
uneventful TLED or MD, exhibiting no major perioperative complications.
Demographical data were not significantly differentiated in the two groups.
Primary outcome measures analysis demonstrated that operation time, length
of incision as well as timing of postoperative mobilization and
hospitalization duration were statistically significantly ameliorated in
TLED group (p < 0.05). Furthermore, self-reported outcome measures (VAS,
ODI, SF-36) featured a statistically significant amelioration at each
follow-up intervals in comparison with preoperative values in both groups,
demonstrating albeit no statistically significant differentiation between
them at determined intervals. Moreover, incidence of recorded complications
and recurrences was not found to be significantly differentiated between the
two groups. Conclusion: In this retrospective analysis, TLED
was demonstrated to be non-inferior in terms of clinical efficacy in
comparison with conventional MD, alongside exhibiting relative superiority
in terms of operation time, length of incision and postoperative
mobilization-hospitalization time. Our results advocate that TLED should be
considered as a beneficial alternative for surgical management of LDH,
concerning, however, the relatively high and steep learning curve that may
crucially compromise favorable clinical outcomes, especially for beginner
spine surgeons.

## 729

## P207: Correction of spinal sagittal alignment after posterior lumbar
decompression: does severity of central canal stenosis matter?

Delano Trenchfield

1

, Yunsoo Lee

1

, Mark Lambrechts

1

, Jeremy Heard

1

, Nick D'Antonio

1

, Sydney Somers

1

, John Paulik

1

, Parker Brush

1

, Tariq Issa

1

, Jose Canseco

1

, Alan Hilibrand

1

, Alexander Vaccaro

1

, Chris Kepler

1

, and Gregory Schroeder

1

1

Division of Spine Surgery, Rothman Orthopaedic Institute,
Philadelphia, United States

Introduction: Maintaining a balanced posture is essential in
patients with lumbar central canal stenosis and understanding sagittal
spinopelvic alignment is necessary to achieve that. A previous study has
shown that central canal stenosis severity is associated with greater
preoperative sagittal misalignment. However, no study has evaluated
postoperative differences. Our study aims to identify if there is a
difference in the degree of correction of spinal sagittal alignment between
severe and non-severe central canal stenosis. Materials and
Methods: Patients undergoing < 4 level posterior lumbar
decompression were retrospectively identified. Patients were excluded if
they had no preoperative MRI or if there was inadequate visualization of the
femoral head and lumbar spine on lateral x-ray. Patients were divided into
two cohorts based on the Lee MRI grading system: Grade 3 (severe) central
canal stenosis and Grades 0-2 (non-severe) central canal stenosis. Patient
demographics, surgical characteristics, clinical outcomes, and sagittal
measurements were collected and compared using independent t-tests,
Mann-Whitney U tests, and Pearson’s chi-square tests. A multivariable
logistic regression model accounting for age, sex, BMI, CCI, and
preoperative MRI Grade 3 stenosis was performed to measure their effects on
preoperative, postoperative, and delta pelvic tilt (PT), sacral slope (SS),
lumbar lordosis (LL), and pelvic incidence minus lumbar lordosis (PI-LL).
Statistical significance was set at P < 0.05.
Results: Of 153 patients, 40 had severe stenosis, and 113
had non-severe stenosis. Patients with severe stenosis were older (67.0 ±
12.9 vs. 54.4 ± 13.7, p < 0.001) with higher CCIs (3.00 ± 1.50 vs. 1.42 ±
1.37, p < 0.001), operative times (123 ± 39.5 vs. 89.8 ± 32.2 minutes, p
< 0.001), lengths of stay (1.68 ± 1.54 vs. 0.64 ± 0.94 days, p <
0.001), and levels decompressed (2.40 ± 1.10 vs. 1.42 ± 0.76, p < 0.001).
There were no significant differences in 90-day readmission or revision
rates. Patients with severe stenosis demonstrated lower preoperative SS and
LL but higher PI-LL (p < 0.05). Postoperatively, SS and LL remained lower
in patients with severe stenosis (P < 0.05). Postoperative PT and PI-LL
trended towards being higher in severe stenosis but were not statistically
significant (p = 0.051 and p = 0.058, respectively). Both groups showed
improvement in sagittal balance postoperatively but there were no
significant differences in delta LL (1.40 o ± 7.15 o
vs 2.37 o ± 6.68 o, p = 0.44), SS (0.96 o ±
4.65 o vs 1.07 o ± 5.38 o, p = 0.91), PT
(-0.18 o ± 5.84 o vs 0.55 o ± 7.60
o, p = 0.583), or PI-LL (-1.40 o ± 7.15
o vs -2.37 o ± 6.68 o, p = 0.440)
between the groups. Multivariate logistic regression found no significant
predictors of delta LL, SS, PT, or PI-LL. However, severe stenosis was
predictive of a lower preoperative LL (estimate = -5.403, p = 0.031), and a
higher preoperative PI-LL (estimate = 6.853, p = 0.12), postoperative PT
(estimate = 3.751, p = 0.033), and postoperative PI-LL (estimate = 5.903, p
= 0.033). Conclusions: Severe stenosis was associated with
greater spinopelvic mismatch preoperatively. Sagittal balance improved in
patients with severe and non-severe central canal stenosis after posterior
lumbar decompression. However, the degree of correction is not statistically
different, and differences in sagittal parameters remain
postoperatively.

## 745

## P208: Association between preoperative lumbar fat infiltration and
clinical outcomes after posterolateral lumbar fusion: A retrospective
study

Filipa Cordeiro

1

, Tiago Barbosa

1

, João Seixas

1

, and Ricardo Rodrigues-Pinto

2

1

Orthopaedics Department, Centro Hospitalar Universitário do Porto,
Porto, Portugal

2

Orthopaedics Department, Centro Hospitalar Universitário do Porto,
Unidade Vertebro-Medular (UVM), Porto, Portugal

Introduction: The lumbar musculature is a fundamental stabilizer
of the spine, and the relationship between chronic low back pain and
paraspinal muscle atrophy has been well established. In several studies, fat
infiltration has been associated with low back pain and lower limb pain.
Thus, the preoperative condition of the lumbar musculature may interfere
with the results of the surgical treatment. The aim of this study was to
assess whether there is an association between preoperative fat infiltration
and clinical outcomes after posterolateral lumbar fusion. Material and
Methods: All patients who underwent elective posterolateral
lumbar fusion between 2014 and 2019 were retrospectively evaluated. The
classification of fat infiltration was performed through the analysis of
preoperative Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) and the correlation with the
postoperative clinical results evaluated by Oswestry Disability Index (ODI),
persistence of low back pain and/or lower limb pain and Visual Analogue
Scale (VAS). Results: A total of 64 MRI were evaluated, most of
which (89.1%) belonged to patients undergoing surgery for spondylolisthesis.
Nine patients (14.1%) did not respond to the postoperative evaluation
questionnaire. Forty-seven patients (73,4%) were women and mean age was 65,8
years old. Preoperative fat infiltration was higher in women than in men (p
= 0.043). In addition, women had higher postoperative ODI scores, that is,
worse clinical outcomes (p = 0.007). However, preoperative fat infiltration
was not associated with ODI, VAS for low back pain/radicular pain or return
to work. Conclusion: The results obtained show that women have
higher levels of preoperative fat infiltration and worse ODI scores.
However, it was not demonstrated an association between the degree of fat
infiltration and clinical outcomes after posterolateral fusion. Further
studies are needed to validate a possible correlation.

## 794

## P209: Fatty infiltration of paraspinal muscle served as an independent
risk factor in cage subsidence and nonunion amongst single level
anterolateral approach lumbar interbody fusion

Kuan Kai Tung

1

, Cheng-Sheng Liu

1

, Kun-Hui Chen

1,2,3,4

, Chien-Chou Pan

1,5

, Cheng-Min Shih

1

, Yun-Che Wu

1

, and Cheng-Hung Lee

1,6,7

1

Taichung Veterans General Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan, Department of
Orthopedics, Taichung, Taiwan

2

Department of Biomedical Engineering

3

Providence University, Department of Computer Science and
Information Engineering, Taichung, Taiwan

4

Department of Nursing

5

Department of Rehabilitation Science, Jenteh Junior College of
Medicine, Taichung, Taiwan

6

Post Baccalaureate Medicine, School of Medicine, National Chung
Hsing University, Taiwan

7

Department of Food Science and Technology,Hung Kuang University,
Taichung, Taiwan

Introduction: Clinical outcomes amongst degenerative lumbar
disease patients have shown satisfactory results being reported after
minimal invasive lumbar interbody fusion surgery. Additionally, the
importance of paraspinal muscle (PM) degeneration on clinical outcomes has
been revealed. However, the risk factors in related to fatty infiltration
(FI) of paraspinal musculature effect led to nonunion and cage subsidence in
lumbar interbody fusion has been scarcely discussed. Material and
Methods: This study aimed to discover how FI of paraspinal muscle
affects bone fusion and cage subsidence after single level anterolateral
lumbar interbody fusion surgery. After application of inclusion and
exclusion criteria, 127 patients received anterior lumbar interbody fusion
(ALIF) and oblique LIF (OLIF) were enrolled in current study. Adjusted total
cross-sectional area of PM and FI proportion of supra-adjacent, superior,
inferior and infra-adjacent level PM was assessed via pre-operative magnetic
resonance imaging. Fusion status and cage subsidence outcome were evaluated
at 2-years after surgery. Results: More than 70% of the study
subjects were diagnosed spondylolisthesis. 55% if the operation level was at
L4/5. FI of supra-adjacent, superior, inferior and infra-adjacent level was
significantly higher in the nonunion group and cage subsidence group (p <
0.001 for all). Multivariate logistic regression revealed FI of
supra-adjacent level PM served as an independent risk factor for nonunion
and cage subsidence (p = 0.041, odds ratio [OR] = 1.15 and p = 0.036, odds
ratio [OR] = 1.13). ROC curve analysis showed cut-off value of 40.4% and
35.8% in supra-adjacent FI of PM in predicting bone fusion and cage
subsidence, respectively (sensitivity 71.4% and specificity 92.9%, area
under curve = 0.869 and sensitivity 93.8% and specificity 60.6%, area under
curve = 0.818). Conclusion: Higher fatty infiltration rate of
supra-adjacent paraspinal muscle was strongly associated with bone nonunion
and cage subsidence after single level anterolateral lumbar fusion surgery.
Patients with more than 35-40% FI of supra-adjacent PM may result in
nonunion and cage subsidence. Therefore, appropriate intraoperative endplate
preparation and close following-up the fusion outcome after surgery are
important.

## 839

## P211: Transpsoas versus ante-psoas technique in lateral approaches: pros
and cons

Alessandro Longo

1

, Federica Penner

1,2

, Mario Allevi

2

, Armando Massara

2

, and Alessandro Ducati

1

1

Spine Surgery Unit, Humanitas Cellini, Turin, Italy

2

Department of Neurosciences “Rita Levi Montalcini”, Neurosurgery
Unit, Neurosurgery, University of Turin, Turin, Italy

Introduction: The lateral transpsoas approach (LLIF) is the most
commonly used among the minimally invasive technique for degenerative spine
diseases and is supported by several recognized advantages over posterior
interbody fusion, such as lower post-operative pain, greater disk removal,
better footprint, good indirect foramen and central canal decompression and
lower adjacent segment disease rates. The oblique lumbar interbody fusion
(OLIF) technique is an ante-psoas approach which brings all the advantages
of an anterior approach and other benefits when compared to the transpsoas
technique, such as excellent visualisation of anterior longitudinal
ligament, avoiding muscular trauma and lumbar plexus injury risk, cost
reduction due to the possibility of not using a monitoring system for lumbar
plexus, no need to use jack knife position. Furthermore using the orthogonal
manoeuvre ante-psoas cage insertion can reach a favourable angle to correct
coronal imbalance and scoliosis. The increased vascular injury risk is the
main drawback of the OLIF technique. The aim of this study is to compare the
LLIF and OLIF techniques focusing on intraoperative challenges and
complications. Material and Methods: The authors performed a
retrospective review on 199 consecutive patients treated over a 4-year
period for lumbar degenerative disease and adult scoliosis. We implanted 59
cages through the OLIF approach. 38 patients underwent single level surgery,
14 patients underwent double level surgery and 7 patients also implanted
other cages through mixed approaches (such as TLIF). We also implanted 198
cages through the LLIF approach. 62 patients underwent single level surgery,
62 patients underwent double level surgery and 7 patients also implanted
other cages through mixed approaches. Results: Our experience
showed 19 (9,6 %) intraoperative complications during cage implants in the
LLIF group (such as subsidence, anterior longitudinal ligament rupturing and
anterior cage migration), while only 3 (5,1 %) intraoperative complications
during cage implants in the ante-posas group (one peritoneum rupturing, one
cage rotation, one cage subsidence). Conclusion: The ante-psoas
technique is a valuable alternative to the transpsoas approach. We
identified several advantages and some cons of using the ante-psoas approach
instead of the transpsoas technique, and different rates of intraoperative
complications. In our experience we observed that the two techniques could
be complementary and they should be performed according to the specific
patient anatomy and clinical needs.

## 850

## P212: The intersection of perioperative polypharmacy and surgical
outcomes after lumbar spinal fusion: a retrospective cohort study

Cathleen Kuo

1

, Mohamed Soliman

1,2

, Alexander Aguirre

1

, Marissa Kruk

1

, Joseph Iskander

1

, Hannon Levy

1

, Asham Khan

1

, Moleca Ghannam

1

, Patrick Jowdy

1

, John Pollina

1

, and Jeffrey Mullin

1

1

Neurosurgery, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, United States

2

Neurosurgery, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt

Introduction: Spine fusions are one of the most common
procedures in elderly patients. Among this group, these patients typically
also balance a multitude of other medical conditions that can require a
delicate management of medications. The objective of this study was to
identify the impact of an increased number of medications, polypharmacy, and
its impact to various postoperative outcomes. Material and
Methods: A retrospective review of patient charts was completed.
Data collection included the number of pharmaceutical drugs a patient was
actively taken, as self-reported by the patients. Polypharmacy was defined
according to previous literature as the patient taking five or more drugs at
a single time. Other data collection included patient demographics,
preoperative comorbidities, intraoperative outcomes, and postoperative
outcomes. Uni-variate analysis was utilized to identify potential
differences between groups. Results: A total of 713 patients
were identified. Among these patients 539 (75.6%) of patients utilized five
or more drugs at a single time. Preoperatively, the polypharmacy group had
significantly higher history of illicit drug abuse (p = 0.003), increased
American Association of Anesthesiologist (ASA) scores (p < 0.001),
increased Charlson Comorbidity index scores (p < 0.001) and were
significantly older (p = 0.01). In the operating room polypharmacy patients
required a larger number of fusion levels (p = 0.01), had greater estimated
blood loss (p < 0.001), and increased length of stay (p = 0.01). The
polypharmacy group also had significantly greater estimated blood loss (p
< 0.001) and longer hospital stay (p = 0.01). Conclusion:
Polypharmacy is an extremely common before and after spine fusions, which
leads to an increased rate of adverse perioperative outcomes.

## 857

## P213: Preoperative degrees of fat infiltration, intervertebral disc
degeneration and Modic changes do not influence the outcomes of lumbar
fusion

Filipa Cordeiro

1

, Tiago Barbosa

1

, João Seixas

1

, and Ricardo Rodrigues-Pinto

1

1

Orthopaedics Department, Spinal Unit, Centro Hospitalar
Universitário do Porto, Portugal

Introduction: The lumbar musculature is a fundamental stabilizer
of the spine. Several studies have associated fat infiltration, especially
of the multifidus and erector spinae, to
low back pain and radiculopathy. In addition, discogenic low back pain has
been described as the most common cause of chronic low back pain. Thus, the
preoperative condition of the lumbar spine may interfere with the results of
its surgical treatment. The aim of this study assess the influence of the
degrees of pre-operative fat infiltration, intervertebral disc degeneration
and MODIC changes on the clinical status of patients submitted to lumbar
fusion. Material and Methods: A retrospective study with
patients submitted to lumbar fusion between 2014 and 2019 was performed. The
preoperative degree of fat infiltration was measured and the degree of
intervertebral disc degeneration was analyzed using the Pfirmann and Modic
classifications, and then correlated with the postoperative clinical
results, using the Oswestry Disability Index (ODI), Visual Analogue Scale
(VAS) and subjective improvement of low back pain and radicular pain.
Results: One hundred thirty-nine patients were included, of
which 64 were submitted to posterolateral fusion (PLF) and 75 to interbody
fusion (51 via transforaminal - TLIF - and 24 via posterior - PLIF). The
most frequent surgical indication was spondylolisthesis (77%). Patients
undergoing interbody fusion reported greater subjective improvement in low
back pain and radicular pain when compared to patients undergoing PLF (p
< 0.05), regardless of the degree of fat infiltration. No statistically
significant association was found between the type of surgery (interbody
fusion vs. PLF) with ODI (30.32 vs. 31.70), VAS for low back pain (5.4 vs.
4.2), for radicular pain (4.1 vs. 2.8), respectively. No relation was found
between previous disc status with ODI, VAS low back pain/radicular pain or
return to work. An association was found between patients with a greater
degree of fat infiltration and greater persistence of postoperative
radicular pain (p = 0.041). There was no association between the degree of
fat infiltration and other postoperative clinical parameters, such as ODI,
VAS low back pain/radicular pain or return to work. Conclusion:
Results in this study failed to identify an association between the degree
of intervertebral disc degeneration or fat infiltration and the
postoperative clinical outcomes of lumbar fusion, regardless of the surgical
technique utilized.

## 888

## P214: Comparison of unilateral versus bilateral instrumentation in
transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion for lumbar degenrerative disorders-
an mid term analysis of 806 cases

Dr Sajan Hegde

1

, Sharan Achar T

1

, Vigneshwara Badikkilaya

1

, and Umesh Kanade P

1

1

Orthopaedics, Apollo Hospitals Chennai India, Chennai,
India

Introduction: Transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion (TLIF) has
become gold standard technique for management degenerative lumbar disc
disease, traditionally performed with bilateral pedicle screw fixation.
Alternatively, Unilateral instrumented in TLIF has been reported to be
effective. This study compares the clinical and radiological outcomes in a
select series of patients treated with Unilateral versus Bilateral Pedicle
Screw instrumented TLIF (UPSF vs BPSF TLIF). Materials: Single
center, Single surgeon, retrospective study with minimum 2-year follow up.
Retrospective cohort study including 806 patients with 396 patients operated
with UPSF TLIF compared to 410 patients with BPSF TLIF with at least 2 years
follow-up. Demographic data, operative time, blood loss, hospital stay,
implant costs, complications were evaluated. Functional outcome assessed
using Oswestry Disability Index (ODI), Short-Form health survey (SF-36) and
visual analog score (VAS) preoperatively and 6 months, 1 year, and 2 years
after surgery. Fusion rates assessed with Bridwell grading at 2 yrs follow
up. Data analyzed using X² test, t test, and Fisher exact test.
Results: The mean follow-up was 33 months (24-86 months). A
significant improvement in VAS, SF-36 and ODI in both groups at 2 years
follow-up was noted, and there was no significant difference between the
groups. The complication rates between the groups were similar, except for
radiological cage migration with bullet cage in UPSF group causing no
symptoms (p > 0.05). The fusion rate in UPSF TLIF was 97.1% and 98.2% in
BPSF TLIF; difference was not statistically significant. The UPSF group had
a significantly shorter operative time, less blood loss, shorter hospital
stay and reduced implant cost compared with BPSF group (p < 0.001).
Conclusions: UPSF in TLIF is comparable with BSPF in terms
of patient-reported clinical outcomes, fusion rates, and complication rates
with the additional benefits of less operative time, less blood loss,
shorter hospitalization, and less cost in selective cases.

## 1022

## P215: Comparison of total health operational cost for 1-stage vs 2-stage
anterior lumbar interbody fusion procedures

Miguel Ruiz Cardozo

1

, Som Singh

1

, Michael Olufawo

1

, Samuel Brehm

1

, Abby Carey-Ewend

1

, Karma Barot

1

, Ahmed Hanafy

1

, Gabriel Trevino Verastegui

1

, Matthew De la Paz

1

, Raj Lavadi

1

, Magalie Cadieux

1

, Julio Jauregui

2

, and Camilo Molina

1 2

1

Neurosurgery, Washington University, St. Louis, United
States

2

Orthopaedic Surgery, Washington University, St. Louis, United
States

Introduction: Anterior lumbar interbody fusions (ALIF) are a
common operative procedure for the management of degenerative lumbar spinal
pathology. Anatomically, an ALIF techniques allows for midline workflow of
disc space and endplate preparation which can maximize surface area during
fusion-based restoration. Let alone, the widespread practice of ALIF has
increased compared to its posterior, transforaminal, lateral, and oblique
lumbar fusion cohorts. This has led to ALIF often being among the highest
Medicare reimbursement expenditures over the past 2 decades. As healthcare
utilization and expenditures continue to rise within spinal surgery, there
becomes more of an imperative need to evaluate lumbar interbody fusion
approaches for value-based care when determining approaches between levels.
The aim of this study is to describes the costs of operations between
1-level and 2-level ALIF surgeries being performed as 1-stage vs 2-stage
procedures. Material and Methods: This was a single
institutional retrospective cohort study of 212 patients who underwent
spinal fusion surgeries at Barnes Jewish Hospital in Saint Louis from
January 2021 to January 2022. Among this cohort, patients who underwent
1-level or 2-level ALIF were evaluated for medical billing costs incurred
during their individual operating room (OR) and hospital courses (HC). All
Hospital Costs (HC) incurred for 18 functional areas were obtained from
Hospital billing for each patient’s surgical admission. We performed
comparisons of ancillary costs (AC) and operating costs (OC) across the
1-level or 2-level ALIF procedures. We used tableau desktop and R Studio for
data visualization and statistical analyses. Cost distributions were
compared using the non-paired samples Wilcoxon rank sum test. Descriptive
statistical analysis was performed using tableau desktop and R studio for
both cohorts. Additionally, the distribution of costs were compared using
independent U tests. Statistical significance was established as p <
0.05. Results: A total of 16 1-level or 2-level ALIF surgeries
were identified in the database. 7 cases were 1-Stage and 9 were 2-Stage
surgeries. The mean OR time of 1-stage surgeries was 403 min (CI
365.59-440.69) and for 2-stage procedures was 530 min (CI 424.85-636.65).
The mean LOS of 1-stage surgeries was 2.86 days (CI 1.61-4.1) and for
2-stage procedures was 4.13 days (CI 2.75-5.5). Neither group developed
complications during the hospital course. In terms of total operational cost
(including ancillary, hospital stay and operating room cost), the median
cost was 50203.14 USD (SD 8012.21) for 1-stage surgeries and 60849.22 USD
(SD 11744.04) for 2-stage procedures. The differences in OR time, LOS and
total operational cost were not statistically significant.
Conclusion: This study establishes economic profile of
medical costs associated with 1-level and 2-level ALIF among patients with
degenerative disease. Based on the data distributions of the total
operational cost total, it seems 1-stage procedures are able to provide more
efficiency in terms of resource utilization for equitable patient outcomes
compared to 2-stage procedures. However, this study failed to showed a
statistically significant difference. Validation with a larger cohort of
patients will help to determine the most cost-effective ALIF approach.

## 1072

## P216: Radiographic outcomes for bilateral versus unilateral cages in
TLIFs

Jeremy Heard

1

, Mark Lambrechts

1

, Nicholas D'Antonio

1

, Yunsoo Lee

1

, John Bodnar

2

, Gregory Schneider

2

, Evan Bloom

2

, Parker Brush

1

, Jose Canseco

1

, Tariq Issa

1

, Christopher Kepler

1

, Alan Hilibrand

1

, Alexander Vaccaro

1

, and Gregory Schroeder

1

1

Orthopedic Surgery, The Rothman Orthopedic Institute at Thomas
Jefferson University Hospital, Philadelphia, United States

2

Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, United States

Introduction: While unilateral cage placement likely confers
less surgical risk to the patient than bilateral cage placement, there is
limited and conflicting literature regarding surgical outcomes when
comparing bilateral and unilateral cages. There is little published
literature comparing radiographic parameters following unilateral and
bilateral cage placement, which may allow us to understand whether one
technique is superior in its restoration of sagittal alignment, disc space
distraction, or endplate obliquity. There is no clear evidence to dictate
whether bilateral or unilateral cages promote superior radiographic or
surgical outcomes in posterior-based spinal fusions. Our study aims to (1)
compare radiographic outcomes between unilateral and bilateral cage
placement in transforaminal lumbar interbody fusions (TLIF) and to (2)
determine if the rate of fusion at the one-year postoperative point was
different between patients who received bilateral versus unilateral cages.
Methods: Patients > 18 years of
age who underwent primary one- or two-level TLIFs at our institution were
identified and propensity matched in a 3:1 fashion (unilateral compared to
bilateral). Patient demographics, surgical characteristics, and radiographic
outcomes including vertebral endplate obliquity, segmental lordosis,
subsidence, and fusion status were compared between groups. Multivariable
regression analysis was performed. Significance was set to p < 0.05.
Results: Of 184 patients included, 46 received bilateral
cages. Bilateral cage placement was associated with greater subsidence (1.06
± 1.25 vs. 0.59 ± 1.16 mm, p = 0.028) and enhanced restoration of segmental
lordosis (5.74o ± 14.1o vs. -1.57o ±
10.9o, p = 0.002) at the one-year postoperative point, while
unilateral cage placement was associated with an increased correction of
endplate obliquity (-2.02o ± 4.42o vs.
0.24o ± 2.81o, p < 0.001). Bilateral cage
placement was significantly associated with radiographic fusion on bivariate
analysis (89.1% vs. 70.3%, p = 0.018) and significantly predictive of
radiographic fusion on multivariable regression (1.35 [1.51 - 12.05], p =
0.010) analysis. Conclusions: In comparing unilateral and
bilateral TLIF procedures, TLIFs with bilateral cages resulted in greater
improvements in segmental lordosis and bony arthrodesis. Unilateral cages
were more likely to affect endplate obliquity. Given that this is one of the
few studies comparing radiographic between unilateral and bilateral cages in
patients undergoing TLIF procedures, additional high-quality prospective
studies are needed to verify the results of the present study and add
further context to whether the improvements in segmental lordosis and
endplate obliquity result in greater long-term clinical outcomes.

## 1100

## P217: Titanium coated PEEK interbody fusion device performance for
treatment of degenerative spine conditions

Madilyn Riegel

1

, Jillian Mohn

1

, Matthew Gary

2

, Joseph Lee

3

, Safdar Khan

4

, Elizabeth Yu

4

, Benjamin Chen

5

, and Hallie Murray

1

1

Tyber Medical, LLC, Clinical Affairs, Bethlehem, United
States

2

Neurosurgery, Emory Spine Center, Atlanta, United States

3

Orthopedic Spine Surgery, Rothman Orthopedics, Tarrytown, United
States

4

Orthopedic Spine Surgery, The Ohio State University, Columbus,
United States

5

Orthopedic Spine Surgery, MultiCare Institute of Research and
Innovation, Puyallup, United States

Introduction: Interbody fusion devices designed using an
integrated technology consisting of an organic thermoplastic polymer,
polyetheretherketone (PEEK), and a porous titanium coating (ProTi) are FDA
cleared and CE marked to treat patients with lumbar degenerative spine
conditions. These degenerative spine conditions include, but are not limited
to, degenerative disc disease, stenosis, and radiculopathy. The objective of
this research is to examine the clinical outcomes and time to fusion for
patients who have received the ProTi interbody fusion devices to evaluate
the device’s performance in treating these degenerative spine conditions.
Material and Methods: Approval from the Institutional
Review Board was obtained to gather clinical and radiographic outcomes on
patients treated retrospectively and prospectively for one-level lumbar
fusion with a ProTi interbody fusion device to correct degenerative disc
disease or other spinal deformities. The ProTi interbody fusion device is
designed with pyramidal teeth to resist expulsion in all directions, tracks
on the surface to lead and turn the spacer into position, and a
self-distracting bullet-nose to allow easy insertion. The subjects in this
study were evaluated by using patient reported outcome measurements
including the Oswestry Disability Index (ODI) and the Visual Analog Scale
(VAS), along with radiographic outcomes using x-rays and computed tomography
(CT) scans. Results: The patients treated with the ProTi
interbody fusion devices demonstrated solid bony fusion with CT scans
displaying bone bridging across the interbody space with an average time to
fusion of 10.93 months (range of 3 to 21 months). Patient reported outcome
measurements had significant (p = 0.001) improvement in VAS back pain,
significant (p = 0.007) improvement in VAS right leg pain, and significant
(p < 0.05) improvement in VAS left leg pain at the 12-month follow-up
when compared to pre-operative VAS pain scores. Patient ODI scores also
demonstrated improvement from an average score of 42.46 pre-operatively to
an average score of 24.23 at 12-month follow-up (p = 0.053). These results
demonstrated the ability of ProTi devices to successfully alleviate pain
caused by a degenerative spine condition managed through spine fusion.
Conclusion: The preliminary analysis for this on-going
study was the most recent to evaluate the clinical outcomes and time to
fusion of one-level lumbar fusion using a ProTi interbody fusion device for
the treatment of degenerative disc disease and other degenerative spine
conditions. Study results demonstrated significant improvements in reported
pain that resulted from the degenerative spinal deformities patients
presented with prior to surgery and proved successful in obtaining solid
bony fusion in one-level lumbar spine fusion procedures. Additional research
will need to be done to fully evaluate the performance of ProTi interbody
fusion devices.

## 1125

## P218: Evaluating 5-years outcomes of interlaminar devices as an adjunct
to decompression for symptomatic lumbar canal stenosis

Naresh Kumar

1

, Andrew Thomas

1

, Meetrra Seyher

1

, Kasia Chua

1

, Sean Lee

1

, Liang Shen

2

, and Laranya kumar

1

1

Orthopaedic Surgery

2

Medical Statistics, National University of Singapore, Singapore,
Singapore

Introduction: Lumbar spinal stenosis(LSS) is a common spine
condition encountered in clinical practice, having an increasing prevalence
especially with an ageing population. The SPORT trial established that
surgical treatment of spinal stenosis yields greater improvement in pain and
function. Currently, the gold standard of treatment of symptomatic LSS is
open decompression and fusion, but it has several drawbacks such as
increased soft tissue morbidity and adjacent segment degeneration. As such,
the interlaminar device (ILD) has been proposed as an alternative solution
that allows for a less invasive procedure with dynamic stabilisation, thus
reducing surgical morbidity. Current literature on the effectiveness of ILD
for patients with symptomatic LSS is limited to short term studies only. Our
study is the first to assess and compare 5-year outcomes following
non-instrumented spinal decompression with and without an ILD insertion to
determine if there was a statistically significant improvement in clinical
outcomes and radiological parameters. Materials and Methods: A
retrospective review of prospectively collected data under a single surgeon
cohort study, consisting of 116 patients who underwent spinal decompression
with and without an ILD insertion between 2007 - 2015 was performed.
Patients who met the study criteria were offered the choice of an ILD device
insertion. Those who accepted an ILD insertion were placed in the D+ILD
group (n = 61) and underwent an additional step involving the insertion of
an ILD (Coflex or Stenofix) at the involved level through the same surgical
incision; while those opting for decompression alone were placed in the DA
group (n = 55). All patients in both groups received the same postoperative
care. Clinical outcomes such as the Oswestry disability index, EuroQoL-5d
(Eq5d), VAS-back pain & VAS-leg pain, and SF-36 scores were measured
while radiological indices comprising of the anterior disc height, posterior
disc height and foraminal height were assessed both preoperatively and up to
5-years postoperatively. Results: Both arms of our study showed
statistically significant (p < 0.001) improvement in all clinical outcome
indicators measured at all time points as compared to their preoperative
state. However, the D+ILD group achieved and maintained significant
radiological correction in posterior disc (p < 0.01) and foraminal height
(p < 0.01) at all time points measured while the DA group did not attain
this. This is in concordance with existing literature that supports the
adjunct use of an ILD for its increased stability in extension and reduction
in intradiscal pressure which translates into better clinical outcome scores
for axial back pain and preservation of radiological parameters at varying
time points. There were no major complications in both groups.
Conclusion: The use of an ILD in conjunction with spinal
decompression in patients with symptomatic LSS has been shown to offer
positive clinical outcomes with reproducible correction in radiological
parameters as compared to decompression alone.

## 1126

## P219: Predict the culprit segment in percutaneous transforaminal
endoscopic surgery (PTES) under local anesthesia for surgical treatment of
lumbar degenerative disease: radiologic images or patient's
symptoms?

YuTong Gu

1

1

Orthopedic Surgery, Zhongshan Hospital Fudan University, Shanghai,
China

Objective: Percutaneous transforaminal endoscopic surgery (PTES)
is a novel minimally invasive technique that has been used in the treatment
of lumbar degenerative diseases (LDDs). It is very important to predict the
culprit segment in surgical treatment of LDDs. Generally, we predict the
culprit segment according to lumbar degenerations and neurologic compression
on MRI and CT. Additionally different lumbar nerve root being compressed can
lead to the pain in special place of buttock and leg, and the culprit
segment can be predicted according to the position of leg pain. When
radiologic images are not in accordance with neurologic symptoms, how to
predict the culprit segment? PTES under local anesthesia was performed to
treat the culprit segment of LDDs predicted by radiologic images or clinical
symptoms, and the efficacy, security and feasibility were evaluated.
Methods: 87 cases of LDDs with nerve root symptoms, which
were not consistent with lumbar degenerative levels and degree on MRI and
CT, were treated with PTES under local anesthesia in day surgery ward from
Jan 2015 to Dec 2019. 42 patients, whose culprit segment was predicted by
radiologic images are included in group A. The other 45 patients, whose
culprit segment was predicted by clinical symptoms are included in group B.
Leg pain VAS and ODI before and after surgery are recorded. The outcome is
defined according to MacNab grade at 2-year follow-up. Postoperative
complications are recorded. Results: In group A, 2 patients
underwent PTES for 1 segment, 37 patients for 2 segments and 3 patients for
3 segments. One of 1-segment PTES had no relief of symptoms and underwent
another PTES for other culprit segment 3 months after surgery. In group B 44
of 45 patients were treated using PTES for 1 segment and 1 patient for 2
segments. Group B showed significantly less operative duration, less blood
loss and less fluoroscopy frequency than group A (p < 0.001). VAS score
of leg pain and ODI significantly dropped after operation in both groups (p
< 0.001). The leg pain VAS of group B was significantly lower than that
of group A immediately, 1 week, 1 month, 2 months and 3 months after surgery
(p < 0.001), but there was no statistical difference between two groups 6
months, 1 year, 2 years after surgery. Five patients (11.9%, 5/42) in group
A and one patient (2.2%, 1/45) in group B had rebound effect of leg pain.
VAS score of these patients rose 1 week after surgery and got relieved
within 2 months. The excellent and good rate was 97.6% (41/42) in group A
and 100% (45/45) in group B at 2-year follow-up. There was no statistical
difference in ODI and the excellent and good rate between two groups. No
complications such as wound infection, permanent nerve injury were observed.
Conclusion: It is much more accurate to predict the culprit
segment according to clinical symptoms than radiologic images in PTES under
local anesthesia for surgical treatment of LDDs, which can decrease
operative duration, blood loss, fluoroscopy frequency, and postoperative
rebound effect of leg pain.

## 1153

## P220: Evaluating 5-year outcomes of between the use of Coflex compared to
Stenofix device as an adjunct to decompression for symptomatic lumbar canal
stenosis

Naresh Kumar

1

, Kasia Chua

1

, Meetrra Seyher

1

, Sean Lee

1

, Laranya kumar

1

, Liang Shen

2

, and Andrew Thomas

1

1

Orthopaedic Surgery

2

Medical Statistics, National University of Singapore, Singapore,
Singapore

Objective: Literature on benefits of interlaminar devices (ILD)
compared to decompression alone for symptomatic lumbar spinal stenosis (LSS)
is limited past the 2-year timeframe. Additionally, no radiological
parameters for quantifying patients with positive surgical outcomes have
been correlated. First, to assess and compare 5-year outcomes following the
use of the Coflex device compared to the Stenofix device as an adjunct to
spinal decompression. Second, to determine whether improvement in
radiological indices correlated with clinical outcomes.
Methods: We conducted a prospective single surgeon cohort
study of 116 patients who underwent spinal decompression with or without ILD
insertion between 2007 - 2015. Patients with a single level symptomatic LSS
were offered spinal decompression with either ILD insertion. An exclusion
criteria of patients < 21 years-age, spondylolysis/listhesis grade 2 or
higher, multiple level LSS, previous lumbar surgery and malignancy was
applied to our study. Clinical outcomes were assessed preoperatively &
up to 5-years postoperatively, using the Oswestry disability index,
EuroQoL-5d (Eq5d), VAS score and SF-36. Radiological indices were assessed
preoperatively and up to 5-years postoperatively. Results: We
had a total number of 70 patients in our study, with 21 in the Stenofix
group and 49 in the Coflex group. In term of anterior disc height, the
Stenofix group had a significant reduction at 5 years from 12.5 to 11.2mm (p
< 0.01) while the Coflex group had an unsustained improvement
postoperatively that reverted back to preoperative height at 5 years (p =
0.34). The Stenofix group had an unsustained increase in posterior disc
height and foraminal height postoperatively that reverted back to
preoperative height at 5 years. The Coflex group had significant maintained
improvement in posterior disc height from 6.9 to 7.9mm (p = 0.01) and
foraminal height of 17 to 20.7mm (p = 0.03) at the 5 year mark. Comparing
between the groups, there was significant improvement in posterior disc
height favouring Coflex (p < 0.01). There was no significant difference
in sagittal balance, overall lordosis and sagittal angle of the index level.
Both groups had significant improvement post-operatively at all time points
for all clinical outcomes. For the SF36-MCS score, Coflex had a greater
improvement than Stenofix (p < 0.01) from 54.5 to 69.5 compared to 48.2
to 51.8 at 5 years postoperative respectively. For the VAS score, Coflex had
a greater improvement than Stenofix (p = 0.03) from 6.0 to 1.0 compared to
6.2 to 2.3 at 5 years postoperative respectively. There was no significant
difference in the remining clinical outcomes between the groups.
Conclusions: Interlaminar device insertion with spinal
decompression in symptomatic LSS with up to grade I spondylolisthesis offers
good clinical outcomes as compared to decompression alone with sustained
radiological correction. Our study highlights that in the treatment of
symptomatic LSS (with up to grade I spondylolisthesis), the use of the
Coflex device is superior to the Stenofix interlaminar device with greater
improvement in posterior disc height and clinical outcomes such as SF-36 MCS
and VAS overall.

## 1165

## P221: Comparing TLIF vs PLF for patient reported outcomes, complications,
readmissions, and revisions

Anthony Steinle

1

, Wilson Vaughan

1

, Andrew Croft

1

, Alicia Hymel

1

, Jacquelyn Pennings

1,2

, Hani Chanbour

3

, Anthony Asher

1,4

, Raymond Gardocki

1

, Scott Lawrence Zuckerman

1,3

, Amir Abtahi

1,2,3

, and Byron Stephens

1,2,3

1

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery

2

Center for Musculoskeletal Research

3

Department of Neurological Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, Nashville, TN, United States

4

Atrium Health Neurosciences Institute & Department of
Neurosurgery, Carolinas Medical Center, Charlotte, NC, United
States

Introduction: Elective lumbar fusion is commonly used to treat
various lumbar pathologies when conservative therapy fails. Two common
approaches for posterior lumbar fusions include transforaminal lumbar
interbody fusion (TLIF) and posterolateral fusion (PLF) alone without an
interbody. Whether TLIF or PLF leads to better patient-reported outcomes
(PROs) and reduced complications remains an area of active research. The
current study sought to compare TLIF vs PLF alone in regard to 1) patient
reported outcomes (PROs), and 2) rates of complications, readmissions, and
reoperations. Material and Methods: The Lumbar Module of the
Quality Outcomes Database (QOD), a national multi center prospective spine
registry, was queried between 04/2013-06/2019 for patients older than 18
years of age who underwent TLIF or PLF. Patients with previous lumbar
surgery and all minimally invasive, multi-stage, and revision cases were
excluded. Covariates included age, BMI, race, education, smoking status,
comorbidities, primary spine diagnosis, number of levels fused, ASA grade,
and baseline PROs. 12-month PROs included Oswestry Disability Index (ODI),
North American Spine Society (NASS) patient satisfaction index, numeric
rating scale (NRS) back and leg scores, and Euroqol 5-Dimension (EQ-5D).
Other outcomes included 30-day complications, 30-day reoperations, 3-month
readmissions, 12-month return to work (RTW), and 12-month return to
activities. For most outcomes of interest, multivariate regression analysis
was run controlling for covariates and the baseline measure of the outcome
when applicable. Unadjusted univariate analysis was performed to evaluate
12-month RTW, 3-month readmission, and 30-day reoperation outcomes due to
the low frequency of these outcomes in the PLF group. Results:
3,318 patients met inclusion criteria. 3,101 patients underwent TLIF while
217 patients underwent PLF. Patients with TLIF were more likely to have a
single level fused vs multiple levels fused when compared to patients who
underwent PLF (64.1% vs 51.2%, p = .001). No differences were found for the
other baseline covariates or any demographic variable. Unadjusted univariate
regression revealed no significant differences between the TLIF and PLF
groups for the following outcomes: 12-month RTW (p = 0.2113), readmissions
within 3 months (p = 0.4610), and reoperations within 30 days (0.8247). The
adjusted multivariate analysis demonstrated no significant differences
between TLIF and PLF groups for all 12-month outcomes including ODI, NRS
back pain, NRS leg pain, EQ-5D and NASS patient satisfaction. Additionally,
TLIF was not a significant predictor of 12-month return to activities (p =
0.0523) or 30-day complication rates (p = 0.8026). Conclusion:
In summary, there were no discernible differences in 12-month PROs, 30-day
complication or reoperation rates, or 3-month readmission rates in patients
undergoing TLIF vs. PLF alone in elective lumbar fusion. Though long-term
follow up is needed, these data add to the growing body of evidence that
interbody fusion does not offer superior benefit with respect to outcomes
following lumbar fusion for degenerative spine conditions. Given the
additional concerns with increased time of procedure and potential
complications raised by previous studies, surgeons should carefully select
which patients would potentially benefit from transforaminal lumbar
interbody fusion.

## 1203

## P222: Observational prospective study of predictors of clinical and
neurological recovery in operated degenerative lumbosacral spine
disorders

Ankit Singh

1

 and Nishat Goda

2

1

Orthopaedics, Max Smart Superspeciality Hospital, New Delhi,
India

2

Orthopaedics, Parakh Hospital, Mumbai, India

Introduction: Majority of the elderly population deal with
nagging backache and claudication resulting in disability and poor quality
of life. Surgical intervention employed in patients not amenable to
conservative management not only decreases chronic pain but prevent dreaded
complication of instability and neurodeficits. Assessing the clinical and
neurological outcomes of operated patients enable us to dictate predictors
thereby improving patient selection and thus the outcome. Material and
Methods: Consecutive 30 patients with diagnosed degenerative
lumbosacral spine diseases not showing improvement to conservative treatment
for 6 weeks were subjected to surgical intervention. Clinical history,
demographics and examination findings with relevant radiographic parameters
were recorded. Clinical examination findings, VAS (Visual analogue scale)
score, Roland Morris disability questionnaire (RMDQ), Oswestry disability
index (ODI) and radiological findings were assessed at 3 months,6 months and
9 months’ follow up after surgery. Counselling regarding compliance was
carried at each follow up and whenever deemed necessary. Patients were
classified then into successful v/s unsuccessful based on pain scale,
neurodeficit and duration to return to work. Results: Patients’
mean age was 51.17 ± 10.03 years with equal sex distribution.63% patients
had single level involvement and 43 % were symptomatic for < 6 months.
Majority (60%) were subjected to decompression alone. Back pain followed by
deformity were chief complaints with VAS score and ODI score being 6.74 ±
0.55 and 42.40 ± 16.13 respectively. Nine months following treatment,
noteworthy reduction in the VAS score (p < 0.05), ODI scores (p <
0.05) and RMDQ (p < 0.05) were found, with VAS score and ODI score
improving by 45.1% and 47.70% respectively. 81% were classified as
successful outcomes. Conclusion: With the increasing longevity
of the population, the incidence of degenerative spine disease is
increasing. Proper selection of patients subjected to surgery often show
improvement maximally after 12 weeks post surgery. Age < 60 years, lower
duration of symptoms less than 9 months and lower number of levels are
positively correlated with better results.
Keywords: clinical, degenerative, lumbo-sacral spine, neurological recovery,
predictors

## 1205

## P223: Effect of timing of total joint replacement on elective lumbar
surgery outcomes

Anthony Steinle

1

, Alex Volkmar

1

, Hani Chanbour

2

, Eric Dilbone

1

, William Waddell

1

, Andrew Croft

1

, Wilson Vaughan

1

, Scott Lawrence Zuckerman

1,2

, Byron Stephens

1,2,3

, Ryan Martin

1

, and Amir Abtahi

1,2,3

1

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery

2

Department of Neurological Surgery

3

Center for Musculoskeletal Research, Vanderbilt University Medical
Center,Nashville, TN, United States

Introduction: Concurrent hip/knee and spine pathology is common
in the elderly population, and many patients require both total joint
arthroplasty and lumbar spine surgery. It is unknown whether the timing of
total joint arthroplasty in relation to lumbar surgery affects lumbar
surgery outcomes. The aim of the current study was to determine whether
lumbar surgery outcomes differed between patients who underwent THA/TKA
before or after lumbar spine surgery. We hypothesized that patients who
undergo THA/TKA before lumbar spine surgery will have better lumbar spine
surgery outcomes due to improved hip/knee range of motion and reduced
hip/knee pain at the time of lumbar surgery. Material and
Methods: A retrospective cohort study was performed utilizing
data from a prospectively collected registry. The registry was queried for
patients who underwent THA/TKA and lumbar surgery within a 3-year timeframe.
THA/TKA revisions, lumbar disc herniations, lumbar revisions, and lumbar
deformity cases were excluded. Patients were dichotomized into: 1) THA/TKA
before lumbar surgery and 2) THA/TKA after lumbar surgery. Covariates
included age, gender, BMI, type of joint replacement (unilateral vs
bilateral), spine pathology, spine approach, number of operated spine
levels, length of hospital stay, and discharge disposition. Outcomes
included 1) 3- and 12-month numeric rating scale (NRS) back pain, NRS leg
pain, Oswestry Disability Index, Patient Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9)
scores and North American Spine Society patient satisfaction scores, 2)
Length of hospital stay and discharge disposition, and 3) 3-month rate of
complications, readmissions, and revisions. Three separate analyses were
performed: THA/TKA grouped together, THA alone, and TKA alone.
Results: Of 108 eligible patients, 52 underwent THA/TKA
before lumbar surgery, while 56 underwent THA/TKA after lumbar surgery.
There were no significant differences in any demographic or baseline
variable. Bivariate analysis showed no differences in spine surgery outcomes
between groups. Multivariate regression showed timing of THA/TKA in relation
to lumbar surgery was not associated with a change in any 3- or 12-month
PROs or complications. A sub-analysis consisting of only THA patients
included 34 patients, of which 17 underwent THA before lumbar surgery and 17
underwent THA after lumbar surgery. Bivariate analysis showed no differences
in any spine surgery outcome. Multivariate regression showed THA after spine
surgery was associated with higher/worse 12-month PHQ-9 scores (p <
0.001). A sub-analysis consisting of only TKA patients included 74 patients,
of which 35 underwent TKA before lumbar surgery and 39 underwent TKA after
lumbar surgery. The group that underwent TKA after lumbar surgery had higher
baseline NRS leg pain scores (p = 0.046). Bivariate analysis showed no
differences in any spine surgery outcome. Multivariate regression showed TKA
after lumbar surgery was associated with lower/better 12-month PHQ-9 scores
(p = 0.043). Conclusion: These results suggest that timing of
THA and TKA in relation to lumbar surgery was not associated with a change
in clinical outcomes following lumbar surgery with the exception of PHQ-9
scores in the individual THA and TKA sub-analyses. Thus, we recommended that
the severity of symptoms as well as patient preference dictate surgical
order for patients with concomitant hip/knee pathology and degenerative
lumbar spine disease.

## 1224

## P224: Predictive factors for discharge disposition after surgery for
degenerative lumbar spondylolisthesis

Anna Filley

1

, Avionna Baldwin

1

, Khuzaima Rangwalla

1

, Faisal Bawahab

1

, Ashraf El Naga

1

, David Gendelberg

1

, and Sigurd Berven

1

1

Orthopaedic Surgery, University of California, San Francisco, United
States

Introduction: Early discharge planning is important for reducing
length of hospital stay, minimizing unnecessary utilization of inpatient
resources, and optimizing the cost-efficacy of surgical treatment.
Particularly for orthopaedic surgical patients, a period of rehabilitation
or additional assistance may be required in the immediate postoperative
period, making an accurate assessment of each patient’s functional needs
crucial for facilitating a safe, efficient discharge from the hospital. The
purpose of this paper is to identify medical and socioeconomic factors that
may impact discharge disposition. Material and Methods:
Retrospective study of 184 consecutive patients who underwent elective
surgical treatment of symptomatic degenerative spondylolisthesis at our
institution between January 2016 and June 2020. The primary outcome was
discharge disposition, either to home (with or without additional services)
or to a non-home location (acute rehab or skilled nursing facility).
Bivariate analysis was used to compare patient groups by preoperative
demographics, medical comorbidities, and surgical characteristics in order
to identify factors associated with discharge disposition.
Results: Eighty-eight patients (47.6%) were discharged to
home, 60 (32.4%) home with additional support services, 17 (9.2%) to acute
rehab, and 19 (10.3%) to a skilled nursing facility (SNF). Among all
patients, those who were not partnered (single, divorced, or widowed) had
greater odds of a non-home discharge (OR: 3.57, p = 0.001) than those who
were partnered (married or with significant other). Compared to patients
discharged home, those discharged to acute rehab were also more likely to
identify as black or multi-racial (OR: 4.88, p = 0.0049). Despite undergoing
similar procedures (operation type, surgical invasiveness index, procedure
duration, blood loss), patients with a non-home discharge had a
significantly longer length of hospitalization than those discharged home (p
< 0.0001). A non-home discharge was also associated with older patient
age, lower baseline functional status, and a greater number and severity of
comorbidities. Conclusion: Patient age, race, relationship
status, baseline functional capacity, and comorbidities are predictive of
discharge disposition following surgical treatment of degenerative lumbar
spondylolisthesis. Attention to these factors may assist with early
discharge planning and identification of patients who may need additional
assistance postoperatively.

## 1254

## P225: Adjacent segments disc disease to lumbar and lambosacral
arthrodesis: clinical asepcts, risk factors and management

Safouen Ben Brahim

1

, Mzid Ahmed

1

, Benjeddou Wassim

1

, Khalil Habboubi

1

, Hassen Makhlouf

1

, and Mondher Mestiri

1

1

Adult Orthopedic Departement Pr Mestiri, Mohamed Taib Kassab,
Mannouba, Tunisia

Introduction: Lumbar fusion has shown to be an effective
surgical management option when indicated, improving patient outcomes and
functional status. However it produces abnormal mechanical conditions at
mobile segments above or below the site of spinal disorders and is
clinically referred to as adjacent segments disc disease (ASDD) or
transition syndrome in the case of a previous surgical treatment.
Methods and Designs: It’s a retrospective descriptive study
of 32 patients who had undergone decompression and instrumented lumbar
fusion of two or more vertebrae over 8 years. The parameters studied were -
after an initial arthrodesis - clinical signs including pain, use of
analgesics, neurogenic claudication and neurological deficit. It should be
noted that radiological exploration by cross-sectional imaging was done in
patients with severe symptomatology only. Results: 32 patients
were contacted and completed the clinical form with a follow-up of 8 years.
The average age was 58.6 years. The re-intervention rate was 7.8%. A
neurological deficit was present in 11.3%. Radiological degeneration was
present in 78.3%. The results of our study are consistent with those of the
literature and are in favor of an acceleration of adjacent level
degeneration and confirm a statistically significant relationship between
age, weight, extent of arthrodesis and its level and surgical technique.
Conclusion: Adjacent segment disease and degeneration
remain a multifactorial problem with several techniques being developed
recently to minimize them. However, there is no definitive data or knowledge
about the incidence or risk factor to ASDD.

## 1290

## P226: International validation of the SORG machine learning algorithm for
predicting prolonged opioid prescriptions in opioid-naive lumbar spine
surgery using 2,795 patients from Taiwan

Shin-Fu Chen

1

, Chih-Chi Su

1

, Chuan-Ching Huang

1

, Paul Ogink

2

, Yin-Tien Kao

1

, Hung-Kuan Yen

1

, Olivier Groot

2

, Aditya Karhade

1

, Yen-Po Lin

1

, Chih-Wei Chen

1

, Wei-Hsin Lin

1

, Juin-Jen Yang

1

, Mao-Hsu Yen

1

, Jorrit-Jan Verlaan

2

, Joseph Schwab

3

, Tze Hong Wong

1

, Shu-Hua Yang

1

, and Ming-Hsiao Hu

1

1

National Taiwan University Hospital, Taiwan

2

University Medical Center Utrecht

3

Massachusetts General Hospital

Introduction: Identifying patients at risk of prolonged opioid
use after surgery could lead to appropriate prescription and more
personalized treatment plans. The Skeletal Oncology Research Group machine
learning algorithm (SORG-MLA) had been developed to predict the risk of
prolonged opioid use in opioid-naive patients after lumbar spine surgery.
However, its utility in a geographically and medicolegally distinct country
remains unknown. Therefore, we sought to externally validate the SORG-MLA in
a Taiwanese patient cohort undergoing lumbar spine surgery. Material
and Methods: This is a retrospective study at a large academic
medical center in Taiwan. Overall, 2,795 patients were included who were 20
years or older undergoing a primary procedure for lumbar decompression
surgery from 2010 to 2018. The outcome of interest was prolonged opioid
prescription defined as sustained prescription opioid use exceeding 90 days
after surgery Discrimination (area under received characteristic operating
curve [AUROC] and area under precision-recall curve [AUPRC]), calibration,
overall performance (Brier score), and decision curve analysis were used to
assess the performance of SORG-MLA in the validation cohort.
Results: Among 2,795 patients, the prolonged opioid
prescription rate was 5.2%. The validation cohort differed with the
developmental cohort on several variables, such as older age, more impatient
disposition, and more common pharmaceutical history of NSAIDs. Despite the
differences, the SORG-MLA provided a good discriminative ability (AUROC of
0.71 and AURPC of 0.36), a good overall performance (Brier score of 0.044
compared to that of 0.039 in the developmental cohort). However, the
probability of prolonged opioid prescription tended to be overestimated
(calibration intercept of -0.07 and calibration slope of 1.45. Decision
curve analysis suggested greater clinical net benefit in a wide range of
clinical scenarios. Conclusion: The SORG-MLA retains good
discriminative abilities and good overall performances despite being applied
in a medicolegally different region. It is validated for use in Taiwan to
predict high-risk patients preoperatively. Future studies should test this
model in real clinical practice by targeting high risk patients with
instrumentations.

## 1334

## P227: Management of massive lumbar intervertebral disc herniation in
young adults: discectomy versus arthrodesis by posterior lumbar interbody
fusion

Benjeddou Wassim

1

, Khalil Habboubi

1

, Ben Mohamed Oussema

1

, Meddeb Mehdi

1

, Hassen Makhlouf

1

, and mondher mestiri

1

1

Adults Service, Institut Med Taieb Kassab, Mannouba,
Tunisia

Background: Symptomatic massive lumbar intervertebral disc
herniation (LDH) is not rare in young adults. To date, the treatments
available for young adults LDH, and the effect of each treatment, have not
been fully reviewed. In our serie, two surgical techniques were used:
discectomy and arthrodesis by PLIF. Objective: The purpose of
this retrospective study is to report the etiology, familial history,
presenting symptoms, level of herniation, duration of symptoms, radiological
findings, as well as treatment methods and outcome. Methods: We
retrospectively reviewed medical records of all patients with inclusion
criteria with ages ranging from 18 to 45 years and with massive disc
herniation; we used magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or saccoradiculography
to confirm herniations between 2003 and 2018. All patients were followed up
for a minimum of 4 years. 11 Our patients were treated conservatively, 37
were treated with surgical procedures, 23 patients with discectomy, 11
patients with arthrodesis by PLIF. The Visual Analogue Scale (VAS), as well
as the Oswestry Disability Scale (ODS) was used to analyze physical
examination findings both before and after treatment. To detect lumbar disc
degeneration, we used the modified Pfirrmann grading system with MRI. All
statistical analyses were performed with commercially available SPSS 20.0
software, while p ≤ 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Results: A total of 48 cases with lumbar disc herniation
have been treated. The mean age was 35,02 years (range 18-45 years). The
male to female ratio was 1.18. concerning the delay of consultation 50%
consulted within the first 6 months, 18.8% between 7 months and one year,
and 31.2% within more than one year. The most common level was L4-5 in 47,9
% patients and the second was L5-S1 in 27.1% patients. Subligamentous
protruded discs were found in 55.8%, extruded in 43.9%, and disc bulge with
intact annulus in 10.3% cases.. The ODS was indexed before and after
treatment, a change from major disability to minimal or moderate disability
was noted during the follow-up. VAS and the OSD were both significantly
decreased after treatment (p < 0.05). Conclusions: Either
conservative or surgical methods can be performed comfortably for young
adult lumbar disc herniations. We proposed surgical treatment for patients
with persistent disabling low back pain or radicular pain that lasted more
than 6 weeks, in spite of a well conducted medical treatment. We also looked
for recurrent pain that disrupted normal life activities, the appearance of
neurological deficits and neurogenic claudication. All these parameters
contributed to the therapeutic decision.

## 1336

## P228: Surgical outcome following lumbar interbody fusion in a low income
population: quality of life improvement

Houssem Eddine Chahed

1

, Mohamed Amine Gharbi

1

, Ahmed zendeoui

1

, Moatassem Belleh Jlassi

1

, and Mouadh Nefiss

1

1

Orthopedic and Trauma Surgery, Mongi Slim Marsa University Hospital
Center, Tunis, Tunisia

Introduction: Health-related quality of life in patients who
underwent Lumbar interbody fusion surgeries including transforaminal lumbar
interbody fusion (TLIF), posterior lumbar interbody fusion (PLIF), oblique
lumbar interbody fusion/anterior to psoas (OLIF/ATP), and anterior lumbar
interbody fusion (ALIF), has been emphasized recently. Yet, there is no data
on Lumbar interbody fusion outcomes from developing regions. Our aim of our
study was to determine the changes in quality-of-life following Lumbar
interbody fusion repair in a low-income population. Material and
Methods: This is a retrospective case series. 128 patients
subjected to lumbar interbody fusion surgeries with a minimum of 2 year’s
follow-up were evaluated. Patients were asked about monthly family income
and completed the visual analog scale (VAS) pain score, the Roland–Morris
disability scale, and the World Health Organisation Quality-of-life Scale
Abbreviated Version (WHOQOL-BREF) before surgery, and at 3, 6, and 12 months
after surgery. Satisfaction was estimated by a yes or no question.
Results: The mean age of patients was 58 years-old, there
were 105 (82%) women and 23 (18%) men. Over 95% declared < 1000 US$
monthly family income. The mean duration of symptoms was 35 months (range,
4– 60 months). procedures were performed by different surgeons. Satisfied
were 58% of patients, partially satisfied were 23% and dissatisfied were 19%
of patientsThe mean WHOQOL-BREF score increased from 56.8 before surgery to
64.1 at 12 months after surgery. The mean VAS pain score decreased from 7.1
before surgery to 2.9 at 12 months after surgery. Conclusion:
Surgical outcomes lumbar interbody fusion surgeries in a low-income
population showed an improvement in health-related quality of life with
decreasing pain and increasing functional ability from 3 months after
surgery. Our findings suggest that successful Lumbar interbody fusion may
improve quality of life.

## 1401

## P229: The technique of unilateral biportal endoscopic (UBE) assisted
fusion extension for symptomatic adjacent segmental disease : a case series
and technical tips and advantages

Jisoo Ha

1

1

Neurosurgery, Yonsei Okay Hospital, Gyeonggi do, South
Korea

Objective: Conventional fusion extension surgery has long been
considered the treatment option for symptomatic adjacent segmental disease
(ASD) after lumbar interbody fusion surgery. However, extensive muscle
dissection and revision of previous operation scar were problems of fusion
extension surgeries. If we used endoscopic assistant procedure of fusion
extension, extensive muscle dissection and skin incision may be reduced and,
it might be easier to achieve fusion extension which relieves the rigors of
open surgery. The purpose of our study is to introduce our technique of
endoscopic fusion extension surgery using biportal endoscopic systems with
video clips. Material and Method: From December 2019 to June
2020, 8 patients underwent fusion extension surgery for symptomatic ASD
using the new-designed biportal endoscopy assisted surgical technique. As
with primary endoscopic fusion surgery, this technique allows for the entire
operation, including the removal of old screws and rods, through small skin
incisions for percutaneous screws insertion. Old screws and rods were able
to be removed under endoscopic guidance through the small step wounds over
the pedicles. Interbody fusion procedures of ASD level were achieved by
usual biportal endoscopic fusion approach. Thus, there is no need to
periosteal dissection on the previously operated area with encountering
serious surgical adhesions. Postoperative Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
were taken routinely to measure the area of muscle damaged. Functional
outcomes were evaluated using Oswestry Disability Index score, and Visual
Analogue Scale, respectively. Results: We successfully
performed biportal endoscopy assistant fusion extension surgery in 8
patients. There were no complications related with surgery. VAS and ODI were
significantly improved after surgeries (p < 0.05). The mean operation
time and estimated blood loss per one level extension were 216.3mins
(185-250) and 163.8 cc (150-200). Conclusion: This procedure
may be a safe and efficacious treatment option for revisional lumbar fusion
extension with less morbidity than open surgery. Thus, this new-designed
endoscopic based technique could be a feasible alternative to conventional
fusion extension surgery, although more cases and long-term follow up
studies are needed to obtain accurate clinical results.

## 1488

## P230: Predictive factors of lumbar pseudarthrosis following primary
lumbar fusion

Hania Shahzad

1

, Moizzah Ahmad

2

, Nazihah Bhatti

1

, Elizabeth Yu

1

, Frank Phillips

3

, and Safdar Khan

1

1

Wexner Medical Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, United
States

2
The Ohio State University, Columbus, United
States

3

Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, United States

Introduction: A common iatrogenic complication of lumbar fusion
is pseudarthrosis which commonly presents with worsening back pain
necessitating surgical intervention. Results for such revision surgeries
have been relatively poor historically. Identifying demographic comorbid
characteristics that are predictive of developing pseudarthrosis can enable
physicians to optimize care for potentially high-risk patients. The
objective of this study is to identify predictors that may be associated
with a higher risk of developing pseudarthrosis in patients that undergo
lumbar fusion surgery for the management of degenerative spinal diseases.
Material and Methods: The PearlDiver database over 92
million MEDICARE and MEDICAID patients was utilized to identify patients who
underwent lumbar spinal fusion. Patients were further grouped into those
that had a claim for pseudarthrosis and those who did not within the 10-year
interval following the initial lumbar spinal fusion. The primary outcome was
the odds of selected demographic/comorbid factors in patients who were
grouped under the claim of pseudarthrosis within 10-years following lumbar
spinal fusion. Univariable model results were reported as odds ratios (OR)
and 95% confidence intervals (CI). All data were analyzed in aggregate form
using R Statistical Software version 4.1.0 in the PearlDiver Software.
Results: The results of the query revealed a total of
304,627 patients who had undergone spinal fusion in the period 2010 to 2021.
Out of the total patients, 11,401 (3.74%) received the diagnosis of
pseudarthrosis following their primary surgery while 293,226 (96.26%) had no
associated claim of pseudarthrosis following 10 years of their primary
lumbar fusion. The average time from the first procedure to the diagnosis of
pseudarthrosis was 2.5 years (SD 2.36). Chi-square analysis and univariable
regression modeling revealed the factors that were associated with patients
who developed pseudarthrosis. A significantly lower proportion of patients
who developed pseudarthrosis were 65 years or older (OR: 0.78 [0.75, 081],
p-value < 0.001). For all comorbid conditions, a significantly higher
proportion of patients who developed pseudarthrosis were male (OR:1.06
[1.02, 1.10], p-value < 0.001), had a CCI score of 2 or more (OR: 1.25
[1.20, 1.30], p-value < 0.001), a prior diagnosis of alcohol abuse (OR:
1.86 [1.72, 2.00], p-value < 0.001), tobacco use (OR: 1.85 [1.78, 1.93],
(p-value < 0.001), a positive history of opioid use (OR: 3.18 [2.77,
3.66], p-value < 0.001) a positive history of cannabinoid use disorder
(OR: 1.72 [1.46, 2.02], p-value < 0.001), a prior diagnostic claim of
osteoarthritis (OR: 1.58 [1.52, 1.64], p-value < 0.001), diabetes (OR:
1.24 [1.19, 1.30], p-value < 0.001), vitamin D deficiency (OR: 1.50
[1.43, 1.56], p-value < 0.001), and claims of a wound infection within 30
days of the primary surgery (OR: 1.45 [1.35, 1.56], p-value < 0.001).
These comorbidities were only included if their claims were made before the
primary lumbar fusion surgery on the patient record.
Conclusion: Pseudarthrosis is a common complication of
lumbar spine surgery. Our analysis outlines potential demographic and
co-morbid risk factors that are associated with the development of
pseudarthrosis. In these patients, physicians should optimize the modifiable
risk factors while counseling the patients for the potential development of
pseudarthrosis, especially in patients at higher risk.

## 1494

## P231: Surgeon preference regarding post-operative dressing management in
lumbar fusion surgery: a global cross-sectional study

Luca Ambrosio

1,2

, Gianluca Vadalà

1,2

, Timothy S. Yoon

3

, Matthew Gary

3,4

, Ho-Joong Kim

5

, Vincenzo Denaro

2

, and AO Spine Knowledge Forum Degenerative

6

1

Research Unit of Orthopaedic and Trauma Surgery, Department of
Orthopaedic and Trauma Surgery, Università Campus Bio-Medico di Roma,
Rome, Italy

2

Operative Research Unit of Orthopaedic and Trauma Surgery,
Fondazione Policlinico Universitario Campus Bio-Medico, Rome,
Italy

3

Department of Orthopaedics

4

Department of Neurosurgery, Emory University, Atlanta, United
States

5

Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Seoul National University Bundang
Hospital, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, South
Korea

6

AO FOundation, Davos, Switzerland

Introduction: Surgical site infection (SSI) is a major cause of
morbidity following lumbar spine surgery, with increased risk of
pseudoarthrosis, deformity, and even death. Wound care is essential to lower
the rates of post-surgical SSI, although there is no high-level evidence
regarding optimal management of postoperative dressings. Indeed, indications
concerning dressing policy is fragmentary and often related to local
protocols rather than international guidelines. The aim of this study is to
evaluate the global practice pattern of dressing use after lumbar fusion
surgery in terms of type of dressing and timing of dressing change.
Material and Methods: A survey issued by AO Spine Knowledge
Forums Deformity and Degenerative was sent out to AO Spine members across
the world. Participants’ country of practice, gender, age, years of
practice, specialty, practice setting and information about spine surgery
fellowship were retrieved, as well as surgical case volume. Surgeons were
also asked if performing long fusions (> 5 levels) including or excluding
the pelvis for adult deformities, open 1-to-2 level fusions, minimally
invasive 1-to-2 level fusions or open 3-to-5 level fusions for degenerative
conditions. Participants were then asked about the type of post-operative
dressing usually employed, timing of initial dressing removal and type of
subsequent dressing applied. Chi-squared test was performed to evaluate
statistical significance. Results: A total of 280 participants
from North America (18.21%), Latin America (14.29%), Europe & Southern
Africa (36.07%), Middle East & North Africa (8.21%), Asia Pacific
(23.21%) completed the survey. Most surgeons were male (94.64%), aged
between 35 and 44 (42.14%), and practicing for at least 5 years (84.29%).
Most respondents were orthopaedic surgeons (75%), practiced in and academic
hospital (46.43%), completed a spine surgery fellowship (64.29%) and
operated between 50 and 150 cases per year (48.21%). Following lumbar spine
surgery, 71.42% utilized a dry dressing, 24.60% a plastic occlusive
dressing, 5.55% applied glue, 5.95% used the DERMABOND™ PRINEO™ Skin Closure
System, 3.17% an incisional wound vacuum, and 4.19% other dressings. Initial
dressing was removed either on postoperative day 1 (11.63%), 2 (39.22%), 3
(20.25%), 4 (1.72%), 5 (4.31%), 6 (0.43%), 7 or later (12.5%), or depending
on drain removal (9.91%). Following initial dressing removal, 75.86% applied
a dry dressing, 17.67% a plastic occlusive dressing, 1.29% glue, while
12.06% used no dressing. No statistically significant differences were found
when comparing type of initial dressing, timing of dressing removal and type
of subsequent dressing with the type of surgery performed (i.e., length of
fusion, deformity vs. degenerative cases, open vs. minimally invasive).
Conclusion: Most spine surgeons utilized a dry or a plastic
occlusive dressing initially applied at the end of surgery. The first
dressing tended to be changed during the first 3 post-operative days and
replaced with the same type of dressing in the majority of cases. However,
no significant differences regarding the type of dressing and timing of
dressing change were reported taking into account the length of fusion or
the use of either an open or minimally invasive approach.

## 1643

## P232: Clinical outcomes of percutaneous endoscopic lumbar annuloplasty
and nucleoplasty for discogenic low back pain: meta-analysis

Saran Pairuchvej

1

 and Jatupon Kongtharvonskul

2

1

Orthopedics Department, Queen Savang Vadhana Memorial Hospital,
Sriracha, Cholburi, Thailand

2

Orthopedics Department, Faculty of Medicine Ramathibodi Hospital,
Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand

Objective: Percutaneous endoscopic lumbar discectomy and
annuloplasty (PELDA) and nucleoplasty (PELAN) is a minimally invasive spinal
technique for relief back pain in lumbar disc herniation and chronic,
non-radicular, and discogenic low back pain (DLBP). The aim of the present
article is to present the outcomes of the systematic review and
meta-analysis regarding the short-term outcomes of this surgical technique.
Methods: We searched all prospective and retrospective
studies that reported post-operative VAS ODI and modified Mcnab’s criteria,
complications and reoperation of percutaneous endoscopic lumbar discectomy
and annuloplasty and nucleoplasty for surgical treatment of lumbar disc
herniation and chronic discogenic back pain from the PubMed and Scopus
databases up to 01 September 2022. Data were independently extracted by two
reviewers. A meta-analysis was applied to assess treatment outcomes.
Results: 13 cohort studies (N = 708 patients) met inclusion
criteria. Interventions were percutaneous endoscopic lumbar discectomy and
annuloplasty and nucleoplasty (PELAN) in lumbar disc herniation (N = 155)
and chronic discogenic back pain (N = 553). A meta-analysis showed that the
UMD of back pain Visual Analog Score (VAS), leg pain VAS and Oswestry
disability index after PELAN in lumbar disc herniation were significantly
difference of -2.67 (95%CI: -5.24 to -0.10), -4.10 (95%CI: -7.64 to -0.56)
and -34.71 (95%CI: -55.08 to -14.34) scores when compared to before surgery
while the UMD of back pain Visual Analog Score (VAS) and Oswestry disability
index after PELAN in chronic discogenic back pain were significantly
difference of -4.64 (95%CI: -5.28 to -4.01), and -30.56 (95%CI: -38.66 to
-22.47) scores when compared to before surgery. Results by the modified
Macnab’s criteria showed an excellent and good outcome, with a success rate
of 34%-90% in chronic discogenic back pain and 81%-99% in lumbar disc
herniation. The prevalence of complication including dura tear and nerve
root injury and reoperation of PELAN in Lumbar disc herniation were 0.116
(95%CI: 0.020 to 0.212) and 0 respectively while in chronic discogenic back
pain were 0.064 (95%CI: 0.022 to 0.106) and 0.045 (95%CI: 0.017 0.106)
respectively. Conclusions: Percutaneous endoscopic lumbar
discectomy and annuloplasty and nucleoplasty provides favorable outcomes for
carefully selected groups of patients with lumbar disc herniation and
chronic discogenic back pain.
Keywords: annuloplasty, nucleoplasty, PELD, Percutaneous endoscopic lumbar
discectomy, ODI, VAS

## 1694

## P233: The impact of diabetes on lumbar spinal stenosis

Peter Udby

1

, Søren Ohrt-Nissen

2

, and Thomas Vestergaard

1

1

Spine Surgery and Research, Zealand University Hospital, Køge,
Denmark

2

Spine Unit, Rigshospitalet, København Ø, Denmark

Introduction: Lumbar spinal stenosis (LSS) is a condition with a
severe impact on walking distance and exercise capacity. Reduced physical
activity due to LSS can increase the risk of obesity and diabetes. Diabetes
(DM), an autoimmune and lifestyle disease, has been associated with a less
successful outcome and increased risk of complications after spine surgery.
The question is what impact Diabetes has on spine degeneration and Patient
Reported Outcomes (PROs) before and after surgery in LSS patients?
Material and Methods: We performed a cohort study over a
nine-year period (2010-19) on patients undergoing lumbar decompression
surgery due to LSS. All patients were registered in the Danish National
spine registry (DaneSpine). Prospective data were collected preoperatively
and at two-year follow-up. Primary outcomes were the Oswestry Disability
Index (ODI), back- and leg pain scores on the visual analog scale (VAS), and
quality of life (QOL) measured by the European Quality of Life-5 Dimensions
(EQ-5D) index score. Results: A total of 362 patients were
included, 311 patients without Diabetes (-DM) and 51 with Diabetes (+DM).
The DM+ group had significantly worse disability scores and reduced QOL
compared to the -DM group preoperatively (p > 0.05). Both groups obtained
significant improvement in all primary outcomes at two-year follow-up (p
> 0.01). The improvement was similar for both groups (ΔODI and ΔEQ-5D, p
< 0.05). At two-year follow-up, the +DM still had significantly worse ODI
and EQ-5D-scores compared to the -DM group (p > 0.05). Pre- and
postoperatively back and leg pain scores including Δ-values were similar for
the two groups (p < 0.05). Conclusion: Patients suffering
from LSS and DM have significantly worse QOL and disability both
preoperatively and at two-year follow-up compared to patients without DM.
Both groups of patients experience a significant improvement in disability,
QOL, and pain scores at two-year follow-up. Physical exercise is important
in the management of DM. Therefore, we advise that additional focus is
directed at the identification and treatment of LSS patients with
concomitant DM.

## 1759

## P234: Surgeon preferences in peri-operative drain utilization in open 1-
or 2- level fusion surgery for lumbar degenerative pathologies

Juan P. Cabrera

1

, Timothy S. Yoon

2

, Matthew Gary

3

, Ho-Joong Kim

4

, Jeffrey C. Wang

5

, Samuel Cho

6

, Zorica Buser

7

, Patrick Hsieh

8

, and AO Spine Knowledge Forum Degenerative

9

1

Department of Neurosurgery, Hospital Clínico Regional de Concepción,
Concepción, Chile

2

Department of Orthopedics

3

Department of Neurosurgery, Emory University, Atlanta, United
States

4

Spine Center and Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Seoul National
University Bundang Hospital and Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul, South Korea

5

Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Keck School of Medicine,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, United States

6

Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount
Sinai, New York, United States

7

Department of Orthopedic Surgery, NYU Grossman School of Medicine,
New York, United States

8

Department of Neurological Surgery, Keck School of Medicine,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, United States

9

Research Department, AO Spine International, Davos,
Switzerland

Introduction: Avoiding wound-related complications
in open fusion surgery for degenerative lumbar conditions is critical to
patients and surgeons. The variation in peri-operative management can be
associated with differences in the incidence of such complications,
including post-operative drain use. Therefore, this study aims to analyze
the surgeon preferences related to drain utilization and the factors
influencing drain use and management. Material and Methods: A
survey was distributed to AO Spine members worldwide to elucidate the
variation in drain use and management around the globe. Surgeon demographics
and factors related to peri-operative drain use in 1 or 2-level open fusion
surgery for lumbar degenerative pathologies were collected. In addition, we
conducted a comparative analysis between surgeons that use peri-operative
drain (DG) and surgeons that do not use drains (ND) with univariate and
multivariate analysis using binary logistic regression.
Results: 231 surgeons responded to the survey, including
220 males (95.2%) and 11 females (4.8%) between the ages of 25 and 44. There
were 100 responses (43.3%) from Europe, 83 from (35.9%) Southern Africa, and
50 responses (21.6%) from the Asia Pacific. Most surgeons are orthopedics
(178, 77.1%), and almost half of the respondents are in
academic/university-affiliated practices (114, 49.4%). The survey revealed
that the overwhelming majority of surgeons worldwide utilize drains in their
surgery for degenerative lumbar conditions (186, 80.5%). In comparison, less
than 20% of surgeons do not use drains (45, 19.5%). In addition, almost all
surgeons prefer to place subfascial drains (178, 77.1%). Drain duration
after placement is variable, with drain removal on day 2 for 33.3% of
surgeons, while 29.4% of surgeons based their decision on drain duration
outputs. 15.6% of surgeons remove drains when output is < 50 mL per 24
hrs, while 10% remove drains when the output is between 50 to 100 mL in 24
hrs. On multivariable analysis, significant predictors of drain use were age
35 - 44 (OR = 11.9, 95% CI = 1.2-117.2, p = 0.034), age 45 – 54 (29.1,
3.1-269.6, p = 0.003), age 55 - 64 (8.9, 1.4-56.5, 0.019), and wound closure
using Steri-Strips (6.0, 1.2-29.0, p = 0.025). Conclusion: The
majority of spine surgeons worldwide prefer to place a post-operative drain
for open lumbar fusion surgery. Subfascial drain placement is preferred by
most, but drain duration after surgery varies widely based on surgeon
preference. Finally, the choice for peri-operative drain placement is
significantly associated with the surgeon's age and the use of Steri-strips
for wound closure.

## 1824

## P235: Cauda equina syndrome following decompression for spinal stenosis.
A very rare yet fearsome complication in a very common spinal
procedure

Mariano Vitelli

1

, Giovanni Barbagli

1

, Elisabetta Peppucci

1

, Nicoletta Gargiuoli

1

, Alexander Evins

2

, Alessandro DiChirico

1

, and Sandro Carletti

1

1

Neurosurgery, IFCA Firenze, Italy

2

Weill Cornell Medical College, Neurosurgery, New York, United
States

Introduction: Cauda equina syndrome (CES) is one of the fearest
complication of lumbar disc herniation; however, a cauda equina syndrome
(with or without motor symptoms) is a very rare complication following a
spinal decompression procedure for spinal stenosis. When this complication
occurs surgical exploration remains the prevailing type of management. In
this study we describe a case of post-operative partial cauda equina
syndrome, without motor dysfunction, following decompression for spinal
stenosis. Material and Methods: We present a case of a 47 years
old man admitted at our institution for a Adjacent Segment Disease (ASD) at
L3-L4 following a L4-L5 posterior lumbar fixation (PLF) in another hospital.
Physical Examination (PE) at admission showed back pain with bilateral
radicular pain at lower legs. The patient underwent a L3-L4 decompression
with posterior screw fixation in order to connect this segment to the one
already fixed. The decompression was achieved under the guidance of the
operative microscope. The procedure has been reported uneventful and blood
loss was less than 100 mL. On the post-operative day 1 (POD) patient
developed a pinpoint anesthesia in the perineal area (encompassing the
entire scrotal area and the penile surface) without any sensitive or motor
deficits at the lower limbs. Patient underwent imaging studies (CT scan and
MRI) that showed no extrinsic compression or alteration to the neural
structures. Patient underwent intermittent catheterization and start to
recover spontaneously both the sensation and the urinary retention from the
POD 5. Authors carried out a complete literature review examining the
current data on PubMed and MEDLINE. Results: The literature
about this tricky situation lacks of sources; however, a cauda equina
syndrome following spinal decompression for spinal stenosis is somewhere
reported. The literature shows that the incidence ranges from 0.08-2%, and
the principal factors implicated are compressive lesions such as epidural
hematomas, fat pad grafts or gel foam. In rare cases there is no evidence of
extrinsic compression at imaging studies. In our belief, according with the
Parke's neuro-ischemic theory, it might depend on scarce blood supply below
the conus medullaris. Moreover, the chance to get a CES following a spinal
decompression could be related to the severity of the stenosis and
consequent edema at the decompression. We should also consider that, in our
case, the stenosis was not related to arthrosis yet was due to a ASD which,
as well known, is an even more stressful situation for the neural
structures. Conclusion: Cauda equina syndrome (CES) following a
spinal decompression for lumbar stenosis is a very rare yet frightful
complication. The vast majority of cases solve spontaneously in weeks but
not all patient completely recover from it. Further studies, as clinical
series or meta-analysis of current literature are needed to provide more
awareness of this serious complication.

## 1829

## P236: Anterior lombar interbody fusion (ALIF) surgery - the first seven
consecutive cases

Ricardo Sousa

1

, Pedro Batista

1

, Raquel Ricardo

1

, Bárbara Costa

1

, Filipe Castelo

1

, and Alfredo Carvalho

1

1

Orthopaedics, Centro Hospitalar Universitário Cova da Beira,
Covilhã, Portugal

Introduction: Anterior lumbar interbody fusion (ALIF) surgery,
though introduced in the mid 20th century, has only been universally
accepted in recent years. This approach allows direct access to the anterior
spinal column through the abdomen, hence mitigating the potential for severe
neurological lesions. Injury to the iliac vessels and hypogastric plexus are
the primary concerns. The present study aims to describe the initial
experience and outcomes with ALIF surgery in a district hospital.
Material and Methods: By review of patients’ medical files,
questionnaires and direct examination, we analysed seven individuals with a
mean age of 50 years (range 42 to 63 years), 29% males and 71% females. All
seven patients presented L5-S1 degenerative disc disease, four of which
additionally suffered from instability. Therefore, all patients underwent
ALIF surgery with further posterior percutaneous screw fixation in those
cases of instability. All procedures were performed by the same surgical
team with both the abdominal approach and lumbar exposure beeing carried out
by general surgeons. The Oswestry Disability Index (ODI)
and Numeric Pain Rating Scale (NPRS) for both lower back
and radicular pain were applied. We also registered post-operative
complications and established a timeline between the patients’ first
symptoms, the surgery and the final interview. Additionally, patient’s
satisfaction levels regarding the treatment were surveyed.
Results: An overall positive response to the treatment was
clear. Apart from mild constipation felt in some cases, major surgical
complications were not reported and the postoperative period was uneventful.
After a minimum follow-up of six months, all seven patients were
experiencing either minimal or moderate disability (ODI) and only one had
more than mild pain (NPRS). At the final interview, all patients showed
elevated levels of satisfaction regarding the surgical outcome.
Conclusion: We conclude that ALIF surgery can be a safe,
well-tolerated, effective technique in carefully selected cases. Convincing
results were obtained even in the early stages of the learning curve. Thus,
it should be considered as a viable alternative to other conventional
approaches in the treatment of L5-S1 degenerative disc disease, particularly
if spondylolisthesis is present or previous posterior surgery was
performed.

## 1857

## P237: Degree of fat degeneration of preoperative paraespinal muscles as
prognostic factors of clinical outcomes in post-operated patients with l4-l5
lumbar degenerative spondylolithesis

Saul Solorio Pineda

1

, Alejandro Reyes-Sánchez

1

, Luis Miguel Rosales Olivarez

1

, Baron Zarate-Kalfopulos

1

, Armando Alpizar Aguirre

1

, and Carla García-Ramos

1

1

Spine Surgery Department, Instituto Nacional de Rehabilitacion,
Mexico City, Mexico

Background: The multifidus muscle is the most important
stabilizer of the lumbar spine, spanning the lumbosacral junction and having
a prominent influence on sagittal alignment. Defects of the paraspinal
muscles cause degeneration of the intervertebral disc. Its size is reduced
in patients with chronic low back pain compared to healthy individuals.
Objectives: To evaluate the influence of the degree of
fatty degeneration of the preoperative paraspinal muscles on the clinical
results of lumbar spine surgery. Material and Methods: A
retrospective, observational and descriptive analysis of 53 patients aged 30
to 59 years with a diagnosis of lumbar degenerative spondylolisthesis,
operated on fixation and posterior lumbar L4-L5 arthrodesis at the National
Institute of Rehabilitation "LGII" in a period of 5 years was carried out.
January 2015 to December 2020. An analysis of the epidemiological, clinical
and post-surgical variables of interest was performed. Preoperative
T2-weighted images (T2WI) axial fast spin-echo sequence spin-echo magnetic
resonance imaging examinations of the lumbar spine were reviewed, evaluating
the volume and degree of fatty degeneration of the paraspinal muscles at the
L4-L5 level by 2 Independent observers, these results were correlated with
the aforementioned variables as well as with the pre- and post-surgical
functional scales (VAS, ODI, Roland-Morris and SF36 physical/mental).
Results: 32.1% (17/53) belonged to male patients and 67.9%
(36/53) belonged to female patients. The age at the time of surgery was
53.72 ± 4.7 years. The degree of degenerative spondylolisthesis was
presented in 54.7% (29/53) grade 1 and 45.3% (24/53) grade 2. An evaluation
of the 4 degrees of fatty degeneration was made, being grade 2 the most
frequent in 37.7% (20/53). Surgical time in minutes 187.28 ± 81.62 (Minimum
80 – Maximum 480); Bleeding in milliliters 437.92 ± 322.18 (Minimum 100 –
Maximum 1600). Correlations were made using the Pearson test, between the
degree of clinical improvement using scales (VAS, Oswestry, Roland-Morris
and SF36 physical/mental) and fatty degeneration. For this purpose, groups 1
and 2 were joined under the term "mild degeneration" and groups 3 and 4
under the term "severe degeneration". It was determined if the degree of
fatty degeneration influenced bleeding, surgical time, presence of
complications without finding any association between the variables. Just as
the rest of the correlations and associations did not show differences
between other factors, such as gender or the rest of the comorbidities, no
factor was associated with complications. Conclusion: With the
present study we determined that the fatty degeneration of the paraspinal
muscles does not influence the clinical results at one year of follow-up in
patients with degenerative spondylolisthesis L4-L5.
Keywords: Degenerative spondylolisthesis, fatty muscle degeneration, low back
pain

## 1887

## P238: Intradural lumb disc herniation

Eya Chahed

1

, Sliti Firas

1

, Nessrine Nessib

1

, Khalil Ghedira

1

, Abdelhafidh Slimane

1

, and nadhir karmani

1

1

Neurosurgery, National Institute of Neurology, Tunisia

Although lumbar disc herniation is very common, intra dural lumbar discal
hernia is one of its rare complications. Less than 100 cases have been
documented to this day. The frequency of intra dural lumbar discal hernia is
very low. The most common level is L4-L5. Research have proven that it is
mainly seen in men. Age is approximatively around 40-60. Symptoms vary
between acute cauda equine syndrome and simple radiculalgia. Sciatic pain
evolving for many years before the diagnosis is very usual. In 26% of cases
there is a spinal intervention during the weeks preceding the diagnosis. MRI
is the modality of choice for the diagnosis. It shows the intra dural hernia
and even some epidural bone fragments. Enhancement on Gadolinium injection
in T1 weighted sequences can indicate an arachnoiditis. We present the
description of two cases of two male patients who were operated at the
National Institute of Neurology in Tunisia. The first one is 42 years old,
who came for sciatica and urinary incontinence. The exam showed a
neurological L5 deficit. Lumbar CT scan showed a rounded intra canal lesion
in L5S1 suggesting a neuroma. MRI however proved that it was in fact an
excluded hernia at the level of L5-S1. The patient had a laminectomy of L5
and S1 and we discovered disc material on the posterior surface of the dura
mater. Post operatively, the patient recovered from his neurological
deficit. The second patient is a 36 year old male who presented for
lumbosciatalgia that has been evolving for 7 years and urinary impetuosity
evolving for 3 months. The exam objectified a L5 band hypoesthesia. Lumbar
MRI showed a mediane disc herniation in L3-L4 migrated upwards conflicting
with the 2 L4 roots and the contents of the dural sheath. He also had a
laminectomy of L3 and L4. During surgery, we discovered disc material on the
anterior surface of the dura mater. Postoperative course was uneventful. In
conclusion, intra dural lumb disc hernia is a rare pathology. In most cases,
it translates as an acute cauda equine syndrome or a lumbar radicular
syndrome. MRI is the modality of choice for the diagnosis. Prognosis in
uncertain.

## 1892

## P239: Prospective study of functional and radiological outcome of TLIF
(Transforaminal Lumbar Interbody Fusion) in lumbar spine instability in
adults

Yash Mehta

1

, Sunny Shethna

1

, and Vishal Mandlewala

1

1

Orthopedics, New Civil Hospital, Surat, India

Introduction: Prospective Study Of Functional And Radiological
Outcome Of TLIF (Transforaminal Lumbar Interbody Fusion) In Lumbar Spine
Instability. Instability mainly due to Spondylolisthesis, is anterior
slippage of vertebra on to the one below. Lumbosacral junction is most
commonly involved. Spinal fusion, indicated in patients with severe symptoms
and radiographic evidence of increased instability, is performed by grafting
intervertebral disc space, preventing its collapse after discectomy and
maintaining height of neural foramen, keeping root free of bony compression.
Methods and Materials: Study was carried out in New Civil
Hospital, Surat from December 2019 to October 2021.The prospective study
consisted of total 20 patients of Lumbar Instability who satisfied inclusion
criteria. All cases were treated with TLIF surgery. TLIF is posterior
interbody fusion through lateral unilateral approach to disc space through
neural foramen by removing facet joint, allowing access to disc space
through triangular “safe zone” between the exiting nerve root and lateral
dural edge. All patients were followed up immediately, 3rd month,
6th month,1 year. In each follow up, X ray were taken to
assess radiological outcome and ODI, VAS score for functional outcome.
Results: 90% Patients showed radiological Fusion, 10%
patients showing no fusion. Both ODI, VAS scores progressively decreased
after surgery. Mean values of ODI of patients with fusion vs those without
fusion, pre operatively were 53.2 vs 63.5. At immediate, 3 month, 6 month, 1
year postoperative period were 50.1 vs 59.5; 34.5 vs 42.5; 21.6 vs 26; 12.2
vs 19.5. Mean values of VAS scores of patients with fusion vs those without
fusion, pre operatively were 8.9 vs 9.5. At immediate, 3 month, 6 month,1
year postoperatively were 5.2 vs 6; 2.8 vs 3.5; 1.5 and 1.5; 0.6 vs 1.Study
showed 15% complication rate. Conclusion: Patients treated with
TLIF using posterior pedicle screw instrumentation + anterior cage yields
good functional, radiological outcome with high fusion rate and low
complication rate.
Keywords: TLIF, Lumbar instability, VAS, ODI

## 1904

## P240: Mini open SA-ALIF with hyperlordotic cages in surgical treatment of
degenerative disc disease and cerrection of spinal sagittal
misalignment

Dimitar Haritonov

1

1

Neurosurgery and Spinal Surgery, Heart and Brain Hospital, Pleven,
Bulgaria

Introduction: Since the introduction of threaded devices in the
mid-1990s, anterior lumbar interbody fusion (ALIF) has become a staple in
the armamentarium of the spine surgeon. We aim at analysing the impact of
stand alone anterior lumbar interbody fusion (SA-ALIF) in treatment of
degenerative disc disease (DDD) and restoring the main spinopelvic
parameters, along with its potentials and limitations in correcting sagittal
imbalance of the approach and implanted hardware. Material and
Methods: Total 72 patients with DDD and spinal misalignment were
treated surgically and followed up in Department of Neurosurgery and Spinal
Surgery – University Hospital Heart and Brain Pleven for period of 2 years.
The following spinopelvic parameters were observed and corrected: pelvic
tilt (PT), sacral slope (SS), lumbar lordosis (LL), segmental lumbar
lordosis (LLseg) and sagittal vertical axis (SVA). Most of the patients (80
%) received hyperlordotic cages (HLC). The indirect decompression potential
of ALIF was also assessed. The clinical outcome was obtained by collecting
visual analogue scale (VAS) for back and leg pain and Oswestry Disability
Index (ODI) scores. Global fusion rate and main complications were
collected. Preoperative dynamic X-Ray, CT scan with venogram, bone density
and MRI were performed. Postoperative CT scan on 3 and 6 month were done.
Results: PT, SS, LL, LLseg and SVA spinopelvic parameters
all improved postoperatively by - 4.3 ± 5.2°, 3.9 ± 4.5°, 10.6 ± 12.5°, 6.7
± 3.5° and 51.1 ± 44.8 mm, respectively. HLC were statistically more
effective in restoring LL and LLseg (p < 0.05). Postoperative disc
height, anterior disc height, posterior disc height and foraminal height,
respectively, increased by 58.5%, 87.2%, 80.9% and 18.1%. Postoperative
improvements were observed in VAS back and leg and ODI scores (p < 0.05).
The global fusion rate was 94.5 ± 5.5%; the overall complication rate was
less than 5%. Conclusion: When managing degenerative disc
disease and sagittal imbalance, SA-ALIF can be considered as a valid and
reliable technique to achieve the correct spinopelvic parameters even in
single level surgery based on preoperative planning. This technique permits
to obtain an optimal LL distribution and a solid anterior column support,
with lower complications and higher fusion rates when compared to posterior
approaches. Using a hyperlordotic cages is a milestone for improving the
postoperative results.

## 1961

## P241: Association between preoperative paraspinal muscle mass and
quality, and clinical outcomes after lumbar spinal fusion: an observational
cohort study

Esther Janssen

1,2

, Bart Bongers

3

 and Paul Willems

1

1

Orthopaedics, Maastricht UMC+, Maastricht, The Netherlands

2

VieCuri MC, Orthopaedics, Venlo, The Netherlands

3

School of Nutr and Transl Res in Metab, Maastricht University,
Maastricht, The Netherlands

Introduction: Patients suffering from a spinal disorder may show
a reduction of muscle mass (atrophy) and increased fat infiltration
(myosteatosis) in the paraspinal muscles on MRI. Studies have identified
that muscle atrophy and myosteatosis in the paraspinal muscles is predictive
of morbidity and mortality after major abdominal surgery. As lumbar spinal
fusion (LSF) is major surgery, atrophy and myosteatosis of the paraspinal
muscles may also be predictive of outcomes after LSF. If so, preoperative
MRI results can be used as a predictor to aid the surgeon in calculating a
patient’s expected outcome and risk for complications after surgery.
Therefore, the aim of this study was to investigate whether muscle atrophy
and myosteatosis in paraspinal muscles, is associated with complications,
length of stay (LoS), functional recovery, and one-year postoperative
reduction in pain in patients undergoing elective LSF. Material and
Methods: Patients undergoing elective 1-3 level LSF because of a
degenerative disorder of the lumbar spine were included in this
retrospective cohort. Patients filled out the visual analogue scale (VAS)
for leg and back pain both pre- and postoperatively, and the difference
between pre- and one-year postoperative VAS was used as a dependent
variable. Functional recovery was measured using the modified Iowa level of
assistance scale (mILAS). To measure muscle atrophy, the cross-sectional
area (CSA) was calculated. To determine myosteatosis, the functional
cross-sectional area (FCSA) was measured. The amount of fatty infiltration
(lean muscle ratio) was measured by calculating a ratio of FCSA divided by
CSA. Measurements were taken from the transversal coupes of L5 from the
preoperative MRI scan. To determine the association between muscle atrophy,
myosteatosis and lean muscle ratio, and surgical outcomes, a Pearson’s or
Spearman’s correlation was calculated. Results: 130 patients
were eligible, of which 12 were excluded as their MRI-scan showed
scattering. Eighteen patients (15,2%) had a complication of which 11 were
minor. Mean LoS was 7.02 days (SD ± 3.02) and the mean functional recovery
time was 5.33 days (SD ± 2.70). Analysis of the complications, LoS and
functional recovery time in relation to the CSA, FCSA, and lean muscle ratio
of the paraspinal muscles showed no correlation (r: -0.417 to 0.124). The
difference between one-year postoperative and baseline pain also showed
there was no correlation between any of the dependent variables with the
CSA, FCSA, or lean muscle ratio of the paraspinal muscles (r: -0.190 to
0.377). Conclusion: Muscle atrophy, myosteatosis, and lean
muscle ratio of the paraspinal muscles on preoperative MRI showed no
association with any of outcome after LSF. These parameters measured at a
single time point may therefore not be predictive of clinical outcome after
LSF. However, these parameters do not consider individual changes in muscle
over time. Moreover, we did not explore the association with physical
functioning. Therefore, a next step would be to study the relation between
paraspinal muscle atrophy and fatty infiltration over time and functional
outcomes after LSF.

## 1971

## P242: Role of pedicle screw augmentation in decreasing the reparations
rate following posterior lumbar inter body fusion

Pablo Mendivil

1

1

Neurocirugía, Unidad de Cirugía Espinal Compleja y Minimamente
Invasiva - Neurocentro Salta - IMAC Instituto Medico de Alta
Complejidad, Salta, Argentina

Objective & Background: Posterior spinal arthrodesis is the
most commonly used spinal fusion procedure. The main middle and long-term
causes of reoperation are adjacent segment disease and screw loosening. The
objective of the present work is to determine the relevance of pedicle screw
loosening in the reoperation rate after lumbar interbody fusion, identify
risk factors and incidence, and assess the impact of pedicle screw
augmentation. Methods: We analyse retrospectively the data of
318 patients, mean age 54 years (± 9.6, range 18 to 84) who underwent
posterior lumbar interbody fusion (miss 163 - open 155) and 57 patients, 69
years mean age (± 8.1, range 53 to 82) who underwent posterior lumbar
interbody fusion with pedicle screw augmentation between March 2015 and
March 2022 looking for screw loosening, reoperation rate and other surgical
complication. The mean of follow-up was 31.8 ± 8.2 months (range, 6 to 84
months). As part of the post-operative patient’s study protocol, 24 Hs. 6
months ± 12 months CT scan was performed. Results: 41 patients
underwent a reoperation (10.9 %) at our spinal unit after lumbar interbody
fusion. Revision because wound or deep infection was excluded. The main
reoperation causes were ASD (13 patients /3.73%) and screw loosening (24
patients /6.4 %), other causes 3 patients (0.8 %). Although screw loosening
was diagnosed in 27 patients (7.2%). Distribution according age groups was;
under 40 years old 2 of 84 patients (2.3%) between 40 and 65 years 8 of 136
patients (5.8%) and in patients older than 65 years 13 of 98 patients
(13.2%). Screw loosening in patients with augmented screws could be
diagnosed in 1 of 57 patients (1.7%). Conclusion: Efforts
toward prevention adverse occurrences are the next step for the quality
improvement in spinal surgery. Knowledge of rates of PLIF complications are
essential when indicating surgery and informing the patient of its risks.
Screw loosening becomes the most important quantitative long term surgical
complication, as lumbar interbody fusion is increasingly common in
osteopenic or osteoporotic patients due to the aging of the population.
Pedicle screw augmentation decreases significantly the screw loosening and
the reoperation rate.

## 1978

## P243: Utilizing viseon camera for minimally invasive lumbar decompression
surgery in low and middle-income countries: a technique and feasibility
study

Costansia Bureta

1

, Francois Waterkeyn

2

, Chibuikem Ikwuegbuenyi

2

, Fabian Sommer

2

, Hamisi Shabani

1

, and Roger Härtl

2

1

Neurosurgery, Muhimbili Orthopedic and Neurosurgery Institute,
Bujumbura, Republic of Burundi

2
Neurological Surgery, New York Presbyterian
Hospital/Och Spine, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York United
States
Introduction: Minimally invasive spinal surgery (MISS) offers
better outcomes and quality of life than traditional methods. However, MISS
is yet to be adopted in low-and middle-income countries (LMICs) owing to
limited knowledge and resources, such as a lack of access to endoscopes or
microscopes, which are cumbersome, expensive, and require specific
maintenance. Objective: We aim to describe our initial
experience utilizing the Viseon MaxView camera system for MISS at Muhimbili
Orthopedic Institute, highlighting this system's safety, feasibility, and
applicability. Methods: We report four cases of unilateral
laminectomy for bilateral decompression (ULBD) using the Viseon Max camera
system in a resource-constrained setting. The Viseon MaxView System is a
novel visualization system that utilizes a miniature, single-use camera
attached to a tubular retractor and projects 4K resolution images onto a
head-up display. Data on the surgery duration, blood loss, perioperative
complications, and technique mishaps were collected. Short-term clinical
outcome was assessed using the visual analog scale (VAS) and the Oswestry
disability index (ODI). Result: Four patients, two male, and
two females, with a mean age of 62 years, had severe radicular pain that was
worse on the left, and mild back pain. Additionally, two patients had severe
claudication, and another had a motor deficit. The duration of symptoms of
the patients was, on average, 49 months. Magnetic resonance imaging showed
disc prolapse or canal stenosis in the lumbar spine (L4-S1). All patients
were obese with BMI >30kg/m2. All patients underwent tubular MISS with
the Viseon system, with a 60- or 70-mm tube size. The system setup was quick
and easy and did not require any assistance from the company. The image
quality was very sharp but could not offer 3D visualization. The average
duration of surgery was 146 min, with an average blood loss of 63 mls. All
patients were ambulant on the first-day post op with no post-op
complications. The average time from admission to surgery was four days.
Conclusion: Despite the lack of depth perception and a few
episodes of frozen images while using monopolar, the Viseon MaxView camera
system appears to be a feasible solution for MISS cases for patients in LMIC
countries, and could be used an alternative to the surgical microscope.

## 1992

## P244: Risk factors for additional lumbar fusion surgery at the index
level after posterior decompression surgery for lumbar canal
stenosis

Tetsuryu Mitsuyama

1

 and Kaiji Ota

2

1

Neurosurgery

2

Orthopedic Surgery, Shinagawa Shishoukai Hospital, Tokyo,
Japan

Introduction: It has been reported that decompression plus
fusion surgery does not result in better clinical outcomes than
decompression surgery alone among patients with lumbar spinal stenosis.
However, some patients require additional lumbar fusion surgery due to
symptomatic foraminal stenosis after posterior decompression for lumbar
canal stenosis. The aim of this study is to investigate predictable factors
of additional fusion surgery after decompression surgery alone for lumbar
canal stenosis. Methods: Fifty-four consecutive patients
undergoing posterior central decompression for lumbar canal stenosis by a
single surgeon from 2016 to 2019 were retrospectively analyzed. Age, sex,
range of posterior decompression and preoperative radiological findings at
the decompressed levels were compared between patients with and without
additional lumbar fusion surgery at the index levels. Predictive risk
factors of additional fusion surgery after central decompression for lumbar
spinal stenosis were determined with multivariate logistic regression
analyses and Mann-Whitney U tests. Results: Seven patients
(13%) underwent additional lumbar interbody fusions for symptomatic
foraminal stenosis at the decompressed levels. Five of them (9%) had
additional fusion surgery within two years after initial decompression
surgery. Significant risk factors for additional fusion surgery were
intervertebral disc wedge angle over 5 degrees (OR = 9.11, 95% CI =
1.62-51.1, p < 0.012), posterior spondylolisthesis over 5 mm (OR = 6.3.
95% CI = 1.08-36.7, P = 0.041) and intradiscal vacuum phenomenon on X-ray
(OR = 5.63 95% CI = 1.07-29.7, P = 0.042). Range of posterior decompression
was significantly larger in patients with additional fusion surgery (mean
2.6 levels) than in patients without additional fusion surgery (mean 1.9
levels). On analyses of additional fusion surgery within two years,
significant risk factors were also intradiscal vacuum on X-ray (OR = 17.8.
95% CI = 1.77-17.9, p = 0.015), posterior spondylolisthesis (OR = 13.2. 95%
CI = 1.76-98.9, p = 0.012) and disc wedge (OR = 9.0. 95% CI = 1.27-63.9, p =
0.028). Discussion: This study demonstrated that 9% of patients
with posterior decompression surgery alone for lumbar canal stenosis
required additional lumbar fusion surgery for symptomatic foraminal stenosis
at the index levels within two years. Intradiscal vacuum phenomenon on
X-ray, posterior spondylolisthesis over 5 mm and intervertebral disc wedge
angle over 5 degrees were predictive risk factors for such additional lumbar
fusion surgery. Lumbar interbody fusion surgery may be indicated for
patients with all of above radiological findings.

## 2035

## P245: Effects of social determinants of health on preoperative
presentation of patients who underwent operative management of degenerative
spondylolisthesis

Avionna Baldwin

1

, Anna Filley

1

, Khuzaima Rangwalla

1

, Ashraf El Naga

1

, David Gendelberg

1

, and Sigurd Berven

1

1

Orthopedic Surgery, University of California, San Francisco, United
States

Introduction: Degenerative spondylolisthesis (DS), is one of the
most common causes of back pain and disability worldwide. Recent data has
supported the role of surgical intervention for improving outcomes in
symptomatic DS. As we study DS treatment efficacy, it is important to look
at populations’ access to surgical care. The purpose of this study was to
investigate the relationship between social determinants of health (SDoH)
and the clinical presentation of patients with operative DS in order to
better understand factors influencing patient access to surgical care.
Methods: Retrospective study of 184 consecutive patients
who underwent surgical treatment of symptomatic DS at UCSF, January 2016 and
June 2020. Primary outcomes were duration of baseline, worsening, and
severity symptoms at first consultation, time from referral to surgical
consultation and time from consultation to surgical procedure. Univariate
analysis was used to assess the influence of SDoH on these outcomes.
Results: Patients with estimated median income in the
lowest two quartiles had a significantly longer duration of baseline (112.4
vs 54.5 months, p = 0.00139) and worsening symptoms (17.4 vs 9 months, p =
0.0262) and waited longer for surgical consultation after initial referral
(52 v 35 days, p = 0.0143) than those in the top two quartiles. Patients
living > 50 miles from UCSF had a significantly longer duration of
baseline symptoms (104 vs 61 months p = 0.018) and waited longer for
surgical consultation after initial referral (53 vs 34 days, p = 0.0086).
Following surgical consultation, patients with public insurance waited
longer for procedures than those with private insurance (440 vs 251 days; p
= 0.046). Conclusion: Low income was a risk factor for worse
preoperative presentation. In order to ensure equitable access to
appropriate surgical care, SDoH must be considered as these are modifiable
risk factors to improve patient outcomes. By understanding factors that may
predispose patients to presenting in a worse clinical state prior to
surgery, we can not only increase access, but also improve surgical
outcomes.

## Diagnostics

## 73

## P246: The legal and socioeconomic considerations of spine telemedicine in
Canada

Jessica Jung

1

, Shawn Baldeo

2

, Markian Pahuta

3

, Sunjay Sharma

4

, and Daipayan Guha

4

1

Faculty of Health Sciences

2

Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Canada

3

Department of Orthopedic Surgery

4

Department of Neurosurgery, McMaster University, Hamilton,
Canada

Introduction: While the COVID-19 crisis had accelerated the use
of telemedicine in Canadian healthcare, there remains significant
uncertainty as to its efficacy and future directions. There are inherent
challenges to telemedicine, including questions of clinical reliability and
privacy, balanced against the possibility of efficiency and increased access
to specialists. Here, we review the current landscape of telemedicine in
Canadian healthcare, with applications to spine surgery. Material and
Methods: This narrative review provides an overview of both the
pragmatic elements of conducting virtual assessments in spinal surgery,
along with a synthesis of its legal implications. This review was supported
by a search of the Lexis Advance Quicklaw database to evaluate the
prevalence of medical negligence lawsuits in Canada. Results:
The Canadian healthcare system poses significant challenges in the
evaluation and systemic implementation of telemedicine, given the lack of a
national legal framework and separate provincial or territorial regulation
systems across the country. Telemedicine is of a particular interest to
spinal surgeons, given the prevalence, morbidity, and economic costs
associated with spinal pathologies. Despite perceptions of increase
liability, to date, there have not been any malpractice suits specifically
related to the use of virtual care or telemedicine. Conclusion:
The role of telemedicine in Canada continues to evolve with the dynamic
aftermath of the COVID-19 pandemic. Its ability to expedite access to
medical care makes it a valuable resource, particularly given the health
disparities across geographically isolated regions in Canada. However, there
are significant challenges navigating the widespread upstart of
telemedicine, given the lack of a national legal framework and the inherent
difficulties of navigating individual provincial systems. Without a unifying
policy, there is uncertainty regarding best practice policies, along with
unclear legal implications of confidentiality and privacy, which may serve
as a barrier for clinicians to integrate telehealth into their practice.

## 181

## P247: Bone turnover markers in the preoperative assessment of bone
quality - A prospective investigation of bone microstructure and advanced
glycation endproducts in lumbar fusion patients

Henryk Haffer

1,2

, Maximilian Muellner

1

, Erika Chiapparelli

2

, Yusuke Dodo

2

, Jiaqi Zhu

2

, Yi Xin Han

3

, Eve Donnelly

3

, Jennifer Shue

2

, Andrew Sama

2

, Frank Cammisa

2

, Federico Girardi

2

, and Alexander Hughes

2

1

Center for Musculoskeletal Surgery, Charité - Universitätsmedizin
Berlin, Germany

2

Hospital for Special Surgery, Spine Care Institute

3

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Cornell University,
New York, United States

Introduction: Effective tools to evaluate bone quality
preoperatively are scarce and the standard method to determine bone quality
requires an invasive biopsy. Therefore, a non-invasive, and preoperatively
available method for bone quality assessment would be of clinical value. We
hypothesized that bone turnover marker are associated to volumetric bone
mineral density (vBMD), posttranslational bone collagen modifications and
the bone microstructure. Therefore the study aimed to investigate the
associations of bone formation marker, serum bone alkaline phosphatase
(BAP), and bone resorption marker, urine collagen cross-linked N-telopeptide
(uNTX) to 1) vBMD, 2) fluorescent advanced glycation endproducts (fAGEs) and
3) bone microstructure. Material and Methods: A cross-secional
analysis using prospective data of patients undergoing lumbar spinal fusion
from from 2014 to 2021 was performed. The study was approved by the
institutional review board and informed consent was obtained from all
patients. BAP and uNTX were preoperatively collected. Quantitative computed
tomography (QCT) was performed at the lumbar spine (vBMD ≤ 120
mg/cm3 osteopenic/osteoporotic). Bone biopsies from the
posterior superior iliac spine were obtained and evaluated with multiphoton
fluorescence microscopy for fAGE crosslink density and microcomputed
tomography (μCT) for bone microarchitecture. Correlations between BAP/uNTX
to 1) vBMD, 2) fAGEs and 3) μCT parameters were assessed with Spearman’s ρ.
Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis evaluated BAP and uNTX as
predictors for osteopenia/osteoporosis. Multivariable linear regression
models with adjustments for age, sex, BMI, race and diabetes mellitus
determined associations between BAP/uNTX and fAGEs. Results:
127 prospectively enrolled patients (50.4% female, 62.5 years, BMI 28.7
kg/m2) were analyzed. uNTX (ρ = -0.331, p < 0.005) and BAP (ρ = -0.245, p
< 0.025) decreased with cortical fAGEs, and uNTX (ρ = -0.380, p <
0.001) decreased with trabecular fAGEs. BAP and uNTX revealed no significant
correlation with vBMD. ROC analysis for BAP and uNTX discriminated
osteopenia/osteoporosis with an AUC of 0.477 and 0.561, respectively. In the
multivariable analysis, uNTX decreased with increasing trabecular fAGEs
after adjusting for covariates (β = 0.923; p = 0.031).
Conclusion: This study demonstrated an inverse association
of bone turnover markers and fAGEs. Both uNTX and BAP could not predict
osteopenia/osteoporosis in the spine. uNTX reflects collagen characteristics
and might have a complementary role to vBMD, as a non-invasive tool for bone
quality assessment in spine surgery.

## 252

## P248: The Hoffmann parallax: a prospective study to determine the benefit
of Hoffmann's sign

Eric Gruenberger

1

, Sohrab Vatsia

1

, Rourke Stay

1

, Cameron Kersey

1

, Mudassar Khan

1

, and Douglas Pahl

1

1

Hughston Clinic, Columbus, GA, United States

Introduction: Degenerative cervical myelopathy (DCM) is the most
common cause of age-related spinal dysfunction worldwide. Despite the
widespread use of provocative physical exam maneuvers in the workup of DCM,
the clinical significance of Hoffmann’s sign is controversial and its
diagnostic benefit in patients with cervical cord compression remains
unclear. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to prospectively assess
the diagnostic performance of Hoffmann’s sign in a cohort of patients
treated by a single spine surgeon. Material and Methods:
Patients were divided into two groups in keeping with the presence of a
Hoffmann sign on physical examination. Advanced imaging studies were
independently reviewed by four raters for confirmation of a diagnosis of
cervical cord compression. Prevalence, sensitivity, specificity, likelihood,
and relative risk ratios for the Hoffmann sign were calculated, with
subsequent Chi-square and receiver operator characteristic (ROC) analysis to
further characterize correlative findings. Results: Fifty-two
patients were included in this study – of whom, thirty-four (58.6%) patients
presented with a Hoffmann sign, and eleven (21.1%) patients demonstrated
cord compression on imaging. The Hoffmann sign demonstrated a sensitivity of
20% and a specificity of 35.7% (LR = 0.32; 0.16-1.16). Chi-square analysis
revealed that imaging findings positive for cord compression were
proportionally greater for patients lacking a Hoffmann sign than those with
a confirmed Hoffmann sign (p = 0.032) ROC analysis demonstrated that a
negative Hoffmann sign performed moderately well in predicting cord
compression (AUC.721; p = 0.031). Conclusion: The Hoffmann sign
is an unreliable marker for cervical cord compression, and the lack of a
Hoffmann sign may be more predictive of cervical cord compression.

## 338

## P249: Reliability of manual intervetebral disc measurment

Philipp Schenk

1

, Nadya Guellil

2

, Ingmar Kaden

3

, Magnus Krieghoff

3

, Christian Hohaus

4

, and Hans-Jörg Meisel

5

1

Department of Science and Research

2

Department of Plastic and Hand Surgery, Burn Unit

3

Institute of Radiology and Neuroradiology

4

Department of Neurosurgery, Hospital Dessau, Dessau,
Germany

5

Department of Neurosurgery, BG Klinikum Bergmannstrost, Halle
(Saale), Germany

Introduction: Reliable methods to quantify disc degeneration are
mandatory for treatment evaluation of degenerated discs. Since MRI have been
used to diagnose vertebral diseases to objectify and quantify disc
degeneration. The aim of this study was to investigate the inter- and
intra-observer reliability (interRR, intraRR) of manual measures of disc
height and volume in healthy and degenerated lumbar intervertebral discs
(IVD) in MRI scans. In addition, the reliability of the
Pfirrmann-classification was investigated. Material and
Methods: T2w images of 60 Patients with mono-segmental lumbar
disc herniation at L4/5 (N = 10) or L5/S1 (N = 50) and healthy,
non-degenerated IVD at L3/4 were investigated in this study. IVD height were
measured using three manual methods: H1: disc height in the center of the
midsagittal layer. H2: mean of anterior and posterior disc height in
midsagittal layer. H3: mean of nine defined locations, three in the
midsagittal layer, three each in a defined left and a right layer,
respectively. IVD volume was calculated by multiplying the slice thickness
(4mm) with the sum of the measured disc areas in every sagittal layer. The
Pfirrmann-classification was determined for the degenerated IVD. Two
observers (observer1: surgeon, observer2: radiologist) carried out the
measurements. To calculate intraRR, observer1 performed the measurements two
times with an interval of 4 weeks. Intra -class-correlation coefficient
(ICC(3, 1)) was used for intraRR and interRR. The reliability of the
Pfirrmann classification was calculated using Kenadalls Tau. InterRR was
calculated two times, comparing the results of both measures from observer1
(1a and 1b) with the results of observer 2. SPSS v28 was used for
statistical analyses. Results: Data of 34 male and 26 female
patients with an age of 36 ± 10 years were analyzed. The highest intraRR for
IVD height measures was found for H3 with 0.822 for healthy and 0.910 for
degenerated IVD (healthy IVD: H1 0.815, H2 0.677; degenerated IVD: H1 0.874,
H2 0.842). For volume measures the intraRR was 0.887 and 0.913 for healthy
and degenerated, respectively. The interRR showed for the healthy IVD for H3
with 0.634 the highest and for H2 with 0.396 the lowest reliability. For the
degenerated IVD, again, H3 showed with 0.792 the highest and H2 with 0.630
the lowest interRR. The interRR of the volume measures of the healthy IVD
was 0.701 for observer1a and observer 2 and 0.728 for observer1b and
observer 2. For the degenerated IVD interRR was 0.860 and 0.791. Degenerated
IVD showed Pfirrmann-classification of Grade II (N = 16), Grade III (N =
17), Grade IV (N = 20) and Grade V (N = 7). The intra-observer reliability
(Kendalls Tau) was 0.628. The inter-observer reliability was 0.457 and
0.615. All reliability values showed a p < 0.01. Conclusion:
Overall, reliability showed values from moderate up to very height. The H3
method (9-points) showed the best reliability for IVD height measures. Using
2 Points (H2) for height measures showed the lowest reliability. The
reliability of the measures of healthy IVD was slightly lower, compared to
degenerated IVD. Studies, which address IVD height and volume, should report
the reliability of their measures.

## 436

## P250: New bone formation in ossification of the posterior longitudinal
ligament and its possible mechanisms: Inflammation or degeneration

Tran Canh Tung Nguyen

1

, Zhongyuan He

2

, Hiroto Makino

1

, and Kawaguchi Yoshiharu

1

1

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Toyama, Toyama
City, Japan

2

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, The Seventh Affiliated Hospital
of Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, China

Introduction: Ossification of the posterior longitudinal
ligament (OPLL) is characterized by the ectopic bone formation that occurs
in the PLL due to hyperostotic changes. The pathogenesis of OPLL is
multifactorial and remained to be fully elucidated. Objectives of this study
are to clarify whether and how spinal inflammation or degeneration is
associated with the new bone formation in ossification of the posterior
longitudinal ligament (OPLL). Material and Methods: The whole
spinal computed tomography and serum high-sensitive C-reactive protein
(hs-CRP) levels were obtained in 162 patients with cervical OPLL. Patients
were divided into plateau-shaped (51 males and 33 females; mean age: 67.7
years) and hill-shaped groups (50 males and 28 females; mean age: 67.2
years). Sacroiliac (SI) joint changes were classified into four types and
three subtypes, as previously described. Interactions among ossification
shapes, hs-CRP levels, and morphological changes in the SI joint were
investigated. Results: The maximum ossified lesion thickness of
the Hill shape was larger and more common in the intervertebral regions
(65.4%) compared to the plateau shape, which was predominant in the
vertebral segments (59.5%). Serum hs-CRP levels in the plateau-shaped group
(0.11 ± 0.10 mg/dL) were significantly higher than that in the hill-shaped
group (0.07 ± 0.08 mg/dL). SI joint intra-articular fusion was the main
finding in the plateau-shaped group and showed significantly higher hs-CRP
levels compared to the anterior para-articular bridging, which more
frequently occurred in the hill-shaped group. Conclusion: OPLL
classification based on the two opposite morphological appearances may be
beneficial for understanding its underlying mechanism. Our findings indicate
that the plateau shape OPLL is similar to syndesmophyte in ankylosing
spondylitis, probably due to inflammatory pathogenesis, whereas the
hill-shaped ossification appears as a degenerative process.

## 784

## P251: Gorham-Stout disease with abdominal chylous effusion and osteolytic
lesions of the lumbar spine. Case report and review of the
literature

Fernando Alvarado Gómez

1

, Nahala Aborashed-Amador

1

, Mario Herrera Méndez

1

, Maria Garcia-Rueda

1

, Carlos Montero-Silva

1

, Sergio Alejandro Nossa

1

, María Alejandra Asmar

1

, Maria Camila Giraldo Bernal

1

, Maria Bravo-Otero

1

, Germán Mogollón

1

, and Gilmar Hernández

1

1

Instituto Roosevelt, Bogota, Colombia

Introduction: The Gorham-Stout syndrome is a rare condition
characterized by progressive osteolysis and bone destruction. Chylous
effusion is present only in 17% of patients with this disease, and when it
occurs, it is located in the thorax. Osteolytic lesions described in the
spine are even more infrequent. Material and Methods: A 14-year
male patient came for vomiting and abdominal pain for six months. The US and
contrast-enhanced CT scan documented a multi-lobulated retroperitoneal cyst
associated with multiple lytic lesions of the vertebral bodies and iliac
bones. The cyst was sclerosed by interventional radiology. Symptoms
reappeared five months later. Results: The persistence of the
retroperitoneal cyst and multiple lytic lesions with cord involvement in all
the spine segments led to the diagnosis of Gorham-Stout syndrome. The
retroperitoneal cyst was sclerosed again, and the patient received adjuvant
therapy with sirolimus. Spine lytic lesions were treated with a brace and
bisphosphonates without recurrence. Conclusion: The
Gorham-Stout disease is considered a benign condition that may resolve
spontaneously in some situations. The manifestations are usually thoracic.
However, it can debut with abdominal symptoms. In this scenario, the
diagnosis can be focused thanks to the bone findings that characterize this
pathology and the age of presentation.

## 914

## P252: Prospective clinical study of the diagnostic accuracy of
SPECTRAL-CT in the primary diagnosis of osteoporotic pelvic ring
fractures

Bernhard Ullrich

1

, Mark Unthan

2

, Heinen Camilla

2

, Felix Kohler

2

, Philipp Schenk

3

, Tobias Franiel

4

, and Florian Buerckenmeyer

4

1

Trauma and Reconstructive Surgery

2

Hand-, Traum- and Reconstructive Surgery

3

Department of Science, Research and Education, BG Clinic
Bergmannstrost Halle, Halle, Germany

4

Radiology, University Hospital, Friedrich Schiller University, Jena,
Germany

Introduction: The WHO defines fragility or insufficiency
fractures as injuries without adequate trauma due to reduced bone quality.
Demographic changes have resulted in an increase in pelvic ring
insufficiency fractures. These patients require special attention in
clinical care and should be considered differently than bone healthy
patients with pelvic ring fractures. When a pelvic ring insufficiency
fracture is suspected, for diagnostic purposes a native CT is employed.
However, the CT shows poorer sensitivity compared to MRI (CT: 77%, MRI:
96.3%) in the diagnosis of sacral fractures. SPECTRAL CT can visualize bone
marrow edema using different absorption spectra, similar to MRI. The study
aims to evaluate the diagnostic accuracy of SPECTRAL CT compared to MRI in
the detection of fractures in the posterior pelvic ring. Material and
Methods: The monocentric, prospective cohort study included
patients presenting to the central emergency department with low back pain.
Patients with adequate trauma and patients younger than 55 years were
excluded. Each patient initially received a SPECTRAL CT (GE RevolutionCT,
GSI, rapid kilovolt switching), and promptly underwent a basin MRI during
the inpatient stay. The study was approved by the ethics committee of the
medical faculty of the University of Jena (2021-2124MV). The evaluation was
performed in a randomized blinded procedure by a diagnostician experienced
in musculoskeletal radiology using a standardized reporting form. Diagnostic
accuracy of SPECTRAL CT and native CT was calculated in comparison to MRI
pelvis, which is the current gold standard. Results: To date,
34 patients (age: 78 ± 10 years, female n = 20, male n = 14) have been
included in the currently ongoing study. Compared to MRI pelvis, SPECTRAL CT
shows high sensitivity (96%) and specificity (75%) in detecting pathology in
the posterior pelvic ring region. CT pelvis native shows significantly worse
sensitivity in comparison (sensitivity 70%, specificity 75%).
Conclusion: The data show a high diagnostic sensitivity of
SPECTRAL CT compared to CT pelvis. In everyday clinical practice, this
enables the correct diagnosis and classification already in primary
diagnostics, for example according to the osteoporotic fractures (OF) pelvis
or fragility fractures of the pelvis (FFP) classification. SPECTRAL CT could
thus represent a time- and resource-saving alternative diagnostic method to
the MRI.

## 934

## P253: Fracture-like lesions could potentially be a red herring for the
clinician. Langerhans cell histiocytosis initially misdiagnosed as a pancake
fracture secondary to a neck injury. A case report

Grigorios Delaportas

1

 and Georgios Manolarakis

2

1

University of Vermont Medical Center, South Burlington, United
States

2

Orthopaedic Sophisticated Surgical Techniques (MOSST), Heraklion,
Greece

Introduction: Difficulties in the clinical diagnoses arise from
cases in which medical history, physical examination, imaging, and lab tests
are contradicting. Bone pain of traumatic etiology may sometimes aggravate
and consequently reveal a preexisting painless bone pathology while painful,
non-traumatic bone lesions may often present as fractures after radiographic
evaluation. Material and Methods: We present the case of a
16-year old female who was referred to our spine clinic due to persisting
and worsening neck pain that started about 6 months prior to her visit to
us. Initially, the patient presented to the emergency department (ED) as a
result of falling and landing on her head while bouncing on a trampoline.
The patient was observed for a couple of hours and was later discharged.
Since the patient had mild pain without neurological deficits, no
radiographs were ordered by the ED physician. However, the pain gradually
increased and, approximately two months after her initial injury, the
patient presented to her primary doctor for further evaluation. The primary
doctor ordered plain radiographs and referred the patient to our clinic with
the diagnosis of a pancake fracture of the C6 vertebra. The radiographs were
reviewed, but the appearance of the fracture in the context of the traumatic
circumstances raised concerns challenging the initial diagnosis.
Results: New radiographs were obtained and compared to the
previous ones. The lesion appeared worse with conspicuous erosion of the C6
endplates and loss of the vertebral height. We proceeded in ordering an MRI.
MRI revealed a lesion compatible with "Langerhans Cell Histiocytosis" and
not with a pancake fracture. The patient was immediately referred to
hematology/oncology which scheduled a bone biopsy. Bone biopsy confirmed the
MRI results. Subsequently, the patient started the indicated treatment with
excellent prognosis. Conclusion: Several times an accurate
diagnosis may be sacrificed in the altar of the "apparent or obvious."
However, a ruminative analysis of the medical history and how it relates to
diagnostic tests may unravel a camouflaged contradiction. In our case, we
speculated that a traumatic impact forceful enough to cause a pancake
fracture at one's C6 vertebra would have most likely caused more intense
pain as well as apparent neurological deficits thus prompting the ED
physician to order at least plane radiographs. Our prudent approach led to
an accurate and timely diagnosis of a sinister condition with excellent
prognosis.

## 1066

## P254: Clinically significant radiologic parameter of thoracic
ossification of the ligamentum flavum on lateral view X-ray?

Hyunjun Jang

1

, Kyung Hyun Kim

1

, Jeong Yoon Park

1

, Keun Su Kim

1

, Yong-Eun Cho

1

, and Dong Kyu Chin

1

1

Department of Neurosurgery, Spine and Spinal Cord Institute, Gangnam
Severance Hospital, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea,
Rep. of South

Introduction: Thoracic ossification of the ligamentum flavum
(OLF) is one of the major cause of motor and sensory deficit of lower
extremity. Since it is hard to detect the disease unless taking MR images of
thoracic spine, it often takes time to get the final diagnosis. The purpose
of this study is to find the parameters that could be useful to screen
thoracic OLF on pre-operative lateral view X-ray. Material and
Methods: We investigated patients who underwent surgery for
thoracic OLF (n = 114) and those who had thoracic OLF but did not undergo
surgery (n = 114) from 2015-2021. Various parameters such as shape and
thickness of OLF were measured on lateral X-ray. Thoracic disc herniation or
ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament was excluded. Thickness
of OLF (TOLF), Foraminal antero-posterior diameter (FD) – TOLF, OLF free
diameter, TOLF / FD were measured. Results: Beak-type was the
most common OLF morphology type, and 88% of patients who underwent surgery
had paralysis symptoms. TOLF / FD was found as the best radiologic
parameter. The optimal cut-off point was 0.42, 82% Sensitivity, and 83%
Specificity. Conclusion: A TOLF / FD of 42% or less is the best
way to diagnose clinically significant thoracic OLF on lateral X-ray. In
this case, the patient may have paralysis due to thoracic OLF, so further
evaluation such as MRI or CT should be actively considered.

## 1077

## P255: Emergency decompression for spontaneous spinal epidural hematoma in
octogenarians: risk factors, clinical outcome and complications

Pavlina Lenga

1

, Guelec Gelo

1

, Karl L. Kiening

1

, Andreas W. Unterberg

1

, and Basem Ishak

1

1

Neurosurgery, Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg,
Germany

Introduction: Spontaneous spinal epidural hematoma (SSEH) is a
rare but disabling disease with a high morbidity. Although several cases
have been reported in the literature, the pathogenesis, diagnosis, and
timing of treatment remain unclear, especially in patients with advanced
age. Owing to the lack of clinical evidence on this topic, we aimed to
describe the clinical outcomes of cervical SSEH in octogenarians with an
acute onset of neurological illness undergoing laminectomy, assess morbidity
and mortality rates, and determine potential risk factors for a
non-ambulatory outcome. Material and Methods: Electronic
medical records from a single institution between September 2005 and
December 2020 were retrieved. Data on patient demographics, neurological
conditions, functional status, degree of disability, surgical
characteristics, complications, hospital course, and 90-day mortality were
also collected. Results: Over a period of 15 years, 22 patients
aged ≥ 80 years with SSEH undergoing surgical decompression via laminectomy
were enrolled in this study. The mean age was 84.3 ± 3.1 years. The mean
Charlson comorbidity index was 9.1 ± 2.0, indicating a poor baseline
reserve. Cardiovascular diseases were the most prevalent comorbidity. Ten
individuals (45.5%) were taking anticoagulant agents and had a pathologic
partial thromboplastin time (PTT) of 46.5 ± 3.4 s. Progressive neurological
decline, as defined by the motor score (MS) of the American Spinal Injury
Association impairment grading system, was observed on admission with a mean
score of 63.8 ± 14.0. The in-hospital and 90-day mortality were 4.5% and
9.1%, respectively. Notably, the MS (93.6 ± 8.3) improved significantly
after surgery (p < 0.05). Revision surgery was necessary in 5 cases due
to recurrent hematoma. Anticoagulant agents and pathological PTT are
significant risk factors for its occurrence. Motor weakness and
comorbidities were unique risk factors for loss of ambulation.
Conclusion: Decompressive laminectomy and evacuation of the
hematoma in octogenarians with progressive neurological decline showed
beneficial effects on the functional outcomes at discharge. Emergent surgery
seems to be the “state of the art” treatment for symptomatic SSEH even in
such a frail cohort. However, potential complications associated with
adverse prognostic factors, such as the use of anticoagulants, should be
clearly discussed with the patient and their relatives.

## 1179

## P256: The role of neurophysiological monitoring during patient
positioning in cervical spine procedures

David Felzensztein

1

, Eilat Sapirstein

1

, and Eyal Itshayek

1

1

Neurosurgery, Rabin Medical Center, Holon, Israel

Introduction: IONM allows intraoperative assessment of spinal
cord function through real time feedback from sensory tracts, motor tracts,
and nerve roots. IONM assess the functional integrity of the spinal cord and
nerve roots, allowing early detection and reversal of neurological deficits.
The pattern of signal loss during monitoring is important - sudden signal
loss is associated with severe and irreversible injury, and gradual
degeneration is more likely to represent mild recoverable damage. Different
evidence exists regarding the sensitivity and specificity regarding the
detection of new neurological deficits and current studies show multimodal
ION (SSEP, MEP, and EMG) to provide a more accurate interpretation of the
information acquired. Positioning during cervical procedures is a
potentially damaging manoeuvre that may require an adequate
neurophysiological monitoring technique to prevent damage to the spinal
cord. IONM can be useful in detecting positioning-related brachial
plexopathy during cervical spine surgery and thus serves as a tool for
predicting neurological outcomes. Despite advancements in understanding IONM
and the popularity of this technique in modern spine surgery, controversies
still exist regarding its effectiveness and the necessity for its use in
routine spinal procedures. Material and Methods: We
retrospectively reviewed prospectively collected data from 2017 and
currently going. All patients who underwent cervical spine surgery with
neuromonitoring at Rabin medical center Beilinson hospital from 2017 till
current were included. Demographic data, medical history, findings at
neurological examination and imaging, electrophysiological data recorded
during surgery, and neurological outcomes were collected and analysed.
Results: Five hundred and one patients met the inclusion
criteria. Loss of potentials detected in twenty patients during patient
positioning and repositioning was performed with the aim of restoring
electrophysiological signals. In 15/20 patients, repositioning resulted in
immediate restoration of the baseline potentials. In 5/20, repositioning did
not immediately restore electrophysiological signals out of those 5, in ¼
potentials reappeared later during the decompression and in ¾ potentials had
not recovered till the conclusion of surgery. Conclusion:
According to the above data, we believe that multimodal IONM is a useful
method to prevent spinal cord injury during neck positioning in cervical
spine surgical procedures and can be used to reduce the risk of neurological
damage caused during patient positioning.

## 1233

## P257: Validity of sedimentation sign of nerve root in the diagnosis of
lumbar canal stenosis

Zion Hwang

1

, Jason Bernard

2

, Timothy Bishop

2

, Jan Herzog

2

, Shahnawaz Haleem

2

, Tesfaladet Kurban

2

, Emily Tsang

1

, Priyanshu Saha

1

, Bisola Ajayi

2

, Thamer Hamdan

2

, and Darren Lui

2

1

St. George's University of London, London, United Kingdom

2

Trauma and Orthopaedics, St. George's University Hospital, London,
United Kingdom

Introduction: Lumbar spine canal stenosis induces a series of
clinical features due to reduction of the lumbar spinal canal capacity which
leads to compression of the neural tissues. At present, the most promising
imaging test for diagnosis of this condition is magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI). These clinical features correlate poorly with the severity of
stenosis and the cross-sectional area of the dural sac in MRI examination.
Therefore, there is a real need to improve the ability to diagnose lumbar
canal stenosis by a special imaging findings. The sedimentation sign is a
new measurement tool that can enable physicians to objectively assess and
quantify spinal stenosis. The sign is most often present in patients who
have clinically significant lumbar stenosis and require surgery. This study
aims to evaluate the validity of the nerve root sedimentation sign in
diagnosing central lumbar canal spinal stenosis. Material and
Methods: This cross-sectional analytic study assessed the MRI of
711 patients complaining of lower back pain with or without sciatica between
1st of April 2019 and 1st of December 2020. The
patients were divided into three groups according to lumbosacral spine MRI
findings: Group I individuals with normal MRI, Group II with lumbar disc
prolapse and Group III with lumbar canal stenosis. We measured the spinal
canal and dural sac diameter at each level from first lumbar (L1) to fifth
lumbar (L5) vertebrae. We looked for the nerve root sedimentation sign above
and below these levels. Results: Positive nerve root
sedimentation sign was seen in 15.2% of normal MRI group, 50.42% of disc
prolapse group and in 86.4% of lumbar canal stenosis group. The sensitivity
and specificity of nerve root sedimentation sign for the diagnosis of lumbar
canal stenosis were 86.4% and 84.74% respectively. Conclusion:
The nerve root sedimentation sign is sensitive but not specific for
diagnosis of lumbar canal stenosis. It is unable to differentiate between
lumbar canal stenosis and other dural compressing diseases like
intervertebral disc herniation. Therefore, the authors suggest that it can
be used as an added tool to clinical examination for diagnosis of lumbar
canal stenosis and its severity but may not add specific diagnostic
information beyond the traditional clinical diagnostic standard.

## 1283

## P258: Awareness of degenerative cervical myelopathy in the primary care
setting in Portugal: results of a survey

Catarina Nogueira

1

, Carolina Luísa Lemos

1

, Oliver Mowforth

1

, Benjamin Davies

1

, and Ricardo Rodrigues-Pinto

1

1

Department of Orthopaedics, Centro Hospitalar Universitário do
Porto, Spinal Unit (UVM), Porto, Portugal

Introduction: Degenerative cervical myelopathy (DCM) is the most
common cause of spinal cord impairment. DCM is often misdiagnosed, and it is
not as discussed as other less debilitating diseases. As DCM might
significantly affect patients’ quality of life, there is an urgency to
detect this condition at its earliest stages. As primary care physicians
(PCPs) are often the first to assess these patients, it is imperative to
ensure a strong knowledge base of DCM amongst primary care physicians.
However, the existing literature suggests PCPs typically fail to diagnose
DCM. This study aimed to assess DCM knowledge amongst family physicians in
Portugal and to address potential factors perpetuating the present issues
regarding DCM awareness. As a secondary aim, this study intended to provide
information to family physicians that may aid them in diagnosing and
managing patients with DCM. Material and Methods: We created an
online questionnaire and shared it with registered general practitioners
(GPs), GP trainees, and physicians without a speciality that practise family
medicine. We advertised our survey via social media platforms and mailing
lists with the help of several medical institutions. An informed consent
explaining the study preceded the questionnaire. All responses were
voluntary and well-informed. All PCPs working in Portugal were considered
eligible for inclusion in this survey. At the end of the questionnaire,
respondents could leave their email if they were interested in participating
in a learning module regarding DCM. To objectively evaluate PCPs’ knowledge
of DCM, we attributed a score to some of the questions inquired. We surveyed
for almost three months. Statistical analysis of this study was conducted
using SPSS software. Results: We collected a total of 341
responses. Most participants scored Low in questions
regarding DCM presentation. The majority of PCPs disregarded lower-limb and
autonomic symptoms as possible DMC manifestations. Most participants checked
hyporeflexia as a typical sign of DCM; every other physical sign presented
in our questionnaire was much less chosen, although typically related to
DCM. PCPs recognise there is a lack of knowledge of DCM in primary care and
reported that it was mainly due to insufficient practising in DCM assessment
during speciality training. Having heard or had any teaching about DCM was
associated with Averagescores in questions related to
disease presentation. Regarding DCM management, conservative treatment was
always the first choice for almost 28% of the population. The main reason
for delaying the referral of a patient to specialist care is the long
waiting time for a specialist consultation. Conclusion: There
is a lack of awareness in primary care, and PCPs appear to mistake
myelopathy for radiculopathy. Our study reinforced the need to develop
diagnostic tools to facilitate DCM detection in primary care. PCPs
demonstrated interest in learning more about this condition.

## 1335

## P259: Gait characterization for patients with cervical myelopathy using
three dimensional motion capture

Miguel Ruiz Cardozo

1

, J.D. Peiffer

1

, Jie Fei

2

, Jennifer Lee

1

, Michele Santacatterina

3

, Ismael Seanez

2

, and Brenton Pennicooke

1

1

Neurosurgery

2

McKelvey School of Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis,
St. Louis, United States

3

Department of Population Health, New York University, New York,
United States

Introduction: Cervical myelopathy (CM) symptoms include
recognizable gait disturbances (with a wide, ataxic pattern) and balance
issues. Our current methods to assess functional status before and after
surgery rely on health-related quality of life metrics with poor sensitivity
and modest reliability. Kinematic analysis is an emerging tool in the
evaluation of movement dysfunction in neurologic populations. The purpose of
this study was to develop a gait analysis algorithm capable of
characterizing CM gait dysfunction compared to normal subjects using
objective measurements of motor function using a motion capture system.
Methods: A control subject without CM (male, height 1.75 m,
weight 76 kg) and a subject with CM underwent kinematic recordings before, 6
weeks and 3 months following a C5-C6 anterior discectomy and fusion (ACDF)
using a 10 camera motion capture system (Qualisys, Göteborg Sweden). Tasks
consisted of an 8-meter walking test completed at casual and fast speeds and
a tandem gait test. Each task was repeated three times. Kinematic metrics
including step length, step width, step height, joint flexion angles, and
normalized pelvic jerk were calculated from markerless pose estimation.
Results: Before surgery, the subject with CM had
significantly decreased step length (0.1 m/m) and increased step width
(0.015 m/m) when compared to control. In addition, the subject with CM had
increased normalized pelvic jerk while walking and during the tandem gait
task. Finally, the subject with CM had decreased joint flexion angles (12°
hip, 4° knee). The shorter and wider steps along with the decreased joint
angles could be a compensatory mechanism for gait disturbances caused by CM.
Further, the increased pelvic jerk indicates an unstable center of mass
during walking and while performing the tandem gait task. Following ACDF,
the subject’s pelvic jerk significantly decreased when compared to
preoperative data during both the walking and tandem gait tasks. This
indicates that their center of mass moved more smoothly over a step and
which indicates the efficacy of the spinal surgery to return y have returned
some balance. Step length and height increased as well, with the increase in
step height occurring at the 3-month timepoint indicating greater confidence
during walking. Conclusion: The subject with CM had significant
differences in kinematic metrics with the control subject before surgery.
Following surgery, these kinematic measures regressed towards the control
subject’s baseline values. These results establish kinematic measures
assessed via motion capture technology as a possible method to evaluate
neurological recovery and predict outcomes following spinal procedures.

## 1603

## P260: Spinal adhesive arachnoiditis: an underestimated entity

Jorge Morales- del Angel

1

 and Armando Díaz

1

1

Hospital Angeles Valle Oriente, Cien, San Pedro Garza García,
Mexico

Introduction: The chronic adhesive spinal arachnoiditis is a
complex entity, with multiple radiologic findings. It was first recognized
in 1909 by Horsley. In the last 55 years around 1000 cases have been
reported. This number is dramatically underrated because of the lack of
recognition, or omission of the patient. It is of uttermost importance to
recognize the spinal adhesive arachnoidtis as a complex entity with many and
various symptoms that can cause severe neurological deficit. Material
and Methods: We present the case of a 61 year old female patient
with history of multiple falls treated with spinal injections and
physiotherapy, who underwent a craniotomy and fenestration for a left
temporal arachnoid cyst. She suffered from dorsalgia, cervicalgia, and
chronic lumbalgia. The patient also experienced a shoulder arthroscopy for
joint wear. Immediately after the procedure she complained of sudden left
arm weakness and thermoalgesic stimuli alteration with C6 hypoesthesia.
Because of these symptoms a cervical MRI was performed, showing
cervicodorsal syringomyelia. The lumbar MRI exposed radiologic features
compatible with spinal adhesive arachnoiditis, with an overt clumping and
syryngomyelia caused by a spinal cord tethering phenomenon because of the
multiple adhesions. Undergoing multiple spinal injections, as well as having
brain surgery are well known risk factor for adhesive arachnoiditis, which
may have caused subarachnoid hemorrhage at some level. Results:
We performed a L4 laminoplasty and adhesiolysis. Histopathological analysis
exposed a dense tissue associated with chronic and acute inflammation. The
patient had a great recovery with MRI imaging showing a decrease in the
syryngomielia. Conclusion: The spinal adhesive arachnoiditis is
an under diagnosed entity that causes neurological deficit that can be as
severe as cuadriparesis or tetraparesis. The importance of this case lies in
the acknowledge of this disease and to remind all spine surgeons that it is
of great importance to know how to recognize this entity.

## 1699

## P261: An extremely rare case of vertebral artery dissection as the cause
of ventral spine epidural hematoma

Joana Tavares

1

, Tiago Lorga

2

, Inês Freire

2

, Cristina Branco

2

 and Ana Luís

1

1

Neurosurgery

2

Neuroradiology, Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Ocidental, Lisboa,
Portugal

Introduction: Acute spinal epidural hematoma occurring in the
absence of any trauma or iatrogenic procedure is described as spontaneous
spine epidural hematoma (SSEH) and has an incidence of 0.1/100,000
inhabitants/year. The anterior location (ventral) of the hematoma is very
uncommon since the dural sac is firmly attached to the posterior
longitudinal ligament. Vertebral artery dissection (VAD) as cause of SSEH is
extremely rare with only two cases reported in the literature.
Material and Methods: We report the case of a patient with
a VAD complicated with SSEH. Results: A 31-year-old female
presented at the emergency room (ER) with a 2h history of sudden onset
cervicalgia while resting, initially radiating to her right arm but that
very quickly progressed to bilateral cervicobraquialgia and tetraparesis. In
her medical history stood out an apparently uneventful eutocic delivery with
epidural anesthesia 4 months earlier and the diagnosis of SARS-CoV-2
infection at this ER admission. She denied any trauma, taking any medication
(including anticoagulants and antiplatelets) or prior neck pain. On
neurologic examination she presented neck stiffness, tetraparesis with
paraplegia and upper limbs severe paresis (grade 2/5 bellow C6), sensitive
level T2 e urinary retention. Neuro-axis CT showed a voluminous hyperdense
collection compatible with a spinal ventral epidural hematoma extending from
C2 to T10, with mass effect, especially between C5-T9. Angio-CT showed a
possible right VAD without other vascular malformations. She was submitted
to an emergent and uneventful C5-T9 laminectomy. Five days after the surgery
the patient was submitted to a digital subtraction angiography which
revealed a dissecting aneurysm of the right vertebral artery at V3 segment.
Given the previous hemorrhage the patient was proposed for endovascular
treatment with stents that took place one month after the event. The
procedure went without complications and the patient was discharged one week
later oriented to a rehabilitation center. At 3-month evaluation she
presented normal light touch and proprioceptive sensation, hypoesthesia for
thermic and pain sensation below T2, need for bladder emptying with clean
intermittent catheterisation when unsuccessful voiding attempt and
significantly improve in upper limbs muscle strength (4/5 at elbow extensors
bilaterally, 3/5 at grip and at finger extensors on the left side and 2/5 on
the right). In the lower limbs despite still not recovering useful strength,
she recovered to a grade 2/5 strength. Conclusion: VAD with
subsequent perivascular hemorrhage is one of the possible causes of SEEH,
especially, when ventrally located in the cervical and/or high thoracic
column. Hence the importance of a thorough investigation of the vertebral
arteries.

## 1744

## P262: Spinal intradural arachnoid cyst: a case report

Sliti Firas

1

, Alaa Belhadj

1

, Abdelhafidh Slimane

1

, Nessrine Nessib

1

, Khalil Ghedira

1

, Eya Chahed

1

, and Jalel Kallel

1

1

Neurosurgery, National Institute of Neurology, Tunis,
Tunisia

Introduction: Spinal intradural arachnoid cyst is a benign
condition of uncertain pathophysiology. It is most often asymptomatic but
can cause serious neurological sequelae especially when treatment is not
initiated in time. We report the case of a 47 years old male patient treated
at the Neurosurgery Department of the National Institute of Neurology,
Tunisia. Material and Methods: We report here the case of a 47
year old man with no notable pathological history, who consulted for
continuous back pain with bilateral sciatica evolving for 3 months, the
evolution of which was marked by the onset of intermittent medullary
claudication severely reducing the walking range, as well as the onset of
urinary disorders. On clinical examination, we find a patient suffering from
pain, with a spastic paraparesis and a pyramidal syndrome, as well as a T12
sensory level. A spinal MRI revealed an elongated well-defined epidural
lesion extending from T9 to T11 with a high T2 signal and a low T1 signal
with no enhancement. The patient was operated on via posterior approach for
cyst resection with simple postoperative course. Neurological symptoms
gradually resolved. Results: Spinal intradural arachnoid cyst
is a rare cause of spinal cord compression. It can be seen at any age; its
pathogenesis is not clear and remains a subject of debate, it can be
congenital or acquired. The clinical presentation is that of a slow spinal
cord compression. Spinal MRI is therefore essential to confirm the diagnosis
of spinal intradural arachnoid cysts and to eliminate other differential
diagnoses. It is therefore the exam of choice to study the spinal content as
a whole, to characterize the cystic nature of the lesion and to better
assess the extent of the cystic and to better appreciate the spinal cord
implications. Once the diagnosis is made, surgery is the best way to restore
the normal flow of CSF by removing the compression exerted by the cyst on
the spinal cord. The prognosis is generally good. Conclusion:
Despite its high rarity, the spinal arachnoid cyst is one of the etiologies
of spinal cord compression syndrome to think about because its diagnosis
allows for a complete cure by radical surgical treatment.

## 1986

## P263: Sarcoidosis inaugurated by vertebral lesion mimicking metastatic
disease

Mouadh Nefiss

1

, Mohamed yassine Belhedi

1

, ben aissa ali

1

, Mohamed Amine Gharbi

1

, Hedi Ezzine

1

, Ramzi Bouzidi

1

, Ezzaouia Khelil

1

, and Tborbi Anis

1

1

Orthopeadic and Traumatology, Mongi Slim Hospital, Marsa,
Tunisia

Introduction: Sarcoidosis is a systemic granulomatous disease
characterized by the formation of granulomas without necrosis in various
organs, most frequently in the lungs and lymphatic system. Because of its
complexity and heterogeneous multisystem involvement, it is usually a
diagnosis of exclusion based on a range of evidence. Bone involvement is
rare (1-13%), and vertebral involvement is even rarer. Most often, this bone
lesion is either concomitant with pulmonary or lymphatic involvement or
occurs in a known patient with the disease. To our knowledge, isolated
vertebral involvement has not been described so far. We report the case of a
young Tunisian woman presenting with back pain in connection with spinal
lesions suggestive of metastatic disease. However, biopsies were consistent
with sarcoidosis. Clinical Presentation: This is a 43-year-old
Tunisian woman with no previous history of SARS-COV2 pneumonia who presented
with bilateral, poorly systematized lumbosciatic pain without neurological
signs. An MRI of the lumbar spine was requested and came back without
abnormalities. Thus the symptomatology was linked to Covid-19 and the
patient was put on symptomatic treatment. The evolution was marked by the
improvement of the lumbosciatic pain and the appearance of back pain
associated with mixed bilateral cervico-brachial neuralgia with poorly
systematized tilt without neurological signs. Moreover, the patient reported
asthenia and a weight loss of 10 kg in one year without night sweats,
evolving in a context of apyrexia. A cerebral-medullary MRI was performed
showing spinal cord replacement lesions with vertebral compression of D4 and
epidural and foraminal extension D3-D4 and D4-D5 on the left side with
compression of the spinal cord opposite D4 and spinal cord replacement
lesions D1, D2 and D3. The metastatic origin was evoked in the first place,
from which a CT scan was requested, but no other lesion was found. This was
completed by a scannoguided biopsy of D4. Finally, the anatomopathological
examination showed epithelioid granulomatous and gigantocellular
inflammatory remodeling without caseous necrosis consistent with
sarcoidosis. The patient then received a Neofrakt brace and was referred to
internal medicine for specific medical treatment. Conclusion:
Sarcoidosis is a complex multi-systemic disease. Spinal involvement is
difficult to differentiate from metastatic lesions on MRI. Hence the
interest of biopsy and anatomopathological examination at the slightest
doubt.

## Disc Degeneration

## 68

## P264: Cervical intradural disc herniation: a systematic review

Qing Guan

1

1

Spine Surgery, The First People’s Hospital of Yibin, Yibin,
China

Background: Cervical intradural disc herniation (CIDH) is rare,
and diagnosis and treatment are challenging.We conducted a systematic review
and meta-analysis of the literature on the diagnosis and treatment of CIDH.
Method: The presentation, imaging manifestations,
diagnosis, management, prognosis and possible pathogenesis were reviewed
following Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses
guidelines. English-language studies and case reports published from
inception to recent were retrieved. Data on presentation, imaging
characteristics, diagnosis, management, outcomes and pathogenesis were
extracted. Results: Twenty articles involving 23 patients were
selected. The most common involved level was C5-6 (43.5%), followed by C6-7
(30.4%), C4-5 (13%), and C3-4 (13%). Spontaneous IDH occurred in 61% of the
patients, and relevant cervical trauma was present in 39%. Brown–Sequard’s
syndrome (56.5%), quadriparesis (34.8%), and radiculopathy (8.7%) were the
main presentations. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was the most commonly
used diagnostic technique, and the ‘‘halo” and ‘‘Y-sign” were strong
indicators of CIDH. Three (13%) patients were diagnosed as having CIDH
preoperatively, and 87% were confirmed intraoperatively. All patients
underwent surgical intervention primarily (73.9%) through an anterior
approach. Neurological function improved postoperatively in all patients but
one. Dural and arachnoid mater tears were managed by direct suture or
covering with a substitute, and only one patient sustained cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF) leakage after surgery. Conclusion: IDH mostly
involves the lower cervical spine. More than half of the patients had
spontaneous CIDH, and some had a relevant cervical trauma history. BSS was
the main presentation. It is difficult to diagnose CIDH depending on
clinical presentations and radiographic findings. Surgery is an effective
treatment for CIDH and can provide a definitive diagnosis. With meticulous
management of dural and arachnoid tears, the postoperative incidence of CSF
leakage is found to be low.

## 533

## P265: Lumbar disc herniations in females: comparative risk factors for
pre-menopausal versus post-menopausal cohorts and emerging etiopathogenesis
of disc disease in younger patients

Jake McDonnell

1

, Kielan Wilson

2

, Gráinne Cunniffe

2

, Stacey Darwish

2

, Conor Buckley

1

, and Joseph Butler

2

1

Biomedical Engineering, Trinity Biomedical Sciences Institute,
Dublin, Ireland

2

National Spinal Injuries Unit, Mater Misericordiae University
Hospital, Dublin, Ireland

Introduction: Lumbar disc disease can prove a debilitating
injury. Typically, it is believed to be a multifactorial process inclusive
of aging, obesity and abnormal biomechanical loading patterns in the spine.
Nevertheless, traditional theories of pathophysiology may not hold true for
younger populations. That serves the premise for this study, to investigate
comparative risk factors for lumbar disc herniation (LDH) in pre- and
post-menopausal female cohorts. Materials and Methods: A
retrospective review was conducted at our institution, a national tertiary
referral centre, for female patients who underwent surgery for symptomatic
lumbar disc herniation between June 2016 and May 2020. Patients were
separated into two specific cohorts; (i) those aged < 45 years of age at
the time of injury, termed the pre-menopausal cohort and (ii) those aged ≥
45 years of age at the time of injury, termed the post-menopausal cohort.
Demographic, clinical and radiological characteristics were collected and
compared between groups. Results: 110 patients were identified
(43 pre-menopausal, 67 post-menopausal). On univariate analysis, the
pre-menopausal cohort had a significantly higher BMI (29.6 kg/m2
vs 27.1 kg/m2; p = 0.02), history of LDH (p = 0.02) history of
lumbar spine surgery (p = 0.02), greater degree of psoas fat infiltration (p
< 0.001), lumbar lordosis (p < 0.01) and proportion of distal lumbar
lordosis (p = 0.01). On multivariate analysis, only psoas fat infiltration
retained its significance (OR: 1.78, 95% CI 1.22:2.97, p < 0.01).
Conclusion: Our findings show that pre-menopausal patients
who presented with LDH were at risk of LDH due to a significantly greater
degree of psoas fat infiltration when compared to the post-menopausal group.
This may be related to a possible relationship between oestrogen, adipokines
and myokines. The authors encourage further robust studies in order to
elucidate this potential relationship.

## 540

## P266: Percutaneous laser disc decompression: a prospective study with
clinical results and radiation exposure

Marc Prod'homme

1

, Grasset Didier

1

, and Duccio Boscherini

1

1

Neuro Orthopedic Center, Clinic La Source, Lausanne,
Switzerland

Introduction: In case of a contained disc herniation (CDH),
percutaneous laser disc decompression (PLDD) may be an alternative to
microdiscectomy. Its percutaneous approach aims to decompress the bulging
disc when not yet an authenticated fragment excluded from the disc.
Computerized navigation with O-arm allows more accurate surgery with the
advantage of providing no irradiation to the surgeon. The aim of the study
is to assess O-arm PLDD in terms of clinical results and irradiation.
Material and Methods: A prospective inclusion of all
consecutive patients was performed when they presented with a lumbar CDH and
related sciatica without any neurological deficit, confirmed by magnetic
resonance imaging, showing a high intensity zone, and operated on by O-arm
PLDD. Demographic data, clinical scores such as numerical rating scale of
pain (NRS) and Oswestry Disability Index (ODI) were recorded. Disc level of
the surgery, operative time and irradiation data were also collected.
Radiation exposure and its absolute risk of radiation-induced cancer (AR,
in%) were calculated using the dose length product (DLP) and the dose area
product (DAP) coming from the dosimetric report of the O-arm, and the
effective dose E was calculated according to the recommendations of the
International Commission on Radiological Protection. Complications were
collected. Results: 26 patients were included, with a follow-up
between 1 and 24 months. Mean age was 47 years. L4/5 and L5/S1 were the most
operated levels. Multi-level surgery was performed on 4 patients. Average
operative time was 32 minutes. NRS decreased from 7 to 4/10, p = 0.04. ODI
decreased from 51 to 20%, p < 0.01. Mean E was 4.03 mSv, with a related
AR of 2.1x10-4 %. No intraoperative complication occurred. One
patient presented with a contralateral recurrence after 10 days and another
with ipsilateral recurrence after 1 month and they were both scheduled for
microdiscectomy with good evolution. Conclusion: Clinical
results are encouraging. O arm PLDD was safe and effective and also
minimally invasive with an acceptable level of irradiation. This technique
plays a role in conditions where surgery is not mandatory and patients have
significant pain.

## 585

## P267: Results in patients undergoing outpatient lumbar discectomy in a
third level clinic in the city of Bogota

Mario Herrera Méndez

1

, Madeline Bilbao

1

, and Geraldine Alvarez

1

1

Spine Surgery, Clinica Universitaria Colombia, Bogota ,
Colombia

Introduction: Lumbar discectomies are the most common procedure
in spinal surgery, for two decades it has been safely performed on an
outpatient basis in the world, and it is important to report the results
that have been obtained in Bogotá, Colombia in patients undergoing lumbar
discectomy outpatient. Methodology: Descriptive observational
study in patients who underwent laminectomy, foraminotomy and
microdiscectomy between January 2014 and January 2021, evaluating pain,
postoperative complications, and readmissions 30 days after surgery among
patients with outpatient management in a high-level University Clinic
complexity. Results: From January 2014 to December 2021, 101
lumbar discectomies were performed in patients with a mean age of 41.9 years
(SD: 12.6). The median bleeding was 30 ml (IQR: 30), a median surgical time
of 63 minutes (IQR: 16), and a postoperative visual analog pain scale of 1
(IQR: 1). An improvement percentage of 100% was obtained in 52 patients. Two
patients were readmitted, one with deep vein thrombosis that required
anticoagulation with adequate evolution and another patient with dyspnea in
whom PTE was ruled out. There were no reinterventions or mortality at 30
postoperative days. Conclusion: The outpatient management of
patients undergoing lumbar discectomies in a University Clinic in Bogotá,
showed low rates of complications, few readmissions and no cases of
reintervention and mortality during the study follow-up, considering that it
is a safe procedure to perform on an outpatient basis. considering an
adequate selection of patients.
Keywords (MeSH): Diseases of the spine, hernia, laminectomy, discectomies,
ambulatory care

## 952

## P268: Predictive factors for disc degeneration at the levels above and
below instrumented posterior fusion in thoracolumbar junction
fractures

Mouldi Lamouchi

1

, Jlidi Mohamed

1

, Mohamed Hedi Gharbi

1

, Walid Bouaicha

1

, Ayachi Montassar

1

, and Selim Daas

1

1

Orthopedics and Traumatology Department, Hospital of Mohamed Taher
Maamouri, Nabeul, Tunisia

Introduction: Disc degeneration is a physiological aging
process. The disc above or below a spinal fixation appears to be exposed to
accelerated degeneration. The objective of our work is to determine the
predictive factors of adjacent segment degeneration after treatment of
thoracolumbar jonction fractures. The objective of our work is to determine
the predictive factors of adjacent segment disease (ASD) after treatment of
thoracolumbar junction fractures with posterior arthrodesis. Material
and Methods: We conducted a single-centre retrospective
descriptive and analytical study over a period of 10 years. The fractures
were classified according to the Magerl classification. The DSA was studied
before surgery and at the last follow-up according to the UCLA
classification. All fractures were operated on through a posterior approach.
Our patients were divided according to the number fixed vertebrae: a long
fixation (2 vertebrae above the fracture and 2 vertebrae below), a mixed
fixation (2 vertebrae above the fracture and one vertebra below) and a short
fixation (one vertebra above the fracture and one vertebra below).
Results: Our series included 120 patients with a mean age
of 48.39 years. The sex ratio was 1.6. The body mass index (BMI) was 28
kg/m2 with extremes of 20.7 kg/m2 and 38.21
kg/m2. The initial radiological control shows an average of
20.51° for the vertebral kyphosis, an average of 18.03° for traumatic
regional angulation of 18.03° and an average of 0.6 for the beck index. 57%
of the patients were grade 1 according to the UCLA classification. Type A3
according to the Magerl classification was the most frequent 54.2% of the
patients had a long fixation. 33 of our patients had a mixed fixation. The
short fixation was used with 22 patients. The average follow-up was 57
months. X-rays at the last follow-up showed an average of 13.49° for the
vertebral kyphosis, an average of 10.39° for the traumatic regional
angulation and an average of 0.77 for the beck index. 27% of our patients
were grade 3 or 4 according to the UCLA classification at the last
follow-up. The segment above the fractured vertebra is the most affected. In
a univariate study, the predictive factors for DSA were: BMI, age, female
gender, short fixation and Magerl type A3. In a multivariate study, the only
factor predicting osteoarthritic degeneration was age (p = 0.019). The
radiological parameters before and after surgery were not predictive
factors. Conclusion: ASD after treatment of thoracolumbar
junction fractures is commonly accepted despite some clinical discordance.
The frequency and main factors of ASD have been analyzed in various
biomechanical and clinical studies. The multifactorial nature of disc
degeneration is well established. The only predictive factor found in our
series was gender. BMI, type of fixation and type of fracture should be
taken into consideration in order to prevent adjacent segment disease during
thoracolumbar junction fixation.

## 1260

## P269: Analysis of umbilical cord stem cell-derived microparticles effects
on disc cells: implications in intervertebral disc metabolism and
regeneration

Julia Martins de Oliveira

1

, Lucas Seabra Fernandes

1

, Gustavo Ribeiro

1

, Mario Lenza

1

, Luciano Rodrigues

1

, Andrea Aparecida de Aro

2

, Rafael Maza Barbosa

2

, Alexandre Leite Rodrigues de Oliveira

2

, Eliane Antonioli

1

, and Pedro Pohl

1

1

Projeto Locomotor, Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein, São Paulo,
Brazil

2

Universidade de Campinas, Campinas, Brazil

Introduction: Spinal diseases related to intervertebral disc
degeneration (IDD) represent a public health problem due to physical and
social limitation and economic losses. Researchers have demonstrated
benefits of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) over intervertebral disc cells.
Pathways of cell-cell communication were recently identified, including a
new way of cellular communication mediated by microparticles (MPs)
(microvesicles (MVs) or extracellular exosomes), that can be isolated from
conditioned media of cellular cultures. There are different sources of MSCs
and umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cells (UC-MSCs) has got attention as a
potential cell source for regenerative medicine, as well as their MPs. Cell
free therapy is a hot topic in treatment of diseases and correlating to this
project can bring together the benefits that UC-MSCs products can provide
through their cellular microparticles. Methodology: Umbilical
cord samples will be collected for isolation of mesenchymal cells following
the protocol described. Human intervertebral disc cells will be obtained
from intervertebral disc waste material during elective spinal surgical
procedures, with the annulus fibrosus and nucleus pulposus being
anatomically separated, washed, fragmented and digested for 60 minutes at
37ºC in an enzyme solution with 0.2% pronase. The material will be subjected
to further digestion and incubated at 37° C in a humidified atmosphere of 5%
carbon dioxide and 20% oxygen and cultured in a monolayer until confluence
of 70-80%. MPs from UC-MSCs will be isolated from the culture medium of
UC-MSCs until the seventh passage. After 95% cell confluency, the cells will
be washed and incubated for 48h in a new medium. Confirmation of the
extraction of MPs from UC-MSCs will be done by direct electron microscopy
image, the criteria for MPS approval will be obtaining MPs with 0.1 to 1 µm,
validating the protocol, and reserved for use. The results will be evaluated
using flow cytometry to confirm and quantify the internalization of MPs
derived from UC-MSCs in intervertebral disc cells, AF and NP, using the
described technique. Controls will be performed with the supernatant and
culture medium without MPs. Gene expression analysis of key factors in the
production and maintenance of the extracellular matrix of intervertebral
disc cells exposed to UC-MSCs MPs will be performed in comparison to their
soluble products present in the supernatant and untreated controls. The
level of gene expression of extracellular matrix molecules by AF and NP
cells will be analyzed after 72h of treatment: collagen types I and II,
aggrecan and enzymes responsible for the degradation of the extracellular
matrix. Results: This is an ongoing project supported by AO
Spine Start-Up Grant. It is expected to present positive effects on IVD
cells when exposed to UC- MSCs MPs. We are analyzing the results, but they
are progressing well. We’ll have them by the Global Spine Congress.
Conclusion: We expect to find that UC-MSCs MPs will be
internalized by intervertebral disc cells, resulting in a change in their
gene and protein expression, stimulating the expression of aggrecan and
collagen and inhibiting the production of factors that favor the degradation
of the extracellular matrix.

## 1402

## P270: Biportal endoscopic trans-laminar approach for the lateral recess
stenosis and scontra-lateral extraforaminal disc herniation: technical
report

Jisoo Ha

1

 and Do Hyung Kim

1

1

Neurosurgery, Yonsei Okay Hospital, Gyeonggi do, South
Korea

Objective: Biportal interlaminar approach for unilateral
laminotomy and bilateral decompression (ULBD) has long been considered the
first treatment option for symptomatic lumbar degenerative disease such as
central canal stenosis or foraminal disc extrusions and stenosis.
Interlaminar approaches. It is satisfactory for central canal stenosis.
However, limited to the contra lateral side lesion with
foraminal/extraforaminal stenosis or herniated disc. If we used
‘translaminar’ approaches. It is not difficult to perform full decompression
from the central canal to the contralateral extra foraminal area. The
purpose of our study is to introduce our technique of translaminar approach
for the lesions with contra-lateral recess stenosis and extraforaminal
stenosis at the same time. Techniques: The “trans-laminar”
approach targets lamina more directly than the “inter-laminar” approach,
which used generally in central canal decompression. It is the same
principle as the full endoscopic PSLD's keyhole laminotomy for discectomy
and the thoracic decompression technique by UBE. Since the translaminar
approaches make the portal more proximally than interlaminar approaches, the
initial point of the laminotomy would be more proximal than formar
decompression. When approaching the epidural space after sufficient bone
work, the working portal becomes parallel to the exiting root-disc level
compared to the interlaminar approach. This allows access to bony spurs,
hard disks, and even to the extraforaminal area around the exiting root.
Thus, you can achieved the contra-lateral side foraminotomy more easily.
Results: We successfully performed “translaminar approach”
for the patient who got central stenosis, traversing root compression due to
contra lateral recess stenosis and even extraforaminal stenosis. There were
no complications related with surgery. VAS and ODI were significantly
improved after surgeries. Conclusion: This procedure may be a
safe and efficacious treatment option for contralateral lesions or
multiple-sites stenosis. Thus, this new-designed endoscopic based technique
could be a feasible alternative to staged decompression surgeries for
multiple site stenosis. although more cases and long-term follow up studies
are needed to obtain accurate clinical results.

## 1850

## P271: Pronostic factors for cauda equina syndrome

Nessrine Nessib

1

, Mahmoud Ben Messaoud

1

, Abdelhafidh Slimane

1

, Eya Chahed

1

, Nadhir Karmani

1

, Khalil Ghedira

1

, and Jalel Kallel

1

1

Neurosurgery, Mongi ben Hamida Institute of Neurology, Tunis,
Tunisia

Introduction: Cauda equina syndrome is a rare clinical entity
which is secondary to the compression of the cauda equina roots. It is a
diagnostic and therapeutic emergency, marked by motor, sensory and
genitourinary sequelae that may be irreversible, with a significant impact
on the patient's life and his social rehabilitation. We carried out this
study to analyze the epidemiological, clinical, para-clinical and
evolutionary characteristics and to study and identify the different
prognostic factors.
Materials and Methods: We performed a retrospective study of 54
cases of Cauda equina syndrome operated in emergency at the neurosurgery
department of the National Institute of Neurology of Tunis over a period of
10 years from 2010 to 2019. Results: The average age of our
patients was 45 years. The most represented age group was between 40 and 49
years (42.6%). Our series included 41 men (76%) and 13 women (24%). The time
course varied from one day to 6 months. Only 14.8% of the cases had a delay
of less than 48 hours. The onset was progressive in 74% of cases. The
functional signs were dominated by genital-sphincter disorders (100% of
cases). The other signs were low back pain in 79% of cases, radiculalgia in
90.7% of cases, paresthesia in 51% of cases and motor disorders in 87.1% of
cases. Perineal sensory disorders were observed in 37% of cases. Our series
included an incomplete form of cauda equina syndrome in 63% of the patients
and a complete form in 37% of the cases. Lumbar MRI, performed in all our
patients, was the examination of choice and allowed to confirm the diagnosis
and to orient the etiology. The etiological origin was dominated by lumbar
disc herniations, which were found in 87% of cases, followed by tumor causes
in 13% of cases. Urgent surgical decompression was performed in all
patients. The long-term evolution (2 years of follow-up) was stationary in
37% of the cases, favorable in 61.1% of the cases of which 33.3% had a
complete recovery, with only one case of aggravation (1.9%). Our analytical
study showed significantly a favorable evolution in the age group below 45
years. The incomplete form was significantly associated with a favorable
evolutionary prognosis. A duration of evolution lower than 48 hours is
associated with better prognosis. The presence of anaesthesia in the saddle
is a statistically significant factor of poor prognosis.
Conclusion: Cauda equina syndrome is a neurosurgical
emergency marked by severe motor and sphincter sequelae. Urgent surgical
decompression within 48 hours of the onset of signs and the incomplete form
are associated with a favorable evolution.

## 1914

## P272: Mechanical characterization of flexible and reservable support
materials for tissue engineered intervertebral discs

Pravesh Gadjradj

1

, Branden Medary

1

, Alikhan Fidai

2

, Byumsu Kim

2

, Ibrahim Hussain

1

, Roger Härtl

3

, and Lawrence Bonassar

2

1
Neurosurgery, Weill Cornell Medical College,
New York, United States

2

Biomedical Engineering, Cornell University, New York, United
States

3
Department of Neurological Surgery, Weill Cornell Medicine and
Och Spine, New York Presbyterian Hospital, New York,
United States
Introduction: An enduring challenge in implementing a tissue
engineered replacement for end stage intervertebral disc (IVD) degeneration
is mechanically stabilizing the construct at early timepoints. Previously,
polylactic acid (PLA) cages were used to provide mechanical reinforcement
for tissue engineered intervertebral discs (TE-IVDs) in a pilot minipig
study. While these materials have properties that should far exceed those
needed to support loads in the spine, stress concentrations arising from
vertebral anatomy led to failure of these implants in vivo.
Identifying materials with sufficient flexibility is key to the successful
implementation of a support cage for TE-IVDs. FlexiFil (FormFutura) is an
elastomeric 3D printer filament that is amenable to the fabrication of
support cages, but little is known on how the mechanical performance of
FlexiFil printed cages compares to PLA. Therefore, the objective of this
study was to compare the mechanical performance of printed PLA and FlexiFil
cages and assess microscale damage as revealed by scanning electron
microscopy (SEM). Methods: To assess how TE-IVD cage materials
behave under loading, force-displacement testing was performed on PLA and
FlexiFil cages. Specifically, 3 PLA and 3 FlexiFil cages with a height of
2.5 mm were printed using a Prusa i3 MK3S+. To simulate compressive forces
arising from differences in vertebral anatomy, a flat ended indenter with a
triangular cross-section was used to load samples through the mid-plane.
Printed cages were mounted and subjected to 2 mm of indentation at a rate of
0.1 mm/s. After loading, samples were sputter coated with Au-PD and imaged
using a Tescan Mira SEM. Results: Force-displacement testing
revealed that at 2 mm of indentation, PLA cages were significantly stiffer
than FlexiFil cages (p = 0.0007) with average loads of 79.6 ± 8.9 N and 30.4
± 1.3 N, respectively. Notably, plastic deformation occurred at much lower
displacements for PLA (0.98 mm) compared to FlexiFil (1.75 mm). Consistent
with mechanical testing, SEM imaging of indented cages revealed that the PLA
samples had a wide footprint of plastic deformation, extending > 2 mm
from the indentation site. Plastic deformation of PLA samples led to
delamination of printed layers and brittle failure of the material at the
indentation site. In contrast, FlexiFil samples showed only a narrow band of
plastic deformation ∼25 µm from the indentation site with no signs of
delamination or brittle failure. Discussion: Force-displacement
testing and SEM imaging reveal early yield and mechanical failure of PLA
cages. In contrast, FlexiFil was able to withstand nearly twice the
deformation without any detrimental changes in mechanical performance and
minimal damage as seen in SEM. To fully recapitulate compressive forces seen
in vivo, future work will load TE-IVD cages in a
minipig spine ex vivo. Collectively, our studies suggest
that FlexiFil is a promising material for fabricating a TE-IVD support
structure. Significance: FlexiFil cages exhibited a wider range
of elastic behavior than PLA cages, with less microscale damage. As such,
FlexiFil is a promising candidate for fabrication of support structures for
IVD tissue engineering.

## 2000

## P273: Diagnosis and management of thoracolumbar spinal disorders
presenting as cardiac, gastrointestinal, and other false pain
syndromes

Nolan Brown

1

, Angie Zhang

1

, Andrew Chan

2

, Shane Shahrestani

1

, Alexander Himstead

1

, Rohin Singh

1

, Alvin Chan

1

, Julian Gendreau

1

, Martin Pham

3

, and Michael Oh

1

1

Neurosurgery, UC Irvine, United States

2

Neurosurgery, Columbia University, United States

3

Neurosurgery, UC San Diego, Unite States

Introduction: Although pseudoangina is most commonly caused by
cervical disc herniation, several cases have been described where thoracic
herniation produced symptoms of pseudoangina. If thoracic herniation can
produce angina-like pain, then it is important to consider whether pathology
of the thoracolumbar spine in general can trigger false pain syndromes
distinct from pseudoangina. Materials and Methods: We seek to
provide the most comprehensive study regarding the diagnosis and treatment
of spinal conditions causing false pain syndromes. In order to accomplish
this objective, we queried the literature and systematically selected
relevant studies according to PRISMA guidelines. Results:
Across 22 selected studies, the sample size was 30 patients, and a total of
26 met criteria for statistical analysis. 7 (26.9%) of these
patients presented with a chief complaint of pseudoangina resulting from
thoracic disc herniation. 73.1% (19/26) of patients exhibited pain mimicking
visceral origin. Overall, 13/19 (68.4%) patients exhibited thoracic
spine disease only and 4/19 (21.1%) patients were affected at lumbar levels
only, while 2 (10.5%) patients exhibited thoracolumbar
herniation. Presentations included abdominal pain (11/19) mimicking
appendicitis or pancreatitis, flank pain mimicking renal colic (8/19), and 2
cases of scrotal pain/orchalgia. Symptom durations ranged from acute (<
24 hours) to 7 years. Treatments were reported for 18/19 patients and all
treated patients reported alleviated pain. 7/18 were managed conservatively
while 11/18 were treated surgically. Misdiagnosis resulted in unnecessary
surgery (pancreaticojejunostomy) or other invasive procedures.
Conclusion: In spinal disorders manifesting with atypical
pain syndromes, delay in proper diagnosis and unnecessary treatments can
unfortunately cause prolonged patient suffering and increased cost of
healthcare. As a result, some have proposed that spinal screening should be
incorporated into clinical examinations involving false visceral pain
syndromes.

## Epidemiology

## 47

## P274: Comparison of opioid use and prescribing patterns among orthopedic
surgeons and other orthopedic subspecialties in the United States

Chadi Tannoury

1

, Rahul Bhale

1

, Justin Koh

1

, Aziz Saade

1

, Christopher Maatouk

1

, and Tony Tannoury

1

1

Orthopaedic Surgery, Boston University, Boston, United
States

Introduction: The US opioid epidemic has received particular
attention with 33091 reported deaths from narcotic overdose in 2015. A
recent survey comparing US and Japanese opioid prescribing patterns from the
AOA-JOA traveling fellows included 76 US orthopedic surgeons representing 8
subspecialties. We used this data to compare opioid prescribing patterns
among US spine surgeons to other orthopaedic subspecialties.
Methods: The survey included data based on surgeon
demographics (gender, age, years in practice), patient baseline opioid
use(pre/post-operative opioid use, types of opioid agents, duration of
opioid use), perioperative pain management (procedure/institution factors,
multimodal analgesic therapy), and responses to questions regarding opioid
use attitudes. Survey responses were recorded as either categorical or
semi-continuous variables. Statistical analysis was performed using
chi-squared analysis for categorical responses and Kolmogorov-Smirnov
testing to a statistical significance level of p < 0.05. Parameters that
trended toward significance to p < 0.10 were also recorded. Statistical
analysis was performed using Stata statistical analysis software [StataCorp,
College Station, Texas]. Results: Spine patients were more
likely using opioid medications prior to evaluation by spine surgeons
compared to non-spine patients (p = 0.029). Patients with spine pathologies
treated non-operatively were also more likely to be prescribed opioids (p =
0.006). Post-operatively, spine patients were less likely to stop opioid
prescriptions on the intended time (p = 0.046). Peri-operatively, spine
patients were more likely to be given muscle relaxant medications, and less
likely to receive local/regional anesthesia (p = 0.0025). Additionally,
spine patients showed a trend toward association for requesting additional
opioids beyond their initial prescription (p = 0.057). Spine surgeons showed
a trend toward association for choice of opioid agent prescribed-spine
patients were less likely to receive codeine/tramadol analogs (p = 0.062).
When surveyed on opinions regarding opioid use, US spine surgeons did not
show significantly different opinions regarding opioid use compared to
surgeons in other subspecialties. Conclusion: Spine patients
did demonstrate statistically significant patterns of opioid use,
particularly regarding opioid use prior to evaluation by orthopedic surgeon
and use of opioids for nonoperative pathologies. They were also less likely
to stop opioid prescriptions on time. Surgeon prescription patterns and
perceptions of opioid use were not significantly different for spine
surgeons compared to other subspecialties.

## 70

## P275: Epidemiology of work related neck pain among spine surgeons

Sameh Abolfotouh

1

, Omar Alnori

2

, Theodore Choma

3

, Don Moore

3

, and Mostafa Abolfotouh

4

1

Orthopedics Department, MEDCARE Hospital, Dubai, United Arab
Emirates

2

Orthopedics Departmen, Hamad Medical Corporation, Doha,
Qatar

3

Spine Unit, Orthopedics Department, University of Missouri,
Missouri, United States

4

King Abdulaziz Medical City (KAMC), National Guard Health Affairs,
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia

Background: Spine surgeons are at risk of musculoskeletal pain
and injuries possibly due to their work-related activities, posture and
affected body mechanics. Aims: to investigate work-related neck
pain among spine surgeons in different AO SPINE regions, by (1) estimation
of the prevalence of work-related neck pain, and (2) determination of its
predictors, its personal and occupational consequences, and the different
management methods adopted for it. Methods: A cross-sectional
survey of 411 spine surgeon members of AO spine was conducted during
March–May 2021, using the Modified Nordic Questionnaire and the Neck
Disability Index. Data on experience of neck pain during the last 12 months,
and its consequences and risk factors were collected. Logistic regression
analysis was done to identify significant predictors of neck pain.
Statistical significance was considered at p < 0.05.
Results: The majority of spine surgeons were married (360,
92.3 %), and their average age was 45.31 ± 7.86 years, and average BMI was
26.95 ± 4.07 kg/m². They experienced 66.7% 1-year neck pain prevalence.
According to the Neck Disability Index, more than one-half (52.8%) of
surgeons experienced disability due to neck pain of mild (45.5%), moderate
(6.5%) and severe (0.8%) grades. Neck pain was responsible for stopping work
in 17.5% of surgeons, with a median 3.5 (IQR, 2-7.8) days off work during
the last year. One half of participants (56.3%) were treated by medical
care, 31.5% by physiotherapy, and 16.5% requested rest days and/or sick
leave. Physical stress (p < 0.001) and non-exercising (p = 0.04) were
significant predictors of neck pain, while demographics, workload-related
factors and the use of surgical magnification (Loupes and microscopes) were
not significantly associated with neck pain prevalence (p > 0.05 each).
Conclusion: The 12-month prevalence of neck pain was high
among spine surgeons, with an impact on activities of daily living, mostly
of mild degree, reported by one-half of surgeons. Physical stress was the
only significant predictors while sports practice was ta protective factor
of neck pain. Medication was the main management adopted. An increased focus
on pain prevention through improved workplace ergonomics, and sports
activity programs to reduce the risk of neck pain and arrange for proper
rest periods is recommended.

## 125

## P276: Analysis of the implications of cervical spine alignment on
lumbopelvic alignment

Taryn Ludwig

1

, Sarup Sridharan

1

, Ariana Frederick

1

, Brent Edwards

2

, Michael Asmussen

3

, and Fred Nicholls

1

1

Department of Surgery

2

Faculty of Kinesiology, University of Calgary, Canada

3

Department of Biology, Mount Royal University, Calgary,
Canada

Introduction: To date, normal patterns of alignment in the
cervical spine have not been conclusively defined. Previous studies have
attempted to correlate cervical spine alignment with the remainder of the
spine and pelvis. Results however, were inconsistent and limited by small
sample size. Knowledge of normal alignment is essential in evaluation and
preoperative planning for deformity correction. This study aims to establish
normative values and correlate these with established patterns of
lumbopelvic alignment. We hypothesize alignment of the cervical spine can
predict lumbopelvic morphotype. Material and Methods: Healthy
volunteers (N = 497) between 20-40 years of age with no pre-existing spine
pathology were recruited. Baseline demographics, Oswestry Disability Index,
and Neck Disability Index were collected. Whole body 2D EOS imaging was
obtained for all participants. Using a semi-automated image analysis
software (KEOPS, by SMAIO), standard measures of alignment of the pelvis,
lumbar, thoracic, and cervical spine were obtained. Roussouly morphotype
(RM) was identified for each participant. Principal components (PC) of
cervical vertebral body centroids were input into a support vector machine
algorithm to predict RM. Results: Average age of participants
was 28.4 ± 5.2 years. Fifty six percent of participants were female, average
BMI was 24.9 ± 4.2. Number of participants of each RM were: Type 1 = 26,
Type 2 = 126, Type 3 = 221, Type 4 = 124. When PC explaining 90% of
variability were used, RM was appropriately predicted as follows: Between
Type 1, 2, 3 and 4 = 50%, Type 2, 3, 4 = 53%, Type 2, 3 = 69%, Type 2, 4 =
47%, Type 3, 4 = 69%. Including nearly all PC (99.99% of the variance),
classification rates improved: Between Type 1, 2, 3 and 4 = 68%, Type 2, 3,
4 = 88%, Type 2, 3 = 89%, Type 2, 4 = 99%, Type 3, 4 = 99%.
Conclusion: This study demonstrates that a predictable
relationship between cervical and lumbopelvic alignment exists; this
relationship is sensitive to subtle features of cervical spine shape,
captured by higher order PCs. It provides a robust normative database for
cervical spine alignment and will provide insight into normal patterns of
lumbopelvic compensation with “abnormal” cervical spine alignment. Future
work will aim to classify patterns of cervical spine alignment, and identify
features specifically captured by each principal component, particularly the
higher components.

## 195

## P277: Level of spin in the abstracts of RCTs in spine surgery - an
ORG-LOC tool based assessment

Sathish Muthu

1,2

 and Girinivasan Chellamuthu

2

1

Department of Orthopaedics, Government Medical College, Dindigul,
India

2

Orthopaedic Research Group, Quality Appraisal Committee,
Coimba

Introduction: There has been a massive surge in published spine
literature in the last few years. Even in highly credible research models
like Randomised Control Trials (RCTs), many pitfalls do exist that a reader
must be aware of. One common but less explored pitfall is the spin.
Particularly in the abstracts, it is a potential source of deception.
Grading of RCTs based on spin will help readers to interpret their results
better. Hence we aim to grade the RCTs of spine surgery based on spin in
their abstracts, analyze its prevalence, and highlight on the usefulness of
spin grading for any RCT. Materials and Methods: We selected
250 recent RCTs from top 5 spine journals. Baseline data were collected.
CONSORT Adherence Score (CAS) based on the adherence of the abstracts of the
RCTS to CONSORT checklist was calculated. The abstracts of the RCTs were
graded using the Level Of Confidence (LOC) grading tool developed by the
Orthopaedic Research Group. The association of spin grade with other
characteristics of the articles were analyzed. Results: The
median CAS was 11 (IQR 10-12). Only 47.6% (n = 119) articles had High LOC
with no or one non-critical spin in abstract and 12.4% (n = 31) had Moderate
LOC with more than one non-critical spin. 28% (n = 70) had at least one
critical spin and 12% (n = 30) had more than one critical flaw making their
results have Low and Critically Low LOC respectively. Of the ten variables
analyzed in multivariate regression analysis, CAS was the only significant
factor that determines the level of confidence in the abstract of RCTs.
Conclusion: Spin based grading of RCTs is the need of the
hour to aid readers to interpret the true essence of research papers. 40% of
the RCTs in top spine journals had low to critically low LOC. Structuring of
abstracts is the way forward to prevent spin.

## 209

## P278: Does English speaking status affect post-acute care in
thoracolumbar fusions? A retrospective study in a multiethnic
population

Henry Hoang

1

, Aaron Hui

1

, Dan Berman

1

, Ananth Eleswarapu

1

, Jonathan Krystal

1

, and Zach Sharfman

1

1

Orthopedics, Montefiore Medical Center, Bronx, United
States

Introduction: English speaking status is an often-overlooked
risk factor that influences the longitudinal progression of patient care.
Obstacles such as the procurement of physician appointments, comprehension
of treatment plans, misdiagnoses, and delayed treatment are all amplified in
the setting of a language barrier. Thoracolumbar fusions are indicated for
the management of degenerative disc disease, degenerative spondylolisthesis,
spinal stenosis, tumors, and fractures with more than 300,000 performed
annually. Post-operative clinical outcomes of non-English speaking patients
who undergo thoracolumbar fusion have not been thoroughly studied. A
comprehensive understanding of the post-operative sequelae of non- English
speaking and minority patients is crucial for the development of
interventions aimed at reducing complications and post-operative
readmissions. The purpose of this study is to compare rates of readmission,
complications, and treatment durations between English and non-English
speaking patients undergoing thoracolumbar fusions. Material and
Methods: A retrospective study of 301 patients who underwent a
thoracolumbar fusion at a level 1 trauma center in the Bronx from 2016 was
performed. Demographic, surgical, and post-operative measures were
collected. The primary outcome were readmission to the emergency department
(ED) within 30 days, 90 days and chief complaint. Our secondary outcome was
length of stay defined as days patient spent in inpatient admission
post-operatively. Odds ratio were calculated using SPSS to determine
differential rates of re-presentation to the ED post-operatively. An
independent-samples t-test was run to determine if there were differences in
postoperative length of stay(days) between non-English speakers and English
speakers. Results: All 301 patients who undergone thoracolumbar
fusions in 2016 were analyzed in this study, consisting of 62 non-English
speakers and 239 English speakers. There were 7 non-English patients that
returned to ED within 30-days post-operation compared to 36 English
speakers. The odds ratio of returning to the ED within 30-days
post-operation in non-English speakers versus English speakers was 1.393
(95% CI, .588 to 3.302). There were 21 non-English speakers who returned to
the ER compared to 63 English speakers. The odds ratio of returning to the
ED within 90 days post-operation was .699 (95% CI, .384 to 1.273). There was
no significant different in length of stay between non-English speakers (7.8
± 6.4) and English speakers (8.5 ± 8.8) with a difference of 1.2 (95% -3.05
to 1.67), T (299) = -.579, p = .563. Conclusion: We have
described that a large portion of patients undergoing thoracolumbar surgery
in the Bronx present back to the ED within 30 and 90 days of operation.
English speaking status was determined not to be associated with different
rates of presentation to the emergency room within 30 and 90 days of
thoracolumbar fusion, or different lengths of stay. Taken together,
English-speaking status is not evidenced to be a risk factor that influenced
post-operative readmission of patients undergoing thoracolumbar fusion.

## 336

## P279: Epidemiological features of traumatic spinal cord injury in a
tertiary hospital in Cagayan Valley: a 5-year cross-sectional study

Jake Albert Miguel

1

 and Niccolo Mamba

1

1

Orthopaedics, Cagayan Valley Medical Center, Tuguegarao,
Philippines

Introduction: Globally, the recorded prevalence and incidence of
people with Traumatic Spinal Cord Injury (TSCI) is maybe underreported due
to the lack of a national registry system for spinal cord injuries
particularly in developing countries, hindering injury prevention, health
care, and other social planning. Numerous articles on TSCI epidemiology have
been published in Europe, North America, and Australia because most Western
nations have implemented TSCI registries or databases. In the Philippines,
Cagayan Valley Medical Center (CVMC) is the largest medical facility and has
the greatest number of admitted patients in the entire region. However,
little is known and documented about the prevalence of TSCI at this time.
The overall objective of this study is to describe the epidemiological and
demographic characteristics of patients with TSCI admitted in CVMC as well
as to determine its prevalence. Material and Methods: The
researchers retrospectively reviewed the medical records of patients with
traumatic spinal cord injuries admitted in Cagayan Valley Medical Center
from 2016 to 2020. Variables included age, sex, civil status, occupation,
and the clinical profile: mechanism of injury, spinal level of injury,
American Spinal Injury Association Impairment (ASIA) Scale, imaging studies,
treatment received (conservative or surgery), and condition upon discharge.
Results: Between 2016 and 2020, a total of 145 patients had
traumatic spinal cord injuries. The mean age of the patients was 42.13
years, and 93.10% were males with a male/female ratio of 13.5:1. The
occupations with the highest risk were the unemployed (59.31%) with falls
from a height (51.72%) were the leading cause of injuries. This was followed
by motor vehicular collisions (43.45%). The most common level of spinal
injury was the cervical region, accounting for 57.24%, with the majority of
documented cases having an American Spinal Injury Association Impairment
(ASIA) Scale of A. Nonoperative management was done in most of the cases
(80%). For those operated cases, instrumented posterior decompression and
spinal fusion were done (65.52%). Most of the patient’s conditions improved
upon discharge (57.93%) Conclusion: The result of this study is
comparable to other previous literature. The majority of the patients are
typically males sustaining injuries in the cervical spine secondary from
falls from a height in the workplace. The formulation of preventive
strategies should focus on identified high-risk groups sustaining such
injuries. In addition, to precisely document the epidemiological profile of
patients with TSCI, a standardized spine trauma form should be created.
Moreover, the establishment of a national registry system will accurately
describe the incidence and prevalence of TSCI not only in CVMC but in the
entire Philippines.

## 341

## P280: Patient reported function outcomes versus objective fitness
assessments: are patients telling the truth about their fitness
level?

Fthimnir Hassan

1

, Yen-Lou Lee

1

, LaRae Klarenbeek-Mitchell

2

, David Ruderman

2

, Eric Schaum

2

, and Lawrence Lenke

1

1

Department of Orthopaedics, Columbia University Medical Center, The
Och Spine Hospital at New York-Presbyterian, New York, United
States

2

Department of Physical Therapy, The Och Spine Hospital at New
York-Presbyterian, New York, United States

Introduction: Adult Spinal Deformity (ASD) patients
provide subjective outcomes to assess overall fitness on various patient
reported outcomes (PROs). However, these outcomes may be subject to response
bias leading pts to answer survey questions untruthfully. This analysis aims
to determine whether pt. reported fitness outcomes correlate with the
results of objective fitness assessments. Methods: ASD patients
≥ 18 who underwent prehabilitation (prehab) fitness assessments prior to
agreeing to surgery were evaluated from 2017-2020. Prehab included a variety
of fitness tests such as 5x sit-to-stand test (5xSST), gait speed, Hand Grip
Strength, and the 6 minute walk test (6MWT). Surgical factors included
surgery type, total fusion levels (TFL), total instrumented vertebrae (TIV),
and length of stay. PROs (SRS22r and ODI) were collected at preop. Prehab
measures were analyzed alongside the SRS function domain to determine
correlation using pearson/spearman correlation coefficients and multiple
linear regression (MLR). Results: Of the 39 patients evaluated,
mean age was 52 ± 11yrs, 34 (83%) were women, 25 (61%) were revision cases,
and 34 (87%) were fused to the pelvis averaging 12 ± 5 TFL, 13 ± 4 TIV and a
length of stay of 6.4 ± 2days. Preoperatively, Mean HR, SpO2, BP were 75 ±
14 bpm, 98 ± 2%, 127/80 ± 13/9 mmMg, respectively. Mean SRS22r and ODI were
65 ± 13 and 38 ± 19, respectively, with a mean SRS function domain of 3.2 ±
1. SRS function domain correlated with the following: age (r = -0.4; p =
0.0049), 5xSTT (r = -0.6; p = 0.0001), gait speed (r = 0.6; p < 0.001),
and 6MWT (r = 0.6; p < 0.0001) demonstrating weak negative, moderately
negative, moderately positive, and moderately positive correlations,
respectively. The best fitted MLR model utilized the distance covered in the
6MWT, 5xSST, age, HR, SpO2, and lung capacity to predict the outcome of the
SRS function domain leading to an Adj-R-squared = 0.5 suggesting a moderate
effect size. Conclusion: ASD PRO’s provide a subjective value
on their overall level of function that has moderate correlation to a
variety of objective fitness tests utilized in this comparative study. Thus,
it is safe to say that ASD patients are telling the truth when reporting
functional status on the SRS outcomes instrument.

## 371

## P281: Variations in treatment for vertebral compression fractures and
impact on the incidence of subsequent hip fractures

Jennifer Bell

1

, Thomas Alter

2

, Mary Kate Erdman

1,3

, Hyunwoo Kang

1,4

, Emily Mills

1

, Andy Ton

1

, Jeffrey C. Wang

1

, Ram Alluri

1

, and Raymond Hah

1

1

Orthopaedic Surgery, Keck School of Medicine of USC, Los Angeles,
United States

2

Orthopaedic Surgery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, United States

3

Orthopaedic Surgery, Harborview Medical Center, University of
Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, United States

4

Orthopaedic Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, United States

Introduction: The purpose of this study is to evaluate the
incidence of hip fractures following a vertebral compression fracture (VCF)
in patients treated with and without anti-osteoporotic medication and/or
surgical intervention. Material and Methods: A deidentified
patient database from a large, private insurer was utilized, identifying
patients from January 2007 to December 2016. Exclusion criteria were
patients less than 50 years of age and patients with less than one-year
follow-up. Patients were grouped based on if they received anti-osteoporotic
medication within one year prior to and following VCF, and whether or not
treatment included surgical intervention (vertebroplasty or kyphoplasty).
Results: Our query resulted in 73,907 patients with VCF,
66.8% of which were female. The most common age group was 70-74 (18.0%). A
total of 9,077 (12.2%) patients received surgical treatment. At one-year and
all-time follow up, 3.5% and 9.3% of patients sustained a hip fracture,
respectively. Of the surgically treated, 4.6% and 12.7% of patients suffered
a hip fracture at one-year and all-time follow up, respectively. Older,
female patients with a higher Elixhauser Comorbidity Index (ECI) had higher
hip fracture rates. A 1:3 match on age, gender, and ECI identified 648
patients initiated on new anti-osteoporotic medication following VCF and
1579 without anti-osteoporotic medication. Patients who were initiated on
AOT had higher rates of subsequent hip fractures (11.6% vs 9.4% at all-time
follow up). Conclusion: Our data displays higher rates of hip
fractures in patients with surgically treated VCF and patients initiated on
anti-osteoporotic medication following VCF. This may be due to the fact that
patients with more severe osteoporosis are more likely to be surgically and
medically treated. Further studies are necessary to identify if patients
with surgically treated VCF and patients initiated on anti-osteoporotic
medication following VCF have more severe osteoporosis at the time of index
VCF.

## 390

## P282: The relationship between handgrip strength and thoracolumbar
vertebral compression fracture

Hirokazu Inoue

1

, Yukinori Hayashi

2

, Hideaki Sawamura

1

, Atsushi Kimura

1

, Masayuki Masubuchi

2

, and Katsushi Takeshita

1

1

Department of Orthopaedics, Jichi Medical University, Shimotsuke,
Japan

2

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Shiobara Spring Hospital,
Nasushiobara, Japan

Introduction: As the elderly population grows, the number of
patients with osteoporosis is increasing, and the prevalence of
thoracolumbar vertebral compression fractures (VCFs) and hip fractures due
to falls is increasing. Loss of lower leg muscle mass and handgrip strength
are also risk factors for the development of VCF, and may be closely related
to the pathogenesis of sarcopenia. Handgrip strength (HGS) is easy to
measure and useful, so it has been used to predict the patient’s condition
in many studies. This study assesses the relationship between HGS and
activities of daily living (ADL), walking speed, and calf circumference for
VCF. Material and Methods: A cross-sectional study in a single
hospital was performed, and elderly patients diagnosed with VCF were
enrolled. After admission, we evaluated HGS, 10m-walk test (speed), Barthel
Index, Berg Balance Score (BBS), numerical rating scale (NRS) of body pain,
and calf circumference. We used low HGS (< 28 kg for male and < 18 kg
for female) and walking speed < 1.0 m/s to define sarcopenia in this
study, according to the 2019 Asian Working Group for Sarcopenia. A
multi-frequency validated bioelectrical impedance analysis instrument, the
Inbody S10 (Biospace, Seoul, Korea), was performed with the patient in the
supine position. Skeletal muscle mass and fat mass were also measured.
Skeletal muscle mass index (SMI) was the measured skeletal muscle mass
divided by the square of the height in meters. Results: A total
of 112 patients who admitted for VCF were included in this study (26 males,
86 females; mean age 83.3 years). The prevalence of sarcopenia according to
2019 Asian Working Group for Sarcopenia guideline was 61.6%. HGS was
significantly correlated with walking speed (p < 0.001, r = 0.485),
Barthel index (p < 0.001, r = 0.430), BBS (p < 0.001, r = 0.511), calf
circumference (p < 0.001, r = 0.491), and SMI (p < 0.001, r = 0.629).
Height, weight, age, and muscle mass were correlated with HGS, but body mass
index and NRS were not correlated with HGS. Conclusion:
Sarcopenia was 61.6% in the patients with VCF. HGS is associated with
walking speed, muscle mass, ADL such as Barthel index and BBS in the
patients with thoracolumbar VCF. HGS is suggested to be important as a
parameter of ADL as well as whole-body muscle strength.

## 455

## P283: Correlation between neurological compromise and projectile
trajectory in vertebral gunshot injuries; a case series study

Juan Mandujano-Sanchez

1

, Jose Maria Jimenez Avila

1

, Fernando Carrillo

1

, and Hao Hua Wu

2

1

Clínica de Columna, Campus Guadalajara, Instituto Tecnológico y de
Estudios Superiores de Monterrey, Zapopan, Mexico

2

Orthopaedic Spine Service, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston,
United States

Introduction: Gunshot wounds to the spine account for about 13
to 17% of spinal trauma today, being the third leading cause of spinal cord
injury only behind car accidents and fall from heights. Trajectory of the
projectile and its anatomical location infer the neurological status of the
patient and its prognosis. Material and Methods: Retrospective,
descriptive case series study which included 50 patients with spinal gunshot
wounds diagnosed by simple CT scan who arrived at a first level trauma
hospital from July 2019 to July 2021. Firearm projectile trajectory was
assessed through the GATA SMI classification. Type I: anteroposterior, type
II: Tangential to spinal canal (oblique trajectory) type III: Side-to-side
trajectory (bullet passed through both facet joints and/or pedicles) and
type IV: Tangential to vertebral column (oblique trajectory). Neurological
compromise was assessed through ASIA International Standards for
Neurological Classification of Spinal Cord Injury (ISNCSCI). Neurological
and projectile trajectory correlation was described using correlation
charts. Results: 50 patients were included. 82% were men and
18% women, the average age was 32.66 years. Thoracic spine injuries were the
most prevalent with 46% of the total. 54% of patients had complete spinal
cord injury (ASIA A). Type III trajectory had more patients with complete
spinal cord injury with 57% of the total in ASIA A. The thoracic segment
presented a higher prevalence of complete spinal cord injury with 67% of all
patients in ASIA A. 14% presented a type I trajectory, 32% a type II
trajectory, 42% type III and 12% type IV according to the GATA SMI
classification. Conclusion: The neurological status of the
patient who presents with a gunshot wound to the spine will depend on the
trajectory of the projectile in relation to the spinal cord and the segment
of the spine affected. The thoracic segment is the segment with the highest
incidence of GS injuries and the one with the highest incidence of complete
spinal cord injury (ASIA A). The type III trajectory according to the GATA
SMI classification presented the highest incidence of patients with complete
spinal cord injury. The type IV trajectory, being a tangential lesion that
does not cross the spinal canal, presented the lowest number of patients
with spinal cord injury. None of these patients presented complete spinal
cord injury. Knowing the projectile trajectory and neurological status in
spinal GS injuries can help ER and spine doctors to determine the prognosis
and the use of future treatment algorithms for patient care.

## 457

## P284: The incidence of vertebral compression fractures and spinal
instability in newly diagnosed multiple myeloma patients

Hester Zijlstra

1,2

, Nienke Wolterbeek

1

, Noa Ponds

1

, Harry Koene

3

, Wim Terpstra

4

, Diyar Delawi

1

, and Diederik Kempen

2

1

Department of Orthopedic Surgery, St. Antonius Hospital, Utrecht,
The Netherlands

2

Department of Orthopedic Surgery

3

Department of Hematology/Oncology, St. Antonius Hospital,
Nieuwegein, The Netherlands

4

Department of Hematology/Oncology, OLVG Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands

Introduction: Multiple myeloma (MM) is a malignant neoplastic
plasma cell disorder that is characterized by clonal proliferation of
malignant plasma cells in the bone marrow. These plasma cell proliferations
often cause extensive skeletal destruction with scattered osteolytic bone
lesions. Myeloma bone lesions are frequently located in de spine and are
associated with severe and debilitating bone pain, pathologic fractures, and
increased mortality. With this study, we aim to investigate the incidence of
vertebral compression fractures (VCFs) and spinal instability in patients
with multiple myeloma. Material and Methods: Newly diagnosed
patients with MM with computed tomography (CT) scans of the spine within 3
months of diagnosis were identified through an electronic patient database.
Relevant clinical baseline data were extracted from the patient charts.
Affected levels were graded on a CT-scan following the Genant grading system
and spinal instability was assessed through the Spinal Instability
Neoplastic Score (SINS). Results: A total of 385 patients with
6,289 eligible vertebrae were included in the study. Mean age at diagnosis
was 67 years and 60% were male. At least one VCF was present in 180 patients
(46.8%). A quarter of fractures were classified as severe according to the
Genant grading system. The incidence of fractures was found to increase with
more advanced disease stage and men were more likely to have a fracture than
women. Conclusion: Our data show that almost half of multiple
myeloma patients present with one or more VCFs at the onset of their disease
of which almost 20% was classified as instable, meaning a surgical
consultation is recommended. While no association between VFCs at baseline
and survival was found, the number of VFCs was associated with a more
advanced disease stage.

## 467

## P285: Independent prognostic factors associated with improved
patient-reported outcomes in the Prospective Evaluation of Elderly Deformity
Surgery (PEEDS) study: can we identify "the winners"?

Fthimnir Hassan

1

, Sigurd Berven

2

, Michael Kelly

3

, Justin Smith

4

, Christopher Shaffrey

5

, Benny Dahl

6

, Marinus De Kleuver

7

, Maarten Spruit

8

, Ferran Pellisé Urquiza

9

, Kenneth Man Chee Cheung

10

, Ahmet Alanay

11

, David Polly

12

, Jonathan N. Sembrano

12

, Yukihiro Matsuyama

13

, Yong Qiu

14

, Stephen Lewis

15

, Lawrence Lenke

1

, and AO Spine KF Deformity

16

1

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Columbia University Medical
Center, The Och Spine Hospital at New York-Presbyterian, New York,
United States

2

Department of Neurosurgery and Orthopaedic Surgery, University of
California San Francisco Medical Center, United States

3

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Washington University - SOM St.
Louis, United States

4

Department of Neurosurgery, University of Virginia Medical Center,
Charlottesville, United States

5

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Duke University, Durham, United
States,

6

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Copenhagen,
Denmark, United States

7

Department of Orthopedics, Radboud University Medical Center,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands

8

Sint Maartenskliniek, Nijmegen, The Netherlands

9

Hospital Universitari de la Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain

10

Department of Orthopaedics and Traumatology, The University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong

11

Department of Orthopaedics and Traumatology, Acibadem Mehmet Ali
Aydinlar University School of Medicine, Istanbul

12

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, United States

13

Department of Orthopedic Surgery,Hamamatsu University School of
Medicine, Hamamatsu, Japan

14

Spine Surgery, Drum Tower Hospital of Nanjing University Medical
School, China

15

Department of Surgery and Spine Program, University of Toronto,
Canada

16

AO Spine Knowledge Forum Deformity

Introduction: Surgery for spinal deformity in the elderly can be
effective, but outcomes are difficult to predict resulting in a large
variation in outcomes. To identify patients who will predictably benefit
from surgery, this study aimed to identify independent prognostic factors
that can be associated with improved PROs and achieving minimal clinically
important difference(MCID) among ASD patients ≥ 60 years of age undergoing
primary reconstructive surgery. Methods: A prospective,
multicenter, multi-continental, observational longitudinal study was
conducted of patients ≥ 60 years undergoing primary ASD surgery and having ≥
5 levels fused. Three approaches were used to assess MCID:(1) absolute
change – 0.5 point increase in the SRS-22r sub-total/0.18 point increase in
the EQ-5D index;(2) relative change – 15% increase in the SRS-22r sub-total
and in the EQ-5D index;(3) relative change with a cut-off in the outcome at
baseline – 15% increase in the SRS-22r score and EQ-5D index with a baseline
score ≤ 3.2 and ≤ 0.7, respectively. Results: 171 patients
completed the SRS-22r and 170 patients completed the EQ-5D at baseline and 2
years postop. 74% and 75% of patients reached MCID in the SRS22r in both the
absolute and relative approaches, respectively. Patients who reached MCID
experienced more pain and worse health at baseline
(absolute:EQ-5D:0.5 ± 0.2 vs 0.6 ± 0.2, p = 0.009;
SRS-22r: 2.6 ± 0.6 vs 3.0 ± 0.6, p = 0.002; relative:EQ-5D:
0.5 ± 0.2 vs 0.6 ± 0.2, p = 0.001;SRS-22r:2.6 ± 0.6 vs 3.0 ± 0.6, p <
0.001). Baseline PRO scores and number of severe adverse events (AEs) were
the only identified risk factors (absolute: no. of AEs:OR =
0.48 [0.28 – 0.82, p = 0.044]; EQ-5D:OR = 0.01 [0.00 – 0.12], p = 0.003;
relative: no. of AEs:OR = 0.39 [0.23 – 0.69, p =
0.007]; EQ-5D:OR: 0.00 [0.00 – 0.07], p < 0.001). 51% and 62% of patients
reached MCID in the EQ-5D using the aforementioned approaches, respectively,
demonstrating similar characteristics regarding pain and health at baseline
(absolute: ODI:48.6 ± 14.1 vs 42.1 ± 15.8, p = 0.017;
relative: ODI:47.7 ± 15.4 vs 41.5 ± 14.3, p = 0.017).
Baseline PROs and number of severe AEs were identified as risk factors
(absolute: no. of AEs:OR = 0.58 [0.38 – 0.89], p =
0.024; ODI:OR = 1.05, [1.02 – 1.07], p < 0.001;
relative: SRS22r:OR = 0.31 [0.16 – 0.57], p <
0.001). In the relative/cutoff approach, 81% reached
MCID in the SRS22r. These patients experienced worse health at baseline
(EQ-5D:0.5 ± 0.2 vs 0.6 ± 0.2, p = 0.040). The number of AEs and baseline
PROs were the only identified risk factors (no. of AEs: OR = 0.44, [0.25 –
0.77], p = 0.007; EQ-5D:OR: 0.01 [0.00 – 0.22], p = 0.007). 83% of patients
reached MCID with the EQ-5D index using the same approach. Patients
experienced less AEs (1.3 ± 1.7 vs 3.1 ± 2.8, p = 0.001) and a lower number
of actions taken due to the occurrence of AEs (1.0 ± 1.2 vs 2.9 ± 2.6, p
< 0.001). The number of actions taken due to AEs (OR = 0.50 [0.35 –
0.73], p < 0.001) was found to be the only risk factor. No surgical,
clinical, or radiographic variables were identified as risk factors using
either of the aforementioned approaches. Conclusion: In this
large multicenter prospective cohort of elderly patients undergoing primary
reconstructive surgery for ASD, surprisingly no clinical, radiological, or
surgical parameters were identified as factors that can be prognostic for
reaching MCID. However, patients who experienced more pain at baseline were
more likely to reach MCID. Conversely, patients who experienced severe AEs
were less likely to reach MCID.

## 578

## P286: The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on ambulatory lumbar spine
decompression surgery

Yusuke Dodo

1,2

, Ichiro Okano

2

, Neil Kelly

3

, Leonardo Sanchez

3

, Haffer Henryk

1

, Maximilian Muellner

1

, Erika Chiapparelli

1

, Lisa Oezel

1

, Jennifer Shue

1

, Darren Lebl

1

, Frank Cammisa

1

, Federico Girardi

1

, Alexander Hughes

1

, Gbolabo Sokunbi

1

, and Andrew Sama

1

1

Spine Care Institute, Hospital for Special Surgery, New York, United
States

2

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Showa University Hospital,
Shinagawa, Japan

3

Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, United States

Introduction: The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) outbreak
spread worldwide in a rapid and unpredicted scale in the beginning of 2020.
During the height of the pandemic, the U.S. Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services (CMS) announced that all elective surgery should be
delayed to enhance the clinical response to COVID-19. This recommendation
led to clinical and ethical challenges for spine surgeons in deciding
practical management and triaging of patients. However, little is known on
how the pandemic affected surgeons’ and patients’ attitudes towards
ambulatory spinal surgery, including factors such as patient selection, and
hospital length of stay (LOS). This study aim to investigate patient
characteristics and hospital LOS trends during the pre-pandemic period and
three pandemic stages in patients undergoing lumbar decompression procedures
in the ambulatory surgery (AMS) setting. Material and Methods:
A total of 2670 adult patients undergoing one- or two-level lumbar
decompression surgery planned for AMS were retrospectively reviewed.
Patients were categorized into four groups: 1: pre-pandemic (before the
pandemic restriction from January 1, 2019 to March 16, 2020), 2: restricted
period (when elective surgery was cancelled from March 17, 2020 to June 30,
2020), 3: post-restricted 2020 (July 1, 2020 to December 31, 2020 before
vaccination) and 4: post-restricted 2021 (January 1, 2021 to December 31,
2021 after vaccination). Data on patient demographics, comorbidities, LOS,
admission patient class, surgical information, and administrative
information was collected. Simple and multivariable logistic regression
analyses as well as retrospective interrupted time series (ITS) analysis
were conducted comparing AMS patients in the four periods.
Results: 1096 patients were classified as pre-pandemic, 128
patients as restricted, 481 patients as post-restricted 2020, and 965
patients as post-restricted 2021. The three pandemic periods had a lower
admission rate (7.8% to 9.1%) compared to the pre-pandemic period (13.2%).
The ITS analysis demonstrated a significant drop in mean LOS at the
beginning of the restricted period. Hospital LOS gradually increased after
the sudden drop and recovered to the pre-pandemic levels in one year’s time.
Compared to the pre-pandemic period, the patients who underwent surgery
during the restricted period were younger and had fewer comorbidities. After
adjusting for these patient factors, post-restricted 2020 patients still
showed significant association with decreased LOS. Multivariable logistic
regression analyses indicated that the pandemic was an independent factor
influencing the LOS in post-restricted phases. Conclusion: Our
results suggest that spine surgery patients from the restricted period were
younger and healthier, which led to a shorter LOS. Hospital LOS that
significantly decreased in the beginning of the restricted period gradually
increased and recovered to the pre-pandemic levels in one year’s time. Since
the results might be independently influenced by the pandemic, these results
should be taken into account when interpreting the LOS of the patients
undergoing ambulatory lumbar spine surgery in post-restricted phases.

## 728

## P287: Epidemiology of scoliosis in the United Arab Emirates (UAE) -
single centre experience

Ziad Mohamed

1

 and Antony Michael

1

1

Neuro Spinal Hospital, Dubai, United Arab Emirates

Purpose: To explore the demographics and clinical presentation
of patients with scoliosis in the United Arab Emirates.
Methods: A questionnaire was filled from the medical
records of the patients with scoliosis who had been seen in our hospital.
The questionnaire was specifically devised for this study and included
questions on patient demographics and clinical presentation. Responses were
expressed as frequencies for qualitative analysis. Results: One
hundred and forty-five patients were included in the study, of which 102
(71%) were female, and 50 (35%) were of the Emirati ethnicity. Ninety-six
patients (67%) had a neuromuscular disease, and 88 patients (61%) primarily
presented with back pain. The onset of scoliosis did not arise until after
age 10 in 115 (80%) of patients, and the degree of spinal curvature was more
than 25-degrees in 107 (74%) of patients. Conclusion: Scoliosis
is more prevalent in females and those of Emirati origin in the UAE.
Furthermore, patients with neuromuscular disease are at an increased risk of
developing scoliosis, as corroborated by the current literature, with back
pain as the primary presentation. No notable findings with regards to
delayed developmental milestones or family history were observed. Future
research should focus on quantitative outcomes and adopt a prospective or
retrospective design to yield valid and reproducible evidence.
Keywords: Scoliosis, qualitative, idiopathic scoliosis, nonidiopathic
scoliosis, UAE

## 738

## P288: Metropolitan versus non-metropolitan location of patients' zip code
before surgery and outcomes of lumbar spine fusion surgery: a retrospective
cohort study analysis

Alexander Aguirre

1

, Mohamed Soliman

1,2

, Cathleen Kuo

1

, Joseph Iskander

1

, Justin Im

1

, Hannon Levy

1

, Asham Khan

1

, Moleca Ghannam

1

, Patrick Jowdy

1

, John Pollina

1

, and Jeffrey Mullin

1

1

Neurosurgery, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, United States

2

Neurosurgery, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt

Introduction: Tertiary medical centers are often located in the
middle of large metropolitan areas. The distance or access to these
institutions can be a hurdle for patients seeking surgical intervention for
spine pathology. The objective of this study was to investigate and report
the surgical outcomes of patients located in both metropolitan and
non-metropolitan areas. The objective of this study was to investigate and
report the surgical outcomes of patients located in both metropolitan and
non-metropolitan areas. Material and Methods: A retrospective
chart review was completed of 792 consecutive patients who underwent lumbar
spine fusion. Once these patients were identified, an analysis of their zip
code was completed using the most updated United States Department of
Agriculture Rural-Urban Continuum Codes. Once this was established, a
statistical analysis was completed to investigate potential differences in
outcomes during and after spine fusion surgeries. Results: A
total of 660 (83.3%) patients lived in a metropolitan area, with the
remaining 132 (16.7%) patients living in a non-metropolitan area. The
distribution of race (p < 0.001) and gender (p = 0.04) differed
significantly between the two groups, as a larger proportion of African
American/Black and a greater proportion of men lived in metropolitan areas.
15 (1.9%) patients required admittance to the intensive care unit (ICU), of
which a significantly greater proportion of these patients came from a
non-metropolitan area (5.3% vs. 1.2%, p = 0.005). No other intraoperative or
postoperative outcomes differed significantly between groups.
Conclusion: Accessibility to healthcare to tertiary
hospitals that can complete complex surgical interventions is not equal in
all parts of the country, which can significantly impact the outcomes of
spine surgery.

## 840

## P289: Median household income based in patients' zip code and
perioperative surgical outcomes after lumbar spine fusions: a retrospective
cohort analysis

Alexander Aguirre

1

, Mohamed Soliman

1,2

, Cathleen Kuo

1

, Marissa Kruk

1

, Joseph Iskander

1

, Hannon Levy

1

, Asham Khan

1

, Moleca Ghannam

1

, Patrick Jowdy

1

, John Pollina

1

, and Jeffrey Mullin

1

1

Neurosurgery, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, United States

2

Neurosurgery, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt

Introduction: The social determinants of health have long been
investigated and a strong negative association between them and the outcomes
after spinal fusions has proven significant. The impact of economic
instability has been shown to correlate with increased rates of hospital
readmission and increased length of stay (LOS). However, the current study
reports the findings between the mean household income and intraoperative
and postoperative outcomes. The current study aimed to report the findings
between the mean household income and intraoperative and postoperative
outcomes. Material and Methods: A total of 792 consecutive
patients who underwent a spine fusion were identified and then data was
collected, which included the patients’ zip code at the time of surgery and
both intraoperative and postoperative outcomes. Using the 2020 United States
Census report, the median household income for each zip code was identified.
Within the sample, a quartile distribution was completed, and an analysis
was completed between the median household income quartile and perioperative
outcomes. Results: Of the 792 patients, 193 (24.4%) were in the
lowest quartile, 124 (15.7%) in the second, 171 (21.6%) in the third, and
304 (38.4%) in the fourth quartile of median household income. Distribution
of races (p < 0.001), gender (p = 0.005), and metropolitan vs.
non-metropolitan location (p < 0.001) all differed significantly with
increased rates of the African American/Black race, women, and metropolitan
location in the lower quartiles. No rates of postoperative complications or
perioperative surgical outcomes differed significantly between quartiles.
Conclusion: While the median household income differs
significantly among patients who undergo spine fusions, the surgical
outcomes of patients are independent of the patients socioeconomic
status.

## 931

## P290: Prevalence of low back and assessment of risk factors for
development of low back pain in patients care at a school hospital in the
Eastern Area of São Paulo

Luiz Claudio Rodrigues

1

, Fernanda Andrea Navarro

2

, Rodrigo Nakao

2

, and Nathalia Adelina Pereira

1

1

Spine Surgery, Santa Marcelina College of Medicine, São Paulo,
Brazil

2

Spine Surgery, Santa Marcelina Hospital, São Paulo, Brazil

Introduction: Low back pain is part of a range of
musculoskeletal disorders (MSD), considered important health problems that
can significantly affect people's quality of life. The diagnosis requires a
careful anamnesis and a good physical examination. The risk factors involved
are possibly linked to psychosocial, behavioral, and occupational aspects
such as high task demand, dissatisfaction with the work environment, as well
as lower socioeconomic status, obesity, smoking, sedentary lifestyle, and
sleep quality.
Objective: To determine the prevalence of low back pain and
establish a correlation with risk factors for the development of low back
pain in a Teaching Hospital in the East Zone of São Paulo.
Methodology: This is a cross-sectional observational
analytical study, interviewing 90 patients from the wards of Hospital Escola
using internationally validated instruments. They were asked about
clinical/epidemiological and behavioral aspects. Results: The
prevalence rate obtained was 57.73%, considered high compared to the rates
of those surveyed carried out outside the hospital environment. 30.13%
female predominance with a standard deviation of 5.32%. Sleep disorders seem
to act as a risk factor, indirectly measured through hours of sleep and the
mean pain score (p = 0.007). Pain assessment instruments seem to be more
effective when used together, seen in the association between the Owestry
questionnaire (ODI) and analogue pain scale (VAS) (p = 0.000).
Conclusion: There is a higher prevalence rate of low back
pain among institutionalized individuals, mainly hospitalized, compared to
rates observed outside this context of hospitalization. Therefore, more
research needs to be carried out in this area, since there are difficulties
in finding systematic studies carried out in Brazil that discuss the
prevalence rates of low back pain in the population and among its
subgroups.

## 972

## P291: Underweight as a risk factor for vertebral fracture: nationwide
cohort study

Jiwon Park

1

, Joonhyeok Boo

1

, and Jae-Young Hong

1

1

Orthopaedic Surgery, Korea University Ansan Hospital, Ansan, South
Korea

Introduction: Underweight, a known risk factor for osteoporosis
and sarcopenia that is strongly associated with vertebral fractures,
particularly in the elderly, can accelerate bone loss, contribute to
impaired coordination, and increase the risk of falls in the elderly as well
as the general population. The purpose of this study is to identify the
degree of underweight as a risk factor for vertebral fractures in the South
Korean population. Material and Methods: This study included
data from nationwide regular health checkup in 2009 conducted by the Korean
National Health Insurance Service. Participants were followed up from 2010
to2018 to find incidence of newly developed fractures. Based on their body
mass index, the study population was categorized into normal (18.50-22.99
kg/m2), mild underweight (17.50-18.49kg/m2), moderate underweight
(16.50-17.49 kg/m2), and severe underweight (< 16.50
kg/m2) groups. Cox proportional hazards analyses were
performed to calculate the hazard ratios for vertebral fractures based on
the degree of underweight with respect to normal weight to identify the
associated risk. Results: This study evaluated 962,533 eligible
participants, of whom 907,484 were classified as normal weight, 36,283 as
mild underweight, 13,071 as moderate underweight, and 5,695 as severe
underweight. The adjusted hazard ratio of vertebral fractures increased as
the degree of under weight increased. Severe underweight was associated with
a higher likelihood of occurrence of vertebral fractures. The adjusted
hazard ratio was 1.11 (95% confidence interval,1.04-1.17) in the mild
underweight group, 1.15 (1.06-1.25) in the moderate underweight group, and
1.26 (1.14-1.40) in the severe underweight group when compared with the
normal weight group. Conclusion: Underweight is a risk factor
for vertebral fractures in the general population. Furthermore, underweight
of greater severity was associated with a higher risk of vertebral
fractures, even after adjustment for other factors. Clinician can educate
the patients to gain weight through adequate nutritional support and
exercise in order to reduce the risk of the vertebral fractures in under
weight patients.

## 988

## P292: Traumatic versus non traumatic spinal cord injury: epidemiological
data from Bio Bio Province, Chile

Oscar González

1,2

, Boris Fuentealba

2

, and Cristian Flores Ferrada

2

1

Neurology, Universidad Católica de la Santísima Concepción,
Concepción, Chile

2

Neurosurgery, Complejo Asistencial Víctor Ríos Ruíz, Los Ángeles,
Chile

Introduction: Spinal cord injury (SCI) is a devastating
condition that can lead to significant neurological impairment and reduced
quality of life. Literature about SCI epidemiology in Chile is sparse. The
aim of the study is to describe the characteristics of patients with SCI
admitted to our Center and compare outcome for patients with traumatic
(TSCI) and non-traumatic spinal cord injuries (NTSCI) after primary
rehabilitation regarding neurological improvement, length of stay and
complications. Material and Methods: We reviewed
retrospectively 51 patients hospitalized in our center, admitted to the
neurosurgery unit over the last decade. Data was collected from their
initial admission and from follow-up and electronics records. Statistical
analysis was performed using Microsoft Excel 2010 and STATA v12.
Results: All 51 cases. Mean age was 44,2 (SD: 17 - 82)
years. 86.2% were men (44/51), 62.7% TSCI and 37.3% NTSCI. In the TSCI
group: mean age was 41.1 years, 87.5% (28/32) were men and 12.5% (4/32) were
women. In the NTSCI group: mean age was 49 years, 84.2% (16/19) were men and
15.8% (3/19) were women. The leading causes of TSCI was Diving Injuries and
Falls, follow by fire weapons injuries and traffic accidents. The main
causes of NTSCI was Tumors, follow by degenerative and infectious conditions
of the spine. Length of Hospital stays was longer in TSCI group 29.8 vs. 24
days. Urinary tract infections frequency were similar in both groups TSCI
(21.9%) vs NTSCI (21%). Pressure ulcers were more frequent among TSCI
(21.9%) vs NTSCI (5.3%). Pneumonia were more frequent in TSCI (31.3%) vs
NTSCI (5.3%). Neurogenic bladder were more frequent in TSCI (75%) vs NTSCI
(63.2%). At discharge, 56.3% in TSCI group were able to walk vs 42.1% in
NTSCI group. The rate of surgery was similar in both group TSCI (65.6%) vs
NTSCI (63.2%). 37.5% in TSCI group improve ASIA score vs 26.3% in NTSCI
Group. Conclusion: For the first time, we are able to provide
local epidemiological status on TSCI and NTSCI based on available data from
hospital registry in Biobío Province, Chile. Further studies are required to
improve the capture of TSCI and NTSCI for future studies. Patients with SCI
have a rehabilitation potential regardless of etiology. Complications are
frequent in both groups and often prolong hospitalization. Complication
patterns differ between the two groups, and specific prevention and optimal
treatment will shorten and optimize the length of primary
rehabilitation.

## 1005

## P293: Familial arachnoiditis with syringomyelia: analysis of a family of
15 affected individuals and a systematic review

Ali Moghaddamjou

1

, Alex Bak

2

, Francois Mathieu

1

, Jerry Ku

1

, and Michael Fehlings

1

1

Neurosurgery, University of Toronto, Canada

2

University of Toronto, Canada

Introduction: We report a case of a 61-year-old male with
non-communicating thoracic syringomyelia living in Canada of Japanese
descent with 15 known family members with the same condition . Most cases of
idiopathic syringomyelia are sporadic, with no family history of the
disease. Familial syringomyelia is an extremely rare form of non-traumatic
spinal cord injury and is defined by the presence of syringomyelic cavities
in 2 or more patients within the same family. Our patient has been diagnosed
in 2011 and after an initial progressive phase causing significant lower
extremity spasticity, has remained clinically and radiologically stable. He
has no history of trauma, Chiari malformation or associated scoliosis. He
has been started on riluzole 50 mg b.i.d. as an off-label use since 2017. We
aim to report on our case of familial arachnoiditis with syringomyelia and
to conduct a systematic review of similar cases to provide a summary of our
current understanding of this condition. Material and Methods:
Ten keywords relating to familial trait and 23 keywords relating to
syringomyelia were used as search terms on MEDLINE, EMBASE and Cochrane
libraries. Abstracts were screened by two reviewers following the PRIMSA
checklist. Papers reporting cases of familial syringomyelia in English were
included for quantitative analysis. Results: The search
revealed 476 results of which 25 were included in the quantitative analysis.
Overall, there are 131 cases reported of which 16% had associated scoliosis
and 65% associated Chiari Malformation. Most of the patients had surgery as
a treatment (71.7%). Among reported outcomes, most patients showed
improvement in their symptoms (n = 18). This was followed by patients that
showed stable symptoms (n = 9) after treatment. Four patients showed
progression of symptoms and one patient experienced peri-operative death
after treatment for FS. Conclusion: After a systematic review
of the current English literature, we can conclude that our case is one of
the largest known family clusters of syringomyelia not associated with a
Chiari Malformation in North America. Although it is difficult to
demonstrate efficacy, we propose the off-label use of riluzole as a
potential conservative therapy. Apart from these results, there is basic
science support for the use riluzole for arachnoiditis-associated secondary
injury. Given the autosomal dominant pattern in our case, whole exome
sequencing would be an interesting avenue of investigation into the
pathophysiology of this condition. Currently there are no known genetic
causes.

## 1017

## P294: The experience of junior spine surgeon in their first years after
the AO Spine fellowship in Latin America

Jose Dangond

1

, Alfredo Guiroy

2

, Guisela Quinteros Rivas

3

, Pedro Couri

4

, omar marroquin

5

, Fernando Alvarado Gómez

6

, and Nelson Astur

4

1

Fundación Clinica Campbell/ Centro Hospitalario Serena del Mar,
Atlántico/Bolivar, Barranquilla, Brazil

2
Hospital Español de Mendoza, Mendoza, Argentina,

3

Hospital Regional de Talca, Talca, Chile

4

Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein, Sao Paulo, Brazil

5

Centro Médico Esperanza, Puebla, Mexico

6

Fundacion Santa Fe de Bogota, Bogota, Colombia

Study Design: Descriptive study. Introduction:
Currently there are no publications that show the reality faced by junior
spine surgeons in Latin America in the first three years after completing
the AO Spine fellowship; This descriptive study is a direct way to show the
relevance and importance of the AO Spine fellowship program in Latin America
and also opens the doors to new studies that will help improve the AO Spine
fellowship program. Objective: Describe the reality and
actuality of the fellows trained by AO Spine in Latin America and describe
fears faced by a junior spine surgeon in his first three years as a surgeon.
Material and Methods: We send to all AOSpine Associate
Fellows of the last 5 years a questionnaire or survey with multiple answers
about their professional activity in the first 3 years of practice after the
fellow has finished their studies; The results will be analyzed
comparatively country by country according to the activity carried out and
the answers given by the surgeons and in this way we will be able to
describe the local and regional results in Latin America.
Results: Currently, the countries with the highest
participation in the AO Spine fellowship program are Argentina (30.7%),
Brazil and Colombia (28.21%), the age ranges with the highest participation
in the AO Spine fellowship program are between 36-45 years (30.7%); 75% of
program participants are orthopedists and among other significant data, 95%
of respondents have greater experience and feel more confortable in
degenerative spine pathology. Conclusion: At present, the
junior fellowships of the AO Spine program report feeling comfortable with
the program, however there is much data in our study that will help improve
it, on the other hand it is clear that the greater affinity for the standard
posterior approach is still evident, however every day junior surgeons show
greater interest in endoscopic and minimally invasive techniques; this study
is an open door with very important data for new studies and to help improve
the fellowship education program in Latin America.

## 1219

## P295: A single site review of COVID-19's impact on elective spine
surgery: temporary decrease in volume, but business as usual?
Jon Raso
1
, Pramod Kamalapathy
1
, Lawal Labaran
1
, Eric Solomon
2
, Hamid Hassanzadeh
2
, and Amit Jain
2

1

Department of Orthopaedics, University of Virginia, Charlottesville,
United States

2

Department of Orthopaedics, Johns Hopkins Medicine, Bethesda, United
States

Introduction: The COVID-19 pandemic has had large impacts on
patient care across all fields, including orthopaedic spine surgery. At many
institutions, elective procedures were cancelled or postponed for a time to
mitigate the risks of COVID exposure. The effects of reduced case volume and
changing practice parameters has been incompletely explored. Our goal was to
evaluate the effect of the pandemic on pre-operative characteristics and
surgical outcomes for patients undergoing elective spine surgery. We
hypothesized that patients selected for elective surgery would overall be
younger, have less comorbidity, and lower American Society of
Anesthesiologists (ASA) scores as compared to pre-COVID. Similarly, we
hypothesized that patient outcomes would not be significantly worse during
the pandemic. Material and Methods: We identified all patients
undergoing elective spine surgery at our single tertiary institution from
January 1st 2019, to December 31st 2020. All surgeries
were performed by five board certified orthopaedic spine surgeons. They were
divided into two cohorts, those receiving surgery before and after March
15th, 2020, which corresponds to the date the elective
procedure deferment was implemented. Demographic and procedural information
for each patient was collected, including age, comorbidities, ASA
classification, and procedure type. Outcomes data up to 90 days was
collected, including major and minor medical complications, reoperation and
readmission rates, length of stay greater than 3 days, and discharge
location. Results: 1545 elective spine surgeries were
identified. Of those, 957 were before March 15th, 2020
(Pre-COVID), and 588 occurred after. 266 patients underwent lumbar fusions,
149 underwent cervical fusions, and 319 underwent lumbar decompression
pre-COVID, compared to 166, 112, and 111 in the COVID cohort. Surgical
volume was lowest in March 2020, in which 34 elective cases were performed
in total- average pre-COVID volume was 69.6 cases per month. Surgical volume
returned to baseline within three months after elective surgery deferment
began, faster than anticipated by the authors. There was a significant
decrease in reoperation rates in the COVID cohort compared to pre-COVID (p =
0.006) for all procedures. When divided by procedure type, fusion patients
experienced a significant decrease in reoperation rates (p < 0.001).
Decompression patient outcomes were not statistically different across
cohorts. Discharge location (long-term care facilities, home) did not change
significantly across the study period. Rates of common post-operative
outcomes were not statistically different for all procedure types both
before and during the cutoff date. Conclusion: Our study
suggests that, despite the COVID-19 pandemic, elective spine procedures did
not carry significantly increased risk. Elective procedure volume returned
to baseline within three months. Further research assessing multiple
different surgical sites is necessary to corroborate these findings. These
findings have a positive implication for future COVID variants or
pandemics.

## 1238

## P296: Demographics and economic trends in vertebral fracture surgeries
throughout the United States

Khaled Taghlabi

1

, Alexander Beschloss

2

, Daniel Rodriguez

2

, Nathan Lee

3

, Sachin Gupta

2

, Kevin Bondar

4

, Joseph Lombardi

3

, Amir Faraji

1

, and Comron Saifi

4

1

Neurosurgery

2

Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
United States

3

Orthopaedic Surgery, Columbia University Vagelos College of
Physicians and Surgeons, New York, United States

4

Orthopaedic Surgery, Houston Methodist Hospital, Houston, United
States

Introduction: Vertebral fractures represent a large public
health concern given the diagnostic challenge and proclivity for
re-fracture. In case of progressive neurological deficits, gross spinal
instability, or intractable pain, surgical intervention is required. Prior
studies have evaluated the costs associated with vertebral fractures;
however, there is little information about the economic and demographic
factors associated with vertebral fracture surgery. The purpose of this
study was to investigate economic and demographic trends pertaining to the
surgical treatment of vertebral fractures between 1993 and 2015 using data
from the National Inpatient Sample (NIS) database. The present papers tests
the hypothesis that the number of vertebral fracture surgeries and costs
increased between 1997 and 2014 due to more common operative management for
vertebral fractures. Materials and Methods: The National
Inpatient Sample (NIS) was queried for patients who underwent surgical
treatment of a vertebral fracture (ICD-9-CM-3.53) (excluding kyphoplasty and
vertebroplasty) between 1993 and 2015. Demographic data included patient
age, sex, income, insurance type, hospital size, and location. Economic data
including aggregate charge, aggregate cost, hospital cost, and hospital
charge were analyzed. Results: The number of vertebral fracture
surgeries, excluding kyphoplasty and vertebroplasty, increased 461% from
3,331 in 1993 to 18,675 in 2014. Inpatient mortality increased from 1.9% to
2.5%. The mean age of patients undergoing vertebral fracture surgeries
increased from 42 in 1993 to 53 in 2015. The aggregate cost of surgery
increased from $189,164,625 in 2001 to $1,060,866,580 in 2014, a 461%
increase. Conclusion: The increase in vertebral fracture
surgeries between 1993 and 2014 may reflect an increased rate of fractures,
an increased propensity for surgical management, or a multifactorial
combination. The increasing rate of vertebral fracture surgery, coupled with
increasing hospital costs and mortality, signifies that efficient and
effective treatment of vertebral fractures is a challenge and that further
research in epidemiology and management will be beneficial.

## 1312

## P297: Time to fixation after traumatic spinal cord injury prolonged with
certain race and insurance statuses

Jon Raso

1

, Pramod Kamalapathy

1

, Eric Solomon

2

, Elizabeth Driskill

3

, Kristina Kurker

3

, Hamid Hassanzadeh

2

,
and
Amit Jain

2

1

Department of Orthopaedics

2

Department of Orthopaedics, Johns Hopkins Medicine, Bethesda, United
States

3

School of Medicine, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, United
States

Introduction: Traumatic spinal cord injuries (TSCIs) are
potentially catastrophic injuries to the spine with historically poor
functional outcomes for patients. The management of TSCI requires prompt
evaluation and may necessitate urgent intervention to preserve neurologic
function, therefore time to fixation as a predictor of patient outcomes is
of great interest. Although the optimal timing of surgical intervention for
TSCI is somewhat controversial, early intervention has been recognized as
being beneficial in several studies. The objective of this study was to
evaluate the role of various socioeconomic factors on the time to surgical
fixation in the management of TSCI. Our primary goal was to identify
socioeconomic factors that may delay treatment. Material and
Methods: The present study utilized the Trauma Quality
Improvement Program (TQUIP) dataset to collect adult patient records from
2007-2016. Patients were divided into subgroups based on race. Patients were
also categorized by insurance type into subgroups for additional analysis.
Demographic information for each patient including patient age, gender,
presence of comorbidities, injury location and procedure type were
collected. Additional facility information was also included. Polytrauma
patients were excluded from analysis. A univariate and multivariate linear
regression analysis was used to compare time to procedure based on primary
race, and payer type while adjusting for demographic, hospital, information,
levels involved, region of the spine fixed, accident patterns, and emergency
room disposition. Significance was set at p < 0.05. Results:
8,773 patients were included in the study. The largest group was White
patients (n = 5902, 67.3%) followed by Black (n = 1217, 13.9%), Hispanic (n
= 771, 8.8%), Other (n = 545, 6.2%), and Unknown (n = 338, 3.9%). Most
patients were male (n = 6,499, 74%), and the average GCS score was 14.24 ±
2.26 for the overall group. Hispanic and Black race was associated with a
significantly increased time to fixation of 12.1 hours (95% CI 5.5-18.7, p
< 0.001), and 20.1 hours (95% CI 12.1-28.1, p < 0.001), respectively
compared to white race. Both Other and Unknown cohorts were not associated
with a statistically significant difference in time to fixation compared to
white patients (p > 0.05). Univariate analysis showed that Medicare,
Medicaid, government and military-based insurances, and self-pay were all
associated with significant increases in time to fixation compared to
private insurance (p < 0.05). However, with multivariate analysis, only
Medicaid insurance was associated with a statistically significant increased
time to fixation when compared with private insurance (11.6 hours, 95% CI
3.9-19.2, p = 0.003). Conclusion: Race and certain insurance
statuses were associated with statistically significant increases in time to
fixation following TSCI, potentially compromising quality of patient care
and resulting in poorer outcomes. More research is needed to better
understand these trends and ensure equitable care.

## 1399

## P298: Prevalelence of global spinal malalignment in the sagittal plane -
A cross sectional analysis of associations with LBP and HR-QOL in a general
non-elderly population

Koichiro Okuyama

1

1

Department of Orthpaedic Surgery, Akita Rosai Hospital, Odate,
Japan

Background Context: Understanding of normal parameters’ range in
the sagittal alignment of the spine is very important to treat degenerative
spinal disorders. For Mongoloid heritage, prevalence of global spine
mal-alignment in the sagittal plane (GS mal-Algin) remains unknown in
general non-elderly populations (18 < age < 65 years). Moreover the
clinical significance and associations between GS mal-Algin and bone mineral
density (BMD), skeletal muscle index (SMI), back muscle extensors strength
(BMES), and HR-QOL has not been disclosed enough. Purpose: To
investigate prevalence of GS mal-Algin, and the associations between BMD,
SMI, BMES, low back pain (LBP), and HR-QOL in non-elderly populations in
East Asia. Study Design: A monocentric, cross-sectional survey.
Patients Samples: Two hundred and sixty-three non-elderly
participants with Mongoloid heritage were consecutively enrolled.
Outcome Measures: Sagittal parameters of the spine and the
pelvis on whole spine radiograms, BMD and SMI using Dual Energy X-ray
Absorptiometry, BMES calculated by a strain-gause dynamotor, and
participants-self reported LBP, and score of Medical Outcome Study
Short-Form36-Health Survey (SF-36). Methods: Two hundred
sixty-three healthy non-elderly participants (84 females and 179 males) were
studied. Participants’ LBP was checked through interview and physical
examination. HR-QOL were ascertained by SF-36. Sagittal parameters of the
spine and the pelvis, including pelvic incident (PI), mismatch between PI
and LL (PI-LL), and pelvic tilt (PT) C7 sagittal vertical axis (SVA) were
measured on whole spine radiograms. BMD and SMI were measured using Dual
Energy X-ray Absorptiometry. BMES was defined as a maximum extension force
at the T4 to T7 level in the supine position. Results: PI-LL ≧
10°, PT ≧ 20°, and SVA ≧ 40 mm were found in 10.6% (28/263), 11.8% (31/263),
and 6.1% (16/263) of the participants, and each mean value was 15.3 ± 5.9°,
25.1 ± 4.0°, and 52.7 ± 12.2 mm, respectively. Prevalence of LBP was
significantly higher in the participants with PI-LL ≧ 10°: 42.8% (12/28)
than those with PI-LL < 10°; 21.2% (50/235) (p < 0.05). PI-LL ≧
10°only had a significant association with LBP (OR: 3.043, 95%CI
1.138-8.141, p < 0.05). In SF 36 scores, BMD, SMI, and BMES, no
significant differences were found between the participants with PI-LL ≧
10°and those with < 10°, PT ≧ 20° and < 20°, and SVA ≧ 40 mm and <
40mm. However, 1.5% (4/263) of the participants associated with all of PI-LL
≧ 10°, PT ≧ 20°, and SVA ≧ 40 mm had a significantly lower SF-36 mental
component score than others (p < 0.05). Conclusions: In a
general non-elderly population (18 < age < 65 years, Mongoloid
heritage in East Asia, n = 263), PI-LL ≧ 10°, PT ≧ 20° , and SVA ≧ 40 mm was
found in 10.6%, 11.8% , and 6.1%, and each mean value was 15.3 ± 5.9°, 25.1
± 4.0°, and 52.7 ± 12.2 mm. PI-LL ≧ 10° only had an association with LBP,
and it is also speculated that coexistence of PI-LL ≧ 10° plus PT ≧ 20° and
SVA ≧ 40 mm leads to a poor mental HR-QOL.

## 1418

## P299: Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the corrections of spinal
deformities through the posterior approach in the Unified Health System in
Brazil

Rodolfo Gomes Dias

1

 and Mohammad Zarrabian

2

1

Orthopaedic and Traumatology Department, Santa Casa de Misericórdia
de Araçatuba, Araçatuba, Brazil

2

Department of Spine Surgery, Winnipeg Spine Centre, University of
Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada

Introduction: In regards on spine deformities, scoliosis
consists of deformities that affect the spine and are characterized by
involving the three reference planes: lateral deviation in the frontal
plane, vertebral rotation in the axial plane and lordosis in the sagittal
plane (1). Data from epidemiological studies point to a high prevalence of
postural alterations in the spine of children and adolescents; presenting an
overall prevalence between 1% and 2%, where idiopathic scoliosis is the most
common subgroup (2). The pandemic caused by COVID-19 considerably affected
elective surgeries in the country, but there are no studies that show its
influence when performing corrections of spinal deformities with posterior
approach (CSDP) in the Unified Health System (UHS). Material and
Methods: This is an observational study using aggregate national
data from the Hospitals Information System (SIH/SUS) and the Brazilian
Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE). These databases capture all
procedures performed in the public health care system which comprises 75% of
the Brazilian health care system. There was no need for ethics committee
approval due to the data being public. We analyzed the number of procedures,
total and mean value in Brazilian reals(R$) of CSDP procedures in 1 to 12 or
more levels in the five Brazilian. The results were organized in a
spreadsheet and then descriptive statistics were used for comparison during
the pre-and ongoing period of the pandemic, consisting of April 2018 to
March 2020 (period 1) and April 2020 to March 2022 (period 2). For the
statistical analysis, the Chi-Square test was used, considering p < 0.05
as significant. Results: In period 1, 1,379 CSDP were carried
out by the UHS, 19, 161, 670, 488 and 41, in the North, Northeast,
Southeast, South and Center-West regions respectively; at a total cost of R$
14,715,548.44 and an average of R$ 10,671.17 per procedure and
hospitalization. During period 2, 985 CSDP were carried out, at a cost of
R$11,076,589.99 at an average value of R$11,245.27; being 11, 174, 513, 243,
and 44 in the North, Northeast, Southeast, South and Center-West regions,
respectively. A reduction of: 42.105%, 23.433%, 50.205%, in the North,
Southeast and South regions respectively; and an increase of 8.075% and
7.317% in the Northeast and Midwest regions, respectively. With a cost
reduction of 24.729%. Conclusion: There was an overall
reduction of 28.571% of CSDP during the pandemic in Brazil, with the most
affected region being the South region, with a reduction of 50.205% (p <
0.05). It is extremely important to analyze these data to identify the
impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in relation to the performance of the
studied procedure. This data from this study may assist the competent
authorities in identifying and correcting discrepancies and reduction of the
procedure studied caused by the COVID-19 pandemic in different Brazilian
regions.

## 1516

## P300: 2 years of COVID-19 pandemic: current overview of the posterior
thoraco-lumbosacral fusion surgeries in the Unified Health System in
Brazil

Rodolfo Gomes Dias

1

 and Mohammad Zarrabian

2

1

Orthopaedic and Traumatology Department, Santa Casa de Misericórdia
de Araçatuba, Araçatuba, Brazil

2

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Spine Surgery Division, Winnipeg
Spine Centre, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada

Introduction: Thoraco-lumbosacral spine fusion (TLSF) is a
surgical technique widely used for the treatment of several pathologies of
the spine, including degenerative diseases, trauma and deformities. The
initial objective of this procedure is to obtain fusion between the
vertebral segments to promote the restoration of stability and alignment
lost due to pathologies that affect the spine. It is known that the pandemic
significantly affected elective medium and high complexity surgeries in
Brazil; however, there are no studies regarding its influence on the
performance of TLSF surgeries in the Unified Health System (UHS) in Brazil.
Material and Methods: This is an observational study using
aggregate national data from the Hospitals Information System (SIH/SUS) and
the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE). These databases
capture all procedures performed in the public health care system which
comprises 75% of the Brazilian health care system. There was no need for
ethics committee approval due to the data being public. All one to seven
level TLSF procedures performed in pediatric and adult populations between
April 2018 and March 2020 (pre-pandemic) and April 2020 and March 2022
(post-pandemic), all five Brazilian regions were analyzed. TLSF procedures
during the pre-pandemic period were compared to the post-pandemic period in
terms of total procedures performed, as well as total and average cost in
Brazilian Reals(R$), included all direct costs to the health system such as
hospitalization and fees. For the statistical analysis, the Chi-Square test
was used, considering p < 0.05 as significant. Results: In
the pre-pandemic period, 12,645 TLSF surgeries were performed by the UHS.
Regional analysis demonstrated 456, 1,447, 4,706, 4,814 and 1,222 procedures
were performed in the Northern, Northeastern, Southeastern, Southern and
Center-West regions respectively. The total cost was R$100,087,353.45
(Brazilian reais) with an average cost of R$7,915.17 per procedure. During
the post-pandemic period 8,891 TLSF surgeries were performed with 318,
1,226, 3,546, 2,952, and 849 performed in the Northern, Northeastern,
Southeastern, Southern and Center-West regions respectively. This
represented a relative reduction of 30.3%, 15.3%, 24.7%, 38.7% and 30.5% in
the Northern, Northeastern, Southeastern, Southern and Center-West regions
respectively as compared to pre-pandemic levels. Total cost was
R$71,330,939.05 with an average cost of R$8,022.83. Conclusion:
There was an overall reduction of 29.7% in TLSF surgeries during the
pandemic in Brazil, with the most affected region being the Southern region,
with a reduction of 38.7% (p < 0.05). It is important to analyze this
data to identify the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in relation to the
performance of posterior spinal surgeries and its implications on wait lists
in the various health regions. Future projects would look for underlying
causes for the decrease in surgeries and its regional variation.

## 1568

## P301: Surgical management of compressive myelopathy due to spinal
fluorosis

Jayprakash Modi

1,2

 and Pratikkumar Prajapati

2

1

Orthopaedic, Nutan Medical College, Mehsansa, India

2

Orthopaedic, B J Medical College, Ahmedabad, India

Introduction: Fluorosis is an endemic disease of India which
causes compressive cervical and/or dorsal myelopathy. This study aims to
evaluate the role of surgical management in the crippling fluorosis along
with evaluation of radiological imaging as screening/diagnosing tool for the
disease. Materials and Methods: This is a prospective cohort
study of 33 patients operated at tertiary care center having non-traumatic
involvement of spinal cord affecting neurology with history, clinical and
radiological features (Ossified Posterior Longitudinal Ligament, Ossified
Ligamentum flavum) suggesting fluorosis as the cause of compression.
Outcomes were measured in terms of improvement in Nurick grading, Rankins
scale, spasticity, Oswestry Disability Index, modified Japanese Orthopaedic
Association scores. Results: Spinal fluorosis is a male
predominant disease affecting the elderly after years of fluorine intake.
Cervical and/or dorsal spine are predominantly involved at multiple levels
(> = 2). Diagnosis of the disease poses difficulty due to lack of
established laboratory parameters with high sensitivity, availability, and
lack of awareness among surgeons. Skeletal survey alone has > 90%
sensitivity for diagnosing the disease. Once evaluated properly,
decompression at correctly identified levels invariably improves the
spasticity and quality of life immediately post-surgery. At final follow-up,
there was on average improvement of 2 scales in Nurick grade, Rankins scale
and Ashworth grading whereas average improvement in ODI, mJOA and dorsal
specific mJOA were 52%, 3.17 points and 2.7 points respectively. However,
preoperative counselling for “apparent neurological deterioration” in
immediate postoperative period is very important. Complications like
infection and dural tear have to be prevented with special surgical tactics.
Conclusion: Skeletal survey along with computed tomography
and magnetic resonance imaging is cost-effective modality for the
screening/diagnosis for fluorosis. Once developed, surgery, either curative
or palliative, is the best treatment at crippling stage of the disease.
Keywords: Dorsal myelopathy, endemic, fluorosis, laminectomy, ossified
ligamentum flavum, ossified posterior longitudinal ligament.

## 1605

## P302: A multidisciplinary approach does not discriminate based on
socioeconomic factors in patients presenting with an adult spinal
deformity

Caroline Drolet

1

, Jesse Shen

1,2

, Michelle Gilbert

1

, Kellen Nold

1

, Venu Nemani

1

, Jean Christophe Leveque

1

, Rajiv Sethi

1

, and Philip Louie

1

1

Neurosurgery, Virginia Mason Franciscan Health, Seattle, United
States

2

Université de Montréal, Canada

Introduction: Adult spinal deformity surgery (ASD) is partly a
high-risk procedure due to the comorbid aging population it often affects.
Multidisciplinary approaches were developed to improve outcomes and decrease
complications and have shown their efficacy in optimizing and screening
patients. However, socioeconomically disadvantaged populations are more
burdened with comorbidities. Whether multidisciplinary teams are biased
towards healthier and more socioeconomically advantaged patients warrants
further investigation. We sought to assess whether patients received surgery
following a multidisciplinary conference review will differ by socioeconomic
status, as defined by the area deprivation index. Material and
Methods: A single-center retrospective analysis of patients
operated for ASD was performed. Patients presented at a multidisciplinary
conference for surgical clearance between August 2015 and March 2021 were
reviewed. Patients were categorized based on their operative status. Each
patient’s residence was ranked using the Area Deprivation Index based on the
Neighborhood Atlas. This index ranks every zip code based on deciles, with
one being the least disadvantaged and ten being the most disadvantaged
within a state. Using logistic regression, we examined whether demographic
variables, ADI rank for Washington (median split into low/advantaged and
high/disadvantaged), distance from the hospital, and the interactions
predicted whether patients received surgery after the conference.
Results: Our analysis identified 330 patients (209 female,
121 male; 19-86 years old, M = 64.6, SD = 12.1). Patients with a history of
psychiatric disorders were less likely to receive
surgery, p = .02. No other main effects approached
significance. There was a significant interaction between ADI and
distance, p = .04. More advantaged patients were less
likely to receive surgery if they were closer than farther from the
hospital, p = .03. Distance did not significantly
affect whether more disadvantaged patients received
surgery, p = .51. Conclusion: This
analysis suggests that a multidisciplinary approach does not discriminate
based on socioeconomic status. Further investigation is needed to understand
the relationship between distance and ADI, and their interactive effect on
surgery.

## 1607

## P303: Disparities in access to timely spine surgeon evaluation for
degenerative lumbar pathology

Karissa Yamaguchi

1,2

, Caroline Drolet

1

, Mary Kim

1,2

, Thomas Hanks

1,2

, Lisa Depledge

1,2

, Rajiv Sethi

1

, and Philip Louie

1

1

Neurosurgery, Virginia Mason Franciscan Health, Seattle, United
States

2

School of Medicine, University of Washington, United States

Introduction: Studies have demonstrated the association between
race, socioeconomic status (SES),and insurance type and worse preoperative
physical and mental health at presentation in patients indicated for spine
surgery. Unfortunately, these factors negatively impact postoperative
clinical outcomes as well. Little research characterizes how race, SES, and
insurance type impact patients’ abilities to navigate the health system from
the initial referral to consultation with a spine surgeon. This study aimed
to evaluate the impact of race, SES (as measured by the Area Deprivation
Index [ADI]), and insurance type on timeliness to a spine surgeon
appointment after initial referral; specifically, evaluating patients
presenting with symptoms of lumbar radiculopathy. We hypothesized that
patients with Medicaid, living in areas of higher deprivation (thus, lower
SES), and of non-white race experience longer wait times between the initial
referral to a spine surgeon and their initial consultation presentation.
Material and Methods: This retrospective observational
study was approved by the institutional review board (IRB). New patients
evaluated for lumbar radiculopathy between March 2021 to September 2021 by
four fellowship-trained spine surgeons at a single-center outpatient clinic
were included. Patients seen as a part of the Centerof Excellence program or
for a second opinion were excluded. A review of the electronic medical
record and patient-staff communication logs obtained the following
variables: Initial referral date, initial spine surgeon visit date, type of
visit (virtual vs. in-person), symptom duration at presentation, referring
provider, referring institution (internal vs. external), and referral
timing. Demographic data including race, insurance type, zip code of
residence, and location of initial consultation were extracted last to avoid
bias in the depth of chart review. Multivariable analyses were performed to
determine if specific demographic characteristics are associated with
prolonged wait times for neurosurgery consultation. Results: Of
the 305 new patients seen for initial neurosurgery consultation, 245 met our
criteria. In our study, patients with Medicaid experienced significantly
longer wait times when compared with patients with Medicare and private
insurance (p = 0.007). Asian patients experienced the longest mean wait time
(mean = 59.1 days), followed by White patients (mean = 30.6), then Black
patients (mean = 21.3), but this was not statistically significant (p =
0.08). Living in an area of high deprivation was also not associated with
significantly prolonged wait times (R = 0.025, p = 0.696).
Conclusion: This study highlighted structural disparities
in access to timely neurosurgery evaluation. Our results indicate that a
patient's insurance status prolongs wait times for consultation. Further
qualitative research is needed to identify specific barriers contributing to
delays in care and solutions.

## 1631

## P304: Scoliosis among children in Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau of China: a
cross -sectional epidemiological study

Lijin Zhou

1

, Yong Hai

1

, and Honghao Yang

1

1

Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Beijing Chaoyang Hospital, Capital
Medical University, Beijing, China

Introduction: The average altitude of the Qinghai-Tibetan
Plateau is 4,500 m and most of the residents are of Tibetan ethnicity. The
purpose of this study was to investigate the prevalence of scoliosis and
associated factors among children in this region through a scoliosis
screening program. Methods: A cross-sectional study was
performed between May 2020 and December 2020 in Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau. A
total of 9,856 children aged 6-17 years from schools and nearby villages
were screened using visual inspection, the Adams forward-bending test, the
angle of trunk rotation, and radiography. A self-designed questionnaire was
used to collect demographic data. The prevalence of scoliosis and associated
factors were analyzed. Results: The overall prevalence of
scoliosis among children in Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau was 3.69%, with 5.38%
for females and 2.11% for males. The prevalence of scoliosis was 3.50% in
children who resided below 4,500 m while 5.63% in those resided above 4,500
m (p = 0.001). The prevalence of congenital scoliosis (2.14 vs. 0.42%, p
< 0.001) and neuromuscular scoliosis (0.34 vs. 0.07%, p = 0.041) were
significantly higher in the altitude above 4,500 m. 50.00% of patients
resided above 4,500m were recommended for surgery while 16.24% in those
resided below 4,500 m (p < 0.001). Independent associated factors were
detected as female (OR = 2.217, 95 CI% 1.746-2.814, p < 0.001), BMI <
18.5 (OR = 1.767, 95 CI% 1.441–2.430, P = 0.005), altitude of residence ≥
4,500 m (OR = 1.808, 95 CI% 1.325-2.483, p = 0.002), and sleep time < 8 h
(OR = 2.264, 95 CI% 1.723-2.846, p = 0.001). Conclusion: The
prevalence of scoliosis among children in Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau was 3.69%.
With increasing altitudes, the prevalence of scoliosis and its major type
were different from that at lower altitudes. Female, BMI < 18.5, altitude
of residence ≥ 4,500 m, and sleep time < 8 h were independently
associated with the prevalence of this disease. Early screening should be
carried out before the age of 7 years, especially in high-altitude,
underdeveloped, and rural areas.

## 1745

## P305: Differences in spinal cord astrocytoma treatment across
urbanicity

David Sykes

1

, Nancy Abu-Bonsrah

2

, Jacob Sperber

1

, Edwin Owolo

1

, Romaric Waguia Kouam

1

, Tara Dalton

1

, Mackenzie Price

1

, Quinn Ostrom

1

, Harrison Hockenberry

1

, Dana Rowe

1

, Emily Luo

1

, Corey Neff

1

, Brandon Bishop

1

, Antoinette Charles

1

, Margaret Johnson

1

, Melissa Erickson

1

, and C. Rory Goodwin

1

1

Department of Neurosurgery, Duke University School of Medicine,
Durham, United States

2

Department of Neurosurgery, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine,
Baltimora, United States

Background: Spinal cord astrocytomas (SCAs) are highly
infiltrative gliomas of the spinal cord, representing the second most common
intramedullary spinal cord tumor. The management of SCAs may include
surgery, radiation therapy, and/or systemic therapy, with patient outcomes
potentially affected by their location. However, the role urbanicity in SCA
treatment remains unknown. The authors, therefore, set out to determine the
association between urbanicity and SCA outcomes. Methods: The
Central Brain Tumor Registry of the United States (CBTRUS) analytic dataset,
a combination of the CDC’s National Program of Cancer Registries and NCI’s
Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results datasets, was used to identify
individuals with histopathologically-confirmed SCAs between 2004 and 2019.
US Department of Agriculture 2013 Rural Urban Continuum Code definitions
were used to classify patients as metropolitan or non-metropolitan.
Multivariable logistic regression models were used to evaluate associations
between urbanicity and SCA treatments adjusted for age at diagnosis, sex,
race and ethnicity. Treatment was defined as radiation, surgery (excisional
biopsy), systemic and comprehensive (radiation, surgery and systemic). Cox
proportional hazard models were constructed to understand the effect of
treatment, urbanicity, and age at diagnosis on the survival time of
patients. Results: 2021 patients were included in this
analysis. Of these, 1744 patients lived in a metropolitan (metro) area and
277 in non-metropolitan (non-metro) area, with a median age at diagnosis of
30 years and 28 years, respectively. There was a higher proportion of White
Non-Hispanic (NH) individuals in the non-metro group (86% vs 66%, p <
0.001), and a higher proportion of Black NH individuals in the metro group
(14% vs 9.9%, p < 0.001). No statistically significant difference was
found on survival between the two groups. Non-metro group had a higher
incidence of Grade I and II astrocytoma than the metro group, (51% vs 44%, p
< 0.001) and (30% vs 19%, p < 0.001) respectively. No statistically
significant difference was found between metro and non-metro groups in
regard to treatment options. However, Hispanic ethnicity was associated with
increased odd of receiving radiation [1.5 CI (1.13; 1.99)], systemic therapy
[1.45, CI (1.07; 1.97)] and comprehensive treatment [1.64; CI (1.08; 2.43);
p = 0.018]. Conclusions: Although metropolitan patients present
with severe SCA (higher grade SCA), living in a metro or non-metro county
was not associated with decreased odds of receiving SCA treatment. Further
work is necessary to understand the role of urbanicity in outcomes of
patients with SCA.

## 1879

## P306: Pull-up bar associated spine injury: an analysis of the 2012-2021
NEISS database

Angelo Changas

1

, Sohrab Vatsia

2

, Grant Reviere

3

, Gerald McGwin

4

, Brent Ponce

2

, L. Erik Westerlund

2

, Douglas Pahl

2

, James McGrory

2

, and David Gloystein

2

1

Philadelphia College of Osteopathic Medicine, Suwanee Campus,
Suwanee, GA, United States

2

Hughston Clinic, Columbus, GA, United States

3

Edward Via College of Osteopathic Medicine, Auburn Campus, Auburn,
AL, United States

4

Department of Epidemiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham,
Birmingham, AL, United States

Introduction: Interest in the use of home exercise regimens in
the United States has risen considerably in the past several years. The use
of pull-up bars allows for ease of access to strength training exercise, yet
faulty manufacturing or improper installation of such equipment has led to a
multitude of serious injuries and even litigation. Therefore, the purpose of
this study was to analyze the mechanism of spinal injuries associated with
pull-up bar usage. Material and Methods: The National
Electronic Injury Surveillance System (NEISS) database was queried to
estimate the incidence of injuries related to pull-up bar consumer products
from 2012-2021 in the United States. Resultant data was analyzed to describe
trends in demographics, incidence, and injury patterns associated with
pull-up bar usage. Results: A total of 1470 pull-up bar-related
injury cases were identified from review of the NEISS database query
resulting in a weighted estimate of 50,108 injuries from 2012-2021 in the
United States. Demographically, pull-up bar-related injuries were more
common in males (74.3%), and the highest incidence of cases was reported in
the 19-44 years old age group (50.4%) followed by the less than 18 years old
age group (36%). Additionally, injuries were 1.55 times more likely to occur
in a “Home” setting versus “Places of Recreation”. The NEISS codes for
“Neck”, “Upper Trunk”, and “Lower Trunk” were utilized to distinguish
anatomic regions of the spinal column – with a majority of cases (54.5%)
localized to the “Upper Trunk” zone. Mechanistically, “Sprain/Strain”
accounted for 24.0% of all injury cases, followed by “Lacerations” (12.5%)
and “Fractures” (10.8%). In total, there were 529 weighted cases of spinal
fracture due to pull-up bar malfunction, of which, 63 estimated “Neck”
spinal fractures all occurred secondary to pull-up bar malfunction.
Conclusion: Pull-up bar-related injuries are largely
attributed to the use of home exercise equipment. These injuries are likely
preventable, as pull-up bar malfunction injuries were 11 times more likely
to occur in the “Home” setting in comparison to all other recorded locales.
Improved product design and education underlying best practices for the use
of pull-up bars and home exercise equipment may prevent an increasingly
prevalent and deleterious mechanism of spinal injury.

## 1906

## P307: Differential interspinous process device adoption and utilization
across the United States

Justin Chan

1

, Nicholas Peterman

2

, Sohaib Hashmi

1

, Yu-po Lee

1

, and Henry Hoang

3

1

Orthopaedic Surgery, University of California, Irvine Medical
Center, Orange, United States

2

Carle Illinois College of Medicine, Medicine, Urbana, United
States

3

Montefiore Medical Center, Bronx, USA

Introduction: Interlaminar/interspinous process
stabilization/distraction devices (IPDs) are relatively new treatment
options for spinal stenosis that have recently been given identifiable
billing codes by Medicare in 2017. This project utilizes publicly available
Medicare physician billing databases, among other population level
databases, to track the practice patterns, utilization, and expansion of
IPDs in the 4-year period of 2017 to 2020 and catalog potential geospatial
disparities in IPD adoption and the sociodemographics of those most
effected. Material and Methods: The yearly Medicare Physician
& Other Practitioners dataset containing all codes billed to Medicare,
the location of billing, and the quantity of reimbursement was utilized for
2017 to 2020. This dataset was filtered to contain only IPD codes 22867,
22868, 22869, and 22870 and combined with the year-matched Medicare
Geographic Variation dataset which contained the sociodemographics of the
Medicare population on a county-level. The total dataset was then merged
with the American Community Survey dataset from the United States (US)
Census Bureau to obtain county-level economic data. Moran’s I clustering
analysis was then conducted using GeoDa, a geospatial analysis software, to
identify significant, p < 0.05, hotspots and coldspots of IPD insertions
per 10,000 Medicare patients. The resulting hotspot and coldspot county
groupings were then compared for significant differences across all recorded
variables with a Mann-Whitney U Test. Results: 30,889 IPD
insertion procedures costing a total of $111,472,207 to Medicare were
captured in this analysis. 12.5% of procedures had PID insertions at two
levels. The number of IPD procedures increased by 95.5% per year while costs
increased by 132.3% per year on average across the 4-year period. 2019 was
an outlier year, with a 17.4% reduction in total procedures from 2018,
likely due to the impact of COVID on elective procedures. Cost increase was
primarily driven by increased utilization of ambulatory surgical centers
(ASCs), which Medicare reimburses at a higher rate. IPD insertion in ASCs
increased by 10.7% per year to 37.6% overall in 2020. Geospatial clustering
analysis of IPD insertions per 10,000 Medicare patients revealed hotspot
clusters of IPD adoption in Los Angeles CA, Denver CO, Las Vegas NV,
Jacksonville FL, Lincoln NE, Wichita KS, and Savannah GA. Coldspot clusters
were predominantly along the Eastern Coast and in the Midwest Region.
Compared to hotspots, coldspots were significantly more rural, whiter, less
educated, more impoverished, and with higher Medicare participation rates.
Conclusion: IPD insertion procedures have grown rapidly in
recent years as a valid treatment strategy, but this growth has not been
equally distributed across the United States. Rural, predominantly white,
areas in the Eastern Coast and Midwest have lagged behind nationally. COVID,
ASC utilization, socioeconomics, and the practice patterns of the surgeons
themselves may all play a part in the geographic disparities identified in
this work.

## 1910

## P308: Subsequent fusion following multilevel lumbar decompression
surgery

Ryan Hoel

1

, Melissa Albersheim

2

, Sharon Yson

2

, Jeffrey Luna

3

, Paul Soriano

2

, Jason Haselhuhn

2

, and Jonathan N. Sembrano

2

1

Twin Cities Orthopedics, Edina, United States

2

University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, United States

3

Minneapolis VA Health Care System, Minneapolis, United
States

Introduction: In select patients with lumbar spinal stenosis,
surgical decompression is efficacious in reducing pain and improving quality
of life. However, there is a debate about the role of posterior
decompression and the number of operative levels contributing to spinal
stability and reoperation rate. In this study, we sought to investigate the
incidence of reoperation of patients after multilevel adjacent lumbar
decompression, with a particular interest in the rate of subsequent fusion
at the previously decompressed levels. We hypothesize a moderate incidence
of subsequent fusion surgery after multilevel decompression surgery.
Materials and Methods: After IRB approval, we
retrospectively reviewed the charts of all spine surgeries performed over 15
years at a single Veterans Affairs tertiary referral hospital. We identified
patients who underwent three or more level of lumbar decompression without
concomitant fusion and determined if surgeons performed any subsequent
spinal operations. We excluded patients with less than a year follow-up
period. We attempted to contact all patients by phone for a follow-up to
inquire if they had received spine surgery outside our institution. We
determined and calculated the reoperation type and rates for each case and
the time it took before a reoperation occurred. Results:
Forty-five patients (44M:1F) with a mean age of 68 met the inclusion
criteria and were included in the final analysis. The median follow-up time
was 27 months. Three (7%) underwent subsequent fusion surgery at a
previously decompressed level at 14, 23, and 25 months. Another three (7%)
patients underwent revision decompression at previously decompressed levels
at 6, 24, and 130 months. Five (11%) other patients underwent reoperation in
the first two months for wound complications related to infection or
hematoma. One (2%) patient underwent debridement of an epidural abscess
located three levels cranial to the most proximal decompression six years
after his index surgery; the abscess was deemed unrelated to the prior
decompression. Overall, 12 patients (27%) underwent reoperation during their
follow-up period. Conclusion: Our results suggest that the need
for subsequent arthrodesis in decompressions of three or more consecutive
levels without concomitant fusion may be less than intuitively suspected and
that concomitant fusion at the time of index surgery is not warranted. We
recommend mid-term and long-term analysis of rates of subsequent fusion.
This study lends information for preoperative discussion with patients
considering the risks and benefits of decompression alone versus
decompression with fusion for multilevel lumbar surgery.

## 1945

## P309: Effects of COVID-19 pandemic on spinal deformity operations and
discectomies in the Unified Health System in Brazil

Rodolfo Gomes Dias

1

 and Mohammad Zarrabian

2

1

Orthopaedic and Traumatology Department, Santa Casa de Misericórdia
de Araçatuba, Araçatuba, Brazil

2

Spine Surgery Division, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery,Winnipeg
Spine Centre, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada

Introduction: Although the COVID-19 pandemic affected elective
surgeries in Brazil there is no data on its effect on spinal surgeries. To
better understand this we analysed data on the number and costs of spinal
deformity operations and discectomy operations done from April 2018 to March
2022. These two categories were chosen for analysis as spinal deformity
operations and discectomies represent opposite ends of the spectrum in terms
of surgical risks, resource utilisation, and costs. Material and
Methods: National data from the Hospitals Information System
(SIH/SUS) and the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE)
collected. These databases capture all procedures performed in the public
health care system which comprises 75% of the Brazilian health care market.
There was no need for ethics committee approval due to the data being
public. The number of posterior spinal deformity operations (PSDO) and
cervical, lumbar or lumbo-sacral discectomies performed between April 2018
and March 2020 (period 1) were compared to the number performed between
April 2020 and March 2022 (period 2) in the five Brazilian health regions.
These procedures were analysed in terms of total procedures performed, as
well as average cost using the chi-square test with p < 0.05 considered
significant. Costs included all direct costs to the health system such as
hospitalisation and fees. Results: In period 1 1,379 PSDOs were
performed with 19, 161, 670, 488 and 41 performed in the Northern,
Northeastern, Southeastern, Southern and Centre-West regions respectively.
During period 2, 985 PSDOs were performed with 11, 174, 513, 243, and 44
performed in the Northern, Northeastern, Southeastern, Southern and
Centre-West regions respectively. The average cost of a PSDO was R$10,671.17
in period 1 and R$11,245.27 in period 2. By comparison 8,130 discectomies
were performed in period 1 with 367, 878, 4,402, 1,877 and 606 performed in
the Northern, Northeastern, Southeastern, Southern and Center-West regions
respectively. In period 2 5,696 discectomies were performed with 212, 597,
3,228, 1,150, and 515 performed in the Northern, Northeastern, Southeastern,
Southern and Centre-West regions, respectively. The average cost of a
discectomy increased from R$ 1,592.02 in period 1 to R$ 1,637.36 in period
2. Conclusion: There was a 28.6% decrease in the number of
PSDOs (p < 0.05) performed in the Brazilian public health care system
between period 1 and period 2 while the average cost per case rose. The
Southern region was the most affected with a reduction of 50.205% (p <
0.05) but the number of PSDOs in the Northeastern and Midwestern regions
paradoxically increased by 8.08% and 7.32% respectively. In comparison
nationally there was a 29.9% decrease in the total number of discectomy
operations during the same time period (p < 0.05) and costs increased.
Decreases occurred in every health region although the most affected was the
Northern region with a 42.2% decrease. Despite significant differences
between the risks, resource utilisation and costs of a spinal deformity
operations and discectomies both types of operations decreased by similar
amounts relative to their pre-pandemic levels while their costs increased.
The Northern region suffered the greatest relative reduction in spinal
surgeries.

## 2005

## P310: Portal utilization in surgical spine patients: sociodemographic
factors and social determinants of health

Edwin Owolo

1

, Zoey Petitt

1

, Antoinette Charles

1

, Cesar Baeta

1

, Emily Poehlein

2

, Cynthia Green

2

, Chad Cook

2

, Jacob Sperber

1

, Melissa Erickson

3

, and C. Rory Goodwin

1

1

Department of Neurosurgery

2

Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics

3

Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Duke University School of
Medicine, Durham, United States

Summary of Background Data: Patient portals (PP) have been shown
to improve outcomes and quality of care. Engaging them requires internet
access, technological literacy, and dexterity, which may serve as access
barriers. The aim of this study is to examine patient portal use among the
surgical spine patient population across different sociodemographic groups
and assess impact of patient portal use on clinical outcomes.
Methods: After exclusion criteria were applied, the study
included data for 9,211 encounters from 7,955 patients. PP utilization was
defined as having activated and used the patient portal system, MyChart, at
least once. Sociodemographic characteristics included urbanicity, age, race,
ethnicity, language, employment, and primary insurer. Clinical outcomes
included length of hospital stay during procedure, 30-day return to the
emergency department, 30-day readmission and being discharged somewhere
other than home. Results: Being older than 65, non-White,
unemployed, non-English speaking, male, not-partnered, uninsured or publicly
insured (Medicaid, Medicare and under 65 years of age, or other government
insurance), and living in a rural environment were all risk factors for
decreased PP utilization among surgical spine patients. A one-risk factor
decrease in the number of social risk factors was associated with a 78%
increase in the odds of PP utilization [odds ratio (OR): 1.78; 95% CI:
1.69-1.87; p < 0.001]. Patients not utilizing the portal at the time of
their procedure had higher odds of 30-day readmission (OR: 1.59; 95% CI:
1.26-2.00), discharge somewhere other than home (OR: 2.41, 95% CI:
1.95-2.99), and increased length of hospital stay (geometric mean ratio:
1.21; 95% CI: 1.12-1.30) compared to those who utilized it.
Conclusions: In patients undergoing spine procedures, PPs
are not equally utilized amongst different sociodemographic groups. PP
utilization is also associated with better outcomes. Interventions aimed at
increasing PP uptake may improve care for certain patients.

## 2024

## P311: Impact of measures to fight the COVID-19 pandemic on posterior
discectomies in the Unified Health System in Brazil

Rodolfo Gomes Dias

1

 and Mohammad Zarrabian

2

1

Orthopaedic and Traumatology Department, Santa Casa de Misericórdia
de Araçatuba, Araçatuba, Brazil

2

Spine Surgery Division, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Winnipeg
Spine Centre, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada

Introduction: The first description of a disc herniation causing
sciatica was made as early as 1934. Symptoms of radiculopathy associated
with a herniated disc, mostly resolves nonoperatively; but some patients
whose conservative management fails, surgical interventions can be
considered. The pandemic caused by COVID-19 considerably affected elective
surgeries in the country, but there are no studies that show its influence
on the performance of posterior cervical, lumbar and lumbosacral
Discectomies in the Unified Health System (UHS). Material and
Methods: This is an observational study using aggregate national
data from the Hospitals Information System (SIH/SUS) and the Brazilian
Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE). These databases capture all
procedures performed in the public health care system which comprises 75% of
the Brazilian health care system. There was no need for ethics committee
approval due to the data being public. We analyzed the number of procedures,
total and mean value in Brazilian reals(R$) of posterior cervical, lumbar
and lumbosacral discectomy procedures ranging 1, 2 or more levels with and
without the use of a microscope (LSPD); from the five Brazilian regions were
analyzed. The results were organized in a spreadsheet and then descriptive
statistics were used for comparison during the pre-and ongoing period of the
pandemic, consisting of April 2018 to March 2020 (period 1) and April 2020
to March 2022 (period 2). For the statistical analysis, the Chi-Square test
was used, considering p < 0.05 as significant. Results: In
period 1, 8,130 LSPD were performed by the UHS; being 367, 878, 4,402, 1,877
and 606, in the North, Northeast, Southeast, South and Center-West regions
respectively; at a total cost of R$ 12,943,109.63 and an average of R$
1,592.02 per procedure and hospitalization. During period 2, 5,696 LSPD were
carried out, at a cost of R$9,336,243.76 at an average value of R$1,637.36;
with 212, 597, 3,228, 1,150, and 515 in the North, Northeast, Southeast,
South and Center-West regions, respectively. A reduction of: 42.234%,
32.005%, 26.670%, 38.732% and 15.017% in the North, Northeast, Southeast,
South and Midwest respectively. With a cost reduction of 28,731%.
Conclusion: There was an overall reduction of 29,688% of
LSPD during the pandemic in Brazil, with the most affected region being the
North region, with a reduction of 42,234% (p < 0.05). It is extremely
important to analyze these data to identify the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic on the procedure studied. This data, may assist the competent
authorities in identifying and correcting discrepancies and reduction of the
procedure studied caused by the COVID-19 pandemic in different Brazilian
regions.

## Imaging

## 172

## P312: Invertertebral vacuum phenonemon, prevalence and severity in
patients older than 50 years

Gaston Camino-Willhuber

1

, Santiago Vildoza

1

, Ezequiel Martinez

1

, Lucia Canestrari

2

, Fernando Holc

1

, Michael Oh

3

, Yu-po Lee

4

, Nitin Bhatia

4

, Homero Bianchi

2

, and Mariana Bendersky

2

1

Orthopaedic and Traumatology Department, Institute of Orthopedics
“Carlos E. Ottolenghi”, Hospital Italiano de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires,
Argentina

2

Department of Anatomy, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Ciudad Autonoma
de Buenos Aires, Argentina

3

Department of Neurosurgery

4

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, UCI Medical Center, Orange,
United States

Introduction: Degenerative low back pain is a common cause of
disability and disc degeneration is one of the most frequent imaging
findings. Intervertebral vacuum phenomenon is usually observed in advanced
degeneration. Recently, this phenomenon has gained interest due to a
relatively new surgical technique called Percutaneous Discoplasty aimed to
treat low back pain secondary to degenerative disc disease in elderly
patients. The objective of this study is to analyze the prevalence and
related factors of vacuum phenomenon in adult patients. Material and
Methods: A retrospective cohort study of patients that underwent
abdominal CT scan for non-spine related reasons was performed. Age, body
mass index, smoking and CT-based characteristics as presence of
intervertebral vacuum phenomenon, subchondral sclerosis and facet joint
degeneration at the lumbar spine from L1 to Sacrum were included in order to
determine the prevalence of vacuum phenomenon in this population and
establish relationship between this condition and patients demographics and
other signs of spine degeneration such as sclerosis and facet joint disease.
Results: 238 patients were included in the study, (124
feminine/114 masculine), mean age of 75.6 ± 12.3. 91 patients had at least
one level of intervertebral vacuum phenomenon (38%). 59 patients exhibited
subchondral sclerosis (25%), and 235 facet joint degeneration (98%). Among
risk factors, age, smoking and subchondral sclerosis were significantly
associated with the presence of vacuum. Conclusion:
Intervertebral vacuum phenomenon was present in 38% of the patients
included. Risk factors associated with vacuum were age, smoking and
subchondral sclerosis.

## 519

## P313: Functional paraspinal muscle area at L3 in the diagnosis of
sarcopenia: establishing normative data in the Asian population and
proposing new surrogate measurements of muscle mass

Julia Ng

1

 and Jacob Oh

1

1

Orthopaedic Surgery, Tan Tock Seng Hospital, Singapore,
Singapore

Introduction: Low back pain and sarcopenia are highly prevalent
conditions in the elderly with significant correlations. A diagnosis of
sarcopenia requires both structural and functional measurements. Our study
sought to investigate two potential estimates of sarcopenia of paraspinal
muscles from routine imaging and to establish normative data for these
indices for the Asian population. Materials and Methods: 250
consecutive non-reformatted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) lumbosacral
spine studies of patients performed at our institution from 1 October 2018
to 31 December 2018 were reviewed in the unenhanced T2 sequence in the axial
slice closest to the level of the lumbar three (L3) superior end plate. For
each patient, bilateral multifidus and erector spinae muscles were measured
using two measurements each: functional muscle area (muscle without
intra-muscular fat) and total muscle area (muscle with its intramuscular
fat) were objectively measured using Fiji, an open-source biological image
analysis software8. Two ratios relevant to functional muscle area
were obtained: functional-to-total muscle area (fCSA:tCSA), and
intramuscular fat-to-functional muscle area (IFA:fCSA; i.e. Goutallier
staging). Multiple regression analysis was done to analyse the correlation
between symptoms of low back pain and the ratios of functional muscle area
for each of the 4 muscle groups, adjusting for age and gender.
Results: 166 patients were included in the study, with 63
aged ≥ 65 years old and 110 reporting symptoms of low back pain during the
scan. Gender distribution was equal. After adjusting for age and gender, our
study found no significant correlation between the presence of low back pain
and neither the fCSA:tCSA ratio nor the Goutallier staging for all 4
paraspinal muscles studied (p values > 0.05 for all measurements). Both
age and gender were significantly correlated to both ratios for all 4
paraspinal muscles (p < 0.05 for all ratios), except for the left ES
Goutallier staging ratio, where the effect of gender was not significant (p
= 0.295). Age- and gender-specific normative data for the two ratios were
further obtained. Older females consistently had the lowest fCSA:tCSA and
highest IFA:fCSA ratios across all 4 paraspinal muscles.
Conclusion: Our study is the first to describe normative
functional paraspinal muscle area data at the L3 level for the Asian
population. We show that functional paraspinal muscle area is poorly
correlated with the presence of low back pain, but is strongly related to
both age and gender. We propose a new measurement incorporating the extent
of myosteatosis, akin to the Goutallier staging of rotator cuff muscles, as
surrogate for muscle area in the diagnosis of sarcopenia.

## 589

## P314: Utility of seated lateral radiographs for the assessment of
degenerative spondylolisthesis

Tariq Issa

1

, Yunsoo Lee

1

, Mark Lambrechts

1

, Qudratallah Qadiri

1

, Caroline Zaworski

1

, Henley Spracklen

1

, Parker Brush

1

, Delano Trenchfield

1

, Jeremy Heard

1

, Jose Canseco

1

, Alan Hilibrand

1

, Alexander Vaccaro

1

, Christopher Kepler

1

, Gregory Schroeder

1

, and Joseph Lee

1

1

Division of Spine Surgery, Rothman Orthopaedic Institute,
Philadelphia, United States

Introduction: The clinical heterogeneity in degenerative
spondylolisthesis (DS) requires multiple imaging view to assess for the
degree of vertebral translation, loss of disc space, slip angle, and the
presence of instability. Traditional dynamic flexion and extension
radiographs have been demonstrated to have poor reliability for detection of
instability, are often pain-limited, and are not possible in patients with
limited mobility. While supine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is used for
preoperative planning and traditional four view radiographs may offer
information regarding DS, traditional protocols may expose patients to
unnecessary radiation at repeated office visits. Therefore, the primary
objective of this study was to evaluate which radiographic images and are
most important for the detection of DS severity and instability.
Material and Methods: A retrospective review was conducted
of all patients who received a clinical diagnosis of DS by a single provider
from January 2021 to May 2022. All patients receive baseline standing
lateral upright, lateral flexion, and seated flexion radiographs during
their office visits. Slip measurement parameters were collected from all
radiographs and MRI, when available. Angular instability was defined as a
change of at least 10 degrees, and translation instability was defined as a
change in vertebral translation of at least 8%. DS was classified according
to Meyerding and CARDS classifications. Univariate ANOVA was utilized to
compare continuous imaging parameters between images, and paired chi-square
tests were utilized to compare categorical variables. Results:
A total of 136 patients were included in this review. Most spondylolisthesis
occurred at L4-L5 (78.7%), followed by L5-S1 (11.8%), and L3-L4 (9.6%).
Seated flexion (Si) and standing flexion (Flex) radiographs revealed the
greatest degree of slip percentage (16.0% and 16.7%), while supine MRI
revealed the lowest slip percentage (12.2%). Seated flexion and standing
flexion radiographs produced more kyphosis (4.66 and 4.97 degrees,
respectively) than standing upright and MRI (7.19 and 7.20, respectively) (p
< 0.001). Seated flexion performed similarly to standing flexion in
identifying slip percentage, slip angle, and detecting the presence of disc
space collapse or kyphotic angulation (p > 0.05). Comparable numbers of
patients were classified in each CARDS (CARDS A, 19.1%; vs 18.4% CARDS B,
21.3% vs 24.3%; CARDS C, 47.1% vs. 40.4%; CARDS D, 12.5% vs 16.9%, p =
0.602) or Meyerding subgroup. Combination of seated flexion or standing
flexion with MRI performed better in detecting translational instability
than when combined with lateral upright films (31.5% vs 20.2%, p = 0.041,
and 28.1% vs 14.6%, p = 0.014, respectively). However, there was no
difference between seated flexion or standing flexion in detecting
translational or angular instability (all, p > 0.20).
Conclusion: Standing upright films do not provide any
additional information in the detection of DS and expose patients to
unnecessary radiation. The detection of instability may be reserved for
detection using MRI that will likely be indicated pre-operatively and may
combined with a single seated flexion radiograph rather dynamic
flexion/extension radiographs.

## 603

## P315: Dynamic standing lateral X-rays used to detect instability in
patients with lumbar spondylolisthesis: how accurate is the standard
technique? A modification aimed to obtain more precise results

Tuna Pehlivanoglu

1

, Bahadir Gokcen

2

, Gorkem Muratoglu

3

, Tugay Yagci

1

, O. Nuri Eroglu

1

, and Cagatay Ozturk

1

1

Dept. of Orthopaedic Surgery, Liv Hospital Ulus, Liv Spine Center
certified by AOSpine, Istanbul, Turkey

2

Dept. of Orthopaedic Surgery, Liv Hospital Vadi, Liv Spine Center
certified by AOSpine, Istanbul, Turkey

3

Dept. of Orthopaedic Surgery, Istinye Uni. Liv Hospital, Liv Spine
Center certified by AOSpine, Istanbul, Turkey

Introduction: Surgical decision making based on the level of
instability in patients with lumbar spondylolisthesis is of crucial
importance. However, no consensus exists in terms of the ideal radiographic
modality for the most accurate detection of instability, while standard
standing lateral dynamic (flexion-extension) X-rays (SSLDXR), which are
extremely subjective and totally dependend on patients’ physical and
cognitive abilities, are the most frequently used method to evaluate lumbar
instability. Hence, these functional X-rays might provide variable results.
The aim of the present study was to assess, if a modified version of
traditional dynamic X-rays might provide higher accuracy of instability
detection, together with more precise measurement of parameters used to
define instability (ST > 3 mm / > 8%, SA > 20°, PVO > 5°).
Methods: 37 consecutive patients with an average age of
68.7, who had a diagnosis of lumbar spondylolisthesis at the level L3-L4
were enrolled. They underwent first SSLDXR, and then the same X-rays were
taken as the patients in standing position leaned on a chair fixed to the
ground while doing the flexion and extension movements (modified standing
lateral dynamic X-Ray (mSLDXR)). Segmental angulation (SA), sagittal
translation (ST), posterior vertebral opening (PVO), lumbar lordosis and
rates of clinically detected instability were calculated and compared
between SSLDXR and its modified version. Results: Mean SA of
the SSLDXR and mSLDXR were 8.4°(3.8°-22.4°) and 14.9° (10.6°-31.2°) (p <
0.001). Mean ST of the SSLDXR and mSLDXR were 5.4% (4.3%-8.7%) and 10.2%
(7.4%-14.1%) (p < 0.001). Mean PVO of the SSLDXR and mSLDXR were
-2.7°(-6.1°-5.2°) and 5.2° (0.4°-6.8°) (p < 0.001). All parameters showed
significant difference between the two modalities. Average instability
detection rate of the SSLDXR and mSLDXR were 32.4% (12/37) and 78.3% (28/37)
(p < 0.001) underlining the superiority of the modification. Mean LL in
flexion of the SSLDXR and mSLDXR were 29.1° (15.2°-40.8°) and 18.4°
(4.6°-32.4°) (p = 0.003), while no significant difference was detected in
terms of LL in extension. As a result of the correlation analysis a
significant negative correlation was detected between LL in flexion and
differences of SA, ST and PVO, while no significant correlation was detected
between LL in extension and any of the parameters of instability.
Conclusion: Using the chair fixed to the ground a physical
assistive device and as a hinge point for lumbar flexion, provided a forced
lumbar movement, resulting in the provocation of the abnormal lumbar
mobility caused by lumbar instability due to spondylolisthesis. Hence,
radiographic parameters regarding the instability (SA, ST, PVO), which are
hindered by utilizing standard technique, are more pronounced are less
biased. This study concluded, that as compared to SSLDXR, by using the
mSLDXR technique, more precise values regarding the lumbar instability could
be obtained resulting in a superior rate of instability detection,
preventing cases that could be missed as a result of patients’ physical or
cognitive incapabilities leading to biased results if assessed for
instability with SSLDXR.

## 640

## P316: Relationship between lumbar disc herniation and sedimentation sign
in upright magnetic resonance images

Kishan Patel

1

, Seung Min Son

2

, Qiwen Zhang

1

, Jeffrey C. Wang

1

, and Zorica Buser

3

1
Orthopaedic Surgery, Keck School of Medicine,
Los Angeles, United States

2
Orthopaedic Surgery, Yangsan Hospital, Pusan
National University, Busan, South Korea

3

Grossman School of Medicine, Orthopaedic Surgery, New York, United
States

Introduction: The nerve root sedimentation sign is a
radiological sign that can serve as a predictor of lumbar spinal stenosis
(LSS) in symptomatic patients on supine and upright MRIs. Pathogenesis of a
positive sedimentation sign is hypothesized to occur due to compression of
the spinal canal. While the sedimentation sign has been seen in cases of
non-specific lower back pain, there are few studies determining the presence
of the sedimentation sign in other causes of spinal canal compression
besides LSS. Lumbar disc herniation can cause compression of the spinal
canal leading to radiculopathy. This study’s goal was to determine the
relationship between lumbar disc herniation and a positive nerve root
sedimentation sign on upright kinematic MRI patients. Material and
Methods: T2-weighted axial upright kMRI images were obtained of
100 patients with the presence of disc herniation in at least one lumbar
disc between L1/L2 and L4/L5. Sedimentation sign, spinal canal
anterior-posterior (AP) diameter, and disc height were measured. Size of
disc herniation, type of herniation, and zone of herniation were evaluated.
A positive sedimentation sign was defined as having either the majority of
nerve roots running ventrally or centrally in the canal or conglomeration of
the nerve roots at the mid-disc level. Herniation types were defined as
either no herniation, disc bulge, protrusion, extrusion, or sequestration.
Zones of herniation were categorized as either central, lateral, or far
lateral per MSU classification. T-test and Chi-Square test were performed to
determine measurements’ significance. Cohen’s kappa values were calculated
for intra-observer reliability. Results: The kappa value of
intra-observer reliability was 0.915. The kappa value of disc levels with a
negative sedimentation sign were seen more frequently (n = 326, 65.2%) than
those with a positive sedimentation sign (n = 174, 34.8%). A positive
sedimentation sign was seen most frequently at the L4/L5 (n = 50, 50%) disc
level. The incidence of Grade IV and V Pfirrmann grades were higher in
patients with a positive sedimentation sign at all disc levels. The spinal
canal AP diameter was found to be significantly decreased at the L3/L4 and
L4/L5 level in patients with a positive sedimentation sign. At all levels,
discs with a negative sedimentation sign were more likely to have no
herniation compared to those with a positive sign. Discs with a positive
sedimentation sign were seen to have a larger average size of disc
herniation compared to those with a negative sign at all levels. The
Chi-square statistic was significant at the L2/L3, L3/L4, and L4/L5 disc
levels for a relationship between positivity of the sedimentation sign and
type of disc herniation. No relationship was seen between herniation zones
and positivity of sedimentation sign. Conclusion: In the
current study a relationship between disc herniation and a positive
sedimentation sign in the lumbar spine was seen. Patients with a positive
sedimentation sign were seen to have larger disc herniations and more
severely degenerated discs. Further studies may elucidate if a positive
sedimentation sign indicates improved post-operative outcomes in discectomy
patients.

## 929

## P318: MRI appropriateness in the evaluation of chronic neck pain:
comparison of ordering practices and treatment outcomes for primary care
physicians and specialists

Danny Lynch

1

, Andrew Mr.

1

, Evan Johnson

2

, Xiang Zhu

3

, and John S. Kirkpatrick

4

1

Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Central Florida/HCA Healthcare
GME Consortium, Ocala, United States

2

Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Tennessee - Campbell Clinic,
Mephis, United States

3

Biostatistics, University of Central, Orlando, United
States

4

Orthopaedic Surgery, 13800 Veterans Way, Orlando, United
States

Introduction: Chronic neck pain is one of the most common
reasons for doctor visits in the U.S. This presentation can be effectively
evaluated through judicious use of patient history, physical and
radiographs. However, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) ordering frequently
precedes complete patient evaluation, posing a financial and medical risk to
patients. It was hypothesized that no difference in ordering practices,
treatment outcomes or ordering appropriateness would be appreciated based
upon ordering physician specialty. Material and Methods:
Retrospective chart review of consecutive charts was performed for cervical
spine MRIs at a VA medical center and its surrounding VA clinics between
January 2014 and June 2018. An American College of Radiology (ACR)
appropriateness score between 1 and 9 was determined for each MRI based on
duration and location of pain, accompanying symptoms, red flags (e.g.
incontinence, fever, chills, weight loss), and physical exam findings.
Results: 332 cases from neurologists (n = 24), orthopaedic
surgeons (n = 76), primary care physicians (n = 203), pain medicine
physicians (n = 21) and physiatrists (n = 8) were reviewed. Orthopaedic
surgeons ordered MRIs most appropriately with an average ACR appropriateness
score of 8.4 (p < 0.05). Orthopaedic surgeons had more comprehensive
physical exams, as they tested range of motion (p < 0.005) and sensory (p
< 0.005), performed a graded motor exam (p < 0.005), and utilized
provocative maneuvers such as Spurling’s test (p < 0.005) and
differentiating maneuvers such as Tinel’s test (p < 0.005) more often
than other specialties. Treatment outcomes did not vary by physician
specialty or ACR appropriateness score, except for patients of pain medicine
physicians who received interventional pain management more often (p =
0.000). Conclusion: Orthopaedic surgeons utilize MRI most
appropriately and have more comprehensive physical exams. These findings
suggest a need for increased physician education on what indicates an
appropriate MRI in order to improve the use of resources and further protect
patient risk-benefit profiles. Further research elucidating factors to
minimize negative findings in “appropriate” MRIs is indicated.

## 1030

## P319: Decay variance processing for multi-echo MRI in diagnosing
intervertebral disc degeneration - First in human results

Kyle Sheldrick

1

 and Ashish Diwan

1

1

University of New South Wales, Kensington, Australia

Introduction: Intervertebral disc degeneration is a cause of
back pain, however current diagnostic techniques in clinical practice
perform poorly. The work of Corniola et al demonstrated that changes in
Pfirrmann grade using T2 weighted MRI correlates poorly with patients’ self
rated levels of pain and disability. Further it does not predict patient
response to surgical intervention. We have previously described and
published “Decay Variance”, a non-relaxometry post-processing technique for
multi-echo T2 data, which correlated strongly with histological disc
degeneration in rabbits. Here we describe the first pilot usage in humans.
Material and Methods: We performed the Decay Variance scan
in adults with back pain and healthy controls. All participants with back
pain met inclusion criteria including: meeting the NIH definition of chronic
low back pain; pain present on > 50% of days over preceding 6 months,
other potential radiologically identified causes of back pain excluded on
structural MRI performed in the previous 12 months; aged at least 18.
Results: 15 participants were recruited, 12 with back pain
and 3 without back pain, 1 to 1 age matching of controls was planned but
abandoned due to the permanent closure of our MRI provider during the
COVID-19 pandemic. Participants with higher self-rated back pain severity
had worse Decay Variance scores. Participants with severe back pain (≥ 7/10)
had worse Decay Variance scores than those without (≤ 6/10), 3.03 ± 0.58 vs
1.87 ± 0.47. Self-rated back pain also correlated moderately strongly with
Decay Variance score using a Pearson correlation co-efficient (r^2 = 0.44, p
= 0.007). Conclusion: The results of this first in human pilot
study suggest that patients with more severe back pain have worse Decay
Variance values in their intervertebral discs, however caution is needed in
interpreting the results. The selection of participants, especially given
the NIH definition of chronicity limits the generalizability of this
finding, especially in regards to effect size and coefficient of
correlation. Further a cross sectional design, especially one without
patient matching such as ours, cannot address causality and is vulnerable to
residual confounding. The small sample size makes the estimates of effect
size imprecise. We have commenced a large longitudinal cohort study, funded
by the Australian government, to overcome these limitations, expected to be
complete 2024.

## 1429

## P320: Signal intensity changes of the second sacrum on MRI targeting the
lumbar spine indicate sacral insufficiency fracture

Kohei Ohta

1

, Hiroki Ikuchi

2

, Takayuki Ogawa

3

, and Akihiro Nagamachi

1

1

Orthopedic Surgery, Yoshinogawa Medical Center, Tokushima,
Japan

2

Orthopedic Surgery, Takamatsu Municipal Hospital, Kagawa,
Japan

3

Orthopedic Surgery, Sakaide Kaisei Hospital, Kagawa, Japan

Introduction: The incidence of sacral insufficiency fracture
(SIF) has been reported to be 1.0% to 1.8% in at-risk patient populations.
Patients with SIF most commonly complain low back pain, buttock pain, hip
pain or other symptoms similar to the lumbar spine diseases. Diagnosis of
SIF often delayed because appropriate diagnostic imaging studies sometimes
lack due to the characteristics of the symptoms. Tamaki reported signal
changes in the second sacrum on sagittal view of MRI targeting the lumbar
spine indicated SIF in 4 patients. This finding will help early diagnosis of
SIF. The purpose of this study was to clarify the clinical features of SIF
and verify the usefulness of the signal changes in the second sacrum on
sagittal view of MRI targeting the lumbar spine in diagnosis of SIF.
Material and Methods: Forty-two patient with SIF
participated in this study. There were 6 male and 36 females and their mean
age was 81 years. Mean bone mineral density was 0.681g/cm2. Cause
of injury and initial symptom extracted from the electric medical record.
Twenty-nine of 42 patients underwent MRI targeting the lumbar spine at the
first visit. We observed signal intensity changes of T1-weighted image,
T2-weighted image and Short T1 Inversion Recovery (STIR) on MRI sagittal
view. Results: The causes of injury were falling down in 28
cases (66.7%), falling in 4 cases (9.5%), farm work in 2 cases (4.8%),
massage in 1 case (2.4%) and unknown in 7 cases (16.7%). The initial
symptoms were low back pain in 27 cases (64.3%), buttock pain in 21 cases
(50%), leg pain in 6 cases (14.3%), hip pain in 8 cases (19.0%) and sacral
pain in 4 cases (9.5%). Signal intensity changes of the second sacrum on MRI
sagittal view were observed in all 29 patients. Low signal intensity of
T1-weighted image was observed in all patients. High signal intensity, low
signal intensity and both high and low signal intensity on T2-weighted
images were observed in 11 (37.9%), 14 (48.3%) and 4 patients (13.8%),
respectively. High signal intensity changes on STIR image were observed in
all 29 patients. Conclusion: Linstrom et al. reported an
anatomical and biomechanical analysis showing that the horizontal component
of the fracture seems to develop at a later stage after loss of support of
the central sacrum from the laterally positioned vertical fracture in the
sagittal plane. The loss of lateral sacral alar support causes the entire
weight of the upper body to be longitudinally transferred down the central
portion of the sacral bodies, which include the second sacrum. We consider
that signal changes at the second sacrum on lumbar MRI indicate an
insufficiency fracture or bone marrow lesion caused by this mechanism. The
initial symptoms of SIF are similar to those of lumbar spine disease. Signal
intensity changes on sagittal view of the second sacrum of MRI targeting the
lumbar spine was a valuable finding in early diagnosis of SIF.

## 1537

## P321: Discrepancies between radiologist and spine surgeon interpretations
of cervical and lumbar stenosis

Graysen Petersen-Fitts

1

, Edwin Chaharbakhshi

2

, John France

2

, Sanford Emery

2

, Shari Cui

2

, and Scott Daffner

2

1

Bluegrass Orthopaedics, Lexington, United States

2

Department of Orthopaedics, West Virginia University, Morgantown,
United States

Introduction: Previous studies have demonstrated poor interrater
reliability of imaging interpretation between surgeons of various
specialties and radiologists for a variety of pathologic conditions.
Discrepancies in radiologic interpretations can lead to diagnostic
frustration and difficulty formulating treatment plans. Moreover,
third-party payors often rely on documented radiology reports rather than
surgeons’ independent interpretation of imaging studies (and never review
the actual images), which can impact insurance authorization for surgery or
reimbursement. Ultimately, conflicting radiologic interpretations may
negatively impact patient care. The purpose of this study was to evaluate
the rate of and degree to which radiologists and spine surgeons differ in
interpreting magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies in the setting of
cervical and lumbar spinal stenosis. Material and Methods: A
retrospective review was performed at a single academic institution of 100
consecutive patients undergoing decompressive surgery of either cervical or
lumbar spine in 2018. Patients’ documented preoperative MRI interpretation
from both the radiologist and the orthopaedic spine surgeon were compared.
Degree of pathology was classified as “mild,” “moderate,” or “severe.”
Demographic data was also recorded. Outcomes included the frequency of
discrepancies as well as the degree of discrepancy (ie “mild” vs
“moderate”). Chi squared analysis was performed to evaluate for differences
between observed and expected outcomes. Results: A total of 100
patients were included (49 males) including 44 cervical and 56 lumbar
studies. Discrepancies were identified in 65 cases (65%). There was no
statistically significant association between patient age, gender, or BMI
and whether a discrepancy existed. There was a trend toward discrepancies
being more common when interpreting cervical MRI than lumbar (p = 0.063).
There were 14 instances (21.5%) of two-grade discrepancy where radiologists
interpreted pathology as “mild” and the spine surgeon interpreted the same
pathology as “severe.” Conclusion: Our data found that
disagreements in MRI interpretation between orthopaedic spine surgeons and
radiologists occur more often than not. Moreover, the discrepancies were
often two-grades, with spine surgeons rating pathology as more severe.
Although this study was not designed to elucidate the reasons behind
discrepancies, we hypothesize that this is due to the spine surgeons also
having information from the physical examination of the patient when
interpreting imaging studies. Given the implications of these discrepancies
including denial or delay of care by third-party payors, we propose that
when such differences exist, payors should defer to the interpretation
provided by the physician who has actually examined the patient.

## 1548

## P322: Evaluating the safe zone for lumbar pedicle screws: a 3D image
analysis using virtual screws

Tony Tannoury

1

, Henry Hojoon Seo

1

, Aziz Saade

1

, Bachir Atallah

2

, Mirna Chahine

2

, and Chadi Tannoury

1

1

Orthopaedic Surgery, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston,
United States

2

Lebanese University, Beirut, Lebanon

Introduction: Pedicle screw breach (PSB) is not uncommon
following lumbar instrumentation, and in some instances, it may lead to
vascular and/or neurologic complications. Previous literature suggested that
screws crossing the vertebral midline on an anterior-posterior (AP)
radiograph (or midsagittal on CT) are concerning for medial pedicle
breach.Our primary aim was to map out the safe zones (SZ) of bilateral
pedicle instrumentation and their relationship at each lumbar vertebral
level. Our secondary aim was to evaluate the presence of SZs’ intersection
at each lumbar level, denoting safe midline pedicle screws crossing not
otherwise associated with medial pedicle breach. Material and
Methods: CT scans of 51 patients were randomly selected from “The
Cancer Imaging Archive” (TCIA) online database for analysis. The Sectra 3D
Spine software was used to create 3D renderings, place virtual screws, and
make measurements. At each lumbar vertebra, the right and left pedicle
corridors were mapped. At each pedicle, two screw positions were templated,
the “medial limit screw” (MLS) and the “lateral limit screw” (LLS). Each
limit screw was the most extreme position that the screw could exist in
without causing a medial or lateral breach. The safe zone was defined as the
zone between MLS and LLS. Measurements were taken for each level (between
L1-L5) and side (Left, Right). Results: A total of 253 lumbar
vertebrae from 51 patients (mean age 53.1, 56.9% male) were included. Two
vertebrae from two patients were removed for poor image quality. Out of the
506 screw positions analyzed in our study, 97.4% had overlapping SZ and
crossed the midplane without medial pedicle breach. The significant factors
(p < 0.01) for safe midplane-crossing screws included: the screw length
(L1-L5); laterality of the screw entry point (L1-L4); and pedicle diameter
(L2 and L5). Conclusion: A midline crossing pedicle screw on a
lumbar AP radiograph is not necessarily indicative of a medial pedicle screw
breach. Anatomical (i.e. larger pedicles diameter) and technical (i.e.
longer screws, and lateral entry points) factors allow for safety zone
intersections and indicate safe midline crossing by pedicle screws.

## 1647

## P323: Management protocol of patients with lumbar spinal stenosis, using
the qualitative grading as a tool

Jayprakash Modi

1,2

 and Pratikkumar Prajapati

2

1

Orthopaedic, Nutan Medical College, Mehsansa, India

2

Orthopaedic, B J Medical College, Ahmedabad, India

Objectives: Several parameters exist for assessment of lumbar
spinal stenosis (LSS) but these parameters lack clinical correlation. To
formulate a protocol for management of these group of patients using the
qualitative grading as a tool. Materials and methods: A
prospective study was undertaken using the qualitative grading on magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) to assess the clinical outcome of LSS at a single
level. Irrespective of the grade every patient underwent a minimum 3 months
period of conservative management after which depending on the Oswestry
disability index (ODI) and visual analogue scale (VAS) for pain he was
grouped into success or failure and the failed patients were advised for
decompression surgery at the involved level. These patients were then
further assessed after a period of 3 months after surgery. A decrease in ODI
by 10 points and a 20 points decrease in VAS was considered as a success.
Results: Out of the 90 patients, there were 61 failures in
conservative group, out of these 57 were operated of which only nine did not
match the success criteria, while the other four either refused surgery or
were lost to follow-up. In grades A1 to 3, only two patients failed
conservative trial while from A4 to D, there was a gradual decline in
success of conservative trial. Conclusion: Qualitative grading
is a useful tool in LSS and correlates with the clinical outcome and to
decision making of these patients.

## 1671

## P324: Evaluation of axonal injury with filtered diffusion weighted
magnetic resonance imaging in cervical spondylotic myelopathy

Saman Shabani

1

, Shekar N. Kurpad

1

, and Matthew Budde

1

1

Neurological Surgery, Medical College of Wisconsin, Wauwatosa,
United States

Introduction: In cervical spondylotic myelopathy (CSM), axonal
injury is believed to be the main correlate with functional outcome.
Although diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) is sensitive to microscopic
pathologies, its utility has been limited in CSM in setting of substantial
edema or myelomalacia. The purpose of this study was to assess the spinal
cord diffusion measures in patients with CSM using a new filtered diffusion
weighted imaging (fDWI) technique that aims to reduce the confounding
effects of edema and extracellular water on the measured diffusion values.
Materials and Methods: Twenty-one patients with CSM
underwent pre-surgical fDWI and DTI scans on 3T MRI system. DTI was obtained
with 25 directions at a b-value of 800 s/mm2. fDWI employed
spinal cord-optimized diffusion weighting along 26 directions with a
“filter” b-value of 2000 s/mm2 and “probe” max b-value of 1000
s/mm2. Parallel diffusivity metrics obtained from DTI and
fDWI were compared to one another and with metrics derived from
T2-weighted MRI including relative signal changes and lesion
size. Results: The parallel apparent diffusion coefficient
(fADC||) acquired from fDWI at the level of maximum
compression (-15.16 ± 12.07%) decreased relative to most cranial slice and
had a larger change than axial diffusivity (AD) acquired by DTI (-3.18 ±
14.41%). A linear regression identified a significant relationship between
AD and T2 metrics (r2 = 0.453, p = 0.05) whereas
fADC|| was not significantly related to T2 metrics
(r2 = 0.069, p = 0.70). AD was significantly increased at
spinal cord slices with T2 intensities (t(81) = 1.65, p = 0.05) compared to
slices without T2 abnormalities, whereas fADC||was not
significantly different between spinal cord slices with or without T2
abnormalities. Conclusions: The results demonstrate that filter
diffusion encoding reduces the coupling between T2 spinal cord changes and
diffusion measurements that are presumed to reflect extracellular water and
can considerably affects DTI metrics. Future studies evaluating the
relationships with functional status and outcomes in a larger cohort of CSM
patients would be beneficial.

## 1953

## P325: MRI-tractography as a method to predict neurological recovery in
patients with cervical spinal cord injury

Oleksii Nekhlopochyn

1

, Ievgenii Slynko

1

, Vadim Verbov

2

, and Yurii Derkach

1

1

Spinal Neurosurgery

2

Restorative Neurosurgery Department, Romodanov Neurosurgery
Institute, Kyiv, Ukraine

Introduction: The achievement of scientific and technical
progress in recent decades, the introduction of computer and magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) into clinical practice made it possible to review
both tactical approaches to the treatment of neurologically complicated
cervical spine injuries, as well as the criteria for predicting the
long-term results of therapy. Currently, MRI is the gold standard in the
diagnosis of traumatic injuries of the spinal cord in patients with
neurological deficits. This is due to the high informativeness of
visualization of soft tissue structures, in particular the spinal cord, the
possibility of detecting damage to the disc-ligamentous apparatus of the
spinal column, and the absence of ionizing radiation. However, the data of
the literature ambiguously interpret the correlation between MRI results and
the degree of neurological disorders. The idea of our study is the primary
assessment of the prognostic features of MRI tractography in patients with
severe subaxial cervical spine and spinal cord injury. Material and
Methods: The clinical group consisted of 5 patients hospitalized
in the Department of Spine Surgery Romodanov Neurosurgery Institute during
period from April to July 2019 with severe traumatic injury of the cervical
spine and spinal cord. MRI was performed in the following modes: T1W, T2W,
FLAIR, STIR, T2W FFE, CSF flow and DTI in 5-7 days after surgery. The
dynamics of neurological disorders regression were evaluated according to
the International Standards for Neurological Classification of Spinal Cord
Injury. The level of spinal canal traumatic stenosis of the was determined
by SCT both before and after surgical correction. Due to the small clinical
group, statistical processing of the obtained digital indicators was not
performed. The main task was to identify general patterns in order to
determine the direction of further detailed studies. Results:
Spinal cord edema at the damage level was observed in 100% of patients, that
corresponded to the level of neurological disorders. The presence of
hemorrhagic component was detected in 3 patients, while post-traumatic
spinal stenosis was: more than 50% - 1 patient, up to 50% - 1 patient and
less than 25% - 1 patient. Spinal cord parenchyma edema was accompanied by
varying degrees of compression of the cerebrospinal spaces, from subtotal to
total, with the presence or absence of a hemorrhagic component that did not
affect the intensity of cerebrospinal fluid flow disorders. Evaluation of
DTI results showed a moderate inverse relationship between fractional
anisotropy (FA) and mean diffusivity (MD) indicators. In 2 patients, a
regression of neurological disorders was registered. Restoration of
sensory-motor functions did not correlate with the degree of compression of
the spinal canal or the nature of changes in the parenchyma of the spinal
cord, but was noted in patients with maximum FA values and low MD.
Conclusion: Tractography is an informative predictor of the
regression of neurological disorders in patients with severe spine and
spinal cord injury. Further studies are needed to identify the optimal
timing of its implementation and to establish diagnostically significant
values of anisotropic diffusion indices.

## Infections

## 69

## P326: Incidence and predictors of postoperative wound infection in the
MENA region: a multicenter retrospective cohort study

Sameh Abolfotouh

1

, Mohamed Khattab

2

, Atiq Uz Zaman

3

, Omar Alnori

4

, Alaa Zakout

4

, Faisal Konbaz

5

, Tarek ElHawala

6

, Ghazwan Hassan

7

, Sami Aleissa

5

, and Mostafa Abolfotouh

5

1

Orthopedics Department, MEDCARE Hospital, Dubai, United Arab
Emirates

2

Orthopedics Department, Ain Shams University, Cairo, Egypt

3

Orthopedics and Spine Surgery Department, Lahore Medical and Dental
College, Ghurki Trust Teaching Hospital, Lahore, Pakistan

4

Orthopedics and Spine Surgery Department, Hamad Medical Corporation,
Doha, Qatar

5

Orthopedics Department, King Abdulaziz Medical City (KAMC), National
Guard Health Affairs, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia

6

Orthopedics Department, Faculty of Medicine, Zagazig University,
Spine Unit, Zagazig, Egypt

7

Orthopedics Department, Royal Private Hospital, Baghdad,
Iraq

Study Design: Retrospective cohort study.
Objectives: This study aimed to estimate the incidence of
postoperative surgical site infection (SSI) following spine surgeries and
its associated factors. Methods: This is a multicenter
retrospective study of all patients ≥ 14 years of age, who had undergone
spine surgeries between January 2014 to December 2019, at 6 tertiary
referral centers in the MENA region (n = 5,872). Patients’ medical records
were examined to collect data on: (1) Patient’s characteristics, (2) Disease
characteristics, (3) Spine surgery approach, and (4) characteristics of
Postoperative SSI. Logistic regression analysis was applied to identify the
predictors of postoperative SSI. Significance was considered at p ≤ 0.05.
Results: The overall incidence of SSI was 4.2 percent (95%
CI: 3.72-4.77), in the form of deep (46.4%), superficial (43.1%), dehiscence
(9.3%) and organ space (1.2%) infections. After adjusting for all possible
confounders, significant predictors of postoperative SSI were; diabetes
(OR=2.12, p < 0.001), smoking (OR = 1.66, p = 0.002), revision surgery
(OR = 2.20, p < 0.001), open surgery (OR = 2.73, p < 0.001,
perioperative blood transfusion (OR = 1.45, p = 0.033), ASA class III (OR =
2.08, p = 0.002), and ≥ 4 days length of stay “LOS” (OR, 1.71, p = 0.001). A
cut-off 4 days was the optimum LOS at which the postoperative SSI is more
likely to occur, with 0.70 sensitivity, 0.47 specificity, and 0.61 area
under the curve. Conclusion: This is the first study that
highlighted the incidence of postoperative SSI in spine surgery in the MENA
region. Incidence figures are comparable to figures in different regions of
the world. Identifying predictors of SSI might help high‐risk patients
benefit from more intensive wound management.

## 81

## P327: Intraoperative topical antibiotics administration in instrumented
spine surgery as a efficient tool to reduce post-operative infections. A
multicenter comparative analysis and literature review

Giovanni Barbagli

1

, Elisabetta Peppucci

1

, Mariano Vitelli

1

, Nicoletta Gargiuoli

1

, Giulio Wembagher

2

, Matteo Capozza

3

, Giuseppe Cavallo

1

, Alexander Evins

4

, Alessandro DiChirico

1

, Stefano Romoli

2

, and Sandro Carletti

1

1

Neurosurgery, IFCA, Firenze, Italy

2

Spine Surgery Unit, Azienda Ospedaliero Universitaria Careggi,
Firenze, Italy

3

Neurosurgery, Azienda USL Toscana Nord-ovest, Livorno,
Italy

4

Neurosurgery, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, United
States

Introduction: The use of topical antibiotic (i.e. vancomycin) in
addition to intravenous administration of antibiotics has been reported as
an effective tool in reducing the rate of surgical site infections (SSI),
which could be very serious complications, in particular in fusion spine
surgery. However, it is not widely used yet. The recent trend in fusion
surgical spine procedures carries along an increased rate of revision
surgeries that are associated with more durotomies and prolonged surgical
length. Both these factors are well-known predictors of SSI; other important
point is an increasing incidence of well-known risk factors such as obesity,
diabetes and smoking. Moreover, SSIs may require surgical debridement, which
leads to higher postoperative morbidity and mortality. The aim of the study
is to evaluate the rate of infections between different cohorts, treated in
different high-volume centers in Italy and estimate the efficacy in reducing
SSIs when a topical antibiotic is added to a routinary intravenous one.
Material and Methods: Six hundred fifty-eight patients
underwent elective lumbar and lumbosacral fusion procedures from 01/02/2021
to 28/2/2022 were evaluated. Descriptive and inferential statistics were
performed using IBM®SPSS® Statistics v.27.0.1.0
analysis software. Descriptive analyses were performed using the frequency
for the nominal variables and the means (± standard deviation) for the
continuous variables. Statistical inference with continuous numerical
variables stratified by groups (patients treated with vancomycin / patients
not treated with vancomycin) was performed with the non-parametric
Mann-Whitney U test with independent samples. The analysis to assess any
difference in risk factors and complications of an infectious nature between
the two groups (vancomycin / only iv antibiotic) was carried out using the
Fisher's exact test. An error α = 0.05 was considered for statistical
significance. Authors carried out a complete literature review and compared
the results of the study with the current data on Pubmed and MEDLINE.
Results: The gender distribution of our series was quite
balanced, with 50.9% of patients being female and 49.1% male. The mean age
of the patients was 58.4 (± 14.2) years, while the mean surgical time was
128.7 (± 68.7) minutes with a minimum of 15 and a maximum of 495 minutes.
Surgical time was found to be higher in the group of treated with vancomycin
than in the untreated one, with a statistically significant difference (p =
0.001), while there was no significance for the difference in age between
the two groups (p = 0.09). 71.6% of patients received intraoperative
vancomycin powder and, in this group, the infection rate was 1.5% while in
the non-vancomycin group the rate of infection was 16%. The use of
vancomycin was found to be associated with a lower occurrence of infectious
post-operative complications, with a very high statistical significance (p =
0.001). Conclusion: The intrawound application of vancomycin
powder in addition to intravenous administration of antibiotics may
significantly reduce the risk of surgical site infections (SSIs) after
spinal surgeries. Further studies with larger sample size and high quality
are needed to provide more evidence.

## 135

## P328: Epidemiological and clinical features of infections
spondylodiscitis

Baghdedi Nahla

1

, Imen Chaabeen

1

, Jlidi Mohamed

2

, Sabrine Bachrouch

1

, Haifa Tounssi

1

, Mohamed Hedi Gharbi

2

, Mouldi Lamouchi

2

, Walid Bouaicha

2

, Zeineb Alaya

1

, Selim Daas

2

, and Raja Amri

1

1

Internal Medicine Department, Hospital of Mohamed Taher Maamouri,
Nabeul, Tunisia

2

Hospital of Mohamed Taher Maamouri, Orthopedics and Traumatology
Departments, Nabeul, Tunisia

Introduction: Infectious spondylodiscitis (SPI) is a disease
with increasing prevalence that can result in poor functional outcome and
progressive spinal deformity. The objective of our study is to summarize the
epidemiological characteristics, clinical features, diagnosis and the
treatment of SPI. Material and Methods: We analyzed the medical
records of cases of SPI hospitalized in internal medicine department of the
HMTM hospital in Nabeul Tunisia during the period from January 2018 to
December 2021. Results: Thirty-two patients were included (25
males and 7 females). The mean age was 59.5 years. A history of diabetes was
found in 13 cases, recent surgery in 2 cases, immunosuppression in 1 case
and end stage kidney failure in 13 cases (Hemodialysis patients). The most
common symptom was back pain (96.8%) and fever (50%). Three patients
presented neurological deficit. The average time to diagnosis was 2 months
and 7 days [3days-6months]. Spinal MRI and CT, performed respectively in 90%
and 59%. The lumbar level was the most common site of infection (71.9%).
Twenty three patients had complicated abscess formation over the epidural
space (71.9%), psoas muscle (11 cases), and paraspinal area (13 cases).
Spinal cord compression was noted in 8 cases. Blood cultures were positive
in 17 cases. 14 patients underwent a CT guided biopsy, and one patient
underwent a surgical biopsy. SPI was pyogenic spondylodiscitis in 25 cases,
tuberculous spondylodiscitis in 5 cases and 2brucella spondylitis. All
patients received a specific antibiotic treatment, and the average treatment
duration was 14 weeks. Two deaths were observed. Neurological sequelae were
noted in 2 cases. Conclusion: SPI remain a difficult diagnosis.
The clinico-radiological presentation as well as the treatment vary
according to the germ in question. Tuberculosis spondylitis remain frequent
in our country. A good etiological investigation is necessary to initiate
adequate treatment.

## 136

## P329: Clinical characteristics of 96 patients presenting with
hematogenous spinal osteomyelitis - a retrospective study

Eeric Truumees

1

, Devender Singh

1

, Jeremiah Alexander

2

, Calvin Chandler

3

, Ashley Duncan

1

, Matthew Geck

1

, and John Stokes

1

1

Spine, Ascension Texas Spine and Scoliosis, Austin, United
States

2

Orthopedics

3

Spine, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, United
States

Introduction: Most spinal infection in adults occurs in the wake
of invasive procedures, wherein flora have been directly inoculated into the
spine and its surrounding soft tissues. Hematogenous spinal osteomyelitis,
on the other hand, results from bacterial spread from a distant site.
Aim: This study aims to detail our series of patients with
hematogenous spinal osteomyelitis. Materials and Methods: The
medical records of patients presenting to two tertiary care centers with
hematogenous spinal osteomyelitis were abstracted using ICD-10 codes M46.20
to M46.59. We collected age, sex, body mass index (BMI), comorbidities,
affected spinal region, microbiological details, type and duration of pre
and postop antibiotics, length of hospital stay (LOS), reoperation, and
mortality. Long-term antibiotics were those in use > 6 months.
Results: Ninety-six consecutive patients with hematogenous
vertebral osteomyelitis were included. The median age was 59.5 years; 64%
were male; median BMI was 27.7. Most infections occurred in the lumbar
region (44.2%), followed by the thoracic spine (37.9%), more than two spinal
regions (10%) and cervical spine (8.9%). Biopsy was performed in 94.1% of
cases and returned positive cultures in 93.4%. Of the cultures taken, MRSA
accounted for 9%; MSSA, 26%; Streptococcus species, 12%; other gram-positive
bacteria, 23%; gram-negative, 17%; fungal, 2.6%; and 11.5% of cultures
returned no growth. Sixty-one patients ultimately underwent surgery to treat
their disease. Of the 61-undergoing surgery, 41% underwent secondary
surgeries due to a heavy wound burden of necrotic tissue and pus, or the
failure of multimodal care including antibiotics and debridement. Of
these, 57% of the patients had undergone a trial of
antibiotics preoperatively, with a mean course of 37.2 ± 25.7
days. Postoperative antibiotics were prescribed to all
patients, with a mean length of 70.2 days. Mean LOS was 17.9 ± 15.3 days.
Additionally, 51.6% of the patients were prescribed long-term antibiotic
therapy. The overall mortality rate was 3.1%. All three patients underwent
surgery. Demographic and clinical characteristics of the deceased patients
include a mean age of 64 years, majority male (66.7%), who had major
comorbidities such as diabetes, anemia, obstructive lung disease and
hypertension. Major cause of death was septic shock. Major post-infection
sequelae occurred in 24.5% of patients. Patients suffering sequelae had a
mean age of 69.3 years, were mostly male (83%) and carried major
comorbidities including diabetes, anemia, hypertension and renal disease.
The most common sequelae were persistent infection, sepsis, and abscess.
Conclusions: The presence of major comorbidities (diabetes,
hypertension, and renal failure) appear to increase the risk of
post-infection sequelae and death. Our population included patients
hospitalized in a tertiary care center with spinal osteomyelitis. They were
therefore more likely to carry concomitant diagnoses such as epidural
abscess, resulting in a high rate of surgical intervention. A future study
with a larger sample size utilizing logistic regression would be able to
identify significant risk factors both for hematogenous infection itself,
and for failure of non-operative and initial operative care. In the
meanwhile, available data suggests that patients presenting with
hematogenous osteomyelitis be followed closely as failure of non-operative
management was high.

## 207

## P330: Comparison of outcomes in thoracolumbar fusion wound closure done
by spine surgeons versus plastic surgeons in varying levels of vertebral
fusion

Jini Jeon

1

, Aaron Hui

1

, Henry Hoang

1

, Dan Berman

1

, Ananth Eleswarapu

1

, and Jonathan Krystal

1

1

Orthopedics, Montefiore Medical Center, Bronx, United
States

Introduction: Plastic surgeons are often involved in closure of
complex thoracolumbar fusion surgeries performed by spine surgeons.
Indications for plastic surgeon involvement is not standardized. A possible
indication that may be used is the number of spinal levels fused. This study
aims to further evaluate and compare outcomes for thoracolumbar fusion wound
closures performed by spine surgeons versus those done by plastic surgeons
across varying levels of total fused vertebrae. Material and
Methods: A retrospective cohort analysis of 301 patients who
underwent a thoracolumbar fusion at a single institution in the Bronx from
2016-2018 was performed. Demographic, surgical, and post-operative variables
were collected. The patients were placed into two cohorts: wound closure
done by a spine surgeon (S) and wound closure done by a plastic surgeon (P).
Cases were also categorized based on number of vertebrae fused: 1-2 levels,
3-6 levels, and ≥ 7 levels. The primary outcomes were length (days) of
postoperative hospital stay, and return to operating room for culture
positive infection and debridement. Our secondary outcome outcomes were
return to the emergency department (ED) within 90 days. An independent two
sample t-test assuming unequal variances was conducted to compare the
average length of postoperative hospital stay. A Fisher’s exact test of
independence was done to determine if there was a difference in rates of
returning to the operating room for culture positive infection and
debridement, revision and emergency room within 90 days.
Results: Three hundred and one patients were identified and
categorized into spine surgeon closure (N = 272), and plastic surgeon
closure (N = 29). In the S cohort: N= 186, 73, 13 were categorized into 1-2
levels, 3-6 levels, and ≥ 7 levels fused respectively. In the P cohort: N =
6, 13, and 10 cases were categorized into 1-2 levels, 3-6 levels, and ≥ 7
levels fused respectively. There was no statistically significant difference
in mean days of postoperative hospital stay between the S and P cohorts
across all levels of fusion. For return to OR for positive culture I&D,
there was statistical significance for 1-2 levels and 3-6 levels of fusion.
There was no significant statistical different between the two cohorts in
return to ED within 90 days of operation for any spinal level fusions.
Conclusion: Findings suggest that a plastic surgery wound
closure in thoracolumbar fusion does not reduce length of postoperative
hospital stay when compared to spine closure across all levels of vertebral
fusion. Plastic surgery closure was found to be non-advantageous over spine
surgeon closure with higher rates of return to OR due to infection in
shorter levels of fusion, which may be explained by patient factors not
explored in this study, such as age, BMI, smoking history, and degree of
complex anatomy. There was no difference in rates of return to ED within 90
days post-op between the cohorts across all levels. Additional studies may
be conducted to further evaluate different factors of complexity that
indicate for plastic surgery wound closure versus spine surgeon wound
closure, and patient outcomes.

## 237

## P331: Removal of instrumentation is not required to successfully treat
post-operative wound infections in most cases

Viral Patel

1

, Benjamin Mueller

1

, Amir Mehbod

1

, Manuel Pinto

1

, James Schwender

1

, Timothy Garvey

1

, John Dawson

1

, and Joseph Perra

1

1

Twin Cities Spine Center, Minneapolis, United States

Introduction: Recommendations for treating surgical site
infections (SSI) in instrumented spine cases include both removing the
implants and retaining the implants. In either case, successful treatment
means eradicating the infection and preventing its recurrence. Retaining the
implants may be advantageous because they help maintain stability. We
studied the persistence of SSI in relation to retaining or removing spinal
implants. Material and Methods: Spine surgery patients who
underwent irrigation and debridement (I&D) for a SSI were studied.
Persistence (recurrence or non-recurrence) of infection in relation to
implant status, fusion status, and patient reported outcomes were analyzed.
Results: One hundred thirty five patients were studied.
Implants were retained in 64% (87/135) of patients; 7% (6/87) had a
persistent infection. Implants were removed in 36% (48/135) of patients; 6%
(3/48) had a persistent infection. Thus, we detected no difference between
persistence with implants present versus implants removed (p = 1.0). Fifty
patients (37%) patients received irrigation and debridement (I&D) and
primary wound closure and 85 patients (63%) received I&D and
vacuum-assisted closure (VAC) treatment. There was no statistical difference
in SSI persistence between primary wound closure and VAC treatment (p =
0.15). Fusion status and persistent infection were unrelated. At minimum
one-year follow up, achieving a minimum clinically important difference
(MCID) for functional outcome was independent of recurrence or
non-recurrence of the infection. Conclusion: Persistent
infection was unrelated to the retention or removal of implants. Those with
a persistent infection were no more likely to exhibit pseudoarthrosis than
those with no persistent infection. All our patients' self-reported
functional outcomes were improved at minimum 1-year follow up.

## 258

## P332: Epidemiological and clinical characteristics of patients with
spinal tuberculosis at a regional spine center in South-west Nigeria

Taofeek Adeyemi

1

, Adetunji Toluse

1

, Mustapha F. Alimi

1

, Gbolabo Babajide Idowu-Deifa

1

, and Babatunde A. Osundina

1

1

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery and Trauma, National Orthopaedic
Hospital Igbobi, Lagos, Nigeria

Background: Although Tuberculosis is one of the world’s oldest
disease, it is still a major public health issue in developing countries
with profound medical, social and economic impact. The objective of this
study was to investigate the epidemiological and clinical characteristics of
patients treated for spinal tuberculosis at a regional spine center in
South-west Nigeria. Methods: This study was a retrospective
observational study. We extracted data from the medical records of all cases
of spinal tuberculosis that presented at the hospital between January 2017
and December 2019. Epidemiological, clinical characteristics, imaging
findings, laboratory test results and treatment methods were recorded and
analyzed. Results: During this three-year period, 171 cases of
spinal Tuberculosis were identified. The patients’ mean age was 43 ± 15.7
years with a slight male predominance (56.1%). Axial pain was the main
clinical manifestation (81.9%); 51.5% presented with over 6 months of
symptoms. Prior history suggestive of pulmonary tuberculosis was seen in
14%. The most common imaging technique was x-ray (94.2%), followed by
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (87.1%). Majority of the lesions involved the
lumbar spine (50.3%), followed by the thoracolumbar spine (23.4%); with
70.2% having less than 3 vertebral involvement. The Erythrocyte
Sedimentation Rate (ESR) was elevated in 79% of cases at diagnosis. Varying
degrees of neurological impairment were seen in 92 (53.8%) patients and 17%
presented with back deformity. All had combination anti-tuberculosis
chemotherapy and a minimum follow up of 12 months. Majority of patients
(91.2%) were managed non-operatively. Neurological improvement was seen in
59.8% of those with neurological deficit. No mortality was recorded.
Conclusions: Spinal tuberculosis affected the productive
age groups most. Late presentation and neurological impairment was seen in
majority of cases. Persistence of neurological impairment is a concern.
There is a need for strategic intervention to encourage early presentation
and appropriate management to reduce morbidity.

## 377

## P334: Significance of cutibacterium acnes in intraoperative cultures
during spinal instrumentation

Geno Tai

1,2

, Gina Suh

2

, Brian Lahr

3

, Paul Huddleston

4

, and Aaron Tande

2

1

Infectious Diseases and International Medicine, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, United States

2

Infectious Diseases

3

Quantitative Health Sciences

4

Orthopedic Surgery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, United States

Introduction:Cutibacterium acnesis a known
pathogen in spinal hardware infections. The ideal management for these cases
is unknown, and there is a lack of data on treatment outcomes. We described
the outcomes of cases with actual infections (AI) and clinically
insignificant (CI) cultures. Material and Methods: We performed
a retrospective study of patients aged 18 years or older who underwent
spinal fusion surgery with instrumentation and whose intraoperative tissue
culture specimens were positive for C. acnesbetween January
1, 2011, and December 31, 2020. We categorized the culture results as actual
infection (AI) or clinically insignificant (CI) based on a set
criterion.
Diagnostic Criteria for Actual Infection:
1. C. acnes was isolated from 
two
 intraoperative specimens obtained during primary or revision
instrumentation.
2.C. acnes was isolated from 
one
 intraoperative specimen, 
PLUS

a. Intraoperative purulence or secondary wound dehiscence with the implant
visible
b. Radiographic evidence of inflammation on x-ray, computed tomography,
magnetic resonance imaging, or radiolabeled scan with gallium or
technetium
c. Systemic signs of inflammation such as fever (> 38 °C) without other
recognized cause
d. Histopathology showing acute inflammation
We excluded cases of polymicrobial infection with virulent organisms
(e.g.,Staphylococcus aureus, Gram-negative bacteria) or
two non-virulent organisms (e.g., Coagulase-negative staphylococci,
anaerobes) to have homogeneity of cases.
We definedtreatment as receiving more than two weeks of
systemic antibiotics. The outcome of interest was an adverse event defined
as a post-operative diagnosis of spinal hardware infection either
with C. acnesor other microorganism/s or unexpected
surgery secondary to infection.
Results: There were 91 patients who had at least one
intraoperative culture positive for C. acnes during spinal instrumentation.
The median age was 59 years old (IQR 43-70). Monomicrobial infections
represented 73.6% (n = 67). Majority (87.9%, n = 80) were isolated during
revision surgeries (e.g., debridement, exchange/ addition/ removal of
hardware). There were 63 AI and 28 CI. Among those with AI, 49 (77.8%) were
treated for a median duration of 344 days (IQR 97-531). There were five
adverse outcomes during 68.6 cumulative patient-years of follow-up, with an
annual rate of 7.3% (95% CI 2.4% - 17.0%). The median time to event was 12.2
months (range, 1.9-14.6). In the 14 untreated patients with AI, two adverse
outcomes occurred over 23.0 cumulative patient-years (annual rate 8.7%, 95%
CI 1.1% - 31.4%). Among those with CI cultures (n = 28), half were treated
with antibiotics. No adverse outcome occurred among all patients with CI
cultures. Conclusion: We described the outcomes of cases with
positive C. acnesduring spinal instrumentation. The
rates of adverse outcomes for treated and untreated AI are almost similar.
We found that some AI cases were managed with hardware removal alone and had
favorable outcomes. In some instances, treating AI with oral antibiotics
alone is appropriate. There is no apparent advantage of treating CI
cultures. Our study was limited by the small number of events; thus, no
formal comparisons were made. Prospective studies are needed to evaluate
different diagnostic criteria to guide treatment strategies.

## 501

## P335: Pre-operative epidural steroid injections do not increase the risk
of post-operative infection in patients undergoing lumbar decompression or
fusion: a systematic review and meta-analysis

Yunsoo Lee

1

, Tariq Issa

1

, Mark Lambrechts

1

, Arun Kanhere

1

, Skylar Nahi

1

, Parker Brush

1

, Jeremy Heard

1

, Delano Trenchfield

1

, Alan Hilibrand

1

, Christopher Kepler

1

, Gregory Schroeder

1

, Alexander Vaccaro

1

, and Jose Canseco

1

1

Division of Spine Surgery, Rothman Orthopaedic Institute,
Philadelphia, United States

Introduction: Epidural corticosteroid injections (ESI) are one
of the mainstays of early nonoperative treatment for patients with lumbar
spine pathology. While many patients are responsive to nonoperative
treatment, a small number may progress to surgical management such as lumbar
decompression or fusion. Recent literature evaluating the risk of infection
following ESI after elective orthopedic surgery has produced conflicting
evidence, which has led to growing debate around the timing of pre-operative
ESI. Our primary objective was to review the literature and provide a larger
meta-analysis analyzing the temporal effects of steroid injections on the
risk of infection following lumbar spine surgery. Material and
Methods: We conducted a query of the PubMed, Embase, and Scopus
databases from inception until April 1, 2022 for studies evaluating the risk
of infection in the setting of prior spinal steroid injections in patients
undergoing lumbar spine decompression or fusion. Three meta-analyses were
conducted, (1) comparing ESI within 30-days to control, (2) comparing ESI
within 30-days to ESI between 1-3 months pre-operatively, and (3) comparing
any history of ESI to control. Tests of proportions were utilized for all
comparisons between groups. Study heterogeneity was assessed via forest
plots, and publication bias was assessed via funnel plots and qualitative
assessment with the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale. Results: Nine total
studies were included, five of which demonstrated a significant association
between pre-operative ESI and post-operative infection, while four studies
found no statistical significance at any evaluated time point. Most data
originated from large databases, but three studies evaluated institutional
data. Comparison of weighted means demonstrated no significant difference in
infection rates between the 30-day ESI group and control group (2.67% vs
1.69%, p = 0.144), 30-day ESI group and the > 30-day ESI group (2.34% vs
1.66%, p = 0.1655), or total ESI group and the control group (1.99% vs.
1.70%, p = 0.544). Heterogeneity was low for all comparisons following
sensitivity analyses (I2 = 0% in the first two analyses and
I2 = 32% in the third comparison). Conclusion:
Our meta-analysis suggests that current evidence does not implicate
pre-operative ESI on an increase in post-operative infection rates following
lumbar fusion or decompression. Operative treatment should not be delayed
due to pre-operative infection rates due to current evidence. There remains
a paucity of high-quality data in the literature evaluating the impact of
pre-operative ESI on post-operative infection rates.

## 532

## P336: Adjacent spondylodiscitis following instrumented spinal fusion -
How can we manage this complication? Case report

Sara Machado Neves

1

, Luis Castelo

1

, Rita Sousa

1

, Diogo Sousa

1

, João Reis

1

, and André Guimarães

1

1

Ortopedia e Traumatologia, Centro Hospitalar de Trás-os-Montes e
Alto Douro, Vila Real, Portugal

Introduction: To date there are only a few cases of
spondylodiscitis adjacent to the instrumentation level of spinal fusion
reported on literature. Responsible for causing important morbidity and
causing serious long-term sequelae, this complication offers a intricated
challenge on how to manage patients and how to stratify the best therapeutic
strategy. Despite this there are some risk factors already identified like
obesity, alcoholism, smoking, diabetes and wound infection site. Study
design: Case Report Objective: Report a case of
management of spondylodiscitis on the adjacent level of instrumentation that
occurred 6 months after spinal fusion. Methods: The authors
describe a case of a morbidly obese 49-year-old female patient who underwent
intersomatic transforaminal arthrodesis L3L4 and L4L5 with unilateral
facetectomies. She was priority admitted to surgery because of persistent
lumbosciatalgia with progressive neurological defects already installed in
the past 11 months (drop foot on the right). On the immediate post-operative
time the patient developed wound surgical dehiscence that resolved with
negative-pressure wound therapy. Along this period, she never manifested
clinic of infection. At 6 months after surgery, she presented with sudden
onset of low back pain without neurological commitment or fever associated
with peri-inflammatory signals on top of the surgical site with active
drainage that motivated hospitalization for study and treatment.
Analytically she had elevation of inflammatory markers with negative blood
cultures and imagiological signs of spondylodiscitis in L2 and L3. She was
hospitalized with empirical antibiotic therapy with ceftriaxone and
vancomycin for 4 weeks combined with negative-pressure wound therapy with
good response and clinical and analytical improvement. Results:
After 3 months of conservative treatment, the patient remains clinically
stable, demonstrating on TC a collapse of the L2’s lower platform with
secondary scoliosis that motivates intention to prolong the instrumentation
as soon as the infection has stabilized. Discussion: Management
of these cases require appropriate medical conservative treatment which may
be insufficient to control the infection and often there’s a need for
surgical re-intervention whose purpose is debridement and surgical cleaning,
obtaining bacteriological samples, as well as eventual decompression and
stabilization in order to control the infection spread and provide spinal
stability. Conclusion: The therapeutic and prognostic success
resides, above all, in a timely diagnosis and intervention and in the
periodic monitoring of the effectiveness of the instituted treatment.
Keywords: Adjacent Spondylodiscitis; Spinal Fusion; Conservative
Treatment;

## 604

## P337: Brace treatment results of thoracolumbar vertebral
osteomyelitis

Sofiane Masmoudi

1

, Saiffedine Mahjoubi

1

, Haithem Eleuch

1

, Amine Soussou

1

, Khaled Zitouna

1

, and Maher Barsaoui

1

1

Orthopedic Surgery, Rabta Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia

Introduction: Vertebral osteomyelitis is an intervertebral disc
and vertebral bodies infection, causing anterior vertebral compression and
spinal deformity thus influencing the spino-pelvic sagittal balance. No
therapeutic modalities were studied and no results were provided according
to the type of treatment, especially brace immobilization. We established an
epidemiological and radiological description of thoracolumbar vertebral
osteomyelitis and presented the results of the brace treatment of these
lesions. Material and Methods: We reported a descriptive
retrospective study of 31 patients treated with thoracolumbar braces for
vertebral osteomyelitis. Medical observations and MRIs were used to collect
the data. The spinal parameters of the global curvatures and segmental were
measured pre and post immobilization. We calculated the evolution of these
parameters. Results: Average age was 54 years old. Sex ratio
was 1.07. The thoracic spine was the most affected (48%). The Koch's
bacillus was the most identified germ (61%). Measurements of initial
radiological parameters showed that the averages of TCVA, CV, AR, LL and CT
were respectively 25%, 11°, 18°, -42° and 48°. The evolutions averages of
TCVA, CV, AR, LL and CT were 7.77%; 0.29°; 3.13°; -1° and 2.71°. Brucella
melitensis was the least destructive germ (p = 0.016). The initial vertebral
compression increased from caudal to cranial spine level (p = 0.021) and
that lumbar lordosis progression was better for patients with a weight less
than 70 Kg (p = 0.013). Conclusion: We concluded that brace
immobilization for vertebral osteomyelitis was better in lumbar than
thoracic spine and for patients with a weight less than 70 kg.

## 679

## P338: Evaluation of percutaneous pedicle screw fixation in patient with
pyogenic spondylitis of the thoracolumbar spine

Katsunori Fukutake

1

, Akihito Wada

1

, Kazumasa Nakamura

1

, Ukyo Gen

1

, Shuhei Matsuoka

1

, Keiji Hasegawa

1

, and Hiroshi Takahashi

1

1

Orthopedics, Toho University, Ota-ku, Tokyo, Japan

Introduction: Basic principle for the treatment of PS is
conservative care, but various complications have been observed in many
conservative cases due to long-term bed rest, poor pain control, and
exacerbation of infection. Thus, treatment methods have been gradually
reformed and surgical intervention have been often required when
conservative treatment may fail. Recent study indicates that percutaneous
pedicle screw (PPS) fixation is a feasible and effective technique to
achieve immediate pain release, and reduce morbidity due to long-term bed
rest, poor pain control.In this study, a comparative study was conducted
between the conservative group and the PPS group in cases showed initial
treatment resistance, to evaluate the impact of PPS fixation in patients
with PS resisted to initial treatment. Material and Methods: We
retrospectively reviewed 54 consecutive patients who underwent treatment in
our hospital for PS during 2005-2018 and followed up for at least 12 months.
Of those we excluded cases showed effectiveness to initial treatment (it was
defined fever relief and C-reactive protein (CRP) inversion in 3 weeks of
intravenous antibiotic) so that this study is a retrospective study in cases
showed initial treatment resistance. Finally, this study included 29 cases.
To evaluate the impact of PPS fixation, these cases divided into two groups,
the conservative group: 17 cases, and the PPS group: 12 cases. Since 2010,
PPS fixation has been relatively selected, but cases with poor general
condition have selected conservative treatment. Results: We
investigated the period from first visit to our hospital to fever relief,
CRP inversion, ambulation, and discharge or transfer. There is no
statistically significant difference in fever relief (p = 0.051) and CRP
inversion (p = 0.208). The period to ambulation and discharge or transfer
was significantly shorter in group P (p = 0.020, p = 0.031). The outcomes
were determined at 12 months after the start of treatment, discharge,
transfer, and death. In the P-group, 1 case died of intestinal obstruction
and 1-year survival rate was 92%. In the C-group, 5cases died of
infarction-sepsis (3cases), acute myocardial infarction (1case), and
unknown(1case). 1-year survival rate was 71%. The P-group was relatively
high 1-year survival rate, but there is no statistically significant
difference (p = 0.354) between two groups. The rate of Discharge to home and
care facility is 58% in P-group, and 47% in C-group. And the rate of
Transfer is 33% in P-group, and 35% in C-group. Conclusion:
Present study shows that PPS fixation was effective to achieve shorten the
period to ambulation and discharge or transfer. But it was not effective to
infection control, such as fever relief and CRP inversion. This result
suggests that PPS fixation should be aggressively administered to patients
who can expect pain relief and early ambulation by PPS fixation in the
patient of PS showed resistance to initial treatment.

## 776

## P339: Pre-XDR spinal tuberculosis and 360° approach in two surgical
stages. Case report

Fernando Alvarado Gómez

1

, Nahala Aborashed-Amador

1

, Maria Garcia-Rueda

1

, Alexander Tristancho

1

, Maria Camila Giraldo Bernal

1

, Freddi Soto-Guzmán

1

, Frank Mario Herrera-Mendez

1

, and Carlos Montero-Silva

1

1

Instituto Roosevelt, Bogota, Colombia

Introduction: Multidrug-resistance (MDR) is considered to be one
of the main obstacles to eliminating spinal tuberculosis (STB). Up to 2,040
cases of STB per year have been reported, mainly in the adult population.
Ineffective treatment leads to severe kyphotic deformities with vertebral
body collapse and neurological deficit due to spinal cord compression or
section. Material and Methods: An 8 year-old female patient
from an indigenous community with a 6-month history of a granulomatous
lesion with a fistula between the 7th and 8th left ribs,
associated with decreased strength in the lower limbs, loss of sphincter
control, and spinal deformity. The bone biopsy showed massive necrosis due
to a granulomatous process. PCR testing of bronchoalveolar lavage, soft
tissue, and bone (vertebral) was positive for Pre-XDR Mycobacterium
tuberculosis. The case was treated with Moxifloxacin, Cycloserine,
Ethionamide, Pyrazinamide, Ethambutol, and Isoniazid. Results:
A 360° approach was necessary due to the extent of the deformity and the
need for bone autograft. Moreover, anterior fixation helps avoid proximal
kyphosis, likely in this patient because of poor bone quality and the
potential for recurrent disease. The patient presented kyphotic deformity at
the level of T7-T8 secondary to tuberculous disease. A 360° approach was
necessary for the resection of vertebral body and intervertebral discs of
the thoracic spine plus spinal canal decompression and placement of a spacer
with antibiotic in T8 through the anterior approach. A posterior approach
was then performed for drainage, curettage and collection sequestrectomy
with fistula. Conclusion: Spinal tuberculosis in the pediatric
population is exotic even in regions with a high incidence of tuberculosis.
There is no consensus regarding the best surgical approach in patients with
massive involvement. The 360° approach allows better surgical control of the
infectious focus, facilitates reconstruction, corrects proximal kyphosis and
ensures a more stable fixation.

## 792

## P340: Risk factor for surgical site infection with spinal instrumentation
surgery

Shinji Tanishima

1

, Tokumitsu Mihara

1

, Chikako Takeda

1

, Masaki Yoshida

1

, Satoshi Fujiwara

1

, and Hideki Nagashima

1

1

Division of Orthopedic Surgery, Department of Sensory and Motor
Organs, School of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Tottori University,
Yonago, Japan

Introduction: Surgical site infection (SSI) after spinal
instrumentation surgery is a serious complication, but its occurrence is
difficult to eliminate. This study aimed to examine the risk factors for SSI
at our institution. Subjects and Methods: A total of 483
patients aged 18 years or older who underwent spinal instrumentation surgery
at our hospital between January 2016 and March 2021 and who were available
for follow-up for at least 30 days were included in the study. The mean age
of the patients was 68.9 ± 14.3 years. Patient-related factors (age, gender,
malignant disease, diabetes, skin disease, hemodialysis, smoking, steroid
and immunosuppressive drug use, body mass index, albumin, total protein,
C-reactive protein (CRP), American Society of Anesthesiologists
classification, and nasal culture) and surgery (the same re-operation,
scheduled/emergency surgery, dural injury, vancomycin spray, operative time,
and blood loss) were analyzed. Statistical analysis was performed with a
univariate analysis of the infected and uninfected groups and multivariate
logistic analysis of factors that showed an associated trend (p < 0.2).
Results: Of the 483 patients, 11 of (2.3%) were infected,
with nine having a deep infection and two having a superficial infection. In
univariate analysis, the patient factors were albumin level (4.1 ± 0.6: 3.7
± 0.8 mg/dl) and CRP level (0.74 ± 1.8 mg/dl: 3.2 ± 5.3 mg/dl) in the
uninfected group and emergency surgery rate (27.8%: 63.6%) in the infected
group. In logistic analysis, emergency surgery was identified as a risk
factor for SSI (odds ratio: 4.6, 95% confidence interval 1.3-15.9, p =
0.016). Although this study was not statistical, once SSIs occurred, they
tended to occur sequentially within 3 months. Currently, SSI countermeasures
are strictly implemented at all facilities, and our hospital is also taking
measures to prevent SSI. As a result, infectious hosts, such as diabetes
mellitus and immunosuppressive drugs, were not risk factors. However,
emergency surgery was a risk factor, but this was thought to be due to the
lack of sufficient infection control measures in emergency situations.
Additionally, once SSIs occurred, they occurred one after another. This
suggests that SSIs occur when some problems occur in the perioperative
management. Conclusion: Although infection rates are not high
in spinal instrumentation surgery, infection rates are increasing in
emergency surgery, and more careful infection control measures are
needed.

## 796

## P341: Retrospective case series review of decompression versus
decompression and fusion for vertebral osteomyelitis and discitis

Zachary Crawford

1

, Jorge Figueras

2

, Cameron Thomson

3

, and Anthony Guanciale

1

1

University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Orthopaedic Surgery,
Cincinnati, United States

2

Indiana University, Orthopaedic Surgery, Indianapolis, United
States

3

Brown University, Orthopaedic Surgery, Providence, United
States

Background Context: Spine infection including epidural abscess,
vertebral osteomyelitis, and diskitis is a major cause of morbidity in the
United States with potential for significant complications. Previous
literature has shown delayed diagnosis can increase mortality and patients
treated with decompression alone have higher complications including
reoperation rates. Purpose: The purpose of this study is to
further evaluate the outcomes of spine infection comparing decompression
versus decompression and fusion. Study Design / Setting: This
retrospective chart review was completed on patients presenting to a single
level 1, tertiary medical center between January 2010 and June 2021 for
osteomyelitis, diskitis, or epidural abscess. Patients were treated by
orthopaedic and neurosurgical trained spine surgeons. Patient
Sample: Patients were included for any osteomyelitis, diskitis,
or epidural abscess within the study time period. Patients were excluded if
they had isolated paravertebral abscess or soft tissue infection that did
not also include osteomyelitis, diskitis, or epidural abscess. Outcome
Measures: Outcome measures included length of antibiotic regimen,
discharge location, ED admissions, complications, and reoperations.
Methods: Electronic medical record chart review was
completed by searching for associated appropriate ICD-9 or ICD-10 codes and
CPT codes for orthopaedic and neurosurgery spine attendings during study
period. Demographic information including age, sex, insurance carrier, and
co-morbidities including history of intravenous drug use, tobacco use, and
Charleston Comorbidity Index were collected on all patients. Additional
information including levels and location of epidural abscess, deformity,
instability, serum infectious markers, and culture data were also collected.
Results: There were a total of 163 patients identified and
111 patients included for study review. There were 58 patients in
decompression alone (60% male, n = 35) and 53 in decompression and fusion
(60% male, n = 32). The average age was 54 years and 53 years respectively
in each group (p = 0.988) and there was no statistical difference in rates
of osteomyelitis, diskitis, and epidural abscess in each group.
Additionally, there was no statistical difference in instability, deformity,
and Charleston Comorbidity Index in each group. Patients in decompression
alone averaged 4.2 spine levels of epidural abscess while those in
decompression and fusion averaged 2.8 levels (p = 0.008). There was no
difference in erythrocyte sedimentation rate, c-reactive protein, or white
blood cell count levels between groups, however patients with decompression
alone were more likely to have concomitant bacteremia (n = 48, 82.7%
compared to n = 28, 52.8% in decompression and fusion, p = 0.00018). There
were 10 reoperations (17%) in decompression alone with 4 to complete fusion,
while decompression and fusion had 13 reoperations (24.5%) with 3 to extend
or revise previous fusion. Conclusions: Patients with spine
infection including osteomyelitis, diskitis, and epidural abscess have a
high morbidity with numerus complications. In this retrospective, single
center study of spine we found there was no significant difference in
outcomes between decompression versus decompression and fusion for spine
infection. Patients who underwent decompression alone were more likely to
have higher burden of infection and concomitant bacteremia compared to those
with decompression and fusion.

## 841

## P342: Preoperative epidural steroid injection does not increase infection
risk following posterior cervical surgery

Tara Shelby

1

, Emily Mills

1

, Hyunwoo Kang

1,2

, Andy Ton

1

, Jeffrey C. Wang

1

, Raymond Hah

1

, and Ram Alluri

1

1

Orthopaedic Surgery, Keck School of Medicine of USC, Los Angeles,
United States

2

Orthopaedic Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, United States

Introduction: ESI is a helpful tool in alleviating pain and is
often used as a diagnostic tool prior to cervical surgery. However, a recent
small-scale study found that ESI prior to cervical fusion was associated
with an increased risk of postoperative infection. The purpose of this study
was to characterize infection risk of preoperative epidural steroid
injection (ESI) in patients undergoing posterior cervical surgery.
Material and Methods: Patients from 2010-2020 with cervical
myelopathy, spondylosis, and radiculopathy who underwent posterior cervical
procedure including laminectomy, laminoforaminotomy, fusion, or laminoplasty
were queried from the PearlDiver database. Patients who underwent revision
or fusion above C2 or who had a diagnosis of neoplasm, trauma, or
pre-existing infection were excluded. Patients were then divided based on
whether they received an ESI within 30 days prior to the procedure. The two
groups were subsequently matched based on age, gender, and preoperative
comorbidities. A chi-square test was used to calculate the risk of
developing a postoperative infection within 90 days of surgery.
Results: Based on our inclusion and exclusion criteria,
82,907 patients were identified, including 991 who received a preoperative
ESI and 81,916 who did not. Matching resulted in 975 in the injected group
and 1,929 in the control group. There was no significant difference in
postoperative infection rate in those who received an ESI within 30 days
preoperatively and those who did not (3.28% versus 3.78%, OR = 0.86, 95% CI:
0.57-1.32, p = 0.494). Conclusion: Given the growing use of
steroid injections in spinal surgery, it is important to determine the
associated risk of surgical site infection. In contrast to previous
literature, the present study has found no association between preoperative
ESI within 30 days prior to surgery and postoperative infection in patients
undergoing posterior cervical surgery after matching for an extensive list
of comorbidities and a comprehensive set of exclusion criteria. Further
multicenter prospective studies are indicated to more fully characterize
infection risk post-ESI.

## 890

## P343: Cervical osteomyelitis: a rare infection

Tiago Canas

1

, Emanuel Homem

1

, Ricardo Simoes

1

, João Cruz

1

, and Luis Soares

1

1

Ortopedia, Hospital Divino Espirito Santo, Ponta Delgada,
Portugal

Introduction: Vertebral osteomyelitis constitutes 1-7% of bone
infections, with the cervical area being affected in only 3-10% of cases and
is related to diabetes, and both recreational and prescription intravenous
drug abuse. Cervical spondylodiscitis is thought to carry a significant risk
for rapid neurologic deterioration with a poor response to nonsurgical
management. It is described most commonly at one level (85%), and less often
at two contiguous levels. Given the overall low quality of the available
literature, it remains difficult to determine the optimal timing of surgical
management. The authors present a case of multilevel cervical
spodylodiscitis, characterizing neurologic presentation and postoperative
neurologic outcome. Material and Methods: A 51-year-old male
patient with a history of intravenous drug abuse, presented at the emergency
department (ER) with an one-month worsening cervical pain which motivated 3
prior visits to the ER. With no past history of trauma, pain, classified as
VAS 9/10, relieved with the conservative management (NSAID and analgesic
drugs) to tolerable levels (VAS 2/10). Physical exam revealed an incomplete
neurological deficit, around C6 level, classified as ASIA B. Cervical CT and
MRI documented an infectious process of C6 and C7 vertebral bodies
conditioning retroshift of the posterior walls and consequent spinal cord
compression. Bloodworks demonstrated a leukocytosis of 17.36 x 10 3 /uL and
increased CPR of 17.9 mg/dL. Blood cultures identified a
methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus. The patient
was submitted to urgent surgery: corporectomy of C6 and C7 and anterior
arthrodesis (C5-T1) with autologous tricortical graft and locked plate;
without complications. Results: The postoperative in-hospital
stay went uneventful (50 days) and the patient recovered neurologically
(classified as ASIA D), which was maintained throughout follow-up (12
months). Intra-operative biopsies isolated the same causative agent (MSSA).
Intravenous antibiotic therapy with flucloxacilin was maintained for 6
weeks, followed by 6 weeks of oral form. PCR and ESR normalized around the
4th week of follow-up and at 6 months arthrodesis was confirmed with
cervical CT. Conclusion: Cervical osteomyelitis normally
presents with nonspecific clinical picture. For that reason an interval of
around 3-4 months between the onset of symptoms and diagnosis is generally
verified. The most frequent agent is Staphylococcus aureus
and neurological injury surgery is an indication for surgery. The authors
describe a classical case of cervical osteomyelitis submitted to multilevel
anterior arthrodesis with good functional, clinical and imagiological
results.

## 1071

## P344: Decompression only versus fusion in octogenarians with spinal
epidural abscesses: early complications, clinical and radiological outcome
with 2 years follow-up

Pavlina Lenga

1

, Gelo Guelec

1

, Karl L. Kiening

1

, Andreas W. Unterberg

1

, and Basem Ishak

1

1

Neurosurgery, Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg,
Germany

Introduction: Despite the global trend toward increased life
expectancy due to remarkable improvements in the quality of health care, the
treatment of pyogenic vertebral osteomyelitis (PVO) with a spinal epidural
abscess (SEA) remains challenging, especially in patients older than 80
years. The aim of this study was to assess, exclusively in octogenarians,
the prevalence of PVO with SEA and clinical outcomes after surgical
treatment, comparing decompression only with decompression and
instrumentation. Material and Methods: A retrospective review
of electronic medical records at a single institution was conducted between
September 2005 and December 2021. Patient demographics, surgical
characteristics, complications, hospital course, and 90-day mortality were
collected. Comorbidities were assessed using the age-adjusted Charlson
comorbidity index (CCI). Results: Over a 16-year period, 35
patients aged ≥ 80 years with PVO and SEA were identified. Eighteen patients
underwent surgical decompression only (“decompression group”), and 17
underwent surgical decompression with instrumentation (“instrumentation
group”). Both groups had a CCI > 6 (8.9, SD 2.1 vs. 9.6, SD 2.7,
respectively; p = 0.065), indicating severe comorbidities. Patients from the
instrumentation group had a significantly longer hospitalization stay, but
no ICU stay. In-hospital and 90-days mortality rates were similar in both
groups (instrumentation: in-hospital = 5.6%; 90-days mortality = 23.5% vs.
decompression: 11.6%; 5.6%; p > 0.05. The mean follow-up was 26.6 months
(SD 12.4), and no further surgeries were performed. Irrespective of
treatment, the levels of infection and neurological status were improved in
both groups at discharge. At second stage analysis significant improvements
in the blood infection parameters and the neurological status were detected
solely in the decompression group. Conclusion: Patients older
than 80 years with PVO and SEA have a high risk of adverse events after
surgical procedures. Surgical decompression only might contribute to earlier
clinical recovery in elderly patients. Additionally, in terms of morbidity
and 90-day mortality, the instrumentation group had poorer outcomes, and
this is why the choice of a surgical approach should be thoroughly discussed
with the patients and carefully weighed.

## 1103

## P345: Comparative analysis of mechanical complications from structural
allograft and titanium cage used for anterior support of the spine in
vertebral tuberculosis

Alderico Girão Campos de Barros

1

, Pedro Cardoso Afonso

1

, Igor Ebert Cechin

1

, and Luis Eduardo Carelli Texeira da Silva

1

1

Instituto Nacional de Traumatologia e Ortopedia Jammil Haddad
(INTO), ARCOL, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil

Introduction: To compare the mechanical complications between
patients who were submitted to vertebral body replacement using either
structural allograft (SA) or titanium cage (TC) in the management of
thoracic and lumbar tuberculosis. Material and Methods: A
longitudinal study, based on retrospective evaluation of medical records of
patients admitted through 4th tier public health system between
November 2012 and July 2021, in consecutive convenience sampling, who were
operated by the same surgical team. All patients with a confirmed
histopathological diagnosis of vertebral tuberculosis who underwent through
vertebrectomy surgery targeting decompression, debridement and deformity
correction were included in the sample. The vertebral bodies were replaced
using either SA or TC containing autologous graft, followed by posterior
arthrodesis of at least two levels above and two levels below the structural
support using pedicle screws. Results: Twenty-two cases of
vertebral tuberculosis surgically treated with vertebral body replacement
were selected, of which 10 (45.5%) were male patients and 12 (54.5%) were
female. Titanium cages containing autografts were used in 17 patients (group
A), while the other 5 patients (group B) received structural allograft from
tissue banks. The median ages ware 32.1 in group A (IQ 8.78 - 58.65), and
5.2 in group B (IQ 3.89 - 11.19). The average postoperative follow-up period
was of 52.7 months. There was no statistical difference in the number of
resected vertebrae (p = 0.05), instrumented levels (p = 1.0) or angular
correction in the coronal and sagittal planes as per Cobb method. Until the
last postoperative follow-up, there were no cases of SA or TC subsidence,
breakage or displacement. Four cases of broken metal rods and one case of
proximal junctional failure were found in group A, as well as three cases of
surgical wound infection, which progressed well after debridement and
antibiotic therapy. Conclusion: Both Structural allograft and
titanium cages filled with autologous bone applied for anterior spine
support and vertebral body replacement in tuberculosis treatment showed
similar results in postoperative correction, as well as similar
postoperative mechanical complication rates. Future studies with larger
samples and follow-up period are necessary to assess metal rod breakage
rates.

## 1113

## P346: Comparison of conservative and surgical treatment of spinal
tuberculosis at a tertiary care hospital in Bangkalan City, East Java,
Indonesia

Adhi Prayoga Ida Bagus

1

 and Dini Sri Damayanti

2

1

Orthopaedic, Bangkalan General Hospital, Bangkalan,
Indonesia

2

Faculty of Medicine, Islamic University of Malang, Malang,
Indonesia

Introduction: WHO estimated that there were 845,000 cases of TB
in 2018, with 93,000 deaths and Indonesia has the 3rd highest burden of TB
in the world. While early diagnosis by thorough history taking, physical and
radiological examination is mandatory, the interpretation to determine
between conservative or operative treatment is debatable and not consistent.
Material and Methods: Twenty-seven patients with clinical
and radiological representation of spinal tuberculosis during the period of
July 2018 to July 2022 were enrolled in the study. Patients with any age and
both sexes were included as study population. Twenty-four patients were
treated surgically due to bone collapse with abscess and neurological
problems. Three patients with mild symptoms and minimal abscess were treated
conservative. Four drug regimen of antituberculous therapy (ATT) were
administrated to all of the patients for 12 months and all patients were
followed up till the end of the treatment. The outcome of the treatments
were recorded. Results: All patients (M-13/ F-14) had back pain
not responding to analgesics and physiotherapy while few had constitutional
symptoms. Localized tenderness and paravertebral muscle spasm was present
all of the cases (100%). Muscle weakness and paresthesia were reported
initially in 75% cases. Following the surgical therapy, 22 patient showed
neurological improvement (M-11/ F-11) and 2 patient (M-1/ F-1) showed no
neurological improvement. All the patients which was treated conservatively
showed good clinical outcome, and marked abscess resorption.
Conclusion: The results of this study evidently show that
good results can be obtained by meticulously applied and supervised
nonsurgical treatment in spinal tuberculosis. The availability of modern
spinal instrumentation nowadays leads to increase the tendency of surgical
treatment, but their indication should be bordered unless accompanied by
complications such as neurological deficits, kyphosis and abscess. Despite
of decades of research and public education campaigns aimed at decreasing
patient morbidity, it is common that the treatment delay were associated
with poor clinical outcome.
Spinal tuberculosis; surgical treatment; conservative treatment.

## 1188

## P347: Vacuum assisted closure - A panacea in postoperative spinal
infections

Shanmuganathan Rajasekaran

1

, Sri Vijay Anand KS

1

, Ashish Naik

1

, Chandhan Murugan

1

, Rishi Kanna

1

, and Ajoy P Shetty

1

1

Dept. of Spine Surgery, Ganga Hospital, Coimbatore, India

Background: Surgical site infections (SSI) following spinal
surgery are potential detrimental complications that increase
hospitalization and expenses, cause significant morbidity and adversely
affect the outcomes. Radical wound debridement, irrigation, and intravenous
antibiotics are the conventional treatments for postoperative deep surgical
site infection. Despite the best efforts, infections can persist. Our study
aims to review the efficacy of the wound vacuum-assisted closure (VAC)
system in treating deep surgical site infection after spine surgery with
instrumentation and exposed dura. Material and Methods: We
retrospectively reviewed 31 patients who underwent vacuum-assisted closure
for postoperative spinal infections following spinal instrumentation between
2016-2020. The patient’s demographic details and biochemical parameters were
noted from the hospital information system, and imaging was analysed by
PACS. Other pertinent information included bacterial culture reports and
antibiotic sensitivity patterns, duration of VAC application, number of
cycles of VAC application before final wound closure, and infection
recurrence. Results: There were 17 females and 14 males in the
study population. There were 21 lumbar spine surgeries and five thoracic and
thoracolumbar spine surgeries. Following wound debridement, VAC was applied
to all patients. A mean of 2.5 cycles of VAC application, each lasting 5-9
days, was applied before wound closure. Twenty-seven had positive bacterial
cultures, and the rest were culture-negative. Klebsiella and Pseudomonas
were the most prevalent organisms. CSF leak through the VAC was managed in
two patients who had dural repair and subsequent infection, by lowering the
suction pressure of the VAC and switching to cyclical mode. One patient died
due to an unrelated cause, and one patient with chronic viral hepatitis had
an increased blood loss following VAC. All the patients had good healing of
wounds with a minimum follow-up of 12 months with no recurrence of
infections. All patients except one had retained the implants.
Conclusion: The VAC system is a valuable tool in managing
postoperative spinal infections. It allows for the retention of the
instrumentation and eradication of infection. It does not increase the
chances of CSF leak and is safe, reliable, and easy to use.

## 1204

## P348: Cervical spine tuberculosis; outcome after one stage surgical
decompression and fixation with unique standalone cage

Haseeb Hussain

1

1

Orthopedics, Ghurki Trust Teaching Hospital, Lahore,
Pakistan

Objective: The main objective of this study was to determine the
outcome after one stage anterior debridement, bone grafting and
stabilization with standalone titanium cage in a 3rd world country.
Methodology: This prospective study was conducted at
Department of spine surgery, Ghurki Hospital, Pakistan from Jan 2008 to Dec
2017.All patients with cervical spine tuberculosis of either gender and any
age were included in the study. All the patients underwent one stage
anterior debridement and stabilization with standalone titanium cage filled
with autologous iliac bone graft. Outcome measured included neck pain using
VAS, Frankel scale, bony fusion, Cobb angle of cervical kyphosis and cost of
implant. SPSS 17.0 was used for data analysis. Results: Total
98 patients (50 males/48 females) of mean age 42.12 ± 13.778. The mean pre
operative VAS scoring was 7.99 ± 1.744 & at last follow up, it was 1.60
± 1.578. The kyphotic deformity pre operatively was 19.15 ±15.068 & post
operatively it was -4.81 ± 6.567. Post operative FRANKEL Scale was
significantly improved (p < 0.005). The cost of implant remained the same
in all patients US $ 30-50 and bony fusion in all patients.
Conclusion: One-stage anterior debridement, autologous bone
grafting, and stabilization with titanium Standalone cage can effectively
remove debris, decompress the cord, reduce pain & correct kyphosis in
patients with cervical tuberculosis. The implant is cost effective with
excellent stability and should be considered in third world countries.
Keywords: Anterior decompression, Standalone Cage, Tuberculosis, Cervical
Spine

## 1210

## P349: Loss of kyphotic deformity after 3 and 5 years. Follow-up in caries
spine patients underwent anterior decompression and locally made cage with
autologous bone graft

Ammar Dogar

1

, Ahsan Atta

1

, and Haseeb Hussain

1

1

Department of Orthopaedics And Spine, Ghurki Trust Teaching
Hospital, Lahore, Pakistan

Background: Spinal deformity and paraplegia/quadriplegia are the
most common complications of tuberculosis (TB) of spine. TB of dorsal spine
almost always produces kyphosis while cervical and lumbar spine shows
reversal of lordosis to begin with followed by kyphosis. kyphosis continues
to increase in adults when patients are treated non operatively or by
surgical decompression. In children, kyphosis continues to increase even
after healing of the tubercular disease. Surgical procedure for these
pathologies can be performed through both anterior and posterior approaches
but anterior approach has the advantage of better canal clearance and better
chances of graft fusion and deformity correction than posterior approach.
Objective: The main objective of this study is to find out
the immediate kyphosis correction and loss in correction after 3 and 5 years
follow up. Materials and Methodology: The study was conducte
prospective study was conducted in the Department of Orthopaedics and Spine
of Ghurki Trust Teaching Hospital, Lahore from 2003 to 2016. 1049 patients
were totally operated during this interval. Out of which 513 patients were
operated 5 years back and they were considered in the study. All patients
underwent anterior decompression and placement of Inter body Titanium Mesh
Cage with packed bone graft. Pre and post-operative lateral view x-rays were
taken to check and record the post operative change in kyphotic angle at
immediate post operative period, after 3 years and after 5 years. Boston
brace was applied for at least 6 months. Data was analyzed using SPSS 17.0.
Results: There were 513 patients in which 301 (58.67%)
males and 212 (41.32%) females. The patients aged between 15-30 years were
232 (45.22%), those between aged 31-45 years were 115 (21.83%) and between
46-60 years there were 166 (32.36%). The mean local kyphosis correction in
the immediate postoperative period was 23.1°± 2.1. The mean late loss of
correction of local kyphosis at 3 years follow-up was 1.7° ± 0.7 and almost
similar findings after 5 years follow up. Conclusion: Anterior
decompression along with Titanium mesh cage and bone graft in patients
suffering from caries spine showed immediate post operative improvement in
kyphotic angle. There is no significant loss of kyphotic angle even after 3
years and 5 years follow up. It is safe and cheap procedure as compared to
other instrumentation especially for the poor patients of developing
countries.

## 1342

## P350: Pyogenic spondylodiscitis: current strategies for diagnosis and
treatment

Benjeddou Wassim

1

, Khalil Habboubi

1

, Aymen Benmahmoud

1

, Mzid Ahmed

1

, Hassen Makhlouf

1

, and Mondher Mestiri

1

1

Adults Service, Institut Med Taieb Kassab, Mannouba,
Tunisia

Purpose: Psoas abscess is a rare disease in developed countries.
Its diagnosis is difficult and any delay could lead to a worsen prognosis.
The aim of this study is to determine the best diagnostic and therapeutic
practices. Methods: A retrospective study of psoas abscess that
occurred during six months was performed. Results: Six cases of
secondary psoas abscess are reported. They were associated with
spondylodiscitis in three cases, arthritis and gynaecologic infection in the
three remaining cases. Anatomic diagnosis was performed by tomodensitometry.
Microbiologic diagnosis was obtained by blood culture or direct puncture of
the abscess. Antibiotics were associated with percutaneous drainage in two
cases, with simple puncture in one case, and with surgery in one case. A
local improvement w observed in all cases. The oldest patients presented the
worst complications which were not directly caused by the abscess.
Conclusion: Physicians must be aware of psoas abscess
because of their increasing incidence. Despite the fact that digestive
pathologies are the main cause of secondary psoas abscess, bone infections,
particularly spine infections, should be taken into consideration.
Tomodensitometry guided puncture or percutaneous drainage are of diagnostic
and therapeutic interest. Infectious samples must be taken before starting
antibiotics, which have to be efficient against Gram negative bacillus,
anaerobes and Staphylococcus aureus. Surgery must be quickly performed when
the primary infection localisation need it, in case of voluminous abscess or
when antibiotics and drainage are inefficient.

## 1356

## P351: Risk factors for surgical site infections in operatively treated
fractures of the ankylosed spine disorders

Celeste Tavolaro

1

, Jonathan Yamaguchi

1

, Mathew Vincent

1

, Jonathan Seavey

1

, Richard Bransford

1

, and Carlo Bellabarba

1

1

Orthopaedics and Sport Medicine, Harborview Medical Center -
University of Washington, Seattle, United States

Introduction: Operative management of spine fractures in
patients with ankylosing spinal disorders is associated with increased risk
for perioperative complications and 1-year mortality. Due to the rigid
nature of the ankylosed spine, these fractures are commonly treated with
posterior instrumentation (typically 3 levels above and below the level of
injury at our institution); multiple and non-contiguous fractures frequently
necessitate longer and/or multiple constructs. Surgical site infection is
one of the more common complications associated with operative treatment and
management frequently requires formal irrigation and debridement combined
with a prolonged course of intravenous antibiotics. Surgical site infections
are a significant source of morbidity to the patient and cost to the
healthcare system, and identification of associated risk factors may help
guide and optimize perioperative management. To describe the incidence and
characteristics of post-operative surgical site infections in patients with
ankylosing spinal disorders undergoing surgical management of a spine
fracture and to identify risk factors associated with surgical site
infection as compared to uninfected controls. Material and
Methods: Following UW IRB approval, a total of 383 patients who
had spine fractures and ankylosing spine disorders (Ankylosing spondylitis
(AS) and diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH)) over a 15-year
period were identified and analyzed retrospectively. The medical and
surgical records were reviewed. Demographic data, comorbidities, operative
data, hospital data, wound complications, and microbiology were recorded
within 90-days of the index surgical procedure. The infected and not
infected groups were analyzed using Chi-square and Student’s T-tests for
categorical and continuous variables, respectively. Results: A
total of 383 patients (55 women and 328 men) were included. The mean patient
age was 70 years old (SD ± 13.3 years). One hundred fifty-five patients had
an underlying diagnosis of AS and 228 had DISH. The mean follow-up was 6
months. Fifty-two patients (13.6%) had surgical site infections, and 48
patients (12.5%) underwent irrigation and debridement within 90 days of the
index procedure. Among all patients, a mean of 7 levels were fused (SD ± 3
levels) – with significant differences (6.36 ± 2.52 vs 7.81 ± 3.23 levels, p
< 0.001) observed between the infected and non-infected groups. The
surgical invasiveness index was also significantly higher in the infected
group 13.49 ± 5.87 vs 16.69 ± 7.54, p < 0.005). Infected patients were
also more likely to have Ankylosing Spondylitis and more multi-level
injuries. Conclusion: Surgical fixation of fractures in the
ankylosed spine is frequently complicated by surgical site infection.
Identified risk factors include longer constructs, multi-level injury and
greater levels of surgical invasiveness. Ankylosing spondylitis also appears
to be associated with a higher risk of post-operative surgical site
infection although the mechanism for this is not well-defined. Diabetes
mellitus, ASA grade and length of ICU and hospital stay were not
significantly associated with presence of surgical site infection compared
to uninfected controls.

## 1369

## P352: Relationship between degenerative disc disease and cutibaceterium
acnes: a prospective analysis

Zachary Crawford

1

, John Stout

1

, John Bonamer

1

, Brian Johnson

1

, and Anthony Guanciale

1

1

Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine,
Cincinnati, United States

Background: Degenerative disc disease and low back pain are
substantial causes of disability and productivity loss with significant
impact on the healthcare system. Previous literature has focused on low back
pain and degenerative changes in the lumbar intervertebral disc although
more recent literature has reported serologic evidence of gram-positive
infection in 31% of patients with radicular symptoms. Of positive disc
cultures, the most common infectious agent is Cutibacterium
acnes with animal models suggesting low grade infection can
precipitate and progressively worsen degenerative disc disease. The Purpose
of this study is to further evaluate the relationship between degenerative
disc disease and infection. Methods: This prospective study
included patients who presented to a single orthopaedic spine surgeon for
the degenerative disk disease. Patients were included if they were taken to
the operating room for decompression of herniated disc or decompression and
fusion of spine for degenerative disc disease. The disc removed was then
cultured in standard fashion based on previously reported literature.
General demographic information including age, gender, medical
comorbidities, smoking status, and infectious disease information were
collected prospectively and retrospectively from chart review. The primary
outcome was positive culture from intervertebral disc. Results:
There were a total of 85 patients and 134 levels included in analysis. The
average age was 54.71 years (±12.9) with an average BMI of 31.7 (±6.39) and
Charleston Comorbidity Index Score of 1.98 (±1.547). There were 8 patients
(9.4%) that were positive for C. acnes with one additional
patient positive for Staphylococcus aureus. There were no
significant differences between patients with and without infection in
regards to previous antibiotic use, smoking status, BMI, or previous steroid
use. The majority of the patients with culture positive disc were men, 7 men
versus 1 woman (p = 0.020). There was no significant difference in MODIC
score of patients with and without infectious degenerative disc disease.
Conclusion: Degenerative disc disease and low back pain
have considerable influence on the healthcare system and productivity in the
United States of America. There have been considerable research efforts to
define the causes of degenerative disc disease with recent literature
suggesting indolent infection from C. acnes may be a
source. Our prospective analysis of over eighty patients and 130 levels
found a significant number of patients were culture positive for C.
acnes. Further studies on associated risk factors and natural
progression of infectious degenerative disc disease are warranted to develop
new treatments or procedures.

## 1432

## P353: Extensive vertebral avascular necrosis following Covid 19
complicated by pyogenic spondylodiscitis- a rare case report

Rohan Parihar

1

, Kshitij Chaudhary

1

, and Samir Dalvie

1

1

Spine Surgery, P.D. Hinduja Hospital, Mumbai, India

Introduction: This is a so-far unreported case of an elderly
gentleman presenting with extensive vertebral body avascular necrosis
following COVID-19 complicated by pyogenic spondylodiscitis secondary to
sepsis. Case Description: Our patient is a 72 yr old diabetic
male with moderately controlled sugars. He was admitted with severe COVID-19
pneumonia in February 2021 and was treated with high dose dexamethasone,
remdesivir, and tocilizumab. This was complicated by Klebsiella
pneumoniae urosepsis and disseminated intravascular
coagulopathy which was treated with meropenem, followed by clinical
recovery. Two weeks later he presented with severe back pain. MRI of the LS
spine followed by a PET-CT showed multiple lesions with increased uptake in
the entire spine, pelvis and proximal femur. A bone marrow biopsy revealed
marrow necrosis and ruled out malignancy, and he was started on a tapering
dose of steroids with good clinico-radiological improvement. A month later,
he developed severe back pain with bilateral radicular pain. MRI pelvis and
lumbar spine showed an anterior epidural collection at L4-5, and infective
foci around sacroiliac joints and left piriformis. CT guided biopsy showed
avascular osteonecrosis and grew Klebsiella sensitive to
meropenem. After 2-3 days, he progressed to develop an acute foot drop and
underwent emergency epidural abscess drainage. The intraoperative cultures
also grew Klebsiella. He was given meropenem for 6 weeks
with good clinico-radiological response. However, after 2 weeks he presented
with increased pain and the MRI showed an increase in osteomyelitis now
involving the L3-4, L4-5 and L5-S1 levels. A repeat CT guided biopsy grew
the same organism. Meropenem was restarted and continued for further 7
months. He has now completed 18 months and 15 months since the diagnosis of
COVID-19 and osteomyelitis respectively. He is pain free but his left foot
drop still persists. Conclusion: Such extensive bone marrow
necrosis following COVID-19 has not been reported in literature. We presume
that this was secondary to the hypercoagulable state induced by COVID-19
infection, sepsis and DIC. The necrotic areas were secondarily infected with
Klebsiella that lead to epidural abscess and
neurological deficit.

## 1460

## P354: Improvement in ODI scores after surgical intervention in TB spine:
a 21 case series

Sushant Srivastava

1

, Paresh Bang

2

, Mohammed Faizan

2

, and Nikhil Tiwari

3

1

Orthopaedics, Pandit Madan Mohan Malviya Shatabdi Hospital, Mumbai,
India

2

Orthopaedics, NKP Salve Institute of Medical Sciences and Research
Centre and Lata Mangeshkar Hospital, Nagpur, India

3

Orthopaedics, Atal Bihari Vajpayee Institute of Medical Sciences
& Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital, New Delhi, India

Introduction: Tuberculosis is one of the oldest maladies
affecting mankind. Since the advent of Homo sapiens on earth, mycobacterium
tuberculosis have lived in symbiosis with humans. The most common subtype of
extra-pulmonary tuberculosis, accounting for almost 15% of cases is spinal
tuberculosis. The proximity of the infection to the spinal cord and nerves
often leads to neurological symptoms such as pain, weakness, and numbness in
the lower limbs. Spinal tuberculosis may go on to cause serious disability,
morbidity, residual neurological deficits, and severe deformities, if it
goes unattended and untreated. This chain of reactions lead to the loss of
functional capabilities, especially in terms of mobility, leading to
difficulty in walking, self-care, and management of the sphincter. The
patient’s quality of life is adversely affected due to the depreciating
physical, mental, emotional health and social trials and tribulations.
Materials and Methods: This was a single centre study and
ethics committee approval was obtained. All patients were explained about
the study and written informed consent was taken from all. The data from
consecutive spinal TB patients was prospectively collected from January 2019
to December 2019. This prospective database included 21 patients with TB of
the cervical, thoracic and lumbar spine with moderate to severe cord
compression who were surgically treated and given chemotherapy. The
diagnosis of spinal TB was based on clinical presentation, radiologic
findings [plain radiographs, computed tomography (CT), and magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI)], and hematologic and pathological examinations.
Clinical presentation manifested as pain, night sweats, low-grade fever,
weight loss, and neurological dysfunction. The ODI scores were calculated
before and after intervention to assess the functional outcome.
Results: Epi info-7 software was used for data analysis. A
paired t-test was used to compare the pre-treatment and post-treatment,
clinical data including ODI Scores. The results are reported descriptively,
as mean ± standard deviation (SD). A P-value of less than 0.05 was
considered statistically significant. There were 3 cervical, 14 thoracic and
5 thoracolumbar cases of spinal tuberculosis out of which 9 were females and
12 males. The age group was from 18 -70 years of age. The pre-operative ODI
score was 75.61 ± 3.066 and post-operative ODI score was 38.09 ± 4.267.
Conclusion: In this study we compared ODI Scores, as
functional outcome assessment before and after surgery of spinal TB
patients. This prospective study proves that there is an improvement in ODI
Scores after surgical intervention in TB spine and the right timing of these
decisions are extremely beneficial.

## 1598

## P355: Intramedullary tuberculoma: a case report

Ghorbel Mohamed

1

, Ines Cherif

1

, Daoud Ahmed

1

, Kolsi Fatma

1

, and Boudouara Zaher

1

1

Neurosurgery, Habib Bourguiba Hospital, Tunisia

Introduction: Intramedullary tuberculoma is a rare condition. It
affects mainly patients in developing countries. Diagnosis and treatment can
be challenging. Material and Methods: We report the case of a
young patient who was diagnosed with intramedullary tuberculoma and was
treated in the department of neurosurgery in the Habib Bourguiba hospital in
Sfax, Tunisia. Results: The patient was a 21-year-old female.
She had a history of pulmonary tuberculosis. She was admitted for walking
disturbances with sphincter dysfunction. Physical examination found a
spastic paraparesis with a T8 sensitive level. The patient had anal
sphincter hypotonia, vesical retention and bilateral Babinski sign. Spinal
MRI showed an intramedullary nodular mass at the level of T7. The patient
underwent urgent surgery. Tumor removal was not complete due to adherences.
Pathology was in favor of tuberculoma. The patient had physical therapy
along long-term antibiotics. She was symptom-free few weeks after surgery.
Conclusion: Intramedullary tuberculoma is rare. However,
such diagnosis should be considered in some contexts. Surgery when possible
followed by medical treatment is the best alternative.

## 1602

## P356: Hydatidosis of the spinal column: our series and review of the
literature

Ghorbel Mohamed

1

, Mohamed Boukhit

2

, Daoud Ahmed

1

, Kolsi Fatma

1

, Ines Cherif

1

, and Boudouara Zaher

1

1

Neurosurgery, Habib Bourguiba Hospital, Sfax, Tunisia

2

Neurosurgery, Fattouma Bourguiba Hospital, Monastir,
Tunisia

Introduction: Hydatid disease is a parasitic infection which can
infect humans through the larval stage of the Echinococcus Granulosis (EG).
It’s commonly seen in the Mediterranean region, Middle East and India.
Hydatid cysts are frequently formed in the liver (60-70%), then the lungs.
Although, Bone involvement is rare with approximately 0.5% of all hydatid
cyst cases residing in the vertebrae. We report a series of spinal column
hydatid cyst, treated over a period of 16 years. This study aim to discuss
the diagnosis and the management of spinal hydatid cyst, based on a
literature review. Materials and Methods: We report a
retrospective study of 7 cases of spinal column hydatid cysts treated in the
neurosurgery department of Habib Bourguiba University Hospital of
Sfax-Tunisia, between January 2003 and December 2018. Results:
It’s about 3 males and 4 females aged from 7 to 66 years with a mean age of
36.8. The revealing clinical symptomatology was spinal cord compression,
back pain and sciatica. Weakness of the lower limbs was seen in 4 cases. We
found bowel and bladder dysfunction in 57.1% of the patients. Whole spine
MRI was done in all cases. Hydatid cysts were localized in dorsal column in
3 cases, dorsolumbar junction in 1 case, lumbosacral vertebrae in 1 case and
lumbar column in 2 cases. All the patients were operated and treated with
antihelminthic (Albendazole). Posterior approach was performed with 5 cases.
The two other patients were operated through a lateral and an anterior
approach. 5 patients had good recovery of muscle strength and resolution of
limb sensory disturbance. The evolution was marked by relapse in 3 cases,
which were reoperated. The average follow-up of patients after surgery was
6.3 years. Conclusion: Spinal hydatid cyst is a serious disease
with significant morbidity. The recommended treatment is surgery with
anterior or posterior approach and subsequent adjuvant medical therapy. The
results are rarely satisfactory and the prognosis is usually poor due to the
frequency of relapses.

## 1757

## P357: Results of intervertebral fusion using autogenous tricortical
spinous process bone during surgical treatment of pyogenic
spondylits

Young-Yul Kim

1

, Jong-Beom Park

2

, and Jae-Hoon Kim

1

1

Orthopedics, Daejeon St. Mary's Hospital, Deajeon, South
Korea

2

Orthopedics,
St. Mary's Hospital, Uijeonbu, South Korea

Introduction: Pyrogenic spondylitis is a rare spinal disease
that occurs in disc space. However, the incidence is increasing due to the
recent increase in treatment of epidural steroid injection. When performing
intervertebral fusion surgery during the surgical treatment of pyogenic
spondylitis, autogenic iliac bone graft is commonly used. But this
autogenous cancellous bone graft may cause problems such as loosening or
breakage of the device due to a decrease in the gap between the vertebrae
after surgery. Therefore, in this study, we evaluate results about
performing intervertebral fusion using trimming tricortical spinous process
bone by microdrill after the autogenous spinous process in the same area
where no infection occurred. Materials and Methods: A total of
9 patients with pyogenic spondylitis diagnosed in 2017-2021 who did not
respond to antibiotic treatment were targeted. All patients had MRI
evaluation preoperatively. Among the patients who observed the abscess of
disc, facet joint, and epidural space on MRI, patients who did not involve
in spinous process were targeted. The average age of the patient was 62.4
years, and the male-female ratio was 6:3. We're going to do postop x-rays,
6-month follow-up x-rays, 12 month x-rays, and postoperative 12 month
CT. The height between the vertebrae of the disc space was
compared and analyzed. In addition, the degree of clinical improvement was
measured using VAS (Visual analog scale) and ODI (Oswestry disability
index). Results: In post op x-ray, the final fusion was 11.2
cm, 6 mon 10.8, and 12 mon 10.4. The convergence period was judged to be
more than 6 months. The average VAS preoperatively cored at 8.2, it
estimated as 5.2, 4.1 at 6 months after the surgery, and finally 2.1 at 12
months. In the case of ODI, all 9 of them showed severe disability, but 6
months after the surgery, 6 of them changed to moderate. And 2 people showed
minimal disability and 1 showed severity disability, and in the 12th month
evaluation, it was shown in 7 people with minimal disability and 2 people
with moderate disability. Conclusion: In patients with
pyrogenic spondylitis, intervertebral fusion using an autogenic tricortical
spinous process bone can induce intervertebral fusion while maintaining the
height of the vertebral body. It was useful option about
pyogenic spondylitis surgery.

## 1855

## P358: Infectious complications in non-instrumented lumbar spine
surgery

Nessrine Nessib

1

, Kais Maamri

2

, Mohamed Boukhit

2

, Mohamed Amine Hadj Taieb

2

, Maher Hadhri

2

, Ghassen Belkahla

2

, Atef Ben Nsir

2

, and Mehdi Darmoul

2

1

Neurosurgery, Mongi ben Hamida Institute of Neurology, Tunis,
Tunisia

2

Neurosurgery, Fattouma Bourguiba Hospital, Monastir,
Tunisia

Introduction: Surgical site infection (SSI) is one of the most
serious complications after lumbar disc herniation surgery. Rates vary from
0.7% to 12.0%. Materials and Methods: This is a retrospective
study conducted between January 2008 and December 2018, to assess the
incidence of surgical site infections following non-instrumental lumbar disc
herniation surgery in adults. We present this study in order to highlight
the epidemiological, clinical, diagnostic and therapeutic characteristics of
SSI, and to identify its risk factors. Results: 869 procedures
for lumbar disc herniation without instrumentation were performed during
this period. 24 SSI were identified with an incidence of 2.76%. Superficial
infections were the most frequent. The time of occurence of SSI was 15.17
days. The most frequently isolated microorganism was Staphylococcus aureus.
Several significant risk factors for SSI were identified. The prognosis and
clinical expression of SSI depend on the extent of the infection and the
time between the surgical intervention and the first symptoms. SSIs should
be treated with appropriate antibiotics associated with surgical treatment.
Conclusion: Our study determined the incidence and
identified the risk factors for SSI following lumbar disc herniation
surgery. This makes it possible to develop effective preventive
measures.

## 1875

## P359: Isolated tuberculosis of the atlas

Nessrine Nessib

1

, Sliti Firas

1

, Abdelhafidh Slimane

1

, Nadhir Karmani

1

, Khalil Ghedira

1

, Alaa Belhaj

1

, and Jalel Kallel

1

1

Neurosurgery, Mongi ben Hamida Institute of Neurology, Tunis,
Tunisia

Introduction: Pott's disease is still a common disease in
countries with poor socio-economic conditions. It continues to pose a public
health problem since it affects a young population in full activity, which
shows the role of prevention. The dorsolumbar spine is the preferred site.
Tuberculosis in the cervico-occipital hinge is very rare. It is estimated to
occur in only 1% of spinal locations. Materials and Methods: We
report the case of a 63-year old female treated in the neurosurgery
department at the Mongi Ben Hamida National Institute of Neurology in
Tunisia. Results: Our patient was without any particular
pathological history and without any notion of tuberculosis infection. The
patient consulted for mechanical cervical pains evolving for 1 year, of
progressive aggravation, with trismus, torticoli and dysphagia to solids.
The clinical examination revealed a significant painful stiffness of the
cervical spine and the neurological examination was normal without any sign
of spinal cord injury, fever or alteration of the general condition. The
biological workup showed a non-specific inflammatory syndrome. The CT scan
of the cervical spine showed an osteolytic lesion of the anterior arch of C1
lateralized to the left with rupture of the cortical bone. MRI showed a
lesion that fixed the contrast, rounded, left paravertebral, extended to the
adjacent soft tissues respecting the aerodigestive carrefour, whose
appearance suggests a tumoral process originating from the paravertebral
soft tissues, invading the anterior arch of C1, or an infectious process
with common or specific germs. Sputum and urine were negative for BK. TST
was negative. Wright serology and card-test negative. Needle biopsy was not
possible because of the invincible trismus, and the lesion was biopsied
surgically. Anatomopathological examination confirmed the tubercular nature
of the lesion. Under anti-tuberculosis treatment, the evolution was
favorable, both clinically and biologically. Conclusion: Pott's
disease of the upper cervical spine is a very rare condition. The diagnosis
is usually made late at the stage of neurological deficit. It should be
suspected in the presence of chronic torticoli associated with prevertebral
thickening and C1C2 lysis. MRI is of great diagnostic value and allows
monitoring of treated forms. The diagnosis must be made early ; it is
confirmed on histo-bacteriological grounds but sometimes retained on
presumptive elements. Medical treatment based on anti-tuberculosis
antibiotic therapy and immobilization of the cervical spine must be
instituted as a first-line treatment despite the extent of bone lysis.
Surgical treatment should be reserved for cases with diagnostic doubt, or in
the presence of severe nerve compression or progressive worsening with or
without respiratory disorders, or in cases of documented dynamic
instability. The evolution under treatment is usually favorable.

## 1877

## P360: Central nervous system infection revealing a dermal sinus

Nessrine Nessib

1

, Abdelhafidh Slimane

1

, Nadhir Karmani

1

, Nessrine Jemel

1

, Eya Chahed

1

, Khalil Ghedira

1

, and Jalel Kallel

1

1

Neurosurgery, Mongi ben Hamida Institute of Neurology, Tunis,
Tunisia

Introduction: The dermal sinus is a congenital dysraphic anomaly
that corresponds clinically to the presence of a punctiform cutaneous
orifice of the median and posterior paramedian raphe from the occipital
region to the sacrum but often from the lumbosacral region. The main
complication of dermal sinus is central nervous system infection.
Materials and Methods: We report the cases of 3 patients
treated in the neurosurgical department at the Mongi Ben Hamida National
Institute of Neurology in Tunisia, in whom the diagnosis of dermal sinus was
made only after a severe central nervous system infection.
Results: They were two boys and one girl, aged 11 months, 3
years and 11 months, respectively. Cerebrospinal MRI was performed in two
cases for a neurological deficit in a febrile context, and in the third case
for a recurrent purulent meningitis. In all three cases, it was a lumbar
intradural abscess associated with a dermal sinus. The abscess was evacuated
with excision of the dermal sinus. Two children had sequelae. These
infectious complications are the most serious aspect of non-operated dermal
sinuses because they can lead to serious neurological sequelae, in
particular urological disorders and/or paraplegia, which will require
long-term multidisciplinary management and can compromise the functional
prognosis of these children. Conclusion: The severity of
neurological sequelae due to infectious complications of the dermal sinus
makes its detection the responsibility of any physician examining a child
and indicates its urgent prophylactic surgery.

## 1930

## P361: Spinal hydatid disease: a survey study from Tunisia

Ghorbel Mohamed

1

, Amine Trifa

2

, Atef Ben Nsir

2

, Ahmed Amine Daoued

1

, and Mehdi Darmoul

2

1

Neurosurgery Department, Habib Bourguiba University Hospital, Sfax,
Tunisia

2

Neurosurgery Department, Fattouma Bourguiba University Hospital,
Monastir, Tunisia

Introduction: The Hydatid cyst infection is caused by infection
with the pathogen Echinococcus Granulosus. Musculoskeletal infection
accounts for 0.5-1 % of all cases with Spinal Hydatid cyst representing half
of those cases. The purpose of this study is to discuss the diagnosis,
Differential Diagnosis and the management of spinal hydatid cyst.
Material and Methods: Using a survey research, this study
reviews six reports of spinal hydatid disease from Tunisia during the past
30 years and the main features of the treatment. Results: The
population of our study is made of four man and two women (Sex Ratio 2:1)
with a medium age of 40 years and symptoms duration ranging from 2 days to
32 years. 2 Patients presented with back pain, 2 patients with local
swelling, 2 patients with radiculopathy and 3 patients with myelopathy.
Radiological assessment (CT for 2 patients, CT+MRI for 4 patients) showed a
dorsal spinal localization of the cyst in 4 cases, 1 case extending from
dorsal to lumbar spine and one extended from lumbar spine to sacrum, with an
associated location of pulmonary infestation in one case. Peri and
post-operative Albendazole drug treatment were given in all cases. The
initial surgery approach was a posterior one with epidural cysts removal and
spinal decompression for all the cases with a relapse rate of 5/6 of the
cases (One patient was lost of view) after an average duration of 3 years.
Second surgery was performed with 3 patients via a posterior approach with a
local relapse after a mean duration of 2 years to all the 3 cases, and a
total spondylectomy with spinal fusion was performed to two patients who
showed No recurrence after a mean duration of 4 years.
Conclusion: The Simple decompression via laminectomy was
found to show poor outcome especially in recurrent disease and a higher risk
of relapse and neurological deterioration. Combined approach (laminectomy +
Spinal fusion) may be strongly considered to maximize the chance of success
Strict follow-up is mandatory. Further studies are needed to establish
Treatment guidelines.

## 1940

## P362: Has SARS-Co V-2 ( COVID-19) caused further increase on already
increasing discitis (NVO)? An observational study

Mukta Vadhva

1

 and Poorna Veerappa

1

1

Orthopaedics, Lancashire Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, Preston,
United Kingdom

Introduction: Bacterial native vertebral osteomyelitis (NVO),
synonymous with spondylodiscitis, is an important cause of back pain. NVO is
associated with haematogenous seeding or contiguous spread from local
infection. The literature reports 1 and 2 per 100,000 population in USA and
UK respectively. The incidence (up to 9.8/100,000 per year (Kehrer et al.,
2014) has increased (from 1-2/100,000 to 9.8/100,000 over the last 2
decades, possibly reflecting an ageing population (Kehrer et al., 2014;
Mylona et al., 2009; Akiyama et al., 2013; Loibl et al., 2014). At our
regional combined spinal surgical unit, our team suspected that there has
been a surge in discitis during the covid period compared to pre-pandemic
levels. A rapid literature search in major bio-medical databases yielded no
current publications regarding this. Material and
Methods:Type of Study: Retrospective,
observational cohort study of adult patients with bacterial NVO.
Inclusion criterion:
1. Adult (above age 18)
2. Radiology (CT/MRI +/-MRI contrast) confirmed discitis
3. No history of previous spine surgery
Exclusion criterion:
1. Non-adult population
2. People with previous spine surgery with or without fusion
Methodology: Referral databases at our tertiary spine
surgery unit, which provides service for a wide geographical area within the
northwest of England by both orthopaedic and neuro-surgical spinal surgeons,
were reviewed. The arms were divided into pre-COVID and post-COVID. Data was
collected for a seven-month period (January to July) in the two years,
namely 2017 and 2021. A total of 2000 patients were included in each limb.
Results: Review of our results showed 20 patients with
confirmed discitis in the pre-COVID study period, whereas 38 patients had
radiology confirmed discitis during the pandemic. Further analysis of our
data showed that prior to COVID-19, 68% of all confirmed cases of discitis
were in females, whereas post COVID-19 the incidence was more prevalent in
males at 79%. It was also observed in our observational study, that
pre-COVID-19 only one patient had skip lesion in the spine, whereas post
COVID-19, skip lesions were observed in a total of five cases.
Conclusion: It is our observation that there has been an
increase (almost doubling) of discitis since the pandemic. It is unclear
about the exact cause for this increase. Our study also noted that only one
patient was COVID positive when discitis was diagnosed. It is our view that
we need to have low threshold in suspecting discitis, especially in male
population presenting with back pain. Further Plan: The
observation was discussed at regional spine network, and it was deemed to
carry out a multicentric study within the Northwest region.
Acknowledgments: Neurosurgical and Orthopaedic spine department for allowing
to use the database of their patients.
Keywords: COVID-19, SARS-Co V-2, Spondylodiscitis, discitis, native vertebral
osteomyelitis

## 1954

## P363: Outcome in caries spine childern treated with standalone cage in
terms of angular correction

Zubair Khalid

1

, Atiq Uz Zaman

1

, and Naeem Ahmed

1

1

Department of Orthopedic and Spine Center, Ghurki Trust Teaching
Hospital Lahore, Lahore, Pakistan

Objective: Spine tuberclosusis is main problem in developing
countries. it is most common in children and young adluts. Posterior
approach is much discussed for caries spine. Data on anterior approach is
not sufficient. the main objective of this study is to assure anterior
approach for caries spine is more effective in treating TB spine in
children. Study Design: Prospective cohort study design.
Materials and Methods: We performed analysis of 116
patients underwent anterior decompression with standalone cage from January
2010-December 2020 in Department of Orthopaedic and Spine Center, Ghurki
Trust Teaching Hospital Lahore, Pakistan. Preop and post op angle of
kyphosis and angle of deformity calculated on digistal xray. Preop and
postop neurological improvement is evaluated with franklins grading. Spinal
instability score also calculated in each case. all these parameters are
evaluated 2 years follow-up. ATT (anti tuberculosis treatment started preop
and continued for 1year post op. Study parameters include, return to daily
activities, return to job and patient satisfaction rate.
Results: In current study, a total of 116 patients included
fulfilling the inclusion criteria among these 56 (48.3%) were males and 60
(51.7%) were female cases with mean age of 6.50 ± 2.12 ranged from (3-14
years). Majority 82 out of 116 were effected from thoracic region, six were
effected from lumbar region. Five cases were effected from cervical region.
The preoperative kyphosis angle was 51.17 ± 21.64o and post op
kyphosis angle was 30.93 ± 18.16o indicating the significance
difference in the mean angle as p < .05. Conclusion:
Anterior decompression and standalone cage is best approach for caries spine
in children. Immediate correction is obtained and disease cure rate is
good.

## 1957

## P364: Gram-negative hematogenous spondylodiscitis. Incidence, risk
factors and outcome

Hamdan Abdelrahman

1,2

, Mootaz Shousha

3

, and Heinrich Boehm

3

1

Asiut University Hospitals, Egypt

2

Helios-Hospitals Erfurt, Spine Surgery, Erfurt, Germany

3

Zentralklinik Bad Berka, Bad Berka, Germany

Introduction: In recent years, the incidence of spinal
infections has raised, this has been attributed to an increasing proportion
of elderly population with predisposing factors and comorbidities. Various
studies confirm staph. aureus as the most common causative organism in
hematogenous spinal infections. Gram negative bacteria cause a significant
proportion of all these cases. The incidence seems to be increasing in the
recent years. Patients and methods: Retrospective analysis of
the prospectively collected data of all patients with spinal infection
between 2005 and 2015. The study revealed 600 patients with hematogenous
spinal infections after exclusion of the cases with postoperative, wound
infections and the cases treated for infection before this period. A
causative organism could be identified from the site of infection in 405
patients (67.5%). Gram-negative bacteria could isolated in 45 patients of
all cases (7.5%). In this study, we have collected and analysed the
demographic, clinical, radiological and laboratory data as well as the
outcome of management of those patients with gram-negative spondylodiscitis.
Results: 45 patients, 21 females and 24 males with mean age
of 66.96 ± 11.42 years 41 patients (91.1%) were older than 50 years. In
those patients, 60% of the patients had ASA- Score class III and IV. The
most common comorbidities were cardiac in 24 patients, DM in 22, renal
insuffiecncy in 20 patients. Other site of infection were found in 30
patients; the most common one was UTI in 21 of them (
p-value 0.000*
). At the time of presentation, 30 patients (66.7%) had received
antibiotic with average period of 15.9 ± 13.13 days (2-50). The pre-surgical
interval was variable and ranged between 5-120 days, neurological deficit in
31 patients (68.9%), fever in 20 (an organism could be isolated from blood
culture in 8 of them) and in 6 patients septic manifestations were found at
admission. Lumbar spine was affected in 33 patients (73.3%); lumbosacral
junction in 5 cases of them. Monosegemental was the commonest in 28 patients
(62.2%), in 4 patients multifocal infection was found. The preoperative
inflammatory parameters revealed mean CRP of 88.91 ± 72.55. The most common
isolated organisms from the site of infection were E. coli in 20 patients
(44.4%). In 5 patients (11.1%) had (mixed infection) and 4 of them had bed
sore at the time of admission. One patient had pyogenic infection (in tissue
culture) on top of tuberculous lesion (histopathological). All patients have
been surgically treated; combined ventro-dorsal approach was necessary in 40
patients. In five patients, recurrence of infection has been detected and
treated surgically (11.1%). In-hospital mortality of 6.7%. The neurological
improvement rate of at least one grade reached 83%. Postoperative antibiotic
therapy had to be taken more than 8 weeks in 31 patients.
Conclusion: Gram-negative bacteria cause a significant
proportion of vertebral osteomyelitis with incidence reached 7.5% in this
study. The multimorbid elderly patients are more affected than the other age
groups. The treatment is challenging, requiring prolonged hospital stay and
multiple antibiotic regimes are often needed to prompt control of the
infection and to prevent its recurrence.

## 1958

## P365: Lumbar posterior inter-apophyseal arthritis complicating jugular
catheterization

Mohamed Yassine Belhedi

1

, Mouadh Nefiss

1

, Chahed Houssem Eddine

1

, Hedi Ezzine

1

, Mohamed Amine Gharbi

1

, Ramzi Bouzidi

1

, Ezzaouia Khelil

1

, and Tborbi Anis

1

1

Orthopeadic and Traumatology, Mongi Slim Hospital, Marsa,
Tunisia

Introduction: Arthritis is defined as an acute or chronic
inflammatory disease of the synovial mucosa of one or more joints. The
etiology can be various, inflammatory, immune, or infectious. Septic
arthritis is a medical-surgical emergency that must be suspected in a
clinical context that is sometimes frustrating or in the presence of other
inflammatory arthropathies. It usually affects a peripheral joint,
particularly the knee and hip. Spinal involvement is not frequent. We report
the case of a patient who presented a septic arthritis of the posterior
lumbar inter-apophysis following the placement of a jugular catheter.
Clinical Presentation: The patient was 60 years old,
diabetic, hypertensive, dyslipidemic, with coronary artery disease and renal
insufficiency at the hemodialysis stage. He presented with feverish low back
pain and a biological inflammatory syndrome, 72 hours after the placement of
a jugular catheter during his dialysis session. An infectious
spondylodiscitis was suspected and the patient was put on antibiotic therapy
(vancomycin + gentamycin). In view of the lack of clinical and biological
improvement and the appearance of a neurological deficit, ASIA score FRANKEL
D, without sphincter disorders, a CT scan of the lumbar spine was performed
at 15 days of the symptomatology, showing a staged zygapophyseal arthritis
with intracanal diffusion. A complementary MRI scan showed an aspect in
favor of a posterior lumbar inter-apophyseal arthritis, extending from L2/L3
to L5/S1, probably of infectious origin with intra-articular effusion,
synovitis as well as collections with intracanal development without
associated discitis. The patient underwent posterior surgery. He underwent
an extended laminectomy from L2 to S1 with exploration of the destruction of
the right L4/L5 joint and the presence of staged intracanal collections
opposite L2/L3, L3/L4 and L4/L5. These collections were drained. A
superficial and deep bacteriological samples were taken and returned
negative. The patient was then put on vancomycin with good
clinico-biological evolution and total recovery of his neurological deficit.
Conclusion: The posterior inter-apophyseal joint is a rare
septic location. The clinical expression is very similar to that of a
spondylodiscitis and is marked by an important spinal stiffness and by an
inconstant febrile syndrome. MRI is the most efficient examination to make
the diagnosis, which constitutes a medical-surgical emergency.

## Medical Economics

## 111

## P366: Isolated thoracic and lumbar transverse process fractures, do they
need spine surgeon evaluation? A high volume level I trauma center
experience with cost analysis

Asa Peterson

1

, Jonathan Behrens

1

, Pooria Salari

1

, and Howard Place

1

1

Orthopaedic Surgery, St. Louis Univeristy, St. Louis, United
States

Introduction: Transverse process fractures (TPF) of the thoracic
and lumbar spine have become increasingly identified due to CT imaging. At
many institutions the spine service, neurosurgical or orthopaedic, is
consulted for further evaluation and management. There are several studies
that demonstrate no difference in clinical outcome with or without spine
service intervention (bracing, surgery, etc.). However, no study to our
knowledge provides an additional cost analysis. We hypothesize that isolated
transverse process fractures of the thoracolumbar vertebrae are structurally
and neurologically stable injuries. Furthermore, spine service consultation
and evaluation results in increased healthcare costs. Methods:
Patients were identified using the trauma registry data at Saint Louis
University (SLU) from January 2012 to August 2018. The registry was queried
for CPT code 22305 (closed treatment of vertebral process fracture). Chart
and imaging review was performed to determine if any additional spine
fractures were identified by the spine team which were not included in the
initial radiology report. TPF associated with other spinal injuries were
characterized by the presence of one or more thoracic and/or lumbar TPF in
addition to any other acute fracture or dislocation in the cervical,
thoracic, or lumbar spine. A separate cost analysis with
institution-specific charges was also performed. Results: Six
hundred and eighty two patients with TPF from January 2012 to August 2018
were identified. Two hundred and twenty eight patients met the criteria to
be included in this study. Of these, four hundred and seventy seven lumbar
TPFs and one hundred and three thoracic TPFs were identified. Additional
spinal pathology that was not included in the initial radiology report was
identified in 5 (2.19%) patients, none of which required surgical
intervention. These included two nondisplaced facet fractures (T6 and L3)
that were treated non-operatively, a nondisplaced C7 laminar fracture
treated with a rigid cervical orthosis, and a T3/4 widening which was
suggestive of possible posterior ligamentous injury on a subsequent MRI exam
which was treated with bracing. Cost analysis demonstrated additional costs
associated with spine service intervention totaled $1,725,360.28. Average
cost per patient in our cohort summed to $2,529.85. Conclusion:
These data support that isolated TPF of the thoracic and lumbar spine are
stable injuries that likely do not require spine service intervention and in
fact may represent unnecessary financial burden. Foregoing unnecessary
consultation can alleviate time constraints within spine service practices
and reduce health care costs by eliminating costly extraneous interventions
from the patient’s care.

## 536

## P367: A 5 year cost-utility analysis for recombinant bone morphogenetic
protein 2 (rhBMP-2) use in transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion for
degenerative lumbar pathologies

Carlos Ortiz-Babilonia

1,2

, Arjun Gupta

1,3

, Micheal Raad

1

, Miguel Cartagena

1,4

, and Amit Jain

1

1

Department of Orthopedic Spine Surgery, John Hopkins University,
Baltimore, United States

2

University of Puerto Rico Medical Sciences Campus, Department of
Orthopedic Surgery, San Juan, Puerto Rico

3

Rutgers New Jersey Medical School, Department of Orthopedic Surgery,
Newark, United States

4

Ponce Health Sciences University, Department of Orthopedic Surgery,
Ponce, Puerto Rico

Study Design: Cost-utility analysis. Objective:
This study aimed to evaluate the cost-utility of utilizing recombinant human
bone morphogenetic protein 2 (rhBMP-2) in addition to local bone graft (LBG)
in transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion surgery (TLIF) for adults with
degenerative lumbar disease compared to LBG only. Background:
Past clinical studies including cost-effectiveness analyses have shown TLIF
to be an effective treatment for degenerative lumbar pathologies in adult
patients. The utilization of rhBMP-2 has been shown to lower pseudoarthrosis
rates in the setting of TLIF, however its cost-effectiveness has not been
previously demonstrated. Therefore, in this study we attempt to evaluate the
cost-effectiveness of rhBMP-2 use as a treatment strategy in adult patients
undergoing TLIF. Methods: A decision tree comparing LBG +
rhBMP-2 use versus use of LBG alone was built for a hypothetical 60-year-old
man with degenerative lumbar pathology (DLP) requiring surgery. A
comprehensive review of the literature was performed to obtain event
probabilities, costs and health utilities. Health utilities were utilized to
calculate Quality-Adjusted Life Years (QALYs). A base-case analysis was
carried out to obtain the incremental cost and effectiveness (QALYs) of
rhBMP-2 utilization in TLIF. A probabilistic sensitivity analysis was
performed using 1000 Monte Carlo simulations to evaluate the uncertainty in
our model and obtain mean incremental costs, effectiveness, and net monetary
benefits. One-way deterministic sensitivity analyses were also performed to
identify the variables with most impact on our base-case results.
Results: TLIF with LBG + rhBMP-2 was favored on base-case
analysis. Adding rhBMP-2 to LBG in TLIF was favored in 80% of the Monte
Carlo simulations. Utilization of rhBMP-2 resulted in mean savings of
$10,024 (SD = 2,191) while gaining a mean of 0.11 (SD = 0.24) additional
QALYs compared to TLIF with LBG only. The mean cost of rhBMP-2 + LBG in TLIF
surgery was $36,400 (SD = 3034), while TLIF with only LBG resulted in
$46,424 (SD = 3814). The mean INMB and ICUR of utilizing rhBMP-2 in TLIF
surgery were found to be $20,967 (95% CI, $19,436 - $22,498) and -$34,096
(95% CI, -$75,695 - $7,501) at a willingness-to-pay (WTP) threshold of
100,000 USD/QALY, respectively; indicating that rhBMP-2 use in TLIF is a
cost-effective strategy in comparison to TLIF with LBG alone. On one-way
deterministic sensitivity analysis, the three parameters with most effect on
the conclusions of our model were the probability of pseudoarthrosis with
LBG only, the cost of revision, and the effect of nonunion on patient
quality of life.Conclusion: Cost-utility analysis supports the
use of rhBMP-2 in adult patients undergoing TLIF for lumbar degenerative
pathologies.

## 541

## P368: Predictors of academic productivity among spine surgeons

Mark Lambrechts

1

, Yunsoo Lee

1

, Jeremy Heard

1

, Nicholas D'Antonio

1

, Tariq Issa

1

, Parker Brush

1

, Delano Trenchfield

1

, Payton Boere

1

, Ari Clements

1

, Zachary Crawford

2

, Patrick O'Connor

1

, Jose Canseco

1

, Christopher Kepler

1

, Alan Hilibrand

1

, Alexander Vaccaro

1

 and Gregory Schroeder

1

1

Orthopedic Surgery, The Rothman Orthopedic Institute at Thomas
Jefferson University Hospital, Philadelphia, United States

2

Orthopedic Surgery, University of Cincinnati, United States

Introduction: Academic productivity of orthopaedic surgery
residency applicants has risen in importance as the field becomes more
competitive. However, the relationship between research productivity in
training and future productivity as an attending physician is not well
established in the literature nor has the impact of geographic location of
training institutions on future academic success been investigated. For
trainees interested in academic medicine, knowing these factors may help set
research goals and choose training programs. Therefore, the aim of our study
was to: (1) summarize characteristics of academically productive spine
surgeons, (2) assess the impact of academic productivity during different
training timepoints on long-term productivity, and (3) establish the impact
of geographic location on long-term academic productivity.
Methods: A query of the 2021-2022 North American Spine
Society (NASS) Spine Fellowship Directory of all orthopedic and
neurosurgical spine fellowship selection committee members for each
institution participating in the spine fellowship match. Each surgeon's
current institution of practice and medical education was recorded through
an online search of institutional websites. A search on PubMed was then used
to collect data on the number of articles published prior to residency,
during residency, during fellowship, and following fellowship determined
based on the recorded medical education history. The attending publication
rate was calculated and the author's h-index was collected
through a search of each author's Scopus profile through July 1, 2022. Data
was analyzed by residency training and attending institution geographic
location. A multivariate linear regression model was developed to determine
if pre-residency, residency, or fellowship publication rate were
independently predictive of attending publication rate or
h-index. Results: A total of 310
orthopedic and neurosurgical spine surgeons, representing 76 fellowship
programs, were identified on the NASS directory as involved in spine
fellowship mentoring. Multivariate linear regression analysis identified
that the publications during residency (p < 0.001) and during fellowship
(p<0.001) were significant predictors of an increased publication rate as
an attending surgeon. In contrast, the pre-residency publication rate (p =
0.729) was not significantly predictive of the attending publication rate.
Multivariate analysis of h-index found that residency
publication rate had a positive correlation (p = 0.031) as compared to
pre-residency (p = 0.579) or fellowship (p = 0.257). Attendings who had
attended residency in the Northeast and currently practicing in the
Northeast had a higher publication rate (p < 0.001 and p = 0.004,
respectively). Conclusion: Understanding factors important to
long term research productivity can help academic institutions hire trainees
and attendings while also assisting trainees in program selection. A higher
number of publications in residency and fellowship was significantly
predictive of an increased publication rate as an attending spine surgeon,
indicating that an emphasis on research throughout surgical training, with a
particular focus during residency, is advantageous for those interested in a
career in academic spine surgery. In contrast, pre-residency publications
may not be indicative of future academic productivity as an attending.
Location may also contribute to attending publication rate and favors those
who undergo residency training and ultimately practice in the Northeast.

## 607

## P369: Gender disparities among abstract presenters at recent Global Spine
Congress Annual Meetings

Yunsoo Lee

1

, Tariq Issa

1

, Delano Trenchfield

1

, Jasmine Lin

1

, Skylar Nahi

1

, Alexander Becsey

1

, Qudratallah Qadiri

1

, Preston Carey

1

, Parker Brush

1

, Jeremy Heard

1

, Jose Canseco

1

, Alan Hilibrand

1

, Christopher Kepler

1

, Alexander Vaccaro

1

, and Gregory Schroeder

1

1

Division of Spine Surgery, Rothman Orthopaedic Institute,
Philadelphia, United States

Introduction: The percentage of female surgeons in neurosurgery
and orthopaedic surgery has grown significantly over the past several years,
but still lags behind other fields. However, research has demonstrated that
women are less likely to have adequate mentorship, promotions to
professorship, and research productivity. We aimed describe trends in the
gender of presenters at the Global Spine Congress over the last 5 years.
Material and Methods: We performed a retrospective study
examining the annual programs of the Global Spine Congress final programs
from 2017-2022. Speaker names, institutional data, and session titles were
collated. The gender of speakers was identified through an online search of
their institutional profiles with collection of gender pronouns, when
available, or classifying individuals by their presenting gender.
Results: During the past 5 Global Spine Congress Annual
Meetings, there were a total 1,636 paper presentations. Gender information
could be identified for 1,514 (92.5%) speakers, all of whom were included in
the final analysis. Speakers were predominantly male (N = 1286, 84.9%) and
from the United States (N = 387, 25.6%). European (N = 99, 22.0%) and North
American (N = 91, 15.9%) institutions supported the most female presenters
(p < 0.001). Among other regions of the world, 12.0% of East
Asian/Pacific Islanders, 11.1% of Central/South American, 8.6% of Middle
Eastern, and only 2.4% of South Asians were female. The 2018 and 2019
meetings in Canada and Singapore had the lowest female representation (10.8%
and 12.8%, respectively) compared to those in France (16.9%), United States
(16.8%), and Italy (17.8%), although this did not meet statistical
significance (p = 0.058). Over the last 5 years, there was no significant
increase in the gender of female presenters. Conclusion:
Overall, 14.1% of presenters at the Global Spine Congress were female in
line with recent trends from other orthopaedic and neurosurgery conferences.
However, disparities exist internationally particularly among institutions
and conferences located outside of Europe and the United States. Efforts
should be established to help promote gender equity at future annual
meetings, monitor gender representation from historically less inclusive
regions of the world, and emphasize recruitment and retention efforts of
women.

## 772

## P370: The impact of COVID-19 on spine surgery

Emily Mills

1

, Ethan Faye

1

, Kevin Mertz

1

, Andy Ton

1

, Jeffrey C. Wang

1

, Raymond Hah

1

, and Ram Alluri

1

1

Orthopaedic Surgery, Keck School of Medicine of USC, Los Angeles,
United States

Introduction: The COVID-19 pandemic had a significant impact on
the healthcare system. However, only a few small scale studies have studied
the effect of COVID-19 on spine surgery volume. Therefore, the aim of this
study was to characterize the impact of COVID-19 on the rate of ten common
spine procedures as well as the percentage of outpatient procedures.
Material and Methods: The PearlDiver national database was
queried for posterior lumbar instrumented fusion (< 6 segments),
thoracolumbar intstrumented fusion (> 6 segments), posterior cervical
fusion, anterior cervical decompression and fusion (ACDF), cervical
laminectomy, lumbar laminectomy, microdiscectomy, cervical disc
arthroplasty, cervical laminoplasty, and lumbar interbody fusion. The yearly
rates of these procedures between January 2010 through April 2021 was
recorded. Monthly trends were assessed from January 2020 through April of
2021. The years 2020 and 2021 were compared to 2019. Monthly trends
throughout 2020 and 2021 were compared to January of 2020. Inpatient versus
outpatient data was compared between 2010-2019 (pre-COVID) and
2020-2021(post-COVID). Results: Overall, there was a 4.3%
decrease in all ten procedures in 2020 compared to 2019 and a 6.3% increase
in all ten procedures in 2021 compared to 2019. March and April of 2020 had
the largest decrease in procedures, with March of 2020 seeing a 18.2%
decrease in procedures and April 2020 seeing at 51.6% decrease in procedures
compared to January of 2020. Although there were also increasing case
numbers in January of 2021, there was only a 1.8% decrease in total cases
compared to January of 2020. Later months of 2021 had an increase in total
cases, with April of 2021 increasing case volume by 138% compared to January
of 2020. Pre-COVID, outpatient procedures made up 39.7% of all spine
procedures, compared to 49.1% post-COVID (p < 0.001).
Conclusion: The greatest effect on volume in spine surgery
from the COVID-19 pandemic occurred in March and April 2020. Other than
these two months, spine procedures were either very similar or increased
compared to January of 2020. Additionally, the COVID-19 pandemic
significantly increased the volume of outpatient spine procedures.

## 1237

## P371: Assessing the economic benefit of Enhanced Recovery After Surgery
(ERAS) protocols in adult cervical deformity patient outcomes: is initial
cost offset by clinical gains?

Peter Passias

1

, Peter Tretiakov

1

, Kimberly McFarland

1

, Jamshaid Mir

1

, Pooja Dave

1

, Bailey Imbo

1

, Tyler Williamson

1

, Rachel Joujon-Roche

1

, Jordan Lebovic

1

, and Andrew Schoenfeld

2

1

Neurological and Orthopaedic Surgery, NYU Langone Health, New York
City, United States

2

Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Brigham and Women's Center for
Surgery and Public Health, Boston, United States

Introduction: Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) can help
accelerate patient recovery and assist hospitals in maximizing the
incentives of bundled payment models while maintaining high-quality patient
care. However, the economic benefits of ERAS protocols, nor the
heterogeneous components that make up such protocols, have been established.
Material and Methods: Operative CD patients ≥ 18yrs with
complete pre-(BL) and up to 2-year(2Y) postop radiographic/HRQL data were
stratified by enrollment in Standard-of-Care ERAS beginning in 2020,
including expedited time to ambulation, multimodal analgesia and pain
control, and early oral diet and Foley catheter removal. Differences in
demographics, clinical outcomes, radiographic alignment targets,
peri-operative factors and complication rates were assessed via means
comparison analysis. Costs were calculated using PearlDiver database
estimates from Medicare pay-scales. QALY was calculated using NDI mapped to
SF6D using validated methodology with 3% discount rate to account for
residual decline to life expectancy. Results: 270 patients were
included (58.11 ± 11.97 years, 48% female, 29.13 ± 6.89 kg/m2. Of
these patients, 54 (20.0%) received ERAS protocol recovery treatment
post-operatively. At baseline, ERAS+ had significantly higher NDI (p = .005)
and EQ5D (p = .023), and significantly lower mJOA scores (p < .001). At
BL, ERAS- patients were significantly more likely to utilize opioids than
ERAS+ patients (p = .016). Furthermore, ERAS+ patients also had
significantly lower EBL overall (583.48 vs 246.51, p < .001), and
required significantly lower doses of propofol intra-operatively than ERAS-
patients (p = .020). ERAS+ patients also reported lower mean LOS overall
(4.33 vs 5.84, p = .393), and were more likely to be discharged directly to
home (χ2(1) = 4.974, p = .028). In terms of complications, ERAS+
patients were less likely to develop neurological complications overall (p =
.025), and less likely experience thromboembolic complications or be
diagnosed with venous disease post-operatively (p = .025). Per cost
analysis, ERAS+ patients reported a significantly lower mean total 2Y cost
of 33,829 USD compared to ERAS- patients at 36,951 (p < .001).
Furthermore, ERAS+ patients trended towards greater life-expectancy 2Y QALYs
gained versus ERAS- patients (.423 vs .368, p = .051), and demonstrated
significantly lower cost of reoperation by 2Y (7050 USD vs 8110 USD, p <
.001). Conclusion: Patients undergoing Enhanced Recovery After
Surgery (ERAS) protocols experience lower operative times, length of stays,
as well as lower rates of peri-and and post-operative complications.
Subsequently, this study demonstrates that ERAS programs in ACD surgery may
lead to increased cost-effectiveness and reduced total cost by 2Y
post-operatively. Due to the potential economic benefit of ERAS for
patients, physicians and institutions should consider incorporation of ERAS
into practice for eligible patients.

## 1282

## P372: Assessing the insurance deductible effect on outcomes following
elective spinal surgery

Anthony Steinle

1

, Jessa Fogel

1

, Rishabh Gupta

1

, Alicia Hymel

1

, Claudia Davidson

1

, Andrew Croft

1

, Wilson Vaughan

1

, Jacquelyn Pennings

1,2

, Kristin Archer

1,2,3

, Scott Lawrence Zuckerman

1,4

, Raymond Gardocki

1

, Amir Abtahi

1,2,4

, and Byron Stephens

1,2,4

1

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery

2

Center for Musculoskeletal Research

3

Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation

4

Department of Neurological Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, Nashville, TN, United States

Introduction: Many private insurers operate on a calendar
deductible system. Plans typically reset on January 1st, placing
pressure on patients and health care workers to perform medical services,
including elective spine surgeries, before the end of the year to maximize
patient savings. This insurance-driven scheduling of elective procedures
could negatively impact patient reported outcomes (PROs) due to the
increased burden placed on healthcare staff during the month of December, in
addition to potentially lowering the threshold to undergo surgery for
patients who have met their deductible. The purpose of this study was to
investigate if patients undergoing surgery in December had different
baseline characteristics and postoperative outcomes compared to the other 11
months. Material and Methods: We conducted a retrospective
review of data collected from The Quality Outcomes Database, a national
spine registry. The registry was queried for patients who underwent elective
lumbar or anterior cervical discectomy and fusion (ACDF) surgery between
2012 and 2021 for degenerative spine conditions. Oswestry/Neck Disability
Index (ODI/NDI), EuroQol 5-Dimensions (EQ5D), EuroQol Visual Analog Scale
(EQ-VAS), numeric rating scale (NRS) leg/arm pain, and NRS back/neck pain
scores were collected at baseline and 3 and 12 months postoperatively.
Patient satisfaction scores using the NASS questionnaire were recorded at 3
and 12 months. Separate analyses were run for the lumbar and ACDF cohorts.
Three multivariable linear regression models were performed for both groups,
in which 12-month outcomes were predicted based on surgical timing. One
model included all patients, a second included patients with private
insurance, and the third included patients without private insurance.
Results: A total of 978 patients underwent ACDF in December
vs 10,526 in other months. 1,104 patients underwent lumbar fusion in
December vs 11,826 in other months. For the ACDF cohort, there was a
significantly higher percentage of patients in the December group with
private insurance (68.1% vs 60.1% p < 0.001) and employment (50.1% vs
43.5%, p < 0.001). The December group had higher 3-month EQ-5D (0.79 ±
0.18 vs 0.78 ± 0.19, p = 0.019) and baseline EQ-VAS (63.36 ± 19.53 vs 61.72
± 20.36, p = 0.016) scores. For the lumbar cohort, there was a greater
chance of undergoing surgery in December if the patient had private
insurance (56.4% vs 45.0%, p < 0.001) and was employed (38.4% vs 29.9%, p
< 0.001). NRS leg pain at 3 months was significantly higher for the
December group vs the other months (2.4 ± 2.9 vs 2.2 ± 2.7, p = 0.038). All
other PROs were similar. Results from the linear regression models showed
timing of surgery was not predictive of any 12-month outcome except for
EQ-VAS in the ACDF group with private insurance (-1.637 [95% CI:
-3.027-(-0.246)]). Conclusion: Financial pressure created by
the deductible calendar likely affects the scheduling of elective fusions,
specifically for patients with private insurance. However, patients
undergoing fusion surgeries in December did not experience any significant
clinical difference in postoperative outcomes compared to the non-December
group. These findings suggest physicians are scheduling patients
appropriately for elective fusion surgery in December despite external
pressure from insurance companies.

## 1305

## P373: Defining patients with spinal metastases suitable for surgical
intervention: a cost-effectiveness analysis

Hsiang-Chieh Hsieh

1

, Hung-Kuan Yen

1

, Ting-En Tseng

1

, Olivier Groot

2

, Min-Tsun Liao

1

, Meng-Kan Chen

1

, Shau-Huai Fu

1

, Chen-Yu Wang

1

, Wang Chun-chieh

1

, Yu-Tine Pan

1

, Mao-Hsu Yen

1

, Aditya Karhade

3

, Feng-Ming Hsu

1

, Wei-Hsin Lin

1

, Fu-Shan Jaw

1

, Jorrit-Jan Verlaan

2

, Joseph Schwab

3

, Andrew Schoenfeld

4

, Shu-Hua Yang

1

, and Ming-Hsiao Hu

1

1

National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, City, Taiwan

2

University Medical Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands

3

Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, United States

4

Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, United States

Introduction: Both nonoperative and operative treatments for
spinal metastasis are expensive interventions. Previous studies have
provided contradictory results regarding the cost-effectiveness of treatment
approaches, based on patients’ prognosis and walking ability. We sought to
determine the cost-effectiveness of operative and non-operative
interventions, stratified by ambulatory status and predicted probability of
3-month survival. Material and Methods: A Markov model with
four defined health states was used to estimate the quality-adjusted
life-years (QALYs) and costs for operative and nonoperative management of
spine metastases. Transition probabilities for the model, including the
risks of mortality and functional deterioration, were obtained from
secondary data analysis and published literature. Willingness-to-pay
thresholds were prespecified at $100,000 and $150,000. The analyses were
censored after 5-year simulation from a health system perspective and
discounted outcomes at 3% per year. Sensitivity analyses were conducted to
test the robustness of the study design. Results: The
incremental cost-effectiveness ratios were $86,500 per QALY for patients
with a 3-month survival probability > 50%, $167,130 per QALY for patients
with a 3-month survival probability < 50%, $119,360 per QALY for patients
with independent ambulatory and a 3-month survival probability > 50%, and
less than 0 for patients with non-ambulation and a 3-month survival
probability < 50%. Conclusions: This study highlights the
importance of patient selection and preoperative survival estimation for
patients with spinal metastases. In patients with intact ambulation, a
surgical intervention could still be cost-effective, especially for those
with better prognosis.

## 1465

## P374: Optimizing spine surgery instrument trays to immediately increase
efficiency and reduce costs in the operating room

Setti Belhouari

1

, Jay Toor

1

, Aazad Abbas

2

, Johnathan Lex

1

, and Jeremie Larouche

2,3

1

Temerty Faculty of Medicine

2

Division of Orthopaedics, Department of Surgery, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Canada

3

Department of Surgery, Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre, Toronto,
Canada

Introduction: Over-crowded surgical trays result in
perioperative inefficiency and unnecessary costs. While methodologies to
reduce the size of surgical trays have been described in the literature,
they each have their own drawbacks. In this study, we compared three
methods: 1) clinician review (CR), 2) mathematical programming (MP), and 3)
a novel hybrid approach based on surveys and cost analysis. While CR and MP
are well documented, CR can yield suboptimal reductions and MP can be
laborious and technically challenging. We hypothesized our easy-to-implement
HM would result in a reduction of surgical instruments in both the
laminectomy tray (LT) and basic neurosurgery tray (BNT) that is comparable
to CR and MP. Material and Methods: Three approaches were
tested: CR, MP, and HM. We interviewed 5 neurosurgeons and 3 orthopedic
surgeons, at our institution, who performed a total of 5437 spine cases,
requiring the use of the LT and BNT over a four-year (2017-2021) period. In
CR, surgeons suggested which surgical instruments should be removed. MP was
performed via the mathematical analysis of 25 observations of the use of a
LT and BNT tray. The HM was performed via a structured survey of the
surgeons’ estimated instrument usage, followed by a cost-based inflection
point analysis. Results: The CR, MP, and HM approaches resulted
in a total instrument reduction of 41%, 35%, and 38%, respectively,
corresponding to total cost savings per annum of $50,211.20, $46,348.80, and
$44,417.60, respectively. Conclusion: While hospitals continue
to examine perioperative services for potential inefficiencies, surgical
inventory will be increasingly scrutinized. Despite MP being the most
accurate methodology to do so, our results suggest that savings were similar
across all three methods. CR and HM are significantly less laborious and
thus are practical alternatives.

## 1853

## P375: A novel pain management protocol for the reduction of opioid usage
perioperative to instrumented lumbar fusion

Gregory Paschal

1

, Fedan Avrumova

1

, Philip Paschal

1

, Ellen Soffin

2

, Joseph Nguyen

3

, Federico Girardi

4

, Gbolabo Sokunbi

4

, Andrew Sama

4

, Frank Cammisa

4

, Darren Lebl

4

, and Celeste Abjornson

1

1

Integrated Spine Research Program

2

Anesthesiology

3

Biostatistics

4

Spine Surgery, Hospital For Special Surgery, New York, United
States

Introduction: In an effort to reduce opioid consumption,
physicians have looked towards alternative options for pain relief for
surgical patients. Opioid alternatives have been shown to be effective while
also decreasing the risk of side effects such as constipation, nausea, and
addiction. One such alternative is IV acetaminophen, which has been shown to
successfully reduce the risk of such side effects, however at a relatively
high cost. Testing the effectiveness of IV acetaminophen may address
questions about the cost-effectiveness of this promising opioid alternative.
Our goal is to prospectively evaluate clinical outcomes of IV versus oral
(PO) acetaminophen following circumferential lumbar fusion. We hypothesize
that IV acetaminophen will reduce length of hospital stay, analgesic
morphine equivalent consumption, and pain levels, and will do so more
effectively than PO acetaminophen. Material and Methods: In
this prospective, single center, randomized control trial, patients were
screened to meet the inclusion/exclusion criteria. One hundred patients (50
per group) between the age of 18-85 undergoing circumferential lumbar fusion
surgery were included in the study. Patients with prior surgery or fracture
at the index level(s), significantly elevated surgical risk, a history of
drug abuse, and/or inability to take orally administered acetaminophen were
excluded from this study. Enrolled patients were randomized into either IV
or PO groups. Preoperative baseline surveys were collected. The first dose
of the assigned acetaminophen was administered within 3 hours prior to
surgery. Postoperatively, 7 additional doses were given every 6 hours.
Patients had access to supplemental opioid analgesics as needed. Analgesic
consumption and visual analog pain scale (VAS) scores were recorded daily
until discharge. Patients were followed at 6 week and 6 month
post-operatively and administered questionnaires. Pain medication usage was
recorded. Results: Daily morphine equivalent (MME) consumption
was statistically significantly lower for the IV group than the PO group (p
= 0.001) from post-operative to final administration of acetaminophen
dosage. Post regimen average daily MME was also statistically significantly
lower for IV group than PO group (p = 0.002). Average length of stay was
similar between groups. The IV group showed greater reduction in VAS and ODI
between baseline and discharge. However, VAS Back and VAS Leg scores were
similar for both groups out to 6 months post-op, but both groups showed
statistically significant differences from baseline in frequency and
intensity. ODI was also statistically lower than baseline in both groups out
to 6 months. Conclusion: In addition to an overall reduction in
opioid use, patient surveys indicate an improvement of pain management with
the use of IV acetaminophen. Our findings suggest that IV acetaminophen is a
safe and effective alternative to opioid use. The decrease in risk of side
effects makes IV acetaminophen a promising alternative to opioid use, even
despite the added cost.

## 1929

## P376: Cost evaluation in open surgery in lumbar disc pathology in a
reference hospital for spinal pathology

Isaac Garcia Guajardo

1

 and Hugo Vilchis Samano

1

1

Spine Surgery, UMAE Hospital de Traumatología y Ortopedia Lomas
Verdes, México City, Mexico

Introduction: Lumbar disc herniations are characterized by the
migration of the nucleus pulposus across its anatomical boundaries, invading
adjacent compartments. Being the most common cause of sciatica, it affects
1% to 5% of the population annually. For symptoms that are resistant to
initial conservative treatments, lumbar discectomy may be considered,
although the question of which treatment is superior has sparked lively
debate. Surgery produces faster symptom relief than continuous conservative
care. Objective: To assess cost-benefits of open surgery in
lumbar disc pathology in a reference hospital for spinal pathology.
Material and Methods: Cross-sectional, descriptive and
retrospective study through a review of records and database of the spine
surgery service of the hospital over a period of two years. using analytical
statistics, the data will be presented in tables and graphs.
Results: In the period included in the study of 2.5 years,
an average of 167 patients operated on for disc pathology were obtained, of
which 141 patients belonged to the population with work disability; with
greater predominance in the male gender (90 patients); with a net cost per
day of hospitalization of 399,831.63 USD; a cost in open surgeries of
216,936.64 USD; generating a total cost of expenditure to the institution of
616,768.27 USD. Conclusion: Disc pathology continues to be a
challenge for the spine surgeon and the institutions representing great
losses in costs for the institution and for the patients to have a greater
delay in their discharge and return to work. this analysis is part of a
protocol for the management of new tools for the surgical management of
degenerative disc pathology such as endoscopic surgery.

## Minimally Invasive Spine Surgery

## 138

## P377: Comparative analysis of outcomes in one to two level minimally
invasive and open transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion

Ashley Duncan

1

, Matthew Geck

1

, Devender Singh

1

, John Stokes

1

, and Eeric Truumees

1

1

Spine, Ascension Texas Spine and Scoliosis, Austin, United
States

Introduction: Minimally Invasive Surgical (MIS) techniques
potentially offer a less morbid alternative to traditional open surgical
techniques with shorter length of stay. Aim: This study aims to
compare the outcomes of patients undergoing minimally invasive
transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion to those that underwent the
traditional open technique. Materials and Methods: 31
Retrospective chart reviews were conducted on patients that underwent one to
two level transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion from 2020-2021. Patients
were divided into two cohorts, those that underwent the traditional open
approach and those that had a minimally invasive technique. Twelve variables
were collected across demographic, surgical, clinical, and patient reported
outcomes (PROs) (PROMIS Physical Function, Pain Interference and
Satisfaction with Social Roles; and Oswestry Disability Index) domains and
analyzed accordingly. Results: 12 patients were included in the
minimally invasive cohort and 19 were included in the open cohort. Mean age,
BMI and sex were similar in both groups. There was a significant difference
in the mean number of levels fused, 1 ± 0 in the MIS group and 1.3 ± 0.5 in
the open group (p = 0.009917). While the MIS group had lower mean
skin-to-skin surgical time, estimated blood loss and length of stay, none of
these were statistically significant. Both cohorts consistently reported
improvements in PROMIS and ODI scores across their recovery period up to one
year postoperatively, however, there were differences not only in timing,
but also in domain reported. At three months postoperative, the MIS cohort
showed significant change in PROMIS Pain Interference (59.9 ± 8.8) from
preoperative (68.4 ± 7.3) and ODI scores (27.5 ± 17.7) from preoperative
(27.5 ± 17.7). MIS patients also reported significant decrease in ODI scores
at six months postoperative, 20.2 ± 13.8 from preoperative 41 ± 15.7. Though
there were improvements in all PRO domains at nine months and 1-year
post-operative, these changes were not significant. The open cohort reported
significant change from preoperative levels in PROMIS Physical Function and
Pain Interference and ODI scores at three months, ODI scores at six months,
and PROMIS physical Function, Pain Interference and Social Roles at nine
months. Though there were improvements in all PRO domains at 1-year
post-operative, these changes were not significant.
Conclusions: The number of levels fused was the
statistically significant surgical variable between the open and MIS groups,
though surgical time, EBL and length of stay were lower in the MIS group.
The open cohort reported more statistically significant changes from
baseline PROs scores across more instruments and postoperative intervals
than the MIS cohort. However, neither group reported statistically
significant changes at one year postoperative from baseline preoperative in
any PRO instrument. This is most likely due to the limited number of
responses at one-year post-operative.

## 150

## P378: Quantitative analysis of tissue injury markers after adolescent
idiopathic scoliosis (AIS) correction: a prospective study of open vs.
minimally invasive surgery

Matthew Geck

1

, Devender Singh

1

, Ashley Duncan

1

, John Stokes

1

, and Eeric Truumees

1

1

Spine, Ascension Texas Spine and Scoliosis, Austin, United
States

Introduction: Minimally invasive surgery (MIS) offers a
potentially less morbid treatment option for patients requiring
stabilization of adolescent idiopathic scoliosis (AIS). Aim: To
compare the tissue injury markers in AIS cohorts matched for Lenke type
curve that had undergone either open or MIS. Materials and
Methods: 39 patients who either underwent MIS or open corrections
were consecutively enrolled. MIS or open approaches were surgeon selected
based on curve magnitude, location, flexibility on bending films and the
patient’s body habitus. Enrollment criteria included: age > 10 yrs and
< 30 years; Lenke types were 1, 2 or 5; Cobb angle ranged 35°∼70°; caudal
levels for open and MIS cases were L2 or above and L3 or above,
respectively. Open approach included posterior spinal instrumentation and
fusion with posterior column osteotomy. MIS technique was uniform in all
patients using two or three para-midline incisions. The serum enzymes
representing skeletal muscle injury (creatine kinase and aldolase) were
analyzed on the day before surgery and days 1, 2, 3, 4, discharge, 3 weeks,
3 months and 6 months postoperatively. Results: MIS and open
groups comprised of 19 and 20 patients, respectively. Mean patient age was
16 years in MIS and 15 years in open group. Mean pre-op Cobb angles for MIS
and open differed significantly (52.8 ± 4.6° vs. 60.5 ± 5.8°). Number of
spinal levels treated were similar between the two groups. Mean surgical
time, blood loss and length of hospital stay were significantly greater for
the open group (p < 0.05). Compared to the baseline, mean serum aldolase
was significantly high on post-op day 2 for both the groups (MIS: 5.18 U/L
vs. 9.8 U/L; Open: 5.36 U/L vs. 13.2 U/L). For all visits, open group had
comparatively higher mean serum aldolase levels than their counterparts.
Mean serum creatine kinase for open group was significantly higher than MIS
group at post-op days 1, 2, 3, 5 and discharge (p < 0.05). For the both
groups, mean creatine kinase was highest at post-op day 2. Mean creatine
kinase and aldolase levels returned to the normal levels for both the groups
at visits 3-week, 3- and 6-months post-op. Patient-reported pain and
disability scores were similar. Both groups reported one complication each
which resolved with interventions (MIS: wound drainage; open: CSF leak and
lumbar drain). Conclusions: Our cohort data indicates that MIS
technique for scoliosis correction is a viable option and may significantly
reduce muscle injury during the acute post-op period. MIS technique may
limit post-operative surgical morbidity.

## 179

## P379: Comparative outcomes betwen percutaneous and endoscopic
radiofrequency ablation of the sacroiliac joint complex in th treatment of
sacroiliac joint pain patients: systematic review and meta-analysis

Saran Pairuchvej

1

 and Jatupon Kongtharvonskul

2

1

Orthopedics Department, Queen Savang Vadhana Memorial Hospital,
Cholburi, Thailand

2

Department of Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Faculty of
Medicine Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok,
Thailand

Introduction: The sacroiliac joint (SIJ) is a junction between
the spine (sacrum) and the pelvis (ilium). The SIJ complex is one of the
sources of chronic low back pain compromising between 15 and 25% of cases.
The treatment of SIJ pain is challenging with no easy solution. Percutaneous
radiofrequency ablation (RFA) is a common practice. However the limitation
of this treatment due to no visualization of the medial branch at the facet
joint L5/S1 resulting in different area is commonly targeted. Recently,
endoscopic RFA of SIJ allows better visualization nerve and the surrounding
ligamentous tissue. But there is no current consensus regarding which method
is the most suitable. Therefore we conducted a systematic review and
indirect meta-analysis to compare the post-operative outcomes among SIJ
treatment and identify which method is the best for surgical treatment of
SIJ pain patients. Material and Method: We searched all
prospective and retrospective studies that reported post-operative outcomes
of percutaneous and endoscopic RFA for surgical treatment of SIJ from the
PubMed and Scopus databases up to 5 January 2022. Data were independently
extracted by two reviewers. An indirect meta-analysis was applied to assess
treatment outcomes. Results: 18 cohort studies (N = 734
patients) met inclusion criteria. Interventions were endoscopic (N = 70
patients) and percutaneous RFA (N = 664 patients). A direct meta-analysis
showed that the UMD of pain (numeric rating scale) after surgery in
endoscopic RFA were significantly difference of -3.5 (95%CI: 4.34 to2.67),
-4.76 (95%CI: -6.43 to -3.10), -4.33 (95%CI: -6.60 to -2.06) scores at 1, 3,
6 months while percutaneous RFA groups were significantly difference of
-4.19 (95%CI: -5.21 to -3.18), -3.56 (95%CI: -3.95 to -3.17), -3.62 (95%CI:
-4.23 to -3.00) and -3.42 (95%CI: -4.07 to -2.76) scores at 1, 3, 6 12
months when compared to before surgery. The UMD of Oswestry Disability Index
(ODI) score after surgery were better of -9.20 (95%CI: -11.70 to -6.70),
-19.51 (95%CI: -40.25 to 1.22) and -24.04 (95%CI: -51.54 to 3.45) scores at
1, 3, 6 months while percutaneous RFA groups were significantly difference
of -8.66 (95%CI: -14.74 to -2.58) and -7.17 (95%CI: -9.95 to -4.39) at 3 and
6 months when compared to before surgery. For indirect meta-analysis showed
that effects of pain of endoscopic RFA were -0.69 (95%CI: -4.89 to 3.51)
scores, 1.22 (95%CI: -0.13 to 2.58) scores and 0.77 (95%CI: -1.25 to 2.79)
scores at 1, 3 and 6 months when compared to percutaneous RFA group. While
the ODI of endoscopic RFA were -9.70 (95%CI: -56.40 to 36.99) and -17.15
(-87.27 to 52.97) at 3 and 6 months when compared to percutaneous RFA group.
There have no statistically significant differences between endoscope and
percutaneous RFA in all outcomes. In term of complications, there have no
complications of both groups. Conclusions: Although there was
no significant difference in pain and disability scores between endoscopic
and percutaneous RFA, the superiority of surgical time, cost of surgery,
wound size and technical demand indicated that percutaneous RFA offer more
effective therapy for SIJ pain than endoscopic RFA surgery.

## 359

## P380: Footdrop and spine endoscopy: is the future here?

Emanuel Homem

1

, Joana Rodrigues

1

, Tiago Canas

1

, João Cruz

1

, Ricardo Simoes

1

, and Luís Soares

1

1

Hospital do Divino Espírito Santo, Ponta Delgada, Portugal

Introduction: Acute and progressive foot drop are well-known
entities. The most common cause is degenerative lumbar spinal disease (with
52% of causes secondary to disc herniation and 35% to spinal stenosis). The
inability of ankle dorsiflexion may lead to multiple falls and injuries,
resulting in substantial impairment and decreased quality of life.
Percutaneous endoscopic discectomy is being increasingly used as solution
for this condition. The authors describe a case of acute right foot drop
caused by a L3-L4 disc herniation with lumbar canal stenosis treated with
percutaneous endoscopic transforaminal. The goal is to highlight the ease of
access and great outcome to support minimally invasive solution for these
cases. Material and Methods: A 40-year-old male presents with
sudden onset of severe back pain (VAS 10/10) with right foot drop while
getting up from a chair. He has past medical history of progressive left
footdrop due to paramedian L4-L5 herniated disc already submitted to
percutaneous translaminar and transforaminal treatment with good functional
outcome. On examination, the patient had a positive straight leg test at 30°
with right ankle and toe extension’s muscle strength of 1/5 and hypoesthesia
of right L4 dermatome. Deep tendon reflexes were normal and without
cerebellar signs. He had previous decreased contralateral ankle strength
(4/5) and no other neurological deficits. His bladder function was normal
with intact perianal sensation. MRI diagnosed a disc herniation at right
L3-L4 level (inferior migrated) with spinal canal stenosis due to ligamentum
flavum hypertrophy. Next day, patient underwent percutaneous transforaminal
endoscopic foraminotomy, discectomy and lumbar decompression at L3-L4 level
by an 1cm incision. Results: Postoperative period was
uneventful: the patient was mobilized on the same day of operation and
discharged the next day with the improvement of ankle and toe dorsiflexion
to 4/5 muscle strength and slight hyposesthesia. At 3 months follow-up, his
muscle strength was recovered and hyposthesia resolved near completely.
Conclusion: Lumbar disc herniation with canal stenosis
should be considered in patients presenting with foot drop. Early surgery
may prevent severe late neurological consequences and has a favorable
outcome. The objective of using endoscopy is to provide a safe and minimally
invasive approach, even to address multiple lumbar levels with early
postoperative mobilization and faster return to work.

## 373

## P381: Full-endoscopic foraminotomy in stable lytic lumbar listhesis. A
multicenter case series and data analysis

Facundo Van Isseldyk

1,2

, Javier Quillo-Olvera

3

, Cristian Ricardo Correa Valencia

1

, Jung-Hoon Kim

4

, Yanting Liu

4

, David Del Curto

1

, and Jin-Sung Luke Kim

4

1

Latinamerican Endoscopic Spine Surgery Society (LESSS)

2

Hospital Privado de Rosario, Neurosurgery, Rosario,
Argentina

3

Anahuac University, School of Medicine, H+ Hospital, Querétaro,
Mexico

4

Spine Center and Department of Neurosurgery, Seoul St. Mary’s
Hospital, College of Medicine, the Catholic University of Korea, Seoul,
South Korea

Introduction: Lytic lumbar spondylolisthesis (LLS) affects 8.2%
of the worldwide population. Although commonly associated in the surgical
community with segmental instability , only a small percentage of cases
demonstrate actual radiological instability. However, even in stable cases
neurological symptoms can occur as a result of radicular compression in
lateral recess or foraminal area. Open foraminal decompression usually
requires a concomitant fusion due to the muscular, osseus and ligament
disruption caused by the surgical approach. In this setting, full-endoscopic
approaches could decompress the affected root while preserving segmental
stability, avoiding the need for instrumented fusion. Material and
Methods: We present a case-series of 17 consecutive patients with
low-grade, stable LLS and concordant symptomatic radiculopathy, treated with
full endoscopic foraminotomy. Patients baseline and imaging characteristics,
as well as preoperative back pain VAS, leg pain VAS and ODI were obtained.
Included patients were treated by four of the authors with endoscopic
foraminotomy according to the “module-based” approach previously published.
Surgery planning and execution was performed following the selected modules.
Degree of intervertebral disc breach during surgical procedure was also
recorded. Outcome variables included back pain VAS, leg pain VAS and
ODI. Postoperative CT scans and dynamic X-Rays were obtained to assess the
amount and precision of bony resection and segmental stability. Follow-up
consultation was performed every 6 months. Paired T-Test was used for
normally distributed variables, while the remaining was analyzed with
Wilcoxon’s sum rank test. Results: 9 male patients and 8 female
were included. The mean age was 68 years. In 76% of the patients a
transforaminal approach was used, while the remaining 24% had an
interlaminar contralateral approach. 76.5 % of patients had high Pfirmann
values (4-5). Postoperative values of ODI, leg pain VAS and back pain VAS
showed statistically significant reduction compared with preoperative
values. No intraoperative or postoperative complications were observed. One
patient had high-level disc breach during surgical procedure (wide
annulotomy and intersomatic discectomy) and subsequently developed
radiological instability that required lumbar fusion as a separate
procedure. No leg pain recurrence was observed in the follow up period.
Conclusion: In the present series, full-endoscopic
foraminotomy allowed to successfully control radicular symptoms in patients
with LSS, while preserving segmental stability in the great majority of
cases. Only one patient developed postoperative instability and required
subsequent fusion, possibly related to high-level disc space breach. This
is, to our knowledge, the first case series of patients with LSS treated
with full-endoscopic foraminotomy ever published.

## 392

## P382: How can cement leakage be prevented in kyphoplasty? Technical
report and clinical study

Inan Uzunoglu

1

, Gokhan Gurkan

2

, Ceren Kizmazoglu

3

, Rafet Ozay

1

, Murat Sayin

2

, and Nurullah Yuceer

2

1

Neurosurgery, Ankara Diskapi Yildirim Beyazit Training and Research
Hospital, Turkey

2

Neurosurgery, Izmir Katip Celebi University, Ataturk Training and
Research Hospital, Ankara, Istanbul

3

Neurosurgery, Dokuz Eylul University Medicine Faculty, Izmir,
Turkey

Introduction: Vertebral compression fractures can occur due to
many different reasons. Kyphoplasty is at the forefront in the treatment of
these fractures. The most worrying complication of kyphoplasty is cement
leakage. We wanted to share the effectiveness of the technique we used in
our series in preventing cement leakage. Material and Methods:
300 patients were retrospectively screened in our clinic. While group A (150
patients) was operated on with classical kyphoplasty techniques, while group
B(150 patients) used similar methods before cement injection, the
suitability of cement fluidity for injection is determined by pushing cement
fillers and forming a ring on itself. After reaching this consistency, it is
sent to the corpus bilaterally or unilaterally. At this stage, the corpus is
divided into three equal areas in the craniocaudal plane on the lateral
x-ray, and the operation is terminated if the cement passes into the most
posterior area. Results: While some of our patients were
treated with a single vertebra in the same session, some of our patients
were treated with 4 vertebrae in the same session. Cement leakage was
detected in 123 (30.8%) of 400 operated vertebrae. Of these 123 vertebrae,
16 (13%) were in Group B and 107 (87%) were in Group A, a statistically
significant difference was found (p < 0.001). Epidural leakage in 5
(4.1%) vertebrae in total were detected in 3 vertebrae in Group A and 2
vertebrae in Group B. While intradiscal leakage was detected in 44 (35.8%)
vertebrae, all of them were in Group A. Extracorporeal leak was detected in
62 (50.5%) vertebrae, while only 8 of them were in Group B. Intravasal leak
was detected in only 12 (9.8%) vertebrae, equally in both groups. There was
a statistically significant difference in terms of cement leakage between
vertebrae whose posterior wall was not intact and the others (p < 0.05).
At the same time, statistically significant differences were found in A3 and
A4 fractures according to the AO spine classification compared to other
fractures and in patients who underwent more than one vertebra operation in
the same session (p < 0.05). Between Group B and Group A, the dose of
scope was statistically significant in favor of Group B (p < 0.05). In
Group B, there was a statistically significant difference between cement
viscosity, fracture type and etiology, trauma-operation time, type of
balloon used, type of intervention, and cement amount. no significant
differences were found (p > 0.05). However, in cases where the amount of
injected cement exceeded 7cc, it was statistically revealed that cement
leakage could increase in both groups (p < 0.05).
Conclusion: Kyphoplasty is an effective treatment method
for vertebral fractures, but a simple surgical procedure can turn into a
very catastrophic one after cement leaks may develop. There are techniques
described in the literature to prevent cement leakage. however, none of them
have been fully successful. In the literature, cement leakage ranges between
5-87%. In our study, it was determined that it could be applied as an
effective technique, with a rate of 7.7%.

## 394

## P383: When to consider stand-alone lateral lumbar interbody fusion: is
there a role for a comeback with new implants?

Cristiano Magalhães Menezes

1

, Erica Godinho Menezes

1

, Jahangir Asghar

2

, and Alfredo Guiroy

3

1

Orthopedics, Columna Institute, Belo Horizonte, Brazil

2

Spine Surgery, Elite Spine Health and Wellness, Fort Lauderdale,
United States

3

Orthopedics, Hospital Español, Mendoza, Argentina

Introduction: Degenerative disc disease is one of the most
common conditions treated by spine surgeons and is a common cause of
dysfunction with a negative impact on quality of life. Lateral lumbar
interbody fusion (LLIF) is a minimally invasive technique proven to be
useful for indirect decompression of the spinal canal and foramina with high
fusion rates and a very low risk of complications. The objective of this
study is to perform a comprehensive review of the literature about the role
of stand-alone lateral lumbar interbody fusion (LLIF). Material and
Methods: A MEDLINE review was conducted including studies about
stand-alone LLIF for any condition. The opinions of the authors were also
considered. Studies that included biomechanical, cadaveric, or clinical
aspects of stand-alone cages were revised to obtain data about the pros,
cons, and limitations of the technique. Comparative studies with 360°
(lateral + posterior) fusions were also analyzed. Results: A
total of 36 studies were identified. After reviewing the abstracts, 18 full
articles of interest for the objective of this review were analyzed.
Recommendations based on the literature were made. Although most of the
recommendations in the literature were about augmentation with pedicle
screws, there may be a role for stand-alone LLIF in some particular cases.
Specific technical aspects should be considered to reduce the failure rate.
Conclusion: Although there might be some specific
indications for stand-alone LLIF, but despite the high subsidence rate and
low fusion rates, it should be considered an exception rather than the
rule.

## 398

## P384: Single position spine corpectomies. A multicentric study

Alfredo Guiroy

1

, Cristiano Menezes

2

, J. Alex Thomas

3

, Ashish Patel

4

, Gaston Camino-Willhuber

5

, Michael Galgano

6

, and Jahangir Asghar

7

1

Spine Surgery, Elite Spine Health and Wellness Center, Fort
Lauderdale, United States

2

Columna Institute, Belo Horizonte, Brazil

3

Atlantic Neurosurgical and Spine Specialists, Wilmington, United
States

4

Spine Surgery, The Spine Center, Duly Health and Care, Illinois,
United States

5

Hospital for Special Surgery, New York, United States

6

Neurosurgery, University of North Carolina, North Carolina, United
States

7

Elite Spine Health and Wellness Center, Fort Lauderdale, United
States

Introduction: Single position spine surgery for disc pathologies
has been gaining momentum as it has proven to reduce operative time, blood
loss and hospital length of stay with similar or better outcomes than
traditional dual-position surgery. The objective of this study is to
describe and discuss a multicentric case series of patients treated by
single position corpectomy (SPC). Material and Methods:
Multicenter retrospective study of patients treated using a single position
corpectomy (SPC) of the thoracic or lumbar vertebra. The following data was
collected from each center involved: demographics, diagnosis (trauma, tumor
or infection), neurological status, comorbidities, surgical approach and
procedure (single position lateral or prone lateral), number of instrumented
levels, intraoperative parameters (length of surgery, estimated blood loss,
transfusion), postoperative parameters (time to mobilization, length of
stay, days spent in the Intensive care unit), complications, reoperation and
readmissions and radiological variables. The minimum follow-up for inclusion
was six months. Results: 34 patients were included (24 males,
10 females), with a mean age of 51.2 years. The diagnosis that motivated the
corpectomy were: trauma (n = 26), tumor (n = 5), infections (n = 2) and a
revision PSO (n = 1). The most common level affected was L1 (n = 11)
followed by L3 (n = 8) and L2 (n = 6). In 27 cases the corpectomy was done
in lateral single position and in 7 in prone. Mean surgical time was 173.2
min, estimated blood loss 498 ml and length of hospital stay 8.1 days.
Segmental angle average changes were from 19º kyphosis to 2º or lordosis. As
complications we had 2 returns to the operating room (1 persistent stenosis
and 1 wound infection). Conclusion: This is the first
multicentric series of patients that underwent single position corpectomy
and fusion. This technique has shown to be safe and effective to treat a
variety of spinal conditions with a relatively low rate of complications.
More series are required to validate this technique as a possible standard
approach when thoracolumbar corpectomies are indicated.

## 446

## P385: Sagittal alignment change after two-level posterior endoscopic
cervical foraminotomy: a single-surgeon's experience with one year follow
up

Tzu Chiang Peng

1

 and Yu-Jen Lu

2

1

Neurosurgery Department

2

Neurosurgical Department, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taoyuan
City, Taiwan

Purpose: Cervical radiculopathy is a disabling disease. When
conservative treatment fails to abate the symptoms, surgical intervention is
an option. Although there are some case-series and biochemical analyzing the
safety of single level posterior endoscopic cervical foraminotomy (PECF),
the feasibility and safety of two-level PECF are not reported. The primary
purpose of this study is to compare mono-level and two-level PECF clinical
and radiologic outcomes. Materials and Methods: Medical records
were reviewed between March 2019 and December 2021 in a single medical
center. 37 patients with 56 levels of radiculopathy were enrolled, who
received mono-level (N = 18) or two-level PECF (N = 29) according to their
clinical symptoms and pre-operative cervical spinal MRI report. All of the
cases were performed by one senior operator. Before the operation, the
patients received four-view cervical roentgenogram (anteroposterior, lateral
neutral, lateral flexion, lateral extension) and were assessed arm-visual
analogue scale(arm-VAS). The following-up radiologic and clinical outcomes
were performed in outpatient visit 12 months after the surgery. Radiologic
parameters were assessed, inclusive of cervical curvature, disc index and
dynamic sagittal plan translation. Results: The most common
affected levels were C5-C6 and C6-C7. The clinical outcomes of both groups
were excellent and compatible(both median pre-operative and post-operative
arm-VAS were 7 and 1 respectively ). Overall, there were no significant
changes in radiologic parameters after the operation. In two-level PECF
group, the cervical lordosis slightly increased from 11.7 to 13.5, after the
operation. In mono-level PECF group, the cervical lordosis decreased from
9.4 to 8.1. Despite being not meaningful statistically, however, we found a
trend toward increasing sagittal plan translation in the lower level of
two-level PECF, as a hint of impaired stability. Conclusions:
Given appropriate indication, single incision two-level PECF is an effective
and safe option for cervical radiculopathy.
Key words: Cervical radiculopathy, Posterior endoscopic cervical
foraminotomy, Two-level, Stability, Sagittal profile

## 460

## P386: Unilateral biportal endoscopic translaminar approach to treat
up-migrated lumbar disc herniation: 12 cases report

Kang Suk Moon

1

 and MinSeung Jeong

2

1

Neurosurgery, Gimpo Wooridul Spine Hospital, Seoul, South
Korea

2

Orthopedic Surgery, Hospital Angeles, Mexico City, Mexico

Introduction: MDH are difficult to reach and completely remove
using a microscope. The objective of this study was to introduce an
effective and safe surgical approach for up migrated LDH by UBE translaminar
keyhole approach. Material and Methods: Twelve patients with
high-grade and very high-grade up LDH treated with a UBE translaminar
keyhole approach between March 2021 and February 2022 were reviewed in this
study. Clinical outcomes were assessed including preoperative, immediately
postoperative and one-month follow up visual analog scale (VAS) for back and
leg pain and MacNab Criteria. Results: Nine male and three
female patients underwent surgery using UBE translaminar keyhole approach.
Seven patients showed high-grade up migrated LDH, and five patients showed
very high-grade up migrated LDH (above the pedicle level). In all cases, the
migrated LDH was removed successfully confirmed by postoperative magnetic
resonance imaging. The improvements of VAS for back pain were 4.5 (SD = 3.1)
to 2.0 (SD = 1.0) and 1.0 (SD = 1.0) for immediately postoperative and
one-month follow-up, showing a statistically significant difference (p <
0.001). Improvements of VAS for leg pain was 6.5 (SD = 2.5) preoperatively
to 2.3 (SD = 1.1) and 0.8 (SD = 0.4) immediately postoperative and one-month
follow up respectively, showing a significant difference (p < 0.001).
According to MacNab criteria, we observed excellent outcomes in 66.6% and
good outcomes in 33.3%. Conclusion: Translaminar discectomy
using UBE is a minimally invasive surgical technique that embraces the
advantages of biportal endoscopy and translaminar approach to treat uo
migrated LDH. It could be considered as a feasible alternative surgical
options to treat high-grade up migrated LDH.

## 490

## P387: Technique notes and preliminary outcome of transforaminal approach
by unilateral biportal endoscopic spinal surgery for lumbar extraforaminal
disc herniation

Chih-ying Wu

1,2

 and Cheng-Di Chiu

3,4

1

Neurosurgery, China Medical University Hsinchu Hospital, Hsinchu,
Taiwan

2
Graduate Institute of Integrated Medicine
3
Neurosurgery, China Medical University Hospital, Taichung,
Taiwan
4
Graduate Institute of Biomedical Science,
China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan
Introduction: Lumbar extraforaminal disc herniation (LEFDH)
accounts for approximately 7-12% of all lumbar herniation discs. It can
cause severe radiculopathy and disability. Unlike the posterolateral lumbar
dis herniations, midline approach for LEFDH is challenge due to the bone
restriction. Minimally invasive spine surgery has seen a breakthrough
progress in recent decades. The purpose of minimally invasive spine surgery
is to reduce normal tissue damage, preserve normal anatomical structures,
decrease patient stress, and achieve the same or better prognosis as open
surgery. At present, the tools of minimally invasive spine surgery are
microscopes and endoscopes. Endoscopic spine surgery included uniportal and
biportal endoscope. Both have their advantages and advocates. According to
the current literature, there seems to be no significant difference in the
comparison of operation time and patient prognosis. However, there was two
advantages of biportal endoscopic spinal surgery (BESS). The first is using
of conventional spine surgical instruments like open surgery. Second is
protecting the neural structures by assistant retractor is safer than the
uniportal endoscopic spine surgery. Hence, in this article, we evaluate the
clinical outcome of LEFDH removal by transforaminal approach of unilateral
BESS. Material and Methods: We collected 13 patients with LEFDH
from January 2021 to August 2022. All patients scheduled transforaminal
approach of unilateral BESS performed by one single neurosurgeon. The BESS
surgical steps are as follows: First, we identified the surgical level and
the tips of transverse processes (TP) under C-arm fluoroscopy guiding. Two
skin incisions were made at the tip of TP on the ipsilateral side. Then the
two portal surgical instruments are inserted into the base of the TP
respectively. The surgical space is enlarged and identified the Kambin's
triangle, lateral border of isthmus and superior articular process.
Foraminoplasty may be performed with drilling and Kerrison punch if
necessary. Then, we could remove the LEFDH safely by assistant retractor. We
recorded the operation time, the number of operation level, complications,
and hospital days. Visual analog scale (VAS) was measured pre- and
postoperatively. After discharge, Modified Macnab criteria was analyzed for
outcome evaluation. Results: The mean age of the patients was
68.7 ± 8.8 years old. There were 8 males and 5 females. The mean operation
time was 97.8 ± 26.3 min. The mean follow-up time was 229.9 ± 8186 days. The
average length of hospital stay was 3.5 ± 0.8 days. Pre- and postoperative
VAS were 7.5 ± 80.8 and1.8 ± 81.1, respectively (p value < 0.001). The
Modified Macnab criteria after discharge: excellent 23.1%, good 69.2%, fair
7.7%. Only one complication is dura tear but no neurological deficit.
Conclusion: BESS requires experienced and skillful surgical
technique for nerve root protection and herniation disc removal. According
to our statistical results, the transforaminal approach of unilateral BESS
is quite effective, safe, and alternative method for the treatment of
LEFDH.

## 499

## P388: Minimally invasive TLIF options for lumbar
spondylolisthesis

Gabriel Tender

1

1

Neurosurgery, Louisiana State University, New Orleans, United
States

Introduction: Previous studies have shown that minimally
invasive spinal techniques result in shorter hospital stays and quicker
recovery. Minimally invasive transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion (MI
TLIF) has become the preferred fusion method for the L5-S1 and / or L4-5
levels at our institution. However, patients with spondylolisthesis may
represent a challenge, due to the distorted anatomy. Material and
Methods: We review our experience with MI and standard open TLIF
for patients with spondylolisthesis within the past 4 years.
Results: A total of 75 patients underwent MI TLIF at our
institution between Jan 2016 and Dec 2020, whereas 27 patients underwent
standard open TLIF. 45 of the MI TLIF patients (60%) had radiographic signs
of spondylolisthesis. The majority exhibited grade 1 spondylolisthesis (33,
44%), with the remainder being grade 2 (12, 16%). One patient in the MI TLIF
spondylolisthesis group had an S1 pedicle fracture after a fall and had to
have that screw repositioned. Of the 39 patients in the MI TLIF group (52%)
who presented for their 1-year follow-up CT, 37 (94%) had a solid fusion,
with one patient in each group not showing bridging bone through the treated
interspace. Similarly, 19 of the 20 patients (95%) in the standard open TLIF
group who presented for the 1-year follow-up CT showed a solid fusion.
Conclusion: MI TLIF for patients with grade 1 or 2
spondylolisthesis yields comparable fusion results with the standard
techniques, with shorter hospitalization and quicker recovery. Certain
surgical maneuvers may help improve fusion rates and screw placement
accuracy.

## 587

## P389: Cage positioning significantly impacts lumbar lordosis and disc
space restoration following minimally invasive lateral lumbar interbody
fusion

Tariq Issa

1

, Yunsoo Lee

1

, Khoa Tran

1

, Mark Lambrechts

1

, Delano Trenchfield

1

, Parker Brush

1

, Jeremy Heard

1

, Sebastian Fras

1

, Jose Canseco

1

, Alan Hilibrand

1

, Alexander Vaccaro

1

, Christopher Kepler

1

, and Gregory Schroeder

1

1

Division of Spine Surgery, Rothman Orthopaedic Institute,
Philadelphia, United States

Introduction: Lateral lumbar interbody fusion (LLIF) offers the
reliability of lordotic correction seen in anterior lumbar surgery while
also supporting a minimally invasive approach that can reduce complications.
While cage geometry and cage placement have been suggested to play an
integral role in radiographic outcomes in various interbody fusion
approaches, the role of these parameters remains unclear in LLIF procedures.
The objective of our study was to evaluate patient and surgical factors that
predict increased overall lumbar lordosis and segmental lordosis correction
following an LLIF. Material and Methods: A retrospective review
was conducted of all patients who underwent 1- or 2-level LLIF.
Pre-operative, initial post-operative, and six-month post-operative
measurements of lumbar lordosis, segmental lordosis, anterior disc height,
and posterior disc height were collected from standing lateral radiographs
for each patient. Cage placement was measured utilizing center point ratio
(CPR) on immediate post-operative radiographs. Spearman correlations were
used to assess associations between cage lordosis and radiographic
parameters. Multivariate linear regression was performed to assess
independent predictors of outcomes. Results: A total of 105
levels in 78 unique patients were included. Most procedures involved fusion
of one-level (N = 50, 64.1%), most commonly at L3-L4 (46.2%). Despite no
differences in baseline segmental lordosis, patients with anteriorly or
centrally placed cages experienced the greatest segmental lordosis
correction immediately (anterior: 4.81 mm and central: 4.46 mm vs.
posterior: 2.47 mm, p = 0.0315) and at six-months post-operatively, and
patients with anteriorly placed cages had greater overall lordosis
correction post-operatively (6.30 deg, p = 0.0338). At six-month follow up,
patients with anteriorly placed cages experienced the greatest increase in
anterior disc height (anterior: 6.24 mm vs posterior: 3.69 mm, p = 0.0122).
Cages placed more posteriorly increased the delta posterior disc height
post-operatively (posterior: 4.91 mm vs anterior: 1.80 mm, p = 0.0001) and
at six-months (posterior: 4.18 mm vs anterior: 2.06 mm, p = 0.0255). There
were no correlations between cage lordosis angle and outcomes. On
multivariate regression, anterior cage placement predicted greater six-month
improvement in segmental lordosis, while posterior placement predicted
greater six-month improvement in posterior disc height. Percutaneous screw
placement, cage lordosis angle, and cage height did not independently
predict any radiographic outcomes. Conclusion: LLIF procedures
reliably improve lordosis and increase intervertebral disc space. Anterior
cage placement improves lordosis angle greater than posterior placement,
which better corrects sagittal alignment, but there is still a significant
improvement of lordosis even with a posteriorly placed cage. Posterior cage
placement provides greater restoration in posterior disc space height,
maximizing indirect decompression, but even the anteriorly placed cages
provided indirect decompression. Cage parameters including cage height,
lordosis angle, and material do not impact radiographic improvement.

## 678

## P390: An effective treatment option for nonuion of Kummell's desease
after treated with PKP

Hui Liu

1

 and Deqing Luo

1

1

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, The Affiliated Southeast Hospital
of Xiamen University, Zhangzhou, China

Introduction: Percutaneous kyphoplasty (PKP) has been widely
used to treat Kummell’s disease and provides good results in patients with
persistent pain and an intact posterior wall. However, intravertebral
nonunion between the cement and bone, like a ball socket effect after
percutaneous vertebroplasty (PVP), can cause persistent severe pain and
sagittal kyphosis, even neurological dysfunction. The optimal treatment for
nonunion of Kummell’s disease treated With PKP remains controversial and
unclear. The purpose of this study was to investigate the efficacy of staged
anterior and posterior minimal invasive approach (OLIF and multifidus
approach) in treating nonunion of Kummell’s disease treated with PKP.
Method: We retrospectively evaluated all patients who
underwent nounion of Kummell’s disease after treated With PKP with between
January 2019 and June 2022. Patients with a minimum follow-up of 12 months
were included. The patients were treated with SRS 2-3 osteotomy and long
segment fixation with screw augmentation through posterior multifidus
approach firstly, secondly expandable mesh cage reconstruction of anterior
column were carried out through OLIF approach. Anterior edge height of
injured vertebrae, kyphosis Cobb angle were measured to evaluate the
radiological result. Patient clinical outcomes were quantified via Oswestry
Disability Index (ODI), Visual Analog Scale (VAS) Back, preoperatively and
postoperatively and at 3, 6, and 12 months follow-up. Analyses were
performed using IBM SPSS Statistics software, v24.0 (IBM SPSS, Chicago, IL).
Results: All patients were followed up 12-28 months, with
an average of 15.3 months. The average operative duration was 126 ± 25
minutes(posterior) and 115 ± 17 minutes(anterior), and the average
intraoperative blood loss was 245 ± 45 mL (posterior) and 168 ± 27
minutes(anterior). ODI, anterior vertebral heights, and kyphotic Cobb angles
were improved significantly at 1 week after surgery compared the
preoperative examinations, and were well maintained at the final follow-up
evaluation. There was no instrumentation failure in our study during
follow-up. Conclusion: staged anterior and posterior minimal
invasive approach (OLIF and multifidus approach) is a safe and effective
surgical option for treating nonunion of Kummell’s disease treated with
PKP.

## 734

## P391: Transforaminal lumbar endoscopic surgery on the limits: experience
from extreme cases management in a single tertiary center

Nikolaos Gkantsinikoudis

1

, Christos Siopis

1

, and Stylianos Kapetanakis

1,2

1

Spine Department and Deformities, Interbalkan European Medical
Center, Thessaloniki, Greece

2

Department of Minimally Invasive and Endoscopic Spine Surgery,
Athens Medical Center, Athens, Greece

Introduction: Transforaminal Lumbar Endoscopic Decompression
(TLED) constitutes a novel, minimally invasive and atraumatic technique
recruited for surgical management of a plethora of spine ailments. Principal
indication for TLED conduction is Lumbar Disc Herniation (LDH). However,
considering the substantial advantages of technique in comparison with
conventional open surgical methods, spectrum of TLED indications has been
demonstrated to constantly widen in recent literature. Recruitment of TLED
for surgical management of extreme cases of foraminal stenosis (FS)
encountered in the framework of Adult Degenerative Scoliosis (ADS), Adjacent
Segment Disease (ASD) post previous fusion surgery and postoperative
Recurrent Foraminal Stenosis (RFS) after open decompression surgery
represents a feasible strategy according to current literature reports,
demonstrating promising clinical outcomes. Hence, we hereby present our
experience with management of extraordinary cases of FS with TLED surgery.
Material and Methods: Twenty-one (21) individuals with
clinically remarkable secondary FS on the ground of ASD (n = 7), ADS (n = 6)
and previous open decompression surgery (n = 8) were included in this
prospective investigation. After meticulous clinical and radiologic
investigation, all enrolled patients underwent TLED (outside-in technique)
in 2018-2019. Postoperative evaluation was conducted in predetermined
follow-up intervals via clinical examination and performance of specific
patient-reported outcome measures as Visual Analogue Scale (VAS), modified
McNab criteria and Oswestry Disability Index (ODI). All patients were
followed-up for an at least 1-year period (mean: 1.4 years).
Results: No major perioperative complications were
observed. Clinical management of enrolled patients with TLED was successful
in all cases. Operated segments were L3-L4 (19.0%), L4-L5 (52.4%) and L5-S1
(28.6%). VAS and ODI measures demonstrated a statistically significant (p
< 0.05) improvement in all patient immediately postoperatively, which was
constantly observed until the end of follow-up. Overall clinical outcomes,
as analyzed with modified MacNab criteria, were depicted to be excellent in
12 patients, good in 6 and fair in 3 patients. Conclusion:
According to our results from this limited case-series analysis, TLED
represents a safe and effective surgical alternative for management of
patients with secondary FS on the ground of ADS, ASD post fusion surgery and
postoperatively after previous open decompression surgery.

## 797

## P392: Ethnic differences in asian and caucasian sacroiliac joint anatomy
for surgical planning of minimally invasive sacroiliac joint fusion

Yu-Cheng Liu

1

, Christopher Wu

1

, Tsung-Jen Huang

2

, Ching-Yu Lee

2

, Po-Yao Wang

2

, Hiroaki Koga

3

, Daniel Cher

4

, W. Carlton Reckling

4

, Pei-I Tsai

5

, and Meng-Huang Wu

2

1

College of Medicine

2

Department of Orthopaedics, Taipei Medical University Hospital,
Taipei, Taiwan

3

Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Kikuno Hospital, Minamikyushu,
Japan

4

SI-BONE, Inc., United States

5

Industrial Technology Research Institute, Taiwan

Introduction: Lateral sacroiliac joint (SIJ) fusion has been
used as a treatment for SIJ pain. However, the SIJ anatomy of Asian
populations for lateral SIJ fusion has not been well studied. Therefore,
this study aimed to compare the SIJ anatomy between Asians and Caucasians.
Material and Methods: In this study, 86 symptomatic
patients (47 Caucasians, 39 Asians) were included. 2D/3D image analysis of
12 measures of sacral and SIJ anatomy: inferior and superior articular limb
length, SIJ-height, SIJ-surface area, and 4 transverse and 4
anterior-posterior measurements of the sacral ala at specified levels were
obtained. Multivariate analysis was used to calculate systematic differences
across populations controlling for total body height, symptoms, and sex.
Results: Most sacral/SIJ measurements were moderately
correlated with total body height. The anterior-posterior thickness of ala
at level of S1 body was smaller in symptomatic Asian-women vs.
Caucasian-women (by 3.5 mm, p = 0.0110). Most measurements were above
standard surgical thresholds for transiliac placement of devices, which
would allow safe placement in nearly all patients (97.7%).
Conclusion: The SIJ anatomy of Asian population is
positively correlated with body height. The shorter stature of Asian
populations compared to Caucasians may be important for preoperative
evaluation to the placement of transiliac fusion implants.

## 803

## P393: Endoscopic transforaminal lumbar discectomy - preliminary clinical
results

Arnaldo Sousa

1

, Sara Diniz

1

, Tiago Barbosa

1

, and Paulo Costa

1

1

Orthopedics, Centro Hospitalar e Universitário do Porto, Porto,
Portugal

Introduction: Minimally invasive spine surgery has grown
exponentially in recent years, with the development of new techniques and
suitable surgical instruments. This has become advantageous in the treatment
of degenerative spinal pathology, as it allows to minimize possible surgical
complications associated with age and comorbidities of the patient, compared
to the conventional “open” surgery. The aim of this study was to evaluate
the clinical outcomes of patients undergoing treatment for lumbar disc
herniation via endoscopic transforaminal approach. Material and
Methods: A retrospective study of all patients consecutively
submitted to endoscopic transforaminal lumbar discectomy by the same surgeon
between September 2018 and May 2021 was performed. Results: A
total of 40 patients were included (24 (60%) men, 16 (40%) women). The mean
age was 55 years. The mean follow-up period was 17 months [12-36 months].
Most patients (82%) had a herniated disc in a foraminal location, 57% at
L4-L5, 25% at L3-L4 and 18% at L5-S1. A statistically significant clinical
improvement was recorded postoperatively compared to preoperatively on the
Oswestry Disability Index (23 ± 3.6 vs 62 ± 3.3; p < 0.005) on the Visual
Analog Low Back Pain Scale (3.6 ± 0.6 vs 7.4 ± 0.6; p < 0.005) and VAS
leg pain (2.9 ± 0.6 vs 8.6 ± 0.3; p < 0.005), respectively. There were no
surgical complications in the immediate postoperative period. Recurrence of
complaints occurred in 8 patients (20%), and of these, 4 patients (10%)
underwent surgical revision via an “open” approach within an average period
of 11 months after the endoscopic procedure. Conclusion:
Transforaminal endoscopic surgery is a safe and effective alternative in the
treatment of patients with foraminal lumbar disc herniation. Studies with a
longer follow-up period and with a greater number of patients are needed to
validate the results of this procedure.

## 908

## P394: Endoscopic treatment of symptomatic lumbar epidural cysts

Karel Willems

1

 and Fred Ruythooren

1

1

Orthopedie, AZ Delta Roeselare, Roeselare, Belgium

Introduction: Lumbar epidural cysts are a rare cause of spinal
cord or nerve root compression. Conventionally, symptomatic cases are
treated by open surgical decompression or percutaneous infiltration
techniques. However, we believe the rise of full endoscopic spinal surgery
offers a sage and reliable alternative to conventional methods due to its
minimal invasive nature, maintaining the ability to directly visualize the
underlying pathology. Materials and Methods: We describe the
resection technique of the three most commonly epidural lumbar cysts: facet
cysts, flavum cysts and blaastrup cysts. Results: Each type of
the cysts need a different type of endoscopic treatment. Flavum cyst is
localised more lateral, adherent at the facet joint. Partial resection of
the medial part of the facet joint is started, followed with peeling the
cyst wall of the adjoining dura/radix. The more dorsal located flavum cysts
are peeled off the dura and resected as the are not as densely adhered to
the thecal sac. Blaastrup cyst needs a spacious central decompression,
achieved by a partial resection of the lamina and the base of the spinous
process. Conclusion: Full endoscopic surgical decompression
offers a safe, reliable and minimal invasive alternative in the treatment of
symptomatic lumbar epidural cysts.

## 1032

## P395: Long term follow-up of MIS-TLIF for patients with degenerative
lumbar disease - Minimally invasive approach reduced adjacent segment
disease

Akihito Wada

1

, Katsunori Fukutake

1

, and Hiroshi Takahashi

1

1

Orthopedic Surgery, Toho University School of Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan

Introduction: Minimally invasive transforaminal lumbar interbody
fusion (MIS-TLIF) has become widely performed for the last decade, but
long-term advantages in patients undergoing MIS-TLIF compared to
conventional TLIF (C-TLIF) have not been well documented. The purpose of
this study is to elucidate the long-term advantage of MIS-TLIF, especially
focused on adjacent segment degeneration (ASD). Material and
Methods: A retrospective analysis of prospectively collected
clinical and radiographic data of patients who underwent MIS-TLIF for
single-level symptomatic degenerative lumbar conditions such as
spondylolisthesis, compared them with C-TLIF. A total of 121patients from
2004 to 2011, 77 (31 males, 46 females) aged 48-81 years that underwent
single-level MIS-TLIF (36 cases) and C-TLIF (41 cases) were included with
minimum follow-up of 10 years. Mean follow-up duration was 13.6 years for
MIS-TLIF cases and 13.4 years for C-TLIF cases. Clinical outcomes were
evaluated according to the Japanese Orthopedic Association score (JOA
score). Clinical ASD was defined as patients who required additional surgery
due to ASD. Radiographic ASD and multifidus muscle atrophy was assessed
using flexion-extension radiographs and MRI. MIS-TLIF was performed via a
unilateral dorsal approach using tubular retractor. MIS-TLIF was achieved
using titanium cage with autologous bone. Percutaneous pedicle screw
fixation was added bilaterally. C-TLIF was performed via a mid-sagittal
dorsal approach, followed by stripping the paravertebral muscle. After
removal of the spinous process, standard laminotomy, unilateral facetectomy
and discectomy followed by interbody fusion and pedicle screw placement was.
Results: Cohorts were well matched based on patient age
(MIS: 64.3 yrs. C: 62.7 yrs.), BMI (MIS: 23.3 C: 24.1), duration of symptoms
(MIS: 15.3 mo. C: 17.2 mo.), and JOA score (MIS: 15.7 points. C: 14.5
points.) before surgery. There was no significant difference in both pre-
and post- radiographic sagittal spinopelvic parameters (PT, PI-LL) between
the two groups. The mean JOA scores in MIS group and C group were both
significantly improved to 25.3 and 24.5 respectively at the latest follow-up
with no significant difference. Clinical ASD was observed in 3 cases with
MIS and in 11 cases with C (p = 0.04). Radiographic ASD was observed in 17
cases with MIS group and in 23 cases with C group (p = 0.36). Postoperative
multifidus muscle atrophy in MIS group was significantly less than C group.
Conclusion: This study demonstrates that MIS-TLIF obtained
the same clinical improvements as C-TLIF over ten years period. Preservation
of posterior elements using MIS technique including minimizing approach
related soft tissue trauma, posterior bony structures can reduce adjacent
segment disease.

## 1049

## P396: Clinical study on functional outcome of percutaneous transforaminal
endoscopic lumbar discectomy under local anaesthesia

Varun Agarwal

1

1

Orthopedics, Rohilkhand Medical College and Hospital, Bareilly,
India

Introduction: Many surgical approaches from conventional open
discectomy, microdiscectomy, percutaneous interlaminar and transforaminal
endoscopic discectomy have been used for treatment of prolapsed
intervertebral disc. Transforaminal endoscopic discectomy through a Kambin
triangle is a minimal invasive procedure which can be done under local
anesthesia, without muscle splitting, with short hospital stay and minimal
complications compared to other techniques used. The aim of this study was
to evaluate the functional outcomes following percutaneous transforaminal
endoscopic discectomy under local anesthesia for lumbar disc herniations.
Material and Methods: This Retrospective study was
conducted between November 2020 to October 2021 in orthopaedics department
of Rohilkhand medical college and hospitals, Bareilly, U.P. This study
included 54 patients with radicular pain for at least three weeks with a
positive nerve root compression sign and underwent percutaneous
transforaminal endoscopic discectomy under Local anesthesia. Visual analogue
score (VAS) and Oswestry Disability Index (ODI) has been used for pre and
post-operative clinical assessment of the patients, follow up was done at 6
weeks, 3 months, 6 months and 1 year postoperatively. Results:
Maximum patients were in the age group of 61 to 70 years and 65.2% of the
patients were males. 68.2% patients had lumbar disc herniation at L4-L5
level. The mean operative time of PTED was 70.6 minutes. Out of 16 cases of
L5-S1 disc prolapse, 1 case was operated by making an iliac bone window due
to inaccessibility of disc space because of highly placed iliac crest. The
mean preoperative VAS and ODI scores were 8.1 and 56.6 respectively. The
Post operative VAS and ODI scores were dramatically improved at each follow
up interval (p < 0.0001). Out of 66 patients who underwent operation, 4
patients developed Surgical site infection and 2 were found to have
dysesthesia, no serious complications were noted. Conclusion:
PTED has been shown to be a safe, effective and minimally invasive
alternative for the treatment of lumbar disc herniation. The procedure
proved to be advantageous as it had shorter operative time, less blood loss,
early recovery period, less postoperative work disability, lesser rate of
complications, and epidural scarring, thus facilitating easy revision
surgeries as and when indicated, clearly point toward a better acceptance of
the endoscopic techniques and their potential large usage in the coming
times.

## 1055

## P397: Limitations of transsacral canal pasty in patients with poor
results

Yoshikazu Yanagisawa

1

1

Department of Orthopedic Surgery and Spinal Disease Center, Fukuoka
Mirai Hospital, Fukuoka City, Japan

Introduction: Epiduroscopy is highly useful for detailed
examination of the cause of chronic lower back and leg pain and for
high-level diagnosis. Although there are reports that it is highly effective
in treating postoperative chronic pain, there is insufficient evidence for
lumbar spinal canal stenosis and intervertebral disc herniation. In this
study, we examined the limitations of TSCP based on poor results of
transsacral spinal canoplasty (TSCP) for lumbar degenerative diseases.
Material and Methods: A survey of 30 cases (male: 8,
female: 22, average age: 71.9 years old (52-96 years old)) who underwent
TSCP. The survey items were the postoperative course (pain VAS value), the
presence or absence of additional surgery, and intraoperative findings. In
addition, cases of additional surgery and cases with low postoperative
satisfaction were grouped into a poor results group, and the good results
group and the poor results group were examined before surgery, 1 month, 2
months, 3 months, 6 months, and 1 year after surgery) We examined changes in
the VAS score of the average follow-up period after surgery was 6.2 months.
The target diseases were lumbar spinal canal stenosis: 17 cases (56%),
postoperative chronic low back and leg pain: 6 cases (20%), and foraminal
disorders in 3 cases (10%). Results: Postoperative VAS values
were preoperative: 77.6mm, 1 month postoperative: 31.6 mm, 2 months
postoperative: 44.8 mm, 3 months postoperative: 52.8 mm, 6 months
postoperative: 58.3 mm, 1 year postoperative: 60.4 mm. Additional surgery
was required in 9 cases (30%) at an average of 6.6 months after surgery.
Surgery included fusion surgery in 3 cases (34%), re-TSCP in 3 cases (34%),
and decompression in 2 cases (22%). Intraoperative findings included
foraminal stenosis in 7 cases, spinal canal adhesion in 6 cases, and spinal
canal stenosis in 2 cases. There were 14 poor results cases. Compared with
the good results group, the poor results group had significantly higher VAS
values from preoperatively (73.7 mm: 81.9 mm, p = 0.0212). In addition,
there was a significant difference in the postoperative VAS score between
the good results group and the poor results group from 1 month to 3 months
after surgery, but after 6 months there was a significant difference between
the two groups. Conclusion: From the poor results group,
foraminal stenosis, intraspinal adhesion, and spinal canal stenosis are
likely to require additional surgery, and it was considered that there is a
limit, especially in complicated cases of severe spondylolithesis and
scoliosis.

## 1105

## P398: Hemorrhagic lumbar facetal cyst secondary to oral anticoagulant: a
case report and literature review

Aishwarya Kripesh

1

, Zhihong Chew

1

, Terry Teo Hong Lee

1

, Wee Lim Loo

1

, and Dinesh Shree Kumar

1

1

Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Changi General Hospital,
Singapore, Singapore

Introduction: Hemorrhagic facet cysts are relatively an uncommon
occurrence, mostly associated with cases of trauma or spinal instability.
Acute onset of lower back pain and radicular symptoms have been previously
reported following hemorrhage of facet cysts, with urinary and bladder
incontinence being rarely reported. However, no previous case of hemorrhagic
facetal cysts secondary to oral anticoagulant (Apixaban - a non-vitamin K
antagonist (NOAC) agent) causing cauda equina compression presenting with
urinary and bowel incontinence has been recorded. Materials and
Methods: Seventy-Four-year-old gentleman presents with a
three-month history of worsening of lower back pain as well as bladder and
bowel incontinence. Patient has significant cardiac history of ischemic
heart disease and atrial flutter for which patient was started on an oral
anticoagulant two weeks prior to onset of symptoms. Magnetic resonance
imaging showed a large extradural mass compressing the cauda equina causing
severe stenosis at the level of lumbar four to five. Patient underwent
minimally invasive transforminal Lumbar four to five decompression and
instrumented fusion. A facet cyst containing gross blood products was
excised during the lumbar decompression and fusion surgery. Post operatively
patient symptoms of lower back pain as well as bladder and bowel
incontinence improved. Results: We conducted a review of the
literature which revealed that predominately patients’ present with leg
pain, lower back pain, weakness and sensory deficits such as numbness,
tingling and paresthesia. Urinary and bowel incontinence is rarely reported
except in two previous cases reports. However, both cases were not
associated with use the anticoagulation. Hence, this case report documents
the first case of hemorrhagic facetal cyst secondary to oral anticoagulant
use causing cauda equina compression presenting with bowel and urinary
incontinence. Conclusion: This is the first case report of
lumbar four to five hemorrhagic facetal cyst secondary to oral
anticoagulant, resulting in cauda equina compression.

## 1107

## P399: Laparoscopic aided interlocking screw removal for symptomatic leg
pain after anterior lumbar interbody fusion technique

Michael Rogers

1

, Ashish Patel

1

, Jahangir Asghar

2

, and Alfredo Guiroy

2

1

Spine Surgery, Duly Health and Care, Naperville, United
States

2

Spine Surgery, Elite Spine Health and Wellness, Plantation, United
States

Introduction: Anterior lumbar interbody fusion (ALIF) has become
a standard procedure in the repertoire of a minimally invasive spine surgeon
and will likely be performed more often as the incidence of adult
degenerative spinal disorders in the United States increases. It is
beneficial for spine surgeons to be aware of technical considerations
associated with an ALIF and how to prevent complications to ensure complete
surgical proficiency. We report 2 cases of an uncommon complication
associated with an S1 compression neuropathy due to deep left-sided sacral
screw placement using a four-hole implant. Material and
Methods: This case study included two patients who underwent a
standalone ALIF with a four-hole implant for lumbar degenerative disease.
Both patients had full strength and were ambulatory. Both patients had
persistent intermittent numbness and aching in the S1 distribution that
promoted evaluation via a CT scan. Results: CT scan
demonstrated the left-sided screw was prominent into the left S1 foramen.
The imaging correlated with the patient's symptoms and both patients elected
for screw removal. Both patients underwent a novel laparoscopic assisted
method for screw removal. In both cases, the screws were removed
uneventfully with complete resolution of leg symptoms in both patients.
Conclusion: Our report describes a novel laparoscopic
method for ALIF screw removal in the event of a prominent screw into the
sacral foramen. Furthermore, we outline the considerations of selecting
screw length in each hole when using this four-hole ALIF implant.

## 1121

## P400: Comparison of postoperative bone healing in patients with UBE or
conventional lumbar discectomy

Jaeyoung So

1

 and Jeong-Yoon Park

1

1

Department of Neurosurgery, Spine and Spinal Cord Institute, Gangnam
Severance Hospital, Seoul, South Korea

Introduction: In unilateral biportal endoscopic (UBE)
discectomy, as opposed to conventional discectomy, continuous irrigation
lowers the temperature thereby reducing bone damage and promoting bone
healing. The purpose of this study was to investigate the difference of bone
healing at the postoperative laminectomy site in patients who underwent
unilateral biportal endoscopic (UBE) or conventional discectomy.
Materials and Methods: From January 2018 to June 2021, 66
patients who underwent laminectomy in our institute were retrospectively
reviewed. All patients were matched with sex, age, BMI, BMD, and F/U
duration by a 1:2 matching ratio and were divided into the “UBE” group (UBE,
22 patients) and the “conventional” group (44 patients, conventional
discectomy). We investigate the site of laminectomy shown in pre- and
postoperative x-ray images through scientific image analysis software
(ImageJ). The factors related with bone healing were also investigated.
Results: The average bone healing area of the UBE group was
69.59 mm2, and that of the conventional group was 44.56
mm2, a significant difference (p = 0.022). The remaining
laminectomy area was significantly lower in the UBE group than in the
conventional group (13.91 mm2 vs. 53.84 mm2, p <
0.001). The bone recovery ratio in the UBE group was 85.42%, compared to
51.33% in the conventional group, a significant difference (p < 0.001).
Primary laminectomy area, bone healing during 6 months, and clinical
outcomes were not significantly different between the two groups.
Conclusion: Compared with the conventional group, the UBE
group had greater bone healing area and higher bone recovery ratio for
patients with lumbar discectomy. These findings suggest that it is more
feasible to preserve the normal structure during UBE than during
conventional surgery.

## 1191

## P402: Comparison of clinical outcomes after single, double and multilevel
ELIF

Carlos De La Torre

1

, Darren Lui

1

, Bisola Ajayi

2

, and Khai Lam

1

1

Orthopaedics, London Bridge Hospital, London, United
Kingdom

2

Orthopaedics, NHS St George's Hospital, London, United
Kingdom

Introduction and Purpose: The minimally invasive extreme lateral
interbody fusion (ELIF) has increasingly gained importance in the treatment
of lumbar spine pathology. The purpose of this study was to compare surgical
outcomes and complications of single, double and multilevel fusion in
patients who underwent ELIF. Materials and Methods: Between
January 2013 and July 2021, we identified 95 patients undergoing ELIF for
lumbar pathology. Patients were divided into groups based on number of
levels fused during their procedure (1,2, or 3 or more) Patient related
outcome measures (PROMS) were collected preoperatively, and up to 12 months
postoperatively. PROMS included Oswestry Disability Index (ODI), Visual
Analog Scale (VAS) for both back (BP) and leg pain (LP) and EQ5D.
Results: There were 55% female and 45% male patients with a
mean age of 55 (26-84) years. 73 patients underwent single-level fusion, 12
underwent two level fusion and 10 underwent 3 or more levels fusion. For
ODI, statistically significant mean improvements from pre-operative to last
follow-up were 29.5± 2.4 (p < 0.001) for single-level, 15.4 ± 8.2 (p <
0.05) for double-level and 17 ± 5.5 (p < 0.01) for multi-level fusion.
For VAS BP, significant mean improvements from pre-operative to last
follow-up were 5.1 ± 0.34 (p < 0.001) for single-level, 3.9 ± 1.2 (p <
0.009) for double-level and 3.5 ± 0.8 (p < 0.001) multi-level. For VAS LP
the mean improvements were 4.6 ± 0.37 (p < 0.0001) for single-level, 2.9
± 1.1 (p < 0.05) for double-level and 4.5 ± 0.8 (p < 0.001) for
multi-level. For EQ5D the mean improvements were 23 ± 2.5 (p < 0.0007)
for single-level, 14.4 ± 6.7 (p < 0.05) for double-level and 21 ± 6.5 (p
< 0.01) for multi-level fusion. Five patients (6%) developed an adverse
event in the single-level group, 2 in the double-level (16%), and 2 in the
multi-level group (20%). The mean retraction time was 24, 36 and 56 minutes
for the single, double and multi-level groups respectively, the mean length
of stay was 3.6, 6.7 and 7.3 days for single, double and multi-level groups
respectively. All groups had an estimated blood loss of less than 100 ml.
Based on a previous study the percentage of patients that met the MCID for
ODI was 76%, 50% and 70% for single, double and multi-level fusion
respectively. For VAS BP was 82%, 66% and 80% and for VAS LP was 74%, 58%
and 80%. Conclusions: Our analysis showed that patients in
double and multilevel ELIF experienced less improvement in all aspects of
PROMS, had more complications, and had a late discharge home compared to
single-level ELIF. These findings are important for operative planning, for
setting appropriate preoperative expectations, and for risk stratification
in patients undergoing ELIF.

## 1236

## P403: Comparison of clinical outcomes between lumbar levels for
single-level extreme lateral inter body fusion

Carlos De La Torre

1

, Darren Lui

1

, Bisola Ajayi

2

, and Khai Lam

1

1

Orthopaedics, London Bridge Hospital, London, United
Kingdom

2

Orthopaedics, NHS St George's Hospital, London, United
Kingdom

Introduction and Purpose: The minimally invasive extreme lateral
interbody fusion (ELIF) has gained importance in the last decade. This
approach has differing complication profiles because of the inherent
anatomical differences encountered on each lumbar level. The purpose of this
study was to evaluate surgical outcomes and complications of single-level
ELIF comparing L4/L5 fusion with any other level fusion. Materials and
Methods: Between January 2013 and August 2021, we identified 76
patients undergoing single-level ELIF. Patients were divided into two
groups: L4/L5 level fusion group and other level fusion group. Patient
related outcome measures (PROMS) were collected preoperatively, and up to 12
months postoperatively. PROMS included Oswestry Disability Index (ODI),
Visual Analog Scale (VAS) for both back (BP) and leg pain (LP) and EQ5D.
Perioperative and postoperative data included retraction time (RT),
estimated blood loss (EBL), length of stay (LOS) and adverse events (AE).
Results: There were 58% female and 42% male patients with a
mean age of 54 (26-82) years. 60 patients underwent single-level fusion at
the L4/L5 level and 16 patients underwent single-level fusion at other level
(11 at L3/L4, 5 at L2/L3). For ODI, statistically significant mean
improvements from pre-operative to last follow-up were 31.2 ± 2.6 (p <
0.001) for L4/L5 fusion, and 24.1 ± 5.1 (p < 0.001) for other level
fusion. For VAS BP, significant mean improvements from pre-operative to last
follow-up were 5.1 ± 0.3 (p < 0.001) for L4/L5 fusion, and 4.5 ± 0.7 (p
< 0.001) for other level fusion. For VAS LP the mean improvements were
4.5 ± 0.4 (p < 0.001) for L4/L5 fusion, and 4.5 ± 0.7 (p < 0.001) for
other level fusion. For EQ5D the mean improvements were 23.3 ± 2.9 (p <
0.001) for L4/L5 fusion, and 19.8 ± 3.9 (p < 0.001) for other level
fusion. Four patients (6%) developed an adverse event in the L4/L5 fusion
group, 2 of them had urinary retention and improved after conservative
treatment, one developed an infection at the navigation pin insertion site,
improving after antibiotic therapy, and one developed radiculopathy which
required posterior revision. Two patients (12%) presented an adverse event
in the other level fusion group. One developed a pedicle fracture which was
treated with exchange of posterior screws, the other patient had
postoperative back and sacroiliac joint (SIJ) pain, which was treated with
SIJ and epidural injections. The mean retraction time was 24 minutes in both
groups, the mean length of stay was 4 days in both groups. All groups had an
estimated blood loss of less than 100 ml. Conclusions: It has
been previously proposed that ELIF at the L4/L5 level carries a higher risk
of postoperative motor deficit due to nerve injury. Our analysis showed that
patients who underwent ELIF approach at the L4/L5 level did not experience
increased incidence of complications compared to other level fusion surgery
and they all experienced similar clinical outcomes. Therefore, we consider
that ELIF at L4/L5 level is a reasonable and effective fusion technique.

## 1284

## P404: Comparative analysis of prone lateral versus lateral decubitus
positioning in achieving optimal outcomes and reducing complication rates in
single-position minimally invasive spine surgery

Peter Passias

1

, Peter Tretiakov

1

, Jamshaid Mir

1

, Pooja Dave

1

, Kimberly McFarland

1

, Rachel Joujon-Roche

1

, Tyler Williamson

1

, Bailey Imbo

1

, Zach Thomas

1

, Stephane owusu-saprong

1

, Jordan Lebovic

1

, Shaleen Vira

2

, and Bassel Diebo

3

1

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, NYU Langone Orthopedic Hospital,
New York, United States

2

UT Southwestern, Dallas, United States

3

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, SUNY Downstate, New York, United
States

Introduction: Recent literature has pointed to the rising use of
prone lateral versus lateral decubitus positioning in Minimally-Invasive
Spine Surgery (MISS) as a method to reduce operative time, increase patient
safety, and aid in surgical accessibility. However, there is a paucity of
literature as to how prone lateral and lateral decubitus positioning
compares in terms of reaching optimal postoperative outcomes and reducing
complication rates. Materials and Methods: MISS patients with
baseline (BL) and 2-year (2Y) postop radiographic/HRQL data were included.
Patients positioned in the Prone Lateral (PL) or single-position Lateral
Decubitus (LD) position were isolated. At 2Y, an optimal outcome score was
calculated using 4 equally weighted criteria: 1) achieving ideal PT per
SRS-Schwab at 2Y, 2) Achieving ideal PI-LL per SRS-Schwab at 2Y, 3) No
complication requiring reoperation 4) Achieving NRS MCID by Salaffi et al.
criteria; optimal score threshold was set at meeting 2 of 4 criteria. Means
comparison analysis assessed differences in radiographic and clinical
outcomes at BL and 1Y post-op. ANCOVA assessed estimated marginal means
adjusting for BL age and revision status. Results: 34 Prone
Lateral and 36 Lateral Decubitus patients were included (54.40 ± 12.49
years, 40% female, 30.93 ± 6.52 kg/m2, mean CCI: 2.23 ± 1.55)
were included. At baseline, patients were comparable in age, gender, BMI,
and CCI (all p > .05). Peri-operatively, PL patients demonstrated
significantly lower operative time (200.09 vs 284.54 min, p = .007) and EBL
(332.35 vs 192.05 mL, p = .027). Though optimization scores were equivalent
between groups (p = .160), PL patients demonstrated significantly lower
peri-operative complication rates (p = .012), neurological complication
rates (p = .006), and had a fewer number of total complications by 2Y (p =
.014). When controlling for BL age and revision status, the PL patients
demonstrated consistently lower intra- and peri-operative complications as
well (both p < .015). In terms of patient-reported outcomes, PL patients
also demonstrated significantly improved NRS-Leg scores compared to LD
patients by 1Y (p = .038). Conclusions: Patients placed in the
Prone Lateral position during minimally invasive adult spinal deformity
surgery demonstrate decreased mean operative times and decreased
intraoperative invasiveness and blood loss versus patients operated on via
single-position Lateral Decubitus positioning. Though overall rates of
achieving optimal outcome remain comparable, Prone Lateral approach should
be considered as there may be significant additional benefit in reducing
peri- and post-operative complications by 2Y.

## 1364

## P405: Perioperative glucose response in diabetic patients with lumbar
spinal stenosis treated with biportal endoscopic decompression

Javier Quillo-Olvera

1

, Javier Quillo-Reséndiz

1

, and Michelle Barrera-Arreola

1

1

Spine Center, Hospital Angeles Centro Sur, Querétaro,
Mexico

Introduction: Physiological stress hyperglycemia is observed in
more than 40% of critically ill patients and 32% of patients undergoing
elective surgery. This phenomenon is usually transient in non-diabetic
patients and is defined as blood glucose > 140 mg/dL and severe
hyperglycemia > 180 mg/dL; the last one is associated with attenuation of
the basophil count, T cells, and monocytic function, leading to decreased
postoperative immunity and a high risk of infections. In diabetic patients,
severe perioperative hyperglycemia is common and associated with poor
postoperative results after spinal surgery. Therefore, we hypothesize that
the perioperative glycemic response of controlled diabetic patients
undergoing biportal endoscopic decompression for lumbar spinal stenosis is
similar to that of non-diabetics. Material and Methods: A
comparative study with prospective data acquisition and retrospective review
was performed. Controlled diabetic patients with a < 7 g/dL HbA1c and
non-diabetics with single-level lumbar spinal stenosis, radicular pain, or
neurogenic claudication consistent with radiological findings were treated
through unilateral biportal endoscopic access and bilateral decompression
(UBE-ULBD). Patients were divided into diabetic and non-diabetic cohorts.
Demographics, perioperative characteristics, and clinical outcomes were
compared and analyzed between groups. Preoperative, intraoperative, and
postoperative at 12 and 24 hours blood glucose measurements were obtained in
all patients to observe glucose response to surgical treatment.
Results: Two groups with 18 patients were made up. The mean
age in the DM2 group was 65.83y (±9.2), while the non-diabetic group was
52.67y (±19.8). L4-L5 was the most decompressed level; 88.9% of diabetic
patients were discharged the next day, while 11.1% on postoperative day 2.
All non-diabetic patients were discharged the next day. The mean operative
time in the DM2 group was 74.28 min (±26.87), while in the non-diabetic was
76.83 min (±29.22). The average EBL in the DM2 group was 29.44mL (±9.98),
while the non-diabetic group was 33.3 mL (±11.88). The mean HbA1c in DM2
group was 6.436 mg/dL (±0.43), and 5.261 mg/dL (±0.23) in non-diabetics. A
statistically significant decrease (p < 0.005) between preoperative and
postoperative pain and disability scores in both groups was observed. The
mean preoperative blood glucose was 136.5 mg/dL (±25.091) in DM2 group and
101.11 mg/dL (±10.255) in non-diabetics. The mean intraoperative glucose in
diabetics reached 170.22 mg/dL (±27.627), while non-diabetics it was 125.50
mg/dL (±19.847) (p = 0.007). The postoperative glucose at 12 and 24 hours
was 130.89 mg/dL (±23.552) in DM2 group and 106.89 mg/dL (±11.591) in
non-diabetics, and 136.06 mg/dL (±11.032) in DM2 group and 105.39 mg/dL
(±10,331) in the non-diabetics respectively (p = 001).
Conclusion: The present study reported that biportal
endoscopic surgery was associated with increased intraoperative glucose in
both groups, much higher in diabetic patients. Therefore measures for its
reduction should be considered during the surgery to avoid sustained
hyperglycemia and the known associated risks. However, postoperative glucose
at 12 and 24 hours did not show a trend of severe hyperglycemia when the
biportal endoscopic technique was used in diabetic patients.

## 1412

## P406: The implementation of minimally invasive spine surgery at a UPMC
peripheral community hospital

Yunting Tang

1

, Anthony Oyekan

1

, Jonathan Dalton

1

, Dominic Ridolfi

1

, and Vivek Sharma

1

1

University of Pittsburgh, 200 Lothrop Ste BST E 1640, Pittsburgh,
United States

Introduction: Minimally invasive spine surgery (MISS) techniques
were developed to address several challenges with traditional approaches to
decompression and fusion, including extensive muscular dissection and
subsequent postoperative back pain and prolonged recovery.1,2
Since the introduction of a tubular distraction system for use in
microendoscopic diskectomy in 1997, MISS has undergone a rapid technological
evolution, including major improvements to endoscopy, robotic-assisted spine
surgery, and navigation.3 The implementation of MISS comes with
challenges including cost and learning curve. Thus, we aimed to study the
initial clinical experiences of a spine surgeon performing unilateral lumbar
laminectomy with bilateral decompression (ULLBD) via MISS at a UPMC
peripheral community hospital with no previous in-house spine service. We
hypothesized that a minimally invasive spine surgery program may be safely
implemented at a peripheral community hospital and will allow most patients
to have a rapid recovery with discharge to home. Material and
Methods: A retrospective review of a prospectively collected
database was performed with University of Pittsburgh review board approval.
We initially identified 131 elective ULLBD cases by a single
fellowship-trained orthopedic spine surgeon, from October 2019 to March
2021, at a non-teaching UPMC community hospital with no previous in-house
spine coverage. The minimum postoperative follow-up was 1 year. Data points
collected include patient demographics, diagnoses, discharge date, discharge
disposition, and narcotic use. Patients who underwent ULLBD were indicated
for instrumented posterior spinal fusion by pre-operative dynamic
instability and iatrogenic instability associated with the decompressive
procedure. Differences in patients who underwent fusion and those who did
not undergo fusion were compared using Chi-squared, Fischer’s exact test,
and two-tailed unpaired t-tests analysis. A p < 0.05 was considered
significant. Results: 55 patients were included in the analysis
(32 F, 23 M; age 65 ± 17 years, BMI 30.0 ± 6.1). 51 (92.7%) patients were
discharged on postoperative day 1, 3 (5.5%) patients were discharged on
postoperative day 2, and only 1 (1.7%) patient was discharged after
postoperative day 2. 53 (96.3%) patients were discharged to home and only 2
(3.6%) required a skilled nursing facility. Instrumented posterior spinal
fusion for ULLBD was generally performed in older patients with
spondylolisthesis and required greater OR time, radiation dose, blood loss,
and narcotic prescription doses than patients without instrumented fusion
Notably, all patients on chronic narcotics had no change in their
preoperative prescriptions despite continued clinical improvement. There
were no complications that required re-operation. Conclusion:
ULLBD via MISS may be safely performed at a MISS-naïve peripheral community
hospital with excellent outcomes. Implementation of a minimally invasive
spine surgery program in such a setting is safe, feasible, and allows for
optimal clinical outcomes. ERAS protocols may improve perioperative
restrictions, pain control, and rehabilitation. Considerations include
equipment needs, personnel training, and surgeon experience.

## 1471

## P407: Short-term clinical and radiological outcome of intradiscal
condoliase injection in lumbar disc herniation

Akihiro Nagamachi

1

, Hiroki Ikuchi

2

, Kohei Ohta

1

, and Takayuki Ogawa

3

1

Orthopaedic Surgery, Yoshinogawa Medical Center, Tokushima,
Japan

2

Orthopaedic Surgery, Takamatsu Municipal Hospital, Kagawa,
Japan

3

Orthopaedic Surgery, Sakaide Kaisei Hospital, Kagawa, Japan

Introduction: Condoliase has high substrate specificity for
chondroitin sulfate and hyaluronic acid, which are glycosaminoglycans of
proteoglycans abundant in the nucleus pulposus of the intervertebral disc.
Condoliase has been used to treat lumbar disc herniation (LDH), however
there is a paucity of evidence in clinical outcome of intradiscal condoliase
injection. In this prospective study, we investigated clinical and
radiological outcome of intradiscal condoliase injection. Material and
Methods: A total of 32 patients with LDH underwent intradiscal
condoliase injection at our hospital. All patients had clinical symptoms of
LDH and confirmed herniated disc on lumbar spine MRI. There were 25 male and
7 female and their mean age was 45 years (16 ∼ 85 years). Affected
intervertebral disc were 2 at L1-2, 1 at L2-3, 16 at L4-5, 13 at L5-S1.
Intradiscal condoliase injection was performed under fluoroscopic guidance.
A single 1 mL dose of condoliase (1.25 U/mL) was injected into the center of
the affected intervertebral nucleus pulposus using a 21-gauge puncture
needle. Patient was hospitalized in one day to observe adverse events.
Clinical and radiological assessments were conducted before, 1 week, 4
weeks, 3 months and 6 months after the injection. Clinical outcome was
measured using Japanese Orthopaedic Association Back Pain Evaluation
Questionnaire (JOABPEQ) and Visual analog scale (VAS, 0 to 100 mm) of
buttock and leg pain. Patient improved without additional surgery was
defined as responder and patient needed additional surgery because of
remained symptoms was defined as non-responder. All patients underwent
lumbar spine MRI. Axial and sagittal MRI were used to classify herniation
types; subligamentous extrusion (Sub), transligamentous extrusion (Trans)
and sequestration (Seq). Herniated disc area was measured on axial section.
All responders completed the minimum follow-up period of 6 months,
non-responders dropped out of this study at when additional surgery was
performed. Results: There were 26 responders and 6
non-responders. Number of patients of Sub, Trans and Seq were 23, 5 and 3,
respectively. Percentage of responders in Sub, Trans and Seq were 75%, 100%
and 0%, respectively. In responders, all item score of JOABPEQ were improved
after the injection. Mean VAS of responder before injection, 1 week, 4
weeks, 3 months and 6months were 68.0, 37.9, 25.0, 14.5 and 16.1,
respectively. On the other hand, mean VAS of non-responders before, 1 week
and 4 weeks after the injection were 82.2, 56.1 and 58.3, respectively.
Herniated disc area before and 6 months after the injection in responders
were 64.0 mm2 and 29.2 mm2, respectively.
Conclusion: Response rate of intradiscal condoliase
injection was 81.3% in this study. Therapeutic effect of condoliase is
confirmed only in Sub type herniation in clinical trial, however, response
rate was 100% even in Trans type in this study. Based on this result, we
indicate intradiscal injection of condoliase for patients with Sub and Trans
type. Non-responder did not improve at 1 week after the injection. Clinical
outcome at 1 week after the injection might give valuable information to
change treatment plan for non-responders.

## 1524

## P408: Interlaminar spine surgery - Is it for us? My journey through the
learning curve

João Cruz

1

, Emanuel Homem

1

, Ricardo Simoes

1

, and Luís Soares

1

1

Ortopedia, Hospital Divino Espírito Santo, Ponta Delgada,
Portugal

Introduction: Surgical treatment of the degenerative disc
disease has evolved from traditional open spine surgery to minimally
invasive approaches and endoscopy. With improvements in endoscopic
technology spine surgeries can be performed for lumbar, cervical and
thoracic regions with less tissue and muscle damage, reduced blood loss,
less epidural fibrosis, reduced in-hospital stay, early functional recovery
and improvement in the quality of life. Appropriate indications, clear
imaging prior to surgery and preplanning are keys to successful outcome.
Interlaminar spine endoscopy started as a mean solution to deal with L5S1
problems that were not accessible to transforaminal approach. The authors
prospectively describe their experience in interlaminar endoscopic spine
surgery. Material and Methods: We prospectively follow all
patients that were submitted to surgery between November 2019 and May 2022.
Patients who had undergone full-endoscopic lumbar discectomy (FELD) with
interlaminar approach were included and follow-up was done at 4 days, 2 and
6 weeks and 3 months. We started to do spine endoscopy cases in November
2019. In total we have performed 18 surgeries for 18 patients. 5 patients
had concomitant transforaminal approach to at different levels.
Results: The median age was 38.1 (21-58) years, 14 left
sided surgeries and 4 right sided, from these we had 9 males and 9 females.
All these with 17 lumbar disc herniation (LDH) and 1 of lombar stenosis
(LS). All cases were at L5S1 level. The average length of stay was 1.38
(0.3-4) days and the average operation time was 103 (45-163) minutes. In the
year 2022 all patients were operated in outpatient setting. As for the
results in overall, we had 67% excellent results, 22% good results, 0% fair
results and 11% of poor results according to MacNab classification. The mean
pre-operative visual analogue scale (VAS) score for leg pain was 5.94 (3-9)
and 1.05 (2-0) at 3-month post-operative follow-up. VAS for back pain was 6
(0-9) and 2 (1-4) respectively. The Owestry score had a pre-op of 43.8
(8-66) and a post-op at 3 months of 14.2 (4-48). We had 2 patients with a
reherniation (11%), no infection or dural leak cases.
Conclusion: Although this is a small case study, we had 89
% excellent/good outcomes. We consider it is quite acceptable for the
initial learning curve of this spine endoscopy technique.

## 1525

## P409: Comparative outcomes of transcorporeal versus transdiscal anterior
endoscopic dissectomy for cervical radiculopathy: meta-analysis

Gun Keorochana

1

 and Jatupon Kongtharvonskul

1

1

Orthopedics Department, Faculty of Medicine Ramathibodi Hospital,
Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand

Objective: In recent years, the application of spinal endoscopy
has become more prevalent. At present, percutaneous endoscopic cervical
discectomy (PECD) is mainly divided into the anterior transdiscal approach
and the posterior interlaminar approach. Although the anterior transdiscal
approach can provide direct decompression for central or paramedian cervical
disc herniation, the iatrogenic disc damage may result in decreased
intervertebral space when compared to posterior interlaminar access.
Anterior transcorporeal approach under endoscopy could enable an individual
and adjustable trajectory within the vertebral body under different
conditions of disc herniation preserving the motion of adjacent segment,
especially in a migrated or sequestered lesion. But there is no current
consensus regarding which method is better. Therefore this systematic review
and meta-analysis of transdiscal and trancorporeal PECD was conducted with
the aim of updating the comparison of the two for post-operative outcomes
(neck pain arm pain (VAS), disabilities (NDI), modified Macnab criteria,
complications and reoperations) for treatment of cervical intervertebral
disc herniation. Methods: This systematic review was conducted
according to the PRISMA guidelines. Relevant studies that reported pain,
disabilities, modified Macnab criteria, complications and reoperations of
either technique were identified from Medline and Scopus from inception to
September 4th, 2022. Results: eleven studies were
included for the analysis of transdiscal(Td) PECD, 17 studies were included
for analysis of transcorporeal (Tc) PECD and one comparative study were
included for compared TdPECD to TcPECD. Overall, there were 1503 patients
(978 in the TdPECD group and 525 in the TcPECD group). A pooled UMD of
post-operative neck pain, arm pain (VAS), disabilities (NDI) scores of
TdPECD and TcPECD were -4.48 (95%CI: -5.28 to -3.68), -6.03 (95%CI: -7.29 to
-4.76), -40.90 (95%CI: -59.81 to -21.98) scores and -4.42 (95%CI: -6.40 to
-2.44), -5.96 (95%CI: -6.80 to -5.12), -27.38 (95%CI: -52.77 to -1.99) when
compared to before surgery. The pooled prevalence of having excellent and
good in modified Macnab criteria, complications and reoperation of TdPECD
and TcPECD were 0.89 (95%CI: 0.77, 1.00), 0.024 (95%CI: -0.030 to 0.078),
0.03 (95%CI: 0.003 to 0.051) and 0.75 (95%CI: 0.61 to 0.88), 0.005 (95%CI:
-0.005 to 0.015), 0.016 (95%CI: 0.002 to 0.032). Indirect meta-analysis,
TdPECD provided better postoperative neck and arm pain (VAS), disabilities
(NDI) of -0.24 (95%CI: -1.98 to 2.46), -0.06 (95%CI: -1.68 to 1.80) and
-13.98 (95%CI: -40.42 to 68.39) when compared to TcPECD technique, but there
were not significant difference between two techniques. While the chance of
having excellent and good in modified Macnab criteria, complications and
reoperations in the TcPECD group were lower of 0.84 (95%CI: 0.67 to 1.05),
0.19 (95%CI: 0.01 to 3.00) and 0.58 (95%CI: 0.16 to 2.08) times when
compared to TdPECD. Conclusion: In post-operative outcomes 3 up
to 4 years follow-up, there is no significant difference in all clinical
outcomes between the 2 approaches. Although TdPECD have better arm pain,
neck pain and neck disabilities scores when compared to TcPELD, however,
TcPELD have lower chance of having complications and reoperations when
compared to TdPELD.
Keywords: percutaneous endoscopic cervical discectomy; PELD; transcorporeal;
trandiscal; disc herniation

## 1526

## P410: Our first 72 spine endoscopic cases: impressions of a learning
curve

Emanuel Homem

1

, João Cruz

1

, Ricardo Simoes

1

, and Luís Soares

1

1

Ortopedia, Hospital Divino Espírito Santo, Ponta Delgada,
Portugal

Introduction: Surgical treatment of the degenerative disc
disease has evolved from traditional open spine surgery to minimally
invasive approaches and endoscopy. With improvements in endoscopic
technology spine surgeries can be performed for lumbar, cervical and
thoracic regions with less tissue and muscle damage, reduced blood loss,
less epidural fibrosis, reduced in-hospital stay, early functional recovery
and improvement in the quality of life. With precise indication, proper
diagnosis and good training, the endoscopic spine surgery can give equally
good result as open spine surgery. Appropriate indications, clear imaging
prior to surgery and preplanning are keys to successful outcome. The authors
prospectively describe their experience in endoscopic spine surgery.
Material and Methods: We prospectively evaluated all
patients submitted to endoscopic spine surgery from November 2019 to May
2022. Patients who had undergone full-endoscopic lumbar discectomy (FELD)
were included and follow-up was done at 4 days, 2 and 6 weeks and 3 months.
Our first case dated November 2019. In total, we have done 72 surgeries for
60 patients. 12 patients had concomitant interlaminar and foraminal approach
at different sites. Results: The median age was 46,7 (20-74),
48 left sided surgeries and 24 right sided, from these we had 23 males and
37 females. A total of 54 transforaminal and 18 interlaminar surgeries, and
66 cases of lumbar disc herniation (LDH) and 6 of lumbar stenosis (LS).
Regarding location, 44 at L4L5 level, 19 at L5S1, 8 at L3L4 and 1 at L2L3.
The average length of stay was 1.23 (0.3-4) days, and the average operation
time was 82 minutes (30-160). In the year 2022 all patients were operated in
outpatient setting. As for the results, overall, we had 79% excellent
results, 10.3% good results, 1% fair results and 9.7% of poor results
according to MacNab classification. The mean pre-operative visual analogue
scale (VAS) score for leg pain was 9.62 (3-8) and 1 (3-0) at 3-month
post-operative follow-up. Median VAS for back pain was 6.28 (0-9) and 2
(1-4) respectively. The Owestry score had a pre-op of 47.9 (8-76) and a
post-op at 3 months of 15.2 (4-50). We had 7 patients with a reherniation
(9.7%) and 1 patient with LS submitted to arthrodesis, and no infection or
dural leak cases. Conclusion: Although this is a small case
study, we had 89,3% excellent and good results, which gives us a good
incentive for continuing doing spine endoscopy. The good results make it a
promising technique for lumbar problems.

## 1530

## P411: Early experience with single paraspinal incision, single-level
minimally invasive transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion (MITLIF) with 3D
printed titanium cage and unilateral pedicle screw construct

Yunting Tang

1

, Anthony Oyekan

1

, and Vivek Sharma

1

1

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, United States

Introduction: The implementation of MISS presents challenges
including cost and learning curve. This study aimed to characterize initial
clinical experiences with minimally invasive transforaminal lumbar interbody
fusion (MITLIF) at a University-Affiliated community hospital. We
hypothesized that MITLIF with a 3D printed titanium cage and unilateral
pedicle screw construct may be safely implemented in single-level lumbar
spine fusions with favorable clinical outcomes. Material and
Methods: With review board approval, a retrospective review of a
prospectively collected database was performed. We reviewed initial
consecutive cases of single-level MITLIF using 3D printed titanium cages
with a unilateral pedicle screw construct performed by a single
fellowship-trained orthopedic spine surgeon from October 2019 to March 2021.
The minimum postoperative follow-up was 1 year. Data points collected
include patient demographics, diagnoses, comorbidities, operating time,
fluoroscopy time/dose, EBL, hospital length of stay (LOS), discharge
disposition, 30-day and 90-day readmissions and narcotic use (per the
Pennsylvania Prescription Drug Monitoring Program, PDMP). The MITLIF
protocol included a single paraspinal incision, non-expandable 18/22mm
beveled slotted tubular retractors, an operating microscope, fluoroscopy,
neurophysiologic monitoring, and an ERAS perioperative plan.
Results: 47 patients were included - 25 F/22 M, age 67 ± 12
years, BMI 31.7 ± 5.7. Average operating time was 120 ± 18 min, fluoroscopy
time 0.93 ± 0.41 min, radiation dose 3.80 ± 2.51 rad, and EBL 65 ± 35 cc.
BMI directly affected radiation dose but had no effect on OR time or EBL.
Patients were prescribed 28 ± 24 outpatient narcotic doses for 8 ± 6 days.
All patients on chronic narcotics had no prescription changes pre- versus
postoperatively, despite achieving their desired outcomes. One patient had
hardware displacement requiring revision surgery, no other complications
were reported. Four patients were readmitted at 30-days, and one at 90-days.
Forty-three patients were discharged on POD1, 3 on POD2, and 1 after POD2.
All patients were discharged home; 21 required home health assistance.
Conclusion: MITLIF with 3D printed titanium cages and a
unilateral pedicle screw construct may be a viable option for minimally
invasive single-level lumbar spine fusions with favorable outcomes. This
technique may help reduce hardware density and surgical footprint. It may
also have future cost benefits and applications in the treatment of lumbar
adjacent segment disease. However, further studies are needed to investigate
these potential applications. Considerations include need for special
equipment, personnel training, surgeon experience, technique proficiency and
diligent patient selection.

## 1551

## P412: Out-patient minimally invasive spine surgeries during the COVID-19
pandemic - A retrospective analysis of 164 consecutive cases

Benjiang Ma

1

 and Aaron Smith

1

1

West Palm Beach, Spine and Orthopaedic Specialists, Florida, United
States

Introduction: Cervical and lumbar spine intervertebral disc
(IVD) disease is the leading cause for neck or back pain. The most common
mechanism of injury during non-fatal motor vehicle accidents is cervical or
lumbar disc herniation and spine instability. Surgery is the last resort if
all conservative measures failed. Here we share the retrospective analysis
of the patient data and our surgical experiences from a single spine surgeon
group utilizing minimally invasive procedures performed in the outpatient
setting at the ambulatory surgery centers (ASC) during the COVID-19
pandemic. Material and Methods: Anterior cervical discectomy
and fusion (ACDF), anterior lumbar interbody fusion (ALIF), minimally
invasive laminotomy and discectomy (MILD), percutaneous endoscopic
laser-assisted discectomy (PELD) and percutaneous kyphoplasty (PK) were
performed on carefully selected patients at multiple ambulatory surgery
centers (ASCs) with appropriate protective measures. Results:
From January 2020 to December 2021, our group performed 164 consecutive
cases on 153 patients involving a total of 249 IVD levels. Of these
surgeries, 116 cases (70.73%) from 114 patients (74.51%) were cervical,
predominantly ACDF, and 48 cases (29.27%) were lumbar. Notably, 8 of these
patients had both cervical and lumbar procedures (single or multi levels) in
a single anesthetic session (SAS) and were discharged on the same day. The
most affected IVDs in cervical spine were at the C4-C5 and C5-C6 levels,
which comprised 92.17% (106) of the ACDF cases and 76.04% (146) of the total
IVD levels. Of the 40 cases of lumbar decompression/fusion procedures
combined, 38 (95.0%) were at lower lumbar levels (L4 to S1). Six (6) cases
(15.0%) involved 2 lumbar levels including L3-S1 IVDs. In sharp contrast, 6
out of 8 kyphoplasties (75.0%) involved lower thoracic/higher lumbar
vertebral columns (T11 to L2) and only 2 were at the lower lumbar L4 level.
Conclusion: With appropriate precautions, we have safely
performed various cervical and lumbar spine surgeries in the ASCs amid
COVID-19 pandemic, including patients that underwent combined multi-level
cervical and lumbar spine procedures in a SAS with no complications and
achieved the same day discharge (SDD). Analysis of our data demonstrated
that, in non-fatal trauma during MVAs, mid-lower cervical (C4 to C6) and
lower lumbar (L4-S1) IVDs were the most vulnerable levels. Clinical
relevance: Our experience could be the valuable reference for
fellow spine surgeons to increase their level of comfort to perform more
skill-demanding surgeries in outpatient settings to reduce the cost in the
today’s rising healthcare expenditures. Enhanced safety measures need to be
investigated to protect the aforementioned skewed vulnerable cervical and
lumbar spine levels from injury during MVAs.
Keywords: intervertebral disc, spine surgery, minimally-invasive, ambulatory
surgery center, single anesthetic session, same day discharge, motor vehicle
accident

## 1580

## P413: Technique for spondylolisthesis reduction and segmental lordosis
optimization in lateral lumbar interbody fusion with percutaneous pedicle
screw fixation: a case series

Paul Soriano

1

, Jason Haselhuhn

1

, and Jonathan N. Sembrano

1

1

University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, United States

Introduction: Lateral lumbar interbody fusion with percutaneous
pedicle screw fixation (LLIF-PPS) is a circumferential minimally-invasive
procedure designed to minimize morbidity and enhance recovery after lumbar
surgery. There has been increasing emphasis on restoring optimal segmental
sagittal alignment, even in single-level fusion procedures. We described a
technique to optimize segmental lordosis (SL) and reduce spondylolisthesis
in LLIF-PPS and analyzed radiographic results in a series of patients on
whom this technique was used. The objective of this study was to evaluate
the effects of introducing an angled-up position of distal screws and
hyper-contouring of rods before the final tightening of instrumentation
("novel reduction technique") on lumbar lordosis (LL) in patients with
spondylolisthesis undergoing LLIF-PPS fixation. Methods: After
IRB approval, we reviewed consecutive cases of single-level LLIF-PPS for
degenerative spondylolisthesis from January 2016 through December 2021. In
all patients, after the pedicle screws were placed percutaneously and after
passing the rods, the caudal screw extenders were tilted caudally, and
caudal set plugs were tightened. This locks the screw heads in place and
leaves the rostral end of the rods sticking up dorsally relative to the
cephalad screw heads. Because the caudal screw heads were already locked,
gradual reduction of the rods to the cephalad screw heads resulted in
spondylolisthesis reduction and SL increase without needing rod compression.
We measured the SL on operative levels in intraoperative images at every
step of the surgery (before cage placement, after cage placement, after
repositioning, and after posterior instrumentation). We measured pelvic
incidence (PI), pelvic tilt, and LL in preoperative and postoperative
standing x-rays. Ideal lumbar lordosis (ILL) was calculated using the
formula: ILL = 0.5 (PI) + 28. Results: We
included 16 patients (7 male; 9 female) in the final
analysis. Five were done in a single position (lateral decubitus), while the
rest were repositioned (lateral then prone). The average age was 60.4 years
(SD ±9.7) and BMI 33.6 (SD ±8.9). The average segmental lordosis change was
4.4°, broken into 2.4° after cage placement and an additional 2.0° after
posterior instrumentation. The percentage of preoperative and postoperative
patients with > 10° difference between measured and ideal LL is 18.8%
(3/16) and 25.0% (4/16), respectively. Conclusions: Together
with interbody cage placement, the described instrumented reduction
technique resulted in increased operative level segmental lordosis (average
4.4°). Although no posterior column osteotomies were performed, 75.0% of
patients who underwent single-level LLIF-PPS using this technique ended
within 10° of patient-specific ideal lumbar lordosis.

## 1634

## P414: Short-term clinical and radiological outcome of full-endoscopic
lateral lumbar interbody fusion via Kambin's triangle in degenerative lumbar
diseases

Akihiro Nagamachi

1
, Hiroki Ikuchi
2
, Kohei Ohta
1
, andMasatoshi Morimoto
3

1

Yoshinogawa Medical Center, Orthopedic Surgery, Tokushima,
Japan

2

Takamatsu Municipal Hospital, Orthopedic surgery, Kagawa

3

Tokushima University, Orthopedic Surgery, Tokushima, Japan

Introduction: Kambin reported the concept of percutaneous
posterolateral nucleotomy in 1973. Since then, minimally invasive procedure
using transforaminal approach has been developed. Full-endoscopic lateral
lumbar interbody fusion via Kambin’s triangle (KLIF) offers several
advantages over open methods like protection of posterior ligamentous and
bony structures and paraspinal musculature. The purpose of this study was to
evaluate early clinical results of degenerative lumbar diseases treated with
KLIF. Material and Methods: Nine patients with degenerative
spondylolisthesis (6 cases), spondylolytic spondylolisthesis (1 case) and
degenerative lumbar scoliosis (2 cases) were participated in this study.
There were 5 male and 4 female and their mean age was 63 years ranged from
34 to 77 years. All patients underwent CT and MRI to observe bony union and
decompression of spinal canal 6 months and 1 year after the surgery.
Clinical result was evaluated by Japanese Orthopaedic Association Back Pain
Evaluation Questionnaire (JOABPEQ) and visual analog scale (VAS). Mean
duration of observation was 21 months ranged from 6 to 36 months. Wilcoxon
signed-rank sum test was used for statistical analysis. KLIF using a
transforaminal approach was performed under general anesthesia with patient
in a prone position on a radiolucent table, combined with motor evoked
potential monitoring. After percutaneous pedicle screws were placed under
fluoroscopic guidance, an endoscope was inserted in the superior articular
process (SAP) through 8 mm skin incision created around 80 mm from the
midline. The exposed SAP was removed using a 3.5 mm diameter high speed
drill to expose disc space adequately. After the disc space was cleaned up,
autologous milled bone and an expansion cage were inserted by using
originally designed instruments. Mean duration of operation was 201 minutes
and mean amount of blood loss was 45.5cc. No neural injury and deep surgical
site infection was observed. Results: Union rate of the fused
level was 100%. Among mean JOABPEQ item scores, pain related disorders sore,
social life dysfunction score and psychological disorders score were
significantly improved postoperatively. Lumbar spine dysfunction score and
gait disturbance score did not have statistically significant improvement,
however, p value were 0.058 and 0.059, respectively. We thought that those
may have statistically significant value if the number of patient will
increase. There were statistically significant improvement in mean VAS of
LBP, buttock and leg pain. Conclusion: Open posterior interbody
fusion inevitably causes paraspinal muscle injury. It is usually limited to
the lower lumbar level. It has an increased risk of durotomy, especially
during the revision surgery. Oblique lumbar interbody fusion and Lateral
lumbar interbody fusion are suitable for degenerative lumbar diseases
including sagittal and coronal deformity. But those carry the risk of
vascular injury and intestinal injury. Zhao compared 40 cases of the
endoscopic transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion group (ETLF) and the 38
cases of Minimally invasive trans foraminal interbody fusion group. He also
reported that ETLIF may be efficient alternative surgery for degenerative
lumbar spinal stenosis. KLIF was safe, effective and minimally invasive
technique in treatment for degenerative lumbar disc diseases.

## 1674

## P415: Anatomical and technical considerations of transiliac endoscopic
assisted intraforaminal lumbar inter body fusion: A cadaveric study

Jose Miguel Sousa

1,2

, Hugo Ribeiro

1

, João Gamelas

1

, and Jose Consciência

2,3

1

Orthopaedics, Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Ocidental, Lisboa,
Portugal

2

Comprehensive Health Research Center, NOVA Medical School, Lisboa,
Portugal

3

Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Ocidental, Pre and Pos Graduation
Department, Lisboa, Portugal

Introduction: Endoscopic spine surgery has gained wide
popularity among spine surgeons over the last decade. The adoption of this
surgical technique is backed up by recent meta-analyses that favor lumbar
endoscopic discectomy over microdiscectomy in clinical outcomes, duration of
surgery, length of hospital stay, and lower risk of complications. Initially
seen as a tool for treating lumbar disc herniations, the range of
applications for spine endoscopy expanded, namely to the cervical and
thoracic spine. Its use in the treatment of foraminal, lateral recess, and
central stenosis is increasingly common. However, the benefits of an
endoscopic approach go beyond decompression surgeries. Initial reports on
endoscopically assisted fusion date back to the mid-1980s. A recent
meta-analysis comparing endoscopic assisted intraforaminal lumbar interbody
fusion (iLIF) and minimally invasive transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion
(MI-TLIF) has shown that for the treatment of lumbar degenerative diseases,
iLIF has significantly less intraoperative blood loss and reduced length of
hospital stay. Although the iLIF technique has been gaining traction in L4L5
and the upper lumbar spine, the unique anatomy of L5S1 has put some
limitations to the expansion of the technique in this segment. To overcome
some of these limitations, a transiliac approach has been described to
address disc herniations and stenotic pathology. However, its reference to
the iLIF technique is anecdotic. The purpose of this study is to demonstrate
the feasibility of a L5S1 iLIF transiliac approach and to characterize the
anatomic correlations of the endoscopic transiliac track. Material and
Methods: Ten transiliac iLIF and ten suprailiac iLIF were
performed bilaterally at L5S1 in five randomly selected fresh-frozen human
cadavers. The following measurements were recorded: distances from the
transiliac track to the iliac crest, posterior superior iliac spine, and
superior gluteal neurovascular bundle; pelvic parameters; approach angles;
cage’s lateral and AP center point ratio (CPR); percentage of the cage
crossing the midline in the AP and lateral views. Endplates integrity was
assessed through endoscopic visualization. Facet joint, sacroiliac joint,
iliolumbar ligament, exiting, and traversing nerve roots were checked for
integrity through anatomic dissection. Results: In the
transiliac technique, the axial and coronal approach angles were
significantly decreased by 13,5° (95%CI -15.5; -11.5; p value < 0.001)
and 13.2° (95%CI -15.3; -11.1; p value < 0.001), respectively, the
sagittal approach angle was significantly increased by 5,4° (95%CI 1.8, 8.9;
p value = 0.008), and the AP CPR was significantly higher (MD 0,16; 95%CI
0.12,0.20; p value < 0.001). The percentage of the cage crossing the AP
view’s midline was increased by 31.6% (95%CI 19.8, 43.4; p value <
0.001). Integrity of endplates, facet joints, sacroiliac joints, iliolumbar
ligament, exiting, and traversing nerve roots was maintained.
Conclusion: L5S1 transiliac iLIF is a feasible surgical
technique. It allows a more centrally placed interbody cage in the coronal
plane without compromising the anterior position in the lateral plane. The
integrity of the major anatomic structures at risk was preserved.

## 1678

## P416: Clinical outcomes, complications and fusion rates in endoscopic
assisted intraforaminal lumbar inter body fusion (iLIF) versus minimally
invasive transforaminal lumbar inter body fusion (MI-TLIF): systematic
review and meta-analysis

Jose Miguel Sousa

1,2

, Hugo Ribeiro

2

, João Luis Silva

2

, and Jose Consciência

1,3

1

Comprehensive Health Research Center, NOVA Medical School, Lisboa,
Portugal

2

Orthopaedics, Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Ocidental, Lisboa,
Portugal

3

Pre and Pos Graduation Department, Centro Hospitalar Lisboa
Ocidental, Lisboa, Portugal

Introduction: Minimally invasive spine surgeries intend to
reduce tissue trauma, decrease complication rates, and improve functional
recovery. Advances in endoscopic spine surgery made way for new
opportunities to minimize tissue aggression further. Recently published
meta-analyses regarding the treatment of lumbar disc herniations favored
endoscopic discectomy (ED) over microdiscectomy (MD) in clinical outcomes,
duration of surgery, length of hospital stay, and lower risk of overall
complications. These results opened the perspective that ED could take over
the place of MD as the gold standard of care in the management of lumbar
disc disease. Technological innovations in endoscopic spine surgery have
widened its range of applications beyond lumbar disc herniations. Endoscopic
treatment of central and lateral recess stenosis, as well as endoscopic
assisted lumbar interbody fusion (LIF) for degenerative lumbar diseases, are
increasingly common. The benefits of an even less invasive technique than
minimally invasive TLIF (MI-TLIF) would be further improvement in the
advantages over open TLIF. Encouraged by the success of ED, endoscopic
assisted intraforaminal LIF (iLIF) has been increasing its popularity. Even
though several surgical techniques have been described, Kambin’s triangle
approach through an intraforaminal facet sparing technique is the most usual
and the one that has greater potential to reduce iatrogenic soft and bone
tissue trauma. Recent studies have shown promising results regarding reduced
blood loss, decreased length of stay, clinical outcomes, complications and
fusion. However, the comparison between MI-TLIF and iLIF is sparse in the
literature, and concerns about the safety and effective benefits of the
endoscopic technique remain unanswered. This systematic review and
meta-analysis of MI-TLIF and iLIF were conducted to synthetize and compare
the available data in the literature on clinical outcomes, complications and
fusion rates. Material and Methods: The MEDLINE, Embase, and
Cochrane Library databases were searched. The inclusion criteria were: five
or more consecutive patients who underwent iLIF or MI-TLIF for lumbar
degenerative diseases; description of the surgical technique; clinical
outcome measures, complications and imaging assessment; minimum follow-up of
12 months. Surgical time, blood loss, and length of hospital stay were
extracted. Mean outcome improvements were pooled and compared with minimal
clinically important differences (MCID). Pooled and direct meta-analysis
were evaluated. Results: We identified 42 eligible studies. The
iLIF group had significantly lower mean intra-operative blood loss (UMD
110,61mL; 95%CI 70.43, 150.80; p value < 0.0001), and significantly
decreased length of hospital stay (UMD 2,36; 95%CI 1.77,2.94; p value <
0.0001). VAS back, VAS leg and ODI baseline to last follow-up mean
improvements were statistically significant (p value < 0.0001), and
clinically important for both groups (MCID VAS back > 1.16; MCID VAS leg
> 1.36; MCID > 12.40). There was no significant difference in
complication nor fusion rates between both cohorts. Conclusion:
Interbody fusion using either iLIF or MI-TLIF leads to significant and
clinically important improvements in clinical outcomes for lumbar
degenerative diseases. Both procedures provide high rates of fusion at 12
months or later, without significant difference in complication rates. iLIF
is associated with significantly less intraoperative blood loss and length
of hospital stay.

## 1692

## P417: Is narrow oblique corridor a contraindication for oblique lumbar
interbody fusion?

Weerasak Singhatanadgige

1

, panupong chatareeyagul

1

, Vit Kotheeranurak

1

, and Worawat Limthongkul

1

1

Orthopedics, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok,
Thailand

Introduction: Evaluation of the pre-psoas oblique corridor is
generally recommended before performing Oblique Lumbar Interbody Fusion
(OLIF) procedure. Narrow corridor especially at L4-5 is one of the
constraints to perform OLIF due to the increasing risk of major vessel
injury. The aim of this study is to investigate if there was a difference in
functional outcome and operative complication between narrow and wide
corridor size patient operated with OLIF at L4-5. Material and
Methods: Retrospective study of patients who had undergone OLIF
surgery at least one level which include L4-5 from 2017 and 2020. The
patients were divided into three groups by size of the corridor; not more
than 10mm, between 10 to 20 mm, and 20 mm or more. We collected and reviewed
VAS score, ODI score, complication and radiographic findings in each group
for up to one-year follow-up. Results: Eighty patients were
divided into three groups from the size of the corridor (0-10 mm, 11-20 mm
and more than 21 mm). No significant difference of VAS score, ODI score and
complication between each group. The radiographic findings including
position of the cage, anterior and posterior disc height, segmental angle
and foraminal height were recorded and found no significant difference
between each group. The only radiographic finding that has significant
difference between each groups is the angle of the cage. In the group of
more than 20mm corridor had found significantly less degree of angle than
the other two groups. (p-value = 0.01). There was no recorded incidence of
major vascular complication. Conclusion: Narrow or wide
corridor does not affect functional outcome and radiographic finding
including position of the cage, anterior and posterior disc height,
segmental angle and foraminal height after OLIF procedure at L4-5 level.
Only angle of the cage that were affected by the size of corridor. Thus,
narrow corridor should not be the contraindication to perform OLIF
procedure.

## 1704

## P418: How safe is minimally invasive lumbar decompression and discectomy
(MILD). Learning curve and outcomes of a single spine surgeon in a
peripheral spine unit

Sultan Malik

1

, Amin Kheiran

1

 and Purnajyoti Banerjee

1

1

Orthopaedic Spine, Kettering General Hospital, Kettering, United
Kingdom

Background: Minimally invasive lumbar decompression and
discectomy (MILD) using tube dilators is an established technique of
treating lumbar spinal stenosis and disc prolapse. We report single surgeon
experience of MILD on reoperation, pain relief, and patient reported outcome
with minimal 6-months follow-up after introduction in our spine unit.
Methods: Patients diagnosed with lumbar spinal stenosis who
underwent MILD over 12 months after introduction of tube assisted spine
surgery in a district general hospital spine unit were included. Data was
collected prospectively. The primary outcome measure was incidence of
revision surgery at 6-months. Secondary outcome measures included change in
pain levels using the Visual Analogue Scale (VAS), Oswestry Disability Index
(ODI), from baseline to 6- months following primary procedure. Duration of
surgery, length of (hospital) stay (LoS), and blood loss, rate of unplanned
operations and readmissions were recorded. Results: Thirty two
patients (14 males and 18 females) aged 66.9 years (range 54-83), with a
single level spinal stenosis that underwent MILD were included. Mean
duration of surgery was 2.05 hours (range, 1.18-3.25). All patients had BMI
> 30 (31.3-46.5). The mean ASA was 3. There were no readmissions or
revision surgery within 6 months. The average blood loss was 72.5 mL (range,
20-210). The mean Length of stay was 1.2 day (range, 1-3 days). Mean
pre-operative and post-operative VAS was 7.7 (range, 4-10), and 4.6 (range,
1-9), respectively. Mean pre-op and post-op ODI was reported as 36.5 (range,
22-55), and 26.3 (range, 13-38), respectively. Further sub-analysis showed
no differences in VAS for pain, LoS and ODI between patients aged < 65 or
> 65 years (p > 0.05). Conclusion: MILD procedure is safe
and achieved reliable pain relief, and improved functionality when
introduced in a peripheral spine unit at 6 months in patients with high BMI
with minimal complications. We recommend introduction of minimally invasive
surgery by trained surgeons can be safely undertaken in smaller spine
units.

## 1709

## P419: Full endoscopic and percutaneous posterior stabilization for lumbar
spinal stenosis with degenerative spondylolisthesis. Case series

Andre Calderaro

1

1

Full Endoscopic Surgery, Centro Ortopedico Valqueire, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil

Objective: To present clinical and radiological outcomes of a
case series of lumbar spine stenosis (LSS) associated with single level
degenerative spondylolisthesis (DS), treated by full endoscopic
decompression and percutaneous posterior stabilization.
Methods: A total of 10 patients with clinical radiological
diagnosis of LSS associated with DS in a single level underwent a full
endoscopic decompression (laminectomy, flavectomy and discectomy) and
posterior stabilization with pedicle screws by minimally invasive
percutaneous access followed up for a period of 6 months. Clinical outcomes
were assessed with Oswestry Disability Index (ODI) and Visual Analog Scales
(VAS) for back and leg pain. Radiological outcomes were assessed comparing
pre and post operative MRI images using the Schizas classification for LSS
and Meyerding classification for lumbar Spondylolisthesis. Level - The L4L5
level was most discussed in this series, 6 cases, 3 in L5S1 and 1 in L3L4.
Schizas – 5 cases grade B, 3 grade C and 2 grade D. Meyerding – 8 cases
grade 1 and 2 cases grade II. Results: All patients reported
significant improvement in axial and radicular pain symptoms as well as
classic neurogenic claudication in LSS cases, documented by the ODI and VAS.
Int 9 of 10 cases, was improvement related to the Schizas. There was no
difference in relation to the pre and post op Meyerding classification.
Conclusion: In this series of cases, full endoscopic
decompression associated with posterior percutaneous stabilization proved to
be affective for the treatment of LSS with DS with favorable clinical and
radiological outcomes, in addition to the advantages of a minimally invasive
surgery.

## 1748

## P421: Decompression without fusion in degenerative lumbar
spondylolisthesis: biportal endoscopic spinal surgery

Ho-Jin Lee

1

, Jae-Sung Ahn

1

, and Sang-bum Kim

1

1

Orthopedic Surgery, Chungnam National University College of
Medicine, South Korea

Introduction: It has been debatable for patients with lumbar
spinal stenosis (LSS) with degenerative spondylolisthesis (DS) whether the
decompression-only surgery is preferable to decompression with instrumented
fusion. The current study was to access clinical and radiological outcomes
after unilateral laminotomy for bilateral decompression (ULBD) procedure
using biportal endoscopic spinal surgery (BESS) in LSS with or without
stable DS. Material and Methods: Between January 2015 and April
2020, we conducted a retrospective study on those who have had ULBD using
BESS for one level lumbar segment and proceeded the assessment into two
groups; LSS with stable DS (Group A) and LSS without DS (Group B). 20
patients in Group A and 49 patients in Group B were enrolled. The length of
hospital stay (LOS), follow-up period, operation segment, operative time,
complications, and clinical and radiological outcomes were evaluated.
Clinical outcomes were measured preoperatively and at the final follow-up
time using Visual Analog Scale (VAS) scores, Oswestry Disability Index (ODI)
scores, and the modified Macnab criteria. Radiological outcomes were
accessed by measuring the sagittal translation of the lateral plain
radiogram of DS. Results: Median follow-up times were 850 days
in Group A and 930 days in group B. All the clinical parameters improved
significantly after the operation in both groups. At the final follow-up, no
clinical parameters differed significantly between the groups and no
complications developed in either group. Radiologically, no significant
progression of sagittal translation at the final follow-up time of DS.
Conclusion: We suggest that ULBD using BESS is a practical,
alternative, minimally invasive procedure for treating one-segment LSS with
stable DS.

## 1755

## P422: Advantages of 4K 3D exoscope in thoracic and thoracolumbar MIS
approaches

Joseph Aferzon

1,2

1

Neurosurgery, Hartford Hospital, Hartford, United States

2

Neurosurgery, University of Connecticut, Farmington, United
States

Introduction: With advent of new MIS techniques, visualization
of deep structures through a narrow portal can be challenging. All
traditional means of visualization present shortcomings. Current
Microscopes are too bulky and with limited focal depth they
presents very restricted working space, particularly when using long
instruments. Additionally, steep working angles require surgeons to stand in
awkward position while trying to look "down the scope". Surgical
Loupes provide limited magnification and require additional means
of illumination. Additionally, surgical loupes are an ergonomic disaster,
particularly for long cases. Endoscope technologies may solve
some of these issues but they do not provide 3D depth perception, which I
believe has contributed to its limited use in high precision surgery. The
new exoscope technology has the potential to address all of the
above shortcomings. Material and Methods: Author has extensive
experience with advanced MIS surgery for thoracic and thoracolumbar
pathology, with over 200 cases performed successfully. He has traditionally
used surgical loupes and microscope when feasible. Author presents his
experience using novel Mantis 3D 4K exoscope (1) for deep MIS thoracic and
thoracolumbar exposures for decompression, fusion and fixation.
Results: Exoscope provides improvement over loupes and
microscope. Because of the longer focal distance and smaller profile it
dramatically increases working space compared to the microscope. Because of
decoupling between image acquisition and visualization it significantly
improves ergonomics during surgery particularly noticeable during long
procedures. It offers excellent depth perception, therefore overcoming the
limitations of an endoscope. This exoscope provides a unique opportunity for
teaching surgical techniques through real time sharing of 3D images as well
as 3D replay after the surgery. This Exoscope use has a learning curve of 5
to 10 cases based on surgeons prior experience with technique and
technology. Conclusion: Exoscope overcomes many limitations of
traditional intraoperative visualization solutions. It is particularly well
suited for deep approaches through a narrow corridor. This technology should
facilitate adoption of advanced minimally invasive techniques.
(1) Mantis Health, Stamford CT USA

## 1761

## P423: Risk factor for screw loosening following minimally invasive
transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion

Weerasak Singhatanadgige

1

, Pipat Klaewkla

1

, Vit Kotheeranurak

1

, and Worawat Limthongkul

1

1

Orthopedics, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand

Introduction: Screw loosening is a postoperative complication
leading to poor outcomes after minimally invasive transforaminal lumbar
interbody fusion (MIS-TLIF). This study aimed to identify the incidence and
risk factors of Screw loosening after 1 level MIS-TLIF for degenerative
lumbar disease. Material and Methods: In this retrospective
study, plain radiographs and three-dimensional computed tomography were
performed 12 months after 1-level MIS-TLIF. Screw loosening was defied by at
least 1 millimeter radiolucent around pedicle screw from CT scan. The
incidence and risk factors of screw loosening was calculated with odds ratio
(OR), confidence interval (CI), and logistic regression analysis.
Results: A total of 151 patients (mean age, 64 years) were
included in this study: 35 (23%) with and 116 (78%) without Screw loosening.
Lower screw is affected more often than upper screws (82% compare to 18%).
The independent risk factors significantly associated with Screw loosening
were lower pedicle Screw depth (OR = 2.01; p = 0.025), severe multifidus
atrophy (OR = 5.56; p = 0.045). Correlation analysis showed that the fusion
rate was associated to screw loosening. Conclusion: In 1-level
MIS-TLIF with a PEEK cage. The factors significantly associated with Screw
loosening were pedicle screw depth and severe multifidus atrophy.

## 1772

## P424: Clinical evaluation of computerized modified paramedian approach
technique (CMPAT) and conventional midline approach (MAT) of lumbar
puncture: study protocol for a prospective, multicenter randomized control
trial

Yuan-Dong Zhuang

1

, Yi-Ze Chen

2

, Qi-Ying Lin

2

, Si-Qi Zhong

2

, and Yi-Xin Chen

2

1

Neurosurgery, Fujian Medical University Union Hospital, Fuzhou,
China

2

Basic Medical College, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou,
China

Introduction: Lumbar puncture (LP) technique is one of the
commonly used clinical treatment methods in the neurological system and is
of great value in the diagnosis and treatment of neurological diseases. The
traditional LP technique is the midline approach technique - lumbar puncture
(MAT-LP), which has various problems such as low success rates, many
complications and crude learning methods. Compared with MAT-LP, paramedian
approach technique - lumbar puncture (PAT-LP) has the advantages of low
puncture failure rate, low number of puncture attempts, and low incidence of
post-LP headache. The various reported PAT-LP puncture methods have not yet
been unified, and previous studies on PAT-LP lacked intelligent global
analysis and three-dimensional multi faceted analysis. Therefore, based on
digital avatar and computer simulation technology, our study has proposed a
evaluation of Computerized Modified Paramedian Approach Technique (CMPAT) in
the early stage, aiming to explore the best LP path with high versatility
and success rate. Accordingly, the purpose of the present study is to to
compare the effects of CMPAT and MAT lumbar puncture in patients requiring
lumbar puncture. Material and Methods: The trial plan included
84 patients, aged 18-99 years, from multiple study centers requiring LP with
Fujian Medical University's Union Hospital as the group leader, randomly and
equally divided into 2 groups of 42 patients each, with CMPAT-LP in group A
and MAT-LP in group B. The patients were followed up on postoperative days
1, 3 and 7. The primary observation of the study was the number of punctures
attempted by the surgeon at the time of successful lumbar puncture; the
secondary observation was the pain in the head, back, hind legs after lumbar
puncture, and pain assessment was performed before, during, and 30 minutes
after the operation, 6 hours after the operation, day 1, day 3, day 7, and
day 30 after the operation, all using the pain numerical rating scale (NRS)
scoring. The study complied with the requirements of the Declaration of
Helsinki established by the World Medical Association. Participants gave
informed consent to the trial content and treatment procedure and signed an
informed consent form. Discussion: The trial expects to
demonstrate thatCMPAT-LP has a higher success rate, lower pain scores and
fewer complications than MAT-LP.

## 1889

## P425: Comparison of clinical effect of percutaneous endoscopy through
lateral approach and posterior approach treating shoulder type of L5/S1 disc
herniaion

Yizhou Xie

1,2

, XiaoHong Fan

1

, and Yang Yu

1

1

Orthopaedic Surgery, Hospital of Chengdu University of Traditional
Chinese Medicine, Chengdu, China

2

Neurological Surgery, Weill Cornell Medical College-New York
Presbyterian Hospital, New York, United States

Study Design: Retrospective Cohort Study.
Objectives: To compare the clinical effect of percutaneous
endoscopic through lateral approach and posterior approach treating the
shoulder type of L5/S1 lumbar disc herniation (LDH). Methods:
Each 30 cases diagnosed in shoulder type of L5/S1 LDH who received
percutaneous endoscopy through lateral approach and posterior approach were
collected and divided into: the lateral approach group and the posterior
approach group. Clinical evaluation was performed at preoperation and
postoperative 3rd day, 1st month and 1st
year in each group. The indicators involved include VAS, ODI, operation
cost, operation time and fluoroscopy time. Results: In
contrast, the posterior approach group showed shorter mean operation time
and fewer mean intraoperative radiation (p < 0.05). However, compared
with posterior approach group, lateral approach group was more economical (p
< 0.05). In terms of VAS and ODI, the difference between two groups is
not significant in preoperative and postoperative 3rd day, 1st
month and 1st year (p > 0.05). On the other hand, mean VAS and
ODI of two groups acquired by three postoperative follow-up phases were
significantly improved compared with preoperation (p < 0.05). No
statistical significance was observed in pairwise comparison among three
postoperative follow up phases in two groups (p > 0.05).
Conclusion: In treating shoulder type of L5/S1 LDH, both
the lateral approach and the posterior approach for percutaneous endoscopy
are effective. Compared with the lateral approach, the posterior approach
has the advantages of fewer intraoperative X-ray radiations and less
operation time. However, the lateral approach is less costly than the
posterior approach.

## 1893

## P426: Biportal endoscopic revision operation of postoperative cage
migration after a lumbar interbody fusion: a case report and literature
review

Yizhou Xie

1,2

, XiaoHong Fan

1

, and Yang Yu

1

1

Orthopaedic Surgery, Hospital of Chengdu University of Traditional
Chinese Medicine, Chengdu, China

2

Neurological Surgery, Weill Cornell Medical College-New York
Presbyterian Hospital, New York, United States

Background: Postoperative cage migration is a catastrophic
operational complication after a spine surgery which could cause severe
clinical symptoms. Its revision operation using endoscope has rarely been
reported in the literature so far. This is a case report of a 48-year-old
female occurring postoperative cage migration in the 3rd days
after a biportal spinal endoscopic lumbar interbody fusion. Case
Presentation: A 48-year-old female patient presented with a left
L4-5 radiculopathy with medical imagining and physical sign corresponded. A
biportal spinal endoscopic lumbar interbody fusion was then performed using
a lordotic polyetheretherketone (PEEK) graft (26 mm length×10 mm width×10 mm
height) packed with allograft bone. In the 3rd postoperative day,
the patient presented with an acute radiculopathy on left leg. An immediate
lumbar CT scan and MRI demonstrated posterior cage migration to the canal at
the L4-5 level. The revision surgery under biportal endoscopy was performed
at once to get it well managed ultimately. After surgery, the patient's
symptoms were greatly relieved until he was discharged in the
15th days postoperatively. Conclusion:
Postoperative cage migration in spinal endoscopic lumbar interbody fusion is
a rare complication. But endplate damage and the undersized cage with
posteriorly placement are more prone to developing this complication.
Endoscopic revision operation is an optimal surgical intervention that worth
considering.

## 1901

## P427: Comparison of the safety and efficacy of unilateral biportal
endoscopic lumbar interbody fusion and uniportal endoscopic lumbar interbody
fusion: a 1-year follow up

Yizhou Xie

1,2

, XiaoHong Fan

1

, and Yang Yu

1

1

Orthopaedic Surgery, Hospital of Chengdu University of Traditional
Chinese Medicine, Chengdu, China

2

Neurological Surgery, Weill Cornell Medical College-New York
Presbyterian Hospital, New York, United States

Objectives: To compare the short-term outcomes of unilateral
biportal endoscopic lumbar interbody fusion (BLIF) and uniportal endoscopic
lumbar interbody fusion (ULIF). Methods: Sixty patients
diagnosed with L4/5 spinal stenosis who underwent BLIF and ULIF were
included (30 in each group). Clinical evaluation was performed
preoperatively and postoperatively in the 1st week,
1st month, and 1st year. Factors such as the
visual analogue score (VAS), Oswestry disability index (ODI), operative
time, surgical complications, and radiological outcomes (fusion rate, screw
loosening, and cage subsidence) were compared between the two groups.
Results: All patients showed improved mean VAS and ODI at
all three postoperative follow-ups, and no statistically significant
differences were detected between the BLIF and ULIF groups. The mean
operative time in the BLIF group was shorter than that in the ULIF group.
Nerve root injury occurred in two patients in the BLIF group, while leakage
of cerebrospinal fluid occurred in one patient in the ULIF group. All
adverse events were treated adequately prior to discharge. The fusion rates
with definite and probable grades were significantly higher in the BLIF
group than that in the ULIF group. One case of cage subsidence with no screw
loosening occurred in each group. Conclusion: Both BLIF and
ULIF are safe and effective surgical techniques. Compared with ULIF, BLIF
has the advantages of shorter operative time and a higher fusion rate. Other
merits of BLIF include a wider surgical field, greater maneuverability of
instruments, visibility during cage implantation, and transverse orientation
of the cage.

## 1938

## P428: The impact of 2 expandable TLIF cage design types on geometry of
the lumbar spine - preliminary results of case series

Pravesh Gadjradj

1

, Fabian Sommer

1

, Ibrahim Hussain

1

, Jacob Goldberg

1

, Sertac Kirnaz

1

, Branden Medary

1

, Rodrigo Navarro-Ramirez

1

, and Roger Härtl

1

1

Department of Neurological Surgery, Weill Cornell Medicine and New
York Presbyterian Hospital - Och Spine, New York, United States

Introduction: Tubular MIS TLIF is a widely used procedure for
lumbar spine fusion. One limitation of this technique is the amount of
segmental lordosis that can be achieved with interbody cages. Recently, a
variety of expandable, lordotic cage designs have been developed that allow
cage height and lordosis adjustment. The RISE ® cage has a fixed
lordosis of 8 degrees and can be expanded in height. The SABLE ®
cage can have lordosis of up to 15 degrees after which the height can be
expanded. It is unclear as to how these cage designs affect lumbar lordosis
postoperatively. We present a case series evaluating short term radiographic
outcomes using this device. Methods: A prospective study of
consecutive patients undergoing one-level tubular MIS TLIF with either a
RISE® or SABLE® expandable cage was performed.
Pre- and postoperative day 1 radiographs were compared, measuring anterior
and posterior disc height, lumbar lordosis, segmental lordosis, and pelvic
incidence. Perioperative data was also collected including operative time,
blood loss, length of hospital stay, and procedure-related complications.
Results: A total of 77 patients were included: 40 with
RISE® cages, and 37 with SABLE® cages. There was a
decrease in overall lumbar lordosis and an increase in posterior disc height
from pre-operation to post-operation for both RISE® and
SABLE® groups, with no difference between segmental lordosis.
There were no differences between RISE® and SABLE®
groups at pre-operation and post-operation overall. In the preoperative low
lordosis group, the segmental lordosis showed a statistically significant
increase compared to preop independent of the type of cages used. The mean
segmental lordosis either stabilized or slightly decreased after surgery in
patients with preoperative segmental lordosis from 16 degrees or higher.
Overall segmental lordosis for RISE® and SABLE® cages
went from 16.9 ± 10.7 to 17.0 ± 8.4 (p = 0.95) and 16.6 ± 8.9 to 15.2 ± 7.8
(p = 0.53) respectively. Overall lumbar lordosis for RISE® and
SABLE® cages significantly decreased from 48.0 ± 19.0 to 44.0
± 17.4 (p = 0.005) and from 35.3 ± 37.1 to 28.1 ± 35.0 (p = 0.002). Finally
posterior disc height for RISE® and SABLE® cages
significantly increased from 4.8 ± 2.7 to 8.7 ± 2.2 (p < 0.001) and from
4.3 ± 2.1 to 8.2 ± 2.8 (p < 0.001). Conclusion: In this
large prospective case series between two expandable cage designs used
during TLIF, there were no differences between RISE® and
SABLE® cages after surgery in terms of radiological spinal
parameters. More patients are needed to make definitive conclusions.

## 1942

## P429: Does the use of robotic guidance system in spine surgery increase
the safety and accuracy of implant placement? Assessment of 450
cases

Sajan Hegde

1

, Appaji Krishnan

1

, Vigneshwara Badikkilaya

1

, Sharan Achar T

1

, Umesh Kanade P

1

, and Harith Reddy

1

1

Orthopaedics, Apollo Hospitals Chennai India, Chennai,
India

Introduction: The placement of pedicle screws in complex and
deformed spines is a challenging task with increased demand on the operating
surgeon to be safe and accurate. The need to do minimally invasive surgery
entailing radiation hazards to the operating room personnel necessitates a
system to guide screw placement safely, accurately and with reduced
radiation exposure. The Renaissance and Excelsius GPS robot helps in guiding
the placement of pedicle screws in deformities and for various minimally
invasive procedures. The objective of this study is to study and analyse
efficacy of the robotic guidance system in pedicle screw placement in spinal
deformities and minimally invasive spine surgery for degenerative and
infective conditions. Material & methods: Prospective case
series of 450 patients with a mean age of 42 yrs (Range: 7-78yrs) were
operated for various indications as spinal deformities in 88 patients
(Adolescent Idiopathic Scoliosis-46, Neuromuscular Scoliosis-18, Congenital
Scoliosis-10, Ankylosing Spondylitis-2, Congenital Kyphosis-6,
Degenerative-2, Post-traumatic-2, Failed/revision-2), degenerative
conditions (single/ double/ multilevel (3-4) lumbar disc disease with
stenosis and/or degenerative listhesis - 336), dorsal stabilisation for
infection/ malignancy- 22 and 4 vertebral body lesions biopsy.
Parameters such as operating time, radiation exposure, screw accuracy and
complications were calculated. Results: In the deformity group
all the screws were found acceptable as per intraoperative fluoroscopy. One
screw was misplaced laterally as a result of ‘Skiving’ but without any
adverse neural or vascular effect. In the Minimally Invasive group, per
operatively 89 guide wires were not as per planning on fluoroscopic check
and needed repositioning. All the screws were found to be acceptable
intraoperatively as per fluoroscopy. Postoperative CT scan analysis of screw
accuracy by an independent radiologist and one of the authors showed that
all screws except 42 had screws placed as per the pre-operative planning,
resulting in an accuracy of 98.9. There were no adverse vascular or
neurological events intra-operatively. The average radiation exposure per
screw was 0.98 seconds in the deformity patients and 1.595 seconds in the
MIS group. The operating time was comparable to standard open procedures and
there was a significant reduction (40%) in operating time in the second half
of cases with respect to the first half, showing an attainable learning
curve. Conclusion: Robotic guidance helps in increasing the
safety and accuracy of the pedicle screw placement in various spinal
disorders especially in obese degenerative disc disease and paediatric
deformity patients.

## 2003

## P430: Pain outcomes in minimally invasive surgery for palliative
treatment of spinal metastases

Nolan Brown

1

, Taylor Reardon

1

, Alvin Chan

1

, Andrew Chan

2

, Shane Shahrestani

1

, Chenyi Yang

1

, Gabrielle Hovis

1

, Elliot Choi

1

, Ryan Beyer

1

, Zachary Hsu

1

, Martin Pham

3

, and Michael Oh

1

1

Neurosurgery, UC Irvine, Irvine, United States

2

Neurosurgery, Columbia University, New York, United States

3

Neurosurgery, UC San Diego, San Diego, United States

Introduction:Minimally invasive surgery (MIS) of the spine has
emerged as an established component of the spine surgeon's armamentarium.
MIS comes with the advantage of reduced surgical insult, conferring
particular benefit to patients undergoing palliative treatment who have
metastatic spinal tumor burden. Materials and Methods:The
present study aims to assess the safety, efficacy, and impact on quality of
life of MIS of the spine for palliative treatment of spinal metastases by
analyzing complication rates and visual analog scale (VAS) pain scores. A
systematic literature search was performed from January 22, 2002 to January
22, 2022 searching for all articles of patients undergoing MIS for spinal
metastases. All studies reporting clinical data and surgical complications
were included. Results:Five studies reporting on 62 metastatic
spinal tumor cases were included. There were 35 males and 27 females. Of the
included studies, China had the most studies (40%) with Germany, Canada and
The United States reporting one study each (20%). The mean age of
participants was 58.1 years. The most common tumor location was in the
thoracic spine (60.5%), while the most common sources of spinal metastasis
included cancers of lung (32.3%), bone marrow (myeloma) (21.0%), and breast
(11.3%). The mean preoperative VAS score was 7.1 ± 1.1 while the mean
postoperative score VAS was 1.2 ± 1. There was an average reduction in VAS
scores across all 5 studies of 6.4 ± 1.0. Mean follow-up time was 9.25
months in the four articles reporting this data. Average complication rate
was 9.26% with a range between 0-32% with zero perioperative deaths
recorded. The most common complication mentioned was cement leakage.
Conclusion:Minimally invasive approaches for palliative
surgical management of spinal metastases are associated with improved VAS
scores. In addition to favorable pain outcomes, complications appear to be
minimal; these approaches therefore represent a viable option for palliative
pain management that can improve quality of life.

## 2009

## P431: Does provider matter: an assessment of evidence supporting
performance of minimally invasive SIJF by spine surgeons versus non-spine
specialists

Nolan Brown

1

, Alexander Himstead

1

, and Michael Oh

1

1

Neurosurgery, UC Irvine, Irvine, United States

Introduction:As patient demand for minimally invasive SIJF has
increased, non-surgeons (including pain management physicians) have begun to
perform a growing number of minimally invasive posterior SIJF procedures,
even though these have traditionally been reserved for spine surgeons, whose
extensive training renders them experts in spinal instrumentation and
biomechanics. Materials and Methods:In November 2021, a
PubMed/Medline search and initial screen yielded 11 studies that were
subjected to full text analysis. Using the list of SIJF devices obtained
from these studies, additional searches were conducted using the National
Institute of Health (NIH) Clinical Trials website and FDA 510(k), among
others, yielding 6 unique devices that can currently be used by non-surgeons
in the posterior SIJF approach. Results:Spine surgeons
generally perform lateral or posterolateral MIS SIJF. There are 11 unique
FDA-approved devices and a total of 33 SIJF devices overall. 10 of these
devices have been described in numerous reports within the peer-reviewed
medical literature. For example, Titanium Triangular Implants (lateral) are
described in 11 retrospective studies (level 4 evidence), 2 level 2
prospective studies, and 2 level 1 prospective studies. By contrast,
non-surgeons have only investigated the use of posterior allograft devices
in 2 studies. One of these studies (PainTEQ) is featured on
ClinicalTrials.gov. The other is a systematic review citing 6 studies on
posterior SIJF performed by non-surgeons. However, 2 of these 6 studies are
conference abstracts and therefore cannot be assigned meaningful levels of
evidence. Conclusion:Instrumentation of the spine requires
extensive surgical training such as that completed by spine surgeons. There
is an increasing body of evidence in the literature supporting the
performance of MIS SIJF.

## 2019

## P432: Minimally invasive spinal surgery for non degenerative spinal
pathologies - a single surgeon experience of 30 cases

Alok Uppar

1

1

Neurosurgery, NIMHANS, Bengaluru, India

Introduction: Tubular retractor(TR) based MISS is an evolving
treatment option for spinal pathologies. A young neurosurgeon's initial
experience of MISS for non-discal pathology is described.
Methods: Retrospective study. All patients who underwent
tubular retractor based MISS treatment for various non-discal spinal
pathology were analysed clinically and radiologically pre-operatively ,
post-operatively and at follow up. Outcomes were analysed (Mc Cormick
grades, Visual Analog scale(VAS) for pain, motor power and length of
post-operative stay). The technical challenges and ways to overcome same
were assessed. Results: Total cases -30. Male: Female ratio was
1:1. Mean age was 32 years (Range 17- 60 years). We had 12 intradural
extramedullary schwannomas and 7 meningiomas, 1 neurenteric cyst, 1
hemagioblastoma (intra-medullary), 7 Chiari malformation with syrinx, and 2
cervical anterior epidural abscess. All were treated with TR based MISS
(Medtronics system) and had good outcomes both clinically and radiologically
at discharge and follow up. Mean follow up was 4 months(Range 2 months to 1
year). Median Mc Cormick grade in the pre-operative period was 4 and
improved to 1 at follow up. Complete tumor excision was documented at follow
up for all patients. ACM patients had definite improvement in their clinical
condition at follow up. The Mean VAS score for pain was 7.5 pre-operatively
and improved to 0.7 in the post-operative period. Best MRCS muscle power
grading : Mean was 3 (Range 0-5) and all patients had improved to normal
power at follow up. Median post-operative stay at hospital was 2.5
days(Range: 1-15 days). Only 1 patient had a complicated post-operative
course as she developed meningitis which required prolonged post-operative
admission for 15 days, after which she was discharged in a neurologically
improved condition. Conclusion: TR based MISS surgery can be
safely performed for intraspinal pathology with excellent outcomes. Young
neurosurgeons can safely perform these minimally invasive spinal surgeries
after proper training.

## Navigation

## 115

## P433: Influence of navigation on pedicle screw malpositions depending on
the vertebral segment supplied

Pascal Beuting

1

1

Trauma, BG Bergmannsheil Bochum, Bochum, Germany

Introduction:Misplacement of pedicle screws can have significant
impact on the postoperative outcome after dorsal spinal fusion. Various aids
such as fluoroscopy and navigation are available to improve the screw
position. The aim of the present study was to clarify to which extent the
supplied spinal column segment has an influence on the selection of the aids
and misalignment of the pedicle screw. Method: This
retrospective CT-based cohort analysis (2016 to 2020) included 631 patients
(m 341/f 293) who underwent surgical treatment in the thoracic and lumbar
area due to their vertebral body fractures. Fractures in the area of the
cervical spine were excluded. The pedicle diameters were measured in all
patients and the surgical treatment was evaluated based on the pedicular
screw position. For this purpose, the distance between the outer edge of the
screw and the pedicle cortex was measured. Based on the measured distance,
the screw position was divided into three stages (< 2 mm, 2-4 mm, > 4
mm overhang). A perforation of the pedicle of the screw > 2 mm was rated
as an incorrect position. Results: The area with the highest
rates of screw misplacement was the middle thoracic segments, where the
smallest pedicle diameters were also measured. Th5 showed the highest
misalignment rate of misplacement 21% (n = 31). Similar misalignment rates
were also found in the adjacent segments. The pedicle screws at T6 16% (n =
26), T7 20% (30) and T8 17% (n = 28) were > 2 mm outside the pedicle. In
the cranial thoracic vertebral segments (Th1-3), malposition rates of 5%
(Th1; n = 1) to 15% (Th2; n = 9) were found. In the area of the
thoracolumbar transition and especially the lumbar spine (Th12 - L3), 3%
(L2; n = 15) to 5% (Th12; n = 25) of the pedicle screws showed a
misplacement of > 2 mm. A comparison of the use of navigation shows that
it was used particularly in the area of the upper and middle thoracic spine.
Looking at the navigated screws in isolation, the malpositions in the area
of the segments T4 to T8 can be seen with 25% (T4; n = 9) to 33% (T7; n =
10). In the area of the cranial thoracic vertebral segments, in which the
navigated method was often used, misalignment rates of 6% (Th1; n = 1) to
16% (Th2; n = 5) are impressive. In the S1 segment, 4% (n = 1) of the
pedicle screws showed a breach. Conclusion: The results of the
present study show that the navigated procedure was used in particular in
the areas of the cranial and middle thoracic spine as well as in the area of
the lower lumbar spine. This can be explained on the one hand by the smaller
pedicle diameter in the thoracic spine and by the more difficult
accessibility of the caudal lumbar spine. In the thoracolumbar transition
and in the area of the upper lumbar spine, due to the larger pedicle
diameters, a low misalignment rate can also be achieved by conventional
insertion of the pedicle screws, and thus the higher time expenditure of the
navigated procedure may not be justified here.

## 876

## P434: iCT-based navigation vs CBCT-based navigation for percutaneous
pedicle screw placement in the thoracic spine: a cadaveric study

Antonia Medrow

1,2

, Eric Mandelka

1

, Jula Gierse

1

, Felix Zimmermann

1

, Paul Alfred Grützner

1

, Jochen Franke

1

, and Vetter Sven

1

1

Department of Trauma Surgery and Orthopedics, BG Klinik
Ludwigshafen, Ludwigshafen, Germany

2

Medical Faculty Heidelberg, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg,
Germany

Introduction: Pedicle screw placement is considered a standard
procedure in thoracolumbar spine surgery for a variety of indications. 3D
navigation guidance is increasingly used as the accuracy has proved to be
more accurate compared to both fluoroscopic guidance and freehand screw
placement. While different imaging and navigation devices can be used for
intraoperative imaging and navigation, there are few studies comparing these
under similar conditions. The aim of this study was to compare iCT-based
navigation and a novel navigation system for 3D C-arm Cone Beam Computed
Tomography (CBCT)-based navigation under standardised, experimental
conditions in human specimens. Material and Methods: The study
was performed on 4 fresh-frozen torsos. The combinations of imaging device
and navigation system investigated were the iCT (Airo, Brainlab, Munich,
Germany) with Curve navigation (Brainlab, Munich, Germany) and a latest
generation flat-panel mobile 3D C-arm CBCT (Cios Spin, Siemens, Erlangen,
Germany) with the Pulse navigation platform (NuVasive, San Diego, CA, USA).
After obtaining referencing scans, the image data was transferred to the
navigation system and unilateral navigated percutaneous pedicle screw
placement (Reline MAS, Nuvasive, San Diego, CA, USA) was performed by an
experienced spine surgeon on levels T2 to T12. Subsequently, referencing
scans were performed using the second image device and navigated screw
placement was performed on the contralateral side. Finally, a control scan
was performed to allow for screw accuracy assessment which was performed by
to blinded observers (Obs1 and Obs2) using Gertzbein and Robbins grading
system. Grades A (no pedicle breach) and B (perforation < 2 mm) were
deemed acceptable, while perforations of ≥ 2 mm (grades C to E) were deemed
inacceptable. Accuracy between the different combinations was compared using
Chi2 test with a significance level of p < 0.05. Interrater agreement was
calculated using kappa (κ) as suggested by Landis and Koch.
Results: Overall, 87 pedicle screws were placed in the 4
specimens. In the iCT navigation group, one screw could not be placed due to
technical issues and a second screw could not be assessed because of poor
image quality. For iCT-based navigation, the accuracy rate was 85.7% (Obs1)
and 83.3% (Obs2) while using CBCT-based navigation reached an accuracy rate
of 95.5% (Obs1) and 93.2% (Obs2). However, the difference between the
combinations was not statistically significant (p = 0.152 for Obs1 and p =
0.191 for Obs2, respectively). Interrater agreement for screw accuracy being
acceptable or not was moderate (88.1%; κ = 0.545) for iCT-based navigation
and fair (93.2%; κ = 0.365) for CBCT-based navigation.
Conclusion: Percutaneous pedicle screw placement in the
thoracic spine proved to be accurate with both iCT- and CBCT-based
navigation, however, accuracy with CBCT-based navigation tended to be
higher. Further studies are needed to investigate if the results of the
navigation system used with the CBCT can be transferred to clinical
practice.

## 903

## P435: 3D custom modelled navigation jigs in posterior spinal fusion: a
retrospective case series

Libby Gooda

1

, Emily Tsang

1

, Bisola Ajayi

1

, Jason Bernard

1

, Timothy Bishop

1

, Priyanshu Saha

1

, Zion Hwang

1

, and Darren Lui

1

1

Trauma & Orthopaedics, St. George's University Hospital, London,
United Kingdom

Introduction: Navigation of the spine is an established
technique to improve accuracy of pedicle screw placement. Intra-operative CT
is often required, and sometimes two scans are required depending on the
length of fusion, which can increase intra-operative time that the spine and
metalwork are exposed with potential for infection. The use of 3D printing
in spinal surgery is a growing technique. In the past, this was limited to
use as a pre-operative visual aid, however, in recent years it has been used
to create intra-operative patient specific screw jigs. A whole spine, low
dose, 1mm axial cut CT scan is used to create a 3D model of the spine, to
which 3D custom modelled navigation jigs (3DCMNJ) are created unique to each
vertebra. This allows for accurate and precise techniques for pedicle screw
insertion. Material and Methods: The British Spine Registry and
ICLIP were used to identify all scoliosis patients who underwent posterior
spinal fusion using 3DCMNJ from 22/09/2020-09/12/2021 at a South London
tertiary medical centre and a London private hospital. Data was then
collated regarding age, gender, time for screw insertion, blood loss during
screw insertion, and screw density. Results: Data was collected
on 25 patients. There was an average age of 16.16 (SD ± 1.95), N = 97. There
was a higher proportion of female patients at 68% female, 32% male. The
average time for screw insertion was 83 minutes (± 45), N = 20. The average
blood loss during screw insertion was 153.1ml (± 159.21), N = 10. Screw
density was 1.60 (± 3.50), N = 25. Two patients returned to theatre, one due
to a spinal cord monitoring event, and one due to wound dehiscence.
Conclusion: The use of 3DCMNJ in posterior spinal fusion
allows for the rapid insertion of pedicle screws, thus limiting blood loss
during this phase. Preoperative low dose CT allows for reduced operating
time compared to intra operative CT for navigation or robotic pedicle screw
entry. Less time of spine or metal work exposure could lead to decreased
risk of infection. Further research is required to compare to standard
posterior spinal fusion.

## 915

## P436: Comparison of 3D custom modelled navigation jigs with freehand
pedicle screw insertion for posterior spinal fusion in scoliosis

Libby Gooda

1

, Emily Tsang

1

, Bisola Ajayi

1

, Timothy Bishop

1

, Jason Bernard

1

, Priyanshu Saha

1

, Zion Hwang

1

, and Darren Lui

1

1

Trauma & Orthopaedics, St. George's University Hospital, London,
United Kingdom

Background: Scoliosis is characterised by a curvature of the
spine. Significant curvature of the spine is often treated with spinal
fusion. There are many different approaches to spinal fusion, with freehand
pedicle screw insertion being the most common. However, this has inherent
inaccuracies and a greater danger of spinal cord injury due to
mispositioning. In more recent years, a new navigation technique has arisen.
This technique utilises 3D printing technology to create unique, custom made
patient-specific screw jigs, that fit onto each vertebra, allowing for
accurate and precise pedicle screw insertion. Material and
Methods: The British Spine Registry and ICLIP were used to
identify all scoliosis patients who underwent posterior spinal fusion from
16/01/2017-09/12/2021 at a South London tertiary medical centre and a London
private hospital. Data was then collated regarding age, gender, diagnosis,
duration of surgery, estimated blood loss, screw density, hospital length of
stay (HLOS), SRS-22 scores, and whether patients returned to theatre.
Results: The average age was 17.94 (SD ± 3.77) N = 72, for
freehand patients, and 16.16 (SD ± 1.95) N = 25, for 3DCMNJ patients. Both
the freehand group and 3D custom modelled navigation jigs (3DCMNJ) groups
had a greater proportion of female patients, at 74% and 68% respectively.
Patients comprising the 3DCMNJ group had a higher screw density (SD ± 1.95,
N = 57) when compared to the freehand group (1.60 ± 3.50, N = 25). 77.8% of
the freehand patients were classed as having adolescent idiopathic scoliosis
(AIS). The remainder: syndromic scoliosis (11.1%), secondary scoliosis
(2.78%), cerebral palsy (2.78%), adult idiopathic scoliosis (1.39%),
neurofibromatosis (1.39%), idiopathic kyphosis (1.39%), unknown (1.39%).
76.0% of the 3DCMNJ patients were diagnosed with AIS. The remainder:
Scheuermann’s kyphosis (8.0%), unknown (8.0%), idiopathic kyphosis (4.0%),
and congenital scoliosis (4.0%). Duration of surgery and estimated blood
loss did not appear to differ significantly between the two groups. There
also did not appear to be any significant differences in HLOS, nor
post-operative SRS-22 scores. In the 3DCMNJ group, there was a return to
theatre rate of 8% (4% spinal cord monitoring event, 4% wound dehiscence).
In the freehand group, there was a return to theatre rate of 11.1% (5.56%
due to failure of metalwork, 1.39% spinal cord monitoring event, 1.39% due
to infection, 1.39% wound dehiscence, and 1.39% post-operative haemothorax).
Conclusion: The use of 3DCMNJ does not lead to significant
differences compared to freehand pedicle screw placement with respect to
operating time, blood loss, HLOS, or SRS-22 scores. However, the 3DCMNJ
group had a higher screw density when compared to the freehand group which
may account for similar operative times and blood loss. Previous research
has shown 3DCMNJ leads to shorter time and low blood loss during screw
insertion. 3DCMNJ assisted spinal fusion patients may have a reduced return
to surgery rate, but a larger study group is needed.

## 1024

## P437: Navigation trends in lumbar spine surgery

Tara Shelby

1

, Emily Mills

1

, Matthew Chen

1

, Hyunwoo Kang

1,2

, Andy Ton

1

, Jeffrey C. Wang

1

, Raymond Hah

1

, and Ram Alluri

1

1

Orthopaedic Surgery, Keck School of Medicine of USC, Los Angeles,
United States

2

Orthopaedic Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, United States

Introduction: Intraoperative computer-assisted navigation (CAN)
has fostered the growth of minimally invasive techniques and improved
anatomical characterization. Using CAN minimizes intraoperative risks, as it
allows for greater surgical precision. As such, CAN utilization has seen a
steady increase over the past decade within cervical and thoracic spine
procedures. Studies investigating CAN specifically in the context of the
lumbar spine, however, remain sparse. Given the high prevalence of
degenerative lumbar pathologies, this study aims to define CAN utilization
trends in the top 10 lumbar spine procedures for treatment of degenerative
conditions. Material and Methods: Patient data from 2010 to
2021 was accessed through the querying of the national insurance database
PearlDiver using ICD-9, ICD-10 and CPT codes. After first identifying the
top five lumbar degeneration codes, the top ten lumbar spine CPT procedure
codes associated with these diagnoses were isolated to create a cohort of
patients. This cohort was then split into the patients who had the procedure
along with one of the top five computer navigation procedure codes and those
that didn’t. Temporal analysis was then conducted on each cohort to identify
the trend of incidence in each group overtime. Results:
Querying PearlDiver found a total of 1,234,493 patients underwent one of the
top ten lumbar spine procedure for lumbar degeneration pathology from 2010
to 2021, with 10,760 (0.87%) and 1,223,733 (99.13%) patients undergoing
procedures performed with and without CAN. Comparing 2010 to 2021
demonstrated a significant increase in the use of CAN with lumbar spine
procedures (p < 0.001), increasing from 0.553% (556 patients) to 2.187%
(769 patients). Trends in CAN utilization was relatively steady from 2010 to
2015, with a decrease from 2015 (0.763%, 933 patients) to 2016 (0.483%, 541
patients), before linearly increasing from 2016 to 2021 (2.187%, 769
patients). Conclusion: The current analysis has demonstrated in
lumbar spine procedures what has been shown previously in cervical and
thoracic procedures: the use of computer assisted navigation has been
increasing in use overtime. We intend to next compare demographic variables
and outcomes between the two cohorts, as well as conduct multivariate
analyses adjusting for patient age, ECI score, insurance, hospital region
for all primary outcomes.

## 1271

## P438: Optical navigation in spine surgery an in vivo study

Josh Schroeder

1

, Leon Kaplan

1

, and hmed Shawan

1

1

Orthopedic Surgery, Hebrew University Hadassah Medical Center,
Jerusalem, Israel

Introduction: Surgery and spine surgery specifically are using
increasing amounts of ionizing radiation in order to allow tracking and
navigation during surgery. This increase in harmful radiation increases the
risk of cancer for both the patients and the surgical staff. In addition, in
cases in which the spine is mobile, the vertebras move during the case
causing decreased accuracy as the case progress. In light of these issues,
research into optical imaging and navigation has been conducted to allow a
radiation-free solution. Materials and Methods: Using a
specialized high definition 3D camera, augmented technology for optical
imaging and AI software allowing radiation free matching of the preoperative
imaging to the real anatomy of a patient, pedicle screws were planned and
lamina anatomy were navigated in lumbar cases (both female and male). Real
time tracing and imaging was tested in all cases. Results: Real
time tracking with optical navigation between L1 and S1 vertebrae was
performed in ten patients, using the real-time tracking software. Spine
anatomy including spinous process, lamina, pars intra-articularis and
transverse process was identified correctly in real time. Real time tracking
and imaging was tested and successful throughout the cases.
Summary: Optical navigation is an emerging new technology
that provides a safe solution for a radiation free spine surgery. As this
technology continues to evolve allowing sub-millimeter accuracy and real
time imaging, it shall be able to decrease the need of intraoperative
imaging for patients. Continues testing is needed to translate this
promising technology to everyday practice.

## 1303

## P439: Treatment of patients with atlantoxial and craniocervical
instability, using O-arm procedures

Nikolay Mirchev

1

, Orlin Pavlov

2

, Andrei Bodrov

1

, Pichkur Oleksandr

1

, and Naydenova Stefania

3

1

Department of Neurosurgery, Klinikum Fulda gAG, Fulda,
Germany

2

Department of Neurosurgery, Klinikum Krefeld, Krefeld,
Germany

3

Department of Physiotherapy, Physiostep, Vienna, Austria

Introduction: A prospective analysis of the surgical treatment
and results of 200 patients with benign and malignant craniocervical,
atlantoaxial lesions operated during 10 years period (2011-2020) at our
department was performed. The aim of the analysis was to assess the factors
affecting outcome of treatment in patients with craniocervical and
atlantoaxial instability. Material and methods: We analyzed 139
patients with traumatic lesions, 14 patients with inflammatory lesions, and
47 patients with craniocervical tumors. Results: We performed
222 operations. Because of craniocervical/cervical instability we made
ventral or/and posterior screw fixation and fusion in all of 200 patients.
In order to improve screw placement accuracy, we performed intraoperative
O-Arm in 178 cases. The operative duration was 2 h. in O-Arm operations and
4.20 h in X-ray procedures. The blood loss was 220 ml in O-Arm and 550ml in
C-Arm procedures. The mean screw length in C1/C2/C3 vertebras was 30 mm in
O- Arm procedures and 24 mm in C-Arm procedures. In order to improve
postoperative neurological recovery, we performed early postoperative
physiotherapy in 150 patients with very good clinical results. The most
common complications were: CSF leak – in 2 cases, postoperative infection –
in 8 cases, screw misplacement - in 3 cases, pulmonary embolism in 4 cases
and 3 case of early perioperative mortality. The 24-monts follow-up patients
showed good recovery in 148 patients, moderate disabling – 34 patients,
severe disabling – 6 patients, vegetative state – 4 patients, death 8
patients with malignant lesions in bad general condition.
Conclusions: Early correction of craniocervical and
atlantoaxial cervical instability facilitated neurological recovery by
preserving the existent neurological function. Using of O-Arm increase
significant operative screw placement accuracy, and preserve intraoperative
nerve and vertebral artery injury. Recently because of the improvement of
neuroimaging techniques, surgical techniques, neurointensive care and early
postoperative physiotherapy the results of treatment of these lesions are
optimal.

## 1376

## P440: Accuracy and treatment results of cervical posterior
instrumentation for cervical spinal injury using O-arm navigation

Takashi Chikawa

1

, Ayaka Hashimoto

1

, and Toshihiko Matsumura

1

1

Orthopedic Surgery, Tokushima Prefecture Naruto Hospital, Naruto,
Japan

Introduction: Cervical spinal injury with bone fracture requires
strong internal fixation due to intervertebral and vertebral body
instability, and although the fixation force of the pedicle screw is
excellent, there is a risk of injury to the spinal cord and vertebral
arteries. On the other hand, the lateral mass screw has advantages and
disadvantages on the contrary. Our hospital introduced O-arm Navigation in
October 2020. Purpose: We will compare the surgical results of
our department for cervical spine injuries with bone injuries between cases
using the C-arm before the introduction of O-arm navigation and cases using
the O-arm after the introduction. Treatment policy: In recent
years, there have been many reports recommending surgery in the acute phase
within 24 hours of injury for cervical spinal cord injury. In our
department, we perform surgery as early as possible (within 48 hours) to
avoid secondary damage due to ischemia and inflammation.
Subjects: Between April 2018 and July 2021, nine patients
who underwent posterior fusion surgery for cervical spine injuries with bone
injuries were included. There were 7 males and 2 females, and the average
age at the time of surgery was 75.8 years (35-88 years). There were 3 cases
in the C group using the C-arm before the introduction of the O-arm, and 6
cases in the O group using the O-arm. Methods: Survey items
included the number of pedicle screws (PS), total number of screws, number
of fixed vertebral bodies, screw deviation rate, number of days until
postoperative sitting position, length of hospital stay, and average
operation time between groups C and O. investigated. We investigated the
improved Frankel classification and extremity MMT as clinical results.
Results: In the C and O groups, the average number of PS
was 2.7 and 6.4, respectively, the average number of screws was 9.7 and 7.8,
the number of fixed vertebral bodies was 5 and 4, and the PS deviation rate
was 12.5. The length of hospital stay was 38 days and 31.4 days, the number
of days until postoperative standing was 3 days and 2.5 days, and the
operating time was 230 and 277 minutes, respectively. No significant
difference was observed for either item. Conclusion: Nine cases
of cervical spinal cord injury with bone injury were treated with posterior
fusion. The O group had a higher PS number than the C group, the total
number of screws and the number of fixed vertebral bodies tended to be
smaller, and the PS deviation rate was 1 out of 32 (Grade 1), 3.1%. It took
time to use O-arm+Navigation, but I was able to insert PS safely.

## 1880

## P441: A muti-angle lasers assistant device installed in C-arm promotes
the efficiency of X-ray fluoroscopy in lumbar spine surgery for
beginners

Yuan-Dong Zhuang

1

, Rui-Jin Li

2

, Jia-Jun Wu

2

, Xue-Wei He

2

, Wen-Bin Zou

2

, Si-Qi Lu

2

, and Xu-Chu Xu

2

1

Neurosurgery Department, Fujian Medical University Union Hospital,
Fuzhou, China

2

The School of Basic Medical Sciences, Fujian Medical University,
Fuzhou, China

Introduction: This study is to evaluate that the C-arm installed
with multi-angle lasers assistant device whether can promote the efficiency
of X-ray fluoroscopy in lumbar spine surgery or not for beginners.
Material and Methods: Twenty sophomores majoring in
clinical medicine in Fujian Medical University were randomly divided into
two groups (n = 10): experimental group (group A) and control group (group
B). In both groups, X-ray fluoroscopic images of the 3D printed lumbar spine
model were taken in normal prone position and crown rotation position. The
images of group A were photographed with multi-angle laser device assisted,
and images of group B were photographed by traditional method. The criteria
for the end of the shooting were until the standard anteroposterior and
lateral images were taken. Outcome measures included the total time of
operation, total attempts of shooting, and initial shooting offset error
(the relative deviation between the target and the radiation center). The
feeling of using the two methods (comfort, interest, efficiency of
self-learning operation, and mastery of operation knowledge) was evaluated
by subjective questionnaire survey after the experiment.
Results: The total time of operation was (790.50 ± 396.474)
s in group A and (1764.10 ± 1070.250) s in group B. There's less time
(55.19%) in Group A compared with group B. The total attempts of shooting
was (11.20 ± 5.095) times in group A and (36.80 ± 9.555) times in group B.
There's less attempts (69.57%) in Group A compared with group B. The mean
initial shooting offset error was (0.221 ± 0.091) in group A and (0.677 ±
0.162) in group B. Group A was more accurate (67.36%) than Group B. In the
above three indexes, group A was better than group B, and the difference was
statistically significant (p < 0.05). The results of the questionnaire
show that the scores of comfort, interest, efficiency of self-learning
operation, and mastery of relevant operation knowledge in group A were
higher than those in group B, and the difference was statistically
significant (p < 0.05). Conclusion: Multi-angle lasers
assisted C-arm can significantly improve the beginners efficiency of X-ray
photography during lumbar surgery, and also have significantly higher
satisfaction, which shows that the new technology is well worth
spreading.

## Nonoperative Clinical Treatments

## 149

## P442: Should physical therapy be incorporated in patient care post 1-2
level lumbar fusions for degenerative lumbar instability? A comparative
outcome analysis

Eeric Truumees

1

, Devender Singh

1

, Ashley Duncan

1

, and Eric Mayer

1

1

Spine, Ascension Texas Spine and Scoliosis, Austin, United
States

Introduction: Fewer studies in the literature have examined the
role of post-operative physical therapy (PT) after lumbar fusion. In the
post-operative setting, much of the rehabilitation literature focuses on
post-discectomy patients. Aim: Evaluate and compare the changes
in pain and functional scores between patients who completed physical
therapy (PT) versus no-PT after their anterior or posterior 1-2 level lumbar
fusions for degenerative lumbar instability. Our null hypothesis was that
the PT group may experience comparatively better functional and pain
outcomes than their counterparts. Materials and Methods: A
database of patients undergoing 1-2 level lumbar fusion surgery for
degenerative disease was assembled. Demographic and outcome scores such as
oswestry disability index (ODI) and visual analog scale (VAS) in patients
who participated in post-operative PT vs. those that did not were compared.
Results: 72 and 51 patients in PT and no-PT met the
inclusion criteria, respectively. There were higher numbers of females
(63.8%) in PT group. No-PT group had similar numbers of males and females.
Mean ages for PT and no-PT groups were 61.4 (±14.7) and 59.5 (±14.1) years,
respectively. Both groups were similar with respective to body mass index.
Majority of the cases in both groups involved posterior/posterolateral
approach. 55.5% of patients in PT group and 50.9% in no-PT had 1 level
lumbar fusion. Mean change (pre-operative vs. 1-year post-operative) in ODI
between the two groups differed significantly (PT vs. no-PT: 18.8 ± 13.9 and
9.3 ± 17.5; p = 0.019). Similarly, mean change in VAS was significantly
different between the two groups (PT vs. no-PT: 3.2 ± 2.18 and 1.05 ± 2.08;
p = 0.026). None of our PT patients reported any change in pre vs. 1-year
post-operative follow up employment status (35% retired, 38% employed
fulltime, 11% unemployed and 16% homemaker). 98% of No-PT patients reported
no change in employment status during the same timeframe (46% retired, 25%
employed fulltime, 13% unemployed and 15% homemaker).
Conclusions: PT group reported significant improvements in
functional and pain scores than their counterparts. Post-lumbar fusion
rehabilitation may benefit the majority of adult patients undergoing lumbar
fusion surgery for a degenerative indication. Prospective studies with
standardized PT approach, additional patients and greater statistical power
are needed to further understand the effects of physical therapy on patients
undergoing lumbar fusions for degenerative lumbar instability.

## 155

## P443: Determining what markers increase the odds of successful
non-operative treatment of lumbar disc herniation

Eeric Truumees

1

, Devender Singh

1

, Jeremiah Alexander

2

, Calvin Chandler

2

, Ashley Duncan

1

, and Eric Mayer

1

1

Spine, Ascension Texas Spine and Scoliosis, Austin, United
States

2

Orthopedics, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, United
States

Introduction: Treatment selection for acute lumbar disc
herniation remains uncertain due to reports of similar outcomes with
surgical and non-operative management over long-term follow-up. Current care
pathways recommend non-operative measures for six weeks before considering
surgical intervention, in the absence of neurological deficits.
Aim: This study aims to identify factors predictive of
successful non-operative treatment. Materials and Methods: We
reviewed 157 charts of patients for lumbar disc herniation. Inclusion
criteria consisted of encounters with ICD10 code M51.26 (other
intervertebral disc displacement, lumbar region), three months of follow-up
care, pre and post treatment ODI scores and non-operative care only.
Independent variables collected consisted of age, smoker status, presence of
comorbidities, antidepressant and opioid use, length of symptoms, treatment
prescribed (Physical Therapy, prescription and opioids, epidural steroid
injections (ESI)) baseline and three-month Oswestry Disability Index (ODI).
Categorical variables were then coded as discrete values, 0 for “no”, 1 for
“yes”; or in the case of smoking status 1 = never, 2 = former, 3 = current.
In regard to change in ODI score between baseline and three months, a
successful treatment was defined as a decrease in ODI of at least 10 points
and encoded as “1”. Treatment failure was defined as any increase in ODI or
a decrease of less than 10 and encoded as “0”. Multinomial logistic
regression was conducted on the encoded data. Results: Mean age
at appointment was 50.6 years. Most patients (81%) were never smokers, while
13% were former smokers and 6% were current smokers. 139 (89%) patients had
the presence of a comorbidity, and 16% were being treated with
antidepressants for anxiety/depression and 15% were already taking opioids
at the time of the first encounter. Mean duration of symptoms was 78.3 weeks
± 26.8. 95% of patients received a prescription, 69% had at least one ESI,
50% went to physical therapy and 16% received a prescription for opioids.
Results of the logistic analysis demonstrated only injection therapy and
opioid treatment were significant predictors of treatment success with odds
of 2.8 and 3.9, respectively. As expected, smoking and presence of
comorbidities decreased the odds of successful non-operative treatment by
1.1% and 28.1%, respectively. Interestingly, the logistic analysis of this
data showed that for each unit increase in age, the odds of successful
outcome increased by 2.5%. Conclusions: ESI and opioid therapy
were the only variables that significantly impacted the odds of successful
non-operative treatment on lumbar disc herniation at three months. The
positive impact of opioid prescription (290.3%) was surprising, given the
small number of occurrences in this population and the mechanism of action,
with no known local oranti-inflammatory properties. Increased age was also
positively correlated with treatment success, although non-significantly.
This contradicts the theories that increasing age becomes a liability and a
risk in the healing process and treatment decision making process. The
impact of opioid and age on treatment success in this analysis begs the
question of what psychological factors impact the patients’ determination of
a meaningful, successful outcome.

## 310

## P444: Recalcitrant coccygiodynia - does Ganglion Impar block or
radiofrequency ablation helps?- a systematic review

Kishor Kunal

1

 and Ranjeet Choudhary

2

1
Orthopaedics, AIIMS, Jodhpur, India, 
2
Orthopaedics, AIIMS, Bhatinda, India
Introduction: Nearly 90 % of cases of coccygiodynia can be
managed with conservative medical treatment; the remaining 10 % need other
invasive modalities for pain relief such as Ganglion Impar block (GIB) or
Radiofrequency ablation (RFA) of Ganglion Impar. Material and
Methods: With a purpose to determine the efficacy of GIB and RFA
of Ganglion Impar in controlling pain in coccygiodynia patients a systematic
research was conducted of PubMed, MEDLINE and Google Scholar to identify
studies reporting the pain relief in terms of Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) or
its counterparts following GIB or RFA in coccygiodynia patients by 2
different authors according to PRISMA guidelines. Results: 7
studies were delineated with a total of 189 patients (104 in GIB group and
85 in RFA group). In GIB group, mean VAS improved from 7.83 at baseline to
3.11 at short term follow-up, 3.55 at intermediate term follow-up and 4.71
at long-term follow-up. In RFA group, mean VAS improved from 6.92 at
baseline, 4.25 at short term follow-up, 4.04 at long-term follow-up. In GIB
group, 13.92 % failure (11/79) and 2.88% complication (3/104) were reported
while in RFA group, 14.08 % failure (10/71) and no complications (0 %) were
reported. Total success rate was > 85%, with either of modalities.
Conclusion: GIB and RFA of Ganglion Impar provides a
reliable and probably an excellent method of pain control in coccygiodynia
patients not responding to conservative medical treatment. However, a
demarcation between responders, non-responders and late non-responders
should be considered and larger studies with longer follow-up (> 1 year)
are needed.

## 370

## P445: Anti-osteoporotic medication prescription patterns in patients with
vertebral compression fractures

Jennifer Bell

1

, Thomas Alter

2

, Mary Kate Erdman

1,3

, Hyunwoo Kang

1,4

, Emily Mills

1

, Andy Ton

1

, Jeffrey C. Wang

1

, Ram Alluri

1

, and Raymond Hah

1

1

Orthopaedic Surgery, Keck School of Medicine of USC, Los Angeles,
United States

2

Orthopaedic Surgery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, United States

3

Orthopaedic Surgery, Harborview Medical Center, University of
Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, United States

4

Orthopaedic Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, United States

Introduction: The purpose of this study was to (1) report
prescribing patterns of anti-osteoporotic medication in patients diagnosed
with a vertebral compression fracture (VCF) and (2) evaluate the influence
of surgical management on anti-osteoporotic prescribing patterns.
Material and Methods: A large de-identified patient
database from a private insurer was utilized. Patients diagnosed with a VCF
from January 2007 to December 2016 were identified. Exclusion criteria were
patients less than 50 years of age and patients with less than one-year
follow-up. Patients were grouped based on whether or not they received an
anti-osteoporotic medication within one year prior to or following the VCF,
and whether or not treatment included surgical intervention.
Results: A total of 73,907 patients sustaining VCF were
identified, of which 66.8% were female. The highest rate of VCF were
reported in patients between 70-74 years of age. Prior to the indexed VCF,
13,219 (17.8%) patients received anti-osteoporotic medication. A total of
60,688 (82.1%) patients were not prescribed anti-osteoporotic medications
prior to sustaining a VCF. Of these 60,688 treatment naïve patients, 9.6%
were prescribed an anti-osteoporotic medication within 1-year of the VCF.
The frequency of initiation in surgical and non-surgical patients was 18.4%
and 8.4%, respectively. For the 60,688 (82.1%) treatment naïve patients,
females between 70 and 84 years of age, were most likely to be initiated on
new anti-osteoporotic medications following a VCF. 9,077 (12.3%) patients
were treated surgically, of which 1,490 (16.4%) were treated with
anti-osteoporotic medication prior to index VCF. Conclusion:
Our data displays similar rates of anti-osteoporotic medication prior to VCF
in both operative and non-operative patients. Older female patients are more
likely to be treated prior to an event in comparison to their younger male
counterparts. Lastly, the prescribing patterns for anti-osteoporotic
medication after VCF, with or without surgical treatment, are low.

## 478

## P446: Clinical outcome of a conservative treatment protocol for lumbar
canal stenosis

Sai Viksheth Raj Basani

1

, and Harvinder singh Chhabra

1

1

Spine Services, Indian Spinal Injuries Centre, New Delhi,
India

Introduction: The management of Lumbar Spinal Stenosis begins
with nonoperative treatment, such as neurotropic medication like membrane
stabilizing agents (MSEs), NSAIDs, epidural steroid injections, and physical
therapy. Surgery is deferred until the failure of conservative treatment or
the appearance of red-flag signs. Unfortunately, most clinicians fail to
concur on what constitutes a fair conservative trial and the duration
required for eliciting the response. So, an urgent need exists to provide an
evidence-based protocol for clinical practice. Material and
Methods: A prospective cohort study was conducted at an Indian
tertiary spine care center. A total of 410 patients were recruited who
presented with neurogenic claudication and had a JOA’s LSS-DST score of 7 or
more. They were managed by a multimodal conservative protocol, consisting of
dose escalation and combination protocol of MSA’s/anti-depressants, NSAIDs,
methylcobalamin, TENS therapy, local heat/ice packs, counterirritants,
general conditioning with stretching exercises and patient education for
lifestyle modification. Those who didn’t respond within three to six weeks
were offered up to three TFESI at weekly intervals or surgery was suggested
when canal morphology is not amiable for TFES (i.e., Schizas’ Grade C and
D). The subjects were analyzed using Claudication distance, VAS score for
the leg and back, ODI score and SF36 score at 6 weeks, 3 months, 6 months
and 1-year intervals. Results: 387 patients completed the
study, while 23 were lost to follow-up. The mean age of the study population
was 61.36 years, with 15% being younger than 50 years. Schizas MRI grades B
and C accounted for 36% of subjects. Neurotropics were well tolerated, with
drowsiness and peripheral oedema reported in 23% of patients requiring dose
modification. No other untoward complication was noted. A total of 15
patients responded to TFES, and 7 others needed it twice; the response
didn’t correlate with MRI grade. A total of 57 patients required surgery. 14
of them had complications ranging from SSI to pyogenic spondylodiscitis. All
outcome variables showed a gradual improvement with time. Claudication
distance revealed a significant difference between MRI grades A1, A2 and
Grade C, D. While grade A1 stenotic patients had a significantly better SF36
score at 6 weeks, 3 months, and 6 months, but at 12 months, there was no
difference in scores among various grades. Similarly, patients on
conservative treatment had better scores at 1st, 2nd,
and 3rd follow-up than operated patients. However, there was no
difference between the endpoint groups at the final follow-up. There was no
significant correlation between baseline variables and outcome. 81.5% of
patients who were advised surgery elsewhere responded to our conservative
protocol. Successfully conserved patients were more likely to be satisfied
with our protocol than those being operated on. Conclusion: Our
study demonstrated encouraging results with multimodal conservative protocol
and a decreased need for surgery. As no baseline variable can successfully
predict the response to our protocol, it is advisable to start an initial
conservative approach for all patients, and those with an unsatisfactory
result can be treated surgically later with a good outcome.

## 787

## P447: The effectiveness and longevity of epidural steroid injections in a
single center retrospective cohort

Annabel Kim

1

, Joshua Sanchez

2

, Marc Abdou

2

, Zorica Buser

3

, David Cheng

1

, and Gene Tekmyster

1

1

Keck Hospital of USC, Los Angeles, United States

2

Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, United States

3

Gerling Institute, New York, United States

Introduction: Low back pain and associated radicular syndromes
are significant health and socioeconomic issues that account for over 100
billion dollars annually in the United States. Epidural steroid injections
(ESIs) are a common method for relieving radicular pain from lumbar spine
etiologies. The current ESI literature is unclear due to the variability in
indications, injection techniques, number of allowed injections, and the
lack of standard and objective outcome measures. Thus, we evaluated the
changes in Numerical Rating Scale (NRS) scores for pain from lumbar spine
ESIs and their specific effectiveness in preventing a subsequent lumbar
spinal fusion procedure within a year follow-up period. Material and
Methods: Keck Hospital patients who received lumbar ESIs by a
single interventional physiatrist from 2018 to 2019 were identified using
Discern Reporting Portal. The electronic health record was used to verify
that their first ESIs were between January 2018 and April 2019, they had
one-year follow-ups, and there were no prior surgeries (foot, ankle, knee,
or hip). Patients whose back pain was instigated by a traumatic incident
were also excluded. All patients had a primary diagnosis of lumbar
radiculopathy (M54.16 ICD-10 code) and received transforaminal ESIs. The
first three ESIs received within the period were included. Collected
variables included demographics (age, gender, BMI, smoking status),
comorbidities (hypertension, diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidemia, pulmonary
conditions, cardiovascular conditions, renal conditions, and/or mental
illness), prior and concurrent opioid use, ESI injection levels and
laterality, NRS pain scores, and conversion to lumbar spine surgery. The
Wilcoxon signed-rank test was used to compare NRS score change from pre-ESI
to post-ESI time points. Results: A total of 46 patients with
1-year follow-ups were identified. The average age was 55.1 ± 16.5. 54.3% of
the patients were male, and 45.7% were female. The most prevalent
comorbidities for the population included hypertension (32.6%),
hyperlipidemia (19.6%), and mental health diagnoses (23.9%). 15 patients
(32.6%) used opioids prior to their first ESI, and 8 (17.4%) used opioids
during their ESI treatment. The average pre-ESI NRS was 6.54 ± 2.64. The
most significant change in NRS scores from baseline was observed 6-month
post-ESI with an average decrease of 3.79 ± 3.75 (p = 0.005). At the 1-year
point, the average decrease in NRS score was 2.5 ± 2.81 (p = 0.02). 35
(76.1%) patients did not undergo lumbar surgery after ESI. In contrast, 11
(23.0%) patients underwent lumbar spine surgery within a year of their first
ESI. Conclusion: ESIs appear to be most effective at the
6-month mark and taper off at the 1-year point. Of the 11 patients that
converted to surgery, the majority (6) received two ESIs prior to surgery. 3
received one, and 2 received at least three ESIs prior to surgery. The
majority of patients (76.1%) did not convert to surgery. However, the
largest mitigating factor to this study is the small sample size, which
affected the ability to accurately determine the surgery conversion
rate.

## 789

## P448: Factors affecting brace adherence in adolescent idiopathic
scoliosis - a qualitative application of protection-motivation
theory

Raveen Jayasuriya

1

, Paul Norman

2

, Daniel Hind

3

, and Ashley Cole

1

1

Paediatric Spinal Surgery, Sheffield Children's Hospital, Sheffield,
United Kingdom

2

Department of Psychology

3

Clinical Trials Research Unit, University of Sheffield, Sheffield,
United Kingdom

Introduction: Full-time brace treatment to prevent the need for
spinal surgery (where 18 - 20 hours of brace wear is required) has been
shown to be adherence dependent in adolescent idiopathic scoliosis.
Adherence to bracing however is variable between individuals. The factors
affecting health related behaviour in bracing have not been evaluated in a
structured theory-based framework. Material and Methods: This
study explores patient and parent perspectives and psychological effects of
bracing through semi-structured interview dyads. The interview topic guide,
and directed content analysis of transcripts, were performed utilising
protection-motivation theory as the underpinning psychological framework.
Results: Fifteen patients and nineteen parents
participated. For approximately half of the participants, appraising the
threat of the diagnosis was not possible as scoliosis was an unknown.
Following information given by surgeons, and independent research, most
participants had consistent perception of the severity of their scoliosis
and their vulnerability for future prognosis. The overwhelming content of
interviews focussed on the coping appraisal of bracing and the response cost
of treatment adherence; this was also consistent between participants,
despite good belief in the response efficacy of bracing. The self-efficacy
strategies that patients employed to increase adherence, and the maladaptive
response rewards of poor adherence, was variable between participants.
Conclusion: This qualitative semi-structured dyadic
interview study demonstrates that PMT provides a coherent psychological
framework with which to explore the factors affecting brace adherence in
patients with adolescent idiopathic scoliosis. Wearing the brace at school
poses a great challenge to patients in full-time bracing, causing anxiety
and stress; from worrying about how peers at school will perceive them, to
the limitations of how to make the brace less visible with clothing choices,
and coordinating extra-curricular activities around brace wear, all whilst
still adhering to the required brace wear hours. This study highlights both
the circumstances under which patients would choose not to wear the brace,
and the self-efficacy strategies employed to maintain adherence. This study
provides valuable data for the development of adherence prediction tools for
screening and stratifying. It also offers clinicians a framework with which
to augment information provided to patients thus maximising
protection-motivation behaviour for optimum brace adherence.

## 822

## P449: Spinal motion and low back pain - prospective analysis of the
association between lumbar movement and the occurrence of chronic back
pain

Friederike Schömig

1

, Luis Becker

1

, Pumberger Matthias

1

, Lea Cordes

2

, Georg Duda

2

, and Hendrik Schmidt

2

1

Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Center for Musculoskeletal
Surgery, Berlin, Germany

2

Berlin Institute of Health, Julius Wolff Institute, Berlin,
Germany

Introduction: Despite the increasing prevalence of chronic low
back pain (LBP), therapeutic management of LBP remains challenging, which is
mainly due to a lack of understanding of the underlying mechanisms of pain
development. While in the past, adaptations of spinal motion in the presence
of LBP have been increasingly studied, to date little is known about the
quantitative analysis of lumbar movements. Thus, we investigated movements
of the lumbar spine of both asymptomatic participants and LBP patients in
their daily lives for the first time. Material and Methods: We
prospectively included asymptomatic participants as well as patients who had
been suffering from LBP for at least twelve weeks. A body-mass-index (BMI)
of > 26 kg/m2 was an exclusion criterion. All asymptomatic
participants and LBP patients were measured for 24 hours during their daily
lives using the Epionics SPINE System with the standing position as a
reference. Lumbar movements of over 5° were recorded independently from the
movement’s starting position and were grouped into movements of >15°,
10-15°, and 5-10°. For statistical analysis, the Student’s t-test, analysis
of variance (ANOVA) with Bonferroni post-hoc test, and the Spearman
correlation coefficient were used. Results: A total of 208
asymptomatic participants and 106 LBP patients were included. While the
groups did not differ significantly in the distribution of sexes or in their
BMIs, the group of LBP patients was significantly older (50.9 ± 13.6 vs.
40.3 ± 14.0 years, p < 0.001). We found significantly fewer small,
medium, and large movements in the sagittal plane (total movement count
15,564 ± 8,078 vs. 20,521 ± 7,160, p < 0.001) in the group of LBP
patients. In the axial plane, LBP patients were shown to perform
significantly fewer small movements (total movement count 7,317 ± 5,881 vs.
11,106 ± 5,134, p < 0.001). There was a weak but significant correlation
between age and the number of sagittal (r = -0.179, p = 0.010) as well as
axial (r = -0.172, p = 0.013) movements shown for the group of asymptomatic
participants, while in LBP patients this correlation was only found for
sagittal movements (r = -0.290, p = 0.003). Conclusion: Our
results show that in addition to a significantly reduced total amount of
lumbar movements in LBP patients compared to asymptomatic participants,
there are significant differences between men and women especially regarding
large sagittal movements. We also found a reduction in lumbar movement with
increasing age, the correlation of which, however, was only weak. While it
remains unclear whether the shown changes in spinal motion are cause or
effect of pain development, the association between movement adaptations and
chronic LBP needs to be considered in the optimization of motion-based
conservative treatment strategies and therefore needs to be further
investigated.

## 1057

## P450: Efficacy of nucleoplasty for radiculopathy caused by foraminal
cervical disc herniation: clinical results of case series and technical
note

Pius Kim

1

1

Neurosurgery, Chosun University Hospital, Gwangju Metropolitan City,
South Korea

Introduction: Percutaneous cervical nucleoplasty (PCN) is a
minimally invasive technique used for the treatment of cervical disc
herniation. However, if the lesion is located at the neural foramen,
complete access and effective neural decompression are often challenging
because of the special anatomical condition of the uncovertebral joint,
osteophyte, and facet joint of the cervical foraminal space. In this
presentation, when performing PCN for foraminal cervical disc herniation
(FCDH), the technique for overcoming those anatomical difficulties is
described, and the study results of analyzing the clinical effects are
reported. Material and Methods: This study included 44 patients
with radiculopathy caused by FCDH who were treated with PCN. Visual analog
scale (VAS) scores, preoperative, 1 week and 3 months postoperatively, and
at the last follow-up, as well as the MacNab criteria, were used to evaluate
clinical outcomes. A paired t-test was used to compare the preoperative and
follow-up VAS scores. The percentage of patients with VAS score ≤ 3 at each
follow-up time point was also investigated. Statistical significance was set
at p < 0.05. Results: Twenty-seven men (62.4%) and 17 women
(38.6%) were enrolled in this study. The mean age was 54.5 years (range
31-81). The average follow-up period after the operation was 15.4 months
(range 3.7-30.8). The mean preoperative VAS was 7.50 ± 1.21. The VAS scores
at 1 week, 3 months, and the last follow-up were 4.36 ± 2.46, 3.20 ± 2.58,
and 2.91 ± 2.74, respectively, showing a significant improvement in pain
compared to before the operation (p < 0.001 for all). The number of
patients (percentage) with a VAS score of ≤ 3 was 20 (45.5%), 28 (63.6%),
and 31 (70.5%) of 44 patients at 1 week, 3 months, and the last follow-up,
respectively. The number of patients (percentage) with excellent, good,
fair, or poor satisfaction according to the MacNab criteria was 17 (38.6%),
9 (20.5%), 8 (18.2%), and 10 (22.7%) of 44, respectively. No patients
experienced postoperative complications. Conclusion: Although
PCN for radiculopathy caused by FCDH is thought to have limitations because
of the surrounding bony structure, the clinical outcome seemed favorable. If
PCN is not contraindicated, it may be a viable treatment option for CR due
to FCDH.

## 1064

## P451: The impact of physical therapy after lumbar fusion surgery

Jeremy Heard

1

, Parker Brush

1

, Yunsoo Lee

1

, Mark Lambrechts

1

, Nicholas D'Antonio

1

, Nicholas Siegel

1

, Tariq Issa

1

, Yash Reddy

2

, Sanath Patil

2

, Caroline Purtill

2

, John Bodnar

2

, Sydney Somers

2

, Delano Trenchfield

1

, Jose Canseco

1

, Christopher Kepler

1

, Alan Hilibrand

1

, Alexander Vaccaro

1

, and Gregory Schroeder

1

1

Orthopedic Surgery, The Rothman Orthopedic Institute at Thomas
Jefferson University Hospital, Philadelphia, United States

2

Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, United States

Introduction: Literature on the efficacy of physical therapy
(PT) after lumbar fusion surgery is mixed and limited guidance on PT
interventions after lumbar surgery exists. Given the prevalence of PT
referrals and lack of high-quality evidence, there is a need for additional
studies investigating the efficacy of PT after lumbar fusion surgery to aid
in developing robust clinical guidelines. Thus, our objectives are to (1)
determine if PT attendance after lumbar fusion impacts PROMs and (2)
determine if PT attendance after lumbar fusion affects readmission or
revision rates. Methods: We retrospectively identified patients
receiving lumbar fusion surgery by current procedural terminology codes and
separated them into two groups based on whether PT was prescribed.
Electronic medical records were reviewed for patient and surgical
characteristics, PT utilization, and surgical outcomes. Patient reported
outcome measures (PROMs) were identified and compared preoperatively to one
year postoperatively. Multivariable regression analysis was performed.
Significance was set to p < 0.05. Results: Our methodology
identified 323 patients that attended PT and 400 patients that did not. In
comparison to patients that did not attend PT, those that attended PT had
similar patient characteristics and comorbidities. Patients that attended PT
had significantly more fused levels (1.41 ± 0.64 vs. 1.32 ± 0.54, p =
0.027), longer operative durations (234 ± 96.4 vs. 215 ± 86.1 minutes, p =
0.012), and lengthier postoperative hospital stays (3.35 ± 1.68 vs. 3.00 ±
1.49, p = 0.004). There were no significant differences between readmission,
complications, and revision rates. Bivariant analysis of PROMs demonstrated
that physical therapy attendance did not confer significant benefits to
overall clinical improvement at the one-year postoperative: MCS-12 (2.88 ±
12.1 vs. 3.52 ± 10.3, p = 0.739), PCS-12 (11.5 ± 11.8 vs. 8.82 ± 11.2, p =
0.171), ODI (-25.50 ± 21.0 vs. -19.16 ± 18.1, p = 0.071), VAS Back (-3.68 ±
3.60 vs. -2.87 ± 3.19, p = 0.175), and VAS Leg (-4.69 ± 3.67 vs. -4.40 ±
3.54, p = 0.644). Multivariable analysis showed that PT was not
significantly associated with PROM improvement postoperatively both at three
months and one year. Conclusion: Our study found there was no
significant benefit to postoperative physical therapy after lumbar fusion
with regards to improvements in three-month or one-year patient reported
outcome measures. In addition, PT attendance did not impact 90-day
readmission rates. Given the current conflicting literature on the topic, at
this time it is difficult to recommend for or against PT after lumbar fusion
surgery. As PT is costly to the healthcare system, however, stronger
recommendations are needed to guide treatment and physicians should use
their discretion when prescribing PT.

## 1148

## P452: Acceptance and commitment therapy screening model for patients
undergoing spinal surgery

Happy Kumar

1

, Alex Coffman

2

, Natalie Glass

2

, Valerie Keffala

2

, Cassim Igram

2

, Andrew Pugely

2

, and Catherine Olinger

2

1

University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine, Iowa City, United
States

2

Department of Orthopedics & Rehabilitation, University of Iowa
Hospitals & Clinics, Iowa City, United States

Introduction: Chronic pain is an issue that affects over 100
million Americans daily. Acceptance and Commitment Therapy (ACT) has been
found to be beneficial for patients with chronic pain by focusing provider
efforts to teaching coping mechanisms for pain instead of eliminating the
pain entirely. Data collected post-operatively indicates ACT benefits
patients with 64.8% improving in at least one key domain in a longitudinal
study by Vowles et al. 2011. Presently the University of Iowa does not have
a strict standard protocol for referring patients to ACT with the Department
of Orthopedic Surgery Pain Psychologist. The aim of the study is to evaluate
the effectiveness of PCS as a screening tool for ACT in the spine patient
population at the University of Iowa Hospitals & Clinics Department of
Orthopedics & Rehabilitation. This study will determine whether the PCS
is effective at identifying patients who would benefit from ACT.
Materials and Methods: Every patient that presented to
spine clinic at University of Iowa Hospitals & Clinics (UIHC) from
February 2022 to June 2022 was surveyed using the Pain Catastrophizing Scale
(PCS). Patients indicated for spinal surgery were reviewed retrospectively.
The patient list was filtered down to 600 adult spinal patients with
pre-operative and post-operative PCS scores. 200 patients were chosen via a
random number generator and additional information, such as the patients’
History of Present Illness, Visual Analog Scale Scores, PROMIS-CAT Pain
Interference Scores, and status of opiate usage were collected and presented
to UIHC Orthopedic Spine Surgeons. Surgeons were blinded to the PCS Cutoff
Scores. The UIHC Orthopedic Spine Surgeons then identified which patients
they would indicate for ACT and their reasoning. Surgeon referral was then
compared to referral based on the PCS score of the same patients to evaluate
the accuracy of the PCS scoring tool. Results: Effectiveness of
this screening tool was based on frequency at which the surgeons and PCS
score were complimentary. ROC Curve demonstrated an area under the curve of
0.7784 with a Sensitivity of 0.68 and a Specificity of 0.79. Cut-point
according to Youden’s index is 35. Conclusion: The data showed
that the PCS is moderately accurate in its ability to distinguish between
patients who should and should not be referred for ACT. The adjusted
cut-point indicates that patients above a PCS of 35 should be deemed at-risk
and referred the department pain psychologist for evaluation for ACT while
those below a PCS score of 35 should not be referred. The goal following
this study is to perform future investigations regarding PCS and ACT with
patients regarding chronic opioid use and post-operative outcomes. Patients
who were referred for help with chronic opiate use would be compared to
PCS-referred patients and non-referred patients. Pre-operative ACT would be
compared to patient outcomes post-operatively. The aim is to evaluate if
PCS-referred patients have better pain management post-operatively as
compared to the control and opiate-referred patients.

## 1230

## P453: Changes in M.multifidus cross sectional area, muscle thickness and
echogenicity measured via ultrasound during an isolated lumbar extension
resistance exercise (ILEX) rehabilitation programme in a sample of chronic,
neuropathic and specific low back pain patients

Bruno Domokos

1

, Ettinger Julia

2

, Raschka Christoph

1

, and Spang Christoph

2

1

Institute of Sport Science, University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg,
Germany

2

Private Spine Center Dr Alfen, Würzburg, Germany

Introduction: Paraspinal muscle atrophy and increased muscle fat
fraction are well documented pathological changes in chronic, specific and
neuropathic low back pain (LBP) conditions (Hodges & Danneels, 2019).
Studies have highlighted the benefits of addressing these muscles in
conservative treatment approaches including post-operative rehabilitation
(Hodges & Danneels, 2019). Machine-based ILEX adapted to the
individual’s pathology has shown good clinical outcomes for patients with
spinal disorders like disk herniations and radiculopathy (Steele et al.,
2015; Golonka et al., 2021). However, morphological adaptations of the
M.multifidus muscle during a rehabilitation process have not been assessed
yet. Material and Methods: In this ongoing prospective study,
ultrasound imaging was used to assess cross-sectional area (CSA), muscle
thickness (MT) and echogenicity in the M.multifidus muscle (right and left
side) of 14 patients (7 women, 7 men) suffering from chronic low back pain
(duration > 3 months) with previously diagnosed specific lumbar spine
pathologies including disc herniations, spondylarthritis, spondylolisthesis
and other degenerative conditions. All patients underwent an ILEX-based
exercise protocol consisting of 18 sessions (9 weeks) within a
diagnose-based range of motion. One set of ILEX was performed per session
with the resistance progressively increased during the protocol. Imaging was
conducted at four time points (t1 = pre-interventional;
t2 = 3 weeks; t3 = 6 weeks; t4 = 9
weeks) using the Logic S7 Expert (GE Healthcare, Munich, GER) ultrasound
device with a linear transducer. Pain and disability levels were documented
with the Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) and the Oswestry Disability Index
(ODI). For statistical analysis, Friedman test (with Bonferroni correction)
and Pearson coefficient was used. Results: A substantial
progressive linear decrease in mean pain levels and disability was found
during the process of rehabilitation. Significant differences were
especially observed between t1 (VAS: 50.5 (mean) ± 19.4 (standard
deviation, SD); ODI: 17.9% ± 8.6) and t4 (VAS: 20.2 ± 14.0, p
< 0.001; ODI: 7.3% ± 5.2, p < 0.001). 13/14 patients reported an
improvement in pain and functional score. Concerning muscular adaptations,
CSA increased progressively in a linear manner (7.44 cm2 ± 1.98
(t1) vs. 8.09 cm2 ± 1.91 (t4); p <
0.001). Furthermore, there was a non-significant increase in MT (3.06 cm ±
0.58 (t1) vs. 3.08 cm ± 0.57 (t4); p = 0.194). No
changes were measured for echogenicity and side differences for MT and CSA.
Before the programme, there was a correlation (r= -0.557, p < 0.05)
between CSA (per kg bodyweight) and ODI scores. Conclusion: To
the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to analyse morphological
effects of heavy loaded ILEX in patients with chronic, specific LBP
conditions. The results indicate that clinical improvement is accompanied by
substantial structural improvements of the M.multifidus. At baseline, there
was a correlation between high CSA and better functional scores which
further highlights atrophy of the M.multifidus in the pathogenesis of
chronic spinal pain conditions. Deriving from the results, ultrasound
imaging is a useful method to be applied for the process and results
evaluation following surgery, conservative rehabilitation or for preventive
purposes in population groups at risk for the development of LBP (e.g. due
to inactivity).

## 1287

## P454: Prognostic significance of lab data and performance comparison by
validating survival prediction models for patients with spinal metastases
after radiotherapy

Hung-Kuan Yen

1,2

, Ming-Hsiao Hu

2

, Hester Zijlstra

3,4

, Olivier Q. Groot

3,4

, Hsiang-Chieh Hsieh

2

, Juin-Jen Yang

2

, Aditya Karhade

3

, Po-Chao Chen

2

, Yu-Han Chen

2

, Po-Hao Huang

2

, Yu-Hung Chen

2

, Fu-Ren Xiao

5

, Jorrit-Jan Verlaan

4

, Joseph Schwab

3

, Rong-Sen Yang

2

, Shu-Hua Yang

2

, Wei-Hsin Lin

6

, and Feng-Ming Hsu

6,7,8

1

Department of Orthopedic Surgery, National Taiwan University
Hospital, Hsinchu City, Taiwan

2

Department of Orthopedic Surgery

3

Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Massachusetts General
Hospital/Harvard Medical School, Boston, United States

4

Department of Orthopedic Surgery, UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, The
Netherlands

5

Division of Neurosurgery, Department of Surgery

6

Division of Radiation Oncology, Department of Oncology, National
Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan

7

Graduate Institute of Oncology, National Taiwan University College
of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan

8

Department of Radiation Oncology, National Taiwan University Cancer
Center, Taipei, Taiwan

Introduction: The incidence of spinal metastasis (SM) diagnoses
has increased worldwide in the past decade and radiotherapy has an important
role in its treatment. Well-performing survival prediction models (SPMs)
help patients and healthcare professionals to choose treatment aligning with
prognosis. Prognostic factors such as laboratory values have rarely been
adopted in existing SPMs for patients receiving palliative radiotherapy.
Although the predictive value of laboratory test results for skeletal
metastases has been recognized, not incorporating these factors in SPMs
might have constrained the predictive ability of these models. This
retrospective study aims to investigate the prognostic impacts of laboratory
data and to compare the performances of Metastases location, Elderly, Tumor
primary, Sex, Sickness/comorbidity, and Site of radiotherapy (METSSS) model,
New England Spinal Metastasis Score (NESMS), and Skeletal Oncology Research
Group machine learning algorithm (SORG-MLA) for SM. Materials and
methods: From 2010 to 2018, patients who received radiotherapy
(RT) for SM at a tertiary center were enrolled and the data were
retrospectively collected. Multivariate logistic and Cox-proportional-hazard
regression analyses were used to assess the association between laboratory
values and survival. The area under receiver-operating characteristics curve
(AUROC), calibration analysis, Brier score, and decision curve analysis were
used to evaluate the performance of SPMs. Results: A total of
2,786 patients were included for analysis. The 90-day and 1-year survival
rates after RT were 70.4% and 35.7%, respectively. Higher albumin,
hemoglobin, or lymphocyte count were associated with better survival, while
higher alkaline phosphatase, white blood cell count, neutrophil count,
neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio, platelet-to-lymphocyte ratio, or
international normalized ratio were associated with poor prognosis. SORG-MLA
has the best discrimination (AUROC 90-day, 0.78; 1-year 0.76), best
calibrations, and the lowest Brier score (90-day 0.16; 1-year 0.18). The
decision curve of SORG-MLA is above the other two competing models with
threshold probabilities from 0.1 to 0.8. Conclusion: We
demonstrated the clinical impact of selective laboratory values such as
serum albumin level, hemoglobin level, and lymphocyte count on survival
prediction in patients receiving radiotherapy for spinal metastases.
SORG-MLA, incorporating laboratory values and the flexible modeling
technique, accurately predicts 90-day and 1-year survival for the
radiotherapy cohort. SPMs integrated into patient decision aids for shared
decision-making present opportunities for individualized patient-centered
care in the future.

## 1617

## P455: Percutaneous lumbar 9-point annuloplasty for chronic low back in
the modified Pfirmann classification, graded 3 to 6

Jin-Sung Luke Kim

1

1

Neurosurgery, Seoul St Mary's Hospital, Seoul, South Korea

Background: Of the varied options available for the management
of chronic discogenic back pain, lumbar annuloplasty provides a reasonably
acceptable option. Being a minimally invasive option with no serious adverse
effects, it can be applied as a daycare option in an ambulatory spine
center. Since the currently described techniques fail to address the target
pathology in the posterior annulus, this report delineates the correct
target-oriented approach of percutaneous lumbar annuloplasty using a
radio-frequency probe to manage discogenic low back pain with the patients
in the modified Pfirmann classification graded 3 to 6.
Objective: To describe an alternative annuloplasty
technique for treating chronic discogenic back pain in an ambulatory
setting. Method: A retrospective review of all patients
presenting with chronic discogenic low back pain and managed by
target-oriented thermal annuloplasty at our institute from May 2015 to June
2021 was performed. The procedure is carried out under local anesthesia in a
prone position. The principle of the technique relies on dividing the
posterior annulus into nine equal segments on the AP view of the C-arm. The
trajectory is through Kambin’s triangle in a horizontal trajectory as much
as possible to target the posterior part of the disc annulus.
Results: 21 patients were treated by this method with an
average follow-up of 32.1 (±11.4) months. The average VAS improved from 4.1
(±1.2) to 2.3 (±0.4) at final follow-up. The ODI improved from 42 (±6.7) to
19.98 (±5.6). None of the patients had any complications. One patient had a
progression of degenerative scoliosis over two years. However, there was no
obvious pain related to scoliosis. The patient satisfaction rate was 82%,
the return to life was 95.2%, and the recommendation rate to others was
100%. Conclusion: Target-oriented lumbar percutaneous
nine-point annuloplasty may be considered a viable option for chronic
discogenic back pain with relatively well-maintained disc heights, which is
the case of the modified Pfirmann classification graded 3 to 6. A successful
outcome depends upon proper patient selection and correct trajectory.
Key words: chronic low back pain, percutaneous, lumbar, annuloplasty,
disc

## 1754

## P456: Ultrasound-guide pulsed radiofrequency of cervical nerve root for
chronic cervical radicular pain: a prospective randomized controlled
trial

Weerasak Singhatanadgige

1

, poornpan Chalermkitpanit

1

, and Vit Kotheeranurak

1

1

Orthopedics, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok,
Thailand

Introduction: Pulsed radiofrequency (PRF) on cervical DRG for
pain management in cervical radicular pain is mostly performed via
transforaminal approached under fluoroscopic guidance. Ultrasound-guidance
periradicular cervical nerve root intervention raises concern in the
neuromodulatory effect. This study aims to evaluate the effectiveness and
duration of pain relief between PRF treatment and steroid injection on the
cervical nerve roots. Material and Methods: Forty-two patients
presented with chronic cervical radicular pain were prospectively randomized
into pulsed radiofrequency (PRF) group and steroid group. Patients in the
PRF group received PRF treatment at 42 degrees Celsius for 4 minutes
followed by the injection of 2% lidocaine 1.5 ml with dexamethasone 10 mg to
the targeted cervical nerve root. The steroid group received the same
injectate. Patients and pain assessor were blinded. Numerical rating scale
(NRS 0-10) and the Neck Disability Index (NDI) questionnaire were used for
pain intensity and neck functional assessment before and after the
procedure. The duration of pain reduction at least 50% was recorded up to
9-month follow up. Results: Data analysis was obtained from 21
and 20 patients receiving pulsed radiofrequency (PRF) and steroid treatment,
respectively. At 3-month post procedure, patients in PRF group had
significantly less pain (NRS 2.8 ± 2.7) than patients in steroid group (NRS
5.5 ± 2.6) (p = 0.01). Neck disability index demonstrated significant
improvement at 3 and 6 months (p < 0.01) after PRF treatment compared to
sole steroid injection. The duration of pain relief at least 50% was
significantly longer in patients received PRF treatment (6.0 ± 4.1 months)
compared to those in the steroid group (2.3 ± 2.1 months) (p < 0.01). The
vascular puncture did not occur in both study groups.
Conclusion: Ultrasound-guided periradicular cervical nerve
root PRF exhibited neuromodulatory effect and was considered a safe and
effective treatment for patients with cervical radicular pain. It provided
longer duration of pain relief and the improvement of neck function up to 6
months.

## 1788

## P457: Comparison of healing rates between rigid and semi-rigid bracing in
adolescent lumbar pars bone stress injuries

Paul Licina

1

, Patrick Beaumont

2

, and Mark Young

2

1

Faculty of Health, Exercise and Nutrition Science, Queensland
University of Technology, Kelvin Grove, Australia

2

Spine Surgery, Brisbane Private Hospital, Brisbane,
Australia

Introduction: Adolescent athletes are predisposed to lumbar bone
stress injuries of the pars interarticularis (pars stress injuries or PSIs).
These injuries are the most common cause of significant adolescent low back
pain and may progress to chronic disability, non-union and isthmic
spondylolisthesis. They are heterogenous and may be acute or chronic, and
unilateral or bilateral, and the injury grade may be a stress reaction, an
incomplete fracture, or a complete fracture. MRI can identify the chronicity
and grade of the lesion by measuring bone marrow oedema (BMO) and
visualising the fracture. Bracing has been proposed as a treatment for acute
PSIs. It not only relieves pain but has been previously shown to increase
the likelihood of bony healing, reducing the risk of progression. The
lumbosacral brace may be a rigid custom-made Boston brace-type orthosis or a
semi-rigid off-the-shelf brace. The objectives of this study were to
quantify the types of PSIs, to determine the bony healing rates after 12
weeks of bracing, and to compare healing rates between rigid and semi-rigid
braces. Materials and Methods: We performed a retrospective
analysis of adolescents with acute PSIs (as defined by a bone BMO ratio ≥ 2)
who wore either a rigid or semirigid brace for 12 weeks. All participants
underwent an MRI scan prior to bracing and at 12 weeks, to assess the degree
of BMO and the injury grade. From this, it was determined whether the BMO
had resolved (ratio < 2) and whether the fracture had healed during the
bracing period. Results: We identified 88 patients with an
acute PSI treated in a brace. Overall, 14 worsened, 12 remained unchanged
and 62 improved (i.e., had resolution of BMO). Of those that improved, 25
also showed fracture healing. 49 were unilateral acute PSIs, 4 of which had
a contralateral chronic complete fracture. Of the 45 unilateral acute PSIs
without a contralateral chronic fracture, 32 improved with 17 of those
healed. However, all 4 patients with a contralateral chronic fracture
worsened. 39 were bilateral acute PSIs, and in this group, 30 improved with
8 of those healed. Of the 88 patients, 42 used rigid orthoses and 46 used
semi-rigid braces. There was no significant difference between rigid and
semirigid bracing in overall improvement or healing.
Discussion: We demonstrated that the use of bracing in
acute PSIs led to a 70% rate of resolution of BMO and a 28% rate of fracture
healing at 12 weeks with only 16% worsening. We found that bracing is
significantly more effective in unilateral only and bilateral acute PSIs,
compared to unilateral acute PSIs with a chronic contralateral fracture,
questioning the role of bracing in this subgroup. We were unable to
demonstrate that bracing was superior to non-bracing but there are
considerable ethical challenges in withholding treatment in an adolescent
population where the intervention is relatively benign and has previously
been demonstrated to be effective. Off-the-shelf semirigid braces are more
convenient and less expensive, and in our study showed similar efficacy in
BMO resolution and bony healing.

## Novel Technologies

## 102

## P458: Full power assisted versus manual pedicle screw insertion a
systematic review

Elie Najjar

1

, Mohamed Hassanin

1

, Ali Mardashti

1

, Nasir Quraishi

1

, and Ali Shetaiwi

1

1

Spine Surgery, Nottingham University Hospital, Nottingham, United
Kingdom

Introduction: Long level pedicle screw placement requiring
repetitive forceful rotational movements have been shown to increase pain
and musculoskeletal disorders impacting the work of spine surgeons. Full
power-assisted pedicle screw insertion decreases the surgeon’s work and thus
the risk of fatigue and injury. Yet there is limited data discussing the
efficacy and safety of full power assisted compared to manual technique.
Methods:A systematic review of the English language
literature dating up until December 2021, was undertaken using search
criteria ((Power Drill) OR (Power Assisted) and (Pedicle Screw)) and the
PRISMA guidelines. Results: Of a total of 224 articles, 3
studies met the inclusion criteria (1 Level I and 2 level III evidence) and
were analyzed. Overall, 1685 patients (male/female = 587/1098, mean age
14.1years) had a scoliosis deformity corrected with posterior
instrumentation using full power assisted pedicle screws. The average
instrumented levels were 11.1, average screw per case was 16.5 with a mean
follow-up of 20.8 months. The average operative time was 237 minutes for all
cases (225 minutes for AIS alone), the number of complications was 8/1685
(0.4%). Additionally, 814 patients (male/female = 266/548, mean age 13.7
years) had manual pedicle screw insertion for correction of their scoliotic
deformity. The average instrumented levels were 10.1, and average screws per
case were 15.2 with a mean follow-up of 26.8 months. Comparing Full power
assisted versus manual pedicle screw insertion, there was no significant
difference in operative time 238.2 vs 250 (p = 0.27, RR: -21.57 95CI: 6.04)
or the complication rate 8/1650 ( 0.5%) vs 15/744 (2%) ( P=0.003, RR:0.11
95CI: 0.63). Conclusion: Full power assisted pedicle screw
insertions has the same operative time and complications risk compared to
manual pedicle screw insertion in scoliosis deformity correction
surgery.

## 104

## P459: Clinical application of new concept of rod connector; connector for
simultaneously fixing screw head and rod (for ASD operation)

Moon-Kyu Kim

1

1

Neurosurgery, Gangneug Asan Hospital, Gangwon-do, South
Korea

Introduction: With the development of pedicle screw system and
spinal deformity surgery, spinal fixation surgery is gradually increasing.
Accordingly, surgery for adjacent segments after spinal fusion is also
increasing. Due to the adjacent segment diseases (ASD), incision of all
previous surgical ranges during surgery has a wide range of surgery and
concerns about damage to muscle soft tissue due to revision, therefore,
several connectors (open connectors) have been developed as results of
effort to minimize revision surgeries. However, these type connectors are
mainly connected only to rods (rod to rod) and single connector is
mechanically weak when they are use alone, thus multiple connectors are used
to get enough strength to extend fusion levels. Therefore, authors developed
a connector capable of extended fusion by combining the top load fixation
type screw head and rod simultaneously to strengthen the connection
structure, exposing only the top-level screw head during adjacent segment
surgery, and applied it to clinical practice. Methods: The
basic concept was prepared in 2016 and patented in 2019 (application in
2017). The clinical device (Qnector) using this concept started development
in 2017 and was completed in 2019, passed KFDA in 2020, and applied to
clinical trials in 2021. The basic concept is that the connector is fixed to
the rod and the screw head located at the end of the existing surgical
instrument at the same time, and a new rod is connected to this connector.
This structure compensates for the vulnerability to rotation based on the
rod direction by fixing it with the screw head, so Qnector has the effect of
using only one connector instead of using multiple open connectors.
Results: Between March 2021 and June 2022, Qnectors were
applied to 9 patients who developed ASD after the previous multilevel level
fusion, and showed a stable and good clinical course without hardware
failure and were enough strong to endure rod bending after connection by in
situ benders. The screws previously operated were different types, but all
were applicable to Qnectors. Discussion: The new concepted
connector can be developed in various shapes other than the one developed
this time. It can be developed in various forms, and could be supposed to
open the horizon for a new concept of connectors that can affix the screw
head and rod simultaneously. Conclusion: A powerful connector
that connects the screw head and rod at the same time could minimize the
re-opening of the previous surgical site, improving the patient's recovery
after surgery and lowering the operator's surgical difficulty.

## 201

## P460: ALL repair and disc replacement for hyperextension injuries -
extending the indications for motion preservation in the cervical
spine

Adrian Cavalcanti Kußmaul

1

, Titus Kuehlein

1

, Becker Christopher

1

, Bruder Jan

1

, Woiczinski Matthias

1

, Kistler Manuel

1

, Böcker Wolfgang

1

, and Greiner Axel

1

,
Sandy Walter

1

1

Department of Orthopaedics and Trauma Surgery, Musculoskeletal
University Center Munich (MUM), University Hospital, LMU, Munich,
Germany

Introduction: Anterior tension band injuries are usually the
result of high impact hyperextension trauma. However, these injuries can be
increasingly observed in geriatric patients based on the current demographic
change. Surgical treatment includes anterior plating bearing the risk of
soft tissue irritation, such as esophageal dysphagia or rupture, and
degeneration of adjacent cervical segments or implant failure due to an
iatrogenic spondylodesis. Tape suture constructs, reenforcing ligamental
stability while permitting physiological micro mobility of the affected
motion segment, are already established for ligamental injuries in ankle,
knee or shoulder surgery. Recently, a biomechanical in vitro study was
further able to demonstrate the feasibility of this flexible osteosynthesis
technique for the treatment of AO type B3 injuries. Consequently, this in
vivo study aims to examine the biomechanical properties of tape suture
constructs for the treatment of AO type B3 injuries in cadaver specimens.
Materials and Methods: The anterior longitudinal ligaments
(ALL) and the cervical disc of 16 human cadaver C5/6 segments were
dissected, simulating an AO type B3 injury. Then, two groups were formed and
treated either with anterior cervical discectomy and fusion (ACDF) (anterior
4-hole-plate, DePuy Synthes®) or a cervical total disc
replacement (CTDR) (Prodisc®- C Vivo) combined with a tape suture
construct, similar to the SpeedBridgeTM (Arthrex®),
which was implanted ventrally according to the anatomical course of the
disrupted ALL. The specimens were then mounted onto a biomechanical testing
machine in a neutral position and biomechanical forces were applied through
a lever arm until a force of 15N was reached in the sagittal plane,
simulating extension and flexion. Next rotational forces to both directions
were applied until cervical resistance resulted in a rotational force of
2N/m. Implant failure was defined as a dislocation exceeding 25mm for
extension and 7° for rotation. For statistical analysis, the dislocation (°)
and its corresponding force (N) of each specimen was measured and compared.
Results: Preliminary results show a higher range of motion
for the tape suture construct in all motion planes with the tape suture
construct however consistently staying below physiological mobility. No
specimen suffered from implant failure. Detailed evaluation among the
specimens is currently in progress and will be completed in time for the
congress. Conclusion: The tape suture combined with CTDR
provides sufficient biomechanical stability for the treatment of AO type B3
injuries compared to anterior plating. Preliminary results display a
sufficient limitation of movement in the sagittal plane, especially
regarding cervical extension, which’s limitation is crucial for ligamental
healing. The rigid ACDF highly compromises cervical rotation and lateral
bending, which are usually not affected in a hyperextension injury, while
the tape suture and CTDR approach the physiological range of motion.
Consequently, the tape suture construct is a promising alternative to the
current gold standard of anterior plating for the treatment of AO type B3
injuries based on its excellent biomechanical results and its preservation
of cervical micro mobility with a concomitant prevention of an iatrogenic
spondylodesis.

## 251

## P461: Early phase outcomes in ACDF with a 3D-printed gyroid architecture
porous titanium interbody reconstruction spacer

Sohrab Vatsia

1

, Matthew McGinty

2

, and L. Erik Westerlund

1

1

Hughston Clinic, Columbus, United States

2

Mercer University School of Medicine, Columbus, United
States

Introduction: Novel 3D-print techniques utilizing porous gyroid
architectures with high surface area and strength in anterior cervical
discectomy and fusion (ACDF) provide an opportunity to program the bulk
modulus of a printed porous titanium implant to emulate that of native
vertebral bone, potentially mitigating implant subsidence. There is a
paucity of evidence investigating outcomes of such 3D-printed interbody cage
implants in ACDF. Therefore, the purpose of this study is to assess
subsidence and early clinical and radiographic outcomes of a 3D-printed
porous gyroid-architecture titanium interbody fusion device used in the
treatment of degenerative cervical disc disease. Material and
Methods: This is a single-surgeon, retrospective cohort study of
20 consecutive patients who underwent either single or multi-level ACDF
using 3D-printed porous gyroid-architecture titanium interbody cages. The
standardized Visual Analog Scales (VAS) of the Neck and Arm were used to
subjectively evaluate pain levels preoperatively and postoperatively at two
and six weeks and three months. Plain film radiographs were used to assess
fusion progress, ingrowth, sagittal plane angulation, implant migration, and
subsidence. Results: The mean patient age was 57 years and 60%
of patients were male. There were 4 one-level, 8 two-level, 7 three-level,
and 1 four-level fusion between the C3 and T1 vertebral levels. The mean
preoperative VAS Neck score for 2-level fusion (5.13) demonstrated a
significant decrease at both two and six weeks postoperatively (3.90, p =
0.01; 3.50, p = 0.03, respectively). The mean preoperative VAS Arm score for
1-level fusion (4.75) demonstrated a significant decrease at both two and
six weeks (4.00, p = 0.01; 3.50, p = 0.04, respectively), and the mean
preoperative VAS value for 3-level fusion (5.67) also reflected a
statistically significant decrease at two and six weeks (2.50, p = 0.01;
1.00, p = 0.01, respectively). Six and twelve weeks postoperatively, all
patients demonstrated reductions in VAS Arm scores. All postoperative
radiographs demonstrated evidence of osseous fusion and no instances of
subsidence or migration of implants. Conclusion: Initial
results indicate that use of 3D-printed, porous titanium gyroid-architecture
interbody implants is safe and presents a suitable alternative for
successful clinical and radiological outcomes in ACDF. Such 3D-printed
interbody cages offer high strength and surface area in a porous form and an
elastic modulus similar to native bone and may offer clinical advantages
over 3D-printed truss structures, PEEK, or prior titanium interbody
solutions in ACDF.

## 330

## P462: Video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) in the prone position
for the surgical treatment of symptomatic thoracic disc prolapse, an
analysis of 156 consecutive patients

Mohamed Alhashash

1,2

, Heinrich Boehm

1

, Reza Bahrami

1

, and Mootaz Shousha

1

1

Spine Surgery, Zentralklinik Bad Berka, Bad Berka, Germany

2

Orthopedics and Trauma, Alexandria University, Alexandria,
Egypt

Introduction: Thoracic disc disease is rare in comparison to
cervical or lumbar discs. A centrally located herniation results in spinal
canal stenosis and even thoracic myelopathy. The posterior approach is
suitable for laterally located disc prolapse. In cases with centrally
located stenosis, an anterior approach allows the direct decompression of
the spinal cord. In this study, an analysis of the surgical results after an
anterior thoracoscopic decompression of thoracic disc herniation was
preformed. Material and Methods: A retrospective analysis of
the prospectively collected data in a single spine center revealed 156
patients surgically treated using VATS for symptomatic thoracic disc
prolapse. Diagnosis was confirmed by MRI and a preoperative CT was performed
to assess the nature of the disc prolapse. The operation was preformed in
prone position using a bi-portal VATS. One lung ventilation was used in some
case in higher thoracic levels (Th9 or above). Identification of the
affected level was verified using C-arm after the positioning of the
patient. Decompression of the spinal canal and anterior fusion was preformed
through the anterior approach. A posterior fixation was done in the same
position using a percutaneous screw-rod system. Intraoperative
neuro-monitoring was used. Results: The study included 156
consecutive patients operated starting from January 2000. There were 98
females and 58 males with a mean age of 54.8 ± 12.4 years. Clinically, back
pain, radiculopathy, thoracic myelopathy, and different degrees of
incomplete paraplegia in 23 patients were the presenting symptoms. The mean
operation time was 224.4 ± 116.8 minutes, and blood loss was 436.4 ± 155.2
ml. There were no intraoperative complications. Postoperative pneumothorax
on the contralateral side occurred in 3 patients and a thorax tube was
inserted. Transient postoperative lower limbs numbness occurred in 4
patients. The mean postoperative follow up was 42.6 ± 16.7 months. VAS
improved from 7.4 ± 2.3 preoperative to 3.2 ± 1.6 after 3 months
postoperatively (p = 0.01). ODI improved from 32.7 ± 12.3 to 9.8 ± 6.4 (p =
0.02). Neurological improved of the 23 patients presenting with preoperative
incomplete paraplegia occurred after a mean of 6.4 months in all but 4
patients. Reoperation was necessary in 4 patients, 2 due to adjacent segment
disease, one patient had inadequate decompression and was revised
posteriorly, and in one patient a false level was operated and had to be
re-operated. Conclusions: VATS approach for thoracic disc
prolapse is safe. Exact intraoperative identification of the affected level
is mandatory. Neuro-monitoring increases the safety of the procedure.
Thoracoscopic approach in prone position allows anterior and posterior
spinal instrumentation without the need of intraoperative repositioning of
the patients.

## 480

## P463: Knowledge gaps in biophysical changes after powered robotic
exoskeleton walking by individuals with spinal cord injury - a scoping
review

Christopher Yip

1

, Chor Yin Lam

2

, Kenneth Man Chee Cheung

2

, Yat Wa Wong

2

, and Paul Koljonen

2

1

The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong

2

Department of Orthopaedics and Traumatology, The University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong

Introduction: In addition to helping individuals with spinal
cord injury (SCI) regain the ability to ambulate, the rapidly evolving
capabilities of powered robotic exoskeletons provide an array of secondary
biophysical benefits which can reduce the complications resulting from
prolonged immobilization. This scoping review seeks to provide an overview
on the known effects of overground exoskeleton use, on the prevention of
secondary health complications, changes to the QOL, and their effect on the
independence of SCI individuals in the community settings. Moreover, the
intent of the review is to identify gaps in the literature currently
available, and to make recommendations on focus study areas and methods for
future investigations. Material and Methods: The reporting of
methods and results in this scoping review follow the Preferred Reporting
Items for Systematic reviews and Meta-Analyses extension for Scoping Reviews
(PRISMA- ScR) guidelines. The framework by Arksey and O’Malley has been
referenced for the protocol of this scoping review. PubMed, Cochrane, and
EMBASE were searched for relevant articles from database inception to June
19, 2021; the bibliographies of included articles were screened. The search
term used included “exoskeleton,” “spinal cord injury,” and related
keywords, both as the free-text keywords and controlled vocabulary of their
respective databases (e.g., MeSH for PubMed and Cochrane Library). The
refinement of protocol was done after the initial search, with focus placed
on a defining eligibility criterion with specific attention to the list of
biophysical characteristics to include. The final selection of studies was
separated into individual groups based on the type of biophysical
characteristic that was evaluated; studies that measured more than one
biophysical characteristic were included more than once across different
tables. Data extraction templates were generated a priori,
with minor modifications done after the initial search, and the data
elements extracted included: study, intervention, number of training
sessions, ASIA grade, number of subjects, time-points during trial when
specific relevant measurements were taken, outcome metrics used in the
study, and the presence of any control arms. Results: 654
articles were found in the initial search, 231 of which were found to be
duplicate; 329 articles were excluded during the screening of the titles and
abstracts, and a further 52 were eliminated after screening the full texts.
In the final analysis, 42 papers were included from the initial search,
combined with an additional 8 from scanning through the reference lists of
relevant studies. 50 unique studies were included in the charting process.
Detailed results will be presented in this abstract.
Conclusion: This scoping review the most robust systematic
review performed on this topic to date. It has identified various focus
areas in the need of further investigation, such as CVS health, BMD, body
composition changes, and independence and functional applications for
exoskeletons. Detailed analysis on each domain were performed and presented.
We have identified pitfalls, such as heterogeneous methodologies, disparate
study populations, and dissimilar training programs, which need to be
overcome in future studies.

## 861

## P464: Smartphones, wearables, and digital biomarkers: the evolution of
spine care outcomes research

David Kurland

1

, Christina Bi

1

, Roee Ber

1

, Douglas Kondziolka

1

, Darryl Lau

1

, Donato Pacione

1

, Anthony Frempong-Boadu

1

, Ilya Laufer

1

, and Eric Oermann

1

1

Neurosurgery, NYU Langone Health, New York, United States

Introduction: Over the past generation, outcomes research in
spine care has evolved from reliance on clinician-reported assessment toward
a recognition of the importance of the patient’s perspective, and the wide
incorporation of patient-reported outcome measures (PROMs). While PROMs are
now considered an integral component of outcomes assessments, they cannot
wholly capture the state of a patient’s functionality. The pervasiveness of
smartphones and wearable devices in modern society, which passively collect
data related to health, has ushered in a new era of spine care outcome
measurement – and in some respects, a return to objectivity. The patterns
emerging from these data, so-called “digital biomarkers,” can accurately
describe characteristics of a patient’s health, disease, or recovery state.
Material and Methods: PubMed was queried for the following
terms on July 20, 2022: (smartphone OR wearable OR mobile device) AND (spine
OR spine surgery OR spinal fusion OR spinal decompression OR spinal
deformity). Two authors (DBK and CB) independently screened each record.
Clinical articles reporting the use of smartphones and wearable devices in
objective spine care outcomes research were eligible for inclusion in this
review. Pertinent topical review articles were also evaluated separately for
content. Non- or pre-clinical studies were excluded, as were reports on
devices that were prototypes or in pre-commercialization stages. We also
excluded manuscripts that described smartphone or wearable applications
strictly designed for use by a provider in a clinical or office setting.
Results: The initial search returned 437 unique results. Of
these, 330 were readily deemed ineligible based on subject matter. Of the
remaining 107 sought for retrieval, 37 were excluded based on the exclusion
criteria described above. A total of 70 manuscripts (46 clinical studies and
24 pertinent topical reviews) published between 2015 and 2022 met inclusion
criteria, and were reviewed in detail. The current applications of digital
biomarkers are manifold and include: 1) surgical decision making, 2)
diagnosis and disease severity stratification, 3) remote pre- and
post-operative symptom monitoring, as well as 4) remote
care/self-management. These applications and concepts have been successfully
applied to patients with chronic low back pain, lumbar stenosis,
degenerative disc disease and cervical stenosis. Conclusion:
Digital biomarkers and continuous passive monitoring have a number of
currently validated applications in the field of spine care, as well as
tremendous potential to expand into the field of personalized medicine.
Smartphones and wearable devices increase the accessibility of mobility
measures previously confined to the clinical or laboratory setting.
Continuous collection of mobility data can improve symptom and disease
progression monitoring, detect deterioration or functional decline, and
improve perioperative care. The pervasiveness of smartphones and wearables
naturally increase patient compliance and have the potential to further
involve patients in their own care, creating a deeper collaboration between
patient and care providers. More extensive data collection of mobility and
gait metrics, both on a population and an individual level, will allow for
the utilization of digital biomarker measures in a more personalized way,
allowing for more appropriate treatment decisions, more accurate prognostic
measures, and more efficient resource allocation.

## 910

## P465: The efficacy of stand-alone spacers in comparison to conventional
cage and plate in anterior cervical discectomy and fusion surgery: a
meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials for clinical and radiological
outcomes

Jake McDonnell

1

, Salma Youssef

2

, Gráinne Cunniffe

1

, Stacey Darwish

1

, and Joseph Butler

1

1

National Spinal Injuries Unit, Mater Misericordiae University
Hospital, Dublin, Ireland

2

School of Medicine, University College Dublin, Dublin,
Ireland

Background: ACDF is commonly performed with cage and plate
constructs to provide stability to the diseased or injured cervical segment.
Despite it being a commonly performed procedure, there are notable rates of
associated morbidity reported in the literature. Anchored stand-alone
spacers represent a novel form of instrumentation to conventional cage and
plate constructs. However, little is known regarding their collective
comparative evidence versus cages and plates. This serves the premise for
this study. The objective of this study is to elucidate if anchored spacers
have improved operative characteristics and postoperative outcomes in
anterior cervical discectomy and fusion (ACDF) cohorts when compared to
traditional cage and plate, and can be inferred as efficacious as
conventional instrumentation in the management of cervical spine disorders.
Methods: A systematic review and meta-analysis was
conducted of PubMed/Medline, Embase and Google Scholar databases per the
Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and
Meta-Analyzes (PRISMA) guidelines. Studies of interest included
comparative (conventional cage and plate) instrumentation versus anchored
stand-alone spacers for patients undergoing ACDF. Pre- and post-operative
clinical and radiological outcomes were collated and compared for
significance between cohorts. Results: 10 RCTs were identified
and included with 779 patients total. Mean age of the entire cohort was 50.1
years (range 30-78 years). 62% (483/779) of the cohort were male, while 38%
(296/779) were female. 384 patients underwent ACDF with stand-alone cage,
while 395 had ACDF with conventional cage and plate. Stand-alone spacers
significantly outperformed conventional instrumentation in terms of
estimated blood loss (p < 0.01), total postoperative complications (p
< 0.01), dysphagia rates (p = 0.04) and adjacent segment disease (p =
0.04). Non-inferiority was evident in both patient reported outcome measures
and radiological outcomes. Conclusion: The results of this
meta-analysis highlight the efficacy of stand-alone spacers for the
management of primarily cervical spondylitic disease for both single-level
and multi-level pathology, and thus present an attractive alternative to
conventional instrumentation for patients undergoing ACDF surgery.

## 948

## P466: Medical grade, operating theatre, HEPA and UV light air filter
effectively reduce air particles with implied viral sterilisation

Angelo Fragkakis

1

, Zion Hwang

2

, Jason Bernard

1

, Timothy Bishop

1

, Jan Herzog

1

, Shahnawaz Haleem

1

, Tesfaladet Kurban

1

, Bisola Ajayi

1

, Emily Tsang

2

, Priyanshu Saha

2

, and Darren Lui

1

1

Trauma and Orthopaedics, St. George's University Hospital, London,
United Kingdom

2

St. George's University of London, London, United Kingdom

Introduction: SARS-CoV-2 has become a worldwide threat exposing
patients and physicians to significant risks. The virus starts primarily as
a respiratory infection and has airborne capabilities with a 60–140nm
diameter transmissible through droplet particles of Ø 0.3-10µm.
Aerosol-generating procedures can increase the particles’ transmission risk,
therefore neutralisation methods become paramount. Studies show that the
success of ultraviolet (UV) light disinfection warrants greater research
into its utility within clinical settings. Only recently, UV light has been
paired with HEPA (high-efficiency particulate air) filters. This innovative
technology could have the potential to aid prevention of viral and bacterial
nosocomial infection and its associated morbidities. Therefore, this study
aims to assess whether Illuvia® HUAIRS, a medical-grade HEPA and
UV light air recirculation system, can reduce the airborne particle count,
and thus potentially reduce the spread of nosocomial infection.
Material and Methods: This prospective pilot study
conducted in an Intensive Care Unit (ICU) of a tertiary UK hospital
(2020-2021) assessed the impact of Illuvia® HUAIRS, filtering
41.8m3/min of air. The air particles concentration was
measured with a validated and published particle counter (HT9600; Dongguan
Xintai Instrument Co. Ltd.). As a surrogate measure for an infectious
bioaerosol carrying COVID-19, 0.3μm, 2.5μm and 10μm particle sizes were
considered. In a 150m2 ICU, with 14 patients and 20 staff, 7
consecutive time-points (T0-T7) were collected 12-hourly over a 4-days
period, from 32 established locations and compared against baseline
samplings. Statistical significance was established at p < 0.05.
Results: A statistically significant improvement was
registered 24 hours after the activation of Illuvia® HUAIRS at
Nurse Stations (NS, 37% and 59%) and Patients’ areas (PT 27% and 52%), for
0.3μm and 2.5μm, respectively. 10μm particles were not detected.
Illuvia® HUAIRS had a clear impact in reducing the pollution
between gates’ and patients’ areas from 2.3-folds to 1.8-folds. No
statistical significance between nursing station/patients nor side-rooms was
identified. Conclusion: The Illuvia® HUAIRS could
represent a potential adjuvant solution in reducing the bioaerosol
particles, making the environment safer for patients and staff. Also, given
the well-established relationship between airborne pathogen levels and
healthcare-associated infections, this technology could be further utilised
on other clinical/surgical areas.

## 1070

## P467: The impact of robotic lumbar spine surgery on 90-day
outcomes

Nicholas D'Antonio

1

, Jeremy Heard

1

, Yunsoo Lee

1

, Mark Lambrechts

1

, Caroline Purtill

2

, John Bodnar

2

, Patrick Fitzgerald

2

, Dominic Farronato

2

, Josh Pezzulo

2

, John Paulik

2

, Tariq Issa

1

, Parker Brush

1

, Sebastian Fras

2

, Jose Canseco

1

, Christopher Kepler

1

, Alan Hilibrand

1

, Alexander Vaccaro

1

, and Gregory Schroeder

1

1

The Rothman Orthopedic Institute at Thomas Jefferson University
Hospital, Orthopedic Surgery, Philadelphia, United States

2

Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, United States

Introduction: Robot-assisted spine surgery has become an
increasingly popular option for spinal fusion and instrumentation
procedures. Although there is promise in the literature regarding robotic
surgery, hesitancy around the widespread adoption of robotic spine surgery
still exists. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to (1) evaluate the
surgical outcomes of robotic surgeries compared to nonrobotic surgeries and
(2) determine trends regarding robotic surgery usage for spine surgery.
Methods: Patients > 18 years of
age who underwent primary lumbar fusion surgery at our institution were
identified and propensity matched in a 1:1 fashion based on use of a robot
during surgery. Patient demographics, surgical characteristics, and surgical
outcomes including 90-day all-cause readmissions and 90-day surgical
readmissions were collected. Multivariable regression analysis was
performed. Significance was set to p < 0.05. Results: Of 830
patients included in the analysis, 415 patients (50.0%) had a robotic lumbar
fusion. Cases with the robot were less likely to be revisions (5.54% vs.
17.1%, p < 0.001) but more likely to have a longer operative duration
(287 vs. 205 minutes, p < 0.001) and more than one incision made during
the operation (30.6% vs. 3.13%, p < 0.001). Intraoperative durotomies
were more common in cases where the robot was not used (14.9% vs. 3.37%, p
< 0.001). On bivariant analysis, compared to patients with a robotic
fusion, those without a robotic fusion had a significantly higher rate of
all-cause 90-day readmissions (14.0% vs. 8.92%, p = 0.029) but no
significant difference in 90-day surgical readmissions (10.6% vs. 8.67%, p =
0.410). A bivariant subanalysis of one to two level fusions demonstrated
all-cause 90-day readmissions (p = 0.024) and intraoperative durotomy (p
< 0.001) were significantly more likely in the nonrobotic fusion group.
However, surgical readmission rate and etiology were not significantly
different between groups. A multivariable analysis of the entire cohort
revealed that robotic fusion was not a significant predictor of all-cause 90
day readmissions (OR = 0.768 [0.47-1.24], p = 0.283) or all-cause 90 day
readmissions (OR = 1.03 [0.64-1.79], p = 0.784). An additional multivariable
analysis those with one to two level fusions demonstrated that robotic
surgery was not a predictor of surgical or all-cause 90-day readmissions.
Conclusion: Our study suggests that robotic-assisted and
nonrobotic-assisted lumbar fusions are associated with a similar risk of
90-day all-cause and surgical readmissions. Robotic surgery may result in
fewer intraoperative complications but increased time under anesthesia.
High-quality prospective studies are needed to add context to the literature
studying the impact of robotic lumbar fusion surgery on readmissions.

## 1180

## P468: A biomechanical analysis of a novel spinolaminar plate construct
for posterior lumbar fusion compared to traditional pedicle screw
fixation

Dimitriy Kondrashov

1,2

, Amit Piple

2

, Victor Ungurean

2

, and Oluwatodimu Raji

1,2

1

Orthopaedic Surgery, St. Mary's Medical Center, San Francisco,
United States

2

Orthopaedic Surgery, The Taylor Collaboration, San Francisco, United
States

Introduction: Bone anchors in osteoporotic patients are prone to
failures, both acute and delayed. In orthopaedic trauma surgery, locking
plates, which utilize locking screws and pre-threaded plates, have
revolutionized the fixation of osteoporotic fractures. We sought to combine
the traumatology principle of locking plate fixation using fixed angle
constructs with the spine principles of segmental fixation.
Methods: A novel pre-contoured spinolaminar locking plate
with a polyaxial saddle was designed based on morphometric anatomic studies
of human thoracolumbar vertebrae. The plates were fixed to an osteoporotic
cadaveric human lumbar spine and connected to form a 1-level L4-L5 construct
using 10-16mm and 3.5mm locking screws and 3.5mm locking plates. An
analogous 1-level T12-L1 construct was made using conventional pedicle screw
fixation. In total, 1 spinolaminar and 1 pedicle screw construct were
designed from the same cadaveric specimen (age: 69 years old, sex: female).
Pure moment testing was performed to assess range of motion
(flexion/extension, lateral bending, and axial rotation) after 30,000 cycles
of combined flexion-compression-anterior shear at 17Nm-400N-200N,
respectively. Evidence of construct failure was assessed every 5,000 cycles
with fluoroscopy. Static load-to-failure was performed under combined
flexion-compression-anterior shear moment. Fixture pullout strength was
assessed by applying a continuous axial tensile force oriented to the
principal axis of the pedicle until pullout was observed.
Results: The pedicle screw construct failed by a windshield
wiper mechanism due to vertebral body fracture along the midplane of the
pedicle at approximately 12,000 cycles. The spinolaminar plate construct
completed cyclic loading with no evidence of failure. Post fatigue range of
motion was observed to be 7.1 degrees in lateral bending, 1.7 degrees of
axial rotation, and 1.7 degrees of flexion/extension for the spinolaminar
plate. Upon static load-to-failure testing, the spinolaminar construct
failed at 41Nm-928N-473N of combined flexion-compression-anterior shear.
Static failure of the spinolaminar construct was due to separation of
proximal non-instrumented vertebral level from upper instrumented vertebra
via dislocation of the posterior elements while the plate, rods and screws
remained intact and fixed.The maximum pullout strength of the spinolaminar
plate was 590N while the maximum pullout strength of the pedicle screw
construct was 424N. Discussion: The spinolaminar locking plate
maintained adequate fixation post-fatigue, particularly in flexion/extension
and axial rotation. Moreover, spinolaminar plates may be superior to pedicle
screw fixation with respect to cyclic fatiguing and pullout strength.
Further testing should be performed on additional cadaver spines to validate
these findings; however, our novel spinolaminar plates appear to be a viable
instrumentation technique for posterior lumbar fusion in osteoporotic
spines.

## 1246

## P469: Digital neurocognitive monitoring in patients undergoing opioid
medication after spinal surgery: a feasibility study

Vicki Butenschön

1

, Ferdinand Wriedt

1

, Bernhard Meyer

1

, and Sandro M. Krieg

1

1

Department of Neurosurgery, Technical University Munich, Munich,
Germany

Introduction: Patients undergoing spinal surgery usually require
postoperative pain management to alleviate wound pain. Pain medication
includes WHO grade 1 analgesic but also potent opioids, potentially leading
to severe side effects such as fatigue, nausea and cognitive decline. Up to
now, the cognitive impairment due to postoperative pain protocols is only
poorly studied. Methods: We performed a prospective monocenter
feasibility study enrolling patients before undergoing spinal surgery.
Cognitive testing was performed using a tablet-based application before
surgery (baseline), as well as on day 2 after surgery (intravenous opioids),
before discharge (oral opioids) and at follow-up. We recorded the exact pain
medication and other side effects from the medication. Potential risk
factors for postoperative decline in cognition were age, high-dosed opioid
application, length of surgery and blood loss. Results: We
included 20 patients in our study. Median age was 67 years. Baseline
assessment revealed no cognitive impairment before surgery. All patients
underwent a dorsal instrumentation in our neurosurgical department for
degenerative (60%), osteoporotic fracture (15%) or tumor (25%) indication.
Cognitive testing after surgery showed a significant decline under
intravenous opioid therapy including short time and delayed recall word
listing as well as logic testing including arithmetic fluency (p <
0.001). Cognitive performance significantly improved with recovery until
follow-up and opioid discontinuation. Conclusion: Cognitive
assessment in patients undergoing spinal surgery with postoperative opioid
medication revealed a postoperative impairment under intravenous medication.
Side effects should be monitored closely, and cognitive decline should be
considered in follow-up operation informed consent.

## 1300

## P470: Pioneering robot-assisted spine surgery in the United
Kingdom

Carlos De La Torre

1

, Darren Lui

1

, Bisola Ajayi

2

, and Khai Lam

1

1

Orthopaedics, London Bridge Hospital, London, United
Kingdom

2

Orthopaedics, NHS St George's Hospital, London, United
Kingdom

Introduction: The placement of a large interbody implant allows
for a larger fusion area. Retroperitoneal approaches facilitate the
placement of these implants. At the same time, robot-navigation facilitate
complex posterior screw fixation. This is a single-surgeon, single-centre
report of the first procedures ever performed for navigated robot-assisted
spine surgery in the United Kingdom. Materials and Methods:
Between October 2019 and May 2021, we identified 34 consecutive patients who
underwent robot-assisted spine surgery. The demographic, intraoperative, and
perioperative data of the 34 patients were reviewed. Technique:
With the patient positioned in the lateral or dorsal decubitus position, a
routine anterior lumbar interbody fusion (ALIF) and/or an extreme lateral
interbody fusion (ELIF) is performed. In a second stage, with the patient in
a ventral decubitus position, a dynamic reference base and a surveillance
marker are put in place, an intraoperative CT scan is obtained and the
images are transferred into the robotic positioning system. Pedicle screw
trajectories are planned and saved. A surgeon-controlled foot pedal
activates and positions the robot arm to the planned pedicle trajectory.
Stab incisions are made on the skin where the pedicle screws are inserted
using navigated instruments guided by the robotic arm. This sequence will be
repeated until all pedicle screws had been placed. Rods will then be placed
in a standard fashion and locking caps will be set once the rods are in
their proper position. If needed, one can also insert the pedicle screws
using an open or a transmuscular technique or consider performing a single
position lateral (SPL) approach with a single stage procedure.
Results: Of the 34 patients, 65 levels were treated in
total (204 screws). 21 patients (60%) underwent single-level fixation, 14 of
them (67%) were treated at the L5/S1 level, 3 at L3/L4, 3 at L4/L5 and 1 at
L2/L3 level, 13 patients (40%) underwent multi-level fixation, with 4 of
them treated for adult scoliosis. Eight patients underwent a supine ALALIF
approach and one a lateral decubitus AL-ALIF, 7 had a pure ALIF approach, 8
patients underwent combined XLIF and AL-ALIF approach in a lateral
decubitus, 6 underwent pure XLIF approach, 1 patient had previous TLIF
surgery, and 3 patients underwent single position lateral surgery (lateral
decubitus fusion and posterior screw fixation). The average estimated blood
loss was 60 cc. The average planning time was 10 min and the average
duration of surgery was 50 min. The average patient age was 54 years and 64%
(22/34) were male. The average BMI was 28.1 kg/m2. There were no
re-interventions due to complications or mal positioned screws.
Conclusion: Minimally invasive spine surgery using
robot-assisted navigation yields an improved level of accuracy, decreased
radiation exposure, minimal muscle disruption, decreased blood loss, shorter
operating theatre time, length of stay, and lower complication rates.
Further follow-up of the patients treated will help compare the clinical
outcomes with other techniques.

## 1340

## P471: Predicting sustained opioid use after surgery for degenerative
spondylolisthesis using machine learning algorithms

Paul Ogink

1

, Aditya Karhade

2

, Nicole van Steijn

2

, Olivier Groot

2

, Cumhur Oner

1

, Jorrit-Jan Verlaan

1

, and Joseph Schwab

2

1

UMC Utrecht, The Netherlands

2

Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, United States

Study design: Prediction model study. Objectives:
We aimed to 1) develop and 2) internally validate a machine learning (ML)
prediction model for prolonged opioid use following surgery for degenerative
spondylolisthesis. Methods: We included adult patients who
underwent surgery for degenerative spondylolisthesis in two tertiary care
referral spine centers. Our primary outcome measure was prolonged
postoperative opioid use defined as prolonged opioid prescriptions 90-180
days after index surgery. The following variables were selected and
subsequently used for algorithm development: age, body mass index, duration
of symptoms, preoperative laboratory values for hemoglobin and white blood
cell count, and preoperative medication use (opioids, statins and
antihypertensives). Four ML algorithms were developed to predict prolonged
postoperative opioid use and were assessed by discrimination, calibration,
and overall performance. Results: For this study, 878 patients
were included for development of the ML algorithms. The rate of prolonged
opioid use was 10% (88/878). The Random Forest algorithm was the best model
based on discrimination c-statistic = 0.80), calibration (slope = 0.86;
intercept = 0.01), and overall performance (Brier score = 0.09). Main
predictive factors were BMI and age. Conclusion: In this study
we developed a ML algorithm with good discrimination and calibration to
predict sustained opioid use after surgery for lumbar degenerative
spondylolisthesis. Utilization of this model could aid clinicians and
healthcare organizations in tailoring their strategies and policies for
reducing sustained opioid use in high-risk patients.

## 1550

## P472: Our experience with a three dimensional patient-specific simulator
for pedicle screw insertion

Zohra Souei

1

, Meryam Slama

1

, Mohamed Boukhit

1

, and Maher Hadhri

1

1

Neurosurgery, Fattouma Bourguiba University Hospital, Monastir,
Tunisia

Introduction: Pedicle screw fixation (PSF) is a challenging
surgical procedure to perform with significant complications rate. It
depends largely on the expertise of the surgeon with a steep learning curve.
Artificial intelligence applications and robotics are now widely used in
this field around the world. On the other hand the access to these rising
technologies in many lower income countries, such ours, is not affordable
and this constitutes a major barrier to the neurosurgical care standards.
Material and Methods: We developed a process to three
dimensional PSF simulator for preoperative planning then studied its
application on a serie of ten patients. Our aim is to describe the steps of
the preoperative planning, compare them with post-operative results.
Results: After the 3D manipulation by the surgeon and
preparation of the spinal fixation prototype, patients were then operated
on. For all cases, each screw was inserted in place in only one attempt,
with a satisfying placement judged on fluoroscopic image control.
Post-operative imaging were then compared to the final simulation prototype
finding almost the same planned trajectory. Conclusion: This is
an attempt from our team to make an affordable yet accurate tool to help not
only surgeons with preoperative planning but also trainees with a
well-developed workshop experience.

## 1645

## P473: The feasibility and efficacy of computer-assisted screw insertion
in severe complex spinal deformity: a prospective study

Yiqi Zhang

1

 and Yong Hai

1

1

Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Beijing Chaoyang Hospital, Capital
Medical University, Beijing, China

Background: Severe spinal deformity is one of the most
challenging problems demanding spine surgeons to face due to its complicated
characteristics. Computed tomography data of the spine were utilized for
spine reconstruction by the Mimics Medical software and surgical planning
including spine morphology, radiographic measurement was worked out
individually to increase the safety of the correction surgery. The objective
of the study was to explore the feasibility and efficacy of
computer-assisted screw inserting planning (CASIP) in surgical treatment for
severe spinal deformity. Methods: A total of 50 patients
participated in this prospective cohort study. 25 patients were allocated
into CASIP group and 25 patients were in Non-CASIP group. The demographic
data, and radiological spinal parameters were documented and analyzed. Each
pedicle screw insertion was classified as satisfactory insertion or
unsatisfactory insertion based on Gertzbein-Robbins classification. The
primary outcome was the accuracy of pedicle screw placement. The secondary
outcomes were the rate of puncturing screws, estimated blood loss, surgical
time, correction rate and other radiological parameters.
Results: A total of 45 eligible patients completed the
study. 20 patients were in CASIP group and 25 patients were in Non- CASIP
group. The accuracy of pedicle screw placement in CASIP Group and Non-CASIP
Group were (92.0 ± 5.5) % and (82.6 ± 8.3) % (p < 0.05), and the rate of
puncturing screws were (0 (0-0)) % and (0 (0-6.25)) % (p < 0.05). The
median surgical time were 280.0 (IQR: 260.0-300.0) min and 310 (IQR:
267.5-390.0) min in two group and showed significant statistic difference (p
< 0.05). Conclusions: CASIP has good feasibility and can
gain a more accurate and reliable instruments fixation, with which spine
surgeons can make a detailed and personalized screw planning preoperatively
to achieve satisfying screw placement.
Keywords: Spinal deformity, Computer-assisted, Screw placement, Software

## 1668

## P474: Radiographic analysis of the spino-pelvic parameters obtained by
using the anterior tlif device. A multi-center study

Maximo de Zavalia

1,2

, Enrique Augusto Gobbi

1,2

, Felipe Jose Lanari Zubiaur

2

, and Rodrigo Pons Belmonte

3,4

1

Orthopaedic Surgery, CEMIC, Buenos Aires, Argentina

2

Orthopaedic Surgery, Grupo Vertebral, Buenos Aires,
Argentina

3

Orthopaedic Surgery, Hospital Argentino, San Juan,
Argentina

4

Orthopaedic Surgery, Hospital Marcial Quiroga, San Juan,
Argentina

Introduction: Sagittal balance is extremely important when
planning spinal surgery. Currently we have various devices provided by the
industry that help us achieve certain results. When needing to restore the
low lumbar lordosis, certain devices such as the ALIF, LLIF or OLIF are
usually the most chosen. Understanding that not all patients are candidates
for any of these techniques, Nuvasive® launched the TLIF-anterior
device on the market to improve the lordosis that can be obtained through
the posterior approach. The objective of the study is to report the results
obtained according to the position in which the previous TLIF device was
placed. Material and Methods: A multicenter, observational,
analytical, cross-sectional, retrospective recovery study. The pre and
post-operative spino-pelvic parameters of spinograms of patients who
underwent surgery between September 2019 and August 2021 were evaluated.
Inclusion: patients who underwent lumbar arthrodesis with an anterior
TLIF-type implant placed in L4-L5 or L5-S1. Exclusion: patients without a
pre or post-surgical spinogram and more than one device.
Results: The mean of monosegmental lordosis was 13.33º
preoperatively and 18.81º postoperatively, (p < 0.001). The mean of
monosegmental lordosis was 7.32º, 2.95º, and 6.24º for positions I, II, and
III respectively. The mean disc height was 6.22 mm for the preoperative
period and 11.06 mm for the postoperative period (p > 0.001).
Conclusion: We found encouraging results on the placement
of this type of device and its relationship with segmental lordosis,
understanding the importance of their arrangement at the anterior end of the
disc space.

## 1691

## P475: Cadaveric laminar torque failure in novel system for stabilizing
the cervical and upper thoracic spine

Manoj Kodigudla

1

, Frank Boehm

2

, Amey Kelkar

1

, Muzammil Mumtaz

1

, Vijay Goel

1

, Sundershan Triparthi

1

, William Lavalle

3

, and Nikunj Patel

4

1

Departments of Bioengineering and Orthopaedic Surgery University of
Toledo, Engineering Center for OrthopaedicResearch Excellence (E-CORE),
Toledo, OH, United States

2

Research and Development, TruSpine Technologies, Plc., New Hartford
NY, United States

3

Department of Orthopedics, SUNY Upstate Medical University,
Syracuse, NY, United States

4

Neurosciences, Institute of Neurosciences, Southmead Hospital,
University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom

Introduction: Novel means of stabilizing the spine are always of
interest to the spinal surgical community as well as the larger health care
delivery ecosystem. A novel strategy being introduced utilizes unique
hook-anchors which are individually fastened to the lamina, these anchors
then being coupled to a rod which stabilizes the construct. A question was
raised regarding the potential for laminar injury by the fastening
mechanism, and to that end, this study was performed at the University of
Toledo. Material and Methods: The hook-anchor which is fastened
to the caudal edge of the lamina is provided with a fixed sublaminar foot
plate and a vertically-adjustable dorsal laminar foot plate, the latter
being actuated by a drive screw. The Manufacturer provided the investigators
at the University of Toledo with a series of “Dummy” clamps, with an
identical actuation mechanism, and which precisely emulated the closing
force of the proposed final anchor design. These included large, medium and
small sizes identical to the design as well. Disarticulated C3-7 vertebrae
from 3 specimens were used in the study, and various sized “clamps,” were
applied to the specimens as deemed size-appropriate. The screws were
actuated with a T8 Driver, and were initially tightened to 6
+ .5 in. lbs. Torque, considering the Company’s
recommendation of 6-8 in. lbs. After inspecting the integrity of the
specimen, the torque was then increased at increments of 4 in.lbs., using a
torque meter, with the end-point being either a) laminar fracture, or b) or
implant failure, or c) a torque of 20 + .5 in. lbs.
was reached, at which point the study was concluded. Maximum torque before
failure was recorded, and a total of 6 data points for each sized anchor was
obtained. Results: At 6 ± .5 in. lbs., all of the clamps were
fastened in a satisfactory fashion and the laminae showed no evidence of
anything disconcerting. In 16 of the specimens, a torque of 18 ± .5 was
achieved without any evidence of laminar damage, and overall, in 13 of the
18 subject laminae, a torque of 20 ± was reached without laminar injury. One
implant had a mechanical failure at 15.7 in. lbs on the left lamina, and was
replaced by another clamp, completing the test on that lamina. One specimen
was excluded because a large anchor was inappropriately utilized therein. In
one specimen, bilateral C6 laminar damage was noted at a torque of 20 ± .5
in. lbs., and in another specimen, left-sided C7 laminar damage was noted,
again at a torque of 20 ± .5. Conclusion: These data offer new
insights into laminar strength, and strongly suggest that this type of
anchor can be secured to the caudal aspect of a cervical lamina at a torque
of 6-8 in. lbs. without concern of laminar damage. This is important when
considering the technique of cervical stabilization being introduced. These
data can, of course, be useful going forward as other strategies and
techniques are introduced.

## 1700

## P476: Posterior ligamentous complex reconstruction with artificial
ligament in patients without cervical vertebral fracture: a technical
note

Chengyi Huang

1

 and Hao Liu

1

1

Department of Orthopedics, West China Hospital, Sichuan University,
Chengdu, China

Introduction: Posterior ligamentous complex (PLC) offers
restraints to deformation as a complex with an interconnected manner. The
stability and range of motion of the posterior cervical spine is greatly
restricted when the posterior ligamentous complex is damaged, even without
bone disruptions. We describe an original surgical technique, advantages
with the novel technology, and postoperative condition of patient who was
first used of artificial ligament in reconstruction surgery of posterior
complex ligamentous injuries in patients without lower cervical vertebral
fracture. The aim of this technique is to retain the mobility of the injured
segment as much as possible on the basis of spinal stability, and try to
treat these patients with dynamic reconstruction. Material and
Methods: Detailed description of the reconstruction surgery with
artificial ligaments carried out for C4-6 posterior complex ligamentous
injuries in a 27-year-old male, with neck pain and restricted movement due
to high fall injury accompanied by impaired movement of limbs, is presented.
Results: Immediately postsurgery, the patient's neck pain
and quadriparesis had been improved. The spinal canal decompression and
cervical spine sequence was satisfactory, the facet joint face was in good
position and spinous process spacing returned to normal. After three months
of rehabilitation, the patient reported improvement of symptoms, physical
and imaging examination showed a significant improvement in the patient's
condition. The patient's neck mobility motor function had improved further.
Conclusion: The present data demonstrates that the novel
technique for reconstruction of PLC injury is feasible and safe. However,
familiarity with cervical anatomy and adequate experience for the lateral
mass screws placement during surgery are crucial for this procedure.
Therefore, this surgery should be best conducted by a highly experienced
cervical surgery team.
Keywords: Cervical vertebra; Posterior ligamentous complex; Injury;
Non-fusion; Reconstruction

## 1734

## P477: Characterization of TumorID technology to differentiate tumor type
in frozen samples

Jacob Sperber

1

, Tanner Zachem

1,2

, Ravi Prakash

1,2

, Gregory Chamberlin

3

, Thomas Cummings

3

, Annee Nguyen

1

, Harrison Hockenberry

1

, Cesar Baeta

4

, Weston Ross

1,2

, Patrick Codd

2,2,5

, Edwin Owolo

1

, Dana Rowe

1

, Tara Dalton

1

, Emily Luo

1

, and C. Rory Goodwin

1,5

1

School of Medicine, Department of Neurosurgery

2

Department of Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science

3

Health System, Department of Pathology, Duke University, Durham,
United States

4

Center for Population Health Sciences, Stanford University, United
States

5

Duke Cancer Institute, Durham, United States

Purpose: Neurosurgical tumor resection depends upon
identification of tumorous tissue from non-tumor. The nascent TumorID
technology employs fluorescence spectroscopy to differentiate tumor from
non-tumor. This study investigates the ability of TumorID technology to
classify frozen neurosurgical samples based on tumor type.
Methods: Patients undergoing neurosurgical resection or
biopsy for suspected malignancy with the Department of Neurosurgery at Duke
University School were identified. Frozen sections of samples were prepared
with either hematoxylin and eosin or polychrome. An excitation wavelength of
405nm was used to obtain emission spectra from tissue as previously
validated by the Codd lab. For the most prominent peak at 564 nm, the
maximum intensity value was obtained by averaging 10 independent intensity
measurements centered around the peak. Results: Tissue analyzed
consisted of glioma (n = 242), gonadotroph adenoma (n = 14), prolactinoma (n
= 19), hemangioblastoma (n = 11), squamous cell carcinoma (n = 106),
metastases (n = 5), Rathke cleft cyst (n = 9), inflammation (n = 35), and
radiation necrosis (n = 1). Spectral shape across all tissue types between
550 nm and 650 nm were similar potentially representing eosin emission;
however, signal intensity varied amongst tissue type. Centered around a
wavelength of 564 nm, prolactinoma had a higher mean peak intensity of
0.556, 95% CI [0.507, 0.605], compared to the mean peak intensity for
gonadotroph adenoma of 0.321, 95% CI [0.303, 0.339]. Spectral signature for
radiation necrosis between 450 nm and 565 nm was distinct from all other
tissue types. Conclusion: The TumorID remains a promising tumor
identification tool. This study represents an important step in
characterizing the ability for TumorID technology to discern tumor from
non-tumor in frozen pathology section.
Keywords: Tumor detection; fluorescence spectroscopy

## 1946

## P478: Telescopic vertebral body replacing implant with improved
functionality: design concept

Oleksii Nekhlopochyn

1

1

Spinal Neurosurgery, Romodanov Neurosurgery Institute, Kyiv,
Ukraine

Introduction: Anterior decompressive corpectomy is frequently
used while surgical care of a number of subaxial cervical spine pathological
states. The most progressive and surgeon easy-to-use way to substitute
vertebral body is telescopic vertebral body implant. The purpose of our
study was to develop a concept of creation improved telescopic vertebral
body implant for anterior subaxial cervical decompression-fusion surgery.
Material and Methods: We’ve searched the database of
National Center for Biotechnology Information using following keywords:
“expandable cage”, “distractable cage”, “expandable vertebral body
replacement”, “distractable vertebral body replacement”, “expandable VBR”,
“distractable VBR”, “distractible cage”, “distractible vertebral body
replacement”, “distractible VBR” and MeSH terms “Spinal Diseases / surgery”,
“Orthopedic Fixation Devices”, “Orthopedic Procedures / instrumentation”,
“Spine / surgery” and selected 24 most frequently used telescopic implants.
The analyzes of results allowed to reveal design features that define
functionality of different implants. Results: Detected
constructive features of implants that influence the surgery results:
• type of implant (integrated or not integrated with anterior
plate);
• design configuration;
• the design of the side walls of the implants and the size of
the perforations;
• number of components;
• universality (interchangeability) of parts;
• type and location of the sliding mechanism;
• type of perception of compression load;
• the way of blocking the implant in the final position;
• the configuration of the endface of the cage contacting with
the end plates of the vertebral bodies;
• the size, location and number of teeth on the end surface of
the implant;
• contact area in the system “implant - vertebral body”;
• the volume of the internal cavity for the composite
material;
• contact area of composite material with the locking plates of
the vertebral bodies;
• type of filling the structure with composite material;
• the possibility of compaction of the composite material in the
“composite material -vertebral body” system after implantation
of implant;
• the number and location of holes to supplement the composite
material after installation;
• implant weight
The search results allowed to develop original vertebral body replacing
implant, that possesses most useful constructive features:
• has the minimum size;
• has a larger cavity compared to that in other devices.;
• has sufficient strength, low metal content, and low weight
• compressive stress is distributed over the entire graft
cross-section, that enables relatively thin wall systems to
withstand sufficiently high compressive load;
• excludes damage to the endplates by teeth of end surfaces
during placement;
• is easy-to-fabricate and easy-to-use.
Conclusion: Big cavity of prototype and proposed installation
method gives a good chance during the operation to compact the composite
material along the entire length of implant. It provides intraoperative
prophylaxis of an undesirable fibrotic fusion of the vertebral motion
segment and maximizes the probability of true bone consolidation.
Preclinical and clinical studies show good results but further research
needed to introduce the final product into clinical practice.

## 1956

## P479: The role of 3D-printed patient-specific models in the understanding
of complex spine morphologies

Benjamin Hajnal

1,2

, Máté Turbucz

1,2

, Ferenc Bereczki

1,2

, Agoston Jakab Pokorni

1,2

, Zoltan Hoffer

3

, Aron Lazary

1,4

, and Peter E. Eltes

1,4

1

In Silico Biomechanics Laboratory, National Center for Spinal
Disorders, Buda Health Center, Budapest, Hungary

2

School of PhD Studies

3

National Center for Spinal Disorders, Buda Health Center, Budapest,
Hungary

4

Department of Spine Surgery, Department of Orthopaedics, Semmelweis
University, Budapest, Hungary

Introduction: 3D printed models facilitate the understanding of
complex anatomical relationships, aiding preoperative surgical planning.
Their use is beneficial in patient education, but also in reducing the
operative time according to the results of scientific publications from the
last five years. In spine surgery, there is currently no consensus or
recommendation on when 3D printed models should and should not be used. We
aimed to develop a questionnaire-based survey to investigate the usefulness
of 3D printed models in complex spine surgery cases. Material and
Methods: CT scans of patients in 6 complex spine surgery cases
were segmented using Mimics® software. Segmentation accuracy was
quantified using Dice Similarity Index (DSI). The models were fabricated
using fused deposition modeling (FDM) 3D printing technology. CT images of
the models were taken, segmented and compared with the original virtual
models to assess geometric accuracy. A questionnaire, consisting 6 questions
for each of the cases (36 questions in total that can be answered by a scale
from 1 to 10) was filled out by spine surgeons (n = 41) from multiple
hospitals after reviewing the imaging (RTG, MR, CT) scans and then examining
the 3D printed models in hand. The digital form of the questionnaire was
created using SurveyMonkey® platform. Statistical analysis of the data was
performed using SPSS® 23.0, G*Power software. Results: The
geometric variation of the printed models was < 1 mm in every case. The
responses show that spine surgeons find the models very useful (8.75 ± 0.14,
ɑ = 0.05). Further analysis shows that there is significant difference
between orthopedic and neurosurgeons (p < 0.001), and between groups with
different years of clinical practice (p < 0.05). The additional benefit
of 3D printed models seems to be the greatest in patient education (p <
0.001). Conclusion: For the clinical integration of 3D printed
models, we need to know how surgeons perceive their usefulness. The role of
basic skills is unknown in the acceptance of 3D printed physical models. The
developed questionnaire survey could greatly contribute to the clinical
integration of 3D printed models, providing evidence for different funding
parties.

## Spine Biologics

## 1319

## P480: Ceramic bone graft substitute (Mg-HA) in spinal fusion: a
prospective pilot study

Giuseppe Tedesco

1

, Cristiana Griffoni

1

, Giovanni Barbanti Bròdano

1

, Angelo Nataloni

2

, and Alessandro Gasbarrini

1

1

Department of Spine Surgery, IRCCS Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli,
Bologna, Italy

2

Finceramica Spa, Faenza, Italy

Introduction: Iliac crest bone graft (ICBG) is considered the
gold standard for spine surgical procedures to achieve a successful fusion
due to its known osteoinductive and osteoconductive properties. However,
complications related to harvesting procedure and donor site morbidity have
been largely reported in literature, favouring the development of a wide
range of alternative products to be used as bone graft extenders or
substitutes for spine fusion. Among all, ceramic-based biomaterials have
been widely studied and employed in the last years as bone graft
substitutes. We report here the results of a prospective pilot study aimed
to evaluating the grade of ossification obtained by the use of an Mg-doped
hydroxyapatite (HA) product to achieve postero-lateral fusion in
degenerative spine diseases. Material and Methods: A
prospective pilot clinical study was conducted at our Centre from February
2017 to March 2020, following the approval of the local Ethics Committee,
with a total number of 20 patients recruited, who were followed up for 18
months. Inclusion criteria were as follows: skeletally mature subjects, at
least 18 years of age at the time of surgery with symptomatic spinal
degenerative disc disease requiring postero-lateral fusion at L1-S1 tract,
signature of the written informed consent for the study. Conventional
posterior approach for lumbar spinal fusion was performed. After the
positioning of pedicle screws, decompression of the cauda and nerve roots
was achieved with hemilaminectomy and foraminotomy. SintLife was apposed on
the hemi-laminae and transvers process on the contralateral side of the
hemilaminectomy, while on the hemilaminectomy side, foramino-arthrectomy was
performed to insert the interbody fusion cage. SintLife is a CE- marked,
implantable, non-active bone graft substitute, available in form of paste,
composed of biomimetic hydroxyapatite (HA) enriched in magnesium ions
(Mg-HA) in a similar amount as in the one found in human bones. Radiographic
and clinical data were collected before surgery and at 3, 6 and 12- 18
months follow-up. Radiographic images were used to determine the degree of
fusion and bone regeneration, determined by an independent radiologist using
the Brantigan classification. Clinical scores (Oswestry Disability Index
(ODI), Visual Analog Scale (VAS) and EuroQoL-5L (EQ-5L)) were used to
evaluate the improvement of patients’ health quality following surgery. The
incidence of adverse events, complications, unattended reactions, incidents
was recorded. Results: Results showed a successful degree of
fusion of about 62% at 12 months follow-up and an improvement of quality of
life and health status starting from 6 months FU, as evaluated by clinical
scores (ODI, VAS and EQ-5L). No adverse events related to the biomaterial
were reported. Conclusion: The present pilot study showed a
safety profile of a Mg-doped HA bone graft substitute used to achieve
postero-lateral fusion in the treatment of degenerative spine diseases.
However, the rate of successful fusion was largely inferior to that reported
in the literature for the autologous bone graft, which is the “gold
standard” for spinal fusion.

## 1679

## P481: Bioactive glass (S53P54) and polyethylene-glycol and glicerol water
soluble synthetic adhesive as a effective fusion promoter in anterior lumbar
interbody fusion surgery

Stipe Corluka

1

, Stjepan Dokuzovic

1

, Jure Pavesic

1

, and Vide Bilic

1

1

Spinal Surgery Division, Department of Traumatology, University
Hospital Centre Sestre Milosrdnice, Zagreb, Croatia

Introduction: Spinal fusion remains the mainstay of treatment
for many different spine conditions and fusion may be achieved in several
different ways, though not all methods are inherently equally effective and
reliable. In principle, the larger the contact area, the shorter the
distance between bony elements, and the presence of living bone (osteogenic,
osteoconductive and osteoinductive properties) all increase the chances of
successful fusion. In certain cases, the gap being fused may be quite wide
and it may be difficult to obtain a sufficient quantity of live autologous
bone graft. Anterior lumbar interbody fusion cages (ALIF, OLIF, LLIF, mesh
and expandable cages) necessarily increase the distance between end plates,
making it difficult to bridge the gap with new bone. In such cases we rely
on synthetic materials which can provide sufficient graft volume, while
reducing donor site morbidity. According to our knowledge there have been no
studies analyzing the fusion capacity of isolated bioactive glass and
polyethylene-glycol and glycerol water soluble synthetic adhesives in
anterior lumbar approaches. We present a retrospective analysis of cases
having undergone single or multilevel anterior lumbar interbody fusion
procedures using interbody cages filled with bioactive glass. Material
and Methods: We analyzed the radiological results of patients
having undergone anterior lumbar interbody fusion procedures using lumbar
interbody cages filled with bioactive glass without additional autologous
bone. Follow-up was performed by standard clinical evaluation, radiographs
at regular intervals, as well as by CT scan at 6 and 12 months to analyze
fusion success/failure through the cage. Results: Patients
having undergone anterior, oblique, or lateral lumbar interbody fusions
through cages displayed successful bony fusion from endplate to endplate
through the cage device at 6 to 12 months follow-up.
Conclusion: Bioactive glass is an effective fusion promoter
with a high rate of successful fusion when used alone in an anterior lumbar
interbody fusion cage.

## 1720

## P482: Is risk factors of vertebral fractures predictable? BMD, Vit-D,
calcium, and bone turn-over marker measurement

Kwan Ho Park

1

, Jung Hoon Sul

1

, Da Hoon Hong

1

, Ju chul Yang

1

, and Tae Wan Kim

1

1

Department of Neurosurgery, VHS Medical Center, Seoul, South
Korea

Introduction: Measurement of bone mineral density (BMD) is the
gold standard for the diagnosis of osteoporosis. However, the BMD
measurement does not provide information on bone quality. We reported the
relationship between BMD, calcium, Vit-D, and Bone turnover markers (BTMs)
in patients with vertebral fracture group. Material and
Methods: This study retrospectively reviewed medical records of
patients who were treated in our institution from 2017 to 2018. A
comparative analysis was carried out between 38 patients with vertebral
fracture (Group A) and 62 patients admitted with no vertebral fracture
(Group B). Sex, age, BMD, calcium, Vit-D, and BTMs were analyzed as
variables affecting vertebral fractures. In this study, BTMs are divided to
formation markers [serum bone-specific alkaline phosphatase (BSAP),
osteocalcin (OC)] and resorption markers [serum C-telopeptide (CTX).
Results: The average age of the subjects was 74.0 ± 6.9
years. The mean BMD were 2.7 ± 1.3 in group A and 1.6 ± 1.0 in group B,
respectively. The mean serum calcium levels were 8.9 ± 0.9 ng/dL and 9.1 ±
0.9 ng/dL, respectively. The mean serum 1,25(OH) vit-D levels were 16.6 ±
10.9 ng/mL and 16.8 ± 7.3 ng/mL, respectively. The mean serum OC levels were
15.8 ± 8.2 ng/mL and 14.7 ± 6.6 ng/mL, respectively. The mean serum CTX
levels were 0.5 ± 0.2 ng/mL and 0.4 ± 0.2 ng/mL, respectively. The mean
serum BSAP levels were 12.0 ± 5.4 mcg/L and 10.2 ± 4.4 mcg/L, respectively.
BMD of group A was lower than that of group B (P &lt; 0.05). The other
variables showed no differences between the 2 groups.
Conclusion: BMD of vertebral fracture patients showed
difference from that of no vertebral fracture group in Korean elderly
population. The occurrence of vertebral fracture is affected by lower BMD
rather than another laboratory findings. The main goal of treatment is to
reduce the prevalence of fractures, maintain stable or increasing BMD.

## 1988

## P483: Chronic myeloid leukemia: an atypical presentation of a spinal cord
compression

Ahmed Amine Daoued

1

, Kolsi Fatma

1

, Ghorbel Mohamed

1

, Ines Cherif

1

, and Boudouara Zaher

1

1

Neurosurgery Department, Habib Bourguiba University Hospital, Sfax,
Tunisia

Introduction: Leptomeningeal Leukaemia in chronic myeloid
leukemia (CML) is a rare phenomenon and represents infiltration of leukemic
blasts in both the subdural and epidural spaces other than bone marrow.
Material and Methods: We report the case of a patient who
was treated for a leptomenengial leukimia in the neurosurgery department, in
the Habib Bourguiba university hospital, Sfax, Tunisia.
Results: We report the findings of a 35-year-old woman who
presented to the emergency room with symptoms of acute spinal cord
compression. A D8 to D10 laminectomy with evacuation of a subdural
collection was performed. Pathological cell study of the cerebral spinal
fluid (CSF) showed myeloid leukemia cells. These findings were consistent
with those observed on bone marrow aspiration. The patient received
chemotherapy after the surgery as the baseline treatment for her CML.
Conclusion: Leptomeningeal Leukaemia is rare complication
of myeloid leukemia. The baseline treatment is chemotherapy after
surgery.

## 2015

## P484: Platelet rich plasma in lumbar facet joint pain: a systematic
review

Hans Grohs

1

, Fabiano Soares

2

, Roberta Yamaguchi

3

, Raissa Pedroso

4

, Robert Meves

1

, and Edilson Silva Machado

2

1

Department of Orthopedics and Traumatology, Santa Casa de
Misericórdia de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil

2

Clínica Regenerar: centro de medicina da dor, Porto Alegre,
Brazil

3

Departamento de Ciências Fisiológicas, Faculdade de Ciências Médicas
da Santa Casa de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil

4

Universidade Estadual de Maringá , Maringá, Brazil

Introduction: To evaluate the efficacy and safety of the use of
Platelet Rich Plasma (PRP) in low back pain of facet origin.
Methods: The research was carried out according to the
guidelines of the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and
Meta-Analyses (PRISMA), searching the following Databases: Pubmed, Scopus
and Web of Science. A manual search was also performed. Randomized clinical
trials, non-randomized trials and case series with more than 10 patients
were included. The quality assessment and risk of bias of the works were
analyzed using the RoB II tools and the Joanna Briggs Institute (JBI) Case
Series checklist. Results: Nine articles that met the criteria
were selected, being two randomized clinical trials with 190 patients and
seven case series with 370 patients. The Randomized Clinical Trials showed a
low risk of bias, according to the RoB II instrument, while the Case Series
showed some heterogeneity, according to the checklist proposed by the JBI.
All studies showed favorable conclusions to the use of PRP in facet joints.
There were no reports of serious adverse effects. Conclusion:
The results of the present studies demonstrate that the use of PRP can be a
viable option for the management of low back pain in facet degenerative
disease, with evidence level II, according to the researched articles.
Larger multicenter studies are needed.

## Surgical Complications

## 46

## P485: Iatrogenic vertebral artery injury during anterior cervical spine
surgery: a systematic review

Qing Guan

1

1

Spine Surgery, The First People’s Hospital of Yibin, Yibin,
China

Background: Iatrogenic vertebral artery injury (VAI) during
anterior cervical surgery is rare but potentially catastrophic.
Methods: Causes, presentation, diagnosis, management,
prognosis, and Prevention of VAI were reviewed following Preferred Reporting
Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses guidelines. English language
studies and case reports published from 1980 to recent were retrieved. Data
on diagnosis, surgical procedures and approach, site and cause of VAI,
management, outcomes, and vertebral artery (VA) status were extracted.
Results: In 25 articles including 54 patients, VAI was
diagnosed during or after surgery commonly indicated for cervical
degenerative diseases (64%), tumors (14%), and trauma (9%). The incidence of
VAI for each side was similar regardless of approach. Common presentations
were unexpected copious surgical bleeding, delayed hemorrhage of
pseudoaneurysm with neck swelling, dyspnea, hypotension, and cervical bruits
caused by arteriovenous fistula. Causes included drilling (61%),
instrumentation (16%), and soft tissue retraction (8%). Direct exposure or
angiography confirmed VAI. Ten patients had VA anomalies; collateral status
was verified in 9 before definitive treatment. Tamponade was adopted for
urgent hemostasis in most cases but with a high incidence of pseudoaneurysm
(48%). Unknown VA status increased occlusion risk and neurologic sequelae
(41%). VA repair and stent placement had excellent Outcomes.
Conclusions: Extensive lateral decompression, loss of
landmarks, and anatomic variations or pathologic status of VA increased VAI
risk. Evaluation of collateral vessels before definitive treatment helped
determine appropriate management and avoid neurologic sequelae. Tamponade
was not recommended as definitive treatment. Meticulous preoperative
evaluation, cautious intraoperative manipulation, and real-time radiographic
guidance reduced VAI risk.

## 96

## P486: Postoperative occipital neuralgia in posterior upper cervical spine
surgery: a systematic review

Qing Guan

1

1

Spine Surgery, The First People’s Hospital of Yibin, Yibin,
China

Background: Postoperative occipital neuralgia (PON) after upper
cervical spine surgery can cause significant morbidity and may be
overlooked. Methods: The causes, presentation, diagnosis,
management, prognosis, and prevention of PON were reviewed following the
Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA)
guidelines. English language studies and case reports published from
inception to recent were retrieved. Data on surgical procedures, incidence,
cause of PON, management, outcomes, and preventive technique were extracted.
Results: Sixteen articles, including 591 patients, were
selected; 93% of the patients with PON underwent C1 lateral mass screw
(C1LMS) fixation, with additional 7% who underwent occipitocervical fusion
without C1 fixation. PON had an incidence that ranged from 1 to 35% and was
transient in 34%, but persistent in 66%. Five articles explained the
possible causes. The primary presentation was constant or paroxysmal burning
pain located mainly in the occipital and upper neck area and partially
extending to the vertical, retroauricular, retromandibular, and forehead
zone. Treatment included medications, nerve block, revision surgery, and
nerve stimulation. Two prospective studies compared the effect of C2 nerve
root transection on PON. Conclusion: Recent PON in upper
cervical spine surgery is a debilitating complication and was most commonly
encountered by patients undergoing C1LMS fixation. The etiology of PON is
partially clear, and the pain could be persistent and hard to cure. Reducing
the incidence of PON can be realized by improving technique. More
high-quality prospective studies are needed to define the effect of C2 nerve
root transection on PON.

## 100

## P487: Early mobilization after incidental durotomies, a systematic
review

Elie Najjar

1

, Nasir Quraishi

1

, and Mohamed Hassanin

1

1

The Spine Center of Spinal Studies and Surgery, Nottingham
University Hospital, Nottingham, United Kingdom

Introduction: An incidental durotomy is a fearful and not
uncommon complication of spinal surgery. The conventional management
involving a prolonged period of flat bed rest is highly debatable. Indeed,
there are scanty data and no consensus regarding the need or ideal duration
of post-operative bed rest following these dural tears. We systematically
evaluated the relevant literature regarding the outcomes of mobilization
within 24 hours and after 24 hours following an incidental durotomy with
respect to the length of hospital stay, minor complications and reoperation
rates. Methods:A systematic review of the English language
literature dating up until December 2021, was undertaken using search
criteria ((Dural Tear Or Durotomy) and (Mobilization Or Bed rest)) and the
PRISMA guidelines. Isolated case reports were excluded.
Results: Of a total of 243 articles, 11 studies met the
inclusion criteria (1 Level I and 10 level IV evidence) and were analyzed.
Overall, 532 patients (mean age 61.1 years) had an incidental dural tear and
were mobilized within 24 hours. Dural repair was performed in 95.3%
(507/532) of the cases. The average follow-up period was 23.24 months (3 -
80 months). The average length of stay (LOS) for this early mobilized
patients was 3.65 days. Twenty-one out of 532 (3.9 %) patients (11 studies)
required reoperation while the rate of minor complications was 26 out of 230
(11.3%) (9 studies). Additionally, 203 patients of mean age 72 years (7
studies) were mobilized after 24 hours (24 - 144 hours); 96% (194/202)
underwent a primary repair with an average LOS of 6.38 days. Comparing early
to late mobilization, there was a significant reduction in the risk of minor
complications due to early mobilization (13/102 (12.7%) vs 33/106 (31.1%) (p
= 0.006); RR: 0.47, 95CI: 0.27, 0.80), but no significant difference in
major complications and reoperation rates (3 studies) (12/106 (11.3%) vs
11/134 (8.2%) (p = 0.27; RR: 1.55, 95CI: 0.72, 3.35). The overall LOS was
also shorter for early mobilizers (3.65 vs 6.38 days).
Conclusion: Although early mobilization after repaired
incidental dural tears has a similar major complication/ reoperation rates
compared to later mobilization, it significantly decreases the risk of minor
complications and length of hospitalizations.

## 158

## P488: Superior mesenteric artery syndrome: analysis of clinical cases,
new diagnostic features, development of diagnostic protocol

Nikita Khusainov

1

, Dmitry Kokushin

1

, Sergey Beljanchikov

1

, Alexandra Filippova

1

, Tatyana Murashko

2

, Sergey Braylov

2

, Maria Pavlova

3

, and Vissarionov Sergey

1

1

Spine Pathology and Neurosurgery

2

Diagnostic Unit, Saint-Petersburg

3

Anesthesiology and Intensive Care, National Medical Research Center
for Pediatric Trauma and Orthopedics, Saint-Petersburg, Russian
Federation

Introduction: Superior mesenteric artery syndrome is a rare but
serious complication in spine deformity surgery. Little is known about
patient predisposition factors except for low weight, same as diagnostic
features in cases of spine deformity due to severe secondary changes of
abdominal content position. CT-angio is used to objectively quantify
aortomesenteric distance and angle which requires use of contrast and
exposes patient to significant amount of radiation. Material and
Methods: We performed retrospective and prospective data
evaluation of 13 patients with severe spinal deformity. CT-angiography was
performed either post-op due to SMA syndrome development or pre-op in cases
where risk factors were present. Aortomesenteric angle and distance were
calculated. Also we evaluated the course direction of SMA and its relation
with deformed vertebral column. In case of decreased distance and angle
endoscopy was performed for evaluation of duodenum. 3 patients underwent
MRI-angiography of the aorta aimed on visualization of SMA as an alternative
to CT-angiography. Results: In 4 patients we observed
left-sided direction of SMA course with decreased aortomesenteric angle and
distance. In 3 out of these 4 patients endoscopic picture of duodenum
compression was present. SMA syndrome occurred in 1 of those patients which
required further Roux duodenojejunostomy. Surprisingly, in 2 patients with
abnormally low aortomesenteric angle and distance we did not observe any
signs of duodenum compression probably due to specific position of the
horizontal part of the duodenum - extremely low and far away from
aortomesenteric triangle. Instead another possible site of duodenum
compression was revealed between SMA and anterior surface of the vertebral
column. For those patients who underwent MRI-angiography of the aorta we
were able to visualize aortomesenteric triangle and measure angle and
distance without using contrast or radiation. Conclusion: We
suggest that one of the predisposing factors for SMA syndrome development is
a left-sided direction of SMA course which might lead to compression of the
horizontal part of the duodenum between SMA and deformed spine. Traditional
measurements of the aortomesenteric angle and distance are not always
acceptable in patients with deformity due to the misalignment of the
duodenum and great vessels. MRI-angiography might be used as an alternative
method of SMA visualization in patients with marked deformity and low weight
without necessity to use contrast and radiation exposure. In cases of
abnormal measurements and SMA direction we would suggest to perform pre-op
endoscopy to evaluate duodenum for possible compression.

## 173

## P489: Utility of a modified 5-items frailty index to predict
complications and mortality in posterior spinal fusion

Gaston Camino-Willhuber

1

, Jeffrey Choi

2

, Sarah Oyadomari

2

, Fernando Holc

1

, Alfredo Guiroy

3

, Hansen Bow

4

, Sohaib Hashmi

2

, Michael Oh

4

, Yu-po Lee

2

, and Nitin Bhatia

2

1

Orthopaedic and Traumatology Department, Institute of Orthopedics
“Carlos E. Ottolenghi”, Hospital Italiano de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires,
Argentina

2

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, UCI Medical Center, Orange,
United States

3

Servicio de Ortopedia y Traumatología, Hospital Español de Mendoza,
Argentina

4

Department of Neurosurgery, UCI Medical Center, Orange, United
States

Introduction: The modified 5-item frailty index is a relatively
new tool to assess the post-operative complication risks. It has been
recently shown a good predictive value after posterior lumbar fusion. We
aimed to compare the predictive value of the modified 5-item frailty index
in cervical, thoracic and lumbar surgery. Material and Methods:
The American College of Surgeons - National Surgical Quality Improvement
Program (ACS-NSQIP) Database 2015-2020 was used to identify patients who
underwent elective posterior cervical, thoracic, or lumbar fusion surgeries
for degenerative conditions. The mFI-5 score was calculated based on the
presence of five co-morbidities: congestive heart failure within 30 days
prior to surgery, insulin-dependent or noninsulin-dependent diabetes
mellitus, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or pneumonia, partially
dependent or totally dependent functional health status at time of surgery,
and hypertension requiring medication. Multivariate analysis was used to
assess the independent impact of increasing mFI-5 score on the postoperative
morbidity while controlling for baseline clinical characteristics.
Results: 53252 patients were included with the mean age of
64.2 ± 7.2. 7946 suffered medical complications (14.9%), 1565 had surgical
complications (2.9%), and 3385 were readmitted (6.3%), 363 died (0.68%)
within 30 days postoperative (6.3%). The mFI-5 items score was significantly
associated with higher rates of complications, readmission, and mortality in
cervical, thoracic, and lumbar posterior fusion surgery.
Conclusion: The modified 5-item frailty score is a reliable
tool to predict complications, readmission, and mortality in patients
planned for elective posterior spinal fusion surgery.

## 191

## P490: Intravenous tranexamic acid reduces blood loss in multilevel spine
surgeries

Raphael Lotan

1

 and Oded Hershkovich

1

1

Edith Wolfson Medical Center, Holon, Israel

Introduction: Complex spine surgeries are associated with
significant blood loss requiring numerous strategies to preserve blood
volume. Tranexamic acid (TXA) is efficacious in reducing blood loss when
used topically during surgery, intravenously with or without postoperative
maintenance treatment. We aimed to evaluate the effect of preoperative
weight independent intravenous administration of 1 gr IV TXA on
perioperative blood loss in lumbar microdiscectomy, single-level lumbar
spinal fusion and multilevel lumbar decompression (two or more levels).
Methods: A retrospective cohort study comparing patients
who underwent microdiscectomy, lumbar single-level fusion and multilevel
laminectomies without and without preoperative IV TXA administration between
2016 to 2020. Results: 210 patients underwent spine surgery
without preoperative IV TXA administration between 2016 and 2018 compared to
109 patients who received preoperative IV 1 TXA gr between 2018 and 2020.
Preoperative IV TXA treatment did not change blood loss following
microdiscectomy, 77.2 ± 53.9 ml and 77.2 ± 95.2 ml, respectively (p =
0.792). Preoperative IV TXA treatment reduced blood loss following
multilevel lumbar laminectomy and lumbar PSF&TLIF (p = 0.004 and p =
0.0001, respectively). The same effect was found for intra-operative blood
loss and postoperative drainage, with preoperative TXA administration
reducing intraoperative blood loss and postoperative drainage for the
multilevel lumbar laminectomy and lumbar PSF&TLIF cohorts. No IV TXA
treatment adverse events were registered in all cohorts.
Conclusion: Routine administration of preoperative
weight-independent 1 gram intravenous TXA protocol is efficacious and safe
in reducing perioperative blood loss for lumbar multilevel laminectomies and
PSF&TLIFs.
Keywords: Tranexamic acid; Blood loss; Bleeding; Spine; Surgery
Abbreviations – TXA = Tranexamic acid, PSF = Posterior spinal fusion, TLIF =
Transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion

## 206

## P491: Does marijuana usage affect post-operative care in thoracolumbar
fusions? A retrospective study in a multiethnic population

Henry Hoang

1

, Aaron Hui

1

, Jini Jeon

1

, Dan Berman

1

, Evan Mostafa

1

, Ananth Eleswarapu

1

, and Jonathan Krystal

1

1

Orthopedics, Montefiore Medical Center, Bronx, United
States

Introduction: Thoracolumbar fusions are indicated for the
management of degenerative disc disease, degenerative spondylolisthesis,
spinal stenosis, tumors, fractures and several spinal disorders with more
than 300,000 performed annually. Marijuana usage has become an
often-overlooked risk factor for postoperative complications in
thoracolumbar fusions. Chronic cannabis usage has previously been associated
with increased rates of inpatient neurovascular, thromboembolic, and
pulmonary complications, and less favorable overall discharge disposition. A
comprehensive understanding of the postoperative sequelae within spinal
surgery patients who use cannabis is crucial for the development of
interventions aimed at reducing complications and postoperative
readmissions. The purpose of this study is to therefore compare rates of
readmission, complications, and length of stay between thoracolumbar fusion
patients who do and do not use marijuana. Material and Methods:
A retrospective study of 301 patients who underwent a thoracolumbar fusion
at a single institution in the Bronx from 2016-2018 was performed.
Demographic, surgical, and postoperative variables were collected. Marijuana
usage was confirmed by accessing documentation in the patient’s chart data.
The primary outcome measure was return to the operating room for revision.
Secondary outcomes included return to the emergency department (ED) within
30 days, 90 days, and length of stay (days). Binomial logistic regression
was performed to ascertain the effects of age, BMI, smoking status, and
alcohol use status on the likelihood that participants return to the OR for
revision. The chi-square test of homogeneity was used to determine if there
was a difference in rates of returning to the emergency room within 30 and
90 days. An independent-samples t-test was run to determine if there were
differences in postoperative length of stay between the two groups.
Results: A total of 301 patients were categorized into
marijuana users (N = 75) and non-users (n = 226). Model fit was assessed
using the Hosmer and Lemeshow goodness of fit test, p =.191 indicating that
the model was not a poor fit. The model explained 4.3%% (Nagelkerke R2) of
the variance in heart disease and correctly classified 90.0% of cases. Of
the five predictor variables, only marijuana status was statistically
significant. Marijuana users had 2.5 times higher odds to return to the
operating room for revision compared to non-users, 2.49, (95% CI 1.07 to
5.78), p = .034. 12 (18.7%) marijuana users returned to the emergency
department within 30 days of operation compared to 29 (12.8%) of non-users,
a non-statistically significant difference in proportion of .059, p=.211. 26
(34.7%) marijuana users returned to the emergency department within 90 days
of operation compared to 58 (25.7%), a non-statistically significant
difference in proportion of .09, p = .132 There was a statistically
non-significant difference in length of stay (days) between marijuana users
(9.1 ± 10.5) and non-users (8.1 ± 7.6), with marijuana users staying longer
than non-users, -.96 (95% CI, -3.2 to 1.24),t(301) = -856, p = .393.
Conclusion: Our retrospective analysis identified a
significant association between marijuana usage and return to operative room
for revision follow thoracolumbar surgery. Marijuana usage was not
associated with increased postoperative infections, rates of return to the
emergency department within 30 days of operation, and length of stay.

## 280

## P492: Factors associated with increased surgical drain output after
spinal deformity correction in adults

Ashley Duncan

1

, Devender Singh

1

, John Stokes

1

, Matthew Geck

1

, and Eeric Truumees

1

1

Ascension Texas Spine and Scoliosis, Austin, United States

Introduction: Surgical drains are the source of much scrutiny
and debate in terms of post-operative outcomes, especially those centered
around surgical site infections and overall length of stay. The aim of this
study was to identify factors associated with increased drain output in
adults that have undergone surgical correction for spinal deformity.
Material and Methods: Retrospective analysis was conducted
on 106 adult patients who underwent surgical deformity correction for
degenerative scoliosis or kyphosis over 2.5 years. 26 independent variables
were collected from demographic, clinical, surgical, and post-operative
domains and were subject to comparative and other statistical analyses.
Results: Overall mean total drain output was 2827.09 ± 1547
mLs. “High Drain Output” (HDO) was defined as greater than the overall upper
quartile value, > 3325.88 mLs. A total of 27 (25.5%) patients were deemed
to have HDO. Demographically, HDO was associated with increased age and
being a former smoker. Clinically, HDO was associated with an increased
preoperative Thromboelastography (TEG) Percent Platelet Inhibition value,
blood types A-, A+ and O-. Intraoperative variables associated with HDO were
increased Skin-to-Skin surgical time, Number of Levels fused, Estimated
Blood Loss (EBL) and subsequent Cell Saver return, Albumin administered and
being the Index surgery. 99.1% of patients received intraoperative
Tranexamic Acid (TXA)for bleeding prophylaxis. Ultimately, the only
variables that were significantly different between cohorts were
Skin-to-Skin time (473.04 ± 67.26 minutes vs 415.73 ± 90.86 minutes, p =
0.005), Number of Levels Fused (12.41 ± 2.59 vs 10.61 ± 3.12, p = 0.0023),
EBL (1504.44 ± 882.43 mLs vs 1091.46 ± 741.2 mLs, p = 0.02) and Cell Saver
return (731.48 ± 442.71 mLs vs 522.59 ± 330.57 mLs). When subject to
logistic regression, the final model identified Male sex decreased odd of
HDO by 96.55% and a one-unit increase in preoperative Vitamin D levels
decreased the odds of HDO by 17.83%. Conclusion: Surgical time,
number of levels fused, EBL and Cell Saver return were significantly higher
in patients that experienced high drain output postoperatively. Results of
logistic regression identified female sex and lower preoperative Vitamin D
levels as significantly increasing the risk of high drain output. Given the
average complexity of an adult spinal deformity patient, it would be prudent
to conduct another study focusing on three or greater level posterior lumbar
fusions.

## 327

## P493: Preventive measures against postoperative nausea and vomiting
(PONV) in spine surgery

Yushi Hoshino

1,2

, Yoshifumi Kudo

2

, Ichiro Okano

2

, Hiroshi Maruyama

2

, Ryousuke Ikeda

1

, Yoshinori Imaizumi

1

, and Tomoaki Toyone

2

1

Department of Orthopedic, Asahi University Hospital, Gifu,
Japan

2

Department of Orthopedic, Showa University Hospital, Tokyo,
Japan

Introduction: PONV (postoperative nausea and vomiting) occurs in
about 30% of patients after spine surgery. Although PONV is uncomfortable
for patients and is a cause of decreased patient satisfaction, there are few
reports on the prevention of PONV in spine surgery. In this study, we
investigated the effect of PONV prevention in spine general anesthesia
surgery. Material and Methods: A total of 188 consecutive spine
surgeries under general anesthesia were performed at our hospital from
January 2020 to August 2021. The mean age of the patients was 67 years. The
sites included 15 cervical, 16 thoracic, and 157 lumbar spine cases. For
these cases, preventive measures were taken with reference to the Apfel
score, which is a PONV risk assessment (female, non-smoker, history of
agitation and PONV, postoperative opioid use). Prophylactic measures
included IV-PCA with Droperidol (Fentanyl), intravenous Dexamethazone at the
time of surgery for women, and intravenous Metoclopramide immediately after
surgery. The incidence of PONV in these patients was evaluated.
Results: PONV occurred in 15 patients (8.0%). The incidence
of PONV was 8.0% in 15 patients, with nausea only in 9 patients (4.9%),
vomiting in 6 patients (3.2%), and the need for additional antiemetic
medication in only 2 patients (1.1%). In our previous report, PONV was
observed in 31.4% of spine surgeries, and the incidence of PONV was clearly
reduced by prophylaxis. In addition, additional antiemetic medication was
required in 62.5% of cases of PONV in our previous report, but was used in
only 13.3% of cases in the present study, and the intensity of PONV was
reduced. Conclusion: The incidence of PONV was significantly
reduced by taking preventive measures focusing on postoperative opioid use
and women, using the Apfel score as a reference. Since the occurrence of
PONV has multiple factors, it is difficult to prevent PONV in patients with
high risk of PONV with a single drug, and multiple preventive measures such
as this one are necessary and effective. In order to achieve this, it is
difficult for orthopedic surgeons alone to prevent PONV, and cooperation
with anesthesiology and other departments is especially important to reduce
the risk of PONV.

## 328

## P494: Effect of multimodal analgesia on postoperative acute pain in
posterior lumbar surgery

Yushi Hoshino

1

, Ichiro Okano

2

, Yoshifumi Kudo

2

, Ryousuke Ikeda

1

, Hiroshi Maruyama

2

, Ryo Yamamura

2

, Yoshinori Imaizumi

1

, and Tomoaki Toyone

2

1

Department of Orthopedic, Asahi University Hospital, Gifu,
Japan

2

Department of Orthopedic, Showa University Hospital, Tokyo,
Japan

Introduction: Severe pain in the acute postoperative period is a
risk for persistent pain and decreased patient satisfaction. However, pain
management in the acute postoperative period is often difficult, which may
hinder the early start of rehabilitation and early discharge from the
hospital. In this study, we investigated the effect of multimodal analgesia
using multiple drugs on postoperative analgesia. Material and
Methods: 48 patients underwent lumbar posterior decompression
surgery (Lumbar spinous process splitting laminoplasty) with IV-PCA
(Fentanyl) and postoperative intravenous acetaminophen for postoperative
pain management (Group A, 2018.1-2019.3). In addition to IV-PCA and
postoperative acetaminophen intravenous infusion, 71 patients received
pentazocine intravenous infusion (AP group 2020.1-2021.9) for acute
postoperative pain. Group A: In addition to IV-PCA (fentanyl), acetaminophen
(1000 mg) was administered intravenously twice a day for 4 and 10 hours
after operation. Group AP: In addition to group A, pentazocine (15 mg) plus
normal saline (100 ml) was administered intravenously twice a day, 1 hour
and 7 hours after surgery. For these, postoperative pain was assessed by the
Numerical Rating Scale (NRS), and the intensity of postoperative pain, the
rate of use of additional analgesics, and the rate of complications such as
delirium were compared. Results and Discussions: There were no
significant differences in age, sex, or number of operated vertebrae between
the two groups. The mean NRS was 4.3/4.4 in group A/AP immediately after
surgery, 5.0/3.4 in group A/AP 3 hours after surgery, and 4.3/2.4 in group
A/AP 6 hours after surgery, with the AP group having a significantly lower
NRS at 3 and 6 hours after surgery. There was no significant difference in
NRS after the next day postoperatively between the two groups. There was no
difference in the amount of additional analgesics used or complications such
as delirium between the two groups. The AP group was able to significantly
reduce NRS in the immediate postoperative period and was effective in pain
management in the immediate postoperative period. The AP group also achieved
an NRS of 4 or higher, which is a risk factor for postoperative prolonged
pain, from the early postoperative period, suggesting that the AP group is
effective not only in the acute postoperative period but also for
postoperative prolonged pain. In addition, complications such as delirium do
not increase, and as a result, there is a possibility that early release
from bed and early rehabilitation can be promoted. On the other hand, one of
the goals of multimodal analgesia that uses multiple drugs is to reduce the
amount of opioids used. However, the use of pentazocine increased the amount
of opioids used in this study, and it is necessary to optimize multimodal
analgesia that is suitable for the surgical technique by considering the
drugs used and area block. Conclusion: Multimodal analgesia
with IV-PCA, postoperative acetaminophen, and intravenous pentazocine is
effective in improving postoperative acute pain in lumbar posterior
decompression surgery.

## 440

## P495: Anterior migration of a broken scalpel blade during lumbar spine
discectomy : A case report, literature review and management
algorithm

Dejan Čeleš

1

 and Janez Mohar

1

1

Department of Spine Surgery, Orthopaedic Hospital Valdoltra,
Ankaran, Slovenia

Introduction: We report a case of a broken surgical blade
anterior migration during lumbar spine discectomy, review the literature on
similar cases and propose an evidence-based management algorithm for this
type of complication since it has not yet been published. A recent
comparison of different discectomy techniques reported an overall
complication rate of 10.1%. Vascular injuries in lumbar spine surgery are
even rarer (1-5 per 10,000 disc surgeries). Broken surgical blades or other
surgically uncontrolled sharp and pointy objects in the disc space represent
a rare but potentially severe complication during posterior lumbar spine
procedures. Appreciation of vascular, bowel, and urethral anatomy is
crucial. Material and Methods:A 59-year-old female with
previous lumbar decompression and interspinous process device implantation
underwent an instrumented revision of the lumbosacral junction due to
degenerative lateral spinal canal stenosis with worsening leg and
concomitant chronic mechanical back pain. During L5-S1 continuous-motion
oval-shaped incision discectomy, the scalpel blade broke. It moved forward
and partially breached the anterior annulus with every attempt to gain hold
of the blade under fluoroscopic and microscope control. Pedicular screws
were locked to rods, and bed rest was ordered. Prior to vascular surgeon
referral, we performed CT angiography. Results:In a subacute
setting, the patient was laparoscopically revised. The broken scalpel blade
was successfully removed. We found 10 case reports in our literature review
subjected to a full-text review, totaling 13 cases. In total, two vascular
injuries were reported. The most common level of injury was L4-L5,
accounting for 46.2%, followed by L5-S1 at 38.5%. Other levels accounted for
15.4%. Conclusion:Risk factors for encountering a broken blade
are No. 15 blade with narrow junction, calcified posterior longitudinal
ligament and annulus, scalpel blade stabbing-and-turning technique, and
narrowed disc space. Complications arising from anterior sharp object
migration are arteriovenous fistula, pseudoaneurysm, vascular, urethral or
bowel laceration, foreign body granuloma, and intravascular migration of a
foreign body. We advise a stabbing motion-type of the posterior disc annulus
excision during discectomy. In these rare events, posterior removal with
fluoroscopic aid is an option unless the sharp object migrates through disc
space to the anterior annulus. With the anterior breach, vascular or other
retroperitoneal injuries should be actively sought. CT angiography is a
diagnostic method of choice, while US Duplex serves as a follow-up imaging
diagnostics. Sharp object removal from the disc space or retroperitoneum is
always indicated. The gold standard technique for anterior retroperitoneal
revision is a robot-assisted laparoscopy.

## 453

## P496: Correlation of lumbar spine fat thickness and surgical site
infection in degenerative lumbar spine surgery

Faisal Konbaz

1

, Tariq Jawadi

1

, Fahad AlThenayan

1

, Abdullah AlMahayni

1

, Lina Alhumaid

2

, and Mutlaq AlMutlaq

2

1

Department of Surgery, King Abdulaziz Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia

2

Medicine, King Saud Bin Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences,
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia

Introduction: Surgical site infection (SSI) defined by the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) as an infection related to
an operative procedure that occurs within 30 days of the procedure. Although
many researches have linked the increase of BMI with the risk of SSI, only
recently have they started to focus on the correlation between the thickness
of subcutaneous fat at the surgical site and the incidence of SSI. There is
an insufficient number of studies internationally that studied this
correlation. The aim of the study is to identify the correlation between
lumbar fat thickness and SSI and determine its predictive value compared to
other risk factors in predicting the incidence of SSI. Material and
Methods: The study team reviewed a total of 200 patients, 151 of
which have been included. Forty-nine patients have been excluded due to
incomplete, poor quality, or undone MRI. Demographic and clinical data were
collected. MRI date, Post-op Fat Thickness: L2, L3, L4, L5, S1, Surgical
approach, Surgical time, OPEN vs MISS. Management with oral Abx, Management
with IV Abx, and Management with debridement. Results: Out of
the 151 patients, four (2.6%) patients developed a post-op SSI. The average
subcutaneous fat thickness of L2, L3, L4, L5, S1 in the non-infected group
(97.4%, n = 147/151) was 18.8 mm, 32.4 mm, 32.8 mm, 32.9 mm, and 32.9 mm,
respectively. On the other hand, the patients that developed a post-op SSI
recorded a higher average on all levels with; 34.2 mm, 38 mm, 50.9 mm, 43.1
mm, and 42 mm, respectively. Patients that recorded a higher L4 fat
thickness were significantly associated with an increased risk of post-op
SSI (p > 0.0264). Conclusion: While BMI is a risk factor for
developing post-op SSI. Our study had shown that subcutaneous fat
distribution was a significant risk factor in the development of an SSI.

## 495

## P497: The outcomes and complication rates of the adult spinal deformity
surgery reported from a single dedicated spine center

Ercan Hassa

1

 and Emre Acaroğlu

2

1

Orthopaedics and Traumatology, Ankara Spine Center, Ankara,
Turkey

2

Spine Surgery Department, Ankara Spine Center/ Memorial Ankara
Hospital, Ankara, Turkey

Introduction: The aim of the current study is to report the
clinical outcomes, radiographic parameters, and complications seen in
patients with adult spinal deformity (ASD) who were operated by a single
dedicated spinal surgeon and to assess the clinical outcomes, radiographic
parameters, and complications at 2-year follow-up. The hypothesis was that
the complication rate was higher than that reported previously by
multicenter studies which may be secondary to underreporting the
complications, missing or faulty medical records, poor patient follow-ups,
study populations with different risk potentials, or more limited surgical
approaches. Material and Methods: This was a retrospective
review of the prospectively collected data of patients who underwent ASD
surgery performed by a single surgeon. The institutional review board
approval had been provided. The deformities secondary to tumoral entities,
syndromic curves, neuromuscular disorders, patients with ≤ 4 levels of
fusion, those without at least 2-year follow-up, and those with
anterior-only surgery were excluded. All the patients recruited to the study
had one of the following criteria; coronal Cobb angle ≥ 20°, sagittal
vertical axis (SVA) ≥ 50 mm, pelvic tilt ≥ 25°, or thoracic kyphosis ≥ 60°.
All the parameters were evaluated just before the surgery and at 2-year
follow-up. The Oswestry Disability Index (ODI), Scoliosis Research
Society-22 (SRS-22), Short-Form-36 (SF-36), back and leg pain visual
analogue scores (BP-VAS and LP-VAS, respectively), and American Society of
Anaesthesiologists (ASA) scores were the clinical assessment parameters. The
radiographic assessment included the coronal and sagittal Cobb angles of the
main deformities, sagittal vertical axis (SVA), L1-S1 lordosis (LL), pelvic
incidence (PI), pelvic tilt (PT), PI-LL, and the coronal balance
(C7PL-CSVL). Results: There were 49 patients with a median age
of 50(22-82) and with a female preponderance of 83.7%. The median was 210
(120-720) minutes for surgical time, 1425 (300-4200) ml for blood loss, 0
(0-144) hours for length of intensive care unit stay, and 1100 (0-3000) ml
for transfused blood. The ASA scores were 1 for 57%, 2 for 49%, and 3 for
4%. The median PI was 55 (37-82). The median LL (from -50 (-75-13)° to -38.5
(-82- -2.3)°), PT (from 26 (2-45)° to 25 (10-48)°), global tilt (from 27
(2-63)° to .30.8 (1-58)°), PI-LL (from 62 (53-79)° to 62 (50-76)°), and
coronal balance (from 2.5 (-44.2-91.3) mm to -0.5 (-54.6-45) mm) did not
change significantly (p > .05) while the median major curve Cobb-angle
improved from 25 (0-80)° to 11.5 (0-60)° (p < .001). However the median
sagittal balance insignificantly worsened from 31.9 (-50.6-144.3) mm to 57.9
(-38.8-114.1) mm (p > .05), and median T2-T12 kyphosis changed from 38.5
(0.3-89)° to 49 (18-76)° (p = .021). After 2-year follow-up, the median
BP-VAS changed from 5 (0-10) to 4 (0-10) (p = .025), the median LP-VAS
changed from 5 (0-10) to 0 (0-10) (p = .021), the median ODI changed from
53.5 (0-92) to 30 (0-88) (p = .001), the median SRS-22 changed from 3 (2-4)
to 4 (2-5) (p < .001), and the median SF-36-PCS changed from 37 (20-66)
to 46.4 (0-65.8) (p < .001). The complication-free patients were 40.8%,
while 44.9% had major and 14.3% had minor complications.
Conclusion: The patient-reported outcome measures were all
improved after ASD surgery at 2-year follow-up, as stated previously by
several studies, despite the lack of radiographic support. However, the
complication rate was around 60% which is significantly higher than the
reports in the literature.

## 534

## P498: Prediction of rates of revision surgery based on pre-operative
cannabinoid use disorder in opioid-naïve patients undergoing total knee
arthroplasty, total hip arthroplasty, and primary 1-2 level posterior lumbar
fusion

Hania Shahzad

1

, Nazihah Bhatti

1

, Safdar Khan

1

, Frank Phillips

2

, and Elizabeth Yu

1

1

Orthopedics, Wexner Medical Center, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, United States

2

Orthopedics, Rush University Medical Center, United States

Introduction: Cannabinoid use has been explored in the treatment
of musculoskeletal and neuropathic pain which are both essential components
in the management of spinal disorders. Since the use of medical marijuana
has been linked to a decrease in opioid use postoperatively, it is of
interest to surgeons to recognize the implications of cannabinoid use in the
perioperative setting for orthopedic procedures. Material and
Methods: The PearlDiver database of over 92 million patients was
utilized to identify patients who underwent total knee arthroplasty (TKA),
total hip arthroplasty (THA), and primary 1-2 levels posterior lumbar fusion
(PLF) for degenerative disease. Patients’ records who had no associated
claim of opioid use within the past year were included in the final analysis
to reduce confounding. Patients were queried for the claim of cannabis use
disorder (CUD) prior to undergoing the primary procedures. Overall
differences in revision rates between patients from the CUD and non-CUD
groups were analyzed using a chi-squared test and univariable logistic
regression models which were reported as odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence
intervals (CI). All data were analyzed in aggregate form using R Statistical
Software version 4.1.0 in the PearlDiver Software. Results: The
total number of patients who underwent revision surgeries was 4,079,799
(TKA), 2,891,492 (THA), and 4,031,791(PLF) in the 10 years following primary
procedures. Of those, 8069 (0.20%) of TKA, 6354 (0.22%) of THA, and 12,244
(0.30%) of PLF patients had an associated diagnostic claim of cannabinoid
use disorder prior to their initial surgery (i.e., CUD group). The average
time to revision for TKA, THA, and PLF in the CUD group was 432.33 days (SD
414.62), 543.44 days (SD 546.18 days), and 444.88 days (SD 499.29 days)
respectively. To statistical differences between both, the groups could not
be analyzed for TKA and THA as the number of records in the database was too
less to run a chi-square analysis. For the PLF cohort, the difference was
not statistically significant (p-value = 0.74). There were no differences in
revision rates in TKA and PLF cohorts (p-values > 0.05) at 90 days, 1
year, 5 years, and 10-year intervals. In the THA cohort, the odds of an
associated diagnosis of CUD in patients who had revisions was higher by 192%
(OR:1.92 [1.14, 3.25], p-value = 0.02) at 90 days, by 196% (OR:1.96 [1.26,
3.04], p-value = 0.004) at 1 year, by 183% (OR: 1.83 [1.24, 2.72], p-value =
0.003) at 5 years and by 181% (OR: 1.81 [1.22, 2.69], p-value = 0.004) at 10
years. Conclusion: It is theorized that cannabinoids may
adversely affect spinal fusion due to their anti-inflammatory and
immunosuppressive properties. Our results show that cannabinoid use in
opioid naïve patients does not affect revision rates at 10-year intervals
for TKA and PLF. However, the reasons for the association between CUD and
revision rates in the THA group remain unclear. Further research into
exploring the impact of cannabinoid use on peri-operative complications in
various orthopedic procedures needs to be conducted before cannabinoids can
be formally introduced as part of multimodal analgesia.

## 545

## P499: The effect of hyperlipidemia as a risk factor on postoperative
complications in patient undergoing anterior cervical discectomy and
fusion

Seung Min Son

1,2

, Rintaro Okada

2,3

, Zoe Fresquez

2

, Blake Formanek

4

, Kevin Mertz

2

, Zorica Buser

5

, and Jeffrey C. Wang

2

1

Orthopedic Surgery, Pusan National University Yangsan Hospital,
Yangsan, South Korea

2

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Keck School of Medicine, Los
Angeles, United States

3

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Osaka General Medical Center,
Osaka, Japan

4

Queensland, University of Queensland School of Medicine,
Australia

5

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, NYU Grossman School of Medicine,
New York, United States

Introduction: Anterior cervical discectomy and fusion (ACDF)
represent the standard procedure performed for focal anterior nerve root
compression or spinal cord with low complication rates. Hyperlipidemia (HLD)
is well known as a risk factor for major complications of vascular and
transplant surgery, and orthopedic surgery. To date, there have been few
studies on HLD as a risk factor for cervical spine surgery. The aim of the
current study was to analyze the effect of HLD on postoperative
complications in patients who underwent ACDF. Material and
Methods: This study was a retrospective review of patients who
underwent ACDF from 2010 through quarter 3 of 2020 using the MSpine subset
PearlDiver Patient Record Database. The patients were divided into a
single-level ACDF group and a multi-level ACDF groups. In addition, each
group was divided into subgroups according to the presence or absence of
HLD. The incidence of surgical and medical complications was queried using
relevant International Classification of Disease and Current Procedural
Terminology codes. Surgical complications included surgical wound
complications, wound infection, and neurological complications. Medical
complications included postoperative sepsis, respiratory failure, pneumonia,
pulmonary embolism/deep vein thrombosis, myocardial infarction,
cerebrovascular accident, renal failure, neurogenic bladder/bowel, and
urinary tract infection/incontinence. Other complications included hardware
removal, revision surgery, and readmission. Charlson Comorbidity Index (CCI)
was used as a broad measure of comorbidity. Chi-squared analysis, with
populations matched for age, gender, and CCI, was performed to calculate
odds ratios (ORs) of complications among HLD patients relative to non-HLD
patients treated with ACDF. Results: A total of 24,936 patients
who underwent single-level ACDF and 26,921 patients who underwent
multi-level ACDF were included. The mean CCIs for single-level and
multi-level ACDF groups were 2.27 ± 2.14 and 2.36 ± 2.23, respectively. In
terms of surgical complications, in the multi-level ACDF group, wound
complications within 90 days (OR = 1.22, 95% Confidence Index [CI] =
1.03-1.44, p = 0.020) were significantly higher in the patients with HLD.
Among medical complications, myocardial infarction (OR = 1.30, CI =
1.18-1.45, p < 0.001 and OR = 1.26, CI = 1.16-1.38, p < 0.001), renal
failure (OR = 1.08, CI = 1.01-1.16, p = 0.029 and OR = 1.08, CI = 1.02-1.14,
p = 0.009), and UTI/urinary incontinence (OR = 1.16, CI = 1.09-1.22, p <
0.001 and OR = 1.10, CI = 1.04-1.15, p < 0.001) were significantly higher
in the patients with HLD in both groups. Revision surgery (OR = 1.22, CI =
1.10-1.36, p < 0.001) and readmission (OR = 1.13, CI = 1.04-1.23, p =
0.004) after 1 year were significantly higher in the patients with HLD who
underwent multi-level ACDF. Conclusion: In patients who
underwent ACDF, several surgical and medical complications were found to be
higher in patients with HLD than in patients without HLD. Preoperative serum
lipid concentration control and appropriate HLD treatment can prevent
postoperative complications due to HLD in patients who underwent ACDF.

## 668

## P500: Lumbar vertebral housefield units associated with interbody cage
subsidence following transforaminal interbody fusion surgery

Jiwon Park

1

, Gijun Shin

1

, and Jae-Young Hong

1

1

Orthopaedic Surgery, Korea University Ansan Hospital, Ansan-si,
South Korea

Study Design: Retrospective case study. Objectives:
After lumbar intervertebral fusion, cage subsidence reduces the height of
the intervertebral foramen and the lumbar lordosis, which may result in
neurological problems. This study aims to investigate the association
between cage sedimentation following intervertebral fusion and the
Hounsfield Unit of the lumbar spine. Summary of Literature
Review: There is a claim that the likelihood of the cage
subsidence following fusion increases with the lumbar vertebrae's Hounsfield
Unit. Materials and Methods: Retrospective analysis of medical
records and records was done on 142 patients from 2015 to 2021 who underwent
the minimally invasive transforaminal interbody fusion surgery for 1-2
segments of the lumbar spine at a single center with a minimum follow-up
duration of more than a year. Records from radiological exams were examined.
Each Hounsfield Unit was measured for lumbar vertebrae into thirds at the
center of the sagittal plane of the CT after the groups had been divided
according on whether or not the cage had subsided in radiography.
Results: A total of 142 patients were analyzed, and a total
of 55 patients had cage subsidence on follow Up CT or X-ray 1 year after
surgery. The average degree of subsidence of the cage was 5.5 mm. The mean
Hounsfield Unit of the lumbar vertebrae in the cage subsidence group was
significantly lower than in the non-subsidence group (125.8 HU vs 157.1 HU,
p < 0.001). Conclusions: Through this study, it was possible
to determine the association between the Hounsfield Unit and postoperative
cage subsidence on preoperative CT scans in patients who did not assess
their bone mass density adequately before surgery. It can aid with cage
selection during surgery for those patients with low lumbar Hounsefield unit
to avoid cage subsidence.
Keywords: TLIF, BMD, Hounsefield Unit, Cage subsidence

## 781

## P501: Acute pancreatitis associated with scoliosis surgery. Could opioids
play a determinant role in its development?

Nahala Aborashed-Amador

1

, Fernando Alvarado Gómez

1

, Andres Motta-Amar

1

, Maria Garcia-Rueda

1

, Helberth González-Rico

1

, Maria Vargas-Osorio

1

, Maria Camila Giraldo Bernal

1

, Carlos Montero-Silva

1

, and Mario Herrera Méndez

1

1

Instituto Roosevelt, Bogota, Colombia

Introduction: Pancreatitis as a complication of scoliosis
correction surgery has been reported, supported by pathophysiological
theories such as hemodynamic imbalance associated with intraoperative
instability and changes in visceral vascular architecture directly related
to tissue distress because of the vascular elongation caused by curve
correction (2-4). In the surgical context, one of the most recent causes
proposed is prolonged postoperative use of opioids at high doses.
Material and Methods: Three pediatric patients who
underwent scoliosis correction surgery, two of them with a diagnosis of
neuromuscular scoliosis secondary to Duchenne (DMD) and cerebral palsy and
one with congenital scoliosis due to hemivertebra. In average, 15 vertebral
segments were instrumented. Two of the patients required two-stage surgery
for definitive correction. Average surgical time was 6.06 hours, with a mean
blood loss of 1.766 ml in the definitive correction. All three patients
required blood product transfusions. Results: Abdominal pain
was the cardinal symptom in the three patients. Progressive pain intensity
and elevation of pancreatic enzyme levels led to the suspicion of
pancreatitis, with a mean of 5 days until diagnosis. Total time of
continuous opioid use during hospitalization was 26 days in average, with
adjustment to the highest dose because of the presence of abdominal pain.
The main opioids used were morphine, tramadol and hydromorphone.
Conservative and surgical management was required in these patients, with
surveillance in the intensive care unit. No major complications were
associated with the pancreatic picture. Conclusion: The
association between prolonged exposure to high-dose opioids and the onset of
pancreatitis in the context of major surgery suggests a potential relation
that warrants further study, given that opioid receptors have been described
in the sphincter of Oddi. This association must be borne in mind in order to
reduce patient morbidity in the context of scoliosis correction surgery.

## 788

## P502: Risk factors for instrumentation failure in anterior cervical spine
surgery

José Alfonso Corona De la Torre

1

, Hugo Vilchis Samano

1

, Luis Miguel Munguia Leon

1

, and Kaori Guadalupe Honda Partida

1

1

Spine Surgery, UMAE Hospital de Ortopedia y Traumatologia Lomas
Verdes IMSS, Mexico City, Mexico

Introduction: To review the risk factors associated with
graft/instrumentation failure in anterior cervical spine decompression and
fusion with PEEK cages and plate/titanium mesh. Material and
Methods: Cohort. Instrumentation failure was assessed using
radiographic parameters for cervical sagittal balance: SVAc (Cervical
Sagittal vertical alignment), Cervical lordosis, TIA (thoracic inlet angle),
Neck Tilt, T1 slope. Also was assessed the technique of the plate and mesh
location taking the parameters: Coronal angle of the plate (CA), Sagittal
angle of the plate (SA), length screw/body vertebral diameter ratio (RTC),
angle of the screw placement (AT). In patients with instrumentation failure
was assessed the amount of Hounsfield Unit (HU) to determine the bone
density. Analysis of relation with smoking and steroid treatment of the
patient with instrumentation failure was assessed. Results:
Records of 349 patients (215 males and 134 females). 8 patients with
instrumentation failure (2.29%), average age 51 years (IQ 56-71). The most
frequent intervened levels were C4-C5 and C5-C6. After evaluation was
founded that a higher Coronal Angle and TIA was significant increased (<
0.001) with failure instrumentation. Steroid treatment and smoking showed a
OR of 3.7 and 0.77 respectively with instrumentation failure. 87.7% of the
patients with instrumentation failure demonstrated by HU assessment with low
bone mineral density (LBMD). Conclusions: A higher TIA and CA
showed and increased risk factor for instrumentation failure. Steroid
treatment and smoking showed an increased ratio for instrumentation failure.
There was not significant relation with the remaining radiographic
parameters in sagittal cervical balance and technique assessment.

## 807

## P503: Outpatient intermittent percutaneous cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
drainage as treatment of CSF leak in spine surgery

Paul Albert Manuel

1

, Gilbert Ranoa

1

, and Michael Louis Gimenez

1

1

Brain and Spine Institute, Cardinal Santos Medical Center, San Juan,
Philippines

Introduction: A dreaded complication of spine surgery is
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) Leak. A CSF leak may result in pain, wound healing
complications, infection, increased hospital stay, and/or reoperation. A
gold standard of post operative management of CSF leak is still lacking. The
authors describe a technique of CSF drainage that may improve the current
management of post operative CSF leak without addition hospital stay or
reoperation. Material and Methods: A retrospective case series
review of spine surgery cases performed by 2 attending surgeons from the
Brain and Spine Institute, Cardinal Santos Medical Center, was performed. In
all, 241 charts were reviewed, spanning a 5-year period. There were 18 cases
in which CSF leak was detected. All cases of CSF leak were managed by
outpatient intermittent percutaneous drainage using a gauge 23 butterfly
needle and a 20-cc sterile syringe.Patients were reevaluated at regular
intervals for and underwent repeat drainage every 1-4 days dependent on the
need and persistence of CSF leak. Results: All patients
observed in this study had CSF leak, All patients were treated using
Intermittent percutaneous CSF drainage and none of the patients needed
revision surgery to close the CSF leak. The duration of the leak for the all
patients were at approximately 20 days on average, with a standard deviation
of 15 days. The most common factors noted in the study population were
elderly, greater than 2 operative levels, and corticosteroid use.
Conclusion: The use of Outpatient Intermittent percutaneous
CSF drainage represents a viable alternative in the treatment of CSF leak as
seen in the resolution of signs and symptoms of all 18 patients. On the risk
factors for the occurrence of CSF leak, the most noted factors besides
increased age were the increased number of operative levels, and
corticosteroid use.

## 856

## P505: Venous thromboembolism prophylaxis safety profile in elective spine
surgery

Mohamed El-Farra

1

, Emily Mills

2

, Christian Jimenez

2

, Samantha Solaru

2

, Hyunwoo Kang

2,3

, Tara Shelby

2

, Andy Ton

2

, Jeffrey C. Wang

2

, Raymond Hah

2

, and Ram Alluri

2

1

Orthopaedic Surgery, University of California, Riverside School of
Medicine, Riverside, United States

2

Orthopaedic Surgery, Keck School of Medicine of USC, Los Angeles,
United States

3

Orthopaedic Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, United States

Introduction: There is currently no consensus regarding
pharmacologic venous thromboembolism (VTE) prophylaxis in elective spine
surgery. The purpose of this study was to assess the safety profile of VTE
prophylaxis in patients undergoing elective spine surgery. Material
and Methods: Patients who underwent elective spine surgery at a
single institution from January 2019 to October 2019 were included for
analysis. Patients were divided into two cohorts based on whether they
received VTE prophylaxis or not. The patients’ demographics, comorbidities,
surgery performed, and surgical outcomes and complications were recorded via
retrospective chart review. Multivariate regression analysis controlling for
age, gender, body mass index, ethnicity, prior VTE, smoking, procedure type,
levels fused, approach, instrumentation, operative time, estimated blood
loss, and intraoperative complication was conducted to assess for any
significant differences in postoperative hematoma, general postoperative
complications, deep vein thrombosis (DVT), pulmonary embolism (PE),
outpatient complications readmission, emergency department visits, and
return to the operating room (OR). Results: Of the 318
patients, 247 patients received VTE prophylaxis, and 74 patients did not.
After controlling for confounders with multivariate analysis, there was no
significant difference in postoperative hematoma formation (p = 0.997),
general postoperative complications (p = 0.684), DVT rates (p = 0.860), PE
rates (p = 0.984), outpatient complications (p = 0.196), return to the OR (p
= 0.331), likelihood of emergency department visits (p = 0.061) and
readmission rates (p = 0.071). Conclusion: The present study
found that patients who received VTE prophylaxis after undergoing elective
spine surgery did not have a significant increase in postoperative hematoma,
general complications, return to OR, ER visits, and hospital readmissions.
In addition, VTE prophylaxis did not affect the rate of DVT or PE. Based on
the present study’s results, VTE prophylaxis does not increase the risk of
postoperative complications in patients undergoing elective spine
surgery.

## 889

## P506: Evaluating the effect of gastroesophageal reflux disease on
postoperative dysphagia following anterior cervical spine surgery - A
prospective, multicenter study

Aditya Mazmudar

1

, Taylor Paziuk

1

, John Mangan

1

, Khoa Tran

1

, Samuel Oh

1

, Sandy Li

1

, Brandon Sherrod

2

, Erica Bisson

2

, Darrel Brodke

3

, Jose Canseco

1

, Alan Hilibrand

1

, Christopher Kepler

1

, Alexander Vaccaro

1

, Gregory Schroeder

1

, and Jeffrey Rihn

1

1
Rothman Orthopedic Institute at Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, United States

2
Department of Neurosurgery, Clinical
Neurosciences Center at University of Utah, Salt Lake
City,United States

3
Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University
Orthopaedic Center at University of Utah, Salt Lake
City,United States
Introduction: While there is little doubt that the operative
insult associated with anterior cervical spine surgery imposes a significant
risk for postoperative dysphagia, numerous patient specific risk factors
have yet to be fully explored. The impact of a preoperative diagnosis of
gastroesophageal reflux (GERD) in particular has yet to be evaluated as a
potential risk factor for dysphagia. To our knowledge, no prior prospective
study has reported on the incidence and severity of dysphagia following
anterior cervical discectomy and fusion (ACDF) based on a patient’s
preoperative diagnosis of GERD. As such, the purpose of this study was to
prospectively evaluate the impact of a preoperative diagnosis of GERD on the
incidence and severity of postoperative dysphagia in a multicenter
population. Material and Methods: A retrospective cohort study
was conducted on patients who underwent one- to five-level ACDF After IRB
approval, written informed consent was obtained from all participating
patients. Patients over 18 years of age who underwent an elective ACDF for a
degenerative condition were prospectively enrolled at two academic centers
from the years 2018 to 2020. Patients were asked to complete a preoperative
demographic survey in addition to dysphagia surveys (Bazaz, DSQ, EAT-10)
both preoperatively and at 2, 6, 12, and 24 weeks postoperatively. Exclusion
criteria included previous cervical fusion at the operative level or surgery
for oncologic, infectious, or traumatic indications. Patients were separated
into two groups: those with and without a preoperative diagnosis of GERD.
Continuous variables were assessed using either an independent t-test or
Mann Whitney U-test for parametric and non-parametric data. All categorical
variables were compared using a chi-square test. Results: A
total of 116 patients met study criteria and were subsequently enrolled.
Overall rates of postoperative dysphagia increased to 47.3% (n = 53) at
2-weeks but eventually decreased towards the preoperative prevalence of
25.0% at the 24-week mark. Patients with preoperative diagnosis of GERD had
lower dysphagia severity scores on a continuous variable analysis in both
the DSQ and EAT-10 surveys at 2-week follow-up in addition to the Bazaz
survey at 24-week follow-up. Our follow up at 24-weeks was 85.7%.
Conclusion: Our study shows that having a preoperative
diagnosis of GERD has no significant effect on the incidence of dysphagia
following ACDF. Nevertheless, having a preoperative diagnosis of GERD does
seem to affect the severity of dysphagia that this patient population
perceives at multiple intervals over a 24-week postoperative period.

## 971

## P507: Ipsilateral psoas hematoma development after two adjacent level
endoscopic transforaminal discectomy in prior two level fused
segments

Sukdeb Datta

1

1

Endoscopic Spine Surgery, Datta Endoscopic Back Surgery and Pain
Center, Saddle Brook, United States

Introduction: Transforaminal endoscopic lumbar discectomy
(TFELD) is increasingly gaining popularity as a minimally invasive procedure
to address the disc herniations in the lumbar spine. There is a scarcity of
reports on hemorrhagic complications after endoscopic spine surgeries. We
are reporting a case of psoas hematoma following TFELD. Material and
Methods: We report a case of left sided psoas muscle hematoma in
a 50-year-old male who underwent a transforaminal endoscopic lumbar
discectomy (TFELD) and foraminotomy. He had prior history of fusion at L2-L3
and L4-L5 fusion. The Magnetic resonance (MRI) imaging study showed adjacent
level disease at L3-4 and L5-S1 levels with severe lateral recess and left
foraminal stenosis. TFELD was performed at the adjacent L3-4 and L5-S1
levels. However, on 2nd post-operative day the patient
experienced increasing radicular pain in left lower extremity mainly along
the L5 and S1 distribution. A repeat MRI with and without contrast showed
circumscribed fluid collection within the substance of the left psoas muscle
adjacent to L5-S1 disc level extending along the muscle rostrally and
caudally (4x3x1.5 cm). The collection was non-enhancing on post-contrast T1
images. Infectious pathology was ruled out owing to absent systemic
symptoms, the negative lab results for infection markers and non-enhancement
of the lesion on MRI. The clinic-radiological presentation was suggestive of
psoas hematoma. Due to persistent radicular symptoms which was attributed to
the hematoma, the patient was referred to an interventional radiologist who
performed a computed tomographic (CT) guided aspiration.
Results: Fortunately, we encountered a small
well-circumscribed hematoma without any systemic symptoms and abnormal blood
parameters. Thus, no re-exploration was required. Even the radicular
symptoms resolved over time. The surgeons may consider CT angiographic
embolization and re-operation if the symptoms and abnormal hematologic
parameters warrant. Conclusion: Hemorrhagic complications after
spine surgeries are rare events. Surgeons must rule out the possibility of
psoas hematoma in patients presenting with increasing radicular pain with or
without flank pain following PELD surgeries. Conservative treatment
including wait and watch strategy is usually sufficient. The surgeons should
exercise an immense care while placing the targeting needle.

## 1002

## P508: Surgical approach and post-operative C5 palsy after decompression
for degenerative cervical myelopathy

Ali Moghaddamjou

1

, Alex Bak

2

, Mohammed Ali Alvi

1

, and Michael Fehlings

1

1

Neurosurgery, University of Toronto, Canada

2

University of Toronto, Canada

Introduction: One of the significant complications following
decompressive surgery to the cervical spine is that of C5 palsy. Despite the
clinical significance of this finding, we do not have strong quality
evidence towards its natural history and strategies to limit the incidence
and duration of this complication. The goal of this project is to leverage
clinical trial data in patients with Degenerative Cervical Myelopathy (DCM)
to enhance our understanding of postoperative C5 palsy. Material and
Methods: Data from the CSM-Protect trial, which was a
multicenter, prospective, randomized clinical trial was used for this
analysis. We identified all adult patients with DCM who received
decompression surgery. We subdivided the data into those patients who had
documented C5 palsy after the surgery and those who did not. The outcome
measure selected was the incidence and duration of C5 palsy post
decompressive surgery. As risk factors for C5 palsy remain unclear, matching
was not performed. One-way ANOVA was used to compare continuous variables
and chi-square tests, or fisher’s exact tests were used for discrete
variables. The level of significance was set to p < 0.05.
Results: In a total of 284 patients that were included, 152
(53.5%) of the patients received surgery via the posterior approach. The
total incidence of C5 palsy was 5.3% (n = 15), which was comparable to
metrics reported in DCM and other degenerative spine diseases. Patients that
received posterior surgery were older (A - 56.4 ± 10.0, P - 60.5 ± 9.9, p =
0.001) and had a greater proportion of males (A - 47%, P - 65.8%, p =
0.002). Both groups had similar proportions of comorbidities in the form of
anxiety, depression, cardiovascular disease, cancer, diabetes, COPD,
hyperlipidemia, hypercholesteremia, hypertension, thyroid disease,
hepatitis, obesity, and sleep apnea. The anterior approach group had a
greater incidence of fibromyalgia (A - 5.3%, P - 0.7%, p = 0.045). The
incidence of C5 palsy was significantly higher in patients that underwent
posterior decompression compared to those that received anterior
decompression (A - 0.8%, P - 9.2%, p = 0.004). Conclusion: The
incidence of postoperative C5 palsy is significantly higher in patients who
received posterior decompression compared to anterior decompression for
DCM.

## 1020

## P509: Incidence and risk factors of venous thromboembolism in the
perioperative period of spine surgery at a tertiary care hospital

Sami Aleissa

1

, Faisal Konbaz

2

, Anouar Bourghli

3

, Fahad Alhelal

1

, Majed Abaalkhail

1

, Husam Altahan

1

, Abdulrahman Al-Farraj

1

, Salman Al-Jafari

4

, Rakan Aldusari

4

, Suhail Alassiri

1

, and Rund Aleissa

4

1

King Abdulaziz Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia

2

King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia

3

Kingdom Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia

4

King Saud Bin Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences, Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia

Introduction: Spine Surgery is considered a moderate risk for
developing Venous Thromboembolism (VTE). To our knowledge, no study has been
done to determine the incidence of VTE in our local population. We aim to
study this and determine the factors associated with developing VTE post
spine surgery. Material and Methods: A retrospective chart
review was conducted to analyze 892 adult patients who underwent either an
elective or emergency spine surgery. Demographics, length of surgery and
hospital stay, diagnosis, and location of surgery in addition to the type of
trauma, if applicable, were collected. Furthermore, spiral computed
tomography was used to diagnose pulmonary embolism (PE), and duplex
ultrasound was used to diagnose deep vein thrombosis (DVT) pre- and
post-operatively. Results: 800 patients were included. The
overall incidence of VTE was 4.1%. In addition, Lumbar spine was the most
common location operated on. Increasing age and length of hospital stay were
both significantly associated with development of VTE. Furthermore, cervical
spine surgery had a lower incidence of VTE compared to other locations which
was statistically significant. Lastly, non-ambulatory patients had a higher
risk of having VTE compared to patient who were able to ambulate
post-operatively. Conclusion: The incidence of VTE after spine
surgery is considered low but carries high rates of morbidity and mortality.
Increased age and prolonged hospital stay increases its risk while early
ambulation lowers it. Larger prospective study is needed to identify the
best prophylactic anticoagulation regimen. Prophylactic measures against VTE
are highly recommended, especially amongst high-risk patients.

## 1085

## P510: Relative benefit of neurophysiologic monitoring during
uncomplicated anterior cervical spine surgery

Torsten Fras

1

 and Christian Fras

1

1

Institute for Spinal Surgery, Broomall, United States

Introduction: Intraoperative neurophysiologic monitoring (IOM)
is commonly used in spine surgery; advantages include identification of
intraoperative neurologic decline that may be related to a remediable cause.
Disadvantages include increased time and cost, morbidity associated with the
monitoring procedure, and the potential for false positive alerts prompting
unnecessary action. The study’s goal was to assess whether use of IOM in
routine, uncomplicated cases of anterior cervical discectomy and fusion
(ACDF) surgery was of demonstrable benefit. Material and
Methods: 50 consecutive patients were identified who underwent
one-level ACDF with anterior instrumentation for cervical disc herniation
with radiculopathy without myelopathy. For all cases, a NIMS tube was used
to monitor laryngeal nerve function, and EMG, SSEP, and MEP modalities were
monitored. Hospital and post-operative records were investigated for the
presence of IOM alerts, whether corrective action was taken during surgery,
and the presence of any post-operative neurologic deficits.
Results: In all cases, there were no alerts of laryngeal
nerve dysfunction, or SSEP / MEP abnormality. In 12 cases, transient EMG
irritation activity was documented; in no cases was there any change to the
surgical procedure, such as abandonment of surgery, removal of implant, etc.
There were no instances of new or worsened post-operative neurologic
deficit, and clinical findings of vocal cord dysfunction.
Conclusion: In ACDF with anterior instrumentation for
cervical disc herniation with radiculopathy without myelopathy, IOM use did
not convey any identifiable advantage. Therefore, the data does not support
considering IOM to be required or standard of care for routine,
uncomplicated ACDF surgery.

## 1092

## P511: Lumbar spinous process fixation: peri-operative complication rate
in instrumented posterior fusion

Torsten Fras

1

 and Christian Fras

1

1

Institute for Spinal Surgery, Broomall, United States

Introduction: Spinal fusion surgery is performed to treat many
conditions. Previous studies have demonstrated increased arthrodesis rates
when supplemental instrumentation is utilized: this commonly involves lumbar
pedicle screw fixation. However, traditional surgical techniques for lumbar
pedicle screw insertion can be associated with significant morbidity (up to
54% complication rate). Spinous process fixation (SPF) is an alternate
method of lumbar spine stabilization in fusion procedures, and can be
accomplished with less invasive techniques. This study seeks to assess the
peri-operative complication rate associated with use of SPF in lumbar fusion
operations. Material and Methods: 100 consecutive patients were
identified who had undergone one-level SPF using Aspen MIS Fusion System
(Zimmer Biomet) as part of lumbar fusion surgery with minimum 90 days
post-operative follow-up. All hospital and office records were reviewed. All
complications were recorded. Results: All 100 patients were
followed for minimum 90 days post-operatively. Complications were:
superficial wound dehiscence (2), all responding to local wound care;
superficial wound infection (3), all responding to oral antibiotics;
post-operative urinary retention requiring catheter insertion (1), resolved
spontaneously. There were no reoperations. No other complications were
identified, and no severe complications (eg, deep infection, neurologic
deficit, implant-related complication). Conclusion: The
short-term (within 90 days of surgery) complication rate associated with SPF
in posterior lumbar fusion surgery was 6%. All complications were minor;
there were no major complications, and no cases of re-operation. The
peri-operative complication rate of SPF compares favorably with that of
pedicle screw instrumentation, and in this regard SPF is an alternate option
to use of pedicle screw fixation in selected patients.

## 1139

## P512: Role of tranexamic acid in reducing peri and post operative blood
loss in open spine surgeries

Shyamasunder Bhat Neerkaje

1

, Saktthi Shanmuganathan

1

, Madhava Pai

1

, and Ramachandra Theja

1

1

Orthopaedics, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal, Manipal Academy of
Higher Education, Manipal, India

Introduction: Spine surgery is associated with significant blood
loss due to the extensive soft tissue dissection, bony decompression and
prolonged surgical time. Surgical bleeding may require blood transfusions.
Also there is risk leading to epidural hematoma formation, cauda equina
compression. Tranexamic acid (TXA), is a synthetic antifibrinolytic drug,
which inhibits plasminogen from binding to fibrin and suppresses
fibrinolysis. This way tranexamic acid will help in reducing perioperative
blood loss in major surgeries. The evidence on the efficacy of this agent in
spine surgeries is not sufficient. The purpose of this study was to assess
its efficacy on perioperative blood loss in major spinal surgeries.
Methodology: Pre-operative assessment included
documentation of the patient’s comorbidities, preoperative Hb, PCV, platelet
count, PT/INR and APTT, RFT, serum electrolytes values and ECG. Patients
with age <18 years, blood dyscrasias and renal disorders are excluded
from the study. Based on whether patients have received the drug or not they
will be grouped into patient receiving tranexamic acid (Group A) and patient
not receiving tranexamic acid (Group B). Intra operative data included
levels of decompression, duration of surgery, assessment of blood loss, need
for intraoperative blood transfusion. Post-operative assessment including
repeating the following parameters Hb, PCV, PT/INR, APTT after 24 hours of
surgery, documentation of blood collected in surgical drain and need for any
postoperative blood transfusion. Results: Intraoperative
Transfusion, Hemoglobin (g/dL) (Post-Operative Hb drop), Surgical Drain (mL)
were statistically significant in Group A when compared to Group B.
Conclusion: In spine surgeries, TXA was found to be
effective in reducing the intra-operative and post operative blood loss and
the need for blood transfusion. Keywords: Tranexamic acid (TXA), spine
surgery, blood loss, blood transfusion.

## 1143

## P513: Performance assessment of the American College of surgeons risk
calculator in metastatic spinal tumor surgery

Jessica Ryvlin

1

, Benjamin Wang

1

, Jorden Xavier

1

, Mousa Hamad

1

, Rafael De La Garza Ramos

1

, Saikiran Murthy

1

, Yaroslav Gelfand

1

, and Reza Yassari

1

1

Department of Neurological Surgery, Montefiore Medical Center/Albert
Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, United States

Introduction: Patients with spinal metastases often require
surgical intervention for cord compression or palliative care. The American
College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality Improvement Program
(ACS-NSQIP) Surgical Risk Calculator was developed to assist surgeons with
estimating 30-day postoperative complications based on patient-specific risk
factors and has been validated within several surgical patient populations.
Since no prior studies have evaluated its performance in patients undergoing
spinal metastasis surgery, we assessed the accuracy of this tool in
predicting postoperative complications. Methods: This was a
single-institution retrospective cohort study. Electronic medical record
(EMR) chart review was performed on consecutive operative patients with
metastatic spine disease from our institution between April 1, 2012 and
April 30, 2022. Preoperative comorbidities and current procedural
terminology (CPT) codes were entered into the ACS-NSQIP calculator
(https://riskcalculator.facs.org/RiskCalculator/) to obtain
predicted complication risk for each patient. Mean predicted risk
percentages were then compared to observed outcomes using receiver operator
characteristic (ROC) curves and two-sided one-sample t-tests. A scatter plot
with regression line was used to compare length of hospital stay.
Results: A total of 153 patients were included in this
study. The overall 30-day postoperative complication rate was 41.2% and
mortality rate was 8.5%. The mean predicted mortality rate was similar to
mean observed mortality (7.9% vs 8.5%, p = 0.352). However, mean predicted
outcomes were significantly lower than mean observed outcomes for all other
measured complications, including any complication, serious complication,
pneumonia, surgical site infection, urinary tract infection, venous
thromboembolism, and return to operating room (p < 0.001). Only mean
postoperative mortality (AUC = 0.749) and sepsis (AUC = 0.709) were found to
be adequately discriminated in ROC analysis, with all other outcomes having
poor predictive value (AUC < 0.700). Finally, the risk calculator was
found to structurally underestimate length of hospital stay in
patient-matched comparison (regression line y = 14.51-0.1x; r2
< 0.001). Conclusion: The ACS-NSQIP risk calculator was
found to be a poor or unreliable predictor for most postoperative
complications in patients undergoing spinal tumor surgery. However, this
tool may be successfully utilized to predict risk of 30-day postoperative
mortality in this patient population. Future work should be done to create
accurate oncology-specific outcome predictors with validation in the spine
population.

## 1156

## P514: The potential role of intraoperative ketamine administration in
reducing postoperative opioid consumption among chronic opioid users in
outpatient spine surgery

Carol Wang

1

, Jennifer Liu

2

, Thomas Sullivan

3

, Kevin Bondar

3

, and Comron Saifi

3

1

Department of Orthopaedics, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, United States

2

Orthopedics and Sports Medicine

3

Spine Surgery, Houston Methodist Hospital, Houston, United
States

Introduction: The rising rate of opioid use disorder in the
United States represents a serious public health crisis. The economic burden
of prescription opioid misuse is extensive. Achieving postoperative pain
control while minimizing opioid overuse and dependence is a continued
challenge in spine surgery. Intraoperative ketamine administration in
patients undergoing spine surgery has been associated with decreased opioid
consumption postoperatively. The present study aimed to determine long-term
postoperative opioid consumption in patients who received intraoperative
ketamine compared to those who did not receive intraoperative ketamine.
Materials and Methods: Patients included in this study
carried a diagnosis of degenerative spinal deformity and had undergone spine
surgery. Patients in the ketamine group received a single bolus of 30, 40,
or 50 mg of ketamine, followed by ketamine infusion at a rate of 1-3
mcg/kg/min until the close of the procedure. Pre- and postoperative opioid
consumption was quantified using cumulative MME. A prescription drug
monitoring program (PDMP) spanning 13 states was used to identify opioid
prescription fills and quantify dosages consumed independent of prescription
source, insurance coverage, or patient self-report. Long-term preoperative
opioid use was defined as filling at least six opioid prescriptions in the
twelve months prior to surgery. Short-term preoperative opioid use was
defined filling an opioid prescription in the 30 days prior to surgery, with
no additional opioid prescription fills in the 180 days prior to surgery.
Study sample characteristics, including demographics, comorbidities,
intraoperative factors, postoperative outcomes, were controlled in the
analyses. Propensity score matching was used. STROBE (Strengthening the
Reporting of Observational studies in Epidemiology) guidelines were
implemented. Results: A total of 434 participants were
included. Compared to the control group, patient who received intraoperative
ketamine presented with a significantly higher number of readmissions (0.291
± 0.75 vs. 0.475 ± 0.874; p = 0.045), and higher mean opioid usage in the
year prior to surgery (5,089 ± 16,813 vs. 11,801 ± 28,043; p = 0.016). There
was no statistically significant difference noted in postoperative opioid
consumption in opioid-naïve patients and short-term opioid users at 1 month,
3 months, 6 months, or 1 year. There was no difference in incidence of
long-term postoperative opioid use in the opioid-naïve patients in patients
receiving intraoperative ketamine. Among patients with long-term
preoperative opioid use, the patients who received ketamine had consumed 41%
fewer total morphine milligram equivalents (MMEs) (k = 1,209 MMEs; c = 2.062
MMEs; p = 0.008) at one month postoperatively. In subgroup analysis based on
percentile of preoperative opioid use in MMEs, no statistically significant
association was observed between ketamine administration and postoperative
opioid use in any subgroup. Conclusion:There was no significant
change in opioid use at 1, 3, 6, or 12 months postoperatively in the two
groups. There was no difference in the incidence of long-term postoperative
opioid use, VAS at discharge, VAS pain scores, and length of stay. There was
a short-term opioid-sparing benefit to intraoperative ketamine use in
patients with long-term preoperative opioid use. Patients with chronic
preoperative opioid use have a short-term opioid-sparing benefit after
intraoperative ketamine administration.

## 1167

## P515: Anterior spinal fusion surgery associated with lower risk of
stroke, pneumonia, and infection compared to posterior spinal fusion
surgery

Leland McCluskey

1

, Ivan Angelov

2

, Victor Wu

3

, Sachin Gupta

4

, Comron Saifi

2

, and Matthew Cyriac

5

1

Orthopaedic Surgery, St. Francis, Emory Healthcare, Columbus, United
States

2

Spine Surgery, Houston Methodist Hospital, Houston, United
States

3

Department of Orthopedic Surgery, University of Texas Health -
Houston, Houston, United States

4

Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
United States

5

Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Tulane University School of
Medicine, New Orleans, United States

Introduction: The question of approach to lumbar fusion is
debated amongst spine surgeons. While prior studies have shown slight
differences in outcomes, most studies have concluded that both approaches
have similar fusion rates and clinical outcomes. Prior studies have lacked
statistical power. This retrospective cohort study compared the 30 and
90-day postoperative complications between an anterior vs. posterior
approach to lumbar interbody fusion (LIF) in 2010-2018 utilizing the largest
sample to date of direct patient outcomes from a mixed private and public
payer database. Materials and Methods: The MSpine database by
PearlDiver was queried using ICD-9, ICD-10, and CPT codes to identify
patients who had undergone single-level anterior or posterior lumbar
interbody fusion surgery. 30 and 90-day postoperative complications of
single-level ALIF/LLIF and PLIF/TLIF surgery were evaluated in 112,023
patients. Readmission rates, ileus, lower extremity DVT, infection,
pneumonia, and stroke were evaluated for patients with in the anterior
approach group and the posterior approach group. Results: There
were 38,529 (34.4%) patients in the anterior group (ALIF/LLIF) and 73,494
(65.6%) in the posterior group (PLIF/TLIF). At both 30 and 90-days
postoperative, patients undergoing an anterior approach to lumbar interbody
fusion had a higher odds ratio of lower extremity DVT (30-day OR: 1.19,
90-day OR: 1.16; p < 0.05) and ileus complication (30-day OR: 1.87, p
< .05; 90-day OR: 1.81, p < .05). At both 30 and 90-days
postoperative, patients undergoing a posterior approach had a higher odds
ratio of stroke (30-day: OR: 0.79, 90-day OR: 0.87; p < 0.05),
transfusion (30-day OR: 0.66, 90-day OR: 0.69; p < .05), infection
(30-day OR: 0.88, 90-day OR: 0.91; p < .05), and pneumonia complication
(30-day OR: 0.85, 90-day OR: 0.90; p < .05). There was no statistically
significant difference in myocardial infarction or pulmonary embolism
between both approaches at 30 and 90-days postoperative.
Conclusion: This study identified differences in
postoperative complications between anterior and posterior approaches at 30
and 90-day postoperative timepoints. The present findings can inform surgeon
treatment decisions for patient profiles. Patients with high risk for
stroke, pneumonia, and infection, or patients with a high likelihood of
requiring postoperative transfusion, may benefit from an anterior approach
for lumbar interbody fusion. Patients with a high risk for developing lower
extremity DVT may benefit from a posterior approach.

## 1211

## P516: Drivers for unplanned readmission following adult spinal
surgery

Comron Saifi

1

, Sarthak Mohanty

2

, and Sachin Gupta

2

1

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Houston Methodist Hospital,
Houston, United States

2

Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
United States

Introduction: Unplanned readmissions following surgical
intervention are costly to health systems, associated with poor outcomes,
and useful as indicators of healthcare quality and hospital performance.
Discerning independent predictors of hospital readmission is especially
crucial in light of the Hospital Readmissions Reduction Program, a part of
the Affordable Care Act that allows centers for Medicare and Medicaid
services to penalize hospitals for higher readmission rates. Identifying
independent risk factors for hospital readmission within one-year post-op is
critical to identifying how risk factors change along a longitudinal scale.
The objectives of this study were to assess the incidence of unplanned
readmission after spine surgery at 0-30 days, 31-90 days, 91-180 days, and
180 days, and one year and to identify preoperative and in-hospital risk
factors using a large, single institution database. Materials and
Methods: A retrospective review of 3,079 patients who underwent a
spinal procedure as a principal or secondary procedure was conducted.
Patients with and without unplanned readmission were compared on baseline
characteristics, intraoperative details, and postoperative outcomes.
Baseline characteristics consisted of comorbidities, age, race, sex, smoking
status, pre-operative diagnosis, procedures performed, and post-operative
outcomes. Multivariable logistic regression was performed to establish
independent associations with unplanned readmission within one-year post-op.
For adjusted analysis, separate models were constructed using purposeful
selection of covariates, incorporating backward elimination after univariate
testing (p-value = ≤ .10). Separate regression models were constructed for
patients who were readmitted between 0-30 days, 30-90 days, 90-180 days,
between 180 days and 365 days. Statistical significance was defined as
p-value < .05 (two-sided test). Analyses were conducted with SPSS
Statistics 23. Results: 3,079 patients met inclusion criteria.
22.34% were readmitted within one year. 10.49% of patients were readmitted
within 30 days postoperatively, 3.77% between 30 and 90-days
postoperatively, 3.25% within 90 and 180 days postoperatively, and 4.77%
between 180 days and one-year post-operatively. Patients that underwent
procedures of the thoracic spine (p = 0.030) had a higher likelihood of
being readmitted. Smokers (p = 0.034) had a higher likelihood of readmission
compared to non-smokers. Each additional day spent in the hospital during
the postoperative stay resulted in 1.071 higher odds (p < 0.0001) of
readmission. Each additional year of age resulted in 1.021 higher odds (p
< 0.0001) of readmission. Infection was the most common reason for
re-admission. Conclusion: Older patients, patients that
smokers, and patients undergoing thoracic procedures had higher rates for
re-admission after adult spine surgery. Infection was the most common reason
for readmission. Surgeons should consider these factors in management
decisions, clinical follow-up, and in counseling patients regarding the
risks for readmission.

## 1218

## P517: Treatment of a symptomatic CSF fistula after full endoscopic
cervical foraminotomy

Bastian Stemmer

1

, Motov Stefan

1

, Christoph Maurer

2

, and Ehab Shiban

1

1

Department of Neurosurgery

2

Department of Radiology, UK Augsburg, Augsburg, Germany

Introduction: There is limited data on the management and
sequalae of CSF fistulas after endoscopic cervical spine surgery. Case
report: We present a case of a 47-year old female patient with
left-sided C7 radiculopathy, who was advised for a left-sided endoscopic
foraminotomy C7 due to a cervical spondylosis with left-sided paramedian
disc herniation and C7 foraminal stenosis. The patient was discharged on the
first postoperative day after an uneventful course of treatment. However,
she returned 8 days later with tingling dysesthesia in both upper
extremities as well as headache and neck pain, which accentuated and
immobilized her during standing and walking. A cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
leak was detected on spinal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). A computer
tomography (CT)-guided epidural blood patch was performed but the patients’
symptoms persisted. Therefore a second CT-guided epidural fibrin patch was
executed and the patient improved and was discharged home without
sensorimotor deficits or sequelae. Discussion and Conclusion:
CSF fistulas after endoscopic cervical spine procedures are a rare
complication, which might severely debilitate and immobilize patients.
Thorough analysis of current literature let us conclude that interventional
treatment with epidural fibrin patch appears to be an efficient treatment if
dural tear is not detected and repaired during initial surgery.

## 1235

## P518: Postoperative VTE complications in spinal oncology patients

Ivan Angelov

1

, Takshi Hirase

2

, Thomas Sullivan

2

, and Comron Saifi

1

1

Spine Surgery

2
Department of Orthopedics and Sports Medicine,
Houston Methodist Hospital, Houston, United States
Introduction: Venous Thromboembolism (VTE) is a serious
complication that occurs following spine surgeries. VTE rates are high in
cancer patients especially in those treated with spine tumor excision
procedures. There are no prior studies that investigate the incidence of
postoperative VTE among spinal instrumentation procedures performed on
patients with oncologic spinal pathologies. The authors hypothesized that
spine instrumentation procedures performed on a greater number of levels
will be associated with a higher risk of VTE complications compared to those
involving fewer levels in patients with oncologic spinal pathologies.
Methods and Materials: The 2010 to 2019 National Surgical
Quality Improvement (NSQIP) database was used to identify all patients
undergoing spine instrumentation procedures for spine tumor excision. A
retrospective review of the NSQIP database was performed on all patients
undergoing spinal instrumentation for spine tumor excision between 2010 and
2019. CPT codes of spinal instrumentation procedures were included. Patients
with incomplete records and CPT codes for procedures other than spinal
instrumentation were excluded. Demographics, operative data, hospital length
of stay, 30-day reoperation, 30-day readmission, discharge disposition and
postoperative complications including VTE complications were collected.
Results: A total of 3,155 patients (1752M, 1403F) and 4 CPT
codes were included in the study. The median age was 61 years and median BMI
was 27. There were 637 (20%) transfers from an outside facility and 605
(19%) were smokers. Average operative duration was 284 minutes and median
hospital length of stay was 8 days. There were 2118 (67%) patients treated
with spine instrumentation of 3 to 6 levels (CPT 22842), 631 (20%) patients
with spine instrumentation of 7 to 12 levels (CPT 22843), 379 (12%) patients
with spine instrumentation of two levels (CPT 22840) and 27 (< 1%)
patients with spine instrumentation of at least 12 levels. A total of 173
(5.5%) patients developed at least one VTE complication. Spinal
instrumentation of 12 levels or greater was associated with the highest rate
of VTE (15%) followed by spine instrumentation of 7 to 12 levels (7%), spine
instrumentation of 3 to 6 levels (5%), and spine instrumentation of two
levels (3%). We performed a Pearson's chi-squared test of independence to
verify if the distribution of the presence of VTE complications varies with
the associated CPT code. The chi-squared test resulted in X2 of 13.54, and a
p-value 0.0036. Conclusion: Spine instrumentation on greater
number of vertebral levels is associated with a higher incidence of
postoperative VTE complications compared to instrumentation performed on
fewer levels in patients with oncologic spinal pathologies. There was an
overall VTE rate of 6% in this patient population. This varied based on the
number of levels instrumented with a 3% rate for a 2-level procedure and a
15% rate for a 12-level or greater procedure.

## 1286

## P519: Preoperative serum albumin predicts length of stay and
perioperative complication following vertebral corpectomy and posterior
stabilization for oncologic spinal pathology

Takshi Hirase

1

, Khaled Taghlabi

2

, Jesus Cruz-Garza

2

, Amir Faraji

2

, Rex Marco

1

, and Comron Saifi

1

1

Department of Orthopedics and Sports Medicine

2

Neurosurgery, Houston Methodist Hospital, Houston, United
States

Introduction: Patients undergoing vertebral corpectomy and
posterior stabilization for oncologic spinal pathology have relatively high
rates of perioperative complications. Low preoperative serum albumin levels
have been associated with increased perioperative complications following
elective spine surgeries. The present study aimed to evaluate the hypothesis
that preoperative serum albumin levels are associated with perioperative
outcomes following vertebral corpectomy and posterior stabilization for
oncologic spinal pathology. Methods: The 2010 to 2019 National
Surgical Quality Improvement (NSQIP) database was used to identify all
patients undergoing vertebral corpectomy and posterior stabilization for
spine tumor excision. Multiple logistic regression ordinal models were used
to examine the relationship between preoperative serum albumin levels on
perioperative outcome measures. Receiver operative characteristic (ROC)
curve analysis and Youden index were used to determine preoperative serum
albumin cut-off values for predicting perioperative complications.
Results: A total of 301 patients were included in the
study. Lower serum albumin was associated with longer post-operative LOS (p
< 0.001) and higher incidence of perioperative complications (p <
0.001). ROC curve analysis demonstrated serum albumin < 3.25 g/dL as an
independent predictor for perioperative complications. After multiple
logistic regression modeling, for every unit decrease of serum albumin
(g/dL), there was a 2.3 times higher chance of increase in length of stay by
one week (95% CI: 1.8, 2.7; p < 0.001) and 1.9 times higher chance of
incurring any perioperative complication including surgical site infection,
urinary tract infection, and need for post-operative blood transfusion (95%
CI: 1.3, 2.7; p < 0.001). There were no significant association between
serum albumin and operative time, need for intraoperative transfusion,
30-day reoperation, 30-day readmission, or discharge disposition.
Conclusion: Low serum albumin levels is associated with a
longer postoperative LOS and a higher incidence of perioperative
complications among patients undergoing vertebral corpectomy and posterior
stabilization for tumor resection. Strategies to improve preoperative
nutritional status in patients undergoing this procedure may improve these
outcome measures.

## 1297

## P520: Risk factors for complications and prolonged lenght of stay in a
single institution retrospective cohort of 336 patients

Luigi Falzetti

1

, Cristiana Griffoni

1

, Giovanni Barbanti Bròdano

1

, Carlotta Cavallari

1

, and Alessandro Gasbarrini

1

1

Department of Spine Surgery, IRCCS Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli,
Bologna, Italy

Introduction: Over the last decades the total number of spine
surgery procedures has increased significantly worldwide. Numerous
advancements in surgical techniques, devices and relevant technological
innovations contributed to this increase. Despite these developments, the
incidence of adverse events (AEs) in spinal surgery is still high and
clinically relevant. The goal of this study is to collect the complications
occurring in a referral centre for spinal surgery, using a reliable method
to capture and classify intra-operative and post-operative complications,
namely SAVES v2 system (Spinal Adverse Events Severity system), and to
identify risk factors related to complications and factors influencing
length of stay (LOS). Material and Methods: All AEs of patients
who underwent spinal surgery at our Department between January 2017 and
January 2018 were retrospectively collected. Patients’ characteristics
including sex, age, comorbidities (Charlson Comorbidity Index), ASA score
and prior exposure to spinal surgery, the type and setting (emergency or
elective) of the surgical procedure were collected. The LOS during the index
admission was calculated for each patient. Analyses for potential risk
factors of complication and prolonged LOS were performed using logistic
regression models. Results were reported as odd ratios with 95% confidence
intervals (95% CI). Results: In the 1-year period from January
2017 to January 2018 a total of 336 patients underwent spinal surgery (223
non-oncological and 113 oncological patients). Two-hundred-ten AEs were
recorded retrospectively (30 intraoperative AEs, 138 early postoperative AEs
and 42 late postoperative). Ninety-nine patients (29.5%) had at least one
complication. Intraoperative complications were more frequent in the
oncological group (23 AEs/113 patients) than in the non-oncological group (7
AEs/223 patients). Early post-operative complications were most of the
recorded complications (138/210, 66%) and were more frequent in the
oncological group than in the non-oncological group (46% vs 38%). The rate
of late post-operative complications was similar in the two groups (15% vs
11%). In the non-oncological group, different factors (age > 75 years
old, anatomical region, surgical time > 3 hours, instrumentation,
previous surgeries, type of surgery) were associated with complications but
only surgical time > 3 hours was confirmed as risk factor for
complications at multivariate analysis (OR=5.0 (95%CI:1.8-13.9)). Surgical
time > 3 hours and the presence of a post-operative complication were
associated with increased LOS, however the presence of a post-operative
complication was the only risk factor for increased LOS at multivariate
analysis (OR = 3.3 (95%CI:1.5-7.1)). In the oncological group, surgical time
> 3 hours, instrumentation, previous surgery were factors associated with
complications but only the presence of previous surgeries was confirmed as
risk factor for complications at multivariate analysis (OR = 3.4
(95%CI:1.3-8.6)). Surgical time > 3 hours and post-operative
complications were confirmed as risk factors for prolonged LOS at
multivariate analysis (respectively: OR = 2.7 (95%CI:1.0-7.3), OR = 3.5
(95%CI:1.3-9.3)) while age > 65 and comorbidity index > 2 were not.
Conclusion: Spine surgery has a relatively high incidence
of complications that can lead to increased morbidity and mortality. Better
categorization of complications and recognition of risk factors for
complications and prolonged LOS are fundamental to improve patients’ safety
and clinical outcomes.

## 1302

## P521: White cord syndrome following posterior decompression and fusion
for severe OPLL and an acute cervical traumatic injury - A case report and
review of literature

Sai Gautham Balasubramanian

1

, Prokopis Annis

1

, and Aditya Dahapute

1

1

Spinal Deformity Unit, The Walton Centre NHS Trust, Liverpool,
United Kingdom

Introduction: White cord syndrome (WCS) refers to the
observation of intramedullary hyperintensity due to edema/ischemia and
swelling on postoperative T2-weighted MRI sequences in the setting of
unexplained neurological deficits after cervical spinal cord decompression.
Ischemia-Reperfusion Injury typically occurs after a cervical decompression
surgery, where a chronically compressed spinal cord is injured by
reperfusion following decompression. Patho-physiologically, WCS/Re-Perfusion
Injury occurs due to oxygen derived free radicals as a result of acute
reperfusion to the previously under-perfused cord or direct trauma from
blood flow itself. Intraoperative neurophysiologic monitoring (IONM) can
give early warning and detect neurologic deficits which can allow surgeon to
take necessary measurements apart from preventing medico-legal
complications. In this context, we are sharing our experience of a case with
chronic severe OPLL of cervical cord with an acute traumatic cervical spine
injury who underwent decompressive surgery and developed quadriplegia
postoperatively without any perceptible iatrogenic technical cord trauma,
documented by IONM and post-operative MRI with classical signs of RPI/WCS.
Materials & Methods (Case Description): A 63-year-old
male presented with a low velocity fall at home followed by quadriparesis.
X-ray images on presentation showed C6 fracture through upper end plate with
local kyphosis. The CT scan demonstrated C6 fracture with ossification of
the posterior longitudinal ligament from C2-T3, most severe from C2-4 with
C6 fracture which extended posteriorly to bilateral facet joints in addition
to DISH. MRI images showed there is marked spinal canal stenosis from C2
down to C4 due to ossified posterior longitudinal ligament with intrinsic
signal changes in the cord. On decompression, MEP signals were not present
below C4. Immediate post-op MRI was done to rule out any compressive
pathology. MRI showed T2 hyperintensity of the cord at C3 level which
appeared expanded with a central syrinx. Cord oedema was noted at the C3
level. No evidence of epidural haematoma or other compressive lesion at the
operative site and the diagnosis of WCS/RPI was established based on post-op
MRI findings as there were no other discernible cause of Quadriplegia.
Conclusion:White Cord Syndrome is essentially a diagnosis
of exclusion. Very rarely, patients sustain severe/new neurological deficits
post-operatively attributed to WCS. Unless, this is confirmed
post-operatively with classical MRI signs of intramedullary hyperintensity
and other extrinsic causes of cord injury/compression is ruled out, the
diagnosis should not be invoked. IONM can help us detect such an event
occurring intra-operatively and help us take appropriate measures in a
timely manner. IONM should be the standard of care in such cases of
decompressive surgeries where there is a severe chronic compression of
cervical cord and, decompression will trigger a cascade of re-perfusion
injury to the spinal cord leading to disastrous complications. IONM is also
highly beneficial in alerting the surgeons intra-operatively and also
provides a source of permanent record of what exactly happened
intra-operatively to prevent medico-legal complications. Understanding
WCS/RPI is a valid diagnosis in such circumstances would be helpful in
detailed consenting processes and help prevent an additional surgery for the
patient which might further increase the risks of mortality and
morbidity.

## 1358

## P522: The prognostic role of neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio,
platelet-to-lymphocyte ratio, and systemic immune-inflammation index on
short- and long-term survival following spinal metastasis surgery

Jessica Ryvlin

1

, Seung Kim

1

, Mousa Hamad

1

, Rafael De La Garza Ramos

1

, Saikiran Murthy

1

, Yaroslav Gelfand

1

, and Reza Yassari

1

1

Department of Neurological Surgery, Montefiore Medical Center/Albert
Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, United States

Introduction: The immune system has been shown to play a
significant role in metastatic tumor progression and prognosis, especially
in the setting of surgical intervention. Specific peripheral inflammatory
markers, including neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio (NLR),
platelet-to-lymphocyte ratio (PLR), and systemic immune-inflammation index
(SII) have similarly shown promise in predicting both short-term and
long-term mortality in a rage of primary tumor types and interventions.
However, these metrics have not been evaluated in patients with metastatic
spine disease. The purpose of this study was to elucidate the predictive
ability of preoperative NLR, PLR, and SII on postoperative 30-day mortality
and overall survival (OS) amongst patients receiving surgery for spinal
metastases. Methods: This was a single-institution
retrospective cohort study. A total of 153 patients who met inclusion
criteria and received surgical intervention for metastatic spine disease
between April 1, 2012 and April 30, 2022 were identified. Electronic medical
records (EMR) were manually reviewed, and collected variables included
patient demographics, medical comorbidities, oncologic history, lab values
within 30 days prior to surgical intervention, and morbidity details. NLR
(n/l), PLR (p/l), and SII (p*n/l) were manually calculated from preoperative
neutrophil (n), platelet (p), and lymphocyte counts (l). Receiver operator
characteristic (ROC) curves with areas under the curve (AUC) were generated
to determine optimal cutoff values based on Youden’s index. Univariate
logistic regression was used to determine significant predictors of 30-day
mortality, after which variables were included in a multivariate logistic
regression model to control for potential confounders in determination of
odds ratios (OR). The Kaplan-Meier method with log-rank test and
multivariate Cox proportional hazards regression analysis were used to
determine hazard ratios (HR) in OS analysis. Results: Cutoff
values to define high NLR, PLR, and SII were calculated to be > 10.2,
> 260, and > 2900, respectively. Overall, 36% (55 of 153) of patients
were found to have high NLR, 46% (70 of 153) had high PLR, and 31% (47 of
153) had high SII. The total 30-day mortality rate was 8.5% (13 of 153).
After controlling for potential confounders such as BMI, ECOG performance
status, and primary cancer type, high preoperative NLR (OR = 5.20; 95% CI
1.21-22.28; p = 0.026) and SII (OR=4.92; 95% CI 1.17-20.63; p = 0.029) were
found to be significantly associated with increased odds of 30-day
postoperative mortality. The median OS time in our population was 25.9
months (95% CI 11.8-40.0 months). After controlling for confounding
variables such as ECOG performance status, primary cancer type,
hypoalbuminemia, and smoking history, only high NLR was found to be
significantly associated with overall mortality (HR = 2.31; 95% CI
1.32-4.03; p = 0.003). PLR was found non-significant in adjusted analysis of
both 30-day mortality and OS. Conclusions: In this study,
preoperative high NLR and SII were found to be independently and
significantly associated with 30-day postoperative mortality. High NLR was
also found to be independently associated with increased risk of poor OS.
These metrics may ultimately be used for surgical planning and outcome
prediction in patients with metastatic spinal tumors; however, further
validation is needed in this population.

## 1398

## P523: Barbed suture versus interrupted suture in posterior cervical spine
surgery: are they equivalent?

Alan Tang

1

, Anthony Steinle

2

, Hani Chanbour

1

, Andrew Croft

2

, Godwin Emeka-Ibe

2

, Byron Stephens

1,2,3

, Scott Lawrence Zuckerman

1,2

, and Amir Abtahi

1,2,3

1

Department of Neurological Surgery

2

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery

3

Center for Musculoskeletal Research, Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, Nashville, TN, United States

Introduction: Posterior cervical spine approaches have been
associated with increased rates of wound complications compared to anterior
approaches. While barbed suture wound closure for lumbar spine surgery has
been shown to be safe and efficacious, there is no literature regarding its
use in posterior cervical spine surgery. In a cohort of patients undergoing
elective posterior cervical spine surgery, we sought to compare
postoperative complication rates between barbed and traditional interrupted
suture closure. Material and Methods: A retrospective review of
demographics, past medical history, and operative and postoperative
variables collected from a prospective registry between 07/2016-07/2020 was
undertaken. All patients 18 years+ undergoing elective posterior cervical
fusion were included. The primary outcome of interest was wound
complications, including surgical site infection (SSI), dehiscence, or
hematoma. In addition, numerical rating scale (NRS) neck pain (NP), NRS arm
pain (AP), Neck Disability Index (NDI), and operative time were collected. A
variety of statistical tests were used to compare the two suture groups.
Results: Of 117 patients undergoing posterior cervical
fusion, 89 (76%) were closed with interrupted suture and 28 (24%) with
barbed suture. The interrupted cohort were more likely to have > 1
comorbidity (p < 0.001), diabetes mellitus (p = 0.013), and coronary
artery disease (p = 0.002). No difference in postoperative wound
complications between interrupted/barbed sutures was observed after
univariate (OR 1.07, 95% CI: 0.27-4.25, p = 0.927) and multivariable
logistic regression analysis (OR 0.77, 95% CI: 0.15-4.00, p = 0.756).
Univariate logistic regression revealed no differences in achieving minimal
clinically important difference (MCID) NRS-NP (OR 0.73, 95% CI: 0.28-1.88, p
= 0.508) or NRS-AP (OR 0.68, 95% CI: 0.25-1.90, p = 0.464) at 3 months
between suture groups. The interrupted suture group was less likely to
achieve MCID NDI at 3 months (OR 0.29, 95% CI: 0.11-0.80, p = 0.016).
Conclusion: The use of barbed sutures, compared to
interrupted sutures, was associated with similar postoperative wound
complication rates, including surgical site infection wound, dehiscence, and
hematoma development. However, while both groups experienced improvement in
PROs at 3-month follow-up, more patients closed with interrupted sutures
achieved MCID NDI. The findings of this study should be taken into
consideration by surgeons in selecting suture type in closing posterior
cervical fusion patients.

## 1483

## P524: Mechanical complications requiring revision surgery in long fusion
down to sacrum for adult spine deformity: single surgery and single
institude experience

Azmi Hamzaoglu

1

, Hamisi Mraja

1

, Celaleddin Bildik

1

, Tunay Sanli

1

, Halil Gok

1

, Onur Levent Ulusoy

1

, Ayhan Mutlu

1

, Selhan Karadereler

1

, and Meric Enercan

1

1

Scoliosis-Spine Center Istanbul, Istanbul, Turkey

Introduction: Surgical treatment of adult spinal deformity (ASD)
is challenging and prone to complications. The aim of this study to evaluate
the rate and characteristics of mechanical complications of ASD patients who
required revision surgery performed by a single surgeon at a single
institution. Methods: Primary ASD patients, > 50 years, >
2 years f/up, fusion > 5 levels, fusion down to the pelvis were included.
Hospital charts were reviewed for demographic data and characteristics of
complications. The mechanical complications were identified as proximal
junctional failure (PJF) and distal junctional problems. Patients were
grouped according to the fixation type; single rod (SR) and Multi rod (MR)
fixation. Preop, postop and f/up x-ray were reviewed. ODI and VAS scores
were used for clinical assessment. Results: 205 (141F, 64M) ASD
patients with mean age was 66 (50-85) years and f/up was 8.2 (2-19) years
were included. Single rod fixation in 124 patients and Multi rod fixation in
81 patients were used. A total of 19 (9.3%) patients required revision
surgery. 11 (5.4%) patients were revised for proximal junctional failure
(screw loosening at UIV in 6 (3%) patients and UIV Fracture in 5 (2.5%)
patients). 8 (3.9%) patients were revised for distal junctional problems; S1
screw loosening in 3 (1.5%) patients, rod fracture between L2-L5 levels in 3
(1.5%) patients, L5-S1 pseudoarthrosis in 2 (1%) patients despite previous
interbody fusion. The onset of proximal junctional failure was mean 9.7
months and 20.3 months for distal junctional problems. Among 19 patients, SR
was used in 16 (84%) patients and MR was used in 3 (16%) patients. SR group
was revised for proximal junctional failure in 8 patients and distal
junctional problems in 9 patients. MR group was revised for proximal
junctional failure in 1 patient and distal junctional problem in 3 patients.
Patients with distal junctional problems had a high rate of PI-LL mismatch
(%66.6), obesity (67.6%) and osteoporosis (52%) were the most common patient
related factors. ODI and VAS scores were improved in all after revision
surgery at f/up. Conclusion: This study showed 9,3% revision
rate among 205 adult spinal deformity patients operated by a single surgeon.
Revision indications were proximal junctional problems (screw loosening and
fracture at UIV) in 5.4% of the patient and distal junctional problems in
3.9% of the patients due to S1 screw loosening, rod fracture between L2-L5
levels and L5-S1 pseudoarthrosis despite previous interbody fusion. Adult
spinal deformity patients with Multi rod constructs showed less mechanical
complications than Single rod constructs. Obesity (67.6%), PI-LL mismatch
(%66.6) and osteoporosis (52%) were the most common factors related with
mechanical failures. All patients benefit from revision surgery with
improved clinical outcomes.

## 1541

## P525: The reliability of cortical bone trajectory instrumentation in
adjacent segment disease

Kim-Soon Oh

1,2

1

Orthopaedics, Hospital Universiti Tunku Abdul Rahman, Kampar,
Malaysia

2

Spine Centre, Island Hospital, Penang, Malaysia

Introduction: Cortical bone trajectory (CBT) screws have been
described for use in adjacent segment disease when extension of the
pre-existing instrumentation column was required. This technique employed
minimal access and did not require removal of the original instrumentation.
Material and Methods: 14 patients with single-level
adjacent segment disease at the cephalad end of previous instrumented lumbar
fusion were studied from 2017 till 2022. They were followed up for a minimum
of 24 months. Parameters studied included clinical signs of instability and
radiographic imaging; radiographs and computed tomograms. 9 of these
patients were elderly, and of these, 7 had bone density T-scores worse than
or equal to -2.5. All patients were operated upon by the same surgeon.
Results: There was no deterioration in physical function or
worsening of clinical symptoms. Follow-up imaging did not reveal any implant
loosening or implant failure. At the end of 24 months or more, 13 patients
displayed evidence of radiographic fusion. The one patient who did not, was
clinically well and had resumed his preoperative level of physical activity.
Conclusion: The CBT technique appears to be a viable option
for use when faced with an adjacent segment disease that requires extension
of the preexisting instrumentation. Certainly, a meaningful number of cases
need to be curated and studied in order to realise its true
significance.

## 1549

## P526: Cervical myelopathy surgical outcomes between two neighboring
medical institutions: a comparative analysis

Nyssa Kantorek

1

 and Carlos Bagley

2

1

Medical School, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, United States

2

Neurological Surgery, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, United States

Introduction: Cervical myelopathy consists of degeneration of
the spinal cord involving deficits in neurological function. Previous
studies compared surgical treatment outcomes in different age groups,
however, demographic and socioeconomic influences have not been explored.
This study investigates the differences in outcomes for patients with
cervical myelopathy at a large urban academic medical center and a tertiary
urban safety net facility based on disease severity, demographics, and
socioeconomic information. Due to the safety net hospital status and care
for a patient population that is largely uninsured or lacking in consistent
primary care, we hypothesize that safety hospital patient patients may
present later and experience poorer surgical outcomes than the tertiary
academic facility. Material and Methods: Using data from the
local Spine Registry and ClinDEN databases for patients surgically treated
at UTSW-affiliated hospitals and Parkland Memorial Hospital, it was
essential to establish a proxy for disease severity since there are none
established in the literature. We discovered that pain may be a reliable
method of measuring disease severity since we found that patients who
experienced more pain tended to have worse surgical outcomes and less
satisfaction with surgery. This was measured with the PROMIS pain scale.
Further analysis consisted of correlative studies using R programming
language to see if race/ethnicity, personal medical history, or
socioeconomic status were associated with either worse pain and/or worse
surgical outcomes. After defining these correlations for the two
institutions individually, we then compared the results to find parallels or
differences. Results: Baseline pain served as an adequate proxy
for disease severity for our analysis as determined by measuring the
correlation between the patient reported pain and survey responses regarding
patient satisfaction with their surgical outcome 3 months post-operatively.
Demographic analysis demonstrated Black patients were both more likely to
present with worse pain before and after surgery than their White or other
race counterparts. Only patients with congestive heart failure experienced
worse pain at baseline prior to surgery compared to those with diabetes,
hypertension, and cancer. Peri-operative complications for patients included
constipation, urinary tract infections, kidney failure, myocardial
infarction, and others. The most common complications were constipation and
UTI as expected due to opioid analgesics and prophylactic antibiotics. The
more serious or life-threatening surgical complications all correlated with
worse baseline pain and arguably more severe presentation.
Conclusion: For a public safety net, such as Parkland
Memorial, many of the patients lack insurance and consistent primary care.
For example, many patients utilize the emergency department to fill
medications instead of treating emergent medical concerns. More research is
required on disparities in spinal surgery to determine if potential
solutions, such as screening, are more beneficial than they are harmful for
the patients with limited access to primary, secondary, and tertiary care.
It is also essential to further understand why Black patients and those with
certain personal medical histories are presenting with later disease.
Studies such as these are essential for the understanding of the patients’
perceptions and experiences with cervical myelopathy given the potential
devastating consequences of this condition.

## 1556

## P527: Grip strength predicts the occurrence of postoperative proximal
junctional kyphosis in patients with degenerative scoliosis

Xueyu Hu

1

1

Spine Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Air Force Military
Medical University, Xi ' an, China

Background: Previous studies have suggested a correlation
between grip strength and paravertebral muscle volume in spine, with greater
grip strength being associated with greater muscle volume. Studies also
reported a significant decrease in paravertebral muscle volume in patients
with proximal junctional kyphosis (PJK), in adult spinal deformity patients,
a significant decrease in cross-sectional area of the T10-L2 paravertebral
muscles was observed in patients who developed PJK. Grip strength has been
shown to be a factor in assessing the prognosis of several spinal disorders.
This study hopes to investigate whether grip strength could be used as a
predictor of the occurrence of PJK after surgery in patients with adult
spinal deformity. Methods: This is a prospective case-control
study, patients aged 40-90 years old suffering from degenerative scoliosis
and treated with posterior fusion internal fixation at the First Affiliated
Hospital of Air Force Military Medical University from March 2020 to
December 2021 were selected according to the following criteria. Inclusion
criteria: (1) Suffering from degenerative scoliosis (Cobb angle > 10° in
the coronal plane) and treated with posterior fusion internal fixation; (2)
At least 2 segments fused; (3) At least 2 years of follow-up. Exclusion
criteria: (1) Age < 40 years; (2) Unable to complete clinical and imaging
follow-up; (3) Hand trauma, and other factors might affect the process of
muscle strength measurement; (4) History of congenital scoliosis, vertebral
slippage, spinal trauma, and other spinal surgery. Patients were divided
into high grip strength group and low grip strength group by clustering
based on the grip strength values measured at admission and comparing the
concordance of baseline levels between the two groups. The incidence of PJK,
ODI, EQ-5D scores, early complications such as pulmonary embolism,
intestinal obstruction, urinary tract infection, transient delirium,
epidural hematoma and neurological dysfunction and late complications such
as screw loosening and pseudoarticular formation were compared.
Results: 395 patients were included, there were no
significant differences between the two groups in terms of age, gender,
surgical segment or duration of surgery. However, significant differences
were observed in the number of co-morbidities. The incidence of
postoperative PJK was significantly lower for patients in high grip strength
group compared to those with low grip strength, but there was no significant
difference in postoperative ODI and EQ-5D scores between the two groups. The
incidence of epidural hematoma was significantly lower in the high grip
strength group, but there was no significant difference in the incidence of
other short-term postoperative complications and long-term pseudarthrosis.
Conclusion: In this study, the high grip strength adult
deformity scoliosis patients showed a significant decrease in the incidence
of postoperative PJK, although the high grip strength group had better
performance in ODI and EQ-5D scores, this difference was not statistically
significant.

## 1623

## P528: Dural tear a feared complication of spine surgery

Ihsan Ullah

1

,
Abdul Sattar

2

, Mohammad Arif

2

, Samir Kabir

2

, and Zahid Wazir

2

1

Orthopedics and Spine Unit, DHQ Hospital Daggar, Buner,
Pakistan

2

Hayat Abad Medical Complex, Peshawar, Pakistan

Objective: To investigate the incidence, risk factors and
clinical presentation of complications in patients undergoing spinal surgery
with and without Dural Tear. Methods: One-year prospective
observational case-control study conducted in the department of orthopedics
and spinal surgery at the Hayatabad Medical Complex (HMC). The spine surgeon
used a discrete surgical approach. The questionnaire was used to collect
patient demographic data, surgical information, and data on perioperative
and postoperative complications. Results: Dural tears were
observed in 3.4% of the patients, among whom 20% of the patients experienced
a Dural leak. After controlling for potentially confounding variables of
age, sex, primary disease, and type of procedure, the surgery-related
complications that were more likely to occur in the Dural Tear group than in
the non-TD group were surgical site complications OR 2.69 and postoperative
neurological defect O 3.28. The proportion of postoperative delirium OR 3.22
was significantly high in the Dural Tear group as perioperative
complications. Conclusion: There is a higher proportion of
surgical site infection, postoperative neurological defect and postoperative
delirium in the Dural Tear group that are due to complications direct, such
as Dural leakage.

## 1715

## P529: Sacroiliac joint degeneration and pain after spinal arthrodesis: a
systematic review

Marco Manzetti

1

, Alberto Ruffilli

1

, Francesca Barile

1

, Giovanni Viroli

1

, Marco Ialuna

1

, matteo traversari

1

, tosca cerasoli

1

, fabio vita

1

, and Cesare Faldini

1

1

1

st

Orthopedic and Traumatology Clinic, IRCCS - Istituto Ortopedico
Rizzoli, Bologna, Italy

Introduction: Aim of the present study is to review the
available literature concerning sacroiliac joint (SIJ) pain and degeneration
after lumbosacral fixation to identify prevalence and potential risk
factors. Although numerous factors can predispose patients to SIJ
degeneration and pain various clinical studies indicate lumbosacral
arthrodesis as a major cause. Material and Methods: The
PubMed-MEDLINE, Cochrane Central Registry of Controlled Trials and Embase
Biomedical database were searched. Peer-reviewed comparative studies, cohort
studies, case series studies and case control studies, conducted either in a
retrospective or prospective design, that registered data about SIJ pain and
degeneration after lumbosacral fixation were included. Results:
Twenty-one studies including 2678 patients met the inclusion criteria. The
percentage of SIJ pain after lumbosacral fixation diagnosed with injections
and physical examination varied widely, from 3% to 90%. Among patients who
underwent spinal fusion, SIJ pain prevalence was higher when arthrodesis was
fixed compared to floating fusions (59% vs 10%, p value > 0.05). The
prevalence of SIJ degenerative changes at CT scan were more frequent in
patients who underwent spinal arthrodesis than in those who did not (75% vs
38.2%, p value = < 0.05). Conclusion: According to current
evidence, patients who received lumbosacral fixation are at risk of SIJ
pain. Number of fused levels, involvement of pelvis or sacrum in the
arthrodesis area, inadequate lumbosacral sagittal alignment and site of bone
graft harvesting could be possible risk factor leading to sacroiliac
degeneration and pain after lumbar spine fixation that should be
investigated by physicians. However, there is a lack of homogeneity of the
studies that address the problem, therefore, further prospective comparative
studies, with a homogeneous architecture and cohorts are needed.

## 1716

## P530: Intrathecal morphine trial/pump infusion therapy for post-surgical
spine syndrome: side effects and complication

Jung Hoon Sul

1

, Ju chul Yang

1

, Tae Wan Kim

1

, Da Hoon Hong

1

, and Kwan Ho Park

1

1

VHS Medical Center, Seoul, South Korea

Introduction: A few cases of post-surgical spine syndrome (PSSS)
are resistant to standard treatments. IT morphine therapy has improved pain
control and side effects over systemic analgesics alone. There are
complications associated with the intrathecal catheter, the implanted pump,
the management of the device, and the drugs themselves. Material and
Methods: A total of 24 patients with post-surgical spine syndrome
were reviewed. All patients underwent IT trial or IT pump implantation.
Complications were divided into three categories: pharmacology, equipment,
and procedure. Results: Most common complications were
transient pharmacologic side effects (n = 7) with procedural (n = 2), and
equipment (n = 1). Most common symptoms were transient urinary difficulty
and/or pruritis. The serious complications were large lumbosacral subdural
hematoma and intradural fibrotic tissues at lumbar puncture site (n = 1).
There was a case of mid-catheter occlusion by precipitated morphine crystals
(n = 1). Another case showed skin necrosis of back operation site.
Conclusion: The pharmacologic complications are transient.
There are serious complications such as procedure-related large subdural
hematoma or intrathecal catheter blockage. With a better understanding of
the intrathecal drugs, equipment, meticulous procedure technique, various
complication can be reduced.

## 1756

## P531: Orthostatic intorelance during early mobilization after enhance
recovery after surgery (ERAS) Program for minimally invasasive lumbar
interbody fusion

Weerasak Singhatanadgige

1

, Panapol Varakornpipat

1

, Vit Kotheeranurak

1

, and Worawat Limthongkul

1

1

Orthopedics, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok,
Thailand

Introduction: Early postoperative mobilization is essential
after spinal surgery. It can reduce pulmonary complication and DVT.
Postoperative orthostatic intolerance (OI) may limit early recovery or lead
to fainting, falls, and fracture. The prevalence of orthostatic intolerance
has not been reported after minimally invasive lumbar interbody fusion. This
study assessed the hemodynamic response to early mobilization after
minimally invasive lumbar interbody fusion with ERAS program. Material
and Methods: Orthostatic intolerance and blood pressure response
to sitting and standing were evaluated by used non-invasive hemodynamic
monitor devices with a two-difference mobilization protocol at preoperative,
6, 12, 24, 48 hours after surgery in 30 patients undergoing single level
Minimally invasive lumbar interbody fusion with an ERAS regimen. Two
protocols were compared: (A) Patients supine, sit and suddenly stand. (B)
Patients supine, sit and rest 30 seconds and stand. Haemoglobin, fluid
balance, and opioid use were recorded. Systolic (SBP) and diastolic (DBP)
arterial pressure, heart rate (HR), cardiac output (CO), stroke volume (SV)
and oxygen saturation were measured. Results: In standard
protocol (A), no demonstrated OI before surgery, whereas 8 (27%) patients
had OI at 6 hours after surgery but no patients had symptoms of OI at 12,
24, 48 hours. OI was associated with significantly decreased orthostatic
responses in SBP, DBP, SV, CO, MAP at 6 hours (p < 0.001). However,
protocol B showed significantly decreased rate of OI at 6 hours compared
protocol A (p < 0.001). Postoperative haemoglobin concentration and
opioid dose was not associated OI. The Clinical outcomes were significantly
improved in all patients. All patients were discharged to home on
postoperative day 3 without complications or readmission.
Conclusion: Twenty-seven percent of patients have OI when
start ambulate at 6 hours after surgery. We suggest that the patients should
rest at sitting position at least 30 seconds before start walking. Start
ambulation after 12 hours is safe without demonstration of OI.

## 1765

## P532: Paramedian approach versus median approach lumbar puncture: a
systematic review and meta-analysis protocol

Yuan-Dong Zhuang

1

, Fenfen Yao

2

, Xuanjie Chen

2

, Yihang Lin

2

, and Zhengqiong Lai

2

1

Neurosurgery, Fujian Medical University Union Hospital, Fuzhou,
China

2

Basic Medical College, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou,
China

Introduction: Lumbar puncture is one of the most common
neurosurgical invasive procedures in modern medicine. It is widely and
frequently used by neurosurgery, anesthesiology, pediatrics, and other
departments. However, the application of lumbar puncture in the clinic,
especially the success rate during surgery, has not yet had a clear
technology with the highest success rate. By searching for relevant clinical
trials, we found that lumbar puncture through different approaches has a
significant impact on the experience of doctors and patients during surgery.
This study will review the randomized controlled trial of the lumbar
paramedian approach and compare it with the lumbar median approach.
Material and Methods: A detailed search will be conducted
of Web of Science, Pubmed, Cochrane, and EMBASE without language or
publication type restrictions. The retrieval task is basically completed.
Patients of any age and sexuality will be included in our study. All
analyses will follow the intention-to-treat principle. Results:
We take the number of needle passes as our main results. The secondary
outcomes included the following: the number of attempts, time taken to
identify landmarks, blood tap, periprocedural pain score, and patient's
discomfort during the spinal procedure radicular pain. This study will be
analyzed by calculating the Relative Risk (RR) with a corresponding 95%
Confidence Interval (CI). For continuous outcomes, the weighted mean
difference with 95% CI will be calculated. If a continuous outcome is
reported as a median, we will assume a normal distribution and consider the
median as a mean. If measures of dispersion are reported as a range, 95% CI,
or standard error of the mean, we will calculate the standard deviation (SD)
by using relevant formulae outlined in the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic
Reviews of Interventions. Conclusion: Four reviewers will
independently perform a quality assessment. The Cochrane Collaboration’s
tool will be used to assess the risk of selection, performance, detection,
attrition, reporting, and other biases among included randomized trials. If
there is insufficient information provided to make a judgment, we will
categorize the study as having an unclear risk of bias and the original
study authors will be contacted for further information. Trials with one or
more high-risk components will be judged as having an overall high risk of
bias. The Newcastle-Ottawa Scale will be used to assess observational
studies on selection, comparability, and exposure. Studies that receive at
least one star in every domain will be categorized as being of high quality.
Any disagreements during the quality assessment will be resolved through
discussion and consensus. If necessary, consult a fifth reviewer. Results
from this study are expected to significantly change clinical practice. By
comprehensively examining the evidence on paramedian approach in comparison
to median approach for lumbar puncture, this review is expected to inform
clinicians on which approach to use for procedures to minimize patient
suffering and improve the success rate.

## 1801

## P533: Hyperacute postoperative thoracic spine epidural haematoma and it's
uncomplicated spontaneous resolution - a case report

Stjepan Dokuzovic

1

, Jure Pavesic

1

, Stipe Corluka

1

, and Vide Bilic

1

1

Spinal Surgery Division, Traumatology Department, University
Hospital Centre Sestre Milosrdnice, Zagreb, Croatia

Introduction: Spinal epidural haematoma, whether spontaneous or
post-surgical, can be a devastating complication if not promptly recognized
and treated. This condition often requires primary decompression and
drainage (if spontaneous haematoma) or revision surgery (if it is a
postoperative complication). Anterior localization of a thoracic level
postoperative haematoma may require revision surgery, which is significantly
more demanding and more neurologically risky than the initial surgery due to
the possibility of causing further “hits” to the compressed spinal cord.
Material and Methods: We present the case of a young
patient operated on for routine stabilization of a 2 level thoracic vertebra
fractures (Th6 and Th12) who developed total paralysis due to a
postoperative hyperacute epidural haematoma localized anterior to the cord,
however the course was quickly spontaneously reversed prior to revision
surgery. This misfortune was thankfully spontaneously resolved prior to
revision surgery simply by elevating the upper body and having the haematoma
“drain” itself more caudally down the canal where there is more space.
Results: The patient did not have any medical risk factors
for developing such a haematoma postoperatively, though developed a
haematoma regardless, either from the fracture line or from an epidural
venous bleed. Roughly an hour after surgery, complete paralysis was noted.
Upon radiological confirmation by emergency MRI scanning, we elevated the
upper part of the body to prevent cranial migration of the haematoma, and
complete spontaneous resolution ensued over the next 45 minutes.
Conclusion: In cases of epidural haematoma development with
neurological impairment, it is not always necessary to perform emergency
revision surgery. When the bleeding is hyperacute and not coagulated, it may
be possible to let it spontaneously disperse itself along the length of the
canal, thus minimizing its local compressive effect. If prompt neurological
recovery is not witnessed, the option of emergency revision must still be
available.

## 1884

## P534: Prognostic factors for effective spinal cord stimulation therapy
for post-surgical spine syndrome

Kwan Ho Park

1

, Ju chul Yang

1

, and Tae Wan Kim

1

1

Department of Neurosurgery, VHS Medical Center, Seoul, South
Korea

Introduction: Post-surgical spine syndrome (PSSS) is a clinical
entity, defined as persistent or recurrent back and/or leg pain after spine
surgery. Various therapeutic approaches are currently used to treat
refractory chronic pain after spinal surgery. A multidisciplinary approach
is unlikely to benefit from further formal surgical intervention. Surgery
benefits a limited number of conditions, mainly root compression and
instability. It is difficult to predict how and where evidence will lead the
field over the next 5 to 10 years. Spinal cord stimulation (SCS) techniques
via a implanted dorsal column neurostimulator is gaining popularity owing to
its substantial superiority over conventional medical management and/or pain
intervention. These approaches may provide a rescue treatment for patients
who have previously failed surgical and less invasive therapies, offering
relief to a patient population among the most difficult to treat. We assess
and report on which patient groups are effective for SCS. Material and
Methods: Thirty four patients had intractable chronic back and/or
leg pain with a diagnosis of PSSS. All patients who underwent SCS
implantation were retrospectively reviewed. Preoperative mean Visual
Analogue Scale (VAS) score for leg was 7.6. SCS trial was performed to
evaluate patient’s response to SCS procedure. We placed percutaneous or
paddle leads depending on neurological symptoms. SCS system was implanted in
patients with pain reduction more than 50% compared to pre-trial procedure.
The mean follow-up was 56 months. Results: Thirty patients were
men and four were women. The mean age was 58 years. The patients with leg
pain responded favorably to SCS. Back pain of patients did not respond well.
SCS was less effective in patients with surgical indication, neural
compressive lesions or spinal cord lesion. Preoperative mean VAS score for
leg was 7.6 and postoperative VAS score was 4.0. Conclusion:
SCS is an effective treatment option for neuropathic pain of PSSS in the
absence of a viable surgery. It is mainly effective for patients with leg
pain and no neural compressive lesion. Careful patient selection is most
important for the success of SCS therapy.

## 1891

## P535: Chance fracture pattern presenting in proximal junctional failure:
a case series

Shea Comadoll

1

, Kenneth Holton

1

, Jason Haselhuhn

1

, Paul Soriano

1

, David Polly

1

, Michael Schmitz

1

, Christopher Martin

1

, Kristen Jones

1

, and Jonathan N. Sembrano

1

1

University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, United States

Introduction: Chance-type fracture is a kind of proximal
junctional failure (PJF) that may present with instability, neurologic
compromise, and pain. We sought to report a series of patients from our
institution who presented with a specific acute Chance-type proximal
junctional failure of the upper instrumented vertebra (UIV) that occurred
within three months of the index surgical procedure. This report aimed to
describe the radiographic features of this Chance-fracture variant, its
detection rate, risk factors, and overcorrection rate. Materials and
Methods: We reviewed cases of early proximal junctional failure
with a specific fracture pattern of the UIV. All index surgeries were
performed between September 2013 and February 2020 by fellowship-trained
orthopedic spine surgeons or neurosurgeons in our institution as single or
dual-surgeon cases. We collected and analyzed demographic data, bone mineral
density, and pre- and postoperative radiographic parameters, including
lumbar lordosis (LL), L4-S1 lordosis (lower lumbar lordosis or LLL), pelvic
incidence (PI), upper segment contour (USC), thoracolumbar sagittal
alignment (TL), and proximal junctional angle (PJA). Results:
Fifteen patients (11F:4M) were included in the final analysis with an
average age of 61.4 years (range 39-77). The average time between index
surgery and fracture identification was 25.4 days (range 3-65), and the
average number of levels instrumented was 5.6 (range 2-15). None of the
patients had antecedent trauma prior to the onset of their fracture. Notable
findings included PJF on postoperative images with a CT scan illustrating a
fracture extending through the long axis of the upper instrumented pedicle,
with the cephalad fragment and the superior articular process displaced
superiorly. In 90% of cases with a lumbar UIV, there was overcorrection of
LL and/or LLL. Four cases with a lower thoracic UIV had undergone
significant correction of preoperative TL junction kyphosis. The reading
radiologists did not identify the fracture on 73% of radiographs and 46% of
CT scans. Thirteen of the 15 patients were treated with an extension of
fusion. Pedicle screws at the fracture level were salvaged by changing to an
anatomic trajectory. Conclusion: This case series reports a
Chance-type fracture pattern of the UIV that is difficult to detect on plain
films and is a unique cause of PJF. Continued pain at 6-12 weeks, along with
lateral radiographs showing increased proximal junctional angle and
cephalocaudal pedicle widening at the UIV, should raise suspicion about this
unique fracture pattern. Obtaining a CT scan is highly recommended. Low bone
density, LL or LLL overcorrection, and selection of lower thoracic UIV in
the setting of significant TL junction correction may contribute to fracture
risk.

## 1935

## P536: The use of high-dose tranexamic acid in spine surgery: an analysis
of perioperative variables and patient outcomes

Chenyi Yang

1

, Alexander Himstead

1

, Nolan Brown

1

, Joshua Kurtz

1

, Neal Patel

1

, Shane Shahrestani

1

, Julian Gendreau

1

, Martin Pham

2

, and Joseph Osorio

2

1

Neurosurgery, UC Irvine, United States

2

Neurosurgery, UC San Diego, United States

Introduction: Previous literature has repeatedly demonstrated
the effective use of antifibrinolytic agents such as tranexamic acid (TXA)
for reducing blood loss during spine surgery. However, there is concern that
high doses of TXA may increase the risk ofcomplications, such as
thromboembolism or seizure. Materials and Methods: The purpose
of this retrospective case series was to delineate perioperative outcomes
and complications in patients that underwent spinal procedures with
administration of high-dose TXA (2350 mg – 7500 mg) at a single institution.
A retrospective chart review was performed on all adult patients who
received surgery in the cervical, thoracic, or lumbar regions between
September 2019 and March 2020.The total dose of TXA administered during the
surgery along with perioperative complications were recorded.
Results: Thirty-six patients were treated with
intraoperative high-dose TXA during the study period. Mean age
was 56.6 (range: 22 - 82). Average BMI was 27.2 (5.1) kg/m2.
Average preoperative CCI was 3.0 (2.7). Mean number of spinal levels
operated on was 6.9 (4.3). Seven cases (19.4%) were revision surgeries. Of
the 36 cases, 1 included pedicle subtraction osteotomy (2.8%), 4 included
vertebral column resection (11.1%), and 20 included a posterior column
osteotomy (55.6%). Mean intraoperative blood loss was 587.1 (900.0) mL,
and total blood loss was 623.8 (991.9) mL. Postoperatively, time to
ambulation was on average 1.7 (1.7) days. Mean total length of stay
was 9.8 days (7.9, range 2 - 41). The most common indication for surgery
was tumor (n = 9, 25%), followed by fracture (n = 8, 22.2%), deformity (n =
7, 19.4%), pseudarthrosis (n = 6, 16.7%), and degenerative disc disease (n =
2, 5.6%). There were no thromboembolic or other significant complications
among the 36 patients. Conclusion: This retrospective case
series demonstrates that the use of high-dose TXA provides a safe and
effective outcome in adult patients undergoing spine surgery.

## 1997

## P537: Does the use of a smoke evacuation device reduce smoke exposure in
the OR? A prospective study

James Hall

1

, Joshua Eisenberg

1

, Alex Coffman

1

, Natalie Glass

1

, Catherine Olinger

1

, Cassim Igram

1

, and Andrew Pugely

1

1

Orthopedics and Rehabilitation, University of Iowa, Iowa City,
United States

Introduction: It is widely accepted that inhalation of smoke,
specifically the particulate matter therein, can cause adverse health
effects. In June 2018, Rhode Island was the first state to enact a law
mandating the use of a smoke evacuation system in the operating room. Nine
more states followed suit in 2020. The presence of dangerous compounds in
surgical smoke is well established in the literature, but few have
investigated the utility of smoke evacuation in spine surgery. With
increased scrutiny on surgical smoke levels, these devices should be further
studied. Therefore, the primary aim of our study was to evaluate the
efficacy of two smoke evacuation systems in reducing surgical smoke levels
in spine surgery. Secondary aims of our study were to determine patient,
facility, or equipment factors that may influence surgical smoke levels.
Material and Methods: Consecutive patients undergoing spine
surgery at a single institution had surgical smoke levels measured utilizing
the PCE instruments particle counter (PCE-PCO 2). Room set-up was
standardized such that the particle counter was positioned on an IV pole
nearest the anesthesiologist. Smoke particle levels were measured during the
first hour of the procedure. The two smoke evacuators used were a smoke
evacuator pencil (SEP) with suction in line with a cautery tip, and a para
incisional vacuum (PIV) that utilizes a large suction tube affixed adjacent
to the wound. The evacuators were compared to one another and to a control
group. We evaluated the relationships between evacuation systems (SEP, PIV,
control) and a) average b) peak levels of 0.3 µm particle size and c)
overall particle count. We then evaluated for relationships with patient,
room and/or surgery factors. Results: In total, 117 patients
were included in the study. SEP was employed in 36 cases, PIV in 43, and no
evacuator in 38. Groups did not vary regarding patient demographics or room
characteristics. There was a significant reduction in average 0.3 µm, peak
0.3 µm, and average overall particle levels when using either the SEP or
PIV. SEP reduced average 0.3 µm, peak 0.3 µm, and average overall particle
levels by 55%, 55%, and 54% respectively. PIV reduced those levels by 68%,
86%, and 72% respectively. Additionally, a significant reduction in peak 0.3
µm particle levels was noted with PIV when compared to SEP. Multivariable
analysis revealed significance in room size and number of operative levels.
Specifically, a smaller operating room and greater number of operative
levels both independently contributed to increased levels of surgical smoke
measured. Significance was defined as p < 0.05. Conclusion:
Our results show that both the SEP and PIV effectively reduce operating room
smoke levels during spine surgery. Furthermore, the PIV shows superiority in
reducing peak smoke levels. This study supports the use of a smoke
evacuation device to reduce surgical smoke levels and thus reduce the
potential associated health risk to operating room personnel.

## Trauma - Cervical

## 53

## P538: Management of lower cervical spine fracture - dislocation
associated with severe traumatic brain injury: case report and surgical
treatment for an uncommon lesion association

Ghassen Gader

1

, Mohamed Amine Gharbi

2

, Mouadh Nefiss

2

, Mohamed Badri

1

, Mohamed Zouaghi

1

, Ramzi Bouzidi

2

, Ihsen Zammel

1

, and Anis Tebourbi

2

1

Department of Neurosurgery, Trauma and Burns Center, Ben Arous,
Tunisia

2

Department of Orthopaedics, Mongi Slim Hospital, La Marsa,
Tunisia

Introduction: Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is the leading cause
for death and severe functional impairment in young adults. Outcome for
severe TBIs is worse when associated to other extracranial traumatisms.
Simultaneous TBI and cervical spine injury (CSI) occurs in 4–8% of TBIs.
CSIs occurring concurrently with severe head injuries deeply worsen the
patient’s condition because of potentialization and occultation of the
traumatic lesions, but also because of some therapeutic situations in which
the management of a lesion may worsen the other. Material and
Methods: We report the case of a patient operated for a TBI
through a decompressive craniectomy, and who needed management for a
fracture-dislocation of the lower cervical spine. Based on this case, we
went through a review of associations between head and cervical spine
trauma, with particular highlights on controversial therapeutic situations
like ours. Case description: We report the case of a 26
years-old male patient, victim of an accidental fall from the roof of his
house, which corresponded to a 6 meters height. He was immediately
transferred to the emergency department. Initial physical exam found a
prostrate patient with a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of 12/15, with incomplete
tetraplegia. Brain CT scan showed a temporo-parietal fracture associated to
a right hemispheric epidural hematoma with a maximal thickness of 3.2 cm.
Cervical spine CT scan showed comminuted bilateral facet
fracture-dislocation C6 to C7 responsible for an 8 mm antelisthesis. The
patient quickly developed a comatose state with a GCS that decreased to
4/15, associated to a right anisocoria. He was intubated, sedated, and
placed under mechanical ventilation. Regarding the neurologic distress,
surgical management for the intracranial lesion was decided. But viewing the
cervical fracture-dislocation that was prone to worsen on head positioning
prior to the hematoma's evacuation, the patient underwent at first a
reduction and realignment of the cervical spine. This approach was mandatory
as neurosurgical and orthopedic departments were not located at the same
institution, thus the necessity to immobilize the cervical spine before any
transfer. The reduction was processed through closed manual maneuvers by
axial traction and hyperextension. Afterwards, patient was transferred to
the neurosurgical department where the hematoma was evacuated through a
decompressive craniectomy. Three days after, the patient underwent a C6-C7
interbody fusion through an anterior cervical approach using an iliac crest
bone autograft. An anterior cervical screw-plate was used for stabilization.
Reduction was verified peroperatively by fluoroscopy. The outcome was
unfavorable as the patient died three weeks later in the follows of a severe
ventilator-associated pneumonia. Conclusions: TBIs and CSIs are
frequently associated in the course of polytraumas. Head and cervical spine
injuries are systematically assessed in all polytraumas followed by a
comatose state, taking in count that their association may result in
increased mortality and morbidity, an impairment of the quality of life, and
hindering the rehabilitation process.

## 64

## P539: Treatment strategy for pedicle fractures of the C2 axis

Jong-Beom Park

1

, Dong-Gune Chang

2

, and Young-Yul Kim

1

1

Orthopaedic Surgery, The Catholic University of Korea College od
Medicine, Uijeongbu-si, South Korea

2

Orthopaedic Surgery, Inje University Sanggye Paik Hospital,
Uijeongbu-si, South Korea

Introduction: C2 pedicle fracture (PF) is not an uncommon
injury1-7 but have been less focused than dens fractures or Hangman’s
fractures. The anatomical structure of the C2 PF differs significantly from
other pedicles of the same cervical spine as well as the lumbar and thoracic
vertebrae. Due to its distinct anatomical features, spine surgeons often do
not understand the exact location of the C2 pedicle and confuse C2 PF with
pars interarticularis fracture. Also, little information is available about
the characteristics and treatment strategy for C2 PFs. We sought to
investigate the characteristics of C2 PF and to propose appropriate
treatment strategy. Material and Methods: A total of 49
patients with C2 PF were included in this study. We divided these patients
into unilateral and bilateral C2 PFs group. The incidence rates and
characteristics of other associated C2 and C2-3 injuries and other cervical
injuries were evaluated. In addition, treatment methods and outcomes were
analyzed. Results: Twenty-two patients had unilateral C2 PFs
and 27 patients had bilateral C2 PFs. Among the cases of unilateral C2 PF,
all patients had one or more other C2 fractures and 20 patients (90.9%) had
one or two C2 body fractures. Meanwhile, among the cases of bilateral C2 PF,
all patients had two or more other C2 fractures and one or two C2 body
fractures. In unilateral C2 PFs, 3 patients with C2-3 anterior slip or
adjacent cervical spine (C1-3) injury underwent surgery and 19 patients
(86.4%) were treated with conservative methods. In bilateral C2 PFs, 3
patients with C2-3 anterior slip or SCI at C2-3 underwent surgery and 24
patients (88.9%) were treated with conservative methods.
Conclusion: Our results showed that C2 PF do not occur
alone and are always accompanied by other associated C2 injuries. C2 PF
should generally be thought of as a more complex fracture type than
Hangman's fracture or dens fracture. In spite of the complex fracture
characteristics, most C2 PF can be managed with conservative treatment.
However, surgical treatments should be considered if the C2 PF are
accompanied by the C2-3 anterior slip and adjacent cervical spine
injury.

## 122

## P540: Intraoperative sensory signals predict prognosis for patients with
traumatic cervical spinal cord injury

John Renehan

1

, Ivan Ye

1

, Alexandra Thomson

1

, Tyler Pease

1

, Ryan Smith

1

, Robin Fencel

1

, Brittany Oster

1

, Daniel Cavanaugh

1

, Eugene Koh

1

, Daniel Gelb

1

, Bryan Ferguson

2

, Bizhan Aarabi

3

, Steven Ludwig

1

, and Vache Hambardzumyan

1

1

Spine Surgery Division, Orthopaedics

2

Anesthesiology

3

Neurosurgery, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore,
United States

Introduction: In patients with traumatic cervical spinal cord
injury (tCSCI), the potential role of intraoperative neuromonitoring as a
prognostic tool has been insufficiently studied. This study aimed to
determine if detectable signals during intraoperative neuromonitoring
portend a greater likelihood of recovery for patients with tCSCI.
Materials and Methods: Patients who underwent decompression
and surgical fixation following tCSCI were retrospectively reviewed through
previously prospectively collected data from the Surgical Timing in Acute
Spinal Cord Injury Study (STASCIS). Improvement in ASIA motor score and AIS
grade conversion rates at final follow-up were compared between patients
with detectable intraoperative neuromonitoring somatosensory evoked
potential (SSEP) signals and those without detectable signals.
Results: A total of 49 patients had intraoperative
neuromonitoring. Patients with incomplete tCSCI had detectable lower
extremity SSEPs more often than patients with complete tCSCI (56.3% vs.
23.5%, p = 0.028). There was no difference in detectable upper extremity
SSEPs between complete and incomplete tCSCI (65.6% vs. 58.8%, p = 0.638). Of
the 17 patients with complete tCSCI, patients with detectable lower
extremity SSEPs had ASIA motor scores similar to the non-detectable cohort
on admission (21.5 vs. 16.2, p = 0.609) but higher ASIA motor scores at
final follow-up (57.5 vs. 27.1, p = 0.041). Of the 32 patients with
incomplete SCI, there was no difference in grade conversion or motor scores
between detectable and non-detectable SSEP cohorts.
Conclusions: The presence of upper extremity SSEP signals
in patients who present with complete tCSCI portends greater improvement in
ASIA motor scores and likelihood of AIS grade conversion at final
follow-up.

## 144

## P541: Outcomes in patients with vertebral injury after blunt cervical
spine trauma

Romil Shah

1

, Devender Singh

2

, Ayane Rossano

1

, and Eeric Truumees

2

1

Orthopedics, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, United
States

2

Spine, Ascension Texas Spine and Scoliosis, Austin, United
States

Introduction: Vertebral artery injury (VAI) occurs in almost 1%
of all blunt trauma hospital admissions. No large study has been conducted
investigating outcomes of VAI in blunt cervical trauma. Aim:
The aim of this study was to evaluate 1-year outcomes in patients with blunt
cervical spine trauma with vertebral artery injuries.
Materials/Methods: Data from the National Trauma Data Bank
(NTDB) of adult patients with cervical vertebral, ligamentous, or
neurological trauma from 2016 and 2017 were analyzed. Patients who died
within 3 days of admission were excluded. Demographic, injury specific
information (mechanism, severity), patient health information, and a
variable indicating the presence of vertebral artery injury were collected
as explanatory variables. Response variables collected included development
of adverse events (DVT/PE, myocardial infarction (MI), stroke, hemorrhage,
or neurological deficit) length of stay (LOS), intensive care unit (ICU)
LOS, and unplanned ICU admission or surgical procedure. Multivariable
regression was used to calculate the risk-adjusted effect of vertebral
artery injury on the presence of adverse events and unplanned events as well
as its relationship with LOS and ICU LOS. Results: 128,908
patients with cervical trauma were reviewed, of which 5,300 had VAI. Of the
patients with VAI, 187 (3.5%) patients had a MI, 156 (2.9%) had a PE/DVT,
196 (3.7%) had a stroke, 1392 (26.3%) had neurologic injury, and 443 (8.4%)
had an unplanned operative procedure or ICU admission. After
risk-adjustment, VAI was associated with a greater than 2-fold increased
risk of increased LOS and ICU LOS (p < 0.001), as well as greater than a
2-fold increased risk of MI, PE/DVT, stroke, and neurologic injury (p <
0.001). Conclusions: Vertebral artery injury in cervical trauma
is associated with increased adverse events and length of stay in the ICU
and in the hospital. Trauma providers should be aware of these increased
risks when treating patients with VAI in cervical trauma.

## 539

## P542: Surgical outcomes of subaxial cervical fractures in patients with
spinal ankylosing diseases

Sara Diniz

1

, Manuel Carrapatoso

1

, Catarina Pereira

1

, João Soares do Vale

1

, Filipe Jardim Rodrigues

1

, Arnaldo Sousa

1

, and Ricardo Rodrigues-Pinto

1

1

Orthopaedic Department, Centro Hospitalar Universitário do Porto,
Portugal

Introduction: Spinal ankylosing diseases are a group of
pathologies associated with decreased bone quality (such as osteopenia or
osteoporosis), stiffness, and increased susceptibility to unstable fractures
that can lead to neurological important damage. Due to the high associated
instability of these fractures, several surgical treatments have been
proposed, such as long instrumentations (anterior or posterior) or combined
instrumentations. A clinical and radiological evaluation of cervical
fractures was carried out in a patient with an ankylosed spine.
Material and Methods: Between 2012 and 2019, all cases of
cervical fractures in patients with an ankylosed spine who were admitted to
the emergency department of Orthopaedics of a single center were evaluated.
Demographic, and fracture pattern imaging data (based on X-ray, CT-scan and
MRI), as well as surgical variables and clinical outcomes were analyzed.
Results: Twelve patients (11 men and 1 woman; mean age of
76 ((± 8.1); Two cases due to a road accident, one case due to a fall from a
tractor, four due to a fall from > 2 m, five due to a fall from standing
height. The mean time from trauma to surgery was 42.9 (± 44.6) hours.
Average length of stay of 23.1 days. Five type C and seven type B AO
fractures (five B2 cases and two B1 cases). Two of the cases of type C
fracture required cranial traction to reduce the dislocation. Mean fracture
segment migration of 1.96 (± 1.1) mm in AO type C. As for pre-surgery
neurological deficits, one ASIA A case, one ASIA C, four ASIA D, and six
cases of ASIA E. Eight patients were submitted to anterior fixation (two
levels above and two levels below), one was managed by posterior approach,
and the remaining three to 360° fixation. The mean surgery time was 164.6
(±131.5) min. There were two cases of surgery failure (16.7%), both after
isolated anterior fixation, requiring conversion to 360° fixation. Most
patients recovered their neurological status (66.7%) and progressed to ASIA
E. Conclusion: These lesions are related to devastating
neurological prognosis and morbidity. Despite the small number of cases,
there were two losses of fracture reduction, both in cases of isolated
anterior approach. Due to its biomechanical superiority, combined fixation
(360°) should be considered as the first line of treatment in patients with
an ankylosed spine.

## 674

## P543: Profile, incidence and outcome of patients diagnosed with cervical
spine injury admitted at Southern Philippines Medical Center - Department of
Orthopedics: a retrospective review

Ali Farhan Pendaliday

1

 and Jeremiah Morales

1

1

Department of Orthopedics, Southern Philippines Medical Center,
Davao, Philippines

Introduction: Cervical spine injury, accounts for approximately
50% of all spinal cord injuries. It is one of the most overwhelming cause of
morbidity and mortality in industrialized and developing countries.
Profiling and determining the outcome of traumatic cervical spine injuries
will provide us with a database identifying the different causes of injury,
co-morbidities and reasons for mortality of admitted traumatic spinal cord
injury (SCI) patients in Southern Philippines Medical Center (SPMC). This
will provide additional source of information since there is no nationwide
database currently available. This study aims to create a registry geared
towards improving data collection of SCI profile. This registry can be used
for future researches that will help improve orthopedic health care in the
future. Materials and Methods: This is a retrospective
descriptive study conducted on all traumatic cervical SCI patients admitted
at SPMC from the year 2015 to 2017. Chart review was done and the following
information were gathered: age, sex, etiology, level of injury, diagnosis,
neurologic status, surgical and nonsurgical management, and disposition.
Data was tabulated and the mean was computed. Results were then interpreted
in a descriptive manner. Results: A total of sixty-one (61)
patients were included in the study. Fifty-six were male and five were
female. Fall was the leading cause of most spinal cord injuries at 60.65%.
Thirty (30, or 49.18%) presented as ASIA A upon admission. C4-C5 level was
the most commonly involved cervical spine segment at 49.18%. Most of the
patients with cervical SCI had bilateral facet dislocation as the most
common morphology at 36.06%. The most common surgery performed was
application of Gardner wells traction with 38 cases recorded. Mean days
before undergoing surgery was 10.07 days ± 19.83. Most common complication
that developed on admitted patients was hospital acquired pneumonia.
Disposition of patients were mostly discharged at 42.62%.
Conclusion: Fall is the leading cause of injury among
Filipinos with cervical SCI in SPMC as compared to the National Spinal Cord
Injury Database (NSCID) data which is road traffic accident. The lack of
local data is the main reason for the conduction of this study. The
demographic and clinical profile gathered can be used as part of the
national database. The creation of this standardized and comprehensive
registry will provide means of collecting accurate data from SCI patients
nationwide. This can be used for future researches and treatment
protocols.
Keyword: Cervical, Profile, Trauma, SPMC, Spine

## 677

## P544: Inhibitory factors for paraplegia improvement in cervical spinal
cord injury surgery patients

Shinji Tanishima

1

, Tokumitsu Mihara

1

, Chikako Takeda

1

, Masaki Yoshida

1

, Satoshi Fujiwara

1

, and Hideki Nagashima

1

1

Division of Orthopedic Surgery, Department of Sensory and Motor
Organs, School of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Tottori University,
Yonago, Japan

Introduction: Cervical spinal cord injuries, once they occur,
can be severely disabling. Surgery is currently the most effective
treatment, although various regenerative therapies are still under
development. On the other hand, it is also a fact that there are cases in
which early surgical intervention fails to improve the condition. The
purpose of this study was to examine the inhibitory factors for improvement
of paralysis in patients with cervical spinal cord injury who underwent
surgery. Subjects and Methods: It was a single-center,
retrospective study. We recruited twenty-three patients with preoperative
ASIA impairment scale (AIS): A to C among cervical cord injury cases
operated on in our department were included in the study. There were 19
males and 4 females, with a mean age of 66.6 ± 18.6 years old. Patients were
classified into two groups: the improved group (n = 11), whose AIS improved
by at least one level at the last observation, and the non-improved group (n
= 12), whose AIS did not improve at the last observation. Comparison was
made between the two groups based on gender, age, BMI, smoking history, time
from injury to surgery, comorbidities, concomitant trauma, postoperative
complications, and presence of DISH/OPLL complications.
Results: AIS at the time of injury was B:4cases and C:7
cases in the improved group, and A:5 cases, B:4 cases, and C:3 cases in the
unimproved group, showing a significant difference between the groups (p =
0.037). No other differences were found between the groups for other
parameters. Since the AIS A cases may have influenced the results, a similar
comparison was performed in a sub analysis of the two groups excluding the
AIS A cases. Only BMI tended to be higher in the non-improved group than in
the improved group (21.1 vs. 25.1, p = 0.051). Conclusion:
There were no cases of improvement in AIS A. With the exception of AIS A,
cases with high BMI showed poor improvement.

## 703

## P545: Tear drop fractures of the axis: management and treatment of 8
cases

Adnene Benammou

1

, Balti Walid

1

, Cherif Kamoun

1

, Ahmed Ben Abid

1

, Khaled Hadhri

1

, Mondher Kooli

1

, and Mohamed Ben Salah

1

1

Orthopedic Surgery Department, Charles Nicolle Hospital, Tunis,
Tunisia

Introduction: Teardrop fractures of C2 are extremely rare. It is
characterized by a fracture of the anterior-inferior corner of the C2 body.
The mechanism is usually in extension which is different from the tear-drop
of lower cervical spine. Our objective was to assess the clinical and
radiological result of patients treated for tear drop fracture of the axis.
Material and Methods: We conducted a retrospective study,
from 2000 to 2021, including patient who were treated for a tear drop
fracture of C2. We excluded patients who had a multilevel spine injury and
lost to follow up patients. We collected demographic data, clinical and
radiographic characteristics as well as the chosen treatment: conservative
or surgical. We also noted the evolutionary data. Results: Our
study included 8 patients. All of our patients were victims of traffic
accidents. None of our patients had neurological deficits. All patients were
explored with a Computed Tomography (CT) scan. Orthopedic treatment using a
rigid collar was undertaken in 7 cases for which no signs of instability
were noted. Only one patient underwent surgical treatment. Decision was made
on the presence of signs of instability. Surgery consisted in an anterior
approach with a C2-C3 discectomy and fusion. Postoperative was uneventful.
Fracture union was achieved in all patients. No complications were noted.
Conclusion: As opposed to lower cervical spine, C2 teardrop
fractures are different by mechanism, rarity of neurological signs and their
management. Treatment can be conservative if there are no signs of
instability. Surgical management is dedicated to instable fracture or cases
with a big fragment. The outcome is usually satisfying.

## 707

## P546: A rare association of two mechanisms in axis fracture

Jlidi Mohamed

1

, Walid Bouaicha

1

, Mohamed Hedi Gharbi

1

, Mouldi Lamouchi

1

, Ayachi Montassar

1

, and Selim Daas

1

1

Orthopedics and Traumatology Departments, Hospital of Mohamed Taher
Maamouri, Tunisia

Introduction: Upper cervical spine traumas are a serious injury
due to its neurological consequences. They are life-threatening fractures
and have a poor functional outcome, due to its short-, medium- and long-term
complications. C2 fractures are the most frequent. They are the subject of
several descriptive classifications according to the mechanism of injury.
The case that we describe in this work associates two different fracture
entities, either in the location of the fracture line and by the mechanism
of the lesion. These two entities combine to create an unusual fracture.
Material and Methods: A 64-year-old man, with no previous
pathological history, was brought to the emergency department by the civil
protection following a 2-meter fall. The exact mechanism of the trauma was
difficult to precise because the patient had a post-traumatic amnesia. On
admission clinical examination shows forehead dermabrasion, he complained of
both wrists and neck pain. The neurological exam was normal. Peripheral
examination showed a deformity of both wrists without skin or vascular
lesions. A neurosurgery emergency was eliminated. X-rays and CT scan of
cervical spine showed bi-pedicular fracture and "Tear-Drop" fracture, both
on the C2 vertebra with a bifocal fracture of the posterior arch of C1.
X-rays of both wrists showed a bilateral fracture with posterior
displacement of the distal radius. Non-operative treatment was decided and
consisted of immobilization with a five-support neck brace (shoulder,
sternum, back, occiput, lower jaw) for four months until consolidation.
Percutaneous pinning under axillary block was indicated for the fracture of
both wrists. Results: The neurological examination remains
unchanged, and vertical position was allowed on the fourth day
post-traumatic. Dynamic X-rays were requested as soon as the neck brace was
removed and did not show any instability of the cervical spine. Cervical CT
scan at 4 months post-trauma confirmed the consolidation. After 24 months,
the patient did not complain about neck pain and dynamic X-rays of the did
not show any instability. Conclusion: The case we report thus
combined two previously separately described entities with different causal
mechanisms. On one hand, a pedicle fracture of C2, supposedly produced by a
mechanism of sudden hyperextension, and on the other hand, a "Tear-Drop"
fracture of the same vertebra, classically caused by a mechanism of axial
compression. Regarding treatment, we took into account the following
parameters:
- The age of the patient
- The absence of neurological signs
- The absence of concrete clinical data on the long-term evolution of this
type of deformity
- The absence of local kyphosis of C2 on C3
- The fact that the fracture of the antéro-inferior corner of the vertebral
body is secondary to a sudden tensioning of the anterior longitudinal
ligament. In this case, the injury was considered stable and treated
non-surgically.

## 938

## P547: Retrospective analysis of patients with cervical spine injury
submitted to surgery in a tertiary hospital in São Paulo

Luiz Claudio Rodrigues

1

, Fernanda Andrea Navarro

2

, Rodrigo Nakao

2

, and Nathalia Adelina Pereira

1

1

Spine Surgery, Santa Marcelina College of Medicine, São Paulo,
Brazil

2

Spine Surgery, Hospital Santa Marcelina, São Paulo, Brazil

In the present study we analyzed retrospectively patients who suffered from
cervical spine lesions and were submitted to surgical treatment in a
tertiary hospital in the east parto f São Paulo, an area of elevated trauma
of the city. Between January 2007 and December 2016, data about 44 patients
were collected, considering age, gender, type of lesion, trauma mechanism,
vertebral level of lesion, surgically addressed spine levels, year of
occurrence, type of surgery performed, cause of trauma, neurological status
according to the Frankel scale and incidence of immediate complications. The
main cause of cervical spine trauma are motor vehicle accidents, followed by
high falls. Most cases of patients were male (72.7%). O principal fator
causador de fraturas de coluna cervical são os acidentes com veículos
automotores, seguidos de queda de altura. A maioria dos casos ocorreu em
pacientes do gênero masculino (72,7%). It appears that prevention measures
can be taken to diminish the severity of cervical spine trauma and thus,
sequels and rehabilitation time of its victims, specially in big urban
centres on which mobility is mainly by cars, the most related factor to this
type of lesion.

## 1262

## P548: C2-C3 complex fracture subluxation with vascular injury: an unusual
presentation

Mohamed Amine Gharbi

1

, Houssem Eddine Chahed

1

, Hedi Ezzine

1

, Mahdi Bouzidi

1

, Tborbi Anis

1

, Ramzi Bouzidi

1

, Ezzaouia Khelil

1

, and Mouadh Nefiss

1

1

Orthopedic and Trauma Surgery, Mongi Slim Marsa University Hospital
Center, Tunis, Tunisia

Introduction: Upper cervical spine injuries have the potential
to be fatal and debilitating due to injury to multiple components.Treatment
decisions is also challenging due to the lack of an unifying algorithm.
Materials and Methods: We present the case of a polytrauma
patient with a hangman’s fracture, an unstable tear drop fracture of the
axis and a concomitent internal carotid aneurysm. Results: A
26-year-old male was brought into the emergency room with multiple injuries
after motor vehicle accident. Computed tomography (CT) scan of the cervical
spine revealed a hangman’s fracture and a C2C3 tear drop fracture. No
subluxation was noted on initial CT. Neurologic status was difficult to
evaluate however the patient reported a change in muscle strength of his
upper left limb during his stay in intensive care. A new CT scan showed the
displacement of the C2C3 tear drop with recoil of C2 at the canal level. He
had C1-C3 fixation. Postoperatively, he complained of headache and visual
disturbance. Angio-CT scan and an MRI showed an internal carotid aneurysm.
Endovascular occlusion was discussed but not performed and he had only
anticoagulant treatment. A 6 month follow-up CT sacn of the spine and of the
aneurysm demonstrated stability and intact instrumentation.
Conclusion: To date, there is no unifying algorithm to
guide treatment decisions in many cases of upper cervical spine
injuries.Vascular injuries have to be taken into consideration before
choosing the approach. In our case going anteriorly would have been a
disaster in front of the presence of the aneurysm of the internal carotid
artery.

## 1264

## P549: Delayed tramatic atlantoaxial sponylptosis with type II odontoid
fracture presenting with occipital neuralgia

Rakesh Kumar

1

 and John Small

1

1

Adventhealth Carrolwood, United States

Introduction: Traumatic Type 2 odontoid fracture is often
diagnosed early utilizing various criteria after injury. Failure to diagnose
and treat appropriately may prove fatal and the risk is significantly higher
in the elderly. Spondyloptosis in this context is rare. Neurologic deficits
often follow the subluxation. Occipital neuralgia was the presenting symptom
in our patient. This led to the diagnosis. Case Report:
83-year-old woman with ground-level fall hitting the back of the head 6
months earlier was discharged after normal head CT. Progressively increasing
neck pain thereafter and developing right-sided occipital neuralgia.
Atlantoaxial spondyloptosis was found related to type II fracture; but
neurologically intact. Intraoperative closed reduction; while motor and
sensory electrophysiological monitoring; done initially in the flexed
position and then gradually in extension led to partial reduction. Open
reduction was then performed after the right atlantoaxial joint was opened
and decorticated; while direct dorsal traction-reduction on the posterior
arch of the Atlas with a towel clip. Immediate relief of pain and maintained
stability and fusion in follow-up. Conclusion: Rigorous
utilization of criteria to exclude cervical spine injury is important.
Occipital neuralgia is an early warning manifestation of atlantoaxial
instability; as is well recognized in rheumatoid arthritis. Open reduction
is often feasible with direct atlantoaxial joint manipulation. As the
posterior arch of Atlas is often intact, this may be used for traction and
reduction avoiding direct force on the lateral mass screws.

## 1273

## P550: Surgical treatment of odontoid fractures: surgical strategy and
outcomes of a series of transarticular C1-C2 screw fixation by Magerl's
technique

Sofia Caldeira Dantas

1 2

, André D. Carvalho

1

, Arnaldo Sousa

1

, and Ricardo Rodrigues-Pinto

1

1

Department of Orthopaedics, Centro Hospitalar Universitário do
Porto, Spinal Unit (UVM), Portugal

2

Department of Orthopaedics, Hospital do Litoral Alentejano,
Portugal

Introduction: Odontoid fractures account for nearly 20% of
cervical spine injuries and, in the elderly, are associated with a high
incidence of nonunion, morbidity and mortality. While these are frail
patients, most studies suggest that elderly surgical treatment should be
offered to those with type II and unstable type III fractures. However, this
approach is still controversial and the ideal surgical technique is not
clearly defined. Material and Methods: This was a retrospective
analysis of a consecutive series of elderly patients with odontoid fractures
submitted to transarticular C1-C2 screw fixation by Magerl’s technique
between 2008 and 2022. Clinical and radiological data were analyzed, as well
as complications and reinterventions during follow-up. Results:
Eighteen cases were included (9 males and 9 females). The last four cases
were performed through a percutaneous approach, while the initial were
performed through an open approach. The average patient age was 75.8 years
old (min. 56; max. 88 years). Most cases were type II fractures that
resulted from a direct trauma (motor vehicle accidents or falls from
height). Seventeen percent presented with some degree of neurological
impairment at admission. The average surgical time was 116.5 ± 40.2 minutes.
No intraoperative complications were reported. The median time of hospital
stay was 9.9 days (min. 2; max. 76 days). From the initial 18 patients 5
were lost to follow-up. The median follow-up time for the remaining patients
was 256 days (min: 64; max: 944). During that time, complications
(infection, neurological impairment, cardiovascular pathologies, respiratory
distress, malpositioning and/or pseudarthrosis) were only reported in 1
patient (7.7%), in which a reintervention was required due to screw
malpositioning. Moreover, 2 patients (15.4%) self‐reported neck pain and
disability. Conclusion: Surgical treatment of odontoid
fractures in the elderly is still controversial. This study demonstrates
that transarticular C1-C2 screw fixation by Magerl’s technique is a viable
technique for the surgical treatment of odontoid fractures in the
elderly.

## 1274

## P551: Failure factors of orthopedic treatement of a tear-drop C2
fracture: a case report and review of the literature

Safouen Ben Brahim

1

, Mzid Ahmed

1

, Khalil Habboubi

1

, ben mohamed oussama

1

, Hassen Makhlouf

1

, and mondher mestiri

1

1

Adult Orthopedic Departement Pr Mestiri, Mohamed Taib Kassab,
Mannouba, Tunisia

Introduction: Extension teardrop fractures of the axis are
extremely rare cervical spinal fractures. It’s a fracture involving the
triangular fragment at the anteroinferior corner of the vertebral body
following a hyper-extension mechanism. The stability of this lesion and the
choice between orthopedic or surgical treatment remain debated in the
literature. We report a case of a neglected tear-drop fracture of the axis
which was complicated by neurological disorders of both upper limbs.
Case Presentation: Our patient is a 55-year-old woman, with
no medical history, who was the victim of a domestic accident. She had a
3-metre fall, causing polytrauma: cranial, axial and peripheral. The
clinical examination showed complete paraplegia ASIA "A" level T5 associated
with cervico-dorsalgia without neurological deficit of the upper limbs.
Initial investigations showed a complex- fracture of T5 with recoil of the
posterior wall and a C2 tear-drop fracture with posterior signal
abnormalities on the MRI. The course of action was to perform a laminectomy
with posterior synthesis from T3 to T9. For the tear-drop fracture,
orthopedic treatment was initiated. The patient did not recover the
neurological deficit postoperatively (permanent paraplegia). After 3 months,
the patient was referred to us due to the appearance of progressive
neurological disorders of both upper limbs. Investigations showed a vicious
callus of C2 tear-drop fracture with signs of instability and newly spinal
cord signal abnormalities in relation to C2. Results: Given
this neurotoxicity, it was decided to perform a posterior decompression
associated with an occipito-cervical fusion. The postoperative course was
simple. Neurological recovery of the upper limbs was noted.
Conclusion: Although the radiological appearance of a tear
drop fracture of C2 appears simple, it may conceal potentially serious
posterior injuries. most patients with an extension tear drop fracture of
the axis can be treated conservatively but large fragment size, displacement
or angulation, intervertebral disc injury, neurologic deficit, or signs of
instability are reasonable indications for surgical treatment.

## 1294

## P552: Gehweiler type III atlas fracture: a difficult decision making
injury

Hedi Ezzine

1

, Mohamed Amine Gharbi

1

, Ahmed zendeoui

1

, Moatassem Belleh Jlassi

1

, Tborbi Anis

1

, Ramzi Bouzidi

1

, Ezzaouia Khelil

1

, and Mouadh Nefiss

1

1

Orthopedic and Trauma Surgery, Mongi Slim Marsa University Hospital
Center, Tunis, Tunisia

Introduction: The treatment of Gehweiler type III atlas fracture
remains controversial and should be analyzed carefully. Materials and
Methods: We present the case of a 31-year-old patient with a
Jefferson fracture type IIIA according to Gehweiler classification treated
at first conservatively. Results: At 6 weeks follow-up we
diagnosed an occipito-cervical subluxation and a displacement of the lateral
mass of C1 that needed occipito-cervical fusion. Case presentation: A 31
year-old man, fell from a height of 3m causing head and neck trauma. He had
a stiff and painful neck and no sensitive nor motor dysfunction. The CT scan
showed a Jefferson fracture with no sign of lesion of the transverse
atlantal ligament (TAL). So the fracture was classified IIA of the AO
Classification and IIIA of Gehweiler classification, and thus was judged
stable. The patient had a treatment with a hard collar. In the follow-up
after 45 days, he had another CT scan showing displacement of the lateral
mass of the atlas, with subluxation of both C1-C2 and C0-C1. The fracture
was then classified again as type IC + Type IIB of the AO Classification,
IIIB of Gehweiler classification and Dickman type I. The patient was then
operated and had an occipito-C3 fusion. Until the last follow-up, the
patient had a stabilized aspect of the fracture, with no neurological signs.
Conclusion: The TAL plays a crucial role in atlantoaxial
stability.In Gehweiler type III fracture this ligament must be carrefully
analyzed.Treatment aims to correct the dislocation, restore the stability of
the atlantoaxial joint, and retain mobility of the cervical spine.

## 1427

## P553: Clinical outcomes of surgery for patients with spinal cord injury
aged 75 and older

Takashi Chikawa

1

, Toshihiko Matsumura

1

, and Ayaka Hashimoto

1

1

Orthopedic Surgery, Tokushima Prefecture Naruto Hospital, Naruto,
Japan

Introduction: The population aged 75 and older accounts for
13.3% in our country. The incidence of traumatic spinal cord injury (SCI)
will increase as elderly population continue to increase. Although it is
accepted that clinical outcome of surgery for SCI in elderly is lower than
that of younger subject because of greater comorbidity burden, there is a
paucity of evidence in clinical outcome of surgery in elderly SCI patient.
The purpose of this study is to investigate clinical outcome of traumatic
SCI patients underwent surgery and to compare with those of younger patient.
Materials and Methods: From 2019 to 2021, a total of 38
traumatic SCI patient were treated at our hospital. They were divided into
two groups. Group A consisted of 21 patients aged 75 years and older and
group B consisted of 17 patients younger than 75 years. In group A, there
were 10 male and 11 female and their mean age was 83 years. Ten patients had
cervical SCI, 9 patients had thoracic SCI and 2 patients had lumbar spinal
and cauda equina injury. In group B, there were 14 male and 3 female and
their mean age was 58 years. Six patients had cervical SCI, 6 patients had
thoracic SCI, and 5 patients had lumbar spinal and cauda equina injury. All
patients in group A had comorbidities such as dementia, Parkinson’s
diseases, diabetes, malignant tumor, cardiovascular diseases and chronic
renal failure. On the other hand, Six patients of 17 patients had no
comorbidities in group B. Decompression was performed in 2 patients and
decompression and fusion were performed in 19 patients in group A.
Decompression was performed in 3 patients and decompression and fusion were
performed in 14 patients in group B. In the current study, time from injury
to surgery, time from hospitalization to surgery and Frankel grade before
and after surgery were extracted from the electric medical record.
Results: In group A and B, time from injury to surgery was
8.7 days and 8.1, time from hospitalization to surgery was 4.8 days and 5.1
days, respectively. There was no statistically significant difference
between both groups. Of 21 patients in group A, the Frankel grade before
surgery was B in 3, C in 12 and E in 3. At follow-up, C in 1, D in 13 and E
in 7, all showed improvement by one grade or more. Of 17 patients in group
B, the Frankel grade before surgery was C in 9, D in 1 and E in 7. At
follow-up, D in 3 and E in 14. Improvement in Frankel grade of group B
significantly superior than that of group A. Conclusion:
Improvements of Frankel grade in elderly SCI patients was inferior than
younger patient. Factors including preoperative comorbidity burden, lack of
physiologic reverse by aging and feeling capacity of the spinal cord might
affect the clinical outcome.

## 1667

## P554: Post-traumatic cervical epidural hematoma in children

Ghorbel Mohamed

1

, Ines Cherif

1

, Daoud Ahmed

1

, Kolsi Fatma

1

, Bel Mabrouk Yassin

1

, and Boudouara Zaher

1

1

Neurosurgery, Habib Bourguiba Hospital, Sfax, Tunisia

Introduction: Cervical epidural hematoma is a rare phenomenon in
children. It was first described in 1963 and most of cases are spontaneous.
However, trivial injury of the cervical spine without any lesions on bone
structures can sometimes cause a serious damage of the neurovascular
elements leading to an hematoma. This pathology requires a quick diagnosis
and emergent treatment consisting on the evacuation of the hematoma which
provide a good prognosis. Material and Methods: We present a
case of a patient who was treated for cervical epidural hematoma in the
department of neurosurgery in the Habib Bourguiba hospital, in Sfax,
Tunisia. Results: We present a case of a 12 years-old girl who
was admitted in our service for torticollis, cervico brachial neuralgia and
brachial weakness. Three weeks before admission she suffered a neck injury
while falling from the bed. On admission, the neurologic exam showed a
neurologic deficit with left brachial paresis. X-ray of the cervical spine
was done with no signs of traumatic lesion. MRI of the cervical spine
revealed the presence of compressive epidural hematoma spanning C3 to C7
which was evacuated urgently after a large Laminoplasty within « open door
technique ». There was a large collection of old blood which was
liquefied making its evacuation easy. Postoperatively, the patient presented
an excellent recovery and the general motor strength of the arm was
regained. Conclusion: Cervical epidural hematoma is quite rare
in children with incidence of 0.1 per 100. Adequate neurological
examination, diagnostics and urgent surgical intervention are of paramount
importance for accomplishing good results. Early and persistent
rehabilitation are the condition for achieving maximal recovery.

## 1723

## P555: Optimal segmental sagittal alignment for anterior
decompression-fusion surgery of damaged subaxial cervical spine

Oleksii Nekhlopochyn

1

, Ievgenii Slynko

1

, Vadim Verbov

2

, and Yurii Derkach

1

1

Spinal Neurosurgery, Romodanov Neurosurgery Institute, Kyiv,
Ukraine

2

Restorative Neurosurgery Department, Romodanov Neurosurgery
Institute, Kyiv, Ukraine

Introduction: Vertical cylindrical mesh implant and anterior
rigid plate is the most common combination for performing subaxial cervical
spine anterior decompression and fusion surgery. Despite the considerable
clinical experience, there is currently no consensus on optimal correction
of the height of the operated spinal motion segment and the formation of a
certain segmental profile in the surgical intervention zone. The purpose of
our study was to improve the state of sagittal kyphosis of the operated
segment in the long-term postoperative period in patients who underwent
anterior subaxial cervical fusion. Material and Methods: We
performed retrospective evaluation and X-ray analysis of sagittal kyphosis
in 151 patients after anterior bisegamental subaxial cervical fusion due to
traumatic injury. A statistical analysis was made and determined the
dependence of the final results on the degree of intraoperative correction.
We verified the ranges of intraoperative values of spinal motion segment
sagittal contour, forming various biomechanical responses of the cervical
spine in the long-term postoperative period. Results: The
dependence of the final state of segmental kyphosis of the operated segment
was determined by the method of nonlinear regression analysis. Cluster
analysis revealed the following ranges of intraoperative values of segmental
kyphosis: <- 6,15°; -6,15° ..; -3,1°; > -3,1°, that form different
dynamics of postoperative changes. Conclusion: The data
analysis clearly demonstrates the connection between the values of sagittal
kyphosis achieved during the operation and the values in delayed
postoperative period. The intraoperative correction with sagittal kyphosis
formation in the range of -6,15°..-3,1° is optimal for preserving the
physiological curvature of the operated segment in the long-term
postoperative period. The obtained data have both clinical and experimental-
biomechanical confirmation.

## 1890

## P556: Number of screws changes the stress-stain state when using
vertebral body replacing implants for anterior subaxial cervical
reconstruction

Oleksii Nekhlopochyn

1

, Vadim Verbov

2

, Michael Karpinsky

3

, and Oleksandr Yaresko

3

1

Spinal Neurosurgery

2

Restorative Neurosurgery Department, Romodanov Neurosurgery
Institute, Kyiv, Ukraine

3

Biomechanical Laboratory, Sytenko Institute of Spine and Joint
Pathology, Kharkiv, Ukraine

Introduction: Anterior decompression and fusion is the most
widely spread surgery for subaxial cervical spine traumatic injuries.
Implantation of a vertebral body prosthesis is important step when reaching
the tasks facing the surgeon. Along with the undeniable advantages of the
use of fusion systems of various modifications there is a risk of migration
due to the imperfection of the methods of fixing prosthesis to the vertebral
bodies. The aim of the work was to analyze the stress-strain state model of
cervical spine with a substituted C5 vertebra with telescopic prosthesis.
Material and Methods: Two variants of the prosthesis: with
one or two monocortical screws for fixation to a vertebral body were
examined. We obtained the critical values of the stress system with "fixing
element - the vertebral body" in various physiological states of the
cervical spine: axial load, flexion, extension, rotation. The influence of
the fixation method on the load distribution within the main supporting
elements of the vertebral-motion segment was analyzed. Results:
The application of “classical” implant fixation to the adjoining vertebrae
using the paired screws does not have essential advantages over the
mono-screw fixation. The evaluation of von Mises equivalent stresses
demonstrates essentially higher loading on the implant fixing elements using
two screws which definitely increases the amount of risk factors, causing
the local imbalance between the processes of bone regeneration and
desorption with the domination of latter. Such tendency, undoubtedly, may to
some degree facilitate the reduction of the fixing element capacities. At
the same time, the mono-screw fixation due to the reduction of loading on
the construction fixing elements determines some increase of tensions on the
support structures of vertebrae adjoining the resected one, however, no
essential peaks of the increase of loading on separate elements are
observed. Conclusion: The presence of the second fixing screw
leads to the tension increase in the system “cortical screw-vertebral body”.
The usage of one screw facilitates more equal distribution of tensions in
the system “implant-vertebra” and may be advantageous as to the reduction of
the stabilizing constructions migration frequency.

## 1903

## P557: Changes of semental sagittal contour after ACCF with different
types of instrumentation

Oleksii Nekhlopochyn

1

, Iaroslav Tsymbaliuk

2

, Vadim Verbov

2

, Ievgen Cheshuk

2

, and Milan Vorodi

2

1

Spinal Neurosurgery

2

Restorative Neurosurgery Department, Romodanov Neurosurgery
Institute, Kyiv, Ukraine

Introduction: Traumatic fracture of cervical spine is one of the
most severe types of musculoskeletal system damage, that is caused by a
significant frequency of functional disorders in the long-term period. The
surgical treatment of subaxial cervical spine traumatic injuries can be
performed using various types of fusion systems. The purpose of our study
was to assess the stabilizing ability of various types of systems for
anterior subaxial cervical fusion based on the segmental kyphosis index of
the operated segment in patients with traumatic cervical spine lesion.
Material and Methods: We have analyzed X-ray patterns of
the cervical spine in 70 patients who underwent anterior subaxial cervical
fusion due to traumatic injury. The patients were divided into 2 groups
depending on the type of vertebral body replacing and fusion system. A
combination of a vertical cylindrical Mesh-type implant with a rigid
anterior plate was used for the first group patients’ surgery, and in the
second group we have implanted telescopic vertebral body replacement implant
integrated with the anterior fixators. Observation terms were estimated:
before surgery, 4-6 days after surgery, and after 3, 6 and 12-18 months.
Results: The obtained data demonstrate that the total loss
of the achieved correction throughout the postoperative period in patients
of the first group was 2.78°, while in the second group 0.73°. Furthermore,
in the first group, the decrease in the intensity of correction loss is
observed by the period of 12-18 months, and in the second group the dynamics
convincingly regresses by 6 months. Conclusion: The presented
data demonstrates the advantages of using single system for anterior
cervical spine fusion. It is caused by the maximum preservation of
intraoperatively achieved correction of the cervical spine sagittal
profile.

## 1916

## P558: Quality of life in patients with mild spinal cord injury after
anterior subaxial cervical decompression-fusion surgery: one-year
follow-up

Oleksii Nekhlopochyn

1

, Vadim Verbov

2

, Iaroslav Tsymbaliuk

2

, Milan Vorodi

2

, and Ievgen Cheshuk

2

1

Spinal Neurosurgery

2

Restorative Neurosurgery Department, Romodanov Neurosurgery
Institute, Kyiv, Ukraine

Introduction: Cervical spine traumatic injury is one of the most
severe types of human musculoskeletal system lesion. Despite the significant
achievements of modern vertebrology, a number of questions concerning the
optimal methods of surgical intervention remain quite controversial. The
quality of life, along with patients’ neurological disorders regression
level after cervical spine trauma, are the basic criteria to determine the
effectiveness of the therapy. The purpose of our study is to assess the
quality of life of patients in the late postoperative period after anterior
decompression-fusion surgery at the subaxial level of the cervical spine due
to traumatic injury using various methods of fixation. Material and
Methods: A retrospective analysis of the test results of 53
patients using the SF-36 questionnaire was conducted. All patients were
hospitalized in the spinal cord pathology department in the period from 2013
to 2017 due to traumatic injury to the cervical spine. Neurological status
at the time of hospitalization corresponded to ASIA D or ASIA E. The testing
was carried out at the control examination in the period of 12 months of the
postoperative period. A combination of “Mesh + ventral plate” and a
telescopic vertebral body replacing implant were used as stabilization
systems. We analyzed transformed values that were not normalized to
population data. Results: When comparing groups of patients
with various systems for subaxial fusion, convincing advantage of usage of
single construction was determined on SF-36 scales: “Physical functioning”,
“Role-Physical Functioning”, “Bodily pain” and “Role-Emotional Functioning”.
The scales: “General health”, “Vitality”, “Social functioning”, “Mental
health” did not show statistically significant difference.
Conclusion: The obtained results demonstrate the advantage
of mono-construction as a vertebral body replacing and fusion system,
providing the better level of quality of life in the time of 12 months after
surgical treatment.

## 1920

## P559: Neurological disorders regression after subaxial cervical spine
traumatic injury and ACCF depends on instrumentation

Oleksii Nekhlopochyn

1

, Iaroslav Tsymbaliuk

2

, Vadim Verbov

2

, Ievgen Cheshuk

2

, and Milan Vorodi

2

1

Spinal Neurosurgery

2

Restorative Neurosurgery Department, Romodanov Neurosurgery
Institute, Kyiv, Ukraine

Introduction: Two types of possible constructive solutions are
used for fusion of subaxial cervical spine traumatic injury. The first is an
independent combination of interbody implant and anterior plating, the
second is the single telescopic implant, that combines both principles. The
purpose of our study was to analyze the dynamics of regression of
neurological disorders in patients with subaxial cervical spine traumatic
injury who underwent anterior decompression-fusion surgery with different
constructive type of fixation. Material and Methods: Clinical
material formed 120 patients with subaxial cervical spine traumatic injury,
divided into two groups depending on the type of fusion system used during
the operation. The dynamics of neurological disorders recovery was assessed
using the International Standards for Neurological Classification of Spinal
Cord Injury. Results: The analysis of data reveales following
particularity. In the early postoperative period, the dynamics of the
neurological disorders regression does not depend on the type of implanted
system and is determined to a greater extent by the timing, volume and
technique of performed spinal cord decompression. In 3 months postoperative
period there was a statistically confirmed difference in the intensity of
restoration of neurological functions, mainly due to a slower regression of
deficiency in the upper extremities in patients with “Mesh + ventral plate”
combination used the during surgery. By 6 months, the described pattern
remains, however, the difference in the values of the analyzed groups is not
statistically significant. By the final observation period, the difference
in the dynamics of recovery is not statistically determined. However, the
frequency of complete regression of neurological manifestations and the
transition of patients from ASIA D to ASIA E group is largely determined by
the type of implanted system (p = 0.0371). Conclusion: The
usage of a telescopic implant for anterior interbody subaxial cervical
fusion is clinically more approved, since it indirectly provides a more
pronounced dynamics of neurological disorders regression.

## 1934

## P560: Is surgical therapy is equally emphatic as conservative treatment
in acute traumatic cord syndrome

Gyan Ranjan

1

 and Kumar Anand

2

1

Orthopaedics, Curesta Hospital, India

2

Orthopaedics, Anand Hospital, India

Introduction: Acute traumatic central cord syndrome (ATCCS) is a
clinical entity characterized by motor deficit causing a predominant
weakness of the upper limbs bladder dysfunction and varying degrees of
sensory loss below the level of the lesion. Most common incomplete traumatic
cervical cord injury pattern. Accounts for 20% of all cervical spinal cord
injuries. ATCCS has a heterogenous etiology. Hyperextension injury acute
disc herniations .fractures or dislocations of the upper cervical spine.
There are only few studies which have compared conservative with surgical
treatment. Their studies are flawed by the poor study design in which they
have included unstable injuries in surgical group and stable injuries in
conservative group. So we see that there is paucity in the literature
regarding ideal modality of treatment of stable variety of TCCS. Aims
and Objectives: The purpose of this retrospective study is to
compare the motor score improvement and functional status in surgically and
conservatively treated patients with stable ATCCS. Materials and
Methods: 106 consecutive patients with ATCCS admitted to our
spinal unit at CHARAK PALIKA HOSPITAL, NEWDELHI and MGM medical college
Kishanganj over a period of 10 years. Patients divided into three groups
based on their etiology. Only stable injuries taken, i.e. only patients with
PIVD and spinal stenosis group taken in our study.44 patients excluded and
62 recruited in the study. 32 opted for surgical management and 30 for
conservative treatment. Pre , intra and post operative data were collected
and analysed. Observation and Results: Our study proves that
there has been statistically significant improvement in UL,LL motor score,
spasticity grade and SCIM score in both surgical and conservative groups (p
value < 0.05). However there has been longer hospital (p value 0.68) and
ICU (0.74) stay in conservative group, and neurological recovery time (0.62)
and bowel, bladder recovery time (0.43) was more in this group, however
which is not statistically significant. Thus we see that results of
conservative management are equally good to surgical in TCCS.
Conclusion: With this available evidence, these patients
with ATCCS secondary to an extension injury in a stenotic canal without
fracture/dislocation/instability/disc herniation can be given an option to
undergo initial conservative management followed by surgery at a later date
if there is a neurological deterioration or there is a plateau of
neurological recovery. There is a need for high quality prospective
randomized control trials to resolve this controversy.

## 1939

## P561: Percutaneous 3D image-guided navigated C1 ring osteosynthesis:
initial single center experience

Kristian Varga

1

, Benedikt Trnovec

1

, Peter Hudak

1

, Jakub Sipos

1

, Milan Liska

1

, and Kamil Kolejak

1

1

Department of Neurosurgery, University Hospital in
Bratislava-Ružinov, Slovak Medical University, Bratislava,
Slovakia

Introduction: The classical surgical management of unstable C1
fracture by atlanto-axial fusion impacts motion and function. Open surgery
can also affect wound healing and duration of hospital stay. We present our
initial experience in a modified procedure in unstable C1 fractures –
Percutaneous navigated procedure for isolated C1 ring osteosynthesis.
Material and methods: The patients were in prone position
in a Mayfield carbon headholder. The navigation frame was placed on the head
holder. An intraoperative, 3D image navigation system was used for the 1,5
cm skin incision on both sides and the optimal placement of C1 screws. A
transverse rod was then placed connecting the two screws under the fascia.
The patients were prospectively evaluated in terms of their clinical,
functional, and radiological outcomes with a follow-up of 6 months.
Results: A total of 4 screws were placed in two patients by
this technique with a mean follow up of 6 months. The mean duration of
surgery was 123 minutes and the average blood loss was 20 mL. The patients
were discharged from the hospital within two days after the surgery. The
intraoperative O-arm scan and follow-up CT showed correct placement of
screws and wound healing. There were no complication regarding the
atlanto-axial stability. Patients returned to their occupation within 2
months. Conclusion: Percutaneous isolated C1 ring
osteosynthesis allows a motion-preserving option in unstable C1 fractures.
This percutaneous navigated technique can safely compete most commonly used
surgical procedures. This mini-invasive method reduce the blood loss during
the surgery, hospital stay and preserve the functional status.

## 1947

## P562: Long-term postoperative outcomes in patients with trauma and
degenerative spine disease after dorsal cervical stabilization- a single
center review in the period of 2011-2016

Andrej Bodrov

1

 and Nikolay Mirchev

1

1

Neurosurgery, Hospital of Fulda, Fulda, Germany

Introduction: All of the 171 patients in the present study were
operated with mono- and multilevel dorsal or combined 360° stabilization in
our clinic in the period from 2011 to 2016 due to a degenerative cervical
spinal disease and trauma. Our patients were treated with stabilization
systems with pedicular- and massa lateralis screws from dorsal or
additionally with cages and plates from ventral. Material and
Methods: All of the 171 patients in the present study were
operated with mono- and multilevel dorsal or combined 360° stabilization in
our clinic in the period from 2011 to 2016 due to a degenerative cervical
spinal disease and trauma. Our patients were treated with stabilization
systems with pedicular- and massa lateralis screws from dorsal or
additionally with cages and plates from ventral. To evaluate the clinical
outcome were also used such criteria as age, sex, height and weight, BMI,
Neck Disability Index before and after the operations and in the follow-
ups, ASA index, the location of the operated segments as well as the number
of operated segments, the usage of intraoperative navigation (o-arm),
problems with instrumentation, type of pedicle screws (polyaxial,
pre-clampable and non-pre-clampable, long-head screws, intraoperative
correction of the screw positioning, application of the vertebral body
replacement, duration of the operation, need of the second operation. The
important criteria for the evaluation of the fusion process were also the
rate of the postoperative complications, such as misplacement of the
implanted material, fistulas on the dura, postoperative bleeding, infection
etc. The fusion was analyzed in the X-ray investigations as well as CT in
the period of 3, 6 months and 1, 2,3 5-years after the operation.
Results: The participants were divided into groups
according to their age: Group A included all patients from 0-45, Group B
45-65 and C 65 y.o. and older. The rate of full fusion was 35.9%, a partial
fusion 29.6%, non-fusion in 7.8%, undefined due to absence of the patients
at follow-ups was in 21.8%. Conclusion: The outcomes after the
operations due to degenerative cervical spine disease and trauma are similar
to most literature data. Most important factors affecting the outcome are:
age, ASA Index (Pre-existing illness), BMI and Osteoporosis, as well as
initial NDI (neck disability index). In the case of osteoporotically changed
bone, differences in cervical fusion behavior are found due to the poor bone
quality. It is also worth mentioning that factors such as diabetes, smoking
or the use of NSAIDs and / or steroids have a negative impact on the fusion
rate. We have found out that such factors as age, morbidity (ASA Index),
pre- or postoperative pain index (VAS) and NDI influence the postoperative
outcome in middle and long-term follow up.

## 1966

## P563: Predictors of neurological recovery after subaxial cervical spine
and spinal cord injury

Oleksii Nekhlopochyn

1

, Vadim Verbov

2

, Iaroslav Tsymbaliuk

2

, Ievgen Cheshuk

2

, and Milan Vorodi

2

1

Spinal Neurosurgery

2

Restorative Neurosurgery Department, Romodanov Neurosurgery
Institute, Kyiv, Ukraine

Introduction: Cervical spine injury is one of the most severe
musculoskeletal system lesion, due to high disability and neurological
disorders. Despite great number of studies, the influence of various factors
on neurological disorders regression in patients with traumatic subaxial
cervical spine injury at the level is insufficiently studied. The idea of
our study was to investigate the nature and influence value of various
factors on neurological disorders regression. Material and
Methods: We performed a retrospective analysis of surgical
treatment results of 98 patients aged 18 to 65 years (43.25; 95% CI: 39.77 ÷
46.73) with subaxial cervical spine trauma and neurological disorders
qualified ASIA A-D. The control term of the examination was 1 year after
surgery. We used the following factors: Gender, Age, Circumstances of
injury, The nature and The degree of spine damage, The size of the
compression factor, Segmental kyphosis, General cervical lordosis, Baseline
neurological disorders, Value of spinal cord injury, Type of spine fusion
system. We defined the dynamics of recovery as the difference between the
final on the primary sum of points when evaluated by the International
Standards for Neurological Classification of Spinal Cord Injury. In order to
identify significant factors, the method of step-by-step adaptation of the
multiple regression model was used. Results: The processing of
the data revealed the factors most critical for neurological recovery: the
initial level of impairment, the victim's age, the time from injury to
surgery, the spinal cord compression value, the type of fusion system (R2 =
0.6; F = 11.7 [20; 97], p < 0.0001). For ASIA B and ASIA C patients
kyphosis in fused segments is associated with neurological recovery slowdown
(R2 = 0.51; F = 17.15 [1; 56], p = 0.0001). For ASIA A neurological
recovery, the most significant factors were the value of spinal cord damage
and surgery performed within 8-24 hours after injury (R2 = 0.51; F = 150.5
[2, 21], p < 0.0001). Conclusion: We found that a
significant number of dissimilar factors influence the neurological
disorders recovery. These predictors of outcome may be used to guide
treatment decisions and prognosis.

## 1974

## P564: Severity and type of traumatic subaxial cervical injury in
prediction of neurological deficit

Oleksii Nekhlopochyn

1

, Iaroslav Tsymbaliuk

2

, Vadim Verbov

2

, Milan Vorodi

2

, and Ievgen Cheshuk

2

1

Spinal Neurosurgery

2

Restorative Neurosurgery Department, Romodanov Neurosurgery
Institute, Kyiv, Ukraine

Introduction: Neurological dysfunction is the most severe
complication of traumatic subaxial cervical spine injury. A comprehensive
approach and assessment of the injured spine as a single structure,
including the contents of the vertebral canal as well, allow achieving the
maximum possible therapy results. The purpose of study was to evaluate the
dependence of neurological disorders value on type and severity of traumatic
subaxial cervical injury. Material and Methods: We performed
retrospective analysis of 140 patient’s cases that were hospitalized at the
Institute of Neurosurgery with subaxial cervical traumatic injury. All
patients were assessed for the type of the damage using the AO Subaxial
Cervical Spine Classification (AO SCSC), the severity of injury using the
Cervical Spine Injury Severity Score (CSISS). Neurological status was
defined as the sum of points according to the International Standards for
Neurological Classification of Spinal Cord Injury (ISNCSCI). Estimation of
dependences was performed using regression analysis. Results:
The most severe neurological symptoms are determined in groups A4 and C.
Values on ISNCSCI scale are 97 (40 ÷ 144) points and 83 (42 ÷ 178) points,
respectively. Slightly higher rates are registered for A3 type of injury:
196 (131.5 ÷ 288.5) points. Within other groups, the median values are in
the range from 251 to 289 points with a fairly wide interquartile range. The
Kruskal-Wallis test showed the significance of the differences (χ2 = 31.58,
df = 7, p < 0.001). The linear regression model of neurological
dysfunction dependence on the severity of damage is characterized by a high
level of reliability (F = 19.6 [1; 138], p < 0.0001), but also a fairly
low coefficient of determination: 0.215. On average, an increase in CSISS by
one point leads to a decrease in ISNCSCI by 30 points within the analyzed
range of values. When analyzing the linear multifactor dependence of
neurological disorders value on type and severity of traumatic subaxial
cervical injury, the prognostic efficiency of the model was determined as
42.5% (F = 7.577 [15; 124], p < 0.0001). Conclusion: The
obtained data show that not only the absolute values of the instability and
the type of the injury, but also the relationship of these factors plays a
significant role in determining the value of neurological disorders in
patients.

## 1980

## P565: AOSpine subaxial classification in determining optimal treatment
strategy

Oleksii Nekhlopochyn

1

, Ievgenii Slynko

1

, Vadim Verbov

2

, and Yurii Derkach

1

1

Spinal Neurosurgery

2

Restorative Neurosurgery Department, Romodanov Neurosurgery
Institute, Kyiv, Ukraine

Introduction: The AOSpine Subaxial Cervical Spine Injury
Classification System was introduced to improve clinical management of
patients with different types of traumatic lesion. At the same time, this
classification does not have clear recommendations regarding treatment
strategy. The purpose of our study was to determine the optimal treatment
tactics for patients with various types of injuries based on AOSpine
subaxial classification system. Material and Methods: A
retrospective review was made of 164 patients with cervical spine trauma who
were admitted to Institute of Neurosurgery between 2008 and 2018. Surgical
management for each patient was determined with the main goal of spinal cord
decompression, fixation, and alignment, considering instability level
(Cervical Spine Injury Severity Score). Retrospectively, all patients were
classified by 3 neurosurgeons independently, using the AOSpine Subaxial
Cervical Spine Injury Classification System morphological types (A1-C).
Results: The analysis identified 4 types of surgical
interventions: Anterior Cervical Discectomy and Fusion (ACDF - 4.9%),
Anterior Cervical Corpectomy and Fusion (ACCF - 65.9%), laminectomy without
or with stabilization (7.3) and combined anterior-posterior fusion (21.9%).
Isolated ACDF was used only for type A fractures: A1 - 50% of cases, A2 -
9.5% and A3 - 2.4%. In two cases A3 type and 5 cases A4 type, combined
fusion was used, due to damage of facet joints with compression of the nerve
roots. In the absolute majority of cases - 83.8% of all A type lesions, ACCF
was used. For type B1 fractures, ACCF was registered in all cases, while
surgical treatment of types B2 and B3 was characterized by an almost uniform
distribution of ACCF, posterior decompression and combined methods: 34.8%,
30.4% and 34.8% for B2 and, respectively and 31.3%, 25% and 43.8% for B3.
With type C lesions, in 56% of cases - 14 - patients we used combined
surgery while in 40% cases - 10 patients - ACCF. Were used no other
decompression and fusion methods with this type of injury.
Conclusion: AOSpine Subaxial Cervical Spine Injury
Classification System is an effective tool for describing the nature of
subaxial cervical spine damage. Further research is required to unify
surgical tactics based on the classification types of lesions. ACCF is the
most prevalent method of surgical correction of traumatic lesions at the
subaxial level of the spine.

## 1987

## P566: Anterior odontoid screw for type II or III dens fractures. Los
Ángeles experience, Chile

Oscar González

1,2

, Claudia Ibarra Calisto

3

, Mario Monsalve Huamanga

3

, Rodrigo Coronel Fuentealba

4

, and Ana Marìa García Gómez

5

1

Neurosurgery,Complejo Asistencial Victor Rios Ruiz, Los Angeles,
Chile

2

Neurology, Universidad Catolica de la Santisima Concepción,
Concepciòn, Chile

3

Emergency, Complejo Asistencial Vìctor Rios Ruiz, Los Angeles,
Chile

4

Lifestyle, Hospital Dr. Maurucio Heyermann, Angol, Chile

5

Medicine, Universidad San Sebastian, Concepción, Chile

Introduction: Anterior odontoid screw fixation is a safe
technique used for fixation of type 2 and rostral type 3 odontoid fractures.
Provides immediate stability, preservation of the C1-C2 motion and an
achieved union rate of 80-100%. Requires a reduced odontoid to allow for
placement of guide wire and cannulated screw. We use Image guidance with
intraoperative fluoroscopy. We review our experience with this technique.
Material and Methods: Retrospective case series, 13
patients under surgery in the last decade. Data collected from electronic
records. descriptive statistics with R software. The same system was used in
all patients, the only one available in our hospital (Dens Access, DePuy
Synthes). Results: 5 females and 8 males patients. The average
age of the series was 56.5 years (sd 18 - 91). The main cause of injury was
traffic accidents, follow by same-level falls. 90% of traffic accidents
occurred in people under 30 years of age, all level fall injuries occurred
in adults older than 65 years. All patients admitted ASIA E. The average
time between admission and surgery was 10.5 days (sd 2 - 49). 92% of the
injuries occurred in the same province. The average surgical time was 69.2
minutes. 11 patients received 1 screw and 2 patients received 2 screws. The
average time of hospitalization was 6.6 days (sd 4-10) without complications
in peri operative care setting. Conclusion: Odontoid fractures
that are suitable to surgery using an anterior approach with trans-odontoid
screw are rare in our setting, corresponding to one or two cases per year.
This technique is safe and easy to implement, in our experience with good
clinical and radiological results, with use only one intraoperative C-arm
because availability, with short surgical times, and without perioperative
complications.
This series confirms that when it is well indicated, it is an excellent
alternative to achieve stability and fusion in the injured segment.

## Trauma - Thoracolumbar

## 103

## P567: Stentoplasty versus spine jack in traumatic vertebral body
fractures, a systematic review

Elie Najjar

1

, Mohamed Hassanin

1

, Ali Mardashti

1

, and Nasir Quraishi

1

1

The Center of Spine Studies and Surgery, Nottingham University
Hospital, Nottingham, United Kingdom

Introduction: The treatment of traumatic vertebral fractures
(Types A and B1) has always been controversial, with no existing consensus.
With recent advances in the field of sagittal balance, minimally invasive
techniques that reduce and maintain vertebral and regional kyphotic
deformities such as Stentoplasty and Spine Jack are becoming popular.
Methods: A systematic review of the English language
literature dating up to March 2022 was undertaken using the key words:
“expandable intravertebral implant”, “armed kyphoplasty”, “Vertebral Body
Stenting” or “Stentoplasty” and “SpineJack”. PRISMA guidelines were
followed. Results: Of a total of 158 articles, 7 studies met
the inclusion criteria (1 level III and 6 level IV) and were analyzed.
Overall, 159 patients of mean age 51.2 years (range 31 – 75) with 189
traumatic vertebral fractures AO type A (97%) and B1 (3%) were treated using
Spine Jack. 81% of the fractures were in the thoracolumbar area. The
preoperative average Visual Analog Score (VAS) of 6.5 (4-9.2) kyphotic
deformity was 13.9 degrees (6.4 -22.6). The average follow up was 15 months
(6-37 months). Post-operatively, VAS improved to 2.2 (0.1-3.5), a difference
of 5 [p value < 0.0001, 95CI: 5.01, 5.64] and the kyphotic angle from
Spine Jack reduced to7.9 (1.9 – 15) with a difference of 6.14 [p value <
0.0001, 95CI: 4.69, 7.58]. The rate of cement leak was 51/141 (36%), 1 case
had a Dural tear, 1 case required revision due to further collapse and 4
cases had adjacent level fractures. Additionally, 122 patients of mean age
49 years (range 15-90) underwent Stentoplasty for traumatic 120 AO type A
vertebral fractures and were followed up to 14 months (3-34). 85% of the
fractures were in the thoracolumbar area. The average preoperative VAS was
8.9 (8-9.7) which improved to 5 (4-6) post operatively. There was not enough
data to conduct a meta-analysis for stentoplasty post-operative kyphothic
angle changes, but three separate studies show a significant reduction in
the Kyphotic Angle from an average of 10.9 (5.5-22) to 6 (0.5-17) degrees (a
difference of 4.9 degrees). 16% (9/57) of the cases had cement leak. No
other complications were documented. Conclusion: The use of
Spine jack in traumatic vertebral fractures had similar clinical outcomes(
VAS difference 4.3 vs 3.9) and kyphotic angle reduction ( 6.14 vs 4.9)
compared to Stentoplasty, but with a higher rate of cement leak (36% vs 16%)
and complications (4.2% vs 0%).

## 185

## P568: Double balloon kyphoplasty results in better radiographic outcomes
than a single balloon kyphoplasty intreating osteoporotic spinal
fractures

Oded Hershkovich

1

 and Raphael Lotan

1

1

Edith Wolfson Medical Center, Holon, Israel

Introduction: Studies found unilateral and bilateral kyphoplasty
to have comparable clinical outcomes. Only a few studies compared
radiographic results using unilateral vs. simultaneous bilateral approaches.
We aimed to examine and compare the radiographic results of unilateral (UKP)
vs. bilateral simultaneous double-balloon kyphoplasty (DKP) for treating
symptomatic vertebral compression fractures (VCF). Methods: A
retrospective cohort of all patients treated for VCF by DKP and UKP over
five years in a single medical center. From 2009 to 2012, we performed UKP
routinely; since 2012, DKP was the routine due to potential benefits in
vertebral realignment. We evaluated pre and post-surgical fracture
characteristics: vertebral height, sagittal and coronal Cobb angle, and
fracture reduction. Statistical analysis Included a t-test for independent
variables and Pearson Correlation. Results: The study cohort
consists of 81 patients (75.8 years ± 10.86) with 119 vertebras who
underwent surgery. We performed 89 UKP on fractured vertebras and 30 DKP on
30 vertebrae. UKP average fluoroscopy radiation exposure was 15.8 mGy
(±11.5) per level compared to 11.2mGy (±8.7) for DKP, p = 0.03. DKP showed
significant fracture reduction, 2.8 degrees of Cobb angle, equaling patient
positioning effect on fracture reduction. Conclusion: DKP
allows better fracture reduction than UKP, equaling the effect of patient
positioning without increased radiation exposure or adverse events.
Key Words: Osteoporotic fractures, Vertebral Compression fractures, Balloon
Kyphoplasty
Abbreviations: Osteoporotic Vertebral Compression Fractures = VCF; Balloon
Kyphoplasty = BKP; Unilateral Balloon Kyphoplasty (UKP); Bilateral
Simultaneous Double-Balloon Kyphoplasty (DKP).

Highlights

• We aimed to examine the immediate radiographic effects of UKP vs. DKP for
treating symptomatic VCF.
• We found that DKP results in better fracture reduction than UKP, equaling
the effect of patient positioning without increased radiation exposure or
adverse events.

## 255

## P569: Treatment and outcome of osteoporotic thoracolumbar vertebral body
fractures with deformation of both endplates with or without posterior wall
involvement (OF 4) - short-term results from the prospective EOFTT
multicenter study

Ulrich Spiegl

1

, Philipp Schenk

2

, Klaus Schnake

3

, Bernhard Ullrich

2

, Osterhoff Georg

1

, Max Scheyerer

4

, and Sebastian Katscher

5

1

University of Leipzg, Germany

2

BG Traumacenter, Halle, Germany

3

Waldkrankenhaus, Erlangen, Germany

4

University Hospital, Düsseldorf, Germany

5

Sanaklinikum Leipziger Land, Germany

Objective: To analyse therapeutical strategies applied to
osteoporotic thoracolumbar OF 4 injuries, to assess related complications
and clinical outcome. Methods: A multicenter prospective cohort
study (EOFTT) including 518 consecutive patients who were treated for an
OVCF. For the present study, only patients with OF 4 fractures were
analysed. Outcome parameters were complications, Visual Analogue Scale,
Oswestry Disability Questionnaire, Timed Up & Go test, EQ-5D 5L, and
Barthel Index after a minimum follow-up of 6 weeks. Results: A
total of 152 (29%) patients presented with OF 4 fractures with a mean age of
76 years (range 41-97). The most common treatment was short segmental
posterior stabilization (51%; hybrid stabilization in 36%). Mean follow up
was 208 days (±131 days), mean ODI was 30 ± 21. Dorsoventral stabilized
patients were younger compared to the other groups (p < 0.001) and had
significant better TuG compared to hybrid stabilization (p = 0.049). The
other clinical outcomes did not differ in the therapy strategies (VAS pain:
p = 1.000, ODI: p > 0.602, Barthel: p > 0.252, EQ-5D 5L index value: p
> 0.610, VAS-EQ-5D 5L: p = 1.000). The inpatient complication rate was 8%
after conservative and 16% after surgical treatment. During follow-up period
14% of conservatively treated patients and 3% of surgical treated patients
experienced neurological deficits. Conclusions: Conservative
therapy of OF 4 injuries seems to be viable option in patients with only
moderate symptoms. Hybrid stabilization was the dominant treatment strategy
leading to promising clinical short-term results. Stand-alone cement
augmentation seems to be a valid alternative in selected cases.

## 346

## P570: Comparison of outcome of patients of thoracolumbar trauma treated
with percutaneous screw fixation and open technique

Umair Ahmed

1

 and Umair Ahmad

1

1

Orthopedic and Spine Center, Ghurki Trust Teaching Hospital, Lahore,
Pakistan

Background Context: Its an established controversy in treatment
of thoracolumbar fracture . Which technique is most rewarding whether open
traditional technique or percutaneous technique. Objective: To
compare clinical and radiological outcomes between percutaneous pedicular
screw fixation [closed reduction internal fixation (CRIF)] and open
technique [open reduction internal fixation (ORIF)] in thoracolumbar spine
fractures without neurologic deficit. Study Design:
Retrospective Cohort study. Materials and Methods: There is
retrospective evaluation of all patients with thoracolumbar fractures
(T11-L4) treated at Ghurki Trust Teaching Hospital Lahore between 2016-2021
with follow-up up to 12 months. 90 patients (mean age 40.5) were arranged
into two treatment groups; Percutaneous vs Open. Radiological outcomes in
term of screw position and anatomic vertebral reconstruction which were
analyzed on x-ray and CT scan.s Study Parameters are; surgery time,
radiation exposure time, blood loss, length of hospital stay, mobilization
and postoperative pain. Results: There was 90 pat. The mean
operation time in CRIF was 70.5 mint vs in ORIF 120.2 mint. Mean blood loss
in CRIF was 100ml vs in ORIF was 500 ml. Mean radiation exposure time was
20.8 mint in CRIF vs 5 .4 mints in ORIF Postoperative pain more in ORIF vs
CRIF. Satisfied patients after immediate postop in CRIF were 10 and in ORIF
were 2. Mean hospital stay in CRIF was 1day and in ORIF was 3 days. Post op
neurology intact in both groups. No loss of reduction was noted in any group
at final follow up. No patient of CRIF was infected. SSI was present in 4
patients of ORIF. Conclusion: Percutaneous Screw Fixation
provide a satisfying radiological and clinical outcome while minimizing
perioperative risks compared to traditional open screw fixation. The only
draw back in CRIF is increased radiation exposure.

## 429

## P572: Mono-axial versus poly-axial pedicle screw fixation for
thoraco-lumbar fractures: a randomised controlled trial

Ahmed Shawky Abdelgawaad

1,2

, Islam Abd El-Hameed

2

, Mahmoud Ibrahim

2

, Ahmed Hassan

2

, and Mohamed El-Meshwawy

2

1

Spine Center, Helios Klinikum Erfurt, Erfurt, Germany

2

Orthopaedics and Trauma, Assiut University Hospitals, Assiut,
Egypt

Introduction: Thoracolumbar fractures are the most common spine
fractures. Posterior transpedicular screw fixation is commonly used in
surgical treatment of these fractures. To date, there is no consensus as to
whether a mono-axial or poly-axial pedicle screw should be used in fixation
of thoracolumbar fractures. This study aims to compare short segment
mono-axial to poly-axial pedicle screw fixation in thoracolumbar fractures
regarding radiological and clinical outcomes. Material and
Methods: This is a randomized controlled trial done in a
university hospital on 50 consecutive patients with thoracolumbar fractures
who met the inclusion criteria divided in two equal groups, group (I)
mono-axial pedicle screw fixation and group (II) poly-axial screw fixation.
Included were patients with type A3 and A4 (according to AOSpine
classification) thoracolumbar fractures between D9 – L3 without neurological
deficits. Excluded were pathological or osteoporotic fractures,
multi-segmental fractures, polytraumatized patients, fractures older than 14
days and fractures with load-sharing score 7 or more. All patients received
open posterior short-segment fixation with instrumentation of the fractured
vertebra. The primary outcome was the sagittal index, and the secondary
outcomes were local kyphotic angle, regional kyphotic angle, anterior
vertebral height, middle vertebral height, posterior vertebral height and
interpedicular distance. Oswestry Disability Index (ODI) and Visual Analogue
Scale (VAS) were used as Patient Reported Outcome Measures (PROMs). All
patients were followed up at 3,6, and 12 months postoperatively.
Results: There were no statistically significant
differences regarding the demographic data (age, sex, co-morbidities, type,
and level of fracture) between both groups. Regarding the sagittal index,
local and regional kyphotic angles, anterior, middle, posterior vertebral
height and the interpedicular distance among the studied group, the mean
post-operative values were significantly improved in both groups. The mean
values for correction of sagittal index, local and regional kyphosis were
higher in the mono-axial group however, this difference was statistically
insignificant (p > 0.05). Also, the mean correction loss was higher in
the poly-axial group however, this difference was statistically
insignificant (p > 0.05). There were no statistically significant
differences in the mean ODI (16.92 ± 4.35 mono-axial group vs. 16.36 ± 4.56
poly-axial group; p = 0.87) and VAS (4.16 ± 1.62 mono-axial group vs. 3.78 ±
1.66 poly-axial group; p = 0.39) after one year. Conclusion:
There is no statistically significant difference between mono-axial and
poly-axial pedicle screws as regards reduction, correction of deformity and
maintenance of correction in management of acute thoracolumbar fractures.
Also, the patient reported outcomes (ODI and VAS) were not statistically
significant between both groups.

## 542

## P573: Spine injuries after ejection seat evacuatio in fighter aircraft of
the German Armed Forces from 1975 to 2021

Fabian Sommer

1

, Pravesh Gadjradj

1

, and Torsten Peppig

1

1

Neurological Surgery, Weill Cornell, Flushing, United
States

Introduction: The ejection seat is one of the most important
rescue tools for military aircrews. However, the high ejection speeds place
high loads on the pilots, which is mainly absorbed by the pilot's spine. The
differentiated evaluation of spinal injuries is of particular importance, as
this has a decisive influence on the further personal life and career of the
affected aircrews. Factors influencing the occurrence of a fracture as well
as the impact of a spinal injury on military flight certification have not
been addressed sufficiently to date. Material and Methods: We
conducted a retrospective evaluation of ejection seat evacuations in German
Armed Forces combat aircraft accidents between 1975 and 2021. The total
number of aviation accidents with ejection seat initiations and the survived
ejections were collected. Accident-specific data and pilot-specific data
were collected. In addition, it was evaluated whether aircrews were military
flight recertified after the accident. The type of spinal injury and the
location of the injury were evaluated. In addition to the descriptive
statistics, two logistics regression models were developed to assess
prediction values of accident and pilot-specific factors for spine injuries.
Results: A total of 103 aircrews were included in this
retrospective analysis. The overall prevalence of spine injuries was 63.7%
and the overall prevalence of major injuries was 33.0%. In the first
regression model analysis, there was no association with pilot flight
experience, age, height, weight, and BMI and being diagnosed with a spine
fracture. Similarly, aircraft type, altitude, and airspeed were not
associated with the occurrence of spine fractures. In the regression model
of analysis for predictors of rejection in military flight recertification
after ejection seat evacuation, lumbar spine fractures were associated with
higher odds of being rejected for recertification. Conclusion:
Military aircraft crews have a high risk of suffering from a spine injury
after emergency evacuation using an ejection seat. In the subsequent medical
workup, special attention should be paid to the spine and ideally a
consultation with a spine surgeon should be performed. Lumbar spine
fractures may have big consequences for military flight certification,
therefore special attention should be paid to successful rehabilitation.

## 576

## P574: Radiographic predictors of neurological injury in patients with
thoraco-lumbar fractures

Ahmed Shawky Abdelgawaad

1,2

, Samuel Merhom

2

, Khaled Hassan

2

, and Mohammed Hassan

2

1

Helios Klinikum Erfurt, Spine Center, Erfurt, Germany

2

Department of Orthopaedics and Trauma, Assiut University Hospitals,
Assiut, Egypt

Introduction: Correlation between radiographic parameters and
neurological deficits after thoraco-lumbar injuries have been reported.
Still there are no definite cut limits and no consensus which parameters do
expect neurological deficits in such patients. This study was conducted to
figure out the relation between neurological deficit and radiological
parameters in patients with thoracic and lumbar spine fractures.
Material and Methods: After IRB ethical approval, patients
with thoracic and lumbar fractures presented to a university hospital were
included. Neurological examination was done according to the American Spinal
Injury Association (ASIA) score. Radiographic evaluation included plain
radiographs, CT (computed tomography) and MRI. Radiographic parameters
including vertebral body compression (Anterior Vertebral Height AVH, Middle
Vertebral Height MVH, Posterior Vertebral Height PVH), canal compromise,
sagittal alignment measured by Cobb angle and type of fracture according to
AO classification (morphological component) were digitally measured. Two
blinded investigators measured all the above mentioned parameters
independently. Results: 160 patients were included. The ASIA
score had significant correlation with sagittal alignment measured by Cobb’s
angle (r = -0.22, p < 0.001), vertebral height compression percentage
measured by AVH (r = -0.26, p < 0.001), and MVH (r = -0.28, p <
0.001), type of the fracture according to AO classification (morphological
part) (p < 0.001) and canal comprise if it was > 50% of the total
canal space (r = -0.34, p =< 0.001) but it has insignificant correlation
with percentage of compression of canal comprise if it was < 50% of the
total canal space (r = -0.12, p = 0.56) and also has insignificant
correlation with PVH (r =- 0.17, p = 0.12). Conclusion: Our
study concluded that there is a positive correlation between neurological
damage and sagittal alignment, vertebral compression, type of the fracture
according to AO classification and high grades of canal compromise (>
50%). But, there is no positive correlation with low grades of canal
compromise (< 50%) in thoracic and lumbar spine fractures patients.

## 731

## P575: Interventional management of single-segment osteoporotic vertebral
compression fractures in the elderly: our experience from 157 cases

Nikolaos Gkantsinikoudis

1

, Christos Siopis

1

, and Stylianos Kapetanakis

1,2

1

Spine Department and Deformities, Interbalkan European Medical
Center, Thessaloniki, Greece

2

Department of Minimally Invasive and Endoscopic Spine Surgery,
Athens Medical Center, Greece

Introduction: Osteoporotic Vertebral Compression Fractures
(OVCFs) constitute a frequent clinical condition with substantial associated
morbidity and mortality, principally encountered in elderly individuals.
Clinical management of these lesions is crucially determined by a plethora
of factors as patient’s general health status, fracture’s anatomical and
biomechanical features and potential neurologic compromise. We hereby
present our clinical outcomes of interventional management of OVCFs with
Minimally Invasive Augmentation (MIVA) procedures [Vertebroplasty (VP) and
Kyphoplasty (KP)] and open Posterolateral Instrumented Fusion (PLF) surgery
in elderly individuals. Material and Methods: One-hundred and
fifty-seven (157) elderly patients with single-segment OVCF were enrolled in
this prospective investigation. Major determinants for selection of
respective therapeutic strategy were the potential related
clinical/radiological segmental instability and the underlying neurologic
status. Seventy-seven (77) patients underwent MIVA procedures (VP or KP,
depending on vertebral height diminution) and eighty (80) open PLF surgery.
Evaluation of enrolled individuals was performed via clinical examination
and performance of determined patient-reported outcome measures as Visual
Analogue Scale (VAS) and Short-Form 36 (SF-36) Medical Health Survey
Questionnaire, for pain and Health-Related Quality of Life (HRQoL)
assessment, respectively. All patients were evaluated preoperatively and at
sequential chronic intervals during a 2-year follow-up period.
Results: All patients were successfully operated, featuring
no major perioperative complications. Analysis of recorded outcome measures
showed that all indices of SF-36 questionnaire exhibited a statistically
significant improvement at all follow-up checkpoints, demonstrating albeit
the maximal amelioration at 3 months with subsequent stabilization with
minimal amelioration until the end of follow-up. On the contrary, VAS score
values were stabilized at 6 months postoperatively, featuring no further
significant quantitative alteration. Conclusion: Interventional
management of OVCFs in elderly patients with MIVA (VP, KP) procedures or
open PLF surgery, depending on determined patient- and condition-related
characteristics, represents a safe and effective strategy with favorable
outcomes in HRQoL.

## 801

## P576: Single Spinejack is each fractured vertebra is feasible to achieve
a significant fracture reduction and corresponding satisfactory outcome by
proper strategy of placing Spinejacks

Chien-Jen Hsu

1

1

Department of Orthopaedics, Kaohsiung Veterans General Hospital,
Kaohsiung, Taiwan

Introduction: Spinejack was one of the most commonly used
augment devices for kyphoplasty. Bilateral placement of Spinejacks into a
vertebra for kyphoplasty was suggested by the manufacture company.
Considering medical expense controlled by insurance, we therefore intended
to investigate the surgical complications and clinical outcomes for patients
undergoing kyphoplasty with one single Spinejack in each fractured vertebra.
Material and Methods: We conducted kyphoplasty by applying
single Spinejack into fractured vertebra for 45 patients from January 2018
to December 2020. By examining the MR images preoperatively, we chose the
more collapsed side for placing the Spinejack unless the pedicle fractured.
Considering high risk for cement leakage through fractured pedicle, the
placement of Spinejack was therefore shifted to the other pedicle. The
Spinejacks were placed across the midline or at least touching the midline
of vertebra for effective expansion bilaterally. A vending trocar was
routinely inserted at the other side for decompression while injecting the
cement. The fluidity of cement was attenuated by extend the setting of
cement if we decided to inject cement through the side of Spinejack first.
Otherwise, we started to inject cement initially through the trocar to fill
the less comminuted side for preventing early leakage outside the vertebra.
The following supplement of cement depended on the distribution of cement
filling through alternative injection of cement bilaterally under the guide
of c-arm image intensifier. We usually stopped cement injection if the
filling of cement realized or approached the pre-opertaive plan.
Results: Excluding 4 patients without complete follow-up
for at least 12 months, 41 patients with 46 fractured vertebrae were
investigated. They were 12 male and 29 female patients with average age of
70.5 years. The mean BMD was -2.87. The fractured levels were T7 in 1
patient, T11 in 3 patients, T12 in 18 patients, L1 in 15 patients, L2 in 4
patients, L3 in 2 patients, and L5 in 1 patient. Except radiographic
assessment, the clinical symptoms were assessed by the SF-36 questionnaire.
The average clinical score of SF-36 improved from 52 to 81 in the final
follow-up at the OPD or by the telephone inquiry. However, the average SF-36
score reached 87 in case of excluding three patients with unsatisfactory
outcomes. These three patients reported poor outcomes that were re-operated
because of new vertebral fracture. The radiographic assessment demonstrated
an average 40% restoration of supposed height of fractured vertebra. The
average reduction of kyphotic angle is 11 degrees. Three patients developed
loss of vertebral height reduction more than 25% but only one was
re-operated by mini-invasive instrumentation. Conclusion:
Although the original recommendation from the manufacture company was
placing Spinejacks through bilateral pedicle into a fractured vertebra,
kyphoplasty by applying only one single Spinejack for each fractured
vertebra achieved a satisfactory reduction of vertebral collapse in this
study. The clinical outcomes assessed by SF-36 questionnaire demonstrated a
significant improvement in addition to evident reduction of vertebral height
and kyphotic angle. Considering cost-effectiveness of Spinejack-augmented
kyphoplasty, one single Spinejack was feasible to achieve satisfactory
outcomes clinically and radiologically.

## 830

## P577: The use of the AO Spine PROST (Patient Reported Outcome Spine
Trauma) among SCI patients - Healthcare professionals' perspective and
development of version 2.0

Aline J. Hakbijl

1

, Marcel Post

1

, Cumhur Oner

2

, and Said Sadiqi

2

1
Department of Spinal Cord Injury Rehabilitation,
De Hoogstraat Rehabilitation, Utrecht, The
Netherlands

2

Department of Orthopaedics,
University Medical Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands

Introduction: The provision of appropriate surgery, medical care
and rehabilitation can have significant effect on disability in people with
spinal cord injury (SCI). To learn what surgical and rehabilitation
treatments are most effective and to compare them in a reliable and valid
fashion, it is important to standardize classification and outcome
measurements. To meet these requirements, the AO Spine Knowledge Forum
Trauma developed the Patient Reported Outcome Spine Trauma (AO Spine PROST).
This tool was developed for people with spine trauma and minor or no
neurological impairment. To the best of authors’ knowledge, it is adopted
worldwide with currently being translated into 17 languages. In the current
study, the applicability of the AO Spine PROST for people with
motor-complete SCI was examined from the perspective of the healthcare
professionals. Also, recommendations were made for adjustments of the tool.
Material and Methods: A discussion meeting with SCI
rehabilitation physicians in the Netherlands was performed, followed by an
international online survey among healthcare professionals involved in the
care of people with SCI. Participants rated the comprehensibility,
relevance, acceptability, feasibility and completeness of the AO Spine PROST
on a 1-5 point scale (5 most positive). Comments could be provided per
question. The discussion meeting was audio taped, meaningful phrases
transcribed, and analyzed thematically. The results of the international
survey was compared with the results of the discussion meeting using
descriptive statistics. The comprehensibility, relevance, acceptability,
feasibility, and completeness of the tool were analyzed by calculating
frequency tables using SPSS. Results: A total of 13 physicians
attended the discussion meeting. The survey was completed by 196
participants worldwide. Comparable results were obtained from the discussion
meeting and the international survey. Comprehensibility (mean 4.1 ± 0.8),
acceptability (4.0 ± 0.8), relevance (3.9 ± 0.8), completeness (3.9 ± 0.8),
and feasibility (4.1 ± 0.7) were rated positively for use in people with
motor-complete traumatic or non-traumatic SCI. A few participants questioned
the relevance of items about the lower extremities (e.g. Walking) or
indicated the lack of questions about respiration/breathing and
complications. Conclusion: The AO Spine PROST was found to be
applicable for people with motor-complete traumatic or non-traumatic SCI.
This study formed the basis for recommendations in adapting the tool
(version 2.0) in order to make it applicable to the entire spine trauma
patient population, including patients with (severe) SCI. With this modified
version, the AO Spine PROST is expected to be even more useful both in the
clinics and for research purposes, contributing to the comparison of spine
trauma outcomes in a valid and reliable fashion with the potential to reduce
the ongoing controversies in spine trauma care.

## 846

## P578: AOSpine Thoracolumbar Injury Classification System (AO TLICS): a
study on its validation in junior surgeons

Zion Hwang

1

, Jason Bernard

2

, Timothy Bishop

2

, Jan Herzog

2

, Shahnawaz Haleem

2

, Tesfaladet Kurban

2

, Bisola Ajayi

2

, Emily Tsang

1

, Priyanshu Saha

1

, and Darren Lui

2

1

St. George's University of London, London, United Kingdom

2

Trauma and Orthopaedics, St. George's University Hospital, London,
United Kingdom

Introduction: Classification systems exist to safely guide
inexperienced surgeons’ management to result in optimal patient outcomes,
but the spine community is yet to agree upon a single thoracolumbar injury
classification system. Several studies have investigated the reliability of
the newest addition, AO TLICS, drawing inconclusive results for some
subtypes. Their analyses focus on AO TLICS’ reliability from the point of
view of each subtype rather than the injury and its management algorithm,
which has greater clinical importance. The binary (yes/no) questionnaire
format used in previous studies fails to assess surgeons’ abilities to
recognise and label an injury and, equally importantly, what classification
an injury does not fall under. In addition, many
assume all assessor responses have equal weighting regardless of their level
of experience. Therefore, this study aims to mitigate these issues by asking
participants to rate each injury by its full classification and by assessing
whether juniors surgeons’ assessment of injuries using AO TLICS agree with
their senior counterparts, thus contributing further data on the topic to
validate the reliability of AO TLICS. Material and Methods: In
2019-2020, two surveys were sent two months apart to the same group of
assessors, consisting of eight junior surgeons and one orthopaedic spine
consultant surgeon. There was a 100% response and participation rate. Spine
MRI scans of the same 11 patients were assessed on the number and full
classification of injuries. Data analysis was performed using Microsoft
excel with the consultant surgeon's answers used as the comparison standard.
Results: The average agreement was 81.3% for wedge
injuries, 81.8% for burst injuries and 86.6% for tension band injuries.
There was only one case of hyperextension injury at 87.5% and one Type C
injury at 100% agreement. On average junior surgeons showed 86.7% agreement
with surgical management but only 45.8% agreement with conservative
management. Further assessment showed 90.8% agreement on the vertebral level
injured, 85.4% agreement of Type C injuries, 67.0% of Type B injuries and
82.1% of Type A injuries. When classifying by subtypes, junior doctors
showed only 33.9% agreement for B subtypes and 50.9% for A subtypes.
Conclusion: AO TLICS is comprehensive and accurate in
junior surgeons overall, but poorer agreement is seen when classifying into
subtypes, especially for Type B injuries. AO TLICS accurately facilitates
junior surgeons’ recognition of which injuries require surgical management
but generally errs on the side of surgical management, which results in the
potential for unnecessary surgeries.

## 883

## P579: Surgical treatment of traumatic fractures of the thoracic and
lumbar spine: a systematic review

Said Sadiqi

1

, Timon Vercoulen

1,2

, Menco Niemeyer

3

, Felix Peuker

3

, Jorrit-Jan Verlaan

1

, and Cumhur Oner

1

1

Orthopaedic Surgery

2
Orthopaedic Surgery, Diakonessenhuis,
Utrecht, The Netherlands

3

Trauma Surgery, UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands

Introduction: Controversies remain on the optimal treatment of
thoracic- and lumbar spine fractures. These fractures are treated either
surgical or non-surgical. Surgical treatment aims to reduce the fracture,
prevent further post-traumatic spinal deformity, maintain spinal alignment
and perform a neural decompression if needed. However, there is no consensus
on the choice of surgical approach and technique. No comprehensive
up-to-date overview is available that facilitates the comparison of the
different surgical methods for these fractures. The goal of this study is to
reproduce and update an earlier systematic review from 2004 by this research
group. All published articles in the past two decades were reviewed, and the
outcomes of different surgical techniques were quantified and analyzed.
Materials and Methods: A systematic literature search was
performed in PubMed and EMBASE® using the search term ‘Spinal
fractures’ for articles published between 2001-2020. Inclusion criteria
were: > 18 years of age; including more than 10 cases; a minimum of 12
months follow-up; adequate description of the surgical procedure; using
generally accepted outcome instruments; surgery performed within three weeks
after trauma. Article screening was performed by four researchers. Studies
were categorized per surgical technique groups: Posterior open (PO),
Posterior percutaneous (PP), Stand-alone vertebroplasty or kyphoplasty (SA),
Anterior endoscopic (AS), Anterior open (AO), Posterior percutaneous and
anterior open (POAO), Posterior percutaneous and anterior endoscopic (PPAS),
Posterior open and anterior open (POAO), Posterior open and anterior
endoscopic (POAS). The PO group was used as a reference group for comparison
and statistical analysis. Results: 103 articles could be
included. Of these studies we could extract 138 cohorts using PO (n = 75),
PP (n = 39), SA (n = 13), AO (n = 5), PPAO (n = 1), PPAS (n = 1), POAO (n =
2) or POAS (n = 2). Pre-operatively, there were more type A fractures in the
SA and PP group compared to the other groups. Moreover, there were more
subjects with neurological impairment (ASIA grade C or D) in the AO group
compared to the other groups. Often, concomitant surgical interventions such
as an additional vertebra- or kyphoplasty, transpedicular spongioplasty,
fusion or a graft was applied. Surgical duration and blood showed no major
differences between groups. Post-operative complications were scarcely
reported. Pre-operative mean Cobb values were lowest in the SA group. The
overall correction obtained at follow-up was lowest in the SA group (1.06
degrees) and most in the AO group (7.65 degrees). Conclusion:
This comprehensive systematic review describes quantitative data to provide
the best possible comparison between different surgical techniques for the
treatment of thoracic and lumbar spine fractures. For type A fractures,
without severe neurological deficit, PP is most researched and can be
combined with vertebroplasty or kyphoplasty (SA) when a kyphosis correction
is needed. Furthermore, PO is feasible in almost all types of fractures and
there seems to be particular use for this technique when additional
posterior decompression or fusion is required which cannot be achieved by
more minimal invasive methods. Overall, all surgical techniques led to
neurological stabilization or improvement. Also, future randomized
controlled trials are imperative for a true comparison of surgical
methods.

## 902

## P580: Vertebral augmentation with cranio-caudal expandable devices in
acute versus subacute/chronic vertebral fractures of thoracolumbar junction.
Complications, clinical and radiological results

Andrea Zanirato

1,2

, Emanuele Quarto

1,2

, and Matteo Formica

1,2

1

IRCCS Ospedale Policlinico San Martino, Genoa, Italy

2

University of Genoa, DISC, Genoa, Italy

Introduction: The use of cranio-caudal expandable devices in
acute (< 8 weeks) and subacute/chronic (> 8 weeks) thoracolumbar
fractures has been proposed for pain control and kyphotic deformity
correction. The aim of this study was to compare the complication rate,
clinical and radiological results of vertebral augmentation with
cranio-caudal expandable devices in relation to timing of thoracolumbar
junction fracture (T10-L2). Material and Methods: The patients
who underwent one-level vertebral augmentation with a cranio-caudal
expandable device for a traumatic and osteoporotic vertebral fracture of the
thoracolumbar junction were enrolled. A minimum follow-up (FU) of 2 years
was established. Vertebral fractures were classified in acute (< 8 weeks)
and subacute/chronic (> 8 weeks). Complications were assessed as
intraoperative or postoperative. Clinical results were evaluated
preoperatively according to a Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) and Oswestry
Disability Index (ODI). Radiological parameters included vertebral wedge
angle (VWA) and segmental kyphosis (SK). Results: Forty-seven
patients were included: 26 acute (Group-A) and 21 subacute fractures
(Group-B). The mean FU was 28.6 ± 2.6 months. The subgroups were
statistically homogeneous for preoperative clinical and radiological
parameters. No intraoperative complications were reported. In the
postoperative FU, 4 adjacent fractures were recorded in Group-B (p =
0.03).  Both groups exhibited a significant improvement in pain and
functional status after surgery, which was maintained up to the final
follow-up. The mean initial VWA was 15.4 ± 7.1° for Group-A and 17.1 ± 6.1°
for Group-B. Post-operative values were 7.4 ± 5.2° for Group-A (p < 0.05)
and 8.4 ± 5.1° for Group-B (p < 0.05). A similar loss of reduction (p
> 0.05) at 3 months was noted in both group: 0.6 ± 2.1° in Group-A and
0.8 ± 0.7° in Group-B. There was no further loss of reduction after 3
months. The mean initial SK was 12.0 ± 8.1° for Group-A and 13.7 ± 7.2° for
Group-B. Post-operative values were 7.1 ± 6.1° for Group-A (p < 0.05) and
7.5 ± 4.9° for Group-B (p < 0.05). A significant loss of segmental
kyphosis correction was noted during the FU in Group-B (SK at the last FU
12.1 ± 5.2°). Conclusion: Vertebral augmentation with
cranio-caudal expandable devices demonstrated promising clinical results in
both groups. In subacute and chronic vertebral fractures, a higher rate of
adjacent fractures was recorded. Furthermore, during the FU, the progressive
degeneration of the discs adjacent to fractured vertebral led to an increase
of segmental kyphosis. The opportunity of a stand-alone vertebral
augmentation with craniocaudal devices in subacute and chronic vertebral
fractures of the thoraco-lumbar junction should be carefully evaluated.

## 909

## P581: Cauda equina syndrome after gunshot injury at the lumbar spine: a
case report and narrative review

Pedro Torres

1

, Andre Castilho

1

, David Israel

1

, and Daniel Araujo

1

1

Spine Surgery, Hospital Unimed, Belo Horizonte, Brazil

Introduction: Gunshot wounds (GSW) is an important cause of
injuries of the spine, especially in the younger population and have high
mortality and morbidity impact. Beside been common in military population,
gunshot injury is becoming more prevalent in civilian population, especially
in developing countries, causing a great impact on health system costs. It
is the second most common cause of all spinal lesions (13-17%) and in some
countries the incidence is even higher than traffic accidents. GSW have a
wide spectrum of clinical presentation, with different associated injuries,
hemodynamic status, vertebral fractures, and neurological deficits. Spinal
Cord and Cauda Equina lesions can occur from different, yet concomitant
factors, such as the direct impact of the bullet, thermic lesion, the
concussive effect of the bullet, the tissue cavitations and the impairment
of blood supply (disrupted or thrombosed vessels). In this study, we present
a case of a male patient with cauda equina syndrome due to a gunshot injury
and a narrative review of the topic. Material and Methods: We
report a case of a 25-year-old patient who suffered a gunshot injury in the
lumbar spine. He was transferred to a spine trauma center after 5 days of
his injury. He presented pain in lower limbs, saddle paresthesia and urinary
retention. The patient had no motor or sensory compromise in lower limbs. A
computed tomography scan revealed the presence of the projectile in the
vertebral canal, at the L1’s right lateral recess. Research was made on
PubMed database for review studies and case reports about gunshot injuries
and gunshot wounds to the spine, spinal cord, and cauda equina. Were used
the terms “Gunshot Wound AND SPINE”. We also made a manual search, and the
most recent and relevant articles were selected for our analysis.
Results: Patient underwent surgery five days after the
trauma, having an open decompression through partial laminectomy and
projectile removal. No macroscopic lesion of the dura mater was observed
during surgery. Patient had a complete resolution of the lower limbs pain in
the first day after surgery and recovered urinary control and sensibility
after one month of surgery. Conclusion: Gunshot injuries to the
spine remains a very important subject to address. After admitted at the
trauma center, patient must undergo for clinical stabilization,
investigation of associated injuries, complete neurologic evaluation, and
imaging studies. The conservative treatment consists of wound care,
antibiotics, tetanus vaccination, stabilization, and rehabilitation.
Surgical treatment is controversial and depends of location in the spine,
neurological impairment, clinical condition and usually consists of open
laminectomy with or without stabilization. The only absolute indications are
cutaneous or pleural liquor fistula and documented progression of the
neurological deficit associated with compression of the neural elements. The
main prognostic factor is the initial neurological status, followed by the
affected segment and spinal cord preservation or transection. Studies report
a rate of recovery 53-65.3% for patients with partial deficits.

## 937

## P582: Transpedicular fixation of thoracic spine fracture in patient with
von Willebrand disease - a case report

Jovana Grupkovic

1

, Slavisa Zagorac

1

, Milos Vasic

1

, Uros Novakovic

1

, Milos Mladenovic

1

, Uros Dabetic

1

, Radmila Klacar

2

, Dragana Vracevic

2

, and Goran Tulic

2

1

Orthopaedic Surgery and Traumatology

2

Anaesthesiology and Reanimatology, University Clinical Center of
Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia

Introduction: Von Willebrand disease is a coagulation disorder
that is caused by a quantitative and qualitative defect of the von
Willebrand factor (vWF), which increases the risk of perioperative bleeding
and associated complications. This can be successfully prevented with
substitution therapy by von Willebrand factor (vWF) or factor VIII (FVIII).
The aim of our article is to present a patient with Th4 fracture that was
treated with transpedicular fixation with minimal perioperative bleeding and
complications. Case Report: We present a case of a 30-year-old
male injured by falling down the stairs and on admission diagnosed with
isolated injury - fracture of Th4 vertebrae. Previously he was diagnosed
with von Willebrand disease by laboratory analysis of aPTT before routine
tonsillectomy 3 years prior to admission. The patient was examined by a
hematologist, he denied spontaneous bleeding prior to admission, and he
stated he had right radiocarpal joint surgery without complications. He
suffered a fracture to Th4 - AO Spine Thoracolumbar Injury Classification
System type A2 - split fracture. Neurovascular status was intact.
Preoperative laboratory findings: Hgb 131 g/l, WBC 5.8 x 10⁹/l, PLT 240 ×
109, aPTT 36.1s, Ddimer 0.17 (0.5 cutoff), FVIII 61%, vWFAc
49%, vWFAg 40%, factor IX 71%, factor XI 93%, factor XII 127%. The HAEMATE P
(the morning of surgery 1000 IU IV) was administrated. The surgery
(transpedicular fixation Th3-Th5) was performed without any complication and
without significant bleeding, it lasted two hours and one dose of red blood
cells concentrate was administrated. Postoperative neurovascular status was
intact. The first 2 postoperative days the patient was treated with 1000
IU\12h of HAEMATE P, and the next three days with one dose daily. On the
third postoperative day the drain was extracted and the volume of the
drained serohemorrhagic content was 400 ml. The patient was treated with
Fraxiparine (0,3 ml SC/24h) pre- and postoperative. Discussion:
Spine injuries are most often caused by a fall from height. VWF disease
prevalence is up to 1% worldwide, with around 0.01% of patients having
significant symptoms. The most common clinical symptoms are mucocutaneous
bleeding and bleeding after trauma and surgery. There are three types of von
Willebrand disease: type I which is partial quantitative deficiency and the
most common (70-80% of cases). The appearance of spine injuries has a
relatively wide range – from mild strains to fractures and dislocations of
the vertebral body with/without spinal cord injury. The accepted
classification of the spine fractures is AO thoracolumbar classification
system, which divides fractures into three types – A, B, and C. Management
of spine fractures can be conservative and surgical. If surgical treatment
is necessary it is paramount to choose an appropriate approach. The
treatment plan for patients with von Willebrand disease requires a
multidisciplinary approach. Conclusion: In patients with von
Willebrand disease and spinal traumatic injuries that require surgical
treatment, preoperative preparation has to be multidisciplinary. This means
good cooperation of orthopedic surgeons, anesthesiologists and hematologists
in order to perform a successful surgery without preventable complications,
and increase patients quality of life.

## 943

## P583: Posterior thoracolumbar instrumented fusion for compression
fractures: long or mixed assembly?

Mouldi Lamouchi

1

, Jlidi Mohamed

1

, Ayachi Montassar

1

, Walid Bouaicha

1

, Mohamed Hedi Gharbi

1

, and Selim Daas

1

1

Orthopedics and Traumatology Department, Hospital of Mohamed Taher
Maamouri, Nabeul, Tunisia

Introduction: The Magerl classification defines compressions
fractures as compression fractures type A. This injury is most likely to
occur as a result of trauma, and is mainly located at the thoracolumbar
junction. Traditionally, the preferred method for stabilization of an
unstable burst fracture is the long fixation with instrumentation of at
least 2 levels above and below the fractured vertebrae. It was thought that
this would provide the necessary stability for fracture healing while
minimizing the risk of post traumatic kyphosis or hardware failure at the
expense of relative vertebral motion. Mixed fixation with instrumentation of
2 levels above and 1 level below the fractured vertebrae has gained
popularity as this decreases surgical time, but most importantly preserves
vertebral motion segments. The objective of our study is to compare these
two different posterior spine fixation methods for burst fracture fixation
of the thoracolumbar junction. Material and Methods: This is a
descriptive and analytic single center retrospective study with a 10 year
follow up. We included thoracolumbar compression fractures treated by
posterior fusion with a long assembly or a mixed assembly. Two groups have
been identified: Group A includes 53 patients treated with a long assembly
(2 levels above the fracture and 2 levels below). Group B includes 28
patients treated with a mixed assembly (2 levels above the fracture and one
level below). The evaluation of results was done by calculating the
variation of radiological parameters between pre-operative radiographs,
postoperative radiographs and last follow-up radiographs. The gain is the
preoperative value minus the postoperative value. The loss of correction is
the value at the last follow-up minus the postoperative value.
Results: The average follow-up of the study was 57 months
(15 months - 144 months). The gain in regional kyphosis was 9.75° for group
A and 9.04° for group B. The gain in vertebral kyphosis was 8.15° and 8.85°
for group A and B respectively. At the last follow-up of group A, the loss
in regional kyphosis (RK) was 0.63°, the loss in vertebral kyphosis (VK) was
0.67 and the loss of traumatic regional angulation (TRA) was 0.653. At the
last follow-up of group B, the loss in RK was 1°, the loss in VK was 0.78°
and the TRA loss was 0.963. At this stage, there was no significant
difference between the two groups. Osteoarthritic degeneration of the upper
and/or lower level was observed in 24 patients in group A and 16 patients in
group B. Conclusion: A mixed fixation method with
instrumentation of 2 levels above and 1 below for the thoracolumbar burst
fractures showed the highest correction of kyphosis angle both at immediate
and final follow-up and also the lowest implant failure at final
follow-up.

## 956

## P584: A pure conus medullaris syndrome with thoracolumbar burst fracture
is not so rare

Tokumitsu Mihara

1

, Shinji Tanishima

1

, Chikako Takeda

1

, Masaki Yoshida

1

, Satoshi Fujiwara

1

, and Hideki Nagashima

1

1

Division of Orthopedic Surgery, Department of Sensory and Motor
Organs, School of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Tottori
University

Objective: To research the features of pure conus medullaris
syndrome (PCMS) with thoracolumbar burst fracture. Methods: The
study included patients who underwent surgery for thoracolumbar burst
fracture from 2008 to 2020. The patients were divided into three groups:
Group N: no neurological deficits, Group L: lower limb paralysis, and Group
P: PCMS. Age, gender, body mass index (BMI), mechanism of injury, the spinal
canal encroachment and effective spinal canal area ratio, and local kyphotic
angle of the patients were investigated. Results: Twenty-four
patients were included in this study and were divided into three groups. The
number of patients in Groups N, L, and P were 8, 10, and 6, respectively.
Age, gender, BMI, mechanism of injury, level of burst fracture, and local
kyphotic angle were found to be similar. The spinal canal encroachment ratio
in Group N, Group L, and Group P were 29% (16%-53%), 61% (36%-87%), and 39%
(29%-48%), respectively. The ratios in Groups N and P were significantly
lower than that in Group L. The effective spinal canal area ratios in Groups
N, L, and P were 63.2% (51%-79%), 38.2% (18%-64%), and 61.3% (57%-65%),
respectively. The ratios in Groups N and P were significantly higher than
that in Group L. All patients in Group P relatively smooth improve in
dysuria after surgery, even if a patient underwent surgery long time after
injury. Conclusions: PCMS with thoracolumbar burst fracture was
not rare. The bladder dysfunction in PCMS was considered as an early symptom
of the neurological disorder and the cause of it was persistent pressure
from the bone fragment.

## 989

## P585: Initial experience with augmented reality-assisted pedicle screws
in spinal trauma surgery

Samuel Brehm

1

, Abby Carey-Ewend

1

, Miguel Ruiz Cardozo

1

, Gabriel Trevino Verastegui

1

, Matthew De la Paz

1

, Karma Barot

1

, Ahmed Hanafy

1

, Michael Kann

1

, Raj Lavadi

1

, Ahmedh Hussein

1

, Alexander Yahanda

1

, Alexander Perdomo-Pantoja

1

, Magalie Cadieux

1

, Julio Jauregui

2

, and Camilo Molina

1

Neurosurgery

2

Orthopaedic Surgery, Washington University, St. Louis, United
States

Introduction: The field of trauma medicine has long been a stage
for novel technology to demonstrate its advances in healthcare. In these
instances, assessing injuries and formulating a plan requires a rapid
response and integration of equipment and machines capable of providing that
insight quickly and accurately. Technology that demonstrates such an
advantage in trauma cases can imply a similar edge in non-emergent cases,
while the inverse is not necessarily true. The importance of operative
outcomes in spinal surgery is paramount given the significant neurologic
sequelae possible if spinal decompression, stabilization, and correction of
deformity, when necessary, are not achieved. Augmented reality
head-mounted-display (AR-HMD) is a novel technology that is designed to
provide surgeons with a CT-guided 3-dimensional recapitulation of an
individual patient’s spinal anatomy in real time and space. In this case
series, the use AR-HMD in trauma cases is explored to determine whether the
use of AR in spinal surgeries affects multiple outcomes, including surgery
time, blood loss, length of stay, and complications. Materials and
Methods: We recruited a retrospective cohort of patients who
underwent navigated pedicle screw placement guided by AR-HMD at the Barnes
Jewish Hospital from January 1, 2021, to January 30, 2022. From this, a
cohort of 7 traumatic cases were found where AR-HMD was utilized during the
surgery. Clinical patient information was collected, and metrics were
calculated using Microsoft Excel. Results: The cohort had a
mean age of 67 years, included 4 female and 3 male patients, and had an
average body mass index of 29.6. Four of the patients had a one-level
fracture, two patients had a two-level fracture, and one patient had a
three-level fracture. The mechanism of injury included falls (3), neoplasms
(2), 1ankylosing spondylosis (1), and hardware failure (1). They had an
average surgical invasiveness index (SII) of 8.3. Intra-operatively, there
was a mean blood loss of 400mL, mean 1.1 transfusion units used, and mean OR
time of 3 hours and 27 minutes. The average length of stay in the hospital
was 24.9 days, with two patients discharging home, one discharging to an
intermediate care facility, two discharging to skilled nursing facilities,
and two patients discharging to other rehabilitation facilities.
Conclusion: This case series illustrates the utility of
AR-HMD for instrumentation of the spine under various scenarios of spinal
trauma. The urgency to treat a spinal pathology constitutes a major hurdle
for the adoption of novel technologies in spine surgery. The average blood
loss, length of hospital stay, transfused units are comparable to the
outcomes observed in robotic-assisted surgery. This study is an early
attempt to demonstrate that AR-HMD can provide equitable outcomes compared
to the traditional surgical practices and can be quickly adopted in Level 1
trauma centers withoutextensive adaptations

## 1007

## P586: Thoracolumbar fractures open versus minimally invasive
approach

Oscar González

1,2

, Jorge Garcés Gallardo

2

, Luis Benavides

2

, Cristian Flores Ferrada

1

, Luis Medina

1

, Gustavo Canessa

1,2

, Ramón Segovia

1,2

, Tatiana Saavedra

1

, Patricio Campos Carrasco

1

, Marco Guevara

1

, Jorge Medina

1

, and Natalia Rolack

1

1

Neurosurgery, Complejo Asistencial Víctor Ríos Ruíz, Los Angeles,
Chile

2

Neurology, Universidad Católica de la Santísima Concepción,
Concepción, Chile

Introduction: Vertebral Fractures accounting for 17% of hospital
discharges from the Neurosurgical Unit of our Hospital. Of these, 40%
correspond to injuries of the thoracic and lumbar segments and about half
require surgical treatment. From 2016 surgeries with MIS techniques have
been performed regularly in our Center, either through mini-open approaches
or with percutaneous procedures. This is an extension of our previous
experience about treatment of thoracolumbar spine fractures adding most
cases with posterior MIS techniques. Material and Methods:
Retrospective Study. Case series of adult patients who suffered fractures of
the thoracic and/or lumbar segments, who received some type of surgical
treatment via a posterior approach, either traditional open, mini-open, or
percutaneous surgery. All patients were treated in "Complejo Asistencial
Víctor Ríos Ruíz" Los Angeles Chile, between January 2016 and December 2019.
Osteoporotic fractures or pathological bone fractures were not included.
Data collection from electronic clinical records, neuroimaging records. All
CT scans were categorized using the current Aospine thoracolumbar fracture
classification. Statistical analysis with Stata v12. For continuous
variables, the unpaired Student's t test was used and for dichotomous
variables, the Chi square test was used, with 95% confidence intervals.
Results: 95 cases were selected for analysis, of which 63%
were male and 37% female. The average age was 50,2 years (SD 17-81). The
most frequent Mechanisms of injury were falls (46.3%) followed by traffic
accidents (38%). The most frequent injuries were type A4, A3 and C. The most
frequently affected segment was the thoraco-lumbar hinge (65%), followed by
thoracic injuries (30%). 85% of the patients were admitted ASIA E, 4% ASIA D
and 12% ASIA A. 47.4% patients were treated with open technique, 52.6% with
less invasive techniques (mini-open or MIS) and one hybrid case. The mean
time from injury to surgery was 4.0 days (SD: 0 - 16), there were no
differences between groups. Hospital stay and postoperative days were
greater in the open technique group. In this group, the average number of
levels operated and the average number of screws used per surgery were also
greater. The average surgical time was longer in the open surgery group, as
was intraoperative blood loss. In relation to post-surgical complications
and the need for reoperation, these were only observed in the open surgery
group. There were no significant differences between the two groups in terms
of post-surgery angulation and decreased height of the vertebral body.
Conclusion: Minimally invasive techniques for the treatment
of thoracolumbar fractures are an alternative that is at least as safe and
effective as the open technique. It has the advantage of shortening
hospitalization times, intraoperative blood loss and postoperative pain,
allowing early rehabilitation. In addition, it is very useful in the context
of polytraumatized patients and in damage control surgery. It is an option
for an important variety of traumatic spinal injuries.

## 1118

## P587: Percutaneous fixation in thoracolumbar fractures: a remote island
reality

João Cruz

1

, Joana Rodrigues

1

, Tiago Canas

1

, Emanuel Homem

1

, Ricardo Simoes

1

, and Luís Soares

1

1

Hospital do Divino Espírito Santo, Ponta Delgada, Portugal

Introduction: Thoracolumbar fractures are the most common spinal
injuries, are more common in men (male-to-female ratio 2:1). About 50–70% of
these fractures occur in the thoracolumbar segment (T11-L2). Posterior
short-segment fixation remains the most commonly used surgical technique for
these fractures and contrary to classical open surgery, the minimally
invasive percutaneous pedicle screw placement needs smaller incision, less
blood loss, less dissection of paraspinal muscles, less postoperative pain,
and faster recovery. This retrospective study analyzed the clinical and
imaging information of patients who underwent percutaneous transpedicular
fixation for thoracolumbar fractures at our hospital. Material and
Methods: From April 2019 to March 2022 all consecutive
trauma-related spine surgeries at a single institution were revised and
percutaneous transpedicular fixation cases were selected (n = 39).
Demographical, clinical and radiological data was collected retrospectively,
including Cobb angle, percentage of anterior vertebral height (AVH%), AO
classification and surgical time. Visual analogue scale (VAS) was evaluated
pre, post and 6 months after surgery, and Oswestry disability index (ODI)
was evaluated at 6 months post-op. Results: Surgical technique:
under general anesthesia, patients were placed prone on a Maquet surgical
bed. A C-arm system was used to determine skin incision, control pedicle
screws insertion and confirm final positioning. Neuromonitoring was not
consistently used. After surgery: all patients began rehabilitation on the
day of surgery and no bracing was used. The patients were followed for at
least 6 months (follow-up). 39 patients underwent percutaneous pedicle screw
fixation (72.73% with screwing of the fractured vertebra): 27 males and 12
females, and the mean age was 46.7 years. The main trauma cause was fall
from height, most common fractured level was L1, and most frequent type of
fracture AO A4. The mean surgical time was 79.785 min. There were no
intraoperative complications. During the follow-up period, there were one
infection and 1 patient with one screw pullout, but no neurological
impairment was found. The mean pre-operative VAS score was 6.2,
postoperative 2.4 and at the last follow-up 1.4. The mean pre-operative ODI
at 6 months was 5.4. Radiographic outcomes: The Cobb angle improved from
11.84º prior to surgery to 6.98 post surgery, and 7.84 at the last
follow-up. The AVH% increased from a mean of 64.1% pre-surgery to 75.9 post
surgery, and 72.3% at the last follow-up. Conclusion: In our
experience, the percutaneous short-segment pedicle screw fixation with or
without screwing of the fractured vertebra are both safe and effective in
the treatment of thoracolumbar fractures.

## 1124

## P588: The importance of intraoperative neuromonitoring in thoracolumbar
fractures

João Cruz

1

, Joana Rodrigues

1

, Tiago Canas

1

, Emanuel Homem

1

, Ricardo Simoes

1

, and Luís Soares

1

1

Hospital do Divino Espírito Santo, Ponta Delgada, Portugal

Introduction: Thoracolumbar fractures are the most common spinal
injuries. Posterior short-segment fixation remains the most commonly used
surgical technique for these fractures. We report a rare case of
intraoperative loss of potentials during instrumentation of a non-fractured
pedicle with an intermediate screw and brief review of current literature
for evidence to support or limit the use of intermediate screws for
thoracolumbar fractures and intraoperative neuromonitoring. (IOM).
Material and Methods: A 28-year male patient admitted to
the emergency department after air transportation from a secondary hospital
due to fall from height (4 meters) with head and spine trauma. The patient
had past medical history of drug abuse. Hemodynamically stable and excluded
life-threatening conditions the patient underwent secondary assessment.
Whole body CT and Spine MRI documented a T5 bony Chance fracture, AO spine
B2, TLICS 7, ASIA E. Results: The patient was submitted to
percutaneous pedicle screw fixation with screwing of the fractured vertebra
with C arm system to determine skin incision, control pedicle screws
insertion and confirm final positioning. IOM was used throughout the entire
procedure. While instrumenting T6 right pedicle (deemed intact on the
preoperative CT) the patient had a sudden loss of potentials in right side,
corresponding to a spinal cord compression, despite apparent well-placed
screw on fluoroscopic images. After screw removal full neurological
potential was recovered and final construct revised. Postoperative
in-hospital stay went uneventful and the patient was discharged without
neurological deficits (ASIA E). He began rehabilitation 2 days after surgery
and was provided thoracolumbar rigid braces for 3 months. The patient’s
current follow-up is 6 months: the pain has resolved and there are no
neurological nor hardware complications. Review of current available
literature on percutaneous instrumentation of the fractured-vertebra
supports its use, because it reduces implant failure rate and postoperative
VAS and has the best effect on postoperative anterior vertebral height ratio
(AVHR) and sagittal Cobb angle (SCA). Conclusion: The authors
reckon that despite the available literature supporting the use of
intermediate screws in intact pedicle fractured vertebrae body caution would
be advised, especially in centers without IOM and/or 3D imaging devices.

## 1128

## P589: Vascular complications in percutaneous spine surgery: the uninvited
unwelcomed guest

Emanuel Homem

1

, Joana Rodrigues

1

, Tiago Canas

1

, João Cruz

1

, Ricardo Simoes

1

, and Luís Soares

1

1

Hospital do Divino Espírito Santo, Ponta Delgada, Portugal

Introduction: Vascular injury rarely occurs during spine
surgery. During pedicular screw insertion, the perforation of the anterior
ligament may lead to vessel injury, with associated arteriovenous fistula
(AVF) and pseudoaneurysm formation. Historically, early surgical
intervention has been the treatment of choice for traumatic AVFs.
Disadvantages of open repair include technically demand procedures,
increased comorbidity, and significant blood loss. Endovascular techniques
that allow for a less invasive repair and prevent permanent hemodynamic
sequelae are a quite attractive alternative in this setting. These are
especially advantageous when there is an extensive hematoma surrounding the
vascular lesion, making anatomical differentiation difficult for open
repair. We describe a rare case of lumbar artery pseudoaneurysm secondary to
percutaneous posterior lumbar spine fixation. Material and
Methods: A 63-year male patient admitted to the emergency
department due to a motorcycle accident with spine trauma. The patient had
past medical history of alcohol abuse. Due to acute respiratory distress
syndrome the patient was admitted to ICU. When hemodynamically stable and
excluded life-threatening conditions, the patient underwent secondary
assessment. Whole body CT and Spine MRI documented a retroperitoneal
haematoma associated with a L1 bony Chance fracture, AO spine B2, TLICS 7,
ASIA E. Results: At the 10th day after admission the
patient underwent percutaneous short-segment transpedicular fixation with
intermediate screws (6S) of T12 to L2 vertebrae. The procedure was
uneventful and the patient was transferred to Intermediate Care Unit.
Post-surgery contrast abdominopelvic CT was performed to access
retroperitoneal hemorrhage evolution, which documented a 31x22mm right
lumbar artery pseudoaneurysm at L1 level, absent in the pre-operative
imaging exams. A vascular surgical consultation was placed following which
an angiogram was performed from a femoral approach. Due to pseudoaneurysm
progression (40x27mm) CT-guided thrombin injection was performed 2 days
later. CT angiography, 5 days after the procedure, showed lesion relapse and
another CT-guided embolization with ethylene-co-vinyl alcohol was performed
the following day. Endovascular embolization achieved resolution of the
pseudoaneurysm, regression of the hematoma and recovery of the patient
during the 6-month follow-up. Conclusion: The authors report
this rare case of iatrogenic vascular injury following posterior fixation of
thoracolumbar fracture to highlight the importance of correct placement of
pedicular screws and support endovascular techniques as a safe and efficient
alternative for surgical repair, especially in patients with multiple
comorbidities and anatomically challenging locations.

## 1178

## P590: Is there still a place for short fixation in the treatment of
thoracolumbar junction fractures?

Jlidi Mohamed

1

, mouldi lamouchi

1

, Ayachi Montassar

1

, Walid Bouaicha

1

, Mohamed Hedi Gharbi

1

, and Selim Daas

1

1

Orthopedics and Traumatology Department, Hospital of Mohamed Taher
Maamouri, Nabeul, Tunisia

Introduction: Injuries of the thoracolumbar junction are the
most frequent and result from the transition between the rigid and fixed
thoracic spine and the mobile and dynamic lumbar spine. This biomechanical
feature makes it particularly vulnerable and constitutes a therapeutic
challenge. The aim of our work is to describe the functional, clinical and
anatomical results of short fixation (one vertebra above and one vertebra
below the fractured vertebra). Material and Methods: This is a
retrospective study over a period of 10 years between January 2010 and
January 2020. We included patients operated on for dorsolumbar junction
fractures by short fixation (one vertebra above the fracture and one
vertebra below). The fractures were classified according to Magerl. The
evaluation of the results is done on postoperative X-rays and at the last
follow-up by calculating the different radiological parameters. Functional
evaluation is done using the Oswestry score and the Dallas
self-questionnaire. Results: Our series includes 22 patients
with an average of age of 44.2 years. None of our patients had an initial
neurological deficit. All fractures were compression fractures. Type A3 is
the most frequent (11 cases). The average of operating time was 67.68
minutes. The average of blood loss is 350.91 ml. The postoperative vertebral
kyphosis was 14.27°, and at last follow-up was 16.73°. The postoperative
regional kyphosis was 13.77° and at last follow-up was 16.86°. The
postoperative regional traumatic angulation was 10.82 and at last follow-up
was 13.86. At last follow-up, the loss in regional kyphosis was 3.09. The
loss in vertebral kyphosis was 2.50. The loss in regional traumatic
angulation was 3.13. 86.36% of patients have adjacent segment disease. At
last follow-up, Oswerty's score was 31.50. Dallas score was 25. The average
time off work was 136.67 days. 27.27% of patients returned to work without
reclassification. Four patients developed sepsis, two of them early. There
were 4 cases of pseudoarthrosis, and one case of screw fracture.
Conclusion: Traditionally, the preferred method for
stabilization of thoracolumbar junction fracture required the
instrumentation of atleast 2 levels above and below the fractured vertebrae.
It was thought that this would provide the necessary stability for fracture
healing while minimizing the risk of posttraumatic kyphosis or hardware
failure at the expense of relative vertebral motion. Currently, mixed
fixation (2 levels above and 1 level bellow the fracture) are taking their
place and they remain a subject of debate. The short fixation (1 level above
and 1 level below the fracture) are losing their indications because of the
more frequent complications and especially the loss of reduction and
adjacent segment disease

## 1184

## P591: Fracture dislocation of the thoracic spine in 91-years old patient
without neurological deficits: report of a case operated
percutaneously

Hamdan Abdelrahman

1,2

, Seyed Emadaldin Sadat

1

, Ahmed Shawky Abdelgawaad

1,2

, Bilal Shoumar

1

, and Ali Ezzati

1

1

Spine Surgery, Helios-Hospitals Erfurt, Erfurt, Germany

2

Orthopedics and Trauma, Asiut Universty Hospital, Asiut,
Egypt

Introduction: Thoracolumbar fractures are the most common injury
of the spine accounting for more than half of all spinal trauma cases.
Thoracolumbar fracture-dislocations are, however, uncommon and represent
less than 3% of these injuries. We report a case of fracture-dislocation of
the thoracolumbar spine without neurological deficit in an elderly patient
operated upon minimally invasive with cement augmented percutaneous
transpedicular posterior fixation. We also review similar cases described in
the literature. Materials and Methods: A 91-year-old female
with post-traumatic fracture dislocation at the T6-T7 level without
neurological deficit, after falling downstairs, was managed as emergency
with percutaneous transpedicular fixation, cement augmentation of the
screws, percutaneous reposition under fluroscopy and microsurgical
decompression Th6/7. Intraoperative three-D image intensifier scan was
conducted, and the position of the screws, cement distribution and reduction
were controlled. Results: Successful reduction, posterior
fixation and cement augmentation was achieved percutaneously. No
intraoperative or postoperative complications were detected. The patient
could be mobilized on the first postoperative day. His Visual Analogue Scale
was 5 on the first day postoperatively. No complications were detected at 3
months follow-up. The patient died 6 months later because of cardiac causes.
Conclusion: Fracture-dislocations of the thoracolumbar
spine without neurological deficit have been infrequently reported. These
fracture-dislocations need to be managed carefully to achieve a good
outcome. Minimally invasive reduction and stabilization could be achieved
even in elderly osteoporotic patients. This minimizes surgical trauma,
postoperative analgesics, and shortens hospital stay.

## 1193

## P592: Bone scan as a diagnostic tool for diagnosing vertebral compression
fractures

Saeda Haj

1

, Alon Rod

1

, Daniel Weiner-Kalish

2

, Elite Arnon-Sheleg

2,3

, and Nimrod Rahamimov

1,2

1

Department of Orthopedics B and Spine Surgery

2

Azrieli Faculty of Medicine, Bar Ilan University, Safed,
Israel

3

Nuclear Medicine and Diagnostic Radiology, Galilee Medical Center,
Nahariya, Israel

Introduction: The diagnosis of vertebral compression fractures
(VCF) is usually based on spine radiographs and Computed Tomography (CT) but
they may not be able to differentiate between acute and old fractures, a
crucial treatment decision parameter. Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (MRI) is the method of choice for determining the
fracture's age but is not used routinely because of its higher costs and
lower availability. Bone scan is a relatively available and low-cost method.
It has a higher sensitivity for VCF than conventional radiographs and can
demonstrate the amount of osteogenic activity in the fracture, which will
change according to the fracture's age. Our study hypothesis was that bone
scan will provide us with information regarding the fracture age,
eliminating the need for magnetic resonance imaging. Material and
Methods: A retrospective study was conducted using data from our
hospital electronic health records. Included were 180 consecutive patients
admitted to the Galilee Medical Center with a suspected acute VCF who
underwent thoraco-lumbar spine CT scanning and triple phase bone scan with
Single Photon Computed Tomography (SPECT) of the whole spine during the
hospitalization period. Results: Overall, 120 women and 60 men
were included (mean age 74.2 years). 13 were excluded because of missing
data. 2,417 (94.0%) vertebrae had no evidence of fresh fracture on bone scan
and CT. 161 (6.3%) fresh VCFs were diagnosed in both CT and bone scan. 27
(16.2%) patients had fresh VCFs on the bone scan while CT was normal. 37
(22.1%) patients had fresh VCFs on the CT while the bone scan was negative
or with low uptake. Conclusion: The combination of CT and bone
scanning is an effective tool for evaluating vertebral fractures to
determine: 1. If a fracture found on CT is fresh or not 2. To find occult
fresh compression fractures not found on CT. This is information is crucial
for proper treatment choice.

## 1201

## P593: Outcome of early surgical intervention in spinal trauma patients,
an overview of 245 spinal trauma patients

Ammar Dogar

1

, Haseeb Hussain

1

, Ahsan Atta

1

, and Omar Aziz

1

1

Department of Orthopaedics And Spine, Ghurki Trust Teaching
Hospital, Lahore, Pakistan

Introduction: The prognosis for spinal cord injuries varies
depending on the severity of the injury. There is always hope of recovering
some function with spinal cord injuries. The completeness and location of
the injury will determine the prognosis., The sooner treatments are
implemented to strengthen muscles below the level of the spinal cord injury,
the better the prognosis. The first year of recovery is the hardest as the
patient is just beginning to adjust to his or her condition. The use of
physical and occupational therapy during this time is the key to recovery.
The extent of the function fully returning is typically seen in the first
two years after the initial injury. Objective: To determine the
neurological outcome of patients who presented early with those whose
presented late. Materials and Methods: It was a descriptive
case series done in the Department of Orthopaedics and Spine between Jan
2016 to Dec 2019. 245 patients who presented to ER or OPD with spinal trauma
were included. Those patients who were operated elsewhere or having trauma
of more than 10 days or those who were managed conservatively were excluded.
After admission, history, examination and investigations surgical
intervention were done on same day. Every patient were followed regularly
for 2 years to assess the neurology. The data was analyzed using SPSS 17.00
Version. Results: There were 109 total patients that presented
with spine trauma. 183 (74%) were male and 62 (26%) were females. Male to
female ratio was 2.11:1. Of the 245 total patients that presented 173 (71%)
were below 40 years of age and 72 (28.5) patients were above 40. 38 (15.6%)
had trauma to the cervical spine, 76 (31.2%) to the thoracic spine, 7 (2.8%)
to the thoracolumbar spine and 122 (50.5%) to the lumbar spine. 177 (72.5%)
patients had a fall from height. 58 (23.9%) were involved in road traffic
accidents. 1 (.9%) had assault and 3 (2.8%) had sports injuries. At the time
of presentation out of 245 patients, 218 (89%) had their neurology involved
while 26 (11%) had intact neurology. 41 (16.5%) presented within the first
24 hrs while 203 (83.5%) presented after 24 hrs. All the patients were
operated on the same day of admission. Among the 41 patient who presented
with in 24 hours, 27 patients having full recovery with in 12.66 ± 1.2
months. While the late presenters only 45 patients get fully recovered after
2 year follow up while 42 patients having partial neurology recovery and 24
having just sensory improvement and 92 having no improvement after two year
follow up. Conclusion: Spinal trauma is an emergency and having
high morbidity and mortality rate. Early presentation and surgical
intervention in spinal trauma patients having good neurological outcome as
compared to delayed presentation and surgery.

## 1320

## P594: Giant thoracolumbar pseudomeningocele: unusual evolution of
traumatic dural tiny tear

Mohamed Amine Gharbi

1

, Moatassem Belleh Jlassi

1

, Ahmed zendeoui

1

, Mahdi Bouzidi

1

, and Mouadh Nefiss

1

1

Orthopedic and Trauma Surgery, Mongi Slim Marsa University Hospital
Center, Tunis, Tunisia

Introduction: Spinal pseudomeningoceles are a common
complication of large iatrogenic tears in the dural-arachnoid layer.
Materials and Methods: We hereby report a case of an
unusual giant dorsolumbar pseudomeningocele arising after a traumatic dural
tiny tear. Results: We report a case of a 32-year-old patient,
a victim of a road traffic accident which caused severe polytrauma including
a C2 Magerl type fracture of T11, with a partial neurological deficit
(Frankel B). The patient underwent an emergency T11-T12 laminectomy,
posterior fixation of T10-T11-T12-L1 and a posterolateral bone graft. We
discovered two millimetric dural breaches opposite T11 which were not
related to the laminectomy and which were respected. At two years follow up,
the removal of the material was performed with intraoperative discovery of a
small right posterolateral pseudomeningocele at T11 level which was
respected. One year later, the patient presented with a right paravertebral
painful mass measuring 20 centimeters. There were no associated neurological
symptoms. The magnetic resonance imaging revealed a dorsolumbar paraspinal
giant pseudomeningocele extending from T10 to L1 with no compression of the
spinal cord. The patient underwent excision of the pseudomeningocele and
repair of the dural sac defect. The right foraminal breach was closed with
biological fibrin glue. Seen two years later the patient had no complaints
and the magnetic resonance imaging was normal. Conclusion:
Several procedures have been described in literature in the management of
dural sac tears and pseudomeningoceles. This observation may encourage
spinal surgeons to repair small dural tears to avoid potential cerebrospinal
fluid leak and its complications.

## 1332

## P595: MIS short-segment fixation & Unipedicular screw manipulation
technique; a novel method with surgical technique

Brian Chin

1

, Joshua Wong

1

, Jiong Hao Tan

1

, and Naresh Kumar

1

1

Orthopaedic Surgery, National University Health Systems, Singapore,
Singapore

Introduction: MIS spine surgery has revolutionized fixation of
thoracolumbar fractures with burst elements. Recent studies have proven that
percutaneous pedicle screw instrumentation is as effective as open
instrumentation, with reduction in intraoperative blood loss and operative
duration. Techniques such as short-segment pedicle screw fixation including
the fractured vertebra has shown satisfactory radiological correction and
functional outcomes, avoiding the need for extensile posterior constructs.
In the present study, we describe our technique utilizing unipedicular index
vertebra fixation and manipulation in minimally invasive surgery (MIS) for
thoracolumbar fractures with burst elements. To the author’s knowledge, this
technique is not well described in literature as open approaches are often
adopted for the above. We aim to highlight the two-year radiological &
functional outcomes of 20 consecutive patients who underwent this technique.
Material and Methods: A retrospective review of
prospectively collected data was conducted on 20 patients with thoracolumbar
fractures with burst elements who underwent fixation using our technique.
Patient data collected included demographic characteristics, mechanism of
injury, associated injuries, neurological deficit at time of admission with
pre- & post-operative neurological evaluation and length of hospital
stay. Radiological investigations included plain radiographs, CT-spine with
reconstruction and MRI-spine which provided data for radiological fracture
classifications such as AO Spine and derivation of TLICS score, as well as
preoperative planning. Radiological investigations in the postoperative
period were carried out by standing radiographs or EOS whole spine at each
postoperative follow-up up to two years. Radiological parameters - vertebral
wedge angle, regional kyphosis angle, coronal cobb angle, anterior and
posterior vertebral body heights were recorded at preoperative,
intraoperative, postoperative, and up to 2-year follow-up. Clinical outcome
scores of VAS and ODI were also recorded at similar time-points.
Results: Radiological outcomes reflect significant lordotic
corrections of the vertebral wedge angles up to 2-year follow-up when
compared to preoperative values (intraoperative: p = 0.06; postoperative: p
= 0.001; 3-month: p = 0.002; 6-month: p = 0.004; 1-year: p = 0.011; 2-year:
p = 0.016). Additionally, significant lordotic corrections of regional
kyphosis angles (intraoperative: p = 0.00; postoperative: p = 0.00; 3-month:
p = 0.031; 6-month: p = 0.039) and increases in anterior vertebral body
heights (postoperative: p = 0.001; 3-month: p = 0.010; 6-month: p = 0.020)
up to 6-month follow-up was found. Preoperatively, median VAS of 85 (range
30 to 100) and ODI of 90 (range 40 - 98) were recorded. Statistically
significant improvements in VAS and ODI were found across all timepoints
when compared to preoperative values, with a mean VAS of 11.5 (S.D 4.8) and
ODI of 9.9 (S.D 4.5) at 2-year follow-up. Conclusion: Surgical
management of thoracolumbar fractures with or without neurological deficit
has a role in reducing nursing requirements and postoperative morbidity in
patients with polytrauma and other associated injuries. Our approach in
treating thoracolumbar fractures with burst elements using MIS short-segment
fixation and unipedicular screw manipulation technique shows satisfactory
radiological correction & high rates of fracture union, whilst reducing
approach-related morbidity & improving functional outcomes.

## 1386

## P596: Thoracolumbar vertebral burst fractures treated by short segment
fixation with index screw and transpedicular transcorporeal bone grafting: A
clinico radiological analysis pre-post radiological study.

Prabhat Agrawal

1

1

Orthopaedics, AIIMS Patna, Patna, India

Introduction: The treatment of thoracolumbar fractures is
controversial. Short segment pedicle screw fixation has been used as a
treatment of choice for many years yet it is associated with loss of
reduction and undesirable implant failure. In 1994, Dick et al introduced an
additional screw in the fractured vertebra leading to the 6 screw construct
to treat the thoracolumbar fractures but screws at the fractured site has
led to inconsistent effect including collapse of the fractured vertebra
leading to reduction in the vertebra height and non-union. While long
segment fixation incorporates multiple normal mobile spinal segments leading
to spinal stiffness. Transpedicular intracorporeal bone grafting proposed by
Liao et al, has a comparative advantage of union of the fractured vertebra
but the incidence of vertebral collapse still persists due to non-support of
the graft under axial loading. Considering both the additional screw at the
fractured site and transpedicular bone grafting have disadvantages as
non-union and collapse respectively, combining both the procedures should
not only fill the void of the fractured vertebra leading to better union but
should also impart mechanically more stable construct due to presence of an
additional screw in the fractured vertebra. Methodology: The
pre-operative clinical examination was done and scoring was done using the
ASIA score, Denis work score and Denis pain score. The pre-operative
radiograph of the thoracolumbar spine was evaluated to identify the
fractured vertebra level and to calculate the radiological parameters like
sagittal index, vertebral wedge angle, anterior body compression, Gardner’s
kyphosis angle, regional kyphosis, posterior wall angles, Cobbs angle. CT of
the thoracolumbar spine was done and the canal clearance at fractured site
was measured in mid sagittal sections, location of void in the vertebral
body in axial cuts and status of the pedicles of the fractured vertebra were
assessed. Results: There were 50 patients on whom we did
transpedicular intracorporeal bone grafting with index screw short segment
screw fixation. The average preoperative kyphosis angle was 22.3_ ± 6.6_,
which was corrected to 5.6_ ± 4.8 immediately after surgery (p < 0.001).
At final follow-up, the mean local kyphosis angle was 10.3_ ± 5.2_; loss of
correction was 4.7_ ± 2.7_ (p < 0.001). The average preoperative anterior
body height was 46.6% ± 12.5%, which improved to 85.7% ± 9.4% immediately
after surgery (p < 0.001). Anterior body height restored by surgery was
39.2% ± 13.3%. Anterior body height at 6-month follow-up was 74.9% ± 12.0%,
and the average loss of body height correction was 10.8% ± 7.0% (p <
0.001). Conclusion: The outcomes of this study confirmed that
the use of two additional augmenting screws in the fractured body with
short-segment pedicle screws and intracorporeal bone grafting is sufficient
for most thoracolumbar burst fractures, to attain fracture reduction,
maintain alignment achieve union and prevent vertebral collapse.

## 1445

## P597: Surgical outcome following delayed short segment posterior fixation
of unstable thoracolumbar junction injury

Dewan Shamsul Asif

1

, Safwat binte Salam

1

, and Sk Sader Hossain

2

1

Neurosurgery, Anwer Khan Modern Medical College, Dhaka,
Bangladesh

2

Neurosurgery, Al Manar Hospital, Dhaka, Bangladesh

Introduction: Spinal cord injury due to traumatic accidents of
the thoracolumbar spine is a major cause of disability throughout the world.
Due to unavailability of operation theatre schedule most of the spine
injured patients are managed conservatively or there is inadvertent delay in
surgery. This prospective study was designed to evaluate neurological
recovery and functional outcome following delayed short segment posterior
fixation of thoracolumbar junction injuries classified according to TLICS
system. Material and Methods: 38 TLJ injured patient followed
up after surgery for 84 months. The purpose of this study is to report the
surgical outcome of thoracolumbar junction fractures treated with
short-segment pedicle instrumentation. All patients had neurologic deficit
at the time of presentation. The unstable spine was fixed based on
Thoracolumbar Injury Classification Score system (TLICS), between 7-82 days
after trauma, by posterior short segment instrumentation. Neurological
recovery and functional status assessed in the follow-up period at one,
three, six- and eighty-four-month’s interval by ASIA impairment scale and
Oswestry Disability Index respectively. Results: There were 36
male and 2 female patients with average age 29.42 ± 8.11 years (range 17-50
years). Fall from a height was the most common (79%). Most of the patients
were farmer or day labour. Most frequent level fractures were at D12 and L1
comprising 76.3%. 10 (26.3%) patients had type A compression fracture and 28
(73.7%) patients had type B distraction type fracture. There were
preoperatively 2 (5.3%) patients with ASIA grade A, 3 (7.9%) patients with
ASIA grade B, 27 (71.1%) patients with ASIA grade C and 6 (15.8%) patients
with ASIA grade D. There was no neurological deterioration after surgery. At
final follow up of 22 patients, 96.87% exhibited neurological improvement
for at least one ASIA grade. There was a statistically significant relation
between pre-operative MRI interpretation and operative findings of posterior
ligamentous complex injury. There were no per-operative complications and
only 15.8% had different kinds of complications post-operatively. On
admission most of the patients were bed bound. But at six follow up ODI mean
score was 19.06 ± 6.67 (range 8-35) i.e. most of patients were in minimal
disability state. We could finally follow up 22 patients at 84 months
interval over telephone. Among 38 patients 2 patient died due to bed sore
complications. Rest of 20 patients are doing their daily job with minimal
disability at 84 months. Conclusion: It became clear that
careful diagnostic imaging examination, especially MRI, should be conducted
in order to eliminate the existence of posterior ligamentous or osseous
pathologies. Where early surgery is a distant dream delayed operative
outcome showed very promising results. Especially in our society where a
dependent person is more than a diseased itself and if these patients were
not treated properly, they would not only lose their employment but could be
a permanent burden and nuisance for their family. Although long term
follow-up evaluation needs to be verified radiologically, the long-term
functional follow-up results suggest a favorable outcome for delayed
short-segment posterior instrumentation of traumatic thoracolumbar junction
injuries.

## 1582

## P599: Pedicle screws length and crosslinks as factors of stabilization
reliability of thoracolumbar junction traumatic injuries: finite element
study in lateroflection

Oleksii Nekhlopochyn

1

, Iaroslav Tsymbaliuk

2

, Ievgen Cheshuk

2

, Milan Vorodi

2

, Michael Karpinsky

3

, and Oleksandr Yaresko

3

1

Spinal Neurosurgery

2

Restorative Neurosurgery Department

3

Biomechanical Laboratory, Sytenko Institute of Spine and Joint
Pathology, Kharkiv, Ukraine

Introduction: The zone of the thoracolumbar junction is the most
susceptible to traumatic injuries due to anatomical and physiological
features. Accordingly, the stabilization of this spine requires high
reliability. Extensive clinical experience of transpedicular stabilization
usage has revealed a number of factors hypothetically or actually
determining the reliability of fixation. The main are the depth of screw
insertion and the use of crosslinks. The effect of lateroflexion on the
operated spine as one of the most unfavorable types of loading is
considered. Material and Methods: Mathematical finite element
model of a fragment of the human thoracolumbar spine (Тh9-L5) was developed
in biomechanics laboratory of Sytenko Institute of Spine and Joint
Pathology. We modeled the result of decompression-stabilizing surgery with
total removal of the anterior and posterior support complexes of the
vertebral bodies Th12‒L1 including installation of vertebral body replacing
implant and fixation with a transpedicular system using 4 pairs of screws
(into the vertebral bodies Th10, Th11, L2 and L3). Lateroflexion was modeled
by applying a load of 350 N acting from right to left on the body and facet
processes of the Th9 vertebra. Results: When evaluating the
model without crosslinks and using monocortical pedicle screws, it was found
that the maximum loading values in the Th10, Th11, L2, and L3 vertebral
bodies were 3.4, 2.0, 3.5, and 8.6 MPa, respectively; and in the screws in
these vertebrae - 48.4, 48.3, 23.3 and 43.5 MPa. When using bicortical
screws without crosslinks - respectively 3.1, 2.5, 3.8, 9.6 MPa and 49.9,
51.9, 25.8, 44.8 MPa for bodies and screws; when using a combination of
short screws and crosslinks - 3.2, 2.0, 2.6, 7.5 MPa and 47.6, 47.5, 22.6,
41.2 MPa; when using crosslinks and bicortical screws - 3.0, 2.2, 2.7, 8.8
MPa and 48.3, 49.6, 24.3, 42.5 MPa. Conclusion: In
lateroflexion monocortical pedicle screws cause lower critical loading rates
compared to long screws at all control points of the model. Crosslinks in
combination with both short and long screws help to reduce stress levels.
The use of monocortical pedicle screws in combination with transverse ties
seems to be the most biomechanically effective in lateroflexion.

## 1619

## P600: Comparison between surgical outcome of short segment versus long
segment transpedicular stabilization for treatment of thorocolumbar
fracture

Md Yousuf Ali

1

 and Samrat Parajuli

2

1

Spine Surgery, Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Bangabandhu Sheikh
Mujib Medical University, Dhaka, Bangladesh

2

Orthopedic Surgery, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujib Medical University,
Dhaka, Bangladesh

Introduction: Thoracolumbar fracture is one of the most common
spinal traumas. It was still indeterminate whether short-segment (SS)
fixation was more effective and preferable than long-segment (LS) fixation.
We therefore conducted this meta-analysis to assess the comparative safety
and efficacy of SS and LS fixation for the treatment of thoracolumbar
fracture. The indications for operative treatment and type of stabilization
procedures for the treatment of thoracolumbar fracture remain controversial.
Material and Methods: The study was conducted at Department
of Orthopedic Surgery, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujib Medical University (BSMMU)
and different private clinics at Dhaka, from July 2006 to June 2020. Surgery
was performed in multiple centers by the same spine surgeon to evaluate the
efficacy of short-segment fixation compared with that of long-segment
fixation in terms of the radiological and clinical outcomes in thoracolumbar
burst fractures. Total of 422 thoracolumbar fracture patients who underwent
the treatment with SS fixation (n = 217) and LS fixation (n = 205) were
included. Results: The outcomes of this study indicated that
outcome regarding implant failure, anterior body height loss (ABHL), cobb
angle (CA) and restoration ratio of compromised canal is better in the LS
fixation group than those of SS fixation group. However, SS group
significantly reduced surgical time when compared with LS group. There was
no significant difference regarding blood loss, complication rate, Sagittal
Index (SI) and kyphotic angle (KA). Radiological assessment of the kyphotic
angle was performed using the Cobb method immediately after the operation
and at 3, 6, and 12 months postoperatively. The clinical outcomes were
evaluated using the Frankel score and ASIA grade criteria at the last
follow-up in Short segment and long segment respectively. The sex ratio,
mean age of patients, and composition of the fractured vertebral body were
similar in both groups. In the long-segment and short-segment group, 195
(95.1%) and 198 (91.2%) cases showed excellent or good outcomes,
respectively. In long segment the mean preoperative angle of injured
vertebra was 18.5°, the mean postoperative angle was 8.8°, the mean angle at
6 month’s follow-up was 10.5°, the mean initial correction was 9.9°, and the
mean loss of correction was 1.9°. So, the mean overall correction was found
8.0°. Whereas in Short segment the mean preoperative angle of injured
vertebra was 19.7°, the mean postoperative angle was 8.6°, the mean angle at
6 month’s follow-up was 11.9°, the mean initial correction was 11.1°, the
mean loss of correction was 3.3°. So, the mean overall correction was found
7.8°. There was no statistically significant difference in the average loss
of kyphosis correction between the two groups (p > 0.05).
Conclusion: In conclusion, short-segment pedicle screw
fixation including the fractured vertebral body might be as effective as
long-segment pedicle screw fixation for the treatment of unstable
thoracolumbar spinal fracture.

## 1630

## P601: New AO spine thoracolumbar injury classification system can predict
subsequent adjacent osteoporotic vertebral compression fracture after
balloon kyphoplasty

Takayuki Ogawa

1

, Chikako Shinozaki

1

, Takashi Chikawa

2

, and Akihiro Nagamachi

3

1

Orthopedics, Kaisei General Hospital, Kagawa, Japan

2

Orthopedics,Tokushima Prefecture Naruto Hospital, Tokushima,
Japan

3

Orthopedics, Yoshinogawa Medical Center, Tokushima, Japan

Introduction: Balloon kyphoplasty (BKP) is a minimal invasive
technique to treat symptomatic osteoporotic vertebral compression fracture
(OVCF). BKP is a relatively effective surgical procedure, however, we
sometimes encountered complications such as subsequent adjacent OVCF or
cement leakages. Subsequent OVCF causes sever back pain and kyphosis,
reducing patient quality of life. Preoperative estimation of subsequent
adjacent OVCF occurrence may help selecting other optional surgery or
planning rehabilitation program after BKP. New AO spine thoracolumbar injury
classification system (AO system) showed substantial reliability and
reproducibility among the surgeons. In this current study, we used AO system
to classify OVCF preoperatively and investigated incidence of subsequent
OVCF after BKP in each type of AO system. Material and Methods:
Between March, 2016 and March, 2022, 72 thoracolumbar OVCF were treated with
BKP. Patients with hemodialysis, Parkinson’s disease, malignant disease and
former BKP were excluded from this study. A total of 52 patients
participated in this study. There were 18 male and 34 female and their mean
age was 80 years. All patients underwent standing plain X-ray, CT and MRI
before surgery, 1 week, 2 months and 4 months after the surgery. All
fracture type were classified according to AO system before surgery.
Occurrence of subsequent adjacent OVCF in each type of AO system was
observed in follow-up period. Results: Thirty-seven patients
had no subsequent OVCF during the observation period, their mean age was 81
years. Fifteen patients had subsequent adjacent OVCF, their mean age was 79
years. Mean T-score of bone mineral density (BMD) of patients with
subsequent OVCF and without subsequent OVCF were -1.33 and -2.24,
respectively. There was no statistically significant difference of patient’s
demographics between two groups. Seventeen patients classified into A1, and
no subsequent OVCF was observed. Twenty-one patients classified into A3, and
subsequent OVCF observed in 2 patients. Eight patients classified into A4,
and subsequent OVCF observed in all patients. Six patients classified into
B2, and subsequent OVCF observed in 5 patients. Incidence of subsequent OVCF
of each type was 0% in A1, 9.3% in A3, 100% in A4 and 83.3% in B2.
Statistically significant difference of incidence was observed among 4 types
of OVCF (chi-square test p < 0.001). Conclusion: This study
demonstrated that AO system can estimate occurrence of subsequent adjacent
OVCF after BKP. Type A4 and B2 were found to be more prone to subsequent
adjacent OVCF.

## 1706

## P602: Posterior approach in surgical management of traumatic
spondyloptosis of thoracolumbar junction

Oleksii Nekhlopochyn

1

, Iaroslav Tsymbaliuk

2

, Vadim Verbov

2

, Ievgen Cheshuk

2

, and Milan Vorodi

2

1

Spinal Neurosurgery

2

Restorative Neurosurgery Department, Romodanov Neurosurgery
Institute, Kyiv, Ukraine

Introduction: The thoracolumbar junction is the most common
location of traumatic spinal injuries and contains 50-60% of all fractures
of the thoracic and lumbar spine. Spondyloptosis is not very frequent, but
one of the most severe types of traumatic injury, that is characterized by a
gross violation of spine axis in one or more planes. Traumatic
spondyloptosis is divided into reducible and irreducible, depending on the
possibility of intraoperative restoration of the spinal axis without
resection of the damaged vertebra. Material and Methods: We
performed a retrospective analysis of the patients’ database admitted in
Romodanov Neurosurgery Institute of National Academy of Medical Sciences of
Ukraine over the past 4 years (2017 to 2020) to identify all cases with
traumatic irreducible spondyloptosis of the thoracolumbar junction.
Results: Five patients aged from 18 to 52 years (mean 31.2
years) were revealed. The minimum period from injury to surgery was 14 days,
maximum 3 months and 2 days (average 42.2 days). All patients had a
neurological deficit of ASIA A at the time of admission. The score by TLICS
scale was 8 points. All the patients had the injury of
laterospondyloroptosis type: in three cases as an isolated displacement only
in the coronary plane, in two combined - in the coronary and sagittal. We
performed surgery by isolated posterior approach in all cases. As a body
replacement system in 2 patients, we used a vertical cylindrical implant
(Mesh), in 3 patients - a telescopic body replacing implant. The method of
bicortical implantation of transpedicular screws was applied. The
transpedicular system was strengthened by two cross links of the rod-to-rod
type. We managed to achieve the restoration of spine axis in both the
coronary and sagittal planes. Subsequent terms of control examinations were
2; 6 and 12-18 months of the postoperative period. We observed regression of
neurological disorders in two patients, in one case to ASIA B, in another to
ASIA C. Conclusion: Isolated posterior approach has
demonstrated high efficacy in the surgical management of traumatic
irreducible spondyloptosis of the thoracolumbar junction, allowed both to
restore the axis of the spine and to provide the stability of fusion.

## 1712

## P603: What is the best decision-making classification of traumatic
thoracolumbar junction injuries?

Oleksii Nekhlopochyn

1

, Iaroslav Tsymbaliuk

2

, Vadim Verbov

2

, Ievgen Cheshuk

2

, and Milan Vorodi

2

1

Spinal Neurosurgery

2

Restorative Neurosurgery Department, Romodanov Neurosurgery
Institute, Kyiv, Ukraine

Introduction: The thoracolumbar junction is one of the most
"typical" areas of traumatic changes when exposed to a mechanical load on
the human body. Currently, a specific classification for injuries of the
thoracolumbar junction has not been developed, therefore, when describing
injuries in this zone, grading schemas characterizing the whole thoracic and
lumbar spine are used. Material and Methods: A retrospective
analysis of the treatment tactics was carried out in 96 patients with
traumatic injuries of the thoracolumbar junction, who attended the
outpatient department of the A.P. Romodanov Institute in the period from
2019 to 2021. The average age of patients is 41.3 years. The ratio of men
and women is 3.6:1.0. We analyzed the patients’ data who underwent both
surgical treatment and conservative therapy. All injuries were ranked using
F. Magerl et al. and AOSpine classifications. Neurological status was
assessed using the ASIA scale (American Spinal Injury Association), the
nature of the lesion was specified using the McCormack criteria. Statistical
data processing was performed using the Random Forest machine learning
algorithm. Results: The most frequent injuries according to the
classification of F. Magerl et al. were A3.1 (14.58%), A3.2 and B2.3 (8.33%
each), according to the AOSpine classification - type C (26.04%), subtypes
B2 (17.71%) and A4 (16.67%). When assessing the relationship between the
nature of damage and the level of neurological disorders, the overall error
rate for F. Magerl et al. and AOSpine classifications were 69.79% and 66.67%
respectively. The greatest relationship between the nature of
osteoligamentous lesions and neurological disorders is typical for patients
with ASIA B and E. In the treatment of patients, open posterior
decompression of the spinal canal in combination with transpedicular
stabilization (40.62%), isolated posterior stabilization without
decompression (25.0%), a combination of decompressive laminectomy,
posterolateral corpectomy with interbody fusion using a body-replacing
system supplemented with transpedicular fixation (14.58%), less often
conservative therapy (9.38%) and percutaneous cementoplasty (7.29%). The
nature of the injury makes it possible to unambiguously determine the
optimal method of therapy using the classification of F. Magerl et al. with
a probability of 58.33%, when applying the AOSpine classification - with a
probability of 55.21%. When building models taking into account the nature
of damage, the level of neurological disorders and McCormack criteria, it
was found that the error in unambiguously determining the most effective
method of treatment when using the classification of F. Magerl et al. is
26.04%, when using the AOSpine classification - 21.88%.
Conclusion: The type of the injury, ranked using the
classifications of AOSpine and F. Magerl et al., does not allow choosing the
optimal method for the treatment of traumatic lesion of the thoracolumbar
junction. The use of additional predictors significantly improves the
accuracy of the forecast. When applying the AOSpine classification, the best
results were recorded. The use of the AOSpine classification is more
promising for the development of a multifactorial algorithm for the
treatment of traumatic injuries of the thoracolumbar junction.

## 1719

## P604: Some biomechanical considerations regarding pedicle screw insertion
depth and role of crosslinks in thoracolumbar junction fracture: a study
under compressive loads

Oleksii Nekhlopochyn

1

, Vadim Verbov

2

, Iaroslav Tsymbaliuk

2

, Michael Karpinsky

3

, and Oleksandr Yaresko

3

1

Spinal Neurosurgery

2

Restorative Neurosurgery Department, Romodanov Neurosurgery
Institute, Kyiv, Ukraine

3

Biomechanical Laboratory, Sytenko Institute of Spine and Joint
Pathology, Kyiv, Ukraine

Introduction: The thoracolumbar junction is one of the most
frequently damaged parts of the human spine when exposed to a traumatic
factor. Corpectomy in combination with posterior decompression and
restoration of the spinal support function is often performed using an
interbody implant and posterior transpedicular stabilization to achieve
adequate decompression and stabilization in severe traumatic injuries of
this level. The surgery of a type is characterized by significant
instability of the operated segment and determines increased requirements
for the rigidity and reliability of posterior fixation. We have modeled the
situation of a two-level corpectomy with subsequent replacement of bodies
with a mesh implant and posterior transpedicular stabilization with 8
screws. Material and Methods: We developed a mathematical
finite element model of the human thoracolumbar spine, the components of
which are the vertebrae Th9 ‒ Th11 and L2-L5 (vertebrae Th12-L1 are
removed), as well as elements of metal structures vertebral replacing
implant and transpedicular system. We modeled four variants of
transpedicular fixation: system with short screws and screws passing through
the cortical layer of anterior wall of vertebral body, as well as with two
cross links and without them. The stress-strain state of the models was
studied under the influence of a vertical compressive distributed load,
which was applied to the body of the Th9 vertebra and its articular
surfaces. The load value was 350 N, which corresponds to the weight of the
upper body. Results: We determined that transpedicular fixation
of the thoracolumbar vertebrae with the use of long screws reduces the level
of tension in the bone elements of the models. In the area of screw entry
into the pedicle of the T10, T11, L2 and L3 vertebral arch, the load when
using short screws was 3.1, 1.7, 3.9 and 12.1 MPa, respectively, when using
bicortically installed screws - 2.9, 1 8, 3.8 and 10.6 MPa. The addition of
two cross-links also reduces the maximum load values in critical areas of
the model to a certain extent. In the case of a combination of short screws
and two cross-links, the load in these areas was 2.8, 1.7, 3.6 and 11.5 MPa,
when using bicortical screws and cross-links - 2.8, 1.6, 3.3 and 9.3 MPa.
The study of the stress-strain state of other parts of the model revealed a
similar trend. Conclusion: The use of long screws with fixation
in the cortical bone of anterior part of the vertebral bodies reduces the
level of tension in the bone elements of the models. The use of cross links
gives greater rigidity to the transpedicular system, that also reduces the
tension in the bone tissue.

## 1746

## P605: Spinal subdural hematoma in ankylosing spondylitis patients without
coagulation therapy: case study of two patients

Inka Berglar

1

, Laura Snyder

2

, and Gabriella Paisan

2

1

Neuroradiology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, United
States

2

Neurosurgery, Barrow Neurological Institute, Phoenix, United
States

Introduction: Patients with ankylosing spondylitis (AS) are at
high risk of significant spinal trauma after relatively low impact events
such as ground level falls. Due to the osteopenic nature of the disease
process, complex spinal fractures are common in these patients.
Additionally, patients may sustain rare traumatic complications from these
fractures, such as spinal subdural or epidural hematomas. Traumatic spinal
subdural hematoma (SSDH) is extremely rare with only a few cases described
in the literature and is typically associated with antiplatelet or
anticoagulant use. In this case series, we describe two cases of traumatic
SSDH in patients with ankylosing spondylitis without anticoagulation or
antiplatelet therapy, which has not previously been reported in the
literature. Material and Methods: Case study.
Results: Ankylosing spondylitis is an important subtype of
an interrelated group of rheumatic diseases and AS patients are particularly
vulnerable to severe spinal injuries following relatively minor traumas due
to the ankylosing process of the spine. Most traumatic spinal hematomas are
epidural and SSDHs account for only a fracture of cases of spinal hematomas.
Treatment options vary between conservative and surgical management and
indications for surgical evacuation are dependent on the clinical context of
the patient and their injury. Conclusion: This is the first
detailed report of two posttraumatic AS patients with SSDHs without prior
anticoagulation therapy. Although the etiology is not yet fully understood,
these cases demonstrate that the appearance of SSDHs can be highly variable
and can occur after only minor trauma in AS patients. While epidural and
especially subdural spinal hematomas are extremely rare in general, AS
patients are more likely to develop these hemorrhages and they should be
considered as a possible cause of spinal cord injury in this population and
may also require surgical evacuation.

## 1800

## P606: Thoracic fracture dislocation with bilateral locked facet joints -
a modified reduction technique

Jure Pavesic

1

, Stjepan Dokuzovic

1

, Stipe Corluka

1

, and Vide Bilic

1

1

Spinal Surgery Division, Traumatology Department, University
Hospital Centre Sestre Milosrdnice, Zagreb, Croatia

Introduction: Thoracic spine fracture dislocations with
bilateral locked facets pose a challenge for safe and effective
intraoperative reduction. Several techniques have been described, though
they may in some contexts prove hazardous or ineffective. Material and
Methods: We present a modification to previously described
reduction techniques where the force required to perform the reduction is
dispersed over several elements of the reduction process as to minimize
further trauma from the reduction process itself. Results: When
other techniques fail due to extreme rigidity, increasing reduction force is
not always an option due to the possibility of screw pull-out, lamina
fracture, or sudden forceful reduction which may potentially cause a second
hit to the spinal cord. Force dispersion by technique modification is our
preferred method to reduce required forces and make the reduction safer for
the cord and remaining healthy bone. Conclusion: Our
modification may be a reliable and safe method for highly rigid locked
fracture-dislocations of the thoracic spine, though further validation is
required.

## 1840

## P607: Results of the placement of thoracolumbar transpedicular screws in
open surgery guided by fluoroscopy in patients with spine trauma

Saul Solorio Pineda

1

, Miguel Angel Ramirez Sosa

2

, Abrahan Alfonso Tafur Grandett

2

, Eduardo Reyna Martinez

2

, Jorge Ortega Espino

2

, and Milton Inocencio Ruiz Flores

2

1

Spine Surgery Department, Instituto Nacional de Rehabilitacion,
CDMX, Mexico

2

Neurosurgery, Centro Medico Lic. Adolfo Lopez Mateos, ISEM, Toluca
de Lerdo, Mexico

Background: The placement of transpedicular screws is a
technique frequently performed in order to provide stabilization to the
spine. This technique consists of placing screws through the pedicle and
directed towards the vertebral body through a posterior approach and placing
a system of titanium bars. Objective: To analyze the results of
precision and malposition of thoracolumbar transpedicular screws guided by
fluoroscopy, through helical tomography. Material and Methods:
A retrospective, observational and descriptive analysis of 124 patients over
14 years of age who presented spinal cord injury with data of vertebral
instability and/or fractures in the thoracolumbar region who underwent
transpedicular fixation with titanium screws by open posterior guided
approach was performed. by fluoroscopy in the period from January 1, 2016 to
December 31, 2019. Results: The most frequently performed
approach was the thoraco-lumbar in 52.62% of the cases, 910 screws were
placed, 75.8% of the cases 8 screws were placed per patient and the
percentage of good placement in our cases was 91.21% (n = 830).
Conclusion: The surgical technique described is safe with
precision percentages comparable to that described in the literature and
with a low percentage of complications.
Keywords: Pedicle screw, fluoroscopy, computed tomography

## 1905

## P608: Multicenter validation of a CT criteria for thoracolumbar posterior
ligamentous complex injury: study protocol and preliminary results

Mohamed Ali

1

1

Neurosurgery, Prince Mohamed Bin Abdelaziz Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia

Introduction: Two recent single-institution studies have
proposed criteria for posterior ligamentous complex (PLC) status in Computed
Tomography (CT) based on the number of positive CT findings. PLC should be
considered injured if ≥ 2 positive CT findings based on a high positive
predictive value (PPV, 91%) for PLC injury in MRI, indeterminate PLC (M1
modifier) if there is a single positive CT finding (PPV 31%), and intact if
there are no positive CT findings (PPV 9%). This retrospective multicenter
study aims to validate those CT criteria for PLC injury in a large,
independent population from diffident settings. Materials &
Methods: Three hundred fifty-seven consecutive patients with at
least one vertebral body fracture (T1-L5) who underwent CT and MRI within
ten days of injury will be enrolled in participating centers. Patients with
translation injury, osteoporotic or pathological fractures or incomplete
imaging were excluded. At least two reviewers from each center will assess
CT for the following findings according to proposed definitions: facet joint
malalignment, facet joint widening, horizontal laminar fracture, spinous
process fracture, and interspinous widening. The reference standard is PLC
injury defined by black stripe discontinuity due to supraspinous or
ligamentum flavum rupture. Each reviewer will interpret all de-identified
CT/ MRI images independently, blinded to clinical data and other readings,
within a 4-week interval. When the two reviewers disagreed about the MRI's
PLC status or the Number of CT findings, the case was resolved by a third
reviewer. Prior consensus training will be done for all reviewers to
standardize the imaging interpretation protocol. Multivariate association
between CT findings and PLC injury will be examined. Results:
the preliminary results from multiple centers will be presented. The
diagnostic accuracy of combinations of those CT findings with independent
association with PLC injury will be examined (0, 1, ≥2 findings). The
following measures will be reported: sensitivity, specificity, accuracy,
positive and negative predictive values, and positive and negative
likelihood ratio. Inter-intraobserver reliability in identifying each CT
finding or combinations of CT findings will be assessed using Cohen’s kappa
(k) and Fleiss kappa statistics. Conclusion: We provided a
comprehensive methodology for a multicenter validation of a CT criteria for
PLC injury. A multicenter design is needed to improve generalizability of
the findings. A retrospective study with well balanced study population is
more feasible thana prospective design.
Keywords: Posterior ligamentous complex, thoracolumbar fractures, imaging
algorithm, Computed tomography, Magnetic resonance imaging

## Trauma - Other

## 120

## P609: Non-cannulated S2AI screws have higher rates of hardware failure
compared to cannulated S2AI screws

Nina Lara

1

, Alex Pu

1

, Navid Chowdhury

1

, Jacob Bruckner

1

, Ivan Ye

1

, Alexandra Thomson

1

, Ryan Smith

1

, Tyler Pease

1

, Brittany Oster

1

, Vincent Miseo

1

, Daniel Cavanaugh

1

, Eugene Koh

1

, Daniel Gelb

1

, Steven Ludwoig

1

, and Vache Hambardzumyan

1

1

Spine Surgery Division, Orthopaedics, University of Maryland School
of Medicine, Baltimore, United States

Introduction: The variability of S2 alar iliac (S2AI) screw
loosening has been reported in the literature to range from 2.9% to as high
as 66% depending on the type of imaging used for assessment. No studies have
compared the type of screw used in S2AI fixation and the impact on hardware
failure or revision rates. The purpose of this study is to compare the
incidence of hardware failure and revision rates between cannulated vs
non-cannulated screws. Materials and Methods: Following IRB
approval, patients who underwent elective or traumatic pelvic fixation
between 2017-2019 were retrospectively reviewed. Patients were divided into
two cohorts depending on the type of S2AI screw received, cannulated or
non-cannulated. The primary outcomes were reoperation rates and hardware
failure within 2 years. Results: A total of 139 patients were
included in this study. There were 54 (38.8%) patients with cannulated screw
implants and 85 (61.2%) patients with non-cannulated screw implants. The
rate of hardware failure within 2 years was significantly higher in the
non-cannulated screw cohort than the cannulated screw cohort (23.5% vs 9.3%,
p = 0.03). Rod breakage was the most common mechanism of failure (55%).
There were no difference in the 2-year reoperation rates.
Conclusions: Non-cannulated S2AI screws had higher hardware
failure rates compared to cannulated S2AI screws. However, there was no
significant difference in reoperation rates within 2 years between
cohorts.

## 198

## P610: The postoperative pedicle screw position after dorsal
instrumentation with intraoperative cone beam CT imaging is worse in
patients with obesity than in normal-weight patients

Felix Zimmermann

1

, Kohl Katharina

1

, Eric Mandelka

1

, Paul Alfred Grützner

1

, Jochen Franke

1

, and Vetter Sven

1

1

BG Klinik Ludwigshafen, Ludwigshafen, Germany

Background: Intraoperative cone beam CT (CBCT) imaging in dorsal
instrumentation facilitates pedicle screw positioning. However, this effect
may be reduced due to artifacts that affect image quality in patients with
obesity. The purpose of this study was to evaluate whether intraoperative
CBCT leads to an improved postoperative screw position independent of body
weight. Materials and Methods: A total of 71 patients (18
patients with a BMI > 30 kg/m2, 53 patients with a BMI < 30
kg/m2) who underwent dorsal instrumentation with
intraoperative CBCT imaging were included in study groups one (SG1) and two
(SG2). In SG1, 128 pedicle screws were implanted, compared with 361 in SG2.
Patient BMI was defined according to the WHO recommendations. The pedicle
screw position in postoperative computed tomography was assessed using the
Gertzbein-Robbins classification. Results: In SG1 (BMI > 30
kg/m2), a total of 107 (83.6%) pedicle screws showed no
relevant perforation (type A + B), and 21 (16.4%) pedicle screws showed
relevant perforation (type C – E) in the postoperative computed tomography.
In SG2 (BMI < 30 kg/m2), 328 (90.9%) screws were classified as
type A + B, and 33 (9.1%) screws were classified as type C – E in the
postoperative computed tomography. There were significant differences
between the values of SG1 and SG2 (p = 0.03). Conclusion: The
included patients with obesity showed significantly worse pedicle screw
positions postoperatively after dorsal instrumentation with intraoperative
CBCT imaging than the included normal-weight patients. Consequently, obesity
seems to have a negative effect on the postoperative pedicle screw position
after dorsal instrumentation despite intraoperative CBCT imaging.
Keywords: spine, dorsal instrumentation, pedicle screw, cone-beam CT,
patients with obesity, BMI.

## 257

## P611: Fragile lumbar chance fracture in patients with ankylosing
spondylitis- Right or wrong for surgical indication

Takahiro Iizuka

1

, Tetsuro Takai

1

, Tokuji Kashiro

1

, and Hiroshige Debata

1

1

Orthopedic Spine Surgery, Kouseikai Takai Hospital, Nara,
Japan

Introduction: Chance Fracture is Classified as Type B1-3 (AO
spine Classification System). This fracture is considered to be a failure of
the whole vertebral column caused by high-energy flexion or extension force.
We experienced 4 patients with Fragile Chance Fracture with ankylosing
spondylitis and also osteoporosis. Osteoporotic vertebral compression
fractures are common fractures as fragile fractures in elderlies. Chance
Fractures with Ankylosing Spine are challenging against conservative
therapies which frequently resulted in non-union. This type of fracture
requires surgical fixation in the early stage of its onset.
Aims: We reported unwonted Fragile Chance Fracture in
patients with Ankylosing Spondylitis and Osteoporosis in extremely elder
patients. We would like to discuss the indications and significance of
Fragile Chance Fractures in extremely elder patients from these patients.
Results and Cases Reports: We experienced Four patients
from 2016-2022 with this TypeB1 fractures. Average age 83 (81-87). All of
them were male and also caused by a fragile fall on the floor, not by
high-energy trauma i.e. traffic accident. All patients were treated with
vertebral plasty using HA sticks, posterior local bone plantations, and
posterior instrumentations 2 above and 2 below of fractured site. Operation
time was 1.5-2 hours and Blood loss was less than 200 ml. All patients were
relieved from intractable pain and discharged within 2-3 weeks. EVENITY
(romosozumab aqqg from AMGEN) was applied to all patients.
Discussions: First of all, we should discuss the surgical
indications for extremely elder patients in aging societies. Unwonted trauma
in the elderly should be treated quickly (data from hip fractures) and also
less invasive in terms of surgical time and blood loss. Fragile Chance
fracture in ankylosing spine is one of the most intractable vertebral
fractures which resulted in prolonged pain and delayed neural damage.
Especially in elderlies, surgical timing loss would sometimes result in loss
of life expectancy. We suggest a quick decision for surgical treatment if
they would be tolerable for surgical stress of 1.5-2 hours and 200ml blood
loss. The delayed surgical indication would spoil all the results in Fragile
Chance Fractures in elderlies.

## 838

## P612: Acute management of spinal cord injury: a retrospective analysis
from a Portuguese referral centre

Rita Faria

1

, Sara Diniz

2

, Carolina Luísa Lemos

1

, and Ricardo Rodrigues-Pinto

2

1

Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar, Portugal

2

Orthopaedic Department, Centro Hospitalar Universitário do Porto,
Portugal

Introduction: Acute spinal cord injury entails significant
impairment in patients’ quality of life and elevated financial costs to the
healthcare system and society. Early access to specialized care and surgical
decompression within 24 hours post-injury have been associated with improved
outcomes and are, therefore, currently recommended. Centro Hospitalar
Universitário do Porto holds a dedicated Spinal Unit which has a rota
through the year that designates an on-call spine surgeon to treat spine and
spinal cord injury patients. Nevertheless, data regarding the timing of
treatment of these patients is not documented. The aim was to characterize
patients with spinal cord injury that underwent surgery at Centro Hospitalar
Universitário do Porto and their pathway to definitive care post-injury.
Material and Methods: A single-centre retrospective study
was performed. Adult patients with pre-operative diagnosis of traumatic
spinal injuries that underwent surgery at Centro Hospitalar Universitário do
Porto over the course of 4 years were identified and classified with
baseline American Spinal Injury Association Impairment Scale grades, which
were reassessed after a year. The times of first hospital admission, arrival
at the site of definitive care and surgery were collected. Patients were
classified by injury mechanism, anatomical level of injury, neurological
injury, admissions at intermediate hospitals and timings of surgery. The
relationship between severity of neurological injury and time to surgery was
evaluated. Results: 208 patients were included, most of whom
were males. Falls were responsible for the majority of injuries. 33.7% of
the patients had neurological deficits, 37.1% of which had the worst pattern
level (ASIA A). 40 (57.1%) patients with neurological injuries were first
admitted at an intermediate hospital. 44 (63.8%) were submitted to surgery
in the first 12 hours, 10 (14.5%) between 12-24 hours and 15 (21.7%) after
24 hours. Patients with more severe neurological injuries were operated
significantly faster (p < 0.001). Conclusion: Admissions at
intermediate hospitals represent a potentially modifiable system-related
cause for delays. Based on these results perhaps an effort should be made in
order to create a streamlined path to definitive care for patients with
acute spinal cord injury.

## 892

## P613: Hitting the target: bullseye trauma in motor vehicle
accidents

Aisha Jeffers

1

, Georgina Crate

1

, Simon Weil

1

, Dimitrios Teslios

1

, Mohamed Abdalla

1

, Bisola Ajayi

1

, Jason Bernard

1

, Timothy Bishop

1

, and Darren Lui

1

1

Neurosciences, St. Georges Hospital, London, United Kingdom

Introduction: A ‘bullseye injury’ is a colloquial term in the UK
for a head injury involving impact to a structure, typically a windscreen,
with the shatter pattern similar to that of a target. The patient can be
either internal or external to the vehicle that has been hit. It is a
colloquial term with a heterogenous variety of mechanism of injury often
insinuating a significant injury severity score (ISS). To the authors
knowledge there are no studies characterising the Orthopaedic injuries and
identifying the prevalence of head and spinal injuries associated with
bullseye trauma. Methods: A retrospective study reviewed a
major trauma centre prospectively collected database between 31/10/2017 and
16/03/2020 searching for the term ‘bullseye’. Identification of head and
spinal injuries were examined. Velocity of injury, type of fractures
sustained and accompanying injuries were assessed. The injury severity score
(ISS) was also calculated for all patients. Results: 129
patients were identified with 102 patients having complete records for
review. The categories were Pedestrians (n = 60), cyclists (n = 14),
motorcyclists (n = 15) and car (n = 13). All patients underwent Full body
Trauma CT scans. The mean ISS was 9.2 and for motorbike injuries 13.5.
Severe injury is denoted ISS > 15 with external bullseye traumas occurred
in pedestrians (20%), cyclists (21%), motorbikes (21%) whereas patients with
internal bullseye injuries within the car was only 7%. Mortality occurrences
were 5% in pedestrians and 7% in cyclists. 4.6% of patients presenting with
a bullseye injury sustained spinal injuries. These patients were all male,
mean age 52.6 (range 57y – 74y). As a whole, the majority of patients were
pedestrians struck by cars (58%) followed by motorcyclists (16%). Therefore
the predominant mechanism in this group of patients was noted to be an
external bullseye injury (83%). Of those patients, all sustained concomitant
axial skeleton fractures with 50% being adjacent spinal segment fractures.
33% of spinal fractures were isolated fractures, with multiple fractures
being seen in 66% of cases. The majority of the fractures sustained were
noted to be stable (83%), with 0% requiring surgical fixation. C spine
injuries occurred in: Pedestrians (1%), Cyclists (14%), Motorcyclists (0%)
and Cars (15%). Head Injuries occurred in: Pedestrians (23%), Cyclists
(21%), Motorcyclists (6%) and Cars (7%). Conclusions:
‘Bullseye’ injuries have a variety of mechanisms where patients are internal
or external to the motor vehicle when they strike the windscreen. Severe
Injuries ISS > 15 occur 1 in 5 of all external mechanisms. Head and
cervical spine injuries constitute 15% pedestrians, 35% cyclists, 6%
motorcyclists and 22% motor vehicles. The spinal injuries reported were most
commonly stable. With 0% requiring surgical fixation. Of the patients with
concomitant head injuries, 60% were reported to have intracranial
haemorrhage. Decompression was not required in any of these cases. 5-7% of
pedestrian or cyclists having this injury will be fatal.

## 919

## P614: Spontaneos epidural hematoma. A case report

Luiz Claudio Rodrigues

1

, Fernanda Andrea Navarro

2

, Rodrigo Nakao

2

, and Nathalia Adelina Pereira

2

1

Ortopedia Surgery, Santa Marcelina School of Medicine, São Paulo,
Brazil

2

Spine Surgery, Hospital Santa Marcelina, São Paulo, Brazil

I.O.P, 15 years old, female. Patient has a history of pain in the thoracic
region that started 15 days ago. As a triggering factor, he relates the fact
that his sister cracked his back. She reports progressive worsening of pain,
associated with difficulty walking for 2 days. Physical examination at the
time of admission showed Frankel D, deficit in plantar flexion and
dorsiflexion of the LLL, paresthesia at T10 and T12 levels and sphincter
dysfunction (urinary and fecal retention). The patient had a personal
history of a previous diagnosis of scoliosis.
An MRI was performed prior to admission, which showed an expansive extradural
lesion at the level of C7 with extensions of the right neural foramina in
D2-D3, D3-D4 and D4-D5 and of the left neural foramina in D3-D4 and D4-D5.
Diffusely heterogeneous lesion promoting compression of the adjacent spinal
cord.
Over the course of 48 hours hospitalized, the patient progresses to LL
strength grade 2 and anesthesia in the territory of L5 and S1.
Operated on the fifth day of hospitalization. At the time of surgery, she had
absent sensitivity and strength in the lower limbs.
Laminectomy with decompression of the spinal canal is indicated. During the
surgical procedure, there was no evidence of the presence of structural
tumor or vascular lesions. The anatomopathological examination showed that
it was a hematoma.
Postoperatively, the presence of hypoesthesia in the region of L5 and S1 in
the lower limbs with absent motor strength was evaluated.
At the time of discharge, he had Frankel E in the upper limbs, Frankel B in
the lower limbs, sensitivity preserved in the lower limbs and extension of
the hallux present in the LLL and D.
Returns to the outpatient clinic 3 weeks after hospital discharge with
satisfactory evolution, without intercurrences, return of sensitivity,
bladder and sphincter control. Presenting gradual return of muscle
strength.
Two and a half months after the surgical procedure, the patient is seen again
in an outpatient clinic, showing maintenance of sphincter control. Already
in gait training with a walker.
In the last visit to the medical clinic, 4 months after the surgery, the
patient continues to perform gait training, being able to take a few steps
without assistance.

## 964

## P615: Floating spine and other types of associated multiple simultaneuos
unstable vertebral fractures. Descriptive study

Guillermo Ricciardi

1,2

, Lyanne Romero Valverde

2

, Santiago Formaggin

1,2

, Ignacio Gabriel Garfinkel

1,2

, Gabriel Genaro Carrioli

1,2

, and Daniel Oscar Ricciardi

1

1

Spine Team - Traumatology and Orhopaedics, Centro Médico Fitz Roy,
Ciudad de Buenos Aires, Argentina

2

Spine Team - Traumatology and Orthopaedics, Sanatorio Güemes, Ciudad
de Buenos Aires, Argentina

Introduction: The association of two non-contiguous unstable
vertebral fractures is rare with only a few previous publications, limited
to case reports or brief case series. The association of two non-contiguous
vertebral fracture dislocations has received different names in the
literature including “in bloc” dislocation and “floating spine”. We aim to
present a series of patients with associated multiple and simultaneous
unstable vertebral fractures (Type B or C). Material and
Methods: Descriptive study of patients with high-energy spinal
cord trauma and associated multiple unstable and simultaneous vertebral
fractures during the period January/2015 to January/2021. Patients with type
B (ligament injury) and/or type C (subluxation/dislocation) multiple
vertebral fractures were included. Patients with incomplete medical records,
osteoporotic or pathological fractures and follow-up of less than 3 months
were excluded. Demographic and clinical data was registered considering
trauma mechanism, spine region, classification, floating spine injury type,
pre- and postoperative neurological status according to ASIA disability
scale, associated injuries and comorbidities, surgical approach,
instrumentation levels involved, complications, radiographic and clinical
evolution. Results: We registered 5 patients (1 woman and 4
men) with two simultaneous unstable vertebral fractures, including 4 cases
(80%) of non-contiguous fractures and 3 (60%) with 2 simultaneous
non-contiguous fracture dislocations (“floating spine”); 2 (40%) cases
presented the association of a type B fracture with a type C. The median age
was 35 years (23-49). All cases suffered from high-energy trauma with
associated injuries. All patients were treated surgically by conventional
posterior approach, reduction and long arthrodesis. Neurological recovery
was confirmed in 2 patients. Surgery-related complications were recorded in
2 (40%) cases. 1 patient with surgical site hematoma with ambulatory
drainage (negative cultures) and 1 case of "floating spine" with incomplete
reduction of the proximal fracture-dislocation. Conclusion: We
present a case series of multiple simultaneous unstable vertebral fractures
(type B or C) due to high-energy trauma. A rare injury association, with
high morbidity related to spinal, systemic and neurological trauma. In
addition to the well-known association of simultaneous type C fractures
(floating spine), we describe the association of type B (B2 or B3) with type
C fractures as a variant of non-contiguous and simultaneous unstable
vertebral injuries.

## 979

## P616: Invasive intrathecal devices for monitoring of the spinal cord cord
perfussion pressure: systematic review

Som Singh

1

, Miguel Ruiz Cardozo

1

, Gabriel Trevino Verastegui

1

, Julio Jauregui

2

, Samuel Brehm

1

, Karma Barot

1

, Abby Carey-Ewend

1

, Ahmed Hanafy

1

, Michael Kann

1

, Matthew De la Paz

1

, Michael Olufawo

1

, Magalie Cadieux

1

, and Camilo Molina

1

1

Neurosurgery

2

Orthopaedic Surgery, Washington University, St. Louis, United
States

Introduction: It is well-known that systemic hypotension after
spinal cord injury (SCI) contributes to cord ischemia, but also aggressive
mean arterial pressure (MAP) management can favor secondary injury to the
spinal cord. Let alone, this requirement requires clinical consideration of
complications related to vasopressor usage in the attempt to maintain target
MAP which could make the consideration that direct MAP augmentation could be
cumbersome compared to alternative hemodynamic mechanisms. In lieu of the
problems of using MAP to guide the acute perfusion needs of the spinal cord,
methods for monitoring the spinal cord perfusion pressure (SCPP) to guide
hemodynamic management of SCI in the setting of SCI. The objective of this
study was to identify the health effects of using different invasive
intrathecal device. Material and Methods: An electronic
database search was conducted for studies that evaluated intrathecal devices
to monitor the spinal cord perfusion, their health effects properties and
adverse events. Data extracted included study design, patient population,
characteristics of the intrathecal device, health effects details, as well
as rates of adverse events. The ROB2 and the ROBINS-I rating scales were
used to assess the risk of bias of the reported health effects.
Results: Out search yielded 3,919 unique citations, 23 of
which met the eligibility criteria and were summarized in this study. 8
studies (7 observational and 1 randomized clinical trial) evaluated the
effects of lumbar drain catheter. These studies found that episodes of SCPP
< 50 mmHg were associated with failure to achieve neurological
improvement by at least one AIS grade after 6 months at follow up (OR 0.9, p
0.031). In addition, clinical adherence to the target perfusion range of 65
mm Hg was positively related to neurological improvement by at least one
ASIA grade. These studies did not reported any major adverse events. 15
studies assessed the effect of a Codman pressure probe inserted at the site
of injury. These group of studies informed that the SCPP values at
90-100mmHg are associated with the best ASIA recovery at 9-12 months (OR
1.039, p 0.002). These studies reported a 7% incidence of persistent CSF
leakage requiring revision after device insertion. The risk of bias among
all included studies ranged from low-to-serious risk of bias across all
domains. Conclusion: We found two approaches to measure the
spinal cord perfusion pressure: via lumbar catheter drains and Codman
pressure probes inserted at the site of injury. The included studies overall
showed positive correlation between SCPP measurement and neurological
improvement post-injury, however due to the moderate to high risk of bias of
the studies it is difficult to ascertain the true health effects of these
interventions. Monitoring SCPP with a Codman probe has value to monitor
physiological changes close to the site of injury, however requires a
duroplasty procedure; lumbar drains can be easily inserted but have the
disadvantage of not being close to the site of injury. Further investigation
is needed to clarify the true effects of these interventions, optimal
set-up, required infrastructure, clarify the risk, benefits and
alternatives.

## 993

## P617: Multi-state modeling for prediction of neurological recovery in
ASIA A spinal cord injury

Ali Moghaddamjou

1

, Alex Bak

2

, Jefferson Wilson

1

, and Michael Fehlings

1

1

Neurosurgery, University of Toronto, Canada

2

University of Toronto, Canada

Introduction: Predicting prognosis after a complete traumatic
Spinal Cord Injury (tSCI) has been challenging given varying disease
courses, clinical histories, and patient populations. To improve our
understanding of tSCI and enhance the clinical prediction of outcomes we
propose to model disease progression, transition probabilities, and patient
characteristics. Material and Methods: Patients with ASIA A
injury were identified from 3 prospective, multi-center datasets. A-priori
we identified age, injury region, and early surgery as covariates in our
analyses. The mstate statistical package in R was utilized to develop
flexible Markov models of disease progression. Covariate effects were
estimated using Cox regression without any proportionality assumption.
Results: We identified 943 ASIA A tSCI patients with a
total conversion of 34.36% from ASIA A. The cumulative hazard ratio plot
overtime reveals an exponential relationship in all transition groups
illustrating the time-dependent impact on transition intensities. The injury
region was a significant independent predictor of ASIA grade conversion.
Conclusion: We demonstrate that multi-state models can
successfully be applied to the progression of tSCI as measured by the
transition of AIS grades of AIS A patients. These results support early
aggressive treatment for ASIA A patients and consideration of patient
trajectories and injury region in decision making.

## 1080

## P618: Posterior spinal fusion and instrumentation of the adjacent
vertebrae fracture in an elderly female patient following spinal fusion
surgery using a computer - Assisted rod bending system: a case
report

Teck Siang Lim

1

, Shangeetha Tarmalinggam

1

, Fadzrul Abbas Mohamed Ramlee

1

, Mohd Hezery Harun

1

, Chor Ngee Tan

2

, and Kung Lung Tiong

2

1

Orthopedic, Hospital Pengajar Universiti Putra Malaysia, Serdang,
Malaysia

2

Orthopedic, Hospital Putrajaya, Putrajaya, Malaysia

Introduction: Adjacent segment disease is highly seen in
postoperative patients due to its increased rigidity over the mobile segment
next to a spinal fusion. Common complications reported following a lumbar or
lumbosacral spinal fusion surgery includes disc degeneration, listhesis,
instability, hypertrophic facet joint, arthritis, herniated nucleus pulposus
and stenosis. However, vertebrae spinal fractures are not commonly seen in
spinal fusion surgery, exception of cases in post-menopausal women.
Case Report: 80 years old Chinese lady, known case of
adenocarcinoma of the gallbladder which was diagnosed in 2020, and
laparotomy cholecystectomy was done. Patient was referred to the Orthopaedic
department at Hospital Putrajaya for L1 osteoporotic vertebrae fracture
following posterior spinal instrumentation and fusion. She was initially
presented to a private centre in early 2022 for L3 osteoporotic vertebrae
fracture. Patient was treated with Posterior Spinal Instrumentation and
Fusion (PSIF) L2-S1 and decompression. Post operatively, the patient’s
symptoms resolved and was subsequently discharged home. However, one-month
after the fusion surgery she had a trivial fall at home in sitting position.
Post trauma she was complaining of localized pain over her upper back. There
was a significant tenderness over the L1 region. Bilateral lower limb
myotome and dermatome was preserved. Reflex and tone were normal.
Lumbosacral x-ray revealed adjacent vertebrae compression fracture at L1.
MRI scan of the lumbosacral revealed L1 compression fracture with diffuse
disc bulge causing stenosis over the spinal canal and neural foramen at
L1/L2. Patient was planned for extension Posterior spinal instrumentation
and fusion using computer assisted bending system under general anaesthesia.
Longitudinal midline skin incision made from T9 to S1 to remove the old
rods. Fenestrated percutaneous pedicle screws inserted over T10, T11 and T12
vertebrae with the guidance of C-arm and augmentation done. Rod bending was
done using a computer assisted rod bending system. Pre-bend rods was
inserted connecting the pedicle screws from T10 to S1. Rods tightened and
crosslink inserted. Discussion: There is a high risk of
kyphotic collapse in elderly patients with severe osteoporotic vertebrae
fracture in view of diminished back muscle power to maintain the spinal
alignment. Failure of conservative treatment and unresolve symptoms such as
pain generally directed to surgical intervention. The biggest challenges
faced during the fixation of osteoporotic vertebrae fracture is screw pull
out. The cement augmented pedicle screws also aimed to provide better
stability. In long segment spinal fixation, approximation of the length of
the rod with adequate rod contouring is very difficult. Bending of the rod
using the computer assisted technique rod curves perfectly matches each
screw head where there will be accurate placement decrease the shear of the
screw-bone interface. This computer assisted system also compatible to use
with other system. Conclusion: Computer assisted rod bending
system in posterior spinal fusion and instrumentation surgery with
fenestrated screw in an osteoporotic vertebra is an effective approach to
achieve adequate spinal stability, especially in long segment spinal
fixation during revision surgery. It also marked reduce the shear force at
the pedicle screw bone interface.

## 1098

## P619: Surgical management of neglected complex sacral fractures by
lumbopelvic fixation

Alderico Girão Campos de Barros

1

, Luiz Felippe Mokdeci Martins de Oliveira

1

, Igor Ebert Cechin

1

, and Luis Eduardo Carelli Texeira da Silva

1

1

Instituto Nacional de Traumatologia e Ortopedia Jammil Haddad
(INTO), ARCOL, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil

Introduction: To evaluate the surgical indications,
epidemiological data, radiographic outcomes and postoperative complications
of a series of 16 cases of complex neglected sacral fractures treated using
bilateral spinopelvic fixation (BSF) or triangular osteosynthesis (TO) in a
traumatology and orthopedics referral center. Material and
Methods: Longitudinal study, based on a retrospective review of
medical records of patients with complex sacral fractures admitted between
2014 and 2020. All patients older than 18 years and whose time of evolution
between trauma and the surgical procedure was equal or greater than three
weeks were included. Results: The mean age was 39.8 years (18
to 71 years). Anterior pelvic ring injuries represented the most common
association, present in 12 (75%) cases. In 8 (50%) cases there was no
neurological injury, 1 (6.2%) individual evolved with paresthesia, 2 (12.5%)
with paresis in the lower limbs and 5 (31.3%) with sphincter dysfunctions.
Among the patients with neurological impairment, 4 (50%) evolved with
complete improvement, 2 (25%) showed partial improvement and 2 (25%) cases
remained with the deficit. The mean surgical time was 3.6 hours for TO and
4.9 hours for BSF. Postoperative complications occurred in 4 (44.4%)
patients who underwent BSF and there were no postoperative complications in
the TO group. The minimum follow-up was 18 months and all the individuals
analyzed showed good evolution. Conclusion: The surgical
management of neglected complex sacral fractures using TO and BSF proved to
be safe and effective. Indirect or direct decompression, even in neglected
injuries point to an improvement in the neurological status.

## 1240

## P620: Traumatic spinal injury patterns of on vs. off-road motorcycle
crashes

Ryland McDermott

1

, Toure Vashon

1

, Brett Allen

1

, James Clark

1

, Gregory Daubs

1

, Iain Elliott

1

, Michael Daubs

1

, and Sukanta Maitra

1

1

Orthopaedic Surgery, Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine at UNLV, Las
Vegas, United States

Introduction: Two-wheel motorized vehicles used in both street
transportation and recreation are a common cause of severe injury in the
United States (US). To date, there has been minimal data describing the
spinal injury patterns among these motorcycle injury patients in the US. The
goal of this study is to characterize and compare differences in injury
patterns of patients sustaining traumatic spinal injuries after motocross
and motorcycle collisions in the southwestern US at a level 1 trauma center.
Material and Methods: Trauma registry data was queried for
patients sustaining a spinal injury after motorcycle collision from
2010-2019 at a single level 1 trauma center. CT scan and MRI reports from
initial trauma evaluation were reviewed and data was manually obtained
regarding injury morphology and location. Results: A total of
1798 injuries were identified in 549 patients who sustained a motorcycle
collision. 67 were involved in off-road motorcycle accidents compared to 482
road motorcycle patients. Off-road motorcycle patients were found to be
significantly younger (34.75 vs 42.66, p = 0.00015). The thoracic spine was
the most commonly injured vertebral segment in both cohorts. Transverse
process fractures and compression fractures were the most common injury
morphologies. Conclusion: All motorcycle collision patients
were more likely to be male, while patients sustaining spinal injury after
an off-road motorcycle collision were more likely to be younger in age
compared to street bikes. The thoracic spine was the most commonly injured
vertebral segment. The most common injury morphologies were transverse
process and compression fractures.

## 1426

## P621: A retrospective analysis of concomitant spinal injuries in the
setting of polytrauma at a tertiary hospital in Singapore

Theophilus Qiu

1

, Cassie Yang

2

, Shermane Lim

1

, and Zhi Xu Ng

3

1

Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, Medical Student, National
University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore

2

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Singapore General Hospital,
Singapore, Singapore

3

Department of General Surgery, Khoo Teck Puat Hospital, Singapore,
Singapore

Introduction: Polytrauma involving multiple organ systems is a
pertinent health concern. In particular, traumatic spinal injuries are often
observed in polytrauma, with serious consequences to patients’ quality of
life and significant healthcare burden. Due to its complexity, there are
limited studies analysing the population of spinal injuries in polytrauma in
Singapore. This study aims to retrospectively evaluate a cohort of
polytrauma patients and characterise the relationship between the presence
of traumatic spinal injury and clinical outcomes. Material and
Methods: A retrospective cohort of patients who presented to the
emergency department for multi-system trauma was assembled from a local
trauma database at a tertiary hospital in Singapore, from January 2012 to
June 2020. Variables analysed were presence of concomitant spine injury,
mechanism of injury, injury severity score (ISS), gender, age, ethnicity and
year of admission. Outcomes were mortality, length of stay and cost.
Results: 1568 patients involved in multisystemic trauma
were identified for this study. It was observed that 27.2% (n = 427) had
concomitant spinal injuries, of which was most commonly due to falls (83.6%,
n = 357), followed by vehicular accidents (12.9%, n = 55). Percentage of
falls as primary injury mechanism increased from 25.9% in the 21- to
30-years-old age range to 96.4% in the 81- to 90-year-old age range.
Meanwhile, the percentage of vehicular accidents as primary injury mechanism
decreased from 67.8% in the 21- to 30-years-old age range to 3.2% in the 81-
to 90-year-old age range. Notably, the mortality rate of patients with spine
injuries (2.6%, n = 416, relative risk 0.17) was significantly lower than
those without spine involvement (15.1%, n = 969, p < 0.001), with an
adjusted odds ratio for mortality of 0.25 (95%CI [0.11, 0.52], p <
0.001). The mean total length of stay was lower in patients with spinal
injuries 11.8 (14.6, p < 0.001) days (SD) compared to 16.0 (28.0) days in
patients without spinal injuries. Mean total hospital bill was lower in
patients with spinal injuries, at 8692 (13980, p < 0.001) Singapore
Dollars (SD), compared to patients without spinal injuries, at 16359
(30658). Conclusion: Spinal injury in the context of polytrauma
is not an independent predictor of poorer outcomes, as it has been observed
to have lower mortality compared to polytrauma patients without spinal
involvement. This may be attributed to the complex nature of polytrauma;
previous studies have found that high-energy traumatic injuries tend to be
associated with more independent living and mobility than low-energy
injuries, with the former having better functional outcomes post-injury.
Similarly, patients with spinal cord involvement in polytrauma, which
suggests a high-energy injury, may have greater functional demands and
subsequently better reserves, hence conferring better survivability.

## 1586

## P622: Correlation of neuropathic pain intensity and neurological recovery
in patients with spinal cord traumatic injury

Oleksii Nekhlopochyn

1

, Iaroslav Tsymbaliuk

2

, Vadim Verbov

2

, Ievgen Cheshuk

2

, and Milan Vorodi

2

1

Spinal Neurosurgery

2

Restorative Neurosurgery Department, Romodanov Neurosurgery
Institute, Kyiv, Ukraine

Introduction: Neuropathic pain is one of the main secondary
complications of spinal cord injury. The biological role of neuropathic pain
has not been established yet. This type of pain is formed directly in the
area of the spinal cord injury; therefore, it can be assumed that its
intensity can characterize both degenerative and reparative processes. The
aim of this work is to assess the possible relationship between the
intensity of neuropathic pain in patients with spinal cord injury and the
dynamics of neurological disorders regression. Material and
Methods: We performed a retrospective analysis of patients
applied to outpatient department of Romodanov Neurosurgery Institute of
National Academy of Medical Sciences of Ukraine in the period from 2010 to
2020 after surgical treatment of spine traumatic injury. The level of
neurological disorders and the intensity of neuropathic pain were assessed
within 5–7 and 11–13 months after surgery. Results: All 102
patients selected for analysis were divided into three groups depending on
the intensity of the registered pain sensations: 1) absence of constant pain
sensations - 19.6% of victims, 2) moderate pain - 56.9%, 3) severe
neuropathic pain – 23.5%. In the first group, the regression of neurological
disorders was 3.5 (95% confidence interval (CI) 2.15-6.15) points, in the
second - 25.0 (95% CI 24.14-29.58) points, in the third - 13.0 (95% CI
10.87-16.55) points. The differences are statistically significant (χ2 =
60.4, df = 2, p < 0.0001). In patients with severe neurological
disorders, the dynamics of recovery did not correlate with the pain
intensity. With ASIA B patients in group 1 the dynamics was 8.5 (95% CI
-10.56-27.56) points, in group 2 - 15.0 (95% CI 13.41-18.41) points, in the
3rd group - 10.5 (95% CI 7.45-14.89) points. In patients with functional
class ASIA C the difference is even more pronounced: in group 1, the median
was 8.0 (95% CI -0.83-20.83) points, in group 2 - 32.0 (95% CI 25.41-36.86)
points, in the third - 15.5 (95% CI 10.27-27.4) points. With ASIA D, a
similar trend was observed. Conclusion: The worst regression of
neurological disorders is observed in patients without clinically
significant pain, the best results of neurological dysfunction recovery are
in patients with moderate neuropathic pain.

## 1664

## P623: Clinical and radiological outcome of lumbopelvic fixation in Isler
class II and III unstable sacral fractures

Umair Nadeem

1

1

Department of Orthopedics and Spine Surgery, Ghurki Trust Teaching
Hospital, Lahore, Pakistan

Introduction: Many sacral fractures can be treated
non-operatively. Unstable sacral fractures, usually as part of pelvic ring
injury and those with neurological involvement need surgical fixation.
Iliosacral screws, tension band ilio-iliac plating and transiliac bars can
be used in sacral fractures not compromising the lumbosacral articulation
(Isler I). Fractures entering the L5-S1 facets (Isler II) and those entering
the lumbosacral spinal canal (Isler III) need lumbopelvic fixation for
proper biomechanical stability. Objective is to study the clinical and
radiological outcome of lumbopelvic fixation of Isler II and Isler III
unstable sacral fractures. Material and Methods: It was a
prospective cohort study at Ghurki Trust Teaching Hospital Lahore from Jan
2019 to December 2020. All patients with unstable Isler II and Isler III
sacral fractures were recruited for this study. All patients were submitted
to lumbopelvic fixation using a Posterior Triangular Osteosynthesis (PTO)
construct. Patients were evaluated clinically and radiologically, including
full lumbopelvic X-Rays and 3DCT scan at the pre- and postoperative period.
Clinical parameters included a full neurological examination, VAS, ODI.
Results: A total of 13 patients including 8 males and 5
females with mean age of 26 ± 9.4 years were recruited for this study. All
patients had either unstable sacral fractures, 7 had Isler II and 6 had
Isler III. Sacral fracture was part of a pelvic ring injury complex in 10
patients. Neurology was disturbed in 9 patients. The mean followup period
was 20.1 ± 9.6 months. The mean preoperative VAS improved from 9.2 ± 2.4 to
2.2 ± 1.3 postoperatively, while the mean preoperative ODI improved from
86.5 ± 5.6 to 14.5 ± 5.1 postoperatively. Fracture healing was complete
radiologically in all patients and none needed revision. Residual deformity
was present in 33% of the cases with no clinical import. 2 patients had
superficial SSI who were treated uneventfully with antibiotics.
Conclusion: Lumbopelvic fixation is a useful procedure in
the treatment of unstable Isler II and Isler III sacral fractures with
satisfactory clinical and radiological outcome.

## 1702

## P624: Hyperbaric oxygenation in complex therapy of spinal cord traumatic
injury

Oleksii Nekhlopochyn

1

, Igor Voronov

2

, and Vadim Verbov

3

1

Spinal Neurosurgery

2

Department of Hyperbaric Oxygenation

3

Restorative Neurosurgery Department, Romodanov Neurosurgery
Institute, Kyiv, Ukraine

Introduction: Spinal cord traumatic injury as resulting
persistent movement and sensory disorders is one of the most disabling
consequences of traumatic factor impact on the human body. Despite a large
number of experimental and clinical studies aimed at developing methods for
restoring lost functions, there is no solution to the problem that is
acceptable in terms of efficiency. One of the promising directions in the
treatment and rehabilitation of this category of patients is the use of
hyperbaric oxygenation (HBO). Experimental models have shown that HBO has a
neuroprotective effect in spinal cord injury, but the results of clinical
application of the method are still contradictory. Material and
Methods: Study design - pilot observational retrospective case -
control. For the analysis we used a database of patients with spinal cord
injury who were hospitalized at the Neurosurgery Institute named after acad.
A.P. Romodanov of National Academy of Medical Sciences of Ukraine in the
period from 2010 to 2020. When selecting a control for each clinical case,
the following factors were considered: gender, age, circumstances of injury,
type of damage to the osteoligamentous apparatus, level of neurological
deficit, degree of damage and compression of the spinal cord, time elapsed
from the moment of injury to surgery. We analyzed 28 "case ‒ control" pairs.
The main criterion for the effectiveness of therapy was the change in the
functional class according to the ASIA scale. Results: Positive
dynamics was registered in 57% of victims, including in the group of
patients receiving HBO therapy - in 71%, in the control group - in 43%. HBO
therapy in the postoperative period significantly affects the dynamics of
regression of neurological disorders (p = 0.0295). Odds ratio - 3.333 (95%
confidence interval - 1.098-10.116, p = 0.0335). The calculation of the odds
ratio, adjusted for additional analyzed factors, showed a more pronounced
efficiency - 4.519 (95% confidence interval - 1.279-15.962, p = 0.0192).
Conclusion: The obtained results indicate that usage of HBO
as a method of complex therapy for traumatic spinal cord injury is promising
for further study in order to determine the effectiveness of the method, the
optimal timing of treatment initiation in the postoperative period and its
duration.

## 1717

## P625: Some characteristics of pain in patients with chronic spinal cord
injury

Oleksii Nekhlopochyn

1

, Vadim Verbov

2

, Iaroslav Tsymbaliuk

2

, Milan Vorodi

2

, and Ievgen Cheshuk

2

1

Spinal Neurosurgery

2

Restorative Neurosurgery Department, Romodanov Neurosurgery
Institute, Kyiv, Ukraine

Introduction: Pain is one of the most common secondary symptoms
seen in patients with spinal cord injury (SCI). Approximately from 65 % to
85 % of all SCI patients complaining pain, with a third having
severe/excruciating pain. Despite the large number of studies, some aspects
that are fundamental for the choice of pain therapy remain practically
unexplored. The purpose of our study was to determine the types, subtypes
and intensity of pain in subaxial cervical spine SCI patients.
Material and Methods: We performed a retrospective analysis
of the patients’ database admitted in Romodanov Neurosurgery Institute of
National Academy of Medical Sciences of Ukraine in period from 2010 to 2020
with subaxial cervical spine traumatic injury. The patients’ state was
assessed within 12‒18 months after the injury. We determined the functional
class of neurological disorders using the ASIA scale. Pain sensations were
characterized using International Spinal Cord Injury Pain Classification.
Numeric Rating Scale was the instrument for pain intensity assessment.
Results: Persistent pain sensations in the period of 12‒18
months after subaxial cervical spine SCI are recorded in 86.42% of 81
analyzed victims, whereas one subtype of pain is noted in 38.57% of all
patients with pain, two subtypes ‒ 40% and three ‒ 21.43%. Elements of
noceptive pain were registered in 54.32% of all patients, and neuropathic
pain was recorded in 71.6 %. When assessing pain subtypes, musculoskeletal
pain was observed in 54.32% (95% CI: 44.44-66.16) of all subjects,
neuropathic pain at the trauma level in 51.85 % (95 % CI: 41.98-63.77), and
neuropathic pain below the trauma level was noted in 43.21% (95% CI:
33.33-54.91). Noceceptive visceral and other neuropathic pain was reported
sporadically ‒ in 4.94% (95% CI: 1.23-9.09) and 3.7 % (95% CI: 1.23-7.94)
patients, respectively. When comparing the nature of pain and the ASIA
functional class, we determined that the frequency pattern of the pain
distribution statistically significantly correlates with the level of
neurological disorders. The greatest intensity of pain was observed in
patients with the functional class ASIA C of neurological disorders.
Conclusion: The obtained results allowed us to reveal the
regularities of the clinical picture in patients with different levels of
neurological disorders, that is of practical importance for the development
of optimal pharmacological treatment schemas.

## 1852

## P626: Acute cauda equine syndrom induced by subdural lumbar hematoma
after spinal anesthesia

Eya Chahed

1

, Nessrine Nessib

1

, Nessrine Jemel

1

, Khalil Ghedira

1

, and Sofiene Bouali

1

1

Neurosurgery, National Institute of Neurology, Tunisia

Although spinal anesthesia is commonly used for many types of surgeries,
subdural lumbar hematoma is one of its rare complications. It is a serious
complication that is favored by the use of anticoagulant.
We, here, present a case of 81 year old man who had a surgery for an inguinal
hernia which was complicated by a scrotal hematoma for which he was operated
under spinal anesthesia. He had a history of persistent atrial fibrillation
and was on anticoagulants.
A day later, he developed lower limb paresthesia and motor deficit as well as
retention of urine.
A cerebral and spinal MRI was performed and showed a subarachnoid hemorrhage
and a spinal hematoma from D12 to L5.
He then underwent emergency surgery which consisted of a spinolaminectomy of
L1-1-3 extended to L4 in order to evacuate the compressive intra dural
hematoma.
He had not recovered from his deficit afterwards.
So although this complication is extremely rare, we as neurosurgeons and
physician in general, must keep in mind that it is a possible complication
of spinal anesthesia.

## 1909

## P627: Percutaneous transpedicular cervicothoracic fixation guided by 2D
fluoroscopy

Joao Oliveira

1

, Sara Sequeira

1

, and Ding Zhang

1

1

Neurocirurgia, Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Ocidental, Lisboa,
Portugal

Introduction: Subaxial cervical transpedicular fixation confers
a biomechanical advantage when compared to instrumentation to lateral
masses. However, it is a challenging technique due to the pedicles small
size and marked convergency, as well as the verterbral arteries close
proximity which leads to an increased risk of neurovascular complications.
Material and Methods: We present a clinical case of a C7-T1
fracture disclocation treated with percutaneous transpedicular fixation and
describe the surgical technique. Results: A 60-year-old-man,
with no relevant medical background, present to our emergency room with
cervical trauma after falling from a bicycle. He had no neurological
deficits. Computed tomography (CT) documented a C7-T1 fracture-dislocation
with grade I/IV anterolisthesis, associated with fracture of the lamina, C7
right pars interarticularis and T1 left pars interarticularis. The patient
underwent urgent surgery, initially with an anterior approach, with open
reduction and C7-T1 arthrodesis with intersomatic cage and plate. Given the
instability caused by a fracture of the pars interarticularis, the patient
underwent a second intervention, seven days later, through a posterior
approach with percutaneous transpedicular fixation of C7-D1 guided by 2D
fluoroscopy (C-arm). In a Concorde positioning, with the skull fixed with a
Mayfield, and pre-operation insurance of a good-quality views in the
anteroposterior, lateral and oblique planes. This last view is essential for
the proper positioning of the transpedicular screws, and the C-arm rotation
was established according to the preoperative study of the convergence angle
of the pedicles to introduce the percutaneous cannula. The percutaneous
entry point was established in the oblique view, after obtaining a perfectly
circular shape of the pedicle contour, and the incision was made at the
point of projection on the skin in the center of this circle. The four
pedicles were progressively cannulated under fluoroscopic support,
alternating between orthogonal and oblique views. The remaining percutaneous
instrumentation technique was the usual. There were no complications and the
control CT showed adequate positioning of the instrumentation and the
patient was discharged 72 hours after the operation, without neurological
deficits. Conclusion: Placement of subaxial cervical
transpedicular screws at the cervicothoracic junction is challenging, due to
its anatomical features and risk of significant neurovascular injury. In C7,
the vascular risk is lower due to the usual absence the vertebral artery at
this level, and the pedicle usually assumeslarger dimensions. With proper
preoperative planning and intraoperative imaging support, it is possible to
safely place transpedicular screws in this anatomical region. Minimally
invasive percutaneous approach allows for faster recovery and shorter
hospital stay.

## 1923

## P628: Extended cervical pneumorrachis due to closed head injury: report
of two cases and literature review

Zohra Souei

1

, Mohamed Boukhit

1

, Maher Hadhri

1

, Chiheb Abdelileh

1

, Ghassen Belkahla

1

, Kais Maamri

1

, and Mehdi Darmoul

1

1

Neurosurgery, Fattouma Bourguiba University Hospital, Monastir,
Tunisia

Introduction: Pneumorrachis (PR) is defined by the presence of
air in the spinal canal. Rarely reported, it can be secondary to
degenerative, infectious, tumoral, or iatrogenic pathologies and is
exceptionally caused by head trauma. Material and Methods: We
report two cases of polytrauma patients with PR and discuss the causes,
mechanisms, and implications of this condition. Furthermore, a literature
review was carried out. Results: In these 2 cases, PR was
accidentally found during CT diagnostics and remained asymptomatic. One
patient had a combination of epidural and subarachnoidal PR and had
developed a CSF leak. PR has been described at the cervical level as an
extension of pneumocephalus secondary to craniofacial trauma with a fracture
of the skull base or the paranasal sinuses. Most often, air collection is
epidural. But it can also extend, by meningeal breach, into the subarachnoid
space, which exposes to an increased risk of meningitis estimated at 25%. As
a result, PR is considered a marker of severity and its presence should
alarm the attending physician to look for other associated lesions,
particularly the possibility of a CSF leak, which may require intervention.
Conclusion: Pneumorrachis is a rare entity and has a wide
variety of etiologies. Rarely causing neurological symptoms, its presence is
often diagnosed by CT, which is very effective in detecting PR and
specifying its extent and starting point in order to discuss the adequate
treatment.

## 1928

## P629: Our experience of damage control principle of acute spinal cord
injury in polytraumatized patients

Oleksii Nekhlopochyn

1

 and Yurii Pedachenko

2

1

Spinal Neurosurgery

2

Department of Miniinvasive and Laser Spinal Neurosurgery, Romodanov
Neurosurgery Institute, Kyiv, Ukraine

Introduction: The last few decades are characterized by a
significant change in the structure and nature of traumatic injuries in the
adult population with a pronounced tendency to increase high-energy damage.
The progressive increase in the number of road traffic accidents, natural
and man-made disasters, industrial injuries and the active development of
military conflicts leads to the fact that polytrauma is the leading cause of
death for the young and most active population. The purpose of our study was
to analyze the effectiveness of a two-stage Damage Control surgery in
treatment of spinal cord injury in patients with severe polytrauma.
Material and Methods: We have performed a retrospective
analysis of 75 patients therapy results. All patients had Injury Severity
Score > 17, neurological disorders ASIA A-C and unstable fracture or
fracture-dislocation regardless of injury level. Patients were divided into
3 groups depending on the timing and extent of surgical treatment: first
group – patients, whose surgical treatment was delayed until the relative
stabilization of somatic status, therapy was carried out on the principle of
“too sick to operate on”; second group - patients initially hospitalized in
a specialized center, whose assistance was provided timely and totally -
“Early total care” group; and the third group of patients - neurosurgical
care was carried out in stages, in accordance with the principles of Damage
Control. Neurological disorders regression, mortality and duration of
intensive therapy were analyzed. Results: Patients with delayed
surgery demonstrate the worst recovery rates of neurological deficits. Early
one-stage decompression-fusion surgery ensures better regression of
neurological disorders, but is characterized by a sufficiently high level of
mortality and duration of intensive therapy. The group of patients who
underwent staged surgical treatment is characterized with the best values of
the analyzed parameters. Conclusion: Damage Control approach
provides the best results in therapy for spinal cord injuries in patients
with polytrauma.

## 1959

## P630: Development and validation of method to asses traumatic compression
of spinal canal

Oleksii Nekhlopochyn

1

, Ievgenii Slynko

1

, Vadim Verbov

2

, and Yurii Derkach

1

1

Spinal Neurosurgery

2

Restorative Neurosurgery Department, Romodanov Neurosurgery
Institute, Kyiv, Ukraine

Introduction: Mechanical compression of spinal canal resulted
with spine traumatic injury is the fundamental criteria in determining
treatment tactics and prognosis of neurological disorders regression.
Analysis of the literature data demonstrates the absence of a criterion that
allows us to characterize a morphologically heterogeneous substrate that
causes compression of the spinal cord. The purpose of our study was to
formulate a definition, develop and perform a validation of radiologic
criteria for assessing the sagittal size of the morphologically heterogenic
ventrally located traumatic substrates of spinal canal. Material and
Methods: Literature analysis revealed the existing indices and
methods for measuring the value of spinal canal compression, as well as the
clinical significance of the nature and value of compression of the spinal
cord with a traumatic substrate. For the initial verification of the
reliability of the method for assessing a ventrally located traumatic
substrate, a retrospective analysis of neuroimaging data of 150 patients
with traumatic changes in the cervical spine was performed. The data of
X-ray films, computer and magnetic resonance tomograms was analyzed. The
measurements were carried out by three independent experts.
Results: The definition of compressing factor has been
developed, that implies a collective concept and reflects the general
characteristics of pathological anatomical substrates caused by damage to
the vertebral motion segment, leading to deformation of the walls of the
spinal canal and, as a result, causing compression of the structures of the
spinal canal. For quantitative characterization, the sagittal size of the
compressing factor was measured, having an absolute metric value and
characterizing the relative degree of substrate displacement into the spinal
canal. The results obtained by statistical processing reveal high
reproducibility of the measurements. The concordance coefficient was 0.85 at
p = 0.00025. Conclusion: The presented radiographic criteria
should be used for the general characteristics of the clinical case, as well
as for statistical data processing in order to unify the idea of the degree
of spinal canal compression.

## 1965

## P631: "Spinopelvic dissociation" revisiting an ambiguous term: a
systematic review

Ahmed Hassan

1

1

Orthopedics and Trauma Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Assiut
University, Assiut, Egypt

Introduction: The term Spinopelvic Dissociation or jumper`s or
Suicidal fracture was initially defined in the 1960`s refers to “the
presence of bilateral vertical sacral fracture lines associated with a
transverse fracture line” leading to total separation between the axial
skeleton and the pelvis. However, by time, more classifications were
developed, and more sacral fractures patterns were described in the
literature adding to the complexity of the term. Additionally, over the past
couple of years, more light was shed on the spine-pelvis relation, which
makes restricting the term to this fracture pattern unjustified and out of
date. Material and Methods: A systematic review was conducted
within the framework of the Cochrane Back and Neck Group and reported
according to PRISMA guidelines. All types of study designs were included in
the systematic review. We included studies on sacral fractures in skeletally
mature patients (older than 18 years old) where at least one definition of
the term spinopelvic dissociation was reported. Additionally, studies on
pathological fractures and non-English articles were excluded. Two reviewers
independently performed the screening and selection against the inclusion
and exclusion criteria. The initial screening involved screening the titles
and abstracts of the identified articles. In case of disagreement between
the two reviewers, the article was included for the full text assessment.
The full texts were obtained and assessed and in case of disagreement
between the two reviewers during the full-text assessment, the article was
assessed by a senior reviewer who made the final decision. The search
strategy included both electronic searches and backward and forward
snowballing of the finally included articles to retrieve as many relevant
studies as possible. The electronic searches were conducted on two
databases: PubMed and Scopus libraries using both controlled vocabularies
and free text forms. Search was conducted from the date of database
inception till 1/9/2022. Risk of bias (ROB) of the included studies was
assessed using the JBI ROB assessment tool. Results: Our
initial search yielded 108 deduplicated articles. Then after further
exclusion by the titles and abstracts and later on by full text reading 67
articles meeting the inclusion and exclusion criteria were finally included
for inclusion in the study. Regarding the definition included in the finally
selected articles, although most of them refer to the original definition
and still use the same term “Spinopelvic dissociation”, most of them
describe other fracture patterns beside the original pattern regardless of
the classification system used. This in turn makes the use of the original
term in-applicable. Conclusion: As a result of the
heterogeneity and inconsistency encountered in describing these complex and
rare fracture pattern, we suggest that the term “Spinopelvic dissociation”
should be replaced with a broader term “Traumatic Spinopelvic Instability”.
This term will encompass all complete vertical sacral fracture patterns
whether unilateral or bilateral, passing medial or lateral to the L5-S1
facet joint.

## Tumors

## 199

## P632: Patient related factors are the best predicting tool for the
overall survival after the surgery in patients with spinal
metastasis

Anton Denisov

1

, Nikita Zaborovskii

2

, Dmitry Ptashnikov

2,3

, and Ghasan Elgeadi

1

1

Orthopaedic Department, Hospital Quironsalud San José, Madrid,
Spain

2

Spinal and Bone Oncology, Vreden Orthopaedic Center,
Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation

3

Traumatology and Orthopaedics, North Western Medical University of
Mechnikov I.I, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation

Introduction: Oncologic treatments increase the incidence of
spinal metastases. Surgical treatment of spinal metastases results in a high
complication rate, which must set against the expected benefits. Frequently
the factors related with the surgery are propense to get more emphasis in
orthopedic treatment studies of bone oncology. However, in clinical trials
and others oncological studies primary tumor related factors are considered
ones that play an important role in patient overall survival. The aim of
this study was to compare and reveal the best predicting Cox-model for
overall survival using an extended database of patients with spinal
metastases. Material and Methods: The clinical data of 361
patients undergoing surgical management of metastatic spinal tumors were
collected at three tertiary hospitals over two decades. Stratification of
this cohort according to disease, patient and surgery specific
characteristics allowed for univariate and multivariate statistical analyses
(three groups) of study population. Observed overall survival estimates were
calculated by the Kaplan-Meier method. Variables that were statistically
significant in the univariate Cox analysis were fitted in the multivariate
Cox proportional hazard (PH) model. All factors were grouped in relation
with their etiology (surgery, patient, tumor). The independence of
covariates was estimated with Matthews correlation coefficient. Predictors
with coefficient less than 0.40 were considered independents. Verification
of the proportional hazards were assessed with Schoenfeld residuals and
log(-log) survival curves. The Likelihood Ratio Test and the minor Bayesian
information criterion were used for selection of the best model. A
two-tailed probability (p) value of < 0.1 was considered for selection
from the univariate to multivariant Cox PH regression. The statistical
difference (p-value) was set at < 0.05 for multivariate Cox PH
regression. Results: A total of 361 patients were included in
the present study with median follow-up of 13 months. At the latest
follow-up, a total of 272 patients (75%) had died. The 3-, 6-, 12-, and
24-month overall survival (OS) rates were 86.7%, 78.4%, 57.1% and 34.7%. The
risk factors included severe grade of CCI, rapid Katagiri tumor type,
presence of lung metastasis, non-ambulatory status at follow-up. The
protective factors were metastasectomy, and postoperative systemic therapy.
Cox-Shell residuals analysis revealed that the best precise and predictive
model is one which includes only patient related factors (CCI, ambulatory
follow-up). Conclusion: For the prediction of the overall
survival of the patients underwent oncological operation due spinal
metastasis more convenient the usage Charlson Comorbidity Index and
ambulatory follow-up status.

## 204

## P633: Fully endoscopic spine separation surgery in metastatic disease -
technical note and early results

Kajetan Latka

1

, Dariusz Latka

1

, Waldemar Kolodziej

1

, Jacek Chowaniec

1

, Tomasz Olbrycht

1

, and Tomasz Sobolewski

1

1

Neurosurgery, Institute of Medicine, University of Opole, Opole,
Poland

Introduction: The purpose of this report is to describe the
surgical methodology and potential effectiveness of endoscopic separation
surgery (ESS) in patients with metastatic spine disease. This concept may
reduce the invasiveness of the procedure, which can potentially speed up the
wound healing process and thus the possibility of faster application of
radiotherapy. Material and Methods: In this study, the
separation surgery for preparing patients to radiotherapy was performed with
fully endoscopic spine surgery (FESS) method followed by percutaneous screw
fixation (PSF). Results: Three patients with metastatic spine
disease in thoracic spine were treated with fully endoscopic spine
separation surgery. First case resulted in progression of paresis symptoms
that resulted in disqualification from further oncological treatment. The
remaining 2 patients achieved a satisfactory clinical and radiological
effect and were referred for further radiotherapy. Conclusion:
Thanks to the dynamic development of medical technology, such as endoscopic
visualization, new tools or coagulation, we have the ability to treat more
and more spine diseases. Until now spine metastasis were not the indication
for the use of endoscopy. Due to the nature of the patient, the diversity of
the morphology and nature of metastatic lesions in the spine, this method is
technically very difficult and risky, especially at such an early stage of
application. The technique of using endoscopic access in spine metastatic
patients is extremely difficult, it must be selected individually and well
planned. Further trials are needed to unambiguously determine whether this
is a potentially new method of treating patients or a dead end. Our results
so far only show that this access is possible to make, but whether it will
bring the expected benefits requires a huge number of cases.

## 353

## P634: Ossification of the common anterior vertebral ligament: a rare
cause of dysphagia

Ghassen Gader

1

, Kamel Bahri

1

, Mohamed Amine Gharbi

2

, Mouna Rkhami

1

, Skander Guediche

1

, Mohamed Zouaghi

1

, Mohamed Badri

1

, and Ihsen Zammel

1

1

Department of Neurosurgery, Trauma and Burns Center, Ben Arous,
Tunisia

2

Department of Orthopaedics, Mongi Slim Hospital, La Marsa,
Tunisia

Introduction: Ossification of the common anterior vertebral
ligament, more commonly known as Forestier's disease or senile spinal
ankylosing hyperostosis, is a rare rheumatic disease of unknown aetiolog. It
is characterized by ossification of the paraspinal ligaments and peripheral
entheses. Most often asymptomatic, it is usually discovered incidentally on
standard radiographs. Case report: We report the case of a
65-year-old diabetic patient who presented for gait disturbances and slow
and progressive onset of dysphagia. This dysphagia was improved by flexion
of the neck and worsened by extension, associated with slight
cervicobrachial neuralgia. Esophageal transit revealed an imprint on the
posterior wall of the hypopharynx at the level of C3-C4. Cervical MRI showed
the presence of a bar ossification of the anterior and posterior vertebral
common ligament extending from C2 to C4. The patient was operated through an
anterior approach in order to perform a C4 corporectomy associated to
interbody fusion. Postoperative course was favorable with regression of
dysphagia and motor disorders. Discussion: Forestier's disease
is a generalized joint disorder characterized by ligamentous ossification
and especially of the anterior longitudinal ligament. Several etiological
hypotheses were discussed: mechanical, dietary, metabolic, and environmental
factors. Its incidence increases with age. Ossification along the posterior
vertebral common ligament is also often associated. This disease is most
often asymptomatic and discovered incidentally on imaging. When symptomatic,
the most frequent symptoms are pain, stiffness and reduced mobility of the
affected areas. Complications should be suspected in case of acute symptoms.
The most severe are cervical myelopathies, vertebral fractures and
compressions of adjacent structures. Respiratory signs and swallowing
problems usually improve after surgery. Conclusions:
Forestier's disease is an entity characterized by exuberant bone
proliferation at sites of ligament and tendon insertions with spinal and
extra spinal manifestations. Its diagnosis can be difficult, but the outcome
remains generally favorable.

## 389

## P635: Treatment of acute neurological deficit in patients with spinal
metastasis with unknown primary -12 year reterospective review

Rohan Parihar

1

, Samir Dalvie

1

, Kshitij Chaudhary
1

, R. Dileepan Chakrawarthi
1

, and Sourav Chatterjee
3

1
Spine Surgery Department, PD Hinduja Hospital, Mahim, Mumbai,
India,
Introduction: Acute neurological deficit in patients presenting
with Metastatic Epidural Spinal Cord Compression (MESCC) requires emergency
spinal cord decompression. The treatment recommendations for MESCC differ
for patients with known metastasis versus those presenting with unknown
primary. Solid organ metastasis with known diagnosis surgery is preferred
while for hematolymphoid malignancies radiotherapy is preferred
respectively. However, this decision cannot be made for patients presenting
to Emergency Room (ER) without a prior cancer diagnosis. We undertook this
study to estimate the incidence of hematolymphoid malignancies presenting as
unknown primary with neurological deficit. Materials and
Methods: Retrospectively reviewed a single hospital database of
patients with an unknown cancer diagnosis with neuro deficit who underwent
surgery from January 2009 - December 2021. Spinal decompression surgery with
known histology of cancer was excluded. Results: 18 patients
underwent urgent surgical decompression via posterior approach for unknown
MESCC with neurological deficit. Postoperative histological diagnoses were
multiple myeloma in 6 (33.3%), lymphoma 3 (16.6%), prostate 3 (16.6%), Lung
2 (11.1%), Thyroid 2 (11.1%) and pancreas 1 (5%). Thoracic spine was the
most common site (15, 83%) followed by lumbar and cervical spine
respectively. Preoperative neurological deficit was Frankel A (5), B (1), C
(8), and D (3). Nine patients (50%) with hematolymphoid malignancy presented
with Frankel A (2), B (1), C (4), D (2). The spine instability neoplastic
score (SINS) for the hematolymphoid malignancies were classified as stable
in 1, indeterminate in 4 and unstable in 4. Decompression without
stabilisation was done for 4 patients out of which 2 patients had
hematolymphoid malignancy. Conclusion: 50% of patients
presenting with a neurological deficit due to unknown MESCC had a
hematolymphoid diagnosis out of which 4 (44%) patients had an unstable
spine. Current international guidelines recommend primary radiation for
these malignancies that present with neurological deficits without frank
instability. However, in an emergency setting when the diagnosis is not
known quickly enough, surgery has to be offered despite the knowledge that
about 50% of patients will have histology that is ultra-radiosensitive. At
present, there is no reliable way to establish a histopathological diagnosis
in the emergency setting.

## 416

## P636: Preservation of neurological function justified anterior corpectomy
with reconstruction in treating patients of thoracolumbar spinal metastatic
tumors

Chien-JenHsu

1

1

Department of Orthopaedics, Kaohsiung Veterans General Hospital,
Kaohsiung, Taiwan

Introduction: The choices of managements are controversial for
metastatic tumor of thoracolumbar spine due to the diversity of patient
condition and un-predictable prognoses. We intended to investigate outcomes
of anterior corpectomy with reconstruction for metastatic tumor of
thoracolumbar spine. Material and Methods: This study
registered 27 cancer patients with thoracolumbar spinal metastases
undergoing anterior corpectomy with reconstruction combining posterior
instrumentation form Jan 2010 to Dec 2019. The origins of malignancy were 13
lung carcinoma, 8 breast carcinoma, 4 renal cell carcinoma, 1 colon
carcinoma, and 1 malignant lymphoma. By using the neurologic, oncologic,
mechanical, and systemic (NOMS) decision framework, The main surgical
indication was determined as intractable back pain or sciatica with
myelopathy that pre-operative MRI demonstrated significant compression on
spinal cord. In addition to posterior transpedicular instrumentation,
adequate decompression was achieved by removing the tumor mass through
anterior corpectomy. For tumors with high vascularity in 4 patients,
pre-operative embolization was performed to decrease blood loss and
operative risk. In the meanwhile, vertebral reconstruction by mesh cages
containing autogenous ribs or allogenous bone graft was conducted. Same day
operations were done if the neurological symptoms were progressing.
Otherwise, posterior instrumentation followed by anterior procedure were
performed on separate days to avoid potential complications of extended
operative time. The postoperative follow-up was arranged every 2 weeks after
discharge from hospital in the first month, thereafter the regular follow-up
was advised at 3 months interval. Results: No surgical
complications required further surgical management in all patients. The
average hospital days were 24 days. Except 3 patients remaining Frankel A as
pre-operative status, the other patients achieved at least one Frankel grade
improvement and relief of back pain. The mean survival time was 16 months
with SF-36 questionnaire improvement from 52 to 80 postoperatively. No
neurological deficit of both lower extremities developed at their last
visits at outpatient clinic or before their mortalities. Neither
dislodgement of mesh cage nor screw loosening was disclosed on follow-up
radiographs at last outpatient visit. No re-hospitalization was caused by
operation-related situation during follow-up except hospice care.
Conclusion: Tumor excision by anterior vertebrectomy
eliminates the compression on spinal cord directly. Motor and sensory
function of lower extremities were therefore preserved. Meanwhile, back pain
and sciatica were relieved by posterior instrumentation. However, patients
with evident progression of muscle weakness pre-operatively could not
achieve neurological recovery. The vertebral reconstruction after
vertebrectomy provided anterior support to achieve at least a mid-term
effect of construct stability. Consequently, the patients regained
symptom-free lives before their mortalities. Even the life expectancy cannot
be extended, posterior instrumentation and anterior vertebrectomy with
reconstruction improved the life quality for cancer patients with spinal
metastasis. Considering preservation of neurological function, anterior
corpectomy deserves a recommendation for patients of thoracolumbar spinal
metastatic tumor with incomplete neurological deficit.

## 419

## P637: Surgical management of spinal metastases of the thoracolumbar
junction.

Vanessa Hubertus

1

, Michelle Marino

1,2

, Charlotte Buhre

1

, Peter Vajkoczy

1

, and Julia Onken

1

1

Neurosurgery, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin and Berlin
Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany

2

Neurosurgery, Vivantes Klinikum am Friedrichshain, Berlin,
Germany

Introduction: Spinal metastases of the thoracolumbar junction
(TLJ) are common and pose a challenge for treatment due to the region`s
anatomy and associated high rates of neurological deficits and postoperative
complications. The aim of our study is to compare surgical strategies for
TLJ metastases (Th11-L1) with respect to complexity and associated
complications. Material and Methods: 100 patients were treated
surgically due to TLJ metastases in 2005-2020 at a tertiary neurosurgical
care center. Patients receiving only kyphoplasty (n = 11) were excluded from
this study. Spinal instability neoplastic score (SINS), clinical, surgical
and outcome data were retrospectively analyzed. Patients were divided into 3
surgical groups: Decompression only (i), decompression and instrumentation
(ii) and decompression and instrumentation with corpectomy (iii).
Results: 27 patients were decompressed (30%), 48 patients
were treated with decompression and instrumentation (54%), and 14 patients
received decompression and instrumentation combined with corpectomy (16%).
In the median 5 vertebrae were instrumented in groups ii and iii, however
with greatly varying range (3-9). Median SINS was 10 (i), 12 (ii) and 13
(iii). Preoperative neurological deficits were most common in patients
treated with decompression (57%) and instrumentation (37%), whilst no
deficits occurred in patients treated with corpectomy. Mechanical pain was
common in all patients, but higher in patients treated with fusion (ii, iii
88-91% vs. i 61%). Mean duration of surgery was significantly shorter in
group i (149min) compared to group ii (204min) and iii (189min). Surgical
complications occurred in 14% (i), 4% (ii), and 19% (iii), mostly as
surgical site infections. Mortality associated with surgery was 0% and
postoperative survival did not differ significantly between surgical groups.
No secondary Hardware failure (HwF) occurred at a median follow-up of 5-12
months independent of the number of fused segments. Conclusion:
In this cohort, patients with TLJ metastases received instrumentation +/-
corpectomy in case of a potentially unstable and unstable SINS and presented
with a higher rate of preoperative mechanical pain than patients treated
with decompression alone. Surgical complication rate was moderate in all
groups, and dependent on surgical complexity. Postoperative survival did not
differ dependent on surgical complexity. With the instrumentation of in a
median 5 vertebrae, no HwF occurred at a median follow-up of 5-12 months.
Larger patient cohorts are necessary to define the actual number of segments
that need to be instrumented to avoid HwF in metastases of the TLJ.

## 476

## P638: Primary spinal canal tumors treated in a tertiary level hopsital in
Nepal - A case series

Rohit Pokharel

1

 and Sushil Paudel

1

1

Dept. of Orthopaedics and Trauma Surgery (Spine Unit), Institute of
Medicine, Maharajgunj Medical Campus, Kathmandu, Nepal

Background and Purpose: Primary spinal tumors are rare
neoplastic lesions. Its incidence varies among the reports because of
difference in sample size and classification of the tumors. Irrespective of
its type, the common presentation are features of space occupying lesion;
distal neurological deficits, back pain and radicular pain. High index of
suspicion and interpretation of relevant investigations are key for reach to
diagnosis. The purpose of the study was to find out relative frequency of
various primary spinal tumors presenting to our hospital, their management
and outcomes. Materials and Methods: This is a retrospective
study done at the Department of Orthopaedics and Trauma surgery (Spine
Unit), Tribhuvan University Teaching Hospital, Nepal over a period of 11
years from January 2010 to December 2020. All primary spinal tumor cases
(with neurological deficits) operated and have histopathological report are
included in the study. Primary bony tumors of the spine are excluded.
Results: A total of 76 patients with primary spinal tumor
arising in the spinal canal encroaching the neural tissues were operated.
The patient’s age ranged from 7 to 65 years with a mean of 49.5 years; there
was slight male predominance (male female ratio of 42:34 = 1.2:1).
Anatomical location of the tumors was; cervical -6, thoracic- 29,
throcolumbar- 21 and lumbo-sacral- 20. There were 3 (3.9%) primary spinal
extradural lymphomas. Majority, 62 (81.6%) were intradural extramedullary
(IDEM); 30 Schwanoma, 18 meningioma, 9 neurofibroma, 3 dermoid cysts, 1
lipoma and 1 primary mesenchymal chondrosarcoma. Seven (9.2%) were inradural
intrameduallry; 5 (6.6%) were muxopapillary ependymomas and 2 astrocytoma;
and 4 were dumbbell tumors (3 neurofibroma and 1 Schwannoma). The mean
follow-up was 16 months ranged from 6 weeks to 60 months. All patients
improved both neurologically and functionally after surgery except three.
One elderly with conus medullaris ependymoma did not improve, out of two
cases with anteriorly located Schwannoma at T4-5 level one developed
incomplete neurology and another had complete neurological deficit after the
surgery. One case of Schwannoma and two cases of ependymoma had recurrence
of the tumor after average of 1.8 years of the index surgery and were
re-operated. Conclusion: Primary spinal canal tumors are
uncommon lesions and should be one of the differentials of any spinal
lesions. IDEM tumors are common with highest frequency of Schwannoma
followed by meningioma. Early diagnosis and total excision surgical
intervention has very good result.
Keywords: extradural, Intradural extramedullary tumor, Spinal canal, Surgical
excision

## 503

## P639: Review of a series of Ewing sarcoma in a Spanish tertiary
center

Borja Sanz

1

, Marta González Pombo

1

, Irene Iglesias Lozano

1

, José Luis Gil Salú

1

, Álvaro Prada Vega

1

, David Mesa Collantes

1

, Leyton Hernán Catari Mallea

1

, Jesús Riqué Dormido

1

, and Francisco Rodríguez Peña

1

1

Neurosurgery, Hospital Universitario Puerta del Mar, Cádiz,
Spain

Introduction: Ewing's sarcoma (ES) is an infrequent malignancy
(WHO grade 4) mainly occurring in adolescents and young adults. It commonly
involves the dorsal spinal column and manifests as myelopathy. We present
three cases in each segment of the spine. Material and Methods:
We review the literature after the diagnosis and treatment of this tumour.
Results:Case 1. 25-year-old man with
cervical pain and tetraparesis. He went to the emergency department and the
MRI showed an extradural cervical mass that caused compression from C2 to C6
that invaded the lateral mass of C4. A posterior decompression, resection
and fusion was performed and in a second stage the lateral mass of C4 was
resected through an anterior corpectomy. He did not present any worsening
and recovered partially from the tetraparesis. He presents 3/5 in the right
arm and is capable of walking short distances. We initiated
vincristine-doxorubicin-cyclophosphamide and ifosfamide-etoposide. 10 months
later the patient has a progression free survival (PFS) and the deficits are
improving. Case 2. 19-year-old woman with dorsal back
pain irradiated to the chest. She also presented paraesthesias from a D7-D8
level. A MRI showed an extradural lesion around D4-D6 with widening of the
foramen of D5-D6 along with intense contrast enhancement. A gross total
resection (GTR) was achieved. We initiated
vincristine-doxorubicin-cyclophosphamide and ifosfamide-etoposide. After 14
months the patient remains asymptomatic with a PFS and no deficits.
Case 3. 16-year-old woman with lumbar pain
irradiated to both legs with no neurological symptoms. A MRI showed an
isointense and hyperintense in T2 intradural tumour in L3-L4. GTR was
obtained and the pain improved. We initiated ifosfamide/etoposide. 4 months
later the patient remains asymptomatic with a PFS and no deficits. The three
cases presented a similar anatomopathological study. They described a tumour
positive to CD99, FLI-1 and vimentin immunohistochemical stain. It also
presented fusion of FUS genes and ERG. ES was the most likely diagnosis. ES
is an infrequent malignancy mainly occurring in adolescents and young
adults. The most frequent symptom is pain followed by myelopathy. Back pain
and paraesthesia are secondary to irritation. The most common location is
thoracic followed by lumbar and cervical. The intradural presentation is
more frequent than the extramedular. In MRI is isointense on T1 and
hyperintense on T2, with varying gadolinium enhancement in more than 60%.
Other characteristics are dumbbell shape (24%), foraminal widening (19%),
and erosion (19%). GTR plus chemotherapy or radiotherapy is the preferred
treatment. The radiotherapy consists of a neuroaxis irradiation with 30–60Gy
and the chemotherapy usually used is
vincristine-doxorubicin-cyclophosphamide and ifosfamide-etoposide. GTR is a
good prognosis factor because it increases the effectiveness of QT-RT. The
prognosis is thought to be dismal due to local invasion and metastases, with
5-year survival of less than 37.5%. Conclusion: ES must be
suspected in cases of rapidly progressing pathology and young patients.
There are no typical radiological signs. GTR and adjutant treatment with
QT-RT is the gold standard.

## 525

## P640: Mini-open vertebroplasty in treating C2 osteolytic lesion

Adnene Benammou

1

, Ahmed Ben Abid

1

, Cherif Kamoun

1

, Balti Walid

1

, Amine Lengliz

1

, Mondher Kooli

1

, and Mohamed Ben Salah

1

1

Orthopedic Surgery Department, Charles Nicolle Hospital, Tunis,
Tunisia

Introduction: Percutaneous vertebroplasty is a well-established
technique in treating multiple painful lesions of the thoracolumbar spine.
It can provide pain relief, bone strengthening and vertebral stabilization.
However, its use in the upper cervical spine is rare due to the difficult
access and multiple potential complications. We report a safer technique
with a mini-open vertebroplasty of a C2 osteolytic lesion. Material
and Methods: A 71-year-old man, with history of neck pain for
which he did not seek medical treatment, sustained a road traffic accident.
He presented to our emergency room. Physical examination revealed only pain
of the right clavicle. No neurological deficit was noted. A full body
Computed Tomography (CT) was conducted due to the violence of the trauma. It
revealed a fracture of the right clavicle and an osteolytic lesion of C2
involving the left half of C2 vertebral body. The fracture of the clavicle
was treated conservatively. The decision for the C2 osteolytic lesion was to
proceed with a mini-open vertebroplasty. Surgery was realized in supine
position with head on horseshoe. Fluoroscopy marking of vertebral levels was
realized. We realized a mini right anterior cervical approach exposing the
edge of C2. We inserted the Jamshidi needle on the lytic region under
fluoroscopic control. Biopsy was taken and addressed to the laboratory. We
injected then the PolyMethyl MethAcrylate (PMMA) using the eggshell
technique with injecting in the posterior part, waiting for the cement to
harden and then proceed to injecting the cement to fill the lesion. We used
the eggshell technique to avoid cement leakage and its possible
complications especially at the level of C2. No extravasation was noted.
Results: Intra and postoperative was uneventful. Pain
relief was immediate after surgery. Visual Analog Scale (VAS) decreased from
8 in preoperative to 2 in postoperative. Postoperative CT-scan showed PMMA
in the body of C2 with no sign of extravasation. The patient was ambulated
and discharged the day next surgery and addressed to a medical department to
establish the etiology of the lesion. At 3 months postoperative, there was a
complete pain relief (VAS = 0). Conclusion: Osteolytic lesions
of C2 are rare. They can cause serious neurovascular complications.
Percutaneous vertebroplasty has shown great result in treating thoracolumbar
spine but can be difficult in upper cervical spine. This technique of
mini-open vertebroplasty can be a safer less demanding technique in treating
osteolytic lesions of C2. It has the advantages of vertebroplasty such as
early pain relief and vertebral stabilization without the risk of the
percutaneous technique in the upper cervical spine which can lead to serious
complications.

## 563

## P641: Spinal surgery for multiple myeloma has a high one year mortality:
analysis of the current British haematological guidelines

Mohamed A. Abdalla

1

, Mark Nyanzu

1

, Jemma Keefe

1

, Bisola Ajayi

1

, Tim Bishop

1

, Jason Bernard

1

, Fenella Willis

2

, Yasmin Reyal

2

, and Darren Lui

1

1

Neurosurgery

2

Haematology, St George's Hospital, London, United Kingdom

Introduction: Advances in the medical treatment of myeloma
patients have shown significant improvements. In 2015, the guidelines of
treatment published by the British journal of haematology indicate three
main treatments for Spinal involvement normal or abnormal neurology:
conservative medical treatment +/- bracing (CMTB), kyphoplasty (KP) and
Spinal decompression +/- stabilization surgery (SDS). Material and
Methods: Retrospective review 338 patients referred to the spine
MDT from 2015-2020. Groups were divided into Normal Neurology and Abnormal
Neurology with subcategories of CMTB, KP, SDS. Results: 338
patients identified: 62% males. The mean age was 65.4 (range 18-93). 46
patients were referred in 2016 compared to 70 in 2020. Isolated
thoracolumbar spine involvement was in 66% and pan-spine involvement was in
33% of cases. Overall: SDS (16.2% n = 55), KP (16.6% n = 56), CMTB (62.2% n
= 224). Abnormal neurology: (47% n=159): Bilsky 3 (44.7% n = 71). SDS (21.3%
n = 34) CMTB (78.6% n = 125). Normal Neurology: SDS (12% n = 21) Kyphoplasty
(31% n = 56) CMTB (57% n = 99). One year mortality: SDS (32.7%), kyphoplasty
(5.4%) and CMBT (7.14%) (p < 0.05 Chi2 test). Conclusion:
Almost half of Myeloma patients will present with abnormal neurology.
Utilising current guidelines overall, only 16% patients underwent SDS or KP.
CMTB accounted for 63%. Of those with abnormal neurology only 21% underwent
SDS. The mortality at one year was significantly higher in
the surgical group compared to Kyphoplasty or medical treatment +/- Bracing
which may indicate the deleterious effect of delaying medical treatment.

## 886

## P642: En-bloc radical spinal surgery still has a role in the era of
stereotactic ablative radiosurgery

Mohamed A. Abdalla

1

, Priyanshu Saha

2

, Tim Bishop

1

, Jason Bernard

1

, Bisola Ajayi

1

, and Darren Lui

1

1

Neuroscience, St George's University Hospital, London, United
Kingdom

2

St George's University, London, United Kingdom

Introduction: With the modern advances in radiotherapy, total
en-bloc spondylectomy (TES) has come out of favour by many spine surgeons.
For example, neurologic, oncologic, mechanical, and systemic (NOMS) decision
framework does not suggest any role for TES. Separation surgery and Cyber
knife can achieve maximum local control in the majority of oligometastatic
cases. However, radio-resistant tumours and sarcoma can be challenging to
even the most advanced current radiotherapy technique. Moreover, violation
of sarcoma can lead to acceleration, aggravation, and agitation of the
tumours. This shows a clear indication for radical surgery to achieve
maximum local control or even cure for selected group of spinal
malignancies. Methods: We retrospectively reviewed patients who
had radical surgeries for spinal malignancies at St George’s hospital in the
period between April 2017 till June 2021. The demographic of these patients,
oncological diagnosis and staging, spinal load of the disease, type of
surgery, hospital stay, and 30-day and one-year mortality were analysed.
Results: We identified nine patients who had radical
surgery for spinal malignancy, five of them were males. The youngest patient
was 28 years old and the oldest was 63. Sarcoma was the histopathological
diagnosis in four patients and the other five had carcinoma of colorectal,
lung, renal or ovarian origin. Only one patient had Chordoma as a primary
spinal tumour. Two had Enneking inappropriate surgery and the rest achieved
radical excision as planned. Surgical complications were dural tears in two
cases. One patient died within a month of surgery because of COVID and one
in the first postoperative year. Conclusion: Radical surgery
like Tomita en-bloc spondylectomy is still an important surgical
armamentarium for a selected group of spinal malignancy. It allows cure or
maximum local tumour control when separation surgery and Cyber knife
radiotherapy are not enough in selected group of patients.

## 939

## P643: En-bloc resection of a recurrent primary lumbar chondrosarcoma of
L5

Sofia Caldeira Dantas

1,2

, Ana Lucinda Correia

1

, João Soares do Vale

1

, Vânia Oliveira

1

, Pedro Cardoso

1

, and Ricardo Rodrigues-Pinto

1

1

Spinal Unit (UVM), Department of Orthopaedics, Centro Hospitalar
Universitário do Porto, Porto, Portugal

2

Department of Orthopaedics, Hospital do Litoral Alentejano, Santiago
do Cacém, Portugal

Introduction: Chondrosarcomas are malignant cartilage-forming
bone neoplasm that represent 10% of all primary bone tumors. These lesions
are commonly low grade and only 12% of all chondrosarcomas are found in the
spine, being the thoracic segment the most frequently affected. Patients
typically present back pain, a palpable mass and/or neurologic deficits.
Both partial and en-bloc resections have been described as surgical
treatment options. Although en-bloc resection is more challenging with
longer surgical time, blood loss and higher risk of instability due to the
extended resection, some authors have reported a better prognosis with this
technique. The advantage of using either one or two-stage surgery for
en-bloc resection, as well as the difference between performing a two-stage
approach in the same surgical time is not yet established. Material
and Methods: The present study describes a case of a lumbar
chondrosarcoma to highlight and discuss its treatment options,
complications, and management. Results: A 30-year-old male with
a prior history of a low-grade chondrosarcoma submitted to an anterior
transperitoneal curettage and autologous bone grafting 14 years ago,
presented to the orthopaedic clinic due a new-onset back pain that had been
worsening for 2 months. A CT-scan, MRI and bone biopsy were performed and
were suggestive of chondrosarcoma recurrence without distant disease. The
patient was submitted to a two-stage posterior-anterior en-bloc resection of
L5 with L3-iliac fixation and anterior L5 expandable cage. In the immediate
post-op an iliac vein thrombosis was noted and a thrombectomy was performed.
Conclusion: Primary spinal chondrosarcomas are rare tumors
and their complete resection is technically very challenging. Here a
recurrent chondrosarcoma of L5 was submitted to an en-bloc resection. The
surgical technique and alternative options are further presented and
discussed.

## 942

## P644: 23 year old pregnancy with bone metastasis and Krukenberg tumor
resulting from gastric adenocarcinoma. A case report

Luiz Claudio Rodrigues

1

, Fernanda Andrea Navarro

2

, Rodrigo Nakao

2

, and Nathalia Adelina Pereira

1

1

Spine Surgery, Santa Marcelina College of Medicine, São Paulo,
Brazil

2

Spine Surgery, Hospital Santa Marcelina, São Paulo, Brazil

Female patient, 23 years old, housewife, single, born in Bahia and living in
São Paulo. Patient with no previous comorbidities, at 28 weeks' gestation by
the date of the last menstrual period (LMP), with a history of G2P1A0, seeks
the emergency service of a tertiary hospital in the east of São Paulo with a
history of low back pain, which started suddenly about two months after
charging a television. There was a worsening of the pain 01 month ago, and
the patient started to present difficulty walking and associated paresthesia
in the lower limbs. She reported having sought medical care on two previous
occasions at other services in this period, being discharged with only
analgesics, but without pain improvement. She refused to undergo
radiological examinations on these occasions, due to the possible risks
associated with radiation doses for pregnancy.
While waiting for the availability of an MRI, the patient underwent an upper
digestive endoscopy, as she continued to complain of significant nausea and
vomiting after 20 weeks of gestation, despite adequate antiemetic
medication. On examination, a stomach with an ulcerative and infiltrative
lesion was visualized, affecting mainly the antrum in all its circumference,
extending to the first duodenal portion. Biopsy was performed with
subsequent results indicating gastric adenocarcinoma, poorly differentiated
and with signet ring cells.
Antibiotic therapy was started associated with adequate intensive support,
but the patient remained in a serious general condition, with significant
respiratory distress and need for vasoactive drugs, progressing to
cardiorespiratory arrest, and death was confirmed. The newborn remained in
the care of neonatology, in a serious general condition, in a neonatal
intensive care unit, evolving to death a few days after delivery.

## 1140

## P645: Idiopathic hypertrophic pachymeningitis with cervical spinal cord
compression: a case report

Jong Tae Kim

1

 and Seonghan Choi

1

1

Neurosurgery, The Catholic University of Korea, Incheon Saint Mary's
Hospital, Incheon, and South Korea

Introduction: Idiopathic hypertrophic spinal pachymeningitis
(IHSP) is a chronic, progressive, inflammatory disorder characterized by
tumorous mass formation by hypertrophic inflammation of the dura mater and
clinical symptoms that progress from local pain to severe myelopathy. The
diagnosis can be established by open biopsy and exclusion of all other
specific granulomatous and infectious diseases. Material and
Method: We report a case of IHSP occurring a cervical dura from
C3 to C4 and C6 to C7. The patient was 42-year-old male, who had been
suffered from pain on his posterior neck, both upper arms and left ulnar
side arm to hand dorsum paresthesia for 5 months and recent onset left
lateral leg paresthesia. Results: During the 9 months of
follow-up period, the patient was treated 2 open biopsies and debulking of
the lesion with marked improvement in his clinical condition.
Conclusion: This case demonstrates the challenge in making
a diagnosis. IHSP should be considered as a differential diagnosis in case
of spinal lesion and the histopathology after the open biopsy. The
implications of the case are discussed.

## 1166

## P646: En-bloc vertevrectomy for the treatment of tumor spine - a case
series of 8 patients

João Soares do Vale

1

, Sara Diniz

1

, Sofia Caldeira Dantas

1

, Pedro Cardoso

2

, António Oliveira

3

, and Ricardo Rodrigues-Pinto

1

1

Spinal Unit (UVM)

2

Musculoskeletal Tumors Group, Department of Orthopaedics, Centro
Hospitalar e Universitário do Porto, Porto, Portugal

3

Department of Orthopaedics, Centro Hospitalar do Porto, Porto,
Portugal

Introduction: En-bloc vertebrectomy, also called spondylectomy,
has become an increasingly widespread procedure used for the treatment of
neoplastic spine lesions. It consists of a resection of the entire tumor and
one of more affected vertebrae with margins. The objective of this surgery
is either cure or localized control of the disease. Material and
Methods: This study was a retrospective case series analysis
conducted in a reference center for the treatment musculoskeletal sarcomas.
The data were obtained from medical reports of patients treated between
January of 2007 and June of 2022. Patients with benign aggressive, primary
malignant spine lesions and spine metastasis who underwent en-bloc
vertebrectomy during the study period was evaluated. Results:
Eight patients (four males and four females) underwent total vertebrectomy.
Their mean age at the time of operation was 47 years (18 to 68). The mean
time of follow-up was 70 months (2 to 144). The diagnosis were
chondrosarcoma, giant cell tumor, angiosarcoma, chordoma, high grade
sarcoma, Ewing sarcoma, leiomyosarcoma and breast cancer metastasis. Type 1
to 6 lesions were treated according to Tomita classification. In seven
patients the tumour was in lumbar spine (L1, L3 and L5) and in one patient
in thoracic spine (T8). In four cases a combined approach was used and in
the other four a posterior approach. In three patients, wide margins were
achieved, and in the other 5 were marginal. Three patients died from their
disease with a mean follow up of 57 months (2 to 144). Three showed no
evidence of disease and two are alive with disease. A 50% complication rate
was observed in this series (infection, hardware failure and neurological
injury). Conclusion: Despite being a technically demanding
surgical procedure with a high rate of complications, en-bloc vertebrectomy
is a good solution when the objective is either cure or localized control of
the disease.
In this series it is possible to confirm the effectiveness of vertebrectomy
to achieve the cure and a good survival rate even in patients in which the
procedure was not curative.

## 1185

## P647: Multi-level kyphoplasty for myeloma of more than 3 vertebral levels
can be safe

Jemma Keefe

1

, Mohamed Abdalla

2

, Mark Nyanzu

2

, Priyanshu Saha

1

, Bisola Ajayi

2

, Jason Bernard

2

, Timothy Bishop

2

, and Darren Lui

2

1

St George's, University of London, London, United Kingdom

2

Department of Complex Neurosurgery, St George's Hospital, London,
United Kingdom

Introduction: Vertebral involvement occurs in approximately 70%
of multiple myeloma cases. Percutaneous kyphoplasty (PKP) has been proven to
improve pain and mitigate spinal deformity in myeloma patients. This can be
performed at both single and multi-vertebral level dependent on vertebral
involvement. Pan-spinal infiltration is not uncommon, affecting
approximately 50% of our patients, emphasising the need for multi-level
kyphoplasty. Original guidelines for kyphoplasty have cautioned against
performing kyphoplasty on more than 3 vertebral levels because of the risk
of multiple mini-pulmonary emboli from cement leakage. This may potentially
be due to the fact that each vertebra can hold approximately 5 to 10cc and
it is essentially the volume of cement rather than the number of vertebrae
which is important. This study aims to determine the safety of PKP for more
than 3 vertebral levels. Material and Methods: This was a
retrospective analysis of 45 multiple myeloma cases (mean age = 64.8 ± 1.57,
25 male/20 female) with vertebral involvement of which management involved
PKP from January 2019 to August 2022. Cases involving more than 3 vertebral
levels (N = 16) were compared to cases involving 3 levels or less (N = 29),
with safety and efficacy of PKP analysed through 30-day mortality and
intra-operative complications. Results: For all cases managed
with PKP there was a 30-day mortality of 7.31%. The 30-day mortality in
cases involving 3 vertebral levels or more (N = 14) was 0.00%, with no
intra-operative complications, whereas the 30-day mortality in cases with
less than 3 levels involved (N = 27) was 11.1%. Comparatively, a similar
cohort of patients with multiple myeloma involving the spine that were
managed conservatively (N = 83) at our centre had a 30-day mortality of
8.43%. Conclusion: In this study PKP performed at more than 3
vertebral levels was shown to be a safe procedure with no evidence of
increased mortality or complications compared to procedures involving less
than 3 vertebral levels. We believe that the volume of cement is more
important than the number of vertebrae operated on. Therefore, in future
patients with pan-spinal involvement may be considered for PKP of more than
3 vertebral levels. Further studies are required to characterise more
accurately the safety and efficacy of this procedure for more than 3
levels.

## 1214

## P648: Can the SORG machine learning algorithms predict 90-day and 1-year
spinal metastatic disease survival in a rural cohort? An external validation
study

James Hall

1

, Michael Garneau

1

, Harmen Kuijten

2,3

, Olivier Q. Groot

2,3

, Trevor Gulbrandsen

1

, Cassim Igram

1

, Andrew Pugely

1

, Catherine Olinger

1

, and Joseph Schwab

2

1

Orthopedics and Rehabilitation, University of Iowa Hospitals and
Clinics, Iowa City, United States

2

Orthopedic Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, United States

3

Orthopedic Surgery, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The
Netherlands

Introduction: To determine the propriety of invasive surgical
procedures, the Skeletal Oncology Research Group machine learning algorithm
(SORG-MLA) was developed to predict 90-day and 1-year survival in spinal
metastatic disease. However, sub-analysis originally demonstrated decreased
probability of prediction in patients who underwent surgery after 2010.
Although further studies demonstrated good performance of these algorithms,
even after 2010, they were based on a cohort of patients in the same region
and have yet to be validated in a varying population. The purpose of this
study was to externally validate the performance of the SORG-MLA on
predicting 90-day and 1-year survival in spinal metastatic disease in a
cohort of patients located in the rural midwestern United States.
Materials and Methods: A retrospective review of patients
who underwent operative management of spinal metastatic disease at one
academic institution (University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics) was
performed. The criteria for inclusion consisted of patients aged ≥ 18 years,
diagnosis of metastatic disease (solid tumor metastasis, multiple myeloma,
lymphoma) with or without pathologic fracture, and operative management
being performed between 2010 – 2021. Exclusion criteria included spinal
metastasis originating from a primary bone tumor (e.g. sarcoma), and death
record or most recent follow-up unavailable. Baseline characteristics of the
validation cohort were obtained and compared to the developmental cohort.
Input parameters to predict survival included 18 variables including primary
tumor histology, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) Performance
Status Scale, American Spinal Injury Association (ASIA) Impairment Scale,
and laboratory values. Discrimination (c-statistic and receiver operating
curve), calibration (calibration slope, intercept, calibration plot, and
observed proportions by predicted risk groups), overall performance (Brier
score), and decision curve analysis were utilized to evaluate the SORG-MLA
in this specific external cohort. Results: Overall, there were
249 patients included in this study. The 90-day and 1-year mortality rates
were 63 (25%) and 134 (54%), respectively. The validation cohort compared to
the developmental cohort had significantly more moderate and rapid growth
primary tumors, more visceral metastasis, and lower pre-operative hemoglobin
levels. The SORG-MLA for 90-day and 1-year survival showed strong
discriminatory ability (AUC 0.85 [95% confidence interval [CI] 0.74-0.94]
and 0.82 [95% CI 0.71-0.91], respectively), Brier score, and decision curve
analysis. The 90-day and 1-year mortality showed almost perfect calibration
demonstrated by a calibration intercept of 0.06 [95% CI -0.09-0.21] and 0.02
[95% CI -0.12-0.16], respectively. Conclusion: This external
validation study demonstrated that the SORG ML algorithm utilized in
predicting 90-day and 1-year survival of patient with spinal metastatic
disease exhibited strong performance in this rural, midwestern United States
cohort. Additional, multi-center studies are needed to further validate
these algorithms in differing populations.

## 1241

## P649: Radiofrequency ablation in radical oncological treatment of spinal
oligometastatic disease

Priyanshu Saha

1

, Emily Tsang

1

, Zion Hwang

1

, Bisola Ajayi

2

, Varinder Singh Alg

2

, Ursalan Khan

2

, Mohamed Abdalla

2

, Shahnawaz Haleem

2

, Tesfaladet Kurban

2

, Jason Bernard

2

, Timothy Bishop

2

, and Darren Lui

2

1

St George's University of London, London, United Kingdom

2

Department of Complex Neurosurgery, St George's University Hospitals
NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom

Introduction: Radiofrequency Ablation (RFA) is a novel addition
to the armamentarium of radical oncological treatment utilized with other
surgical techniques. It aids in cytoreduction and potentially utilized
independently to be curative and offer maximum local control. RFA as an
adjunct to separation surgery may be a new technique that may have a
beneficial compound effect of cytoreduction. Spinal oligometastatic disease
(OMD) and oligo-progression (OPD) treatment has experienced paradigm shifts
where indications of surgery is no longer focused on palliative outcomes
including maintenance of ambulation, continence, neurological symptoms and
pain management. Stereotactic ablative radiosurgery (SABR), separation
surgery and En Bloc Surgery can provide radical oncological treatment with
curative results. The novel use of RFA in conjunction to radical treatment
or independently for the treatment of OMD and OPD is investigated at a
quaternary level 1 spinal center. Methods: Retrospective review
of spinal OMD patients at quaternary level 1 spinal center between
2017-2022. Patient demographic data, tumour histology, OMD type, surgical
type and instrumentation (titanium versus carbon fiber), RFA, PD, local
recurrence, infection, mortality data was analyzed. Results: 15
cases of RFA. Including 2 cases of en bloc surgery with post adjuvant
radiosurgery, RFA was used for neoplastic eradication of the pedicles to
allow Tomita en bloc spondylectomy without seeding cancerous cells. Patient
1 experienced resolution of disease with no LR at 12 month follow up;
patient 2 had died 9 months postoperatively because of concurring distant
metastases from the primary disease. Mean hospital length of stay was 64
days, no inpatient postoperative or medical complications. EOS scans
determined no local recurrence at 6 months. 11 out 26 separation surgeries
performed for patients in the OMD/OPD pathway had adjunct RFA ± cement. Of
the separation surgeries 4 cases utilized titanium instrumentation and 7
cases utilized carbon fiber instrumentation. Titanium separation surgery
with RFA ± cement (n = 4): 2-year LC– 0%; 2 years mortality – 0%. Titanium
separation surgery without RFA ± cement (n = 16) – 1 year LC – 6% (n = 1);
30-day mortality – 12.5% (n = 2; SS surgery was demoted to palliative
decompression for both patients), 1 year mortality – 19% (n = 3; Patient 3
was demoted to palliative decompression). There were 7 cases with
independent RFA and cement, 1 case with RFA + biopsy and 3 cases with cement
only. LR –0% at 6 months (n = 9), 12 months (n = 7) and 24 months (n = 5),
pain was well managed, no infection and mortality – 0% at 6 months (n = 11),
12 months (n = 7) and 24 months (n = 5). The Histopathology analysis of the
biopsy case showed increased local necrosis rates of 70%, indicating
neoplastic control. Conclusions: RFA is promising for OMD
pathway which can potentially deliver radical oncological control. As an
adjunct to SS and SABR, it may offer improved cytoreductive control. The
authors believe they are the first to describe this technique used in
conjunction with SS where we show local recurrence of 0% at 2 years.
Furthermore, in carefully selected cases, RFA ± cement has shown excellent
LC and mortality. However, it is important to acknowledge the limited sample
size in our study.

## 1248

## P650: Anterior separation surgery to allow for stereotactic ablative
radiotherapy: a novel approach permitting radical oncological treatment of
oligometastatic disease

Priyanshu Saha

1

, Emily Tsang

1

, Zion Hwang

1

, Pawan Minhas

2

, Mohamed Abdalla

2

, Bisola Ajayi

2

, Timothy Bishop

2

, Jason Bernard

2

, and Darren Lui

2

1

St George's University of London, London, United Kingdom

2

Department of Complex Neurosurgery, St George's University Hospitals
NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom

Introduction: A paradigm shift in the treatment of spinal
metastases has allowed surgeons to deliver curative results utilising
radical oncological treatment opposed to traditionally palliative
decompression for neurological symptom and pain management. In
oligometastatic disease and oligo-progressive disease, the accompaniment of
Stereo tactic ablative radiotherapy (SABR) as a primary modality or adjuvant
treatment to surgery has been shown to excellent survival outcomes, lower
morbidities, and better pain management. The novel use of carbon fibre VBR
allows optimal planning of SABR, less reflection and better future
surveillance imaging. Carbon fibre has physical and chemical properties that
includes high heat tolerance, high tensile strength, resistance to corrosion
and conductivity. Carbon fibre reinforced PEEK has mechanical properties
that allow high resistance to ionizing radiation and low wear particles,
which is better suited to the planned SABR as opposed to use of titanium VBR
and screws. Methods/Case: The patient was a 48-year-old lady
with a solitary metachronous lesion in T2, this is a recurrence of her
breast oligometastatic disease in 2014 which was diagnosed and treated in
2014, Spinal Instability Neoplastic Score (SIN) was determined, the location
was junctional (C7-T2), pain free, a lytic bone lesion was found on CT with
normal alignment and no vertebral collapse. The patient also did not present
with any neurological deficit. She was ASA grade 3. She had a Tokuhashi
score of 14 hence indicating she would live more than a year, the revised
Tokuhashi with a Tomita score of 2 indicated for highly morbid excision
surgery. To avoid morbidity, separation surgery with postoperative SABR was
opted. A Bilsky ESCC score of 2 and the Neurologic Oncologic Mechanical and
Systemic framework (NOMS) indicated the patient was suitable for separation
surgery. Although the SIN score was 6 indicating that the patient should not
be operated on and most likely be treated palliatively. separation surgery
was decided for the patient due to the patient’s age and systemic
suitability. This case report illustrates a novel approach to the treatment
of spinal oligometastatic disease utilizing anterior separation surgery with
a custom carbon fibre vertebral body replacement cage followed by
postoperative SABR. Due to several contraindications of posterior separation
surgery and the morbidity associated with radical surgery; anterior surgery
was opted for utilising the philosophy of Enneking radical surgery despite
Enneking inappropriate resection. Results: There were no
complications intraoperatively and post operatively, pain was managed
appropriately in the hospital. Patient did not complain of pain or wasn’t
immobilised outside of the hospital. In both 15 and 30 monthsthe
postoperative follow up MRI and PET CT scans demonstrated that the patient
was tumour-free and the patient was fully mobile, pain free and living
independently. Conclusion: Utilising this novel approach,
Anterior Spinal Separation Surgery and SABR has shown maximum local control
and can deliver curative, radical oncological control without the morbidity
of Enneking radical surgery. The use of carbon fibre VBR has been better
suited for post-operative SABR planning due to the physical properties
superior to titanium.

## 1253

## P651: Vascular supply and neurological outcome after surgical treatment
of spinal intradural hemangioblastoma: a multicenter retrospective case
series

Vicki Butenschön

1

, Bernhard Meyer

1

, and Maria Wostrack

1

1

Department of Neurosurgery, Technical University Munich, Munich,
Germany

Introduction: Spinal cord hemangioblastoma are rare highly
hypervascularized benign neoplasms. Surgical resection remains the treatment
of choice, with a significant risk of postoperative neurological
deterioration. Methods: Retrospective multicenter study
including five high-volume neurosurgical centers assessing patients
surgically treated for spinal hemangioblastoma between 2006 and 2021.
Clinical status, surgical data, preoperative angiograms, and embolization
were analyzed when available. Follow-up records were reviewed, and logistic
regression performed to assess possible risk factors for neurological
deterioration. Results: We included 60 patients in 5
high-volume neurosurgical centers in Germany and Austria. Preoperative
angiography was performed in 30% of the cases, ten patients underwent
preoperative embolization. The clinical outcome revealed a transient
postoperative neurological deterioration in 38.3%, depending on symptom
duration and preoperative McCormick grading, but patients recovered in most
cases until follow-up. Posterior tumor location and presence of a syrinx
favored gross total tumor resection. Preoperative embolization was not
associated with postoperative worsening. Conclusion: Spinal
hemangioblastoma patients significantly benefit from early surgical
treatment with only transient postoperative deterioration and complete
recovery until follow-up. The performance of preoperative angiograms remains
subject to center disparities.

## 1267

## P652: L5 en bloc spondylectomy for oligometastatic liposarcoma with post
adjuvant stereotactic ablative radiotherapy

Priyanshu Saha

1

, Emily Tsang

1

, Zion Hwang

1

, Bisola Ajayi

2

, Mohamed Abdalla

2

, Varinder Singh Alg

2

, Ursalan Khan

2

, Shahnawaz Haleem

2

, Tesfaladet Kurban

2

, Jason Bernard

2

, Timothy Bishop

2

, Pawan Minhas

2

, and Darren Lui

2

1

St George's University of London, London, United Kingdom

2

Department of Complex Neurosurgery, St George's University Hospitals
NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom

Introduction: Total en bloc spondylectomy is a radical technique
first pioneered by Katsuro Tomita for solitary spinal metastases. Its use in
oligometastatic lesions of the spine aims to improve prognosis and
oncological curability for patients via complete surgical resection rather
than the piecemeal excision. We present a challenging case of an L5 en bloc
spondylectomy for a case of oligometastatic liposarcoma performed at our
specialist complex spinal unit with an analysis of the extensive
pre-operative planning and specialist intra-operative techniques that may be
of assistance to others taking on these challenging cases.
Methodology: First Stage: Carbonfibre pedicle screws
planned from L2 to S2AI-Pelvis, aligned, to her patient-specific rods.
Custom 3D-printed navigation guides used to overcome challenging limitations
of carbon instruments. Radiofrequency ablation (RFA) of L5 pedicles prior to
osteotomy was performed to prevent sarcoma cell seeding. Microscope-assisted
thecal sac-tumour separation and L5 nerve root dissection was performed.
Novel surgical navigation of the ultrasonic bone cutter assisted inferior L4
and superior S1 endplate osteotomies. Second stage: We performed a
vascular-assisted retroperitoneal approach to L4-S1 with protection of great
vessels. Completion of osteotomies at L4 and S1 to en-bloc L5: (L4 inferior
endplate, L4/5 disc, L5 body, L5/S1 disc and S1 superior endplate). Anterior
reconstruction used an expandable PEEK cage obviating the need for a third
posterior stage. Reinforced with a patient-specific carbon plate L4-S1
promontory. Sacrifice of left L5 nerve root undertaken.
Results: Patient rehabilitated well and was discharged
after 42 days. Patient underwent SABR two months post-op. Despite left foot
drop, she’s walking independently 9 months post-op. Conclusion:
In conclusion, we present a challenging case of an L5 en bloc spondylectomy
for a case of oligometastatic liposarcoma performed at our specialist
complex spinal unit. Our reported extensive pre-operative planning and
specialist intra-operative techniques may be of assistance to others taking
on these surgically challenging cases. We recommend a truly
multi-disciplinary team approach for pre, intra and post-operative stages
when managing such complex cases including Complex Spine team, Neurosurgery,
Vascular surgery, Anaesthetics, Intensive care, Radiologists, Radiotherapy
Physicists, Oncologists, Physiotherapy, Occupational therapists,
Psychologists and specialist nursing staff.

## 1310

## P653: Solitary bone plasmocytoma of the axis: a rare case report

Mohamed Amine Gharbi

1

, Hedi Ezzine

1

, Ahmed zendeoui

1

, Houssem Eddine Chahed

1

, Tborbi Anis

1

, Ramzi Bouzidi

1

, Ezzaouia Khelil

1

, and Mouadh Nefiss

1

1

Orthopedic and Trauma Surgery, Mongi Slim Marsa University Hospital
Center, Tunis, Tunisia

Introduction: Solitary bone plasmacytomas (SBP) are localized
plasma cell malignancies involving bone marrow. It is a rare entity and in
the spine, it mainly concerns the dorsolumbar spine. Involvement of the
upper cervical spine is rare and more challenging condition. Materials
and Methods: We report the case of a man with solitary
plasmacytoma involving vertebral body and posterior arch of the axis.
Result: A 50-year-old man presented with neck pain and
uncommon right sided cervicobrachial neuralgia evolving for 4 months and
becoming resistant to symptomatic treatment. X-ray showed a lytic lesion of
C2. MRI concluded in a high signal mass of the entire vertebral body, the
odontoid process and the right posterior hemi-arch of C2 with invasion of
the pre-vertebral soft tissue, the intervertebral disc and the anterior part
of C3.A CT- sacan guided biopsy failed to confirm diagnosis. We decided to
perform posterior biopsy with occipito-cervical fusion. The diagnosis of
solitary plasmocytoma of the axis was confirmed based on histopathological
examination, biologic and extension assessment. The patient was reviewed in
the hematology department and he received both postoperative radiotherapy
and chimiotherapy. He remains with no neck pain or neurological deficit and
serum markers of multiple myeloma were normal at 2-year follow-up.
Conclusion: SBP is a rare diagnosis especially in the upper
cervical spine for which the primary treatment is local radiotherapy.
However, instability is the main reason for pain, which can only be relieved
completely by surgery.

## 1313

## P654: Lumbar spine chordoma: a case report

Sofiane Masmoudi

1

, Hedi Belhassen

1

, Saiffedine Mahjoubi

1

, Haithem Eleuch

1

, Khaled Zitouna

1

, and Maher Barsaoui

1

1

Orthopedic Surgery, Rabta Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia

Introduction: Chordoma is a rare tumor arising from notochord
remnants in the spine. The slow-growing of this tumor makes it difficult to
diagnose and to follow up after treatment. Mostly, it occurs in the base of
the skull and sacral spine and rarely occurs in other parts of the spine.
The aim of our case report is to remind that these tumors can be seen and to
discuss the way to diagnose them and to treat them. Material and
Methods: We report the case of a 57 years-old men who presented
low back pain since 2 months with progressive partial paralysis of lower
limbs wich has worsened to a complete paralysis of both lower limbs. The
X-ray showed an osteolytic lesion of the 4th lumbar vertebra. The
CT-scan and the MRI showed intraductal extension of the tumor. We made a
scano-guided biopsy that concluded to a chordoma. We made a complete
transperitoneal resection of the body of L4 and we stabilized the spine with
interbody cage and bone graft. Results: Two months afer
surgery, the pain and paralysis completely disappeared and the patient went
back to work. Six months after surgery the MRI found residual tumor tissue
in the right pedicle of l4. Now a posterior resection, bone grafting and
stabilization of L3-L5 is planned. Conclusion: Chordoma is a
rare condition that should be considered in the differential diagnosis of
central destructive lesions in the spine and base of skull. Their management
is not easy.

## 1341

## P655: Cervical bone metastasis of hepatocellular carcinoma: case report
of a misleading clinical entity

Mohamed Amine Gharbi

1

, Ahmed zendeoui

1

, Houssem Eddine Chahed

1

, Mahdi Bouzidi

1

, and Mouadh Nefiss

1

1

Orthopedic and Trauma Surgery, Mongi Slim Marsa University Hospital
Center, Tunis, Tunisia

Introduction: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most common
primary liver cancer. It is often discovered late in the course of
metastasis (64% of cases). Bone metastases of HCC are rare and exceptionally
revealing. Their elective sites are the vertebrae, the ribs, and more
rarely, the sternum. Material and Methods: The particularity of
our case is that the cervical spine bone lesion is the first clinical
presentation revealing the diagnosis of HCC which was later confirmed by a
liver biopsy. Result: The patient was 61 years old, a heavy
smoker, with a history of peptic ulcer, and was followed up in rheumatology
for inflammatory cervical pain evolving in a context of altered general
condition for three months associated with a right laterocervical swelling.
The standard X-ray showed a degenerative cervical spine and the ultrasound
of the soft parts came back in favor of an adenophlegmon whose cytopunction
showed a lymph node tuberculosis. The patient was put on anti-tuberculosis
treatment and a cervical collar for pain relief. Three months later, the
patient was seen again for worsening neck pain, an irreducible flexion
attitude with a partial sensory-motor deficit of the right upper limb.
Radiological examination showed bone lysis of the body of C4 associated with
a dislocation of C4-C5 reduced under traction. The patient was then operated
through a right anterolateral approach. The tumor was resected with the
placement of a cement spacer and osteosynthesis with a Senegas plate with
simple postoperative follow-up. The histological examination showed a
secondary localization in C4 of a moderately differentiated carcinoma whose
immunohistochemical phenotype may be consistent with an excreto-biliary
origin which was later confirmed by a liver biopsy. Conclusion:
Bone metastases from HCC are rare; they should, however, be considered in
the presence of any lytic bone lesion, particularly in patients with chronic
liver disease. Given their poor prognosis, their treatment is palliative,
aimed primarily at improving the patient's quality of life.

## 1345

## P656: Mesenchymal chondrosarcoma of the sacrum : surgical treatment by
hemi-sacrectomy and pelvic reconstruction

Benjeddou Wassim

1

, Khalil Habboubi

1

, Aymen Benmahmoud

1

, Mzid Ahmed

1

, Hassen Makhlouf

1

, and Mondher Mestiri

1

1

Adults Service, Institut Med Taieb Kassab, Mannouba,
Tunisia

Rationale: Chondrosarcoma of the sacrum is a highly unusual
disease without standard curative managements yet. The objective of this
study is to report a very rare case of chondrosarcoma of the sacrum
successfully operated by percutaneous vertebroplasty. The management of
these unique cases has yet to be well-documented. Patient
concerns: A 32-year-old woman presented with a five-month history
of continuous and progressive pain and numbness of left extremity. A lytic,
expanding lesion of the sacrum and paraspinal region with severe epidural
spinal cord compression was identified. Diagnosis: MRI of spine
showed spinal cord compression secondary to the epidural component of the
giant mass, with increased marrow infiltration of the left S2 vertebral and
paravertebral region, which presented as a solid tumor. Post-operative
pathology confirmed the diagnosis of sacral well-differentiated
chondrosarcoma (stage I B). Interventions: The patient
underwent percutaneous vertebroplasty and cement augmentation of sacrum via
a posterior approach after hemisacrectomy. Outcomes: The
patient's neurological deficits improved significantly after the surgery,
but the patient died of multiple systemic metastases at the 2-year follow-up
visit. There were no complications associated with the operation during the
follow-up period. Lessons: Taken together, the lesion's
clinical features, imaging results, and pathological characteristics are
unique. Combined efforts of specialists from orthopedics, radiology,
neurosurgery, pathology, and medical oncology led to the successful
diagnosis and management of this patient. Giant sacral chondrosarcoma,
although rare, should be part of the differential diagnosis when the patient
presents with back pain and radiculopathy. We recommend the posterior
approach for spinal decompression of the sacral chondrosarcoma when the
tumor has caused neurological deficits or other severe symptoms. Osteoplasty
by cement augmentation is also a good choice for surgical treatment.

## 1397

## P657: The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the presentation of patients
with spinal metastases

Aleksander Mika

1

, Colby Wollenman

1

, Anthony Steinle

1

, Hani Chanbour

2

, Wilson Vaughan

1

, Andrew Croft

1

, Julian Lugo-Pico

1

, Scott Lawrence Zuckerman

1,2

, Amir Abtahi

1,2,3

, and Byron Stephens

1,2,3

1

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery

2

Department of Neurological Surgery

3

Center for Musculoskeletal Research, Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, Nashville, TN, United States

Introduction: The COVID-19 pandemic has placed unprecedented
pressure on the US healthcare system, causing a deprioritization of
non-emergency services including elective surgery. Delay in surgical
treatment for oncology patients can result in progression of the disease,
which can complicate surgical care, distort normal anatomy, and worsen
patients ‘preoperative health. Currently, little is known about how the
COVID-19 pandemic has affected preoperative health in patients undergoing
surgical treatment for metastatic disease to the spine. The purpose of this
study was to determine if preoperative Spinal Instability Neoplastic scores
(SINS) and Tokuhashi scores differed in patients receiving surgical care
during the COVID-19 pandemic compared to patients who received surgical care
before the pandemic. Material and Methods: Data was
retrospectively collected from the electronic medical records from a single
institution. All patients who underwent surgical treatment for metastatic
disease to the spine between 3/1/19 to 3/1/21 were included. All cases with
primary spinal tumors or insufficient imaging or chart information were
excluded. Patients were separated into two groups: one group received
surgery between 3/1/19 to 2/29/20 (before COVID restrictions) and the other
group received surgery between 3/1/20 to 3/1/21 (during COVID restrictions).
The following variables were obtained through electronic medical records:
gender, age, race, Bilsky score, cancer type, SINS, Tokuhashi score, and
mortality within 12 months of the index spine surgery. Primary outcomes
included preoperative SINS and Tokuhashi scores. Additionally, patient
postoperative Skeletal Oncology Research Group (SORG) scores were obtained.
Descriptive statistics were performed using Wilcoxon rank-sum test.
Univariate and multivariate linear regression models controlling for age and
cancer histology were performed to determine the association of having a
surgery before or during COVID-19 pandemic with SINS and Tokuhashi scores at
presentation. Results: 52 patients who underwent surgery before
the COVID-19 pandemic were compared to 45 patients who underwent surgery
during the COVID-19 pandemic. There was a significant difference between the
before COVID-19 and during COVID-19 groups with respect to SINS (9.31 ± 2.39
vs 10.84 ± 2.75, p = 0.004) and Tokuhashi scores (9.27 ± 2.35 vs 7.89 ±
2.76, p = 0.009). Linear regression demonstrated that having surgery during
COVID-19 was independently associated with a higher SINS score at
presentation (β = 1.37, 95% CI: 0.32-2.42, p = 0.011) and a lower Tokuhashi
score at presentation (β = -1.45, 95% CI: -2.48-(-0.41), p = 0.006). There
were no differences found between the two groups in 6-week, 90-day, or
1-year SORG scores, nor were there differences between the two groups in
6-month or 1-year mortality rates. Conclusion: The current
study demonstrates that patients undergoing surgical treatment for
metastatic spine disease during the COVID-19 pandemic had significant
differences in SINS and Tokuhashi scores, however, these differences are
likely not clinically significant. This study provides valuable information
regarding the impact the COVID-19 pandemic had on patients receiving
surgical care for metastatic spine disease. While both groups had similar
prognostication scores and 1 year mortality rates, alternative healthcare
delivery modalities, such as telehealth clinic visits, could be an important
tool to help mitigate poor outcomes for this patient population in the
post-COVID era.

## 1446

## P658: Spinal solitary fibrous tumor: a case report

Sliti Firas

1

, Nessrine Nessib

1

, Abdelhafidh Slimane

1

, nadhir karmani

1

, Khalil Ghedira

1

, Alaa Belhadj

1

, and Jalel Kallel

1

1

Neurosurgery, National Institute of Neurology, Tunis,
Tunisia

Introduction: Solitary fibrous tumors of the spine are extremely
rare tumors. Most solitary fibrous tumors originate in the thoracic spine,
then in the cervical spine and finally in the lumbar spine with only 6 cases
reported in the literature. Involvement of the vertebral body is an even
rarer entity with 4 cases found. Material and Methods: We
report the cas of a 29-year olf female treated in the neurosurgery
department at the Mongi Ben Hamida National Institute of Neurology in
Tunisia. Results: Our patient was initially treated for a
right-sided cauda equina hemisyndrome, with an expansive process on imaging
that destroyed the 4th lumbar vertebra. The patient underwent surgery with
incomplete removal of the tumor process by a posterior approach. The
anatomopathological study concluded to a solitary fibrous tumor of the
hemangiopericyte type (Grade III WHO). The patient reconsulted for
recurrence of the symptomatology 2 years later, with a tumor recurrence on
imaging. She underwent embolization followed by subtotal excision by
posterior approach. Subsequently, she was reoperated for additional L4
corporectomy and anterolateral excision. The patient received 22 sessions of
radiotherapy postoperatively. Currently, at 4 years post-op, imaging shows
no recurrence. Conclusion: Solitary fibrous tumors of the
spine, especially of the lumbar spine, are extremely rare. The diagnosis of
certainty remains histological. The management of these tumors is poorly
codified and there is currently no recognized adjuvant treatment. Only
complete removal of the tumor can control its evolution. Prolonged follow-up
is in all cases essential to detect early local or general recurrences.

## 1458

## P659: Tumour masquerading as sciatica

Sushant Srivastava

1

, Virendra Agrawal

1

, Kaustubh Sawant

1

, Tushar Patil

1

, and Harish Pawar

1

1

Orthopaedics, Pandit Madan Mohan Malviya Shatabdi Hospital, Mumbai,
India

Introduction: Nerve sheath tumors can be found in different
regions of the spinal cord, with the cervical cord region being the most
common site, followed by the thoracic and lumbosacral regions .Spinal
schwannomas, along with the meningiomas, are the most common spinal nerve
sheath tumors. A Schwannoma is defined as a benign tumor of the nerve sheath
which arises from Schwann cells. Schwannomas most frequently involve the
head and neck area, and also the major nerve trunks. They usually also
appear on the flexor aspects of the limbs, especially near the elbow, wrist
and knee. Also, the spinal roots and the cervical plexus, the vagus,
peroneal and ulnar nerves are the most commonly affected. Materials
and Methods: Presenting a case of 29 yr old male complaining of
severe pain radiating from lower back region to the right lower limb. The
neurological examination showed MRC Grade 5 power and normal reflexes for
bilateral lower limbs. Local examination showed a hard mass near the
sacro-iliac joint. Radiological investigations showed the mass to be a
multilobulated 3.2 x 3.6 x 3.4 cm sized hyperintense mass on T2/STIR along
the right gluteus maximus muscle. The patient was explained of this
condition. An oval , multilobulated and well encapsulated tumour was found
near the gluteus maximus muscle. Its origin was unclear and attempts were
made to trace it. Later the lesion was excised en bloc surgically. After the
surgery, presenting symptoms disappeared immediately. Histopathologic
examination showed schwannoma. One year following excision of the lesion,
the patient remained asymptomatic, with no evidence of local recurrence or
any complication. Results: Surgical excision of the tumour
causing symptoms is curative and provides the patient immediate and
permanent relief of symptoms. However, in literature there have been several
reports of a incidences of neurological complications like new or worsening
pain and motor weakness after excision of the schwannoma. In our patient, en
bloc surgical excision was performed and he was symptom free and displayed
no clinical or any radiographic evidence of recurrence of the tumour after
12 months of postoperative follow-up. Conclusion: To treat a
case of sciatica the most important tools with a clinician are the detailed
and complete clinical history, thorough physical examination and
radiological investigation like magnetic resonance imaging to reach the
pertinent solution. Careful and complete surgical excision of the tumour
lesion is curative, which provides immediate and permanent remission of
symptoms without any complication.

## 1487

## P660: Inadequate average daily sleep time is associated with depression,
dysfunctional ApoEe2 (rs7412) gene expression and 2-year postoperative neck
or back pain incidence in primary intradural extramedullary spinal cod tumor
patients: prospective clinical outcomes

Nicholas Van Halm-Lutterodt

1,2,3

, Krishna Mandalia

4

, Nicholas Storlie

5

, Chenlong Yang

6

, Ziyang Ye

3,7

, Mohamed Mesregah

8

, Andrew Mecum

9

, Josh Gonzalez

3

, Wei-Hsun Huang

2

, Wei-Cheng Chen

2

, Roberta Kungulli

3

, Mercy Bartels-Mensah

10

, Wenju Jiang

2

, Yu Wang

2

, Sunny Kim

3

, and Yulun Xu

2

1

Department of Professional Studies and Public Health, Brown
University, Providence, United States

2

Department of Neurosurgery, Beijing Tiantan Hospital, China

3

Department of Orthopedics and Neurosurgery,Inspired Spine Health,
Burnsville, United States

4

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Tufts University School of
Medicine, Boston, United States

5

School of Medicine, Creighton University School of Medicine, Omaha,
United States

6

Department of Orthopedics and Neurosurgery, Peking University,
China

7

Department of Data Science and Analytics, University of Chicago,
United States

8

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Menoufia University, Shibin el
Kom, Egypt

9

School of Medicine, University of Colorado Anschutz School of
Medicine, Aurora, United States

10

Debrecen School of Medicine, University of Debrecen,
Hungary

Background: Inadequate sleep has been reported to affect mood
and function. Psychiatric comorbidity is seldom reported in primary
intradural-extramedullary spinal cord tumors (IDEM-SCT) patients. Generally,
minimal perioperative improvement outcomes have been evidently reported in
degenerative spine patients with underlying depressive comorbid status but
this information highly lacking in the primary spinal cord tumor population.
Methods: Following Institutional Review Board (IRB) of
Beijing Tiantan Hospital approval, we prospectively obtained patient data
from January 2017 through December 2017. The study design included: adult
patients who were clinically confirmed with primary IDEM-SCTs who underwent
tumor resection surgery as primary treatment. The 17-itemized Hamilton
Depression Rating Scale [HAM-D] questionnaire tool [Score Scale: 0 to 30
points] was utilized to evaluate depressive status in the IDEM-SCT patients,
prior to surgical intervention. Patients who scored > 7 points were
considered having depressive baseline status, (DP_IDEM-SCT) while those with
score of ≤ 7 points were considered as non-depressed, (NDP_IDEM-SCT):
Baseline demographics, ApoE status, serum metabolic panel, and 2-year
postoperative clinical, neurological, and quality of life outcomes were
analyzed by t-tests following Python-based ‘age and sex’ propensity score
matching (PSM) of the [NDP_IDEM-SCT] and [DP_IDEM-SCT] patients.
Significance was set at (p < 0.05). Results: Overall, 92
patients with IDEM-SCTs were matched in this study, [NDP_IDEM-SCT]; n = 46
(50.0%) and [DP_IDEM-SCT]; n = 46 (50.0%) patients, respectively. The
overall average age was [44.97 ± 13.10] years. The incidences of comorbid
status and apolipoprotein Eε2 [ApoEε2, (rs7412) variant type (VT)]
expression, were significantly higher in the [DP_IDEM-SCT] group which were
consistent with increased fasting blood serum triglyceride (TG) and
cholinesterase (ChE) levels, (p < 0.05), at baseline. Significantly
decreased daily average sleep time of [383.38 ± 101.46] minutes (i.e.,
1-hour or 14.0% less average sleep time) was observed in the [DP_IDEM-SCT]
group compared to [445.70 ± 61.38] minutes in the [NDP_IDEM-SCT] group, (p
< 0.05). At baseline, the incidence of disability assessed by NDI or ODI
was significantly higher in the [NDP_IDEM-SCT] patient group, (p < 0.05)
but no significant difference between W.H.O. gradings was observed. At
2-year postoperative, the incidence of neck or back pain was significantly
higher in the [DP_IDEM-SCT] patient group concomitant with decreased patient
satisfaction rate, (p < 0.05). Conclusions: This study
indicated that IDEM-SCT patients with baseline depressive status were also
vulnerable to metabolic aberrations, particularly, in those with ApoEε2
(rs7412) variant genotype who showed less adequate average sleep time
(average of ≤ 6.5 hours per day). The ApoEε2 (rs7412) variant genotype
expression dysfunction in these DP patients suggests the potential negative
effects of psychiatric comorbidity on modulating the physiological
cardio-metabolic function of ApoEε2 (rs7412) as this gene variant is known
to robustly control serum lipid profile. A baseline DP status was also
associated with increased 2-year postoperative pain, and patient
dissatisfaction rates. Future studies are encouraged to explore the
relationship between ApoEε2 (rs7412) variant and DP status and how these
facets overlap in spine patients. The anticipated findings would help
uncover the clinical impacts of these entities in spine patient
population.

## 1506

## P661: Primary epidermoid cyst of the cauda equina: a case report

Ghorbel Mohamed

1

, Daoud Ahmed

1

, Kolsi Fatma

1

, ines cherif

1

, Mohamed Boukhit

2

, and Boudouara Zaher

1

1

Neurosurgery, Habib Bourguiba Hospital, Sfax, Tunisia

2

Neurosurgery, Fattouma Bourguiba Hospital, Monastir,
Tunisia

Introduction: Intraspinal epidermoid cyst is very rare. It
represents 0.5 to 1% of all spinal tumors. The cauda equina is an uncommon
location in such cases. Material and Methods: We report the
case of a patient who was treated in the department of neurosurgery in the
Habib Bourguiba hospital for a primary epidermoid cyst located in the cauda
equina. Results: We report the case of a 44-year-old female.
The patient has been suffering from chronic lumbar pain for two years.
During the last two months, she reported a weakness of both lower limbs with
a retention type sphincter malfunction. Neurological examination showed
paraparesis with abolished deep tendon reflexes. Lumbar spine MRI showed a
posterior intradural and extramedullary oval tumoral formation extending
from L1 to L5. Surgery was performed and complete removal was not possible
due tight adherences to the cauda equina nerve roots. Histological
examination was in favor of an epidermoid cyst. The patient had a good
recovery. She was symptom-free few weeks after surgery.
Conclusion: Epidermoid cyst of the cauda equina is a rare
finding. Despite its location and surgery difficulties, the post-operative
results are promoting.

## 1510

## P662: Spinal localization of brown tumors: a case report and a review of
literature

Sliti Firas

1

, Khalil Ghedira

1

, Alaa Belhadj

1

, Abdelhafidh Slimane

1

, Nadhir Karmani

1

, Khansa Abderrahmane

1

, Imed Ben Said

1

, and Jalel Kallel

1

1

Neurosurgery, National Institute of Neurology, Tunis,
Tunisia

Introduction: The brown tumor is a benign bone lesion that is
the consequence of a hyperparathyroid state. It is less frequent in cases
with secondary hyperparathyroidism but is common in patients with chronic
renal failure at the hemodialysis stage. The spinal location remains,
nevertheless, exceptional and requires a particular management especially in
case of nerve compression. Material and Methods: We present the
case of a 40-year-old patient with a 20-year history of hepatitis C on
interferon and chronic renal failure at the hemodialysis stage for 10 years,
with renal osteodystrophy. She has been on calcium and vitamin D
supplementation for 2 years. For the past 6 weeks, this patient has had a
progressive intermittent medullary claudication without sphincter disorders.
A few months earlier, she complained of back pain resistant to
anti-inflammatory drugs. Spinal radiography had shown indirect signs of
renal osteodystrophy. Examination on admission found spastic paraparesis,
posterior cord syndrome and a T10 sensory level. Spinal CT and spinal MRI
showed a lytic expansive lesion of the posterior arch of T11 compressing the
spinal cord posteriorly. We performed a laminectomy of T10 and T11 with
total resection of the lesion. The tumor was red-gray, friable and mildly
hemorrhagic. The postoperative follow-up showed a progressive regression of
the motor deficit and total disappearance of his back pain. Histological
examination showed a bone tumor with two cellular contingents:
multi-nucleated giant cells with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and
mononuclear spindle cells, associated with a brown deposit of hemosiderin.
This appearance is strongly consistent with a brown bone tumor.
Results: Although brown tumors are benign in nature, they
are a reflection of failed treatment of renal osteodystrophy in chronic
renal failure patients on hemodialysis. Bone remodeling in these patients is
related to a disorder in the regulation of phosphocalcium metabolism. This
results in a state of permanent hypocalcemia responsible for a so-called
secondary hyperparathyroidism. These brown tumors are uncommon, observed in
1.5 to 13% of chronic renal failure patients.The spinal location is
exceptional. Brown tumors of the spine are usually asymptomatic but may
present with a picture of slow or sometimes acute spinal cord compression
secondary to a pathologic vertebral fracture. It is a pathologic
proliferation of osteoclasts into multinucleated giant cells with brown
hemosiderin deposition in the stroma. Rigorous reinforcement of calcium and
vitamin supplementation treatment can break the vicious circle of bone
hyper-remodeling. Surgery is usually not indicated except in the case of
spinal localization where urgent spinal decompression is required in case of
functional threat. Para thyroidectomy is only indicated in secondary
hyperparathyroidism when the pararthormone level cannot be controlled.
Conclusion: Spinal localization of brown tumors is rare but
it is a diagnosis that should be considered in the presence of suggestive
radiographic findings in patients with chronic renal failure. Treatment is
based on calcium supplementation and surgery is usually performed in case of
neurological emergency.

## 1534

## P663: Increased neurological morbidity and inferior quality of life
outcomes in primary intramedullary spinal cord tumor patients with baseline
depressive status: a prospective clinical outcome with propensity score
matching

Nicholas Van Halm-Lutterodt

1,2,3

, Ziyang Ye

3,4

, Krishna Mandalia

5

, Nicholas Storlie

6

, Chenlong Yang

7

, Mohamed Mesregah

8

, Josh Gonzalez

3

, Andrew Mecum

9

, Wei-Hsun Huang

2

, Wei-Cheng Chen

2

, Roberta Kungulli

10

, Mercy Bartels-Mensah

11

, Wenju Jiang

2

, Yu Wang

2

, Sunny Kim

3

, and Yulun Xu

2

1

Department of Professional Studies and Public Health, Brown
University, Providence, United States

2

Department of Neurosurgery, Beijing Tiantan Hospital, China

3

Department of Orthopedics and Neurosurgery, Inspired Spine Health,
Burnsville, United States

4
Department of Data Science and Analytics,
University of Chicago, United States

5

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Tufts University School of
Medicine, Boston, United States

6

School of Medicine, Creighton University School of Medicine, Omaha,
United States

7
Department of Orthopedics and Neurosurgery,
Peking University, China

8

Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Menoufia University, Shibin el
Kom, Egypt

9

School of Medicine, University of Colorado Anschutz School of
Medicine, Aurora, United States

10
School of Medicine, Capital Medical
University, Beijing, China

11

Debrecen School of Medicine, University of Debrecen,
Hungary

Background: Depression incidence in spine patients in rapidly
receiving a lot of attention due to the significant impact it has on
post-surgery outcomes including poor postoperative recovery, prolonged
hospital-stay, high neurological morbidity and disability rates, inferior
health-related quality of life (HRQoL) outcomes, as well as minimal patient
satisfaction rates. Albeit depression has been reported in spondylotic
patients undergoing spine surgery, there is a high lack of information of
depressive status in primary intramedullary spinal cord tumor [IM-SCT]
patients. We anticipate that this study would lend support to the
inclusivity of psychosocial comorbidity and how such element(s) impact
clinical, surgical, neurological, and quality of life outcomes in spine
patient population. Methods: Following Institutional Review
Board (IRB) of Beijing Tiantan Hospital approval, we prospectively obtained
patient data from January 2017 through December 2017. The study design
included: adult patients who were clinically confirmed with primary IM-SCTs
that underwent tumor resection surgery as primary treatment. The 17-itemized
Hamilton Depression Rating Scale [HAM-D] questionnaire tool [Score Scale: 0
to 30 points] was utilized to evaluate depressive status in the IM-SCT
patients, prior to surgical intervention. Patients who scored >7 points
met the criteria for baseline depressive status, (DP_IM-SCT) while those
with score of ≤7 points were considered as non-depressed, (NDP_IM-SCT):
Primary outcomes included: baseline demographics, clinical, serum metabolic
panel, and perioperative neurological outcomes. Secondary outcomes included:
2-year postoperative neurological, functional, and quality of life outcomes.
Data were analyzed by t-tests following Python-based ‘age and sex’
propensity score matching (PSM) of the [NDP_IM-SCT] and [DP_IM-SCT]
patients. Significance was set at (p < 0.05). Results:
Overall, 76 patients with IM-SCTs were matched in this study, [NDP_IM-SCT];
n = 38 (50.0%) and [DP_IM-SCT]; n = 38 (50.0%) patients, respectively. The
overall average age was [48.91 ± 9.41] years. Significantly decreased daily
average sleep time of [414.70 ± 77.34] minutes was observed in the
[DP_IM-SCT] group compared to [469.96 ± 55.73] minutes in the [NDP_IM-SCT]
group, (p < 0.05). Baseline fasting blood total cholesterol (TC), Apo-B,
and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-c) levels were significantly
increased in the [DP_IM-SCT] group, (p < 0.05). At 2-year postoperative,
the incidences of myelopathy, localized muscle weakness, generalized muscle
weakness, paralysis (paraplegia), disability, McCormick’s grading, average
muscle strength grading and ND/ODI scores, [(3/8): Physical Functioning
(PF), (Bodily Pain (BP), and Role Emotional (RE), the overall Physical
Component Summary (PCS)] scores and patient satisfaction rates demonstrated
significant inferior outcomes in the [DP_ID-SCT] patient group, (p <
0.05). Conclusions: Our study indicated that spine patients
with IM-SCTs with baseline depressive status demonstrated inferior serum
lipid levels which were consistent with significantly decreased average
daily sleep time (< 7 hours per day). Further, DP patients had
significant inferior outcomes with myelopathy incidence, disability, quality
of life and satisfaction rates. Baseline depressive status should not be
taken lightly in spine patients indicated for surgery. Perioperative
assessments of psychiatric elements concomitant with interdisciplinary
involvement and collaboration can supportably foster value-based health
outcomes following surgical interventions in our spine patient
population.

## 1588

## P664: Primary malignant tumors of the spine: a bicentric clinical
analysis of 20 cases

Zohra Souei

1

, Rihab Benfredj

2

, Mohamed Boukhit

1

, Asma Elmir

1

, Maher Hadhri

1

, and Mehdi Darmoul

1

1

Neurosurgery, Fattouma Bourguiba University Hospital, Monastir,
Tunisia

2

Neurosurgery, Sahloul University Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia

Introduction: Primitive malignant tumors of the spine are
relatively rare. They account for less than 5% of all primary bone tumors,
and make up a heterogeneous group of neoplasms which may pose diagnostic and
treatment challenges. Clinical presentation is discreet and not specific
which delays the diagnosis and increases the likelihood of treatment
failure. Material and Methods: We retrospectively reviewed the
medical records from 20 patients who were treated for primary malignant
spine tumor at the neurosurgery department of University hospital of
Monastir and Sousse in the period from 2010 to 2020. The aim of this study
is to discuss clinical and radiological features and management of such
lesions. Results: Male to female ratio was 12 to 8. Mean age
was 42;7. The mean diagnostic delay was 11 months. Back pain and progressive
neurological deficit were the most common presenting symptoms. The thoracic
spine was the most affected level (60%). We reported also three cases of
multiple level presentations. Total spondylectomy was realised in 8 cases.
Histological types included chordoma (4), myeloma (6), plasmocytoma (6) and
Ewing sarcoma(4). Adjuvant therapy with radiotherapy ± chemotherapy after
surgery. Four out of six paraplegic patients improved considerably.
Neurological decline was observed in only two patients. Three cases of
chordoma recurred within eleven months. The mean survival in our serie was
of 13 months. Conclusion: Patients with primary spine
malignancies must be treated by specialized multidisciplinary teams composed
of pathologists, surgeons, oncologists, radiologists and radiotherapists,
all with experience in the diagnosis and treatment of these tumors. Early
diagnosis is the most important factor to preserve neurological
function.

## 1592

## P665: Giant aneurysmal bone cyst of the spine: an illustrative case of
benign histology versus malignant presentation

Zohra Souei

1

, Maher Hadhri

1

, Asma Elmir

1

, Atef Ben Nsir

1

, and Mehdi Darmoul

1

1

Neurosurgery, Fattouma Bourguiba University Hospital, Monastir,
Tunisia

Introduction: Aneurysmal bone cyst (ABC) is rare bone tumor
representing approximately 1% of all bone solid tumor and approximately
one-third of these tumors arise from the spine. It is an expansile,
non-neoplastic lesion. However, it has the ability to destroy and expand
bone. Material and Methods: We report the case of a giant ABC
with striking images that was managed in the neurosurgery department of
Fattouma Bourguiba University Hospital. Clinical presentation, radiological
and pathological features are reviewed along with the surgical intervention
utilized and its outcome. Results: A 37-year-old woman
presented to our outpatient clinic with 3-year history of lower back pain.
The patient’s medical, drug, and family history were unremarkable. Symptoms
were worst at night. 2 months ago she developed a bilateral lombocruralgia
with poor response to regular pain medication. Routine examination of the
motor and sensory system objectified a deficit of the quadriceps muscle of
the right thigh and depression of tendon reflexes on this side. She had no
anesthesia nor cauda equina symptoms. Radiological investigation showed an
expansile osteolytic mass measuring 7*5*8 cm which involves the transverse
process, pedicle and lamina. It crosses midline into the anterior part of
the vertebral body of L1 and L2.There is an extra osseous extension with
involvement of the epidural space extending from L1 to L3 causing
compression of the cord and right nerve roots at these three levels.
Anterolateraly the tumor extends to the right psoas muscle and the
retroperitoneal space in contact with the right kidney. The “soap bubble
appearance” was strongly evocative of an aggressive ABC. Liquid absolute
alcohol based sclerotherapy was proposed. Unfortunately after the second
course, our patient presented a severe exacerbation of her clinical
symptoms. Surgical approach was then validated. It consisted in tumor
debulking paravertebral soft tissue dissection, posterior decompression and
D11 D12 L4 L5 pedicle screw fixation. Clinical amelioration was rapidly
gained. The patient gained good neurological recovery without any adverse
effect in the final follow-up. Pathology exam confirmed the diagnosis. She
is programmed for a lateral approaches along with urology surgeons to
complete the retroperitoneal extension. Conclusion: ABC of the
spine is a benign tumor that can present with a wide variety of non-specific
symptoms. Local extension to the epidural space can jeopardize the
neurological outcome. For some aggressive types in the lumbar spine,
anterior extension to the retroperitoneal space (urinary tract) can have
malignant consequences. Pain management, careful preparing for surgery,
prompt resection of the lesion as well as spinal stability reconstruction
can promote good recovery and minimal adverse effect.

## 1601

## P666: Sciatica caused by dorsal meningioma: a case report

Ghorbel Mohamed

1

, Mohamed Amine Hadj Taieb

2

, Kolsi Fatma

1

, Daoud Ahmed

1

, Ines Cherif

1

, and Boudouara Zaher

1

1

Neurosurgery, Habib Bourguiba Hospital, Sfax, Tunisia

2

Neurosurgery, Fattouma Bourguiba Hopital, Monastir, Tunisia

Introduction: Meningioma is usually a benign tumor of the
central nervous system. It can be located in the spine in 25% of the cases
and the symptoms are related to spinal cord compression. In very few cases
they can be responsible for sciatica. Material and Methods: We
report the case of a patient who was admitted for sciatica that was caused
by a dorsal meningioma. The patient was treated in the department of
neurosurgery in Habib Bourguiba hospital in Sfax, Tunisia.
Results: A 46-year-old woman consulted for right sciatica.
She had no previous medical history. The sciatica had S1 trajectory and
started 10 months before admission. The pain was constant and did not
respond to medical treatment. Physical examination was normal. A medullary
MRI was performed. It revealed an intradural extramedullary lesion at T5-T6
level. The patient underwent surgery and the mass was completely removed.
Pathology concluded that it was a meningioma. The pain disappeared
immediately after surgery. Conclusion: Sciatica caused by a
dorsal meningioma is a rare situation. A long delay separates symptoms and
diagnosis. Surgery is the treatment in order to relive the suffering.

## 1662

## P668: Intra medullary pilocytic astrocytome: a case report

Ghorbel Mohamed

1

, Daoud Ahmed

1

, Ines Cherif

1

, Bel Mabrouk Yassin

1

, and Boudouara Zaher

1

1

Neurosurgery, Habib Bourguiba Hospital, Sfax, Tunisia

Introduction: Pilocytic astrocytoma is the benign form of
astrocytomas. It represents a classic tumor of the posterior fossa in
children. Its intraspinal localization is much less well known.
Patients and Methods: We report a case of intra-medullary
pilocytic astrocytoma occurring in an 11-year-old girl. Case
Report: An 11-year-old girl presenting gait disorders that had
been evolving for 2 months, associated with gestational disorders of both
upper limbs and vesico-sphincteric disorders. The examination founded a
spastic paraparesis with peripheral brachial diplegia. Medullary MRI
revealed an intramedullary lesion ranging from the medullary bulbo junction
to D4. Complete excision was performed. Histological examination confirmed
the diagnosis of pilocytic astrocytoma. Conclusion:
Intramedullary astrocytomas are rare tumors. The clinical symptomatology is
nonspecific. Medullary MRI is quite evocative, showing an iso or slightly
hypo-intense lesion in T1, hyper-intense in T2 and often associated with
cysts. The enhancement after injection of GADO is smaller and more eccentric
than ependymoma. The most complete surgical excision possible is necessary
to ensure a good evolution of the patients.

## 1665

## P669: Primary malignant lymphoma in a spinal cord presenting as an
epidural mass: report of a two cases

Daoud Ahmed

1

, Ines Cherif

1

, Ghorbel Mohamed

1

, Kolsi Fatma

1

, Bel Mabrouk Yassin

1

, Mohamed Amine Hadj Taieb

2

, and Boudouara Zaher

1

1

Neurosurgery, Habib Bourguiba Hospital, Sfax, Tunisia

2

Neurosurgery, Fattouma Bourguiba Hospital, Sfax, Tunisia

Introduction: Malignant lymphoma can involve the central nervous
system either primarily or by secondary spread, which tends to occur late in
the disease as part of widespread dissemination. Lymphoma presenting as
primary tumors of the spinal cord are extremely uncommon. Materials
and Methods: We report tow cases of primary malignant lymphoma in
a spinal cord. Results: The first case was about a
59-year-old-woman who presented with progressive paraparesis over 2 weeks.
Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a spinal epidural mass from T2 to D4. We
performed a decompressive laminectomy and mass removal. The histopathology
was consistent with a small cell lymphoma B. The second patient was a
60-year-old -men who presented with progressive paraparesis and sphincter
changes over 2 weeks. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a spinal epidural
mass from T3 to T5. We also performed a decompressive laminectomy and mass
removal. The histopathology was consistent with a large cell lymphoma B.
Both patients were addressed to chemotherapy and radiotherapy.
Conclusion: Primary central nervous system lymphoma is a
rare form of extra nodal lymphoma, particularly isolated primary spinal
lymphoma. A primary small lymphocytic lymphoma of the spine should be
considered in the differential diagnosis of primary spine tumors. Surgical
decompression and tumor removal are mandatory to recover neurologic
function, if the patient had a neurologic deficit. The combined modality
treatment after surgical decompression resulted in improvement of the
neurologic symptoms and remission of the lymphoma.

## 1669

## P670: Epidural Ewing sarcoma: about three cases

Ahmed Amine Daoued

1

, Ines Cherif

1

, Ghorbel Mohamed

1

, Kolsi Fatma

1

, and Boudouara Zaher

1

1

Neurosurgery, Habib Bourguiba Hospital, Sfax, Tunisia

Introduction: Ewing's sarcoma is an uncommon tumor, accounting
for 15% of all primary malignant bone tumors, most common in children under
10 years old. Extraosseous Ewing's sarcoma is rare, and primary spinal
epidural localization has been reported in only few cases. Material
and Methods: We report the cases of three patients who was
treated for an epidural sarcoma in the department of neurosurgery in the
Habib Bourguiba university hospital, in Sfax, Tunisia. Result:
We report the cases of three men. The average age was 20.66. The
symptomatology was made of a heaviness of the two lower limbs for all the
patients associated with a cervicobrachial neuralgia in only one case and
vesico-sphincter disorders with urinary retention in two cases. The
symptomatology was sudden in two cases and progressive in one case. The
examination revealed spastic paraparesis in two cases and flaccid
paraparesis in one case. All our patients had a spinal cord MRI showing an
epidural lesion taking strong contrast and infiltrating the paraspinal
muscles in only one case. The location was the cervico-dorsal junction in
two cases and dorsal in one case. A complete excision was performed in all
cases through a C7-D2 laminectomy in two cases and D8-D9-D10 in the other
case. The histopathological examination concluded to an EWING sarcoma. All
our patients had chemotherapy with a good evolution with complete recovery
in 2 cases and partial recovery in 1 case. Conclusion: Spinal
epidural Ewing's sarcoma is an exceptional extraosseous malignant bone
tumor, more frequent in children and adolescents. MRI remains the gold
standard examination in the diagnosis of spinal epidural tumor. But the
confirmation remains histological. Through our observations, we underline
the rarity of this pathology and especially of the epidural localization and
we insist on the importance of the complete surgical resection which
conditions the vital and functional prognosis.

## 1672

## P671: Ependymomas of the filum terminale

Ghorbel Mohamed

1

, Ines Cherif

1

, Daoud Ahmed

1

, Kolsi Fatma

1

, and Boudouara Zaher

1

1

Neurosurgery, Habib Bourguiba Hospital, Sfax, Tunisia

Introduction: Terminal filum ependymoma is a rare tumor of the
cauda equina that accounts for 30-40% of all spinal ependymomas. It affects
adults between 30 and 40 years old. In this work we report the clinical,
radiological and therapeutic characteristics and the postoperative evolution
of these tumors. Material and Methods: We report the case of
two patients who was treated for an ependymomas of the terminal filum in the
department of neurosurgery in the Habib Bourguiba university hospital, in
Sfax, Tunisia. Results: Case report 1: We report the case of a
29 years old patient who had presented from 2 years, progressive low back
pain that became hyperalgesic with gait disorders. The examination revealed
a paraparesis with a lumbar spinal syndrome. The spinal cord MRI showed a
lesion opposite to L1-L2 with heterogeneous enhancement, compressing the
terminal cone and pushing back the roots of the cauda equina. The patient
was operated with a complete removal of the tumor. The histopathological
examination concluded to an ependymoma. The outcome was good with a clear
improvement of the symptomatology. Case report 2: We report the
case of a 35 years old man, who had been presenting for 6 years
progressively worsening low back pain and intermittent radicular
claudication with vesico-sphincter disorders (urinary impaction). The
examination showed a lumbar spinal syndrome with saddle hypoesthesia.
Myelography and myeloscan concluded to a lesion of the terminal filum. She
was operated with good evolution after 21 years of follow-up. The
histopathological examination concluded to an ependymoma.
Conclusion: The clinical presentation of terminal filum
ependymoma is often poor. MRI is the gold standard to confirm the diagnosis.
The histological type is myxopapillary in the majority of cases. Complete
microsurgical excision is the best way to limit recurrence and to have a
good prognosis.

## 1673

## P672: Paraganglioma of the cauda equina

Ghorbel Mohamed

1

, Ines Cherif

1

, Daoud Ahmed

1

, Kolsi Fatma

1

, Bel Mabrouk Yassin

1

, and Boudouara Zaher

1

1

Neurosurgery, Habib Bourguiba Hospital, Sfax, Tunisia

Introduction: Paragangliomas of the cauda equina are rare
tumors. The revealing symptomatology is usually radiculalgia with low back
pain, which may be associated with sphincter disorders. The reference
treatment is surgical resection. Material and Methods: We
report the case of a patient operated for a paraganglioma of the cauda
equina in our department of neurosurgery in the Habib Bourguiba university
hospital, in Sfax, Tunisia. Results: This is a 64-year-old
patient with no particular pathological history who consulted for bilateral
S1 lumbosciatica associated with heaviness of both lower limbs that evolved
rapidly over a week without vesico-sphincter disorders. The examination
found a predominantly right paraplegia with abolition of the patellar and
achilles reflexes and a lumbar spinal syndrome. Spinal cord MRI showed an
extensive intradural lesion from L2 to L3. The patient was operated with
complete surgical removal of the tumor. The histological examination
concluded to a paraganglioma. Conclusions: Paragangliomas of
the cauda equina are rare tumors whose histological appearance is close to
neurinomas. The treatment of these tumors remains complete surgical
excision, most often requiring the sacrifice of the supporting nerve root.
The absence of tumor residue after excision makes recurrence exceptional. No
additional treatment is recommended.

## 1689

## P673: Survival and surgical outcomes of breast cancer spinal metastases
in a National Tertiary Centre

Sandra O'Malley

1

, Jake McDonnell

1

, Gráinne Cunniffe

1

, and Seamus Morris

1

1

Trauma and Orthopaedics, Mater Misericordiae University Hospital,
Dublin, Ireland

Introduction: Breast cancer is one of the most common cancer
types in women and due to advances in various therapies the frequency of
long-term sequelae has increased; 10 to 30% of patients with primary
malignancies are expected to develop spinal epidural metastases, and since
Patchell’s landmark study in 2005 there is increased demand for aggressive
therapies including surgery to optimize patient outcomes. However, there is
limited evidence for managing individual histopathological types of cancers.
This study was restricted to patients with spinal metastases from breast
cancer to limit differences as a result of various different tumour types.
Material and Methods: A retrospective review was carried
out on all patients that underwent spinal surgery for breast cancer spinal
metastases causing instability, cord compression or irretractable pain from
2005 to 2020. Patients were followed up for 2 years after surgery. Hospital
records were assessed for demographic, clinical, operative and radiological
parameters. Univariate and multivariate analyses were used to assess the
data. Results: 90 patients underwent surgery over a 15-year
period in a National Tertiary referral centre for spinal injuries. Median
patient age at time of breast cancer diagnosis was 53.3 years (range 32-78
years), median patient age at time of spinal surgery for metastases was 57.8
years (range 35-82 years). 44 deaths occurred during the follow-up period,
median age at death was 60.4 years (range 35-82). There were 20 deaths in
the first 6 months post-surgery and an additional 24 deaths within the first
2 years post-surgery. Conclusion: The volume of surgery
increased throughout the study period, suggesting an increase in
presentation of spinal metastases as predicted from long-term sequelae or a
combination of treatment shift to more aggressive decompressive surgery. The
most important predictor of survival was no neurological deficit
pre-operatively, followed by time from diagnosis of breast cancer to surgery
for spinal metastases.

## 1708

## P674: Cryptogenic spinal epidural hemangioma: case report

Andrea Veroni

1,2

, Roberto Spnelli

1,2

, Mattia Seida

1,2

, Simone Zironi

1,2

, Giulia Ghisellini

1,2

, Villiam Dallolio

1,2

, Vitaliano Nizzoli

1,2

, and Marco Ruini

1,2

1

Neurosurgery, Ospedale di Suzzara, Suzzara, Italy

2

Neurosurgery, GVM Care & Research - Salus Hospital, Reggio
Emilia, Italy

Introduction: Epidural hemangioma is extremely rare, accounting
for only 4% of all extradural spinal tumors, and only 171 epidural
hemangiomas are reported since 1929. The most common symptoms include
myelopathy or radicular pain with or without deficit. Our case report is
about a patient treated for a herniated disc by microsurgical technique,
which reveals an epidural spinal hemangioma during surgery, without any
suspicion at preoperative radiological exams. Materials and
Methods: Introduction to the case report. We describe a case
report who find no equals in literature. The patient went our observation
for a typical radicular pain with L5/S1 herniated disc. The patient
underwent all common conservative treatments without any benefit. We
therefore proceeded performing herniectomy with microsurgical technique.
Results: The surgical operation. The patient underwent a
standard approach for herniectomy. During the normal manipulation of the
nerve root, the L5 root appeared to progressively swollen itself. The roots
was both L5 and also S1 free, and the swollen of the L5 root was not clear
if it was due to vascular, neoplastic or everything else. In addition, we
have informed the patient about the herniectomy and its specific risks and
benefits, and so we weren’t having a patient’s valid consensus to facing the
unknown lesion. Consequently, we decided to conclude the surgical operation,
referring any attempt to biopsy or remove the lesion after adequate
radiological study and a share planning. Then we informed the patient and
followed up him, who presented a good recovery, with complete resolution of
neurological deficits and pain. However, the MRI revealed a minimal trend in
enlargement of the lesion. We explain the risk and benefits and the patient
decided to approve the surgical removal of the lesion. So, we performed an
emi-laminecthomy. We identified the lesion and we noted that the L5 root was
upper and well separately from the lesion. We isolated the lesion and
removed it, and the histhopathological examination revealed an epidural
hemangioma, not visible in the preoperative MRI. The patient returned early
to his normal life, without deficits or pain. Discussion: Our
interpretation of this case report is that originally there was a vascular
nidus compressed by the herniated disc. The high pressure of the herniated
disc reduced the caliber of the vessel nidus of the hemangioma to a virtual
size. Consequently to the removal of the herniated fragment, the reduction
of the pressure on the vessels nidus enabled instantly the hemangioma to
swollen the caliber of its anomalous vessels growing its global volume.
Conclusions: Our case is characterized by a clinical
presentation like no other in the literature reports, because the patient
haven't specific symptoms due to the hemangioma, before the diagnosis. Also
if the spinal hemangioma is a very rare pathology, we experienced that it
can happened and exceptionally it can develop during surgery. So it is huge
important to know this eventuality, in order to manage it with properly
timing and surgical planning.

## 1738

## P675: The inflammatory pseudotumor, the great imitator in an unusual
location

Sliti Firas

1

, Abdelhafidh Slimane

1

, Sinda Laafif

1

, Khalil Ghedira

1

, Imed Ben Said

1

, and Jalel Kallel

1

1

Neurosurgery, National Institute of Neurology, Tunis,
Tunisia

Introduction: Inflammatory pseudotumor is an uncommon tumor,
initially described in the lung. It can affect different organs. It is a
controversial entity. In the nervous system, this pathology is difficult to
diagnose because its clinical and radiological presentation is not specific.
Material and Methods: We present the case of a 40-year-old
patient with no previous pathological history who was admitted to the
hospital with left S1 low back pain of progressive onset for two months. The
neurological examination did not reveal any deficit or Irritative phenomena.
MRI showed an infiltrative epiduritis extending from T10 to L2 without
obvious disc and vertebral body involvement. This epidural lesion totally
engages the spinal cord, which is narrowed and compressed anteriorly, and is
attached to the posterior ligament. It also causes bilateral foraminal
entrapment with bilateral medial L5-S1 disc herniation with intramedullary
right L5 and S1 radicular impingement. A laminectomy from T10 to L2 was
performed, uncovering a localized fibrous, whitish, non-hemorrhagic dural
thickening organized in an onion bulb. A macroscopically total resection was
performed. Histological examination of the resection specimens showed the
existence of a characterized inflammatory process compatible with the
diagnosis of an inflammatory pseudotumor. Results: The
inflammatory pseudotumor corresponds to an aspect of inflammatory mass whose
symptomatology depends on its location. Relatively ubiquitous, it is rarely
described in the central nervous system. This unusual lesion represents a
wide spectrum of clinical presentation posing diagnostic problems for both
pathologists and clinicians. The main differential diagnosis of extradural
inflammatory pseudotumors is lymphoma and also metastases, myeloma and
meningioma. Without biopsy, the differential diagnosis is difficult.
Conclusion: Inflammatory pseudotumors (IPT) are benign
lesions of unknown etiology, probably an immunological response to traumatic
or infectious aggression. Sometimes considered an IgG4-related autoimmune
disorder. They may present as an isolated or multicentric lesion. Central
nervous system involvement is rare. Only nine cases of epidural IPT have
been reported to date. It is clinically and radiologically a diagnosis of
exclusion.

## 1743

## P676: Spinal schwannomas: a review and institutional experience

Sliti Firas

1

, Skander Guediche

1

, Abdelhafidh Slimane

1

, Nadhir Karmani

1

, and Jalel Kallel

1

1

Neurosurgery, National Institute of Neurology, Tunis,
Tunisia

Introduction: Spinal schwannomas are benign tumors that develop
from Schwann cells of the spinal roots. They account for 35% of
extramedullary intradural tumors, 80% of them along the spinal cord and 20%
in the cauda equina. The carrier root is often a sensitive root, which
explains the frequency of the revealing radicular pain. Neuromas are most
often sporadic, but can be part of a neurofibromatosis type II.
Material and Methods: This is a retrospective study spread
over 8 years (2010-2017) concerning 36 cases of spinal schwannomas, treated
and followed up at the neurosurgery department of the National Institute of
Neurology, Tunisia. Results: The average age of our patients is
52 years (10-76 years). There was a male predominance of 61% with a sex
ratio of 1.5. The circumstances of discovery were dominated by radicular
syndrome in 62% of cases. 53% of the patients presented spinal pain. 73% of
the patients presented sensory disorders such as paresthesia. Sphincter
disorders were present in 22% of cases. The clinical picture is silent for a
long time, and the diagnostic delay is variable according to the location
and volume of the neuromas. They are responsible for a spinal cord
compression syndrome in 73% of cases, a spinal syndrome (45%) and a lesion
syndrome (56%). Magnetic resonance imaging was performed in all our
patients. The most frequent localization was cervical in 36% of cases,
dorsal in 30% and lumbar in 34% of cases. Multiple neuromas were found in
11% of cases. All patients underwent posterior surgery, allowing
macroscopically complete removal of the tumor in all cases. 60% of the
patients underwent postoperative MRI at a distance, confirming complete
removal of the tumor. The immediate postoperative course was simple in all
our patients. 7 patients (20%) presented a postoperative motor and sensory
deficit, 5 of whom recovered after rehabilitation. Conclusion:
This study also allowed us to study the evolution of patients treated for
spinal schwannoma. Their detection at an early stage of evolution, a
primordial parameter to improve the prognosis, has been greatly facilitated
by the development and better accessibility of neuro-diagnostic techniques.
The prognosis also depends on the quality of the resection, which can be
complete in some cases only at the expense of nerve sacrifice. This balance
is sometimes difficult to weigh, with on the one hand a non-negligible risk
of tumor recurrence, and on the other hand the fear of producing
neurological sequelae in patients who did not have them before surgery.

## 1839

## P677: Management of metastatic epiduritis : a review of 50 cases

Nessrine Nessib

1

, Khalil Ghedira

1

, Sliti Firas

1

, Eya Chahed

1

, Sofiene Bouali

1

, Abdelhafidh Slimane

1

, Alaa Belhaj

1

, and Jalel Kallel

1

1

Neurosurgery, Mongi ben Hamida Institute of Neurology, Tunis,
Tunisia

Introduction: The spine may be the site of metastasis in 40% of
patients with neoplastic pathology. The aim of our work is to describe the
epidemiological, clinical and paraclinical characteristics of metastatic
epiduritis, to review the therapeutic modalities and to evaluate the
clinical evolution of the patients. Materials and Methods: This
is a retrospective study of 50 patients admitted for metastatic epiduritis
to the neurosurgery department at the Mongi Ben Hamida National Institute of
Neurology in Tunisia between 2011 and 2018. Results: The mean
age was 54.11 years. Motor deficit was the most frequent reason for
consultation (94%), followed by spinal pain (84%). The average time to
progression was 1.9 months. All patients underwent spinal cord MRI. The
lesions were located in the dorsal region in 82% of cases. As soon as the
diagnosis was positive, management was urgent. A scan-guided biopsy was
performed in 8 patients (16%) after a multidisciplinary decision. Surgery
was performed in 42 cases (84%). It was performed through a posterior
approach in all cases. The 3 most frequent cancers were respectively: lung
(32%), breast (28%) and prostate (20%). All patients were referred for
radiotherapy. Improvement of the neurological status was noted in 34 cases
(68%), the status was stationary in 9 cases (18%) and worsening was noted in
7 cases (14%). Conclusion: Metastatic epiduritis represents a
neurosurgical emergency. Their diagnosis must not be delayed and this as
soon as the first symptoms appear. MRI is the best examination to confirm
the diagnosis. Urgent surgical management allows for a chance of recovery.
Radiotherapy and physical rehabilitation are necessary in the subsequent
management.

## 1873

## P678: The importance of inpatient and outpatient palliative care
utilization at the end of life for patients with spine metastases

Edwin Owolo

1

, Dana Rowe

1

, Meghan Price

1

, Jacob Sperber

1

, Tara Dalton

1

, Harrison Hockenberry

1

, Isabel Prado

1

, Arif Kamal

1

, Margaret Johnson

1

, Brandon Bishop

1

, Antoinette Charles

1

, and C. Rory Goodwin

1

1

Department of Neurosurgery, Duke University School of Medicine,
Durham, United States

Introduction: Given the significant symptom burden associated
with spine metastases (SM), specialty Palliative Care(PC) can be
instrumental in improving patient quality of life(QoL). Therefore, it is
important to identify/address disparities in access to this intervention to
ensure comprehensive and equitable care. Objective: The purpose
of this study is to assess the impact of sociodemographic and treatment
factors on inpatient PC (IPPC) and outpatient PC (OPPC) utilization in
patients with SM. Methods: We evaluated IPPC and OPPC
utilization in a cohort of 270 patients seen by our institution’s Brain and
Spine Metastases Tumor Board from February 2018- February 2020. Patient
demographics, oncologic history, interventions received, OPPC and IPPC
consultations/encounters, and clinical outcomes were collected via
retrospective chart review. Statistical analyses compared characteristics
and outcomes between patients who did or did not utilize IPPC and/or OPPC.
Results: 47 (17.4%) and 73 (27.0%) patients received at
least one IPPC consult or OPPC visit, respectively. We observed that Black
patients received IPPC consults at a higher rate than non-Black patients
(25.9% vs 15.1%, p = 0.077), while White patients received OPPC consults at
higher rates than non-White patients (27.7% vs 20.0%, p = 0.13). Patients
who received surgical intervention or radiation therapy had higher rates of
OPPC utilization than those who did not (36.9% vs 21.7%,p = 0.011; 31.6% vs
19.2%,p = 0.033, respectively). Patients who received an IPPC consult had
worse median overall survival (OS) than patients who did not (6.5 months vs.
24.2 months) while OPPC consultation was associated with a survival
advantage (11.2 months vs 19.2 months for those seen by OPPC and not).
Conclusion: We present several race and intervention-based
differences in OPPC and IPPC utilization for patients with SM. Further work
is needed to better appreciate PC utilization trends and identify
interventions that may improve the equity and accessibility of PC for this
patient population.

## 1876

## P679: Lumbar spine osteosarcoma with large retroperitoneal extension and
vascular attachment: a case report and literature review

Pablo Sanchez Quinones

1,2,3

, Andres Felipe Pineda-Martínez

1,2

, Juan Felipe Abaunza-Camacho

1,2,3

, Javier M Saavedra

1,2,3

, William M Riveros

1,2,3

, Jorge Torres-Mancera

1,2,3

, and Camilo Benavides-Burbano

1,2,3

1

Neurosurgery Department, Center for Research and Training in
Neurosurgery CIEN, Bogotá, Colombia

2

Neurosurgery Department, Hospital Universitario de La Samaritana,
Bogotá, Colombia

3

Neurosurgery Department, Hospital Universitario Mayor Méderi,
Bogotá, Colombia

Introduction: Osteosarcoma of the spine (OS) is a rare, highly
malignant tumor representing 3-5% of all osteosarcomas. It is a tumor with
potential local invasive destruction and metastatic spread. OS has the worst
5‐year survival of all spinal sarcomas (39%). Its independent prognosis
factors include age (> 60 years old) and advanced stage that produces
poor outcomes. Surgical management in OS positively affects prognosis and
produces favorable survival. Its goal is curative resection with negative
margins. However, it depends on location, adjacent structures,
aggressiveness, and size. Surgical technique is controversial over the
superiority of intralesional versus en-bloc resection. Larger size and
adjacent neurovascular structures imply challenging surgical management.
Material and Methods: We report a case of a 41-year-old
female with L4 spinal osteosarcoma with large retroperitoneal extension
treated with a first posterior elements en-bloc resection with lumbar
arthrodesis and second stage anterior en-bloc resection with L4
vertebrectomy. Results: A 41-year-old female complained of
chronic lumbar pain exacerbated one month prior to admission. She had a
history of pathologic L4 fracture three years previously, with reported
osteoblastic osteosarcoma Ki67 10% in a percutaneous biopsy without
complementary management. Physical examination showed vertebral pain in the
lumbar spine. The neurological exam was intact. Lumbar MRI and abdominal
angio-CT showed a 120 x 87 x 97 mm calcified lesion of the L4 vertebral body
with facet, epidural and abdominal extension without central canal
compromise. Additionally, right displacement of aortic bifurcation and both
common iliac arteries without occlusion was identified. Bone scintigraphy
discarded other lesions, and lower-limbs electromyography was normal.
Surgical management was indicated with a first stage posterior and second
stage anterior en-bloc tumoral resection. At first, a posterior approach was
completed with L4 partial vertebrectomy and L3-L4 and L4-L5 discectomy. A
viaflex bag was positioned anterior to the thecal sac to protect neuronal
structures during second stage approach. Finally, L2-L3 and L5-S1 polyaxial
screws were placed and fixated, achieving lumbar arthrodesis. One week
later, an anterior approach was made. A retroperitoneal approach, lymph node
drainage, and vascular release from feeding vessels of the aorta and the
posterior wall of the vena cava was performed with an oncologic surgeon.
En-bloc mass resection was performed, and anterior L3-L4 and L4-L5
discectomy with L4 total vertebrectomy was completed. Epidural Viaflex bag
was identified and removed. Then, vertebral body reconstruction using an
expandable cage was completed. Intraoperative neurophysiological monitoring
remained normal during both approaches. Postoperative bleeding was present,
with a requirement of 10 units of red-blood-cell transfusion. Secondary
mesenteric ischemia was encountered, and the patient required colostomy plus
antibiotic management for peritonitis. Finally, the patient responded well
and was discharged without neurological deficit. Conclusion:
Osteosarcoma of the lumbar spine is an uncommon and challenging disease. The
surgical approach depends on tumoral size, localization, and involvement of
adjacent vascular structures. When an abdominal extension is present, a
multidisciplinary surgical treatment with aggressive posterior and anterior
approaches could be an excellent option since it provides an impact on
survival and reduces postoperative complications.

## 1883

## P680: Atlantoaxial Langerhans cell histiocytosis manifesting as painful
torticolis

Nessrine Nessib

1

, Mohamed Zairi

2

, Kais Bouzouita

1

, Sofiene Bouali

1

, Mohsni Ahmed Amine

2

, Ahmed Msakni

2

, Rim Boussetta

2

, and Nessib Mohamed Nabil

2

1

Neurosurgery, Mongi ben Hamida Institute of Neurology, Tunis,
Tunisia

2

Orthopedics, Bechir Hamza Children's Hospital, Tunis,
Tunisia

Introduction: Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH) is a rare
disorder of clonal proliferation of dendritic cell mostly seen in children.
It consists in various clinical manifestations from a single lytic bone
lesion to multisystemic lesions with organ dysfunction. Atlantoaxial
involvement by LCH is very rare, especially in a young child. The aim of
this work was to describe the management challenges of treatment of a rare
localization of Langerhans cell histiocytosis in the craniocervical junction
complicated by spinal instability and deformity. Materials and
Methods:A 6-year-old child consulted for painful torticollis
evolving for two weeks without fever. Patient has no medical and surgical
history or cervical spine trauma. The clinical examination objectified a
torticollis without neurosensory deficit. Cervical spine x-ray showed spinal
deviation without bone lesions. Specialized examinations have been
requested. Results: Cervical spine CT scan concluded in an
atlantoaxial rotational dislocation with bone involvement of C1 and C2. The
MRI objectified the presence of spinal cord compression at the CCJ and a
soft-tissue mass between C1-C2. Bone scintigraphy showed two fixation
locations. One at the cranio-cervical junction, the other at the level of
the left iliac crest. Bone biopsy at the lesion of the iliac crest concluded
in Langerhans cell histiocytosis. The biological explorations objectified a
pancytopenia. The child had medical treatment such as corticosteroids and
vinblastine. For bone lesions and instability of the cranio-cervical
junction, two-stage surgery was performed. Stabilization of the skull by
halo-vest. Then enlargement of foramen magnum, C1 laminectomy and
non-instrumented occipito-C2 arthrodesis. At 3-years of follow-up, the
cervical spine was stable without torticollis and the child has
healed. Conclusion: Damage to the craniocervical junction
during Langerhans cell histiocytosis is a source of spinal instability and
deformity. Surgical stabilization must be urgent before the appearance of a
sensory-motor deficit. The two-stage approach non-instrumented vertebral
arthrodesis was desirable in growing children.

## 1885

## P681: Primary bone tumors of the spine: assessment of 20 years single
center experience

Zohra Souei

1

, Mohamed Boukhit

1

, Nessrine Nessib

1

, Souhaiel Khalfaoui

1

, Maher Hadhri

1

, and Mehdi Darmoul

1

1

Neurosurgery, Fattouma Bourguiba University Hospital, Monastir,
Tunisia

Introduction: Primary bone tumors of the spine are relatively
rare, and make up a heterogeneous group of neoplasms that can pose
diagnostic and treatment challenges. Material and Methods: We
retrospectively studied 19 cases of primary bone tumors of the spine that
were diagnosed and managed at the Neurosurgery department of Monastir
University Hospital in Tunisia. We aim to review through this study,
epidemiologic, clinical, imaging and management features in these tumors in
order to provide an appropriate treatment strategy. Results:
Sixteen males and four women aged between 5 and 78 years were included in
the study. The mean age of our population was 46.8 years with a male
predominance. The mean diagnostic delay was up to 18 months. Back pain and
progressive limbs weakness were. The lesions were located in the cervical
spine in 3 patients, thoracic spine in 4 patients, and lumbar spine in 4,
and sacral region in 7 patients. Total spondylectomy was realized in six
patients. Histological types included osteoid osteoma (2), Brown tumor (2),
osteoblastoma (4), chordoma (4), lymphoma (2), Ewing sarcoma (2) and primary
plasmocytoma (4). Adjuvant treatment with radiotherapy and/or chemotherapy
was performed in 13 cases. Three cases of chordoma recurred within 11 months
and tumor control was obtained in 15 cases after a median follow up period
of 2.5 years (range 1-11 years). Conclusion: Primary malignant
tumors are markedly more frequent than benign tumors of the spine. Early
intervention is necessary to restore the spinal stability, decompress the
spinal cord and realize the maximum tumor resection allowing a better tumor
control.

## 1886

## P682: Spinal cord compression secondary to voluminous thoracic primary
extraosseous Ewing's sarcoma: presentation of an anecdotic and catastrophic
disease

Andres Vargas

1

, Borja Ferrandez Pujante

1

, and Marc Valera Mele

1

1

Department of Neurosurgery, Hospital Clinico San Carlos, Madrid,
Spain

Introduction: Ewing’s Sarcoma (ES) is a rare osseous tumor, with
an annual incidence of 3 cases per 1.000.000 people, mainly affecting large
bones. Spinal Affection (SA) is anecdotic (less than 5% of all ES cases),
including primary extra-osseous tumors with SA being no more than 13 cases
reported in literature between 1969 and 2015. Tipically, SA tumors present a
highly aggressive histology compatible with Primitive Neuroectodermic Tumor
(PNET). Spinal Surgery role in the disease is fundamental due to its
multiple benefits derived from decompression of neural structures,
restoration of spinal stability and from the reduction of tumor volume,
this, also contributing to improve the response to adjuvant therapy. We
present the case of a young patient presenting with a severe Spinal Cord
Compression (SCC) syndrome secondary to a voluminous cervical primary
extra-osseous tumor with histologic diagnosis of ES. Material and
Methods: A previously healthy 32-year-old male patient presented
to the Emergency Room (ER) with 48 hours progressive paraparesis associating
bladder dysfunction. During his ER admittance muscle power of 2/5 according
to mMRC and C7-T1 sensitive level was evidenced. Urgent magnetic resonance
imaging revealed a thoracic-soft-tissue mass with C6-C7-T1-T2 spinal canal
invasion and severe SCC and displacement. The patient underwent C7-T1
laminectomy, tumor debulking and resection for decompression and C6
bilateral lateral-mass arthrodesis, C7 left unilateral pedicular screw due
to right pedicular tumoral involvement and T1-T2 bilateral pedicular screw
under fluoroscopic control. No complications related with arthrodesis or
wound healing were present. Pathology analysis revealed a highly cellular
tumor compatible with ES. During his admittance the patient had a stable
evolution, with partial motor recovery (distal predominance), requiring
in-patient rehabilitation program. Results: The patient was
discharged to a National highly specialized rehabilitation center for
treatment of spinal cord injury and is receiving high-dose chemotherapy
including Vincristine, Etoposide, Ifosfamide and Actinomicin-D, with a
complete tumoral response according to the last PET-Scan. Anterior approach
by a cervico-sternotomy and C7-T1 corpectomy to complement posterior
arthrodesis is pending due to recent chemotherapy and request of a fourth
chemotherapy cycle. Conclusion: SA of ES is a poor prognostic
tumor due to its highly aggressive histology and the possibility of debuting
with a severe neurological deficit. Surgery for decompression and spinal
stabilization represents an important tool when addressing urgent treatment
of this disease, in addition with aggressive adjuvant therapy. Close
follow-up is recommended in order to evaluate tumor response to adjuvant
therapy, residual tumor behavior and spinal stability.

## 1899

## P683: Rare case of epidural metastasis of thymoma

Joao Oliveira

1

, Mário Vale Campos

1

, and Pedro Ribeiro da Cunha

1

1

Neurocirurgia, Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Ocidental, Lisboa,
Portugal

Introduction: Malignant thymoma is a rare, slow growing,
anterior mediastinal tumor, that is often associated with extrathoracic
metastasis (up to 15%, mostly liver, kidney and bone). Local invasion and
intrathoracic spread are relatively common. Despite the highly aggressive
behaviour of malignant thymoma, spinal metastasis is exceptionally rare,
with less than 50 cases reported in the literature. Material and
Methods: A 48 year old-man, with medical background of an
operated thymoma in 2013, initially presented with discrete hemiparesis in
2017, then on May 2018 presented with intense axial pain in the
cervico-dorsal transition that irradiates to the right superior limb.
Physical examination revealed intense cervico-dorsal pain in axial
transition with irradiation to the right superior limb. Neurological
examination revealed paresis of both distal superior limbs (hands), worst on
the right. Right hypoesthesia on C6-C8. Without evident deficit on inferior
limbs. TC guided biopsy confirmed metastasis in D1 of thymoma. Cervical MRI
revealed infiltration of all vertebral body of D1, predominantly lytic
areas, with anterior and posterior epidural component towards C7-D2 with
dural contact, without deformity and no medular hypersignal. PET revealed
captation only in D1 level. The patient was submitted to 5 radiotherapy
sessions, with pain relieve but unfortunately without neurological
remission. Due to weak response to radiotherapy and lack response to
chemotherapy, the patient was submitted to surgery, with circumferential
decompression of C7-D2 through a posterior approach, with cervico-dorsal
fixation and vertebroplasty. Results: Pathology confirmed an
epidural infiltration of neoplasia with thymic differentiation, compatible
with epidural metastasis of Thymoma. Postoperative course was uneventfully,
with progressive neurological improvement. Conclusion: Spinal
epidural metastasis should be suspected in all cancer patients with back
pain. Because metastasis to the spine from thymoma are very rare, there are
no treatment guidelines. Nevertheless, surgical management of the metastatic
lesion is the most appropriate, for the preservation of the patient quality
of life.

## 1960

## P684: Association between urbanicity and outcomes among patients with
spinal cord ependymomas in the United States

Jacob Sperber

1

, Edwin Owolo

1

, Nancy Abu-Bonsrah

1

, Corey Neff

1

, Cesar Baeta

2

, Chuxuan Sun

1

, Tara Dalton

1

, David Sykes

1

, Harrison Hockenberry

1

, Brandon Bishop

1

, Antoinette Charles

1

, Jill Barnholtz-Sloan

3

, Carol Kruchko

3

, Kyle Walsh

1

, Sheng-fu L. Lo

4

, Daniel Sciubba

1,4

, Quinn Ostrom

1

 and C. Rory Goodwin

1

1

Department of Neurosurgery, Duke University School of Medicine,
Durham, United States

2

Center for Population Health Sciences, Stanford University, Durham,
United States

3

Central Brain Tumor Registry of the United States

4

Long Island Jewish Medical Center and North Shore University
Hospital, Northwell Health, United States

Purpose: Spinal Cord Ependymomas (SCE) represent the most common
intramedullary spinal cord tumors among adults. Access to neurosurgical care
can be greatly influenced by patient location. This study investigates the
association between the outcomes of SCE patients in metropolitan and
non-metropolitan areas. Methods: Patients with diagnosis of SCE
between 2004 and 2019 were identified within the Central Brain Tumor
Registry of the United States. Multivariable logistic regression models were
constructed to evaluate the association between urbanicity and SCE
treatment. Cox proportional hazard models were used to understand the effect
of surgical treatment, county urbanicity, age at diagnosis and the
interaction effect between age at diagnosis and surgery, on the survival
time of patients. Results: 7,577 patients were identified, with
6,454 (85%) residing in metropolitan and 1223 (15%) in non-metropolitan
counties. Demographics were not associated with differences in the type of
surgery received when stratified by urbanicity. Regardless of metropolitan
status, American Indian/Alaska Native and Hispanic ethnicities were
associated with reduced odds of receiving surgery alone. Black Non-Hispanic
and Hispanic ethnicities were associated with increased odds of receiving
comprehensive treatment (radiation and surgery). Diagnosis of SCE at later
ages was linked with elevated mortality (HR = 4.83, p < 0.001). Gross
total resection was associated with reduced risk of death (HR = 0.47, p =
0.018). However, among older patients, gross total resection resulted in
increased risk of death (HR = 1.02, p < 0.008). Conclusion:
The relationship between patient residential location and access to
neurosurgical care is critical to ensuring equitable distribution of care.
This study represents an important step in delineating areas of existing
disparities.