2003jshaJournal of the Saudi Heart AssociationJ Saudi Heart AssocSaudi Heart AssociationPMC1026312610263126102631263732313510.37616/2212-5043.13342023 National Heart Center/Saudi Heart Association Focused Update of the 2019 Saudi Heart Association Guidelines for the Management of Heart Failure
Al HabeebWaleed TashAdel ElasfarAbdelfatah AlmasoodAli BakhshAbeer ElshaerFayez Al AyoubiFakhr AIghalayiniKamal Waheeb AlQaseerMaryam Mohammed AlhusseinMosaad AlmogbelOsama AlSaifShukri Merza AlHebeshiYahia 
aDepartment of Cardiac Sciences, King Saud University, Riyadh, 
Saudi Arabia
bConsultant Cardiac Surgeon, Adult Cardiac Surgery, Ministry of Health, Jeddah, 
Saudi Arabia
cNational Heart Center Saudi Health Council Riyadh, 
Saudi Arabia
dMadinah Cardiac Center, Madinah, 
Saudi Arabia
eCardiology Department, Heart Center, Tanta University, 
Egypt
fConsultant Cardiologist, Specialized Medical Center, Riyadh, 
Saudi Arabia
gPrince Sultan Cardiac Centre, Riyadh, 
Saudi Arabia
hKing Khaled University Hospital, Riyadh, 
Saudi Arabia
iKing Fahad Cardiac Center, Riyadh, 
Saudi Arabia
jKing Saud University, Riyadh, 
Saudi Arabia
kNational Heart Institute, Cairo, 
Egypt
lIntensivist Cardiology Pharmacist, Department of Cardiac Sciences KFCC College of Medicine, Riyadh, 
Saudi Arabia
mAdjunct Assistant Professor, College of Pharmacy, King Saud University, Riyadh, 
Saudi Arabia
nProfessor of Cardiology, King Abdul-Aziz University, Jeddah, 
Saudi Arabia
oConsultant Cardiologist, Heart Failure, King Fahad Specialist Hospital, Dammam, 
Saudi Arabia
pCollege of Medicine, King Saud Bin Abdul-Aziz University for Health Sciences, Riyadh, 
Saudi Arabia
qKing Abdullah International Medical Research Center, Riyadh, 
Saudi Arabia
rThe Heart Center, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh, 
Saudi Arabia
sDepartment of Cardiac Sciences, College of Medicine, King Fahad Cardiac Center, Riyadh, 
Saudi Arabia
tKing Saud University Medical City, King Saud University, Riyadh, 
Saudi Arabia
uDepartment of Cardiology, Saud AlBabtain Cardiac Centre, Dammam, 
Saudi Arabia*
Corresponding author at: E-mail address: alhabeebw@yahoo.com (W. Al Habeeb).
25520233517171–1341562023© 2023 Saudi Heart AssociationThis is an open access article under the CC-BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)

## Abstract

## Background
The burden of cardiovascular diseases is undeniable in local populations, who have high mortality rates and a young age of disease onset. A systematic review of emerging evidence and update of the Saudi Heart Association (SHA) 2019 heart failure (HF) guidelines was therefore undertaken.

## Methodology
A panel of expert cardiologists reviewed recommendations of the 2019 guidelines following the Saudi Heart Association methodology for guideline recommendations. When needed, the panel provided updated and new recommendations endorsed by the national heart council that are appropriate for clinical practice and local resources in Saudi Arabia.

## Recommendations and conclusion
The focused update describes the appropriate use of clinical assessment as well as invasive and non-invasive modalities for the classification and diagnosis of HF. The prevention of HF was emphasized by expanding on both primary and secondary prevention approaches. Pharmacological treatment of HF was supplemented with recommendations on newer therapies, such as SGLT-2 inhibitors. Recommendations were also provided on the management of patients with cardiovascular and non-cardiovascular co-morbidities, with a focus on cardio-oncology and pregnancy. Updated clinical algorithms were included in support of HF management in both the acute and chronic settings. The implementation of this focused update on HF management in clinical practice is expected to lead to improved patient outcomes by providing evidence-based comprehensive guidance for practitioners in Saudi Arabia.

Keywords: Heart failure, Saudi Arabia, NHC/SHA clinical practice guidelines, Focused update, Diagnosis, Prevention, Therapeutics, Surgery

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2023 Feb 28; Revised 2023 Mar 29; Accepted 2023 Apr 7; Collection date 2023.

## 1. Introduction
The global burden of cardiovascular diseases continues to increase, with an estimated 523 million prevalent cases of cardiovascular disease (CVD) and 197 million prevalent cases of ischemic heart disease in 2019 [ ]. Heart failure (HF) is a global pandemic estimated to affect 64.3 million people in 2017 [ ]. Countries in the Gulf region have some of the highest age-standardized prevalence rates of HF around the world [ ]. Several local registries provided nascent insights into the epidemiology of HF in the Gulf and Middle East region ( ). Local populations are distinct from their Western counterparts in that they have higher mortality rates and a younger age of disease onset; on average, people with heart failure in the region are 10 years younger than patients in Western countries [ ]. Data from Saudi registries and studies paint a similar picture. The HEARTS and HEARTS-Chronic registries reported that the mean age of patients was relatively young (60.6 years in HEARTS, and 55.6 years in HEARTS-Chronic) [ , ]. Moderate to severe left ventricular (LV) dysfunction is observed in the majority of patients and coronary artery disease (CAD) is the main etiology of HF [ , ]. Mortality and re-hospitalization rates are high [ , ], and the risk of death is higher in patients with chronic HF who experience acute HF events [ ]. Moreover, HF carries a significant economic burden. The annual per-patient cost reaches approximately $9563 and is mainly driven by procedures and hospitalizations [ , ]. Disease progression to Class IV HF naturally incurs higher medical costs, which are estimated at almost double that of other patients [ ]. While underrepresentation of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF) and smaller patient numbers remain a limitation of local registries, generated data pave the way for future structured studies and healthcare initiatives to improve HF management. This is important considering that lower health-related quality of life predicts mortality and re-hospitalization in HF regardless of symptoms severity and LV dysfunction [ ]. This was reflected among Saudi HF patients among whom impaired quality of life was reported [ ] and involvement in a structured management program for HF improved quality of life, reduced mortality as well as hospitalization [ , ]).
 Since the publication of the SaudiHeart Association (SHA) Heart Failure Guidelines in 2019, new studies have been published. This required systematic review and update of the guidelines. In these guidelines, health practitioners can find evidence-based recommendations supplemented by expert opinion where needed for the diagnosis, prevention, therapeutic and surgical management of both chronic and acute HF, as well as special patient populations.

## 2. Methods
A panel of expert cardiologists met in a series of meetings and reviewed recommendations of the 2019 guidelines in light of emerging evidence. The guidelines followed the Saudi Heart Association methodology for guideline recommendations ( ). Updated and new recommendations appropriate for clinical practice and local resources in Saudi Arabia were provided based on available data from clinical studies and meta-analyses, as well as local experience ( ). Unchanged recommendations are shown in their respective section in the text. These recommendations are endorsed by the national heart center (NHC).
 

## 3. Results - guideline statements

## 3.1. Definition and classification
Consistent with current practice, left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) measurement is adopted as a practical approach to define HF. The definition of HF in its three types is included in ; LVEF ≤40% is indicative of heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF), LVEF 41–49% defines heart failure with mildly reduced ejection fraction (HFmrEF) while heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF) is defined as LVEF ≥50%.
 Other relevant terminology and concepts should also be noted:
(1) asymptomatic LV systolic dysfunction refers to a patient who has never exhibited the typical signs and/or symptoms of HF and with a reduced LVEF); (2) stable HF refers to a treated patient with signs and symptoms that have remained generally unchanged for at least 1 month); (3) decompensated HF is used to describe deterioration of a chronic stable HF patient—this may happen suddenly or slowly; (4) heart failure with improved ejection fraction refers to patients with previously reduced ejection fraction that was improved at later measurement (by > 10%); and (5) heart failure with recovered ejection fraction refers to patients with recovery of LV dysfunction (LVEF >55%). Improved ejection fraction is not necessarily indicative of full myocardial recovery or normalization of LV function (heart failure with recovered ejection fraction (EF). There is currently no consensus on the definition, diagnosis, nor management of heart failure with recovered EF. However, it is recognized that guideline-directed medical and device therapy should be continued indefinitely considering the high rates of LV dysfunction recurrence, despite the improved clinical outcomes in this patient population [ ].

## 4. Chronic heart failure

## 4.1. Etiologies
The SHA 2019 HF guidelines offer an overview of the causes of chronic heart failure (please refer to ). The scheme divides the etiologies into two broad categories: HF secondary to diseased myocardium and HF secondary to abnormal loading conditions. In the current update, we highlight the relationship between HF and atrial fibrillation, as well as some of the evidence linking COVID-19 and de-novo HF.
 

## 4.1.1. HF and atrial fibrillation
Clinicians should be aware of arrhythmia-induced cardiomyopathy, which leads to a reversible dilated cardiomyopathy [ ]. It is therefore important to consider whether atrial fibrillation (AF) is fully or partially responsible for LV dysfunction in patients with concomitant HF and AF. Data from randomized controlled trials suggests that the restoration of sinus rhythm through catheter ablation in patients with concomitant AF and HF can also induce favorable structural remodeling, including early recovery or improvement of LVEF and HF symptoms [ , ]. The efficacy of this approach for LV function improvement is highest when performed early in the natural history of atrial fibrillation and heart failure. Suspicion of arrhythmia-induced cardiomyopathy can be confirmed in case of reversal of cardiomyopathy by elimination of the arrhythmia.

## 4.1.2. HF and infections
HF can arise as the result of an infection by a virus, bacteria, fungi, etc. The most prominent example is that of COVID-19. A meta-analysis of data from close to 19,000 patients showed that severe COVID-19 was associated with elevated B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP)/N-terminal pro-BNP (NT-proBNP) plasma concentrations and higher mortality [ ]. Data also suggests that COVID-19 can cause acute de-novo HF as a result of myocardial injury, with the disease linked to both systolic and diastolic LV dysfunction [ – ]. Immunization against COVID-19 was also associated with an increased risk of myocarditis/pericarditis in large-scale population-wide studies, particularly in younger populations (40 years and younger) [ – ].

## 4.2. Symptoms and signs
No changes in the symptoms and signs of HF were made to the SHA 2019 HF guidelines. For more information please refer to the appropriate section.

## 4.3. Diagnosis
When HF is suspected, prior clinical history, physical examination, and resting electrocardiogram will indicate whether a diagnosis of HF is likely. If all results fall within the normal range, HF is highly unlikely and differential diagnoses should be considered. The diagnosis of HF will primarily rely on laboratory tests in addition to non-invasive and invasive imaging and diagnostic modalities (see ). The majority of recommendations for the diagnosis of chronic HF proposed in the 2019 SHA guidelines remain applicable. The 2023 guidelines provide an update to natriuretic peptide cutoff levels to be consistent with current practice, modifies the wording of some recommendations and proposes new recommendations as shown in and discussed below. For more information on unchanged recommendations, please refer to the 2019 SHA HF guidelines.
 

## 4.3.1. Diagnostic laboratory tests
BNP is an active peptide hormone that results from the cleavage of the precursor pro-BNP into BNP and the inactive N-terminal fragment (NT-proBNP). BNP and NT-proBNP are biomarkers of cardiac hemodynamic stress and are useful for the diagnosis and prognosis of HF regardless of EF [ , ]. BNP and NT-proBNP levels below the cutoff of 125 pg/mL and 35 pg/mL have a high negative predictive value for HF [ – ]. Measuring natriuretic peptides is therefore recommended for the exclusion of HF and subsequently preventing further unnecessary testing. A SHA position statement published in 2022 further discusses the use of biomarkers in the management of HF and acute coronary syndromes [ ].
Basic laboratory investigations (serum urea and electrolytes, creatinine, full blood count, liver and thyroid function tests) are also recommended to eliminate other possible conditions that could manifest similarly to HF, for prognostication and for guiding the therapeutic management of patients. Additional diagnostic tests aiming to identify other HF etiologies and comorbidities should be considered in individual patients with HF when there is a clinical suspicion of a particular pathology (see on HF etiologies in the 2019 SHA HF guidelines).

## 4.3.1.1. Stress echocardiography and cardiopulmonary exercise testing
Stress echocardiography and Cardiopulmonary Exercise Testing (CPET) can be used for the detection of diastolic dysfunction related to exercise in patients with exertional dyspnea, preserved LVEF, and inconclusive diastolic parameters at rest. Stress echocardiography and CPET can also be effective in the assessment of inducible ischemia, myocardial viability, and in valve disease. Exercise stress echocardiography and cardiopulmonary exercise testing are recommended for the dynamic assessment of HFpEF seeing as the severity of HFpEF is not accurately reflected by resting echocardiography [ ]. Stress echocardiography is therefore advisable especially in patients with shortness of breath and no clear resting abnormality; exercise reveals the deterioration of ventricular and peripheral performance in HF patients with no LV dysfunction. Moreover, exercise is an effective way to show chronotropic in HF [ ]. CPET or 6-min walk test should be considered to assess functional capacity in ambulatory HF patients [ , ]. CPET is recommended as part of the evaluation for advanced treatments (heart transplantation and/or mechanical circulatory support) considering its prognostic capacity in terms of durable mechanical circulatory support (MCS), transplantation, or survival [ ]. CPET may also be considered in select cases to identify the cause of unexplained dyspnea.

## 4.3.1.2. Cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR)
CMR remains the gold standard for measurements of volume, mass, and the EF of both the left and right ventricles. CMR is recommended for the evaluation of myocardial fibrosis and complex congenital heart disease. CMR allows myocardial characterization in myocarditis, amyloidosis, sarcoidosis, Chagas disease, Fabry disease, noncompaction cardiomyopathy, and hemochromatosis [ , ]. CMR with late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) should also be considered in dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) to differentiate ischemic from non-ischemic myocardial damage; myocardial fibrosis/scarring of the mid-wall typical of DCM can be detected by CMR with LGE, T1 mapping and extracellular volume. It may also be used to guide revascularization by detecting myocardial ischemia in patients with concomitant HF and CAD [ – ].

## 4.3.1.3. CCTA and other non-invasive modalities
Cardiac computed tomography angiography (CCTA) is a useful noninvasive tool with excellent accuracy for the diagnosis of HF [ ]. CCTA can reliably rule-out CAD in patients with low-or-intermediate pretest probability of CAD. CCTA conducted at high spatial and temporal resolution allows fast and convenient non-invasive imaging in addition to exposure to lower doses of ionizing radiation [ ]. LV dysfunction can be detected with CCTA with good correlation to echocardiographic assessment [ ]. As such, CCTA can be used as a gatekeeper for invasive coronary angiography (ICA) and prevent unnecessary invasive testing. However, it should be noted that compared to CMR, CCTA leads to slight overestimations of end-systolic volume and EF due to its limited temporal resolution, especially in patients with HFrEF. CCTA also has an emerging role in the diagnosis and assessment of HFpEF cases in case of clinical uncertainty [ ]; CCTA is useful for the identification of CAD, ischemia, pericardial effusion and constriction. It can also be used for chamber quantification and fibrosis detection. Nuclear imaging techniques such as single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) and Positron emission tomography (PET) (with or without CT) may be considered for the assessment of myocardial viability or ischemia [ ]. However, the use of nuclear imaging would incur exposure to higher levels of radiation, higher cost and remains limited by restricted availability. Noninvasive imaging techniques other than CCTA (stress echocardiography, SPECT, PET, myocardial perfusion imaging) may be considered in patients with a low to intermediate probability of CAD or those with equivocal non-invasive stress tests in order to rule out coronary artery stenosis. Noninvasive stress imaging (CMR, stress echocardiography, SPECT, or PET) may also be considered for the detection of myocardial viability to help guide revascularization in patients with HF and CAD who are candidates for coronary revascularization [ – ].

## 4.3.2. Invasive cardiac imaging and diagnostic work-up
Please refer to SHA 2019 HF guidelines for discussion of unchanged recommendations.

## 4.3.2.1. EMB
Endomyocardial biopsy (EMB) may be considered when a specific diagnosis is suspected that would influence therapy but should not be routinely performed. This includes but is not limited to Suspected fulminant myocarditis or acute myocarditis with acute HF, LV dysfunction and/or rhythm disorders, Suspected myocarditis in hemodynamically stable patients, DCM with recent onset HF, moderate-to-severe LV dysfunction, refractory to standard treatment, and cardiac tumors [ ]. The availability of EMB remains limited in Saudi Arabia and it is preferable that patients be referred to experienced centers when EMB is needed.

## 4.3.2.2. Right heart catheterization
Right heart catheterization is recommended in patients with advanced HF being evaluated for advanced heart therapy (heart transplantation or mechanical circulatory support) [ ]. For more information, please refer to SHA 2019.

## 4.3.3. Genetic testing
Patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), DCM, and arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC) should be provided with genetic counseling. Genetic testing in combination with CMR and cardiac biomarkers allow the diagnosis and risk stratification of HCM as well as the assessment of the need for placement of implantable cardioverter defibrillators (ICDs) for primary prevention of complications [ , ].
ARVC is an inherited disease of the heart muscle associated with potentially life-threatening ventricular arrhythmias, sudden cardiac death, and/or biventricular HF [ ]. ARVC is predominantly associated with mutations in desmosomal genes. However, several disease phenotypes have been identified and ARVC has an age-related penetrance [ ]. Diagnosis of ARVC remains challenging considering the current limitations of the genetic etiologies of the disease. Genetic testing can reveal pathogenic mutations leading to the diagnosis of ARVC. However, the absence of pathogenic mutations does not necessarily exclude the disease as it could be due to an as-of-yet unidentified mutation. Despite this, genetic testing is a pivotal component in ARVC diagnosis, along with CMR [ , ]. Genetic testing is therefore recommended for patient with HCM and ARVC.
Genetic testing should also be considered in other suspected cases of familial cardiomyopathy, such as DCM. Genetic heterogeneity is characteristic of DCM, with more than 40 genes implicated in the disease [ , ]. Familial disease can occur in up to half of DCM cases and around 20% of patients with an established nongenetic risk factor or a nonfamilial disease were found to carry a pathogenic gene variant [ ]. Some genetic mutations are associated with worse clinical outcomes [ ]. Screening for DCM may be useful for the early detection and management of the disease, potentially improving prognosis [ ]. Moreover, testing for pathogenic mutations would allow the prediction of disease risk for family members before the onset of symptoms.

## 4.3.4. Diagnosis of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF)
A considerable proportion of HF patients have preserved EF. Yet this patient population continues to pose a significant diagnostic challenge; signs and symptoms of HFpEF are non-specific and markers of diastolic dysfunction are very limited. Natriuretic peptides can be used for screening diagnosis and risk stratification in HF, and have been suggested to predict morbidity and mortality in HFpEF [ ]. However, it should be noted that natriuretic peptides are less reliable biomarkers of HF in HFpEF compared to HFrEF and may be more suited to rule out HFpEF rather than diagnose it [ ]. Echocardiography provides valuable insights for the diagnosis of HFpEF Scores incorporating echocardiographic findings with other clinical variables have been shown to be promising for the diagnosis of HFpEF [ , ]. HFpEF scoring systems can be considered for the diagnosis of this condition but the choice of which score remains at the treating physician’s discretion as none have been developed for or adapted to the local Saudi population. Advanced diagnostic modalities might be needed to distinguish between HFpEF and other causes of dyspnea. This includes exercise echocardiography, CMR, invasive haemodynamics and assessment of other conditions that might mimic HFpEF [ , ]. The presence of three key clinical, echocardiographic, and hemodynamic abnormalities are required for the definitive diagnosis of HFpEF ( ).
Possible echocardiography parameters to aid diagnosis of HFpEF and minimize the need for invasive testing are listed in . HFpEF has a unique pathophysiology, characterized by severe dysfunction of the diastolic phase of the cardiac cycle that results in elevated ventricular pressures. In addition, impairment of myocardial relaxation and stiffness lead to reduced LV filling, elevated diastolic pressures, and HF symptoms. Hemodynamic measurements reveal prolonged isovolumic pressure decline and upward–leftward shift in the pressure–volume loop, with aberrant myocardial relaxation coupled with high indices of passive stiffness.
 

## 4.4. Prevention
Recommendations for the prevention of HF are largely consistent with the SHA 2019 guidelines. In the current 2023 version, we have divided HF prevention into primary and secondary prevention. Primary prevention focuses on the prevention of the onset of HF (see ), while secondary prevention addresses the risk of morbidity and mortality in established HF (see ). For cardiac risk assessment methods, please refer to the Saudi Heart Association Guidelines on Best Practices in the Management of Chronic Coronary Syndromes [ ].
 

## 4.4.1. Primary prevention
Treatment of hypertension and the use of statins is still recommended to prevent or delay HF onset and is discussed in more details in SHA 2019. A recommendation was added for the use of Sodium-glucose Cotransporter-2 (SGLT2) inhibitors based on emerging clinical evidence of their benefit in diabetes as well as in HF [ – ], discussed in detail in later sections. Pharmacological approaches should also be supplemented with patient counseling regarding risk factors associated with a higher risk of developing HF.

## 4.4.2. Secondary prevention/Prevention of hospitalization
Self-management can improve outcomes in HF and is recommended to reduce the risk of hospitalization and death with HF [ ]. Patient education on self-management strategies address several topics implicated in HF patient management, such as how to adjust diuretics in the case of increasing dyspnoea or oedema or a sudden unexpected weight gain of >2 kg in 3 days, when to alert the healthcare team, lifestyle modifications, importance of treatment adherence, etc. Self-management education methods are flexible; education can be provided in different settings (group session, home visit, telephone/tele-monitoring), by any implicated healthcare provider including the nurse, the physician, or a health educator. Influenza and pneumococcal vaccinations should also be considered based on their association with reduced hospitalizations in HF [ , ]. Moreover, a supervised, exercise-based cardiac rehabilitation program should be considered in patients with more severe disease, frailty or with comorbidities [ – ]; in addition to increasing exercise capacity and quality of life, exercise-based rehabilitation can reduce hospitalizations in general and those due to HF specifically. However, while its effect on mortality requires further validation in RCTs, exercise-based cardiac rehabilitation has led to significant reductions in all-cause mortality in several large scale cohort studies [ – ]. Considering its benefit, referral of patients with HF to cardiac rehabilitation programs should be promoted. Recommendations on Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEi), Angiotensin receptor blockers (ARB), beta-blockers and ICD are discussed in the SHA 2019 HF guidelines.

## 4.5. Pharmacological management

## 4.5.1. HFrEF
The algorithm for the pharmacological treatment of HFrEF is shown in . shows all recommendations for the pharmacological management of HFrEF; all drugs should be given and doses titrated as needed to achieve intended outcomes as tolerated by the patient. ACEi/ARBs or Angiontensin Receptor Neprilysin Inhibitor (ARNI) (sacubitril/valsartan), SGLT2 inhibitors, MRAs and beta-blockers are recommended for the first line treatment of all patients with HFrEF, unless contraindicated or not tolerated. The ARNI sacubitril/valsartan can be used as first-line therapy, or used to replace ACE-Is in ambulatory HFrEF patients who remain symptomatic despite optimal therapy. Diuretics are also recommended to be used, but only as needed. Digoxin may be considered in patients with AF with symptomatic HFrEF to reduce the risk of hospitalization (both all-cause and HF hospitalizations). Ivabradine should be considered in symptomatic LVEF ≤35% who are in sinus rhythm and resting heart rate >70pbm despite maximum tolerated therapy. Hydralazine and isosorbide dinitrate should be considered in symptomatic patients with HFrEF who cannot tolerate an ACEi or an ARB (or for whom they are contraindicated), to reduce the risk of death. Hydralazine and isosorbide dinitrate may also be considered in symptomatic patients with HFrEF despite treatment with an ACEi, ARB, a beta-blocker and a Mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist (MRA) to reduce the risk of HF hospitalization and death. Vericiguat may be considered in patients in NYHA class II–IV who have had worsening HF despite treatment with an ACEi (or ARNI), a beta-blocker and an MRA to reduce the risk of cardiovascular (CV) mortality or HF hospitalization. Potassium binders (patiromer, sodium zirconium cyclosilicate) maybe be considered in patients who experience hyperkalemia while using a Renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system inhibitor (RAASi). More details on the management of hyperkalemia are provided in Section 4.5.5. Evidence in support of the above recommendations is provided in following sections. Recommended target doses of key agents used for managing patients with HF are outlined in .
 The PARADIGM-HF trial consistently demonstrated the benefit of the ARNI sacubitril/valsartan on the level of risk of death and hospitalization in patients with HFrEF and worsening HF [ ] (see – ).
 Sacubitril/valsartan was also shown to be beneficial for the symptomatic improvement of HF, improvement of quality of life, reduction of diabetes requiring insulin treatment, reduction in estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) decline, reduction of loop diuretic requirement and reduction of hyperkalemia rates [ – ]. Additional benefits of sacubitril/valsartan include the reduction of loop diuretic requirement. That being said, sacubitril/valsartan was associated with higher rates of symptomatic hypertension compared to enalapril, albeit with no restriction of its clinical benefits [ , ]. The PIONEER-HF trial also demonstrated the benefit of sacubitril/valsartan in acute decompensated heart failure, leading to more reduction in compared to enalapril therapy with comparable rates of worsening renal function, hyperkalemia, symptomatic hypotension, and angioedema [ ]. Current evidence suggests the superior effect of sacubitril/valsartan on cardiac remodeling compared to ACEi/ARB and the potential value of early ARNI initiation for HFrEF [ , ]. Regardless, this needs to be confirmed in larger trials. Moreover, ACEis and ARBs have a well-established efficacy in HFrEF, ensuring reductions in mortality and symptom improvement [ – ].
The benefits of ACEi/ARBs are also relatively comparable to ARNI. A network meta-analysis of 48 randomized controlled trials (RCTs) conducted in patients with HFrEF including monotherapies or combinations of ACEI, ARB, ARNI, Beta blockers, MRA, SGLT2 inhibitor, and ivabradine reported significant reductions in the risk of all-cause death, cardiovascular mortality and hospitalization for HF [ ]. This risk reduction was highest with the combination of ARNI, Beta blockers and MRA (60% reduction of all-cause mortality), and the combination of SGLT2i, ACEi, Beta blocker and MRA (58% reduction of all-cause mortality) [ ]. Another recent meta-analysis showed that the combination of ARNi, Beta Blocker, MRA, and SGLT2 inhibitor conferred the highest reduction in all-cause mortality among patients with HFrEF (61% reduction) [ ]. However, this was closely followed by the combination of ARNi, beta blocker, and MRA, with or without vericiguat (59% reduction with vericiguat, 56% reduction without verciguat) [ ]. It is therefore recommended that all patients with HFrEF be treated with ACEi or ARB or ARNI in the first line setting. The choice of drug must be made based on treatment tolerability, possible contraindications as well as treatment accessibility. Patients who cannot tolerate ACEi/ARB or who remain symptomatic despite optimal therapy should be switched to ARNI.

## 4.5.1.1. Beta blockers
Beta-blockers are a mainstay of HF treatment considering the reversal of the neurohumoral effects of the sympathetic nervous system associated with their use (with or without ACEi/ARB), in addition to their improvement of HF symptoms and prognosis [ – ]. Beta blockers were associated with mortality risk reduction compared to placebo or standard treatment in a meta-analysis of 21 clinical trials including 23,122 patients treated with beta-blockers (focusing on atenolol, bisoprolol, bucindolol, carvedilol, metoprolol, and nebivolol). all beta-blockers were comparable in terms of LVEF improvement, risk of death, sudden cardiac death, death due to pump failure, or drug discontinuation [ ]. A more recent meta-analysis of 11 trials including 13,833 patients (aged 40–85 years, of whom 24% were women) confirmed that beta-blockers effectively reduce mortality across all ages [ ]. Beta-blockers are therefore recommended for all patients with HFrEF, in combination with ACEi/ARB or ARNI.

## 4.5.1.2. SGLT2 inhibitors
The DAPA-HF trial demonstrated that dapagliflozin, an SGLT2 inhibitor, led to significant improvements (26%) in the composite endpoint of worsening HF (hospitalization or an urgent visit resulting in i.v. therapy for HF) or CV death compared to standard of care in patients with HFrEF despite optimal medical therapy. Reduction in all-cause mortality, HF symptoms and improvement in physical function as well as quality of life were also reported with dapagliflozin. The survival benefits of this SGLT2 inhibitor were not restricted to patients with diabetes and were observed to have an early onset [ , ]. The EMPEROR-Reduced trial conducted in a similar patient population also reported a similar reduction in the primary endpoint of CV death or HF hospitalization with the SGLT2 inhibitor empagliflozin. Empagliflozin was also associated with significant improvements in quality of life, and reduction in eGFR decline but no significant reduction of CV mortality [ , ]. This benefit was confirmed by several meta-analyses of RCTs, which reported that SGLT2 inhibitors lead to a reduction in the risk of both HF hospitalizations and cardiovascular mortality, in addition to symptomatic improved among patients irrespective of ejection fraction [ – ]. SGLT2 inhibitors are therefore recommended for all patients with HF along with standard therapy.

## 4.5.1.3. Mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists (MRAs)
MRAs are recommended for the first-line management of all patients with HFrEF in addition to an ACEi/ARB or ARNI, beta blocker and SGLT2 inhibitor. Both selective and non-selective MRAs are associated with a reduction in mortality and morbidity in patients with HFrEF [ ]. However, caution is advised with the use of MRAs in patients with impaired renal function and serum potassium concentrations >5.0 mmol/L seeing as MRAs have been known to cause hyperkalemia [ ]. The risk of hyperkalemia increases along with the dose of MRA. To note that it is hypothesized that hyperkalemia would not modify the efficacy of these drugs [ ]. Epleronone was reported to be efficacious and safe when carefully monitored in patients with chronic HFrEF, in NYHA functional Class II and an estimated glomerular filtration rate >30 mL/min/1.73 m2 and potassium <5.0 mmol/L [ ].

## 4.5.1.4. Diuretics
See SHA 2019.

## 4.5.1.5. If-channel inhibitor ivabradine
Ivabradine was demonstrated to significantly reduce the risk of a composite primary endpoint (cardiovascular death or hospital admission for worsening HF) compared to placebo. Ivabradine led to a 21% reduction in hospital admission for worsening HF and 5% reduction in deaths due to HF [ ]. The INTENSIFY study confirmed the benefit of ivabradine in reducing resting heart rate, relieving signs of decompensation, reducing BNP levels and improving quality of life [ ]. Ivabradine should therefore be considered in symptomatic LVEF ≤35% who are in sinus rhythm and resting heart rate >70pbm despite maximum tolerated therapy.

## 4.5.1.6. Hydralazine and isosorbide dinitrate
See SHA 2019 HF guidelines.

## 4.5.1.7. Digoxin
The effect of digoxin in patients with HF is conflicting, with no RCTs available on its use in this patient population. Digoxin may be considered in patients who are symptomatic despite treatment with an ACEi (or ARB), ARB, a beta-blocker and an MRA to reduce the risk of hospitalization [ , ]. Serum concentration of digoxin is strongly associated with its safety and efficacy. For therapeutic benefit, it is therefore necessary maintain low digoxin serum concentrations (0.5–0.9 ng/mL) [ ]. Some evidence suggests that the use of digoxin might increase mortality (all-cause and cardiovascular) and sudden cardiac death in patients with HF, regardless of concomitant HF [ ]. By contrast, a previous meta-analysis detected no deleterious effects of the use of digoxin on mortality in patients with concomitant AF and HF [ ].

## 4.5.1.8. Vericiguat
The VICTORIA trial reported the efficacy and safety of the oral soluble guanylate cyclase stimulator, vericiguat, in patients with a reduced EF and recently decompensated chronic HF. Patients who received vericiguat has significantly lower incidence of the primary endpoint of death from CV causes or hospitalization for HF compared to placebo, albeit with no significant reduction in all-cause or cardiovascular mortality [ ]. Vericiguat may be considered in patients in NYHA class II–IV who have had worsening HF despite treatment with an ACEi (or ARNI), a beta-blocker and an MRA to reduce the risk of CV mortality or HF hospitalization.

## 4.5.1.9. Potassium binders
The potassium binder sodium zirconium cyclosilicate (ZS-9) has a demonstrated efficacy for the management of hyperkalemia and maintenance of normokalemia [ ]. Another Phase II trial supported the use of sodium zirconium cyclosilicate for the maintenance of normokalemia in HF patients specifically, without need for RAASi therapy adjustment [ ]. Patiromer is another potassium binder with recently proven efficacy in the reduction of recurrent hyperkalemia in combination with MRAs when used in patients with HFrEF [ ]. A meta-analysis showed that while both potassium binders are safe for the management of hyperkalemia, sodium zirconium silicate might have an advantage in the setting of acute hyperkalemia due to its more rapid reduction of serum potassium levels [ ]. Potassium binders (sodium zirconium cyclosilicate, patiromer) may be considered in patients who experience hyperkalemia while using a RAASi.

## 4.5.2. HFmrEF

## 4.5.2.1. Therapeutic options
Diuretics are recommended for all patients with HFmrEF to alleviate symptoms and signs in case of congestion. The recently published results of the EMPEROR-Preserved and DELIVER-Preserved RCTs confirmed the efficacy of SGLT2 inhibitors in patients with mildly reduced and preserved ejection fraction (EF>40%) [ , ]. Both trials demonstrated that SGLT2-inhibitors reduce the combined risk of worsening heart failure or cardiovascular death, regardless of the presence of diabetes [ , ]. The benefit of SGLT2 inhibitors was also reported by several meta-analyses to be irrespective of EF [ – ]. SGLT2 inhibitors are therefore recommended for all patients with HFmrEF. A recent meta-analysis of studies on the management of HF with mildly reduced or preserved ejection fraction (EF>40%) confirmed that SGLT2 inhibitors are currently the optimal drug class for these patients [ ]. Overall evidence suggests a potential accumulative improvement in HF hospitalization rather than all-cause death with the combination of SGLT2 inhibitors with an ACEi/ARB/ARNI, an MRA or a beta blocker [ , ]. However, RAASi through ACEi, ARB or ARNI has not yet been specifically investigated among patients with HFmrEF in a RCT and current evidence for their use remains limited. the same applies to MRAs and beta blockers. As a result, these drugs may be considered in patients with HFmrEF to reduce the risk of hospitalization and death. It is important that guideline-directed medical therapy be continued in patients with HFmrEF after treatment to prevent relapse of HF and LV dysfunction, even in patients who may have become asymptomatic [ ].

## 4.5.3. HFpEF
The diagnosis and treatment of HFpEF remains challenging despite its high prevalence among all HF cases. HFpEF is characterized by a heterogeneous population often with multiple comorbidities, as well as different race, age, and etiology. It is therefore recommended to screen HFpEF patients for cardiovascular and noncardiovascular comorbidities, which if present, should be treated. As with HFrEF and HFmrEF, diuretics are recommended for the relief of symptoms in congested patients. Currently, SGLT2-inhibitors is the only drug class with significant benefit in terms of mortality and HF worsening in HFpEF patients [ – , , ]. The DELIVER trial is the largest (6263 patients enrolled) and broadest global trial to date in patients with LVEF >40%. 190 patients were enrolled from Saudi Arabia [ ]. The results of the DELIVER trial confirmed the reduction of the combined risk of worsening heart failure or cardiovascular death with the use of Dapagliflozin among patients with HFmrEF or HFpEF [ ]. Moreover, a patient-level pooled meta-analysis of two RCTs investigating dapagliflozin and another of two RCTs investigating empagliflozin showed that the benefit of these SGLT2 inhibitors is preserved across the spectrum of LVEF [ , ]. SGLT2 inhibitors are therefore recommended for all patients with HFpEF.
Other therapeutic options may be considered, although none of the large RCTs conducted in HFpEF were able to meet their primary endpoints (PEP-CHF trial of perindopril [ ], CHARM-Preserved trial of candesartan [ ], I-PRESERVE trial of irbesartan [ ], TOPCAT trial of spironolactone [ ], DIG-Preserved trial of digoxin [ ], and PARAGON-HF of sacubitril/valsartan [ ]. However, available evidence suggests a potential benefit on the level of HF hospitalization with the combination of SGLT2 inhibitors with other drugs such as ACEi, ARBs, ARNI, MRA and β-blockers [ ]. The improvement of mortality with the use of these drugs is less established among patients with HFpEF [ ]. That being said, health-related quality of life is an important treatment target in patients with HFpEF that can be improved with these drugs. The management of HFpEF should be individualized rather than follow a one-size-fits-all approach. Based on this, ACEi, ARBs, ARNI, MRA and beta-blockers may be considered in select patients with HFpEF to reduce the risk of hospitalization and death. In patients with HFpEF, nitrates or phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors did not prove beneficial for the increase of activity or quality of life levels in the NEAT-HFpEF and RELAX trials [ , ]. Their routine use in HFpEF is therefore not recommended.

## 4.5.4. Management of diuretic resistance
In case of insufficient diuretic response/diuretic resistance, it is important to check patient adherence and fluid/salt intake. Diuretic dose should be increased as needed and switching from furosemide to bumetanide or torasemide should be considered. The addition of an MRA or the increase of an existing MRA’s dose can also help resolve diuretic resistance. The combination of a loop diuretic and thiazide/metolazone could produce diuretic synergy via “sequential nephron blockade”, although this approach was not studied in randomized clinical trials. diuretic resistance might also be resolved by increasing the administration frequency of a loop diuretic to at least two times daily, or administering it on an empty stomach. If needed, short-term intravenous infusion of loop diuretic might be considered. Ultrafiltration could help resolve fluid overload and has been described for the management of diuretic resistance in HF.

## 4.5.5. Management of hyperkalemia
HF patients frequently experience electrolyte disturbances [ ]. A U-shaped relationship with mortality is observed with serum potassium levels; both hypokalemia and hyperkalemia are associated with an increased risk of death and require adequate correction [ , – ]. Loop and thiazide diuretic administration can often induce hypokalemia. Treatment options include RAAS inhibitors, potassium-sparing diuretics, and prescription of oral potassium supplements (i.e. potassium chloride tablets) or intravenous infusions of potassium-rich solutions.
Hyperkalemia can be caused by RAAS inhibitors, chronic kidney disease (CKD) and increased absorption. The lowest risk of severe hyperkalemia was observed with sacubitril/valsartan in PARADIGM-HF, compared to enalapril [ ]. Immediate treatment is recommended for life-threatening hyperkalemia; a combination of calcium carbonate and/or sodium bicarbonate, insulin, with or without glucose, and beta adrenoceptor agonists should be used to favor potassium entry into the cells without increasing potassium secretion. Once hyperkalemia is addressed, loop diuretics can be administered to ensure potassium levels return to normal values. Another option is potassium binders, which can be used for acute and chronic potassium lowering as discussed in section 4.5.1.

## 4.6. Non-surgical device management of HFrEF

## 4.6.1. ICD
ICDs are effective for the prevention of sudden cardiac death [ ], leading to a 35% reduction of death primarily in NYHA class II patients [ ]. This is important considering the high risk of arrythmia recurrence and death in survivors of cardiac arrest or symptomatic sustained ventricular tachycardia. The benefit of ICD was significantly more prominent in patients with LVEF ≤35% compared to patients with higher EF [ ]. To note that the AVID study showed that 64% of patients experience recurrence of arrhythmia 3 years after ICD implantation [ ]. ICD implantation significantly reduces overall mortality in patients with chronic HFrEF (LVEF≤35%) [ , ], with decreasing benefit as comorbidity increases [ ]. Increasing age could also reduce the benefit of ICD implantation, with the least benefit observed in patients older than 75 years [ ]. This association could be related to a higher burden of comorbidities with increasing age, other causes of death or limited data. In a meta-analysis, it was demonstrated that an improvement of arrhythmic mortality and all-cause mortality can be achieved with ICD-only therapy in patients with ischemic or non-ischemic heart disease, with an LVEF ≤35%, 40 days from MI, and at least 3 months before Cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT) [ ]. The MADIT-II trial reported significant reductions in mortality with ICD implantation in patients with previous MI and LVEF <30%, 37% of whom had congestive heart failure [ ]. ICDs are effective for the primary and secondary prevention of sudden cardiac death and their cost may be justified by their cost-effectiveness compared to conventional treatments [ ]. In particular, ICD is cost-effective for all non-NYHA IV patients with QRS duration <120 ms and for NYHA I/II non- Left bundle branch block (LBBB) morphology patients with QRS duration between 120 ms and 149 ms [ ].

## 4.6.2. CRT
CRT can reduce morbidity and mortality when used in appropriate clinical settings, and can lead to improvements in cardiac function as well as quality of life [ – ]. Five RCTs comparing CRT with no active device or CRT with a defibrillator were included in a meta-analysis which demonstrated that the effect of CRT on morbidity and mortality is significantly predicted by QRS duration; Survival benefit can be expected in QRS duration exceeding 140 ms [ ]. The MADIT-CRT trial demonstrated a 41% reduction in the risk of HF events with CRT in patients with a QRS duration >150 ms [ ]. Evidence suggests that CRT prevents the progression of disease in patients with asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic LV dysfunction [ ]. The reduction of LV end-systolic volume index and LV mass after CRT was significant in patients with an LVEF>30% [ ]. Significant mortality reductions (68%) were associated with LV end-systolic volume index following CRT [ ]. Another maker of reverse modeling and clinical improvement with CRT in patients with mild HF was LBBB [ , ]. Patients with LBBB benefited from a lower risk of first and subsequent HF events after CRT. This persists on the long-term, where patients with mild HF symptoms, LV dysfunction, and LBBB were found to have long-term survival benefit from early intervention with a CRT-D [ ]. Patients with LBBB with a history of intermittent atrial tachyarrhythmias or by development of in-trial atrial tachyarrhythmias also benefit from CRT-D [ ]. Patients with non-LBBB morphology generally do not show the same survival benefit with CRT as that observed with LBBB morphology [ , ]. That being said, individual-patient data meta-analyses have shown that QRS morphology or etiology do not influence the survival and morbidity improvement with CRT after accounting for QRS duration [ , ]. Moreover, QRS morphology or ischemic etiology were not used for patient selection in any of the landmark trials. That being said, the long-term follow-up of the MADIT CRT study demonstrated the role of prolonged PR interval in predicting favorable response in patients with non-LBBB morphology [ ].
Overall, evidence supports the long-term benefit of CRT concomitantly with medical therapy [ ]. CRT with biventricular pacing can also be beneficial to reduce hospitalization in patients with NYHA Class III–IV symptoms, an EF <35%, and intraventricular conduction delay of >120 ms [ ]. In an analysis of 19 studies, patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy seemed to have better survival after CRT compared with non-ischemic cardiomyopathy [ ]. An algorithm for the use of CRT in HF patients is provided in (see ).
 

## 4.7. Advanced HF

## 4.7.1. Definition
Clinical indicators of advanced HF based on the ESC 2018 and ACC 2022 guidelines are shown in . Patients with advanced HF can also be stratified based on the 7 profiles of the INTERMACS (Interagency Registry for Mechanically Assisted Circulatory Support) ( ). The INTERMACS classification is also useful for the prognostication in the setting of urgent heart transplantation [ ], LV assist device (LVAD) implantation [ ], and ambulatory advanced HF [ ].
 

## 4.7.2. Management

## 4.7.2.1. General considerations
Patients who exhibit clinical indicators of advanced heart failure should be referred to specialty HF care in order to review current management and assess suitability for advanced HF therapies (e.g. LVAD, cardiac transplantation, palliative care and palliative inotropes). Timely referral has been associated with improved patient outcomes [ – ], and decisions related to advanced HF therapies should take into consideration clinical variables as well as patient values, goals and preferences (see ).
 Evidence regarding the benefit of fluid restriction for the symptomatic relief of acute decompensated HF remains uncertain. A registry study reported marginal improvement in hyponatremia with fluid restriction [ ]. A pilot RCT also reported the benefit of fluid restriction in terms of quality of life among patients with HFrEF (NYHA class I to IV) [ ]. That being said, fluid restriction might not have any influence on hospitalization or mortality as well as other clinical variables, as shown in a meta-analysis [ ]. For patients with advanced HF and hyponatremia, fluid restriction may be considered to reduce congestive symptoms.

## 4.7.2.2. Inotropic support
Positive inotropic agents do not improve survival in HF patients but improve hemodynamic compromise [ ]. Continuous intravenous inotropic support can help maintain systemic perfusion and preserve end-organ performance [ – ]. The use of inotropes should therefore be considered as a bridge to advanced therapies (heart transplantation or MCS) considering the possible reduction of pulmonary hypertension and maintenance of end-organ perfusion [ – ]. However, inotropes are associated with a risk of arrythmia and catheter-related infections when used palliatively. While this risk could be reduced with the presence of an ICD, patients should be counseled about these risks and the use of inotropes as palliative therapy should be carefully considered and monitored. It is currently not recommended to maintain long-term use of either continuous or intermittent intravenous inotropic agents unless needed due to the risks of currently available inotropic agents.

## 4.7.2.3. Mechanical circulatory support
Durable LVADs are associated with improved survival in patients with advanced HFrEF with NYHA class IV symptoms deemed dependent on continuous intravenous inotropes or temporary MCS [ , ]. The improvement in patient survival was higher when LVADs were used as bridge to transplant compared to destination therapy (>5 years vs > 4 years, respectively). In addition to their survival benefit, LVADs lead to functional and quality of life improvement [ , ]. Durable LVAD implantation is therefore recommended as bridge to transplantation and should be considered as destination therapy in select cases (advanced HFrEF with NYHA class IV symptoms dependent on continuous intravenous inotropes or temporary MCS).
Durable MCS should be considered in select cases (advanced HFrEF who have NYHA class IV symptoms despite optimal medical therapy) based on its association with improved survival, as well as symptomatic and functional improvement [ – ]. To note that poor clinical outcomes after MCS were reported in certain cases, such as elevated central venous pressure, pulmonary hypertension, coagulopathy, and INTERMACS profile of 1 [ – ].
Temporary MCS (including percutaneous and extracorporeal ventricular assist devices) should be considered as a “bridge to recovery” or “bridge to decision” in patients with advanced HFrEF and hemodynamic compromise and shock [ , ]. Temporary MCS is valuable for clinical stabilization of patients until decisions on durable MCS, heart transplantation or device removal can be made.

## 4.7.2.4. Cardiac transplantation
Observational studies have reported the improvement of patient survival from less than 2 years without advanced therapies to more than 12 years in adult heart transplant recipients [ , ]. Heart transplant patients also have better health-related quality of life compared to patients with advanced HF [ , ]. Cardiac transplantation is therefore recommended to improve survival and quality of life in select cases with advanced HF despite optimal medical therapy.

## 4.8. Cardiovascular comorbidities

## 4.8.1. Atrial fibrillation (see )
 

## 4.8.1.1. Anticoagulation
For the prevention of embolic events, an oral anticoagulant is recommended in all patients with concomitant HF and paroxysmal, persistent or permanent AF and CHA2DS2-VASc score ≥2 in men or ≥3 in women (unless contraindicated) [ ]. In patients with concomitant HF and AF and lower CHA2DS2-VASc score (≥1 in men or ≥2 in women), oral anticoagulation should be considered [ , ]. Registry data revealed increased risk of ischemic stroke, thromboembolism, and death with high CHA2DS2-VASc scores. Direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs) are recommended in preference to vitamin K antagonists (VKAs) in patients with HF seeing as they have similar efficacy but a lower risk of intracranial hemorrhage. A meta-analysis of four RCTs [RELY (dabigatran), ROCKET-AF (rivaroxaban), ARISTOTLE (apixaban), and ENGAGE-TM (edoxaban)] with a total of 19,122 AF patients with HF showed that DOACS are associated with a significantly lower risk of stroke/systemic embolic events and major bleeding compared to VKAs [ ]. To note that DOACS are not recommended in preference to VKAs in patients with moderate or severe mitral stenosis or mechanical prosthetic heart valves [ , ]. Oral anticoagulation therapy for the prevention of embolic events is a lifelong treatment. Dosage adjustment should be made according to the recommendation of each drug and relevant anticoagulation guidelines.

## 4.8.1.2. AF catheter ablation
Catheter ablation was demonstrated to be superior to antiarrhythmic drug therapy in the maintenance of sinus rhythm in drug naïve, resistant, and intolerant patients with AF [ ]. Moreover, another meta-analysis including more than 21 thousand patients reported an increased risk of adverse events and in some cases, mortality, with the use of antiarrhythmic drugs. The latter were moderately effective in maintaining sinus rhythm after conversion of AF [ ].
A detailed discussion is provided in the SHA 2019 HF guidelines on:
- Rate control and Cardioversion
- The initial management of HF and AF in the acute or chronic setting
- Rhythm control management in patients with AF, symptomatic HF, LV systolic dysfunction and no evidence of acute decompensation
- VT
- Bradyarrhythmias
Please refer to the appropriate sections for more information.

## 4.8.2. CCS
For the diagnosis and management of chronic coronary syndrome (CCS), please refer to the SHA 2022 guidelines on best practices in the management of CCS [ ].

## 4.8.2.1. Medical therapy (see )
 A beta-blocker (in an evidence-based dose or maximum tolerated) is recommended as the preferred first-line treatment to relieve angina because of the associated benefits of this treatment (reducing the risk of HF hospitalization and the risk of premature death) [ – , , ]. While there is evidence that ivabradine can be considered as an alternative to beta-blockers when they are contraindicated or addition anti-angina therapy is needed, ivabradine was excluded from recommendations for patients with HF and CCS in Saudi Arabia seeing as its indication by the Saudi Food and Drug Administration (SFDA) is restricted to HF and does not include angina. Other drugs (1: trimetazidine or ranolazine; 2: nicorandil or a short-acting/long-acting oral/transcutaneous nitrates; 3: felopidine or amlopidine) may be considered in patients with HR < 70 bpm and/or atrial fibrillation and persistence of CCS symptoms despite beta-blockers [ , ].
To note that ranolazine is not widely used in Saudi Arabia. The following are not recommended:
Ivabradine for stable CAD and patients who had acute coronary syndrome 0 for the last 2 months; Combination of any of ivabradine, ranolazine, and nicorandil because of unknown safety; Combination of nicorandil and a nitrate (because of lack of additional efficacy); Dilitazem and verapamil because of their negative inotropic action and risk of worsening HF.

## 4.8.2.2. Myocardial revascularization
Evidence on myocardial revascularization in patients with HF remains limited. The STITCH trial failed to show a significant difference between Coronary artery bypass graft surgery (CABG) and medical therapy on the level of all-cause death in its initial analysis in patients with CAD and reduced LV function [ ]. A survival advantage as well as a reduction in the combined endpoint of all-cause death or hospitalization for CV causes became clear in the CABG group in the extended 10-year follow-up of the trial [ ]. The HEART trial also failed to demonstrate significant differences between CABG and medical therapy, although the trial was underpowered due to low patient enrollment [ ]. Little to no RCTs are currently available on Percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) vs medical therapy or vs CABG in HF. The recently published results of the REVIVED-BCIS2 trial showed that PCI did not lead to lower all-cause mortality or hospitalization for HF in patients with severe ischemic left ventricular systolic dysfunction compared to medical therapy [ ]. Meta-analyses of available non-randomized data confirmed better outcomes with CABG compared with PCI and/or medical therapy on the level of mortality, MI and repeat revascularization [ , ].

## 4.8.3. Valvular heart disease (see )
 

## 4.8.3.1. Aortic stenosis
The selection of an appropriate treatment depends on the accurate assessment of aortic stenosis grade [ ]. Aortic valve area can be evaluated using dobutamine stress echocardiography, which can also be used to differentiate between fix severe aortic stenosis and pseudo-severe aortic stenosis [ ]. In symptomatic patients with reduced LVEF and “low-flow, low-gradient” aortic stenosis (Valve area <1 cm2, LVEF <40%, mean pressure gradient <40 mmHg), low-dose dobutamine stress echocardiography should be considered to identify those with severe aortic stenosis suitable for valve replacement. This is necessary considering the implication of HF on operative mortality and long-term survival in patients undergoing aortic valve replacement [ ]. For patients with HF and severe high gradient aortic stenosis, medical therapy cannot improve outcomes and aortic valve reintervention (TAVI or SAVR) is recommended to reduce mortality and improve symptoms [ ]. The choice between TAVI and SAVR should be made by the Heart Team (including a HF specialist).

## 4.8.3.2. Secondary mitral regurgitation
The MITRA-FR and COAPT trials both investigated Percutaneous edge-to-edge mitral valve repair with or without optimal medical therapy in symptomatic patients with reduced LVEF and moderate-to-severe or severe secondary mitral regurgitation. The MITRA-FR trial could not demonstrate any benefit from percutaneous edge-to-edge mitral valve repair at the 12 month follow-up on the level of all-cause mortality or HF hospitalization [ ]. By contrast, the COAPT trial reported a significant mortality reduction as well as less HF hospitalizations at 24 months with percutaneous edge-to-edge mitral valve repair compared to optimal medical therapy alone [ ]. Percutaneous edge-to-edge mitral valve repair should be considered in carefully selected patients with moderate to severe secondary mitral regurgitation, for whom coronary revascularization is not needed and who are at high risk for surgery and exhibit symptoms despite optimal medical therapy and who would benefit from a reduction of HF hospitalizations after the procedure [ ]. Patients should be selected based on the inclusion criteria of the COAPT study (i.e. LVEF 20–50%, LV end-systolic diameter <70 mm, systolic pulmonary pressure <70 mmHg, absence of moderate or severe RV dysfunction, absence of severe TR, absence of hemodynamic instability) [ , ]. Combined surgery of secondary mitral regurgitation and CABG should be considered in symptomatic patients with LV systolic dysfunction. The addition of mitral valve repair to CABG was not found to improve LV reverse remodeling at 1 year in patients with moderate regurgitation [ ]. After 2 years of follow-up, indices of left ventricular reverse modeling remained comparable albeit with significantly higher incidence of moderate or greater recurrent MR after mitral valve repair compared with valve replacement [ ]. Percutaneous edge-to-edge mitral valve repair may be considered for symptom improvement in medically exhausted patients with secondary mitral regurgitation [ ].
An algorithm for the management of secondary mitral regurgitation is provided in . It is important to keep in mind that the optimal medical therapy can ensure improvement of secondary mitral regurgitation and preclude the need for intervention [ – ]. The optimal duration of therapy to decrease mitral regurgitation is no less than 3–6 months. Patients who are not responding to guideline-directed medical therapy after this timeframe should be considered for surgical interventions (percutaneous edge-to-edge mitral valve repair or combined surgery of secondary mitral regurgitation and CABG), as deemed appropriate by the Heart Team. Medical therapy should be judged as optimized by a multidisciplinary team before any surgical decisions are made. Through this, the clinician can ensure that the patient is well medicated before opting for surgery, particularly considering the access and cost issues associated with these procedures.
 

## 4.9. Other comorbidities (see )
 

## 4.9.1. Diabetes
SGLT2 inhibitors improve clinical outcomes in patients with established cardiovascular disease or ‘cardiovascular risk factors, as shown in several clinical trials (EMPA-REG OUTCOME, VERTIS-CV trials, CANVAS, DECLARE-TIMI 58, SCORED trial [ – ]). Meta-analyses of RCTs confirm that SGLT2 inhibitors lead to a reduction in the risk of both HF hospitalizations and cardiovascular mortality, in addition to symptomatic improvement among patients irrespective of ejection fraction [ – ]. the EMPEROR-Preserved and DELIVER-Preserved RCTs recently confirmed that SGLT2 inhibitors are effective in patients with mildly reduced and preserved ejection fraction (EF>40%), regardless of the presence of diabetes [ , ]. SGLT2 inhibitors are therefore recommended for all patients with HF along with standard therapy.
A review of observational data from 34,000 patients showed a reduction in mortality with the use of metformin in patients with concomitant HF and diabetes [ ]. Metformin was also shown to have comparable safety to other glucose-lowering treatments [ ]. However, metformin is contraindicated in patients with severe renal or hepatic impairment because of the risk of lactic acidosis [ ].

## 4.9.2. Cancer/cardiotoxic
Risk stratification is recommended in patients with cancer scheduled to receive potentially cardiotoxic therapy to assess the likelihood and degree of potential CV toxicity [ – ]. Such patients should receive medical care aimed at promoting a healthy lifestyle and strict control and management of cardiovascular risk factors according to the current guidelines. Cardiology referral (preferably to a cardio-oncology program or cardiologist with expertise in managing CVD in patients with cancer) and multidisciplinary discussion are recommended before anticancer therapy in high-risk and very high-risk patients and in patients with pre-existing CVD or abnormal findings at baseline CV toxicity risk assessment. Such referral and discussion are also recommended in patients who develop CV toxicity.
Clinical assessment and ECG are recommended at baseline in all patients with cancer. In addition to this, echocardiography, cardiac biomarkers, or other cardiac imaging tests are also recommended in selected patients according to baseline CV toxicity risk and cancer treatment type [ , ]; cancer therapy-related cardiac dysfunction can be monitored with cardiac biomarkers such as cardiac troponin and natriuretic peptides. Echocardiography remains the preferred modality for the assessment of baseline cardiac function in cancer patients [ ].
Baseline comprehensive echocardiography (including 3D LVEF and Global Longitudinal Strain (GLS), if available) is recommended in all patients with cancer at high risk and very high risk of CV toxicity before starting anticancer therapy and periodically during treatment for early detection of cardiac dysfunction [ – ].
ACEI or ARB, beta-blockers and statins should be considered for primary prevention in high- and very high-risk patients receiving cancer therapies that may cause HF. This is based on the significant prevention of LVEF reduction in patients with cancer treated with anthracycline chemotherapy and HER2-targeted therapies with the use of renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system blockers, beta-blockers, and mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists [ – ]. The severity of cancer therapy-related cardiac dysfunction (CTRCD) should be assessed using the combination of new CV symptoms and the change in LVEF, GLS and/or cardiac biomarkers (see the 2022 ESC cardio-oncology guidelines definition/classification) [ ]. Guideline-directed HF therapy is recommended in patients who develop symptomatic CTRCD or asymptomatic moderate to severe CTRCD during anthracycline chemotherapy or HER2-targeted treatment (see the 2022 ESC cardio-oncology guidelines definition/classification) [ ]. Cardioprotective therapy with ACE-I/ARB and/or beta-blockers should be considered in asymptomatic mild CTRCD (patients who have LVEF ≥50% and have developed a significant fall in GLS and/or elevation in troponin and/or NP) during anthracycline chemotherapy or HER2-targeted treatment [ – ].

## 4.9.3. Amyloidosis
Clinical suspicion of cardiac amyloidosis should be confirmed. Serum free light chains concentration and urine immunofixation electrophoresis are used to rule out amyloid cardiomyopathy [ – ]. Bone scintigraphy can confirm the presence of transthyretin cardiac amyloidosis, but only in case of negative screening for free light chains [ ]. Genetic testing should then be done for the differentiation of hereditary and wild-type variants in patients diagnosed with transthyretin cardiac amyloidosis [ ].
Light chain immunoglobulin cardiac amyloidosis should be treated by addressing underlying hematological etiologies either with chemotherapy or autologous stem-cell transplant.
Transthyretin cardiac amyloidosis is treated by reducing or stabilizing the production of Transthyretin. Patients with end-stage familial Transthyretin cardiac amyloidosis can be considered for liver and/or cardiac transplantation. Tafamidis is recommended in patients with genetic testing proven hereditary Transthyretin cardiac amyloidosis or with wild type Transthyretin cardiac amyloidosis and NYHA class I or II symptoms to reduce symptoms, CV hospitalization and mortality [ ]. This is based on the reduction of all-cause mortality and cardiovascular hospitalizations, a well as functional improvement associated with tafamidis [ , ].

## 4.9.4. Pregnancy

## 4.9.4.1. Pre-pregnancy counseling and risk assessment
It is recommended that pre-pregnancy counseling on contraception and the risks of cardiovascular deterioration during pregnancy be offered to patients with a history of HF or cardiomyopathy (including peripartum cardiomyopathy). A history of peripartum cardiomyopathy is associated with increased risk in subsequent pregnancies if full recovery of LVEF is not achieved [ , ]. While still associated with transient risks, maternal and neonatal outcomes could be favorable if ejection fraction is recovered prior to subsequent pregnancy in patients who previously suffered from peri-partum cardiomyopathy [ ]. Moreover, pre-pregnancy counseling ensures patients are well informed of the risks carried by pregnancy in HF, are confident in their health-related decisions and are satisfied with healthcare services [ , ].
Counseling should be informed by pregnancy cardiovascular risk assessment through appropriate tools, and echocardiography for myocardial structure and function assessment. Patients should be counseled to avoid pregnancy if they have severe heart disease (ejection fraction less than 30% or class III/IV heart failure, severe valvular stenosis, Marfan syndrome with aortic diameter more than 45 mm, bicuspid aortic valve with aortic diameter more than 50 mm, or pulmonary arterial hypertension. Pregnancy termination may be considered only after agreement by a multi-disciplinary heart team for patients with severe heart disease.

## 4.9.4.2. HF management during pregnancy
Close maternal and fetal monitoring is recommended for HF signs or symptoms or other cardiovascular instability by cardiology and obstetric and maternal–fetal medicine teams. Screening for any significant changes in HF symptoms or signs during pregnancy is recommended, particularly in the third trimester and if HF medication is changed [ ]. Hemodynamic monitoring and MCS are recommended as deemed appropriate by a multidisciplinary heart team for patients presenting with decompensatied HF or cardiogenic shock. Monitoring-based adjustment of HF treatment is recommended as appropriate to avoid hypotension and placental hypoperfusion. Safe medications in pregnancy include beta-blockers as they are not associated with congenital malformations or cardiac anomalies [ , ]. It is recommended that patients are switched to beta-1-selective blockers (bisoprolol, metoprolol succinate). Hydralazine, oral nitrates and methyldopa are also safe in pregnancy and may be considered if required. Adjustment of diuretic dosing should be considered to minimize the risk of placental hypoperfusion [ , ].
ACE-Is, ARBs, ARNI, MRAs, ivabradine, vericiguat and SGLT2 inhibitors are contraindicated due to risk of fetal harm and should be stopped prior to conception [ ]. While no specific information is available for ARNI and ivabradine in pregnancy, significant fetal harm in the second and third trimester (renal and tubular dysplasia, oligohydramnios, fetal growth restriction, ossification disorders of the skull, lung hypoplasia, contractures, large joints, anemia, and intrauterine fetal death) were reported with ACEi and ARB [ – ]. SGLT2 inhibitors are currently contraindicated in pregnancy and breastfeeding due to theoretical toxicity. Similarly, vericiguat is associated with embryo-fetal toxicity and is also contraindicated in pregnancy.

## 4.9.4.3. Peripartum cardiomyopathy
Peripartum cardiomyopathy is a frequently occurring condition with acute HF that could be accompanies with ventricular arrhythmias or cardiac arrest. It is recommended that pregnant patients with peripartum cardiomyopathy exhibiting signs of both severe HF and cardiogenic shock requiring inotropic or vasopressor support be transferred to tertiary heart centers with the capacity to administer extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, LVAD and/or cardiac transplantation if needed. Regardless of the gestational age, urgent delivery by caesarean section should be considered with MCS immediately available. Considering the possible side effects of adrenergic agents (dobutamine, adrenaline) [ ], levosimendan or MCS may be considered for hemodynamically unstable patients. LVAD implantation should be considered in refractory cases of cardiogenic shock as bridge to transplantation or bridge to recovery. Bromocriptine has been associated with LV function recovery and may be considered for treatment of peripartum cardiomyopathy [ , ]. If treatment is initiated, side effects should be considered and include deep venous thrombosis and cessation of lactation. Prophylactic (or therapeutic) anticoagulation should therefore accompany treatment, as detailed below.

## 4.9.4.4. Anticoagulation
If needed, therapeutic anti-coagulation is possible in pregnancy. However, DOACs should be avoided. Low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) can be used during the first and last trimesters in patients with concomitant HF and AF who are pregnant. VKAs can be used for the second trimester.

## 4.9.4.5. Contraception
Considering the risks of pregnancy in patients with HF, contraception counseling should be provided. Patient preference and desires should guide the choice of contraception along with a critical assessment of disease and the relative risks and benefits of the contraceptive option considered. Intrauterine devices are highly effective and reliable long-acting reversible contraception with an annual failure rate of less than 1% [ ]and are therefore the recommended nonpermanent option for women with high-risk cardiovascular conditions [ , ]. Other contraception options, such as progestin-only hormonal contraception and combined hormonal contraception have not been studies in RCTs in HF. Progestin-only hormonal contraceptives seem to be effective and safe for women with valvular heart disease, cardiomyopathy, and well-controlled hypertension [ , , ]. On the other hand, combined hormonal contraception is associated with significant risks in women with uncontrolled hypertension and cardiovascular diseases such as peripartum cardiomyopathy [ ] and are therefore not advisable.

## 4.9.5. Sleep apnea
In patients with HF and suspicion of sleep-disordered breathing, a formal sleep assessment may be considered to inform clinical decision-making by confirming the diagnosis and differentiating between obstructive and central sleep apnea. This is necessary seeing as the treatment of obstructive sleep apnea and central sleep apnea differs, and these two conditions can co-exist [ – ]. Treatment of sleep apnea and obesity hypoventilation syndrome is recommended with non-invasive ventilation as per guidance of sleep experts. For more information on sleep apnea, please refer to SHA 2019.

## 4.9.6. Anemia, hypertension, depression and vaccination
Please refer to SHA 2019 HF guidelines (see ).

## 5. Acute heart failure
For the definition, classification and diagnosis of acute HF (AHF), please refer to and the SHA 2019 HF guidelines.
 

## 5.1. Management
The management of AHF remains largely unchanged from the SHA 2019 HF guidelines. Please refer to the relevant sections for a detailed discussion of recommendations in . Two new algorithms are provided in and on the management of suspected AHF and AHF in general.
 

## 5.1.1. Pharmacotherapy

## 5.1.1.1. Vasodilators
In case response remains less than optimal after IV loop diuretics or a combination of loop diuretics and thiazide-type diuretic or acetazolamide, vasodilators may be considered for patients with SBP>110 mmHG. To note that two RCTs failed to show significant improvement with early intensive and sustained vasodilation compared to high-dose diuretics [ , ].

## 5.1.1.2. Inotropic agents and vasopressors
Inotropic agents should be considered for patients with low cardiac output and hypotension (SBP≤ 110mHg). Inotropic agents must be cautiously used starting at low doses and up-titrating as needed [ , ]. ECG and blood pressure monitoring are recommended for all patients receiving an inotropic agent. Inotropic agents are not recommended for routine use due to safety concerns (sinus tachycardia, increased ventricular rate, myocardial ischemia, arrhythmia, mortality).
A vasopressor (norepinephrine preferably) may be considered in patients who have cardiogenic shock, despite treatment with another inotrope, to increase blood pressure and vital organ perfusion [ , , ].

## 5.1.1.3. Thromboembolism prophylaxis
Thromboembolism was shown to be effective for the reduction of the incidence of deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism in a meta-analysis involving 19,958 at-risk hospitalized patients [ ]. Thromboembolism prophylaxis (e.g. with LMWH) is recommended in patients not already on anticoagulants and with no contraindication to anticoagulation, to reduce the risk of deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism [ , ]. Anticoagulation is recommended in patients with AHF and other indications for anticoagulation (e.g. AF).

## 5.2. Monitoring and discharge planning
Please refer to the SHA 2019 guidelines for detailed discussion of recommendations on monitoring and discharge planning ( ).
 

## 6. Multidisciplinary team management
Please refer to the SHA 2019 guidelines for detailed discussion of recommendations provided in – .
 

## 7. Conclusions
Cardiovascular diseases carry a significant burden in Saudi Arabia. This focused update of the SHA 2019 HF guidelines provides new and updated recommendations as well as clinical algorithms for the management of HF patients in light of emerging evidence. Clinicians should ensure patients are appropriately diagnosed and treated in order to achieve optimal clinical outcomes. Efforts should also be made to implement both the primary and secondary prevention of HF in Saudi Arabia. Special considerations should be made for the management of special patient populations, such as those with cardiovascular and non-cardiovascular co-morbidities. Overall, the adoption of updated and evidence-based HF management practices by healthcare providers in Saudi Arabia should improve clinical outcomes in patients afflicted by a disease with significant morbidity and mortality.

## Acknowledgments
The authors also thank Konoz Retaj, Saudi Arabia and Nancy Al Akkary MSc, BSc, for providing editorial and medical writing assistance for the preparation of this manuscript. This medical writing fee was funded by (Boehringer Ingelheim, AstraZeneca).

## Abbreviations list
ACEiAngiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors
AFatrial fibrillation
AHFacute heart failure
ARBAngiotensin receptor blockers
ARNIAngiontensin Receptor Neprilysin Inhibitor
ARVCarrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy
BNPB-type natriuretic peptide
CABGCoronary artery bypass graft surgery
CADcoronary artery disease
CCSchronic coronary syndrome
CCTACardiac computed tomography angiography
CKDchronic kidney disease
CMRcardiac magnetic resonance
CPETCardiopulmonary Exercise Testing
CRTcardiac resynchronization therapy
CTRCDcancer therapy-related cardiac dysfunction
CVcardiovascular
CVDcardiovascular disease
DCMdilated cardiomyopathy
DOACdirect oral anticoagulant
EFejection fraction
eGFRestimated glomerular filtration rate
EMBEndomyocardial biopsy
GLSGlobal Longitudinal Strain
HCMhypertrophic cardiomyopathy
HFheart failure
HFmrEFheart failure with mildly preserved ejection fraction
HFpEFheart failure with preserved ejection fraction
ICAinvasive coronary angiography
ICDimplantable cardioverter defibrillators
LBBBleft bundle branch block
LGElate gadolinium enhancement
LMWHlow molecular weight heparin
LVleft ventricular
LVADLV assist device
LVEFleft ventricular ejection fraction
MCSMechanical circulatory support
MRAMineralocorticoid receptor antagonist
NHCnational heart center
NT-pro BNPN-terminal pro- B-type natriuretic peptide
PCIPercutaneous coronary intervention
PETPositron emission tomography
RAASiRenin–angiotensin–aldosterone system inhibitor
RCTrandomized controlled trial
SFDASaudi Food and Drug Administration
SGLT-2Sodium-glucose Cotransporter-2
SHASaudi Heart Association
SPECTsingle photon emission computed tomography
VKAvitamin K antagonist

## Funding Statement
This work was supported by (Boehringer Ingelheim, AstraZeneca).

## Footnotes
Conflicts of interest
None declared.

Author contributions

Conception: Waleed Al Habeeb.
Literature review: Waleed Al Habeeb; Adel Tash; Abdelfatah Elasfar; Ali Almasood; Abeer Bakhsh; Fayez Elshaer; Fakhr Al Ayoubi; Kamal Waheeb AIghalayini; Maryam Mohammed AlQaseer; Mosaad Alhussein; Osama Almogbel; Shukri Merza AlSaif; Yahia Al Habeeb.
Methodology: Waleed Al Habeeb.
Writer-original draft: Waleed AlHabeeb; Adel Tash; Abdelfatah Elasfar; Ali Almasood; Abeer Bakhsh; Fayez Elshaer; Fakhr Al Ayoubi; Kamal Waheeb AIghalayini; Maryam Mohammed AlQaseer; Mosaad Alhussein; Osama Almogbel; Shukri Merza AlSaif; Yahia AlHebeshi.
Writing-review & editing: Waleed Al Habeeb; Adel Tash; Abdelfatah Elasfar; Ali Almasood; Abeer Bakhsh; Fayez Elshaer; Fakhr Al Ayoubi; Kamal Waheeb AIghalayini; Maryam Mohammed AlQaseer; Mosaad Alhussein; Osama Almogbel; Shukri Merza AlSaif; Yahia AlHebeshi.
Supervision: Waleed Al Habeeb.
Project administration: Waleed Al Habeeb.
Fundings: Waleed Al Habeeb.

Disclosure of funding

This work was supported by (Boehringer Ingelheim, AstraZeneca).

## References