pmcCochrane Database Syst RevCochrane Database Syst Rev3102cochrev10090974714651858The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews1469-493X1361-6137John Wiley and Sons, Inc. and the Cochrane LibraryPMC10790339PMC10790339.110790339107903393822672410.1002/14651858.CD013295.pub2CD013295.pub2CD0132951Orthopaedics & traumaRheumatologyInsurance medicineMinimising blood transfusion and blood lossPharmacological interventions for the prevention of bleeding in people undergoing elective hip or knee surgery: a systematic review and network meta‐analysis
Cochrane Injuries GroupGibbsVictoria N )Total studies: 47Total participants: 4398Relative effect*(95% CrI)Anticipated absolute effect**Certainty of evidence( )Median nodal ranking (95% CrI)***Probability of ranking 1st (%)****Without interventionWith interventionDifferenceTXA given orally and intra‐articularly at a total dose of greater than 3 g pre‐incision, intraoperatively and postoperatively0.02 (0 0.31)150 per 10003 per 1000147 fewer per 1000 (150 fewer to 104 fewer per 1000)⊕⊕⊕⊝Moderate(due to reporting bias)1 (1 to 13)53%TXA given orally at a total dose of 3 g pre‐incision and postoperatively0.06 (0 to 1.34)150 per 10009 per 1000141 fewer per 1000 (150 fewer to 51 more per 1000)⊕⊕⊝⊝Low(due to imprecision)5 (1 to 28)18%TXA given intravenously and orally at a total dose of greater than 3 g intraoperatively and postoperatively0.1 (0.02 to 0.55)150 per 100015 per 1000135 fewer per 1000 (147 fewer to 68 fewer per 1000)⊕⊕⊝⊝Low(due to within‐study bias, heterogeneity)6 (1 to 21)5%TXA given intravenously at a total dose of 2 g pre‐incision0.09 (0.02 to 0.56)150 per 100014 per 1000136 fewer per 1000 (147 fewer to 66 fewer per 1000)⊕⊕⊕⊝Moderate(due to within‐study bias)6 (1 to 21)5%TXA given intravenously and intra‐articularly at a total dose of 2 g intraoperatively0.09 (0.03 to 0.3)150 per 100014 per 1000136 fewer per 1000 (146 fewer to 105 fewer per 1000)⊕⊕⊕⊝Moderate(due to within‐study bias)5 (1 to 14)4%TXA given intravenously and orally at a total dose of greater than 3 g pre‐incision and postoperatively0.21 (0.02 to 2.08)150 per 100032 per 1000118 fewer per 1000 (147 fewer to 162 more per 1000)⊕⊕⊝⊝Low(due to imprecision)11 (1 to 29)3%TXA given intravenously at a total dose of 1 g pre‐incision and postoperatively0.18 (0.03 to 1.11)150 per 100027 per 1000123 fewer per 1000 (146 fewer to 17 more per 1000)⊕⊕⊝⊝Low(due to within‐study bias and imprecision)11 (2 to 29)2%TXA given intravenously and intra‐articularly at a total dose of greater than 3 g pre‐incision, intraoperatively and postoperatively0.18 (0.03 to 1.17)150 per 100027 per 1000123 fewer per 1000 (146 fewer to 26 more per 1000)⊕⊕⊝⊝Low(due to imprecision)11 (2 to 28)2%TXA given intra‐articularly at a total dose of 2 g intraoperatively0.17 (0.02 to 1.47)150 per 100026 per 1000124 fewer per 1000 (147 fewer to 71 more per 1000)⊕⊕⊝⊝Low(due to imprecision)10 (2 to 28)2%TXA given intravenously at a total dose of 1 g intraoperatively and postoperatively0.15 (0.03 to 0.74)150 per 100023 per 1000127 fewer per 1000 (146 fewer to 39 fewer per 1000)⊕⊕⊝⊝Low(due to within‐study bias and imprecision)8 (2 to 24)2%TXA given orally at a total dose of greater than 3 g pre‐incision and postoperatively0.16 (0.03 to 0.84)150 per 100024 per 1000126 fewer per 1000 (146 fewer to 24 fewer per 1000)⊕⊝⊝⊝Very low(due to within‐study bias and imprecision)9 (2 to 25)1%TXA given orally at a total dose of 2 g pre‐incision0.33 (0.05 to 2.12)150 per 100050 per 1000100 fewer per 1000 (143 fewer to 168 more per 1000)⊕⊕⊝⊝Low(due to imprecision)15 (2 to 29)1%TXA given intra‐articularly at a total dose of 1 g intraoperatively0.16 (0.04 to 0.58)150 per 100024 per 1000126 fewer per 1000 (144 fewer to 63 fewer per 1000)Low(due to within‐study bias)8 (2 to 23)0%TXA given intravenously at a total dose of greater than 3 g intraoperatively and postoperatively0.34 (0.1 to 1.19)150 per 100051 per 100099 fewer per 1000 (135 fewer to 29 more per 1000)⊕⊕⊕⊝Moderate(due to imprecision and heterogeneity)15 (4 to 28)0%TXA given intravenously and intra‐articularly at a total dose of 2 g pre‐incision and intraoperatively0.36 (0.1 to 1.26)150 per 100054 per 100096 fewer per 1000 (135 fewer to 39 more per 1000)⊕⊝⊝⊝Very low(due to within‐study bias and imprecision)17 (5 to 28)0%TXA given orally at a total dose of 2 g pre‐incision and postoperatively0.29 (0.1 to 0.84)150 per 100044 per 1000106 fewer per 1000 (135 fewer to 24 fewer per 1000)⊕⊕⊝⊝Low(due to within‐study bias, imprecision and heterogeneity)14 (5 to 25)0%TXA given intravenously at a total dose of 2 g pre‐incision and intraoperatively0.42 (0.12 to 1.43)150 per 100063 per 100087 fewer per 1000 (132 fewer to 65 more per 1000)⊕⊝⊝⊝Very low(due to within‐study bias and imprecision)19 (6 to 28)0%TXA given intravenously at a total dose of 1 g pre‐incision and intraoperatively0.29 (0.11 to 0.78)150 per 100044 per 1000106 fewer per 1000 (134 fewer to 33 fewer per 1000)⊕⊕⊕⊝Moderate(due to within‐study bias and heterogeneity)14 (5 to 24)0%Aprotinin given intravenously0.59 (0.36 to 0.96)150 per 100089 per 100061 fewer per 1000 (96 fewer to 6 fewer per 1000)⊕⊕⊝⊝Low(due to within‐study bias and heterogeneity)23 (15 to 27)0%Desmopressin given intravenously1.41 (0.23 to 8.53)150 per 1000212 per 100062 more per 1000 (116 fewer to 1130 more per 1000)⊕⊕⊝⊝Low(due to imprecision)28 (12 to 29)0%EACA given intravenously0.6 (0.29 to 1.27)150 per 100090 per 100060 fewer per 1000 (107 fewer to 41 more per 1000)⊕⊝⊝⊝Very low(due to within‐study bias and imprecision)23 (12 to 28)0%Fibrin (topical)0.86 (0.25 to 2.93)150 per 1000129 per 100021 fewer per 1000 (113 fewer to 290 more per 1000)⊕⊝⊝⊝Very low(due to within‐study bias and imprecision)26 (12 to 29)0%TXA given intravenously at a total dose of 1 g intraoperatively0.37 (0.19 to 0.73)150 per 100056 per 100094 fewer per 1000 (122 fewer to 41 fewer per 1000)⊕⊕⊝⊝Low(due to within‐study bias, imprecision and incoherence)17 (9 to 24)0%TXA given intravenously at a total dose of 1 g pre‐incision0.47 (0.31 to 0.73)150 per 100071 per 100079 fewer per 1000 (104 fewer to 41 fewer per 1000)⊕⊕⊕⊝Moderate(due to within‐study bias and heterogeneity)20 (14 to 25)0%TXA given intravenously at a total dose of 1 g pre‐incision, intraoperatively and postoperatively0.7 (0.26 to 1.87)150 per 1000105 per 100045 fewer per 1000 (111 fewer to 131 more per 1000)⊕⊕⊝⊝Low(due to within‐study bias and imprecision)25 (12 to 29)0%TXA given intravenously at a total dose of 2 g intraoperatively and postoperatively0.32 (0.17 to 0.61)150 per 100048 per 1000102 fewer per 1000 (125 fewer to 59 fewer per 1000)⊕⊕⊝⊝Low(due to within‐study bias)15 (7 to 24)0%TXA given intravenously at a total dose of 2 g pre‐incision and postoperatively0.39 (0.19 to 0.77)150 per 100059 per 100091 fewer per 1000 (122 fewer to 35 fewer per 1000)⊕⊕⊕⊝Moderate(due to within‐study bias and heterogeneity)17 (9 to 25)0%TXA given intravenously at a total dose of 3 g intraoperatively and postoperatively0.4 (0.17 to 0.91)150 per 100060 per 100090 fewer per 1000 (125 fewer to 14 fewer per 1000)⊕⊕⊕⊝Moderate(due to within‐study bias and heterogeneity)18 (8 to 26)0% 

## Background

## Description of the condition
Musculoskeletal conditions such as osteoarthritis represent a major international public health challenge. Osteoarthritis affecting the hip or knee was reported as being the 11th highest contributor to global disability in the Global Burden of Disease Study ( ).
Hip or knee replacement surgery is a well‐established means of improving quality of life and offers effective pain relief, as well as restoration of function in people suffering from hip or knee disease. Data from the National Joint Registry in the UK demonstrate that 85.6% of people having hip replacement surgery and 70.8% of people having knee replacement surgery report being ‘much better’ following their surgery ( ; ).
Internationally, the number of total hip replacements is increasing. In a study across 20 OECD (Organisation for Economic Co‐operation and Development) countries, the annual growth rate of hip replacement surgery is projected to rise from 1.8 million hip replacements per year in 2015 to 2.8 million per year in 2050. The mean incidence of hip replacement is expected to increase from 184 per 100,000 population to 275 per 100,000 population ( ). In 2015, the incidence of knee replacements was 150 per 100,000 population; it is anticipated that this figure will increase four‐fold by the year 2030 ( ).
Despite the benefits, hip or knee replacement surgery is associated with significant risk. In the UK, mortality from primary hip replacement within 90 days of surgery ranges from 0.2% in younger people, to 3.1% in older people, with even higher risk following revision surgery ( ). It is estimated that one‐third of people undergoing primary joint replacement are anaemic preoperatively ( ). Hip or knee surgery can result in significant blood loss and up to 90% of patients are anaemic following surgery ( ; ). For revision surgery, the prevalence of preoperative anaemia and the average blood loss may be even greater ( ). The increased prevalence of preoperative anaemia amongst people undergoing revision surgery is probably because the people who require revision surgery are older, and so more likely to suffer with chronic diseases and to be malnourished, all of which are factors that contribute to anaemia ( ).
As a consequence, people undergoing orthopaedic surgery receive 3.9% of all packed red blood cell transfusions in the UK and, of those, hip or knee replacement surgery uses 77% ( ). Bleeding and the need for allogeneic blood transfusions (donated blood from other people) has been shown to increase the risk of surgical site infection and mortality ( ). In addition, it is associated with an increased duration of hospital stay, and increased costs associated with surgery ( ; ).
Prevention of bleeding during surgery offers the opportunity to reduce the risk of allogeneic blood transfusion, reduce cost and improve patients' outcomes following surgery. Several interventions are available and are currently employed as part of routine clinical care. These interventions include pharmacological therapies that have been proven to reduce blood loss from surgery ( ; ).

## Description of the intervention
There are many pharmacological interventions that can be administered to reduce bleeding during surgery ( ). This review focuses on several interventions including antifibrinolytics, desmopressin, factor VIIa and factor XIII, fibrinogen and sealants. Antifibrinolytics include tranexamic acid, aprotinin and epsilon‐aminocaproic acid. Tranexamic acid and epsilon‐aminocaproic acid are synthetic derivatives of the amino acid lysine and aprotinin is a non‐specific serine protease inhibitor derived from bovine lung. Antifibrinolytics are widely used in cardiac surgery to prevent bleeding ( ). Sealants can be grouped into fibrin containing sealants and non‐fibrin containing sealants. Fibrin sealants are composed of blood clotting agents and are applied to the wound to reduce blood loss; they have been found to be most effective when used in orthopaedic surgery ( ). Non‐fibrin sealants tend to function through mechanical expansion and prevent bleeding in a similar way to the application of pressure to a wound ( ). These interventions provide an advantage over blood transfusion through a reduction in the risk of the infective and compatibility complications associated with blood transfusion. In addition, there is a greater availability of pharmacological interventions than of blood transfusions. Finally, pharmacological interventions are versatile; they can be administered in a variety of different ways, including intravenously, orally, topically and nasally (see ).

## How the intervention might work
When blood loss from hip or knee surgery results in a haemoglobin level below a certain threshold and the onset of associated symptoms, patients are often transfused with red blood cells, even though this procedure is associated with significant risk. All of the interventions described above aim to reduce bleeding and minimise blood loss. Each intervention and its mode of action, along with any limitations or potential risks, is described below.

## Antifibrinolytics (tranexamic acid, aprotinin and epsilon‐aminocaproic acid)
During surgery, the clotting mechanism is activated. Antifibrinolytic drugs block the process of blood clot breakdown (fibrinolysis), therefore increasing clot strength and stability, which prevents excessive bleeding ( ). The most commonly used antifibrinolytic agents include tranexamic acid, aprotinin and epsilon‐aminocaproic acid ( ). In the UK, tranexamic acid is used in 42% of planned surgical cases ( ). These medicines may be given orally, intravenous or topically ( ). Most have few side effects, however there is a theoretical increased risk of venous thromboembolism with their use ( ; ).

## Desmopressin
Desmopressin functions as a vasopressin analogue that increases the levels of von Willebrand factor and factor VIII ( ). Von Willebrand factor and factor VIII enable platelets to adhere to wound sites and form clots to prevent bleeding. Desmopressin may be administered intravenously, subcutaneously or intranasally ( ). Side effects include facial flushing and possibly low blood sodium levels, especially with repeated doses ( ; ).

## Recombinant factor VIIa and factor XIII
Recombinant factor VIIa (rFVIIa) is an intervention licensed for use in people with haemophilia, congenital factor VII deficiency and inhibitory alloantibodies. However, it has also been used off‐license to prevent bleeding in surgery where the potential for blood loss is expected to be high ( ). Despite its use, the efficacy of the drug in people without haemophilia remains uncertain. Factor XIII protects a developing clot from fibrinolysis and improves clot strength. Recombinant factor XIII (rFXIII) has been shown to mediate clot formation in a dose‐dependent manner, and it has been suggested that maintaining higher levels of rFXIII levels may prevent bleeding ( ).

## Fibrinogen
Fibrinogen concentrate is a blood component that is administered intravenously. Fibrinogen is converted to fibrin by thrombin and forms the structural basis of a clot. As it is derived from blood, there is a small risk of viral infection with its use, however due to its manufacturing process this is unlikely to result in infection ( ).

## Fibrin sealants
Fibrin sealants are derived from plasma and may be applied to actively bleeding bony surfaces or the wound. They usually consist of fibrinogen, thrombin, factor XIII, an antifibrinolytic agent and calcium chloride. However, some sealants do not contain an antifibrinolytic agent ( ). Allergy is a rare complication ( ). Although fibrin sealants are derived from blood plasma, they have a lower risk of transmitting infections than allogeneic blood transfusions ( ).

## Non‐fibrin sealants
Non‐fibrin sealants tend to be low‐viscosity liquids that polymerise to form a film that enables platelet activation and aggregation. This allows a clot to form, but relies on the patient’s own fibrin to create the clot. Other forms of non‐fibrin sealants include dressings, powders or bandages. Non‐fibrin sealants may enable clot formation where the use of a tourniquet is impractical. Adverse events that have been reported with their use are either associated with expansion of the sealant, e.g. nerve compression, or are the result of allergy ( ).

## Why it is important to do this review
A key objective for global health agencies such as the World Health Organization (WHO) is to ensure that every country is able to provide universal access to safe and adequate blood supplies to help save lives ( ). Undertaking unnecessary transfusions and using unsafe transfusion practices can expose people to transfusion‐transmitted infections and serious adverse transfusion reactions, as well as consuming blood products that could be better used in those who are in need ( ). This review will focus on the question of which pharmacological bleeding prevention treatment is most effective at preventing blood transfusion and blood loss. Bleeding and the need for blood transfusion may lead to costly adverse events such as infections and increased length of hospital stay ( ; ). Reducing the number of blood transfusions is important to reduce these risks and to help preserve an already limited resource. Saving blood by reducing bleeding during surgery through pharmacological interventions may offer a lower‐risk option and will be cheaper than transfusing blood. For example, an ampoule of tranexamic acid or desmopressin costs approximately GBP 1.50 ( ), whereas one unit of red blood cells costs GBP 153.30, an increase of GBP 24.30 since 2019 ( ).
To date, audits in orthopaedic hip or knee surgery suggest that there is still limited use of alternatives to allogeneic blood transfusion ( ). In addition, there is some concern around using pharmacological interventions such as tranexamic acid due to a theoretical risk of unwanted blood clots, such as deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolism (blood clots in the lungs, which can affect breathing). In other populations, the timing of the dose has been shown to be of importance when considering adverse events. In the CRASH‐2 trial (a large multicentre international trial of tranexamic acid versus placebo), patients with significant bleeding from trauma had an increased risk of mortality if tranexamic acid was given after three hours ( ). The dose of the intervention is also important from a cost perspective, as well as minimising the side‐effect profile of the agent. Safety concerns in people at increased risk of stroke or myocardial infarction have led to limited use of alternative interventions ( ). In addition, topical alternatives may aid haemostasis while reducing systemic exposure to the treatment ( ).
At protocol stage ( ), we anticipated that it would be unlikely that we would identify any trials that compared timing, dose and route of all these interventions directly, and that this would lead to uncertainty for decision‐makers. Therefore, in order to lessen this uncertainty and provide the highest level of evidence for treatment decisions in those undergoing orthopaedic surgery, we planned a network meta‐analysis to synthesise direct and indirect evidence to enable the evaluation of different treatment strategies for the prevention of bleeding in hip or knee surgery.

## Description of network meta‐analysis
We carried out a network meta‐analysis (NMA) to allow the comparison of more than two treatments ( ). The evidence for each comparison is represented within a network map where each treatment is represented by a node (vertex), with lines connecting treatments to be compared ( ). We have used solid lines to represent ‘direct’ comparisons where the treatments in question have been compared in clinical trials. We have used absent lines to represent ‘indirect’ comparisons, and indicate there are no clinical trials that made that comparison ( ; ).
We used the data from the ‘direct’ comparisons to infer and estimate the effects of the missing comparisons ‘indirectly’ ( ; ; ; ). By doing this, we were able to bridge gaps in the evidence by combining data from direct comparisons in clinical trials with missing comparison information in the network structure, enabling more precise estimates to be obtained by using data from across the network ( ; ). We only included data in the network that was similar enough in terms of effect modifiers across all direct comparisons to draw robust conclusions ( ).
We presented results in a tabular format specifying treatment and outcome, to enable clinical decision‐making ( ; ; ; ).

## Objectives
To determine the relative efficacy of pharmacological interventions for preventing blood loss in elective primary or revision hip or knee replacement, and to identify the optimal administration of interventions regarding timing, dose and route, using network meta‐analysis methodology.

## Methods

## Criteria for considering studies for this review

## Types of studies
We included randomised controlled trials (RCTs). If the process of randomisation was unclear, we contacted the trial authors to obtain further information. If we were unable to contact the authors, we included the trial in the review and considered it to be at unclear risk of bias. To be eligible, trials had to compare at least one of the active interventions of interest versus placebo or versus another active treatment. We used both abstracts and full‐text publications if they reported adequate information about study design, participant characteristics and interventions.
We did not include quasi‐randomised trials (assigned to a treatment, procedure or intervention by methods that are not random) due to lack of proper randomisation.
We only included trials that had been prospectively registered, unless the final trial report was published before 2010. The decision to exclude unregistered (or retrospectively registered) trials was taken due to the evidence highlighting issues surrounding false data ( ; ) and has now become the policy of Cochrane Injuries ( ; ). Prospective registration reduces the chance of publication bias, and has been compulsory for randomised controlled trials since 2005, suggesting that those that have not been registered (or were registered retrospectively) since then are less likely to be of high quality ( ). We have used a cut‐off of 2010 as this allowed studies that commenced before the introduction of compulsory registration in 2005 to complete and publish.

## Types of participants
We included any person who had undergone an elective hip or knee replacement or revision surgery. We included people who had total knee replacements, partial or unicondylar knee replacements, hip replacements, and revision hip or knee surgery. We excluded people with known bleeding disorders such as haemophilia. We placed no restrictions on ethnicity or gender.
If an eligible trial contained a mixed population of people, then we only used data contributed from our population of interest. If no subgroup data were given, and we were unable to contact the corresponding author to provide this information, at least 80% of the sample size had to be from our population of interest for the trial to be eligible for inclusion.

## Types of interventions
We included trials that compared one or more of the following interventions:
antifibrinolytics:
tranexamic acid;
aprotinin;
epsilon‐aminocaproic acid;
desmopressin;
factor VIIa and factor XIII;
fibrinogen;
fibrin sealants/glue (not including surface dressings);
non‐fibrin sealants (not including surface dressings).

Drugs and treatments that are not listed above were not used in the NMA. Acceptable comparators included placebo or one of the active interventions listed above. We excluded trials that used standard of care as the comparator.
We considered interventions given at a range of threshold doses, and as single or multiple doses via intravenous, subcutaneous, intranasal, oral or topical routes of administration. We also considered the timing of the interventions.

## Types of outcome measures
We assessed the relative hierarchy ranking of the interventions using the following outcome measures.

## Primary outcomes
Risk of an allogeneic blood transfusion (up to 30 days)
All‐cause mortality (deaths occurring up to 30 days after the operation)

## Secondary outcomes
Mean number of transfusion episodes per person (up to 30 days)
Re‐operation due to bleeding (within seven days)
Length of hospital stay
Adverse events:
Risk of thromboembolism (deep vein thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, myocardial infarction, stroke): within 30 days
Risk of transfusion reactions (acute): within 24 hours
Risk of suspected serious drug reactions: within 30 days

We collected quality of life and cost data reported in the included studies. We did not perform an analysis of quality of life data or a formal economic evaluation with the collected information.

## Search methods for identification of studies
The Systematic Review Initiative (SRI, Oxford, UK) Information Specialist (CD) formulated the search strategies in collaboration with Cochrane Injuries.

## Electronic searches

## Bibliographic databases
We developed a thorough and sensitive search strategy to search for RCTs and systematic reviews from database inception to 18 October 2022, in the following databases:
the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL 2022, Issue 10), in the Cochrane Library;
MEDLINE (Ovid; 1946 to 18 October 2022);
Embase (Ovid; 1974 to 18 October 2022);
CINAHL (EBSCOhost; 1937 to 18 October 2022);
Transfusion Evidence Library (Evidentia Publishing, 1950 to 18 October 2022) (www.transfusionevidencelibrary.com);
ClinicalTrials.gov (www.clinicaltrials.gov);
World Health Organization International Clinical Trials Registry Platform (ICTRP) (apps.who.int/trialsearch).

Search strategies developed specifically for this review consisted of index terms, text words and word variations for the concepts of population (hip and knee surgery) and intervention/comparator (pharmacological interventions for the prevention of bleeding). We combined our searches in MEDLINE, Embase and CINAHL with adaptations of the recommended Cochrane RCT filter ( ), and of the SIGN systematic review filters (www.sign.ac.uk/search-filters.html). We did not limit searches by language, year of publication or publication type. Search strategies for all databases are presented in .

## Searching other resources
To complement the database searches, we handsearched the reference lists of recent systematic reviews to identify additional trials potentially missed by the electronic searches, but also to ensure that we collected as much of the available evidence as possible. We contacted the corresponding authors of the reviews to determine whether they were aware of any further trials in this area. In addition, we contacted authors of ongoing trials to obtain any unpublished data. We also examined any relevant retraction statements and errata for the included studies.

## Data collection and analysis
We performed the review according to the methods stated in Chapter 7 of the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions ( ). We summarised the direct (pairwise) evidence using Review Manager Web (RevMan Web) ( ), and performed the network meta‐analysis using BUGSnet ( ).

## Selection of studies
Independently, two review authors (VNG, RC) screened all titles and abstracts identified by the electronic searches for eligibility and they excluded any citations deemed irrelevant. Independently, these review authors (VNG, RC) screened the full texts of all potentially relevant trials for eligibility against the criteria set out in the protocol. We resolved disagreements through discussion or, if required, through consultation with a third review author (LJE). We requested information from trial authors when there was insufficient information from trial reports to make a decision about eligibility. We kept the records of the selection process, as well as details of our reasons for exclusion at the full‐text stage. These were used to populate a PRISMA flowchart to demonstrate the selection of studies ( ; ). We used colleagues or Cochrane resources such as Task Exchange for translation of articles written in languages that the review authors cannot read and we thank and acknowledge these colleagues.

## Data extraction and management
Independently, VNG and RC undertook data extraction of the included trials, using standardised, piloted forms designed according to the methods described in the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions ( ). The review authors were not blinded to institutions, authors or outcomes of the trials. Colleagues who provided translation of studies written in languages other than English also extracted data from these studies. We piloted the data extraction forms on a random sample of 10 included trials (split equally between the review authors) and made adjustments. If a trial was identified as relevant by one author but not by the other, the authors discussed the rationale behind their assessments. If a consensus was not reached between the two authors, LJE served as the arbitrator. We contacted the corresponding authors of included trials up to three times to request additional trial data. If no response was received within four weeks, we deemed the data unobtainable. If there was conflict over data sources, we gave preference to published data over unpublished, as published data have been through a peer review process.
There were a large number of possible combinations for each intervention and data synthesis was difficult to determine prior to data extraction. Taxonomy of interventions took place prior to outcome data extraction, with help from an external expert panel to create clinically meaningful groups ready for data analysis. The external panel consisted of two haematologists (blood specialist doctors), two orthopaedic surgeons (bone and joint specialist doctors) and two anaesthetists. The panel were blinded to the outcome data and were given information on the study design, types of studies included and intervention information. The panel recommended nodes consisting of intervention name, mode of administration, total dose of intervention and timing. For tranexamic acid, the panel recommended doses were grouped into 1 g, 2 g, 3 g and > 3 g, and for the interventions EACA, aprotinin and desmopressin they recommended grouping all the studies together, as they are likely to be weight‐adjusted doses. The panel recommended timing be subdivided into pre‐incision (prior to making a surgical incision), intraoperative, postoperative within six hours of surgery, and postoperative administered within 6 to 24 hours. Where a study reported weighted doses of the interventions (e.g. mg/kg), we converted these doses to a uniform dose. We used the average weight of the patient population of the country in which the study was conducted according to published literature ( ).
We extracted the following information.
General information: name of review author carrying out data extraction; date of when data extraction was done; study ID (and any other unique trial identifiers); surname and contact address of first author of included trial; citation of included trial; language of trial and details of any duplicate publications.
Trial information: trial design ‐ type of RCT; location of trial; setting; sample size; duration of trial; power calculation; treatment arms; randomisation; inclusion and exclusion criteria; comparability of groups and length of follow‐up.
Characteristics of participants: age; sex; ethnicity; breakdown of total numbers for those recruited, randomised and analysed; type of surgery; numbers lost to follow‐up; dropouts (percentage in each arm) with reasons; protocol violations and co‐morbidities.
Characteristics of interventions: number of treatment arms; description of experimental arm(s); description of control arm; timing, dose and route of administration of intervention; and other differences between intervention arms.
Outcomes: need for blood transfusion within 30 days postoperatively; number of units of red blood cells transfused; mortality due to any cause within 30 days postoperatively; proportion of participants requiring each type of transfusion; and adverse effects (transfusion reactions, thromboembolism and drug reactions), re‐operation due to bleeding and length of hospital stay. (We extracted exactly how ‘adverse effects’ and ‘serious adverse effects’ were defined in each study.)
Quality assessment: allocation concealment; blinding (participants, personnel, outcome assessors); incomplete outcome data; selective outcome reporting; other sources of bias. (Blinding was not possible for some comparisons.)

We utilised arm‐level data rather than study‐level data from both abstracts and full‐text papers. We obtained maximal data by extracting data from all publications available but used one data extraction form per trial. We contacted the primary or corresponding author of a trial, study groups or companies for additional data, if insufficient information was provided in the trial reports.
We also collected and have presented data on costs reported in the included studies. Although this does not constitute a formal economic evaluation, it provides useful additional information that may be of value in a decision‐making context.
Three review authors (VNG, RC, CK) entered the data into RevMan 5 and cross‐checked entries for accuracy.

## Data on potential risk modifiers
From every included trial we extracted data on the following characteristics, which may act as treatment risk modifiers.
Type of surgery(primary hip or knee replacement or hip or knee revision): surgery may have an impact on allogeneic transfusion and mortality, as often revision joint surgery results in more blood loss than primary joint replacement ( ). This is likely due to revision surgery taking longer and being more complex than primary joint replacement.
Reason for surgery: the indication for surgery may also affect blood loss during surgery as, although most primary replacements are performed for arthritis, people who have replacements performed for other reasons such as bony cancer, may bleed more due to the tumour being more vascular than normal bone ( ).
Duration of surgery: longer surgery is likely to result in more bleeding.
Incidence of preoperative anaemia: people with anaemia have a higher risk of blood transfusion following surgery ( ; ).
Type of anaesthetic used (general or spinal): general anaesthesia has been associated with increased risk of blood transfusion, which may be due to loss of maintenance of venous pressure when the anaesthetic agents are administered ( ).
Use of tourniquet (in knee replacement surgery): tourniquet use may reduce intraoperative blood loss, however some studies suggest that this may not affect total blood loss ( ).
Use of anticoagulation: participants on anticoagulants are likely to bleed more.

## Assessment of risk of bias in included studies
We performed quality assessment on all the included trials using the methods described in Chapter 8 of the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions ( ). We used the Cochrane risk of bias tool (RoB tool) ( ). We tested the RoB tool in a small, random sample of trials. Three review authors (VNG, RC, CK) independently assessed risk of bias for each trial to assign each a classification of high, low or unclear risk. We created a table and outlined the judgement process. We compared the review authors’ statements and reached a consensus on the classification of risk of bias. If necessary, a third author (LJE) was consulted.
Using this information, we explored statistical heterogeneity in each study and performed a sensitivity analysis. We followed the Cochrane methods for assessing risk of bias and addressed the following domains:
selection bias (random sequence generation and allocation concealment);
reporting bias (selective reporting);
attrition bias (incomplete outcome data);
performance bias (blinding of participants, personnel and outcome assessors);
detection bias (blinding of outcome assessment);
other forms of bias.

We assigned each of the domains listed above a classification of risk:
low risk ‐ if the criterion has been adequately fulfilled in the study;
high risk ‐ if the criterion has not been fulfilled in the study;
unclear risk ‐ if the study report does not provide enough information with which to reach a clear decision.

We resolved any conflicts through discussion between the review authors (VNG, RC, CK) or by involving another author (LJE).
If a publication stated that participants were randomised but the method of randomisation used was not described, we contacted the trial authors. If this information was unobtainable, then we included the trial and considered it to be at an 'unclear' risk of bias as per the Cochrane risk of bias tool ( ).
We included both abstracts and full‐text publications.

## Measures of treatment effect
When extracting data for dichotomous outcomes (number of participants with at least one bleeding episode, number of participants with at least one severe or life‐threatening bleeding episode, mortality, proportion of participants needing an allogeneic blood transfusion, adverse events), we documented the number of events and number of participants in the intervention and control arms.
For continuous outcomes (number of units of allogeneic blood transfused per participant, length of hospital stay), we documented the mean, standard deviation and total number of participants in both the intervention and control arms. If only study‐level data were available we recorded the reported effect size and the associated standard error.
We presented direct treatment comparisons and grouped the comparisons by treatment nodes; we compared and produced the forest plots using RevMan ( ). We produced these to provide transparency on all outcome data collected for all studies.

## Unit of analysis issues
In pairwise meta‐analyses, we treated trials with multiple treatment group comparisons as individual, independent two‐arm studies. The placebo group acted as a node in the NMA, which helped with indirect analyses and formation of a hierarchy of interventions. In the NMA, we included all comparisons where there were sufficient data to do so. These trials were analysed appropriately to take into account the respective treatment effects. The NMA method accounted correctly for correlations in relative effects from trials with more than two arms. We performed our analyses using the participant as the unit of analysis.
In future updates, in the event that we include one or more cluster‐RCTs, we will follow the guidance in Chapter 23 of the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions ( ), using a method of generic inverse variance in RevMan. We will also carefully consider the potential risk of bias associated with the method of randomisation described.

## Dealing with missing data
Where there were missing data from any study, we contacted a corresponding author, by email, to obtain missing data. We attempted to contact the authors, by email, up to a maximum of three times to obtain the information. If we were still unable to obtain the information, and where missing data were thought to introduce serious bias, we performed a sensitivity analysis to evaluate the impact of missing outcome data.
We recorded the number of participants lost to follow‐up in each trial. In trials that also included other populations, such as those undergoing non‐elective hip or knee replacement, we extracted data for the elective hip or knee subgroup.
Continuous outcomes are often reported as a median and a measure of spread, such as a range or interquartile range (IQR) when the distribution is skewed. We considered using an assumption of log‐normality to obtain estimates of mean and SD from medians and range/IQR. However, neither of our continuous outcomes (units of blood product transfused and length of hospital stay) are granular enough for this approach to be reasonable, and small sample sizes posed an additional problem where range was the only available measure of spread.

## Assessment of heterogeneity

## Assessment of clinical and methodological heterogeneity within treatment comparisons
If we deemed the data to be homogenous, we combined them and performed a meta‐analysis. We assessed whether clinical and methodological heterogeneity were present within each comparison by looking at trial and participant characteristics across all included trials within the nodes. If significant clinical and methodological heterogeneity were found within a particular comparison, which meant that a meta‐analysis could not be performed, or that the summary statistic could not be reported, we provided a descriptive summary.
Network meta‐analysis
An assumption underlying NMA is that effect modifiers are similarly distributed across comparisons in the network. That means that an effect modifier should be similar in AB and BC trials in order to obtain a valid AC estimate. Equivalent formulations of the transitivity assumption are presented in Salanti 2012. In order to verify this assumption, for each comparison we compiled a table of important trial and patient characteristics and visually inspected the similarity of factors we considered likely to modify treatment effect. We also assessed the inclusion and exclusion criteria of every trial in the network to ensure that patients, trial protocols, etc. were similar in those aspects that might modify the treatment effect.
In the NMA we assumed a common estimate for heterogeneity across our comparisons and estimated a total I2 value for the network. We assessed statistical heterogeneity in the entire network based on the magnitude of the heterogeneity variance parameter (Tau2), which was estimated from the NMA models. We performed a likelihood ratio test for the null hypothesis of no heterogeneity versus presence of heterogeneity. For pairwise meta‐analyses, we estimated different heterogeneity variances for each pairwise comparison. We calculated the heterogeneity within each pair using the I2 statistic and 95% CI (I2 > 50% indicating moderate heterogeneity), which describes the variability that cannot be due to random error. We planned to explore heterogeneity by performing subgroup meta‐regression, but this was not possible.

## Assessment of reporting biases
At the protocol stage, we planned to explore the existence of small‐study effects in our pairwise meta‐analyses (when there were more than 10 studies) by producing funnel plots, and by using meta‐regression in our NMA. We deemed a P value below the threshold of 0.10 to be statistically significant. The association between study effect size and funnel plot asymmetry is affected by several factors. We assumed that a lack of studies in areas of non‐significance would be indicative of publication bias. In the event, we were unable to action these plans, due to insufficient numbers of studies in the pairwise analyses.

## Data synthesis

## Relative treatment effects
We performed a Bayesian NMA using the package in R (v1.1.0) with default priors, producing estimated treatment effects for each comparison along with 95% credible intervals (CrIs). For the network meta‐analysis, we grouped interventions into clinically meaningful groups during the first stage of the data extraction, and treated each group as a single node within the network analysis. The large number of tranexamic acid regimens were grouped by dose, route and timing. Two review authors (VNG and RC) entered the data into the software and cross‐checked for accuracy.
For NMA of binary outcomes, we excluded direct comparisons with zero events, or zero non‐events, in one or both arms. Zero event studies are highly likely to lead to numerical instability and lack of convergence as this can affect connectivity ( ; ).
For both continuous and binary outcomes, we used a random‐effects consistency model with 1000 adaptations, 50,000 burn‐ins and 100,000 iterations to ensure good convergence, and compared this with the equivalent inconsistency model to check that the model assumptions were reasonable.

## Relative treatment ranking
We performed a Bayesian NMA using the package in R (v1.1.0) with default priors, producing rankings based on Surface Under the Cumulative RAnking curve (SUCRA). Two review authors (VNG and RC) entered the data into the software and cross‐checked for accuracy.

## Subgroup analysis and investigation of heterogeneity

## Subgroup analysis
We were unable to perform any subgroup analyses due to a lack of data and the number of interventions (23) included within the NMA compared with the number of studies (43).
We had planned to perform subgroup analyses and network meta‐regression for each of the following variables in order to explain heterogeneity, inconsistency, or both.
Participants with preoperative anaemia
Type of surgery (hip or knee primary replacement or hip or knee revision)
Type of anaesthesia (general or spinal)
Duration of surgery
Use of tourniquet in knee replacement surgery
Reason for surgery
Use of anticoagulation

## Investigation of heterogeneity
We estimated heterogeneity within direct comparisons grouped into broadly clinically consistent groups. We assessed statistical heterogeneity using Tau2, Cochran's Q and the I2 statistic.

## Assessment of transitivity and inconsistency
We reported event rates or means for each node in the networks for each outcome and compared the model fit of a random‐effects consistency model to a random‐effects inconsistency model to check for potential problems with the transitivity assumption.

## Sensitivity analysis
If trials contained mixed populations (e.g. included those requiring trauma surgery), then we used data only from the elective hip and knee subgroups, if available. If no subgroup data were presented and the corresponding author was not contactable for the information, we specified that at least 80% of the sample size had to be from our population of interest for the trial to be included.
We planned to assess the strength of the overall results by performing sensitivity analyses excluding trials deemed to be at high risk of bias. In the event, the network was too fragile to allow sensitivity analysis; we considered risk of bias in our interpretation of results.

## Summary of findings and assessment of the certainty of the evidence
We did not specify any information related to the summary of findings table in our protocol. We produced an NMA summary of findings table as recommended by Yepes‐Nuez et al ( ).
We used the CINeMA framework (Confidence in Network Meta‐Analysis) to evaluate the confidence of the evidence for the summary of findings table ( ). We used the CINeMA framework rather than GRADEpro ( ) to develop a summary of findings table as the CINeMA framework has been created specifically to assess confidence in the results of a network meta‐analysis where there are a large number of interventions.
We used the online CINeMA tool to assess confidence for each comparison within the network based on: within‐study bias, across‐studies bias, indirectness, imprecision, heterogeneity and incoherence. We provide justifications in the summary of findings table for any decisions made to downgrade the certainty of the evidence to aid the reader's understanding of the review. We also included the relative effect with 95% credible intervals, the anticipated absolute effect with 95% credible intervals, the median nodal ranking point with 95% credible intervals and the probability of intervention ranking first (%).

## Results

## Description of studies
See ; ; ; .

## Results of the search
Our search, conducted on 18 October 2022, retrieved 6889 records. After removing all duplicates, we screened 3493 records based on their titles and abstracts.
We excluded 2870 records that did not meet the prespecified inclusion criteria at title and abstract stage and following full‐text screening we excluded a further 241 studies (from 251 publications). We identified 102 eligible completed trials (from 158 publications), 30 ongoing trials (from 31 publications) and 166 trials (from 183 publications) awaiting assessment. For further details, see ; ; .
The study flow diagram illustrates the study selection process according to PRISMA guidelines ( ).
 

## Included studies
See for full details of each trial.

## Study selection
We included 102 RCTs in the review. For an overview of the studies included, see and . TXA was the most common drug studied. The trials were mostly conducted in primary hip and knee replacement surgery. The most common route of administration studied was intravenous alone, followed by intra‐articular and then combined (intravenous and intra‐articular or oral and intra‐articular).
 

## Design
All included trials were RCTs. There were 12 multi‐arm studies included in the primary outcome NMA (risk of an allogeneic blood transfusion) ( , ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ) and 36 two‐arm studies.

## Setting
The included trials were published between 1992 and 2022. Ten included studies were multicentre studies ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ), 30 studies did not report this information ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ), and the remaining 62 were single‐centre studies. One study was conducted across two countries (America and Canada) ( ). We found a global spread of trials, with the highest number of trials being conducted in Europe and Asia ( ). Four studies included were translated into English for the review ( ; ; ; ).

## Trial size
The number of participants enrolled in the included studies ranged from 16 ( ) to 300 ( ). Power calculations were included in 47 studies ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ). In one study it was unclear whether the investigators had achieved their target sample size ( ), and in 30 studies a sample size was not reported ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ). The remaining 24 studies did not achieve their target sample size.

## Characteristics of participants
We summarised the characteristics of the participants in each trial in the table and provided an overview of the characteristics of the included studies in . The mean age of participants in the included trials ranged from 50 to 77 years of age ( ; , respectively). Trials included more women (5388 (64%)) than men (3030 (36%)). (There is a discrepancy in the number of males and females in ; the authors were contacted for clarification). Five studies reported ethnicity, and of those the majority of included participants were white (Caucasian) ( ).

## Characteristics of outcomes reported
Twenty studies reported the primary outcome mortality within 30 days and 86 studies reported the primary outcome of risk of requiring a blood transfusion within 30 days. Sixty‐four studies reported the secondary outcome mean number of units transfused within 30 days. For adverse events, 28 studies reported on the outcome cerebrovascular event, 89 reported on the outcome deep vein thrombosis, 32 reported on the outcome myocardial infarction and 70 reported on the adverse outcome pulmonary embolism. There were 42 studies reporting on the length of hospital stay ( ).

## Characteristics of interventions
The majority of the included studies examined tranexamic acid (150 arms, 83%). Aprotinin was the next most studied intervention (17 arms, 9%), followed by epsilon‐aminocaproic acid (EACA) (seven arms, 4%), desmopressin (five arms, 3%) and fibrin (two arms, 1%) (see ).

## Sources of support
In total, 81 studies declared a funding source and of those seven were funded by pharmaceutical companies ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ), and five were reported as being partly funded via pharmaceutical companies and partly non‐pharmaceutical ( ; ; ; ; ).
Twenty‐one studies did not report a funding source ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ).

## Ongoing studies
We identified 30 ongoing studies (from 31 publications):
11 studies exploring TXA in elective knee surgery ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; );
11 studies exploring TXA in elective hip surgery ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; );
four studies exploring TXA in elective hip or knee surgery ( ; ; ; );
one study exploring bone wax in elective knee surgery ( );
one study exploring topical haemostatic drugs in elective knee surgery ( );
one study exploring topical haemostatic drugs in elective hip surgery ( );
one study exploring fibrinogen in elective hip surgery ( ).

## Studies awaiting assessment
We identified 166 studies (from 183 publications) for which a decision on eligibility could not be made. Full details are provided in .
Unable to find a trial registration to determine whether the trial was prospectively or retrospectively registered = 131 ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ).
Status on trial registry:
complete = 10 ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; );
“not yet recruiting” = 12 ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; );
paper in submission = 1 ( );
recruitment complete = 2 ( ; );
unknown = 10 ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ).

## Excluded studies
After full‐text screening, we excluded 241 studies (within 251 publications) from the review. Full details are provided in the with a summary of the reasons for exclusion below:
154 were retrospectively registered (see );
29 were unregistered trials as confirmed by the author or stated in the text ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; );
28 had an ineligible study design only confirmed at full‐text screening (study design unclear or not reported in abstract but could be an RCT) ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; );
15 had an ineligible comparator, which was not discovered until full‐text screening ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; );
seven had an ineligible patient population, which was not discovered until full‐text screening ( ; ; ; ; ; ; );
seven were withdrawn ( ; ; ; ; ; ; );
one had an ineligible intervention, which was not discovered until full‐text screening ( ).

## Risk of bias in included studies
For a visual representation of the assessments of risk of bias across all trials, see and . For further information regarding bias detected in individual trials, see .
 

## Random sequence generation (selection bias)
We considered no trial to be at high risk of bias and 39 trials to be at unclear risk of bias, as they did not provide sufficient information on sequence generation ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ).
We judged 63 trials to be at low risk of bias as they provided clear and detailed information on sequence generation ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ).

## Allocation concealment (selection bias)
We considered no trial to be at high risk of bias and 74 trials to have unclear risk of bias due to lack of information on allocation concealment ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ).
We judged 28 trials to be at low risk of bias as they provided clear and detailed information on allocation concealment ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ).

## Blinding
To assess bias due to a lack of blinding, we separately assessed the risk for objective and subjective outcomes.
We considered objective outcomes to include: mortality, incidence of myocardial infarction (MI), cerebrovascular accident (CVA) or stroke, and pulmonary embolism (PE) due to the clear diagnostic criteria in wide use.
We deemed the remaining outcomes subjective: need for allogeneic blood transfusion, length of hospital stay, incidence of serious drug reactions and the incidence of deep vein thrombosis (DVT), due to the more subjective nature of a DVT diagnosis.

## Blinding of participants and personnel (performance bias)

## Subjective outcomes
We judged 18 studies to be at high risk of bias due to inadequate blinding ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ), 31 studies were judged to be at unclear risk of bias ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ), and the remaining 53 studies are low risk of bias ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ).

## Objective outcomes
We judged all trials to be at low risk of bias as we believed that the blinding would not affect the objective outcomes stated in this review.

## Blinding of outcome assessment (detection bias)

## Subjective outcomes
We judged eight studies to be at high risk of bias ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ).
We assessed 43 studies as being at unclear risk of bias ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ).
We judged the remaining 51 studies to be at low risk of bias ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ).

## Objective outcomes
We judged all trials to be at low risk of bias as we believed that the blinding would not affect the objective outcomes stated in this review.

## Incomplete outcome data
We judged three trials to be at high risk of bias ( ; ; ).
We judged 25 trials to be at unclear risk of bias ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ).
We considered the remaining 74 studies to be at low risk of bias ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ).

## Selective reporting
We assessed 35 trials as being at high risk of bias ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ).
We assessed 36 studies as at unclear risk of bias ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ).
We judged the remaining 31 trials to be at low risk of bias ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ).

## Other potential sources of bias
Other potential biases that we considered included: baseline imbalances, block randomisation in an unblinded trial, and funding and conflict reporting. We also noted where data were being drawn from a non‐peer‐reviewed publication, and any other potential risks.
We judged 17 studies to be at high risk of bias: (non‐adherence to protocol, additional TXA given by personal depending on need); (baseline imbalances); (trial stopped early due to data‐dependent process); (per protocol analysis); (baseline imbalances); (power calculation re‐done); (per protocol analysis); (per protocol analysis); (per protocol analysis); (mismatch between interventions in protocol and in published paper); (no demographics reported); (other interventions used (EACA and desmopressin) and not reported); (study terminated early); (per protocol analysis); (study terminated early and baseline imbalances); (conflicts of interest); (per protocol analysis).
We assessed 46 studies as at unclear risk of bias ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ).
We considered the remaining 39 trials at low risk of bias ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ).

## Effects of interventions
See: ; 
Results are presented primarily for NMA, which we conducted for four outcomes with a reasonably coherent network available for analysis. Direct comparisons included in the NMAs are summarised in ; ; ; and . For completeness, the pairwise results for all trials and outcomes are also shown in forest plots grouped by broadly similar treatment nodes and comparisons. The data in the forest plots are treatment nodes and have not been split for multi‐arm trials; totals are not included in the plots.
 The results of each NMA are reported in full in . This includes a summary of each network; a comparison of model fit for random‐effects consistency and inconsistency models; trace plots and convergence diagnostics; results for all comparisons in the network with forest plots for comparisons with placebo; SUCRA curves and rankings based on SUCRA score.

## Primary outcomes

## Risk of allogeneic blood transfusion

## Network meta‐analysis
See (section 1), and .
 All included participants had either a primary total hip or knee replacement, unicompartmental knee replacement, bilateral replacements or a revision of a hip or knee replacement.
The NMA included a total of 47 RCTs, involving 4398 participants. There were 406 possible pairwise comparisons and 44 comparisons with direct data and a total of 765 blood transfusions. Trials excluded from the network are summarised in section 1.1.2 of . The direct results for each included treatment node are summarised in .
There were considerable differences between nodes in the risk of allogeneic blood transfusion, ranging from 1% to 67%, reflecting increasingly restrictive transfusion policies over time ( , sections 1.1.3 and 1.1.4). This may be responsible for some moderate heterogeneity seen within groups of trials making similar comparisons ( ). , for example, commented: "Perhaps this was because of the different transfusion strategies of the anesthetists, one of whom transfused most patients unless they were young and healthy. We established no defined criteria for administering blood transfusion in this trial, and this could be a source of bias."
There is no evidence that these differences have invalidated the transitivity assumption of our NMA model, with little difference between the consistency and inconsistency models ( , section 1.2.2).
 , section 1.2.3 shows the forest plot of all interventions included within the network compared to placebo with risk ratios (RRs) and 95% credible intervals (CrIs). There is some evidence of benefit for all but one of the included interventions (desmopressin) but the credible intervals are wide and certainty of the evidence is low. The network is sparsely populated, with not many more trials than there are treatments to compare, with all the trials being small or very small.

## Treatment ranking
The SUCRA plot in section 1.2.5 of plots the cumulative ranking probabilities with treatment nodes involving tranexamic acid identified by line thickness to indicate dose, line colour to indicate route(s) of administration and line style to indicate timing. While the results for individual regimens should be treated with caution due to the limited amount of direct evidence in the network, the SUCRA plot does suggest that higher doses appear more effective, regimens including oral administration perform well and combined routes may be the most effective strategy, although this observation is somewhat confounded by dose.

## Pairwise analyses
Data for all studies that reported the primary outcome risk of requiring allogeneic blood transfusion within 30 days are presented in forest plots: TXA intravenous (IV) versus placebo ( ); TXA oral versus placebo ( ); TXA topical versus placebo ( ); TXA IV + TXA topical versus placebo ( ); TXA IV lower dose versus TXA IV higher dose ( ); TXA IV versus TXA oral ( ); TXA IV versus TXA topical ( ); TXA oral lower dose versus TXA oral higher dose ( ); TXA topical lower dose versus TXA topical higher dose ( ); TXA versus aprotinin ( ); TXA IV versus EACA ( ); TXA oral versus EACA oral ( ); TXA IV versus desmopressin ( ); TXA IV versus fibrin topical ( ); TXA topical versus fibrin topical ( ); aprotinin versus placebo ( ); EACA versus placebo ( ); EACA versus aprotinin ( ); fibrin topical versus placebo ( ); TXA IV + TXA oral versus TXA IV ( ); TXA IV + TXA topical versus TXA IV ( ); TXA IV + TXA topical versus TXA oral ( ); TXA IV + TXA topical versus TXA topical ( ); TXA topical versus TXA oral + TXA topical ( ); TXA oral versus TXA combined topical + IV + oral ( ); TXA IV + topical lower dose versus TXA IV + topical higher dose ( ); TXA oral + topical lower dose versus TXA oral + topical higher dose ( ).

## All‐cause mortality
We did not have enough data to present an NMA for our primary outcome of mortality within 30 days of surgery.
We presented the available data in pairwise meta‐analyses: TXA IV versus placebo ( ); TXA oral versus placebo ( ); TXA topical versus placebo ( ); TXA IV lower dose versus TXA IV higher dose ( ); TXA IV versus TXA topical ( ); TXA oral lower dose versus TXA oral higher dose ( ); TXA topical lower dose versus TXA topical higher dose ( ); TXA oral versus EACA oral ( ); TXA IV versus fibrin topical ( ); TXA topical versus fibrin topical ( ); aprotinin versus placebo ( ); desmopressin versus placebo ( ); fibrin topical versus placebo ( ); TXA IV + TXA oral versus TXA IV ( ); TXA topical versus TXA oral + TXA topical ( ); TXA oral + topical lower dose versus TXA oral + topical higher dose ( ).

## Secondary outcomes

## Mean number of red cell units transfused per person (up to 30 days)
We had planned to report the number of transfusion episodes but no studies reported this outcome; instead we reported the number of red cell units transfused per participant.

## Network meta‐analysis
See (section 2).
We were able to conduct an NMA for this outcome. We analysed the number of units per person randomised, using reported means and standard deviations. We included 16 studies and nine interventions in the NMA. There were a total of 1223 participants within the network, with a total of 36 pairwise comparisons, with 10 comparisons containing direct data. The direct results for each included treatment node are summarised in .
The mean number of units transfused within each node varied from 0.19 to 1.65, reflecting increasingly restrictive transfusion policies over time. This may be responsible for some moderate heterogeneity seen within two of the groups of trials making similar comparisons ( ). , for example, commented: "Perhaps this was because of the different transfusion strategies of the anesthetists, one of whom transfused most patients unless they were young and healthy. We established no defined criteria for administering blood transfusion in this trial, and this could be a source of bias."
There is no evidence that these differences have invalidated the transitivity assumption of our NMA model, with little difference between the consistency and inconsistency models ( , section 2.2.2).
There is some evidence of reduced volume of blood transfusion in favour of aprotinin and some TXA regimens, with no evidence of benefit for desmopressin or EACA, although all the confidence intervals are wide ( , section 2.2.3). The network is sparsely populated, with not many more trials than there are treatments to compare, with all the trials being small or very small.

## Treatment ranking
The SUCRA plot in section 2.2.5 of plots the cumulative ranking probabilities with treatment nodes involving tranexamic acid identified by line thickness to indicate dose, line colour to indicate route(s) of administration and line style to indicate timing. All of the TXA regimens included in this network were IV only. The results for individual regimens should be treated with caution due to the limited amount of direct evidence in the network.

## Pairwise analyses
Data for all studies that reported the outcome mean number of red cell units transfused per person up to 30 days are presented in pairwise meta‐analyses: TXA IV versus placebo ( ); TXA IV lower dose versus TXA IV higher dose ( ); TXA IV versus EACA ( ); aprotinin versus placebo ( ); EACA versus placebo ( ); desmopressin versus placebo ( ).

## Re‐operation due to bleeding (within seven days)
We did not have enough data to present an NMA for the secondary outcome re‐operation due to bleeding.
Data for all studies that reported the outcome are presented in pairwise meta‐analyses: TXA IV versus placebo ( ); TXA topical versus placebo ( ); TXA IV lower dose versus TXA IV higher dose ( ); TXA IV versus TXA topical ( ); TXA topical lower dose versus TXA topical higher dose ( ); TXA IV versus EACA ( ); TXA oral versus EACA oral ( ); TXA topical versus fibrin topical ( ); aprotinin versus placebo ( ); EACA versus placebo ( ); EACA versus aprotinin ( ); fibrin topical versus placebo ( ); TXA IV + TXA oral versus TXA IV ( ).

## Length of hospital stay

## Network meta‐analysis
See (section 4).
We were able to conduct an NMA for this outcome. We included 28 studies and 30 interventions in the NMA. There were a total of 3205 participants within the network with a total of 435 pairwise comparisons, with direct data available for 44 comparisons. The direct results for each included treatment node are summarised in .
The mean length of hospital stay varied from 1.97 to 13.9 days, with the single trial of aprotinin reporting a much longer stay than the other trials in the network. There is little heterogeneity within direct comparisons for this outcome, primarily because there were few direct comparisons made by more than one trial.
There is little difference between the consistency and inconsistency models for this outcome (section 4.2.2, ).
There is limited evidence of reduced hospital stay for any treatment regimen, although all the confidence intervals are wide (section 4.2.3, ). The network is sparsely populated, with not many more trials than there are treatments to compare, with all the trials being small or very small ( ).

## Treatment ranking
The SUCRA plot (section 4.2.5, ) shows the cumulative ranking probabilities with treatment nodes involving tranexamic acid identified by line thickness to indicate dose, line colour to indicate route(s) of administration, and line style to indicate timing. The results for individual regimens should be treated with caution due to the limited amount of direct evidence in the network. There is little evidence from the SUCRA plot that dose, route or timing of treatment has any consistent effect on length of hospital stay ( ).

## Pairwise analyses
Data for all studies that reported the outcome are presented in pairwise meta‐analyses: TXA IV versus placebo ( ); TXA oral versus placebo ( ); TXA topical versus placebo ( ); TXA IV + TXA topical versus placebo ( ); TXA IV lower dose versus TXA IV higher dose ( ); TXA IV versus TXA oral ( ); TXA IV versus TXA topical ( ); TXA IV versus EACA ( ); TXA IV versus desmopressin ( ); TXA topical versus fibrin topical ( ); aprotinin versus placebo ( ); fibrin topical versus placebo ( ); TXA IV + TXA oral versus TXA IV ( ); TXA IV + TXA topical versus TXA IV ( ); TXA IV + TXA topical versus TXA oral ( ); TXA topical versus TXA oral + TXA topical ( ); TXA oral versus TXA combined topical + IV + oral ( ); TXA IV + topical lower dose versus TXA IV + topical higher dose ( ); TXA oral + topical lower dose versus TXA oral + topical higher dose ( ).
We could not separate hip and knee data for one study comparing desmopressin versus placebo ( ; ). The combined result for both hip and knee populations was mean difference (MD) 0.50 (95% confidence interval (CI) ‐1.57 to 0.57, 92 participants).

## Adverse events

## Deep vein thrombosis

## Network meta‐analysis
See (section 3), and .
 We were able to conduct an NMA for the secondary outcome deep vein thrombosis (DVT). We included 19 studies in the network with a total of 2395 participants. There were 153 possible pairwise comparisons, with direct data available for 23 comparisons. There were 168 events in the network. Trials excluded from the network are summarised in section 3.1.2 of . The direct results for each included treatment node are summarised in .
There were considerable differences between nodes in the risk of DVT, ranging from 1% to 38%, which probably reflects the subjectivity of this outcome ( , sections 3.1.3 and 3.1.4). There was little evidence of heterogeneity within direct comparisons, primarily because few comparisons included more than one trial.
There is no evidence that the different rates of diagnosis of DVT have affected the transitivity assumption of our NMA model, with little difference between the consistency and inconsistency models ( , section 3.2.2)
 , section 3.2.3 shows the forest plot of all interventions included within the network compared to placebo with risk ratios (RRs) and 95% credible intervals (CrIs). There is no evidence of harm with respect to the risk of DVT and some evidence overall of a potential protective effect, but the credible intervals are wide and the certainty of the evidence is low.

## Pairwise analyses
Data for all studies that reported the outcome are presented in pairwise meta‐analyses: TXA IV versus placebo ( ); TXA oral versus placebo ( ); TXA topical versus placebo ( ); TXA IV + TXA topical versus placebo ( ); TXA IV lower dose versus TXA IV higher dose ( ); TXA IV versus TXA oral ( ); TXA IV versus TXA topical ( ); TXA oral lower dose versus TXA oral higher dose ( ); TXA versus aprotinin ( ); TXA IV versus EACA ( ); TXA oral versus EACA oral ( ); TXA IV versus desmopressin ( ); TXA IV versus fibrin topical ( ); TXA topical versus fibrin topical ( ); aprotinin versus placebo ( ); EACA versus placebo ( ); EACA versus aprotinin ( ); desmopressin versus placebo ( ); fibrin topical versus placebo ( ); TXA IV + TXA oral versus TXA IV ( ); TXA IV + TXA topical versus TXA IV ( ); TXA IV + TXA topical versus TXA oral ( ); TXA topical versus TXA oral + TXA topical ( ); TXA oral versus TXA combined topical + IV + oral ( ); TXA IV + topical lower dose versus TXA IV + topical higher dose ( ); TXA oral + topical lower dose versus TXA oral + topical higher dose ( ).

## Pulmonary embolism, myocardial infarction and cerebrovascular event (CVA or stroke)
We did not have enough data to present NMAs for the secondary outcomes pulmonary embolism, myocardial infarction and CVA (stroke) within 30 days.

## Pulmonary embolism pairwise analyses
Data for all studies that reported the outcome are presented in pairwise meta‐analyses: TXA IV versus placebo ( ); TXA oral versus placebo ( ); TXA topical versus placebo ( ); TXA IV + TXA topical versus placebo ( ); TXA IV lower dose versus TXA IV higher dose ( ); TXA IV versus TXA oral ( ); TXA IV versus TXA topical ( ); TXA oral lower dose versus TXA oral higher dose ( ); TXA IV versus EACA ( ); TXA oral versus EACA oral ( ); TXA IV versus desmopressin ( ); TXA IV versus fibrin topical ( ); TXA topical versus fibrin topical ( ); aprotinin versus placebo ( ); EACA versus placebo ( ); EACA versus aprotinin ( ); desmopressin versus placebo ( ); fibrin topical versus placebo ( ); TXA IV + TXA topical versus TXA IV ( ); TXA IV + TXA topical versus TXA oral ( ); TXA topical versus TXA oral + TXA topical ( ); TXA IV + topical lower dose versus TXA IV + topical higher dose ( ); TXA oral + topical lower dose versus TXA oral + topical higher dose ( ).

## Myocardial infarction pairwise analyses
Data for all studies that reported the outcome are presented in pairwise meta‐analyses: TXA IV versus placebo ( ); TXA oral versus placebo ( ); TXA IV lower dose versus TXA IV higher dose ( ); TXA IV versus TXA topical ( ); TXA oral lower dose versus TXA oral higher dose ( ); TXA IV versus EACA ( ); TXA oral versus EACA oral ( ); aprotinin versus placebo ( ); EACA versus placebo ( ); desmopressin versus placebo ( ); TXA topical versus TXA oral + TXA topical ( ); TXA IV + topical lower dose versus TXA IV + topical higher dose ( ); TXA oral + topical lower dose versus TXA oral + topical higher dose ( ).

## Cerebrovascular event (CVA or stroke) pairwise analyses
Data for all studies that reported the outcome are presented in pairwise meta‐analyses: TXA IV versus placebo ( ); TXA oral versus placebo ( ); TXA topical versus placebo ( ); TXA IV lower dose versus TXA IV higher dose ( ); TXA IV versus TXA oral ( ); TXA IV versus TXA topical ( ); TXA oral lower dose versus TXA oral higher dose ( ); TXA topical lower dose versus TXA topical higher dose ( ); TXA IV versus EACA ( ); TXA oral versus EACA oral ( ); TXA topical versus fibrin topical ( ); aprotinin versus placebo ( ); EACA versus placebo ( ); fibrin topical versus placebo ( ); TXA IV + TXA topical versus TXA IV ( ); TXA IV + TXA topical versus TXA oral ( ); TXA topical versus TXA oral + TXA topical ( ); TXA IV + topical lower dose versus TXA IV + topical higher dose ( ); TXA oral + topical lower dose versus TXA oral + topical higher dose ( ).

## Transfusion reactions within 24 hours
Only one study reported on transfusion reactions within 24 hours ( ) and one pairwise analysis was conducted ( ).

## Suspected serious drug reactions: within 30 days
Few studies reported the secondary outcome suspected serious drug reaction within 30 days and there was not enough data to conduct an NMA.
Data for all studies that reported the outcome are presented in pairwise meta‐analyses: TXA IV versus placebo ( ); TXA IV lower dose versus TXA IV higher dose ( ); TXA IV versus TXA topical ( ); TXA topical lower dose versus TXA topical higher dose ( ); TXA oral versus EACA oral ( ); aprotinin versus placebo ( ); desmopressin versus placebo ( ).

## Cost and quality of life data
We collected information on the cost of interventions and quality of life measures where they were reported. Thirty‐one studies reported information on cost and five studies reported any quality of life data. We summarise the information in and , respectively.
 

## Subgroup analysis
We were unable to perform any of the subgroup analyses detailed in our protocol ( ), due to the very limited networks remaining after the data were split.

## Sensitivity analysis
No included study reported a dropout rate of more than 20%; therefore, we did not perform any further sensitivity analyses. Sensitivity analyses by risk of bias could not be performed as planned. Exclusion of studies with high risk of bias resulted in loss of connectivity.

## Discussion

## Summary of main results
We aimed to determine the relative efficacy of pharmacological interventions for preventing blood loss in elective primary or revision hip or knee replacement, and to identify optimal administration of interventions regarding timing, dose and route. We identified 102 eligible RCTs including participants undergoing hip or knee replacement surgery. Our primary outcomes were the proportion of participants requiring an allogeneic blood transfusion and all‐cause mortality; secondary outcomes included the mean number of units transfused per participant (up to 30 days), reoperation due to bleeding (within seven days), length of hospital stay and adverse events including DVT, pulmonary embolism, myocardial infarction and stroke, transfusion reactions (acute): within 24 hours and serious suspected serious drug reactions: within 30 days. We also collected cost data and quality of life data, where they were reported in the included studies.
There are relatively few data to support the large number of treatment regimens identified. There is low‐certainty evidence that TXA given at higher doses, intra‐articularly and orally, is likely to be the most effective approach for reducing the need for blood transfusion in people undergoing hip or knee replacement surgery ( ; ). The ranking of individual treatments should be interpreted with caution given the limited amount of evidence contributing to each comparison.
Tranexamic acid interventions consistently ranked higher than other treatments such as aprotinin, EACA and topical fibrin sealants compared with placebo. We noted that mixed routes of administration (oral and intra‐articular, intravenous and intra‐articular) appear to be more effective than single routes of administration and higher doses of tranexamic acid feature higher up the treatment ranking hierarchy. Oral tranexamic acid appears to perform well, which is an important finding as oral tranexamic acid is cheaper and easier to administer than intravenous tranexamic acid (GBP 6.01 for sixty 500 mg tablets (30 g) versus GBP 15.47 for five 1 g ampoules (5 g), ).
Mortality was not reported by many trials, which is likely due to the low risk of death in people undergoing hip or knee replacement surgery.
We found that there was little to no evidence of harm associated with any of the interventions compared with placebo. In particular, the number of thromboembolic events was low in all arms and there is no evidence that higher doses of tranexamic acid increased this risk. In fact, while the estimates are imprecise, what evidence there is suggests that the risk may actually be reduced ( ; ). This may be due to the anti‐inflammatory effects of TXA (TXA reduces the levels of inflammatory proteins such as C‐reactive protein and interleukin‐6) within people undergoing orthopaedic procedures who receive TXA compared to those receiving no or lower doses of TXA ( ).

## Overall completeness and applicability of evidence
We excluded all studies published after 2010 that were unregistered, or retrospectively registered, as per our protocol and in line with Cochrane Injuries Editorial Policy ( ; ; ). This may have excluded some relevant and useful studies from the review.
Given the ability of studies to compare all the various combinations of drug, route, dose and timing, we conducted an NMA to enable the combination of direct and indirect evidence and to rank different treatment interventions in a methodologically robust way. Our review includes 102 trials assessing a variety of drug regimens for the prevention of bleeding in people undergoing hip or knee surgery. The review includes all pre‐registered trials identifiable through bibliographic databases and trial registries, with no date restrictions.
Our review has limitations. The trials included in this review were small, with a large number of interventions tested, resulting in a sparsely populated network, wide credible intervals and low certainty in the evidence for any specific treatment. Evidence for some of the interventions studied was informed by a single trial, which led to imprecision and low certainty of evidence. The included population was quite homogeneous, as it was limited to people who had undergone a hip or knee replacement. However, some variation in the use of topical tranexamic acid or fibrin sealants in these populations could affect the transitivity assumption as they may have been administered in different ways (e.g. through bathing the joint during surgery or injected within the tissues). Transitivity may have also been affected by transfusion thresholds. The variations in the criteria to trigger a transfusion could have a significant influence on the pooled studies for analysis, especially if in the presence of a network with fewer connections.
Whilst 102 eligible trials were identified, we could only include 47 in the NMA for our primary outcome. Many studies could not be included due to observing zero events in one or more arms, and some did not connect within the network ( ).
Although we were able to undertake an NMA for our primary outcome (risk of needing an allogeneic blood transfusion), we did not have enough data to conduct an NMA for all‐cause mortality. Only 19 studies reported the outcome all‐cause mortality and many studies reported zero events. Similarly, we did not have enough data to conduct an NMA for reoperation due to bleeding within seven days or adverse events, except for DVT. The rate of adverse events, including reoperation for bleeding, was low and concerns over increased risk of thromboembolic events are not borne out by the evidence we identified.
Our current protocol does not include plans for regular updating ( ); however, we identified 30 ongoing trials planning to recruit 3776 participants, which may allow firmer conclusions to be drawn in future.

## Quality of the evidence
The overall degree of certainty of the evidence evaluated ranged from very low to moderate based on grading using the CINeMA assessment. However, in general there was not enough good evidence to draw definitive conclusions. The degree of certainty of the evidence of our top‐ranking TXA treatments was assessed as low, except for TXA given orally and intra‐articularly at a total dose of greater than 3 g pre‐incision, intraoperatively and postoperatively. The main reason for downgrading the certainty of evidence was imprecision (wide credible and/or confidence intervals) and within‐study bias. Many comparisons yielded low‐certainty evidence due to these concerns ( ; ). This means that we are not able to draw any firm conclusions on the optimal dose, route and timing of administration of TXA.

## Potential biases in the review process
We have attempted to minimise bias in the review process. We conducted a comprehensive search: we searched multiple data sources (including multiple databases and clinical trial registries) to ensure that all relevant studies would be captured. There were no restrictions on the language in which reports were originally published. We assessed the relevance of each publication carefully and performed all screening and data extraction in duplicate. We prespecified all outcomes and subgroups prior to analysis.
We excluded trials that did not prospectively register their protocol (for publications since 2010) to minimise the potential for bias from the included data, although we accept that this may have excluded some relevant and useful studies ( ). However, the decision to exclude unregistered (or retrospectively registered) trials was taken due to the evidence highlighting issues surrounding false data, including the possibility of 'zombie' trials, where a trial did not even take place ( ; ). Prospective registration reduces the chance of publication bias, and has been compulsory for randomised controlled trials since 2005, thus suggesting that those that have not been registered (or registered retrospectively) since then are less likely to be at low risk of bias ( ).
We planned subgroup analyses by type of surgery (primary hip or knee replacement or hip or knee revision), reason for surgery, duration of surgery, incidence of preoperative anaemia, type of anaesthetic used (general or spinal), use of tourniquet and use of anticoagulation. However, the data were too limited to allow informative subgroup analyses. Similarly, our sensitivity analyses by risk of bias could not be performed as planned. Exclusion of studies with high risk of bias resulted in loss of connectivity.
There were a large number of interventions tested in a relatively small number of trials, all with small sample sizes. We grouped the interventions according to total dose, route and timing to provide a manageable set for analysis and inevitably some detail is lost, especially for postoperative infusion strategies. There are not sufficient data to establish the most effective regimen of those tested in these trials, only some broad general trends.

## Agreements and disagreements with other studies or reviews
Our findings have demonstrated greater efficacy of tranexamic acid compared to placebo and other pharmacological agents studied. TXA has been shown to be effective for preventing bleeding in people undergoing hip or knee replacement surgery in other reviews. Fillingham et al performed a network meta‐analysis of randomised trials using tranexamic acid in people having a primary hip replacement ( ). These authors included 34 studies in their review. They similarly concluded that there was strong evidence to support the use of TXA to reduce blood loss and risk of transfusion; however, they were not able to clearly identify superior routes of administration, dosage, dosing regimen or timing of administration. They found that oral TXA may not have been as effective as other routes of intervention, a finding that this review did not conclude. As with our review, the authors found that many treatments relied on a limited number of studies connecting the nodes and therefore relied more heavily on indirect comparisons.
The same group of authors also conducted an NMA of randomised trials in people undergoing primary knee replacement ( ). They included 67 studies in their review. They found that there was strong evidence to support the use of TXA to reduce blood loss and the risk of transfusion in people undergoing a primary knee replacement. However, they were not able to conclude a superior route or dose of administration. They did, however, find moderate evidence to support the use of TXA pre‐incision.
Another recent NMA looking at tranexamic acid use in people undergoing both hip and knee replacement found that TXA given intravenously and intra‐articularly provided the best efficacy to prevent transfusion ( ). We did not draw this conclusion. Our review found that interventions including intra‐articular administration and oral TXA regimens may be more beneficial in reducing the need for blood transfusion. Importantly, all three reviews studying tranexamic acid report no increased risk of adverse events compared with placebo.
In some countries, EACA is cheaper than TXA and has been preferred for use in people undergoing hip or knee replacement surgery. A meta‐analysis study conducted by Riaz et al focused on the efficacy of EACA compared with TXA in reducing the need for blood transfusion ( ). They found three studies comparing TXA and EACA and concluded that TXA was not superior to EACA, and both antifibrinolytic therapies demonstrated similar efficacy in terms of transfusion requirements and blood loss. Our review found that TXA was superior to EACA in terms of reducing the need for blood transfusion.
In this review, we have focused exclusively on people undergoing elective (planned) surgery, excluding those studies that had a mixed population where we could not separate the relevant data. Our sister review focused on non‐elective surgery only ( ).

## Authors' conclusions

## Implications for practice
Tranexamic acid (TXA) probably reduces the need for blood transfusion in people undergoing hip or knee replacement surgery. Other antifibrinolytics (aprotinin and epsilon‐aminocaproic acid) are not as effective at reducing the need for allogeneic blood transfusion as tranexamic acid. We are not able to draw strong conclusions about the optimal dose, route and timing of administration. We found that tranexamic acid given at higher doses tended to rank higher in the treatment hierarchy, and we also found that it may be more beneficial to use a mixed route of administration (oral and intra‐articular, or intravenous and intra‐articular). Oral administration may be as effective as intravenous administration of tranexamic acid at reducing the risk of allogeneic blood transfusion. Although cost‐effectiveness was not directly assessed in this review, oral tranexamic acid is widely known to be cheaper than intravenous and this may provide a cheaper alternative to intravenous tranexamic acid with similar efficacy. We found little to no evidence of harm associated with higher doses of tranexamic acid in the risk of deep vein thrombosis (DVT). However, we are not able to definitively draw these conclusions based on the trials included within this review.

## Implications for research
The majority of trials included in this review had a small number of participants, which affected the quality of the network meta‐analysis. Larger, adequately powered randomised controlled trials, conducted in a way that reduces bias, need to be carried out in order for us to ascertain the optimal dose, route and timing of administration of tranexamic acid. Studies including people undergoing revision hip and knee replacement, for whom blood loss is higher, are also needed to evaluate the optimal dose, route and timing of tranexamic acid. Currently, there are no ongoing trials identified that are studying people undergoing revision hip or knee replacement surgery.

## History
Protocol first published: Issue 3, 2019

## Acknowledgements
This review was funded by the National Institute for Health and Care Research (NIHR) Evidence Synthesis Programme (16/114/04) Programme Grant Scheme. This review was also supported by NIHR via Cochrane Infrastructure funding to Cochrane Injuries. The views expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the NIHR or the Department of Health and Social Care, NHS Blood and Transplant or the National Health Service.
We thank the NIHR and Complex Reviews Support Unit Members: Prof Olivia Wu and Dr Yiqiao Xin.
We thank the following clinicians for being part of the expert consensus panel: Mr Antony Palmer (Consultant Orthopaedic Surgeon, Oxford), Mr Abtin Alvand (Consultant Orthopaedic Knee Surgeon, Oxford), Dr Akshay Shah (NIHR Academic Clinical Lecturer in Intensive Care Medicine, Oxford), Mr Ben Kendrick (Consultant Orthopaedic Hip and Knee Surgeon) and Dr Graham Barker (Consultant Anaesthetist, Oxford).
We would like to thank the following colleagues who helped with translations of non‐English articles via Task Exchange:
Chinese: Ruowen Jiang (10 papers), Yu‐Tung Kao (one paper), Czech: Simona Slezáková (two papers), Danish: Filip Ericsson (two papers), French: Paul Abraham (one paper), German: Hebatullah Abdulazeem (one paper), Lydia Jones (one paper), Jutta Scheffczik (one paper), Japanese: Kyoko Gibbons (one paper), Spanish: Leslie Copstein (three papers), Alicia Plaza Cajide (one paper).
We would also like to thank Clareece Nevill and Professor Alex Sutton from Leicester University for their support and guidance with the use of MetaInsight and conducting of Bayesian NMA.

## Editorial and peer reviewer contributions
The following people conducted the editorial process for this article:
Sign‐off Editor (final editorial decision): Arash Afshari, Juliane Marie Centre ‐ Anaesthesia and Surgical Clinic Department 4013, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University Hospital
Managing Editor (selected peer reviewers, provided editorial guidance to authors, edited the article): Liz Bickerdike, Cochrane Central Editorial Service
Editorial Assistant (conducted editorial policy checks, collated peer reviewer comments and supported the editorial team): Leticia Rodrigues, Cochrane Central Editorial Service
Copy Editor (copy editing and production): Jenny Bellorini, Cochrane Central Production Service
Peer reviewers (provided comments and recommended an editorial decision): Nuala Livingstone, Cochrane Evidence Production and Methods Directorate (methods), Jo Platt, Central Editorial Information Specialist (search), Steven M. Frank M.D. Professor, Department of Anesthesiology/Critical Care Medicine Director, Johns Hopkins Health System Blood Management Program Director, Center for Bloodless Medicine and Surgery, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions (clinical) and Kerry Seymour, MSc Student, School of Psychology and Neuroscience, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, Scotland, UK (consumer)

## Appendices

## Appendix 1. Table of intervention variables
This table highlights the scope of our question by demonstrating all possible variable combinations
 

## Appendix 2. Search strategies

## CENTRAL (The Cochrane Library)
#1 MeSH descriptor: [Arthroplasty, Replacement, Hip] this term only #2 MeSH descriptor: [Hip] this term only and with qualifier(s): [surgery ‐ SU] #3 MeSH descriptor: [Osteoarthritis, Hip] explode all trees and with qualifier(s): [surgery ‐ SU] #4 MeSH descriptor: [Arthroplasty, Replacement, Knee] this term only #5 MeSH descriptor: [Knee Injuries] explode all trees and with qualifier(s): [surgery ‐ SU] #6 MeSH descriptor: [Knee] explode all trees and with qualifier(s): [surgery ‐ SU] #7 MeSH descriptor: [Osteoarthritis, Knee] explode all trees and with qualifier(s): [surgery ‐ SU] #8 ((hip* or knee* or femur or femoral) near/10 (replac* or operat* or surg* or arthroplast* or reconstruct* or repair* or osteotom* or alloplast* or plast* or resurfac* or implant* or prosthes*)) #9 (acetabuloplast* or acetabulum arthroplast*) #10 (THA or THR or TKA or TKR or UKA or UKR) #11 #1 or #2 or #3 or #4 or #5 or #6 or #7 or #8 or #9 or #10 #12 MeSH descriptor: [Antifibrinolytic Agents] this term only #13 MeSH descriptor: [Tranexamic Acid] this term only #14 MeSH descriptor: [Aminocaproic Acid] explode all trees #15 antifibrinolytic* or anti‐fibrinolytic* or antifibrinolysin* or antiplasmin* or plasmin inhibitor* or tranexamic or tranhexamic or cyclohexanecarboxylic acid* or amcha or t‐amcha or amca or transamin or amchafibrin or anvitoff or spotof or cyklokapron or femstrual or ugurol #16 AMCHA or amchafibrin or amikapron or amstat or antivoff or caprilon or cl65336 or cyclocapron or cyclokapron or cyklocapron or cyklokapron or exacyl or frenolyse or fibrinon or hemostan or hexacapron #17 hexakapron or kalnex or lysteda or rikaparin or ronex or theranex or tranexam or tranexanic or tranexic or "trans achma" or transexamic or trenaxin or TXA #18 (fibrinolysis near/2 inhibitor*) #19 (Agretax or Bio‐Stat or Capiloc or Capitrax or Clip Inj or Clot‐XL or Clotawin‐T or Coastat or Cuti or Cymin or Dubatran or Espercil or Examic or Existat or Extam or Fibran or Gynae‐Pil or Hemstate or Kapron or Menogia or Monitex or Nestran or Nexamic or Nexi‐500 or Nexmeff or Nicolda or Nixa‐500 or Pause or Rheonex or Sylstep TX or Synostat or T‐nex or T Stat or T Stat or Tanmic or Temsyl‐T or Texakind or Texanis or Texapar or Texid or Thams or Tonopan or Traklot or Tramic or Tramix or Tranarest or Trance Inj or Tranecid or Tranee or Tranemic or Tranex or Tranexa or Tranfib or Tranlok or Transtat or Transys or Transcam or Tranxi or Trapic or Traxage or Traxamic or Traxyl or Trenaxa or Trexamic or Trim Inj or Tx‐1000 or Tx 500 or Wistran or X‐Tran or Xamic) #20 ecapron or ekaprol or epsamon or epsicaprom or epsicapron or epsilcapramin or epsilon amino caproate or epsilon aminocaproate or epsilonaminocaproic or epsilonaminocapronsav or ethaaminocaproic or ethaaminocaproich or emocaprol or hepin or ipsilon or neocaprol or resplamin or tachostyptan #21 lederle or acikaprin or afibrin or amicar or caprocid or capracid or capramol or caprogel or caprolest or caprolisin* or caprolysin* or capromol or epsikapron or hemocaprol or caproamin or EACA or caprolest or capralense or hexalense or hamostat or hemocid #22 aminohexanoic or aminocaproic or aminohexanoic or amino caproic or amino‐caproic or amino‐n‐hexanoic #23 #12 or #13 or #14 or #15 or #16 or #17 or #18 or #19 or #20 or #21 or #22 #24 MeSH descriptor: [Aprotinin] this term only #25 (antagosan or antilysin* or aprotimbin or apronitin* or aprotinin* or bayer a128 or contrical or contrycal or contrykal or dilmintal or frey inhibitor or kontrycal or Kunitz inhibitor or gordox or haemoprot or kallikrein‐trypsin inactivator or iniprol or kontrikal or kontrykal or kunitz pancreatic trypsin inhibitor or midran or pulmin or tracylol or trascolan or trasilol or tra?ylol or traskolan or zymofren or pancreas antitrypsin or protinin or riker 52g or Rivilina zymofren) #26 #24 or #25 #27 MeSH descriptor: [Factor VIIa] this term only #28 (factor viia or factor 7a or rfviia or fviia or novoseven* or novo seven* or aryoseven or acset or eptacog* or proconvertin) #29 (activated near/1 (factor seven or factor vii or rfvii or fvii)) #30 (factor seven or factor vii or factor 7):ti #31 #27 or #28 or #29 or #30 #32 MeSH descriptor: [Fibrinogen] this term only #33 ("fibrinogen concentrate" or "factor I" or Haemocomplettan* or Riastap* or Fibryga* or Fibryna*) #34 #32 or #33 #35 MeSH descriptor: [Deamino Arginine Vasopressin] this term only #36 (desmopressin* or vasopressin deamino or D amino D arginine vasopressin or deamino 8 d arginine vasopressin or vasopressin desamino 8 arginine or desmotabs or DDAVP or desmogalen or adin or adiuretin or concentraid or d void or dav ritter or deamino 8 dextro arginine vasopressin or deamino 8d arginine vasopressin or deamino dextro arginine vasopressin or deaminovasopressin or defirin or defirin melt or desmirin pr desmomelt or desmopresina or desmospray or desmotab* or desurin or emosint or enupresol or minirin or minirinette or minirinmelt or minrin or minurin or miram or nictur or noctisson or nocturin or nocutil or nordurine or novidin or nucotil or octim or octostim or presinex or stimate or wetirin) #37 #35 or #36 #38 MeSH descriptor: [Factor XIII] explode all trees #39 (factor xiii or fxiii or fibrin stabili?ing factor* or Tretten* or Catridecacog) #40 #38 or #39 #41 MeSH descriptor: [Tissue Adhesives] explode all trees #42 MeSH descriptor: [Collagen] explode all trees and with qualifier(s): [therapeutic use ‐ TU] #43 MeSH descriptor: [Thrombin] explode all trees and with qualifier(s): [therapeutic use ‐ TU] #44 MeSH descriptor: [Gelatin] explode all trees and with qualifier(s): [therapeutic use ‐ TU] #45 MeSH descriptor: [Gelatin Sponge, Absorbable] this term only #46 ((fibrin* or collagen or cellulose or gelatin or gel or thrombin* or albumin or hemostatic* or haemostatic*) next (glu* or seal* or adhesive* or topical* or local* or matrix or matrices or spong* or fleece* or foam* or scaffold* or patch* or sheet* or bandag* or aerosol* or dressing* or paste or powder*)) #47 ((nonfibrin* or non‐fibrin* or synthetic* or non‐biological* or nonbiological* or biological*) near/3 (glue* or seal* or adhesive*)) #48 (surgical* near/3 (glue* or sealant* or adhesive*)) #49 ((fibrin* or collagen or cellulose or gelatin or thrombin) near/3 (hemosta* or haemosta*)) #50 (8Y or Aafact or Actif‐VIII or Advate or Artiss or Bioglue or Biocol or Collaseal or Omrixil or Transglutine or Raplixa or Evarrest or Aleviate or Alphanate or Amofil or Beriate or Beriplast or Biostate or Bolheal or Cluvot or Conco‐Eight‐HT or Crosseel or Crosseal or Crosseight or Emoclot or Evarrest or Evicel or Factane or Fanhdi or Fibrogammin P or Green VIII or Green VIII Factor or Greengene or Greenmono or Greenplast or Haemate or Haemate P or Haemate P or Haemate P500 or Haemate‐P or Haemoctin or Haemoctin SDH or Haemoctin‐SDH or Hemaseel or Hemaseal or Hemofil M or Hemoraas or Humaclot or Humafactor‐8 or Humate‐P or Immunate or Innovate or Koate or Koate‐DVI or Kogenate Bayer or Kogenate FS or Monoclate‐P or NovoThirteen or Octafil or Octanate or Octanate or Optivate or Quixil or Talate or Tisseel or Tisseal or Tissel or Tissucol or Tricos or Vivostat or Voncento or Wilate or Wilnativ or Wilstart or Xyntha) #51 (Glubran or Gluetiss or Ifabond or Indermil or LiquiBand or TissuGlu or Evithrom or Floseal or Hemopatch or Gel‐Flow or Gelfoam or Gelfilm or Recothrom or Surgifoam or Surgiflo* or "rh Thrombin" or Thrombi‐Gel or Thrombi‐Pad or Thrombin‐JMI or Thrombinar or Thrombogen or Thrombostat) #52 (porcine gelatin or bovine collagen or bovine gelatin or nu‐knit or arista or hemostase or vita sure or thrombin‐jmi or thrombinjmi or avicel or vivagel or lyostypt or tabotamp or arterx or omnex or veriset) #53 (polysaccharide next (sphere* or hemostatic powder)) #54 MeSH descriptor: [Chitosan] this term only #55 MeSH descriptor: [Polyethylene Glycols] this term only and with qualifier(s): [therapeutic use ‐ TU] #56 MeSH descriptor: [Hydrogel, Polyethylene Glycol Dimethacrylate] explode all trees and with qualifier(s): [therapeutic use ‐ TU] #57 MeSH descriptor: [Polyurethanes] explode all trees and with qualifier(s): [pharmacology ‐ PD, adverse effects ‐ AE, toxicity ‐ TO, administration & dosage ‐ AD, therapeutic use ‐ TU] #58 ((polymer‐derived elastic* or polymer tissue adhesive* or elastic hydrogel* or glutaraldehyde or PEG‐based or polyurethane‐based tissue or polyethylene glycol* or polyvinyl alcohol‐based tissue or PVA‐based tissue or natural biopolymer* or polypeptide‐based or protein‐based or polysaccharide‐based or chitosan or poliglusam or cyanoacrylic or cyanoacrylate or cyacrin or dextran‐based or chondroitin sulfate‐based or mussel‐inspired elastic* or glycol hydrogel or polymer‐based) next (glu* or seal* or adhesive* or topical* or local* or matrix or matrices or spong* or fleece* or foam* or scaffold* or patch* or sheet* or bandag* or aerosol* or dressing* or paste* or powder*)) #59 (chitosan* or mucoadhesive or muco‐adhesive or Celox Gauze or ChitoGauze or Combat Gauze) #60 MeSH descriptor: [Cellulose, Oxidized] this term only #61 (absorbable cellulose or resorbable cellulose or oxidi?ed cellulose or carboxycellulose or oxycellulose or cellulosic acid or oxycel or oxidi?ed regenerated cellulose) #62 (BioGlue or Progel or Duraseal or Coseal or FocalSeal or ADAL‐1 or AdvaSeal or Pleuraseal or Angio‐Seal or Avitene or Instat or Helitene or Helistat or TDM‐621 or Dermabond or Tissueseal or PolyStat or Raplixa or Spongostan or Surgicel or Surgilux or Tachosil or Traumstem) #63 (collagen‐thrombin or thrombin‐collagen or gelatin‐fibrinogen or fibrinogen‐gelatin or gelatin‐thrombin or thrombin‐gelatin or fibrinogen‐thrombin or thrombin‐fibrinogen or collagen‐fibrinogen or fibrinogen‐collagen or microfibrillar collagen or CoStasis or "GRF Glue" or GR‐Dial or Algosterile or TraumaStat or HemCon or ChitoFlex or Celox or QuikClot or WoundStat or Vitagel or TachSeal or TachoComb or Cryoseal) #64 #41 or #42 or #43 or #44 or #45 or #46 or #47 or #48 or #49 or #50 or #51 or #52 or #53 or #54 or #55 or #56 or #57 or #58 or #59 or #60 or #61 or #62 or #63 #65 MeSH descriptor: [Waxes] explode all trees #66 (bonewax* or bone wax* or bone putty or hemasorb or ostene) #67 #65 or #66 #68 MeSH descriptor: [Hemostatics] this term only and with qualifier(s): [administration & dosage ‐ AD, therapeutic use ‐ TU] #69 (((haemosta* or hemosta* or antihaemorrhag* or antihemorrhag* or anti haemorrhag* or anti‐hemorrhag*) next (drug* or agent* or treat* or therap* or dressing*)) or ((coagulat* or clotting) next factor*)) #70 #23 or #26 or #31 or #34 or #37 or #40 or #64 or #67 or #68 or #69 #71 #11 and #70

## MEDLINE (Ovid)
1. Arthroplasty, Replacement, Hip/ 2. Hip/su 3. Osteoarthritis, Hip/su 4. Arthroplasty, Replacement, Knee/ 5. exp Knee Injuries/su 6. Knee/su 7. Osteoarthritis, Knee/su 8. ((hip* or knee* or femur or femoral) adj10 (replac* or operat* or surg* or arthroplast* or reconstruct* or repair* or osteotom* or alloplast* or plast* or resurfac* or implant* or prosthes*)).tw,kf. 9. (acetabuloplast* or acetabulum arthroplast*).tw,kf. 10. (THA or THR or TKA or TKR or UKA or UKR).tw. 11. or/1‐10 12. Antifibrinolytic Agents/ 13. Tranexamic Acid/ 14. Aminocaproic Acid/ 15. (antifibrinolytic* or anti‐fibrinolytic* or antifibrinolysin* or antiplasmin* or plasmin inhibitor* or tranexamic or tranhexamic or cyclohexanecarboxylic acid* or amcha or trans‐4‐aminomethyl‐cyclohexanecarboxylic acid* or t‐amcha or amca or "kabi 2161" or transamin or amchafibrin or anvitoff or spotof or cyklokapron or cyclo‐F or femstrual or ugurol or aminomethylcyclohexanecarbonic acid or aminomethylcyclohexanecarboxylic acid or AMCHA or amchafibrin or amikapron or aminomethyl cyclohexane carboxylic acid or aminomethyl cyclohexanecarboxylic acid or aminomethylcyclohexane carbonic acid or aminomethylcyclohexane carboxylic acid or aminomethylcyclohexanecarbonic acid or aminomethylcyclohexanecarboxylic acid or aminomethylcyclohexanocarboxylic acid or aminomethylcyclohexanoic acid or amstat or antivoff or caprilon or cl?65336 or cl65336 or cyclocapron or cyclokapron or cyklocapron or cyklokapron or exacyl or frenolyse or fibrinon or hemostan or hexacapron or hexakapron or kalnex or lysteda or rikaparin or ronex or theranex or tranexam or tranexanic or tranexic or trans achma or transexamic or trenaxin or TXA or (fibrinolysis adj2 inhibitor*)).tw,kf. 16. (Agretax or Bio‐Stat or Capiloc or Capitrax or Clip Inj or Clot‐XL or Clotawin‐T or Coastat or Cuti or Cymin or Dubatran or Espercil or Examic or Existat or Extam or Fibran or Gynae‐Pil or Hemstate or Kapron or Menogia or Monitex or Nestran or Nexamic or Nexi‐500 or Nexmeff or Nicolda or Nixa‐500 or Pause or Rheonex or Sylstep TX or Synostat or T‐nex or T Stat or T Stat or Tanmic or Temsyl‐T or Texakind or Texanis or Texapar or Texid or Thams or Tonopan or Traklot or Tramic or Tramix or Tranarest or Trance Inj or Tranecid or Tranee or Tranemic or Tranex or Tranexa or Tranfib or Tranlok or Transtat or Transys or Transcam or Tranxi or Trapic or Traxage or Traxamic or Traxyl or Trenaxa or Trexamic or Trim Inj or Tx‐1000 or Tx 500 or Wistran or X‐Tran or Xamic).tw,kf. 17. (6‐aminohexanoic or amino?caproic or amino?hexanoic or amino caproic or amino‐caproic or amino‐n‐hexanoic or cy‐116 or cy116 or lederle or acikaprin or afibrin or amicar or caprocid or capracid or capramol or caprogel or caprolest or caprolisin* or caprolysin* or capromol or epsikapron or hemocaprol or caproamin or EACA or caprolest or capralense or hexalense or hamostat or hemocid or cl 10304 or cl10304 or ecapron or ekaprol or epsamon or epsicaprom or epsicapron or epsilcapramin or epsilon amino caproate or epsilon aminocaproate or epsilonaminocaproic or epsilonaminocapronsav or etha?aminocaproic or ethaaminocaproich or emocaprol or hepin or ipsilon or jd?177or neocaprol or nsc?26154 or resplamin or tachostyptan).tw,kf. 18. or/12‐17 19. Aprotinin/ 20. (antagosan or antilysin* or aprotimbin or apronitin* or aprotinin* or bayer a128 or contrical or contrycal or contrykal or dilmintal or frey inhibitor or kontrycal or Kunitz inhibitor or gordox or haemoprot or kallikrein‐trypsin inactivator).tw,kf. 21. (iniprol or kontrikal or kontrykal or kunitz pancreatic trypsin inhibitor or midran or pulmin or tracylol or trascolan or trasilol or tra?ylol or traskolan or zymofren or pancreas antitrypsin or protinin or riker 52g or Rivilina zymofren).tw,kf. 22. or/19‐21 23. Factor VIIa/ 24. (factor viia or factor 7a or rfviia or fviia or novoseven* or novo seven* or aryoseven or acset or eptacog* or proconvertin).tw,kf. 25. ((activated adj2 factor seven) or (activated adj2 factor vii) or (activated adj3 rfvii) or (activated adj2 fvii)).tw,kf. 26. (factor seven or factor vii or factor 7).ti. 27. 23 or 24 or 25 or 26 28. Fibrinogen/ad, ae, de, sd, tu, th, to 29. *Fibrinogen/ 30. (fibrinogen concentrate* or factor I or Haemocomplettan* or Riastap* or Fibryga* or Fibryna*).tw,kf. 31. 28 or 29 or 30 32. Deamino Arginine Vasopressin/ 33. (desmopressin* or vasopressin deamino or D‐amino D‐arginine vasopressin or deamino‐8‐d‐arginine vasopressin or vasopressin 1‐desamino‐8‐arginine or desmotabs or DDAVP or desmogalen or adin or adiuretin or concentraid or d‐void or dav ritter or deamino 8 dextro arginine vasopressin or deamino 8d arginine vasopressin or deamino dextro arginine vasopressin or deaminovasopressin or defirin or defirin melt or desmirin or desmomelt or desmopresina or desmospray or desmotab* or desurin or emosint or enupresol or minirin or minirinette or minirinmelt or minrin or minurin or miram or nictur or noctisson or nocturin or nocutil or nordurine or novidin or nucotil or octim or octostim or presinex or stimate or wetirin).tw,kf. 34. 32 or 33 35. exp Factor XIII/ 36. (factor XIII or fXIII or fibrin stabili?ing factor* or Tretten* or Catridecacog).tw,kf. 37. 35 or 36 38. exp Tissue Adhesives/ 39. *Adhesives/ 40. Collagen/tu 41. Thrombin/tu 42. Gelatin/tu 43. Gelatin Sponge, Absorbable/ 44. ((fibrin* or collagen or cellulose or gelatin or gel or thrombin* or albumin or hemostatic* or haemostatic*) adj3 (glu* or seal* or adhesive* or topical* or local* or matrix or matrices or spong* or fleece* or foam* or scaffold* or patch* or sheet* or bandag* or aerosol* or dressing* or paste or powder*)).tw,kf. 45. ((nonfibrin* or non‐fibrin* or synthetic* or non‐biological* or nonbiological* or biological*) adj3 (glue* or seal* or adhesive*)).tw,kf. 46. (surgical* adj3 (glue* or sealant* or adhesive*)).tw,kf. 47. ((fibrin* or collagen or cellulose or gelatin or thrombin) adj3 (hemosta* or haemosta*)).tw,kf. 48. (8Y or Aafact or Actif‐VIII or Advate or Artiss or Bioglue or Biocol or Collaseal or Omrixil or Transglutine or Raplixa or Evarrest or Aleviate or Alphanate or Amofil or Beriate or Beriplast or Biostate or Bolheal or Cluvot or Conco‐Eight‐HT or Crosseel or Crosseal or Crosseight or Emoclot or Evarrest or Evicel or Factane or Fanhdi or Fibrogammin P or Green VIII or Green VIII Factor or Greengene or Greenmono or Greenplast or Haemate or Haemate P or Haemate P or Haemate P500 or Haemate‐P or Haemoctin or Haemoctin SDH or Haemoctin‐SDH or Hemaseel or Hemaseal or Hemofil M or Hemoraas or Humaclot or Humafactor‐8 or Humate‐P or Immunate or Innovate or Koate or Koate‐DVI or Kogenate Bayer or Kogenate FS or Monoclate‐P or NovoThirteen or Octafil or Octanate or Octanate or Optivate or Quixil or Talate or Tisseel or Tisseal or Tissel or Tissucol or Tricos or Vivostat or Voncento or Wilate or Wilnativ or Wilstart or Xyntha).tw,kf. 49. (Glubran or Gluetiss or Ifabond or Indermil or LiquiBand or TissuGlu).tw,kf. 50. (Evithrom or Floseal or Hemopatch or Gel‐Flow or Gelfoam or Gelfilm or Recothrom or Surgifoam or Surgiflo* or "rh Thrombin" or Thrombi‐Gel or Thrombi‐Pad or Thrombin‐JMI or Thrombinar or Thrombogen or Thrombostat).tw,kf. 51. (porcine gelatin or bovine collagen or bovine gelatin or nu‐knit or arista or hemostase or vita sure or thrombin‐jmi or thrombinjmi or avicel or vivagel or lyostypt or tabotamp or arterx or omnex or veriset).tw,kf. 52. (polysaccharide adj (sphere* or hemostatic powder)).tw,kf. 53. *Chitosan/ or (chitosan* or mucoadhesive or muco‐adhesive or Celox Gauze or ChitoGauze or Combat Gauze).tw,kf. 54. *Polyethylene Glycols/ 55. *Hydrogel, Polyethylene Glycol Dimethacrylate/ 56. Polyurethanes/ad, ae, pd, tu, to 57. ((polymer‐derived elastic* or polymer tissue adhesive* or elastic hydrogel* or glutaraldehyde or PEG‐based or polyurethane‐based tissue or polyethylene glycol* or polyvinyl alcohol‐based tissue or PVA‐based tissue or natural biopolymer* or polypeptide‐based or protein‐based or polysaccharide‐based or chitosan or poliglusam or cyanoacrylic or cyanoacrylate or cyacrin or dextran‐based or chondroitin sulfate‐based or mussel‐inspired elastic* or glycol hydrogel or polymer‐based) adj3 (glu* or seal* or adhesive* or topical* or local* or matrix or matrices or spong* or fleece* or foam* or scaffold* or patch* or sheet* or bandag* or aerosol* or dressing* or paste* or powder*)).tw,kf. 58. Cellulose, Oxidized/ 59. (absorbable cellulose or resorbable cellulose or oxidi?ed cellulose or carboxycellulose or oxycellulose or cellulosic acid or oxycel or oxidi?ed regenerated cellulose).tw,kf. 60. (BioGlue or Progel or Duraseal or Coseal or FocalSeal or ADAL‐1 or AdvaSeal or Pleuraseal or Angio‐Seal or Avitene or Instat or Helitene or Helistat or TDM‐621 or Dermabond or Tissueseal or PolyStat or Raplixa or Spongostan or Surgicel or Surgilux or Tachosil or Traumstem).tw,kf. 61. (collagen‐thrombin or thrombin‐collagen or gelatin‐fibrinogen or fibrinogen‐gelatin or gelatin‐thrombin or thrombin‐gelatin or fibrinogen‐thrombin or thrombin‐fibrinogen or collagen‐fibrinogen or fibrinogen‐collagen or microfibrillar collagen or CoStasis or "GRF Glue" or GR‐Dial or Algosterile or TraumaStat or HemCon or ChitoFlex or Celox or QuikClot or WoundStat or Vitagel or TachSeal or TachoComb or Cryoseal).tw,kf. 62. or/38‐61 63. exp Waxes/ 64. (bonewax* or bone wax* or bone putty or hemasorb or ostene).tw,kf. 65. 63 or 64 66. Hemostatics/ad, th, tu 67. (((haemosta* or hemosta* or antihaemorrhag* or antihemorrhag* or anti haemorrhag* or anti‐hemorrhag*) adj5 (drug* or agent* or treat* or therap* or dressing*)) or ((coagulat* or clotting) adj factor*)).tw,kf. 68. 18 or 22 or 27 or 31 or 34 or 37 or 62 or 65 or 66 or 67 69. 11 and 68 70. Meta‐Analysis.pt. 71. ((meta analy* or metaanaly*) and (trials or studies)).ab. 72. (meta analy* or metaanaly* or evidence‐based).ti. 73. ((systematic* or evidence‐based) adj2 (review* or overview*)).tw,kf. 74. (evidence synthes* or cochrane or medline or pubmed or embase or cinahl or cinhal or lilacs or "web of science" or science citation index or scopus or search terms or literature search or electronic search* or comprehensive search* or systematic search* or published articles or search strateg* or reference list* or bibliograph* or handsearch* or hand search* or manual* search*).ab. 75. Cochrane Database of systematic reviews.jn. 76. (additional adj (papers or articles or sources)).ab. 77. ((electronic* or online) adj (sources or resources or databases)).ab. 78. (relevant adj (journals or articles)).ab. 79. or/70‐78 80. Review.pt. 81. exp Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic/ 82. selection criteria.ab. or critical appraisal.tw. 83. (data adj (abstract* or extract* or analys*)).ab. 84. exp Randomized Controlled Trial/ 85. or/81‐84 86. 80 and 85 87. 79 or 86 88. Randomized Controlled Trial.pt. 89. Controlled Clinical Trial.pt. 90. (placebo or randomly or groups).ab. 91. (randomi* or trial).tw,kf. 92. exp Clinical Trial as Topic/ 93. 87 or 88 or 89 or 90 or 91 or 92 94. exp animals/ not humans/ 95. 93 not 94 96. 69 and 95

## Embase (Ovid)
1. exp Hip Surgery/ 2. exp Hip Disease/su 3. exp Knee Surgery/ 4. exp Knee Disease/su 5. ((hip* or knee* or femur or femoral) adj10 (replac* or operat* or surg* or arthroplast* or reconstruct* or repair* or osteotom* or alloplast* or plast* or resurfac* or implant* or prosthes*)).tw. 6. (acetabuloplast* or acetabulum arthroplast*).tw. 7. or/1‐6 8. Antifibrinolytic Agent/ 9. Tranexamic Acid/ 10. Aminocaproic Acid/ 11. (antifibrinolytic* or anti‐fibrinolytic* or antifibrinolysin* or antiplasmin* or plasmin inhibitor* or tranexamic or tranhexamic or cyclohexanecarboxylic acid* or amcha or trans‐4‐aminomethyl‐cyclohexanecarboxylic acid* or t‐amcha or amca or "kabi 2161" or transamin or amchafibrin or anvitoff or spotof or cyklokapron or cyclo‐F or femstrual or ugurol or aminomethylcyclohexanecarbonic acid or aminomethylcyclohexanecarboxylic acid or AMCHA or amchafibrin or amikapron or aminomethyl cyclohexane carboxylic acid or aminomethyl cyclohexanecarboxylic acid or aminomethylcyclohexane carbonic acid or aminomethylcyclohexane carboxylic acid or aminomethylcyclohexanecarbonic acid or aminomethylcyclohexanecarboxylic acid or aminomethylcyclohexanocarboxylic acid or aminomethylcyclohexanoic acid or amstat or antivoff or caprilon or cl?65336 or cl65336 or cyclocapron or cyclokapron or cyklocapron or cyklokapron or exacyl or frenolyse or fibrinon or hemostan or hexacapron or hexakapron or kalnex or lysteda or rikaparin or ronex or theranex or tranexam or tranexanic or tranexic or trans achma or transexamic or trenaxin or TXA or (fibrinolysis adj2 inhibitor*)).tw. 12. (Agretax or Bio‐Stat or Capiloc or Capitrax or Clip Inj or Clot‐XL or Clotawin‐T or Coastat or Cuti or Cymin or Dubatran or Espercil or Examic or Existat or Extam or Fibran or Gynae‐Pil or Hemstate or Kapron or Menogia or Monitex or Nestran or Nexamic or Nexi‐500 or Nexmeff or Nicolda or Nixa‐500 or Pause or Rheonex or Sylstep TX or Synostat or T‐nex or T Stat or T Stat or Tanmic or Temsyl‐T or Texakind or Texanis or Texapar or Texid or Thams or Tonopan or Traklot or Tramic or Tramix or Tranarest or Trance Inj or Tranecid or Tranee or Tranemic or Tranex or Tranexa or Tranfib or Tranlok or Transtat or Transys or Transcam or Tranxi or Trapic or Traxage or Traxamic or Traxyl or Trenaxa or Trexamic or Trim Inj or Tx‐1000 or Tx 500 or Wistran or X‐Tran or Xamic).tw. 13. (6‐aminohexanoic or amino?caproic or amino?hexanoic or amino caproic or amino‐caproic or amino‐n‐hexanoic or cy‐116 or cy116 or lederle or acikaprin or afibrin or amicar or caprocid or capracid or capramol or caprogel or caprolest or caprolisin* or caprolysin* or capromol or epsikapron or hemocaprol or caproamin or EACA or caprolest or capralense or hexalense or hamostat or hemocid or cl 10304 or cl10304 or ecapron or ekaprol or epsamon or epsicaprom or epsicapron or epsilcapramin or epsilon amino caproate or epsilon aminocaproate or epsilonaminocaproic or epsilonaminocapronsav or etha?aminocaproic or ethaaminocaproich or emocaprol or hepin or ipsilon or jd?177or neocaprol or nsc?26154 or resplamin or tachostyptan).tw. 14. or/8‐13 15. Aprotinin/ 16. (antagosan or antilysin* or aprotimbin or apronitin* or aprotinin* or bayer a128 or contrical or contrycal or contrykal or dilmintal or frey inhibitor or kontrycal or Kunitz inhibitor or gordox or haemoprot or kallikrein‐trypsin inactivator).tw. 17. (iniprol or kontrikal or kontrykal or kunitz pancreatic trypsin inhibitor or midran or pulmin or tracylol or trascolan or trasilol or tra?ylol or traskolan or zymofren or pancreas antitrypsin or protinin or riker 52g or Rivilina zymofren).tw. 18. or/15‐17 19. Blood Clotting Factor 7a/ 20. (factor viia or factor 7a or rfviia or fviia or novoseven* or novo seven* or aryoseven or acset or eptacog* or proconvertin).tw. 21. ((activated adj2 factor seven) or (activated adj2 factor vii) or (activated adj3 rfvii) or (activated adj2 fvii)).tw. 22. (factor seven or factor vii or factor 7).ti. 23. 19 or 20 or 21 or 22 24. Fibrinogen Concentrate/ 25. (fibrinogen concentrate* or factor I or Haemocomplettan* or Riastap* or Fibryga* or Fibryna*).tw. 26. 24 or 25 27. Desmopressin/ 28. (desmopressin* or vasopressin deamino or D‐amino D‐arginine vasopressin or deamino‐8‐d‐arginine vasopressin or vasopressin 1‐desamino‐8‐arginine or desmotabs or DDAVP or desmogalen or adin or adiuretin or concentraid or d‐void or dav ritter or deamino 8 dextro arginine vasopressin or deamino 8d arginine vasopressin or deamino dextro arginine vasopressin or deaminovasopressin or defirin or defirin melt or desmirin or desmomelt or desmopresina or desmospray or desmotab* or desurin or emosint or enupresol or minirin or minirinette or minirinmelt or minrin or minurin or miram or nictur or noctisson or nocturin or nocutil or nordurine or novidin or nucotil or octim or octostim or presinex or stimate or wetirin).tw. 29. 27 or 28 30. Blood Clotting Factor 13/ 31. (factor xiii or fxiii or fibrin stabili?ing factor* or Tretten* or Catridecacog).tw. 32. 30 or 31 33. exp Tissue Adhesive/ 34. *Adhesive Agent/ 35. *Hemostatic Agent/ 36. ((fibrin* or collagen or cellulose or gelatin or gel or thrombin* or albumin or hemostatic* or haemostatic*) adj3 (glu* or seal* or adhesive* or topical* or local* or matrix or matrices or spong* or fleece* or foam* or scaffold* or patch* or sheet* or bandag* or aerosol* or dressing* or paste or powder*)).tw. 37. ((nonfibrin* or non‐fibrin* or synthetic* or non‐biological* or nonbiological* or biological*) adj3 (glue* or seal* or adhesive*)).tw. 38. (surgical* adj3 (glue* or sealant* or adhesive*)).tw. 39. ((fibrin* or collagen or cellulose or gelatin or thrombin) adj3 (hemosta* or haemosta*)).tw. 40. (8Y or Aafact or Actif‐VIII or Advate or Artiss or Raplixa or Evarrest or Aleviate or Alphanate or Amofil or Beriate or Beriplast or Biostate or Bolheal or Cluvot or Conco‐Eight‐HT or Crosseel or Crosseal or Crosseight or Emoclot or Evarrest or Evicel or Factane or Fanhdi or Fibrogammin P or Green VIII or Green VIII Factor or Greengene or Greenmono or Greenplast or Haemate or Haemate P or Haemate P or Haemate P500 or Haemate‐P or Haemoctin or Haemoctin SDH or Haemoctin‐SDH or Hemaseel or Hemaseal or Hemofil M or Hemoraas or Humaclot or Humafactor‐8 or Humate‐P or Immunate or Innovate or Koate or Koate‐DVI or Kogenate Bayer or Kogenate FS or Monoclate‐P or NovoThirteen or Octafil or Octanate or Octanate or Optivate or Quixil or Talate or Tisseel or Tisseal or Tissel or Tissucol or Tricos or Vivostat or Voncento or Wilate or Wilnativ or Wilstart or Xyntha).tw. 41. (Glubran or Gluetiss or Ifabond or Indermil or LiquiBand or TissuGlu).tw. 42. Collagen Sponge/ or Collagen Dressing/ 43. Gelatin Sponge/ or Gelfoam/ 44. (Evithrom or Floseal or Hemopatch or Gel‐Flow or Gelfoam or Gelfilm or Recothrom or Surgifoam or Surgiflo* or "rh Thrombin" or Thrombi‐Gel or Thrombi‐Pad or Thrombin‐JMI or Thrombinar or Thrombogen or Thrombostat).tw. 45. *Chitosan/ or (chitosan* or mucoadhesive or muco‐adhesive or Celox Gauze or ChitoGauze or Combat Gauze).tw. 46. Hydrogel Dressing/ 47. Fibrinogen plus Thrombin/ 48. Polyvinyl Alcohol Sponge/ 49. (porcine gelatin or bovine collagen or bovine gelatin or nu‐knit or arista or hemostase or vita sure or thrombin‐jmi or thrombinjmi or avicel or vivagel or lyostypt or tabotamp or arterx or omnex or veriset).tw. 50. (polysaccharide adj (sphere* or hemostatic powder)).tw. 51. ((polymer‐derived elastic* or polymer tissue adhesive* or elastic hydrogel* or glutaraldehyde or PEG‐based or polyurethane‐based tissue or polyethylene glycol* or polyvinyl alcohol‐based tissue or PVA‐based tissue or natural biopolymer* or polypeptide‐based or protein‐based or polysaccharide‐based or chitosan or poliglusam or cyanoacrylic or cyanoacrylate or cyacrin or dextran‐based or chondroitin sulfate‐based or mussel‐inspired elastic* or glycol hydrogel or polymer‐based) adj3 (glu* or seal* or adhesive* or topical* or local* or matrix or matrices or spong* or fleece* or foam* or scaffold* or patch* or sheet* or bandag* or aerosol* or dressing* or paste* or powder*)).tw. 52. Oxidized Cellulose/ 53. Oxidized Regenerated Cellulose/ 54. Recombinant Thrombin/ 55. Tachocomb/ 56. (absorbable cellulose or resorbable cellulose or oxidi?ed cellulose or carboxycellulose or oxycellulose or cellulosic acid or oxycel or oxidi?ed regenerated cellulose).tw. 57. (BioGlue or Progel or Duraseal or Coseal or FocalSeal or ADAL‐1 or AdvaSeal or Pleuraseal or Angio‐Seal or Avitene or Instat or Helitene or Helistat or TDM‐621 or Dermabond or Tissueseal or PolyStat or Raplixa or Spongostan or Surgicel).tw. 58. (Tachosil or Traumstem or CoStasis or "GRF Glue" or GR‐Dial or Algosterile or TraumaStat or HemCon or ChitoFlex or Celox or QuikClot or WoundStat or Vitagel or TachSeal or TachoComb or Cryoseal).tw. 59. (collagen‐thrombin or thrombin‐collagen or gelatin‐fibrinogen or fibrinogen‐gelatin or gelatin‐thrombin or thrombin‐gelatin or fibrinogen‐thrombin or thrombin‐fibrinogen or collagen‐fibrinogen or fibrinogen‐collagen or microfibrillar collagen).tw. 60. or/33‐59 61. Bone Wax/ 62. (bonewax* or bone wax* or bone putty or hemasorb or ostene).tw. 63. or/61‐62 64. Hemostatic Agent/ 65. (((haemosta* or hemosta* or antihaemorrhag* or antihemorrhag* or anti haemorrhag* or anti‐hemorrhag*) adj5 (drug* or agent* or treat* or therap* or dressing*)) or ((coagulat* or clotting) adj factor*)).tw. 66. 14 or 18 or 23 or 26 or 29 or 32 or 60 or 63 or 64 or 65 67. 7 and 66 68. Meta Analysis/ 69. (meta analy* or metaanaly* or evidence‐based).ti. 70. ((meta analy* or metaanaly*) and (trials or studies)).ab. 71. Systematic Review/ 72. ((systematic* or evidence‐based) adj2 (review* or overview*)).tw. 73. (evidence synthes* or cochrane or medline or pubmed or embase or cinahl or cinhal or lilacs or "web of science" or science citation index or scopus or search terms or literature search or electronic search* or comprehensive search* or systematic search* or published articles or search strateg* or reference list* or bibliograph* or handsearch* or hand search* or manual* search*).ab. 74. ((electronic* or online) adj (sources or resources or databases)).ab. 75. ((additional adj (papers or articles or sources)) or (relevant adj (journals or articles))).ab. 76. or/68‐75 77. Review.pt. 78. (data extraction or selection criteria).ab. 79. 77 and 78 80. 76 or 79 81. Editorial.pt. 82. 80 not 81 83. crossover‐procedure/ or double‐blind procedure/ or randomized controlled trial/ or single‐blind procedure/ 84. (random* or factorial* or crossover* or cross over* or cross‐over* or placebo* or doubl* blind* or singl* blind* or assign* or allocat* or volunteer*).mp. 85. 83 or 84 86. 82 or 85 87. 67 and 86

## CINAHL (EBSCOhost)
S1 (MH "Arthroplasty, Replacement, Hip") S2 (MH "Osteoarthritis, Hip") S3 (MH "Arthroplasty, Replacement, Knee+") S4 (MH "Knee Injuries+/SU") S5 (MH "Knee/SU") OR (MH "Hip/SU") S6 (MH "Osteoarthritis, Knee/SU") S7 TI ( ((hip* or knee* or femur or femoral) N10 (replac* or operat* or surg* or arthroplast* or reconstruct* or repair* or osteotom* or alloplast* or plast* or resurfac* or implant* or prosthes*)) ) OR AB ( ((hip* or knee* or femur or femoral) N10 (replac* or operat* or surg* or arthroplast* or reconstruct* or repair* or osteotom* or alloplast* or plast* or resurfac* or implant* or prosthes*)) ) S8 TI ( (acetabuloplast* or acetabulum arthroplast*) ) OR AB ( (acetabuloplast* or acetabulum arthroplast*) ) OR TI ( (THA or THR or TKA or TKR or UKA or UKR) ) OR AB ( (THA or THR or TKA or TKR or UKA or UKR) ) S9 S1 OR S2 OR S3 OR S4 OR S5 OR S6 OR S7 OR S8 S10 (MH "Antifibrinolytic Agents") OR (MH "Aminocaproic Acids") OR (MH "Tranexamic Acid") S11 TI ( (antifibrinolytic* or anti‐fibrinolytic* or antifibrinolysin* or antiplasmin* or plasmin inhibitor* or tranexamic or tranhexamic or cyclohexanecarboxylic acid* or amcha or trans‐4‐aminomethyl‐cyclohexanecarboxylic acid* or t‐amcha or amca or "kabi 2161" or transamin or amchafibrin or anvitoff or spotof or cyklokapron or cyclo‐F or femstrual or ugurol or aminomethylcyclohexanecarbonic acid or aminomethylcyclohexanecarboxylic acid or AMCHA or amchafibrin or amikapron or aminomethyl cyclohexane carboxylic acid or aminomethyl cyclohexanecarboxylic acid or aminomethylcyclohexane carbonic acid or aminomethylcyclohexane carboxylic acid or aminomethylcyclohexanecarbonic acid or aminomethylcyclohexanecarboxylic acid or aminomethylcyclohexanocarboxylic acid or aminomethylcyclohexanoic acid or amstat or antivoff or caprilon or cl?65336 or cl65336 or cyclocapron or cyclokapron or cyklocapron or cyklokapron or exacyl or frenolyse or fibrinon or hemostan or hexacapron or hexakapron or kalnex or lysteda or rikaparin or ronex or theranex or tranexam or tranexanic or tranexic or trans achma or transexamic or trenaxin or TXA or (fibrinolysis N2 inhibitor*)) ) OR AB ( (antifibrinolytic* or anti‐fibrinolytic* or antifibrinolysin* or antiplasmin* or plasmin inhibitor* or tranexamic or tranhexamic or cyclohexanecarboxylic acid* or amcha or trans‐4‐aminomethyl‐cyclohexanecarboxylic acid* or t‐amcha or amca or "kabi 2161" or transamin or amchafibrin or anvitoff or spotof or cyklokapron or cyclo‐F or femstrual or ugurol or aminomethylcyclohexanecarbonic acid or aminomethylcyclohexanecarboxylic acid or AMCHA or amchafibrin or amikapron or aminomethyl cyclohexane carboxylic acid or aminomethyl cyclohexanecarboxylic acid or aminomethylcyclohexane carbonic acid or aminomethylcyclohexane carboxylic acid or aminomethylcyclohexanecarbonic acid or aminomethylcyclohexanecarboxylic acid or aminomethylcyclohexanocarboxylic acid or aminomethylcyclohexanoic acid or amstat or antivoff or caprilon or cl?65336 or cl65336 or cyclocapron or cyclokapron or cyklocapron or cyklokapron or exacyl or frenolyse or fibrinon or hemostan or hexacapron or hexakapron or kalnex or lysteda or rikaparin or ronex or theranex or tranexam or tranexanic or tranexic or trans achma or transexamic or trenaxin or TXA or (fibrinolysis N2 inhibitor*)) ) S12 TI ( (6‐aminohexanoic or amino?caproic or amino?hexanoic or amino caproic or amino‐caproic or amino‐n‐hexanoic or cy‐116 or cy116 or lederle or acikaprin or afibrin or amicar or caprocid or capracid or capramol or caprogel or caprolest or caprolisin* or caprolysin* or capromol or epsikapron or hemocaprol or caproamin or EACA or caprolest or capralense or hexalense or hamostat or hemocid or cl 10304 or cl10304 or ecapron or ekaprol or epsamon or epsicaprom or epsicapron or epsilcapramin or epsilon amino caproate or epsilon aminocaproate or epsilonaminocaproic or epsilonaminocapronsav or etha?aminocaproic or ethaaminocaproich or emocaprol or hepin or ipsilon or jd?177or neocaprol or nsc?26154 or resplamin or tachostyptan) ) OR AB ( (6‐aminohexanoic or amino?caproic or amino?hexanoic or amino caproic or amino‐caproic or amino‐n‐hexanoic or cy‐116 or cy116 or lederle or acikaprin or afibrin or amicar or caprocid or capracid or capramol or caprogel or caprolest or caprolisin* or caprolysin* or capromol or epsikapron or hemocaprol or caproamin or EACA or caprolest or capralense or hexalense or hamostat or hemocid or cl 10304 or cl10304 or ecapron or ekaprol or epsamon or epsicaprom or epsicapron or epsilcapramin or epsilon amino caproate or epsilon aminocaproate or epsilonaminocaproic or epsilonaminocapronsav or etha?aminocaproic or ethaaminocaproich or emocaprol or hepin or ipsilon or jd?177or neocaprol or nsc?26154 or resplamin or tachostyptan) ) S13 S10 OR S11 OR S12 S14 (MH "Aprotinin") S15 TI ( (antagosan or antilysin* or aprotimbin or apronitin* or aprotinin* or bayer a128 or contrical or contrycal or contrykal or dilmintal or frey inhibitor or kontrycal or Kunitz inhibitor or gordox or haemoprot or kallikrein‐trypsin inactivator) ) OR AB ( (antagosan or antilysin* or aprotimbin or apronitin* or aprotinin* or bayer a128 or contrical or contrycal or contrykal or dilmintal or frey inhibitor or kontrycal or Kunitz inhibitor or gordox or haemoprot or kallikrein‐trypsin inactivator) ) S16 TI ( (iniprol or kontrikal or kontrykal or kunitz pancreatic trypsin inhibitor or midran or pulmin or tracylol or trascolan or trasilol or tra?ylol or traskolan or zymofren or pancreas antitrypsin or protinin or riker 52g or Rivilina zymofren) ) OR AB ( (iniprol or kontrikal or kontrykal or kunitz pancreatic trypsin inhibitor or midran or pulmin or tracylol or trascolan or trasilol or tra?ylol or traskolan or zymofren or pancreas antitrypsin or protinin or riker 52g or Rivilina zymofren) ) S17 S14 OR S15 OR S16 S18 TX ( (factor viia or factor 7a or rfviia or fviia or novoseven* or novo seven* or aryoseven or acset or eptacog* or proconvertin) ) OR TX ( ((activated N2 factor seven) or (activated N2 factor vii) or (activated N3 rfvii) or (activated N2 fvii)) ) S19 TX (factor seven or factor vii or factor 7) S20 S18 OR S19 S21 (MH "Fibrinogen") S22 TX (fibrinogen concentrate* or factor I or Haemocomplettan* or Riastap* or Fibryga* or Fibryna*) S23 S21 OR S22 S24 (MH "Desmopressin") S25 TI ( (desmopressin* or vasopressin deamino or D‐amino D‐arginine vasopressin or deamino‐8‐d‐arginine vasopressin or vasopressin 1‐desamino‐8‐arginine or desmotabs or DDAVP or desmogalen or adin or adiuretin or concentraid or d‐void or dav ritter or deamino 8 dextro arginine vasopressin or deamino 8d arginine vasopressin or deamino dextro arginine vasopressin or deaminovasopressin or defirin or defirin melt or desmirin or desmomelt or desmopresina or desmospray or desmotab* or desurin or emosint or enupresol or minirin or minirinette or minirinmelt or minrin or minurin or miram or nictur or noctisson or nocturin or nocutil or nordurine or novidin or nucotil or octim or octostim or presinex or stimate or wetirin) ) OR AB ( (desmopressin* or vasopressin deamino or D‐amino D‐arginine vasopressin or deamino‐8‐d‐arginine vasopressin or vasopressin 1‐desamino‐8‐arginine or desmotabs or DDAVP or desmogalen or adin or adiuretin or concentraid or d‐void or dav ritter or deamino 8 dextro arginine vasopressin or deamino 8d arginine vasopressin or deamino dextro arginine vasopressin or deaminovasopressin or defirin or defirin melt or desmirin or desmomelt or desmopresina or desmospray or desmotab* or desurin or emosint or enupresol or minirin or minirinette or minirinmelt or minrin or minurin or miram or nictur or noctisson or nocturin or nocutil or nordurine or novidin or nucotil or octim or octostim or presinex or stimate or wetirin) ) S26 S24 OR S25 S27 TX (factor XIII or fXIII or fibrin stabili?ing factor* or Tretten* or Catridecacog) S28 (MH "Tissue Adhesives") S29 (MH "Fibrin Tissue Adhesive") S30 (MH "Collagen/TU") S31 (MH "Thrombin/TU") S32 (MH "Surgical Sponges") S33 TI ( ((fibrin* or collagen or cellulose or gelatin or gel or thrombin* or albumin or hemostatic* or haemostatic*) N3 (glu* or seal* or adhesive* or topical* or local* or matrix or matrices or spong* or fleece* or foam* or scaffold* or patch* or sheet* or bandag* or aerosol* or dressing* or paste or powder*)) ) OR AB ( ((fibrin* or collagen or cellulose or gelatin or gel or thrombin* or albumin or hemostatic* or haemostatic*) N3 (glu* or seal* or adhesive* or topical* or local* or matrix or matrices or spong* or fleece* or foam* or scaffold* or patch* or sheet* or bandag* or aerosol* or dressing* or paste or powder*)) ) S34 TI ( ((nonfibrin* or non‐fibrin* or synthetic* or non‐biological* or nonbiological* or biological*) N3 (glue* or seal* or adhesive*)) ) OR AB ( ((nonfibrin* or non‐fibrin* or synthetic* or non‐biological* or nonbiological* or biological*) N3 (glue* or seal* or adhesive*)) ) S35 TI ( (surgical* N3 (glue* or sealant* or adhesive*)) ) OR AB ( (surgical* N3 (glue* or sealant* or adhesive*)) ) S36 TI ( ((fibrin* or collagen or cellulose or gelatin or thrombin) N3 (hemosta* or haemosta*)) ) OR AB ( ((fibrin* or collagen or cellulose or gelatin or thrombin) N3 (hemosta* or haemosta*)) ) S37 TI ( (8Y or Aafact or Actif‐VIII or Advate or Artiss or Bioglue or Biocol or Collaseal or Omrixil or Transglutine or Raplixa or Evarrest or Aleviate or Alphanate or Amofil or Beriate or Beriplast or Biostate or Bolheal or Cluvot or Conco‐Eight‐HT or Crosseel or Crosseal or Crosseight or Emoclot or Evarrest or Evicel or Factane or Fanhdi or Fibrogammin P or Green VIII or Green VIII Factor or Greengene or Greenmono or Greenplast or Haemate or Haemate P or Haemate P or Haemate P500 or Haemate‐P or Haemoctin or Haemoctin SDH or Haemoctin‐SDH or Hemaseel or Hemaseal or Hemofil M or Hemoraas or Humaclot or Humafactor‐8 or Humate‐P or Immunate or Innovate or Koate or Koate‐DVI or Kogenate Bayer or Kogenate FS or Monoclate‐P or NovoThirteen or Octafil or Octanate or Octanate or Optivate or Quixil or Talate or Tisseel or Tisseal or Tissel or Tissucol or Tricos or Vivostat or Voncento or Wilate or Wilnativ or Wilstart or Xyntha) ) OR AB ( (8Y or Aafact or Actif‐VIII or Advate or Artiss or Bioglue or Biocol or Collaseal or Omrixil or Transglutine or Raplixa or Evarrest or Aleviate or Alphanate or Amofil or Beriate or Beriplast or Biostate or Bolheal or Cluvot or Conco‐Eight‐HT or Crosseel or Crosseal or Crosseight or Emoclot or Evarrest or Evicel or Factane or Fanhdi or Fibrogammin P or Green VIII or Green VIII Factor or Greengene or Greenmono or Greenplast or Haemate or Haemate P or Haemate P or Haemate P500 or Haemate‐P or Haemoctin or Haemoctin SDH or Haemoctin‐SDH or Hemaseel or Hemaseal or Hemofil M or Hemoraas or Humaclot or Humafactor‐8 or Humate‐P or Immunate or Innovate or Koate or Koate‐DVI or Kogenate Bayer or Kogenate FS or Monoclate‐P or NovoThirteen or Octafil or Octanate or Octanate or Optivate or Quixil or Talate or Tisseel or Tisseal or Tissel or Tissucol or Tricos or Vivostat or Voncento or Wilate or Wilnativ or Wilstart or Xyntha) ) S38 TI ( (Glubran or Gluetiss or Ifabond or Indermil or LiquiBand or TissuGlu) ) OR AB ( (Glubran or Gluetiss or Ifabond or Indermil or LiquiBand or TissuGlu) ) S39 TI ( (Evithrom or Floseal or Hemopatch or Gel‐Flow or Gelfoam or Gelfilm or Recothrom or Surgifoam or Surgiflo* or "rh Thrombin" or Thrombi‐Gel or Thrombi‐Pad or Thrombin‐JMI or Thrombinar or Thrombogen or Thrombostat) ) OR AB ( (Evithrom or Floseal or Hemopatch or Gel‐Flow or Gelfoam or Gelfilm or Recothrom or Surgifoam or Surgiflo* or "rh Thrombin" or Thrombi‐Gel or Thrombi‐Pad or Thrombin‐JMI or Thrombinar or Thrombogen or Thrombostat) ) S40 TI ( (porcine gelatin or bovine collagen or bovine gelatin or nu‐knit or arista or hemostase or vita sure or thrombin‐jmi or thrombinjmi or avicel or vivagel or lyostypt or tabotamp or arterx or omnex or veriset) ) OR AB ( (porcine gelatin or bovine collagen or bovine gelatin or nu‐knit or arista or hemostase or vita sure or thrombin‐jmi or thrombinjmi or avicel or vivagel or lyostypt or tabotamp or arterx or omnex or veriset) ) S41 TX (polysaccharide NEXT (sphere* or hemostatic powder)) S42 (MM "Polyethylene Glycols") S43 (MH "Hydrogel Dressings") S44 (MH "Polyurethanes/AD/AE/TU/ST/DE") S45 TI ( ((polymer‐derived elastic* or polymer tissue adhesive* or elastic hydrogel* or glutaraldehyde or PEG‐based or polyurethane‐based tissue or polyethylene glycol* or polyvinyl alcohol‐based tissue or PVA‐based tissue or natural biopolymer* or polypeptide‐based or protein‐based or polysaccharide‐based or chitosan or poliglusam or cyanoacrylic or cyanoacrylate or cyacrin or dextran‐based or chondroitin sulfate‐based or mussel‐inspired elastic* or glycol hydrogel or polymer‐based) N3 (glu* or seal* or adhesive* or topical* or local* or matrix or matrices or spong* or fleece* or foam* or scaffold* or patch* or sheet* or bandag* or aerosol* or dressing* or paste* or powder*)) ) OR AB ( ((polymer‐derived elastic* or polymer tissue adhesive* or elastic hydrogel* or glutaraldehyde or PEG‐based or polyurethane‐based tissue or polyethylene glycol* or polyvinyl alcohol‐based tissue or PVA‐based tissue or natural biopolymer* or polypeptide‐based or protein‐based or polysaccharide‐based or chitosan or poliglusam or cyanoacrylic or cyanoacrylate or cyacrin or dextran‐based or chondroitin sulfate‐based or mussel‐inspired elastic* or glycol hydrogel or polymer‐based) N3 (glu* or seal* or adhesive* or topical* or local* or matrix or matrices or spong* or fleece* or foam* or scaffold* or patch* or sheet* or bandag* or aerosol* or dressing* or paste* or powder*)) ) S46 (MH "Cellulose/TU") S47 TI ( (absorbable cellulose or resorbable cellulose or oxidi?ed cellulose or carboxycellulose or oxycellulose or cellulosic acid or oxycel or oxidi?ed regenerated cellulose) ) OR AB ( (absorbable cellulose or resorbable cellulose or oxidi?ed cellulose or carboxycellulose or oxycellulose or cellulosic acid or oxycel or oxidi?ed regenerated cellulose) ) S48 TI ( (BioGlue or Progel or Duraseal or Coseal or FocalSeal or ADAL‐1 or AdvaSeal or Pleuraseal or Angio‐Seal or Avitene or Instat or Helitene or Helistat or TDM‐621 or Dermabond or Tissueseal or PolyStat or Raplixa or Spongostan or Surgicel or Surgilux or Tachosil or Traumstem) ) OR AB ( (BioGlue or Progel or Duraseal or Coseal or FocalSeal or ADAL‐1 or AdvaSeal or Pleuraseal or Angio‐Seal or Avitene or Instat or Helitene or Helistat or TDM‐621 or Dermabond or Tissueseal or PolyStat or Raplixa or Spongostan or Surgicel or Surgilux or Tachosil or Traumstem) ) S49 TI ( (collagen‐thrombin or thrombin‐collagen or gelatin‐fibrinogen or fibrinogen‐gelatin or gelatin‐thrombin or thrombin‐gelatin or fibrinogen‐thrombin or thrombin‐fibrinogen or collagen‐fibrinogen or fibrinogen‐collagen or microfibrillar collagen or CoStasis or "GRF Glue" or GR‐Dial or Algosterile or TraumaStat or HemCon or ChitoFlex or Celox or QuikClot or WoundStat or Vitagel or TachSeal or TachoComb or Cryoseal) ) OR AB ( (collagen‐thrombin or thrombin‐collagen or gelatin‐fibrinogen or fibrinogen‐gelatin or gelatin‐thrombin or thrombin‐gelatin or fibrinogen‐thrombin or thrombin‐fibrinogen or collagen‐fibrinogen or fibrinogen‐collagen or microfibrillar collagen or CoStasis or "GRF Glue" or GR‐Dial or Algosterile or TraumaStat or HemCon or ChitoFlex or Celox or QuikClot or WoundStat or Vitagel or TachSeal or TachoComb or Cryoseal) ) S50 S27 OR S28 OR S29 OR S30 OR S31 OR S32 OR S33 OR S34 OR S35 OR S36 OR S37 OR S38 OR S39 OR S40 OR S41 OR S42 OR S43 OR S44 OR S45 OR S46 OR S47 OR S48 OR S49 S51 (MH "Waxes/TU") S52 TI ( (bonewax* or bone wax* or bone putty or hemasorb or ostene) ) OR AB ( (bonewax* or bone wax* or bone putty or hemasorb or ostene) ) S53 S51 OR S52 S54 TI ( (((haemosta* or hemosta* or antihaemorrhag* or antihemorrhag* or anti haemorrhag* or anti‐hemorrhag*) N5 (drug* or agent* or treat* or therap* or dressing*)) or ((coagulat* or clotting) NEXT factor*)) ) OR AB ( (((haemosta* or hemosta* or antihaemorrhag* or antihemorrhag* or anti haemorrhag* or anti‐hemorrhag*) N5 (drug* or agent* or treat* or therap* or dressing*)) or ((coagulat* or clotting) NEXT factor*)) ) S55 S13 OR S17 OR S20 OR S23 OR S26 OR S50 OR S53 OR S54 S56 S9 AND S55 S57 (MH Clinical Trials+) S58 PT Clinical Trial S59 TI ((controlled trial*) or (clinical trial*)) OR AB ((controlled trial*) or (clinical trial*)) S60 TI ((singl* blind*) OR (doubl* blind*) OR (trebl* blind*) OR (tripl* blind*) OR (singl* mask*) OR (doubl* mask*) OR (tripl* mask*)) OR AB ((singl* blind*) OR (doubl* blind*) OR (trebl* blind*) OR (tripl* blind*) OR (singl* mask*) OR (doubl* mask*) OR (tripl* mask*)) S61 TI randomi* OR AB randomi* S62 MH RANDOM ASSIGNMENT S63 TI ((phase three) or (phase III) or (phase three)) or AB ((phase three) or (phase III) or (phase three)) S64 ( TI (random* N2 (assign* or allocat*)) ) OR ( AB (random* N2 (assign* or allocat*)) ) S65 MH PLACEBOS S66 MH META ANALYSIS S67 MH SYSTEMATIC REVIEW S68 TI ("meta analys*" OR metaanalys* OR "systematic review" OR "systematic overview" OR "systematic search*") OR AB ("meta analys*" OR metaanalys* OR "systematic review" OR "systematic overview" OR "systematic search*") S69 TI ("literature review" OR "literature overview" OR "literature search*") OR AB ("literature review" OR "literature overview" OR "literature search*") S70 TI (cochrane OR embase OR cinahl OR cinhal OR lilacs OR BIDS OR science AND citation AND index OR cancerlit) OR AB (cochrane OR embase OR cinahl OR cinhal OR lilacs OR BIDS OR science AND citation AND index OR cancerlit) S71 TI placebo* OR AB placebo* S72 MH QUANTITATIVE STUDIES S73 S57 or S58 or S59 or S60 or S61 or S62 or S63 or S64 or S65 or S66 or S67 or S68 or S69 or S70 or S71 or S72 S74 S56 AND S73

## Transfusion Evidence Library
Clinical Specialty: Orthopaedic Surgery AND Subject Areas: Alternatives to Blood/Antifibrinolytics OR Alternatives to Blood/Fractionated Blood Products OR Alternatives to Blood/Recombinant Coagulation Factors

## ClinicalTrials.gov
1. Other Terms: (hip surgery OR knee surgery OR arthroplasty OR hip replacement OR femoral replacement OR knee replacement OR knee injury OR osteoarthritis OR THA OR TKA) AND (randomized or randomised OR randomly OR random) AND Intervention: hemostatic OR antifibrinolytic OR tranexamic OR EACA OR aminocaproic OR aprotinin OR desmopressin OR DDAVP OR factor viia OR novoseven OR aryoseven OR fibrinogen OR haemocomplettan OR Riastap OR Fibryna OR Fibryga OR factor XIII OR Tretten 2. Other Terms: (hip surgery OR knee surgery OR arthroplasty OR hip replacement OR femoral replacement OR knee replacement OR knee injury OR osteoarthritis OR THA OR TKA) AND (randomized or randomised OR randomly OR random) AND Intervention: sealant OR adhesive OR collagen OR cellulose OR gelatin OR glue OR matrix OR sponge OR fleece OR foam OR scaffold OR patch OR sheet OR gelfoam OR chitosan OR hydrogel OR polyethylene glycol OR tachocomb OR BioGlue OR Surgicel OR Veriset 3. Other Terms: (hip surgery OR knee surgery OR arthroplasty OR hip replacement OR femoral replacement OR knee replacement OR knee injury OR osteoarthritis OR THA OR TKA) AND (randomized or randomised OR randomly OR random) AND Intervention: Evithrom OR Floseal OR Tachosil OR Cryoseal OR Hemopatch OR Progel OR Duraseal OR Coseal OR FocalSeal OR Algosterile OR TraumaStat OR HemCon OR ChitoFlex OR Celox OR QuikClot OR WoundStat OR Vitagel OR TachSeal OR bonewax OR hemasorb OR ostene 4. Other Terms: (hip surgery OR knee surgery OR arthroplasty OR hip replacement OR femoral replacement OR knee replacement OR knee injury OR osteoarthritis OR THA OR TKA) AND (randomized or randomised OR randomly OR random) AND Intervention: iniprol or kontrikal OR CloSys OR Glubran OR Gluetiss OR Ifabond OR Indermil OR LiquiBand OR Octafil OR Octanate OR Optivate OR Quixil OR Tisseel OR Tissucol OR TissuGlu OR Thrombi‐Gel OR Vivostat OR Voncento OR Wilate OR Wilnativ OR Wilstart 5. Other Terms: (hip surgery OR knee surgery OR arthroplasty OR hip replacement OR femoral replacement OR knee replacement OR knee injury OR osteoarthritis OR THA OR TKA) AND (randomized or randomised OR randomly OR random) AND Title: hemostasis OR hemostatic OR antifibrinolytic OR factor OR fibrinogen OR thrombin OR collagen OR gelatin OR cellulose 6. Other Terms: (hip surgery OR knee surgery OR arthroplasty OR hip replacement OR femoral replacement OR knee replacement OR knee injury OR osteoarthritis OR THA OR TKA) AND (randomized or randomised OR randomly OR random) AND Condition: bleeding OR hemorrhage OR blood loss OR bloodloss 7. 1 OR 2 OR 3 OR 4 OR 5 OR 6 [N.B. combined and de‐duplicated in EndNote]

## WHO ICTRP
1. Title OR Condition: hip surgery OR knee surgery OR arthroplasty OR hip replacement OR femoral replacement OR knee replacement OR knee injury OR osteoarthritis OR TKA OR THA Intervention: hemostatic OR antifibrinolytic OR tranexamic OR EACA OR aminocaproic OR aprotinin OR desmopressin OR DDAVP OR factor viia OR novoseven OR aryoseven OR fibrinogen OR haemocomplettan OR Riastap OR Fibryna OR Fibryga OR factor XIII OR Tretten
2. Title OR Condition: hip surgery OR knee surgery OR arthroplasty OR hip replacement OR femoral replacement OR knee replacement OR knee injury OR osteoarthritis OR TKA OR THA Intervention: sealant OR adhesive OR collagen OR cellulose OR gelatin OR glue OR matrix OR sponge OR fleece OR foam OR scaffold OR patch OR sheet OR gelfoam OR chitosan OR hydrogel OR polyethylene glycol OR tachocomb OR BioGlue OR Surgicel OR Veriset
3. Title OR Condition: hip surgery OR knee surgery OR arthroplasty OR hip replacement OR femoral replacement OR knee replacement OR knee injury OR osteoarthritis OR TKA OR THA Intervention: Evithrom OR Floseal OR Tachosil OR Cryoseal OR Hemopatch OR Progel OR Duraseal OR Coseal OR FocalSeal OR Algosterile OR TraumaStat OR HemCon OR ChitoFlex OR Celox OR QuikClot OR WoundStat OR Vitagel OR TachSeal OR bonewax OR hemasorb OR ostene
4. Title OR Condition: hip surgery OR knee surgery OR arthroplasty OR hip replacement OR femoral replacement OR knee replacement OR knee injury OR osteoarthritis OR TKA OR THA Intervention: iniprol or kontrikal OR CloSys OR Glubran OR Gluetiss OR Ifabond OR Indermil OR LiquiBand OR Octafil OR Octanate OR Optivate OR Quixil OR Tisseel OR Tissucol OR TissuGlu OR Thrombi‐Gel OR Vivostat OR Voncento OR Wilate OR Wilnativ OR Wilstart
5. Title OR Condition: hip surgery OR knee surgery OR arthroplasty OR hip replacement OR femoral replacement OR knee replacement OR knee injury OR osteoarthritis OR TKA OR THA Intervention OR Title: hemostasis OR hemostatic OR antifibrinolytic OR factor OR fibrinogen OR thrombin OR collagen OR gelatin OR cellulose
6. 1 OR 2 OR 3 OR 4 OR 5 [N.B. combined and de‐duplicated in EndNote]

## Appendix 3. Results of network meta‐analysis
https://ora.ox.ac.uk/objects/uuid:4d1c666f-22a0-447d-8b8b-c9b30e291d81

## Appendix 4. Interventions of interest by ATC code
 
Abbreviation ATC: anatomical therapeutic chemical

## Data and analyses
 

## Characteristics of studies

## Characteristics of included studies [ordered by study ID]
 

## Characteristics of excluded studies [ordered by study ID]
 

## Characteristics of studies awaiting classification [ordered by study ID]
 

## Characteristics of ongoing studies [ordered by study ID]
 

## Differences between protocol and review
The protocol for the review was prospectively published in 2019 ( ). This review deviates from the protocol in the following ways:
1. Definition of "Red cell transfusions up to 30 days post‐surgery (units)" outcome
In hindsight, this definition was ambiguous. In the review, under this definition, we recorded the mean number of red blood cell transfusions.
2. Definition of outcomes
Following advice from the Cochrane Injuries editorial base, we have changed the primary outcome from "Proportion of people needing allogeneic blood transfusion" to "Risk of allogeneic blood transfusion", and we defined more clearly the secondary outcome of adverse events as the "risk of" an adverse event.
2. No thromboembolic events
Many of the included papers reported that in their study there were ‘no thromboembolic events’. We have taken that to mean that both pulmonary embolism and deep vein thrombosis events were zero.
3. Intention‐to‐treat (ITT)
In some papers, it was not explicitly stated whether ITT analysis was done or not. In these situations, we looked at the numbers in the study flowchart, as well as the data, to assess how the analyses were conducted.
4. Definition of "mean number of transfusions"
When considering the data for this outcome in preparation for the network meta‐analyses, we excluded any studies where the mean and/or standard deviation was 0. This was done following guidance from an experienced statistician (Prof N Welton). We were also advised to exclude the mean number of transfusions data from any studies where the median interquartile range was reported, as this denotes skewed data.
5. Definition of ‘N’
In the protocol, it was not clearly explained that for the "Mean number of transfusions" outcome, N was used to describe the number of patients randomised and not the number of patients transfused.
6. Network meta‐analysis (NMA) software
We used BUGSnet v1.1.0 (an R package for Bayesian network meta‐analysis) to perform the network meta‐analyses rather than Stata as we had stated in the protocol. This choice was made because we preferred a Bayesian approach.
7. Rounding up of doses
When inputting pairwise data into RevMan, we categorised study data by comparison, outcome and then dose. Where possible, we tried to divide studies into 1 g, 2 g, 3 g or more than 3 g options. Sometimes this categorisation did not work; in these situations, we rounded up doses. This was done consistently amongst the studies where this was a problem.
8. Sensitivity and subgroup analysis
In the protocol we stated that we would perform the main analysis only with trials at low risk of bias, but we felt that we should conduct the main analysis with all trials included and then perform a sensitivity with trials at low risk of bias, as this approach is more commonly used. In the event, however, we decided not to do this because it breaks the network in such a way that we cannot directly compare results, and also because the trials were generally of good quality, so it was not expected to make a difference to our conclusions.
Similarly, we have not produced any subgroup analyses as there were not enough data for a reliable analysis.

## Contributions of authors
Victoria N Gibbs (VNG), Rita Champaneria (RC), Antony JR Palmer (AJRP), Carolyn Dorée (CD), Susan J Brunskill (SJB), Lise J Estcourt (LJE), Josie Sandercock (JS), Louise J Geneen (LJG), Catherine Kimber (CK)
Conceiving the review: LJE
Co‐ordinating the review: VNG, RC
Development or design of methodology; NW
Undertaking manual searches: CD, VNG, RC
Screening search results: VNG, RC, CK
Organising retrieval of papers: VNG, RC, CK
Screening retrieved papers against inclusion criteria: VNG, RC, CK
Appraising quality of papers: VNG, RC, CK
Abstracting data from papers: VNG, RC, CK
Writing to authors of papers for additional information: VNG, RC
Translating non‐English papers: RC
Obtaining and screening data on unpublished studies: VNG, RC, CK
Managing data for the review: VNG, RC, JS
Entering data into Review Manager 5 (RevMan 5): RC, JS
Analysing RevMan statistical analysis not using RevMan 5: VNG, JS
Performing other statistical analysis not using RevMan 5: VNG, JS
Interpreting data: VNG, RC, JS, LJE
Making statistical inferences: VNG, RC, JS, LJE
Writing the review: VNG, RC, CD, SJB, LJE, JS, LJG, CK
Securing funding for the review: LJE
Serving as guarantor for the review: LJE
Taking responsibility for reading and checking the review before submission: VNG, RC, AJRP, CD, SJB, LJE, JS, LJG, CK

## Sources of support

## Internal sources
NHS Blood and Transplant, Research and Development, UK
Funded the work of the Systematic Review Initiative (SRI)

## External sources
Cochrane Injuries Group, UK
Provided editorial support
National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Cochrane Programme Grant, UK
This review was funded by the National Institute for Health and Care Research (NIHR) Evidence Synthesis Programme (16/114/04) Programme Grant Scheme. This review was also supported by NIHR via Cochrane Infrastructure funding to Cochrane Injuries. The views expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the NIHR or the Department of Health and Social Care, NHS Blood and Transplant or the National Health Service.

## Declarations of interest
Victoria N Gibbs: funded by an NIHR Cochrane Programme Grant
Rita Champaneria: funded by an NIHR Cochrane Programme Grant
Antony JR Palmer: none known
Carolyn Dorée: none known
Susan J Brunskill is an editor of Cochrane Haematology (Methodologists and Clinicians); she has not been involved in the editorial process for the article.
Lise J Estcourt is a Co‐ordinating Editor of Cochrane Haematology; she has not been involved in the editorial process for the article.
Josie Sandercock: none known
Louise J Geneen: none known
Catherine Kimber: none known