1888jahaJournal of the American Heart Association: Cardiovascular and Cerebrovascular DiseaseJ Am Heart AssocWileyPMC1205443812054438120544383971941410.1161/JAHA.124.038782Thrombosis, Translational Medicine, and Biomarker Research: Moving the Needle
ShawJoseph RMD, MSc NoppStephanMD, MSc StavikBenedicteMSc, PhD YoukhanaKimberleyMD MichelsAlison LMD, PhD KennesSoetkinMD RakJanuszMD, PhD ten CateHugoMD, PhD 
1
Department of Medicine, University of Ottawa, and The Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, Canada
2
Clinical Division of Hematology and Hemostaseology, Medical University of Vienna, Austria
3
Department of Hematology and The Research Institute of Internal Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway
4
Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA
5
Department of Surgery, Division of Vascular Surgery, McMaster University, Hamilton, Canada
6
Department of Hematology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium
7
Department of Pediatrics and the Division of Experimental Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, Canada
8
Cardiovascular Research Institute Maastricht, Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands*

Correspondence to: Joseph R. Shaw, MD, MSc, FRCPC, Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology, The Ottawa Hospital, General Campus, 501 Smyth Road, Box 201A, Ottawa ON K1H 8L6, Canada. Email: josshaw@toh.ca

*J. R. Shaw and S. Nopp are co‐first authors.
✉Corresponding author.
24122024141e038782e038782652025© 2024 The Author(s). Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley.This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited and is not used for commercial purposes.

## Abstract
Arterial and venous thromboembolism are leading causes of morbidity and death worldwide. Despite significant advances in the diagnosis, prognostication, and treatment of thrombotic diseases over the past 3 decades, the adoption of findings stemming from translational biomarker research in clinical practice remains limited. Biomarkers provide an opportunity to enhance our understanding of pathophysiological processes and optimize treatment strategies. They hold the promise of revolutionizing patient care. Still, this potential remains untapped, and several factors impede their use for near‐patient applications. We sought to provide an overview of biomarker research in arterial and venous thromboembolic disease. We then aimed to discuss key barriers to the broader clinical implementation of biomarker research and highlight promising strategies to overcome them. We emphasize the merits of translational and implementation science to bridge the gaps from bench to bedside. Innovative trial design, data sharing, and collaborative efforts between academia and industry will be essential. Purposeful regression methodology using rational conceptual framework design, causal mediation analysis, and artificial intelligence might better leverage the use of observational data. Dedicated translational science training programs geared toward educating physicians on the appropriate measurement, interpretation, and integration of biomarker data in clinical practice should foster endorsement by frontline physicians. Finally, we make the case in support of a paradigm shift in cardiovascular medicine. Improved recognition of biomarker research and a greater emphasis on mechanistic evidence can better equip clinicians to deal with the uncertainty that defines the practice of thrombosis medicine.
Keywords: biomarkers, cardiovascular diseases, evidence‐based medicine, implementation science, thrombosis, translational science—biomedical

Subject Categories: Biomarkers, Mechanisms, Cerebrovascular Disease/Stroke, Acute Coronary Syndromes, Thrombosis

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoCollection date 2025 Jan 7.

## Nonstandard Abbreviations and Acronyms
APLASantiphospholipid antibody syndrome
ATEarterial thromboembolism
COMPASSCardiovascular Outcomes for People Using Anticoagulation Strategies
MLmachine learning
RPMrisk prediction model
SR/MAsystematic review/meta‐analysis
TFtissue factor
VOYAGER PADVascular Outcomes Study of ASA Along With Rivaroxaban in Endovascular or Surgical Limb Revascularization for Peripheral Artery Disease
Thrombosis and thromboembolism are the principal causes of acute cardiovascular disease, including ischemic stroke, myocardial infarction, and venous thromboembolism (VTE)‐related organ damage. Worldwide, thrombotic diseases are leading contributors to long‐term morbidity and death.
Tremendous progress has been made over the past 30 years with respect to the diagnosis, prognostication, and treatment of VTE. Advanced imaging techniques, numerous risk prediction models (RPMs), enhanced risk stratification, a shift toward outpatient management and an ever‐expanding armamentarium of antithrombotic treatments have yielded real progress with respect to patient‐centered care and tangible improvements in clinically relevant outcomes. , Likewise, advances in the cardiovascular sciences have improved our understanding of the mechanisms underlying atherothrombosis, as well as its diagnosis and management. State‐of‐the‐art imaging modalities enable the early detection of atherothrombotic lesions, while personalized preventive measures are more easily implemented through improved risk stratification. Breakthroughs in antithrombotic therapy have substantially reduced the incidence of arterial thrombotic events. With proof of principle for dual pathway inhibition as a therapeutic strategy targeting both platelet activation and fibrin formation, cardiovascular medicine has refocused its attention on the molecular mechanisms underpinning these pathways, aiming to improve patient outcomes using biomarker‐directed approaches.
The National Institutes of Health Definitions Working Group defines a biomarker as “a characteristic that is objectively measured and evaluated as an indicator of normal biological processes, pathogenic processes, or pharmacological responses to a therapeutic intervention.” To be sure, biomarker research and translational science have played a foundational role in advancing our understanding of physiology, pathobiology, treatment, and disease management as it relates to both VTE and arterial thromboembolism (ATE). Yet the path from bench to bedside is laden with obstacles. The number of biomarkers that have made their way from in vitro biological research–based tools to that of a validated, standardized and clinically actionable assay is concerningly small. Herein, we sought to summarize and discuss the status of biomarker‐based ATE‐ and VTE‐directed research and outline barriers to future discovery. We also aimed to highlight new approaches geared toward revolutionizing the uptake of biomarker research and optimizing implementation in practice.

## Biomarker Discovery, Development, and Clinical Implementation
Mayr and colleagues characterize biomarkers as belonging to 1 of 3 overlapping “types,” corresponding to either mechanistic, clinical, or therapeutic biomarker categories (Figure  ). Applications in a research or clinical setting will often span 2 or 3 of these categories. While Figure  provides a useful conceptual framework with which to classify biomarkers, practical clinical applications generally fall under 4 categories (diagnosis, staging, prognosis, and treatment; Table  ). 

 The typical process (Figure  ) leading to the eventual use of a biomarker in clinical practice involves laboratory‐based discovery, assay standardization, the establishment of reference intervals among healthy and diseased individuals, validation, and ultimately, regulatory approval for clinical use. Biomarker development can span decades and often involves international collaboration between laboratory‐based scientists and clinician investigators. Modern high‐throughput techniques such as the use of microarray and “omics” technologies have accelerated the identification of candidate biomarkers. Validation is a general term used to refer to the process of evaluating the utility and characteristics of a biomarker. Validation can take on a different meaning depending on the stage of biomarker development to which it refers. “Assay validation” refers to the process of evaluating the performance of a biomarker as it relates to measurement itself (eg, reproducibility, precision, accuracy). Biomarkers felt to be mechanistically linked to a pathological process are measured in healthy individuals and individuals with the disease of interest to establish reference intervals and preliminary associations with disease status. The association of biomarker status to a clinically defined outcome is confirmed, first using retrospective methods (eg, sensitivity/specificity in case–control studies), followed by prospective validation. “Statistical validation” focuses on the mathematical performance of a biomarker. This involves measuring the discrimination and calibration of a biomarker (in isolation, or through its inclusion in an RPM). Discrimination refers to the ability of a biomarker to distinguish between “disease” and “no disease,” whereas calibration refers to its ability to correctly predict the probability of disease relative to the observed probability. Prospective validation generally applies mathematical regression and receiver operating characteristic curve analysis to quantify the added utility of a biomarker in the context of known risk factors. Biomarkers are often incorporated into new or existing RPMs and are validated using both an internal and external cohort of patients.
 Therapeutic biomarkers can also be applied in the context of a prospective randomized controlled trial (RCT) as a surrogate end point or as a measure of disease control. The National Institutes of Health Biomarkers Definitions Working Group states that surrogate end points can be considered a subset of all biomarkers and necessitate that the biomarker in question be “reasonably likely, based on epidemiologic, therapeutic, pathophysiologic, or other evidence, to predict clinical benefit.” The use of a surrogate end point can be particularly advantageous when clinical measures relating to the outcome of interest require a long follow‐up period or an unattainably large sample size to detect a statistically significant effect, or are otherwise challenging to quantify reliably (ie, complex end point definitions). For a candidate biomarker to be useful as a surrogate end point, it should account for a substantial proportion of observed variation in a clinical end point (Figure  ). Confounding or treatment effects not captured by the biomarker lower its value as a potential surrogate end point. Although many biomarkers may fall short of these requirements, they may still prove useful by bolstering assessments of efficacy and toxicity, in concert with rigorous clinical evaluation (Figure  ). The US Food and Drug Administration has issued formal guidance on the use of “enrichment strategies” for use in clinical investigations to demonstrate the effectiveness of investigational products. Enrichment strategies are intended to increase the statistical power of a study either by reducing outcome variability, or by increasing absolute or relative effects of the intervention in a high‐risk population. Biomarkers feature prominently among proposed enrichment strategies and can be used to identify participants who are either more likely to experience an outcome event (prognostic enrichment) or benefit from the investigational treatment (predictive enrichment).
 

## Biomarkers in Venous Thromboembolic Disease—Recent Past and Current Applications
The current VTE biomarker landscape reflects the scientific and medical community's understanding of the condition being studied. As thrombosis medicine evolves, so too do concepts, perceived needs, and strategies to monitor disease status. Most efforts geared toward improving VTE‐related patient care have traditionally been linked to effector mechanisms, rather than their corresponding upstream triggers.
The d‐dimer is one of the oldest and most widely used biomarkers in the field of venous thromboembolism (Figure  ). Fibrin degradation products were first characterized in the 1960s and were first postulated to be of potential diagnostic utility by Gaffney in 1972. The discovery of the d‐dimer followed in 1973. Methodology evolved over the course of decades. , , Preliminary attempts at using the d‐dimer as a clinically oriented assay were plagued by challenges bearing an uncanny resemblance to oft‐cited struggles when discussing modern candidate biomarkers. Investigators in the 1980s voiced concerns around specificity, what to consider “normal” (ie, reference range), discrepancies between methodologies and the prohibitive costs associated with new technologies at the time (eg, ELISA). , In 1984, Whitaker et al stated that: “The desirability of a practical assay specific for cross linked fibrin derivatives was first noted by Gaffney, but in the end has been difficult to realize.” , 

 
d‐dimer testing was eventually linked to clinical disorders associated with thrombosis or hyperfibrinolysis. , As the prototypical VTE biomarker, d‐dimer testing is now used to facilitate the clinical diagnosis of VTE, as well as a prognostic tool for VTE prediction. d‐dimer testing is applied in concert with RPM strategies for the diagnosis of VTE (eg, the Wells Score for deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolism), , for VTE risk stratification, and as part of risk enrichment strategies in clinical trials. Importantly, the timeline outlined above, from d‐dimer discovery to clinical implementation and familiarity on the part of clinicians, spans a period of nearly 60 years. The path from bench to bedside was beset with technological hurdles, methodological challenges, and struggles related to implementation.
Coagulation assays, such as the prothrombin time (PT) and activated partial thromboplastin time have played vital roles with respect to therapeutic monitoring of anticoagulant treatments. , The use of the PT to measure the anticoagulant effects of dicoumarol was first reported in 1942 by Allen, Barker, and Waugh, and it was soon adopted as the routine method to monitor the anticoagulant effects of oral vitamin K antagonist therapy. Failure to standardize thromboplastin reagents ultimately generated divergent vitamin K antagonist dosing between European and North American clinical centers, where the use of less sensitive commercial PT reagents was common. North American patients received higher vitamin K antagonist doses than their European counterparts and experienced more bleeding complications. , Attempts at standardizing the PT began in 1962, and after several iterations, culminated in 1983 with the adoption of the international normalized ratio (INR) as the international standard for monitoring vitamin K antagonist therapy. 

Important biomarkers in the context of thromboembolic disease are listed in Figure  . , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , The 1980s and 1990s brought several biomarkers focused on quantifying the activity of thrombin, given its central role in coagulation, platelet activation, and regulation of the activated protein C system. Determination of thrombin–antithrombin complex and prothrombin fragment 1+2 using ELISA were both proposed as in vivo measures of coagulation activation and a “prethrombotic” state. Both prothrombin fragment 1+2 and thrombin–antithrombin complex were eventually linked to clinical thromboembolism. , Measurement of thrombin generation was first reported in 1953. In 1993, Hemker and colleagues established an assay capable of continuously registering thrombin enzymatic activity using defibrinated plasma and a slow‐reacting chromogenic substrate. Significant advances have been made with respect to thrombin generation assay methodology, standardization, and implementation over the past 3 decades. , Measurement of thrombin generation has been instrumental in providing a better characterization of both hyper‐ and hypocoagulability. Altered thrombin generation assay parameters have been linked to both incident and recurrent VTE. , 

 A relationship between blood typing and factor VIII levels was first noted in 1964, and an association between “non‐O” blood types and VTE was subsequently noted in 1969. A formal link between von Willebrand factor, elevated factor VIII levels and thromboembolism was established in the 1990s and further confirmed over the past 20 years. , 

Viscoelastic testing was first described in 1948. Thromboelastography gained popularity throughout the 1960s to 1980s. Initial applications included the care of battlefield trauma patients during the Vietnam War, as well as for monitoring hemostasis during liver transplantation. Rotational thromboelastometry, a modern iteration of thromboelastography, was later introduced in the early 2000s. Both platforms measure clot formation/dissolution in whole blood by continuously applying a rotational force to the developing clot and capturing transmitted forces using an electromechanical transduction system. Viscoelastic methods measure the speed of clot formation, clot strength, and clot lysis. They are frequently referred to as “global coagulation assays” insofar as they simultaneously measure clot formation kinetics (ie, coagulation activation), clot strength (contribution from platelets and fibrinogen), and fibrinolysis. Viscoelastic methods are primarily used to provide a real‐time assessment of coagulation in the bleeding patient and to optimize transfusion support in the context of high‐bleed‐risk scenarios such as cardiac surgery, liver transplantation, or acute traumatic coagulopathy. Viscoelastic testing might also be useful for identifying patients at increased thromboembolic risk and for rapidly detecting clinically relevant direct oral anticoagulant concentrations in blood.
The past 2 decades have been defined by a surge of interest in cancer‐induced hypercoagulability and cancer‐associated thrombosis on the part of both clinicians and researchers. P‐selectin is a cell adhesion receptor, an important mediator of interactions between endothelial cells, platelets, and leukocytes, and might play an important role in stimulating the release of tissue factor (TF)–bearing microparticles from monocytes. P‐selectin has been prospectively associated with an increased risk of VTE, specifically in patients with cancer. Prothrombin fragment 1+2, d‐dimer and peak thrombin generation have all been prospectively associated with an increased risk of cancer‐associated VTE. , Several groups have investigated the role of platelet‐derived microparticles in thrombosis, and specifically TF‐bearing microparticles, in the context of cancer‐mediated hypercoagulability. Microparticles are small membrane‐derived vesicles and can contain the procoagulant phospholipid phosphatidylserine (phosphatidylserine microparticles), as well as tissue factor (TF microparticles). Both platelet‐derived phosphatidylserine microparticles and TF microparticles display procoagulant properties. Higher levels of both platelet‐derived phosphatidylserine microparticles and tumor‐derived TF microparticles have been observed in case–control studies of patients with cancer‐associated VTE, albeit not in all cancers. Indeed, cancer‐associated thrombosis offers an interesting case in point that clinically similar cases of VTE may have vastly different pathomechanisms and triggering events, which increasingly gravitate toward disease‐related changes in the expression of thromboinflammatory factors, often referred to as the “coagulome”. 

## Biomarkers in Arterial Thromboembolic Disease—Future Potential and Possibilities
Arterial thromboembolism manifests as myocardial infarction, ischemic stroke, and systemic embolism, each driven by unique pathomechanisms. The pivotal role of biomarkers in atherothrombosis is underscored by current guidelines endorsing a class I recommendation for the use of high‐sensitivity cardiac troponin in diagnosing acute myocardial infarction. However, the applicability of biomarkers varies by manifestation; for instance, the utility of current clinical biomarkers in diagnosing ischemic stroke and systemic embolism remains limited. Prognostication of arterial events relies primarily on lipid and cholesterol markers, which represent only 1 component of atherothrombosis. Biomarker research has established robust links between atherothrombosis and indicators of tissue damage and organ dysfunction (eg, NT‐proBNP [N‐terminal pro‐B‐type‐natriuretic peptide], lactate dehydrogenase), systemic inflammation (C‐reactive protein, interleukin‐6), and metabolic biomarkers (oxidized low‐density lipoprotein, lipoprotein [a]). Coagulation‐specific biomarkers, the focus of the present article, provide important insight into underlying thromboembolic mechanisms and deepen our understanding of the complex interplay between platelets, coagulation, and fibrinolysis. In contrast to VTE, biomarker‐based risk stratification in ATE is a relatively new phenomenon.
Platelet‐derived biomarkers are integral to elucidating the pathophysiology of arterial thromboembolism, offering critical insights into the dynamics of platelet activation, aggregation, and their role in inflammation. Given their pivotal role in atherothrombosis, platelets, in addition to their corresponding microvesicular remnants and release products, have been studied in patients with both acute and chronic arterial vascular disease. Upon activation, platelets release >300 proteins, many of which have been scrutinized as potential biomarkers for arterial events. Among these, soluble CD40 ligand, soluble glycoprotein VI, soluble P‐selectin, soluble C‐type lectin‐like receptor 2 and thromboxane B2 are promising candidates. Soluble CD40L, released from activated platelets, mediates interactions between platelets, leukocytes, and the vascular endothelium. Soluble glycoprotein VI, indicative of platelet activation, has been linked to thrombotic events like myocardial infarction and ischemic stroke. , Soluble P‐selectin enhances leukocyte adhesion and platelet aggregation and acts as a marker for both thrombosis and inflammation. Soluble C‐type lectin‐like receptor 2, derived from activated platelets, seems to be particularly relevant to the pathophysiology underpinning acute ischemic stroke, whereas thromboxane B2, an inactive metabolite of thromboxane A2, shows potential as a marker for measuring the efficacy of acetylsalicylic acid. Von Willebrand factor mediates platelet adhesion to damaged endothelium, a crucial step in early thrombus formation, with some studies suggesting an association between increased von Willebrand factor levels and the risk of ischemic stroke. Similarly, low ADAMTS‐13 activity (a protease that cleaves von Willebrand factor) has been linked to an increased risk of stroke. β‐Thromboglobulin, another platelet marker, has been positively correlated with both the timing of acute stroke, as well as the severity of clinical outcomes following stroke, indicating its role in the acute phase of ischemic events. Taken together, this research highlights the untapped potential of soluble platelet biomarkers to assess thrombotic risk. Whether these statistical associations eventually translate to predictable and actionable biological pathways remains to be determined.
In addition to their role in VTE pathophysiology, platelet‐derived microparticles also appear to be very relevant to atherogenesis and arterial thrombosis. Platelet‐derived microparticles play key roles in coagulation, inflammation, and angiogenesis, and have been found to correlate with cardiovascular risk and atherosclerotic disease severity. They can exacerbate atherosclerosis by promoting cellular adhesion and proliferation, stimulating coagulation, and inducing arterial thrombus formation. Microparticles are now also recognized as promising therapeutic targets in atherothrombotic disease. 

Several coagulation factors have been linked to arterial cardiovascular disease risk. Meta‐analyses have established that elevated levels of fibrinogen, d‐dimer, and tissue plasminogen activator correlate with an increased risk of coronary artery disease and stroke. Genetic studies also suggest coagulation factor gene polymorphisms for factors II, V, and VII may causally mediate coronary artery disease. Coagulation proteases typically work in concert as part of the coagulation cascade, leading to the production of fibrin and secondary hemostasis. However, distinct protease properties beyond their effects on coagulation may also be relevant in relation to atherogenesis and coronary artery disease. A recent body of research has focused on the pleiotropic effects of coagulation factors and the resulting crosstalk between the coagulation cascade, platelet activation, and endothelial function/dysfunction. Both thrombin and factor Xa might contribute to atherothrombotic pathophysiology through their effects on protease activated receptor–mediated cell signaling. The COMPASS (Cardiovascular Outcomes for People Using Anticoagulation Strategies) and VOYAGER PAD (Vascular Outcomes Study of ASA Along With Rivaroxaban in Endovascular or Surgical Limb Revascularization for Peripheral Artery Disease) trials found that a dual‐pathway inhibition strategy with low‐dose rivaroxaban and acetylsalicylic acid leads to improved cardiovascular outcomes in patients with stable atherosclerotic vascular disease, or following peripheral arterial revascularization, respectively. , Ongoing research linking factor XI to thromboembolic events has culminated in current phase III trials investigating the role of factor XI inhibition for cardioembolic and noncardioembolic stroke and acute coronary syndrome. Prothrombotic and atherogenic disease mechanisms have been explored using biomarkers leveraging coagulation factor activation (factors X and XI in particular), yielding insight into regulatory pathways and providing clues about novel atherothrombotic treatment strategies.
Unfortunately, few of these biomarkers have reached the clinical laboratory due to a lack of commercial diagnostic development. Commercial ELISAs for prothrombin fragment 1+2 and thrombin–antithrombin complex have been available for decades but have fallen short of routine use due to high cost and lack of recognized applicability in the clinical laboratory. On the other hand, d‐dimer testing appears to stand out as a promising atherothrombotic biomarker. In fact, high d‐dimer levels consistently predict an increased risk of severe atherosclerotic complications. , A particularly well‐documented example is its predictive value for ischemic stroke in patients with atrial fibrillation, an association that persists even when accounting for anticoagulation status, underscoring its potential in clinical risk assessment and management.
Testing for antiphospholipid antibody syndrome (APLAS) typically includes anti‐β‐2 glycoprotein I and anticardiolipin serology testing, as well as testing for the presence of lupus anticoagulant. The association between APLAS positivity and VTE/ATE is well established. It has taken clinicians and scientists nearly 60 years to better understand the pathophysiology underlying these antibodies, although much remains to be understood in terms of their optimal use in the clinic (Figure  ). Studies have consistently found that direct oral anticoagulants provide inadequate antithrombotic protection in a subset of patients with APLAS, particularly when it comes to preventing recurrent ATE. , 

Although many studies have applied thrombin generation toward VTE risk prediction, a more recent and growing body of literature also supports a link between thrombin generation assay parameters, cardiovascular disease, ATE risk, and death. Similarly, thromboelastography/rotational thromboelastometry might have a future role in evaluating arterial thromboembolic risk and tailoring antithrombotic therapy in patients with cardiovascular disease. 

## Biomarkers in Clinic—Nowhere to Be Found?
A search of the literature using the terms marker, biomarker, thrombosis, and thromboembolism reveals over 121 862 publications since 1942 dedicated to biomarker discovery, biomarker–outcome linkage, validation, or the incorporation of a biomarker into an RPM (Figure  ). Despite more than half a century of research and widespread interest in the biomarker concept, few biomarkers have ascended to the rank of a clinically implemented test. Among the laboratory biomarkers listed in the preceding section, those routinely implemented in clinical practice are generally limited to the d‐dimer, coagulation testing (eg, PT/INR) and APLAS testing. These parameters are, for the most part, used either for screening, diagnosis, and disease classification or for therapeutic monitoring (Figure  ), and usually with an implicit expectation that the result will alter clinical management in some way.
For the most part, these clinically recognized biomarkers started out as mechanistic markers of disease. Indeed, the d‐dimer, now widely recognized as an indispensable diagnostic tool in VTE management, was initially limited to the research laboratory. Fibrin degradation products were first measured as mechanistic biomarkers of fibrinolysis. , Although the potential diagnostic utility of fibrin degradation products was first postulated in 1972, it took nearly 60 years of laboratory and clinical innovation before it positioned itself as a clinically implementable tool (Figure  ). Other biomarkers, such as the lupus anticoagulant, were incidentally discovered through an inverted process, whereby the association with clinical illness was observed first by a screening test for an unrelated disease entity (eg, syphilis), and mechanistic associations with thrombotic pathophysiology followed thereafter. 

This begs the question: What distinguishes these clinically implemented biomarkers from those confined to the research laboratory? Why have some been put into practice, whereas others continue to be relegated to mechanistic and theoretical applications? And why, despite seemingly exponential growth in discovery and exploration (Figure  ), are more biomarkers not being recognized by clinicians?

## Barriers to Clinically Actionable Biomarker Research
Important barriers to biomarker research are outlined in Table  . Biomarker discovery continues at a frantic pace. This enormous body of preclinical research has, to some extent, failed to have tangible impact on the clinical paradigm. 

 Many biomarkers mentioned in this article have been linked to several disease states or phases of treatment. Biomarkers, by virtue of their relationship to complex biological processes, might lack the specificity needed for near‐patient applications. Some biomarkers might capture only a fraction of the effects of the natural history of disease or of a therapeutic intervention (Figure  ). Early candidate biomarkers might be biologically interesting to the fundamental scientist but hold little practical value to the clinician. While the d‐dimer has achieved widespread acceptance as a useful diagnostic tool, other common physiologic (eg, pregnancy) or pathophysiologic processes (eg, inflammation) contribute to its lack of specificity and have hampered its implementation in other settings (eg, inpatient VTE diagnosis). Individual biomarkers might confer little added value to more easily accessible “clinical predictors” (eg, sex, age, or site of VTE for predicting risk of recurrent VTE). Biomarkers with a strong relative link to the diagnosis of interest (eg, odds ratio ≥3.0) might still be insufficient to identify patients at sufficiently high risk in absolute terms to benefit from prophylactic treatments. This can be seen in how the clinical perception of genetic thrombophilia testing (eg, factor V Leiden) has shifted over the past half‐century from scientific exuberance, to uncertainty in practice, to “diagnostic nihilism.” 

From a conceptual perspective, early research successes in thrombosis and hemostasis (eg, predictable associations between TF and cancer‐associated thrombosis) might have driven clinician scientists toward an incrementally specialized and potentially narrow mindset. Recent discovery and implementation efforts among thrombosis specialists have focused on coagulation itself, rather than upstream biological triggers or underlying predisposing pathological conditions (eg, tumor biology and immunothrombosis in the setting of cancer‐associated thrombosis). Biological targets beyond coagulation can sharply demarcate VTE risk in some patient subgroups. Research efforts focused solely on coagulation‐related pathophysiology would have missed associations such as these. Specialization may contribute to field‐specific perspectives and reinforce cognitive biases surrounding pathophysiology, diagnosis, and treatment.
Indeed, slow progress might also relate to the siloed nature of research along the translational medicine continuum. Scientists focused on fundamental research might be unaware of important logistical, financial, or “real‐world” barriers to implementing their findings. On the other hand, the potential clinical impact of fundamental scientific discoveries may not be immediately apparent to clinician scientists and frontline physicians. The result is a breakdown of communication across phases of discovery, translation, and implementation. Most scientists specialize in a specific phase of biomarker development (Figure  ). Fundamental researchers focus on preclinical research (phase 1) and assay validation (phase 2). The expertise of clinician scientists and epidemiologists lies in retrospectively/prospectively establishing clinical associations (phases 3 and 4, respectively). Clinical trialists leverage these findings to identify and optimize therapeutic interventions (phase 5). Scientific complexity, scrutiny and regulation are growing like never before. This necessarily forces researchers to specialize in parts of this process. In drug discovery and development, this phenomenon has been described as a “divide between research and development,” whereby successful candidate pharmaceutical compounds are “thrown over the fence” from the “discovery department” to the “development department.” Clinical considerations are not properly accounted for during the early stages of preclinical discovery. 

At the most basic level, the need for an “assay” for biomarker measurement creates an important barrier and adds complexity to the implementation of biomarker research. Assays developed by academic research groups might lack standardization and employ ad‐hoc “in‐house” reagents. They might leverage processes and technologies that are not widely available. These factors might affect the reproducibility of results and undermine the perception of research findings by the scientific community. Assay commercialization by diagnostic companies can in turn increase costs and hinder information sharing because of proprietary reagent systems and assay platforms. Competing assay platforms might each have their own set of reagents, quality controls, calibrators, and reference ranges. From an implementation perspective, one of the most frequently cited reasons for not using biomarkers in clinical practice is the lack of access to the equipment needed to run the assay. Many biomarker assays are available only at research laboratories. Cost, slow turnaround times, and the need for specialized training can all limit the clinical use of a biomarker. Limited experience with interpreting the results of new assays can sow confusion among early adopters and instill skepticism in the broader clinical community.
It might be surprising to recognize that the most important barrier to the adoption of biomarker research could in fact be the present‐day epistemological framework applied by clinicians to rationalize, interpret, and implement research findings. Evidence‐based medicine (EBM), the paradigm for the practice of modern medicine, is grounded in a data‐driven approach to diagnosis and treatment. EBM aims to ensure that systematic and methodologically rigorous approaches are used to appraise the validity of clinical research findings. In 1992, this modern paradigm was contrasted with “The Former Paradigm” in a seminal paper by the Evidence‐Based Medicine Working Group. They describe this former paradigm as being guided by “unsystematic observations” from clinical experience and highlight that the study of basic mechanisms of disease and pathophysiologic principles are insufficient to guide clinical practice. The skills of “problem defining, searching, evaluating, and applying original medical literature” and the critical appraisal of this literature form the core tenets of modern EBM‐based practice. This is best exemplified by the “EBM pyramid,” which hierarchizes study design on the basis of the likelihood of bias. The RCT and systematic reviews/meta‐analyses (SR/MA) sit atop the pyramid. Basic scientific studies are often relegated to the base. Pyramid‐based evidence structures imply increasing validity of results at higher levels of the pyramid. However, they also serve to emphasize that the lower levels of the pyramid are least preferred in practice, partly because they require greater expertise to appraise and apply. Some have questioned this hierarchy and have recognized that this ranking of study design can, at times, be overly simplistic, reductionist, and problematic. , SR/MAs in particular have recently come under scrutiny. Mathematically merging a large body of research and the impression of strength in numbers are appealing on paper. Reality often fails to match these ideals. RCTs regularly prioritize internal over external validity and suffer from selection bias. Meta‐analysis increases precision but will not overcome bias, and pooled data can obscure findings. SR/MAs are quick to carry out and may be published in higher impact journals despite questionable methodological rigor and appropriateness of combining heterogenous data. , RCTs and SR/MAs often generate discrepant results. Findings depend on the approach. Discordant clinical results might be dismissed as natural and expected. Yet discrepant results in the context of biomarker research are blamed on the assay or chalked up to the inapplicability of the measure.
This “EBM absolutism” is defined by a mechanical and reflexive misuse of the EBM pyramid and its implied hierarchy of quality to dismiss some forms of evidence and overvalue others (ie, RCTs and meta‐analyses). This same phenomenon has been referred to by Greenhalgh and colleagues as the “EBM orthodoxy,” where probabilistic and epidemiological evidence dominate and the kinds of evidence which help establish causal mechanisms are dismissed. Ironically, “EBM absolutism” may have contributed over the past several decades to a culture of skepticism and conservatism among physicians, whereby any line of inquiry that falls short of an RCT or SR/MA, including preclinical and biomarker research, is seen as subpar and irrelevant.

## The Way Forward: Bench to Bedside—Accelerating Discovery, Knowledge Translation, and Clinical Implementation
Omics technologies have enabled high‐throughput profiling of biological signatures at scale, including epigenetic, genetic, transcriptomic, and proteomic profiling. These technologies have accelerated biomarker discovery but pose a challenge for classical statistical methods such as simple frequentist comparisons (eg, t test or ANOVA) or regression adjustment. Conventional approaches assume specific data distributions (ie, normality) and these are often missing in complex or large biomarker data sets. Classical frequentist approaches are well suited for simple directed comparisons and for testing well‐defined hypotheses specified a priori. These methods cannot handle high‐dimensional data or identify complex nonlinear associations. Multiple testing in the context of frequentist statistics is discouraged due to the possibility of false discovery (ie, type I error rate or “α”). This inherently limits the suitability of these approaches for analyzing biomarker data. Artificial intelligence, and machine learning (ML) in particular, might provide solutions to these obstacles. ML algorithms can identify patterns in large data sets and can be used to categorize patients or predict clinical outcomes on the basis of data input. Unsupervised ML models can be used for exploratory analysis to discover patterns or associations in the data that may not be obvious using other methods, particularly in the absence of prior knowledge or assumptions. In turn, supervised ML models are first trained using labeled data and can then be used for outcome prediction, disease categorization, or to predict therapeutic responses using new data input. Several ML algorithms have been applied toward VTE diagnosis/prognostication and the prediction of bleeding complications related to antithrombotic therapy. , Explainable artificial intelligence platforms can confer human interpretable (and trustable) explanations to complex “black box” model outputs. Explainable artificial intelligence can also contribute to mechanistic insight by first identifying novel and potentially useful biological mechanisms, which can then be validated using conventional applied biomarker research. The potential for ML approaches with respect to applied biomarker research in a clinical context remains underexplored.
Translational science seeks to bridge the gaps from preclinical discovery to clinical effectiveness research, to clinical implementation. Translational medicine came about because of the observation that considerable fundamental biomedical discovery has not generated a corresponding increase in new therapies and approaches to managing disease. , It aims to shift the focus of biomedical research away from empirical failure‐prone “trial and error” to “predictive and productive science.” By establishing a road map for future research, translational science can leverage biomarker research to avoid some of the common causes of translational research failure. Pragmatic trial design, adaptive trials, Bayesian inference, and improved community engagement might all make better use of biomarker data. Innovative approaches to transparency, data sharing, and intellectual property management can stimulate greater collaboration between academic clinician scientists and industry. Biomarker consortia might help spearhead the push for a greater role for biomarkers in both academic and pharmaceutical research. Finally, improved translational science training programs for academic clinicians are needed. These programs should focus on teaching frontline physicians how to best understand, interpret, and use biomarker data. This includes accounting for the effects of clinical factors (eg, anticoagulation status) on biomarker measurement and how to best apply techniques such as conceptual framework design, the use of directed acyclic graphs, purposeful regression adjustment, and the development of pragmatic RPMs. Finally, training programs should try to address what seems to be an increasingly inward looking and conservative approach to medical discovery. Collaboration across fields of inquiry (eg, immunothrombosis) and a greater emphasis on new ideas can shift biomarker research away from the unproductive narratives currently entrenched in clinical medicine.
Implementation science, the scientific study of methods to promote the systematic uptake of research findings and other evidence‐based practices into routine clinical work, will play a growing role in accelerating the adoption of findings stemming from biomarker research and address the “research‐to‐practice” gap. Considering implementation and deployment early in the translational process might better identify biomarker targets with a greater likelihood of eventual clinical utility. Biomarker development efforts that consider implementation from the outset (“designing for implementation”) and acknowledge the “centrality of behavior” among clinicians may have a higher chance at success. , Hybrid effectiveness–implementation study designs and improved reporting of biomarker implementation methods in clinical studies (eg, sample collection and processing, integration with existing clinical workflow processes) can accelerate fruitful discovery, enhance applicability, mitigate replication failure and can provide valuable information to clinical leaders on whether biomarker assays warrant adoption in practice. 

“EBM absolutism,” while well intentioned, fails to recognize that many clinical questions may never be answered using conventional EBM‐based approaches. An outcome of interest might be so rare that achieving adequate statistical power to detect a difference in an RCT is near impossible. Questions focused on the severest forms of disease (eg, high‐risk pulmonary embolism) or complex processes (eg, hemostasis) might not be easily answerable using clinical end points. What's worse, they may be answered incorrectly. Guyatt et al acknowledged in their pivotal paper on EBM that “many aspects of clinical practice cannot, or will not, ever be adequately tested.” They emphasize that “clinicians must be ready to accept and live with uncertainty and to acknowledge that management decisions are often made in the face of relative ignorance of their true impact.”
On this basis, we propose that the careful reintegration of “mechanistic evidence” can help deal with the uncertainty that defines cardiovascular medicine. Mechanistic evidence includes a range of study designs, such as in vitro analysis, biomedical imaging, autopsy data, animal experiments, engineering, and simulation studies. , This includes biomarker research. The need for a greater recognition of mechanistic evidence in EBM has been highlighted by others. , , , Goodman and Gerson have proposed a mechanistic framework model to evaluate the evidential weight of mechanistic knowledge in EBM. Parkkinen et al define the principles of mechanistic evidence, contextualize its importance in view of contemporary EBM, and provide tools for its appraisal. Parkkinen, Williamson, and Greenhalgh refer to this as “EBM+”, “an approach that systematically considers mechanistic evidence (studies that aim to explain which factors and interactions are responsible for a phenomenon) on a par with probabilistic clinical and epidemiological studies”. , , , The RCT will remain the gold standard to estimate the efficacy of most medical interventions, but when 94% of all medical interventions are not supported by “high‐quality evidence” as conventionally defined using today's EBM framework, a change of course is indicated. 

We propose that the value of a candidate biomarker should not be judged on statistical considerations alone (eg, P value associations with an outcome of interest). Rather, useful biomarkers are grounded in established inferential effects and must be evaluated through the lens of “how an intervention works.” , As Goodman and Gerson report, evidence from a mechanistic standpoint is “information that modifies the probability that an intervention will have a non‐null causal effect on an outcome.” Biomarker data, if implemented cautiously and correctly, can support clinical decision making. A different approach to EBM is needed, one that retains the core tenets of EBM but places a greater emphasis on mechanistic evidence and evidential pluralism. No one kind of evidence stands alone, and there are no shortcuts to the truth. , A shift from EBM to “EBM+” and the integration of findings from well‐designed and high‐quality fundamental scientific research, including biomarker research, could promote a more holistic and rational approach to cardiovascular medicine.

## Conclusions and a Call to Action
Biomarkers are used to delineate biological processes and provide insight into the mechanisms of illness. They can aid in the categorization, stratification, and prognostication of thrombotic disease. Clinical manifestations of disease will always be of primary importance to the clinician. Even so, biomarkers offer an opportunity to enhance our understanding of thrombotic pathophysiology, facilitate diagnosis, and optimize antithrombotic therapy.
The explosive growth of thrombosis biomarker research clearly indicates a powerful interest in using biomarkers and heralds their significant future role in the biological sciences and cardiovascular medicine. The process for laboratory‐based biomarker discovery is well described, but more work needs to be done to ensure that scientific progress makes its way to the clinic. Artificial intelligence, translational science, and implementation science may provide the tools needed to revolutionize cardiovascular medicine. They might change how biomarkers are used in research and applied at the bedside. Scientific methodology has advanced in leaps and bounds since the paradigm of EBM was established in the 1990s. A new approach with a greater emphasis on mechanistic evidence could better leverage the breathtaking scientific innovation of the past 50 years. Another paradigm shift is needed.

## Sources of Funding
Dr Youkhana was supported by a National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute grant T32HL007149‐44. Dr Rak has received support from the Fondation Charles Bruneau and the Fondation CIBC (Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce)—NET Program, as well as a Jack Cole Chair in Pediatric Hematology/Oncology.

## Disclosures
Dr Shaw has received in‐kind laboratory support from Diagnostica Stago. Dr ten Cate has received research support from Bayer and consultancy fees from Astra Zeneca, Galapagos, Novostia, and Alveron; he is shareholder with CoagulationProfile, a Maastricht University spin‐off diagnostic company. All revenues are deposited at the CARIM Institute for Research. The remaining authors have no disclosures to report.

## Supporting information
Figure S1

## Acknowledgments
The lead authors (J.R. Shaw and S. Nopp) affirm that the manuscript is an honest, accurate, and transparent account of the study being reported, and that no important aspects of the study have been omitted. Conceptualization: Drs Shaw, Nopp, Rak, and ten Cate; methodology: Drs Shaw, Nopp, and ten Cate; investigation: Drs Shaw and Nopp; supervision: Drs Rak and ten Cate; writing—original draft: Drs Shaw, Nopp, Stavik, and ten Cate; writing—review and editing: Drs Shaw, Nopp, Stavik, Youkhana, Michels, Kennes, Rak, and ten Cate.

This manuscript was sent to Thomas S. Metkus, MD, PhD, Associate Editor, for review by expert referees, editorial decision, and final disposition.
Supplemental Material is available at https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/suppl/10.1161/JAHA.124.038782

For Sources of Funding and Disclosures, see page 14.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
Figure S1