4614revcardmedReviews in Cardiovascular MedicineRev Cardiovasc MedIMR PressPMC1136699911366999113669993922847410.31083/j.rcm2508281Current Antithrombotic Treatments for Cardiovascular Diseases: A Comprehensive Review
GalantiKristian Di MarinoMario MansourDavide TestaSabrina RossiDavide ScolloClaudio MagnanoRoberta PezziLaura D'AllevaAlberto ForlaniDaniele VitulliPiergiusto PalosciaLeonardo RicciFabrizio RendaGiulia GallinaSabina Di MarcoMassimo TantryUdaya SAcademic EditorAiraksinenJuhaniAcademic Editor
1Department of Neuroscience, Imaging and Clinical Sciences, G. D'Annunzio University of Chieti-Pescara, 66100 Chieti, Italy

2University Cardiology Division, Heart Department, “SS Annunziata” Polyclinic University Hospital, 66100 Chieti, Italy

3Cardiology and ICCU Department, Santo Spirito Hospital, 65124 Pescara, Italy

4Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund University, 21428 Malmö, Sweden
*Correspondence: dimarcom@hotmail.com (Massimo Di Marco)
†These authors contributed equally.
882024258281281392024Copyright: © 2024 The Author(s). Published by IMR Press.This is an open access article under the CC BY 4.0 license.

## Abstract
Antithrombotic therapies (ATT) play a pivotal role in the management of 
cardiovascular diseases, aiming to prevent ischemic events while maintaining a 
delicate balance with the patient’s bleeding risk. Typically, ATT can be 
classified into antiplatelet and anticoagulant therapies. Their application spans 
a broad spectrum of cardiovascular conditions, ranging from ischemic heart 
disease to atrial fibrillation, encompassing venous thromboembolisms and 
innovative structural interventional cardiology procedures. The global burden of 
cardiovascular diseases is steadily increasing, often giving rise to overlapping 
clinical presentations. Accordingly, the adoption of combined pharmacological 
approaches becomes imperative, potentially disrupting the delicate equilibrium 
between ischemic and bleeding risk, thus leading to nuanced pharmacotherapeutic 
pathways. In this context, contemporary investigations strive to identify a 
convergence point that optimizes the duration of medical therapy while addressing 
the need for antithrombotic effects, especially in the context of ischemic heart 
disease. This review aims to comprehensively revisit the main antithrombotic 
strategies in cardiovascular diseases, with the intention of enhancing a 
systematic approach which is key for the effective clinical management of these 
patients. Also, the review will examine the most impactful studies that have 
established the groundwork for current scientific evidence, with acknowledgement 
of special populations. Finally, we will cast a gaze into the future of this 
dynamic and evolving research field, exploring forthcoming perspectives and 
advancements.
Keywords: antithrombotic treatments, anticoagulation therapy, antiplatelet therapy, ischemic risk, bleeding risk, risk-to-benefit ratio, cardiovascular diseases

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2024 Feb 5; Revised 2024 May 7; Accepted 2024 May 14; Collection date 2024 Aug.

## 1. Introduction
Cardiovascular diseases (CVD) represent a leading cause of premature mortality 
and escalating public health care costs [ , ]. Their prevalence is widespread, 
often associated with reduced survival, and continues to exhibit an increasing 
trend. The global CVD burden has nearly doubled from 271 million in 1990 to 523 
million, nowadays [ ]. Given the pivotal role of antithrombotic therapies (ATT) 
in managing these conditions, it becomes clear that understanding these therapies 
is key to optimal clinical management. The primary goal of ATT, often categorized 
into antiplatelet and anticoagulant treatments, is to prevent ischemic events 
while carefully balancing the inevitable bleeding risk for the treated patient. 
The determination of the risk-benefit ratio (RBR) is crucial in this context. 
Tools, such as the assessment of high bleeding risk (HBR) status, aid clinicians 
in evaluating the ischemic and bleeding risks of each patient, based on 
historical data and current clinical status [ ]. The congestive heart failure, 
hypertension, age 75 (double), diabetes mellitus, prior 
stroke/transient ischemic attack (TIA)/thromboembolism (double), vascular disease, age, sex category (female 
gender) ( VASc) score is another widely used tool, particularly 
valuable in stratifying patients with atrial fibrillation to discern the 
necessity for anticoagulant treatment [ , ]. These tools provide significant 
support for clinicians in managing patients with CVD, enabling tailored 
decision-making regarding the initiation, escalation, or de-escalation of 
antithrombotic therapy. Considering the extensive nature of this subject and its 
possible clinical and pharmacological ramifications, the focus of this review is 
delimited to a comprehensive examination of pivotal studies that have shaped the 
modern landscape of antithrombotic management in cardiovascular pathologies.

## 2. Primary Prevention Strategies
Primary prevention via antiplatelet therapy for CVDs is one of the most debated 
topics, considering that it still lacks a unanimous agreement among major 
cardiology societies worldwide.

## 2.1 Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis for Primary Prevention 
Strategies
A collaborative meta-analysis encompassed six major trials from 1988 to 2005, 
involving approximately 95,000 patients treated with low-dose aspirin, except for 
one trial (500 mg), or placebo. It revealed an annual reduction of 12% in major 
adverse cardiovascular events (MACE) in the aspirin group compared to the placebo 
group. Aspirin demonstrated a decrease in major coronary events, primarily driven 
by a reduction in non-fatal myocardial infarctions (MI), without influencing 
mortality due to coronary disease, from any form of stroke or vascular events. 
However, a remarkable increase in significant bleeding events was noted, 
including intracerebral haemorrhage, major gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding, and 
other extracranial bleeding [ ]. In 2016, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force 
analysed a total of 11 trials, highlighting a 22% reduction in MACE within the 
aspirin group [ ]. This reduction was specifically associated with a decrease in 
non-fatal MI over the initial 5 years of treatment using a daily aspirin dosage 
of 75 to 100 mg. However, no recognizable benefit was observed with regard to a 
reduction in cardiovascular or all-cause mortality. Instead, there was a notable 
increase in significant extracranial bleeding events, particularly the GI ones. 
These studies had some limitations, including: unclear baseline stratification of 
cardiovascular risk, variations in baseline characteristics of the study 
populations, variable duration and dosage of aspirin, higher prevalence of 
cigarette smoking or the concurrent use of new antihypertensive drugs or statins. 
For these reasons, it was key to conduct subsequent trials with the additional 
aim of investigating specific populations at cardiovascular risk (Table , Ref. [ , , , ]).
 

## 2.2 ASPREE, ARRIVE, ASCED Controlled Randomized Trial
The ASPREE (Aspirin in Reducing Events in the Elderly) study was conducted by 
randomizing patients aged 70 or older (or 65 years among blacks and 
hispanics in the United States) without CVDs, dementia, or physical disabilities 
to receive either 100 mg of aspirin daily or a placebo. The primary endpoint was 
a composite of death, dementia, or persistent physical disability, and was found 
to be similar in both groups, leading to early study discontinuation (p 
= 0.79). The secondary endpoint of major bleeding occurred in 3.8% of 
participants in the aspirin group, compared to 2.8% in the placebo group (hazard ratio (HR) 
1.38; 95% CI 1.18–1.62; p 
 0.001). Fatal or non-fatal haemorrhagic 
stroke (including subarachnoid haemorrhage) occurred in 0.5% of cases in the 
aspirin group and 0.4% in the placebo group. As a consequence, the low-dose 
aspirin use in older individuals without CVDs did not prolong disability-free 
survival but significantly increased the rate of major bleeding [ ]. This 
information should always be considered in the evaluation of RBR for antiplatelet 
therapy in this particular population. The ARRIVE (A Randomized Trial of 
Induction Versus Expectant Management) trial randomized 55-year-old men 
or 60-year-old women with moderate cardiovascular risk, to receive 
low-dose aspirin or placebo. Patients with a high risk of GI or other bleeding 
and with diabetes were excluded. The primary efficacy endpoint was a composite 
outcome of time to the first occurrence of cardiovascular death, MI, unstable 
angina, stroke, or TIA. The primary endpoint occurred 
in 4.29% of the aspirin group and 4.48% of the placebo group (HR 0.96; 95% CI 
0.81–1.13; p = 0.6038). The overall incidence rate of serious adverse 
events was similar in both treatment groups, nonetheless, with a significant 
increase in mild GI bleeding events in the aspirin group (HR 2.11; 95% CI 
1.36–3.28; p = 0.0007) [ ]. A total of 15,480 participants with 
diabetes but unknown CVD were randomized to receive either 100 mg of aspirin 
daily or a placebo in the ASCED (A Study of Cardiovascular Events in Diabetes) 
trial. At a mean follow-up of 7.4 years, severe vascular events (MI, stroke or 
TIA, or death from any vascular cause) occurred in a significantly lower 
percentage of participants in the aspirin group compared to the placebo group 
(8.5% vs. 9.6%; HR 0.88; 95% CI 0.79–0.97; p = 0.01). While reducing 
the risk of thrombosis, an elevated incidence of major bleeding events was 
observed. These events manifested in 4.1% of participants in the aspirin group 
compared to 3.2% in the placebo group (HR 1.29; 95% CI 1.09–1.52; p 
= 0.003). GI bleedings were predominant, together with extracranial hemorrhages 
[ ]. The US Preventive Services Task Force published a new meta-analysis, 
revealing that the use of low-dose aspirin was significantly associated with a 
reduction in cardiovascular events (major cardiovascular events, total MIs, and 
ischemic strokes), albeit without a significant reduction in CVD-related and 
all-cause mortality, confirming previous data [ ]. Aspirin was found to be 
significantly associated with an increase in haemorrhagic events, including both 
intracranial and extracranial bleeding. Unfortunately, there are no effective 
means to reduce the risk of intracranial bleeding, apart from a thorough analysis 
of the RBR for each patient. GI haemorrhagic events are the major side effects 
associated with aspirin, and evidence has demonstrated that the co-administration 
of proton pump inhibitor drugs reduces their occurrence. For this reason, it is 
advisable to combine these drugs with aspirin [ ].

## 2.3 Current Guidelines and Future Perspectives
The current guidelines of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) are 
restrictive regarding the use of aspirin in primary prevention, which is only 
weakly recommended in diabetic patients and those with multiple cardiovascular 
risk factors and in the absence of clear contraindications (Class IIB, Level of 
Evidence A) [ ]. Conversely, the American College of Cardiology and the American 
Heart Association guidelines have identified age as a discriminating factor: 
patients with high cardiovascular risk without an increased bleeding risk aged 
between 40 and 70 years might be considered for primary prevention, with low 
class of recommendation (Class IIB, Level of Evidence A) [ ]. The US Preventive 
Services Task Force emphasizes the need for cardiologists to assess on a 
case-by-case basis the initiation of primary prevention treatment in patients 
with a cardiovascular risk equal to or greater than 10% over 10 years who do not 
have bleeding risk factors [ ]. While not solely focused on antiplatelet therapy 
efficacy, the recent TIPS-3 study (The International Polycap Study 3) emphasized unclear advantages in cardiovascular 
mortality or event rates, except for stroke incidence; markedly conflicting 
results were observed for hemorrhagic safety outcomes. To note, this trial 
investigated a population at true intermediate cardiovascular risk (mean 
INTERHEART risk score 17.9) [ ]. The divergence in guidelines reflects the 
paucity of robust evidences derived from trials and meta-analyses in the context 
of primary prevention, posing a notable challenge for clinical cardiologists. 
Decisions necessitate meticulous consideration on an individualized basis, with a 
keen focus on the RBR.

## 3. Chronic Coronary Syndrome
Chronic coronary syndrome (CCS), a stable manifestation of the coronary artery 
disease (CAD), shows different clinical manifestations with distinct prognostic 
and therapeutic implications. The classical presentation involves anginal pain 
and dyspnea.

## 3.1 Primary Prevention
In patients with CCS without a history of ACUTE CORONARY SYNDROME (ACS) or 
percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI), primary prevention therapy with aspirin 
receives a weak recommendation (Class IIb, Level of Evidence C) due to 
conflicting meta-analyses [ , ]. The ongoing ASA-IN trial (NCT05347069) results 
may aid in complexity unraveling the benefit of this. The CHARISMA study showed 
that clopidogrel plus aspirin was not significantly more effective than aspirin 
alone [ ]. Therefore, dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) is not indicated in this 
setting.

## 3.2 Long-Term Secondary Prevention
For long-term secondary prevention, aspirin is established as the cornerstone, 
and a 6-month DAPT regimen combining clopidogrel with aspirin is strongly 
recommended for CCS patients undergoing elective PCI [ ]. This strategy is deemed 
optimal for achieving a balance between efficacy and safety across most patients 
[ , , , , , , , ]. Bleeding risk influences therapeutic decisions, with a decreasing 
strength in the recommendation for high bleeding risk patients: a 3-month DAPT is 
suggested for individuals identified as high risk based on a PRECISE-DAPT Score 
 25 (Class IIa, Level A) [ , ]. A shorter duration of DAPT is 
recommended at the lowest level of recommendation, as indicated by the results of 
two trials focused on specific types of drug-eluting stents (DES). However, these 
findings may not be automatically extrapolated to other contemporary DES [ , ]. 
The use of Ticagrelor and Prasugrel in this clinical setting lacks sufficient 
data, limiting their use to specific high-risk situations (e.g., suboptimal stent 
deployment, complex left main stem, or multivessel stenting) or if DAPT cannot be 
employed due to aspirin intolerance (Class IIb, Level C). Therapeutic 
implications may arise from ongoing trials tailoring DAPT, using the 
latest-generation bioresorbable/biodegradable stents (SMART-CHOICEII, 
NCT03119012; PARTHENOPE, NCT04135989; TARGET DAPT, NCT03008083) or intracoronary 
imaging (OPTIMIZE-APT, NCT05418556). In patients with a history of ACS after 12 
months, clopidogrel may be preferred as a default strategy in cases of aspirin 
intolerance (Class I, Level B) or in patients with concomitant peripheral 
arterial disease (PAD), history of stroke, or TIA (Class IIb, Level B), based on 
the results from CAPRIE [ ]. Clopidogrel also shows equal efficacy to ticagrelor 
in symptomatic PAD (EUCLID study) [ ]. A recent review and meta-analysis showed 
that short DAPT followed by P2Y12 inhibitor monotherapy reduces 1-year net 
adverse cardiovascular events (NACE) risk in complex PCI [ ]. It is possible 
that in the future clopidogrel may become the default post-DAPT strategy. 
Additional evidence will emerge from ongoing SMART-CHOICE 3 trial (NCT 04418479). 
Yet, according to current evidence and ESC guidelines on ACS management, aspirin 
is the preferred antithrombotic agent following 12 months of DAPT. Additional 
therapeutic options for prolonging DAPT beyond 12 months depend on the balance 
between ischemic and bleeding risks. Fig. shows the main classes of 
antithrombotic agents and their mechanism of action.
 The PEGASUS TIMI 54 trial assessed two ticagrelor doses (60 mg or 90 mg) in 
post-myocardial infarction patients [ ]. Both doses reduced the primary endpoint 
(cardiovascular death, MI, or stroke) by 15%, but increased clinically 
significant bleeding. The studied population, at high ischemic risk without 
recent bleeding or anticoagulation indications, may not represent all MI 
patients, especially those with different risk profiles [ ]. The DAPT-Score is a 
valid tool that can help physicians understand those patients who can benefit 
from a longer DAPT duration after coronary stent placement. Caution is indicated 
for its use since only modest accuracy in derivation and validation cohorts was 
shown [ ]. Factors for assessing ischemic and bleeding risks are listed in Table (Ref. [ , , ]), along with therapeutic regimens, drug indications, and respective 
recommendation classes according to ESC guidelines. A recent development in 
antithrombotic therapy for CCS is the possibility of using Non-vitamin K or 
direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs) in dual antithrombotic therapy (DAT) [ ]. 
Specifically, the results of the COMPASS trial highlighted how the combination of 
rivaroxaban 2.5 mg and aspirin can reduce the composite endpoint of 
cardiovascular death, MI, or stroke, especially in patients with concomitant PAD 
[ ]. Moreover, rivaroxaban at vascular dose plus aspirin may represent the only 
strategy for CAD patients without prior MI. The selection of a long-term 
secondary prevention strategy hinges significantly on the dynamic assessment of 
bleeding risk, a process that should be conducted at each follow-up. Notably, the 
literature reveals a diversity of criteria employed to define bleeding, thereby 
posing a challenge when attempting to compare various trials to generate high 
levels of evidence [ ]. Table (Ref. [ , , ]) provides an overview of the main characteristics 
and outcomes of these randomized trials, accompanied by the definitions used for 
assessing bleeding risk.
 

## 3.3 Patients with Atrial Fibrillation
Antithrombotic therapy is crucial for patients with CCS and concomitant atrial 
fibrillation (AF), especially considering that 10–15% of AF patients undergo 
PCI for CAD [ ]. Due to the absence of trials with a focus on CCS patients, 
there are few recommendations on the use of antiplatelet agents in the context of 
primary prevention for patients without a history of MI. Similarly, adding 
aspirin or clopidogrel to long-term DOAC-based therapy in CCS patients with 
concomitant AF and a history of MI not undergoing PCI has the lowest 
recommendation class [ ]. This recommendation is contingent on a careful 
assessment of ischemic and bleeding risks and is based on the results of trials 
not originally designed for this purpose [ , ]. In the context of patients 
undergoing PCI, the management becomes more intricate. For peri-procedural 
management, the discontinuation of anticoagulant therapy is not recommended when 
using vitamin K antagonists, while it is indicated when using DOACs. Pretreatment 
with aspirin and clopidogrel (Class I, Level C) is recommended, along with the 
use of intraprocedural unfractionated heparin (UFH) at a standard dose (reduced 
dose in case of vitamin K antagonists (VKA) use). Despite some variability, 
employing triple therapy after PCI, followed by randomization to DOAC and DAPT, 
demonstrated a notable reduction in major or clinically significant bleeding. 
Furthermore, it showed comparable rates of ischemic stroke and had a neutral 
effect on MACE and all-cause mortality compared to dual therapy [ , , , ]. 
Subsequent meta-analyses have consistently affirmed a significant reduction in 
major bleeding with dual vs. triple and DOAC vs. VKA-based therapies, reporting 
similar stroke rates across all treatment arms [ , , , ]. However, these analyses 
indicated higher rates of MI and stent thrombosis with dual vs. triple therapy. 
In particular, two meta-analyses demonstrated a statistically significant 
increase in stent thrombosis with dual vs. triple therapy. Consequently, after 
PCI in a patient with CCS and concomitant AF, the preference is to use DOAC 
rather than VKA (Class I, Level A). The duration of triple therapy is recommended 
for a period ranging from 1 week (Class I, Level A) to 6 months (Class 
IIa, Level C), contingent on the evaluation of bleeding and stent thrombosis 
risk. When choosing between ticagrelor, prasugrel and clopidogrel, it is key to 
consider that ticagrelor and prasugrel are associated with a higher risk of 
bleeding compared to clopidogrel, making their use weakly recommended as an 
alternative to triple therapy. Drawing on findings from the ISAR-TRIPLE and WOEST 
trials, it was established that the duration of dual therapy with DOAC or VKA and 
P2Y12 inhibitors should be 6 months, followed by continued anticoagulant therapy 
alone [ , ]. For patients with an indication for VKA, due to the lower safety 
profile in terms of major or fatal bleeding, VKA dosing should be carefully 
regulated to achieve a target international normalized ratio (INR) of 2.0–2.5 
and Time in Therapeutic Range (TTR) 70% [ ]. Supplementary Table 1 
summarizes the most important randomized control trials (RCT) that have built the 
groundwork for antithrombotic management in CCS.

## 4. Acute Coronary Syndrome
ACS encompasses various conditions, including cases where individuals display 
recent changes in clinical symptoms or signs, regardless of whether there are 
associated modifications on a 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG), and with or 
without acute rises in cardiac troponin (cTn) levels. MI is linked to the release 
of cTn and is determined in accordance to the fourth universal definition of MI. 
Individuals with suspected ACS are usually categorized according to their initial 
ECG findings, for the initial treatment and the subsequent management, in ST 
segment elevation MI (STEMI) and Non-ST segment elevation MI (NSTEMI). Unstable 
angina (UA) is defined as myocardial ischemia at rest or on minimal exertion in 
the absence of acute cardiomyocyte injury or necrosis [ ].

## 4.1 Antithrombotic Therapy
ATT plays a central role in the treatment of ACS. According to the latest 
international guidelines, 12-month DAPT remains the cornerstone therapy for 
patients with ACS, both those managed medically and those undergoing PCI [ ]. 
Several randomized controlled trials and meta-analyses have explored the 
possibility of shortening DAPT compared to the standard 12-month strategy and 
de-escalation strategies. In most cases, patients with a low to intermediate risk 
of ischemia were enrolled, and early monotherapy involved the use of either 
clopidogrel or ticagrelor. Some trials included a comparison with a control arm 
using more extended DAPT than the standard duration. Patients with STEMI were 
often excluded or underrepresented. The TWILIGHT trial investigated the 
impact of ticagrelor monotherapy compared to a combination of ticagrelor and 
aspirin for a duration of 1 year, following an initial 3-month-long DAPT 
involving ticagrelor and aspirin, specifically focusing on clinically relevant 
bleeding outcomes. Bleeding events (Bleeding Academic Research Consortium (BARC) type 2, 3, or 5 bleeding) were 
significantly reduced by omitting aspirin after 3 months, without a signal of 
increased ischaemic risk. STEMI patients were excluded from this trial [ ]. 
The STOPDAPT-2-ACS trial 
explored the efficacy of a brief DAPT approach in patients with acute ACS [ ]. The 
trial did not establish the non-inferiority of the investigational strategy for 
the composite endpoint of cardiovascular or bleeding events [ ]. These findings 
suggest that a systematic approach of very short duration DAPT (i.e., 3 
months) followed by clopidogrel monotherapy may not be a beneficial strategy for 
ACS patients. De-escalation refers to the shift from a potent P2Y12 receptor 
inhibitor class to clopidogrel. The 
TROPICAL-ACS trial 
demonstrated that the switch from prasugrel to clopidogrel after two weeks from 
the acute event, guided by platelet function, is not inferior to one year of 
DAPT with prasugrel in terms of net clinical 
benefit [ ]. In the TOPIC trial, ticagrelor was also assessed alongside prasugrel for de-escalation, but 
without being guided by platelet function (or cytochrome P450 2C19 (CYP2C19) genotyping, as in the 
POPular Genetics trial); in these 
cases, it was observed that the de-escalation strategy reduced bleeding events, 
and the ischemic risk remained unchanged [ ]. This data is crucial for emphasizing 
the importance of evaluating the response to clopidogrel, which, as is 
well-known, varies among patients [ ]. In summary, the duration of DAPT can be 
shortened to three or six months, or even to one month, especially for HBR 
patients. De-escalation strategies can be initiated after a minimum of one month 
of DAPT with a potent P2Y12 inhibitor. Recent evidence supports the possibility 
of continuing antiplatelet therapy after DAPT with a P2Y12 inhibitor, rather than 
aspirin. This approach is an appealing option for clinical practice as it has 
been observed to reduce NACE at 
1 year in patients undergoing PCI [ ]. Cangrelor has been assessed in clinical 
trials for ACS during PCI. Trials such as 
CHAMPION and CHAMPION PHOENIX administered 
cangrelor either before or after PCI comparing it with clopidogrel. Considering 
its proven efficacy in preventing stent thrombosis in P2Y12 receptor 
inhibitor-naïve patients, cangrelor may be considered in these patients 
[ ]. However, it is important to consider that this study not only included 
patients with ACS but also CCS patients.

## 4.2 Anticoagulant Therapy
Anticoagulation plays a 
pivotal role in the initial treatment of ACS and in the peri-procedural 
management of ACS patients undergoing an invasive strategy. 
UFH is the current default choice 
for anticoagulation in the acute setting [ ]. Enoxaparin is a valid alternative 
to UFH: in a meta-analysis comparing 
these two molecules, there was no substantial difference in terms of mortality 
and major bleeding. Therefore, it is currently recommended, albeit with a lower 
level of evidence compared to UFH [ ]. 
Bivalirudin is recommended as 
an alternative to UFH, with a lower recommendation class (IIa), particularly in 
patients with a working diagnosis of STEMI and heparin-induced thrombocytopenia 
[ ]. In NSTE-ACS patients without an early invasive strategy, fondaparinux is 
recommended over enoxaparin, showing favorable outcomes 
in the OASIS-5 trial [ ]. 
Based on the 
results of the OAIS-6 trial, fondaparinux is not recommended in patients with 
STEMI undergoing primary PCI (Table , Ref. [ , , , , , , , ]). Triple antithrombotic therapy (TAT) in 
patients with ACS and an indication for anticoagulation poses a significant 
challenge for clinicians, navigating the delicate balance between thrombotic and 
bleeding risks. 
Literature suggests 
that opting for a shorter strategy (one week) results in lower bleeding risk 
without significantly increasing MACE risk compared to a longer strategy (one 
month) [ ]. Fibrinolytic therapy, which is fundamental for STEMI patients unable 
to undergo prompt primary PCI, prevents 30 early deaths per 1000 patients treated 
within 6 hours from symptoms onset. The highest net treatment benefit refers to 
high-risk patients, including the eldest ones. Quick initiation, preferably 
within 10 minutes from initial diagnosis, is vital. Pre-hospital fibrinolysis, 
especially within 2 hours, reduces early mortality by 17% [ ]. The STREAM trial 
advocated for pre-hospital fibrinolysis followed by early PCI, mirroring primary 
PCI for patients within 3 hours of symptom onset. Administering half the usual 
dose of tenecteplase reduces the risk of intracranial bleeding in patients aged 
over 75 [ , ]. Patients treated with fibrinolysis, for whom an immediate 
invasive strategy via PCI is not feasible, should receive anticoagulation with 
low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) or UFH, with dosages adjusted for age and 
weight. This bridging therapy should be maintained until PCI is performed or for 
a maximum of 8 days, bearing in mind that PCI is recommended between 2 and 24 
hours after the index event [ ].
 

## 4.3 Future Perspectives
Recent evidence has delineated two phenotypes of atherosclerotic lesions that 
warrant attention: plaque rupture and plaque erosion [ ]. In ACS patients, the 
characteristics and location of the plaque within the coronary vasculature 
influence platelet activation and thrombus composition. In-depth investigations 
into characterizing thrombus architecture are essential for identifying key 
pathophysiological factors, thus enhancing therapeutic efficacy in ACS patients. 
These models allow for the evaluation of novel platelet inhibitors (e.g., glycoprotein VI inhibitors) and/or anticoagulants, either as monotherapy or on top of the 
standard of care. Combining anti-inflammatory drugs with antithrombotic 
treatments holds promise in preventing cardiovascular atherothrombotic events, 
offering a potential avenue for ACS treatment (Supplementary Table 2 summarizes ongoing RCTs on ACS).

## 5. Atrial Fibrillation
AF is a supraventricular arrhythmia marked by uncoordinated atrial electrical 
activity manifesting as irregularly irregular R-R intervals and the absence of 
distinct P waves on electrocardiography. The current estimated prevalence of AF 
in adults ranges from 2% to 4%, exhibiting an age-related increase [ ]. Common 
AF symptoms include palpitations, dyspnea, shortness of breath and fatigue, with 
additional complaints such as chest pain, dizziness and syncope.

## 5.1 Patients Risk Stratification
AF is an independent risk factor for stroke, whose incidence can be reduced by 
using antithrombotic prophylaxis. However, thromboembolic risk is not 
homogeneous, depending on the presence of specific stroke risk factors or 
modifiers. Patients with moderate-to-severe mitral stenosis and mechanical 
prosthetic heart valves are considered at high risk of thromboembolism: for these 
patients, an ATT is strongly recommended. For all the other patients, common 
stroke risk factors are considered to stratify the risk, and these are summarized 
in the clinical risk-factor-based VASc score. This score 
demonstrates enhanced sensitivity in distinguishing lower and intermediate-risk 
patients, thereby refining therapeutic decision-making [ ]. Current guidelines 
recommend oral anticoagulation for stroke prevention in AF patients with a 
 VASc score 2 in men or 3 in women, and it should 
be considered in patients with a VASc score of 1 in men or 2 in 
women, based on net clinical benefit and consideration of patient values and 
preferences (Class of Recommendation I, level of Evidence A) [ ]. However, 
alternative scores have been developed to assess thromboembolic risk. A recent 
systematic review and metanalysis analysed 19 scores and 76 updates, revealing 
that the VASc score showed inferior discriminative abilities 
compared with newer scores. Further external validations will be needed before 
considering novel scores in clinical practice [ ]. Regarding bleeding risk, the 
HAS-BLED (Hypertension, Abnormal renal/liver function, Stroke, Bleeding history 
or predisposition, Labile INR, Elderly, Drugs/alcohol concomitantly) score has 
demonstrated superiority in assessing major bleeding risk in clinical practice, 
surpassing the performance of other risk scores. Therefore, careful consideration 
of the HAS-BLED score is necessary when estimating the RBR [ ].

## 5.2 Main Therapeutic Option
Historically, coumarin derivatives have been the predominant therapeutic options 
for this condition, inhibiting several vitamin K-dependent coagulation factors 
(II, VII, IX, and X). However, the effectiveness and safety of VKAs hinge on the 
quality of anticoagulation control, contingent upon the maintenance of the INR 
within the therapeutic range (2.0 to 3.0). Furthermore, the metabolism of these 
drugs is closely linked to cytochrome P450 genetic polymorphisms and is also 
influenced by food and drug interactions, necessitating frequent monitoring and 
continuous daily dose adjustments. This complexity can ultimately lead to the 
risk of inadequate anticoagulation dosing [ ]. The challenging manageability of 
warfarin has driven pharmacological research to explore new drugs, resulting in 
the approval of DOACs. These approvals are based on large RCTs and subsequent 
metanalyses (Table , Ref. [ , , , , ]), demonstrating their better efficacy/safety profile 
compared with warfarin [ , , , ]. Considering the phase III trials results and the 
better efficacy/safety profile of DOACs vs. VKAs, confirmed also by real world 
evidence, guidelines now recommend DOACs over VKAs for stroke prevention in AF 
patients who are eligible for anticoagulant therapy, excluding patients with 
moderate-to-severe mitral stenosis or mechanical heart valves (Class of 
Recommendation I, level of Evidence A) [ ]. Thromboembolic risk is not 
equivalent for all forms of valvular heart disease (VHD) in patients with AF. 
Phase III clinical trials of DOACs included variable proportions of VHD patients 
and individually provided no evidence of a differential effect of DOACs over 
warfarin in patients with and without VHD [ , ]. However, patients with 
moderate-to-severe mitral stenosis and mechanical heart valves were excluded from 
all phase III DOAC vs. warfarin trials in AF, due to their higher thromboembolic 
risk. Thereafter, clinical trials designed in these populations support the use 
of VKAs for these indications [ , , ]. A possible explanation for the failure 
of DOACs in these settings is the direct inhibition of a single coagulation 
factor compared with warfarin which blocks the production of several factors of 
the intrinsic and common pathways, including factor IX (FIX), factor X (FX), and prothrombin, in 
addition to factor VII (FVII) in the extrinsic pathway, all playing a role in the 
thromboembolic mechanism related to mitral stenosis and mechanical prostheses.
 

## 5.3 Role of DOACs in Special Populations: Obesity and Renal 
Impairment
Table outlines the most significant differences among DOACs in terms of 
mechanism of action and pharmacological characteristics: some of them are key for 
a tailored approach to clinical management. Apixaban exhibits the lowest renal 
excretion (27% renal elimination), while dabigatran undergoes almost complete 
renal elimination (80%). Dabigatran, being a pro-drug, requires activation by 
plasma and hepatic esterases, affecting both its bioavailability (6.5%) and 
absorption [ ]. Additionally, the presence of tartaric acid increases the risk 
of dyspepsia and GI symptoms, thus leading to treatment interruptions at an 
incidence of up to 35.6%, compared to 1.6% and 0% for rivaroxaban and 
apixaban, respectively. Rivaroxaban, however, can be influenced by food, 
necessitating its intake shortly after meals. Certain special populations warrant 
particular attention in anticoagulation management and necessitate dosage 
adjustments. Obesity has implications for renal clearance, metabolism, and drug 
delivery. In individuals with obesity, both renal blood flow and renal clearance 
increase potentially diminishing anticoagulant activity [ ]. The use of the 
Cockcroft-Gault (CG) formula, recommended by guidelines based on clinical trial 
results, may lead to an overestimation of renal function and misdiagnosis of 
hyperfiltration. Estimation of glomerular filtrate using formulas such as 
Modification of Diet in Renal Disease (MDRD) or Chronic Kidney Disease 
Epidemiology Collaboration (CKD-EPI) is advised [ ]. Meta-analyses and reviews of 
trial-based publications focusing on body mass index (BMI) levels indicate that 
in patients with grade III obesity (BMI 40–49 kg/ ), there is limited 
efficacy data for dabigatran and rivaroxaban, while data for edoxaban and 
apixaban are more robust. In individuals with large obesity (BMI 50 
kg/ ), data are limited for all DOACs and warfarin is recommended [ , ]. 
The presence of chronic kidney disease (CKD) poses challenges for anticoagulation 
therapy in patients with AF, as it increases both thromboem bolic and bleeding 
risks. CKD and AF are interconnected conditions, as several studies and national 
registries have highlighted the heightened incidence of AF among those with 
worsening renal function. The European PREFER register in AF indicates that using 
formulas such as MDRD and CKD-EPI would assign patients to different dosages than those indicated by the 
CG formula [ , ]. In patients with mild-to-moderate CKD (creatinine clearance (CrCl) 30–49 mL/min), 
the safety and efficacy of DOACs vs. warfarin was consistent with patients 
without CKD in landmark DOAC trials, hence the same considerations for stroke 
risk assessment and choice of oral anticoagulant (OAC) may apply. Moreover, observational studies 
showed that DOACs may be associated with lower risks of adverse renal outcomes 
than warfarin, conferring some grade of protection against the progression of 
renal failure [ , ]. The CONFIRM-AF database demonstrates the superiority of 
DOACs over warfarin in patients with renal dysfunction [ ]. In patients with 
CrCl 15–29 mL/min, RCT-derived data on the effect of VKA or DOACs are lacking. 
These patients were essentially excluded from the major RCTs, with the exception 
of apixaban, which was tested in 269 patients with ClCr between 25–30 mL/h in 
the ARISTOTLE trial [ ]. The evidence for the benefits of OAC in patients with 
end-stage kidney disease with CrCl 15 mL/min or on dialysis is even more 
limited, and to some extent, controversial. Some studies compared apixaban versus 
warfarin in patients undergoing hemodialysis: the bleeding rate was not higher in 
the case of apixaban. More studies will be needed to confirm these initial data. 
While there is notable diversity in renal clearance, significant variability 
among different anticoagulant drugs is not observed. Dose reduction without 
specific criteria increases the risk of stroke and death, emphasizing the 
importance of proper dosing (Table ) [ ]. Future perspectives in 
anticoagulation therapy involve exploring novel therapeutic targets, such as 
factor XI, which promotes thrombus propagation by supporting thrombin production. 
Inhibitors of factor XI, such as milvexian and asundexian are being investigated 
in phase III studies to evaluate their efficacy and safety profile [ ].
 

## 6. Venous Thromboembolism and Pulmonary Embolism 
Venous thromboembolism (VTE), clinically manifesting as deep vein thrombosis 
(DVT) or pulmonary embolism (PE), represents a prevalent disorder associated with 
significant morbidity and mortality. Globally it ranks as the third most frequent 
acute cardiovascular syndrome, following MI and stroke. Anticoagulation is the 
cornerstone of VTE treatment [ , ].

## 6.1 Main Therapeutic Options
Historically, VKAs, UFH, or LMWH, were the primary choices for VTE treatment and 
prevention. Although effective, these agents pose significant drawbacks, 
including individual pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics, the necessity for 
subcutaneous and/or intravenous delivery, susceptibility to drug interactions and 
vitamin K intake for VKAs. Dietary habits, variations in alcohol consumption, and 
long-term changes often lead to significant fluctuations in INR values. DOACs 
offer several advantages, for example the oral administration at a fixed dose and 
the absence of mandatory routine laboratory monitoring, exerting direct action on 
coagulation factors with a predictable pharmacokinetic profile. However, DOACs 
exhibit extended elimination half-lives when compared to UFH or LMWH. 
Consequently, DOACs can accumulate in patients with suboptimal kidney function or 
impaired liver function. Pivotal RCTs for acute or extended VTE treatment 
excluded patients with serum creatinine levels 2.5 mg/dL or ClCr 25 to 30 
mL/min [ ]. Evidence-based clinical practice guidelines strongly advocate for 
the use of DOACs as the preferred choice for most patients with 
non-cancer-related VTE cases [ ]. Notably, DOACs are not recommended for 
patients with severe kidney impairment, during pregnancy and lactation, and for 
individuals with antiphospholipid antibody syndrome or mechanical heart valves 
[ , , ]. Failure to promptly initiate anticoagulation therapy and delayed 
administration of therapeutic anticoagulation therapy can result in a worse 
prognosis [ ]. Therefore, it is imperative to utilize anticoagulants with rapid 
onset of action and a predictable dose-effect response for the acute treatment of 
VTE.

## 6.2 Treatment Regimens for DOACs
DOACs fulfill these criteria, offering a favorable pharmacodynamic profile and a 
dose-response curve. Two distinct treatment regimens for DOACs in VTE have been 
developed. The singular drug approach entails an initial phase of high-dose DOAC 
treatment, followed by a maintenance dose without parenteral anticoagulants. 
Conversely, the sequential approach comprises an initial treatment with heparin 
or fondaparinux for 5 to 10 days, followed by a maintenance dose of DOACs. 
Apixaban and rivaroxaban have been developed using the single drug approach, 
while dabigatran and edoxaban using the sequential approach (Table , Ref. [ , , , , , , ]). 
Large-scale Phase III global RCTs have systematically assessed fixed doses of 
DOACs in comparison to conventional anticoagulation therapy (heparin followed by 
VKA) for VTE treatment. These trials demonstrated the non-inferiority of each 
DOAC concerning efficacy compared to conventional treatment [ , , , , , ]. 
Furthermore, a meta-analysis of these clinical trials corroborated the 
non-inferiority of DOACs in efficacy, coupled with a noteworthy reduction in 
bleeding risk [ ]. Despite the decline in warfarin use, it remains a viable 
treatment option for patients with severe renal insufficiency, antiphospholipid 
syndrome, or financial constraints hindering DOAC accessibility. There are 
uncertainties surrounding the tradeoffs associated with the use of DOACs based on 
certain indications [ ]. For example, in the context of catheter-associated DVT, 
Brandt et al. [ ] found that apixaban 2.5 mg twice daily, in comparison 
to a placebo, was linked to decreased rates of VTE with no significant difference 
in major bleeding. In the TRIM-line study, thromboprophylaxis with rivaroxaban 10 
mg daily, compared to placebo, showed no significant variation in the rate of VTE 
among patients with cancer and central venous catheters (CVCs), except for one 
major bleeding incident in the rivaroxaban group [ ]. An ongoing trial, aiming 
to enrol 1828 patients, is presently comparing rivaroxaban 10 mg daily with a 
placebo for primary thromboprophylaxis in cancer patients with CVCs. Regarding 
cerebral venous sinus thrombosis, findings from the RE-SPECT CVT indicate that 
dabigatran 150 mg twice daily, when compared to warfarin with an INR of 2 to 3, 
led to no recurrent VTE in both groups [ ]. One major bleeding event was 
recorded in the dabigatran arm, and two in the warfarin arm at 25 weeks. 
Concerning splanchnic vein thrombosis, the RIPORT study revealed that rivaroxaban 
15 mg daily, compared to placebo, resulted in a significantly lower rate of 
recurrent VTE in patients with noncirrhotic chronic portal vein thrombosis [ ]. 
Nevertheless, the sample size is limited, so it is essential to investigate the 
rates of recurrent VTE, and additional RCTs are needed. 

 

## 6.3 Treatment Phases
Treatment phases for deep vein thrombosis (DVT) are categorized into three 
distinct stages (Table ):
 - Initial treatment (5–21 days after diagnosis): patient management involves 
parenteral therapy transitioning to VKA or DOACs administered at high doses.
- Long-term treatment (3–6 months): both VKA and DOACs are used during this 
phase. These stages, initial and long-term, are mandatory for all DVT patients 
[ ].
- Extended phase: continuation of treatment beyond the initial 3–6 months 
depends on evaluating the RBR of prolonged anticoagulation [ ].
After PE diagnosis, the optimal duration of treatment has been explored in four 
randomized clinical trials focusing on dabigatran [ ], rivaroxaban [ ], 
apixaban [ ], and edoxaban [ ]. These studies confirmed the efficacy of these 
medications in reducing recurrence risks but with an increased bleeding risk. 
Each study had a condition of clinical equipoise about continuing oral 
anticoagulant therapy, prescribing up to 12 months of initial DOAC or warfarin 
treatment post-VTE. Afterwards, patients were assigned to active treatment or 
placebo, except for two studies that included an active comparator in the control 
group [ , ]. Key findings are summarized in Supplementary Table 3. 
Notably, the RE-MEDY study found that 150 mg of dabigatran given twice daily was 
associated with a higher recurrence risk compared to warfarin [ ]. Extended 
anticoagulant therapy beyond the typical 3-month period hinges on the estimated 
risk of recurrence after stopping treatment. The PADIS-PE trial found that 
warfarin for an additional 18 months following an initial 6 months after PE 
reduced recurrent VTE and major bleeding risks [ ]. While prior studies focused 
on extended DOAC treatment for VTE including DVT, none specifically addressed 
extended DOAC treatment post-PE. An observational study indicated that extending 
anticoagulation for PE for 2–12 years was more beneficial and safer than not 
extending treatment [ ]. Still, indefinite OAC therapy 
must be carefully weighed against bleeding risk [ ]. Although results generally 
support extended treatment, pinpointing which patients will benefit most remains 
challenging. Few studies have examined extended treatment in VTE [ ]. DeRemer 
et al. [ ] analyzed the impact of continued treatment using 2.5 mg versus 5 
mg apixaban in patients 6 months-post VTE treatment, suggesting comparable 
outcomes with the lower dose. However, this study is limited by potential 
biases due to its observational design. Chopard et al. [ ] conducted a 
cohort study of 1199 patients post-PE. They found that 71.5% underwent extended 
treatment with DOACs or VKA for at least two years. Extended treatment was 
associated with a 2.1% risk of all-cause death or recurrent VTE, versus a 7.7% 
risk without extended treatment [ ]. Determining anticoagulation duration 
should involve individual patient risk factor analysis. Kyrle et al. 
[ ] assessed the Vienna Prediction Model (VPM) to estimate recurrence 
probability in unprovoked VTE by considering sex, thrombosis site, and D-dimer 
levels. During a median follow-up of 23.9 months, the study found a 5.2% 
one-year recurrence rate. While the VPM validation aids in optimizing 
extended-phase anticoagulation in unprovoked VTE, further research is needed to 
reliably estimate bleeding complications and enhance decision-making, especially 
now that reduced dose DOACs have become more prevalent than VKA for 
extended-phase treatment [ ].

## 6.4 Antithrombotic Prophylaxis for Cancer-Associated 
Thromboembolism
Patients in certain special categories, such as those with cancer or 
thrombophilia, face a heightened risk of developing VTE, leading to complex 
clinical management. Outpatient oncology patients exhibit nearly a 5-fold higher 
probability of VTE development compared to non-cancer patients, with a 
corresponding 2 to 3-fold higher mortality rate [ ]. Its management in cancer 
patients with solid tumors is complex due to an increased risk of both thrombotic 
and hemorrhagic events [ ]. Current guidelines from the American Society of 
Hematology (ASH) recommend using either LMWH or a DOAC, specifically apixaban 2.5 
mg or rivaroxaban 10 mg, for VTE prevention in high-risk patients [ ]. 
Pharmacological prophylaxis is emphasized in high-risk patients to prevent 
thrombotic complications. The AVERT trial examined the incidence of VTE in two 
groups of outpatient cancer patients at medium-high risk, randomized to receive 
apixaban 2.5 mg twice daily or placebo. VTE occurred in 4.2% in the apixaban 
group and 10.2% in the placebo group (hazard ratio, 0.41; 95% confidence 
interval [CI], 0.26 to 0.65; p 
 0.001). The rate of major bleeding 
episodes was higher with apixaban than with placebo [ ]. A meta-analysis 
highlighted the effectiveness of anticoagulant prophylaxis in reducing VTE 
incidence in outpatient cancer patients. Both oral and parenteral anticoagulants 
have been studied, with apixaban demonstrating a reduction in the risk of VTE 
without increasing bleeding risk [ ]. However, validation in larger study 
cohorts is warranted. The effectiveness of LMWH-based thromboprophylaxis has been 
supported by various randomized trials, including the PROTECHT and SAVE-ONCO 
studies, further confirming its net benefit [ , ]. The guidelines typically 
recommend a minimum of 6 months of anticoagulation treatment after 
cancer-associated VTE [ ]. While LMWH remains the preferred anticoagulant drug 
class for patients with GI and urogenital tract cancer, DOACs are recommended as 
first-line treatment in almost all other patients with cancer-associated 
thrombosis (clinical trials comparing DOAC versus LMWH for cancer-associated VTE 
are summarized in Supplementary Table 4). However, there are 
uncertainties regarding their treatment beyond the initial 6-month period [ ]. 
Despite the guidelines suggesting continued anticoagulation therapy beyond the 
initial 6-month period, specific dosage recommendations or decision tools are 
lacking, with uncertainties persisting. Studies like SELECT-D: a 12 month study 
and the Cancer-DACUS trial indicate lower VTE recurrence with continued 
treatment, but a higher risk of bleeding compared with the placebo group 
[ , ]. Rivaroxaban, apixaban, and LMWH are potential options for primary 
prevention in high-risk oncology patients in the absence of significant 
contraindications, as per ESC guidelines, particularly those with locally 
advanced or metastatic lung or pancreatic cancer and a Khorana score 2 [ ].

## 6.5 Antithrombotic VTE Prophylaxis for Patients with Thrombophilia
Patients affected by inherited thrombophilia (IT) face a heightened risk of DVT 
complicated by PE or thrombosis in atypical sites at a young age. In fact, a 
thrombophilic phenotype occurs in approximately 4% of patients with idiopathic 
VTE [ ]. Genetic testing is clinically useful in carriers of severe IT, notably 
those with confirmed deficiency of antithrombin, protein C, or protein S, and 
those with homozygous Factor V Leiden, homozygous prothrombin variant G20210A, or 
heterozygous for the two combined genetic abnormalities. These patients are 
candidates for indefinite anticoagulant treatment after the first episode of VTE. 
In VTE trials with DOACs, the prevalence of known thrombophilia ranges from 2 to 
18% [ ]. Key studies, such as RE-COVER, RE-COVER II and RE-MEDY comparing 
dabigatran with warfarin [ ], EINSTEIN studies comparing rivaroxaban with 
warfarin [ , ], and AMPLIFY and HOKUSAI studies comparing warfarin with 
apixaban and edoxaban, respectively, have been conducted [ , ]. A 
Post-hoc analysis of these studies reveals no discernible differences in the 
efficacy and safety of DOACs, regardless of the presence or absence of IT [ ].

## 7. Cardiac Surgery and Structural Interventional Procedures
Structural interventions and cardiac surgery pose an increased risk of 
thrombotic and haemorrhagic events. The thrombotic risk peaks in the initial 
months, and is even more pronounced after tricuspid valve interventions due to 
the low pressures in the right sections of the heart. Guidelines suggest that if 
a patient already has an indication for DOAC or VKA therapy, it is recommended to 
continue the therapy unless there is a high risk of bleeding. 
Supplementary Tables 5,6 provide a summary of the most relevant 
evidence from the literature supporting antithrombotic treatment after structural 
interventions and cardiac surgery.

## 7.1 Coronary Artery Bypass Graft Surgery
The goal of ATT in coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery patients would be 
to reduce disease progression and graft occlusion, although there is no evidence 
of this and data are scarce. Compared with aspirin monotherapy, the benefit of 
DAPT following CABG is still controversial. Current guidelines recommend a 
12-month duration of DAPT in ACS patients, including those undergoing CABG [ ] 
and new data are emerging for the possibility of using P2Y12 inhibitors as a 
second antiplatelet drug in combination with aspirin [ ]. However, the optimal 
duration of DAPT in CABG patients with CCS and the potential role of DOACs as a 
therapeutic option remain uncertain. In individuals with both CABG and concurrent 
AF, guidelines suggest using a single DOAC alongside antiplatelet therapy 
(aspirin or clopidogrel), despite the lack of randomized trials assessing its 
efficacy and safety. Similarly, the combination of DAPT with a DOAC appears to 
pose a heightened risk of haemorrhage, although robust evidence is scarce. 
Following CABG, single therapy may be discontinued after one year, with DOAC as a 
single treatment option. The CASCADE study, involving 113 patients randomized to 
either DAPT or aspirin monotherapy, showed no improvement in venous bypass 
patency in the DAPT group [ ]. A sub-analysis of the CURE study, with 2072 
patients undergoing CABG, found that those taking DAPT had a reduction in the 
incidence of cardiovascular death, MI, and stroke at one year [ ]. However, 
there was a 30% increase in life-threatening haemorrhage. In the DACAB study, 
greater patency of venous bypasses was observed in patients on DAPT compared to 
aspirin alone, with no difference between ticagrelor and aspirin treatment. The 
study also revealed an increase in minor bleeding in the DAPT group [ ].

## 7.2 Transcatheter Aortic Valve Implantation
Transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI) is employed in patients with 
symptomatic severe aortic stenosis, typically aged over 75 years, and who are not 
suitable candidates for surgical aortic valve replacement. Corrective 
intervention is recommended in symptomatic patients with high-gradient aortic 
stenosis (Vmax 4 m/s, mean gradient (MG) 40 mmHg, valve area 1 ), in patients 
with low flow-low gradient aortic stenosis with reduced ejection fraction 
presenting with contractile reserve. Surgery is recommended in asymptomatic 
patients with left ventricular dysfunction not attributable to other causes or in 
patients with documented symptoms during stress testing. The management of 
peri-procedural antithrombotic therapy depends on the administered molecule and 
the concurrent clinical characteristics of the patient. Patients receiving VKA 
therapy should undergo discontinuation to achieve a target INR 1.5. However, 
in cases of mechanical heart valves, atrial fibrillation with significant mitral 
stenosis, or thrombotic events within the previous four weeks, bridging with an 
oral anticoagulant (OAC) is recommended using UFH or therapeutic doses of LMWH 
[ ]. Also, the guidelines recommend lifelong single antiplatelet therapy (SAPT) after the procedure in patients for whom an OAC is not indicated. 
However, OAC is advised indefinitely if there is another indication for such 
therapy [ ]. The Delphi Consensus recommends an optimal duration of single 
antithrombotic therapy ranging from 3 to 12 months, based on individual risk 
[ ]. Conversely, the ARTE trial compared clopidogrel plus aspirin with aspirin 
alone in patients undergoing TAVI, revealing that dual antiplatelet 
administration increased bleeding risk without reducing mortality, stroke and MI 
three months post-procedure [ ]. The POPular-TAVI trial represents a pioneering 
RCT examining the efficacy of anticoagulation alone versus anticoagulation 
combined with antiplatelet therapy in patients undergoing TAVI [ ]. Two cohorts were 
examined: one, without DOAC indication, and the second with indication for oral 
anticoagulation, randomized in a 1:1 ratio to receive clopidogrel or not. Initial 
findings revealed a lower incidence of severe bleeding with anticoagulant therapy 
alone compared to the cohort taking DOAC combined with clopidogrel, without a 
reduction in thromboembolic events. Limitations of this study include: small 
sample size and limited use of DOACs [ ]. The GALILEO trial investigated 
patients undergoing successful TAVI without indication for DOAC therapy [ ]. Patients 
were randomized to receive rivaroxaban 10 mg daily plus aspirin versus 
antiplatelet therapy alone. The primary outcome, a composite of mortality from 
thromboembolic causes and events, revealed higher rates in the rivaroxaban group 
over approximately 18 months of follow-up, alongside increased severe bleeding 
[ ]. In contrast, the ATLANTIS trial compared antiplatelet therapy to apixaban 
in TAVI patients [ ]. Although not superior to standard therapy in primary outcomes, 
apixaban showed a lower thrombotic risk. Notably, patients without anticoagulant 
indication outside TAVI had increased non-cardiovascular mortality with apixaban, 
warranting further investigation [ ]. Two ongoing trials, ACASA-TAVI [ ] and 
AVATAR-TAVI [ ], aim to further explore the optimal antithrombotic strategy 
post-transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR), with ACASA-TAVI focusing on the use of OACs vs. single antiplatelet 
therapy, and AVATAR-TAVI investigating single anticoagulant superiority over the 
combination with aspirin. Table (Ref. [ , , , , ]) provides a summary of the relevant completed 
or ongoing trials on antithrombotic treatments for TAVR.
 

## 7.3 Mitral valve Transcatheter Edge-to-Edge-Repair
Mitral Valve Transcatheter Edge-to-Edge-Repair (M-TEER) serves as a nonsurgical 
alternative for patients experiencing signs of severe mitral valve (MV) 
regurgitation, despite optimized medical therapy and adherence to specific 
echocardiographic criteria [ ]. Notably, the COAPT trial involved patients 
without a pre-existing indication for DOAC therapy, who received aspirin and/or 
clopidogrel for at least 6 months after M-TEER [ ]. In the MITRA-FR trial, 78 
patients were administered DAPT with aspirin and clopidogrel for 3 months, 
followed by aspirin monotherapy [ ]. In the EVEREST II trial, 77 patients 
received DAPT with aspirin and clopidogrel for 30 days, followed by aspirin 
monotherapy for 6 months [ ]. However, available studies are limited, data are 
scarce, and standardized protocols are lacking. More robust data are eagerly 
awaited to confirm the true benefit of antithrombotic therapy in this context, 
even though aspirin treatment seems efficient in reducing the risk of death and 
thromboembolism [ ].

## 7.4 Left Atrial Appendage Occlusion
Transcatheter left atrial appendage occlusion (LAAO) is a valuable alternative 
option for stroke and systemic embolism in patients unsuitable for OACs due to 
HBR or contraindications. ATT after LAAO is essential to prevent thrombus 
formation on the device, reducing embolic risk [ , ]. PROTECT-AF and PREVAIL 
trials recommend a short-term VKA plus SAPT, followed by long-term SAPT, soon 
after WATCHMAN (Boston Scientific, Natick, MA, USA) implantation [ , ]. 
Limited data exist on DOAC regimen after LAAO. The ADRIFT trial found no 
differences in adverse events between rivaroxaban and DAPT groups [ ]. The 
continuation of SAPT after 6 month-long dual therapy is debated, due to bleeding 
risk, but aspirin monotherapy is common. In general, continuing aspirin appears 
reasonable if a concomitant indication for long-term antiplatelet therapy 
coexists, but its benefit-risk profile has to be carefully discussed with the 
patient otherwise. To date, the optimal antithrombotic therapy in patients 
undergoing transcatheter LAAO remains debated [ ].

## 7.5 Patent Foramen Ovale
Transcatheter device-based closure of patent foramen ovale (PFO) is advised for 
patients under 60 with cryptogenic stroke and high-risk characteristics, such as 
an atrial septal aneurysm or a moderate-to-severe right-to-left shunt. Typically, 
SAPT is administered during the pre-intervention phase [ , ]. The PFO CLOSE 
trial randomized patients to either transcatheter closure or medical management 
using anticoagulants or antiplatelet drugs [ ]. This trial reported a reduced 
rate of stroke recurrence at five years with anticoagulation; however, the 
significance of these findings was not assessed due to the study’s limited scope 
on clinical outcomes. The ongoing HALTI study (NCT04475510) is set to evaluate 
the benefits of discontinuing antiplatelet therapy 12 months following a 
successful PFO closure. Current guidelines from Professional Cardiology Societies 
suggest using DAPT (aspirin plus clopidogrel) for 1 to 6 months post-closure, 
transitioning to SAPT, preferably with aspirin, for the following 5 years. 
Patients with additional cardiovascular risks or a high potential for recurrent 
cerebrovascular events might consider extended ATT 
beyond this period. Alternatively, for patients at HBR or those with a low 
predicted risk of stroke recurrence, halting all antithrombotic treatments a year 
post-procedure is considered a viable option [ ].

## 8. Antithrombotic Treatments for Pregnant Women

## 8.1 Coronary Artery Disease
The management of ATT during pregnancy poses a significant challenge for 
cardiologists and multidisciplinary teams. ACS is increasingly becoming a notable 
complication of pregnancy, given the rising mean age of pregnancy [ ]. 
Furthermore, ACS is not solely of atherosclerotic origin: there is a notable 
incidence of spontaneous acute coronary dissections and coronary thrombosis due 
to hypercoagulability [ , ]. The management of ACS during pregnancy largely 
follows established guidelines outside of pregnancy. However, concerning 
medication use, evidence is limited. While low-dose aspirin was proven to be 
relatively safety, there was a lack of reliable data for bivalirudin, prasugrel, 
and ticagrelor [ ]. Clopidogrel is currently the only P2Y12 inhibitor with more 
substantial data [ ]. Following a myocardial infarction with coronary stent 
placement, it is advisable to wait at least 12 months before planning a 
pregnancy. This timeframe aims to avoid premature cessation of DAPT, thereby 
preserving coronary stability [ ].

## 8.2 Pre-Eclampsia
The use of an antiplatelet drug such as aspirin has been linked to the 
prevention of pre-eclampsia, a significant cause of maternal and foetal morbidity 
and mortality. Numerous studies and meta-analyses conducted in recent decades 
have identified antiplatelet agents as effective in reducing the risk of 
pre-eclampsia [ , , ]. The timing of antiplatelet therapy initiation has been 
largely investigated, with some meta-analyses suggesting no significant influence 
on pre-eclampsia prevention outcomes [ ], while others emphasize the need for 
early initiation within the first 16 weeks [ , , ]. Contrarily, the ASPRE 
trial randomized pregnant women at high risk of pre-eclampsia to receive low-dose 
aspirin (150 mg) versus placebo, achieving a statistically significant lower 
incidence [ ]. The ASPIRIN study investigated the use of low-dose aspirin (81 
mg) in nulliparous women, resulting in a reduction in the incidence of preterm 
birth before 37 weeks and a decrease in perinatal mortality [ ]. The EAGeR 
trial involved women with a history of recurrent pregnancy loss (recurrent 
spontaneous abortions), where the use of low-dose aspirin led to a reduced risk 
of foetal loss, an increase in live births, and a decreased risk of preterm birth 
compared to placebo [ ]. The use of aspirin for the prevention of preeclampsia 
in high-risk women is recommended, but adequate monitoring and individual 
assessment of risks and benefits are essential.

## 8.3 Venous Thromboembolism
VTE exhibits a higher incidence during pregnancy and the postpartum period, 
compared to the general population [ , ], with the highest risk in the 
immediate post-delivery period [ , ]. Prophylactic treatment for VTE 
predominantly relies on the use of LMWH, established as the drug of choice [ ]. 
Optimal thromboprophylaxis is achieved when the LMWH dosage is tailored to body 
weight at the initial prenatal visit [ ]. LMWH remains the drug of choice for 
the treatment of hemodynamically stable PE and DVT. UFH is employed in the 
treatment of massive PE cases with a risk of hemodynamic instability, albeit with 
an increased risk of thrombocytopenia. Thrombolytic agents should be reserved for 
patients experiencing severe hypotension or shock, acknowledging the 
non-negligible risk of bleeding. Fondaparinux emerges as a viable alternative in 
cases of allergy or adverse reactions to LMWH. DOACs are currently not indicated 
for use in pregnant patients [ ]. Specifically, rivaroxaban crosses the 
placental barrier and is therefore not recommended during pregnancy, as it may be 
associated with a risk of spontaneous abortion and possible embryopathy [ ].

## 8.4 Atrial Fibrillation
DOACs are contraindicated during pregnancy, even for AF management. There are 
two alternative options: therapeutic doses of LMWH throughout the entire duration 
of pregnancy, spanning all three trimesters, or LMWH during the first and third 
trimesters with VKA during the second one [ ].

## 8.5 Mechanical Heart Valves
Unfortunately, pregnancy and the presence of mechanical valves are associated 
with a high rate of maternal-foetal complications, stemming from the delicate 
balance between appropriate anticoagulation and the risks of bleeding and 
prosthesis thrombosis [ ]. While UFH and LMWH are linked to a high risk of 
prosthetic heart valve thrombosis [ , ], the risk is relatively low with VKAs 
during pregnancy (0–4%) [ , , ]. The LMWH dose requirement significantly 
increases due to elevated renal clearance, but monitoring anti-Xa levels with 
dose adjustments reduces the risk. Nevertheless, the safety of LMWH for 
thrombosis risk remains debated, regardless of the trimester of use. Currently, 
the use of VKAs with closely monitored INR is the safest regimen to prevent valve 
thrombosis. VKAs during the first trimester are associated with an increased risk 
of spontaneous abortion, linked to escalating doses [ , ]. Additionally, VKAs 
in the first trimester may cause embryopathy, particularly limb defects and nasal 
hypoplasia, while their use in the second and third trimesters may be associated 
with ocular and central nervous system anomalies and intracranial haemorrhage 
[ ]. Vaginal delivery is not recommended if VKAs are used in the last trimester 
due to the risk of foetal intracranial haemorrhage. UFH and LMWH, on the other 
hand, do not cross the placenta. The advantages and disadvantages of different 
anticoagulation regimens should be extensively discussed before pregnancy. VKAs 
are more effective in preventing valve thrombosis, ensuring greater safety for 
the mother, but the risks of embryopathy or fetopathy, foetal loss, and foetal 
bleeding are not negligible. On the other hand, with LMWH, there are fewer foetal 
risks but a higher risk of valve thrombosis. The management of valvular 
thrombosis should be approached similarly to the non-pregnant state [ ]. 
Choosing the correct anticoagulation regimen is a genuine challenge, requiring 
thorough discussion with the mother, who should be informed about the RBR for 
herself and the foetus, and should be an integral part of the decision-making 
process.

## 9. Conclusions with a Focus on Future Perspectives
ATT is widely employed in the management of cardiovascular diseases and 
constitutes a field of research in constant and fervent renewal. The growing 
evidence supporting shorter-duration therapies in ACS [ ], novel coagulation 
factors [e.g., FXIa] to be targeted in anticoagulant therapies [ ], or the 
growing evidence on the integration of genetic characterization in risk score 
formulation [ ], are only some of the examples that cannot be overlooked. 
Therefore, an in-depth and up-to-date understanding of its indications, along 
with a prospective outlook on potential future implications, is fundamental for 
clinically tailored management which is aligned to the individual needs of each 
patient.

## Acknowledgment
Not applicable.

## Abbreviations
ACS, acute coronary syndrome; AF, atrial fibrillation; ASH, American Society of 
Hematology; ATT, antithrombotic treatments; CABG, coronary artery bypass graft; 
CAD, coronary artery disease; CCS, chronic coronary syndrome; CKD, chronic kidney 
disease; CVC, central venous catheter; CVD, cardiovascular diseases; DAPT, dual 
antiplatelet therapy; DES, drug eluting stent; DOAC, direct oral anticoagulant; 
DVT, deep vein thrombosis; ESC, European Society of Cardiology; GI, 
gastrointestinal; HBR, high bleeding risk; INR, international normalized ratio; 
IT, inherited thrombophilia; LAAO, left atrial appendage occlusion; LMWH, low 
molecular weight heparin; MACE, major adverse cardiovascular events; MI, 
myocardial infarction; M-TEER, mitral valve transcatheter edge-to-edge-repair; 
MV, mitral valve; NACE, net adverse cardiovasculare events; NSTEMI, non ST 
segment elevation MI; PAD, peripheral artery disease; PCI, percutaneous coronary 
intervention; PE, pulmonary embolism; PFO, patent foramen ovale; RBR, 
risk-benefit-ratio; RCT, randomized control trial; SAPT, single antiplatelet 
therapy; STEMI, ST segment elevation MI; TAT, triple antithrombotic therapy; 
TAVI, transcatheter aortic valve implantation; TIA, transient ischemic attack; 
TMVR, transcathether mitral valve replacement; TTR, time in therapeutic range; 
TTVR, transcatheter tricuspid valve replacement; UFH, unfractioned heparin; VHD, 
valvular heart disease; VKA, vitamin k antagonist; VPM, Vienna Prediction Model; 
VTE, venous thromboembolism.

## Supplementary Material
Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at https://doi.org/10.31083/j.rcm2508281.

## Footnotes
Publisher’s Note:
IMR Press stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional
affiliations.

## Author Contributions
KG, MDMari, DM, ST, DR and CS equally contributed to performing data research 
and draft the manuscript. KG, MDMari, DM, ST, DR, CS, RM, LP, ADA, DF, PV, LP, 
FR, GR, SG, MDMarc made substantial contributions to conception and design of the 
manuscript. KG, FR, GR, SG, RM, LP, ADA, DF, PV, LP, MDMarc have been involved in 
critically reviewing the manuscript for important intellectual content and given 
final approval of the version to be published. All authors contributed to 
editorial changes in the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final 
manuscript. All authors have participated sufficiently in the work and agreed to 
be accountable for all aspects of the work.

## Ethics Approval and Consent to Participate
Not applicable.

## Funding
This research received no external funding.

## Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials