3815pheelsevierJournal of the American College of CardiologyJ Am Coll CardiolPMC7164881716488171648813231144810.1016/j.jacc.2020.04.031COVID-19 and Thrombotic or Thromboembolic Disease: Implications for Prevention, Antithrombotic Therapy, and Follow-Up
JACC State-of-the-Art ReviewBikdeliBehnoodMD, MS MadhavanMahesh VMD JimenezDavidMD, PhD ChuichTaylorPharmD DreyfusIsaacMD DrigginElissaMD NigoghossianCaroline DerPharmD AgenoWalterMD MadjidMohammadMD, MS GuoYutaoMD, PhD TangLiang VMD HuYuMD GiriJayMD, MPH CushmanMaryMD, MSc QuéréIsabelleMD, PhD DimakakosEvangelos PMD GibsonC MichaelMD LippiGiuseppeMD FavaloroEmmanuel JPhD FareedJawedPhD CapriniJoseph AMD, MS TafurAlfonso JMD, MS BurtonJohn RMD FranceseDominic PMPH WangElizabeth YMD FalangaAnnaMD McLintockClaireMD HuntBeverley JMD SpyropoulosAlex CMD BarnesGeoffrey DMD, MSc EikelboomJohn WMBBS WeinbergIdoMD SchulmanSamMD, PhD CarrierMarcMD, MSc PiazzaGregoryMD, MS BeckmanJoshua AMD StegP GabrielMD StoneGregg WMD RosenkranzStephanMD GoldhaberSamuel ZMD ParikhSahil AMD MonrealManuelMD, PhD KrumholzHarlan MMD, SM KonstantinidesStavros VMD, PhD WeitzJeffrey IMD LipGregory YHMD for the Global COVID-19 Thrombosis Collaborative Group, Endorsed by the ISTH, NATF, ESVM, and the IUA, Supported by the ESC Working Group on Pulmonary Circulation and Right Ventricular FunctionaNewYork-Presbyterian Hospital/Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, New YorkbCenter for Outcomes Research and Evaluation (CORE), Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, ConnecticutcClinical Trials Center, Cardiovascular Research Foundation, New York, New YorkdRespiratory Department, Hospital Ramón y Cajal and Medicine Department, Universidad de Alcalá (Instituto de Ramón y Cajal de Investigación Sanitaria), Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Madrid, SpaineDepartment of Medicine and Surgery, University of Insubria, Varese, ItalyfMcGovern Medical School, University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TexasgDepartment of Cardiology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, ChinahInstitute of Hematology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, ChinaiCardiovascular Division, Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PennsylvaniajPenn Cardiovascular Outcomes, Quality, and Evaluative Research Center, Leonard Davis Institute of Health Economics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PennsylvaniakCorporal Michael J. Crescenz VA Medical Center, Philadelphia, PennsylvanialUniversity of Vermont Medical Center, Burlington, VermontmDepartment of Vascular Medicine, University of Montpellier, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Montpellier, InnoVTE F-CRIN Network, Montpellier, FrancenOncology Unit GPP, Sotiria General Hospital Athens School of Medicine, Athens, GreeceoHarvard Medical School, Boston, MassachusettspBeth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MassachusettsqLaboratory of Clinical Chemistry and Hematology, University Hospital of Verona, Verona, ItalyrHaematology Laboratory, Institute of Clinical Pathology and Medical Research, NSW Health Pathology, Westmead Hospital, Westmead, New South Wales, AustraliasSydney Centres for Thrombosis and Haemostasis, Westmead, New South Wales, AustraliatLoyola University Medical Center, Chicago, IllinoisuPritzker School of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, IllinoisvDivision of Vascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, NorthShore University HealthSystem, Skokie, IllinoiswDepartment of Immunohematology and Transfusion Medicine, Hospital Papa Giovanni XXIII, University of Milan Bicocca, Bergamo, ItalyxAuckland City Hospital, Auckland, New ZealandySt Thomas’ Hospital, London, United KingdomzDonald and Barbara Zucker School of Medicine at Hofstra/Northwell, Hofstra University, Hempstead, New YorkaaCenter for Bioethics and Social Science in Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MichiganbbFrankel Cardiovascular Center, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MichiganccPopulation Health Research Institute, Hamilton Health Sciences, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, CanadaddMassachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MassachusettseeDepartment of Obstetrics and Gynecology, I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, Moscow, RussiaffMcMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, CanadaggThrombosis and Atherosclerosis Research Institute, Hamilton, Ontario, CanadahhOttawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, CanadaiiBrigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MassachusettsjjVanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TennesseekkINSERM U1148, Hôpital Bichat, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, FACT (French Alliance for Cardiovascular Trials), Paris, FrancellUniversité Paris, Paris, FrancemmRoyal Brompton Hospital, Imperial College London, London, United KingdomnnZena and Michael A. Wiener Cardiovascular Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New YorkooCologne Cardiovascular Research Center, Heart Center, Department of Cardiology, University of Cologne, Cologne, GermanyppDepartment of Internal Medicine, Hospital Universitari Germans Trials i Pujol, Universidad Católica San Antonio de Murcia, Barcelona, SpainqqDepartment of Health Policy and Administration, Yale School of Public Health, New Haven, ConnecticutrrSection of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, ConnecticutssCenter for Thrombosis and Hemostasis, Johannes Gutenberg University of Mainz, Mainz, GermanyttLiverpool Centre for Cardiovascular Science, Liverpool Heart and Chest Hospital, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United KingdomuuAalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark∗Address for correspondence: Dr. Behnood Bikdeli, NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital/Columbia University Irving Medical Center, 622 West 168th Street, PH 3-347, New York, New York 10032.
∗∗Dr. Mahesh V. Madhavan, NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital/Columbia University Irving Medical Center, 622 West 168th Street, PH 3-347, New York, New York 10032.
∗Drs. Bikdeli and Madhavan contributed equally to this work.
1742020752329502950–29732042020© 2020 by the American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by Elsevier.Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID-19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID-19. The COVID-19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect, the company's public news and information website. Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID-19-related research that is available on the COVID-19 resource centre - including this research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories, such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re-use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID-19 resource centre remains active.

## Abstract
Coronavirus disease-2019 (COVID-19), a viral respiratory illness caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2), may predispose patients to thrombotic disease, both in the venous and arterial circulations, because of excessive inflammation, platelet activation, endothelial dysfunction, and stasis. In addition, many patients receiving antithrombotic therapy for thrombotic disease may develop COVID-19, which can have implications for choice, dosing, and laboratory monitoring of antithrombotic therapy. Moreover, during a time with much focus on COVID-19, it is critical to consider how to optimize the available technology to care for patients without COVID-19 who have thrombotic disease. Herein, the authors review the current understanding of the pathogenesis, epidemiology, management, and outcomes of patients with COVID-19 who develop venous or arterial thrombosis, of those with pre-existing thrombotic disease who develop COVID-19, or those who need prevention or care for their thrombotic disease during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Key Words: anticoagulant, antiplatelet, antithrombotic therapy, COVID-19, SARS-CoV-2, thrombosis

Abbreviations and Acronyms: ACS, acute coronary syndrome; COVID-19, coronavirus disease-2019; DIC, disseminated intravascular coagulation; DOAC, direct oral anticoagulant; DVT, deep vein thrombosis; ECMO, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation; LMWH, low-molecular-weight heparin; PE, pulmonary embolism; SARS-CoV-2, severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus-2; STEMI, ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction; UFH, unfractionated heparin; VKA, vitamin K antagonist; VTE, venous thromboembolism

## Central Illustration
 

## Highlights
•COVID-19 may predispose patients to arterial and venous thrombosis.
•Initial series suggest the common occurrence of venous thromboembolic disease in patients with severe COVID-19. The optimal preventive strategy warrants further investigation.
•Drug-drug interactions between antiplatelet agents and anticoagulants with investigational COVID-19 therapies should be considered.
•The available technology should be used optimally to care for patients without COVID-19 who have thrombotic disease during the pandemic.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2020 Apr 15; Accepted 2020 Apr 15; Issue date 2020 Jun 16.

Coronavirus disease-2019 (COVID-19) is a viral illness caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2), and now has been deemed a pandemic by the World Health Organization ( , , ). COVID-19 has a number of important cardiovascular implications ( , , ). Patients with prior cardiovascular disease are at higher risk for adverse events from COVID-19. Individuals without a history of cardiovascular disease are at risk for incident cardiovascular complications ( ).
There are several ways in which the COVID-19 pandemic may affect the prevention and management of thrombotic and thromboembolic disease (hereafter collectively referred to as thrombotic disease for brevity). First, the direct effects of COVID-19 or the indirect effects of infection, such as through severe illness and hypoxia, may predispose patients to thrombotic events. Preliminary reports suggest that hemostatic abnormalities, including disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), occur in patients affected by COVID-19 ( , ). Additionally, the severe inflammatory response, critical illness, and underlying traditional risk factors may all predispose to thrombotic events, similar to prior virulent zoonotic coronavirus outbreaks ( 
) ( , ). Second, investigational therapies for treating COVID-19 may have adverse drug-drug interactions with antiplatelet agents and anticoagulants. Third, the pandemic, because of resource allocations or social distancing recommendations, may adversely affect the care of patients without COVID-19 but who present with thrombotic events. For example, (mis)perception that antithrombotic agents confer increased risk for contracting COVID-19 may lead to untoward interruption of anticoagulation by some patients.
 The current paper, authored by an international collaborative of clinicians and investigators, summarizes the pathogenesis, epidemiology, treatment, and available outcome data related to thrombotic disease in patients with COVID-19, as well as management of thrombotic events in patients without COVID-19 during this pandemic. Although the focus is on the prevention and management of venous thromboembolism (VTE) and antithrombotic therapy for acute coronary syndromes (ACS), many of the recommendations are relevant to other conditions requiring antithrombotic therapy. We provide clinical guidance, when feasible, and also identify areas that require urgent attention for future research.

## Methodological Considerations
Every effort was made to provide a comprehensive assessment of the published evidence (MEDLINE with PubMed interface; date of last search: April 12, 2020). To accommodate the rapidly evolving nature of information and concern for the delay between completion of studies and their publication, we also reviewed manuscripts on 2 preprint servers (medRxiv and SSRN; date of last search: April 12, 2020). We acknowledge that the manuscripts from the latter 2 sources are not peer-reviewed.
There is international variability in preventive measures and testing strategies by local authorities, diagnostic tests’ availability, access to care, and treatment strategies, as well as variability in outcome reporting for COVID-19. These issues influence the reported diagnosed cases, casualties, and in turn, case-fatality rates. Moreover, to date, we lack large prospective cohorts. The existing evidence, including data on thrombotic complications, is derived primarily from small and retrospective analyses ( 
).
 The current document represents an effort to provide general guidance for patient care related to thrombosis and antithrombotic therapy. Given the limitations of the evidence base, the steering committee (B.B., M.V.M., J.I.W., S.V.K., S.Z.G., A.J.T., M.M., H.M.K., G.Y.H.L.) chose several questions that seemed more challenging but relevant to patient care ( ). These questions were sent to the entire group of authors twice. The Delphi method was implemented to provide consensus-based guidance. The questions included considerations for prophylactic or therapeutic anticoagulant regimens among various subgroups of patients with COVID-19, and antithrombotic therapy in the setting of suspected or confirmed DIC.

## Pathogenesis and Transmission
SARS-CoV-2 is a single-strand RNA coronavirus, which enters human cells mainly by binding the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 ( ), which is highly expressed in lung alveolar cells, cardiac myocytes, the vascular endothelium, and other cells ( , ). SARS-CoV-2 is transmitted primarily after viral particles are inhaled and enter the respiratory tract ( ). In addition, the virus can survive for 24 to 72 h on surfaces, depending on the type of surface, which enables fomite transmission ( ).
Initial symptoms of COVID-19 overlap with other viral syndromes, and include fever, fatigue, headache, cough, shortness of breath, diarrhea, headaches, and myalgias ( , , ). As with other virulent zoonotic coronavirus infections such as SARS and Middle East respiratory syndrome, COVID-19 has the potential to result in severe illness including systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS), acute respiratory disease syndrome (ARDS), multiorgan involvement, and shock ( ). Although older age and comorbidities such as cardiovascular disease confer a higher risk for severe disease, young and otherwise healthy patients are also at risk for complications ( ).
Common laboratory abnormalities found in patients with COVID-19 include lymphopenia ( ) and elevation in lactate dehydrogenase and inflammatory markers such as C-reactive protein, D-dimer, ferritin, and interleukin-6 (IL-6) ( ). IL-6 levels may correlate with disease severity and a procoagulant profile ( ).

## COVID-19 and Hemostasis Parameters
The most consistent hemostatic abnormalities with COVID-19 include mild thrombocytopenia ( ) and increased D-dimer levels ( ), which are associated with a higher risk of requiring mechanical ventilation; intensive care unit (ICU) admission; or death ( 
). Data related to other tests are less certain and often contradictory ( , ). Disease severity is variably associated with prolongation of the prothrombin time (PT) and international normalized ratio (INR) ( , , ), and thrombin time (TT) ( ), and variably by a trend toward shortened activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) ( , , , ). Recently, Tang et al. ( ) assessed 183 patients with COVID-19, 21 (11.5%) of whom died. Among the notable differences between patients who died and those who survived were increased levels of D-dimer and fibrin degradation products (∼3.5- and ∼1.9-fold, respectively) and PT prolongation (by 14%) (p < 0.001). Further, 71% of COVID-19 patients who died fulfilled the International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis (ISTH) criteria ( ) for DIC, compared with only 0.6% among survivors. Collectively, these hemostatic changes indicate some forms of coagulopathy that may predispose to thrombotic events ( 
), although the cause is uncertain.
 Nevertheless, it is yet unknown whether these hemostatic changes are a specific effect of SARS-CoV-2 or are a consequence of cytokine storm that precipitates the onset of SIRS, as observed in other viral diseases ( , , , ). Another consideration that has not yet been investigated is that the hemostatic changes seen with COVID-19 infection are related to liver dysfunction ( ). A recent study reported 3 cases with severe COVID-19 and cerebral infarction, with 1 associated with bilateral limb ischemia, in the setting of elevated antiphospholipid antibodies. Whether antiphospholipid antibodies play a major role in pathophysiology of thrombosis associated with COVID-19 requires further investigation ( ).

## COVID-19, markers of myocardial injury, and thrombotic disease
Elevated troponin levels are associated with poor outcomes in several studies of COVID-19 ( ). However, the differential diagnosis for elevated troponin in COVID-19 is broad ( ) and includes nonspecific myocardial injury, impaired renal function (leading to troponin accumulation), myocarditis, pulmonary embolism (PE), and type 1 and 2 myocardial infarction (MI) ( , ). Similarly, elevation of natriuretic peptides is nonspecific ( ), and consideration for thrombotic events (e.g., PE) should only be raised in the appropriate clinical context.

## COVID-19 Investigational Therapies and Considerations for Thrombotic Disease
Several investigational agents are being tested in the management of COVID-19, especially for patients who develop severe disease. Some of these drugs have clinically important interactions with antiplatelet or anticoagulant agents ( 
and 
).
 Further, a few of these investigational agents have been associated with excess risk (or, in other cases, reduced risk) for thrombotic events, or for thrombocytopenia in prior studies of non–COVID-19 populations. For example, bevacizumab, a monoclonal antibody that binds to vascular endothelial growth factor, and is under investigational use for COVID-19, is associated with increased risk for adverse cardiovascular events, including MI, cerebrovascular accidents, and VTE ( , ). Alternatively, fingolimod, an immunomodulating agent being tried for COVID-19, may reduce reperfusion injury and improve outcomes in patients suffering from acute ischemic stroke ( ). Hydroxychloroquine, recently receiving Emergency Use Authorization from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for treatment of COVID-19, may potentially exert antithrombotic properties, especially against antiphospholipid antibodies ( ).

## COVID-19 investigational therapies and antiplatelet agents
Scientists are studying a number of agents for COVID-19 treatment that may have interactions with oral antiplatelet agents. presents potential drug interactions between investigational drugs for COVID-19 and commonly administered oral antiplatelet agents. Lopinavir/ritonavir is a protease inhibitor and inhibits CYP3A4 metabolism. Although the active metabolite for clopidogrel is mostly formed by CYP2C19, inhibition of CYP3A4 may also lead to reduction in effective dosage of clopidogrel. In contrast, inhibition of CYP3A4 may increase effects of ticagrelor. Therefore, the concomitant use of these agents along with lopinavir/ritonavir should be cautioned. Although limited clinical data exist, use of P2Y12 platelet function testing to guide the use of clopidogrel or ticagrelor in this setting might be considered. An alternative, in the absence of contraindications, is to use prasugrel, which is not prone to these interactions ( , , , ). Remdesivir, a nucleotide-analog inhibitor of RNA-dependent RNA polymerase, is reportedly an inducer of CYP3A4; however, dose adjustments for oral antiplatelet agents are currently not recommended. Of note, there are no known major drug-drug interactions between investigational COVID-19 therapies and parenteral antiplatelet agents such as cangrelor and glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors.

## COVID-19 investigational therapies and anticoagulants

 summarizes interactions between investigational drugs for COVID-19 and commonly administered oral anticoagulants. Lopinavir/ritonavir has the potential to also affect choice and dosage of a number of anticoagulants. For example, vitamin K antagonists, apixaban, and betrixaban may all require dose adjustment, while edoxaban and rivaroxaban should not be coadministered with lopinavir/ritonavir. Tocilizumab, an IL-6 inhibitor, increases expression of CYP3A4; however, no anticoagulant dose adjustments are currently recommended with concomitant use of tocilizumab at this time. There are no known major drug-drug interactions between investigational COVID-19 therapies and parenteral anticoagulants. Although the focus of the current manuscript is primarily related to VTE and ACS, the guidance provided for antithrombotic considerations is broadly relevant across other clinical indications.

## COVID-19 and VTE

## Risk stratification and in-hospital prophylaxis
Hospitalized patients with acute medical illness, including infections such as pneumonia, are at increased risk of VTE ( , ). Prophylactic anticoagulation reduces the risk of VTE in acutely ill hospitalized medical patients ( , , ), and appropriate use of VTE prophylaxis is covered in clinical practice guidelines ( , , ). Multiple risk stratification tools are available for VTE risk assessment in this setting (e.g., the Caprini score, IMPROVE [International Medical Prevention Registry on Venous Thromboembolism] model, and Padua model) ( , , , , , ).
The choice of specific risk assessment model may vary across health system. However, similar to other acutely ill medical patients, VTE risk stratification for hospitalized patients with COVID-19 should be undertaken. A recent study from China, using the Padua model, reported that 40% of hospitalized patients with COVID-19 were at high risk of VTE. The study did not provide data about the use of VTE prophylaxis, or the incident VTE events ( ). Hospitalized patients with COVID-19 who have respiratory failure or comorbidities (e.g., active cancer, heart failure) ( ), patients who are bedridden, and those requiring intensive care should receive pharmacological VTE prophylaxis, unless there are contraindications. The choice of agents and dosing should be based on available guideline recommendations ( , , ). The World Health Organization interim guidance statement recommends prophylactic daily low-molecular-weight heparins (LMWHs), or twice daily subcutaneous unfractionated heparin (UFH) ( ). If pharmacological prophylaxis is contraindicated, mechanical VTE prophylaxis (intermittent pneumatic compression) should be considered in immobilized patients ( , ). Missed doses of pharmacologic VTE prophylaxis are common and are likely associated with worse outcomes ( ). Therefore, every effort should be made to ensure that patients receive all scheduled doses of pharmacologic VTE prophylaxis. In this regard, once daily dosing regimen of LMWHs may be advantageous over UFH to reduce personal protective equipment (PPE) use and exposure of health care workers.
Consideration for risk of VTE in pregnant patients with COVID-19 deserves further attention. The risk of VTE is increased during pregnancy and the postpartum period ( , ). Although limited data are available, pregnant women admitted to hospital with COVID-19 infection are likely to be at an increased risk of VTE. It is reasonable to assess the risk of VTE and to consider pharmacological thromboprophylaxis, especially if they have other VTE risk factors. Weight-adjusted prophylactic dosing of anticoagulation is an interesting topic that requires additional investigation ( ).

## Extended (post-discharge) VTE prophylaxis
After hospital discharge from acute medical illness, extended prophylaxis with LMWH ( ) or direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs) ( , , , ) can reduce the risk of VTE, at the cost of increase in bleeding events, including major bleeding ( , ). Although no data specific to COVID-19 exist, it is reasonable to employ individualized risk stratification for thrombotic and hemorrhagic risk, followed by consideration of extended prophylaxis (for up to 45 days) for patients with elevated risk of VTE (e.g., reduced mobility, comorbidities such as active cancer, and [according to some authors in the writing group] elevated D-dimer >2 times the upper limit of normal) who have low risk of bleeding ( , , ).
The role of thromboprophylaxis for quarantined patients with mild COVID-19 but significant comorbidities, or for patients without COVID-19 who are less active because of quarantine is uncertain. These patients should be advised to stay active at home. In the absence of high-quality data, pharmacological prophylaxis should be reserved for those patients at highest risk, including those with limited mobility and history of prior VTE or active malignancy.

## Diagnosis of VTE in patients with COVID-19
As described previously, elevated D-dimer levels represent a common finding in patients with COVID-19 ( ), and do not currently warrant routine investigation for acute VTE in absence of clinical manifestations or other supporting information. However, the index of suspicion for VTE should be high in the case of typical deep vein thrombosis (DVT) symptoms, hypoxemia disproportionate to known respiratory pathologies, or acute unexplained right ventricular dysfunction.
A diagnostic challenge arises among patients with COVID-19, as imaging studies used to diagnose DVT or PE may not be pursued given risk of transmitting infection to other patients or health care workers and potentially due to patient instability. Moreover, imaging studies may be challenging in the setting of patients with severe ARDS who require prone positioning. Investigation for PE is not feasible due to critical illness and prone position. Lower extremity ultrasound is also limited due to patient positioning. However, it may be argued that the prognosis of patients with ARDS requiring prone position is so grave that investigation for underlying VTE may not alter the course. A potential option may be to consider echocardiography to assess for signs of potentially worsening right ventricular dysfunction and, in rare circumstances, clot in transit ( ).

## Role for empiric therapeutic anticoagulation without a diagnosis of VTE
In view of the hemostatic derangements discussed previously and observations from prior viral illnesses ( ), some clinicians use intermediate- or full-dose (therapeutic) parenteral anticoagulation (rather than prophylactic dosing) for routine care of patients with COVID-19 ( ), hypothesizing that it may confer benefit to prevent microvascular thrombosis. However, the existing data are very limited, and are primarily based on a subgroup analysis (n = 97) from a single retrospective study with limited control for potential confounders ( ). A single-center study from China suggested that D-dimer levels >1,500 ng/ml has a sensitivity of 85.0% and specificity of 88.5% for detecting VTE events. However, the study was limited by small sample size and lack of validation. At this moment, while practitioners use a variety of prophylactic, intermediate, or therapeutic doses of anticoagulants in patients, the optimal dosing in patients with severe COVID-19 remains unknown and warrants further prospective investigation. The majority of panel members consider prophylactic anticoagulation, although a minority consider an intermediate or therapeutic dose to be reasonable.

## Incident VTE
Few published studies have commented on incident VTE in patients with COVID-19 ( , ). In a retrospective study from China, among 81 patients with severe COVID-19 admitted to ICU, 20 (25%) developed incident VTE. Of note, none of the patients had received VTE prophylaxis ( ). In a study of 184 patients with severe COVID-19 from 3 academic medical centers in the Netherlands, the authors reported that 31% (95% confidence interval: 20% to 41%) of patients developed incident VTE. All patients received pharmacological prophylaxis, although underdosing was observed in 2 of the 3 participating centers ( ). These findings require validation in additional studies.
It is possible but unknown that VTE remains underdiagnosed in patients with severe COVID-19. This is important, as ARDS in patients with COVID-19 is itself a potential etiology for hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction, pulmonary hypertension, and right ventricular failure. Further insult from PE may be unrecoverable.

## Medical therapy for VTE
Therapeutic anticoagulation is the mainstay of VTE treatment ( , , ). Selection of an agent requires consideration of comorbidities such as renal or hepatic dysfunction, thrombocytopenia, and gastrointestinal tract function, and the agent will likely change across the hospital course to the time of discharge. In many ill inpatients with VTE, parenteral anticoagulation (e.g., UFH) is preferred as it may be temporarily withheld and has no known drug-drug interactions with investigational COVID-19 therapies. However, concerns with UFH include the time to achieve therapeutic aPTT and increased health care worker exposure for frequent blood draws. Therefore, LMWHs may be preferred in patients unlikely to need procedures. The benefit of oral anticoagulation with DOACs includes the lack of need for monitoring, facilitation of discharge planning, and outpatient management. The potential risk (especially in the setting or organ dysfunction) may include clinical deterioration and lack of timely availability of effective reversal agents at some centers. For patients who are ready for discharge, DOACs or LMWH would be preferred to limit contact of patients with health care services required for INR monitoring for vitamin K antagonists (VKAs).

## COVID-19 and interventional therapies for VTE
PE response teams allow for multidisciplinary care for patients intermediate and high-risk with VTE ( , , , ). During the COVID-19 pandemic, similar to other consultative services, PE response teams should transition from in-person inpatient evaluation to e-consults using phone calls or telemedicine systems whenever feasible. It is important to note that there are minimal available data demonstrating lower mortality from routine use of advanced VTE therapies ( , ). Therefore, the use of catheter-directed therapies during the current outbreak should be limited to the most critical situations. Indiscriminate use of inferior vena cava filters should be avoided ( ). Recurrent PE despite optimal anticoagulation, or clinically significant VTE in the setting of absolute contraindications to anticoagulation, would be among the few scenarios in which placement of an inferior vena cava filter may be considered ( ). Even after inferior vena cava filter placement, anticoagulation should be resumed as soon as feasible, and this is often done with gradually increasing doses and close observation for bleeding. With regard to reperfusion strategies for acute PE, current guideline recommendations should be followed. Intermediate-risk hemodynamically stable patients (intermediate-low risk, or intermediate-high risk PE according to European Society of Cardiology [ESC] classification, submassive PE according to prior classifications) ( , , , ) should be managed initially with anticoagulation and close monitoring. In case of further deterioration, rescue systemic fibrinolysis should be considered, with catheter-directed options as an alternative. For patients with overt hemodynamic instability (high-risk PE according to the ESC classification, massive PE according to prior classifications) ( , , , ) systemic fibrinolysis is indicated, with catheter-based therapies reserved for scenarios that are not suitable for systemic fibrinolysis. If infection control settings are equal, bedside initiation of extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) is preferred in cases with known COVID-19 positivity or uncertain status, rather than support strategies requiring the use of a catheterization laboratory or an operating room ( ). 
presents a potential algorithm for treatments based on risk due to VTE and COVID-19 severity.
 The vast majority of patients with symptomatic acute DVT, should be managed with anticoagulation, with home treatment whenever possible. The few that may require acute endovascular techniques (either local fibrinolysis or embolectomy) include those with phlegmasia, or truly refractory symptoms ( ).

## COVID-19 and ACS

## COVID-19 and incident ACS
Myocardial injury in COVID-19, as evidenced by elevated cardiac troponin levels or electrocardiographic and echocardiographic abnormalities, is associated with severe disease ( , ). Furthermore, higher troponin levels are associated with severe COVID-19 ( , ). However, not all such events are due to thrombotic ACS. Although anecdotal cases of patients with COVID-19 presenting with ACS due to plaque rupture have been described (type 1 MI), currently no such cases have been published. Such cases have been also previously described with influenza or other viral illnesses, and have been attributed to a combination of SIRS as well as localized vascular or plaque inflammation ( , , ).

## COVID-19 and antithrombotic therapy for ACS
In presentations consistent with ACS due to plaque rupture (i.e., type 1 MI) ( ), dual antiplatelet therapy and full-dose anticoagulation per the American College of Cardiology (ACC)/American Heart Association (AHA) and ESC guidelines should be administered, unless there are contraindications ( , , , ). In patients with perceived elevated bleeding risk, regimens with less potent antiplatelet agents, such as with clopidogrel, should be considered, given that hemorrhagic complications are not uncommon. Special attention should be also given to drug-drug interactions between antiplatelet agents or anticoagulants and COVID-19 investigational therapies. Parenteral antithrombotic agents, in general, do not have known major interactions with the COVID-19 investigational therapies ( and 
).
 

## COVID-19 and interventional therapies for ACS
The ACC and Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions recently provided guidance regarding catheterization laboratory procedures in the current climate ( , ). The recommendations note that it is reasonable to continue optimal medical therapy and defer nonurgent cardiac procedures, in order to preserve PPE, as well as hospital resources including inpatient and ICU beds, and minimize exposure for patients and health care workers alike.
Prior to intervention, efforts should be made to distinguish nonspecific myocardial injury, myocarditis, and true plaque rupture presentations ( ). A low threshold to use transthoracic echocardiography to identify wall motion abnormalities should be considered prior to catheterization laboratory activation. Even in case of ST-segment elevation MI (STEMI), in which primary percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) reduces mortality and reinfarction, risk of COVID-19 transmission from patients to health care workers, or vice versa (asymptomatic vectors) must be considered. In light of this, individual centers in China and elsewhere have developed adjusted ACS protocols, which call for consideration of fibrinolytic therapy in selected patients with STEMI ( ). Centers in which timely PCI is less feasible may be more likely to adopt such a strategy. However, given that presentations of COVID-19 can mimic ACS (e.g., in the setting of myocarditis), fibrinolytic therapy must be used with caution.

## Critical Illness With SARS-CoV-2 and Management of Antithrombotic Agents
The risk of VTE, which is increased in critically ill patients, is likely even higher in those with SARS-CoV-2 and critical illness. Aside from hemostatic derangements, immobility (a systemic inflammatory state), mechanical ventilation, and central venous catheters contribute to VTE risk within the ICU ( , , ), nutritional deficiencies and liver dysfunction may also interfere with the production of coagulation factors ( ). Alterations in pharmacokinetics in critically ill patients may necessitate anticoagulation dose adjustment ( ), owing to factors relating to absorption, metabolism, and renal (or hepatic) elimination of these drugs in the setting of potential organ dysfunction.
Parenteral anticoagulation is recommended in most cases in which anticoagulant therapy is needed for known thrombotic disease. UFH can be used in the setting of anticipated procedures, or in patients with deteriorating renal function. If no urgent procedures are anticipated, LMWHs are a reasonable alternative ( ). In patients requiring ECMO, anticoagulation is frequently required to maintain circuit patency, especially at lower flow settings. Rates of complications are unknown in patients with SARS-CoV-2, but rates of thrombosis and hemorrhage may be as high as 53% and 16%, respectively, in other populations with respiratory failure ( ). The limited outcome data that are available for ECMO in patients with SARS-CoV-2 suggest poor outcomes, with 5 of 6 patients dying in one series and 3 of 3 in another ( , ). There are currently insufficient data to recommend anticoagulation targets for COVID-19 patients requiring ECMO ( ).

## Additional considerations
As previously mentioned, severe COVID-19 may predispose to DIC, with such patients experiencing particularly poor outcomes ( ). Supportive care and addressing the underlying hypoxia or coinfection are appropriate ( ). There are insufficient data to recommend transfusion thresholds that differ from those recommended for other critically ill patients. If invasive procedures are planned, prophylactic transfusion of platelets, fresh frozen plasma, fibrinogen, and prothrombin complex concentrate may be considered ( ). Last, patients requiring targeted temperature management may exhibit prolongations of both PT and aPTT without evidence of bleeding diathesis ( ). Therefore, correction of coagulopathy in unselected patients without overt bleeding is not currently recommended.

## DIC and Considerations for Antithrombotic Therapy

## Diagnosis and management
DIC is common in many patients with critical illness ( ), including those with COVID-19 ( , ). It is uncertain whether COVID-19 has unique characteristics to cause direct activation of coagulation. The diagnosis of DIC is best established using the ISTH DIC score calculator ( ). Regular laboratory monitoring of platelet count, PT, D-dimer, and fibrinogen in patients with COVID-19 is important to diagnose worsening coagulopathy. The first step in management of DIC is to identify and treat the underlying condition(s). Bacterial superinfections should be treated aggressively.
In addition to preventing VTE, LMWH prophylaxis may decrease thrombin generation and modify the course of DIC. Preliminary results, albeit with small number of events and limited adjustment, may suggest a favorable response from LMWH prophylaxis ( , ). Long-acting antiplatelet agents should be generally discontinued in most patients with DIC, unless required (e.g., recent ACS or stent implantation). For patients with moderate or severe COVID-19 and an indication for dual antiplatelet therapy (e.g., PCI within the past 3 months or recent MI) and with suspected or confirmed DIC without overt bleeding, in the absence of evidence decisions for antiplatelet therapy need to be individualized. In general, it is reasonable to continue dual antiplatelet therapy if platelet count is ≥50,000, reduce to single antiplatelet therapy if platelet count is ≥25,000 and <50,000, and discontinue if platelets <25,000. However, these guidelines may be revised upward or downward depending on the individualized relative risk of stent-related thrombotic complications versus bleeding. Recovery from DIC is dependent on endogenous fibrinolysis breaking down the disseminated thrombi.

## Management of bleeding
Clinically overt bleeding is uncommon in the setting of COVID-19. However, when bleeding occurs in COVID-19-associated DIC, blood products support should be considered as per septic coagulopathy ( ). In summary, the mainstay of blood products transfusion are as follows: platelet concentrate to maintain platelet count >50 × 109/l in DIC patients with active bleeding or >20 × 109/l in those with a high risk of bleeding or requiring invasive procedures, fresh frozen plasma (15 to 25 ml/kg) in patients with active bleeding with either prolonged PT or aPTT ratios (>1.5 times normal) or decreased fibrinogen (<1.5 g/l), fibrinogen concentrate, or cryoprecipitate to patients with persisting severe hypofibrinogenemia (<1.5 g/l), and prothrombin complex concentrate if fresh frozen plasma transfusion is not possible. With the existing data, tranexamic acid should not be used routinely in COVID-19-associated DIC.

## Management of Patients With Thromboembolic Disease Without COVID-19
The main goal of management for patients with known or new onset thrombotic disease but without COVID-19 is to provide sufficient antithrombotic protection, while minimizing physical contact between patients, health care workers, and health systems. Outpatient management or early discharge for acute VTE should be instituted when possible ( , , ), and early discharge after medication stabilization for low-risk ACS or PCI for high-risk ACS should be considered ( , , ). Telemedicine should be the preferred method of follow-up, and in-person visits should be reserved only for scenarios that cannot be addressed by telemedicine, or that may potentially warrant hospitalization.
In general, pharmacotherapy in patients with known thrombotic disease and without COVID-19 should be followed similar to the period prior to the pandemic. Although a recent document from the CDC indicated an increased risk of severe COVID-19 in patients receiving “blood thinners” ( ), there is no evidence that antiplatelet agents or anticoagulants, increase the risk of contracting COVID-19, or of developing severe COVID-19. Sufficient education should be provided to patients for self-monitoring of symptoms, and to avoid unnecessary emergency department visits for nuisance bleeding.
For patients receiving VKAs, frequent INR monitoring may pose logistical challenges because of lockdowns and may unnecessarily increase the risk of being exposed to SARS-CoV-2. Therefore, thoughtful considerations should be given to potential alternatives, including using extended INR testing intervals if prior INRs have been stable ( ). Other alternatives include home-based INR checks, if this can be set up promptly, drive-through INR testing, or switching to a DOAC or LMWHs when clinically appropriate ( 
). A summary of key recommendations is presented in 
.
 

## Impact of COVID-19 on Health Care Workers and Health Systems

## Considerations for health care workers
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends contact and droplet personal PPE for health care workers in their routine care of patients with COVID-19. If an aerosol-generating procedure is being performed (e.g., intubation, extubation, cardiopulmonary resuscitation), additional airborne PPE with an N95 respirator is recommended. Use of telemedicine in place of in-person office visits is a strategy to minimize physical exposure. Further details have been discussed elsewhere ( , ).
The following considerations specific to the care of patients with thrombotic disease may be useful. Over-the-phone and telemedicine approaches should be considered for all nonurgent appointments. For necessary in-person visits, visitor restrictions and staggering of appointments are important considerations ( ). For patients with COVID-19 who require urgent procedures, such as interventions for ACS, high-risk PE, or critical limb ischemia, the fewest number of staff necessary should be involved. For patients without known infection, health care workers should screen patients for COVID-19 exposures or infectivity, consider appropriate PPE during the procedure, and apply disinfection techniques post-procedure, as outlined previously ( ). In patients who require emergent cardiac catheterization with unknown COVID-19 status, airborne PPE with an N95 respirator or powered air-purifying respirator is recommended ( , ).

## Considerations for health systems
Active involvement of health systems with respect to the care of patients with thrombotic disease are critical to achieving optimal outcomes for both COVID-19-infected and uninfected patients. If feasible, resources should be allocated to enable at-home or drive-through INR checks. Further, system-based considerations should be made to monitor and make necessary adjustments to algorithms for management of suspected STEMI or severe PE requiring PERT teams. If procedures are deemed necessary for COVID-19–infected patients, specific protocols should be put into place regarding PPE use and room disinfection.

## Role of Professional Societies
Professional societies, along with other partners, have an important role in knowledge generation and dissemination for various aspects of COVID-19 ( , , ), as well as leading by example. Illustrative examples include the responsible and wise decisions by the ACC to cancel the 2020 Annual Scientific Sessions, the Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions to cancel the 2020 Annual Scientific Sessions, and the ISTH to cancel the XXVIII Congress of the ISTH to promote social distancing and to avoid further spread of the disease. Enabling meetings to continue virtually, as with the recent ACC scientific sessions (in this case at no charge) further promotes knowledge dissemination and sense of community, allowing a semblance or normality in challenging times. Many professional societies, including the ACC, AHA, American Society of Hematology, ESC, ISTH, and others, are compiling COVID-related resources in dedicated websites. Professional societies can further foster collaborative knowledge generation by supporting multicenter multinational original research studies to address the pressing clinical or laboratory questions ( 
).
 

## Public Health Considerations Related to Care for Thrombotic Disease
The World Health Organization and government agencies have recognized the critical importance of public health interventions at the societal level (including social distancing and self-isolation) to decrease transmission rates and alleviate the burden on health systems ( ). In the most affected areas, governments have enacted mandatory home quarantine for all nonessential personnel ( , , ). There are several important issues to consider as these interventions relate to thrombotic disease.
First, given the recommendations to stay at home, with decreased daily activity and sedentary lifestyles, patients may be at increased risk for VTE ( , , , , ). Clinicians should be aware of this (especially in older adults and higher-risk patients) and provide education on the importance of home activities to mitigate this risk ( ). Second, as daily routines are disrupted, dietary changes (especially in daily intake of green vegetables, which are the major source of vitamin K in the Western diet) may affect patients who receive VKAs. As quarantine measures become more severe, changes in diet and vitamin K intake may impact INR values. Practitioners and patients should be aware of these risks, and patients should be advised to maintain a stable diet to the best of their ability. Third, the COVID-19 pandemic has produced damaging economic effects ( ), with the United Nations estimating that COVID-19 is likely to cost the world economy more than $2 trillion in 2020. These losses may adversely affect patients’ treatment for thrombotic diseases. Socioeconomic disadvantage has been linked to higher rates of VTE and adverse outcomes ( , ). As the economic effects of COVID-19 continue to evolve, these communities may come under new and significant stress.

## Conclusions and Future Directions
More data and higher-quality data are required to learn how COVID-19 and thrombotic disease interact. Such data, ideally derived from prospective, multicenter, multinational studies, could help to elucidate the similarities and distinctions in disease presentation and outcomes of patients with COVID-19 and pre-existing and incident thromboembolic disease, and help to identify management strategies to optimize outcomes in these patients. Currently, one large international registry of patients with venous thromboembolism (the RIETE [Registro Informatizado Enfermedad TromboEmbólica] registry) ( ) is incorporating data elements for COVID-19, and a dedicated adjudicated prospective registry to study COVID-19 and other cardiovascular outcomes is being initiated (CORONA-VTE registry; BWH Thrombosis Research Group; principal investigator: G.P.). A multicenter, multinational ACS registry has been initiated, as well as a new AHA registry for cardiovascular care and outcomes of these patients. Special attention should also be given to patients with pre-existing thromboembolic disease who have limited access to care in the face of the COVID-19 pandemic, which has hindered transportation and limited the resources of the health care system.
Funding agencies, professional societies, and organizations with active patient participation will all play an important role when it comes to future research in this area. Funding agencies, including the National Institutes of Health (which has already responded swiftly) ( ), should continue to pay specific attention to this pandemic. Coordination and cooperation are necessary to quickly address research priorities including those related to thrombotic disease ( ). Organizations such as the Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute and the North American Thrombosis Forum can ensure the voices and concerns of patients are at the forefront of research questions. Professional societies, including the AHA, ESC, ISTH, International Union of Angiology, and others, should promote knowledge generation and dissemination and advocacy in this challenging climate.
The current paper has provided an interim summary and guidance for considerations related to thrombotic disease and antithrombotic therapy during the COVID-19 pandemic. Such guidance should supplement, rather than supplant, clinical decision making. Nuances of conversations between patients and practitioners should be considered for appropriate patient-centered decisions.
In conclusion, thrombotic disease may be precedent factors or incident complications in patients with COVID-19. Important considerations for the preventive and therapeutic use of antithrombotic agents should be kept in mind to mitigate the thrombotic and hemorrhagic events in these high-risk patients. Funding agencies, professional societies, patients, clinicians, and investigators should work collaboratively to effectively and efficiently address numerous critical areas of knowledge gap.

## Acknowledgments
The authors thank Kathryn Mikkelsen, MBA, from the North American Thrombosis Forum, and Adriana Visonà, MD, from the European Society of Vascular Medicine for their comments related to this initiative. The authors credit Julie Der Nigoghossian for assistance with graphic design.

## Footnotes
This work was endorsed by the International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis, North American Thrombosis Forum, European Society of Vascular Medicine, and International Union of Angiology; and supported by the European Society of Cardiology Working Group on the Pulmonary Circulation and Right Ventricular Function (to Drs. Rosenkranz and Konstantinides). Dr. Madhavan was supported by a grant from the National Institutes of Health/National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute to Columbia University Irving Medical Center (T32 HL007854). Dr. Bikdeli has served as a consulting expert, on behalf of the plaintiff, for litigation related to a specific type of inferior vena cava filters. Dr. Jimenez has served as an advisor or consultant for Bayer HealthCare Pharmaceuticals, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Daiichi-Sankyo, Leo Pharma, Pfizer, ROVI and Sanofi; has served as a speaker or a member of a Speakers Bureau for Bayer HealthCare Pharmaceuticals, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Daiichi-Sankyo, Leo Pharma, ROVI, and Sanofi; and has received grants for clinical research from Daiichi-Sankyo, Sanofi, and ROVI. Dr. Ageno has received a research grant from Bayer; and has recevied honoraria for participation in Advisory Boards from Boehringer Ingelheim, Bayer Pharmaceuticals, Bristol-Myers Squibb/Pfizer, Daiichi-Sankyo, Aspen, Sanofi, Portola, Leo Pharma, and Janssen. Dr. Giri has served on the Advisory Board for AstraZeneca; has served on the Trial Steering Committee for Inari Medical; has received institutional research grant support from Recor Medical and St. Jude Medical; and has received personal fees for trial adjudication from the New England Research Institute. Dr. Quéré has received lecture fees from Pfizer, Bayer Pharmaceuticals, Aspen, and Leo Pharma. Dr. Dimakakos has received consulting fees from Sanofi and Leo Pharma. Dr. Caprini has served on the steering committee for Janssen R&D; has served on the bleeding Advisory Board for Pfizer; has served on the Advisory Board for Bristol-Myers Squibb and Alexion Pharmaceuticals; has served as a consultant for Recovery Force; and has received honoraria from Sanofi. Dr. Tafur has served as a consultant for Recovery Force; has conducted research for Janssen, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Doasense, and Idorsia; and has received educational grant support from Janssen. Dr. Falanga has received speaker honoraria from Bayer, Pfizer, and Sanofi. Dr. Hunt has served as chair of the steering group of World Thrombosis Day and Medical Director of Thrombosis UK, 2 not-for-profit organizations from which she takes no fees. Dr. Spyropoulos has served as a consultant for Boehringer Ingelheim, Janssen, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Bayer, Portola, and the ATLAS Group; and has received research grant support from Boehringer Ingelheim and Janssen. Dr. Barnes has served as a consultant for Pfizer/Bristol-Myers Squibb, Janssen, Portola, and AMAG Pharmaceuticals. Dr. Barnes has served as a consultant for Pfizer/Bristol-Myers Squibb, Janssen, Portola, and AMAG Pharmaceuticals; and has received grant funding from Pfizer/Bristol-Myers Squibb, and Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan. Dr. Eikelboom has received consulting fees and/or honoraria from AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Daiichi-Sankyo, Eli Lilly, GlaxoSmithKline, Pfizer, Janssen, Sanofi, and Servier; and has received grants and/or in-kind support from AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol-Myers Squibb, GlaxoSmithKline, Pfizer, Janssen, and Sanofi. Dr. Weinberg has received consulting fees from Magneto Thrombectomy Solutions. Dr. Schulman has received research grant support from Octapharma and Boehringer Ingelheim; and has received honoraria from Alnylam, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Daiichi-Sankyo, and Sanofi. Dr. Beckman has served on the Advisory Board for Amgen, AstraZeneca, GlaxoSmithKline, and Janssen; has served on the Data Safety Monitoring Board for Bayer and Novartis; has received consulting fees from JanOne; and has received personal fees for trial adjudication from Sanofi. Dr. Carrier has received research funding from Bristol-Myers Squibb, Leo Pharma, and Pfizer; and has received consulting honoraria from Bristol-Myers Squibb, Bayer, Pfizer, Leo Pharma, Servier, and Sanofi. Dr. Piazza has received research grant support from EKOS/BTG International, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Daiichi-Sankyo, Bayer, Portola, and Janssen; and has received consulting fees from Pfizer and Thrombolex. Dr. Steg has received research grants from Amarin, Bayer, Sanofi, and Servier; has served on the Steering Committee, Data Safety Monitoring Board, or Clinical Endpoint Committee for clinical trials for Amarin, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Idorsia, Novartis, Pfizer, Sanofi, and Servier; and has received speaker or consulting fees from Amarin, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Idorsia, Novartis, Pfizer, Sanofi, and Servier. Dr. Stone has received speaker or other honoraria from Cook, Terumo, QOOL Therapeutics, and Orchestra Biomed; has served as a consultant to Valfix, TherOx, Vascular Dynamics, Robocath, HeartFlow, Gore, Ablative Solutions, Miracor, Neovasc, V-Wave, Abiomed, Ancora, MAIA Pharmaceuticals, Vectorious, Reva, and Matrizyme; and has equity/options from Ancora, Qool Therapeutics, Cagent, Applied Therapeutics, Biostar family of funds, SpectraWave, Orchestra Biomed, Aria, Cardiac Success, MedFocus family of funds, and Valfix. Dr. Rosenkranz has received consulting and/or lecture fees from Abbott, Acceleron, Actelion, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Janssen, Merck Sharp and Dohme, Novartis, Pfizer, and United Therapeutics; and has received institutional research grants from Actelion, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Novartis, Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, Else-Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung, and Kröner-Fresenius-Stiftung. Dr. Goldhaber has received research support from Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol-Myers-Squibb, BTG EKOS, Daiichi-Sankyo, Janssen, the U.S. National Heart, Blood, and Lung Institute, and the Thrombosis Research Institute; and has received consulting fees from Bayer and Boehringer Ingelheim. Dr. Parikh has received institutional grants/research support from Abbott Vascular, Shockwave Medical, TriReme Medical, and Surmodics; and has received consulting fees from Terumo and Abiomed; has participated on Advisory Boards for Abbott, Boston Scientific, CSI, Janssen, Medtronic, and Philips; and has served on the Data Safety and Monitoring Board for Silk Road Medical. Dr. Monreal has served as an advisor or consultant for Sanofi, Leo Pharma, and Daiichi-Sankyo; and has received a nonrestricted educational grant by Sanofi and Bayer to sponsor the RIETE registry. Dr. Krumholz has worked under contract with the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services to support quality measurement programs; has received institutional research grant support from Medtronic and the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Johnson & Johnson, and Shenzhen Center for Health Information; has served as a consultant for the National Center for Cardiovascular Diseases in Beijing; has received consulting fees from Arnold & Porter law firm (Sanofi clopidogrel litigation), Ben C. Martin law firm (Cook Celect IVC filter litigation), and Siegfried and Jensen law firm (Vioxx litigation); has served as Cardiac Scientific Advisory Board chair for UnitedHealth; has served as a member of the IBM Watson Health Life Sciences Board; has served on the Advisory Board for Element Science and Facebook; has served on the Physician Advisory Board for Aetna; and is the cofounder of HugoHealth and Refactor Health. Dr. Konstantinides has received research grant support from Bayer AG, Boehringer Ingelheim, Actelion/Janssen; has received educational grant support from Biocompatibles Group UK/Boston Scientific, and Daiichi-Sankyo; and has received lecture fees from Bayer AG, Pfizer/Bristol-Myers Squibb, and Merck Sharp and Dohme. Dr. Weitz has served as a consultant to and received honoraria from Bayer, Janssen, Johnson & Johnson, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Pfizer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, Daiichi-Sankyo, Merck, Servier, Anthos, Ionis, and PhaseBio. Dr. Lip has served as a consultant for Bayer/Janssen, Bristol-Myers Squibb/Pfizer, Medtronic, Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, Verseon, and Daiichi-Sankyo; and has served as a speaker for Bayer, Bristol-Myers Squibb/Pfizer, Medtronic, Boehringer Ingelheim, and Daiichi-Sankyo. All other authors have reported that they have no relationships relevant to the contents of this paper to disclose. Thomas M. Maddox, MD, MSc, served as Guest Editor-in-Chief for this paper.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’ institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more information, visit the JACCauthor instructions page.
Listen to this manuscript's audio summary by Editor-in-Chief Dr. Valentin Fuster onJACC.org.

## References