pmceLifeElife1894elife101579614eLifeeLife2050-084XeLife Sciences Publications, LtdPMC8942469PMC8942469.1894246989424693529433810.7554/eLife.77444774441Research ArticleBiochemistry and Chemical BiologyMicrobiology and Infectious DiseaseCoagulation factors directly cleave SARS-CoV-2 spike and enhance viral entry
KastenhuberEdward Rhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-1872-212X ; ), the limited world-wide vaccine distribution ( ; ; ; ), the emergence of viral variants ( ; ), and the repeated SARS-like zoonotic outbreaks over the last 20 years ( ; ; ) underscore the urgent need to develop antivirals for coronavirus ( ).
In addition to attachment to specific receptors on target cells, coronaviruses require proteolytic processing of the spike protein by host cell proteases to facilitate membrane fusion and viral entry ( ; ; ). In SARS-CoV-2, host cell proteases act on two sites residing at the S1/S2 subunit boundary and at the S2’ region proximal to the fusion peptide ( ; ; ; ). S1/S2 site cleavage opens up the spike trimer and exposes the S2’ site, which must be cleaved to allow for the release of the conserved fusion peptide ( ; ). While the prevailing model suggests that furin cleaves the S1/S2 site and TMPRSS2 cleaves the S2’ site ( ), it remains unclear to what extent other proteases may be involved ( ; ).
TMPRSS2 is an important host cell factor in proteolytic activation across multiple coronaviruses ( ; ). TMPRSS2 knockout or inhibition reduces infection in mouse models of SARS and MERS ( ; ). More recently, TMPRSS2 has been highlighted as a drug target for SARS-CoV-2 ( ; ).
Furin activity is not essential to produce infectious particles ( ) and furin is not necessary for cell fusion ( ), but deletion of the S1/S2 site attenuates SARS-CoV-2 in vivo ( ). Proteolytic activation of envelope proteins presumably coordinates target cell engagement and envelope conformational changes leading to fusion. Furin cleavage during viral biogenesis, before release of viral particles, may render SARS-CoV-2 spike less stable in solution and reduce the likelihood to reach and interact with target cells ( ; ; ). Although the S1/S2 site is often referred to as the ‘furin site’ ( ), the full spectrum of proteases that catalyze biologically relevant activity in the lung remains incompletely defined.
Proteases also orchestrate the coagulation pathway, via a series of zymogens that are each activated by a chain reaction of proteolytic processing. Coagulopathy and thromboembolic events have emerged as a key component of COVID-19 pathogenesis ( ). Comorbidities associated with severe COVID-19 are also linked to dysregulated blood clotting ( ). Patients with a history of stroke prior to infection have nearly twice the risk of in-hospital mortality ( ). Upon hospital admission, elevated D-dimer levels (an indicator of fibrinolysis and coagulopathy) and low platelet counts (an indicator of consumptive coagulopathy) are predictive biomarkers of severe disease and lethality in COVID-19 patients ( ). Systemic activity of clotting factors V, VIII, and X are elevated in severe COVID-19 disease ( ). While early phase disease is typically restricted to a local pulmonary hypercoagulable state, late-stage disease may be accompanied by systemic DIC, stroke, and cardio-embolism ( ; ; ; ). Ischemic stroke occurred in approximately 1% of hospitalized COVID-19 patients, and strikingly, a fraction of them experienced stroke even prior to onset of respiratory symptoms ( ).
In a drug-repurposing effort to target TMPRSS2, we observed that multiple direct-acting anticoagulants have anti-TMPRSS2 off-target effects. We subsequently investigated overlap in substrate specificity between TMPRSS2, factor Xa, and thrombin. Circulating proteases involved in blood clotting can cleave and activate SARS-CoV-2 spike, enhancing infection, specifically at the stage of viral entry. We propose that the serine protease inhibitor nafamostat may incorporate a combined mechanism in the treatment of COVID-19 through inhibition of TMPRSS2 and coagulation factors.

## Results

## Serine protease inhibitors suppress SARS-CoV-2 entry via inhibition of TMPRSS2
We developed a fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET)-based protease enzymatic assay based on peptides containing either the S1/S2 or S2’ cleavage sites of SARS-CoV-2 spike ( , ). Upon cleavage, the liberated 5-FAM emits fluorescent signal proportional to the quantity of product ( ). Camostat and nafamostat resulted in strong inhibition of TMPRSS2 ( ), as expected ( ; ). We also identified that otamixaban and the active form of dabigatran (but not its prodrug dabigatran etexilate) inhibit TMPRSS2 enzymatic activity in vitro ( ).
 
 
 
 
To explore these candidates in a cell-based functional assay of spike protein, SARS-CoV-2 S-pseudotyped HIV-1 particles were employed to infect human lung Calu3 cells ( ; ). Consistent with the TMPRSS2 enzymatic assay, camostat, nafamaostat, otamixaban, and dabigatran etexilate suppressed pseudoviral entry, as indicated by nanoluciferase luminescent signal ( ). No effects on relative cell growth were observed at the same timepoint in Calu3 ( ) or A549 cells (data not shown), confirming that reduced luminescent signal was not due to cytotoxicity. A dose-response experiment with select protease inhibitors revealed a submicromolar IC50 for camostat and nafamostat and IC50s in the 10–20 µM range for otamixaban and dabigatran in Calu3 cells ( ).
Using A549 cells with or without ectopic ACE2 expression, we confirmed that HIV-1NL/SARS-CoV-2 pseudovirus infection is dependent on ACE2, while infection with HIV-1NL pseudotyped instead with VSV G envelope protein is not ACE2 dependent ( ). Caco2 cells, which endogenously express ACE2 and TMPRSS2, show greater susceptibility to SARS-CoV-2 S-pseudotyped HIV-1NL, but equivalent susceptibility to VSV G-pseudotyped HIV-1NL, when compared to A549/ACE2 cells ( ).
To further validate these results in an alternative pseudovirus system, we used recombinant G protein-deficient vesicular stomatitis virus (rVSV∆G) pseudotyped with SARS-CoV-2-S ( ), yielding pseudovirus dependent on spike for cell entry ( ). The antiviral effects of the four candidate protease inhibitors were confirmed in the VSV pseudovirus system in multiple cell lines, and response was associated with TMPRSS2 expression ( ).
We aimed to determine whether the effects of camostat and nafamostat are indeed TMPRSS2-dependent, or if other unidentified cellular proteases can compensate for TMPRSS2 suppression. To do so, we knocked out TMPRSS2 in ACE2+ TMPRSS2+ Caco2 cells and found that susceptibility to pseudovirus was significantly reduced, comparable to knockout of ACE2 ( , ). Furthermore, both camostat and nafamostat reduce pseudovirus entry into control Caco2 cells harboring control sgRNA, but this trend was lost in cells with two independent TMPRSS2-targeting sgRNAs ( ). These data indicate that, in the absence of exogenous proteases, TMPRSS2 is a critical host enzyme activating SARS-CoV-2 spike in TMPRSS2+ cells and that TMPRSS2 is the primary target of camostat and nafamostat in these conditions.

## Coagulation factors directly cleave SARS-CoV-2 spike
Anticoagulants are highly represented among FDA-approved drugs that target proteases, and among the hits from the screen described above. The off-target effects of anticoagulants on TMPRSS2 imply that these small molecules can interact with the active sites of TMPRSS2 in a similar manner to coagulation factors. This led us to hypothesize that coagulation factors may interact with some of the same substrates as TMPRSS2, including SARS-CoV-2 spike.
To determine the properties of enzyme-substrate relationships, TMPRSS2, factor Xa, and thrombin cleavage of S1/S2 and S2’ peptides were determined over a range of 0–160 µM peptide substrate ( , ). Surprisingly, factor Xa catalyzed S1/S2 cleavage more than an order of magnitude faster than TMPRSS2 ( ), although factor Xa showed lower affinity (higher Km) compared with TMPRSS2 to the S1/S2 peptide ( ). Thrombin has greater affinity (lower Km) than TMPRSS2 and factor Xa for the S1/S2 substrate ( ) and performs S1/S2 cleavage at a rate intermediate between TMPRSS2 and factor Xa ( ). Unlike factor Xa, thrombin cleaves the S2’ peptide with greater activity than TMPRSS2 ( ).
 
 We next compared the ability of coagulation factors to cleave SARS-CoV-2 S to their ability to cleave their known substrates. During the physiological process of clotting, factor Xa cleaves prothrombin at R271, which ultimately becomes the activated form α-thrombin ( ). Thrombin, in turn, cleaves multiple sites of fibrinogen, including the beta chain (FGB) at R44, in a critical step toward aggregation and polymerization of high molecular weight fibrin clots. Fluorogenic peptides corresponding to THRBR271 and FGBR44 were synthesized and assayed with TMPRSS2, factor Xa, and thrombin. TMPRSS2 exhibited relatively broad activity to cleave this collection of substrates ( ). As expected, factor Xa showed strong selectivity for THRBR271 over FGBR44, while thrombin showed the opposite substrate preference ( ). Remarkably, factor Xa showed ~9-fold greater maximum initial reaction velocity (Vmax) in cleaving the spike S1/S2 peptide compared to cleaving a peptide corresponding to its known substrate, THRBR271 ( ). The Vmax for thrombin cleavage of the spike S1/S2 peptide was within ~4.5-fold of the Vmax for the benchmark FGBR44 peptide ( ), indicating that thrombin might also cleave this site when activated during coagulation.
We next assessed the effect of substituting amino acids adjacent to the cleavage site of the S1/S2 peptide on proteolytic cleavage by these proteases. An arginine preceding the cleavage site (P1 position) is a common feature of substrates of many serine proteases. Substitution of the P1 arginine in the S1/S2 substrate with alanine (S1S2-P1A) resulted in a 4-fold reduction in TMPRSS2 cleavage and abolished nearly all cleavage by factor Xa and thrombin ( ). Substitutions in the P3 and P4 positions (S1S2-HPN) with features typical of a substrate of type II transmembrane serine proteases (TTSPs), a family which includes TMPRSS2 and hepsin ( ), did not change TMPRSS2 cleavage and greatly reduced factor Xa and thrombin cleavage ( ). Although the substrate specificity of TTSPs and coagulation factors are not universally similar, the cleavage sites of SARS-CoV-2 are specifically cleaved by TMPRSS2, factor Xa, and thrombin.
To consider whether the context of protease activity may influence substrate specificity, we repeated the enzymatic assay in the presence of phospholipids. The addition of phospholipid vesicles did not change factor Xa activity or substrate preference in this assay ( ). To ensure the quality of our phospholipid vesicle preparation, we added 0–100 µM PC/PS to a dilute Russell’s viper venom time (dRVVT) clotting assay, where PC/PS drives a significant, concentration-dependent acceleration of clotting of normal pooled human plasma ( ). In summary, the coagulation serine proteases factor Xa and thrombin exhibit proteolytic activity against SARS-CoV-2 spike peptide substrates.

## Factor Xa and thrombin facilitate SARS-CoV-2 spike-mediated entry
We next investigated whether coagulation factors could cleave trimeric spike in its native 3D conformation, and whether this activity potentiated spike function in viral entry into cells. To do so, we used replication-defective SARS-CoV-2 spike-pseudotyped VSV or HIV-1 virus ( ). In the VSV pseudovirus system, addition of purified factor Xa or thrombin to the media significantly increased infection in Calu3 cells 16 hr post infection as determined by either quantification of NeonGreen ( , ) or nanoluciferase activity ( ).
 
 
While factor X and prothrombin levels are variable between individuals in healthy populations ( ), the concentration of proteases used in the pseudovirus assay (125–250 nM) are comparable to reference ranges of factor X ( ; ; ) and prothrombin ( ; ; ). Similar concentrations of active purified proteases were required to normalize in vitro clotting times, where purified factor Xa was used to correct dRVVT of factor X-deficient human plasma ( , ) and purified thrombin was used to correct the prothrombin time of prothrombin-deficient human plasma ( ).
SARS-CoV-2 contains a notable insertion of basic residues at the S1/S2 boundary, distinguishing its sequence from many related betacoronaviruses ( ). Entry of rVSV∆G was increased when complemented with spike protein from SARS-CoV of the 2002 outbreak ( ), but not when complemented instead with VSV G ( ). This indicates that factor Xa spike cleavage could be relevant across multiple coronaviruses, but is not generally associated with VSV entry.
We further validated that factor Xa activated spike-mediated entry the HIV-1-based pseudovirus system ( ). Consistent with the results above, addition of purified factor Xa to the media at the time of infection enhanced entry of HIV-1-based SARS-CoV-2 pseudovirus in Calu3 cells ( ). Thrombin did not appear to enhance spike-mediated entry by HIV-1/SARS-CoV-2 pseudovirus, unlike rVSV∆G/SARS-CoV-2 pseudovirus ( ).
We investigated the functional interplay of TMPRSS2 expression and the effect of exogenous activated coagulation factors. TMPRSS2 is expressed in Calu3 cells and contributes to coronavirus entry ( ), whereas A549/ACE2 and Vero cells lack endogenous TMPRSS2 expression. Factor Xa induced a significant dose-dependent effect on pseudovirus entry in both Calu3 and A549/ACE2 ( ). Furthermore, an isogenic pair of Vero cells was generated by expressing TMPRSS2 or GFP control. Pseudovirus infection of both VeroGFP and VeroTMPRSS2 cells were significantly increased by factor Xa, indicating that factor Xa enhancement of infection is not dependent on TMPRSS2 ( ). This is consistent with the model that FXa cuts the S1/S2 site and TMPRSS2 has functionally important activity at the S2’ site.

## Nafamostat broadly inhibits cleavage of spike peptides by both transmembrane serine proteases and coagulation factors
Given that multiple proteases could contribute to SARS-CoV-2 spike cleavage activation, a drug that could inhibit both transmembrane serine proteases and coagulation factors would be potentially valuable as a dual action anticoagulant/antiviral in COVID-19. Accordingly, we next explored the candidate set of inhibitors for cross-reactivity against a broader set of proteases that could facilitate viral entry. Like TMPRSS2, human airway trypsin-like protease (HAT), encoded by TMPRSS11D, is a member of the TTSP family of proteases and could activate SARS-CoV-2 S ( ). HAT exhibited sensitivity to camostat and nafamostat, similar to TMPRSS2 ( ). Compared to TMPRSS2, HAT was more sensitive to dabigatran and less sensitive to otamixaban ( ). Factor Xa activity against the S1/S2 peptide was most sensitive to otamixaban and moderately sensitive to nafamostat and dabigatran ( ). Thrombin activity was sensitive to camostat, nafamostat, and dabigatran, and moderately sensitive to otamixaban ( ).
 
 
We performed a dose-response curve of the panel of inhibitors on factor Xa and thrombin S1/S2 cleavage. Otamixaban, a designed factor Xa inhibitor, demonstrated an IC50 at the nanomolar level to factor Xa, while nafamostat and dabigatran demonstrated IC50s in the micromolar range ( ). Camostat did not potently inhibit factor Xa spike cleavage. Dabigatran, a designed thrombin inhibitor, as well as nafamostat and camostat demonstrated a submicromolar IC50 for thrombin-dependent spike cleavage ( ). Otamixaban inhibited thrombin spike cleavage in the micromolar range.
Furin showed high activity against the S1/S2 peptide, but not against the S2’ peptide, and was not sensitive to any of the candidate inhibitors ( ). While it has been suggested that TMPRSS4 or neutrophil elastase may also cleave SARS-CoV-2 spike, we detected minimal activity against either S1/S2 or S2’ peptide substrates in our enzymatic assay (<1% of furin cleavage of S1/S2) ( ).
In the pseudovirus assay, nafamostat effectively suppresses SARS-CoV-2 S-mediated entry with or without the addition of exogenous factor Xa, using either the VSV-based ( ) or HIV-1-based ( ) SARS-CoV-2 pseudovirus. To clarify the pleiotropic nature of nafamostat, which inhibits TMPRSS2 and factor Xa, we compared the effect of apixaban, which inhibits factor Xa but not TMPRSS2. Apixaban rescued the effect of exogenous FXa back to the baseline level of infection, but did not affect pseudovirus infection in the absence of exogenous protease ( ). Direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs) have the potential to block clotting factor-mediated enhancement of viral entry, but TMPRSS2-mediated cleavage activation would remain unaffected by treatment with DOACs in common usage in North America and Europe. Taken together, nafamostat appears to be a versatile inhibitor of spike activation by a variety of TTSPs and coagulation factors. The multitarget mechanism of nafamostat distinguishes its potential as an antiviral/anticoagulant from currently FDA-approved DOACs.

## Factor Xa and thrombin increase SARS-CoV-2 infection in lung organoids
To explore the effect of coagulation factors in a more physiologically relevant setting, we exposed human pluripotent stem cell-derived lung organoids (hPSC-LOs) to SARS-CoV-2 infection under BSL-3 conditions with or without addition of exogenous protease. Stepwise, directed differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells generates lung organoids that form three-dimensional cellular structures and recapitulate functional and molecular characteristics of the lung ( ; ; ; ; ). hPSC-LOs express alveolar type II cell markers and were previously shown to be permissive to SARS-CoV-2 infection and replication ( ).
Mature lung organoids were infected with SARS-CoV-2 at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.1 ( ) or 0.01 ( ) and viral replication was measured by quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) for SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid (N) ( ) and SARS-CoV-2 envelope (E) ( ). The addition of either factor Xa or thrombin increased the levels of viral RNA following infection ( ). This effect was accentuated at 48 hr post infection with respect to 24 hr post infection, and with lower initiating MOI. Factor Xa and thrombin increase SARS-CoV-2 infection in the context of multicycle viral replication in human lung organoids.
 

## Discussion

## Coagulation factors cleave the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein
Using a FRET-based enzymatic assay, two platforms of pseudovirus assays, and SARS-CoV-2 infection experiments in lung organoids, we demonstrate that coagulation proteases factor Xa and thrombin cleave SARS-CoV-2 spike protein. Coagulation-induced cleavage enhances spike activation and increases viral entry into target cells, potentially instigating a positive feedback loop with infection-induced coagulation. Nafamostat, among currently available drugs, is best suited as a multi-purpose inhibitor against spike cleavage by TTSPs and coagulation factors. These data have numerous implications at the intersection of virology and coagulation.

## Viral envelope protein activation by non-target cell proteases
Hijacking of host transmembrane, endosomal, and ER proteases to activate viral envelope proteins has been described in influenza A, human metapneumovirus, HIV, and Sendai virus ( ; ). In the present study, we find an instance where the virus can be primed not by proteases expressed by the target cell, but by host organism proteases derived from the microenvironment of the target cell. Prior studies have described cleavage activation of SARS-CoV by elastase and plasmin, illustrating that microenvironmental host proteases can indeed play an important role in coronavirus spike priming ( ; ; ). Generally, the scope by which circulating proteases, such as coagulation factors, or proteases expressed by immune cells interact with viral envelope proteins during infection has not been comprehensively explored.
Relatively few studies have examined the interaction of factor Xa or thrombin and viral proteins, and each relies on target cells as the source of coagulation factors. Our results are consistent with a prior study that concluded that factor Xa cleaves and activates SARS-CoV spike ( ). Traditionally, influenza vaccines rely on viral propagation in chicken eggs, where hemagglutinin cleavability by factor Xa is a determinant of the efficiency of strain-specific propagation of influenza A virus in ovo ( ; ). Hepatitis E virus ORF1 polyprotein is processed intracellularly by thrombin and factor Xa in the cytoplasm of hepatocytes, which are the primary cell type responsible for generating and secreting coagulation factors ( ).
Activation of coagulation has the potential to exacerbate SARS-CoV-2 infectivity in both TMPRSS2+ and TMPRSS2- host cells. Reliance on extracellular proteolytic activity could expand the field of susceptible cell types and regions of the airway. Extrapulmonary infection has been described, particularly in small intestinal enterocytes ( ; ) and, in some cases, the central nervous system ( ). It warrants investigation whether hypercoagulation is linked to extrapulmonary infection.

## Evolutionary perspective on viral-host interaction
Proteolytic cleavage of the spike forms a barrier to zoonotic crossover independent of receptor binding ( ). Hemostasis is of central importance in mammals and represents a major vulnerability of mammals to predators and pathogens, either through hyperactivation of coagulation or uncontrolled bleeding. The dysregulation of hemostasis is a convergent mechanism of toxins of snakes, bees, and bats ( ; ; ) and a driver of virulence in Ebola and dengue virus infection ( ; ). Acute lung injury from viral cytopathic effects, the induction of a COVID-19-associated cytokine storm, complement activation, and anti-phospholipid autoantibodies have all been suggested to instigate the coagulation cascade ( ; ). Furthermore, one model posits that COVID-19 coagulopathy is platelet-driven and an Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD) motif on SARS-CoV-2 spike directly interacts with GPIIb/GPIIIa integrins on the surface of platelets ( ), consistent with in silico predictions of integrin binding ( ). Perhaps, SARS-CoV-2 has undergone selection to exploit an environment locally enriched in coagulation proteases for enhanced entry. As infection spreads, more clotting is induced, instigating a positive feedback loop to promote entry into additional host cells.

## Clinical relevance of potential antiviral activity of anticoagulants
Effective anticoagulation is a critical area of investigation to improve outcomes in coronavirus infection. Vitamin K antagonists, including heparin, are commonly used for preventing venous thromboembolism in COVID-19, although no strong evidence yet supports any specific anticoagulant ( ). Three large randomized clinical trials to determine the benefit of therapeutic intensity vs. prophylactic intensity heparin in critically ill COVID-19 patients were suspended at interim analysis for futility (NCT02735707, NCT04505774, and NCT04372589). There has been interest in the use of direct-acting oral anticoagulants (DOACs) to manage COVID-19-related coagulopathy, but optimal protocols for managing coagulopathy in COVID-19 patients have not yet been developed ( ; ). The most prominent risk of anticoagulants is bleeding, and notably DOACs, as well as nafamostat, have a reduced risk of intracranial hemorrhage and other bleeding events compared to vitamin K antagonists ( ; ; ).
In our studies, anticoagulant serine protease inhibitors, otamixaban and dabigatran, exhibited off-target activity against TMPRSS2 and other TTSPs, but likely require concentrations higher than those safely reached in vivo ( ; ). On the other hand, our data suggest that nafamostat and camostat may offer three distinct therapeutic mechanisms against SARS-CoV-2 infection; these compounds have the potential to block spike cleavage mediated by TMPRSS2 and other TTSPs, to block spike cleavage by coagulation factors, and to serve as an anticoagulant. It is also plausible that nafamostat, like related protease inhibitor pentamidine, could also interfere with platelet GPIIb/IIIa, platelet aggregation, and thrombus formation ( ; ). Nafamostat ( ; ; ) and Camostat ( ) have been in clinical use in Asia for many years for the treatment of pancreatitis. Nafamostat has also been used as an anticoagulant during hemodialysis ( ) and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation ( ), and to manage disseminated intravascular coagulopathy ( ). As of this writing, there have been eight clinical trials initiated (reported on https://www.clinicaltrials.gov/) to investigate the use of nafamostat in COVID-19, while 24 active clinical trials of camostat for COVID-19 were identified.
Inhibition of coagulation factor-induced spike cleavage may contribute to the molecular mechanism of these agents, if treatment is given sufficiently early. Many COVID-19-associated complications leading to hospitalization occur as immune hyperactivation waxes and peak viral titer wanes ( ). To take advantage of the potential antiviral effect of anticoagulants, early intervention in an outpatient setting may be beneficial.

## Limitations
The experiments of this study, like prior studies using similar techniques, have some limitations. Protease enzymatic assays on peptide substrates allow for detailed biochemical characterization of a specific site, but peptide substrates may not have the equivalent three-dimensional conformation or post-translational modifications of the full-length protein produced in appropriate cells. For instance, SARS-CoV-2 S is extensively glycosylated ( ). The possibility of additional spike cleavage sites and potential pro- and anti-viral consequence of proteases acting on cell surface proteins including ACE2 cannot be excluded. The amount, density, and accessibility of spike protein could be different between pseudovirus assays and wild type (WT) SARS-CoV-2 infection. However, antibody neutralization is highly correlated between authentic virus and corresponding pseudotyped viruses, suggesting similar conformation ( ). We confirmed our results using WT SARS-CoV-2 infection, which alone does not easily allow for precise definition of which stage of the viral replication cycle is being affected, but pseudovirus assays confirm a cell-entry mechanism. We have attempted to mitigate the risk of artifact by using multiple orthogonal platforms.

## Conclusion
Collectively, our data provide rationale for the investigation of early intervention with judiciously selected anticoagulant treatment, which may have collateral benefit in limiting progressive spread of SARS-CoV-2 infection throughout the lung in infected individuals. Preparedness to mitigate future coronavirus outbreaks is critical to pursue through the understanding of coronavirus-host interactions.

## Materials and methods
 

## Enzymatic assay
Thrombin (605195, human, activated by factor Xa, factor Va, and phospholipid) and factor Xa (69036, bovine, activated by Russell’s Viper Venom) were obtained from Millipore Sigma. Recombinant TMPRSS2, purified from yeast, was obtained from LSBio (LS-G57269). TMPRSS4 was obtained from Aviva System Biology (OPCA0240), furin was obtained from Thermo Fisher Scientific (1503SE010), neutrophil elastase was obtained from Thermo Fisher Scientific (9167SE020). FRET peptides were obtained from Anaspec, and a peptide sequences are listed in . Protease assay buffer was composed of 50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, pH 8. Enzyme dilution/storage buffer was 20 mM Tris-HCl, 500 mM NaCl, 2 mM CaCl2, 50% glycerol, pH 8. Peptides were reconstituted and diluted in DMSO. Enzyme kinetics were assayed in black 96-well plates with clear bottom and measured using a BMG Labtech FLUOstar Omega plate reader, reading fluorescence (excitation 485 nm, emission 520 nm) every minute for 20 cycles, followed by every 5 min for an additional eight cycles. A standard curve of 5-FAM from 0 to 10 µM (1:2 serial dilutions) was used to convert RFU to µM of cleaved FRET peptide product. Calculation of enzyme constants was performed with GraphPad Prism software (version 9.0). Camostat and nafamostat were obtained from Selleck Chemicals and all other inhibitors were obtained from MedChem Express.

## Phospholipid vesicles
Phosphatidylcholine (1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine, Avanti Polar Lipids #850375C) and phosphatidylserine (1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phospho-L-serine, Avanti Polar Lipids #840035C) were mixed in a 3:1 w/w ratio in chloroform solvent in a screw top vial and the chloroform solvent was evaporated under a nitrogen stream. Unilamellar vesicles were isolated by extrusion using 0.1 µm pore filters and diluted in buffer AB2 (50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, pH 8).

## Cell culture
Calu3, A549, Caco2, and Vero cells were tested for mycoplasma (Lonza MycoAlert detection kit) and human cell line identity was authenticated by ATCC. A549 and Vero cells were grown in DMEM, supplemented with 10% FBS, 100 U/ml penicillin, and 100 µg/ml streptomycin. Calu3 and Caco2 cells were grown in MEM, supplemented with 10% FBS, 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 µg/ml streptomycin, 1% MEM NEAA, and 1 mM sodium pyruvate.

## Plasmids and lentivirus infection
Overexpression constructs pEGPN-GFP, pEGPN-ACE2, and pEGPN-TMPRSS2 were constructed by Gibson cloning using NEBuilder master mix (New England Biolabs, E2621) with overlapping PCR generated inserts for promoter EF1α, the gene of interest, promoter PGK, and neomycin/resistance gene. Lentiviral vectors were co-transduced with MD2G and PAX2 in 293T cells (5 million cells/10 cm plate) with 25 µl of XtremeGene9 (Millipore Sigma, #6365787001) and supernatant was harvested at 48 and 72 hr post transfection. Target cells were transduced with the addition of 4 µg/ml polybrene (Santa Cruz, sc-134220). Infected cells were selected and maintained in 500 µg/ml G418 (Life Technologies, #10131027). lentiCas9-Blast was a gift from Feng Zhang ( ) (Addgene plasmid #52962). ipUSEPR was a gift from Francisco Sanchez-Rivera and Scott Lowe. sgRNAs were selected from the Brunello CRISPR database ( ). Four guides per gene were tested in Caco2 cells and the most efficient two sgRNAs/gene were used in subsequent experiments ( ). Knockout efficiency was determined by next-generation amplicon sequencing (Genewiz).

## Pseudovirus
Recombinant VSV-based and HIV-1-based SARS-CoV-2 pseudovirus was generated as described previously ( ). To generate rVSVΔG/SARS-CoV-2 pseudovirus, 293T cells (12 million cells/15 cm plate) were transfected with 12.5 µg pSARS-CoV-2Δ19, and 24 hr post transfection, were infected with VSV-G-complemented rVSVΔG virus at an MOI of 1. Supernatant was collected 16 hr post infection, centrifuged at 350 g × 10 min, filtered through a 0.45 µm filter, and concentrated using Lenti-X-Concentrator (Takara Bio). Prior to infection of target cells, the viral stock was incubated with anti-VSV-G antibody (3 µg/ml) for 1 hr at 37°C to neutralize contaminating rVSVΔG/NG/NanoLuc/VSV-G particles.
To generate HIV-1NL/SARS-CoV-2 pseudovirus, 293T cells (12 million cells/15 cm plate) were co-transfected with 15.75 µg CCNanoLuc/GFP, 15.75 µg HIV-1NL GagPol, and 5.625 µg CMV-SARS-CoV-2-S, using 50 µl per 15 cm plate X-tremeGENE 9 (Sigma-Aldrich, 8724121001). Media was changed at 24 hr post transfection, and supernatant was collected at 48 and 72 hr. Centrifuged and filtered pseudovirus was concentrated with Lenti-X-Concentrator or with 40% (w/v) PEG-8000, 1.2 M NaCl, pH 7.2.

## Incucyte
Cells were imaged and analyzed using an Incucyte ZOOM (Essen BioScience). Four fields of view per well were averaged and 3–6 wells/condition were assayed in each experiment. Confluence was calculated from brightfield images, GFP/NeonGreen object confluence was calculated from green fluorescent images taken with 400 ms exposure time, and GFP+ fractional area is the ratio of these variables.

## Luciferase assay
Following pseudovirus infection, cells were washed twice with PBS, which was subsequently aspirated. Lysis buffer (Promega, E1531) was added (50 µl/well) and incubated rotating for 15 min at room temperature. NanoGlo Substrate (Promega, N1130) was diluted 1:50 in assay buffer and 25 µl/well was added and incubated for an additional 15 min. Samples were transferred to a white, opaque-bottom 96-well plate and luminescence was read using a BMG Labtech FLUOstar Omega plate reader.

## Clotting assays
Pooled normal human plasma was obtained from Pacific Hemostasis (VWR #95059–698). Factor X and prothrombin-deficient plasma were obtained from Haematologic Technologies (#FX-ID and #FII-ID). Russell’s viper venom test was performed with 10 µg/ml snake venom from Vipera russelli (RVV, Sigma-Aldrich #V2501) diluted in Tris buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 14 mM CaCl2, pH 7.5). Pre-warmed plasma was mixed with pre-warmed dilute venom (100 µl each) and monitored for visible clotting at 37°C. Prothrombin time was determined by mixing 100 µl pre-warmed plasma with 200 µl pre-warmed thromboplastin (VWR #95059–802) and monitoring for visible clotting at 37°C.

## hPSC lung organoids
The hPSC-derived lung organoids were differentiated and cultured as described previously ( ). Briefly, hPSCs were differentiated into endoderm in serum-free differentiation (SFD) medium (DMEM/F12 (3:1) (Life Technologies) supplemented with 1 × N2 (Life Technologies), 1 × B27 (Life Technologies), 50 μg/ml ascorbic acid, 2 mM Glutamax (Gibco), 0.4 μM monothioglycerol and 0.05% BSA) in a 5% O2 incubator; followed by 10 μM Y-27632, 0.5 ng/ml human BMP4 (R&D Systems), 2.5 ng/ml human bFGF and 100 ng/ml human activin A (R&D Systems) for 3 days; and subsequently single cells were plated on fibronectin-coated plates. Differentiation to anterior foregut endoderm was performed with SFD with 1.5 μM dorsomorphin dihydrochloride (R&D Systems) and 10 μM SB431542 (R&D Systems) for 3 days, and then 10 μM SB431542 and 1 μM IWP2 (R&D Systems) treatment for 3 days. Differentiation to early stage lung progenitor cells was accomplished by treatment with 3 μM CHIR99021 (CHIR, Stem-RD), 10 ng/ml human FGF10, 10 ng/ml human KGF, 10 ng/ml human BMP4, and 50–60 nM all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) in a 5% CO2/air incubator. Differentiation to late-stage lung progenitor cells, cells were treated with SFD containing 3 μM CHIR99021, 10 ng/ml human FGF10, 10 ng/ml human FGF7, 10 ng/ml human BMP4 and 50 nM ATRA on fibronectin-coated plates, and subsequently maintained for 1 week in SFD medium containing 3 μM CHIR99021, 10 ng/ml human FGF10 and 10 ng/ml human KGF, in a 5% CO2/air incubator. Mature lung organoids were generated by growing late-stage lung progenitor cells in 90% Matrigel in SFD medium containing 3 μM CHIR99021, 10 ng/ml human FGF10, 10 ng/ml human KGF, 50 nM dexamethasone, 0.1 mM 8-bromo-cAMP (Sigma-Aldrich), and 0.1 mM IBMX (3,7-dihydro-1-methyl-3-(2-methylpropyl)-1H-purine-2,6-dione; Sigma-Aldrich) for ~20 days.

## SARS-CoV-2 virus infection
SARS-CoV-2 was maintained and infections were performed as described previously ( ). SARS-CoV-2, isolate USA-WA1/2020 (NR-52281), was deposited by the Center for Disease Control and Prevention and obtained through BEI Resources, NIAID, NIH. SARS-CoV-2 was propagated in Vero E6 cells in DMEM supplemented with 2% FBS, 4.5 g/l D-glucose, 4 mM L-glutamine, 10 mM non-essential amino acids, 1 mM sodium pyruvate, and 10 mM HEPES. MOI of SARS-CoV-2 was determined by plaque assay in Vero E6 cells in Minimum Essential Media supplemented with 2% FBS, 4 mM L-glutamine, 0.2% BSA, 10 mM HEPES and 0.12% NaHCO3, and 0.7% agar.
All work involving live SARS-CoV-2 was performed in the CDC/USDA-approved BSL-3 facility of the Global Health and Emerging Pathogens Institute at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai in accordance with institutional biosafety requirements.
At 24 or 48 hpi, RNA was extracted with TRIzol and Direct-zol RNA Miniprep Plus kit (Zymo Research). SARS-CoV-2-N and SARS-CoV-2-E transcripts were quantified by two-step qRT-PCR using LunaScript RT SuperMix Kit (E3010L) for c-DNA synthesis and Luna Universal qPCR Master Mix (NEB #M3003) for RT-qPCR. qRT-PCRs were performed on CFX384 Touch Real-Time PCR Detection System (Bio-Rad). Primers specific for the N gene (SARS-CoV-2-N-F: TAATCAGACAAGGAACTGATTA, SARS-CoV-2-N-R: CGAAGGTGTGACTTCCATG), for the E gene (SARS-CoV-2-E-F: ACAGGTACGTTAATAGTTAATAGCGT, SARS-CoV-2-E-R: ATATTGCAGCAGTACGCACACA), as well as internal control human 18S (Forward: GGCCCTGTAATTGGAATGAGTC, Reverse: CCAAGATCCAACTACGAGCTT) were used. The delta-delta-cycle threshold (ΔΔCT) was determined relative to 18S and vehicle-treated samples.

## Funding Information
This paper was supported by the following grants:

http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100000002National Institutes of Health

R01AI35270 to Gary R Whittaker.

http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100000054National Cancer Institute

R35CA197588 to Lewis Cantley, Lewis Cantley.

http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100010304Pershing Square Foundation
 to Lewis Cantley, Lewis Cantley.

## Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Pilar Mendoza (Rockefeller University), John Blenis (WCMC), Elena Piskounova (WCMC), Tim McGraw (WCMC), Marco Straus (Cornell University), Tomer Yaron (WCMC), and all members of the Cantley Lab for insightful discussion and helpful comments. We thank Paul Bieniasz (Rockefeller University) and Theodora Hatziioannou (Rockefeller University) for providing reagents and helping to establish the pseudovirus platform in our laboratory. We thank Danielle Bulaon (Weill Cornell) for provisioning inhibitors, Benjamin tenOever (Mount Sinai) for providing Vero cells, and Francisco Sanchez-Rivera and Scott Lowe (MSKCC) for the ipUSEPR plasmid. This work was funded in part by the National Institute of Health research grants R01AI35270 (to GW) and R35 CA197588 (to LCC) and the Pershing Square Foundation (LCC).

## Additional information

## Competing interests
No competing interests declared.
No competing interests declared.
is on the scientific advisory board for Miromatrix Inc and is a consultant and speaker for Alnylam Inc.
is a founder and member of the SAB of Agios Pharmaceuticals and a founder and former member of the SAB of Ravenna Pharmaceuticals (previously Petra Pharmaceuticals). These companies are developing novel therapies for cancer. Holds equity in Agios. Lewis Cantley's laboratory also received some financial support from Ravenna Pharmaceuticals.

## Author contributions
Conceptualization, Investigation, Methodology, Writing – original draft, Writing – review and editing.
Investigation.
Investigation, Methodology.
Methodology, Writing – review and editing.
Investigation, Methodology.
Methodology, Resources, Writing – review and editing.
Methodology, Resources.
Investigation, Writing – review and editing.
Investigation.
Funding acquisition, Supervision, Writing – review and editing.
Funding acquisition, Supervision.
Funding acquisition, Investigation, Supervision, Writing – review and editing.
Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Supervision, Writing – original draft, Writing – review and editing.

## Additional files
Transparent reporting formSupplementary file 1.

## Graphical abstract: Positive feedback in SARS-CoV-2 infection and coagulopathy.
In this study, we investigated the role of coagulation factors in SARS-CoV-2 infection. Hyperactivated coagulation is a feature of COVID-19 pathology. Coagulation factors, including factor Xa and thrombin, can cleave SARS-CoV-2 spike. This activity can exacerbate infection by enhancing viral entry. Lastly, we show that a subset of protease inhibitors with anticoagulant properties, such as nafamostat, also have the potential to block host-mediated spike activation by multiple human proteases.

## Data availability
All new plasmids will be made available through Addgene.

 10.7554/eLife.77444.sa0Editor's evaluation
van der MeerJos WReviewing Editor
https://ror.org/05wg1m734Radboud University Medical Centre
Netherlands
This study examines the potential role host proteases involved in coagulation may play in proteolytic processing of the SARS CoV-2 virus spike protein, which is required for viral entry. Serine protease inhibitors such as nafamostat and camostat may limit viral entry into host cells and also be useful to treat coagulopathy in patients with SARS CoV-2 infection, particularly if treatment is initiated early.
10.7554/eLife.77444.sa1Decision letter
van der MeerJos WReviewing Editor
https://ror.org/05wg1m734Radboud University Medical Centre
Netherlands
In the interests of transparency, eLife publishes the most substantive revision requests and the accompanying author responses.
[Editors' note: this paper was reviewed by Review Commons.]
10.7554/eLife.77444.sa2Author response
Reviewer #1 (Evidence, reproducibility and clarity (Required)):
This paper shows that cleavage of SARS-CoV-2 spike protein is necessary for infection and that this is mediated by host proteases. Specifically, they show that activated coagulation factors are effective at cleaving spike protein.
Major comments
The authors clearly show that coagulation factors, especially FXa and thrombin, are capable of cleaving spike protein, as is TMPRSS2. They also show that the protease inhibitor nafamostat is effective at inhibiting spike protein cleavage.
We appreciate the Reviewer’s positive comments about our manuscript and we are grateful that the Reviewer concurs that our conclusions are clearly shown by the experimental data.
The evidence for a role for coagulation proteins in vivo is weak. Despite the use of anti-coagulants as standard of care the evidence for their benefit is weak and even studies using higher doses have not been very promising. This suggests that TMPRSS2 is the important enzyme and as long as it is uninhibited spike protein cleavage will still occur.
The Reviewer rightly points out the inherent challenge of reconciling clinical observation, which suffer from limited control over important variables and lack of molecular detail, with controlled perturbation experiments, which require compromises in approximating the physiological setting. We made our best effort to be precise in the text to not overextend our claims beyond what can be supported by the data and, where appropriate, to cite the copious but circumstantial clinical evidence that supports the physiological relevance of dysregulated coagulation in COVID-19.
A safe and effective drug regimen to address COVID-19 coagulopathy has not been optimized and is urgently needed. As the reviewer points out, multiple clinical trials failed to detect a reduction in organ support-free days following therapeutic dose over prophylactic dose heparin (A. Investigators et al., 2021; R.-C. Investigators et al., 2021). Timing is a critical factor in the interpretation of the potential for direct antiviral effects of anti-coagulation strategies. In the aforementioned studies, treatment occurred in-hospital, typically during the inflammatory phase of disease, after the peak of viral titer has already passed (Griffin et al., 2021). Thus, any antiviral effect of DOACs, for instance, are difficult to evaluate in this context. We observed that apixaban reverses the effect of exogenous FXa, but its overall effect was partial, presumably since it spares the activity of both furin and TMPRSS2 (Supplementary Figure 9). For this reason, we would predict that heparin or commonly used DOACs might have a modest antiviral effect if applied soon after disease onset, but that other drugs with a dual mechanism towards coagulation proteases and TMPRSS2/TTSPs, would be a far superior strategy.
Our results demonstrate that factor Xa can activate SARS-CoV-2 spike in cells with or without TMPRSS2 expression (Figure 3G) and that dual inhibition of factor Xa and TMPRSS2 with nafamostat can have a remarkable effect on spike-mediated entry (Figure 4 G-H, Supplementary Figure 9) without impacting furin (Supplementary Figure 8A). Our interpretation is that TMPRSS2 is one important host protease in the process of SARS-CoV-2 infection, but is unlikely to be the only important host protease. It remains challenging to fully reproduce the complex biological process of coagulation in cell culture and therefore care must be taken when extrapolating in vitro results to the human condition. Experiments with psuedoparticles and enzymatic assays using peptide substrates allow for precisely controlled conditions and provide mechanistic insight for the involvement of coagulation factors in SARS-CoV-2 spike-mediated entry.
During the course of revision, we added an additional experiment that we believe has strong physiological relevance. We generated lung organoids by stepwise differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells, which recapitulates more of the form and function of human lung tissues than lung-derived cell lines grown in standard culture conditions. We used this material to conduct an infection experiment with WT SARS-CoV-2 in lung organoids to achieve greater physiological relevance. For details, please refer to Methods (lines 664-710). We describe this experiment in the main text as follows (lines 261-277):
“Factor Xa and thrombin increase SARS-CoV-2 infection in lung organoids
To explore the effect of coagulation factors in a more physiologically relevant setting, we exposed human pluripotent stem cell-derived lung organoids (hPSC-LOs) to SARS-CoV-2 infection under BSL-3 conditions with or without addition of exogenous protease. […] This effect was accentuated at 48 hours post infection with respect to 24 hours post infection, and with lower initiating MOI. Factor Xa and thrombin increase SARS-CoV-2 infection in the context of multicycle viral replication in human lung organoids.”
Furthermore, there is significant evidence to show that coagulopathy associated with COVID-19 and other severe viral infections is in fact platelet driven (Cox D. Targeting SARS-CoV-2-Platelet Interactions in COVID-19 and Vaccine-Related Thrombosis. Frontiers in Pharmacology. 2021;12). An interesting fact about nafamostat and the related protease inhibitor pentamidine is that they are both GPIIb/IIIa antagonists (Cox D, Aoki T, Seki J, Motoyama Y and Yoshida K. Pentamidine is a specific, non-peptide, GPIIb/IIIa antagonist. Thromb Haemost. 1996;75:503-9). SARS-CoV-2 spike protein has an RGD sequence possibly allowing it to bind to platelet GPIIb/IIIa. Thus, nafamostat has three potential benefits in COVID-19: inhibition of spike protein cleavage, inhibition of SARS-CoV-2 binding to platelet GPIIb/IIIa and inhibition of platelet aggregation and thus thrombus formation.
We appreciate the Reviewer’s comments. We will incorporate the points raised and the references mentioned above into the discussion (lines 328-331 and 356-358), concerning the model of a platelet-driven COVID-19 coagulopathy and how this relates to an additional potential mechanism of nafamostat, respectively.
Line 328-331:
“Furthermore, one model posits that COVID-19 coagulopathy is platelet-driven and an Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD) motif on SARS-CoV-2 spike directly interacts with GPIIb/GPIIIa integrins on the surface of platelets (Cox, 2021), consistent with in silico predictions of integrin binding (Meszaros et al., 2021).”
Line 356-358:
“It is also plausible that nafamostat, like related protease inhibitor pentamidine, could also interfere with platelet GPIIb/IIIa, platelet aggregation and thrombus formation (Cox, 2021; Cox et al., 1996).”
Reviewer #1 (Significance (Required)):
This is an interesting insight into the role of proteases in SARS-CoV-2 and may be a potential therapeutic strategy in COVID-19.
I am a pharmacologist so my expertise is not in biochemistry but have a major interest in viral-mediated thrombosis.
We thank the Reviewer for their time, consideration, and expertise. We hope that readers will also be interested in the potential role of coagulation proteases in SARS-CoV-2 and how this reframes the approach to protease inhibitors currently under clinical investigation.
Reviewer #3 (Evidence, reproducibility and clarity (Required)):
The authors present a study exploring the potential that host proteases involved in coagulation play a role in proteolytic processing of the spike protein on the SARS CoV-2 virus required for viral entry into target cells. They propose broad based serine protease inhibitors such as nafamostat and camostat could be useful in limiting viral entry into host cells as well as reducing coagulopathy related problems in patients with SARS CoV-2 infection particularly if treatment is initiated early in the disease course. The authors use FRET based enzymatic assays in purified systems to demonstrate that peptides mimicking the S1/S2 and S2'cleavage sites of the SARS CoV-2 spike protein can be cleaved by coagulation proteases FXa and thrombin at rates comparable to that of TMPRSS2. TMPRSS2 has been established in the relevant literature to be an important host protease involved in the proteolytic activation of several coronaviruses. In addition, the authors present data from cell based pseudoviral infection assays to demonstrate the ability of coagulation proteases to process the particles for cell entry as well as the effectiveness of inhibitors such as nafamostat and camostat in preventing infection by SARS CoV-2 pseudovirons.
The data presented provides convincing support for the conclusions reached by the authors. Suitable control experiments using modified FRET peptides with key residues altered to make them poorer substrates for FXa and thrombin provided additional weight to support the conclusion that coagulation proteases could play a role in processing the spike protein for viral entry.
We appreciate the reviewer’s positive comments about our manuscript and we are grateful that the reviewer concurs that our conclusions are convincingly supported by the experimental data and that appropriate controls were included.
Prior studies seem to be referenced appropriately. The text and figures are clear and accurate.
We thank the reviewer for remarking on the appropriate contextualization of other studies in the field and the accuracy and clarity of the text and figures.
The authors may consider including phospholipids in the assay where they measure activity of FXa toward its "known" substrate THRBR271 to reduce the potential for overstating the preference for the S1/S2 peptide over natural FXa substrates.
We thank the Reviewer for raising this point. We agree with that the results of factor Xa enzymatic assays are dependent on assay-specific conditions including pH and buffer composition. We aimed to clarify our statement on FXa substrate selectivity to reflect the reviewer’s suggestion (lines 163-165, 178-180):
Line 163-165:
“factor Xa showed ~9-fold greater maximum initial reaction velocity (Vmax) in cleaving the spike S1/S2 peptide compared to cleaving a peptide corresponding to its known substrate, THRBR271”
Line 178-180:
“In summary, the coagulation serine proteases factor Xa and thrombin exhibit proteolytic activity against SARS-CoV-2 peptide substrates.”
Furthermore, we conducted the factor Xa enzymatic assays with the addition of phosphatidylcholine/phosphatidylserine (PC/PS) to determine the effect on factor Xa substrate preference. The results were added to Supplementary Figure 5 (related to figure 2). We found that the addition of phospholipid vesicles did not change factor Xa activity or substrate preference in this assay (Figure S5E). To ensure the quality of our phospholipid vesicle preparation, we added 0-100 µM PC/PS to a dilute Russell’s Viper Venom time clotting assay, where PC/PS drives a significant, concentration-dependent acceleration of clotting of normal pooled human plasma (Figure S5E). The dRVVT test was selected over more common coagulation assays because it relies on direct activation of factor X to Xa and does not rely on reagents that include exogenous phospholipids.
Our interpretation is that the use of purified, RVV-activated factor Xa and peptide substrates in the enzymatic assay renders the reaction independent of phospholipid membranes. On the surface of platelets, one might expect that providing a membrane scaffold, thereby spatially restricting the tenase complex that activates factor Xa, could potentially increase the velocity of the cleavage activation of factor X, by increasing the likelihood of collision of fX and tenase (Basavaraj and Krishnaswamy, 2020; Husten, Esmon, and Johnson, 1987). However, our assay relies on purified factor Xa, activated by Russell’s viper venom (Tans and Rosing, 2001), alleviating the requirement for upstream activation. The use of peptide substrates in this assay has the consequence that downstream cleavage requires that enzyme and substrate meet in 3-dimensional space, rather than along the surface of a 2-dimensional membrane.
Lines 590-600 (Methods):
“Phospholipid vesicles
Phosphatidylcholine (1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine, Avanti Polar Lipids #850375C) and phosphatidylserine (1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phospho-L-serine, Avanti Polar Lipids #840035C) were mixed in a 3:1 w/w ratio in chloroform solvent in a screw top vial and the chloroform solvent was evaporated under a nitrogen stream. Unilamellar vesicles were isolated by extrusion using 0.1 micron pore filters and diluted in buffer AB2 (50mM Tris-HCl, 150mM NaCl, pH 8). The addition of phospholipid vesicles did not change factor Xa activity or substrate preference in this assay (Figure S5E). To ensure the quality of our phospholipid vesicle preparation, we added 0-100 µM PC/PS to a dilute Russell’s Viper Venom time clotting assay, where PC/PS drives a significant, concentration-dependent acceleration of clotting of normal pooled human plasma (Figure S5E).”
Reviewer #3 (Significance (Required)):
Given the rapidly evolving nature of the SARS CoV-2 pandemic the work presented in the manuscript should be relevant to both the fields of virology and coagulation. The potential for treatments aimed at inhibiting both TMPRSS2 and coagulation associated proteases should be of interest to both clinicians and basic science researchers involved in the treatment and research of SARS CoV-2.
We appreciate that the Reviewer found the manuscript to be relevant and of broad interest to the fields of virology and coagulation. We also hope that the work is of interest to both clinicians and basic scientists.
References:
Basavaraj, M. G., and Krishnaswamy, S. (2020). Exosite binding drives substrate affinity for the activation of coagulation factor X by the intrinsic Xase complex. J Biol Chem, 295(45), 15198-15207. doi:10.1074/jbc.RA120.015325
Cox, D. (2021). Targeting SARS-CoV-2-Platelet Interactions in COVID-19 and Vaccine-Related Thrombosis. Front Pharmacol, 12, 708665. doi:10.3389/fphar.2021.708665
Cox, D., Aoki, T., Seki, J., Motoyama, Y., and Yoshida, K. (1996). Pentamidine is a specific, non-peptide, GPIIb/IIIa antagonist. Thromb Haemost, 75(3), 503-509. Retrieved from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8701416
Griffin, D. O., Brennan-Rieder, D., Ngo, B., Kory, P., Confalonieri, M., Shapiro, L.,... Marik, P. (2021). The Importance of Understanding the Stages of COVID-19 in Treatment and Trials. AIDS Rev. doi:10.24875/AIDSRev.200001261
Husten, E. J., Esmon, C. T., and Johnson, A. E. (1987). The active site of blood coagulation factor Xa. Its distance from the phospholipid surface and its conformational sensitivity to components of the prothrombinase complex. J Biol Chem, 262(27), 12953-12961. Retrieved from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3477541
Investigators, A., Investigators, A. C.-a., Investigators, R.-C., Lawler, P. R., Goligher, E. C., Berger, J. S.,... Zarychanski, R. (2021). Therapeutic Anticoagulation with Heparin in Noncritically Ill Patients with Covid-19. N Engl J Med, 385(9), 790-802. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2105911
Investigators, R.-C., Investigators, A. C.-a., Investigators, A., Goligher, E. C., Bradbury, C. A., McVerry, B. J.,... Zarychanski, R. (2021). Therapeutic Anticoagulation with Heparin in Critically Ill Patients with Covid-19. N Engl J Med, 385(9), 777-789. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2103417
Meszaros, B., Samano-Sanchez, H., Alvarado-Valverde, J., Calyseva, J., Martinez-Perez, E., Alves, R.,... Gibson, T. J. (2021). Short linear motif candidates in the cell entry system used by SARS-CoV-2 and their potential therapeutic implications. Sci Signal, 14(665). doi:10.1126/scisignal.abd0334
Tans, G., and Rosing, J. (2001). Snake venom activators of factor X: an overview. Haemostasis, 31(3-6), 225-233. doi:10.1159/000048067