SOURCE URL: https://www.atcc.org/support/order-support/permits-and-restrictions
FINAL URL: https://www.atcc.org/support/order-support/permits-and-restrictions
HTTP: 200
CONTENT-TYPE: text/html; charset=utf-8
======================================================================
Permits and Restrictions | ATCC 

 Log In 

 Create a Profile 

 Order Status 
 Quick Order 

 0 

 Applications Cell Products Microbe Products Services Federal Solutions Resources About Us Order Status Quick Order 

 Careers 

 Support 

 Location: United States 

 United States 
 Afghanistan 
 Albania 
 Algeria 
 American Samoa 
 Andorra 
 Angola 
 Anguilla 
 Antigua and Barbuda 
 Argentina 
 Armenia 
 Aruba 
 Australia 
 Austria 
 Azerbaijan 
 Bahamas 
 Bahrain 
 Bangladesh 
 Barbados 
 Belarus 
 Belgium 
 Belize 
 Benin 
 Bermuda 
 Bhutan 
 Bolivia 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina 
 Botswana 
 Brazil 
 Brunei 
 Bulgaria 
 Burkina Faso 
 Burundi 
 Cambodia 
 Cameroon 
 Canada 
 Cape Verde 
 Cayman Islands 
 Central African Republic 
 Chad 
 Chile 
 China 
 Colombia 
 Comoros 
 Congo 
 Congo, Democratic Republic 
 Cook Islands 
 Costa Rica 
 Cote d'Ivoire 
 Croatia 
 Curacao 
 Cyprus 
 Czech Republic 
 Denmark 
 Djibouti 
 Dominica 
 Dominican Republic 
 Ecuador 
 Egypt 
 El Salvador 
 Equatorial Guinea 
 Eritrea 
 Estonia 
 Eswatini 
 Ethiopia 
 Fiji 
 Finland 
 France 
 French Guiana 
 French Polynesia 
 Gabon 
 Gambia 
 Georgia 
 Germany 
 Ghana 
 Greece 
 Grenada 
 Guadeloupe 
 Guam 
 Guatemala 
 Guernsey 
 Guinea 
 Guinea-Bissau 
 Guyana 
 Haiti 
 Honduras 
 Hong Kong 
 Hungary 
 Iceland 
 India 
 Indonesia 
 Iraq 
 Ireland 
 Israel 
 Italy 
 Jamaica 
 Japan 
 Jersey 
 Jordan 
 Kazakhstan 
 Kenya 
 Kiribati 
 Kosovo 
 Kuwait 
 Kyrgyzstan 
 Laos 
 Latvia 
 Lebanon 
 Lesotho 
 Liberia 
 Libya 
 Liechtenstein 
 Lithuania 
 Luxembourg 
 Macau 
 Macedonia 
 Madagascar 
 Malawi 
 Malaysia 
 Maldives 
 Mali 
 Malta 
 Marshall Islands 
 Martinique 
 Mauritania 
 Mauritius 
 Mexico 
 Micronesia 
 Moldova 
 Monaco 
 Mongolia 
 Montenegro 
 Montserrat 
 Morocco 
 Mozambique 
 Myanmar 
 Namibia 
 Nauru 
 Nepal 
 Netherlands 
 New Caledonia 
 New Zealand 
 Nicaragua 
 Niger 
 Nigeria 
 Northern Mariana Islands 
 Norway 
 Oman 
 Pakistan 
 Palau 
 Panama 
 Papua New Guinea 
 Paraguay 
 Peru 
 Philippines 
 Poland 
 Portugal 
 Qatar 
 Reunion 
 Romania 
 Russia 
 Rwanda 
 Saint Kitts and Nevis 
 Saint Lucia 
 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 
 Samoa 
 San Marino 
 Sao Tome and Principe 
 Saudi Arabia 
 Senegal 
 Serbia 
 Seychelles 
 Sierra Leone 
 Singapore 
 Slovakia 
 Slovenia 
 Solomon Islands 
 Somalia 
 South Africa 
 South Korea 
 South Sudan 
 Spain 
 Sri Lanka 
 Sudan 
 Suriname 
 Sweden 
 Switzerland 
 Taiwan, R.O.C. 
 Tajikistan 
 Tanzania 
 Thailand 
 Timor-Leste 
 Togo 
 Tonga 
 Trinidad and Tobago 
 Tunisia 
 Turkey 
 Turkmenistan 
 Turks and Caicos Islands 
 Tuvalu 
 Uganda 
 Ukraine 
 United Arab Emirates 
 United Kingdom 
 Uruguay 
 Uzbekistan 
 Vanuatu 
 Vatican City 
 Venezuela 
 Vietnam 
 Virgin Islands, British 
 Virgin Islands, USA 
 Western Sahara 
 Yemen 
 Zambia 
 Zimbabwe 

 Home 

 Support 

 Order Support 

 Permits and Restrictions 

 Share

 Permits and Restrictions

 We are committed to ensuring a seamless ordering process and prompt delivery of your ATCC products. Certain materials in our collection may require you to obtain permit(s) from government agencies before ATCC can ship your order. The government agency permit application process can take several weeks, or more. To ensure you receive your order quickly, we recommend you proactively obtain the necessary permit(s) from the relevant government agencies. Here are some tips on permit requirements:

 Start your permit process early! Review the ‘Permits and Restrictions’ section of the product page to understand the steps you need to take to receive your products.

 Work with the relevant government agency to obtain the necessary permit. Please allow extra time from the government agency for permit approval—expect delays in receiving your permit. 

 You may place your order now; however, products will not be confirmed and shipped until the necessary permit is provided to us. Permits can be emailed to [email protected] . Please include your sales order number.

 Please reach out to [email protected] for additional support. 

 ATCC Requirements

 Certain materials in the collection may require one or more permits to be filled out and submitted before the material can be distributed. A listing of the permits and licenses required for shipping a particular material can be found in the "Permits and Restrictions" section on the product page. Customers are notified when orders are received without the necessary permits and given two months to supply the permit before the order will be cancelled. Permits can be emailed to [email protected] . Please include your sales order number or purchase number. 

 Email your permits 

 USA Requirements

 United States Veterinary Permit for Importation and Transportation of Controlled Materials and Organisms and Vectors:

 Certain materials require a permit issued by the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), Animal and Plant Health Inspection Services (APHIS), Veterinary Services (VS) to transport controlled materials and organisms and vectors. Complete and submit an “Application for Permit to Import or Transport Controlled Material or Organisms or Vectors” (VS Form 16-3). The fastest way to submit a permit is through the APHIS ePermits and eFile system . A paper application can also be submitted to APHIS, VS via fax, email, or mail. For information concerning regulations governing these permit requirements, please contact the VS organisms and vectors staff . For information on filling out VS Form 16-6A, read our compliance and domestic shipment document to learn the common mistakes to avoid.

 Permit to Move Live Plant Pests, Noxious Weeds, and Soil:

 Certain materials require a permit issued by the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), Animal and Plant Health Inspection Services (APHIS), Plant Protection & Quarantine (PPQ) to transport live plant pests, noxious weeds, and soil. Complete and submit an “Application for Permit to Move Live Plant Pests, Noxious Weeds, Soil, and Prohibited Plants” (PPQ Form 526). The fastest way to submit a permit is through the APHIS ePermits and eFile system . A paper application can also be submitted to APHIS, PPQ via fax, email, or mail. For information concerning regulations governing these permit requirements, please contact the PPQ staff .

 Permit or Courtesy Permit Under 7 CFR 340:

 Certain materials require a permit issued by the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), Animal and Plant Health Inspection Services (APHIS), Biotechnology Regulatory Services (BRS) to transport organisms modified or produced through genetic engineering. Complete and submit an “Application for Permit or Courtesy Permit Under 7 CFR 340” (APHIS Form 2000). The fastest way to submit a permit is through the APHIS ePermits and eFile system . A paper application can also be submitted to APHIS, BRS via mail. For information concerning regulations governing these permit requirements, please contact the BRS staff .

 State of Hawaii Department of Agriculture, Plant Quarantine Branch:

 The importation of certain plants, microbial products, microorganisms, and viruses into the State of Hawaii requires an import permit from the Hawaii Department of Agriculture (HDOA) . It is the responsibility of customers located in Hawaii to contact HDOA, Plant Industry Division, Plant Quarantine Branch, Import Program to determine if an import permit is required.

Import Infectious Biological Agents, Infectious Substances, and Vectors:

 Certain materials require a permit issued by the United States Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) to transport infectious biological agents, infectious substances, and vectors. All CDC permit applications must be submitted electronically using the CDC eIPP system . For information concerning regulations governing these permit requirements, please contact the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Import Permit Program (IPP) .

 International Requirements

 International customers should request any necessary import permits or licenses from their appropriate government agency. Licenses must be provided to either ATCC or your ATCC distributor prior to shipment.

 The international shipment of any material derived from endangered wildlife species listed by the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) is conditional on the issuance of a valid permit to ATCC by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service. Inquire with your national CITES management authority or authorities in charge of administering the CITES permit system on whether the material you are interested in requires an import permit. 

 In addition, the following countries will be required to submit information to ATCC. This information is required by Airlines & Freight brokers in order to secure shipment to end destinations. The accuracy and timeliness of this information is critical to the shipment of the order.

 Argentina – CUIT (Clave Única de Identificación Tributaria) number

 Ecuador – RUC (Registro Único del Contribuyente) 13-digit Tax ID number 

 Indonesia – HS (Harmonized System) Code (6 or 8 digit) number. Please confirm with government agency on which code to supply to ATCC.

 Paraguay – RUC (Registro Único del Contribuyente) four letter followed by 11-digit Tax ID number

 Peru – RUC (Registro Único del Contribuyente) 11-digit Tax ID number 

 Limited Restriction Items

 From time-to-time, ATCC must limit quantities on certain items being ordered. If this happens you will be contacted by an ATCC Representative for a discussion on how to proceed with the order. 

 Nagoya Protocol Advisor Notice

 Genetic material deposited with ATCC after 12 October 2014 falls under the Convention on Biological Diversity and its Nagoya Protocol. This allows for the fair sharing of genetic resources. Of particular relevance to ATCC customers are articles 6 (prior informed consent required), 14 (access and benefit clearing house), and 15 (local enforcement). 

It is the responsibility of end users that these undertakings are complied with and we strongly recommend that customers refer to this prior to purchase. ATCC does not fall under the obligations of the Nagoya protocol; however, this can impact our customers and we recommend that you refer to the protocol to determine if your country falls under the new regulations. Please note that with a view to traceability the transfer of cultures to third parties is not permitted without consent from ATCC.

 Get more details 

 Index of ATCC Forms

 Material Transfer Agreement (MTA) 

 Addendum to MTA for MJFF Materials 

 Global Priority Superbugs Material Addendum 

 HUB/Organoid MTA 

 Label License Agreement — CR Technology 

 Label License Agreement — CRISPR Products (Broad Institute)

 Label License Agreement — CRISPR Products (ERS Genomics)

 Label License Agreement — Zinc Finger Nuclease (ZFN) 

 Label License Agreement (Life Technologies)

 Limited Use Label License (iPS Materials)

 Limited Use Label License (HaloTag® Products)

 Limited Use Label License (Luciferase Products; Promega)

 Limited Use Label License (NanoLuc® Products)

 Limited Use Label License (TransfeX)

 Mount Sinai Addendum (7AC5 EYFP)

 Mount Sinai Addendum (R1)

 National Park Service Material Transfer Agreement (MTA) 

 We are ready to help 
 Order support Product technical support Resources Products and Services 
 New products Cell products Microbe products Services Federal solutions Make a deposit Policies 
 Privacy policy Product use policies Terms of sale Terms of services Trademarks Website Terms of Use About us 
 Upcoming events Newsroom Career opportunities Contact us Follow Us 
 Newsletter Signup Keep up to date with our events, news, and more. Enter your email to sign up. 
 Please enter a valid email address. 
 Sign Up 

 Quality Accreditations ISO 9001 ISO 13485 ISO 17025 ISO 17034 © ATCC 2026. All rights reserved. 

 Keep up to date with our events, news, and more. Enter your information below.
 Email * 

 First name * 

 Last name * 

 Organization name * 

 Country * 
 Please Select United States United Kingdom Canada India Netherlands Australia South Africa France Germany Singapore Sweden Brazil -------------- Afghanistan Åland Islands Albania Algeria American Samoa Andorra Angola Anguilla Antarctica Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Armenia Aruba Austria Azerbaijan Bahamas, The Bahrain Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belgium Belize Benin Bermuda Bhutan Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Botswana Bouvet Island British Indian Ocean Territory British Virgin Islands Brunei Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Cambodia Cameroon Cape Verde Cayman Islands Central African Republic Chad Chile China Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Colombia Comoros Congo Congo (DRC) Cook Islands Costa Rica Côte d’Ivoire Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Djibouti Dominica Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Estonia Ethiopia Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas) Faroe Islands Fiji Finland French Guiana French Polynesia French Southern and Antarctic Lands Gabon Gambia Georgia Ghana Gibraltar Greece Greenland Grenada Guadeloupe Guam Guatemala Guernsey Guinea Guinea-Bissau Guyana Haiti Heard Island and McDonald Islands Honduras Hong Kong SAR Hungary Iceland Indonesia Iran Iraq Ireland Isle of Man Israel Italy Jamaica Japan Jersey Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati Korea Kosovo Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Macao SAR Macedonia, Former Yugoslav Republic of Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mali Malta Marshall Islands Martinique Mauritania Mauritius Mayotte Mexico Micronesia Moldova Monaco Mongolia Montenegro Montserrat Morocco Mozambique Myanmar Namibia Nauru Nepal Netherlands Antilles New Caledonia New Zealand Nicaragua Niger Nigeria Niue Norfolk Island North Korea Northern Mariana Islands Norway Oman Pakistan Palau Palestinian Authority Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru Philippines Pitcarin Islands Poland Portugal Tahiti Puerto Rico Qatar Reunion Romania Russia Rwanda Saba Saint Barthélemy Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Martin Saint Pierre and Miquelon Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Samoa San Marino São Tomé and Príncipe Saudi Arabia Scotland Senegal Serbia Seychelles Sierra Leone Slovakia Slovenia Solomon Islands Somalia South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands South Korea South Sudan Spain Sri Lanka Sudan Suriname Svalbard and Jan Mayen Island Swaziland Switzerland Syria Taiwan Tajikistan Tanzania Teheran Thailand Timor-Leste Togo Tokelau Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan Turks and Caicos Islands Tuvalu U.S. Minor Outlying Islands Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates Uruguay Uzbekistan Vanuatu Vatican City Venezuela Vietnam Virgin Islands Wallis and Futuna Western Sahara Yemen Zambia Zimbabwe 

 Company or Organization Location * 
 Please Select... Alaska Alabama Arkansas American Samoa Arizona California Colorado Connecticut D.C. Delaware Florida Micronesia Georgia Guam Hawaii Iowa Idaho Illinois Indiana Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Massachusetts Maryland Maine Marshall Islands Michigan Minnesota Missouri Marianas Mississippi Montana North Carolina North Dakota Nebraska New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico Nevada New York Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Puerto Rico Palau Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Virginia Virgin Islands Vermont Washington Wisconsin West Virginia Wyoming Military Americas Military Europe/ME/Canada Military Pacific Alberta Manitoba British Columbia New Brunswick Newfoundland and Labrador Nova Scotia Northwest Territories Nunavut Ontario Prince Edward Island Quebec Saskatchewan Yukon Territory None 

 Job Role * 
 Select One Facility Manager Laboratory Manager/Director Laboratory Technician/Research Assistant Manufacturing Process Development Marketing Physician/Doctor Postdoctoral Fellow Principal Investigator Professor/Instructor Purchasing QA/QC Research Scientist/Staff Scientist Senior Management Student/Graduate Student Other 

 Job Role (if other) 

 Please subscribe me to the following:

 Events 

 New Product Launches 

 News / Announcements 

 Newsletters 

 Special Offers 

 Which of the following product types are you most interested in hearing more about? * 
 Cell Biology 

 cGMP Services 

 Microbiology 

 What are your application areas of interest? * 
 Oncology and Immuno-Oncology 

 Toxicology and Drug Safety Testing 

 Infectious Disease Diagnostics Development 

 Bioproduction 

 Standards and Controls 

 Cell and Gene Therapy 

 Bioinformatics 

 Neuroscience 

 Select all that apply

 Which of the following best describes your industry focus? * 
 Please Select Academia or Education Agriculture Bioinformatics Bioproduction CDMO or CMO Chemical or Environmental Clinical Laboratory Contract Research Organization Cosmetics Food & Beverage Genomic Profiling or Testing Government Hospital or Clinical Laboratory Human Therapeutics R&D (Pharma/Biopharma) IVD or Assay Development Medical Devices Purchasing Agent, Broker, or Consultant Reagents & Tools Supplier Secondary School (Middle or High School) Veterinary Science Other 

 Industry - Other 

 If Other, please fill in the box above

 I agree to receive emails from ATCC and its distributors * 
 Yes 

 No 

 We will not share your information outside of our distributors network and solely use it to send relevant communications.

 address1 

 Are you sure you don't want to sign up to get news from ATCC? Yes No 

 Log In

 Email address 

 Password 

 Forgot your password? 
 Log In 

 Don't have a profile? Create one now .

 You have an application in progress 

Continue your most recent application below, or check its status from My Dashboard. If you started this application before June 20, it has been transitioned to the new application process and you can continue it from here.

 Continue account application

 Start a new account application

 Associate an Account to Your Profile

 Associating an account to your profile allows you to place an order on atcc.org. Please provide the following information to access this account.

 Account number

 Account billing postal code 

 Associate Account 

 You've successfully associated your account with your Profile. You can update your default account on the My Dashboard Accounts Management page at any time.

 My Dashboard Accounts Management 

 Close

 You can find your account number on your sales order confirmation or order invoice.

 Share

 Easily share this ATCC resource with your network. Use the options below to spread the word or save the link for later.

 LinkedIn

 X

 Email

 Copy Link