SOURCE URL: https://www.dsmz.de/customer-support/faq-order
FINAL URL: https://www.dsmz.de/customer-support/faq-order
HTTP: 200
CONTENT-TYPE: text/html; charset=utf-8
======================================================================
FAQ order - Leibniz Institute DSMZ 

 Skip to content 

 Shop 
 Prices 
 Support 
 Catalogue 
 Deposit 
 FAQ 
 DE

 DSMZ Portrait Vision 
 Mission 
 Organisation Chart 
 History 
 Management 
 Supervisory Board 
 Scientific Advisory Board 
 Good Scientific Practice 
 Policy on Financial Conflict of Interest (FCOI) 
 Quality Management 
 
 Network 
 Career 
 BerufundFamilie 
 Gender Equality 
 Equal opportunities and Diversity 
 Science Communication 
 Staff Boards Equal opportunity commissioner 
 PhD Initiative 
 Representative body for disabled employees 
 Representative body for diversity 
 Works Council 
 
 Staff Search 
 Accessibility 
 
 Collection Catalogue Microorganisms Catalogue 
 Microbiota 
 Special Groups of Organisms 
 Prices 
 Ordering / Delivery Information 
 Culture Technology 
 Safety Instructions 
 Permissions / Restrictions 
 FAQ - microorganisms 
 FAQ - bacteriophages 
 FAQ - phage therapy 
 
 Human and Animal Cell Lines Catalogue 
 Prices 
 Quality Assurance 
 Ordering / Delivery Information 
 Safety Information 
 Permissions / Restrictions 
 FAQ 
 
 Plant Viruses and Antisera Catalogue 
 Prices 
 Ordering / Delivery Information 
 Protocols 
 Permissions / Restrictions 
 FAQ 

 Digital Collection Cell line data 
 Genome-based taxonomy 
 Prokaryotic names 
 Prokaryotic phenotypic data 
 
 Deposit Open Collection Microorganisms 
 Human and Animal Cell Lines 
 Plant Viruses 
 
 Safe Deposit Microorganisms 
 Human and Animal Cell Lines 
 Prices 
 
 Patent Deposit Biological Material 
 Deposit Forms 
 Checklist for the Depositor 
 Furnishing of Samples 
 Prices 
 Transport Requirements 
 Safety 
 The Budapest Treaty 
 Obligations under the Nagoya Protocol 

 Nagoya Protocol Digital Sequence Information 
 Due Diligence 
 Registered Collection 
 Strain Deposit 
 Legal background 
 Convention on Biological Diversity 
 
 Collection Experts 
 How to order 
 
 Research Research at the DSMZ 
 Staff 
 Research in the focus 
 
 Services Human and Animal Cell Lines Cell Line Authentication / Identification 
 Mycoplasma Detection / Elimination 
 Virus Detection 
 Cell line data tool (DSMZCellDive) 
 Prices 
 FAQ 
 
 Microorganisms Biochemical Analysis Cellular Fatty Acids 
 Metabolic Activities 
 Respiratory Quinones 
 Peptidoglycan Structure 
 Polar Lipids 
 Other Analyses 
 
 Bioinformatic Services Bacterial Phylogenomic Study 
 Identification using rRNA sequencing 
 Molecular Identity Check 
 Microbial Diversity Analysis 
 
 Microbiological Analysis Antibiotic susceptibility testing 
 Chemotaxonomic Characterization 
 Identification of Bacteria 
 Identification of Yeast and Fungi 
 Phenotypic Characterization of Bacteria 
 Phenotypic Characterization of Yeasts 
 
 Material used as reference Bacterial Genomic DNA 
 Biomass Production 
 Fungal Genomic DNA 
 Mock Communities 
 Peptidoglycan 
 Test and Reference Cultures of Yeasts and Fungi 
 
 Prices 
 Order 
 Safety 
 FAQ 
 
 Plant Viruses Services List 
 Prices 
 Order 
 
 Deposit (incl. Safe and Patent Deposit) 
 Online tools 
 
 Digital Diversity 
 Communication Press Releases 
 Events 
 DSMZ in the media 
 Downloads 

 Search input 

 Search 

 Menu 

 Search term 

 Search: 

 Home Customer Support FAQ order 

 FAQ order

 FAQ related to ordering from the DSMZ

 This page provides answers to frequently asked questions related to our ordering processes (registration, order, payment).
 In addition, a guideline on how to order from DSMZ can be download here ( German version ).

 Please select the topic of interest

 Available products and distributors 

 How to place an order with the DSMZ 

 Shipment 

 Invoice / Payment 

 Complaint of goods 

 0 

 What kind of products does the DSMZ offer?

 The DSMZ offers different kinds of bioresources (microorganisms, human and animal cell lines, plant virus, DNA), plant virus diagnostics as well as a portfolio of scientific analyses and services .
 In addition, the DSMZ offers a deposit of bioresources in its collection (public collection, safe deposit and patent deposit).
 The DSMZ does not offer cultivation media. For the composition of the cultivation media of your microorganism please check Media Dive , for human and animal cell lines please use DSMZCellDive .

 Are there any legal restrictions for purchasing bioresources from the DSMZ?

 Only institutions and companies are eligible to order from the DSMZ.
 Depending on the bioresource requested, you may have to submit different documents, e. g. working permits or a Material Transfer Agreement. You will be informed by the sales team which documents you need to provide. Please note that the ordering process will only continue once you have submitted all necessary documents.
 Legal restrictions to the distribution of a bioresource are marked in its catalogue entry.

 Are there any restrictions for the use of bioresources purchased from the DSMZ?

 Bioresources purchased from the DSMZ may not be used for commercial purposes. Exceptions to this are regulated in our Terms and Conditions (§10 para. 4).
 All biological material from DSMZ GmbH is intended solely for research purposes (with the exception of patent and safe deposit material) and is not for use in humans (including food or cosmetics) or for veterinary or clinical purposes. All products may only be used in premises used for research purposes, such as laboratories or greenhouses, under the supervision of a technically qualified person.

 Can I order your products from a distributor in my country?

 The DSMZ does not have distributors. All products have to be ordered directly from DSMZ. For available destinations and corresponding freight charges please see our price list .

 Do I need to register with DSMZ in order to browse the online catalogue?

 No, you can browse the online catalogue (in the DSMZ online shop as well as on the DSMZ website) without prior registration.

 Are there different delivery forms of bioresources?

 Some bioresources are available in different delivery forms. Available delivery forms are stated in the online catalogue . Please note that prices vary for the different delivery forms. In addition, the chosen delivery form may affect the mode of dispatch.

 Is it your initial order with the DSMZ?

 If you are ordering bioresources from the DSMZ for the first time, a validation of your institution is required. Our sales team will contact you after receiving your order and advise you of the documents required for validation. The delivery of your first order is only accepted against prepayment.
 No validation is required to order analyses and other scientific services .

 In the download section of the DSMZ website you will find the forms required for ordering (such as the order form or the Material Transfer Agreement (MTA)).

 Do I need to register with the DSMZ in order to purchase products?

 You do not need to register for browsing our online catalogues! 
You only need to register when placing an order via the DSMZ online shop. Please note that it may take up to one working day to activate your account when registering for the online shop.

 Where can I get a quote?

 It is recommended that you generate a quote using the DSMZ online shop . Please make sure that you only generate a quote and do not place an order.

 Do I have to sign specific documents for ordering from the DSMZ?

 The documents you have to sign and to provide depend on your order. Our sales team will provide you all relevant information during the ordering process.

 Is there a minimum order quantity?

 No, there is no minimum order quantity.

 How do I place an order for bioresources?

 Please note that ordering, shipment and use of the bioresources are subject to the General Terms and Conditions .

 Simply order via the DSMZ online shop or by e-mail to the relevant sales team.
 Please note that it may take up to one working day to activate your account when registering for the webshop.
 When ordering by e-mail, please note that it must be clearly recognisable that it is not a spam e-mail.

 Please always state your company's internal order number (PO number) when placing your order. This is the only way your accounting department can allocate the DSMZ invoice to your order.

 After completing your order, you will receive a confirmation e-mail with a DSMZ order number. Please always quote this number if you have any further questions.
 Once we have received your order, we will carry out a legal check to determine whether the products ordered may be delivered to the address (company, country) provided. This check may take a few working days.

 Please check whether you require e. g. an import licence for the purchased bioresources. The delivery is uninsured according to CPT (Incoterms® 2020). This means that you are responsible for the import in your country and customs clearance of the goods. 

 Download our short guide on how to order .

 How do I place an order for analyses and other services?

 Orders for analyses and scientific services are currently only possible by e-mail. Please get in touch with the relevant contact person .
 If your institute’s purchase order number is required on the invoice, please provide this number on the form.

 Where can I find the prices for bioresources and services?

 The prices of all bioresources are listed in the online catalogue as well as in the price list .
 As analyses and services are offered customised, costs will be calculated upon request.
 Handling fees and shipping costs are also provided in our price list .

 Can I place an order via platforms like SAP or Chorus Pro?

 Yes, you can place orders using these platforms. The generated orders should be sent to sales(at)dsmz.de .

 Why are there different contacts in the sales department?

 Dependent on the bioresource or analyses you would like to order, you have to address different sales teams. The following list provides a short overview on whom to address:

 microorganisms 
 • all bioresources with a DSM number
 sales(at)dsmz.de 
 • all analyses and services for microorganisms
 • all quantified bioresources with DSM number, e.g. production of biomass,
 mock communities
 microbialservices(at)dsmz.de 

 human and animal cell lines 
 • all bioresources with ACC number
 • all analyses and services for human and animal cell lines
 mutz(at)dsmz.de 

 plant viruses and plant virus diagnostics 
 • all bioresources with PV number
 • all products with RT, PC or NC number
 • all analyses and services for plant viruses
 plantvirus(at)dsmz.de 

 Where do you deliver to?

 The export of bioresources is subject to various legally binding regulations. An overview of the countries to which DSMZ delivers as well as the corresponding shipping costs can be found in our price list .
 The shipment is uninsured according to CPT (Incoterms® 2020). This means that you are responsible for the import in your country and customs clearance of the goods. 

 How long is the delivery time?

 The delivery time depends e. g. on the bioresource ordered and the country of destination.
 Please note that dispatch will only take place once you have provided all necessary information (e. g. contact details, documents). To ensure a smooth delivery, please make sure to have all necessary documents for import and customs clearance at hand.
 The estimated delivery time of your order can be found in the order confirmation.
 You will receive a shipping confirmation to the e-mail address that you provided as contact in the delivery address section.

 How much are the shipping costs?

 The shipping costs depend on various factors like the ordered product, the kind of shipment, or the destination. An overview of freight costs is given in our price list .

 Do I receive a confirmation of shipment?

 You will receive a shipping confirmation to the e-mail address that you provided as contact in the delivery address section. Please check this e-mail address regularly for updates.

 Are packages X-rayed during the air transportation chain?

 It is not possible for the DSMZ to prevent packages from being security-checked. This should not affect the bioresources.

 What are the payment terms?

 All invoices are payable immediately and without deduction. Detailed information on payment terms and set-off are provided in our terms and conditions .

 Where can I find the bank details?

 You can find the bank details on our website , in the online price list and on all relevant business documents.

 Are invoices only issued in Euro?

 Yes, invoices are only issued in Euro. We also accept only payments in Euro.

 Is a prepayment invoice the final invoice?

 The prepayment invoice you have received is a legally valid document for all commercial, accounting and tax purposes. In some countries, the validity requires that the delivery note is attached to the invoice. Although the title only indicates the payment term, it is still a commercial invoice.

 How do I send payments?

 The DSMZ is currently offering payment submission via bank transfer, PayPal or credit card. Please make sure to include the invoice number or DSMZ order number.
 When placing your order by sending your formal purchase order to us by email, we kindly ask you to mention your preferred payment method directly on your purchase order form.
 If you choose payment via credit card, you will receive our invoice together with a payment link. The payment link will be formatted as the following example: secure.lyra.com/t/0tpyxgz4 .

 How can I send a notice of payment?

 In case you send us a notice of payment, please address it to accounting(at)dsmz.de .

 How do I complain about an order?

 Please note that the characteristics of the biological material are such that it is provided solely for immediate use. A reclamation must therefore be made within five working days. For more details on the product quality see our Terms and Conditions (§8).
 If your order has arrived damaged, please contact our sales department.
 If the ordered bioresource does not grow or you assume a contamination, please contact our customer support to address the relevant contact person.

 Do you need support?

 Contact the Customer Support .

 DSMZ

 Career 
 Events 
 How to find us 
 Science Campus 
 Science Communication 
 Accessibility 

 Shop

 Prices and freight charges 

 Catalogue 

 Shop 

 FAQ 

 Change Password 

 Customer Support 

 Contact

 Leibniz Institute
 DSMZ-German Collection of
 Microorganisms and Cell Cultures GmbH
 ADR: 
 Inhoffenstraße 7B
 38124 Braunschweig
 Science Campus Braunschweig-Süd
 GERMANY
 Look at the map 
 
 PHONE: 
 +49 (0)531 2616-0

 Customer Support 

 Social Media

 Facebook 

 Instagram 
 
 LinkedIn 
 
 ResearchGate 

 Xing 
 
 Youtube 

 Mastodon 

 Bluesky 

 © DSMZ, 2026 Imprint 
 Privacy Statement 
 Prices and freight charges 
 Customer Support 
 Links 
 Sitemap 
 Accessibility 
 Terms 
 Print 

 Switch contrast