SOURCE URL: https://experiment.com/
FINAL URL: https://experiment.com/
HTTP: 200
CONTENT-TYPE: text/html; charset=utf-8
======================================================================
Experiment 
 You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser or activate Google Chrome Frame to improve your experience.

 Discover 
 Start a Project 
 Sign In 

 Search 
 Discover 
 About 
 How It Works 
 Sign In 
 Register 
 ✕ 

 Fund curiosity &
fuel scientific discovery

 On the world's biggest platform for collaborative research funding.
 Start a project Discover projects 

 Is there climate-smart coffee? A search for resilient arabica varietals in Costa Rica

 Emily Pappo 

 Chasing orangutans in uncharted territory: how large are their home ranges?

 Robert Rodriguez Suro 

 Colorado Mycoflora Project

 Andrew Wilson 

 How carbon sequestration is modulated by Mycorrhizal and soil bacteria symbionts in Abies trees?

 David J. Castillo 

 Death of a Tyrant: Help us Solve a Late Cretaceous Dinosaur Mystery!

 Katja Knoll 

 Illuminating the firefly genome

 Jing-Ke Weng 

 Creating a refuge from amphibian chytrid fungus for the critically endangered mountain chicken

 Luke Alexander Jones 

 Nepalese shrines and parks: hotspots for pathogen exchange between primates and humans?

 Marilyn Roberts 

 Fungal diversity of Grass Lake, California's largest montane peatland

 Taylor Bright 

 Can shear thickening materials like Silly Putty offer a better way to waterproof electronics?

 Eric L. Stackpole 

 Moths from a flame: Surveying moth ecological succession as a factor of plant succession post-fire

 Naomi Jones 

 Happening now
on Experiment

 1,400
 Projects Funded

 49%
 Funding Rate

 56,000
 Backers

 250
 Institutions

 25,000
 Labnotes

 Helping make ideas real since 2010
 Scientists are building on Experiment.
 Experiment directly connects scientists with funders of all sizes, to make projects happen.

 Pursue Curiosity
 Building new tools for molecular cloning
 As an amateur biologist and flower designer, Sebastian Cocioba built a community around low-cost, accessible science.

 Turn community into science impact
 Science becomes real when it is shared with others.
 One family's mission to solve rare disease turns into something impactful. After changing careers to become scientists, Sonia Vallabh & Eric Minikel have been on a years-long journey to study the genetics of fatal familial insomnia.

 Turn community into science impact
 Tackling climate change by looking inside the DNA of a tiny fern.
 Even the biggest problems have millions of little beginnings, and big problems have the ability to bring together people.
 Azolla is a small plant with a long story and big potential. A team from Duke University rallied supporters to sequence the genome of this incredible species.

 Read the project results in Nature Plants ⇀ 

 Experiment makes it easier
 Crowdfunding and grant programs purpose built for hypothesis-driven question and scientific research projects.
 
 You created your
first project!

 A Biogeochemical Profile of the Seafloor
 By David Lang
 Oakland, CA
 There is a huge gap in knowledge of deep seafloor habitats. Current methods of studying the deep seafloor limit the types...

 2 New Grant Programs
 Homeworld Foundation
 $50,000 BIOLOGY

 ⚑

 Wildlife Disease Assoc.
 $50,000 ECOLOGY

 ⚑

 This Week
 
 30 new backers!
 $5,000 RAISED 3,500 VIEWS

 The Experiment Method
 Purpose built for hypothesis-driven and scientific research projects.
 A simple way to share your ideas with others—both funders and future collaborators.

 1
 Create and organize your project
 A simple, open grant application you can share with the world.

 2
 Get project feedback from Experiment reviewers
 Receive review feedback from community reviewers. Open project proposals make for better science.

 3
 Raise project funds
 Funders big and small can help you make your project a reality.

 4
 Stay in the loop and share science
 Track and follow project progress with open lab notes and results.

 Learn more with our Researcher Guide Read the guide 

 Powerful tools to help you grow
 Features to help you start building your community.
 Discover the indispensable features that liberate your scientific storytelling.

 Document your story
 Lab notes are windows into your scientific journey.

 Control your funds
 You have flexibility for how you want to receive your funds.

 Receive feedback from staff
 All projects are reviewed by a community of peer scientists.

 Manage collaboration
 Invite team members and manage collaborator access.

 Powerful project dashboard
 View analytics and stats about each project.

 Participate in open science
 Projects can be discoverable or private, depending on your team.

 Free DOI archival
 Funded projects receive free Digital Object Identifiers for easy future reference.

 Share methods and results
 First class support for project artifacts, files, and citations.

 Researcher guide
 Dive into our science communication knowledge base.

 Support from our lovely team
 Over a decade of experience helps us help you.

 Support science you love
 Follow and support projects to receive updates.

 Anyone can start a project. Have some science that is ready to be shared?
 Get Started 

 Grant programs on Experiment
 Grant opportunities that make a difference.
 Experiment is more than a crowdfunding platform, we also enable a community of forward-thinking science funders to support research projects via grant programs.
 Browse grant programs 

 $14,330
 Funding Awarded

 Hyperspectral Biology 
 The history of biology is built on close-up observation. We use lasers to excite fluorescent proteins, then read them out under a micr...

View grant program 

 $52,390
 Funding Awarded

 The Range Storytelling Science Fund 
 Science is more than data and discoveries — it’s a story of exploration, doubt, creativity, and human curiosity. This fund suppo...

View grant program 

 $112,630
 Funding Awarded

 MPA Monitoring and Enforcement Innovation 
 This challenge is dedicated to finding and funding innovative solutions that address the critical need for improved monitoring and enf...

View grant program 

 $57,760
 Funding Awarded

 California Species Collection 
 Voucher specimens are the physical receipts of biodiversity. Yet archiving them is chronically under‑funded, slowing discovery and und...

View grant program 

 Apply directly to grant programs
 Anyone can start a project. Have some science that is ready to be shared?

 Get alerts when grants fit your interests
 Anyone can start a project. Have some science that is ready to be shared?

 Easy submission process
 The same projects can be used to launch crowdfunding campaigns and apply for grant programs.

 What our community says
 Trusted by community-led science innovators
 Experiment supports great organizations wherever they are, whatever their scientific support goals take them.

 “Without Experiment, we would not have been able to run successful grant program to fund 109 incredible projects. Experiment brings a unique mix, supporting innovative, and even outsider science, providing access to a great network beyond the typical gatekeepers, and they truly combine rigor with fun.”

 Paul Himmelstein
 Executive Director

 “Experiment has been a key partner in California Institute for Biodiversity's effort to support a broad and diverse community of scientists, to help them do important and agile work. Experiment brings a unique mix, supporting innovative, and even outsider science, providing access to a great network beyond the typical gatekeepers, and they truly combine rigor with fun.”

 Daniel Gluesenkamp, PhD
 Executive Director

 ...and loved by by scientists.
 Join 1M+ users already on Experiment.

 167% funded by 52 backers 
 “We're gearing up to expand to a second space by the end of 2025 and have welcomed in 50 members to our community working on various projects. This initial funding enabled us to kickoff and continue to teach How To Grow (Almost) Anything and expand our broader community to >1800 people learning the tools of biotechnology.”

 Elliot Roth
 Cellsius Community Biology Laboratory

 108% funded by 57 backers 
 “I hired two field assistants straight out of undergrad, one got a science tech job, and the other is now going to grad school, and I hope that being part of my field team gave them good experience to boost their field and data analysis skills.”

 Salome Buglass
 University of British Columbia

 100% funded by 25 backers 
 “Really easy to use, update funders and share results. We found a swath of other people and communities doing similar work in the space. We're hoping to hand over the project to an organization with mor/continuing funding.”

 Kate Sutter Insley
 LabX, National Academy of Sciences

 101% funded by 61 backers 
 “I was able to hire the master's student that worked on the project as a PhD candidate! I also believe the research project was a significant contributor to my promotion to Associate Professor. The experiment foundation funding resulted in preliminary data that I used in my NSF CAREER grant that was funded ($600,000.00).”

 Rosalyn Abbott
 Carnegie Mellon University

 102% funded by 41 backers 
 “Experiment was my first experience in getting funding and writing grant proposals. It was a truly enriching experience and allowed me to really make my work and carreer move forward. I was helped by the Experiment.com staff in the grant application process making it very smooth.”

 Annah-Ololade Sangosanya
 Vrije Universiteit Brussel

 101% funded by 4 backers 
 “Funding from Experiment allowed us to explore an avenue of elasmobranch research we wouldn't have been able to otherwise. We were able to make new inroads into our understanding of shark osmoregulation and were able to educate over 1,000 citizen scientists throughout the project. The funding we received from Experiment also allowed us to hire one masters student who would not have otherwise had a research opportunity in our lab.”

 Emily Yeager
 University of Miami

 100% funded by 14 backers 
 “It has enabled two amazing undergraduate students, one of whom is a member of the Amah Mutsun Tribal band, to engage deeply with marine science and community work. We were able to leverage the funding to bring them both to Ulithi Atoll to replicate the work, and to engage with the indigenous communities we have been working with there on collaborative conservation solutions. We are so excited about the potential to scale this work, and have now been asked by three additional communities in the islands to work with them on collaborative solutions for marine stewardship.”

 Nicole Crane
 One People One Reef

 100% funded by 24 backers 
 “I'm very grateful that this platform exists. It provided me with enough seed funds to generate preliminary data that is now being used to apply for larger grants from places like the National Science Foundation and the United States Department of Agriculture. ”

 Todd Ugine
 Cornell University

 100% funded by 7 backers 
 “We are in the process of forming a company called Salmon Vision, which will operate in both the US and Canada as a public benefit company, focused on providing cutting edge AI tools for fishery conservation, thanks to multiple follow up grants supporting ML work, including $3million from Canadian BC SRIF.”

 William Atlas
 Wild Salmon Center

 106% funded by 6 backers 
 “The Experiment helped us to get the funds to start building our prototype and get more fundings from Fundación IDEAS in Venezuela, a national non-profit.”

 Mariana Hernandez Montilla
 University of Manchester

 102% funded by 5 backers 
 “I know that my career was impacted positively as I was able to create stronger working ties with hawaiian knowledge holders here in hawai'i, as well as with academics on the continent. I was invited to be on the Stanford bio4e Advisory Board . I am now exploring how to create a multigenerational project that blends the care of indigenous hala trees with the weaving of lauhala as technology and a medium for scientific inquiry.”

 Corinne Okada Takara
 Okada Design

 101% funded by 37 backers 
 “This funding was truly a lifeline for a project that was on life support and we are so grateful for the support! When funding dried up, we were at risk of losing the progress we had made in restoration of kelp so far which would have been such a waste and erase all the progress achieved so far.”

 Brooke Truesdale
 Reef Check Foundation

 The science of science funding
 Why Experiment?
 A simple philosophy to share your ideas with funders and future collaborators.

Learn more by reading about our mission. 

 Over $12M in grants for research and 100,000 new projects started

 Discover 
 Current Projects 
 Lab Notes 
 Results 
 Grant Programs 
 Grant Funders 
 Institutions 
 
 Start 
 Start A Project 
 Researcher Guide 
 
 About 
 How It Works 
 FAQ 
 About 
 Press 
 Mission 
 Cookie Policy 
 
 Newsletter

 © 2026 Experiment Inc., all rights reserved.