SOURCE URL: https://genesynthesisconsortium.org/
FINAL URL: https://genesynthesisconsortium.org/
HTTP: 200
CONTENT-TYPE: text/html; charset=UTF-8
======================================================================
Home | International Gene Synthesis Consortium 

 International Gene Synthesis Consortium 

 About 

 Members 

 Resources 

 Contact 

 International Gene Synthesis Consortium 

 About 

 Members 

 Resources 

 Contact 

 -->

 Where Gene Synthesis and Biosecurity Align 

 What Is Biosecurity?

 Biosecurity refers to measures taken to prevent or stop misuse or exposure of harmful biological agents.

 Minimizing Risk

 Formed as an industry-led organization, the objectives of IGSC are to: safeguard biosecurity, apply a common protocol for screening DNA sequences and customers while promoting the beneficial use of gene synthesis.

 Maximizing Innovation

 With the ability to improve many different industries, the IGSC supports the responsible synthesis of DNA for new medicine, diagnostic tests, agricultural biotechnology products, industrial chemicals and other beneficial applications.

 In the News: 

 2023 HHS/ASPR Synthetic Nucleic Acids Guidance

 About IGSC

 The International Gene Synthesis Consortium (IGSC) is an industry-led group of gene synthesis companies and organizations formed to design and apply a common protocol to screen both the sequences of synthetic gene orders and the customers who place them. In addition, the consortium works with national and international government organizations and other interested parties to promote the beneficial application of gene synthesis technology while safeguarding biosecurity.

 Formed in 2009, IGSC members screen synthetic gene orders to identify regulated pathogen sequences and other potentially dangerous sequences. By screening the sequences of ordered genes and vetting customers, IGSC members help to ensure that researchers and the synthetic biology community realize the many benefits of gene synthesis technology while minimizing risk.

 Specifically, IGSC members screen the complete DNA and translated amino acid sequences of every double-stranded gene order against the IGSC’s comprehensive curated Regulated Pathogen Database derived from international pathogen and toxin sequence databases.

 Currently, the IGSC members together represent a majority of commercial gene synthesis capacity world-wide.

 Members

 Aclid 

 Aclid was founded to advance responsible research in synthetic biology. The company's platform is an end-to-end solution for screening DNA sequences and customers.

 Aldevron 

 Aldevron is a premier manufacturing partner in the global genetic medicine field. Founded in 1998 by Michael Chambers and John Ballantyne, the company provides critical nucleic acids and proteins used to make gene and cell therapies, DNA and RNA vaccines, and gene editing technologies. Aldevron’s 600 employees support thousands of scientists who are developing revolutionary treatments for millions of people.

 Ansa Biotechnologies 

 Ansa Biotechnologies combines unique approaches to oligo synthesis and DNA assembly to make DNA in a new way that is faster and more robust than existing methods. Ansa's enzyme-based platform promises to dramatically accelerate innovation in biological research and biotechnology, including therapeutics, diagnostics and biomanufacturing.

 Atum 

 ATUM (formerly DNA2.0) offers an integrated pipeline of solutions including gene design, optimization and synthesis, technology platforms for protein and strain engineering and protein expression.

 Azenta Life Sciences 

 Azenta Life Sciences, formerly GENEWIZ, leads the way in providing cold-chain sample management solutions and sample analysis and multiomics services including Sanger DNA sequencing, gene synthesis, molecular biology, high throughput/next generation sequencing, bioinformatics, and GLP regulatory services. Our integrated portfolio enables researchers across areas such as drug development, clinical research, and advanced cell therapies to advance their scientific discoveries faster, with greater confidence, and with a trusted partner by their side. Azenta Life Sciences is headquartered in Massachusetts, with operations in North America, Europe and Asia.

 Battelle 

 Battelle is the world’s largest independent, non-profit research and development organization, founded to translate scientific and technological advancements into societal benefits. The company’s business spans areas that encompass risk-reduction, security solutions, and technology enablement. Recognizing the emerging complexity and scale of gene synthesis, Battelle developed ThreatSEQ™ services, a web-based, continuously-curated DNA screening platform for the detection, characterization, and threat assessment of sequences of concern.

 BGI 

 With a goal of making state-of-the-art genomics highly accessible to the global research community and clinical markets, BGI has integrated the industry’s broadest array of leading technologies, including high-throughput , cost-effective sequencing and synthesis platform, large sample collection and storage, and expert bioinformatics resources, to offer a wide service portfolio around the world.

 Biolytic Lab Performance, Inc. 

 Biolytic Lab Performance, Inc. designs and manufactures cutting-edge DNA and RNA oligo synthesizers. Biolytic offers comprehensive oligonucleotide synthesis solutions, including consumables, Dr. Oligo DNA RNA oligo synthesizers, accessories, and instrument services, with a commitment to innovation, efficiency, and quality. Headquartered in Fremont, CA, Biolytic serves biotech labs worldwide, leveraging over 30 years of industry experience.

 Bioneer Corp. 

 Bioneer Corp., an innovative genomics platform company, pioneers the next generation high performance and rapid automation in delivering cost-efficient total genomics solution.

 Blue Heron 

 Blue Heron Biotech LLC is a member of the Eurofins Group. Blue Heron’s proprietary Genemaker® Technology platform makes us the true experts in custom DNA design and gene synthesis.

 BUILT 

 BUILT Biotechnologies bridges the gap between DNA synthesis and ready-to-use DNA molecules, completing the 'last mile' of the DNA supply chain. Through its centralized, subscription-based DNA Manufacturing-as-a-Service platform, BUILT provides the biotech industry with specialized expertise in building long and complex DNA constructs that are often deemed 'unbuildable,' offering unparalleled capability, reliability, and speed. By streamlining access to Fully BUILT DNA™, BUILT empowers customers to eliminate in-house assembly, accelerate research timelines, and reduce costs.

 Camena Bioscience 

 Camena Bioscience has developed a highly accurate DNA and gene synthesis technology. Our mission is to enable synthetic biologists by providing access to genes produced with unparalleled accuracy.

 Constructive Bio 

 Constructive Bio develops technologies for wholesale genome synthesis and genetic code expansion, turning cells into programmable biofactories to produce complex, valuable molecules at scale. By adding new chemistries to the repertoire of living cells, Constructive drives the sustainable bioproduction of the next generation of biopharmaceuticals.

 Cyber@Ben-Gurion University of the Negev 

 Cyber@BGU is at the forefront of security, big data analytics, and AI applied research at Ben-Gurion University. Nestled in the heart of Beer Sheva’s Hi-Tech park—Israel’s Cyber Capital—our state-of-the-art R&D center is a beacon for pioneering projects. In collaboration with industrial and governmental allies, CBG continually strives to drive innovation and tackle the most pressing technological security challenges.

 The DAMP Lab 

 The DAMP lab, a cloud laboratory located at Boston University, supports synthetic biology-related activities by creating novel biological systems using a combination of liquid handling robotics, standardized protocols, and computerized software scheduling.

 DNA Script 

 DNA Script was created to revolutionize DNA write with enzymes. Our core R&D efforts have produced innovations in enzyme engineering, surface and nucleotide chemistries, and instrumentation. The integration of these innovations has resulted in SYNTAXTM, the world’s first benchtop DNA printer powered by enzymatic technology. 

 Edinburgh Genome Foundry 

 The Edinburgh Genome Foundry specialises in the computer-aided-design and automated assembly of large DNA constructs up to chromosome size.

 Elegen Bio 

 Elegen is bringing unique insights and technical innovation to create high-quality synthetic DNA faster, catalyzing the next revolution in the life sciences. The company is led by seasoned leaders with decades of experience in developing novel and scalable approaches in molecular biology, chemistry, and microfluidics. Elegen uses a proprietary microfluidics approach to build longer, higher-quality DNA on a faster timeline for agricultural, chemical, healthcare, and pharma industries. Founded in 2017, Elegen is privately held and based in the San Francisco Bay Area.

 Emerald Cloud Lab 

 Emerald Cloud Lab provides researchers with remote access to state-of-the-art scientific labs from anywhere on earth, 24 hours a day, 365 days per year. With ECL researchers utilize a single software interface to securely design, run, and analyze experiments, allowing researchers to spend more time designing protocols and analyzing data, and less time on mundane time-intensive activities in the lab.

 GenScript 

 Founded in 2002 in New Jersey, GenScript Biotech Corporation accelerates innovation in healthcare and consumer goods by providing researchers and companies with the building blocks needed to develop groundbreaking treatments and products. Guided by its mission to make people and nature healthier through biotechnology, and its role as a trusted global leader, GenScript has a team of over 5,000 employees and has served more than 200,000 customers across 100 countries. 

 Ginkgo Bioworks 

 Ginkgo Bioworks uses the most advanced technology on the planet–biology–to grow products instead of manufacture them. The company’s technology platform is bringing biotechnology into consumer goods markets enabling companies to make better products. In early 2017 Ginkgo acquired Gen9 and has since integrated the company’s DNA synthesis expertise into its foundries to accelerate organism engineering.

 GP-Write 

 Genome Project-write (GP-write) is an open, international consortium, formed as a sequel to the Human Genome Project (HGP-read), and led by a multi-disciplinary group of scientific leaders. The overarching goal is to oversee a reduction in the cost of engineering and testing large genomes in cell lines more than 1,000-fold over the next decade through scientific and technological initiatives. GP-write technology has launched with a whole genome software design platform as a foundational technology in its emergent international foundry and start-up ecosystem.

 IBBIS 

 IBBIS is a Geneva-based nonprofit that works collaboratively with global partners to strengthen biosecurity norms and develop innovative tools to uphold them.

 iBioFAB 

 The Illinois Biological Foundry for Advanced Biomanufacturing (iBioFAB) is an automated biofoundry based at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign and a member of the Global Biofoundry Alliance. We aim to automate synthetic biology and biological engineering on the molecule, protein, and cellular scale and provide services for our customers and collaborators, such high-throughput screening and plasmid assembly.

 IDT 

 IDT specializes in DNA synthesis, gene construction, antisense oligos, molecular beacons and a variety of molecular biology products.

 Microsynth 

 Microsynth provides custom DNA and RNA oligonucleotides, sequencing and molecular analysis services for research, diagnostics and biotechnology. With a broad portfolio of modifications and scalable synthesis solutions, the company supports gene synthesis and synthetic biology workflows—from oligonucleotide building blocks to the verification of completed DNA constructs.

 Molecular Assemblies 

 Molecular Assemblies, Inc. is a private life sciences company developing an enzymatic DNA synthesis technology designed to power the next generation of DNA-based products. The company’s patented Fully Enzymatic Synthesis™ (or FES™), based on making DNA the way nature makes DNA, produces long, high quality, sequence-specific DNA reliably, affordably, and sustainably. FES™ technology will enable the reading and writing of DNA for many industries, including industrial synthetic biology and precision medicine, as well as emerging applications of DNA for data information storage, nanomachines, and bio-based electronics. Molecular Assemblies is headquartered in San Diego. 

 nagene 

 nagene GmbH is a Vienna-based biotechnology company specializing in de novo gene synthesis and advanced DNA construct development. We focus on complex and high-quality synthetic DNA solutions for applications in gene therapy, mRNA, and synthetic biology.Our in-house production enables fast turnaround times while maintaining high quality standards under an ISO 9001-certified quality management system. We are currently preparing for GMP certification and have already implemented key processes aligned with regulatory expectations for advanced therapeutic applications. As an emerging provider, we are committed to responsible innovation, biosecurity, and alignment with international standards.

 Raytheon BBN 

 Raytheon BBN Technologies is a leading research and development company, and provider of critical solutions for national defense and security missions.

 Ribbon Bio 

 We are redefining scientific possibility with our algorithm-driven technology that produces pristine synthetic DNA molecules, enabling our partners to deliver a new generation of transformative solutions for the health of people and planet.

 Switchback Systems 

 Switchback Systems is accelerating the Synthetic Biology Revolution by placing tools directly in the hands of scientists. Through a simplified approach, we’ve developed a unique, highly scalable DNA synthesis platform, with a focus on dramatic minimization of time, cost, and waste.

 Synbio Technologies 

 Synbio Technologies, is a full-service provider of advanced synthetic biology products and services. The company specializes in the development of innovative technology platforms for industrial biotechnology applications. They offer a wide range of services including gene synthesis and engineering, protein design and optimization, custom library construction, gene expression testing and analysis, bioinformatics consulting services, product formulation, and manufacturing support. With their dedicated team of experts and progressive DNA technologies, Synbio Technologies enables researchers, scientists, synthetic biologists, and drug developers to push the boundaries of what is possible in the life sciences.

 Synplogen 

 Synplogen is a DNA synthesis company spun out of Kobe University. Combining its proprietary OGAB techniques with cutting edge genetic engineering, information science and robotics, Synplogen provides a variety of services including DNA synthesis, DNA library development and viral vector development for gene therapy applications.

 Telesis Bio 

 Telesis Bio empowers researchers with the tools they need to rapidly and securely design, code, and create synthetic DNA. Creators of the BioXp™ system, the world’s only synthetic biology workstation, and the industry-standard Gibson Assembly® method, Telesis Bio accelerates advances in the fields of personalized medicine, antibody engineering, vaccine development, biologics drug discovery, and more.

 Thermo Fisher Scientific 

 Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc. is the world leader in serving science. Our mission is to enable our customers to make the world healthier, cleaner and safer.

 Touchlight 

 Touchlight is a privately-owned company based in London, U.K., focused on the provision of DNA services and manufacture of enzymatically produced novel DNA formats, such as doggybone DNA (dbDNA™) to enable the development of genetic medicines. Touchlight provides enzymatic DNA development and manufacturing, from research to GMP grade, for advanced therapy production, in a wide range of modalities including mRNA, viral and non-viral gene therapy and DNA vaccines. dbDNA™ is a linear, double-stranded, covalently closed DNA vector which eliminates bacterial sequences, including antibiotic resistance genes.

 Tsingke Biotechnology Co., Ltd. 

 Tsingke covers the whole industry chain of gene synthesis, from equipment to raw materials. Based on the high-throughput synthesis platform, Tsingke provides a wide range of services including gene synthesis and modified oligos as well as molecular reagents.

 Twist Bioscience 

 At Twist Bioscience, we work in service of people who are changing the world for the better. In fields such as medicine, agriculture, industrial chemicals and data storage, our unique silicon-based DNA Synthesis Platform provides precision at a scale that is otherwise unavailable to our customers. 

 Consortium Resources

 Press Releases

 International Gene Synthesis Consortium Updates Screening Protocols for Synthetic DNA Products and Services 

 Videos

 Presidential Commission for the Study of Bioethical Issues 

 Print

 Venter Institute Report 

 Harmonized Screening Protocol 

 Launch Announcement 

 Presentation at PCSBI 

 Statement AAAS Meeting 

 Nature 2009-Minshull-Wagner 

 Contact Us

 Interested in becoming a member of the International Gene Synthesis Consortium? 

 Contact the IGSC at info@genesynthesisconsortium.org .

 Want to Join Us?

 Download PDF >>> 

 About 

 Members 

 Resources 

 Contact 

 Home 

 Copyright © 2020 IGSC All Rights Reserved