SOURCE URL: https://www.saromics.com/fragment-screening-drug-discovery-services/
FINAL URL: https://www.saromics.com/fragment-screening-drug-design-services/
HTTP: 200
CONTENT-TYPE: text/html; charset=UTF-8
======================================================================
Fragment Screening Services & Fragment-Based Drug design 

 Skip to content 

 Search 

 Home 

 Blog 

 Services 
 
 X-ray Crystallography 

 ligand complexes 

 Antibody structure 

 NMR spectroscopy 

 Drug Discovery 

 Protein optimization 

 Proteinshop 

 Technology 
 
 Platform overview 

 BioNMR Practical 

 Discovery strategies 

 languages 
 
 Français 

 Japanese 

 About 
 
 Company 

 Company Board 

 Management 

 Publications 

 Press archive 

 Career 

 Contact 

 Fragment Screening and Fragment-Based Drug Discovery Services

 SARomics Biostructures offers advanced contract research services in fragment-based drug discovery and design. We use proprietary fragment libraries, weak-affinity chromatography (WAC) screening technique, NMR- and crystallographic fragment screening, advanced computational tools, and extensive industrial expertise to accelerate our clients’ drug discovery and design and support their efforts to develop novel therapeutics.

 Contact us! 

 Biophysical Fragment Screening Techniques For Drug Discovery

 SARomics Biostructure’s fragment screening services are part of our broader structural biology and drug discovery offerings. Our advanced technology platform offers a range of biophysical fragment screening methods, including NMR- and crystallographic fragment screening, and our proprietary weak-affinity chromatography screening. Our proprietary fragment libraries and our library of 600+ off-the-shelf proteins enable rapid screening and co-crystallization of new hits with the drug target.

Our fragment screening group collaborates closely with the medicinal chemistry team at RG Discovery to deliver a comprehensive, well-integrated fragment-based drug discovery and design (FBDD) process. We focus on driving the project from initial hit identification through hit expansion, lead generation, and optimization. Ultimately, our goal is to nominate the most promising candidate drug for further trials. Please visit our Knowledge Center for a discussion of the different structure-based drug design strategies . We also invite you to have a look at our blog posts on various experimental methods used in structural biology. 
 For details, please see below. 

 Download the screening services presentation 

 Weak affinity chromatography

 Computational Chemistry

 Review Our Fragment Screening Services

 NMR Fragment Screening Using 1D or 2D NMR Spectroscopy

 Weak Affinity Chromatography (WAC™) Screening

 Crystallographic Fragment Screening , Proprietary Kinase-Focused Fragment Library

 Computational Chemistry : Pharmacophore and Shape-Based Screening

 Screening Using Vipergen’s Unique DNA-Encoded Library (DEL) Technologies 

 WAC™ fragment library screening

 Together with RG Discovery, we provide fragment screening services using our proprietary weak-affinity chromatography (WAC™) technology. After seven years of rigorous testing, WAC™ has clearly demonstrated its cost-effectiveness as a high-throughput method for generating exceptional starting points for hit-to-lead Medicinal Chemistry programs, thereby advancing clients’ projects. For more details on the technology and results, please refer to our blog post or download the information flyer below.

 Download WAC™ information flyer! 

 NMR spectroscopy & Crystallographic Fragment Screening

 NMR spectroscopy and protein crystallography are two powerful techniques for screening fragments in fragment-based drug discovery and design. They enable the identification of weak binders to proteins, revealing a detailed map of molecular interactions within the fragment-protein complex. Fragment screening uses a small library of molecular fragments with molecular weights in the 100-300 Da range. Additionally, the three-dimensional structure guides the expansion from hits to leads and the optimization of compounds’ affinities and specificities. 

 Proprietary Fragment Libraries 

 Our biophysical fragment screening services utilize a proprietary library of MedChem-friendly low-molecular-weight compounds (around 1300) for WAC and NMR screening. Additionally, we have a kinase-focused fragment library designed explicitly for crystallographic fragment screening ( download the poster for details ). These compounds are designed to cover diverse chemical spaces and are general-purpose. Customers can also use their own libraries for screening. Some characteristics of the library are listed below:

 Designed to be general-purpose (not target-directed), covering diverse chemical space.

 A focus on low-molecular-weight fragments (<220)

 Solubility data (DMSO, water) are available for >80% of the fragments

 Analytical data (LCMS, 1H-NMR) available for all fragments

 Designed to be MedChem friendly (HBDs, HBAs, and ring count, ClogP, functional groups, etc.)

 More than 90% commercially available, facilitating rapid SAR generation

 See also our blog post on choosing a compound library for screening . 

 NMR Fragment Screening & Ligand Verification 

 Our leading NMR fragment and larger ligand screening services are often run within our integrated drug discovery services projects. We regularly run compound validation, either in combination with our proprietary weak-affinity chromatography (WAC™) or other biophysical screening methods. Depending on the target protein, we can run either 1D ligand-detection experiments or use 2D spectra.

For 1D ligand detection, we can conduct either 1H or 19F experiments. We can identify potential binding sites by competition experiments with a known binder. In 2D experiments, the protein must generally be labeled with 15N (or 2H for large proteins). However, recent advances in NMR technology enable us to conduct NMR fragment screening on non-isotopically labeled samples by examining the methyl region of the 13C NMR spectrum. If the assignment is available, we can readily identify the binding epitope of various fragments at atomic resolution.

 Crystallographic Fragment Screening 

 Practical implementation of crystallographic fragment screening became possible only with technical advancements, such as high-brilliance X-ray beams and automation at synchrotrons. The BioMax beamline at the MAX IV Laboratory has established a comprehensive crystallographic screening platform, FragMAX. It offers state-of-the-art instrumentation and a high-brilliance X-ray beam at the MAX IV synchrotron radiation facility. 

At SARomics Biostructures, we provide crystallographic fragment screening CRO services, which make use of our proprietary library specifically designed for this type of experiment. Screening can be offered as a standalone service or as part of our fragment-based drug discovery program. Our dedicated team will support you at every stage of the project, including:

– Crystal preparation and optimization for soaking
– Determination of solvent tolerance of the crystals (fragments are dissolved in DMSO)
– Soaking of crystals (more than 400 data sets per day may need to be collected)
– Crystal mounting and high-throughput data collection
– Data processing and analysis

Our clients do not need to apply for synchrotron beamtime, since all experiments are conducted under our standard agreement with MAX IV.
Please view our blog post for more details about the crystallographic fragment screening technique. 

 Our comprehensive computational chemistry services offer a wide range of solutions to meet your needs, including but not limited to :

 Pharmacophore and shape-based compound screening

 Ligand-based drug design

 Scaffold hopping

 Design of screening fragment library

 QSAR analysis and optimization

 What are the advantages of outsourcing your early drug discovery project to SARomics Biostructures? It is all in our blog post . 

 computational chemistry

 Computational Chemistry & Virtual Screening Services 

 Computational chemistry is central to structure-based drug design . It constitutes the basis of virtual screening ( in silico screening) of fragment and drug-like compound libraries, ligand docking, and scoring. 

Once hits are identified in the intial screening, computational chemistry methods are used at all subsequent stages, including hit expansion, hit-to-lead generation, and lead optimization. Docking and scoring are used in combination with pharmacophore- and shape-based methods, as well as quantitative structure-activity relationships (QSAR) analysis, to assess and compare the efficiency of the new compounds ( design-make-test-analyze cycle ). Other methods, such as scaffold hopping and ligand-based approaches, can also be used to identify new potential binders. These tools significantly accelerate the drug discovery process.

When screening compounds in silico, we use a proprietary virtual library containing millions of purchasable compounds that have already been filtered to remove reactive groups and excessively lipophilic molecules.

Our computational chemistry team closely collaborates with the medicinal chemistry, X-ray crystallography, and NMR spectroscopy teams throughout our fragment-based drug design process. This collaboration effectively advances the project from hit identification to structure-based hit expansion, structure-based hit-to-lead optimization, lead generation, and candidate drug nomination. Our learning center offers comprehensive information on various structure-based drug design strategies , informed by available data.

 Recent publication: Discovery of selective galacten-1 inhibitors

 Zetterberg FR, Diehl C, Håkansson M, Kahl-Knutson B, Leffler H, Nilsson UJ, Peterson K, Roper JA & Slack RJ (2023).
Discovery of Selective and Orally Available Galectin-1 Inhibitors
 J. Med. Chem. 2023, 66, 24, 16980–16990 

 PDB entries:
8OJP – Human galectin 1 in complex with inhibitor (on hold until publication)

 A new series of orally available α-d-galactopyranosides with high affinity and specificity for galectin-1 has been discovered. Researchers replaced six-membered aryl-triazolyl substituents in previously reported galectin-3-selective α-d-thiogalactosides with five-membered heterocycles such as thiazoles to achieve high affinity and specificity. One specific compound, GB1490, showed promising results (Kd galectin-1/3: 0.4/2.7 μM) and was further analyzed for selectivity across various galectins, demonstrating 6- to 320-fold selectivity, depending on the specific galectin class. The X-ray structure of GB1490 bound to galectin-1 revealed that the compound binds in a single conformation in the carbohydrate-binding site.

 We invite you to visit our publications page to explore more examples of our contributions to projects .

 Contact us to discuss your project! 

 Structural Biology & Drug Discovery Services: X-ray crystallography, NMR spectroscopy, fragment screening & structure-based lead optimization

 Blog 

 Contact 

 Privacy policy 

 © 2026 Structural Biology & Drug Discovery Services

 Home 

 Blog 

 Services Toggle child menu 

 X-ray Crystallography 

 ligand complexes 

 Antibody structure 

 NMR spectroscopy 

 Drug Discovery 

 Protein optimization 

 Proteinshop 

 Technology Toggle child menu 

 Platform overview 

 BioNMR Practical 

 Discovery strategies 

 languages Toggle child menu 

 Français 

 Japanese 

 About Toggle child menu 

 Company 

 Company Board 

 Management 

 Publications 

 Press archive 

 Career 

 Contact 

 Search for: