3954cellrepsmedCell Reports MedicineCell Rep MedElsevierPMC1186643811866438118664383970881210.1016/j.xcrm.2024.101877Neoadjuvant chemotherapy by liposomal doxorubicin boosts immune protection of tumor membrane antigens-based nanovaccine
ChenYang QinHao LiNan WeiYaohua LinYixuan DengRonghui DingHao LvYuanyuan MaTianyu LiRong XiongChanghao ZhengGuyu ChenHanqing ShiJian ZhaoYuliang ZhaoRuifang NieGuangjun 1CAS Key Laboratory for Biomedical Effects of Nanomaterials and Nanosafety, CAS Center of Excellence in Nanoscience, National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, Beijing 100190, P.R. China2Center of Materials Science and Optoelectronics Engineering, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, P.R. China3Beijing Key Laboratory of Environmental Toxicology, Department of Toxicology and Sanitary Chemistry, School of Public Health, Capital Medical University, Beijing 100069, P.R. China4School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Guangzhou University, Guangzhou 510006, P.R. China∗Corresponding author zhaorf@nanoctr.cn
∗∗Corresponding author niegj@nanoctr.cn
5Lead contact
20122024611018771018772822025© 2024 The AuthorsThis is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Summary
Autologous tumor cell membrane antigen-based vaccines (TMVs) have garnered extensive attention as personalized immunotherapy. However, patients who take TMVs therapy usually undergo various treatments prior to surgery, and these processes modulate the immunogenicity of the tumor membrane and the tumor immune microenvironment. Herein, we investigate the impact of preoperative chemotherapy on the efficacy of TMVs. Liposomal doxorubicin ameliorates the immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment and enhances immunological molecule expression on the tumor membrane. This has driven TMVs to elicit a more robust immune response than doxorubicin, resulting in more effective immune protection. The TMVs formulated from liposomal doxorubicin-treated tumors induce superior dendritic cell maturation and T cell activation compared to doxorubicin, thus demonstrating better efficacy in preventing recurrence and metastasis in the postoperative murine model. Collectively, our study suggests that chemotherapy can induce immunomodulatory changes that augment the therapeutic potential of immunotherapy and provides valuable insights into the clinical utilization of TMVs.
Keywords: autologous tumor vaccines, tumor membrane antigens, neoadjuvant chemotherapy, liposomal doxorubicin

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•Neoadjuvant chemotherapy facilitates the efficacy of TMVs
•NP-Dox chemotherapy ameliorates the immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment
•NP-Dox chemotherapy enhances tumor membrane immune-related molecules
•TMVs derived from NP-Dox-treated tumors exhibit potent anti-tumor efficacy

Chen et al. demonstrate a tumor membrane antigens-based nanovaccine derived from liposomal doxorubicin-treated tumor tissues, which is efficacious in inducing a potent immunological defense against tumors. Liposomal doxorubicin endows the capacity to both activate the tumor immune microenvironment and augment the expression of immune-associated molecules on the tumor membrane.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2024 May 6; Revised 2024 Aug 26; Accepted 2024 Nov 26; Collection date 2025 Jan 21.

## Introduction
Surgery continues to be the primary treatment modality for the majority of solid tumors; however, the challenges of postoperative tumor recurrence and metastasis persist. , Various strategies have been devised in response to these challenges, including using autologous tumor vaccine. , , These personalized vaccines leverage patients’ tumor cells as a source of antigens to stimulate immune responses and mitigate the risk of tumor recurrence following surgical intervention. , , Although autologous tumor cells cover the comprehensive and personalized antigen repertoire, their efficacy in clinical trials has been limited by their weak immunogenicity. , The tumor membrane (TM) contains tumor-presented antigens and associated antigens, which can be developed into a personalized antigen library that more accurately reflects the expression of tumor antigens. , Consequently, vaccines based on autologous tumor cell membrane antigens have been developed. , , An integrated vaccine formulation based on autologous TM antigens and bacterial cytoplasmic membrane adjuvants could achieve enhanced anti-tumor immune responses with a favorable biosafety profile. , 
Many patients may have undergone various treatments before receiving personalized tumor vaccines prepared from their tumors in clinical practice. For instance, some patients may be subjected to systemic chemotherapy before surgery, known as neoadjuvant chemotherapy, to reduce the clinical stage of the tumor, improve the pre-operative state, and create favorable conditions for subsequent surgery. , , Studies have indicated that chemotherapy can potentially enhance the immune landscape of the tumor microenvironment, shifting it toward a state of immune activation. , , Meanwhile, the systemic adverse effects caused by chemotherapy can have a detrimental inroad on the immune system. The dynamic changes in tumor cell membranes in response to the stimuli from chemotherapy may directly affect the efficacy of the TM vaccine. Therefore, the variations induced by chemotherapy, either the changes in the patient’s overall immune status or the modifications of the tumor itself, need to be considered when implementing autologous tumor vaccines under the conditions. Whether these alterations affect the vaccine’s efficacy has not been reported.
Hence, in the present study, we investigated the effect of preoperative chemotherapy on the efficacy of autologous tumor cell membrane antigen-based vaccines (TMVs). The chemotherapeutic agent doxorubicin (Dox) can induce immunogenic cell death (ICD) in tumors, releasing tumor antigens and immune-related signals, which further trigger immune responses. Therefore, our preoperative chemotherapy was preliminarily targeted to Dox. Considering that free Dox has severe toxic effects, which may affect the immune system, we opt for the safer and more effective nano-formulated liposomal Dox, while using the free Dox as a control. For the formulation of the TMVs, we obtained the TM as the antigen and resiquimod (R848), a potent dual Toll-like receptor (TLR) 7/8 agonist with excellent efficacy, was employed to act as the adjuvant of the vaccine. Notably, the metabolism of R848 in vivo is rapid, making it prone to severe immune-related adverse events. Therefore, we encapsulated it in Poly (lactide-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) nanoparticles, where co-delivery of the antigen and adjuvant could be achieved. We first analyzed the alterations in membrane proteins of tumors exposed to different treatments and then studied the immune response of mice by implementing the procedure described earlier. We evaluated its prevention of recurrence and metastasis in postoperative murine models to interpret preoperative chemotherapy’s impact on TMVs’ efficacy.

## Results

## Construction and characterization of TMVs
To prepare TMVs for postoperative vaccination of mice, tumors from mice without any preoperative treatment or treated with Dox or liposomal doxorubicin (NP-Dox) were surgically resected to obtain TMs as antigens, which were designated as TM, DTM, and NTM, respectively. R848 was encapsulated in PLGA nanoparticles to act as the vaccine’s adjuvant. The synthesized PLGA-R848 nanoparticles were then co-extruded with the three TMs described earlier to form three TMVs (TM-NPs, DTM-NPs, and NTM-NPs) ( A). The ratio of TM to nanoparticles was based on our previously published research, using a mass ratio of membrane to nanoparticles of 1:5. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images confirmed that TMs were successfully coated onto the surface of the nanoparticles and that the three preparations had a core-shell structure of relatively uniform size. ( B). Consistent with the results observed by TEM, the nanoparticle sizes of each group measured by dynamic light scattering (DLS) were also similar, with a hydrodynamic diameter of about 165 nm ( C). The polydispersity index (PDI) of all nanoparticles was less than 0.2. In addition, the zeta potential measured by DLS was approximately −25 mV, and the NTM-NPs group exhibited a less negative zeta potential than the TM-NPs group ( C). NTM-NPs were stable for over 2 weeks based on DLS and TEM measurements ( A−S1C). These experiments demonstrated that the synthesized nanoparticles display good dispersibility and stability in the solvent. To assess whether the extrusion process could lead to protein loss, protein gel electrophoresis and Coomassie brilliant blue staining were performed, confirming the intact retention of proteins during extrusion, which guarantees the presence of TM antigens ( D). We then examined the ultraviolet (UV) absorption spectra of PLGA, R848, and PLGA-R848 to investigate whether the adjuvant R848 had been successfully encapsulated in PLGA. As expected, the spectrum of PLGA-R848 was consistent with that of pure R848, proving that PLGA has successfully encapsulated R848 ( E). The encapsulation efficiency was determined by calculating the percentage of encapsulated drugs in the total amount delivered ( D), which was approximately 16%.
 

## The TMs treated with NP-Dox exhibited upregulation of immune-related pathways
Proteomic sequencing was performed on the different processed TMs to investigate the variations in the TM. Venn diagram showed the proteins identified between groups, including common and unique proteins, and TM, DTM, and NTM were represented as described previously ( F). We next screened differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) between any two groups (NTM and TM, NTM and DTM, and DTM and TM) under the defined statistical conditions (p < 0.05, up-regulated fold change >1.5, down-regulated fold change <0.67). As shown in G, the up-regulated and down-regulated proteins were plotted in red and blue, respectively. To find out which biological processes these DEPs predominantly involved, all DEPs between any two groups were analyzed using gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) separately, and the top 20 protein sets for normalized enrichment score (NES) were presented ( ). Intriguingly, we found that GSEA analysis of NTM compared to TM demonstrated a positive correlation with several biological processes that are highly immune related, such as the immune effector process ( H), leukocyte-mediated immunity, lymphocyte-mediated immunity, adaptive immune response, and antigen processing and presentation of peptide antigen ( A). Additionally, the GSEA analysis of NTM in comparison to DTM also highlighted a positive correlation with the immune effector process ( I), immune response, leukocyte-mediated immunity, lymphocyte-mediated immunity, and antigen processing and presentation of exogenous antigen ( B). However, GSEA analysis of DTM compared to TM did not present a correlation with immune processes in the top 20 protein sets for NES ( ), which may be because the amount of drug enriched to the tumor site by the systemic administration of Dox was too limited to result in the substantial molecular alterations of TM. Additionally, the global negative impact of the systemic distribution of free drugs on the immune system may also affect the local immune microenvironment of the tumor. The aforementioned analysis implied that preoperative chemotherapy of NP-Dox may provide superior efficacy compared to Dox or non-treatment when the TMVs were employed.
To further characterize the protein changes in NTM compared with the other two groups, the proteins that were simultaneously up-regulated (NTM up) or down-regulated (NTM down) in the NTM group were focused on ( C). Gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis was then performed for the proteins NTM up and NTM down. As expected, some of the top 20 GO terms where NTM up proteins significantly enriched are biological processes related to immunity, such as antigen processing and presentation of peptide antigen, antigen processing and presentation, and leukocyte-mediated immunity ( D). However, NTM down proteins were remarkably enriched in a series of biological processes related to RNA regulation ( E). This further suggests that, after exposure to NP-Dox, TMs significantly upregulate the expression of immune-relevant proteins and down-regulate some proteins that modulate cell stability. Moreover, the eradication of tumor cells by cytotoxic CD8+ T cells necessitates the recognition of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I antigen complex, which is presented on the surface of tumor cells; thus, the down-regulation of MHC class I facilitates tumors’ escape from immune surveillance. Therefore, restoration or enhancement of MHC class I expression on the tumor cell surface is conducive to improving the efficacy of immunotherapy. Hence, we analyzed the expression of MHC class I-related genes on the membrane of B16-F10 tumor cells. Intriguingly, the expression of MHC class I-related genes was notably up-regulated after NP-Dox chemotherapy ( F). We further analyzed the expression of two classical MHC class I molecules, H2K and H2D, in tumors under various treatments to confirm our findings. NP-Dox chemotherapy increased their expression in 4T1 and B16-F10 tumors ( G and S2H). We also evaluated PD-L1 expression as increased MHC class I might raise PD-L1 levels. , NP-Dox-treated tumors showed increased PD-L1 expression, while no significant change was noted ( I and S2J). These findings suggest that NTM had a higher concentration of immune-related proteins than TM and DTM, potentially enhancing the effectiveness of TMVs from NP-Dox treatment.

## Immune effects of TMVs in vitro
To preliminarily assess the immune responses generated by the three TMVs mentioned earlier, we performed in vitro experiments. The internalization of nanoparticles and the processing and presentation of antigens by dendritic cells (DCs) are the first and essential steps in the adaptive immune response. Hence, we first investigated the internalization of several nanoparticles by DCs. For this, rhodamine B and R848 co-loaded membrane formulations were synthesized and incubated with bone marrow-derived dendritic cells (BMDCs) for 1 h or 6 h. The percentage of nanoparticles uptake by BMDCs and the mean fluorescence intensity were then measured by flow cytometry. It is observed that the uptake of nanoparticles by BMDCs gradually progressed over time, with the percentage of uptake approaching 100% after 6 h ( A, S3B, and A). However, there was no significant difference in the internalization of nanoparticles made from the resected tumors with or without preoperative treatment, whether co-incubated for 1 h ( A and S3B) or 6 h ( C and A), which is also comprehensible given that several nanoparticles were equipped with the same adjuvant. Confocal images further illustrated the effective internalization of several nanoparticles (TM-NPs, DTM-NPs, and NTM-NPs) by BMDCs, and the colocalization of nanoparticles with lysosomes was visualized ( B), which is the pathway for antigen processing by DCs. Furthermore, given that the upregulation of costimulatory molecules CD80 and CD86 is crucial for the priming of naive T cells by DCs, we next assessed the expression of CD80 and CD86 in BMDCs after co-incubation with each group of materials. Different from the uptake experiment, TMVs produced by tumors pretreated with NP-Dox (NTM-NPs) induced higher CD80 ( C and 2D) and CD86 ( E and 2F) expression in BMDCs in comparison to the other groups. Of greater interest was the evident increase in the expression of costimulatory molecules in the NTM group alone, compared to the other two TM groups (TM and DTM groups) ( C−2F). The reason may be due to variations in membrane molecules caused by preoperative chemotherapy with NP-Dox in favor of DCs maturation, which is consistent with our previous proteomic results. Furthermore, we accessed the ability of the nanovaccine to stimulate the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines by BMDCs. The vaccine significantly enhanced cytokine production compared to the adjuvant alone ( G−2I). Notably, NTM-NPs induced the highest levels of interleukin (IL)-1β, IL-6, and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) among all groups ( G−2I). These findings collectively indicate that NTM-NPs are efficiently internalized by BMDCs and effectively elicit the immune response.
 Additionally, considering that tumor cell membranes exhibit antigens presented via MHC class I on their surface, we explored the potential of TMVs to induce T cell activation directly. To this end, CD3+ T cells were isolated and enriched from mouse spleens ( D), followed by co-culturing with TMVs for 24 h. The activation of CD8+ T cells was subsequently accessed by detecting the activation markers CD69 and CD25. Intriguingly, the results revealed that the TMVs could directly activate CD8+ T cells ( E). NTM-NPs exhibited a more significant activating effect than the other two vaccines, implying that NTM-NPs have the potential to elicit a robust anti-tumor immune response.

## TMVs produced by tumors pretreated with NP-Dox elicited effective immune responses in vivo
Given the potent immune responses evoked by the TMVs in vitro, we further explored whether postoperative vaccination with these vaccines could similarly induce anti-tumor immunity in vivo. To this end, 4T1 tumor-bearing mice were either left untreated or subjected to Dox or NP-Dox chemotherapy intravenously before surgery, and the tumors undergoing different treatments were subsequently excised to prepare several TMVs, as described previously. The vaccines were then employed for postoperative immunization in corresponding groups ( A). Following the subcutaneous vaccination, DCs internalize and convey the vaccine to the lymph nodes for T cell activation. To ascertain whether TMVs are recognized and processed by the immune system in vivo, we monitored the accumulation of the vaccine in the draining lymph nodes (dLNs) at 6 h or 24 h. We found that TMVs significantly enriched in dLNs after 6 h ( A). As time increased, the accumulation of the vaccine in dLNs considerably rose 24 h later ( B and B). Notably, the accumulation of NTM-NPs in dLNs showed a noticeable difference compared to the sole 1,1'-dioctadecyl-3,3,3',3'-tetramethylindodicarbocyanine perchlorate (DiD) group. At the same time, there was no statistical difference among the three groups of vaccines, which is consistent with the in vitro results. Next, we evaluated the immune response in lymph nodes. The lymph nodes of the immunized mice were enlarged compared to the untreated mice, and, as expected, the mice in the NTM-NPs group exhibited the largest lymph nodes ( C). We then analyzed the stimulatory signals on DCs, and, consistent with the in vitro results, the percentage of mature DCs, measured by CD80 ( D) and CD86 ( E), was markedly improved in the NTM-NPs group compared to the other three groups, which were not significantly different from each other. Next, we examined the T cell in dLNs, and, similarly, there was an increase in CD8+ T cells in the NTM-NPs group, but no alteration in the proportion of CD4+ T cells in the lymph nodes was observed ( C−S4E). To further refine the changes in T cells, we additionally measured the activated CD4+ and CD8+ T cells as well as regulatory T cells (Tregs) in dLNs. As expected, the activation of CD4+ T cells was significantly enhanced in mice immunized with NTM-NPs compared to the other three groups ( F), while the proportion of suppressive Tregs was considerably reduced compared to the unimmunized mice ( G). Additionally, mice treated with TM-NPs and DTM-NPs showed a remarkable reduction in Tregs ( G), implying that these two vaccines also played a role in anti-tumor immunity. The activation of CD8+ T cells was in line with the aforementioned results, with a substantial increase in the proportion of activated CD8+ T cells in the NTM-NPs group compared to the other three groups ( H and S4I). Effector T cells that directly exert anti-tumor effects are key to the success of anti-tumor immunity. Further analysis revealed that the proportion of effector T cells (CD44highCD62Llow) in dLNs was up-regulated from the NTM-NPs group, again indicating that the NTM-NPs group produced a more robust immune response than the other three groups ( F and 3G). We also observed a significant increase in cytokine concentrations, including IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α, in serum after vaccination with NTM-NPs, indicating that the systemic immune response was activated ( H−3J). Furthermore, the concentration of IL-1β also noticeably elevated after TM-NPs and DTM-NPs vaccination compared to the untreated group ( H).
 As another crucial site for immune responses, we also evaluated the adaptive immune response in the spleen. We found that the spleen’s volumes and weights in the NTM-NPs group were significantly increased after treatment compared to the other three groups. There was no noticeable difference between the other three groups ( J), indicating that the NTM-NPs group might be better equipped against tumors as more immune cells were infiltrated in the spleen. To further demonstrate the immune response generated in the spleen, dissected spleens were ground into single-cell suspensions and assayed for interferon (IFN)-γ and Granzyme B secreted by T cells after stimulation with phorbol myristate acetate (PMA) and ionomycin that are effective in activating T cells. As speculated, CD8+ T cells in the spleen of the NTM-NPs group produced enhanced secretion of IFN-γ and Granzyme B ( K−3N), in particular, a large elevation in Granzyme B secretion with a 3-fold upregulation compared to the other groups ( M and 3N). Another noteworthy finding was that the production of IFN-γ in the DTM-NPs group was also slightly higher than that in the other two groups ( K), suggesting that TMVs prepared after preoperative chemotherapy of Dox also played a role. Moreover, CD4+ T cells in the spleen of the NTM-NPs group also performed increased IFN-γ and Granzyme B secretion, in accordance with the results for CD8+ T cells ( K and S4L). Simultaneously, except for re-stimulating with the non-specific stimulator described earlier, the same detections of the spleen cells were also performed after stimulation with a specific antigen, namely the TM antigen of each group. The NTM-NPs group also showed increased secretion of the anti-tumor cytokine IFN-γ and Granzyme B by CD4+ and CD8+ T cells ( M−S4P).
In summary, postoperative vaccinating mice with tumor-derived TMVs could induce a certain degree of immune response. In short, the antigens were internalized and processed by DCs and then presented to T cells. This induced T cells to proliferate and differentiate into effector T cells to exert anti-tumor effects ( Q). Our results demonstrated that vaccines prepared from NP-DOX-treated tumors before surgery could boost immune responses after postoperative immunization in mice.

## TMVs produced by chemotherapy-pretreated tumors reduced tumor recurrence and metastasis in a murine 4T1 breast tumor model
Based on the previous validation of the effective immune response in vivo and in vitro generated by TMVs produced from chemotherapy-pretreated tumors, we wondered whether this regimen could inhibit postoperative tumor recurrence and metastasis of mice that underwent tumor resection. For this, 4T1 tumor-bearing mice were divided into four groups, two of which were left untreated, and the other two were given Dox or NP-Dox intravenously every other day for a total of four doses (day 5, 7, 9, and 11) when the tumor grew to approximately 100 mm3 ( A). The day after the fourth treatment, tumors in each group of mice were surgically resected, with 1% leaving to mimic the clinical microtumor foci. The obtained tumors undergoing different treatments were subsequently made into three TMVs, as described previously, which were then employed for postoperative immunization in corresponding groups, and the vaccination schedule was followed in our previous study on a total of three occasions on day 3, 5, and 9 after surgery ( A). In addition, mice were inoculated with an additional tumor on the opposite side of the back one day after surgery to mimic tumor metastasis. The tumor growth was monitored regularly. As shown in B and 4C, the tumor volumes of the non-immunized mice rapidly increased, and the tumors in the mice vaccinated with TM-NPs or DTM-NPs also gradually relapsed. In contrast, the mice treated with NTM-NP vaccines remained relapse free on day 30. Postoperative vaccination could also inhibit the growth of metastatic tumors, and the NTM-NPs group exhibited the best inhibitory effect on metastatic tumors ( D). In line with the effect of inhibiting tumor recurrence and metastasis, the survival rate of the NTM-NPs group reached about 63% over 60 days, while no mice survived in the other groups ( E). All these results indicated that TMVs made after preoperative chemotherapy with NP-Dox in mice are more conducive to inhibiting tumor recurrence and metastasis. Meanwhile, immunofluorescence and the results of flow cytometry of tumor microenvironment after different preoperative treatments suggested that the mice treated with NP-Dox exhibited greater infiltration of immune cells in the tumor microenvironment, including CD3+CD4+ T cells, CD3+CD8+ T cells, CD49b+ cells (natural killer [NK] cells), and F4/80+ cells (macrophages) ( F and 4G). Macrophages possess different subtypes depending on their activation status and functional roles. We explored the pro-inflammatory (M1) and anti-inflammatory (M2) macrophages infiltrating the tumor. Intriguingly, the M1 macrophages, which mainly exhibit anti-tumor effects, significantly increased in the tumor following chemotherapy with NP-Dox, while the tumor-promoting M2 macrophages decreased ( A and S5B). These results suggest that activating the immune microenvironment after preoperative chemotherapy with NP-Dox may be another reason for the improved immune response in the postoperative setting. In addition, we evaluated the safety of adopting this treatment regimen in mice. The weight of the mice was continuously monitored throughout the treatment period, and it was seen that they lost a slight amount of weight after chemotherapy but gradually returned to average weight after stopping chemotherapy ( C). Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining was performed on the dissected organs, and no significant histological changes were observed ( D). In addition, blood biochemical studies showed that alanine aminotransferase and aspartate transaminase increased slightly after vaccination, which may be due to negligible liver damage; kidney damage was not observed ( E).
 

## TMVs produced by chemotherapy-pretreated tumors reduced recurrence and metastasis in a murine B16-F10 melanoma model
To further validate the efficacy of the therapeutic regimen in other tumor models, we established another murine melanoma model. C57BL/6J mice were inoculated with B16-F10 melanoma cells, and the following experimental procedures and dosing regimens were performed as described earlier ( A). As with the results of the 4T1 tumor model, none of the tumors of mice in the NTM-NPs group had recurred even as they approached 40 days, whereas all of the surgically resected tumors of the mice in the other three groups had recurred ( B and 5C). Mice treated with NP-Dox preoperatively and immunized postoperatively with the vaccine derived from NP-Dox-treated tumors also displayed favorable inhibition of metastatic tumors ( D). Also, they improved the survival rate of mice ( E). Similarly, we also analyzed the immune cells in the tumor microenvironment after different preoperative operations, and there were significantly higher numbers of CD3+CD8+ T cells, NK cells, macrophages, and DCs in the tumor microenvironment treated with NP-Dox ( F). We also examined the different phenotypes of tumor-infiltrating macrophages in the tumor, and the results were consistent with the 4T1 model, with an increase in M1 macrophages and a decrease in M2 macrophages after chemotherapy ( ).
 Despite having demonstrated the efficacious anti-tumor efficacy of the systemic therapeutic strategy we proposed, we proceeded to investigate the direct anti-tumor efficacy of TMVs to provide a more explicit delineation of the vaccine’s intrinsic therapeutic role. C57BL/6J mice were subcutaneously inoculated with B16-F10 tumor cells and then immunized with the nanovaccines on day 4, with three doses administered on days 4, 6, and 10 ( A). Notably, the mice immunized with NTM-NPs exhibited the slowest tumor growth, with tumor volume on day 13 being only 20% of that of untreated mice ( B). Furthermore, TM-NPs and DTM-NPs also exerted some control over tumor growth, suggesting that they can also induce anti-tumor immune responses ( B). The mice were sacrificed on day 13, and the tumors were excised, photographed, and weighed. Tumor growth propensity between groups was consistent with tumor volume ( C and S7D).
Next, we evaluated the immune response at the end of treatment. We first analyzed the maturation of DCs in dLNs and the activation of CD8+ T cells by DCs. As expected, the proportion of mature DCs was significantly elevated in the NTM-NPs group ( E), as was the activation of CD8+ T cells ( F and S7G). Notably, the DTM-NPs group also presented an increase in both mature DCs ( E) and CD69-positive CD8+ T cells ( F). To further investigate the immune response in the spleen, dissected spleen was disrupted into single-cell suspensions and, after re-stimulation with PMA and ionomycin, IFN-γ secretion by CD8+ T cells was measured. Similarly, the NTM-NPs group generated the largest IFN-γ secretion, which was almost three times higher compared to the non-immunized group ( H). Simultaneously, the other two vaccine groups also displayed enhanced IFN-γ production, in accordance with the therapeutic effects ( H). In addition, the infiltration of CD3+CD8+ T cells in the tumor was determined; the NTM-NPs group showed a notable enhancement of CD3+CD8+ T cells compared to the other groups, indicating the superior anti-tumor effect ( I). The increase in CD3+CD8+ T cells was also observed in the TM-NPs and DTM-NPs groups, implying that these two nanovaccines can also exert anti-tumor immune responses ( I). Collectively, the data indicate that, beyond the changes in the tumor microenvironment precipitated by neoadjuvant chemotherapy, the vaccine generated from post-chemotherapy tumors is inherently capable of eliciting a potent anti-tumor response.

## TMVs produced by chemotherapy-pretreated tumors reduced recurrence and metastasis in the melanoma lung metastases model
To further investigate the efficacy of the therapeutic regimen on metastatic tumors, C57BL/6J mice were inoculated with B16-F10 melanoma cells, followed by the administration regimens and experimental procedures as described earlier for B16-F10 melanoma, except that subcutaneous metastases were replaced with lung metastases ( A). Consistent with the previous results, none of the mice in the NTM-NPs group experienced tumor recurrence, while tumors in mice from the other groups recurred successively after resection ( B). To explore the growth of lung metastases, the mice were sacrificed on day 26, and the lungs were dissected for quantitative analysis of tumor metastatic foci. As expected, the lungs of mice immunized with NTM-NPs showed almost no metastatic nodules, while the anti-tumor efficacy in the lungs of mice treated with TM-NPs or DTM-NPs was limited ( C). To further explicate whether any potential metastatic foci are not observed, an H&E staining analysis of the lungs was performed, and similar findings were obtained ( D). We also analyzed CD8+ T cell infiltration in the lungs by immunohistochemistry. Although no metastatic foci were observed in the NTM-NPs group, there was still a significant infiltration of CD8+ T cells compared to the other three groups, which might be residual after successful tumor killing ( E); the other two groups treated with the vaccine also demonstrated an increase in CD8+ T cell infiltration compared to the untreated group ( E).
 Next, we assessed the adaptive immune response in the model by first examining the costimulatory signals CD80 and CD86 in dLNs to evaluate the maturation of DCs and found a remarkable elevation in the proportion of mature DCs in the NTM-NPs group ( F). Similarly, the spleen’s volume and weight in the NTM-NPs group were significantly increased compared to the other three groups ( A). We then assessed the immune response in the spleen via IFN-γ enzyme-linked immunospot assay (ELISPOT) and intracellular IFN-γ and Granzyme B staining by flow cytometry. As expected, there was a marked increase in IFN-γ ( G and 6H) and Granzyme B ( I) secretion by CD8+ T cells in the spleen of the NTM-NPs group, and the same was true for CD4+ T cells ( B and S8C). Moreover, we also performed an H&E staining analysis on the main organs, and no visible pathological changes were found in any of the organs examined ( D).

## Discussion
TMVs have gained significant interest in personalized immunotherapy, , , , , and researchers are striving to enhance TMVs effectiveness. Importantly, patients typically undergo various treatments, particularly chemotherapy, before receiving TMVs. These treatments can change the immunogenic properties of tumor cell membranes, thereby influencing TMVs efficacy. Our study reveals that TMVs created post-chemotherapy provoke a stronger immune response and better inhibit tumor recurrence and metastasis in a postoperative murine model. TMVs from mice treated with nanoparticle-bound NP-Dox were more effective than those from free Dox-treated mice. We propose four key points. First, NP-Dox accumulates more in tumors than free Dox, , enhancing its anti-tumor effect and reducing tumor size, which decreases the risk of post-surgical tumor recurrence and metastasis. Second, NP-Dox’s limited distribution in normal tissues diminishes toxic side effects, , improving the overall condition of the treated mice and thereby enhancing the TMV’s efficacy. Third, NP-Dox modifies the immune microenvironment toward immune activation, aiding subsequent vaccine effectiveness. Lastly, NP-Dox-treated TMs upregulate immune-related molecule expression, boosting the immune response when used in vaccines. Moreover, DTM-NPs inhibit postoperative tumor recurrence and metastasis without the therapeutic efficacy being impaired by pre-treatment with Dox. This suggests that even neoadjuvant chemotherapy with free Dox can increase the immunogenicity of TM antigens. However, it may also have adverse effects on the immune system.
In addition, given that tumor vaccines function primarily through the uptake and presentation of antigens by antigen presenting cells (APCs) to T cells after immunization, our study focused principally on the uptake and processing of the vaccine by the specialized APCs, DCs, and their presentation to T cells, thereby activating T cells to proliferate and differentiate into effector T cells to exert anti-tumor effects. However, it cannot be excluded that other activated immune responses also participate in this process. When examining macrophages infiltrating the tumor, we observed an elevation in M1 macrophages, which contributes to anti-tumor effects, while M2 macrophages, which enable tumor growth, trended downward, suggesting that macrophages also played a role throughout the treatment process. Furthermore, macrophages may also have been involved in antigen presentation as another type of APCs. A study has reported that R848 can activate NK cells by acting on DCs, hinting that NK cells may also have been implicated after vaccination. Notably, in this study, we uncovered that TMVs could directly activate CD8+ T cells, possibly due to the presence of TM with MHC class I-presented antigens. Moreover, it has been revealed that tumor cells can also express the costimulatory factor CD80, which provides the dual signals necessary for T cell activation. This finding is of significant reference value for designing future cancer vaccine studies.
This study is complementary to our previous work, in which we proposed a postoperative immunization strategy using a hybrid membrane vaccine (HM-NP) that integrates surgically removed TMs and bacterial cytoplasmic membranes, which could effectively postpone tumor recurrence, improve survival, and provide long-term tumor-specific protection. However, we also highlighted that a limiting factor in the previous work is that the membrane-localized proteins contained not only self-antigens but also some immunosuppressive factors that may escape immune surveillance. One potential solution is to incorporate it into neoadjuvant therapy, which could effectively upgrade the expression of TM proteins before surgery. We have demonstrated the feasibility of the notion in this current study. In addition, other preoperative treatments, aside from those mentioned in this study, may have similar effects and require further investigation. In summary, our study suggested that preoperative chemotherapy with some agents could further enhance the efficacy of TM antigens-based nanovaccine, which provides valuable insights into the clinical application of TMVs.

## Limitations of the study
While we have posited that chemotherapeutic drugs with the potential to induce ICD may share comparable efficacies, this hypothesis is ultimately derived from empirical data and scholarly inference, necessitating additional substantiation. Furthermore, our findings indicate that tumors undergo a spectrum of immune-relevant molecular alterations on the TM after liposomal Dox chemotherapy, and elucidating the precise nature of these alterations would yield significant insights. Such an investigation could encompass the identification of novel tumor antigens, holding considerable promise for the formulation of individualized neoantigen-based cancer vaccines.

## Resource availability

## Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Ruifang Zhao (zhaorf@nanoctr.cn).

## Materials availability
This study did not generate new unique reagents.

## Data and code availability

•Proteomic sequencing data have been deposited at iProX: IPX0009570001 and ProteomeXchange: PXD055424 and are publicly available. Accession numbers are listed in the .
•This study did not report original code.
•Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.

## Acknowledgments
This work was financially supported by grants from the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2023YFC2508500 to R.Z.), the Fundamental Research Center Project of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (T2288102 to G.N.), the Strategic Priority Research Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (XDB36000000 to G.N.), CAS Project for Young Scientists in Basic Research (YSBR-041 to R.Z.), the Beijing Nova Program (202304584382 to R.Z.), and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (32301202 to H.Q.).

## Author contributions
Y.C. and R.Z. conceived the project, designed and performed most experiments, analyzed the data, and wrote the manuscript. N.L., T.M., and Y. Lv assisted in surgical resection. Y. Lin, R.D., R.L., C.X., and G.Z. assisted in the anatomy of mice. H.Q., H.C., Y.Z., Y.W., H.D., and J.S. provided suggestions on project design and data presentation. G.N. and R.Z. supervised all experiments and revised the manuscript.

## Declaration of interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

## STAR★Methods

## Key resources table

 

## Experimental model and study participant details

## Mice models
8-week female BALB/c and C57BL/6J mice were purchased from Speyford Experimental Animal Technology Co., Ltd. (Beijing, China) and maintained in a pathogen-free environment. All animal experiments were approved by the Animal Care and Welfare Committee of the National Center for NanoScience and Technology.

## Cell lines
The 4T1 mouse breast cancer cell (ATCC, CRL-2539) and B16-F10 melanoma cell (ATCC, CRL-6475) were purchased from Procell Life Science & Technology Co., Ltd. (Wuhan, China). The cells were cultured at 37°C and 5% CO2 in complete RPMI 1640 medium (catalog 350-000-CL) supplemented with 100 μg/mL penicillin/streptomycin (catalog 450-201-EL) and 10% FBS (catalog 085–150).

## Bone marrow derived dendritic cells (BMDCs)
Bone marrow-derived dendritic cells (BMDCs) were extracted from the bone marrow of mice. In Brief, the bone marrow cavity of mice was rinsed with RPMI 1640 medium to collect the rinsing solution, which was centrifuged at 500 ×g for 5 min, and the supernatant was discarded. The pellets by re-centrifugation after lysis of red blood cells with red blood cell lysate were resuspended in complete RPMI 1640 medium containing 2 mM L-glutamine, 0.05 mM β-ME, 20 ng/mL GM-CSF, and 10 ng/mL IL-4. The obtained BMDCs were placed in a 6-well plate and cultured at 37°C. The medium was refreshed every two days with a half replacement. The day on which BMDCs were harvested was recorded as day 0, and cells were collected on day 6 for further experiments.

## Method details

## Synthesis of PLGA-R848 nanoparticles
PLGA-R848 was synthesized by double-emulsion evaporation technique. Specifically, 20 mg PLGA was dissolved in 2 mL dichloromethane with the adding of 10 μL R848 dissolved in DMSO (50 mg/mL), followed by 0.2 mL sterile water, which was emulsified for 3 min using ultrasonication (30 W). Then 5 mL of 2.5% (w/v) aqueous PVA solution was mixed into the primary emulsion and emulsified (35 W) again for 6 min. The emulsion was next drip-dropped into 5 mL 0.25% (w/v) aqueous PVA solution and stirred overnight to volatilize the organic solvent. PLGA-R848 nanoparticles were harvested by centrifuging emulsion at 10000 ×g for 20 min and washing three times with sterile water.

## Preparation of tumor membrane-coated nanoparticles
To obtain different tumor membranes, tumors resected after preoperative treatment were placed into 6-well plates, followed by the addition of pre-prepared digestive enzymes, which was a mixture of collagenase IV (1.0 mg/mL), DNase I (0.1 mg/mL) and hyaluronidase (0.1 mg/mL) in Gey’s Balanced Salt Solution (GBSS) buffer. The tumors were then cut into small pieces and digested at 37°C for 2 h. After that, the tumors were ground into single-cell suspension through a 70-μm filter, which was then collected by centrifugation at 500 ×g for 5 min. The harvested tumor cells were resuspended in 4 mL membrane isolation buffer and disrupted using ultrasonication (35 W) for 5 min in an ice bath to allow adequate cell lysis. The cell lysate was then centrifuged at 3000 ×g for 5 min to collect the supernatant, which was further centrifuged at 10000 ×g for 10 min. The obtained supernatant was centrifuged at a high speed of 100000 ×g for 2 h, and the precipitate obtained was the cell membrane, which was washed twice with sterile PBS and then stored at −80°C. All the centrifugation steps described above were performed at −4°C to prevent membrane protein loss. The protein concentration of the tumor cell membrane isolated was quantified by the BCA protein assay kit. Proteomic analysis was commissioned by Majorbio Bio-Pharm Technology Co., Ltd (Shanghai, China) to obtain the protein composition of tumor membranes. To prepare the membrane-coated nanoparticles, the tumor cell membrane obtained above was co-extruded with PLGA-R848 at a mass ratio of 1:5 by repeated physical extrusion through a 400 nm cut-off extruder (Hamilton Company, Reno, Nevada, USA).

## Characterization of nanoparticles
The morphology of nanoparticles was characterized by a transmission electron microscope (HT7700, HITACHI, Tokyo, Japan). The hydrodynamic size distribution, ζ potential, and polydispersity index (PDI) were determined by a dynamic light scattering instrument named Zetasizer Nano ZS (Malvern, UK). The protein expression of different nanoparticles was separated by SDS-PAGE and stained with Coomassie brilliant blue. To investigate the encapsulation efficiency of PLGA for R848, we first prepared a series of solutions with gradient concentrations of R848. We measured the absorbance at 308 nm using UV to construct a standard curve. Next, we dissolved the synthesized PLGA-R848 in DMSO and measured its absorbance value at 308 nm to calculate the encapsulated R848. Encapsulation efficiency (EE%) was calculated using the following formulation:
EE%=WeightofentrappeddrugOverallfeedingweight×100%

## Uptake and maturation of BMDCs in vitro
To detect the uptake of BMDCs, rhodamine B-loaded nanoparticle PLGA-R848-rhodamine B was first synthesized. To this end, the sterile water in the first step of the synthesis step of PLGA-R848 nanoparticles described above was replaced with an aqueous solution of rhodamine B. Then BMDCs extracted from mouse bone marrow were collected on day 6 and pulsed with rhodamine B-loaded nanoparticles PLGA-R848, TM-NPs, DTM-NPs, or NTM-NPs for 1 h or 6 h. The uptake of nanoparticles by BMDCs was measured by flow cytometry (Cytoflex S, Beckman Coulter, USA) and imaged with a confocal laser scanning microscope (Zeiss 710, Zeiss Microsystems). In addition, BMDCs were pulsed with various materials PLGA-R848, TM, DTM, NTM, TM-NPs, DTM-NPs, or NTM-NPs for 24 h. The maturation markers CD80 (catalog 104734) and CD86 of BMDCs were detected by flow cytometry (Cytoflex S, Beckman Coulter, USA).

## Tumor models and treatments
For the 4T1 breast cancer model, BALB/c mice were subcutaneously inoculated with 5 × 105 4T1 tumor cells, whereas for the B16-F10 melanoma model, C57BL/6J mice were inoculated with 3 × 105 tumor cells. The day on which the tumor was inoculated was recorded as day 0. When the tumor volume reached ∼100 mm3 on day 5, the mice were intravenously administered the chemotherapy drug Dox or NP-Dox at a dose of 2.5 mg/kg. The mice were administered every other day for a total of four doses. The day after the end of dosing, tumors were surgically removed from the mice, leaving about 1% to mimic clinical residual microtumor foci. In addition, the mice were inoculated with another tumor on the opposite side of the back on the first day after surgery to mimic tumor metastasis. For the B16-F10 melanoma lung metastases model, C57BL/6J mice were injected intravenously with 2 × 105 tumor cells. Next, mice were subcutaneously immunized 3 times (on days 15, 17, and 21) after surgery with the TMVs, which consisted of autologous tumor membrane (200 μg) as antigen and R848 (20 μg) as an adjuvant.

## Assessment of splenic immune responses in vivo
After the third postoperative vaccination according to the above procedure, the spleens of the mice were dissected and ground into single-cell suspension through a 70-μm filter, which was centrifuged at 300 ×g for 5 min to collect cell precipitates. Then 1 mL of red blood cell lysate was added for 5 min to lyse red blood cells, which was terminated with 10 mL of RPMI 1640 medium and centrifuged again to obtain target cells. We then seeded the cells into 24-well plates at 1 × 106 cells per well and restimulated with PMA (0.1 μg/mL) or membrane proteins (20 mg/L) together with GolgiPlug (1 μL/mL) at 37°C for 8 h. The cells were collected and stained with fluorescence-labeled CD3, CD4 (catalog 100451), CD8 (catalog 100707), IFN-γ, and Granzyme B, and the percentage of positive cells was determined by flow cytometry (Cytoflex S, Beckman Coulter, USA).

## Evaluation of lymph node immune responses in vivo
After the third postoperative vaccination, according to the above procedure, the lymph nodes of the mice were excised and ground into single-cell suspension through a 70-μm filter for immune response assays. One was stained with fluorescence-labeled CD11c, CD80 (catalog 104734), and CD86 to measure DCs maturation. Another was stained with fluorescence-labeled CD3, CD4 (catalog 100451), CD8 (catalog 100729), CD44, and CD62L, and the percentage of positive cells was determined by flow cytometry (Cytoflex S, Beckman Coulter, USA). Detection of T cell activation was determined by staining with fluorescence-labeled CD3, CD4 (catalog 100428), CD8 (catalog 100751), CD69 and CD25 (catalog 101910). To examine the proportion of Tregs that had undergone different treatments, the prepared lymph node cells were fixed and permeabilized with Perm buffer, followed by incubation with antibodies against marker CD3, CD4 (catalog 100408), CD25 (catalog 101916) and FoxP3, and the proportion of Tregs among CD4+ T cells was measure by flow cytometry (Cytoflex S, Beckman Coulter, USA).

## Immunofluorescence and immunohistochemistry of CD4 and CD8
Tumor tissues undergoing preoperative treatment were excised and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 24 h. The fixed tissues were then serially dehydrated, embedded, sectioned, and stained with antibodies against CD4 (1:100 dilution) and CD8 (1:30 dilution for immunofluorescence; 1:1000 dilution for immunohistochemistry).

## Measurements of immune cells in tumors
100 mg of the tumor resected after preoperative treatment was placed into a 6-well plate, followed by the adding of pre-prepared digestive enzymes, which was formed by dissolving collagenase IV (1.0 mg/mL), DNase I (0.1 mg/mL) and hyaluronidase (0.1 mg/mL) in GBSS buffer. The tumors were then cut into small pieces and digested at 37°C for 2 h. After that, the tumors were ground into single-cell suspension through a 70-μm filter, which was then collected by centrifugation at 500 ×g for 5 min for staining with fluorescence-labeled CD45, CD3, CD4, CD8 (catalog 100707), CD49b, NK1.1, CD11c, F4/80, CD80 (catalog 104707), CD206 (catalog 141719) antibodies to detect immune cells in tumors. The percentage of positive cells was determined by flow cytometry (Cytoflex S, Beckman Coulter, USA).

## Accumulation of TMVs in LNs in vivo
C57BL/6J mice were subcutaneously immunized with DiD-labeled nanovaccines (TM-NPs, DTM-NPs, and NTM-NPs) at a dose of 200 μg autologous tumor membrane and 20 μg R848. After 6 or 24 h, mice were sacrificed to harvest lymph nodes for imaging using an IVIS Spectrum.

## Activation of T cell by TMVs
Purified CD3+ T cells were isolated from mouse spleens using an EasySep Mouse T cell Isolation Kit according to its instructions, and the sorting efficiency was verified by flow cytometry (Cytoflex S, Beckman Coulter, USA). Next, harvested T cells were resuspended in complete RPMI 1640 medium containing IL-2 (40 U/mL) and placed in a 24-well plate at a concentration of 3 × 105 cells/mL accompanied by the addition of different vaccines (TM-NPs, DTM-NPs, and NTM-NPs). After 24 h, the cells were collected, and the percentage of activated CD8+ T cells was detected by flow cytometry (Cytoflex S, Beckman Coulter, USA).

## Cytokine analysis by ELISA
After co-culturing BMDCs with various materials for 24 h, the supernatant culture medium was collected. For in vivo experiments, the mouse whole blood was sampled at the endpoint of the experiment, and then centrifuged at 3000 ×g for 10 min, followed by the collection of the supernatant to obtain serum. Next, the content of cytokines, including IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α in the culture medium and serum, was detected using ELISA Kits.

## Real-time qPCR
1 μg total RNA was extracted from tumor tissues undergoing different treatments with TRIzol reagent and then reverse transcribed into cDNA using a Hifair Ⅲ 1st Strand cDNA Synthesis SuperMix kit (Yeasen Biotech Co., Ltd, Shanghai, China) and the concentration and purity were determined by NanoDrop (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Real-time PCR assays were performed with predenaturation at 95°C for 2 min followed by 40 cycles of 95°C for 10 s and 60°C for 30 s according to Hieff UNICON Universal Blue qPCR SYBR Green Master Mix Kit (Yeasen Biotech Co., Ltd, Shanghai, China). The primer sequences used are shown in .

## Quantification and statistical analysis
The data represented means ± standard deviation (SD). Sample numbers (n) are indicated in the figure legends. Statistical significance of three or more groups was performed with a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Tukey’s post-hoc test. The tumor growth curves were analyzed by two-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons post-test. The log rank (Mantel-Cox) test was applied in the survival analysis. ∗p < 0.05, ∗∗p < 0.01, ∗∗∗p < 0.001, and ∗∗∗∗p < 0.0001 were considered significant, and ns represents no significant difference. All data in this study were analyzed with GraphPad Prism 8.0.2 software.

Published: December 20, 2024

## Footnotes
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrm.2024.101877.

## Contributor Information
Ruifang Zhao, Email: zhaorf@nanoctr.cn.
Guangjun Nie, Email: niegj@nanoctr.cn.

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1−S8 and Tables S1−S4

## Document S2. Article plus supplemental information

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Document S1. Figures S1−S8 and Tables S1−S4

## Document S2. Article plus supplemental information

## Data Availability Statement

•Proteomic sequencing data have been deposited at iProX: IPX0009570001 and ProteomeXchange: PXD055424 and are publicly available. Accession numbers are listed in the .
•This study did not report original code.
•Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.