pmcBioact MaterBioact Mater3413bioactmat101685294Bioactive Materials2452-199XKeAi PublishingPMC12268350PMC12268350.112268350122683504067826410.1016/j.bioactmat.2025.06.038S2452-199X(25)00274-91Review ArticleBiomaterials nanoplatform-based tumor vaccines for immunotherapy
LiZhilin ZhangHongbin GongQiyong LuoKuiluokui@scu.edu.cn aKey Laboratory of Medicinal Chemistry for Natural Resource, Ministry of Education, Yunnan Key Laboratory of Research and Development for Natural Products, School of Pharmacy, Yunnan University, Kunming, 650500, ChinabDepartment of Radiology, Huaxi MR Research Center (HMRRC), Institution of Radiology and Medical Imaging, Breast Center, Institute of Breast Health Medicine, Frontiers Science Center for Disease-Related Molecular Network, State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610041, ChinacFunctional and Molecular Imaging Key Laboratory of Sichuan Province, NHC Key Laboratory of Transplant Engineering and Immunology, Research Unit of Psychoradiology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Chengdu, 610041, ChinadXiamen Key Lab of Psychoradiology and Neuromodulation, Department of Radiology, West China Xiamen Hospital of Sichuan University, Xiamen, 361021, China⁎Corresponding author. Department of Radiology, Huaxi MR Research Center (HMRRC), Institution of Radiology and Medical Imaging, Breast Center, Institute of Breast Health Medicine, Frontiers Science Center for Disease-Related Molecular Network, State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610041, China. luokui@scu.edu.cn9202530620255148967792496114202519620251962025300620251707202530042026© 2025 The Authors2025https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).With the increasing incidence of cancer, it has become one of the most significant diseases threatening global human health. Tumor vaccines effectively induce activation of antigen-specific anti-tumor immune responses by delivering tumor antigens and adjuvants to antigen presenting cells (APCs), significantly inhibiting tumor recurrence and metastasis. Consequently, tumor vaccines have emerged as one of promising modalities in the next generation tumor immunotherapy. Biomaterial-based nanoplatforms have exhibited remarkable potential in enhancing the efficacy of tumor vaccines through antigen stabilization, spatiotemporal co-delivery of antigens/adjuvants to APCs, augmented lymphatic targeting, and initiation of robust responses from Th1/or cytotoxic T lymphocytes with immunological memory. In this review, we analyzed the state-of-art development of tumor vaccines delivered by biomaterial-based nanoplatforms. We first elaborated tumor vaccine components, including tumor antigens and adjuvants, and their mechanisms of immune activation. We then dived into an array of biomaterial-based nanoplatforms explored for tumor vaccine delivery, including lipid nanoparticles, polymeric nanoparticles, inorganic nanoparticles, biomimetic nanoparticles, and hydrogels. Furthermore, recent clinical trials of tumor vaccines were summarized, and future directions and key challenges in the development of tumor vaccines were discussed.

## Graphical abstract
Engineered biomaterial nanoplatforms (lipid/polymer/inorganic/biomimetic nanoparticles, hydrogels) serve as tumor vaccine delivery systems for immunotherapy. These systems enhance therapeutic efficacy by (1) protecting antigens from degradation, (2) enabling spatiotemporal co-delivery of antigens and adjuvants, (3) targeting lymphoid organs (lymph nodes or spleen), and (4) initiating robust antitumor immune responses. 

## Highlights
•Tumor antigens and adjuvants are systematically elaborated.
•Biomaterial-based nanoplatforms are examined as tumor vaccine delivery systems.
•Innovations in nanoplatform design are emphasized.
•Recent clinical tumor vaccine trials are summarized, with key challenges and future directions discussed.

## Keywords
Biomaterial nanoplatformsTumor vaccinesAntigensAdjuvantsImmunotherapypmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND1

## Introduction
Cancer has posed a substantial threat to public health. Over the past decade, tumor immunotherapy by employing immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs), chimeric antigen receptor T cells, tumor vaccines, and cytokines has shifted the paradigm of tumor therapy from traditional chemotherapy and targeted therapy, and it has become one of most promising treatment modalities [ , ]. ICIs targeting PD-1/PD-L1, CTLA-4, LAG-3, TIM-3, and/or TIGIT, cytokine-based therapeutics such as superagonists for interleukin-2 (IL-2), tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) or IL-15/IL-18, and cytokine-antibody fusion proteins, have displayed clinical efficacy in restoring immune surveillance by enhancing tumor cell recognition and elimination. Notably, multiple therapeutic agents within these categories including Nivolumab, Pembrolizumab, Atezolizumab, and Ipilimumab have received Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval for cancer immunotherapy [ , , ]. However, unsatisfactory response rates, immune-related adverse side effects, and acquired resistance diminish their benefits to patients [ ]. Among these immunotherapies, tumor vaccines deliver antigens and adjuvants to antigen presenting cells (APCs), such as dendritic cells (DCs), to induce tumor-specific immune responses to eradicate tumor cells, and they have shown promising anti-tumor therapeutic and preventive effects [ , , ].
There are five critical steps for tumor vaccines to elicit potent, specific anti-tumor effects: (1) identification of tumor antigens; (2) development of immune-stimulating adjuvants, (3) incorporation of antigens and adjuvants into a drug delivery system; (4) efficient targeting of immune organs including lymph nodes or spleens; and (5) degradation of antigens in APCs and formation of complexes with major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class Ⅰ or Ⅱ molecules. The complexes are presented to T lymphocytes to activate cellular or humoral immune responses.
Materials science and nanotechnology have played a crucial role in achieving potent immunotherapeutic effects of tumor vaccines [ , , , , , ]. Nanoplatforms, such as lipid nanoparticles (LNPs), polymeric nanoparticles, inorganic nanoparticles, biomimetic nanoparticles, and hydrogels, have been extensively explored for tumor vaccine delivery. Herein, we summarized biomaterial/nanotechnology-based platforms for co-delivery of antigens and adjuvants for potent anti-tumor immune responses ( ). Tumor antigens and adjuvants that have been extensively studied and recently emerged were first elaborated. Subsequently, we surveyed the nanoplatforms developed for tumor vaccine delivery, encompassing (1) LNPs, (2) polymeric nanoparticles, (3) inorganic nanoparticles, (4) biomimetic nanoparticles, and (5) hydrogels. Furthermore, we summarized the status of clinical trials of tumor vaccines and provided perspectives and potential hurdles associated with clinical translation of biomaterials-based nanoplatforms for tumor vaccines. 

2

## Development of antigens and adjuvants
2.1

## Tumor antigens
The tumor antigen, in a format of an immunogenic protein, a peptide, an encoding mRNA, can elicit systemic immune responses. Tumor antigens are classified into tumor-associated antigens (TAAs) and tumor-specific antigens (TSAs). TAAs are often abnormally or excessively expressed in tumor tissues, whereas their expression is at a low level in normal tissues [ ]. Well-recognized TAAs include prostate-specific antigen (PSA), glycoprotein 100 (gp100), human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER2), mucin protein-1 (MUC-1), TTK protein kinase, and tyrosinase, and these TAAs have been widely used as model antigens [ ]. TSAs are heterogeneous tumor-antigens on the tumor surface or inside tumor cells, including neoantigens derived from somatic mutations, viral oncoproteins, and epigenetically reactivated cancer-testis antigens. Among these TSAs, neoantigens that arise from non-synonymous mutations or genomic rearrangements have emerged as prioritized targets for personalized cancer vaccines due to their high tumor specificity and low risks of central tolerance [ ]. For example, EGFRvIII is expressed in glioblastoma, non-small cell lung cancer, and ovarian cancer, while melanoma-associated antigen 3 (MAGE-A3) is predominantly expressed in melanoma, non-small cell lung cancer, and myeloma. Based on the characteristics of TAAs and TSAs, TSAs may avoid immune tolerance and mediate potent anti-tumor immune responses with high safety compared to TAAs [ ]. The advances of next-generation sequencing and whole-exome sequencing techniques, combined with bioinformatic tools such as NeoPredPipe, MuPeXI, Pvac-Seq, and CloudNeo, allow the prediction of TSAs and facilitate the exploration of their potential as therapeutic vaccine targets. As illustrated in , TAAs or TSAs can be presented through three distinct modalities: nucleic acids (DNA or mRNA), peptides, and cell-derived antigens. 
Nucleic acids for tumor antigens (DNA or RNA), which encode genetic information of tumor antigens, can be translated into proteins and processed into peptides. DNA vaccines, in particular, have displayed protective efficacy against diseases such as hepatitis B, HIV, and human papillomavirus [ ]. The DNA vaccine has a bacterial plasmid containing antigen-encoding gene, which can be first transcribed to RNA and then translated into proteins [ ]. It is important for DNA vaccines to penetrate through both cell membranes and nuclear membranes. RNA vaccines utilize messenger RNA (mRNA)-including conventional non-replicating mRNA or self-amplifying mRNA-or engineered circular RNA (circRNA), all of which are designed for cytoplasmic translation into antigenic proteins [ ]. The proteins translated from DNA or RNA undergo proteasomal degradation into peptides. The peptides are transported to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) as intracellular antigens, and the resulting peptides are presented to MHC class I/ Ⅱ molecules. Compared to DNA vaccines which require delivery of DNA into the cell nucleus, RNA vaccines can be directly translated in the cytoplasm, eliminating the risk of genomic integration [ ]. However, it is crucial to note that mRNA exhibits low stability, rendering it susceptible to degradation by various nucleases in vivo, and it often suffers from a suboptimal transfection efficiency [ ]. These factors must be carefully addressed in the design and development of tumor vaccines.
Peptide-based antigens consist of polypeptides derived from well-known or predicted tumor antigen epitopes, which can be categorized into genetically engineered peptides and synthetic peptides including short peptides and synthetic long peptides (SLPs). Peptide-based vaccines are designed to be presented to T cells, thereby inducing epitope-specific T cell responses for protective immunity [ ]. Genetically engineered peptides are produced by integrating TAAs or TSAs genes into an appropriate expression platform, such as E. coli or mammalian cells, through genetic engineering, followed by large-scale culture and purification. SLPs, typically consisting of 20–50 amino acids, encompass multiple epitopes recognized by MHC class I or II molecules, thereby inducing comprehensive and well-balanced immune activation [ ]. The synthesis of SLPs is dictated by their amino acid sequence and the sequence directly influences key physicochemical properties of SLPs, including solubility, chemical stability, hydrophobicity, and propensity for aggregation. These factors can significantly impact the preparation time and failure rates during synthesis, thus the synthesis of SLPs faces significant challenges [ ]. Peptides-based antigens generally display low immunogenicity, and they can be administrated with adjuvants for efficient immune activation [ ].
Cell-derived antigens could be derived from tumor cell lysates and immunogenically dying tumor cells, which collectively offer a comprehensive source of potential antigens [ ]. Tumor cell lysates, including both water-soluble and water-insoluble components, have demonstrated their remarkable potential in the prevention and treatment of triple-negative breast cancer, lung cancer, and melanoma in murine models [ ]. Immunogenically dying tumor cells are the tumor cells after treatment with chemotherapeutics (e.g., doxorubicin, mitoxantrone, paclitaxel, or oxaliplatin) [ ], photodynamic/photothermal therapy [ , , , ], radiotherapy [ ], and chemodynamic therapy [ , ]. Immunogenic cell death (ICD) would be induced to release TAAs and TSAs from these tumor cells [ , ]. The released TAAs and TSAs can be captured and presented by APCs to initiate the cancer-immunity cycle, acting as in situ vaccination [ ]. The development of cell-based tumor vaccines requires intensive extraction and ex vivo manipulation of patient-derived cells, which not only extends biomanufacturing timelines but also imposes substantial economic constraints. In addition, their scalability and clinical translatability remain to be addressed.
After uptake of antigens by APCs, the antigens are proteolytically processed into small polypeptide fragments. These fragments subsequently bind to MHC molecules, forming peptide-MHC complexes. These complexes are then translocated to the APC surface, where they are presented for recognition by T cell receptors (TCRs) on T cells. This comprehensive process is referred to as antigen presentation [ ]. There are two primary pathways: the MHC class I pathway and the MHC class II pathway [ ]. For exogenous antigens, the process begins with their endocytosis into lysosomes, where they are degraded by acid-dependent enzymes, such as proteases and hydrolases, into long peptides (typically 15–25 amino acids in length). These peptides subsequently bind to the MHC class II molecules. The obtained antigen-MHC class II complexes are subsequently translocated to the APC membrane, where they are specifically recognized by CD4+ T cells. Endogenous antigen peptides are degraded into short peptides (8–10 amino acids) by proteasomes in the cytoplasm. These peptides bind to the MHC class I molecules and the formed complexes are transferred to the cell surface for recognition by CD8+ T cells [ ]. Additionally, exogenous antigens can be presented through the MHC class I pathway via antigen cross-presentation [ ]. Cytosolic and vacuolar pathways can mediate the antigen cross-presentation process [ ]. In the cytosolic pathway, internalized exogenous antigens are transported to the cytosol, where they are degraded into short peptides. These fragments are loaded onto the MHC class I molecules to form the peptide-MHC class I complexes. By contrast, in the vacuolar pathway, antigen processing and assembly with the MHC class I molecules occur within phagosomes. Since CD8+ T cells play a critical role in mediating antitumor immunity [ ], exogenous antigens-based tumor vaccines could be directed into cytosolic and vacuolar pathways through rational design to effectively activate CD8+ T cells via antigen cross-presentation. CD8+ T cells are cytotoxic to tumor cells through two primary mechanisms: the perforin-granzyme pathway in which perforin facilitates membrane pore formation to enable granzyme-induced caspase-dependent apoptosis, and the death receptor pathway in which FasL-Fas binding triggers caspase-8-mediated apoptosis. CD4+ T cells, polarized by cytokine cues (e.g., IL-12), can be differentiated into the Th1 subtype that secrete IFN-γ to enhance MHC class I expression, amplify the APC activity, and recruit macrophages and natural killer (NK) cells. Innate effector cells further augment these responses: NK cells exert antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) and execute direct killing via NKG2D recognition of stress ligands (e.g., MICA/MICB). Antitumor immune responses, initiated by antigen presentation, are coordinated through synergistic interplays between activated T cells and associated effector cells [ ].

2.2

## Adjuvants
Adjuvants (from adjuvare that means help) are the molecules that can potentiate the strength and longevity of immune responses [ ]. Aluminum adjuvants, the oldest adjuvant, has been used in the diphtheria vaccine since 1920s. They have a high safety profile and a low cost in preparation. Aluminum adjuvants, such as aluminum oxyhydroxide (AlO(OH)) that is known as commercial Alhydrogel® (Alum), induce humoral immunity responses via the “depot effect” mechanism [ ]. Other FDA licensed adjuvants including MF59, AS01B, AS03, AS04, and CpG 1018, and they have been used in commercially available vaccines [ ]. Pathogen recognition receptors (PRRs) on innate immune cells are the guards that detect foreign substances to protect the host. The immune system in the host employs five major classes of PRRs, comprising Toll-like receptors (TLRs), retinoic acid-inducible gene-I-like receptors (RLRs), nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-like receptors (NLRs), C-type lectin receptors (CLRs), and cytosolic DNA sensors [ ]. These receptors can identify pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) from microbial invaders and damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) originating from cellular components [ ]. Among these PRRs sensors, TLRs and cytosolic DNA sensors have shown great potential in boosting immune responses. A summary of adjuvants including TLR agonists, cyclic GMP-AMP synthase-stimulator of interferon genes (cGAS-STING) agonists, polyphosphazene, and ICD-based adjuvants are listed in . 
2.2.1

## TLR agonists
To date, the TLRs family has been profiled with 10 members in the human body (TLR1-TLR10), while mice possess 12 TLRs (TLR1-TLR9 and TLR11-TLR13). In the human TLRs family, TLR1, TLR2, TLR4, TLR5, and TLR6 are expressed on the plasma membrane, while TLR3, TLR7, TLR8, and TLR9 reside within intracellular compartments such as endosomes and lysosomes [ ]. In contrast, murine TLR11 and TLR12, which are absent of human orthologs, displaying species-specific adaptation in innate immune sensing mechanisms [ ] ( A). TLR signaling bifurcates into two cardinal pathways: the MyD88-dependent pathway and the TRIF-dependent pathway (MyD88-independent). The MyD88-dependent pathway, utilized by nearly all TLRs, initiates rapid activation of NF-κB and Mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs), driving pro-inflammatory cytokine/chemokine production. Conversely, the Toll/IL-1R domain-containing adaptor-inducing IFN-β (TRIF)-dependent pathway, selectively engaged by TLR3 and TLR4, activates TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) to phosphorylate interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and IRF7, culminating in type I interferon (IFN-α/β) induction and antiviral immunity [ , ]. 
TLRs engagement can promote antigen capture and presentation to stimulate inflammation and antigen-specific immune responses [ ]. TLR2 can form heterodimers with TLR1 and TLR6 (or TLR10 in humans), and the heterodimers can recognize a wide range of PAMPs including lipopeptides, lipoarabinomannans, lipoteichoic acids, zymosan and peptidoglycan [ ]. TLR3 recognizes viral double-stranded RNA (dsRNA), and it plays an important role in provoking adaptive immunity. Activation of TLR3 in DCs induces secretion of type I interferons (IFN-α/β) and inflammatory cytokines (e.g., IL-12, TNF-α), thereby promoting adaptive immunity through enhanced T cell priming. Synthetic dsRNA analogs like Poly I:C serve as potent vaccine adjuvants for inactivated viral and recombinant protein vaccines [ ]. TLR4 specifically binds to lipopolysaccharides (LPS), a critical structural element of the outer membrane in Gram-negative bacteria, thereby initiating robust cellular immune responses. Synthetic compounds, such as monophosphoryl lipid A (MPLA) and glucopyranosyl lipid A, have shown a pronounced immune-potentiating power as TLR4 agonists [ ]. Flagellin, as a natural ligand of TLR5, activates NF-κB via the MyD88 pathway, initiating inflammatory responses and innate immune responses, and it has shown great potential in boosting anti-cancer immune responses [ ]. TLR7/8 is another hot target in tumor immunotherapy, and it is expressed in immune cells such as DCs and monocytes. After interacting with its ligands, including single-stranded RNA (ssRNA), oligonucleotides, and synthetic agonists, TLR7/8 undergoes a conformational change to form a homodimer, which results in the activation of the IRF7 and NF-κB signaling pathways via the downstream MyD88/IRAKs cascade, triggering the secretion of a series of inflammatory cytokines, including IFN-α and TNF-α [ ]. Synthetic imidazoquinoline family members including imiquimod (R837) and resiquimod (R848) are widely used as TLR7/8 agonists in immunotherapy and they exhibit potent adjuvant effects [ ]. TLR9 serves as a specific receptor for unmethylated cytosine-phosphate-guanine (CpG) motifs, which are PAMPs abundant in bacterial and viral DNA. Its activation induces innate immune signaling (e.g., IFN-α or IL-6) in plasmacytoid DCs and B cells, indirectly promoting T cell priming and tumor infiltration [ ]. Synthetic 18-25-mer unmethylated CpG oligodeoxynucleotides (CpG ODNs) are well-established TLR9 agonists that drive Th1-polarized adaptive immunity and enhance B cell-mediated antibody responses [ ].

2.2.2

## cGAS-STING agonists
The cGAS-STING pathway, a cytosolic DNA sensing mechanism, has been demonstrated to be a highly promising therapeutic target within the immune system [ ] ( B). STING, which serves as a receptor for cyclic dinucleotides (CDNs) in their dimerized form, is primarily localized at the ER [ ]. As a cytosolic DNA sensor, cGAS undergoes allosteric activation through its interaction with double-stranded DNA (dsDNA). During this enzymatic process, the magnesium ion (Mg2+) is an essential catalytic cofactor to facilitate the production of 2′,3′-cyclic GMP-AMP (cGAMP) from precursor molecules including adenosine-5′-triphosphate (ATP) and guanosine-5′- triphosphate (GTP) [ ]. The resulting cGAMP, functioning as an endogenous CDN, exhibits high-affinity binding to a characteristic V-shaped cleft within the STING dimer complex. This molecular interaction initiates a cascade of structural rearrangements in the STING protein, ultimately promoting its intracellular trafficking from the ER to the Golgi apparatus. S-palmitoylation modification of STING within the Golgi compartment has been identified as a critical regulatory mechanism for orchestrating sequential recruitment of TBK1 and subsequent phosphorylation-dependent activation of IRF3 [ ]. This post-translational modification cascade ultimately initiates the transcriptional program responsible for IFN production and downstream IFN-inducible effector gene expression, and coordinates release of pro-inflammatory cytokines, which collectively enhance antigen presentation and drive DC maturation [ ]. Activation of this pathway also helps establishing a critical immunostimulatory microenvironment that bridges innate immune sensing with adaptive immunity potentiation [ ]. A great many of pre-clinical studies have confirmed that STING agonists may act as adjuvants in anti-cancer vaccines [ ].(1)CDNs and CDN derivatives. cGAMP, a natural CDN, has been evaluated as a potential STING agonist, and it has shown excellent anti-tumor effects in both CT26 and B16-bearing mouse models [ ]. However, phosphodiester bonds in cGAMP are susceptible to degradation by phosphodiesterases and nucleases, resulting in a short half-life and a poor pharmacokinetic profile [ ]. Through structural modification, phosphothioate analogs, such as Rp, Rp-2′,3′-c-di-AMPSS (ADU-S100), can effectively activate the STING pathway, and they are undergoing evaluation in clinical trials [ ].
(2)Non-CDN small molecular agonists. The development of non-CDN small-molecular agonists has been motivated because of suboptimal pharmacokinetic properties of CDN-based agonists. DMXAA (5,6-dimethylxanthenone-4-acetic acid), a synthetic derivative of flavone-8-acetic acid, functions as a species-specific STING agonist with potent activity in the murine system, and it elicits robust IFN-β secretion through selective engagement of the murine STING signaling axis [ ]. However, since it can not effectively activate the human STING, the development of DMXAA was discontinued during its Phase III clinical trial [ ]. diABZI is a human active small molecular STING agonist. After administration of diABZI via intravenous injection, a great breakthrough for immune-mediating cancer treatment in murine models has been achieved [ , ]. Chin et al. synthesized a non-nucleotide small-molecular STING agonist, SR717, which effectively promoted antigen cross-presentation, leading to an elevation in the number of CD8+ T cells and NK cells in the spleen and lymph nodes [ ]. Pan et al. implemented an integrated high-throughput cellular phenotypic screening strategy to identify MSA-2 (benzothiophene oxobutanoic acid), which promoted STING activation through noncovalent dimer stabilization, thereby potentiating IFN-β biosynthesis. This STING agonist can be orally administered; thus, it has great potential for clinical application due to its convenient and cost-effective delivery method [ ].
(3)Cytosolic dsDNA. Mitochondria-derived cytosolic dsDNA is an endogenous ligand for cGAS, and it triggers the STING-dependent signaling cascade activation. Radiotherapy and chemotherapy agents, including cisplatin, doxorubicin, camptothecin, and paclitaxel, induce DNA damage or interfere with DNA replication, leading to the activation of the cGAS-STING pathway [ ].
(4)Manganese ions. The pioneering investigation by the Jiang's team in 2018 suggested that manganese ions (Mn2+) could enhance the cGAS sensitivity as a biochemical sensor for dsDNA, concurrently promoting cGAMP-STING interfacial binding dynamics [ , ]. A subsequent mechanistic study in 2020 revealed that Mn2+-mediated cGAS activation drives cGAMP biosynthesis through a dsDNA-independent catalytic mechanism [ ]. Furthermore, zinc ions (Zn2+) promote cGAS phase separation, enhance catalytic activity, and induce reactive oxygen species (ROS)-mediated mitochondrial damage and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) release, activating the cGAS-STING pathway to trigger innate immune responses via type I interferons [ ].
(5)Natural polysaccharides and synthetic polymers. Chitosan, a cationic polysaccharide with excellent biocompatibility, can promote DC maturation and enhance Th1 cell responses, thus it has been attempted as an adjuvant [ ]. The mechanism of chitosan-mediated immune responses was revealed: chitosan may enhance mitochondrial ROS production and endogenous DNA release to activate the STING pathway [ ]. The Gao group engineered a series of pH-ultrasensitive nanoparticles, and they found that cyclic tertiary amine-containing copolymers, particularly those with seven-membered ring architectures (designated as PC7A), were efficient in cytosolic delivery of tumor antigens to lymph nodes and activation of type I interferon-stimulated genes, and these nanoparticles with great anti-tumor effects could be employed to construct a multifunctional nanovaccine system [ ]. The polymer length significantly influences the valency of interaction, thereby modulating the degree of STING activation. PC7A selectively targets an allosteric binding site on STING that is structurally distinct from the canonical cGAMP-binding domain, thereby inducing sustained amplification of pro-inflammatory cytokine secretion through non-competitive pathway modulation [ ].

2.2.3

## Polyphosphazene
Polyphosphazene, a water-soluble and biodegradable macromolecule, can be intrinsically assembled with tumor antigens to form a virion-mimetic nanostructure to achieve co-delivery of antigens and adjuvants [ ]. Emerging polyphosphazene-based adjuvants, particularly their structurally analogous derivatives including poly[di(carboxylatophenoxy)phosphazene] (PCPP), poly[di(carboxylatoethylphenoxy)phosphazene] (PCEP), and poly[di(carboxylatomethylphenoxy)phosphazene] (PCMP), have been explored ( C). These carboxylated polyphosphazene polyelectrolytes, which belong to a homologous polymer class, have demonstrated encouraging immunomodulatory potential in extensive preclinical evaluations and early-phase clinical trials, with evidence of enhanced antigen-specific immune responses [ ]. Despite their considerable promise as vaccine adjuvants, the mechanisms underlying their immune activation remain to be comprehensively unveiled.

2.2.4

## ICD-based adjuvants
Immune signaling pathways activated by ICD can be considered as an endogenous adjuvant ( D). Chemotherapy by agents such as anthraquinones and oxaliplatin, photodynamic therapy, photothermal therapy, and radiotherapy could effectively induce ICD [ ]. After ICD is successfully induced from tumor cells, calreticulin (CRT) can be transferred from the ER to the surface of cell membranes, acting as an “eat me” signal. CRT binds to the CD91 receptor on DCs to promote antigen engulfment and presentation [ ]. Over-expressed CRT on the cell membrane results in an increase in the mature ratio of bone marrow-derived dendritic cells (BMDCs) compared to that on the normal tumor cell membrane, suggesting that CRT could be a promising adjuvant for tumor vaccines [ ]. High mobility group box 1 (HMGB1), the most abundant nonhistone chromatin protein in the cellular nucleus, may be released to the cytoplasm in the process of apoptosis. Extracellular HMGB1 can bind to TLR4, and the formed complex could be a potent proinflammatory stimulus to facilitate secretion of TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-8 [ ]. Dying tumor cells release ATP as a “find me” signal, and the signal is sensed by the P2Y7 receptor on monocytes to promote immune cells recruitment to engulf dead tumor cells and it can bind to the P2X7 receptor on DCs and macrophages to activate the NALP3 inflammasome pathway to secrete IL-1β [ ]. The released heat-shock proteins (HSPs), including HSP70 and HSP90, can be recognized by the CD91 receptor to promote antigen presentation and DC maturation [ ].

3

## Biomaterial-based nanoplatforms for efficient vaccine delivery
Nano-sized delivery systems have been widely explored as carriers for the delivery of antigens and adjuvants to APCs. Biomaterials-based nanoplatforms exhibit desirable properties, such as biocompatibility, versatile surface modifications, accommodation for diverse molecules, stimuli-responsiveness, and high antigens/adjuvants-loading capacity [ , , , , , , , , , ]. Tailored functionalities can be created for these nanoplatforms to optimize immune responses. The functionalities have been demonstrated including protecting antigens from degradation, spatiotemporally co-delivering antigens and adjuvants to APCs, facilitating APCs engulfment of tumor vaccines, improving accumulation of tumor vaccines in immune organs [ ], initiating potent anti-tumor Th1 or cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) responses, and establishing durable antigen-specific immunological memory. The physicochemical and functional characteristics of biomaterial-derived nanoplatforms, including LNPs, polymeric nanoparticles, inorganic nanoparticles, biomimetic nanoparticles, and hydrogels, are systematically summarized in . 
3.1

## LNPs
Lipid-based drug delivery platforms are broadly categorized into conventional liposomes and next-generation LNPs, and they are differentiated by their structures and functions. Liposomes, spherical phospholipid/cholesterol bilayers, facilitate compartmentalized drug loading. Hydrophilic agents are encapsulated in hydrophilic cores and lipophilic payloads are often embedded within membranes [ , ]. A clinic example for the liposomes-based drug delivery system is Doxil® which delivers doxorubicin via the enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect, and this system remains pivotal for chemotherapeutic application. LNPs as a multifunctional delivery platform have been demonstrated to successfully encapsulate and transport a myriad of therapeutic payloads, including hydrophilic compounds, hydrophobic agents, and nucleic acid-based therapeutics [ ]. Ionizable lipids (e.g., DLin-MC3-DMA), PEG-lipids, and cholesterol are employed to form stable LNPs via microfluidic self-assembly [ , ]. Comirnaty®, an FDA-approved COVID-19 mRNA vaccine formulated with LNPs, leverages pH-dependent endosomal membrane disruption to enable cytosolic mRNA release, and this mechanism is not achievable by traditional liposomes [ ].
3.1.1

## Cationic LNPs
Cationic LNPs with a positive charge can efficiently encapsulate negatively charged mRNA via electrostatic interaction, and they can protect mRNA from degradation in the blood. Cationic LNPs can facilely fuse with cell membranes to promote cell endocytosis through electrostatic interactions. Cationic lipids have been explored including N, N, N-trimethyl-2,3-bis(octadec-9-en-1-yloxy) propan-1-aminium chloride (DOTMA), dioleoyl-3-trimethylammonium propane (DOTAP), 2,3-Dioleyloxy-N-[2(sperminecarboxamido)ethyl]-N,N-dimethyl-1-propanaminium trifluoroacetate (DOSPA), and dioleoylethylphosphatidylcholine (EDOPC). Chen et al. developed a core-shell LNP system for mRNA delivery, which was fabricated using a microfluidic technique ( A(a)). In this system, protamine sulfate and mRNA constituted the inner core, while the outer lipid shell was composed of EDOPC, 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine (DOPE), and cholesterol. The formulated mRNA vaccine particles (MPVs) displayed an optimal mRNA encapsulation efficiency and excellent stability and retained their biological activity even after lyophilization or freeze-thaw cycles. After intradermal injection, MPVs promoted DC maturation and activated the STING-dependent pathway to evoke T cell responses, which inhibited growth of MC38-OVA colorectal cancer and B16-OVA melanoma ( A(b-c)). It is worth noting that EDOPC, a cationic lipid, played an essential role in activating the STING pathway when it was formulated into LNPs [ ]. Other cationic lipid-like materials have been reported to form LNPs for mRNA delivery, and the cationic lipid-like materials can be acted as a potent immune adjuvant. Zhang et al. synthesized cationic lipid-like compounds via ring opening of epoxides and they found that poly(-amidoamine) (PAMAM) dendrimers with a 12-carbon tail, termed as C1, could efficiently deliver mRNA to APCs. C1, DSPE-PEG 2000, and mRNA were formulated into LNPs as a C1-mRNA nanovaccine through self-assembly at a size of around 150 nm, and the nanovaccine remained stable within 7 days. The C1-mRNA nanovaccine effectively induced immune activation of both STING and TLR4-dependent NF-κB signaling pathways. The C1-mRNA nanovaccine could serve as a potent preventive and therapeutic vaccine for B16-OVA tumors with high biosafety [ ]. 

3.1.2

## Ionizable LNPs
Ionizable lipids exhibit a neutral charge under a physiological condition, but the neutral charge can be tuned to a positive charge when the pH is in the acidic range [ ]. Therefore, ionizable lipids-based LNPs have been widely explored for mRNA vaccine delivery. Lee et al. reported C12-200 ionizable lipids-based LNPs to incorporate mRNA and tri-palmitoyl-S-glyceryl cysteine linked to a pentapeptide (Pam3) as an adjuvant. The LNPs were fabricated by formulating C12-200, DOPE, C16-polyethylene glycol2000 (PEG-lipid), Pam3, and mRNA in a citrate buffer solution (pH 3). Under such an acidic condition, C12-200 acquired a positive charge, resulting in electrostatic interaction with mRNA, and the remaining lipid components self-assembled to form the LNPs [ ]. Miao et al. designed a series of cationic heads, linkers, and alkyl chains to construct a library of ionizable lipids containing 1080 compounds ( B (a)). The lipid compounds in conjunction with two helper lipids of DOPE and 1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DSPC) self-assembled into LNPs to deliver an mRNA vaccine. They identified critical structural characteristics of ionizable lipids for effective mRNA delivery: (1) an unsaturated lipid tail; (2) a dihydroimidazole linker; and (3) a head group containing cyclic amine ( B(b)). Besides, the LNPs prepared from the top candidate of the lipid compounds activated the STING pathway, which was TLR independent to stimulate immune cells, leading to inhibition of tumor growth and prolonged survival of B16F10-OVA-bearing mice over 40 days [ ].

3.1.3

## Actively targeted LNPs
LNPs can target immune organs including spleens and lymph nodes through two pathways: (1) decoration of LNPs with targeted molecules for actively targeted delivery, and (2) tuning of lipid components in LNPs to improve accumulation in secondary lymphoid organs. It has been reported that stearic acid-modified LNPs could effectively target the spleen [ ]. Stearic acid was mixed with conventional lipids, such as Dlin-MC3-DMA, DSPC, 1,2-dimyristoyl-rac-glycero-3-methoxypolyethylene glycol-2000 (DMG-PEG2000), and cholesterol, to fabricate stearic acid-doped lipid nanoparticles (sLNPs). These nanoparticles were used to encapsulate ovalbumin (OVA)-encoding mRNA and MPLA as a TLR4 agonist, resulting in a nanovaccine: sLNPs-OVA/MPLA. sLNPs-OVA/MPLA selectively delivered mRNA to the spleen after intravenous injection. The LNPs exhibited an encapsulation efficiency of 81.58 ± 3.74 % and remarkable stability, and they retained their spleen-targeting ability even after storage at 4 °C for 7 days. sLNPs-OVA/MPLA was efficiently internalized into DCs in the spleen, and this formulation promoted mRNA transcription and enhanced the expression of co-stimulatory molecules including CD80 and CD86, which resulted in the highest proportion (39 %) of SIINFEKL-specific CD8+ T cells compared to other formulations tested in this study. Furthermore, immunization with sLNPs-OVA/MPLA induced the production of a potent IgG antibody in the blood to mediate adaptive immunity. sLNPs-OVA/MPLA displayed a strong and long-term immune protection ability. Tumor recurrence was effectively blocked in a 6/6 EG.7-OVA tumor-bearing murine model upon secondary challenges with EG.7-OVA cells for 60 days post-treatment [ ]. LNPs were also engineered through the incorporation of phosphatidylserine (PS) to actively enhance immune cell uptake in the spleen and lymph nodes. These targeted LNPs, termed as PS-LNPs, were formulated by adding 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phospho-L-serine (DOPS) to the LNP components, including DSPC, cholesterol, and DMG-PEG2000. PS-LNPs exhibited an mRNA delivery efficiency of approximately 90 % to the spleen and 10 % to the liver, whereas 58 % of LNPs without PS modification were delivered to the spleen and 41 % to the liver [ ].
An alternative strategy is proposed to achieve targeted delivery to immune organs by modulating the chemical composition of LNPs. Elwakil et al. engineered ligand-free glycidylamine (GA)-incorporated LNPs through rational molecular design to achieve spleen-selective mRNA delivery. The LNPs exhibited a high targeted transfection efficiency in splenic immune cell populations following systemic administration. A novel class of cholesterol-conjugated glycidylamine (Chol-GA) lipid derivatives was systematically synthesized via the controlled organocatalyzed ring-opening polymerization methodology. Cholesterol moieties were employed as a catalytic initiator for precise molecular assembly of GA monomeric building blocks under an optimized stoichiometric condition. The Chol-GA lipid derivative with a degree of polymerization of 30 and a racemic configuration was identified to be a top-performing lipid. This derivative was subsequently formulated with DOPE and DMG-PEG2000 to prepare LNPs, termed as estriol-GA05-30 LNPs. Estriol-GA05-30 LNPs exhibited pronounced targeting and delivery efficiencies towards APCs and induced strong anti-tumor effects in the E.G7-OVA bearing mice [ ]. Endogenous lymph nodes-targeting LNPs without modification with active targeting moieties were explored for mRNA delivery. After screening a library of reduction-responsive lipids, Chen et al. systemically examined the impact of the head, the tail, and linkers of lipids on their targetability ( C(a)). They suggested a few crucial structural components including: (1) the methyl group of the amine head that may play a role in targeting since replacement of the methyl group with hydroxyl, ethyl, or N-(1,2-ethanediyl)acetamide groups resulted in a reduced delivery efficiency; (2) the lipid with a shorter tail which outperformed one with a long tail; (3) an ester linker could promote transfection in lymph nodes compared to the amide bond. By capturing these lipid structural characteristics, a lipid was selected and named as 113-O12B ( C(b)). A LNPs delivery system was prepared through molecular integration of 113-O12B with cholesterol as a structural component, dioleoyl phosphatidylcholine (DOPC) as a zwitterionic helper lipid, and DMG-PEG 2000 as a steric stabilizer. Quantitative biodistribution profiling of subcutaneously delivered LNP formulations revealed distinct organotropic patterns between 113-O12B and ALC-0315 (an FDA approved lipid in the COVID 19 mRNA vaccine). 113-O12B exhibited preferential lymph nodes retention, while ALC-0315 displayed pronounced hepatic sequestration ( C(c)). The lymph nodes-targeting 113-O12B formulation significantly enhanced APCs presentation and promoted antigen-specific CD8+ T cells infiltration into the tumor tissue, resulting in potent protective and therapeutic effects in the established B16F10-OVA tumor-bearing mice [ ].

3.2

## Polymeric nanoparticles
Polymeric nanoparticles have been widely used for diagnosis and treatment of various diseases [ , , , ]. In recent years, polymer-based nanovaccines have been developed for cancer immunotherapy. Polymeric nanoparticles as nanocarriers for tumor vaccines have the following advantages: (1) polymeric nanoparticles enable co-delivery of antigens and adjuvants through covalent binding or encapsulation, facilitating the presentation of antigenic information via MHC class I or MHC class II molecules and promoting the expression of co-stimulatory molecules including CD80 and CD86, which result in effective activation of T cell-mediated immune responses; (2) polymeric nanoparticles facilitate endosome escape of antigens for cross presentation; and (3) polymers can be functionalized through chemical decoration.
3.2.1

## Polymeric nanoparticles for co-delivery of antigens and adjuvants
Polymeric nanoparticles can efficiently encapsulate antigens and adjuvants within their core, thereby protecting antigens from enzymatic degradation and realizing spatiotemporal co-delivery of both components to APCs for robust enhancement in their activation of CTLs.
Poly (L-lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA), a biodegradable and biocompatible polymer, has been approved by FDA as a pharmaceutical excipient for parenteral and mucosal administration [ ]. An investigation revealed that PLGA-based nanocarriers simultaneously encapsulated multiple immunomodulatory agents, including Poly I:C as a TLR3 ligand, resiquimod (R848) as a dual TLR7/8 agonist, and MIP3α as a chemotactic cytokine, thereby showcasing their capacity for accommodating multiple payloads in a murine model bearing TC-1 tumors [ ]. Cationic polyethyleneimine (PEI) can complex with a negatively charged antigensand CpG adjuvant via electrostatic interaction. The positive charge characteristics of PEI facilitated efficient internalization of nanoparticles by DCs, promoted lysosome escape, and achieved antigen cross-presentation for effectively activating CD8+ T cell responses. A PEI-based vaccine nanoplatform for co-delivery of a tumor antigen and an adjuvant was constructed from a three-step preparation process. First, Adpgk, an MC38 colon cancer antigen, was conjugated to PEI via a disulfide bond, and the antigen was efficiently released under a reductive intracellular environment; next, the Adpgk-conjugated PEI was modified with PEG to reduce the cytotoxicity of PEI; finally, anionic CpG was incubated with the PEGylation antigen-conjugated PEI to self-assemble into sub-50 nm nanoparticles. The PEI-based vaccine elicited a robust CD8+ T cell response, and the duration of immunity extended beyond three weeks, suggesting that engineered PEI could serve as a promising delivery vehicle for co-delivery of antigens and adjuvants [ ].
pH-responsive polymeric nanoparticles (CRS NPs) were developed to co-deliver two TLR agonists (R848 and CpG) along with an antigen. A proton-sensitive star-branched copolymer (S40) comprised three functionally distinct domains: (1) cationic poly(2-dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate) (PDMA) segments that facilitate charge-driven complexation with anionic CpG oligonucleotides; (2) PEG coronas that could promote steric stabilization and attenuate the surface charge for enhanced hemocompatibility; and (3) pH-labile poly(2-diisopropylaminoethyl methacrylate) (PDPA) blocks as a hydrophobic core that could encapsulate neoantigen cargos through solvophobic entrapment. To integrate R848, a thiol-functionalized derivative (R848-SH) was site-specifically conjugated to maleimide-activated PEG-PLA copolymers, followed by combination with S40 to form hybrid nanoparticles. The bi-adjuvant/antigen nanoparticles co-delivered antigens and adjuvants to APCs to strengthen immunity responses, significantly increasing the ratio of SIINFEKL-specific CD8+ T cells from 5.08 % in the free antigen and adjuvant group (free CRS) to 33.63 % in the nanoparticles group (CRS NPs) [ ].
In addition to delivering exogenous adjuvants, polymeric nanoparticles containing primary amines have been demonstrated to possess an intrinsic adjuvant property: they are capable of stimulating DC maturation. Building on this discovery, a dual immunofunctional polymeric nanoplatform (DIPNP) has been developed through strategic integration of two complementary mechanisms ( A(a)). A triblock copolymer, PEG-PBAEMA-P18C6MA, was synthesized through a sequential reversible addition-fragmentation chain transfer polymerization strategy. During the initial synthesis step, a diblock precursor PEG-PBAEMA was constructed from a PEG-functionalized chain transfer agent (PEG-CPPA). Controlled polymerization of 18-crown-6-yl methacrylate (18C6MA) monomers and the diblock precursor was utilized to achieve a precise triblock architecture. Post-polymerization modification through acidolytic removal of NH-Boc protecting groups led to spontaneous self-assembly into a nanovaccine, DIPNV. Mechanistically, the p18C6MA block orchestrated the activation of the STING pathway via potassium ion (K+) flux-mediated ER stress, inducing conformational changes of STING proteins to initiate their trafficking through ER-Golgi-autophagosome networks ( A(b)). This cascade resulted in TBK1-dependent phosphorylation of IRF3, driving the secretion of IFN-β ( A(c)). Concomitantly, the primary amine moieties on the PBAEMA segment were engaged in TLR4 signaling, which potentiated DC maturation through inflammasome activation and antigen cross-presentation after lysosomal escape ( A(d)). In vitro validation studies revealed a synergistic enhancement in DC activation, and assessments in B16-OVA and EG7-OVA murine tumor models supported that DIPNV had a profound antitumor efficacy, and it could induce durable immunological memory formation. The molecularly engineered triblock architecture also allowed concurrent antigen (OVA) encapsulation via charge-mediated complexation and spatiotemporal regulation of dual immune activation pathways. The multimodal functionalities shifted from carrier-only to carrier/adjuvant dual-functionality, thus a robust platform derived from this copolymer scaffold could be established for developing next generation nanovaccines with programmable immunopharmacological profiles [ ]. 

3.2.2

## Polymeric nanoparticles promote endosomal escape
Polymers engineered with specific chemical structures or functional groups can facilitate endosomal escape, and the encapsulated antigens in the polymers can be released into the cytoplasm. Antigens released in this approach could promote their cross-presentation via the MHC class I pathway, thereby enhancing CD8+ T cell activation. There are different engineering approaches for polymers to achieve their endosomal escape. First, polymers can destroy endosomal membranes to promote their endosomal escape. Poly (propylacrylic acid) (pPAA) with a PKa of 6.7 contains carboxyl groups, which can mediate membrane-destabilization in an acidic environment. Polyanionic pPAA was combined with antigen peptides modified with a cationic oligolysine tail to form polyplex nanoparticles, and efficient cytosolic delivery of antigens from the polyplex nanoparticles was achieved with enhanced cross-presentation with MHC class I molecules [ ]. The “proton sponge” effect is another approach to rupturing endosomes to promote endosome escape of polymeric nanoparticles containing antigens. A pH-sensitive polymer, PDPA, was synthesized via atom transfer radical polymerization. This polymer self-assembled into a multivesicular nanovaccine upon mixing of PDPA with an antigen and a STING agonist (cGAMP) ( B(a)). The erythrocyte hemolysis assay was employed to assess the endo-osmotic activity of drug vesicles. The result revealed that the PDPA nanoparticles induced distinct hemolysis at a pH of 6.2, while negligible hemolysis at a pH of 7.4 ( B(b)). The nanocarriers with high pH sensitivity were confirmed to remain stable under a physiological condition but facilitate endosome escape in an acidic environment to release cGAMP and the antigen into cytosol ( B(c)). The nanovaccine induced a pronounced increase in the number of antigen-specific CD8+ T cells, which was 8-fold higher than that in the PBS group. More encouragingly, the treatment with the nanovaccine led to an elevation of the proportion of memory T-cells including central memory (TCM) and effector memory (TEM) cells [ ]. Similarly, poly (β-amino ester) would self-degrade into small fragments in response to a change in pH after poly (β-amino ester) entered the endosome. After successful endosome escape, the antigen and cGAMP released from poly (β-amino ester) promoted cross presentation to MHC class Ⅰ molecules and release of IFN-γ [ ].
The third approach is to introduce functional groups into polymers to reduce/mitigate their entrance into endosomes and enhance the cytosolic delivery efficiency. For example, polyethyleneimine derivatives functionalized with fluoroalkane moieties could enter cytosolic compartments directly, which may be attributed to a low surface energy and lipophobic characteristics of fluoroalkyl side chains. Xu et al. constructed a fluoroalkane-grafted polyethyleneimine nanovaccine, which delivered the antigen to the cytoplasm for cross presentation and induced robust immune responses in vivo [ ]. Fluoroalkane-grafted polyethyleneimines were demonstrated to efficiently deliver OVA-encoding mRNA intracellularly and activate the TLR4 signal pathway, which promoted DC maturation and induced OVA-specific T cell responses [ ].
Besides the above approaches to facilitating endosome escape, polymeric nanoparticles could be transformed to mechanically disrupt the endosomal membrane for cytoplasm delivery. For instance, Gong et al. constructed a proton-actuated nanotransformer-based vaccine (NTV), which could be transformed from a nano-size to a micro-size to burst the endosomal membrane [ ]. The NTV consisted of a polymer and a peptide conjugate via an acetal bond. It had a monodispersed spherical nanostructure with a mean hydrodynamic diameter of 100 nm. After internalization, the pyrene-conjugated d-peptide (PDP) in the NTV was degraded in an acidic endosomal environment (pH 6.5), and the polymer/peptide re-assembled into 5–8 μm nanosheets with a Young's modulus of 491.1 MPa. The nanosheets disrupted the endosomal membrane and the peptide antigen was released into the cytoplasm for cross-presentation. The antigen presentation process was enhanced as the NTV effectively activated the NLRP3-inflammasome pathway. NTV vaccination indued potent CD8+ T cell-mediated anti-tumor immune responses and long-term immune memory, resulting in a survival rate of 37.5 % for the B16F10-OVA bearing-mice on day 62 and the same survival rate for the TC-1 bearing mice on day 83 after tumor inoculation [ ].

3.2.3

## Polymeric nanoparticles for targeted delivery
Polymers can be decorated with a specific ligand or an antibody for targeted delivery. Mannose, which binds to mannose receptors, a subset of C-type lectins expressed on APCs such as macrophages and DCs, has been utilized for targeted delivery of antigens to APCs [ ]. Therefore, mannose-modified polymers or mannosylated compounds have been demonstrated to have great potential in the development of tumor vaccine platforms. A mannan-decorated pathogen-like polymeric nanovaccine (MPVax) was reported by Xu et al. The nanovaccine had a core-shell architecture with a mannose-functionalized outer shell and a polylactic acid-polyethylenimine (PLA-PEI) composite core, and the antigen and CpG were encapsulated within the core ( C(a)). Mannose decoration effectively promoted nanovaccine accumulation in lymph nodes, and the fluorescence intensity was 18.3-fold higher than that in the free antigen group ( C(b)). After vaccination three times, the nanovaccine induced antigen-specific T cell responses at a tumor inhibition rate of 94 % ( C(c)) and a cure rate of 50 % ( C(d)) in a B16-OVA tumor model [ ]. Zhou et al. developed a mannose-modified acid-responsive nanovaccine to target DCs and effectively deliver an antigen and a STING agonist (DMXXA) into the cytoplasm [ ]. The nanovaccine was constructed from poly (ethylene glycol)-block-poly (2-(diisopropanol amino) ethyl methacrylate) (PEG-b-PDPA) and a cationic polymer 1,2-epoxytetradecane alkylated oligoethylenimine 800 (OEI-C14). DMXAA and mannose were conjugated to PEG-b-PDPA via ester bonds. After OVA was loaded at an encapsulation efficiency of ∼70 %, the nanovaccine at a size of about 50 nm could efficiently accumulate in lymph nodes. The uptake efficiency of the mannose-modified nanovaccine was 2.8-fold higher compared to the formulation without mannose modification. OEI-C14-mediated endosome escape promoted OVA and DMXAA release into the cytosol for MHC class Ⅰ presentation and activation of the STING pathway. The versatile nanovaccine promoted DC maturation, resulting in an increase in the ratio of CD8+ T cells/regulatory T cells (Treg) and an enhancement in antigen-specific CD8+ T cell infiltration in the tumor site, which dramatically prevented progression of B16-OVA melanoma and 4T1 triple-negative breast tumors [ ].
A mannose-functionalized copolymer was synthesized via addition-fragmentation chain transfer-mediated polymerization, and the spontaneously formed 100 nm micellar nanostructure was capable of encapsulation and delivery of tumor antigens [ ]. Mannose methacrylate (MMA) was polymerized to form a mannose block, 2-diisopropylaminoethyl methacrylate (DIPAMA) was incorporated into the block to confer pH sensitivity, and pyridyl disulfide ethyl methacrylate (PDSEMA) was copolymerized to facilitate conjugation with thiolated peptide antigens through disulfide-thiol exchange chemistry, resulting in a mannosylated polymer. The amount of the tumor antigen in the mannosylated micelle internalized by DCs in lymph nodes was increased by 79-fold compared to the naked antigen group. Mannosylated micelles loaded with MHC class I and II OVA epitopes with a loading efficiency of 67 % and 50 %, respectively, significantly increased the proportion of mature DCs (CD86+MHCII+) and subsequently activated antigen-specific CD8+ T cells in vivo. This approach markedly delayed the growth rate of B16F10-OVA tumors and extended the survival rate when the vaccine was combined with an anti-PD-1 antibody therapy [ ].

3.3

## Inorganic nanoparticles
Inorganic materials, such as silica, carbon, and metals, represent another major category of materials for the construction of nanoplatforms [ ]. Inorganic nanoparticles have a high surface-to-volume ratio, and they often display a remarkable loading capacity for therapeutic agents. Their synthetic process is facile compared to a sophisticated synthetic process for polymers [ ]. Beyond the conventional size-dependent EPR effect for inorganic nanoparticles, tumor-specific targeting can be achieved through rational surface engineering strategies [ ]. Recently, inorganic nanocarriers have been applied to co-deliver antigens and adjuvants for tumor immunotherapy.
3.3.1

## Mesoporous silica nanoparticles (MSNs)
Mesoporous silica is a typical inorganic material, and it has been applied in drug delivery owing to a porous structure, facile surface modification, and a controllable size [ ]. MSNs display pore size-dependent immune activation when they are used as a vaccine delivery platform. MSNs at a particle size of around 80 nm with a large pore size (12.9 nm, MSN-L), a medium pore size (10.3 nm, MSN-M), and a small pore size (7.8 nm, MSN-S) were prepared through adjustment of the concentration of tetraethyl orthosilicate in cyclohexane [ ]. The encapsulation efficiency was positively correlated with the pore size: MSN-L showed the highest OVA encapsulation efficiency (89.6 %), while the encapsulation efficiency was 73.2 % for MSN-M and 51.5 % for MSN-S. The MSNs exhibited sustained OVA release kinetics, and the release rate was 33 % for MSN-L, 24 % for MSN-M, and 20 % for MSN-S. All these MSNs were transported to lymph nodes and effectively internalized by DCs. After their internalization, they escaped from endosomes and the released antigens were processed for cross presentation. MSN-L was found to be the most effective in the production of cytokines including IL-4, IFN-γ, and TNF-α, thus significantly prolonging the survival of B16F10-OVA-bearing mice compared to MSN-S and MSN-M. Potent anti-tumor efficacy induced by MSN-L could be ascribed to its critical attributes: (1) MSN-L efficiently facilitated antigen cross-presentation; and (2) MSN-L had a faster degradation rate than MSN-S and MSN-M to promote the release of adequate OVA in lymph nodes to activate T cells [ ]. Beyond the immunomodulatory effect exerted by manipulating the MSNs size, architectural structures in MSN chemical frameworks significantly impact immune activation efficacy. To systematically investigate the structure-immunogenicity relationship of MSNs, three distinct architectural variants were engineered: tetrasulfide-incorporated MSNs (TMSNs), ethoxy-functionalized MSNs (EMSNs), and pristine Si-O-Si framework MSNs (MSNs) ( A(a)). Encapsulation of the OVA antigen into these MSNs yielded OTMSNs, OEMSNs, OMSNs, respectively. Comprehensive analysis revealed TMSNs displayed superior performance based on multiple immunological parameters. Mechanistically, OTMSNs were found to enhance antigen loading, cellular internalization, ROS generation, lymph node targeting, immune activation, eventually improving the anti-tumor effect. The superior performance of TMSNs was stemmed from tetrasulfide-mediated dual-pathway cellular internalization: dynamin-dependent endocytosis in synergy with thiol-mediated transcytosis. Concurrently, intracellular glutathione scavenging by disulfide bonds in TMSNs induced redox dyshomeostasis, elevating ROS to polarize macrophages from an M2 phenotype to an M1 one ( A(b)). The structure-guided immune potentiation mechanism could lay a conceptual foundation for clinical translation of programmable nanovaccines for precision oncology interventions [ ]. 
The elasticity of MSNs may influence the vaccine delivery efficiency. It was reported that soft MSNs could be a better vaccine delivery platform than stiff MSNs[151]. Mesoporous organosilica nanoparticles (MONs) at different elasticities were constructed. Stiff MONs were synthesized via a cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB)-directed sol-gel process, and soft MONs were prepared by dispersing stiff MONs in NaOH to etch inorganic silica species in the shell. Stiff and soft MONs were dispersed in a PEI solution for PEI modification, and the prepared nanoparticles were termed as MONP and SMONP, respectively. The elastic Young's modulus of MONP and SMONP was 144.4 ± 41.9 MPa and 97.5 ± 27.9 MPa, respectively, indicating successful construction of MONs at different elasticities. OVA, a model antigen, was encapsulated into MONP and SMONP as nanovaccines. The SMONP-derived nanovaccine displayed a higher DC uptake level, a higher cytoplasmic antigen delivery efficiency, and a greater degree of T cell activation compared to the MONP-derived nanovaccine. In vivo anti-tumor results revealed that the SMONP-derived nanovaccine treatment led to an increase in the proportion of CD8+ T cells and a decrease in the Treg ratio in tumor tissues. More importantly, memory T cells were increased for long-term protection, thus inhibiting tumor growth in the E.G7-OVA tumor-bearing mice [ ].
The structural configuration of MSNs can have an impact on the efficacy of antigens and adjuvants encapsulated in MSNs. Mesoporous silica rods (MSRs) were reported as an immunomodulatory scaffold to recruit APCs [ ]. A dual-scale mesoporous silica vaccine containing MSNs and MSRs was developed. The amine-modified MSNs were functionalized via silane coupling chemistry, and OVA and CpG were encapsulated in MSNs through electrostatic interaction. Meanwhile, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), a DC-recruiting chemokine, was encapsulated in MSRs to produce GM-CSF-loaded MSRs. After incubation of MSNs with MSRs, MSNs at a particle size of 150 nm were spontaneously assembled onto the MSR surfaces through synergistic van der Waals forces and hydrogen bonding interactions, resulting in the formation of a hierarchical MSN-MSR hybrid vaccine delivery system. After injection of the MSR-MSN-delivered vaccine into nodules, the number of DCs in the interparticle macropores of MSRs was increased from 2.5 × 104 on day 1 – 5.8 × 105 on day 7, demonstrating that the hybrid MSR-MSN system could effectively recruit DCs. The recruited DCs engulfed MSNs to process the released antigen from MSNs and their maturation was promoted, which activated OVA-specific CD8+ T cells to kill tumor cells [ ].
MSNs with extra-large mesopores, approximately 20–30 nm, are termed as hollow MSNs (HMSNs). The HMSNs can accommodate multiple cargos with a high loading capacity, thus they have exhibited great promise in vaccine delivery [ ]. Lee et al. reported a HMSNs-based tumor vaccine. The HMSNs were prepared through two steps: MSNs with a spherical assembly were constructed from multicore iron oxide nanoparticles; and the HMSNs with extra-large mesopores (20–30 nm) were obtained after extraction of MSNs in an acidic solution to remove iron oxide nanoparticles. To improve the immunomodulatory effect of HMSNs, PEI was modified on HMSNs to yield P-HMSNs. OVA as a model antigen was effectively loaded in P-HMSNs, and the prepared vaccine prolonged survival of the B16-OVA-based melanoma-bearing mice [ ].
MSNs can be modified to realize responsive and controlled release of the loaded antigen. A pH/reduction dual sensitive MSN-based nanovaccine was constructed. PEI-modified MSNs with encapsulated OVA via electrostatic interaction acted as a core and disulfide bond-containing metal-phenolic networks (MPNs) were employed as the outer protective corona. 70 % of OVA was released in pH 7.4 PBS supplemented with reductive glutathione within 8 h, whereas only 23.9 % of OVA was released in PBS alone over 35 h. This difference was attributed to the thiol-disulfide exchange reaction in MPNs, leading to the removal of the corona for effective release of OVA in MSNs. In contrast, under a weakly acidic condition (pH 5.0 PBS), a cumulative OVA release of 80.5 % was achieved within 10 h, attributable to the pH-dependent dissociation of phenolic hydroxyl-ferric ion coordination bonds within the MPN structure. After subcutaneous immunization of the nanovaccine, cellular immunity was activated to inhibit tumor growth and memory immune responses were demonstrated after tumor rechallenge [ ].

3.3.2

## Metal-organic frameworks
Metal-organic frameworks (MOFs), as a class of organic-inorganic hybrid nanomaterial, are highly porous and structurally versatile, and they are composed of metal ions or metal clusters interconnected with organic ligands. They have an excellent loading capacity and become an emerging delivery system [ ]. Zeolitic imidazolate frameworks (ZIFs) are a crucial subfamily of MOFs with high stability and a pH-stimulation response, and ZIFs have been widely applied as nanocarriers for tumor immunotherapy [ ]. ZIF-8 nanoparticles could effectively co-deliver both antigens and adjuvants. For example, Zhang et al. prepared ZIF-8 nanoparticles at a size of around 200 nm, and OVA and CpG were encapsulated in ZIF-8 via electrostatic interaction to serve as a tumor vaccine [ ]. ZIF-8 may be used as a nanocarrier to load cargos, and they could serve as an immunomodulator via Zn2+. Ding et al. revealed Zn2+ promoted secretion of IFN-α and IFN-β from DCs through activation of the STING pathway, up-regulated the MMP-2 activity to facilitate tumor extracellular matrix degradation and induced tumor cell apoptosis at a concentration of 1000 μM [160]. They prepared ZPM@OVA-CpG by mixing Zn2+, PEI, and 2-methylimidazole in an aqueous solution, loaded OVA and CpG in the core, and coated the outer layer by D-mannose ( B(a)). Zn2+ and OVA were released from ZPM@OVA-CpG in a pH-responsive manner ( B(b)), promoting antigen presentation and DC maturation. By activating immune responses and degrading ECM to reverse the immunosuppressive microenvironment, ZPM@OVA-CpG effectively inhibited melanoma growth, prevented tumor recurrence, and suppressed metastasis [ ].

3.3.3

## Graphene-based nanoparticles
Graphene and its derivatives including graphene oxide (GO) and reduced graphene oxide nanosheets (RGO) have become popular in recent years, and they have been explored for vaccine delivery [ ]. A GO-based therapeutic nanovaccine was reported by Zhang et al., OVA and CpG were loaded into a PEI-modified GO nanosheet, and PEG was conjugated to the nanosheet to prevent material aggregation and improve its biocompatibility [ ]. RGO as a delivery system has been demonstrated to display excellent lymph node-targeting ability. RGO was synthesized via thermal reduction of GO, and PEGylation of its surface yielded RGO-PEG at a size of 20–30 nm and a thickness of 1.2 nm. Adpgk, a neoantigen, was conjugated to PEG-RGO by reaction with maleimide groups on PEG, while CpG was loaded through π−π stacking interactions. The preparation process of the RGO-PEG system loaded with the antigen and adjuvant was finished in about 2 h, which may offer a convenient platform to deliver a vaccine. The delivery system displayed over 100-fold greater accumulation in inguinal and axillary lymph nodes compared to free soluble antigens ( C). Strikingly, treatment with RGO-PEG led to an increase in the ROS content in DCs to induce alkalization of endo-lysosomes for effective antigen presentation to T cells. MC38-bearing mice with a single immunization of RGO-PEG-derived nanovaccine induced strong and long-term antigen-specific T cell responses to eradicate the MC38 tumors [ ].

3.3.4

## Calcium carbonate nanoparticles
Calcium carbonate (CaCO3) with advantages including pH-sensitivity, facile preparation and a low cost has shown the promise in drug delivery [ ]. Coprecipitation of Na2CO3 and NaCl2 is often used to prepare CaCO3 microparticles. OVA and the TLR7/8 agonist were adsorbed onto the surface of CaCO3 microparticles with a high incorporation efficiency, thus CaCO3 microparticles could be prepared for co-delivery of antigens and adjuvants [ ]. A pH-responsive calcium carbonate-based nanoplatform was also synthesized through a precipitation-based fabrication strategy, and the tumor cell lysate (TCL) as an antigen library and CpG as an adjuvant were loaded onto the nanocarrier via electrostatic interaction. To improve the stability of the vaccine during blood circulation, PEG was coated as an outer shell ( D (a)). The CaCO3-based vaccine, CaCO3@TCL/CpG, exhibited pH-responsive release of TCL, and the TCL release percentage in pH 6.5 was 2.4 folds of that in pH 7.4 (67.83 % ± 6.37 % vs 27.13 % ± 2.55 %). CaCO3@TCL/CpG down-regulated the lactate content in the tumor microenvironment ( D (b-c)), effectively polarizing M2 macrophages to M1 macrophages ( D (d)) and enhancing effector T cell infiltration into the tumor site to curb tumor growth [ ].

3.4

## Biomimetic nanoparticles
Biomimetic nanoparticles that are inspired from nature with multi-functionalities have reshaped the development of nanoplatforms for drug delivery [ ]. Biomimetic nanoparticles are often constructed by coating inner nanoparticles with biomimetic membranes as an outer layer, which integrates the characteristics of nanoparticles and membranes to improve the functions of nanoplatforms [ ]. The most widely explored biomimetic membranes include tumor cell membranes, immune cell membranes, exosomes, and bacterial outer membranes (OMVs) ( ). Biomimetic nanoparticles-based tumor vaccines could revolutionize tumor immunotherapy. 
3.4.1

## Cell membrane-derived biomimetic nanoparticles
The cell is a fundamental unit of biology, and it can independently collaborate with other cells to carry out various activities of the organism. Cell membranes as the outermost layer of cells consist of lipids, proteins, and polysaccharides, and they facilitate information exchange with different cells and substance exchange with its external environment. The cell membrane-coating nanotechnology is a top-bottom method. The collected cell membranes are coated onto nanoparticles as their outmost layer via sonication, extrusion, or microfluidic mixing [ ]. The cell membrane coating nanotechnology provides a facile approach to recapitulating unique bio-interfacing properties of cells, but these properties can not be easily imparted onto nanoparticles via traditional chemical synthesis methods. Zhang et al., in 2011 first reported an erythrocyte-coated PLGA nanoparticle, and the blood circulation time of the nanoparticle was extended up to 72 h, which opened an avenue to developing cell membrane-derived biomimetic nanoparticles [ ]. It has been reported that a great many of cells have been employed to develop cell membrane-camouflaged nanoplatforms. Cell membrane-based biomimetic nanoparticles are commonly classified according to the source of cell membranes: blood cells (red blood cells, leukocyte, and platelets), immune cells (DCs, macrophages, neutrophils, and NK cells) [ ], and tumor cells.
Cell membranes from different types of cells inherit some intrinsic properties of their source cells. Immune cell membranes endow these membrane-coated nanoparticles with invisibility to immune surveillance and these membrane-coated nanoparticles preferably home to an inflammatory site. DC membrane-derived nanovaccines exhibit lymph node-specific tropism and enhanced intranodal retention through CCR7-mediated chemotactic trafficking [ ]. In addition, co-stimulatory signaling molecules on the DC membrane, such as CD80 and CD86, can enhance the activation of T cells [ ]. For example, DC membrane-coated nanoparticles were developed from histidine-modified stearic acid-grafted chitosan as the core, and the model antigen OVA was encapsulated within the chitosan nanoparticles. These core nanoparticles mediated lysosome escape to present the antigen to CD8+ T cells and promote DC maturation both in vitro and in vivo. After subcutaneous injection, remarkable accumulation of the nanovaccine in lymph nodes was observed and the retention time was about 168 h, confirming the homing effect of DC membranes to lymph nodes. This nanovaccine effectively inhibited B16-OVA tumor growth through activation of CD8+ T cell-mediated specific anti-tumor immune responses and production of antitumor cytokines, such as IFN-γ, TNF-α, IL-6, and IL-12 [ ]. Macrophage membranes, an alternative antigen-presenting cell derivative in addition to DCs, display intrinsic inflammatory tropism through surface adhesion molecules (CCR2, VCAM-1, and ICAM-1), which promote homing to the inflammatory site. PEI-modified macrophage membranes were utilized to construct a vaccine delivery system. In this system, dendrobium devonianum polysaccharides served as an adjuvant and OVA as an antigen. The antigen and the adjuvant were co-encapsulated within the core of PLGA nanoparticles. The macrophage membrane coating promoted uptake of the vaccine by APCs and effectively activated CD4+ and CD8+ T cells [ ].
Tumor cell membrane-camouflaged nanoplatforms can often achieve dual functionalities by leveraging homotypic targeting mechanisms to enhance tumor-specific recognition specifically through EpCAM/E-cadherin adhesion and Thomsen-Friedenreich (TF) antigen/Galectin-3 interactions, as well as concurrently exploiting CD47/SIRPα-mediated immune evasion. These biomimetic systems not only exhibit a superior homologous targeting efficiency for tumor accumulation but also serve as antigen reservoirs to prime DCs and amplify adaptive immune responses. The synergistic integration of homophilic adhesion and antigenic mimicry helps establishing a paradigm for precision theranostics [ ]. CRT over-expressed on tumor cell membranes not only provides an entire spectrum of tumor cell membrane antigens but also promotes DC uptake due to the interaction between CRT and the CD91 receptor on DCs. Xiong et al. reported a CRT-overexpressed 4T1 cell membrane-coated PLGA nanoparticle delivery system, and R837, a TLR7 agonist, was encapsulated as an adjuvant in the delivery system to improve immune responses ( A). 4T1 cells were pre-treated with 10 μg/mL of doxorubicin to undergo ICD, and the ratio of CRT-positive cells was 64.9 %. Compared with the normal tumor cell membrane-coated nanovaccine, the CRT-overexpressed cell membrane-coated nanovaccine effectively facilitated active uptake of the nanovaccine by DCs. This nanovaccine displayed an inhibition rate of 67.8 % in 4T1-bearing mice and 70.85 % in an immunoprophylaxis assay model, and it could have great potential in personalized vaccine immunotherapy [ ]. 
The function of the cell membranes can be improved due to its modifiable characteristics. Cell membrane modification techniques have been extensively developed to achieve functionalized cell membranes.(1)Gentle chemical reaction, such as the click reaction between azid and dibenzocyclooctyne (DBCO) [ ]. This reaction can be conducted in an aqueous solution with high selectivity and excellent biocompatibility. It has been widely applied to incorporate an antibody onto a cell membrane. Azid is commonly decorated on the cell membranes, and the candidate antibody is modified with NHS-PEG4-DBCO. The modified cell membranes and the target antibody are mixed for click reaction. There are two common methods to obtain azid-decorated cell membranes: direct incubation of cell membranes with 0.1 mM azid-choline for 24 h or indirect metabolic engineering to label a chemical tag on living cell membranes [ ]. N-azidoacetyl mannosamine-tetraacylated (Ac4ManNAz) is the most widely used reagent in metabolic engineering. After cells are co-cultured with Ac4ManNAz for 72 h, Ac4ManNAz can be metabolized into N-azidoacetyl neuraminic acid and incorporated into glycans on the membrane. Considering the issue associated with the reliance of the immune activation efficacy on the labeled MHC class I molecules and CD28 antibodies, a mature DC membrane-based artificial APCs (aAPCs) system was developed [180]. DCs from the bone marrow were first pre-treated with Ac4ManNAz, tumor antigens, IFN-γ, and LPS, and the azid-labeled cell membranes with MHC class I molecules and CD28 co-stimulators were obtained. PLGA nanoparticles were functionalized by coating the collected cell membranes, and imiquimod was encapsulated in the core of PLGA nanoparticles through sonication. To improve the immune activation capacity, an αCD3ε antibody which can interact with the CD3 receptor on T cells to mediate transduction and cellular activation was conjugated to cell membranes after incubation of the above nanoparticles with the DBCO-αCD3ε antibody ( B(a)). The constructed spherical polyclonal aAPCs, termed as M[αCD3ε/Ag]-NP-Imq, was illustrated in B(b). M[αCD3ε/Ag]-NP-Imq exhibited an enhanced lymphatic targeting efficiency and prolonged its retention in lymph nodes. They enhanced the proportion of mature DCs, polarized macrophages toward their M1 phenotype, and activated CD8+ T cells ( B(c)). In synergy with an anti-PD-1 antibody, M[αCD3ε/Ag]-NP-Imq elicited a pronounced prophylactic effect in melanoma tumors and a marked therapeutic effect in colorectal tumors [ ].
(2)The lipid insertion method. This method is based on the finding that lipids can be automatically inserted into cell membranes through hydrophobic interaction [ ]. Mannose, a mannose receptor overexpressed on APCs including DCs and macrophages, has been widely employed as a modified ligand in nanoplatforms for targeted delivery of vaccines to DCs. 1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine-polyethylene glycol-mannose (DSPE-PEG-Man) could be inserted into cell membranes after incubation of DSPE-PEG-Man with cell membranes under stirring. Erythrocyte membranes with inserted DSPE-PEG-Man could actively target APCs in lymph nodes. For instance, an antigenic peptide, hgp10025-33, and MPLA as an adjuvant were loaded into PLGA nanoparticles, which were coated with mannose-modified erythrocyte membranes, resulting in a nanovaccine, Man-RBC-NP [ ]. An increase in the efficiency of internalizing the nanovaccine was seen in DC2.4 cells (in vitro) and CD11b+CD11c+ DCs (in vivo, 31.4 % in the Man-RBC-NP group vs 22.4 % in the RBC-NP group). Meanwhile, a longer retention time of Man-RBC-NP was found in lymph nodes compared to RBC-NP. After internalization into DCs, the nanovaccine effectively up-regulated the ratio of mature DCs from 33.1 % in the PBS group to 81.6 % in the Man-RBC-NP group and promoted the secretion of cytokines including TNF-α, IL-12P70, and IFN-γ. The Man-RBC-NP nanovaccine exhibited a distinct preventive effect, significantly suppressing tumor growth with a potent anti-metastatic efficacy in a subcutaneously xenograft B16F10 melanoma mice model [ ]. To realize targeted delivery of tumor vaccines to DCs, a DC-targeting nanovaccine was developed including critical components such as tumor cell membranes, a TLR9 agonist (CpG), and an aptamer targeting DC-specific intercellular adhesion molecule 3-grabbing non-integrin (DC-SIGN). The tumor cell membrane vesicle was functionalized using the lipid insertion method: cell membranes were incubated with cholesterol-conjugated CpG and the cholesterol-conjugated DC-SIGN aptamer at 4 °C for 1 h ( C). The aptamer anchored on the membrane facilitated DCs uptake of the nanovaccine and improved the delivery efficiency into lymph nodes. Treatment with this nanovaccine in conjunction with an anti-PD-1 antibody effectively delayed the growth of established tumors and prevented tumor recurrence due to induced immune memory [ ].
(3)Genetic engineering. Genetic engineering as another robust strategy can be harnessed to tailor specific components on cell membranes. The plasmid transfection method is often employed to generate overexpressed specific proteins on cell membranes [ ]. With the aid of gene editing technology, OVA, a model antigen, and a co-stimulatory marker, CD80, were overexpressed on B16F10 cell membranes. The produced B16F10 cell membranes directly presented antigens to activate T cells to mediate specific immune responses against tumors [ ]. Genetic engineering via lentivirus plasmid transfection was used to construct anti-CD40 single chain variable fragment (scFv)-overexpressed tumor cell membranes [ ]. The PLGA nanoparticles were coated with the antibody-anchored membrane (AAM) to form a nanovaccine, Nano-AAM/CD40. The Anti-CD40 scFv, a co-stimulatory immune checkpoint, retained its biological functionality through genetic engineering on the cell membrane surface ( D). Nano-AAM/CD40 induced potent immune responses in both “hot” and “cold” tumors to inhibit MC38 and Panc02 tumor growth, which may be ascribed to targeted delivery to lymph nodes, promoted maturation of DCs, and the released IL-12 cytokine [ ].
(4)Membrane fusion. Membrane fusion is another promising approach for producing biomimetic nanoparticles. Two or more kinds of cell membranes are fused to form hybrid cellular membranes, which may integrate unique biological functions from each cell membrane [ ]. Hybrid membranes from erythrocyte membranes and cancer cell membranes displayed prolonged systemic circulation, effective immune evasion, and homotypic tumor-targetability [ ]. DC membranes and tumor cell membranes are complementary to produce cell membrane-based tumor vaccines: tumor cell membranes provide the immunogenicity from antigens on tumor cell membranes, and DC membranes enhance antigen presentation and provide co-stimulation signals [ ]. Zhang et al. developed a fusion cell membrane-based nanovaccine. The hybrid membranes were prepared from DC membranes and ovarian cancer cell membranes. PLGA nanoparticles loaded with CpG as an adjuvant were enveloped into the hybrid membranes. The nanovaccine was found to display effective antigen presentation, promote CTLs proliferation, and stimulate cytokines secretion to prevent tumor growth and metastasis [ ].

3.4.2

## Exosome-derived biomimetic nanoparticles
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are phospholipid bilayer-enclosed vesicles secreted from cells or shed from plasma membranes. EVs allow the exchange of proteins, lipids, and nucleic acids between two cells, acting as a bridge for cell-to-cell communication [ ]. Based on the size of vesicles, EVs are commonly divided into exosomes (50–150 nm) and microvesicles (50–500 nm, up to 1 μm) [ , ]. Both exosomes and microvesicles can retain the characteristics of the original cell source, and they contain nucleic acids, proteins, lipids, and metabolites generated from their original cells. Exosomes can be used as a nanocarrier for tumor vaccines, and they have shown great potential in carrying chemotherapeutics and mRNA. Exosome-based delivery systems are garnering increasing attention for tumor treatment and diagnosis due to their excellent biocompatibility and targeted delivery [ ].
Exosomes from DCs, termed as dexosomes, have enriched MHC class Ⅰ/Ⅱ molecules and costimulatory molecules including CD86, and they can effectively induce CD8+/CD4+ T cells-mediated immune responses [ ]. Therefore, dexosomes have been widely applied to prepare tumor vaccines in preclinical and clinical studies [ ]. In one study, BMDCs were incubated with OVA and Poly I:C as a TLR-3 agonist to obtain the dexosomes loaded with OVA and Poly I:C, shortened as Dexo (OVA + PLC), through ultra-centrifugation. The B16F10 melanoma cell lysate containing tumor antigens was effectively encapsulated in dexosomes to prepare a tumor vaccine, which markedly recruited melanoma-specific CD8+ T cells and NK cells into the tumor site to inhibit tumor growth and prolonged the survival of the B16F10-bearing mice [ ]. DC-derived exosomes were engineered as a biomimetic nanocarrier platform (Exo) for delivering tumor-specific neoantigens, including Adpgk (associated with MC38 colorectal cancer) and M27/M30 (B16F10 melanoma-associated epitopes). With lymph node migration capability, the Exo vaccine induced potent CD4+/CD8+ T cell immune responses to retard tumor progression. In B16F10 rechallenge models, the M27/M30-loaded Exo vaccine elicited durable antigen-specific memory, characterized by CD3+CD44+CD62L+ central memory T cells (82.6 %) and CD3+CD44+CD62L− effector memory T cells (16 %), conferring 100 % survival for up to 180 days post-rechallenge [ ]. These results demonstrated that dexosomes-based nanovaccines could be developed for personalized immunotherapy.
Exosomes from M1 macrophages have been reported to polarize M2 macrophages to their M1 phenotype, reversing an immunosuppressive microenvironment into an immunoactive one [ ]. Primary macrophages were cultured with LPS that could induce an elevation in the expression of CD80 and a decline in the expression of CD206 to stimulate them into M1 macrophages. M1OVA-Exo was isolated from the culture supernatant of M1 macrophages containing OVA ( A(a)). After macrophages were incubated with M1OVA-Exo, they were remarkably polarized into their M1 phenotype via downregulation of the Wnt signaling pathway ( A(b)). M1OVA-Exo treatment of B16-OVA melanoma resulted in an enhancement in the infiltration of CD4+/CD8+ T cells into the tumor site, promotion of M2 macrophage polarization to M1, and secretion of cytokines to create a “hot” immune microenvironment [ ]. 
Tumor-derived exosomes (TEXs) exhibit a propensity for tumor-targeted delivery because of their intrinsic homotypic binding properties [ ]. Huang et al. constructed an in-situ DC vaccine derived from breast cancer exosomes. An overexpressed immunodominant protein on breast cancer, α-Lactalbumin (α-LA), was genetically engineered in MDA-MB-231 cells, and α-LA-expressed exosomes were obtained with improved DC-targetability and immunogenicity. A TLR3 agonist, hiltonol, and an ICD inducer, human neutrophil elastase (ELANE), were encapsulated into the exosomes to produce a nanovaccine, HELA-Exo. HELA-Exo displayed a potent anti-tumor effect in a mouse model and human organoids of breast cancer. The nanovaccine activated DCs at the tumor site for antigen cross-presentation and increased the ratio of CD8+ T cells to kill tumor cells [ ]. Furthermore, Liang et al. engineered a bioinspired nanovaccine platform through programmable integration of ER stress induction and TEXs biogenesis. PLGA nanoparticles loaded with α-mangostin (αM-NPs), an ER stress inducer, were selectively internalized by B16F10-OVA tumor cells. Sustained release of αM exerted PERK-dependent ER stress, upregulating Hsp70s (70 kDa) ( B). This cellular reprogramming orchestrated self-assembly of the TEXs-mimicking nanovaccine (αM-Exos). In this αM-Exos nanovaccine, (1) a tumor antigen repertoire was preserved; (2) membrane-anchored Hsp70s acted as an endogenous TLR4 agonist, and (3) PLGA cores enabled pH-responsive cargo release. Crucially, subcutaneous administration of αM-Exos exhibited enhanced lymph node targeting with a 2.7-fold efficiency compared to the control Exos, which was attributed to the abundant expression of Hsp70s, facilitating dual-modal DC activation ( B(b)). The modular design allowed scalable production of vaccines that retained a native exosome topology and diverse tumor neoantigens, leading to effective inhibition of B16F10-OVA and 4T1 tumor growth. This cellular biofactory strategy revolutionizes precision nanovaccinology by leveraging intrinsic biosynthetic pathways for clinically deployable cancer immunotherapy [ ].
Inspired from the characteristics of exosomes from immune cells and tumor cells, the concept of chimeric exosomes is proposed. Macrophages were treated with the tumor cell nuclei to obtain hybrid cells, and LPS was added to stimulate the macrophage-based hybrid cells to enhance the expression of costimulatory molecules ( C(a)). Chimeric exosomes (aMT-Exos) were obtained from the cell culture supernatant via gradient centrifugation and ultracentrifugation. They contained tumor cell components including EpCAM on 4T1 cell membranes and TRP1 on B16 cell membranes, and immune stimulatory molecules including CD86, MHC Ⅰ, and MHC Ⅱ ( C(b-c)). aMT-Exos exhibited a marked level of accumulation in lymph nodes and tumor sites due to its nano-sized property and homogenic targetability. APCs populations (macrophages and DCs) in aMT-Exos-treated lymph nodes showed a 3-fold elevation compared to the PBS control, and they subsequently migrated to T cell-rich paracortical regions to drive T cell priming ( C(d)). Besides, aMT-Exos promoted polarization towards M1 macrophages and elevated the ratio of CD4+ or CD8+ T cells/Treg cells to reshape an immunosuppressive microenvironment. Excellent universality of the chimeric exosomes has been demonstrated in E.G7 lymphoma tumor cells, 4T1-breast cancer cells, and B16 melanoma cells, and they have significantly inhibited primary tumors, displayed potent anti-metastatic effects, and distinctly prevented tumor recurrence after surgery [ ].

3.4.3

## OMVs-derived biomimetic nanoparticles
OMVs bleb from the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria, and they are spherical lipid bilayer nanovesicles with a size of around 50–250 nm [ ]. The components of OMVs, including bacteria-specific antigens, diverse PAMPs like LPS, enzymes, membrane proteins, DNA and RNA, are similar to those of their parent bacteria [ ]. Due to these natural characteristics, OMVs have shown great potential in constructing tumor vaccine nanoplatforms [ ]. OMVs-based nanovaccines have the following advantages: (1) OMVs can be engulfed by DCs and drained to lymph nodes due to their nano-size; (2) myeloid cells can recognize these PAMPs on OMVs to trigger innate immunity, and OMVs can also activate T cells and B cells to mediate adaptive immunity, thus, it could act as a self-adjuvant in a nanovaccine; and (3) OMVs can be functionalized by chemical modification and genetic engineering to display antigens/epitopes for personalized vaccination.
OMVs decorated with maleimide groups on their surfaces can be an antigen catcher via stable thioether bonds, which can effectively capture tumor antigens from tumor cells after ICD to establish in situ vaccination. For example, OMVs were incubated with Mal-PEG4-NHS under room temperature for 2 h, and maleimide-modified OMVs (Mal-OMVs) were obtained after treatment with N-ethylmaleimide to consume free thiol groups ( A(a-b)) [ ]. The antigen capture percentage of Mal-OMVs (21.1 %) was two folds higher than that of OMVs without any modification (11.3 %) ( A(c)). To reverse an immunosuppressive immune microenvironment, 1-methyl-tryptophan (1-MT), an IDO inhibitor, was encapsulated into Mal-OMVs to construct 1-MT@Mal-OMVs. After combination with photothermal therapy, 1-MT@Mal-OMVs effectively captured the released antigens and the captured antigens were then delivered to DCs. After DCs engulfed OMVs and their captured antigens, the levels of co-stimulatory molecules including CD86 and CD80 were elevated, leading to an increase in the antigen presentation molecules (MHC class Ⅱ). The in vivo antigen delivery results revealed that Mal-OMVs effectively delivered antigens into draining lymph nodes for T cell activation. Treatment with 1-MT@Mal-OMVs significantly reduced the proportion of immunosuppressive CD3+CD4+Foxp3+ Tregs and increased the percentage of immunoactivated IFN-γ-producing CD4+ and CD8+ T cells at the tumor site, which resulted in pronounced inhibition of primary tumor growth, delayed progression of distant tumors, and an extended survival rate of 54 % for CT26-bearing mice for over 42 days [ ]. Patel et al. also showed that Mal-OMVs in synergy with radiotherapy could induce in situ vaccination against B78 melanoma and NXS2 neuroblastoma. They constructed a multifunctional nano-drug delivery system (BNP). The PC7A/CpG polyplex was the core of BNP and Mal-OMVs were its outer layer. In this nanosystem, radiotherapy mediated tumor antigen release and the outer membrane of BNP captured the antigens. The PC7A/CpG polyplex in the core acted as a potent adjuvant to strengthen antigen presentation, which facilitated CD4+/CD8+ T cell infiltration and mediated strong long-term immune memory [ ]. 
Genetic engineering of Gram-negative bacteria could help tuning the surface components of OMVs and this approach has been actively explored to build a vaccine platform. The technology of “Plug and Display” based on genetic engineering has been applied in personalized nanovaccine construction [ ]. This modular platform utilizes a covalently conjugated peptide pair (e.g., SpyTag/SpyCatcher), which is genetically fused to the ClyA scaffold protein expressed on the surface of OMVs. This system enables site-specific antigen display on OMV surfaces through spontaneous isopeptide bond formation between the peptide pair and target antigens, thereby allowing modular and scalable loading of diverse TAAs for tailored vaccine development [ ]. Cheng et al. employed recombinant DNA technology to express SpyCatcher (SpC) and SnoopCatcher (SnC) as a fusion protein with ClyA on the surface of OMVs, and SpyTag (SpT) or SnoopTag (SnT)-labeled antigens were bound to SpC or SnC on the OMVs. The antigen epitope, tyrosinase-related protein 2 (TRP2), was displayed on the OMVs, and the OMVs-based vaccine facilitated CD8+ T cells infiltration into the lung to eliminate B16F10 melanoma metastasis. It is worth noting that they also found that two antigens could be loaded onto the OMVs via the catcher-decorated method, and the resulting OMVs-based vaccine induced strong anti-tumor immune responses [ ]. Similarly, in an OMVs-based nanovaccine (Nano Vac) platform, a covalent protein ligation system was implemented by utilizing SpyCatcher/SpyTag technology for rapid antigen modularization. Genetic fusion of SpyCatcher002 to ClyA, an OMV-anchored pore-forming protein, enabled site-specific surface functionalization through spontaneous isopeptide bond formation with SpyTag002-conjugated tumor antigens. Immunization with NanoVac facilitated DC maturation and antigen presentation to mediate antigen-specific T cell immune responses. NanoVac displayed a potent anti-tumor effect in subcutaneous B16F10 tumor and hepatic carcinoma models [ ]. An advanced OMVs-based nanovaccine platform with an antigen presentation signal enhancer (APSE) was developed through synergistic integration of SpyCatcher/SpyTag-mediated antigen display and Fc-selective antibody conjugation ( B). The SpyCatcher/SpyTag bioconjugation system allowed covalent, site-specific anchoring of heterologous antigens onto OMVs via spontaneous isopeptide bond formation. In parallel, ClyA-engineered single-chain variable fragment binding proteins (ClyA-SPAb) facilitated orientation-controlled immobilization of PD-L1-blocking antibodies through Fc domain recognition, preserving paratope integrity for dual checkpoint inhibition by suppressing PD-L1/PD-1 interactions. The OMVs-based nanovaccine displayed potent antitumor efficacy, which was evidenced with effective tumor growth inhibition in a Pa02-OVA pancreatic adenocarcinoma model, a suppression rate of 65.8 % in MC38 colorectal carcinoma-bearing mice, and concurrent reduction in the lung metastasis formation in a B16F10-OVA tumor model [ ].
Furthermore, OMVs after genetic engineering modification can be applied as an ideal nanocarrier for mRNA to construct mRNA-based vaccines. For example, OMVs were decorated with L7Ae, an RNA-binding protein, and listeriolysin O, a lysosomal escape protein to produce OMVs-LL. L7Ae could specifically bind to box C/D-labeled mRNA to achieve effective loading of mRNA. After OMVs-LL was uptaken by DCs, listeriolysin O could form pores on endosomal membranes in an acidic environment to promote mRNA release into the cytoplasm. The OMVs-based mRNA vaccine displayed a potent anti-tumor efficacy in both pulmonary metastatic melanoma with a survival rate of 42.8 % of mice for 40 days and subcutaneous colon cancer with a tumor inhibition rate of 93.6 %. Compared with traditional mRNA vaccines formulated from lipid nanoparticles, OMV-LL induced a higher ratio of IFN-γ+CD8+ T cells in the spleen to significantly prevent MC38 colon cancer progression [ ].
It has been a common practice to administrate vaccines by intramuscular injection or subcutaneous injection. Intestine, the largest immune organ, has 70 % of immune cells in the body system, thus oral administration of vaccines may be one promising administration route [ ]. An orally administrated bacterial robot vaccine exhibited its potential in eliciting robust anti-tumor immune responses ( C). First, tumor antigens and the Fc fragment of a mouse IgG were fused to the surface protein ClyA via genetic engineering of E. Coli and arabinose was employed as an inducible promoter to control the secretion of antigen-displayed OMVs ( C(a-b)). The released OMVs could penetrate through intestinal epithelial barriers, and the Fc fragment was recognized by DCs, thus activating antigen-specific T cells, achieving a notable anti-tumor effect in a subcutaneous MC38 colon cancer model ( C(c)), and inducing long-term memory immune responses against rechallenges in a melanoma model ( C(d-e)) [ ].

3.5

## Hydrogels
Hydrogels with a three-dimensional (3D) cross-linked network, one of the most attractive drug delivery systems, have been applied in biomedicine delivery [ ]. Hydrogels with a porous structure exhibit an outstanding loading capacity, and small molecule drugs, biomacromolecules, and cells can be encapsulated into hydrogels [ ]. Hydrogels delivered at a tumor site can sustainedly and controllably release the loaded cargos to induce the depot effect, which is crucial for vaccine delivery [ ]. Hydrogels are formed through cross-linking of chemical synthetic polymers or natural polysaccharides. Based on these advantages of hydrogels, they have been applied for delivery of tumor antigens, adjuvants, cytokines and other immunomodulators for tumor immunotherapy [ ].
3.5.1

## Natural polysaccharides-based hydrogels
Natural polysaccharides with excellent biocompatibility, such as sodium alginate, chitosan, and hyaluronic acid, have been employed to prepare hydrogels under a mild condition. Sodium alginate is the most widely used water-soluble polysaccharide. The negatively charged carboxyl group on the side chain of sodium alginate crosslinks with polyvalent cations including Ca2+ and Mg2+ to facilitate “sol-gel” transformation [ ]. After injection of sodium alginate into a biological tissue, it often crosslinks with calcium ions under a physiological condition to form hydrogels. Ke et al. designed a sodium alginate-based hydrogel vaccine by encapsulating bifunctional fusion membrane nanoparticles from Mycobacterium phlei (M.ph) membrane extracts, tumor cell membranes, and GM-CSF into the hydrogel. M.ph membranes stimulated DC maturation and tumor cell membranes provided tumor antigens. The fusion membrane nanoparticles (FM NPs) were prepared by sequential extrusion through 100 nm polycarbonate membranes using a mini-extruder apparatus. Subsequently, FM NPs and GM-CSF were co-encapsulated within a porous hydrogel matrix with an interconnected pore ranging from 20 to 50 μm. The release rates of FM NPs and GM-CSF were different due to their distinct sizes and electrostatic interactions. Specifically, 50 % of GM-CSF was released within one week to recruit DCs into the hydrogel, while 82.17 % of FM NPs were retained within the hydrogel to activate the recruited DCs to process the tumor antigens in these cells. Treatment with the bifunctional fusion membrane-based hydrogel resulted in a survival rate of 66.67 % in 4T1-bearing mice for up to 60 days, and potent immune responses were observed in lymph nodes, the spleen, and the tumor. The hydrogel exhibited excellent biocompatibility with low systemic inflammation and great biodegradability with complete degradation after 105 days [ ]. Another similar sodium alginate-based functionalized hydrogel was reported by Nie et al.[224]. They constructed a functionalized hydrogel through three process steps: first, tumor cell membranes and OMVs were coextruded through a polycarbonate membrane to obtain the fusion membranes (HCMs); next, to modify HCMs with mannose to obtain MHCMs, HCMs were incubated with DSPE-PEG-mannose to allow insertion of the DSPE moiety into the bilayer of the cell membrane; finally, NaIO4 oxidized sodium alginate with an aldehyde group which reacted with the amino group on membrane proteins through Schiff base reaction to form O-MHCMs as a gelator. After subcutaneous injection of the mixture of E64, an irreversible cysteine protease inhibitor, and the O-MHCMs solution, O-MHCMs cross-linked with Ca2+ under a physiological condition at a Ca2+ concentration of 1.8 × 10−3 M to form a hydrogel. E64 was encapsulated inside the hydrogel micropores. The hydrogel realized controlled release of MHCMs, which improved the DC uptake efficiency due to mannose modification and promoted DC maturation due to adjuvanticity of OMVs and immunogenicity of tumor cell membranes. The released E64 suppressed tumor antigen degradation in lysosomes, thus adequate antigens were presented to T cells. With single vaccination, the functionalized hydrogel induced potent T cell activation to prevent 4T1 breast tumor recurrence [ ].
To improve structural stability of sodium alginate-based hydrogels, a chitosan-modified sodium alginate hydrogel was reported for oral immunization. The intriguing programmable oral bacterial hydrogel as a nanovaccine was prepared via the following steps ( A): (1) E. Coli was genetically engineered to express AH1-A5, a segment of the envelope protein MuLV GP70 on the bacterial surface; and (2) the engineered E. Coli was encapsulated in the chitosan-modified sodium alginate hydrogel, which protected the bacterium with high activity in the gastrointestinal transit environment. After oral administration of the hydrogel, it adhered onto the gastrointestinal surface and the nanovaccine was periodically released in a controlled manner. DCs in mesenteric lymph nodes effectively internalized the released nanovaccine to induce effective CD8+ T cell responses, resulting in an inhibition rate of 75 % in CT26-bearing mice [ ]. 
Hyaluronic acid is a natural biopolymer material with excellent water solubility and biocompatibility [ ]. A hyaluronan-based hydrogel was developed to deliver mRNA. mRNA and R848 as an adjuvant were loaded in LNPs through electrostatic interactions and hydrophobic interactions, respectively. LNPs mixed with hyaluronan at a ratio of 4:1 to form a dynamic hyaluronan hydrogel. The hydrogel was excellent in stabilizing mRNA LNPs through mitigating their hydrolysis and aggregation/fusion. It is noteworthy that the hyaluronan-based dynamic hydrogel could maintain stability after storage at room temperature for a minimum of 14 days. Long-term release of mRNA in LNPs for up to 20 days effectively promoted DC maturation, activated IFN-γ+CD8+ T cell responses, and enhanced cytokines secretion to inhibit melanoma growth. Remarkably, the intensity of immune responses was not weakened after injection of the hydrogel stored under room temperature for at least 2 weeks [ ].

3.5.2

## Polymer-based hydrogels
Polymer-based hydrogels with stimuli-responsive characteristic have been employed for vaccine delivery. Thermosensitive hydrogels exhibit sol-gel transition at a volume phase transition temperature (VPTT): a polymeric solution below the VPTT is transformed into a gel when the temperature exceeds the VPTT [ ]. The sol-gel transition can be achieved under a physiological condition. Triblock copolymers of poly(d,l-lactide-co-glycolide)-poly(ethylene glycol)-poly(d,l-lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA-PEG-PLGA) are thermosensitive and they self-assemble into micelles. The thermosensitive property of PLGA-PEG-PLGA arises from the PEG segment, which forms a thin corona around the crew-cut micelle structure [ ]. Cao et al. constructed a PLGA-PEF-PLGA copolymer-based hydrogel to deliver an inorganic calcium salt and organic R837 and prepared a therapeutic-prophylactic vaccine ( B). A solution of PLGA-PEF-PLGA copolymers at two different molecular weights were mixed with CaCl2, CaCO3, and R837 to form a thermosensitive hydrogel due to the formation of a percolated network. The sol-gel transition temperature (Tgel) was about 29 °C, and gel transition occurred when the in vivo temperature was higher than Tgel. Burst-released Ca2+ induced ICD of tumor cells to promote CRT exposure and sustainedly released R848 strengthened immune responses. The hydrogel as a therapeutic-prophylactic vaccine effectively prevented recurrence and metastasis in a postoperative orthotopic breast mice model [ ]. Copolymers of poly (d, l-lactide)-poly (ethylene glycol)-poly (d, l-lactide) (PDLLA-PEG-PDLLA, PLEL) with similar thermosensitive characteristics were also used for hydrogel preparation. A biodegradable thermosensitive PLEL hydrogel vaccine was composed of the tumor cell lysate, GM-CSF, and CpG. The PLEL hydrogel displayed sol-gel transition under a physiological condition, and the antigen and the immunomodulator were sustainedly released from hydrogels. 90.79 % of GM-CSF and 97.28 % of CpG were released within 7 days, while 60 % of the antigen was released on day 10. Administration of the hydrogel vaccine resulted in 3-fold mature DCs compared with the saline group and enhanced secretion of cytokines including IFN-γ and IL-6, leading to effective inhibition of B16F10 and CT26 tumor growth [ ].
Polymers can form hydrogels not only through physical cross-linking but also chemical reaction with crosslinkers. Poly (vinyl alcohol) (PVA) with the diols moiety can complex with two phenylboronic acid molecules in the presence of N1-(4-boronobenzyl)-N3-(4-boronophenyl)-N1, N1, N3, N3-tetramethylpropane-1,3-diaminium (TSPBA), a ROS-labile crosslinker, to form hydrogels [ ]. For example, a ROS-responsive hydrogel platform, termed as (ACCO + CpG) @gel, was developed through crosslinking between PVA and TSPBA. Autologous tumor cells underwent oncolysis after treatment with an oncolytic peptide LTX-315. These ICD-induced tumor cells as the source of TAAs, designated as ACOO, and CpG as an immunoadjuvant were encapsulated into the hydrogel. (ACCO + CpG) @gel displayed controlled biodegradation and sustained release of ACCO and CpG over 7 days. More strikingly, it exhibited potent anti-tumor effects in B16F10 melanoma, CT26 colon carcinoma, and LLC-1 Lewis lung carcinoma models [ ]. Another similar hydrogel was developed from crosslinking of phenylboronic acid ester-modified PEI and mannose. PEI was functionalized with 2-formylphenylboronic acid via Schiff base conjugation between the primary amine groups and the aromatic aldehyde moieties, yielding phenylboronic acid-grafted PEI, denoted as PF. Polyribocytidylic acid as a TLR3 adjuvant and mitoxantrone hydrochloride-treated tumor cells were mixed with the PF solution, and mannose was added to yield the hydrogel, termed as Angel-Vax. Three-dimensional reconstructed images revealed that the hydrogel had a continuous network of porous structures, and the pre-treated tumor cells were embedded within the network. The Angel-Vax platform enhanced activation and maturation of APCs, including DCs and macrophages, and elicited robust tumor-specific immunity, thereby functioning as a preventive and therapeutic vaccine in B16F10 murine melanoma model [ ].

3.5.3

## Bioinspired-based hydrogels
Bioinspired hydrogels have demonstrated significant potential in tumor vaccine delivery. Huang et al. reported a blood plasma-derived natural hydrogel, inspired by the observation that blood stasis in the subcutaneous tissue can spontaneously recruit macrophages and other immune cells. Plasma can chelate with Ca2+ to trigger the agglutination reaction through the formation of insoluble fibrin. The plasma solution loaded with OVA as an antigen and Mn2+ as an adjuvant can be transformed into a hydrogel within 10 min after subcutaneous injection of Ca2+. In vivo DC recruitment results demonstrated that the plasma hydrogel exhibited persistent capacity to recruit DCs, while the free OVA group showed a moderate level of recruitment of DCs within 24 h. Released Mn2+ activated the STING pathway to potentiate and prolong immune responses. By activation of both innate and adaptive immunity, the plasma hydrogel pronouncedly delayed B16F10-OVA tumor progression [ ]. Furthermore, a bioinspired self-assembled peptide-based hydrogel was constructed. Three tumor-associated antigenic epitopes: glycoprotein 100209-217 (gp100209-217), tyrosinase369-377 (Tyr369-377), and the melanoma antigen recognized by T cells 126-35 (MART-126-35), were individually conjugated to a lysine-rich carrier peptide (FEFEFKFK, F peptide) through covalent linkage, generating three epitope-functionalized peptide constructs: F-gp100209-217, F-Tyr369-377, and F-MART-126-35, respectively ( C). The trivalent peptide vaccine was constructed through spontaneous self-assembly of F-gp100209-217, F-Tyr369-377, and F-MART-126-35 at 20 mg/mL for each conjugate in an aqueous medium into a supramolecular hydrogel with a 3D nanofibrous architecture via synergistic electrostatic and π-π stacking interactions. Immunization with the hydrogel vaccine facilitated antigen presentation to T cells, promoted secretion of IFN-γ, and elicited a broad spectrum of antitumor CD8+ T cell responses, eventually suppressing tumor growth in B16F10-bearing mice [ ].

4

## Clinical trials and clinical translation challenges
Inspired by promising therapeutic and preventive effects of tumor vaccines, a great many of tumor vaccines including DNA vaccines, mRNA vaccines, peptide-based vaccines, and cell-based vaccines are currently in clinical trials at different phases. A comprehensive analysis of cancer vaccine clinical trials conducted over the past ten years is systematically presented in , and key milestones and future trends in the field can be observed from the table. 
A COVID-19 DNA vaccine, ZycoV-D, has been recently approved in India, and it is the first DNA vaccine authorized for clinical use [ ]. DNA vaccines for tumor treatment have been intended for Cervical Intraepithelial Neoplasia. VGX-3100, a DNA vaccine containing plasmids designed to express the E6 and E7 oncoproteins of HPV types 16 and 18, has been successfully through its phase III clinical trial (NCT03185013) in 2021, and it has shown efficacy in treating high-grade cervical dysplasia. DNA vaccines could be a potentially groundbreaking therapeutic modality for treating cancer, and VGX-3100 may become one of the first DNA vaccines approved for HPV-related precancerous lesions. Poor immunogenicity of DNA vaccines is the main obstacles for their progression into clinical application. DNA vaccines based on chimeric antigens and multi-epitope antigens has been demonstrated to improve their immunogenicity [ ]. Chimeric antigen-encoding DNA vaccines can express both heterologous proteins to evade immune tolerance and homologous proteins to stimulate specific immune responses. Multi-epitope antigen-encoding DNA vaccines can express multiple antigens to induce a wide spectrum of antigen specific CD8+ T cell responses to overcome the tumor heterogeneity.
Two mRNA vaccines, Moderna's Spikevax and Pfizer's BNT162b2, have been approved by FDA for COVID-19. With the characteristics of rapid production and effective translation, mRNA vaccines could be a potential platform for personalized cancer vaccine development [ ]. Moderna's lipid-based mRNA vaccine mRNA-2752, in which mRNAs encoding OX40 ligand (OX40L), IL-23, and IL-36γ are co-encapsulated in lipid nanoparticles, is under Phase I evaluation (NCT03739931). The vaccine is combined with a PD-L1 inhibitor durvalumab for advanced solid tumors or lymphomas. Despite numerous advantages of mRNA vaccines, there are several outstanding challenges. mRNA is susceptible to degradation by various nucleases and encapsulation of mRNA within a nanocarrier can significantly reduce its degradation rate. LNPs, known for their high safety and controlled design, facilitate efficient delivery of mRNA, and they are the most widely used nanomaterials for the construction of mRNA tumor vaccines [ ]. The LNP stability in the mRNA-1273 vaccine (Moderna) was achieved via lyophilization optimization and ionizable lipid engineering, and the stability was instrumental for scalable manufacturing and eliciting robust immunogenicity during Phase III trials. Conversely, failures in early-stage RNA nanotherapies (e.g., siRNA-LNPs for solid tumors) are attributed to nanoparticle aggregation, endosomal entrapment, and dysregulated protein corona formation. Furthermore, rational modification of the backbone of mRNA can enhance its stability and improve its translation efficiency [ ]. The 5′ cap, a pivotal component of mRNA, is responsible for recruiting eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E (EIF4E) to initiate the translation process. The CleanCap™ technology enables efficient co-transcriptional capping, improving mRNA integrity during synthesis.
Peptide vaccines are another promising candidate for tumor vaccine development in clinical research [ ]. MUC1 is excessively expressed in a variety of forms on adenomatous polyps and colorectal cancer, and it could be a potential target for constructing peptides-based vaccines [ ]. In a phase II trial (NCT00773097), MUC1 peptides were co-administered with Poly-ICLC as an adjuvant in patients with advanced colorectal adenoma. DSP-7888 containing peptides derived from the Wilms’ tumor 1 (WT1) protein with immunomodulating, and antineoplastic activities is combined with bevacizumab for recurrent or progressive glioblastoma (Phase III, NCT03149003). Next-generation sequencing (NGS) technologies have been extensively employed for precise antigen selection and therapeutic protocol optimization, thus facilitating the development of personalized vaccines. An NGS-based peptide vaccine combined with Montanide ISA-51 VG as an adjuvant is administered via intradermal injection and this vaccine is still in the Early Phase 1 period (NCT04509167). Personalized genomic vaccine 001 (PGV001) is a peptide-based vaccine specifically tailored to the tumor sequence of a patient with advanced non-hematologic malignancies, and PGV001 is combined with the Poly-ICLC adjuvant to enhance immune responses (NCT02721043). To develop the peptide vaccine PGV001, RNA and DNA of the tumor from the patient were first sequenced, and the OpenVax computational pipeline was utilized to identify peptides and predict their binding affinity to MHC class I. 13 patients were enrolled in the phase I trial. Ex vivo ELISPOT analysis of patient blood samples revealed remarkable induction of CD4+/CD8+ T cell responses after administration of ten doses of the PGV001 peptide vaccine [ ]. Furthermore, PGV001, a multipeptide personalized neoantigen vaccine, was combined with Poly-ICLC as an adjuvant and atezolizumab, an anti PD-1 antibody, for urothelial/bladder cancer treatment (NCT03359239). In the Phase I trial, 12 patients with urothelial/bladder cancer were stratified into non-metastatic and metastatic cohorts. Among the non-metastatic subgroup (n = 4), no recurrence was observed, and 2/5 metastatic patients achieved an objective response [ ]. It has been reported that it takes 18–19.9 weeks to prepare personalized neoantigen peptide vaccines [ ], and high cost may impede clinical translation of peptides-based vaccines. Novel and efficient sequencing technologies, artificial intelligence (AI) and machine-learning (ML)-aided neoantigen prediction algorithms, and facile peptides synthetic technologies may accelerate the development process and reduce the cost associated with peptide vaccines.
Cell-based vaccines could be another promising candidate for next generation tumor immunotherapy. They have been extensively clinically studied with distinct anti-tumor effects [ ]. Cell-based vaccines that are undergoing clinical trials are predominantly DC-based vaccines and tumor cell-based vaccines. Inspired by Provenge (sipuleucel-T), an FDA approved DC vaccine for metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer, a few DC vaccines are currently undergoing different phases of clinical trials, and they have demonstrated encouraging results. DCs sourced from monocytes are pulsed with a tumor antigen or mRNA encoding the antigen and injected into patients to induce antigen-specific CD4+/CD8+ T cell responses. For example, autologous DCs pulsed with the tumor lysate antigen, termed as DCVax-L, were combined with nivolumab for patients with glioblastoma (phase Ⅱ, NCT03014804). The anti-tumor efficacy of DCVax-L vaccine for newly diagnosed Glioblastoma (nGBM) patients who have received the standard of care including radiation and temozolomide therapy was assessed in a phase III study (NCT00045968). A total of 331 patients were enrolled in the trial and the overall survival rate of nGBM patients was pronouncedly prolonged compared to the external control patients [ ]. The DC vaccine pulsed with tumor antigen mRNA was explored to treat advanced cancer patients with brain metastases (phase I, NCT02808416).
Tumor cell-derived vaccines, specifically those containing the tumor lysate, are popular due to the rich antigenic information content on tumor cells. In a phase Ⅱ study on the tumor lysate particle only (TLPO) vaccine for solid tumor malignancies (NCT06175221), 250–500 μg of a tumor tissue was used to prepare the tumor lysate (TL) and TL was loaded into yeast-cell wall microparticles with a diameter of 1–5 μm for DC phagocytosis and antigen processing. Besides, tumor cell membranes can also be used to construct vaccines. NV-001, a novel tumor vaccine developed through the hybridization of tumor cell membranes with adjuvant-containing membranes. It could elicit potent anti-tumor immune responses against malignant neoplasms, the vaccine is currently under evaluation in a phase I clinical trial (NCT06051760). The cell-based tumor vaccines necessitate the isolation and ex vivo modification of patient-derived cells (e.g., DCs and tumor cells), resulting in a time-consuming process and substantial financial costs, thereby hindering their scalability. And more attention needs to be focused on critical parameters such as cell viability, antigen-loading efficiency, and immunostimulatory capacity, due to potential heterogeneity across production batches, which compromises the therapeutic reproducibility of cell-based vaccines.

5

## Conclusions and perspectives
Tumor vaccines could open a new avenue for tumor prevention and treatment. In this review, we summarized antigens and adjuvants that have been discovered and applied for tumor vaccine and surveyed biomaterial nanoplatforms for efficient delivery of antigens and adjuvants. We elaborated design principles and application examples of these nanoplatforms including LNPs, polymeric nanoparticles, inorganic nanoparticles, biomimetic nanoparticles, and hydrogels for co-delivery of antigens and adjuvants to targeted tissues to induce antigen-specific immune responses. Clinical trial results of DNA vaccines, mRNA vaccines, peptide vaccines, and cell-based vaccines have confirmed these vaccines could significantly extend the patient survival rate, suggesting that patients with advanced cancer could be benefit from rapid advances in the development of tumor vaccines.
The development of nanotherapeutics, mandated by FDA guidelines, requires a multidisciplinary framework that rigorously integrates physicochemical characterization, preclinical safety assessments, good manufacturing practice (GMP)-compliant manufacturing controls, and clinical validation to ensure therapeutic efficacy and patient safety, which underpin the advancing field of tumor vaccines. Despite encouraging results in preclinical and clinical studies on tumor vaccines, the following areas remained to be addressed ( ).(1)Antigen predication: Antigens selection is an essential process in designing cancer vaccines. Clinical screening of tumor neoantigens to identify immunogenic targets for personalized immunotherapy could be efficient through multidisciplinary collaboration through systematical integration of genomic profiling, computational immunology, and functional validation. Tumor-normal paired whole-exome sequencing (WES) and RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) are initially performed to detect somatic mutations (e.g., nonsynonymous single-nucleotide variants, indels) and fusion events, while high-resolution HLA genotyping defines patient-specific MHC class I/II alleles to guide epitope restriction. Bioinformatics pipelines can filter mutations for tumor specificity by excluding germline variants via public databases like dbSNP and prioritize those with functional relevance using annotation tools such as ANNOVAR. Predicted neoantigens are subsequently evaluated through a multi-tiered computational framework: the MHC binding affinity is quantified using algorithms like NetMHCpan 4.0 or MHCflurry; the proteasomal processing efficiency is modeled via NetChop 3.0, and the TCR-pMHC interaction probabilities are estimated via machine learning platforms such as pMTnet or PRIME 2.0 [ , ]. Neoantigens are primarily derived from two distinct origins: (i) non-synonymous somatic mutations in malignant cells and (ii) viral oncoproteins expressed during persistent infection. The mutational landscape of cancer genomes is predominantly shaped by four classes of genomic alterations: single nucleotide variants (SNVs), small insertions/deletions, chromosomal rearrangements generating from fusion transcripts, and alternative splicing aberrations. Mitochondrial genome mutations are an emerging fifth category of mutations in tumors. The antigen predictors often identify the neoantigens from SNVs, and numerous neoantigens in other categories remain to be characterized or discovered [ , ]. Furthermore, while mainstream computer simulation models are primarily oriented towards predicting the binding affinity between neoantigens and MHC molecules, other crucial factors such as antigen cleavage in proteasomes and peptide transportation are often neglected. Therefore, comprehensive predictors that take essential factors for tumor antigen predictions into consideration should be constructed.
(2)Development of safety and efficient adjuvants: The clinical translation of these therapies remains hindered by a critical bottleneck: the scarcity of safe, efficient, and adaptable adjuvants. Current clinical trials predominantly rely on Poly-ICLC as the primary adjuvant, indicating that the stark paucity of alternatives and novel adjuvants remain to be discovered for tumor vaccines. The cGAS-STING agonist could be a promising candidate for adjuvants in clinical applications [ ]. Synergizes computational prediction, biochemical validation, and translational optimization may be an admissible approach to discovery of high-efficacy STING agonists. Initial screening employs molecular docking against STING structures (e.g., PDB:4LOH) and machine learning models to prioritize compounds with high CDN-pocket affinity and optimal ADMET (A: absorption; D: distribution; M: metabolism; E: excretion; T: toxicity) profiles. Subsequently, biochemical and cell-based high-throughput screening (HTS) employs STING-dependent luciferase reporter assays in engineered HEK293T or THP-1 cells, fluorescence polarization competition assays with labeled CDN, and phenotypic cytokine profiling in primary immune cells to quantify interferon pathway activation and ligand binding kinetics. Functional validation progresses to in vitro co-culture systems assessing T cell priming and tumor cytotoxicity, followed by in vivo testing in syngeneic tumor models. Clinical translation requires cross-species reactivity validation, formulation stability, and toxicity screening using humanized organoids.
(3)Modulation of the immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment: The solid tumor microenvironment has a detrimental effect on the efficacy of tumor vaccines. Tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs, CD206+) and Tregs (Foxp3+CTLA-4+) can secrete cytokines, such as IL-10 and transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β), to impair DC-mediated antigen presentation [ , ]. The impairment of antigen presentation induced by TSAs or TAAs in tumor vaccines results in a low efficiency in activating CD8+/CD4+ T cells. Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs, CD11b+Gr1+) can deplete microenvironmental arginine through arginase-1 (Arg1), thereby inhibiting the mTOR pathway in T cells and inducing functional anergy [ , , ]. Neutrophils exhibit context-dependent effects in tumor progression, and they orchestrate stage-specific modulation of the tumor microenvironment. N1-polarization induces ROS/TNF-α-mediated early apoptosis, while N2-polarization drives MMP-9/VEGF-dependent angiogenesis and immunosuppression via TGF-β/STAT3 signaling [ ]. Cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs), the most abundant stromal cells within the tumor microenvironment, contribute to physical barriers through CXCL12 secretion and extracellular matrix component synthesis to obstruct T cell infiltration [ ]. Non-cellular constituents, particularly the extracellular matrix (ECM), regulate tumor progression via mechanobiological remodeling [ ]. The ECM-comprising collagen, fibronectin, elastin, and laminin-forms a fibrotic barrier to block CTL infiltration while driving metastasis through integrin/FAK mechanotransduction and structural heterogeneity-mediated apoptotic resistance [ , ]. Consequently, deciphering the multidimensional immunosuppressive network within the tumor microenvironment and developing precisely targeted combination therapies are pivotal strategies for optimizing the efficacy of cancer vaccines.
(4)A balance in complicated nanoplatform design and clinical translation. Challenges of translating multifunctional nanovaccines into clinical trials could be relieved by carefully balancing between structural sophistication and manufacturing feasibility. Multifunctional integration (e.g., co-delivery of antigen/adjuvant with immune checkpoint modulators) in tumor nanovaccines requires a multi-stage GMP-compliant manufacturing process. The manufacture process complexity inevitably leads to 1) an exponential cost escalation, 2) chromatographic purification challenges of removing impurities, and 3) batch-batch variations [ , ]. Manufacturing scalability of lipid-based systems, exemplified by the Moderna's clinically validated mRNA-1273 platform, has been demonstrated through precise microfluidic synthesis and lyophilization stabilization, while persistent GMP hurdles including lipid purity thresholds and cold chain logistics should be surmounted. By contrast, inorganic carriers like MSNs exhibit superior thermal resilience and ambient storage stability, but they are produced from energy-intensive solvothermal synthesis and the product may contain cytotoxic leaching residues. Emerging approaches, such as modular nanoparticle architectures and AI-driven Quality by Design (QbD) platforms, could be employed to minimize batch-to-batch variations [ ]. This paradigm-shifting approach enables systematic deconvolution of the structural complexity-clinical translatability matrix, thus predictive algorithms could be established to balance the immunological multifunctionality with the pharmaceutical manufacturability in next-generation cancer vaccine development.
 
Rapid advances in tumor immunotherapy, coupled with breakthroughs in RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq), AI/ML-driven neoantigen prediction, nanomaterial synthesis, analytical characterization, and tumor microenvironment profiling, have driven a paradigm shift of cancer vaccine development toward personalized immunotherapy. By leveraging patient-specific genetic and immunogenic signatures, personalized tumor vaccines enable precise activation of tumor-reactive T cells while mitigating immune tolerance, underscoring a transformative framework in precision oncology. These tumor vaccines are dynamically optimized to align with the evolving genomic and immunological landscapes of individual patients, thereby converting transient therapeutic responses into sustained clinical remissions. Collectively, tumor vaccines tailored to individual cancer patients could be developed with enhanced efficacy and biosafety profiles.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement
Zhilin Li: Writing – original draft, Visualization, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Hongbin Zhang: Supervision. Qiyong Gong: Supervision. Kui Luo: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Funding acquisition.

## Ethics approval and consent to participate
The manuscript is a review article. The authors declare no experimentation on human or animals were designed.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

 

## Acknowledgments
This work was supported by 10.13039/501100001809National Natural Science Foundation of China (32401125, 32271445), Yunnan Fundamental Research Project (202501CF070064), Scientific Research Fund of 10.13039/501100007846Yunnan Provincial Department of Education (2024J0008), Ling-Jun and Yun-Ling Scholars of Yunnan Province (202005AB160003), 10.13039/501100004829Department of Science and Technology of Sichuan Province (2024NSFJQ0050), the 10.13039/501100012166National Key Research and Development Program of China (2023YFB3810004).
Peer review under the responsibility of editorial board of Bioactive Materials.