822acssdMolecular PharmaceuticsMol PharmPMC1054847410548474105484743772138710.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.3c00330Controlling
Antigen Fate in Therapeutic Cancer Vaccines
by Targeting Dendritic Cell Receptors
WijfjesZacharias van DalenFloris J Le GallCamille M VerdoesMartijn †Chemical
Immunology group, Department of Medical BioSciences, Radboud University Medical Center, Geert Grooteplein Zuid 28, 6525 GA Nijmegen, The Netherlands‡Institute
for Chemical Immunology, Geert Grooteplein Zuid 28, 6525 GA Nijmegen, The Netherlands*Email: Martijn.Verdoes@radboudumc.nl.
*Email: Camille.LeGall@childrens.harvard.edu.
1892023201048264826–48475102023© 2023 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

## Abstract
 Antigen-presenting cells (APCs) orchestrate immune responses
and
are therefore of interest for the targeted delivery of therapeutic
vaccines. Dendritic cells (DCs) are professional APCs that excel in
presentation of exogenous antigens toward CD4+ T helper
cells, as well as cytotoxic CD8+ T cells. DCs are highly
heterogeneous and can be divided into subpopulations that differ in
abundance, function, and phenotype, such as differential expression
of endocytic receptor molecules. It is firmly established that targeting
antigens to DC receptors enhances the efficacy of therapeutic vaccines.
While most studies emphasize the importance of targeting a specific
DC subset, we argue that the differential intracellular routing downstream
of the targeted receptors within the DC subset should also be considered.
Here, we review the mouse and human receptors studied as target for
therapeutic vaccines, focusing on antibody and ligand conjugates and
how their targeting affects antigen presentation. We aim to delineate
how targeting distinct receptors affects antigen presentation and
vaccine efficacy, which will guide target selection for future therapeutic
vaccine development.
Keywords: cancer vaccine, immunotherapy, cross-presentation, dendritic cells, endocytic receptor

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2023 Apr 17; Accepted 2023 Sep 7; Revised 2023 Sep 5; Collection date 2023 Oct 2.

1.

## Introduction to Vaccines
Vaccines are
immunological tools to boost the immune system of
the recipient. The aim of prophylactic vaccination is to generate
immunological memory after exposure to an antigenic challenge. Vaccines
drastically improved global healthcare playing a crucial role in the
eradication of smallpox and rinderpest, and controlling many other
pathogenic diseases. , In principle, a vaccine contains
two fundamental components: antigens to confer specificity and adjuvants
to induce antigen-presenting cell (APC) maturation and immunity.
APCs are key regulators of adaptive immunity. APCs take up and
process antigens into epitopes that are presented via major histocompatibility
complexes (MHCs). They express pathogen recognition receptors (PRRs)
to discriminate between harmless and hazardous antigens. Engagement of PRRs such as toll-like receptors
(TLRs), by damage associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) or pathogen
associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) leads to APC maturation. Mature
APCs downregulate antigen uptake, while enhancing antigen preservation
and presentation on MHC. Moreover, APC
maturation causes an increase in the expression levels of costimulatory
molecules such as CD40, CD80 (B7–1), or CD86 (B7–2)
and an inflammatory cytokine profile characterized by IL-2, IL-12,
and IFN-γ. − In this state, APCs license B cells, CD4+ T cells, and CD8+ T cells to induce an immune response
against the presented antigen. Antigen uptake without engagement of
PRRs causes the APC to present the antigen in an immature state, which
can induce anergy in reactive CD4+ or CD8+ T
cells or activate peripherally induced regulatory T cells (iTregs). Among APCs, dendritic cells (DCs) are considered
the most specialized in antigen processing and presentation.
Researchers are investigating therapeutic vaccination strategies
with the goal to replicate the success of prophylactic vaccines. − Therapeutic cancer vaccines aim to induce or reactivate adaptive
immune responses toward an established tumor. They are highly promising
in the field of cancer immunotherapy, because they can induce antigen-specific
memory responses that could prevent cancer relapse by maintaining
long-term immune surveillance against cancer cells. The initial response
of cancer vaccines is directed against a restricted set of antigens
present in the vaccine. This can be either tumor-associated antigens
(TAAs) or tumor-specific antigens (TSAs). TAAs are commonly overexpressed
or aberrantly expressed proteins on tumors, for instance, glycoprotein
100 (gp100) or tyrosine related protein-2 (TRP-2). As TAAs are often
shared across patients and cancer types, their incorporation in vaccines
could benefit a larger group of patients and ease the manufacturing
process. However, their efficacy is threatened by pre-existing central
and peripheral tolerance, which could limit their immunogenicity.
In contrast, TSAs originating from, for example, point or frame shift
mutations are highly immunogenic. Since TSAs are unique to each patient,
a personalized approach is necessary for their identification and
production of the vaccine. This presents a manufacturing challenge.
Second, tumors develop an immunosuppressive microenvironment, which
could induce peripheral tolerance toward TSAs in the absence of strong
immunostimulatory agents to drive the immune response. After the initial
tumor cell killing by effector immune cells, other tumor antigens
are released to induce epitope spreading. This can expand the range
of tumor antigens recognized by the immune system and improves responses
against the tumor. 
Two main strategies
exist in therapeutic vaccination focused on
antigen presentation by DCs: 1) Ex vivo DC therapy consists of activating
and loading patient-derived DCs ex vivo and the subsequent transfusion
of the matured DCs into the patient. 2) In vivo cancer vaccination
depends on targeted delivery of antigens and immunostimulatory adjuvants
to DCs in vivo. Subsequently, the trained DCs will activate antigen-specific
responses via CD8+ cytotoxic and CD4+ helper
T cells to elicit antitumoral immunity. The following paragraphs introduce these vaccination strategies
and their associated advantages.
Ex vivo DC therapy relies on
differentiating and maturing patient-derived
DCs or DC progenitors ex vivo while pulsing them with tumor lysate
or antigens. Tumor-primed DCs are transfused back in the patient and
can migrate to the lymph nodes where they prime tumor-specific T cells. Most studies have relied on monocyte-derived
DCs (moDCs), which are easily generated in large numbers. After over
two decades of evaluation, it is evident that patients almost always
respond to the cell therapy by generating vaccine-specific T cells
but only show modest clinical benefits. − A recent murine study
demonstrated that host DCs are essential for T cell priming after
vaccination with ex vivo loaded moDCs. It is theorized that most transfused
moDCs cannot migrate to lymph nodes and die upon injection. Upon cell
death, they release their tumor antigens to host DCs instead of priming
T cells themselves. This suggests that moDCs are not the optimal choice
for ex vivo DC therapies. , Clinical studies have
recently shown that the use of naturally present DCs outperforms moDCs. Additionally, it was demonstrated that ex vivo
loaded type 1 conventional DCs (DC1s), but not type 2 conventional
DCs (cDC2s) or moDCs, can drive tumor rejection in mice independently
of host DCs. As such, DC1-based ex vivo
DC therapy has an increased potential to function as cancer therapy. , While DC1s are scarce in peripheral blood (<0.05% of PBMCs),
technical advances such as cell reprogramming or differentiation from
stem cells to generate larger numbers of functional DC1s will allow
clinical studies utilizing autologous DC1s. − 
In vivo
cancer vaccines deliver antigenic epitopes to APCs to elicit
antitumor immunity ( a). This can be promoted by targeting APC surface molecules.
TAAs or TSAs can be delivered as full proteins, peptides, or antigen-encoding
nucleotides. Immunostimulatory adjuvants
can be administered systemically or incorporated into the vaccine. − Moreover, the antigen itself can be intrinsically immunostimulatory,
such as antigen-encoding DNA or mRNA, that can bind to TLRs 3, 7,
8 or 9. The manufacturing of in vivo
vaccines is relatively affordable and scalable and does not require
the isolation and culturing of DCs from the patient. This could result
in readily available off-the-shelf therapies and is a major advantage
in comparison to ex vivo DC therapy. Several
in vivo cancer vaccines are currently in clinical trials. NEO-PV-1
is a neoantigen peptide-based vaccine adjuvanted with poly-ICLC, which
was demonstrated to be safe in a phase I study. Combination of NEO-PV-1 with nivolumab, an anti-PD-L1 immune
checkpoint inhibitor, increased T cell reactivity and epitope spreading
in a phase Ib study. Lipo-MERIT (BNT111,
FixVac) and mRNA-4157 are mRNA-formulated tumor antigens encapsulated
in liposomes. These mRNA/liposomes assemblies have demonstrated an
acceptable safety profile, with promising immunological and clinical
responses in phase I/II trials. − Human papillomavirus-16 (HPV-16)-derived
synthetic long peptides conjugated to Amplivant, a synthetic TLR2
agonist, were administered intradermally in a phase I study. This
vaccine was capable of inducing T cell responses as measured by IFN-γ
ELISpot assays. In this trial, most patients
developed CD4+ T cell responses, while CD8+ T
cell responses were observed less frequently. These recent trials
showed promising results, yet none of these vaccines actively target
APCs. This while the nonspecific uptake of these vaccines by other
cells could decrease their effectiveness and could potentially cause
harmful off-target responses.
 DCs are ideal candidates for targeted vaccine
delivery. Pioneering
studies by Steinman and colleagues showed that selective delivery
of antigens to DCs improves T cell priming. , These results have been confirmed by a myriad of follow-up studies,
which reinforces that targeting antigens toward DCs improves antigen
presentation, adaptive immune responses and tumor rejection. , DCs can engage CD4+ T helper cells as well as cytotoxic
CD8+ T cells, both of which are required to induce long
lasting antitumor immune responses. , 
DCs
display a large array of specialized surface receptors functioning
as pathogen sensors. Downstream signaling of these receptors culminates
in an immune response mechanistically biased to the elimination of
the given pathogen. Sensing of viruses results in type I interferon
release, which promotes cross-presentation and induces a CD8+ T cell-bias. Detection of bacteria
or helminths induces a Th1- or Th2-bias, respectively. It may be possible
to exploit these biases by selecting specific DC surface receptors
to control the immune responses generated by vaccination. In line
with this, preclinical studies have reported different immunological
and clinical outcomes when comparing DC surface markers as vaccine
target. This holds true for receptors expressed by distinct DC subpopulations
and also for receptors expressed by the same DC subpopulation. − 
Selecting specific cell surface targets can enhance the effectiveness
of therapeutic vaccines by determining the subpopulation of DCs targeted,
affecting the endosomal routing and antigen fate, and ultimately steering
the immune response ( b). , Decoupling the influence of the
DC subset from that of the cell surface receptor is difficult, and
few comparative studies have set out to investigate this issue. In
this Review, we aim to delineate the impact of target receptor choice
on the efficacy of DC-targeted therapeutic vaccines, in a perspective
focused on endosomal routing inherent to the receptor. We set out
to compare the effects of antibody and ligand conjugates on antigen
presentation and immune response, particularly in the context of cancer
vaccines. Ultimately, we aim to guide the target selection for the
development of therapeutic cancer vaccines.

2.

## General Considerations on Immune Cells Involved
in Therapeutic Vaccines and Antigen Processing Pathways
2.1.

## Types of Immune Cells Induced by Therapeutic
Vaccines
2.1.1.

## Dendritic Cells
DCs can be divided
into several subpopulations: plasmacytoid DCs (pDCs) are involved
in antiviral immunity via secretion of type I and type III interferons; DC1s are known to preferentially induce CD8+ T cell mediated immune responses but also can induce CD4+ T cells, such as T helper type 1 (Th1); , DC2s represent 90% of the conventional DCs (cDCs) and excel in the
induction of CD4+ T cells; , DC3s, macrophages,
and Langerhans cells can also scavenge antigens. DC3s have only recently been described as separate subset
and are mainly considered to be immunosuppressive. In such, they might hamper the efficacy of vaccines that
target DC subsets with an overlapping receptor expression. As discussed above, moDCs are DC-like cells
often used as in vitro models in DC biology, but they are also present
in circulation during the course of inflammation. The unique expression
profile of receptors on DC subpopulations enables targeting of specific
subtypes with specialized properties and determines the encountered
endocytic pathway ( ). This offers an opportunity to steer the immune system toward
the desired response.
 
2.1.2.

## CD8+ T Cells
MHC I restricted
T cell responses have received the most attention in cancer vaccine
design. CD8+ T cells can lyse tumor cells directly by releasing
cytotoxic granules or by inducing apoptosis via the Fas/FasL pathway. Incorporation of CD8+ T cell-specific
epitopes in cancer vaccines is feasible. Epitopes are well described
for the most common TAAs in multiple MHC subclasses, and algorithms
have been developed to predict putative MHC I epitopes originating
from TSAs. Either a too strong or too weak antigenic stimulation during
the initial priming can drive CD8+ T cell dysfunction and
lack of tumor control. The potential
impact of the strength of TCR stimuli on CD8+ T cell responses
is currently not understood fully.

2.1.3.

## CD4+ T Cells
CD4+ T helper cells provide support to other immune cells during
priming and activation by producing large amounts of immunostimulatory
cytokines. In the context of antitumor responses, CD4+ T
cells license DCs and improve priming of CD8+ T cells, whereas CD8+ T cell priming in absence
of CD4+ T cells leads to T cell exhaustion. Moreover, CD4+ T cells support B
cell development and affinity maturation. CD4+ T cells
have repeatedly been shown to be crucial for antitumor responses. , Results of a trial using peptides selected to encompass MHC I TSAs
adjuvanted with poly-ICLC noted that most patients mounted TSA-specific
CD4+ T cells responses instead of the expected CD8+ T cell responses. , We suggest that the
predisposition of CD4+ T cells to respond to tumors should
be harnessed by including MHC II epitopes in vaccination strategies. However, MHC II epitopes are often insufficiently
characterized for TAAs. Algorithms to identify TSA-derived MHC II
epitopes are not as accurate due to less stringent factors determining
the binding of MHC II epitopes in comparison with MHC I epitopes.
To bypass the need to identify MHC II epitopes, Sahin and colleagues
have postulated that point mutations are intrinsically immunogenic
and aimed to generate a diverse pool of epitope variants by placing
mutations strategically within epitopes. , Yet, the elimination of MHC II-deficient tumors is still dependent
on CD4+ T cells. These findings
indicate that CD4+ T cells may not necessarily need to
recognize tumor-specific antigens. Instead,
pre-existing memory CD4+ T cells directed against universal
epitopes, such as those found in diphtheria and tetanus, might provide
the necessary support to the immune system. Therefore, the inclusion
of universal epitopes in cancer vaccines could enhance antitumoral
effectiveness while simplifying the manufacturing process.

2.1.4.

## B Cells
It remains elusive whether
humoral immunity to cancer antigens is important for antitumor responses.
In principle, antibodies can recognize antigens aberrantly expressed
by tumor cells and mediate antibody-dependent cytotoxicity by natural
killer (NK) cells or phagocytosis by macrophages. Tumor-reactive antibodies
also promote antigen uptake by DCs via immune complexes and broaden
the tumor-reactive T cell repertoire. , Nevertheless,
humoral immunity is often overlooked in cancer vaccination strategies
as well as the antigen-presenting capacity of B cells.

2.2.

## Antigen Cross-Presentation
Antigenic
epitopes are present to T cells on DC surfaces via MHC molecules.
In principle, exogenous antigens are presented via MHC II to CD4+ T cells, whereas endogenous antigens are presented via MHC
I to CD8+ T cells. Yet, exogenous
antigens can be presented on MHC I, a process referred to as cross-presentation
(XP). − XP is crucial to inducing a cytotoxic immune response
against virally infected or malignant cells. In particular DC1s excel
at XP and subsequent induction of cytotoxic immune responses. The current paradigm proposes two main pathways
for XP ( ).
 2.2.1.

## Endosome-to-Cytosol Cross-Presentation
The endosome-to-cytosol pathway describes the escape of antigens
from endocytic compartments to the cytosol, their processing by the
proteasome, and the transport to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) or
endosomes, where epitopes are loaded onto MHC I. Antigen escape can
be passive, following membrane lipid peroxidation induced by NOX2; or active, via endosome transporter proteins
(ETPs) such as Sec61, Derlin-1, and HRD1. − Sec22b likely
regulates antigen transport by ETPs. After
they escape the endocytic compartment, antigens are processed by the
ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS), an elaborate catalytic machinery
able to efficiently hydrolyze cytosolic and nuclear proteins. Antigenic
peptides released by the proteasome are translocated to the ER or
endosomes by the transporter associated with antigen processing (TAP).
The endosome-to-cytosol pathway strictly requires TAP activity. , In the ER or endosomes, antigenic epitopes are loaded onto MHC I
and transported via the Golgi apparatus to the cell surface.

2.2.2.

## Vacuolar Cross-Presentation
The
vacuolar pathway is TAP- and proteasome-independent. In this second main XP pathway, antigen processing and
epitope loading take place directly inside early endosomes. Cathepsin
S is presumably largely responsible for the antigen processing, as
its inhibition leads to major deficiencies in the vacuolar pathway. MHC I is transported to endosomes in vesicles
originating from the ER under regulation of CD74, or via endosomal
recycling compartments (ERCs) under control of Rab11a and SNAP23. , The recruitment of MHC I from the ERCs is TLR-dependent, and promoted
by the simultaneous presence of TLR stimulating signals and antigens
inside individual phagosomes. − This is thought to be a mechanism
to transiently enhance XP in response to an antigenic threat.

3.

## Promoting Antigen Presentation on MHC I to Induce
Cytotoxic Immunity
In the next sections, we introduce receptors
described to target
therapeutic vaccines to DCs. For each receptor, we highlight what
has been reported in murine and human studies and briefly summarize
the influence of targeting this receptor on the downstream response.
3.1.

## DEC205
DEC205 (CD205, LY75, Clec13b)
binds keratin at slightly acidic pH to recognize apoptotic or necrotic
cell debris. − DEC205 can mediate the internalization and trafficking
to late endosomes/lysosomes of CpG oligonucleotides promoting TLR9
signaling. In the mouse, DEC205 is expressed
mainly by CD8+ DCs (DC1s). In humans, besides its expression
on DC1s, DEC205 is also expressed at low levels on DC2s and pDCs,
and in high levels on epithelial cells ( ). , In a pioneering work,
Steinman and colleagues targeted antigens to DEC205 and established
that delivering antigens specifically to DCs could enhance antigen-specific
T cell responses and improve the therapeutic window. , 
3.1.1.

## DEC205–Mouse
Targeting of
mouse DEC205 is extensively described in literature. In Steinman’s
initial studies, ovalbumin (OVA) protein was chemically conjugated
to the anti-DEC205 monoclonal antibody (mAb). Conjugation of OVA to
anti-DEC205 increased CD8+ T cell responses over 1000-fold,
and CD4+ T cell responses are over 50-fold compared to
soluble OVA. Co-administration of immunostimulatory
anti-CD40 mAb was shown to be crucial for tumor rejection and prevented
the induction of tolerance. These promising
results encouraged further study of the DEC205 receptor: Many studies
have reported enhanced XP of TAAs (gp100, HER2/neu, mesothelin) and
strong CD8+ T cell responses upon targeting DEC205. − Antigens targeted to DEC205 mainly accumulated in late endosomes,
which should bias antigen processing toward proteolysis, MHC II presentation,
and CD4+ T cell activation. MHC II antigen presentation was not increased as much as XP. We
attribute the enhanced CD8+ T cell activation to the combination
of DEC205-mediated intracellular trafficking with an increased antigen
uptake by DC1s, which upregulate Tap1/2 and Sec61 thereby promoting
the endosome-to-cytosol XP pathway. , 

3.1.2.

## DEC205–Human
The broad expression
profile of DEC205 in human cells complicates interspecies comparison. The first in-human targeted cancer vaccine consisted
of an anti-DEC205 mAb fused to the cancer testis antigen NY-ESO-1
adjuvanted with coadministered poly-I:C (CDX-1401). Its clinical evaluation
in phase I and II trials demonstrated a favorable safety profile and
moderate CD4+ and CD8+ T cell responses without
induction of Tregs. , Pretreatment with systemic fms-like
tyrosine kinase 3 ligand (Flt3l) 1 week before CDX-1401 administration
increased the abundance of DCs prior to vaccination and improved T
cell responses to CDX-1401. This preliminary
study did not examine the specific contribution of different DC subsets
to T cell activation. In a different study, PBMCs isolated from NY-ESO-1-expressing
cancer patients were treated with anti-DEC205 or anti-CD206 mAbs fused
to NY-ESO-1. While receptor targeting
improved expansion of antigen specific CD4+ and CD8+ T cells in vitro, no significant differences in targeting
DEC205 or CD206 were observed. Targeting influenza peptide to isolated
human DC1s in vitro via DEC205 resulted in lower levels of XP in comparison
with targeting to CD40 and CD11c, both known to direct antigens to
early endosomes. Strikingly, early endosomal targeting resulted in
comparable levels of XP in DC1s and DC2s. This emphasizes the importance
of taking into account antigen routing to optimize processing in cancer
vaccines. In total, ten clinical trials
using CDX-1401 have been initiated ( ). These pioneering trials in DEC205-targeted
antigen delivery could provide valuable insight into the translation
of targeted vaccines. Yet, targeting human DEC205 might not be as
effective at inducing antigen XP and subsequent CD8+ T
cell activation due to routing to late endosomes. Moreover, the broad
expression profile of DEC205 in myeloid and nonmyeloid human cells
may result in undesirable off-targeting and could decrease the efficacy
of DEC205 targeted vaccines in vivo.
 

3.2.

## Clec9a
Clec9a (DNGR-1, CD370) recognizes
actin exposed to damaged cells. It binds filamentous actin in complex
with cytoskeletal proteins and signals through the Syk-cascade. Clec9a is selectively expressed on DC1s in
mouse and human ( ). Clec9a and DEC205 differ in their
intracellular routing. In an in vitro study, fluorescently labeled
anti-DEC205 mAbs but not anti-Clec9a mAbs colocalized with lysotracker.
Instead, anti-Clec9a colocalized with necrotic cell material away
from lysosomes. In addition, engagement
of Clec9a signals for phagosomal rupture, resulting in antigen escape
into the cytosol, which, in turn, enhances XP. These features make
Clec9a a compelling target to promote XP.
3.2.1.

## Clec9a–Mouse
In B6 mice,
delivery of CD8+ and CD4+ T cell epitopes to
DC1s using anti-Clec9a mAb results in enhanced XP and MHC II presentation,
respectively, in comparison with untargeted controls. , In CB6.F1 mice, HIV gag-p24 peptide targeted to either Clec9a or
DEC205 resulted in similar CD8+ T cell proliferation and
comparable IFN-γ levels in an restimulation assay. Targeting antigens with CBP12, a 12-mer peptide
specific to Clec9a, also demonstrated enhanced XP and increased specific
T cell responses. , CBP12-mediated delivery of the
peptides of the peptides of the OVA257–264 and gp100
under adjuvant-free conditions demonstrated potent antitumor responses
in anti-PD1-resistant B16-OVA and B16 melanoma, respectively. Mechanistically,
the authors demonstrated that CBP12 binding triggered IL-21 signaling,
which was crucial for vaccine activity. Targeting Clec9a with mAb-OVA
fusion constructs increased XP in comparison with Clec12a targeting.
Targeting Clec9a significantly enhanced humoral responses compared
to DEC205 and Clec12a, even in adjuvant-free conditions. Altogether, this indicates that Clec9a is a
promising target for the delivery of antigen to murine DC1s.

3.2.2.

## Clec9a–Human
CLEC9a has
restricted expression on human DC1s, unlike DEC205. Viral antigen
(pp65), NY-ESO-1 polypeptide, or Wilms’ tumor 1 antigen delivery
to Clec9a or DEC205 was compared using human PBMCs. − Naïve and memory CD8+ T cell activation was enhanced
upon antigen delivery to Clec9a compared with DEC205. Yet, in humanized
NSG-A2 mice, equally potent XP of pp65 was observed for both targets. Unlike humans, NSG mice express do not express
DEC205 on nonlymphatic endothelial cells. The authors speculate that
this leads to a higher persistence of anti-hDEC205 mAb in NSG mice
than is expected in humans, effectively increasing the specificity
of anti-hDEC205 to DC1s. Due to the highly specific expression profile
of Clec9a on human DC1s, it is expected that a Clec9a-targeted vaccine
will demonstrate an increased activity compared to DEC205 in a clinical
setting. 

3.3.

## XCR1
X-C motif chemokine receptor
1 (XCR1, GPR5) mediates chemoattraction toward lymphotactin (XCL1),
a chemokine secreted by activated T cells and NK cells. , This interaction promotes antigen uptake in inflammation sites and
interaction with CD8+ T cells. Similar to Clec9a, XCR1 expression is restricted to DC1s ( ). , , Because of the lack of publicly
available mAbs against human XCR1, studies on XCR1 have been limited
to XCL1-mediated targeting.
3.3.1.

## XCR1–Mouse
XCL1 fused to
OVA or influenza antigens induces strong CD8+ T cell cytotoxicity
in B6 mice. , Fossum and colleagues performed
a thorough comparative study of XCR1, Clec9a and DEC205 as potential
DC1 vaccine targets. Immunization with
plasmid DNA encoding XCR1 or Clec9a targeted hemagglutinin (HA) protected
mice in a lethal viral challenge, whereas DEC205 targeted HA did not.
Clec9a and DEC205 were targeted by nanobodies, whereas XCR1 was targeted
via XCL1. The strongest immune responses were noted for XCR1, irrespective
of the antigen or the mouse strain. This study is one of the few that
compared the activities of vaccines targeting receptors specifically
expressed by the same DC subpopulation. Future studies should confirm
whether this also holds true for protein-based immunization and investigate
the influence of the adjuvant. Taken together, these results emphasize
that intrinsic factors of receptors, such as expression levels and
endosomal routing, influence antigen presentation and subsequent T
cell activation.

3.3.2.

## XCR1–Human
XCL1–antigen
fusions induced stronger antigen XP in comparison with free antigen
or vehicle control in human PBMCs. − Human XCL1–antigen
fusions conserved its targeting ability in vivo, as confirmed in transgenic
mice expressing human XCR1, and induces potent CD8+ T cell
activation. Moreover, XCL1-NY-ESO-1-peptide-PEG5k constructs retained their activity as DC1 chemoattractant,
which could potentiate DC1 activation and XP by attracting DC1s toward
the injection site. In summary, XCL1
has chemotactic properties and retains its DC1-specific targeting
capability upon C-terminal modification. Further engineering of XCL1
constructs to increase its affinity, stability and agonistic activity
could yield optimized targeting agents to explore in a therapeutic
setting. , 

3.4.

## CD169
The sialic acid binding immunoglobulin-type
lectin 1 (SIGLEC-1, Sn, CD169) is involved in uptake and presentation
of dead cell-associated antigens, including tumor antigens. CD169 is expressed on a subpopulation of macrophages
located in the marginal zone of the spleen and the lymphatic sinuses
of secondary lymph nodes. This strategic location allows CD169+ macrophages to filter and capture circulating antigens, pathogens
or cellular debris. CD169+ macrophages act as an antigen reservoir for the splenic and sinusoidal
resident lymphohematopoietic systems by retaining and releasing these
antigens gradually. CD169 itself mediates antigen transfer to DCs,
and especially DC1s, by binding to sialic acid containing glycans
on the surface of DCs. 
3.4.1.

## CD169–Mouse
Targeted delivery
using anti-CD169 or CD169-specific ligands conjugated to TAA peptides
resulted in antitumor responses in B6 mice. , Mice that lack DCs but not CD169+ macrophages were as
capable as WT mice at priming CD8+ T cells upon CD169-mediated
delivery of OVA peptide. In a more physiological
setup, CD169+ macrophages transferred antigens to DC1s
to promote cross-priming of CD8+ T cells in vivo. This plausible mechanism may be exploited to
improve the XP in targeted therapeutic vaccines.

3.4.2.

## CD169–Human
Antigen delivery
to CD169 resulted in a slower uptake compared to antigen delivery
to DC-SIGN in moDCs. This correlated
with murine data and hints toward a pathway favoring antigen retention
for transfer to DC1s. Delivery of the
tumor antigens gp100 and WT1 using anti-CD169 resulted in specific
CD8+ T cell expansion possibly mediated through cross-talk
between CD169+ macrophages and DC1s. Sialic acid covered liposomes were shown to induce antigen-specific
CD8+ T cell activation and proliferation in human PBMCs. Targeting CD169+ macrophages could
be an efficient way of indirectly targeting the relatively low number
of DC1s by harnessing the higher prevalence of CD169+ macrophages
and their capacity to retain antigens.

3.5.

## CD206
CD206 (MR, MCR1, MMR) is involved
in numerous processes such as cellular activation, clearance of glycosylated
molecules, promotion of antigen presentation, cell trafficking and
collagen internalization. CD206 binds
to mannose, fucose, and N-acetylglucosamine, but
it is especially known for its high affinity for multivalent oligosaccharides. In DCs, soluble antigen uptake by CD206 leads
to transport to early endosomes, which increases XP via the vacuolar
pathway. , 
3.5.1.

## CD206–Mouse
CD206 appears
to be involved in the uptake of soluble antigens by DCs. Mannan, an
inhibitor of CD206-mediated endocytosis, completely blocked uptake
of soluble OVA in mouse bone marrow-derived DCs (BMDCs) but not of
cell-associated OVA. In line with this, OVA-specific CD8+ OT-I cells activation upon vaccination with OVA was hampered in
CD206–/– B6 mice. This finding prompted a study on trafficking and processing of OVA
in BMDCs of WT or CD206–/– B6 mice. MHC II antigen presentation of the CD4-epitope
was unaltered in CD206–/– BMDCs, whereas
XP of the CD8-epitope was strongly reduced in CD206–/– BMDCs, as measured by OT-II and OT-I cell proliferation, respectively.
Microscopy revealed that CD206-mediated uptake delivered antigens
toward early endosomes and away from lysosomes, thus facilitating
antigen preservation and XP. Mannosylation of antigenic peptides enhanced
XP in B6 mice and resulted in stronger T cell proliferation compared
to nonmannosylated peptides. This was
not observed in CD206–/– B6 mice, indicating
a functional dependency on CD206.

3.5.2.

## CD206–Human
Human chorionic
gonadotropin β (hCG-β) is a TAA that is expressed in epithelial
cancers. The targeted cancer vaccine CDX-1307, anti-CD206 mAb fused
to hCG-β, demonstrated tolerable safety profiles in a phase
I trial of bladder cancer patients. Patients developed T and B cell
responses even if they presented hCG-β high serum levels pretreatment.
This was especially pronounced upon coadministration of the TLR-agonists
resiquimod and/or poly-ICLC. , These trials demonstrate
the feasibility of breaking tolerance against a self-antigen by targeting
CD206. Unfortunately, the subsequent phase II trial (NCT01094496)
was terminated due to portfolio prioritization. An in vitro comparative
study of NY-ESO-1 delivery via anti-CD206 or anti-DEC205 was conducted
using moDCs and patient-derived T cells. Targeting to either DEC-205 or CD206 increased XP of NY-ESO-1 compared
to untargeted protein, but the MHC II presentation was comparable
in all conditions. This suggests that targeted delivery of NY-ESO-1
to late (via DEC-205) or early (via CD206) endosomal compartments
increased XP. These findings should be confirmed using isolated DC1s
and DC2s in a similar setup. Of note, CD206 is highly expressed on
tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs), which opens up the possibility
to repolarize TAMs by targeting TLR7/8 agonists toward CD206. Simultaneous antigen delivery to TAMs is two-edged:
If repolarization is successful, then it could remodel the TME and
harness the antigen-presenting capacity of prevalent macrophages.
However, if repolarization is unsuccessful, then it could strengthen
peripheral tolerance.

3.6.

## Clec12a
Clec12a (MICL, CD371, DCAL-2)
is an inhibitory PRR that recognizes uric acid crystals formed upon
release of intracellular uric acid by dying cells. Clec12a inhibits the Syk-cascade and hampers ROS production
to limit inflammatory responses. Clec12a is highly expressed on murine
pDCs and DC1s, but equally expressed among human DC subpopulations
( ). , 
3.6.1.

## Clec12a–Mouse
Murine splenic
DCs targeted ex vivo with anti-Clec12a mAb-OVA fusions displayed superior
cross-presenting capabilities in comparison with Clec9a-targeting
fusions as measured by proliferation of OT-I cells. , Yet, in a head-to-head comparison of OVA protein fused to anti-Clec12a
mAb, anti-Clec9a mAb, or anti-DEC205 mAb, Clec12a-targeting fusions
induced lower proliferation of CD8+ T cells in B6 mice
compared to the latter two. This emphasizes
that in vitro studies of XP do not always accurately predict in vivo
efficacy. CD4+ T cell proliferation was not observed for
Clec12a-targeting fusions, whereas fusions targeting Clec9a or DEC205
resulted in both CD8+ and CD4+ T cell proliferation. 

3.6.2.

## Clec12a–Human
Both Clec12a
and DEC205 direct antigens to lysosomes via early endosomes. The retention
of antigen in early endosomes has been shown slightly longer upon
targeting Clec12a, thus promoting XP. Clec12a-mediated delivery of keyhole limpet hemocyanin (KLH) to
moDCs, pDCs, DC2s, or DC1s led to enhanced XP, IFN-γ production,
and CD4+ T cell proliferation compared to untargeted controls. These findings indicate a potential use for
Clec12a as a target in cancer vaccines. However, mouse studies demonstrate
no to little beneficial effects and challenge these conclusions. In summary, conflicting results prevent one
from concluding on the potential of Clec12a as target to enhance XP.

4.

## Promoting MHC II Antigen Presentation to Improve
CD4+ T Helper Responses
4.1.

## DECTIN-1
DECTIN-1 (Clec7a, CD369)
initiates the release of antifungal cytokines and chemokines upon
recognition of β-d-glucose polysaccharides, often present
on pathogens. − Its signaling is inherently immunostimulatory
and is synergistic with TLR2 signaling. , DECTIN-1 can be used to target DC2s ( ).
4.1.2.

## DECTIN-1–Mouse
Notable differences
in T cell activation were observed upon delivery of the OVA using
anti-DECTIN 1 and anti-DEC205. Targeting DECTIN-1 increased CD4+ T cell proliferation and antibody production, whereas targeting
DEC205 increased CD8+ T cell proliferation. β-glucan functionalization of nanoparticles
increased CD4+ T cell proliferation compared to untargeted
controls, and reduced tumor growth by elicitation of CD4+ Th1 cells, and to a lesser extent, of CD4+ Th9 cells. − However, the dependency on DECTIN-1 remains to be demonstrated as
particle functionalization can alter charge, uptake properties, and
pharmacokinetics.

4.1.3.

## DECTIN-1–Human
In humans,
targeting DECTIN-1 via β-glucans or mAbs was shown to be immunostimulatory. , This finding has been used to target moDCs with MART-1 peptide without
extra adjuvant to activate T cells in vitro. The selective expansion of CD4+ Th17 cells in vitro may
be explained by the involvement of DECTIN-1 in antifungal immunity. The intrinsic immunostimulatory capacity of
β-glucans is being explored in phase I clinical trials to enhance
the efficacy of anti-GD2 immunotherapy against neuroblastoma. The dual use of β-glucans as both DECTIN-1-targeting
and immunostimulatory adjuvants should be further explored in cancer
vaccine formulations.

4.2.

## DCIR(2)
DCIR (Clec4a, CD367) regulates
inflammation and T cell immunity. The
mouse homologue DCIR2 is uniquely expressed on DC2s, whereas DCIR
is expressed less restrictively in humans ( ). DCIR(2) binds
mannose, glucose, N-acetylglucosamine, fucose, and
asialo-N-glycan(s). The latter is crucial in DC regulation
processes. A single glycosylation site
in its carbohydrate binding pocket controls the specificity of DCIR
for its ligand. 
4.2.1.

## DCIR2–Mouse
Dudziak and
colleagues compared DCIR2 and DEC205 as vaccine targets. In vivo delivery of the OVA protein to DCIR2
resulted in a faster class switching to IgG2b/c, indicating a Th1-oriented
response in B6 mice, whereas delivery to DEC205 increased antigen
presentation on MHC I. Both vaccines elicited similar CD4+ T cell responses. Even though DEC205 targeting formulations led
to increased CD8+ T cell responses, both formulations were
capable of protection in a tumor challenge. In contrast, in BALB/c mice, immunization with viral NS1 protein
delivered to DCIR2 did not provide protection in a lethal challenge,
whereas delivery to DEC205 conferred partial protection. This reflects a heavy dependence on CD8+ T responses during a dengue challenge, while antitumor immunity
benefits from the combined action of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells. , It is possible that the strain
in which these studies were made influenced the nature of the immune
response, as B6 mice are Th1 prone while BALB/c are Th2-prone. , Performing similar experiments in CB6.F1 mice (B6 × BALB/c
(H2Kb+/d+)) could help unify these findings. In addition,
DCIR2 and DEC205 are expressed on distinct DC subsets, and it is thus
not possible to dissect the effect of the receptor and routing from
the inherent physiological differences among the DC subsets. Nevertheless,
these studies demonstrate the possibility of directing the immune
response by targeting different DC receptors.

4.2.2.

## DCIR–Human
The less restricted
expression of DCIR in humans enables a comparison of antigen delivery
to the same receptor on different subsets. Myeloid DCs, pDCs, and
Langerhans cells isolated from human PBMCs showed similar CD8+ T cell priming ability when targeted with anti-DCIR-MART-1
peptide or anti-DCIR-influenza matrix protein fusions. DCIR had a different intracellular routing
than other C-type lectins and did not preferentially colocalize with
either early, late, or recycling endosomes, nor with the ER or Golgi. In line with the poor association with the
endolysosomal system, low CD4+ T cell responses were measured
upon ligand internalization. These results should be translated with
caution, as DCs might act differently in an in vivo setting.

4.3.

## MGL(2)
MGL (Clec10a, DC-ASGPR, CD301)
is a galactose-binding lectin that is mainly targeted using its ligands,
α- or β-linked N-acetyl galactosamine
(GalNAc) or galactose. − Activation of MGL leads to production
of IL-10 via Syk signaling. MGL is primarily
expressed on DC2s and downregulated upon DC activation. 
4.3.1.

## MGL2–Mouse
MGL1 and MGL2
homologues have been identified in mice. Murine MGL2 can be specifically targeted by modifying antigens with
GalNAc, which has been shown to enhance CD4+ T cell responses. , 

4.3.2.

## MGL–Human
Abnormal O-glycosylation of mucins is a trait often shared by tumors.
The Thomsen-nouveau (Tn) antigen, α-linked GalNAc carried on
serine or threonine residues, is often found on mucin-type glycoproteins
such as MUC1 at the surface of carcinoma cells. Because MUC1 is a tumor antigen, the capacity of Tn to
bind human MGL has been used to increase TAA delivery to DCs. − Tn-MUC1 glycoprotein was detected only in MHC II compartments,
while a short Tn-MUC1 glycopeptide was found in both MHC I and MHC
II compartments. This suggests that antigen size or physicochemical
properties can influence intracellular routing and that using short
peptide antigens could favor XP. This remains to be confirmed with
an increased sample size. As Tn-glycosylation
can negatively impair antigen processing, it should be carefully studied
to what degree Tn-glycosylation can be introduced to increase uptake
via MGL without interfering with antigen presentation. Rhesus macaques vaccinated with Tn-MUC1 showed
significantly higher IFN-γ+ T cell responses by ELISpot
than those vaccinated with Tn-negative MUC1. Unfortunately, the authors
did not investigate whether these were CD4+ or CD8+ T cells. In a different study,
Tn-MUC6 glycoprotein was found to induce lower IFN-γ but higher
IL-17 secretion by CD4+ T cells compared to nonglycosylated
MUC6. This suggests that targeting of Tn via MGL can promote a Th17
phenotype. 

4.4.

## Langerin
Langerin (Clec4k, CD207)
is specifically expressed on Langerhans cells (LCs), a skin resident
cell population of monocytic origin that displays DC-like properties.
LCs patrol dermal tissue, take up antigens and migrate to lymph nodes
upon activation. , LCs can be targeted by transdermal
vaccines through simple application on the skin, which has the advantage
to be noninvasive. Langerin is also
expressed at low levels on a subset of murine DC1s and human DC2s.
Antigens taken up via Langerin are internalized into Birbeck granules,
which are unusual organelles involved in viral degradation. Langerin has a high affinity for galactose-6-sulfated
oligosaccharides and recognizes sulfated and mannosylated glycans. 
4.4.1.

## Langerin–Mouse
In a comparative
study, subcutaneous delivery of OVA conjugated to anti-Langerin, anti-DEC205,
or anti-DCIR2 revealed that LCs can induce systemic CD4+ and CD8+ T cell responses. Anti-Langerin fusions induced fewer CD8+ T cells but
more CD4+ T cells compared to anti-DEC205 fusions upon
subcutaneous vaccination, while anti-DCIR2 delivery induced even more
pronounced CD4+ T cell responses. Moreover, anti-Langerin
targeting resulted in a prolonged antigen presentation for several
days. Taken together, this indicates that Langerin mediates efficient
OVA antigen presentation on both MHC I and MHC II, however this should
be confirmed in more clinically relevant settings. In a different setup, HIV gag-p24 protein was delivered
intraperitoneally via anti-Langerin, anti-Clec9a, anti-DCIR2, or anti-DEC205
in combination with anti-CD40 and polyI:C. In comparison with Langerin-targeting
vaccines, DC1-targeting vaccines (anti-Clec9a, anti-DEC205) induced
comparable IFN-γ-producing CD4+ Th1 and CD8+ T cells in CB6.F1 mice and outperformed DC2-targeted vaccines (anti-DCIR2). This suggests that targeting Langerin can be
as potent as targeting Clec9a or DEC205. The authors speculate that
the evident contradiction between these studies could be due to the
model antigen, mouse strain, vaccination route, or adjuvant used.
The multitude of possible factors emphasize the potential benefit
of standardization of the mouse model (CB6.F1 mice) and vaccine components
for comparative therapeutic vaccine studies.

4.4.2.

## Langerin–Human
Human skin
is highly tolerogenic compared with murine skin. Skin resident human
LCs are thus more prone to induced peripheral tolerance. Moreover,
human LCs have been shown incapable of XP. , Langerin can be targeted with glycomimetics of its ligand, which
was shown to improve immune responses in various studies when compared
to free cargo. − However, it remains unclear whether improved
pharmacokinetic properties are responsible for this increase or whether
Langerin targeting itself played a role. In summary, Langerin might
not be an ideal target to induce CD8+ T cell-oriented immunity
in humans, but rather to direct transdermal vaccines toward LCs in
combination with immunostimulatory adjuvants to improve classical
antigen presentation to CD4+ T cells.

5.

## Promoting Pan-APC Antigen Presentation
5.1.

## DC-SIGN
The main function of DC-SIGN
(CD209, Clec4L) is engagement of resting T cells via ICAM-3. DC-SIGN’s natural ligands are high mannose-
and fucose-containing carbohydrates, such as Lewis X oligosaccharides. DC-SIGN has overlapping ligands with CD206,
and displays a similar expression profile. , Studying immunity induced by targeting DC-SIGN is complex in mouse
models, as mice have eight homologues of human DC-SIGN. , 
5.1.1.

## DC-SIGN–Human
Targeting
antigens to DC-SIGN was shown to induce both CD4+ and CD8+ immune responses in humanized mice and in vitro models using
moDCs. − Targeting antigen with anti-DC-SIGN antibodies
binding to the carbohydrate recognition domain (CRD) of DC-SIGN promoted
routing toward late endosomes, whereas targeting antigens using antibodies
binding to the neck region of DC-SIGN routed the antigen to early
endosomes. The latter enhanced T cell
proliferation compared to untargeted control; however, the CRD targeting
mAb was not investigated for antigen delivery. Still, this study demonstrates
that the targeted epitope can influence endosomal processing.

5.2.

## MHC II
MHC II is expressed by all
professional APCs. Recycling of MHC II on the cell membrane is rapid
in immature DCs but slower in mature DCs leading to a relative higher
expression of MHC II on mature DCs. Targeting
antigen to MHC II delivers the antigen to recycling compartments where
antigen can be loaded directly on recycled MHC II complexes or cross-presented
on MHC I. 
5.2.1.

## MHC II–Mouse
Nanobodies
recognizing mouse MHC II conjugated to MUC1 or T cell epitopes of
OVA were shown capable of inducing T cell proliferation in B6 mice
when administered with immunostimulatory anti-CD40 mAbs and polyI:C. , Targeting MHC II increased CD4+ T cell activation compared
to targeting DEC205. In addition, a MHC II targeted vaccine induced
potent humoral immune responses against the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein. Due to its broad expression on DCs, B cells
and other APCs, MHC II might be one of the best ways to reach a large
population of immune cells. 

5.3.

## CD11c
CD11c (integrin αx, ITGAX)
recognizes a variety of ligands, including bacterial lipopolysaccharide
(LPS) and several adhesion molecules. , It is expressed
on all conventional DC subsets as well as several other immune cells
such as macrophages, neutrophils, and B cells ( ). Conflicting reports have been published
on the efficacy of CD11c as vaccine target. − 
5.3.1.

## CD11c–Mouse
In a comparative
study, OVA was targeted to CD11c, DEC205, MHC II, CD40, TLR2, and
FcγRII/III by chemical conjugation to the respective Fab′
fragments. Anti-CD11c conjugates outperformed
all others in inducing CD4+ and CD8+ T cell
proliferation in B6 mice. Humoral responses were induced without adjuvant
upon targeting CD11c in BALB/c mice. Furthermore, tumor-reactive CD4+ and CD8+ T
cells were observed in BALB/c mice upon delivery of HER2/neu using
anti-CD11c antibody fragments. In contrast,
plasmid DNA vaccination of B6 mice with CD11c-targeted tuberculosis
antigen did not increase T cell activation compared to a nontargeting
variant, whereas DEC205 targeting did. It is hypothesized that the vaccine format, as well as the mouse
strain, can influence the outcome. We emphasize again the importance
of conducting major comparative studies in H2Kb+/d+ CB6.F1
mice.

5.4.

## CD40
CD40 (Bp50, TNFRSF5) is part
of the TNF-receptor superfamily and an important regulator of antigen
processing. Interaction with its ligand
CD154 (CD40L) promotes the antigen presentation and maturation of
APCs. Agonistic anti-CD40 antibodies have been developed and can be
used to mimic the CD40-CD154 interaction. They are utilized as immunostimulatory
adjuvant or stand-alone cancer immunotherapy. , CD40 is expressed on all APCs and upregulated during maturation. Similar to DEC205, CD40 is expressed on endothelial
cells, which may lead to more off-targeting in comparison with restrictedly
expressed DC surface markers. 
5.4.1.

## CD40–Mouse
Agonistic anti-CD40
mAb antigen fusions could be an interesting avenue to combine antigens
and adjuvants into a single construct. Fusions of the T cell epitope
λ2315 of myeloma protein M315 with CD40-targeting
single-chain variable fragments (scFvs) induced stronger M315-specific
T cell proliferation compared to untargeted fusions. The agonistic capability of the CD40-targeting moiety was
not altered by the conjugation of the antigen in these in vitro experiments.
In BALB/c mice, strong IgG2a humoral responses were induced by targeting
CD40. High IgG2a levels are associated
with Th1-mediated immunity; thus, targeting antigens to CD40 might
have induced a Th1-biased response. Nanoparticles targeted to CD40
induced stronger CD8+ T cell responses in comparison with
nanoparticles targeted toward DEC205 or CD11c. , However, as nanoparticles have pharmacokinetic properties distinct
from those of antibody-based vaccines, it would be interesting to
repeat this comparative study using antibody-based formulations. Special
attention should be given to the intrinsic immunostimulatory capacities
of CD40-targeting, as this might provide new opportunities for cancer
vaccines without the requirement of systemic adjuvants.

5.4.2.

## CD40–Human
Enhancement of
T cell proliferation and humoral responses by targeting CD40 has been
shown for distinct types of antigens (FluM1, HIV, HPV) in vitro. − Careful dissection of endosomal routing revealed that targeting
CD40 directed antigen to early endosomes, resulting in equally potent
XP in comparison with targeting DEC205 on primary DC1s. Yin et al. performed an extensive comparative
study on targeted delivery of MART-1 peptide conjugated to mAb in
moDCs. They observed enhanced MART-1
specific CD4+ and CD8+ T cell proliferation
upon targeting CD40 in comparison to LOX-1 and DECTIN-1. MoDCs were
cultured with IL-2 and IL-7 during the T cell activation assay, but
no adjuvant was provided. Therefore, it cannot be concluded whether
antigen fate or DC maturation induced by CD40 targeting was the main
determinant for the enhanced T cell proliferation. Of note, an exciting
prospect in the context of CD40 targeting are bispecific antibodies
recognizing CD40 and a TAA. , These constructs bring
tumor debris in proximity to CD40+ cells, which can take
up, process, and present the tumor antigens, while simultaneously
being stimulated via CD40. This results in antitumor responses surpassing
immune reactivity toward the initial targeted epitope. 

5.5.

## Fc Receptors
Fc receptors (FcRs)
are expressed in a variety of immune cells. FcRs recognize specific
glycosylation patterns on the Fc-region of mAbs and notably mediate
the uptake of opsonized antigens. They
can be actively targeted using anti-CD16, anti-CD32 or anti-CD64 mAbs,
or FcR specific ligands. Moreover, FcRs are also passively targeted
when mAbs containing functional Fc regions. FcRs are usually specific
for a set of isotypes and can trigger inflammatory (e.g., FcγRI,
FcγRIIa) or tolerogenic (FcγRIIb) responses. FcR biology is complex because of their varying
affinity for different isotypes and expression patterns on different
APCs, and it remains difficult to identify general intracellular pathways.
Furthermore, interspecies differences between mouse and human complicate
comparison, although signaling cascades and effector function are
reasonably conserved. Unlike most endocytic
receptors mentioned in this review, FcRs generally do not release
their ligand upon internalization, which has been suggested to target
antigens toward lysosomes. 
5.5.1.

## Fc Receptors–Mouse
Formyl
peptide receptor-like 1 inhibitor (FLIPr) is secreted by bacteria
to evade opsonization by binding antagonistically to FcRs. Fusions of FLIPr with OVA conferred a significant
survival benefit in tumor-bearing B6 mice, even in the absence of
an adjuvant. , These effects were not observed
in TAP–/– B6 mice highlighting the necessity
for XP to obtain antitumor effects. 

5.5.2.

## Fc Receptors–Human
Active
targeting of FcγRII on moDCs with a peptide derived from human
cytomegalovirus enhanced XP compared to nontargeting variants in vitro,
demonstrating the possibilities of actively targeting FcRs. In contrast, antigen delivery via FcεRI-bound
IgE targets antigens to a cathepsin S-dependent MHC class II pathway
is expected to favor CD4+ T cell responses. The diverse physiological functions of FcRs
are reflected in the various types of vaccines targeting them. − Examples include vaccines targeting FcγRI for protection against
dengue, vaccines recruiting intracellular FcR TRIM21 to induce XP
in moDCs, and vaccines targeting multiple FcRs (CD16, CD32, CD64)
to dampen autoimmunity. FcRs can be targeted to promote classical
antigen presentation or XP, but the specific pathways activated by
targeting different FcRs require further investigation for the therapeutic
vaccine development.

6.

## Future Perspectives and Recommendations for
Therapeutic Vaccine Design
6.1.

## Controlling the Immune Response by Targeting
Specific DC Receptors
Therapeutic vaccines have yet to achieve
the same impact on modern healthcare as prophylactic vaccines. While
it is firmly established that targeting vaccines to DC receptors enhances
therapeutic efficacy, the optimal target remains elusive. Here, we
reviewed the literature regarding distinct receptors for their effect
on antigen presentation and immune response ( ).
Targeting therapeutic vaccines to
DC1-specific receptors harnesses the superior ability of DC1s at XP
and improves CD8+ T cell responses. The first-in-human DC-targeted vaccine CDX-1401 demonstrated
a reasonable safety profile and a proof-of-concept for feasibility.
It elicited NY-ESO-1-specific T cell responses in patients, but yielded
only modest clinical benefits. , The observed T cell
responses are likely not a result of increased XP directly but rather
increased uptake by DCs in general. The broad expression pattern of
DEC205 on myeloid and nonmyeloid cells may have hindered efficient
delivery of NY-ESO-1 to DC1s. Targeting of the DC1-specific receptors
Clec9a or XCR1 induced stronger XP in preclinical studies in comparison
with human DEC205, which we hypothesize is due to fundamental differences
in intracellular routing. , , , We envision that targeting Clec9a
or XCR1, both exclusively expressed on cross-presenting DC1s, could
strongly improve the efficacy of therapeutic cancer vaccines through
the promotion of potent XP of the delivered antigen. Importantly,
CDX-1401 efficacy was potentiated by pretreatment with Flt3l, which
increased the abundance of peripheral conventional DCs and monocytes. Other studies including Flt3l have shown its
ability to induce differentiation and recruitment of DC1s. Therefore, pretreatment with Flt3l could be
especially beneficial to vaccines designed to improve XP by targeting
of DC1s. Yet, the low numbers of circulating DC1s (<0.05% of PBMCs)
could restrict the absolute antigen uptake, and therefore targeting
a larger fraction of APCs may overall be more beneficial. Antigen
retention and transfer to DC1s by CD169+ macrophages is
a promising strategy to improve antigen XP. , Finally, targeting CD206 was shown to promote XP by delivering antigens
to early endosomes. , Because CD206 is also expressed
on TAMs, antigens should only be targeted to CD206 in combination
with TAM repolarization agents such as TLR7/8-agonists. Clinical studies exploring antigen targeting
to CD206 (e.g., CDX-1307) may especially benefit from codelivery of
adjuvants. , 
Antigen routing toward
late endosomes or direct delivery in the
MHC II loading compartment improves CD4+ Th responses and
humoral immunity. This can be promoted by targeting DC receptors such
as DCIR(2), MGL(2), or MHC II. Incorporating CD4+ T cell
epitopes in vaccine design is expected to support cytotoxic immune
responses by means of CD4+ T cell help. , Finally, the immunostimulatory signaling inherent by receptors as
DECTIN-1 or CD40 could be advantageous when trying to break tolerance
to self-antigens and should be further explored in the context of
therapeutic cancer vaccines. , , 

6.2.

## Specific Targeting of DC Subpopulations or
Broad Targeting of pAPCs?
Targeting FcRs or MHC II allows
for the targeting of a broad range of APCs, and this approach has
been shown to significantly enhance immune responses. , , Targeting a larger pool of APCs
could potentially elicit an immune response of greater magnitude compared
to targeting less abundant DC subpopulations. Yet, broad targeting approaches could be more prone to induce Tregs
if antigens are delivered to immune suppressive APCs such as TAMs.
So far, there have been no reports of a direct comparison between
therapeutic cancer vaccines that target broadly expressed receptors,
such as MHC II or FcR and vaccines that target receptors with restricted
expression, such as XCR1 or Clec9a. Such comparative studies would
help define whether strict targeting or broader targeting induces
optimal antitumor immune responses to explore for clinical translation.
Lastly, combined targeting of CD8 epitopes to XP-enhancing receptors
and CD4 epitopes to receptors specialized in class II antigen presentation
may be of interest to pursue in the field of therapeutic cancer vaccines.

6.3.

## Extensive Characterization of Adjuvants, Immune
Responses, and Formulation
Immunostimulatory adjuvants are
essential in therapeutic cancer vaccines to induce immune responses
toward the presented epitope. Antigen presentation, in absence of
immunostimulatory adjuvants, by immature DCs induces tolerance and
tumor progression. , Preferably, antigen and adjuvant
should be delivered simultaneously to DCs, as this increased antigen
presentation in multiple models. , A premature
maturation of DCs could impair vaccine uptake and cause autoimmunity
in response to systemic adjuvant encounter. Covalent incorporation of adjuvants into DC-targeted vaccines could
improve the therapeutic window, ensure simultaneous delivery of both
antigen and adjuvant and limit off-target effects. , , , Much like
interspecies differences in DC surface receptors, variations in TLR
expression patterns affect the clinical translation of murine studies. , For instance, murine DC1s do not express TLR7, yet human DC1s are
highly responsive to imidazoquinolines, a class of TLR7-agonists with
promising therapeutic potential. TLR3
is mainly expressed by DC1s, which would indicate that TLR3-agonists
as poly-I:C can be more effective than other adjuvants to promote
XP and CD8+ T cell activation by DC1s. A combination therapy
of TLR3-agonist, Flt3l, and radiotherapy recruited cross-presenting
DCs in the tumor, resulting in cytotoxic T cell responses and tumor
clearance in lymphoma patients. These
promising results emphasize the potential of Flt3l to stimulate DCs,
which could also be used in combination with therapeutic vaccines.
The significant role of CD4+ T cells in driving antitumor
responses is increasingly evident. , , , While most mechanistic
studies focus on individual pathways, we recommend including the characterization
of T helper responses and humoral responses along with cytotoxic T
cell responses. Such studies will be crucial to delineate whether
a single receptor on DCs can optimally induce XP as well as classical
presentation or whether combination therapies should be investigated
as an ideal targeting strategy. In mouse studies, the strain should
be considered carefully. , We recommend the use
of CB6.F1 mice to unify previous findings, as this hybrid mouse strain
neutralizes the difference between the commonly used B6 and BALB/c
mice. While moDCs are easy to generate at moderate costs and well-suited
for initial studies, they have inherent differences in antigen processing
and presentation capacity, and are therefore not fully reflective
of circulating primary DCs. , Therefore, in vitro
studies should include naturally occurring DC subsets to confirm findings
on moDCs. Finally, the influence of the isotype in the case of a targeting
mAb should be studied to account for FcR-mediated effects. , , We emphasize the importance
of including isotype controls in DC targeted vaccine studies. Improved
circulation time has been shown to positively affect targeting and
improve immunological outcome of targeted vaccines. Fc-isotype engineering could offer opportunities for improving
circulation time, for example through incorporation of Fc-silent mutations
or increasing affinity to neonatal FcR to promote recycling of mAbs. − 
This review focuses on targeted antigen delivery through antibody
and ligand conjugates. Targeting of DCs has also been explored using
other delivery vehicles, for instance, nanoparticles or viral vectors.
Nanoparticle encapsulation of antigens is an attractive strategy to
extend half-life and allow codelivery of antigens and adjuvants. The
particulate nature renders them especially susceptible to phagocytosis
by APCs. However, this nature also promotes clearance via neutrophils
or macrophages, reducing antigen presentation. Although DC targeting
of nanoparticles can be improved by conjugation of antibodies or ligands
recognized by DC receptors, skewing the biodistribution of nanoparticles
is difficult, as it is mostly dictated by particle size and surface
composition. Larger nanoparticles (>150
nm in diameter) are cleared by the reticuloendothelial system and
taken up by phagocytic cells in proximity of the injection site or
in the liver. In contrast, smaller nanoparticles (<150 nm in diameter)
can evade clearance by the reticuloendothelial system and reach lymph
nodes. A positive surface charge has
been reported to improve the uptake of nanoparticles in vivo. , For more in-depth reading on nanoparticles vaccination strategies,
we refer to reviews covering this subject. − 
An approach different from nanoparticles or antibody or ligand
conjugates is viral vectors. Lentiviral vectors are a commonly used
type of vector to deliver antigens to DCs, which are inherently immunogenic,
thereby also serving as adjuvant. Engineering of the Sindbis viral
vector by removing the heparan sulfate recognition site, while preserving
the glycoprotein recognized by DC-SIGN, enables targeting of these
vectors toward DCs. Phase I/II clinical
trials for the DC-SIGN targeted lentiviral vector LV305 containing
a NY-ESO-1 TAA demonstrated the feasibility of this approach, as no
undesired mutagenesis and viral persistence were noted. , Direct comparisons between delivery vehicles are seldom performed.
This is an interesting avenue to explore and could provide new insights
into the field of targeted antigen delivery.

6.4.

## Recommendations for Designing Targeted Therapeutic
Cancer Vaccines
In this Review, we suggest that selecting
the appropriate target may surpass selecting a specific DC subset.
Distinct receptors on a single DC subset engage specific endosomal
pathways, resulting in different levels of antigen presentation. An
ideal therapeutic cancer vaccine achieves sufficient XP to prime CD8+ T cells, while maintaining adequate CD4+ T helper
activation. The next step in targeted therapeutic vaccination is the
translation of preclinical studies into the clinic. We recommend the
use of Clec9a or XCR1 as target for therapeutic vaccines in combination
with Flt3l to boost DC1 abundance. Targeting
Clec9a or XCR1 results in superior CD8+ T cell mediated
antitumor immunity over targeting DEC205, while sustaining CD4+ T helper cell responses in preclinical models. , , − Moreover, Clec9a and XCR1 are specifically expressed on DC1s, thereby
limiting off-target engagement. Flt3l coadministration could augment
DC1-targeted therapies by increasing the natural low abundance of
DC1s (<0.05% of PBMCs), as demonstrated by clinical trials administering
CDX-1401 in combination with Flt3l. To
further enhance vaccine efficacy, we would recommend incorporation
of immunostimulatory adjuvants, for example through encapsulation
in nanoparticles, antigen-adjuvant conjugates, or self-adjuvating
mRNA vaccines. , This will ensure simultaneous
delivery of adjuvant and antigen to DCs, which strongly improves antigen
presentation, reduces tolerance induction, and may improve the therapeutic
window of the adjuvant by reducing systemic immune activation. , 
Results of clinical trials have shown the safety and feasibility
of in vivo cancer vaccination ( ). Thorough preclinical evaluation and comparison of
different vaccines and targets is required to move toward clinical
translation. It will require head-to-head comparisons of different
vaccine targets and experimental standardization, for example, in
terms of the use of mouse strain, adjuvant, and isotype controls.
Studies on human targets should be performed on primary DCs as much
as possible to aid the clinical translation of the vaccine formulation.
It is recommended that future studies focus on a broad readout of
the immune response including phenotypic characterization of CD4+ and CD8+ T cell responses. , An interesting comparative study would be to investigate side-by-side
targeting of broadly expressed receptors, such as MHC II or FcRs,
and restrictedly expressed receptors, such as Clec9a or XCR1. This
will help to establish the most optimal target to pursue in therapeutic
cancer vaccines. It is well established that targeting MHC I epitopes
toward receptors promoting XP enhances CD8 T cell responses in a preclinical
setting. However, analyzing this in a clinical setting remains challenging.
Humanized mouse models offer an opportunity to assess the rationale
of steering the immune system through receptor targeting, yet capturing
the full complexity of the human immune system will be difficult.
Therefore, the true benefits of novel targeted antigen delivery strategies
ought to be assessed in clinical trials, which is an exciting prospect.
To conclude, ample suitable surface markers on DCs exist for targeted
therapeutic cancer vaccines, and proper selection will undoubtedly
enhance future vaccine efficacy.

## Glossary

## Abbreviations
APCantigen-presenting
cell
DCdendritic
cell
MHCmajor histocompatibility
complex
PRRpathogen
recognition receptor
TLRToll-like receptors
DAMPdamage associated molecular pattern
PAMPpathogen associated molecular pattern
iTregsinduced regulatory
T cells
TAAtumor-associated
antigen
gp100glycoprotein
100
TRP-2tyrosine
related protein 2
TSAtumor-specific antigen
NKnatural killer
moDCmonocyte-derived dendritic cell
DC1type 1 conventional dendritic cell
DC2type 2 conventional dendritic
cell
HPVhuman papillomavirus
XPcross-presentation
ERendoplasmic reticulum
ETPendosome transporter
protein
UPSubiquitin-proteasome
system
TAPtransporter
associated with antigen processing
ERCendosomal recycling compartment
pDCplasmacytoid dendritic cell
Th1T helper type 1
Th2T helper type 2
cDCconventional dendritic
cell
OVAovalbumin
mAbmonoclonal antibody
Flt3Lfms-like tyrosine
kinase 3 ligand
HAhemagglutinin
BMDCbone marrow-derived dendritic cell
hCG-βHuman chorionic gonadotropin β
TAMtumor-associated
macrophage
KLHkeyhole
limpet hemocyanin
GalNAcgalactosamine
TnThomsen nouveau
LCLangerhans cell
CRDcarbohydrate recognition domain
LPSlipopolysaccharide
scFvsingle chain variable fragment
FLIPrformyl peptide receptor-like
1 inhibitor

## Author Present Address
§ Program in Cellular and Molecular Medicine,
1 Blackfan Circle,
Boston Children’s Hospital, 02115, Boston, Massachusetts, United
States of America

## Author Contributions
∥ C.M.L.
and M.V. contributed equally. The manuscript was written
by Z.W., F.J.D., C.M.L., and M.V. Figures were designed by Z.W. and
F.J.D. Conceptualization was done by Z.W., F.J.D., C.M.L., and M.V.
All authors have approved the final version of the manuscript.

This
work was
supported by the NWO Gravity Program, Institute for Chemical Immunology
(ICI-00031 and ICI-00201), ERC Starting grant CHEMCHECK (679921) and
ERC PoC grant CNECT-VAX (101069163). The APC was funded by the NWO
Gravity Program, Institute for Chemical Immunology (ICI-00031)

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

## References