pmcWiley Interdiscip Rev Nanomed NanobiotechnolWiley Interdiscip Rev Nanomed Nanobiotechnol379blackwellopen101508311WNANWiley Interdisciplinary Reviews. Nanomedicine and Nanobiotechnology1939-51161939-0041pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleWiley Open Access CollectionPMC11976204PMC11976204.111976204119762044019562310.1002/wnan.70007WNAN70007NANOMED-996.R21Advanced ReviewAdvanced ReviewEngineering Lipid Nanoparticles for mRNA Immunotherapy
ZwolsmanRobbyhttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-6059-2982 DarwishYoussef B.https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2035-7579 KluzaEwelinahttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-7040-0427 van der MeelRoyhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-2200-7946 r.v.d.meel@tue.nl

1

Laboratory of Chemical Biology, Department of Biomedical Engineering
Eindhoven University of Technology
Eindhoven
the Netherlands

*
Correspondence:

Roy van der Meel (r.v.d.meel@tue.nl)
0742025Mar-Apr202517248617110.1002/wnan.v17.2e70007
1132025
05112024
1532025
080420250904202509042025© 2025 The Author(s). WIREs Nanomedicine and Nanobiotechnology published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited and is not used for commercial purposes.

## ABSTRACT
Over the last decades, messenger RNA (mRNA) has emerged as a promising therapeutic modality, enabling the delivery of genetic instructions to cells for producing therapeutic proteins or antigens. As such, mRNA‐based therapies can be developed for a wide range of conditions, including infections, cancer, metabolic disorders, and genetic diseases. Nevertheless, using mRNA therapeutically requires chemical modifications to reduce immunostimulatory effects and nanotechnology to prevent degradation and ensure intracellular delivery. Lipid nanoparticles (LNPs) have become the most effective delivery platform for mRNA therapeutics, which are primarily employed for vaccine purposes following local administration and hepatic applications following systemic administration. Here, we review the state‐of‐the‐art LNP‐mRNA technology and discuss its potential for immunotherapy. We first outline the requirements for mRNA to be used therapeutically, including the role of LNP‐mediated delivery. Next, we highlight LNP‐mRNA immunotherapy approaches for vaccination, immuno‐oncology, and autoimmune disorders. In addition, we discuss challenges that are limiting LNP‐mRNA's widespread use, including tunable biodistribution and immunostimulatory effects. Finally, we provide an outlook on how implementing approaches such as library screening and machine learning will guide the development of next‐generation mRNA therapeutics.

 

immunotherapylipid nanoparticles (LNP)messenger RNA (mRNA)Dutch Research Council (NWO) Vidi Grant
10.13039/501100024872no.19861 The journey of mRNA from a fundamental biological molecule to a potent therapeutic modality is characterized by decades of fundamental research and technological innovations (Pascolo et al.  ) (Figure  ). Over half a decade ago, the discovery of mRNA was published (Brenner et al.  ; Gros et al.  ; Jacob and Monod  ), soon followed by the first report of successful protein synthesis from isolated mRNA (Lockard and Lingrel  ). In the 70's, the first studies emerged demonstrating the use of liposomes to deliver mRNA to mouse (Dimitriadis  ) and human (Ostro et al.  ) cells, resulting in functional protein expression. With in vitro transcription (IVT) of RNA discovered in the 80's (Melton et al.  ), functional protein expression following mRNA delivery was demonstrated following injection into frog eggs (Krieg and Melton  ) and into mouse skeletal muscle in vivo (Wolff et al.  ). In the early 90's, the therapeutic potential of mRNA was demonstrated by inducing antiviral responses in mice following liposomal delivery (Martinon et al.  ), and protein replacement therapy in rats (Jirikowski et al.  ). During the 2000's, important discoveries related to mRNA's immunostimulating properties were reported, enabling the use of mRNA therapeutically (Karikó et al.  ), and awarded the Nobel Prize in 2023 (Callaway and Naddaf  ).
 However, despite mRNA's potential for vaccines and therapeutic protein applications, its susceptibility to degradation and the need for intracellular localization pose significant challenges (Dowdy  ). In this review, we discuss the requirements for using mRNA as a drug, with a focus on the role of lipid nanoparticle (LNP) delivery platform technology. Besides vaccination purposes, we highlight state‐of‐the‐art LNP‐mRNA immunotherapy approaches in immuno‐oncology and for treatment of autoimmune disorders. We conclude by providing an outlook on how developments in library screening and machine learning approaches are contributing to unlocking mRNA's full (immuno)therapeutic potential.

2

## Requirements for mRNA's Therapeutic Application
mRNA's therapeutic potential lies in its ability to efficiently exploit the cellular synthesis machinery and produce any desired protein (Jackson et al.  ). Nevertheless, several challenges must be overcome for employing mRNA as a drug related to its inherent instability, immunostimulatory effects, and inability to pass cellular membranes. Native mRNA is unstable because of its large size and negatively charged phosphate backbone, and it is rapidly degraded by cellular ribonucleases (Houseley and Tollervey  ). Following cellular uptake, mRNA is recognized by intracellular pattern recognition receptors such as melanoma differentiation‐associated protein 5 (MDA5) and Toll‐like receptors (TRL) 3, 7, and 8 (Lee and Barton  ). While such recognition is essential for defense against pathogens, for nucleic acid therapeutic applications, these RNA sensors and resulting immune responses represent a considerable obstacle (Jensen and Thomsen  ).
Designing stable therapeutic mRNA, therefore, requires understanding the characteristics of native mRNA, which has several intrinsic stabilizing features such as the 5′ cap, a 7‐methylguanosine linked to the adjacent nucleotide via a triphosphate bridge (Topisirovic et al.  ) (Figure  ). Besides enhancing stability, the 5′ cap also serves as a recognition signal for the binding of eukaryotic initiation factor 4E (eIF4E), which in turn recruits the ribonucleoprotein 43S preinitiation complex (43S PIC). Upon encountering a start codon, this complex forms the 80s elongation‐competent ribosome. In addition to the 5′ cap, mRNAs contain a poly(A) tail at the 3′ terminus consisting of a sequence of adenine nucleotides granting protection from enzymatic degradation (Nicholson and Pasquinelli  ; Passmore and Coller  ). The poly(A) tail is added post‐transcriptionally, and its length impacts mRNA's stability and translational efficiency. Longer tails typically lead to increased stability and higher translational output (Jalkanen et al.  ; Nicholson and Pasquinelli  ; Passmore and Coller  ). The 5′ and 3′ untranslated regions (UTR) are located on either side of the mRNA's coding sequence and are required for stability, translation, and structure (Leppek et al.  ). While the 5′ UTR encodes sequences that are relevant for ribosome recruitment and translation initiation, elements within the 3′ UTR play a role in mRNA stability (Leppek et al.  ). Finally, therapeutic mRNA can be designed to reduce off‐target protein production in specific tissues via conserved microRNA (miRNA)‐mediated regulation of mRNA translation. For example, it has been shown that for mRNA‐containing target sites for miRNA‐122 (miR122), which is highly expressed in hepatocytes, protein expression in the liver is efficiently suppressed (Ludwig et al.  ) (Figure  ).
 Although introducing exogenous mRNA for therapeutic purposes was long limited due to immunostimulatory effects, the pioneering work by Karikó, Weissman, and others demonstrated that incorporating naturally occurring modified nucleosides—particularly pseudouridine (Ψ) and N1‐methyl pseudouridine (m1Ψ)–could significantly reduce mRNA's immunogenicity (Karikó et al.  ). Compared to uridine, pseudouridine harbors a single nitrogen‐carbon bond and partial or complete uridine replacement with pseudouridine enhanced mRNA translation efficiency and reduced immunogenicity (Figure  ). The increased translation efficiency is attributed to pseudouridine's molecular structure which enhances interactions with the RNA‐translation machinery. In comparison to pseudouridine, N1‐methyl pseudouridine has advantages in terms of translation efficiency and diminished immunogenicity (Andries et al.  ). N1‐methyl pseudouridine harbors a methyl group at the N1 site of pseudouridine, which promotes its engagement with ribosomes while decreasing immune detection. Another naturally occurring modified nucleoside that can enhance the properties of therapeutic mRNA is N6,2′‐O‐dimethyladenosine (m6Am), which is typically located adjacent to the 5′ cap and as an internal modification. Studies have shown that m6Am provides immune evasive properties, which various viruses have exploited. (Wang et al.  ; Zhang et al.  ). In addition, adding 5‐methylcytosine (m5C) provides stability and improves translation, attributed to RNA binding protein YBX1 which together with IGF2BPs stabilizes the mRNA (Liu et al.  ). Besides structural elements and modifications, mRNA codon optimization can further improve translation and increase structural stability (Zhang et al.  ).
Other types of RNA can also be engineered to improve stability and prolong expression. For example, self‐amplifying RNA (saRNA) utilizes virally derived replicase proteins (nsP) and conserved sequence elements to drive RNA‐dependent RNA polymerase‐mediated self‐amplification (Bloom et al.  ; Démoulins et al.  ; McKay et al.  ; Sheridan  ). Aside from the viral replicase, saRNA design is identical to conventional mRNAs containing a 5′ cap, poly(A) tail, and 5′ and 3’ UTRs. When taken up by cells, the viral replicase produces multiple copies of the mRNA transcript, resulting in sustained mRNA transcription. Therefore, saRNA can be administered at lower doses than non‐self‐replicating mRNAs while maintaining comparable potency. As modifications do not carry over during self‐amplification (Bloom et al.  ; McKay et al.  ; Sheridan  ), saRNAs are usually unmodified. In fact, chemically modified saRNAs are generally less potent than unmodified saRNAs due to RNA‐dependent RNA polymerase not being compatible with most modified nucleosides. However, a recent study found that the therapeutic efficacy of saRNA can benefit substantially from implementing specific modified nucleosides (McGee et al.  ). It was shown that in a murine model, m5C‐modified saRNA outperformed unmodified and m1Ψ‐modified constructs regarding total protein expressed and expression duration. Additionally, the survival rate of mice vaccinated with 10 ng of m5C‐modified saRNA and exposed to a lethal dose of SARS‐CoV‐2 MA30 virus was 75%, which was considerably higher than mice treated with non‐modified (< 50%) or m1Ψ‐modified saRNA (< 25%).
In contrast to mRNA and saRNA, circular RNA (circRNA) is characterized by its covalently closed circular structure, providing increased stability and durability compared to linear RNA (Chen et al.  ). The unique structure grants circRNA resistance to exonucleases, improving its half‐life and expression duration (Pamudurti et al.  ; Wesselhoeft et al.  ). CircRNAs can encode therapeutic proteins and initiate internal ribosome entry site (IRES)‐driven translation, bypassing the 5′ cap‐mediated translation (O'Leary et al.  ). Enhanced stability and longevity make circRNA a noteworthy alternative to linear mRNA in therapies requiring long‐lasting protein expression (Parayath et al.  ; Santer et al.  ) (Figure  ).
Apart from construct design, a critical feature for generating therapeutic mRNA involves eliminating immunogenic double‐stranded RNA (dsRNA) during the production process (Karikó et al.  ), which greatly increases the immunogenicity of IVT mRNA (Mu et al.  ). Typically, dsRNA is removed by reversed‐phase high‐performance liquid chromatography or RNAse III treatment (Karikó et al.  ). Besides removal, dsRNA production can be limited by engineering the most used bacteriophage T7 RNA polymerase. As the main issue leading to the production of these double‐stranded transcripts is the relative instability of the T7 polymerase upon forming the transcription initiation complex, a double‐mutant T7 RNAP (G47A + 884G) was engineered that reduces dsRNA IVT byproducts while maintaining RNA yield and purity (Dousis et al.  ). Interestingly, when performing IVT with T7 polymerase, the relative amount of generated dsRNA is reduced when utilizing modified nucleosides compared to their unmodified counterparts (Mu et al.  ). Moreover, optimizing the IVT reaction conditions can reduce the generation of dsRNA. For instance, using 5 mM of MgCl2 compared to the conventional concentration of 20 mM resulted in lower production levels of dsRNA while not affecting mRNA yield (Mu et al.  ).

3

## Lipid Nanoparticle Platform Technology for mRNA Delivery
LNPs have emerged as the leading delivery platform for mRNA therapeutics owing to their ability to protect mRNA from degradation and facilitate its efficient cellular uptake. In this section, LNP design features are discussed, including compositional modifications and surface functionalization that are enabling various mRNA‐based therapeutic applications, including immunotherapy.
3.1

## Lipid Nanoparticle Composition
LNPs are lipid vesicles with a diameter generally < 100 nm and composed of sterols, phospholipids, ionizable cationic lipids, and polyethylene glycol (PEG)‐conjugated lipids. Each component has a distinct role contributing to the LNP's functionality (Figure  ).
 Sterols—typically cholesterol—are essential for modulating the fluidity and stability of the LNP's outer lipid layer. Moreover, cholesterol acts as a molecular bridge between the hydrophobic core of the LNP and the hydrophilic phospholipid heads. This bridging function is vital for maintaining the structural integrity and rigidity of the phospholipid layer, influencing the stability and drug release properties of the LNP (Koltover et al.  ; Kulkarni et al.  ). Notably, a certain cholesterol threshold is necessary for efficient nucleic acid encapsulation. However, an excess of cholesterol can lead to the formation of cholesterol crystallites within the LNP core alongside deprotonated ionizable lipids, potentially impacting the LNP's physicochemical properties (Kulkarni et al.  ; Li et al.  ). Phospholipids are often referred to as “helper lipids” or “structural lipids” which can influence the LNP's stability. Distearoylphosphatidylcholine (DSPC), an amphiphilic phospholipid with saturated tails (C18) is often used to generate stable LNPs (Gruner et al.  ) as it has a cylindrical geometry compatible with bilayer structures (Kulkarni et al.  ). Another typically used phospholipid includes 1,2‐dioleoyl‐sn‐glycero‐3‐phosphoethanolamine (DOPE). In contrast to DSPC, DOPE has a small uncharged headgroup and two unsaturated acyl chains (C18) which endow it with fusogenic properties (Cullis and De Kruijff  ). As DOPE displays an “inverted cone” geometry and preferentially forms an inverted hexagonal HII phase, the lipid is often used to improve endosomal escape (Bailey and Cullis  ; Kulkarni et al.  ).
Arguably the most important LNP component constitutes ionizable cationic lipids, which efficiently complex nucleic acids at low pH during the LNP production process, ensure a net neutral surface charge at physiological pH, and promote endosomal escape. To achieve this, these lipids contain tertiary amines and are characterized by an apparent acid dissociation constant (pKa) between 6 and 7 (Heyes et al.  ; Kulkarni et al.  ). LNPs are generally taken up by cells via endocytosis and must ensure their mRNA cargo is released into the cytoplasm. While the exact mechanisms of endosomal escape remain an area of ongoing research, the drop in pH within the endosome protonates the ionizable cationic lipids. This promotes interactions between the positively charged ionizable cationic lipids and the negatively charged endosomal membrane lipids, forming inverted hexagonal HII phases (Cullis and De Kruijff  ; Cullis and Hope  ). These structures do not support lipid bilayers, enabling endosomal escape and mRNA release into the cytoplasm. The ionizable lipid's molecular structure, particularly tail branching, which is characteristic of newer generation ionizable cationic lipids, influences its efficiency in promoting endosomal escape. Other features also affect the ionizable cationic lipids' potency and applicability. For instance, the apparent pKa must be low enough not to harbor a net positive surface charge at a physiological pH since this is associated with rapid clearance and toxicity (Heyes et al.  ; Semple et al.  ). At the same time, the pKa must be high enough to adopt a protonated state under acidic endosomal conditions. In addition, hydrolysable ester bonds are typically used for branching unit conjugation, providing increased biodegradability and, thereby, lower toxicity levels (Figure  ) (Li et al.  ; Semple et al.  ). Lastly, the ionizable cationic lipids should be unsaturated. Since unsaturated tails promote interaction with endosomal anionic lipids, this interaction results in membrane lytic nonbilayer structures enabling cytoplasmic delivery (Koltover et al.  ; Kulkarni et al.  ).
PEG‐lipids play an important role during the LNP production process by dictating size and preventing aggregation after formation (Hald Albertsen et al.  ; Kulkarni et al.  ). For example, an LNP containing 0.25 mol% PEG‐lipid displayed a particle diameter of 120 nm (Belliveau et al.  ), while an increase in the relative PEG‐lipid content to 5 mol% at the expense of cholesterol resulted in LNPs with a diameter of 25 nm. As PEG‐lipids form a hydrophilic corona around the LNPs that prevents cell uptake, “diffusible” PEG‐lipids with short dialkyl chains (C14) were developed that dissociate from the LNP in the presence of a lipid sink (Akinc et al.  ; Schober et al.  ). This enables LNPs to interact with components in the circulation and be efficiently taken up by cells following administration (Allison and Milner  ). For example, apolipoprotein E (apoE) binding to the LNP surface occurs following dissociation of the PEG lipids after systemic administration. This has been demonstrated using apoE knockout mice, where LNP‐induced hepatic silencing efficacy is reduced compared to wild‐type mice, an effect that can be rescued by incubating the LNP with apoE prior to administration (Allison and Milner  ). Similar results have been shown in low‐density lipoprotein receptor (LDLr) knockout mice, a receptor for apoE that is highly expressed on hepatocytes (Akinc et al.  ). Furthermore, the PEG‐lipid content affects the degree of interaction with serum proteins and cells, as 95% of LNPs containing 0.5 mol% of diffusible PEG‐lipids are taken up by the liver 15 min after administration (Chen et al.  ). Conversely, LNPs with a PEG‐lipid content of 5 mol% display increased circulation times and decreased liver uptake (Chen et al.  ). An emerging alternative to PEGylation is polysarcosine (pSar), a water‐soluble polypeptoid, which offers comparable stealth properties to PEG with lower immunogenicity. Moreover, pSar is readily biodegradable and displays a higher transfection potency than conventional PEG‐based LNPs (Nogueira et al.  ).

3.2

## Lipid Nanoparticle Production
Aside from designing potent ionizable cationic lipids, the clinical translation of LNPs for delivering nucleic acid therapeutics was enabled by the development of a robust, scalable, and reproducible manufacturing procedure (Belliveau et al.  ) (Figure  ). Rapid mixing production procedures have emerged that enable controlling LNP size, homogeneity, and encapsulation efficiency (Cullis and Hope  ; Evers et al.  ). For example, T‐junction mixers produce stable LNPs by rapidly mixing lipids dissolved in ethanol with an aqueous solution of nucleic acids (Jeffs et al.  ). This approach is driven by the electrostatic interactions between the negatively charged nucleic acid phosphate backbone and the positively charged ionizable lipids, resulting in efficient nucleic acid encapsulation within the hydrophobic interior of LNPs (Kulkarni et al.  ). Technological advancements have led to the development of microfluidic chip‐based mixing platforms, such as staggered herringbone mixers, which allow for fine‐tuning flow rates and mixing parameters (Evers et al.  ). This methodology utilizes syringe pumps to feed solutions into the two inlets on the chip. Upon entering the device, passing through a series of herringbone structures induces rotational flow combining the fluids, and additional orientation changes define the chaotic flow of the laminar streams, rapidly mixing the ethanol and aqueous phases (DeMello  ). Subsequent polarity increase causes the components to self‐assemble and take on their structural LNP conformation.
Mixing parameters, such as flow rate and the ratio between the aqueous phase (RNA) to organic phase (lipids)—also known as flow rate ratio—significantly influences the batch‐to‐batch reproducibility and the resulting formulation's polydispersity index (PDI) (Belliveau et al.  ). Generally, a low PDI of < 0.1 is preferred, defining a homogeneously sized particle population. Selecting the ideal flow rate results in consistent and reproducible LNPs with a PDI as low as 0.03 (Song et al.  ). Moreover, a high flow rate facilitates the formulation of the smallest‐sized LNPs, achievable according to the physical properties of the molecular components (Belliveau et al.  ).
Following the mixing process, the nascent LNPs undergo a dialysis step against a buffer at physiological pH to remove the organic solvent and allow the nanoparticles to attain their final conformation (Chen et al.  ; Kulkarni et al.  ). The final product LNPs are typically spherical with diameters < 100 nm, characterized by an outer layer of PEG‐lipids and a core encapsulating the ionizable lipids and nucleic acid payload (Kulkarni et al.  , ; Evers et al.  ).
While microfluidic chip‐based production methods are well‐suited for LNP production in laboratory settings, producing LNPs on an industrial scale is typically done using jet impingement mixers (Warne et al.  ). This technique uses multiple high‐velocity fluid jets to thoroughly mix the lipid and nucleic acid solutions, ensuring consistent product quality and scalability. Following rapid mixing‐based production, LNPs are typically purified and concentrated using tangential flow filtration, which involves a peristaltic pump feeding an LNP solution through a filtration membrane (Musumeci et al.  ) promoting rapid buffer exchange and a quick increase to physiological pH.

3.3

## Lipid Nanoparticle Modifications
Despite the successful applications of LNP‐RNA for vaccine purposes and hepatic delivery, its widespread implementation requires the ability to control its biodistribution following administration. This section highlights strategies including compositional modifications and surface functionalization to promote and enrich LNP localization in specific organs, tissues, or cells.
3.3.1

## Compositional Modifications
The molecular structure of the ionizable cationic lipid tails affects the biophysical properties and mRNA delivery efficacy of LNPs (Figure  ). For example, switching from linear tertiary amine headgroups to heterocyclic amines activated the Stimulator of Interferon Genes (STING) pathway, enhancing the adjuvant properties of LNP‐mRNA for vaccine applications (Miao et al.  ). Even the type of bond within the tail can influence LNP biodistribution; incorporating ionizable cationic lipids with ester bonds in the tails resulted in liver accumulation, while switching to an amide bond shifted delivery towards the lungs (Qiu et al.  ; Qiu et al.  ). The specific arrangement of the tail structure has also been shown to be critical, as incorporating thiophene‐based ionizable lipids with linoleic tails attached on the same side resulted in LNP enrichment in the liver and spleen, while positioning them on opposite sides led to lung and spleen accumulation (Eygeris et al.  ). Besides organ enrichment, tailoring the LNP's ionizable lipid component can be used to promote mRNA delivery to specific immune cells. For instance, incorporating piperazine‐derived lipids in LNPs resulted in mRNA delivery to antigen‐presenting cells like liver Kupffer cells, splenic macrophages, and dendritic cells (Ni et al.  ). Likewise, incorporating polyamine‐core lipids in LNPs resulted in T transfection, facilitating applications such as chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cell engineering and developing immunosuppressive T cells for the treatment of autoimmune disorders (Billingsley et al.  ; Thatte et al.  ). Other approaches include optimizing the tail length and incorporating disulfide bonds, which enhanced mRNA vaccine delivery to lymph nodes, leading to robust CD8+ T cell activation and potent anti‐tumor immunity (Chen et al.  ).
Aside from the ionizable cationic lipid, modifying other lipid components has been shown to alter LNP features. For instance, substituting cholesterol with β‐sitosterol provided advantages for developing stable, inhalable LNP‐mRNA formulations (J. Kim et al.  ), while incorporating phospholipids with constrained adamantyl groups promoted mRNA delivery to Kupffer cells in the liver (Gan et al. ).
Finally, incorporating an additional lipid in the LNP formulation has been reported to promote selective organ targeting (SORT). For example, incorporating the anionic lipid 1,2‐dioleoyl‐sn‐glycero‐3‐phosphate (18PA) was shown to result in splenic enrichment of LNPs, while incorporating the cationic lipid 1,2‐dioleoyl‐3‐trimethylammonium‐propane (DOTAP) skewed accumulation to the lung, and adding the neutral lipid1,2‐dioleoyl‐3‐dimethylammonium‐propane (DODAP) enhanced liver enrichment (Cheng et al.  ; LoPresti et al.  ; Radmand et al.  ). However, the implementation of permanently positively charged lipids is a subject of debate due to safety concerns (Cheng et al.  ; Omo‐Lamai et al.  ). For example, adding DOTAP significantly increases the zeta potential of the LNP‐mRNA, and mice intravenously injected with a dose of 10 μg DOTAP‐LNPs displayed severe side effects (Omo‐Lamai et al.  ). Upon anatomical inspection, the lungs displayed a morphology reminiscent of acute respiratory distress syndrome, revealed to be induced by activating the clotting cascade. Interestingly, the size of the DOTAP‐LNP influenced the clotting severity. While LNPs with a diameter of 100 nm facilitated thrombin binding and induced clotting, LNPs with a diameter of 80 nm maintained lung tropism. Next to cationic lipids, the anionic phospholipid phosphatidylserine—which acts as a signaling molecule and promotes the endocytic activity of phagocytes—has also been incorporated in LNPs (Luozhong et al.  ). Adding ~5 mol% of phosphatidylserine improved the uptake and expression in lymphoid organs such as the spleen and lymph nodes, mediated by macrophages and monocytes.

3.3.2

## Lipid Nanoparticle Surface Functionalization
Tissue and cellular enrichment while minimizing off‐target effects remains a critical challenge for LNP‐mRNA's widespread implementation. In addition to compositional modifications, LNP surface functionalization can promote specific cell interactions and tissue accumulation (Akinc et al.  ). For instance, LNPs containing mannose‐conjugated PEG‐lipids have demonstrated targeted delivery to sinusoidal endothelial cells via interactions with CD206 receptors (M. Kim et al.  ). Other approaches include the LNP surface functionalization with antibodies or antibody fragments to PEG‐lipids. A notable example is the Anchored Secondary scFv Enabling Targeting (ASSET) platform which enables functionalizing the LNP surface with antibody single‐chain variable fragments (scFv) to improve RNA delivery to specific cell types (Veiga et al.  ). This modular system allows flexibility in targeting various leukocyte subsets in vivo, by switching between different scFv's without compromising mRNA encapsulation or LNP integrity. The therapeutic potential of ASSET‐modified LNPs was demonstrated by improved targeted interleukin‐10 expression in Ly6c + inflammatory leukocytes in models of inflammatory bowel disease. Another example includes conjugating anti‐CD4 antibodies to LNPs, which significantly enhanced mRNA delivery to T cells, achieving a 30‐fold higher signal compared to non‐targeted LNPs and resulting in efficient in vivo gene editing of CD4+ T cells in spleen and lymph nodes (Tombácz et al.  ). Similarly, CD5‐targeted LNPs facilitated efficient gene editing in both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, enabling the development of CAR T cell therapies for cardiac repair (Rurik et al.  ). Moreover, LNPs targeted to c‐kit (CD117) effectively delivered mRNA to hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs) in rodents, achieving ~90% gene editing efficiency in vivo and highlighting their therapeutic applicability in hematological disorders (Shi et al.  ) (Figure  ). For mRNA delivery to activated endothelium, PECAM‐ and VCAM‐targeted platforms have been proposed and tested in acute brain inflammation mouse models (Marcos‐Contreras et al.  ; Parhiz et al.  ).

4

## Immunotherapy Applications
The rapid development and implementation of the COVID‐19 vaccines have firmly established LNP‐mRNA technology as a prophylactic vaccine platform (Baden et al.  ; Polack et al.  ; Verbeke et al.  ). Leveraging existing production infrastructure, LNP‐mRNA drug products are currently being developed for several types of immunotherapy applications, including vaccines for diverse infectious diseases, immuno‐oncology purposes, and as treatment for autoimmune diseases (Figure  ).
 4.1

## Infectious Diseases
Employing LNP technology for vaccine purposes involves administering mRNA encoding antigens, provoking the host's immune response, and ultimately resulting in immunological memory and production of protective antibodies (Heinz and Stiasny  ; Verbeke et al.  ). Following intramuscular LNP‐mRNA injections, transfected muscle cells expressing the antigen on the surface activate antigen‐presenting cells (APCs). The APCs in turn initiate an adaptive immune response by presenting the antigen to naive T cells, which differentiate into effector T cells and develop into cytotoxic T cells (Sadarangani et al.  ). In parallel, the resultant T follicular helper cells facilitate the differentiation of B cells into antibody‐producing plasma cells. Besides SARS‐CoV‐2, LNP‐mRNA‐based vaccines are also being developed for a range of other infectious diseases caused not only by viruses, but also by bacteria and parasites.
One such example includes influenza. Traditional influenza virus vaccines rely on egg‐based production, typically targeting one or more viral strain(s) selected on seasonal probability (Weir and Gruber  ). This development process, production procedure, and vaccination strategy lack adaptability during the flu season and could potentially lead to viral proteins harboring unwarranted mutations (Oxford et al.  ; Robertson et al.  ). In contrast, the LNP‐mRNA platform is readily adaptable, and the encoded antigen is unlikely to carry mutations. Like most licensed seasonal vaccines, it can be adapted for quadrivalent shots that cover multiple antigens, eliciting broad immunity (Pecetta and Rappuoli  ). For instance, a quadrivalent seasonal LNP‐mRNA candidate (mRNA‐1010) that encodes 4 full‐length haemagglutinin influenza strains recommended by the World Health Organization (WHO) is currently undergoing a phase III clinical trial (Table  ) (Kackos et al.  ). However, interim results demonstrated that the occurrence of adverse events was higher for mRNA‐1010 compared to the seasonal virus vaccine, while displaying similar immunogenicity against influenza A but an inferior response against influenza B (Ananworanich et al.  ). These findings indicate that further optimization or rational design of mRNA immunogens and adjuvants is required to create a vaccine with superior characteristics compared to the currently licensed products. Some approaches include the addition of neuraminidase transcripts in the vaccine to generate protection against viral infectivity, as is the case for mRNA‐1020 and mRNA‐1030 (Table  ). Neuraminidases are enzymatic proteins that are displayed on the influenza viral capsid and promote infectiousness by cleaving sialic acid after replicating and exiting the host cell, enabling the virus to infect other cells (Matrosovich et al.  ). Therefore, generating inhibitors against neuraminidase hampers the virus from infecting other cells. A two‐fold increase in neuraminidase inhibitors reduces the chance of infection by 30% (Cortés et al.  ). When vaccinating against trimeric envelope or spike proteins, one approach encompasses the genetic linkage of protein subunits within a single mRNA open reading frame, thereby increasing the probability of native‐like trimeric protein conformation. This enables neutralizing antibody production and establishes immunity since all the key antigens are displayed (del Moral‐Sánchez et al.  ). Moreover, it provides the ability to encode chimeric trimer proteins that might convey broader protection. The genetic linkage of protein subunits allows for the expression of chimeric trimers, essentially conveying resistance to multiple viral strains within one protein.
 Aside from the flu, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infection is a serious health threat to the elderly and young children. Initial RSV vaccine efforts included generating classical formalin‐inactivated RSV (Acosta et al.  ). Unfortunately, upon exposure to RSV, the subjects developed severe lung inflammation. These problems can be attributed to the elusive nature of the RSV F glycoprotein (Acosta et al.  ). The F protein undergoes conformational changes on the viral surface, particularly upon fusion with target cells. The so‐called fusion state of the F protein primarily induces non‐neutralizing antibody responses that exacerbate the infection. Nevertheless, the pre‐fusion state F protein is known to display an epitope that elicits potent neutralizing antibodies (Su et al.  ). Therefore, producing the F protein's pre‐fusion state emerged as a promising vaccination strategy. While challenging, it is possible to manufacture and purify the labile F protein in the prefusion state (Walsh et al.  ). By designing mRNA encoding glycoprotein F in its prefusion conformation, LNP‐mRNA vaccines bypass complicated protein manufacturing and purification techniques (Buschmann et al.  ; Pardi et al.  ). Upon administration, the mRNA directs the production of the pre‐fusion F protein within the host, effectively presenting this critical antigen to the immune system and inducing potent neutralizing antibodies (Mullard  ), resulting in a vaccine efficacy of 83.7% against RSV. Moreover, this approach has demonstrated a safe profile in preclinical and clinical studies without causing vaccine‐enhanced respiratory disease. These results led to the recent approval of the LNP‐mRNA RSV vaccine mRNA‐1345. Besides RSV, there are several LNP‐mRNA vaccines for other viral infections undergoing clinical evaluation, including combination vaccines (Table  ).
Vaccine potency could be increased by using saRNA (Maine et al.  ). This is particularly useful for multivalent vaccines where the antigen encoding for 4 strains constitutes a quartered dose for each strain (Dolgin  ). Next‐generation saRNA vectors comprised of a minimally non‐natural alphavirus‐derived template were recently designed (Maine et al.  ). The resulting saRNA can be dosed immunogenically at a 1 to 10 pg in mice, and mice immunized with two doses of 10 ng survived a lethal rabies virus challenge. Additionally, a clinical vaccination trial comprising administration of a primer and booster, both dosed at 10 μg saRNA, elicited protective titers > 0.5 IU/mL RVNA in 100% of the participants. In contrast, a 1 μg dose resulted in an adequate response of 94% after receiving a booster (Maine et al.  ). Recently, COVID‐19 vaccines were approved based on the LNP‐saRNA platform (Table  ) (Wayne and Blakney  ).
Apart from viruses, increasing numbers of human pathogenic bacteria have developed antibiotic resistance (Ventola  ), emphasizing the need for effective vaccines. However, vaccine development against bacteria is more challenging than against viruses as their often more advanced genome gives rise to many potential vaccine targets (Frost et al.  ). Some additional challenges include non‐protein immunogens such as sugars, which mRNA vaccines cannot exploit. Nevertheless, LNP‐mRNA vaccines are, for example, developed against Borrelia burgdorferi (Lyme disease) (Pine et al.  ). These efforts include mRNA‐1982, a monovalent vaccine targeting the outer surface protein (OspA) and mRNA‐1975, consisting of a heptavalent formulation (targeting 7 OspA variants), which are both in phase I–II clinical trials (NCT05975099). At the same time, early‐stage clinical trials are conducted to evaluate a vaccine against 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
 (tuberculosis) (Looney et al.  ). The currently available vaccine, bacillus Calmette–Guérin (BCG), provides suboptimal durability and often induces adverse events (Turnbull et al.  ). Additional preclinical LNP‐mRNA studies include vaccination against 
Yersinia. pestis
, responsible for the bubonic plague (Kon et al.  ). Although there have been successful clinical trials, currently there are no approved plague vaccines in western countries (Rosenzweig et al.  ). In mice, intramuscular vaccination of 5 μg of LNP‐mRNA (prime and 2 boosters) encoding the cp‐caf1 gene coding for mF1 elicited protective IgG titers (Kon et al.  ). Interestingly, various mRNAs were evaluated for their efficacy, including a construct comprising a human Ig kappa light chain signaling peptide (facilitating secretion) and a human Fc sequence. Both performed well, whereby a single 5 μg dose prevented lethality upon lethal 
Yersinia pestis
 exposure. Another pathogen that might benefit from LNP‐mRNA vaccination is 
Clostridium difficile
, which causes gastrointestinal disorders (Lessa et al.  ). The prevalence of infection upon hospitalization is among the highest of pathogens worldwide (Lessa et al.  ). Recently, a phase 3 clinical trial (NCT03090191) provided protection but could not provide immunity (Donskey et al.  ). Due to the genetic diversity in 
Clostridium difficile
 strains, vaccines should target relatively conserved targets (Alameh et al.  ). As such, mRNA against PPEP‐1, TcdA, and TcdB was selected, exhibiting, on average, at least 90% similarity in terms of the amino acid sequence to 137 representative strains. In an infection model that exposed mice to 10,000 spores of 
Clostridium difficile
, both the bivalent and trivalent LNP‐mRNA vaccines dosed twice at 1 μg provided protection from bacterial challenge. In contrast, unvaccinated mice succumbed 2 days after 
Clostridium difficile
 exposure. Finally, a primer and booster administered at 200 μg of tetravalent LNP‐mRNA (now additionally including CdeM) in macaques elicited adequate antibody responses (Alameh et al.  ). Additionally, LNP‐mRNA is also being developed for vaccination against parasites such as malaria (Plasmodium falciparum). A recent LNP‐mRNA‐mediated preclinical vaccination trial in mice against Pfs25 and PfCSP demonstrated superior immunogenicity compared to the licensed Pfs25 and PfCSP DNA vaccines (Hayashi et al.  ). Furthermore, LNP‐mRNA is employed in malaria vaccination to induce transmission‐blocking vaccines (Scaria et al.  ). In this context, the Pfs25 mRNA is engineered to be anchored in the cell membrane via genetic linkage to a glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor or a transmembrane domain. Notably, Pfs25 antigens prominently displayed on the cell membrane resulted in the highest transmission reduction. The most potent LNP‐mRNA candidate achieved a transmission reduction of over 99% for 126 days in mice (Scaria et al.  ).

4.2

## Immuno‐Oncology
Cancer immunotherapy—harnessing the body's own immune system to fight cancer cells—has revolutionized cancer treatment by providing unprecedented responses in patients that were previously deemed untreatable (Baker et al.  ; Ribas and Wolchok  ). However, immunotherapies including cytokine therapy, checkpoint blockade, and chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cell therapy are often accompanied by adverse effects and are only effective in a subset of patients (Cappell and Kochenderfer  ). The use of LNP‐mRNA provides opportunities for potent cancer immunotherapy with increased specificity and potentially reduced adverse effects (Hofstraat et al.  ; Raimondo et al.  ). Currently, LNP technology is used for delivering mRNA encoding proinflammatory cytokines, tumor antigens, and in vivo CARs (Liu et al.  ) (Figure  ). Cytokines can be regarded as master regulators of the immune system and pro‐inflammatory cytokines interferon (IFN)‐α and interleukin (IL)‐2 have been approved for the treatment of various cancer types. However, the therapeutic application of recombinant cytokine therapy is characterized by limited response rates and considerable toxicity, resulting from off‐target effects (Deckers et al.  ). Intratumoral administration of LNP‐mRNA encoding immune‐stimulating proteins such as IL‐12, IL‐27, and GM‐CSF has demonstrated robust anti‐tumor immunity by activating various immune cells, including dendritic cells and T cells (Liu et al.  ). Similarly, intratumoral injections of LNP‐mRNA encoding IL‐23, IL‐36γ, and OX40L led to tumor regression in various cancer models, primarily through the induction of a potent type 1 T helper cell response characterized by increased CD8+ T cell infiltration into tumors (Hewitt et al.  ), outperforming treatment with recombinantly produced cytokines. This approach is currently being evaluated in a phase I clinical trial (NCT03739931, Table  ). Besides local administration, LNP‐mRNA encoding an albumin‐IL‐2 fusion protein has been administered systemically for hepatic protein production. This approach achieved higher and more sustained serum IL‐2 concentrations in preclinical models than intravenous administration of recombinant IL‐2 protein (Beck et al.  ). Furthermore, engineering the mRNA transcript to encode an albumin‐IL‐2 fusion protein extended serum half‐life and enhanced tumor growth suppression. This approach is currently being evaluated in an ongoing phase I clinical trial (NCT04710043) in patients with metastatic or unresectable solid tumors (Table  ).
Intramuscular administration of LNP‐mRNA as cancer vaccines offers several advantages, including ease of administration, localized delivery to immunologically active muscle tissue, and the expression of patient‐specific neoantigens native to tumor cells, which are characterized by genomic mutations, abnormal transcriptomic variants (Xie et al.  ), and faulty post‐translational modifications (Schumacher and Schreiber  ). The resulting neoantigens enable targeting tumor‐specific antigens that do not occur in healthy cells. The broad adoption of next‐generation sequencing (NGS) techniques provides a cost‐effective detection method for tumor‐specific mutations in individual patients (Mardis  ; Schumacher and Schreiber  ). Combining NGS with predictive algorithms to identify immunogenic neoantigens upon MHCII presentation has paved the way for personalized immuno‐oncology (Mardis  ; Lang et al. ). Indeed, LNP‐mRNA provides a scalable and flexible platform for implementing personalized medicine. This is evident from Moderna's and Merck's joint trial (2 bNCT 03897881) of mRNA‐4157, which encodes up to 34 specific melanoma neoantigens and is administered intramuscularly (Weber et al.  ). In this trial, the neoantigen vaccine was administered up to nine times after tumor resection, while pembrolizumab was administered up to 18 times. Interestingly, 91% of the patients receiving both checkpoint blockade therapy and mRNA‐4157 were given LNPs encoding 34 specific neoantigens. The levels of circulating tumor DNA—a prognostic biomarker for recurrence‐free survival—were decreased in patients receiving mRNA‐4157 therapy. Vaccination combined with PD‐1 blockade prolonged recurrence‐free survival in melanoma patients compared to those receiving PD‐1 inhibitor monotherapy (Weber et al.  ). The clinical benefit of mRNA‐4157 in high‐risk resected melanoma compared with PD‐1 blockade is further evaluated in a phase 3 trial (NTC05933577). Similarly, BioNTech is developing a trial based on the individualized neoantigen‐specific therapies (iNeST) platform (Rojas et al.  ). Currently, the only curative treatment for pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDCA) is surgery; however, PDCA outcomes can be significantly improved by combining patient‐specific neoantigens with PD‐L1 checkpoint inhibitors. The iNEST platform is administered intravenously, facilitated by lipoplexes that are favorably taken up by the spleen, specifically by dendritic cells. Patients who developed neoantigen vaccine‐specific T cells (50%) remained recurrence‐free for over 25 months after surgery. Recently, personalized uridine mRNA lipoplexes (autogene cevumeran) were evaluated for tolerability, preliminary antitumoral activity, and immunogenicity in advanced solid tumors (Lopez et al.  ). As a standalone treatment, autogene cevumeran induced neoantigen‐specific ex vivo T cell responses in 11 out of 15 patients. When combined with PD‐L1 inhibitors, a similar percentage of patients (N = 75; > 70%) exhibited prevalent neoantigen‐specific T cell responses. Finally, the T cell responses were measurable for up to 65 weeks and continuing. Interestingly, a phase II clinical trial (NCT 03815058) featuring gene cevumeran was initiated against previously untreated advanced melanoma. Personalized peptide neoantigen vaccination for resected stage III or IV renal cell carcinoma led to potent T cell responses (NCT02950766) (Braun et al.  ). All nine enrolled patients who received neoantigen vaccines, with or without concurrent ipilimumab, remained recurrence‐free 40.2 months after surgery.
While CAR T cell therapy provides unprecedented benefits to patients with previously untreatable hematological malignancies (Finck et al.  ; Labanieh and Mackall  ), several barriers hamper widespread CAR T cell immunotherapy implementation resulting from the costly and long ex vivo manufacturing process and limited efficacy in solid tumor models. However, in vivo reprogramming of T cells using LNP‐mRNA offers a cost‐effective approach that would be accessible to a larger group of patients. For instance, an encoded antigen‐specific CAR against an abundant or uniquely expressed neoantigen eradicated malignant cells (Schmidt et al.  ). Although the mRNA‐based transient expression is a limitation (Parayath et al.  ), a strategy to overcome this is the co‐delivery of CAR‐encoding LNP‐mRNA with siRNA targeting PD‐1, a key immune checkpoint. Knockdown of PD‐1 provides enhanced CAR T cell persistence and anti‐tumor efficacy by preventing T cell exhaustion and promoting sustained anti‐tumor activity (Hamilton et al.  ). Besides successful transfection with constructs encoding CARs, activation of engineered T cells is crucial for successful CAR T cell therapy. This activation typically requires the engagement of CD3 and CD28 co‐stimulatory receptors. While ex vivo activation typically involves using antibodies targeting CD3 and CD28 immobilized on magnetic beads, recent advancements have led to the development of activating lipid nanoparticles. These LNPs are engineered to display fragments of CD3 and CD28 antibodies on their surface, enabling direct activation of T cells in vivo. Preclinical studies using LNPs to generate anti‐CD19 CAR T cells demonstrated antitumor activity in a leukemia mouse model (Metzloff et al.  ). Targeted LNP‐mRNA could therefore be an alternative to costly and time‐consuming ex vivo CAR T production (Mullard  ; Short et al.  ). However, (non‐viral) T cell transfection, especially in vivo, is notoriously difficult. The future success of LNP‐mRNA‐based strategies depends on further optimization of cationic ionizable lipids for efficient T cell transfection and, secondly, on the LNP surface functionalization with T cell receptor targeting moieties (Short et al.  ). Besides T cells, the myeloid cell repertoire holds promise for in vivo LNP‐mRNA CAR therapy. For instance, incorporating DOPE into LNP‐mRNA formulations enabled the delivery of CAR to macrophages (CAR M) (Hamilton et al.  ). Moreover, a recent pre‐clinical study featuring LNP‐mRNA CAR therapy geared to myeloid cells displayed a prominent anti‐tumor response in various solid tumors (Argueta et al.  ), highlighting the development of a CAR construct against trophoblast cell surface antigen 2 (TROP2) or against GP75, which is overexpressed in many solid tumors. In this study, the antigen‐specific CAR construct was tethered to a truncated version of CD89 (FcαR), facilitating association with FcRγ and providing myeloid cell activation. The in vivo LNP‐mRNA CAR therapy displayed a prominent anti‐tumor response in various solid tumors, which have been challenging so far to treat with CAR T cell therapy.

4.3

## Autoimmune Disorders
Autoimmune diseases are characterized by an overactive immune response typically treated by immunosuppressive drugs (Davidson and Diamond  ). These chronic immunosuppressive therapies can cause adverse effects, including increased susceptibility to infections (Holt  ; Peleg et al.  ). This leaves patients in a precarious balancing situation where the immune system is sufficiently dampened but can still fend off opportunistic pathogens (Peleg et al.  ).
Recently, CAR T cell therapies have been employed to combat autoimmune diseases by targeting CD19‐overexpressing autoantigen‐specific and malignant B cells (Müller et al.  ). This type of therapeutic intervention induces a cellular purge, thereby depleting autoantigen and malignant B cells (Müller et al.  ). Implementing this therapy in 15 patients with three different autoimmune diseases, including systemic lupus erythematosus, idiopathic inflammatory myositis, and systemic sclerosis, led to significant clinical improvement and remission over 2 years.
Regarding the safety profile, a small clinical trial showed remarkably low adverse effects. Noteworthy, CAR T cells were engineered to deplete the general B cell population, eliminating essential components of the adaptive immune system and enabling opportunistic pathogens. Considering this fact, one might improve the CAR's design by engineering the epitope to selectively deplete autoantigen‐specific B cells (Rampotas et al.  ).
Next to CARs, LNP technology offers the possibility to deliver mRNA encoding immunosuppressive factors to specific cells or tissues, potentially improving the therapeutic efficacy while minimizing side effects (Cao and Xia  ). Target cells include, for example, hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs), the precursor to blood and immune cells residing in the bone marrow (Sugimura et al.  ). In the context of autoimmune disease, the genetic modulation of HSPCs using LNP‐mRNA to either induce tolerance to specific antigens, correct underlying genetic defects, or promote an immunosuppressive environment that could provide long‐lasting therapeutic benefits. HSPCs self‐renew and differentiate into various cell types, allowing for sustained production of regulated immune cells (Laurenti and Göttgens  ). For example, LNP‐mRNAs can rebalance the immune system by expressing mRNAs encoding immunosuppressive cytokines such as IL‐4, IL‐6, IL‐10, IL‐11, and IL‐13 (Vignali et al.  ). These cytokines enable T regulatory cells (Tregs) to gain control and maintain peripheral tolerance (Vignali et al.  ), thus preventing chronic inflammatory diseases and the development of autoimmune diseases.
Another approach to prevent allergies and autoimmune diseases relies on an entirely different strategy, namely the induction of tolerance to specific antigens. The success of this strategy depends on the introduction of an antigen under non‐inflammatory conditions, as this leads to Treg development and reduces the effector T cell population (Krienke et al.  ). As a result, the Tregs induce strong immunosuppression, conveying that the presented antigen is harmless. The actualization of this strategy yielded promising results in several mouse models of multiple sclerosis, evoking the tolerance of a myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (Pishesha et al.  ). In this context, LNP‐mRNA might be beneficial if administered at a low enough dose, minimizing the induction of inflammatory responses or developing immunosilent LNP‐mRNA formulations. The benefit of LNP‐mRNA in promoting tolerance is its sustained expression of the antigen, unlike a single administration of protein, which is likely to be rapidly cleared upon administration. Engineered MCHII‐targeted antigens might offer a solution by providing antigen tolerance at negligible immunogenicity. It comprises a modular platform aided by highly specific nanobodies providing affinity to MCHII, expediting the natural antigen processing route. In mouse models of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, accelerated type 1 diabetes, and in a T cell‐mediated arthritis, the prophylactic systemic administration of 20 μg MHCII‐targeted antigen was sufficient to induce tolerance for at least 2 months (Pishesha et al.  ). However promising, these strategies are mainly effective as prophylactic treatments since, when introduced in mice with the pre‐existing inflammatory environment, the antigens aggravated the inflammation. Interception of the autoimmune disease requires additional small‐molecule drugs, such as dexamethasone, which, given its hydrophobicity, could be integrated into LNP‐mRNA (Lammers et al.  ). Alternatively, LNP‐mRNAs can provide a versatile platform for personalized medicine. By modifying the mRNA sequence, individualized epitopes for specific immunomodulation can be generated. LNP‐mRNAs encoding antibodies could target immune cells involved in the autoimmune response, leveraging the effectiveness of antibody‐based therapies already established in treating cancer, chronic inflammation, and autoimmune conditions. Importantly, LNP‐mediated delivery of antibody‐encoding mRNA offers advantages over direct antibody administration, such as sustained in vivo antibody production (Stadler et al.  ).

5

## Outlook
Following the approval of the first LNP‐siRNA drug (Adams et al.  ; Akinc et al.  ) and the COVID‐19 LNP‐mRNA vaccines (Baden et al.  ; Polack et al.  ), LNP‐mRNA platform technology is currently being applied for various immunotherapy approaches, including treatment of infectious diseases, cancer, and autoimmune disorders (Beck et al.  ; Breda et al.  ; Mackensen et al.  ; Rurik et al.  ) (Table  ).
Importantly, while impressive therapeutic effects have been achieved, adverse effects have also been observed. Ionizable cationic lipids and PEG‐lipids have been reported to induce immune responses by activating TLR4 or CD1d receptors or inducing anti‐PEG antibodies, respectively (Ju, Carreño et al.  ; Ju, Lee et al.  ). However, the complete picture of LNP immunogenicity is complex, given the involvement of multiple mechanisms including the complement system and inflammasome activation (Lee et al.  ). In the case of vaccination or cancer immunotherapy, the inherent reactogenicity of LNPs and the mRNA payload is tolerated to some extent because the desired outcome is immunostimulation. However, balancing immunotherapeutic benefits and unwanted adverse effects remains complicated. Implementing LNP mRNA‐mediated immunotherapy is especially challenging for diseases characterized by an overactive immune system, where the goal is to dampen the immune response. In the case of protein replacement therapy or gene editing, the ramifications of an immunostimulatory response can be detrimental to the patient. Managing reactogenicity is therefore considered one of the main hurdles in unlocking the full potential of LNP immunotherapy. As a result, substantial efforts are focused on developing next‐generation ionizable cationic materials, which are both potent and immunosilent at the same time (Chaudhary et al.  ; Omo‐Lamai et al.  ).
To identify these materials, libraries of ionizable cationic lipids need to be rationally designed and screened, guided by machine learning methods. Recent advances in machine learning approaches offer powerful tools to accelerate the discovery and optimization of novel ionizable cationic lipids with improved safety profiles. By identifying critical molecular features that govern these properties, machine learning models are trained on the structural, functional, and immunogenic data of ionizable cationic lipids (B. Li et al.  ; van der Meel et al.  ). This knowledge can guide the design of ionizable cationic lipid libraries, enriched with candidates exhibiting a favorable translation‐to‐immunogenicity ratios (Chaudhary et al.  ) (Figure  ). Noteworthy, the screening potential of DNA barcoding combined with automated LNP formulation opens the possibility of simultaneously assessing 1000s of LNP variants in vivo and uncovering the relationship between LNP compositional modification and biodistribution/organ targeting (Paunovska et al.  ; Xue et al.  ) (Figure  ).
 In a recent example of a self‐driving lab integrating machine learning with robotic automation called Large‐scale Unsupervised Modeling followed by Iterative experiments (LUMI‐lab), 1700 LNPs through an machine learning‐powered screening process consisting of 10 iterative cycles were succesfully created and evaluated (Cui et al.  ). Notably, this screening identified brominated lipid tails as a novel feature for enhancing mRNA delivery. The foundation of the model relies on two key inputs: the atomic types and their 3D atomic coordinates, which allow the model to develop a comprehensive understanding of the physicochemical properties and atomic interactions. The process concludes with closed‐loop optimization through active learning, where the model integrates self‐driven experiments, refining its approach throughout each iteration. Aside from establishing next‐generation nanomaterials and LNP compositions, alternative delivery platform nanotechnologies are being developed for immunotherapy applications. For example, it was recently demonstrated that apolipoprotein nanoparticles (aNPs) are capable of functionally delivering siRNA and mRNA to various immune cells and HSPCs in the bone marrow (Hofstraat et al.  ). Another example includes incorporating fusion‐associated small transmembrane proteins isolated from fusogenic orthoreoviruses in lipid nanoparticles, which showed low immunogenicity, broad biodistribution, and effective mRNA and DNA delivery in mouse and non‐human primate models (Brown et al.  ).
Aside from mRNA therapeutic and vaccine applications, the LNP‐mRNA platform is increasingly applied for gene editing approaches (Table  ). This presents additional challenges including the production and characterization of LNPs encapsulating sgRNA and mRNA encoding for the editor. To address this, ionizable cationic lipids like lipid LP01 (Finn et al.  ) have been developed. Virtually all contemporary LNP‐based in vivo gene editing approaches are aimed at hepatic applications. For example, NTLA‐2001 is an LNP containing sgRNA and mRNA encoding Cas9, which is currently undergoing a phase 3 clinical trial for treatment of transthyretin amyloidosis (Table  ). Another example includes base editing, which is used (Rothgangl et al.  ; Villiger et al.  ; Zhang et al.  ) for its ability to correct or edit the genome without inducing erratic double‐stranded breaks (Figure  ) (Madigan et al.  ; Rothgangl et al.  ; Zhang et al.  ). It relies on a Cas9‐nickase with adenine (T/A to C/G) or cytosine base editor (C‐G to T‐A). The cytosine editor, in addition to correcting mutations, can introduce stop codons in the genome; this characteristic is exploited for therapeutic interventions. Alternatively, as demonstrated in a clinical trial (NCT05398029), base editors can be utilized to edit splice sites to inactivate the gene of interest (Musunuru et al.  ; Rothgangl et al.  ). Previously, this strategy was used to deactivate the PCSK9 gene to reduce low‐density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL‐c) levels. In non‐human primates, this single A/T to G/C edit significantly reduced PSCK9 and LDL‐c for more than 2.5 years. When used to treat patients, the base editing therapy and doses ranging from 0.45 to 0.6 mg/kg facilitated a reduction in PCSK9 levels from 39% to 55% over 6 months (Table  ). Aside from hepatic applications, the genetic targetability of the CRISPR Cas9 system can be implemented for immunotherapy by modulating the epigenome in the future (Greer and Shi  ; Hyun et al.  ). To this aim, a catalytically inactive Cas9 protein combined with effector domains can be used to regulate the gene expression of immune cells (Cappelluti et al.  ). On the one hand, the effector domain can write or erase the methylation patterns on the epigenomic level, which dictate the expression of the underlying gene. For instance, an H3K4me signature enables higher gene expression since it makes the epigenome more accessible. Some examples of chromatin modifiers are LSD1 and PRDM9, which can write and erase H3K4me modification, respectively (Hyun et al.  ). On the other hand, dCas9 can be utilized for direct transcriptional regulation. For this strategy, dCas9 is fused to activators, such as VPR complex or repressors like KRAB, to modulate gene expression, allowing for durable but reversible precision immunomodulation (Cappelluti et al.  ).
Finally, following the COVID‐19 pandemic and subsequent mRNA vaccine development, establishing scalable GMP‐compliant production of LNP‐mRNAs for clinical applications has propelled innovation in mRNA synthesis and manufacturing techniques. The advancements in mRNA synthesis, including the chemically synthesized minimum mRNA and optimized multitailed mRNA (with multiple synthetic poly(A) tails), provide improved stability and efficacy, yet translating these into large‐scale LNP‐mRNA production is challenging (Imani et al.  ). The parallelized microfluidics emerge as a powerful tool, which enables control over fluid dynamics, highly reproducible and tunable LNP size, encapsulation efficiency, homogeneity, and high throughput—critical for meeting stringent GMP requirements of pharmaceutical production. Simultaneously, there is ongoing research on formulation stability, such as developing lyophilized formulations with enhanced resilience during transportation and allowing for storage at 4°C (Ruppl et al.  ).
In conclusion, the intrinsic capability of nanomaterials to interact with immune cells has resulted in the LNP‐mRNA platform being exploited as a robust modality for vaccine applications and immuno‐oncology. However, unlocking mRNA's full potential for immunotherapy beyond these applications will require establishing nanomaterials and formulations with optimized potency and reactogenicity profiles, combined with innovations to refine production and analytical methods. As it is expected that the number of genetic medicines will only increase, continued innovations in delivery platform nanotechnology and RNA design will be crucial for successful and widespread implementation.

## Author Contributions

Robby Zwolsman: writing – original draft (equal). Youssef B. Darwish: writing – original draft (equal). Ewelina Kluza: supervision (supporting), writing – original draft (supporting), writing – review and editing (supporting). Roy van der Meel: conceptualization (lead), writing – original draft (lead), writing – review and editing (lead).

## Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

## Related WIREs Articles

Strategies for Organ‐Targeted mRNA Delivery by Lipid Nanoparticles

## Acknowledgments
Images were created with BioRender.com and smart.servier.com. This review was supported by a Dutch Research Council (NWO) Vidi grant (no. 19681) to R.v.d.M.

## Data Availability Statement
Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no new data were created or analyzed in this study.