pmcCell Rep MedCell Rep Med3954cellrepsmed101766894Cell Reports Medicine2666-3791ElsevierPMC11148567PMC11148567.111148567111485673862676910.1016/j.xcrm.2024.101516S2666-3791(24)00185-X1015161ArticleNeoantigen-targeted dendritic cell vaccination in lung cancer patients induces long-lived T cells exhibiting the full differentiation spectrum
IngelsJoline De CockLaurenz StevensDieter MayerRupert L. ThéryFabien SanchezGuillem Sanchez VermijlenDavid WeeningKarin De SmetSaskia LootensNele BrusseelMarieke VerstraeteTasja BuyleJolien Van HoutteEva DevrekerPam HeynsKelly De MunterStijn Van LintSandra GoetgelukGlenn BonteSarah BillietLore PilleMelissa JansenHanne PascalEva DeseinsLucas VantommeLies VerdoncktMaarten RoelandtRia EekhoutThomas VandammeNiels LeclercqGeorges TaghonTom KerreTessa VanommeslaegheFloris DhondtAnnemieke FerdinandeLiesbeth Van DorpeJo DesenderLiesbeth De RyckFrederic VermassenFrank SurmontVeerle ImpensFrancis MentenBjörn VermaelenKarimkarim.vermaelen@ugent.be VandekerckhoveBartbart.vandekerckhove@ugent.be 1Department of Diagnostic Sciences, Ghent University, 9000 Ghent, East-Flanders, Belgium2Cancer Research Institute Ghent (CRIG), 9000 Ghent, Easy-Flanders, Belgium3Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, 9000 Ghent, East-Flanders, Belgium4Respiratory Medicine, Ghent University Hospital, 9000 Ghent, East-Flanders, Belgium5VIB-UGent Center for Medical Biotechnology, VIB, 9000 Ghent, East-Flanders, Belgium6Department of Pharmacotherapy and Pharmaceutics, Université Libre de Bruxelles, 1050 Brussels, Brussels, Belgium7Institute for Medical Immunology, Université Libre de Bruxelles, 1050 Brussels, Brussels, Belgium8Université Libre de Bruxelles Center for Research in Immunology, Université Libre de Bruxelles, 1050 Brussels, Brussels, Belgium9WELBIO Department, WEL Research Institute, 1300 Wavre, Walloon Brabant, Belgium10GMP Unit Cell Therapy, Ghent University Hospital, 9000 Ghent, East-Flanders, Belgium11VIB Single Cell Core, VIB, 9000/3000 Ghent/Leuven, East-Flanders/Flemish Brabant, Belgium12Hematology, Ghent University Hospital, 9000 Ghent, East-Flanders, Belgium13Nephrology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent University, 9000 Ghent, East-Flanders, Belgium14Pathology, Ghent University Hospital, 9000 Ghent, East-Flanders, Belgium15Thoracic and Vascular Surgery, Ghent University Hospital, 9000 Ghent, East-Flanders, Belgium∗Corresponding author karim.vermaelen@ugent.be∗∗Corresponding author bart.vandekerckhove@ugent.be16These authors contributed equally
17Lead contact
215202415420245546410910151619920239220242532024150420240506202405062024© 2024 The Author(s)2024https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Summary
Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is known for high relapse rates despite resection in early stages. Here, we present the results of a phase I clinical trial in which a dendritic cell (DC) vaccine targeting patient-individual neoantigens is evaluated in patients with resected NSCLC. Vaccine manufacturing is feasible in six of 10 enrolled patients. Toxicity is limited to grade 1–2 adverse events. Systemic T cell responses are observed in five out of six vaccinated patients, with T cell responses remaining detectable up to 19 months post vaccination. Single-cell analysis indicates that the responsive T cell population is polyclonal and exhibits the near-entire spectrum of T cell differentiation states, including a naive-like state, but excluding exhausted cell states. Three of six vaccinated patients experience disease recurrence during the follow-up period of 2 years. Collectively, these data support the feasibility, safety, and immunogenicity of this treatment in resected NSCLC.

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•Neoantigen-targeted dendritic cell vaccination is feasible and safe in resected NSCLC
•The vaccine induces durable neoantigen-specific T cell reactivity
•Responding T cells exhibit the near-full spectrum of T cell differentiation states
•Responding T cells include naive-like, stem cell memory populations

Ingels and De Cock et al. demonstrate feasibility, safety, and immunogenicity of a dendritic cell vaccine targeting patient-individual neoantigens in patients with resected NSCLC. Vaccine-induced T cells persist long term, are polyclonal, and exhibit the near-full spectrum of differentiation states, including naive-like, and excluding exhausted cell states.

## Keywords
neoantigenspersonalized vaccinenon-small cell lung cancerdendritic cell vaccineimmunotherapyT cell responsesclinical trialcell therapypmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-NDPublished: April 15, 2024

## Introduction
Lung cancer is one of the most common malignancies worldwide, with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) accounting for more than 80% of the diagnoses. , Standard treatment of early-stage NSCLC (stage I–IIIa) is surgical resection. Postoperative disease recurrence rates are high, translating into 5-year survival rates ranging from 95% down to 35% depending on stage. Adjuvant chemotherapy is commonly recommended for high-risk patients to eradicate residual disease but has been shown to improve 5-year overall survival by only 5% with often severe impact on quality of life. Therefore, there is a need for more effective and well-tolerated adjuvant therapies for resectable NSCLC.
Recent phase 3 randomized controlled trials have shown benefit of immune checkpoint blockers (ICBs) in high-risk early-stage NSCLC, demonstrating a longer disease-free survival when given as adjuvant or neoadjuvant treatment. , , , However, toxicities, especially immune-related adverse events, remain a concern.
Vaccines targeting neoantigens are currently widely investigated in various types of early-stage and advanced cancer settings and have shown encouraging results. , , , , , , , , , Immunomonitoring revealed their ability to induce strong and high-affinity neoantigen-specific T cell responses. These trials also demonstrated feasibility and safety as well as suggestive signs of potential clinical benefit as standalone therapy or combined with ICBs. , , , 
Dendritic cells (DCs) are the most potent antigen-presenting cell (APC), with the unique ability to prime naive T cells, and therefore DCs were studied extensively in the last decades as an antigen delivery vehicle for cancer vaccination. , , , Clinical efficacy of DC vaccination in cancer has been disappointing so far. Several factors account for this fact, one of which is the predominant use of tumor-associated antigens rather than mutanome-derived neoantigens. 
Here, we report the results of a first-in-human clinical trial in which we explored the potential of an autologous DC vaccine targeting neoantigens as adjuvant therapy in early-stage resected NSCLC patients. The primary endpoint of the trial was safety. Secondary endpoints were feasibility, immunogenicity, and relapse-free survival.

## Results

## Overall study design
The overall study workflow is illustrated in A. The study recruited patients with a diagnosis of NSCLC without oncogenic driver mutations or gene rearrangements (EGFR/ALK/ROS1/RET) eligible for surgical resection. Manufacturing of the vaccine proceeded as follows: (1) collection of tumor material from resected specimen and peripheral blood for sequencing and mutation calling; (2) in silico prioritization of neoantigens; (3) production of neoantigen-encoding mRNA (Neo-mRNA); and (4) patient leukapheresis, generation of mRNA-loaded monocyte-derived DCs (Neo-mDCs), and cryopreservation. In the Neo-mRNA, neoantigens were encoded as 25-mers in a tandem minigene (TMG) design ( B). The 25-mers contained the mutated amino acid centrally, flanked on both sides by 12 wild-type amino acids. Neo-mDCs were administered intravenously (i.v.) following an intra-patient dose-escalation scheme with a maximum of five doses progressing along the following scheme: 10 × 106, 20 × 106, 40 × 106, 80 × 106, and 100 × 106 Neo-mDCs ( C). Patients were monitored for safety and followed up until 2 years after the last dose. Blood was drawn on serial time points to study neoantigen-specific T cell responses. 

## Selection of neoantigens for inclusion in the vaccine
Ten resectable patients with stage Ia3–IVb NSCLC were enrolled between December 2019 and May 2021 ( D; ). To identify neoantigens, residual tumor material from the surgical specimen and matched peripheral blood were collected of the 10 enrolled patients. One patient was excluded due to inadequate tumor material ( D). For the remaining nine patients, whole-exome sequencing (WES) was performed on the tumor and blood sample to identify tumor-specific variants. RNA of the tumor was sequenced to determine gene and variant expression. We developed a neoantigen identification pipeline aiming to identify four to six neoantigen targets for each patient using the following selection criteria: (1) clonal nature of the variant within the sample, (2) strong predicted binding (binding affinity rank <0.5) with one of the expressed human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class I allotypes, and (3) expression of the gene and variant at the RNA level ( ).
The total number of identified clonal tumor-specific mutations per patient ranged from 41 to 1,361 variants, with the tumors from patient 04, being a never-smoker, and 06 having the lowest number of variants ( E). For epitope prediction, both frameshift indels and missense single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) were selected. The combined number of these variants per patient ranged from 12 to 600 and consisted predominantly of SNVs ( F). For these variants, epitope prediction was performed for the respective major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I alleles of the patients ( G). The HLA genotype was deduced from WES-based typing. Epitope prediction resulted in 4–337 potential strong binding neoepitopes per patient. After further filtering based on gene and variant expression on the RNA level, 0–56 potential neoepitopes remained per patient with patients 04, 06, and 08 having insufficient neoepitopes remaining (respectively none, two, and three) ( H). Manual review of the data of patient 08, however, revealed six borderline variants, which were included for downstream analysis (data not shown). To further select for the potentially most immunogenic neoepitopes, we evaluated the following characteristics: (1) absence from the healthy human proteome, (2) position of the mutated amino acid in the predicted epitope, and (3) binding affinity relative to the corresponding wild-type peptide. As part of this further selection, we also evaluated whether the patient samples showed signs of a common immune escape mechanism, total or partial loss of HLA class I gene expression. , Therefore, all enrolled patients were screened for mutations in the B2M gene and/or HLA gene loss. , None of the patients harbored mutations in the B2M gene; however, for two patients, we observed loss of heterozygosity in the HLA locus, meaning that they lost a complete HLA haplotype ( G, A, and S2B). In addition, for patient 03, we observed a mutation in a splice acceptor site of the HLA-A∗03:01 gene, causing exon 4 to be skipped ( G and C). Exon 4 skipping has previously been described to lead to a loss of T cell recognition and thus loss of immune reactivity. Neoantigens predicted to bind to the affected HLA genes were thus eliminated. Additionally, the combination of vaccine targets was selected to be presented by as many HLA allotypes as possible, to further limit immune escape. In this manner, we were able to select five to six neoantigens for seven out of nine patients ( D; ).
Predicted epitopes were further validated using three strategies. First, mass spectrometry (MS)-based immunopeptidomics analysis was performed on HLA class I eluted peptides from five out of nine tumors to demonstrate HLA presentation of neoepitopes ( , ). The spectra identified through this analysis were searched against a personalized proteome database, containing mutated protein sequences based on the known somatic and germline variants of the patient. Despite the high quality of the immunopeptidome data, only one neoantigen was detected, namely DAKIRVFDL in patient 05. This peptide is derived from the ribosomal gene RPL10, which showed high RNA expression in the tumor ( ).
Second, to validate natural processing and HLA-binding capacity of the selected neoantigens, patient-derived B lymphoblastoid cell lines (B-LCLs) were engineered to express the patient-specific tandem of minigenes and subsequently subjected to MS-based immunopeptidomics analysis ( A and S4B; ). Of 23 tested 25-mers, eight mutated peptides derived of six 25-mers were detected. Five of these eight peptides matched the predicted epitope sequence.
Finally, tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) were interrogated for reactivity toward neoantigen 25-mers, as TIL reactivity provides evidence that neoantigens are immunogenic and suggests natural processing and presentation of neoantigens within the tumor ( C–S4E; ). TILs responded to three 25-mers, and all responding T cells were identified as CD8+ T cells. Two of the three TIL reactivities recognized the in silico-predicted peptides. In conclusion, by combining the HLA immunopeptidomics and TIL reactivity analyses, we could provide evidence that nine out of 33 (27%) selected neoantigens are naturally processed and presented on (tumor) HLA, supporting the reliability of our neoantigen identification approach ( I).

## Neo-mDC vaccine manufacturing and patient treatment
For the seven patients for whom sufficient neoantigens were identified, Neo-mRNA and Neo-mDCs were produced and quality controlled ( ). At least three Neo-mDC doses could be produced for each of the seven patients. All Neo-mDC batches passed release testing except the batch for patient 07 due to failed mRNA integrity tests, and therefore this patient was excluded from the trial ( D). This translates into a manufacturing success rate in the intent-to-treat population of six out of 10 (60%). Release testing of Neo-mDCs showed a viable cell recovery of >60%, with viable cells containing >99% CD11c+HLA-DR+ mDC ( ). Furthermore, all Neo-mDC batches actively secreted CXCL10, a major chemoattractant for type-1 polarized T cells and natural killer (NK) cells and showed membrane expression of maturation markers involved in lymph node migration (CCR7) and priming of naive T cells (CD83, CD86, CD70, and CD40). As an exploratory quality-control test, whole-proteome analysis was performed on released Neo-mDC batches to quantify the expression level of the tandem neoantigen protein. The protein was detected in four out of six released batches. When identified proteins were ranked according to abundance, the tandem protein was at least in the top 58% ( ). These data indicate that viable and highly mature, type-1 polarized mDCs expressing neoantigens were generated.
Six patients were treated i.v. with Neo-mDCs and were evaluable for safety, clinical activity, and immunogenicity. The median time from surgery to first vaccination was 198 days (range, 152–246 days) ( J). All available doses (three to five doses) were administered ( ). Adverse events (AEs) were observed in all six patients ( ). All AEs were mild and self-limiting even at the highest dose of 100 × 106 DCs. The most common events were fatigue, chills, and headache in four patients, and flu-like symptoms and fever in two patients. No grade 3–4 AEs occurred, nor were there any infusion-related AEs. Hypocalcemia occurred in three patients during leukapheresis. 
Three patients (03, 05, and 10) experienced disease recurrence following vaccination ( J; ). Patient 03 with stage IVb NSCLC who underwent surgery in an oligometastatic treatment plan developed lung, bone, and kidney metastases 9.5 months after surgery. The patient was subsequently treated with platinum-based chemotherapy and ICB but succumbed to the disease 23 months after the last dose of the vaccine. Interestingly, WES of the resected tumor of this patient also uncovered a loss-of-function mutation in JAK1, a known mechanism of acquired immune resistance. , Patient 05 underwent stereotactic body radiation therapy for a growing and hypermetabolic solitary pulmonary nodule in the right lower lobe 24.5 months after lobectomy of the left lower lobe for stage IIB NSCLC. Patient 10 experienced systemic relapse with new lung metastases 8.0 months after lobectomy of the right middle lobe for stage IIIA NSCLC and was subsequently treated with double ICB in combination with platinum-based chemotherapy. Three other patients (02, 08, and 11) are free of disease recurrence with a maximal follow-up of 2 years after the last vaccine dose. Taken together, these data demonstrate the safety and feasibility of manufacturing and administrating a neoantigen-targeting autologous DC vaccine in surgically treated NSCLC patients.

## Neo-mDCs elicit neoantigen-specific T cell immunity at low dose levels
To evaluate vaccine immunogenicity, peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) collected prior to Neo-mDC treatment (baseline, B), 2 weeks after each Neo-mDC dose (on treatment), and 3 weeks after the last dose (post treatment) were interrogated for the presence of CD4+ and CD8+ T cell responses against neoantigen 25-mers using intracellular cytokine staining (interferon [IFN]-γ). To increase sensitivity, T cell responses were assessed after a 10-day in vitro stimulation protocol ( A). To be defined as a vaccine-induced T cell response, T cell responses had to be detected at least at one time point during the treatment phase and the frequency of the T cell response had to be at least 2-fold higher than the frequency of the response observed at baseline. Vaccine-induced T cell responses were demonstrated in five of six treated patients, with a total of 14 out of 33 (42%) neoantigens inducing a T cell response ( B). Among these 14 neoantigens, nine (64%) induced a CD8+ T cell response, whereas five (36%) elicited a CD4+ T cell response ( B and 2C). None of the neoantigens induced a combined CD4+ and CD8+ T cell response. Neoantigen-specific T cell responses were mostly undetectable prior to vaccination but were already evident following the first dose and persisted over the course of treatment ( D and 2E). In patients 02 and 03, T cell responses were detected prior to vaccination, were amplified after the first or second dose, and remained present in higher frequencies during the treatment course compared to baseline ( D and 2E). These data indicate that, even at the lowest doses, Neo-mDCs primed naive T cells and/or expanded pre-existing T cell responses. We next assessed whether the presence of T cell responses in the vaccinated patients was associated with the detection of tandem protein in the respective Neo-mDC batches by whole-proteome analysis ( ). Notably, vaccination induced strong T cell responses in patients 02 and 11, while tandem protein expression could not be detected in the respective Neo-mDC batches. Conversely, no T cell responses were detected in patient 10, although tandem protein expression was confirmed in the Neo-mDC batch ( E). Next, the minimal recognized epitope sequence was determined for the CD8+ T cell responses using peptide pools containing minimal predicted peptides and overlapping 15-mers ( A). All tested CD8+ T cell responses (eight out of eight) recognized the predicted epitopes. Of note, the T cell response against mRPL10 in patient 05 recognized the epitope detected in HLA class I of the tumor through immunopeptidomics analysis, providing direct evidence of tumor specificity of the response ( B). For T cell responses recognizing neoantigen mE2F7 in patient 08 and neoantigen mPTEN in patient 11, cross-reactivity toward the corresponding wild-type epitope was assessed. T cell lines with enriched neoantigen reactivity were stimulated with mutant and corresponding wild-type peptide across a wide range of concentrations. Even at the highest concentrations, the T cell responses were highly specific for the mutant peptide, with virtually no reactivity observed toward the wild-type counterpart ( C). These data demonstrate that Neo-mDC vaccination induced CD8+ T cell responses highly specific for predicted neoepitopes. 

## Neo-mDCs induce long-lived neoantigen-specific T cells with diverse phenotypes
Next, we aimed to evaluate the ex vivo frequency and differentiation phenotype of vaccine-induced T cells in PBMC by using peptide-HLA (pHLA)-tetramer pairs. To maximize the likelihood of detecting vaccine-induced T cells ex vivo, pHLA tetramers were generated for neoantigens mE2F7 of patient 08 and mPTEN of patient 11 as strong vaccine-induced T cell responses against these neoantigens were observed after in vitro stimulation ( E). Negative staining on HLA-matched PBMCs from an unrelated donor and positive staining on neoantigen-specific T cell lines confirmed the antigen specificity of the pHLA-tetramer pairs ( ). PBMCs collected at serial time points of patients 08 and 11 were stained with the pHLA-tetramer pairs. In both patients, less than 0.01% of the total CD8+ T cells before vaccination were tetramer+. Already after the first dose, tetramer+ T cells were expanded to a measurable frequency of 0.02% ( A). Subsequent vaccinations further enhanced the tetramer+ T cell population in patient 08 to a peak of 0.51% after the last dose, while in patient 11 the frequency of tetramer+ T cells peaked at 0.14% after the second dose. Tetramer+ T cells remained detectable for at least 1.5 years post vaccination at frequencies of 0.10% and 0.01% in patients 08 and 11, respectively. To assess the differentiation phenotype of vaccine-induced T cells, PBMCs obtained on on-treatment and post-treatment time points of patient 08 and 11 were stained with pHLA-tetramer pairs and an antibody panel for the T cell differentiation markers CCR7, CX3CR1, CD127, GZMB, CD95, and CD45RA. In order to enable dimensionality reduction analysis based on these markers, a concatenate file of all samples was generated pooling all tetramer+ cells and a downsample of 10,000 cells from total CD8+ T cells per sample. Dimensionality reduction of the concatenate file revealed a continuum of T cell differentiation phenotype markers ( B and 4C). Cluster analysis revealed five clusters within this continuum, which were annotated as follows: naive and minimally differentiated T cells (CCR7high, CD45RAhigh, CD95low), early differentiated T cells (CCR7high/low, CD45RAlow, CD95high), intermediate differentiated T cells 1 (CX3CR1high/low, CD127high, GZMBhigh/low), intermediate differentiated T cells 2 (CX3CR1low, CD127high/low, GZMBlow), and late differentiated T cells (CX3CR1high, CD127low, GZMBhigh). We evaluated the distribution of tetramer+ T cells within the different clusters ( B and 4C). At all evaluated time points, tetramer+ T cells of both patients were found within the early, intermediate, and late differentiated populations ( D and 4E). In patient 08, tetramer+ cells were mainly early differentiated after the first dose but shifted to a mainly late differentiated phenotype after subsequent vaccinations. On the post-treatment time points of patient 08, the tetramer+ T cells remained mainly late differentiated. On the post-treatment time points of patient 11, tetramer+ T cells were mainly early differentiated and remained so over time. Remarkably, when tetramer+ T cells were traditionally subsetted based on the CCR7, CD45RA, and CD95 markers, a fraction of tetramer+ T cells showed a stem cell memory T cell (TSCM) phenotype (CCR7+CD45RA+CD95+) on different time points in patient 08 and 11 ( F and ). TSCMs are long-lived cells with the capacity for self-renewal and multipotent differentiation. The TSCM fractions within tetramer+ cells reached levels of 2% and 21% on the 6-months-post-treatment time point in patients 08 and 11, respectively. Altogether, vaccine-induced CD8+ T cell responses exhibited diverse differentiation phenotypes, including TSCM, and could be detected ex vivo in high frequencies up to 1.5 years after the last vaccine dose. 

## Neo-mDC-induced T cells exhibit a continuum of transcriptional differentiation states ranging from naive-like to terminal effector T cells
To further characterize vaccine-induced T cells at the population and clonal level, CD8+ tetramer+ cells were sorted ex vivo from on-treatment and post-treatment PBMCs in patients 08 and 11 and subjected to single-cell whole-transcriptome and T cell receptor (TCR) sequencing ( A). As a reference, total CD8+ T cells obtained from baseline PBMCs of both patients were sorted as well. To enable assignment of the cells in the bioinformatics analysis to the corresponding samples, PBMCs were labeled with sample tags before sorting. PBMCs obtained on treatment were pooled and labeled with the same sample tag. After quality filtering and removing potential multiplets in the downstream bioinformatics analysis, 4,261 cells were retained: 3,291 total CD8+ cells and 970 tetramer+ CD8+ cells ( A). Unsupervised clustering on these 4,261 cells identified nine different transcriptional clusters ( B). All clusters expressed CD3D, CD8A, and TRAC, confirming the CD8+ T cell identity of the cells ( C). Clusters were manually annotated based on analysis of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) identified by comparing the transcriptome of each individual cluster against all others ( C and B). One cluster highly expressed ZBTB16 and KLRB1, canonical markers for MAIT/NKT cells, and was therefore annotated as unconventional T cells (UTCs). Two other clusters represented IFN stimulated (IS) and cycling T cells (Tc) based on upregulation of respectively IFN-stimulated genes and genes associated with proliferation. The six other clusters corresponded to different differentiation states of conventional T cells. A naive-like T cell (TN-like) state was annotated based on the differential upregulation of CCR7, LEF1, IL7R and downregulation of effector genes including GZMK, GZMB, and NKG7. , The neighboring cluster showed differential upregulation of CCR7, IL7R, and GZMK and downregulation of GZMB and NKG7 and was therefore annotated as early differentiated memory T cells (TEDMs). Two other clusters were annotated as early and late effector memory T cells (TEEMs and TLEMs). Although not significant for TEEM, these clusters upregulated effector genes such as GZMB, GNLY, and NKG7. Alongside the TEM clusters, a cluster was found that differentially upregulated effector genes along with activation markers CD69, JUN, and FOS and thus corresponded to activated effectors (TEffs). A final cluster differentially upregulated ZEB2 consistent with terminal effector T cells (TTEs). Semi-supervised pseudo-time analysis with Monocle3 and with TN-like cluster set as starting point reveals a trajectory from TN-like going through TEDM and then TEEM, where it bifurcates in two branches; one branch progresses through TEff and the other through TLEM ( D). Both branches ended in the ZEB2+ TTE cluster. This pseudo-time trajectory, supported by the DEG analysis, thus reflects a continuum of CD8+ T cell differentiation states. 
We examined the distribution of the individual tetramer+ T cell populations among the different clusters ( E). At all time points, tetramer+ T cells of both patients were found within naive-like and early differentiation clusters TEDM and TEEM as well as in the late differentiation cluster TLEM. In patient 08, tetramer+ T cells were mainly present in the late differentiation clusters TLEM and TTE on and 3 weeks post treatment, while 6 months post-treatment tetramer+ T cells were enriched in TEEMs and TLEMs. Conversely, in patient 11, tetramer+ T cells were predominantly found within the TN-like and TEDM clusters at all time points.
Exhaustion is a common phenomenon in chronically stimulated T cells. Therefore, we checked the expression of a set of checkpoint molecule genes and TOX, a gene encoding an exhaustion-associated transcription factor, within tetramer+ T cells obtained 3 weeks post treatment ( F). Interestingly, the expression of checkpoint molecules and TOX was low or not detectable in most tetramer+ T cells.
Vaccination with the live-attenuated yellow fever vaccine (YFV) is known to induce memory T cells that persist for decades. , To verify whether Neo-mDC-induced T cells exhibit transcriptional similarities to long-lived YFV-induced T cells, we performed gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) using a set of previously published genes that were either up- or downregulated in long-lived compared to effector T cells induced by YFV ( G). The upregulated genes in long-lived YFV-induced T cells were strongly enriched in tetramer+ T cells that were in TN-like and TEDM clusters, whereas the downregulated genes were strongly enriched in tetramer+ T cells in late differentiation TLEM and TTE clusters. These data further indicate that T cells induced by Neo-mDC vaccination contain effector cells as well as cells with the potential to persist for many years.

## Neoantigen-specific T cells are polyclonal and display a broad spectrum of T cell differentiation states at the clonal level
To study individual clonotypes within neoantigen-specific T cell populations induced by vaccination, the TCR repertoire of tetramer+ cells was analyzed at the single-cell level. Due to technical reasons, we only assessed the TCRVβ repertoire. Across all time points, 43 different TCRVβ sequences for tetramer+ T cells of patient 08 and 12 different TCRVβ sequences for tetramer+ T cells of patient 11 were detected, indicating that polyclonal responses were generated against individual neoantigen-HLA complexes ( A). Respectively 44% and 25% of the TCRVβ sequences of patients 08 and 11 were identified in at least two cells, suggesting clonal expansion of neoantigen-specific T cells ( B). In patient 08, more than 50% of on-treatment cells with a successful TCRVβ identification were represented by 10 TCRVβ clonotypes that were detected 3 weeks post treatment (eight clonotypes) and/or 6 months post treatment (five clonotypes), demonstrating the persistence of vaccine-induced T cells at the clonal level ( C). We assume that these 10 TCRVβ clonotypes represent 10 T cell clones as it is highly unlikely, considering the complex composition of the junctional regions, that these rearrangements occur more than once ( ). To investigate whether the observed heterogeneity in differentiation states was also present at the level of individual T cell clonotypes, the transcriptome of cells with the same TCRVβ sequence was analyzed. We determined the cluster distribution of three TCRVβ T cell clones that were detected in all samples of patient 08 ( D). Within one clonotype, early differentiation clusters TN-like, TEDM, and/or TEEM clusters as well as late-differentiation clusters TLEM and TTE are present, suggesting that individual T cells differentiate into the various memory phenotypes. In conclusion, vaccine-induced T cell populations are polyclonal with individual clonotypes displaying a broad spectrum of T cell differentiation states. 

## Discussion
Here, we report on a first-in-human trial of an autologous DC therapy presenting mRNA-encoded, patient-individual tumor neoantigens in patients with resected NSCLC.
The manufacturing process, including tumor proteogenomics, in silico neoepitope prediction, and Neo-mDC manufacturing was successfully completed in six out of 10 intention-to-treat subjects. Manufacturing failure was due to inadequate starting tumor material, low tumor mutational load, and mRNA quality issues.
An important challenge of Neo-mDC therapy is the extensive coordination required between the different actors and processes (i.e., next-generation sequencing [NGS], immunopeptidomics, bioinformatic analyses, production of the plasmid template, good manufacturing practice [GMP] production of RNA, apheresis of the patient, and finally GMP production of the cell therapy product) in order to streamline the overall production process and time. For this study, the mean production time was 194 days. The latter approaches the production times reported by earlier studies of Sahin et al. (median time of 103 days) and Ott et al. (average time of 126 days). , When compared to whole-tumor-cell-derived vaccines, which is an alternative approach to induce neoantigen-specific T cell responses, this production time is considerably longer, 194 versus 35 days. However, optimal coordination between the aforementioned actors of the Neo-mDC production should allow a reduction in production time to 12 weeks or 84 days. While this is a significant reduction of our current production time, it would still be longer compared to whole-tumor-cell vaccines. However, whole-cell-derived vaccines have a lower neoantigen presentation rate due to the abundant presence of non-mutated self-peptides, which might dilute the HLA presentation of the neoantigens. Another limitation is the significant cost of manufacturing autologous monocyte-derived DCs according to GMP standards. Classically, antigen-loaded, autologous monocyte-derived DCs for clinical use are generated according to a 7- to 8-day culture protocol. In the present trial, fully functional, neoantigen-loaded, monocyte-derived DCs were generated in only 4 days, which is associated with reduced costs compared to classical 7/8-day DCs due to fewer operator interventions, less consumables, and less occupation time of ultrapure, class B clean rooms dedicated to aseptic processing. Further reduction of costs may be achieved by using fully automated, closed cell-culture systems, of which several platforms are currently being developed and actively explored for chimeric antigen receptor (CAR)-T cell production. , The introduction of these systems will enable further reduction in operator interventions and reduce the need for class B clean rooms.
This trial was not powered for clinical efficacy, although interesting observations could be made regarding the three subjects with early tumor progression following DC vaccination. In patient 03, risk of relapse was a priori high as resection was performed in an oligometastatic setting. In addition, this patient was pretreated with an ICB combination (anti-programmed cell death protein 1 [PD1]/anti-cytotoxic T lymphocyte-associated protein 4 [CTLA4]). Although the DC vaccine induced neoantigen-specific CD8 and CD4 responses, genomic analysis of the resected tumor indicated acquired immunoresistance within the tumor (JAK1 mutation). , Patient 05 showed comparatively very weak neoantigen-specific T cell responses and developed a single lesion 2 years post surgery. However, the lesion could not be histologically confirmed but was considered suspect for malignancy based on metabolic activity on F18-fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography-computed tomography (18FDG-PET-CT) scan. Given the long time interval after surgery, this lesion could have been a second primary lung cancer rather than a metachronous metastasis of the operated tumor. Finally, relapsing patient 10 was the only patient that showed a total absence of DC vaccine-induced T cell responses against five predicted neoantigens. In addition, the presence of an STK11 mutation in this tumor is known to be associated with an immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment. 
Expression of the tandem protein is a critical quality attribute of the Neo-mDC product. Most techniques for protein detection rely on antibodies specific for the protein of interest. As the tandem protein is patient specific, the use of antibody-based techniques is not feasible. We explored the suitability of whole-proteome analyses, which does not require antibodies, as quality control and could detect tandem protein in four out of six Neo-mDC batches. However, two batches for which we could not detect protein induced strong T cell responses in patients, indirectly showing translation of the tandem protein in the Neo-mDCs. We hypothesize that this discrepancy is attributed to the short half-life of the tandem protein due to the presence of a leader peptide and MHC class I trafficking domain (MITD), which are expected to lead to accelerated protein degradation. 
To this day, the dose-effect relationship has been largely under-investigated in cancer vaccine trials. We detected vaccine-induced T cell responses in the peripheral blood after the lowest dose level of 10 × 106 DCs. This minimal biologically active dose is within the range of an earlier study involving neoantigen-targeting DCs in melanoma patients. Interestingly, escalation of vaccine doses did not necessarily result in enhanced T cell responses. Based on these observations, sufficient doses of Neo-mDCs could even be made from a blood donation instead of apheresis, which may put less burden on the patient.
Three of six vaccinated patients (05, 10, and 11) received adjuvant chemotherapy after surgery. The impact of postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy on DC vaccine effectiveness is not known. However, given the fact that adjuvant chemotherapy and Neo-mDC therapy were not administered concurrently, and patients were fully recovered from chemotherapy-induced hematological toxicities such as lymphopenia before start of Neo-mDC therapy, we believe that the real impact of chemotherapy on vaccine effectiveness was only limited. Furthermore, we know from the metastatic setting that chemotherapy and DC vaccination therapy can act synergistically. Chemotherapy can, for example, reduce systemic levels of myeloid-derived suppressor cells and regulatory T cells in the tumor microenvironment. In addition, chemotherapy can also promote antitumor immune responses by upregulating the expression of tumor antigens and MHC class I molecules on the tumor, thereby increasing the capacity for antigen presentation. 
We found CD8+ T cell reactivity against nine of 33 selected neoantigens and eight of nine responses were demonstrated to be specific for the predicted HLA class I epitope, showing that the neoantigen prediction algorithm was quite reliable. However, the main limitation of this study and of neoantigen vaccine trials in general is the inability to demonstrate that the selected neoantigens are actually expressed at the protein level and presented on HLA by the malignant cells. Direct proof can be obtained by performing immunopeptidomics on a tumor sample. This approach requires large quantities of tumor material, which can only be achieved by surgical removal of a lesion. , Still, by using this technique, we detected only one neoantigen in five tumor samples from surgical resections of five different patients. This limited yield may be attributed to poor neoantigen presentation by the analyzed tumors and/or the rather low sensitivity of contemporary MS-based immunopeptidomics. Indeed, in addition to their low abundance, immunopeptides do not necessarily contain the C-terminal basic residue (Lys or Arg) that is present in peptides digested with trypsin, the most widely used enzyme in standard MS-based proteomics. This complicates ionization and fragmentation of the immunopeptides. Moreover, most bioinformatics tools for interpretation of peptide fragmentation spectra are developed for tryptic peptides and are not sufficiently accurate for immunopeptide identification. Improving procedures for immunopeptide isolation, MS acquisition, and spectral interpretation will therefore be crucial for more successful neoantigen detections. We did, however, obtain indirect evidence for the presentation of some of the selected neoantigens on the tumor by immunopeptidomics analyses on patient-derived cells transduced to express the tandem of minigenes: six of the 23 tested neoepitopes were shown to be processed and presented by HLA class I of the patient. This is evidence but not proof that these neoantigens are presented by the tumor. The investigation of TIL reactivities was informative as well: CD8+ T cell reactivity was detected against three selected neoantigens. This constitutes strong evidence that these three neoantigens are indeed expressed and presented by the malignant cells. Altogether, these analyses allowed us to present good evidence that five of nine CD8+ T cell responses are actually directed toward the tumor ( ).
Although the vaccine-included neoantigens were predicted by HLA class I binding algorithms, we observed CD4+ T cell responses against five of 33 vaccine neoantigens in total. The induction of CD4+ T cell responses against neoantigens containing HLA class I predicted epitopes was also observed in previous neoantigen vaccine trials, which, similar to our study, incorporated the predicted eight- to 11-amino acid (aa) neoepitope sequence within a longer stretch of 25 aa. This enables binding to MHC class II allotypes, which require longer (at least 13 aa) peptides. , 
To date, two phase 1 trials have reported the use of DC vaccines targeting neoantigens, showing feasibility, safety, and first signs of clinical benefit. , T cell response evaluation was limited to assays after in vitro stimulation. , Furthermore, T cell responses were not studied in the long term. , With the results of the trial reported here, we confirm and extend the earlier neoantigen-targeted DC vaccination studies. Indeed, we showed that Neo-mDC-induced T cells could persist up to 1.5 years in high frequencies after the last vaccine dose. Moreover, we provided detailed insights in the ex vivo differentiation states of DC vaccine-induced CD8+ T cells on single-cell level by leveraging multiparameter flow cytometry and single-cell transcriptome sequencing. We demonstrated that vaccine-induced T cells specific for a particular neoantigen adopted the near-full spectrum of differentiation states, including a naive-like state. By analyzing the TCR repertoire of the vaccine-induced T cells, we observed that individual TCRVβ clonotypes exhibited distinct states along this transcriptional continuum. We further observed that expression of exhaustion-associated genes, such as PDCD1, TOX, and HAVCR2, in the transcriptome of the vaccine-induced T cells was limited. This suggests that the T cells are not in an exhausted state, although repeated vaccine doses were administered. These observations are in contrast to T cells induced by neoantigen vaccines based on RNA in lipid nanoparticles and peptides, which have been reported to exhibit mainly effector and/or exhausted T cell states, with virtually no naive-like states observed. , , 
We were encouraged by the observation that Neo-mDCs induced T cells with naive-resembling transcriptomes. Antigen-experienced, naive-like T cells are generally classified as TSCMs and are widely shown to be superior in providing long-term and potent anti-tumoral immunity compared to T cells that progressed further down the differentiation trajectory. , This is attributed to their ability to self-renew and to differentiate into the entire spectrum of memory and effector T cells. Moreover, these T cells have been shown to survive chemotherapy, further confirming their clinical relevance. TSCMs are therefore currently considered the preferred T cell subset for cancer immunotherapies. , It is, however, debatable whether the generation of late differentiated T cells is dispensable for therapeutic efficacy, at least for solid tumors. Indeed, in contrast to minimally differentiated T cells, late differentiated T cells are poised to migrate to the periphery and exert immediate effector functions upon re-exposure to antigen, providing the potential to rapidly control tumor outgrowth. , When the outgrowth of tumor exceeds the capacity of late differentiated T cells, replenishment is needed through differentiation and proliferation of less-differentiated T cells. It is therefore reasonable to hypothesize that the induction of minimally differentiated T cells should not be at the expense of more-differentiated T cells and that the full spectrum of circulating T cell states is a desirable outcome for solid cancer vaccination. , 
Circulating, vaccine-induced CD8+ T cell responses could be detected ex vivo in patients 08 and 11 in frequencies up to 0.5% of total CD8+ T cells by using pHLA-tetramer staining and flow cytometry. Recently, in a phase I clinical trial evaluating individualized neoantigen vaccination in 16 resected pancreatic patients, circulating T cell responses were studied ex vivo by ELISpot, showing frequences between 0.01% and 2% of total PBMCs. These T cell responses could be correlated with clinical benefit: patients with ex vivo-detectable T cell responses to vaccination showed delayed cancer recurrence compared to patients without ex vivo-detectable responses. This is preliminary evidence for a correlation between measured T cell responses in the circulation and clinical benefit of neoantigen vaccination in cancer. Possibly, inclusion of the differentiation states and polyclonality of the T cell responses in future studies may further increase the correlation with clinical findings. , 
In summary, we demonstrated that neoantigen-targeted autologous DC vaccination in surgically resected NSCLC patients is safe and feasible. Furthermore, vaccination induced long-lived neoantigen-specific T cells with a high degree of differentiation heterogeneity, providing a multifaceted T cell response. With high rates of disease relapse even after surgical treatment, lung cancer is still the top cancer killer worldwide. By leveraging the immunogenic power of DCs combined with the excellent tumor specificity of mutanome-derived neoantigens, this approach may prove to be superior to current therapy in selected patients.

## Limitations of the study
The main limitation of this study is the small patient cohort, with a total of 10 enrolled patients of whom six were vaccinated. This is a typical sample size for a first-in-human clinical trial. Another limitation was the long time required for vaccine manufacturing. The production of the Neo-mDC vaccine requires coordination between different actors and processes (e.g., NGS, bioinformatic analyses, and GMP unit). We believe that, with optimal coordination between these different actors, we can reduce the production time to 12 weeks instead of 28.

## STAR★Methods

## Key resources table

 

## Resources availability

## Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Prof. dr. Bart Vandekerckhove (bart.vandekerckhove@ugent.be).

## Materials availability
This study did not generate new unique reagents.

## Data and code availability

•The immunopeptidomic and shotgun proteomics data are available through the PRIDE database (PRIDE: PXD044794, PXD044799). The single cell RNA-sequencing data have been deposited to the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database (GEO: GSE240361).
•This paper does not report original code.
•Any additional information that might be required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.

## Experimental model and study participant details

## Patients and trial design
Neo-mDC was evaluated in a phase 1a, monocentric, open-label, first-in-human, intra-patient dose escalation trial (NCT04078269, EudraCT 2018-004666-34). This trial was conducted in accordance with the Good Clinical Practice Guidelines of the International Council for Harmonisation. The clinical trial protocol and investigantional medicinal product dossier (IMPD) were approved by the institutional review board and ethics committee of Ghent University Hospital and the Belgian Federal Agency for Medicines and Health Products (FAMHP). All the patients provided written informed consent. Patients who were at least 18 years of age were eligible if they had a histologically or cytologically proven diagnosis of NSCLC, were considered functionally and surgically resectable (cT1-3 cN0-1 cM0 per 8th TNM classification or cT4 cN0-1 in a case-by-case evaluation) and had an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status score of 0–2. Patients considered resectable in an oligometastatic treatment plan could also be included. Patients were excluded if they had a disease requiring chronic treatment with systemic glucocorticoids with a daily dose of >10 mg prednisolone or equivalent, or other immunosuppressive drugs, had active autoimmune disease or organ allograft. Eligible patients were enrolled before surgery (pre-screening). Adjuvant chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy were allowed per standard-of-care at the discretion of the investigator. After successful identification of ≥4 neoantigens and production of Neo-mRNA, patients were invited for screening with respect to the interventional phase of the trial.

## Method details

## Clinical trial design

## Treatment schedule and route of administration
The vaccine was administered intravenously as a single bolus every 2 weeks with the following dose escalation scheme: 10 x 106, 20 x 106, 40 x 106, 80 x 106 and 100 x 106. Dose levels were escalated per patient until occurrence of a grade ≥3 toxicity in a particular subject or until exhaustion of the vaccine batch. Patients were monitored in the outpatient clinic for 2 h following the injection of the vaccine.

## Clinical evaluation and follow-up
Toxicity was assessed from the day of leukapheresis until 3 weeks after the last vaccine dose. Routine oncological follow-up by the treating physicians was done every 2–3 months and included medical history, physical examination and radiological assessment with contrast enhanced computed tomography of the chest and upper abdomen. Clinical follow-up data were collected up to two years after the last vaccine dose.

## Endpoints
The primary endpoint was toxicity as defined by the Common Toxicity Criteria for Adverse Events version 5.0. Secondary endpoints included oncological feasibility, manufacturing feasibility defined as the success rate (%) of manufacturing sufficient DCs for vaccination, vaccine-induced immune responses as measured by in vitro and in vivo immunomonitoring, and relapse-free survival defined as the time from surgery (months) to the time of recurrence or death from any cause, whichever occurred first.

## Neoantigen prediction

## Material collection and processing
For each patient, a fresh tumor and blood sample were collected as input for the neoantigen identification pipelines. If possible, at least 600 mg of tumor tissue was collected. Fresh tumor material from the surgical resection specimen was snap frozen in liquid nitrogen for further processing and optional storage at −80°C. Prior to DNA and RNA extraction a small tumor sample was embedded in Optimal Cutting Temperature (OCT) Compound (4583; SAKURA) for cryostat sectioning. For each patient, ten 14μm sections were cut in sets of five. Before, in-between the two sets and after, one 4μm thin section was cut for hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining and microscopic evaluation by a pathologist to confirm the tumor content and sufficiently high tumor cell percentage. One set of 5 sections was used for DNA and RNA extraction with the Allprep DNA/RNA micro kit (80284; Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. DNA was extracted from the blood sample using the MagCore Automated Nucleic Acid Extractor (MagCore HF16 SUPER; Atrida) with the MagCore Genomic DNA Large Volume Whole Blood Kit (104; Atrida) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

## Whole exome sequencing
DNA libraries were prepared using the SureSelect Human All Exon v7 low input kit (5191-4030; Agilent Technologies) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The tumor library was sequenced to an average depth of 300x and the blood library to 100x on an Illumina NovaSeq 6000 system.

## RNA sequencing
The RNA samples from patients 02, 03, 05 and 08 were processed using the Illumina TruSeq RNA Exome kit (20020189, 20020490, 20020492, 20020493 and 20020183; Illumina) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For each library at least 50M reads were sequenced. While the RNA samples from patients 10 and 11 were processed with the SMARTer Stranded Total RNA Sample Prep Kit - HI Mammalian (634873; Takara). Also, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. These libraries were subsequently sequenced to at least 150M reads per sample.

## Neoantigen prediction pipeline
This prediction pipeline covers all necessary steps to go from raw sequencing data to a set of four to six selected neoantigens. The main steps are i) pre-processing, ii) variant calling, iii) HLA-typing, iv) expression analysis, v) epitope prediction and vi) epitope selection. A schematic overview can be found in .
For the DNA data, pre-processing consisted of i) alignment to the human reference genome GRCh38/hg38 using BWA-mem (version 0.7.17), ii) duplicate marking with the bamsormadup function from the biobambam2 tool suite (version 2.0.79) and iii) base quality score recalibration using the BQSR function from the GATK suite (version v3.8.0). Pre-processing of the RNA data was more extensive and included the following steps: i) removal of ribosomal, transfer and small nucleolar RNAs using HiSat2 (version 2.1.0), ii) alignment to the human reference genome GRCh38/hg38 using a two-step approach: 1) alignment with HiSat2 and 2) alignment of the remaining reads with BWA-mem to allow for gapped alignment, iii) extraction of unique alignments with samtools (version 1.7) and iv) duplicate removal with the bammarkduplicates function (biobambam2).
Prior to the identification of tumor-specific variants, the patient-origin of the tumor and blood sample was verified through a germline variant calling with HaplotypeCaller (GATK) and the vcfeval function from RTG tools (version 3.9.1). HaplotypeCaller was run with default parameter settings and followed by hard variant filtering with bcftools (version 1.6) according to the recommendations of GATK with a few exceptions : i) for SNVs the MQ filter was set to <30 instead of 40 and no SOR or QUAL filtering was performed, ii) for Indels there was no filtering on QUAL, but there was an additional filter for SOR >10 and iii) for both SNVs and Indels and extra filter was set to remove variants with low quality and low frequency: QD < 10.0 && AD[1]/(AD[0] + AD[0]) < 0.25 && ReadPosRankSum <0.0. Only variants that passed filtering were retained for analysis of the variant call format (VCF) files with vcfeval. Vcfeval was run with default parameter settings and the VCF file from the blood sample was set as baseline. If the F-measure between tumor and blood samples was larger than 0.90, the samples were assumed to stem from the same patient.
The next step in the pipeline is somatic variant calling. For which the MuTect2 algorithm (GATK) was employed. Tumor-specific variants are identified by comparing the binary alignment maps (BAM files) from the tumor and blood sample. MuTect2 was run with default parameter settings on the BAM files from these samples with variants only being called in exonic regions covered by our library preparation kit. Variants were filtered with the standard filters from MuTect2 and only variants passing all filters were retained for further analysis and use during the epitope prediction step.
Subsequently, HLA-typing was performed on the DNA data from both blood and tumor using the HLA-HD algorithm (version 1.1.1). The HLA type was also identified on the transcriptomic data of the tumor through seq2HLA (version 2.3). Both tools were run with default parameter settings. The results of this step can be used as additional evidence to verify that the tumor and blood samples stem from the same patient.
Once the tumor-specific variants and the HLA type are determined, we moved forward with the fourth step, namely expression analysis. Two types of expression analysis are performed: i) transcript expression and ii) variant expression. To determine the expression levels of all known transcripts (Ensembl version 93) we used kallisto (version 0.44.0). For this analysis the deduplicated RNA BAM-file was converted into two FASTQ-files, one for each read, through samtools fastq. Next, kallisto was run on the FASTQ data with bootstrap-samples set to a 1000. The mean expression value for each transcript of these 1000 bootstraps was calculated and used as input in the epitope prediction step. The variant expression was determined through ASEReadCounter (GATK). This function determines the number or reads supporting either the ALT or REF allele based on a BAM file and a VCF file. So, to determine the expression of the somatic variants we supplied this function with the VCF file from MuTect2 and the deduplicated RNA BAM-file. Expression of indel variants was manually reviewed through the integrative genomics viewer (IGV). 
Subsequently the data from the 4 previous steps is combined in the epitope prediction. For this step we made use of the MuPeXI framework (version 1.2.0). This framework includes all necessary procedures to go from a list of somatic mutations to a list of prioritized neoantigens. For the identification of non-synonymous mutations and the binding affinity prediction the framework makes use of the Ensembl Variant Effect Predictor (VEP) (version 93) and netMHCpan (version 4.0) respectively. Predictions with the MuPeXI framework were run for 9, 10 and 11 mer peptides. Alongside netMHCpan, HLAthena , was also used for epitope prediction using the same mutant 9, 10 and 11 mers as input. If we detected loss of HLA alleles through LOHHLA (see below for a detailed explanation), we took this into account during this step. Afterward the output of MuPeXI and HLAthena was summarized. For each somatic missense and frameshift mutation the maximal binding affinity rank, its associated mutant and wild type peptide and the respective HLA allele were determined. Afterward the variant allele frequency, maximal transcript expression and the variant expression value were added to the summary as well.
This summary was used in the final step of our pipeline, epitope selection. For this step we opted for a tiered approach. In a first selection round we look at clonality, binding affinity rank and expression level. Only clonal variants with a binding affinity rank ≤0.5, a transcript expression level ≥1 TPM and variant expression >0 were retained for further selection. In the second selection round we looked for overlap between the predictions of netMHCpan and HLAthena as well as overlap between prediction and immunopeptidomics (see below). The third and final selection round relies on three criteria: i) binding affinity rank of the wild type epitope, which should be higher or equal to that of the mutant, ii) position of the mutation in the epitope, preferably the mutation lies at the center and iii) absence from the normal/healthy human proteome. Based on these selection criteria we tried to select four to six neoantigens per patient that bound with as many HLA alleles as possible.

## Tumor purity estimation and detection of loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of HLA alleles
The tumor purity was estimated/predicted with the PureCN algorithm. This algorithm also calculates the tumor ploidy as well as the b-allele frequencies and the copy number profile of the tumor. For this analysis we started out with a tumor only variant calling with MuTect2 on the tumor BAM-file. Similar as before only variants that passed all standard filters from MuTect2 were retained for further analysis. Afterward, the detected variants were labelled as somatic, or germline based on their appearance in respectively the VCF file of the paired somatic variant calling or the VCF file from HaplotypeCaller. The resulting annotated VCF file was then used alongside the BAM files of the blood and tumor sample in the PureCN analysis. As we performed WES, we also included a BED-file with the target regions/intervals of our library preparation kit. The GC content of these regions was determined with the preprocessIntervals function. Next, we calculated that coverage over the different intervals for the tumor and blood sample with calculateBAMCoverageByInterval. The resulting coverage files were subsequently corrected for any coverage biases resulting from for instance the GC content, with correctCoverageBias. The corrected coverage file and the annotated VCF file from the tumor-only calling were then used in the final step, namely runAbsoluteCN. This step predicts the tumor purity and ploidy alongside the calculation of the copy number profile. The results are visualized with the plotAbs function. The top estimation of the tumor purity and ploidy was used in further analyses.
To the determine the loss of specific HLA alleles, the LOHHLA algorithm was used. This algorithm takes as input the BAM files from the tumor and blood sample, the tumor purity and ploidy and the HLA type of the alleles of interest as well as a FASTA file with the precise sequences of the HLA alleles. The FASTA sequences of the HLA alleles were downloaded from IPD-ImMunoGeneTics(IMGT)/HLA database. LOHHLA was run with the following settings: i) mappingStep = True, ii) minCoverageFilter = 10, iii) fishingStep = True and iv) cleanUp = False.

## Generation of a personalized proteome search database
For each patient a personalized proteome search database was created based on the somatic and germline mutations discovered in the tumor and blood sample. Therefore, the VCF-files from MuTect2 and HaplotypeCaller were converted into mutation dataframes containing an identifier for each mutation, the mutation type, associated gene and transcript id from Ensembl, the reference and alternative allele, the start and end position in the cDNA sequence, the inserted/deleted bases and the length of the indel. Based on the strand information the reference and alternative allele are reverse complemented if needed. Afterward the mutations are built into the cDNA sequence of the associated transcript. The cDNA sequences were downloaded from Ensembl. Since one transcript can contain more than one mutation, we decided to include all possible permutations of the different mutations into separate mutated isoforms of the transcript in case there were less than 20 mutations. If a single transcript contained more than 20 mutations, a separate isoform was created for each mutation. The information of the reference allele was used to verify that the correct location in the cDNA sequence was selected. Once the mutation(s) were inserted, the cDNA sequences were then translated in silico and written to a FASTA-file to generate the database.

## Generation of immunoaffinity columns for MHC class I pull down
W6/32 antibody was purified from hybridoma cell (#HB-95, ATCC) supernatant as recommended by the cell line provider. To generate immunoaffinity columns, 1 mL of precipitated protein A Sepharose 4B beads (#101041, Thermo Fisher Scientific) were washed with 100 mM Tris pH 8.0 (#0210313305, MP Biomedicals) before 3 mg of purified W6/32 antibody was added and allowed to bind at room temperature for 1 h in a rolling tube. W6/32-bound beads were then washed with 0.2 M sodium borate pH 9 (#B3545-500G, Sigma-Aldrich, Merck) and fresh 20 mM dimethylpimelimidate (#D8388-250MG, Sigma-Aldrich, Merck) dissolved in sodium borate solution was added for cross-linking of the W6/32 antibody to the beads. Cross-linking occurred for 45 min in a rolling tube after which beads were washed with 0.2 M ethanol amine pH 8 (#149582500, Thermo Fisher Scientific) to quench the crosslinking reaction.

## MS-based immunopeptidomics
Tissues or cells were lysed with buffer containing 1% octyl-β,D-glucopyranoside (#O9882-500MG, Sigma-Aldrich, Merck), 0.25% sodium deoxycholate (#1065040250, Millipore, Merck), 1x cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail (#4693159001, Roche), 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (#52332-5GM, Sigma-Aldrich, Merck), 0.2 mM iodoacetamide (#I1149-5G, Sigma-Aldrich, Merck) and 1 mM ethylendiamine tetraacetic acid (#EDS-100G, Sigma-Aldrich, Merck) in 20 mM Tris.HCl and 150 mM NaCl (#S9888, Sigma-Aldrich, Merck) at pH 8.0. Ice-cold lysis buffer is added at a ratio of 1 mL per 0.1 g tissues or 1E8 cells. For tumor tissues, the samples were homogenized with an ultra turrax homogenizer followed by incubation for 1 h on ice facilitated by pipetting up and down the lysate every 15 min. For cells, the samples were incubated for 1 h on ice facilitated by pipetting up and down the lysate every 15 min. Lysates were then cleared by an initial centrifugation at 2,000 × g for 10 min at 4 °C, and supernatants were further cleared at 16,000 × g for 35 min at 4 °C. Lysates were also cleared by incubation with Protein-A beads for 1h at 4°C.
Cleared lysates were placed in a glass Econo column (#7374150, Biorad) containing 3 mg of anti-human MHC class I antibody (W6/32) cross-linked to 1 mL of precipitated protein-A beads. Lysates were incubated with anti-MHC-I immunoaffinity columns overnight while rolling at 30 rpm at 4 °C. Beads were washed with ice-cold solutions in the cold room: twice with 150 mM sodium chloride in 20 mM TRIS pH 8, twice with 400 mM NaCl in 20 mM TRIS pH 8, again twice with 150 mM NaCl in 20 mM TRIS pH 8 and finally twice with 20 mM TRIS pH 8. MHC Class I: peptide complexes were eluted by applying 5 mL 10% acetic acid (#1000562500, Sigma-Aldrich, Merck) per 1 mL settled beads.
The eluate was further acidified to a final concentration of 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (#85183, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and pH was checked to be at 2.5 or below, prior to loading on preconditioned C18 ODS 100 mg SampliQ columns (#5982-1111, Agilent Technologies) using a vacuum manifold. After initial loading, samples were re-loaded four times before washing with 1 mL of 2% acetonitrile (ACN) (#1000292500, Sigma-Aldrich, Merck) in 0.2% acetic acid. Next, MHC class I peptides were specifically eluted by applying twice 300 μL of 30% acetonitrile in 0.2% trifluoracetic acid, followed by pooling of the eluates and complete drying in 2 mL protein LoBind tubes (#0030108450, Eppendorf). For further purification, immunopeptides were reconstituted in 100 μL of 2% ACN in 0.2% TFA for 15 min in an ultrasonic bath. OMIX C18 pipette tips (#A57003MB, Agilent Technologies) were conditioned three times with 200 μL of 80% ACN in 0.2% TFA, followed by five times 200 μL of 0.2% TFA. Resolubilized MHC-peptides were loaded onto the conditioned OMIX tips by pipetting up and down ten times, washed with 100 μL of 0.2% TFA and eluted by pipetting up and down ten times with 80 μL of 30% ACN in 0.2% TFA, followed by 20 μL of 30% ACN in 0.2% TFA. Eluates were completely dried and stored at −20 °C until further use. In the analysis of EBV-B cells, peptides were eluted from C18 solid phase at 25% ACN in 0.1% TFA instead of 30% ACN and, if mentioned, peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS after one C18 purification with the the sampliQ columns omitting the OMIX tips (if mentioned in the.RAW file names). Additionally, half of the eluates containing the immunopeptides derived from the EBV-B cells were labeled with TMT reagent (TMT10plex, reporter mass 126 #90110, ThermoFisher Scientific). Briefly, dried peptides were resuspended in 45 μL with 50% ACN and 100 mM in triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB) (#T7408-100ML, Sigma-Aldrich, Merck) and sonicated 5 min in ultrasonic bath to alleviate peptide resuspension. Peptides were incubated for 1 h with 50 μg of TMT10plex reporter by adding 5 μL of TMT reagent at a concentration of 1 μg/μL. Reaction was quench by adding 0.5% (v/v) of hydroxylamine and after incubation under agitation at room temperature for 15 min. Peptides were dried under reduced pressure, resuspended in 2% acetonitrile and desalted with OMIX C18 tips as mentioned above. Peptides were eluted with 40% acetonitrile, dried under reduced pressure and kept at −20°C until MS analysis. TMT-labeled peptides were analyzed in single injection and without pooling or pre-fractionation.

## LC-MS/MS and data analysis of immunopeptides
In the analysis of tumor tissues, peptides were redissolved and injected for LC-MS/MS analysis one time with 7 μL out of 15 μL and a second time with 15 μL out of 20 μL for patient 05; one time with 8 μL out of 15 μL for patient 08; and one time with 15 μL out of 20 μL for patient 11. In the analysis of EBV-B cells, peptides for label-free or TMT analysis were redissolved in 35 μL from which 2 μL (test run) or 15 μL (analytical run) were injected for LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were redissolved in solvent (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in water/acetonitrile (ACN) (98:2, v/v)) and injected on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanospray flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Trapping was performed at 10 μL/min and 20 μL/min for 4 min in loading solvent on a 20-mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter, 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany), respectively for tumor tissues and EBV-B cells. In the analysis of tumor tissues, peptide separation after trapping was performed on NanoEase M/Z HSS C18 T3 column (100 A, 1.8 μm, 250 mm, 75 μm, C18, #186008818, Waters). In the analysis of EBV-B cells, peptide separation after trapping was performed on a 25CM Aurora Series Emitter Column (25cm, 75 μm, 1.6 μm, C18, IonOptikcs). Peptides were eluted by a nonlinear gradient from 1 to 55% MS solvent B (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) over 50, 135, 145 or 175 min for a run length of 90, 180, 210 and 210 min, respectively. Flow rate was set at of 300 nL/min washing phase plateauing was set at 99% MS solvent B for 10 or 15 min. Re-equilibration with 99% MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water) was performed for 20 or 30 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent, positive ionization mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the ten or sixteen most abundant peaks in a given MS spectrum. The source voltage was 2.2 kV, and the capillary temperature was set at 275 °C. One MS1 scan (m/z 300–1650 or 375–1500, AGC target 3 × 106 ions, maximum ion injection time 60 m), acquired at a resolution of 60,000 (at 200 m/z), was followed by up to ten tandem MS scans (resolution 15,000 at 200 m/z) of the most intense ions fulfilling predefined selection criteria (AGC target 1 × 105 ions, maximum ion injection time 120 m, isolation window 1.5 Da, fixed first mass 100 m/z, spectrum data type: centroid, intensity threshold 8.3 × 103, exclusion of unassigned, 4–8, >8 positively charged precursors, optionally including +1 ions, peptide match was set to preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion time 12 or 20 s). The higher-energy collisional dissociation was set to 28% normalized collision energy, and the polydimethylcyclosiloxane background ion at 445.12003 Da was used for internal calibration (lock mass).
Mass spectrometry raw data were searched with PEAKS Studio (version 11 build 20230327, Bioinformatics Solutions Inc, Waterloo, Canada). MS2 spectra were searched against a database containing the human sequences in UniProt SwissProt (version January 2022) merged with protein sequences specific for each patient and samples. The databases for the analysis of tumor tissues were generated by merging the protein sequences from uniprot.org with the protein sequences derived from the bioinformatics pipeline. The database for the analysis of the EBV-immortilized cells were generated by merging the protein sequences from uniprot.org with the protein sequences derived from the mini-gene vaccine. Databases were merged using dbtoolkit 2.0 (version 4.2.5). The peptide length was restricted to 8–30 amino acids, and unspecific digestion was chosen as digest mode. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, and mass error tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da for parent and fragment ions, respectively. If relevant, TMT10plex was set as a fixed modification. FDR estimation was carried out using the decoy-fusion approach. Identified peptide sequences were filtered at the PSM level for an FDR of 1%.

## Vaccine manufacturing

## Production of Neo-mRNA
Neo-mRNA was produced by in vitro transcription of a patient-specific DNA plasmid encoding the 5 to 6 selected neoantigens as described earlier. This plasmid encoded a T7 promotor upstream of a signal peptide sequence, a tandem of neoantigen minigenes, MHC Class I trafficking domain, two serial 3′ human β-globin untranslated regions (UTR) and a poly(A) tail of 120 adenosines. , Each neoantigen was encoded in a minigene as a 25-mer peptide, which contained the mutated amino acid centrally, flanked bilaterally by 12 amino acids of the wild type sequence. The minigenes of all selected neoantigens were concatenated and connected by 10-mer glycin-serin (GS) linker sequences to create a tandem of minigenes. In the next step, the plasmid DNA was linearized, and mRNA was transcribed and purified by using the Hiscribe T7 ARCA mRNA kit. The purified mRNA was sterilized, aliquoted and stored at −80°C.

## Production of Neo-mDCs
To generate mDCs, the patients underwent a single leukapheresis on a Spectra Optia apheresis system. A maximum of 2,5 patient blood volumes was processed. mDCs were generated according to a previously published 4-day protocol. In brief, monocytes were immunomagnetically purified using CliniMACS CD14 reagent (Miltenyi Biotec). Purified CD14+ monocytes were cultured in serum-free CellGro medium (CellGenix GmBH) supplemented with 1000 IU/mL pharmaceutical-grade GM-CSF (Leukine Saggramostim) and 500 IU/mL GMP-certified recombinant IL-4 (Miltenyi Biotec) for 3 days at 37°C and 5% CO2. At day 3, 1000 IU/mL pharmaceutical-grade IFN-γ (Immukine) and 2.5 μg/mL synthetic TLR4 agonist monophosphoryl lipid A (MPLA) (Invivogen) was added. Isolation, manipulation and cultures were performed in a closed-bag system (GMP cell differentiation bags, Miltenyi). At day 4, the mature mDCs were harvested and stained for flow cytometry analysis of viability, cell number (viable CD11c+HLADR+ cell count), purity (% CD11c+HLADR+), phenotype (CD14, CD86, CCR7, CD83, CD70 and CD40), and impurities (CD3, CD56, CD19). Next, the DCs were resuspended in Opti-MEM at a concentration of 35-65x106 DC/350 μL. A total of 350 μL of the DC suspension and 50 μL of 1 μg/μL Neo-mRNA were then added to a 4 mm gap cuvette and one square wave electroporation pulse (500 V, 1 ms) was applied with a GenePulser Xcell Electroporation System (Bio-Rad). After electroporation, cells were pooled and left to recover in CellGro medium supplemented with 1000 IU/mL GM-CSF and 500 IU/mL IL-4 in Cell Differentiation bags at 37°C and 5% CO2. The Neo-mDCs were harvested 4 h later, counted and cryopreserved in cryovials in aliquots of 5 x 106 DCs in 100 μL Plasmalyte A with 4% human serum albumin (HSA, Alburex), 6% DMSO and 0.4% HES. Finally, the cells were cryopreserved in a controlled rate freezer, followed by transfer and storage in the vapor phase of a liquid N2-container. The final Neo-mDC products were thawed and tested for sterility, mycoplasma, viable cell count, endotoxin level, maturation phenotype, presence of cell impurities (T cells, B cells, NK cells) and functionality (production of IP10) ( ). Productions of Neo-mRNA and Neo-mDCs were performed in compliance with GMP guidelines in B-grade clean rooms in the GMP Unit Facility of Ghent University Hospital (Unit for Cell Therapy).
On the day of vaccination, the required number of aliquots was thawed to obtain the total dose, combined and diluted 5-fold in Plasmalyte A with 4% HSA and dispensed in a syringe in a total volume varying between 1 and 10 mL depending on the dose. The vaccine was held on 4°C until administration. Administration was done within 2 h after cell thawing.

## Shotgun proteomics
For patient 03 and 05, released Neo-mDCs batches were lysed by probe sonication in a buffer containing 8 M urea (Merck, #U5378) and extracted proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested with endoLysC (Wako, #129–02541) and trypsin (Promega, #V5111) as described previously. For patient 02, 08, 10 and 11, released Neo-mDCs batches were lysed in lysis buffer containing 5% Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) (Merck, #L4509) with 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) (Merck, #T7408) at pH 8.0. 20 μg of proteins were resuspended in 25 μL and processed for downstream analysis. Proteins were reduced and alkylated with 10 mM tris(2- carboxyethyl)phosphine) (TCEP) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #20491) combined with 40 mM chloroacetamide (CAA) (Merck, #C0267) and incubated for 10 min at 95°C under agitation. Samples were acidified by adding 2.5 μL of 27% Phosphoric acid (final 2.5%, v/v) (Merck, #438081). Samples were mixed with 165 μL of binding/wash buffer containing 100 mM TEAB in 90% methanol (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #A456-212) and loaded onto S- TrapTM micro columns (≤100 μg) (ProtiFi, #C2-micro) to retain the protein. Proteins were washed on the S-trap four times with 150 μL of binding/wash buffer. Proteins were digested with 2 μg trypsin in 20 μL of 50 mM TEAB at pH 8.0 for overnight at 37°C on the S-trap. Peptides were eluted by the sequential addition of three elution buffers containing: 50 mM TEAB (buffer 1), 0.2% formic acid (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #006914143BS) (buffer 2) and 50% acetonitrile (ACN) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #A955-212) (buffer 3). Peptides were dried under reduced pressure and desalted a second time using OMIX C18 pipette tips (#A57003MB, Agilent Technologies). Peptides were reconstituted in 100 μL of 2% ACN in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 002023441A8BS). C18 tips were conditioned three times with 200 μL of 80% ACN in 0.2% TFA, followed by five times 200 μL of 0.2% TFA. Peptides were loaded onto the conditioned C18 tips by pipetting up and down 20 times, washed trice with 100 μL of 0.2% TFA and eluted by pipetting up and down ten times with 70 μL of 50% ACN in 0.2% TFA, twice. Eluates were completely dried and stored at −20°C until further use.

## LC-MS/MS and data analysis for shotgun proteomics
Peptides were dissolved in 30 μL and the equivalent of 2 μg of peptides was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were redissolved in solvent (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in water/acetonitrile (ACN) (98:2, v/v)) and injected on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanospray flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Trapping was performed at 10 μL/min and 20 μL/min for 4 min for patient 03; 05 and patient 02; 08; 10; 11, respectively. Trapping was performed in loading solvent on a 20-mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter, 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, German. For patient 03 and 05, peptide separation after trapping was performed on NanoEase M/Z HSS C18 T3 column (100 A, 1.8 μm, 250 mm, 75 μm, C18, #186008818, Waters). For patient 02, 08, 10 and 11, peptide separation after trapping was performed on a 110 cm μPAC HPLC Columns (prototype, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted by a nonlinear gradient from 1 to 55% MS solvent B (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) over 100, 145 or 165 min for patient 03, for patient 05 and for patient 02, 08, 10 and 11, respectively. Run length was 180 min for all samples. Flow rate was set at of 300 nL/min. Washing phase plateauing was set at 99% MS solvent B for 10 or 15 min. Re-equilibration with 99% MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water) was performed for 20 or 30 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent, positive ionization mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the eight or sixteen most abundant peaks in a given MS spectrum. The source voltage was 2.2 kV, and the capillary temperature was set at 275 °C. One MS1 scan (m/z 375–1500, AGC target 3 × 106 ions, maximum ion injection time 60 m), acquired at a resolution of 60,000 (at 200 m/z), was followed by up to ten tandem MS scans (resolution 15,000 at 200 m/z) of the most intense ions fulfilling predefined selection criteria (AGC target 1 × 105 ions, maximum ion injection time 80 ms or 100 m, isolation window 1.5 Da, fixed first mass 145 m/z, spectrum data type: centroid, intensity threshold 8.3 × 103, exclusion of unassigned, 4–8, >8 positively charged precursors, peptide match was set to preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion time 12 s). The higher-energy collisional dissociation was set to 28% normalized collision energy, and the polydimethylcyclosiloxane background ion at 445.12003 Da was used for internal calibration (lock mass).
Mass spectrometry raw data were searched with MaxQuant (version 2.0.3.0.) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% on the PSM and protein level. All spectral data files were searched against all human proteins in the Uniprot/Swiss-Prot database (database release version of February 2022, taxonomy ID 9606, downloaded from www.uniprot.org) and the protein sequence encoded by the neoantigen-mRNA encoded amino acid sequence. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine (trypsin), also allowing cleavage at arginine/lysine-proline bonds with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine (sulfoxides) and acetylation of protein N-termini. Matching between runs was OFF. Protein IBAQ was calculated and used to rank proteins based on their IBAQ intensity. Top % rank is reported in the .

## Generation of autologous neoantigen-transgene B-LCL cells
PBMC of the patients were thawed and left to rest overnight at 37°C and 5% CO2. The following day, PBMC were incubated with supernatant of the EBV-producing cell line B9-58 in the presence of phytohemagglutinin (4 μg/mL, Sigma-Aldrich) in RPMI (Gibco) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (Biowest), 2 mM L-glutamine (Invitrogen), 100 IU/mL penicillin (Invitrogen) and 100 IU/mL streptomycin (Invitrogen). Cells were further incubated at 37°C and 5% CO2 with medium refreshment each week. When exponential B-LCL growth was observed, cells were transduced with retroviral particles encoding the tandem of neoantigen sequence used in the vaccine and enhanced GFP (eGFP) as a reporter. Two days after transduction, eGFP positive B-LCL cells were sorted with BD ARIA II cell sorter (BD Biosciences). The sorted B-LCL cells were expanded to obtain 500x106 cells (of which >60% was eGFP positive) which were subjected to immunopeptidomics analysis.

## Expansion of TILs and evaluation of neoantigen reactivity
TILs were expanded from the resected tumor specimen. First, the tumor specimen was enzymatically and mechanically dissociated into a single-cell suspension by using gentleMAC Dissociator (Miltenyi) in combination with the Tumor Dissociation Kit (Miltenyi). The single cells were subsequently cultured for 10 days in the presence of 1500 U/ml IL-2 (Roche) and 10 μg/mL anti-PD1 (Nivolumab, Bristol-Myers Squibb) in cIMDM in a U-bottom 96 well plate. Every 3–4 days, half of the media was removed and replaced with fresh media supplemented with IL-2 and anti-PD1. At 10 days in culture, TILs were seeded on feeder cells consisting of a mixture of 40 Gy irradiated PBMC of 2 random blood donors and 50 Gy irradiated JY cells in cIMDM supplemented with 1 μg/mL PHA (Sigma-Aldrich). Fresh medium with IL-2 at a final concentration of 2.5 ng/mL was added every 3–4 days. After 9–14 days in culture with feeder cells, TILs were evaluated for neoantigen reactivity. In brief, expanded TILs were stimulated in a 2:1 ratio with autologous PHA blasts which were treated with DMSO (negative control) or pulsed for 2 h with either the predicted neopeptide(s) or overlapping peptide pools representing each 25-mer of the vaccine. The peptide pool consisted of 9 or 10-mer predicted peptide(s) and 4 15-mers which overlapped at least 11 amino acids and covered together the 25-mer encoded in the minigene. As a positive control, TILs were stimulated with ImmunoCult Human CD3/CD28/CD2 T cell Activator (Stemcell Technologies). After 6 h of incubation, IFNγ was intracellularly stained and analyzed by flow cytometry.

## PBMC isolation for the analysis of T cell responses
Prior to vaccination, PBMC were collected from either mononuclear cell (MNC) apheresis product (patients 02, 03 and 05) or from whole blood (patients 08, 10 and 11). During and after the treatment course, PBMC were collected from whole blood. PBMC were isolated from the whole blood samples by density gradient centrifugation (Lymphoprep, Axis-Shield). Cells were cryopreserved in RPMI (Gibco) containing 4% human albumin (Alburex) and 10% DMSO (Serva).

## Analysis of vaccine-specific T cell responses in PBMC after in vitro stimulation

## In vitro stimulation
PBMC obtained at serial time points were monitored for the presence of neoepitope-specific T cells after in vitro stimulation (IVS). The PBMC were thawed and rested overnight at a concentration of 10 x 106 cells/ml in IMDM (Gibco) supplemented with 10% human AB serum (Biowest), 2 mM L-glutamine (Invitrogen), 100 IU/mL penicillin (Invitrogen), 100 IU/mL streptomycin (Invitrogen), further referred to as completed IMDM (cIMDM). To generate APCs presenting the vaccine antigens, leukapheresis PBMC were electroporated with Neo-mRNA and irradiated. In brief, leukapheresis PBMC were washed twice with Opti-MEM medium (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and resuspended to a concentration of 5–15 x 106 cells in 170 μL Opti-MEM and transferred to a 4 mm electroporation cuvette (Bio-Rad). Next, 1 μg mRNA/106 PBMC was added in 30 μL water for injection (B. Braun). The cells were electroporated by applying a square wave pulse of 500 V and 5 ms using a GenePulser Xcell Electroporation System (Bio-Rad). The cells were left to rest for 4 h and were subsequently irradiated at 15 Gy by using Sarrp irradiator (X-Srahl). Next, PMBC of the serial time points were harvested. For patients 02, 03 and 05, all PBMC were first subjected to T cell enrichment by using a human Pan T cell Isolation kit (Miltenyi Biotec) according to manufacturer’s instructions. 3x105 irradiated APCs were then added to 6x105 PBMC (for patients 08, 10 and 11) or purified T cells (for patients 02, 03 and 05) in 100 μL cIMDM in a 96 well U-bottom plate and cultured at 37°C and 5% CO2. At day 3, the cells were diluted 1:10 in cIMDM supplemented with 2.5 ng/mL IL-7 and IL-15 (both Miltenyi Biotech) and transferred to a 24 well plate. IL-7 and IL-15 were replenished at day 7 and cells were further incubated until day 10.

## Restimulation and intracellular IFNγ staining
At day 9 of the IVS culture, leukapheresis PBMC were thawed and rested overnight. At day 10, the cells were labelled with CellTrace Violet (Invitrogen) to distinguish them from the IVS T cells in the flow cytometry data. Next, the cells were treated with DMSO (negative control) or pulsed for 2 h with peptide pools (each peptide at 1 μg/mL) representing each neoantigen included in the vaccine. The peptide pool consisted of 9 or 10-mer predicted peptide(s) and 4 15-mers which overlapped at least 11 amino acids and covered together the 25-mer encoded in the minigene. The peptides were custom-made and lyophilized by JPT (PepTrack peptide Library, crude). The peptides were dissolved in DMSO to a final concentration of 1 μg/μL and stored at −80°C. IVS T cells were harvested and restimulated by adding the cells to the peptide pulsed PBMC in a 1:2 ratio in a U-bottom 96 well plate. As a positive control, the IVS T cells were stimulated with ImmunoCult Human CD3/CD28/CD2 T cell Activator (Stemcell Technologies). After 2 h of stimulation, BD GolgiPlug (BD Biosciences) was added, and the cells were incubated for another 4 h. After incubation, the cells were stained with fixable Live/Dead stain (Thermofisher) and with anti-CD3 (UCHT1, PE-Cy7, Biolegend), anti-CD8 (SK1, APC/Fire, Biolegend) and anti-CD4 (SK3, PerCP/Cyanine5.5, Biolegend) antibodies for 15 min at room temperature. Next, the cells were fixed, permeabilized (Fixation/Permeabilization kit, BD Biosciences) and stained intracellularly with an anti-IFNγ (4S.B3, FITC, Biolegend) antibody for 30 min on 4°C. Cells were measured on a flow cytometer (LSR II, BD Biosciences) with Facs Diva software (BD Biosciences). The resulting data was analyzed by using FlowJo v.10 software (TreeStar). Cells were hierarchically gated on lymphocytes (FSC-A vs. SSC-A), alive cells (FSC-A versus Live/Dead), singlets (FSC-A vs. FSC-H), IVS T cells (FSC-A vs. CellTrace in Pacific Blue), CD3+CD4+ and CD3+CD8+. IFNγ staining was plotted for each of the latter populations. CD4+IFNγ+ or CD8+ IFNγ+ T cell frequencies were calculated as the mean of duplicate determinations. T cell responses were calculated by subtracting the CD4+IFNγ+ or CD8+ IFNγ+ T cell frequencies observed in the DMSO control from the respective frequencies detected after peptide stimulation. Negative values were set to zero. A T cell response was considered positive if the mean frequency of CD4+IFNγ+ or CD8+ IFNγ+ T cells after peptide stimulation was at least 2-fold higher than the mean frequency in the corresponding DMSO-control and if at least 25 events were present in the CD4+IFNγ+ or CD8+ IFNγ+ gate. To be defined as a vaccin-induced T cell response, positive T cell responses had to be detected at least at one time point during the treatment phase and the frequency of the positive T cell response had to be at least 2-fold higher than the frequency of the response observed at baseline. Due to limited samples sizes, no statistical analyses were performed.

## Generation of T cell lines enriched in neoantigen reactivity
IVS T cells of patients 08 and 11 were restimulated at day 10 for 6 h with neoepitope peptides. Next, cells were processed with the IFNγ Secretion Assay Detection kit (Miltenyi Biotec) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Live, CD3+CD8+IFNγ+ T cells were sorted by flow cytometry and polyclonally expanded by seeding them on feeder cells consisting of a mixture of 40 Gy irradiated PBMC of 2 random blood donors and 50 Gy irradiated JY cells in IMDM (Gibco) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (Biowest), 2 mM L-glutamine (Invitrogen), 100 IU/mL penicillin (Invitrogen), 100 IU/mL streptomycin (Invitrogen) and 1 μg/mL PHA (Sigma-Aldrich). Fresh medium with IL-2 (Roche) at a final concentration of 2.5 ng/mL was added every 3 to 4 days to obtain neoantigen reactive T cell lines.

## Surface CD137 staining of T cell lines stimulated with mutant versus wild-type peptide
T cell lines were thawed and rested overnight in cIMDM with 10 ng/mL IL-2. Subsequently, 5 × 104 T cells were incubated with mutated or wild type peptide across a range of peptide concentrations in 100 μL cIMDM in a 96 well U-bottom plate and cultured for 16 h at 37°C and 5% CO2. As a negative control, T cells were treated with DMSO. As a positive control, T cells were stimulated with ImmunoCult Human CD3/CD28/CD2 T cell Activator (Stemcell Technologies). Stimulations were done in duplicate. After incubation, cells were stained with fixable Live/Dead stain (Thermofisher), anti-CD3 (UCHT1, PE-Cy7, Biolegend), anti-CD8 (SK1, APC/Fire, Biolegend) and anti-CD137 (4B4-1, PE, Biolegend) and analyzed by flow cytometry with a BD FACSymphony system (BD Biosciences) and FACS Diva software. Data were analyzed using FlowJo v.10 software.

## Ex vivo detection of neoantigen-specific T cells in PBMC by pHLA tetramer staining
All pHLA-tetramers complexes, both in APC and PE, were manufactured by the NIH Tetramer Core facility using custom-made peptides (≥80% pure, GenScript). PBMC were thawed and rested for 1 h. Next, PBMC were resuspended at a concentration of 10 x 106 cells/ml, and treated with 50 nM Dasatinib (StemCell Technologies) for 30 min at 37°C. Subsequently, the cells were washed and stained with both APC and PE conjugated pHLA-tetramers (2nM) in the presence of 50 nM Dasatinib for 15 min on room temperature. Right before staining, aggregates were removed from the tetramer solutions by centrifugation. Next, the cells were stained with anti-CD3 (OKT3, BV421, Biolegend) and anti-CD8 (SK1, PerCP/Cyanine5.5, Biolegend) for 15 min on room temperature. Finally, the cells were washed and analyzed by flow cytometry with a BD FACSymphony system (BD Biosciences) and FACS Diva software. Data were analyzed using FlowJo v.10 software. To determine the differentiation phenotype of tetramer+ T cells, pHLA-tetramer staining was preceded by staining with anti-CCR7 (G043H7, APC/Fire, Biolegend) antibody at 37°C for 30 min and followed by staining with anti-CD3 (OKT3, BV650, Biolegend), anti-CD8 (SK1, PerCP/Cyanine5.5, Biolegend), anti-CD45RA (FITC, homemade), anti-CX3CR1 (2A9-1, BV421, BD Biosciences), anti-CD127 (A019D5, BV711, Biolegend), anti-Granzyme B (QA16A02, PE-Cy7, Biolegend) and anti-CD95 (DX2, PE/Dazzle594, Biolegend) antibodies at room temperature for 15 min. To run UMAP analysis, a concatenate file was generated containing a downsample of 10,000 cells in the CD3+CD8+ gate and all cells in the CD3+CD8+tetramer+ gate from each FCS file. UMAP analysis was ran in FlowJo v10 software using the UMAP plugin (version 4.0.4) and following parameters: nearest neighbors of 15, minimum distance of 0.01 and an Euclidean Metric. Clusters were analyzed in FlowJo v10 software by using the FlowSOM plugin (version 4.0.0) and visualized by using the ClusterExplorer plugin (version 1.7.6).

## Sorting of pHLA tetramer-specific T cells
PBMC of patient 08 and 11 obtained on serial time points were thawed and left to rest for 2 h at 37°C and 5% CO2. Next, the PBMC were incubated with Fc block (Miltenyi) and APC and PE conjugated p-HLA-tetramers (2nM) for 15 min on room temperature. Subsequently, PBMC were labeled with anti-CD3 (BV421, OKT3, Biolegend) and anti-CD8 (PerCP/Cyanine5.5, SK1, Biolegend) antibodies for 30 min at 4°C. Next, cells were washed and labelled with sample tags using BD Single-Cell Multiplexing Kit (BD Biosciences) for 50 min at 4°C. PBMC obtained on-treatment were pooled and labeled with the same sample tag, all other PBMC samples were labeled with unique tags. PBMC were washed twice and resuspended in PBS +1% bovine serum albumin (BSA, Roche). Live, CD3+CD8+ T cells were sorted from PBMC obtained pre-treatment and live, CD3+CD8+tetramer-APC+tetramer-PE+ T cells were sorted from PMBC obtained on-treatment and post-treatment with BD ARIA II cell sorter (BD Bioscience). Sorted cells were pooled and volume of cell suspension was diluted to 600 mL with BD Sample Buffer (BD Bioscience).

## Single cell whole transcriptome and TCR sequencing
Single cell capture and cDNA library preparations were performed using the BD Rhapsody system. First, BD Rhapsody cartridges were primed, and the pooled cells were loaded onto the cartridges and incubated at 4°C for 15 min. The subsequent steps were performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions (23-21336-01, BD Biosciences). Sample tag and cDNA libraries were generated for both the pre-treatment and on/post-treatment PBMCs (23-21712-00, BD Biosciences), while an additional TCR library was generated for on/post-treatment PBMCs (23–24018(01), BD Biosciences). Libraries were sequenced on a NovaSeq6000 flow cell (Illumina) and the BD Rhapsody Sequence Analysis Pipeline (version 1.11, BD Biosciences) was used to map the reads to the human reference genome (GRCh38).

## Single cell data analysis

## Pre-processing
The Combined_RSEC_MolsPerCell, Sample_Tag_Calls and VDJ_perCell CSV files from the BD Rhapsody Analysis Pipeline were loaded into R with the read.table function. The gene count matrix from the Combined_RSEC_MolsPerCell file was subsequently transposed and converted to a Seurat object using the CreateSeuratObject function from the Seurat package (version 4.3.0). The data from the Sample_Tag_Calls and VDJ_perCell files were added to the Seurat Object through the AddMetaData function. Based on the data from the sample tag calls only cells with a single sample tag (Singlets) were retained for further analysis. These cells were subsequently filtered further to remove low quality, empty and/or multiplet cells based on the following criteria: percent.mt < 20, nCountRNA <10000 and nFeatureRNA <3000. Next the gene expression data was normalized using the NormalizeData function with the normalization method set to LogNormalize and the scale factor to 10000. Then the highly variable features were identified using the FindVariableFeatures function and the selection method was set to vst and the number of features (nfeatures) to 600. Afterward the data was scaled with the ScaleData function.

## Data integration and cluster annotation
The pre-processed Seurat Objects from the pre-treament and the on/post-treatment cDNA libraries were merged and subsequently the FindVariableFeatures, ScaleData and RunPCA functions were applied to the data as preparation for the data integration with Harmony (version 1.0). Afterward the data was integrated with the RunHarmony function taking into account that the data originated from two donors, different time points and that cells were sorted on two devices. Afterward, we identified and visualized the clusters in the integrated object through RunUMAP, FindNeighbors and FindClusters. For the latter the resolution was set to 0.9. Afterward the FindAllMarkers function was run to identify the differentially expressed genes (DEG) between the clusters with min.pct set to 0.25. Based on the DEGs per cluster and the available literature the clusters were manually annotated.

## Trajectory analysis
To evaluate that the cells progress naturally through the different T cell states, we performed a trajectory analysis with Monocle3. , Prior to this analysis the UTC, IS and TC clusters were removed from the integrated object. Then this object was converted to a CDS object with the as.cell_data_set function. Gene names and UMAP coordinates from the original Seurat object were added manually. The cells were then reclustered with the cluster_cells function from Monocle3 and afterward the graph was learned (learn_graph) and the cells were ordered along the graph (order_cells). The results of this trajectory analysis were visualized with the plot_cells function.

## Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA)
For this analysis we downloaded the RNA-Seq data (Accession Number: GSE100745) from Akondy et al. and processed it with kallisto and DeSeq2 to identify the differentially expressed genes between effector T cells found 14 days after vaccination and memory T cells found between 4 and 13 years after vaccination. The resulting sets of up- and downregulated genes were used in a GSEA.
The on- and post-treatment cells were isolated from the integrated Seurat Object and subsequently we calculated the DEStats for each gene in the dataset with the wilcoxauc function. Next the DEStats of a cluster were isolated and the genes within the dataset were ordered based on their AUC value. The AUC ranks of the different genes were subsequently stored in a separate vector. For the actual GSEA we made use of fgsea function, which takes as input a list of gene sets, in this case the up- and downregulated genes of the DeSeq2 analysis, and a vector with stats, in this instance the vector with AUC ranks. The scoreType was set to pos. The results of this analysis were then ordered based on the normalized enrichment score (NES). These steps were repeated for all clusters and the NES value for each gene set and their associated p value were plot in a dotplot.

## Quantification and statistical analysis
As this was a single-arm phase 1 first-in-human trial, no sample size calculation was applied. We intended to enroll and treat at least six patients. The intention-to-treat population consisted of all patients who signed informed consent. Feasibility was measured in all patients who successfully underwent leukapheresis and safety, immunogenicity and clinical activity were measured in all patients treated with at least one dose of the vaccine.

## Additional resources
This clinical trial has been registered on https://clinicaltrials.gov/, ID: NCT04078269.

 

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S7 and Tables S1 and S5

## Table S2. Characteristics of selected neoantigens, related to Figure 1

## Table S3. Summary of epitope mapping across all patients, related to Figures 1 and 4
N.I., not identified; N.D., not determined.

## Table S4. Results of quality controls on intermediates and investigational medicinal product, related to STAR Methods

## Table S6. Results of IMGT junctional analysis of TCRVβ sequences of patient 08, related to Figure 6
Note that only the 10 TCRVβ sequences that were shared by at least two time points were used in this analysis.

## Table S7. Summary of the MIDRIXNEO clinical trial, related to Figures 1, 2, and 3
N.D., not determined; green, patients that completed the clinical trial; red, patients that did not complete the full clinical trial protocol.

## Document S2. Article plus supplemental information

## Acknowledgments
We would like to thank all patients who participated in this clinical trial. We would also like to acknowledge the department of clinical biology (UZ Ghent) for their aid with quality control, VIB Single-Cell Core and Nucleomics Core for their support and access to their instrument park, and Anna Vantilborgh and Conny Matthys for donor screening. This work was supported by Innovatiefonds UZ Gent, 10.13039/501100011851Kom op tegen Kanker (KotK UG/2017-2020 and KotK_UG/2021/12771/1), Geconcerteerde Onderzoeksacties (BOF21-GOA-033), and 10.13039/501100005026Stichting Tegen Kanker (C/2020/1348). R.L.M. acknowledges VIB and a faculty interim fellowship from the UGent Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences. F.I. is supported by Odysseus grant G0F8616N from the 10.13039/501100003130Research Foundation Flanders (FWO). J.I. and L.D. are supported by a 10.13039/501100007229BOF grant. L.D.C., S.D., M.P., L.B., and E.P. are FWO fellows. D.S. is supported by a Kom op Tegen Kanker starter’s grant (Emmanuel Vanderschueren) and Ghent University Hospital Innovation Fund. K.V. is supported by an FWO Senior Clinical Fellowship.

## Author contributions
Conceptualization, J.I., L.D., B.M., K.V., and B.V.; data curation, J.I., L.D., D.S., R.L.M., F.T., T.V., J.B., S.D., R.R., T.E., K.V., and B.V.; formal analysis, J.I., L.D., D.S., R.L.M., F.T., G.S.S., D.V., R.R., T.E., L.F., and T.E.; methodology, J.I., L.D., D.S., R.L.M., F.T., G.S.S., M.B., T.V., E.V.H., P.D., K.H., F.V., A.D., F.I., B.M., K.V., and B.V.; project administration, J.I., L.D., D.S., R.L.M., F.T., G.S.S., P.D., B.M., K.V., and B.V.; software, J.I., L.D., D.S, and T.E.; visualization, J.I., L.D., D.S., F.T., G.S.S., D.V., and T.E.; writing – original draft, J.I., L.D., D.S., F.T., D.V., K.V., and B.V.; resources, D.S., K.W., T.V., J.B., L.V., M.V., F.V., A.D., L.D., F.D.R., L.D., F.D.R., F.V., V.S., B.M., F.I., B.V., and K.V.; validation, S.D.S., N.L., M.B., P.D., K.V., and B.V.; supervision, D.V., N.V., G.L., T.T., F.V., A.D., L.F., J.V.D., L.D., F.D.R., F.V., V.S., F.I., B.M., K.V., and B.V.; and funding acquisition, F.I., B.M., K.V., and B.V. All authors read, edited, and agreed to the manuscript.

## Declaration of interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrm.2024.101516.