pmcMedComm (2020)MedComm (2020)4101mcomm101769925MCO2MedComm2688-2663WileyPMC12932978PMC12932978.112932978129329784175625310.1002/mco2.70586MCO2705861ReviewReviewRNA Regulatory Networks: Key Hubs in the Panorama of Cancer and Emerging Therapeutic Targets
YinXuan DuZengkan JiangShuya LiaoYan WangChangli LiJiaqi ZhangHaoling zhanghaolingedu@163.comWeiTing‐Ting weiting0905@163.comZhangWangzheqi zwzq001031@smmu.edu.cnZouZuihttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-8433-8388 zouzui@smmu.edu.cn

1

Faculty of Anesthesiology, Changhai Hospital
Naval Medical University
Shanghai
China

2

Basic Medical University
Naval Medical University
Shanghai
China

3

Department of Gastroenterology, National Clinical Research Center For Digestive Diseases, Changhai Hospital
Naval Medical University
Shanghai
China

4

The Third Department of Hepatic Surgery, Eastern Hepatobiliary Surgery Hospital
Naval Medical University
Shanghai
China

5

School of Anesthesiology
Naval Medical University
Shanghai
China

6

Department of Biomedical Science
Universiti Sains Malaysia
Penang
Malaysia

7

Department of Laboratory Medicine, Shanghai Changzheng Hospital
Naval Medical University
Shanghai
China
2422026320267350771410.1002/mco2.v7.3e70586
09122025
2472025
11122025
240220262602202627022026© 2026 The Author(s). MedComm published by Sichuan International Medical Exchange & Promotion Association (SCIMEA) and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

## ABSTRACT
Cancer is a global health challenge. The initiation and progression of cancer are correlated with dynamic dysregulation of RNA regulatory networks. This review systematically explains how contending RNAs (including mRNA, miRNA, lncRNA, circRNA, etc.) remold gene expression programs across multiple dimensions. They do this primarily through the competing endogenous RNA sponge effect, RNA–protein complex assembly, RNA editing (A‐to‐I editing, m6A modification, etc.), tumorigenesis, heterogeneous evolution, and therapeutic resistance. RNA regulatory networks do not only help one to decode cancer biology but because they are dynamic in nature, they are now also being looked at as good precision targets for diagnosis and treatment. This article integrates recent findings on the emerging functions of RNA networks in tumor metabolic reprogramming, tumor immune microenvironment shaping, and cancer stem cell property maintenance, while highlighting their clinical application prospects as liquid biopsy biomarkers. Our therapies focus on assessing the potential and clinical translation bottlenecks of novel RNA‐targeted interventions, including antisense oligonucleotides, RNA aptamers, and the CRISPR–Cas13 system. A dynamic adjustability made the RNA‐targeted therapies promising intervention nodes in precision medicine even if most of them are still in a preclinical state.

RNA regulatory networks play a crucial role in the initiation and progression of cancer through various modes of RNA interactions. Notably, circulating RNAs have emerged as potential biomarkers, while targeted interventions in RNA regulatory networks facilitate precise therapeutic strategies.
 

cancerliquid biopsyprecision medicineRNA regulatory networktherapeutic target
Natural Science Foundation of China10.13039/501100001809
8257249482202584
Shanghai Oriental Talent Top Project and Changhai Hospital Anesthesia Specialty Platform Construction Project
 As important parts of the ceRNA network, lncRNAs compete with mRNAs for binding to the miRISC through their miRNA‐binding sites to reverse miRNA‐mediated gene silencing. lncRNA HULC acts as an endogenous sponge sequestering miR‐372 in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), thereby relieving miR‐372 inhibition on downstream target genes leading to malignant tumor progression [ ]. As a result of their closed circular structure and a high number of miRNA‐binding sites, circRNAs form another type of efficient sponge molecules within the ceRNA network [ ]. For instance, CDR1as/circRNA consists of 60 or more conserved miR‐7‐binding sites. As a significant sequestering agent of miR‐7 and the recruiter of AGO protein, it enhances the expression levels of miR‐7 target genes. This plays a very important role in cancer like glioma [ ]. Notably, a single circRNA can regulate multiple miRNAs simultaneously. A working circRNA that specifically sequesters miR‐130b/miR‐494 in bladder cancer (BLCA) is circSLC8A1. In cardiac hypertrophy, it primarily binds to miR‐133. This shows the ceRNA function is cell‐ and context‐dependent [ ]. According to tissue‐specific miRNA expression profiles, this ceRNA regulatory network may help to reveal tumor heterogeneity and develop tissue‐specific targeting strategies [ ].
The ceRNA hypothesis provides a powerful framework for understanding RNA interactions, but it still has some biological limitation such as relative intracellular abundance of miRNAs and ceRNAs, affinity of MREs and subcellular localization [ ]. Some studies suggest that the effects of ceRNA regulatory networks may be overestimated in some scenarios whilst false positives are common in experimental validation. This indicates that when analyzing ceRNA networks, it will require comprehensive validation through integration of multiomic data and functional experimentation [ ].
Through miRNA‐mediated targeting, lncRNA‐mediated competition, and circRNA‐mediated sponging, RNA–RNA interactions construct a multilevel, multidimensional network for gene expression regulation. The abnormality of these important regulatory systems in major diseases such as cancer, supports their potential as interesting new therapeutic targets. This knowledge helps understand how diseases result as issues arise. It also acts as a basis in developing new therapy strategies. Moreover, the RNA–RNA interaction artificial technologies have moved from the old RNA immunoprecipitation and fluorescence in situ hybridization to the new high‐throughput sequencing ones such as CLASH and LIGR‐seq. They greatly facilitate the systematic dissection of RNA–RNA interaction networks and powerful tools to exploit their roles in biological activities.

2.4

## RNA–Protein Interactions
RNA–protein interactions are a molecular regulatory process in living organisms where specific RNA and protein components bind together, thus forming complexes that coordinately regulate gene expression, RNA metabolism, and cell function. Interactions of these types depend primarily on recognition of RNA sequences or secondary structures by protein RNA‐binding domains. Aberrant RNA–protein interactions are closely associated with cancer and thus become crucial targets for disease therapy and RNA‐drug development. Figure  illustrates three classical RNA–protein interaction processes.
 RNA‐binding protein (RBP) contains multiple RNA‐binding domains and a flexible spatial conformation, plays a central role in regulating RNA metabolism at the posttranscriptional level [ ]. RBPs help to maintain transcriptome homeostasis via the regulation of RNA processing and transport. These processes include RNA splicing, polyadenylation, mRNA stability, mRNA localization, and translation [ ]. RBPs influence cancer development following key oncogenic events primarily by altering various cancer‐related downstream targets. This modification facilitates a chain reaction that potentiates the phenotypic consequence of the first transformative hit [ ]. RBPs function during RNA metabolism in a cell type‐ and context‐dependent manner [ ]. The same RBP might have protumorigenic and tumor‐suppressor effect in different cancers, which is challenging for therapy strategies directed against these RBPs [ ]. Additionally, current understanding of the interaction networks between RBPs and ncRNAs is still in its preliminary stages, and their dynamic regulatory mechanisms and pathological significance await further exploration [ ].
The protein–ribonucleic acid (RNP) complexes formed by interaction of RBP to RNA are the core molecular machinery that regulates gene expression [ , ]. Research affirms that the abnormal creation of ribosomes—a common kind of RNP complex—is crucial for the onset and progression of most sporadic cancers [ ]. The spliceosome is an RNP complex that is made up of small nuclear RNAs and protein factors. It can accurately identify splice sites and catalyze splicing reactions between precursor mRNAs (pre‐mRNAs) [ ]. RNA splicing consists mostly of constitutive splicing and alternative splicing [ ]. According to alternative splicing, which increases transcript diversity, protein structure and function can be modified diversely. Its dysregulation is closely associated with the occurrence and development of various diseases, especially tumors, and holds significant clinical research value [ ].
RISC is a classic study in RNA–protein cooperation. RISC is a complex comprised of small RNAs and members of the AGO protein family that represses target genes. Mature RISC binds to the target mRNAs complementary to the guide RNA. Gene silencing is achieved by cleaving the target mRNAs or recruiting proteins that inhibit the translation and cause degradation of the mRNA. The particular method of action depends on the complementarity of the guide RNA to the target mRNA and on the class of effector molecules recruited by the AGO proteins. In animals, miRNA‐mediated silencing mainly takes place via translation repression and mRNA degradation, with translational repression typically preceding mRNA decay [ ]. The degradation of target mRNAs mediated by miRNAs involves processes such as deadenylation, decapping, and exonucleolytic degradation, which are coordinated by the GW182 protein [ ]. The mechanisms of translational repression are more complex. They include the dislodging of polyadenylate‐binding proteins, the recruitment of translational inhibitors that target eIF4E or eIF4G and the disassociation of eIF4A [ ].
RNA–protein interactions, facilitated by the precise regulation of RNA metabolism by RBPs and gene silencing mediated by RISC complexes, collectively maintain cellular transcriptome homeostasis. These regulatory mechanisms are frequently dysregulated in cancer, a phenomenon characterized by aberrant splicing events and uncontrolled translation. This dysregulation provides a critical theoretical foundation for the development of cancer therapeutic strategies that target RNA–protein interactions.
The unique structure of RNA lays the foundation for its functions, molecular diversity provides the material premise for regulatory networks, and its multidimensional interactions with DNA, other RNAs, and proteins constitute the core link for network formation. These three elements synergistically construct an elaborate regulatory system covering transcriptional, posttranscriptional, and epigenetic levels (Figure  ). Dysregulation of this system's homeostasis is a key driver of cancer initiation and progression, and core regulatory nodes have emerged as potential therapeutic targets due to their specificity and intervenability. However, current research mostly focuses on single molecules or static interactions, lacking systematic analysis of the network's spatiotemporal dynamic evolution and synergistic regulation of multiple components. Future innovative breakthroughs need to break away from the “single‐molecule targeting” mindset and shift toward “global network regulation.” By leveraging cutting‐edge technologies to decipher the dynamic rules of the network, an efficient leap from mechanistic research to clinical translation can be achieved.
 

3

## RNA Regulatory Networks and Cancer Onset
Cancer initiation is the result of complex interactions between genetic and epigenetic factors. These factors lead to the abnormal activation of key oncogenes (e.g., MYC and RAS) and the inactivation of tumor suppressor genes (including TP53 and RB1), ultimately giving rise to cancer‐specific tissue characteristics [ ]. RNA regulatory networks play a critical role in cancer initiation through multiple mechanisms, including the activity of noncoding RNAs (e.g., oncogenic miR‐21 and lncRNA HOTAIR), epigenetic modifications, and RNA editing. The subsequent sections will systematically explore these mechanisms from three perspectives: the activation of oncogenes and silencing of tumor suppressor genes, RNA regulation and epigenetic modifications, and the role of RNA editing in cancer initiation.
3.1

## Oncogene Activation and Tumor Suppressor Gene Silencing
As tumor cells multiply unchecked, they gain the ability to become self‐sufficient in growth signals. This is achieved by activating oncogenes while simultaneously inactivating tumor suppressor genes [ ]. Studies from large projects like The Cancer Genome Atlas and the International Cancer Genome Consortium using deep sequencing have shown that mutations that occur in tumors not only happen in protein‐coding sequences but they happen extensively in noncoding regions. Driver mutations in cancerous tumors can occur in various genetic elements, including noncoding. Research established that mutations within the ncRNAs of cancer genome may target oncogenes TERT and MIR‐21. It also includes tumor suppressor genes TP53, APC, BRCA1, and RB1 [ ]. In addition, evidence is also building that certain ncRNAs may function as oncogenes or tumor suppressors, which are important regulators of human tumor initiation and progression [ ].
The importance of miRNAs in oncogenesis has caught a lot of attention. Specific miRNAs are overexpressed in cancer cells. They facilitate cancer progression via tumor cell proliferation, invasion, malignant behavioral promotion, and regulation of development in numerous cancer types. Notably, miR‐126 is significantly overexpressed in BC, colorectal cancer (CRC), and human B‐lymphoblastic leukemia (B‐ALL) [ , , ]. Further studies have demonstrated that the overexpression of miR‐126 downregulates the expression of TP53 and its associated genes [ ]. miR‐155 has been identified as an oncogene in various cancers and is regarded as a therapeutic target for different malignancies [ ]. In contrast, miRNAs such as let‐7 function as tumor suppressors, with most being downregulated in various cancer types. Let‐7 miRNAs target and downregulate the expression of multiple oncogenes, including E2F1, ARID3B, K‐RAS, and C‐MYC, effectively inhibiting tumor progression [ ]. Indeed, some miRNAs can be classified as either oncogenes or tumor suppressors, depending on the cellular context in which they are expressed. For instance, miR‐221 and miR‐222 target the oncogene KIT and inhibit the growth of erythroleukemia, thus acting as tumor suppressors in erythroblasts [ ]. However, they also target at least four significant tumor suppressor genes—PTEN, P27, P57, and TIMP3—and function as oncogenic miRNAs by inhibiting these tumor suppressors in various human solid tumors [ ].
A bidirectional regulatory relationship exists between miRNAs and tumor‐related factors. miRNAs can function as either oncogenes or tumor suppressors, thereby contributing to tumorigenesis. Conversely, alterations in tumor suppressors or oncogenes can also lead to dysregulated miRNA expression. These factors can act as transcriptional activators or repressors, directly regulating the transcription of pri‐miRNAs [ ]. For instance, the tumor suppressor p53 can promote the expression of the miR‐34 family, whose members work synergistically with the p53 network to inhibit abnormal cell proliferation and induce apoptosis by suppressing growth‐promoting genes. During carcinogenesis, MYC can activate the expression of oncogenic miRNAs such as the miR‐17∼92 cluster, while simultaneously repressing the transcription of tumor‐suppressive miRNAs in B‐cell lymphoma. Additionally, various cancer‐related transcription factors participate in the aberrant regulation of miRNA transcription [ ].
Similar to miRNAs, ncRNAs, including lncRNAs and circRNAs, can function as either oncogenes or tumor suppressors thereby regulating the onset and progression of tumors. These findings establish a critical theoretical foundation for the development of ncRNA‐targeted therapeutic strategies in cancer treatment. Table  provides a summary of notable ncRNAs that are of significant interest in cancer research along with their respective functions.
 ncRNAs biological functions are not fixed and invariant but display a strong context‐dependence and functional plasticity. They participate in regulating the dynamic balance of tumor‐related gene expression through diverse regulatory pathways. These molecules not only have the ability to switch between onco‐genic and tumor‐suppressive functions depending on the regulatory microenvironment but also show a crosstalk regulatory pattern in which different ncRNA subtypes target core signaling pathways. In a revolutionary way, this brings to light the evidence of the networked architecture and modular organizational nature of tumor molecular regulation, thereby instilling doubts on the single‐molecule view. Researchers have identified a critical susceptibility factor that can inhibit tumor growth, which has the potential to enhance the effectiveness of a wide range of cancer treatments. Future research needs to shift from targeting isolated molecules to systematic analysis of regulatory networks and functional modules. This will provide a new academic perspective for developing more precise and efficient combination therapy strategies.

3.2

## RNA Regulation and Epigenetic Modifications
Epigenetics is a field that studies hereditary changes in gene expression that do not involve changes to the DNA sequence. Research studies conducted in the last 10 years have shown that epigenetic regulation is vital in cell growth and differentiation, as well as autoimmune diseases and cancer. DNA methylation, histone modification, and ncRNA‐mediated regulation are the main epigenetic control mechanisms, all of which have become a strong focus of research [ ]. This section systematically summarizes recent advances in understanding the role of ncRNAs in tumor epigenetic regulation and elaborates on their underlying mechanisms.
DNA methylation is generally characterized by a methylation modification at the C5 position of cytosine. This occurs mostly at symmetric cytidylyl phosphate guanosine (CpG) dinucleotide regions in mammals [ ]. The best‐studied change in cancer epigenetics is CpG island methylation. About 70% of mammalian promoter regions have been found to contain CpG islands, and alteration of their methylation status plays a crucial role in transcriptional regulation. These undergo major changes during malignant transformation. Research has revealed that global hypomethylation is a common feature of malignant cells [ ]. According to a recent study, every malignant cell studied to date exhibits global hypomethylation. The DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) family, including DNMT1, DNMT3A, and DNMT3B, mediates DNA methylation by adding methyl groups to cytosine residues without changing the sequence of DNA [ ].
lncRNAs exhibit multifaceted roles in regulating DNA methylation. First, through specific binding, lncRNAs can recruit DNMTs or demethylases (TETs) to specific gene loci or hinder their binding. Second, certain lncRNAs, such as lncRNA H19, can indirectly regulate DNMT activity by controlling the levels of DNMT cofactors, such as (SAM and SAH). Third, lncRNAs can regulate the expression levels of DNMTs and TETs at multiple levels, including transcriptional and posttranscriptional stages. These regulatory mechanisms have been validated in developmental biology and disease research, particularly in driving cancer initiation and progression [ ]. Notably, lncRNAs can regulate DNA methylation not only in gene promoter regions but also in gene bodies. For example, during transcription in dermatomyositis‐related leiomyomas, lncRNAs recruit DNMT3A to induce methylation of the cathepsin G gene, thereby altering its transcriptional activity [ ]. Furthermore, lncRNAs themselves are targets of DNA methylation regulation. For instance, hypomethylation of the promoter region of lncRNA SNHG12 enhances its recognition and binding by the Sp1 transcription factor, leading to aberrant overexpression of this lncRNA in cancer cells and increased resistance to temozolomide [ ]. In BC studies, three interaction modes between miRNAs and DNA methylation have been identified [ ]: (1) DNMTs methylate miRNA promoter regions, causing epigenetic silencing of tumor‐suppressive miRNAs, which in turn affects key biological processes such as cell proliferation, migration, and apoptosis; (2) miRNAs primarily suppressor miRNAs, target and bind to the 3′UTR of DNMTs via RISC, inhibiting DNMT expression; (3) oncogenic miRNAs exhibit abnormally hypomethylated states in BC cells, promoting their overexpression and tumor progression [ ].
Histone modifications are covalent chemical alterations (e.g., methylation, acetylation, phosphorylation, ubiquitination) that occur on specific amino acid residues of histones, the core proteins of chromatin. These modifications dynamically regulate gene transcriptional activity by altering chromatin structure or recruiting epigenetic regulatory factor, such as methylation readers and acetyltransferase complexes [ ]. RNA molecules can interact with factors related to histone modifications to participate in regulatory processes. For instance, the upregulation of the histone methyltransferase RIZ1 in HCC cells mediates the enrichment of H3K9me1 at the HOTAIRM1 promoter, thereby regulating cancer cell growth and metastasis through the targeting of miR‐125b [ ]. Also, lncRNA GClnc1 binds the histone acetyltransferases WDR5 and KAT2A and acts as a modular scaffold for the WDR5–KAT2A complex to coordinate their localization and the specification of histone modification patterns at target genes such as SOD2. This eventually changes the biological behavior of gastric cancer (GC) cells [ ].
As research advances, growing evidence indicates that various ncRNAs do not act separately but are instead linked through complex molecular networks in epitopes regulation of tumors. Various classes of ncRNAs, along with DNA methylation and histone modifications, exhibit multilevel, multidimensional regulatory loops. Furthermore, these regulatory loops synergistically pattern the gene expression profiles of tumor cells. In addition, collectively drive tumor initiation, development, and progression. Many potential target and strategic directions for precise diagnosis and treatment of tumors is provided by these findings.

3.3

## RNA Editing and Cancer Onset
Chemical modifications of RNA have emerged as an essential regulator of gene expression and display the dynamic regulatory profiles typical of DNA and histone modifications. RNA modification at both base and ribose positions is critical to fine‐tuning RNA activity and gene expression programs. The processes of “writing,” “erasing,” and recognition by modification enzymes and binding proteins occur at these positions. RNA editing is a type of posttranscriptional modification that plays a major role in normal physiological processes. Examples are: base editing, methylation, and pseudouridylation. These changes can dynamically control RNA processing, stability, and translational efficiency by altering RNA–protein interaction patterns or RNA secondary structure [ ]. RNA editing can change mRNA sequences, leading to differences with genomic templates and causing isoforms of proteins with different functions. Research has shown that aberrant RNA editing can drive the activation of oncogenes or the inactivation of tumor suppressors, a major contributor to cancer initiation and progression [ ]. As research continues to advance, the dysregulation of RNA modification pathways is increasingly being implicated in human cancers, making them promising targets for cancer therapy [ ].
The A‐to‐I modification is the most widespread type of RNA editing found in metazoans. The adenosine deaminases acting on RNA family (ADAR) facilitates the process [ , ]. The upregulation of ADAR1 expression or activity has been linked with cancer of GC, BC, liver cancer (HCC), non‐small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), thyroid cancer (TC), and chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). On the other hand, decreased expression of ADAR1 is significantly associated with enhanced development of metastatic melanoma and renal cancer [ ]. The ADAR family controls tumor formation using different mechanisms, which includes regulating miRNA maturation, for example, ADAR1 A‐to‐I editing of pri‐let‐7d, which inhibits its maturation and enhances self‐renewal and therapeutic resistance of CML stem cells [ ]. Second, ADARs interact with the Dicer protein to promote oncogenic miRNA processing independently of their catalytic activity [ ]. Third, they edit the 3′UTR of mRNA to modify miRNA binding sites, thereby influencing the stability of key oncogene mRNAs; for example, ADAR1p110 can competitively inhibit Staufen1‐mediated mRNA degradation [ , ]. Interestingly, RNA molecules can also reciprocally regulate ADAR function; for example, the immunosuppressive lncRNA LINC00624 stabilizes ADAR1, promoting tumor progression and drug resistance [ ].
m6A modification occurs posttranscriptionally in nearly 90% of human mRNAs and ncRNAs, exerting significant biological effects in tumor initiation and progression [ ]. m6A is predominantly localized in the 3′UTR and near the stop codon of mRNAs, and is regulated by specific methyltransferases (“writers”), demethylases (“erasers”), and m6A‐binding proteins (“readers”). The core methyltransferase complex comprises methyltransferase‐like (METTL) 3 and METTL14, with METTL3 serving as the catalytic subunit. Other proteins such as Wilms tumor 1‐associated protein, VIR‐like m6A methyltransferase associated, RNA‐binding motif protein (RBM) 15, and zinc finger CCCH‐type containing 13 support this complex, facilitating the cotranscriptional deposition of m6A on nascent pre‐mRNAs. Demethylation is executed by enzymes including FTO and alkB homolog 5 (ALKBH5). Reader proteins that recognize and decipher m6A marks include YTHDF1‐3, YTHDC1‐2, and additional members such as insulin‐like growth factor 2 mRNA‐binding proteins (IGFBPs), musashi2 (MSI2), proline‐rich coiled‐coil containing protein 2A (PRRC2A), and heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein A2/B1 (HNRNPA2B1) [ ]. Writers and erasers maintain a dynamic balance through competitive colocalization and coregulation of expression. Readers recognize m6A via the YTH domain or structural switch mechanisms, dictating RNA fate: YTHDF2 recruits the CCR4–NOT complex to degrade mRNAs, YTHDF1 recruits eIF3 to promote translation, and YTHDC1 regulates splicing and nuclear export [ , , ]. The activity of these three classes of proteins modulates RNA stability, translation, splicing, and localization in a spatiotemporal way that determines the cellular phenotypic output [ , ]. ncRNAs have also been extensively studied in regulating m6A modification. In relation to miRNA processing, METTL14, a methyltransferase responsible for m6A, promotes the m6A modification and maturation of pri‐miR‐126 through its interaction with DGCR8, while miR‐126 can antagonize METTL14's inhibitory effect on tumor metastasis [ ]. The impact of m6A modification on lncRNAs may involve multiple regulatory mechanisms. On one hand, m6A modification can regulate lncRNA function by providing binding sites for m6A reader proteins or by adjusting local RNA structures to facilitate the entry of RBPs. On the other hand, m6A modification may also influence the relationship between lncRNAs and specific DNA sites by affecting RNA–DNA triple helix structures. In glioblastoma (GBM) stem cells, the m6A demethylase ALKBH5 interacts with lncRNA FOXM1‐AS to promote cancer cell proliferation and tumorigenicity [ ]. Additionally, m6A modification of circRNAs can recruit eIF4G2 and YTHDF3, facilitating the translation process of circRNAs [ ]. The functional heterogeneity of m6A modification mainly stems from three factors: site topology and structural context, cancer type, and the competitive interaction of reader proteins [ , ]. Current controversies focus on the “bidirectional paradox” of writers such as METTL3—their protumor or tumor‐suppressive activity is not an intrinsic property but conferred by the cell type‐specificity of the target transcriptome profile [ ]. Research limitations are reflected in insufficient technical resolution and sensitivity, fragmented mechanistic studies (i.e., neglecting the synergy of multiprotein complexes and cross‐talk between different modifications), and lack of evidence for clinical translation [ , , ]. In the future, it is necessary to integrate single‐cell multiomics and spatiotemporal transcriptomics to construct causal RNA interaction network models, thereby deepening the understanding of m6A [ ].
5‐Methylcytosine (m5C) modification refers to a methylation modification at the C5 position of the cytosine ring in RNA [ ]. m5C is enriched in 3′UTRs, GC‐rich sequences, and regions near start codons, where it regulates mRNA stability, nuclear export, translation, and DNA damage repair [ ]. Similar to m6A, dysregulation of m5C modification leads to altered RNA stability, disrupted splicing patterns, and changed epigenetic profiles [ ]. It also impairs normal RNA folding, modifies RNA interactions with other molecules, affects the subcellular localization of specific RNAs, regulates the expression of immune‐related genes and immune checkpoints, and may influence the tumor microenvironment (TME) and immune escape mechanisms [ ]. In epidermal growth factor receptor‐NSCLC, aberrant RNA m5C modification mediates intrinsic resistance to gefitinib through the NSUN2–YBX1–QSOX1 axis [ ]. The tumor‐promoting role of m5C is not limited to mRNA; many m5C‐modified ncRNAs also play critical roles in tumorigenesis. For example, NSUN2 enhances the stability of the lncRNA NKILA in a YBX1‐m5C‐dependent manner. As a sponge for miR‐582‐3p, NKILA promotes the expression of YAP1, thereby driving the development of cholangiocarcinoma [ ].
The three RNA modifications mentioned above have been extensively studied in the field of cancer. The latest advances in their effects on tumors are summarized in Table  .
 Pseudouridine (Ψ) modification is the result of a 180° rotation of the uracil (U) pyrimidine ring around the C3–C6 axis. The base of Ψ is connected to ribose through a C─C bond unlike U whose linkage is through an N─C bond. The orientation of the Ψ base is more stable than that of U, and its N1 position can act as a proton donor and form additional hydrogen bonds that stabilizes RNA [ ]. Modification of Ψ impacts cancer development by governing translation or RNA stability [ ]. Regarding ribosomes, Ψ modification affects both ribosomal proteins and rRNA. Ψ modification in rRNA increases ribosomal translation efficiency, promotes protein synthesis, and ultimately enhances cell proliferation and invasion [ ]. However, miswiring Ψ modifications in particular portions of rRNA may result in miscalculation and tumorigenesis [ ]. mRNA molecules that code for Ψ‐modified ribosomal proteins are more stable, which results in a greater abundance of ribosomal proteins and this in turn enhances the proliferation of tumor cells [ ]. Moreover, tRNA Ψ modifications impact tumorigenesis by regulating cellular translation. For example, the overexpression of PUS7 leads to increased Ψ modification on tRNA that inhibits the translation of TYK2 mRNA and promotes GBM tumorigenesis [ ]. Importantly, the Ψ modification plays essential roles in mitochondrial protein synthesis as well as oxidative phosphorylation; enhancement of mitochondrial function may help meet the high energy demands of fast‐growing tumor cells [ ].
N4‐acetylcytidine (ac4C) modification is currently the only known RNA acetylation event occurring on rRNA, tRNA, and mRNA in eukaryotic RNA [ ]. N‐acetyltransferase 10 (NAT10) is the only known enzyme that mediates the mRNA ac4C modification, which is essential for mRNA stability and translation [ ]. According to the research, NAT10 catalyzes the ac4C modification of mRNA that activates the overtranslation of oncogenes to enhance cancer cell proliferation, migration, and chemoresistance. The oncogenes that were modified by ac4C have the ability to either activate or inhibit key signaling pathways associated with cancer progression. They were also able to regulate the expression of a series of downstream genes [ ]. NAT10 further regulates the lipid metabolism in cancer cells through the ac4C modification of genes related to fatty acid metabolism [ ].
N1‐methyladenosine (m1A) modification is understudied when compared with other RNA modifications and was only recently discovered. New findings suggest that when m1A is not regulated properly, it could change the stability of some types of RNA, the translation of some types of mRNA, RNA processing and maturation, RNA protein interaction, and the deposition and removal of m1A—ultimately contributing to cancer initiation and progression [ ]. Building on the successful cases of m6A, m1A modification may provide new strategies and targets for tumor immunotherapy. Researchers need to address challenges such as the scarcity of novel modifications and the promiscuous substrate specificity of many mRNA modifiers. Future research must clarify the roles of regulator m1A in gene and protein regulation, which are likely to be shared with m6A. It must also validate the importance of m1A modification [ ].
RNA editing is not an isolated phenomenon; rather, it works in concert with epigenetic regulation, posttranscriptional networks, and the TME to contribute to tumor heterogeneity and therapeutic resistance. ADAR1‐mediated A‐to‐I editing, for example, regulates tumor stemness through the maturation of various miRNAs, including let‐7, and alters the interferon pathway via the editing of immune‐related transcripts, ultimately mediating immune escape [ , ]. m6A changes enhance the stability of mRNAs from important immune checkpoint molecules promoting immune evasion of tumor cells [ , ]. There is also m6A and A‐to‐I editing cross‐regulation. As an illustration, by editing METTL3 mRNA, the ADAR1 changes the binding site to miR532‐5p; hence, increasing METTL3. This further targets ARHGAP5, which is recognized by YTHDF1 and promotes further proliferation, migration and invasion of BC cells [ ]. Additionally, m1A and m6A modifications share coregulatory proteins, such as members of the ALKBH family and FTO family [ ]. Going forward studies will benefit from a systems biology view to explore the interactions (synergistic and antagonistic) among different RNA modifications across spatiotemporal scales and their global roles in the adaptive evolution of tumors.

4

## Dynamic Changes of RNA Regulatory Networks in Cancer Progression
RNA regulatory networks show a remarkably dynamic spatiotemporal specificity in the context of cancer progression. Their functions extend beyond the regulation of individual genes or pathways; they also drive malignant biological behaviors. Their activities include those that increase tumor cell proliferation, metabolic reprogramming, TME remodeling, invasion and metastasis, and angiogenesis. This section will explore the core regulatory mechanisms of RNA molecules involved in these critical biological events and their potential value in translational clinical applications.
4.1

## Tumor Cell Proliferation
The cell cycle refers to the regulated sequence of events that leads to cell growth, division, and DNA damage repair [ ]. The initiation and progression of the cell cycle depend on the functions of a number of key regulatory factors such as cyclin‐dependent kinases (CDKs), cyclins (CCNs), cyclin‐dependent kinase inhibitor and E2F transcription factors [ , ]. Cancer‐related mutations frequently affect processes that lead to cell cycle exit, enabling tumor cells to gain a capacity for unlimited division [ ].
ncRNAs form intricate regulatory networks by targeting essential cell cycle regulators and associated signaling pathways. It will play the most critical roles in the initiation along with the progression of a cancer. Regarding the influence of ncRNAs on cell cycle regulators, miRNAs can negatively regulate cell cycle progression by inhibiting the expression of cyclins and interfering with transitions between cell cycle phases [ ]. Notably, miR‐223, miR‐186‐3p, and miR‐186‐5p have been shown to inhibit the proliferation of lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) and NSCLC cells by targeting CDK2, respectively [ , ]. Additionally, miR‐613, miR‐545, and miR‐486‐3p exert inhibitory effects on NSCLC by regulating CDK4 [ , ]. A primary target of lncRNAs in tumor progression is the CDK4/6–CCND1 complex [ ]. As core regulatory molecules of the G1/S checkpoint, aberrant activation of CDK4/6 is closely linked to tumorigenesis and progression [ , ]. The significant downregulation of lncRNA TUG1 in BC tissues results in the upregulation of CCND1 and CDK4, thereby promoting the cell cycle progression of BC cells [ ]. Furthermore, lncRNAs and circRNAs can indirectly influence cyclin‐mediated cell cycle regulation through interactions with miRNAs. For example, lncRNA HNF1A‐AS1 can competitively sponge miR‐93‐5p to enhance CCND1 expression, thereby accelerating the cell cycle progression of CRC cells [ ]; lncRNA SNHG12 functions as a sponge for miR‐129‐5p, thereby influencing cell apoptosis and the G1/S phase transition through the upregulation of MAPK1 and E2F7 expression [ ]. In LUAD, hsa_circ_0013958 enhances CCND1 expression by sequestering miR‐134, thereby promoting G1 phase progression [ ]. In laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma, circ‐CCND1 not only acts as a sponge for miR‐646 but also interacts with the RBP HuR to stabilize CCND1 mRNA, further enhancing its expression [ ]. At the signaling pathway level, ncRNAs regulate PI3K/AKT and Wnt/β‐catenin pathways to influence the cell cycle [ ]. For example, in HCC, circZFR activates AKT1 signaling by downregulating miR‐511, which leads to the upregulation of CCND1 [ ]. In TNBC, circRNA_069718 enhances the expression of its target genes like β‐catenin, which upregulates CCND1 expression and increases cellular proliferation [ ].
The rapid division of tumor cells and their self‐protecting response to external stimuli, such as chemotherapy, is due to cell cycle abnormalities. Cancer cells acquire a reversible state of G0 phase arrest termed quiescence. Quiescent cells enhance stem cell properties, such as self‐renewal and multipotency. Furthermore, dormant or quiescent cells have lower metabolic activities. These properties help tumor cells evade chemotherapy‐induced cytotoxicity [ ]. Research has shown that ncRNAs have the potential to exert an influence over the quiescent state of CSCs. This is achieved through targeted regulation of cell cycle regulators that are associated with dormancy [ ]. For instance, the downregulation of CCND1 mediated by miR‐93/193 and the targeted inhibition of CDK3 by miR‐126 respectively induce GBM cells to enter a quiescent state and develop chemoresistance [ ]. Moreover, ncRNAs take part in the regulation of quiescent cancer cell reactivation. In the cancer types of NSCLC and myeloma, the piRNAs piR‐651 and piR‐823 can induce cancer cells to re‐enter the proliferative cycle by promoting the expression of CCND1 and CDK4 [ , ]. According to a report, regulatory ncRNA networks are promising targets for developing new strategies to effectively deal with cancer and provide patients with modern personalized treatment [ ].
ncRNAs establish intricate and dynamic regulatory networks by interacting with factors related to the cell cycle and regulators of cell cycle checkpoints. These results shed new light on how cancer cells escape cell arrest and provide a theoretical basis for cycle‐specific therapies targeting RNA networks. The mechanisms through which noncoding RNAs, or ncRNAs, facilitate the quiescent and subsequent reactive state of cancer cells need further investigation. This is to ensure that these insights help address the clinical challenge of chemoresistance.

4.2

## Metabolic Reprogramming
The unlimited proliferation of cancer cells relies heavily on a continuous and stable supply of energy and the synthesis of macromolecules. In order to satisfy requirements for sustaining rapid proliferation, cancer cells reprogram their metabolism via multiple pathways, resulting in some striking differences in the metabolic characteristics of the normal cells [ , ]. Recent studies show that RNA regulatory networks are important for cancer cell metabolic reprogramming. A detailed understanding of these mechanisms should elucidate the principles of tumorigenesis and progression that could aid in generating effective anticancer approaches.
At the posttranscriptional level, various ncRNAs hit metabolic enzymes or signaling pathway key molecules, forming an elaborate regulatory network. lncRNAs have various critical roles in controlling cancer metabolism [ ]. Research suggests that lncRNAs that bind to essential TCA cycle metabolic enzymes may impact their protein stability and activity and ultimately cause metabolic reprogramming in tumorigenesis [ ]. lncRNAs act as molecular scaffolds that recruit metabolic enzymes, enhancing their interaction with protein or protein complexes for improved function. As an example, lncRNA FEZF1‐AS1 binds to pyruvate kinase 2 (PKM2) specifically and markedly enhances PKM2 protein stability, and as a result, PKM2 levels show a rise in the cytoplasm as well as the nucleus. The interaction stimulates pyruvate kinase activity in colorectal cancer cells, causing aerobic glycolysis [ ]. In esophageal squamous cell carcinoma cells, lncRNA AGPG binds to the C‐terminal domain of 6‐phosphofructo‐2‐kinase/fructose‐2,6‐bisphosphatase 3 (PFKFB3), inhibiting ubiquitination at residue Lys302 of PFKFB3. This blockage inhibits proteasome‐dependent destruction, stimulates glycolytic flow, and encourages metabolic reprogramming in tumor cells [ ]. On a larger scale, the regulatory networks formed by RBPs and their associated lncRNAs may regulate central metabolic processes. HULC acts as a molecular scaffold that interacts with LDHA and PKM2 and converts them into RNABPs. As a result, the enzymes are more likely to become phosphorylated by fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR1), which increases their glycolytic activity and proliferation [ ]. In addition, tumor metabolism may be regulated by interactions with other molecules in metabolic signaling pathways. HIF1A‐AS2 promotes the expression of FOXC1 posttranscriptionally by sponging miR‐141‐3p allowing CRC379 to undergo metabolic reprogramming [ ].
The epitranscriptomic modifications, especially the m6A modification, play an important role in the regulation of tumor metabolism as well as the expression and function of other metabolism‐related molecules [ ]. Methyltransferases, including METTL3 and METTL14, enhance the stability and translation of target mRNAs by directly binding to their respective mRNAs. Studies show that METTL3 can directly activate the pathway of PI3K–Akt–mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), which changes the metabolic landscape in cells and allows cancer cells to proliferate, migrate, and invade [ ]. Besides, m6A modification controls regulatory ncRNAs that, in turn, influence metabolism. For example, the lncRNA XIST that is regulated by m6A‐methylation can target miR‐126 and affect glucose metabolism levels in glioma cells, which in turn, affects tumor cell proliferation [ ].
The glycolytic metabolic pattern of tumors is highly correlated with malignant phenotypes that include tumor proliferation, angiogenesis, lymphangiogenesis, metastasis, and immune escape, which is of important reference value for assessing tumor prognosis and formulating therapeutic strategies [ ]. A comprehensive outlook of the role of RNA regulatory networks in the metabolic change of cancer cells can certainly provide new ideas and new targets for tumor therapy. On the one hand, it is possible to develop inhibitors or activators that would target selective RNAs or RNA methylation‐modifying enzymes, thereby reducing the metabolic status of tumor cells. One example would be that the inhibition of METTL3 activity may help reverse the metabolic abnormality of tumor cells and also lower their malignancy. There are also expectations that monitoring expression levels and modification states of key molecules within RNA regulatory networks will aid in the early diagnosis and prognostic evaluation of tumors, ultimately facilitating personalized treatment. The field of RBPs that regulate cellular metabolism—especially in stem cells—would be a very exciting area to investigate further [ ]. Future studies should use high‐throughput screening technologies to identify new RBPs in metabolic regulation and develop more sensitive methods to detect potentially important transient or weak RBP–RNA interactions involved in metabolic switching.

4.3

## Tumor Microenvironment
The TME refers to the environment around the tumor within the tumor stroma. The TME comprises inflammatory cells, immune cells, mesenchymal stem cells, fibroblasts, endothelial cells, pericytes, and the extracellular matrix [ , ]. The key components of the TME are exosomes, which are 40–150 nm extracellular vesicles. They have a vital role in regulating multiple physiological and pathological processes, especially intercellular communications [ ]. Exosomes in the TME can alter the TIME to induce immune suppression that can further assist in tumor growth, beyond their effects on the initiation and growth of tumor cells [ ]. RNA is a critical component through which exosomes exert their effects. RNAs within the exosomes can modulate the activities of immune cells, fibroblasts, and other components within the TME, thus playing an essential role in tumorigenesis and progression. Figure  demonstrates how exosomes develop and communicate, in addition to the effects that exosomal RNAs have on tumors.
 ncRNAs found in exosomes can impact tumor bio‐behaviors as a whole. They can exert their effects by creating interlocking molecular regulatory networks, which hit a key link in tumor initiation and development. The recent research scholar on the role of exosomal ncRNAs playing in the tumorigenesis and development is systematic summarized in Table  . Via specific binding, modulation of signaling pathways, and molecular trapping, RNA networks upset the natural dial‐operation of oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes in tumor cells, leading to proliferation of tumor cells. As they do this, they also regulate cell cycle and apoptosis‐related molecular mechanisms to further consolidate the malignant proliferative phenotype of tumors. The network remodels the cytoskeleton and activates invasion‐related signaling pathways of tumor cells to enhance their migration and invasion during dissemination. It also modifies how cells in the TME interact with each other in a way that favors tumor metastasis. According to angiogenesis, the RNA networking system can induce neovascularization for supplying essential nutrition and metabolic pathway required for tumor growth via regulating proliferation, differentiation, and functional activity of vascular endothelial cells. The chemoresistance development is closely linked to this network. By regulating drug metabolism, cell survival pathways, and stress responses, it reduces the sensitivity of tumor cells to chemotherapeutic drugs, thereby overcoming a major obstacle to effective clinical treatment [ , ].
 Within the TME, both tumor and nontumor cells, such as fibroblasts and immune cells can secrete exosomes that collectively shape an immunosuppressive microenvironment [ ]. The TIME consists of distinct immune cell populations and their interactions within the TME niche, which has garnered significant attention due to its critical role in carcinogenesis, cancer progression, and therapeutic responses [ ]. Exosomal ncRNAs reshape the TIME by regulating the functions, interactions, and infiltration of immune cells, fibroblasts, and myeloid‐derived suppressor cells [ ]. The exosomal ncRNAs have been shown to play a dual role in immune evasion by tumors, whereby some of the tumor‐derived exosomal ncRNAs such as miRNAs are able to inhibit dendritic cell (DC) function, natural killer (NK) cell and CD8+ T cell cytotoxic activity, and promote M2 macrophage polarization and regulatory T cell (Tregs) immunosuppressive function to help escape immune surveillance by tumors. Conversely, other tumor‐derived exosomal ncRNAs enhance DC function, inhibit M2 macrophage polarization, and improve CD8+ T cell cytotoxicity, thereby strengthening antitumor immune responses [ ]. Macrophages abundant in the TME, exist in two polarized phenotypes: M1 and M2 [ ]. The polarization toward the M2 phenotype promotes tumor progression and mediates therapeutic resistance [ ]. For instance, in PCa, exosome‐enriched miRNAs such as let‐7a‐5p, let‐7b, let‐7 g, and let‐7i downregulate integrin‐β3, thereby inducing M2 polarization [ ]. In HCC cells, the highly expressed exosomal lncRNA TUC339 promotes M2 polarization, which leads to a reduction in proinflammatory cytokine production, impaired phagocytosis, and downregulation of costimulatory molecule expression [ ]. Conversely, miR‐21 in CRC exosomes promotes M1 polarization via toll‐like receptor 7, inducing interleukin‐6 (IL‐6) production, which in turn creates a proinflammatory premetastatic niche that facilitates CRC cell survival, colonization, and liver metastasis [ ].
Hypoxia, elevated lactate levels, extracellular acidosis, and limited nutrient availability are characteristic features of the TME [ , ]. Stressors such as hypoxia, nutrient deprivation, and acidosis enhance the release of exosomes by malignant cells, thereby fostering the dynamic evolution and expansion of the TME and driving tumor progression [ ]. Hypoxic circumstances lead to glioma stem cell exosomes high in IL‐6 and miRNA‐155‐3p that activated the signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)3 pathway, which in turn highlights IL‐6 release. The expression of miRNA‐155‐3p, which was upregulated by IL‐6, enhances glioma development via autophagy induction and M2 macrophage polarization [ ]. An analogous process occurs when CRC cells secrete exosomes rich in miRNA‐210‐3p, which subsequently causes downregulation of CELF2. This ultimately inhibits apoptosis and drives the G1‐to‐S phase transition. Research on cancer exosomes has shown that miRNA‐210‐3p levels are significantly elevated in CRC patients. In CRC patients, miRNA‐210‐3p levels are closely linked with the poor prognosis [ ]. Notably, RNA and RBPs also play a crucial role in regulating the uptake and secretion of exosomes [ , ].
Exosomal RNAs play a crucial role in shaping the immunosuppressive and prometastatic characteristics of the TME by regulating intercellular signaling, immune cell functions, and metabolic stress responses. The bidirectional effects of exosomal RNAs warrant that their clinical application should be strictly differentiated according to their origin and function. Creating RNA delivery systems that can specifically target the TME may enhance immunotherapy options. Right now, modified exosomes that have surface decorations and internal therapeutic molecules (i.e., engineered exosomes) can deliver antitumor drugs to tumor sites with high efficiency and precision while inducing fewer treatment side effects. However, the clinical translation of engineered exosomes has many obstacles to overcome.

4.4

## Invasion and Metastasis
Epithelial–mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a crucial biological process during normal embryonic development and in tissue regeneration that is essential for the maintenance of homeostasis of the organism. The abnormal activation of the EMT enables tumor cells to acquire multiple malignant traits, including higher migratory and invasive capacities, enhanced CSC properties, and greater resistance to chemotherapy and immunotherapy during cancer progression and metastasis [ ]. This process is tightly regulated by a complex network of intrinsic and extrinsic factors, which include transcription factors (e.g., SNAIL, ZEB, TWIST), posttranslational modifications, epigenetic modifications, and precise regulatory mechanisms mediated by ncRNAs [ , ].
ncRNAs primarily regulate cancer cell metastasis and invasion by influencing EMT transcription factors or related structural proteins. A typical regulatory model is observed in the miR‐200 family, which includes miR‐200a, miR‐200b, and miR‐200c, and is downregulated in various tumor tissues. These miRNAs directly bind to the mRNAs of ZEB1/ZEB2 mRNAs to inhibit the expression of these transcription factors. This action This action relieves the repression of epithelial genes by ZEB proteins, effectively suppressing the EMT process [ ]. Interestingly, ZEB1 and ZEB2 can bind to regulatory elements in the miR‐200 promoter, inhibiting miR‐200 transcription and forming a negative regulatory feedback loop that promotes EMT [ ]. In NSCLC tissues, significantly upregulated miR‐196b‐5p promotes lung cancer cell migration by directly targeting the tumor suppressors GATA6 and TSPAN12 [ ]. Beyond miRNAs, other ncRNAs exhibit unique regulatory mechanisms: for instance, lncRNA H19 has been reported to act as the sponge of miR‐22‐3p and relieve the inhibition of matrix metalloproteinase 14 induced by miR‐22‐3p, culminating in lung metastasis in CRC487 scrutiny [ ]. In circRNA research, circITGB6 and circ‐IARS facilitate tumor metastasis and progression. Presented in a TGFβ‐driven EMT context, circITGB6 promotes tumor metastasis in vivo by stabilizing IGF2BP3 mRNA. circ‐IARS enhances vascular permeability and, thus, tumor invasiveness through the miR‐122–ZO‐1 axis and the RhoA pathway [ , ].
Apart from RNAs, RBPs that bind to RNAs are also crucial in cancer metastasis [ ]. Changes in RBP function is correlated with the development of many human ailments, especially cancer [ ]. RBPs are important factors that participate in RNA biogenesis. For example, KH‐type splicing regulatory protein (KSRP), a multifunctional RBP, has been shown to promote the maturation of special microRNAs by interacting with their various precursor microRNAs. Research has shown that KSRP is involved in TGFβ‐mediated EMT by facilitating the maturation of miR‐192‐5p, which targets multiple EMT‐related factors [ ]; in addition, KSRP promotes the maturation of miR‐23a, which downregulates early growth response protein 3 expression by directly targeting its 3′UTR, and thus effectively inhibits the invasion and metastasis of NSCLC cells [ ]. RBPs may act as oncogenes or tumor suppressors by regulating the stability and processing of lncRNAs and circRNAs [ ]. At the posttranscriptional stage, the alternative splicing of mRNA molecules, mediated by RBPs, is an important regulatory mechanism contributing to mRNA stability. The splicing factor quaking (QKI) is an important regulator of circRNA formation during EMT in humans [ ]. In PCa cells, the circZEB1 expression is upregulated by QKI. Subsequently, circZEB1 enhances the protein expression of mesenchymal‐related transcription factor ZEB1 via competing for the binding to miR‐141‐3p [ ]. Additionally, the alternative splicing of CD44 mRNA is coordinately regulated by multiple RBPs, and its aberrant splicing is closely associated with EMT progression and cancer metastasis [ ]. In studies of lung cancer mutant MORC2 interacts with heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein M to promote shifts in the alternative splicing patterns of CD44, thereby driving the invasion and metastasis of TNBC cells [ ]. RBPs are also known to regulate RNA stability, intracellular localization, translation efficiency, and RNA modifications through various means, which altogether regulates the entire EMT process [ ].
EMT in tumors represents a range of intermediate states instead of a binary process [ ]. The role of EMT in cancer is somewhat controversial and contradictory, according to existing studies. The primary discrepancies are thought to arise from differences in tissue, model limitations as well as the complexity of cell states [ ]. First, some studies reveal that loss of EMT does not prevent metastasis in some models. This indicates the existence of functional redundancy or alternative mechanisms [ ]. Second, when we refer to the connection between EMT and tumor stemness, it was generally accepted that the mesenchymal epithelial transition boosted stem cell qualities. More recently, it was shown that a fully mesenchymal state could reduce stemness. However, tumors with a partial EMT state, or intermediate states, have a greater invasive capability [ ]. Third, “complete EMT” induced in vitro is rare in vivo; animal models often overlook the influence of the immune microenvironment, and detection methods relying on single biomarkers struggle to accurately capture the spectral characteristics of EMT [ , ]. The existing contradictions point to the need to examine EMT with respect to tumor type and stage and also the microenvironment. In addition, models and detection methods should be optimized so as to accurately reveal the biological significance of EMT in cancer [ ].

4.5

## Angiogenesis
The angiogenesis of a tumor enables distant metastasis of solid tumors as well as their growth. RNA regulatory networks play an important role in regulating angiogenesis by inducing posttranscriptional modifications and mediating exosomal communication between cells. Besides, they have a vital role in tumorigenesis.
RNA is a fundamental component of the regulatory network governs tumor angiogenesis. ncRNAs primarily influence angiogenesis by modulating the stability and translation of angiogenesis‐related mRNAs. For example, the miR‐200 family effectively inhibit angiogenesis by directly targeting IL‐8 and the chemokine CXCL1 secreted by tumor endothelial cells and cancer cells, or by indirectly regulating associated signaling pathways [ ]. Conversely, under hypoxic conditions, HIF‐1α activates the expression of miR‐210, which promotes neovascularization by enhancing the activity of the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) signaling pathway [ ]. lncRNAs such as H19 and MALAT1 can upregulate VEGF expression and drive angiogenesis by competitively binding to miRNAs or activating the STAT3 signaling pathway [ , ]. circRNAs like circDENND4C indirectly activate pathways such as VEGFR2 by sequestering miRNAs. Furthermore, the critical role of the piRNA family member piR‐31115 in regulating tumor angiogenesis has been increasingly confirmed [ ]. In addition to ncRNAs, the regulation of mRNA stability (e.g., VEGF mRNA regulated by the RBP HuR) and translation efficiency (e.g., significantly enhanced translation efficiency of HIF‐1α mRNA under hypoxia) also directly impacts the expression of angiogenesis‐related genes [ , ]. Interestingly, the secretion of extracellular exosomes is significantly increased in response to the hypoxic TME. This has led to considerable attention on the role of miRNAs carried by tumor‐derived exosomes in regulating angiogenesis [ ]. Studies have confirmed that exosomal miR‐21 activates STAT3, which, in turn, elevates VEGF levels in recipient cells, thereby inducing angiogenesis and malignant transformation in human bronchial epithelial cells [ ]. Also, exosomal miR‐25‐3p regulates the expression of VEGFR2, ZO‐1, occludin, and Claudin5 in endothelial cells targeting KLF2 and KLF4, further highlighting the diverse roles of exosomal miRNAs in the regulation of tumor angiogenesis [ ].
RNA modifications (e.g., m6A) play a central role in tumor angiogenesis by dynamically regulating key signaling pathways and effector molecules [ ]. Methyltransferases METTL3/METTL14 directly enhance the expression of proangiogenic factors such as the VEGF and CTGF via modification of the TGFβ and HIF‐1α mRNAs. Moreover, they enhance the hypoxic stimulation of TGFβ1 signaling, leading to EMT and neovascularization [ , ]. Conversely, FTO inhibits the antiangiogenic chemokine CCL19 by reducing mRNA methylation levels, resulting in increased microvessel density and exacerbated tumor angiogenesis [ ]. The biological processes and functions of these agents can interact to form an epigenetic regulatory network that promotes angiogenesis and remodelling of the TME, which in turn promotes cancer progression and metastasis.
Tumor angiogenesis is accurately regulated by RNA regulatory networks in various dimensions, such as regulation of gene expression through modification, miRNA signaling mediated by exosome transport, and synergistic effect of ncRNA on mRNA. A detailed study of the molecular players within RNA regulatory networks will lay the groundwork for cancer treatment strategies targeting angiogenesis, as well as provide novel therapeutic targets.

5

## RNA Regulatory Networks and Tumor Heterogeneity
Tumor heterogeneity exists in malignant tumors and is characterized by, differences in the growth rate and invasiveness of tumors as well as differences in drug sensitivities and prognosis. It is caused due to the large number of genetic and molecular changes that occur in tumor cells due to their incessant divisions. Tumor heterogeneity causes a multitude of different genotypes and phenotypes to exist within tumors. Such diversity creates subclonal cell populations with their own biological agendas. There are two types of tumor heterogeneity. The first one is spatial heterogeneity, which means the changes between different regions of the same tumor. The second one is temporal heterogeneity. It refers to the differences between the primary and secondary tumors. Both types of heterogeneity have a profound impact on tumor evolution and therapy efficacy.
5.1

## Tumor Heterogeneity and RNA Expression Profiles
There are two types of tumor heterogeneity, including inter and intra. Genetic and phenotypic variations between different tumor cells categorize into intertumoral heterogeneity, whereas the genetic and phenotypic variations between cells of the same tumor involves intratumoral heterogeneity. This section primarily addresses intratumor heterogeneity. Tumors are often heterogeneous. One way this effect manifests is with the variation in the RNA expression profile of different subpopulations of cells within the same tumor tissue, this includes both the protein‐coding mRNAs and the ncRNAs. The spatial distribution patterns and molecular regulation mechanism exhibit multidimensional complexities.
Evidence from different lines shows that RNA expression is regionally specific within the tumor studied. For example, GBM is marked by large differences in miRNA expression throughout core, margin and invasive edge. In particular, when comparing the invasive edge with both the core and margin, miR‐330‐5p and miR‐215‐5p were upregulated, and miR‐619‐5p, miR‐4440, and miR‐4793‐3p were downregulated [ ]. The expression levels of miRNA between the specimen taken from the boundary of the tumor and the intratumor regions are significantly different in BC. Eleven miRNAs, including miRNA‐20a, ‐21, and ‐125b, demonstrate significant differences between tumor boundary and central specimens (p < 0.05). Additionally, eight miRNAs, such as miRNA‐126, ‐221, and ‐222, show differential expression between tumor boundary and tumor P1 specimens (p < 0.05). Furthermore, miRNAs like miRNA‐145 and ‐451a exhibit dynamic changes across subregions (e.g., P1/P2) [ ]. In HCC, miRNA analysis of different compartments within liver tumors indicates that miRNA dysregulation varies across tumor compartments 186 [ ].
RNA regulatory networks drive cancer heterogeneity through multidimensional crosstalk. For instance, in pancreatic cancer (PC), H19 can also regulate the expression of the m6A reader protein YTHDC1 by competitively binding to miR‐107. The two synergistically stabilize the splicing factor SRSF1, thereby regulating the alternative splicing of IL‐6 and IL‐10, promoting the polarization of tumor‐associated macrophages toward the M2 phenotype, and exacerbating cancer heterogeneity [ ]. BC subtypes and stages show differential expression patterns of m6A enzymes, which can serve as their diagnostic markers [ ]. Epigenetic control also contributes to this heterogeneity, such that immune phenotypes can be distinguished by differences in DNA methylation status of lncRNAs in gliomas. Patients displaying hypomethylated cluster C1 (includes GBM and LGG) have a poorer prognosis, and patients with hypermethylated cluster C2 (Largely LGG) have a better prognosis, indicating a correlation between methylation levels and malignancy [ ].
The effective management of cancer treatment is hugely dependent on the detection of relevant molecular subtypes or therapeutic targets. Despite achieving great progress in terms of personalized therapy under tumor heterogeneity, the very rapid emergence of adjuvant, neoadjuvant, and metastatic tumor‐targeted drugs emphasize the significant clinical challenge in optimizing precision therapy to enhance patient survival and minimize late recurrence.

5.2

## RNA Regulatory Networks and CSC Properties
Another important aspect of tumor heterogeneity is represented by CSCs. Research shows us that although a tumor is made up of a lot of tumor cells, only some of these cells can initiate or sustain the tumor. These cells are referred to as CSCs or tumor‐initiating cells [ ]. A comprehensive understanding of the biological characteristics of CSCs can help in understanding how cancers originate and evolve and can also enhance therapies.
RNA regulatory networks play an important role in regulating the maintenance and differentiation of CSCs. ncRNAs maintain stem cell properties of cancer cells through signaling pathways [ ]. For example, the anomalous activation of the Wnt/β‐catenin signalling pathway is an important contributor to the tumorigenesis and differentiation driven by CSCs. In NSCLC, the protein kinase membrane‐associated tyrosine/threonine 1 (PKMYT1)‐related lncRNA sponges miR‐485‐5p to upregulate PKMYT1, which inhibits β‐transducin repeat‐containing protein 1 (β‐TrCP1)‐mediated degradation of β‐catenin, thereby activating the WNT signaling pathway [ ]. Similarly, in liver CSCs, lncSNHG5 activates the Wnt/β‐catenin pathway by inhibiting upstream frameshift 1, thereby maintaining cellular stemness [ ]. In other pathways, lncRNA ASB16 antisense RNA 1 (ASB16‐AS1) collaborates with ATM kinase to phosphorylate tripartite motif‐containing 37 (TRIM37), thereby activating the nuclear factor kappa‐B (NF‐κB) pathway and promoting stemness in GC cells [ ]. Additionally, the Let‐7a/rat sarcoma (Ras)/NF‐κB axis serves as a stemness‐antagonizing pathway in breast CSCs, where Let‐7a inactivates the NF‐κB pathway in a Ras‐dependent manner [ ]. Conversely, some RNA molecules act to inhibit CSC stemness; for example, the miR‐139/phosphodiesterase 2 (PDE2A)/Notch1 regulatory loop in GSCs diminishes stemness and tumorigenicity by suppressing the WNT signaling pathway [ ]. Furthermore, miR‐34a is downregulated in GBM cells and inhibits cell growth by targeting Notch1 [ ].
RNA editing, plays a crucial role in the regulation of gene expression and is significantly involved in the biological processes of CSCs [ ]. miRNAs can modulate the self‐renewal properties of CSCs by targeting genes associated with stemness. Specifically, miR‐17 targets ADAR2, an editing enzyme essential for sustaining the stemness of melanoma stem cells. As melanoma stem cells have reduced expression of miR‐17, which functions as a tumor suppressor by restricting stemness while promoting their differentiation [ ]. Furthermore, regulatory mechanisms involving m6A modification are equally vital. In GSCs, METTL3‐mediated m6A modification leads to the overexpression of LINC00839, which enhances c‐Src‐driven β‐catenin phosphorylation, thereby activating WNT signaling and promoting the maintenance of stemness [ ]. In CRC, METTL3‐mediated m6A modification induces Sec62 expression, facilitating the nuclear translocation of β‐catenin and reducing its ubiquitin‐dependent degradation, which ultimately sustains cancer stemness [ ].
RNA editing, ncRNAs, and epigenetic modifications establish networks that maintain CSC stemness at several levels, either by modifying posttranslational modifications or targeting relevant signalling pathways. These factors have become prominent players in the development of tumor therapeutic resistance. Nevertheless, at the present time, most studies are single pathway or single molecule. It is essential to construct dynamic regulatory network models and validate combination strategies targeting CSCs by using organoid and single‐cell technologies in future studies.

6

## RNA Regulatory Networks in Cancer Diagnosis and Prognosis
The RNA expression profiles hold a highly significant value in cancer and cancer biomedical research. The mechanistic level helps us unravel the molecular mechanisms of tumorigenesis; discover new oncogenes, tumor suppressor genes and biomarkers; and better understand the heterogeneity of tumors. The RNA expression profile can have applications in the clinic to discover early diagnostic markers, define tumor types, and assess prognosis. In therapy, they are useful in making strategies for individuals, checking therapy responses and finding new targets to treat cancer, leading toward precision medicine [ , ].
6.1

## RNA Biomarkers in Liquid Biopsies
The body fluid (e.g., blood, urine, feces, saliva)‐based testing (liquid biopsy) to analyze tumor‐derived substances (circulating tumor cells, circulating tumor DNA, circulating tumor RNA, platelets, exosome etc.) is an emerging pathological detection technology. The application generates vital information to facilitate early diagnosis, disease state measurement, therapeutic monitoring, and prognosis in tumoral patients. Due to its noninvasiveness and convenience, liquid biopsy has a very broad application prospect in clinical practice [ , ].
Circulating miRNAs have been found to be very stable in different biofluids (including blood, plasma, serum, and saliva) and are resistant to degradation by endogenous RNases, making them great biomarkers [ ]. Research shows that panel of different miRNAs (miR‐1246, miR‐1307‐3p, miR‐4634, miR‐6861‐5p, and miR‐6875‐5p) can be used for BC detection where identification of specific miRNA panels helps in identifying cancer as well as early‐stage patients [ ]. The analysis of circulating miRNA profiles in bodily fluids can effectively separate patients from healthy persons. Urine sample analysis shows good reliability, reproducibility, and stability [ , ]. In addition, aberrantly expressed miRNAs in feces and serum show significance as cancer diagnostic markers. The use of blood miRNAs for the diagnosis of CRC shows high sensitivity but low specificity. However, the simultaneous detection of multiple miRNAs can produce a much‐improved diagnostic accuracy relative to single‐miRNA detection [ ]. A number of lncRNAs or their processed fragments were stable in human body fluids and could be detected in plasma and urine from cancer patients. Their expression levels correlate with disease severity, thus positioning them as potential tumor biomarkers. Research has shown that exosomal H19 expression in the serum of BC patients is significantly increased compared with patients without malignancy and exhibits better diagnostic value than standard markers [ ]. Urinary PCA3 expression positively correlates with disease severity, and is significantly upregulated in PCa [ ]. mRNA and protein biomarkers have emerged as potential early biomarkers of BC, being detected in saliva to differentiate between patients and healthy individuals [ ].
Exosomes are advantageous materials for liquid biopsy as they display high stability and can comprehensively reflect tumor cells’ characteristics. Useful for the diagnosis and treatment of cancer [ ]. For example, the upregulation of exosomal miR‐1246, miR‐4644, miR‐3976, and miR‐4306 can be highly sensitive biomarkers for PCa patients [ ]; similarly, the exosomal lncRNA H19 expression is elevated in the serum of BLCA patients, which suggests that exosomal lncRNAs may be important diagnostic markers [ ]. Also, cancer type separation can be performed with specific miRNA‐containing exosomes. Plasma exosomes enriched with miR‐30e‐3p, miR‐30a‐3p, miR‐181‐5p, and miR‐361‐5p serve as specific diagnostic biomarkers for adenocarcinoma while plasma exosomes enriched with miR‐15b‐5p, miR‐10b‐5p, and miR‐320b serve as specific diagnostic biomarkers for squamous cell carcinoma [ ]. The exosomal miRNAs have potent capabilities to work as inhibitors of tumor progression in cancer therapy, in addition to tumor markers. As an illustration of the above, the transfer of miR‐142 and miR‐223 influences the posttranscriptional regulation of proteins in HCC. This transfer reduces the expression of reporter proteins and endogenously expressed stathmin‐1 and insulin‐like growth factor‐1 receptor, inhibiting the proliferation of cancer cells. Thus, miR‐142 and miR‐223 may serve as inhibitors in tumor therapy [ ].
Nevertheless, to use exosomes as biomarkers, it is required to solve technical obstacles, attain technical standardization, optimize detection sensitivity, as well as specificity. Every exosome isolation technique has certain benefits and drawbacks. The specific need of the research, like purity, throughput, resources, and so on, determines the choice of technology [ ]. The problem is: there is a lack of standardization in the protocols used for exosome isolation and quantification. This makes the reproducibility and reliability of biomarker detection derived from exosomes problematic and hinders the translation [ ]. Addressing this challenge requires sustained research and development efforts, investment in next‐generation isolation and analysis technologies, and the establishment of globally recognized standards. Second, exosomes present in body fluids are heterogeneous and originate from different types of tissues. Therefore, it is hard to distinguish tumor signals from “noise” of normal cells, in RNA transcriptomic analysis. At present, exosomes can be isolated according to tissue origin using the capture of specific exosomal surface proteins with immunoprecipitation and nanoflow cytometry. These technologies can enhance particular exosomes and amplify disease indications, which can enhance the performance of exosome‐based RNA analysis [ ]. Third, to improve diagnostic and prognostic accuracy, future studies should focus not only on mRNA or ncRNA but also on multiple exosomal cargos (mRNA, ncRNA, proteins, metabolites) [ ]. In fact, due to the unique vesicular structure of the exosomes multianalyte testing is suitable. Combined biomarker panels that integrate exosomal RNA with other exosomal cargos reflecting different aspects of exosomes will provide precise and multidimensional information for cancer diagnosis, prognosis, and prediction [ ].
Liquid biopsy is an important breakthrough as it enables early screening, diagnosis, and treatment of cancer where tissue samples are not available. The transient molecular, genetic, and epigenetic features of tumor cells, identified from earlier therapies as drug‐resistant clones, can be assessed using circulating biomarkers obtained from liquid biopsy. These noninvasive tools make it easy to track responses to ongoing treatments. The data from these tools help guide rapid medical decision making regarding the next cycles of chemotherapy or if the plan needs to be amended or changed [ ]. Table  presents circulating RNAs as potential biomarkers in liquid biopsies. Circulating RNAs can be considered as biomarkers in liquid biopsies. Still, the sensitive detection of RNA remains challenging in liquid biopsies as RNA is low in frequency, unstable, and the absence of standardized protocols between the different platforms such as quantitative reverse transcription‐polymerase chain reaction, microarrays, and next‐generation sequencing [ ]. It is necessary to develop more sensitive and specific biomarkers and to generate more evidence‐based medical data for liquid biopsy to move from research to clinical practice. We must begin to develop better and more scalable protocols for the separation of circulating RNAs (especially exosomal RNAs) using advanced molecular biology detection technologies that increase the specificity and reliability of liquid biopsies [ ]. In near future, liquid biopsy is expected to be crucial in early diagnosis, targeted treatment, ongoing monitoring, and prognostic assessment of cancer.
 
6.2

## RNA Regulatory Networks and Prognostic Prediction
With the rapid development of high‐throughput sequencing technology and bioinformatics in recent years, RNA regulatory networks indicators have become more important in studying disease prognosis assessment. Regulatory networks of RNA molecules not only participate in disease development through mechanisms (e.g., posttranscriptional regulation and epigenetic changes), but also their expression profile characteristics may provide a crucial tool for guiding clinical decision‐making.
The poor prognosis of tumor cells that are related to immune escape function and drug resistance are regulated by RNA networks through various means. Regarding immune escape: in NSCLC, circ_0074158 upregulates the expression of the RBP QKI6 by direct binding, thereby promoting the STUB1 (an E3 ubiquitin ligase)‐mediated ubiquitinative degradation of PD‐L1. At the same time, it induces CD8+ T cells to secrete IFN‐γ and TNF‐α, interfering with immune escape capacity [ ]; circ_0000512 has the exact opposite effect in TNBC—it sequesters miR‐622 to upregulate the expression of its target gene CMTM6, inhibiting PD‐L1 ubiquitinative degradation and strengthening the tumor immunosuppressive microenvironment [ ]. The m6A reader protein YTHDF2 is also involved in immune escape regulation: YTHDF2 upregulated in PC regulates CD8+ T cell infiltration‐related gene network, affects immune checkpoint molecules expression, promotes tumor immune escape, which relates to poor prognosis [ ]. Regarding drug resistance: the lncRNA SNHG12 is overexpressed in renal cell carcinoma. It binds to the transcription factor SP1 and inhibits its ubiquitinative degradation, thereby promoting the transcriptional activation of its target gene CDCA3. Ultimately, this enhances tumor cell resistance to sunitinib, and patients with high SNHG12 expression have poorer clinical prognosis [ ]; in NSCLC, lncRNAs can regulate EGFR‐TKIs resistance‐related pathways through the ceRNA mechanism. Some lncRNAs can also form complexes with RBPs, synergizing with m6A modification to alter the stability of target mRNAs and accelerate the enrichment of drug‐resistant subpopulations [ ]. The crosstalk between these mechanisms directly affects clinical treatment response. For example, m6A subtype classification shows that BLCA patients with high expression of m6A regulators such as METTL3 have enriched inhibitory immune components in the TME, lower response rates to chemotherapy and immunotherapy, and significantly shortened overall survival [ ].
ncRNAs demonstrate unique advantages in the prognostic evaluation of cancer. Research has shown that miR‐132 acts as a tumor suppressor, with its downregulation due to hypermethylation serving as a marker of poor prognosis in CRC patients [ ]. Furthermore, the lncRNA DANCR is upregulated in CRC tissues and is associated with TNM stage, histological grade, lymph node metastasis, shorter overall survival, and disease‐free survival [ ]. Additional studies have identified specific miRNAs as novel biomarkers for resistance to particular chemotherapy regimens, with alterations in their expression levels correlating with patient survival rates. For instance, miR‐4299 and miR‐196b have been identified as potential biomarkers for chemotherapy resistance in patients with intestinal adenocarcinoma [ , ]. Moreover, advancements in liquid biopsy technology have broadened the application of RNA biomarkers in clinical prognostic evaluations [ ].
RNA modifications and their regulators are frequently aberrantly expressed in tumor tissues and are closely associated with the prognosis of cancer patients [ ]. Studies have shown that m5C RNA methyltransferases hold significant potential for prognostic prediction in cancer [ ]. In clear cell renal cell carcinoma, the mRNA levels of NOP2 and NSUN4 in tumor tissues are elevated compared with those in normal tissues, while the mRNA levels of NSUN6 and the m5C eraser TET2 are reduced. These four m5C regulators constitute a risk signature for determining patient prognosis [ ]. In PC, the levels of NSUN6 are significantly reduced, and elevated NSUN6 expression is associated with a lower risk and improved prognosis for PC patients [ ]. Additionally, the m1A modification status in RNA molecules can also be used to predict patient prognosis and even serve as prospective therapeutic targets [ ]. Studies have identified a negative correlation between ALKBH1 overexpression and overall survival in CRC patients. Conversely, decreased ALKBH3 expression in CRC is associated with poorer overall survival [ ]. Small‐molecule inhibitors under development that target RNA modification sites and RNA‐modifying enzymes can offer new, more targeted ways to combat cancer. Moreover, sometimes, a single enzyme can have an opposite effect in different cancers, or even have different effects in the same cancer. As a result, more studies are required to confirm and to clarify the mechanisms of RNA methylation in cancer and to provide a better explanation for the existing conflicting studies, and also address the discrepancies in the literature.
The most important part of any cancer diagnosis, molecular subtype, and prognosis is the RNA expression profile and modification status. The unique invaluable value of these tools in early screening, monitoring of therapeutic efficacy, and prognostic prediction, especially the advantage of noninvasive liquid biopsy. It provides a new pathway for precision medicine in cancer. There are many issues that need urgent resolution. For example, first, the biomarkers have imbalanced sensitivity and specificity. Further, there is no standardization of detection. The tissue tracing is also difficult. Also, there is no multicenter large‐sample validation. Further research efforts would shift from the single‐biomarker paradigm to a multidimensional RNA panel construction combined dynamic monitoring systems with nanotechnology for maximum detection efficiency. This will facilitate the transfer of RNA‐based diagnostics from the laboratory to the clinic for accurate cancer diagnosis and personalized prognostic management.

7

## Cancer Therapeutic Strategies Targeting RNA Regulatory Networks
Traditional cancer therapies like surgery, radiotherapy, and chemotherapy can delay cancer recurrence and extend patient survival for a time. However, frequent tumor recurrence and drug resistance are often the main reasons for poor prognoses. Also, as these chemotherapies and radiotherapies are nonspecific, they also cause major toxic side effects and sometimes even death. In this context, precision medicine has emerged as a pivotal direction in medical research. The therapeutic potential of RNA has been extensively studied, with mRNA vaccines, shRNAs, small interfering RNAs (siRNAs), antisense ASOs, RNA aptamers, and CRISPR technology becoming prominent research hotspots.
7.1

## | mRNA Vaccine
mRNA vaccines have emerged as a promising platform for cancer immunotherapy [ ]. mRNA‐based cancer vaccines function by encoding tumor‐specific antigens, which are then translated into proteins by the patient's cells—particularly antigen‐presenting cells—thereby stimulating innate/adaptive immune responses against cancer [ ]. Owing to advantages such as high efficacy, safe administration, great development potential, and low production costs, mRNA cancer vaccines outperform other traditional vaccine platforms [ ]. Recently, the United States Food and Drug Administration (US FDA) approved lipid nanoparticles (LNP)‐loaded mRNA vaccines for COVID‐19 prevention, and mRNA cancer vaccines have achieved favorable therapeutic outcomes in multiple clinical trials targeting various aggressive solid tumors [ ].
However, relatively few mRNA vaccines for tumors have advanced to Phase III clinical trials, which may be attributed to the following reasons. First, mRNAs encoding a single tumor antigen may induce tumor immune escape mutations; thus, vaccines targeting multiple tumor‐associated antigens or tumor‐specific antigens simultaneously need to be developed. Second, the heterogeneity of tumor surface antigens calls for a personalized vaccine design; however, their high production costs hinder its widespread application. The third factor emphasizes the effectiveness of adjuvants in immune responses. In other words, the TME can impair neoantigen recognition and immune cell function. The effects of the inborn instability, low delivery efficiency, and the poor transfection efficacy of mRNA itself restrict the therapeutic effect. Therefore, a continuous optimization of mRNA molecular structure and delivery vectors is in demand. Fifth, tumor patients often have diminished immune responses because they are old, taking other drugs, or have comorbidities, and these may require careful observation of other adverse reactions while boosting immunity [ ]. Ultimately, however, advanced tumors are unlikely to be cured by mRNA vaccines alone; these should be combined with other treatments, like adoptive cell therapy and immune checkpoint blockade, to provide synergistic effects [ ].
Strategies to improve mRNA vaccines focus on three key elements: mRNA sequences, delivery vectors, and adjuvants [ ]. The use of nucleoside modification technology results in lower levels of immunogenicity in mRNA and a more efficient expression of proteins. Furthermore, the optimization of the polyadenylate tail structure improves stability and translational efficiency [ ]. Innovations in adjuvants have focused on TLR agonists (e.g., Pam2Cys) incorporated into delivery systems or direct construction of mRNA or mRNA fused to the C3d adjuvant [ , ]. Concerning delivery systems, while LNPs can shield mRNA from degradation, their cationic nature may harm cells. Therefore, making biodegradable lipids is an important direction. Furthermore, the use of stimulus‐responsive nanoplatforms enables targeted delivery in response to microenvironment‐specific stimuli—for instance, pH or enzyme activity or surface modification—and greatly enhances tissue specificity while mitigating off‐target toxicity [ ].

7.2

## Antisense Nucleic Acid Technology
Antisense nucleic acid technologies, such as ASOs and siRNAs, have demonstrated substantial potential in targeting oncogenic RNA molecules. ASOs are artificially produced single‐stranded DNA or RNA molecules of 15–25 nucleotides in length and bind to the target mRNAs or ncRNAs due to base complementarity. This binding either inhibits their translation or leads to their degradation, thus controlling gene expression and RNA behavior. The role of this tech is an “antisense” sequence that binds to target RNA. This is useful for either silencing the genes responsible for cancer and regulating splicing or correcting the function of RNA [ ]. Targeting aberrantly expressed RNAs using ASOs may represent a promising strategy for cancer treatment. Numerous studies have confirmed that ASO‐mediated knockdown of metastasis‐associated LUAD transcript 1 (MALAT1) significantly inhibits tumor growth and metastasis in BC and LC [ , ]. Additionally, ASO‐mediated downregulation of lncRNA–SChLAP1 effectively restricts tumor formation and metastasis in PCa patients exhibiting high expression of this molecule [ ]. Furthermore, locked nucleic acid‐modified antisense oligonucleotides (LNA‐ASOs) targeting lnc‐USMycN significantly suppress tumorigenesis in glioma mice models [ ]. Lastly, treatment with Stat3‐ASO reduces circulating VEGF, basic FGF, tumor volume, and weight in HCC [ ].
Compared with siRNAs, a significant advantage of ASOs is their ability to target immature miRNAs in the nucleus, facilitated by the ubiquitous distribution of RNase H, which is recruited by ASOs in both the cytoplasm and nucleus. In contrast, siRNAs, which depend on the RISC that is present only in the cytoplasm, can only act on mature miRNAs [ ]. However, the inherent limitations of ASOs have hindered their clinical translation. ASOs have high negative charges and are easily degraded by enzymes and eliminated from circulation too quickly—these factors hamper their use in the clinic [ ]. The efficient delivery of ASO drugs to the right tissues and subcellular targets is hampered by several physiological barriers. ASOs used for tumor therapy are given intravenously, and they must overcome the vascular endothelial barrier to reach the TME. While chemical changes can improve the pharmacokinetics, biodistribution, and targeting of new ASOs, effective delivery systems are still required to further enhance their therapeutic effect. At present, nucleic acid delivery systems like LNPs, liposomes, polymer nanoparticles, and bioconjugates have been employed in research, with an increasing number of ASO‐based therapies undergoing clinical trials. There is a growing need for drug delivery systems capable of carrying, protecting and targeting ASOs in tissues for the efficient clinical implementation of ASOs [ ].
The role of siRNAs is not just limited to studying single‐gene functions in vitro and in vivo but they also have therapeutic potential with distinct advantages. They can target “undruggable” entities in cancer and other diseases [ ]. siRNA consists of chemically synthesized double‐stranded RNA (dsRNA) that usually comprising of 19 to 23 nucleotides in length with the presence of 2‐nucleotide overhang at the 3’ end, also having a structure similar to that of endogenous miRNAs. The mechanism of action of siRNAs begins with recognition and processing by the Dicer enzyme. Then they are unwound by AGO proteins. Here, the guide strand is incorporated into the RISC and the passenger strand gets degraded by exonucleases. Finally, the binding of the RISC‐siRNA complex facilitates the cleavage and degradation of target RNAs. This occurs by binding of the guide strand to complementarily binding target RNAs. siRNAs and miRNAs are mechanistically similar but also differ in several important regards: siRNAs bind to their targets with near perfect sequence complementarity and induce cleavage of the target RNA, while miRNAs function by repressing translation. siRNAs have become indispensable tools for studying single‐gene functions because they can precisely silence target gene expression in a sequence‐specific manner [ ]. The actions of siRNAs have persistence and a cascading amplification effect. RISC can continuously target mRNAs, leading to a prolonged duration of drug action on the one hand [ , ]. On the other hand, the sense strand released by siRNAs (or its degradation products) can function as a primer for amplification of new dsRNAs using target mRNAs and RNA‐dependent RNA polymerases as catalysts. After this, Dicer degrades these dsRNAs into siRNAs again to get back into the RNA interference cycle and achieve cascade amplification of the drug effect [ , ]. The continuous presence of siRNA molecules amplifies their potency or biological value. Such processes, known as cascade amplification processes, will strengthen the value of siRNA. This not only improves siRNA efficacy in gene silencing but also offers a basis to translate siRNA into clinical therapeutic applications. Moreover, such amplifying processes could allow siRNA to find application in pathologies with low dosages. The authors also demonstrated that specific siRNAs encapsulated in polyethyleneimine (PEI) target circITGB6 to inhibit liver metastasis [ ]. In cancers such as NSCLC, therapeutic siRNAs designed to target molecular markers associated with tumor development can significantly inhibit tumor growth [ ].
The use of siRNAs in the clinic faces two main challenges: immunogenicity and off‐target effects [ ]. In terms of the immune response, Toll‐like receptors are able to recognize siRNAs. The structural similarity of the siRNAs with that of the viruses’ dsRNAs allows for the triggering of excessive innate immune responses and the uncontrolled release of cytokines. To tackle the issue, chemical modifications, for example, 2′O‐methyl modification can, are effective in TLR activation inhibition. Moreover, designing the sequences with known immune‐stimulatory motifs such as the UG dinucleotide and 5′‐UGU‐3′ motifs can avoid these [ , ]. About off‐target effects, siRNAs may cause off‐target gene silencing by fully saturating endogenous RNAi machinery or by partial complementarity to 3′UTRs, thus showing miRNA‐like gene silencing [ ]. New control designs with guide strand point mutations such as 2‐nucleotide mutations can increase the specificity of experiments [ ]. Although siRNA therapies face many obstacles in the treatment of cancer, their in vivo delivery technology is rapidly advancing, thereby representing an exciting and novel area of biomedicine and drug development [ ].

7.3

## RNA Aptamers and Nanotechnology
RNA aptamers are functional RNAs that can specifically bind to target molecules. Right now, almost all RNA aptamers come from in vitro selection methods, particularly the systematic evolution of ligands by exponential enrichment (SELEX) [ ]. These molecules can form complex secondary and tertiary structures that include stems, loops, hairpins, triplexes, and quadruplexes. The processes by which they interact with their targets that include everything from a small‐molecule compound, metal ions to proteins and even cell through hydrophobic interaction, hydrogen bonding, and electrostatic interaction to form three‐dimensional complexes having high specificity and affinity. RNA aptamers are more specific and have a greater affinity for RNA secondary structures than complementary oligomers [ ]. Furthermore, aptamers can not only degrade RNA but also inhibit RNA functions, highlighting their potential as therapeutic agents targeting RNA. The working mechanisms of the three RNA‐based therapeutic approaches are shown in Figure  .
 RNA aptamers are capable of binding to wide‐ranging targets having a capacity that holds greater promise than others for cancer diagnosis and prognosis, as well as therapy [ ]. They are sensitive detectors of serum levels of VEGF, which is a major regulator of angiogenesis, widely employed as a biomarker for BC, LC, and CRC [ ]. In the diagnosis and treatment of CRC, an increasing number of RNA aptamers have been confirmed to have considerable clinical value. Using tumor‐bearing mouse models, many nuclease‐resistant RNA oligonucleotides have been screened, and the study was able to identify RNA aptamers that selectively localize to hepatic metastatic lesions of colon cancer. One of the aptamers specifically binds to the RNA helicase p68 that is overexpressed on CRC [ ]. RNA aptamers can target both the cell surface marker and important intracellular component (such as proteins). For instance, an aptamer that binds to the RNA helicase DHX9 can selectively target cancer cell nuclei in vivo, thus providing a feasible strategy for nucleus‐targeted delivery [ ]. Besides their potential to target the desired site, RNA aptamers can also act as antagonists. They can prevent the interaction between an extracellular target and its ligand [ ]. The carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) overexpression in CRC cells increases the cell adhesion and the resistance to anoikis and the liver metastasis [ ]. An RNA aptamer selective to CEA, screened during SELEX, will bind the metastasis‐related domain of CEA. As a result, it blocks the interaction between CEA and the heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein M4 or death receptor 5. This has significant impact on colonic cancer cells’ liver metastasis in mice [ ].
RNA aptamers are a new class of molecules with potential in diagnosis and therapy that work as antibodies but avoid many of their drawbacks, including large molecular weight, strong immunogenicity, and peptidase degradation [ , , ]. RNA aptamers have significant advantages over protein‐based reagents due to the cell‐free assembly property, enabling their low‐cost, fast, and large‐scale manufacturing [ ]. Aside from working alone, RNA aptamers are now increasingly being combined with nanotechnology to enhance their diagnostics [ , , ]. Functionalized nanoparticles like liposomes can be aptamers, and they facilitate targeted drug delivery, improving bioavailability and reducing off‐target effects [ ]. Nanostructures can be synthesized to encapsulate chemotherapeutics, siRNA or imaging probes, with aptamer modifications on their surface permitting recognition of surface markers specific to cancer (e.g., PSMA in PCa or HER2 in BC) [ , ]. Furthermore, aptamer‐based biosensors employ nanomaterials like quantum dots and graphene oxide, which enable ultrasensitive detection in liquid biopsies of cancer biomarkers [ ]. It is clear that RNA aptamers have been found to be a new molecular tool and are proving to be useful tools for more and more fundamental applications like bioanalysis and medical diagnosis as well as new areas like nano‐technology and gene therapy (Figure  ).
 
7.4

## RNA Editing and Gene Therapy
CRISPR–Cas system is a revolutionary gene editing tool. The well‐studied CRISPR–Cas9 system targets DNA. This system can also be used for pathogen detection and antibacterial strategies besides for gene therapy [ , ]. Recently, the RNA‐targeting CRISPR–C2c2/Cas13a system has attracted much scientific attention [ ]. The CRISPR–Cas13a system recognizes and binds to single‐stranded RNA sequence in a specific manner, followed by cleavage of RNA in a nonspecific manner, thereby functioning as a molecular tool to disrupt gene expression or edit gene transcripts at the transcriptional level [ ]. The RNA editing technology has unique potential in the cancer therapy field to target aberrant RNAs of oncogenes and repair critical mutations.
Solid tumor therapies value CRISPR–Cas13a as follows: Three aspects: first, it directly knocks down oncogenic transcripts. For instance, in case of NSCLC, targeting NSCLC‐associated circRNA C190 or gene EML4‐ALK can result in reduction of cell viability by 50% [ ]. The delivery of CRISPR–Cas13a through an adeno‐associated virus (AAV) system can efficiently knock down the TERT/EZH2/RelA complex in HCC with a significant inhibition rate. One other important application is reversing therapeutic resistance [ ]. This system can accurately identify and target mutant KRAS transcripts to overcome chemoresistance [ ]. CRISPR–Cas13a is very helpful in therapeutic target with respect to oncogenes other than direct targeting. It is also able to help in immunomodulation and TME reprogramming. According to BLCA, the application of this technology seriously interferes with the proliferation, migration, and invasion of tumor cells and induces apoptosis. Moreover, this is achieved by knocking down eRNAs, (e.g., SMAD7e and P2RY2e), and lncRNAs, (e.g., GACAT3 and MALAT‐1) [ ]. Thus, the multifaceted applicability of RNA editing suggests its utility not only in silencing driver oncogenes but also in reprogramming the immunosuppressive microenvironment. More research is still needed about the medicinal use of CRISPR–Cas13 in the treatment of nonsolid tumors [ ].
Additionally, the Cas13a system can be combined with other devices to construct signal‐amplifying sensors for detecting RNA or exosomes. This system has also been proven to hold broad prospects in tumor diagnosis and early screening [ , ]. For example, the CRISPR–Cas13a/Cas12a system was used to develop a fluorescent biosensor capable of simultaneously detecting BC biomarkers circROBO1 and BRCA1. The findings of the technology we developed recently of circROBO1 was instrumental in revealing the molecular mechanism by which circROBO1 via the ceRNA mechanism binds to miR‐498 to regulate expression of BRCA1. Our these observation will provides a crucial basis for an in‐depth understanding of the intrinsic regulatory network in BC [ ]. The sensitivity, speed and minimally invasive nature of detection in nonsolid tumors leukemia and lymphoma, has advanced with CRISPR–Cas13 [ ]. Traditional detection techniques are complex to operate and rely on sophisticated instruments; in contrast, CRISPR–Cas13 can accurately capture targets (e.g., leukemia fusion transcripts and lymphoma BRAF mutant RNAs) through RNA‐targeted recognition combined with a fluorescent reporting system [ ]. At present, this technology has a very low limit of detection that can detect trace amounts of minimal residual disease that would not be picked up by standard techniques. This facilitates early diagnosis and assessment of treatment efficacy [ ].
Unlike traditional genomic tools like CRISPR–Cas9, Cas13 regulates the gene expression by targeting intracellular RNA molecules without permanently altering the genomic DNA. This type of intervention, which is reversible and transient, greatly reduces the risk of off‐target‐induced irreversible mutations [ ]. The Cas13 system is additionally not cytotoxic or procarcinogenic as it does not activate the p53 pathway, which gets activated upon DNA breaks. Therefore, it is a more versatile tool that can be used when further fine‐tuning of gene expression is required, rather than a full knockout of functions [ , ]. More importantly, this technology can target molecular classes that are difficult to access with traditional DNA editing—such as noncoding RNAs and mitochondrial RNAs—greatly expanding the scope of transcriptome intervention [ ]. Nonetheless, one should not lose sight of its limitations. The transient nature of RNA targeting means that its duration of action is limited by the half‐life of the target RNA and the cell's own transcriptional dynamics. This poses challenges of repeated administration in the treatment of diseases requiring long‐term phenotypic correction [ ]. Though the use of RNA targeting does not present genomic integration‐associated risks, it also forfeits the possibility of achieving lifelong efficacy through a single intervention. This “reversibility” may instead result in burdening continuous intervention in chronic disease management [ , ].
The challenges of the clinical translation of RNA editing therapies are standing with the promising preclinical experiments and high rates of inhibition. A major obstacle is the development of safe and effective in vivo delivery systems that can achieve targeted tissue distribution while minimizing off‐target accumulation [ ]. The presence of immunogenicity and potential insertional mutagenesis is a risk in the use of viral vectors such as AAV. When it comes to nonviral delivery systems, these face issues of poor stability, low packaging efficiency, and potential cytotoxicity, especially in LNPs and polymeric nanoparticles [ ]. The innate immunogenicity of Cas proteins from bacteria may activate the immune system of the host that could lessen their therapeutic effectiveness and elicit side‐effects [ ]. Additionally, although the collateral cleavage activity of Cas13a can be used for signal amplification in diagnostics, it poses a risk of nonspecific RNA degradation in therapeutic contexts, which may disrupt normal cellular functions [ ]. Currently, CRISPR–Cas13‐based tumor therapy is still in the preclinical and early clinical research stages; thus, data on its long‐term efficacy and safety remain limited and require further exploration.
Therefore, there is a need to design Cas13 variants with lower immunogenicity, optimize guide RNA design to minimize off‐target effects, and develop new delivery platforms [ ]. Exosome‐based or targeted nanoparticle‐mediated delivery systems for CRISPR components can reduce immunogenicity while enhancing targeting ability, thereby improving therapeutic precision [ , ]. To address the adverse cytotoxicity caused by the collateral RNA cleavage activity of CRISPR–Cas13, Xu et al. developed an ultra‐small RNA editing platform designed based on IscB (the evolutionary ancestor of Cas9). This platform exhibits RNA editing activity comparable to or higher than that of Cas13; it can effectively alter splicing outcomes in human cells and further mediate trans‐splicing to correct any mutations at the mRNA level, without inducing cytotoxicity [ ]. Studies have confirmed that combining gene therapy with chemotherapy can effectively alleviate the limitations of single gene therapy in tumor suppression [ ]. This indicates the great significance of developing chemotherapeutic drugs that integrate immune checkpoint inhibition, promote immune infiltration, and induce tumor cell death.
Currently, RNA cancer therapies exhibit a parallel development pattern of “personalization and combination” in clinical trials, demonstrating tremendous application potential (Table  ). Figure  illustrates RNA networks driving cancer processes, RNA‐based therapies, as well as the associated clinical translation barriers and potential solutions. mRNA vaccines are the only RNA cancer therapies that have entered Phase III clinical trials to date. Moderna's mRNA‐4157 has completed Phase IIb, confirming that combination with anti‐PD‐1 monoclonal antibody reduces the risk of recurrence/death in high‐risk melanoma by 49%. It has also been granted US FDA Breakthrough Therapy Designation, becoming the first personalized mRNA tumor vaccine to advance to Phase III (NCT05933577) [ ]. Earlier technologies such as siRNA–LNPs and CRISPR–Cas13 remain in preclinical/Phase I stages. RNA aptamers are mostly used for targeted delivery [ ]. Overall, mRNA vaccines have progressed from proof‐of‐concept to randomized controlled confirmation phases, while RNA interference and editing therapies still need to overcome bottlenecks in delivery and safety. In the future, researchers should develop solutions addressing the corresponding challenges of RNA therapies, and advance RNA cancer treatment into clinical practice through technologies centered on “target prediction‐precise delivery‐immune combination.”
 

8

## Discussion
RNA regulatory networks serve as the central hub for decoding cancer biology. Their dynamic complexity has not only reshaped our understanding of tumorigenesis and progression but has also propelled a shift in cancer diagnosis and treatment toward a focus on “network targeting.” Present researches have been incrementally revealing that the ncRNAs, which include miRNAs, lncRNAs and circRNAs, create a complex regulatory network that activates oncogenes by silencing tumor suppressor genes through multilevel mechanisms. These mechanisms consist of ceRNA sponge effect, RNP complex assembly and modification. Most RNAs do not function in isolation in biological processes. Instead, RNAs represent critical branch points in regulatory networks. The regulatory functions of pluripotent transcription factors are highly pleiotropic by virtue of their large networks of signal outputs that they dynamically impose on cellular transcriptomes and proteomes, which, in turn, determine cellular biological fates. A wide variety of RNA molecules that have pleiotropic regulatory functions interact. The emergence of regulatory interplay across regulatory paradigms weaves an exceptionally complex web of gene regulatory networks and establishing RNA regulatory networks as the wire frame of tumor cell heterogeneity, adaptive evolution, and therapeutic resistance.
Currently, the multidimensional roles of RNA regulatory networks in cancer initiation, progression, diagnosis, and therapeutic intervention have become increasingly prominent, demonstrating unprecedented value in clinical translation. However, existing research continues to face three major cognitive gaps: First, most mechanistic studies focus on individual RNA types or static interaction patterns, lacking a spatiotemporal dissection of dynamic transcriptome–epigenome–proteome networks. For instance, while RNA crosstalk between immune cells and cancer cells in the TME has been established, the coordinated regulation of this process by RNA modifications (e.g., A‐to‐I editing) requires further investigation. Second, the clinical translation of circulating RNAs in liquid biopsy encounter a “specificity bottleneck.” The sensitivity and tissue traceability of existing biomarkers in early screening need improvement; for example, some miRNA‐based liquid biopsy panels exhibit variable false‐positive rates across different patient cohorts, and currently US FDA‐approved detection methods have limitations in detecting early‐stage cancers or distinguishing malignant from benign nodules. Multidimensional diagnostic models should be developed by integrating single‐cell sequencing and spatial transcriptomics. Third, RNA‐targeted therapeutic strategies (e.g., ASOs, CRISPR–Cas13) show promise in precise intervention; however, the immunogenicity, tissue targeting efficiency, and off‐target effects of delivery systems remain key barriers to clinical application. For example, systemically administered ASOs and siRNA‐loaded nanoparticles typically exhibit suboptimal tumor biodistribution and may trigger innate immune responses via pattern recognition receptors. Likewise, the in vivo delivery of CRISPR–Cas13 components is limited by packaging capacity and vector immunogenicity, as well as collateral RNA cleavage. New solutions are being sought to guide drug delivery. They include biomimetic nanoparticles, engineered exosomes and cell‐specific ligand conjugation. This will need innovation across materials science, bioengineering, and biology.
Future research on RNA regulatory networks in cancer is expected to open many more exciting directions. First, we must advance past simplified studies of RNA species and move toward more integrated systems biology studies of the RNA species. The ultimate goal is to develop computational models that integrate multiomics transcriptomics, epitranscriptomics, and proteomics data to build dynamic maps of RNA interaction networks across cancer stages and subtypes. Second, solving the delivery barriers for RNA‐targeted therapeutics (ASOs, siRNAs, CRISPR–RNA editors) is vital. Further studies should focus upon delivery platforms of the next generation like tunable LNPs, programmable exosomes as well as ligand–receptor targeted conjugates, and their pharmacokinetics, biodistribution, and immunogenicity through rigorous preclinical studies. Third, the next step is to find and validate more robust biomarkers that will be able to improve the clinical utility of liquid biopsy RNAs. A recommended strategy is to combine different RNA types (e.g., miRNAs, circRNAs and exosomal RNAs) with other analytes (e.g., circulating tumor DNA, proteins) in a single panel that improves sensitivity and specificity and helps in tissue‐of‐origin determination. Finally, long‐term studies are essential to understand the potential mechanisms of acquired resistance to RNA‐targeted therapies and to develop effective combination strategies with immunotherapies, targeted therapies, or conventional treatments for durable clinical responses.
As research progresses, RNA regulatory networks will bridge the gap between gene regulation and phenotype expression, transforming cancer diagnosis and treatment from “targeting target” to “systemic remodeling.” Such an evolution will open new paths to address issues like tumor heterogeneity and metabolic reprogramming, and allow for a shift from intervening in disease to regulating life itself.

## Author Contributions
Xuan Yin, Zengkan Du, Shuya Jiang, Yan Liao, Changli Wang, Jiaqi Li, and Wangzheqi Zhang contributed to the manuscript writing and figure preparation. Xuan Yin, Zengkan Du, and Wangzheqi Zhang designed the work. Zui Zou, Haoling Zhang, Ting‐Ting Wei, and Wangzheqi Zhang supervised the work. All authors have read and approved the article. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

## Funding
This study was funded by the Natural Science Foundation of China (82572494 and 82202584) and Shanghai Oriental Talent Top Project and Changhai Hospital Anesthesia Specialty Platform Construction Project.

## Ethics Statement
The authors have nothing to report.

## Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

## Data Availability Statement
Data sharing not applicable to this article as no datasets were generated or analyzed during the current study. All information is derived from publicly available articles and datasets.