2814apsbActa Pharmaceutica Sinica. BActa Pharm Sin BElsevierPMC1084043410840434108404343832234410.1016/j.apsb.2023.10.012Lipid nanovehicles overcome barriers to systemic RNA delivery: Lipid components, fabrication methods, and rational design
YanJing ZhangHao LiGuangfeng SuJiacan WeiYan XuCan aInstitute of Translational Medicine, Shanghai University, Shanghai 200444, ChinabInstitute of Medicine, Shanghai University, Shanghai 200444, ChinacDepartment of Orthopedics, Xinhua Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200092, ChinadDepartment of Orthopedics, Shanghai Zhongye Hospital, Shanghai 200941, ChinaeOrganoid Research Center, Shanghai University, Shanghai 200444, ChinafDepartment of Gastroenterology, Changhai Hospital, Shanghai 200433, China∗Corresponding authors. drsujiacan@163.comywei@shu.edu.cnxucan@smmu.edu.cn
†These authors made equal contributions to this work.
20102023142579579–601622024© 2024 The AuthorsThis is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
Lipid nanovehicles are currently the most advanced vehicles used for RNA delivery, as demonstrated by the approval of patisiran for amyloidosis therapy in 2018. To illuminate the unique superiority of lipid nanovehicles in RNA delivery, in this review, we first introduce various RNA therapeutics, describe systemic delivery barriers, and explain the lipid components and methods used for lipid nanovehicle preparation. Then, we emphasize crucial advances in lipid nanovehicle design for overcoming barriers to systemic RNA delivery. Finally, the current status and challenges of lipid nanovehicle-based RNA therapeutics in clinical applications are also discussed. Our objective is to provide a comprehensive overview showing how to utilize lipid nanovehicles to overcome multiple barriers to systemic RNA delivery, inspiring the development of more high-performance RNA lipid nanovesicles in the future.
Key words: Lipid nanovehicles, RNA therapeutics, Barriers to systemic RNA delivery, Lipid components, Fabrication methods, Lipid nanovehicle design, Extrahepatic tissue targeting, Organ tropism

## Graphical abstract
This review provides a comprehensive overview of how to design lipid nanovehicles to overcome multiple extracellular and intracellular barriers to systemic RNA delivery.
 
statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2023 Jul 17; Revised 2023 Sep 24; Accepted 2023 Oct 8; Issue date 2024 Feb.

1.

## Introduction
In human disease treatment, conventional antibodies or small-molecule drugs cannot effectively target numerous pathogenic proteins . In contrast, RNA-based therapeutics, e.g., small interfering RNAs (siRNAs), short hairpin RNAs (shRNAs), microRNAs (miRNAs), and messenger RNAs (mRNAs), can regulate the expression of a protein by silencing specific genes or encoding related proteins. Therefore, RNAs introduce new treatment possibilities for otherwise undruggable human diseases . Despite their unique advantages, naked RNAs do not readily lead to desirable outcomes after systemic injection due to RNAs undergoing rapid filtration through the kidney, enzymatic degradation, and phagocytosis by macrophages in the circulatory system and generally low cellular internalization , . Thus, the main challenge for those establishing RNA therapeutics is the construction of safe and effective vehicles for overcoming multiple delivery barriers.
For systemic RNA delivery, carrier systems fall into viral and nonviral vectors. Most clinical trials to date have evaluated the use of viral vehicles. However, only 4.2% of these viral vectors have been evaluated in patients at a late clinical stage due to their undesirable immunogenicity and general toxicity . Therefore, nonviral vectors, especially lipid nanovehicles, are garnering intensive attention by virtue of their lower immunogenicity and higher safety than those of viral vehicles, ability to encapsulate large payloads, and ease of manufacturing , , , . Conventional liposomes used for RNA entrapment were introduced in the late 1970s; however, they showed low encapsulation ability, partly due to neutral lipids and passive encapsulation methods . Later, lipoplexes were developed; they comprise cationic lipids that can form complexes with negatively charged RNAs, leading to efficient RNA encapsulation. However, the constitutively charged cationic lipids caused the lipoplexes to be rapidly eliminated from the circulatory system and to activate the immune system, thereby precluding their use in the clinical. The advent of ionizable lipids made it possible to develop pharmacologically useful lipid formulations . Specifically, pH-titratable lipids are almost entirely uncharged at the physiological pH of blood but positively charged at the acidic pH of endosomes. These features enable these lipid carriers to interact with negatively charged RNAs and endosomal membranes but prevent disadvantageous rapid clearance and low tolerability. Cationic or ionizable lipids with poly (ethylene glycol) (PEG)-lipids and helper lipids constitute the main components of lipid nanovehicles used for RNA delivery. PEG-lipids contribute to drug formulation stability during the production process and can shield the surface of lipid nanovehicles from blood components to optimize their pharmacokinetics and biodistribution. Helper lipids mainly facilitate lipid nanovehicles to escape from endosomes.
With the development of preparation technology, lipid nanovehicles have been developed from conventional lipoplexes to stabilized nucleic acid-lipid particles (SNALPs), lipopolyplexes, membrane/core nanoparticles (MCNPs), and lipid nanoparticles (LNPs). Therefore, in this review, lipid nanovehicles specifically include lipoplexes, SNALPs, lipopolyplexes, MCNPs, and LNPs. In contrast to classical hollow liposomes, lipopolyplexes, MCNPs, and LNPs contain a solid internal core that encapsulates RNA molecules, and therefore, they show higher kinetic stability and more rigid morphology. In particular, homogeneous LNPs are obtained by large-scale commercial fabrication methods such as T-mixing or microfluidic-mixing technology. Accordingly, LNPs are the most advanced lipid nanovehicles to deliver RNAs developed to date . Since 2018, three LNP-based RNA therapeutics have been approved for clinical use, i.e., Alnylam patisiran (ONPATTRO) (a siRNA drug used for the treatment of transthyretin-mediated amyloidosis), Moderna mRNA-1273 (an mRNA vaccine used for the prevention of COVID-19) and Pfizer BNT162b2 (another mRNA vaccine used for the prevention of COVID-19) . Patisiran was the first nonviral vector product to be marketed, validating the applicability of lipid nanovehicles to RNA delivery.
Systemic injection is an ideal route for RNA administration, allowing them to reach target cells more efficiently . Hence, in this review, systemic RNA delivery is mainly discussed. Various types of RNA molecules and multiple barriers to their systemic delivery are first introduced. The functions of lipid nanovehicles depend mainly on their lipid components, including their cationic or ionizable lipids, helper lipids, and PEG lipids; additionally, preparation methods exert profound effects on lipid nanovehicle structures , and therefore the effects of both the component and method factors are highlighted. In particular, approaches to rationally designing lipid nanovehicles that overcome the multiple hurdles of systemic RNA delivery are extensively articulated. Finally, the status quo and challenges of lipid nanovehicle-based RNA therapeutics in clinical use are analyzed, and future research directions are proposed. Notably, previously published relevant reviews focused on multiple types of RNA-loaded nanovectors used for cancer treatment , , , localized RNA delivery to treat pulmonary diseases , , or LNPs for transporting RNAs, proteins, and small-molecule drugs . In contrast, we mainly discuss a series of lipid nanovehicles (i.e., lipoplexes, SNALPs, LNPs, MCNPs, and lipopolyplexes) and strategies to design lipid nanovehicles that overcome multiple obstacles to systemic RNA delivery ( ). Overall, we aim to inspire the development of highly efficient lipid nanovehicles that induce low toxicity levels for use in RNA delivery shortly.
 
2.

## RNA-based therapeutics
Based on different action mechanisms, RNA-based therapeutics include multiple types, such as siRNAs, shRNAs, and miRNAs. The structural and functional characteristics of these RNAs are summarized in .
 2.1.

## Small interfering RNAs and short hairpin RNAs
RNA interference (RNAi) was first discovered as a natural antiviral defense mechanism in plants . Long double-stranded RNAs (dsRNAs) produced during viral replication can be cleaved by Dicer, an endoribonuclease or helicase with an RNase motif, into 21–23 nucleotide double-stranded siRNAs . Mature siRNAs can also be produced through direct chemical synthesis or by Dicer processing of shRNAs ( A). One siRNA strand is called the guide (or antisense) strand. In contrast, the other strand is designated the passenger (or sense) strand. A siRNA binds to multiple proteins to form an RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC) through which the passenger strand is cleaved by the enzyme Argonaute-2 (Ago2). Then, the guide strand attached to the activated RISC directs RISC to target mRNA via sequence homology, and Ago2 then cleaves the corresponding mRNA, leading to specific gene silencing.
 ShRNAs are synthetic RNA molecules with a short hairpin secondary structure and generally comprise 20–25 nucleotides . Because shRNAs are delivered in a DNA plasmid rather than as dsRNAs, they can be expressed persistently for months or years ( A). After transcription, the product is processed by Drosha to produce pre-shRNA, which then enters the cytoplasm via Exportin 5-mediated export. Then, a shRNA is cleaved by Dicer to yield an siRNA that subsequently induces gene silencing.

2.2.

## MicroRNAs and microRNA antagonists
In addition to siRNA and shRNA, RNAi mechanism-based therapeutics include miRNAs and miRNA antagonists (anti-miRs). MiRNAs are noncoding RNAs comprising approximately 22–24 nucleotides. MiRNAs are encoded by endogenous miRNA genes that drive the generation of primary miRNA (pri-miRNA) in the nucleus ( B) . Pri-miRNA is then degraded into precursor miRNA (pre-miRNA), exported from the nucleus into the cytosol by Exportin 5, and processed into mature miRNA. Natural mature endogenous miRNA is single-stranded, while chemically synthesized miRNA is typically double-stranded, resulting in higher performance and stability in vitro and in vivo. When exported into the cytoplasm, synthesized miRNAs are loaded onto RISCs, and the passenger miRNA strand is cleaved, which removes it from the complex. This process activates the RISC, resulting in subsequent gene targeting and silencing via either translation repression or mRNA degradation .
An anti-miR, a synthetic single-stranded RNA, is entirely complementary to a specific miRNA which suppresses Ago2-mediated cleavage of target miRNA by mismatching at the cleavage site of Ago2 or certain base modifications ( C) . Hence, after introducing an anti-miR corresponding to a miRNA, the expression of the gene initially inhibited by the miRNA is upregulated.
Although both siRNAs and miRNAs are noncoding RNAs that can induce gene silencing, their modes of action and clinical potential differ. MiRNAs can modulate the expression of hundreds of genes by base mispairing, while siRNAs exert effects on a single gene at a specific location.

2.3.

## Antisense oligonucleotides
Antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs), single-stranded nucleotide sequences, comprise 12–25 nucleotides that can specifically block the transcription or translation of target genes . ASOs regulate gene expression through mRNA degradation or occupancy-only mechanisms. Once bound to an mRNA via Watson–Crick base pairing, ASOs form hybrid substrates of endogenous Ribonuclease H1 (RNase H1). RNase H1-induced cleavage at the binding position of an ASO destroys the target mRNA, thereby silencing target protein expression ( D) . The cleaved RNA product is then eliminated through regular cellular degradation routes in the cytoplasm or nucleus .
In addition, by binding a functional cis-element of the target pre-mRNA, ASOs prevent cellular machinery from reaching the pre-mRNAs ( E). Therefore, ASOs may induce isoform splice switching and inhibit the translation of mRNA or reduce target mRNA stability, thereby downregulating target protein expression.

2.4.

## Small activating RNAs
In contrast to siRNA- or miRNA-induced gene silencing, chemically synthesized small activating RNAs (saRNAs) can upregulate gene expression. This phenomenon, called RNA activation (RNAa), is a small RNA-directed and Ago2-dependent gene expression modulation process in which short dsRNAs target promoters to enhance the expression of target genes at the transcriptional/epigenetic level ( F) . This regulatory process is highly regulated and evolutionarily conserved. Notably, saRNAs are very useful for developing novel treatments against undruggable diseases , .

2.5.

## Messenger RNAs
An mRNA can deliver genetic information from genes to protein synthesis machinery. Therefore, mRNAs are essential to expressing specific encoded proteins and modulation of posttranslational modifications ( G) . Notably, mRNA therapy, which involves synthesizing and injecting a specific mRNA into a patient's body, allows cells to generate the target therapeutic proteins in vivo, which avoids the massive manufacturing issues related to recombinant proteins. mRNAs function for shorter periods than DNA therapy. Therefore, DNA therapy is suitable for treating inherited diseases caused by genetic mutations, while RNA treatment may be an alternative to treating other diseases.
RNA-based therapeutics provide several unique advantages over conventional antibody and small-molecule drugs. First, RNA therapeutics specifically target a single gene without affecting off-target genes. In contrast, small-molecule drugs frequently exert effects on multiple targets, increasing the possibility for off-target binding of unknown proteins. Second, in contrast to static antibody and small-molecule treatment, RNA-based therapeutics can pharmaceutically evolve their sequence at the same rate as disease progression, such as the progression of pandemic influenza or cancer, thereby facilitating the cure of undruggable diseases. Third, once a delivery system has been developed to transport RNAs to a specific cell type (e.g., delivering siRNAs to hepatocytes), every disease-associated RNA in that cell type is highly likely to achieve targeted delivery.

3.

## Multiple biological barriers to systemic RNA delivery
Systemic injection is an ideal administration route that enables RNAs to reach target cells more efficiently than other routes . However, multiple extracellular and intracellular barriers severely limit their effective delivery. After injection into the blood, RNAs must first overcome extracellular barriers, including endogenous nuclease-induced degradation, kidney filtration, and uptake by the MPS ( A). First, nucleases widely exist in plasma and tissues. The main nuclease in plasma is a 3ʹ‒5ʹ exonuclease, and it can also cleave internucleotide-formed bonds. Therefore, RNAs undergo ribozyme degradation in the blood circulatory system . Second, RNAs are rapidly eliminated from the bloodstream through kidney filtration . The pore size of the glomerular filtration barrier is approximately 8 nm , which allows molecules <50 kDa to pass through the kidney. Most RNAs have a molecular weight of <50 kDa and thus can pass through glomeruli and into urine. In addition, the MPS is critical for clearing foreign pathogens, cellular debris, and apoptotic cells via phagocytosis, and they can engulf many RNAs . The MPS comprises phagocytic cells, including mononuclear phagocytes and tissue macrophages. Tissue macrophages are the most abundant in the liver (Kupffer cells) and spleen. Therefore, RNA molecules show high accumulation levels in these organs after systemic administration.
 Furthermore, the cell membrane is a fluid mosaic membrane composed of a uniform anion phospholipid bilayer with randomly floating proteins ( B). Small, neutral, and slightly hydrophobic molecules (<1000 Da) can passively cross the lipid bilayer. However, all RNA therapeutics are highly negatively charged macromolecules that cannot pass through the cell membrane , and thus must enter cells in a specific vehicle.
Lipid nanovehicles are generally taken up via endocytosis, which involves diverse pathways, such as caveolae-mediated endocytosis (CvME), clathrin-mediated endocytosis (CME) , and macropinocytosis pathways . Therefore, lipid nanovehicle-mediated intracellular transport of RNAs usually begins in early endosomes. During endosomal maturation, the endosomal environment changes from being neutral to being slightly acidic (pH ∼6.5 in early endosomes, pH ∼5.5 in late endosomes, and pH ∼4.7 in lysosomes) ( B). In particular, lysosomes contain various nucleases that degrade RNAs . Thus, RNAs must escape from endosomes before lysosome formation to avoid enzymatic degradation .

4.

## Lipid components used for constructing lipid nanovehicles
Lipid nanovehicles, extensively used for RNA delivery, comprise three essential components: cationic or ionizable cationic lipids, helper lipids, and PEG lipids. These main lipids are introduced herein based on their chemical structures and functions.
4.1.

## Cationic lipids
Cationic lipids bear a permanent positive charge on head groups and thus can interact with anionic RNAs via electrostatic interactions, promoting their encapsulation during lipid nanovehicle synthesis . Moreover, cationic lipids mediate electrostatic interactions between lipid nanovehicles and the cell and endosomal membrane, conducive to their cellular uptake and endosomal escape, respectively . However, cationic lipids induce cytotoxicity, such as hemolysis and undesirable immune stimulation, and rapid plasma clearance .
Based on the chemical structure of their head groups, cationic lipids can be classified into four kinds of lipids: quaternary ammonium, guanidinium, pyridinium and imidazolium lipids ( A). Notably, cationic lipids with delocalized positive charges, such as imidazolium, pyridinium and guanidinium, show less cytotoxicity than quaternary ammonium lipids.
 4.1.1.

## Quaternary ammonium lipids
Since the 1980s, many types of cationic lipids with quaternary ammonium head groups have been synthesized for the delivery of DNAs or RNAs; these include 1,2-di-O-octadecenyl-3-trimethylammonium propane (DOTMA), 1,2-dioleoyloxy-3-[trimethylammonium]-propane (DOTAP) and N,N-dioleoyl-N,N-dimethylammonium chloride (DODAC) ( A) . Quaternary ammonium is an organic cation in which a nitrogen atom with a permanently positive charge is covalently bound to four organic substituents. The positive charge at physiological pH enables quaternary ammonium lipids to bind RNAs in aqueous environments strongly. For example, the in vitro commercialized gene delivery kit Lipofectin comprises DOTMA and a helper lipid, 1,2-dioleoylphosphatidylethanolamine (DOPE), at a mass ratio of 1:1. However, quaternary ammonium lipids might cause potential cytotoxicity (e.g., hemolysis) and undesirable immunostimulation . One approach to this problem is delocalizing the permanently positive charge on the cationic head groups. Therefore, cationic lipids with head groups of guanidinium, pyridinium, or imidazolium have been developed .

4.1.2.

## Guanidinium lipids
Guanidine is a basic functional group with an acid dissociation constant (pKa) value of approximately 13.5. Hence, guanidine can be protonated throughout an extensive pH range and is permanently positively charged at physiological pH. Arginine, a natural amino acid containing a guanidinium group, was the starting material to synthesize guanidinium-containing cationic lipids. In 2006, Santel et al. synthesized a guanidinium lipid l-arginyl-2-amino-N-hexadecyl-N-(9Z)-9-octadecenyl (AtuFECT01) derived from arginine ( A). The lipoplex formulation Atu027 comprising AtuFECT01, commercially available 1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine (DSPE-PEG) and helper lipids DPhyPE was thus developed. Atu027 encapsulating siRNA markedly inhibited protein kinase N3 activity in the endothelium, indicating its use as an effective therapy for pancreatic and prostate cancers in mice , , leading to its evaluation in clinical trials .
The multivalent forms of guanidinium lipids produced by coupling guanidine groups with other moieties, such as amines, show more productive transfection activity and less cytotoxicity than its monovalent analogs . For example, Chen et al. developed a series of guanidinium lipids whose head groups were composed of an l-lysine residue and a guanidinium group, such as N,N-distearyl-N-methyl-N-2 [N′-(N2-guanidino-l-lysinyl)] aminoethyl ammonium chloride (DSGLA) ( A). SiRNA encapsulated by DSGLA-containing lipopolyplexes downregulated pERK protein expression in H460 cells more effectively than their DOTAP-containing counterpart.

4.1.3.

## Pyridinium and imidazolium lipids
In addition to guanidinium head groups, the permanently positive charge can be delocalized by introducing heterocyclic rings, e.g., pyridinium and imidazolium rings. Liu et al. developed a series of cyclen-derived cationic lipids containing an imidazole head group. The hydrophilic head group of cyclen carries four amine groups with distinct pKa values (pKa = 0.8, 1.6, 9.49, and 10.51). The most basic amines (pKa = 9.49 and 10.51) were highly protonated at physiological pH, producing good cationic properties. However, the other two amines exhibited too little basicity to be protonated in acidic endosomes (at pH 5.0–6.5). Therefore, adding imidazole with a pKa value of approximately 6 led to the protonation of the cyclens in the acidic endosomal environment, which promoted their endosomal escape.

4.2.

## Ionizable cationic lipids
Many ionizable cationic lipids bearing ionizable amino head groups have been synthesized to overcome the limitations of cationic lipids for RNA delivery. Ionizable lipids commonly have a pKa value < 7 and are thus neutral under physiological conditions (pH 7.4) and protonated at an acidic pH (pH < 6.0). The lipid nanovehicles formed by ionizable lipids have an overall neutral surface charge and thus exhibit lower toxicity and longer circulation times than cationic lipid-containing counterpart . Furthermore, in acidified endosomes, ionizable lipids become positively charged via protonation and thus interact with negatively charged endosomal membranes, causing membrane destabilization and RNA release into the cytosol .
3-(Dimethylamino)propane-1,2-diyl dioleate (DODAP) was the first ionizable amino lipid employed in an SNALP formulation ( B). In 2001, Semple et al. revealed that ionizable lipid DODAP-loaded SNALPs showed a half-life of 5–6 h. In contrast, their cationic lipid DODAC-containing counterpart showed a shorter half-life of 15 min. This difference was attributed to DODAP having a pKa value 6.6, leading to low surface charge intensity at physiological pH. Subsequently, Heyes et al. revealed that increasing the number of double bonds in the hydrophobic tails of ionizable lipids (increasing the unsaturation degree) promoted the transition into the fusogenic HII hexagonal phase of the SNALP. DODAP has two oil acyl hydrophobic tails, one of which is a C18 chain with a single cis double bond. Endosomal fusion and delivery efficiency were considerably enhanced when the number of double bonds nearby was increased to 2. The resulting lipid, called 1,2-dilinoleyloxy-3-dimethylaminopropane (DLin-DMA), led to effective RNAi in nonhuman primates for the first time after systemic administration with LNPs, becoming the first ionizable lipid to be entered in a clinical trial ( B) .
Next, the linker connecting linoleyl chains to the remaining part of the lipid was optimized. A carbon atom in a ketal ring linking both chains led to substantially increased potency. Moreover, the length of the carbon linker between the head group and the remaining lipid structure exerted an apparent effect on pKa. Furthermore, the spacer of two carbon atoms showed superior potency. Therefore, 2,2-dilinoleyl-4-dimethylaminoethyl-1,3-dioxolane (DLin-KC2-DMA) with a ketal ring and two carbon spacers was identified as the best-performing lipid by screening ( B) . Then, the structure of DLin-KC2-DMA was optimized. Jayaraman et al. found that replacing the ketal ring with a carboxylic ester but maintaining the single carbon bond of KC2 to the linoleyl chains led to higher RNAi efficacy. The lipid (6Z,9Z,28Z,31Z)-heptatriacont-6,9,28,31-tetraene-19-yl 4-(dimethylamino) butanoate (DLin-MC3-DMA) was identified by screening and used in the Onpattro product ( B) .
Although MC3 is not biodegradable, it is safe when administered at 0.3 mg/kg every three weeks in Onpattro. However, biodegradability may be necessary for lipid formulations that require frequent dosing. For instance, mRNA payloads encode a therapeutic protein. It is an effective strategy to insert carboxylic ester groups into ionizable lipids that can be cleaved by esterases. The degradation time depends on the location of the carboxylic ester moiety. L319 was rapidly degraded in vivo, whereas L343 showed prolonged stability, presumably because of steric hindrance preventing the enzyme from reaching the ester. These biodegradable lipids are reported to be more potent than MC3 .
Other lipids known as lipidoids or lipid-like compounds can be easily synthesized via combinational chemistry. A unique advantage of this approach is that numerous lipids can be developed by assembling changeable building modules, which, combined with high-throughput screening, has allowed the rapid discovery of potent ionizable lipids , . The first lipidoid, 98N12-5, transports siRNA to hepatocytes and endothelial cells , but high doses are required. The later generation of lipidoids, such as 1-[2-[bis(2-hydroxydodecyl)amino]ethyl-[2-[4-[2-[bis(2-hydroxydodecyl)amino]ethyl]piperazin-1-yl]ethyl]amino]dodecan-2-ol (C12-200), shows higher potency ( B) .

4.3.

## Helper lipids
Helper lipids, such as phosphatidylcholines (PCs), DOPE, and cholesterol, are crucial formulation components that promote formulation stability, membrane fusion, and endosome escape .
4.3.1.

## Phosphatidylcholines
PCs, one of the major components of cell membranes, easily form a bilayer phase due to their cylindrical geometry. 1,2-Dioleoyl-sn-glycerol-3-phosphatidylcholine (DOPC) with unsaturated tails has a low phase transition temperature (Tm) and exists in a fluid state at physiological temperature, making the lipid nanovehicles it forms susceptible to serum protein opsonization . Furthermore, DOPC is less effective in transfection than DOPE because it tends to form a stable structure ( C) . Indeed, Hattori et al. found that a DOTAP plus DOPC formulation showed transfection rates inferior to those of DOTAP plus DOPE because the DOPC-containing lipoplexes were trapped in late endosomes. In contrast, the DOPE-loaded lipoplexes rapidly escaped from endosomes.
PCs with saturated tails, such as 1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DSPC) and 1,2-dipalmitoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DPPC), have a relatively high Tm and are commonly used for the preparation of highly stable LNPs ( C) . The Cullis group found that in blank LNP systems, DSPC–cholesterol existed in the outer layers of LNPs, whereas DSPC–cholesterol was partially internalized with siRNAs into siRNA-loaded LNPs. By participating in the formation of siRNA-lipid complexes, DSPC increased siRNA encapsulation into LNPs . DSPC is a helper lipid in the marketed LNP products mRNA-1273, patisiran, and BNT162b2.

4.3.2.

## Dioleoyl phosphatidylethanolamine
DOPE has a relatively small phosphoethanolamine headgroup that binds to two bulky and unsaturated oleoyl chains via an ester linker ( C). Because of its low Tm (30 °C), DOPE can enter an inverted hexagonal (HII) phase at physiological temperature, which is conducive to membrane fusion and bilayer disruption . Thus, DOPE is commonly described as a fusogenic lipid. However, DOPE-containing vectors have relatively low colloidal stability because of bilayer fusion-induced size increase during storage and enhanced interplay with serum proteins in the circulatory system . Furthermore, excessive fusion leads to undesirable cytotoxicity. DOPE is a primary component of several lipoplex formulations on the market, e.g., lipofectamine (a mixture of 3:1 (w/w) of N-[2-({2,5-bis [(3-aminopropyl)amino]-1-oxopentyl}amino)ethyl]-N,N-dimethyl-2,3-bis[(1-oxo-9 octadecenyl)oxy] salt with hydrogen chloride (DOSPA) and DOPE) and lipofectin (a mixture of 1:1 (w/w) of DOTMA and DOPE) , .

4.3.3.

## Cholesterol
By filling in gaps between phospholipids, cholesterol stabilizes lipid bilayers in the circulatory system ( C) , . For example, incorporating cholesterol into liposomes increased their stable time in the bloodstream from several minutes to over 6 h . In addition, cholesterol promotes interactions between lipoplexes and cellular or endosomal membranes . As a helper lipid in LNP formulations, cholesterol generally performs better than DOPE despite its lower fusogenic tendency . The presence of cholesterol and PCs leads to the formation of stable bilayers and is frequently used in LNP formulations .

4.4.

## PEG-lipids
PEG-lipids comprise a hydrophilic PEG polymer covalently bound to a hydrophobic lipid anchor; they include DSPE-PEG and N-[(methoxy poly (ethylene glycol)2000)carbamoyl]-1,2-dimyristyloxlpropyl-3-amine (PEG-C-DMA) ( D). The incorporation of a PEG-lipid into lipid nanovehicles increases colloidal stability in vitro. For example, without a PEG-lipid, the ethanolic environment and low pH of the LNP manufacturing process can accelerate particle fusion to induce particle size amplification. Moreover, PEG-lipids in lipid nanovehicles can prevent serum protein opsonization and MPS clearance and thus prolong their circulation time in vivo. A longer retention time in the blood means that the particles are more likely to distribute to disease sites, such as solid tumors, via the enhanced penetration and retention (EPR) effect.
However, a PEG polymer can form a steric barrier that prevents cellular uptake and endosome escape, decreasing RNA delivery efficiency . Various strategies have been developed to address this dilemma. First, PEG can be adopted at a low mole percentage. For example, Semple et al. revealed that a 5-fold increase in siRNA's in vivo delivery efficiency was achieved when the PEG content was decreased from 10% to ∼1.5%. Second, a PEG-lipid with a short hydrophobic tail can be used. For instance, PEG-C-DMA carries a relatively short myristic lipid anchor (14 carbons), not a stearoyl (18 carbons) tail, as in DSPE-PEG. Thus, PEG-C-DMA gradually detaches from the LNP surface in the circulatory system . This detachment of PEG-C-DMA reduces the PEG density, which is conducive to liposome interaction with cellular or endosomal membranes and, thus, better intracellular delivery. Third, PEG-lipids can be covalently decorated with ligands to target cell-specific membrane receptors to increase the cellular uptake of the lipid nanovehicles. Lipopolyplexes bearing DSPE-PEG-anisamide targeted the sigma receptor on B16F10 cells and showed efficient intracellular delivery of siRNA .

5.

## Fabrication methods and corresponding lipid nanovehicles
5.1.

## Fabrication methods
Various methods, such as simple mixing, thin-film hydration, precomplexation followed by liposomal coating, ethanol dilution, and T-mixing or microfluidics-mixing, have been used for lipid nanovehicle construction. Among these processes, the T-mixing or microfluidics-mixing technique is a scalable production method. Notably, fabrication methods exert crucial effects on lipid-based nanostructures and RNA encapsulation efficiency.
5.1.1.

## Simple mixing of RNAs with preformed liposomes
The simplest way to prepare lipoplexes is by incubating preformed cationic liposomes with an RNA solution ( A). This method is applicable for liposomes with no or low PEG coverage on their surface, facilitating the sandwiching of RNAs between multilayered lipid structures. For instance, complexes were formed by incubating siRNAs with DOTAP–cholesterol liposomes containing liver-targeting ligands . After complexation with siRNA, the liposome was increased from 150–175 nm to 180–200 nm, indicating a multilayer formation. The surface potential declined from 50 mV to 40 mV, indicating that some of the siRNA molecules remained on the external leaflets of the liposomes. SDS-PAGE assays showed that a high percentage of siRNAs was protected from degradation in human serum, suggesting that most of the siRNAs had been encapsulated inside the liposome. In addition, cationic liposomes containing low superficial PEG coverage also formed protective complexes. For example, the size of preformed cationic liposomes comprising AtuFECT01/DPhyPE and 1 mol% DSPE-PEG with an initial size of ∼60 nm was approximately doubled after complexing with siRNAs . However, this method does not apply to liposomes with high PEG densities because RNAs bind only to the external surface of liposomes under such conditions ( A).
 
5.1.2.

## Surface modification of preformed lipoplexes with PEG (PEGylation)
Although PEGylation prevents the formation of protective lipid multilayers via steric hindrance, non-PEGylated cationic liposomes can be easily eliminated by MPS in vivo. Decorating PEG chains on the surface of preformed non-PEGylated lipoplexes can effectively prevent their phagocytosis, and these chains can be added by incubating the lipoplexes with a micellar suspension of PEG-lipids at high temperature; this is called the postinsertion method ( B) . PEG chains can shield the surface charge of the liposomes. Therefore, PEG-lipid insertion can be confirmed by measuring the zeta potential. Alternatively, PEGylation can be achieved by covalently conjugating PEG chains to preformed lipoplexes, although this technique is only sometimes used .

5.1.3.

## Thin-film hydration method
RNA molecules are negatively charged and thus cannot cross the lipid bilayer of preformed PEGylated cationic liposomes. However, when RNA molecules are complexed within the inner leaflet of liposomes, they are protected from premature liberation or degradation in the blood circulatory system. An easy method to synthesize these complexes involves hydrating a dry, thin lipid film using a concentrated RNA solution, through which approximately one-half of the RNA molecules are encapsulated and located on the liposome inner leaflet ( C) . This encapsulation occurred because negatively charged RNA molecules are distributed evenly over all cationic charges in the liposome's inner and outer leaflets.

5.1.4.

## Precomplexation of RNAs followed by liposome coating
RNA molecules can be complexed with polymers (e.g., protamine and poly (lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA)) or inorganic nanoparticles [e.g., calcium phosphate (CaP) and silicon dioxide (SiO2)] followed by liposome coating and final PEG grafting ( D). Pre-encapsulation of RNA molecules into nanoparticle cores enhances the encapsulation efficiency within liposomes. In addition, CaP cores can be rapidly dissolved in acidic endosomes, induce nanoparticle disassembly, and increase osmotic pressure to induce endosome swelling, thereby promoting RNA release into the cytoplasm . Furthermore, PEGylated liposome coatings protect the nanocores from degradation in the circulatory system .

5.1.5.

## Ethanol dilution method
In addition to the thin-film hydration method, the ethanol dilution method distributes RNA molecules over all cationic charges in a highly PEGylated cationic liposome ( E). Through this approach, PEGylated cationic liposomes and RNAs are mixed in a buffer with a critical concentration of ethanol (∼40%), which destabilizes liposomes and allows RNA molecules to penetrate the lipid bilayer. Then, the ethanol is eliminated by tangential filtration or dialysis, leading to the generation of closed PEGylated liposomes. Similar to the direct hydration method, this method induces 50% encapsulation of RNA molecules into liposomes, and the RNAs have been confirmed to be evenly distributed along all cationic charges of the liposomes. Notably, a suitable ethanol concentration must be used when applying this method. An ethanol concentration that is too low results in insufficient liposome destabilization, while an ethanol concentration that is too high induces large-scale liposome aggregation.

5.1.6.

## T-mixing or microfluidics-mixing technique
LNPs are generally prepared by a T-mixing or microfluidics-mixing technique ( F). Briefly, an ethanol solution of lipids is mixed with an RNA aqueous solution at an acidic pH using a T-tube or microfluidic mixer. Then, ionizable lipids are protonated and thus form complexes with negatively charged RNAs, as the overall solubility of the lipids is decreased due to ethanol dilution. This complexation leads to the construction of unstable nascent lipid-RNA particles that tend to aggregate until they are diluted in the neutral buffer. This technique applies to many formulation conditions and RNA types and exhibits high RNA encapsulation efficiency (>80%). In contrast to the aqueous compartment surrounded by a lipid bilayer observed in classical liposomes, the formed LNPs have a solid core comprising ionizable cationic lipids and their complexes with RNA payloads, which are coated by a monolayer of structural lipids (i.e., cholesterol, phospholipids) and PEG-lipids , , . The technique has been used to produce Onpattro and several other LNPs in the clinical stage of development .

5.2.

## Corresponding lipid nanovehicles
A series of lipid nanovehicles can be formed using the abovementioned fabrication methods. Indeed, based on their physical structures, these nanostructures can be classified into five main types, i.e., lipoplexes, SNALPs, lipopolyplexes, MCNPs, and LNPs. Accordingly, the fabrication methods and critical characteristics of these lipid-based nanostructures are summarized in .
 5.2.1.

## Lipoplexes
Lipoplexes with a diameter of approximately 60–200 nm are commonly fabricated by incubating preformed cationic liposomes with an RNA solution followed by PEG grafting, as indicated in A and B . Lipoplexes generally form multilamellar structures in which RNAs are embedded between adjacent lipid bilayers ( A). The typical sandwich structure of lipoplexes can be observed in the cryogenic transmission electron microscopy (Cryo-TEM) images ( B) . Several commercially available lipoplex formulations, e.g., Lipofectin, Lipofectamine, and LipoRNAiMAX, are frequently used for in vitro gene transfection .
 
5.2.2.

## Stabilized nucleic acid-lipid particles
SNALPs with a particle size of approximately 70–150 nm are constructed by the ethanol dilution method, as shown in E , , , , . Only liposomes containing ionizable lipids (i.e., they are cationic at pH 4 and neutral at pH 7.4) can form SNALPs ( C). Preformed liposomes are mixed with an RNA solution in acid ethanol-containing complexation buffer (pH 4–5). Due to membrane permeability, RNAs penetrate the liposome interior and adhere to the positively charged internal leaflet via electrostatic adsorption. After dialysis against a neutral buffer (pH 7.4), the overall charge on the external surface of these liposomes becomes neutral, causing residual unencapsulated RNAs to detach. The resulting SNALPs exhibit a siRNA encapsulation efficiency higher than 90%. Cryo-TEM images confirmed that SNALPs comprise a hollow core surrounded by a lipid bilayer ( D) .

5.2.3.

## Lipopolyplexes
Lipopolyplexes are liposomes that enwrap polyplexes (cationic polymer/RNA complexes) ( E) and generally have a diameter of approximately 100–200 nm . The concept of lipopolyplexes was derived from plasmid DNA delivery by liposomes . Lipopolyplexes are fabricated by coating a cationic lipid bilayer onto anionic polyplexes or vice versa through electrostatic interactions via the method shown in D. PEG grafting is commonly required for both in vitro and in vivo stability . In addition, lipopolyplexes can be prepared by directly hydrating lipid membranes with polyplex dispersions . Shadow area within the cores of lipopolyplexes confirmed the presence of polyplexes as indicated in Cryo-TEM images ( F) .

5.2.4.

## Membrane/core nanoparticles
MCNPs comprise an inorganic nanoparticle core surrounded by a lipid bilayer shell ( G). The cores generally consist of porous CaP or SiO2 nanoparticles, whose porous surfaces can be loaded with large amounts of RNAs. The bilayer comprises homogenous (symmetric) or mixed (asymmetric) lipids . Symmetric MCNPs are prepared using the method indicated in D, with lipid bilayers coated onto preformed siRNA-loaded nanocores. The fabrication of asymmetric MCNPs is based on a similar procedure, except that the inner and outer layers are coated sequentially. As shown in H, CaP core-containing asymmetric MCNPs showed a clear core-shell structure ( H) . The size of MCNPs depends on the size of the nanoparticle core. In some cases, the MCNP size is tiny (∼20–30 nm), conducive to tissue penetration and cellular uptake for high RNA delivery efficiency . However, the MCNP synthesis procedure is somewhat complicated because the nanocore and shell must be synthesized.

5.2.5.

## Lipid nanoparticles
LNPs typically consist of ionizable lipids, cholesterol, phospholipids (e.g., PCs), and PEG-lipids. In contrast to traditional liposomes, LNPs form a micellar structure within the internal core, thereby showing more rigid morphology and better kinetic stability than traditional liposomes ( I). This supposed structure is supported by the “solid-core” morphology of LNPs as shown in the Cryo-TEM images ( J) . Furthermore, LNPs can be prepared via fully scalable methods, e.g., a T-mixing or microfluidics-mixing technique ( F), leading to homogeneous LNPs with RNA entrapment efficiencies higher than 8%. Indeed, LNPs of specific sizes can be precisely produced by controlling the microfluidic operating parameters, such as the total flow rate and flow rate ratio.

6.

## Lipid nanovehicle design for overcoming multiple barriers to systemic RNA delivery
As mentioned above, systemic RNA delivery must overcome multiple extracellular and intracellular barriers ( ). In the blood circulatory system (an extracellular barrier), entrapment by lipid nanovehicles effectively protects RNAs from nuclease degradation and MPS phagocytosis and prevents elimination through the kidneys because the size of the nanovehicles greatly exceeds the pore size of glomeruli (∼8 nm) ; however, as foreign particles, nanovehicles can be phagocytized by the MPS, leading to low blood retention and limiting the amount of loaded RNA delivered to target tissues. Therefore, various strategies have been developed to increase the blood pharmacokinetics of lipid nanovehicles; these methods include surface PEGylation, modulation of physicochemical properties, and nanoprimer pretreatment. In addition, to overcome intracellular barriers, the surface properties and formulation constituents of lipid nanovehicles have been extensively tailored to enhance cellular endocytosis and endosome escape.
6.1.

## Lipid nanovehicle design for prolonged circulation in the blood
A prolonged blood circulation time is a favorable property through which liposomes have more opportunities to carry RNAs to target tissues. Liposomes are eliminated mainly via postopsonization macrophage phagocytosis in the MPS in the circulatory systems. Through opsonization, plasma proteins are adsorbed to the surface of a foreign nanoparticle. This process thus depends on the properties and components of the nanoparticle formulation. Therefore, nanoproperties of lipid nanovehicles have been optimized for prolonged blood retention. In addition, by occupying the MPS in advance, nanoprimers improve the blood pharmacokinetics of subsequently administered nanovehicles.
6.1.1.

## PEGylation
Surface decoration of lipid nanovehicles with PEG forms a hydrated layer to prevent lipid nanovehicles from aggregation, opsonization, and phagocytosis via steric hindrance, leading to prolonged retention in blood. In particular, the modification density of PEG exerts a crucial effect on nanovehicle function. A high PEG density (>8 mol%) destroys the structure of liposomal vesicles, inducing the liposome-to-micelle transition . However, at low surface PEG density (<4 mol%), PEG chains form a ‘mushroom’ configuration with gaps in the PEG protective layer, and opsonin proteins can freely move through these gaps to bind the liposome surface , . Therefore, only when the PEG density ranges from 5 to 7 mol% can PEG chains exhibit the “brush” configuration that effectively covers the liposome surface .
Although PEGylation is conducive to prolonged blood circulation, PEG polymer forms a steric barrier that prevents cellular uptake and endosome escape of nanovehicles. Phenomena are commonly known as the “PEG dilemma” . Various strategies have been proposed to resolve this problem. First, PEG-C-DMA with short myristyl (14 carbons) hydrophobic tails, compared to stearoyl (18 carbons) anchor for DSPE-PEG, gradually detaches from the LNP surface in the circulatory system to reduce PEG density, facilitating the subsequent interaction of the LNPs with cell and endosome membranes. SNALP formulated with DLin-KC2-DMA, cholesterol, DPPC, and PEG-C-DMA (57.1/7.1/34.3/1.4, mol/mol/mol/mol) showed in vivo activity at a low siRNA dose (0.01 mg/kg) in nonhuman primates . Second, modification of liposomes with a stimulus-responsive detachable PEG shell is also helpful. Methoxy-PEG5 k-polymethacryloyl sulfadimethoxine (mPEG5 k-SDM8) can be responsively released from the liposome surface at pH 6.5, which mimics the tumor microenvironment . Accordingly, detachment of the PEG shell exposes the cell-penetrating peptide, which is conducive to intracellular delivery of encapsulated RNA or small-molecule drugs.
Notably, PEGylated lipid nanovehicles bind immunoglobulins (Igs) on reactive B cells in the marginal zones of the spleen, thereby stimulating the secretion of anti-PEG IgM. Accordingly, once a second dose is administered, the previously produced anti-PEG IgM adheres to PEG on nanovehicles, and the complement system is activated, leading to increased phagocytosis by macrophage cells , , . This undesired immunogenic reaction to PEG is commonly known as the “accelerated blood clearance (ABC) phenomenon,” which increases the clearance of PEGylated nanovehicles in vivo. PEG-lipids with short hydrophobic tails, e.g., PEG-C-DMA, can dissociate rapidly from the lipid bilayer, reducing the occurrence of the ABC phenomenon .

6.1.2.

## Optimizing the physicochemical properties of nanovehicles
Particle size exerts essential effects on the long-circulating properties of nanovehicles. First, the nanovehicles must be large enough to prevent renal filtration. Generally, nanovehicles smaller than 10 nm tend to be eliminated from the body via renal excretion . Second, the size of the nanovehicles must be small enough to reduce opsonization and MPS clearance. For larger nanovehicles (>200 nm), a low radius of curvature contributes to the adsorption of opsonins and protein assembly into bulkier complexes , . Therefore, a spherical nanovehicle with a particle size ranging from 10 to 200 nm is optimal .
Surface charges are also crucial in determining the in vivo fate of nanovehicles. Negative or positive surface charges of nanovehicles promote complement activation and adsorption of plasma proteins and thus accelerate macrophage phagocytosis and clearance from the circulatory system . Hence, neutral nanovehicles generally circulate in blood longer than charged nanovehicles. SNALPs formulated with DODAC (a cationic lipid) and either PEG-CerC14 or PEG-CerC20 showed significantly shorter half-lives (∼15 min and 2–3 h, respectively) than SNALPs formulated with DODAP (an ionizable lipid) and either PEG-CerC14 or PEG-CerC20 (∼5–6 h and 10–12 h, respectively) . These results were attributed to the neutral charge of the ionizable lipids at physiological pH.
The elastic modulus of liposomes also dramatically influences their retention in the blood circulatory system . A higher elastic modulus indicates less compressible interfaces that resist opsonization and is conducive to prolonged circulation. The addition of cholesterol markedly increases the elastic modulus of a lipid bilayer. For example, the elastic area dilation modulus (KA) values of SOPC and SOPC: cholesterol (1/1, mol/mol) are ∼200 and 1200 mN/m, respectively . Similarly, sphingomyelin: cholesterol (1/1, mol/mol) bilayers are essentially incompressible (KA = 1800 mN/m) and are retained in the bloodstream for a prolonged time, laying the foundation for the development of a vincristine liposome . Therefore, cholesterol, which is extensively used as a helper lipid in lipid nanovehicles, contributes to their retention in blood.

6.1.3.

## Nanoprimer pretreatment
Kupffer cells in the liver occupy 80%–90% of the overall macrophage population in the MPS of the body , . In particular, liver sinusoidal endothelial cells (LSECs) and Kupffer cells take up a large proportion of nanoparticles after systemic administration, decreasing their circulation time. To reduce nanovehicle capture, Saunders et al. designed a liposome with a highly negative surface charge (−99.4 mV) and large size (259 nm). After intravenous injection, liposomes with these unique physicochemical properties transiently occupied the MPS and thus decreased the uptake of siRNA-loaded LNPs by Kupffer cells and LSECs, prolonging their retention in blood. Ultimately, through the action of a nanoprimer, LNPs carrying human erythropoietin (hEPO) mRNA or factor VII (FVII) siRNA increased hEPO production (by 32%) or enhanced FVII silencing (by 49%).

6.2.

## Lipid nanovehicle design for enhanced cell internalization
RNAs take effect within target cells; however, as negatively charged macromolecules, they cannot cross cell membranes and depend on vehicles to enter cells. Hence, nanoproperties of lipid nanovehicles have been extensively tailored for increased cell internalization of RNAs.
6.2.1.

## Ligand functionalization
Ligand decoration is commonly utilized to promote the cellular uptake of lipid nanovehicles via ligand-receptor interactions . Ligands, such as monoclonal antibodies, antibody fragments, proteins, peptides, carbohydrates, glycoproteins, and vitamins, must couple the nanovehicle surface to target cells overexpressing particular surface receptors. Among all the parameters, the specificity of the cell surface receptors and targeting ligands influence cellular uptake efficiency.
The ideal receptors should be highly expressed on target cells and at negligible or low levels on normal tissues or cells. For instance, asialoglycoprotein receptors, exclusively expressed on the hepatocyte surface, bind and internalize β-d-galactose ligands . Therefore, galactose-modified lipoplexes loaded with plasmid DNA generated one order of magnitude higher gene expression in the liver than was generated by unmodified lipoplexes . In another study, after systemic injection, galactose-decorated lipoplexes loaded with siRNA led to a 1.9-fold higher siRNA distribution in liver parenchymal cells than was realized with galactose-free lipoplexes . Similarly, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) in breast cancer, folate receptor in ovarian cancer, and α4β1 in multiple myeloma have been excellent targets on tumor cells, resulting in considerable success in preclinical studies .
Antibodies or antibody fragments show higher affinity and specificity for target receptors than other ligands. Compared with whole antibodies, frequently used in the early days of research, antibody fragments possess lower immunogenicity and superior pharmacokinetic properties and thus are preferred for clinical use . Peptides and peptidomimetics are preferred targeting ligands owing to their easy generation, low cost, and increased resistance to enzymatic cleavage . In particular, many peptides and peptidomimetics with high targeting activity can be identified by screening via phage display technology . Cyclic RGD-modified lipoplexes effectively delivered anti-signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) siRNA into melanoma cells via integrin receptor-mediated endocytosis, leading to a 2.1-fold increase in cell apoptosis compared to that induced by unmodified lipoplexes . Yang et al. modified lipoplexes with dual peptides specifically targeted to low-density lipoprotein receptor (Angiopep-2) or neuropilin-1 receptor (tLyP-1) and showed higher uptake into glioma cells via specific receptor-mediated endocytosis than nonmodified and single-peptide-modified lipoplexes. Ultimately, lipoplexes enhanced the gene silencing and antiproliferation activity of the loaded vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) siRNA and docetaxel, producing synergistic antitumor efficacy. In addition, several other types of ligands, e.g., sugars, proteins, and vitamins, have been employed in lipid nanovehicle functionalization for targeted cellular internalization .
However, ligand modification has not always translated into positive outcomes. For example, Goren et al. found that liposomes functionalized with a monoclonal antibody (N-12A5) against the erbB-2 oncoprotein showed no efficacy against breast cancer cells owing to their inefficient internalization. In addition, Gabizon et al. reported that modification with folic acid promoted liver uptake of liposomes, thereby accelerating their clearance from circulation. These results were attributed to changes to the surface properties of lipid nanovehicles caused by ligand modification, and these changes stimulated the adsorption of plasma proteins to generate a protein corona. The protein corona not only accelerated nanovehicle elimination from the circulatory system by intensifying macrophage uptake but also compromised the targeting ability by shielding ligands. An effective strategy to resolve this dilemma is the reversible shielding of targeting ligands using linkers that can be cleaved in response to extracellular stimulus, e.g., an acidic microenvironment or a tumor-associated enzyme , , , . Overall, the influence of ligand decoration on the in vivo fate of lipid nanovehicles still needs to be carefully evaluated.

6.2.2.

## Cell membrane fusion functionalization
Fusogenic lipid nanovehicles do not require receptor-mediated endocytosis and directly introduce RNAs into the cytoplasm, leading to enhanced cellular internalization. For example, Kim et al. developed a fusogenic MCNP comprising a porous silicon nanocore and an external sheath of homing peptides. Through the guidance of the peptide ligands, the MCNPs specifically target macrophages and release their siRNA payload into the cytoplasm via membrane fusion. Efficient silencing of IRF5, a proinflammatory marker, increased the clearance ability of macrophages, thereby prolonging the survival of mice with Staphylococcus aureus pneumonia. Furthermore, researchers discovered that the fusogenic feature of MCNPs was due to the specific proportions of structural lipid (DMPC), cationic lipid (DOTAP), and PEG-lipid (DSPE-PEG) components . DMPC was the main structural component, and its phase transition temperature (24 °C) was lower than the body temperature (37 °C). This property enabled the lipids to undergo a fluidic liquid–crystal phase transition, facilitating MCNP fusion with cell membranes. In addition, the positive charge of DOTAP promoted uptake and fusion owing to the electrostatic attraction between the MCNPs and the anionic plasma membrane. Ultimately, the PEG-lipid DSPE-PEG can dehydrate the gaps between the fusogenic MCNP lipid bilayer and the plasma membrane, making lipid fusion structurally and energetically favorable.

6.2.3.

## Biomimetic modification
Biomimetic camouflage strategies leverage the inherent ability of cells to interact with their environment, bestowing traditional nanoparticles with cell-targeting function . For example, a previous study reported that adhesion molecules with homotypic adhesion domains on the cancer cell membrane, e.g., N-cadherin, galectin-3, or epithelial cell adhesion molecule, facilitated multicellular aggregation formation. Thus, coating with cancer cell membrane endows the lipid nanovehicles with homotypic targeting capability by completely replicating cell surface antigens . For example, Liu et al. constructed azidosugar-loaded pH-sensitive liposomes fused with cancer cell membranes for tumor cell-specific glycan engineering. Notably, through multiple membrane receptors, membrane-camouflaged liposomes showed higher glycan-labeling efficiency than single-ligand-modified liposomes. This homotypic targeting strategy can also enhance cell internalization of RNA molecules.

6.3.

## Lipid nanovehicle design for promoting endosomal escape
Except for lipid nanovehicles with cell membrane-fusing capability, lipid nanovehicles are generally delivered into early endosomes, which then fuse with late endosomes and lysosomes. Sahay et al. reported that approximately 70% of internalized siRNA cargoes underwent exocytosis via LNP efflux out of late endosomes/lysosomes, mediated by a lysosomal surface protein of Niemann Pick type C1. The remainder of the endocytosed siRNA undergoes lysosomal degradation or enters other nonproductive pathways. By directly monitoring gold nanoparticles covalently modified to siRNAs, Gilleron et al. found that endosomal escape of siRNAs was rare (<2%) and occurred in a narrow time window when the LNPs were located in early and late endosomes. In contrast, a higher percentage of mRNAs than siRNAs have been reported to be released from endosomes, with some studies reporting 15%, which depended on ionizable lipid fusogenicity , . These results demonstrate that endosomal escape is a crucial efficiency-limiting factor for successful RNA delivery. Various strategies have been developed for increasing the endosomal escape efficiency of lipid nanovehicles, and they are described in the following subsections.
6.3.1.

## Endosomal membrane destabilization and pore formation
The most commonly proposed factors destabilizing endosomal membranes are cationic charge and membrane-destabilizing peptides. Moreover, persistent membrane destabilization induces pore formation, allowing smaller particles or molecules to leak from endosomes into the cytoplasm.
Since the external leaflet of endosomal membranes comprises negatively charged phospholipids, the interplay of intraluminal lipoplexes with the endosomal membrane is thought to cause anionic phospholipids to flip from the cytosolic side to the intraluminal side of an endosome , . The charge-neutralized ion pair leads to a nonlamellar phase transition, destabilizing the membrane. Cationic lipids with quaternary amine groups can confer a permanent positive charge, such as DOTMA and DOTAP. Alternatively, ionizable lipids, including DODAP and DLin-DMA, can endow liposome membranes with a cationic charge in acidified endosomes, and this type of membrane destabilization occurs mainly in acid endosomes. In addition, some amphiphilic peptides with lysine residues (e.g., KALA (WEAKLAKALAKALAKHLAKALAKALKA) and K5) and cell-penetrating peptides (CPPs) (e.g., TAT and other arginine-rich CPPs) can cause membrane destabilization via cationic interplay with the endosome membrane . Miura et al. reported a KALA-modified lipopolyplex that allowed the pDNA payload to be efficiently released into the cytoplasm in marrow-derived dendritic cells. Ultimately, the KALA-modified lipopolyplex showed transfection activity ∼ two orders of magnitude higher than its R8-modified counterpart.

6.3.2.

## Endosomal membrane rupture
Li et al. , developed an MCNP comprising a CaP core coated with a lipid bilayer for siRNA delivery. They suggested that via the CaP material was dissolved in acidic endosomes after entering the cells via endocytosis, leading to liposome disintegration . Then, the released calcium and phosphate ions enhanced the osmotic pressure, leading to endosome swelling and bursting. Accordingly, siRNA molecules, calcium ions, and phosphate ions were released into the cytosol. Notably, sufficient CaP must be transported to the same endosome simultaneously for osmotic pressure-induced membrane rupture, which is often tricky under in vivo conditions .

6.3.3.

## Endosomal membrane fusion
Fusion with the endosomal membrane promotes lipid nanovehicles to release payloads into the cytosol, and fusion is mediated mainly by fusogenic lipids and cationic lipids. When reaching an endosome, cationic lipids interact with the negatively charged endosomal membrane via electrostatic interactions, causing membrane destabilization. Then, after acidification, fusogenic helper lipids such as DOPE transform a lipid nanovehicle in the liquid phase into an inverted hexagonal configuration, thereby facilitating its insertion into the endosomal membrane and enabling fusion . In addition, cholesterol has been added to lipid nanovehicles to promote fusion in a pH-independent manner . Starting with DLin-DMA, Semple et al. used the pKa and bilayer-to-hexagonal HⅡ transition temperature (TBH, an indicator of membrane fusion activity) parameters to guide the design of an ionizable cationic lipid with superior delivery ability. The best-performing lipid was DLin-KC2-DMA, formulated with DSPC/cholesterol/PEG lipid into an SNALP. The SNALP showed in vivo activity at siRNA doses of as low as 0.1 mg/kg in nonhuman primates and 0.01 mg/kg in rodents.

7.

## Lipid nanovehicle-based RNA drugs on the market and in the clinical trial stage
Three lipid nanovehicle-based RNA therapeutics have been approved for clinical application, including Alnylam patisiran, Pfizer BNT162b2, and Moderna mRNA-1273. Patisiran is an siRNA drug used for treating transthyretin-induced amyloidosis, while the other two drugs are mRNA vaccines for preventing COVID-19. Patisiran is the first nonviral delivery vector approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for RNA delivery, marking the initiation of nucleic acid nanomedicine.
Among all three FDA-approved products, only patisiran is administered by systemic injection, which was thus emphatically introduced. In addition to siRNA molecules, the specific components of patisiran include DLin-MC3-DMA (an ionizable cationic lipid), DSPC (a helper lipid), cholesterol (a helper lipid) and PEG-C-DMG (a PEG-lipid) . DLin-MC3-DMA with a pKa value of 6.2–6.5 exhibited a positive charge at pH 4, facilitating the encapsulation of negatively charged siRNAs. As mentioned above, by taking part in the formation of siRNA-lipid complexes, DSPC plus cholesterol increased siRNA encapsulation efficiency into LNPs . Then, when the medium pH was converted to the physiological value (pH 7.4), the surface charge of the LNPs was neutral. The inclusion of cholesterol enhanced LNP stability in the circulatory system . The introduction of PEG-C-DMG prolonged the blood retention of patisiran. Moreover, PEG-C-DMG with short acyl chains (C14) gradually dissociated from the LNP surface, inducing endogenous apolipoprotein E (ApoE) adsorption . After accumulating in the liver, ApoE promoted hepatocyte LNP uptake via ApoE receptor-mediated endocytosis. Then, in acidic endosomes, DLin-MC3-DMA was protonated and thus destabilized the endosomal membrane, and when combined with the membrane-fusing action of cholesterol, these LNPs escaped from endosomes. Accordingly, the released siRNA inhibited hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis (hATTR) mRNA expression in the cytoplasm, downregulating the TTR protein misfolding rate . A study with rats using a 14C-labeled ionizable lipid (14C-MC3) reported that approximately 90% of the radioactive lipid that had been injected was detected in the liver at 4 h after systemic injection with a single dose of patisiran, indicating the excellent liver targeting of these LNPs .
The list of lipid nanovehicle-based RNA drugs in the clinical trial stage includes siRNAs, mRNAs, miRNAs, ASOs, and so on ( ). Among these lipid nanovehicles, LNPs have been the most extensively used (21/26) because of their unique clinical advantages. As mentioned above, LNPs contain a micellar internal core and exhibit a rigid morphology, resulting in higher kinetic stability. Moreover, they can be controllably prepared via a large-scale method, such as T-mixing or microfluidics-mixing technique, showing RNA encapsulation efficiencies higher than 80%
 
8.

## Challenges
As shown in , numerous lipid nanovehicle-based RNA drugs are being evaluated in clinical trials, confirming the great potential of lipid nanovehicles for RNA delivery. However, only three LNP-based RNA drugs, including Alnylam patisiran, Moderna mRNA-1273, and Pfizer BNT162b2, have been approved by the FDA for clinical use. The data reveal that the clinical transformation of lipid nanovehicles is hindered by significant challenges, especially those related to biosafety and targeting beyond the liver.
8.1.

## Biosafety
Safety is paramount compared to the potency of lipid nanovehicles, and it is the deciding factor for the courses of drug and drug delivery system development, clinical translation, and ultimate success. Lipid nanovehicle- or RNA payload-induced cytotoxicity, immunotoxicity, or immunogenicity severely hinders clinical application.
8.1.1.

## Cytotoxicity
Under some circumstances, cationic lipids cause cytotoxicity by inhibiting cell mitosis, forming vacuoles in the cytoplasm, or damaging crucial cellular proteins, e.g., protein kinase C . The hydrophilic head groups of cationic lipids exert important effects on their cytotoxicity. For example, quaternary ammonium head group-bearing cationic lipids are more toxic than those with tertiary amine head groups .

8.1.2.

## Immunotoxicity
RNAs, such as siRNAs and mRNAs, can activate the innate immune system and stimulate the secretion of cytokines in vivo and in vitro , . The potentially deleterious results of these responses are exemplified by mice treated with immunostimulatory siRNAs that showed signs of toxicity, including elevated levels of serum alanine and aspartate aminotransferases and reduced numbers of lymphocytes and platelets , . Notably, RNAs’ sequence and chemical nature dictate their gene regulation efficiency and ability to stimulate immune responses . Accordingly, intense interest is focused on identifying chemical modifications that can preserve RNA modulation efficacy while not stimulating immune responses. A 2′-O-methyl decoration has been shown to attenuate the immunostimulatory effects of siRNA greatly . MRNA modified with N (1)-methylpseudouridine (m1Ψ) alone or in combination with 5-methylcytidine (m5C) induced significantly higher reporter gene expression than pseudouridine (Ψ) or m5C/Ψ-decorated mRNA . Furthermore, m5C/m1Ψ-modified mRNA induced lower intracellular innate immunogenicity than m5C/Ψ-modified RNA after in vitro transfection, enhancing cell viability . Nevertheless, administering RNA over a certain dose threshold via LNP format still risks immune activation and induces cytotoxicity.
Compared to RNAs, ionizable lipids lead to higher immunotoxicity. Abrams et al. found that systemic injection of LNPs bearing ionizable lipids of 2-{4-[(3b)-cholest-5-en-3-yloxy]-butoxy}-N,N-dimethyl-3-[(9Z,12Z)-octadeca-9,12-dien-1-yloxy]-propan-1-amine (Clin-DMA) stimulated the production of pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines, which was primarily attributed to their lipid components and, to a lesser extent, their payloads. In addition, systemic administration of LNPs can induce serum complement activation, ultimately leading to non-IgE-mediated hypersensitivity reactions (HSRs) , , , . Moreover, complement activation-related HSRs are unpredictable and occasionally lead to lethal outcomes .
Interventions have been implemented to attenuate the immunotoxicity associated with lipid nanovehicles and expand the therapeutic window; these interventions include premedication or codelivery with corticosteroids (e.g., dexamethasone), the application of pathway-specific inhibitors (e.g., Janus kinase inhibitor), and the use of reinforced PEG shielding. By activating glucocorticoid receptors in multiple cell types, immunosuppressive drugs such as dexamethasone attenuated the generation of several proinflammatory factors . In 2010, Abrams et al. showed that after mice were intraperitoneally injected with increasing doses of dexamethasone 1 h prior to LNP dosing, the levels of at least six cytokines were reduced to near basal levels. For this reason, corticosteroid premedication has extensively been employed in the clinical . However, chronic steroid medication may lead to undesired side effects.
By regulating the receptors for several cytokines associated with inflammatory responses, the Janus kinase-signal transducer and activator of transcription (JAK-STAT) pathway plays a crucial role in immune modulation . Tao et al. reported that inhibiting the JAK-STAT pathway reduced the immune stimulation induced by LNPs. Pretreatment with 2 doses of a JAK inhibitor before systemic injection of LNPs attenuated LNP-induced lethality in rats, and this outcome was accompanied by significant mitigation of all relevant toxicity-induced responses. Furthermore, this medication may be superior to corticosteroids, which induce multiple immunosuppressive side effects.
PEG shielding has been another practical approach to attenuating lipid nanovehicle interplay with serum proteins and complements. Kumar et al. reported that increasing the amount of PEG grafted from 1.5% to 10% (mol/mol) decreased cytokine secretion, complement activation, and LNP recognition by macrophages in a murine model. However, as expected, high PEG coverage suppressed LNP uptake by target cells, reducing their gene-silencing efficacy. Therefore, optimizing the PEG molar ratio for maximum protection of LNPs from the immune system is crucial without compromising their effectiveness.

8.1.3.

## Immunogenicity
As mentioned above, PEGylated lipid nanovehicles can stimulate B cells in the spleen to generate anti-PEG IgM antibodies, thereby exacerbating the clearance of a second dose of PEGylated nanovehicles (the ABC phenomenon) , , . IgM, a well-known opsonin, can recognize foreign bodies and trigger complement activation, eventually leading to phagocytosis . Judge et al. reported that “diffusible” PEG lipids rapidly dissociating from the lipid nanovehicle surface ameliorated PEG-induced antibody responses. They prepared various PEGylated liposomes harboring PEG lipids with different lengths of alkyl chains (C14, C16, and C18). They found that the PEG lipids with a short alkyl chain (a C14 chain) caused a 10-fold reduction in anti-PEG antibodies at 7 days after intravenous injection in mice compared to the effect of PEG lipids with a long alkyl chain (a C16 or C18 chain). In addition, by injecting liposomes in 2-week intervals or with washout periods between the injections, the ABC effect was largely attenuated, presumably due to the short biological half-life of IgM. Notably, these studies were conducted with animal models without prior exposure to PEG. However, humans are increasingly exposed to numerous PEG-containing marketed products and presumably possess anti-PEG antibodies before they are introduced with liposomes, complicating the situation in the clinical.

8.2.

## Targeting beyond the liver
Of the 26 clinical trials with data in , 18 were based on intravenous injection, with 9 treatments targeting the liver. The findings from these studies supported the supposition that systemic injection is the best administration route but that targeting sites beyond the liver faces challenges. The liver tropism of lipid nanovehicles is mainly attributed to the following reasons: 1) the blood flow rate through the liver is high, accounting for 27% of cardiac output; 2) sinusoidal membranes in the liver are extensively fenestrated; 3) Kupffer cells, liver-specific macrophages, are responsible for clearing most nanoparticles; and 4) liver endothelial cells present efficient uptake activity . In addition to traditional active and passive targeting tactics, innovative strategies have been developed to achieve targeting sites outside the liver (e.g., targeting the spleen, lung, and tumors), including targeting by adjusting the lipid constituents and physicochemical properties of the lipid nanovehicles and biomimetic decoration.
8.2.1.

## Targeting the spleen
As mentioned above, lipid nanovehicles in the blood circulatory system are opsonized, phagocytosed, and then accumulate in the MPS, including the liver and spleen. However, most injected lipid nanovehicles (∼80%) are delivered to the liver. Therefore, some strategies have been developed to modulate the physicochemical properties of lipid nanovehicles and have shown increased spleen tropism. Indeed, the incorporation of cholesterol increased the rigidity of the lipid bilayer , thereby promoting its uptake into the spleen . In addition, Kranz et al. prepared a series of lipoplexes with different charge ratios (i.e., different cationic lipid: RNA ratios) without targeting ligands. They observed that gene expression was decreased in the lung and increased in the spleen as the cationic lipid: RNA ratio was gradually decreased, suggesting that the charge ratio may play a crucial role in organ-specific gene expression. Similarly, a recent study reported that adding anionic lipids and the modulation of their molar ratio facilitated a change in the tissue tropism of LNPs, showing reduced delivery rates to the liver and higher delivery rates to the spleen .

8.2.2.

## Targeting the lung
Lung-targeted RNA delivery is achieved mainly via two strategies: active targeting and passive targeting. In the first approach, lipid nanovehicles are modified with a specific targeting ligand that binds to a specific target receptor on the lung vasculature. Specifically, Parhiz et al. modified mRNA-loaded LNPs with antibodies specifically against platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1 (PECAM-1), which led to lower hepatic uptake and a concomitant increase of ∼200-fold in mRNA delivery to the lungs compared to that of their untargeted counterpart. Passive targeting is generally achieved by modulating the physicochemical properties and lipid composition of lipid nanovehicles. McMillan et al. constructed lipoplexes containing DOTAP and DOPE and found that they effectively delivered siRNA to the lung, including epithelial and endothelial cells. At a relatively high siRNA dose of 2 mg/kg, these lipoplexes caused 80% of genes to be silenced at 48 h postinjection. Cheng et al. , recently developed a selective tissue-targeting strategy termed selective organ targeting (SORT). The SORT LNPs that functionally delivered mRNA to the lung contained a high percentage of permanently cationic lipids, e.g., DOTAP. Including 50% DOTAP into ionizable lipid-containing LNPs effectively tuned their lung-specific tropism. However, since lung tropism was driven by temporal trapping of the LNPs in microvessels accompanied by the formation of large aggregates within erythrocytes, this strategy may cause microinfarction and, therefore, possible myocardial damage and tissue ischemia .

8.2.3.

## Targeting the tumor
Most studies have reported that the average intratumoral accumulation of lipid nanovehicles following systemic administration ranges from 5% to 10% (w/w) of the injected dose, much of which was taken up by the MPS , . Inspired by nature, bioinspired and biomimetic technology has been used for tumor targeting. As an alternative to a classical PEG coating, red blood cells (RBCs) naturally evade the MPS by triggering an inhibitory molecule of “signal regulatory protein α (SIRPα)” on the surfaces of macrophages. Therefore, incorporating a lipophilic drug into mouse RBCs showed a more than 10-fold longer circulatory time than PEGylated micellar carriers, leading to efficient cargo delivery to tumor tissues . Furthermore, Zhuang's team utilized platelet membranes to wrap siRNA-loaded metal-organic framework (MOF) nanoparticles, which showed ∼6-fold higher accumulation in tumors than their RBC membrane-coated counterparts owing to the excellent tumor-targeting ability of the platelet membrane.

9.

## Conclusions and future perspectives
Although lipid nanovehicles were initially used for RNA delivery in the late 1970s, three LNP-based RNA therapeutics have been approved for marketing in the past five years, suggesting a profound bottleneck in the clinical use of lipid nanovehicles. First, the potency and toxicities of lipid formulations are the most crucial indicators. Fortunately, some high-throughput methods have been developed for lipid synthesis and formulation optimization, facilitating rapid screening of high-potency and low-toxicity lipid formulations. Li et al. designed a three-component reaction system to simplify the tedious lipid synthesis process and rapidly synthesized a library of 720 novel biodegradable ionizable lipids. Kauffman et al. utilized the Design of Experiment (DOE) for LNP formulation optimization and thus considerably reduced the number of individual experiments required to establish statistically significant trends. The resulting LNPs loaded with erythropoietin mRNA showed 7-fold higher potency than the original LNP formulation.
Surface PEGylation increases lipid nanovehicle stability in vitro and prolongs lipid nanovehicle retention in blood by preventing the adsorption of plasma proteins and reducing subsequent MPS uptake. However, it also prevents lipid nanovehicles from entering cells and escaping from endosomes (i.e., the PEG dilemma) and leads to rapid elimination of lipid nanovehicles by stimulating B cells to secrete anti-PEG IgM (i.e., the ABC phenomenon) , , . In contrast, biomembrane camouflage reduces MPS uptake of lipid nanovehicles, promotes their cell internalization, and shows little immunogenicity, representing a more appealing strategy . However, no biomimetic lipid nanovehicle-based RNA drugs have yet been approved for use in the clinical, mainly because of their batch-to-batch variation and lack of scalable production methods . A practical solution to these challenges will inspire the development of biomimetic lipid nanovehicle-based RNA therapeutics.
Due to the liver tropism of lipid nanovehicles, targeting tissues outside the liver is still challenging. Interestingly, SORT LNPs have been shown to target extrahepatic tissues. Cheng et al. reported a SORT strategy in which multiple types of LNPs were engineered by adding a SORT molecule, leading to selective editing of extrahepatic tissues. Patisiran targets the liver following systemic injection. However, when DOTAP (a SORT molecule) was added to the patisiran formulation, the protein expression profile changed; it was decreased in the liver and increased in the spleen and lung . With the development of the SORT technique, lipid nanovehicle-based RNA products used for extrahepatic disease treatment will be available in the clinical in the future.

## Author contributions
Jing Yan: Writing-original draft, Data curation, Figure design, manuscript revision. Hao Zhang: Figure drawing, manuscript revision. Guangfeng Li: Data curation, Figure design. Jiacan Su, Yan Wei, and Can Xu: Conceptualization, Resources, Supervision, Writing–review & editing, Funding acquisition.

## Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

## Acknowledgments
The work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Nos. 82172098, 81872428, 81703010, and 82202344) and the Shanghai Municipal Natural Science Foundation (23ZR1463300).

## Footnotes
Peer review under the responsibility of Chinese Pharmaceutical Association and Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences.

## Contributor Information
Jiacan Su, Email: drsujiacan@163.com.
Yan Wei, Email: ywei@shu.edu.cn.
Can Xu, Email: xucan@smmu.edu.cn.

## References