pmcPLoS BiolPLoS Biol212plosbiolplosPLOS Biology1544-91731545-7885PLOSPMC11637276PMC11637276.111637276116372763966668210.1371/journal.pbio.3002930PBIOLOGY-D-24-013301Methods and ResourcesBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCell AdhesionIntegrinsBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular Structures and OrganellesExtracellular MatrixIntegrinsBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryProteinsCollagensMedicine and Health SciencesOncologyCancers and NeoplasmsBreast TumorsBreast CancerBiology and life sciencesGeneticsGene expressionGene regulationSmall interfering RNABiology and life sciencesBiochemistryNucleic acidsRNANon-coding RNASmall interfering RNAResearch and Analysis MethodsSpecimen Preparation and TreatmentStainingCell StainingBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCell MotilityCell MigrationCancer Cell MigrationBiology and Life SciencesDevelopmental BiologyCell MigrationCancer Cell MigrationBiology and Life SciencesMolecular BiologyMolecular Biology TechniquesTransfectionResearch and Analysis MethodsMolecular Biology TechniquesTransfectionMedicine and Health SciencesOncologyCancers and NeoplasmsGastrointestinal TumorsPancreatic CancerNovel kinase regulators of extracellular matrix internalisation identified by high-content screening modulate invasive carcinoma cell migration
ECM-bound integrin uptake controls invasive cell migrationMartinezMontserrat LlansesConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodology NanKeqianInvestigationMethodology BaoZheInvestigationMethodology BacchettiRacheleInvestigationMethodology YuanShengnanInvestigation TylerJoeData curationInvestigationMethodology GuezennecXavier LeMethodologySupervisionWriting – review & editing BardFrederic A.Funding acquisitionSupervision https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1402-8701RaineroElenaConceptualizationFunding acquisitionProject administrationSupervisionWriting – review & editing 1
School of Biosciences, University of Sheffield, Western Bank, Sheffield, United Kingdom2
Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Singapore, Singapore3
Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, CRCM, Marseille, FranceParentCarole A.Academic Editor files.

## Data Availability
All relevant data are within the paper and its files.

## Introduction
The extracellular matrix (ECM) is a noncellular 3D structure that surrounds cells and organs in vivo. Depending on its organisation, it is classified into basement membrane and interstitial matrix. ECM dynamics are tightly regulated in morphogenesis, differentiation, and tissue homeostasis; therefore, dysregulations in ECM remodelling are associated with pathological conditions, including fibrosis and tumour progression. Cells engage with the ECM through the heterodimeric integrin receptors, which are composed of an α and a β subunit and activate diverse pro-survival signal transduction pathways [ , ]. However, the ECM may simultaneously pose a physical constraint for cancer cell invasion and tumour initiation [ , ]. As a result, ECM degradation accompanies tumour progression. Our lab has recently shown that ECM internalisation supports proliferation of breast cancer cells under amino acid starvation by promoting tyrosine metabolism, through a mechanism that requires ECM macropinocytosis, followed by lysosomal degradation [ ]. However, the signalling regulators controlling ECM endocytosis are poorly understood.
α2β1 integrin is the major collagen I receptor and is expressed in epithelial cells, platelets, and fibroblasts, among other cell types [ ]. α2β1 integrin mediates the reorganisation and contraction of collagen matrices in fibroblasts [ ]. In addition, α2β1 integrin has been shown to regulate melanoma and pancreatic carcinoma cell migration [ , ], as well as bone metastatic dissemination of prostate and breast cancer cells [ , ]. However, the mechanisms underlying α2β1 integrin-mediated cancer cell invasive migration have not been elucidated. Integrin/ECM binding triggers the activation of several signalling pathways, including the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway. In mammalian cells, there are 4 distinct MAPK signalling pathways according to the terminal tier kinase: extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) 1/2, c-Jun N-terminal Kinase (JNK) 1/2/3, p38 and ERK5 [ , ]. p38 MAPK is a family of 4 serine/threonine-specific protein kinases: p38α or MAPK14, p38β or MAPK11, p38γ or MAPK12, and p38δ or MAPK13 [ ]. p38α and p38β are ubiquitously expressed and share 75% amino acid sequence homology [ ]. p38 MAPK plays an important role in cell proliferation, differentiation, stress responses, autophagy, and cell migration, among other biological processes [ ].
A deep comprehension of how cancer cells interact with the ECM is essential to understand tumour growth and metastasis. Here, we showed that ECM internalisation was up-regulated in primary cancer cells extracted from a polyoma middle T (PyMT)-driven mouse model of breast cancer, compared to non-transformed mammary epithelial cells and ECM components were trafficked through EEA1-positive early endosomes and delivered to the lysosomes, where the ECM is targeted for degradation. Through a kinase and phosphatase functional screen, we identified MAP3K1, MAPK11, and PPP2R1A as novel regulators of the macropinocytosis of ECM components, which we defined as being mediated by α2β1 integrin and the Na+/H+ Antiporter, Amiloride-Sensitive (NHE1). Interestingly, invasive breast cancer cells were shown to internalise ECM as they migrated on cell-derived matrices (CDMs) and blocking ECM uptake impaired the invasive migration of breast, pancreatic, and ovarian cancer cells, both in 2D and 3D culture systems. Finally, α2β1 integrin and MAP3K1 were significantly up-regulated in pancreatic tumours compared to healthy tissue and high expression of these genes correlated with reduced survival of pancreatic cancer patients. Remarkably, chemotherapy-resistant breast tumours showed higher mRNA expression levels of MAP3K1, MAPK11, PPP2R1A, and α2 integrin. Altogether, we identified a novel signalling pathway linking ECM macropinocytosis, degradation, and invasive migration in different cancer types, which could potentially be exploited for the generation of novel therapeutic interventions to prevent metastatic dissemination.

## Results

## A kinase and phosphatase screen identifies MAPK signalling cascade as a novel regulator of Matrigel internalisation in breast cancer cells
Polyoma middle T oncogene expression under the mammary epithelial MMTV promoter constitutes a widely used mouse model of breast cancer that recapitulates many aspects of the human disease [ , ]. To assess whether ECM endocytosis is up-regulated in primary breast cancer cells, NMuMG cells, derived from normal mouse mammary glands, and PyMT#1 cells, generated from MMTV-PyMT tumours [ ], were seeded on fluorescently labelled Matrigel, a basement-membrane formulation, and CDM, generated by telomerase-immortalised human fibroblasts. It is widely established that, following endocytosis, the ECM is degraded in the lysosomes [ ]. Therefore, to prevent lysosomal degradation and discern between changes that could be due to altered ECM degradation rather than endocytosis, cells were treated with a cysteine-cathepsin lysosomal inhibitor, E64d [ , ]. Internalisation of Matrigel was up-regulated in PyMT#1 cells compared to NMuMG cells, both in the presence and the absence of E64d ( ). Similarly, CDM internalisation was significantly higher in PyMT#1 cells in the presence of E64d ( ). Conversely, E64d did not increase internalisation of CDM in NMuMG, suggesting that CDM lysosomal degradation is specifically triggered in invasive breast cancer cells ( ). These data indicate that ECM internalisation and degradation is higher in invasive breast cancer cells, in agreement with our previous results showing that internalisation of collagen I and CDM was increased in the invasive and metastatic MCF10CA1 cells compared to non-transformed MCF10A and non-invasive MCF10-DCIS cells [ ].
To determine the trafficking pathway followed by ECM components, we measured Matrigel colocalisation with an early endosomal marker, EEA1, and a late endosomal/lysosomal marker, LAMP2, in MDA-MB-231 triple-negative breast cancer cells. Matrigel colocalisation with EEA1 progressively decreased over time, with the strongest colocalisation observed 3 h after seeding the cells, as indicated by the colocalisation map ( ). In contrast, Matrigel colocalisation with LAMP2 increased over time and reached a strong colocalisation after 12 h ( ). These data indicate that Matrigel is first delivered to early endosomes and subsequently to lysosomes for degradation. The endosomal-lysosomal system creates an enclosed environment which is progressively acidified as cargos are transported towards the lysosomes [ ]. This difference in pH can be exploited to specifically visualise cargos within the endosomal system, by using pH-sensitive dyes. MDA-MB-231 cells were seeded on collagen I labelled with NHS-fluorescein and a pH-sensitive dye, pHrodo, which fluorescence increases as the endosomal compartment is acidified [ , ]. Using time-lapse microscopy, we showed that as collagen I is internalised, there is a progressive increase in the intensity of pHrodo, while the NHS-fluorescein signal is slightly decreased, consistent with the quenching of the green fluorescence in acidic environments [ ] ( and ). These data indicated that following endocytosis, endosomes are rapidly acidified (in about 12 min) and thus pHrodo is a reliable dye for dissecting ECM uptake mechanisms.
To identify the signalling pathways responsible for controlling ECM uptake, we screened an siRNA library targeting 948 protein kinases and phosphatases [ ]. MDA-MB-231 cells were knocked down for 72 h, transferred and seeded on pHrodo-labelled Matrigel for 6 h, stained with a nuclear dye and imaged live ( ). ECM uptake was normalised between the non-targeting (NT) and NT in presence of bafilomycin A1, a V-ATPase inhibitor that prevents lysosomal acidification, as a positive control (Figs , and ). Moreover, we observed a good correlation between replicates, with R2 = 0.6219 ( ). Since we previously showed that p21-activated kinase 1 (PAK1) was required for ECM macropinocytosis [ ], PAK1 was included as an additional positive control. It was reassuring that PAK1 knockdown ( ) consistently reduced Matrigel uptake in the screen ( ). To control for transfection and silencing efficacy, we knocked down β1-integrin across different plates in the screen. Upon knockdown, β1-integrin intensity was significantly reduced, indicating successful protein knockdown upon siRNA transfection ( ). The Z-factor (Z’) provides insight into the quality of a high-throughput assay (where 1.0 > Z ≥ 0.5 indicates an excellent assay and 0.5 > Z > 0 is considered a marginal assay) [ ]. The Z’ robust and Z’ standard calculated were respectively 0.6 and 0.694, indicating the high quality of the assay ( ).
We utilised Reactome [ ] to assess the enrichment for biological pathways in the positive and negative regulators identified by the screen, and enriched pathways included negative regulation of MAPK signalling pathway (p-value: 2.68E-05) and MAPK signalling cascades (p-value: 3.23E-04; ). MAP3K1 and PPP2R1A were top positive regulators in the screen ( ). COPB2 knockdown, despite resulting in a strong inhibition in ECM uptake, was not considered further as it was associated with high levels of cell toxicity. MAP3K1 promotes ERK1/2, JNK and p38 activation under distinct stimuli [ , ], while protein phosphatase 2 scaffold subunit α (PPP2R1A) is the regulatory subunit of protein phosphatase 2 A (PP2A) [ ]. Consistent with the pathway analysis, we explored additional siRNA targets relevant for MAPK pathway and checked Matrigel uptake upon ERK1/2 (MAPK3 and MAPK1), JNK1/2/3 (MAPK8-10), and p38 (MAPK 11–14) knockdown in the screen. Only MAPK11 (p38β) consistently reduced Matrigel internalisation ( ), suggesting that MAPK11 signalling is important in this process.
To validate our hits, we performed a secondary screen for 45 common hits obtained between replicates. The pooled siRNAs for each gene were deconvoluted into 4 individual siRNAs ( ). We considered it an on target hit if 2 out of 4 siRNAs reduced or increased Matrigel uptake. Based on siPAK1, a 30% reduction or increase compared to NT was used as a cut-off to confirm positive or negative regulators. According to this criterion, 19 genes were validated, among them MAP3K1 and PPP2R1A ( ). As in the primary screen, knocking down COPB2 strongly reduced both Matrigel uptake index and cell count, indicating cell toxicity. While the individual siRNAs against the positive regulators gave consistent results, this was not the case for most of the negative regulators (on-target hits marked by a green star in ). Therefore, we focused on the positive regulators of ECM uptake, including MAP3K1, MAPK11, and PPP2R1A.
 PP2A is composed of the “C” catalytic subunit, the “B” regulatory subunit, which confers target specificity [ ], and the “A” scaffold subunit ( ). The scaffold subunit is encoded by PPP2R1A and PPP2R1B. The former constitutes the PP2A complex in 90% of assemblies [ ]. In phosphoproteomic studies, knocking down PPP2R1A has been used to inhibit the whole PP2A phosphatase complex in HeLa cells [ ]. At this point, we sought to discern whether other subunits modulated the process in the original screen ( ) and found that only the “C” subunit PPP2CA reduced Matrigel uptake by 25%, maybe due to possible functional redundancies between subunits [ ]. Actin polymerisation by the WAVE complex drives macropinocytosis [ ] and PPP2R1A was described to form part of the WAVE shell complex, regulating actin polymerisation in a phosphatase activity-independent manner [ ]. To discern whether PPP2R1A regulated ECM internalisation through its phosphatase activity or via the regulation of actin polymerisation, we assessed collagen I uptake in the presence of okadaic acid, a PP2A inhibitor [ , ], and found that 50 nM okadaic acid significantly reduced collagen I internalisation after 6 h treatment ( ), suggesting that the phosphatase function of PPP2R1A regulated ECM uptake. High concentrations of okadaic acid (100–500 nM) have been shown to promote morphological changes, including cell detachment [ ]. To rule out that the inhibition of collagen I uptake by okadaic acid was due to cell detachment from the ECM, we performed time-lapse microscopy either in MDA-MB-231 and A2780-Rab25 cells transfected with siPPP2R1A or treated with 50 nM okadaic acid on CDM. Of note, both PPP2R1A knockdown ( ) and okadaic acid treatment ( ) resulted in cell rounding but not detachment from CDM of either cell line, suggesting that the effect observed was PPP2R1A-specific.

## ECM internalisation is dependent on α2β1 integrin
Our screen identified MAPK signalling as an important regulator of ECM internalisation. Collagens have been linked to the activation of p38 MAPK in platelets [ ], while the collagen receptor α2β1 integrin activates p38 MAPK and PP2A in fibroblasts [ , ]. We therefore hypothesised that α2β1 integrin may activate MAPK11 and regulate ECM internalisation. Indeed, down-regulation of β1 integrin significantly reduced Matrigel internalisation in MDA-MB-231 cells ( ). To assess whether the ECM was trafficked together with β1 integrin, we assessed β1 integrin localisation in cells seeded on fluorescently labelled Matrigel. Colocalisation analysis revealed a strong overlap between Matrigel and β1 integrin at all the time points measured ( ). This data supports the hypothesis that β1 integrin not only regulates ECM endocytosis but is trafficked together with the ECM.
In MDA-MB-231 cells, treatment with the α2 integrin pharmacological inhibitor BTT-3033, which disrupts collagen binding, significantly decreased CDM and collagen I endocytosis ( ). Consistently, siRNA-mediated down-regulation of α2 integrin ( ) reduced the internalisation of CDM and collagen I ( ). We then wanted to determine whether α2-dependent ECM uptake was shared between different cancer types or was a specific feature associated with invasive breast cancer cells. In ovarian cancer, the overexpression of the small GTPase Rab25 promotes the internalisation of fibronectin-occupied α5β1 integrin to sustain invasive migration [ ]; therefore, we measured ECM internalisation in the highly invasive ovarian carcinoma cell line A2780, overexpressing Rab25 (A2780-Rab25). Similar to MDA-MB-231 cells, α2 integrin down-regulation significantly reduced CDM and collagen I uptake in A2780-Rab25 cells ( ). To study whether α2 integrin regulated this process in a primary cell line, we treated the polyoma middle T-driven mouse breast cancer cell line YEJ P [ ] with BTT-3033. Again, pharmacological inhibition of α2 integrin nearly abolished collagen I internalisation in YEJ P cells ( ). Similar to breast tumours, pancreatic tumours are surrounded by an extremely dense and fibrotic stroma [ , ] and pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) cells have been previously shown to be able to internalise collagen I [ ]. We assessed collagen I uptake in the metastatic PDAC cell line SW1990 and found that α2 integrin inhibition significantly reduced collagen I internalisation ( ). Altogether, this data suggests that α2β1 integrin is required for ECM internalisation in different cancer types.
 

## MAP3K1, MAPK11, and PPP2R1A regulate macropinocytosis of ECM-bound α2β1 integrin
Our data suggested that MAPK signalling regulates ECM endocytosis ( ). To characterise the role of MAPK signalling in this process, we screened 4 inhibitors against p38α/β (SB202190 and SB203580), ERK1/2 (FR180204), and MEK1/2 (PD98059) on Matrigel, collagen I, and CDM uptake in MDA-MB-231 cells ( ) [ – ]. The strongest uptake impairment was obtained by p38 inhibition in a dose-dependent manner, starting from 10 μM ( ). While 50 μM ERK1/2 inhibition reduced ECM internalisation, inhibition of MEK1/2, an upstream activator of ERK1/2, did not reduce ECM uptake at effective inhibitory concentrations starting from 10 μM ( ). Altogether, this data supported a major role for p38 MAPK in mediating ECM internalisation.
To corroborate these results, highly invasive MDA-MB-231 and A2780-Rab25 cells were seeded on labelled CDM and treated with 10 μM and 50 μM of p38α/β inhibitors. Similarly, p38 inhibition reduced CDM internalisation in a dose-dependent fashion (Figs , and ). These experiments were performed with pHrodo-labelled ECM. Under these conditions, a reduction in pHrodo signal could represent either a blockade of endocytosis, a defect in lysosomal targeting of internalised ECM or an impairment of lysosomal acidification. To address this, MDA-MB-231 cells and A2780-Rab25 cells were seeded on collagen I labelled with NHS-Alexa Fluor 555, a non-pH sensitive dye. Consistently, collagen I internalisation was markedly decreased upon p38α/β inhibition (Figs , and ), indicating that the observed effect was due to changes in endocytosis and not in endosomal acidification. Similarly, p38 inhibition reduced collagen I internalisation in YEJ P and SW1990 cells ( ), suggesting that p38 signalling regulates ECM internalisation in breast, ovarian, and PDAC cells. Importantly, these tumours are characterised by a dense and collagen I-rich stroma. Since we showed that β1 integrin trafficked together with Matrigel and α2β1 integrin was required for ECM uptake ( ), we aimed to assess whether p38 inhibition controlled the internalisation of α2β1 integrin, by measuring α2 internal pool. Indeed, p38 inhibition reduced the levels of internalised α2 integrin in MDA-MB-231 cells ( ). Both inhibitors significantly reduced p38 phosphorylation in MDA-MB-231 cells, indicating inhibition of p38 ( ). In agreement with our previous observations, α2 integrin could be detected in collagen I-positive vesicles ( ), indicating that p38 promotes the internalisation of ECM-bound α2β1 integrin.
 To validate the positive regulators identified in our screen, we assessed CDM and collagen I uptake by highly invasive MDA-MB-231 and A2780-Rab25 cells in the presence of siRNA against MAP3K1, MAPK11, and PPP2R1A ( ) and found that the knockdowns significantly reduced CDM and collagen I uptake in both cell lines (Figs and ). Moreover, MAPK11 down-regulation by 3 individual siRNAs sequences significantly impaired collagen I uptake ( ), indicating it is an on-target hit as MAP3K1 and PPP2R1A ( ). In MDA-MB-231 cells, down-regulating MAP3K1, MAPK11, and PPP2R1A also significantly reduced α2 integrin internal pool ( ). To rule out the possibility that the decrease in internalised α2 integrin was due to changes in its expression, we assessed how MAPK11 and PPP2R1A knockdown affected α2 integrin protein levels by western blotting. Knocking down PPP2R1A resulted in a ~50% decrease in α2 integrin expression ( ), while MAPK11 down-regulation resulted in a small, but not statistically significant increase in α2 integrin levels ( ). These data suggest that changes in the α2 integrin internal pool are likely due to reduced endocytosis upon MAPK11 down-regulation; however, PPP2R1A may potentially regulate both α2 integrin trafficking and expression. Altogether, these data indicate that MAP3K1, MAPK11, and PPP2R1A control ECM uptake by modulating integrin endocytosis. To investigate the fate of internalised ligand-bound α2 integrin, we quantified collagen I and α2 integrin internal pool in the presence of either E64d or Bafilomycin A1, which prevents lysosomal function, and found that the treatments resulted in a significant accumulation of both collagen I and α2 integrin inside the cells ( ). Consistently, higher α2 integrin protein levels were detected by western blotting upon Bafilomycin A1 treatment ( ), indicating that ligand-bound α2 integrin endocytosis resulted in lysosomal degradation.
 We have previously shown that breast cancer cells uptake different ECM components through macropinocytosis [ ]. To assess whether p38 was controlling this endocytic process, we measured dextran uptake in MDA-MB-231 cells seeded on collagen I ( ). Interestingly, p38 inhibition significantly reduced dextran internalisation ( ), suggesting that this pathway is a conserved macropinocytic programme. Since integrins cluster in macropinocytic cups [ ], we reasoned that α2 integrin may be required for macropinocytosis. Indeed, α2 inhibition with either BTT-3033 or siRNA-mediated down-regulation significantly reduced dextran uptake ( ), indicating that α2β1 integrin is a novel macropinocytosis regulator in invasive breast cancer cells.

## Regulators of ECM internalisation modulate invasive cancer cell migration
Integrin endocytosis is essential for integrin turnover, migration, and invasion [ ]. Internalisation of fibronectin-bound α5β1 integrin is required for invasive migration in A2780-Rab25 cells [ ], while degradation of the ECM is required in invasive migration [ ] to enable cell movement through “ECM barriers” [ ]. We observed that MDA-MB-231 cells seeded on 2D collagen I internalised and acidified collagen I while migrating ( and ), suggesting that ECM endocytosis might facilitate cell migration. Consistently, breast cancer cells internalised CDM during migration, and this seemed to occur in the perinuclear region in front of the extending protrusion at the leading edge ( and ). We therefore reasoned that α2β1 integrin and p38 may facilitate invasive migration by promoting ECM uptake.
To assess this, we treated MDA-MB-231 cells with p38 MAPK inhibitors and found that 10 μM and 50 μM SB203580 and SB202190 significantly reduced the velocity of MDA-MB-231 cells migrating on CDM, while only 50 μM SB203580 and SB202190 impinged on the directionality of cell migration ( ). Correspondingly, down-regulation of MAP3K1, MAPK11, PPP2R1A, and α2 integrin significantly reduced the velocity and directionality of MDA-MB-231 cell migration ( ). To confirm the relevance of this process to different cancer types, A2780-Rab25 cells were treated with 50 μM SB203580 or siRNAs against MAP3K1, MAPK11, PPP2R1A, and α2 integrin and seeded on CDM. Consistently, A2780-Rab25 cell migration was impaired upon p38 inhibition or siRNA down-regulation of MAP3K1, MAPK11, PPP2R1A, and α2 integrin ( ). As a WAVE shell complex subunit, PPP2R1A has been shown to modulate migration persistence in the non-transformed mammary cell line MCF10A and MDA-MB-231 cells [ ]. To discern if the effect of PPP2R1A on migration required its catalytic activity, cells were treated with okadaic acid. PP2A inhibition significantly reduced the velocity and directionality of cell migration in both MDA-MB-231 and A2780-Rab25 cells, indicating that PP2A phosphatase activity is required for migration (Figs and ). To study whether regulators of ECM endocytosis similarly affected directional cell migration, we performed a scratch-wound healing assay with a collagen I overlay [ ] in SW1990 cells. We found that α2 integrin and p38 inhibition significantly reduced wound healing closure compared to the control ( ). We have previously shown that metabolic adaptations induced by ECM internalisation and lysosomal degradation facilitated invasive cell migration under amino acid starvation [ ]. To determine whether ECM-endocytosis-driven cell migration was linked to the ability of the cells to degrade the endocytosed material in the lysosomes or was a mechanism of ECM remodelling to enable cell invasion, we monitored MDA-MB-231 cells migration on CDM in the presence of E64d and Bafilomycin A1. Interestingly, we found that the inhibition of lysosomal function significantly reduced both velocity and directionality of cell migration ( ). Taken together, these data indicate that MAP3K1, MAPK11, PPP2R1A, and α2 integrin, positive regulators of ECM uptake, modulate cell migration, therefore correlating ECM internalisation and lysosomal degradation to cell migration.
 p38 has been reported to phosphorylate a variety of downstream targets, including the sodium/proton exchanger 1 (NHE1). Indeed, p38 was shown to directly interact and phosphorylate NHE1 on 1 threonine and 3 serine residues in the C-terminal [ ]. Importantly, the phosphorylation was required to trigger the channel activation [ ]. As NHE1 is a well-established regulator of macropinocytosis ( ) [ ], we hypothesised that p38 might control cancer cell migration through the modulation of NHE1-dependent ECM macropinocytosis. To test this, we assessed the ability of NHE1 knockdown cells ( ) to internalise pH-rodo labelled collagen I and found that NHE1 down-regulation significantly impaired collagen I uptake ( ). Moreover, NHE1 knockdown significantly reduced the directionality of MDA-MB-231 cells migrating on cell-derived matrices, without affecting the velocity of cell migration ( ), suggesting that p38 could control ECM uptake through the regulation of NHE1 function.
Since ECM endocytosis is (1) up-regulated in breast cancer cells; and (2) is required for migration on CDM, we next tested whether regulators of ECM endocytosis were important for 3D invasion ( ). Indeed, down-regulation of MAP3K1 significantly reduced invasion of MDA-MB-231 cells in 3D culture systems ( ). In agreement with the cell migration data, MDA-MB-231 cells were able to internalise ECM in 3D and MAP3K1 knockdown significantly reduced ECM uptake in these settings ( ). We also observed differences in the invasive front morphology, where MAP3K1 knockdown resulted in shorter and thicker multicellular strands protruding from the spheroid core ( ). This observation demonstrates that regulators identified in our 2D screen also play a role in 3D systems, suggesting the screening setup developed in this study has the potential of identifying novel regulators of cancer cell invasion. Similarly to MAP3K1, α2 integrin down-regulation or pharmacological inhibition impaired breast cancer cell invasion in 3D systems ( ). Altogether, these data demonstrate that MAP3K1 and α2 integrin, regulators of ECM macropinocytosis, are required for MDA-MB-231 cell invasion.
 

## α2 integrin, β1 integrin, and MAP3K1 are poor prognosis factors for pancreatic carcinoma and are linked to chemoresistance in breast cancer
Since ECM endocytosis is up-regulated in breast cancer cells ( ), we stained mammary glands of MMTV-PyMT mice extracted at 44 days (normal mammary gland, preceding tumour formation), 73 days (representing ductal carcinoma in situ, DCIS, stage), and 91 days (invasive adenocarcinoma, IDC) for collagen I. Consistent with our in vitro results, more collagen I positive vesicles were present in the IDC tumour, compared to DCIS and normal mammary gland, where a strong collagen I staining can be detected in the stroma ( ). Therefore, we hypothesised that the ECM uptake regulator α2 integrin might be up-regulated during tumour progression in vivo. Indeed, α2 integrin expression was slightly higher in DCIS and IDC tissue sections, compared to the healthy tissues ( ). In breast cancer, chemotherapy resistance is often accompanied by metastatic dissemination, leading to poor clinical prognosis [ ]. To examine whether regulators of ECM internalisation may impact on chemoresistance in breast cancer patients, we looked at the correlation between MAP3K1, MAPK11, PPP2R1A, and α2 integrin expression and chemotherapy response using transcriptomic data of 3,104 breast cancer patients [ ]. Interestingly, these genes were highly expressed in chemoresistant (non-responder) tumours ( ). Indeed, the area under the ROC curve (AUC) for PPP2R1A and α2 integrin was over 0.6 ( ), which classified them as a weak biomarker with potential use in prediction of chemotherapy treatment [ ]. Given the requirement of α2β1 integrin/p38 MAPK axis in ECM internalisation and invasion in PDAC cells, we looked at the relationship between the expression of α2 integrin, β1 integrin, and MAP3K1 and disease outcomes in PDAC patients. RNA sequencing data showed overexpression of α2 integrin, β1 integrin, and MAP3K1 in pancreatic adenocarcinomas compared to normal pancreas ( ). Correspondingly, high expression of these genes correlated with poor overall survival ( ) and relapse-free survival ( ). These data indicate that α2 integrin and MAP3K1 may contribute to invasion, metastasis, and chemoresistance in vivo.
 

## Discussion
Dysregulations in endocytic trafficking, such as overexpression of trafficking proteins or macropinocytosis, have been associated with cancer [ , – ]. We showed that Matrigel and CDM internalisation and degradation are up-regulated in mouse mammary cancer cells, PyMT#1, compared to normal mouse mammary epithelial cells, NMuMG. These data agree with our previous observations using the MCF10 series of non-transformed, DCIS and invasive cells [ ]. It is noteworthy that the MCF10 cell lines are epithelial and present cell–cell contact sites, indicating that the changes observed between non-transformed and invasive cells is not due to changes in cell morphology nor cell–cell contact sites. Increased lysosomal degradation of CDM, in contrast to Matrigel, in invasive cancer cells may reflect a characteristic acquired during invasion into the surrounding stroma of primary tumours. In fact, starved mouse mammary epithelial cells were reported to internalise and degrade the underlying basement membrane for survival [ ]. Following a canonical endocytic route, Matrigel is first delivered into early endosomes and later to lysosomes. This differs from previous results in which fibronectin-occupied α5β1 integrin was directly delivered into lysosomes [ ], suggesting that different ECM components follow distinct trafficking routes. We previously reported that macropinocytosis is the main endocytic route for internalisation of collagen I, Matrigel, and CDM [ ]. Macropinosome acidification has been shown to occur within 5 to 10 min after macropinosome formation [ ], which is in agreement with our live cell imaging observations, where pHrodo-collagen I fluorescence increased approximately 12 min after internalisation.
Integrin signalling has mainly been associated with Src, focal adhesion kinase (FAK) and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) activation, resulting in cell adhesion, proliferation, and migration [ – ]. While integrins have been shown to modulate ECM uptake, the signalling regulators downstream of integrin engagement that promote ECM internalisation have remained mainly unexplored. We designed a semi-automated high-content screen and found that MAPK signalling, and in particular p38β, is a key regulator of this process. The role of p38 in tumour development remains controversial. Owing to the high sequence homology between p38α and p38β, few studies have focused on deciphering the role of p38β in tumour progression. Nonetheless, recent evidence proposed that p38β may have distinct and nonredundant functions [ ]. The p38 inhibitors used in this study target both p38α (MAPK14) and β (MAPK11) [ ], we thus cannot discard that under certain circumstances MAPK14 may regulate this process. We previously showed that PAK1 modulates macropinocytosis of Matrigel, collagen I, normal fibroblast- and cancer-associated fibroblast-CDM [ ]. PAK1 is recruited to p38 kinase complex in a phosphorylation-dependent manner [ ]. Interestingly, PAK1 has been shown to phosphorylate MAP3K1 on serine 67, which inhibits its binding to JNK kinases [ ], while MAP3K1 has been described as an upstream regulator of MAPK11 and 14 [ – ]. 3D collagen I has been shown to lead to p38 activation downstream of α2β1 integrin in mesenchymal cells, such as fibroblasts, in a Cdc42-dependent manner [ ]. As PAK1 can be activated by Cdc42, this raises the intriguing hypothesis that PAK1 might promote MAP3K1-dependent p38 activation, leading to ECM uptake, downstream of collagen I binding to α2β1 integrin. Indeed, α2 integrin inhibition or down-regulation significantly decreased the uptake of collagen I-rich matrices in MDA-MB–231, A2780-Rab25, YEJ P, and SW1990 cells. It is important to note that α2 integrin down-regulation had a stronger effect on collagen I than CDM internalisation in A2780-Rab25 cells. This is likely due to the abundance of fibronectin in the CDM, which is internalised in an α5β1-dependent manner in A2780-Rab25 cells [ ], while fibronectin uptake in MDA-MB-231 cells is very low. This may be due to Rab25 not being overexpressed in MDA-MB-231 cells [ ]. These results agree with previous studies showing that α2β1 integrin regulates collagen I remodelling through its phagocytosis in fibroblasts [ ]. In addition, we have shown that α2β1 integrin traffics together with internalised collagen I and the down-regulation of MAP3K1, MAPK11, or PPP2R1A significantly reduced ECM uptake and the internal pool of α2 integrin. In addition to ECM uptake, we showed that α2 integrin and p38 were also required for soluble dextran internalisation. For these experiments, cells were seeded on low collagen I concentrations, which resulted in minimal collagen I uptake. It is therefore unlikely that the reduced dextran uptake is due to dextran mostly binding to collagen I and being internalised together with it. Similarly, NHE1, a well-known regulator of macropinocytosis, is required for ECM internalisation. In line with these results, we have previously shown that 5-(N-Ethyl-N-Isopropyl)amiloride (EIPA), a specific NHE1 inhibitor [ ], modulates uptake of matrigel, collagen I and CDMs generated by normal and cancer-associated fibroblasts [ ]. Thus, we hypothesise that activation of p38 by α2β1 integrin promotes macropinocytosis of both soluble components, such as dextran, and fibrillar ECM. In fact, p38 inhibition was reported to prevent dextran uptake in dendritic cells [ ], while α5β1 integrins [ ] and α6β1 [ ] have been shown to localise to macropinocytic cups and macropinosomes, respectively.
Protein phosphatases have been commonly studied in the context of negative regulation of MAPK signalling pathways; however, our results may indicate that protein kinases (MAP3K1 and MAPK11) may cooperate with PPP2R1A to promote ECM internalisation. Interestingly, the phosphatase activity of PP2A has been shown to dephosphorylate p38 after its activation downstream of collagen I signalling in platelets [ ]. Moreover, PP2A is activated downstream of α2β1 integrin in fibroblasts [ ]. PP2A is found in integrin adhesion complexes [ ], where it promotes FA maturation and cell migration of the fibrosarcoma cell line HT1080 [ ]. We propose that MAP3K1 activation downstream of α2β1 integrin promotes MAPK11 activation, with subsequent PP2A activation to regulate the spatiotemporal activation of MAPK11 ( ). Interestingly, MAPK11/14 activation by extracellular stimuli inhibits endocytic recycling and promotes lysosomal degradation of endocytosed receptors [ ], suggesting that activation of MAPK11/14 may regulate ECM trafficking at different stages. Future studies will focus on the mechanism regulating the trafficking of ECM to the lysosomes.
Integrin internalisation and ECM degradation have been associated with invasive migration and metastatic dissemination. Live cell imaging showed that MDA-MB-231 cells internalise CDM while migrating. Interestingly, pharmacological inhibition or siRNA-mediated down-regulation of ECM uptake regulators reduced the velocity and directionality of migrating cells. Of note, 50 μM SB202190 and SB203580 affected both the velocity and directionality of migrating MDA-MB-231 cells, in agreement with MAPK11 knockdown. Nonetheless, 10 μM SB202190 and SB203580 did not affect the directionality of these cells. This could be in part explained by the fact that the lower p38 inhibitor concentrations had a moderate effect on CDM uptake compared to the higher concentrations. In addition, the IC50 of the compounds for MAPK11 is higher than MAPK14 [ ]; therefore, a higher concentration might be required to fully inhibit MAPK11, which appears to be the major regulator of ECM uptake.
The role of macropinocytosis in modulating invasive migration is controversial, as while α5β1 macropinocytosis decreases invasion in the Ewing sarcoma A-673 cell line [ ], macropinocytosis of α6β1 promotes glioblastoma cell invasion [ ]. Interestingly, PPP2R1A is required for embryonic patterning, primitive streak formation, gastrulation and mesoderm formation [ ], which consist of migration processes [ ]. This suggests the intriguing possibility that during embryonic development migrating cells remodel the surrounding ECM via macropinocytosis. Indeed, the syncytialisation of placental trophoblasts is accompanied by a strong activation of macropinocytosis [ ]. Our results suggest that PP2A activity is required for cell migration of MDA-MB-231 and A2780-Rab25 cells. Indeed, PP2A activity is up-regulated in the osteosarcoma cells LM8, MG63 and SaOS cells [ ] and PP2A regulates migration, proliferation, and metastasis of osteosarcoma cells [ ]. Nevertheless, PP2A was shown to inhibit cervical cancer cell migration by dephosphorylating JNK, p38, and ERK [ ]. This suggests that the role of PP2A in cell migration may be cancer specific. In addition, MAP3K1 down-regulation resulted in changes in the multicellular protrusions projecting from 3D spheroids, suggesting either a possible change in the mode of invasion or reduced invasion with limited effects on cell proliferation, resulting in an accumulation of cells in invasive protrusions.
Immunohistological analysis revealed increased collagen I vesicular staining in DCIS and IDC mouse mammary tumours, which may indicate increased ECM internalisation in vivo. However, we cannot rule out the possibility that the intracellular collagen I dotted structures may be due to increased collagen I expression/secretion, associated with acquisition of mesenchymal traits [ ]. We observed that α2 integrin expression increased in breast and pancreatic tumours and correlated with poor survival. In agreement with our results, patient-derived xenografts from breast cancer bone metastasis showed increased α2β1 integrin expression when undergoing epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition with progressive passages through mice [ ]. Similarly, α2 integrin expression is induced in ovarian cancer cells that metastasized to the omentum [ ]. The role of α2 integrin in pancreatic cancer remains controversial. While α2 integrin expression correlates with poor overall survival and resistance to gemcitabine in high-stiffness matrices in pancreatic cancer [ ], poorly differentiated tumours were reported to express low levels of α2 integrin, while well-differentiated ones showed high levels of α2 integrin [ ]. Consistent with our data showing a correlation between MAP3K1 levels and poor prognosis in PDAC patients, MAP3K1 expression correlates with progression and poor prognosis of hormone-receptor-positive, HER2-negative early-stage breast cancer patients [ ]. Single-cell transcriptomes from matched primary tumours and metastasis from patient-derived xenograft models of breast cancer showed that metastasis displayed increased stress response signalling during metastatic progression [ ]. Interestingly, p38β (MAPK11) activation has been associated with stress signalling [ ], suggesting the intriguing hypothesis that ECM uptake might be induced by the stress response during cancer dissemination. Indeed, MAPK11 promotes metastatic dissemination to the bone, where it promotes osteolytic bone destruction [ ]. Similarly, α2 integrin expression promotes bone metastasis of the prostate cancer cell line LNCaP PCa [ ]. In addition, integrins and stress responses have been linked to therapy resistance [ ]. Indeed, MAPK14 is up-regulated in BRAF-inhibition-resistant melanoma in mouse models [ , ], while MAPK11 abrogation promotes radiosensitivity in A549, MCF7, and HCT-116 cells [ ]. Consistently, we showed that MAP3K1, MAPK11, PPP2R1A, and α2 integrin expression is higher in chemoresistant breast cancer patients. Dual inhibition of MAPK11 and MAPK14 is currently being tested as a monotherapy or in combination with other agents, such as gemcitabine and carboplatin, for the treatment of glioblastoma, ovarian, and metastatic breast cancer. Interestingly, the combination therapy improved progression-free survival in epithelial ovarian cancer [ ]. A recent preprint has shown that in patients resistant to PD1/L1 therapy (nivolumab), combination treatment with p38 inhibition (pexmetinib) increased T cell infiltration and clinical response [ ]. Similarly, α2 integrin inhibitors are being studied in clinical trials for solid tumours, either alone [ ] or in combination with chemotherapy [ ]. This raises the intriguing hypothesis that MAPK11/14 activation in therapy-resistant cancers could contribute to metastatic dissemination by promoting ECM-bound α2β1 integrin internalisation. Further work will look into this.
Altogether, we showed that ECM internalisation is up-regulated in breast cancer cells and ECM macropinocytosis facilitates invasive migration of breast, ovarian, and pancreatic cancer cells, through the activation of p38 signalling. High expression of the regulators of ECM internalisation correlates with poor prognosis of pancreatic cancer patients and is associated with chemoresistance in breast cancer, therefore targeting ECM macropinocytosis could open new avenues for the development of novel strategies to prevent cancer cell invasion and dissemination, which ultimately constitutes the primary cause of cancer death [ ].

## Methods

## Antibodies and reagents
Primary antibodies Alexa-Fluor 488 Anti-human CD29 (ITGB1, Clone TS2/16; 303016), FITC anti-human CD49b (ITGA2; Clone P1E6-C5; 359306), Alexa-Fluor 488 anti-mouse CD49b (Clone HMα2; 103510), and mouse anti-human LAMP2 (354303) from BioLegend, primary antibodies mouse anti-human CD49b (611017) mouse anti-EEA1 (610457) from BD Bioscience. Primary antibodies anti-human GAPDH (SC-47724) and NHE1 (sc-136239) from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. Primary antibody against p38 MAPK from Cell signalling (9212S). Primary antibody against phospho-p38 MAPK (Rabbit PolyAb Thr180/Tyr182) from Proteintech (28796-1-AP). Primary antibody against collagen I (NB600-408) from Novus. Secondary antibodies Alexa-Fluor 488 Donkey Anti-mouse were from Fisher Scientific (A-21202), IRDye 800CW and IRDye 680CW were from LI-COR. Alexa Fluor 647 Phalloidin, NHS-Fluorescein, NHS-Alexa Fluor 555, pHrodo iFL STP ester red, and Hoechst-33342 were from Invitrogen. Collagen I and Matrigel were from Corning. DMEM, RPMI, OptiMEM, Trypsin-EDTA, TrypLE, and FBS were from Gibco. E64d (Aloxistatin) was from AdooQ Bioscience. Bafilomcyin A1, FR180204, PD98059, SB202190, and SB203580 from MedChem express. SB203580 from Startech. SB202190 from APExBIO. Okadiac acid from Merk. BTT-3033 from Tocris. Bafilomycin A1 from VWR. siRNA from Dharmacon Horizon discoveries. Vectashield antifade mounting medium from VECTOR laboratories.

## Cell culture
MDA-MB-231 cells, MDA-MB-231 cells overexpressing PPP2R1A-GFP, MDA-MB-231 cells expressing GFP, Telomerase immortalised normal fibroblasts (TIF) and SW1990 cells were cultured in high glucose Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS). MDA-MB-231 cells overexpressing PPP2R1A were a gift from Professor Alexis Gautreau (École Polytechnique, Paris, France). A2780 overexpressing Rab25, A2780-Rab25, were maintained in Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI) medium supplemented with 10% FBS. NMuMG cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS and 10 μg/ml insulin. PyMT#1 and YEJ P cells were cultured in DMEM 20 ng/ml EGF and 10 μg/ml insulin. NMuMG, PyMT#1, and YEJ P cells were a gift from Professor Jim Norman (CRUK Scotland Institute, Glasgow, United Kingdom). Cells were grown at 5% CO2 and 37°C and passaged every 3 to 4 days.

## Generation of cell-derived matrices (CDMs)
CDMs were generated as previously described [ ], either in a 35-mm glass bottom dish, 12-well plate, 8-well chamber, or a 384-well plate. Tissue culture plates were first coated with 0.2% (v/v) gelatin for 1 h at 37°C. Following that time, plates were washed twice with PBS and crosslinked with 1% (v/v) sterile glutaraldehyde (dissolved in PBS) for 30 min at room temperature. Plates were thereafter washed twice with PBS and the remaining glutaraldehyde was quenched with 1 M sterile glycine for 20 min at room temperature. Subsequently, plates were washed twice with PBS and equilibrated for 30 min in complete medium at 37°C. Confluent TIFs were seeded onto the gelatin-coated plates ( ). TIFs were incubated at 37°C in 5% CO2 until being fully confluent. The following day or the day after, the media was changed to complete media supplemented with 50 μg/ml ascorbic acid, the media was refreshed every other day. TIFs were kept secreting CDM for 9 days in a 10 cm dish, 12-well plate and 35 mm glass bottom dish. While only 7 days were required for CDM production in 384-well plates. Following that time, cells were washed once with PBS containing CaCl2 and MgCl2 (PBS++). Cells were incubated with the extraction buffer (20 mM NH4OH and 0.5% triton X-100 in PBS++) for 2 to 5 min at room temperature until no visible cells remained. For 384-well plates, cells were extracted twice for 2 min. Extracted CDMs were subsequently washed twice with PBS++ and residual DNA was digested with 10 μg/ml DNase I in PBS++ at 5% CO2, 37°C for 1 h; for 384-well plates, DNase incubation was overnight. CDMs were then washed with PBS++ and stored at 4°C in PBS++ supplemented with 1% Penicillin/Streptomycin.

## High-throughput ECM internalisation screen
Matrigel coating and labelling. Matrigel preparations were handled using high-grade dispensing pipette tips (E1-ClipTip Equaliser pipette). All the reagents were added in a high-throughput fashion by using the multidrop combi at slow or medium speed. The small and large multidrop combi dispenser cassettes, henceforth small or large cassettes, were sterilised with 100 ml of 70% ice-cold ethanol. Cassettes were then rinsed with sterile ice-cold water (Gibco). The large cassette dispensed 50 μl ice-cold PBS in a 384-well plate. PBS plates were kept at 4°C for 15 min. The small cassette was kept at 4°C and was set to dispense 2 μl ice-cold Matrigel in the 384-well plates containing PBS. Plates were centrifuged for a few seconds at 500 rpm, kept at 4°C for 8 min and then polymerised for 2 h and 30 min at room temperature. Bravo liquid handling system (Agilent Technologies, hereafter Bravo) was used to perform Matrigel washes. After polymerisation time was completed, 40 μl PBS was pipetted up and deposited into the waste reservoir. The multidrop combi large cassette was set to dispense 30 μl/well of 20 μg/ml pHrodo in a 384-well plate. Plates were kept in the dark on gentle rocking for 1 h for efficient Matrigel labelling. Following that time, Bravo was used for washing pHrodo off. All washes were performed with PBS containing 1% antibiotic-antimycotic (anti/anti) to avoid contamination. Plates were kept in 50 μl 1% anti/anti in PBS at 37°C overnight. Cell detachment. VIAFLO-384-well head (Integra) was used for cell transfer. Cell media in transfected plates was automatically pipetted and released in a waste reservoir. Transfected plates were washed with 80 μl PBS once and 20 μl of TrypLE was used to ensure the detachment of cells. Cells were incubated for 5 min at 37°C. Cells were then vortexed every 1 min thrice. TrypLE Express Enzyme was neutralised with 80 μl 10% FBS DMEM. Cells were pipetted up and down before transferring to ECM-coated 384-well plates. Transfected and transferred cells were incubated for 6 h. After 2 h, cell media was changed to 200 nM Bafilomycin A1 in positive control wells containing NT. After 5 h and 45 min, Hoechst-33342 was spiked into a final concentration of 0.5 to 1 μg/ml. Cells were imaged with 40× water objective Opera Phenix. The screen was performed in duplicates (biological replicates); the same imaging and analysis threshold was applied for both replicates. Data was normalised between the average of the non-targeting (NT) control and NT in the presence of Bafilomycin A1, as a positive control to assess the magnitude of modulation between technical replicates, as in [ ]. To identify the hits, we calculated the first derivative of the curve of normalised values within the population tested, excluding controls. We identified 25 and 37 positive regulators, and 66 and 55 negative regulators for the first and second replicate, respectively. The correlation and reproducibility of the hits were the main criteria for selecting the hits; this approach has been conventionally followed in many studies [ , – ]. To rule out that changes in ECM uptake were a consequence of changes in apoptosis, survival, and/or proliferation, we assessed the nuclei count and considered a nuclei count lower than 200 as an indication of cell toxicity of the knockdown as in [ ].

## ECM internalisation
Collagen I was dissolved in ice-cold PBS to a final concentration of 1 mg/ml, and 100 μl of the solution was used to coat a 35 mm glass-bottom dish with the help of a pipette tip. ECM-coated dishes were incubated at 37°C and 5% CO2 for 1 h for polymerisation. Collagen I dishes were labelled with either 300 μl of 10 μg/ml NHS-fluorescein, 5 μg/ml Alexa Fluor 555 NHS ester, or 20 μg/ml pHrodo iFL red. The dishes were incubated for 1 h at room temperature on gentle rocking. CDMs were labelled with 20 μg/ml pHrodo iFL red for 1 h at 37°C. The labelled ECM dishes were washed twice with PBS prior to cell seeding. To avoid evaporation, PBS was added to each dish to keep in the incubator. Alternatively, CDMs were labelled with 0.13 mg/ml NHS-SS-biotin in PBS++ for 30 min with gentle rocking at 4°C, labelled CDMs were washed twice, and cells were seeded on top. Cells were then washed once with ice-cold PBS++ and treated with a cell-impermeable reducing agent (15 mg/ml sodium 2-mercaptoethane sulfonate supplemented in 3 mM NaOH for 1 h and 30 min at 4°C). Reduced cysteines were alkylated with 17 mg/ml iodoacetamide for 10 min at 4°C. Dishes were kept on ice, washed once with PBS++ and fixed with 4% formaldehyde. Cells were permeabilised and stained with Streptavidin Alexa Fluor 488 (1:1,000) at room temperature for 1 h. For pHrodo-labelled ECM, cells were stained with Hoechst-33342 and imaged live. For p38 MAPK inhibitors, cells were serum starved for 16 to 18 h. Cells were detached using TrypLE and neutralised in serum-free media. Preliminary screening of MAPK inhibitors was performed in serum-free conditions to assess ECM-specific contribution and avoid MAPK activation by growth factors found in serum [ ]; other assays were performed in 5% FBS. For uptake, cells were incubated for 6 h, except for YEJ P cells, which were kept for 16 h. For BTT-3033 experiments, cells were allowed to adhere for 2 h before adding 5 μM or 10 μM BTT-3033 depending on the cell line. MDA-MB-231 cells were cultured for an additional period of 6 h in the presence of BTT-3033 before fixation and immunofluorescence staining. SW1990 cells were cultured for 4 additional hours before nuclei labelling and live imaging. For knockdown experiments, cells were incubated for a total of 6 h on the different types of ECM. Cells were imaged using a 60× Nikon A1 confocal microscope. For these experiments, cells were stained for a membrane protein, which is not shown in the images for better visualisation of the uptake. For live imaging uptake, the outline of the cells was visible, therefore being used to calculate the cell area. Confocal experiments were analysed manually. For time-lapse uptake, MDA-MB-231 cells were seeded on collagen I matrices labelled with NHS-fluorescein and pHrodo iFL red for 30 min and imaged every minute with a 63× oil objective Zeiss LSM980 Airyscan 2 microscope for a total period of 5 to 6 h.

## Rhodamine-dextran internalisation
MDA-MB-231 cells were seeded at a density of 105 cells/well for 6 h on 0.1 mg/ml collagen I (50 μl/well)-coated 8-well chamber. Then, cells were pretreated with DMSO or 50 μM SB202190 for 30 min. Cells were later incubated for 1 h with 0.25 mg/ml Rhodamine-dextran in the presence of SB202190 or DMSO. Alternatively, MDA-MB-231 cells were seeded at a density of 3 × 105 cells/dish on 35 mm glass-bottom dishes coated with 0.1 mg/ml collagen I for 5 h in the presence of BTT-3033 or DMSO. Cells were later incubated for 1 h with 0.25 mg/ml Rhodamine-dextran in the presence of the inhibitors or the vehicle control. Cells were then fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde and stained for human β1 integrin (1:400 dilution). Vectashield mounting medium with DAPI allowed the visualisation of the nuclei. Cell imaging was carried out with a 60× objective Nikon A1 confocal microscope. Fiji/Image J [ ] was used to calculate Dextran uptake index [ ].

## Immunofluorescence
Cells were fixed with 4% (w/v) formaldehyde in PBS for 15 min. Next, cells were permeabilised with 0.25% (v/v) Triton X-100 in PBS for 5 min and washed twice with PBS. For dextran internalisation assays, cells were not permeabilised. For ECM internalisation assays, cells were stained with Phalloidin conjugated with Alexa Fluor 555, diluted 1:500 in PBS; cells were incubated for 10 min at room temperature. For antibody staining, cells were blocked in 1% (w/v) bovine serum albumin (BSA) for 1 h at room temperature. Cells were then incubated with the respective primary antibodies for 1 h at room temperature. Anti-human ITGB1 antibody conjugated to Alexa Fluor 488 (1:400 in PBS) was used for the colocalisation experiments. For α2 integrin staining, cells were incubated with FITC anti-human CD49b antibody (1:200 dilution) in PBS. For non-fluorescently conjugated antibodies, EEA1 and LAMP2, cells were first incubated with the primary antibody (1:100 in PBS) for 1 h at room temperature. Cells were then washed thrice with PBS and incubated with the secondary antibody Alexa Fluor 488 Donkey Anti-mouse (1:1,000) for 45 min at room temperature. Cells were washed 3 times with PBS and once with ionised water. Vectashield antifade mounting media with DAPI was used for nuclear staining and sample preservation. For colocalisation experiments, the “colocalization colormap” ImageJ plug-in was used [ ].

## siRNA transfection
For 384-well plates, 2.5 μl of 500 nM siGENOME siRNA and 2.5 μl Opti-MEM per well were added into CellCarrier Ultra 384-well plates (Perkin Elmer), and 4.95 μl Opti-MEM was incubated with 0.05 μl Dharmafect IV for 5 min, and 5 μl of the Dharmafect IV solution was added into each well. Plates were incubated for 20 min on gentle rocker at RT; 3 × 103 cells were seeded in 40 μl DMEM containing 10% FBS. The final concentration of the siRNA was 25 nM. Cells were kept at 5% CO2 and 37°C for 72 h. β1 integrin knockdown efficiency was analysed in Columbus software. For 6-well plates, 10 μl 5 μM siRNA ( ) were mixed with 190 μl Opti-MEM into each well of a 6-well plate; 198 μl Opti-MEM and 2 μl Dharmafect I were mixed and incubated for 5 min at RT. A total of 200 μl of the Opti-MEM Dharmafect I mix was added on top of the siRNA and incubated for 20 min on a rocker, and 4 × 105 cells in 1.6 ml were added into each well. Cells were incubated at 37°C and 5% CO2 for 72 h. Following this time, cells were used for uptake experiments or analysis of knockdown efficiency by western blot or RT-qPCR. For PPP2R1A knockdown, cells were seeded on a glass bottom dish and knockdown efficiency was analysed in ImageJ. Alternatively, for ITGA2 knockdown migration and invasion assays in MDA-MB-231 cells, cells were seeded in 6-well plates. The next day, 5 μl of Lipofectamine-2000 were mixed in 250 μl of Opti-MEM (Solution A) and 5 μl of 20 μM siRNA were mixed with 250 μl Opti-MEM (Solution B). Both solutions were mixed and incubated for 20 min at room temperature. Plates containing adhered cells were washed once with PBS and 500 μl of Solution A+B was added on top of each well, 500 μl of Optimem was added and cells were incubated for a period of 4 to 6 h. After this time, the media was aspirated and 2 ml of fresh 10% DMEM was added; alternatively, for 3D spheroid generation, knockdown cells were cultured into methylcellulose drops for 48 h.

## Western blotting
Confluent 6-well plates were harvested with 100 μl of lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7) and 1% SDS). For p38 activation/inhibition, cells were serum starved for 24 h, pretreated with SB202190, SB253080, or DMSO for 1 h before being treated with 250 mM sorbitol for 15 min. Cell lysates were collected and transferred into QiaShredder columns (Qiagen), which were spun at 4°C for 10 min at 13,000 rpm. Extracted proteins were mixed in a 4:1 ratio with NuPAGE buffer with a final concentration of 1 mM DTT; 15 μl to 25 μl of extracted proteins in NuPAGE buffer and 0.5 μl protein ladder (BioLabs) were loaded into a Bio-Rad 4% to 15% Mini-PROTEAN precast polyacrylamide gel. The gels were run at 100V constant voltage for 1 h and 15 min in running buffer (3 g Tris base, 14.4 g glycine, and 1 g SDS in 1l ionised water). Afterwards, proteins were transferred to a FL-PVDF membrane using the Towbin transfer buffer (25 mM Tris, 192 mM glycine, 20% methanol (v/v) (pH 8.3)). Membrane transfer was performed at room temperature, constant voltage 100V for 1 h and 15 min. Membranes were blocked in 5% milk for 1 h at room temperature. Membranes were washed twice TBST (50 mM Tris HCl, 150 mM NaCl, and 0.5% (w/v) Tween 20) and incubated 1 h and 30 min with the primary antibody anti-human CD49b, anti-p38 MAPK, anti-phospho-p38 MAPK, and mouse anti-human GAPDH in TBST. Membranes were washed thrice in TBST (10 min/wash). Secondary antibodies were then applied for 1 h at room temperature. Anti-mouse IgG secondary LiCOR IR Dye 800 antibody was diluted 1:30,000 in 0.01% (w/v) SDS TBST. Next, 3 TBST washes were performed and the last wash with deionized water. A LiCOR Odyssey Sa system was used for imaging the membranes. The intensity of the bands was quantified with Image Studio Lite software. Bands were normalised to GAPDH intensity.

## Cell migration
For p38 inhibitor experiments, cells were serum starved for 16 to 18 h. Cells were detached using TrypLE and neutralised with serum-free media, and 5 × 104 MDA-MB-231 cells per well were seeded into a CDM-coated 12-well plate. Migration experiments were carried out with 5% FBS DMEM. DMSO, p38 MAPK inhibitors (10 μM and 50 μM SB202190 and SB203580), and PP2A inhibitor (50 nM okadaic acid) were added at the time of cell seeding. Time-lapse imaging was started after a 6-h incubation. Bafilomycin A1 and E64d were added at the time of seeding in 10% FBS DMEM. For knockdown experiments, cells were plated in complete media and allowed to adhere for 6 h before imaging. Plates were imaged in a Nikon Inverted Ti eclipse with Oko-lab environmental control chamber with a 10×/NA 0.45 objective. Cells were incubated at 37°C and 5% CO2; images were acquired every 10 min for at least 7 h and more than 40 cells per well were quantified per biological replicate. Individual cell migration was manually tracked using MTrack2, a Fiji/ImageJ plugin. The chemotaxis tool plugin in Fiji/Image J (https://ibidi.com/chemotaxis-analysis/171-chemotaxis-and-migration-tool.html) was used to calculate the velocity and directionality of migrating cells.

## Wound healing
For wound healing experiments, SW1990 cells were detached using Trypsin-EDTA and neutralised using 10% FBS DMEM. Cells were seeded into a 12-well plate and incubated overnight to achieve confluency. Monolayers were manually scratched into a cross shape with the help of a 200 μl pipette tip. Cells were covered by 0.5 mg/ml collagen I in 10% FBS DMEM (300 μl/well) and incubated for 30 min at 37°C to polymerise. After this time, 1 ml media was added on top of the scratches in the presence of the vehicle (DMSO), 10 μM BTT-3033 or 50 μM SB203580. Each branch of the scratches was imaged at 0 h, 3 h, and 6 h after adding the inhibitors using an Olympus Inverted Fluorescence Microscope (4× objective). The area of the scratch was calculated by tracing the perimeter of the non-invaded area using Fiji/Image J. The invasion ratio was normalised to the area at time 0 h.

## mRNA expression (RT-qPCR)
mRNA was extracted from snap-frozen samples, and stored at −80°C, according to the manufacturer’s protocol (RNeasy Mini–Qiagen). For one-way qPCR (analysis of MAP3K1, Hs_MAP3K1_1_SG QuantiTect Primer Assay, Qiagen), Luna Universal One-Step RT-qPCR Kit was used. Samples were prepared by adding less than 1 μg RNA, 5 μl Luna Universal One-Step Reaction Mix, 0.5 μl Luna WarmStart RT Enzyme Mix, 0.8 mix forward and reverse primer and toped up with RNase-free water for a total of 10 μl. For two-way qPCR (analysis of MAPK11; Hs_MAPK11_1_SG QuantiTect Primer Assay, Qiagen), cDNA was first synthesised with High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Fisher). Afterwards, loading master mix containing 5 μl QuantiNova SYBR Green PCR Kit (Qiagen) master mix, 1 μl forward and reverse primer, and 1 μl RNase free water was prepped and mixed with 3 μl cDNA solution (5 ng/μl). Finally, for both methodologies used, 10 μl of the sample was loaded into a 384-well plate. Quantstudio 12K flex real-time PCR system was used in the SYBR mode to analyse the samples. Expression levels were calculated using the 2−ΔΔCT method [ ]. GAPDH was used as a control (Hs_Gapdh_3_SG QuantiTect Primer Assay, Qiagen). Each sample was tested in 3 technical replicates.

## DNA transfection
MDA-MB-231 stably expressing GFP was generated as described in [ ]. Briefly, 8 × 105 cells/well were seeded into a 6-well plate in 2 ml of 10% FBS DMEM without antibiotics. Confluent cells were transfected with 2.5 μg of pSBtet-GB GFP Luciferase plasmid and 0.25 μg of the sleeping beauty transposon plasmid, pCMV(CAT)T7-SB100, and 250 μl of OptiMEM, 5 μl p3000, and 3.75 μl Lipofectamine 3000, together with both plasmids were added on top of the 2 ml. Media was changed after 6 h. After 48 h, cells were selected with 2 μg/ml blasticidin. After selection, cells were FACS sorted.

## 3D ECM internalisation and 3D spheroids
3D spheroids were generated by the hanging drop method, previously described in [ ], and 2,000 cells per 20 μl drop containing 4.8 mg/ml methylcellulose (Sigma-Aldrich) and 20 μg/ml soluble collagen I (BioEngineering) were pipetted on the lid of tissue culture dishes. Lids were turned and put on top of the bottom reservoir of the dish, which was filled with PBS to prevent evaporation. After 48 h, spheroids were embedded in 40 μl of 3 mg/ml rat tail collagen I (Corning) and 3 mg/ml Matrigel (Corning). For 3D uptake assays, ⅕ (v/v) of the matrix solution was labelled with a final concentration 20 μg/ml pHrodo containing 0.1 M sodium bicarbonate. Cells were imaged live every 24 h until day 3 post-embedding for α2 integrin knockdown and BTT-3033 treatment. For MAP3K1 knockdown, spheroids were imaged until day 4. Nikon A1 confocal (10× objective) was used to image whole spheroids. For invasion analysis, spheroids were thresholded, and the area of the selected threshold was quantified in Fiji/Image J. The invasion rate was defined as the ratio between the invasion area and the total area. For 3D uptake, the pHrodo-ECM intensity in the spheroid was quantified.

## Overall survival, relapse-free survival, and ROC analysis
The survival analysis was performed using Kaplan–Meier plotter (https://kmplot.com/analysis/), which can assess the effect of genes of interest on survival in 21 cancer types, including pancreatic cancer. Sources for the databases include Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO), European Genome-Phenome Archive (EGA), and The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) [ ]. RNA sequencing data from pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma and normal pancreas was performed using TNMplot (tnmplot.com), which enables a direct comparison of tumour and normal samples and runs a Mann–Whitney U test [ ]. The ROC plotter was used to analyse the link between gene expression and response to chemotherapy (including, taxane, anthracycline, ixabepilone, CMF, FAC, and FEC) using transcriptome-level data of breast cancer patients (https://www.rocplot.com/) [ ]. Breast cancer data sets were identified in GEO (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gds), using the platform IDs “GPL96,” “GPL570,” and “GPL571” and the keywords “breast,” “cancer,” and “therapy.” For genes with multiple probes, Jetset was used to select the most reliable probe set (https://services.healthtech.dtu.dk/services/jetset/).

## Immunofluorescence of FFPE tissue samples
Samples were provided by SEARCHBreast (https://searchbreast.org/). Tissue slides were deparaffinized and rehydrated. After antigen retrieval with sodium citrate buffer at pH 6, the slides were blocked for endogenous peroxidase with 3% hydrogen peroxide, permeabilised with 1% FBS, 0.5% Triton X-100 in PBS and blocked for non-specific binding with 5% FBS, 0.5% Triton X-100 in PBS. Staining for α2 integrin (Alexa-Fluor 488 anti-mouse CD49b, 1:200 in 5% FBS, 3% bovine serum albumin, 0.5% Triton X-100 in PBS) was performed overnight. Alternatively, slides were stained for collagen I (1:200 in 1% FBS PBST) overnight and with Alexa-Fluor 488 anti-rabbit IgG (1:500 in 1% FBS PBST) for 1 h. Slides were counterstained with Hoechst-33342 and then mounted (ProLong Gold Antifade Mountant) before fluorescence imaging with Nikon Inverted Ti eclipse with a 10×/NA 0.45 objective. The mean intensity of the mammary glands or tumour cells from the tissue sections was quantified using Fiji/ImageJ.

## Statistical analysis
All the gathered data was normalised to the control population. Data representation and statistical analysis were performed in GraphPad Prism (Version 9.4.1) software. Scatter plot data are represented by SuperPlots, which enables the incorporation of cell-level data and experimental repeatability in a single diagram [ ]. Cell-level data is represented by dots. For images acquired at Nikon A1 confocal, cell data is colour-coded in blue, red, and cantaloupe to display individual biological replicates. SuperPlots include the average (mean) data in each biological replicate for Nikon A1 confocal data. Average values or well data is represented by squares. For images acquired in Opera Phenix microscope, blue, red, and cantaloupe squares show mean biological replicates. Multiple squares with the same colour represent technical replicates for each well. To compare 2 data sets, an unpaired t test was used; to compare more than 2 data sets, nonparametric one-way ANOVA was performed. High-throughput screening data was normalised between the NT5 and NT5 in the presence of Bafilomycin A1 (Normalised index = (Matrigel uptake index—mean NT5)/(Mean NT5-Mean Bafilomycin A1)).

## Supporting information
S1 Fig

## The ECM was delivered to and degraded in the lysosomes.
(a) NMuMG and PyMT#1 cells were seeded on NHS Fluorescein-labelled 1 mg/ml matrigel for 12 h in the presence or absence of 20 μM E64d, fixed, stained for actin and nuclei and imaged with a Nikon A1 confocal microscope. Scale bar, 20 μM. Matrigel uptake index was calculated with Image J. Data are presented as the normalised mean ± SD; N = 3 independent experiments. ****p < 0.0001; Kruskal–Wallis test. (b) NMuMG and PyMT#1 cells were seeded on biotinylated CDM for 12 h in the presence or absence of 20 μm E64d, fixed, stained with streptavidin Alexa Fluor 488, Phalloidin Alexa Fluor 555 and DAPI, imaged and quantified as in (a). Scale bar, 20 μm. Data are presented as the normalised mean ± SD; N = 3 independent experiments. ****p < 0.0001; Kruskal–Wallis test. (c, d) MDA-MB-231 cells were seeded on NHS Alexa Fluor 555-labelled 1 mg/ml matrigel for 3 h, 5 h, 8 h, and 12 h, fixed, stained for EEA1 (c) or LAMP2 (d), actin and nuclei and imaged as in (a). Scale bar, 10 μm. Colocalisation was quantified with Image J. Data are presented as the mean ± SEM; N = 3 independent experiments. **p = 0.0057, ****p < 0.0001 (c); *p = 0.0207, **p = 0.0069, ***p = 0.0003 (d); One-way ANOVA/Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. (e) MDA-MB-231 cells were seeded on NHS-fluorescein (green) and pHrodo-labelled (magenta) 1 mg/ml collagen I and imaged live for 5 h. Representative time frames from S1 Video are shown. Scale bar, 5 μm. All the raw data associated with this figure are available in .
(TIF)
S2 Fig

## A kinome and phosphatome screen identified regulators of matrigel internalisation.
(a) Normalised cloud plot analysis from replicate 2. (b) First derivative of the curve for hit threshold for replicate 2. (c) Correlation between replicate 1 and 2. (d) Representative images of matrigel uptake in cells transfected with a non-targeting siRNA control (siNT) and an siRNA targeting PAK1 (siPAK1). Scale bar, 20 μm. (e) Data are presented as the normalised mean ± SD; N = 6 replicates from 2 independent experiments. ****p < 0.0001; Kruskal–Wallis test. (f) Screening plates were fixed and stained for β1 integrin (green) and nuclei (blue) and imaged with 40× Opera Phenix microscope; scale bar, 60 μm. Signal intensity was quantified with Columbus Software. *p = 0.0286; Mann–Whitney test. (g) MDA-MB-231 cells were transfected with an siRNA targeting PAK1 (siPAK1) or a non-targeting siRNA control (siNT). PAK1 and GAPDH protein levels was quantified by western blotting. Data are presented as the normalised mean ± SD; N = 4 independent experiments; *p = 0.0286; Mann–Whitney test. (h) Z’ robust and standard for screening validation. (i) Diagram of MAPK activation pathways. (j) Heatmap of major MAPKs in the kinome and phosphatome screen. N = 2 biological replicates. Representative images for MAPK11. Scale bar, 20 μm. All the raw data associated with this figure are available in .
(TIF)
S3 Fig

## PP2A regulates collagen I uptake and cell morphology.
(a) Representative scheme of Protein Phosphatase 2A (PP2A) subunits. (b) Heatmap of major PP2A subunits in the kinome and phosphatome screen. N = 2 biological replicates. (c) 3 × 105 MDA-MB-231 cells were cultured on pHrodo-labelled collagen I for 6 h in the presence of 50 nM okadaic acid (Okad Ac.) or water (Control), stained with 1 μg/ml Hoechst and imaged live. Scale bar, 20 μm. Collagen I uptake index was measured with Image J. Values represented are normalised mean + SD from N = 3 independent experiments; ****p < 0.0001; Kruskal–Wallis test. (d–g) MDA-MB-231 (d) and A2780-Rab25 (e) cells were transfected with an siRNA targeting PPP2R1A (siPPP2R1A) or a non-targeting siRNA control (siNT) and seeded on CDM. MDA-MB-231 (f) and A2780-Rab25 (g) were seeded on CDM in the presence of 50 nM Okadaic acid or the control (water). Cells were imaged live with a 10× Nikon Inverted Ti eclipse with Oko-lab environmental control chamber for 17 h. Aspect ratio (AR) was calculated with Image J at 6 h, 12 h, and 18 h after cell seeding. Scale bar, 50 μm. Values represented are AR from single cells, mean AR + SD from N = 3 independent experiments; ****p < 0.0001; Kruskal–Wallis test. All the raw data associated with this figure are available in .
(TIF)
S4 Fig

## α2 and β1 integrin mediated ECM internalisation in cancer cells.
(a) MDA-MB-231 cells transfected with an siRNA targeting β1 integrin (siITGB1) or a non-targeting siRNA control (siNT), plated on pHrodo-labelled 0.5 mg/ml matrigel for 6 h, stained with 1 μg/ml Hoechst and imaged live. Data are presented as the normalised mean ± SD; N = 3 independent experiments. ****p < 0.0001; Mann–Whitney test. (b) MDA-MB-231 cells were seeded on NHS Alexa Fluor 555-labelled 1 mg/ml matrigel for 3 h, 5 h, 8 h, and 12 h, fixed and stained for β1 integrin (ITGB1), actin and nuclei. Scale bar, 10 μm. Data are presented as the mean ± SEM; N = 3 independent experiments. (c, d) A2780-Rab25 cells were transfected with an siRNA targeting α2 integrin (siITGA2) or a non-targeting siRNA control (siNT), seeded on pHrodo-labelled CDM (c) or collagen I (d) for 6 h, stained with 1 μg/ml Hoechst and imaged live. Data are presented as the normalised mean ± SD; N = 3 independent experiments. ****p < 0.0001; Mann–Whitney test. (e) YEJ P cells were allowed to adhere to pHrodo-labelled 1 mg/ml collagen I for 2 h, treated with 5 μM BTT-3033 or DMSO for 14 h, stained with 1 μg/ml Hoechst and imaged live. Data are presented as the normalised mean ± SD; N = 3 independent experiments. ****p < 0.0001; Mann–Whitney test. (f) SW1990 cells were seeded on pHrodo-labelled 1 mg/ml collagen I for 2 h, treated with 10 μM BTT-3033 or DMSO for 4 h, stained with 1 μg/ml Hoechst and imaged live. Data are presented as the normalised mean ± SD; N = 3 independent experiments. ****p < 0.0001; Mann–Whitney test. (g) Cells were transfected with an siRNA targeting α2 integrin (siITGA2) or a non-targeting siRNA control (siNT) for 72 h, lysed and α2 integrin and GAPDH protein levels were measured by western blotting. Data are presented as the normalised mean ± SD; N = 4 independent replicates. *p = 0.0286; Mann–Whitney test. All the raw data associated with this figure are available in .
(TIF)
S5 Fig

## p38 MAPK inhibition reduced ECM internalisation.
(a) Schematic representation of MAPK inhibitors. (b) MDA-MB-231 cells were serum starved for 16 to 18 h, and 104 cells were seeded on pHrodo-labelled ECM for 6 h in the presence of DMSO or MAPK inhibitors in 0% FBS, stained with 1 μg/ml Hoechst and imaged live. Data analysis was performed with Columbus software. (c) A2780-Rab25 cells were serum starved for 16 to 18 h; 3 × 105 cells were seeded on pHrodo-labelled CDM for 6 h in the presence of DMSO, 10 μM or 50 μM SB202190 in 5% FBS, stained with Hoechst and imaged live. Scale bar, 20 μm. CDM uptake was quantified with ImageJ. Values represented are normalised mean + SD from N = 3 independent experiments; ****p < 0.0001; Kruskal–Wallis test. (d) A2780-Rab25 cells were serum starved for 16 to 18 h, and 3 × 105 cells were cultured on 1 mg/ml collagen I, labelled with NHS-Alexa fluor 555, for 6 h in the presence of DMSO, 10 μM or 50 μM SB202190 in 5% FBS. Cells were fixed and stained for actin and nuclei. Scale bar, 20 μm. Collagen I uptake was quantified with ImageJ. Values represented are normalised mean + SD from N = 3 independent experiments; ****p < 0.0001; Kruskal–Wallis test. (e) YEJ P cells were serum starved for 18 h, and 3 × 105 cells were seeded on pHrodo-labelled 1 mg/ml collagen I for 16 h in the presence of DMSO or 10 μM SB203580 in 5% FBS, stained with Hoechst and imaged live. Scale bar, 20 μm. Collagen I uptake was quantified with ImageJ. Values represented are normalised mean + SD from N = 3 independent experiments; ****p < 0.0001; Mann–Whitney test. (f) SW1990 cells were serum starved for 18 h, and 3 × 105 cells were cultured on pHrodo-labelled 1 mg/ml collagen I for 6 h in the presence of DMSO, 10 μM or 50 μM SB203580 in 5% FBS, stained with Hoechst and imaged live. Scale bar, 20 μm. Collagen I uptake was quantified with ImageJ. Values represented are normalised mean + SD from N = 3 independent experiments; ****p < 0.0001; Kruskal–Wallis test. All the raw data associated with this figure are available in .
(TIF)
S6 Fig

## MAP3K1, MAPK11, and PPP2R1A knockdown decreased ECM internalisation.
(a) A2780-Rab25 cells were transfected with an siRNA targeting MAPK3K1 (siMAP3K1), an siRNA targeting MAPK11 (siMAPK11), an siRNA targeting PPP2R1A (siPPP2R1A), or a non-targeting siRNA control (siNT), seeded on pHrodo-labelled CDM for 6 h, stained with 1 μg/ml Hoechst and imaged live. Scale bar, 20 μm. (b) CDM uptake index was calculated with Image J. Values represented are normalised mean + SD from N = 3 independent experiments; ****p < 0.0001; Kruskal–Wallis test. (c) A2780-Rab25 cells were transfected as in (a), seeded on 1 mg/ml collagen I, labelled with NHS-Alexa fluor 555, for 6 h, fixed and stained for nuclei. Scale bar, 20 μm. (d) Collagen I uptake index was calculated with Image J. Values represented are normalised mean + SD from N = 3 independent experiments; ****p < 0.0001; Kruskal–Wallis test. (e, f) MDA-MB-231 (e) and A2780-Rab25 (f) cells were transfected with an siRNA targeting MAP3K1 (siMAP3K1) or a non-targeting siRNA control (siNT), RNA was extracted and MAP3K1 expression was quantified by qPCR. Normalised data from N = 3 independent experiments; **p = 0.0022; ***p = 0.0003; Mann–Whitney test. (g, h) MDA-MB-231 (g) and A2780-Rab25 (h) cells were transfected with an siRNA targeting MAPK11 (siMAPK11) or a non-targeting siRNA control (siNT), RNA was extracted and MAPK11 expression was quantified by qPCR. Normalised data from N = 3 independent experiments; ****p < 0.0001; Kruskal–Wallis test. (i) MDA-MB-231 cells overexpressing PPP2R1A-GFP were transfected with an siRNA targeting PPP2R1A (siPPP2R1A) or a non-targeting siRNA control (siNT), fixed and stained for nuclei. GFP normalised mean intensity + SD from N = 3 independent experiments is shown; ****p < 0.0001; Mann–Whitney test. (j, k) MDA-MB-231 cells were transfected with an siRNA targeting MAPK11 (siMAPK11, j), an siRNA targeting PPP2R1A (siPPP2R1A, k) or a non-targeting siRNA control (siNT), α2 integrin (ITGA2) and GAPDH protein levels was quantified by western blotting. Data are presented as the normalised mean ± SD; N = 4 independent experiments; *p = 0.0286; Mann–Whitney test. All the raw data associated with this figure are available in .
(TIF)
S7 Fig

## Individual MAPK11 siRNAs impaired collagen I uptake.
(a) MDA-MB-231 cells were transfected with 3 individual siRNA targeting MAPK11 (siMAPK11-7, 9, and 10) or a non-targeting siRNA control (siNT), seeded on pHrodo-labelled 1 mg/ml collagen I for 6 h, stained with 1 μg/ml Hoechst and imaged live. Scale bar, 20 μm. (b) Collagen I uptake index was calculated with Image J. Values represented are normalised mean + SD from N = 3 independent experiments; ****p < 0.0001; Kruskal–Wallis test. (c) MDA-MB-231 cells were transfected as in (a), RNA was extracted and MAPK11 expression was quantified by qPCR. Normalised data from N = 4 independent experiments; ****p < 0.0001; **p = 0.0065; Kruskal–Wallis test. All the raw data associated with this figure are available in .
(TIF)
S8 Fig

## Collagen I-bound α2β1 integrin was degraded in the lysosomes following internalisation.
(a) MDA-MB-231 cells were seeded on NHS-Alexa Fluor 555-labelled 1 mg/ml collagen I for 24 h in the presence of 20 mM E64d, 200 nM Bafilomycin A1 (BafA1) or DMSO control, stained with 1 μg/ml Hoechst and imaged live. Scale bar, 20 μm. (b) Collagen I internal pool was calculated with Image J. Values represented are normalised mean + SD from N = 3 independent experiments; ****p < 0.0001; Kruskal–Wallis test. (c) MDA-MB-231 cells treated as in (a), fixed and stained for α2 integrin (ITGA2, green), actin (red), and nuclei (blue). Scale bar, 20 μm. (d) α2 integrin internal pool was calculated with Image J. Values represented are normalised mean + SD from N = 3 independent experiments; ****p < 0.0001; Kruskal–Wallis test. (e) MDA-MB-231 cells were seeded on 1 mg/ml collagen I for 24 h in the presence of 200 nM Bafilomycin A1 (BafA1) or DMSO control, α2 integrin (ITGA2), and GAPDH protein levels was quantified by western blotting. Data are presented as the normalised mean ± SD; N = 4 independent experiments; *p = 0.0286; Mann–Whitney test. All the raw data associated with this figure are available in .
(TIF)
S9 Fig

## p38 and a2 integrin inhibition reduced macropinocytosis of soluble dextran in MDA-MB-231 cells.
(a) Schematic representation of the experimental set up. (b) MDA-MB-231 cells were seeded on 0.1 mg/ml collagen I for 6 h, pretreated with DMSO (vehicle) or 50 μm SB202190 for 30 min, incubated with 0.25 mg/ml rhodamine-dextran (red) for 1 h in the presence of DMSO or SB202190, fixed and stained for β1 integrin (ITGB1) and nuclei. Scale bar, 20 μM. Dextran uptake index was measured with Image J. Data are presented as the normalised mean ± SD; N = 3 independent experiments. ****p < 0.0001; Mann–Whitney test. (c) MDA-MB-231 cells were seeded on 0.1 mg/ml collagen I for 6 h in the presence of DMSO (vehicle) or 10 μM BTT-3033, incubated with 0.25 mg/ml rhodamine-dextran (red) for 1 h, fixed and stained for β1 integrin (ITGB1) and nuclei. Scale bar, 20 μm. Dextran uptake index was measured with Image J. Data are presented as the normalised mean ± SD; N = 3 independent experiments. ****p < 0.0001; Mann–Whitney test. (d) MDA-MB-231 cells were transfected with an siRNA targeting α2 integrin (siITGA2) or a non-targeting siRNA control (siNT), seeded on 0.1 mg/ml collagen I for 6 h, incubated with 0.25 mg/ml rhodamine-dextran (red) for 1 h, fixed and stained for β1 integrin (ITGB1) and nuclei. Scale bar, 20 μm. Data are presented as the normalised mean ± SD; N = 3 independent experiments. ****p < 0.0001; Mann–Whitney test. All the raw data associated with this figure are available in .
(TIF)
S10 Fig

## Regulators of ECM internalisation were required for ovarian and pancreatic cancer cell migration.
(a–c) A2780-Rab25 cells were transfected with an siRNA targeting MAP3K1 (siMAP3K1), an siRNA targeting MAPK11 (siMAPK11), an siRNA targeting PPP2R1A (siPPP2R1A), an siRNA targeting α2 integrin (si-ITGA2), or a non-targeting siRNA control (siNT), seeded on CDM for 6 h and imaged live with a 10× Nikon Inverted Ti eclipse with Oko-lab environmental control chamber for 17 h. Spider plots show the migration paths of manually tracked cells (directionality >0.5 in black, <0.5 in red). Box and whisker plots represent 5–95 percentile, + represents the mean, dots are <5% and >95%; N = 3 independent experiments. ****p < 0.0001; Kruskal–Wallis test. (d) A2780-Rab25 cells were seeded on CDM for 6 h in the presence of DMSO (Ctrl.) or 50 μM SB203580 and imaged live with a 10× Nikon Inverted Ti eclipse with Oko-lab environmental control chamber for 17 h. Spider plots show the migration paths of manually tracked cells (directionality >0.5 in black, <0.5 in red). Box and whisker plots represent 5–95 percentile, + represents the mean, dots are <5% and >95%; N = 3 independent experiments. ****p < 0.0001; Kruskal–Wallis test. (e) A2780-Rab25 cells were seeded on CDM for 6 h in the presence of the vehicle (water, Ctrl.) and 50 nM Okadaic acid (Okad Ac.) and imaged live with a 10× Nikon Inverted Ti eclipse with Oko-lab environmental control chamber for 17 h. Spider plots show the migration paths of manually tracked cells (directionality >0.5 in black, <0.5 in red). Box and whisker plots represent 5–95 percentile, + represents the mean, dots are <5% and >95%; N = 3 independent experiments. ****p < 0.0001; Kruskal–Wallis test. (f) SW1990 cell confluent monolayers were scratched and overlaid with 0.5 mg/ml collagen I and cells were imaged at 0 h, 3 h, and 6 h. Yellow lines indicate the wound edges. The bar graph shows the normalised relative gap area ± SEM. N = 4 independent experiments. *p ≤ 0.0213, **p = 0.0025; 2-way ANOVA. All the raw data associated with this figure are available in .
(TIF)
S11 Fig

## ECM lysosomal degradation was required for breast cancer cell migration.
MDA-MB-231 cells were seeded on CDM in the presence of 200 nM Bafilomycin A1 (BafA1), 20 μM E64d, or DMSO control for 6 h and imaged live with a 10× Nikon Inverted Ti eclipse with Oko-lab environmental control chamber for 17 h. Spider plots show the migration paths of manually tracked cells (directionality >0.5 in black, <0.5 in red). Bar, 200 mm. Box and whisker plots represent 5–95 percentile, + represents the mean, dots are <5% and >95%; N = 1 independent experiments. ***p = 0.0002, ****p < 0.0001; Kruskal–Wallis test. All the raw data associated with this figure are available in .
(TIF)
S12 Fig

## NHE1 was required for collagen I uptake and directional cell migration.
(a) Schematic, NHE1 promotes macropinocytosis. (b) MDA-MB-231 cells were transfected with an siRNA targeting NHE1 (siNHE1) or a non-targeting siRNA control (siNT), seeded on pHrodo-labelled 1 mg/ml collagen I for 6 h, stained with 1 μg/ml Hoechst and imaged live. Scale bar, 30 μm. Collagen I uptake index was calculated with Image J. Values represented are normalised mean + SD from N = 3 independent experiments; ****p < 0.0001; Mann–Whitney test. (c) MDA-MB-231 cells were transfected as in (a), seeded on CDM and imaged live with a 10× Nikon Inverted Ti eclipse with Oko-lab environmental control chamber for 17 h. Spider plots show the migration paths of manually tracked cells (directionality >0.5 in black, <0.5 in red). Bar, 200 mm. Box and whisker plots represent 5–95 percentile, + represents the mean, dots are <5% and >95%; N = 3 independent experiments. ****p < 0.0001; Kruskal–Wallis test. (d) Cells were transfected as in (a) for 72 h, lysed and NHE1 and GAPDH protein levels were measured by western blotting. Data are presented as the normalised mean ± SD; N = 4 independent replicates. *p = 0.0286; Mann–Whitney test. All the raw data associated with this figure are available in .
(TIF)
S13 Fig

## α2 integrin is up-regulated in mouse mammary tumours and MAP3K1, MAPK11, PPP2R1A, and α2 integrin expression is higher in chemotherapy-resistant breast cancer patients.
(a, b) Tissue sections from polyoma middle T-derived mouse mammary tumours were stained for collagen I (black) and nuclei (blue) (a) or α2 integrin (ITGA2, b); * highlights the stroma, arrow-head indicate collagen I-positive vesicles. Scale bar, 10 μm (a) and 50 μm (b). (c) α2 integrin mean intensity was quantified with Image J; N = 3 independent experiments. ****p < 0.0001; Kruskal–Wallis test. (d–g) RNA sequencing data and ROC analysis for MAP3K1 (a), MAPK11 (b), PPP2R1A (c), and α2 integrin (ITGA2, d) from chemoresistant (non-responder (NR)) and chemosensitive (responder (R)) breast cancer tumours. **p = 0.0090; ***p = 0.0002; ****p < 0.0001; Mann–Whitney test. All the raw data associated with this figure are available in .
(TIF)
S1 Video

## MDA-MB-231 cells internalised and acidified collagen I.
MDA-MB-231 cells were seeded on NHS-fluorescein (green) and pHrodo-labelled 1 mg/ml collagen I (magenta), cells were allowed to adhere for 30 min before being imaged live for 5 h every minute with a 63× oil objective Zeiss LSM980 Airyscan 2 microscope with environmental chamber. Video corresponding to .
(AVI)
S2 Video

## MDA-MB-231 cells internalised collagen I during cell migration.
MDA-MB-231 cells were seeded on NHS-fluorescein (green) and pHrodo-labelled 1 mg/ml collagen I (magenta), cells were allowed to adhere for 30 min and imaged live for 5 h every minute with a 63× oil objective Zeiss LSM980 Airyscan 2 microscope with environmental chamber. Video corresponding to .
(MOV)
S3 Video

## MDA-MB-231 cells internalised CDM during cell migration.
MDA-MB-231 cells were seeded on pHrodo-labelled CDM (red) for 6 h before imaging for an additional period of 6 h with a 10× objective from a Nikon Inverted Ti eclipse with Oko-lab environmental control chamber. Video corresponding to .
(AVI)
S1 Table

## Raw data values for Matrigel uptake index.
Data were normalised between NT5+BafA1 (-1) and NT5 (0). Hits are shown in blue, while controls are in green.
(XLSX)
S2 Table

## Reactome analysis of the positive and negative regulator hits obtained in the screening.
(XLSX)
S3 Table

## Data were normalised between NT5+BafA1 (-1) and NT5 (0).
The table shows kinome and phosphatome results and deconvolution of 4 individual siRNAs (2 biological replicates, 2 technical replicates per biological replicate). Validated positive regulators are highlighted in orange, while negative regulators are in green. Controls (ITGB1 and PAK1) are in dark red, NT5+BafA1 is in pink, and NT5 is blue.
(XLSX)
S4 Table

## Cell seeding values for generation of cell derived matrices.
(XLSX)
S5 Table

## siRNA information.
(XLSX)
S1 Raw Images

## Original western blot images used to prepare Figs , S2g, S4g, S6j, S6k, S8e, and S12d.
(PDF)
S1 Data

## Numerical data used for the generation of the graphs presented in .
The biological replicates are colour coded.
(XLSX)
S2 Data

## Numerical data used for the generation of the graphs presented in .
The biological replicates are colour coded.
(XLSX)
S3 Data

## Numerical data used for the generation of the graphs presented in .
The biological replicates are colour coded.
(XLSX)
S4 Data

## Numerical data used for the generation of the graphs presented in .
The biological replicates are colour coded.
(XLSX)
S5 Data

## Numerical data used for the generation of the graphs presented in .
The biological replicates are colour coded.
(XLSX)
S6 Data

## Numerical data used for the generation of the graphs presented in .
The biological replicates are colour coded.
(XLSX)
S7 Data

## Numerical data used for the generation of the graphs presented in .
The biological replicates are colour coded.
(XLSX)
S8 Data

## Numerical data used for the generation of the graphs presented in .
The biological replicates are colour coded.
(XLSX)
S9 Data

## Numerical data used for the generation of the graphs presented in .
The biological replicates are colour coded.
(XLSX)
S10 Data

## Numerical data used for the generation of the graphs presented in .
The biological replicates are colour coded.
(XLSX)
S11 Data

## Numerical data used for the generation of the graphs presented in .
The biological replicates are colour coded.
(XLSX)
S12 Data

## Numerical data used for the generation of the graphs presented in .
The biological replicates are colour coded.
(XLSX)
S13 Data

## Numerical data used for the generation of the graphs presented in .
The biological replicates are colour coded.
(XLSX)
S14 Data

## Numerical data used for the generation of the graphs presented in .
The biological replicates are colour coded.
(XLSX)
S15 Data

## Numerical data used for the generation of the graphs presented in .
The biological replicates are colour coded.
(XLSX)
S16 Data

## Numerical data used for the generation of the graphs presented in .
The biological replicates are colour coded.
(XLSX)
S17 Data

## Numerical data used for the generation of the graphs presented in .
The biological replicates are colour coded.
(XLSX)
S18 Data

## Numerical data used for the generation of the graphs presented in .
The biological replicates are colour coded.
(XLSX)
S19 Data

## Numerical data used for the generation of the graphs presented in .
The biological replicates are colour coded.
(XLSX)
S20 Data

## Numerical data used for the generation of the graphs presented in .
The biological replicates are colour coded.
(XLSX)

Imaging work was performed at the Wolfson Light Microscopy Facility, University of Sheffield, using the Nikon A1 confocal, Nikon widefield and Airyscan microscope. High-throughput imaging was performed in the RNAi screening facility in IMCB, Singapore. FACS sorting was performed by SIgN (A*STAR, Singapore). qPCR analysis was performed in collaboration with the Tsakiridis lab at the University of Sheffield. We would like to acknowledge Marga Albu for developing the Image J macro used for ECM uptake quantification. We thank Dr. Rebecca Bennion for the critical reading and proofreading of the manuscript.
The Wolfson Light Microscopy Facility, University of Sheffield, is funded by the Wellcome Trust (grant WT093134AIA).

## Abbreviations:
BSAbovine serum albumin
CDMcell-derived matrix
DCISductal carcinoma in situ
DMEMDulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium
ECMextracellular matrix
EGAEuropean Genome-Phenome Archive
EGFRepidermal growth factor receptor
ERKextracellular signal-regulated kinase
FAKfocal adhesion kinase
FBSfetal bovine serum
GEOGene Expression Omnibus
MAPKmitogen-activated protein kinase
PDACpancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
PP2protein phosphatase 2
PyMTpolyoma middle T
TCGAThe Cancer Genome Atlas
 10.1371/journal.pbio.3002930.r001Author response to previous submission
Submission Version0
2 May 2024

AttachmentSubmitted filename: 143918_1_rebuttal_3004408_sct12l.docx
10.1371/journal.pbio.3002930.r002Decision Letter 0
Alvarez-GarciaInesSenior Editor© 2024 Ines Alvarez-Garcia2024Ines Alvarez-Garciahttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
22 May 2024

Dear Dr Rainero, 
Thank you for submitting your manuscript entitled "Internalisation of integrin-bound extracellular matrix modulates invasive carcinoma cell migration" for consideration as a Research Article by PLOS Biology.
Your manuscript, along with the Review Commons' reports and your revision plan, has now been evaluated by the PLOS Biology editorial staff as well as by an academic editor with relevant expertise, and I am writing to let you know that we would like to invite you to submit a revision, but as a Methods and Resources paper. Thus, when you submit the metadata (see below), please select that type of article from the drop down menu.
Before we can send you the decision, we need you to complete your submission by providing the metadata that is required for full assessment. To this end, please login to Editorial Manager where you will find the paper in the 'Submissions Needing Revisions' folder on your homepage. Please click 'Revise Submission' from the Action Links and complete all additional questions in the submission questionnaire.
Once your full submission is complete, your paper will undergo a series of checks. After your manuscript has passed the checks, we will send you the decision. To provide the metadata for your submission, please Login to Editorial Manager (https://www.editorialmanager.com/pbiology) within two working days, i.e. by May 24 2024 11:59PM.
During the process of completing your manuscript submission, you will be invited to opt-in to posting your pre-review manuscript as a bioRxiv preprint. Visit http://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/preprints for full details. If you consent to posting your current manuscript as a preprint, please upload a single Preprint PDF. 
Feel free to email us at plosbiology@plos.org if you have any queries relating to your submission.
Kind regards,
Ines
--
Ines Alvarez-Garcia, PhD
Senior Editor
PLOS Biology

ialvarez-garcia@plos.org

10.1371/journal.pbio.3002930.r003Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
23 May 2024

AttachmentSubmitted filename: 143918_1_rebuttal_3004408_sct12l.docx
10.1371/journal.pbio.3002930.r004Decision Letter 1
Alvarez-GarciaInesSenior Editor© 2024 Ines Alvarez-Garcia2024Ines Alvarez-Garciahttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
28 May 2024

Dear Dr Rainero,
Thank you for completing the metadata of the manuscript entitled "Internalisation of integrin-bound extracellular matrix modulates invasive carcinoma cell migration" and submitted via Review Commons as a Methods and Resources article in PLOS Biology.
Based on the associated reviews and the advice of an Academic Editor expert in the field, we would like to invite you to submit a revision that thoroughly address the reviewers' reports according to the revision plan.
Please note that we cannot make a decision about publication until we have seen the revised manuscript and that your revised manuscript is likely to be sent for further evaluation by all or a subset of the original reviewers.
We expect to receive your revised manuscript within 3 months. Please email us (plosbiology@plos.org) if you have any questions or concerns, or would like to request an extension. 
At this stage, your manuscript remains formally under active consideration at our journal; please notify us by email if you do not intend to submit a revision so that we may withdraw it.
**IMPORTANT - SUBMITTING YOUR REVISION**
Your revisions should address the specific points made by each reviewer. Please submit the following files along with your revised manuscript:
1. A 'Response to Reviewers' file - this should detail your responses to the editorial requests, present a point-by-point response to all of the reviewers' comments, and indicate the changes made to the manuscript. 
*NOTE: In your point-by-point response to the reviewers, please provide the full context of each review. Do not selectively quote paragraphs or sentences to reply to. The entire set of reviewer comments should be present in full and each specific point should be responded to individually, point by point.
You should also cite any additional relevant literature that has been published since the original submission and mention any additional citations in your response. 
2. In addition to a clean copy of the manuscript, please also upload a 'track-changes' version of your manuscript that specifies the edits made. This should be uploaded as a "Revised Article with Changes Highlighted" file type. 
3. Resubmission Checklist
When you are ready to resubmit your revised manuscript, please refer to this resubmission checklist: https://plos.io/Biology_Checklist
To submit a revised version of your manuscript, please go to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pbiology/ and log in as an Author. Click the link labelled 'Submissions Needing Revision' where you will find your submission record. 
Please make sure to read the following important policies and guidelines while preparing your revision and fulfil the editorial requests:
a) *PLOS Data Policy*
Please note that as a condition of publication PLOS' data policy (http://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/data-availability) requires that you make available all data used to draw the conclusions arrived at in your manuscript. If you have not already done so, you must include any data used in your manuscript either in appropriate repositories, within the body of the manuscript, or as supporting information (N.B. this includes any numerical values that were used to generate graphs, histograms etc.). Please also indicate in each figure legend where the data can be found. For an example see here: http://www.plosbiology.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pbio.1001908#s5
b) *Published Peer Review*
Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out. Please see here for more details:

https://blogs.plos.org/plos/2019/05/plos-journals-now-open-for-published-peer-review/

c) *Blot and Gel Data Policy*
Please provide the original, uncropped and minimally adjusted images supporting all blot and gel results reported in an article's figures or Supporting Information files. We will require these files before a manuscript can be accepted so please prepare them now, if you have not already uploaded them. Please carefully read our guidelines for how to prepare and upload this data: https://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/figures#loc-blot-and-gel-reporting-requirements

d) *Blurb*
Please also provide a blurb which (if accepted) will be included in our weekly and monthly Electronic Table of Contents, sent out to readers of PLOS Biology, and may be used to promote your article in social media. The blurb should be about 30-40 words long and is subject to editorial changes. It should, without exaggeration, entice people to read your manuscript. It should not be redundant with the title and should not contain acronyms or abbreviations. For examples, view our author guidelines: https://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/revising-your-manuscript#loc-blurb
e) *Protocols deposition*
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that if applicable you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/submission-guidelines#loc-materials-and-methods
Thank you again for your submission to our journal. We hope that our editorial process has been constructive thus far, and we welcome your feedback at any time. Please don't hesitate to contact us if you have any questions or comments.
Sincerely,
Ines
--
Ines Alvarez-Garcia, PhD
Senior Editor
PLOS Biology

ialvarez-garcia@plos.org

10.1371/journal.pbio.3002930.r005Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version2
9 Aug 2024

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response_to_reviewers_Llanses_Martinez.pdf
10.1371/journal.pbio.3002930.r006Decision Letter 2
Alvarez-GarciaInesSenior Editor© 2024 Ines Alvarez-Garcia2024Ines Alvarez-Garciahttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
1 Oct 2024

Dear Dr Rainero,
Thank you for your patience while we considered your revised manuscript entitled "Internalisation of integrin-bound extracellular matrix modulates invasive carcinoma cell migration" for publication as a Methods and Resources at PLOS Biology. This revised version of your manuscript has been evaluated by the PLOS Biology editors, the Academic Editor and the two original reviewers.
Based on the reviews (attached below), we are likely to accept this manuscript for publication, provided you satisfactorily address the data and other policy-related requests stated below.
In addition, we would like you to rework the Abstract keeping in mind the resource nature of the manuscript and we would also like you to consider a suggestiong to improve the title:
"Novel kinase regulators of extracellular matrix internalization identified by high-content screening modulate invasive carcinoma cell migration"
As you address these items, please take this last chance to review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the cover letter that accompanies your revised manuscript.
We expect to receive your revised manuscript within two weeks. 
To submit your revision, please go to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pbiology/ and log in as an Author. Click the link labelled 'Submissions Needing Revision' to find your submission record. Your revised submission must include the following:
- a cover letter that should detail your responses to any editorial requests, if applicable, and whether changes have been made to the reference list
- a Response to Reviewers file that provides a detailed response to the reviewers' comments (if applicable, if not applicable please do not delete your existing 'Response to Reviewers' file.)
- a track-changes file indicating any changes that you have made to the manuscript. 
NOTE: If Supporting Information files are included with your article, note that these are not copyedited and will be published as they are submitted. Please ensure that these files are legible and of high quality (at least 300 dpi) in an easily accessible file format. For this reason, please be aware that any references listed in an SI file will not be indexed. For more information, see our Supporting Information guidelines:
https://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/supporting-information

*Published Peer Review History*
Please note that you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out. Please see here for more details:

https://plos.org/published-peer-review-history/

*Press*
Should you, your institution's press office or the journal office choose to press release your paper, please ensure you have opted out of Early Article Posting on the submission form. We ask that you notify us as soon as possible if you or your institution is planning to press release the article.
*Protocols deposition*
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that if applicable you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
Please do not hesitate to contact me should you have any questions.
Sincerely,
Ines
--
Ines Alvarez-Garcia, PhD
Senior Editor
PLOS Biology

ialvarez-garcia@plos.org

------------------------------------------------------------------------
DATA POLICY: IMPORTANT - PLEASE READ
You may be aware of the PLOS Data Policy, which requires that all data be made available without restriction: http://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/data-availability. For more information, please also see this editorial: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1001797

Note that we do not require all raw data. Rather, we ask that all individual quantitative observations that underlie the data summarized in the figures and results of your paper be made available in one of the following forms:
1) Supplementary files (e.g., excel). Please ensure that all data files are uploaded as 'Supporting Information' and are invariably referred to (in the manuscript, figure legends, and the Description field when uploading your files) using the following format verbatim: S1 Data, S2 Data, etc. Multiple panels of a single or even several figures can be included as multiple sheets in one excel file that is saved using exactly the following convention: S1_Data.xlsx (using an underscore).
2) Deposition in a publicly available repository. Please also provide the accession code or a reviewer link so that we may view your data before publication. 
Regardless of the method selected, please ensure that you provide the individual numerical values that underlie the summary data displayed in the following figure panels as they are essential for readers to assess your analysis and to reproduce it:
Fig. 1B, C, E, F; Fig. 2A-D; Fig. 3B, D-F; Fig. 4B, D, E; Fig. 5C-F; Fig. 6C-G; Fig. 7A-I; Fig. S1A-D; Fig. S2A-C, E-H, J; Fig. S3B-G; Fig. S4A-H; Fig. S5B-F; Fig. S6B, D-K; Fig. S7B, C; Fig. S8B, D, E; Fig. S9B-D; Fig. S10A-F; Fig. S11; Fig. S12B-D and Fig. S13C-D
NOTE: the numerical data provided should include all replicates AND the way in which the plotted mean and errors were derived (it should not present only the mean/average values).
Please also ensure that figure legends in your manuscript include information ON WHERE THE UNDERLYING DATA CAN BE FOUND, and ensure your supplemental data file/s has a legend.
Please ensure that your Data Statement in the submission system accurately describes where your data can be found.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
CODE POLICY
Per journal policy, if you have generated any custom code during the course of this investigation, please make it available without restrictions. Please ensure that the code is sufficiently well documented and reusable, and that your Data Statement in the Editorial Manager submission system accurately describes where your code can be found.
Please note that we cannot accept sole deposition of code in GitHub, as this could be changed after publication. However, you can archive this version of your publicly available GitHub code to Zenodo. Once you do this, it will generate a DOI number, which you will need to provide in the Data Accessibility Statement (you are welcome to also provide the GitHub access information). See the process for doing this here: https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/archiving-a-github-repository/referencing-and-citing-content
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Reviewers' comments
Rev. 1: Johanna Ivaska - note that this reviewer has signed her review
The authors have addressed all of my concerns and I recommend publication of this interesting study.
Rev. 2:
The revised manuscript by Martinez et al. has addressed all of my previous concerns. I support publication. I commend the authors on a lovely manuscript.
There is one error to address. In the results for examination of ECM in tissue, this is referred to as Extended data Fig. 9. I believe that this should be Extended data Fig. 13.
10.1371/journal.pbio.3002930.r007Author response to Decision Letter 2
Submission Version3
9 Oct 2024

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response_to_reviewers_Llanses_Martinez.pdf
10.1371/journal.pbio.3002930.r008Decision Letter 3
Alvarez-GarciaInesSenior Editor© 2024 Ines Alvarez-Garcia2024Ines Alvarez-Garciahttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version3
6 Nov 2024

Dear Dr Rainero,
Thank you for the submission of your revised Methods and Resources entitled "Novel kinase regulators of extracellular matrix internalization identified by high-content screening modulate invasive carcinoma cell migration" for publication in PLOS Biology. On behalf of my colleagues and the Academic Editor, Carole Parent, I am delighted to let you know that we can in principle accept your manuscript for publication, provided you address any remaining formatting and reporting issues. These will be detailed in an email you should receive within 2-3 business days from our colleagues in the journal operations team; no action is required from you until then. Please note that we will not be able to formally accept your manuscript and schedule it for publication until you have completed any requested changes.
Please take a minute to log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pbiology/, click the "Update My Information" link at the top of the page, and update your user information to ensure an efficient production process.
PRESS
We frequently collaborate with press offices. If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper at this point, to enable them to help maximise its impact. If the press office is planning to promote your findings, we would be grateful if they could coordinate with biologypress@plos.org. If you have previously opted in to the early version process, we ask that you notify us immediately of any press plans so that we may opt out on your behalf.
We also ask that you take this opportunity to read our Embargo Policy regarding the discussion, promotion and media coverage of work that is yet to be published by PLOS. As your manuscript is not yet published, it is bound by the conditions of our Embargo Policy. Please be aware that this policy is in place both to ensure that any press coverage of your article is fully substantiated and to provide a direct link between such coverage and the published work. For full details of our Embargo Policy, please visit http://www.plos.org/about/media-inquiries/embargo-policy/.
Many congratulations and thanks again for choosing PLOS Biology for publication and supporting Open Access publishing. We look forward to publishing your study. 
Sincerely, 
Ines
--
Ines Alvarez-Garcia, PhD
Senior Editor
PLOS Biology

ialvarez-garcia@plos.org