3547genesdissGenes & DiseasesGenes DisChongqing Medical UniversityPMC1049198010491980104919803769248510.1016/j.gendis.2023.06.017IGF2BPs as novel m6A readers: Diverse roles in regulating cancer cell biological functions, hypoxia adaptation, metabolism, and immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment
DuanMeiqi LiuHaiyang XuShasha YangZhi ZhangFusheng WangGuang WangYutian ZhaoShan JiangXiaofeng aDepartment of General Surgery, The Fourth Affiliated Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning 110032, ChinabDepartment of Gastroendoscopy, The Fourth Affiliated Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning 110032, ChinacDepartment of Rheumatology and Immunology, The First Affiliated Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning 110002, China∗Corresponding authors. zhaoshan1109@163.com18900912171@163.com
1These authors contributed equally to this work.
2072023112890890–9201092023© 2023 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co., Ltd.This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
m6A methylation is the most frequent modification of mRNA in eukaryotes and plays a crucial role in cancer progression by regulating biological functions. Insulin-like growth factor 2 mRNA-binding proteins (IGF2BP) are newly identified m6A ‘readers’. They belong to a family of RNA-binding proteins, which bind to the m6A sites on different RNA sequences and stabilize them to promote cancer progression. In this review, we summarize the mechanisms by which different upstream factors regulate IGF2BP in cancer. The current literature analyzed here reveals that the IGF2BP family proteins promote cancer cell proliferation, survival, and chemoresistance, inhibit apoptosis, and are also associated with cancer glycolysis, angiogenesis, and the immune response in the tumor microenvironment. Therefore, with the discovery of their role as ‘readers’ of m6A and the characteristic re-expression of IGF2BPs in cancers, it is important to elucidate their mechanism of action in the immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment. We also describe in detail the regulatory and interaction network of the IGF2BP family in downstream target RNAs and discuss their potential clinical applications as diagnostic and prognostic markers, as well as recent advances in IGF2BP biology and associated therapeutic value.
Keywords: Cancer, IGF2BP, Immunosuppressive TME, m6A, Molecular mechanism, Therapy

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2022 Dec 6; Revised 2023 Mar 24; Accepted 2023 Jun 14; Collection date 2024 Mar.

## Introduction
Epigenetic mechanisms, mainly involving chromatin rearrangement, DNA methylation, RNA interference, RNA modification, and histone modification, refer to reversible and heritable phenotypes, which do not arise from altered DNA sequences. There are over 170 types of RNA modifications, including N6-methyladenosine (m6A), N6,2′-O-dimethyladenosine (m6Am), 5-methylcytidine (m5C), 5-hydroxylmethylcytidine (hm5 C), and N1-methyladenosine (m1A). Among these, m6A methylation is the most abundant internal mRNA modification in eukaryotes, and m6A sites are enriched in 3′ untranslated regions (UTR) especially located near stop codons. The methylation of m6A sites regulates the post-transcriptional modifications of RNAs in several ways, including splicing, exporting, stabilization, translation, and decay. Recently, it has been demonstrated that m6A can participate in the regulation of biological processes through a variety of mechanisms, thus playing a key role in cancer. 
The methylation of m6A is regulated by regulators, consisting of ‘writers’, ‘erasers’, and ‘readers’. Writers are methyltransferases, which install m6A methyl groups on RNA, while erasers are demethylases, which remove RNA m6A methylation reversibly. Readers are proteins that perform the biological functions of m6A methylation, and IGF2BPs are newly identified members of this group and include IGF2BP1, IGF2BP2, and IGF2BP3. However, as newly discovered m6A readers, the effects of IGF2BP in various malignancies and their associated mechanisms are still poorly understood.
Initially, researchers identified a protein with four K-homologous (KH) domains that is highly expressed in pancreatic cancer (PC) and named it KOC. With further research, the understanding of this protein grew, and was later named IGF2BP3. IGF2BP1, IGF2BP2, and IGF2BP3 belong to the family of RNA-binding proteins (RBPs), which participate in determining the fate of mRNAs transcripts by becoming a structural component of messenger ribonucleoprotein particles (mRNPs). , , Recently, a large number of studies have emerged investigating the function of IGF2BPs as m6A readers for recognizing m6A methylation. These studies provide evidence that IGF2BPs regulate gene expression by binding to the m6A binding sites of target mRNAs, thus intervening in various stages of RNA metabolism to influence many oncogenic processes, such as maintaining cancer stem cell stemness, promoting cancer proliferation, migration, glycolysis, cell cycle transition, and angiogenesis. , , , , , , Convincing evidence that IGF2BP mediates tumor bio-behavioral changes and regulates the progression of various malignant diseases including pancreatic, hepatocellular, breast, and colorectal cancers through m6A methylation modifications. , , For example, IGF2BP2 promoted stem cell properties in breast cancer by stabilizing m6A-modified DROSHA mRNA. Herein, we propose that the role of IGF2BPs in the tumor microenvironment (TME) is multifactorial, not only promoting cancer biological properties but also their relationship with immune cells prompting us to further explore their role in the immunosuppressive TME.
The global incidence of malignant cancers is increasing and exploring their pathogenesis is of great significance for the early diagnosis and treatment of malignant cancers. Thus, it is particularly important to study the upstream regulatory mechanism of IGF2BPs. Understanding how these are expressed in malignant cancers will lead to a better understanding of the mechanisms responsible for tumorigenesis. In this review, we summarize various aspects involved in IGF2BP-mediated regulation of gene expression and the influence of different factors on their RNA binding capacity. Meanwhile, the specific mechanism of IGF2BPs in regulating RNA stability, localization, translation, and other processing in cancers is updated and the post-transcriptional regulatory network of its targeting noncoding RNAs (ncRNAs) is introduced. Finally, we discuss their potential value in cancer diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment, and track the development status of selective inhibitors of IGF2BPs to explore the possibility of their clinical application ( ).
 

## The related structure of IGF2BPs protein for binding with the target RNAs
IGF2BPs are a family of insulin-like growth factor 2 mRNA-binding proteins that contain IGF2BP1–3. IGF2BPs' aliases include IMP1–3, VICKZ1–3 (based on the first letter of its founding members), CRD-BP (IGF2BP1), ZBP1 (IGF2BP1 homologue in chickens), Vg1RBP/Vera (homologue in Xenopus), or KOC (IGF2BP3), and are considered new m6A readers. However, it should be noted that Z-DNA binding protein 1 (ZBP1) should not be confused with IGF2BP1 and U3 small nucleolar ribonucleoprotein (IMP3) with IGF2BP3, as these share a common symbol/alias. IGF2BPs are highly conserved in many species, such as humans, chimpanzees, Rhesus monkeys, dogs, cows, rats, chickens, and zebrafish. IGF2BPs contain two RNA recognition motifs (RRM) at the N-terminal and four KH domains at the C-terminal ( ). From previous studies, we know that the four KH domains are essential for intracellular granule formation, trafficking of IGF2BP1, and RNA binding in vitro. Further research has revealed that the KH1/2 domain may be necessary for the stabilization of IGF2BP-RNA complexes, and the KH3/4 domain is essential for m6A recognition and binding with target RNAs. , A recent study found that the high affinity of the KH1/2 domain for mRNA binding was achieved by interdomain coupling, which supported the role of IGF2BP1 recognition of known cancer targets. Different target RNAs require different KH domains for binding. For example, the KH1/2 domains of IGF2BP1 are necessary for binding to long ncRNA (lncRNA) KB-1980E6.3. Although circNSUN2 binds to the KH3-4 didomain of IGF2BP2, other studies have shown that all four KH domains of IGF2BP1 are essential for binding to KRAS or the microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (MITF) mRNA. , Importantly, any single-point mutation in one of the four KH domains significantly affects the binding between IGF2BP1 and mRNA. 
 

## The regulation of IGF2BPs in cancers

## The regulation process of IGF2BPs expression
IGF2BPs are expressed in the embryo and are also expressed in mature testicular germ cells and oocytes. , In adult tissues, IGF2BPs except IGF2BP2 have low expression levels. IGF2BPs are increased or re-expressed in some malignant cancers and are therefore considered a conserved post-transcriptional enhancer of pro-oncogenic factors. The regulatory mechanisms of IGF2BP expression have not been fully elucidated, and therefore we will outline some regulatory modalities in cancers, including chromosomal rearrangements, epigenetic modifications, transcriptional control, post-translational modifications, degradation, and regulation.

## Effect of chromosomal rearrangements on IGF2BPs expression
With the help of full transcriptome and whole genome sequencing, researchers have identified the chromosomal rearrangements occurring in thyroid cancer (TC), where the thyroid adenoma-associated (THADA) fusion to LOC389473 (the upstream region of the IGF2BP3 gene) and other regions in the vicinity increased the expression of full-length IGF2BP3 mRNA and protein. As we know, copy number alteration (CNA) is generally due to genomic rearrangements and is one of the mechanisms that lead to the overexpression of IGF2BP2 in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). However, CNAs are not the cause of the up-regulation of IGF2BP1 in anaplastic thyroid carcinomas (ATC), indicating that the expression regulation of IGF2BP1/2/3 in cancers is diverse.

## Epigenetic modifications affect IGF2BPs expression
Under the action of DNA methyltransferase or histone deacetylase inhibitors, the expression of IGF2BP3 increased significantly in mouse osteosarcoma, indicating that the expression of IGF2BP3 is partly attributable to epigenetic regulation such as DNA demethylation and histone acetylation. Furthermore, researchers found that DNA methylation at the IGF2BP3 gene promoter contributed to its silencing in normal human tissues, in contrast to its almost complete demethylation in intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma. In addition, histone acetylation on the promoter of IGF2BP1 promotes its transcriptional activation in melanoma cells. In pancreatic islet cancers, it was also verified that IGF2BP2 is epigenetically regulated by menin–histone methyltransferase complexes in a time-dependent manner. From this evidence, we know that one of the causes of IGF2BP re-expression in cancers is the alteration of epigenetic modifications.

## Transcriptional and post-transcriptional control influence IGF2BPs expression
Exploring the regulation of gene transcription in the context of cancer helps to understand the occurrence and development of cancer. Some studies have identified the mechanism of IGF2BP transcriptional control in different cancers. In breast cancer, IGF2BP1 transactivation was shown to be associated with nuclear translocation of β-catenin, where a highly conserved element (CTTTG-TC) located near the IGF2BP1 promoter region was essential for IGF2BP1 transcriptional activity. Conversely, IGF2BP1 could also stabilize β-catenin mRNA, implying that there exists a positive feedback loop. There is also evidence that IGF2BP2 transcription was regulated by the high mobility group AT-hook 2 (HMGA2) and its tumor-specific truncated form HMGA2Tr. In detail, HMGA2 binds directly to the AT-rich regulatory region located in the first intron of IGF2BP2, while a consensus binding site for NF-κB adjacent to the AT-rich regulatory region can bind to NF-κB. Ultimately, they synergistically promote the transcription of IGF2BP2 in human liposarcomas. Nonetheless, MYC, a widely recognized oncogene, is not only a target mRNA for IGF2BP3 but it also effectively binds to the IGF2BP3 promoter in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) and increases its transcriptional activity, indicating that there may be a positive feedback loop between IGF2BP3 and MYC. , In other cancers, such as triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) and lung cancer, studies have explored their transcriptional regulation. Moreover, the positive feedback loops described above partially explain why IGF2BPs are highly expressed in malignant cancers, as these positive feedbacks may initiate cascade reactions that amplify their effects.
It has been shown that miRNAs can bind to IGF2BP to inhibit their expression. , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , In contrast, in colorectal cancer (CRC), the short 3′UTR transcript of IGF2BP1 increases IGF2BP1 protein expression as it lacks miRNA sites. Therefore, it can be speculated that competitive binding to miRNAs can also up-regulate IGF2BPs in cancers, and recent studies have confirmed this hypothesis. , , , , , , , , , , Interestingly, IGF2BP3 stabilizes the lncRNA KCNMB2-AS1 in an m6A methylation-dependent manner, while KCNMB2-AS1 sponges miR-130b-5p and miR-4294 can induce the up-regulation of IGF2BP3, which then forms a positive feedback loop in cervical cancer. The mRNA of IGF2BP1 or IGF2BP3 is stabilized by the lncRNA THOR or DARS-AS1 in cancer cells. , Therefore, the mechanisms by which ncRNAs regulate IGF2BP protein expression involve regulating gene transcription.

## The influence of post-translational modifications on IGF2BPs
In post-translation and co-translation, mTOR can dually phosphorylate the Ser162 and Ser164 residue of IGF2BP2 located in the N-terminal linker region between RRM2 and KH1 in a rapamycin-sensitive manner. , IGF2BP3 was also phosphorylated by mTOR at the Ser183 residue, and similarly, IGF2BP1 is co-translationally phosphorylated at Ser181 by mTOR in the mTOR complex 2 (mTORC2), and subsequently released from mTOR to bind target mRNAs, which protected the phosphorylation site from cellular protein phosphatases. Human embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma cells and mouse embryonic fibroblasts were used in these studies to demonstrate that phosphorylated IGF2BP could bind to downstream target RNAs, providing evidence for their role in cancer-promoting activity.

## Regulation of IGF2BPs protein degradation
Regarding the degradation of IGF2BPs, researchers have recently reported that makorin ring finger protein 2 (MKRN2), an E3 ligase, acts as a cancer suppressor in neuroblastoma by mediating the ubiquitination of IGF2BP3. Ubiquitin-specific protease 11 (USP11), a deubiquitinating enzyme, prevented the ubiquitination and degradation of IGF2BP3 in colorectal cancer. Furthermore, SUMO1-mediated SUMOylation, a modification that regulates substrate protein expression and activity, prevents IGF2BP2 degradation in glioma through the ubiquitin proteasome pathway. 
ncRNAs can also regulate IGF2BP degradation in different ways. For example, circNDUFB2 is down-regulated in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), but its overexpression improves ubiquitination and degradation of IGF2BP1/2/3 meditated by TRIM25, a member of the tripartite motif (TRIM) family of E3 ubiquitin ligases. LncRNA LINRIS prevented the degradation of IGF2BP2 via the autophagy-lysosome pathway in CRC by binding to the ubiquitination site K139 of IGF2BP2 in the absence of inhibition factors, such as GATA3. circNEIL3 could inhibit HECTD4-mediated degradation of IGF2BP3 via the ubiquitin proteasome in glioma. The differential regulation of IGF2BP degradation by ncRNAs also confirms that cancers have complex environments and regulatory mechanisms. In summary, preventing the degradation of IGF2BPs is another way to maintain their expression in cancers. In recent years, the development of molecules that specifically degrade targeted proteins is an emerging cancer treatment strategy; therefore, drugs targeting IGF2BP degradation may be a viable therapeutic approach.

## Various factors affecting the binding ability of IGF2BPs and RNA
IGF2BPs are required to bind to different RNAs to influence cancer progression; therefore, the RNA binding ability of IGF2BPs is very important and can be affected by many factors, including proteins, mRNAs, and ncRNAs. For instance, the Aurora kinase A (AURKA) oncogene enhanced the IGF2BP2 binding to m6A methylation-modified transcripts in breast cancer, rather than promoting its nuclear translocation. Although lncRNAs belong to ncRNAs, recently researchers have found that some lncRNAs can also encode proteins. Zhu et al confirmed in different cancer cell lines that LINC00266-1 encodes a peptide called RNA-binding regulatory peptide (RBRP), which binds to the KH3-4 domain of IGF2BP and promotes the ability of IGF2BP1 to recognize the m6A sites on c-MYC mRNA. YBX1 is important in promoting the recognition of m6A-modified RNAs by IGF2BP1/2/3 in myeloid leukemia. Conversely, in Ewing sarcoma, ABCF1 mRNA acts as a sponge to bind to IGF2BP3 and limits its interaction with oncogenic target transcripts. Tyrosine protein phosphatase non-receptor type 13 (PTPN13) also inhibits the binding of IGF2BP1 to c-MYC to inhibit HCC cell proliferation and tumorigenesis. Although most ncRNAs are not translated into proteins, they have made great contributions to the regulation of genes, especially in the occurrence and development of cancers. Its regulatory effect on IGF2BPs could also manifest itself by affecting the binding ability of IGF2BPs and target RNAs. As shown in , some ncRNAs could promote binding processes to promote cancer progression, , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , and some other ncRNAs could competitively bind to the KH domain of IGF2BP, thus interfering with the recognition of m6A modified RNAs by IGF2BP and inhibiting their expression to suppress cancers. , , , , , The above results suggest that the effects of ncRNAs on the binding capacity of IGF2BPs are complex. Therefore, it is very interesting to investigate this mechanism in depth, which will help us to better understand the role of IGF2BPs in cancers and their mechanisms, and to find the molecules that can specifically inhibit the binding ability of IGF2BP with RNAs to treat cancers more effectively.
 

## IGF2BPs-induced regulation of cancer

## IGF2BPs regulate cancer progression by affecting RNAs
Despite being RNA-binding proteins with similar sequence homology, IGF2BP1, IGF2BP2, and IGF2BP3, the proteins exhibit different RNA-binding properties and may be related to different target transcripts. Each family member regulates a unique pool of RNAs. Thousands of transcripts have been identified as targets of each IGF2BP protein, but the exact molecular mechanism by which IGF2BPs control these transcripts and participate in biological processes has just begun to be elucidated. The most recent research indicates that the oncogenic function of IGF2BPs may depend on its role as m6A readers. Therefore, in this section, we review previous studies, combined with recent novel insights, to summarize the mechanism of action of IGF2BPs in the regulation of mRNA processing ( ) and the regulatory network of IGF2BPs and ncRNAs in cancers.
 

## Modulation of mRNA by IGF2BPs in cancers

## IGF2BPs could increase the stability of mRNA
Since the discovery of the IGF2BP protein family, its role as RBPs has been continuously updated. IGF2BP proteins can influence RNA stability through a variety of mechanisms in different cancers, including sequestering mRNAs in mRNP that did not contain the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC), , , preventing miRNA-dependent degradation, , , , and functioning as m6A readers that bind to m6A sites in RNA. , , , Specifically, Huang et al identified three IGF2BPs that could preferentially bind to the “UGGAC” consensus sequence containing the “GGAC” m6A core motif and found that binding of IGF2BPs to the m6A methylation modification site in MYC mRNA could increase the stability of MYC mRNA as well as the translation efficiency in HCC and cervical cancer. Additionally, AURKA improved IGF2BP2 binding to the m6A-modified RNase III DROSHA transcript to stabilize DROSHA mRNA, which was further strengthened by binding of AURKA and the DROSHA transcript, thus promoting stem cell properties in breast cancer. Interestingly, in a recent study, Muller et al verified that IGF2BP1 stabilized SRF mRNA in cancer by weakening miRNA-dependent decay and binding to its m6A sites. We know that ALKBH5 is an m6A demethylase, and its down-regulation increases the m6A methylation level of oncogene LY6/PLAUR domain containing 1 (LYPD1), which was recognized to be stabilized by IGF2BP1 and thus promoted HCC oncogenesis. 
IGF2BPs can also destabilize RNAs. Ennajdaoui et al found that in addition to stabilizing mRNAs by competing with miRNAs for common binding sites in target mRNAs, IGF2BP3 promoted mRNA binding to argonaute 2 (Ago2) (a RISC-component) and was believed to be a bimodal regulator of mRNA stability in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). However, it is not difficult to determine that although IGF2BPs have opposite effects on the regulation of target RNA stability, they play an oncogenic role in cancers. For example, by destabilizing stress-induced ligands ULBP2 they promote cancer immune escape, or they destabilize eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E binding protein 2 (EIF4E-BP2) to activate EIF4E, or they recruit CCR4-NOT transcription complex subunit 1 (CNOT1) to destabilize progesterone receptor (PR) mRNA, and these processes mediated by IGF2BP eventually promote cancer cell progression. , 

## IGF2BPs could influence the localization of mRNA
In the cytoplasm, IGF2BP1 was found to be present in RNP granules 200–700 nm in size and was distributed along microtubules; it moved at an average speed of 0.12 μm/s in an ATP-dependent manner. These granules were enriched in the perinuclear region but were also observed in neuronal processes and growth cones. Hence, these data supported the view that IGF2BP1 was associated with subcytoplasmic localization of the mRNA. Later, data from Jønson et al determined that the RNP granules were 100–300 nm in diameter and contained 40S ribosomal subunits, shuttling heterologous nuclear RNPs, poly(A) binding proteins, and mRNAs, as well as CBP80 and factors belonging to the exon junction complex without EIF4E, EIF4G, and 60S ribosomal subunits. Therefore, mRNAs integrated into IGF2BP1 mRNP particles could not be translated and transported to the appropriate destinations to initiate protein synthesis.
In human breast cancer, IGF2BP1 promoted the localization of mRNAs related to cell adhesion and motility, such as E-cadherin, β-actin, α-actinin, and Arp2/3, to stabilize cell–cell junctions and focal adhesions, which eventually suppress cancer cell invasion. However, this role of IGF2BP1 in stabilizing the cell junctions of breast cancer is contradictory to its role in cervical cancer, because Vikesaa et al showed that the deletion of IGF2BP1/3 resulted in the altered formation of invasive pseudopodia in the HeLa cell line. Complex tumorigenesis and development mechanisms led to the regulation of IGF2BP1 by different factors and binding to different mRNAs is one possible explanation.

## IGF2BPs could regulate the translation of mRNA
In malignant cancers, another important function of IGF2BPs in mRNA processing is to regulate mRNA translation. , Phosphorylation of IGF2BP2 by mTOR promotes its translational activity, thereby regulating the translation initiation of IGF2 leader 3 mRNA through EIF4E and activation of the 5′ cap-independent internal ribosome in human embryonic rhabdomyosarcoma. After identifying IGF2BP as m6A readers, IGF2BP1 was also shown to reduce BMI1 protein levels in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) as BMI1 m6A methylation levels decreased. Similarly, translational regulation of pancreatic and duodenal homeobox 1 (PDX1) in pancreatic β cells and V-Erb-B2 avian erythroblastic leukemia viral oncogene homolog 2 (ERBB2) in radioiodine-refractory papillary thyroid cancer were also dependent on the recognition of m6A methylation by IGF2BP2. , This evidence also provides strong evidence that IGF2BPs regulate mRNA translation through methylation of m6A.
However, just as the regulation of mRNA stability in malignant cancers by IGF2BP is twofold, so is the regulation of translation. , As mentioned above, IGF2BPs participate in the cellular localization of β-actin. Hüttelmaier et al further studied its translation mechanism in neuroma cells and found that β-actin translation would occur only when IGF2BP1 transported it to the endpoint of mRNA transport and phosphorylated tyrosine residues on IGF2BP1 by protein kinase Src, which had blocked the translation of β-actin.

## Other modulation mechanisms of IGF2BPs to RNA
In addition to the above functions, nuclear localization of IGF2BPs is also important. Rivera Vargas et al confirmed in six different cancer cell lines that the nucleocytoplasmic IGF2BP3–HNRNPM complex could regulate the expression of cyclins D1, D3, and G1 by shuttling to the nucleus and occupying the relevant binding sites before the export of mRNAs to the cytoplasm. In glioblastoma, IGF2BP2 could bind to oxidative phosphorylation-related mRNAs, such as NDUFS3 and COX7b, and deliver them to mitochondrial polysomes. These findings reveal the functional diversity of IGF2BPs in RNA processing.

## Modulation of IGF2BPs for ncRNA
IGF2BPs not only affect mRNAs but also interact with ncRNAs, which in turn modulate the expression of malignant cancer-related RNAs ( ). As we know, ncRNAs can affect mRNAs involved in the biological process of tumorigenesis and help identify potential targets for cancer treatment, which contribute to the discovery of cancer drugs. Just as IGF2BPs are identified as new m6A readers, how they regulate lncRNAs and circRNAs is also being updated, which has been shown to be associated with m6A binding sites in ncRNAs. Understanding the mechanism by which IGF2BP regulates RNAs remains to be further clarified, in that they can prevent miRNA-dependent degradation of target RNAs; the only difference is that some RNA target RNAs have modified sites m6A that can be recognized and bound by IGF2BP. Therefore, we will summarize below the regulation network between IGF2BPs and ncRNAs and describe the specific mechanism.
 

## Interaction between IGF2BPs and miRNAs
One of the roles of miRNAs in cancers is to mediate mRNA silencing. As mentioned above, IGF2BPs alter the ability to decay miRNA-dependent mRNA by binding to the binding sites and attenuating the interaction between miRNAs and Ago2 or acting as cytoplasmic safe houses in the context of cancer. , , , , , Based on the presence of m6A methylation sites in miRNA-regulated mRNAs in HCC, ovarian cancer, and lung cancer, we can continue to study whether most miRNA-targeted mRNAs have m6A sites, which can clarify the activity of IGF2BPs in cancers. Furthermore, combined activation of the IGF2BP family promoted oncogenic transformation through Dicer and was included in an oncogenic network that included miRNAs and complex post-transcriptional regulation. In this network, IGF2BPs regulated the interaction with miRNAs through a variety of complex mechanisms, thus affecting the expression of malignant cancer-related RNAs, and changing cell fate and behavior.
An important mechanism of IGF2BP1 affecting cancer was its complex regulation network with let-7 miRNA. Let-7 was a family of highly evolutionarily conserved miRNAs that suppressed cancer growth and is a key regulator of IGF2BP1 in post-transcriptional regulation. Although let-7 targets gene products, including LIN28A, LIN28B, and HMGA2, and displays oncogenic and self-renewal functions. The cancer suppressor role of the let-7 miRNA family was antagonized by the self-promoting oncogenic ‘triangle’ composed of HMGA2, IGF2BP1, and LIN28B. Similarly, IGF2BP2 protected let-7 miRNA family target genes from silencing to preserve glioblastoma stem cells. IGF2BP3 prevented the binding of Ago2/let-7 to LIN28B, thus increasing the expression of other let-7 target genes (such as HMGA2). The ultimate result of this complex regulation is to promote the occurrence and development of cancer.

## Interaction between IGF2BPs and lncRNAs
LncRNAs are a subgroup of ncRNAs with a length of more than 200 nucleotides, which play an important role in various biological functions and disease processes. In the study of their cancer-promoting mechanisms, lncRNAs were found to be related to the methylation of m6A and could bind to IGF2BP to stabilize themselves. , , A representative example is the DANCR lncRNA regulated by IGF2BP2 in an m6A methylation-dependent manner, which promoted the stem cell-like properties of cancer, cell proliferation, and stabilization of PC pathogenesis. A recent study found that the crosstalk between IGF2BP2 and the ZFAS1 lncRNA promoted ATP hydrolysis and the Warburg effect and played an important role in mitochondrial energy metabolism in colon cancer. More importantly, lncRNAs can form positive feedback regulation with IGF2BPs to better promote cancer progression, , , meaning that the regulatory mechanism of IGF2BPs on lncRNA expression is complex. However, there is a study that has not investigated whether IGF2BP and lncRNA binding sites were modified by m6A methylation and only concluded that IGF2BP3 could slow lncRNA TINCR decay and promote its stability. However, IGF2BPs can also promote the destabilization of lncRNAs by recruiting the CCR4-NOT deadenylase complex, thus promoting the degradation of the lncRNA HULC in HCC and the lncRNA UCA1 in breast cancer. , However, these data are also sufficient to demonstrate that one of the mechanisms of interaction between lncRNAs and IGF2BPs is through the m6A methylation, thus promoting cancer progression.

## Interaction between IGF2BPs and circRNAs
Currently, there is little research on how IGF2BPs regulate circRNAs in cancer, and only a few articles have written that they function by recognizing and binding to the m6A site in circRNAs. For example, m6A methylation in circARHGAP12 is recognized by IGF2BP2, which then together promotes stabilization of the forkhead box M1 (FOXM1) mRNA in cervical cancer. The Hsa_circ_0003258–IGF2BP3–HDAC4 complex can enhance the stability of histone deacetylase 4 (HDAC4) mRNA, and both hsa_circ_0003258 and HDAC4 contain m6A modification sites. Interestingly, circMAP3K4 encodes a new peptide, and IGF2BP1 promotes its translation through m6A methylation. Apart from that, the elimination of circCD44 or IGF2BP2 influences the level of m6A-modified c-MYC mRNA, and the combination between circCD44 and IGF2BP2 may improve the stabilization of c-MYC in TNBC. Therefore, reasonable speculation is that IGF2BPs can bind to m6A-modified circRNAs, thus regulating the expression of downstream genes. However, that study also showed that IGF2BPs interact with circRNAs in more than one way. The KH3-4 di-domain of IGF2BP2 was also necessary for its interaction with circNSUN2 and HMGA2, which allowed IGF2BP2 to bind to the CAUCAU motif of circNSUN2, and then enhanced the stability of the HMGA2 mRNA. However, in this study, IGF2BP2 stabilized HMGA2 in a manner independent of m6A methylation. 

## IGF2BPs could regulate the biological functions of cancer cells
CSCs are cells with self-renewal ability and cloning capacity, which are associated with cancer recurrence, metastasis, and resistance. Therefore, the mechanism of various factors that maintain the stem of CSCs needs to be studied in depth to identify targets that can be used for cancer therapy. IGF2BPs are reported to be key regulators of stem-like tumorigenic features in HCC, glioblastoma, and osteosarcoma. , , , In leukemia, IGF2BP1 maintained the stemness of leukemia stem cells by regulating the key regulators of self-renewal, HOXB4, and MYB, and the metabolism-related factor ALDH1A1. Importantly, in a recent study, IGF2BP2 could recognize lncRNA DANCR and DROSHA mRNA through m6A methylation, thereby promoting the stemness of pancreatic or breast cancer stem cells. , Disrupting the interaction between IGF2BP and MYC may suppress the stem properties of breast cancer cells. SRY box transcription factor 2 (SOX2) is also an important factor involved in maintaining the self-renewal capacity of CSCs. For IGF2BPs, IGF2BP2 stabilizes SOX2 in an m6A methylation-dependent manner to maintain the stem-like properties of CRC. Although IGF2BP1 also stabilized SOX2 in endometrial cancer, it remains to be explored whether IGF2BP1 promotes the maintenance of stemness. Unlike IGF2BP1/2, IGF2BP3 promoted cancer self-renewal and initiation by binding to SLUG and promoting its downstream target SOX2, rather than directly binding to SOX2 in TNBC. This is also evidence to support differences in the target RNAs of the IGF2BP family. In addition, in the hypoxic TME, IGF2BP also can contribute to maintaining the stem capacity of CSCs and adaptation to hypoxia. , 
There is a period called the G1 phase between nuclear division (M phase) and DNA synthesis (S phase) of the cell cycle, allowing repair of DNA damage and replication errors. Mistakes in this period can lead to the formation of cancer cells. The regulation of the cancer cell cycle by IGF2BPs is positive and can promote the G1/S transition to promote cell proliferation. , , , , Subsequently, it was confirmed that IGF2BP3 could bind to m6A sites in the coding sequence (CDS) region of cyclin D1 (CCND1, a checkpoint of the G1/S phase of the cell cycle), increasing the proportion of cancer cells in phase S. In addition, we know that E2F is a positive regulator of the G1/S phase checkpoint, and IGF2BP1 promotes the shortening of the G1 phase by stabilizing its mRNA in a 3′UTR/miRNA/m6A methylation-dependent manner, thus promoting cancer cell proliferation. Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDK) are also a factor that promotes cell cycle entry into the S phase and can be a therapeutic target for cancer. Although the lncRNA DMDRMR could cooperate with IGF2BP3 to promote the transition G1/S by binding to the CDK4 m6A binding site. 
The generation of resistance to cancer drugs is a major challenge in cancer treatment. A review of the recent literature revealed that IGF2BPs can induce a variety of cancer cells to develop resistance to chemotherapeutic drugs, such as NPC, NSCLC, CRC, seminoma, leukemia, glioblastoma, and melanoma. Importantly, in radioiodine-refractory papillary thyroid carcinoma, IGF2BP2 promoted the translation efficiency of target RNAs through m6A methylation, thereby resulting in cancer cells resistant to tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Moreover, IGF2BPs are also factors that lead to cancer cells being resistant to radiotherapy. , 

## IGF2BPs regulate cancers by altering the TME
The TME is a complex environment in which cancer cells grow and includes multiple components, such as cancer-associated cells, the extracellular matrix, and some cytokines. However, due to metabolic disorders of cancer cells and other factors, an immunosuppressive TME is often formed and promotes cancer cells to evade immune surveillance, which is an important cause of the poor efficacy of current cancer therapy. Reviewing previous studies, it is not difficult to find that although some studies have confirmed that IGF2BPs can inhibit cancers, most studies support their cancer-promoting effects, such as inhibiting the antitumor immune response, promoting the function of immunosuppressive cells, adapting to hypoxia, and promoting cancer metabolism, angiogenesis, drug resistance, metastasis, and cell cycle transition. In the following, we summarize the specific roles of IGF2BPs in modulating TME, especially immunosuppressive TME.

## IGF2BPs inhibit the anti-tumor immune response
With increasing research efforts, it has been found that IGF2BPs may be related to the immune response in the TME, resulting in dynamic changes in their impact on cancer cells. For example, a restricted epitope peptide derived from IGF2BP3 was found to induce CD8+ T cells to produce powerful and specific immune responses against cancer cells, , suggesting that IGF2BP3 can serve as an antigen for T-cell-mediated immunotherapy. Although IGF2BP1-depleted TME could induce the appearance of CRC, which is inconsistent with the role of IGF2BP1 in the promotion of colon cancer found in other studies. , This may be due to the different TME, but specific reasons still need to be further explored.
Given the few studies on IGF2BP and important cytokines in TME, and most are in inflammatory diseases, , we next focus on the relationship between IGF2BP and tumor-associated cells. For antitumor immune cells, IGF2BP3 can stabilize PD-L1 mRNA expression through m6A methylation, thus inhibiting the killing effect of cytotoxic T cells in the TME, or inhibit NK cell-mediated cytotoxicity by promoting stress-induced ligand ULBP2 mRNA decay. CircIGF2BP3, a circRNA derived from a back splicing event between exons 4 and 13 of IGF2BP3, suppressed CD8+ T cell infiltration in NSCLC TME by promoting PD-L1 deubiquitination. In summary, IGF2BPs inhibit antitumor immune cells in the TME in various ways and ultimately promote tumor immune escape.

## IGF2BPs promote the function of immunosuppressive cells
Immunosuppressive cells in the TME include tumor-associated macrophages (TAM), myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSC), regulatory T cells (Treg), and carcinoma-associated fibroblasts (CAF). TAMs are formed by the infiltration of peripheral blood immune cells into cancer tissue and are also important factors that mediate cancer immune escape in the immunosuppressive TME. Among IGF2BPs, IGF2BP2 was involved in the immune response of peripheral blood immune cells in CRC patients, and the ternary complex composed of circITGB6/IGF2BP2/FGF9 can induce TAM polarization to the M2 phenotype (with tumor-promoting activity) in ovarian cancer. Because cell communication mediated by extracellular vesicles (EVs) is also a key part of TME, Pan et al found that after EVs secreted by glioma cells were delivered to TAMs, the transported circNEIL3 cargo could stabilize IGF2BP3 and promote the polarization of its immunosuppressive phenotype. In addition, EVs secreted by IGF2BP1 knockdown melanoma cells inhibit cancer cell metastasis, but it remains to be explored whether this process involves the regulation of immunosuppressive TME by IGF2BPs. In breast cancer, the co-culture of fibroblasts with cancer cells could promote the CAF phenotype, and under this condition, IGF2BP3 can promote the proliferation and survival of breast cancer cells by promoting CD44 expression in fibroblasts. , 
In conclusion, although there are no studies on the relationship of IGF2BPs with other immunosuppressive cells, such as MDSCs and Tregs, continuing to dig deeper into this field may also help us understand tumorigenesis and deepen our understanding of the immunosuppressive TME.

## IGF2BPs promote the adapting to hypoxia of cancer cells
Hypoxia caused by rapid cancer growth is a common feature of the TME, leading to increased expression of hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF), which promotes cancer immune escape. It has been confirmed that hypoxia could induce the invasion of metastatic melanoma cells by regulating IGF2BP1 expression through HIF-1α. Currently, only a few studies mention that IGF2BPs regulate the biological behavior of cancer cells in a hypoxic environment through m6A methylation. For example, in gastric cancer, IGF2BP3 recognizes the m6A site on HIF-1α mRNA and enhances its expression, thus promoting hypoxia-induced cell metastasis and angiogenesis. Further, hypoxia-induced downregulation of FTO promoted metastasis of CRC through an m6A-IGF2BP2-dependent mechanism. Whereas IGF2BP1 silencing in one study did not reverse hypoxia-induced chemoresistance in HCC, suggesting that IGF2BP1 was not the only gene involved in the regulation of chemoresistance. Importantly, binding of the lncRNA HIF1A-AS2 to IGF2BP2 promotes the adaptation of stem cells from glioblastoma multiforme to hypoxia. This adaptive change can prevent hypoxia-induced cancer cell necrosis and forms an immunosuppressive TME.

## IGF2BPs could affect the cancer metabolism
Cancer cells can also change their metabolism to regulate the adaptation to hypoxia. The use of glycolysis as a source of energy even in the presence of oxygen, known as the Warburg effect, is a unique way of glucose metabolism in cancer cells. Lactic acid produced by cancer cells accumulates in the TME, resulting in an immunosuppressive effect. IGF2BPs can promote cancer glycolysis by interacting with target RNAs related to glucose metabolism. , , , , , In studies on glucose metabolism in CRC, it was found that m6A methylation in target genes (HK2 and GLUT1) could promote the activation of glycolysis and cell proliferation, while IGF2BP2/3 could bind to them to play its m6A reader role. In addition, in gastric cancer (GC), HCC, and cervical cancer, there are similar findings that IGF2BP3 promotes the stability of target RNAs (HDGF, PDK4) through m6A methylation to regulate glycolysis and ATP production in cancer cells. , In a recent study, Lu et al found that IGF2BP2 recognized and stabilized the lncRNA ZFAS1 through the m6A site, thus promoting ATP hydrolysis and the Warburg effect, providing a new mechanism for IGF2BP to promote cancer glycolysis. Although aerobic glycolysis is the main source for cancer cells to obtain energy, in recent years oxidative phosphorylation has also been found to be crucial in maintaining the stemness of some cancer stem cells (CSCs). IGF2BPs also play a role in this form of energy metabolism. For instance, inhibition of IGF2BP2-mediated oxidative phosphorylation was detrimental to the clonogenicity of glioblastoma CSC. However, because of the high energy demand of cancer cells, they often utilize lipid metabolism and amino acid metabolism to maintain their own growth needs. Current research on IGF2BP lipid metabolism has focused on its deletion which could make mice resistant to obesity and regulate glucose tolerance, , but little is known about its mechanism of action in cancers. In NPC, IGF2BP3 could regulate acetyl-CoA-related metabolic processes by stabilizing the lncRNA TINCR, thus promoting lipid biosynthesis. It is believed that with the deepening of the research, the mechanism of m6A methylation mediated by IGF2BPs to promote cancer metabolism will be elucidated and warrants further research.

## IGF2BPs could promote cancer neovascularization
Cancer neovascularization is very important for nutrient and oxygen delivery and is essential for cancer growth and metastasis. IGF2BPs can also use their m6A reader function to stabilize related mRNAs to promote cancer angiogenesis. , Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is also an important regulator of angiogenesis. In recent years, through in-depth research on m6A methylation, we have learned that there are m6A sites in the VEGF mRNA, which could be recognized and bound by IGF2BP3, thus promoting cancer angiogenesis. 
In summary, the rapid growth of cancer cells leads to insufficient oxygen supply and the formation of a hypoxic environment, prompting cancer cells to alter their glucose metabolism and secrete a large amount of lactic acid into the TME, which inhibits the function of immune cells and enhances the activity of immunosuppressive cells. Moreover, the formation of cancer angiogenesis, cell cycle transition, and resistance to radiotherapy and chemotherapy, promote the cancer's adaptation to the adverse environment, which requires the joint efforts of all links. The role of IGF2BPs in the induction of immunosuppressive TME is very important. Due to the wide range of target RNAs of IGF2BPs, we can also find that they regulate many aspects of tumorigenesis and development, which may better explain the mechanism of IGF2BPs in the promotion of cancers. A better understanding of the mechanisms involved in IGF2BP regulation of immunosuppressive TME may contribute to avoiding cancer immune escape mechanisms.

## The potential clinical application of IGF2BPs in cancers

## Potential diagnosis values of IGF2BPs
The tumor-promoting effects of IGF2BPs have emerged from studies over the past few years. As we know, tissue biopsy is the gold standard for diagnosing cancer, and by studying the expression of IGF2BPs in tissues—using methods such as immunohistochemistry—it was found that they were rarely expressed in normal tissues. Therefore, whether IGF2BPs can be used as a cancer diagnostic marker is a question worthy of research ( ). For example, the detection of IGF2BP3 expression in samples obtained from a core needle biopsy or endoscopic biopsy could diagnose PC, CRC, etc. , , , In the immunohistochemical staining analysis of pleural effusion cell block, IGF2BP3 could be used to distinguish metastatic gastric adenocarcinoma cells and reactive mesothelial cells in effusions. However, IGF2BPs can not only distinguish between cancer and normal tissue but they can also differentiate between different types of cancers; IGF2BP1 can distinguish ATC from other follicular-derived thyroid cancers. With the development of medicine, the requirements for less invasive diagnostic methods are increasing, so the examination of markers in the peripheral blood of patients has attracted greater attention. Some researchers have studied whether the presence of anti-IGF2BP2 autoantibody in peripheral blood could be used as a basis for diagnosing CRC, but the results obtained were not ideal, a result which may be attributed to the very low sensitivity (23.4%), although its specificity was very high, reaching 97.1%. Therefore, more studies are needed to determine whether it could be used as a complementary marker to diagnose CRC. 
 High specificity is a condition that can be used to define a cancer diagnostic marker, while the diagnostic utility of IGF2BPs in some cancers is still relatively low. The inability to differentiate salivary gland cancers, in situ carcinoma, and invasive laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma (LSCC), as well as benign lesions and malignant papillary thyroid cancer (PTC), or low diagnostic sensitivity in HCC, were all IGF2BP defects as diagnostic markers in different cancers. Therefore, greater efforts are needed to apply IGF2BP as a potential cancer diagnostic marker, and studies of IGF2BP1/2 as diagnostic markers are far less than those of IGF2BP3, indicating that more representative studies with larger samples are needed.

## The prognosis value of IGF2BPs
How to accurately estimate the prognosis of various malignancies is always of interest to clinicians. Over the past few decades, an increasing number of studies on IGF2BPs have found that they are tumor-promoting factors, and their qualified potential as prognostic markers can be confirmed in various large-sample studies or bioinformatic analyses. IGF2BP3 is currently the most studied, and there is much literature on its prediction of a poor prognosis in different cancers. In contrast, although IGF2BP1/2 have been poorly studied, they are known to be associated with a poor prognosis in some common cancers ( ).
 As shown in , several large-sample studies have analyzed the expression of IGF2BPs in different cancers and correlated levels with clinical information and revealed that IGF2BP expression may be associated with metastasis, depth of invasion, early recurrence, and shorter overall survival (OS), and disease-free survival (DFS), which are independent prognostic factors predicting a poor prognosis. , , , , , , , For example, in a retrospective study, it was found that the 5-year metastasis-free survival rate of IGF2BP3-positive patients with renal cell carcinoma was much lower than that of IGF2BP3-negative patients, concluding that IGF2BP3 could help identify patients with high metastatic potential and who may benefit from early systemic therapy. However, in stage 4 neuroblastoma, researchers found that IGF2BP1 had prognostic significance independent of that of the MYC family member, MYCN. With the development of high-throughput sequencing and bioinformatics, various clinical information data sets can be analyzed to identify whether a gene is associated with cancer prognosis and to establish cancer risk prognosis models. In recent studies, IGF2BPs, as m6A readers, were selected from different models of different cancers, which could predict cancer prognostic information. , , IGF2BP2 was the only m6A gene that was correlated with the DFS of PTC and had a strong correlation with clinical phenotypes. In isocitrate dehydrogenase wild-type glioblastoma, Johnson et al established a nine-gene expression-based risk signature based on nine genes that included IGF2BP3, which predicted a poor prognosis.
However, evidence from some studies suggested that the prognosis of some cancers was not related to IGF2BP3 expression, such as urachal carcinoma of the bladder and prostate cancer. , Even in several bioinformatics studies, IGF2BP2 was found to be a protective factor in neuroblastoma and TC, , and deletion of IGF2BP1 led to poorer OS in soft tissue sarcomas. The reasons for this phenomenon may be due to the different types of cancers studied on the one hand and may be related to limited sample size or limitations of bioinformatics methods on the other. But these results also suggest that IGF2BP can also estimate the prognosis of certain cancers.
Therefore, IGF2BPs have great potential to predict cancer prognosis, involving different systems for a wide range of cancers.

## The potential treatment values of IGF2BPs
The treatment of malignant cancers poses a significant challenge in the development of modern medicine. Given that cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) respond to cancer cells expressing IGF2BP3. , , In small-cell lung cancer, Zhang et al constructed a prognostic signature based on m6A regulators, including IGF2BP3, the low score group had greater CD8+ T cell infiltration and better response to immunotherapy, so investigating immunotherapeutic approaches targeting IGF2BP3 in cancers is also an option. A recent phase I clinical trial demonstrated that a vaccine derived from IGF2BP3 and two other cancer peptides was effective against solid pediatric refractory cancers. As we know, antibody-based PD-1-PD-L1 inhibitors are an effective therapeutic approach for patients with various advanced cancers, but there are still many limitations and shortcomings. However, by further exploring the upstream regulatory mechanism of PD-L1, it was found that IGF2BP3 could stabilize its mRNA. This may help improve the effect of anti-PD-1 immunotherapy on cancers.
Because IGF2BPs promote the development of various cancers, the identification of specific inhibitors of IGF2BPs is also a viable approach to cancer treatment. In a recent study, a fluorescence polarization-based screening platform identified some specific inhibitors targeting IGF2BP2 belonging to the benzamidobenzoic acid class and the ureidothiophene class, and achieved reduced cancer xenograft growth in zebrafish embryos. This was the first description of a small-molecule inhibitor of IGF2BP2, facilitating the construction of RBP-specific inhibitors. Over the past few years, two inhibitors have been identified that specifically inhibit IGF2BP1. One is a newly identified small molecule inhibitor 7773, which binds directly to the hydrophobic surface of the KH3-4 domain of IGF2BP1 and acts by suppressing its binding to KRAS mRNA, thus specifically inhibiting its tumor-promoting activity. Another is a small-molecule inhibitor BTYNB, which functions as a selective allosteric inhibitor of IGF2BP1 to decrease IGF2BP1 protein levels. Mechanistically, BTYNB impairs the interaction between IGF2BP1 and c-MYC or E2F1 mRNA. Its inhibitory effect on IGF2BP1 was demonstrated simultaneously in experimental cancer models, where cancer growth and peritoneal spread were inhibited. , 
In addition to these small-molecule inhibitors, many compounds play a role in inhibiting IGF2BPs. Confluentin, a compound isolated from Albatrellus flettii, inhibits the interaction between IGF2BP1 and KRAS mRNA. Furthermore, triptolide inhibits lnc-THOR-IGF2BP1 signaling, causing the inhibition of NPC cell growth. Berberine down-regulates IGF2BP3 expression to inhibit the proliferation of CRC cells, and IGF2BP3 expression is also inhibited by bromodomain and extraterminal domain inhibitor JQ1, which influences Ewing sarcoma anchorage-independent cell growth. 
Furthermore, oligonucleotides are also feasible as a new class of drugs, with several oligonucleotide therapies already on the market. The development of oligonucleotides targeting IGF2BP as oncology drugs is also a strategic option, as it can inhibit IGF2BP1 binding to mRNA. , 
In conclusion, exploring the role of IGF2BPs in cancer immunotherapy and the development of drugs that specifically inhibit IGF2BPs, such as small molecule inhibitors, molecular compounds, and oligonucleotides, can help improve clinical therapeutic outcomes of different cancers, and therefore has great therapeutic potential.

## Discussion
With the development of high-throughput sequencing and bioinformatics, an increasing number of studies have evaluated m6A methylation. We know that m6A methylation is inseparable from the occurrence and development of cancers and its mechanism is very complex. This review explored the role of m6A new readers IGF2BP1/2/3 in cancer immunosuppressive TME. Various functional in vitro and in vivo studies provide strong evidence for the regulation of cancer cell fate by IGF2BP, which act as oncogenes to promote cancer cell proliferation, survival, metastasis, and invasiveness in almost all cancers analyzed thus far. In contrast, a small number of studies report that IGF2BPs have an inhibitory effect on cancers. , , The different origins of cancer cells, differences in the TME, or the dissimilarity between nonmetastatic cells and metastatic cells are potential influencing factors. However, the detailed reasons for the contradictory functions of IGF2BP are still unclear and more research is needed to reveal the underlying causes. Additionally, we also reviewed the mechanisms by which IGF2BPs regulate cancers and find that IGF2BPs affect tumorigenesis by regulating the activity of different RNAs, including mRNAs, miRNAs, lncRNAs, and circRNAs. The consequence of this regulation is to inhibit the function of antitumor immune cells, influence cancer metabolism and the cancer cell cycle, and promote cancer angiogenesis and resistance to various treatments, thus inducing the formation of an immunosuppressive TME, which finally contributes to tumor-immune escape.
Currently, the research of various cancer markers has become an important direction for the development of oncology and other disciplines. More specific, sensitive, and minimally invasive markers discovered in these studies could help clinicians better diagnose and analyze the prognosis of malignant cancers earlier. At the same time, the discovery of different cancer suppressor genes and oncogenes, as well as an in-depth study of tumorigenesis, development, and malignant behavior, can help us better develop personalized cancer treatment strategies. Many studies indicate that further study of IGF2BP expression and its functions may meet the clinical requirements of new biomarkers for the diagnosis and prognosis of patients with malignant cancers. The search for inhibitors targeting the interaction between IGF2BP and its target RNAs may also be an effective strategy for cancer treatment. However, from the above discussion, it is not difficult to see that there are still several unanswered questions to be solved.
Although IGF2BPs can specifically recognize cancers with high specificity, their low sensitivity in some cancers is also of concern. Therefore, it may be more feasible to combine IGF2BPs with other highly sensitive markers. At the same time, exploring whether IGF2BPs are promising biomarkers for the detection of different cancers or whether they may have a better diagnostic and prognostic value for a specific cancer type is also a factor to evaluate prior to clinical application. With the increase in the application of immunotherapy in recent years and the growing research on the relationship between IGF2BPs and PD-L1, it may be worthwhile to continue exploring this combination. Although specific small molecule inhibitors and clinical application of cancer vaccines have provided additional choices for patients with malignant cancers, the development of IGF2BP inhibitors and therapeutic cancer vaccines has just begun, and more evidence is needed to prove their efficacy and safety.
In conclusion, the complex relationship between IGF2BPs and their target RNAs is involved in the development of cancer, especially in the formation of the immunosuppressive TME, which is likely to be accomplished by m6A methylation. Therefore, it may be possible to explore further interconnections between IGF2BPs and their target RNAs in the context of specific cancers, which may open new frontiers for the diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment of cancers.

## Author contributions
Meiqi Duan drafted this review; Haiyang Liu provided editorial assistance and gave some valuable suggestions; Shasha Xu provided the manuscript revision and figure drawing; Xiaofeng Jiang and Shan Zhao provided the design, guidance and revision of the manuscript; Xiaofeng Jiang, Haiyang Liu and Zhi Yang obtained funding supports. All authors provided substantial and useful assistance to this manuscript; All authors approved the final manuscript.

## Conflict of interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

## Funding
This study was supported by grants from the Liaoning Nature Science Foundation of China (No. 2022JH2/101300042), The National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 82173194, 81672877), the Key Research Project of Liaoning Provincial Department of Education of China (No. ZD2020004), and 2018 Youth Backbone Support Program of China Medical University (No. QGZ2018063).

## Footnotes
Peer review under responsibility of Chongqing Medical University.

## Contributor Information
Shan Zhao, Email: zhaoshan1109@163.com.
Xiaofeng Jiang, Email: 18900912171@163.com.

## References