pmcTransl OncolTransl Oncol615transoncol101472619Translational Oncology1936-5233Neoplasia PressPMC11652953PMC11652953.111652953116529533963120710.1016/j.tranon.2024.102204S1936-5233(24)00330-91022041CommentaryIndirect targeting of MYC and direct targeting in combination with chemotherapies are more effective than direct mono-targeting in triple negative breast cancer
MekonnenNegessemnegesse@snu.ac.kr YangHobinhbyang@ks.ac.kr RajasekaranNirmalnirmalrajasekaran@gmail.com SongKyoungsongseoul17@duksung.ac.kr ChoiYoon-Laylachoi@skku.edu ShinYoung Keeykeeshin@snu.ac.kr aResearch Institute of Pharmaceutical Science, Department of Pharmacy, Seoul National University, College of Pharmacy, Seoul, South KoreabDepartment of Veterinary Science, School of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Bahir Dar University, Bahir Dar, EthiopiacCollege of Pharmacy, Kyungsung University, Busan, South KoreadR&D Center, ABION Inc., Seoul 08394, South KoreaeCollege of Pharmacy, Duksung Women's University, Seoul, South KoreafDepartment of Molecular Medicine and Biopharmaceutical Sciences, Seoul National University, Graduate School of Convergence Science and Technology, Seoul, South KoreagDepartment of Health Sciences and Technology, SAIHST, Sungkyunkwan University, Seoul, South KoreahLaboratory of Molecular Pathology and Theranostics, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, South KoreaiDepartment of Pathology and Translational Genomics, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, South KoreajBio-MAX/N-Bio, Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea⁎Corresponding author: 20-424, Gwanak-ro 1, Gwanak-gu, Seoul, 08826, South Korea. ykeeshin@snu.ac.kr12025031220245147399910220415520242010202412112024031220241812202420122024© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc.2024https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Highlights
•The combined inhibition of MYC with EGFR or PARP is synthetic lethal.
•Indirect targeting of MYC is more effective than direct targeting.
•Chemotherapy resistant cells upregulate DNA repair genes.
•MYC inhibition re-sensitize resistant cells to chemotherapy.
•Direct targeting of MYC upregulates cFLIP and BCL2, and increases cell survival.

MYC amplification is disproportionally elevated in triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) compared to other subtypes of breast cancer. Indeed, MYC has long been considered an undruggable oncogene using conventional drug design strategies or small molecules. We hypothesized that targeting MYC using asymmetric siRNA (asiRNA) alone or in combination with chemotherapeutic agents or indirectly via BRD4 and RRM2, may curb its oncogenic behavior. We developed paclitaxel-, doxorubicin-, and cisplatin-resistant MDA-MB-231 cells to study MYC's role in upregulating DNA repair genes during drug resistance development. Our results showed that the knockdown of either MYC or RRM2 downregulated both RAD51 and PARP1 but increased γH2AX. The cytotoxic effect of RRM2 knockdown was significantly (p < 0.05) higher than that of direct MYC knockdown. The knockdown of BRD4 was more effective than the direct knockdown of MYC in downregulating MYC protein. The combined use of asiRNA-VP (Vinylphosphonate) with dacomitinib or talazoparib was synthetic lethal in TNBC cell lines. Compared to chemotherapy-sensitive cells, resistant cells showed overexpression of MYC, RRM2, RAD51, and PARP1 proteins upon chemotherapy treatment, but downregulated in cells treated with asiRNA-VP combination. We confirmed that MYC knockdown upregulated cFLIP, BCL2, STAT1, pSTAT1, STAT2, and cleaved saspase-3 in both TNBC and non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines. Finally, we recommend a combination treatment approach that synergizes with MYC inhibition rather than monotherapy or indirect targeting via upstream regulators such as the BRD4 and RRM2 genes or selective modulation at the protein level to suppress anti-apoptotic genes (cFLIP and BCL2) at the same time.

## Graphical abstract
 

## Keywords
c-MYCRRM2Synthetic lethalityChemotherapy resistanceDNA repair gene upregulationpmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND

## Introduction
Breast cancer has ranked first in prevalence and fifth in global mortality among women with cancer in the past five years, according to the International Agency for Research in Cancer (IARC)([ , ]). The clinical treatment and prognosis of breast cancer, which is a highly heterogeneous disease, vary greatly among patients and subtypes. Breast cancer is classified into four major molecular subtypes, namely, luminal A (ER and/or PR positive, HER2 negative and Ki-67 < 14 %), luminal B (2 types: [HER2 negative, ER and/or PR positive and Ki-67 ≥ 14] and [HER2 positive: ER and/or PR positive, HER2 expressed/amplified, and Ki-67 any]), HER2-enriched (HER2 overexpressed or amplified, ER and PR absent) and basal-like (ER and PR absent and HER2 negative) subtypes, also called triple-negative breast cancer (TBNC)[ ].
The BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes are responsible for the repair of double-strand breaks (DSBs). Germline/acquired mutations in these genes impede the DSB repair mechanism known as homologous recombination repair (HRR), allowing cells to undergo uncontrolled replication of damaged DNA. These factors pose a significant risk, resulting in genomic instability and the development of breast and other types of cancers ([ , ]). Patients with BRCA1 and/or BRCA2 biallelic inactivation have a positive prognosis since they can benefit from treatment with PARP inhibitors and DNA-damaging agents ([ , ]). However, germline BRCA1 and BRCA2 inactivation contributes to only 5–10 % of all breast cancer cases, underscoring the importance of alterations in other DNA repair genes, such as PALB2, ATM, ATR, RAD51 and its paralogs, Fanconi anemia (FA) genes, etc. Activating mutations in oncogenes (e.g., PIK3CA) and gene amplifications (e.g., MYC and HER2) are important causes of breast cancer in addition to inactivating mutations in tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) ([ , ]).
The MYC family genes include c-MYC (hereafter referred to as MYC), MYCN and MYCL, which function as transcription factors for almost 15 % of all expressed genes [ ]. The three MYC paralogs have similar functions but differ in expression timing and tissue specificity during development. Although MYC paralog genes belong to the same family due to their redundant functions in some instances, their chromosome number and location are different: MYC (8 q24.21), MYCN (2p24.3), and MYCL (1p34.2). MYC is located at the junction of many signal transduction pathways, including the Wnt/β-catenin, receptor tyrosine kinase (ERK/MAPK and PI3K/AKT), T-cell receptor (TCR) and transforming growth factor (TGF-β) signaling pathways [ ]. In addition to its amplification and expression, MYC dysregulation is a common hallmark of cancer, driving it to undergo many alterations, such as chromosomal translocation and increased enhancer activity [ ].
MYC regulates cell differentiation, cell proliferation, the cell cycle, metabolism and apoptosis. MYC is ubiquitously expressed during tissue development and is expressed in many types of cancers, including breast, ovarian, prostate, esophageal, uterine, liver, melanoma, lung, and many other cancers ([ , ]). For instance, in a targeted sequencing of 2509 primary breast tumors, the proportions of amplification of MYC, MYCL, and MYCN were 554 (25.5 %), 29 (1.3 %), and 25 (1.2 %), respectively. In the same study, among 270 TNBC patients, 105 (38.9 %) had MYC amplification ([ , ]). MYC amplification is greater in TNBC than in other subtypes of breast cancer. Targeted exome sequencing of 70 Korean TNBC patient samples revealed that MYC amplifications was detected in 26 (37 %) of the cases [ ].
Unlike patients with TNBC, patients with hormone receptor- and HER2-positive breast cancer benefit from targeted therapy. There are few treatment options for TNBC due to a lack of specific targets; as a result, chemotherapeutic agents are commonly used for treatment [ ]. Recently, sacituzumab govitecan (anti-Trop2 antibody conjugated with SN-38) was approved for treating metastatic TNBC [ ]. In addition, two poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors (olaparib and talazoparib) were approved for the treatment of metastatic TNBC [ ]. Therefore, the demand for the development of targeted therapy for TNBC is very high.
MYC reportedly regulates several DNA repair genes, and the overexpression of MYC upregulates the RAD51 protein, resulting in PARP inhibitor resistance ([ , ]). In addition, PARP inhibitor-sensitive cells exhibited impaired RAD51 foci formation compared with PARP-resistant cells, regardless of BRCA mutation status [ ]. Moreover, the overexpression and prolonged activity of DNA damage repair genes were observed in cisplatin-resistant tumor cells in a mouse model [ ]. Overall, these findings might indicate the involvement of multiple pathway genes in drug resistance development in addition to the previously known drug-specific mechanisms.
Analysis has shown that MYC is a number one amplified oncogene, and many clinical trials in which MYC is directly or indirectly targeted by small molecules or siRNAs have experienced dire failure. In this work, we targeted MYC directly or indirectly or in combination with different drugs. We hypothesized that the indirect targeting of MYC by RRM2 and BRD4 knockdown might have additional advantages over direct MYC targeting. Previous findings confirmed that MYC is a transcriptional target of BRD4, which regulates MYC expression through diverse mechanisms. Specifically, BRD4 enhances MYC transcription by binding to its promoter and enhancer regions, while also facilitating the stabilization of MYC mRNA through increased binding of coding region determinant-binding protein (CRD-BP). Furthermore, BRD4 modulates MYC protein levels post-translationally, particularly in response to cellular stimuli. For instance, under stimulatory signals, BRD4 activates ERK1, resulting in phosphorylation of MYC at serine 62, which in turn stabilizes the MYC protein [ ]. Consequently, targeting BRD4 is crucial for indirectly targeting MYC.
Additionally, knockdown of RRM2 in combination with a BRAF inhibitor has been shown to downregulate MYC in melanoma cells. Specifically, siRNA-mediated RRM2 knockdown reduced β-catenin levels by enhancing the phosphorylation of GSK-3β, which promotes β-catenin degradation, subsequently suppressed MYC expression. This highlights the role of RRM2 in regulating MYC via the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway. Moreover, immunohistochemical and tissue microarray analysis have revealed elevated RRM2 expression in nearly 77 % of breast cancer cases. Thus, targeting RRM2 presents a pleiotropic effect and represents a promising strategy for indirectly targeting MYC in cancer therapies [ ].
Importantly, targeting BRD4 and RRM2 offers multiple advantages beyond indirectly modulating MYC, as aberrant expression of these genes is frequently associated with various cancers ([ , ]). Their inhibition not only disrupts MYC's downstream oncogenic activity but also addresses key pathways involved in tumor proliferation, survival, and chemoresistance.
The use of PARP inhibitors has significantly impacted the treatment of cancers in BRCA mutation carriers, including ovarian, breast, pancreatic, and prostate cancers. However, BRCA mutation carriers represent a small proportion of the total cancer patient population. Recent studies have demonstrated that patients without BRCA mutations, but with elevated HRD scores, also benefit from platinum therapy [ ]. The study reported that those with high HRD scores but without BRCA mutation showed 50 % complete pathological remission (pCR) after neoadjuvant therapy. Thus, expanding the concept of synthetic lethality beyond BRCA mutations including other DNA repair gene mutations, such as PALB2, ATM, RAD51, etc., or patients with high HRD scores, holds significant therapeutic promise. Moreover, inducing synthetic lethality by simultaneously targeting HR- and BER pathways could further expand the benefits from synthetic lethality-based treatments. In this context, we hypothesized that targeting MYC in combination with EGFR or PARP inhibitors might induce synthetic lethality in non-BRCA mutant cancer cell lines.
Chemotherapy resistance poses a significant challenge in cancer therapy, particularly in aggressive cancers such as TNBC. MYC has been identified as a key contributor to drug resistance, primarily through its regulation of RAD51, a protein involved in DNA repair ([ , ]). Hence, developing strategies to re-sensitize MYC-driven resistant mechanisms is crucial for improving therapeutic outcomes. Hence, we hypothesized that the combination of asiRNA-VP with cisplatin, doxorubicin and paclitaxel could re-sensitize chemo-resistant cells to chemotherapy.
Therefore, the objectives of this study were as follows: [ ]. To investigate the direct targeting of MYC in combination with chemotherapeutic agents, and [ ]. Explore the indirect targeting of MYC through RRM2 and BRD4; and [ ]. To determine the expression status of DNA repair genes in paclitaxel-, doxorubicin- and cisplatin-resistant cells treated with their respective drugs and in combination with asiRNA-VP.

## Materials and methods

## siRNA design
siRNAs were either self-designed from the mRNA of MYC and RRM2 using the freely available software siDirect v2.0 [ ] or purchased from different companies. All the self-designed siRNAs were synthesized by GenePharma (Zhangjiang Hi-Tech Park, Shanghai, China), while the siRNAs of cFLIP, BRD4 and BRD4-NUTM1 were purchased from Dharmacon™ siRNA Solutions (Lafayette, USA). Negative control siRNAs were used either from commercial sources or were self-designed. The scramble and mismatch control asymmetric siRNA (asiRNA) sequences were designed from full-length siRNAs using the freely available online software GenScript Biotech [ ] and computational resources for drug discovery [ ], respectively. Vinylphosphonate-modified asiRNA (asiRNA-VP) was synthesized by AXOLABS nucleic acid therapeutics (Kulmbach, Germany).
The siRNAs were screened step by step for their knockdown efficacy. All the full-length siRNAs were tested for knockdown efficacy, and those achieving over 50 % reduction in MYC mRNA and protein were further screened by adjusting dosages, transfection reagents, and cell numbers. Once the best parent siRNA was selected, asiRNA designs were made by progressively removing single nucleotides from the 5′ end of the passenger strand, followed by screening for knockdown efficacy. After selecting the asiRNAs, various modification types and patterns were employed to enhance stability, reduce off-target effects, and increase potency using 2′-O-methyl (2′-Ome), 2′-fluoro (2′-F), phosphorothioate (PS), and 5′-(E)-Vinylphosphonate (VP) addition.

## Cell lines and culture conditions
Triple-negative breast cancer cell lines (MDA-MB-157, MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-436, MDA-MB-453, MDA-MB-468, HCC1937, Hs-578T and HCC38), immortalized mammary epithelial cell lines (MCF-10A), NUT midline carcinoma cell lines (HCC2429 and SNU-2972–1), BEAS-2B cells (human pulmonary epithelial cells) and non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines (H1993 and H1975) were used throughout the experiment. All the cells were tested for mycoplasma by using a CycleavePCR™ Mycoplasma Detection Kit (#CY232, TaKaRa Bio Inc. Shiga, Japan) before use. MDA-MB-157, MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-436, MDA-MB-453, HCC1937, HCC38, HCC2429, SNU-2972–1, H1993 and H1975 cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium (#LM 011–01, WELGENE, Gyeongsangbuk-do, Korea) supplemented with 10 % FBS, 100 units/ml penicillin and 100 μg/ml streptomycin. MDA-MB-468 and Hs-578T cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented with high-glucose Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (WELGENE, #001–05, Gyeongsangbuk-do, Korea). MCF-10A cells were cultured in MEGM™ Mammary Epithelial Cell Growth Medium BulletKit™ (#CC-3150, Cambridge, MA, USA). BEAS-2B cells were cultured in BEGM™ Bronchial Epithelial Cell Growth Medium (BulletKit™, #CC-3170, Cambridge, MA, USA). All the cell lines were cultured at 37 °C in 95 % atmospheric air and 5 % CO2. Additional cell line characteristics, including mutations, gene expression and copy number alterations, are given in Table S1.

## siRNA transfection
A total of 1.5–2 × 105 cells were seeded on six-well plates and cultured overnight at 37 °C and 5 % CO2. After 24 h, as the cells reached 60–80 % confluence, the cells were washed with PBS, and the media was changed. The transfection mixture was prepared by adding 200 µL of Opti-MEM™ I Reduced Serum Medium (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #319850620, Carlsbad, CA, USA), 5–7 µL of Lipofectamine™ 3000 (Invitrogen, #L3000015, Carlsbad, CA, USA) or DharmaFECT 1 (Horizon Discovery, #T-2001–03, Cambridge, UK), and 2 µL of a 20 µM siRNA solution to a 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube. The mixtures were incubated at room temperature for 15 min when using Lipofectamine™ 3000 and for 20 min when using DharmaFECT 1. Subsequently, 207–209 µL of the transfection mixture was added to the respective wells of six-well plates. Cells were incubated for 48–72 h at 37 °C and 5 % CO₂.
For HCC2429 cell line, the Neon™ Transfection System (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) was used. A total of 5 × 10⁶ cells, 20 nM of siRNA, with settings of 1600 V, 10 ms pulse width, and 3 pulses were used for transfection. Cells were transfected at ∼70–90 % confluency. The cells were washed with PBS without Ca²⁺ and Mg²⁺, centrifuged to remove the PBS, and resuspended in R buffer at a cell density of 5 × 10⁶ cells per mL. An equivalent volume of cell suspension was prepared as a negative control in R buffer. A 400 µL aliquot of the cell suspension was transferred to a 1.5 mL tube. Media (2 mL per well) containing serum, but no antibiotics were added to the six-well plates. Subsequently, 100 µL of the cell suspension was electroporated using 100 µL Neon™ tips and transferred to each well. The same process was applied for the scramble siRNA control. Cells were incubated for 48–72 h prior to further assays.

## Chemotherapy drugs and development of resistant MDA-MB-231 cell lines
Dacomitinib (PF00299804) (#S2727, MedChemExpress, Monmouth, USA), doxorubicin (HCL) (#S1208, Selleck Chemicals LLC, Houston, USA), paclitaxel (NSC 125973) (#S1150, Cayman Chemical, Michigan, USA), talazoparib (BMN 673) (#S7048, Selleck Chemicals LLC, Houston, USA) and cisplatin (#S1166, Selleck Chemicals LLC, Houston, USA) were used either individually or in combination with MYC siRNA. A high-level laboratory model system was chosen to develop MDA-MB-231 cell lines resistant to cisplatin, doxorubicin and paclitaxel, as described previously [ ]. Before drug resistance development, the IC50 of each drug was predicted (Table S2 and Fig. S4A-E). Once the IC50 was predicted, the cells were continuously exposed to escalating doses of individual drugs for 16 weeks. The media and drugs were changed every 4–5 days. The treatment concentrations and ranges are described in Table S3.

## Water soluble tetrazolium salt (WST-1) assay
Cells were cultured in six-well plates and treated with either siRNA or chemotherapeutic drugs intended for the study. The cells were incubated at 37 °C for 48–72 h. To determine cell viability, 1800 μl of fresh media and 200 μl of EZ-Cytox (#EZ-3000, Doogenbio Co., Ltd., Gyeonggi, Korea) were added to the six-well plates. The cell viability assay was conducted in duplicate for each experiment. The cells were incubated for 3 h at 37 °C, after which 100 μl of the culture medium was added to each well of a 96-well plate at least in triplicate, after which the absorbance at a wavelength of 450 nm was read using a Multi-Reader (Molecular Devices, SpectraMAX M5). The data were analyzed in excel, and in all cases, the data from the treatment groups were normalized to those from the nontreated, mock or negative control groups.

## Cell lysis, protein concentration determination, and western blotting
Cell lysis was performed using RIPA lysis buffer (#89901, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc., San Francisco, USA) supplemented with Halt™ Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (100 ×) (#78440, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc., San Francisco, USA). Protein concentrations were determined by Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kits (#23225, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc., San Francisco, USA). Cell lysates were resuspended in 5x SDS‒PAGE loading buffer (#SF2002-110-00, Biosesang, Korea). Western blotting was performed according to the protocols [ ]. Image documentation was performed by LAS4000 (GE Healthcare, ImageQuant) using chemoluminescence with the help of detection reagent A (#RPN2232S1 Luminol enhancer solution from GE Healthcare, Hertfordshire, UK) and Reagent B (#RPN2232S2: peroxide solution from GE Healthcare, Hertfordshire, UK), which were mixed at a ratio of 1:1.
The following primary and secondary antibodies were used throughout the experiment: recombinant anti-c-MYC antibody [Y69] at 1:1000 (#ab32072, Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA), anti-GAPDH antibody [EPR16891] at 1:10,000 as a loading control (#ab181602, Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA), anti-RAD51 antibody [EPR4030(3)] at 1:10,000–50,000 (#ab133534, Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA), anti-gamma γH2AX (phospho S139) antibody [EP854(2)Y] at 1:5000–10,000 (#ab81299, Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA), anti-E-cadherin antibody at 1:500 (#ab15148, Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA), Met (D1C2) XP® Rabbit mAb at 1:1000 (#8198, Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA), Cleaved Caspase-3 (Asp175) (5A1E) Rabbit mAb at 1:1000 (#9664, Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA), Phospho-Stat1 (Ser727) Antibody at 1:1000, HRP-conjugated anti-rabbit IgG (#7074, Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA) and HRP (1:2000–5000, ab205718, Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA). In addition, the drug substance interferon beta mutein cytokine (IFNβ-C17S/R27T, ABN101) from ABION BIO, which is under development, was used.

## Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
A SimpleChIP® Enzymatic Chromatin IP Kit, Magnetic Beads (#9003, Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA) was used for ChIP, followed by qPCR amplification of the target gene from the ChIP DNA. Approximately 4 × 106 cells were seeded before one day in five 10 cm dishes, which included the desired sample, positive control, negative control, sample for analysis of chromatin digestion and concentration, and finally sample for the determination of cell number by a hemocytometer. All the procedures were performed according to the protocols described in the kit. A total of 9.2 μg of DNA was used for all antibodies. Chromatin immunoprecipitation was performed by using 10 μl of histone H3 (D2B12) XP® Rabbit mAb ChIP formulated (#4620, Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA) as a positive control, 15 μl of NUT (C52B1) rabbit mAb 1:1000 (#3625, Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA) and 10 μl of BRD4 (E2A7X) rabbit mAb, ChIP formulated, 1:1000 (#13,440, Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA) as a targeting antibody, and 2 μl (2 μg) of normal rabbit IgG (ChIP formulated (#2729, Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA) as a negative control. To determine whether the BRD4 and BRD4-NUTM1 proteins bind to the promoter of MYC, we designed primers for the genomic DNA of MYC at the promoter and upstream regions (Table S4).

## Immunocytochemistry
HCC2429 cells (2.5 × 10⁵) were seeded in duplicates in six-well plates for hematoxylin-eosin (H&E) and antibody staining. After 24 h, the media was replaced, and the cells were transfected with scramble, asiRNA-VP, NUTM1-SP, and siBRD4. Following 72 h of culture, the cells were harvested, counted, and resuspended at 5 × 10⁴ cells per 100 µL. Cell suspensions (100–200 µL) were centrifuged at 5000 g for 5 min onto microscope slides using a cytospin centrifuge. The cells were then fixed in 4 % paraformaldehyde for 15 min and dried overnight. Fixed cells were stained with NUT (C52B1) rabbit mAb (#3625, Cell Signaling Technology), 1:200 or H&E, followed by horseradish peroxidase (HRP) conjugated antibody (#ab205718, Abcam), 1:2000. Images were captured using a bright-field microscope.

## RNA purification, cDNA synthesis and reverse transcriptase quantitative PCR (RT‒qPCR)
Total RNA was isolated using GeneAll Hybrid-R™ (#305-101, GeneAll Biotechnology, Seoul, Korea) with RiboEx™ lysis following the manufacturer's instructions. The total RNA concentration was determined by a Nanodrop spectrophotometer, which measures the absorbance at 260 nm (A260). Total RNA purity was verified by determining the A260/A280 ratio. A total of 1 μg of RNA was reverse transcribed to cDNA using a RevertAid First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (#K1622, Thermo Scientific™, San Francisco, USA) in accordance with the protocol. TaKaRa Thermal Cycler Dice Touch (TaKara Bio. INC. SHIGA, Japan) was used at 25 °C for 5 min, 42 °C for 1 hour, 70 °C for 5 min and 40 °C. qPCR was performed to quantify the mRNA expression of different transcripts by using TOPreal™ SYBR Green qPCR 2X PreMIX with low ROX Enzynomics (RT500 M, Daejeon, Korea) on a 7500 Real-Time PCR system (Applied Biosystems, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc., San Francisco, USA). All the qPCR primers were either designed using the free online PrimerQuest™ Tool at Integrated DNA Technology (IDT) or predesigned by IDT, as listed in Table S5. The qPCR procedure was as follows: initial denaturation at 95 °C for 12 min, denaturation at 95 °C for 10 s, annealing at 60 °C for 15 s, elongation at 72 °C for 15 s, and 45 cycles. Throughout the experiment, HPRT1 was used as an endogenous control for normalization. Then, the Ct values were analyzed by using the delta-delta (2‑ΔΔCq) method [ ].

## Droplet digital PCR (ddPCR)
We determined the status of MYC gene amplification from DNA extracts of 7 triple-negative breast cancer cell lines by using droplet digital PCR (ddPCR). To determine MYC gene amplification status, eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2C, 1 (EIF2C1), a commonly used reference gene for MYC amplification, was used [ ]. Primers and probes were designed using the PrimerQuest tool from Integrated DNA Technology. The MYC primer probes were labeled with FAM (at the 5′ end and BHQ-1 at the 3′ end), and the EIF2C1/AGO1 primer probes were labeled with HEX (at the 5′ end and BHQ-1 at the 3′) and then used for copy number determination (Table S6). ddPCR was performed using a QX200™ Droplet Digital™ PCR (ddPCR™) system (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer's protocols. PCR was performed at 95 °C for 10 min, followed by 50 cycles of 94 °C for 30 s, 60 °C for 1 min and 10 min at 98 °C. The reaction was performed in a 20 μl total volume with a concentration of 10 ng/μl DNA, 2x ddPCR Supermix (#1,863,010, Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) for 10 μl probes (no dUTP), 1 μL MYC primers/probes, 1 μL EIF2C1 primer/probes and nuclease-free water until a 20 μL volume was reached. A total of 10 pmole forward and reverse primers and 4 pmole primer probes were used. To assess the number of droplets positive for MYC and EIF2C1, plates were read using a Bio-Rad QX200 droplet reader (QuantaSoft v1.0.596 software, Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). Then, MYC gene copy number variation was determined by dividing the MYC value by the reference gene multiplied by 2 ([MYC/EIF2C1] x 2), and the final result was obtained from the average of 2 replicate values (Table S7).

## Flow cytometry-based apoptosis detection
Apoptosis in MDA-MB-157 and MDA-MB-231 cells was assessed using the Dead Cell Apoptosis Kit with Annexin V Alexa Fluor™ 488 (AV AF-488) and Propidium Iodide (PI) (#V13241, Invitrogen™, USA), following the manufacturer's instructions. Cells were washed with PBS, detached with 0.25 % trypsin (without EDTA), and centrifuged. After discarding the supernatant, cell pellets were washed with cold PBS. Trypan blue exclusion assay was used to determine the cell number, and adjusted to 1 × 10⁶ cells per ml. Cells were centrifuged to remove PBS, and the cell pellets were resuspended in 100 µL of 1X Annexin binding buffer. To each tube, 5 µL of AV AF-488 and 1 µL of 100 µg/mL Propidium Iodide (PI) were added. The cells were incubated at room temperature for 15 min in the dark. Then, 400 µL of 1X Annexin binding buffer was added. The samples were placed on ice until analysis. Stained cells were analyzed using the FACS Lyric flow cytometer (BD Biosciences, USA).

## Prediction of drug combination index using SynergyFinder+ online tool
Both sensitive and resistant MDA-MB-231 cell lines were seeded in a 96-well plate. After 24 h, the culture media was replaced, and the cells were treated with either 2-fold serial dilutions of asiRNAs-VP or 4-fold serial dilutions of paclitaxel, or a combination of both. The cells were cultured and monitored daily for 72 h at 37 °C and 5 % Co2. After 72 h, the media was replaced, and 10 µL of WST-1 reagent was added to each well. The plates were incubated for an additional 3 h. Absorbance was measured at 450 nm using a SpectraMAX M5. Data were normalized to either DMSO or scrambled siRNA controls to determine cell viability. Cell viability data were organized into a matrix format and analyzed using SynergyFinder+ (http://www.synergyfinderplus.org/) [ ]. Synergy scores were calculated using Zero Interaction Potency (ZIP) model.

## Statistical analysis
Data analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism version 8.0.2 software. For comparisons between treatment groups, students’ t-test, as well as one-way and two-way ANOVA, were employed. When significant differences were found, Tukey's or Sidak's post-hoc multiple comparison tests were used to identify specific group differences. The IC50 curves were fitted using log (inhibitor) versus normalized response with variable slope. In all cases, the significance level was set at the 95 % confidence interval with p < 0.05: *, p < 0.01: **, p < 0.001: ***, p < 0.0001:****. Pearson correlation coefficient was used to determine the correlation between MYC DNA copy number and protein expression and between MYC protein expression and RAD51 and PARP1 protein expression. Survival analysis was performed using freely available Kaplan-Meier Plotter (https://kmplot.com/analysis/) [ ].

## Results

## siRNA structural design, MYC copy number variation and protein expression in TNBC cell lines
To gain insight into the role of MYC, we designed and screened siRNAs for their knockdown efficacy ( - ). Asymmetric siRNAs were designed from the parent siRNA to enhance specificity and reduce off-target effects ( ) and were screened for their knockdown efficacy. Various modification types and patterns have been employed to enhance nuclease resistance and increase potency, safety and longevity. The modifications included alternate full modifications containing (2′-Ome + 2-F + PS) ( ) or ( ’-Ome + 2-F + PS + VP), as shown in , as well as reduced (PS modification at the 5′ end) and global (2′-F) modifications ( , ). 
We aimed to determine the MYC DNA copy number and protein expression status to facilitate proper experimental design and interpretation of the results. The EIF2C1 gene is commonly used as a reference gene for determination of MYC copy number variation (CNV) via ddPCR . MYC CNV was determined using ddPCR in reference to EIF2C1 (Table S7 and ). MYC protein expression ( ) was determined via western blotting, and the western blot bands were quantified by ImageJ software (Fig. S1A and B).
To determine the correlation between the copy number ratio of MYC/EIF2C1 and MYC protein expression, we conducted Pearson correlation coefficient analysis ( ). MYC copy number was strongly correlated (r = 0.7873, R2 = 0.6199, p = 0.0355) with MYC protein expression. We also assessed the basal expression levels of other proteins used in this study via western blotting; these proteins might interact with the MYC protein (Fig. S1 A and B). A significant correlation was observed between MYC and RAD51 protein expression (Fig. S1C). However, the correlation between MYC and PARP1 protein expression was not significant despite the higher correlation coefficient (Fig. S1D).

## Indirect targeting of MYC via RRM2 and BRD4
Tremendous efforts have been devoted to targeting MYC directly or indirectly using small molecules or other biological agents. However, none of these approaches have yet resulted in the development of clinical-grade drugs. The MYC protein is intrinsically disordered and lacks active sites for drug targeting, posing a significant challenge to direct intervention. As a consequence, many researchers have turned to indirect targeting of MYC using small molecules. However, the presence of partially redundant functions with other MYC family genes (MYCN and MYCL) complicates these efforts [ ].
Recent research has increasingly focused on targeting MYC indirectly by inhibiting its upstream regulators or proteins that interact with MYC, which help stabilize its oncogenic activity. For example, the MYC-Aurora A, heterodimer, has been highlighted as a key interaction essential for MYC's oncogenic potential. This interaction offers a novel platform for structure-based drug design, enabling the development of more selective inhibitors compared to compounds directly targeting MYC itself. Additionally, other MYC-interacting proteins, such as PP2A, PIM1 kinase, SKP2, USP7, WDR5, Aurora kinase B (AURKB) and upstream regulators such as BRD4 and RRM2 provide alternative avenues for MYC inhibition ([ , ]). Targeting these MYC interactors or upstream regulators has shown promise in disrupting MYC stability and function, offering a more viable therapeutic strategy for cancers driven by MYC overexpression. This indirect targeting approach is gaining attention because MYC's undruggable nature poses significant challenges for direct inhibition, while disrupting its regulatory network or upstream drivers may offer more specific and effective therapeutic options.
BRD4 regulates MYC at both the transcriptional and posttranscriptional levels [ ], while RRM2 regulate MYC through the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway [ ]. In our study, we chose to indirectly target MYC by focusing on RRM2 and BRD4, in addition to direct MYC targeting using asiRNA-VP. Kaplan-Meier survival analysis conducted on cohorts of breast, lung, melanoma, ovarian, pancreatic, acute myeloid leukemia (AML), and gastric cancer patients revealed that those with high RRM2 and BRD4 mRNA expression had significantly reduced overall survival (OS) compared to patients with low expression levels in these cohorts (p < 0.05) (Fig. S2A-L). These findings suggest that the overexpression of RRM2 and BRD4 may serve as negative prognostic factors in various cancer types, highlighting their potential as therapeutic targets.

## Knockdown of RRM2 is more cytotoxic than direct knockdown of MYC
RRM2 knockdown resulted in the downregulation of MYC, RAD51, and PARP1 ( , , ) but significantly upregulated RAD51 in the siRRM2–3- and siRRM2–8-treated groups ( ). The mRNA knockdown efficacy of siRRM2–6 was significantly higher (p < 0.05) than that of siRRM2–3 and siRRM2–8 in downregulating RRM2, MYC, and PARP1 ( , , ). Additionally, all three siRNAs targeting RRM2 induced significant cell death (>70 %) in the MDA-MB-157 cell line ( ).
Efficient RRM2 knockdown led to the downregulation of RRM2, MYC, RAD51, and PARP1 but also induced the expression of γH2AX ( and Fig. S1E). Furthermore, compared with full-length siRNAs, siRNAs targeting RRM2 and asiRNAs exhibited comparable efficacy in downregulating RRM2 and other downstream targets ( and Fig. S1F). Interestingly, RRM2 knockdown was more cytotoxic than direct MYC knockdown in the MDA-MB-157 cell line ( ).
To determine whether the reduced cell viability was due to cell death or decreased metabolism, MDA-MB-157 and MDA-MB-231 cells were transfected with 10 nM of MYC, RRM2, or their respective scramble siRNAs. The cells were incubated for 72 h and inspected daily under a microscope. After 72 h, cell counts were performed using a trypan blue exclusion assay, and the cells were either stained with AV AF-488 and PI for flow cytometry or used for RNA purification followed by RT-qPCR in MDA-MB-231 cell line to confirm mRNA knockdown. In MDA-MB-157 cells, a relatively higher percentage of cells were positive for PI alone in the siRNA10 and siRRM2–6 treated groups compared to the scramble control, confirming the ongoing death of late apoptotic cells ( ). A similar proportion of cells were positive for both AV AF-488 and PI in the scramble, siRNA10, and siRRM2–6 treated groups, while the proportion of cells positive only for AV AF-488 was lower in the siRNA10 treated group compared to the scramble and siRRM2–6 groups, suggesting the anti-apoptotic effect of direct MYC inhibition. However, nearly 75 % of siRRM2–6 treated cells were dead before flow cytometry analysis ( ), as observed under the microscope and confirmed by cell count using the trypan blue exclusion assay. Flow cytometry was only performed on non-floating live cells, which explains the lack of big difference between the target and scramble siRNA-treated groups in apoptotic and dead cell detection. On the other hand, these results might be based solely on cells that were either minimally transfected or not transfected at all, while highly transfected cells may have detached early and been washed away during media removal or PBS washing, as observed under the microscope.
To confirm whether these results could be replicated in another cell line, the MDA-MB-231 cell line was treated with siRNA10, siRRM2–6, and their respective scramble siRNAs. The results showed significant cell death (p < 0.05) and mRNA knockdown of MYC, RRM2, and PARP1, but not RAD51 ( - ). Additionally, PI staining followed by flow cytometry in MDA-MB-231 cells revealed a higher proportion of necrotic cells in the siRRM2–6 treated group compared to the siRNA10 and scramble treated groups ( ). Similarly, flow cytometry was conducted after discarding dead or floating cells.

## Indirectly targeting MYC through BRD4 knockdown is more potent than directly knocking down MYC itself
To investigate this hypothesis, HCC2429 and SNU-2972–1 cell lines were used as models, and both cell lines contained the chimeric protein BRD4-NUTM1 fusion protein. This fusion protein exerts a dominant negative effect on the normal BRD4 gene. Previous studies have demonstrated that MYC remains constitutively activated by BRD4 and/or the BRD4-NUTM1 [ ] fusion oncoprotein, making these cell lines an excellent model for investigating the role of BRD4 in regulating downstream targets, such as MYC. The differences in the expressions of BRD4 and BRD4-NUTM1 were compared by siRNA-mediated knockdown which targets different regions of BRD4 and BRD4-NUTM1, these includes BRD4 siRNA [siBRD4], BRD4-NUTM1 (siBRD4-NUTM1) and BRD4-NUTM1 (NUTM1 pooled siRNA [NUTM1-SP]). In addition, we also knocked down MYC via siRNA10 and asiRNA-VP. siRNA10, asiRNA-VP, siBRD4, siBRD4-NUTM1 and NUTM1-SP significantly (p < 0.05) downregulated MYC ( ). The knockdown efficacy of siBRD4 and NUTM1-SP on MYC protein expression was greater than that of siRNA10 and asiRNA-VP ( and Fig. S3H). Moreover, the combination treatments also enhanced the knockdown efficacy of MYC. Compared with direct knockdown of MYC by siRNA10, knockdown of BRD4 or BRD4-NUTM1 caused significant (p < 0.05) cell death ( ). On day 8, the knockdown efficacy of siBRD4 and siNUTM1-SP in downregulating MYC was significantly (p < 0.05) greater than that of siRNA10 and asiRNA-VP ( ). The knockdown efficacy of siBRD4 and siNUTM1-SP was significantly greater on day 8 than on day 3 (p < 0.05) ( ), indicating that the knockdown efficacy increased with time. 
Then, we wanted to confirm whether BRD4 and BRD4-NUTM1 are direct upstream drivers of the MYC oncogene by performing ChIP (Fig. S3A-F) on the SNU-2972–1 (which has BRD4-NUTM1 fusion) and BEAS-2B (without BRD4-NUTM1 fusion) cell lines. To confirm whether the MYC promoter was bound/enriched by BRD4 and/or BRD4-NUTM1, qPCR primers were designed on the genomic DNA of MYC at the promoter (∼1000 bp) and upstream (∼9445 bp) regions of the MYC gene start site (Fig. S3G). In the SNU-2972–1 cell line, the MYC promoter region was enriched/bound to both BRD4 and BRD4-NUM1 ( ). In the MYC upstream region, BRD4 was significantly more enriched than BRD4-NUTM1 ( ). In the BEAS-2B cell line, the MYC promoter region was enriched/bound to BRD4 but not to BRD4-NUTM1 since BRD4-NUTM1 is absent in normal cells ( ). In addition, MYC upstream region was not enriched or bound by either the BRD4 or the BRD4-NUTM1 protein ( ).
To evaluate whether BRD4-NUTM1 inhibition induces senescence, HCC2429 cells were transfected with scramble, asiRNA-VP, NUTM1-SP, and siBRD4. Immunocytochemistry staining was performed 72 h post-transfection using NUT (C52B1) rabbit monoclonal antibody (#3625, Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA). The results showed that BRD4-NUTM1 inhibition by NUTM1-SP significantly reduced BRD4-NUTM1 protein expression, as confirmed by immunocytochemistry staining ( , ). Furthermore, the cell morphology in NUTM1-SP-treated groups displayed an enlarged and flattened appearance, indicative of differentiation or reduced proliferation, compared to scramble and asiRNA-VP-treated groups. In siBRD4-treated groups, a mixture of stained and less-stained cells was observed, likely due to the lower knockdown efficacy of siBRD4 compared to NUTM1-SP. Hematoxylin and eosin staining revealed that most cells in the NUTM1-SP-treated group were enlarged and flattened, while the siBRD4-treated group exhibited a heterogeneous population of both enlarged/flattened and smaller cells (Fig. S3I). In contrast, cells in the scramble and asiRNA-VP-treated groups were uniform and smaller in size, an indication of proliferation potential (Fig. S3I).

## MYC inhibition in combination with EGFR or PARP inhibitors induced synthetic lethality in TNBC cell lines
In this study, we investigated the synthetic lethal interactions of MYC inhibition with either EGFR or PARP inhibitors. Since MYC regulates RAD51 and PARP1 [ ], MYC inhibition can disrupt both the HRR, and single-strand break repair (SSBR) pathways. MYC knockdown may partially compromise the efficiency of HRR in HR-proficient cells and could induce synthetic lethality when combined with EGFR and PARP inhibitors.
DNA repair gene alterations varied among the MDA-MB-157, MDA-MB-231, and MDA-MB-453 cell lines (Table S1), leading to differing responses to combination treatments depending on the genetic alterations in each cell line. First, the IC50 values of each drug (dacomitinib and talazoparib) were determined in TNBC cell lines (Fig. S4A and B and Table S2). Each treatment group included at least two cell lines based on their DNA repair gene alteration status.
MDA-MB-157 cell line was considered HR-proficient due to its few DNA repair gene alterations (e.g., TP53 heterozygous mutation among DNA repair genes) and high RAD51 protein expression (Fig. S1A and B). Similarly, MDA-MB-453 cell line harbored ATM, PIK3CA and PTEN mutations, while the MDA-MB-231 cell line exhibited heterozygous ATM and TP53 mutations along with other alterations (Table S1).
In MDA-MB-157 cells, treatment with dacomitinib or asiRNA-VP significantly suppressed MYC and PARP1 expression but induced RAD51 overexpression ( , , and ). Interestingly, combined treatment with dacomitinib and asiRNA-VP also suppressed MYC expression but led to RAD51 and PARP1 overexpression ( , , and ). Although dacomitinib alone did not induce cell death at the given dose, asiRNA-VP or its combination with dacomitinib caused significant (P < 0.05) cell death ( ). Moreover, dacomitinib downregulated MYC and PARP1, while asiRNA-VP suppressed both MYC and PARP1 but induced γH2AX overexpression ( ). The combined use of asiRNA-VP and dacomitinib downregulated MYC, RAD51, and PARP1 but markedly induced γH2AX overexpression ( , Fig. S5A and B). 
In MDA-MB-453 cell line, dacomitinib significantly downregulated MYC and PARP1 but not RAD51 ( , , and ). Conversely, treatment with asiRNA-VP alone or in combination with dacomitinib significantly downregulated MYC, RAD51, and PARP1 expression ( , , and ) and induced significant (P < 0.05) cell death ( ). Treatment of MDA-MB-453 cells with dacomitinib alone induced RAD51 overexpression ( ). However, treatment with asiRNA-VP alone or in combination with dacomitinib efficiently downregulated MYC, RAD51, and PARP1 and induced γH2AX overexpression ( ), confirming induction of synthetic lethality in non-BRCA mutant cell lines.
Additionally, asiRNA-VP was combined with talazoparib in the MDA-MB-157, MDA-MB-453, and MDA-MB-231 cell lines. In the MDA-MB-157 cell line, talazoparib treatment significantly downregulated PARP1 expression and induced dose-dependent cell death ( , ). asiRNA-VP effectively downregulated MYC and PARP1, induced RAD51 mRNA overexpression, and caused significant cell death ( - ). The combined use of asiRNA-VP and talazoparib downregulated MYC and PARP1, substantially reduced cell viability, and upregulated RAD51 ( - ). Notably, MYC inhibition was more potent than high-dose talazoparib treatment at suppressing PARP1 expression and inducing cell death in the MDA-MB-157 cell line ( , ). Similarly, asiRNA-VP effectively downregulated MYC, RAD51, and PARP1 and had a greater effect on PARP1 than did high-dose talazoparib ( and Fig. S5C and D). Moreover, high-dose talazoparib partially (40 %) depleted RAD51 but induced γH2AX overexpression ( ). These results suggested that MYC inhibition depleted RAD51 by 56 % (Fig. S4C) and suppressed PARP1 more effectively by 64 % (Fig. S5D), which are crucial for the HRR of double-strand breaks (DSBs) and single-strand break repair (SSBR), respectively.
In the MDA-MB-453 cell line, low-dose talazoparib treatment did not significantly suppress PARP1 or induce significant cell death ( , ). However, treatment with asiRNA-VP alone or in combination with talazoparib efficiently downregulated MYC, RAD51, and PARP1 and caused significant cell death ( - , and ).
Moreover, treatment of the MDA-MB-231 cell line with asiRNA-VP alone or in combination with talazoparib downregulated RAD51 and PARP1 expression and caused significant cell death (Fig. S6A-C). Similarly, treatment with asiRNA-VP alone or in combination with talazoparib efficiently downregulated MYC, RAD51, and PARP1 but resulted in γH2AX overexpression (Fig. S6D and E).
The significant reduction in cell viability and downregulation of RAD51 and PARP1 upon concurrent inhibition of MYC and EGFR or MYC and PARP1 indicate the successful induction of synthetic lethality in the BRCA wild-type MDA-MB-157, MDA-MB-231, and MDA-MB-453 cell lines.

## Development of paclitaxel-, doxorubicin- and cisplatin-resistant MDA-MB-231 cells
To further explore the importance of MYC inhibition in reversing chemotherapy resistance, we generated paclitaxel-, doxorubicin-, and cisplatin-resistant MDA-MB-231 cell lines. Prior to developing the resistant cell lines, we predicted the IC50 of each drug using a nonlinear regression model in GraphPad Prism version 8.0.2 software (Fig. S4C-E and Table S2). The cells were continuously exposed to a gradient dose for 16 weeks, and the media was changed every 4–5 days. The treatment dose ranges from IC10 to the IC60 for (doxorubicin and cisplatin) and IC10 to IC80 or ICany (for paclitaxel). Once the resistant cells were established, we determined the IC50 of each drug by comparing them with those of control cell lines grown for 16 weeks in parallel with the resistant cells ( and Fig. S8A-F). Subsequently, the fold change or resistance index of each drug was calculated by dividing the IC50 of the drug-resistant cells by the IC50 of the drug-sensitive cells ( ). To investigate the treatment response between the resistant and sensitive cell lines, both groups were treated with paclitaxel, doxorubicin, or cisplatin alone or in combination with MYC siRNA (asiRNA-VP). We explored the role of DNA repair genes in chemotherapy-resistant cells and identified drugs that could synergize with MYC inhibition using cell cytotoxicity assay. To accommodate the IC50 of both sensitive and resistant cells and appreciate the difference in the treatment responses, a wider dose range was selected for each drug. Then, 2-, 10-, and 4-fold dilutions were used for paclitaxel, doxorubicin, and cisplatin, respectively, as shown in , , . 

## Paclitaxel-resistant cells upregulated MYC, RRM2, RAD51, and PARP1 in response to paclitaxel treatment
In both sensitive and resistant cells, RRM2 expression was significantly downregulated following treatment with asiRNA-VP alone or in combination with paclitaxel ( ). Compared to paclitaxel-sensitive cells, paclitaxel-treated resistant cells exhibited significant overexpression of RRM2, which was notably reversed by combination treatment. RAD51 expression was significantly greater in paclitaxel-resistant cells than in paclitaxel-sensitive cells ( ). Although this upregulation decreased with asiRNA-VP treatment, RAD51 levels remained unchanged in paclitaxel-resistant cells compared to sensitive cells ( ). RAD51 expression was consistently elevated in paclitaxel-resistant cells across all treatment groups ( ). Differences in sensitivity to asiRNA-VP treatment were observed between paclitaxel-sensitive and paclitaxel-resistant cells, with the latter being more sensitive to MYC knockdown ( ). While paclitaxel-sensitive cells showed greater viability in the asiRNA-VP-only treatment group, paclitaxel-resistant cells exhibited the opposite effect in the combination treatment group. To assess whether the combination of paclitaxel and asiRNA-VP exhibits synergistic, additive, or antagonistic effects, we treated cells for paclitaxel, asiRNA-VP and their combination across a range of concentrations and calculated synergy scores using SynergyFinder+ (http://www.synergyfinderplus.org/). Heat map and 3D map were used to display the ZIP synergy score values (Fig. S9A-D). According to the ZIP synergy score model, the combination treatment demonstrated antagonistic effects in both paclitaxel-sensitive and -resistant MDA-MB-231 cells.
The basal expression levels of MYC and γH2AX were lower in paclitaxel-, doxorubicin-, and cisplatin-resistant cells than in sensitive cell lines under drug-free conditions ( ). Additionally, the basal expression levels of MYC, RRM2, RAD51, PARP1, and γH2AX were greater in paclitaxel-sensitive cells than in paclitaxel-resistant cells in both nontreated and scramble control cells ( - ). Treatment with asiRNA-VP effectively downregulated MYC, RRM2, RAD51, and PARP1 while inducing the upregulation of γH2AX in both sensitive and resistant cells ( - ). Higher doses of paclitaxel suppressed the expression of MYC, RRM2, RAD51, and PARP1 in paclitaxel-sensitive cells but upregulated the expression of these proteins in resistant cells ( , ). Combined treatment with asiRNA-VP and any dose of paclitaxel significantly depleted MYC, RRM2, RAD51, and PARP1 but upregulated γH2AX in both paclitaxel-sensitive and paclitaxel-resistant cells ( - ).

## MYC knockdown re-sensitized doxorubicin-resistant cells to doxorubicin treatment
Treatment of both doxorubicin-sensitive and doxorubicin-resistant cells with asiRNA-VP resulted in substantial knockdown (at least 43.9 %) of MYC, RRM2, PARP1, and RAD51 ( - ). In doxorubicin-sensitive cells, a higher dose (800 nM) of doxorubicin suppressed the expression of MYC, RRM2, PARP1, and RAD51, while in resistant cells, it led to their upregulation ( - ). The protein quantification results ( , ) confirmed the upregulation of these proteins, along with the overexpression of the DNA damage and repair marker γH2AX ( , ).
In combination-4 (combi-4)-treated resistant and sensitive cells, a knockdown efficacy greater than 80 % was observed ( , ). Compared to doxorubicin-sensitive cells, doxorubicin-resistant cells treated with Combi-5 and Combi-6 exhibited synergistic knockdown of RRM2, PARP1, and RAD51 expression ( - ). Additionally, γH2AX was overexpressed in both sensitive and resistant cells treated with asiRNA-VP, doxorubicin, or the combination of both ( - ).
Cell death resulting from MYC knockdown was significantly greater in resistant cells than in sensitive cells ( ). However, the viability of resistant cells was significantly greater than that of sensitive cells when treated with doxorubicin, regardless of the dose ( ). Doxorubicin-resistant cells exhibited significantly lower cell viability than doxorubicin-sensitive cells in the combination treatment in a dose-dependent manner ( ). Compared with asiRNA-VP and doxorubicin monotherapy, the combination treatment resulted in significant cell death in both doxorubicin-sensitive and doxorubicin-resistant cells (Fig. S7A and B).

## MYC knockdown re-sensitized cisplatin-resistant cells to cisplatin treatment
MYC knockdown by asiRNA10-VP downregulated RRM2, PARP1 and RAD51 in both resistant and sensitive cells ( - ). A high dose of cisplatin (50 μM) suppressed MYC, RRM2, PARP1 and RAD51 protein expression in the cisplatin-sensitive MDA-MB-231 cell line ( , ). In contrast, treatment of resistant cells with high doses of cisplatin resulted in sustained overexpression of MYC, RRM2, PARP1 and RAD51 ( , ). Compared to those in cisplatin-sensitive cell lines, MYC, RRM2, PARP1 and RAD51 were upregulated in resistant cells treated with only cisplatin, regardless of the dose ( - ). The combined use of asiRNA-VP and cisplatin had synergistic effects on the knockdown of MYC, RRM2, PARP1 and RAD51 in cisplatin-resistant cells compared with sensitive cells ( - ).
Compared with cisplatin-sensitive cells, cisplatin-resistant cells treated with asiRNA10-VP exhibited significant cytotoxic effects ( ). Compared with resistant cells, cisplatin-sensitive cells exhibited significant cell death after treatment with a high dose of cisplatin ( , Fig. S7C and D). In cisplatin-sensitive cells, a synergistic cytotoxic effect was observed when a high dose of cisplatin (50 μM) was used in combination with asiRNA10-VP (Fig. S7C), but not at lower doses. Compared to cisplatin monotherapy, the combination of cisplatin and asiRNA10-VP enhanced the cytotoxic effect in cisplatin-resistant cells but was less than the cytotoxic effect observed for asiRNA-VP alone ( and Fig. S7D).

## MYC knockdown upregulated pSTA1, STAT1, STAT2, cFLIP, BCL2 and cleaved caspase-3 in TNBC and NSCLC cell lines
We sought to investigate whether direct MYC knockdown could effectively inhibit cancer cell proliferation or not. However, the MYC gene copy number in TNBC cell lines was not significantly elevated, as confirmed by ddPCR analysis ( ). To gain a more comprehensive understanding, lung cancer cell lines, including H1993 and H1975, which have MYC gene amplifications of approximately 12 copies (Table S1), were incorporated into the study alongside TNBC cell lines. To validate this hypothesis, we analyzed interferon pathway genes (STAT1/pSTAT1 and STAT2), apoptosis-related genes (cleaved caspase-3, cFLIP, and BCL2), and the MYC downstream target gene (RRM2).
To confirm this, we knocked down MYC, cFLIP, or both in the MDA-MB-468, H1993 and H1975 cell lines or treated them with IFNβ-C17S/R27T. Knockdown of MYC using different siRNA derivatives (asiRNA-VP, Mod_asiRNA10–6, siRNA10 and siRNA8-mf-PS) upregulated cFLIP, BCL2, STAT1, and STAT2 but suppressed RRM2 expression in the H1993 cell line ( - ). However, the cell viability in response to treatment with Mod_asiRNA10–6 and other siRNAs targeting MYC was >80 % ( ), indicating either the ineffectiveness of direct MYC knockdown in blocking cell proliferation or the presence of other compensatory mechanisms, such as MYC paralogs (MYCN and MYCL), in H1993 cells. Since MYC knockdown upregulated cFLIP and BCL2, we knocked down both MYC and cFLIP in H1993 and H1975 cells. Both cell lines exhibited MYC amplification, and the results showed that cFLIP and BCL2 were overexpressed ( , , ). However, the viability of H1993 cells treated with either asiRNA-VP, cFLIP siRNA, or their combination was similar to that of the control, indicating the ineffectiveness of MYC or cFLIP knockdown in inducing significant cell death ( ). Knockdown of MYC with asiRNA-VP, treatment with IFNβ-C17S/R27T, or the combination of both resulted in a 3-, 4-, and 5-fold overexpression of pSTAT1, respectively, while reducing cleaved caspase-3 expression by 34 %, 14.2 %, and 42.4 % compared to the negative control ( and Fig. S10A), indicating a predominance of antiapoptotic activity. In addition, we wanted to validate this result in another cell line (H1975); however, we found similar results, except for cell viability, in the cFLIP siRNA-treated group. Knockdown of the H1975 cell line with asiRNA-VP alone or in combination with cFLIP siRNA upregulated cFLIP, but knockdown of the H1975 cell line with cFLIP siRNA alone downregulated cFLIP ( ). Knockdown of cFLIP in the H1975 cell line significantly (p < 0.05) reduced cell viability by ∼40 % ( ), but the viability of cells in the combination treatment group increased since the knockdown of MYC upregulated cFLIP, which promoted cell survival. Then, we investigated this phenomenon in the TNBC (MDA-MB-468) cell line by treating with asiRNAs targeting MYC, IFNβ-C17S/R27T or their combination. The results showed a 2-, 4-, and 4-fold overexpression of pSTAT1, respectively, while cleaved caspase-3 expression increased by 35-, 114-, and 137-fold, respectively ( and Fig. S10B). These findings aligned with the cell viability data ( ) and might indicate a predominant activation of apoptotic activity, particularly in the combi-1 treated group. The combined treatment of asiRNA-VP and IFNβ-C17S/R27T significantly (p < 0.05) reduced cell viability ( ). MYC knockdown, treatment with IFNβ-C17S/R27T or their combination downregulated MYC and RRM2 ( , ) and upregulated STAT1 and cFLIP ( , ). 

## Discussion
MYC copy number was significantly correlated (r = 0.7873, R2 = 0.6199, p = 0.0355) with MYC protein expression ( ). The copy number of MYC in the TBNC cell lines was low to moderate, ranging from ∼3–8 copies, as described previously ( and Table S7). A previous report also revealed a low level of MYC copy gain (∼1–4) in breast carcinoma samples regardless of the subtype of breast cancer [ ]. The same study reported a correlation between MYC gene amplification and protein expression.
Targeting RRM2 was another strategy for downregulating RRM2, MYC, RAD51 and PARP1 at the same time, resulting in potent cytotoxicity ( - ). RRM2 is one of the key enzymes that catalyzes the conversion of ribonucleotide 5′-diphosphate to 2′-deoxyribonucleotides, which are necessary for DNA synthesis, repair and replication ([ , ]). RRM2 depletion results in a reduction in intracellular dNTP pools and subsequently exacerbates DNA damage [ ]. MYC knockdown followed by exogenous dNTP supplementation reportedly failed to alter the levels of MYC, TS, and RRM2 but increased the intracellular dNTP pool, reduced the senescence phenotype and DNA damage, and enhanced cell proliferation [ ]. Cell death following RRM2 knockdown was significantly (p < 0.05) greater than the cell death resulting from direct MYC knockdown in both MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-157 cell lines ( , , ). This might indicate the presence of additional mechanisms that enhance cell death following RRM2 knockdown. Previous report showed that inhibition of RRM2 induces apoptosis activation through Bcl2/caspase pathway [ ]. In addition, the inhibition of RRM2 impedes cell survival by suppressing the protein kinase B (AKT) pathway [ ]. RRM2 knockdown induced apoptosis and DNA damage in NCI-H929 cells [ ].
Many researchers have reported an association between RRM2 expression and drug resistance, while inhibition of RRM2 can potentially induce chemosensitivity [ ]. Moreover, RRM2 overexpression suppresses ferroptosis and autophagy, whereas RRM2 knockdown induces both ferroptosis- and autophagy-dependent cell death [ ]. Overall, RRM2 is a key enzyme in regulating apoptosis, ferroptosis, and autophagy-dependent cell death. Hence, targeting RRM2 holds significant clinical relevance, including overcoming drug resistance, enhancing treatment efficacy by indirectly targeting MYC, disrupting DNA repair mechanisms as a consequence of dNTP pool depletion, and activating multiple cell death pathways such as apoptosis, ferroptosis, and autophagy. In vivo tumor xenograft study demonstrated that RRM2 knockdown in Panc-1 and Miapaca-2 cells significantly slowed tumor growth [ ]. Additionally, in vivo study using A549 lung cancer cells showed RRM2 silencing significantly reduced tumor growth and increased STING expression, suggesting both direct tumor inhibition and immune response activation. The above studies confirmed the therapeutic potential of targeting RRM2 across different types of cancer, underscoring its broader clinical relevance as a promising strategy for cancer treatment. Moreover, Kaplan-Meier analysis of breast, lung, melanoma, pancreatic, and ovarian cancers from public databases revealed significantly reduced overall survival in patients with RRM2 overexpression (Fig. S2A-F).
In our study, the knockdown of RRM2 downregulated RAD51, PARP1 and MYC. Conversely, the knockdown of MYC depleted RRM2, RAD51, and PARP1 in TNBC cell lines. A previous report identified RRM2 as a direct downstream target of MYC [ ]. RRM2 knockdown downregulated Wnt/β‑catenin signaling by upregulating phosphorylated GSK‑3β, which promoted β-catenin protein degradation, consequently leading to MYC depletion [ ]. MYC serves as a downstream effector of Wnt/β-catenin signaling ([ , ]).
The second strategy for targeting MYC is BRD4 inhibition. Previous findings have shown a positive correlation between BRD4 and MYC expression ([ , ]). Indirect targeting of MYC by BRD4 or BRD4-NUTM1 knockdown was more potent than direct MYC knockdown ( , ). This is because BRD4 regulates MYC at multiple levels. First, BRD4 binds to both promoter and enhancer regions, leading to increased MYC and BRD4 histone acetyltransferase (HAT) activity, which drives MYC transcription via chromatin decompaction. Second, BRD4 regulates MYC mature transcripts via CRD-BP proteins and miRNAs (e.g., miRNA let-7, miR 34 and miR-145). Third, BRD4 mediates posttranscriptional regulation; under homeostatic conditions, the BRD4 dimer phosphorylates MYC at Thr58, leading to degradation, while during cell stimulatory signaling, GSK-3β and ERK1 regulate each other differently. The phosphorylation of MYC at Ser62 by ERK1 results in its stabilization, while the phosphorylation of MYC at Thr58 by GSK-3β directs its degradation [ ]. Thus, targeting BRD4 and/or BRD4-NUTM1 is more effective than direct MYC inhibition because it more efficiently induces apoptosis-mediated cell death [ ]. Indirect targeting of MYC via BRD4 or BRD4-NUTM1 knockdown significantly increased and prolonged the extent of MYC downregulation, respectively. Additionally, we confirmed that BRD4 and BRD4-NUTM1 bound to the promoter region of MYC on the genomic DNA. This binding site was confirmed to be a direct upstream regulator of MYC through ChIP followed by qPCR ( - ).
A tumor xenograft study using HCC2429 cell lines treated with siRNA targeting the BRD4-NUTM1 fusion region showed a significant reduction in tumor volume compared to the negative controls [ ]. The study also reported the colocalization of BRD4-NUTM1 and MYC expression in patient samples using immunohistochemical staining. This finding confirms that MYC is continuously regulated by BRD4-NUTM1, consistent with earlier studies. In another study, targeting BRD4 with JQ1 in epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) cells led to a significant reduction in MYC expression, inhibition of cell proliferation, induction of apoptosis, and cell cycle arrest. Moreover, JQ1 exhibited substantial antitumor effects in vivo, suppressing tumorigenicity in a xenograft mouse model, underscoring the potential of targeting BRD4 to downregulate MYC in the treatment of EOC [ ]. In addition, Kaplan-Meier analysis of breast, lung, melanoma, gastric, acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and ovarian cancers revealed significantly reduced overall survival in patients with BRD4 overexpression (Fig. S2G-L). Our findings, along with previous research, emphasize the greater clinical relevance of indirectly targeting BRD4 or BRD4-NUTM1 compared to direct MYC targeting
The overexpression of RAD51 mRNA ( ) in response to EGFR or MYC inhibition might indicate the initiation of HRR in HR-proficient MDA-MB-157 cells. However, the RAD51 protein was sufficiently downregulated, especially in the combination treatment group, indicating that the RAD51 mRNA overexpression was transient or was overexpressed early in response to the suppression of HRR activity by MYC and EGFR inhibition. Previous reports have indicated that increased expression of RAD51 promotes DNA damage repair in KRAS mutant lung cancer cell lines [ ]. MYC knockdown interfered with both the HRR pathway and the SSBR pathway by downregulating RAD51 and PARP1, respectively ( , , , , , ). Reports have confirmed that the combined use of an EGFR inhibitor (lapatinib) and a PARP inhibitor (ABT-888) causes transient DNA DSB repair deficits and activation of intrinsic apoptosis pathways [ ]. The same study showed that the combined inhibition of EGFR and PARP significantly delayed the growth of MDA-MB-231 tumor xenografts in mice, confirming a marked reduction in tumor growth in the combination treatment group compared to controls. Our findings revealed that the increase in γH2AX expression and RAD51 depletion were indicators of the suppression of the HRR of damaged DNA as a consequence of synthetic lethal interactions from the combined treatments ( , ).
Differences in response to the treatments were observed between the two cell lines; for instance, the RAD51 protein was effectively downregulated in the MDA-MB-453 than in the MDA-MB-157 cell lines after treatment with either asiRNA-VP alone or in combination with dacomitinib ( , ). This might indicate the presence of increased RAD51 activity in the MDA-MB-157 cell line. On the other hand, there were fewer genetic alterations in DNA repair-related genes in the MDA-MB-157 cell line than in the MDA-MB-453 cell line (Table. S1). The suppression of MYC mRNA and protein expression with dacomitinib treatment confirmed that EGFR is an upstream regulator of MYC.
The combined use of talazoparib and asiRNA-VP had synergistic effects on downregulating PARP1 and caused significant cell death ( , ). Similar findings showed that, the combined use of niraparib and siRNAs for the knockdown of MYC and RAD51 decreased cell proliferation and clonogenicity but increased apoptosis ([ , ]). RAD51 mRNA was overexpressed in MDA-MB-157 cells treated with asiRNA-VP and/or talazoparib but was efficiently downregulated in MDA-MB-453 and MDA-MB-231 cells ( and Fig. S6A). MDA-MB-157 cell line might transiently upregulate RAD51 during the HRR of DNA in response to MYC inhibition, as discussed before. Similar findings were reported in the olaparib-resistant HCC1937 and SUM149 cell lines, where olaparib was found to be ineffective because of enhanced HRR activity resulting from the upregulation of RAD51 [ ]. DNA repair gene alterations in the MDA-MB-157 cell line were relatively lower than those in the MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-453 cell lines, which have multiple mutations (Table S1).
Knockdown of MYC resulted in the overexpression of RAD51 mRNA ( ) but suppressed RAD51 protein expression in the MDA-MB-157 cell line ( ). Upregulation of RAD51 was reported as a mechanism for PARP inhibitor resistance [ ]. The upregulation of the RAD51 protein, a compensatory mechanism for DNA damage repair via the HR pathway, was reported in MDA-MB-436 cells [ ]. In the present study, the IC50 of talazoparib (Fig. S4B and Table S2) in MDA-MB-157 cells was 76-fold greater than that in all the other TNBC cell lines tested, which is an indication of natural resistance to talazoparib. In acquired olaparib-resistant HCC1937 cells, overexpression of MYC and RAD51, phosphorylation of β-catenin at Ser675, and overexpression and activation of the β-catenin signaling pathway were confirmed [ ]. β-catenin activation can upregulate MYC expression [ ]. RAD51 mRNA expression was confirmed in MDA-MB-157 cells treated with either asiRNA-VP alone or in combination with talazoparib ( ). This might be the result of transient activation of the HR pathway to maintain double-strand breaks in response to MYC knockdown; however, RAD51 protein expression decreased by 56 % following MYC downregulation ( and Fig. S5C). A previous report showed that MYC is a direct transcriptional regulator of RAD51 [ ].
The knockdown of MYC induced the overexpression of the γH2AX protein ( , ). H2AX phosphorylation is a key step in the DNA damage response pathway and plays a significant role in the initiation and activation of DNA DSB repair [ ]. The overexpression of γH2AX is a consequence of MYC loss in the DNA repair pathway, while γH2AX overexpression is an indicator of the presence of unrepaired DNA double strand breaks [ ]. MYC is known to upregulate DNA damage response pathway genes for DNA repair via HRR [ ].
The present finding confirmed that the induction of synthetic lethality through the combined targeting of EGFR and MYC, as both genes regulate HRR and BER pathways. Previous studies have shown that combined inhibition of MYC and PARP induces synthetic lethality, independent of BRCA mutation status in vivo [ ]. Furthermore, among non-BRCA mutation carriers who received platinum-based therapy, 50 % (6/12) of HRD-positive patients achieved a cPR, compared to only 8.3 % (2/24) in HRD-negative patients [ ]. Additionally, a recent meta-analysis highlights the importance of PARP inhibitor therapy in non-BRCA mutation cases with HRR proficiency [ ]. The clinical translational relevance of our work lies in its potential to extend synthetic lethality beyond BRCA-mutant cancers by disrupting HRR and BER, offering a novel therapeutic option for BRCA wild-type tumors with high HRD scores and addressing drug resistance through targeted combination therapies.
To investigate the role of MYC and its downstream targets in the development of chemotherapy resistance, we generated paclitaxel-, doxorubicin- and cisplatin-resistant MDA-MB-231 cell lines. The MYC, RRM2, RAD51 and PARP1 proteins were upregulated in these resistant cell lines compared to sensitive cell lines after treatment with one of their respective drugs. However, the overexpression of DNA repair proteins following chemotherapy was significantly decreased in cells treated with the combination of asiRNA-VP ( , , , , , , ). On the other hand, MYC inhibition re-sensitized resistant cells to chemotherapeutic treatments, as confirmed by combination treatment with asiRNA-VP.
Our findings revealed significant overexpression of RAD51 in the paclitaxel-resistant MDA-MB-231 cell line compared to the sensitive cell line ( ), which might indicate its role in the mechanism of resistance development. In paclitaxel-treated resistant cells, the overexpression of RAD51 mRNA and protein was consistent ( , ). A previous report showed the overexpression of RAD51 protein in olaparib-resistant HCC1937 cell lines compared to that in sensitive cell lines [ ]. The viability of paclitaxel-resistant cells was significantly greater than that of paclitaxel-sensitive cells ( ). Previous findings confirmed that MYC inhibition in combination with paclitaxel has an antagonistic effect [ ]. The same study reported that knockdown of MYC prevented paclitaxel-induced apoptosis. However, in doxorubicin- and cisplatin-resistant cells ( , ), the viability of sensitive cells was significantly greater than that of resistant cells, indicating that resistant cells are dependent on MYC overexpression.
Moreover, the basal protein expression of MYC, RRM2, RAD51, γH2AX, and PARP1 was lower in resistant cells than in sensitive cells under drug-free conditions ( - ). A possible explanation for these findings might be that long-term and continuous exposure to chemotherapies might exert selective pressure and that only HR-proficient cells survive and proliferate. Under drug-free conditions, resistant cells might have very little DNA damage, as the expression of γH2AX was low ( ). Similarly, in the untreated and scramble control paclitaxel-resistant cells ( , ), the basal protein expression levels of MYC, RRM2, RAD51, PARP1 and γH2AX were lower than those in the sensitive cell lines ( , ). However, when paclitaxel-resistant cells were treated with various concentrations of paclitaxel, DNA repair genes were overexpressed for the repair of damaged DNA and subsequent cell survival ( - ). Treatment of the resistant cells with chemotherapy alone resulted in the overexpression of DNA repair-related proteins, confirming the plasticity of DNA repair pathway genes ( , , , , ). All the resistant cells showed greater sensitivity to MYC knockdown than did the sensitive cells ( , , ), indicating the dependency of resistant cells on MYC overexpression to overcome the higher dose of chemotherapy.
Moreover, compared to sensitive cell lines, the combination of doxorubicin or cisplatin with asiRNA10-VP showed synergistic downregulation effects on RRM2, PARP1, and RAD51 proteins in resistant cell lines ( and ). The upregulation of MYC, RRM2, RAD51 and PARP1 ( , , , ) following paclitaxel, doxorubicin and cisplatin treatments might constitute additional resistance mechanisms in addition to the basic resistance mechanisms known for paclitaxel [ ], doxorubicin [ ] and cisplatin [ ]. The overexpression of DNA repair proteins in resistant cells was suppressed by combination treatment with asiRNA-VP ( , , , , , ). This finding confirmed the indispensable role of MYC inhibition in the re-sensitization of resistant cells to chemotherapy.
The current study highlights the clinical translational potential of targeting MYC to suppress its downstream effectors, such as RRM2, RAD51, and PARP1, in overcoming chemotherapy resistance in cancers. Combining MYC inhibition with chemotherapy re-sensitized resistant cancer cells and suppressed DNA repair mechanisms, offering a promising strategy to enhance treatment efficacy and combat drug-resistant tumors. This approach could substantially improve the outcomes for patients with resistant cancers.
Finally, we aimed to investigate the feasibility of direct MYC targeting in TNBC and NSCLC cell lines ( - ). The knockdown of MYC resulted in the upregulation of cFLIP, BCL2, STAT1 and STAT2 and the downregulation of RRM2 ( - ). Previous findings have indicated a negative correlation between MYC overexpression and interferon (INF) and JAK-STAT signaling [ ]. Additionally, RNA sequencing data revealed that MYC overexpression strongly suppressed INF signaling pathway genes. In our study, MYC knockdown induced the overexpression of STAT1 mRNA, pSTAT1 and cleaved caspase-3, which can inhibit tumor cell survival and proliferation. However, the overexpression of the anti-apoptotic protein cFLIP and BCL2 overwhelmed the effects of STAT1/pSTA1 and cleaved caspase-3, resulting in most of the H1993 cell lines in the treatment groups showing unperturbed (>80 %) cell viability ( ).
Knockdown of cFLIP did not abrogate the effect of MYC, as evidenced by cFLIP mRNA overexpression in the combination treatment group, underscoring the role of MYC as a crucial upstream regulator of cFLIP ( , ). Previous ChIP sequencing studies confirmed that MYC binds to the promoter of cFLIP ([ , ]), confirming that it is a direct downstream target of MYC. In H1993 and H1975 cells, MYC knockdown upregulated cFLIP and BCL2, with unperturbed cell proliferation compared to that of the controls ( , , , , , ). Although cFLIP knockdown efficiently downregulated cFLIP in both cell lines, cell proliferation remained unaffected in H1993 cells, while cell viability decreased by ∼40 % in the H1975 cell line. Surprisingly, cell viability in the combination treatment group was significantly greater than that in the cFLIP siRNA-treated group, confirming the influence of MYC on cFLIP regulation. Previous reports also confirmed that MYC overexpression suppressed the anti-apoptotic proteins cFLIP [ ] and BCL2 [ ], while MYC knockdown upregulated the cFLIP and BCL2 proteins. In tumor cells, the inherent apoptotic effect of MYC is abrogated by TP53 inactivation and overexpression of BCL2 and MDM2 [ ].
This finding highlighted that direct mono-targeting of MYC may not have been feasible due to compensatory upregulation of anti-apoptotic proteins such as cFLIP and BCL2, which overwhelmed the apoptotic signaling pathways activated by MYC knockdown. This underscored the importance of combining MYC inhibition with strategies that simultaneously targeted these survival pathways or indirectly targeting MYC through upstream regulators like RRM2 and BRD4.
Limitations: The lack of in vivo experiments to validate the major in vitro findings may limit the ability to draw definitive conclusions, and may reduce the translational potential of these findings. While in vitro results provide valuable insights into mechanisms and efficacy, they may not adequately capture the complex interactions and tumor microenvironment present in vivo. Moreover, the lack of a targeted delivery system for siRNA to the specific organ may limit its efficacy in future in vivo trials and hinder further clinical translation.

## Conclusions and recommendations
Indirect targeting of MYC via BRD4 and RRM2 is more effective than direct mono-targeting due to additional downstream effects, with RRM2 knockdown resulting in greater cell death than direct MYC knockdown. Combining asiRNA-VP with dacomitinib or talazoparib showed synthetic lethality, while its combination with doxorubicin or cisplatin led to synergistic downregulation of RRM2, RAD51, and PARP1 in resistant cells. Additionally, the combination of doxorubicin and asiRNA-VP reduced both protein levels and cell viability in doxorubicin-resistant cells. In resistant cells, MYC, RRM2, RAD51, and PARP1 were upregulated following drug treatment, although their expression levels were lower than in sensitive cell lines under drug-free conditions.
Knockdown of MYC upregulated cFLIP and BCL2 expression and enhanced cell viability, and combined knockdown of MYC and cFLIP did not abrogate the overexpression of cFLIP or cell survival. This indicates that directly targeting MYC to inhibit cancer cell growth may be impractical. Alternative strategies include using Omomyc to suppress anti-apoptotic genes, combining MYC targeting with chemotherapy (e.g., talazoparib, dacomitinib, and doxorubicin), or indirectly targeting upstream regulators like BRD4 and RRM2 should be considered. MYC inhibition with asiRNA-VP can serve as a re-sensitizer to overcome MYC-dependent chemotherapeutic resistance in cancers.
To enhance the translational potential of this research, it is crucial to conduct in vivo experiments in the near future. Integrating in vitro and in vivo outcomes could ultimately strengthen the clinical relevance of these findings. These findings may serve as an input to the current treatment approaches. For instance, several MYC inhibitors, despite demonstrating safety in clinical trials, have not been approved due to limited efficacy. A notable example is Omomyc, which showed good tolerability and a favorable safety profile in early trials but was ineffective as a standalone therapy. However, combining well-tolerated MYC inhibitors like Omomyc with chemotherapeutic agents such as doxorubicin could offer a promising therapeutic strategy. By suppressing MYC-driven oncogenic pathways and enhancing chemotherapy's effectiveness, improved outcomes may be achieved in MYC-dependent cancers.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement
Negesse Mekonnen: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Validation, Software, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Hobin Yang: Writing – review & editing. Nirmal Rajasekaran: Writing – review & editing, Resources. Kyoung Song: Writing – review & editing. Yoon-La Choi: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Resources. Young Kee Shin: Writing – review & editing, Validation, Supervision, Resources, Project administration, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
The authors declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing interests:

 Appendix

## Supplementary materials

Image, application 1
Image, application 2

## Funding statement
This research was funded by (1). Basic Science Research Program through the 10.13039/501100003725National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the 10.13039/100019169Ministry of Education (NRF-2022R1A6A1A03046247), (2). Laboratory of Molecular Pathology and Cancer Genomics, College of Pharmacy and Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea, and (3). ABION Inc., R&D Center, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.tranon.2024.102204.