101genesdevGenes & DevelopmentGenes DevCold Spring Harbor Laboratory PressPMC1153515311535153115351533933282810.1101/gad.351930.124A germline PAF1 paralog complex ensures cell type-specific gene expression
VilstrupAstrid Pold GuptaArchica RasmussenAnna Jon EbertAnja RiedelbauchSebastian LukassenMarie Vestergaard HayashiRippei AndersenPeter 1Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Aarhus University, 8000 Aarhus, Denmark;2The Shine-Dalgarno Centre for RNA Innovation, The John Curtin School of Medical Research, The Australian National University, Acton, Australian Capital Territory 2601, Australia;3Technical University of Denmark, 2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark✉Corresponding authors: pra@mbg.au.dk, rippei.hayashi@anu.edu.au
✉Corresponding author.
Sep-Oct20243817-20866866–886132025
© 2024 Vilstrup et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
This article is distributed exclusively by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press for the first six months after the full-issue publication date (see http://genesdev.cshlp.org/site/misc/terms.xhtml). After six months, it is available under a Creative Commons License (Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International), as described at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.In this study, Vilstrup et al. identify a testis-specific paralog of the polymerase-associated factor 1 complex (tPAF) that drives efficient transcription termination of genes activated by testis-specific TBP-associated factors (tTAFs). The work presents a mechanistic model by which tPAF protects against aberrant gene activation through its interaction with key transcription regulators, thereby playing an essential role in meiosis and germ cell differentiation.
Keywords: germline, transcription termination, cell type identity, PAF1 complex, paralogs

## Abstract
Animal germline development and fertility rely on paralogs of general transcription factors that recruit RNA polymerase II to ensure cell type-specific gene expression. It remains unclear whether gene expression processes downstream from such paralog-based transcription is distinct from that of canonical RNA polymerase II genes. In Drosophila, the testis-specific TBP-associated factors (tTAFs) activate over a thousand spermatocyte-specific gene promoters to enable meiosis and germ cell differentiation. Here, we show that efficient termination of tTAF-activated transcription relies on testis-specific paralogs of canonical polymerase-associated factor 1 complex (PAF1C) proteins, which form a testis-specific PAF1C (tPAF). Consequently, tPAF mutants show aberrant expression of hundreds of downstream genes due to read-in transcription. Furthermore, tPAF facilitates expression of Y-linked male fertility factor genes and thus serves to maintain spermatocyte-specific gene expression. Consistently, tPAF is required for the segregation of meiotic chromosomes and male fertility. Supported by comparative in vivo protein interaction assays, we provide a mechanistic model for the functional divergence of tPAF and the PAF1C and identify transcription termination as a developmentally regulated process required for germline-specific gene expression.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2024 May 15; Accepted 2024 Aug 27.

Across the tree of life, gene expression is facilitated by highly conserved core gene expression machineries, such as basal transcription factors, RNA polymerase complexes, RNA export factors, and ribosomes. These core gene expression machineries are generally not considered regulatory and rather facilitate gene expression globally and across all cell types in multicellular organisms. Cell type identity in multicellular organisms is instead controlled by a separate layer of gene regulatory proteins, many of which recognize target genes or RNA in a sequence-specific manner, such as in the case of sequence-specific transcription factors, RNA-binding proteins, and microRNAs ( ; ; ). Although this textbook generalization aligns with our current knowledge of gene expression, examples of tissue- and cell type-specific variants of core gene expression machineries have been identified in most animal model organisms, including mice, frogs, zebrafish, and fruit flies (Drosophila melanogaster). These machineries include paralogs of basal transcription factors ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ), RNA exporters ( ; ), ribosomal proteins ( ; ; ), and proteasome subunits ( ). However, the molecular function and developmental impact of such core gene expression machinery variants remain underexplored.
Notably, most identified paralogs of core gene expression machineries are expressed specifically in the germline tissue of the male (testis) and female (ovary) animals. Although some of the identified paralogs are likely nonessential pseudogenes, several are required for proper germline development and animal fertility ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ). The lack of tractable in vitro systems for animal germline biology has limited detailed molecular characterization, with only a few paralogs having been characterized at the molecular level. Such examples include the mouse TATA-box binding protein (Tbp) paralog TBPL2/TRF3, which replaces the general transcription factor TBP in growing oocytes and mediates transcription of oocyte-expressed genes ( ), and the Drosophila TFIIA paralog Moonshiner, which enables transcription of transposon silencing piRNA precursors from otherwise silent heterochromatin ( ). Germline-specific paralogs of core gene expression machinery thereby facilitate germline development and animal fertility by enabling alternative modes of gene expression.
Germ cell differentiation from proliferating spermatogonia to meiotic spermatocytes comprises one of the most substantial genome reprogramming events known in animals and entails thousands of testis-specific genes being activated, shut down, or expressed in alternative isoforms ( ; ). In D. melanogaster, this dramatic genome regulation relies on testis-specific paralogs of core gene regulatory factors, including bromodomain proteins (tBRDs) ( ; ), the dREAM complex (tMAC) ( ), and the TFIID complex (tTAF) ( ; ). Consistently, mutation of the tTAF genes cannonball (can/TAF5L), no hitter (nht/TAF4L), meiotic arrest (mia/TAF6L), and spermatocyte arrest (sa/TAF8L) leads to a block of meiotic cell cycle progression and complete infertility in male flies ( ; ). Mechanistically, tTAF and tMAC proteins are thought to regulate gene expression through direct association with the promoter regions of the target genes ( ). However, it remains unclear how these complexes are functionally connected and whether they couple to downstream noncanonical gene expression regulators to enable germline development.
Here we identify a variant polymerase-associated factor 1 complex (PAF1C) as an essential transcriptional regulator required for Drosophila male germline development. The testis-specific PAF1C (named tPAF) is composed of paralog proteins of each of the four canonical PAF1C core proteins as well as the PAF1C-associated protein Ski8. tPAF is required for proper expression of all six gigantic Y-linked male fertility factor genes. Furthermore, tPAF ensures efficient transcription termination specifically at tTAF-activated genes to prevent aberrant activation of downstream genes, thereby maintaining spermatocyte-specific gene expression. We show that tPAF both physically and functionally connects germline-specific variant core genome regulation complexes. Our findings uncover how the fundamental reprogramming during animal germline development is enabled by the concerted function of paralog-based variants of core gene expression regulators.

## Results

## Paralogs of the PAF1 complex are required for male fertility in D. melanogaster
To probe the existence of functional connections between paralog-based genome regulators in the fly male germline model system, we searched for novel tTAF protein associations using in vivo proximity labeling coupled with mass spectrometry analyses. From confocal microscopy of testes from flies harboring the lowly expressed TurboID ligase-anti-GFP nanobody fusion protein ( ) and a GFP-tagged spermatocyte arrest (sa) tTAF allele, we observed a marked accumulation of biotinylation in spermatocyte nucleoli, overlapping GFP-tTAF protein (Supplemental Fig. S1A), thereby indicating high specificity and efficiency of the proximity labeling. Mass spectrometry analyses of biotinylated proteins from lysates of Sa-GFP revealed strong enrichment relative to control testes of basal transcription factor proteins ( A, light-blue data points), including known tTAF subunits, as well as CG14930, a previously unrecognized paralog of the TFIID subunit Taf9 (Supplemental Fig. S1B) that we therefore named Taf9L. We note that the known tTAF protein Taf12L becomes undetectable by imaging when used as proximity labeling bait (Supplemental Fig. S1C) and is therefore likely missing in the Sa proximity labeling data due to biotin-related degradation. BLAST searches of the other highly enriched uncharacterized proteins revealed two proteins with strong homology with the Paf1/atms and Leo1/Atu subunits of the polymerase-associated factor 1 complex (PAF1C), an essential and highly conserved eukaryotic RNA polymerase II regulatory complex ( ). We therefore named the two genes based on this homology: CG12674 as Paf1/atms-like (Paf1L) and CG10887 as Leo1/Atu-like (Leo1L). Reverse BLAST searches for the two other core PAF1C subunits, Cdc73/hyx and Ctr9, identified CG6220 (renamed Cdc73L) and CG9899 (renamed Ctr9L) to reveal a complete set of PAF1C core subunit paralogs enriched by Sa-GFP proximity labeling ( A, orange data points).
 The PAF1C paralog genes originated 50 million to 100 million years ago (Supplemental Fig. S2A,B), likely through retroduplication of the canonical PAF1C genes, as indicated by their comparatively low number of introns and spread across the genome ( B). Since then, the PAF1C paralog genes have undergone notable sequence divergence, including loss of several protein domains important for canonical PAF1C function ( C). However, the paralog genes have retained the homologous regions known to facilitate PAF1C formation ( C), indicating maintenance of some functionality. Although the canonical PAF1C is expressed in all tissues, the PAF1C paralog genes are expressed exclusively in testes ( D), and we refer to these as tPAF for the testis-specific PAF1C. To assay the putative function of the tPAF genes, we generated flies harboring CRISPR/Cas9-induced frameshift mutations (Supplemental Fig. S2C). Transheterozygous mutants of all four tPAF genes are viable but display full sterility in males, consistent with an essential function in testis genome regulation ( E). A complementary short hairpin RNA (shRNA)-based depletion approach using a germline-specific knockdown driver validated the sterility phenotype and further supported that tPAF functions in the testis germline cells (Supplemental Fig. S3A). In sum, we conclude that despite pronounced sequence divergence, tPAF genes have likely maintained genome regulatory function and evolved to become essential for male fertility.

## tPAF mutant males exhibit meiotic defects
To elucidate the role of tPAF genes in male fertility, we investigated potential morphological anomalies occurring during spermatogenesis in tPAF gene mutants. During spermiogenesis, the final stage of spermatogenesis, spermatids transform into spermatozoa. This transformation involves a series of events, including the initial elongation of nebenkern (mitochondrial derivatives) along the axoneme, subsequent nuclear elongation, histone-to-protamine exchange, and finally, spermatid individualization ( A). Previous studies have demonstrated that mutants of the tMAC and tTAF complexes exhibit a complete meiotic arrest at the premeiotic spermatocyte stage, leading to the absence of postmeiotic germline cells ( ; . ). We were able to recapitulate this meiotic arrest phenotype using a mutant of the tMAC gene always early (aly), which was evident from the absence of postmeiotic germline cells. However, tPAF mutant alleles did not display such a meiotic arrest, as postmeiotic germline cells were still observed ( B; Supplemental Fig. S4A). To understand where in germline development tPAF mutant sterility arises, we first investigated spermatid individualization. In contrast to the distinctive morphology in control samples with aligned elongated bundles of needle-like spermatid nuclei trailed by actin cones ( C, left), tPAF mutants exhibited pronounced deficiencies in spermatid maturation characterized by rounded nuclei, “lagging” actin cones, and a lack of polarization, as marked by Orb protein ( C,D; Supplemental Fig. S4B,D,E). Furthermore, we observed the association of transition proteins and protamines with the disorganized spermatid nuclei in Paf1L mutants, indicating that DNA compaction itself remained unaffected (Supplemental Fig. S5). To understand whether the defects resulting in faulty spermatid individualization arise before or after completion of meiosis in spermatocytes, we next characterized early spermatids at the “nebenkern/onion” stage, where aberrant nuclear morphology is a known hallmark of meiotic defects in the preceding spermatocyte stage ( ). In control testes, most spermatids exhibited nuclei and nebenkern structures that were spherical and of equal size and occurred in pairs ( E, left). In contrast, tPAF mutant testes displayed pronounced abnormalities in the majority of spermatid cysts ( E,F; Supplemental Fig. S4C,F). Abnormalities include irregular shapes, enlarged nebenkern, and multinucleation—defects that strongly suggest failure in cytokinesis during meiosis ( ).
 To understand the possible meiotic defects in tPAF mutants, we next investigated meiosis using live imaging. In control spermatocytes, prometaphase is characterized by condensed chromosomes occupying three distinct territories at the periphery of the cell: two autosomal territories and an X–Y territory ( G, left panel; ). tPAF mutants, however, display a lack of well-defined territories, with His2Av-RFP diffusely present in the center of the cell ( G; Supplemental Fig. S6A). This suggests that tPAF mutants exhibit incomplete chromosomal condensation by prometaphase. During metaphase I, these condensed chromosomes migrate to the central part of the cell, forming a distinct mass. Concurrently, the nuclear membrane breaks down, and astral fibers penetrate into the nucleus, securing the condensed chromosomes ( H, left panel; ). Although astral fiber formation is observed, tPAF mutants lack a central mass during metaphase I ( H; Supplemental Fig. S6B), likely leading to unequal chromosomal division during anaphase I. In sum, tPAF mutants exhibit aberrant chromosome movement during meiosis, which likely originates from faulty chromosome condensation in premeiotic spermatocytes. Together, these observations suggest that tPAF functions to enable proper spermatocyte maturation and differentiation.

## tPAF forms a complex in vivo in spermatocytes that is distinct from the canonical PAF1C
To characterize the molecular function of the tPAF genes, we next generated endogenously tagged alleles of all four tPAF genes as well as of three canonical PAF1C genes by integrating a localization and purification (LAP) tag consisting of triple FLAG and V5 tags as well as GFP. LAP tag integration using CRISPR/Cas9 resulted in fully viable and fertile flies showing the expected fusion protein expression in testis lysates ( A; Supplemental Fig. S8A). All tagged tPAF proteins showed a similar localization with strong expression specifically in spermatocytes ( B; Supplemental Fig. S7A,B), consistent with the proposed functional role during spermatocyte differentiation and meiosis. On the other hand, canonical PAF1C proteins are expressed already in mitotic spermatogonia as well as in spermatocytes and the surrounding somatic muscle sheath cells ( C; Supplemental Fig. S8B).
 We next used the 3xFLAG epitope of the tPAF fusion proteins to investigate whether tPAF proteins are integrated into complexes in vivo by coimmunoprecipitation (co-IP) coupled to protein identification by mass spectrometry. We produced protein lysates by cryo-grinding whole male flies, thereby creating a highly complex protein lysate for stringent co-IP assays. Co-IP of Ctr9L and Paf1L showed marked enrichment of the other three tPAF proteins ( D–F). Given the low number of spermatocytes in the whole-male lysate, these results strongly indicate that (1) tPAF proteins form a complex in vivo and (2) the tPAF complex forms exclusively from tPAF proteins without cross-interaction with the core canonical PAF1C proteins. Leo1L co-IP showed a notably stronger association with Paf1L than with the other tPAF proteins (Supplemental Fig. S9A), and Leo1L protein levels were comparably low in the Cdc73L co-IP (Supplemental Fig. S9B), indicating that Leo1L may form a subcomplex with Paf1L, analogous to what has been observed for the canonical PAF1C ( ). In addition to the core tPAF proteins, Ski8/CG3909 was strongly enriched in all tPAF protein co-IP experiments ( D–F; Supplemental Fig. S9A,B). Ski8 is a member of the conserved cytoplasmic RNA decay cofactor, the Super Killer (SKI) complex conserved from yeast to flies and humans ( ; ). In mammals, but not in yeast, Ski8 is also part of canonical PAF1C ( ). Furthermore, both yeast and human PAF1Cs contain the protein Rtf1 ( ; ). Although we identified a testis-specifically expressed Rtf1 paralog with an evolutionary origin similar to that of the tPAF genes (Supplemental Fig. S10A–C), Rtf1L mutants showed no fertility defects, and endogenously LAP-tagged Rtf1L protein did not colocalize with or coimmunoprecipitate tPAF proteins (Supplemental Fig. S10D–I). Although these results suggest that tPAF does not contain an Rtf1 family protein, such associations cannot be excluded because Rtf1 family proteins could be loosely associated, as is the case for human RTF1 association with PAF1C ( ; ), thus potentially hindering detection by co-IP.
Structure modeling of tPAF using AlphaFold2 ( ) predicts that it forms a complex with an overall structure very similar to that modeled for the canonical Drosophila PAF1C as well as the experimentally determined human PAF1C structure ( G–I; Supplemental Fig. S11A–D). We therefore conclude that tPAF forms a protein complex consisting of the paralog proteins Paf1L, Leo1L, Cdc73L, and Ctr9L, as well as Ski8 in vivo, constituting a protein composition similar to that of the mammalian canonical PAF1C.

## tPAF is required to maintain spermatocyte-specific gene expression
The prominent subnuclear localization of tPAF is similar to that described for tTAF and tBRD proteins, which are known to accumulate in spermatocyte nucleoli ( ; ; ). Indeed, covisualization of LAP-tagged tPAF proteins with the nucleolar protein Fibrillarin revealed a clear nucleolar accumulation of all tPAF proteins in the granular component nucleolar subregion outside the Fibrillarin-dense areas ( A; Supplemental Fig. S12A), overlapping with the localization of the GFP-tagged Sa (tTAF) protein (Supplemental Fig. S12B). tPAF initially accumulates in the nucleolus as spermatogonia differentiate into spermatocytes and then remains in the nucleolar region even after Fibrillarin has left the nucleoli. The nucleoli disappear before cells enter meiosis, where the tPAF proteins are detectable only as small DNA-associated foci (Supplemental Fig. S13A,B). Of note, a diffuse but notable tPAF protein signal was also observed over the nuclear chromosome territories ( A, right panels), suggesting that tPAF, similar to tTAF proteins ( ), is also present on the main nuclear chromosomes and may function in the nucleoplasm too.
 Because the canonical PAF1C is known to function in transcriptional regulation, we next investigated whether the tPAF complex might also serve such functions. To this end, we performed transcriptome profiling of total testis RNA derived from control and mutants of each tPAF subunit. All tPAF mutant samples showed a pronounced depletion of mRNA from the mutated gene ( B). Consistent with a function in gene regulation, differential gene expression analysis showed that mutants of Paf1L and Leo1L result in notable transcriptome changes (59 and 58 differentially expressed genes, respectively) ( C), although at modest levels compared with the dramatic changes in mutants of the cannonball (can; tTAF) and cookie monster (comr; tMAC) subunits (1698 and 2859 differentially expressed genes, respectively) (Supplemental Fig. S14A,B). In contrast, gene expression in Cdc73L and Ctr9L mutants was only very mildly affected (Supplemental Fig. S14C,D), suggesting that tPAF-mediated gene regulation relies mainly on Paf1L and Leo1L.
To uncover whether the gene regulatory function of tPAF is connected to the nucleolar accumulation, we set out to identify the tPAF protein(s) responsible for the nucleolar localization. To this end, we assayed the localization of all endogenously tagged tPAF subunits in the mutant background of each of the other tPAF genes. We found that Cdc73L independently localizes to the nucleolus and is required for nucleolar accumulation of all other tPAF proteins ( D; Supplemental Fig. S15A,B). In addition, Paf1L and Ctr9L showed interdependence, whereas Leo1L was largely dispensable for nucleolar localization of the remaining tPAF proteins. Although no notable GFP signal was visible in localization-disrupting mutants, Western blot demonstrated that tPAF proteins remained expressed, indicating dispersal upon loss of nucleolar localization (Supplemental Fig. S15C,D). Because Cdc73L mutants show little effect on genic mRNA levels (Supplemental Fig. S14D), we conclude that the nucleolar localization of tPAF is not required for its function in gene regulation. However, because Cdc73L mutants are fully sterile ( E; Supplemental Fig. S3A) and show pronounced developmental defects ( ; Supplemental Fig. S4), we propose that nucleolar tPAF plays an important yet unknown role in spermatocyte development.
tPAF proteins are specifically expressed in spermatocytes, and bulk tissue transcriptome analysis may therefore mask the true regulatory phenotype. We took advantage of the observed tPAF-independent nucleolar localization of Cdc73L and used the detection of Cdc73L-GFP to purify tPAF-expressing spermatocytes in control as well as in Leo1L and Paf1L mutants and performed transcriptome profiling (Supplemental Fig. S16A–C). Differential gene expression analysis revealed several hundreds of genes being strongly upregulated in Leo1L and Paf1L mutants, a notably higher number compared with bulk testis transcriptome analysis ( E). Among the downregulated genes, we found kl-5 ( E,F), one of six genes on the D. melanogaster Y chromosome classically known as male fertility factors ( ; ), each essential for male fertility. In fact, all six male fertility factor genes showed reduced expression in Leo1L and Paf1L mutants in RNA-seq from spermatocyte as well as bulk testes, whereas Ctr9L mutants showed a similar trend with smaller effect size ( G; Supplemental Fig. S17A). All six fertility factor genes harbor gigantic introns in the megabase range ( ; ) that likely require the full ∼90 h duration of spermatocyte development to be transcribed ( ). We therefore propose that tPAF, through an unknown cotranscriptional mechanism, enables expression of these gigantic genes on the Y chromosome, which likely contributes to the observed fertility defect in tPAF-deficient male flies. This model is further supported by phylogenetic analysis showing that Paf1L, Ctr9L, and Leo1L all arose in common ancestors near the root of the Drosophilidae family, but that these genes have been lost in the Drosophila pseudoobscura species group (Supplemental Fig. S17B). Strikingly, loss of tPAF genes in this species group coincides with drastic size reduction as well as Y-to-autosome translocation of the otherwise Y-linked male fertility factor genes ( ; ). This correlative phylogenetic analysis complements the tPAF mutant molecular phenotype to support a likely role of tPAF in expression of Y-linked fertility factor genes.
In sum, we found that tPAF harbors subunit-specific subfunctionalities related to nucleolar accumulation and genome regulation and show that Leo1L and Paf1L play a role in maintaining cell type-specific expression of both autosomal and gigantic Y-linked genes in spermatocytes.

## tPAF ensures efficient transcription termination at testis-specific genes
To understand the molecular mechanism causing upregulation of hundreds of autosomal genes in tPAF mutants, we performed manual inspection of the genome-mapped RNA-seq data. This analysis revealed a common pattern in which the upregulated genes (1) showed no expression in testes under wild-type conditions and (2) were often positioned downstream from a highly expressed gene oriented in the same direction ( A; Supplemental Fig. S18A–C). We therefore hypothesized that readthrough transcription from an upstream gene (the readthrough gene) causes the upregulation of the downstream read-in gene. Of note, inspection of such individual loci revealed that although the increased expression is most pronounced in Paf1L and Leo1L mutants, Ctr9L and Cdc73L mutants show similar transcriptome phenotypes with lower effect size ( A; Supplemental Fig. S18A–C). Consistent with a model of upregulation by readthrough transcription, a metagene analysis showed increased spermatocyte RNA-seq coverage immediately upstream of the upregulated read-in genes in Paf1L and Leo1L mutants compared with control libraries ( B; Supplemental Fig. S18D, middle panels). Furthermore, increased coverage in tPAF mutant conditions was also observed immediately downstream from the nearest expressed upstream gene on the same strand ( B; Supplemental Fig. S18D, left panels). We therefore conclude that readthrough events from upstream genes are the likely origins of the read-in transcription, leading to the many upregulated genes in Leo1L and Paf1L mutants.
 Further inspection of the RNA-seq data showed that the length of the intergenic space between the read-in gene and the upstream readthrough gene varies from a few hundred base pairs to more than 33 kb (Supplemental Fig. S19A–H). Notably, for short (<1 kb) intergenic spaces, the RNA-seq coverage is similar across the intergenic space and exons of the read-in gene (Supplemental Fig. S19A–D), whereas the RNA-seq coverage at longer intergenic spaces is lower than the read-in exon coverage (Supplemental Fig. S19E–H). This pattern was also found at loci where readthrough from a read-in gene resulted in a secondary read-in gene activation (Supplemental Fig. S19I,J). These results suggest that for short intergenic spaces, the spliced read-in gene mRNA may exist as a fusion transcript with the upstream gene and intergenic space, whereas for longer intergenic spaces, most of the read-in gene mRNA is not fused with the upstream gene from which the readthrough transcription originated. Such transcript separation could be due to cleavage and decay of the intergenic RNA, which would likely cause the read-in mRNA to have an uncapped 5′ terminus close to the annotated transcription start site. Furthermore, RNA-seq coverage over the bodies of readthrough genes was unaffected by tPAF mutation and was orders of magnitude higher than that over the downstream read-in genes (Supplemental Fig. S19A–H), indicating that only a minor fraction of the transcription events at readthrough genes is responsible for the observed read-in gene activation.
To characterize the genes that produce readthrough transcription in tPAF mutants, we grouped annotated genes by the fold increase in RNA-seq coverage immediately downstream from the genes ( C; Supplemental Fig. S20A). Genes with tPAF-dependent readthrough show a strong tendency to be expressed specifically in the testes ( D; Supplemental Fig. S20B) and tend to be among the most highly expressed genes in spermatocytes ( E). Because these patterns are observed for mild to strong readthrough signatures in both Paf1L and Leo1L mutants, we define readthrough (RT) genes as spermatocyte-expressed genes with an at least fourfold increase in downstream RNA-seq coverage in Paf1L or Leo1L mutants and read-in (RI) genes as genes with an at least fourfold increase in upstream RNA-seq coverage in Paf1L or Leo1L mutants and negligible expression in wild-type spermatocytes ( F; Supplemental Fig. S20C). Consistent with our observations from manual inspection, read-in genes are strongly upregulated in tPAF mutants, whereas readthrough genes are unaffected, as are other genes irrespective of their expression level in spermatocytes ( G; Supplemental Fig. S20D). Given the newly identified connection between tPAF and tTAF ( A), we next asked whether readthrough transcription in tPAF mutants occurs specifically at tTAF- or tMAC-regulated genes. Indeed, the vast majority of readthrough genes also show strongly decreased mRNA expression in can (tTAF) mutants as well as in comr (tMAC) mutants compared with control ( G, right panels, data from ). tTAF/tMAC-dependent genes constitute many of the highest expressed genes in spermatocytes ( G), which may explain why a dedicated transcription elongation complex is needed at these loci. To further substantiate our analyses, we categorized tTAF/tMAC-dependent genes conservatively by showing an at least fourfold decrease in tTAF (can) of tMAC (comr) mutants (Supplemental Fig. S21A). We then identified transcriptional readthrough by a minimum fourfold RNA-seq coverage increase in tPAF (leo1l or paf1l) mutants relative to control in the downstream flanking region (Supplemental Fig. S21B) or from reads spanning the gene terminus (Supplemental Fig. S21C). We observed readthrough transcription for up to 8% of the tTAF/tMAC-dependent genes, which is likely an underestimation limited by our conservative fourfold change thresholds and the limited RNA-seq coverage of unstable readthrough transcripts. If readthrough at tTAF/tMAC-dependent genes is causative of the observed gene activation in tPAF mutants, then there should be an upstream tTAF/tMAC-dependent gene on the same strand for each gene activated within the >30 kb intergenic range observed by individual inspection (Supplemental Fig. S19A–H). Indeed, we found a pronounced overrepresentation of upstream tTAF/tMAC-dependent genes among genes activated in tPAF mutants compared with other annotated genes (Supplemental Fig. S21D). Although ∼50% of all genes activated in tPAF mutants have an upstream tTAF/tMAC-dependent gene within 25 kb, this is likely an underestimation given our conservative fourfold change threshold for categorizing tTAF/tMAC dependence. We conclude that readthrough transcription arising at tTAF/tMAC-dependent genes drives the activation of hundreds of genes in tPAF mutants.
In sum, unlike the canonical PAF1C, which promotes productive RNA polymerase II regulation genome-wide ( ), tPAF enables efficient transcription termination specifically at tTAF/tMAC-dependent genes. Although the deficient Y-linked gene expression in tPAF mutants ( F,G) would likely lead to male sterility in isolation ( , ), fertility factor gene mutants have not been found to cause premeiotic developmental defects as observed for tPAF mutants ( G–H). We therefore speculate that the aberrant regulation of hundreds of genes caused by transcriptional readthrough further contributes to the sterility phenotype observed in tPAF mutants through perturbation of the spermatocyte-type gene expression program.

## tPAF functionally connects transcription initiation factors and cotranscriptional effectors
The canonical PAF1 complex is thought to regulate multiple steps in gene expression by acting as a molecular landing pad for various effector proteins of cotranscriptional processing and chromatin regulation ( ). To uncover whether the tPAF complex functions are enabled through a similar platform-like function, we performed proximity labeling coupled to mass spectrometry analysis of the four tPAF-specific subunits: Paf1L, Leo1L, Ctr9L, and Cdc73L. Confocal imaging of testes from flies harboring both a GFP-nanobody-TurboID expression cassette and endogenously tagged tPAF genes showed a strong enrichment of biotinylation colocalizing with GFP-tagged tPAF protein (Supplemental Fig. S22A). Mass spectrometry analysis of biotinylated proteins enriched by streptavidin-based purification revealed high enrichment of all four tPAF paralog subunits ( A,B; Supplemental Fig. S23A–C), thus indicating successful biotinylation of tPAF-associated proteins. We note that Ski8 was not observed in these analyses and speculate that this was due to technical reasons given the strong Ski8 enrichment in the more stringent biochemical tPAF complex purifications ( D–F; Supplemental Fig. S9A,B). In addition to the tPAF proteins, the mass spectrometry data also uncovered multiple subunits of the tTAF complex and the two testis-specific bromodomain proteins tBRD-1 and tBRD-2, which we also observed to associate with tTAF in proximity labeling experiments ( A). These results strongly support a model in which the genes regulated by tPAF are defined through the association of tPAF with tTAF and tBRD proteins.
 Notably, Pcf11, a key protein responsible for inducing eukaryotic RNA polymerase II transcription termination ( ; ), was highly enriched by tPAF proximity labeling. This offers a mechanistic model of tPAF-mediated Pcf11 recruitment to mediate the observed tPAF function in transcription termination at tTAF-dependent genes. Supporting a multifunctional platform-like role of tPAF, we also observed the association of tPAF with proteins that play major roles in DNA maintenance (Pol θ), chromatin regulation (NO66), and splicing (SRPK). Complementary characterization of canonical PAF1C protein associations by proximity labeling confirmed that tPAF and the PAF1C do not share core subunits ( C,D; Supplemental Figs. S23D, S24A). Furthermore, although some proteins, such as Pcf11, are associated with both tPAF and the canonical PAF1C, comparative analysis uncovered that several proteins associate specifically with tPAF (e.g., tTAF, tBRDs, Pol θ, and Taf2/6/7) or with the PAF1C (e.g., Taf3 and all subunits of the cleavage stimulation factor [CstF] mRNA 3′ processing complex) ( D; Supplemental Figs. S23E,F, S24A). Of note, only one of the 13 RNA polymerase II complex subunits (Polr2A) was enriched over control in only one set of samples (Cdc73 and the PAF1C) ( C,D), suggesting that RNA polymerase may be difficult to detect for technical reasons similar to Ski8 or that most tPAF and PAF1Cs are associated with the detected transcription factors and cotranscriptional effector proteins in vivo. Further supporting a multifunctional role of tPAF, we also observed that tPAF, including Cdc73L, is required for the nucleolar localization of Sa-GFP (tTAF) protein ( E; Supplemental Fig. S24B). Cdc73L mutants show little to no defect in transcriptional regulation (Supplemental Fig. S14D,E) but are nonetheless fully sterile ( E). Together, this indicates that tPAF, through Cdc73L-mediated nucleolar anchoring, serves a yet to be understood function in spermatocyte development.
In sum, we found that the PAF1C and tPAF display distinct protein association profiles that provide a mechanistic model for the specialized functions in general RNA polymerase II regulation and proper cotranscriptional regulation of spermatocyte-specific genes, respectively ( F).

## Discussion

## A paralogous Paf1 complex facilitates male germline development
In this study, we identify tPAF, a paralog-based PAF1C-like complex, and characterize its essential function in germline development in Drosophila males. tPAF mutants displayed defects in germline development that indicate defects in meiosis during the spermatocyte stage ( , ). Consistently, the tPAF proteins are expressed specifically in the premeiotic spermatocytes, where they form a protein complex including the Ski8 protein, which is also part of the canonical PAF1C as well as the cytoplasmic SKI complex ( ). tPAF proteins are enriched in spermatocyte nucleoli but also accumulate in regions overlapping with chromosome territories. Whether the association of tPAF with nucleoli relates to previous observations of yeast Paf1C nucleolar accumulation in mutant backgrounds ( ) and functional connections to RNA polymerase I activity ( ) remains an important question for future research. Likely independent of its putative function in nucleoli, we found that tPAF ensures efficient transcription termination at testis-specific genes that depend on tTAF for their transcriptional activation ( , ). tPAF-induced transcription termination thereby prevents aberrant activation of hundreds of genes via read-in transcription. In addition, tPAF is required for expression of Y-chromosomal male fertility factor genes and thus altogether ensures cell type-specific gene expression in the male germline. Mechanistically, we propose that tPAF functions through protein associations that are conserved between tPAF and the canonical PAF1C as well as tPAF-specific protein connections that have evolved after the duplication of the tPAF genes ( ). We note that several of the above findings are supported by independent parallel work from Taichiro Iki and colleagues ( ).

## Cell type-specific regulation of transcription termination via tPAF
The canonical PAF1C regulates RNA polymerase II transcription pause release, elongation, termination, and 3′ processing and also affects local chromatin states (for review, see ). In contrast, we found that tPAF has evolved to be a much more specialized regulator of gene expression as it (1) stimulates expression of the six gigantic fertility factor genes on the Y chromosome ( E–G) and (2) facilitates efficient transcription termination specifically at tTAF-dependent genes ( ). We observed markedly stronger transcriptional defects in Leo1L and Paf1L mutants compared with mutants of the other tPAF components: Cdc73L and Ctr9L. This indicates that Leo1L and Paf1L proteins may form a functional subcomplex, which is also supported by the close biochemical association of Leo1L and Paf1L proteins ( G–I; Supplemental Fig. S9A). On the other hand, differences in phenotypic effect size could also arise through variation in how penetrant or expressive the investigated frame mutants are or from technical limitations in analyzing transcriptional readthrough using RNA-seq as opposed to a more direct measure of transcription, such as PRO-seq ( ). Notably, both CDC73 and PAF1 have been found to accumulate at human gene termini, and depletion of either gene elicits alternative polyadenylation defects in human ( ; ) and yeast ( ; ) cells, suggesting that for the canonical PAF1C, the full complex rather than a subcomplex acts at gene termini. Together with our findings, this indicates that regulation of RNA polymerase II at gene termini is a conserved function of the PAF1C, which in tPAF has evolved to enhance transcription termination at a specific subset of genes to maintain cell type-specific gene expression.
Through proximity labeling coupled to mass spectrometry analyses, we found that both the Drosophila tPAF complex and the PAF1C, similar to yeast ( ) and human PAF1Cs ( ), are associated with proteins of the cleavage and polyadenylation specificity factor (CPSF) complex ( ). However, although the canonical PAF1C associates with various CPSF proteins, mainly Pcf11 is enriched in tPAF proximity labeling ( A–C). Pcf11 is a central component of the CPSF complex but is known to play a major role in inducing transcription termination of RNA polymerase II, even capable of inducing termination independent of the remaining CPSF complex proteins in vitro ( ; ). We speculate that the evolution of the association of specifically Pcf11 with tPAF compared with the CPSF-connected PAF1C reflects an adapted functional difference between the two paralogous complexes. Specifically, although tPAF depletion results in pronounced transcription termination defects, depletion of human Leo1L and Paf1L was reported to mainly cause alternative polyadenylation site usage ( ). The testis-specific genes at which tPAF ensures efficient termination are typically short and transcribed at very high levels ( E). We propose that the very high transcription rates of spermatocyte-specific genes challenge cell type-specific gene regulation due to the risk of aberrant read-in gene activation, which tPAF counteracts through its ability to effectively induce transcription termination via Pcf11.
The mechanism underlying the observed requirement of tPAF for normal expression of the six male fertility factor genes remains unknown. However, we speculate that tPAF plays a role in the cotranscriptional regulation of these gigantic genes to facilitate their timely expression before the end of spermatocyte development ( ; ). For example, tPAF might (1) enable timely RNA polymerase II transcription through the vast repetitive intronic sequences within the male fertility factor genes, a model supported by the recent identification of deficient transcription of long genes in the absence of the human PAF1C ( ), or (2) facilitate efficient, likely recursive, splicing of these gigantic introns. Interestingly, SRPK, one of the most enriched proteins associated with tPAF in vivo, was recently found to be required for proper expression of the same six gigantic male fertility factor genes ( ), suggesting a possible mechanistic link between transcription and splicing of these genes. Intron gigantism is also physiologically important in vertebrates ( ). For example, mutations in the largest gene in the human genome, the 2.4 Mb gene Dystrophin, are the underlying cause of Duchenne muscular dystrophy ( ). The Drosophila male fertility factor genes thus constitute a favorable model system for further investigations of the molecular mechanisms underlying expression of gigantic genes in general.

## Coupled initiation and termination in noncanonical transcription
Although the canonical PAF1C is thought to function at all RNA polymerase II transcribed loci ( ; ; ; ), tPAF mutants display aberrant transcription specifically at tTAF/tMAC-dependent genes ( F; Supplemental Fig. S21B,C). Because tPAF is not required for the expression of tTAF/tMAC-dependent genes ( G), this argues that transcription activation via tTAF couples to tPAF-mediated transcription termination. This connection seems specific to tTAF/tMAC-dependent genes, as other genes much more rarely show signatures of readthrough in tPAF mutants (Supplemental Fig. S21B,C). Such coupling between a variant basal transcription factor complex and variant cotranscriptional processing factors has already been shown to enable important variations in RNA polymerase II function. For example, proper snRNA 3′ processing relies on snRNA gene promoter elements, which are activated by the snRNA-activating protein complex (SNAPc) ( ; ; ), and in Drosophila, a TFIID variant complex couples heterochromatic piRNA precursor transcription to suppression of both splicing and polyadenylation site recognition as well as to a dedicated piRNA precursor nuclear export pathway ( ; ; ; ; ). tTAF-coupled transcription termination via tPAF thus supports a broader model for RNA polymerase regulation, in which variant transcription initiation mechanisms direct downstream processes in gene expression. Notably, alternative cleavage and polyadenylation is known to enable cell type-specific mRNA isoform expression ( ), and recent findings indicate that connections between transcription initiation and termination are widespread in the human genome ( ). The underlying molecular connection mediating these couplings, including possible tTAF/tPAF-like transcription and termination factor associations, remains to be uncovered. For tPAF, our proximity labeling results indeed support a model in which recruitment to tTAF-dependent loci happens through direct protein–protein interactions with either tTAF or tBRD proteins ( A, ). Direct biochemical investigation of this model by, for example, tPAF chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analyses will be important to uncover how transcription initiation and termination processes are coupled.
Cdc73L and Ctr9L mutants display only mild readthrough transcription phenotypes but still show meiotic defects and are sterile. Therefore, we currently cannot determine to what extent readthrough transcription in the Leo1L and Paf1L mutants contributes to the sterility phenotype. Given that the readthrough phenotype activates hundreds of genes aberrantly via read-in transcription ( C), the developmental impact of this effect is difficult to dissect experimentally, but such a level of aberrant gene expression is in itself likely to disturb normal development. In addition, Paf1L mutants, which perturb tPAF complex localization (likely due to loss of tPAF complex integrity given the predicted tPAF structure) ( G) as well as transcription termination ( , ; Supplemental Fig. S15), show overall stronger developmental phenotypes compared with Cdc73L mutants ( ; Supplemental Figs. S4, S6), which have only very mild transcription termination defects ( E, B). Therefore, we propose that Leo1L and Paf1L function together to ensure cell identity maintenance by blocking promiscuous gene activation that would otherwise arise through read-in transcription from upstream tTAF-dependent genes.
Maintenance of cell type-specific gene expression through repression of lineage-incompatible genes is also known from the Kumgung (Kmg) zinc finger protein acting through the dMi-2 repressor in the Drosophila male germline ( ) and from the separate CoREST complexes functioning in Drosophila somatic and germline cells ( ). The combined action of transcription activation and repression mechanisms thus seems particularly important for germ cell maintenance, begging future investigation of similar pathways beyond Drosophila. We propose that paralog-based gene regulatory complexes form connected functional pathways and that such connections are required to fix the problems arising from bending or bypassing the textbook dogmas of gene regulation. Such paralog-based pathways represent valuable model systems for future mechanistic studies of animal germline genome regulation as well as of the parental canonical complexes through comparative mechanistic studies.

## Materials and methods

## Drosophila maintenance and strains
D. melanogaster strain maintenance and experiments were done on standard medium with a 12:12 h light/dark cycle at 25°C and 70% humidity unless otherwise stated. Fly strains used in this study are listed in Supplemental Table S1. Frame-shift mutants of tPAF genes were generated by Peter Duchek (Vienna Biocenter Core Facility). Knock-in (KI) D. melanogaster lines tagging the endogenous gene tPAF and PAF1C genes with N-terminal 3xFLAG-3xV5-GFP were generated by Rainbow Transgenic Flies, Inc., CRISPR cloning. Eric Wieschaus kindly gifted the RFP-tagged Fib fly strain. GFP-tagged Tpl94D and ProtA strains were kind gifts from Benjamin Loppin (University of Lyon). tMAC and tTAF mutants were kind gifts from Margaret T. Fuller (Stanford University). We used FlyBase ( ) to find information on phenotypes/function/stocks/gene expression, etc. of genes mentioned in this study.

## Paralog identification
Paralog genes of PAF1C and ortholog genes across species were identified by NCBI tBLASTn using the RefSeq genome database with default search parameters ( ). Potential orthologs were verified with a BLASTp search within the D. melanogaster genome to verify that the correct ortholog was the top hit. Orthologs were further verified by comparing the synteny of the adjacent genomic region. Genes were accepted as orthologs if they were the top hit in BLAST searches and had comparable synteny. Gene identifiers of paralogs and orthologs are listed in Supplemental Table S2.

## Fertility assay
Fertility assays were done with transheterozygous mutant males or females mated to control (w1118) flies of the opposite sex. Matings were set up with flies of 2–4 days old in a 4:8 ratio of males to females in a food vial for 24 . After 24 h, flies were transferred to a Petri dish with solidified agar and apple juice with yeast paste and net covering. Flies were allowed to lay eggs on the agar for 24–30 h, after which they were removed, and the Petri dish was covered and left for a further 24 h to let larvae hatch from the eggs. Next, the ratio of hatched versus unhatched out of 100 eggs was counted. Each tPAF mutant was tested with two different transheterozygous mutant genotypes, and the fertility of each genotype was measured in duplicates.

## Immunostaining of postmeiotic spermatids
The immunostaining protocol was adapted from . Briefly, a testis pair from young tPAF1C mutants and control (w1118) flies was dissected and placed on a glass slide with 20 μL of 1× PBS. The posterior end of the testes was nicked using a needle to release elongated spermatids. A coverslip was gently placed on top, and excess PBS was removed using a Kimwipe to obtain a monolayer squash. The samples were quickly snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen for 30 sec. The coverslip was immediately removed, and samples were immersed in 95% ice-cold ethanol and incubated for 20 min at −20°C. The samples were then fixed using 4% formaldehyde in 1× PBS/0.3% Triton X-100 for 7 min at room temperature. After two washes with 1× PBS for 5 min each, the samples were permeabilized in 1× PBS/0.3% (v/v) Triton X-100 for 30 min at room temperature. Subsequently, the samples were washed twice with 1× PBS for 5 min and incubated with 1 mg/mL DAPI (1:100) and Alexa Fluor 488 phalloidin (1:1000; Thermo Scientific A12379) for 30 min at room temperature. Finally, samples were washed with 1× PBS and mounted using VectaShield antifade mounting medium (Vector Laboratories H-1000-10).
For imaging the polarization process, five pairs of testis tissue from young tPAF1C mutants and control w1118 flies were dissected and transferred into an Eppendorf tube containing fixation solution (2% formaldehyde in 1× PBS/0.3% Triton X-100) for 10 min at room temperature. The samples were washed three times with 1× PBS/0.3% Triton X-100 for 10 min each. Subsequently, the samples were permeabilized in 1× PBS/1% Triton X-100 for 30 min, followed by two washes using 1× PBS/0.3% TritonX for 10 min each. The samples were then blocked with 1× PBS/0.3% Triton X-100 containing 0.05% (w/v) BSA for 30 min at room temperature. Samples were incubated with the primary antibody Orb 4H8 (mouse) from Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank (1:1000) in 1× PBS/0.3% Triton X-100 containing 0.05% BSA overnight at 4°C. After three washes with 1× PBS/0.3% Triton X-100 for 10 min each, the samples were incubated with DAPI at a final concentration of 10 μg/mL, antimouse IgG, and Alexa Fluor 647 conjugate (1:1000) for 30 min at room temperature. Finally, samples were washed with 1× PBS and mounted using VectaShield antifade mounting medium (Vector Laboratories H-1000-10).
For imaging the chromosomal condensation process, five pairs of testis tissue from 0 to 2 day old tPAF1C mutants and w1118 flies with His2AV-RFP and β-Tubulin-GFP were dissected and transferred into an Eppendorf tube containing fixation solution (2% formaldehyde in 1× PBS/0.3% Triton X-100) for 10 min at room temperature. The samples were washed three times with 1× PBS/0.3% Triton X-100 for 10 min each and mounted using VectaShield antifade mounting medium (Vector Laboratories H-1000-10).
All samples were imaged using a Zeiss LSM 800 laser-scanning confocal microscope, and images were processed in Fiji ( ). Prometaphase I and metaphase I identification was based on the formation of astral fibers around the nucleus and the spindle formation, respectively.

## Live imaging
Live imaging was performed to examine whole-testis tissue, the nebenkern stage, and meiosis I prometaphase. Testis tissues from 0 to 2 day old male flies were dissected from the described genotypes and placed on a glass slide with 20 μL of 1× PBS. For imaging the nebenkern stage and meiosis I, the anterior end of the testes was nicked using a needle to release the cells from the dissected tissue, while the tissue was left intact for whole-testis overviews. A coverslip was gently placed on the dissected tissue, and excess PBS was removed using a Kimwipe to obtain a monolayer squash. The samples were imaged via an Olympus IX51 phase contrast microscope within 10 min of slide preparation. Images were processed in Fiji ( ).

## Fixed immunofluorescence sample preparation and imaging
Testes were dissected from males of age 1–3 days in cold 1× PBS on ice. Tissues were fixed in 2% formaldehyde solution for 20 min at room temperature with nutation. After fixation tissues were washed three times for 10 min in PBX (1× PBS with 0.3% Triton X-100), blocked in BBX (PBX with 1% BSA) for 30 min, and washed once in PBX for 10 min; all steps were with nutation at room temperature. Tissues from knock-in LAP-tagged PAF1C flies were detected with anti-V5 tag (Invitrogen R96025) diluted 1:500 in BBX and incubated overnight at 4°C with nutation. Next, tissues were washed four times for 10 min in PBX at room temperature with nutation. Samples were then incubated with antimouse IgG, Alexa Fluor 647 conjugate (Cell Signaling Technologies 4410S) at 1:1000 in BBX overnight at 4°C with nutation. Tissues were washed for 10 min in PBX, for 5 min with 1:10,000 DAPI, and twice for 10 min in PBX at room temperature with nutation before being mounted on a microscopy slide with ProLong Diamond mounting medium (Thermo Fisher Scientific P36961). All other tissues were not incubated with antibodies, only stained with DAPI following the steps described for knock-in-tagged PAF1C samples. Samples were imaged using a Zeiss LSM800 confocal microscope with Airyscan. Images were processed in Fiji ( ).

## Whole-fly sample preparation for co-IP
Knock-in LAP-tagged tPAF flies and control flies expressing the LAP tag only (“N1NLS” stock) were collected when 1–3 days old and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Samples were made into powder by grinding three times at 400 rpm for 1 min in a Planetary Ball Mill PM 100 machine (Retsch). To avoid degradation during milling, the samples were cooled by liquid nitrogen through sample handling and processing. For co-IPs, each powdered sample was dissolved in five powder sample volumes of protein lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl at pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM PefaBloc SC Plus, 0.2% Igepal CA-630, ELGA water). Samples were then lysed by incubation for 15 min on ice and centrifuged for 5 min at 4°C, and the lysate supernatant was transferred to clean tubes. Eight microliters of anti-FLAG M2 magnetic beads (Sigma-Aldrich M8823) was added to each sample, and the lysate/antibody mixtures were incubated with rotation for 3 h at 4°C. The magnetic bead-coupled antibodies were then washed four times for 2 min in 1 mL of protein lysis buffer followed by five brief washes with 1 mL of wash buffer (20 mM HEPES at pH 7.4, 2 mM MgCl2, 150 mM NaCl, ultrapure water [ELGA]). In between washes, the beads were quickly spun down and pelleted on a magnetic rack to remove supernatant. Last, the beads were pelleted, the supernatant was removed, and the samples were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −70°C until mass spectrometry analysis.

## Biotin proximity labeling sample preparation
One day old to 3 day old male flies harboring knock-in LAP-tagged tPAF genes combined with a transgenic biotin ligase fused to a GFP nanobody (TurboID-GFPvhh) ( ) were transferred from standard cornmeal food to 100 µM biotin-supplemented food for 24 h before testis dissection. Two-hundred testis pairs were dissected in ice-cold 1× PBS. PBS was exchanged with 100 µL of lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCL at pH 7,5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 1% Triton X-100, 0.5% Na-deoxycholate, benzonase, 1× cOmplete, 1 mM DTT), and the tissue was homogenized using an electric pestle for 20 sec on ice followed by quick centrifugation at 20,000g at 4°C. The pestle treatment was repeated. The lysates were incubated for 20 min at 4°C followed by centrifugation at 20,000 for 10 ming at 4°C. Pierce magnetic streptavidin beads (150 µL; S88817) pre-equilibrated in lysis buffer were mixed with the lysates and incubated overnight at 4°C with nutation. The beads were washed consecutively under rotation for 10 min in 1 mL of each of the following buffers at 4°C: (1) lysis buffer, (2) 2% SDS in Tris-EDTA pH 7.5 (wash done at room temperature to avoid SDS precipitation), (3) wash buffer 1 (50 mM HEPES at pH 7.5, 500 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0,1% Na-deoxycholate, 1% Triton X-100, benzonase), (4) wash buffer 2 (10 mM Tris-HCl at pH 7.5, 250 mM LiCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0,5% Na-deoxycholate, 1% NP40), and (5) six times with wash buffer 3 (20 mM Tris-HCl at pH 7.5, 137 mM NaCl). The beads were frozen in liquid nitrogen and shipped on dry ice for mass spectrometry analysis.

## Sample preparation for mass spectrometry
Mass spectrometry was done at the Danmarks Tekniske Universitet Proteomics Core, Kongens Lyngby, Denmark. The samples were mixed with 20 µL of lysis buffer (6 M guanidinium hydrochloride, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM CAA, 50 mM HEPES at pH 8.5) and sonicated five times on high for 30 sec in a Bioruptor sonication water bath (Diagenode) at 4°C. Samples were diluted 1:3 with 10% acetonitrile and 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5), and 200 ng of LysC (MS grade; Wako) was added (1:50 enzyme to protein ratio). The samples were then incubated for 4 h at 37°C. The samples were further diluted 1:10 with 10% acetonitrile and 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5), and 100 ng of trypsin (MS grade; Promega) was added (1:100 enzyme to protein ratio) followed by incubation overnight at 37°C. Enzyme activity was quenched by adding 2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 1%. The samples were desalted on a SOLAµ SPE plate (HRP, Thermo), following the standard procedure. The dried peptides were reconstituted in 12 µL of 2% ACN and 1% TFA/20 µL of 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5).

## Mass spectrometry analysis
Peptides were loaded onto a 2 cm C18 trap column (Thermo Fisher 164946), connected in-line to a 15 cm C18 reverse-phase analytical column (Thermo EasySpray ES904) using 100% buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) at 750 bar using the Thermo EasyLC 1200 HPLC system and the column oven operating at 35°C. Peptides were eluted over a 140 min gradient ranging from 6% to 60% of buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at 250 nL/min, and the Q-Exactive instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was run in a DD-MS2 top10 method. Full MS spectra were collected at a resolution of 70,000, with an AGC target of 3 × 106 or a maximum injection time of 20 msec and a scan range of 300–1750 m/z. The MS2 spectra were obtained at a resolution of 17,500, with an AGC target value of 1 × 106 or maximum injection time of 60 msec, a normalized collision energy of 25, and an intensity threshold of 1.7 × 104. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 sec, and ions with a charge state <2 or unknown were excluded. MS performance was verified for consistency by running complex cell lysate quality control standards, and chromatography was monitored to check for reproducibility.

## Analysis of mass spectrometry data
Mass spectrometry data were analyzed using the FragPipe (https://github.com/Nesvilab/FragPipe) proteomics pipeline using standard parameters for label-free quantification unless otherwise noted. Fully detailed search and analysis parameters are available through the listed PRIDE repository accessions. Briefly, 50% reversed decoys were added to the UniProt D. melanogaster proteome database, and spectra were searched against the proteome database using MSFragger ( ) with a wide precursor mass tolerance (±50 PPM). Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, and a maximum of two missed trypsin cleavages was allowed. Peptide to spectrum matches (PSM) were validated and rescored using Percolator ( ) and MSBooster ( ), respectively, with standard settings. Protein inference was done using ProteinProphet ( ). Label-free quantification was performed using IonQuant ( ) with match between runs (MBR).
Statistical analysis of the FragPipe search and quantification results were performed using FragPipe-Analyst (https://github.com/MonashProteomics/FragPipe-Analyst) with the following settings: datatype = LFQ, intensity type = intensity, normalization type = no normalization, imputation type = minimum (co-IP data) or Perseus type (proximity labeling data), and type of FDR correction = Benjamini–Hochberg. The applied parameters were chosen based on extensive parameter testing and evaluation of signal to noise ratios based on expected intracomplex protein–protein interactions.

## AlphaFold prediction
Homology models of the D. melanogaster tPAF complex comprising the proteins Leo1L, Paf1L, Ctr9L, Cdc73L, and Ski8 and of the PAF1C comprising Cdc73, Ctr9, Leo1, Paf1, and Rtf1 were manually assembled based on the cryoEM structure of the human PAF complex ( ). Three-dimensional coordinates from individual D. melanogaster proteins were extracted from the AlphaFold database ( ), and the main domains were superimposed onto the respective human PAF counterparts using PyMOL v2.5. For Leo1L and Paf1L, manual adjustments were made using Coot ( ) to fit the unstructured regions to resemble interactions found in the human PAF complex.

## Sample preparation for the whole-testis RNA-seq library
RNA was isolated from testis tissues of 1–3 day old transheterozygous tPAF mutants and control (w1118) flies. Tissues were dissected in cold 1× PBS on ice. Samples were homogenized and lysed in 1 mL of TRIzol. Chloroform (200 µL) was added, and samples were vigorously shaken, incubated for 3 min at room temperature, and centrifuged at 12,000g for 15 min at 4°C. The RNA-containing phase was transferred to a clean RNase-free tube with 1 µL of GlycoBlue coprecipitant (Thermo Fisher AM9516), 550 µL of isopropanol was added, and samples were incubated overnight at −20°C. The following day, samples were centrifuged at 16,000g for 30 min at 4°C and supernatant was removed from the RNA pellet. One milliliter of ice-cold 75% ethanol was added to the RNA pellet, samples were centrifuged at full speed for 5 min at 4°C, and the supernatant was removed. Samples were briefly centrifuged at full speed at 4°C and residual ethanol was removed from the RNA pellet. Samples were dissolved in 15 µL of RNase-free water. Genomic DNA was removed from the purified RNA samples using RNA Clean&Concentrator-5 columns with on-column DNase digest (Zymo Research R1014). For rRNA-depleted samples, rRNA was removed with RNase H using a modified version of the original protocol from as described by . Briefly, rRNA depletion was performed using a mixture of antisense oligos complementary to the mature D. melanogaster rRNA transcripts. The oligo pool was mixed with 1 μg of DNase-free total RNA in RNase H buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl at pH 8, 100 mM NaCl) and annealed over a temperature gradient from 95°C to 45°C. The RNA–DNA hybrids were then digested with thermostable RNase H (NEB M0523S) for 1 h at 45°C. Next, RNA was purified and the DNA oligos were removed from samples using RNA Clean&Concentrator-5 columns with on-column DNase digest (Zymo Research R1014) according to the manufacturer's instructions. rRNA depletion was verified by qPCR. Library preparation was done with the NEBNext Ultra II directional RNA library preparation kit for Illumina (NEB E7770L), following the recommended kit protocol. Amplified libraries were purified by SPRI beads, and library quality was assessed with Bioanalyzer high-sensitivity DNA analysis (Agilent Technologies 5067-4626). Samples were sequenced on a NovaSeq 6000 sequencing system (Illumina).

## Sorted spermatocyte RNA-seq library preparation
For spermatocyte isolation, testis tissues were dissected from 1 to 3 day old knock-in LAP-Cdc73L flies (control or in combination with Paf1L or Leo1L mutant alleles) into cold Schneider's medium on ice. Next, the medium was removed, the tissue was homogenized with a plastic pestle, and lysis buffer (560 µL of PBS, 70 µL of 1× trypsin, 70 µL of 2% collagenase) was added. Samples were rotated for 30 min at room temperature followed by careful pipetting with a p1000 tip. The cell suspension was then drawn through a 40 µm mesh cell strainer into 500 µL of Schneider's medium. An additional 100 µL of Schneider's medium was drawn through the cell strainer to collect the remaining cells. Samples were centrifuged at 1200 rpm for 7 min at 4°C and the supernatant was removed. Then, the cells were resuspended in 200 µL of Schneider's medium, and DNA was stained with bisbenzimide Hoechst 33342 (Sigma). GFP-expressing cells were then isolated by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) on a FACSAria III machine (BD Biosciences, FACS Core Facility at Aarhus University, https://www.facs.au.dk). Flowjo software (Treestar) was used for data analysis. The preparation and FACS sorting of control and mutant spermatocytes were performed in three independent experiments. To this end, we isolated control and mutant spermatocytes with a purity of at least 85% by FACS sorting and characterized their transcriptome by RNA-seq (see also Supplemental Fig. S16). Wild-type testes were used to clearly identify the GFP-expressing spermatocyte population during flow cytometry. RNA isolation was performed as described above for whole-testis RNA-seq. Sorted spermatocyte RNA-seq libraries were prepared for each sample with and without rRNA depletion to minimize technical biases from working with small sample amounts. For the analyses, both library variants were pooled and analyzed together (see also “Analysis of RNA-seq Data”). Otherwise, the library preparation was performed as described above for whole-testis RNA-seq.

## Analysis of RNA-seq data
After trimming to bases 5–45, RNA-seq reads were mapped to the D. melanogaster genome (dm6, r6.40) using STAR (for genome-mapping) ( ) or to D. melanogaster mRNA sequences using Salmon (for transcriptome quasimapping) ( ). Normalization between samples was done based on the number of genome-unique mapping reads for each sample (for STAR-based mapping). For gene expression quantification, gene length-corrected TMM (GeTMM) ( ) values were calculated using edgeR (v3.34.0) ( ). Differential gene expression analysis was performed on Salmon analysis output using DESeq2 ( ). The scripts used for RNA-seq analysis and visualization as well as related processed data files are available at GitLab (see “Data and Code Availability”)

## Data visualization
All data panels, excluding schematics and microscopy images, were produced using R (https://www.R-project.org), RStudio (http://www.rstudio.com), the seqNdisplayR package (genome coverage plots) ( ), and the Tidyverse package assembly ( ).

## Data and code availability
The high-throughput sequencing data generated for this study have been deposited at the Sequence Read Archive (SRA) under accession number GSE263955.
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifiers PXD049360 (co-IP data) and PXD049375 (proximity labeling data). Interactive volcano plots can be accessed from the GitLab project listed below by downloading the HTML versions of the R markdown scripts for mass spectrometry analysis.
Computational scripts used for analysis and data visualization, processed data tables used for plotting, and interactive visualization of the mass spectrometry data can be accessed at https://www.gitlab.com/AndersenGermlineLab/tpaf_vilstrup_2024.

## Supplemental Material
Supplement 1Supplement 2Supplement 3

## Acknowledgments
We thank P. Duchek and J. Gokcezade (Institute of Molecular Biotechnology [IMBA] Fly Facility) for generating CRISPR-edited tPAF frameshift mutant flies during P.A.’s affiliation with the IMBA. We thank Changwei Yu (Brennecke group, IMBA) for sharing the TurboID-GFPvhh fly line ahead of publication. We thank Margaret T. Fuller for sharing the Sa-GFP fly line. We thank Mie Aarup (P.A. group, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Aarhus University [MBG-AU]) for organizing essential laboratory infrastructure for the project and for contributing help with plasmid cloning. We much appreciate the helpful comments on the manuscript from Torben H. Jensen and Anne F. Nielsen. Much of the computing for this project was performed on the GenomeDK Cluster, and we thank GenomeDK and Aarhus University for this support. Flow cytometry and cell sorting were performed at the FACS Core Facility, Aarhus University, Denmark. Confocal imaging was performed at the Bioimaging Core Facility at Aarhus University (https://www.imaging.au.dk) and at the Centre for Advanced Microscopy at Australian National University (https://microscopy.anu.edu.au). In the P.A. group, this work was supported by the Novo Nordisk Foundation (NNF18OC0030954), an Aarhus Institute of Advanced Studies (AIAS) Marie Skłodowska-Curie Actions (MSCA) COFUND Fellowship, and the Independent Research Foundation Denmark (9064-00056B). The R.H. group is supported by the Australian Research Council (DP210102385).
Author contributions: A.P.V. performed the experimental work apart from the contributions listed below, analyzed data, and wrote the original draft of the manuscript. A.G. carried out the characterization of tPAF mutant developmental and meiotic phenotypes. A.J.R. performed all experiments related to proximity labeling and Ski8. A.E. carried out tissue preparation and fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) for the generation of spermatocyte RNA-seq. S.R. made the structure modeling of the tPAF complex and the PAF1C using AlphaFold2. M.V.L. carried out the mass spectrometry data acquisition. R.H. conceived the study, performed data analyses, wrote the manuscript, and supervised A.G. P.A. conceived the study, performed data analyses, wrote the manuscript, and supervised A.P.V., A.J.R., A.E., and S.R.

## Footnotes
Supplemental material is available for this article.
Article published online ahead of print. Article and publication date are online at http://www.genesdev.org/cgi/doi/10.1101/gad.351930.124.

## Competing interest statement
The authors declare no competing interests.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
Supplement 1Supplement 2Supplement 3

## Data Availability Statement
The high-throughput sequencing data generated for this study have been deposited at the Sequence Read Archive (SRA) under accession number GSE263955.
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifiers PXD049360 (co-IP data) and PXD049375 (proximity labeling data). Interactive volcano plots can be accessed from the GitLab project listed below by downloading the HTML versions of the R markdown scripts for mass spectrometry analysis.
Computational scripts used for analysis and data visualization, processed data tables used for plotting, and interactive visualization of the mass spectrometry data can be accessed at https://www.gitlab.com/AndersenGermlineLab/tpaf_vilstrup_2024.