445elsevierwtDrug Resistance UpdatesDrug Resist UpdatPMC5844649584464958446492949983610.1016/j.drup.2018.01.001New tools for old drugs: Functional genetic screens to optimize current chemotherapy
GerhardsNora M RottenbergSven aInstitute of Animal Pathology, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Bern, Bern, SwitzerlandbDivision of Molecular Pathology, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands⁎Corresponding author at: Institute of Animal Pathology, University of Bern, Laenggassstrasse 122, 3012 Bern, Switzerland.Institute of Animal PathologyVetsuisse FacultyUniversity of BernBernSwitzerland sven.rottenberg@vetsuisse.unibe.ch
12018363030–461232018© 2018 The Author(s)This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
Despite substantial advances in the treatment of various cancers, many patients still receive anti-cancer therapies that hardly eradicate tumor cells but inflict considerable side effects. To provide the best treatment regimen for an individual patient, a major goal in molecular oncology is to identify predictive markers for a personalized therapeutic strategy. Regarding novel targeted anti-cancer therapies, there are usually good markers available. Unfortunately, however, targeted therapies alone often result in rather short remissions and little cytotoxic effect on the cancer cells. Therefore, classical chemotherapy with frequent long remissions, cures, and a clear effect on cancer cell eradication remains a corner stone in current anti-cancer therapy. Reliable biomarkers which predict the response of tumors to classical chemotherapy are rare, in contrast to the situation for targeted therapy. For the bulk of cytotoxic therapeutic agents, including DNA-damaging drugs, drugs targeting microtubules or antimetabolites, there are still no reliable biomarkers used in the clinic to predict tumor response. To make progress in this direction, meticulous studies of classical chemotherapeutic drug action and resistance mechanisms are required. For this purpose, novel functional screening technologies have emerged as successful technologies to study chemotherapeutic drug response in a variety of models. They allow a systematic analysis of genetic contributions to a drug-responsive or −sensitive phenotype and facilitate a better understanding of the mode of action of these drugs. These functional genomic approaches are not only useful for the development of novel targeted anti-cancer drugs but may also guide the use of classical chemotherapeutic drugs by deciphering novel mechanisms influencing a tumor’s drug response. Moreover, due to the advances of 3D organoid cultures from patient tumors and in vivo screens in mice, these genetic screens can be applied using conditions that are more representative of the clinical setting. Patient-derived 3D organoid lines furthermore allow the characterization of the “essentialome”, the specific set of genes required for survival of these cells, of an individual tumor, which could be monitored over the course of treatment and help understanding how drug resistance evolves in clinical tumors. Thus, we expect that these functional screens will enable the discovery of novel cancer-specific vulnerabilities, and through clinical validation, move the field of predictive biomarkers forward. This review focuses on novel advanced techniques to decipher the interplay between genetic alterations and drug response.
Keywords: Functional genetic screens, Chemotherapy, CRISPR/Cas9, Haploid cells, Insertional mutagenesis, 3D organoids, Gene essentiality, DNA damage, Predictive markers

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfnois-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2017 Nov 28; Revised 2017 Dec 29; Accepted 2018 Jan 6.

1.

## Introduction
Anti-cancer drug resistance is the major cause of death of cancer patients with disseminated tumors ( ). In some patients intrinsic (or primary) drug resistance is already observed from the start (i.e. prior to chemotherapy) and tumors grow in the presence of chemotherapy ( ). Such intrinsic drug resistance can be a cancer-type specific or caused by individual cancer features ( ). Frequently however, resistance arises in two steps. The tumor initially responds, but not all tumor cells are eradicated. From the residual disease the tumor regrows and eventually becomes resistant to all available chemotherapeutic drugs ( ). We have recently reviewed various mechanisms that may cause minimal residual disease ( ). Although residual disease may already contain selected drug-refractory tumor cells, it is also possible that the residual tumors are only transiently resistant due to cell cycle characteristics ( ). Then, drug resistance is acquired during the course of treatment ( ). This secondary resistance is often due to (epi-)genetic alterations arising during the treatment that lead to, for instance, the activation of alternative signaling pathways, increased drug efflux, altered drug target availability, or rewiring of the DNA damage response ( ; ; ). To attenuate the development of drug resistance, combinational therapies of several drugs with different molecular mechanisms are frequently given to cancer patients ( ). Another approach is to re-sensitize resistant tumor cells by drugs targeting the resistance mechanism or the tumor microenvironment ( ; ). Unfortunately, we often lack knowledge about the mechanisms underlying resistance and therefore we usually lack a personalized strategy how to treat patients with (relapsing) tumors.
In the past decades, progress in the treatment of disseminated cancers has reduced cancer-related mortality ( ). In addition to classical chemotherapy, also targeted anti-cancer drugs further improved cancer remission ( ; ). Despite these advances, treatment failure due to drug resistance remains a substantial challenge in the clinical management of cancer. Treating a non-responsive tumor causes side effects without providing a benefit for the patient. Moreover, it incurs unnecessary costs and may even decrease the likelihood of success of subsequent treatments with other regimens ( ).
To improve cancer therapy outcome, precision oncology is a promising strategy. Through the assessment of a tumor’s specific genetic or proteomic changes, i.e. its biomarkers ( ), an individualized best treatment regimen can be chosen. Prognostic gene expression signatures are clinically well established, because prognosis of tumor recurrence directly depends on the altered expression of a number of genes involved in tumor progression and metastasis ( ; ; ). Conversely, a tumor’s response to a particular treatment can fail due to the alteration of a single gene, such as the drug target or drug entry transporter ( ). Such alterations may not reliably be picked up by standard gene expression profiling. Thus, it is not surprising that only few predictive biomarkers are established, and even those remain imperfect in predicting therapy success. Currently, biomarkers are only available for targeted therapies, which block or stimulate specific pathways of tumor cells ( ) and usually yield good initial response with a modest effect on overall survival ( ). In contrast, classical cytotoxic chemotherapy interferes with all rapidly dividing cells, does not rely on oncogenic protein or pathway alterations, but often results in long-term remission and even cures some cancer types, and reduces cancer-related mortality. Unfortunately, not all patients benefit from the treatment and many eventually become resistant to all drugs available. Hence, there is a lack of clinically validated predictive biomarkers for classical chemotherapy.
Regarding targeted therapy, an early example of a predictive biomarker is HER2 expression status for trastuzumab treatment in metastatic breast cancer, an anti-cancer drug approved by the FDA in 1998. In combination with classical chemotherapy, trastuzumab efficiently decreases disease progression in HER2-amplified metastatic breast cancer ( ). In contrast, trastuzumab provides no benefit in breast cancer patients lacking HER2. Unfortunately, only about 30% of all HER2-positive breast cancer patients respond to trastuzumab-containing chemotherapy ( ). Thus, there are additional factors that influence therapy response, such as the intertumoral heterogeneity among a cancer (sub-)type, reflecting variations in molecular profiles of cancers in different patients. Additionally, the intratumoral heterogeneity complicates predictions of drug response ( ). Molecular and genetic profiling of tumors has become cheaper and is often readily available. For mutations in specific genes, for instance BRAF, the effect on therapy response has been well characterized, so that sequencing of the corresponding genomic region will directly yield a predictive marker for therapy response. Unfortunately, the number of such well-defined biomarkers is limited, and to date only a small fraction of cancer patients directly benefit from established biomarkers. This is aggravated by the fact that not all patients bearing BRAF mutations do respond equally well to targeted BRAF inhibitors ( ; ; ). Thus, even such well-defined biomarkers are not sufficient, and additional characterization of the tumor is needed.
Several approaches have successfully identified novel molecular peculiarities which serve as predictive biomarkers. Hypothesis-driven approaches have, for instance, resulted in the establishment of BRCA1/2 mutational status in predicting a positive response upon PARP inhibitor treatment in breast and ovarian cancer ( ; ; ). Analyses of large, population-based clinical trials have also identified subgroups of responsive patients ( ), e.g. leukemia patients with the Philadelphia chromosome responded better to imatinib treatment ( ). Predictive markers based on clinical data have also been suggested for classical chemotherapeutics, including high HER2 or low tau expression as markers for paclitaxel sensitivity ( ). Besides BRCA1/2 status, these markers have not entered the clinic, however, and still require additional validating clinical studies ( ).
In recent years, advances in experimental genetic screening techniques have linked many genotypes to novel phenotypes in mammalian cells ( ; ; ; ; ; ). Furthermore, genome-wide screens have broadened our understanding of molecular mechanisms responsible for therapy response ( ; ; ; , for instance; and ). Thus, these screens are valuable tools which can reveal novel mechanisms of resistance or hypersensitivity towards drugs, and facilitate a better understanding of drug response which might ultimately result in novel predictive biomarkers ( ). While most targeted anti-cancer therapeutics exploit gain-of-function alterations, e.g. in terms of oncogene addiction ( ), not all tumors bear targetable gain-of-function mutations. Inactivation of tumor suppressor genes is frequent, and cannot be directly targeted with a drug. However, as shown by the example of PARP inhibitor treatment in BRCA1/2 mutated tumors, loss of a tumor suppressor can offer a treatment option with low side effects for healthy tissue. The study of synthetic lethality and context-dependent gene essentiality has been challenging in mammalian cells and was for long time limited to few model organisms. With the development of CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing and insertional mutagenesis in haploid human cells, it is now possible to efficiently study genetic interactions as well as the functional consequence of genetic mutations and possibly reveal new predictive biomarkers by linking drug-responsive phenotypes to genotypes.
 Although some novel anti-cancer drugs have been successful and have yielded improvements for cancer patients, they remain imperfect ( ; ), and have also become a financial burden for the health system ( ; ; ; ). During the course of treatment, most patients sooner or later also receive classical chemotherapy including platinum drugs, topoisomerase inhibitors, microtubule-targeting agents or antimetabolites as part of standard care ( ; ). Their clinical use is based on empirical experience. However, these drugs are relatively cheap, effective and widely used. If clinical oncologists could be supported in their choice of classical chemotherapy based on molecular characteristics of a tumor, the therapeutic benefit of a standard treatment may increase and drugs to which the tumor is unlikely to respond would be avoided. To improve the proper selection of the treatment of choice and to expand our repertoire of drug response predictions, one needs to identify more molecular peculiarities of tumors which impact therapy response.
This review therefore elaborates on genome-wide screening techniques in mammalian cells with special emphasis on the response against classical cytotoxic drugs.

2.

## Forward genetic screens to improve our understanding of drug resistance and synthetic lethality
Using forward genetic screens, genetic mutations can efficiently be linked to phenotypes of interest and identify the crucial genes for the selected phenotype. The success of a screen depends on the choice of the best model as well as efficient gene suppression. Genome-wide screens were made possible in mammalian cells with the discovery of RNA interference, which introduces small specific RNA molecules into cells and targets the corresponding host mRNA for degradation ( ; ). RNA interference screens have led to the discovery of novel predictive biomarkers for chemotherapy response which could be translated into the clinic. For instance, large-scale RNA interference screens identified loss of PTEN as a determinant of trastuzumab resistance in breast cancer ( ) and feedback activation of EGFR as a resistance mechanism in BRAF-mutated colorectal cancer ( ). However, for many applications RNA interference screens are imperfect, because this technique usually fails to inactivate gene function completely and remaining gene activity may mask the phenotype ( ; ; ), although in some cases, such as the knock-down effect of essential genes on drug response, an incomplete gene inactivation might be required to detect an effect of the knock-down on drug response. Nevertheless, off-target effects complicate RNA interference screens through a high proportion of false positive hits. As RNA interference screens for biomarker discovery have been reviewed elsewhere ( ; ; ), we will focus here on more recent developments in screening technologies ( and ).
 2.1.

## CRISPR/Cas9 screens in 2D cell lines
The discovery of the bacterial Cas9 endonuclease has revolutionized genome engineering. A 20-basepairs site-specific single guide RNA (sgRNA) directs the endonuclease to its corresponding target site and introduces a DNA break. This break stimulates repair by non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ) or homology-directed repair (HDR) by frequently introducing frameshifts by indel mutations, resulting in a premature stop codon or nonsense-mediated decay of the transcript. Consequently, gene inactivation is achieved at the genomic level by CRISPR (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats)/Cas9 by creating a gene knock-out which, for many applications, outperforms gene knock-down by RNA interference ( ; ; ). CRISPR/Cas9 also allows the study of inactivation of non-transcribed elements ( ).
2.1.1.

## Choice of cellular model
The universal applicability of CRISPR/Cas9 screens in a broad repertoire of models ( ) makes this technique a powerful tool to study cancer-type-specific genetic requirements. The most outstanding advantage of CRISPR/Cas9 is that genetic mutations can be introduced into versatile cellular models. Some mechanisms of drug resistance or hypersensitivity might only be present in a certain lineage or cancer type. Melanoma patients bearing the valine-to-glutamate change at residue 600 (V600E) of BRAF, for instance, respond well to a BRAF inhibitor in combination with a mitogen/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (MEK) inhibitor ( ), whereas the same treatment in colorectal patients bearing the same BRAF mutation is less efficient ( ). It may therefore be necessary to study specific genetic requirements in several models to identify novel genetic dependencies originating from pathway rewiring following genetic perturbations. Exploiting such lineage-specific vulnerabilities could identify targets for use in personalized medicine ( ).
Despite this major advantage, the large genetic variation between tumor cell lines may also hinder the successful identification of genetic contributions to a phenotype. The efficacy of genetic modification of CRISPR/Cas9 depends on the number of target loci in the genome. Whereas most human cells are diploid, cancer cell lines often have increased numbers of chromosomes or individual gene amplifications due to genomic instability ( ). To inactivate genes in HeLa cells, for instance, which have up to five copies of a chromosome ( ), Cas9 needs to cleave the locus with higher efficiency compared to a cell line with a diploid gene set. Screens performed in diploid cells will therefore likely yield more robust data with a higher signal-to-noise ratio compared to polyploid cells. Furthermore, cells adapt to genetic mutations with secondary genetic changes or other forms of compensation ( ). This needs to be particularly considered when comparing studies in long-term cultured isogeneic cells ( ). Due to the individual variation of genes affecting their genetic interactions and fitness requirements, every cell line will have a different “essentialome”. Combining several screens from multiple cell lines can therefore identify the “core essentialome” of a lineage, while at the same time some information will be missed as a result of the variation in genetic context between cell lines. Hence, the properties of the chosen cell line directly impact screening results.
Moreover, the activity of DNA repair pathways in a cell line influences mutation efficiency by CRISPR/Cas9. The introduced DNA break can be repaired by HDR, which uses a homologous DNA template such as a sister chromatid. HDR is usually error-free, resulting in an unchanged genomic locus. The success of genetic inactivation using CRISPR/Cas9 therefore depends on the error-prone NHEJ repair pathway. The DNA cleavage site gets trimmed before re-ligation of the two DNA ends. This causes insertions or deletions of base pairs, resulting in a frameshift. If both HDR and NHEJ are active in a chosen cell line, one can expect a lower probability for complete gene inactivation in every locus ( ). However, in cell lines lacking a functional HDR, CRISPR/Cas9-mediated gene knock-out has a high success rate ( ).

2.1.2.

## Impact of the sgRNA library on screening success
To date, three major classes of CRISPR/Cas9-mediated genomic modifiers are available. The most common CRISPR libraries are knock-out libraries, but gene repression (CRISPRi) and activation (CRISPRa) libraries are also employed for specific research questions ( ; ; ; ). Libraries can either be genome-wide, targeting for example about 20,000 genes ( ), or specifically designed to study one particular pathway or a selection of genes of interest ( ). For instance, within a genetic region of interest, CRISPR/Cas9 tiling screens are able to dissect which genetic segments encode functional domains relevant for a phenotype ( ). Recent developments of the CRISPR system for RNA targeting or base editing will further broaden the investigable research fields ( ; ).
The selection of the individual sgRNAs in a library directly impacts screening results. For loss-of-function screens, sgRNAs should preferably target an early, constitutively expressed exon of a gene of interest. Ideally, this leads to nonfunctional transcripts of all gene variants with no off-target activity on other genes. Most commercially available libraries contain 5–10 sgRNAs per gene designed to achieve high cleavage efficacy and low off-target activity. However, these libraries do not take potential genomic pleomorphisms of different cell lines into account, and for some genes, shorter sequence variants might not be targeted and retain some gene functionality.
Off-target effects arise from partial complementarity of the sgRNA target site with additional unintended target sites. Off-target effects can be reduced by the use of improved Cas9 nuclease variants, e.g. by a decreased binding efficacy and increased site specificity, by the use of alternative endonucleases or improved bioinformatics algorithms to design specific sgRNAs ( ; ; ; ; ). This, in turn, increases the need for a perfect alignment of the sgRNA sequence with the target site. A single nucleotide mismatch as a cell line-specific genetic variation or the introduction of a terminal G during sgRNA design could by itself prevent sgRNA alignment with the target site. Moreover, optimized PAM sequence variants may also improve site specificity ( ).
Another crucial step in CRISPR/Cas9 screens is the efficacy of library transduction in a cell line. Typically, sgRNA libraries are transduced at a MOI of 0.4–0.6 to ensure that every cell contains only a single sgRNA ( ; ). For successful screens, a single copy of each sgRNA needs to cleave both (or even more) copies of the target locus ( ). If more than one sgRNA is introduced into a single cell (as usually achieved through direct transfection), it is challenging to determine which sgRNA caused the phenotype due to the relatively low number of distinct sgRNAs. In contrast, less than one sgRNA per cell can lead to insufficient library coverage at the end of a screen.
Depending on the plasmid system used to deliver the library, a stable expression of both sgRNA as well as Cas9 increases the genomic cleavage over time ( ). This may be on purpose, but it might also be problematic when screens are performed over a long time period, as not only on-target sites but also off-target sites will be cleaved repeatedly. DNA double strand breaks also result in genotoxic stress, causing a non-specific anti-proliferative effect which limits the use of CRISPR/Cas9 for highly amplified genomic regions ( ; ; ).

2.1.3.

## Data analysis
Owing to the popularity of CRISPR/Cas9 screens, a broad spectrum of resources for data analysis is available. To analyze a screen, sgRNA sequences are amplified by PCR before deep sequencing. The library sequencing reads may subsequently be analyzed using publically available algorithms, including HitSelect ( ) or MaGeCK ( ). Although they require some programming experience, these algorithms are widely used, relatively user-friendly and provide a certain consistency in the analysis of many CRISPR/Cas9 screens.
When analyzing CRISPR/Cas9 screens, it is crucial to remember that sgRNA copy abundance is counted as an indirect measurement of mutations. Not every sgRNA necessarily creates a frameshift mutation, since the DNA break can also be repaired error-free by HDR or with an in-frame mutation retaining functionality of the transcript. When a sgRNA introduces both frame-shift and in-frame mutations, resulting in a mixed phenotype of this sgRNA, it is possible that this sgRNA will not score as being significant in the analysis ( ).

2.1.4.

## Applications to study drug response
CRISPR/Cas9 screening technology has enabled a systematic analysis of gene function in mammalian cells in terms of both positive (enrichment of mutants) and negative selection (depletion of mutants) ( ; ; ; ). Already at an early stage of development of the CRISPR/Cas9 technology, it has been shown that multiplexing with several sgRNAs can be achieved in vitro as well as in vivo ( ; ; ; ).
In general, positive selection screens are less prone to alterations in library representation than negative selection screens which require a quantitative evaluation of sgRNA abundance. A good coverage and few false positives made CRISPR/Cas9 screens a valuable tool to study resistance phenotypes. In terms of anti-cancer drug resistance, for instance, genes were identified whose loss-of-function-mutations cause resistance to vemurafenib, cytosine arabinoside, 6-thioguanine and DNA topoisomerase II inhibitors ( ; ; ; ). As an example, Shalem et al. identified two known mediators of resistance against the BRAF inhibitor vemurafenib, NF1 and MED12 ( ; ) in a genome-wide CRISPR/Cas9 library screen targeting 18,080 genes with 3–4 sgRNAs/gene ( ). Additionally, the authors found novel genes which have not been linked to BRAF inhibitor response so far, and validated their inactivation as resistance factors towards vemurafenib in vitro. Among those genes were members of the STAGA complex which recruit Mediator complex proteins including MED12, which negatively regulates TGF-β, to c-myc activating cell proliferation ( ). Thus, CRISPR/Cas9 screens are able to identify novel mechanisms of anti-cancer drug resistance.
For the analysis of negative selection screens, the abundance of all sgRNAs needs to be quantified to identify the sgRNAs that were depleted from the population. As a consequence, gene knock-out efficacy needs to be close to 100% because every remaining non-modified cell or in-frame modification may mask the phenotype. These screens are less robust compared to positive selection screens and thus depend on more extensive statistical analysis, which in turn could be complicated by poor sgRNA-mediated cleavage efficacy. Despite these technical hurdles, CRISPR/Cas9 screens have successfully identified essential genes in mammalian cells ( ; ), as well as synthetic lethal genetic interactions which could potentially serve as targets for cancer therapy ( ; ). For instance, a study focusing on synthetic lethal interactions with oncogenic Ras identified critical regulators of the MAPK pathway in acute myeloid leukemia cell lines ( ).
Moreover, CRISPR/Cas9 screens have proven useful to study intracellular phenotypes by employing reporter- or antibody-labelled quantitative protein measurements ( ; ). This type of screen compares cell populations with high and low signal measurements, and couples genes to an intracellular phenotype which does not necessarily result in altered cell viability. Studying such intracellular phenotypes broadens the understanding of key biological processes, and may identify crucial genetic dependencies of a phenotype of interest.

2.2.

## Haploid insertional mutagenesis screens
Insertional mutagenesis screens are a powerful alternative to CRISPR/Cas9 screens. They provide the possibility of applying principles of classical genetics in mammalian cells to uncover fundamental biological processes in a highly comparative manner. In particular, recessive genetic screens in haploid yeast have substantially contributed to gene discovery and our understanding of development, basic physiology, and various diseases ( ). It was therefore a great achievement of Thijn Brummelkamp and coworkers to establish insertional mutagenesis screens in haploid human cell lines and thereby increase the power of insertional mutagenesis in a mammalian system ( ).
2.2.1.

## Haploid cell lines
Insertional mutagenesis screens crucially depend on haploid (or near-haploid) cell lines, because no second copy of the gene exists which could phenotypically mask the effect of gene inactivation. Thus, genetic manipulation is highly efficient in haploid cells. To date, only few haploid cell lines exist. The KBM7 cell line, derived from a chronic myeloid leukemia patient, is haploid except for chromosome 8 ( ). Its non-hematopoietic derivate HAP1 is haploid for all chromosomes, except of a duplicated 30-megabase fragment of Chromosome 15 fused to Chromosome 19, which was excised to obtain the fully haploid eHAP cell line ( ). With the isolation of haploid human, murine, rat and monkey embryonic stem cells, a broader repertoire of haploid cell lines is currently being established, also by further differentiating these cells into several lineages ( ; ; ; ; ).
Compared to CRISPR/Cas9 screens, the restriction to a few haploid cell lines limits the use of haploid screens in the study of lineage-specific biology. However, this limitation simultaneously provides an opportunity, exemplified by the achievements of yeast genetics where a well-characterized single-model organism unveiled numerous insights into diverse biological processes ( ; ). By introducing genetic alterations into a clearly defined, controlled genetic background, effects of gene inactivation can be studied and compared with precision, facilitating the investigation of complex genetic effects and interactions ( ; ). Subsequently, findings from haploid screens may be validated in a variety of cell lines to address lineage-specific variations.

2.2.2.

## Insertional mutagenesis
In contrast to CRISPR/Cas9 screens which depend on a sgRNA library, mutations are usually achieved by random mutagenesis in haploid screens. The choice of the random mutagenesis technique is commonly determined by the ease of retrieving genetic mutation sites for analysis from a pool of cells, with transposon- or retroviral gene-trapping being the most frequent mutagenesis strategies to date. Mutagenesis performed by gene-trapping is highly efficient and delivers a molecular tag to identify mutations in the genome by integrating an exogenous viral DNA section in the host genome which marks the mutation site ( ). The gene-trap cassette introduces a splice acceptor site, followed by a polyadenylation signal, which prematurely terminates gene splicing and translation and thereby creates mutants resembling knock-outs ( ). Transposon-mediated gene-trap mutagenesis is achieved by co-transfecting a gene-trap vector with a plasmid for transposase expression. The transposase stimulates insertion of the gene-trap in the genome, and by varying transposase expression, the gene-trap insertion frequency can be influenced ( ; ).
In theory, gene-trapping mutation events occur all over the genome and this technique therefore provides a very high coverage. However, the gene-trap integration is not completely random, as preferred viral or transposon integration sites exist ( ; ; ; ). Nevertheless, a genome-wide distribution of integration sites, for example integrations in more than 98% of expressed genes by retroviral gene trapping ( ), is achieved, and improved vectors can reduce integration bias ( ).
Compared to the use of sgRNA libraries which employ a guiding RNA strand defining the target site and directly depend on sgRNA representation as well as cleavage success and error-prone DNA repair, insertional mutagenesis creates individual mutations at a higher frequency and efficiency ( ). The phenotypic effect of a gene is determined indirectly in CRISPR/Cas9 screens, usually by determining the abundance of DNA encoding the sgRNAs. In contrast, sensitive amplification of gene-trap insertion sites allows a direct count of hundreds of independent mutations in a gene, achieving a high resolution of the observed phenotype ( ).
However, similar to the need of a sgRNA disrupting all gene variants simultaneously to abolish gene function, alternative splicing as well as gene-trap integrations near the 3′ end of a gene can also maintain (partial) gene activity ( ).

2.2.3.

## Data analysis
Deep sequencing following PCR amplification retrieves millions of unique gene-trap integration sites which are mapped to the genome, allowing subsequent direct counting of individual knock-outs that each has contributed to the phenotype of interest. The large number of individual mutants permits powerful statistical analyses. This enables an improved distinction between hits and background noise compared to other screening methods ( ). Due to the high efficacy of gene disruption and the absence of second gene copies, haploid cells further improve the signal to noise ratio compared to screens performed in diploid cells, enabling the identification of subtle fitness defects or advantages ( ; ).
To analyze insertional mutagenesis screens, basic statistical tests such as Fisher's exact and/or binomial tests are usually employed. However, for complex research questions, such as the study of a cell line’s essentialome, more complex algorithms are used ( ). Recently, bioinformatics pipelines have been proposed for the analysis of gene-trap insertional mutagenesis screens ( ; ).

2.2.4.

## Applications to study drug response
Initially, haploid insertional mutagenesis screens were predominantly employed to study resistance factors of host cells towards pathogens ( ; ; ; ). Furthermore, haploid screens yielded novel insight into resistance against chemical compounds including chemotherapeutic agents like platinum drugs, topoisomerase II, PARP, and other chemical inhibitors ( ; ; ; ; ). Regarding platinum drugs, it has been unclear which transporters are responsible for reduced drug uptake that may explain clinical drug resistance ( ). Using a haploid screen, we identified volume-regulated anion channels composed of LRRC8A and D as a cellular uptake mechanism of cisplatin and carboplatin ( ), providing a new lead to understand clinical resistance. Similarly, proposed resistance mechanisms against topoisomerase II inhibitors, such as doxorubicin, cannot explain all cases of therapy failure in the clinic ( ). Here, a haploid screen identified novel resistance mechanisms which reduce DNA double strand break formation or stimulate DNA repair ( ). Although gene trap viruses should be inactivating, a gain-of-function mutation cannot be excluded. For example, we found a significant enrichment of integrations that induce the ABCG2 gene expression upon topotecan selection (Guyader, Blomen, Gerhards, Brummelkamp and Rottenberg, unpublished results). Despite the technical differences between haploid and CRISPR/Cas9-positive selection screens, direct comparisons of both approaches showed high concordance ( ; ; ).
The inactivation of genes at high efficiency makes haploid screens very effective for negative selections, as most sense integrations in an intron will lead to reproducible and complete depletion of a gene ( ; ). Since negative selection aims at identifying mutations that are depleted from a population of mutants, which is easily influenced by environmental factors, a robust identification of depleted mutations of the pool of cells can be challenging. A unidirectional design of the gene-trap cassette overcomes this problem and has facilitated the identification of essential genes in human cells as well as genotype-specific gene requirements by using the distribution of sense and antisense orientations as a readout for gene essentiality ( ; ; ). Haploid screens have furthermore been employed to study genotypes which sensitize cells to chemical compounds ( ). For instance, we have recently found that loss of the tumor suppressor FBXW7 sensitize cells to Vinca alkaloids. This finding might aid the choice of microtubule-targeting chemotherapeutic drugs in patients (Gerhards et al., submitted).
Similar to CRISPR/Cas9, reporter- or antibody-based haploid screens have deciphered genetic modifiers of various intracellular phenotypes regardless of their effect on the viability of a cell ( ; ; ; ; ). For instance, a reporter-based haploid screen for transgene silencing demonstrated the potential of this methodology to study epigenetic changes in human cells ( ). Epigenetic mechanisms such as DNA methylation or histone modifications are considered to drive secondary drug resistance by altering the expression of genes involved in drug transport, DNA repair or apoptosis ( ; ). As genetic reporters are not available for all intracellular processes, antibody-based screens in fixed mutagenized cells further expanded the scale of query phenotypes that can be studied ( ). Hence, haploid screens can contribute to our understanding of the epigenetic drivers of drug resistance and potentially identify novel therapeutic strategies.

2.3.

## In vivo screens
Screens in 2D models are affected by assay conditions, the choice of cell lines as well as their growth on plastic in high oxygen. It has been shown that results vary between labs despite similar approaches ( ; ). Furthermore, it has been found that tumors exhibit contrasting drug responses ex vivo and in vivo ( ) and that a tumor’s microenvironment impacts drug response ( ). Additionally, comparisons of patient-derived and control cell lines revealed that the variation rather reflects the genetic background, culture conditions and cell line history than a disease-relevant phenotype ( ; ). Thus, 2D cancer models encounter limitations regarding their clinical relevance and their application to study complex phenotypes such as metastasis formation or a host’s immune response. In vivo screens can overcome these limitations and bridge the gap to clinically more relevant settings. They allow not only assessing tumor cell-intrinsic contributions to drug sensitivity or resistance, but also take a body’s microenvironment and immune response into account.
2.3.1.

## Choice of model
In vivo screens may be conducted by using a large cohort of knock-out animal models ( ). However, this approach is not feasible for all laboratories, as the majority does not have an extensive collection of animal models. With the development of CRISPR/Cas9, powerful and fast alternatives became available. CRISPR/Cas9 can be employed for ex vivo gene editing of cells which are subsequently transplanted into recipient mice or for non-germline manipulation of tumors in vivo. Somatic delivery of Cas9-expressing cells can cause an immune response clearing those cells ( ). Therefore, Cas9-transgenic mice are frequently employed, which only require local or systemic delivery of the sgRNAs, for instance through lentiviruses, into mice ( ; ). Alternatively, lentiviruses encoding both Cas9 and sgRNAs or ex vivo CRISPR/Cas9-modified cells can be injected into immunodeficient or Cas9-tolerant mice for in vivo screening ( ; ). A genome-wide screen, targeting for instance 20,000 genes with 6 sgRNAs per gene, would consist of 120,000 sgRNAs and therefore require millions of transplanted tumor cells. This is often not feasible, but a genome-wide screen is usually not necessary to study the phenotype of interest in vivo. For most in vivo screening approaches, a focused library targeting selected biological processes is sufficient to address the research question.

2.3.2.

## Applications to study drug response
The major benefit of in vivo over in vitro screens is the contribution of the animal organism to the phenotype. A solid tumor in vivo is a multicellular complex that interacts with its surrounding tissue, differing substantially from a clonal cancer cell line in a cell culture dish. The tumor microenvironment and tumor-stromal interactions gained increasing importance as modulators of drug response. For instance, stroma-induced drug resistance has been described in several preclinical models for chemotherapeutic drugs such as resistance to doxorubicin, vincristine or vemurafenib ( ).
Until today, most in vivo screens were performed using RNA interference editing ( ; ; ; ; ; ). In vivo CRISPR/Cas9 screens have been employed to assess the metastatic potential upon gene inactivation ( ). Furthermore, novel immune modulatory factors which could serve as immunotherapeutic targets were identified in a CRISPR/Cas9-edited melanoma screen in vivo ( ). Additional biological processes for in vivo screening approaches include the role of tumor angiogenesis and hypoxia in drug response, and basic research topics such as tumor development and tissue regeneration. Screens for these complex phenotypes are still in the process of being optimized.
Nevertheless, limitations of pooled in vivo screens are encountered due to the complexity of the library, poor efficiency of virus delivery, loss of sgRNA representation and of diversity in the outgrown tumor after transplantation or injection, as well as the complex interactions of tumors with the host body ( ). Furthermore, ethical concerns of performing in vivo screens may rise, as they require large numbers of experimental animals.

2.4.

## Screens using 3D cancer organoids
A promising model to recapitulate in vivo tumor behavior in an ex vivo setting is the use of 3D organoid cultures ( ). These have several advantages over 2D cell lines. Traditional cell lines are usually clonal, immortalized cells, genetically adapted to cell culture conditions and lacking a tumor’s heterogeneity as well as its complex multilayered cell organization. In a solid tumor, a drug may not reach all cells at equal levels due to varying vascularization. This situation is mimicked to some extent in a 3D culture, as drugs do not freely penetrate the viscous biomaterial in which organoids are embedded. In contrast, all cells in a monolayer will receive equal concentrations of an administered drug. Furthermore, the composition and architecture of organoids correspond to the tissue they are derived from. Organoids can usually be expanded easily, cryopreserved and biobanked and efficiently genetically manipulated ( ; ; ).
2.4.1.

## Choice of model
3D organoids have been generated from the eye ( ; ), brain ( ; ), intestine ( ; ; ), kidney ( ; ), liver ( ; ), lung ( ), inner ear ( ) and other organs. Organoids have furthermore been derived from cancer tissues (so-called tumoroids) ( ; ; ; ), or were transformed into cancer organoids by genetic modification ( ; ). 3D cultures allow an organ-like architecture, facilitate interactions with the extracellular matrix and provide rudiments of functionality ( ).
Considering that organoids consist of primary cells, the passage number influences the organoid’s geno- and phenotype. During culturing, some cells of the heterogeneous cell pool will be lost, leading to a larger discrepancy between original tumor and the organoid line. When larger amounts of starting material is available, e.g. from large excised patient or mouse tumors, a higher complexity of the heterogeneous cell pool can be maintained for longer time than with little starting material such as a biopsy. Additionally, organoid culturing medium is frequently supplemented with various factors such as Noggin or R-spondin which further select cells or alter gene expression in the organoid culture. Thus, organoids are less robust and less well-characterized than cell lines, but the heterogeneity resembles more the tumors observed in patients.
Gene editing components to modify organoids can be delivered by adenoviruses, retroviruses or lentiviruses ( ; ; ). The subsequently achieved modifications create a polyclonal pool of cells with mixed genotypes. To efficiently select modified cells, reporter genes can be added to the viruses. However, the introduction of genetic modifications will also cause additional selective pressure so that one should evaluate to what extent the original tumor is still fully represented in the modified organoid culture after some passages.

2.4.2.

## Applications to study drug response
3D organoid cultures are useful to study drug response of patient-derived material in vitro. They can be archived easily and used for high-throughput analyses of drug response linked to their omics profiles ( ). Using matched samples of a PARP-inhibitor-sensitive and –resistant BRCA2-mutated mammary tumor, we have recently shown that more sophisticated functional assays to measure drug response (e.g. replication fork stability) can be performed in tumoroids ( ). How reliable the in vitro drug responses are in predicting the drug response in the patient from whom the tumoroids were derived remains to be seen. When we tested several matched PARP-inhibitor-sensitive and –resistant BRCA1-mutated organoids in vitro, we found examples where the resistant tumors regained drug sensitivity in vitro, despite the stable in vivo resistance of tumors derived from these tumoroids ( ). This illustrates that further optimization of the in vitro conditions is required to mimic the response of real tumors.
The CRISPR/Cas9 system facilitates rapid genome engineering as well as forward screening approaches in 3D organoids ( ). Given the heterogeneous nature of organoids, these screens are more complex, their statistical power is reduced compared to screens in well-defined genetic backgrounds and the variation of size and shape of organoids further affect phenotypic selections. However, the sampling error is low due to the cellular complexity of the drawn test sample from the given pool of cells in the tumoroid and thus 3D screening results are expected to validate in vivo. So far, a CRISPR screen in lung organoids with a miniature focused library discovered genes involved in ciliogenesis and barrier function in the airway epithelium ( ). The high number of cells, required to ensure an appropriate coverage, needs to be taken into consideration when organoid screens will be performed. These numbers of cells are usually only obtained after several passages which might conflict with the ambition of high similarity between the organoids and the original tumor. Additionally, the success of organoid screens strongly depends on the control of organoid size with clear pathophysiological gradients, as seen in a solid tumor, while preventing a too large area of central necrosis. Due to a batch-to-batch variation of the extracellular biomaterial, reproducibility and scalability of experiments is thus far limited. Thus, large-scale screens remain technically challenging in tissue-derived organoids.
However, we found that a major advantage of tumoroids is that they can serve as a rapid intermediate step to introduce genetic modifications, and subsequently transplant the tumors into mice to test drug response in vivo ( ). Using tumoroids from Brca1-mutated mouse mammary tumors we introduced Trp53bp1 mutations by CRISPR/Cas9 and show that the tumors derived from the Trp53bp1-depleted tumoroids are resistant to PARP inhibition. Importantly, we also observed that tumoroids exhibit high clonal heterogeneity in vivo and give rise to tumors that preserve the cellular complexity of the parental organoid population ( ). We therefore conclude that these models are suitable to study the effects of intratumoral heterogeneity in vivo and are useful for in vivo screening approaches to identify mechanisms of drug resistance.
Since tumoroids are more readily cultured from patient tumors than patient-derived 2D cell lines ( ; ; ), they also provide an opportunity to better follow a patient’s disease development. Using genome-wide CRISPR/Cas9 mutagenesis, the essentialome of an individual tumor may be determined to provide information about specific vulnerabilities of this particular tumor. The patient could subsequently receive a treatment accordingly, and if the tumor relapses or stops responding, a new organoid line could be obtained and the essentialome re-analyzed by another functional genome-wide screen. This “sensitive-to-resistant-essentialome”-comparison approach may yield new insights into drug resistance mechanisms, directly received from clinical patients, and provide useful information for new vulnerabilities and treatment options.
In summary, organoid screens are still in the process of optimization and technical hurdles need to be resolved. Nevertheless, they provide a very promising approach to study complex contributions to a phenotype of interest in vitro that resembles treatment responses in vivo. It is very likely that novel factors influencing drug response will be discovered soon in tumoroid models, and they will further broaden our repertoire to study cancer specimens directly derived from patients.

3.

## Conclusions
In contrast to targeted anti-cancer treatment, predictive biomarkers for classical chemotherapy have been much more difficult to identify. This might be explained by the complex heterogeneity between tumors due to secondary mutations, epigenetic alterations or other mechanisms of drug resistance which are still poorly understood ( ). Even in a well-characterized genetically homogeneous tumor system, such as syngeneic transplantable tumors from genetically engineered mouse models, the identification of genes contributing to drug response is limited ( ). Only if a gene is altered in most of the analyzed tumors, gene expression analysis will detect it as a predictive candidate, whereas drug response mechanisms present only in a subset of tumors will be missed. Given the fact that a variety of mechanisms, either single- or multi-genetic in nature, influence drug response, together with various mechanisms of action of classical chemotherapeutics, it is not surprising that we have not been very successful to establish predictive biomarkers for these drugs.
The advances in screening technologies however might provide the necessary starting point to develop novel hypotheses which might eventually translate into clinical predictive biomarkers. Forward genetic screens in mammalian cells have substantially broadened our understanding of cell biology, the mode of action of chemical compounds and anti-cancer drug resistance or hypersensitivity. These approaches offer crucial tools to discover novel tumor vulnerabilities, while at the same time highlighting context-specific dependencies and mechanistic complexities of cancer. A variety of cellular features determine drug sensitivity of a cell, and drug response varies between individual tumors and patients, which represents a major hurdle for clinical oncologists. Frequently, cancer patients do not benefit from a chosen treatment but predominantly experience the side effects, and better predictive biomarkers are urgently needed. Forward genetic screens allow modeling of the complex mutational landscape of human cancer and identifying similarities or differences between drug effects. For instance, studies performed on cellular platinum uptake showed that carboplatin and cisplatin, but not oxaliplatin, are entering cells through LRRC8A/D-containing anion channels ( ). Thus, for patients with low LRRC8A/D expression, cisplatin and carboplatin might not be an effective treatment regimen. Such findings may be clinically useful and, thus, more screens using well-established, classical chemotherapeutic drugs may further contribute to improved precision oncology.
We expect that further technical improvements of existing screening technologies and the comparison of screens for various drugs will aid in the development of novel treatment regimens. The potential use of patient-derived tumoroids for drug response screens can additionally be exploited for personalized medicine. Future treatment concepts will increasingly be based on personalized tumor features and thus knowledge about specific tumor vulnerabilities is essential to move the field forward. Since classical chemotherapeutic agents are widely available, inexpensive and well-characterized in terms of dosage and toxicity, more effort should be made to unravel the full potential of these drugs and assess their benefit in clinical trials for patient subgroups characterized by particular genetic mutations. Furthermore, new drug combinations could be suggested when the impact of a genotype on drug response is better understood.
Given the advantages and limitations of the screening techniques, the chosen approach should be carefully evaluated. Screening output might depend more on experimental design than on the technology itself, as shown by a study comparing CRISPR/Cas9 with optimized RNAi screens concluding that both techniques perform equally well ( ). In general, the most comprehensive picture will be achieved by combining several approaches. Clinical data from patients remain essential to validate the findings and assess the predictive potential of identified gene-drug dependencies. Thus, studies would benefit from more than one approach to answer the same question and their combination into a therapy response map might promote the translation into clinically predictive markers and effective treatments with improved patient life quality and overall survival.

## Conflict of interest
The authors declare no potential conflicts of interest.

## Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Piet Borst, Vincent Blomen (The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands), Sohvi Blatter and Kerstin Hahn (Institute of Animal Pathology, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Bern, Switzerland) for critical feedback on the manuscript. Our research is supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation (P1BEP3_155461 and 310030_156869), the Dutch Cancer Society (2014-6532) and the European Union (ERC CoG-681572).

## References