101genesdevGenes & DevelopmentGenes DevCold Spring Harbor Laboratory PressPMC7528699752869975286993300448510.1101/gad.342089.120A most formidable arsenal: genetic technologies for building a better mouse
ClarkJames F DinsmoreColin J SorianoPhilippe 1Department of Cell, Developmental, and Regenerative Biology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mt. Sinai, New York, New York 10029, USA1These authors contributed equally to this work.
✉Corresponding author: philippe.soriano@mssm.edu
11020203419-2012561256–1286142021© 2020 Clark et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory PressThis article is distributed exclusively by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press for the first six months after the full-issue publication date (see http://genesdev.cshlp.org/site/misc/terms.xhtml). After six months, it is available under a Creative Commons License (Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International), as described at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.In this review, Clark et al. summarize the history of mice in genetic studies and the development of classic approaches to genome modification, and how they have been used and improved in recent years. They also discuss the recent surge of nuclease-mediated techniques and how they are changing the field of mouse genetics.
Keywords: gene targeting, CRISPR, mice, genetics, transgenesis

## Abstract
The mouse is one of the most widely used model organisms for genetic study. The tools available to alter the mouse genome have developed over the preceding decades from forward screens to gene targeting in stem cells to the recent influx of CRISPR approaches. In this review, we first consider the history of mice in genetic study, the development of classic approaches to genome modification, and how such approaches have been used and improved in recent years. We then turn to the recent surge of nuclease-mediated techniques and how they are changing the field of mouse genetics. Finally, we survey common classes of alleles used in mice and discuss how they might be engineered using different methods.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractedno

## The origins of mice as a genetic system
The house mouse, Mus musculus, has been a tool of genetic inquiry for well over a century. A case can be made that the tradition dates back even further to 18th century Japan and China where local mouse and rat fanciers wrote guidebooks on how to raise these animals, including detailed breeding strategies to obtain particular coat patterns ( ; ). The hobby of mouse fancying was exported to England and from there to the United States, where fancier stocks formed the basis of many modern inbred strains ( ). Nevertheless, the first genetic experiment using mice may have been performed in 1887 by August Weismann, who surgically removed the tails of mice, bred them, and found offspring with tails of normal length ( ). This result challenged Lamarckian inheritance and led Weismann to propose the germ theory of inheritance, which stated that hereditary information was transmitted only through germ cells: the sperm and egg. The origin of mice as a model system for genetic analysis, with intrinsic variable and heritable traits worthy of study, dates to 1902 when Lucien Cuénot published the first in a series of papers describing Mendelian inheritance for mouse coat color characteristics ( ). Mendel himself had started down this same road fifty years earlier, only for his bishop to snuff out the nascent breeding program because a monk had no business, frankly, breeding ( ).
Following Cuénot's papers ( ), genetic research using the mouse began in earnest, often through the study of spontaneous mouse mutants. One line of research further explored the complicated genetics of pigmentation and the sometimes-surprising coincident phenotypes. The Dominant white spotting allele W (an allele of the receptor tyrosine kinase Kit) was found to affect not only pigmentation but also hematopoiesis and fertility, for instance. Another line focused on the genetic basis of other variable traits such as histocompatibility, sex determination and X-inactivation, and classic studies of tail length and the T locus ( ). Perhaps the most consequential endeavor, however, was the effort to understand the relationship between genetics and cancer, as this led to the establishment of many of today's inbred mouse strains as well as the founding of mouse genetic research centers such as the Jackson Laboratory in 1929, Oak Ridge in 1943, MRC Harwell in 1947, and the National Institute of Genetics in Japan in 1949 ( ). Alongside research using laboratory inbred strains, study of wild mouse populations led to important insights in immunity, cancer, and adaptation ( ). Modern genomic techniques now couple wild populations’ variations and selective pressures with molecular precision ( ; ). A full accounting of the history of mouse genetic research is beyond the scope of this article, but has been the subject of several excellent books and reviews ( ; ; ; ).
Even with these impressive genetic bona fides, the true potential of mouse genetics lies in the ability of the researcher to modify the mouse genome. This ability, along with the fact that mice are mammals with substantial genetic similarity to humans, has made mice a favorite system for understanding the genetic underpinnings of mammalian development and human disease ( ). Indeed, as of July 28, 2020, there were 64,204 mutant mouse alleles listed in the Mouse Genome Informatics (MGI) database. The tools available to generate these alleles have been steadily expanded from forward genetic screens, to viral and gene trap-mediated approaches, as well as classic homologous recombination-based targeting in mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs) that served as the basis for the myriad knockout, knock-in, knockdown, conditional, and lineage-tracing mouse models that now exist. More recently, nuclease-mediated technologies such as CRISPR/Cas have led to a second explosion of techniques. These not only promise an easier, more efficient means to traditional genetic ends, but are also opening the door to ways of modifying the genome that were previously impractical or impossible with classical techniques.

## Forward genetic screens
Forward genetic screens involve germline mutagenesis and subsequent breeding of male mice to obtain a collection of novel mutations. Offspring in the first generation (termed G1, the result of crossing a mutagenized mouse with a wild-type female) can be immediately screened for dominant mutations giving rise to a phenotype of interest. For recessive mutations, G1 males can be crossed with a wild-type female and then any G2 females are crossed back to their G1 father to generate homozygous offspring in the third generation (G3). After identifying mutant lines with the desired phenotype, the underlying mutation is identified. This was traditionally achieved by time-consuming genetic mapping but can now be resolved through genome sequencing, greatly accelerating the overall process ( ; ). The advantage of genetic screens is that mutations are generated semi-randomly throughout the genome, so screens are unbiased with respect to the underlying mutation and can reveal unexpected genotype–phenotype connections. One reason for this is that such screens can identify many genes important for a given process that have not yet been investigated or linked to that process. A second is that genetic screens induce not only null alleles, but also hypomorphic, hypermorphic, and neomorphic alleles through point mutations, truncations, insertions, deletions, and chromosomal rearrangements, that can affect coding or regulatory sequences. Of note, chemical mutagenesis and other nontargeted genome modification techniques (e.g., transgene, retrovirus, and transposon insertion events, discussed below) are not completely random but exhibit some bias or unique preference in mutation/insertion site ( ; ; ). We therefore refer to these events as semi-random throughout the review. Although the prospect can be daunting, with careful planning screens can be performed by individual laboratories ( ) and often reveal exciting, unforeseen biology ( ). Screens have been used to better understand topics ranging from mouse development ( ; ), to circadian rhythms ( ), congenital heart disease ( ), and the genetic basis of sleep ( ), among many others.
The precursor to mouse genetic screens arose from an interest in cancer and the effects of atomic radiation on mammals. These effects were investigated using mice, principally at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory in Oak Ridge, Tennessee, and the MRC Radiobiological Research Unit in Harwell, England. This research generated numerous mutant mouse strains, but because X-rays induce double-stranded breaks (DSBs) in DNA, the approach often caused large deletions and chromosomal rearrangements that affected multiple genes, making interpretation of the mutant phenotypes difficult ( ). Radiation has been supplanted by chemical mutagenesis with the DNA alkylating agent N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea (ENU), which is more mutagenic than X-rays ( ) and more likely to result in point mutations ( ). Because screening large numbers of mice in the G3 generation is so time- and labor-intensive, there are several modified approaches that allow for recovery of recessive mutations in the G2 generation. Specifically, modifier (enhancer or suppressor) and noncomplementation screens are performed by crossing G1 mutants with an existing mutant strain and assaying for a modified phenotype or failure to complement. This usually identifies new genes that genetically interact with the gene of interest or novel alleles of the same gene, respectively. Deletion screens, in which G1 males are crossed to females carrying a deletion of a chromosomal interval, facilitate rapid identification of mutations in this region. Finally, balancer screens, most famous from the world of fly genetics, can also be performed in mice even though the number of existing balancer chromosomes is limited ( ). These involve crossing mutagenized males to mice carrying a balancer chromosome, which has the following features: one or a series of tandem chromosomal inversions that suppress recombination within the region, a dominant visible trait such as coat color, and often a recessive lethal mutation ( ; ). This combination of factors allows efficient breeding schemes to quickly isolate mutations within the balanced chromosome or region ( ).

## Transgenics, viruses, transposons, and gene trap-mediated transgenesis
Transgenesis is the process of introducing genetic information from one organism into another. The first mouse carrying exogenous DNA was made in 1974 by injecting simian virus 40 (SV40) DNA into the cavity of an E3.5 mouse blastocyst, although the DNA was incorporated variably throughout the animal ( ). A similar study using infection of morula-stage embryos with Moloney leukemia virus subsequently demonstrated that exogenous provirus could integrate into the germline ( ). The technique was refined to show that injection of DNA into the pronucleus of a one-cell embryo resulted in incorporation and expression of DNA from a variety of sources ( ; ; ; ; , ). Transgenesis via pronuclear injection is still popular whenever expression of an exogenous gene is desired ( ; ; ). The technique is reliable, although relatively inefficient and the microinjection process itself has the potential to induce cellular and chromosomal damage ( ). Nevertheless, pups can quickly be screened by PCR to identify transgenics. Due to its semi-random site of integration, the transgene is subject to the effects of local environment (chromatin state, proximity to enhancers, etc.) such that individual founders can exhibit different expression levels and expression patterns, their expression levels can lessen over time due to methylation-induced silencing, and they often have multiple copies of the transgene integrated in tandem ( ; ). These effects can be partially suppressed through the inclusion of insulator elements on both ends of the inserted sequence ( ), though position effects are still sometimes observed ( ). Furthermore, transgenes can disrupt endogenous genes by insertional mutagenesis so transgenics should be analyzed for unexpected phenotypes. Transgenics are most safely maintained as heterozygotes because homozygotes can be complicated to genotype and are more likely to display undesired phenotypes ( ). However, transgenics can be bred to homozygosity to check whether an essential gene was disrupted or whether the transgene has unexpected dosage-dependent toxicity ( ; ). Multiple individuals should always be screened for expression patterns or levels and founders selected carefully. The insertion site should be mapped whenever possible. Once laborious, this is now facilitated through various PCR techniques or next-generation sequencing. Alternatively, transgenesis can be targeted without resorting to homologous recombination-based techniques by recombinase-mediated insertion, provided the recognition site has been knocked in to the genome ( ).
Several techniques that also rely on the random insertion of genetic material were developed in the intervening decades to enable lineage tracing, gene knockout, and gene and enhancer discovery that we only briefly mention here, as they have largely been superseded by other methods. Infection of preimplantation or postimplantation embryos with retroviruses leads to semi-random integration of the viral genome and occasional disruption of mouse genes, which can then be identified using viral sequences as a landmark ( ; ). Similarly, mESCs can be infected with a retrovirus, the cells injected into blastocyst stage embryos, and the mutant lines recovered by breeding the chimeric offspring ( ).
Transposons are genetic elements that insert semi-randomly into the genome upon expression of a transposase enzyme ( ). Terminal inverted repeat sequences located at each end of a transposon are bound by the transposase, which mobilizes the element and mediates its insertion at a new locus. Several systems have been used in mice, each with their own efficiencies and insertion biases, but piggyBac and Sleeping Beauty are the most widely used. These systems have been used to drive insertional mutagenesis in both mESCs ( ) and mice ( ; ; ). Transposon studies carried out in an embryo or adult mouse are basically a variation of a forward genetic screen. The transposon is typically activated in a subset of cells, mice with a desired phenotype are identified (often a tumor or developmental malformation), and the transposon insertion site is mapped.
Gene trapping has been used widely to generate mutant alleles, rapidly clone them, and assess their expression patterns ( ; ; ; ). Typically, a trapping vector is used that contains a splice acceptor attached to a promoterless reporter gene such as lacZ or βgeo. mESCs are transfected with the vector or infected with a retrovirus transducing a gene trap and selected for expression of the reporter gene, as insertion within an intron of an expressed gene will also result in marker expression. The trapped gene can be cloned using 5′ or 3′ RACE and sequences from the reporter gene ( ). One caveat of the approach is that alternative splicing can splice around the trap in some gene trap designs if the splice acceptor is not strong enough, resulting in a hypomorphic allele ( ). A second is that correctly trapped genes will not be identified if the gene is not expressed in mESCs. Nonexpressed genes can be successfully trapped, however, by using polyadenylation trap vectors. These use a separate promoter to drive expression of the resistance marker, which itself contains a splice donor but no poly(A) sequence, relying instead on the 3′ UTR of the trapped gene ( ; ; ). Multiple large-scale trapping efforts have taken place, sometimes targeting specific classes of genes, many using sophisticated vectors that allow further modification or conditional mutagenesis of the trapped locus ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ). A significant number of genes have also been trapped through the targeted insertion of promoterless trap vectors using homologous recombination rather than random insertion ( ). Numerous trapped lines are available that can be used to generate mutant mice ( ).
 

## Embryonic stem cells and homologous recombination
Experiments performed in the 1970s demonstrated that tumor-derived embryonal carcinoma cells injected into mouse blastocysts could generate chimeric mice but never successfully colonized the germline ( ; ; ). In 1981, and independently isolated embryo-derived mESCs and demonstrated that in chimeras these cells could contribute much more extensively to multiple organs. Several years later it was shown that mESCs were able to colonize the germline ( ), even when carrying a transgene ( ; ). In 1987, building on work in cancer cells and fibroblasts, homologous recombination (HR) between exogenous and chromosomal DNA was demonstrated in mESCs ( ; ; , ; ; ; ). By introducing exogenous DNA with a desired genetic alteration between two arms of homology to a region of interest, it became possible to make precise genetic modifications. Because the natural ratio of HR to random insertion is generally low, typically around one to several thousand ( ), the first alterations were to genes where correctly targeted cells could be directly selected for, for example, mutation of the gene Hprt, which allowed growth in selective media ( ; ; ; ). HR was soon extended to nonselectable loci, by screening large numbers of clones by PCR ( ; ), and demonstrated in nonexpressed genes ( ). The process was made more efficient with the introduction of positive-negative selection that selects both for cells that integrate donor DNA into the genome and simultaneously against cells that integrate the DNA randomly ( ). This constellation of breakthroughs enabled scientists to manipulate the mouse genome with precision and relative ease. Almost any genetic change one could imagine could now be introduced and studied in a living mammal.
In ES cell gene targeting strategies, the targeting constructs are typically defined by two homology arms (5′ and 3′) that are several kilobases in length. These flank a selectable marker such as neoR and any mutations or genetic sequence to be inserted at the intended locus. The positive selection marker can be flanked by loxP or FRT sites to enable its later removal using a site-specific recombinase (SSR) (see “Conditional Mutations” below). This is oftentimes desirable as its presence can interfere with local gene expression ( ; ) or can affect gene expression from the locus ( ). Outside the homology arms is a negative-selection marker, most commonly herpes simplex virus-1 thymidine kinase (HSV-TK) or diphtheria toxin fragment A (DTA), which selects against random insertion ( ; ). Targeting efficiencies for positive–negative HR can range from <1% of clones correctly targeted to near 80% for permissive loci using well-optimized vectors. The ratio of HR to random insertion depends on how the DNA is introduced to cells, electroporation yielding the best ratio for the effort ( ). The efficiency of targeting can be improved by increasing the length of the homology arms ( ; ). Of particular importance, homology arms constructed from the same strain as the mESC line that will be targeted greatly increase the targeting rate ( ). Most early targeting was performed in mESCs derived from the agouti-pigmented 129 mouse strain, as these cells had a high rate of germline transmission ( ; ). Once the targeted mESC clone is verified, the cells can either be injected into the cavity of embryonic day E3.5 blastocyst stage embryos or aggregated with E2.5 morula stage embryos ( ). Because not all chimeras have mESC contribution to the germline, using agouti 129 mESCs and nonagouti host embryos, chimeras with the highest degree of overall mESC contribution can easily be chosen based on coat color. Alternatively, complete germline transmission can be consistently achieved by injecting mESCs into a mutant mouse strain that cannot form male germ cells, a technique that is offered commercially ( ). If the final mouse needs to be a different strain, then at least 10 generations of time-consuming and costly backcrossing are required to be considered congenic, though this can be accelerated by speed congenics ( ; ). Even after backcrossing, genes near the targeted locus are more likely to be derived from the mESC line, introducing a variable that could complicate subtle phenotypes such as behavior ( ). Indeed, the strain for an experiment should be carefully considered as different backgrounds can show variable phenotypes from an otherwise identical underlying mutation ( ). By using newer culture conditions there are now mESC lines from other inbred strains that show high degrees of germline competency, such as C57BL/6N-derived JM8 or VGB6 cells used in the Knockout Mouse Project (KOMP) ( ; ). Additionally, there are protocols for deriving germline-competent mESCs from many strains ( ) and numerous lines are commercially available. Therefore, when possible, researchers should build their targeting constructs and perform the targeting itself in a mESC line derived from the same strain they use in their mouse colony. Alternative sources of germline-competent pluripotent cells include embryonic germ cells and induced pluripotent stem cells, though these are rarely used for generating novel mouse models ( ; ; ; ).
Alternative techniques to accelerate targeting or boost its efficiency have also been explored. The possibility of HR directly in zygotes was tested, but resulted in a single case of successful targeting among 500 embryos injected, so the technique was considered infeasible ( ). Knockdown of Blm, a known suppressor of HR, improved targeting by around threefold at multiple loci ( ; ). Most portentously, inducing a DSB at the edit site, here by using a rare cutting endonuclease, enhanced HR efficiency as much as 5000-fold ( ; ). However, until recently, generating such a specific DSB was so laborious as to be impractical.

## Programmable nucleases
In 1996, zinc finger nucleases (ZFNs) were introduced, representing a new customizable method for the induction of DSBs at a specific site in the genome ( ). ZFNs are engineered proteins consisting of multiple ZF motifs and the FokI nuclease domain. The FokI domain induces DSBs in DNA when bound as a dimer, requiring two ZFNs to bind in reverse orientation, one on each strand of DNA ( ; ). Typically, each ZF binds a 3-nt recognition sequence; with concatenated domains, a recognition sequence of nine or more nucleotides can be engineered. However, designing ZFNs in a purely modular fashion is difficult, as the recognition sequence of individual fingers may be altered by the adjacent fingers ( ).
Transcription activator-like effector nucleases (TALENs) were the next evolution in targetable nucleases ( ). Like ZFNs, TALENs use the FokI nuclease domain to facilitate the induction of DSBs. However, rather than relying on ZFs, TALE DNA-binding domains are used to dictate sequence specificity. Each TALE domain recognizes a single nucleotide based on the repeat variable di-residue (RVD), a pair of amino acids that dictate nucleotide interaction ( ; ); multiple domains can be strung together to produce a nuclease with a unique binding sequence. TALENs provided the potential to target any sequence of nucleotides within a genome.
While both ZFNs and TALENs provided a valuable resource for genetic manipulation and were successfully used in embryos to make mutant mice ( ; ), new nucleases need to be constructed for each target. Additionally, if the target does not contain inverted binding sites for each copy of the nuclease, two different nucleases would need to be produced to allow for dimerization of FokI. In the process of testing binding efficiency and specificity, numerous protein constructs would need to be cloned and produced for each locus. Over the years, various tools and databases have been developed to offer improved prediction and design of both ZFNs and TALENs ( ; ; ; ; ). However, because of this complicated workflow, they were quickly overshadowed by the advent of an RNA-guided endonuclease.

## CRISPR/Cas9 editing
The history of CRISPR (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats) began with the observation of a repeated DNA sequence in E. coli ( ). The function of these repeated sequences was subsequently identified in adaptive immunity ( ; ; ). The typical locus of a CRISPR system ( A) consists of a spaced repeat region accompanied by a protein-coding region. The repeat region acts as a library of previous infections, with unique spacers between each repeat corresponding to previously encountered invading DNA. Each spacer and repeat represent a CRISPR RNA (crRNA). The adjacent protein-coding region encodes multiple CRISPR-associated (Cas) proteins that are involved in the acquisition, processing, and utilization of crRNAs. Mature crRNAs function to guide the Cas endonuclease to target DNA ( B). The cleavage target for a given Cas complex is specified by two elements: a recognition sequence (protospacer) encoded in the crRNA that must occur in the target DNA next to a protospacer adjacent motif (PAM) whose identity is specific to individual Cas complexes ( C). Once the Cas complex is bound to a target, endonuclease domains induce DSBs in the DNA (for review, see ).
 Cas9, the endonuclease of the class 2 type II CRISPR system ( ), was the first to be explored for gene editing as it only required a single protein ( ; ; ). Type II systems require an additional nonprotein-coding transactivating CRISPR RNA (tracrRNA) that is necessary for the recruitment and activation of Cas9 ( ). The crRNA:tracrRNA complex can be replaced with a single guide RNA (sgRNA or gRNA) that contains both sequences and a short linker to maintain proper conformation ( B). Harnessing this technology, the first mouse models were created, paving the way for the use of CRISPR/Cas9 in mice ( ; ). The efficiency of CRISPR/Cas editing promised to speed up the creation of in vivo mouse models by bypassing mESCs to directly edit zygotes.
Early experiments used Streptococcus pyogenes Cas9 (SpCas9), which recognizes an NGG PAM site. While theoretically, NGG, or its complement, NCC, should occur once every 8 bp in a random sequence, the specificity of the protospacer and the requirement of the PAM to occur as close to the editing site as possible left targets of interest without efficient gRNAs. Subsequently, groups began using directed evolution to alter the PAM specificity of Cas9. Additionally, SpCas9 orthologs, such as the Staphylococcus aureus SaCas9, proved a valuable resource as they recognize different PAM sequences ( C; , ). Cas12a, previously known as Cpf1, is an additional class 2 single protein CRISPR/Cas system that recognizes a T-rich PAM sequence ( E), supplying new editing possibilities for AT-rich regions of the genome ( ). Additionally, Cas12a is a type V system and does not require the use of a tracrRNA ( ). Currently, a plethora of Cas9 and Cas12a variants provide flexibility in PAM and gRNA selection ( ; ; ; ; ).
 Additional mutations have been made in Cas9 to alter the functionality of the enzyme. Mammalian codon optimization was used to improve expression and nuclear localization sequences were added to facilitate proper localization ( ; ). Early alterations also targeted the nuclease domains. Cas9 contains two nuclease domains: RuvC cleaves the targeted strand, while HNH cleaves the nontargeted strand ( D). A D10A substitution inactivates the RuvC domain, while an H840A substitution inactivates the HNH domain ( ). Inactivating one domain results in a DNA nickase (Cas9n) while inactivating both results in catalytically dead Cas9 (Cas9d). The modified activity has not only aided the development of multiple genome engineering strategies, as discussed below, but also opened the door for various nonediting roles, such as transcriptional regulation and chromosomal mapping ( ; ), the discussion of which is beyond the scope of this review.
CRISPR/Cas can be used to create two general types of mutations. The first is the formation of small insertions or deletions (indels) through the repair of DSBs via nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ) (for review, see ). Indels typically result in frameshift mutations, which often lead to an early stop codon and subsequent nonsense-mediated decay (NMD) of mRNA transcripts. To facilitate large deletions, two distinct gRNAs are used to induce DSBs that flank the region of interest, effectively deleting the internal sequence ( ; ; ; ).
The second type of mutation is the introduction of specific edits using donor DNA via homology-directed repair (HDR). HDR is much less efficient than NHEJ, leading to a lower success rate. Various groups have worked along multiple lines to improve the efficiency of CRISPR/Cas-induced HDR. Early experiments typically used plasmid dsDNA as a donor, similar in design as used for HR, with modest efficiency ( ; ). Single-stranded oligodeoxynucleotide (ssODN) donors were also used alongside Cas9 to introduce short tags and loxP sites, albeit with variable efficiencies ( ; ). With both strategies, NHEJ was still the predominant outcome. These limitations spurred researchers to consider alternative approaches and attempt to quantify the numerous parameters that produce high-efficiency donors. Two promising systems have been developed in recent years, Easi-CRISPR and Tild-CRISPR ( ; ; ). Efficient additions with ssDNA inserts CRISPR (Easi-CRISPR) ( ) uses long ssDNA (lssDNA) with short homology arms ranging from ∼50 to 100 bp in length flanking the sequence to be inserted. Easi-CRISPR has been used to create floxed alleles and knock-in cassettes up to ∼1.5 kb, with efficiency ranging from 8.5% to 100% and 25% to 67%, respectively ( ). While the results of this study are promising, using lssDNA limits the length of insertion to ∼1–1.5 kb due to errors in production. Using dsDNA can introduce larger segments of exogenous DNA into the targeted locus. Targeted integration with linearized dsDNA CRISPR (Tild-CRISPR) ( ) uses linear dsDNA with 800 bp of homology flanking the desired sequence edit, with no other DNA outside the homology arms. One group successfully inserted cassettes ranging from 0.6 to 6 kb via injection into mouse embryos, with efficiencies ranging from 6.9% to 54.4% in pups across six genomic loci ( ). Alternatively, homology-independent targeted integration (HITI) and related techniques have been used to insert various protein tags onto genes of interest. HITI uses a gRNA target sequence in both the gene of interest and the plasmid containing the insertion. The resulting DSBs are then repaired via NHEJ rather than HDR. Unlike HDR-based Cas9 editing, HITI provides an avenue for editing nonmitotic cells and tissues ( ; ; ).
Another method for improving efficiency has been to actively recruit donor DNA to the targeted locus. One option is to use a modified Cas9 containing a monomeric streptavidin domain and biotinylated donor DNA. The strong affinity of streptavidin-biotin recruits the donor DNA to the site of the DSB. Using this strategy, flanking loxP sites were successfully inserted at a rate of 15%–22%, when screened in pups ( ). A second group inserted larger fluorescent tags, reporting high rates of success, with one locus exhibiting correct tagging in three out of three founder males ( ). Alternatively, described the use of Cas9 fused to a porcine circovirus 2 rep (PCV) domain. This PCV domain allows for the covalent linkage of ssDNA to the Cas9 protein, which resulted in increased rates of HDR when attempting to insert fluorescent tags ( ). However, the investigators only examined the use of this strategy in human cell lines. As such, the translation of this success into mice is unknown, but promising. Overall, recruiting donor DNA to the targeted locus appears to have a significant effect on the success of HDR.
When using CRISPR/Cas there are potential pitfalls to consider. Early emphasis was placed on determining the specificity of Cas9, in an effort to examine the scope of off-target mutations. Wild-type Cas9 can tolerate nucleotide mismatches in the gRNA, especially in the 5′ end. Reducing the length of the protospacer sequence from 20 to 17 nt or 18 nt may impart a positive effect on specificity while maintaining on-target activity by increasing the thermodynamic impact of each nucleotide ( ; ). Directed mutagenesis has produced multiple high-fidelity enzymes that boast on-target activity comparable with wild type with significantly reduced levels of off-target mutations ( ; ; ; ). Multiple webtools exist to aid in the design of gRNAs and prediction of off-target binding, incorporating various modified Cas9 enzymes and thermodynamic models of gRNA binding ( ). Efficacy of gRNA designs can be validated in vitro via nuclease-based mismatch cleavage assays, such as Surveyor or T7E1 ( ; ). Another strategy to reduce off-target mutations is through the use of Cas9n and two gRNAs. One gRNA targeted to each strand of DNA in conjunction with Cas9n will create two staggered nicks in the DNA, creating a DSB. This technique reduces off-target effects by requiring the annealing of two separate gRNAs in close proximity ( ). Off-target screening should always be performed to characterize the extent of additional genome modifications in each individual experiment. However, when generating mice, off-target mutations can be removed via outcrossing, unless tightly linked.
The majority of analysis has focused on off-target mutations; however, recent studies have reported various on-target rearrangements when using CRISPR/Cas9. One study examined the variability in alleles generated using a single cut site, either in an exon or intron, and found evidence of various forms of genomic damage at three different loci. Most alleles resulting from a cut in an exon exhibited indels <50 bp; however, there were instances of deletions up to 6 kb in length. Various alleles recovered from either exon or intron targeted gRNAs also resulted in large insertions up to 2.5 kb, or displayed evidence of translocation or inversion ( ). A second group performed analysis on 109 different loci using Cas9n with pairs of gRNAs to reduce off-target effects. Southern blot analysis revealed possible genomic damage at 40% of all loci examined, accounting for roughly 8% of all clones ( ). Of note, both studies were performed in mESCs; when creating in vivo models, extensive DNA damage may partially account for the low recovery of CRISPR/Cas9 engineered live pups. However, both studies emphasize the need for proper screening of mutations at both off-target and on-target loci, as the full extent of genomic damage may not be readily apparent via short-range PCR and sequencing.

## Base editors
In 2016, the Liu laboratory ( ) published a paper describing a Cas9 fusion protein that could alter a nucleotide without a DSB, referred to as a base editor (BE) ( A). The first BEs consisted of Cas9n fused to a cytidine deaminase domain (APOBEC1) and a uracil DNA glycosylase inhibitor (UGI). APOBEC1 converts cytidine to uracil without requiring a break in the dsDNA backbone. The UGI represses base excision of the uracil while the Cas9n nicks the nonedited strand, resulting in more favorable repair of the nicked strand and thus effecting a C-to-T transition mutation (Fig. B). The following year, the same group published a new variant, Cas9n fused to an adenine deaminase domain (TadA) able to convert adenine into inosine, which would effectively be repaired as guanine ( ). Multiple groups have worked on improving the efficiency and specificity of both cytidine base editors (CBEs) and adenine base editors (ABEs) ( ; ). BEs function as a genetic pickaxe, able to alter a single nucleotide with relative precision and accuracy, and offer a wide variety of uses: correcting or mimicking disease-causing SNPs, altering enzyme function via precise amino acid changes, inducing an early stop codon, altering a binding motif, or even inducing or altering alternative splicing behavior, as was recently reported using a CBE system ( ).
 The deaminase enzymes catalyze ssDNA. When the BE binds to its target, the gRNA forms a heteroduplex with the complementary DNA strand, leaving the noncomplementary strand exposed as ssDNA ( C). The targetable nucleotides therefore fall within the protospacer sequence (N1 … N20) prior to the PAM site (N21N22N23). Particular BEs have varying targeting windows ( D); for instance, the recent CBEmax is optimal at nucleotides N4 through N8, while ABEmax is optimal at N4 through N7 ( ). Altering the Cas9 enzyme also affects the targeting window; saBE3 has an expanded window of editing between N2 and N15 ( ). Additionally, the use of novel circularly permutated variants of spCas9 can adjust the targeting window ( ). This allows for an increase in the editing window of CBEmax (CP-CBEmax) and ABEmax (CP-ABEmax) to N4 through N11 and N4 through N12, respectively ( ). Careful selection of a BE system can produce an efficient window for the desired mutation.
While base editing certainly has advantages over traditional CRISPR/Cas systems, it is not without its caveats. Currently, only four of 12 possible base edits are achievable (C to T, G to A, A to G, and T to C), thus allowing for only 66 amino acid substitutions out of a possible 420. Selecting an optimal gRNA is more restricted when using base editing. First, as discussed above, the target nucleotide must fall within the window of editing dictated by the BE. Second, the deaminases are not selective and will potentially edit all targets within the window. Early in vitro data suggest that the enzyme works sequentially, moving from upstream nucleotides to downstream ones ( ). This can be either a detriment or a strength, depending on the desired edit. Additionally, base editing can result in off-target mutations similarly to traditional CRISPR/Cas systems. Care must be taken to screen predicted off-target sites based on gRNA mismatches and the respective editing windows for potential mutations. However, the rate of indel formation is lower than traditional Cas9 via the use of Cas9n.
Many disease-causing alleles can be traced to deleterious point mutations and the ability to produce and study mammalian models of those mutations is quite valuable. Base editing is seen as a powerful toolbox to create disease models accurately and efficiently. Multiple BEs have been successfully used to create mouse models ( ; ; ). However, reports have begun to shed light on the promiscuity of CBE systems in mouse embryos. A recent study used whole genome sequencing to examine the frequency of off-target mutations. The investigators injected sibling embryos at the one-cell stage with either ABE or CBE, both using the same gRNA, and compared de novo SNPs and indels with noninjected sibling embryos. A twofold increase in novel SNPs was observed using CBE, while ABE had levels comparable with those of controls. Surprisingly, only 2% of the SNPs correlated with predicted off-target sites, indicating that screening off-targets based on the gRNA sequence is not sufficient to adequately determine the degree of unintended mutations. The number of indels was comparable between the three groups, indicating that the cytosine deaminase is the likely culprit and not the Cas9n ( ). Further optimization and analysis of CBE systems is necessary depending on the experiment.

## Prime editor
To overcome the editing limitations of BEs, the Liu group ( ) introduced a system, termed a prime editor (PE) ( E). PEs consist of Cas9n fused to a Mo-MLV reverse transcriptase (RT) domain alongside a multifunction prime editing gRNA (pegRNA). The pegRNA consists of a protospacer, a modified scaffold, and an extended 3′ sequence containing a template and complementary binding sequence, known as the primer binding sequence (PBS). Cas9n nicks the PAM-adjacent DNA strand, the free DNA strand hybridizes with the PBS of the pegRNA, the RT domain reverse transcribes the template into the DNA strand, and finally the DNA is repaired. In PE3, a second gRNA nicks the nonedited strand to favor repair using the newly edited DNA ( F).
Like BEs, PE benefits from the ability to avoid DSBs. Indel formation is much lower than that of normal Cas9 HDR, and is comparable with BE. The second strength of prime editing lies in its specificity. To properly introduce the desired mutation, the target DNA must contain both a compatible protospacer region and complementarity to the PBS. This stringency results in significantly lower off-target mutations, with the investigators reporting <1% at predicted sites. The pegRNA also imparts PE's main restriction: The length of the template has an upper limit. The PE system is suited to small-scale edits, with successful insertions up to 44 bp and deletions up to 80 bp ( ).
PE was recently used in mice, by injecting mRNA encoding the PE3 system into one-cell embryos ( ). One locus yielded correct editing in 10%–27% of live pups; however, no successful editing was observed at a second locus. Additionally, indel frequency was low (<0.3%), while targeted deep sequencing and whole-genome sequencing found no off-target editing. The major problem noted by the investigators was the fidelity of the edit in embryos, as unintended conversions at the targeted base were observed. The investigators concluded that prime editing shows promise as a highly specific mechanism for gene editing in mice, however the accuracy of the editing may need improvement alongside substantial screening of pegRNAs ( ).

## In vivo delivery of CRISPR/Cas systems
Successful editing requires careful consideration on the delivery of CRISPR/Cas machinery. The Cas enzyme and gRNA are delivered in one of three forms: plasmid DNA, RNA, or in complex as ribonucleoproteins (RNPs). A single plasmid containing Cas and gRNA sequences can be used ( ; ), but may result in several potential drawbacks. The delay in editing is on the order of several hours, as the enzyme needs to be transcribed and translated. The window of editing can also be quite long, as the plasmid persists, resulting in prolonged expression and greater off-target risk. Additionally, the plasmid may randomly integrate into the genome. Delivering the components as RNA is less risky as it reduces the potential of prolonged expression or genomic integration and editing proceeds sooner once the mRNA is translated. A drawback is that the gRNA is exposed to native RNA degradation machinery, which could reduce efficiency. Chemically modified gRNAs can be acquired commercially to improve stability. The method considered to support the highest efficiency, while reducing off-target effects, is the delivery of Cas nuclease and gRNA as an RNP complex ( ; ; ; ). The complexes consist of a single Cas9 nuclease and a single gRNA molecule and are precomplexed in vitro before delivery, typically using 1:1.1 molar ratio of Cas9:gRNA ( ). Editing begins upon nuclear localization, the gRNA is protected from degradation by the Cas nuclease, and the limited supply of RNP reduces the window of editing, resulting in fewer off-target mutations. However, while many Cas variants are commercially available as protein, the majority of engineered Cas9 and Cas12a enzymes are only available as plasmids, adding the necessary steps of protein production, purification, and activity verification.
Once the CRISPR/Cas payload is determined, the system must be efficiently delivered. The means of delivery will differ depending on the goal of the experiment; however, two main strategies are commonly used when attempting to create an in vivo model. The first is electroporation, an efficient method of transferring DNA into a large quantity of cells. Similar to gene targeting, mESCs can be electroporated to deliver the CRISPR/Cas reagents. Individual colonies of mESCs can be screened for proper editing before being injected into blastocysts. Alternatively, electroporation can be used to transfer CRISPR/Cas reagents directly into zygotes. The zygote electroporation of nuclease (ZEN) technique can deliver Cas9 RNP and ssDNA via a high-throughput workflow, yielding knock-in rates of correct mutations in over 40% of living pups ( ; ). A similar protocol, CRISPR RNP electroporation of zygotes (CRISPR-EZ), also uses RNP and ssDNA, reporting successful HDR in 42% of live pups ( ). Alternatively, the improved genome-editing via oviductal nucleic acids delivery (i-GONAD) technique uses direct electroporation of the oviduct in pregnant females to induce CRISPR/Cas editing without ex vivo manipulation of zygotes ( ; ; ; ). These protocols highlight the strength of electroporation: high-throughput processing of embryos without requiring as much technical expertise as direct injection. Of note, both ZEN and CRISPR-EZ use ssDNA; larger mutations requiring a dsDNA donor may not be feasible.
The second delivery strategy is direct physical injection into embryos ( ; ; ; ). Injection requires technical expertise but can achieve some of the highest rates of successful CRISPR/Cas9 editing. CRISPR/Cas reagents can be injected either into the cytosol or the nucleus. Pronuclear injection can yield the highest efficiency as the reagents are physically delivered directly to the site of editing. This efficiency is potentiated when used in conjunction with RNPs as editing can begin within minutes. Cytosolic injection can still achieve high rates of successful HDR without the need for Nomarski optics. However, the most opportune time for injection, yielding the greatest efficiencies, is debated.
Timing of delivery is indeed important, as homologous recombination occurs predominantly in the late S and G2 phases. Chemical synchronization of the cell cycle was examined in HEK293T cells and indicated that increased HDR efficiency could be achieved via synchronization up to roughly 33% when nucleofecting RNP at the G2 stage ( ). While chemical synchronization can be used for cell culture, these techniques cannot be used in embryos, although embryos may be more synchronized if produced by in vitro fertilization. Microinjection during the two-cell stage could increase efficiency, as the G2 phase is prolonged (∼12 h) and coincides with zygotic genome activation, providing a more open chromatin configuration. Editing efficiency up to 35% was observed for insertion of a fluorescent tag when injecting at the two-cell stage compared with 6.5% in zygotes ( ). Conversely, a recent paper compared pronuclear injection at various time points during both the one-cell and two-cell zygote stages and reported the most successful knock-in efficiencies at pronuclear stages 3 and 4 of the one-cell embryo, corresponding to S phase when the paternal and maternal DNA are replicating, prior to the fusion of the pronuclei. Additionally, injecting into a single pronucleus can only result in a heterozygote, while injecting into both pronuclei can result in a homozygote ( ). This can be particularly useful when attempting to create alleles that may be nonfunctional in essential genes, as homozygous zygotes would not survive development.
Alternatively, lipid- and viral-mediated transfection have both been used for CRISPR/Cas editing. Lipid-mediated transfection is predominantly used in cell culture ( ), and can effectively transport DNA, RNA, or RNP across the cell membrane ( ). Once optimized, transfection is an efficient method for introducing CRISPR/Cas editing in cell culture and can be used to assess the efficacy of gRNAs prior to embryo editing. Conversely, viral-mediated transfection is mainly used for editing in somatic tissues ( ; ), although it has been used to edit embryos for certain applications ( ; ). Adeno-associated viruses (AAVs) are commonly used to deliver DNA encoding the Cas nuclease and gRNA; however, smaller Cas9 homologs are better suited due to space limitation within the viral envelope ( ).

## HR, CRISPR, and generating specific alleles
Traditional homologous recombination and newer CRISPR-centric techniques are both capable of generating most common modified mouse alleles, so the questions naturally arise: Which is better and should this be done in mESCs or zygotes? We refrain from providing an outright recommendation here, as the desired allele, available laboratory expertise and reagents, and nature of available transgenic facilities will yield many different answers. However, we first evaluate tradeoffs between the approaches, before briefly reviewing common classes of transgenic mouse alleles and relevant points for making them by HR or CRISPR.
A recent study ( ) compared traditional HR and CRISPR/Cas9 in mESCs across 128 loci in the mouse genome. The investigators defined two measures to assess targeting: discovery index, describing the ability to produce mutant clones, and validation index, describing the number of correct mutant clones. They found that at every locus tested, CRISPR/Cas had a significantly higher discovery index, albeit a lower validation index compared with traditional HR. HR yielded correct bands in 99.5% of clones, while CRISPR/Cas yielded 92.4%. However, the investigators note that CRISPR/Cas showed higher efficiency when inserting sequences >8 kb.
When using traditional gene targeting, each mESC clone contains a single recombination event on one of two homologous chromosomes that is validated prior to blastocyst injection. On the other hand, CRISPR/Cas has the potential to create two distinct mutant alleles, one on each homologous chromosome, in a single cell or zygote. This is an especially relevant concern for knockout alleles, as each NHEJ event will be uniquely repaired. Additionally, CRISPR/Cas reagents injected into a zygote can continue to edit for as long as they persist, resulting in more than two different mutant alleles if editing occurs after the one-cell stage ( ).
However, despite the comforting known quantity aspect of traditional HR, CRISPR has two enormous advantages over its tried and true forebear. First, the ability to perform in embryo editing allows researchers to bypass mESCs altogether, yielding significant time and cost savings ( ). Second, the increase in editing efficiency means repair sequences do not need to contain a positive selection marker and genome edits can be made to produce a “clean” allele without leaving any exogenous sequence behind ( ). One caveat is that the relatively lower efficiency of obtaining large insertions by CRISPR may still limit one or both of these advantages for the time being.
 

## Null alleles
One of the most common goals in mouse genetics is to interrogate gene function by generating a complete loss-of-function, or null allele. Indeed, the KOMP was established to generate a null mutant for every mouse gene ( ). Null alleles can be generated by removal of one or several exons, or creation of short indel mutations that cause a frameshift in the resulting transcript leading to NMD. Such efforts are typically focused at the 5′ end of genes to increase the chances of NMD and reduce the chance of making a mutation that results in a truncated protein that retains some function. Prospective null alleles should be verified by RNA and/or protein expression analysis to confirm there is no residual gene product and the allele is therefore a true null. An alternative approach is to delete all (or most) exons of a gene and thereby prevent any expression whatsoever. While this method assuredly creates a null allele, the lost DNA may include regulatory regions that affect other genes or encode microRNAs. A recent report described a mechanism of genetic compensation, whereby degraded mRNA transcripts lead to the up-regulation of related genes, blunting the impact of the mutation ( ). Conversely, alleles that transcribe no mRNA at all do not exhibit this phenomenon and have comparatively stronger phenotypes. The extent of this effect across existing mouse strains is not currently known, but will be worth accounting for when designing future knockout mice, particularly if the gene has closely related paralogs. According to MGI, 14,981 genes have mutant mouse alleles and a further 6937 genes are mutated in mESC lines, so assessing existing models is an important first step in any new mouse genetic research project. However, depending on the nature of the allele and the genetic background of the strain it was generated in, researchers may still prefer generating their own knockout, even if one already exists.
For traditional HR gene targeting to induce a frameshift through exon deletion, a repair construct would be used to replace the targeted exon with a selection cassette flanked by SSR sites ( ). When using CRISPR/Cas, two strategies to induce a frameshift are available. The first involves using a single gRNA to induce a DSB within an exon (or two gRNAs with Cas9n), with the goal of making an indel that causes an early stop codon. The sequence of the exon should be examined for potential stops induced by frameshifts downstream from the DSB, as short genes especially may be unlikely to generate an NMD-causing mutation. The alternative method is to use gRNAs that flank an exon, ideally resulting in the deletion of the exon. When using Cas9n, this approach would require four different gRNAs, which may impose limitations on the ability to design efficient gRNAs while reducing off-target effects, potentially negating the benefit of using Cas9n.
To delete an entire gene, HR repair constructs can be built with homology arms using sequence from either side of a gene and a resistance cassette in between where the gene would otherwise be. Regions up to 40 kb were consistently deleted via HR by Regeneron using a process termed VelociGene, as part of the KOMP, so this approach is accessible by HR for many genes ( ; ). Larger regions can be deleted by knocking in widely spaced loxP sites (see below) and expressing Cre recombinase, but this approach requires multiple rounds of targeting ( ). CRISPR/Cas targeting at two distant sites and deletion of the intervening sequence has been demonstrated in mouse embryos at the kilobase and megabase scales ( ; ). The repaired allele can be made somewhat more predictable using a short donor that bridges the intended deletion. CRISPR/Cas provides an overall simple approach to creating a knockout allele; however, the alleles recovered in each individual will vary, requiring screening, sequencing, and functional analysis to verify that the modification results in a null. Another consideration is whether the targeted gene is essential, as CRISPR/Cas may edit both copies of the gene, resulting in inviable mice. To overcome this, it may be beneficial to inject only one pronucleus during the single cell stage, injecting one cell at the two-cell stage, or carefully titrating the RNP dose. Conversely, using traditional gene targeting would guarantee that each founder had an identical heterozygous mutation.

## Point mutations
It is also possible to engineer precise edits to the mouse genome using HR or CRISPR-based strategies ( ). In traditional gene targeting, the targeting vector contains the intended mutation in close proximity to the selection cassette, which is flanked by SSR sites for later removal with a recombinase such as Cre. For CRISPR/Cas targeting, the reagents are supplied along with a short donor sequence, usually a ssODN, harboring the mutation, and if necessary, additional silent mutations in the PAM or recognition sequence to prevent postrepair recutting. If compatible, a base or prime editor system can be used to change the nucleotide without introducing a DSB or repair construct, and would ideally reduce indel formation compared with traditional CRISPR/Cas9. This type of allele is one where CRISPR may have a decided advantage as short ssDNA donors can be produced commercially in just days or weeks. Furthermore, even after removal of the resistance cassette using an SSR such as Cre (see “Conditional Mutations” below), some residual exogenous sequence will remain and even these short sequences can interfere with gene expression ( ). The ability to introduce targeted point mutations is a powerful complement to the semi-random point mutations obtained in ENU mutagenesis screens, as they allow a researcher to leverage biochemical, structural, and genomic knowledge in an organismal context under the control of endogenous regulatory elements. Point mutations impart a degree of experimental subtlety to reveal biology that may be missed with a simple knockout. Indeed, point mutations have been used to tremendous effect, enabling the introduction and correction of disease mutations ( ; ), mutation of regulatory binding sites ( ; ), phospho-mimetic and phospho-dead mutations ( ; ), kinase and other enzymatic-activating or inactivating mutations ( ; ), and allelic series that systematically test individual binding or regulatory sites on a single protein ( ; ; ).

## Knock-ins and tagging
The coding sequence of genes can be similarly extended or replaced using traditional gene targeting or CRISPR-based methods, the only difference being the nature of the targeting vector or donor sequence. This approach can be used to add a tag or fluorescent protein to a gene, generating a fusion protein that can enable biochemical, localization, expression, imaging, and sorting experiments. These are typically added at the 5′ or 3′ end of a gene along with a short flexible linker to alleviate any steric hindrances; however, with careful planning and detailed knowledge of a gene's protein structure such tags can also be added internally. Another use is to replace a gene with a paralog or functionally related gene ( ; ), an ortholog from another species ( ; ), perform domain swapping between genes ( ), or insert a human disease allele ( ; ). This is sometimes possible by knocking in one or a few replacement exons, but becomes unwieldy if the entire gene must be replaced and especially so if the endogenous regulation is to be maintained. In these cases, knock-in of a complete or partial cDNA along with a splice acceptor creates a hybrid transcript that expresses the desired protein product. However, this can affect gene expression by bypassing any splicing-mediated regulation ( ). Therefore, a control cDNA should always be knocked in in a separate mouse strain to control for this effect ( ). Knock-in–knockout strategies replace a gene or the first exon with an alternative gene, such as a reporter, which allows simultaneous study of gene expression and loss-of-function analysis ( ; ). Finally, genes can be knocked in to a locus and expressed as a separate protein from a single transcript, thus leaving the original gene product relatively unaffected. This can be achieved by inserting a sequence at the 3′ end of a gene in-frame, with a self-cleaving peptide sequence (e.g., P2A) in between, or with a virally derived internal ribosome entry sequence (IRES) that allows independent translation of the two genes from a dicistronic transcript ( ; ).
When using traditional gene targeting to create a knock-in or tagged allele, the repair construct should contain the modification or tag of choice (fluorescent protein, epitope, etc.) aligned within the same reading frame as the targeted protein, along with a selection cassette flanked by SSR sites ( ). When using CRISPR/Cas, the size of the knock-in dictates the method used. For smaller tags, the prime editing system can be used to insert up to ∼45 bp without inducing a DSB. The prime editor holds promise as an accurate and efficient method to insert small tags. However, if the insert is larger, a lssDNA (∼1- to 1.5-kb) or dsDNA (>1.5-kb) repair template can be used alongside traditional CRISPR/Cas9. Large, complex knock-ins may benefit from CRISPR/Cas editing in mESCs to facilitate screening rather than direct injection into zygotes.

## Conditional mutations
A common goal of researchers is to achieve spatiotemporal control over gene expression. One approach is to place genes under the control of drugs that can be administered to mice. The tetracycline-controlled trans-activator protein (tTA) and related reverse tTA (rtTA) system can be used in mice to repress or activate genes, respectively, in response to the drug doxycycline ( ; ). The gene of interest is put under control of a tetracycline responsive element and crossed to a mouse expressing tTA/rtTA, sometimes under control of a tissue-specific promoter. This system enables reversible activation or repression of a gene in a time- and dose-dependent manner. Several updates have been made to the original system to enhance its usefulness in mice, making the system both less leaky and more sensitive to doxycycline for greater dynamic range and accessibility in hard-to-drug tissue; for instance, the central nervous system, where crossing the blood-brain barrier is limiting for many small molecules ( ; ). Another approach for conditional control of gene expression uses the yeast-derived GAL4-UAS system, where GAL4 activator is expressed by a tissue-specific promoter and drives expression of a gene controlled by GAL4-responsive UAS elements ( ). However, this system did not achieve the same popularity in the mouse as it did in the fly and there were several reports of GAL4-induced toxicity ( ; ).
More commonly, spatiotemporal control is achieved through the use of SSRs ( ). These enzymes mediate recombination between short recognition sequences that can be inserted into specific genetic loci via HR. Recognition sequences have an intrinsic directionality such that the recombinase will loop out and delete the sequence between two recognition sequences oriented in parallel. Antiparallel recognition sites can be used to create inversions and this approach has been used to generate balancer chromosomes, discussed above ( ).
Conditional knockouts are made by flanking a critical exon or exons of a gene with recognition sites ( ). Expression of the recombinase deletes the flanked region either creating a truncated protein, or more typically, introducing a frameshift that causes NMD and thus a null allele. Naturally, this approach can also be used to flank entire genes or genomic regions, as well as regulatory sequences, with the caveat that efficiency of recombination generally decreases with increasing distance between recognition sequences ( ; ). Genes can also be conditionally activated by placing a STOP signal, such as tandem polyA motifs or a resistance marker, between the promoter and the coding sequence of the gene to be expressed. Removal of the intervening STOP by the SSR enables expression of the gene. This strategy can be used to overexpress (or express mutant forms of) genes to study their function ( ), mark cells with expression of LacZ or EGFP for lineage tracing or cell sorting ( ; ), exert optogenetic control over signaling ( ), express signaling sensors such as calcium indicators ( ), or to kill cells by expression of DTA ( ).
Expression of the SSR (or tTA/rtTA) is achieved by creating a separate mouse line and then crossing the two. The SSR line is often made as a transgene that inserts semirandomly into the genome, but whose expression is driven by a promoter and regulatory sequences that restrict expression to a tissue or cell type of interest. As for all transgenes, multiple founders should be screened for proper expression, especially to assure there is no misexpression in the male or female germline ( ). Alternatively, SSRs can be knocked in to the locus of a gene with the desired expression pattern. This can purposely knock out the endogenous gene in the process or the SSR can be knocked in at the 3′ end creating a fusion transcript that codes for a self-cleaving peptide or IRES as discussed above ( ; ). An alternative approach is to knock the SSR into a gene of interest not in the mouse genome, but in a bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) that is then inserted into the mouse genome as a transgene, thereby retaining the desired regulatory activity without affecting the endogenous gene ( ). Finally, exogenous genes can be targeted to so-called “safe harbor” loci, genomic sites where exogenous DNA can be introduced and stably expressed without being influenced by (or influencing) nearby genetic elements or disrupting a developmentally important gene, thus avoiding undesirable positional effects. The most popular safe harbor in the mouse is the ROSA26 locus, which disrupts a nonprotein-coding gene of unknown function, though several other safe harbors have been identified ( ; ; ; ; ; ). Identification of safe harbor sites will be important for gene therapy approaches and the mouse is currently the best organismal model for this effort ( ). In most cases, the above strategies can also be used to drive expression of any gene of interest, not only SSRs.
Temporal control can be further refined using the ERT/ERT2 system where the SSR is fused to a mutant estrogen receptor that retains it in the cytoplasm until the administration of tamoxifen ( ; ). The degree of SSR-ERT activity can be tuned by the tamoxifen dose, number of doses, and route of administration ( ). High doses of tamoxifen can induce abortions in pregnant mice, an effect that can be offset by coadministration of progesterone ( ). Nevertheless, dosing should be carefully controlled, particularly for embryonic recombination. Similar to tamoxifen-inducible systems, a fusion can be made between an SSR and a mutant progesterone receptor that is activated by administration of the synthetic steroid RU486, though this system is less widely used ( ). Alternatively, the SSR can be expressed by a promoter that is only active under certain conditions, such as an inflammatory stimulus, which is how the first conditional Cre allele was made ( ). More recently, photoactivatable SSRs have been used successfully in mice ( ).
There is now a toolbox of multiple SSRs available for conditional genetics, but by far the most widely used is the Cre-lox system ( ). Cre recombinase is a bacteriophage-derived SSR that mediates recombination between 34-bp-long loxP sites. There are now over 3000 Cre recombinase-expressing mouse strains or mESC lines listed at MGI driven by hundreds of unique drivers, attesting to its usefulness. Extending Cre's capabilities, mutant loxP sites that do not recombine with the WT sequence or are inactivated after undergoing recombination can be used to generate gene expression switches (FLEx switches) or mediate efficient insertion of floxed DNA into a previously targeted genomic loxP site, respectively ( ; ; ). These have also been used to generate a lineage reporter that can mark two lineages, depending on the level of Cre activity ( ). Complementing Cre, the Flp-FRT ( ; ; ), Dre-Rox ( ), Vika-Vox ( ), Nigri-Nox ( ), and ϕC31 SSR systems ( ; ) have all been validated or optimized for use in mice. These systems can be used in combination to mark multiple lineages or in intersectional genetic schemes to create sophisticated logic gates governing conditional gene expression ( ; ; ; ; ). An alternative intersectional genetic strategy could use a split-Cre, where two fragments of the gene are expressed by different promoters and the protein is only reconstituted where expression overlaps ( ).
To generate a conditional allele, a pair of SSR sites need to be inserted flanking an exon or gene for removal upon expression of the SSR. When using traditional HR gene targeting, a repair construct should contain the WT exon flanked by SSRs along with a selection cassette flanked by distinct SSR sites (e.g., loxP sites flanking the exon and FRT sites flanking the selection cassette). If using CRISPR/Cas to create a conditional allele, multiple methods may be considered. Early reports suggested that using two gRNAs alongside two ssODNs could be used to insert flanking SSR sites ( ); however, correct insertion of both SSR sites on the same allele happens at a low frequency ( ). A single lssDNA containing both SSR sites and the flanked exon can be used to ensure that both SSR sites are inserted in cis. Alternatively, a single SSR site can be inserted and once that mouse strain is screened and verified, a second SSR site can be inserted through a second round of CRISPR/Cas editing. Although currently untested, the prime editor system may be able to insert flanking SSR sites through the codelivery of two pegRNAs. While this method suffers the same pitfalls as using unmodified Cas9, the decreased prevalence of indels may increase the overall efficiency. CRISPR/Cas has the potential to significantly reduce the time necessary for obtaining a conditional allele, however published efficiencies of simultaneously modifying two regions on the same allele are still quite low and will require future optimization.

## Lineage tracing and clonal analysis
To study cell fate and mark distinct lineages, conditional expression of reporter alleles is now commonplace ( ). There are an enormous number of mouse reporter lines that conditionally express an enzyme (e.g., lacZ) or fluorescent protein following expression of Cre or another SSR. This irrevocably marks all cells and their progeny and is often used to validate Cre lines, perform lineage analysis, and mark conditional mutant cells when used in conjunction with a conditional mutant allele. However, different reporters and mutant alleles can have varying rates of recombination, depending on both the distance between SSR recognition sequences and other less well-understood effects likely involving the local chromatin environment ( ; ), so such mice should be carefully analyzed to understand the degree of overlap between the marked (e.g., fluorescent) and mutant populations. This is especially important for tamoxifen-inducible systems where the window of recombination is limited or the goal is to mark very few cells for clonal analysis, as the limited number of events may highlight differences in efficiency that are otherwise overcome by a constitutively active Cre line. For particularly timing-sensitive experiments, it is worth noting that tamoxifen exhibits an ∼12-hr delay to be converted to the active metabolite 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4-OHT) and delivered to embryonic tissue, after which it can remain active for hours or even days, depending on the dose, Cre line, and particular recombination ( ). More rapid recombination can be induced by administering 4-OHT directly. Several systems that link reporter expression with loss of a mutant allele, assuring overlap between the two populations. Mosaic analysis with double markers (MADM) relies on Cre-mediated interchromosomal mitotic recombination to generate homozygous mutant and wild-type daughter cells from a heterozygous parent cell, while simultaneously marking mutant cells with a fluorescent protein ( ). An alternate strategy, mosaic mutant analysis with spatial and temporal control of recombination (MASTR), uses FLP-ER to control expression of Cre-EGFP, which simultaneously marks cells and mediates recombination of any existing floxed conditional allele ( ). Two recent tools for clonal analysis are worth pointing out. The first is the Brainbow and Confetti class of reporters, which uses pairs of variant and mutually incompatible lox sites to randomly express one or a combination of fluorescent proteins upon Cre expression, ideally using an inducible Cre, allowing multiple adjacent clones to be tracked ( ; ; ; ). Second, CRISPR-based lineage tracing uses a CRISPR-induced mutation rather than expression of a marker to track cells. As cells divide during embryogenesis, mutations accumulate so that the lineage relationship and fate of these cells can be reconstructed using single-cell sequencing ( ; ; ; ).
When constructing reporter alleles, traditional gene targeting repair constructs typically contain a ubiquitous promoter driving the expression of a selection cassette flanked by SSR sites ( ). Further downstream is the reporter itself. When using CRISPR/Cas, due to the size of the reporter, a dsDNA or lssDNA donor will most likely be required. Using two gRNAs in conjunction with Cas9n would ideally yield fewer off-target mutations.

## Existing resources
The fastest way to make any kind of mouse is if someone else has already made it for you. The best places to begin searching are at the International Mouse Strain Resource, which compiles strain information from multiple repositories, and the Mouse Genome Informatics database, which also contains a list of most of the existing alleles for a given gene, as well as phenotype and expression data, and a list of publications using each allele. These websites and additional resources, including mutagenesis consortia and mutant mouse repositories, are listed in .

## The future of mouse genetics
Charles Dickens opened A Tale of Two Cities by declaring, “It was the best of times, it was the worst of times.” Although admittedly not as consequential as human travails during the French Revolution, the same sentiment could apply to mice during the current CRISPR revolution. In many ways, there has been no better time to make a mouse. Forty years of genetic lessons and tool building have now been supercharged so that new and more sophisticated genetic models can be made with less effort, cost, and time than ever before. However, CRISPR has also opened the door to making these same genetic edits, once the exclusive domain of mice, flies, worms, yeast, and bacteria, in any system that can express exogenous DNA or be injected with CRISPR RNP complexes. In particular, the stunning complexity seen in human ESC-derived organoids and gastruloids will certainly appeal to researchers interested in studying human disease, as this grants them a source of tissue, made of human cells, without the need to maintain a mouse colony (for review, see ). Traditional model organisms with certain superior embryological properties such as fish, frog, and chick can now be strong genetic systems, as well, not to mention the increasing number of nontraditional organisms that now vie for genetic attention ( ). However, between the need to study development and disease in a living mammal, the existing unrivaled genetic toolkit, and its many advantageous characteristics for laboratory use, it is hard to see the mouse going away anytime soon ( ). Rather than a passing of the torch, the age of CRISPR will be more like a sharing of the genetic spotlight. It is going to be quite a show.

## Glossary
4-OHT: 4-hydroxytamoxifen
AAV: adeno-associated virus
ABE: adenine base editor
BAC: bacterial artificial chromosome
BE: base editor
Cas: CRISPR-associated protein
Cas9d: catalytically dead Cas9
Cas9n: Cas9 nickase
CBE: cytidine base editor
CRISPR: clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats
CRISPR-EZ: CRISPR RNP electroporation of zygotes
crRNA: CRISPR RNA
DSB: double-stranded breaks
DTA: diptheria toxin fragment A
Easi-CRISPR: efficient additions with ssDNA inserts–CRISPR
ENU: N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea
G1: generation 1
G2: generation 2 or second growth phase
G3: generation 3
gRNA: guide RNA
HDR: homology-directed repair
HITI: homology-independent targeted integration
HR: homologous recombination
HSV-TK: herpes simplex virus-1 thymidine kinase
i-GONAD: improved genome editing via oviductal nucleic acids delivery
IRES: internal ribosome entry sequence
KOMP: knockout mouse project
lssDNA: long single-stranded DNA
MADM: mosaic analysis with double markers
MASTR: mosaic mutant analysis with spacial and temporal control of recombination
mESCs: murine embryonic stem cells
MGI: mouse genome informatics
NHEJ: nonhomologous end joining
NMD: nonsense-mediated decay
ODN: oligodeoxynucleotide
PAM: protospacer-adjacent motif
PBS: primer-binding sequence
PCR: polymerase chain reaction
PCV: porcine circovirus 2 rep
PE: prime editor
pegRNA: prime-editing gRNA
RNP: ribonucleoprotein
RT: reverse transcriptase
SNP: single nucleotide polymorphism
SSR: site-specific recombinase
SV40: simian virus 40
TALEN: transcription activator-like effector nuclease
Tild-CRISPR: targeted integration with linearized dsDNA–CRISPR
tracrRNA: transactivating CRISPR RNA
tTA: tetracycline-controlled trans-activator protein
UAS: upstream activation sequence
UGI: uracil DNA glycosylase inhibitor
UTR: untranslated region
ZEN: zygote electroporation of nuclease
ZFN: zinc finger nuclease

## Acknowledgments
We thank Yas Furuta, Alex Joyner, Kevin Kelley, Chris Raymond, and our laboratory colleagues for critical comments on the manuscript. We apologize to the many colleagues whose work we could not cite, due to space limitations. J.F.C. and C.J.D. are supported by F32 DE029387 and DE026678, respectively, from the National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research (NIDCR). Work in the authors' laboratory is supported by grants DE022363 and DE022778 from the NIDCR to P.S.

## Footnotes
Article is online at http://www.genesdev.org/cgi/doi/10.1101/gad.342089.120.

## References