822acssdACS NanoACS NanoPMC8482762848276284827623450576610.1021/acsnano.1c05099Delivery
of Oligonucleotide Therapeutics: Chemical
Modifications, Lipid Nanoparticles, and Extracellular Vesicles
BostJeremy P BarrigaHanna HolmeMargaret N GalludAudrey MaugeriMarco GuptaDhanu LehtoTaavi ValadiHadi EsbjörnerElin K StevensMolly M El-AndaloussiSamir †Department
of Laboratory Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge 14152, Sweden‡Department
of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm 17177, Sweden§Department
of Biology and Biological Engineering, Chalmers
University of Technology, Gothenburg 41296, Sweden∥Advanced
Drug Delivery, Pharmaceutical Sciences, R&D, AstraZeneca, Gothenburg 43150, Sweden⊥Department
of Rheumatology and Inflammation Research, Institute of Medicine,
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg 41390, Sweden#Institute
of Technology, University of Tartu, Nooruse 1, Tartu 50411, Estonia¶Department
of Materials, Department of Bioengineering, Institute of Biomedical
Engineering, Imperial College London, London SW7 2BU, United Kingdom*Email: jeremy.bost@ki.se.
*Email: samir.el-andaloussi@ki.se.
10920211591399313993–140211102021© 2021 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).This article has been corrected. See ACS Nano. 2021 Oct 29;15(11):18590.

## Abstract
 Oligonucleotides
(ONs) comprise a rapidly growing class of therapeutics.
In recent years, the list of FDA-approved ON therapies has rapidly
expanded. ONs are small (15–30 bp) nucleotide-based therapeutics
which are capable of targeting DNA and RNA as well as other biomolecules.
ONs can be subdivided into several classes based on their chemical
modifications and on the mechanisms of their target interactions.
Historically, the largest hindrance to the widespread usage of ON
therapeutics has been their inability to effectively internalize into
cells and escape from endosomes to reach their molecular targets in
the cytosol or nucleus. While cell uptake has been improved, “endosomal
escape” remains a significant problem. There are a range of
approaches to overcome this, and in this review, we focus on three:
altering the chemical structure of the ONs, formulating synthetic,
lipid-based nanoparticles to encapsulate the ONs, or biologically
loading the ONs into extracellular vesicles. This review provides
a background to the design and mode of action of existing FDA-approved
ONs. It presents the most common ON classifications and chemical modifications
from a fundamental scientific perspective and provides a roadmap of
the cellular uptake pathways by which ONs are trafficked. Finally,
this review delves into each of the above-mentioned approaches to
ON delivery, highlighting the scientific principles behind each and
covering recent advances.
Keywords: oligonucleotide, oligonucleotide delivery, intracellular trafficking, endosomal escape, RNA
therapeutics, lipid nanoparticles, extracellular
vesicles, cellular uptake

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2021 Jun 15; Issue date 2021 Sep 28.

## RNA Therapeutics Overview
The field
of nucleic-acid-based therapeutics is entering an era
highlighted by increased clinical success and intense interest by
pharmaceutical and biotech industries. The continuous improvements
in nucleic-acid-based drug compositions along with the extensive mapping
of genetic targets are fueling the exponential growth of applications
for these therapies.
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
broadly defines gene therapy
as therapy that seeks to modify or manipulate the expression of a
gene or to alter the biological properties of living cells for therapeutic
use. This is often accomplished by delivering
exogenous nucleic acid sequences to the cells of interest. These sequences
may include DNA, RNA, a range of synthetic analogues which are based
off of these two natural nucleic acids, or quite often a mix thereof.
In addition, functional delivery is often boosted by addition of other
bioactive compounds and macromolecules such as lipids and peptides.
The ability to construct these complex molecules has resulted in a
wave of medical innovation. Using the approaches outlined in this
review, nucleic-acid-based therapies can be used to treat a range
of diseases which have remained unreachable through classical pharmacological
intervention.
Recently, the outbreak of the SARS-CoV-2 virus
has prompted a significant
shift of focus into the RNA therapeutics space as Moderna Therapeutics
and Pfizer/BioNTech developed mRNA vaccines to combat the ongoing
pandemic. As much of the media focus highlighted the novelty of using
RNA in a vaccine, it could be overlooked that an equally important
feat was the development of the lipid nanoparticle (LNP) formulations
that enabled cellular administration and hence therapeutic functionality
of the mRNA. The development of these vaccines was also dependent
on the ability to mass-produce RNA therapeutics. Broadly, RNA therapeutics
can be classified as either mRNA-based or small RNA-based. Both classes
are growing rapidly in scientific and therapeutic interest.
Oligonucleotides (ONs) are small nucleic acid strands which are
typically 15–30 base pairs in length and contain various chemical
modifications to favorably alter their behavior. These short sequences
can bind with exceptional specificity and affinity to almost any RNA
sequence, whether in pre-mRNA, mRNA, ribonuclearproteins, or miRNAs.
ONs can furthermore be designed to assemble to a specific 3D conformation
capable of binding proteins. The inherent combinatorial nature of
nucleic acid sequences provides an immediate advantage in terms of
drug design; any nucleic acid target can be addressed, while the pharmacokinetic
properties of the drug can be tuned separately. The pharmacokinetics
of an ON are generally determined by the backbone chemistry, while
the target is determined by the nucleotide sequence. In contrast,
small-molecule compounds are often extremely limited in their ability
to separate these two characteristics. 
Still, significant hurdles remain for widespread use of ONs
and
other nucleic-acid-based therapeutics, which must be overcome at almost
all levels from drug design to functional delivery:
Chemical: the therapeutic molecules
must have an adequate
half-life and stability.
Cellular: the
molecules must be able to enter cells
in adequate concentrations and usually cross biological lipid membranes
to reach their sites of action. Additionally, the ONs should be able
to effectively target specific cells and evade others.
Immunological: the molecules should stimulate appropriate
immunorecognition outcomes but should not induce an undesired immune
response.
Tissue: the targeted cells
must have been corrected
in a high enough quantity and in a time-dependent manner to overcome
the tissue’s weakness or defect.
Clinical (patient-facing): the specificity of the drug
to the desired tissues must be high and toxicity must be low, and
off target affects must be minimal.
Clinically
(population-facing): the drug must be readily
scalable and affordably produced to be a practical therapeutic, with
a predictable behavior across the population.
These barriers have been known to researchers for years; however,
there are still improvements which need to be made. In particular,
the infamous “endosomal escape” problem has proven difficult
to solve. This involves the inability of biomolecules such as ONs
to permeate endosomal membranes and gain access to the cytosol. Three
promising approaches to overcome this barrier have emerged: chemically
altering naked ONs to give them favorable properties, formulating
synthetic lipid-based nanoparticles capable of inducing endosomal
release, and loading ONs into biological vesicles to exploit natural
delivery pathways. The aim of this review is to summarize the recent
clinical advancements of ON therapeutics and to discuss in-depth the
underlying scientific developments regarding the chemistry and uptake
of ONs, specifically through three delivery strategies: administering
chemically modified ONs, formulating lipid nanoparticles to deliver
ONs, and designing extracellular vesicles to deliver ONs.

## Commercial
Advancements in ON Therapeutics
Although
ONs were shown to target RNA and inhibit protein translation in 1978, it took 20 years before patients received a commercial
ON treatment. ONs do not fall within the scope of advanced therapy
medicinal product (ATMP) regulations as they are classified as chemical
drugs by the FDA and the European medicines agency (EMA). Ionis Pharmaceuticals (formerly Isis Pharmaceuticals)
earned FDA approval for an ON drug in 1998 with the development of
Vitravene (fomivirsen), which was used for the treatment of cytomegalovirus
(CMV) retinitis in AIDS patients. The
problem of tissue targeting was overcome by administering the drug via intraocular injection. However, the commercialization
of this ON was not entirely successful. Fomiversen’s market
share has fallen considerably due to the introduction of a small-molecule
drug for the same condition. Additionally, the next two ONs to receive
FDA approval, Macugen (pegaptanib) and Kynamro (mipomersen), experienced
difficulties after they made it to market. Both ONs failed to maintain strong market share due to competing
antibody-based and small-molecule therapeutics. However, 2016 marked
a turning point in two significant FDA approvals: Exondys 51 (Eteplirsen)
for Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) and
Spinraza (nusinersen) for spinal muscular atrophy (SMA), discussed
further below. The complete list of FDA-approved
ON therapies as of today is shown in .
 ONs which have not met their clinical
trial end points also continue
to provide valuable insights into the development of future drugs.
For example, in 2016, Alnylam Pharmaceuticals had two ON therapies
(siRNA-based) in phase III trials for human transthyretin amyloidosis
(hATTR), patisiran and revusiran. While both drugs utilized delivery
strategies to target the liver, they differed in their delivery approach—revusiran
was administered subcutaneously and was composed of siRNA conjugated
to the carbohydrate N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc);
patisiran was an siRNA formulated within a lipid nanoparticle (LNP).
Revusiran, although capable of efficient delivery, never gained FDA
approval due to a high mortality rate in a phase III study. Although the discontinuation of revusiran was
a major setback to Alnylam and the ON field, the GalNAc conjugation
delivery approach later reached clinical relevance when Alnylam received
approval for givosiran in 2019. Givosiran targets the liver for the
treatment of acute hepatic porphyria (AHP).
Since fomiversen
received approval in 1998, the field of antisense
technology has matured significantly, with some products advancing
to approval quickly while others are hindered due to a number of scientific
and regulatory factors. Additionally,
disease targets have been mapped across a range of diseases, providing
numerous opportunities for intervention with ONs. At the beginning
of 2021, there were over 200 clinical trials registered for ONs in
the oncology space in the USA. Further,
current clinical trials are using ONs to treat cardiovascular diseases,
metabolic diseases, and, among others, infectious diseases such as
hepatitis. In order to understand where
the next medical and scientific advancements lie, the underlying science
of the field must be considered.

## Classes of ON Therapeutics
ONs have been developed to target DNA, RNA, protein regions, and
even post-translational modifications. Here, the most clinically relevant
classes of ONs are summarized along with examples of FDA-approved
ON therapies. A general illustration of the classes discussed herein
is found in . Several other types of ONs have been identified and synthesized.
A recent review by Smith and Zain comprehensively reports the broad
range of ON therapeutic strategies in more depth. Additionally, other classes may emerge as we expand our
understanding of the many regulatory roles of RNA.
 

## Gapmers
Gapmers have historically been the most widely
used class of antisense ON (AON) therapeutics. The sequence of a gapmer is fully complementary to its
target RNA strand so that binding occurs via Watson–Crick
base pairing. The gapmer contains a middle region of 6–10 DNA
nucleotides, which is flanked on either end by 3 to 5 modified oligonucleotides.
These modified nucleotides should contain chemical modifications (discussed
below) that increase both nuclease resistance and target binding affinity. The name “Gapmer” was coined for
this DNA “gap” between the modified nucleotides. Gapmers
operate by binding their target mRNA sequence and sequentially recruiting
RNase H1, an endogenous RNase which cleaves the RNA strand of a DNA–RNA
duplex in both the cytoplasm and the nucleus. Gapmers have received particular attention for their ability to
successfully silence genes in cells which are traditionally difficult
to transfect, such as T-cells. They have
shown promise in vivo for their gene-silencing potency,
even showing a higher potency than siRNAs in certain cases. Inotersen is an approved gapmer therapeutic
which targets transthyretin (TTR) mRNA to reduce pathogenic TTR aggregation
in individuals with hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis. In a phase
I clinical trial, a 22 day schedule of subcutaneous administration
of 300 mg of inotersen led to reductions of plasma TTR protein up
to 76% for 4 weeks after the last dose, and the drug is now used in the treatment of the polyneuropathy
of hereditary transthyretin-mediated amyloidosis in adults.

## Splice-Switching
ONs (SSOs)
SSOs are a class of steric
block ONs that emerged in the early 1990s. While gapmers lead to degradation of the mRNA, SSOs redirect splicing
without depleting mRNA transcript levels, which is particularly valuable
in cases of disease where abnormal splicing depletes functional protein.
SSOs work by masking a splice site or silencing and enhancing elements
in exons and introns, leading to the failure of the spliceosome to
assemble and/or read properly. Pre-mRNAs with weak splice sites are
generally better suited for targeting with SSOs than with gapmers
as they are already prone to produce various protein isoforms. SSOs
can work to either restore function in dysfunctional splice variants
or to impede the splicing of pathological variants including viral
transcipts. , 
SSO structure differs from
gapmer structure, as SSOs should be designed to prevent RNase recruitment
as their purpose is not to induce mRNA degradation. SSOs are designed
to utilize chemical modifications which increase their stability,
cellular delivery, and binding affinity. These include for example
morpholinos, 2′-OMe phosphorothioate, LNAs, and other modified
nucleotides. , As inferred by , SSOs have proved particularly
useful for treatment of SMA and DMD. In 2009, morpholino SSOs were
able to achieve a dose-dependent restoration of functional dystrophin
without any adverse events reported. Since
2016, half of the FDA-approved ON therapeutics have been SSOs. Eteplirsen
is a morpholino SSO which targets exon 51 of dystrophin pre-mRNA,
leading to exon-skipping in the DMD gene which yields a truncated
yet functional dystrophin protein. The phase II study of eteplirsen
revealed that it was tolerated very well when treated up to 20 mg/kg
for 12 weeks. However, the results of
this study and yet another phase II trial have only been able to induce
modest increases of dystrophin expression. Furthermore, the methods
used in these clinical trials were heavily disputed, leading to a
delay in market approval. , Ultimately, the FDA
approved eteplirsen in 2016. Another SSO with a significant history
is nusinersen, a modified SSO which targets survival motor neuron
1 and 2 (SMN1 and SMN2, respectively) pre-mRNA in patients with SMA.
The severity of SMA is dependent primarily on the absence of SMN1
and the absence of SMN2 to a lesser extent. The more functional transcripts
of these genes a patient has, the less severe the disease outcome
will be. Nusinersen works by masking a weakened splice site to restore
inclusion of exon 7 into SMN2, enhancing production of the full-length
protein variant. Importantly, as only a small fraction of ONs can
cross the blood–brain barrier, nusinersen must be administered
intrathecally by lumbar puncture. In two separate phase III studies,
nusinersen was found to drastically improve motor function in young
children. , Both trials were ended early due to favorable
outcomes in the drug-treated subjects. Additionally, a phase II trial
in which nusinersen was given to presymptomatic children found that
most children (>88%) achieved normal motor function development. 

## Aptamers
Aptamers are synthetic
structural binding
elements composed of nucleic acids. They
are single stranded with a function reliant on their folded 3D structure.
Aptamers are produced in vitro through a process
called systematic evolution of ligands by exponential enrichment (SELEX),
a method of ligand screening for specificity. , Aptamers have been nicknamed “chemical antibodies”
due to their ability to recognize and bind proteins in a similar fashion
to protein antibodies. It was previously
believed that aptamers were immunoinert; however, it has since been
demonstrated that single-stranded DNA ONs have the potential to activate
immune responses when administered in blood. The advantages of aptamers over antibodies are numerous: aptamers
exhibit better uptake due to their relative smaller molecular weight
compared to proteins and they can be chemically synthesized at scale,
whereas protein antibody production is a far more laborious process. Additionally, aptamers can be rapidly “turned
off” with administration of a complementary ON strand. , Despite these numerous advantages, aptamers are not yet a competitive
therapeutic alternative to protein antibodies as the only FDA-approved
aptamer, pegaptanib, is losing market share to a more efficacious
monoclonal antibody. 

## Micro-RNA
(miRNA)
miRNAs are naturally present double-stranded
RNA ONs, usually found within intronic regions of RNA. They undergo
a two-step RNase III-dependent processing to create primary miRNA
(pri-miRNA) hairpin structures which are cleaved into an active form
by Dicer, an endoribonuclease enzyme. The Dicer cleavage forms a 21 nucleotide, double-stranded miRNA.
miRNAs work through the RNA interference mechanism, which is the main
post-transcriptional gene-silencing mechanism. This includes the miRNA
binding in the 3′ untranslated region of mRNA, leading to loss
of the poly-A tail and consequent mRNA destabilization. As a result, the mRNA is prevented from forming
mRNA–protein structures (mRNPs) and therefore protein translation
from the mRNA cannot be initiated. Additionally,
it is believed that miRNAs can switch roles between translation repression
and activation according to cell cycle phase. 
Several hundreds of endogenous miRNAs have been identified
and extensively characterized. They have been investigated and mapped
as biomarkers in a diagnostic approach toward cancer detection. miRNAs found in circulation may also be present
as a result of their role in immune system communication. miRNAs have
both physiological and pathological roles in the immune system. − There exists an opportunity to further characterize the connection
between miRNAs and the immune system, demonstrated by the fact that
several clinical trials are being conducted for therapeutics which
target miRNAs have led to immunological adverse effects. 
Therapeutic strategies involving miRNAs
fall into two categories:
antimiRs and miRNA mimics. AntimiRs, as their name suggests, are antagonists
to miRNAs and function by binding and deactivating endogenous miRNAs. miRNA mimics, on the other hand, are exogenous
and act to boost the activity of the endogenous miRNAs. Both antagomirs
and mimics can be synthetically modified to increase their stability
and binding affinity.

## Short Interfering RNA (siRNA)
siRNAs
are usually 20–25
base pairs long and delivered to the cell as a double-stranded RNA
duplex, which includes a guide strand and a passenger strand. The
guide strand is designed to be completely complementary to their target
sequence. Once in the cytosol, the guide strand dissociates from the
passenger strand and binds to endogenous Ago2, the key nuclease component
of the RNA-induced-silencing complex (RISC). The guide strand then
directs this protein complex to the target mRNA. While gapmers bind their target sequence and then recruit
the nuclease, siRNA binds the nuclease complex (RISC) and then targets
the mRNA. Due to their intrinsic ability to specifically silence gene
expression by degrading mRNA, siRNAs have most commonly been utilized
to downregulate protein expression levels.
Ago2 and the RISC
complex have specific structural requirements that the ONs must contain
in order to bind. This limits the extent of chemical modification
that the siRNA can undergo and in turn its stability and cellular
uptake. So far, three siRNAs which contain partially modified bases
have shown clinical success and attained FDA approval, beginning with
patisiran. Patisiran is a modified siRNA
which is formulated with a lipid nanoparticle (LNP) carrier to target
TTR mRNA. Administration of 0.3 mg/kg patisiran every 3 weeks for
18 months was able to decrease TTR levels up to 87.8%. 

## Chemical Modifications
of RNA ONs
Unmodified
DNA and RNA exhibits minimal therapeutic activity because
they are rapidly degraded, exhibit poor cellular uptake and/or are
filtered out of blood in biological environments. In order to overcome
these problems, enormous efforts have been made to identify ON chemistries,
naturally occurring and synthetic, which improve the target binding
affinity, plasma stability, resistance to degradation, and pharmacokinetics.
Most of the currently utilized chemistries for ONs have been resolved
and characterized for several years and the fact that they are still
widely used implies that they have proven to be highly effective. The structure of an ON can be modified at all
three of the functional regions—the nucleobase, the carbohydrate,
and the phosphodiester linkage.

## Nucleobase Modifications
Base modifications
are often
used when stronger Watson–Crick base pairing is needed. By
modifying the base of the nucleotide, a higher affinity for the target
nucleotide can be achieved. This increases the thermal stability of
the duplex formed between the ON and its target RNA, which can greatly
increase the activity when using ONs for mRNA-silencing. If the ON
has bound its target RNA tightly enough, splice sites can be hidden,
ribosomal assembly can be prevented, and translation can be inhibited. Additionally, base modifications can act to
strengthen the 3D structure of aptamers. It must be noted, however, that the increased binding affinity may
increase the risk of off-target binding and thus the risk of adverse
effects.
The 5-position of pyrimidines is a commonly utilized
location for modification. The most commonly
utilized is the “5-methyl-C” chemistry in which a methyl
group is attached. The increase in stability is attributed to the
stacking of the methyl groups between the nucleobases in the major
groove of the formed RNA duplex. Importantly, the modification seems
to act unfavorably if it is too large, as another common 5-position
modification, the 5-propynyl group, has been shown to impede siRNA-mediated
silencing due to the fact that it is a relatively bulky modification
and the RISC cannot properly attach. 
There exist further synthetic base modifications including tricyclo
DNA (tcDNA) and others, covered more in depth in a recent review by
Smith and Zain. 

## Carbohydrate Modifications
The deoxyribose in DNA and
the ribose in RNA can be modified to increase the oligo’s stability
against nuclease degradation, greatly enhancing its pharmacokinetic
half-life from a matter of days to weeks. This is due to the fact that an electron-withdrawing group on the
2′ carbon of ribose can induce the ribose to pucker into a
conformation which is favorable for duplex formation. This is the reason RNA–RNA duplexes are more stable
than DNA–DNA duplexes, and several ON chemistries aim to replicate
this structure. Hybridization analysis of several 2′-modifications
revealed that not all modifications enhance RNA affinity equally. The most widely utilized modification is the
2′-O-methyl (2′-O-Me) in which a methyl group is attached.
Other common modifications include 2′-O-methoxyethyl (2′-O-MOE),
and 2′-fluoro RNA (2′-F-RNA).
The carbohydrate
can also contain modifications in which “lock” the nucleotide
into its north conformation. By bridging the 2′-O to the C4′
with a methylene linkage, a drastic increase in duplex stabilization
can be achieved. This chemistry, the locked nucleic acid (LNA), has
since been effectively used in siRNAs, gapmers, splice-switching ONs,
and antagomirs. 

## Phosphodiester Linkage
Modifications
The backbone of
a nucleic acid strand is the repetitive sequence between sugar group
and phosphodiester linkage which effectively gives the strand its
helix shape. The backbone is also the target for degradative endo-
and exonucleases. The nonmodified phosphodiester (PO) linkage of human
DNA and RNA has several unfavorable pharmacokinetic and distribution
properties for its use as a therapeutic, including a short half-life
in circulation due to nuclease susceptibility and low serum protein
binding ability.
The most commonly employed chemical modification
in both research and clinical use is the phosphorothioate (PS) modification.
In the PS backbone, a nonbridging oxygen of the phosphodiester linkage
is replaced with a sulfur atom. The foremost advantage to this substitution
is that the PS-ON gains resistance against nuclease degradation. As the chemistry was studied further, it was
also found that the PS backbone was inducing an increase in tissue
uptake. When PO-ONs are administered
by injection in vivo, they are rapidly degraded into
their constituent monomers and cleared in urine without any significant
delivery to tissue. However, PS-modified
ONs show much better tissue uptake with as little as 10% of the administered
dose cleared in urine, and even the cleared ON had not been degraded. It is believed that PS-ONs are retained in circulation
due to their increased binding affinity for serum proteins such as
albumin, which helps them to evade blood clearance long enough to
reach their target tissues. PS-ONs accumulate most readily into kidney
and liver, with the kidney having 84:1 organ-to-blood ratio and the
liver having 20:1 at 2 h after injection. 
Interestingly, it was later found that the PS backbone exists
in
nature in certain bacteria DNA. In nature,
some bacteria contain CpG motifs, C-G dinucleotides which are partially
modified to contain PS backbone linkages. CpG dinucleotides have been
found to bind TLR9, triggering immune stimulation and B-cell activation. This finding has been the basis for many therapeutic
developments in which CpG-containing ONs are used as immunostimulatory
therapeutics against allergies, cancer, and a range of other immunological
disorders. 
Importantly, the activity
of PS-ONs cannot always be correlated
between in vivo and in vitro experiments
due to the delicate dependency on time, temperature, concentration,
and cell line used. The most common problems
with using a PS linkage include the decrease in binding affinity to
the target RNA/DNA and nonspecific protein binding. To compensate
for this, the PS chemistry is often used together with base and/or
sugar modifications which increase target binding affinity.
Phosphorothioamidate morpholino oligomer (PMO) ONs contain a modified
backbone in which the phosphodiester linkage and the ribose sugar
ring are replaced with synthetic, noncharged morpholine linkages.
The advantages to such a chemistry can include high efficacy and specificity,
nuclease resistance, aqueous solubility, and low production costs. However, the incorporation of the PMO chemistry
lowers the ON melting temperature, which may be compensated for by
increasing the number of bases in the sequence. However, PMOs also
have a decreased binding affinity for serum proteins, which leads
to rapid blood clearance and limited tissue distribution. The two
PMO ONs which have received FDA approval, eteplirsen and golodirsen,
suffer from high clearance with 66 and 60%, respectively, of intravenous
(IV)-administered ON being recovered in urine within 24 h of administration. , 
 

## Bioconjugation
Apart from modifying
the internal chemical structures on the ON,
the possibility exists to chemically modify an ON by conjugating other
molecules to it. This can serve the purpose of influencing the targeting
and uptake of the ONs on the tissue and cellular level. Additionally,
bioconjugates have been shown to alter the kinetics of the therapeutic
ONs. Recent work from Alnylam Pharmaceuticals has shown that N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc), when conjugated to therapeutic
ONs, do not actively induce endosomal escape of the ON but rather
serve to increase the uptake and storage of the ON within cellular
compartments, leading to a sustained therapeutic outcome in
vivo.( ) Through this approach,
a single administration of GalNAc-conjugated siRNA can lead to silencing
of the target gene that persists for weeks.
Some of the most
commonly utilized bioconjugates include cholesterol
and N-GalNAc, but bioconjugates can also include other lipids, sugars,
antibodies, and peptides. Cell-penetrating peptides (CPPs) have been
used as a bioconjugate, which bolsters the activity of the covalently
lined ON. While CPPs have proven effective to increase ON activity in vitro, their mechanism of action is not entirely elucidated.
It has been shown that CPPs can be designed to work either by pore
formation in the plasma membrane or by endosomal destabilization,
although the latter is not well-defined. , 
As bioconjugates do not necessarily induce endosomal escape
but
may rather increase ON activity by other means, bioconjugates lie
outside the scope of this review. However, a recent review from Kulkarni et al. thoroughly covers the use of this
effective delivery strategy in more depth. 

## Uptake of Naked ONs (Gymnosis)
Although the hydrophobicity of the cell membrane
prevents ONs from
permeating freely through, it was shown in 2009 that appropriate dosing
can trigger cells to internalize naked LNA ONs in a process known
as gymnosis. , Therefore, at least one endocytic
route for naked ONs must exist. The exact mechanisms driving ON endocytosis
are not completely understood. Due to this, ON uptake has been broadly
classified as “productive” (yielding a functional outcome
in the recipient cells) or “unproductive”.
The
uptake process can be divided into three stages: association,
internalization, and trafficking, discussed in-depth below. Whether
modified ONs are being delivered via gymnosis or
shuttled into the cell by delivery vehicles, they must escape the
endosomal compartment to reach their targets in the cytosol or nucleus.
This has proven to be the limiting step in ON delivery, known as “endosomal
entrapment”. A considerable portion of recent research has
focused on manipulating the association, internalization, and trafficking
processes to encourage endosomal compartments to release their cargo.
This release, referred to as “endosomal escape”, has
become the predominant focus area in the development of RNA therapies.
Additionally, a major factor in determining the therapeutic outcome
of an ON lies in its ability to induce the proper immunostimulatory
response. Depending on the therapeutic mechanism of the ON, this can
include immune evasion or intentional immune recognition and activation.
For antisense ONs, it is usually the case that immune avoidance is
desired so the ON can reach its target cell without inducing toxicity
and other off-target gene effects associated with the inflammatory
response. For example, unmodified ONs
can activate the innate immunity by binding pattern-recognition receptors
(PRRs) such as Rig-I and PKR, which detect double-stranded RNA in
the cytoplasm. , In this case, it is desired to
design antisense ONs to evade immune recognition. It has been shown
that certain chemical modifications such as 2′-OMe-modified
uridine and guanidine residues, discussed above, can be incorporated
to achieve immune evasion in siRNAs. Unfortunately,
the means by which ONs can induce immune activation are not completely
elucidated, and it is not uncommon for ONs which were promising in vitro to fall short of their end points in vivo due to their immunogenicity. It should be noted that ONs with neutral
backbones have not been implicated in immune activation. , Conversely, unmethylated CpG-containing ONs activate another PRR,
Toll-like receptor 9 (TLR-9), which stimulates the innate immune system.
CpG-containing ONs have therefore been tested clinically as vaccine
adjuvants and for cancer immunotherapy. − 

## Association
The
first stage of uptake, association,
occurs as the ON makes contact with proteins on the cell’s
surface. PO-ONs show a very low potential for binding to the cell
surface. The PS backbone modification has been found to increase binding
affinity of naked ONs to proteins on the cell surface. In 1997, it
was found that scavenger receptors on endothelial cells were able
to bind certain ON species. More recently,
class A scavenger receptors (SCARAs) have been implicated as the principle
association target of peptide-conjugated PMOs, tcDNA, and ONs containing
2′-OMe modifications. Serendipitously,
these findings were expanded to include SCARAs as binding targets
for PS-ONs when the ONs are administered in high concentrations. − Since then, more protein receptors have been identified. These include
stabilin-1 and stabilin-2 which were both found to bind PS-ONs with
high affinity, inducing clathrin-dependent endocytosis. Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) has
also been shown to directly interact with PS-ONs, cotrafficking them
alongside EGF into clathrin-coated pit structures. Gymnotic uptake is also partly dependent on SIDT2, however
to what extent is unclear yet. 
As far as we know now, protein binding is the principle association
mechanism. It is also important to consider the roles that plasma
membrane lipids play in the ON delivery process. In association, lipids
coordinate various functions by laterally segregating the membrane
proteins into lipid raft structures. The
ability of lipid rafts to form these assemblies of proteins and lipids
is critical for internalization to occur.
Other than the PS
backbone modification, ON chemistries involving
targeting ligand conjugations have been used to increase ON association.
Since clathrin-dependent endocytosis has been identified as a productive
uptake pathway, many of these conjugations
target membrane proteins known to be internalized during clathrin-dependent
endocytosis. These include LDL receptor, transferrin receptor, and
certain GPCRs. 
Since the 1990s,
researchers have also used lipofection techniques
to improve the cellular delivery of ONs. This is partially due to
the cationic lipids increasing the amount of ON which becomes associated
with the cell membrane. Also, it is also
believed that a small percentage of ONs can enter the cell through
stimulated macropinocytosis, a less-regulated albeit highly coordinated,
triggered pathway of fluid-phase endocytosis. , 

## Internalization
After association, internalization
of the ON leads to the entrapment into endosomal vesicles. There are
several routes that this could occur by, but all involve two main
steps: first, the concentration of materials into a distinct patch
on the cell membrane, and subsequently, the protruding or pinching
of the membrane-which causes the membrane bud inward, becoming an
endosomal vesicle. 
Clathrin-mediated
endocytosis is the most extensively characterized internalization
pathway for productive ON delivery. Clathrin was identified in 1975
as a coat protein comprised of heavy and light chains. , Coat proteins are the key players in endocytosis as they induce
the formation of specialized membrane patches and sequentially trigger
these patches to bud inward. The clathrin-coated
membrane buds are then severed to become endosomal vesicles by dynamin
GTPase in a two-step process. Clathrin-mediated
endocytosis is a highly selective process, capable of forming complex
vesicles and maintaining precise stoichiometric ratios of the cargo
regardless of the vesicle sizes. 
Other clathrin-independent internalization mechanisms can also
facilitate ON activity. Of these, the most characterized mechanism
is caveolae-mediated endocytosis. Caveolin pits are invaginations
in the cell membrane which are present in many, but not all, cell
types and contain at least one caveolin family protein. They have
been implicated in endocytic uptake, as well as maintenance of membrane
tension and cell surface area. These
caveolin pits can endocytose a wide range of cargo. Caveolin pits are dependent on dynamin for vesicle scission
similar to clathrin-mediated endocytosis.
Macropinocytosis is
another internalization route which does not
necessitate the association step. Macropinocytosis involves the ruffling
of the membrane to form a protrusion which then collapses, essentially
“swallowing” a volume of the extracellular environment.
While macropinocytosis is an activated type of endocytosis and therefore
requires some cargo association, the internalized volume is large
enough for nonselected solute molecules to be internalized from the
extracellular environment. Macropinocytosis involves internalization
of membrane patches which are much larger than the other endocytic
routes (larger than 1 μm). 
Several internalization pathways may each contribute to productive
ON delivery as all internalization routes converge at the early endosome.
In the case of ON delivery, this results in the accumulation of ONs
into endosomal compartments regardless of the exact internalization
pathway that led them there. This is to the benefit of nuclear ON
delivery considering endosomal maturation is a process which generally
traffics cargo toward the lysosomes, which are located in proximity
to the cell’s nucleus.

## Trafficking
Intracellular
trafficking naturally differs
between cell types and remains one of the most important processes
determining the eventual pharmacological activity of ONs. Endocytic vesicles typically fuse with early
endosomes (EEs) after pinching off from the plasma membrane. This fusion is mediated by the class C core
vacuole/endosome tethering (CORVET) complex which localizes to early
endosome membranes. Early endosomes
may then sort their cargo inward to late endosomes (LEs) or multivesicular
bodies (MVBs) or recycle cargo back to the cell membrane via recycling endosomes for exocytosis. , For all cases
except exocytosis, the endosomal trafficking will involve a decrease
in luminal pH as endosomal compartments mature and eventually converge
with lysosomes with an acidic pH between 4 and 5. 
The movement of endosomal vesicles through the cytoplasm
is a highly regulated process, where vesicles attach to motor proteins
in a GTPase-dependent process. In nonpolarized cells, microtubules
are arranged radially, enabling endosomal vesicles to move bidirectionally
along them toward or away from the nucleus. Kinesin motors are responsible
for shuttling organelles inward along microtubules, while dynein motors
transport them in the opposite direction. 
The Rab protein family, which comprises over 60 GTPases, determines
when and how vesicles should move. Rab proteins can recruit a wide
variety of effector proteins, making them central to the spatiotemporal
regulation of vesicle trafficking by acting as on/off switches for
motors, kinases, tethers, and other proteins. Due to their specific localizations, the Rab proteins are
often used in research as markers for various endolysosomal organelles.
Rab5 is commonly used as an early endosome marker, while Rab7 is an
established late endosome/lysosome marker. 
The final step within the trafficking process is the recognition
and fusion of vesicles to their targets. The vesicles must be brought
within close enough proximity to meet their targets in a process called
docking. Docking occurs via tether proteins, which
are able to recognize markers on the vesicle’s surface to determine
whether fusion should occur. On one
end, tether complexes will interact with Rab proteins on the vesicle
surface, and on the other end they interact with SNAP receptor proteins
(SNAREs). 
There are several protein
families controlling the fusion process,
but at its core, the SNARE complex is responsible for the reaction
driving membrane fusion. There are two subsets which form the complex
when they meet: t-SNARE proteins located on the target membrane and
v-SNARE proteins bound to the vesicle membrane. Formation of the SNARE
complex is an extremely energetically favorable reaction, sufficient
to overcome the energy barrier to membrane fusion. It cannot work alone, however, due to a lack of specificity,
and there exists a wide assortment of factors and regulators, assuring
the vesicles only fuse to their intended targets. 
PS-ONs have been shown to quickly progress from EEs
to LEs with
the help of Annexin A-2 (ANXA2). ANXA2
colocalizes with PS-ONs in late endosomes, and upregulation of ANXA2
enhances ON activity. ANXA2 reduction caused significant accumulation
of ONs in early endosomes and reduced their localization in LEs, ultimately
decreasing PS-ON activity. EGFR, mentioned
above involved with association, has also been implicated to assist
the endocytic trafficking of PS-ONs to late endosomes, and interestingly,
increased levels of EGFR correlates with increased PS-ON activity. 
As the endosomal cargo is trafficked along
the endosomal system,
it will proceed through certain points which have been identified
as potential points of endosomal escape.

## Endosomal Escape
The endolysosomal network ultimately
have three end points. ONs will either be redirected to the extracellular
environment via exocytosis, released into the cytosol
of the cell where they can reach their targets, or arrested and degraded
in lysosomes. In the context of ON delivery, the exocytic and lysosomal
end points can be considered as nonproductive. The targets for almost
all ONs are generally in the cytosol or the nucleus. The ideal ON
delivery pathways would allow the ONs to “hitchhike”
along the endosomal pathway toward the nucleus and then escape before
reaching the lysosome.
The predominant approaches for encouraging
endosomal escape rely on the acidification of endosomal vesicles that
occurs as they mature from EE to LE to lysosomes. This acidity is
achieved by action of vacuolar-type ATPase (V-ATPase), an ATP-reliant
complex which pumps protons into the lysosomal lumen. The extent of V-ATPase activity may vary between
lysosomes, as lysosomal luminal pH and composition can differ depending
on their cellular location. The positioning
of lysosomes to the perinuclear region is determined by the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) protein ring finger protein 26 (RNF26) and to a lesser
extent by Rab34, which associates to the Golgi apparatus. − 
In the context of ON delivery, this decreasing pH can be buffered
with an ionizable or amphipathic delivery agent. One hypothesis, deemed
the “proton sponge effect” asserts that buffering the
lumen of late endosomes and lysosomes results in an osmotic inflow
of water into the endosome, which can lead to engorgement and leakiness
due to physical stress on the membrane. 
Another approach for enhancing endosomal escape involves exploiting
the differences in lipid profiles of the endolysosomal organelles.
For example, cholesterol is abundant in the membrane of late endosomes,
but it is present at very low levels in the lysosomal membrane. LDL cholesterol has been observed to enlarge
endosomes and increase their volume, which could induce leakage due
to mechanical stress. After LDL has
been internalized in a clathrin-dependent manner, it can be released
directly from the early endosome, or it can continue to the late endosome
where it undergoes hydrolysis and the LDL-derived cholesterol egresses
from the late endosome. 
Third,
the formation of MVBs is another key point for leakage to
occur. During the transition from endosome (either early or late)
to MVB, inward budding of the endosomal membrane will occur, resulting
in the formation of intraluminal vesicles (ILVs). ILVs, which contain the luminal cargo, can sometimes fuse
with the MVB membrane which they are contained within, in a process
known as back fusion. Back fusion is
one possible route for ONs to escape into the cytosol and the nucleus.
Lysobisphosphatidic acid (LBPA) has been indicated as an important
controller of the fusion cycles of ILVs. LBPA is necessary for the late endosomal membrane to deform and
bud inward, as it does during the formation of ILVs. LBPA is a phospholipid which is only present in LEs, and
has been implicated in controlling endosomal cholesterol levels. LBPA-mediated intraendosomal trafficking significantly
contributes to productive ON release. 
 

## Nanoparticles for RNA Delivery
In addition to the current
repertoire of chemical modifications,
there is a growing focus on developing synthetic and biological nanoparticles
for ON delivery. In this review, we look into two nanoparticle-based
approaches that are used to enhance delivery: lipid nanoparticles
(LNPs) and extracellular vesicles (EVs).

## Lipid-Based Nanoparticles
for RNA Delivery
Sophisticated synthetic delivery systems
are designed for genetic
drugs to be used clinically. Lipid-based nanoparticles can be engineered
to package diverse cargo for effective therapeutic delivery and are
currently the most promising nonviral delivery systems for enabling
the clinical potential of genetic drugs. − The particle structure of the nanoparticle is dictated by the self-assembled
properties of the lipid and cargo mixtures in the specific buffer
conditions chosen. Broadly, lipid-based particles can be divided into
two key types: liposomes and lipid nanoparticles (LNPs).
Liposomes
have a core–shell structure with a uni- or multilamellar
lipid bilayer surrounding an aqueous internal core. Many investigated
drug delivery systems employ unilamellar lipid vesicles of around
100 nm in size, although depending on the formulation method a significant
proportion of multilamellar lipid vesicles may coexist, which can
impact cargo loading and delivery. 
LNPs lack the internal aqueous core that defines liposomes and
instead have a lipid-based core whose structure depends on the lipid
and cargo mixtures used. In some cases,
the core is highly ordered and the packing of lipids can be described
by specific morphologies such as cubic, hexagonal, micellar or sponge
phases. These are typically interspersed with either aqueous pockets
or water channels. In other cases, the internal lipid core is less
well-defined and is an amorphous structure. These have been extensively
characterized in other reviews. − 
The formation
of stable LNPs also requires the inclusion of a stabilizing
moiety. The most commonly used stabilizers are PEG-based polymers
and PEGylated lipids. Different stabilizers and their effects on morphology,
uptake, and toxicity have already been summarized previously. , Understanding the lipid structures and their response to local environments
is key to rational design of LNPs, effective cargo loading and its
subsequent delivery.
As described above, the major challenge
to implementing RNA-based
gene therapies is the delivery to their intracellular targets which
is limited by their degradation in biological fluids, and limited
tissue targeting and cell penetration. Here, we briefly describe LNPs as synthetic nonviral delivery systems
which have the advantages of being easily designed and manufactured
while enhancing the delivery to disease sites and reducing immune
system stimulation.

## RNA Encapsulation with Ionizable Cationic
Lipids
Efficient
loading of diverse cargo into lipid-based therapeutics is complex.
Small hydrophobic drug molecules can incorporate into the lipid bilayer
while hydrophilic molecules can be encapsulated in the aqueous environment. For larger cargo, such as proteins and RNA,
encapsulation can be less efficient and a direct interaction between
the particle and cargo is necessary. Electrostatic interactions, where
the cargo and membrane have opposite charges, leads to increased loading via a charge association. Cargo encapsulation is performed
at low pH where the lipid is protonated and positively charged, while
at physiological pH, its charge is neutral and the LNP exhibits near-neutral
external membrane surface charge. This is the key particle loading
mechanism exploited for LNPs with RNA cargo. , 
In 1987, Felgner et al. reported
on the formation of complexes between the cationic lipid DOTMA and
plasmid DNA, which when formulated with DOPE to make lipoplexes resulted
in successful transfection of cells in vitro.( ) However, using cationic lipids results in a
surface charge on the LNP, and it has subsequently been suggested
that this may increase toxicity and lead to rapid surface protein
adsorption and clearance by the reticuloendothelial system (RES),
as well as undesired side effects. − 
The development
of optimized “ionizable lipids” represents
one of the most important factors in the clinical success of RNA loaded-LNPs.
The term ionizable lipid is typically used in the field to describe
amine-containing lipids which are neutral at pH 7 but become positively
charged at lower pH via protonation of the amine
moieties. These ionizable lipids can
be used to efficiently encapsulate negatively charged polymers such
as RNA and DNA into LNPs by virtue of charge interactions between
the lipids and the ONs during the initial formulation step, which
occurs below the lipid pKa. Many studies
have quantified particle formation and functional delivery of ON cargo
using ionizable lipids. In some cases, they are the predominant lipid
species, and in others, form only a percentage of the total lipid
mixture. The self-assembled particle structures formed by the lipid
mixtures are driven by the biophysical characteristics of the lipid
mixture and their interaction with the cargo. There is some evidence
indicating that particle structure may impact cytotoxicity. However, interpretation of these studies is
challenging as particle structure is predominantly tuned via composition and it can be complex to decouple differences in toxicity
due to composition and structure.
Studies into the chemical
structures of ionizable lipids and lipid-like
structures (termed lipidoids) that maximize the potency of siRNA delivery
have systematically varied the hydrocarbon chain unsaturation, linker
moiety, and headgroup. , Replacing the DOTMA
trimethylammonium headgroup with dimethylammonium yields the ionizable
lipid DODMA, with one unsaturated carbon bond per C18 hydrocarbon
chain. The level of chain unsaturation seems to be an important parameter.
By varying the level of chain unsaturation, Heyes and co-workers reported
that the most effective formulations were observed using 1,2-dilinoleyloxy-3-dimethylaminopropane
(DLinDMA) which has two carbon–carbon double bonds per alkyl
chain, and that more or less unsaturation leads to less effective
siRNA gene-silencing in vitro. They observed that
increased unsaturation led to a decrease in the lamellar (Lα) to inverse hexagonal (HII) phase transition temperature
and therefore increased fusogenicity, which facilitates endosomal
escape. Notably, however, uptake experiments suggested that despite
their lower gene-silencing efficiency, the less fusogenic particles
were more readily internalized by cells. 
Using DLinDMA as a starting molecule, optimization of the
“linker
group” between the hydrophobic hydrocarbon chains and the hydrophilic
headgroup demonstrated that the introduction of a ketal ring linker
resulted in approximately a 2.5-fold increase in potency, with siRNA-LNP
formulations using this resulting DLin-KC2-DMA (KC2) lipid exhibiting
an ED50 of approximately 0.4 mg/kg (versus 1 mg/kg for DLinDMA) in non-human primates. Further variation of the headgroup chemistry, and therefore
pKa value, showed a tight correlation
between lipid pKa and the ED50 of corresponding LNP formulations. Jayaraman and co-workers observed
maximum potency at an optimal ionizable lipid pKa range of 6.2–6.5 and
identified DLin-(MC3)-DMA (MC3), with a pKa of 6.44, as particularly potent in siRNA-LNP formulations for gene-silencing
in mouse and non-human primate models. 
LNP formulations using this optimized MC3 lipid (see for structure) have
led to
potent delivery vectors, including the FDA-approved siRNA drug patisiran
(Onpattro). Additional applications
have been observed by Jyotsana et al., who reported on a highly efficient (nearly 100% uptake) and nontoxic
MC3 lipid-based LNP formulation loaded with siRNA targeting the BCR-ABL
fusion oncogene found in human chronic myeloid leukemia cells in vivo.( ) This study demonstrates
that fusion oncogene specific RNAi therapeutics can be exploited against
leukemic cells and promises additional treatment options for leukemia
patients. MC3 can also be used to safely transfect mRNA in order to
express therapeutic proteins. Nabhan et al. have demonstrated that RNA transcript therapy can be used
for the delivery of therapeutic mRNA to dorsal root ganglia using
an MC3-based LNP system. In rat and
monkey models, Sedic et al. reported
on the safe profile of MC3-based mRNA-loaded LNPs which led to hEPO
expression and were well tolerated even above the anticipated efficacious
dose levels. Ionizable lipids developed
by Harashima and co-workers use the same DLin tail as MC3 with slight
modifications on the amine-containing headgroup, giving pKa values of 6.5 (lipid YSK05) and 8 (lipid YSK12-C4). Formulations including these lipids have shown
good in vivo delivery of respectively plasmid DNA
to the spleen and siRNA to dendritic
cells. Furthermore, by adjusting the
ratio of these lipids in LNP formulations, they reported tuning the
LNP membrane pKa for targeted delivery
of siRNA to liver sinusoidal endothelial cells in mice. 
 Development of the next-generation
of ionizable lipids, which have
biodegradable properties such as cleavable linkages that lead to rapid
elimination in vivo, is already ongoing. A key motivation has been to improve biocompatibility
and tolerability while maintaining high potency in vivo.( ) Screening large libraries of lipids
and lipidoids synthesized via a variety of chemical
routes has enabled the roles of structural features in the molecules
to be linked to in vitro/in vivo efficacy. The presence of ester linkages on the lipid tails render
these structures biodegradable thanks to esterase activity in the
intracellular compartment, and they show enhanced liver clearance versus MC3 in non-human primates. , Ramaswamy et al. also reported
successful protein replacement with human recombinant factor IX mRNA
in a mouse model of hemophilia B using an LNP formulation that utilized
a proprietary ionizable lipid with biodegradable tails, ATX-100. Here, introduction of ester groups on the lipidic
backbone, which can be cleaved by esterases at acidic pH, increased
clearance rate with favorable secondary effect outcomes while maintaining
potency in comparison to MC3. 
Modifications on structures which have showed in vivo potency for siRNA delivery include tertiary amino alcohols, where
the headgroup alcohol was found to increase activity. Moderna has in recent years reported the efficacy
of aminoethanol headgroup-containing lipids with one linear and one
branched alkyl tail, connected via biodegradable
ester linkers to the tertiary amine, for mRNA therapies. , , One such ionizable lipid structure,
SM-102, is a component of Moderna’s COVID-19 vaccine. The Pfizer/BioNTec
“Comirnaty” COVID-19 vaccine uses a similar structure,
named ALC-0315, with an aminobutanol headgroup.
Anderson and
co-workers developed a diketopiperazine-based ionizable
lipid, cKK-E12 (also known as MD1), which has been used in LNP formulations
for cancer immunotherapy and genome editing. − For LNP delivery of mRNA coding for human erythropoietin (EPO),
the cKK-E12 formulation potency was superseded by OF-02, which introduced
unsaturated fatty chains, thereby increasing mRNA expression compared
to cKK-E12. Further, a biodegradable
ester version of OF-02, named OF-Deg-Lin, was shown to promote protein
expression selectively in the spleen, whereas the nonbiodegradable
OF-02 promoted expression in mouse liver. 
In other examples, in formulations utilizing libraries of
lipidoids
synthesized via Michael addition of primary amines
and alkyl acrylates and alkyl acrylamides while alcohol-terminated lipidoids with amide-linked tails improve
cell uptake, amine-terminated lipidoids with ester-linked tails impart
intracellular delivery by navigating obstacles to delivery further
downstream. Notably, in HeLa cells and a mouse model, they observed
near complete knockdown of firefly luciferase in siRNA-containing
LNPs utilizing mixtures of these two ionizable lipidoids in a synergistic
approach, while LNP formulations with the individual lipidoid components
were ineffective. Another variant ionizable
lipid named LP-01 (approximate pKa 6.1),
with an amine headgroup and ester-linked tails, was reported by Finn et al. as part of the LNP formulation for the co-delivery
of Cas9 mRNA and single guide RNA for transthyretin gene, enabling
successful editing of the mouse transthyretin gene in the liver. 
In another example, the COATOSOME SS-series
comprises two tertiary
amines with a range of aliphatic chains, linked by a disulfide bridge.
LNP formulations using these ionizable lipids have shown efficient
intracellular delivery and low cytotoxicity. The tertiary amine motifs
respond to an acidic compartment, such as endosome/lysosome, resulting
in membrane destabilization/fusion and RNA cargo release, and the
disulfides can be cleaved in the reductive environment of the cytoplasm. Miao and co-workers reported LNP formulations
utilizing lipidoids synthesized from isocyanides in a one-step, three-component
reaction. They found that, from a library of over 1000 molecules,
lipidoids with cyclic amine headgroups, azole linkers, and unsaturated
alkyl tails were the best performing as mRNA vaccines in tumor models in vivo, by stimulating adaptive immune cells through the
stimulator of interfereon genes (STING) pathway. In a final example, screening of LNP formulations including
lipidoids synthesized by reaction of epoxides with diamines identified
the lipidiod C12-200 as having good in vivo activity
in delivery of siRNA, mRNA, and also of self-amplifying RNA (saRNA). In the latter, the saRNA is complexed to the
surface of the LNPs by incubating it with already formulated LNPs,
instead of traditionally being incorporated in the formulation mixture,
and this was seen to be enough to prevent degradation.
In addition
to the structure of the ionizable/cationic lipid, the
overall lipid mixture composition, i.e., the ratio
of ionizable lipid/cholesterol/phospholipid/stabilizer is crucial
for optimized formulations. summarizes key structural and formulation optimization studies
and details the optimal formulations for specific cargo including
the outcome, size/ and formulation method used to produce the LNPs.
The majority of studies listed in use loaded LNPs prepared with a lipid/nucleic
acid charge ratio of 3:1. It has been
suggested that the amine/phosphate charge ratio is a key parameter
for cargo delivery, where a critical amount of excess amino lipid
is necessary for maximum endosome destabilization. Additionally, PEG-lipid
surface coverage and dissociation rate have a significant impact on
circulation times. 
 

## RNA-LNP Activity:
Structures and Formation Mechanisms
Optimizing production
methods for the controlled formulation of LNPs
is challenging. From an industrial perspective, samples typically
need to exhibit functional and structural reproducibility, long-term
stability, scalability, and cost efficiency. Many studies have reported
optimization of production methods for laboratory studies to improve
the controlled assembly of RNA-loaded LNPs. Particular challenges
include control of LNP diameter, encapsulation efficiency morphology,
and composition. , , , , 
The required diameter of LNP formulations designed for passive
targeting will depend on their clinical application. A 100–200
nm diameter LNP is appropriate to get a reasonable cell uptake. For
tumor extravasation and retention, however, a 50–100 nm is
more suitable. For targeting the lymphatic system, e.g., bone marrow, 40–50 nm diameter would
be a pertinent choice. Considering the size of low-density lipoproteins
made in the liver (about 20 nm), for a long-circulating LNP system,
a 20–30 nm diameter size will allow access to most locations
in the body, except perhaps the brain and muscle. Therefore, control
over the particle size is crucial for clinical success.
Tuning
the particle size can be achieved using microfluidic formulation
and by precisely controlling fluid flow rates, allowing different
size distributions to be achieved for identical particle compositions.
Changing the scale of formulations may affect their properties, requiring
expensive and time-consuming process development. It is possible to
form LNPs using numerous techniques including sonication, agitation,
homogenization, the spontaneous vesicle formation method, preformed
vesicle method, and microfluidic mixing. , , The first three techniques necessitate
cargo loading post-LNP formation as the harsh conditions can degrade
sensitive cargo such as RNA. With these considerations, the majority
of LNPs loaded with ON cargo are currently formulated using the spontaneous
vesicle formation method either in bulk or with an automated mixer
with two inputs. More recently, the mixing is commonly performed on
a microfluidic chip.
In a microfluidic chip, one input channel
injects the lipids used
in the formulation, typically the ionizable lipid, cholesterol, and
some helper lipids such as phospholipids (e.g., DSPC,
DOPC) and PEG-lipids which are dissolved in ethanol, and the other
channel injects the nucleic acid which is formulated in aqueous buffer
at pH 4. The rapid mixing of the solvent and aqueous mediums drives
the self-assembly of lipid structures. Recently, many experimental
approaches have been employed to optimize siRNA loaded LNPs formulated via microfluidics. In many
cases, the resulting LNPs are highly dependent on the formulation
conditions used and subsequent dialysis steps. At a pH below its pKa, the ionizable lipid is positively charged,
and therefore, at pH 4, there is an electrostatic interaction between
the negatively charged RNA and the lipid structures formed which drives
an association between them. At pH 7.4 the ionizable lipid is above
its pKa and therefore no longer positively
charged. After mixing of the lipids and cargo in the microfluidic
chip, the solution is subjected to a dialysis to remove the ethanol
and increase the pH from 4 to 7. This pH change and the removal of
ethanol induces structural changes in the particles and drives the
formation of the resulting LNP. The
proposed LNP formation mechanism is vesicle fusion induced by the
increased pH during the dialysis step and therefore decrease in the
charge on the ionizable lipid. Calculations suggest that for every
LNP observed after dialysis at pH 7.4, approximately 36 of the positively
charged vesicles formed at pH 4 need to fuse as the pH is increased. By understanding this process, lipid composition
can be revised in order to optimize LNP stability and performance.
Understanding the assembly mechanisms of RNA loaded LNPs is crucial
to optimizing formulations. An early mechanistic study used molecular-modeling
approaches, cryo-transmission electron microscopy, 31P
NMR, membrane fusion assays, and density measurements to study mixtures
of DLinKC2-DMA/DSPC/Chol/PEG-lipid (40/11.5/47.5/1 mol %). The results
suggested that siRNA-LNP systems have a nanostructured core consisting
of a periodic arrangement of inverted micelles with aqueous cores,
some of which contain siRNA duplexes. The proposed formation involved
three key stages; first, rapid mixing between the aqueous siRNA phase
and the lipid ethanol phase, second, the association of cationic lipid
with siRNA to form hydrophobic nucleating micellar structures, and
third, the coating of the nucleating structures by remaining lipids
(potentially the PEG-lipids) as they reach their solubility limits
in the ethanol/water system. Further
studies have shown that LNP–siRNA systems can exist in a continuum
of bilayer and nanostructured micellar structures where the morphology
depends on the lipid composition and siRNA content. As the DLin-KC2-DMA
content increased beyond 70 mol % siRNA encapsulation efficiencies
decreased. This effect was even more pronounced for formulations containing
higher percentages of PEG-lipid. Proof of concept data also demonstrated
encapsulation of mRNA, plasmid DNA, and gold nanoparticles into LNP
systems using microfluidic formulation techniques. 
More recent studies of lipid mixtures loaded with
siRNA and characterized
using cryogenic transmission electron microscopy and small-angle X-ray
scattering at clinically relevant siRNA content levels have proposed
a revised LNP structure which includes a combination of siRNA-bilayer
structures and an amorphous core. Based on structural observations
where the size of the amorphous LNP core depends on the amount of
ionizable lipid (20–50 mol %), the amorphous core appears to
be enriched with the ionizable lipid. The effect of mRNA on the structure of MC3-based LNPs with encapsulated
mRNA has also been reported. In a small-angle scattering study, Lindfors
and co-workers observed a disordered inverse hexagonal structure in
mRNA-loaded LNPs which was absent in unloaded particles. The also
reported localization of the lamellar phase lipid DSPC to particle
surfaces and showed that both size and
particle surface structure has a significant effect on intracellular
protein production in vitro.
Experiments demonstrate
that increasing the PEG content up to 5
mol % of the LNP by weight decreases the particle size (27–117
nm), and it has been suggested that the LNP surface is enriched in
PEG-lipid. , Consideration of the amount
and type of PEG-lipid is also crucial for rational design of RNA loaded
LNPs. The PEG-lipid is essential to produce a stable LNP population
with low polydispersity. However, short chain PEG-lipids are currently
preferable to promote shedding of the steric barrier following IV
administration to maximize hepatic gene-silencing in vivo. Studies using lipid compositions of MC3, distearoylphosphatidylcholine,
cholesterol, and PEG-lipid to quantitate hepatic gene-silencing showed
increasing the concentration above 1.5 mol % substantially compromises
hepatocyte gene knockdown for PEG-lipids with longer chains (C18)
but not for shorter chains (C14 and C16). This is attributed to an
increased PEG-lipid desorption time in vivo for C18
compared to C14. 
The amount of
PEG-lipid also impacts the LNP size—as mentioned
previously, the effect of particle size on activity is crucial for
certain applications. By varying the amount of PEG-lipid content,
particle size can be controlled, with smaller LNPs being formulated
at high ratios of PEG-lipid. , , By altering the PEG-lipid composition, LNP-siRNA particles formulated
to have a mean diameter of 78 nm showed maximum FVII gene-silencing in vivo.( )
While the size
is controlled by the PEG-lipid content, LNP systems
that do not contain enough DSPC to cover an external surface monolayer
will incorporate additional cholesterol and/or ionizable lipid in
that monolayer, thus disturbing the activity. It was shown that siRNA-LNP
systems containing 10 mol % of DSPC exhibit maximum activity for a
size of 80 nm, which suggests that to obtain smaller systems with
optimized activity, higher levels of DSPC should be incorporated. This was confirmed in both human adipocytes
and hepatocytes, where protein expression levels for 130 nm mRNA-LNP
systems differed as much as 50-fold depending on lipid compositions
with a constant DLin-MC3-DMA/Chol molar ratio. The results suggest
that some of these differences may be attributed to changes in surface
composition of the particles and the impact this may have on the ability
of LNPs to fuse with the endosomal membrane. , 
The proportions of different lipid species in optimized RNA-LNP
systems may vary according to the particular ionizable cationic lipid
employed (see ). This expands considerably the possible lipid composition of an
LNP system but mostly challenges researchers to find the optimal combination
for a particular application. On-going efforts are put on using advanced
approaches such as high-throughput screening methods and computer-assisted
drug formulation, as well as implementing digitalization and artificial
intelligence for developing personalized nanomedicine.

## Biological
Interactions: PEG Shedding and the Protein Corona
In biological
media, LNP dispersions will interact with the numerous
biomolecules present. The exact nature of this interaction and the
impact on functional delivery will undoubtedly be complex and systematic
studies are needed. It is possible that serum proteins adsorb on to
the surface of LNPs which could trigger uptake by surrounding macrophages
(e.g., Kuppfer cells) or dendritic cells. The PEG-lipid
is crucial to maintain the size and stability of the LNPs before administration
and any PEG molecules that are present on the particle surface will
also minimize in vivo serum protein adsorption. This
will facilitate access to tissues other than phagocytes. However,
if the PEG-lipid is not optimized for the application and lipid composition
it can inhibit cellular uptake. It had been observed that the presence
of a long-lived PEG-coating (i.e., PEG molecules
with C18 or C20 lipids anchors) can dramatically reduce RNA activity. , , To avoid this, the PEG-lipids
have to date mostly been designed to partly dissociate from the LNPs
following injection. It is thought that this enables access to the
LNP surface and therefore interactions with the biological environment
and the target cells. This phenomenon is called “PEG shedding”.
NMR studies have shown that the rate of “PEG shedding”
is inversely proportional to the lipid hydrocarbon chain length, meaning
that formulations with shorter PEG-lipids shed more than those with
longer tails. , Inhibition of cellular uptake
and immune response effects were observed by using a C14 anchor PEG-lipid
which sheds off from the surface in few minutes postinjection. , The mechanism behind this process and the proteins involved remain
obscure; however, it is possible that a synergy between PEG shedding
and coating of the RNA-LNPs by biomolecules in the surrounding medium, i.e., coronation, is essential to maintain particle stability,
cellular uptake, and functional response. 
Coronation, or protein corona formation, is described as the
protein adsorption layer that forms and defines the biological “identity”
of a particle as well as mediates further interactions between the
particles and the biological environment. − Protein corona studies provide molecular level insight into mechanisms
of cellular recognition, uptake, and intracellular destiny of particles. Among the different classes of adsorbed biomolecules
(e.g., proteins, lipids, carbohydrates, , and metabolites ), the apolipoprotein ApoE, involved in the
metabolism of fats in the body, has shown to play a crucial role for
LNP uptake in hepatocytes. , LNP-siRNA gene-silencing
activity was significantly decreased in an ApoE knockout mouse model
(ApoE–/−), and activity could be rescued by preincubating
the particles with ApoE before administration. In a low-density lipoprotein
receptor knockout model (LDLR–/−), LNP-siRNA formulations
displayed less gene-silencing activity (leading to higher ED50 values) than in wild-type animals. LNP activity could be rescued
through addition of a multivalent targeting ligand, N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc), for the hepatocyte asialoglycoprotein
receptor, thereby promoting internalization through an alternative
endocytic route. , Authors concluded that ApoE
association with siRNA-LNP systems plays a major role in triggering
LNP uptake into hepatocytes by clathrin-mediated endocytosis via the LDL receptor. These observations are in line with
a previous study by Gilleron et al. reporting that
uptake of LNPs in vitro occurs via macropinocytosis and clathrin-mediated endocytosis. In this study, 50% reduction of LNP uptake
upon downregulation of the clathrin heavy chain-1 was observed and
knockdown of the macropinocytosis regulators CTBP1, Rac1, Rabankyrin-5
(but not Cdc42) or the use of EIPA, a pharmacological inhibitor of
macropinocytosis, led to a 60% and 70% decrease in LNP uptake in HeLa
cells, respectively. Downregulation of caveolin 1 did not modify LNP
uptake. In the same cell model but using a different cationic lipid
to formulate the LNP, Sahay et al. reported that
downregulation of Cdc42 and Rac1 led to 80% decrease in LNP uptake,
whereas inhibition of clathrin heavy chain-1 and caveolin-1 had little
impact on LNP entry. Together, these
studies highlight areas in the design of LNP, which need further optimization
and understanding to achieve efficient intracellular delivery.
Since LNP delivery efficiency is influenced by the formation of
a protein corona in biological media, one may expect that a healthy
individual or a patient suffering of a pathology affecting the serum
composition, will have different serum-protein diversity and concentration
which could possibly affect the protein-corona composition of LNP
and thus alter their activity in vivo, as observed
for PLGA nanoparticles. In addition,
it is important to note that lipid self-assembly and therefore LNP
morphology is driven by biophysical parameters including composition,
temperature, pressure, electrostatics and lipid packing which have
already been extensively reviewed and are therefore not addressed
here. − Therefore, the morphology and functional
response of an RNA-LNP system administrated into a patient with abnormal
body temperature (e.g., fever or low-body-temperature-related
syndrome) may differ (e.g., protein-corona formation
and delivery efficiency) when compared to a healthy volunteer. To
date, LNPs have shown efficient delivery of RNA to the liver using
passive cellular targeting (size control and protein adsorption).
Compositional variations in LNPs have been demonstrated to enhance
LNP accumulation in the lung and spleen; however, delivery to other organs remains challenging. Like liposomal
systems, LNPs can take advantage of “natural” and synthetic
targeting processes to actively reach specific tissues and cells.
The main strategies rely on proteins, peptides or natural ligands,
antibodies or antibody fragments, as well as aptamers. Antibody-mediated
targeting has demonstrated success in gene-silencing with LNP systems.
As an example, Rameshetti et al. used an anti-CD4
monoclonal antibody as a targeting moiety on LNP and showed specific
binding, uptake and CD45-silencing in murine CD4 positive T lymphocytes
following intravenous administration. In the study, a dose of 1 mg/kg siRNA, lower than other nontargeted
systems to leukocytes, was effective in silencing T-cells in the blood,
spleen, bone marrow, and inguinal lymph nodes. It was also demonstrated
that two CD4 positive T-cell populations exist, whereby internalization
of the targeted LNPs was observed only by the CD4 low-expression level
population, leading to 69% CD45 knockdown, while localization of LNPs
on the surface of the CD4 high-expression level population did not
alter CD45 expression. For B-cell malignancy, Weinstein et
al. designed an anti-CD38 monoclonal antibody-coated LNP
to specifically deliver encapsulated siRNA against cyclin D1 in mantle
cell lymphoma cells. The study showed
that treatment induced gene-silencing, suppressed tumor cell growth
and prolonged survival of mice. Hyaluronan is a natural ligand of
the CD44 receptor, which is often overexpressed on the surface of
various cancer cells. Cohen et al. have shown that
local delivery of hyaluronan-coated LNPs containing siRNA for PLK1
specifically target CD44 cells in a murine glioma model. The treatment induced internalization of the
LNP, robust PLK1-silencing, and cell death of glioma cells prolonging
survival of animals. It seems reasonable to wonder whether the protein
corona confound the targeting of LNP with specific ligands coated
on their surface and if the surface functionality of LNP is preserved
in the presence of a protein corona. Nevertheless, it remains possible
to control on purpose the corona composition. Zhang et al. have provided an elegant example whereby retinol-conjugated polyetherimine
nanoparticles selectively recruit retinol binding protein 4 in its
corona, enabling targeted delivery of antisense ONs to hepatic stellate
cells. 

## Intracellular Trafficking
and Endosomal Escape
Upon
internalization, cargo is sequentially transported through early endosomes,
late endosomes, and lysosomes. The various
stages of transport can be evaluated by the time-dependent colocalization
with specific markers such as EEA1, as well as Rab5, for early endosomes,
and Rab7/9 or LAMP-1 for late endosomes and lysosomes. It is believed
that an efficient LNP-RNA transfection relies on an early and narrow
endosomal escape window prior to lysosomal sequestration and/or exocytosis.
In their study, Gilleron et al. have explored the
biogenesis and maturation of LNP-containing organelles. Following
injection of mice with LNP composed of ionizable lipid, cholesterol,
DSPC, and DMG-PEG with gold particles conjugated-siRNA, they estimated
that only 1–2% of internalized siRNA was released from moderately
acidic compartments sharing early and late endosomal characteristics,
which nevertheless lead to a significant knockdown. Sahay et al. have tracked the intracellular
transport in HeLa cells of similar LNP system (with different cationic
lipid) loaded with siRNA. They estimated that 70% of the siRNA underwent
endocytic recycling via late endosomes and lysosomes
and concluded that efficiency of siRNA delivery by LNP is limited
by endocytic recycling. To block these
events and thereby increase opportunities for endosomal escape, Wang et al. have inhibited the Niemann Pick type C1, a late endosomal/lysosomal
membrane protein involved in endosomal recycling. The study revealed that the presence of the inhibitor NP3.47
caused 3-fold or higher increases in accumulation of LNP-siRNA in
late endosomes/lysosomes and the gene-silencing potency of LNP siRNA
was enhanced up to 4-fold in the presence of NP3.47. This is an attractive
strategy to enhance the therapeutic efficacy, however, it is believed
that a deep understanding of what orchestrates the RNA escape from
endosomes will aid the design of safe and efficient LNP systems. It
has been shown ex vivo that cationic lipids can exhibit
the ability to induce nonbilayer structures in lipid systems containing
anionic phospholipids. 
Biophysical
studies where the behaviors of biological particles (e.g., cellular organelles or LNPs) and membrane-membrane interactions
are mimicked can provide insights into mechanisms driving LNP functionality.
These approaches enable control of the LNP environment (e.g., hydrodynamic flow, controlled pH, protein-corona formation) to
track their motion via surface-sensitive optical
imaging, enabling determination of their diffusion coefficients and
flow-induced drifts, from which accurate quantification of both size
and emission intensity can be made. In
cells, the two methods that provide robust confirmation of endosomal
disruption are transmission electron microscopy and cellular fractionation,
but these methods are not amenable to rapid, high-throughput analysis.
In contrast, fluorescent microscopy allows to detect endosomal rupture
events in living cells with high-content imaging. After the role of
Galectin 8, a cytosolically dispersed protein, in innate immunity—in
which it functions to detect disrupted endosomes due to high-affinity
binding with glycans selectively found on the inner leaflet of endosomal
membranes—was discovered, Wittrup et al. used cytosolic galectins (Gal1, Gal3, Gal4, Gal8
and Gal9) to monitor endosomal disruption of LNP in living cells. They reported that the appearance of Gal8 positive
spots temporally coincides with the cytosolic delivery of fluorescently
labeled siRNA from LNPs. More recently, Kilchrist et al. have established the utility of Gal8 subcellular tracking for the
rapid optimization and high-throughput screening of the endosome disruption
potency of intracellular delivery technologies. Galectins are 15 members family of carbohydrates with widespread
functions and expressions across cell types. The tracking of endosomal
escape events requires the development of live-cell imaging assays
which can be used to screen for LNP efficiency on a large diversity
of cells. A 30-cell line LNP-mRNA transfection screen identified three
cell lines having low, medium, and high transfection that correlated
with protein expression when they were analyzed in tumor models. Endocytic
profiling of these cell lines identified major differences in endolysosomal
morphology and pH, localization, endocytic uptake, trafficking and
recycling. The endocytic profiling and
monitoring of endosomal escape events are an important and challenging
preclinical evaluation step to support the success of nucleic acid
delivery systems and improve their translation to clinical trials.

## Extracellular Vesicles for RNA Delivery
Extracellular vesicles
(EVs) consist of a heterogeneous family
of nanosized vesicles (overall 40–2000 nm) including exosomes,
microvesicles (MVs), and apoptotic bodies. EVs are naturally released
by all cells into the extracellular environment and body fluids, playing
key roles in different processes including antigen presentation and
intercellular communication. EVs are able to transfer molecules from
donor cells to recipient cells through the extracellular environment
and the bloodstream. − The field of using EVs for drug delivery was ignited in 2007 when
Valadi et al. demonstrated that exosomes from murine
mast cells could transfer material to human mast cells, resulting
in the presence of exogenous murine protein in the recipient human
cells. Since then, myriad publications
have demonstrated the utility of using EVs derived from different
sources for delivery of various RNA species.
While LNP-based
therapeutics have already reached the clinic, EVs
are not far behind. Recent developments in the EV field have led to
numerous clinical trials involving EVs as targeted therapeutics. , As discussed herein, EVs are complex, multicomponent systems, and
therefore, their development as a next-generation drug delivery platform
requires expansive elucidation. To this end, the EV field has grown
exponentially in recent years. In this section, the engineering and
production methods of EVs are outlined with a focus on using EVs to
deliver RNA.

## EV Biogenesis
Whether in vitro or in vivo, cells constantly produce, internalize, and recycle
biomolecules and nanoparticulate species including EVs. Several subpopulations
of EVs exist and can be classified by various criteria such as their
cargo composition, their size and density, or, most commonly, their
biogenesis.
The goal of EV biogenesis studies is to characterize
how EVs are formed via different pathways and how
each pathway determines the EV composition and physical characteristics. , The two general types of EVs, based on biogenesis, are microvesicles
(MVs), which bud from the plasma membrane, and exosomes, which originate
from the endocytic pathway. Exosomes are formed through the release
of intraluminal vesicles (ILVs) from within multivesicular bodies
(MVBs). These can be further classified into smaller subpopulations
of EVs based on size, density, and the presence or absence of EV biomarkers.
Due to MVs and exosomes being formed in different cellular locations
and loaded via different packaging machinery, their
luminal cargo differs in composition. 
The biogenesis of EVs is a heavily discussed subject within
the
EV research field. Years of research have brought to light numerous,
difficult-to-elucidate pathways of EV biogenesis, which are heavily
interwoven with other cell functions. For example, exosome biogenesis
can be broadly divided into endosomal sorting complex required for
transport (ESCRT)-independent or ESCRT-dependent pathways. ESCRT and
its associated proteins, such as ALIX, syntenin, syndecan, and TSG-101,
have been implicated in ILV formation and exosome biogenesis to varying
degrees between cell types. Do to their role in EV biogenesis, these
proteins have historically been used as EV biomarkers. However, studies
in mammalian cell culture have revealed that a complete disruption
of ESCRT function, and therefore the interactions of these proteins,
does not abolish ILV formation. Similarly,
ALIX depletion decreases but does not abolish EV production but rather
shifts the heterogeneity in protein composition of the produced EVs. − These findings imply that numerous pathways for exosome secretion
exist with some interdependencies, but exosome production is not completely
dependent on any single pathway.
The fact that various EV-packaging
machineries exist coincides
with the fact that certain EV subpopulations can induce differential
effects in recipient cells. , Together, these imply
that certain subpopulations may be better suited than others for some
therapeutic strategies. For example, subpopulations can exhibit differential
organ biodistribution profiles in vivo. , It also suggests that certain subpopulations of EVs may contain
more relevant biomarkers than other subpopulations and should therefore
be preferentially isolated for analysis in diagnostic settings. The functional differences between EV subpopulations
are not yet fully characterized, and there remains a strong focus
in the EV field to better understand EV heterogeneity at the single
vesicle level.
Despite the complexity of EV biogenesis, effective
approaches to
load EVs with specific cargo have been developed. These engineering
strategies often utilize the proteins which contribute to endogenous
EV biogenesis, such as those mentioned above. In the context of RNA
delivery, EV engineering approaches seek to preferentially load RNAs
into EVs. This can be accomplished through endogenous of exogenous
loading approaches.

## Endogenous Loading of RNA into EVs
Several groups have
attempted to map the endogenous RNA profiles of EVs from different
species, organs, disease states, and cell types. To date, almost all
types of RNA have been found in isolated EVs in both functional and
fragmented forms, including miRNA, rRNA (rRNA), long noncoding RNA.
The majority of RNA present in EVs is between 20 and 200 nucleotides
in size. Several groups have also found that EVs, particularly those
of cancer origin, contain full length, functional mRNA. − Almost every study mapping the RNA profiles of EVs has revealed
that certain RNA species are differentially loaded into EVs. It appears
that in some instances, the selection of certain RNAs is due to a
specific RNA-sorting machinery, and in other instances this differential
loading is simply a biproduct of unspecific, unrelated processes. 
It is currently believed that EVs carry
approximately half of the total circulating RNA in plasma. , This includes coding and noncoding RNA such as miRNA, mRNA, tRNA,
and others. Additionally, the different populations of EVs contain
distinct RNA profiles, with MVs having an RNA profile most closely
resembling the transcriptome of the producer cells while exosomes
are enriched in miRNA. The foremost
goal of endogenous RNA loading is to take advantage of the inherent
selective enrichment of the desired RNA into EVs. This can be accomplished
by either a passive or an active loading process. Passive endogenous
loading involves using a construct to overexpress the desired RNA
which is then loaded into EVs via the cells’
own mechanisms. In this approach, the overexpression vector functions
to stoichiometrically increase RNA loading without the need for other
vectors which alter RNA loading through molecular interaction. Active
endogenous loading, on the other hand, involves the implementation
of a recombinant fusion construct which usually contains an RNA-binding
domain (RBD) fused to an EV protein. Active endogenous loading has been used to substantially increase
the number of target mRNA loaded into EVs. 
Active endogenous loading of mRNA must utilize some RBD which
recruits
the desired RNA into EVs. Currently, there is a strong focus in the
EV field to identify RBDs responsible for the endogenous sorting of
specific RNA into the EVs. So far, these
studies have revealed specific RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) such as
MVP (major vault protein), YBX1 (Y-box protein 1), and sumoylated
hnRNPA2B1 (heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein A2/B1). , The presence of endogenous RBPs implies the existence of protein-binding
motifs on the mRNA which is enriched in EVs. Separately, this was
confirmed in the identification of a zipcode-like 25 nucleotide sequence
in the 3′-untranslated region (3′UTR) of mRNAs enriched
in MVs compared to their parental cells. 
Active endogenous loading is a well-established technique
to load
exogenous proteins into EVs. For example, in a screening study comparing
several GFP-tagged EV sorting domains, Corso et al. found that transient overexpression of CD63-GFP in the EV-producing
cells yielded fluorescent EVs which contain 40–60 GFP molecules
per vesicle. Additionally, approaches
which use non-human RNA-binding domains exist. For example, Wang et al. developed a platform utilizing the HIV-TAT peptide
to selectively load mRNA into MVs for functional delivery. The number of RBDs and EV proteins which are
being utilized for active endogenous mRNA loading is continually increasing.
Apart from mRNAs, platforms for loading small RNA species into
EVs are being developed. Passive endogenous loading of miRNAs can
be achieved by use of a miRNA overexpression construct. For example,
it has been shown that HEK293 and COS-7 cells, upon transfection with
a plasmid coding for several miRNAs (e.g., miR-16,
−21, −143, −146a or −155), release exosomes
containing these specific miRNAs. Importantly, these exosomes could
deliver the miRNAs into recipient cells, leading to mRNA-silencing. Similarly, pre-miR-451 has been identified
as a pre-miRNA which is highly enriched in extracellular vesicles.
As long as the hairpin structure of the pre-miRNA is conserved, the
miRNA target sequence can be altered. By inserting a desired target sequence into the pre-miR-451 hairpin
structure, EVs were produced which could functionally deliver the
pre-miRNA in an efficacious manner, demonstrating this approach as
an effective passive endogenous method of loading functional small
RNA into EVs.
One of the biggest experimental challenges with
using endogenous
EV loading is the inability to prevent carry-over of plasmid DNA,
viral RNA, or translated protein into the produced EVs. Overexpressing
mRNA is always accompanied by increased protein translation in the
EV-producing cells. It is then difficult to discriminate between RNA-mediated
effects and protein-mediated effects in the recipient cells. de Jong et al. approached this issue with development of a Cas9-based
reporter system which relies on EV transfer of sgRNA, enabling measurement
of EV RNA transfer on the single-cell level. While there is a focus within the EV field to address this challenging
aspect of endogenous RNA loading, there also exist techniques to load
EV cargo in a highly selective manner through exogenous loading.

## Exogenous Loading of RNA into EVs
While the endogenous
approaches rely on the production of cargo-loaded EVs, the exogenous
approaches focus on loading cargo into EVs once the EVs are already
produced and isolated. For some EV cargo which is hydrophobic, this
can be achieved simply by co-incubation with EVs. In 2010, Curcumin
(an anti-inflammatory therapeutic) was successfully loaded into EVs
after co-incubation with isolated EVs at room temperature (22 °C)
for 5 min. These EVs were able to protect the curcumin as well as
to improve its solubility and functional efficiency in vivo, suppressing the inflammation in mouse models. 
However, cargo which is hydrophilic must be loaded
in a strategic manner. This often occurs via harsh
physical methods which can compromise EV integrity, decrease immune-compatibility,
and induce EV and cargo aggregation or degredation. , Electroporation is the most common method to date, in which EVs
are electrically stimulated while in a solution of the cargo. The
EV membrane spontaneously forms pores in which the cargo can enter
the lumen. This has proven an effective
method for loading functional siRNA. , In 2018,
EVs electroporated with either miR-125b-ASO or Cas9 mRNA + sgRNA were
able to functionally deliver their cargo. When the EVs containing the miR-125b-ASO were delivered in vitro to leukemia cells or systemically injected in mouse
models, the miR-125b expression was reduced; at the same time, EVs
loaded with Cas9 mRNA were transferred, simultaneously with gRNA targeting
miR-125b, to leukemia cells (MOML13), miR-125b expression was reduced
by 98%.
Another, more recent, exogenous RNA loading technique
is to co-incubate
isolated EVs with cholesterol-conjugated siRNAs (cc-siRNA). After
optimizing the protocol for siRNA loading via this
method, EVs achieved concentration-dependent silencing of human antigen
R (HuR). Similarly, a hydrophobically
modified siRNA (hsiRNA) targeting Huntingtin (HTT) mRNA could be functionally
loaded into exosomes via co-incubation. Reduction
of HTT mRNA was observed after the EVs were injected to mouse primary
cortical neurons. Other methods of exogenous
RNA loading include EV transfection, sonication, extrusion, and liposome-EV
hybrid particle formation. , 
A combination
of both endogenous and exogenous methods can also
be applied successfully. For example,
targeting proteins can be endogenously incorporated to the EV membrane,
and then RNA can be loaded to the isolated EVs via exogenous methods. This was demonstrated by Alvarez-Erviti et al. by means of endogenously loading Lamp2b-fusion constructs
onto EVs and then sequentially loading the EVs with siRNA via electroporation. Similarly,
EVs engineered with Lamp2b-Rabies Virus Glycoprotein (RVG) and loaded
with siRNA were successfully delivered to mouse brain via intravenous injection. These combination
engineering strategies are being continuously optimized and show promise.
 

## EV Fate and Cargo Delivery
The fate of EVs in circulation
is believed to be determined by factors such as EV size and the display
of surface components which may influence recognition of the EVs by
cells. The extents to which EV uptake is determined by EV characteristics
or by attributes of the recipient cells remains incompletely characterized,
and there are studies suggesting the importance of both. Generally,
the mechanisms of EV uptake can be broken down into 3 steps: targeting,
internalization, and cargo delivery.
Targeting to the acceptor
cell refers to the initial contact and capture of the EV by the acceptor
cell. Targeting can occur on a tissue-specific level and a cell-specific
level. In regard to tissue targeting, EVs have been shown to have
a short half-life in circulation in mice when administered intravenously,
with organs showing peak EV internalization at 5 min postinjection. The organs with the highest EV signal were
the liver and spleen.
On the cellular level, several proteins
present on both EVs and
the surfaces of the acceptor cells have been implicated in EV targeting
and capture. These including lectins, proteoglycans, integrins such
as ITGB3, and T-cell immunoglobulins. − Additionally, exogenous targeting
proteins can be utilized to increase or decrease EV targeting to a
desired cell type or tissue. As mentioned above, RVG can increase
EV targeting to mouse brain. Conversely,
EVs which display CD47 are capable of evading macrophage and monocyte
detection, which beneficially increases the EV time in circulation. 
The second step, internalization, is
also determined both in part
by characteristics of the EVs and the acceptor cell types. Early studies
of EV internalization identified macropinocytosis as a route of internalization,
and since then several other uptake pathways have been identified
including receptor-mediated endocytosis and filopodia-recruitment. − To date, there are no specific proteins which have been shown completely
sufficient and necessary to initiate EV internalization. However, specific factors have been identified
as strongly influencing EV internalization. For one, heparin sulfate
proteoglycans (HSPGs) that reside on the acceptor cells are able to
bind cancer-derived EVs and the level of HSPG-dependent EV uptake
is strongly relevant to the biological activity of the EVs. In line with this, heparin has been shown to
block functional EV transfer between cells. Additionally, integrins on the surface of EVs from tumors have been
implicated as a key component driving the uptake of these EVs. Together, these findings implicate both positive
and negative uptake-regulating factors on the surface of EVs.
The third step, cargo delivery, is dependent on the ability of
the EV membrane to fuse with the membrane of the endosomal compartment
it is trafficked into. By achieving this fusion, endosomal escape
of the EV cargo can be initiated. EV Zeta-potential partially determines
membrane destabilization and subsequent membrane fusion. The zeta
potential of EVs is influenced by pH and the valency of surrounding
ions. It follows that as internalized
EVs are shuttled along the endosomal system, the decreasing pH reduces
EV membrane stability, encouraging membrane fusion. The exact endocytic
organelles in which this occurs is not fully elucidated.
The
lipid composition of the EV membrane and the endosomal membrane
are also proposed to influence cargo delivery. Endosomal membranes
are constantly undergoing remodeling and recomposition as endosomes
mature. The dynamic nature of the endosomal membrane is crucial to
EV cargo delivery. Endosomal remodeling is dependent in part on the
presence of cholesterol and phosphatidylserine, both of which are
present endogenously to EV membranes. − The presence of these membrane
components may play a crucial role in EV-endosome membrane fusion.
Fitting with this, it has been demonstrated that EV cargo delivery
is diminished by blocking EV phosphatidylserine. 
Many early studies of EV uptake fall short of demonstrating
cargo
delivery, and instead quantitate only EV internalization. This is
usually based on a fluorescent readout which can quantitate uptake
events per cell. However, even if the
fluorescent signal is coming from within the cell, it is still unknown
if the signal is coming from a functional compartment of the cell
such as the cytosol or nucleus, or if the cargo has been arrested
in the endosomal system. Recent work has focused on developing approaches
to quantitate cytosolic or nuclear delivery of EV cargo. This can
be accomplished by means of complementary subunit reporter systems,
in which a nonfunctional protein subunit is loaded into EVs and the
complementary subunit is expressed in the cytosol of the recipient
cell. This has led to the development
of strategies which encourage endosomal escape of EV cargo.
Another recently developed strategy for endosomal escape of EV
cargo is to engineer EVs to display fusogenic proteins or peptides
on their surface. One of the most promising proteins is the G glycoprotein
of the vesicular stomatitis virus glycoprotein (VSVG). VSVG is responsible
for membrane attachment and membrane fusion in rhabdoviruses. In regard to EV engineering, VSVG can be incorporated
to the EV membrane through passive endogenous loading. VSVG can then induce EV membrane fusion in
a similar mechanism as it does with viral envelopes, encouraging EV
cargo release. The list of molecular
engineering strategies to encourage EV cargo delivery is continuously
expanding.

## Current Developments
Even as EVs
prove effective in
clinical trials, as an emerging next-generation drug delivery platform
there are certain areas which remain the focus of ongoing research.
For one, EV heterogeneity has been historically addressed on the EV
population level. The heterogeneous composition of any EV population
adds a layer of complexity to their use. To further resolve this,
there is a strong focus on developing single-particle characterization
methods for EV analysis. By examining
EVs on the single-particle level, the numerous variables effecting
EV activity can be better described.
Additionally, there is
a strong focus on elucidating in vivo uptake pathways
which drive the therapeutic outcome of EVs. As discussed above, there
exist quantitative models for investigating EV uptake in vitro and in vivo, but there is no current consensus
regarding the mode of EV uptake in vivo. , Further, the fate of EV cargo within acceptor cells in vivo has yet to be completely elucidated, even though the therapeutic
outcomes are quantifiably tangible.
There also exists a practical
need in the lack of a standard EV-dosing
protocol. As mentioned, EVs are nanoparticles which contain proteins,
lipids, nucleic acids, and other biomolecules as cargo. A significant
problem with dosing EVs lies in the fact that none of these molecular
species correlate perfectly with the overall EV number. These ratios of the EV cargo to the particle
number can be influenced by several factors, including the method
of EV isolation and the method of EV quantitation. EVs have historically
been quantified by the total particle number, the mass of either protein
or lipid, or the presence of specific molecules such as RNA. While
it may seem optimal to use the RNA concentration to dose RNA-loaded
EVs, the RNA quantitation can be confounded by nonvesicular RNA which
is can be present in the final EV preparation in the form of ribonuclearproteins. − 
In conclusion, the potential of using EVs as an RNA therapeutic
strategy lies in their ability to combine biological and physical
engineering approaches. Each challenge that arises in RNA delivery
can be addressed individually and through a range of techniques, as
highlighted by the studies discussed herein. As broader genetic engineering
approaches develop, the therapeutic EV field will directly benefit.

## Concluding Remarks
The number of clinical and preclinical
studies involving RNA therapies,
and specifically ON therapies, is rapidly expanding. Only a small
number of possible combinations of ON chemistries, targets, and formulations
have been investigated to date—a sign that the ON and RNA therapeutic
fields are still just in their early days. Nevertheless, ONs have
already successfully proven effective to target DNA, RNA, pre-mRNA,
and proteins. These qualities firmly establish ONs as a therapeutic
class. Separately, biological and synthetic nanocarriers such as EVs
and LNPs are each in their own early stages of development but are
rapidly gaining attention. As all of these individual advancements
come together, the coming years should witness an inflection point
in the rate of development of RNA therapeutics.

## Acknowledgments
This review has been supported by the Swedish Foundation
of Strategic Research (SSF) in the Industrial Research Centre, FoRmulaEx–Nucleotide
Functional Drug Delivery (IRC15-0065), and AstraZeneca, PLC. M.M.S.
acknowledges support from the UK Regenerative Medicine Platform grant
“Acellular/Smart Materials–3D Architecture” (MR/R015651/1)
and from the Royal Academy of Engineering under the Chairs in Emerging
Technologies scheme (CIET2021\94).

## Glossary

## Vocabulary
oligonucleotidea short
(15–20 bp) strand of natural or synthetic nucleic acids
endosomal escapethe point in drug delivery in which the active molecule breaches
the endosomal membrane to enter the cell cytosol
gapmersstructurally unique
ONs which bind to and initiate the degradation of their target RNA
in an RNase H-dependent mechanism
splice-switching ONsONs which act to
redirect the splicing repertoire of the target sequence by blocking
the normal assembly of the splicing machinery to the pre-mRNA
extracellular vesiclea nanosized lipid-bilayer-bound particle naturally released
from cells
lipid nanoparticlespherical vesicles composed at least partially of
ionizable lipids

The authors
declare the following competing financial interest(s): SEA is a shareholder
and co-founder of EVOX Therapeutics.

## References