J Med ChemJ Med Chem822acssd9716531jmJournal of Medicinal Chemistry0022-26231520-4804pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleACS AuthorChoicePMC8009507PMC8009507.1800950780095073267245710.1021/acs.jmedchem.0c005101PerspectiveModulating microRNA
Processing: Enoxacin, the Progenitor
of a New Class of Drugs
FelicettiTommasoCecchettiViolettaManfroniGiuseppe Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Perugia, via del Liceo 1, 06123 Perugia, Italy*Phone: (+39)
075 585 5136. Email: giuseppe.manfroni@unipg.it.160720201211202063213785601227512289270320203003202131032021070820242020American Chemical Societyhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/Permits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). 
The
RNA interference (RNAi) process encompasses the cellular mechanisms
by which short-noncoding RNAs posttranscriptionally modulate gene
expression. First discovered in 1998, today RNAi represents the foundation
underlying complex biological mechanisms that are dysregulated in
many diseases. MicroRNAs are effector molecules of gene silencing
in RNAi, and their modulation can lead to a wide response in cells.
Enoxacin was reported as the first and unique small-molecule enhancer
of microRNA (SMER) maturation. Herein, the biological activity of
enoxacin as SMER is discussed to shed light on its innovative mode
of action, its potential in treating different diseases, and the feasibility
of using enoxacin as a chemical template for inspiring medicinal chemists.
We debate its mechanism of action at the molecular level and the possible
impact on future ligand and/or structure-guided chemical optimizations,
as well as opportunities and drawbacks associated with the development
of quinolones such as SMERs.

pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BYdocument-id-old-9jm0c00510document-id-new-14jm0c00510ccc-price

## Overview of RNAi
Until some years ago, most scientific studies had been directed
toward the understanding of protein-coding DNA regions, thus ignoring
the remaining DNA considered by many as “junk”. Much
has been made of the year 1993, when two independent studies led to
the discovery that a short noncoding region of DNA (lin-4) was involved in negatively regulating the expression of LIN-14
in Caenorhabditis elegans. , A
few years later (1998), Andrew Fire and Craig Mello published their
breakthrough study on the mechanism of RNA interference (RNAi) and were subsequently awarded the Nobel Prize
in Physiology or Medicine in 2006. 
Today, we know that RNAi is a posttranscriptional process triggered
by double-stranded RNA (dsRNA), which leads to gene silencing in a
sequence-specific manner. MicroRNAs (miRNAs), small noncoding RNAs
constituting approximately 22 nucleotides, play a key role in RNAi.
By targeting a specific mRNA through base pairing, miRNAs lead to
its degradation or translational suppression. To date, more than 1,000
miRNAs have been discovered and more than 60% of human protein-coding
genes contain at least one conserved miRNA-binding site. The miRNA biogenesis (outlined in ) begins in the nucleus after
RNA-polymerase II-mediated transcription to generate a primary transcript
(pri-miRNA) that in turn is cleaved by the RNase III Drosha in combination
with the double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) binding protein (dsRBP) named
DGCR8 to a shorter hairpin precursor having approximately 70 nucleotides
(pre-miRNA). After export to the cytosol by Ran-GTP/Exportin-5, the
RNase III Dicer cleaves the loop of pre-miRNA to generate a mature
double-stranded miRNA by interacting with the cofactor TAR-RNA binding
protein (TRBP), a double-stranded RNA binding protein that was first
identified as a cellular protein that facilitates the replication
of human immunodeficiency virus. Subsequently,
the Dicer/TRBP/miRNA complex is loaded onto Argonaute proteins that,
after duplex miRNA unwinding, generate the RNA-induced silencing complex
(RISC) including the single-stranded miRNA responsible for specific
mRNA silencing (degradation/suppression). The seed region of mature miRNAs is typically a sequence of 6–8
nucleotides at the 5′ end with partial or total complementarity
to the 3′ untranslated region (UTR) of the mRNA target. Each miRNA has hundreds of target mRNAs, and
miRNAs having a common seed region regulate the same targets. In this manner, miRNAs play a crucial role in
various processes such as tissue development, morphogenesis, apoptosis,
and signal transduction pathways, thus showing involvement in both
physiological pathways and numerous diseases. , 
 Tuning miRNA pathways
has attracted great interest in the past
decade, leading to different strategies aimed at targeting specific
miRNAs or mRNAs involved in various diseases. miRNA and/or short-interfering
RNA (siRNA)-based therapeutics have been developed, culminating in
tens of molecules facing clinical trials. Patisiran, the first siRNA-based drug approved by the FDA in 2018
to treat polyneuropathy, sheds light on the high potential of this
strategy. However, the downside, represented
by ADME properties, still poses major limitations and tough challenges
for the development of these innovative RNA-based therapeutics. The
identification and design of accurate and specific delivery systems
for each miRNA/siRNA drug is challenging but essential to enable tissue-specific
targeting and reduce toxicity and off-target effects, thus extending
the development time for these drugs. In addition, this kind of drugs
suffers from poor stability in gastric fluids as well as low intestinal
adsorption, thereby being administrable only for intravenous and subcutaneous
rather than oral administration. 
In recent years, a part of the research in the RNAi field has been
focused on the identification of small molecules that inhibit the
expression of specific miRNAs, named small molecule inhibitors of
specific miRNAs (SMIRs). The first example
of a SMIR reported in the literature appeared in 2008 as a result
of a screening performed on 1,000 compounds followed by medicinal
chemistry optimization. The first identified
SMIR, a diaminohexahydropyrimidine derivative, was able to strongly
decrease miR-21 expression endogenously expressed in different cancer
cell lines. However, insights into the mechanism of action showed
that the SMIR targeted the transcription of miR-21 gene into pri-miR-21
but not downstream processes of the common miRNA pathway. Since then, several research groups initiated
studies focused on the identification of new SMIRs, but further details are beyond the scope of this review.
Although different approaches have been pursued to reduce the expression
of specific miRNAs, new findings suggest that miRNA expression is
widely suppressed in different diseases, thus focusing attention toward
new strategies aimed at stimulating miRNA biogenesis. , Nonetheless, research toward the identification of a small-molecule
enhancer of microRNA (SMER) maturation did not attract great attention
until the appearance of enoxacin, the sole SMER reported in the literature
to date. In this review, insights on its discovery and associated
research are described. Potential applications as well as future directions
for the development of SMER compounds are discussed with the aim to
boost scientific research in this field, especially from a medicinal
chemistry stance. In this review, we illustrate the milestones that
led enoxacin to becoming a validated chemical probe, which is now
used in biological processes involving the modulation of RNAi. The
logical thread we follow does not exactly correspond to the timeline
of the discoveries but considers the findings in sections based on
activities. However, the timeline of papers appearing in the literature
regarding enoxacin as a SMER is reported in and .
 

## Enoxacin: The First and
Sole SMER Reported in the Literature
to Date
In 2008, by screening of 2,000 US Food and Drug Administration-approved
compounds and natural products, Jin et al. at Emory University reported,
for the first time, the small-molecule enoxacin as an RNAi enhancer
( , ). Enoxacin ( ) is an oral broad-spectrum fluoroquinolone bactericidal agent
that inhibits DNA gyrase and topoisomerase IV but is unable to interfere
with human topoisomerases. Enoxacin was identified as an RNAi enhancer
via a reporter assay performed with 2,000 molecules using human embryonic
kidney (HEK293) cells expressing the gene encoding 293-EGFP (enhanced
green fluorescent protein) infected with a lentivirus expressing a
short-hairpin RNA (shRNA). By the RNAi mechanism, shRNA is processed
in siRNA that specifically targets the mRNA transcripts of the 293-EGFP,
thereby reducing their translation. Compounds that are able to enhance
the RNAi mechanism have been expected to increase siRNA formation
and in turn reduce EGFP-mediated fluorescence. Of 2,000 compounds,
only enoxacin reduced fluorescence, showing a dose-dependent effect
(EC50 ≈ 30 μM). In addition, enoxacin lost
its activity when the assay was repeated in the absence of shRNA,
thus showing its role in increasing siRNA production. In parallel,
experiments in the presence of different shRNAs, specifically designed
to reduce the expression of a variety of proteins (i.e., luciferase
and Fmr1), were also carried out; enoxacin retained its ability to
enhance siRNA production, thereby highlighting a universal effect
that was not only dependent on the siRNA targeting the 293-EGFP mRNA.
Unexpectedly, the RNAi enhancing effect of enoxacin appeared to be
structure-dependent since other related compounds belonging to the
same fluoroquinolone class did not possess this ability ( ). Indeed, when setting
the RNAi-enhancing activity of enoxacin as 100%, only ciprofloxacin
and norfloxacin exhibited an activity greater than 50%. Although the
authors did not comment on any type of structure–activity relationship
(SAR), we extrapolated some useful clues: (i) carboxylic
function as well as the free piperazine nitrogen are needed to retain
the RNAi-enhancing effect (both features are present in enoxacin,
norfloxacin, and ciprofloxacin); (ii) whether the
carboxylic function and piperazine moiety appear essential, they are
not sufficient to obtain the RNAi-enhancing activity, as demonstrated
by pipemidic acid, which, in contrast to enoxacin, norfloxacin, and
ciprofloxacin, possesses a pyridopyrimidine backbone; (iii) focusing attention on the molecule backbone, the 1,8-naphthyridone
moiety seems to be preferred over the quinolone scaffold, as demonstrated
by the comparison between enoxacin and norfloxacin, which differ only
in position 8 for the presence of a nitrogen. Nonetheless, given the
small number of reported fluoroquinolones, a robust SAR analysis is
not possible.
 In the same work focusing attention on the miRNA
maturation pathway,
the authors observed an increase in miR-125a in HEK293 cells treated
with enoxacin and stably expressing pri-miR-125a transcripts, suggesting
that enoxacin can promote the processing of miR-125a and, thus, exhibit
its SMER effect. Moreover, when performing miRNA TaqMan assays to
monitor the profiles of 157 miRNAs in HEK293 cells treated with enoxacin,
only 15 out of 157 endogenous miRNAs were significantly affected (i.e.,
let-7b, miR-124a, miR-125a, miR-139, miR-146, miR-152, miR-190, miR-199a*,
miR-199b, miR-23a, miR-30a, miR-96, miR-99a, let-7i, and miR-128b).
In contrast to all miRNAs, in a parallel experiment on untreated HEK293
cells, the authors observed that the increase in miRNAs was associated
with high levels of its own precursors, thereby suggesting that enoxacin
could promote Dicer processing activity without influencing miRNA
precursor expression.
In further experiments, enoxacin showed
no effects on the maturation
of pre-let-7 and pre-miR-30a by in vitro Dicer-mediated
processing assays (in the absence of TRBP). In contrast, when processing
experiments were repeated in the presence of the cofactor TRBP, enoxacin
significantly enhanced miRNA maturation differently from oxolinic
acid used as a negative control. Therefore, as stated by the authors,
enoxacin activity was TRBP-dependent and likely involved improvement
of TRBP-pre-miRNA affinity, as also shown by binding assays displaying
a decrease in the KD between TRBP and pre-miRNA in the
presence of enoxacin (from 221 nM to 94 nM). Of note, the RNAi enhancing
activity mediated by enoxacin was also confirmed in in vivo studies performed using GFP transgenic mouse models injected with
a lentivirus expressing shGFP.
Regarding the molecular target
recognized by enoxacin, an additional
protein has been proposed that merits mentioning. In fact, in 2017
( ), in an attempt to directly identify the molecular
target of enoxacin, Xhemalce and colleagues performed a pull-down
experiment with streptavidin beads using a close derivative of enoxacin
that was directly reacted by click chemistry in the lysate of MCF7
cells. Surprisingly, analysis of the experiment by SDS-PAGE and high-resolution
mass spectrometry revealed PIWIL3 as the potential target. Data authenticity
regarding PIWIL3 was confirmed by Western blot analysis using an anti-PIWIL3
antibody. PIWIL3 belongs to the PIWI argonaute proteins involved in
the maturation of the Piwi-interacting RNAs (piRNAs), small noncoding
RNAs that differ from miRNAs. Although
mostly present in normal testis tissue, PIWIL3 has been reported to
be aberrantly expressed in a variety of cancers, playing important
roles in tumorigenesis. , When the authors depleted
PIWIL3 in MCF7 cells, increased miRNA levels and growth defects were
detected, similar to the behavior observed for MCF7 cells treated
with enoxacin. Taken together, these results strongly suggested an
additional molecular target for enoxacin, necessitating further detailed
investigations. A comparison between the targets identified for enoxacin
will be the objective of a specific section titled .

## Enoxacin, Not Only an RNAi Enhancer
The recent
findings that small noncoding RNAs, specifically DNA
double-strand break-induced RNAs (diRNAs), appeared to be involved
in DNA repair, laid the foundation for a broader view of the RNAi
machinery, thus overcoming the specific role in gene silencing toward
the more complex mechanism of DNA-damage response (DDR) modulation. , The concomitant discovery that Dicer accumulated at DNA double-strand
break sites to catalyze diRNA formation led d’Adda di Fagagna et al. ( , ), in 2019, to evaluate the ability of enoxacin to
stimulate DNA-damage response RNA (DDRNA) maturation. HeLa cells treated with enoxacin (50 μM) before exposure
to ionizing radiation exhibited increased DDR activation with respect
to control cells treated with DMSO. The authors specified that enoxacin
did not directly increase the expression of the studied proteins involved
in DDR (γH2AX, pATMS1981, 53BP1, MDC1, and pS/TQ)
but strongly boosted their activation. In addition, the authors observed
that enoxacin led to an increase in the levels of the phosphorylated
forms of pCHK2T68 and p53S15, both effector
kinases and direct substrates of the Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated
(ATM) kinases, thus highlighting the ability of enoxacin to mediate
the ATM-CHK2-p53 signaling pathway.
To verify whether enoxacin-mediated
diRNA maturation was TRBP-dependent,
in the same work, the authors investigated the activity of enoxacin
in HeLa cells in which TRBP was knocked down. In accordance with the
miRNA-enhancing maturation, the absence of TRBP in HeLa cells completely
prevented enoxacin-mediated DDR activation.
In addition, when
the authors monitored DDRNA expression, an event
mediated by Dicer activity, in NIH2/4 cells (wt TRBP) by qRT-PCR analysis,
enoxacin was directly able to enhance it in a manner similar to the
increase observed for miR-29b, a miRNA involved in enoxacin-mediated
maturation. Thus, enoxacin once again displayed that its activity
was dependent on TRBP; indeed, as confirmation, its activity was abrogated
by TRBP depletion.
To understand how enoxacin promoted DDR,
in the same paper, the
authors investigated the two known DNA repair mechanisms, homologous
recombination (HR) and nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ), upon enoxacin
treatment in the U2OS cell line. Interestingly, enoxacin significantly
improved the NHEJ mechanism, in turn reducing HR efficiency. Since
NHEJ is known as an error-prone repair mechanism, the authors also evaluated the ability of enoxacin to refine
the accuracy of the NHEJ mechanism and, surprisingly, observed that
enoxacin positively impacted NHEJ accuracy by promoting accurate DNA
repair.

## The SMER Enoxacin as an Anticancer Agent
Cancer represents
one of the most serious diseases in which genetic
alterations lead to dysregulation of the wide and fine machinery making
up the complex cellular signaling pathway.
In the cancer field,
miRNAs can be grouped in two different classes:
those targeting tumor suppressor proteins, also called tumor suppressive
miRNAs, and those targeting oncogenes. Dysregulation of miRNAs underlies the transformation of normal cells
into malignant ones. Focusing attention on the miRNA pathway, two
different anticancer strategies can be applied: (i) repression of miRNA function to prevent mRNA silencing of onco-suppressor
genes or (ii) enhancing of miRNA function to degrade
mRNA encoded by oncogenes.
To date, the former approach relies
on antisense oligonucleotides
(antimiRs), locked nucleic acids (LNAs), LNA-antimiR constructs, antagomirs,
miRNA sponges, ribozymes/DNAzymes, siRNAs, and shRNAs. Although all these molecules represent an exciting
strategy in counteracting cancer, as previously stated for miRNA/siRNA-based
therapeutics, some issues remain to be fixed; the delivery system
and pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic properties pose a hard challenge
to overcome before therapeutic application. , , All these approaches can be grouped in the
first set of therapeutics concerning the repression of miRNA function.
Conversely, to date, little is known about molecules belonging
to the second set, which are able to enhance miRNA function to degrade
mRNA encoded by oncogenes. These molecules show potential in cancer
therapy, especially considering some recent findings where the expression
levels of miRNA-processing machinery components (i.e., Drosha and
Dicer) were decreased in some cancers, which was often associated
with a poor clinical outcome. , In addition, there
have been reports showing that miRNA biogenesis machinery components
exhibit normal expression in cancer, but with a widespread suppression
of miRNAs. 
In 2011, Esteller and
colleagues ( , ) described
the effect of enoxacin on a panel of 12
cancer cell lines after 5 days of exposure, and the EC50 (40 μg/mL or 124 μM) was evaluated using the HCT-116
cell line. Enoxacin reduced cell viability
in all cancer cell lines while not affecting primary cells, thus displaying
a cancer-specific growth-suppressive activity. Based on the previous
results reporting that enoxacin could enhance miRNA processing, the authors monitored the maturation of specific
tumor-suppressor miRNAs in two enoxacin-treated cancer cell lines
(HCT-116 and RKO). In that experiment, enoxacin increased the production
of 24 mature miRNAs and in turn reduced the amount of the corresponding
precursor pre-miRNAs. According to the
previous findings of Jin et al., among the affected miRNAs, the authors
identified let-7 and miR-125a. In a wider analysis of the whole miRNA
expression profile, it was evident that enoxacin was able to enhance
miRNA biogenesis, upregulating 100 out of 122 differently expressed
miRNAs. Interestingly, most of these upregulated miRNAs could be associated
with a tumor-suppressor effect.
To evaluate whether enoxacin
could enhance miRNA processing by
binding to TRBP, in the same work, biophysical experiments were performed
using surface plasmon resonance (SPR) and isothermal titration calorimetry
against wild-type and mutated TRBP proteins. Of note, enoxacin was
able to bind in the low micromolar range to wild-type TRBP but not
the mutated TRBP. In addition to the biophysical assays, a TRBP-dependent
effect of enoxacin was also demonstrated in in vitro assays using human cells carrying TRBP mutants. In three tumor human
cell lines having different mutations of TRBP, enoxacin did not reduce
cell viability, thus confirming its TRBP-dependent mechanism of action.
This trend was also retained in in vivo animal tumor
models using both xenografted cancer cells and primary colorectal
tumors. Most importantly, enoxacin did not show any toxic effect at
the dose used (10 mg/kg i.p. daily injection for 4 weeks).
Following
this pioneering research, in subsequent years, a series
of studies have been published examining the antitumor effect of enoxacin
toward specific human cancers. Jeronimo et al. ( , ) in 2013 studied the ability of enoxacin in the growth
inhibition of different prostate cancer cells (LNCaP and DU145) with an EC50 of 105 μM and
141 μM, respectively. Thus, the authors performed an extensive
analysis of the miRNA expression profile in a panel of 742 miRNAs
upon enoxacin treatment. Enoxacin was able to differentially modulate
the expression of 122 and 147 miRNAs in LNCaP and DU145 cells, respectively.
Upregulation occurred in 53% of cases (65 of 122) in LNCaP cells and
60% (88 of 147) in DU145 cells. Focusing their attention on specific
miRNAs involved in prostate cancer, in the same work, the authors
observed a significant increase in the biogenesis of the tumor-suppressor
miR-17*, miR-29b, miR-34a, miR-132, miR-146a, and miR-449a coupled
with a reduction of the oncogenic miR-141 and miR-191 after enoxacin
treatment. Since HDAC1 and SIRT1 proteins are targeted by miR-449a
and miR-34a, respectively, their levels were measured by Western blotting
to indirectly estimate the enhancement of miRNA maturation. According
to the hypothesis, HDAC1 and SIRT1 protein levels decreased after
enoxacin exposure in both cell lines.
A few years later, Uldrijan
et al. ( , ) demonstrated that
enoxacin at 156 μM also displayed
antitumor effects on human melanoma cell lines during a five-day treatment. Enoxacin was effective regardless of common
mutations in melanoma cells such as on BRAF kinase or NRAS oncogene.
In the same article, by using A375 cells with enoxacin, the authors
performed an Affymetrix GeneChip miRNA assay containing 5706 probe
sets and observed that it was able to modify the expression levels
of 55 maturated miRNAs, in particular upregulating 26 of them. After
a thorough analysis concerning the potential targets of the affected
miRNAs, the authors focused attention on miR-3154 and miR-4459, which
were predicted as the target of the human MdmX (Mdm4) transcript. The potential interference with MdmX expression can
strongly impact p53 protein levels and thus significantly influence
apoptotic cell pathways. Indeed, after a 24-h incubation with A375
cells, enoxacin (25 μg/mL) increased p53 protein levels simultaneously
producing a slight decrease in MdmX levels, mostly when enoxacin was
used at higher doses (75 and 100 μg/mL). To validate that the
antitumor effect of enoxacin involved the increase in p53 levels,
different p53 targets such as BBC3/PUMA, p21/CDKN1A, GADD45, and MDM2 were monitored and found to be effectively reduced in A375 cells.
In the same work, the authors observed that ciprofloxacin ( ), in contrast to
ofloxacin ( ), was able to reproduce, although to a lesser extent, a comparable
profile to enoxacin; this finding is in agreement with previous studies
by Jin and colleagues. However, the authors
wondered whether enoxacin could enhance the p53 response by acting
as a DNA-damaging agent (never excluded previously), similar to doxorubicin
or etoposide. When monitoring the stabilization of p53 protein after
3 and 6 h, there was a significant increase in p53 stabilization in
A375 cells treated with doxorubicin and etoposide, while no response
was observed in the presence of enoxacin. In addition, a strong phosphorylation
of p53 and histone H2AX was observed only in cells treated with DNA-damaging
agents. Enoxacin did not induce such a phosphorylation, thus indirectly
validating that its antitumor activity was DNA damage-independent.
Attention focused on enoxacin has increased over the years, and
in 2019, Santisteban et al. ( , ) observed that in thyroid cancer cells, miRNAs differing from the
oncogenic miR-146b-5p (e.g., miR-146b-3p, miR-221-3p, miR-222-3p,
miR-21-5p, miR-21-3p and miR-182-5p) were overexpressed and involved
in reducing Dicer expression. Therefore,
all of them potentially act as negative feedback regulators of Dicer
expression, in turn producing a global downregulation of miRNAs. Among
these downregulated miRNAs, the authors observed a downregulation
of some tumor suppressor miRNAs such as miR-30a-5p, miR-30a-3p, miR-100,
and miR-204. Interestingly, in the same
work, the authors also observed that a similar profile of miRNA downregulation
could be obtained when silencing Dicer in Cellosaurus Cal62 and TPC1
cells, thus producing an increase in terms of migration and invasion,
and in protein markers involved in epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT). Based on these findings, the authors rationalized that enoxacin
could reverse the effect of the reduced Dicer levels. Thus, Cal62,
TPC1, and SW1736 cells, overexpressing miR-146b-5p, were treated with
enoxacin (40 μg/mL) and showed a significant decrease in terms
of proliferation, migration, and EMT markers, similarly to Dicer-silenced
cells treated with miR-30a and miR-100. This antitumor effect was
further confirmed in vivo using an orthotopic mouse
model of human thyroid cancer treated with 15 mg/kg of enoxacin for
28 days. We want to highlight that in addition to the effect of enoxacin
in inhibiting cancer cell growth, several studies demonstrated, for
the first time, the relevance of restoring/enhancing global miRNA
expression in the treatment of cancer.
Focusing attention toward
bone cancer, enoxacin has previously
been reported as a small molecule that is able to inhibit osteoclast
formation by indirectly blocking the interaction between vacuolar
H+-ATPase and microfilaments. However, the mechanism of action underlying this effect is still
poorly understood. Recently, based on the aforementioned results,
Holliday et al. ( , ) observed
that the enoxacin-mediated osteoclastogenesis inhibition could be
related to the ability of enoxacin at 50 μM to increase levels
of miR-214-3p. However, concentrations
of enoxacin higher than 100 μM were required for growth inhibition
of 4T1 cancer cells, the murine breast cancer cells commonly used
to study the ability of breast cancer to invade bone. Further investigations
showed that 4T1 cancer cells treated with enoxacin at 50 μM
generated significantly smaller extracellular vesicles (EVs) than
the control. EVs have emerged as important intercellular regulators
in cancer invasion and in regulating bone remodeling. Therefore, Holliday et al. observed that, after treatment
with enoxacin, 4T1-derived EVs showed higher levels of miR-214-3p
and lower levels of miR-146a-5p and let-7b-5p than the control. When
these EVs were used to treat calcitriol-stimulated mouse marrow, strong
osteoclast formation inhibition was observed compared with the control. Therefore, enoxacin was able to exert two different
effects depending on the concentration used (inhibition of osteoclastogenesis
at 50 μM and of cancer cell proliferation at >100 μM);
however, both effects appeared to be related to the modulation of
miRNA biogenesis.
The anticancer effect of enoxacin was also
recently reported by
d’Adda di Fagagna and colleagues ( , ) in the research article in which enoxacin was identified
as a potential diRNA enhancer (see above for details). The authors presented a relevant point. A molecule
that is able to repair DNA damage could counteract the anticancer
activity of DNA-damaging agents such as etoposide or doxorubicin.
Indeed, when the authors incubated U2OS and HeLa cells with increasing
amounts of etoposide or doxorubicin in the presence of enoxacin, they
observed a significant increase in the IC50 of the chemotherapeutics,
thereby confirming their concerns regarding a potential interference
between DNA-damaging agents and enoxacin (or similar agents) for future
anticancer therapy.
The warning provided by d’Adda di
Fagagna and colleagues
that enoxacin cannot be used in combination with DNA-damaging agents
should be carefully considered in each individual case. In our opinion,
the combinations between enoxacin and DNA-damaging agents must be
studied and understood in greater detail, especially in view of the
opposite finding previously obtained by Stamenkovic and colleagues. Indeed, the authors observed a synergistic activity
between enoxacin and doxorubicin in treating Ewing sarcoma family
tumors (EFST) both in in vitro and in vivo. In such synergism, the ability of enoxacin relies on inhibiting,
at mild concentrations (those used for the antibacterial activity),
cancer stem cell growth, which is only moderately inhibited by doxorubicin
alone. In contrast, doxorubicin was able to strongly deplete the rapidly
dividing cells that formed the tumor mass of the EFST.

## Enoxacin: A New
Hope against Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis
We have dedicated
a large section to the effects of enoxacin on
tumors, but another very interesting application is the potential
treatment of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). ALS belongs to a
wider group of disorders known as motor neuron diseases, which are
caused by the degeneration and death of motor neurons. Extending from
the brain to the spinal cord and to muscles throughout the body, motor
neurons are nerve cells that initiate and provide vital communication
links between the brain and voluntary muscles. However, in ALS, both
the upper and lower motor neurons degenerate or die and stop sending
messages to the muscles. Unable to exert their function, the muscles
gradually weaken, start to twitch (fasciculations), and waste away
(atrophy). Currently, there is no effective
cure for ALS and no effective treatment to stop, or reverse, the progression
of the disease. 
Stress and stress
granules (SGs), cytoplasmic sites for modulating
mRNA translation, could be involved in the pathogenesis of ALS. Dicer and its cofactors have been reported to
participate in the mechanisms involved in the stress response; Dicer deficiency reduces stress tolerance, and the consequent loss of miRNA biogenesis
causes spinal motor neuron degeneration. Based on these findings, in 2015, Hornstein and colleagues published
a paper ( , ) in which enoxacin
was used as a chemical probe to modulate miRNA processing in NSC-34
cells carrying mutant forms of proteins responsible for the ALS phenotype
(FUS, TDP-43, and SOD1). Indeed, cells
carrying mutant proteins showed decreased expression of miRNAs despite
retaining a normal Dicer level. When enoxacin (100 μM) was administered
to mutated NSC-34 cells, miRNA maturation was improved after 72 h
by restoring a miRNA expression profile comparable to wild-type cells.
Of note, this effect was retained in a mouse model of ALS (SOD1 mutation)
in which enoxacin enhanced several miRNAs in motor cortices. Enoxacin
displayed the ability to delay neurological symptoms by 7 days in
ALS mice (SOD1 mutation) when compared with controls.
This enoxacin-mediated
activity observed in the ALS models appeared
to be similar to that observed in thyroid cancer cells in which Dicer
activity was negatively regulated by miR-146b-5p. Thus, although the diseases are widely different, the increase
in miRNA maturation and processing up to physiological levels appear
to be a common route to fight both cancer and ALS. Thus, enoxacin
appears to improve miRNA maturation in a context where Dicer struggles
to perform its dicing activity.
In the wake of this finding,
in 2018, Corti et al. investigated
the role of enoxacin in induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). They reprogrammed fibroblasts from sporadic
and familial ALS patients into iPSCs and evaluated miRNA expression
profiles of motor neuron progenitors. With respect to the control,
motor neuron progenitors exhibited decreased expression of 15 miRNAs,
in particular, miR-504, miR-429, miR-34a, miR-133a, miR-7-2*, and
miR-1225-3p. To identify potential targets linked to these dysregulated
miRNAs, the authors performed a bioinformatics analysis. By reducing
the choice of targets involved in the central nervous system, the
authors identified miR-34a and miR-504 as miRNAs likely having a key
role in ALS pathology. Considering the role of enoxacin in improving
dicing activity, the authors investigated the expression of miR-34a
and miR-504 in iPSC cells treated with enoxacin (100 μM) for
48 h and observed a significant increase in both miRNAs with respect
to the control treatment group.
In the same year, Buchman et
al. ( , ) showed a further
effect of enoxacin in ALS. They observed
that in SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma
and MCF7 cells, defects in the miRNA biogenesis machinery led to an
increase in the formation of paraspeckles, which are subnuclear bodies
localized in mammalian cells that control gene expression. In this specific case, depletion of TAR DNA-binding
protein 43 (TDP-43) in cells increased paraspeckle formation, according
to the role of TDP-43 in contributing to miRNA biogenesis. It is known that paraspeckles can compensate
for TDP-43 depletion by spatially organizing proteins involved in
miRNA biogenesis. When Buchman et al.
treated neuroblastoma cells with enoxacin (10 μM), paraspeckle
assembly was increased after 24 h. Such
an effect could occur as a result of an increase in miRNA biogenesis,
thus again confirming the indirect but key role of enoxacin in increasing
miRNA maturation in ALS.
As a consequence of these studies,
enoxacin received an orphan
designation by the European Medicines Agency (EMA) for ALS treatment
in 2015 (EU/3/15/1459); to date, no further information regarding
the outcomes of the study is available. 

## Enoxacin-Mediated miRNA
Modulation Leaves Room for a Wide Panel of Applications
Until
now, we have described the effects of enoxacin on cancer
and, to a lesser extent, ALS, focusing attention on the peculiar mechanism
of action aimed at modulating miRNA processing by Dicer. However,
due to its effect on this complex process, the activity of enoxacin
can be extended to many other applications.
In 2014, Dwivedi
et al. ( , ) reported the ability
of enoxacin to enhance miRNA expression in
the rat frontal cortex. Based on previous
discoveries showing that (i) downregulation of miRNAs
is present in depressed suicide subjects and (ii)
rats exposed to repeated inescapable shock exhibit differential miRNA
changes depending on whether they present normal adaptive responses
or learned helpless behavior, the authors
investigated the role of enoxacin in modulating the rat response to
inescapable shock. Of course, enoxacin
was selected considering its ability to interfere with miRNA maturation
and its known capability to cross the blood–brain barrier,
given its use as an antibacterial to treat meningitis. When intraperitoneally administered to rats,
enoxacin (10 mg/kg) increased miRNA levels by 3- to 12-fold, especially
considering specific miRNAs involved in neuronal cell biology such
as let-7a, miR-124, miR-125a-5p, and miR-132. Pretreated rats with
enoxacin showed a reduced learned helpless behavior when subjected
to inescapable shock. We underline that this represents the first
example of a small molecule capable of reducing a depressive behavior
by modulating miRNA processing.
Considering the acquired fame
in modulating miRNA processing, enoxacin
has recently been employed by Qin and colleagues as an antiviral agent
that is able to prevent Zika virus (ZIKV) infection by interfering
with miRNA expression in human neural progenitor cells (hNPCs). ZIKV is a positive-sense, single-stranded RNA
virus belonging to the genus Flavivirus; it spreads
mostly by the bite of an infected Aedes species mosquito
(Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus).
Zika infection during pregnancy can cause a birth defect of the brain
called microcephaly and other severe brain defects. hNPCs, which give rise to the building blocks of the human
cortex, are the major target cells of ZIKV, which damages their proliferation
and differentiation and causes extensive cell death. In their manuscript, Qin et
al. ( , ) reported that, unlike
more differentiated cells, hNPCs lacked the IFN-based immune response
to counteract ZIKV, and the main response to ZIKV of hNPC cells consisted
of an antiviral RNAi mechanism. However, through Dicer, viral RNAs
were transformed in virus-derived small interfering RNAs (vsiRNAs)
that are loaded on the cellular RISC to cleave cognate viral RNAs,
but the downregulation of Dicer in infected hNPC cells enhanced ZIKV
replication. Enoxacin (100 μM) prevented ZIKV infection in hNPC
cells, thus suggesting that its known ability to modulate miRNA processing
and RNAi mechanisms could prevent viral infections in hNPC cells.
Enoxacin showed an IC50 of 51.99 μM and a CC50 of 175.8 μM. In contrast, in knockout Dicer hNPC cells,
enoxacin failed to prevent viral infection, suggesting its involvement
in RNAi mechanisms.
We speculate that in addition to the exact
impact of the antiflavivirus
activity of enoxacin (far from considered a promising drug candidate),
it is important to underline the potential role of an agent that is
able to interfere with miRNA maturation with the aim to treat several
virus infections.
A recent published article by Mori et al.
described the ability
of enoxacin to reduce the levels of a specific miRNA, thus extending
the lifespan in C. elegans worm. In contrast to previous research works, here the authors
highlighted the SMIR effect of enoxacin. Based on the evidence that
miRNAs have been linked to aging in a wide variety of organisms, the authors used enoxacin as a proof-of-concept
approach to confirm that the modulation of miRNA processing could
extend the worm lifespan. At 100 μg/mL, enoxacin increased the
lifespan in C. elegans, as measured by levels of
muscular dysfunction, depending on the presence of SKN-1 protein,
involved in the SKN-1/Nrf2-mitohormesis pathway. Enoxacin significantly
modulated miRNA maturation, affecting the expression of 40 miRNAs
(28 upregulated and 22 downregulated). However, only enoxacin-mediated
miR-34-5p reduction was attributable to the observed effects in C. elegans, thus highlighting the SMIR behavior of enoxacin
to carry out this action.
In the same article, Mori and colleagues
( , ) observed that this
activity was not dependent on
the presence of the RDE-4, the C. elegans protein
homologue of TRBP in humans. Thus, following an in-silico study to
identify potential targets, the authors experimentally observed that
enoxacin activity was directly dependent on the presence of the dsRNA-specific
adenosine deaminases (ADARs) ADR-1 and ADR-2. Previously, implicated
in miRNA processes and aging, these proteins can bind different classes
of dsRNAs and convert adenosine to inosine. , In this regard, Mori et al. speculated that enoxacin might stabilize
the interaction between ADARs and pri-miR-34, thus preventing its
processing. The authors also observed a failure of the activity of
enoxacin in extending lifespan in the presence of the antioxidant N-acetylcysteine, suggesting that enoxacin could lead to
the activation of a prooxidative/mitohormetic pathway.

## Considerations
of the Mechanism of Action in the Context of
Drug Discovery
The involvement of TRBP in the biological
effect of enoxacin is
evident in many published articles, but experiments validating a molecular
binding between TRBP and enoxacin are limited to the two papers of
Jin et al. and Esteller et al. ( , ).
Since 2011, there have been no further experiments demonstrating the
binding between TRBP and enoxacin; thus, we believe that more detailed
investigations should be performed to shed light on a topic that could
make a change in the treatment of many human diseases.
Indeed,
the recent research article of Xhemalce et al. showed PIWIL3 as the mechanistic target of enoxacin,
thereby casting doubt on its correct mechanism of action. Regarding
this study, some considerations should be made. A concern could be
the possibility that the click chemistry step, used in the experimental
procedure (see above for details), led to a false positive target
because it was performed using cell lysates and, thus, in the presence
of a large amount of different proteins. In addition, enoxacin showed
a high IC50 value in different experimental models, thus
suggesting a modestly high affinity to its target for chemical biology
studies. Therefore, the process of cell lysis could negatively impact
the pre-existing bond between the molecule and its target (commonly
based on weak interactions), thus generating potential rearrangements
during the experiment. Indeed, cutting-edge strategies to carry out
target fishing by activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) involve
the use of photoaffinity groups that are able to covalently bind the
target under UV irradiation after the first interaction between the
molecule and target but before cell lysis. Conversely, a possible explanation concerning why depletion of 
PIWIL3 in MCF7 cells showed a behavior comparable to wt MCF7 cells
treated with enoxacin might involve the complex mechanism underlying
piRNA expression, which is still poorly understood. 
The topic becomes even more complicated when considering
the recent
discovery that enoxacin targets ADARs in C. elegans. ADAR proteins are also present in humans. They have dsRBDs and are involved in the miRNA maturation pathway
through their ability to bind Dicer and augment RISC loading. However, little is known about the piRNA biogenesis
mechanism and ADAR1 involvement in miRNA maturation.
Therefore,
there are no answers available to date regarding this
enigma, raising concerns about the exact mechanism of action of enoxacin
as the sole SMER reported in the literature. The ability of enoxacin
to modulate/enhance miRNA maturation is well-known, but there is insufficient
information to support or deny a theory regarding how enoxacin exerts
its SMER activity. It must be recognized, however, that there are
many clues regarding the involvement of Dicer and TRBP in the mode
of action of enoxacin.
In recent years, the Dicer/TRBP complex
has been extensively examined.
Focusing attention on the cytoplasmatic step involving Dicer slicing,
Wang et al. recently published high-resolution cryo-EM structures
of the Dicer/pre-let-7 complex. In addition,
attached to the DExD/H-box helicase domain of Dicer, the authors identified
the third of the three dsRBDs of the cofactor TRBP. This finding explains that the DExD/H-box helicase domain
serves as a platform for Dicer to bind TRBP and that its deletion
indeed led to a significant decrease in the binding affinity between
Dicer and pre-let-7. However, the truncated form of Dicer even improved
its dicing activity, suggesting that TRBP did not take part in the
catalytic activity. Indeed, as demonstrated
by Joo and colleagues, TRBP ensures efficient
Dicer processing in an RNA-crowded environment that does not directly
contribute to the catalytic activity but rather assures accurate pre-miRNA
to miRNA cutting. In the same period, Allain et al. released NMR structures
of dsRBD1 and dsRBD2 of TRBP in complex with a 19-base-pair siRNA. Of note, the authors observed that RNA recognition
from the dsRBDs of TRBP was completely unspecific, suggesting that
TRBP possesses an unbiased binding behavior toward RNA molecules. 
Assuming that enoxacin binds TRBP, its
function in the dicing process
was questioned. Based on known information about enoxacin and its
ability to enhance miRNA maturation, we would like to provide a possible
explanation of the mechanism of action.
Considering the innate
ability of the quinolone class to bind (ribo)nucleic
acids, a conceivable mechanism for enoxacin may involve just this
feature. Indeed, on the one hand, enoxacin can bind to one of the
three dsRBDs of TRBP, while on the other hand, it may strongly bind
the pre-miRNA for maturation. In this manner, the role of enoxacin
would be to enhance the affinity between TRBP and pre-miRNA, as experimentally
reported by Jin et al. The increased
affinity between TRBP and pre-miRNA would enable TRBP to rapidly load
pre-miRNAs and form the Dicer/TRBP/pre-miRNA complex, thus facilitating
the in toto dicing process ( ).
 This proposed mechanism would agree with the ability of enoxacin
to enhance the miRNA maturation process. However, essential considerations
should be addressed: how does enoxacin increase the expression of
specific miRNAs without interfering with the maturation of others?
More importantly, how does enoxacin specifically modulate miRNA maturation
to halt the proliferation of cancer cells? In an attempt to answer
these questions, enoxacin likely can bind a precise nucleotide sequence
on specific pre-miRNAs, thus accounting for its preference in enhancing
the maturation of some miRNAs rather than others. It would be challenging
but groundbreaking to identify, using bioinformatics tools, any potential
shared nucleotide sequences in regulated miRNAs to predict the pre-miRNAs
that will be enhanced by enoxacin. Regarding the second question concerning
how enoxacin-mediated miRNA expression regulates cell growth, an answer
can be found by examining the overall increase in miRNA maturation
following enoxacin treatment and considering that miRNA downregulation
is often associated with cell proliferation. 
It is worth noting that TRBP belongs to a large family of
the RBPs
(such as HuR, PUM2, Musashi, LIN28, etc.), and thus, enoxacin is considered
as a small molecule targeting RBP–RNA interactions. Targeting
RBPs represents an attractive and challenging approach of modern drug
discovery that has some strengths but also different weaknesses that
are mainly related to the resulting unwanted effects. , To the best of our knowledge, there have been no experimental findings
concerning the interaction of enoxacin with other human RBPs, which,
however, cannot be excluded as potential targets. In addition, the
mechanism of action of enoxacin underlying the modulation of miRNA
biogenesis requires an improvement of the interaction between RNA
(pre-miRNA) and RBP (TRBP). Therefore, enoxacin belongs to the small
molecules targeting RBP–RNA interactions but with the aim of
enhancing this interaction, as experimentally demonstrated by Jin
et al. Consequently, enoxacin should
be placed in a different cluster with respect to the small molecules
designed to inhibit the interaction with the RNA of RBPs that are
often abnormally expressed in different diseases. , 
At present, we are hopeful that NMR or crystallographic studies
on this direction will soon be performed to confirm or refute the
suggested hypothesis. Only when the exact mechanism of action at the
molecular level is definitely revealed can drug discovery programs
be planned in a more rational way; however, it is possible to test
the many thousands of already known quinolones to identify those with
an enoxacin-like mechanism of action.

## Challenges in the Development
of New Anticancer Quinolone-Based
SMER Compounds
Considering the large number of review articles
recently published
and reporting various mechanisms underlying the anticancer activity
of a large number of (fluoro)quinolones, − the scope of this section lies
in discussing whether the quinolone class may be developed to obtain
potent anticancer compounds that function as SMERs. In fact, in addition
to the popular antimicrobial activity, the quinolone class is well-known
for its anticancer effect exerted by different mechanisms; one of
the most common mechanisms entails the inhibition of human topoisomerase.
In this context, vosaroxin (or voreloxin) represents the quinolone-like
(naphthyridone nucleus) molecule at the later stage (phase III) as
an anticancer agent. Discovered in the
early 2000s, as expected, its action entails the inhibition of human
topoisomerase II with a dual mechanism: (i) stabilization
of the cleavage complex topo II α/β isoforms and DNA resulting
in an accumulation of DNA double-strand breaks and (ii) intercalation into DNA. These mechanisms
ensure a certain degree of vosaroxin selectivity, such as targeting
the replicating cells and being less effective against normal cells.
However, vosaroxin is one of the many quinolones that act as topo
II inhibitors. It appears evident that
the mechanism of action of vosaroxin, like that of other quinolone
topo II inhibitors, is very similar to the mechanism adopted by antimicrobial
quinolones in inhibiting bacterial DNA gyrase or topoisomerase IV. This similarity in the mechanism of action,
especially in the mode of action, makes the building of a differentiated
SAR around the quinolone class very difficult. Indeed, both in antibacterial and anticancer activities,
quinolones seem to depend mainly on the presence of the carboxylic
function at the C-3 position because of the requirement for the essential
Mg2+ ion interaction. However, after decades of efforts,
it is not possible to identify substituents to add on the quinolone
core to definitely obtain a specific effect. The case of vosaroxin
represents a success story since it shows anticancer activity at concentrations
approximately 20-fold lower than its antimicrobial effect. This distinction of activities should not be
undervalued. In the early stage of a medicinal chemistry program,
especially in the cancer field, the selectivity index toxicity/activity
is the area of focus, thus overlooking the antibacterial effect. Then,
in the later medicinal chemistry stage, once the quinolone molecule
has achieved potent anticancer activity coupled with a low toxicity
toward human cells, the removal of antibacterial effects becomes difficult
if not impossible. Nonetheless, the antimicrobial activity must be
eliminated because the long treatment required for anticancer therapy
cannot be paired with an antibacterial effect. This pairing would
lead to severe side effects in the patient and serious consequences
for global health, uncontrollably promoting the insurgence of antimicrobial
resistance.
All the issues described previously can also greatly
impact the
discovery of new quinolone-based SMER compounds and make their design
in the context of multiple activities very interesting. Specifically,
new quinolone-based SMER compounds should have a potent effect on
miRNA maturation without retaining human topo II inhibition and antibacterial
activity. However, in the search for a polypharmacology agent, human
topo II inhibitory activity could be conserved with the aim to obtain
a multitarget anticancer agent that is able to modulate miRNA maturation
and poison/break DNA; toxicity against normal cells, however, should
be closely monitored for any type of poisonous agent.
Returning
a “clean” SMER compound, research could
also be directed toward molecules with a different scaffold from the
quinolone core. In this manner, reducing the antibacterial effect
may be facilitated but with the loss of many of the key features of
the quinolone class: (i) the intrinsic ability to
bind RNA/DNA, (ii) known and ideal physicochemical
properties, and (iii) synthetic feasibility. To date,
research aimed at designing new quinolone-based SMER compounds is
naive. Little is known about the SAR around enoxacin since the only
available information is provided in the article published by Jin
et al. However, a starting point could
be based on the bonding of quinolones to Mg2+, which is
absent in the structure of TRBP (most likely the target of enoxacin).
Support may still be derived from the article in which enoxacin
was first reported as an RNAi enhancer compound. The authors defined its activity as structure and not quinolone
class-dependent, thus considering enoxacin as the sole compound in
the literature with this innovative mechanism of action. However,
in the same article, the authors also observed that ciprofloxacin
and, to a lesser extent, norfloxacin could enhance the RNAi process.
In parallel, over the years, ciprofloxacin and other quinolones have
often been reported as promising anticancer agents endowed with different
mechanisms of action, differing from the modulation of miRNA maturation
and human topo II inhibition. In our
opinion, most of these compounds could be involved in modulating miRNA
maturation because any interference in this process can produce several
downstream changes in cellular mechanisms. We know that enoxacin is
able to enhance miRNA maturation in cells; however, ignoring this
effect, we can state that enoxacin can (i) increase
p53 expression, (ii) improve Dicer activity, (iii) reduce HDAC1 and SIRT1 levels, and (iv) lower EMT markers, among other effects. Thus, most quinolones reported
as anticancer agents with multiple mechanisms of action could serve
as SMER compounds. Perhaps a step back should be taken to re-evaluate
the mode of action of many anticancer quinolones to diversify those
with and without SMER activity. The availability of a pool of compounds
belonging to the same class would be of great relevance to build a
robust SAR that may boost research on new SMER molecules.
Thus,
considering the large number of quinolones present in academic
groups and pharmaceutical companies, we are extremely surprised that,
in more than ten years from the first publication, no other quinolone has been identified as a SMER compound.
A question persists in our mind: are pharmaceutical companies working
on this topic without revealing promising results or, conversely,
are they failing to reveal unsuccessful data? Regardless, although
challenging, research on the identification of potent SMER compounds
holds promise for the identification of molecules having effects in
disparate diseases. The high concentration needed to achieve SMER
activity would involve the use of enoxacin at suboptimally high doses
that are still suitable due to its good pharmacokinetic properties
(PK) and high tolerability (highest tolerated single dose 1600 mg). , Thus, we believe that enoxacin should be considered as the progenitor
of a future class of SMER drugs, and we hope that this review will
encourage the development of molecules endowed with similar PK properties
and improved potency.
In this regard, considering the long-standing
experience in designing
and synthesizing quinolones with different biological activities, − we undertook a wide screening to identify compounds possessing SMER
activity. To date, we have collected preliminary results demonstrating
that other quinolones distinct from enoxacin, already published with
different activities, exhibit anticancer effects most likely acting
as SMER compounds, to a greater extent than enoxacin; the results
of this research will be published in the near future.

## Closing Remarks
The fluoroquinolone class of drugs, which includes the naphthyridone
enoxacin, has recently received some restrictions from the EMEA and
FDA due to potential permanent side effects following long-term treatment. , However, fluoroquinolones remain an essential class of antibacterials
that are commonly used to treat several infections. Due to the favorable
physicochemical properties and synthetic feasibility, quinolone molecules
have been extensively used in medicinal chemistry, and most of them
have shown biological functions that are unrelated to their antibacterial
properties. 
The SMER enoxacin could
be considered the progenitor of a new class
of drugs with different therapeutic applications: from anticancer
to antiviral and from anti-ALS to antiaging effects. In addition,
it is widely known that many quinolones have been reported as anticancer
agents, especially as human topo II inhibitors, none of which are
SMERs. In this article, we reviewed all the main activities highlighted
for enoxacin, also taking into account the different targets of quinolone
molecules. Although the SMER activity of enoxacin occurs at high concentrations,
solid and numerous data are available regarding this innovative mode
of action; thus, we feel that enoxacin may be considered a very promising
template for future drug discovery programs, but the concept of polypharmacology
or promiscuity should be carefully considered. The apparent promiscuity
of quinolones, especially enoxacin, could be due to the SMER properties,
which rely on the complexity of influencing miRNA maturation; however,
the severity of some diseases (e.g., cancers, amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis, and to some extent Zika infections) can justify the therapeutic
use of SMERs acting on multiple miRNAs.
When this review was
written, the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic struck the
world. Based on the previously reported imbalance of miRNAs in coronavirus-infected
cells − and on the anti-Zika activity of enoxacin through RNAi modulation, we would like to suggest that this activity
might be investigated in an attempt to counteract SARS-CoV-2 infection.
We cannot exclude the possibility that in the near future new quinolones,
given their nucleic acid binding capability, will be identified and
designed to discriminate between different miRNA pools. We believe
that enoxacin represents a robust proof-of-concept that strongly drives
away the idea of promiscuity while bringing to light future opportunities
around quinolone compounds. We can define the SMER effect of enoxacin
as follows: “one molecule, one pathway, multiple effects”.
Thus, we vigorously support the hypothesis that enoxacin falls within
the polypharmacology and will provide a platform for the next generation
of drugs.
Since its discovery as a SMER compound in 2008, enoxacin
has remained
the only molecule reported in the literature to possess this activity.
A future challenge will be to identify new SMERs, the solution to
which lies in the hands of medicinal chemists.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.
Tommaso Felicetti graduated in Pharmacy
(July 2014)
and received his Ph.D. in Pharmaceutical Chemistry (March 2019) from
the Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences of the University of Perugia.
He is currently a research fellow of the Associazione Italiana per
la Ricerca sul Cancro (AIRC) at the University of Perugia. In 2016,
he spent a period at the University of Groningen (Netherlands) as
a visiting Ph.D. student under the supervision of Prof. Anna K. H.
Hirsch, focusing on the kinetic target-guided synthesis. He is the
author of 15 papers, and his research is mainly focused on Medicinal
Chemistry of antimicrobial agents (efflux pump inhibitors of Staphylococcus aureus and Nontuberculous Mycobacteria) and
anticancer agents. In 2019, he was awarded “Best PhD thesis
in Medicinal Chemistry” from the Italian Chemical Society.
Violetta Cecchetti, Ph.D., is
a full Professor of
Medicinal Chemistry since 2000 at the University of Perugia, where,
since 2016, she has been the Director of the Department of Pharmaceutical
Sciences. Her research is mainly addressed to the design, synthesis,
and identification of new chemical entities endowed with specific
biological activities with particular regard to the field of chemotherapeutic
agents. Within this frame, she successfully collaborated in the development
of the first once-daily fluoroquinolone antibacterial approved drug,
i.e. rufloxacin. Her current research activity mainly concerns the
discovery and optimization of anti-HIV, anti-HCV, antiflavivirus,
and antiflu agents through a multidisciplinary approach combining
medicinal chemistry, biochemistry, biophysics, and molecular and cellular
biology. More recent interests include the rational discovery of small-molecules
with antiprion or immunomodulatory activity.
Giuseppe Manfroni received his Ph.D. in Medicinal
Chemistry from University of Perugia in 2006 and conducted postdoctoral
studies at the same university until 2008. In that year he became
assistant professor and in 2018 he was appointed as associate professor
in medicinal chemistry at the University of Perugia. He is lecturer
of Pharmaceutical analysis and Chemical and Fermentative methodologies
for biodrugs production at the courses of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical
Biotechnology. He spent a short period abroad as a visiting researcher
at the Katholieke Universiteit of Leuven and University of Tuebingen
to improve his skills in virology and drug metabolism. Giuseppe Manfroni’s
research interests are in antiviral, antibacterial, antitumor, and
immunomodulatory drug discovery fields. He is an expert in heterocycle
chemistry, chemical probe synthesis, and rational drug design.

## Acknowledgments
Tommaso Felicetti was supported by a AIRC fellowship
for Italy and he collaborated to write the present manuscript within
his research project focused on the identification of new SMER quinolones.

## Abbreviation Used
ABPPactivity-based protein profiling
ADARdsRNA-specific
adenosine deaminase
ALSamyotrophic lateral sclerosis
ATMAtaxia Telangiectasia Mutated
DDRDNA-damage response
DGCR8double-stranded RNA
binding domain protein
diRNAdouble-strand break-induced RNA
dsRBPdouble-stranded RNA binding protein
dsRNAdouble-stranded RNA
EFSTEwing sarcoma
family tumors
EGFPenhanced green fluorescent protein
EMAEuropean Medicines Agency
EMTepithelial-mesenchymal transition
EVsextracellular vesicles
HEK293human embryonic
kidney
hNPCshuman
neural progenitor cells
HRhomologous recombination
iPSCsinduced pluripotent stem cells
LNAslocked nucleic acids
miRNAmicroRNA
NHEJnonhomologous end joining
piRNAPiwi-interacting
RNA
RISCRNA-induced
silencing complex
RNAiRNA-interference
SARstructure–activity relationship
SGsstress granules
shRNAshort-hairpin RNA
siRNAshort-interfering RNA
SMERsmall-molecule enhancer
of microRNA
SMIRsmall molecule inhibitors of specific miRNA
SPRsurface plasmon resonance
TDP-43TAR DNA-binding protein
43
TRBPTAR-RNA
binding protein
UTRuntranslated region
vsiRNAsvirus-derived small interfering RNA
ZIKVZika virus