3532isciiScienceiScienceElsevierPMC9988578998857899885783689565110.1016/j.isci.2023.106161Mevalonate biosynthesis pathway regulates the development and survival of brown adipocytes
KwonJungin YehYu-Sheng KawarasakiSatoko MinaminoHiroto FujitaYoshihito Okamatsu-OguraYuko TakahashiHaruya NomuraWataru MatsumuraShigenobu YuRina KimuraKazuhiro SaitoMasayuki InagakiNobuya InoueKazuo KawadaTeruo GotoTsuyoshi 1Division of Food Science and Biotechnology, Graduate School of Agriculture, Kyoto University, Kyoto 611-0011, Japan2Department of Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Nutrition, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan3Departments of Basic Veterinary Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Hokkaido University, Sapporo 060-0818, Japan4Research Unit for Physiological Chemistry, the Center for the Promotion of Interdisciplinary Education and Research, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan5Division of Clinical Nutrition, Graduate School of Comprehensive Rehabilitation, Osaka Prefecture University, Osaka 583-0872, Japan6Department of Food Science and Nutrition, University of Ulsan, Ulsan 44610, Republic of Korea∗Corresponding author goto.tsuyoshi.6x@kyoto-u.ac.jp
7Lead contact
822023263106161106161832023© 2023 The Author(s)This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Summary
The high thermogenic activity of brown adipose tissue (BAT) has received considerable attention. Here, we demonstrated the role of the mevalonate (MVA) biosynthesis pathway in the regulation of brown adipocyte development and survival. The inhibition of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA reductase (HMGCR), the rate-limiting enzyme in the MVA pathway and the molecular target of statins, suppressed brown adipocyte differentiation by suppressing protein geranylgeranylation-mediated mitotic clonal expansion. The development of BAT in neonatal mice exposed to statins during the fetal period was severely impaired. Moreover, statin-induced geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate (GGPP) deficiency led to the apoptosis of mature brown adipocytes. Brown adipocyte-specific Hmgcr knockout induced BAT atrophy and disrupted thermogenesis. Importantly, both genetic and pharmacological inhibition of HMGCR in adult mice induced morphological changes in BAT accompanied by an increase in apoptosis, and statin-treated diabetic mice showed worsened hyperglycemia. These findings revealed that MVA pathway-generated GGPP is indispensable for BAT development and survival.
Subject areas: Biochemistry, Biological sciences, Molecular Genetics

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•Protein geranylgeranylation is essential for brown adipocyte differentiation
•Neonates exposed to statin during the embryonic period exhibit BAT atrophy
•GGPP is required for survival of mature brown adipocytes
•Brown adipocyte-specific Hmgcr-deficient mice show BAT atrophy

Biochemistry; Biological sciences; Molecular Genetics

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2022 Aug 2; Revised 2023 Jan 8; Accepted 2023 Feb 3; Collection date 2023 Mar 17.

## Introduction
Obesity is a major risk factor for type 2 diabetes (T2D) , and is characterized by excessive accumulation of adipose tissue, which is composed of white adipose tissue (WAT) and brown adipose tissue (BAT). Unlike WAT, which stores excessive energy in the form of triglycerides, BAT oxidizes energy substrates such as fats, carbohydrates, and branched-chain amino acids to produce heat via mitochondrial uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1); therefore, BAT is considered a metabolically active tissue. , , , Notably, rodent and human studies have shown that BAT activity is inversely correlated with adiposity and insulin resistance. , , , Moreover, a previous study indicated that individuals with BAT have a significantly lower prevalence of T2D. Thus, increasing the quantity or quality of BAT could be a promising therapeutic strategy for obesity and T2D.
The mevalonate (MVA) biosynthesis pathway produces both sterols and non-sterols. Among non-sterols, isoprenoids, such as farnesyl pyrophosphate (FPP) and geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate (GGPP), play pivotal roles in the post-translational modification (prenylation) of Ras and Ras-related small GTP-binding proteins and in the formation of biologically important molecules, including coenzyme Q, thereby regulating several cellular processes. Statins, which are inhibitors of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA reductase (HMGCR), a rate-limiting enzyme in the MVA pathway, are widely used for the clinical management of hypercholesterolemia. Along with the low-density lipoprotein cholesterol-lowering effect, statins can exhibit multiple pleiotropic effects that confer protection against cardiovascular diseases. However, statins also exhibit several adverse effects, such as rhabdomyolysis, liver damage, and an increased risk of T2D, which appear to be primarily mediated by the suppression of isoprenoid biosynthesis. Although the mechanisms underlying the adverse effects on skeletal muscle and the liver have been gradually clarified by tissue-specific inhibition of the MVA pathway in mice, , , the mechanisms underlying the statin-mediated increased risk of T2D remain unclear. A recent study showed an inverse correlation between statin use and active BAT in humans. , BAT dysfunction owing to inhibition of the MVA pathway could be associated with an increased risk of T2D following statin use.
The number of adipocytes is thought to be defined by the balance between newly differentiated adipocytes from preadipocytes and dead adipocytes. Upon hormonal induction of differentiation, growth-arrested preadipocytes re-enter the cell cycle and undergo several rounds of mitosis, which is referred to as mitotic clonal expansion (MCE). , Transcription factors C/EBPβ and C/EBPδ, members of the CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) family, are involved in the initiation of the clonal expansion phase. , C/EBPβ and C/EBPδ interact with C/EBP regulatory elements to activate the transcription of adipocyte-specific genes, including peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (Pparg) and Cebpa, which are master transcription factors of adipogenesis. , Differentiated adipocytes meet their fate via apoptosis, where activated caspase 3 induces cell death. Under normal physiological conditions, adipocyte number seems constant, and approximately 10% of fat cells undergo annual turnover in adults. Conditions such as intake of a high-fat diet and PPARγ agonist treatment, which are known to increase adipogenesis, have been found to be associated with increased adipocyte death. , These studies indicate that adipogenesis and adipocyte death are mutually controlled and are crucial regulatory events for maintaining adipose tissue mass. Dysregulation of either brown adipogenesis or brown adipocyte death can lead to abnormal regulation of BAT mass. , , BAT atrophy leads to impaired thermogenesis and glucose intolerance. , These findings indicate that brown adipogenesis and brown adipocyte death play pivotal roles in maintaining BAT mass and function.
Although the essential role of the MVA pathway in adipocyte browning, which is a process converting white adipocytes to thermogenic adipocytes, has been reported, the detailed physiological roles of the MVA pathway in brown adipogenesis and brown adipocyte survival and their underlying mechanisms remain largely unknown. In the present study, we demonstrated that the MVA pathway–mediated GGPP production is required for both brown adipogenesis and brown adipocyte survival, which subsequently affects BAT function. Our findings revealed that GGPP is an essential regulatory factor for BAT mass and function.

## Results

## Hmgcr expression levels are highly correlated with Ucp1 expression levels in BAT and brown adipocytes
As shown in A, mRNA expression levels of Hmgcr were found to be high in the testis and brain, which is consistent with a previous study. 
Hmgcr mRNA expression levels in BAT are similar to those in skeletal muscles, in which HMGCR has been reported to be functional. Because the thermogenic function of BAT is upregulated under cold temperatures, we examined HMGCR expression levels during cold exposure. Interestingly, mRNA and protein expression levels of HMGCR were increased by cold exposure. Although mRNA expression of Hmgcr was immediately induced (∼8 h) ( B), prolonged cold exposure was required to markedly increase its protein levels (∼48 h) ( D). Both HMGCR mRNA and protein expression patterns were highly correlated with those of UCP1, the gene responsible for non-shivering thermogenesis in brown adipocytes ( C and 1E). To investigate whether cold-induced β-adrenergic stimulation was involved in the upregulation of Hmgcr mRNA expression in brown adipocytes, the effect of isoproterenol (ISO), a β-adrenergic receptor agonist, on Hmgcr expression in HB2 brown adipocytes was examined. Similar to Ucp1, Hmgcr expression was markedly induced by ISO treatment ( F and A). We confirmed that Hmgcr expression was closely associated with the expression of Ucp1 in brown adipocytes during β-adrenergic stimulation ( G and B). Moreover, HMGCR protein exhibited a similar expression pattern as UCP1 protein, peaking at 12 h in response to ISO stimulation ( C), which showed a strong positive correlation ( D). These findings indicate that Hmgcr expression in brown adipocytes is highly associated with Ucp1 expression, which raises the possibility that the MVA pathway plays an important role in regulating BAT function.
 

## Inhibition of the MVA biosynthesis pathway by statins impairs the differentiation capacity of HB2 brown preadipocytes
First, we determined the mRNA expression level of Hmgcr in HB2 cells. Hmgcr was highly expressed in HB2 brown preadipocytes and gradually decreased in differentiated HB2 cells, in which adiponectin (Adipoq) was highly expressed ( ). Based on these results, HB2 brown preadipocytes were induced to differentiate in the presence of statins to investigate the potential role of the MVA pathway in brown adipocyte differentiation. Treatment with statins (atorvastatin [ATR] and lovastatin [LVS]) in the early stages of brown adipocyte differentiation suppressed lipid accumulation in a dose-dependent manner ( A and 2B). Moreover, LVS treatment suppressed the expression of adipocyte marker genes, including Pparg, fatty acid–binding protein 4 (Fabp4), and Adipoq, accompanied by marked suppression of Ucp1 ( C). Notably, statin treatment suppressed the adipogenic stimulation-induced increase in DNA content ( A and 2D), suggesting that HMGCR suppression inhibited MCE during brown adipogenesis. Time-course experiment showed that differentiation induction of brown preadipocytes increased DNA content by almost 2.2 times 48 h after differentiation induction, whereas only 1.6 times increase in DNA content was observed in the presence of LVS ( E). These findings indicated that the MVA pathway is required for adequate MCE during brown adipocyte differentiation.
 

## Protein geranylgeranylation is required for HB2 cell differentiation
To determine the metabolites responsible for the regulation of brown adipogenesis in the MVA pathway, HB2 cells were treated with LVS in combination with or without MVA, FPP, GGPP, or squalene (SQ) ( A). We found that LVS-induced inhibition of brown adipogenesis was largely recovered by MVA or GGPP ( B). Analysis of the fluorescence intensity of Nile red–stained cells revealed that the suppressed lipid accumulation by LVS treatment was partially recovered by MVA or FPP and completely recovered by GGPP co-treatment ( C). Moreover, LVS-induced suppression of differentiation-induction-activated cell proliferation was completely abolished in the presence of MVA or GGPP but not by FPP or SQ ( D). Consistent with the phenotypic results, LVS-induced suppression of the mRNA expression levels of Ucp1 and adipocyte marker genes, such as Fabp4 and Adipoq, was largely recovered by co-treatment with GGPP in HB2 brown adipocytes ( E). The time-course experiment clearly showed that GGPP co-treatment allowed HB2 cells to undergo MCE, as shown by the increase in DNA content to the same extent level as that in differentiation-induced (DI) HB2 cells ( F). Because LVS treatment at the concentrations used in this study has been reported to suppress cellular GGPP levels, , these findings clearly indicated that the MVA pathway–mediated GGPP production is essential for MCE during brown adipocyte differentiation. To further confirm whether GGPP is the key metabolite for brown adipocyte differentiation, HB2 cells were treated with zoledronate (Zol), a nitrogen-containing bisphosphonate, to inhibit geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate synthase 1, which is required for GGPP biosynthesis. Although Zol treatment at the beginning of brown adipogenesis significantly decreased intracellular lipid accumulation ( G and 3H; DI 100.0 ± 5.8 vs. Zol 47.3 ± 4.0, p = 0.0000) and DNA content ( G and 3I; DI 100.0 ± 3.6 vs. Zol 61.9 ± 2.4, p = 0.0000), these effects were completely reversed by co-treatment with GGPP ( G–3I). Coenzyme Q10, a product of GGPP, has been shown to be important for BAT function ; however, co-treatment with coenzyme Q10 (ubiquinol [CoQH2; reduced form] or ubiquinone [CoQ; oxidized form]) could not recover either LVS-induced suppression of lipid accumulation ( J, 3K, A, and S3B) or LVS-induced suppression of the increase in DNA content ( L, 3M, A, and S3B), suggesting that LVS-mediated suppression of coenzyme Q10 production is not important for the anti-brown adipogenic effects of LVS. The attachment of GGPP to a target protein, called protein geranylgeranylation, is catalyzed by geranylgeranyltransferase type 1 (GGTase I). To investigate the effect of protein geranylgeranylation, GGTI-286, a GGTase I inhibitor, was used at the beginning of brown adipocyte differentiation. Similar to the effects of LVS, treatment with more than 10 μM of GGTI-286 significantly suppressed both lipid accumulation and increased DNA content ( N and 3O). Although co-treatment with GGPP significantly recovered GGTI-286-induced suppression of lipid accumulation ( P and 3Q; GGTI-286 + GGPP 60.8 ± 1.7 vs. GGTI-286 48.4 ± 1.2, p = 0.0022; vs. DI 100.0 ± 2.5, p = 0.0000) and cell proliferation ( P and 3R; GGTI-286 + GGPP 65.2 ± 2.4 vs. GGTI-286 50.5 ± 1.5, p = 0.0039; vs. DI 100.0 ± 3.2, p = 0.0000), these recoveries were very limited. These results indicated that GGPP-mediated protein geranylgeranylation is essential for adequate MCE in differentiating brown adipocytes.
 

## Neonates exposed to LVS during the BAT developmental period exhibit BAT atrophy and fail to maintain body temperature
Previous reports have shown that BAT develops from embryonic day 10 (E10) to postnatal day 2 (P2) ; thus, we administered LVS to pregnant dams to expose their fetuses to LVS from E8.5 to E18.5, as shown in A. Notably, neonates from the LVS-injected dam showed interscapular BAT atrophy ( B and 4C). The BAT weight normalized to body weight yielded similar results ( D). Experiments using UCP1- monomeric red fluorescent protein 1 (mRFP1) reporter mice showed that LVS exposure during the embryonic period significantly reduced mRFP1-derived fluorescence in the interscapular region, suggesting that UCP1 expression levels in BAT are suppressed by LVS ( E and 4F; vehicle (Veh) 100.0 ± 5.7 vs. LVS 78.4 ± 7.8, p = 0.0399). Actually, the surface temperature of neonates exposed to LVS was significantly lower than that of Veh-exposed neonates ( G; Veh 28.44°C ± 0.28 vs. LVS 26.02°C ± 0.48, p = 0.0001). A histochemical analysis showed that LVS-exposed neonatal BAT barely consisted of adipocytes with lipid droplets compared with Veh-exposed BAT ( H). Consistent with this, LVS treatment decreased the number of monocarboxylate transporter isoform 1 (a marker for mature brown adipocytes )-positive cells, whereas the number of platelet-derived growth factor alpha (a marker for adipocyte progenitor cells )-positive cells increased in LVS-exposed BAT in immunofluorescence analysis ( I). Furthermore, both thermogenesis-related genes (Ucp1, PPARγ coactivator 1 alpha [Pgc1a], and PR domain containing 16 [Prdm16]) and adipocyte marker genes (Pparg, Fabp4, and Adipoq) in BAT were markedly downregulated by LVS treatment ( J). Further investigation was performed to determine the effects of fetal LVS exposure on the development of BAT in adult mice, following the schedule shown in A. Fetal LVS exposure did not affect body weight or length, without significant changes in food intake ( B–S4D). Interestingly, BAT atrophy persisted even after the offspring from the LVS-exposed dam became adults, whereas other tissues and organs showed no apparent differences in weight compared to those of the offspring from the Veh-exposed dam ( E and S4F). However, obvious histological changes in BAT were not observed in fetal LVS-exposed BAT ( G). We also could not detect any changes in the mRNA expression levels of either thermogenesis-related genes (Ucp1 and Pgc1a) or adipocyte marker genes (Pparg, Fabp4, and Adipoq) in BAT from a grown-up offspring of the LVS-exposed dam ( H). Consistently, no significant differences in UCP1 protein expression levels in BAT were observed between the Veh and LVS groups ( I). Taken together, these findings indicate that the MVA pathway in the embryonic period not only plays an essential role in the development of BAT in the fetus but also affects BAT mass in adult mice.
 

## LVS-mediated suppression of retinoblastoma phosphorylation may be associated with the functional inactivation of C/EBPβ in HB2 cells
C/EBPβ and C/EBPδ are the main MCE regulators. , Although the mRNA expression of both Cebpb and Cebpd was induced soon after the induction of differentiation in HB2 brown preadipocytes, LVS treatment did not affect the expression of either gene ( A and 5B). However, we confirmed that LVS treatment decreased the ratio of nuclear to cytoplasmic C/EBPβ protein levels without affecting nuclear C/EBPδ protein levels ( ) in differentiating HB2 cells ( C), suggesting that LVS treatment decreased the nuclear localization of C/EBPβ protein. Interestingly, total C/EBPβ protein levels were also suppressed by LVS treatment ( D), which is consistent with a previous report using white adipocytes. A previous study showed that adipocyte differentiation stimuli-induced hyperphosphorylation of the retinoblastoma (RB) protein is required for the transcriptional activation of C/EBPβ in 3T3-L1 cells. RB phosphorylation was strongly induced within a day by the induction of differentiation in HB2 cells, whereas it was barely detectable in the presence of LVS ( D). In fact, LVS treatment suppressed C/EBPβ target genes, which are known to be important transcription factors for terminal differentiation of brown adipocytes, such as Pparg, Cebpa, and sterol regulatory element binding protein 1c (Srebp1c), at 48 h after differentiation induction without affecting Cebpb expression levels ( E–5H). These findings suggest that LVS treatment suppresses RB phosphorylation, which is followed by a change in C/EBPβ nuclear localization and suppression of its transcriptional activation.
 

## GGPP recovers LVS-induced cell apoptosis in mature brown adipocytes
Next, we investigated the role of the MVA pathway in mature brown adipoytes. Differentiated HB2 brown adipocytes treated with LVS for 96 h showed a decrease in both lipid accumulation ( A and 6B) and Hoechst-stained nuclei ( A). The 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-5-(3-carboxymethoxyphenyl)-2-(4-sulfophenyl)-2H-tetrazolium (MTS) assay revealed that LVS treatment reduced the viability of HB2 brown adipocytes ( C), suggesting that reduced lipid accumulation and nuclear levels are derived from reduced cell viability. The LVS-induced reduction in lipid accumulation was almost completely recovered by co-treatment with MVA or GGPP ( B). FPP co-treatment also partially recovered lipid accumulation, whereas SQ co-treatment showed no recovery effect ( B). Consistent with the lipid accumulation levels, co-treatment with MVA or GGPP completely reversed the LVS-induced decrease in cell viability ( C). Next, we stained HB2 cells with an fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) -conjugated annexin V fluorescent probe and propidium iodide (PI), which stain cells in the early and late stages of apoptosis, respectively. As shown in D, LVS treatment increased the number of both annexin V– and PI-stained HB2 brown adipocytes. The number of apoptotic cells was largely decreased by co-treatment with MVA or GGPP but not by co-treatment with FPP or SQ. Similar results were observed for the expression levels of the Bcl-2-associated X protein (Bax) and caspase 3 (Casp3), which are pro-apoptotic genes ( E). Moreover, cleaved-caspase 3 expression level, which represents the active form of caspase 3, was increased by treatment with LVS, whereas MVA or GGPP co-treatment almost reduced it in HB2 brown adipocytes ( F). These findings clearly indicate that the MVA pathway in brown adipocytes plays an essential role in survival of brown adipocytes by regulating apoptosis via GGPP production. Moreover, Zol treatment significantly decreased cell viability (DI 100.0 ± 4.8 vs. Zol 77.7 ± 6.0, p = 0.0499); however, this effect was almost reversed by co-treatment with GGPP ( G). Consistent with this, the increased Bax and Casp3 expression levels after Zol treatment were completely abolished in the presence of GGPP ( H). However, co-treatment with coenzyme Q10 hardly prevented the LVS-induced decrease in viability of HB2 cells ( I and ). Although 100-μM CoQH2 treatment partially recovered the viability of LVS-treated HB2 cells ( I), the expression levels of pro-apoptotic markers remained unchanged ( J). To investigate the effect of protein geranylgeranylation, HB2 cells were treated with GGTI-286. We found that the inhibition of protein geranylgeranylation neither affected cell viability nor increased the expression levels of pro-apoptotic markers in HB2 cells ( K and 6L). These results indicate that GGPP plays an important role in the regulation of HB2 brown adipocyte survival through mechanisms other than coenzyme Q10 production and protein geranylgeranylation.
 

## Brown adipocyte–specific Hmgcr knockout mice exhibit BAT atrophy and impaired thermoregulation
To validate the role of the MVA pathway in Ucp1-expressing mature brown adipocytes in vivo, we generated Ucp1-Cre-driven Hmgcr knockout (Hmgcrflox/flox; Ucp1-Cre; BAT KO) mice. The Hmgcr knockout allele was observed only in the genomic DNA extracted from BAT but not in other tissues, including WATs, in BAT KO mice ( A). BAT KO mice grew normally until adulthood, and the body weight of BAT KO mice did not differ from that of Hmgcrflox/flox (control; Ctrl) mice ( B). However, the weight of interscapular BAT, unlike other tissues in BAT KO mice, was much lower than that in Ctrl mice, and its weight was only 28.6% of that of Ctrl mice ( C and 7D; ). Histologically, BAT of BAT KO mice exhibited an extensive loss of adipocytes and a relative increase in non-lipid-laden cells ( E). We detected many cells undergoing apoptosis in BAT of BAT KO mice, as determined by an increase in terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase–mediated deoxyuridine triphosphate (dUTP) nick end labeling (TUNEL)-positive cells. ( F). Histological analysis and TUNEL assay indicated that BAT atrophy observed in BAT KO mice was associated with the loss of cells by apoptosis. mRNA expression analysis confirmed that Hmgcr mRNA expression level in BAT of BAT KO mice was only 60.9% of that in BAT of Ctrl mice ( G); however, there was no significant difference in Ucp1 mRNA expression levels ( H). In the cold tolerance test, cold exposure at 4°C decreased the rectal temperature of both genotypes, whereas Ctrl mice maintained the rectal temperature even under prolonged cold exposure. The rectal temperature of BAT KO mice gradually decreased and showed a significant decrease compared to that of Ctrl mice after 3 h of cold exposure ( I; Ctrl −3.5°C ± 0.15 vs. BAT KO −8.2°C ± 0.74, p = 0.0001). Infrared thermal images showed that dorsal surface temperatures were drastically reduced in BAT KO mice after cold exposure ( J). We also examined β3-adrenergic receptor agonist CL316,243 (CL)-induced BAT thermogenesis. As shown in K, administration of CL quickly increased the rectal temperature of Ctrl mice but not that of BAT KO mice. To investigate the role of the MVA pathway in BAT in adult mice, we generated tamoxifen-inducible adipocyte-specific Hmgcr KO (Hmgcrflox/flox; Adipoq-CreERT2; aiKO) mice. Twenty days after KO induction, we found a loss of lipid-containing adipocytes and the presence of apoptotic cells in the BAT of tamoxifen-treated aiKO mice ( L and 7M). As statin use has been reported to increase the risk of diabetes, we investigated the effects of prolonged statin treatment on BAT and circular metabolic parameters in an obese diabetic mouse model (KK-Ay mouse ). Plasma total cholesterol levels were significantly decreased after 52 days of ATR treatment ( N; Veh 145.9 ± 7.1 vs. ATR 120.9 ± 5.8, p = 0.0216). Although BAT weight was not affected by ATR treatment ( A), morphologically altered areas, in which typical lipid-laden brown adipocytes did not exist, were observed in the BAT of KK-Ay mice treated with ATR ( O). Immunohistochemical analysis revealed abnormally aggregated perilipin (lipid-droplet-associated protein) and many apoptotic cells accumulated in these areas ( P). Moreover, although plasma triglyceride levels did not change ( B), plasma glucose levels were significantly increased by ATR treatment ( Q; Veh 174.6 ± 10.0 vs. ATR 254.4 ± 23.5, p = 0.0177), suggesting that ATR-induced apoptosis in BAT possibly contributes to hyperglycemia in KK-Ay mice. These findings clearly show that the MVA pathway in mature brown adipocytes is indispensable for maintaining BAT mass and function.
 

## Discussion
Increasing BAT thermogenesis, which can be achieved by enhancing BAT activity and mass, could be a promising strategy for treating obesity and obesity-induced T2D. In the present study, we demonstrated that MVA pathway–generated GGPP plays an indispensable role in retaining the thermogenic capacity of BAT by regulating BAT mass through controlling both brown adipogenesis and apoptosis of brown adipocytes. Notably, we demonstrated that distinct regulatory mechanisms govern brown adipogenesis and brown adipocyte survival via the MVA pathway; the former is partially dependent on geranylgeranylation ( ), and the latter is independent of geranylgeranylation ( ), respectively. Recently, Balaz et al. reported that HMG-CoA synthase 2 is important for adipocyte browning. The authors showed that the MVA pathway–produced GGPP is essential for adipocyte browning by regulating geranylgeranylation-dependent yes-associated protein (YAP) / transcriptional coactivator with PDZ-binding motif (TAZ) signaling. Importantly, our findings, as well as those of the previous report, could highlight molecular mechanisms underlying a strong negative correlation between statin use and BAT prevalence. Altogether, besides adipocyte browning, our findings demonstrate that GGPP also plays important roles in brown adipogenesis and brown adipocyte survival.
Hmgcr expression is regulated by SREBPs, which are transcription factors involved in the expression of key enzymes required for cholesterol, fatty acid, and triglyceride synthesis. SREBP1/2 expression was upregulated in maternal cold-exposed fetal BAT. Moreover, BAT-specific depletion of SREBP prevented the maintenance of body temperature under chronic cold exposure in mice. These results suggest that the transcriptional activity of SREBPs in BAT is tightly regulated to maintain BAT function. In the present study, we showed that Hmgcr expression levels were altered in cold-innervated BAT and β-adrenergic receptor-activated cultured brown adipocytes, and these changes in expression levels were highly correlated with Ucp1 expression levels ( ). Therefore, SREBPs are candidate transcription factors that regulate the MVA pathway by modulating Hmgcr expression in the brown adipocytes.
During early adipocyte differentiation, growth-arrested preadipocytes re-enter the cell cycle, followed by transient mitosis, known as MCE, and subsequently express genes that produce adipocyte-specific phenotypes. , Forty-eight hours after the induction of differentiation, the DNA content of HB2 brown preadipocytes increased by more than 2-fold; however, the increase in DNA content was suppressed by LVS treatment ( F). GGPP supplementation completely recovered LVS-induced suppression of MCE ( F), suggesting that the MVA pathway plays an essential role in MCE during brown adipogenesis via the production of GGPP. MVA-mediated GGPP production appears to be important for substrate supply, at least partially for protein geranylgeranylation during MCE. Protein geranylgeranylation is especially important for anchoring small GTPases to the plasma membrane for their respective activation. Thus, inactivation of these small GTPases may be involved in inadequate MCE during brown adipogenesis. Geranylgeranylation of small G proteins is important for the proliferation of various cell types. , , Our results, as well as those of several previous reports, suggest that GGPP is an important substrate for protein geranylgeranylation, which is essential for adequate MCE during brown adipocyte differentiation.
In this study, we demonstrated that statin treatment inhibits brown adipogenesis in HB2 cells. Consistently, we observed impaired BAT development in neonates exposed to LVS from E8.5 to E18.5, when differentiation of brown preadipocytes actively occurs. These results suggest that MVA pathway–mediated regulation of brown adipocyte differentiation is important for BAT development in vivo. Previous studies have shown that Ewing sarcoma, bone-morphogenic protein 7, and homeobox A5 are critical regulators of brown adipogenesis in cultured cells, and its loss of function reduces BAT mass in mice. , , , These previous reports clearly indicate that the regulatory mechanisms of brown adipogenesis in cultured cells are closely related to BAT development in vivo. Therefore, MVA pathway–mediated regulation of brown adipocyte differentiation is thought to be important for BAT development in vivo. However, further studies are needed to investigate the effects of the MVA pathway on brown adipogenesis in vivo.
Statins inhibit multiple cellular functions of white adipocytes. For example, statin treatment triggers apoptosis in mature white adipocytes; however, this effect is reversed by GGPP treatment. Similarly, we found that statin treatment induced apoptosis in mature brown adipocytes, which was possibly associated with the lack of downstream products from GGPP. Moreover, statin treatment impairs white adipogenesis by reducing the expression levels of C/EBPβ, C/EBPα, and PPARγ, , , which is consistent with the findings of our study showing reduced adipocyte markers after LVS treatment in differentiating brown adipocytes. In particular, we observed a decrease in nuclear C/EBPβ expression in differentiating brown adipocytes upon LVS treatment. Importantly, C/EBPβ functions not only as a regulator of early adipogenesis but also as a fate switch in thermogenic adipocytes. , Although most mechanisms underlying statin effects on brown adipocytes and white adipocytes may be similar, further investigation, especially regarding cellular fate, is needed to determine whether statins function as a molecular switch in determining thermogenic adipocyte development.
Although the differentiation of white adipocyte and brown adipocyte is controlled by a similar set of transcription factors, including C/EBPβ, their contribution to the adipocyte differentiation process may differ. The active form of C/EBPβ (LAP) serves as a critical regulator of brown adipogenesis by forming a transcriptional complex with PRDM16, a transcription factor that regulates thermogenic genes in brown adipocytes. One known regulator of C/EBPβ function is RB, which is an important regulator of cell cycle processes and cellular differentiation. , , In 3T3-L1 cells, RB hyperphosphorylation (inactive) induced by adipocyte differentiation stimuli has been implicated in the regulation of adipocyte differentiation via physical interactions with C/EBPβ and in the regulation of its transcriptional activity. RB-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts differentiate into adipocytes with a gene expression pattern resembling that of brown adipocytes. We demonstrated that LVS treatment suppressed the differentiation stimuli-induced inactivation of RB and the simultaneous nuclear localization of C/EBPβ in HB2 cells, which could be highly informative regarding the essential role of RB in the MVA pathway–mediated regulation of brown adipocyte differentiation.
Several studies using tissue-specific Hmgcr KO mice have shown that the MVA pathway is an important physiological regulator of cell survival by producing non-sterol isoprenoid intermediates in various cells. , , , However, the mechanism by which the MVA pathway affects mature brown adipocytes remains unclear. In this study, we showed that disruption of the MVA pathway causes programmed cell death owing to a lack of GGPP synthesis in mature brown adipocytes. Unlike LVS treatment, treatment with a GGTase I inhibitor did not induce apoptosis in brown adipocytes, suggesting the involvement of mechanisms independent of protein geranylgeranylation. The possible involvement of coenzyme Q10 deficiency in statin-induced cell death has been reported in several cell types, such as myotubes and hepatocytes. , However, in the present study, GGPP deficiency–induced apoptosis was not attributed to a coenzyme Q10 deficiency. Therefore, other metabolites derived from GGPP may be involved in statin-induced apoptosis in brown adipocytes. Liver X receptors (LXRs) were shown to regulate statin-induced cell death in 3T3-L1 cells. LXRs suppress proliferation of various cancer cells. For example, Zhang et al. showed that treatment with T0901317, a synthetic LXR agonist, suppresses the proliferation of melanoma cells by activating caspase 3, suggesting that LXRs play an important role in cell survival. Interestingly, GGPP has been reported to regulate the function of LXRs by acting as a direct antagonist. , These reports highlight the possibility that GGPP-mediated LXRs regulation may play an important role in Hmgcr deficiency–induced apoptosis in brown adipocytes.
Niemann et al. reported that apoptotic brown adipocytes induce de novo brown adipogenesis in BAT through the action of inosine to maintain BAT mass. Although brown adipocyte apoptosis occurred in BAT ( F), BAT atrophy was observed ( D) in BAT KO mice, suggesting that the formation of new brown adipocytes in BAT KO mice is very limited. Niemann et al. showed that extracellular inosine activates the mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) in brown adipocytes, suggesting that mTORC1 may be involved in inosine-induced brown adipogenesis. The importance of mTORC1 signaling in BAT development has been reported by several study groups. For example, mTORC1 inhibition by rapamycin or siRNA decreased the proliferation and differentiation of brown adipocytes. Adipocyte-specific mTORC1 loss in mice completely blocked cold-induced BAT recruitment. Importantly, statin treatment suppresses mTOR signaling, suggesting that the MVA pathway regulates mTOR signaling. The small GTPase Rac1, a target of GGTase I, regulates mTORC1 activity. In P–3R, we demonstrated that treatment with a GGTase I inhibitor suppressed brown adipocyte differentiation, suggesting that GGPP depletion by statins might suppress the geranylgeranylated Rac1-mTORC1 axis. This pathway may be involved in the inosine-induced differentiation of brown adipocytes.
In conclusion, the MVA pathway appears to be critical for maintaining brown adipocyte function by regulating both differentiation and apoptosis of brown adipocytes. GGPP is a pivotal isoprenoid produced by the MVA pathway in both processes. Our results highlight the importance of the MVA pathway in brown adipocytes to identify mechanisms that can be employed to develop therapeutic approaches for lowering statin-induced side effects, such as T2D.

## Limitations of the study
We demonstrated that LVS treatment to fetuses during the BAT developmental period impaired BAT formation in neonates, suggesting the pivotal role of MVA pathway in brown adipocyte differentiation. However, we cannot rule out the possibility that LVS-induced cell apoptosis of mature brown adipocytes also contributes to BAT atrophy in neonates. There is also a possibility that inhibition of MVA pathway by LVS affects the fate of potential progenitors for brown adipocytes in vivo. Further study is still needed to fully clarify the effects of the MVA pathway on brown adipogenesis in vivo. Another limitation is that we could not measure the actual cellular and tissue GGPP levels, so it is necessary to confirm the exact amount of GGPP required for normal BAT maintenance. We hopefully clarify these important limitations in our future studies.

## STAR★Methods

## Key resources table

 

## Resource availability

## Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Tsuyoshi Goto (goto.tsuyoshi.6x@kyoto-u.ac.jp).

## Materials availability
Mouse line generated in this study will be available by the upon reasonable request.

## Experimental model and subject details

## Mice
All animal experiments were performed according to protocols approved by the Animal Research Committee of Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan (permission number: R2-50). All mice were housed at 24 ± 1°C and maintained under a 12 h light/dark cycle. During all experiments, mice were fed a normal chow diet (MF; Oriental Yeast Co., Japan). To achieve LVS-induced pharmacological inhibition of the MVA pathway in the fetus, male UCP1-mRFP1 BAC Tg mice were mated with C57BL/6N-albino female mice (B6N-Tyrc-Brd/BrdCrCrl; Charles River Laboratories). Female mice with confirmed virginal plug the day after mating were subcutaneously administered 10 mg/kg/day of LVS (Tokyo Chemical Industry) from embryonic day 8.5 (E8.5) to 18.5 (E18.5) (11 days in total). The mRFP1-positive offspring were identified by genotyping and analyzed on postnatal day 0.5 (P0.5). BAT-specific Hmgcr KO mice were generated by crossing Hmgcrflox/flox mice with Ucp1-Cre mice (B6.FVB-Tg [Ucp1-cre] 1Evdr/J; The Jackson Laboratory) to generate Hmgcrflox/+Ucp1-Cre progeny. The progeny was then backcrossed with Hmgcrflox/flox mice, and their Hmgcrflox/floxUcp1-Cre progeny were backcrossed with Hmgcrflox/flox mice to yield Hmgcrflox/flox and Hmgcrflox/floxUcp1-Cre progeny. Hmgcrflox/flox mice were used as the controls. To generate tamoxifen-inducible adipocyte-specific Hmgcr knockout (aiKO) mice, Hmgcrflox/flox mice were mated with Adipoq-CreERT2 mice (C57BL/6-Tg [Adipoq-cre/ERT2] 1Soff/J; The Jackson Laboratory). The progeny of Hmgcrflox/floxAdipoq-CreERT2 mice were obtained in the same manner as Hmgcrflox/floxUcp1-Cre mice. 13-week-old male Hmgcrflox/floxAdipoq-CreERT2 mice were intraperitoneally injected with tamoxifen (100 mg/kg/day; Tokyo Chemical Industry) or corn oil (Nacalai Tesque) for 5 consecutive days. Twenty days after the tamoxifen injection, the mice were sacrificed with isoflurane for further investigation. For the ATR treatment experiment, 4-week-old male KK-Ay mice (KK.Cg-Ay/TaJcl; CLEA, Japan) were intraperitoneally injected with ATR (10 mg/kg/day; Tokyo Chemical Industry) for 52 consecutive days. The mice were sacrificed using isoflurane for further investigation.

## HB2 cells
HB2 preadipocytes from the interscapular fat of p53-KO mice were cultured as described previously with some modifications. Briefly, HB2 cells were maintained in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium (Nacalai Tesque) with 10% fetal bovine serum (Gibco) and 100 U/mL penicillin and 100 μg/mL streptomycin (Nacalai Tesque) at 37°C in 5% CO2. Post-confluent HB2 cells were incubated in a differentiation medium containing 1 μM dexamethasone (DEX; Nacalai Tesque) and 0.5 mM 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine (IBMX; Nacalai Tesque) in the growth medium. After 48 h, the cell culture medium was replaced with a post-differentiation medium containing 10 μg/mL insulin (Wako Pure Chemical) and 50 nM 3,3,5-triiodothyronine (T3; Sigma-Aldrich) in the growth medium, and the medium was changed every two days. To determine the effect of the MVA pathway on brown adipocyte differentiation, post-confluent HB2 brown preadipocytes were treated with LVS (Tokyo Chemical Industry), ATR (Tokyo Chemical Industry), LVS in combination with metabolites from the MVA pathway (MVA, FPP, and GGPP, Sigma-Aldrich; SQ, Nacalai Tesque), Zol (Sigma-Aldrich), Zol in combination with GGPP, LVS in combination with coenzyme Q10 (Ubiquinone, Tokyo Chemical Industry; Ubiquinol, Toronto Research Chemicals), GGTI-286 (Cayman Chemical), or GGTI-286 in combination with GGPP until day 2 after the induction of differentiation. On day 4, the HB2 cells were harvested for subsequent experiments. For DNA and intracellular lipid staining, brown adipocytes were double-stained with 5 μg/mL Nile red (Tokyo Chemical Industry) and 5 μg/mL Hoechst 33342 (Nacalai Tesque). The cells treated with Nile red and Hoechst 33342 were observed under a fluorescence microscope (Olympus IX83; Olympus), and images were captured with a DP71 CCD camera (Olympus). Fluorescence images were collected and merged by using DP-BSW software (Olympus). The fluorescence intensities were measured (Nile red, 485 nm/535 nm; Hoechst 33342, 360 nm/465 nm) by an Infinite® 200 apparatus (Tecan) and analyzed using i-control™ Microplate Reader Software (Tecan). For the LVS treatment experiment with mature brown adipocytes, differentiation-induced mature HB2 cells were treated with LVS, LVS in combination with metabolites from the MVA pathway, Zol, Zol in combination with GGPP, coenzyme Q10, or GGTI-286 from day 4 to day 8. On day 8, the HB2 cells were harvested for subsequent experiments. For the ISO treatment experiments, differentiation-induced HB2 cells were stimulated with 1 μM ISO (Sigma-Aldrich) for the indicated time durations, as described in F and harvested for further analysis. Apoptotic cells were detected by using the Annexin V-FITC Apoptosis Detection Kit (Nacalai Tesque) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, and cells stained by both Annexin V-FITC and PI were observed under a fluorescence microscope (Olympus IX83; Olympus). Fluorescence images were captured, collected, and merged as mentioned above. Cell viability was measured by using CellTiter-96® Aqueous One Cell Proliferation Assay (MTS assay; Promega) in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

## Primary brown preadipocytes
Immortalized brown preadipocytes from interscapular BAT of UCP1-mRFP1 transgenic mice were cultured as described previously. Briefly, post-confluent immortalized primary cells were incubated in a differentiation medium containing 0.25 μM DEX (Nacalai Tesque), 0.5 mM IBMX (Nacalai Tesque), 1 nM T3 (Sigma-Aldrich), 10 μg/mL insulin (Wako Pure Chemical), 125 μM indomethacin (Wako Pure Chemical), and 0.5 μM rosiglitazone (LKT Laboratories) in the growth medium. After 48 h, the cell culture medium was replaced with a post-differentiation medium containing 5 μg/mL insulin (Wako Pure Chemical), 1 nM T3 (Sigma-Aldrich), and 0.5 μM rosiglitazone (LKT Laboratories) in the growth medium, and the medium was changed every two days. For the ISO treatment experiments, differentiation-induced brown adipocytes were stimulated with 1 μM ISO (Sigma-Aldrich) for the indicated time durations, as described in A and S1C and harvested for further analysis.

## Method details

## RNA preparation and quantification of gene expression
Total RNA was extracted using the QIAzol Lysis reagent (QIAGEN) or Sepasol Super-I (Nacalai Tesque), and 2 μg of total RNA samples was reverse-transcribed using Moloney murine leukemia virus reverse transcriptase (Promega), according to the manufacturer’s instructions, in a thermal cycler. To quantify mRNA expression levels, quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction was performed using a Light Cycler 480 II System (Roche) with THUNDERBIRD® SYBR® qPCR Mix (Toyobo). All measured mRNA expression levels were normalized to ribosomal protein lateral stalk subunit P0 (Rplp0) expression levels. The primer sequences are provided in .

## Protein extraction
For whole cell lysates, the cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS, and lysed in ice-cold lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100 [v/v], 0.25% deoxycholate [w/v], 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate [SDS; w/v], and 1 mM EDTA) supplemented with 1% protease inhibitor cocktail (Nacalai Tesque) and 1% phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Nacalai Tesque). After centrifugation at 16,700 ×g for 10 min at 4°C, the resulting supernatant was quantified using a DC protein assay Kit (Bio-Rad) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were denatured by boiling for 5 min in Laemmli sample buffer and used for western blotting analysis. For BAT lysates, BAT was homogenized and lysed in ice-cold lysis buffer (78 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 6.25% sucrose [w/v], and 2% SDS [w/v]) supplemented with 1% protease inhibitor cocktail (Nacalai Tesque) and PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Roche). After centrifugation at 21,500 ×g for 30 min at room temperature, the resulting supernatant was quantified and denatured as mentioned above.

## Subcellular fractionation
Cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS, harvested, and lysed in ice-cold lysis buffer (10 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 10 mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.1% Triton X-100 [v/v], 0.1 mM EDTA and 1 mM dithiothreitol) supplemented with 1% protease inhibitor cocktail (Nacalai Tesque) and PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and incubated on ice for 15 min. The lysates were centrifuged at 860 ×g for 5 min at 4°C to isolate nuclei. The cytoplasm-containing supernatants were transferred to new tubes and centrifuged at 13,800 ×g for 1 h at 4°C to remove any contaminating nuclei. The supernatants were collected as cytoplasmic fractions. The nuclei pellets were resuspended in high salt buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 400 mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 1% nonidet P-40 [v/v], 0.1 mM EDTA, 10% glycerol [v/v] and 1 mM dithiothreitol) supplemented with protease inhibitor and phosphatase inhibitor as mentioned above, followed by sonication with a Bioruptor UCD-300 (Cosmo Bio). The suspension was centrifuged at 16,200 ×g for 5 min at 4°C and supernatants were collected as nuclear fractions. Protein quantification was performed using a DC protein assay Kit (Bio-Rad) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were denatured by boiling for 5 min in Laemmli sample buffer, and used for western blotting analysis.

## Western blotting
Protein samples were separated by SDS-PAGE and transferred to an Immobilon-P polyvinylidene fluoride transfer membrane (Millipore). After blocking, the membrane was incubated with a primary antibody overnight at 4°C, followed by incubation with the horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody (HRP-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG, Santa Cruz Biotechnology; HRP-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG, Novus Biologicals). Primary antibodies used in this study were anti-UCP1 (an antiserum from a rabbit immunized with the rat UCP1 purified from BAT in cold-exposed rats, as described previously ), anti-β-Actin (4967; Cell Signaling), anti-HMGCR (ab174830; Abcam), anti-RB (ab181616; Abcam), anti-C/EBPβ (sc-150; Santa Cruz Biotechnology), anti-C/EBPδ (sc-636; Santa Cruz Biotechnology), anti-α-Tubulin (2144; Cell Signaling), anti-Histone H3 (3638; Cell Signaling), anti-Caspase 3 (GTX110543; GeneTex), and anti-Cleaved Caspase 3 (Asp175) (9661; Cell Signaling). Proteins were visualized by chemiluminescence using an Immobilon Western Chemiluminescent HRP Substrate (Millipore). The chemiluminescent signal was detected using an ImageQuant LAS4000 (GE Healthcare) apparatus. The intensity of Western blot bands was quantified with ImageJ software (National Institutes of Health).

## Thermal imaging and in vivo fluorescence imaging of neonates
Neonates (P0.5) were removed from the cage and the warmest spot within a defined region in the upper dorsal area of each neonatal mouse was identified by infrared thermographic camera (T335; Teledyne FLIR) ( G). Fluorescence imaging was performed in the interscapular area using a Lumazone in vivo macro imaging system (Roper Technologies). Bright field and fluorescence imaging (excitation filter, 530–560 nm; emission filter, 590–650 nm) were performed with 0.3 s exposure time ( E). Surface plots of the images were acquired using PMCapture Pro 6.0 software (Roper Technologies). The range of the surface plot was 50–180 relative fluorescence units ( E). Fluorescence intensity was calculated using the ImageJ software (National Institutes of Health).

## Rectal temperature measurement
For cold exposure experiments shown in B and 1D, 14-week-old male C57BL/6N mice (SLC, Japan) were housed individually and exposed to 10°C with ad libitum food and water. The mice were anesthetized with isoflurane at the indicated time points and dissected for further analysis. For cold exposure experiments shown in I, 3-h-fasted 11–12-week-old male BAT KO and their littermates (Ctrl) were placed individually in cages and exposed to 4°C with free access to water. The rectal temperature was measured with a thermometer (BAT7001H; Physitemp Instruments Inc.) before exposure to cold and every hour after cold exposure. Infrared thermal images were obtained before and 3 h after cold exposure at 6°C using an infrared thermographic camera (T335; FLIR) ( J). For the CL316,243 injection experiment ( K), 11–12-week-old male BAT KO mice and Ctrl mice were anesthetized with isoflurane at concentrations of 1.5%, were placed on a heat block set at 38.5°C. In addition, mice were subcutaneously administered saline or CL316,243 (1 mg/kg; Sigma-Aldrich) after a stable rectal temperature was confirmed; then, rectal temperature was monitored every minute using a thermometer (BAT7001H; Physitemp Instruments Inc.).

## Hematoxylin and eosin staining of tissue sections
BAT was fixed with Bouin’s solution (saturated picric acid: 37% formaldehyde: glacial acetic acid = 15 : 5: 1) for 3 h, embedded in paraffin, and sectioned at 5 μm thickness using a microtome. The sections were transferred onto silane coated slides, deparaffinized with xylene, and rehydrated with sequential washes with diluted ethanol (100%, 99%, 90%, and 80%) followed by washing with running water. The samples were stained with eosin Y (Nacalai Tesque) and counterstained with Gill’s hematoxylin (Merck).

## Immunostaining analysis of BAT
For immunofluorescence staining with MCT1 and PDGFRα, deparaffinized BAT sections were incubated in 0.3% Triton X-100 (Nacalai Tesque)/PBS for 1 h, blocked with Blocking One Histo (Nacalai Tesque) for 10 min, and incubated with the primary antibodies diluted with Blocking One Histo (Nacalai Tesque) overnight at 4°C. After washing three times with PBS, the sections were incubated with fluorescence-conjugated secondary antibodies for 2 h. All sections were mounted with Fluoro-KEEPER Antifade Reagent with DAPI (Nacalai Tesque) and observed under a confocal microscope (FluoView FV1000 Olympus IX81; Olympus). Fluorescence images were obtained and merged by using FV10-ASW software (Olympus). Primary antibodies used for immunofluorescence staining included anti-MCT1 (AB1286; Sigma-Aldrich), anti-PDGFRα (ab203491; Abcam). Secondary antibodies used for immunohistochemical staining were as follows: CF488A-labeled goat anti-chicken IgY (Biotium), and CF568-labeled donkey anti-rabbit IgG (Biotium).

## TUNEL staining of BAT section
TUNEL staining was performed using the in situ Apoptosis Detection Kit (Takara) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, deparaffinized BAT sections were incubated in proteinase K (Nacalai Tesque) containing solution (50 mM Tris-HCl pH8.0, 1 mM EDTA, and 20 μg/mL proteinase K) for 10 min, washed with PBS, blocked with Blocking One Histo (Nacalai Tesque) for 10 min, and incubated with anti-Perilipin (NB100-60554; Novus Biologicals) diluted with Blocking One Histo (Nacalai Tesque) overnight at 4°C. After washing three times with PBS, the sections were incubated with CF568-labeled donkey anti-goat IgG (Biotium) and TUNEL labeling buffer for 90 min at 37°C. After washing three times with PBS, all sections were mounted with Fluoro-KEEPER Antifade Reagent with DAPI (Nacalai Tesque) and observed under a confocal microscope (FluoView FV1000 Olympus IX81; Olympus).

## Triglyceride measurement
HB2 cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS, lysed in 0.5% Triton X-100 (Nacalai Tesque)/PBS, and sonicated by Bioruptor UCD-300 (Cosmo Bio, Japan) at a maximum setting for 30 s, performed four times on ice. The sonicated samples were boiled for 10 min and centrifuged at 16,200 ×g for 10 min at 4°C. The supernatant was collected, and the triglyceride concentration was measured using a Triglyceride E-test Kit (Wako Pure Chemical) in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

## Mouse genotyping
mRFP1-positive mice and BAT-specific Hmgcr KO mice were identified by genotyping, as described previously. Briefly, the tail (2–3 mm) of mice or tissues were incubated with a lysis buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 25 mM EDTA, 0.5% SDS, and 100 mM NaCl) containing 1 mg/mL proteinase K (Nacalai Tesque) at 50°C overnight. After the samples were dissolved, 200 μL of phenol:chloroform:isoamyl alcohol (25:24:1; Nacalai Tesque) was added, and centrifuged at 13,800 ×g for 5 min at 4°C. The supernatant was transferred to a new tube, and 200 μL of chloroform was added. After centrifugation at 14,000 ×g for 5 min at 4°C, 160 μL of the supernatant was transferred to new tube containing 16 μL of 3 M Na-acetate and 400 μL of ethanol and centrifuged at 19,000 ×g for 20 min at 4°C. The DNA pellet was dissolved in TE buffer (pH 8.0). Genomic DNA was amplified using EmeraldAmp MAX PCR Master Mix (Takara) in a thermal cycler and confirmed by agarose gel electrophoresis. Primer sequences used are listed in .

## Analysis of plasma chemical parameters
Levels of plasma glucose, cholesterol, and triacylglycerol were measured by using Glucose C-test Kit (Wako Pure Chemical), Cholesterol E-test Kit (Wako Pure Chemical), and Triacylglycerol E-test Kit (Wako Pure Chemical), respectively, in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.

## Transfer C57BL/6N neonates to ICR mice
On postnatal day 0.5 (P0.5), the neonates from the Veh or LVS (sc., 10 mg/kg/day from embryonic day E8.5 to embryonic day E18.5)-treated C57BL/6N mice (SLC, Japan) were removed from their dams and transferred to lactating ICR mice (SLC, Japan) within 24 h to be fostered. The number of neonates to be fostered per ICR mouse (fostering mouse) was limited to 5–6 to minimize the variability in pup weaning weight. ICR mice were used to foster neonates until weaning. The pups were weaned from the dam at 21 days of age and fed a normal chow diet (MF; Oriental Yeast Co., Japan) throughout the experimental period. Among grown-up mice, 9-week-old female mice were used in the experiments.

## Quantification and statistical analysis
Data are presented as the mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM). Statistical analysis was performed using unpaired two-tailed Student’s t test or one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Tukey’s HSD post hoc test. Correlation was analyzed by Pearson’s correlation. Differences were considered statistically significant at p < 0.05. Statistical differences are indicated as ∗p < 0.05, ∗∗p < 0.01, ∗∗∗p < 0.001. Analyses were performed using SPSS Statistics for Windows, Version 17.0 (IBM).

## Acknowledgments
The authors sincerely thank Assoc. Prof. Taiho Kambe (Kyoto University, Japan) for helpful advice on the subcellular fractionation experiment. The authors are grateful to Prof. Yusaku Iwasaki (Kyoto Prefectural University, Japan) for technical advice on rectal temperature measurement of mice. The authors also thank Su-Ping Ng for improving the use of English, Rika Yoshii for secretarial support, and Masaomi Komori for technical support. This study was supported by JSPS KAKENHI: grant numbers JP19H02910, JP20K21755, and JP22H02287.

## Author contributions
T.G. and Y.-S.Y. conceived and designed the experiments. J.K. designed the experiments and conducted most of the experiments and collected and analyzed data. Y.-S.Y. conducted animal experiments related to KK-Ay mice and collected and analyzed data. S.K. conducted in vivo fluorescence imaging for postnatal mice. S.M. assisted with animal experiments. Y.O.-O., K.K., and M.S. supported experiments using HB2 cells. H.M., Y.F., and N.I. supported animal experiments especially those using infrared thermography. Y.O.-O., H.T., W.N., R.Y., K.K., M.S., K.I., and T.K. provided expertise and feedback. J.K. and T.G. interpreted data and wrote the manuscript. T.G. was involved in project planning and supervision.

## Declaration of interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

Published: February 8, 2023

## Footnotes
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2023.106161.

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S7 and Tables S1 and S2

## Data and code availability

•Original western blot images and microscopy data reported in this paper will be available by the upon reasonable request.
•This paper does not report original code.
•Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Document S1. Figures S1–S7 and Tables S1 and S2

## Data Availability Statement

•Original western blot images and microscopy data reported in this paper will be available by the upon reasonable request.
•This paper does not report original code.
•Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.