3532isciiScienceiScienceElsevierPMC1166705611667056116670563972052910.1016/j.isci.2024.111416Single cell profiling of hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients reveals TGF-β1 and IL-2 confer immunoregulatory functions to NK cells
MathewsJessica A BorovskyDorota T ReidKyle T MurphyJulia M ColpittsSarah J CarreiraAbel Santos MoyaTommy Alfaro ChungDouglas C Novitzky-BassoIgor MattssonJonas OhashiPamela S CromeSarah Q 1Toronto General Hospital Research Institute, Ajmera Transplant Centre, University Health Network, Toronto, ON M5G 1L7, Canada2Department of Immunology, Temerty Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A8, Canada3Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University Health Network, Toronto, ON M5G2C4, Canada∗Corresponding author sarah.crome@utoronto.ca
4These authors contributed equally
5Lead contact
18112024271211141611141624122024© 2024 The Author(s)This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Summary
Natural killer (NK) cell activity is influenced by cytokines and microenvironment factors, resulting in remarkably diverse functions, by contributing to inflammatory responses or serving as rheostats of adaptive immunity. Using single cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq), we identified a TGFβ1highCD56brightNK cell population associated with hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients protected from acute graft-versus-host disease (GVHD). We further define a role for the combination of interleukin-2 (IL-2) and transforming growth factor β1 (TGF-β1) in promoting a regulatory phenotype in NK cells. “Induced” regulatory NK cells produce high amounts of TGF-β1, inhibited T cells, could promote naive T cells differentiation into regulatory T cells, and exhibited a unique transcriptional program that includes expression of IKZF2 (HELIOS) and ZNF683 (HOBIT). This phenotype was not stable, and “induced” regulatory NK cells lost the ability to secrete TGF-β1 upon exposure to different cytokines. These findings define protective CD56brightNK cells post-hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, and demonstrate the combination of IL-2 and TGF-β1 promotes regulatory activity in NK cells.
Subject areas: Immunology, Cell biology, Transcriptomics

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•scRNA-seq identifies a TGFβ1highCD56brightNK cell population in HSCT patients without GVHD
•IL-2 and TGF-β1 induce similar transcriptional programs in NK cells from normal donors
•IL-2 and TGF-β1-induced immunoregulatory NK cells secrete TGF-β1 and suppress T cells
•These “induced” regulatory NK cells are not a stable cell state

NK cells exhibit diverse functions shaped by cytokines and microenvironments. We identify TGF-β1highCD56bright NK cells linked to protection from GVHT post-HSCT. IL-2 and TGF-β1 drive NK cells to a transient regulatory phenotype with unique transcriptional profiles, highlighting non-canonical regulatory functions can be induced by these cytokines.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2023 Dec 21; Revised 2024 Feb 7; Accepted 2024 Nov 14; Collection date 2024 Dec 20.

## Introduction
Natural killer (NK) cells have essential functions in immune homeostasis, and depending on the context, can either contribute to inflammatory immune responses or instead act as regulators of adaptive immunity. , Comprising 5%–20% of circulating lymphocytes, NK cells are generally classified as CD56brightCD16− NK cells or CD56dimCD16+ NK cells. , , Circulating CD56bright NK cells are described as being more immature, with the capacity to develop into CD56dim NK cells. They have also been described as “regulatory” NK cells, due to their ability to secrete high amounts of interferon (IFN)-γ, tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α), granulocyte macrophage colony stimulating-factor (GM-CSF), and displaying little to no cytotoxicity. In contrast, CD56dim NK cells, which comprise 90%–95% of NK cells in blood, are mature NK cells, express high amounts of cytotoxic molecules and exhibit antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) functions via the Fc receptor CD16. , , While these classifications have been used to characterize NK cells historically, it is now understood that NK cells exhibit extensive heterogeneity and can develop diverse memory and tissue-adapted phenotypes. , , 
Hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) is often a curative therapy for hematological malignancies. The success of this therapy is mediated in part by donor-derived T cells and NK cells attacking leukemic cells, known as the graft-versus-leukemic (GVL) effect. After HSCT, a high number of circulating NK cells correlates with decreased relapse incidence and lower rates of infection. , Circulating NK cells in HSCT recipients that contribute to GVL effects are associated with high expression of degranulation marker CD107a by NK cells (<20%). In addition to being associated with beneficial GVL responses, NK cells are also associated with protection from acute graft-versus-host disease (aGVHD), which occurs when donor-derived T cells attack healthy recipient tissues including the gut, skin, liver, and lung. aGVHD affects 30%–60% of HSCT recipients and has a 1-year mortality rates of 35% despite prophylactic cyclophosphamide. , , , Recent studies support that specifically CD56bright NK cells are associated with protection from GVHD; HSCT recipients protected from aGVHD have elevated proportions of circulating CD56bright NK cells in comparison to those who developed aGVHD, and a high ratio of NK cells to CD8+ T cells is correlated with protection from aGVHD. , , , , , Interestingly, the presence of “regulatory” CD56bright NK cells has been reported in chronic GVHD, characterized as NKp46+granzyme K+CD16− NK cells, with decreased expression of granzyme B and perforin. Further, loss of these regulatory CD56bright NK cells and an increase in naive T cells is associated with onset of chronic GVHD. While there is widespread appreciation of protective functions of NK cells in HSCT, we currently lack detailed understanding of factors that influence post-HSCT NK cell development, phenotypes and activity, particularly in humans.
The function of NK cells is greatly influenced by cytokines within local microenvironments. Activation of human NK cells via interleukin (IL)-15, IL-18, and IL-12 results in acquisition of memory-like properties with increased activity toward acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cells. In contrast, in the presence of solely IL-2 and IL-12, NK cells were reported to express IL-10 and suppress antigen specific T cells. Cytokines can greatly influence NK cell anti-tumor responses, and can induce non-typical NK cell phenotypes or even NK cell conversion to other innate lymphoid cell (ILC) family members. , , , , For example, mouse tumor-infiltrating NK cells lose CD49b and EOMES expression and convert into non-cytotoxic ILC1s, when exposed to the immunosuppressive cytokine transforming growth factor β (TGF-β). , In humans, we described a population of regulatory NK cell-like ILCs in high grade serous ovarian cancer that exhibited distinct functions from conventional NK cells, including the ability to directly inhibit tumor-associated CD4+ and CD8+ T cells via non-cytotoxic mechanisms. Importantly, these “regulatory” NK cell-like ILCs were associated with early cancer recurrence. While regulatory NK cell-like ILCs in high grade serous ovarian cancer shared many characteristics with NK cells, including an expression of CD94, KIRs, and NKp46, they exhibited a distinct transcription profile, did not produce IFN-γ or TNF-α, and instead expressed cytokines associated with other ILC family members. Several other groups have also reported distinct NK cell populations with immunosuppressive functions in cancer. For example, NKp46+CD56dimCD16+ NK cell in non-small cell lung carcinoma tumors correlated with worse overall survival and suppressed tumor-specific IFN-γ secretion from T cells, and a CD73+ NK cell population was observed in sarcoma and breast cancer patients that was characterized by the ability to secrete IL-10 and TGF-β1 and inhibited IFN-γ production from CD4+ T helper (Th) 1 cells. Further, NK cells with regulatory activity in acute lymphoblastic leukemia patients were identified as a CRTAM+ CD56+ population with low cytotoxic potential and expression of IL-10 and TGF-β1. Despite these many reports of NK cells with altered functions or acquisition of immunoregulatory functions, the signals that promote regulatory functions by NK cells is not well understood.
In this study, we identified a unique circulating NK cell population in HSCT recipients protected from aGVHD using single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq). This CD56bright NK cell population was defined by expression of TGFβ1 and was the predominant NK cell population in HSCT recipients protected from aGVHD, but was only present in very low abundance in HSCT recipients with aGVHD, and was completely absent in healthy donors. Analysis of cytokine receptor expression by this TGFβ1+ NK cell population revealed high expression of TGFBR1-3 and IL2 receptor subunits (β, γ, α subunits). Based on these observations, we explored TGF-β1 and IL-2 effects on human NK cells, and demonstrate that the combination of TGF-β1 and IL-2 promotes acquisition of regulatory functions in CD56brightNK cells. Altogether, our results characterize the synergistic effects of IL-2 and TGF-β1 on NK cells, and define a distinct TGFβ1+NK cell population in HSCT recipients protected from GVHD.

## Results

## Identification of a TGF-β1+CD56bright NK cell population in HSCT recipients protected from GVHD
To delineate specific features of NK cells in HSCT recipients protected from aGVHD and identify factors that might contribute to their development or activity, circulating NK cells from HSCT recipients that developed grade 3–4 aGVHD (n = 7), or HSCT recipients that did not develop aGVHD (n = 6) were assessed by scRNA-seq ( A; ). All patients in this cohort received post-transplant prophylactic cyclophosphamide (see ), with 4 of the 7 individuals that developed GVHD receiving additional treatments for 24 h or less, prior to sampling. scRNA-seq was used to enable assessment of heterogeneity of NK cell populations across individuals, to ensure other ILC family members were not included in analysis, and to enable identification of unique features of NK cell post-HSCTs in an unbiased manner. We further compared the phenotype of NK cells following HSCT to circulating NK cells in peripheral blood of healthy donors (n = 8) to determine unique NK cell states in HSCT recipients with differing clinical outcomes. A total of 15,993 NK cells were captured with approximately equal proportions of total NK cells coming from HSCT patients with GVHD (36.4%), without GVHD (36.7%), and healthy donors (26.9%).
 Based on NCAM1 and FCGR3A expression, we identified four clusters of CD56bright NK cells and four clusters of CD56dim NK cells ( A). There were no significant differences in the median proportion of CD56dim NK cells from cluster 1 and cluster 2 between HSCT recipients with and without GVHD, though both patient groups had reduced proportions compared to healthy individuals ( B and A). In contrast, there was an increased median proportion of CD56dim NK cells from cluster 3 in patients with aGVHD and no differences in CD56dim NK cells from cluster 4 ( B and A) Within the CD56dim NK cells, differential gene expression analysis indicated that CD56dim cluster 1 and cluster 2 highly expressed NKG7, FCGR3A, cytotoxic granules (GZMK and GZMH) and chemokines (CCL3, CCL4, and CCL5) ( C). Between these two clusters, CD56dim cluster 1 more highly expressed PRF1, CD81, KLRB1, and chemokine receptors (CX3CR1 and CXCR4) ( C). While still expressing genes indicative of a CD56dim NK cell, cluster 3 had a unique gene expression profile consisting of CTSD, SEPTIN7, SEPTIN9, and TLE5 as well as AREG, potentially indicating a role in epithelial cell repair, while cluster 4 had was defined by expression of ITGB1, a marker of homing, as well as RORA typically associated with ILC2s and ILC3s ( C).
Within the four CD56bright NK cell clusters, cluster 3 was observed to have an increase in median frequency in HSCT recipients with aGVHD, CD56bright cluster 2 has relative equal frequencies across HSCT recipients with aGVHD and healthy donors, and CD56bright cluster 1 was significantly elevated in proportion from patients without aGVHD and was virtually absent in healthy controls ( B and A). This cluster comprised a median of 51.96% of all NK cells in the blood of HSCT recipients that did not develop GVHD, supporting that this unique NK cell population is associated with protection from GVHD. The differential gene expression of CD56bright NK cells revealed increased expression of genes associated with tissue homing (SELL and ITGAX), nuclear receptor family members (NR4A1 and NR4A3) and GZMK, while cluster 2 highly expressed chemokines CCL5 and IL7R ( C). Cluster 3 predominately originating from HSCT recipients with aGVHD had high expression of IL7R, AREG, and TCF7, while also sharing the unique signature seen in CD56dim cluster 3 ( C). Finally, cluster 4 had elevated expression of IFITM3, ITGB1, and HLA-DRA ( C).
Based on the significantly increased prevalence of CD56bright cluster 1 in patients without GVHD, we further examined the gene expression profile of this NK cell population. CD56bright cluster 1 had higher expression of transcription factors (FOS, FOSB, and TCF7), chemokines (XCL1 and XCL2), and activation markers (CD69) ( C). We noted CD56bright cluster 1 expressed some molecules previously been reported on regulatory NK cells in the context of chronic GVHD. This included elevated expression of GZMK, IL7R, GPR183, TNFRSF11A, TCF7, SELL, and XCL1 with decreased expression of FCGR3A and CCL4 compared to other NK cell clusters. Interestingly, the immunosuppressive cytokine TGFβ1 was highly expressed in CD56bright cluster 1 in patients that did not develop GVHD ( D and 1E). To confirm TGF-β1 expression was a unique feature of CD56bright NK cells in HSCT recipients that did not have GVHD, CD56bright NK cells from HSCT recipients with and without GVHD were isolated by flow cytometry and assessed for expression of active TGF-β1. TGF-β1 expression was detected in supernatants from sorted CD56bright NK cells from HSCT recipients protected from GVHD following 24-h culture in IL-2 alone, but not observed in CD56bright NK cells from any HSCT recipients with aGVHD that were assessed ( B). This was of note, as NK cells expressing TGF-β1 and exhibiting a regulatory NK cell phenotype by inhibiting T cells had been observed in other contexts. , , We next examined whether this unique CD56bright NK cells population was associated with particular immunosuppressive treatments or cancer relapse. All study participants received prophylactic post-transplant cyclophosphamide (PTCy), including those that did not develop GVHD. However, some patients that developed GVHD received additional immunosuppression for <24 h prior to sampling. When the presence of this TGFβ1-expressing NK cell population was compared between HSCT recipients that received PTCy alone or PTCy plus additional immunosuppression, CD56bright NK cell expression of TGFβ1 was not altered ( C and S1D; treatments detail in ), indicating these additional therapies did not specifically inhibit TGF-β1-expressing NK cells. Additionally, CD56bright cluster 1 proportions and TGFB1 expression were not increased HSCT recipients that experienced cancer relapse, indicating this population is likely not correlated with inhibition of the GVL effect ( E and S1F). Collectively, the absence of this CD56bright
TGFβ1high population in normal donor blood and reduction in HSCT recipients that developed GVHD suggests this population is a unique cell state in HSCT recipients protected from GVHD. We therefore next sought to identify factors that might promote NK cells to acquire this regulatory phenotype.
To identify potential signals responsible for promoting protective TGFβ1+ NK cells in HSCT recipients without aGVHD, we examined expression of cytokine receptors expressed by NK cells in CD56bright cluster 1, as this would indicate cytokines this population was possibly responding to ( F and G). Of the cytokine receptors expressed, receptors for TGFβ, (TGFβR1, TGFβR2, and TGFβR3) and IL-2 receptor (IL2RA, IL2RB, and ILRG) were highly expressed in patients without GVHD, supporting a potential role for IL-2 and TGF-β1 in driving NK cells to acquire an immunoregulatory phenotype.

## IL-2 and TGF-β1 induce functional properties associated with regulatory NK cells
To explore the possibility that the combination of IL-2 and TGF-β1 confers functions in line with regulatory NK cells, we examined the combined effects of IL-2 and TGF-β1 on circulating CD56bright NK cells and CD56dim NK cells from healthy donors, and contrasted these effects with those of other cytokine combinations known to promote cytotoxic NK cells functions (IL-2, IL-15, and IL-18). We also assessed the impact of other cytokines that promote development of all helper ILC subsets (IL-2, IL-7, IL-23, and IL1β), cytokines that support ILC2s (IL-2, IL7, and IL-33), and cytokine receptors expressed by regulatory CD56+CD3− ILC population in ovarian cancer. Here, CD56bright CD16− and CD56dimCD16+ NK cells were isolated from healthy donor peripheral blood using flow cytometry sorting and cultured ex vivo with indicated cytokines to assess effects on NK cell phenotype and function ( A and 2B; ). Of all conditions tested, the combination of IL-2 and TGF-β1 could expand CD56bright NK cells and had the highest upregulation NKp46 expression, which we previously observed on regulatory NK-like ILCs and linked to their immunoregulatory activity. Treatment with IL-2 and TGF-β1 did not alter the percentage of CD94 co-expression with NKp46 but did decrease CD16 and degranulation marker CD107a expression in both CD56bright and CD56dim NK cells, in line with regulatory NK cell-like ILCs ( ).
 A distinguishing characteristic of regulatory NK-like ILCs has consistently been low IFN-γ and TNF-α expression, and instead the acquisition of a distinct cytokine expression profile, with differing reports of expression of IL-10, TGF-β1, IL-9, and IL-22. CD56bright NK cells treated with IL-2 and TGF-β1 had a significant decrease of IFN-γ, TNF-α, and GM-CSF, and did not upregulate IL-22 or IL-9 expression, cytokines associated with ILC3s and ILC2s, respectively ( D). In addition, we did not observe expression of IL-10 ( D). However, both CD56bright and CD56dim NK cells treated with IL-2 and TGF-β1 (referred to hereafter as NKTGF-β) acquired the ability to secrete TGF-β1 themselves, in line with the TGFβ1+ NK cells associated with protection from GVHD following HSCT ( E); NKTGF-β and NK cells treated with NK cell-associated activating cytokines IL-2, IL-15, and IL-18 (referred to as NKconv) were washed and cultured in IL-2 alone for 12–18 h, and assessed the supernatants for active TGF-β1 by cytometric bead array. Both CD56bright NKTGF-β and CD56dim NKTGF-β cells themselves produced active TGF-β1, with CD56bright NKTGF-β having a higher average expression of 920 pg/mL ± 1.05 compared to CD56dim NKTGF-β that had 530 pg/mL ± 0.66 ( E). This was of note, as NK cells that secrete TGF-β1 were reported to suppress T cell responses. 
Increased proportions of CD4+ Th1 and Th17 cells are associated with the pathophysiology of GVHD. We therefore assessed whether NKTGF-β cells could inhibit naive T cell proliferation, or expression of cytokines associated with Th1 cells (IFN-γ and TNF-α) or Th17 cells (IL-17A, IL-17F, and IL-22). Expanded NKconv cells or NKTGF-β cells were co-cultured with cell proliferation dye labeled naive CD4+ T cells that were stimulated with αCD3 and αCD28 beads. After four days, the percent divided CD3+CD4+CD56− T cells were determined based on flow cytometry analysis software ( F), and cytokine expression potential assessed by intracellular cytokine staining. After 3 days in culture with CD56bright NKTGF-β cells, no change in the percent of IFN-γ, TNF-α, IL-2, or GM-CSF were observed after stimulation with PMA/ionomycin ( A). Additionally, no statistically significant impact on T cell cytokine expression was observed when CD56dim NKTGF-β cells were co-cultured with naive CD4+ T cells compared to CD56dim NKconv ( A). However, a consistent decrease in percent of divided T cells was observed with CD56bright NKTGF-β cells ( F and 2G), indicating NKTGF-β cells could inhibit T cell proliferation.
We confirmed this decrease in T cell proliferation was not the result of CD56bright NKTGF-β killing T cells, as the CD56bright NKTGF-β cells did not express CD107a, a marker of recent degranulation within co-cultures and no change the number of live CD4+ T cells was observed ( B and S3C). Culture with CD56bright NKconv did not limit T cell proliferation, with the exception of one experiment where a minor decrease in proliferating T cells was observed that corresponded to high CD56bright NKconv expression of CD107a, indicating the reduction was due to NK cell-mediated T cell killing in contrast to CD56bright NKTGF-β ( B). To confirm low cytotoxic potential of CD56bright NKTGF-β cells and further support T cell killing did not underlie their ability to limit T cell proliferation, we assessed NK cell killing capacity toward K562 cells, an HLA class I deficient cell target commonly used to evaluate NK cell cytotoxicity. While CD56bright NKconv cells were able to kill K562 cells, CD56bright NKTGF-β cells failed to induce cell death or apoptosis, as measured by Helix-NP and Annexin-V+ expression, in K562 cells ( H). While CD56brightNKTGF-β cells lost their cytotoxic potential, CD56dim NKTGF-β cells from some donors still maintained cytotoxic potential ( H), perhaps due to CD56dim being more differentiated than CD56bright NK cells, and therefore less plastic.
We next explored whether NKTGF-β cells were inhibiting T cell activation, or upregulating expression of immunoregulatory molecules. We assessed T cell expression of PD-1, TIGIT, CD69, ICOS, and CD39 but did not observe altered expression of any of these markers on naive T cells (data not shown). We next asked whether NKTGF-β cells were capable of inducing T cells to develop into regulatory T cells themselves, as induced Tregs develop downstream of TGF-β1. We observed a significant fold increase of CD25+FOXP3+CD127- T cells within CD4+ T cell co-cultures with CD56bright NKTGF-β in comparison to stimulated T cells alone ( I), indicating CD56bright NKTGF-β could promote naive CD4+ T cells differentiation into regulatory T cells (Tregs). To confirm these “induced” Tregs (iTregs) from CD56bright NKTGF-β co-cultures were suppressive, we compared their ability to suppress T cells to FOXP3+ Tregs induced from naive T cells using published protocols (Cook et al., 2021, referred to as induced Treg or “iTreg”). CD25+FOXP3+CD127−CD4+ T cells induced by NKTGF-β cells had comparable suppressive capacity to that of iTregs ( J), supporting CD56bright NKTGF-β cells were capable of promoting naive T cells to differentiated into functional FOXP3+Tregs.
Throughout these studies, CD56bright and CD56dim NK cells treated with IL-2 and TGF-β1 both expressed TGF-β1 and had similar changes in phenotype. However, CD56dim-treated NK cells exhibited much greater heterogeneity in terms of cytokine profile, effects on T cells and maintained their cytotoxic potential. The difference could be due to CD56dim NK cells being a more heterogeneous population, more terminally differentiated or possibly include memory-like NK cells whose phenotypes would be less plastic. Irrespective of the underlying reason, we decided to focus our studies on CD56bright NK cells treated with IL-2 and TGF-β1, and further explore induced regulatory programs, as the phenotype was more pronounced and consistent between independent donors, and protective TGFβ1+NK cells in HSCT recipients were CD56bright.

## CD56bright NKTGF-β cells share a unique NK cell gene signature
In addition to NK cells, the family of innate lymphoid cells includes non-cytotoxic ILC family members comprising ∼0.09% of circulating CD45+ cells, which are classified as group 1 ILCs (ILC1s), group 2 ILCs (ILC2s), and group 3 ILCs (ILC3s) based on their cytokine and transcription factor expression. ILC3s can express IL-22, GM-CSF, IL-17A, and IL-17F, and the transcription factor RORC2. Distinguishing ILC family members sometimes presents challenges; however, ILC family members sometimes display overlapping characteristics with other ILC family members. For example, ILC3s can also express NK cell-associated molecules including CD56, NKp44, and NKp46, presenting challenges in differentiating ILC3s from NK cells. 
With this in mind, and to examine distinct and overlapping programs in CD56bright NKTGF-B cells to other ILC family members, we performed bulk RNA-seq on ex vivo expanded CD56bright NKTGF-β and CD56bright NKconv cells, to allow unbiased transcriptome analysis, and supervised analysis of gene expression programs associated with other ILC family members. When the top differentially expressed genes were assessed, the majority of upregulated genes in CD56bright NKTGF-β were genes associated with cell-cell junctions (TJP1, JCAD, BOC, OPCML, and ADGRG6), and transcription factors (TBXT and STOX2) ( A). The 27 genes downregulated are mostly attributed to surface markers (B3GAT1, CX3CR1, FCGR3A, IL1RL1, ITGAX, ITGAM, and ITGB2), genes involved in cytoskeleton (FN1, AFAP1L2, COL15A1, and FRAS1) and signaling pathways (MAL, PLEKHG3, and RASA3) ( A). Similarly, after performing gene set enrichment analysis, NKTGF-β cells downregulate networks that were highly enriched in NKconv cells, such as those that promote monocyte chemotaxis, neutrophil degranulation, and lymphoid killing cytotoxicity ( B). RNA-seq further confirmed CD56bright NKTGF-β cells had a low cytotoxic gene signature with statically significantly lower transcriptional expression of PRF1, GZMB, GZMK, and GZMA in comparison to CD56bright NKconv cells ( B). Whereas, for KLRC2 encoding for NKG2C, is expressed on NK cells, had higher expression in CD56bright NKTGF-β cells (0.62 log2fold) but several activating and inhibitory KIRS had lower expression (KLRD1, KLRC1, KIR3DL2, KIR2DL1, KIR2DL3, KIR3DL1, and KLRK1), indicating a shift of NK cell function ( C). We confirmed NK cell identity by assessing molecules associated with other ILC family members. No expression of CD5 and a decrease gene expression of other ILC1 markers including CXCR3, IL12RB1, and CD300A were observed ( D). Additionally, ILC2 genes including KLRG1, CTLA-4, and PTGDR2 (CRTh2) were not statistically different between groups ( D). However, we noted RORA, a transcription factor associated with ILC2s, had a statistically significant fold change (0.56 log2fold) in CD56bright NKTGF-β cells ( E). Helper ILC3s shares several characteristics with CD56bright NKTGF-b cells, including expression of CD56, NKp44, and NKp46, but are characterized by CD127 (IL7R), CD117 (KIT), AHR (AHR), and RORC2 (RORC) expression. We observed CD117 and CCR6 were co-expressed in CD56bright NKTGF-β cells, but had significant lower expression of RORC2 and AHR (−2.94 log2fold and −0.66 log2fold, respectively), suggesting that CD56bright NKTGF-β cells have similar surface marker expression but have limited overlapping transcriptional programs characteristic of ILC3s ( E).
 As prior studies identified a role for TGF-β1 in promoting a decidual-like NK cell profile, we also investigated expression of decidual NK (dNK) cell-associated genes in CD56bright NK cells treated with the combination of IL-2 and TGF-β1. Expression of CD9 and ITGA1 (CD49a), both associated with dNK cells was elevated in CD56bright NKTGF-β 3.66 log2fold and 2.29 log2fold higher expression, respectively , ( C). Decidual NK cells have been further classified into three subsets, dNK1, dNK2, and dNK3 cells. CD56bright NKTGF-β had statistically lower expression of dNK1 associated genes (ENTPD1, CYP26A1, HAVCR2, GNLY, and B4GALNT1) and dNK2 defining gene, ITGB2 ( C). Interestingly, there was a dichotomous gene expression of dNK3 defining genes (ITGB2, CD160, KLRB1, and ITGAE), with a statistically significant lower expression of ITGB2, but higher KLRB1 (CD161) and ITGAE (CD103) in CD56bright NKTGF-β cells ( C). We analyzed these markers to verify protein level expression and found CD103 was highly expressed in CD56bright NKTGF-β cells but there was limited expression of CD161( H and 3I). This is in line with prior reports showing peripheral blood NK cells given TGF-β downregulate CD16 with a corresponding increase in CD103. Therefore, CD103 is a distinguishing marker of IL-2 and TGF-β1-induced regulatory NK cells, a characteristic shared with both decidual NK cells and tissue resident NK cells.
We further characterized the surface marker expression to understand if there is a phenotype associated with regulatory CD56bright NKTGF-β cell. Along with a decrease in CD16 expression, there was a decrease in CD7, CD107a, and GITR expression in IL-2 and TGF-β1-induced regulatory CD56bright NK cells ( H and 3I; A). NCR1 (NKp46) and NCR2 (NKp44), and CD69 (CD69) were not differentially expressed transcriptionally or protein level ( H and 3I; A). We noted, however, an increase the mean fluorescence intensity of NKp46 in CD56bright NKTGF-β cells ( H and 3I), similar to our prior observation of NK cell-like regulatory ILCs from ovarian tumors. 
To identify transcription factors driving regulatory programs, we examined changes in expression of ILC-associated transcription factors, as well as transcription factors associated with tissue residency or regulatory T cells (Tregs). NK cell transcription factors TBX21 (TBET) and EOMES (Eomes) were decreased in CD56bright NKTGF-β cells, in line with prior reports of NK cells exposed to TGF-β1 ( E). CD56bright NKTGF-β cells did not differentially express ILC2-associated GATA3 or Treg-associated FOXP3 ( E). However, increased expression of ZNF683 (HOBIT), IKZF3 (AIOLOS), and IKZF2 (HELIOS) was observed in CD56bright NKTGF-β cells ( E). HELIOS expression was confirmed by flow cytometry, where both an increase in percent positive and geometric mean fluorescent intensity was observed ( F). HELIOS is a transcription factor associated with Tregs, but has also been observed in NK cells, with activity downstream of NKp46, which was notably increased by MFI with TGF-β1 treatment. Collectively, TGF-β1 and IL-2 induce a unique surface markers and transcription factor profile with overlapping characteristics to those previously reported in tissue-resident NK cells, and have decreased expression of TBET and EOMES and upregulate HELIOS, supporting altered transcriptional programs.

## IL-2 and TGF-β1-induced regulatory CD56bright NK cells do not exhibit a stable phenotype
Having established that CD56bright cells in IL-2 and TGF-β1 acquire immunoregulatory functions and a distinct profile, we next examined the stability of this induced cell state. After being cultured for 21 days in IL-2 and TGF-β1, CD56bright NKTGF-β cells were cultured for an additional 10 days in either conventional NK cell-associated cytokines (IL-2, IL-15, and IL-18), ILC2-associated cytokines (IL-2, IL-7, and IL-33), or ILC3-associated cytokines (IL-2, IL-7, IL-23, and IL-1β) ( A). No significant change in fold expansion of CD56bright NKTGF-β cells was observed in these different cytokine conditions ( B), and expression of CD16, CD7, and CD107a had no statistically significantly changes in CD56bright NKTGF-β cells when cultured in these cytokine conditions ( C–4E). However, a decrease in the mean fluorescence intensity of NKp46 was observed, suggesting reduced levels of NKp46 expression ( D). Additionally, CD56bright NKTGF-β cells cultured in ILC2- or ILC3-associated cytokines regained their ability to secrete IFN-γ and TNF-α and lost the ability to secrete active TGF-β1 ( F and 4G). NK cell-associated cytokines surprisingly did not upregulate IFN-γ and TNF-α production but did abrogate the ability of CD56bright NKTGF-β cells to secrete active TGF-β1. Collectively these findings indicate that while IL-2 and TGF-β1 induce circulating CD56bright NKTGF-β cells to acquire a regulatory phenotype, this is not necessarily a stable cell state, and NK cells can still regain NK cell-associated characteristics and functions depending on microenvironment signals.
 

## Discussion
The existence of NK cells with immunosuppressive functions has been observed in a wide range of disease contexts and anatomical locations. , , However, knowledge of factors promoting their development is relatively underexplored. In this study we identified a distinct CD56bright NK cell population highly expressing TGF-β1 in individuals protected from aGVHD following HSCT, which was not observed in healthy individuals and virtually absent in HSCT recipients with aGVHD. Expression of receptors for IL-2 and TGF-β1 led us to explore the impact of these cytokines on phenotypic and functional properties, and examine whether IL-2 and TGF-β1 induced regulatory in NK cells. IL-2 and TGF-β synergized to promote circulating NK cells to acquire phenotypic and functional properties in line with regulatory NK cell-like ILCs, including high expression of NKp46 and CD94, low expression of IFN-γ and TNF-α, and the ability to secrete active TGF-β1. However, this was not sufficient to induce a stable cell state, as IL-2 and TGF-β treated CD56bright cells lost their immunosuppressive characteristics when cultured in different cytokine conditions.
Exposure to IL-2 and TGF-β1 consistently promoted CD56bright NK cells to acquire suppressive functions, whereas CD56dim NK cells did not consistently acquire an immunosuppressive phenotype. IL-2 and TGF-β1 “induced regulatory” CD56bright NK cells suppressed autologous naive CD4+ T cell proliferation in a cytotoxicity-independent mechanism and promoted naive T cells to develop a regulatory T cell phenotype. These induced FOXP3+Tregs exhibited comparable suppressive capacity to those induced from naive CD4+ T cells using established protocols. Whether this occurs in the context of HSCT, however, remains to be explored.
Importantly a distinct transcription profile was observed, with NK cells acquiring characteristics of tissue resident NK cells (expression of ITGAE [CD103]). The transcription factors that define NK cells, TBX21, and EOMES, were significantly reduced on CD56bright NKTGF-β cells, and instead ZNF683 (HOBIT), IKZF3 (AIOLOS), and IKZF2 (HELIOS) were all expressed at high levels. Elevated HELIOS expression was confirmed at the protein level in CD56bright NK cells treated with IL-2 and TGF-β1, in addition to increased expression levels of NKp46. This was of note, as Narni-Mancinelli et al. reported in mice with a Ncr1 gene loss-of-function mutation (Noé/Noé mice), that signaling through NKp46 in Noé/Noé mice dampens NK cell responses, and NK1.1+CD11b+ NK cells in Noé/Noé mice had increased IKZF2 transcripts compared to wild-type mice. HELIOS expression in IL-2 and TGF-β1 treated human CD56bright NK cells coincided with loss of both cytotoxicity and IFN-γ and TNF-α production and acquiring the ability to secrete TGF-β1. Examination of programs downstream of HELIOS in NK cells will be an interesting area to explore moving forward.
IL-2 and TGF-β1 also increased AIOLOS, CD103, and HOBIT expression that correlates with promoting a resident memory phenotype. AIOLOS is expressed by ILC1s and NK cells and when suppressed it prevented the differentiation of ILC3s toward NK cells and ILC1s. In mouse, AIOLOS is constitutively expressed throughout NK cell development, and alters expression of several hundred NK cell genes, supporting key roles in peripheral NK cell maturation. CD103, also known as integrin alpha E, along with ZNF683 that encodes for transcription factor HOBIT are widely associated with resident lymphocyte populations. , Additionally, HOBIT has been observed in ILC1s, circulating CD56dim NK cells and liver resident CD56bright NK cells, and silencing HOBIT-inhibited NK cell development from human CD34+ cord blood progenitor cell. , The proportion of IFN-γ producing cells, however, increased with HOBIT knockdown, supporting complex functions in both NK cell development and NK cell functions.
We noted that the gene signature of IL-2 and TGF-β1 treated NK cells displayed significant overlap with the other gene signature of tissue resident NK cells defined by Dogra et al. In addition to ITGAE (CD103), CD56bright NKTGF-β upregulated ITGA1 and downregulated markers involved in tissue egress including S1PR1 and KLF2. Intriguingly, CD56bright NKTGF-β cells downregulated CXCR6, a chemokine receptor associated with NK cells restricted to bone marrow, spleen, and lymph node. CXCR6- NK cells with a tissue resident profile were reported to predominantly be found in the intestinal tract and lung. As one of the primary organs impacted by GVHD is the intestinal tract, future studies should explore whether NK cells in tissues of those protected from GVHD maintain a profile consistent with these protective circulating CD56bright NK cells and explore if these populations can limit harmful immune responses within tissues post-HSCT.
CD56bright NK cells have been widely associated with protection from both acute and chronic GVHD post HSCT. We identify expression of TGFβ1 as a defining feature of NK cells in HSCT recipients who do not develop aGVHD. NK cell with protective functions in both acute and chronic GVHD shared expression of GZMK expression, expression of NCR1 (NKp46), and CXCR3 ( ). Unique to our study was the determination that TGF-β1 was expressed on regulatory NK cells associated with protection from aGVHD. This TGFB1+CD56bright cluster 1 NK cell population also appears distinct from regulatory NK cell-like ILC populations reported in cancer, which expressed ENTPD1 (CD73) or CRTAM. We noted a low CD73 expression (average of 3.7%) and no IL-10 expression, differentiating these NK cells from CD73+ regulatory NK cells characterized in breast and sarcoma tumor patients. Rather protective CD56bright NK cells in our study were distinguished by TGF-β1, CD9, KLRC1 (NKG2A), and CD69 expression. Future studies should explore the kinetics of development of these NK cells following HSCT, define their longevity within patients, and assess whether they traffic to tissues and exhibit local protective functions to prevent GVHD in different anatomical locations.

## Limitations of the study
Our study utilized scRNA-seq to assess differences in NK cells between individuals who do or do not develop GVHD following HSCT. While cytokine and cytokine receptor differences were identified as a defining factor of the CD56brightCluster 1 that was expanded in HSCT recipients protected from GVHD, additional factors likely impact the development and function of this unique NK cell state. Further, the relatively small size of our HSCT cohort limits our ability to comment on how variables between patients impacted our data, particularly the type of cancer, type of HSCT transplant, and time from transplant. Indeed, the relatively small sample size and sampling at only one time point prevents us from determining whether the TGFB1+ NK cells observed in patients without aGVHD have a role in directly preventing aGVHD development, or are instead part of cellular circuits that do not promote GVHD post-HSCT. However, flow cytometry analysis of active TGF-β1 expression by CD56bright NK cells post-HSCT in B supports that TGF-β1-expressing CD56bright NK cells is correlated HSCT recipients that do not have GVHD. Our in vitro experiments with healthy donor blood highlight the role of the combination of IL-2 and TGF-β1 in promoting CD56bright NK cells to acquire at least some characteristics of these NK cells associated with protection post-HSCT. However, due to the limited availability and small number of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) available from samples of patients with or without GVHD post-HSCT based on study design, we could only assess TGF-β1 expression in ex vivo CD56bright NK cells, and were unable to ability perform extensive flow cytometry phenotyping and functional assays is parallel to IL-2 and TGF-β1-induced NK cells. Due to study design, we did not include analysis of when this population arises temporally, and for how long this unique cell state is observed, which would be interesting to pursue in follow up studies. We were also not powered to assess associations of sex, gender, or both on the results.

## Resource availability

## Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to the lead contact, Dr Sarah Q. Crome (sarah.crome@utoronto.ca).

## Materials availability
This study did not generate new unique reagents.

## Data and code availability

•scRNA-seq data can be accessed via GEO using accession code GSE255298.
•This paper does not report original code.
•Additional information needed to reanalyze the data reported in this paper and permitted by UHN REB 19–6351 is available from the upon request.

## Acknowledgments
First and foremost, we would like to thank the HSCT recipients at UHN who made this work possible. We would also like to thank the nurses, physicians, and surgeons at Princess Margaret Cancer Centre for efforts to obtain samples, and acknowledge technical support provided by the Princess Margaret Genomics Cent, particularly Troy Ketela and Julissa Tsao, and the Princess Margaret Cancer Centre flow cytometry core. S.Q.C. holds a Tier 2 Canada Research Chair in Tissue-Specific Immune Tolerance. This research was supported by funding from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (169084) and the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (RGPIN-2021-03672). S.Q.C. was also supported by the Medicine by Design program (Canada First Research Excellence Fund), the Ajmera Transplant Centre and Canadian Foundation for Innovation (CFI) grant 38308. Schematic figures were created with BioRender.com.

## Author contributions
J.A.M. and S.Q.C. designed and implemented IL-2 and TGF-β1 studies. K.T.R., A.S.C., J.M., and S.Q.C. designed HSCT patient-based studies. D.T.B., K.T.R., and J.M.M. share co-second authorship. J.M. established the Hans Messner biobank and the infrastructure required to enable this study. A.S.C., I.N.B., T.A.M., and J.M. liaised with patient care teams to obtain human samples for study. J.A.M., K.T.R., J.M.M., S.J.C., and S.Q.C. developed ILC isolation and expansion methods. J.A.M., D.T.B., K.T.R., J.M.M., and S.J.C. performed experiments and analyzed data. K.T.R. and J.M.M. designed and implemented the bioinformatic pipeline, with advice from S.Q.C. P.S.O. advised on analysis and interpretations. S.Q.C. supervised the work. J.A.M., K.T.R., and S.Q.C. wrote the manuscript, which all authors reviewed and edited.

## Declaration of interests
The authors have submitted a provisional patent application# 63/353,823 with regards to effects of TGF-β1 and IL-2 on human NK cells.

## STAR★Methods

## Key resources table

 

## Experimental model and study particpant details

## Human Hematopoietic stem cell transplant and healthy peripheral blood mononuclear cell samples
Study protocols were approved by the Research Ethics Board of the University Health Network in accordance with the Helsinki Declaration and good clinical practice guidelines (UHN REB 19–6351). All patients provided written, informed consent for collection of samples. Fresh peripheral blood for this study was collected in EDTA blood collection tubes (BD Biosciences). HSCT recipient PBMCs were obtained from the Messner Allogeneic Transplant Program Biobank, the sample size was 13. PBMCs from HSCT recipients that developed grade 3–4 GVHD were collected at time of diagnosis. PBMCs from HSCT recipients that did not develop GVHD were collected at comparable timepoints, and age and sex-matched where possible. Patient characteristics are listed in . Here, Biological sex was tracked and reported, however this study was not powered to assess associations of sex, gender, or both on the results.
Samples were prepared according to 10× Genomics Single Cell 5′ v2 Reagent kit user guide. For studies using healthy donor PBMCs, samples were collected from healthy patients through Canadian Blood Services Blood4Research Program (approved study 2020.047). All participants provided written informed consent per the netCAD Blood4Research Consent Form. Healthy donor blood was also collected according to an approved study per the Review Ethics Board policies (CAPCR ID 17–6229). The biological sex and age of patients are reported in .

## Cell lines
The K562 cell line is a human lymphoblast cells isolated from the bone marrow of a 53-year-old chronic myelogenous leukemia patient and was purchased directly from ATCC. They were cultured in RPMI 1640 (Gibco) complete medium containing 10% FBS (Cytiva) and 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin (Gibco) in 5% CO2 at 37°C. Cells were maintained at a concentration of 1 × 105 – 1 × 106 viable cells/mL and were tested to ensure no mycoplasma contamination.

## Method details

## Single cell RNA-sequencing
For single-cell RNAseq experiments, isolated patient PBMCs were resuspended in 1xPBS with 0.04% BSA (Millipore Sigma) and prepared according to 10× Genomics Single Cell 5′ v2 platform in accordance with manufacturers instructions. 12,000 cells were targeted for capture from each sample, sequenced to a depth of 40,000 reads. Expression matrices and alignment to the reference human genome (GRCh38/hg38) was done using CellRanger v6.1.2. Single cells were filtered to exclude cells that expressed >10% mitochondrial genes, <1000 total transcripts and <200 unique genes. Data were log normalized, principal component analysis was preformed and cells were clustered with the Louvain algorithm using FindNeighbors and FindClusters in Seurat using the top 20 principal components. Doublets were excluded using the DoubleFinder package. Free mRNA contamination in each droplet was estimated and removed using the SoupX package. Clusters were visualized using the Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection(UMAP). NK cell clusters were subsetted based on expression of NCAM1 and FCGR3A without expression of T cell markers CD3E, CD8A and CD4 as well as other lineage markers. Differential expression of markers in each cluster was done using FindMarkers in Seurat and was visualized using EnhancedVolcano. 

## Natural Killer cell isolation
PBMCs were isolated from whole blood from both male and female normal donors. Sex of normal blood donors was not available prior to receiving blood, therefore we could not include sex as a variable for this study. However, in all experiments, NK cells from both male and female donors were included, with no significant differences observed with our sample size.
Whole blood was diluting 1:1 with FACS buffer (1× PBS +2%FCS) and layered using Lymphoprep. Cells were washed in FACS, and platelets were removed by centrifugation for 10 min three times. Red blood cells were lysed with ACK Lysing Buffer (Gibco). PBMCs were stained with FITC conjugated antibodies for the following lineage markers: CD3 (OKT3), CD3 (UCHT1), CD4 (RPAT4), CD8α (RPAT8), CD14 (M5E2), CD15 (W6D3), CD19 (HIB19), CD20 (2H7), TCRαβ (IP26), TCRδγ (B1), CD33 (HIM3-4), CD34 (581), CD203c (NP4D6), FCεr1α (AER37), CD79α (HM47) and CD138 (MI15). Cells are washed in FACS buffer, resuspended in EasySep Buffer (StemCell Technologies) and enriched using the EasySep FITC Positive Selection Kit II (StemCell Technologies), as per manufacturer instructions. Enriched cells were stained with a cocktail containing CD94 (PerCPCy5.5, DX22), NKG2D (PerCPCy5.5, 1D11), CD127 (PE, HIL-7R-M21), CD16 (PE-Dazzle594, 3G8), CD117 (PE-Cy7, 1D11), CCR6 (APC, G034e3), FVS700, CD45 (APC-Cy7, HI30), CRTh2 (BV421, BM16) and CD56 (BV605, HCD56). NK were sorted as live CD45+Lineage−CD56brightCD16−CCR6−CRTH2- or CD45+CD56dimCD16+CCR6−CRTH2- using a FACSAria Fusion (BD Biosciences).

## Natural Killer cell expansion
NK cells were cultured in 500IU/mL of IL-2 (SteriMax), 20 ng/mL of IL-15 (BioLegend), 20 ng/mL of IL-18 (BioLegend) in complete MACS NK Miltenyi Medium (5% human serum, 1% supplement, 1% penicillin/streptomycin) are identified throughout as NKconv for conventional NK cells. NK cells cultured in 500 IU/mL of IL-2 (SteriMax), 20 ng/mL of TGF-β1 (R&D), and 10 ng/mL of α-IFN-γ (R&D) in complete XVIVO 15 medium (supplemented with 5% human serum, 1% glutamax, 1% penicillin/streptomycin) are identified as NKTGFB. Media was replenished every 2–3 days with fresh cytokines.

## K562 cell killing assay
Expanded NK cells were co-cultured with cell proliferation dye labeled K562 cells at an effector-to-target ratio of 1:1 for 12 h in complete RPMI 1640 medium (10% fetal bovine serum, 1% penicillin/streptomycin, 1% glutamax) supplemented with IL-2 (100 IU/mL) in 5% CO2 at 37°C. After 12 h, cells were harvested, stained with surface antibodies, followed by staining with Annexin-V PerCPCy5.5 and Helix-NP FITC (20nM). Samples were assessed immediately using a BD Fortessa cytometer.

## Naive T cell co-culture assay
After 21 days in culture, NK cells were counted and co-cultured with autologous naive CD4+ T cells. Naive T cells were isolated from frozen PBMCs using STEMCELL Naive CD4+ T cell isolation kit. Following isolation, the cells were labeled with cell proliferation dye eF450 per the manufacturer’s instructions. T cells were co-cultured with NK cells at a 1:1 ratio for a duration of 4 days with anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 Dynabeads (ratio of 1:8) in the absence of exogenous cytokines. Percent suppression was measured by percent divided live CD3+ CD4+ CD56− CD8− that were co-cultured with NK cells divided by naive CD4+ T cells activated with anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 antibodies (%suppression = 100 – [%T cells of NKTGF-β1/%T cells in beads alone]∗100).

## Flow cytometry
Following 15 min incubation with human TruStain FcX (BioLegend), staining was performed in 1× PBS supplemented with 2% fetal calf serum (FACS buffer) at 4°C. Followed by surface marker staining for 30 min at 4°C. For intracellular staining, cells were washed with FACS, fixed using the FOXP3/Transcription Factor Staining set (eBioscience) for 30 min at room temperature and permeabilized for 15 min, and then incubated with intracellular antibodies found in at room temperature for 30min. Samples were washed and resuspended in FACS buffer and then were assessed on an LSR Fortessa (BD Biosciences). The data were analyzed using FlowJo version 10 software.

## Cytokine and active TGF-β1 analysis
For secreted cytokine analysis, following expansion cells were washed three times in media without cytokines and plated in a 96-well round bottom plate at the same concentration in complete media with 500IU/mL of IL-2 alone, including a well with complete media alone as a control. Supernatants were collected after overnight incubation and were frozen at −80°C. Analytes were thawed and measured using the 12-plex LegendPlex Human Th Cytokine Panel (BioLegend) or Human active TGF-β1assay (BioLegend) as per manufacturer’s instructions.

## RNA preparation and sequencing analysis
NK cells were expanded as described above (and denoted as NKconv or NKTGF-b depending on if cultured conditions) for 20 days. RNA was extracted from 100,000 cells from 3 independent donors using RNeasy Plus MiniKit (Cat74134) kit and stored in RLT solution at −80°C. RNA samples were quantified by qubit RNA kit (Life Technologies) and quality assessed by Agilent Bioananlyzer. All samples have RIN >9.6. Libraries were prepared with 15ng of total RNA using Stranded Total RNA prep with Ribo-Zero Plus kit (Illumina) with 13 cycles of amplification used. Final cDNA libraries were size validated using Agilent Bioanalyzer or Tapestation and concentration validated by qPCR (Kapa Biosystems/Roche). All libraries were normalized and pooled together, denatured with 0.2N NaOH and diluted to a final concentration of 250 p.m. Pooled libraries were loaded onto an Illumina Novaseq V1.5 cartridge for cluster generation and sequencing on an Illumina Novaseq 6000 instrument (Illumina) Paired-end 101 bp protocol to achieve ∼60 million reads per sample. Output FASTQ files were assessed for quality using the MultiQC package. Sequencing data were aligned to the GRCh38 genome (version refdata-gex-GRCh38-2020-A, 10× Genomics) using STAR aligner version 2.7.9. Feature counts were generated using the featureCount utility in the subread package, discarding multi-mapping reads. Differential expression analysis of CD56bright NK cells between NKconv and NKTGF-b conditions, controlled for donor, was conducted using the DESeq2 package, and significance was calculated using the Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted p-value less than 1 × 10−10. A ranked gene list for the comparison was generated using log2 fold changes and p values for gene set enrichment analysis using GSEA.

## Quantification and statistical analysis
Statistical significance was determined by Kruskal-Wallis test, one way ANOVA, or Wilcoxon test and indicated in the figure legend. The number of replicates is represented by n and is indicated in each figure legend. ∗p < 0.05; ∗∗p < 0.01; ∗∗∗p < 0.001; ∗∗∗∗p < 0.0001; ns, not significant unless otherwise stated in figure legend. Data are represented as mean ± SEM unless otherwise stated. Data analysis was preformed using GraphPad Prism v9 and RStudio v4.2.3.

Published: November 18, 2024

## Footnotes
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2024.111416.

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S5, Tables S1 and S2

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Document S1. Figures S1–S5, Tables S1 and S2

## Data Availability Statement

•scRNA-seq data can be accessed via GEO using accession code GSE255298.
•This paper does not report original code.
•Additional information needed to reanalyze the data reported in this paper and permitted by UHN REB 19–6351 is available from the upon request.