pmcNeuroscienceNeuroscience319nihpa7605074Neuroscience0306-45221873-7544pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleNIHPA Author ManuscriptsPMC11444371PMC11444371.11144437111444371NIHMS20232753897707010.1016/j.neuroscience.2024.07.002NIHMS2023275NIHPA20232751ArticleSubregion-specific transcriptomic profiling of rat brain reveals sex-distinct gene expression impacted by adolescent stress
KrolickKristen N. CaoJingyi GullaEvelyn M. BhardwajMeeta MarshallSamantha J. ZhouEthan Y. KissAndor J. ChoueiryFouad ZhuJiangjiang ShiHaifei aDepartment of Biology, Miami University, Oxford, OH 45056, USAbDepartment of Human Sciences, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USAcCenter for Bioinformatics & Functional Genomics, Miami University, Oxford, OH 45056, USAdJames Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA*Corresponding author at: Department of Biology, Miami University, 700 E. High St., Oxford, OH, USA. shih@miamioh.edu (H. Shi).Author contributions
K.N.K., J.Z. and H.S. initiated the study and designed the experiments; K.N.K., J.C., F.C., E.Y.Z., E.M.G., M.B., S.J.M., A.J.K., J.Z. and H.S. performed the experiments; K.N.K., J.C., F.C., E.Y.Z., J.Z. and H. S. wrote the main manuscript, K.N.K., J.C., F.C., E.Y.Z., E.M.G., M.B., S.J.M., A.J.K., J.Z., and H.S. edited the manuscript. All authors reviewed the manuscript.
16820240672024553471842193925092024011020240110202427012026https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Stress during adolescence clearly impacts brain development and function. Sex differences in adolescent stress-induced or exacerbated emotional and metabolic vulnerabilities could be due to sex-distinct gene expression in hypothalamic, limbic, and prefrontal brain regions. However, adolescent stress-induced whole-genome expression changes in key subregions of these brain regions were unclear. In this study, female and male adolescent Sprague Dawley rats received one-hour restraint stress daily from postnatal day (PD) 32 to PD44. Corticosterone levels, body weights, food intake, body composition, and circulating adiposity and sex hormones were measured. On PD44, brain and blood samples were collected. Using RNA-sequencing, sex-specific differences in stress-induced differentially expressed (DE) genes were identified in subregions of the hypothalamus, limbic system, and prefrontal cortex. Canonical pathways reflected well-known sex-distinct maladies and diseases, substantiating the therapeutic potential of the DE genes found in the current study. Thus, we proposed specific sex distinct, adolescent stress-induced transcriptional changes found in the current study as examples of the molecular bases for sex differences witnessed in stress induced or exacerbated emotional and metabolic disorders. Future behavioral studies and single-cell studies are warranted to test the implications of the DE genes identified in this study in sex-distinct stress-induced susceptibilities.

Chronic restraint stressSex-specific differencesAmygdalaHippocampusHypothalamusOrbitofrontal cortexpmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptyespmc-prop-open-manuscriptyespmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND

## Introduction
While decreased food intake due to exposure to an acute stressor may be beneficiary, i.e. staying in shelter when dangerous environment arises instead of seeking food, prolonged decreases in feeding with persistent weight loss due to a chronic stressor could become harmful or ill-adaptive to an individual ( ; ). Such non-successful allostatic habituation after chronic stress could be caused by dysregulation of the hypothalamus–pituitary–adrenal cortex (HPA) axis after exposure to a chronic stressor ( ). Chronic stress leads to dysregulation of the HPA axis with alterations in glucocorticoid secretion being heavily associated with a wide array of maladies ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ). Furthermore, abundant sex differences are witnessed in the presentation of stress-related maladies in humans ( ; ; ; ; ) and rodent studies ( ), suggestive of differences in underlying neurobiology between sexes ( ). For example, metabolic disturbances are more prevalent in men, and estrogen has been shown to be protective against metabolic disturbances compared to testosterone ( ). Likewise, male rats are more vulnerable than female rats to metabolic challenges after prenatal stress ( ).
Sex differences witnessed in prevalence and presentation of stress-induced disorders are manifested especially during adolescence and puberty in humans and rodent models ( ; ). In rodents, while hypothalamic pathways are fully developed by PD18 ( ), many corticolimbic brain regions heavily implicated in stress-induced maladies, such as the hippocampus, amygdala and prefrontal cortex ( ), undergo developmental and maturational processes during adolescence ( ), making adolescence an especially vulnerable window for stress-induced long-term changes in adult behavior ( ). Therefore, discovery of underlying stress-induced transcriptional changes in aforementioned brain regions during adolescence is critical ( ).
Despite this need to discover the neurobiology underlying sex differences manifested due to stress, few studies have analyzed stress-induced unique transcriptional differences among various brain nuclei at once, especially on a genome-wide scale. Furthermore, recent neuro-sequencing studies support that analyzing genes from specific subnuclei, instead of from entire nuclei or whole brain regions, yields results that are more conclusive and consistent, due to relatively similar neurochemical and genetic components within each subnuclei ( ; ). Therefore, the aim of the current study was to investigate the transcriptional changes due to stress in nine specific subnuclei of brain regions especially implicated in significant stress-related maladies. These brain regions included major players in corticolimbic and prefrontal circuitry, including the amygdala, hippocampus, and prefrontal cortex; along with the major neuroendocrine regulator of energy homeostasis and stress response, the hypothalamus ( ).
The major hypothalamic subregions integrating neural and endocrine signals involve the arcuate nucleus (ARC), paraventricular nucleus (PVN), and ventromedial hypothalamic nucleus (VMH), which form a complicated loop to regulate energy homeostasis. For example, activation of single-minded 1 (SIM1) neurons in the PVN by ARC anorexigenic, pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) neurons stimulates glutamatergic projections to the parabrachial nucleus and decreases feeding; whereas inhibition of SIM1 neurons by orexigenic, ARC agoutirelated protein (AgRP)/neuropeptide Y (NPY) neurons increases feeding ( ; ; ). Completing the hypothalamic loop, VMH neurons project to and activate AgRP/NPY neurons, and POMC neurons project to and activate VMH neurons ( ). Additionally, the PVN has monoaminergic and cholinergic projections to the mid-brain and hindbrain ( ).
Neuropeptides traditionally known for regulation of energy homeostasis also show significant effects on HPA-axis stress hormone regulation ( ). For example, restraint stress was shown to activate ARC POMC neurons, thereby increasing corticotropin releasing hormone (CRH)-neuron activity in the PVN and peripheral levels of ACTH and CORT ( ). Furthermore, restraint stress has been shown to increase POMC neuronal firing activity responsible for gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)ergic input onto dopaminergic neurons at the ventral tegmental area, leading to decreased food intake and other maladies ( ). High levels of CORT initiated during the stress response activate glucocorticoid receptors presented widely in the brain ( ; ; ), triggering nuclear localization and regulation of the transcription of genes ( ).
Limbic regions such as the amygdala and hippocampus regulate CRH release and thus the HPA axis via mainly indirect projections to the PVN ( ; ; ). This is reflected in human studies, for example, increases in stress-related symptoms correlate with enhanced amygdala and hippocampal responsiveness to stress ( ). Original evidences suggested that the hippocampus primarily suppresses, while the amygdala primarily enhances HPA axis responses and releases of ACTH and CORT ( ), although a full understanding including all pathways among these regions is in development ( ; ).
The basolateral amygdala (BLA) is important in regulating reward, emotion, and stress responses ( ). For example, stress produces hyperexcitability of BLA output to the nucleus accumbens core, and hyperexcitability of nucleus accumbens core region is associated with various behavioral maladies ( ). The BLA receives sensory input from stress and, in-turn, excites the central nucleus of amygdala (CEA) ( ). The CEA mediates feeding and, via CRH receptor signaling, anxiety responses ( ), and connects to both reward circuitry and gustatory regions in the brain ( ). Projections from the parabrachial nucleus to the CEA are known for appetite suppression ( ), and depending on the type of receptor projections from the BLA to CEA promote or suppress appetitive behaviors ( ). While sex-specific differences in stress-induced maladies are known, studies analyzing neural or molecular mechanisms thereof are sparse, especially sex differences in differential amygdala nuclei responses to stress ( ). Thus, it is important to understand gene expression changes in response to stress in these amygdala regions.
The hippocampus is important in memory formation, learning, and mood regulation ( ). For example, chronic stress or chronic CORT administration induces hippocampal atrophy and behavioral maladies in rodents ( ). The Cornu Ammonis areas 1 (CA1) is the major output of the hippocampus, with connections to the medial prefrontal cortex, nucleus accumbens, entorhinal cortex, and amygdala ( ). Furthermore, BLA to CA1 connections are important ( ). The Cornu Ammonis areas 3 (CA3) offers glutamatergic projections to the CA1 via the Schaeffer collateral, and increased excitatory connections from CA3 to CA1 has been reported to be necessary for restraint stress-induced CA1 dendritic atrophy ( ). Medium spiny neurons and pyramidal neurons in the hippocampal CA1 are also linked to feeding behaviors, including food motivation and reward ( ). The dentate gyrus (DG) is one of the brain regions known to display adult neurogenesis and, concomitant, decreased depressive-behavior in rodents ( ). Decrease in neurogenesis has been noted in the DG of adult male rats after repeated restraint stress ( ). Transcriptional activity by glucocorticoid receptor activation in glutamatergic cells of the DG has shown to increase behavioral maladies ( ). Thus, these hippocampal regions are susceptible and pertinent to stress responses.
CRH also directly affects the prefrontal cortex ( ). The orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) of the prefrontal lobe is critical to social and emotional health, with suggested importance in controlling feeding ( ; ), and is also one of the last brain regions to fully develop. Damaged developmental connections between the OFC and amygdala or hippocampus by early life stress lead to later life social, emotional, and health deficits ( ; ). Thus, the OFC plays important roles in regulation of limbic and hypothalamic regions, with functional consequences witnessed due to stress.
To generate data worthy of translatability to known sex differences in human stress-induced maladies, adolescent male and female rats underwent chronic restraint stress from postnatal day (PD) 32 to PD44 ( ). Food intake, body weight, body composition, and CORT responses were measured to assess regulation of energy homeostasis and HPA axis in response to chronic stress. Nine discrete brain nuclei or subregions: ARC, VMH and PVN of the hypothalamus; BLA and CEA of the amygdala; CA1, CA3 and DG of the hippocampus; and OFC of prefrontal lobe were analyzed for genome-wide transcriptome changes using RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) ( ). Global transcriptome profiles were generated, and genes differentially expressed (DE) due to adolescent chronic stress were identified for each specific region above for males and females independently. Pathway analyses identified players that are likely crucial candidates for causing known stress-induced sex-specific differences. Thus, this study provides evidence for molecular bases underlying known stress-induced, sex-distinct maladies.

## Results

## Plasma CORT and blood glucose levels of stress or nonstress rats
On the 1st day of chronic restraint stress on PD32, stress females had greater circulating CORT levels than nonstress females at 30 and 60 min into restraint stress, although they had lower CORT level than nonstress females right before the test at 0 min ( ). The corresponding area under the curve (AUC) was greater for stress females than nonstress females on the 1st day of stress ( ). In contrast, on the 12th day of stress on PD43, CORT levels of all time points and AUC were comparable between female stress and nonstress groups ( ). Similar to the females, on the 1st day of stress, stress males had greater plasma CORT levels at 15 min and 30 min into restraint stress and greater AUC than nonstress males ( ). Different from the female groups, on the 12th day, stress males had greater plasma CORT levels at 15 min, 30 min, and 60 min, and greater AUC than nonstress males ( ). In summary, female adolescent rats showed abolished HPA response to stress on day 12 of chronic restraint stress, whereas male adolescent rats had sustained HPA response to stress, which was still seen on day 12 of stress. Thus, stress induced sex distinct CORT response between adolescent females and males, with the increases in CORT levels continued into day 12 of stress in adolescent male rats, but not female rats.
Stress hyperglycemia has been reported in rodents receiving chronic restraint stress (Zheng et al., 2018). In this study, blood glucose levels were similar between adolescent female nonstress (189.58 ± 4.84 mg/dl) and stress (179.25 ± 3.39 mg/dl) groups, and between adolescent male nonstress (170.00 ± 4.46 mg/dl) and stress (179.00 ± 6.17 mg/dl) groups, on the 1st day of stress (PD32), as it was expected. However, on the 12th day of stress (PD43), blood glucose levels remained similar between nonstress (174.25±4.40 mg/dl) and stress (174.08 ± 2.12 mg/dl) females and between nonstress (173.50 ± 5.62 mg/dl) and stress (159.83 ± 4.67 mg/dl) males. There was no difference in blood glucose levels between stress and nonstress groups for either females or males throughout this study, possibly because the current stress paradigm is not severe enough to cause hyperglycemia.

## Body weight, food intake and body composition of nonstress and stress rats
Female body weight was affected by time [F(18,360) = 1213, P < 0.0001] and interaction between time and stress [F(18,360) = 9.841, P < 0.0001], but not stress [F(1,22) = 2.390, P > 0.05] ( ). There were no differences in cumulative food intake for stress females compared to nonstress females during adolescence or early adulthood [F(1,22) = 0.3521, P > 0.05], although time had significant effects on cumulative food intake [F(19,361) = 1898, P < 0.0001] ( ).
In males, ANOVA revealed that time [F(19,382) = 3142, P < 0.0001], stress [F(1,22) = 7.756, P < 0.05], and interaction between time and stress [F(19,382) = 13.70, P < 0.0001] had significant effects on body weights. Post hoc tests revealed that body weight was significantly lower in stress males compared to nonstress males at five timepoints PD39, PD40, PD41, PD43 and PD44 during adolescent stress, and all three timepoints PD50, PD57 and PD64 during early adulthood after stress had terminated ( ). In males, time [F(19,379) = 3965, P < 0.0001], stress [F(1,22) = 5.199, P < 0.05], and interaction between time and stress [F(19,379) = 9.100, P < 0.0001] had significant effects on cumulative food intake. Post hoc tests revealed that food intake was significantly lower in stress males compared to nonstress males on the last day of adolescent restraint stress PD44 ( ). Similar to their body weights, lower food intake of stress males continued throughout early adulthood at all three time points measured on PD50, PD57 and PD64 ( ). It is noteworthy that stress-induced lower body weights were detected before lower food intake in males, indicating that adolescent stress induced lower weight gain is not entirely due to hypophagia in males, and is presumably due to an increase in metabolic rate or energy expenditure.
The stress females had delayed lower body fat mass shown on PD56 during adulthood, instead of at the end of adolescent stress ( ), and had temporally lower body lean mass on the last day of stress PD43 ( ), compared to nonstress females. On the other hand, stress males had persistently lower body fat mass ( ) and lean mass ( ) than nonstress males at both timepoints measured at the end of adolescent stress on PD43 and two weeks later on PD56.

## Plasma levels of adiposity hormones and sex hormones of nonstress and stress rats
Hormones were measured in blood samples collected on PD44 or PD64. Plasma levels of leptin and insulin were not significantly different between stress and nonstress groups within the same sex on either PD44 or PD64 ( ). Additionally, leptin level increased with age from adolescence PD44 to adulthood PD64 in both females [F(1,20) = 9.772, P < 0.01] and males [F(1,20) = 23.93, P < 0.0001], with males but not females showing significance in post hoc tests ( ). Neither leptin nor insulin level was affected by stress in females or males, although we expected to see lower leptin levels in stress groups with lower body fat mass compared to nonstress groups. Leptin has been shown to increase in response to stress ( ), which could counterbalance its reduction due to fat mass decrease.
Stress but not age significantly decreased estradiol levels of female rats [F(1,20) = 7.166, P < 0.05], although post hoc tests did not reveal any significance ( ). Age (adolescence PD44 vs. adulthood PD64), but not stress condition, significantly affected testosterone levels of male rats [F(1,20) = 31.41, P < 0.0001], with post hoc tests revealing greater testosterone levels on PD64 than PD44 ( ). Neither stress condition nor age affected male estradiol levels or female testosterone levels ( ). Thus, stress reduced plasma estradiol levels in females but not males, and did not affect testosterone levels in either sex. Estradiol has anorexigenic effects ( ), while testosterone has orexigenic effects ( ; ). Our result of reduced estradiol levels due to stress in females could be one potential mechanism by which the stress females were able to prevent weight loss and feeding reduction to maintain their feeding and body weights at similar levels as nonstress females. However, such reduction in estradiol levels was not adequate to increase body weights or feeding following the absence of the stressor ( and ). It is noteworthy that circulating estradiol levels of nonstress rats were similar between PD44 and PD64 in females, whereas circulating testosterone levels were increased from PD44 to PD64 in males ( ), indicative that the females experienced puberty prior to chronic restraint stress, but the males did not reach puberty until some time after stress was started, suggesting potential protective effects of sex hormones and related nervous system maturation on metabolic regulation and HPA responses to adolescent stress.

## DE genes, canonical pathways, diseases and disorders, molecular and cellular functions, physiological system development and function, and upstream regulators
All DE genes due to stress identified in the nine examined brain subregions (ARC, VMH and PVN of the hypothalamus; CEA and BLA of the amygdala; CA1, CA3 and DG of the hippocampus; and OFC of the prefrontal cortex) are listed in formatted by each gene. All significantly enriched canonical pathways, diseases and disorders, molecular and cellular functions, physiological system development and function, and upstream regulators are listed in Additional File (n = 3 / group; P < 0.05). Some commonly between sexes and physiologically relevant enriched canonical pathways, along with some top (P < 0.001) diseases and disorders, molecular and cellular functions, physiological system development and function, and upstream regulators were discussed.

## Hypothalamus

## ARC.
In the ARC, 18 DE genes were identified between nonstress and stress females and 7 DE genes were identified between nonstress and stress males. Two common DE genes being downregulated in both sexes were Cartpt and Pomc ( ).
Enriched canonical pathways (Additional File) in both female and male ARC were “glutamate receptor signaling” and “leptin signaling in obesity”, implying that glutamate receptor and leptin signaling are dysregulated due to stress in both sexes. Female-biased enrichments in the ARC were “cAMP-mediated signaling” and “circadian rhythm signaling”, implying that females may be more stress-biased towards intracellular dysregulation through cAMP and circadian rhythm signaling. Interesting enriched canonical pathways only in male ARC were “GP6 signaling pathway” and “neuropathic pain signaling in dorsal horn neurons”, as GP6 signaling in the brain has been found in response to insulin treatment and may play an important role in the blood brain barrier ( ), and stress-induced or exacerbated neuropathic pain is a significant problem ( ), with neuromodulation of pain being a rapidly expanding field ( ). “Melanocyte development and pigmentation signaling” also enriched only in males, but it is more likely because of DE gene Pomc in the ARC contributing to stress-induced feeding dysregulation, but unlikely functionally relevant in the context of ARC neurons.
Top diseases and disorders associated with ARC DE genes identified in both sexes were related to dysregulation of energy homeostasis (such as “early-onset obesity”, “eating disorders”, “susceptibility to obesity”, “weight gain”, and “fever”), HPA axis and melanocortin system (such as “deficiency of proopiomelanocortin”, “alkalinization of melanosomes”, “growth of pituitary gland tumor”, and “hypocortisolemia”), and “depressive disorder” (Additional File).
Top molecular and cellular functions related to ARC DE genes identified in both females and males were related to “release of GABA”, “secretion of molecule” (such as prostaglandin E2 and various types of epoxyeicosatrienoic acids) and secretory cells (such as “entry into S phase of lactotropes” and “regulation of melanocytes”), “transport of molecule” (such as “area of microvilli”, “complexity of microvilli”, and “quantity of microfilaments”), and activation of “neuropeptide signaling pathway” involving cyclic GMP, cyclic AMP, “binding of STAT-3/STAT-6 binding site”, “calcium response of nervous tissue cell lines”, and “synthesis of phosphatidylinositol 4,5-diphosphate” (Additional File).
Top physiological system development and function related to ARC DE genes identified in both sexes were related to “regulation of endocrine system” especially the adrenal gland, such as “activation” and “perfusion” of adrenal gland” and “morphology of adrenal cortex tissue”; adrenal cortex hormone-related regulation in “blood pressure”, “pigmentation of hair follicle”, and “yellowness of fur”; “feeding”- and “appetite”-related physiology and behavior, such as “accumulation of subcutaneous fat”, “ambulatory response”, “contraction in stomach”, “hunched posture”, “analgesia”, “aversive behavior”, “ingestion by rats”, “ingestion of ethanol”, “taste aversion”; and “emotional behavior”, such as “anxiety”, “place preference”, and “operant performance” (Additional File includes all P < 0.05).
Top upstream regulators (P < 0.001) in the ARC identified by IPA were ASB4, AVP, AVPR1B, BDNF, CNR1, CPE, CRH, CRHR1, GHRL, KISS1, NPBWR1, NPY, NPY2R, PCSK2, RAB3A, SCG5, SERPINA6, and ZFHX3 in both females and males; AP3M2, CARTPT, CREB1, CRY2, HTT, NLGN3, and PER1 in females only; and TMEM59 in males only (Additional File).

## VMH.
Eleven DE genes in females and 12 DE genes in males due to adolescent stress were revealed in the VMH ( ). VMH Calcr was commonly upregulated in both females and males; while VMH Asb15 was upregulated in females but downregulated in males ( ).
No common VMH DE genes-associated enriched canonical pathway, top diseases and disorders, or top physiological system development and function was revealed in two sexes (Additional File). In females but not in males, top diseases and disorders associated with VMH DE genes were mostly associated with “severe psychological disorder” and neurological disorders, including “mood disorders”, “bipolar disorder”, “cannabinoid withdrawal syndrome”, “depressive disorder”, “drug dependence”, “heroin dependence”, “neurodevelopmental disorder with progressive spasticity and brain white matter abnormalities”, “post-traumatic stress disorder”, “spastic quadriplegic cerebral palsy”, “Williams-Beuren syndrome”, and “withdrawal syndrome” (Additional File). Similarly, top physiological system development and function associated with VMH DE genes in females were mostly related to neurological and behavioral changes, such as “aggressive behavior”, “anxiety”, “attentional engagement”, “emotional behavior”, “feeding”, “grooming”, “inhibition of sympathetic nervous system”, “social behavior”, and “trust” in females only. It is noteworthy that some top physiological system development and function related to kidney and smooth muscle in females were likely due to upregulated Avp and Oxt expression; and those related to reproductive tissues and functions in males were likely due to upregulated Prlr expression in the VMH (Additional File). Top molecular and cellular functions related to VMH DE genes revealed in both sexes were mostly related to Ca2+ signaling (such as “accumulation of inositol phosphate”, “elevation of Ca2+ in cytosol”, “mobilization of Ca2+”, and “quantity of Ca2+”), with additional female-biased molecular and cellular functions related to activation, synthesis, and release of neurotransmitter GABA, cyclic AMP, inositol phosphate, K+, fatty acid, prostaglandin, and thromboxane A2 (Additional File).
Top upstream regulators in the VMH identified by IPA were ACSL4, CD300LF and NFATC1 in both females and males; and AZIN1, BBS10, CACNA1B, CADPS2, CPE, CREB1, CRHBP, DLX1, DLX2, GAL, MAOA, mir-379, mr-500, NUCB2, and PTF1A in females only; while no upstream regulator was associated with male only VMH DE genes (Additional File).

## PVN.
Eight DE genes in females and 11 DE genes in males due to adolescent stress were revealed in the PVN. PVN Avp and Sim1 were upregulated in females but downregulated in males, while PVN Asb15 was commonly downregulated in both females and males ( ).
No common PVN enriched canonical pathways were revealed. Top diseases and disorders related to PVN DE genes identified in both sexes were mostly related to kidney cells and renal functions (such as hyponatremia and diabetes insipidus) due to changed Avp expression in the PVN (Additional File). Similarly, top physiological system development and function revealed in both sexes were mostly associated with water balance and renal functions associated with DE gene Avp, and neurological regulation of “maternal behavior” associated with DE gene Sim1 (Additional File). Top molecular and cellular functions related to PVN DE genes revealed in both sexes were mostly related to intracellular signaling involving inositol phosphate, phosphatidylinositol 4,5-diphosphate, cyclic AMP, cyclic GMP, Ca2+, prostaglandin E2, and thromboxane A2 (Additional File). Top upstream regulators in the PVN identified by IPA were AZIN1, BBS10, CACNA1B, CARTPT, CPE, CRHBP, GAL, MAOA, NPY, NUCB2, PTHLH, and ZFHX3 in both females and males; LHX1, MCHR1, NR1H2, and SLC16A10 in females only; while no top upstream regulator associated with DE genes was identified in the PVN of males only (Additional File).

## Amygdala

## BLA.
Sixteen DE genes in females and three DE genes in males due to adolescent stress were revealed in the BLA, with Scn4b expression being upregulated in both females and males ( ). No common BLA enriched canonical pathways were revealed in two sexes (Additional File).
Top diseases and disorders associated with BLA DE genes identified in both sexes were mostly related to psychiatric disorders (such as “alcohol abuse”, “alcohol use disorder”, and “social anxiety disorder”) and neurological disorders (such as “Huntington disease”, “fibromyalgia”, “migraines”, and “Tourette syndrome”); in females alone included “COVID-19”, in addition to psychiatric disorders (such as “anhedonia”, “cocaine-related disorder”, “depressive disorder”, and “drug dependence”), neurological disorders (such as “backache” and “idiopathic Parkinson disease”), some types of anemia, and “obesity” and “undernutrition” (Additional File).
Top molecular and cellular functions related to BLA DE genes were revealed in females only, most of which were related to release and function of neurotransmitters and neuromolecules, including dopamine, acetylcholine, GABA, L-glutamic acid, catecholamine, and nitric oxide (Additional File). Similarly, top physiological system development and function (such as “addiction behavior”, “aggressive behavior”, “anxiety”, “arousal”, “emotional behavior”, “exploratory behavior”, “function of brain”, “grooming”, “place aversion”, “spatial memory”, and “waking”) and top upstream regulators (ADGRV1, EP300, HTT, and ZNF503) were also revealed in females only (Additional File).

## CEA.
Fourteen and 20 DE genes due to adolescent stress were identified in the female and male CEA respectively, with two common DE genes Fam111a being downregulated in both females and males, while Asb15 being upregulated in females but downregulated in males ( ). No common CEA enriched canonical pathways were revealed in two sexes (Additional File).
Top diseases and disorders associated with CEA DE genes identified by IPA were related to rare bone diseases in both females and males; were related to mobility and locomotion, activation of parvocellular neurons and vasopressin neurons, and pancreatic exocrine secretion in females only; and were “limb development”, “mature lymphocytic neoplasm”, “oligodactyly”, “shape change of epithelial cells”, and “tumorigenesis of prostatic tumor” in males only (Additional File).
Top molecular and cellular functions related to CEA DE genes were “cell viability of sarcoma cell lines” in both females and males; “apoptosis of spermatogenic cells”, “conversion of lysophosphatidylcholine/lysophosphatidylethanolamine/lysophosphatidylserine”, “detachment of melanocytes”, and “uptake of doxorubicin” in females only; and “shape change of epithelial cells” in males only (Additional File). Top physiological system development and function related to CEA DE genes were related to movement and secretion of gallbladder and pancreas in females only; and “limb development” in males only. Top upstream regulators in the CEA identified by IPA were SNCA in both females and males; OMP and TCF7L2 in females only; and MECP2 in males only (Additional File).

## Hippocampus

## CA1.
Nine DE genes in females and 10 DE genes in males due to adolescent stress were revealed in the CA1. Among them Bmp3 in the CA1 were upregulated by stress in both females and males, while Asb15 was upregulated in females but downregulated in males ( ).
Canonical pathways significantly enriched by adolescent stress in the CA1 of both males and females were “basal cell carcinoma signaling” and “BMP signaling pathway” (Additional File). Top diseases and disorders associated with CA1 DE genes identified by IPA were “dorsalization of embryo” in both females and males; were mostly related to tumor and cancer cells in females only; and were mostly related to tumor cells and neurons and secretion of pituitary hormone and acetylcholine in male only (Additional File). Top molecular and cellular functions related to CA1 DE genes were “exchange of guanin”, “intravasation of breast cancer cell lines”, and “killing of cytotoxic T cells” in females only; and “intracellular pH of breast cancer cell lines”, “priming of cells”, and “reduction of acetylcholine” in males only. Top physiological system development and function related to CA1 DE genes was “dorsalization of embryo” in both females and males. Top upstream regulators in CA1 identified by IPA were MYRF, SH3TC2, SOX2, and TCF7L2 in males only (Additional File).

## CA3.
Twenty-nine and nine DE genes by adolescent stress were identified in female and male CA3 respectively, with Asb15 being upregulated in females but downregulated in males ( ). No common CA3 enriched canonical pathways or top diseases and disorders were revealed in two sexes (Additional File).
Top diseases and disorders associated with CA3 DE genes identified by IPA were mostly related to “synaptic transmission” in females only, while related to the nervous system including psychiatric (such as “alcohol abuse”, “bipolar disorder”, “borderline personality disorder”, “cocaine-related disorder”, “opioid-related disorder”, “generalized anxiety disorder”, “impulse control disorder”, “obsessive–compulsive disorder”) and neurological (“detachment of neuroblasts”, migraine, epilepsy, “formation of radial cellular projections”, “restless legs syndrome“, “stratification of cortical neurons”, “synapsis of hippocampal neurons”, “tinnitus”, “Tourette syndrome”, and “Wolfram syndrome type 1”) in males only (Additional File).
Top molecular and cellular functions related to CA3 DE genes were “acidification by hepatoma cell lines”, “formation of radial cellular projections”, and “synapsis of hippocampal neurons” in males only (Additional File). Top physiological system development and function related to CA3 DE genes were “hyperlocomotion”, “impulsivity”, “memory extinction”, “memory suppression”, and “relearning” in females only (Additional File). Top upstream regulators in the CA3 identified by IPA were NGEF, and NPAS1 in males only (Additional File).

## DG.
Five DE genes in females and no DE genes in males by adolescent stress were identified in the DG ( ). One canonical pathway significantly enriched by adolescent stress in the female DG was “SNARE signaling pathway” (Additional File). Additionally, no significant levels of analyses of diseases, functions, or regulators related to DG DE genes enriched in females reached P < 0.001 (Additional File).

## OFC of prefrontal cortex
Three DE genes in females and 15 DE genes in males due to adolescent stress were identified in the OFC ( ). No common OFC enriched canonical pathways or top diseases and disorders were revealed in two sexes (Additional File). No common OFC enriched canonical pathways or top diseases and disorders were revealed in two sexes (Additional File).
Top diseases and disorders associated with OFC DE genes identified by IPA were in males only and were related to neurological disorders and bone diseases (Additional File). Top molecular and cellular functions, as well as top physiological system development and function, related to OFC DE genes were mostly related to cell development, division, growth, and migration in females and in males (Additional File). Top upstream regulators in the OFC identified by IPA were JADE2, mir-32, RASSF6, and SMARCD1 in females; and ALK, APEX1, BDNF, CREB1, SH3TC2, and TET1 in males (Additional File).

## Discussion

## Physiological findings
The present study revealed sex-distinct stress responses in body weight and body composition, food intake, levels of CORT and estradiol, and brain subregion-specific gene expression following chronic restraint stress in adolescent female and male rats. Specifically, stress male rats displayed significant reductions in both body weight and food intake, whereas stress female rats did not display significant reductions in body weight or food intake compared to their respective nonstress counterparts. Decreased body weight due to stress in males is consistent with other studies ( ; ). Additionally, stress males displayed persistently lowered body weight, fat mass, and lean mass, which occurred in adolescence and continued into adulthood; whereas stress females had temporarily decreased lean mass at the end of the stress phase and a delayed decrease in fat mass in adulthood. These physiological findings reflected that males were not able to revert to allostasis after adolescent stress had terminated; instead, males maintained dysregulated body weight and body composition into adulthood. Furthermore, as measured by corticosterone levels, male adolescent rats had a sustained HPA response to stress that was persistent on day 12 of chronic restraint stress; whereas female adolescent rats showed an abolished HPA response to stress by day 12 of stress, suggesting that by day 12, the adolescent females had adapted to the stressor. The variability observed in CORT values between male and female rats measured on different days of stress, and the variability in proximity to physiological ranges, may stem from individual differences in stress responses, housing conditions, sex, and strain of rats. It is noteworthy that single housing, although necessary for monitoring feeding, may impact females and males differently. A study has reported that single housing is stressful for female but not male rats, as indicated by hypertrophic adrenal weights and elevated plasma epinephrine levels, which could mask the response to a chronic three-week footshock stress in female rats ( ). Overall, the physiological and HPA responses observed in this study implied that females, but not males, were able to maintain energy homeostasis in response to chronic stress.
Repeated restraint stressors are known to induce habituation in the HPA response, evidenced by less pronounced CORT level increases after several days into the stress compared to the initial exposure to restraint. Some studies have found similar habituated responses between male and female rats, with comparable peak CORT level habituation observed ( ; ). The findings from the present study are consistent with previous research indicating that chronic stress leads to lower expression of Fos and CRH in the PVN of female rats compared to males ( ; ; ), suggesting that female rats exhibit more rapid habituation to stressors than male rats.

## Transcriptional findings
Despite the relevance of brain nuclei and subregions of the hypothalamus, amygdala, hippocampus, and prefrontal lobe in mental and metabolic disorders, and the potential role of adolescent stress in sex-distinct pathology of these disorders, sex-specific, whole-genome transcriptome profiling of these brain nuclei/subregions in response to stress was unclear in available literature.
In this study, both sex similar and sex-specific effects were seen regarding to the genes that were DE between stress and nonstress rats. Many of these DE genes, along with their canonical pathways and upstream regulators, not only reflect the aforementioned metabolic and HPA results of the current study, but have been implicated in aberrant metabolic and behavioral health. For example, some identified DE genes in this study are well-known biomarkers for human metabolic diseases and psychological disorders, such as Pomc ( ; ), Cartpt ( ), and Sim 1 ( ) seen in human obesity; Scn4b ( ; ; ), Sncg ( ), and Btg2 ( ) witnessed in human anxiety and depression; and Npas4 ( ) associated with learning and cognitive impairments. For further details, see sections below, which contain various in-depth examples of the identified DE genes, canonical pathways, and upstream regulators, in relation to the physiological results of the current study or relevant literature. Noteworthy DE genes identified in multiple brain regions, yet novel to brain studies, included Asb15 and Fam111a; while uncharacterized genes such as AABR07000398.1 and Rn50_{X0}752.3 were also identified.

## Sex-similar biomarkers of metabolic health in the hypothalamus
A sex-similar biomarker of aberrant metabolic health witnessed in the ARC in the current study was Cartpt (downregulated in male and female ARC), encoding cocaine and amphetamine regulated transcript prepropeptide (CARTPT). Neuronal activation of CARTPT in the ARC has anorexigenic but anabolic effects of decreasing feeding and energy expenditure ( ), and Cartpt is a hallmark of cardiometabolic risk factors in human obesity ( ).
Another sex-similar biomarker of aberrant metabolic health in the ARC in the current study was Pomc. Variant expression of Pomc is a well-studied biomarker for human obesity. For example, humans with mutations in POMC responsible for either posttranslational product or direct POMC deficiency experience hyperphagia and early-onset obesity ( ; ), and this has been recapitulated in mouse models lacking Pomc alleles ( ). In the current study, Pomc was found to be downregulated due to adolescent stress in both the female and male ARC on day 12 of adolescent stress. This is inconsistent with increased Pomc mRNA level in the hypothalamus witnessed on day 2, but not on day 12, of restraint stress in adult male mice ( ). It is possible that, over continuous days of restraint stress, Pomc expression initially increases (as shown in ) then later decreases (as shown in the current study). More studies involving various timepoints would be needed to verify. Since knock-down of Pomc is known for causing hypophagia and body weight loss ( ), one may initially speculate that the decreased expression of Pomc seen by day 12 of stress in both sexes in this study is a mechanism for maintaining adequate food intake after exposure to a chronic stressor in both sexes; however, we witnessed sex differences in feeding due to stress, with stress males but not stress females exhibiting feeding suppression. One explanation for the sex-distinct phenotypes witnessed due to stress could be that it is possible that female and male Pomc downregulation occur in distinct subpopulations of POMC neurons, such as serotonin- or leptin- sensitive neurons. Thus, future single-cell RNA-sequencing experiments are warranted to confirm gene expression in certain subpopulations of POMC neurons of both sexes. Furthermore, sex-specific POMC neuronal firing activity could exist in response to stress, as higher neuronal POMC activity is known to occur in females ( ). Obviously, any one gene, such as Cartpt and Pomc, should not be thought of as existing in a vacuum, as co-expression of multiple genes contributes to distinct phenotypes. The contribution from all simultaneous DE genes needs to be considered in relation to phenotypes.

## Sex-specific DE genes and pathways in the hypothalamus representing sex-distinct aberrancies
A sex-distinct biomarker of aberrant metabolic health witnessed in the current study was Sim1 (upregulated in female PVN and downregulated in male PVN). SIM1 is implicated in early-onset obesity in humans ( ) and knockout of Sim1 in mice causes hyperphagia and reduced energy expenditure ( ).
Examples of pathways associated with metabolic disease and reflective of known sex-specific male susceptibility in the current report included “glucose metabolism disorder” being enriched in male but not female VMH and PVN. Plce1 encoding phospholipase C epsilon that catalyzes production of second messengers IP3 and DAG and Prlr encoding prolactin receptor were upregulated in stress male VMH, involved in “glucose metabolism disorder”. “Glucose metabolism disorder” was also enriched in the male PVN involving genes Gpd1, Sim1, and Lef1. Example of other pathways within the hypothalamic regions reflective of known sex-specific female susceptibility to stress-induced disorders included “anxiety disorders” and “cocaine-seeking behavior” enriched in the female ARC.
Evidence for how stress females but not males were able to maintain their body weight is provided by the DE genes and related pathways identified in the ARC. While “feeding” was significantly enriched in both male and female ARC, there is more evidence for this pathway to be activated in females. For example, while both Pomc and Cartpt were downregulated to activate feeding in male and female ARC, two additional genes Vipr2 and Slc32a1 known for activating feeding were upregulated in females. Furthermore, Pomc was down-regulated about 2-times more in males than females. Additional pathways that offer support for the sex-specific body weight maintenance described in females of the current report included “size of body”, predicted to be activated in females; and “ingestion by mice” enriched in both male and female ARC but with more evidence for it to be activated in females. Thus, these DE gene and pathway results offer support for the sex-specific physiological findings witnessed due to stress in the current report.
Avp was another sex-specific gene changed due to stress in the hypothalamic regions. In the current study, Avp encoding arginine vasopressin (AVP) was upregulated in all three hypothalamic regions (ARC, VMH, and PVN) in females and downregulated in the male PVN. Similarly, Oxt encoding oxytocin was upregulated in the female VMH but downregulated in the male PVN. AVP is a known stress facilitator, capable of estrogen-dependent effects on the HPA axis ( ). Parvocellular neurons of the PVN co-release AVP and CRH ( ). When released, AVP potentiates CRH action of ACTH release, especially hypothesized to be important when maintained responses to chronic stress are needed ( ). Thus, upregulated Avp expression in females but downregulated Avp expression in males could be a primary underlying mechanism for successful regulation of HPA-axis seen in adolescent females, but not males.
Pmch encoding pro-melanin concentrating hormone, a neuropeptide that stimulates hunger, was downregulated by stress in the PVN and VMH of male but not female rats, which is consistent with decreased food-intake in male rats. Melanin concentrating hormone plays an important role in energy homeostasis through multiple pathways including energy expenditure, reward, and locomotor activity, with its orexigenic effects on ingestive behavior thought to be secondary effects ( ). A prior study has reported that Pmch knock-out mice decreases body weights due to hypophagia and increased metabolic rate ( ). Thus, the downregulation of Pmch in the stress male rats of this study may be responsible for increasing their metabolic rate and decreasing their food intake.
In the current study, adolescent stress upregulated Oprm1 encoding mu 1 opioid receptor (MOR) in the VMH of male but not female rats. The opioid system is an important mediator in the regulation of energy homeostasis and stress response ( ). However, injection of opioid receptor antagonist naloxone into the VMH has no effect on food-intake in male food-deprived mice ( ). Different effects of MOR in the VMH to do with stress and energy regulation may exist, awaiting future studies. Finding of this study indicates an effect of stress on VMH Oprm1 gene upregulation in males but not females. This suggests that opioid regulation in the VMH may be a novel area to study sex differences in the effects of stress and sex differences thereof.

## Sex-specific DE genes and pathways in the hippocampus and amygdala representing sex-distinct aberrancies
One sex-distinct biomarker of aberrant health witnessed in the hippocampus in the current study was Sncg, a known biomarker for depression ( ) and involved in the response to cocaine ( ). In the current study, Sncg expression was downregulated in all three female hippocampal regions studied, the CA1, CA3, and DG, but was not changed in males. This may prove to be a susceptible gene response to stress in females and an important underlying mechanism in what causes females to be more prone to stress-induced depression and cocaine responses, and thus could be an important therapeutic target for women.
Males are susceptible to metabolic diseases. Gpd1, a gene that encodes an enzyme positively regulating glycerol production in metabolism, was increased in the male CEA (also in male PVN and VMH) but not changed in females due to stress. Mutations of this gene in humans are known to cause hypertriglyceridemia in infants ( ).
One sex-distinct biomarker of protection against aberrant health witnessed in males of this study was Sst. In males, stress upregulated Sst encoding somatostatin (SST) in the CA1. SST is known to colocalize with GABA in the brain, and may participate in upregulating an inhibitory cortical circuit, with Sst deficiency being a hallmark of neuropsychiatric disorders ( ). Sst gene and its protein have been shown to be upregulated in response to stress in rodents, with effects known of helping to suppress the CRH stress response ( ). Hippocampal infusions of somatostatin receptor agonist inhibit stress-induced corticosterone activity and produce anxiolytic and antidepressant-like effects ( ). Thus, Sst being upregulated in males but not females due to stress may represent an important protective mechanism underlying the sex-specific effect of males being less susceptible to stress-induced depressive- and anxiety-like symptoms.
Example of pathways within limbic regions and reflective of known sex-specific female susceptibility to stress-induced drug seeking included “drug dependence”, which was enriched in stress female but not male BLA. Involved molecules were Scn4b encoding Na+ voltage-gated channel beta subunit 4, Adora2a encoding adenosine A2a receptor, and Drd2 encoding dopamine receptor D2, which were all upregulated. For example, an adenosine receptor antagonist of human ADORA2A protein is in phase 4 clinical trials for treatment of cocaine dependence in humans (clinicaltrials.gov: NCT00495183); three clinical trials exist for an inhibitor of SCN4B protein in treatment for either nicotine dependence or alcohol dependence (NCT04388319, NCT02901041, NCT00595556); and 13 clinical trials exist for binders of DRD2 in either alcohol, heroin, or methamphetamine dependence (NCT00326235, NCT01813643, NCT02918370, NCT00124059, NCT01639872, NCT02541513, NCT01822730, NCT00875836, NCT00746785, NCT00434876, NCT00208143, NCT00114686, NCT01813656). Thus, female BLA upregulated genes agree with the literature of females being more susceptible to drug-use after stress, and selective BLA-specific therapeutic targets may be warranted in future studies.
A few genes involved in axon ensheathment were upregulated in male CA1 but not changed in females due to stress. Cldn11, also upregulated in male PVN, encodes a member of the claudin family of integral membrane proteins and components of tight junction strands. Proteins encoded by Cldn11 are components of myelin, regulating proliferation and migration of oligodendrocytes, maintaining cell polarity and signal transductions, and serving as a physical barrier to prevent solutes and water from passing freely through. Mag encodes myelin-associated glycoprotein involving the process of myelination, associated with diseases including substance abuse and multiple sclerosis, and nervous system development. Mobp, also upregulated in male OFC, encodes myelin-associated oligodendrocyte basic protein for the structural component of the myelin-sheath. Mog encodes myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein involving cell adhesion. The upregulation of these genes perhaps serves as a protective mechanism against stress.
“Relearning”, “memory extinction”, and “memory suppression” pathways were enriched in female CA3 and male CA1 due to stress. Involved molecules were downregulated Adcy8 in male CA1, and downregulated Adcy1 and Adcy8 in female CA3. Adcy1 encoding adenylate cyclase 1 and Adcy8 encoding adenylate cyclase 8 are a part of the adenylate cyclase regulating G protein-coupled receptor signaling pathway and cAMP biosynthetic process. Adenylate cyclase 1 primarily expressed in the brain involves long-term memory. Adenylate cyclase 8 catalyzes cAMP production in response to Ca2+ entry leadings to cAMP signaling activation and CREB transcription factor activity modulation, which affects brain functions through regulation of synaptic plasticity. Downregulated Adcy8 and Adcy1 would predict inhibition of “relearning”, “memory extinction”, and “memory suppression” pathways. Thus, sex-specific effects of stress on learning and memory pathways hint at males being more susceptible to stress effects on memory that would be encoded by CA1, with females’ susceptibility being what would be encoded by CA3.

## Sex-specific DE genes and pathways in the cortex
In the current study, Npas4 encoding neuronal PAS domain protein 4 was downregulated due to adolescent stress in the male, but not female, OFC. Npas4 plays essential roles in the development of GABAergic synapses and apoptosis of Schwann cells ( ). Downregulation of Npas4 has been implicated in stress response of rodent brains as being either adaptive or maladaptive ( ). Npas4 downregulation in the prefrontal cortex has been suggested to be especially critical during adolescent stress ( ). Adolescent stress or Npas4 deficiency in the prefrontal cortex during adolescence but not adulthood has been shown to decrease Npas4 and GABAergic maturation, and impair cognitive flexibility ( ). In the male OFC, stress upregulated Hs3st2 encoding heparan sulfate-glucosamine 3-sulfotransferase 2, a transferase enzyme involved in the biosynthesis of heparan sulfate. Heparan sulfate proteoglycans binds to Wnt ligands, and plays a role in axon guidance, synapse development, and synapse function, with alterations in its expression found in neuropsychiatric disorders ( ).
Btg2, coding B-cell translocation gene anti-proliferation factor 2 (BTG2), was downregulated in female OFC by adolescent stress. Btg2 is implicated in inducing RNA-poly II-specific transcription repressor activity and neuronal differentiation ( ), and is a negative regulator of neuron apoptotic processes ( ). In the liver, Btg2 has roles in regulating energy homeostasis and is suggested to be an important future therapeutic target for treating metabolic dysregulation ( ). In the brain of adult male rats, chronic mild stress upregulates Btg2 in the frontal cortex and causes depressive-like symptoms ( ). This is reflected in human studies, in which Btg2 is upregulated in the prefrontal cortex of humans with major depressive disorder ( ). Thus, our results of Btg2 being downregulated in the stress female OFC may be indicative of a decrease in neuronal differentiation due to stress and/or a protective effect on depressive symptoms. Clearly, more research on Btg2 in the OFC and stress-related, sex-dependent, susceptibilities is needed.

## Neurotransmission related channels and solute carriers
Several canonical pathways of neurotransmission were identified, including GABA (female VMH and CA3), glutamate signaling (female and male ARC) and glutamate degradation (female VMH), serotonin (female CA1 and CA3; male CA3), and ion channels and ion transporter involving K+, Na+, and Ca2+ transport.

## Sex-similar pathways, but with sex-distinct DE genes and isoforms
“Glutamate receptor signaling” was enriched in female and male ARC. Enriched “glutamate receptor signaling” canonical pathway is tied with identified DE genes coding glutamate receptor transporters. Slc17a7 responsible for producing glutamate receptor transporter vesicular glutamate transporter 1 (VGLUT1) was upregulated in male ARC but downregulated in male CEA ( ); while Slc17a6 responsible for producing glutamate receptor transporter VGLUT2 was down-regulated in female ARC, suggesting that glutamatergic transmission via VGLUT1 was increased in male ARC, but suppressed in male CEA, while glutamatergic transmission via VGLUT2 was inhibited in female ARC. These results reveal not only genes involved in glutamatergic transmission in distinct brain subregions, but also opposite glutamatergic regulation receptor isoforms (Slc17a7 and Slc17a6) in male and female ARC, and opposite regulation between genes.

## Sex-similar and sex-distinct channels in the hypothalamus
Sex similar effects involved calcium homeostasis. Stress upregulated VMH Calcr which encodes calcitonin receptor involved in maintaining Ca2+ homeostasis in both sexes. Stress effects on K+ transmembrane transport in the ARC uniquely affected females, involving upregulation of Kcnh8 encoding K+ voltage-gated channel subfamily H member 8, and Slc12a7 encoding K+/Cl− cotransporter. Restraint stress activates POMC neurons in the ARC to increase neuronal CRH release from the PVN ( ), a process relying on transmembrane electroneutral ionic movement via K+/Cl− cotransporters ( ).
In stress female ARC, Slc12a7 was upregulated, potentially contributing to a maintained steady-state neuronal CRH release from the PVN in stress females ( ). In female but not male ARC, stress upregulated Slc32a1 encoding GABA and glycine vesicular transporter, which is involved in GABA and glycine uptake into synaptic vesicles and maintaining their concentrations for inhibitory synaptic transmission. GABA release is associated with the orexigenic NPY neurons in the ARC, and thus an increased drive to eat ( ). Stress-induced regulation of glutamatergic transmission in the ARC was also sex-distinct, with downregulated Slc17a6 encoding vesicular glutamate transporter 2 (vGluT2), which maintains glutamate concentrations for excitatory synaptic transmission in female ARC, but upregulated Slc17a7 encoding vGluT1, a brain-specific vesicle-bound Na+-dependent phosphate transporter, in male ARC. Thus, the data indicated sex-distinct differences in ARC synaptic transmission due to stress, with females having increased inhibitory GABAergic responses and decreased excitatory glutamatergic responses, and males having increased glutamatergic responses. These results suggested decreased excitation of POMC neurons in females, whereas increased excitatory glutamatergic transmission associated with increased POMC activity in male ARC, consistent with suppressed feeding in males but not in females due to stress. It is noteworthy that a previous study has shown very little vGluT1 labeling in the ARC; instead, excitatory glutamatergic fibers, labeled by vGluT2, innervate about 40% of POMC neurons and 15% of NPY neurons in the ARC ( ). Further studies are warranted to determine which GABAergic circuitries and projection pathways in the adolescent female are upregulated due to stress, which would have impacts on how females maintain homeostasis during stress compared to males.

## Sex-similar and sex-distinct in the amygdala
Stress upregulated Scn4b encoding Na+ voltage-gated channel beta subunit 4 in male and female BLA and in male CEA. Na+ voltage-gated channel is known for producing the initial rise of membrane potential in an action potential, and β subunit 4 is responsible for gating the channel core and producing long-term depression (LTD) by extension of the low Ca2+ currents responsible for internalizing α-amino-3-hyd roxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid receptor, an ionotropic transmembrane receptor for glutamate, that mediates fast synaptic transmission in the nucleus accumbens ( ). Thus, Scn4b is specifically responsible for desensitizing dendrites through LTD induction. Upregulation of Scn4b in the BLA and CEA seen in the current study could be a protective mechanism for decreasing BLA and CEA hyperexcitability after chronic stress. This finding is inconsistent with the findings of two previous rodent studies, but consistent with one study in the literature. In one study, neonatal stress enhances anxiety and downregulates Scn4b in the amygdala of adult male rats ( ). In a different study using chronic social stress known for producing depression in adult male mice, Scn4b was highly down-regulated in both the BLA and CEA ( ). In yet another study adult mice undergoing 8 weeks of unpredictable chronic mild stress have increased Scn4b in the BLA of males but not females ( ). Discrepancies could be due to different ages of rodents at time of stress and types of stress, which could be critical in producing molecular variations between rodent studies. Furthermore, much of the disparities seen in the rodent stress literature could be due to sex hormone interaction, as many rodent studies do not consider rodent reproductive status or independently analyze both sexes.
In male but not female CEA, stress upregulated Slc5a7 encoding choline transporter 1 suggestive of increased cholinergic signaling, but downregulated Slc17a7 and Slc30a3 encoding zinc transporter 3 suggestive of reduced glutamatergic signaling. Slc17a7 mRNA in the CEA and BLA is mostly expressed in glutamatergic projection neurons ( ). Ages of rodents at time of stress and types of stress affect vGluT1 in the amygdala. Neurosynaptic transmission in the amygdala being dysregulated due to stress has been indicated in psychiatric disorders ( ). Adolescent stress increases vGluT1 in the CEA along with increased novelty reactivity, sociability deficits, and aggression during adulthood in male rats ( ). Chronic stress that produced depressive-like symptoms of anhedonia in sucrose-preference also increased vGluT1 protein in the amygdala of male rats ( ). However, chronic social defeat stress in male adult mice decreases Vglut1 mRNA in the amygdala along with depressive-like symptoms and social-avoidance ( ). The downregulated Slc17a7 encoding vGluT1 in the current study suggested that males may have increased sociability deficits and aggression, but decreased depressive-like symptoms and social-avoidance.
In the male BLA, stress increased Tanc1 encoding tetratricopeptide repeat, ankyrin repeat and coiled-coil containing 1, known to be involved in reorganization of glutamatergic synapses and increasing excitatory synapse strength, although other molecular functions of Tanc1 are still being unraveled ( ).

## Conclusion
Findings from this study suggest that even minor chronic stress could induce long-term metabolic and psychiatric disorders after stress has been terminated. Progress in studying molecular basis of sex-distinct changes in the central nervous system due to adolescent stress has been hampered by lack of genome-wide information, such as incorporating RNA-Seq technique instead of multiplex targeting particular genes of interest, and especially the lack of genome-wide information from specific subregions of discrete brain nuclei instead of from entire nuclei or even whole brain regions. Using biological pathway analyses, canonical pathways enriched in stress compared to nonstress rats were found to be congruent with well-known sex-distinct maladies in the literature, providing examples of identified DE genes likely involved in producing functional consequences.
We discuss some of these identified DE genes, canonical pathways, and upstream regulators. Notable sex-distinct responses involving neurotransmitters and neurohormones, along with their associated receptors and signaling molecules, important in the stress response and maintaining energy homeostasis were found, and many future hypotheses can be proposed from these data. Furthermore, sex-specific differences were dependent on analyzed nuclei and subregions, supporting the need to include both sexes in preclinical and clinical studies. Future rodent studies involving genetic manipulation of the genes indicated in this study as potentially important due to stress, along with behavioral analyses are warranted; especially since our ontology analyses implicated pathways involved in neurotransmission, neuronal synapse signaling, and behavior.
The limitation of this RNA-Seq study is the low sample size with three biological replicates for each sex, stress condition, and brain subnuclei, although DE genes were analyzed using bROC that is appropriate for analyzing RNA-Seq data with small number of two or more biological replicates per state ( ). Some non-typical gene expressions were revealed in certain brain regions, such as vGluT1 expression in the CEA and vasopressin expression in the VMH. Brain nuclei were microdissected using Palkovits punch at each predetermined Bregma level under a stereo microscope, which did not provide a three-dimensional view. Therefore, even though the microdissection was carefully performed by an experienced researcher, neurons close by from a different brain region or subnuclei projecting to or terminating on the targeted nuclei could also be collected. This is one likely reason leading to the small number of outliers witnessed in the principal component analysis ( ). Researchers studying similar fields are encouraged to make further use of the data with caution. The bROC method used in this publication tends to be more conservative in revealing statistical significance. Other researchers may use different methods to explore differential expression results. Future studies involving single cell techniques are warranted. For example, current study results may foreshadow sex-specific regulation of POMC subpopulations in the ARC or sex-specific regulation of neurotransmission.
Findings from this study may provide rationale to consider sex distinct neural neurotransmission involving metabolic and psychological etiology to treat stress-induced disorders in males and females. Additionally, stress-induced activation of non-genomic responses, e.g. due to glucocorticoid receptor activation and effects on intracellular signaling molecules ( ), or norepinephrine and epinephrine release ( ) also affect neuroendocrine responses to stress ( ), but were not evaluated by our RNA-Seq data. Since non-genomic effects of glucocorticoid receptor activation can also produce long-lasting changes in behavior ( ), we do not conclude without noting that investigations into non-genomic mechanisms would be worthy of future study. Epigenetic mechanisms are also worthy of future study.
To conclude, in the current report, mRNA transcriptional responses on a genome wide level were studied in major brain nuclei implicated in stress related psychiatric and metabolic disorders. Evaluating the molecular mechanisms for sex-different responses to stress in rodent models can lead to better treatments for these disorders in both sexes.

## Materials and methods

## Animals, treatments and measurements
Twenty-four female and 24 male Sprague Dawley Rats (Charles River, Wilmington, MA, USA) arrived at Miami University’s Animal Care Facility at three-week of age. Rats were initially group-housed and then single-housed on PD26 in a temperature- (21 ± 2 °C) and light- (12:12 light:dark; lights on at 0600 and lights off at 1800) controlled vivarium. Female and male rats were housed in two separate rooms. A standard rodent chow (Purina Rodent Chow No. 5001, St. Louis, MO, USA) and water were provided ad libitum except during the one-hour restraint stress procedure. Repeated restraint stress is a commonly used chronic stressor to examine an array of physiological, endocrine, and neurological responses. Most rat studies repeat daily restraint stress for a period of 6 days to 2 weeks ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ), and the duration of each restraint stress varies from 30 min ( ; ), 1 h ( ; ; ; ; ), 2 h ( ), to 2.5 h ( ), with 1-hour daily restraint stress being the most commonly used. Thus, in the current study, 1-hour restraint stress for 13 days, a standard chronic restraint stress paradigm, was used.
Body weight and food intake of rats were measured daily from PD28 to PD44 and weekly afterwards. Body composition (i.e., fat mass and lean mass) was measured using a whole-body composition analyzer (EchoMedical Systems, Houston, TX, USA) before stress on PD31, on the 12th day of stress PD43, and two weeks later on PD56. Rats were metabolic-profile matched into nonstress and stress groups (n = 12/group) with similar daily food intake, body weights, and body composition on PD31. The stress group rats were subjected to one-hour restraint every day for 13 consecutive days at random times during the light phase, from PD32 to PD44 when rats at this age are considered in adolescence (Sengupta, 2013). During the stress procedure, stress and nonstress rats were physically separated. Briefly, rats receiving stress were transported in their home cages to a backroom, placed into cylindrical Plexiglas restrainers (Plas-Labs, Lansing, MI, USA) in their home cages for one hour, then were released from the restrainers and transferred back to their home room. Nonstress rats were left in the home room the entire time.
For the purpose of measuring CORT levels due to stress (n = 12/-group), on the 1st and 12th days of restraint stress (PD32 and PD43), serial blood collection was performed between 0700 and 0900 to avoid circadian variation in CORT levels. Briefly, serial blood samples from the tail vein were taken via tail clip for both the stress and nonstress groups at 0 min immediately before, and at 5, 15, 30, and 60 min after, either being placed into a restrainer (stress) or not (nonstress); then at 120 min, one hour after rats were taken out of the restrainer (stress) or not (nonstress). Plasma was collected following blood sample centrifugation and stored at −20 °C until use for CORT ELISA (Enzo Life Sciences, Ann Arbor, MI, USA). Also, during the early hours of light cycle when rats have least feeding and physical activity, a drop of blood from the tail vein was taken before stress occurred to measure glucose (Infinity® glucometers and test strips, US Diagnostics, New York, NY).
On PD43, rats were metabolic-profile matched into further two groups euthanized either one hour after the last restraint stress on PD44 during adolescence (male and female groups of n = 6 stress, and n = 6 nonstress) or 20 days after the last stressor exposure on PD64 during adulthood (male and female groups of n = 6 stress and n = 6 nonstress).
All female rats were monitored for their estrous cycles, and were sacrificed in the estrus. The order of euthanization was counterbalanced between the sexes and stress and nonstress groups. One hour after the last restraint stress, on PD44 between 1100 and 1300 during the middle of light phase, rats were overdosed by isoflurane anesthesia, decapitated, and trunk blood and brains were immediately collected. Brains were flash frozen in isopentane over dry ice and stored at − 80 °C until cryosectioning. Plasma samples were collected and stored at − 20 °C until ELISAs for measuring 17-beta estradiol and testosterone (Cayman Chemicals, Ann Arbor, MI, USA), and leptin and insulin (Crystal Chem, Downers Grove, IL, USA) were performed. See the overall experimental design schematic ( ). All animal procedures were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Miami University Ohio and were conducted in compliance with the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals as adopted by the National Institutes of Health.

## Brain region microdissection
Brain nuclei subregions were microdissected using the brains collected on the last day of adolescent stress, PD44. Breifly, frozen brains were coronally cryosectioned every 300 μm at a maintained temperature of −9 °C, and identified for their Paxinos and Watson Bregma levels ( ). Sections were thaw-mounted on glass microscope slides that were stored on ice; then slides were placed on dry ice and sections rapidly refroze to the slide for Palkovits punch technique (Stoelting, Wood Dale, IL, USA). Punches included 9 discrete brain regions: OFC at Bregma 5.6 – 3.3 mm; PVN at Bregma −0.60 – −2.10 mm; ARC and VMH at Bregma −1.8 – −3.0 mm; CEA and BLA at Bregma −1.5 – −3.0 mm; and CA1, CA3, and DG at Bregma −3.0 – −3.9 mm ( ). The frozen punches were immediately stored at −80 °C until RNA isolation. The 0.50 mm punch was used for punches of PVN, ARC, VMH, CEA, BLA, and OFC. The 0.25 mm punch was used for punches of CA1, CA3, and DG.

## RNA isolation, library preparation, RNA sequencing, and genome mapping
Total RNA of dissected brain tissues was extracted following manufacturer’s instructions using Maxwell® 16 LEV simplyRNA tissue kit (Promega, Madison, WI, USA), an RNA extraction kit that provides RNA with excellent quality ( ). Ribosomal RNA (rRNA) was removed using a Low Input Ribominus Eukaryote System v2 (Ambion, Austin, TX, USA). Concentration, purity, and integrity of all RNA samples were assessed using a NanoDrop spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and an RNA 6000 pico chip on an Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100 (Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany). High-quality RNA samples were analyzed for genome-wide transcriptome using RNA-Seq. The RNA integrity numbers (RINs) of most RNA samples were above 8.0. The RNA samples with RINs lower than 8.0 were visually inspected to ensure they were of high quality.
Three of six rats from each group with high-quality of microdissection punches and high-concentration RNA samples with high RNA integrity yielded and RINs being above 8.0, from all nine brain subnuclei, and with their physiological measurements (e.g., hormone levels, blood glucose, body weights and body fat) within 1.5 times of respective interquartile ranges, were included in the RNA-Seq analysis (male and female groups of n = 3 stress, and n = 3 nonstress). Thus, a total of 108 samples (2 sexes × 2 stress conditions × 9 subnuclei × 3 biological replicates) were analyzed for RNA-Seq.
An RNA-sequencing library was prepared from the rRNA-depleted RNA using Nextflex Rapid Directional qRNA-Seq Kit (Bioo Scientific, Austin, TX, USA). This RNA-sequencing kit uses unique molecular indices (UMI) to reduce PCR bias ( ; ). The prepared libraries were checked for size distribution and quantity by High Sensitivity DNA Assay on the Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100 and quantitated by Universal Illumina KAPA qPCR prior to final pooling and sequencing.
Samples were sequenced on Illumina HiSeq3000 using 150bp paired-end reads (Center for Genome Research and Biocomputing at Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA). About 57.5 million raw reads of 2 × 150 bp each were retrieved from each sample. CLC Genomics Workbench 10.0 (Qiagen) was used for preparing and mapping reads. Trimming of any low-quality reads with Phred quality score of Q30 was performed. Q30 is Illumina’s quality score that provides 99.9% accuracy ( ). After QC and adaptor read-through trimming, deconvoluting PCR based duplicates using UMI, 98% of the reads mapped to the Rattus norvegicus genome (Ensembl, Rnor_6.0). Additionally, by performing the principal component analysis with all gene expression data normalized together using two principal components, DE genes were clustered by brain regions ( ).

## Statistical analyses

## Corticosterone, food intake, body weight, and body composition
CORT measurements were analyzed by two-way repeated measures ANOVA for the factors of stress condition (stress and nonstress) and time points (0 min, 15 min, 30 min, 60 min, and 120 min) with Bonferroni multiple comparison tests (GraphPad Prism version 9.0, San Diego, CA, USA). CORT area under the curve (AUC) was calculated from 0 min to 60 min timepoints and analyzed by unpaired t-tests between stress and nonstress groups (GraphPad Prism). Cumulative food intake and body weights from PD27 to PD64, fat mass and lean mass measurements on PD31, PD43, and PD56, blood glucose measurements from PD31 and PD43, and measurements of hormones (estradiol, testosterone, leptin, and insulin) on PD44 and PD64 were analyzed by mixed measures two-way ANOVA for the factors of stress condition (stress and nonstress) and time (PD) with Bonferroni multiple comparison tests (GraphPad Prism). Statistical significance was set at P < 0.05.

## DE genes and functional analyses
DE gene analysis was performed in CLC Genomics Workbench 10.0 (Qiagen) using bootstrapped Receiver Operating Characteristic (bROC) approach with a GINI coefficient of confidence (CONF) ≥ 0.95 cut-off for DE of identified genes ( ) between nonstress and stress groups within each sex and subnuclei. bROC is a machine learning analytical approach especially well-suited to detect complex weak signals from noisy background signals, ideal for bioinformatics and genomics datasets ( ). The use of the bROC statistical approach for low replicate numbers as in the current study has been validated for microarray and RNA-Seq experiments ( ). It is similar to DESeq Bioconductor package ( ), but deviates in that it does not assume a functional form of the noise distributions, rather it subsamples the noise distributions of the data from the two groups and creates pseudo-replicates (bootstrap) to effectively apply the non-parametric ROC procedure for data in a binary (two-group) comparison. In other words, bROC analysis supersedes the low replicate number of samples common to most RNA-Seq experiments, while at the same time creating large numbers of pseudo-replicates that are better reflective of the datasets being analyzed. The chosen CONF cut-off (≥0.95) is the analogous of a P = 0.05 statistical cut-off in edgeR or DESeq2 analyses. Median of M-values (MMV) was used for the normalization of the bROC analysis ( ). Based on the range of expression data, the bROC algorithm implemented in CLC Genomics Workbench decides if log2 transformation is needed and, if there are null values present, performs unity shift and log2 transformation.
The canonical pathway and all related functional analyses were generated through the use of QIAGEN Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA, Spring Release 2020, Qiagen). The significantly DE genes identified from the above bROC analysis were inserted into IPA as the ‘dataset’ for the analysis ( ). All genes identified from RNA-Seq, along with their bROC expression and CONF values, were used as the ‘reference dataset’ (although some ensembl gene IDs were not recognized by IPA, as usually occurs when gene IDs do not correspond to, or cannot be unambiguously mapped to, any known gene products ( )) Significantly associated canonical pathways were determined by: (1) a ratio of the number of molecules from the ‘dataset’ that map to a given canonical pathway divided by the total number of molecules from the ‘reference dataset’ that map to the same canonical pathway is displayed; and (2) a right-tailed Fisher’s Exact Test was used to calculate a P value determining the probability that the association between the genes in the dataset and the canonical pathway is explained by chance alone ( ). Significantly associated diseases and functions, and upstream regulators were also determined in a similar manner. For upstream regulator analyses, the “tissues and cell lines” setting was used to filter the analyses so that only relationships occurring in tissues and cells of each specific brain nuclei we investigated were considered. The Benjamini-Hochberg procedure was used in multiple hypothesis testing to control the expected 5% of false discoveries ( ).

## Supplementary Material
supplementary info

## Acknowledgements
This work is partially supported by the NIH grants R15DK090823 (HS) and R35GM133510 (JZ), Miami University Dissertation Scholarship (KNK), and Committee Faculty Research Award (HS).
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Kristen N. Krolick: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Funding acquisition, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Resources, Software, Supervision, Validation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Jingyi Cao: Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Resources, Software, Supervision, Validation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Evelyn M. Gulla: Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Validation, Writing – review & editing. Meeta Bhardwaj: Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Validation, Writing – review & editing. Samantha J. Marshall: Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Validation, Writing – review & editing. Ethan Y. Zhou: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft. Andor J. Kiss: Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Resources, Software, Validation, Writing – review & editing. Fouad Choueiry: Formal analysis, Methodology, Software, Validation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Jiangjiang Zhu: Formal analysis, Funding acquisition, Methodology, Software, Supervision, Validation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Haifei Shi: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Funding acquisition, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Resources, Software, Supervision, Validation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroscience.2024.07.002.