4105faoFoot & Ankle OrthopaedicsFoot Ankle OrthopSAGE PublicationsPMC8738938873893887389383509748810.1177/24730114211060251AOFAS Annual Meeting 2021
4120227124730114211060251247301142110602512812022© The Author(s) 2022This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/) which permits
non-commercial use, reproduction and distribution of the work without further permission
provided the original work is attributed as specified on the SAGE and Open Access pages
(https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoCollection date 2022 Jan.

## Is Repair of the Superficial Deltoid Ligament Alone Enough to Restore Medial Ankle
Stability in Deltoid Ligament Injuries? A Cadaveric Study

Mohamed M. Abd-Ella, MD

Category: Trauma
Keywords: Deltoid Ligament Injury; Ankle Fracture; Deltoid Rupture
Introduction/Purpose: Deltoid ligament injuries are controversial in many
aspects: the best method to assess the stability of a Weber B fibular fracture, the
indications of deltoid repair after lateral side surgical fixation, the best technique of
deltoid repair and the efficacy of superficial deltoid repair alone, compared to repair of
both deep and superficial deltoid ligaments, to restore medial ankle stability. The last
point is specifically important because of the technical difficulty of repairing the deep
deltoid ligament, specially if performed after fixation of the fibular fracture and the
syndesmosis, which is the common scenario. The aim of the study was to evaluate the ability
of superficial deltoid repair without deep deltoid repair to restore medial ankle stability
in cases of deltoid ligament injuries.
Methods: Ten fresh frozen ankle cadaveric specimens were used. Anteromedial
dissection was performed to expose the ankle joint and to visualize the deltoid ligament.
After good exposure, stress valgus and stress external rotation tests were performed with
observation of the medial gutter and the medial part of the ankle joint for any widening. In
all specimens, the ankle was stable at this point. Then, the superficial deltoid ligament
was detached by sharp dissection from the medial malleolus followed by transection of the
deep deltoid ligament completely at its midportion. Stress valgus and stress external
rotation tests were repeated to demonstrate the gross instability of the ankle joint. Then,
the superficial deltoid ligament was repaired using a suture anchor to the medial malleolus
without any repair of the deep deltoid ligament. Then, stress valgus and stress external
rotation tests were performed again to assess the medial ankle stability.
Results: All ankles were stable initially as confirmed by stress valgus and
stress external rotation tests. After cutting both components of the deltoid ligament, the
ankles were found to be grossly unstable using the same tests. After repair of the
superficial deltoid, all ankles were stable again with a medial space equal to the initial
status and with negative stress valgus and stress external rotation tests.
Conclusion: Surgical repair of the superficial deltoid ligament without repair
of the deep deltoid ligament in cases of deltoid ligament injury may be sufficient to
restore medial ankle stability. Limitations of the study include that all potential
secondary restraints are intact in the cadaveric study compared to the actual situation
where other structures like the capsular attachments may be injured especially if a fracture
dislocation is encountered. Clinical trials are needed to confirm this finding.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00001

## Risk Factors for Nonunion Following Tibiotalocalcaneal Arthrodesis: A Systematic Review
and Meta- Analysis

Amiethab A. Aiyer, MD; Sumit S. Patel, MS; Jose Perez, MD; Ettore Vulcano, MD;
Jonathan R. Kaplan, MD

Category: Ankle; Ankle Arthritis; Trauma
Keywords: Tibiotalocalcaneal Arthrodesis; Ankle; Ankle Arthritis
Introduction/Purpose: Tibiotalocalcaneal (TTC) arthrodesis is a routinely
utilized salvage procedure that treats patients with severe talar and subtalar joint
disease. Unfortunately, nonunion is a relatively common complication postoperatively which
can increase risks and costs for patients. The goal of this study is to review the
literature to identify risk factors for nonunion post TTC arthrodesis and stratify them
based on strength of evidence. A meta-analysis will be performed on risk factors when
appropriate to establish values based on pre-existing studies.
Methods: Five databases (CINAHL, Cochrane Library, EMBASE, MEDLINE, and Web of
Science) were searched from inception to May 17th, 2020. Two independent reviewers screened
abstracts and full-text articles for those that included risk factors predictive of nonunion
for TTC arthrodesis. Any disagreements were discussed between the two reviewers and a third
reviewer served as the ultimate decision maker if a consensus could not be reached. Relevant
data regarding participants’ characteristics, study design, follow-up time, statistical
tests and identified risk factors were extracted from the included studies. The two
reviewers independently appraised the methodological quality of the studies using the
Quality In Prognosis Studies tool. Those risk factors described in multiple studies were
included in the meta-analysis. Random effects meta-analyses were summarized as forest plots
of individual study and pooled random effect results. Results were reported as odds ratios
(OR) with 95% confidence intervals (CI).
Results: Database search identified 428 articles, of which 113 were screened
for full text. Eight studies involving 607 patients were included and 33 potential risk
factors for nonunion were identified. Risk factors were stratified into demographic,
preoperative, intraoperative and postoperative. Results of the meta-analysis established two
significant risk factors for nonunion following TTC arthrodesis. Strong evidence supports
that prior neurological deficits, such as Charcot neuroarthropathy and diabetes neuropathy,
are associated with nonunion following surgery (OR: 2.86, 95% CI: 1.56 - 5.23). There was
moderate evidence to suggest that preoperative infection was predictive for nonunion (OR:
3.99, 95% CI: 1.26 - 12.68). Although our meta- analysis did not find smoking (OR: 1.75, 95%
CI: 0.90 - 3.38) or diabetes (OR: 2.28, 95% CI: 0.98 - 5.34) to be significant risk factors,
multiple high quality studies support these as comorbidities that increase the likelihood of
nonunion.
Conclusion: TTC arthrodesis can be an effective salvage procedure but is
associated with high nonunion rates. The results of our meta-analysis suggest that prior
neurological deficits, such as Charcot neuroarthropathy or diabetes neuropathy, have strong
evidence for failure to achieve union. Although our meta-analysis did not find other
statistically significant risk factors, the findings of individual studies in our review
suggest that diabetes mellitus and smoking are both factors which can lead to failure of
fusion. Surgeons should be cognizant of these risks when performing TTC arthrodesis and
carefully monitor patients with the aforementioned comorbidities to achieve successful
results.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00002

## Cavovarus with A Twist: Coronal and Axial Plane Rotational Deformity in the Midfoot of
Charcot- Marie-Tooth Patients

Tonya W. An, MD; Edward T. Haupt, MD; Max Michalski, MD; Jari Salo; Glenn B. Pfeffer,
MD

Category: Hindfoot; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Charcot Marie Tooth; Cavovarus Foot Deformity; Weight Bearing CT
Introduction/Purpose: The cavovarus deformity of Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT)
disease typically presents with hindfoot varus and forefoot valgus. This seemingly
paradoxical relationship is poorly understood. Better insight into this complex three-
dimensional alignment under physiologic load-bearing conditions is possible using
weight-bearing computed tomography (WBCT). This is the first study to examine the extreme
rotational deformity in the midfoot of CMT patients, and thereby provides a key to the
successful operative correction of the CMT cavovarus foot.
Methods: We retrospectively reviewed the WBCTs of patients with CMT who
presented to a single surgeon. Those with history of bony surgical correction, severe
degenerative joint disease, or open physes in the foot, were excluded. Scans were analyzed
using three-dimensional analysis software (Disior Bonelogic) to generate axes of select
bones and their relationship relative to the tibial plafond anterior-posterior axis in the
axial plane. The coronal alignment of the foot involved angular measurements of the
calcaneus, talar dome, midfoot and forefoot relative to the ground. We reported quantitative
alignment parameters and compared the measurements to WBCT of 20 controls.
Results: 17 WBCT scans from 15 CMT patients (average age 24 years) met
criteria for inclusion. In the axial plane, external rotation of the distal tibia accounted
for the varus heel position rather than subtalar malalignment. The greatest change in axial
alignment occurred between the talar neck and navicular (26 degrees). The average
talonavicular (TN) medial uncoverage angle was -15 degrees for CMT patients, indicating
medial overcoverage, compared to +11 degrees for controls, (p<0.01). Coronal plane
analysis revealed varus rotational deformity at the calcaneus (23 degrees), a peak of 61
degrees varus across the navicular and cuboid, then compensatory rotation of the cuneiforms
and metatarsals to achieve a plantigrade forefoot (11 degrees varus). In comparison,
controls averaged 9 degrees coronal valgus at the calcaneus and 34 degrees varus at the
naviculo-cuboid level, (p<0.01). shows the WBCT scans of a representative CMT patient and control case.
 Conclusion: This three-dimensional WBCT analysis is the first to characterize
and quantify the axial and coronal rotational deformity in CMT. Axial plane deformity had a
center of rotational angulation at the talonavicular joint, associated with medial
’overcoverage’ of the talar head, likely from chronic tibialis posterior over-pull. The peak
coronal deformity was localized at the navicular and cuboid, which measured nearly twice as
much as controls. These observations suggest dorsiflexion osteotomy of the 1st metatarsal
would fail to address the coronal rotation; releases through the talonavicular joint may be
necessary to abduct and de-rotate the midfoot to achieve a plantigrade foot.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00003

## Strength and Compressive Ability of Midfoot Fusion Nail vs Midfoot Fusion Bolt and Role
of Subtalar Fusion

Victor Anciano, MD; D. Barcel, MD; Phillip Kaiser, MD; Nahir Habet, PhD; Co-Author
-Todd A. Irwin, MD; Carroll P. Jones, III, MD

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot; Other
Keywords: Charcot Arthropathy; Medial Column Stabilization; Biomechanics
Introduction/Purpose: Surgical management of midfoot Charcot arthropathy
typically includes fusion through the midfoot to obtain a stable plantigrade foot. Multiple
surgical strategies exist, including variable combinations of internal fixation with plates,
or thin wire external fixator frames, or both. More recently, intramedullary beams and bolts
have been used as an alternative means of fixation. The current understanding of midfoot
fusion lacks knowledge of how much stiffness, strength and compression is provided using two
different intramedullary midfoot fusion devices. The purpose of this study is to assess 3
point bending strength of midfoot fusion nails versus bolts as well as to test their
compressive abilities. Additionally, we looked to assess how the addition of a subtalar
fusion affects midfoot stiffness and rotational control in a cadaver model.
Methods: Bone blocks and cadaver feet were used for compression and
biomechanical testing, respectively. Bone blocks were pre-drilled with an undersized pilot
bit and then cut in two. A washer-type load cell measured the compressive force produced by
the implants. Sixteen (8 nails and 8 bolts) compressive tests were performed. Ten matched
cadaver foot specimens were prepared, and medial column fusions were performed with midfoot
fusion nails or bolts (10 each). Another ten matched specimens were prepared evaluating
midfoot fusion nails with or without subtalar fusions. Specimens were placed on a custom
platform at 20 degrees of dorsiflexion. A linear variable differential transformer (LVDT)
was used to record local displacement at the midfoot ( ). Each specimen underwent 3000 cycles of
compressive loading (200N - 1000N) followed by displacement- controlled loading to 9mm of
total axial displacement via servo-hydraulic test frame. The Wilcoxon signed rank test
(paired analysis) was used for analysis.
Results: The overall performance between nail vs bolt matched specimens or
between nail only vs nail with subtalar fusion showed no statistical difference with regards
to stiffness. The compressive force tests show the nail to be significantly stronger in all
aspects of the analysis. When comparing nail vs bolt matched specimens, only the accumulated
height drop at the end of cycling was significantly different (p=0.008). For the nail only
VS nail with subtalar fusion, only the displacement before fatigue was significantly
different (p=0.035). There was no difference among the matched pairs with regards to
stiffness, displacement after fatigue or maximum force during load to failure.
Conclusion: This study highlights important biomechanical and compressive data
comparing midfoot fusions using nails vs bolts. The compressive force test of nails was
superior to bolts. This could provide valuable insight when considering implants for
arthrodesis. The overall comparison between matched pairs of nails vs bolts did not provide
significant differences among those groups. Similarly, adding a subtalar fusion did not
provide significant mechanical improvement based on this model. The clinical utility of
these findings is limited by the difficulty in recreating a Charcot like scenario using
cadavers.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00004

## Risk Factors for Postoperative Falls in Foot and Ankle Surgery

Nicholas A. Andrews; Jared R. Halstrom, BS; Kenneth J. Fellows; Austin Hughes; David
A. Patch, MD; Whitt Harrelson; Tanvee Sinha; Ashish Shah, MD

Category: Other
Keywords: Outcomes Measures; Complications; Clinical Outcomes
Introduction/Purpose: Falls following orthopaedic surgery are a known entity
in the healthcare field possessing significant patient morbidity and driving increased
healthcare cost. The vast majority of studies have focused on the incidence and risk factors
for postoperative falls in the inpatient setting, however, this is in direct contrast to
shifts seen toward same-day outpatient orthopaedic surgery over the past decade. It is
crucial to better understand the incidence and risk factors for falls in a mixed inpatient
and outpatient model. Additionally, no study to date has examined the risk factors for falls
after foot and ankle surgery.
Methods: A total of 168 patients were administered a questionnaire and
interviewed to investigate the incidence of postoperative falls. Patients completed surveys
pertaining to fall history pre- and post-operatively, fall risks, current medical status,
and use of an ambulatory assist device. Medical records were reviewed. Questionnaires and
interviews were completed at 2 week and 6-week post-operative follow up visits. Factors
found to be associated with postoperative falls in univariate analysis (p<.05) were
included in a binary logistic regression model.
Results: Full six-week follow-up was present in 138 patients. A total of 87
(63.0%) females and 51 (37.0%) males with a median age of 52 (21 IQR) and BMI of 32.4 (11
IQR) were included. The total fall incidence in the first six postoperative weeks was 29.7%
(41 patients). In multivariate analysis, antidepressant use and VAS score at two weeks
postoperatively were independently associated with falls OR 3.6 (95% CI 1.3 - 10.1) and OR
1.3 (95% CI 1.1 -1.5), respectively. The results of other variables included in the model
were as follows: The Johns Hopkins Fall Risk Score OR 1.0 (95% CI.87-1.2), total number of
medications excluding as needed OR.85 (95% CI.65-1.1), anticonvulsant use OR 1.8 (95% CI.67
- 5.0), and history of falls in the past six months preoperatively 1.6 (.95% CI.44 -
5.7).
Conclusion: The high outpatient fall rate in foot and ankle surgery warrants
awareness of risk factors. Antidepressant use has been associated with falls, but has not
been established as a risk factor for postoperative falls. Surgeons should be aware of the
risk of postoperative falls in this patient population. The postoperative VAS score at two
weeks was also shown to be independently associated with falls. Adequate postoperative pain
control is vital to minimize such falls. This study has identified antidepressant use and
postoperative VAS score at two weeks as two independent risk factors for postoperative falls
in foot and ankle surgery.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00005

## Functional Outcomes and Deformity Correction of Double vs Triple Arthrodesis in Stage
III Posterior Tibial Tendon Insufficiency. A Prospective Cohort Study

Ahmed K. Attia, MD; Amr A. Mohammed; Wael El-Adly, MD; Mo’men M. Mohamed, MSc; Aly
Mohamadean, MD; Ahmed E. Osman, MD

Category: Hindfoot
Keywords: AAFD; Hindfoot Arthrodesis; Posterior Tibial Tendon
Insufficiency
Introduction/Purpose: Posterior tibial tendon insufficiency (PTTI) remains the
most important contributor to AAFD. When the deformity becomes rigid, management options are
limited to arthrodesis. Triple arthrodesis is considered the gold standard for treating
painful, rigid flatfoot deformities with proven long-term reliability of correction and
favorable functional outcomes. However, the necessity of fusing an unaffected calcaneocuboid
joint has been questioned, and double arthrodesis has been suggested as an alternative to
triple arthrodesis. The double arthrodesis has been proven to restore function, provide a
plantigrade foot, and protect against postoperative ankle valgus. This study aims to
prospectively compare double and triple arthrodesis in terms of functional outcomes and
deformity correction. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first prospective
comparative study in the literature to date.
Methods: This is a prospective comparative cohort study carried out between
May 2017 and May 2019. The study was approved by the IRB at Assiut University and done
according to the Helsinki declaration. Patients with AAFD stage III aged between 15 and 40
years old were assigned to double arthrodesis or triple arthrodesis. The groups were
prospectively followed for one year. Primary outcomes were union rates, AOFAS scores, and
radiological parameters of deformity correction plain radiographs. Secondary outcomes were
operative time, time to union, and complications. Twenty-three patients matched the
inclusion criteria. Thirteen (all males) patients underwent double arthrodesis, while ten
(nine males and one female) patients underwent triple arthrodesis. The mean age for double
and triple arthrodesis was 20.15+-5.63 and 25.10+-8.36 years, respectively, and the mean
follow-up lengths were 12.46 and 12.9 months, respectively, with no statistically
significant differences in age, follow-up or gender between both groups.
Results: All patients in both groups achieved union by four months. The mean
time to union in the double and triple arthrodesis groups was 3.39+-0.65 vs. 3.31 +-0.6
months, respectively, with no statistically significant differences (P=0.77). The mean
operative time in the double arthrodesis group than the triple arthrodesis group,
55.77+-15.18 vs. 91.6+-24.14 minutes (P<0.001), respectively. Both double and triple
arthrodesis groups had a statistically significant improvement of the mean AOFAS hindfoot
score postoperatively (71.46 +-7.77 vs. 88.38 +-3.66, P<0.001) and (66.9 +-7.69 vs. 85
+-5.83, P<0.001), respectively. Both double and triple arthrodesis groups had
statistically significant improvement of preoperative Meary’s angle, calcaneal pitch,
Cal-MT5 height, calc-MT1 angle, and TN coverage angle postoperatively. There were no
statistically significant differences between double vs. triple arthrodesis groups in AOFAS
score improvement or the magnitude of deformity correction.
Conclusion: Double arthrodesis is an equally reliable surgical option for AAFD
stage III for achieving union, improving the functional outcomes, and deformity correction
as triple arthrodesis with a significantly shorter operative time in the former. The authors
recommend double arthrodesis if the calcaneocuboid joint is unaffected.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00006

## Alignment of the Hindfoot Following Total Knee Arthroplasty: A Systematic
Review

Mohammad Azam; James J. Butler; Nathaniel P. Mercer; Eoghan T. Hurley, MB BCh BAO;
John G. Kennedy, MD, FRCS(Orth)

Category: Ankle; Hindfoot
Keywords: Hindfoot; Valgus; Ankle
Introduction/Purpose: The purpose of this systematic review was to evaluate
changes in the alignment of the hindfoot following total knee arthroplasty (TKA), subjective
clinical outcomes following surgical intervention and to analyze the level of evidence (LOE)
and quality of evidence (QoE) of the included studies.
Methods: MEDLINE, EMBASE, and Cochrane Library databases were systematically
reviewed in accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and
Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines. Studies reporting changes in the postoperative alignment
of the hindfoot following TKA were included. The level and quality of evidence were recorded
and assessed.
Results: Eleven studies with a total of 1142 patients (1358 knees) met the
inclusion/exclusion criteria. Six studies were of level of evidence II and 5 studies were of
level of evidence III. Patients with preoperative varus knee deformity and valgus hindfoot
deformity demonstrated improvement in hindfoot alignment post-TKA. Patients with
preoperative varus knee deformity and varus hindfoot deformity demonstrated no improvement
in hindfoot alignment following TKA. Twelve different radiographic parameters were used to
measure the alignment of the hindfoot across the included studies, with the tibio-calcaneal
angle (TCA) most frequently utilized (27.3%).
Conclusion: This systematic review demonstrated that the hindfoot may display
compensatory changes in alignment following total knee arthroplasty in patients with knee
osteoarthritis. However, the marked heterogeneity between the included studies and poor
quality of evidence limits any meaningful cross-sectional comparisons between studies.
Further, well-designed studies are necessary to determine the changes and outcomes of
hindfoot alignment following total knee arthroplasty.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00007

## WBCT Can Effectively Diagnose Syndesmotic Instability Among Patients with Weber B Ankle
Fractures

Rohan Bhimani, MD, MBA; Soheil Ashkani-Esfahani, MD; Bart Lubberts, MD, PhD; Philip
Kaiser, MD; Lorena Bejarano-Pineda, MD; Gino Kerkhoffs, MD; Gregory R. Waryasz, MD;
Christopher W. DiGiovanni, MD; Daniel Guss, MD, MBA

Category: Ankle; Trauma
Keywords: Alignment Weight Bearing CT; Syndesmotic Stability; Weber B Ankle
Fractures
Introduction/Purpose: Diagnosing and treating syndesmotic instability that
occurs in some Weber B ankle fractures is essential to restore normal ankle joint kinematics
and optimize clinical outcomes however subtle instability can be difficult to identify. WBCT
evaluates the syndesmotic joint under physiologic load. We compared the diagnostic
sensitivities of one-dimensional (1D) distance, two-dimensional (2D) area, and
three-dimensional (3D) volumetric measurement of the injured syndesmotic joint on WBCT, in
patients with unilateral Weber B ankle fractures with surgically-confirmed syndesmotic
instability, to the contralateral uninjured side.
Methods: Patients with unilateral surgically confirmed syndesmotic instability
accompanying a Weber B type lateral malleolar ankle fracture (n = 23) who underwent
preoperative bilateral foot and ankle WBCT were included. A separate group of patients with
unilateral Weber B ankle fractures without syndesmotic instability and who underwent
bilateral WBCT were included as a control group (n = 18). With the uninjured side serving as
an internal control, measurements on bilateral WBCT images included: 1) syndesmotic area, 2)
tibiofibular distance measured at the anterior, middle, and posterior aspect of the distal
tibiofibular articulation, 3) fibular rotation, 4) distance from fibular tip to plafond, 4)
fibular fracture displacement and 5) medial clear space distance. In addition, 3D volumetric
measurements: 1) syndesmotic joint volume from the tibial plafond extending to 3cm and 5cm
proximally, respectively 2) medial clear space volume, and 3) lateral clear space volume
were calculated, and their sensitivities were compared to the aforementioned
measurements.
Results: Among patients with unilateral syndesmotic instability with Weber B
ankle fractures, all WBCT measurements except medial clear space distance, syndesmotic area,
and anterior and posterior tibiofibular distance were significantly greater on the injured
compared to the uninjured side (p-values ranging from <0.001 to 0.004). Of these
measurements, 3D syndesmosis volumetric measurements spanning from the tibial plafond to a
level 3cm and 5cm proximally had the highest relative volumetric ratio between the injured
and uninjured side, suggesting high sensitivity to distinguish between stable and unstable
syndesmotic injuries (p -values ranging from 0.001 to 0.036). In the control group without
syndesmotic instability, all evaluated WBCT parameters except for MCS volume, and distal
fibular tip to tibial plafond showed no significant side-to-side difference.
Conclusion: Bilateral WBCT can effectively diagnose syndesmotic instability
among patients with Weber B ankle fractures. While middle incisura distance, fibular
rotation, and 3D volumetric measurements can all be used to identify such instability, 3D
syndesmotic volume measurements are the most sensitive and thus strongly recommended for
future application in scenarios of clinical dilemma of syndesmotic injury-particularly when
injuries are subtle. When performing these 3D volume measurements, it appears that
syndesmosis volume extending from the tibial plafond to a height of 5cm proximally is best
suited to evaluate such instability given the larger absolute side to side difference of 3.5
cm3.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00008

## Correction of the Hindfoot Alignment after Supramalleolar Osteomy in Ankle Varus
Deformity - A Three-Dimensional Analysis Using Weightbearing CT

Arne Burssens; Peter Kvarda; Caspar S. Steiner, MD; Roman Susdorf, PhD; Ursina
Peterhans; Nicola Krahenbuhl, MD; Alexej Barg, MD; Roxa Ruiz, MD; Beat Hintermann,
MD

Category: Ankle; Ankle Arthritis; Hindfoot
Keywords: Ankle Arthritis; Hindfoot Deformity; Weight Bearing CT
Introduction/Purpose: While correction of varus alignment at the level of the
ankle joint has been investigated extensively after supramalleolar osteotomy (SMOT), the
effect on the hindfoot alignment remains unclear. This can be attributed to the limitations
of former 2-dimensional radiographic measurements used to quantify the complex 3-dimensional
subtalar joint alignment. Therefore, we aimed to determine both the ankle and subtalar joint
alignment before and after SMOT using a weightbearing CT and autogenerated 3-dimensional
measurements.
Methods: Twenty-seven patients with a mean age of 53 years (SD=10.1;
range=25-73) were retrospectively analyzed in a pre- post study design using weightbearing
CT images. Inclusion criteria were correction of ankle varus deformity by either an opening
wedge (N=19) or dome osteotomy (N=8). Exclusion criteria consisted of an additional
inframalleolar bony correction, i.e. calcaneal osteotomy or subtalar arthrodesis.
Corresponding three-dimensional bone models were reconstructed to compute the autogenerated
measurements: tibial anterior surface (TAS) -, tibiotalar surface (TTS)-, talar tilt (TT) -
and talocalcaneal (TC) angle.
Results: The pre-operative (TAS=86.9°, SD=4.9; TTS=79.8°, SD=5.6; TT=8.8°,
SD=4.3) radiographic parameters of the ankle joint alignment improved significantly compared
to the post-operative parameters (TAS=92.4°, SD=4.9; TTS=87.1°, SD=6.3; TT=5.1°, SD=2.7;
P<0.05). ( ) Radiographic
parameters to assess the subtalar joint alignment improved significantly from preoperatively
(TCax =42.8°, SD=9.3; TCsag=42.3°,SD=10.9; TCcor =29.5°,SD=11.8) to post-operatively (TCax
=37.8°, SD=8.8; TCsag=39.1°, SD=10.6; TCcor=24.6°,SD=9.1; P<0.05). ( )
Conclusion: A supramalleolar osteotomy is able to correct both the ankle and
subtalar joint alignment. However, correction at the level of the subtalar joint accounted
for only 3 to 4 degrees, which was less than found for the ankle joint alignment. For cases
where a higher correction at the subtalar joint is necessary, we thus suggest adding a
calcaneal osteotomy or subtalar arthrodesis to the SMOT.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00009

## Treatment and Outcomes of Atraumatic Subtalar Dislocations in Adult Acquired Flatfoot
Deformity

Shaun Chang; Joan R. Williams, MD; Bruce J. Sangeorzan, MD

Category: Ankle; Hindfoot
Keywords: AAFD; Hindfoot Deformity; Fusion
Introduction/Purpose: Painful adult acquired flatfoot is classified into
multiple types, with a one category reserved for those that have rigid deformity. However,
there is a subset of patients with rigid progressive collapsed foot deformity (PCFD) in
which navicular and calcaneus are subluxed from the talus causing sub-fibular impingement
and erosion and fixed abduction of the forefoot. This condition is not well described in the
literature. The treatment of these patients can be technically difficult given the
attenuation and erosion of soft tissue and articular constraints. In this study we sought to
identify reduction technique, shared characteristics, treatments, and outcomes in patients
with severe hindfoot valgus deformity with subluxation and subfibular impingement who were
treated by subtalar reduction and arthrodesis, and talonavicular arthrodesis at a single
institution.
Methods: A retrospective chart review was done of all patients who underwent
flat foot reconstruction by a single surgeon. Patient were included in the study if on
preoperative weight-bearing (WB) CT they met the following radiographic criteria: 3
sequential sagittal cuts of the calcaneus without the talus present, 3 sequential sagittal
cuts of the talus without the calcaneus present, and the presence of a calcaneofibular
articulation on coronal cuts. Patients with neuromuscular disorders or peripheral neuropathy
were excluded. This review evaluated demographic data, comorbidities, complications, and the
need for reoperation. Plane radiographs and CT findings were compared to identify
subluxation on plane images. Patients were treated with a double, triple, or pantalar
arthrodesis based on the treating surgeon’s discretion. A cohort of 23 patients has already
been identified, but additional data review is currently underway.
Results: The initial patient cohort consisted of twenty-three patients who met
the inclusion criteria with an average age of 64.5 (range, 48-79) years. The initial cohort
consisted of patients who were treated from 2009-2014. Seven of the twenty-three patients
(30.4%) required reoperation for various reasons ranging from late infection to nonunion and
symptomatic hardware (Table 1). We found that the average BMI for patients with this
disorder was 34kg/m2. Four patients have fibular stress fractures on
presentation, these patients had an average BMI of 41.6kg/m2. Specific techniques
for reduction included use of distractors at subtalar and TN joints. Radiographic findings
on plane films are linked to findings on CT scan. Recurrence of deformity occurred with tilt
of the talus requiring bracing in 2 patients. Incomplete correction was common, particularly
early in the study period.
Conclusion: PCFD is a very problem seen by foot and ankle surgeons. Physicians
should be aware of the challenges presented in treating the subset of patients who have
atraumatic dislocation of the subtalar joint. Diagnosis can be made on plane radiographs,
though WB CT is useful for treatment planning. Treatment of these patients requires careful
physical and radiographic examination. Reduction and arthrodesis is the treatment of choice.
Patients should also be counseled about the possible need for reoperation given the high
rate of reoperation in this population.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00010

## Long Term Outcome Measures Following Arthroscopically Assisted Particulated Juvenile
Allograft Cartilage Implantation for Treatment of Difficult to Treat Osteochondral Lesions
of the Talus

Cary B. Chapman, MD; Joseph E. Manzi; Kshitij Manchanda, MD

Category: Ankle; Arthroscopy; Sports
Keywords: Osteochondral Lesions; Allograft; Arthroscopy
Introduction/Purpose: Conventional methods are not suitable for difficult to
treat osteochondral lesions of the talus (OCLT) such as those defects that are large,
shoulder lesions, failed previous surgery, or certain patient factors. Osteochondral
autograft transfer system (OATS) has been accepted as the primary method of treatment for
these more difficult defects, however, complications such as residual knee pain from the
graft site, a multiday procedure, and the necessity for a malleolar osteotomy have made this
technique not devoid of complications. Particulated juvenile articular cartilage
transplantation for these lesions has theoretical advantage of performing the procedure
arthroscopically, without need for an osteotomy or autograft. The purpose of this study is
to determine long term patient reported outcomes for this procedure.
Methods: Thirteen patients with difficult to treat OCLT underwent arthroscopic
assisted implantation of DeNovo NT graft into defects from 2010-2012 by the same surgeon.
‘Difficult to treat’ was defined as having at least three of the following features or two
if both variables described lesion characteristics: 1) lesions size of 107mm2 or
greater, 2) shoulder lesions, 3) patients who failed microfracture, 4) patient age over 40,
or 5) patient BMI>25kg/m2. Patients were evaluated using physical examination,
patient interviews, and pre and postoperative outcome score measures utilizing Visual
Analogue Scale, Short Form 36 and Foot and Ankle Ability Measurement questionnaires, and the
American Orthopaedic Foot & Ankle Society (AOFAS) ankle-hindfoot scale. Patients had
follow-up at 2 years, 4 years, and between 6-9 years at their most recent follow-up.
Differences in functional outcome scores were compared before and after surgery.
Results: Patients (Age: 46.5+-11.8years, Body Mass Index: 28.5
+-6.1kg/m2) had on average, most recent follow-up of 8.0 years (range 72-113
months). Average VAS pain score decreased for patients by 3.9 points, 95% CI [2.18, 5.60],
when compared to preoperative assessment. FAAM ADL and Sports scores also showed improvement
from 46.5 to 80.9, 95% CI [21.35, 47.43] and from 18.8 to 57.9, 95% CI [21.05, 57.10],
respectively. SF-36 physical component scores showed significant improvement by an average
of 45.5 points, 95% CI [32.42, 58.50]. AOFAS scores improved from 55.2 to 80.3, 95% CI
[12.459, 37.741]. Patient demographics and results are seen in Tables 1 and 2
respectively.
Conclusion: These results demonstrate clinically positive long-term outcomes
for a cohort of patients with difficult OCLT, followed over the course of 6-8 years after
treatment with arthroscopic assisted DeNovo NT implantation. Understanding the longevity of
this intervention can better aid clinicians in deciding if this treatment option is
appropriate for patients and should ultimately be included as part of the orthopedics’
armamentarium.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00011

## Clinical and Radiographic Outcomes of Minimally Invasive Chevron Bunionectomy Compared
to the Modified Lapidus Procedure

Elizabeth Cody, MD; Kristin C. Caolo, BA; Scott J. Ellis, MD; A. Johnson, MD

Category: Bunion; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Bunion; Minimally Invasive; Hallux Valgus
Introduction/Purpose: Minimally invasive bunion surgery is relatively new in
the United States, with the requisite burrs only approved for use by the FDA in 2017. Early
reports on outcomes have been encouraging. However, no study to date has compared outcomes
from the minimally invasive chevron and Akin procedures (MICA) to the modified Lapidus
procedure. Our goal was to compare clinical and radiographic outcomes of MICA to those of
the modified Lapidus procedure in patients with comparable deformities. We hypothesized that
radiographic parameters of hallux valgus would be superior in the Lapidus group, but that
there would be no significant difference in clinical outcomes or satisfaction between the
two groups.
Methods: Patients were retrospectively reviewed for inclusion from a
prospectively-collected foot and ankle registry at our institution. Patients were eligible
if they underwent either the MICA or modified Lapidus procedure, were 18 years or older, and
had preoperative and minimum 5 month postoperative weightbearing radiographs. Exclusion
criteria included prior forefoot surgery, additional surgeries (such as metatarsal
shortening), and concomitant foot conditions (such as flatfoot deformity). Each surgery was
performed by one of six fellowship-trained orthopedic foot and ankle surgeons. Demographics,
PROMIS scores, and satisfaction data were collected from the registry. Complications and
reoperations were collected from chart review. The hallux valgus angle (HVA),
intermetatarsal angle (IMA), and tibial sesamoid position (SP) were measured pre- and
postoperatively. Patients in the MICA group were matched to patients who underwent Lapidus
bunionectomy based on radiographic parameters. Differences between the groups were assessed
with paired t-tests for continuous variables and chi-square tests for categorical
variables.
Results: 41 patients who underwent MICA and 81 patients who underwent Lapidus
bunionectomy met the inclusion criteria. Of the Lapidus patients, 41 were included, matched
to the MICA patients. There were no significant differences in demographics or preoperative
parameters between groups aside from sex (Table). Both groups achieved similar radiographic
correction (Table). Bunion recurrence (HVA >=20°) occurred in one MICA patient and two
Lapidus patients, with all patients asymptomatic. The most common reason for reoperation was
removal of hardware (4 patients in the MICA group, 2 patients in the Lapidus group). One
additional patient in the MICA group required reoperation for wound closure, and one
additional patient in the Lapidus group required a derotational proximal phalanx
osteotomy.
Conclusion: This is the first study to our knowledge to compare outcomes
between MICA and the modified Lapidus procedure in patients matched for bunion severity. We
found that patients with similar preoperative deformities experience similar radiographic
outcomes following MICA versus modified Lapidus bunionectomy. Our analysis of PROMIS scores
and satisfaction data is currently underway. Although this is short-term data, it provides
additional support for minimally invasive techniques which allow for faster, less painful
recoveries. Further research is needed to investigate longer term outcomes and to establish
which deformities are best suited to each procedure.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00012

## Does Time to Intervention Affect Patient Reported Outcomes after Ankle
Fracture?

Yvonne Conway; Jacob Hawkins, MD; Brad Alexander, BS; Nicholas A. Andrews; Abhinav
Agarwal, MBBS; Whitt Harrelson; Tanvee Sinha; Gerald McGwin; Ashish Shah, MD

Category: Ankle
Keywords: Ankle Fracture; PROMIS; Outcomes Measures
Introduction/Purpose: Advances in surgical technique and technology have
allowed orthopedic surgeons to attempt early operative fixation of closed ankle fractures.
Little is known about the modifiable factors impacting the recovery of these patients and
how early operative intervention affects patient reported outcomes. This study aims to
determine if early surgical treatment can be performed safely without increasing a patient’s
risk for postoperative wound complications and how time to surgery affects both clinical and
patient reported outcomes.
Methods: A review of 311 patients records who underwent open reduction and
internal fixation (ORIF) for an ankle fracture between July 1st, 2011 and July 1st, 2018 at
a single academic center was conducted. Medical records were reviewed. Patients were
contacted for collection of PROMIS Physical function, PROMIS Pain Interference, and the Foot
Function Index. Patients with open fractures, high energy fractures with ipsilateral lower
extremity injuries, pilon fractures, revision cases, non-respondents to the patient reported
outcomes survey, and those lost to follow-up prior to radiographic evidence of union or
non-union were excluded. After exclusions, 86 patients were then stratified by time to
surgery after injury and injury classification. A linear regression model was constructed
for each outcome instrument with the covariates of age, BMI, diabetes, smoking status,
union, wound complication, time from surgery, and severe injuries by the Lauge-Hansen
classification.
Results: The delayed union, nonunion, and wound complication rate was similar
regardless of timing of operative intervention (p=.470, p=.149, & p=.578, respectively).
At a median of 4.5 (2.0 IQR) years postoperatively, outcomes scores were as follows (median
(IQR)): PROMIS Physical Function 47.9 (11.2), PROMIS Pain Interference 50.1 (17.4), FFI Pain
26.0 (52.0), FFI Disability 17.0 (49), FFI Activity Limitation 3.0 (22.0), and FFI Total
20.0 (41.5). Time to intervention was not found to have an independent effect on any outcome
score. Severe injuries by the Lauge-Hasen classification were found to be independent
predictors of PROMIS physical function -6.3 (Unstandardized beta, 95% CI -11.5 to -1.1).
Diabetes had a significant independent effect on PROMIS pain interference 52.4
(Unstandardized beta, 95% CI 24.3 to 80.5).
Conclusion: Early surgical intervention did not significantly delayed union
rate, nonunion rate, wound complications, or patient reported outcomes instruments. Severity
of injury classification has a significant independent effect on patient’s physical
function. Notably, this effect is above the minimal clinically important difference for
PROMIS physical function. Overall, the intermediate term outcomes of ankle fracture fixation
indicate patients are within one standard deviation of the population mean in terms of pain
and physical function. Surgeons should be aware timing of intervention did not have an
effect on outcomes scores at intermediate term follow-up.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00013

## Predictors of Outcomes of Microfracture for Osteochondral Lesions of the Talus

John Dankert, MD, PhD; John G. Kennedy, MD, FRCS(Orth); Yoshiharu Shimozono, MD;
Timothy Deyer; Nathaniel P. Mercer

Category: Ankle
Keywords: Ankle Pain; Lesions of Talus; Osteochondral Lesions of the Talus
Introduction/Purpose: Microfracture has been widely published as a treatment
modality for osteochondral lesions of the talus (OLT). However, little is known about the
outcome predictors following microfracture for smaller-sized OLT (<100mm2).
This study sought to define the predictors of both clinical and magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) outcomes for small OLT treated with microfracture.
Methods: A retrospective cohort study investigating patients who received
arthroscopic microfracture for OLT (<10mm or 100mm2) between 2008 and 2017
were evaluated. Multivariate regression models were used to evaluate factors affecting post-
operative Foot and Ankle Outcome Scores (FAOS) and Magnetic Resonance Observation of
Cartilage Repair Tissue (MOCART) scores. Kaplan-Meier survival curves with log-rank test
were constructed and endpoint was defined as the requirement of revision surgery.
Results: Eighty-seven patients were included in the study. The mean follow-up
time was 41.4+-28.7 months. The mean FAOS pain score significantly improved from 60.4+-14.8
preoperatively to 79.3+-12.8 at final follow-up (p<0.001). Patients with uncontained-
type OLT had an approximately 9-point worse FAOS pain score compared to contained-type OLT
(p=0.036). Patients with cystic OLT also had an approximately 9-point worse pain FAOS
compared to non-cystic OLT (p=0.026). Patients with larger lesion sizes had worse
postoperative MOCART scores (p=0.012). Both Uncontained-Cyst and Uncontained-Noncyst groups
had significantly worse FAOS pain than the Contained-Noncyst group (p<0.001, p=0.026).
Survival rates in uncontained and contained lesions were 51.5% and 84.4%, respectively
(p=0.616).
Conclusion: Lesion uncontainment and the existence of cysts are independent
predictors of poor clinical outcome following arthroscopic microfracture for smaller-sized
OLT (<100mm2).
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00014

## Diagnostic Accuracy of Weightbearing CT in Detecting Subtle Chronic Syndesmotic
Instability: A Prospective Comparative Study

Cesar de Cesar Netto, MD, PhD; Matthieu Lalevee, MD; Alan G. Shamrock, MD; Samuel J.
Ahrenholz; Francois Lintz, MD MSc FEBOT; Alexej Barg, MD; John E. Femino, MD; Donald D.
Anderson; Kevin N. Dibbern, PhD; Nacime S. Mansur, MD

Category: Ankle; Arthroscopy; Sports; Trauma
Keywords: Syndesmotic Stability; Syndesmotic Reduction; Arthroscopy
Introduction/Purpose: Improving the diagnosis of subtle syndesmotic
instability (SSI) represents one of the most challenging missions in orthopedic surgery,
since undiagnosed instability frequently leads to posttraumatic ankle arthritis. Stressed
conventional radiographs, ultrasonography, bilateral comparative conventional CT and MRI
serve as important diagnostic tools, however, the current diagnostic gold-standard is
arthroscopic assessment, an invasive surgical method. The advent of weight- bearing computed
tomography (WBCT) brought hope for improved non-invasive SSI diagnosis, particularly by
utilizing distal tibiofibular syndesmotic (DTFS) area and volume measurements. However, to
date, no studies assessed WBCT diagnostic accuracy for chronic SSI. The purpose of this
study was to prospectively evaluate the diagnostic accuracy of WBCT area and volumetric
measurements in patients with suspected chronic SSI, when compared to the gold-standard
arthroscopic assessment.
Methods: In this IRB-approved prospective comparative study, 11 patients with
suspected SSI were enrolled from July 2019 to December 2020. Patients were assessed
preoperatively by bilateral standing WBCT. Raw 3D WBCT was automatically segmented by
dedicated software. WBCT measurements performed: semi-automatic DTFS area (1cm proximally to
tibial dome apex); DTFS volumes (1, 3 and 5cm proximally to tibial dome apex). Threshold
values for WBCT abnormality were defined based on currently available data
(area>105mm2 and volumes>796mm3, >3062 mm3, and
>6733 mm3 for 1, 3 and 5cm, respectively). Subjects underwent surgical
treatment including DTFS instability arthroscopic assessment, defined as positive when a 3mm
diameter sphere could enter the syndesmotic incisura. Confirmed unstable cases were treated
with open reduction/internal fixation. WBCT measurements sensitivity, specificity, positive
and negative predictive values (PPV/NPV) and accuracy were calculated using confirmed
arthroscopic instability as diagnostic gold standard. Paired t-tests/Wilcoxon analysis was
used to compare measurements. P-values<0.05 were considered significant.
Results: When compared to non-injured sides, DTFS area and volumes were
significantly higher in injured ankles at 1cm (667 vs 554mm3) and 3cm (2331 vs
2038mm3). Medial gutter volumes were also increased in injured sides (398 vs
370 mm3). DTFS volumes at 5cm and lateral gutter volumes were not different. Nine
of eleven patients had confirmed arthroscopic DTFS instability. Considering WBCT area
measurements, 4/11 patients were found to be positive (>105mm2), including 3
true positives (+WBCT/+Arthroscopy), 1 false positive (+WBCT/-Arthroscopy), 6 false
negatives (-WBCT/+Arthroscopy), and 1 true negative (-WBCT/-Arthroscopy), leading to a 33.3%
sensitivity, 50%, specificity, 75% PPV 75%, 14.3% NPV and 36% accuracy. When analysing WBCT
DTFS volumes (1cm), 3/11 patients were found positive (>796mm3), depicting 3
true positives, 0 false positives, 2 true negatives and 6 false negatives, with resultant
diagnostic accuracy of: 33.3% sensitivity, 100% specificity, 100% PPV, 25% NPV 25%, and 45%
accuracy.
Conclusion: This is the first study to prospectively assess WBCT diagnostic
accuracy of area and volume measurements in detecting chronic SSI, comparing it to
arthroscopic diagnostic standard. When compared to uninjured side, DTFS area and volumetric
measurements were significantly increased in injured sides of patients with suspected SSI,
including medial gutter volumes, consistent with associated deltoid ligament instability.
However, interestingly, we observed a diagnostic accuracy for WBCT area and volumetric
measurements to be lower than initially expected. Further incorporation of additional
patients, as well as introduction of an external rotational stress can potentially optimize
the WBCT diagnostic accuracy for chronic SSI.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00015

## Three-Dimensional Distance Maps of Ankle and Syndesmotic Joints from Weightbearing CT
in Progressive Collapsing Foot Deformity: A Retrospective Case-Control Study
Cesar de Cesar Netto, MD, PhD; Victoria Vivtcharenko, BS; Andrew Behrens; Matthieu Lalevee,
MD; Nacime S. Mansur, MD; Donald D. Anderson; Andrew J. Goldberg, OBE MD FRCS (Tr&Orth);
Alexej Barg, MD; Scott J. Ellis, MD
Category: Ankle
Keywords: Flatfoot AAFD Computed Tomography Weightbearing CT; Ankle; Weight
Bearing CT
Introduction/Purpose: Recently, weightbearing computed tomography (WBCT) has
been utilized to provide more comprehensive and accurate assessment of complex foot and
ankle deformities, notably to diagnose and stage Progressive Collapsing Foot Deformity
(PCFD). The 3D data provided by WBCT has enabled the developed of novel tools like distance
mapping (DM), coverage mapping (CM), and volume measurements. Over the past year, novel DM
and CM have shown promise in providing sensitive automated measures of peritalar
subluxation, a major component of PCFD. However, the early effects of PCFD on the tibiotalar
joint have not yet been quantified. This study sought to use DM and CM to objectively
characterize the effects of PCFD on the tibiotalar and tibiofibular joints. We hypothesized
that changes seen in early PCFD will be identified.
Methods: IRB approval for retrospective review of patient data from 2014-2020
was obtained to identify patients with clinical and radiographic diagnoses of PCFD. The
first consecutive 20 patients with symptomatic flexible PCFD and high-resolution
weightbearing CT examination without arthritis that had not undergone prior surgery were
selected and compared with 20 controls. Fully automated volume measurements of the
syndesmosis at 1cm, 3cm, and 5cm from the tibiotalar joint were performed as well as of the
medial and lateral tibiotalar gutters based on models created in Disior Bonelogic. Distance
Maps (DMs) were obtained for the tibiofibular incisura, tibiotalar joint, and gutters.
Coverage maps (CMs) were created using the measured 3DDMs to identify joint interaction,
subluxation, and impingement. Data were checked for normality using the Shapiro- Wilk W
test. Two-tailed independent samples student t-tests or Wilcoxon Tests were used to assess
differences between groups.
Results: There were significant decreases in coverage of all 3 anterior
regions of the tibiotalar joint in PCFD patients when compared to controls along with
corresponding significant increases in coverage of all 3 posterior regions (Figure). There
were no significant differences in mean or minimum distances in any region of the tibiotalar
joint surface. Significant increases in average and minimum DMs of the anterior medial (36%,
p<0.01, 19%, p<0.03) gutter were observed with significant decreases in coverage of
both anterior medial and anterior lateral regions. Significant decreases in the average and
minimum distances of the tibiofibular joint were found anteriorly in PCFD patients compared
to controls (-26%, p<0.006). There were no significant differences in overall syndesmotic
distance or volume at any level.
Conclusion: The results of our study were able to identify that, compared to
controls, patients with early stage PCFD demonstrated significant tibiotalar and
tibiofibular joint changes ahead of developing the tibiotalar narrowing associated with
arthritis and syndesmotic widening associated with instability. Decreases in anterior
coverage with increases posteriorly support early plantarflexion of the talus in PCFD. When
combined with plantarflexion of the talus and unchanged syndesmotic volume, decreases in
anterior tibiofibular distances support the absence of syndesmotic joint instability in
early PCFD. Novel tools may assist with clinical decision-making regarding restoration of
normal tibiotalar and tibiofibular alignment during PCFD correction.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00016

## Fusion Rate of Subtalar Arthrodesis in Pre-Existing Ankle Arthrodesis: Is There Enough
Evidence

Yahya Elhassan, Mch, FRCS (Tr&Orth); Ammer Jamjoom; Adam Lomax, FRCS(Tr&Orth);
Nazzar Tellisi, MB ChB, MSc, FRCS(Tr&Oth)

Category: Hindfoot
Keywords: Ankle Arthrodesis; Subtalar Arthrodesis; Hindfoot Arthrodesis
Introduction/Purpose: Isolated subtalar arthrodesis is a commonly performed
procedure, which produces high union rates. It was suggested that the fusion rate of
subtalar arthrodesis is negatively affected by the presence of pre-existing ipsilateral
ankle (tibiotalar) arthrodesis, though the mechanism by which this occurs remains unclear.
The aim of this study is to assess the fusion rate of subtalar arthrodesis in the presence
of pre-existing ipsilateral ankle arthrodesis and to suggest alternative techniques to
improve fusion rate.
Methods: Electronic patient records and images of all consecutive isolated
primary subtalar arthrodesis that were performed in our institution over ten years between
(2009-2019) were retrospectively reviewed. Data that was collected included patients’
demographics, body mass index (BMI), smoking status, diabetes, and rheumatoid arthritis,
fusion rate; other factors like the method used of the pre-existing ankle arthrodesis were
also studied. Subtalar arthrodesis was performed using a lateral approach and compressed by
two screws. Two groups were compared, included all isolated primary subtalar arthrodesis
with or without previous ipsilateral ankle arthrodesis. Logistic regression was performed to
check for the correlation between fusion rate and all factors.
Results: A total of one hundred and thirty-three (n=133) primary isolated
subtalar arthrodesis were identified between (2009- 2019), amongst which twenty-one (n=21)
had pre-existing ipsilateral ankle arthrodesis. Ten (n=10) recorded subtalar non-unions
occurred in the pre-existing ankle arthrodesis group representing a fusion rate of only 52.4
%, as opposed to sixteen (n=16) in the isolated subtalar fusion without pre-existing
ipsilateral ankle arthrodesis group representing a fusion rate of 86.9 %. A significant
statistical difference between the two groups, those with ipsilateral ankle arthrodesis had
a higher non-rate (P =.001). Age, gender, Body mass index (BMI), smoking status, diabetes,
rheumatoid arthritis, and the method used of the pre-existing ankle arthrodesis were found
not to have any significant effect on these results.
Conclusion: Our results show a significantly higher non-union rate of isolated
subtalar arthrodesis in the presence of pre-existing ipsilateral ankle arthrodesis. Further
research is required to help in clarifying the mechanism by which this effect occurs and to
study alternative surgical techniques that might be required.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00017

## The Outcome of Extended Tarso-Metatarsal and Mid-Tarsal Midfoot Arthrodesis

Yahya Elhassan, MCh, FRCS (Tr & Orth); Ray Monkhouse

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Midfoot; Fusion; Patient Reported Outcome Measures (PROMS)
Introduction/Purpose: Arthrodesis of extended midfoot arthritis (more than
four joints) remains surgically challenging and technically demanding due to bone loss and
deformity with a goal to achieve fusion between multiple joints. Yet the outcome and fusion
rate of this particular group was sparsely reported and with a lot of heterogeneity. The aim
of this study is to assess the outcome of extended midfoot arthrodesis, which included a
combined fusion of Tarsometatarsals, Naviculocuneiform, and/or the Talonavicular joints.
Methods: Patients who underwent extended midfoot fusion (> four joints)
over ten year period (2009-2019) were identified. Only non-neuropathic patients where
multiple joints midfoot fusion were performed were included, more specifically the group of
patients who required combined fusion of the second and third Tarsometatarsal joints with
extension to the Naviculocuneiform, the Talonavicular, and/or the first Tarsometatarsal
joints. All operations were performed by the senior author through a single incision using
non-locking compression lag screws and 2.7mm locking plates. Institutional review board
approval was obtained to review electronic patient records and imaging. Etiology of midfoot
arthritis, fusion rate, reoperation, postoperative complications, and patient satisfaction
were independently evaluated. Pre-paid addressed envelopes were posted and Patient Report
Outcome Measures (PROMs), including patient satisfaction, MOxFQ (Manchester Oxford Foot )
were collected, and statistical analysis was performed.
Results: Fifty-one patients (59 feet) out of 162 patients were included. The
questionnaire response rate was 82.3%. Female: male ratio was 2.9:1 with a mean age 56.9.
The most prevalent diagnosis was primary osteoarthritis in 54.2%, rheumatoid arthritis in
10.2 %, post-traumatic arthritis 17%. AVN of the navicular was the indication for surgery in
18.6%. Extension to naviculocuneiform and talonavicular joint was performed in 100% and
40.6% respectively. 73.8 % were satisfied, with a higher satisfaction rate in older age (P
< 0.005) and talonavicular group (P <0.05).Total number of joints fused was 292, with
a fusion rate of 95.6%. A lower fusion of the talonavicular and naviculocuneiform joints was
observed at 89.8% and 79.2% respectively (Table).Other minor complications included removal
of metal, metatarsals stress fracture, metatarsalgia, talonavicular arthrosis, delayed wound
healing, SPN neuroma, and CRPS. Deep infection was not reported.
Conclusion: In this series, we highlighted that extended multiple joint
midfoot arthrodesis which included fusion of the naviculocuneiform or/and the talonavicular
joints produced a high fusion rate when compared to the total number of joints fused,
although a lower fusion rate was observed across the naviculocuneiform and talonavicular
joints. Extended midfoot arthrodesis is complex; patients should be well informed and
counseled about the outcome and the consequences, with a careful approach when quoting
satisfaction.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00018

## Results of Hallux Metatarsophalangeal Joint Arthrodesis with and without Calcaneus
Autograft

Fred T. Finney, MD; D. Barcel, MD; Bruce E. Cohen, MD; W. Hodges Davis, MD; J. Kent
Ellington, MD, MS; Todd A. Irwin, MD; Carroll P. Jones, III, MD

Category: Bunion; Midfoot/Forefoot; Other
Keywords: Hallux Rigidus; Fusion; 1st MTP Joint
Introduction/Purpose: Hallux rigidus is the most common degenerative
arthropathy of the foot. Primary hallux metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joint arthrodesis is the
most common surgical treatment for end-stage hallux rigidus and can also be utilized for
correction of hallux valgus. Though satisfaction rates following hallux MTP joint
arthrodesis are very favorable, nonunion rates have been reported as high as 12%. Many
surgeons use orthobiologics and/or autograft to augment arthrodeses about the foot and ankle
in an effort to increase union rates. The purpose of this study is to retrospectively
compare union rates of hallux MTP joint arthrodesis with and without calcaneus
autograft.
Methods: A query of our institution’s administrative database was performed to
identify patients who underwent a primary hallux MTP joint arthrodesis between February 2016
and February 2019. We compared patients who underwent arthrodesis with and without calcaneus
autograft. Surgeon preference dictated use of autograft, as some in our group routinely use
graft while others do not. Patients 18 years and older who underwent a primary hallux MTP
arthrodesis were included. Patients were excluded if they had radiographic evidence of
significant bone loss or if allograft or biologic therapies were used. Patient charts and
final radiographs were reviewed. The primary outcome was successful union of the hallux MTP
joint arthrodesis. Secondary outcomes included preoperative diagnosis, type of surgical
fixation and surgical complications. Data was compared using a student T-test.
Results: There were 336 feet included in the final analysis, and 140 underwent
hallux MTP arthrodesis with calcaneus autograft. Mean follow-up time was 14.8 weeks. Among
all patients, 89.9% had a successful union. There was no difference in union rates between
those who underwent arthrodesis with calcaneus autograft (87.9%) compared to without
autograft (91.4%; p = 0.302). Hallux valgus was the preoperative diagnosis in 52.7% of cases
followed by hallux rigidus (39.9%). The most common fixation method was a lag screw with a
dorsal plate (80.5%). Painful hardware was the next most common complication (8.6%), and
smoking and diagnosis of diabetes demonstrated no effect on union rates. In the autograft
group, there were no complications related to the calcaneus autograft donor site.
Conclusion: As orthobiologics and local bone autograft gain popularity in foot
and ankle surgery, it is important to report clinical outcomes and establish evidence-based
guidelines for use. In this relatively large retrospective comparison, the use of calcaneal
graft was noted to be safe (no complications from graft site). However, there was no
difference in union rate when comparing hallux MTP arthrodesis with and without calcaneus
autograft.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00019

## Mid-Term Prospective Evaluation of Structural Allograft Transplantation for
Osteochondral Lesions of the Talar Shoulder

Amanda N. Fletcher, MD, MS; Samuel B. Adams, Jr., MD; James A. Nunley, II, MD; Mark E.
Easley, MD

Category: Ankle
Keywords: Allograft; Ankle; Cartilage Defect
Introduction/Purpose: The management of large osteochondral lesions of the
talar shoulder remains a clinical challenge. Their size, three-dimensional geometry, and
subchondral cystic degeneration often preclude treatment with traditional measures such as
microfracture and osteochondral autograft transplantation. Structural or bulk osteochondral
allograft transplantation has demonstrated efficacy in several retrospective reviews. The
purpose of this study was to prospectively evaluate patients who received fresh structural
allograft transplantation to the talus.
Methods: A prospective evaluation of consecutive patients who underwent fresh
structural allograft transplantation for an OLT form 2010 to 2019 was performed under
Institutional Review Board approval. All patients failed a minimum of 6 months of
conservative management. Preoperative MRI and/or CT, as well as plain radiographs were
obtained on all patients. The following patient reported outcomes questionnaires were
administered preoperatively and yearly after surgery: 100mm VAS pain scale, AOFAS
Ankle-Hindfoot Scale, SF-36, and the Short Musculoskeletal Functional Assessment (SMFA).
Pre- and postoperative radiographs were assessed for allograft incorporation and the
development of arthritis.
Results: 27 patients underwent fresh osteochondral allograft transplantation
and were followed for a minimum of 2 years. The mean follow-up was 5 years (range 2-11). The
average size of the OLT was 2,269 mm3 (range 813-8,366) based on CT imaging and
5,797 mm3 (range 1,136-12,489) based on MRI imaging. There was significant
improvement in the VAS pain score, AOFAS Ankle- Hindfoot Scale score, the SF-36 total score,
and the SMFA functional and bother indices ( ). Thirteen (48%) of the patients required
subsequent surgery. Twelve underwent removal of hardware and joint debridement and one
patient underwent isolated joint debridement. At the time of these surgeries, two grafts
demonstrated cartilage delamination. One of these patients had continued pain and
progression of arthritis without additional surgery and one was converted to an ankle
replacement. Therefore, the failure rate was 7%.
Conclusion: Significant improvement in pain and function can be achieved with
structural allograft transplantation for large OLTs. However, it is important to council
patients that painful hardware and stiffness can occur in approximately one-half of
patients. An unstable graft and cartilage delamination are indicators of subsequent failure.
The use of a structural allograft does not preclude subsequent ankle arthrodesis or
arthroplasty.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00020

## Short Term Complications Following Total Ankle Arthroplasty and Associated Risk
Factors: A NSQIP Database Analysis

Amanda N. Fletcher, MD, MS; Nicholas Kwon; Richard Danilkowicz; Jaewhan Kim; Nathan L.
Grimm; Samuel B. Adams, Jr., MD

Category: Ankle; Ankle Arthritis; Diabetes
Keywords: Total Ankle Arthroplasty; Complications; Diabetes
Introduction/Purpose: Total ankle arthroplasty (TAA) has become increasingly
utilized over the past 20 years to treat osteoarthritis of the ankle. The efficacy and
safety of this procedure has been previously reported, but relatively few studies have
documented the risk of post-operative complications associated with TAA over the past 10
years. Thus, the aim of this study is to provide a current report on the safety of TAA,
particularly in association with a number of preoperative risk factors.
Methods: A retrospective review of all patients in the American College of
Surgeons National Surgical Quality Improvement Program (ACS-NSQIP) database who underwent
TAA between 2012-2018 was performed. A total of 1333 patients were included in this
analysis. Penalized logistic regression to consider small numbers of the postoperative
complications was used to identify factors associated with incidence of the
complications.
Results: The rate of readmission and superficial wound infection were found to
be 1.4% and 0.6%, respectively. Risk factors associated with a prolonged hospital stay were
Black race, Hispanic race, and smoking ( ). Diabetes was associated with a significantly increased risk of
readmission. Age, sex, BMI, and steroid use were not associated with increased risk of
postoperative complications.
Conclusion: In this study, the rate of surgical site infection and readmission
in TAA was found to be relatively low, compared to published data on TKA and THA. Both race
and smoking increase the risk of prolonged hospital stay, while diabetes increases the risk
of readmission.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00021

## Short-Term Efficacy and Safety of Combined Total Talus and Total Ankle
Replacement

Amanda N. Fletcher, MD, MS; Abhinav Balu; Gregory F. Pereira, MD; James K. DeOrio, MD;
Mark E. Easley, MD; James A. Nunley, II, MD; Selene G. Parekh, MD, MBA

Category: Ankle; Ankle Arthritis
Keywords: Total Ankle Arthroplasty; Talus; Aspetic Necrosis
Introduction/Purpose: The indications for both total talus replacement (TTR)
and total ankle replacement (TAR) are expanding. Combined total ankle-total talus (combined
TAR) is a novel treatment option for patients with end-stage ankle arthritis and talar
avascular necrosis (AVN) and patients with a prior TAR and talar component collapse.
End-stage talar AVN with subchondral collapse is a challenging entity to treat.
Historically, an alternative treatment option was tibiotalocalcaneal arthrodesis with
structural allograft which results in fair outcomes including nonunion rates up to 40%.
Combined TAR is a treatment option that theoretically maintains joint range of motion and
restores anatomic alignment. The purpose of this study is to evaluate the short-term
outcomes for combined TAR including pain, functional outcomes, radiographic outcomes, and
complications.
Methods: Consecutive patients who underwent combined TAR from 2016-2020 were
retrospectively reviewed. All surgeries were performed by one of four fellowship-trained
foot and ankle orthopaedic surgeons at a single academic institution. All talus implants
were custom 3D printed total tali (Additive Orthopaedics, Little Silver, NJ), composed of an
alloy primarily made of cobalt chrome. The implants were sized based on computed tomography
scans of the contralateral talus and created to articulate with multiple TAR systems.
Patient demographics, comorbidities, and surgical data were collected. Outcomes included the
Visual Analog Scale (VAS) scores, radiographic alignment, range of motion, and
complications. Data analysis was performed with paired t- tests and a significance level of
p<0.05.
Results: A total of 66 patients (67 ankles) were included with an average
12-month follow-up. There were 35 (52.2%) men, and the average age was 56.4 years old. The
majority of patients (n=42, 62.7%) underwent combined TAR for talar AVN and tibiotalar
arthritis while 21 (31.3%) patients were converted from an isolated TAR and 4 patients
(6.0%) from an isolated TTR to combined TAR. A total of 23 (34.3%) patients had a previous
talus fracture. Significant postoperative improvements compared to preoperative included:
VAS (2.8 vs. 8.2; p<0.0001), ankle dorsiflexion (11.0° vs. 4.7°; p=0.0007), ankle
plantarflexion (31.9° vs. 23.7°; p<0.0001), talar declination angle (20.7° vs. 11.6°;
p=0.0007), Meary’s angle (2.2° vs. 10.4°; p=0.0043), and talocalcaneal height (79.6mm vs.
74.2mm; p <0.0001). There was a total of 10 (14.9%) complications, 7 (10.4%) of which
required repeat surgery. There were 3 (4.5%) failures requiring explant, revision, or
amputation (Table 1).
Conclusion: Combined TAR is an efficacious and safe procedure. Patients
experienced improvement in pain, ankle range of motion, and radiographic parameters
postoperatively. This technique provides an anatomic treatment with preservation of ankle
motion for patients with severely deficient bone stock due to talar AVN with ankle arthritis
or failed TAR. To confirm these preliminary positive results, further studies are required
including continued longer-term follow-up, prospective cohorts, and comparative analyses to
other treatment options.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00022

## Ankle Arthritis Etiology Predicts Patterns of Gait Dysfunction: A Prospective
Multivariate Gait Analysis

Samuel E. Ford, MD; Daniel J. Scott, MD, MBA; David Vier, MD; Scott Coleman; Shannon
F. Alejandro, MD; James W. Brodsky, MD

Category: Ankle; Ankle Arthritis; Basic Sciences/Biologics; Hindfoot
Keywords: Ankle Arthritis; Gait Study Range of Motion; Segmental Gait
Introduction/Purpose: Preoperative factors influencing functional disability
imparted on the patient by ankle arthritis have not previously been assessed with gait
analysis. The purpose of this study was to assess the influence of ankle arthritis etiology
and deformity, measured radiographically, on gait performance in a dedicated gait lab
utilizing a multisegment foot model. With three calcaneal and four metatarsal markers in
addition to standard lower extremity markers, the modified Helen Haynes model allows for the
evaluation of range of motion (ROM) within the ‘ankle-hindfoot segment.’ The primary
hypothesis was that three- dimensional ankle-hindfoot segment ROM would be more restricted
in patients with post-traumatic ankle arthritis than other etiologies. The secondary
hypothesis was that temporospatial and kinetic measures would not vary by etiology.
Methods: A longitudinal cohort of 183 patients with end-stage ankle arthritis
were prospectively enrolled from 2008-2018. Mean age was 61, BMI 29, and 56% were male. Four
etiologic groups were defined: Post-fracture (100), arthritis caused by planovalgus foot
deformity (23), chronic instability associated with cavovarus (32), and miscellaneous (28),
comprised of inflammatory (7), idiopathic (6), instability without deformity (5), septic
(2), and avascular necrosis (3) as causes. The four-segment Milwaukee foot model was used in
a dedicated gait lab with a 12-camera motion capture system. Gait data was collected over a
minimum 20 gait cycles across a 10-meter walkway. Kinetic data was simultaneously collected
with two force plates embedded in the walkway operating at 1 MHz. AP and lateral tibiotalar
angles, lateral talus-first metatarsal angles, calcaneal pitch, and tibiotalar ratio were
measured. Multivariate regression analyzed the effect of etiology and radiographic measures
on gait function, controlling for age, gender, and BMI.
Results: The primary hypothesis was confirmed. Sagittal plane ankle-hindfoot
segment ROM was lower in post-traumatic and higher in valgus patients compared to other
etiological groups (P<0.0001) ( ). Sagittal plane ankle-hindfoot segment ROM restriction relative to the
contralateral limb was also more severe in the post-traumatic group than others (P=0.0005).
Valgus AP tibiotalar angles were associated with greater sagittal plane ankle-hindfoot ROM
(P=0.0016). The secondary hypothesis was disproven. Post-traumatic patients ambulate with
greater maximum ankle moment than other groups (P=0.0043). Valgus patients ambulate with a
comparatively longer step length (P<0.0001). Significant reductions in affected limb
walking speed (P<0.0001), step length (P<0.0001), and maximum ankle moment (P=0.036),
as well as increases in double limb (P=0.0007) and total support percentage (P<0.0001)
were found among the miscellaneous etiology group.
Conclusion: Of the four groups, patients with post-traumatic ankle arthritis
ambulated with the greatest ankle and hindfoot stiffness, but also the greatest ankle
moment. Patients with valgus ankle arthritis had the greatest ROM through the ankle and
hindfoot and the longest step length. In addition to diminished ROM, patients in the
miscellaneous group had the lowest cadence, symmetry, and torque of gait. The etiology of
severe ankle arthritis can predict the pattern of gait dysfunction, which, in turn, may
inform choices of surgical reconstruction.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00023

## Compression of A Midfoot Osteotomy Using A Circular External Fixator: What is the Ideal
Pin Configuration?

Tyler R. Freeman, MD; Henry Yu; Todd Baldini; Keanu Chee; Jason L. Koerner; Kenneth J.
Hunt, MD

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot; Diabetes; Trauma
Keywords: Midfoot arthrodesis; Osteotomies; Thin Wire External Fixation
Introduction/Purpose: Foot and ankle deformity correction through midfoot
osteotomy can be implemented in a wide variety of clinical situations. Use of a circular
ring fixator for osteotomy fixation is particularly useful for patients with poor soft
tissue envelopes and/or active infection as can occur in diabetes and Charcot arthropathy.
The foot pins in a ring fixator can be configured to apply compression at the osteotomy
site. However, the optimal pin configuration and force has yet to be determined. The purpose
of this study was to quantify compressive forces achieved across midfoot osteotomies with
various wire configurations in a circular ring fixator construct.
Methods: Nine through-knee amputation cadavers were stabilized with a standard
circular external fixation carbon frame. A midfoot osteotomy through the transverse tarsal
joint was performed using an oscillating saw. A 4mm bone wedge was removed from the
osteotomy site for placement of a Tekscan pressure sensor. A two-ring frame was applied in
the standard fashion and three parallel 1.8mm smooth wires were placed parallel to each
other through the foot distal to the osteotomy: wire #1 proximally through the cuneiforms,
wire #2 through the base of the metatarsals, wire #3 through the metatarsal shafts. After
baseline pressure readings, wires were sequentially attached (wire #1 alone, wire #1-2, wire
#1-3) to the ring fixator and tensioned to 90kg. Pressure readings were recorded at the
osteotomy site for each sequential wire tensioning both at the hole location where the wire
naturally crossed, ‘neutral’, and again at one hole ‘proximal’ (e.g., toward the
osteotomy).
Results: Average compressive load at neutral hole positioning for wire #1 was
382 N. The addition of wire #2 increased the compressive load to 439 N on average. The
addition of wire #3 decreased compressive force to 372 N. Similar trends were seen in
proximal hole positioning where average compressive force increased following tensioning of
wire #2 from 580 N to 600 N but compressive force decreased on wire #3 addition to 425 N.
Therefore, tensioning forefoot thin wires in the proximal hole position increases
compressive forces by 50% compared to neutral position, and adding a second wire increased
compressive force by up to 15% compared to a single forefoot wire.
Conclusion: In a circular frame midfoot fusion model, the greatest compressive
force was achieved with two wires tensioned in the proximal hole position. The addition of a
third wire led to force decrease likely due to off-axis forces that may distract the
osteotomy site given the difficulty of passing all wires perfectly parallel in all planes.
Ideal positioning and tensioning of forefoot pins may optimize construct stability and
compression and improve healing of the midfoot osteotomy.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00024

## Arthroscopic vs Open Ankle Arthrodesis: A 5-Year Comparison

Oliver Gagné, MD; Monther Abuhantash; Andrea N. Veljkovic, MD, MPH, FRCSC; Kevin J.
Wing, MD, FRCSC; Murray J. Penner, MD, FRCSC; Alastair S. Younger, MB ChB, ChM,
FRCSC

Category: Ankle; Ankle Arthritis; Arthroscopy
Keywords: Open Ankle Arthrodesis; Ankle Fusion; Arthroscopic Ankle
Arthrodesis
Introduction/Purpose: End-stage ankle arthritis has long been managed
surgically with open ankle arthrodesis (OAA). More recently, arthroscopic ankle arthrodesis
(AAA) is thought to be associated with improved patient-reported outcome measures (PROMs)
and fewer complications. The objective of this study was to systematically compare these two
approaches in long-term PROMs, major complication rates and survivorship of the ankle
fusion.
Methods: In this retrospective longitudinal cohort study, all patients with an
ankle fusion done at our institution and a minimum two-year follow-up were screened for
inclusion. Patients demographics at baseline were collected including: age, gender, BMI,
smoking status, diabetes status as well as preoperative ankle arthritis COFAS (Canadian
Orthopedic Foot and Ankle Society) type. The following PROMs were completed preoperatively,
at 6-months and annually thereafter to five years: AAS, AOS, SF-36, expectation,
satisfaction and swelling scores. PROMs were compared at all timepoints using a
mixed-effects regression model adjusted for baseline patients’ demographics, COFAS type and
PROMs. Major postoperative complications and survival analysis/rate of revision of the ankle
fusions were also compared.
Results: Of 874 patients screened for inclusion, 351 ankle fusions done
between 2003 and 2019 were eligible for the study, 223 AAA and 128 OAA. The two groups were
similar at baseline with respect to demographics, but COFAS type was higher in the OAA group
and AAS and AOS scores were better in the AAA group. At one-year post-operatively, there was
a higher mean AAS score in the AAA group, but there were no other differences in outcomes at
any other timepoint. Survivorship of the ankle fusion in the arthroscopic group was lower
(ie higher rate of revision) due to a higher rate of amputation or fusion. Deep infection
and wound complications were more common with OAA and accounted for most ankle fusion
revisions in this group.
Conclusion: There were no consistent differences in PROMs of patients who
underwent AAA versus OAA patients up to five- years postoperatively. Ankle fusions done
arthroscopically had a lower survivorship rate compared to those done with the open approach
due to a higher rate of major complications. Previously proposed advantages of AAA over OAA
may therefore need to re-assessed and weighed against the technical challenges and
associated complications of the arthroscopic technique.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00025

## Minimum 5-Year Outcomes of the Lateral Trabecular Metal Ankle Arthroplasty

Oliver Gagné, MD; Jaeyoung Kim, MD; Kristin C. Caolo, BA; Scott J. Ellis, MD;
Constantine A. Demetracopoulos, MD; Jonathan T. Deland, MD

Category: Ankle; Ankle Arthritis
Keywords: Ankle Arthritis; Ankle Arthroplasty; End-Stage Ankle Arthritis
Introduction/Purpose: The treatment of ankle arthritis has changed
significantly with the recent advances in total ankle arthroplasty (TAR). Many different
designs of TAR have been used around the world as the biomechanical technology advances and
our understanding increases. Most implant system are anterior-based and have a flat cut on
the tibial prosthesis. Only one implant, the Trabecular Metal (Zimmer-Biomet, Warsaw, IN),
utilizes a lateral approach with a fibular osteotomy to gain access to the tibiotalar joint
and a sagittally curved tibial component. Recent publications have described a higher
reoperation rate with this implant system. This study aimed to report the 5-year clinical
and radiographic outcome as well as the survivorship of the implant.
Methods: Over a three-year period, two fellowship-trained foot and ankle
surgeons used this implant system for patients indicated for TAR. A total of 38 patients
were reviewed with an average age of 63.4+-8.6 years-old, BMI of 28.9+-4.6 and the majority
(78%) had post-traumatic arthritis. Reoperations and revisions were collected prospectively
as part of the local database. Patients participated in surveys preoperatively and at every
annual follow-up which included the Foot and Ankle Outcome Score (FAOS). Patients were also
evaluated with weightbearing radiographs preoperatively, at the 3 months postoperative and
at the 5 year-mark. Those were analyzed by looking at the implant position with validated
angles and comparing those over time. Further statistical analysis used paired t-test and
Mann-Whitney U test.
Results: The survivorship for our cohort was 92% at the 5-year mark. Three
patients had the implant extracted at 12 and 15 months postoperative. Two of those patients
had revisions to stemmed TARs and one had a below-knee amputation. Reoperations otherwise
included 4 fibular hardware removal and 5 medial gutter debridement. As seen in Table 1, the
FAOS improved significantly for all domains at 5-year compared to preoperative status. The
Pain and Symptoms domains improved above than the MCID. The implant positioning both tibial
coronal and sagittal as well as talar sagittal did not significantly change between 3 months
and 5 years postoperative.
Conclusion: This study describes the use of a laterally based Trabecular Metal
TAR with great survivorship (92%) and clinically significant improvement in patient-reported
outcomes. The rate of reoperation is higher due to prominent lateral hardware or poorly
visualized medial gutters and revisions had to be performed through an anterior approach.
Few other studies report 5-year outcomes from this prosthesis. There is a growing need to
present more data from different centers to guide its ongoing clinical use.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00026

## Total Ankle Replacement vs Ankle Arthrodesis (TARVA): A Randomised, Multi-Centre Trial
in Patients Over 50 with End Stage Ankle OA, Comparing Clinical and
Cost-Effectiveness

Andrew J. Goldberg, OBE MD FRCS (Tr&Orth); Andrew P. Molloy, MB ChB,
FRCS(Tr&Orth); Mark Bowen Davies, MD, FRACS(Orth); Steve Hepple, MB ChB; Rhys H.
Thomas, MBBS, FRCS(Tr&Orth); Malik S. Siddique, FRCS (T&O); David T. Loveday,
MBBS, FRCS(Tr&Orth); Sunil Dhar, MBBS,MS,MCh; Andrew J. Bing; Michael Karski; Stephen
P. Bendall, MBBS, FRCS(Orth); Mark Rogers; Paul Halliwell; Stephen Milner; Viren Mishra;
Michael Butler; Kashfia Chowdhury; Ekaterina Bordea; Caroline J. Dore; Dominic Hague;
David N. Townshend, MBBS, FRCS(Tr&Orth); Paul Cooke

Category: Ankle Arthritis; Ankle; Other
Keywords: Clinical Outcomes; Ankle Replacement; Ankle Arthrodesis
Introduction/Purpose: Both ankle replacement and ankle arthrodesis are offered
as treatments to patients with end stage ankle osteoarthritis. Systematic reviews have
confirmed that both procedures are effective but there has never been a robust randomised
multicentre level I study comparing the two treatments. Our objective was to investigate and
compare the clinical and cost effectiveness and complication rates of ankle replacement
against ankle arthrodesis in the treatment of end-stage ankle osteoarthritis in patients
aged 50-85 years.
Methods: 17 NHS centres and 35 surgeons across the United Kingdom
participated. Formal Ethics committee approvals were obtained. A Trial Management Group was
overseen by a Trial Steering Committee, and an Independent Data Monitoring Committee.
Randomisation was carried out using a secure on-line service and was stratified by surgeon
and the presence or absence of adjacent joint OA (based on an independently reviewed
preoperative MRI scan). Participants were randomised 1:1 to either TAR or ankle fusion. The
primary outcome was the change in the Manchester Oxford Foot & Ankle Questionnaire
(MOXFQ) walking/standing domain scores between pre-operation and 52 weeks post-operation.
Secondary outcomes measures included FAAM; FAAM (ADL); and Sport subscale scores. Quality of
life was measured using the EQ-5D-5L. Total range of motion was measured using a validated
method. Radiological parameters and adverse events were captured. Health economic analysis
used mean incremental cost per quality-adjusted life years (QALY) gained.
Results: 1600 patients were screened for eligibility. 330 participants were
consented and 303 were randomised; 282 underwent surgery and attended follow-up visits. Mean
age was 68 years (71% male). The aetiology of OA was post-trauma in 60%, with 6% patients
having inflammatory OA. 42% had MRI evidence of OA in the adjacent joints. The groups were
well balanced at baseline on all other parameters including deformity, range of motion and
baseline clinical and quality of life scores.42% had MRI evidence of OA in the adjacent
joints. 54% TARs used were fixed bearing; 46% were mobile bearing. 61% of fusions were
performed arthroscopically. We present all outcomes including adverse effects (death;
thromboembolic events; reoperation and revision); radiological findings; and range of
motion. We also present subgroup analyses looking at the performance of fixed versus mobile
bearing implants; differences by age; and by the presence or absence of adjacent joint
OA.
Conclusion: This is the first publicly funded, multicentre, prospective,
randomised clinical trial comparing the clinical and cost effectiveness of ankle replacement
against ankle fusion. It is also the first study in surgery to have detailed prospectively
captured health economic data to be able to feed into the reimbursement discussions on these
life transforming treatments. Due to contractual requirements of the funders the formal
results cannot be released until the final report has been submitted for peer review which
will not happen until the end of April 2021. The paper is submitted on behalf of the TARVA
Study Group.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00027

## Minimally Invasive Surgery for Severe Hallux Valgus with 2 Year Minimum Follow Up in
106 Feet

David Gordon, MD, MB BCh, FRCS(Orth), MRCSEd; Thomas L. Lewis, MB ChB; Robbie
Ray

Category: Bunion; Lesser Toes; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Hallux Valgus; Patient Reported Outcome Measures (PROMS); Minimally
Invasive
Introduction/Purpose: There is widespread variation in the optimal procedure
for correction of severe hallux valgus deformity. Severe hallux valgus (defined as hallux
valgus angle (HVA) (>=40°) and/or 1-2 intermetatarsal angle (IMA) (>=20°)) is
associated with increased complication rates including recurrence, delayed or non-union and
metatarsal shortening with transfer metatarsalgia. There is limited evidence investigating
the clinical or radiological outcomes following treatment of severe hallux valgus deformity
with third-generation minimally invasive chevron and akin osteotomies (MICA). Objective: The
primary aim was to investigate clinical patient reported outcome measures (PROMs) two years
following surgery and the radiographic deformity correction for patients undergoing
third-generation MICA for severe hallux valgus deformity.
Methods: Prospective observational single surgeon series of consecutive
patients who underwent primary third-generation MICA with screw fixation for severe hallux
valgus. The primary outcome was a validated patient reported outcome measure, the
Manchester-Oxford Foot Questionnaire (MOXFQ), assessed minimum 2 years following MICA.
Secondary outcomes were radiographic deformity correction, complication rates and other
quality of life PROMs (EQ-5D and Visual Analogue Pain Scale).
Results: Between September 2014 and May 2018, 106 consecutive feet (n=78
patients; 73 female, 5 male) met the inclusion criteria. Prospectively collected
pre-operative and 2 year PROM MOXFQ data was available for 86 feet (81.1%). At two years
following surgery, the MOXFQ score significantly improved for the Pain, Walking and Standing
and Social Interaction domains from 39.2 to 7.5, 38.2 to 5.9 and 48.6 to 5.5, respectively
(p<0.001). Pre- and post-operative radiographic data was available for all 106 feet. Mean
IMA following surgery improved from 18.2° to 6.3° (p<0.001) whilst mean HVA improved from
45.3° to 10.9° (p<0.001).
Conclusion: This study has demonstrated third-generation MICA for the
treatment of severe hallux valgus deformity can achieve significant improvements in clinical
PROMs and radiographic deformity correction.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00028

## 2021 IFFAS Award for Excellence Winner: Weightbearing Radiographs Reliably Predict
Normal Ankle Congruence in Weber B/SER2 and 4a Fractures: A Prospective Case-Control
Study

Martin G. Gregersen, PT, MSc; Marius Molund, MD, PhD

Category: Ankle; Trauma
Keywords: Ankle Fracture Evaluation; Ankle Instability; Weber B Ankle
Fractures
Introduction/Purpose: In Weber B/SER2-4 ankle fractures assessment with
weightbearing radiographs to ascertain stability of the ankle mortise has been advised.
However, no previous studies report whether this method leads to preservation of normal
ankle congruence in ankles deemed stable. The purpose is to evaluate equivalence of ankle
congruence of injured ankles after fracture union versus the uninjured side for stable Weber
B/SER2 and partially unstable Weber B/SER4a fracture types.
Methods: We conducted a prospective, case-control study of 149 patients with
an isolated Weber B fracture demonstrating stability on weightbearing radiographs. All
participants were treated nonoperatively with a functional orthosis and full weightbearing
allowed. Results from gravity stress radiographs classified ankles as SER2 or SER4a fracture
types. We defined an equivalence margin in medial clear space difference of 1.0 millimeters.
We also evaluated the reliability of obtaining measurements from weightbearing
radiographs.
Results: No difference in medial clear space between the injured and uninjured
ankle could be observed after fracture union for stable Weber B/SER2 (mean difference 0.1
millimeters, 95% confidence interval -0.3 to 0.0, P =.056) or partially unstable Weber
B/SER4a fracture types (mean difference 0.0 millimeter, (95% confidence interval -0.1 to
0.1, P =.797). No between group differences could be observed (mean difference 0.0
millimeter, 95% confidence interval -0.2 to 0.2, P=.842). These findings were consistent
with equivalence as the higher limit of the confidence intervals for the differences were
less than the predefined equivalence margin. Estimated 95% confidence intervals for the
intraclass correlation coefficients indicated excellent inter- and intraobserver
reliability.
Conclusion: We demonstrated that weightbearing radiographs successfully
predict preservation of normal ankle congruence when the weightbearing radiograph is deemed
stable. Ankle congruence was equivalent comparing stable Weber B/SER2 and partially unstable
Weber B/SER4a fracture types. Excellent reproducibility of the method of obtaining medial
clear space measurements was demonstrated.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00029

## Return to Physical Activity after Isolated Subtalar Arthrodesis

Patrick D. Grimm, MD; Todd A. Irwin, MD; Carroll P. Jones, III, MD

Category: Hindfoot
Keywords: Subtalar Fusions; Clinical Outcomes; Patient Reported Outcome
Measures (PROMS)
Introduction/Purpose: Subtalar arthrodesis has been shown to provide reliable
pain relief and deformity correction for a variety diagnoses including include primary
arthritis, posttraumatic arthritis, inflammatory arthritis, talocalcaneal coalitions, and
hindfoot deformity. However, the level of functional activity achievable following this
procedure is unknown. The aim of this study was to assess physical activity and functional
outcomes in patients following isolated, primary subtalar arthrodesis.
Methods: A retrospective review of isolated primary subtalar fusions was
performed. Inclusion criteria were: age between 18 and 65, isolated primary subtalar fusion
that achieved bony union, minimum 4 month radiographic follow up (XR or CT), and 1 year
minimum questionnaire follow up. Patients who had neuromuscular diagnoses, adjacent joint
arthritis, inflammatory arthritis, contralateral ankle or hindfoot pathology, significant
medical comorbidities, or were treated under worker’s compensation were excluded. The
primary outcome measure was the Foot and Ankle Ability Measure. Additional patient reported
outcomes included a novel functional assessment questionnaire, Coughlin Satisfaction Score,
and a contralateral hindfoot comparison score.
Results: Patient reported outcome measures were collected from 15 (10 F, 5 M)
patients at a median of 78 (49, 106) months following surgery. The median FAAM ADL subscore
was 83.3 (71.4, 98.8) and the sports subscore was 59.4 (40.6, 87.5). The majority (58%) of
patients maintained the same level of physical activity before and after surgery. Fewer
patients were able to golf, rollerskate/ice skate, run, weightlift, or take aerobics/yoga
after surgery. More patients were able to dance, hike, play tennis/pickleball, or walk for
exercise. More patients were able to wear shoes without limitations and fewer patients
required a brace or orthotics. Good and excellent outcomes were reported by 73% of the
cohort. The median contralateral comparison score for the cohort was 90 (50, 100).
Conclusion: Isolated subtalar arthrodesis can provide reliable pain relief and
allow reasonable functional outcomes as demonstrated in this patient cohort. In general,
most patients maintain their level of function and have fewer limitations with shoe wear.
Select, higher impact activities may be more challenging for patients with a fused subtalar
joint. These findings may be used to help surgeons appropriately counsel patients about
expected postoperative physical activity following an isolated subtalar arthrodesis.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00030

## Automated Volume Measurement of the Syndesmosis Using 3D Weightbearing CT
Daniel Guss, MD, MBA; Olivia Lucchese, MSc; Soheil Ashkani-Esfahani, MD; Rohan Bhimani, MD,
MBA; Gregory R. Waryasz, MD; Gino Kerkhoffs, MD; Bart Lubberts, MD, PhD; Christopher W.
DiGiovanni, MD
Category: Ankle; Trauma; Other
Keywords: Tibiofibular Syndesmosis; Syndesmotic Diastasis; Weight Bearing
CT
Introduction/Purpose: Recent studies have shown that weight-bearing computed
tomography (WBCT) that allows 3D volume measurement of the distal syndesmosis while under
physiologic load brings about a higher accuracy in detection of syndesmotic instability,
especially if subtle. Since the volume measurement method is complex, time-consuming, and
has a noticeable interobserver bias, most clinicians might not still be interested in
utilizing it in practice. Automatization of this measurement using computer-assisted methods
will not only reduce the interobserver bias but also will be faster and more applicable in
practice. This study aimed to develop an automated 3D syndesmosis volume measurement tool
using image processing methods and compare the speed and the interobserver bias with human
interpreters.
Methods: We included 30 patients with subtle syndesmotic instability who had
undergone WBCT and were diagnosed intraoperatively. Thirty individuals with otherwise
healthy ankles who had WBCT images were allocated to the control group. The volume
measurement up to 5cm proximal to the tibial plafond was considered as the most sensitive
and specific method to assess syndesmotic stability based on the literature. An algorithm
was developed using MATLAB software that could recognize and calculate the syndesmotic
volume using WBCT images. The volume measurement method was used by two orthopaedic surgeons
for the same population. The time spent by each surgeon and the algorithm was measured.
Finally, the values were compared using the t-test; the interobserver correlation
coefficient (ICC) was also calculated. P<0.05 was considered statistically
significant.
Results: The percentage of changes in 3D volume showed a significant
difference at 5cm (25.4%; p<0.001), proximal to the tibial plafond. Based on our clinical
study, the volume measurement up to 5cm showed a sensitivity of 95.8%, 95%CI:87.8-100, and
specificity of 83.3%, 95% CI:68.4-98.2 for detection of syndesmotic instability. The ICC
between the clinicians was 75% while using the automated measurement algorithm showed an ICC
of 97%. The mean time spent by the clinicians was 268.4+-56.4 and by the algorithm was
2.9+-0.3 seconds (p<0.001, ).
Conclusion: Given the fact that 3D volume measurement of the syndesmosis using
WBCT is still a complex technique for most clinicians while it is one of the most accurate
diagnostic methods based on recent literature, developing a faster and more accurate method
for 3D volume measurement of the syndesmosis leads to a more reliable and easier to use the
technique to be used in practice.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00031

## Effect of Blood Flow Restriction Therapy Following Achilles Rupture and Repair: A
Randomized Controlled Trial

Oliver B. Hansen; Andrea Papson; Stephanie K. Eble; Mark C. Drakos, MD

Category: Sports; Other
Keywords: Achilles Tendon Rupture; Return to Play; Functional
Rehabilitation
Introduction/Purpose: Blood flow restriction (BFR) therapy involves the use of
a tourniquet to partially occlude blood flow to the affected limb, creating an anaerobic
environment during exercise. This is thought to stimulate growth and recovery by increasing
the body’s anabolic response. BFR therapy can be initiated shortly after surgery since it
allows for significant muscle activation with limited load bearing. To date, no existing
study has evaluated the effect of using BFR therapy for recovery following Achilles tendon
rupture and repair, after which patients often experience significant losses in calf
strength and girth. This is a randomized controlled trial designed to study whether BFR can
minimize loss of calf strength and muscle volume after Achilles rupture compared to a
conventional physical therapy protocol.
Methods: Patients presenting with an acute Achilles tendon rupture were
randomized into the BFR or control group. Patients in the control group performed at-home
exercises and began in-person physical therapy at 6 weeks postoperatively, as is the
standard of care in our practice. The exercises were standardized across groups with BFR the
isolated variable. The primary outcome studied was ankle plantarflexion strength as measured
during isokinetic strength testing 3 months after surgical repair. We also tested knee
strength during flexion and extension. All strength tests were performed at two rotational
speeds. Calf atrophy was assessed by measuring the circumference of both calves 15 cm below
the joint line at the time of operation and at 2 weeks, 6 weeks, 3 months, and 6 months
postoperatively. Finally, Patient-Reported Outcome Measurement Information System (PROMIS)
scores were collected pre- and postoperatively.
Results: The study enrolled 43 patients, 24 of whom were assigned to the BFR
group. 30 patients completed strength testing at 3 months and 26 at 6 months. Calf
measurements through 3 months were completed for 39 patients and 6 month measurements were
completed for 32 patients. Results for ankle plantarflexion strength at 3 months are
displayed in Table 1, showing that patients in the BFR group demonstrated greater absolute
strength in the operative calf compared to the control group, but no significant advantage
in strength relative to the uninvolved calf. We failed to detect a significant difference in
strength between groups for ankle dorsiflexion, knee extension, or knee flexion. Our model
of calf circumference over time showed that BFR had a positive but insignificant correlation
to calf circumference (p = 0.59). The only factors that demonstrated a significant
(p<0.05) positive relationship to calf circumference were male sex and BMI.
Conclusion: We have observed significant advantages in the BFR group when
analyzing absolute calf strength metrics when compared to a randomized control group. This
indicates that, when used during rehabilitation following Achilles rupture, BFR therapy may
increase the strength of the operative leg and may facilitate recovery and outcome.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00032

## Is There a Difference in PROMIS Outcomes Between Patients Who Received K-Wire or
Intramedullary Implant PIP Joint Arthrodesis for Hammertoe Deformity?

Amanda M. Holleran, MD; Daniel Homeier; Judith F. Baumhauer, MD, MS, MPH; Adolph S.
Flemister, MD; Irvin Oh, MD; Benedict F. DiGiovanni, MD; Gabriel A. Ramirez; Caroline
Thirukumaran, MBBS, PhD, MHA; John P. Ketz, MD

Category: Lesser Toes
Keywords: Forefoot; Lesser MTP Joint Deformities; Outcomes Measures
Introduction/Purpose: Hammertoe corrective procedures are common foot and
ankle procedures. Traditionally Kirshner wire (K-wire) fixation has been the gold standard
in terms of fixation. Due issues such as pin loosening, failure, tract infection, fibrous
pseudoarthrosis, and recurrent deformity with K-wire fixation, newer intramedullary implants
have become widely used in the foot and ankle community. These implants have increased cost
compared to K-wire fixation. The primary purpose of this study is to evaluate PROMIS
T-scores for physical function (PF), pain interference (PI), and depression domains in
patients who have undergone PIP arthrodesis by either K-wire or intramedullary fixation. The
secondary goal is to determine if there are any differences in these two fixation groups in
regard to complication or recurrence rates.
Methods: From January 2010 to November 2019, prospective Patient Reported
Outcome Measure Information System (PROMIS) score data was retrospectively reviewed for
patients who had undergone a hammertoe deformity correction at a multi- surgeon tertiary
foot and ankle clinic. Inclusion criteria was patient’s older than 18 years, failed
conservative management, undergone correction of lesser toe deformity with either K wire
fixation or intramedullary fixation. Exclusion criteria was inadequate PROMIS data, previous
fracture in same toe, revision surgery, both K wire and intramedullary fixation in the same
toe. Preoperative scores were evaluated compared to postoperative scores at multiple time
points. Chart review was also performed for patient demographics, complications, and
revision surgery. PROMIS physical function (PF), depression, and pain interference (PI)
scores were evaluated. Patients with incomplete data sets were excluded from the study.
Complications and number of reoperations were noted for each group.
Results: 252 patients met inclusion criteria, 111 and 138 patient in the
intramedullary (IM) and K-wire groups (KW) respectively. Univarate analysis demonstrated
significant improvement in PROMIS PF and PI in IM group compared to KW group. Multivariate
analysis demonstrated the following: KW group demonstrates a 2.9 point decrease in PROMIS PF
post-operative scores relative to the IM group (95% CI -4.75 to -0.99; p = 0.003). The IM
implants had significantly higher PF scores than the K-wire group at final follow up
(p<0.05). BMI, smoking, and Medicare/Medicaid insurance demonstrated worse PF scores
(p<0.05). PROMIS PI did not demonstrate a difference between groups (95% CI -0.377 to
3.724; p = 0.110). The KW group did not demonstrate increase recurrance rate (OR 0.348 95%
CI 0.118-1.027; p = 0.056), but did trend towards a higher complication rate compared to the
IM group (OR 2.049, 95% CI 0.92 to -4.54; p = 0.078).
Conclusion: There is evidence that use of intramedullary implants for
operative correction of hammertoe deformity is superior to K-wire fixation in regard to
post-operative patient reported measures, specifically the PROMIS domains of physical
function. Intramedullary implant use does not increase complication or recurrence rates.
Additionally, advanced age, increased BMI, positive smoking status, and Medicare or Medicaid
payor status negatively affect patient reported outcomes, which can be used to council
patients appropriately. The limitations are that cost of intramedullary implants, are more
expensive when compared to conventional K-wires.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00033

## Early Outcomes, Revisions, and Patient Satisfaction Following Synthetic Cartilage
Implant for Hallux Rigidus

Kenneth J. Hunt, MD; Mark W. Bowers, MD; Mary C. Hamati, MD; Jonathan Bartolomei, MS;
Daniel K. Moon, MD, MS, MBA; Joshua A. Metzl, MD

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot; Other
Keywords: Hallux Rigidus; 1st MTP Joint; Patient Reported Outcome Measures
(PROMS)
Introduction/Purpose: Hallux rigidus is a common condition estimated to affect
1 in 40 adults older than 60 years old. Patients experience functional limitations secondary
to progressive pain and stiffness of the 1st metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joint. Historically,
1st MTP arthrodesis has been considered the gold-standard treatment for end-stage hallux
rigidus. In 2016, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved the use of a synthetic
cartilage implant (SCI) for the treatment of hallux rigidus grades 2-4 with an aim to
improve pain and preserve range of motion at the 1st MTP joint. Studies evaluating patient
satisfaction and need for reoperation have varied considerably (4-20%). We aim to evaluate
outcomes, complication rate, revision rate, and overall satisfaction for patients undergoing
primary SCI for hallux rigidus.
Methods: In a single-institution retrospective study, we evaluated patients
undergoing primary SCI for hallux rigidus between August 2016 to May 2020 by three
fellowship-trained foot and ankle surgeons. Preoperatively, patient demographics, age at the
time of surgery, laterality, body mass index (BMI), hallux rigidus grade, hallux valgus
angle, and first-second intermetatarsal angle were collected. Operative reports were
reviewed for concomitant procedures and implant size. Postoperatively, we recorded all
additional treatments for continued pain or stiffness and need for revision surgery or
conversion to arthrodesis. Patients were surveyed via email or telephone by an author not
previously involved in their care administering patient reported outcomes (PROs): PROMIS
physical function (PF), and pain interference (PI) surveys, foot and ankle SANE score, and a
satisfaction survey.
Results: A total of 59 feet in 56 patients underwent a primary SCI procedure
for hallux rigidus. Patients were classified as grade 2 (32%), 3 (59%), or 4 (2%). Nineteen
(34%) patients underwent additional procedures, and 8 (14%) had a history of prior surgery
to the MTP joint. Forty-five patients (80%) completed surveys at an average of 19.5-month
follow-up. The majority (58%) considered surgery a success and 42% reported being
unsatisfied or very unsatisfied. Mean (+-SD) post-operative foot and ankle SANE, PROMIS PF
and PI scores were 57 (+-27), 48 (+-7) and 54 (+-9), respectively. The overall revision rate
was 11% (6/56) with 3 patients undergoing conversion to arthrodesis. The majority of
patients (61%) stated they would undergo the procedure again.
Conclusion: Consistent with existing literature, we found that the majority of
patients undergoing the procedure were satisfied and would undergo the procedure again.
Further, post-operative PRO scores were favorable, even when factoring in patients who were
less satisfied. While our revision rate (11%) is consistent with early studies of the
implant, 42% reported being unsatisfied or very unsatisfied with their procedure. These
findings emphasize the importance of preoperative patient counseling regarding post-
operative limitations, risks, satisfaction, and revisions rates. Further investigation into
factors that may predict successful outcomes is needed to inform surgical decision-making
and appropriate patient selection for this procedure.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00034

## Factors Influencing the Nonunion Rate Following First Metatarsophalangeal Joint
Arthrodesis

Amir R. Kachooei, MD; Steven M. Raikin, MD; Joseph N. Daniel, DO

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: 1st MTP Joint; Arthrodesis; Hallux Rigidus
Introduction/Purpose: The choice of fixation, biomechanical stability, and
hardware density might influence the union after the first metatarsophalangeal (MTP)
arthrodesis. This study aimed to assess the influencing factors on the union rate and
fixation failure after MTP-1 arthrodesis.
Methods: In this retrospective cohort study, we included 359 patients with 378
feet from the practice of two foot and ankle surgeons. The surgical technique was identical.
The providers randomized patients to receive either the locking plate or cross screws, which
comprised 187 (50%) plate fixation and 191 (50%) cross screw fixation. Radiographic union
was assessed at three months and the final follow-up and was further categorized as
symptomatic versus asymptomatic nonunion.
Results: Accounting for potential interaction between variables using
multivariable logistic analysis, plate fixation (P=0.018), and diabetes (P=0.044) were
significantly associated with a higher nonunion rate. At three month follow-up, 15 (8.3%)
patients in the locking plate group and 5 (2.5%) patients in the cross screws group showed
nonunion. Of 15 nonunion with plate fixation, 6 (40%) underwent a second surgery because of
device failure, while none of the screw fixations required a second surgery (P<0.001). In
comparison to asymptomatic nonunion, remaining symptomatic at three months follow-up was a
significant risk factor for developing a nonunion with possible device failure at the final
follow-up requiring intervention.
Conclusion: Cross screw fixation is significantly associated with a lower
nonunion, device failure, and secondary surgery rate than plate fixation, which might be
related to contact surfaces and biomechanical stability. Besides, the cost saving is more
with the cross screws than plate and screws. Diabetic patients should be counseled about the
higher nonunion rate.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00035

## Total Ankle Arthroplasty Outcome in Patients with Inflammatory vs Non-Inflammatory
Arthritis: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis

Amir R. Kachooei, MD; Alireza Mousavian, MD; Lew C. Schon, MD; Joseph N. Daniel, DO;
David I. Pedowitz, MD, MS

Category: Ankle; Ankle Arthritis
Keywords: Ankle Arthroplasty; Ankle Replacement; Ankle Pain
Introduction/Purpose: The decision regarding total ankle replacement is
challenging in inflammatory arthritis patients regarding more inferior bone quality, large
bone cysts, and increased risk for infections. This systematic review aimed to compare the
short and long-term results of total ankle replacement, including the revision rate and the
patient-reported outcomes between inflammatory rheumatoid arthritis (RA) versus
non-inflammatory ankle osteoarthritis (OA).
Methods: All published clinical studies on total ankle arthroplasty were
searched in the databases. We extracted the data, specifically the American Orthopaedic Foot
& Ankle Society (AOFAS) improvement, complication rate, and the reoperation rate. The
results were also analyzed based on the prosthesis type.
Results: In total, 34 trials were included in our study. Out of 5,078
patients, the underlying condition was rheumatoid arthritis in 1,327 patients and was
non-inflammatory osteoarthritis in 2,849 patients. There was statistically significant
higher AOFAS improvement in the patients with RA vs. OA with a mean follow-up of 63 months
(P=0.009). The rates of TAA removal or revision were estimated at 16% (95% CI, 10%-23%) in
the OA and 13% (95% CI, 9%-18%) in the RA group. Overlapping confidence intervals showed no
significant difference in the rate of failure between RA and OA. The survival rate was 66%
in the OA group and 88% in the RA group during a 63-month follow-up.
Conclusion: Total ankle replacement is a safe procedure in RA patients with
fewer minor and major complications relative to other reasons for ankle osteoarthritis.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00036

## Subtalar Arthrodesis and Dynamic Medial Column Stabilization in the Surgical Treatment
of Rigid Progressive Collapsing Foot Deformity: A Comparative Analysis with Triple
Arthrodesis

Jaeyoung Kim, MD; Kim Ji-Beom, MD; Woo-Chun Lee, MD

Category: Hindfoot; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Subtalar Arthrodesis; FHL; Flatfoot
Introduction/Purpose: In the surgical treatment of rigid progressive
collapsing foot deformity (PCFD), triple arthrodesis has been commonly used for its ability
to correct multiplanar deformities. However, complications associated with postoperative
stiffness resulting from the added number of arthrodesis have led to an interest in more
joint sparing options. A recent study has shown that dynamic medial column stabilization
(DMCS), which transfers flexor hallucis longus tendon to the first metatarsal base,
successfully restores medial longitudinal arch without the need for arthrodesis. This study
aimed to evaluate the results of subtalar arthrodesis with dynamic medial column
stabilization (DMCS) in treating rigid PCFD compared to the triple arthrodesis.
Methods: Sixteen patients (18 feet) who underwent triple arthrodesis (TA
group) and 24 patients (24 feet) who underwent subtalar arthrodesis and DMCS (SA+DMCS group)
for surgical correction of rigid PCFD were reviewed. Five radiographic parameters were
measured preoperatively, 3 months, 6 months postoperatively, and at the last follow-up
(minimum 2 years) to compare the amount of correction and its maintenance. Clinical outcomes
were assessed using a visual analogue scale (VAS) and foot function index (FFI).
Complications such as non-union, development of adjacent joint arthritis were recorded.
Results: TA group demonstrated a greater amount of correction in the Meary
angle than the SA+DMCS group at 3 months postoperatively. However, the TA group showed a
significant decrease in the medial cuneiform height, navicular-1st metatarsal angle, and
Meary angle at 6 months compared to the initial reduction at 3 months. In contrast, the
SA+DMCS group maintained initial correction throughout the follow-up ( ). Clinical scores improved in all patients.
Degenerative arthritis in the NC and TMT joints newly developed in nine and one foot,
respectively, in the TA group. In contrast, there were no patients with newly developed
arthritis in the SA+DMCS group. Postoperative valgus talar tilt occurred with nine ankles in
the TA group, whereas only one ankle in the SA+DMCS group. One non-union of the subtalar
arthrodesis occurred in the SA+DMCS group.
Conclusion: SA+DMCS group demonstrated a comparable amount of correction as
the TA group and maintained initial correction throughout the follow-up period.
Additionally, the SA+DMCS group developed fewer complications than the TA group. The current
findings suggest that SA+DMCS may be a viable option in treating rigid PCFD deformity with
less concern for the complications related to the stiffness.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00037

## Does Distal Metatarsal Articular Angle Reflect A Real Joint Deformity in Hallux
Valgus?

Matthieu Lalevée; Nacime S. Mansur, MD; Eli Schmidt; Kevin N. Dibbern, PhD; Emilio
Wagner, MD; Pablo Wagner, MD; Caio A. Nery; Francois Lintz, MD MSc FEBOT; Cesar de Cesar
Netto, MD, PhD

Category: Bunion; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Forefoot; Hallux Valgus; Weight Bearing CT
Introduction/Purpose: The Distal Metatarsal Articular Angle (DMAA) has long
been described as a valgus increase of the distal articular surface of the first metatarsal
in Hallux Valgus (HV) deformity. Since then, several studies have reported a poor
reliability of this measurement and some authors currently claim that DMAA is misinterpreted
as just the rounded shape of the lateral part of the first metatarsal head reflecting
pronation of the first ray and could also be biased by the first metatarsal plantarflexion
angle. Our study aimed to compare the DMAA in HV and control populations after correcting,
with a dedicated software, pronation and plantarflexion of the first metatarsal. We
hypothesized that after correction, DMAA will be higher in the HV population, especially in
juvenile cases.
Methods: We performed a retrospective case-control study including 36 HV and
20 control feet. Patients under 15 or with surgery antecedent were excluded. DMAA1 was
measured as initially described on X-rays by the angle between the distal articular surface
and the longitudinal axis of the first metatarsal. DMAA2 was measured on Weight Bearing
Computed Tomography (WBCT) without any corrections. DMAA3 was measured after correction of
the first metatarsal plantarflexion in the sagittal plane. DMAA4 was measured after
correction of the pronation of the first ray relative to the ground in the coronal plane
using the alpha-angle. And DMAA5 after both corrections. Corrections in the coronal and
sagittal planes were performed along the axis of the first metatarsal. Normality was
assessed using Shapiro-Wilk tests. Comparisons were made using Student tests for normal
variables and Mann-Whitney for non-normals. Correlations between age and angles were
assessed by the Pearson correlation coefficient.
Results: HV and Control groups were comparable on BMI (p=0.69), Age (p=0.58)
and Gender (p=0.27). DMAA1 (25.9°+/-7.3 vs 7.6°+/-4.2; p<0.01), DMAA2 (19.1°+/-7.1 vs
3.3°+/-2.4; p<0.01), DMAA3 (16.1°+/-6.2 vs 2.9°+/-2.4; p<0.01), DMAA4 (14.4°+/-5.7 vs
2.6°+/-2.5; p<0.01) and DMAA5 (11.9°+/-4.9 vs 3.3°+/-2.9; p<0.01) were significantly
higher in the HV group than in the Control group. Significant decreases in angles were
present between DMAA1 and DMAA2 (Δ=-6.9; CI95[-8.6;-5.1]; p<0.01), DMAA2 and DMAA3 (Δ=-3;
CI95[-4.1;-1.9]; p<0.01), DMAA2 and DMAA4 (Δ=-4.7; CI95%[-6.3;-3.1]; p<0.01), DMAA2
and DMAA5 (Δ=-7.2 ;CI95%[-8.8;-5.6]; p<0.01) and between DMAA3 and DMAA4 (Δ=-1.7
;CI95%[-2.9;-0.5]; p<0.01) in the HV group. No significant correlation was found between
the 5 different DMAA values and the age in the HV group (respectively ρ=0.1,p=0.55 ;
ρ=0.31,p=0.07 ; ρ=0.19,p=0.28 ; ρ=0.1,p=0.56 ; ρ=0.04,p=0.83).
Conclusion: Although overestimated with the 2-dimensional DMAA assessment, the
valgus increase of the distal articular surface of the first metatarsal was present in the
HV deformity, even after correction of pronation and plantarflexion of the first ray. DMAA
overestimation was close to 14 degrees on X-rays and 7 degrees on WBCT without any
correction and pronation of the first metatarsal seemed to play a more important role on
this overestimation than plantarflexion. Age did not seem to influence this deformity.
Increase of valgus of the distal articular surface of the first metatarsal should be
considered in HV correction surgical planning.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00038

## Impact of Resilience on Long Term Outcomes of Open Brostrom-Gould Repair

Megan Lameka; Aseel G. Dib, BS; Nicholas A. Andrews; Timothy Torrez; Vyshnavi
Rallapalle; Tanvee Sinha; Ashish Shah, MD

Category: Ankle; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Broström; Chronic Ankle Instability; PROMIS
Introduction/Purpose: The Brostrom-Gould procedure has become known as the
gold standard operative procedure for lateral ankle ligament repair. However, little is
known about the factors effecting the intermediate outcomes of the Brostrom- Gould repair as
measured by new patient reported outcomes instruments and the impact of resilience on
post-operative outcomes. This is the first study investigate the impact of resilience on the
outcomes of lateral ligament repair.
Methods: A retrospective chart review was performed on 173 patients identified
using CPT code 27698 who underwent open modified Brostrom Gould lateral ligament repair from
Jan 2013 to June 2020. Patient demographics, comorbidities, athletic activities, post op
complications as well as co-pathologies commonly seen in CAI were collected. PROMIS Pain
Interference v1.1, Physical Function v1.2, and FAAM were collected. Brief Resilience Scale
was used to quantify resilience. A linear regression model was constructed to evaluate the
independent effect of resilience on each PROMIS and FAAM outcome instrument. Variables were
included in the regression model based on an a-priori significance threshold of p<.05 in
bivariate analysis.
Results: Resilience was found to have an independent effect on all PROMIS and
FAAM measures when controlling for the effect of confounding variables. Resilience’s effect
on outcome measures was as follows: PROMIS physical function (Unstandardized β 8.2, 95% CI
3.9 to 12.6), PROMIS Pain Interference (Unstandardized β -4.8, 95% CI -7.9 to -1.7), FAAM
Activity of Daily Living Subscale (Unstandardized β 16.6, 95% CI 8.7 to 24.6), and FAAM
Sports Subscale (Unstandardized β 28.4, 95% CI 15.9 to 40.9). Preoperative participation in
athletic activities also had a positive independent effect on multiple outcomes metrics
including: PROMIS Physical Function (Unstandardized β 9.4, 95% CI 2.8 to 16.0), PROMIS Pain
Interference (Unstandardized β -5.3, 95% CI - 10.0 to -.582), and FAAM Sports Subscale
scores Interference (Unstandardized β 34.4, 95% CI 15.4 to 53.4).
Conclusion: Resilience and patient participation in athletic activities are
independent predictors of improved postoperative functional outcomes as measured by PROMIS
and FAAM instruments at intermediate term follow-up. Resilient patients and athletes
reported significantly higher physical function and less pain burden postoperatively.
Furthermore, preoperative quantification of resilience could enable improved prognostication
of patients undergoing lateral ligament repair of the ankle.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00039

## 2021 J. Leonard Goldner Award Winner: Vancomycin Topically Applied at the Surgical Site
Does Not Impair Diabetic Fracture Healing and Dose-Dependently Inhibits Calcified Tissue
Formation by Osteoblast Precursors Cells

Alexis Hernandez, MS; Ohidur Rahman, BS; Yazan Kadkoy, MS; Katherine L. Lauritsen, BS;
Alexandra Sanchez, BA; Kevin Innella, DO; Anthony Lin, BA; J. Patrick O’Connor, PhD;
Joseph Benevenia, MD; David Paglia, PhD; Sheldon S. Lin, MD; Jessica A. Cottrell,
PhD

Category: Diabetes; Basic Sciences/Biologics; Trauma
Keywords: Diabetes; Fractures; Wound Complications
Introduction/Purpose: Prophylactic vancomycin treatment decreases the rates of
surgical site and deep infections by >70% for diabetic patients undergoing reconstructive
foot and ankle surgery. We aimed to identify whether local vancomycin at a clinically
relevant dose impaired fracture healing in diabetic rats. Our hypothesis was that local
vancomycin powder to the fracture site would not affect long term healing outcomes, but
continuous exposure of vancomycin would inhibit differentiation of osteoblast precursor
cells and their osteogenic activity in vitro. The 25 mg/kg vancomycin was a modest increase
to routine surgical site vancomycin application of 1-2 grams for a 70 kg. adult (21.42
mg/kg). Determining how vancomycin affects diabetic fracture healing is of clinical
interest, particularly considering its prophylactic use in foot and ankle patients.
Methods: Following induction of a femur fracture in male BB Wistar type 1
diabetic rats, a longitudinal incision was made in the lateral aspect of the femur. Powdered
vancomycin (25mg/kg) was administered to fracture site of treated (n=5), and Sham surgery
(n=6) control rats. Femurs harvested at 6 weeks after fracture, were X-ray scored, µCT
scanned and tested to failure in torsion. Bone marrow and periosteal cells isolated from
diabetic bones and MC3T3 cells were plated for MTT survival and osteogenic assays. After 4
days, beta glycerol phosphate, ascorbic acid and either 0, 50, 500, or 5,000 µg/mL
vancomycin were added to the media (n=3 per group). Cells were fixed at 7 and 14 days for
alkaline phosphatase (ALP) staining and at 28 days for Alizarin Red S staining. Parametric
data were analyzed using student t-tests. Non-parametric data were analyzed using a
Kruskal-Wallis ANOVA on RANKs and Tukey post-hoc tests.
Results: Radiographic scoring did not show differences between the control
(2.28+-1.57) and treatment (3.67+-0.75) groups (p=0.093). BV/TV was similar between the
control (61.2+-8.4 %) and treatment (56.5+-5.2 %) groups (p=0.081). Mechanical testing found
similar values in normalized torque to failure (69.56+-36.80 vs 50.05+-28.82 %N*mm,
p=0.356), and torsional rigidity (105.97+-103.62 vs 48.68+-32.95 %Nmm2, p=0.291),
for control and treatment groups, respectively. ALP staining was comparable between groups
at either 7 (p=0.809) or 14 days (p=0.343) in bone marrow or MC3T3 cells. Alizarin Red S
staining found dose- dependent decreases in mineralized nodule formation between the
untreated (10.16+-5.01 nodules per 3.8cm2), and 500µg/mL vancomycin (3.16+-2.26
nodules per 3.8cm2) bone marrow groups at 28 days (p=0.026). Periosteal and MC3T3
cell viability were only impaired at the 5000µg/mL vancomycin dose (p=0.001).
Conclusion: Our study argues that local application of vancomycin does not
affect diabetic fracture healing at clinically relevant doses. We studied a nearly 2-fold
higher vancomycin dose than the ‘standard’ dose of 14.3mg/kg and less than the 143.5mg/kg
dose that did not impair rat spine fusion. Although in vitro vancomycin did not affect cell
viability and osteogenic staining in periosteal and MC3T3 cells, mineralized nodule
formation was dose-dependently inhibited at day 28 in bone marrow cells. Our results bring
novel insight into the effects of vancomycin in diabetic fracture healing and the how
long-term dosing impacts cell viability and osteoblastogenesis.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00040

## Comparison of Suture-Button Fixation with Suture-Tape Augmentation and
Trans-Syndesmotic Screw Fixation for Syndemosis Injury: A Biomechanical Study

Hong Seop Lee; Hong S. Lee, MD; Ki Won Young; Young Koo Lee, MD, PhD; Woo Jong
Kim

Category: Ankle; Basic Sciences/Biologics
Keywords: Ankle; Biomechanics of the Foot and Ankle; Syndesmosis
Introduction/Purpose: The treatment of syndesmotic injuries with ankle
fractures is controversial. The purpose of this study was to compare the biomechanical
properties of suture-button fixation with suture-tape augmentation with those of screw
fixation.
Methods: Ten matched pairs of human cadaver specimens were subjected to
suture-button fixation with suture-tape augmentation or screw fixation. Each specimen
underwent initial intact physiologic loading, consisting of 10 cycles of axial loading with
peak of 750N, 10 cycles of external torsional loading with peak of 7.5Nm, and 10 cycles of
combined axial and external torsional loading with peak of 750N and 7.5Nm at 0.05 Hz.
Injuries of the anterior inferior tibiofibular ligament, tibiofibular interosseous membrane,
posterior tibiofibular ligament and medial malleolar fracture were applied to each specimen.
Postfixation cyclic loading consisted of 50 cycles of combinedaxial and external rotation
loading with peak torques of 750 N and 7.5 Nm at a rate of 0.05 Hz. After postfixation
loading, each specimen underwent failure loading by external rotation at 0.25
degrees/second. Failure torque and failure angle were measured.
Results: Mean failure torques were 15.99 +- 8.88 Nm in the suture-button
fixation with suture-tape augmentation and 17.10 +- 10.38 Nm in the screw group. There was
no significant difference in average failure torque between two groups (p-value =
0.669)Average failure angle in screw-fixation group (39.37 +- 10.19 deg) was significantly
lower than average failure angle suture- button fixation with suture-tape augmentation
(56.64 +- 9.64 deg) (p-value = 0.001).Average rotational stiffness in screw-fixation group
(0.53 +- 0.24 Nm/deg) was significantly higher than average rotational stiffness in
suture-button fixation with suture-tape augmentation group (0.35 +- 0.19 Nm/deg) (p-value =
0.033).
Conclusion: Suture-button fixation with suture-tape augmentation for ankle
syndesmotic injury provides similar torsional strength to that of screw fixation and has
lower stiffness than screw fixation. Therefore, Suture-button fixation with suture-tape
augmentation can be considered as an alternative treatment option for syndesmosis
injury.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00041

## Dynamic Syndesmotic Stabilisation and Reinforcement of the Antero-Inferior Tibiofibular
Ligament with Internal Brace: Early Results and Clinical Outcome

Christopher G. Lenz; David Shepherd, MBBS

Category: Ankle; Arthroscopy; Sports; Trauma
Keywords: Syndesmotic Stability; Ankle Arthroscopy; Suture-button
Construct
Introduction/Purpose: Syndesmotic injuries are associated with long recovery
times and high morbidity. Systematic reviews show a trend toward better outcomes of dynamic
suture buttons compared to screw fixation. Higher rates of malreduction have been reported
with screw fixation. The anteroinferior tibiofibular ligament (AITFL) confers the most
significant component of translational and rotatory stability. Techniques have developed
which reinforce the AITFL. This study aimed to assess results of syndesmotic stabilisation
with dynamic stabilisation and reinforcement of the AITFL, with an early mobilisation
program.
Methods: Retrospective case series of 30 patients (mean age 31 years).
Syndesmotic instability was confirmed with clinical examination, MRI and weightbearing-CT.
In all cases arthroscopic assessment confirmed the instability intraoperatively and anatomic
reduction with an AO clamp was achieved under direct vision. Dynamic syndesmotic
stabilisation with a single suture button was performed followed by the placement of an
Internal Brace over the AITFL. A standardized postoperative rehabilitation protocol was
established. Patients were asked to immediately weight bear in a CAM boot for 6 weeks,
commence sagittal Range of Motion (ROM) at 2 weeks, cycling at 4 weeks. At 6 weeks patients
continued with full ROM and strengthening, running and cutting at 8 weeks and return to
sports at 10 weeks. Foot and Ankle Ability Measure (FAAM) scores were collected
postoperatively and outcome of acute and chronic injuries were compared.
Results: The average follow-up was 13 months. The total FAAM score for ADL was
95+-4.9% (range, 83 - 100%) and for sport activities 87+-13.6% (range, 50 - 100%). The
rating of mean postoperative function for ADL was 94+-5.5% (range, 80 - 100%) and 90+-13%
(range, 35 - 100%) for sportv. The difference between acute and chronic injuries was
statistically higher (p<0.05) for daily activities and sport, but the rating of current
level of sport activites as well as for daily activites did not show a significant
difference (p=0.9296 and p=0.1615, respectively). Twenty-seven patients (90%) rated their
overall current level of function as normal or nearly normal.
Conclusion: This technique aims to directly stabilise the AITFL and the
interosseous components of the syndesmosis, and allow early mobilisation and return to sport
as early as 10 weeks. Early results show the procedure is safe, with comparable results to
the literature. Acute injuries showed better results of the FAAM score than chronic
injuries. Long term follow up will address long term outcomes, requirement for removal of
devices and how well the Internal brace is tolerated.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00042

## Hindfoot Varus Deformity: An Essential but Easily Neglected Pathological Change in
Müller-Weiss Disease
Shuyuan Li, MD, PhD; Mark S. Myerson, MD; Cesar de Cesar Netto, MD, PhD
Category: Hindfoot; Midfoot/Forefoot; Other
Keywords: Muller Weiss; Weight Bearing CT; Varus Deformity
Introduction/Purpose: The key pathology of Müller-Weiss Disease (MWD) is
fragmentation of the lateral pole of the navicular which leads to lateral rotation of the
talar head, inversion of the subtalar joint, and eventually collapse of the medial arch with
a paradoxical flatfoot deformity since the varus heel persists. Treatment for MWD should be
based on an understanding of this unusual hind and midfoot deformity in order to achieve
ideal outcomes. For years however, some authors have treated MWD as a flatfoot deformity
instead of correction of the varus heel. This study used weightbearing CT (WBCT) images to
demonstrate the structural and alignment changes of the hindfoot and medial arch in patients
with MWD compared to those of controls and patients with adult acquired flatfoot deformity
(AAFD).
Methods: Twelve patients with 17 feet from two medical centers with a clinical
diagnosis of MWD were retrospectively reviewed. Ten feet with flexible AAFD were chosen as
the flatfoot control group. Ten feet without deformity, arthritis, a history of trauma, or
prior surgical history in the foot and ankle were chosen as normal controls. The hindfoot
moment arm (HMA), foot and ankle offset (FAO), middle facet subluxation (MFS), talonavicular
joint coverage angle (TNCA), and the percentage of calcaneocuboid joint subluxation (CCS)
measured on WBCT were used to assess the alignment of the hindfoot and peritalar joints. The
arch height index was used to assess the height of the medial arch. Positive was used to
reflect lateral subluxations and negative was for the medial ones. ANOVA test were used to
compare data among the three groups with a normal distribution, while Wilcoxon test were
used for non normal distribution.
Results: According to WBCT analysis, patients with MWD showed totally
different hindfoot alignment and peritalar subluxation characteristics compared to the AAFD
and the normal control groups. In the order of MWD, AAFD and control, the mean HMA values
were -3.44 mm, 15.75 mm, and 3.19 mm, FAO values were -0.72%, 7.42%, and 2.63%. TNCA values
were -7.18, 22.11, and 11.37; MFS values were 14%, 45%, and 23%; CCS values were -0.19, 0
and -0.04. The arch height index values were 0.46, 0.45, and 0.58. There was statistically
significant difference among the three groups in all the above parameters except the middle
facet subluxation and fifth metatarsal medial cuneiform height ratios between the MWD group
and the normal controls.
Conclusion: This study confirmed that hindfoot varus is a typical feature of
MWD. And this is the first study to demonstrate that peritalar subluxation is an important
marker. With lateral rotation of the talar head, the subtalar joint is driven into varus,
with medial subluxation of both the middle facet and the calcaneocuboid joint, resulting in
peritalar subluxation opposite to that of AAFD. No significant difference between the medial
arch of the MWD group and the controls was present. In conclusion, structural changes of the
midfoot and hindfoot totally different from the characteristics of AAFD are present in
MWD.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00043

## 2021 Roger A. Mann Award Winner: Long-Term Revision Rates and Functional Outcomes of
Total Ankle Arthroplasty and Ankle Arthrodesis

Evan M. Loewy, MD; Kevin M. Goodson, MD; Kevin Huang, MS; Alexandrea Perkins, BS;
Arthur K. Walling, MD

Category: Ankle Arthritis; Ankle
Keywords: Ankle Arthritis; Ankle Arthroplasty; Ankle Arthrodesis
Introduction/Purpose: Recent studies have shown acceptable long-term survival
rates with TAA however there remains a general paucity of information directly comparing
ankle arthroplasty to arthrodesis over long-term follow-up. This study compares revision
rates and functional outcomes for a large cohort of patients undergoing ankle arthrodesis or
arthroplasty. All surgeries were performed by a single surgeon from 1999 to 2013. Ankle
arthrodesis was performed using a standardized 3-screw technique with anterior plate
supplementation. Arthroplasty was performed utilizing the Scandinavian Total Ankle
Replacement (STAR) prosthesis.
Methods: A retrospective chart review was performed for 335 consecutive cases
in 326 patients (198 ankles in the arthrodesis group and 137 in the arthroplasty group).
Patient demographics including age, sex, body mass index (BMI), and preoperative diagnoses
were collected. Foot Function Index (FFI) scores were obtained and recorded at final
outpatient follow-up. Primary outcomes included the rate of revision surgery and functional
outcome scores. Secondary outcomes included perioperative complications such as polyethylene
fracture and patients who went on to undergo postoperative subtalar fusion for symptomatic
adjacent joint arthritis.
Results: Ten (6%) ankles in the arthrodesis group and twenty-one (15%) in the
arthroplasty group required revision surgery at a mean of 8.9 +- 6.5 and 61.1 +- 52.9
months, respectively [P=.039]. One hundred four of the 335 cases were available to complete
functional outcome surveys at final follow-up at a mean of 11.2 +- 4.1 years from time of
surgery (minimum 6-year follow-up). Mean FFI scores were significantly better in the
arthroplasty group (40.3 +- 36.9) than in the arthrodesis group (61.5 +- 45.1) [P=.011].
Thirteen polyethylene components in 12 TAAs (8.7%) required replacement for fracture at an
average of 9.6 +- 4.2 years postoperatively. Seven (3.5%) cases in the arthrodesis group and
three (2.2%) in the arthroplasty group went on to undergo subtalar fusion at an average of
4.9 +- 3.9 years post-operation [P=.536].
Conclusion: Long-term functional outcome scores were better in TAA patients;
however, the revision rate for major complications was found to be greater over time. While
the ankle arthroplasty group did show a slightly lower frequency of adjacent joint arthritis
progression leading to subsequent subtalar fusion, this difference was not statistically
significant. To our knowledge, this is the largest and longest-term follow-up comparing the
STAR prosthesis to ankle arthrodesis published in the United States to date.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00044

## Radiographic Indirect Parameters for First Metatarsal Rotation do not Correspond to
Real Measurements in Hallux Valgus

Nacime S. Mansur, MD; Matthieu Lalevee, MD; Eli Schmidt; Tutku Tazegul; Kevin N.
Dibbern, PhD; Emilio Wagner, MD; Pablo Wagner, MD; John E. Femino, MD; Caio A. Nery; Cesar
de Cesar Netto, MD, PhD

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot; Bunion
Keywords: Hallux Valgus; Alignment Weight Bearing CT; Metatarsals
Introduction/Purpose: Subjective radiographic findings are commonly used in
Hallux Valgus (HV) to dictate deformity aspects and surgical treatment. Head roundness,
distal metatarsal metaphyseal angle (DMMA) and sesamoid positioning are being employed as
predictors of ray pronation, intrinsic deformities, and soft tissue imbalance despite the
lack of these observations’ reliability. Estimation of first metatarsal rotation based on
different head shapes has been proposed, including classifications for its severity. The
objective of this study was to demonstrate if first metatarsal rotation measured by the
alpha angle in weight-bearing computerized tomography (WBCT) images correlates with its head
shape. We hypothesized that alpha angle values would not reliably reflect an indirect
classification for rotation, and other variables would contribute to miscalculation.
Methods: In this IRB-approved, case-control retrospective study, we analyzed
26 hallux valgus feet (19 patients) and 20 control feet (16 patients) through conventional
radiographs (XR) and WBCT images. Two blinded fellowship-trained orthopedic foot and ankle
surgeon performed the measurements. Head format, roundness classifications (0, 1, 2 or 3),
head plantar surface diameter, hallux valgus angle (HVA), intermetatarsal angle (IMA), DDMA,
sesamoid station, sesamoid rotation, sesamoid arthritis, and metatarsal rotation (alpha
angle) were evaluated. Interclass Correlations Coefficients (ICC) were performed for
interrater reliability. Normative data were analyzed by ANOVA and comparison among groups
and methods by Student’s T-test. A multivariate regression analysis was executed to evaluate
which of the measurements influenced the rotation classification and a partition prediction
model constructed to find how the variables contributed to the grading system. Statistical
significancy was considered for p-values of less than 0.05.
Results: All ICCs were found above 0.80 within both XR and WBCT readings. HV
patients and controls were analogous regarding age and body mass index. Similarity was also
found in WBCT and XR for traditional HV angles, considering both groups. Mean values were
higher in HV patients than controls when evaluating alpha angle (11.51 [9.42-13.60] to 4.23
[1.84-6.62], 95%CI), head diameter (22.35 [21.52-23.18] to 21.01 [20.07-21.96]) and sesamoid
rotation angle (26.72 [24.09-29.34] to 4.56 [1.63-7.50]). HVA and IMA were poorly correlated
to alpha angles (values below 0.11). WBCT assessment downgraded the head roundness
classification in comparison to XR. Changes in this classification were explained chiefly by
the sesamoid station in the axial plane (R2: 0.37), where stations 4 to 7 were found to be
strong predictors of roundness classification 2 and 3. The alpha angle had a low influence
in head roundness classification (R2: 0.15).
Conclusion: Metatarsal rotation cannot be reliably predicted through head
roundness. Glenosesamoid arthritis and sesamoid subluxation alter the first metatarsal head
format and diameter, blurring roundness evaluation. Sesamoid stations from 4 to 7 were
strong predictors of higher roundness classifications. Measurements using different readers
and methods (XR and WBCT) were reliable. First ray rotation (alpha angle) values did not
influence head roundness classification strongly nor were correlated to HV severity.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00045

## Inter-Rater Reliability of Classifications for Fifth Metatarsal Base Fractures

Max Michalski, MD; John Y. Kwon, MD; Eitan M. Ingall; Christopher P. Chiodo, MD

Category: Trauma; Midfoot/Forefoot; Sports
Keywords: 5th Metatarsal Fractures; Metatarsals; Jones Fracture
Introduction/Purpose: Fractures of the fifth metatarsal base have been a
source of confusion since their original description by Jones in 1902. The term Jones’
fracture has been used indiscriminately leading to further confusion. Zone classifications
have been described but never evaluated for their reliability. The most recent
classification, metaphyseal versus metaphyseal-diaphyseal is unknown to most surgeons. The
purpose of this study was to evaluate the inter-rater reliability of American Orthopaedic
Foot & Ankle Society (AOFAS) members classifying fractures of the base of the fifth
metatarsal.
Methods: A survey was emailed to members of the AOFAS including radiographs of
18 fifth metatarsal base fractures. Demographic information was collected in addition to
evaluation of the 18 sets of radiographs using three classification systems. Surgeons were
asked if the fracture is a Jones’ fracture, zone of the fracture and if the fracture was
metaphyseal or metaphyseal- diaphyseal. A total of 223 surgeons with an average experience
of 14 years in practice (range: fellow - 50 years) completed the initial survey for
inter-rater reliability. Additionally, each surgeon was asked which zones or zone junctions
they consider a Jones’ fracture. Reliability was tested using Fleiss’ Kappa scores.
Results: Inter-rater agreement for use of the term Jones’ fracture was
moderate (kappa 0.533, 95% confidence interval (CI) [0.530, 0.535]). The zone classification
had an inter-rater agreement was moderate (kappa 0.537, 95% CI [0.535, 0.539]). Inter- rater
agreement for metaphyseal versus metaphyseal-diaphyseal was substantial (kappa 0.705, 95% CI
[0.702, 0.708]). Results of surgeon definition of a Jones’ fracture is seen in .
Conclusion: This is the largest study of its kind looking at inter-rater
reliability of an orthopaedic classification with 223 raters. The terminology regarding the
classification of fifth metatarsal base fractures remains confusing and inconsistent. The
term Jones’ fracture has little meaning in terms of communicating these injuries as there is
only moderate agreement when surveying surgeons and it is defined differently by most. The
zone classification has similar reliability as the Jones’ fracture. The terms metaphyseal
and metaphyseal-diaphyseal was the most reliable means to describe these fractures.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00046

## Use of Weight-Bearing Computed Tomography in the Evaluation of Abnormal Hindfoot
Morphology in Charcot-Marie-Tooth Patients

Max Michalski, MD; Tonya W. An, MD; Edward T. Haupt, MD; Brandon Yeshoua; Jari Salo;
Glenn B. Pfeffer, MD

Category: Hindfoot; Other
Keywords: Charcot Marie Tooth; Weight Bearing CT; Cavovarus Foot Deformity
Introduction/Purpose: The hindfoot deformity seen in Charcot-Marie-Tooth
disease (CMT) is poorly understood, and the contribution of abnormal bone morphology has
never been conclusively demonstrated. The purpose of this study was to compare the
three-dimensional (3D) bone morphology of the talus, calcaneus and navicular in a cohort of
CMT patients versus a control population. We used the data obtained from weight-bearing
computed tomography (WBCT) to reconstruct the geometric shape of each bone using 3D surface
meshing techniques. Surface mesh analysis of this type is commonly used in engineering to
evaluate and optimize 3D geometries and structures.
Methods: A total of 17 WBCTs from 15 patients (average age 24) with CMT who
underwent WBCT without previous surgeries, degenerative changes or open physes were
included. These were compared to 20 healthy control WBCTs. Calcaneal measurements included
the radius of curvature and the angle between the posterior tuberosity and posterior facet
in the sagittal plane. Talar measurements include axial and sagittal declination between the
body and neck as well as coronal rotation of the talar head relative to the body.
Surface-mesh model analysis was performed comparing the average of the CMT cohort to the
controls using CT analysis software (Disior Bonelogic). Means were compared with a t test
(p<0.05).
Results: CMT patients had significantly less sagittal declination
(plantarflexion) versus controls (14.9 versus 25.1 degrees respectively) (p<0.01).
Similarly, CMT patients had less talar head coronal rotation versus controls (30.2 versus
42.5 degrees respectively) (p<0.001). There was no difference in axial rotation of the
talar neck versus body between the groups (p=0.88). The calcaneal radius of curvature in CMT
patients was significantly smaller than the control population (716.6 versus 2143.5 mm
respectively) (p<0.05). Angular differences were also significant between the posterior
tuberosity and posterior facet of the subtalar joint in the sagittal plane (CMT 57.7
degrees, control 67.9 degrees) (p<0.001). Additionally, surface-mesh model analysis
demonstrated the largest differences in morphology at the navicular tuberosity, medial talar
head, sustentaculum tali and anterior process of the calcaneus ( ).
Conclusion: This is the first study to quantify the morphologic differences in
osteology seen in CMT patients. The decreased sagittal declination of the talar neck is seen
with a reciprocal decreased slope of the posterior facet of the calcaneus. The coronal
rotation of the talar head and abnormal navicular tuberosity morphology shows changes seen
in patients with CMT and may be attributed to unbalanced pull of the posterior tibial tendon
during development. These findings will help refine, and potentially revolutionize the
surgical reconstruction of cavovarus deformity in CMT patients.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00047

## Declining Trends in Medicare Reimbursement in Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle
Surgery

Sandra Miskiel, MD; Matthew Bye, BS; Erik C. Freeland, DO; Andre J. Pagliaro,
MD

Category: Ankle; Ankle Arthritis; Arthroscopy; Bunion; Hindfoot; Lesser Toes;
Midfoot/Forefoot; Sports; Trauma; Other
Keywords: Payment Reform; Healthcare Reform; Cost
Introduction/Purpose: With the increasing complexity of physician
reimbursement models, understanding reimbursement trends is crucial to the financial
sustainability of orthopaedic practices nationwide. Inflation-adjusted Medicare physician
reimbursement for total joint arthroplasty has decreased by approximately 33% from 2000 to
2019. Recent trends in orthopaedic foot and ankle reimbursement are unknown. Thus, our study
sought to analyze trends in Medicare reimbursement rates from 2000 to 2020 for common
orthopaedic foot and ankle surgical procedures.
Methods: The financial database of a single academic tertiary care center was
queried to identify the CPT codes most frequently utilized in orthopaedic foot and ankle
care. Next, the Physician Fee Schedule Look-Up Tool from the Centers for Medicare &
Medicaid Services was queried for the top 30 CPT codes utilized, and physician reimbursement
data extracted. Monetary data was subsequently adjusted for inflation utilizing the consumer
price index and reported in 2020 US dollars (USD). Average annual and the total percent
change in reimbursement were calculated for included procedures.
Results: After adjusting for inflation, the average physician reimbursement
decreased by 31.6% for all included foot and ankle procedures from 2000 to 2020, with 23/30
codes decreasing by more than 30%. The greatest decrease in reimbursement observed from 2000
to 2020 was for open treatment of calcaneal fracture at 48.3% ($2,254.17 to $1,164.97),
followed by flexor tendon repair at 48.2% ($741.02 to $357.39), and open treatment of pilon
fracture at 43.9% ($2,451.37 to $1,076.36).
Conclusion: Over the past two decades, physician reimbursement for foot and
ankle procedures has dramatically decreased by up to 48.3%. Continued downward trends in
orthopaedic foot and ankle physician reimbursement may lead to decreased access to quality
foot and ankle care.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00048

## Hardware Choice and Risk Factors of Talonavicular Arthrodesis Non-Union

Tara Moncman, DO; Daniel O. Corr, BS; Parth Kothari, MD; Joseph T. O’Neil, MD; David
I. Pedowitz, MD, MS

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot; Ankle
Keywords: Arthrodesis; Midfoot arthrodesis; Staples
Introduction/Purpose: Talonavicular arthrodesis is a commonly performed
procedure in orthopedic foot and ankle surgery, for conditions including osteoarthritis,
instability, and others. The surgery is frequently performed as part of a double or triple
arthrodesis. Multiple surgical constructs have been described, including screws, plate/screw
constructs, and staple/screw constructs. Few studies exist that specifically focus on the
talonavicular joint, and those that do are often limited by low patient volumes. Studies
that do examine non-union of the talonavicular joint do not offer comparative data on
non-union rates between the different methods of fixation. The purpose of this study was to
determine the rate of arthrodesis in talonavicular fusion surgery among different fixation
techniques and determine if hardware has a significant effect on union rate among patient
factors.
Methods: This is a retrospective single institution, multi-surgeon study
evaluating arthrodesis rates in the talonavicular joint. Adult patients undergoing primary
talonavicular fusion (isolated or as part of double/triple arthrodesis) from 2015-2018 with
a minimum of 3-month radiographic follow-up were studied. Patients undergoing revision
talonavicular fusion or fusion as part of Charcot reconstruction were excluded. Patient
radiographic and chart notes were reviewed to assess fixation type (single screw, 2-hole
compression plate, or screw + staple), the status of the arthrodesis at >=3 months and
any hardware complications or reoperations following the index procedure. Descriptive
statistics were generated for standard patient demographics and co- morbidities. Non-union
rates were calculated for the cohort as a whole and for each fixation technique utilized
along with the frequency of hardware complications/removal. Univariate analysis was
performed to determine risk factors for increased non- union rate, including patient
demographics, co-morbidities, and fixation technique.
Results: A total of 198 patients were included. Hardware included 131 double
straight screws, 42 two-hole compression plates, and 25 screw + staple constructs. Seventeen
patients (8.59%) had a nonunion of the talonavicular joint at >3 months, while 18
patients (9.09%) had hardware complications of breakage or prominence and 11 (5.56%)
required eventual removal. Hardware type was not a significant predictor of nonunion, as 11
patients had straight screw hardware (8.40%), while 3 had a two-hole plate (7.14%) and 3 had
screw + staple (12%) (p=0.801). Hardware breakage or backing out occurred in 6/131 patients
with straight screws (4.58%), 5/42 with 2-hole plates (11.90%), and 7/25 with staple + screw
(28%) (p=0.001). Hardware removal was necessary in 5 (3.82%) straight screw patients, 3
(7.14%) two-hole plate patients, and 3 (12%) screw + staple patients (p=0.186). Patient age,
sex, diabetic and smoking status were not significant for nonunion or hardware
complication.
Conclusion: The type of hardware used in talonavicular arthrodesis is not a
significant factor in achieving union. Staple + screw constructs may be more susceptible to
hardware breakage or migration, but was not significant for the necessity of hardware
removal, as a number of patients remain painless and achieve the intended union. The authors
recommend that physicians can make decisions of which to utilize based on familiarity and
preference. Further study is indicated on even larger patient cohorts with increased
population of nonunion cases so that further significant patient risk factors for nonunion
of the joint can be identified.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00049

## TranexAMIC Acid Associated with Less Wound Complications in Hindfoot Surgery

Andrew Moore; Benjamin R. Smith; Ryan J. O’Leary; Caroline P. Hoch; Christopher E.
Gross, MD; Daniel J. Scott, MD, MBA

Category: Hindfoot; Ankle
Keywords: Wound Complications; Hindfoot Fusion; Total Ankle Arthroplasty
Introduction/Purpose: Tranexamic acid (TXA) is an increasingly popular
antifibrinolytic therapy used to decrease bleeding during surgery and postoperative
swelling. TXA has been shown to decrease bleeding in total knee arthroplasty and total hip
arthroplasty, and is now routinely administered in many centers performing these operations.
To date, there is very limited data on its use in foot and ankle surgery. We sought to
review of the effect of TXA on outcomes of total ankle arthroplasty (TAA), hindfoot fusions,
and other related hindfoot surgeries, with the hypothesis that patients receiving TXA would
exhibit fewer wound complications.
Methods: We conducted a retrospective review of 252 patients (258 operations)
undergoing hindfoot fusions and/or TAA between 2015 and 2020 by a single fellowship trained
foot and ankle surgeon at an academic medical center. Twenty-seven patients (28 operations)
were excluded for less than 90-day follow-up, leaving 230 eligible procedures (TAA=72,
subtalar fusion=47, ankle fusion=37, double arthrodesis=33, tibiotalocalcaneal fusion=20,
triple arthrodesis=8, total talus=4, and hardware removal=8). Patient demographics, ASA
scores, comorbidities, pre-operative diagnoses, smoking status, wound complications, union
status (for fusions), readmissions and reoperations were recorded and compared between TXA
(n=104) and non-TXA (n=126) cohorts. Subgroup analysis was performed for TAAs and hindfoot
fusions. Mean follow-up was 453 days. Continuous variables were compared using independent
sample t-test, and categorical variables with chi-square test, unless more than 20% of
expected values were less than 5, in which case Fisher’s exact tests were utilized.
Results: There were no significant differences in demographics, comorbidities,
preoperative diagnoses or smoking status between cohorts. The TXA group exhibited
significantly less postoperative infections requiring oral antibiotics (5.8% vs. 15.1%,
p=.024). These included superficial (p=.174) and deep infections requiring reoperation
(p=.095). Subgroup analysis of hindfoot fusions (n=146) revealed significantly shorter time
to fusion between TXA and non-TXA groups (146 vs. 202 days, p=.049) and fewer reoperations
(8.6% vs. 21.6%, p=.042). TXA fusion patients had significantly shorter follow-up (349 vs.
479 days, p=.020), fewer active smokers (5.2% vs. 15.9%, p=.048), but more patients with
Charcot neuroarthropathy (20.7% vs. 5.7%, p=.006). Subgroup analysis of TAAs showed fewer
infections requiring oral antibiotics (4.7% vs. 31%, p=.005) and less delayed wound healing
(25.6% vs. 48.3%, p=.047) in the TXA cohort.
Conclusion: We found TXA use in hindfoot surgery to correlate with a reduction
in wound infections requiring antibiotics and quicker time to union in hindfoot fusions.
Further, the use of TXA in TAA specifically was correlated with fewer infections requiring
antibiotics and lower rates of delayed wound healing. These reductions were both
statistically and clinically significant. TXA has already been shown to be beneficial in
other areas of orthopaedic surgery and appears to also be quite beneficial in foot and ankle
surgery, though further research is needed to confirm these findings.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00050

## Comparing Rates of Fusion and Time to Fusion in A Viable Cellular Allograft vs
Autograft in Forefoot, Midfoot, and Hindfoot Fusions

G. Andrew Murphy, MD; Shumaila Sarfani, MD; David R. Richardson, MD; Clayton C.
Bettin, MD; Benjamin J. Grear, MD

Category: Other; Ankle Arthritis; Hindfoot; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Allograft; Autograft; Arthrodesis
Introduction/Purpose: Allograft is routinely used to enhance bone healing in
foot and ankle surgery. One allograft in particular employs viable cells and bone
scaffolding in a gel base. There is little evidence that compares how this material effects
rate of fusion (ROF) and time to fusion (TTF) when compared to autograft in routine
forefoot, midfoot, and hindfoot fusions. Our study investigates the use of a viable cellular
allograft and its effect on these two variables in a population of patients undergoing
fusions in the foot and ankle.
Methods: A retrospective review was conducted over a five-year span of
patients undergoing fusions in the foot and ankle where the cellular allograft was used. We
compared the ROF and TTF between the following three graft groups: cellular allograft alone,
autograft alone, and combined allograft + autograft. Data was retrieved from the patients’
electronic medical record and TTF was recorded as the time, in days, it took for a solid
radiographic fusion to form. Secondary variables collected included etiology of disease
(post-traumatic, inflammatory, or diabetic arthropathy) and also analyzed for effect on ROF
and TTF.
Results: Two hundred and twenty-five patients underwent a fusion in the foot
or ankle over a five-year period. Autograft alone was used in 101 patients, the cellular
allograft alone was used in 88 patients, and a combination of autograft and the cellular
allograft was used in 36 patients. Each group were similar in their comorbid conditions and
demographics. The ROF of the autograft only group was 88% (89/101), compared to the cellular
allograft group’s ROF of 89% (78/88), and the combination graft group’s ROF of 75% (27/36).
The average TTF between each group varied slightly, with the cellular allograft group fusing
the fastest at 86, followed by the autograft alone group at 97 days, and the combined group
at 112 days.
Conclusion: Our study investigated the use of a viable cellular allograft and
its effect on ROF and TTF compared to autograft alone and autograft combined with said
cellular allograft. We found no significant difference in ROF between autograft alone and
the cellular allograft alone but did find a significant difference in ROF for the combined
group resulting in lower rate of fusion. Additionally, use of the cellular allograft
resulted in fastest time to fusion compared to autograft alone or a combination of the graft
types.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00051

## Risks of Preoperative Opioid Therapy on Forefoot and Hindfoot Surgery Success

William Newton; Kevin D. Shrake; Caroline P. Hoch; Daniel J. Scott, MD, MBA;
Christopher E. Gross, MD; William Newton

Category: Hindfoot; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Preoperative risk factors; Trauma; Diabetes
Introduction/Purpose: Past studies in total joint arthroplasty and orthopaedic
trauma have found that preoperative opioid therapy correlates with increased postoperative
opioid use and lesser surgical outcomes. To date, these trends have not been studied in
cases of forefoot or hindfoot foot and ankle surgery. We hypothesized that patients with
preoperative chronic opioid use would have increased likelihood of postoperative opioid use,
complications, and re-operation.
Methods: A retrospective review was conducted of forefoot, midfoot and
hindfoot surgeries performed from January 2015- September 2020 by a fellowship trained foot
and ankle surgeon at an academic medical center. Pre- and postoperative opioid and other
analgesic use, medical history, demographic data, operative treatment, and surgical outcomes
were reviewed. Records of preoperative opioid use were limited to 50 patients, 90-day
postoperative opioid use to 60 patients, and 180-day postoperative opioid use to 69
patients. A total of 149 patients (female=102, male=47) with a mean BMI of 30.87 and mean
follow-up up of 1.2 years were included. Of the patients undergoing hindfoot, midfoot, or
forefoot arthrodesis, 71/79 joints went on to union, while there were 8 non-unions (3
sub-talar, 2 metatarsophalangeal, 1 tibiotalar, 1 talo-navicular, and 1 calcaneocuboid). The
most common procedures were hammertoe correction and Achilles tendon repair. Statistical
analysis was performed using correlation, linear multivariate regression, and one-way
ANOVA.
Results: Preoperative opioid use was statistically significantly associated
with loss to follow-up (users=10.0%, non-users=0.0%; p=.044) and continued postoperative
opioid use at 90 (92%; p<.001) and 180 days (94%; p<.001). Preoperative benzodiazepine
use was significantly associated with continued postoperative benzodiazepine use at 90 (20%;
p<.001) and 180 days (26%; p<.001). Of comorbidities, diabetes (p=.007) and
psychiatric disease (p=.025) were significant predictors of postoperative opioid use.
Psychiatric disease was also a significant predictor of postoperative benzodiazepine use
(p=.026). Postoperative opioid use significantly differed by surgical indication
(post-traumatic=20.52 MME, prior procedure(s)=232.51 MME, instability=7.64 MME,
osteomyelitis=4.67 MME; p<.001), but postoperative benzodiazepine use did not.
Additionally, follow-up duration significantly differed by operated area (hindfoot=1.48
years, forefoot=0.92 years, both=3.02 years; p<.001).
Conclusion: We found that patients with preoperative opioid use have
statistically significantly higher rates of loss to follow-up and continued postoperative
opioid use. We also found that on average, patients with a history of prior procedures on
the forefoot and/or hindfoot require statistically significantly more narcotics than those
with a history of post-traumatic injuries, instability, or osteomyelitis. Patients and
surgeons should be aware of this data to help appropriately council patients on post-
operative expectations.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00052

## Hallux Valgus Multiplanar Correction Surgery Through a Minimally Invasive Technique.
Our Initial Experience.

Florencia Pacheco, MD; Pablo E. Mocoçain Mac-iver, MD; Stephane Elgueta, MD; Andres
Keller Díaz, MD; Ruben D. Radkievich, MD; Diego A. Villagran; David A. Salinas; Marisol
Marti

Category: Bunion; Other
Keywords: Hallux Valgus; Minimally Invasive; Bunionectomy
Introduction/Purpose: Recently, minimally invasive surgery for hallux valgus
correction has regained popularity. The minimally invasive Chevron and Akin (MICA), has been
proved to be as satisfactory for patients as conventional open techniques. However, due to
its design, it is difficult to correct the coronal plane malalignment, which could lead to
the recurrence of the deformity. Instead, a Bösch-type osteotomy allows multiplanar
correction, and with an upgrade in its fixation we can create a stable third- generation
percutaneous osteotomy. We report our early results using the minimally invasive Bösch and
Akin osteotomy (MIBA).
Methods: This was a prospective case series of our first 40 patients (41 feet)
undergoing MIBA procedure. Outcome measures included the Manchester-Oxford Foot
Questionnaire (MOXFQ), the AOFAS Forefoot Score, and the visual analog scale (VAS) for pain
assessment. Radiographic measures included the hallux valgus angle (HVA), intermetatarsal
angle (IMA), distal metatarsal articular angle (DMAA) and the pronation of the metatarsal.
All complications and emitted radiation dosage were reported as well.
Results: At 12 months MOXFQ and AOFAS improved from 54.8 to 0.66 (p=0) and
39.1 to 99.2 (p=0), respectively. The mean preoperative VAS was 5.8, and improved during the
first week to 1.3 (p<0.05). There was also a significant improvement in all radiographic
parameters. We had two significant and five minor complications.
Conclusion: The MIBA procedure is a safe and effective option to achieve a
multiplanar hallux valgus correction.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00053

## Total Talus Replacement with Subtalar Arthrodesis for End-Stage Talar Osteonecrosis and
Adjacent Joint Arthritis

Gregory F. Pereira, MD; Amanda N. Fletcher, MD, MS; Abhinav Balu; James K. DeOrio, MD;
Selene G. Parekh, MD, MBA

Category: Ankle; Hindfoot; Trauma; Other
Keywords: Subtalar Arthrodesis; Talus; Aspetic Necrosis
Introduction/Purpose: Late stage talar avascular necrosis (AVN) results in
devascularization of the talus with osteonecrosis, subchondral collapse, talus fracturing,
loss of talar height and declination, and adjacent joint arthritis. This results in
significant disability for patients with limited treatment options. Tibiotalocalcaneal
arthrodesis with structural allograft has been the historic treatment option for this
challenging clinical scenario, however, the outcomes are fair with reported nonunion rate up
to 40%. Total talus replacement (TTR) is an emerging treatment option for patients with
talar AVN. TTR with subtalar arthrodesis may be utilized for end-stage talar AVN with
adjacent joint arthritis. The purpose of this study is to evaluate the short-term outcomes
for TTR with subtalar arthrodesis including pain, ankle range of motion, union rates, and
complications.
Methods: Consecutive patients who underwent TTR with a subtalar arthrodesis
from 2016-2020 were retrospectively reviewed. All surgeries were performed by one of two
fellowship-trained foot and ankle orthopaedic surgeons at a single academic institution. All
talus implants were custom 3D printed total tali (Additive Orthopaedics, Little Silver, NJ),
composed of a cobalt chrome alloy. The implants were sized based on computed tomography
scans of the contralateral talus. The plantar surface of the tali were prepared with an
ingrowth surface and drill holes to accept screws and facilitate subtalar arthrodesis.
Patient demographics, comorbidities, and surgical data were collected. Outcomes included the
Visual Analog Scale (VAS) scores, range of motion, union rates, and complications. Data
analysis was performed with paired t-tests and a significance level of p<0.05.
Results: A total of 19 patients were included with an average of 11.4 months
follow-up. There were 11 (57.9%) men, and the average age was 52.3 (range, 18-75) years-old.
About half (n=9, 47.4%) of the cohort had a previous talus fracture, and 17 (89.5%) patients
had previous ipsilateral ankle surgery. There were 5 (26.3%) patients who underwent
concomitant talonavicular arthrodesis at the time of TTR and subtalar arthrodesis.
Significant postoperative improvements were observed in VAS scores (2.4 vs. 8.6;
p<0.0001), ankle dorsiflexion (10.7° vs. 1.8°; p=0.0131), and ankle plantarflexion (32.9°
vs. 21.3°; p<0.0068). All patients achieved a successful union of their subtalar
arthrodesis (n=19/19, 100%) and talonavicular arthrodesis (n=5/5, 100%). There were 2
(10.5%) complications including 1 (5.3%) delayed wound healing successfully treated
nonoperatively and 1 (5.3%) reoperation in a patient with persistent varus ankle deformity
requiring distal tibia and fibula osteotomies. There were no postoperative infections,
explants, or amputations required.
Conclusion: TTR with subtalar arthrodesis should be considered as a treatment
option for patients with end-stage talar AVN and adjacent joint arthritis. Patients
experienced significant improvement in pain and ankle range of motion. The complication rate
was 10.5% with only 1 patient requiring a reoperation. A union rate of 100% was observed
with no postoperative infections, explants, or amputations. This technique perves ankle
motion while eliminating hindfoot pain in patients with loss of talar bony integrity and
adjacent joint arthritis. Further studies are required including longer-term follow-up and
prospective cohorts to ensure continued safety and efficacy.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00054

## Achilles Pathology and Surgical Approach Determine Post-Operative Infection
Rate

Carson M. Rider, MD; Oliver B. Hansen; Mark C. Drakos, MD

Category: Sports; Other
Keywords: Wound Complications; Achilles Reconstruction; Achilles Tendon
Introduction/Purpose: Post-operative infections can be a devastating
complication after Achilles tendon surgery. While Achilles infection rates have decreased
with the development of less invasive surgical techniques, these infections remain a
challenging complication for patients and clinicians due to the relative lack of vasculature
in the Achilles tendon region. This study aimed to analyze rates of postoperative Achilles
tendon infection based on the type of Achilles pathology and surgical approach. We
hypothesized that procedures with smaller incisions that avoided the critical zone would be
associated with lower infection rates than those that require larger incisions, such as
reconstructions.
Methods: All patients undergoing Achilles tendon surgery at a single,
multi-surgeon center between 2011 and 2020 were identified. Charts were reviewed for
infection, pathology, surgical approach, incision size, and risk factors such as body mass
index (BMI), smoking status, and diabetes. Rates of infection were compared between groups
based on pathology and operative technique. These groups included acute rupture treated
immediately, chronic pathology treated with debridement and repair, and chronic pathology
treated with graft reconstruction. For patients treated for an acute rupture, minimally
invasive and open approach sub-groups were compared. Further, prevalence of risk factors was
compared between patients with and without post- operative infections. Statistical
comparisons were performed between groups using a student’s t-test or Fisher’s exact
test.
Results: A total of 1,148 cases were identified, 23 of which involved a
post-operative infection requiring a return to the operating room for irrigation and
debridement. The overall infection rate was 2.00%. Cases involving chronic pathology treated
with graft reconstruction were associated with an infection rate of 8.96%. Acute repairs had
an infection rate of 1.32% and other chronic pathologies treated without graft
reconstruction had an infection rate of 0.73%. Statistical comparisons of infection rates
for these sub-groups are displayed in Table 1 alongside comparisons of risk factor
prevalence between the infection and non-infection groups. The comparison of risk factors
between groups did not identify any significant differences. No infections were observed
following the use of a distal lateral incision to treat chronic tendon pathology (179 cases)
or the use of a windows incision technique for reconstructions (8 cases).
Conclusion: Analysis of infection rates indicated that treatment options
requiring large incisions, such as reconstruction with a graft, pose a significantly greater
risk of post-operative Achilles infection. Both minimally invasive treatments and measured
open incisions were associated with similarly low infection rates for primary repair of
acute ruptures. Comparison of risk factors between patients with and without infection did
not reveal any significant differences. Given low infection rates for chronic pathology
treated with distal lateral incisions and windows-type incisions, we recommend these
whenever possible.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00055

## Lateral Instability in Total Ankle Arthroplasty: A Comparison Between the
Brostrom-Gould and Anatomic Lateral Ankle Stabilization (ATLAS)

Calvin J. Rushing, DPM; Bryon J. McKenna, DPM; Gregory C. Berlet, MD; Antonio M.
Malloy McCoy

Category: Ankle; Sports; Other
Keywords: Ankle Instability; Ankle Sprain; Total Ankle Arthritis
Introduction/Purpose: Lateral ankle instability is not uncommon after osseous
cuts and soft tissue releases are performed during Total Ankle Arthroplasty (TAA),
particularly with varus malalignment. The purpose of the present study was to compare the
outcomes of ankles that underwent TAA with concurrent Brostrom-Gould (BG) or Anatomic
Lateral Ankle Stabilization (ATLAS) at a minimum of 1-year follow-up.
Methods: Thirty-eight TAA’s underwent BG (21 INFINITY, 4 CADENCE) or ATLAS (13
INBONE-2) between August 2015 and February 2019 at a single institution and were at least 1
year postoperative (mean 18.3 months, range 12-40). Baseline patient demographics,
characteristics, and operative factors were assessed via medical record and chart reviews.
Radiographs parameters were measured preoperatively, at 6 weeks postoperative, and during
the latest follow-up. Revisions, reoperations, and complications were classified according
to the criteria established by Vander Griend et al. and Glazebrook et el., respectively.
Univariate and multivariate analyses were performed.
Results: Survivorship for TAA with concurrent BG/ATLAS was 97%. Overall, TAA
with concurrent BG had higher incidences of early TAA revision (4%), recurrent instability
(4%), reoperation (16%), and complications (29%) compared to ATLAS. Postoperative coronal
and sagittal tibiotalar alignment changes were significant for both groups (p< 0.001,
p=0.014); however, the differences were greater for ATLAS (p= 0.045, p<0.001).
Conclusion: The present study is the first to compare outcomes between
techniques for addressing ankle instability in the TAA population. At short-term follow-up,
anatomic reconstruction produced better outcomes than the traditional BG procedure.
Additional comparative studies between techniques to address instability in the TAA
population are warranted.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00056

## High Rate of Talar Collapse in STAR Total Ankle

Daniel J. Scott, MD, MBA; David Vier, MD; Samuel E. Ford, MD; Shannon F. Alejandro,
MD; James W. Brodsky, MD

Category: Ankle; Ankle Arthritis; Hindfoot
Keywords: Ankle Arthroplasty; Total Ankle Replacement; Total Ankle
Arthroplasty
Introduction/Purpose: Despite substantial advancements in Total Ankle
Arthroplasty (TAA), catastrophic failure due to implant subsidence remains a common and
serious problem. While there are many studies of short and some of intermediate term follow-
up of TAA, the number of long-term studies, especially with prospectively collected data, is
much fewer, and the data on the incidence and impact of talar subsidence on those results is
even more limited. Talar subsidence can be especially challenging to manage, given the
limited talar bone stock and revision options as compared to the larger tibial bone stock.
The purpose of this study was to evaluate the long-term incidence and characteristics of TAA
implant failure.
Methods: A prospectively collected database of TAAs performed in a tertiary
referral center began enrolling in 1999. Medical records/radiographs were reviewed to
evaluate outcomes of TAA and final radiographs were reviewed to identify implant failure
from 1999-2016. Minimum radiographic follow-up was two years. Pre-operative and
post-operative radiographs were measured for ankle, foot, and implant coronal and sagittal
alignment Failure and reoperation rates of two different implants, the mobile bearing
Scandinavian Total Ankle Replacement (STAR) and the fixed bearing Salto Talaris (Salto) were
analyzed. Paired Student t- tests were performed between groups. TAA revision surgeries were
excluded if the primary TAA was performed at another institution. Reoperations were recorded
according to the Reoperations Coding System (CROCS) classification of the Canadian
Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society (COFAS). There were 149 TAAs reviewed in 146 patients
(136 STARs and 13 Saltos), with an average follow-up of 7.03 years (range 2-20 years).
Results: Implant survival was 85.8% at mean 7 years. 25 TAAs demonstrated
radiographic catastrophic failures, 21 underwent re- operation, and 4 declined revision
surgery (Table 1). One failure was due to infection (CROCS 10), others were aseptic (CROCS
9). 13/25 failures were related to talar subsidence, all STARs (9.6% of all STARs in the
series). Nine STARs (6.4%) had less severe talar subsidence but were asymptomatic, The STAR
talar component, in total, subsided in 17.6% (24/136) of STARs, requiring revision in 13
(9.6%) of cases at mean 3.8 years post-op. There was no difference in
pre-operative/post-operative radiographic alignment between the TAAs that did and did not
fail. Twenty-six ankles (17.4%) underwent additional surgery with retention of metal
components, bringing the total reoperation rate to 47/149 (31.5%).
Conclusion: At long-term follow-up, TAA demonstrates reasonable implant
survival rates, especially given the learning curve that includes STARs implanted prior to
the Food and Drug approval study. We describe a unique mode of failure in STARs that
highlights one of the risk factors for failure in total ankle arthroplasty. This represents
the highest reported rate of talar subsidence in the literature with almost 10% of STARs
demonstrating talar-sided failure at mean 7-year follow-up. Surgeons who utilize the STAR
total ankle should be vigilant for talar subsidence given the high rates reported in this
series.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00057

## Association Between Hindfoot Alignment and First Metatarsal Rotation

Jesse Steadman; Neil K. Bakshi, MD; Christopher B. Arena, MD; Matthew T. Philippi;
Alexej Barg, MD; Charles L. Saltzman, MD

Category: Other; Hindfoot; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Alignment Weight Bearing CT; Adult Acquired Flatfoot Deformity;
Malalignment
Introduction/Purpose: The interplay between forefoot and hindfoot alignment
has been well established in the literature for pathologies such as the flexible cavovarus
foot. However, no study has evaluated the relationship between hindfoot alignment and first
metatarsal axial rotation. Therefore, the purpose of this study is to determine the
relationship, if any, between hindfoot alignment and first metatarsal axial rotation in
patients with mild, moderate, and severe hindfoot varus/valgus deformity using weight
bearing computed tomography (WBCT). We hypothesize that patients with hindfoot valgus
alignment will be associated with a first metatarsal pronation/eversion deformity.
Conversely, we hypothesize that patients with hindfoot varus alignment will be associated
with a first metatarsal supination/inverted deformity.
Methods: Patients who underwent weight bearing radiographs (WBR) and WBCT
between 2015 and 2018 were evaluated with inclusion/exclusion criteria. Patients with prior
foot surgery/trauma were excluded. Hindfoot alignment was evaluated using the calcaneal
moment arm ( ; horizontal
distance between the most inferior aspect of the calcaneus and an extended line
approximating the longitudinal axis of the tibia). Six subgroups were created based on the
severity of hindfoot malalignment 1) Moderate valgus, 2) moderate varus, 3) substantial
valgus, 4) substantial varus, 5) severe valgus, and 6) severe varus. Moderate was 1/2-1
standard deviations (SD) from the mean. Substantial was 1-2 SDs from the mean. Severe was
>2 SDs from the mean. Patients with CMA values within &frac12; SD of the mean were
excluded to focus on patients with significant hindfoot malalignment. First metatarsal axial
rotation was measured using the Kim and Saltzman angles ( ). Meary’s angle was obtained using WBR.
Results: 196 patients were included (average age - 52.6 years). The average
CMA was +6.0+-16.2mm (valgus). The average Kim and Saltzman angles were 7.7+-12.9 and
2.8+-13.1 degrees (pronated). The average Meary’s angle was 182.0+-11.9 degrees (>180
degrees-apex dorsal measurement). There was a significant association between hindfoot
alignment and the Saltzman (r=0.641, p<.001) and Kim angles (0.615, p<.001). Hindfoot
valgus was associated with 1st metatarsal pronation and hindfoot varus was associated with
1st metatarsal supination. There was a significant inverse relationship between Meary’s
angle and the Saltzman (r=-.600, p<.001) and Kim Angles (r=-.529, p<.001). This
suggests that as Meary’s angle decreases, as seen in a pes planovalgus deformity, 1st
metatarsal pronation increases.
Conclusion: There is significant correlation between hindfoot alignment and
1st metatarsal rotation. We demonstrated an association between hindfoot valgus and 1st
metatarsal pronation, as well as between decreased Meary’s angle and 1st metatarsal
pronation. This suggests that 1st metatarsal pronation is associated with pes planovalgus
deformity. We also report an association between hindfoot varus and 1st metatarsal
supination, as well as between increased Meary’s angle and 1st metatarsal supination. This
suggests that 1st metatarsal supination is associated with cavovarus deformity. A
derotational osteotomy/fusion may be required for first metatarsal rotational correction, in
addition to hindfoot correction, for patients with cavovarus/planovalgus deformities.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00058

## Peripheral Nerve Block Compared to Intra-Articular Injection for Post-Operative Pain
Control in Total Ankle Arthroplasty: A Randomized, Controlled, and Non-Inferiority
Trial

Nicholas L. Strasser, MD; Michelle Bremer; Erin C. Owen, PhD, MPH

Category: Ankle Arthritis; Ankle; Other
Keywords: Pain; Ankle Arthritis; Total Ankle Arthroplasty
Introduction/Purpose: Ankle arthritis is associated with debilitating pain and
chronic disability. Total ankle arthroplasty (TAA) is increasingly performed to treat
end-stage arthritis resulting in favorable clinical outcomes. Peripheral nerve blocks (PNB)
are widely used for post-operative pain management; however, PNB can lead to post-operative
neuropathic complications. Intra- articular injections (IAI) have been widely reported as an
alternative to PNB in total knee arthroplasty, resulting in lower post- operative narcotic
consumption and accelerated functional recovery. Little information exists on patient
outcomes following IAI in TAA. The purpose of this study was to assess the effectiveness and
tolerability of IAI compared to PNB for pain control, measured by oral morphine milligram
equivalents (MME) and a Visual Analogue Pain Scale (VAS), following TAA.
Methods: We conducted a prospective, randomized, non-inferiority study
involving 51 opioid naïve adults undergoing primary, unilateral TAA. Participants were
randomized to IAI joint cocktail containing anesthetic and steroid at the completion of the
TAA (n=26), injected in four joint capsule locations, or PNB (n=25). PNB included a single
popliteal fossa block of the sciatic nerve and adductor canal block of the distal femoral
nerve. Primary outcomes were mean difference in oral post-operative MME, via inpatient
record and patient daily narcotic diaries, and post-operative pain measured by the VAS
(0-100mm) at 24 hours and 2 weeks post-TAA. IAI was considered non-inferior to PNB if mean
difference in consumption of narcotics was less than 30 MME (24 hour) and 75 MME (2 weeks),
and the mean difference in pain was less than 15mm on the VAS using the upper limit of one-
sided 95% confidence intervals (UCI) for increase in MME and VAS scores.
Results: There were 39 patients with complete data. Mean oral MME in 24 hours
was 50.4 (sd = 38.1) in the IAI group (n=22) versus 52.9 (sd = 48.1) in PNB (n=17) with -2.4
MME mean difference (UCI 20.8). Mean VAS at 24 hours was 25.6 (sd = 25.1) in IAI compared to
25.4 (sd = 29.2) in PNB. Mean difference in VAS at 24 hours was 0.22 (UCI 14.9). Mean two
week post- VAS was 13.3 (sd = 17.2) in IAI compared to 15.1 (sd = 21.2) for PNB with mean
difference of -1.8 (UCI 8.5). All demonstrate non- inferiority. At two week post- IAI
reported 384.6 MME (sd = 491.0) and PNB 319.2 (sd = 323.7) with 65.5 MME difference (UCI
303.6), not supporting non-inferiority.
Conclusion: IAI is non-inferior to PNB in the first 24 hours after TAA as
measured by oral narcotic consumption and patient-self reported pain. At two week post-TAA,
IAI resulted in non-inferior pain scores; however, non-inferiority was not confirmed for
oral narcotic consumption due to the high variability in documented use. This study suggests
IAI is effective for controlling immediate post-operative pain without introducing the
neuropathic complications associated with PNB.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00059

## The Weil Osteotomy for Angular Correction of Axial Plane Deformities of the Lesser MTP
Joints: A Radiographic Analysis

Carson D. Strickland, MD; Joseph T. Cline, MD; Eric D. Villarreal, MD; G. Andrew
Murphy, MD

Category: Lesser Toes; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Hammertoe Correction; Forefoot; Lesser MTP Joint Deformities
Introduction/Purpose: The oblique shortening (Weil) osteotomy of the distal
metatarsal neck has been described as an effective means of correcting lesser toe
metatarsophalangeal joint deformity. Previous studies have focused on clinical outcomes,
complications, and the magnitude of plantar displacement and shortening. The aim of this
study was to quantify the magnitude of axial plane correction obtainable when a medial or
lateral displacing Weil osteotomy was used in conjunction with other procedures in forefoot
reconstruction surgery.
Methods: Consecutive patients with a minimum 12-month follow-up who were
treated by the senior surgeon from January 1, 2008, to September 1, 2018, were included.
Review of the medical records identified 234 toes in 190 patients that had medial or lateral
displacement Weil osteotomies as a part of their treatment for metatarsalgia and lesser toe
deformity. Concomitant procedures were recorded. Pre- and post-operative weightbearing
radiographs were analyzed to determine the amount of transverse plane change and residual
varus/valgus alignment. Radiographs were then classified as good (<10 degrees of
angulation), intermediate (10-15 degrees), or bad (>15 degrees). Any worsening of the
post-operative alignment compared to the pre- operative alignment was noted. Follow-up notes
were reviewed for clinical observations of floating toe, resting alignment, persistent pain
and swelling at 3 months, complications, and need for revision surgery.
Results: The average transverse plane correction was 12.5 degrees (range 0-45
degrees). Most toes remained in some degree of radiographic varus or valgus alignment as a
true neutral toe was rare. Over a third, (35%, n=81) had increased postoperative angulation;
42% of radiographs were graded as good alignment (n=99), 20% as intermediate (n=46), and 38%
as bad (n=90). The most common concomitant procedures were PIP joint resection arthroplasty
and distal chevron bunionectomy. Review of clinic notes revealed low incidences of floating
toe (7%, n=16), clinical malalignment (8%, n=18), and need for revision surgery (3%, n=8).
Persistent swelling was the most common complication, present in 44% of patients at the
3-month follow-up.
Conclusion: The medial and lateral displacing Weil osteotomy can be a powerful
tool to correct lesser toe MTP joint transverse plane deviation. It was typically used with
PIP joint resection and hallux valgus procedures to improve the lesser toes and overall
forefoot alignment. Interestingly, most toes had a neutral or good clinical alignment
regardless of the radiographic alignment. Further studies to correlate radiographic and
clinical outcome measures may help define its role in correcting lesser toe deformity.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00060

## Surgical Imbrication of Plantar Plate to Metatarsal Neck in the Setting of Lesser Toe
Metatarsophalangeal Joint Instability

Paul G. Talusan, MD; Eric Colomb; Robert N. Kent; Vandan D. Patel; James R. Holmes,
MD; David M. Walton, MD

Category: Lesser Toes; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Lesser Toe Metatarsophalangeal (MTP) Joint Instability;
Metatarsalgia; Patient Reported Outcome Measures (PROMS)
Introduction/Purpose: Persistent metatarsalgia refractory to non-operative
therapy with accompanying plantar plate injury represents a common and challenging treatment
problem. In previous studies, radiofrequency shrinkage has been used for the treatment of
MTP joint instability secondary to low-grade plantar plate lesions.1 In the shoulder, this
technique shows histological evidence of modest regenerative capacity but is also associated
with several chronic sequelae including capsular stretching, nerve damage, recurrent
instability, adhesive capsulitis, and thermally-induced chondrolysis.2-6 The purpose of this
observational study was to examine the efficacy of surgical imbrication of the plantar plate
to the metatarsal neck as a novel, cost-effective approach to repair Grade 0-1 plantar plate
injuries. We sought to characterize patient-reported and radiographic outcomes in patients
undergoing this procedure.
Methods: Patients from a single fellowship-trained orthopaedic surgeon (1/2017
- 12/2020) were screened by electronic medical record review. Inclusion criteria were age
>18 years, a pre-operatively measured Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information
System (PROMIS) score, a Grade 0 or 1 plantar plate tear discovered at time of surgery, and
repair via surgical imbrication to the metatarsal neck. PROMIS Physical Function and Pain
Interference scores were obtained from 14 enrolled patients (median age was 55 years; range:
40-69; 12 female) post-operatively at 6-9 weeks, 3 months, 6 months, and 1-2 years. Basic
demographic information and pertinent medical information were also obtained. Three
fellowship-trained orthopaedic surgeons independently reviewed radiographs to assess
reduction of the metatarsophalangeal joint, and joints were graded as reduced, subluxated,
or dislocated. Wilcoxon signed-rank tests compared pre- and post-operative PROMIS scores.
Changes in PROMIS scores were compared to numerical and categorical patient characteristics
via univariate linear regressions and Mann- Whitney U-tests, respectively.
Results: Median postoperative times to most recent PROMIS score and
radiographs were respectively 13.0 months (95% confidence interval: 10.0-21.4) and 7.6
months (2.9-10.0). Median preoperative and most recent Physical Function scores were 39.5
(35-50) and 52.5 (41-62), respectively (p=0.003), and median Pain Interference scores
changed from 61.0 (56-68) to 53.5 (39- 58) (p=0.002) ( ). Changes in PROMIS scores showed no
association with BMI, age, preoperative opioid use, wound complications, concomitant
dislocation, fibromyalgia, or mood disorder (p>0.10). Preoperatively, 9 second MTP joints
were concentrically reduced, and 5 were subluxated (n=14). At 6 weeks post-operation, 13
joints remained reduced (n=14). At most recent measurement, all (n=10) joints were reduced
(4 patients missing data). 9 of 14 patients underwent concomitant correction of hallux
valgus at time of surgery.
Conclusion: Patients with Grade 0-1 plantar plate injuries improved
significantly in radiographic parameters and patient reported outcome scores following
surgical imbrication of the plantar plate to the metatarsal neck. This procedure represents
a novel, alternative approach that is both efficacious and cost-effective. Our work
contributes valuable surgical outcomes data to a limited knowledgebase regarding
pathophysiology and management for low-grade plantar plate lesions in MTP joint instability.
Future work will involve larger, prospective studies to better understand outcomes of and
indications for this approach.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00061

## The Intercalary Fragment in Posterior Malleolus Fractures: Characterization and
Significance

Benjamin D. Umbel, DO; Devon Myers, DO; Benjamin C. Taylor, MD; John A. Buchan;
Anthony J. Melaragno

Category: Trauma
Keywords: Ankle Fracture; Ankle Osteoarthritis Scale; Posterior Malleolus
Fracture
Introduction/Purpose: Methods of fixation in ankle fractures involving the
posterior malleolus have become increasingly scrutinized. With the increase in computed
tomography (CT), an intercalary fracture fragment (ICF) adjacent to the posterior malleolus
has often been described. Treatment of this intercalary comminution remains controversial.
The primary goal of this study was to compare clinical and radiographic outcomes in patients
who had direct reduction and fixation of this fragment compared to those where the ICF was
removed or not reduced prior to posterior malleolus fixation.
Methods: This retrospective study included 249 trimalleolar and posterior
pilon ankle fractures grouped into those who had the ICF reduced and fixed (n=74) and those
where the ICF was not directly addressed or excised (n=175). CT scans were evaluated for
size and location of the ICF. Demographic, radiographic and intraoperative variables were
collected and analyzed. The Kellgren and Lawrence classification system was utilized to
grade severity of post-traumatic arthritis during the follow up period. Chart review was
performed assessing time to weightbearing, repeat surgeries and post-operative
complications.
Results: For the group which had the ICF reduced and fixed, follow up
radiographs demonstrated significantly worse Kellgren- Lawrence scores compared to the group
that did not specifically reduce the ICF (p< 0.05). There was also a higher rate of
repeat surgery in the group which had the ICF fixed, although not meeting statistical
significance. There were no differences in size or location of the ICF fragment between
groups. The average overall time to weightbearing amongst all patients was 9.7 +- 3.8 weeks.
There was no significant difference between time to weightbearing between groups (p = 0.6).
There was no significant difference in need for secondary surgeries or post-operative deep
and superfical infections.
Conclusion: With the widespread utilization of CT-scans for preoperative
planning of ankle fractures involving the posterior malleolus, there has been greater
discussion surrounding the optimal management of the ICF when present. In our study, the
primary aim was to explore radiographic changes in patients after direct reduction and
fixation of this ICF compared to those without ICF fixation. We demonstrated significantly
worse radiographic outcomes following attempted direct reduction and fixation of the ICF.
Our results suggest that while concentric joint reduction and syndesmosis stabilization are
of utmost importance, attempting to reduce and fix the ICF may lead to worse radiographic
outcomes.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00062

## Autologous Matrix-Induced Chondrogenesis (AMIC) with Lateral Ligament Stabilization for
Osteochondral Lesions of the Talus in Patients with Ankle Instability

Arnd F. Viehöfer; Jakob Ackermann; Stephan H. Wirth, MD; Fabio A. Casari; Lizzy
Weigelt; Christoph Germann

Category: Ankle; Hindfoot; Sports
Keywords: Osteochondral Lesions; Matrix; Ankle Instability
Introduction/Purpose: Autologous matrix-induced chondrogenesis (AMIC) has
shown to result in favorable clinical outcome in patients with osteochondral lesions of the
talus (OLT). Yet, the influence of ankle instability on cartilage repair of the ankle has
still to be determined. This study sought to compare the clinical and radiographic outcome
in patients with and without concomitant lateral ligament stabilization (LLS) undergoing
AMIC for the treatment of OLT.
Methods: This study evaluated AMIC that were implanted in patients for the
treatment of symptomatic OLT with and without concomitant ankle instability. Postoperative
MRI, Tegner, AOFAS and Cumberland Ankle Instability Tool (CAIT) were obtained at a minimum
follow-up of 2 years. A musculoskeletal radiologist scored all grafts according to the
MOCART 1 and 2.0 scores. Patients were stratified into two groups based on whether they
underwent concomitant LLS for ankle instability. Patients without LLS served as controls.
Patients were matched 1:1 for BMI, lesion size, follow-up and age.
Results: Twenty-six patients that underwent AMIC with a mean follow-up of 4.2
+- 1.5 years were enrolled in this study (13 with and 13 without concomitant ankle
instability). Patients’ mean age was 33.4 +- 12.7 years with a BMI averaging 26.2 +- 3.7.
Patients with concomitant LLS showed worse clinical outcome measured by AOFAS (85.1 +- 14.4
vs. 96.3 +- 5.8, p=0.034) and Tegner (3.8 +- 1.1 vs. 4.4 +- 2.3, p=0.012). No difference was
seen between both groups regarding MOCART 1 and 2.0 scores (p=0.714 and p=0.371,
respectively). Additionally, postoperative CAIT and AOFAS significantly correlated in
patients that underwent concomitant LLS (r=0.766, p=0.002) with a CAIT score of > 24
(stable ankle joint) resulting in AOFAS scores comparable to scores in patients with
isolated AMIC (90.1 +- 11.6 vs. 95.3 +- 6.6; p=0.442).
Conclusion: The results of this study suggest a negative influence of ankle
instability on the clinical outcome of cartilage repair with AMIC for the treatment of OLT.
If postoperative ankle stability is achieved in patients with LLS, however, comparable
outcome as seen after isolated AMIC can be expected.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00063

## Does Preoperative Valgus Deformity Severity Predict Outcomes in Total Ankle
Arthroplasty vs Ankle Arthrodesis?

David Vier, MD; Rasikh N. Hamid; Susan M. Odum, PhD; Carroll P. Jones, III, MD; Bruce
E. Cohen, MD; Todd A. Irwin, MD; W. Hodges Davis, MD

Category: Ankle; Ankle Arthritis
Keywords: Ankle Arthritis; Ankle Arthroplasty; Ankle Arthrodesis
Introduction/Purpose: Coronal plane deformity is an important consideration in
the treatment of ankle arthritis, and valgus alignment presents its own unique challenges.
Ankle fusions were previously considered the gold standard, but advancements in total ankle
arthroplasty (TAA) implant design and surgical technique have increased its popularity in
the treatment of even large coronal plane deformities. Although many studies have compared
fusion to arthroplasty, no studies have directly compared these two treatments in the
treatment of valgus ankle arthritis. The purpose of this study was to evaluate and compare
clinical and radiographic outcomes of TAA to ankle fusion in the treatment of valgus ankle
arthritis.
Methods: 137 patients with valgus ankle arthritis who underwent either TAA or
ankle fusion were identified through a prospectively collected database. Minimum clinic
follow-up was two years. Preoperative radiographs were measured for tibiotalar angle to
include patients with valgus ankle arthritis five degrees or greater. Axial alignment views
were also analyzed for preoperative hindfoot alignment. Patients who underwent
tibiotalocalcaneal fusion or had previous ankle corrective osteotomy were excluded.
Complications, failures, revisions, and reoperations were recorded. Failures were defined by
explant of a metal component. Reoperations included any additional related ankle/hindfoot
surgery including subtalar fusion. Patients were categorized by severity of preoperative
valgus deformity into 4 groups: 5-10 degrees, 11-15 degrees, 16-20 degrees, and greater than
20 degrees. Outcomes were compared across these groups between TAA and ankle fusion. There
were 98 patients who underwent TAA and 39 patients who underwent ankle fusion. Median
follow-up was 50.4 months (inner quartile 37.4-74.1).
Results: Patients who underwent TAA with greater than 15 degrees of
preoperative valgus deformity had higher rates of failures, revisions, and reoperations
compared to those who underwent fusion with the same deformity severity. Overall, 44% of
patients (60/137) had major or minor complications. There were 6 failures (6%) in the TAA
cohort and 5 failures (13%) in the fusion cohort. 36% of fusions (14/39) underwent
reoperation which was a higher rate compared to 18% of TAAs (18/98) (p=0.03). Combined
fusion and TAR cohorts had less complications, failures/revisions, and reoperation rates as
the severity of deformity increased (p<0.01).
Conclusion: Severity of preoperative valgus deformity is an important
consideration in the surgical treatment of ankle arthritis. Patients with greater than 15
degrees of preoperative valgus had lower rates of failures, revisions, and reoperations when
treated with fusion. Patients with less than 15 degrees of preoperative valgus had lower
rates of failures, revisions, and reoperations when treated with TAA. Overall, patients with
greater preoperative valgus deformity had less complications. Patients with valgus ankle
arthritis remain a challenging problem with high complication rates regardless of surgical
procedure and additional procedures should be considered to treat any coronal plane
instability and foot deformity.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00064

## Suture Tape Reinforcement Device as an Independent Fixation Solution for Partial
Syndesmosis Injuries

Gregory R. Waryasz, MD; Takahisa Ogawa, MD, MPH; Bart Lubberts, MD, PhD; Christopher
W. DiGiovanni, MD; Daniel Guss, MD, MBA

Category: Ankle; Arthroscopy; Basic Sciences/Biologics; Sports
Keywords: Syndesmosis; Arthroscopy; Syndesmotic Stability
Introduction/Purpose: A suture tape reinforcement device is designed for
repair of syndesmotic injury. Its insertion in the fibular and tibial footprints of the
anterior inferior tibiofibular ligament (AITFL) promises a dynamic constraint to external
rotation, antero-posterior translation of fibula and diastasis of the syndesmosis in the
coronal plane.We hypothesized that following fixation of transected syndesmosis with suture
tape reinforcement, syndesmotic stability becomes similar to that of an intact
syndesmosis.
Methods: Fifteen non-paired fresh frozen cadaveric specimens amputated above
the knee were included in this study. Assessment of the ankle syndesmosis was performed in
six stages; 1) with all syndesmosis ligaments intact; 2) after transection of the AITFL, 3)
the interosseous ligament, 4) subsequent fixation with suture tape reinforcement device, 5)
transection of the posterior inferior syndesmotic ligament, and 6) after removal of the
suture tape reinforcement device (complete ligament transection stage). Instability
measurements included anterior and posterior tibiofibular spaces measured arthroscopically
under 100N lateral stress using a bone hook, tibiofibular anteroposterior and
posteroanterior translation in sagittal plane measured arthroscopically under sagittal
stress of 100N, and anterior tibiofibular space measured directly with a caliper under
external rotation torque of 7.5 Nm. Instability measurements taken after each fixation
method were compared with the intact stage and to the complete ligament transection stage
using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test.
Results: The suture tape reinforcement device was able to stabilize an AITFL-
and the interosseous ligament-transected stage, similar to the intact stage, with respect to
all measures of instability. As for the complete ligament transection stage, after suture
tape reinforcement it remained unstable in the coronal plane, compared to the intact stage:
there was an increase in anterior tibiofibular space without stress (1.7 mm vs 1.1 mm,
p=0.005) and with stress (1.8 mm vs 1.1 mm, p=0.007), as well as in posterior tibiofibular
space with stress (2.8 mm vs 1.6 mm, p=0.002).
Conclusion: Our findings suggest that suture tape reinforcement device might
be effective for fixation of partial syndesmotic injury, but not for complete syndesmotic
injury. Future clinical research is needed to confirm this.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00065

## Evaluation of Lisfranc Injuries: How Involved is the First Tarsometatarsal
Joint?

Liam H. Wong; Bopha Chrea, MD; Lara C. Atwater, MD; James E. Meeker, MD

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot; Trauma
Keywords: Lisfranc Injuries; TMT; Lisfranc Joint Injuries
Introduction/Purpose: Lisfranc injuries are among the most debilitating
injuries to the midfoot. Various classification systems have characterized the injury
patterns with specific focus on the interval between the base of the second metatarsal and
the medial cuneiform as well as the importance of the ligamentous structures of the midfoot.
The medial ligamentous restraints of the first tarsometatarsal (TMT) joint and the bony
involvement of these injuries remains unclear. Improved knowledge on how the first TMT joint
is affected in Lisfranc injuries will provide information on how best to manage these
injuries.
Methods: We conducted a single institution review of all Lisfranc fractures
from 2010 through 2020. Patients were identified by CPT codes. Hardcastle and Myerson
Lisfranc injury classifications and computed tomography and radiograph characterizations of
the first TMT joint were identified by three foot and ankle trained orthopaedic surgeons.
Light’s kappa statistics (mean weighted Cohen’s kappa) evaluated inter-rater reliability of
Lisfranc classifications. The effects injury mechanism and Lisfranc classification on the
first TMT joint were further assessed using t-test, Mann-Whitney U, Fisher’s exact test, and
analysis of variance.
Results: Of 71 patients with a Lisfranc injury, 62 (87%) had a sign of injury
to the first TMT joint, which significantly varied by Lisfranc classification (P<0.001;
Table). Light’s kappa coefficient for inter-rater reliability was 0.46. A fragment of the
first TMT articular surface was present in 39 patients (55%; median size=10mm) and a medial
capsular avulsion fragment was seen in 28 patients (39%). A fracture was present in the
medial cuneiform in 25 patients (35%) and in the first metatarsal in 18 patients (25%).
Forty-nine patients (69%) had medial/lateral TMT joint incongruence (median overhang=4mm);
21 (30%) had dorsal/plantar incongruence (median overhang=6mm), which significantly differed
by Lisfranc classification (P<0.02) and gender (Female=3.5mm; Male=7mm; P<0.03).
Angulation of articular surfaces in the first TMT joint over 5 degrees on the
transverse/antero-posterior plane occurred in 32 patients (45%) and in 12 patients (17%) on
the sagittal/lateral plane, which significantly differed between Lisfranc classifications
(P<0.03).
Conclusion: Lisfranc injuries have great potential for long-term disability
requiring careful screening and diagnosis. The overwhelming majority of Lisfranc injuries
include damage to the first tarsometatarsal joint. This is the first study to our knowledge
that characterizes this in detail. This study found that the most common patterns involving
the first TMT joint included joint incongruity, capsular avulsion and articular surface
fracture. A better understanding of injuries to the first TMT can help orthopaedic surgeons
with diagnosis and management.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00066

## Adolescents with Lisfranc Injury Frequently Have Different Pathology with Higher
Incidence of Proximal Extension of the Ligamentous Disruption

Amr Abdelgawad; Ahmed Thabet, MD

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot; Trauma
Keywords: Lisfranc Injuries; 1st MTP Joint; TMT
Introduction/Purpose: Lisfranc injuries are rare injuries in the adolescent
age group and can be easily missed. Ligamentous Lisfranc injuries have been classically
descried as disruption of the Lisfranc ligament (between medial cuneiform and second
metatarsus) and ligamentous disruption of the first metatarso-phalangeal joint. The study
aimed to report pathological pattern of Lisfranc injury in adolescent patient and if it was
different from the common adult forms.
Methods: This is a retrospective study of patients with Lisfranc injury
treated at a Level 1 trauma center between 2012 and 2019. This study has been IRB approved.
The inclusion criteria were of adolescents with isolated Lisfranc injuries and treated via
surgical intervention. The surgical intervention helped to identify the exact pathology. The
study excluded patients over the age of 18, patient with high energy injuries and patients
treated non-operatively. Patients’ demographics including age and gender, were recorded.
Other variables included the mechanism of injury, side of injury, fracture type, the
intraoperative findings of the ligamentous injury and follow-up data. Follow up radiographs
were reviewed for time to bony union and any post-traumatic complications. Outcomes include
wound healing status, the union status of the fracture, and complications that may arise
along with treatment and follow-up.
Results: A total of 9 patients met the study inclusion criteria. Mean age was
15.4 years old, male to female ratio of 5:4, mean follow-up time was 9.5 months. All
patients achieved full union at the final follow-up. The postoperative course went without
complications except one for patient. The patient had prominent screw under the skin. The
screw removed in the office under local anesthesia. Intraoperative findings in 6/9 (66.6 %)
cases demonstrated a Lisfranc injury pattern with proximal extension through the
inter-cuneiform ligament. Operative treatment in cases of proximal extension included added
fixation between the middle cuneiform and middle cuneiform (screws or plates). Also noted in
2 cases, that the 1st tarso-metatrsal joint was not affected (in contrast to classic
Lisfranc injury in adults). In these cases, no fixation was need for the 1st TMT joint.
Conclusion: Lisfranc injury in adolescent has frequently different pathology
compared to adults’ counterparts. It commonly involves proximal extension with the ligament
disruption. It also sometimes spares the ligaments of the 1st TMT joint. Orthopedic surgeons
should be aware of these changes as it implies changes in the treatment strategy and
fixation construct.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00067

## 10 Year Outcomes of Unilateral vs Bilateral (Staged) Total Ankle Replacement

Nicole G. Abdul, MBChB, BMedSci, MClin Res, MRCS; Jayasree Ramas Ramaskandhan, MPT,
MSc; Karen Smith, MSc, BSc; Mohammad A. Alkhreisat, MD, FRCS T&O; Adam P. Bennett,
MRCS; Malik S. Siddique, FRCS (T&O)

Category: Ankle Arthritis; Ankle
Keywords: Ankle Arthritis; Ankle Arthroplasty; Ankle Outcome Rating Scales
Introduction/Purpose: Comprehensive long-term outcomes of total ankle
replacement (TAR) help guide clinicians when they are deciding on the management of patients
with more than single joint arthritis. Some patients will only require unilateral TARs,
while others will need bilateral TARs. When deciding on treatment plans for patients, it is
important to know the long-term surgical outcomes of both of these groups before treatment
can be recommended. Currently there is a paucity of literature on long-term outcomes of
unilateral versus bilateral TARs. The aim of the study is to assess long-term outcomes in
patients who underwent unilateral vs. staged bilateral TARs.
Methods: We performed a retrospective review of a prospectively completed
hospital registry database for TAR. This consisted of a consecutive series of TARs performed
by one senior surgeon from 2006 to December 2010 with 10-years of follow up. Clinical
complications, radiological complications (lucency, cysts, and osteolysis), and patient
reported outcome measures (WOMAC score, SF-36, general health survey, and patient
satisfaction survey) were included for all patients. Outcomes were evaluated pre-operatively
and at 1, 3, 5, and 10 years post-operatively. Three component mobile bearing implants were
used in all patients.
Results: There were 132 unilateral TARs (Group A) vs. 24 staged bilateral TARs
(Group B). WOMAC scores significantly improved from pre-op to 1 year for pain (45.3 to 77.8;
52 to 76) function (49.1 to 77.8; 53.6 to 76) and stiffness (39.8 to 67.9; 55 to 65) in both
groups respectively (p<0.05). At 5 years, Group B reported higher function scores than
Group A (79.1 vs. 65.7; p=0.05). At 10 years Group B reported significantly better stiffness
scores than Group A (78.5 vs. 59.5; p=0.034). There was no significant difference in SF-36
scores between groups at 5 and 10 years. Group A was 40% dissatisfied with return to
recreational activities compared to 30% in Group B (p>0.05). Group A reported 16%
dissatisfaction with surgery compared to 10% in Group B (p>0.05). At 5 years there were a
higher number of radiological and clinical complications in Group A compared to Group B.
Conclusion: For patient reported outcomes, staged bilateral TAR patients had
more improvement in function at 5 years, and stiffness at 10 years, when compared to
unilateral TAR patients. Unilateral TAR patients had higher rates of complications compared
to staged bilateral TAR patients at 5 years.A limitation of this study was the smaller size
of Group B patients compared to Group A. We will be able to present a detailed breakdown of
outcomes at each time point if the abstract is selected for presentation.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00068

## A Bioengineered Organized Collagen-Based Microfibrous Implant Designed for Tendon
Regeneration

Samuel B. Adams, Jr., MD; Michael P. Francis; Yas Maghdouri-White; Nardos Sori; Nathan
Kemper

Category: Basic Sciences/Biologics; Sports
Keywords: Tendon Injuries; Biologics; Achilles Tendon Repair
Introduction/Purpose: Tendon healing is a slow and complicated process that
results in inferior structural and functional properties compared to healthy tissue. It may
be possible to improve outcomes of tendon healing with enhancement of biological repair
through the development of tissue engineered medical products (TEMPs). Although many tendons
heal with satisfactory outcomes, others do not, leading to pain and additional cost. Current
augments for repair lack either native tissue structure or composition, limiting their
potential effectiveness. For example, in tendon healing, restoring native organized and
dense collagen composition is a primary goal; however, most TEMPs, such as lyophilized
collagen or electrospun pure collagen fibers, are mechanically weak and unstable. For
optimizing stability and biocompatibility, collagen can be combined with a high-performance
co-biopolymer, such as poly(D,L-lactide) (PDLLA).
Methods: The purpose of this study was to demonstrate the efficacy of a novel
biointegrative construct, composed of type I collagen and PDLLA for Achilles tendon repair.
PDLLA is biocompatible, has shown to support cell growth, and degrades to CO2 and H2O in
vivo. The electrospun copolymer constructs were post-processed with low-temperature
annealing to enhance their porosity and mechanical stability. The constructs were first
tested for their ability to absorb blood and platelet-rich-plasma (PRP). Additionally, the
constructs were tested in vivo by implantation in a rabbit Achilles tendon injury model by
creating a 7 mm midsubstance Achilles defect. For each tendon defect, a copolymer construct
was circumferentially wrapped around the defect and sutured into place. Finally, human
cadaver testing was performed to assess implant handling and fixation characteristics.
Results: Collagen-PDLLA constructs absorbed more than ten times their weight
in blood and PRP. Histologically, rabbit tendons showed rapid implant cellularization by 2-8
weeks, along with de novo collagen deposition. By 16 weeks, dense collagenous connective
tissue was seen integrating at the tendon-implant interface and throughout the implant.
Movin-Bonar scores for the collagen-PDLLA-implanted and sham-operated tendons were identical
from 16-72 weeks post-operatively, indicating a return to normal tendon morphology. Overall,
surgical application of the collagen-PDLLA constructs demonstrated dense collagenous fibrous
connective tissue ingrowth into and around the implant. Moreover, cadaver surgical
implantation of the implant in a minimally invasive Achilles tendon repair and arthroscopic
rotator cuff repair, allowed easy graft orientation and delivery as well as excellent
handleability and suture fixation to the native tendon.
Conclusion: Electrospun biointegrative implants were tissue-engineered to
enhance cell infiltration for promoting tissue integration and functional remodeling. When
implanted in the rabbit Achilles tendon, the implants demonstrated new in situ tissue
generation and remodeled into dense, regularly oriented connective tissue at the
tendon-implant interface. Collagenous ingrowth may be crucial in tendon protection and
significantly progresses towards improving clinical outcomes following tendon injury.
Moreover, the implants demonstrated additional clinical utility by absorbing greater than
ten times their weight in biologic fluids which demonstrates the potential to combine this
novel biointegrative implant with additional fluid based biologic therapies.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00069

## Increasing Age and Modifiable Comorbidities are Associated with Short Term
Complications after ORIF of Ankle Fractures

Samuel B. Adams, Jr., MD; Richard Danilkowicz; Nathan L. Grimm; Jaewhan Kim; Jeffrey
O’Donnell; Nicholas B. Allen

Category: Trauma; Ankle
Keywords: Ankle Fracture; Ankle; Ankle Pain
Introduction/Purpose: Ankle fractures are common orthopedic injuries with
complication rates fixation of up to 40%. Limited evidence exists in the literature
regarding complications in the elderly population, and moreover, these studies frequently
define elderly arbitrarily at 60-65 years old. The purpose of the present study was to
utilize a large, validated database to evaluate whether there is an inflection point of age
when postoperative complications after an ankle fracture significantly increase.
Methods: A retrospective review of all patients in the American College of
Surgeons National Surgical Quality Improvement Program database who underwent fixation of an
ankle fracture between 2012-2018 was performed. Patients were identified within the database
using the Current Procedural Terminology codes. Appropriate statistical analysis was
performed with p-value less than 0.05 considered statistically significant.
Results: A total of 27,633 fractures were including and comprised of 221
posterior malleolar, 1,567 medial malleolar, 8,495 lateral malleolar, 10,175 bimalleolar,
and 7,175 trimalleolar. A total of 1,545 complications were encountered (5.6%). There was a
statistically significant association between increasing age and complications (OR=1.03;
p<0.001). Further analysis shows the largest spike in complications within the age 78+
bracket. There were no overall interaction effects between age and fracture subtype
(p=0.223).
Conclusion: ORIF of ankle fractures is a common orthopedic procedure performed
on patients of all ages, with complications ranging in severity. In order to best counsel
patients on their individual post-operative risks, large data sets are often necessary to
prognosticate. This study found that postoperative complications increase with advanced age.
The incidence of complications did not spike for patients around the age of 65, but rather
followed an incremental linear pattern with the largest increase in odds ratio occurring at
age 78 and above. Complication rate was not associated with specific fracture type based off
of ICD codes.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00070

## Racial Disparities in Total Ankle Arthroplasty: An Analysis of a Large National
Dataset
Samuel B. Adams, Jr., MD; Jason Long; Richard Danilkowicz; Nathan L. Grimm; Jeffrey
O’Donnell; Jaewhan Kim
Category: Ankle; Other
Keywords: Ankle Arthritis; Healthcare Reform; Ankle Replacement
Introduction/Purpose: A significant body of literature exists that documents
the racial/ethnic disparities in orthopedics. Previous studies have looked at racial
disparities in total ankle arthroplasty and have shown concerning TAA utilization rates. One
such study detailed a two fold difference in rate per 100,000 of 0.14 in Whites vs. 0.07 in
Blacks in 1998, which continued to worsen and by 2011 the utilization rate was 1.17 in
Whites vs. 0.33 in Blacks, a 4-fold difference. The purpose of this study was to update the
literature and analyze the utilization rates of TAA by race as well as to detect any
differences in outcomes between the groups through the most updated data available in the
National Surgical Quality Improvement Program (NSQIP) database.
Methods: A retrospective cohort study was performed utilizing the National
Surgical Quality Improvement Program (NSQIP) database. Patients were identified for
inclusion using the Current Procedural Terminology (CPT) codes 27700 and 27702,
corresponding to arthroplasty ankle and arthroplasty ankle with implant, respectively. All
patient’s with known race were included, non-Hispanic White, non-Hispanic Black, Asian,
Native American, and Hispanic. A total of 1164 patients met inclusion criteria for this
study.
Results: A total of 1164 patients with known race undergoing TAA from
2012-2018 were included in this analysis. Of these patients 1051 (90.3%) were non-Hispanic
white (White), and 113 (9.7%) were non-Hispanic Black, Asian, Native American, and Hispanic
(Non-White). The mean patient age for White patients was 63.7 years, compared to 55.3 years
for Non-White patients which was statistically significant. (p-value <0.01). There was a
similar distribution of males and females in each group, and smoking status and presence of
diabetes mellitus was similar in both groups. In the listed postoperative complications,
non-white patients were at no increased risk of developing superficial wound infection, deep
wound infection, PE, DVT, requiring a blood transfusion, requiring another operation, or
requiring readmission to the hospital within 30 days.
Conclusion: Based on this large national data set, between the years 2012 and
2018 there was nearly 10-fold more non-Hispanic white patient’s undergoing TAA when compared
to other racial/ethnic groups. This unfortunately highlights the continued, if not worsening
racial disparities present in TAA. Additionally, no differences were found in post-operative
outcomes based on racial or ethnic group. This indicates that different racial or ethnic
groups are doing no worse post-operatively from TAA when compared to Whites.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00071

## Pain Mapping as a Predictive Model for Diagnosis and Treatment in Foot and Ankle
Conditions

Vidhi Adukia; Martin Hughes; Alistair J. Best; Patricia Allen, MB ChB; Jitendra
Mangwani, MBBS,MS(Orth),FRCS(Tr&Orth)

Category: Other; Ankle; Ankle Arthritis; Bunion; Hindfoot; Lesser Toes;
Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Pain; Outpatient; Elective Surgery
Introduction/Purpose: With the COVID19 pandemic, virtual consultations are
becoming a necessity. Clinicians are having to adapt consultations to determine where
patients’ symptoms are, and what the appropriate next line of investigation or treatment
should be, without the benefit of traditional face-to-face contact. The aim of this project
was therefore to use pain mapping in foot and ankle conditions, in order to see if there was
a predictive correlation between certain symptomatic areas and the ultimate surgical
treatment required by patients.
Methods: Data was collected prospectively from patients attending foot and
ankle clinics from 2014 to 2019, and this was cross- matched with operative data
subsequently. Data included patient demographics, co-morbidities, smoking status and
previous injuries or surgeries. In a structured questionnaire, patients also marked the
regions of the foot and ankle that they thought were the most symptomatic. The foot and
ankle was divided into 12 segments for the purpose of analysis.
Results: A total of 2007 patients completed these questionnaires, from which
operative data was available for 407 patients. In the first instance, data was analysed for
122 patients who underwent one of five specific procedures. Pain mapping was found to have a
good predictive value for first MTP fusion and bunion surgery (n=20, 46), 1st metatarsal
cheilectomy (n=10) and arthroscopic ankle arthrodesis (n=23). The least predictive pain
mapping was seen for patients who had a triple arthrodesis (n=23), with those patients
presenting with pain more globally in the foot and ankle.
Conclusion: The results suggest that pain mapping can be used effectively as
postal questionnaires, prior to a virtual consultation, as an aid to predict diagnosis and
the ultimate treatment required in some specific foot and ankle conditions.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00072

## The Generation Game: Has Modern Contemporary Total Ankle Replacement (TAR) Improved
Survivorship?
Raju S. Ahluwalia, MBBS, MFSEM(UK), BSc, FRCS(Tr&Orth); Jean Pierre; En Lin Goh; Daniel
Hay; Isobel Pilkington; Nadja Bednarczuk
Category: Ankle
Keywords: Ankle
Introduction/Purpose: Total ankle replacements (TARs) provide pain relief with
preservation of movement and function. The most successful TARs are either 2nd or current
3rd generation in design, whilst 4th generation implants are steadily being introduced. This
meta-analysis evaluates the survivorship of 2nd, 3rd and 4th generation ankle replacements
used today to determine whether any difference between generations and bearing types
exist.
Methods: A systematic review and meta-analysis of published data from January
2000 to January 2020 was conducted following PRISMA guidelines. Inclusion criteria: English
language papers, adult population, >= 20 ankles with a minimum follow up >= 24 months,
pre- and post-operative functional scores available. Clinical outcomes of primary TARs were
evaluated as well as their associated survivorship. Statistical analyses were undertaken to
determine survivorship and complications associated with the second, third and fourth
generation implants and the bearing design. Ankle generations were determined from the
original studies and confirmed based on literature set definitions. The modified Coleman
Methodology Score was used to evaluate the quality of studies.
Results: A total of 4642 TARs in 4487patients from 51-studies were included.
The mean age was 61.9years and mean follow up of 57.8months. The most common indications
were post-traumatic-OA (54.5%), primary-OA (25.5%) and inflammatory-arthropathy (15.2%).
Relative-risk calculations showed significant reductions in nerve-injury (p < 0.01),
post-operative fracture ( p < 0.01), wound complications (p < 0.01), radiolucencies (
p < 0.01), or heterotopic bone formation (p < 0.01), aseptic loosening (p < 0.01)
for later generations. Sensitivity analysis performed for the withdrawal of 2 prostheses
showed 2yr survivorship for 2nd, 3rd and 4th generation TARs was 95.3%, 97.9% and 98.9% (p
< 0.05). Third-generation TARs had better 10-yr survivorship compared to 2nd generation
(83.50% vs. 70.76%) (p < 0.01). Bearing design had little influence on survivorship.
Conclusion: In the real world subsequent generations of modern contemporary
TAR demonstrate lower rates of complications and improved survivorship independent of
bearing design, without reaching designer series levels. Population changes have meant a
reduction in mean age at implementation and the commonest pathology for a TAR has become
post traumatic OA without a observed detrimental affect in outcomes. Even so, superior
short-term survivorship of fourth generation implants is promising for the future of modern
TAR surgery.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00073

## Performance Outcomes after Surgical Repair of Achilles Tendon Rupture in the Women’s
National Basketball Association

Amiethab A. Aiyer, MD; Blake H. Hodgens; Joseph S. Geller; Michael G. Rizzo; Julianne
Munoz; Jonathan R. Kaplan, MD

Category: Sports; Ankle
Keywords: Achilles Tendon Rupture; Basketball; Return to Play
Introduction/Purpose: Achilles tendon ruptures are devastating injuries in
elite athletes. Current literature shows poor prognosis following Achilles tendon rupture in
professional male basketball players, however there are currently no studies examining the
effects of Achilles tendon rupture on performance outcomes in the Women’s National
Basketball Association (WNBA). Understanding the impact Achilles tendon rupture has on
return to play and performance metrics in the WNBA will provide valuable information to
players, team personnel, and medical professionals on post-injury expectations.
Methods: 17 WNBA players who sustained an Achilles tendon rupture from
2000-2019 were identified from publicly available injury reports and player profiles.
Demographic information collected included age, body mass index (BMI), position, and service
in the WNBA when the tear occurred. Statistics were collected for the season before the
injury, and two seasons after the injury, and the Player Efficiency Rating (PER) was
calculated. PER is defined as ([points + rebounds + assists + steals + blocks] - [(field
goals attempted - field goals made) + (free throws attempted - free throws made) +
turnovers]) / games. Controls were matched by service in the WNBA, position, and PER.
Results: Following Achilles tendon rupture, four players never returned to
play in the WNBA, while seven players failed to play >1 season. Players who returned saw
a significant decrease in the number of minutes played per game in both their first and
second seasons post-injury (mean differences -6.11 and -6.54, respectively, p<0.01).
Players also suffered a significant decrease in PER during their second season after injury
compared with their pre-injury PER (mean difference -2.53, p=0.024). Compared to healthy
controls, players who returned to play were significantly more likely to experience a
decrease in minutes played per game at both one and two seasons postoperatively (-6.11 mpg
vs +1.05 mpg, p<0.01 and -6.54 mpg vs +0.53 mpg, p= 0.018, respectively), while also
experiencing significant per-game decreases in field goals (-0.85 vs + 0.20, p=0.47), free
throws (-1.04 vs +0.12, p<0.01), steals (-0.48 vs +0.24, p=0.018), and points scored
(-2.89 vs +0.58, p=0.014).
Conclusion: Achilles tendon rupture and subsequent surgical repair in the
Women’s National Basketball Association (WNBA) accounted for significantly decreased minutes
played and performance outcomes in athletes at one and two years post-operatively compared
to both their pre-injury year and healthy matched controls. 23.5% of players failed to
return to the WNBA, while 41.2% failed to play >1 season after returning from injury.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00074

## Cost Analysis and Utilization of Weight Bearing CT

Nathaniel B. Alexander; Clayton C. Bettin, MD; Shumaila Sarfani, MD; Carson D.
Strickland, MD; David R. Richardson, MD; G. Andrew Murphy, MD; Benjamin J. Grear,
MD

Category: Other
Keywords: Cost Effectiveness; Weight Bearing CT; Cost
Introduction/Purpose: Weightbearing Computed Tomography (WB CT) is becoming a
valuable tool in the evaluation and understanding of foot and ankle pathology. With this,
more practices may be interested in acquiring WB CT scanners and understanding cost
effectiveness of acquisition. To date there are currently no US based reports of cost
analysis of WB CT scanners. Our study is a cost analysis of WB CT at tertiary referral
physician owned practice.
Methods: Data was collected for all patients who underwent imaging utilizing a
weight bearing CT scanner at our institution from the date of acquisition in 2016. For ease
of analysis and applicability of information across orthopedic practices, Medicare
reimbursement was used as a uniform estimation of reimbursement across all insurances at a
rate of $163.50 per scan. We then compared the number of scans obtained per month to total
costs related to acquiring and maintaining the WB CT machine. Secondary variables collected
included patient demographic information, pathology location (forefoot, midfoot, hindfoot),
and utilization of the device by subspecialty.
Results: A WB CT scanner was acquired by a private group in 2016. A proforma
analysis demonstrated $179,000 to acquire the machine, $30,000 for extended warranty, $995
for additional licenses. Between August 2016 and February 2021, 1702 unilateral studies and
100 bilateral studies were performed. Patients ranged in age from 6 to 92. Average age was
45 years with 45.9% male and 54.1% female. Forty-one staff utilized the CT scanner from
various subspecialties with 5 Foot and Ankle (F&A) surgeons ordering 80% of scans. When
dividing total costs by number of months since acquisition the monthly cost of the device is
$3,318 which requires 20 scans per month when using Medicare reimbursement rates. Over a 55
month the average number of scans per month is 34. When dividing the cost of acquisition by
reimbursement per scan, the breakeven point was 1,284 scans which occurred at approximately
3 years.
Conclusion: As WB CT scans become a valuable tool for the analysis of foot and
ankle pathology, groups may be interested in understanding the financial implications of
such an investment. Our study is the only cost analysis based in the United States of WB CT.
We found that WB CT is a cost-effective tool that can be used to evaluate a number or
pathologies in the foot and ankle.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00075

## Ten-Year Outcomes of MobilityTM Total Ankle Replacement Confirms Radiological Loosening
is Not Conclusive or Reliable for Long Term Survival Analysis

Mohammad A. Alkhreisat, MD, FRCS T&O; Jayasree Ramas Ramaskandhan, MPT, MSc; Adam
P. Bennett, MRCS; Karen Smith, MSc, BSc; Malik S. Siddique, FRCS (T&O)

Category: Ankle; Ankle Arthritis
Keywords: Ankle Arthroplasty; Ankle Replacement; Outcomes Measures
Introduction/Purpose: Different designs of Ankle replacement are being
performed nowadays, long-term outcome data is the better way to understand these implants
behaviour and survival. We compared the differences in demographic data, clinical,
Radiological, and patient-reported outcomes among patients who underwent total ankle
replacement performed with use of the uncemented stemmed mobile bearing (MOBILITY) Total
Ankle System with 10 year follow up.
Methods: We analysed 156 (15 bilateral ankles (3 non-mobility) Mobility TAR
(of which 41, 45, 22 for OA, PTOA, Inflammatory arthritis respectively). Mean age 61.7 (SD
11.4) (Range 33-90). 70 Ankles had 10 years of follow up, 115 had 5 years follow up,. 96
were males, with 30 patients deceased before 10 years follow up covering 33 ankles. All from
our local registry looking at the patient’s demographic data, and patient-reported outcomes
as measured with use of WOMAC (Western Ontario and McMaster Universities Osteoarthritis
Index), the Foot and Ankle Outcome Score (FAOS), the 36-item Short-Form (SF-36) Health
Survey, clinical and radiological outcomes and patient-satisfaction scores, collected
preoperatively and at 1,3,5 and 10 years postoperatively.
Results: Of the 156 ankle1060251 had wound complications after surgery two
only needed surgical debridement. 5 CRPS,16 stress fractures 2 only requiring surgical
fixation,11 had subsequent STJ fusion.77 had no signs of radiolucency. The rest had some
degree of radiolucency on x-ray (55% on the tibia side) only 11 where symptomatic to require
further surgery (6 revised to another TAR, 2 fused, and3 required bone grafting). 11 needed
osteotomies after surgery. Aseptic loosening and infection are the least common
complications requiring revision. There was significant improvement in WOMAC for pain (35.9
to 67.9), function (40.6 to 66.9) and stiffness (39.4 to 62.5) from pre-op to 1 year
(p<0.05), this was maintained for 10 years. Although improvement noted in the composite
physical component of SF=36 (28.3 to 34.5) there was no significant increase for composite
mental component score. 77.5% reported satisfaction from pain relief,72.4% with return to
ADL, 40% were dissatisfied with return to recreational activities and15.5% reported
dissatisfaction with overall results of surgery. Mobility TAR shown about 86% survival in
our 10 years cohort.
Conclusion: With improved PROMS at 1,3,5,10 years showing Patient satisfaction
score at 10 years indicates that uncemented mobile bearing implants have good long-term
results, osteolysis and aseptic loosening as the least common cause of revision. It is
pertinent that reporting of radiological loosening in an uncemented ankle is not conclusive
or reliable for long term survival analysis.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00076

## Clinical and Radiological Results after Use of A Human Bone Graft (Shark Screw®) in TMT
II/+II Arthrodesis

Pascal Amann; Peter Bock, MD

Category: Basic Sciences/Biologics; Midfoot/Forefoot; Trauma
Keywords: Tarsometatarsal Arthrodesis; Allograft; Outcomes Measures
Introduction/Purpose: The tarsometatarsal joints, also called Lisfranc-joints,
are the joints between the midfoot bones and the tarsal bones. The continuous arthrotic
destruction of the tarsometatarsal joints leads to pain and foot deformities. The therapy of
choice after failure of conservative therapy is arthrodesis. For this operation there is the
possibility of using a transplant screw made of allogenic human bone material (Shark Screw),
instead of conventional metal implants. This study investigates the clinical significance
and radiological integration of the allogenic bone screw for arthrodesis of the
tarsometatarsal joints II/+III.
Methods: This is a retrospective study involving 20 feet of 17 patients who
received TMT II/+III arthrodesis with an allogenic bone screw (Shark Screw) at Speising
Orthopedic Hospital in Vienna, Austria. VAS, FFI, FAOS, and AOFAS were used as measures to
compare preoperative and postoperative results. Radiologic integration in the recipient bone
was also evaluated.
Results: Comparing preoperative with the postoperative score of 20 feet from
17 patients, a significant reduction of the VAS (pain) from 7,6 points to 1,4 points
(p=<0,001)), as well as a decrease of the VAS (function) from 7,25 points to 1,8 points
has been observed. Further, a significant reduction of the FFI from 62,3% to 16,7%
(p=<0,001), and a significant increase from 29,7 points to 79,9 points of the AOFAS
(p=<0,001) was detected. Analyzing the FAOS score, there was a significant (p=<0,001)
increase of all subscales (Symptoms, Pain, Function and Quality of life). Moreover, in all
cases a good radiological integration into the recieverbone was noticed. As a result the
screw was, after a follow-up time from 12 months, no longer distinguishable from the
original bone.
Conclusion: These results demonstrated that the human bone screw used for TMT
II/+III arthrodesis has a good outcome and reliable clinical significance. This study may be
used for further investigations that should be performed to ensure this result.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00077

## The Incidence of Surgical Cancellations: Lessons Learned from the Resumption of
Elective Orthopaedic Operating after the First Wave of COVID-19

Emlyn Amutharasan; Karan Malhotra, MRCS; Amit Zaveri, MBBS; Matthew J. Welck, MD,
FRCS(Orth)

Category: Ankle; Other
Keywords: Economic Analysis; Cost Effectiveness; Elective Surgery
Introduction/Purpose: In the aftermath of the first wave of COVID-19, there
was a significant backlog of elective orthopaedic cases. To address this problem, efficient
running of theatres with optimal theatre utilisation was paramount. However, as new
processes were introduced to reduce transmission risk, ‘last-minute’ cancellations of
patients were inevitable. We report our experience of resuming elective work, with
particular focus on surgical cancellations, and lessons learned.
Methods: This was a retrospective, single centre audit at a specialist
elective orthopaedic hospital. We identified and examined all cancellations in foot and
ankle cases between June and October 2020. Data was analysed and cancellations were
categorised into groups by reason of cancellation.
Results: There were 36 cancellations out of 193 patients listed (19%).
Twenty-one cancellations (57%) were directly related to COVID-19 and its processes. These
comprised six patients (17%) with COVID-19 swab related issues including: booking errors,
transport problems, non-attendance, and invalid swabs. Three patients (8%) contracted
COVID-19 preoperatively. Nine patients (25%) cancelled their procedure at short notice
amidst fears of contracting COVID-19 perioperatively. Three (8%) cancellations were due to
the patient being unfit on the day of surgery - these issues were not routinely identified
at pre-assessment appointments as face-to-face pre-assessment clinics had been suspended. A
further 15 cancellations (42%) were due to non- COVID-19 reasons including lack of beds,
unwell patients, and patients cancelling for other personal reasons.
Conclusion: Mitigation of cancellations is a key factor in maintaining theatre
utilisation. Based on our experience we recommend thorough counselling of patients regarding
the importance of self-isolation prior to surgery and of the pre-operative swab. Having a
designated team to manage COVID-19 swabs is also critical. Reinstatement of face-to-face
pre-operative assessments may help identify evolving issues and prevent last-minute
cancellations. These lessons are pertinent to trusts, particularly as we emerge from
subsequent waves of COVID-19.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00078

## Popliteal Nerve Catheters for Perioperative Pain Control in Charcot-Marie-Tooth
Patients

Tonya W. An, MD; Elliot S. Schwartz; Michael S. Kissen; Gabriel A. Pollock; Glenn B.
Pfeffer, MD

Category: Hindfoot; Other
Keywords: Cavovarus Foot Deformity; Charcot Marie Tooth; Pain
Introduction/Purpose: The underlying neuropathy of Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT)
disease often makes postoperative pain control difficult. Previous institutional regimens
for outpatient foot and ankle surgery in this population included preoperative single-shot
regional nerve blocks and oral narcotic analgesics, but still resulted in unplanned visits
for uncontrolled pain, especially after block effects abated. Longer duration of regional
anesthesia effects were desired to manage pain and reduce opioid intake. We aimed to
investigate the safety and efficacy of ultrasound-guided placement of popliteal nerve
catheters in CMT patients undergoing foot deformity correction surgery.
Methods: Twelve CMT patients, average 28 (range 13-53) years old, undergoing
reconstructive surgery by a single foot and ankle attending surgeon were consented for
preoperative ultrasound-guided popliteal catheters and single-shot adductor canal blocks.
Patients were separately consented for enrollment in this study and follow-up questionnaires
as per Institutional Review Board protocol. Seven patients underwent joint sparing
reconstruction and 5 patients had subtalar fusion. Patients were discharged on postoperative
day (POD) 0. Popliteal catheters were maintained, providing continuous infusion and
patient-controlled bolus doses until POD3, and then self-discontinued. Oral oxycodone 5 mg
(#60-80 pills) was prescribed as needed for breakthrough pain. Daily visual analog scale
(VAS) pain scores were collected by phone. Patient satisfaction (0-10) was surveyed on POD5.
A pill count for opioid consumption occurred at the surgeon’s office on POD14. Five-point
sensory testing using a 10g Semmes- Weinstein monofilament was performed preoperatively and
on POD14.
Results: All patients tolerated the catheters well. There were no
complications related to infection or catheter malfunction requiring replacement. Four of
the twelve patients had pre-existing sensory deficits involving at least two areas on the
five-point monofilament test (Table 1). Postoperative testing showed these deficits were
unchanged and there were no instances of new sensory deficits. Postoperative VAS pain scores
were typically low with the median value (interquartile range IQR) 3.7 (1.5 - 5.75) on POD1,
3.2 (1.75 - 4.25) on POD2, and 2.5 (1 - 3.5) on POD3 ( ). At POD14, VAS pain was 1 (0.75-1). Patients
consumed an average total of 25 oxycodone pills (IQR 9-42) over 2 weeks, less than half the
prescribed number. Patient satisfaction was high with the mean (standard deviation) score of
9.1 (1.6). All patients reported they would choose to have a nerve catheter again for a
similar surgery.
Conclusion: Regional anesthesia using ultrasound-guided popliteal catheters
was effective for pain control in this series of CMT patients undergoing deformity
correction. Opioid consumption was reduced from historical levels and no patients required
emergency treatment for uncontrolled pain. These catheters provided three days of local
anesthetic infusion. No new sensory deficits were detected and patients with underlying
preoperative sensory deficits remained unchanged. Patients were highly satisfied. This small
study group provides preliminary evidence supporting nerve catheter usage in CMT patients.
Utilizing ultrasound guidance to minimize nerve injury, nerve catheters may allow safe and
successful outpatient correction of CMT foot deformity.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00079

## Preliminary Results of an Institutional Charcot Database: Risk Factors of Conversion to
Operative Treatment in Charcot Arthropathy Patients

Victor Anciano, MD; Samuel E. Ford, MD; Todd A. Irwin, MD

Category: Diabetes; Midfoot/Forefoot; Other
Keywords: Charcot Arthropathy; Charcot; Diabetes
Introduction/Purpose: Operative correction of Charcot is generally accepted
for nonplantigrade deformity that cannot be accommodated with commercially available
therapeutic footwear, painful ‘nonunion’ type pain, in addition to the accepted indications
of osteomyelitis, persistent wounds, and non-braceability. Classification schemes associated
with Charcot foot are primarily descriptive in nature. Scant literature has attempted to
correlate characteristics of the deformity with a specific operative strategy to enable
correction of the acquired deformity. Hence, the purpose of this study is to create a
database that will shed light on much needed guidelines in the management of Charcot
arthropathy. Among those guidelines, identifying risk factors for conversion to operative
treatment of non-operative Charcot feet is essential.
Methods: A query of our institution administrative database was performed
based on the Charcot ICD-10 codes for reconstruction procedures between 2015 - 2018. Clinic
and hospital medical records were reviewed to determine if Charcot neuropathy was diagnosed
and identify treatment plan. Minimal follow up was established at 2 years. Patient must have
completed all surveys in the outcomes portion during their follow up period. If bilateral
patients are identified, all records will be retained, and patients will be addressed as
separate sides. The primary outcome was conversion to surgery. Independent risk factors
analyzed were demographics, history of diabetes, peripheral vascular disease, use of
anticoagulants, tobacco use, shoe wear, bracing, plantigrade foot, neuropathy, presence of
ulcer, infection, and Brodsky classification. The data was both stored and analyzed in the
REDCap electronic data capture tools hosted at our institution.
Results: A total of one hundred and eighty (180) records were initially
queried for. Thirty-four (34) patients met the inclusion criteria. Of the 34 patients,
fourteen (41%) patients had conversion to surgery. Average age of patients who converted to
surgery was 53.1 compared to patients who remained in the non-operative treatment arm (age =
66.1) (p=0.05) (Table 1). Diabetes, peripheral vascular disease, anticoagulant, and tobacco
use were not found to be significant risk factors. 11 (78.6%) patients who underwent surgery
had diabetes compared to 8 (40%) patients in the nonoperative arm (p=0.160). 12 (85.7%)
patients in the conversion arm were diagnosed with peripheral vascular disease (p=0.184).
Type of shoe wear, bracing, plantigrade foot, neuropathy, presence of ulcer, and Brodsky
classification were not found to be significant risk factor.
Conclusion: Identification of risk factors that lead to conversion to surgical
treatment of Charcot is important. There are no well-established guidelines with regards to
management or indications for surgery. This database aims to provide valuable insight into
guidelines and recommendations for Charcot treatment. Preliminary results did not find
independent risk factors for conversion to surgical treatment other than age. Presumably,
younger patients with higher functional demands, or patients with high disease burden at
younger ages are at higher risk of requiring surgical intervention. As our database expands,
we will better identify risk factors and include treatment outcomes Charcot patients.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00080

## Clinical and PROMIS Outcomes of Maisonneuve Fractures

Nicholas A. Andrews; Abhinav Agarwal, MBBS; Megan Coffin; Kenneth J. Fellows; James
Pate, BS; Vyshnavi Rallapalle; Whitt Harrelson; Ashish Shah, MD

Category: Ankle; Trauma
Keywords: Ankle Fracture; PROMIS; Clinical Outcomes
Introduction/Purpose: Torsional injury to the foot and ankle may result in
high fibular fracture with disruption of the syndesmotic ligaments, interosseous membrane,
and other associated injuries to medial, posterior structures of the ankle. High Fibular
Fracture at the fibular neck is referred as Maisonneuve Fracture of Fibula (MFF). These
injuries are often missed or misdiagnosed as ankle sprains. Most of the current
classification consider MFF a variant of ankle fracture with disruption of syndesmosis and
high fibular fracture {Lauge Hansen PER, AO C3, Weber type C}. Only a few articles have
described associated injuries and surgical treatment outcomes. The study’s primary aim is to
evaluate the associated injuries of MFF and the outcomes of our treatment approach.
Methods: All patients undergoing syndesmotic fixation (CPT 27829) at a large
tertiary academic center from 2012-2020 were identified. In these 748 patients, patient
radiographs were reviewed to identify patients with Maisonneuve fractures (AO-44C3). Medical
records were reviewed for patient characteristics, energy information of original injury,
operative variables, and complications. Radiographic reduction was assessed on standard
radiograph with assessment of the tibiofibular clear space and tibiofibular overlap on AP
and mortise views, talocrural angle, the medial clear space, shenton line, and fibular
station. An abnormality in one of these parameters was considered an abnormal reduction.
Patients were contact to complete PROMIS Physical function and Pain Interference
postoperatively. A total of 24 patients with Maisonneuve fractures were identified and
included in analysis. Eleven patients completed PROMIS outcomes measures for a response rate
of 55%, as four patients were deceased or incarcerated at the time of survey.
Results: The average age was 45.3 (16 SD) with a mean BMI of 31.3 (10.4 SD).
Nineteen patients were male (79.2%) with only 5 females (20.8). The mechanism of injury was
low energy in 16/24 patients (66.7%) leaving 8 (33.3%) patients with high energy mechanisms.
In addition to the high fibular fracture, a total of 13 patients (54.2%) had a posterior
malleolar fracture, 11 (45.8%) had a medial malleolar fracture, and 8 (33.3%) had a deltoid
ligament injury. Seven patients (29.2%) received screw fixation compared to 14 patients
(58.3%) with tightrope fixation. Three patients (12.5%) received both tightropes and screws.
No patient developed wound complications, and two patients underwent reoperation. Abnormal
reduction occurred in 5/24 patients (20.8%) at final clinical follow up. At a median of 20
months (25 IQR) postoperatively, the median PROMIS physical function and pain interference
scores were 41.2 (13.0 IQR) and 52.8 (4.8 IQR), respectively.
Conclusion: Maisonneuve fractures are an extremely rare ankle fracture variant
with a diverse subset of injury patterns. Our results show the clinical outcomes of
Maisonneuve fractures are largely satisfactory in terms of wound complications and
intermediate term outcomes. While 21% of patients were determined to have abnormal reduction
postoperatively, we are limited by the inherent difficulties of assessing syndesmosis on
plain radiographs rather than advanced imaging. PROMIS outcome scores demonstrate
Maisonneuve fractures patients are more impacted by loss of function than pain, but both are
within a standard deviation of the population mean.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00081

## Impact of Resilience on Patient Reported Outcomes of First Metatarsophalangeal
Arthrodesis

Nicholas A. Andrews; Sterling Tran; Jared R. Halstrom, BS; Jessyca Ray; Whitt
Harrelson; Aseel G. Dib, BS; Abhinav Agarwal, MBBS; Ashish Shah, MD

Category: Other; Ankle; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: 1st MTP Joint; Arthrodesis; PROMIS
Introduction/Purpose: Resilience is an interactive dynamic construct most
simply defined as the ability to recover from stress. To date, there is no literature
examining the impact of resilience on the outcomes following foot and ankle surgery.
Methods: We retrospectively reviewed patients who underwent first MTP
arthrodesis from September 2011 to May 2020, 98 met inclusion criteria. Medical records were
reviewed for patient characteristics and union status. PROMIS Physical Function (PF), Pain
Interference (PI), Depression (D), and the Foot Function Index (FFI) were collected.
Resilience was measured using the Brief Resilience Scale. A multivariable linear regression
analysis examining the impact of resilience on patient reported outcomes while adjusting for
potential confounding covariates was conducted.
Results: At an average of 3.4+-2.6 (SD) years postoperatively, resilience was
found to have an independent effect on patient reported outcomes across all instruments,
except the FFI pain subscale. Resilience’s effect on the instruments was as follows: PROMIS
physical function (Unstandardized β 5.0, 95% CI 2.6 to 7.4), PROMIS pain interference
(Unstandardized β -4.8, 95% CI - 7.8 to -1.8), PROMIS Depression (Unstandardized β -9.4,
(95% CI -12.8 to -6.1), FFI disability subscale (Unstandardized beta -13.3, 95% CI -20.3 to
-6.3 ), FFI activity limitation subscale (Unstandardized beta -15.7, 95% CI -23.0 to -8.5),
FFI total (Unstandardized beta -11.7, 95% CI -18.1 to -5.4), and FFI pain subscale
(Unstandardized beta -6.5, 95% CI -13.1 to.01).
Conclusion: In this first study examining the impact of resilience following
foot and ankle surgery, we found that resilience has an independent positive effect on
overall physical function, disability, pain, and mental health following MTP arthrodesis.
Preoperative resilience scores could be used to predict postoperative functional outcomes
following MTP arthrodesis and guide postoperative rehabilitation. These findings help
establish the role of early positive psychosocial characteristics within orthopaedic foot
and ankle population.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00082

## Long Term Patient Reported Outcomes of Tarsal Coalition Resection in Pediatric
Patients

Nicholas A. Andrews; Timothy Torrez; Jared R. Halstrom, BS; Tanvee Sinha; James Pate,
BS; Abhinav Agarwal, MBBS; Michael J. Conklin; Ashish Shah, MD

Category: Hindfoot; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Tarsal Coalitions; PROMIS; Clinical Outcomes
Introduction/Purpose: Tarsal Coalition has been known to be associated with
pes planovalgus, unrelenting pain, recurrent sprains, and arthrosis due to an abnormal
connection between two or more bones of the feet following failure of segmentation during
development. Three entities of coalition exist fibrous, cartilaginous and osseous. Most
commonly patients present with pain during activity. On exam range of motion is usually
limited and there may be valgus or varus malalignment of the hindfoot. Patients are often
offered surgical resection following failure of conservative management. Few large cohort
studies exist analyzing complications and patient reported outcomes of pediatric patients
undergoing operative treatment.
Methods: After IRB approval, patients under the age of 18 undergoing excision
of tarsal coalition at a single academic center from 2010-2019 were identified. Medical
records were reviewed for variables such as demographics, surgical technique, coalition
characteristics, postoperative complications, and coalition recurrence. Patients were
contacted via telephone to complete a PROMIS Physical Function and Pain Interference in
addition to the Foot Function Index. Contact was attempted at least 3 times before a patient
was considered non-respondent. A total of 44 patients and 54 feet were included in the
analysis with 17 patients (22 feet) completing patients reported outcomes.
Results: The median age at the time of surgery was 12 (IQR 3). Thirty-five
feet (64.8%) were from male patients, while 19 feet (35.2%) were from female patients. Pain
was the presenting symptom in 49 (90.7%) of feet. Pes planovalgus was present in 25 feet
(46.3%). Forty feet (74.1%) had calcaneonavicular coalition compared to 12 feet (22.2%) with
talocalcaneal coalition and 2 feet (3.7%) with both. Fibrous coalition was found in 19 feet
(35.2%) and the most common. Interposition material was used in 49/54 (90.7%) feet. Wound
complications or temporary neuropraxias were seen in 7/54 feet (13.0%), and coalition
recurrence occurred in 3/54 feet (5.6%). At a median of 6 years (6.0 IQR) postoperatively,
the median postoperative outcomes scores were as follows: PROMIS Physical Function 54.7
(17.9 (IQR)), PROMIS Pain Interference 38.7 (10.0), FFI Pain 14.0 (30.0), FFI Disability 1.0
(9.0), FFI Activity Limitation 3.0 (8.0), and FFI Total 6.0 (12.0).
Conclusion: Our study investigated complications and long-term patient
outcomes following coalition resection. At follow-up, pediatric patients who underwent
excision of tarsal coalition had higher physical function and less pain than the average
U.S. population (PROMIS population mean is score of 50). Our recurrence rate of 5.6% is
lower than reported in literature. Infection rate was similar to reports in literature at
3.1%. Overall, Coalition resection in pediatrics is a well-tolerated procedure that improves
both physical and emotional health.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00083

## MTP Arthrodesis: Outcomes of Crossroads Dynaforce and Stryker Locking Plate

Nicholas A. Andrews; Jared R. Halstrom, BS; Jessyca Ray; Kenneth J. Fellows; Whitt
Harrelson; Aseel G. Dib, BS; Abhinav Agarwal, MBBS; Osama M. Elattar, MD, MB BCh, MSc;
Ashish Shah, MD

Category: Ankle; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Hallux Metatarsophalangeal Arthrodesis M1M2 Angle M1P1 angle; Hallux
Rigidus; 1st MTP Joint
Introduction/Purpose: Metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joint arthrodesis is commonly
performed for end-stage hallux rigidus with largely satisfactory results. While current
literature demonstrates union rates in the low 90’s, there is still room for evolution of
techniques and fixation constructs. The new Crossroads Dynaforce plate provides area for
direct integration of a compression staple into the dorsal locking plate construct. The
purpose of this present study was to compare outcomes of this new plating system to a
standard dorsal locking plate from Stryker.
Methods: Patients undergoing primary MTP arthrodesis from 2010-2020 were
identified. Patients receiving Crossroads Dynaforce plates (23 patients) and Stryker Dorsal
locking plates (21) for Hallux Rigidus were selected. Radiographic follow-up of >12 weeks
and no ongoing ipsilateral infection were required for inclusion. Medical records were
examined for patient characteristics, operative variables, and complications. PROMIS
physical function, pain interference, and depression domains were collected postoperatively
in addition to Foot Function Index (FFI).
Results: The median age was 57.0 (IQR 16.0) with the average BMI of 30.4 (SD
11.2). No patient comorbidities or demographics were significantly different between Stryker
and Crossroads groups. Importantly, the preoperative hallux valgus and intermetatarsal
angles did not vary between groups. The use of an interfragmentary screw was significantly
higher in the Stryker cohort 20/21 (95%) compared to 16/23 (70%) The rate of wound
dehiscence, deep infection, and reoperation did not vary between groups. The nonunion rate
did not differ between groups and was 3/21 (14.3%) in the stryker cohort compared to 1/23
(4.3%) in the Crossroads group. Patient reported outcomes measures did not differ between
groups and were completed at an average of 2.2 years postoperatively (SD 1.9).
Conclusion: The Crossroads Dynaforce plate provides comparable outcomes to a
legacy dorsal locking plate from Stryker in hallux rigidus. In addition to clinical
outcomes, patients report similar levels of function at intermediate term follow up.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00084

## MTP Arthrodesis: Percutaneous Interfragmentary Screw Placement and Nerve Injury

Nicholas A. Andrews; David A. Patch, MD; Roshan Jacob; Charles R. Sutherland; Whitt
Harrelson; Abhinav Agarwal, MBBS; Ashish Shah, MD

Category: Basic Sciences/Biologics; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: 1st MTP Joint; Arthrodesis; Screws
Introduction/Purpose: Iatrogenic cutaneous nerve injury is the most common
complication encountered in foot and ankle surgery with limited evidence to inform surgeons
on neuroprotective techniques. The purpose of this study was to assess risk for injury to
the dorsomedial cutaneous nerve (DCN) during insertion of percutaneous interfragmentary
screws used in metatarsophalangeal (MTP) arthrodesis.
Methods: Ten mid-tibia fresh frozen cadaver specimens were obtained for
execution of this study. All cadavers were grossly and radiographically inspected for any
evidence of existing pathology or prior operative intervention. Percutaneous placement of
interfragmentary screw in both distal to proximal and proximal to distal fashion was
performed. Only the skin was incised before reaming and screw placement. After screw
placement, dissection of the great toe was conducted. The distance between the screws and
the DCN was obtained. The DCN was also inspected for injury.
Results: A total of 10 cadavers were included. The average age of our
population was 64 (+- 12.6). Males represented 80% of our included specimens. Injury to the
DCN was not reported using the proximal to distal screw fixation. The mean distance from the
dorsal cutaneous nerve using proximal to distal interfragmentary screw fixation was 7.45+-
3.85 mm compared to 4.30+-2.71 mm in the distal to proximal screw. Distal to proximal screw
fixation was associated with 10% risk of nerve injury with no nerve injuries occurring at
the site of proximal to distal screws.
Conclusion: In our cadaver study, proximal to distal screw fixation seems to
offer neuroprotection in the setting of MTP arthrodesis. The DCN is known to have many
anatomic variants, and DCN injuries can be a pretext for painful neuroma formation. Surgeons
should consider careful dissection to the joint capsule in effort to decrease the risk of
neurogenic injury when placing interfragmentary screws in MTP arthrodesis.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00085

## To Be(Ar) Or Not to Be(Ar) – Jones Dilemma?

Nicholas A. Andrews; Neha Singh; Abhinav Agarwal, MBBS; Austin Hughes; Roshan Jacob;
Whitt Harrelson; Vyshnavi Rallapalle; Ashish Shah, MD

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: 5th Metatarsal Fractures; Jones Fracture; Fractures
Introduction/Purpose: Jones fracture is the fracture of the base of 5th
metatarsal and is a commonly encountered in the clinical setting. Its management has always
been a subject of great debate with paucity of consensus on post- operative weight bearing
protocols. We aim to evaluate the efficacy of early weight bearing in the post-operative
management of Jones fracture and assess its association with radiological union and patient
reported outcomes.
Methods: Retrospectively, patients undergoing fixation of Jones fracture from
January 2011 to December 2020 were identified. Radiographic follow-up of at least 8 weeks
was required for inclusion yielding 40 patients. Patients were grouped by early weight
bearing (EWB) as tolerated (26 patients) and non-weight bearing (NWB) for 2 weeks followed
by partial weight bearing (14 patients). Medical records were reviewed for demographic
variables, associated comorbidities, type of surgical construct used, fracture type, mode of
injury and union. Delayed union was defined as patients without radiographic evidence of
union at 12.5 weeks. Patients completed PROMIS physical function, PROMIS pain interference,
and FFI scoring postoperatively.
Results: The mean age was 42.83+- 17.03 years with a female gender
predominance (n=23; 57.5%) and an average BMI of 32.2 +- 8.7. Thirteen (50%) in the EWB and
5 (43%) in NWB groups experienced delayed radiological union (>12 weeks) and this did not
differ by group. There was one nonunion in the NWB group and none in the EWB group. The
number of wound complications did not vary by group. Seventeen patients completed
postoperative FFI and PROMIS scores at a median of 40 months (41.5 IQR). The FFI and PROMIS
scores did not differ by group. In the EWB group, the median PROMIS scores were physical
function 43.7 (6.7 (IQR)) and pain interference 52.8 (10.1) compared to physical function
44.0 (11.6) and pain interference 55.2 (11.8) in the NWB group. The median total FFI score
in the EWB group was 20.0 (27) compared to 32 (32) in the NWB group.
Conclusion: The EWB group exhibited comparable results to the NWB group after
surgical fixation of Jones fracture. Importantly, PROMIS scores indicate both groups had
comparable functional outcomes at long term follow up and were within a standard deviation
of the general population of the United States (Score of 50 with SD of 10) for both pain and
function. While further investigation is required, EWB may have equivocal results in terms
of union, wound complications, and functional outcomes while allowing for early mobilization
after Jones fracture fixation.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00086

## The Effectiveness of Perioperative Parecoxib Intravenous Administration in Foot and
Ankle Surgery: A Prospective, Double-Blinded, Randomized, Placebo-Controlled Trial

Chayanin Angthong, MD, PhD

Category: Trauma; Ankle
Keywords: Ankle Fracture; IFFAS Award; Pain
Introduction/Purpose: Parecoxib is indicated for the short-term treatment of
postoperative pain in adults. A systematic review assessed the analgesic efficacy of single
dose intravenous (IV) or intramuscular (IM) parecoxib in acute postoperative pain and
concluded that parecoxib is an effective analgesic in the postoperative setting in adults.
However, little is known about its effectiveness in the perioperative intravenous
administration in foot and ankle surgery. The present study conducts a double- blinded
prospective randomized controlled trial via an ‘intention-to-treat analysis’ principle to
compare the effectiveness of perioperative parecoxib versus placebo in patients with
unstable ankle fractures who have surgical indications.
Methods: A total of 40 patients undergoing open reduction and internal
fixation of the unstable ankle fractures were randomly allocated either to Group A
(parecoxib 40 mg IV 30 min before surgery and then an additional 40 mg every 12 hours for 48
hours after surgery [n=20]) or Group B (placebo (saline) [n=20]). The baseline data were
recorded in each patient. The efficacy of pain control was assessed by total morphine used,
pain intensity (at rest/ambulation) and pain relief (at rest/ambulation) using the verbal
numerical rating score (VNRS) from 0 (no pain) to 10 (worst imaginable pain) and the verbal
numerical rating percentage (VNRP) from 0 (no relief) to 100 (best relief) respectively, as
well as each patient’s subjective rating of the medication. The patients’ subjective rating
of the medication used the classifications of ‘excellent’, ‘good’, ‘fair’, or ‘poor’. When
the patients were moved to the post-anesthesia care unit (PACU) after surgery, the study
procedure was to record the time as 0. The data were then recorded at 0, 4, 12, 24, and 48
hours after surgery by trained personnel. The overall adverse effects experienced by
patients were reported in both groups. All outcomes were recorded by trained personnel who
were blind to the patient group allocation. All surgeons, anesthesiologists, and patients
involved in the process were also blind to the group allocations. The outcomes including
efficacy, patients’ subjective ratings of the medication, and overall adverse effects were
statistically compared between the two groups.
Results: From a total of 40 patients in the study, four patients were excluded
by the study criteria. The remaining 36 patients continued in the study. The mean age of
patients was 49.3 +/- 18.0 years. No significant difference was found regarding the mean age
of patients between the two groups (p-value > 0.05). Male patients appeared more
frequently in the saline group than the parecoxib group (p-value = 0.018). For the main
outcomes, there were no significant differences between the two groups in terms of the pain
intensity, pain relief, patients’ subjective ratings of the medication at both preoperative
and postoperative periods, total quantity of morphine used, and side effects and acute
complications of surgery (p-values > 0.05).
Conclusion: Based on the results of the present study, the perioperative
administration of parecoxib could not significantly improve postoperative pain control as
defined by the reduction in opioid requirements, lower pain scores, higher pain relief, and
higher patients’ subjective ratings of the medication when compared to the placebo. Male
predominance was significantly found in the placebo group. This may have influenced the
level of pain tolerance between the two groups. This may also affect the results as no
significant differences of pain parameters between the two groups in the study. Further
study with larger numbers of patients is still necessary to clarify the role of preemptive
parecoxib on ankle fracture surgery.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00087

## Correlation Between X-Ray and Weight-Bearing Computed Tomography for Imaging Evaluation
of Hallux Valgus Deformity

Raul M. Espinoza Aravena, MD; Felipe R. Chaparro, MD; Cristian A. Ortiz, MD; Giovanni
M. Carcuro, MD; Manuel J. Pellegrini, MD

Category: Bunion; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Bunion; Weight Bearing CT; Alignment Weight Bearing CT
Introduction/Purpose: Weight-bearing computed tomography (WBCT) has emerged as
a valuable diagnostic tool for foot and ankle pathologies. Hallux valgus deformity values
are well described in the literature, but there is a lack of correlation studies between
x-rays and WBCT for the most widely used imaging parameters. The role of coronal plane
deformity has gained importance in the last few years as a recurrence predictor factor. Most
radiological descriptions in this topic are indirect measures of this rotational deformity.
WBCT seems more precise to evaluate hallux valgus 3D deformity. Purpose: Correlate Hallux
Valgus deformity parameters, metatarsal head morphology, and sesamoids position on x-rays
compared to WBCT.
Methods: Hallux valgus (HVA), intermetatarsal (IMA), interphalangeal (IFA),
and the distal metatarsal articular angle of the first metatarsal (DMAA) was measured on
standing AP load-bearing radiographs (WBXR) and WBCT by 2 observers in hallux valgus
patients. Deformity parameters obtained by both imaging methods were correlated with the
Spearman Correlation (SCC) and the Intraclass Correlation Coefficient (ICC). Also, WBXR was
analyzed to estimate the first metatarsal head rotation (pronation) by the round sign and
sesamoids position. Then, direct pronation measurement was measured on WBCT by obtaining the
Alpha Angle (AA) and sesamoids position in relation to the metatarsal head was defined. The
Kappa concordance index (KCI) was determined.
Results: 40 feet with Hallux Valgus were evaluated. In WBXR the medians of
HVA, IMA, IFA, and DMAA were 24.5, 12, 8.98, and 13.08 degrees respectively. In WBCT the
medians were 24.75, 12.93, 6.05, and 13.03 respectively. The SCC was 0.934 for HVA, 0.956
for IMA, 0.713 for IFA, and 0.487 for DMAA, and the ICC was excellent for HVA, IMA, and IFA
for both methods, excellent for DMAA in WBXR, but poor for WBCT. For rotation deformity, the
correlation between metatarsal head morphology and AA was poor with a KCI of -0.073, and
also for the position of the sesamoids between both methods and the KCI was 0.061.
Conclusion: Evaluated deformity parameters had an excellent correlation
between WBXR and WBCT. Both methods are useful for determining HVA, IMA, and IFA in Hallux
Valgus patients, but it was poor for DMAA. Also the correlation between first metatarsal
head morphology on WBXR (Round sign) with metatarsal head pronation (Alpha Angle) on WBCT
was poor, as well as sesamoids position. Given greater WBCT precision to evaluate rotational
deformity, we believe it should be considered in the diagnostic process to most accurately
understand this complex deformity.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00088

## A Systematic Review of the Management of Multiple Adjacent Morton’s Neuromas in the
Same Foot

Zaki Arshad; Awf Alshahwani; Maneesh Bhatia, MBBS, FRCS(Tr&Orth)

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Morton’s Neuroma; Forefoot; Patient Reported Outcome Measures
(PROMS)
Introduction/Purpose: The most common presentation of Morton’s neuroma is that
of a single neuroma in a single interdigital space. However, the occurrence of multiple
neuromas in adjacent interdigital spaces of the same foot is not uncommon, with this
scenario reported in 3-4% of all cases. Treatment of Morton’s neuroma has been studied
extensively, with most authors recommending surgical intervention only after failure of
non-operative approaches such as steroid injection orthoses or shockwave therapy. Whilst
systematic reviews on the management of Morton’s neuroma have been performed previously,
these focus on the treatment of a single neuroma in a single foot. This review aims to
address this gap in the literature by systematically reviewing studies reporting treatment
of multiple neuromas in adjacent intermetatarsal spaces of the same foot.
Methods: A systematic review was performed according to PRISMA guidelines. A
thorough computer-based search was performed by two reviewers independently in Pubmed,
Embase, Cinahl, Emcare, Web of Science and Scopus databases using relevant terms such as
‘interdigital’, ‘Morton’s’, ‘intermetatarsal’, ‘neuroma’, ‘neuralgia’, ‘adjacent’ and
‘multiple’. Title/abstract and full text screening was performed independently by the same
two reviewers, using a-priori selection criteria. All original research articles (randomised
control trails, cohort studies and observational studies) reporting any management strategy
for multiple adjacent Morton’s neuromas in the same foot were included. Studies describing
treatment of both single and multiple adjacent neuromas in the same article were included if
results were clearly separated according to these distinct presentations. The methodological
index for non-randomized studies (MINORS) was used to assess risk of bias and methodological
quality of included studies.
Results: A total of 253 unique articles were identified, with seven studies,
including 383 patients included in the final review. Of these seven studies, four describe
treatment of both single and multiple neuromas in the same article, whilst three include
only patients with multiple adjacent neuromas in the same foot. Simultaneous excision using
a single incision was the most common strategy, reported in three studies. Whilst two
studies each reported use of simultaneous excision with two distinct incisions and delayed
excision respectively. Of the four studies reporting treatment of both single and multiple
neuromas, the pooled proportion of patients with the later presentation was 51/354 (14.4%).
Only two studies, both describing simultaneous excision with a single incision, used scoring
scales to assess treatment outcomes. These articles find significant increases in Manchester
Oxford Foot questionnaire (MOXFQ), 12 item short form health survey (SF-12) and American
Orthopaedic Foot & Ankle Society (AOFAS) scores.
Conclusion: There is currently no evidence favouring use of a delayed excision
or multiple incision approach in the treatment of multiple adjacent neuromas. However, there
is a paucity of literature describing this presentation, with a number of studies failing to
separate outcomes of single and multiple neuroma treatment. Given that the presentation of
multiple adjacent neuromas may not be as rare as previously thought, it is important that
further high-quality comparative research is performed to enable clinicians to draw firm,
evidence-based conclusions to guide clinical practice. Future research should also
investigate the role of alternative strategies such as non-operative treatment.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00089

## Non-Operative Management of Chronic Achilles Tendon Ruptures: Short Term
Outcomes

Zaki Arshad; Maneesh Bhatia, MBBS, FRCS(Tr&Orth)

Category: Hindfoot; Sports; Trauma
Keywords: Achilles Tendon Rupture; Achilles; Achilles Tendon
Introduction/Purpose: The incidence of Achilles tendon rupture in the United
States is approximately 2.6 per 100,000 person years, with a significant increase in
incidence over recent years reported. Should the acute rupture not be diagnosed promptly, as
is the case in up to 20% of patients, the injury may be termed chronic. A number of
operative treatment strategies for chronic Achilles ruptures have been described, including
v-y tendinous flap, flexor hallucis longus tendon transfer, peroneus brevis graft and free
gracilis transfer. Despite the extensive investigation of non-operative treatment in acute
ruptures, there is a lack of similar research into chronic injuries. This article aims to
address this gap in the literature, reporting treatment results of patients treated
conservatively after being deemed unfit for operative intervention.
Methods: A retrospective review of all patients receiving non-operative
treatment for chronic Achilles ruptures, in the senior author’s clinic between December 2014
and May 2019 was performed. A chronic injury was defined as occurring when there was a delay
of at least 28 days between initial injury and start of treatment. Patients with a minimum
final follow up of less than 6 months were excluded. All patients were managed according to
the previously described Leicester Achilles Management Protocol (LAMP), an eight-week
functional dynamic regime with use of a VACOped boot (OPED, Valley, Germany). Formal
physiotherapy treatment was also provided following completion of the LAMP. Hospital records
were searched for relevant data including patient age and sex, side of injury, time between
injury and start of treatment and post-treatment Achilles tendon total rupture score
(ATRS).
Results: A total of 17 consecutive patients with a minimum follow up of 6
months were managed non-operatively during the stated time period. The cohort included eight
males and nine females with a mean age of 63.4 14.3 years. The right side was injured in
five cases, with the left side affected in 12. The mean time from initial injury to start of
treatment was 43.9 days (range 30 - 102 days). The mean ATRS at 6 months post treatment was
53+-17.8. A total of 10 patients were also available for follow up at 12 months. The mean
ATRS in these patients at 12 months was 73 +-15.2.
Conclusion: The mean 12-month ATRS of 73 achieved is lower than figures of
89-92.5 reported in previous studies describing operative treatment. However, our results
indicate that good outcomes may be achieved using a non-operative protocol in patients who
decline or are unfit for surgery. Recent research reports that the mean age of Achilles
rupture has increased by 0.721 years every five years, since 1953. It could therefore be
likely that an increasing number of patients suffering chronic Achilles ruptures may be
unfit for surgical treatment. It is important that further research into the non-operative
treatment of these patients is conducted.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00090

## Assessment of Ankle Fractures using Deep Learning Algorithms and Convolutional Neural
Network

Soheil Ashkani-Esfahani, MD; Reza Mojahed-Yazdi; Rohan Bhimani, MD, MBA; Gino
Kerkhoffs, MD; Daniel Guss, MD, MBA; Christopher W. DiGiovanni, MD; Bart Lubberts, MD,
PhD

Category: Ankle; Trauma
Keywords: Ankle Fracture; Fractures; Ankle
Introduction/Purpose: Early and accurate detection of ankle fractures is
crucial for reducing future complications. Radiographs are the most abundant imaging
techniques for assessing fractures. We believe deep learning (DL) methods, through
adequately trained deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs), can assess radiographic
images fast and accurate without human intervention. In this study, we aimed to assess the
performance of two different DCNNs in detecting ankle fractures using radiographs compared
to the ground truth.
Methods: In this retrospective study, our DCNNs were trained using radiographs
obtained from 1050 patients with ankle fracture and the same number of individuals with
otherwise healthy ankles. Inception V3 and Renet50 pre-trained models were used in our
algorithms. Danis-Weber classification method was used. Out of 1050, 72 individuals were
labeled as occult fractures as they were not detected in the primary radiographic
assessment. Using single-view radiographs was compared with 3-views (anteroposterior,
mortise, lateral) for training the DCNNs.
Results: Our DCNNs showed a better performance using 3-views images versus
single-view based on greater values for accuracy, F-score, and area under the curve (AUC).
The sensitivity and specificity in detection of ankle fractures using 3-views were 97.5% and
93.9% using Resnet50 compared to 98.7% and 98.6 using inception V3, respectively. Resnet50
missed 3 occult fractures while Inception V3 missed only one case. In cases that detected
the fracture, the saliency map showed the location of the fracture ( ).
Conclusion: The performance of our DCNNs showed a promising potential that can
be considered in developing the currently used image interpretation programs or as a
separate assistant to the clinicians to detect ankle fractures faster and more
precisely.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00091

## The Use of Deep Machine Learning in Detecting Subtle Lisfranc Joint Instability on
Weightbearing Radiographs and Non-Weightbearing CT Scans

Soheil Ashkani-Esfahani, MD; Reza Mojahed-Yazdi; Rohan Bhimani, MD, MBA; Gino
Kerkhoffs, MD; Gregory R. Waryasz, MD; Christopher W. DiGiovanni, MD; Bart Lubberts, MD,
PhD; Daniel Guss, MD, MBA

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot; Trauma
Keywords: Subtle Lisfranc Injuries; CT; Lisfranc Joint Injuries
Introduction/Purpose: Diagnosis of subtle Lisfranc joint instability, as a
commonly missed foot injury, has remained a concern since it can result in future
disabilities if inadequately treated. Weightbearing radiographs (WBR) and conventional CT
scans are the most frequent methods in healthcare centers all around the world that are used
to assess tarsometatarsal injuries, specifically the Lisfranc joint. However, their accuracy
in detecting subtle cases varies depending on the experience and expertise of the
interpreter as well as the quality of the images. We aimed to evaluate the use of deep
learning and deep convolutional neural network (DCNN) in the detection of subtle Lisfranc
instability using WBR and CT scans. Our hypothesis was that this method can increase the
accuracy and hasten the interpretation using these modalities.
Methods: We gathered 200 WBR and 200 CT scans of cases with subtle Lisfranc
instability who were diagnosed intraoperatively; 200 WBR and 200 CT scans of patients with
otherwise healthy feet were added as the control group. To increase the confidence in the
results we implemented saliency maps to visualize the location of the injury as a heat map
and exhibit the process of decision-making by the algorithm. The data of the study was
expressed as sensitivity, specificity, accuracy, and the area under the curve (AUC). We used
Inception DCNN model as the pre-trained DCNN model in this study.
Results: The performance of the DCNN using WBR resulted in sensitivity=93.6%,
specificity=91.1%, Accuracy= 94.7, AUC=98.2%. DCNN applied on CT scan resulted in
sensitivity=95.8%, specificity=96.9%, accuracy= 93.2, and AUC=98.4%. In cases that the
injury was detected correctly by the DCNN, the saliency map had shown the location of the
injury correctly as well (100%, ).
Conclusion: Here we showed that using DCNN on the currently used
interpretation method can significantly improve the accuracy of interpretation using WBR and
CT scans in the detection of subtle Lisfranc instability. WBR has lower costs and a lower
rate of radiation, thus, improving its performance using deep learning methods can lead to a
significant improvement in healthcare quality for the patient and reduced costs for the
system.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00092

## Volume Measurements on Weightbearing Computed Tomography Can Detect Subtle Syndesmotic
Instability

Soheil Ashkani-Esfahani, MD; Rohan Bhimani, MD, MBA; Bart Lubberts, MD, PhD; Gino
Kerkhoffs, MD; Gregory R. Waryasz, MD; Christopher W. DiGiovanni, MD; Daniel Guss, MD,
MBA

Category: Ankle; Trauma
Keywords: Weight Bearing CT; Tibiofibular Syndesmosis; Ankle Instability
Introduction/Purpose: The ability to compare the ankle joints bilaterally in a
3D manner under physiologic weight provided by weight-bearing CT has led to a more accurate
diagnostic method. While weight-bearing computed tomography (WBCT) allows 3D visualization
of the distal syndesmosis, image interpretation has largely relied on 1D distance and, more
recently, 2D area measurements. This study aimed to: 1) determine the sensitivity and
specificity of 2D area and 3D volume WBCT measurements towards detecting subtle syndesmotic
instability, 2) evaluate whether the patterns of changes in the 3D shape of the syndesmosis
can be attributed to the type of ligament injury.
Methods: A total of 24 patients with unilateral subtle syndesmotic instability
and 24 individuals with uninjured ankles (controls) with bilateral ankle WBCT were assessed
retrospectively. First, 2D areas at 0, 1, 3, 5,10 cm, and 3D volumes at 1, 3, 5, and 10cm
above the tibial plafond were measured bilaterally. Secondly, given the volume measurement
at the level of 5 cm proximal to the platform as the most sensitive and specific method
introduced in this study, the 3D model of the distal tibiofibular space was created based on
WBCT in a subset of 8 patients out of 24 in whom the type of ligament injury was recognized
via MRI. The 3D model of the injured side was superimposed on the uninjured contralateral
side to visualize the pattern of changes in different planes. P<0.05 was considered
statistically significant.
Results: No specific pattern was observed in 2D and 3D models of the
syndesmotic space which can be attributed to a specific ligamentous tear. However, in
patients with IOL rupture, the volume increased by >=39% at 5 cm height while without IOL
injury the volume increased up to 26% ( ). The percentage of changes in 2D areas and 3D volumes showed significant
differences in areas at 0cm (19.2%; p=0.004), 1cm (24.1%; p=0.002), 3cm (27.3%; p=0.003),
5cm (28%; p=0.002), and 10cm (29.3%; p=0.003) as well as volumes at 1cm (31.2%; p=0.003),
3cm (26.5%; p=0.001), 5cm (25.4%; p<0.001), and 10cm (24.7%; p=0.004) proximal to tibial
plafond. Volume up to 5cm showed the lowest p-value, higher sensitivity (95.8%,
95%CI:87.8-100), and specificity (83.3%, 95% CI:68.4-98.2) for detection of syndesmotic
instability.
Conclusion: We suggest 3D volume measurements, best measured up to 5cm
proximal to the plafond, as a promising means of diagnosing syndesmotic instability,
particularly for subtle cases that are hard to detect.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00093

## Donor Site Morbidity of Calcaneal, Distal and Proximal Tibial Cancellous Autografts in
Foot and Ankle Surgery: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of 2296 Grafts

Ahmed K. Attia, MD; Karim Mahmoud Khamis, MB BCh; Kareem Ahmed H.M.A. Elsweify; Jason
T. Bariteau, MD; Sameh A. Labib, MD

Category: Other
Keywords: Bone Block Graft; Complications; Arthrodesis
Introduction/Purpose: Non-union of foot and ankle arthrodesis sites has been
associated with revision surgery, morbidity and increased healthcare costs, so many surgeons
elect to augment the fusion site with autologous bone grafts to improve union. While iliac
crest autografts are considered the historical gold standard, other donor sites distal in
the lower extremity such as calcaneus, proximal and distal tibia have been successfully used
in foot and ankle surgery. This study aims to report on the safety and donor site morbidity
of distal lower extremity (calcaneal, proximal and distal tibial) bone autografts. We
summarized the findings in a comprehensive infographic illustration. We are unaware of any
similar meta-analyses to date.
Methods: Following the PRISMA guidelines, 2 independent investigators searched
several databases in December 2020 using the following keywords and their synonyms: (‘Bone
graft’, ‘donor site morbidity’, ‘calcaneal graft’, ‘Proximal tibia graft’, and ‘distal tibia
graft’). Besides, the reference lists from previous review articles were searched manually
for eligible studies. The primary outcomes of interest were (1) Chronic pain, (2) Fracture
and (3) infection whereas the secondary outcomes were (1) neurological complications, (2)
sensory disturbance and hypertrophic scars, (3) other complications such as shoe-wear
difficulties and gait disturbance. Inclusion criteria were: studies on complications and
adverse events of lower extremity bone autografts (calcaneal, proximal tibial, and distal
tibial bone autografts) reporting at least one desired outcome. Studies not reporting any of
the outcomes of interest or if the full text is not available in English were excluded.
Studies reporting on bone marrow aspirate or autografts for non-orthopedic indications were
also excluded.
Results: After removal of duplicates, 5981 studies were identified. After
screening, 85 studies remained for full-text assessment, and 15 studies qualified for the
meta-analysis with a total of 2296 bone grafts.1557(67.8%) were calcaneal grafts, 625
(27.2%) were proximal tibial grafts, and 114 (5%) were distal tibial grafts. The mean age of
all patients was 52.43+-16 [CI=51.77-53.08] years. The mean follow-up duration was
1.86+-1.70[CI=1.79-1.93] years. The primary surgery was reported for 2129 grafts(92.7%).Out
of those, foot and ankle procedure represented 97.4% of the procedures. In calcaneal bone
grafts, there were 28 cases of chronic pain [1.97%,CI:1.10-2.50%, I2=66%], 5 fractures
[0.32%,CI:0.10-0.60%, I2=0%], 20 sural neuritis [1.28%,CI:0.70-1.80%, I2=0%), and no wound
infections. In proximal tibial grafts there were 13 cases of chronic pain
[2.08%,CI:1.01-3.2%, I2=34.5%], 1 fracture [0.16%,CI:0.10-0.50%, I2= 0%], and 3 superficial
wound infections [0.48%,CI:0.10-1.01, I2=0%]. In the distal tibial grafts there were no
cases of chronic pain or wound infections, 1 fracture [0.90%,CI:0.80-2.6%,I2=0%], and 5
saphenous neuritis [4.5%,CI: 0.70- 8.40%,I2=65%].
Conclusion: Calcaneal, distal tibial, and proximal tibial bone autografts are
safe with a low rate of overall and major complications. We report an overall complication
rate of 6.8%, which is less than half of that previously reported for iliac crest grafts.
The authors recommend using distal lower extremity grafts for foot and ankle primary
surgeries instead of iliac crest grafts when indicated. Clinical trials with large sample
sizes are required.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00094

## Outcomes and Complications of Open vs Minimally Invasive Surgical Repair of Acute
Achilles Tendon Rupture: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Randomized Controlled
Trials

Ahmed K. Attia, MD; Karim Mahmoud Khamis, MB BCh; Pieter Dhooghe, MD, MBA, PhD; Jason
T. Bariteau, MD; Sameh A. Labib, MD; Mark S. Myerson, MD

Category: Ankle; Sports; Trauma
Keywords: Achilles Tendon Repair; Open Repair; Minimally Invasive
Introduction/Purpose: Traditionally, open surgical repair has provided
improved functional outcomes, reduced re-rupture rates, and quicker recovery and return to
activities at the expense of increased wound complications of infection and skin necrosis
compared to nonoperative management. Ma and Griffith in 1977 introduced the percutaneous
approach, and over the following decades, multiple improved techniques, and modifications
thereof, have been described with comparable outcomes to the open repair. The current study
aims to provide updated level I evidence comparing the open and minimally invasive (MIS)
through a comprehensive search of literature published in English, Spanish, Portuguese, and
German while avoiding limitations of previous studies such as heterogeneous study designs
and a small number of included studies.
Methods: Following the PRISMA guidelines, two independent team members
searched several databases to identify randomized controlled trials (RCTs) comparing open
and MIS Achilles tendon repairs. The primary outcomes were (1) Sural nerve injury, (2) Skin
complications, (3) Infection (deep/superficial), whereas the secondary outcomes were (1)
AOFAS/ATRS score, (2) surgical time, (3) re-rupture (4) adhesions (5) ankle range of motion.
Population: Achilles tendon rupture Intervention: MIS repair Control: Open repair Outcomes:
Primary: (1) Sural nerve injury, (2) Skin complications, (3) Infection (deep/superficial)
Secondary: (1) AOFAS/ATRS score, (2) surgical time, (3) re-rupture, (4) adhesions, (5) ankle
range of motion (6) other complications.
Results: Ten RCTs qualified for the meta-analysis with a total of 522
patients. 260(49.8%) patients had open repair while 262(50.2%) had MIS repair. The mean
total complication rate was 15.5% (0-36.4%) in open repair vs. 10.4% (0-45.5%) in MIS
repair, with non-significant statistical difference (RR= 1.50,CI=0.87-2.57,p= 0.14;I2=40%).
The mean re-rupture rate was 2.5% (0-6.8%) in open repair vs. 1.53% (0-4.6%) with MIS
repair, with non-significant statistical difference (RR=1.56,CI=0.42-5.70,p= 0.50;I2=0%). No
cases of sural nerve injury were reported in the open repair group. The mean sural nerve
injury was 3.4%(0-7.3%) in the MIS group, that was statistically significant (RR=
0.16,CI=0.03-0.46,p=0.02;I2=0%). The mean deep infection rate in the open group was 1.4%
(0-5%) while no deep infection was reported in MIS, with no statistically significant
difference (RR= 3.24,CI=0.48-20.54,p= 0.23;I2=0%). The mean superficial infection rate was
6.04% (0-18.2%) and 0.40% (0-4.5%) for open and MIS repairs, respectively, with
statistically significant difference (RR= 5.70,CI=1.80-18.02,p< 0.001;I2=0%).
Conclusion: Open Achilles tendon repair is associated with longer surgical
time, higher risk of superficial infection, and ankle stiffness, while MIS repair is
associated with a greater risk of temporary sural nerve palsy. Re-rupture rate and
functional outcomes are mostly equivalent. We found MIS to be a safe and reliable technique.
However, high-quality standardized RCTs are still needed before recommending MIS as the gold
standard for the management of Achilles tendon rupture.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00095

## Outcomes of Arthroscopic vs Open Broström Surgery for Chronic Lateral Ankle
Instability: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Comparative Studies

Ahmed K. Attia, MD; Tarek A. Taha, MD; Karim Mahmoud Khamis, MB BCh; Kenneth J. Hunt,
MD; Sameh A. Labib, MD; Pieter Dhooghe, MD, MBA, PhD

Category: Ankle; Arthroscopy; Sports
Keywords: Ankle Instability; Broström; Ankle Arthroscopy
Introduction/Purpose: Ankle sprains are the most common ankle injury
accounting for up to 85% of all ankle injuries, and nearly 20% of acute ankle sprains
progress to chronic lateral ankle instability that requires surgical intervention. In recent
years, there has been a growing interest in arthroscopic Broström techniques as an
alternative to open surgery. In the past two years alone, four comparative studies have been
published. Recent case series and cohort studies showed reliable improvement in clinical and
radiographic outcomes with arthroscopic surgeryAIM. The current study aims at providing the
foot and ankle surgery community with the most updated evidence comparing outcomes of open
to arthroscopic Broström procedure for chronic lateral ankle instability.
Methods: This article was performed following the Preferred Reporting Items
for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses (PRISMA) guidelines. Two independent authors
searched several databases for relevant comparative studies in English literature were
identified between database inceptions to May 2020. The primary outcomes were (1) Functional
scores (KAFS, AOFAS) and (2) Pain score on VAS, whereas the secondary outcomes were
differences in (1) anterior drawer and talar tilt, (2) surgical time and complications rate,
(3) time to return to sports and weight-bearing. Population: Chronic lateral ankle
instability (LAI)Intervention: Arthroscopic Broström procedure Control: Open Broström
procedure Outcomes: Primary: Functional scores, pain Secondary: Anterior drawer and talar
tilt, complications, time to return to sport and weight-bearing
Results: A total of 408 patients in eight studies met the inclusion criteria
were subjected to analysis. 193 (47.3%) patients underwent open surgery, while 215 (52.7%)
patients underwent arthroscopic surgery. The one year-AOFAS was 80.05 vs. 88.6 in open and
arthroscopic surgery, respectively (MD= -11.96, CI= -21.26, -2.76, I2= 82%, p= 0.01). The
mean one year VAS was 2.05 and 1.45 in open and arthroscopic repair, respectively (MD= 0.31,
CI= 0.09 to 0.54, I2=0%, p<0.001).The mean time to weight- bearing was 14.25 weeks and
9.0 weeks in open and arthroscopic repair, respectively (MD=1.89, CI= 1.24 to 2.54, I2=99%,
p<0.001).There were no statistically significant differences in the time to RTP,
postoperative anterior drawer, postoperative talar tilt, and operative time. The total
complications rate in open and arthroscopic repair was 21.3% vs. 10%, with statistical
insignificance (OR= 0.73, 95%CI= 0.39 to 1.38, I2=0%, p= 0.34).
Conclusion: While technically more demanding, arthroscopic Broström is
superior to open Broström-Gould surgery in AOFAS functional scores at six and twelve months,
time to return to weight-bearing, and VAS pain scores. Operative time, complications rate,
talar tilt, and anterior drawer tests are excellent and statistically comparable. Long-term
clinical trials are required before recommending arthroscopic Broström as the new gold
standard.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00096

## Return to Play after Low-Energy Lisfranc Injuries in High Demand Individuals: A
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Athletes and Active Military Personnel

Ahmed K. Attia, MD; Karim Mahmoud Khamis, MB BCh; Abduljabbar Alhammoud, MD; Pieter
Dhooghe, MD, MBA, PhD; Daniel C. Farber, MD

Category: Sports; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Lisfranc Injuries; Athlete; Return to Play
Introduction/Purpose: Low-energy Lisfranc injury is increasingly reported in
the literature. While there is a relatively large body of studies discussing the high energy
Lisfranc injuries, the evidence available on this low-energy injury in active individuals
with high demand remains scarce and mostly retrospective. The injury can range from a
non-displaced ligamentous sprain to fracture-dislocations, and management varies from
non-operative management to primary arthrodesis with a multitude of variables potentially
affecting the return to play (RTP) and return to duty (RTD). This study aims to report on
return to play (RTP) rate and time with regard to the type of the injury, whether bony or
ligamentous, management whether non-operative, open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF)
or the increasingly debated primary arthrodesis (PA).
Methods: Following the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and
Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines, relevant studies in English literature were identified
between database inceptions to June 2019. Electronic based search on MEDLINE (PubMed),
EMBASE, Google Scholar, and Cochrane databases using the following keywords with their
synonyms: (‘Lisfranc’ AND ‘athlete’ AND ‘midfoot sprain’). In addition, the reference lists
from previous review articles were searched manually to check for eligible studies. Two
investigators (AA, KM) independently reviewed all titles, abstracts, and the full text of
articles that were potentially eligible based on the abstract review. The eligible studies
were selected according to the inclusion and exclusion criteria. Any disagreement was
resolved by the senior author (DF). The primary outcomes were (1) return to play rate and
(2) time to return to play, whereas the secondary outcomes were (1) games missed, (2) time
out of practice, (3) midfoot arthritis, and reoperation.
Results: 15 studies were eligible for meta-analysis with a total of 441
subjects. Out of 441 subjects, a total of 380 (86.16%) were able to return to play and duty.
There were no statistically significant difference in RTP comparing op vs. non-op [OR=0.714,
CI: 0.17-2.88,I2=0%] nor ORIF vs. PA [OR=0.780, CI: 0.310-1.963, I2=0%]. The overall RTP in
bony and ligamentous injuries were 82.1% [CI:70.9-93.4%, I2=0%] and 95.8% [CI:92.6-99.1%,
I2=0%], respectively with no statistically significant differences [OR=1.909, CI=0.64- 5.64,
I2=37%]. The mean time out in non-op and op. groups were 58.01 [CI:13.6-102.4, I2=98.03%]
and 116.4 [CI:62.4-170.4; I2=99.45%] days, respectively. The mean time out in bony and
ligamentous injury groups were 98.8 [CI:6.1- 191.6, I2=99.82%] and 76.4 [CI:37.9-115.02;
I2=99.83%] days, respectively with statistically significant differences [SMD:3.621, CI:-
5.7-13, I2=83.17%].
Conclusion: Our meta-analysis on low-energy Lisfranc injuries in high demand
individuals found an overall excellent RTP/RTD rate. The time out was not affected by the
management, bony or ligamentous nature of the injury nor players’ position. However, the low
level of evidence and significant heterogeneity of the included studies precludes making
conclusions regarding the exact time out or optimal management. Superior quality studies on
low energy Lisfranc are needed.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00097

## Return to Play and Fracture Union after Surgical Management of Jones Fracture in
Athletes: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis

Ahmed K. Attia, MD; Tarek A. Taha, MD; Geraldine W. Kong; Abduljabbar Alhammoud, MD;
Karim Mahmoud Khamis, MB BCh; Mark S. Myerson, MD

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot; Sports; Trauma
Keywords: 5th Metatarsal Fractures; Athlete; Fractures
Introduction/Purpose: Proximal fifth metatarsal fractures are among the most
common forefoot injuries in athletes. Management of this injury can be challenging due to
delayed union and refracture. Intramedullary screw fixation rather than conservative
management has been recommended in the athletic population. This meta-analysis aims to
provide an updated summary of return to play (RTP) rate and time with regard to the
management, whether operative or non-operative, after Jones fractures in athletes only. We
also explore the characteristics of the union such as time and rate, and complications such
as refracture.
Methods: Following PRISMA guidelines, relevant studies in English literature
were identified between databases inceptions to November 2019. Electronic based search on
MEDLINE (PubMed), EMBASE, Google Scholar, and Cochrane databases using the following
keywords with their synonyms: (‘fifth metatarsal fracture’ AND ‘athlete’ AND ‘return to
play’). In addition, the reference lists from previous review articles were searched
manually to check for eligible studies. Two investigators independently reviewed all titles,
abstracts, and the full text of articles that were potentially eligible based on the
abstract review. Any disagreement was resolved by the senior author. The primary outcomes
were (1) return to play rate and (2) time to return to play, whereas the secondary outcomes
were (1) games missed, (2) time to union and union rate (3) non-union, delayed union and
refracture. The current study accepted the definitions of included studies for non-union,
delayed union, and refracture for practicality purposes.
Results: Out of 168 studies identified, 22 studies were eligible for
meta-analysis with a total of 646 Jones fractures. The overall RTP rate was 98.4% (97.3%-
99.4%) in 626 out of 646. The RTP rate in IM screw only was 98.8% (97.8%-99.7%), in other
surgical fixations methods (plate, mini fix) was 98.4% (95.8%-100%) whereas in conservative
management was 71.6% (45.6%-97.6%). There were three studies directly comparing the RTP in
surgical versus conservative management, which showed significant superiority in favor of
the surgical group OR: 0.033 CI:( 0.005-0.215) P-value <0.001. The overall time to RTP
was 9.6 (8.5-10.7) weeks. The time to RTP in the surgical group (IM screw) was 9.6
(8.3-10.9) weeks, significantly less than the conservative group, which was 13.05
(8.15-17.95) weeks. The pooled union rate in the operative group (excluding refracture) was
97.3% (95.1%-99.4%), whereas the pooled union rate in the conservative group was 71.4%
(49.1%- 93.7%).
Conclusion: Return to play following surgical management of Jones fractures in
athletes is excellent regardless of the implant used and sport. Intramedullary screw
fixation is superior to conservative management as it leads to a higher rate of return to
play, shorter time to return, higher union rate, shorter time to union, and improved
functional outcomes. The authors recommend surgical fixation for all Jones fractures in
athletes.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00098

## Bulk Osteochondral Allograft for Osteochondral Lesions of the Talus: A Systematic
Review

Mohammad Azam; Martin S. Davey; Christopher Colasanti; Nathaniel P. Mercer; Eoghan T.
Hurley, MB BCh BAO; Yoshiharu Shimozono, MD; John G. Kennedy, MD, FRCS(Orth)

Category: Ankle
Keywords: Osteochondral Lesions of the Talus; Lesions of Talus; Ostoechondral
lesion
Introduction/Purpose: The use of bulk osteochondral allograft (OCA) is often
warranted in patients with a large osteochondral lesion of the talus (OLT). Previous
literature reported that bulk OCA has high failure and revision rates, suggesting these
procedures should be thought of as an intermediate step, buying time before arthrodesis or
arthroplasty is required. However, recent studies suggest that the long-term survival of
bulk OCA has improved and that these procedures may provide a definitive solution for large
OLT. The purpose of this study was to systematically review the literature to ascertain the
outcomes of bulk OCA for OLT.
Methods: Two independent reviewers performed the literature search based on
PRISMA guidelines, utilizing the EMBASE, MEDLINE, and The Cochrane Library Databases.
Studies were included if they reported outcomes of OLTs which were managed by bulk OCA.
Results: Overall, 9 studies with 112 patients (55.4% males) including 115
ankles with a mean follow-up of 72.7 (8 - 240) months were included in this review.
Pre-operative OLT characteristics showed that 68.4% were medial lesions, with a mean lesion
size of 3.04cm2 (0.7 - 6.1 cm2). Overall, 23.5% of patients required
revision surgery following bulk OCA; 10.4% (12/115) underwent subsequent arthrodesis, 1.7%
(2/115) underwent revision osteochondral grafting and 9.6% (11/115) underwent arthroscopic
debridement. Radiological outcomes reporting graft failure was 21.3% (13/61), joint space
narrowing was 25.2% (29/115) and cysts were present in 19.5% (15/77) of cases.
Conclusion: Patients experience satisfactory patient-reported clinical
outcomes in the medium term following bulk OCA in the management of OLT. Despite recent
advances in graft procurement and storage radiological graft failure and the requirement for
additional surgeries still remain. At this time can only be recommended in cases that are
refractory to other treatments and where the patient is aware that this may be a temporizing
procedure before arthroplasty or arthrodesis.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00099

## Chronic Achilles Tendon Ruptures: A Systematic Review

Mohammad Azam; James J. Butler; Nathaniel P. Mercer; Eoghan Hurley; Yoshiharu
Shimozono, MD; John G. Kennedy, MD, FRCS(Orth)

Category: Ankle; Trauma
Keywords: Achilles Tendon Rupture; Achilles; Tendon Injuries
Introduction/Purpose: Chronic Achilles tendon ruptures (CATR) are an uncommon
injury compared to acute ruptures. Currently, no evidence-based guidelines exist for
treating CATR. The purpose of this systematic review was to present the outcomes of the
current treatment options for CATR and to analyze the level of evidence (LOE) and quality of
evidence (QoE) of the included studies.
Methods: In July 2020, MEDLINE, EMBASE and Cochrane Library databases were
systematically reviewed based on the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and
Meta-Analyses guidelines. The LOE and QOE of the included studies was evaluated using the
Modified Coleman Methodology Score. Studies reporting outcomes following repair of CATR were
included.
Results: Thirty-one studies with 653 CATRs were included. Three studies were
LOE III and 28 studies were LOE IV. Six studies reported dual technique procedures and 23
studies reported single technique procedures. Semitendinosus graft was the most frequently
utilized single technique procedure amongst the included studies. Most studies reported good
postoperative subjective outcomes, strength outcomes, and return to sports data at mid-term
follow-up. In total, 14.6% of patients experienced postoperative complications. The most
common complication was surgical wound complications (10.8%).
Conclusion: This systematic review found that no evidence-based treatment
guidelines exists for CATR. Surgical management of CATR produces good clinical outcomes at
mid-term follow up, but a high complication rate (14.6%) was noted. Future studies of higher
QOE and LOE with improved data reporting are warranted to determine the optimal treatment
strategy for CATR.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00100

## Cylindrical Osteochondral Allograft for Osteochondral Lesions of the Talus: A
Systematic Review

Mohammad Azam; Martin S. Davey; Christopher Colasanti; Nathaniel P. Mercer; Eoghan T.
Hurley, MB BCh BAO; Yoshiharu Shimozono, MD; John G. Kennedy, MD, FRCS(Orth)

Category: Ankle
Keywords: Ankle; Osteochondral Lesions of the Talus; Lesions of Talus
Introduction/Purpose: Ankle injuries commonly result in damage to the
articular cartilage of the talus. The use of cylindrical osteochondral allografts (OCA) for
osteochondral lesions of the talus (OLT) smaller than 1.5cm is increasingly common,
particularly in cases whereby autologous osteochondral transplantation (AOT) is
contraindicated. The primary aim of this study is to systematically review the outcomes of
cylindrical OCA for OLT. The secondary aim of this study is to compare the outcomes of
cylindrical OCA and AOT in the management of similar cases of OLT.
Methods: Two independent reviewers searched the literature based on PRISMA
guidelines, utilizing the EMBASE, MEDLINE, and The Cochrane Library Databases. Only studies
that reported outcomes of cylindrical OCA in the management of OLT were included.
Results: Overall, 4 studies with 100 patients including 101 ankles were
included in this review. Pre-operative OLT characteristics showed 69.3% of OLT lesions were
located medially, with a mean lesion size of 1.47cm2 (0.46 - 4.2 cm2).
Overall, 16.8% of ankles required surgical revision following cylindrical OCA; 1.0% (1/101)
underwent subsequent arthrodesis, 6.9% (7/101) underwent revision osteochondral grafting and
7.9% (8/101) underwent subsequent arthroscopic debridement. Radiological outcomes between
the graft failure were reported as 10.0% (3/30), joint space narrowing as 30.4% (14/46), and
cysts as 42.9% (27/63). Significantly higher revision rates were reported following
cylindrical OCA when compared to AOT at over two years follow up (28.1% versus 6.7%, p =
0.02).
Conclusion: Our systematic review established that although there are high
rates of patient satisfaction following cylindrical OCA for OLT, these are less than those
reported with AOT for the same condition. Concerns regarding the rates of radiological
deterioration as well as the need for surgical revision may represent harbingers for poorer
long-term outcomes.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00101

## Use of Extracellular Matrix Cartilage Allograft May Improve Infill of the Defects in
Bone Marrow Stimulation for Osteochondral Lesions of the Talus

Mohammad Azam; Yoshiharu Shimozono, MD; Emilie Williamson, MD; Nathaniel P. Mercer;
Eoghan T. Hurley, MB BCh BAO; Hao Huang; Timothy Deyer

John G. Kennedy, MD, FRCS(Orth)
Category: Ankle
Keywords: Ankle; Osteochondral Lesions of the Talus; Lesions of Talus
Introduction/Purpose: The purpose of this study is to evaluate the
effectiveness of Extracellular Matrix Cartilage Allograft (EMCA) as an adjuvant to bone
marrow stimulation (BMS) compared to BMS alone in the treatment of osteochondral lesions of
the talus (OLT).
Methods: A retrospective cohort study comparing patients treated with BMS with
EMCA (BMS-EMCA group) and BMS alone (BMS group) between 2013 and 2019 was undertaken.
Clinical outcome was evaluated with the Foot and Ankle Outcome Score (FAOS) pre-and
postoperatively. Postoperative MRIs were evaluated using a modified Magnetic Resonance
Observation of Cartilage Tissue (MOCART) score. Comparisons between groups were made with
the Man-Whitney U test for continuous variables and the χ2 or Fisher exact test for
categorical variables.
Results: Twenty-four patients underwent BMS with EMCA (BMS-EMCA group) and 24
patients underwent BMS alone (BMS group). The mean age was 40.8 years (range, 19 to 60
years) in BMS-EMCA group and 47.8 years (range, 24 to 60 years) in BMS group (p=0.060). The
mean follow-up time was 20.0 months (range, 12-36 months) in BMS-EMCA group and 26.9 months
(range, 12 to 55 months) in BMS group (p=0.031). Both groups showed significant improvements
in all FAOS subscales. No significant differences between groups were found in all
postoperative FAOS. The mean MOCART score in BMS-EMCA group was higher (76.3 vs 66.3), but
not statistically significant (p=0.176). The MRI analysis showed that 87.5% of BMS-EMCA
group had complete infill of the defect with repair tissue, however less than half (46.5%)
of BMS group had complete infill (p=0.015).
Conclusion: BMS with EMCA is an effective treatment strategy for the treatment
of OLT and provides better cartilage infill in the defect on MRI. However, this did not
translate to improved functional outcomes compared with BMS alone in the short-term.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00102

## Influence of Local Chemokine Delivery and Postoperative Peripheral Blood Mobilization
on Achilles Tendon Repair

Kevin C. Baker, PhD; Erin A. Baker, PhD; Paul T. Fortin, MD; Zachary M. Vaupel, MD; Bo
N. Loy, MD

Category: Basic Sciences/Biologics; Sports; Trauma
Keywords: Achilles Tendon; Achilles Tendon Repair; Tendon Stem Cells
Introduction/Purpose: Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) have demonstrated promise
in augmenting the surgical repair of full thickness tendon tears. Despite this promise,
obtaining a therapeutic concentration of MSCs is time-, labor- and resource intensive, and
is subject to ever-tightening governmental regulations. Our group recently demonstrated that
postoperative mobilization of MSCs from the marrow compartment and into peripheral blood via
subcutaneous granulocyte- colony stimulating factor administration enhanced tendon-bone
healing in a rat model of surgical repair of a full-thickness supraspinatus tendon tear. We
hypothesized that combining postoperative stem cell mobilization with local delivery of a
chemokine that stimulates MSC chemotaxis would enhance the surgical repair of a
mid-substance Achilles tendon transection.
Methods: Following IACUC approval, Achilles tendons were unilaterally frayed
via multiple longitudinal scalpel blade nicks in 24 Lewis rats. Tendons were then surgically
transected, followed by repair with braided non-absorbable suture in a modified-Kessler
pattern. Based on randomization (n=6/group), the tendon anastomosis was coated with a
resorbable chitosan hydrogel containing 100 ng of the chemokine, CCL5 (RANTES), or hydrogel
without RANTES. Skin closure and anesthesia recovery were then performed; rats were allowed
ad libitum activity. Beginning 24 hours postoperatively, rats received a daily subcutaneous
injection of either a peripheral blood mobilizing agent, AMD3100 (5 mg/kg), or saline;
dosing was repeated at 48 and 72 hours. At the 4- week endpoint, Achilles tendons harvested
en bloc. Decalcified histologic sections were stained with H&E and Alcian Blue as well
as immunostained for Collagen III, CD163, and CD68. Slides were digitized (40x
magnification) and graded by blinded reviewers via modified-Bonar score to assess tendon
integrity.
Results: Rats that received local application of RANTES-loaded chitosan
hydrogel had worse (higher) modified-Bonar subscores with respect to tenocyte morphology,
collagen orientation, and ground substance staining, though none of these comparisons were
statistically significant (p=0.068, p=0.672, and p=0.407, respectively). Animals that
received subcutaneous AMD3100 alone, or in conjunction with RANTES-loaded chitosan hydrogel
displayed the best (lowest) total modified Bonar scores, though these comparisons were also
not statistically significant (p = 0.498). No significant differences were found with
respect to CD163 (p=0.132) and CD68 (p=0.104) staining. Despite a lack of statistical
significance, animals that received AMD3100 displayed a higher number of both macrophage
subtypes. No differences were found with respect to Collagen III immunostaining
(p=0.808).
Conclusion: Tendon repair and regeneration remains a significant clinical
challenge, which may be aided by MSC transplantation. The mobilization of endogenous
marrow-derived MSCs into peripheral blood and subsequent recruitment via local chemokine
delivery may be an efficacious way to enhance tendon repair without the need for ex vivo
processing. We failed to demonstrate significant effects of stem cell mobilization via
AMD3100 injections, and chemokine-directed recruitment, though trends were present
indicating that AMD3100 alone may be beneficial. Additional work is required to draw any
translatable conclusions from this research.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00103

## Analysis of Complications Following Distal Ankle Nerve Blocks for Foot and Ankle
Procedures

Ania Bartholomew; Tyler Slone; Michael Ciesa; Nicholas A. Cheney, DO; Brian C.
Clark

Category: Ankle; Arthroscopy; Bunion; Hindfoot; Midfoot/Forefoot; Other
Keywords: Ankle Block; Complications; Foot and Ankle Instability (Ligament
Injuries)
Introduction/Purpose: Popliteal nerve blocks are a common procedure employed
by anesthesiologists to augment intraoperative anesthesia and provide postoperative pain
control. Unfortunately, these can be associated with unintended complications including
pain, numbness, and foot drop, sometimes without clear resolution. Studies from Kahn (2017),
Anderson (2015), Park (2018), Lauf (2020) suggest complications higher than previously
reported with Lauf (2020) finding short-term complication rates of 10.1% and 4.1% long-term
as confirmed by EMG. Our study looked to address the complication rates from an alternative
anesthetic procedure, a distal ankle nerve block involving anesthesia to the five nerve(s)
more intimately involved in the surgical procedure. This alternative technique may provide
equivalent anesthetic properties and pain relief as popliteal blocks, with fewer
complications for many patients across various demographics.
Methods: We retrospectively reviewed patient charts and messaging from 2019 to
2021 that received a distal ankle field block for various surgical procedures including
ankle arthroscopy, ankle fractures, and lateral ankle stabilizations. The five nerves
anesthetized in the distal ankle nerve block included the tibial, superficial and deep
peroneal, sural, and saphenous. Thus far, 61 surgeries have been reviewed and analyzed for
neuropathic complications and confirmed via EMG.
Results: Of the 61 patients analyzed, 3 patients were found to have a
superficial peroneal neuropathy that included dorsal numbness as a result of the distal
ankle block, resulting in a 4.92% complication rate. 1 patient required a rescue block to be
performed postoperatively for pain. The remaining 57 patients recovered appropriately and
without complications. No motor complications have been found from patients receiving distal
ankle nerve blocks, as performed by the senior author.
Conclusion: With the absence of motor complications and markedly reduced
incidence of sensory complications, distal ankle nerve blocks may be a beneficial
alternative to popliteal nerve blocks for various foot and ankle orthopedic surgeries. As
motor complications can result in life-altering disability, an anesthetic procedure with
reduced negative motor outcomes can improve surgery and recovery prognosis. Future
directions for this study include adding more patients to increase the sample size, as well
as continuing to follow current patients, monitoring symptoms or complications.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00104

## Intramedullary Nailing vs Plating of the Fibula for Ankle Fractures in the Young Active
Patient

Gonzalo F. Bastias, MD; Natalio R. Cuchacovich Mikenberg, MD; Felipe G. Diaz; Paulina
Gutierrez, MD; Gerardo Munoz, CAE; Rodrigo Melo, MD; Magdalena I. Jofre; Jorge Filippi,
MD, MBA

Category: Ankle; Trauma
Keywords: Ankle Fracture; Clinical Outcomes; Intramedular Fibular Nail
Introduction/Purpose: The use of fibular nailing (FN) for fixation of lateral
malleolar fractures has been rising in recent years. Currently, it has been validated as an
effective minimally invasive approach to ankle fractures specially in patients with high
risk of wound dehiscence, diabetics and elderly low-demand patients. While most of the
studies comparing the use of a fibula nail versus plating (PL) are carried out in this
population at risk, the use of FN in younger patients with higher functional demands has
been hardly studied. The aim of this study is to compare the functional and quality of life
outcomes of patients treated with FN and PL in an active population.
Methods: We performed an IRB-approved retrospective study including ankle
fractures treated in our hospital from January 2017 to February 2020, with a minimum
followup of one year. We included only patients between 18 and 55 years old treated by five
fellowship-trained foot and ankle surgeons and divided into two groups according to the
method of fixation of the fibula: intramedullary nailing (FN) or plating (PL). Demographics,
medical comorbidities, type of fracture, reoperations and complications were collected.
Functional and clinical evaluation included the Lower Extremity Functional Score (LEFS) and
Short form 12 (SF 12) were obtained at an average of 28 months follow-up (range 14-50).
Results: Eighty-five patients were included in this study with a mean age of
36.9 years old (range 16-55). The FN group was conformed by 31 patients (18 men) while the
PL group consisted of 54 patients (32 men). Both groups were comparable in terms of age,
sex, type of fracture, open fractures, number of malleoli compromised (P>0.05). Union was
achieved in all patients. The complication rate was 3.2% (1 patient) in the FN group versus
5,5% (3 patients) in the PL group (p=0.66). Two patients (6.5%) in the FN group and 7
patients (13%) in the PL group required hardware removal (p=0.36). There were no significant
differences in SF-12 physical component (p=0.30), SF-12 Mental component (p=0.52) and LEFS
Score (p=0.88).
Conclusion: In this comparative study, there were no differences between the
FN and PL groups for fixation of the fibula in terms of functional results and quality of
life at an average of 28 months follow-up. Complications and hardware removal rates had no
statistical differences between both groups. This is the first report on the literature
comparing both fixation strategies on an active high-demand population.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00105

## Learning Curve for Fixation of the Posterior Malleolus in Trimalleolar Ankle Fractures
Through A Posterolateral Approach

Gonzalo F. Bastias, MD; Juan P. Bergeret, MD; Jose M. Rojas Fuentes, MD; Victor M.
Barrientos; Rodrigo Jose Gutierrez Boris; Bastian A. Leonart Correa, MD; Patricio A.
Fuentes

Category: Ankle; Trauma
Keywords: Ankle Fracture; Anatomic Plating; Trauma
Introduction/Purpose: Fractures of the posterior malleolus (PM) are present in
7-44% of all ankle fractures. Controversy exists referring to the optimal strategy for the
fixation of these fractures. The anatomical reduction of the PM has been related to better
functional outcomes and lower rates of posttraumatic osteoarthritis. The posterolateral (PL)
approach has proven useful for obtaining an accurate reduction of the articular step-off and
remotion of intraarticular fragments that may interfere with the reduction. Common reported
complications are wound dehiscence, sural nerve injuries and persistent intraarticular
step-off of the PM. There have been no previous reports on the literature regarding the
learning curve (LC) of this approach. The aim of this study was to assess the LC of
performing a PLA by orthopedic surgeons.
Methods: A retrospective study was performed including patients with posterior
malleolar fractures treated by eight orthopedic foot and ankle surgeons between 2012 and
2018 in a Level-I trauma center. Open reduction and internal fixation using a PL approach
was used in all patients. Demographic data, fracture pattern and approach-related
complications were noted. Anatomical reduction or persistent step-off and of the PM was
assessed with postoperative CT-Scan. The LC-CUSUM (Learning Curve - Cumulative Sum)
quantitative assessment was used to evaluate the learning curve in terms of approach-related
complications and quality of reduction. Based on the acceptable failure rate was defined by
less than 10% of approach-related complications and less than 15% of patients with
postoperative step-off greater than 1 mm.
Results: We included 167 patients with a mean age of 47 years old (R22 - 75).
PM morphology was classified according to Haraguchi being I:52.1%, II:46.1% and III:1.8%.
Mean size of the PM was 29.8% (R13 - 58). The overall approach-related complications
incidence was 10.2 % being the most frequent: wound complications and sural nerve
paresthesias. Persistent step-off >1 mm was present in 23 patients (13.8%) on CT-Scan.
LC-CUSUM score peaked at the 31st case for significant reduction of approach-related
complications. There was a decrease in the incidence of approach-related complications from
19.4% in the first 31 cases and 8,1% in cases 32nd-167th. There was a significant reduction
of persistent step-off >1 mm with the LC-CUSUM score peaking after the 28th case. This
manifests in a decrease from 21.4% incidence in the first 28 cases versus 12.2% in cases
28th- 167th.
Conclusion: The learning curve for fixation of PM fractures using a PL
approach, as indicated by a cumulative sum quantitative assessment, corresponds to 31 cases
for achieving success in terms of approach-related complications and 28 cases for an
acceptable quality of reduction. These results are useful for novice trainees in this
approach for defining a point of competence and assess the feasibility to achieve expertise
in centers with lower caseloads of PM fractures.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00106

## Percutaneous Modified Lapidus Procedure with Early Weightbearing: Technique and Early
Outcomes of the First 30 Cases

Bryan Bean, MD; Devin R. Mangold, MD; Mostafa Abousayed, MD, MSc; Michelle M. Coleman,
MD, PhD; John Thompson, MD; Gregory P. Guyton, MD

Category: Bunion; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Hallux Valgus; Minimally Invasive; Lapidus
Introduction/Purpose: Minimally invasive techniques (MIS) have focused on
first metatarsal osteotomies in hallux valgus correction. Concurrently, new fixation methods
allow early weightbearing protocols with the open Lapidus procedure, with nonunion rates
comparable to those of more traditional protocols requiring nonweightbearing. We aimed to
assess clinical and radiographic results of an MIS-modified Lapidus technique with axial
nail fixation (Phantom Lapidus Intramedullary Nail: Paragon28, Englewood, CO USA) and early
weightbearing.
Methods: After institutional review board approval, the first 30 consecutive
percutaneous MIS-modified Lapidus procedures by a single surgeon were retrospectively
reviewed. Indications for surgery included moderate to severe hallux valgus deformity with
or without first tarsometatarsal joint (TMT) instability, first TMT arthritis, adolescent
bunion, and failed prior surgery. All patients initiated weightbearing within 12 days and
returned to regular footwear by 6 weeks postoperatively. Patients had a minimum follow-up
period of 3 months (average 8.3 months). The pre- and postoperative visual analog scale
(VAS) pain scores, intra- and postoperative complications, and need for revision surgery
were recorded. Pre- and postoperative radiographs were used to evaluate the hallux valgus
angle (HVA), 1-2 intermetatarsal angle (IMA), and sesamoid station. Postoperative
radiographs were evaluated for signs of hardware loosening and union of the first TMT
arthrodesis site. A postoperative CT scan was obtained if nonunion was suspected.
Results: Thirty consecutive percutaneous modified Lapidus procedures were
performed in 28 patients. VAS scores improved from 4.1 preoperatively to 1.8 at final
follow-up. The IMA decreased 8.3 degrees to an average of 5.9 degrees. The HVA decreased
19.2 degrees to 11.7 degrees. The medial column was shortened by 0.6%. There were no
intraoperative complications. There were two reoperations, including one nonunion requiring
revision first TMT fusion with autograft and one hallux valgus recurrence requiring a distal
chevron osteotomy. There were no wound complications, surgical site infections, hardware
complications, postoperative transfer metatarsalgia, or nerve-related problems.
Conclusion: The current study provides clinical evidence that the
intramedullary nail is a biomechanically stable construct evidenced by the high union rate,
lack of hardware failure, and tolerance for early weightbearing. This percutaneous modified
Lapidus technique may allow for a low rate of wound complications, accelerated
rehabilitaion, and improved cosmesis.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00107

## Modified Brostrom with and without Suture Tape Augmentation: A Systematic
Review

Michael D. Bedrin; Andres S. Piscoya; Alexander Lundy; Tobin T. Eckel, MD

Category: Ankle; Sports
Keywords: Broström; Lateral Ankle Instability; Ankle Instability
Introduction/Purpose: The Modified Brostrom (MB) has become the gold standard
for operative management of chronic lateral ankle instability. Despite overall good clinical
outcomes with this procedure, recent biomechanical data has called into question the
strength and durability of this technique. Accordingly, the addition of suture tape to the
MB construct has been described in an attempt to more closely recreate the natural
biomechanical properties of the ankle lateral ligament complex. Despite its increasing
popularity, the Modified Brostrom with suture tape augmentation (MBA) remains controversial
due to a lack of clinical data. The purpose of this study is to determine the differences in
clinical outcomes of MB compared to MBA.
Methods: A systematic review of the literature was performed using PubMed,
Embase, and CINAHL to identify English-language articles from 2009 - present discussing
outcomes with the MBA technique. Total number of patients, patient demographics, follow-up
time, subjective and objective outcome measures, return to sport, recurrent instability, and
complications were evaluated.
Results: A total of 4 studies (2 retrospective cohort studies, 2 case series)
involving 156 patients with MBA met inclusion criteria. Average follow-up time was 13.8
months. Of the 3 studies reporting patient-reported outcome measures both pre-and post-
operatively, there was a significant improvement in all measures (p<0.05). Two studies
compared MB directly to MBA, one of which found a statistically significant difference in
the Foot and Ankle Ability Measure (FAAM) in favor of the MBA (93.1 vs 90.5, p=0.027), while
American Orthopaedic Foot & Ankle Society (AOFAS) score was not significantly different
(p>0.05) between MB and MBA across studies. One study reported a significantly greater
rate of return to sport at 12 weeks in the MBA group versus the MB (82% vs 27%, p<.001).
There were no significant differences in complications between MB and MBA.
Conclusion: MBA for chronic lateral ankle instability can produce good
short-term clinical outcomes with few complications, comparable to MB. The overall quality
of evidence is low, and long-term, prospective, head-to-head comparison data will be needed
to determine the clinical efficacy, complication profile, and cost-benefit relationship of
the MBA technique as it compares to the MB.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00108

## Accuracy of Weightbearing CT vs Non-Weightbearing CT Scans for Patient-Specific
Instrumentation in Total Ankle Arthroplasty

Gregory C. Berlet, MD; Antonio M. Malloy McCoy; Devon Consul, DPM; Benjamin D. Umbel,
DO; Mitchell Thompson

Category: Ankle
Keywords: Weight Bearing CT; Total Ankle Arthroplasty; Ankle
Introduction/Purpose: Total ankle arthroplasty (TAA) is a popular and viable
option for end stage ankle arthritis. Accuracy and reproducibility in placing the implant on
the mechanical axis has been shown to be paramount in total ankle replacement. Patient
specific pre-operative navigation up until this past year has been based off of
non-weightbearing computerized tomography (CT). Our institution has created a protocol to
use weightbearing CT in the pre-operative patient specific navigation for TAA using the
ProphecyTM system. The purpose of our study was to compare the accuracy and
reproducibility of implant alignment and size using WBCT versus prior studies using NWBCT
for the Prophecy reports.
Methods: Patients who underwent TAA using our WBCT protocol for their Prophecy
scans had their charts reviewed to see if they met the proper inclusion criteria. Inclusion
criteria was a primary TAA with proper follow-up to have first post-operative weightbearing
radiographs. The first post-operative weightbearing radiographs were used to measure
alignment of the axis of the implant in frontal and sagittal planes comparative to the
tibial axis. These results were then compared to the pre-operative prophecy scans to
determine reproducibility. The size of the implants components were also recorded for each
patient and compared to the pre-operative predicted implant sizes from the patient specific
reports. Our results were also compared to previous studies on reproducibility of patient
specific navigation when using non-weightbearing CT.
Results: Ten patients met our inclusion criteria of WBCT ProphecyTM
preoperative planning. 100% of the TAA were within the intended target of less than 50 varus
or valgus. The average post-operative coronal alignment was an average of 0.844 degrees.
Average sagittal plane deformity was 1.88 degrees post-operative. Tibial component size was
properly predicted 100% of the time and talar component in all but one patient.
Conclusion: This data supports superior accuracy and reproducibility in
pre-operative patient specific navigation when utilizing WBCT for TAA vs published controls
with non-weightbearing CT.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00109

## Ankle Fusion Outcomes Utilizing Anterior Ankle Plating Techniques: A Systematic
Review

Gregory C. Berlet, MD; Mark A. Prissel, DPM; Emily E. Zulauf; Antonio M. Malloy
McCoy

Category: Ankle; Ankle
Keywords: Ankle Arthrodesis; Ankle; Fusion
Introduction/Purpose: Ankle arthrodesis is a time-tested surgical treatment
for end-stage ankle arthritis. Fixation constructs continue to evolve with recent
advancements in anterior ankle plating. A systematic review of anterior approach ankle
arthrodesis using anterior plating was performed to analyze outcomes such as time to weight
bearing, union rate, and complications.
Methods: A systematic literature search was performed following Preferred
Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta- Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines was performed.
Inclusion criteria were as follows: 1) prospective or retrospective comparative study or
consecutive case series reporting clinical outcomes following ankle arthrodesis; 2) surgeon
technique includes anterior incisional approach with anterior plating construct; 3) minimum
3 months follow-up; and 4) reported outcomes including time to weight bearing, union or
nonunion rate, complications, and patient population characteristics including age and
comorbidities. Thirteen citations met inclusion criteria. Studies were organized into three
groups based on similar time to weightbearing protocols.
Results: Mean time to weightbearing was as follows: Group A. 0.6 weeks, Group
B. 6 weeks, and Group C. 9 weeks with fusion rates of 95.2%, 95.4%, and 96.6%, respectively.
The average time to weightbearing post-operation across all groups was 4.6 weeks with a mean
union rate of 95.3% (82 to 100%).
Conclusion: Wound healing complications and infection rates did not increase
with earlier weight bearing guidelines. This systemic review revealed comparable fusion
rates across different weight bearing regimens following anterior plate fixation for ankle
arthrodesis, supporting re-evaluation of historically accepted weightbearing protocols.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00110

## Maintenance of First Ray Length after First Metatarsophalangeal Joint Distraction
Arthrodesis Using Allograft Discs: A Statistical Analysis

Gregory C. Berlet, MD; Antonio M. Malloy McCoy; Mitchell Thompson; Devon Consul, DPM;
Mark A. Prissel, DPM

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: 1st MTP Joint; Arthrodesis; First Metatarsophalangeal Joint
Arthrodesis
Introduction/Purpose: The first metatarsophalangeal joint (MTPJ) is one of the
most common locations for arthritis in the foot. When conservative methods fail, two main
surgical treatment options exist, fusion or joint implant. For various reasons these
surgeries can fail leaving relatively few salvage options. A common salvage option is the
first MTPJ distraction arthrodesis. Use of allograft discs to decrease surgical time and
donor site morbidity has become an increasingly popular option for MTP distraction
arthrodesis. The purpose of this study was to look at the maintenance of the first ray
length in first MTPJ distraction arthrodesis using allograft discs.
Methods: We reviewed 14 patients who underwent first MTPJ distraction
arthrodesis, measuring first ray length at the first post- operative weightbearing
radiograph and most recent weightbearing radiograph. Average follow up was 12.75 months
between radiographs.
Results: Average shortening was 3 mm on the lateral measurements and 2.3 mm on
the AP measurements. CT verified overall nonunion rate was 43% whereas, symptomatic nonunion
rate was 21%.
Conclusion: Amount of shortening and graft size did appear to have a positive
correlation. Union rate did not affect shortening of first ray, but revision for a failed
implant arthroplasty did correlate with increased shortening compared to revision for a
failed first MTPJ fusion. Our data suggests a 2-3 mm shortening of the first ray can be
predicted over the first 12 months after a first MTPJ distraction arthrodesis using
allograft discs. Longer term studies with larger patient populations, and a comparative
study to cortical autograft would provide more accurate insight to outcomes of first MTPJ
distraction arthrodesis.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00111

## Bosch Osteotomy for Hallux Valgus Correction: Results at a Mean 10-Year
Follow-Up

Alessio Bernasconi, MD PhD FEBOT; Maria Rizzo; Anna Paola Russo; Salvatore Vallefuoco,
MD; Amedeo Guarino; Massimo Mariconda

Category: Bunion; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Bunion; Hallux Valgus; Bunionectomy
Introduction/Purpose: Boesh osteotomy (BO) is a surgical option for the
correction of hallux valgus (HV). The aim of this study was to assess the long-term clinical
and radiographic results in a cohort of patients treated at our institution.
Methods: In this retrospective cohort study, we included 58 HVs (28 right, 30
left) in 46 patients (42 females, 4 males; mean age and BMI at surgery 44 +- 15 (range,
15-64) years and 26 +- 4 (range, 22-38) points, respectively) who underwent HV correction by
BO and were followed at a minimum of 7 years. The range of motion (ROM), the American
Orthopaedic Foot & Ankle Society’s Forefoot scale (AOFAS-FS) and the Visual Analogic
Scale (VAS) for pain were recorded. On weightbearing radiographs, the Hallux Valgus Angle
(HVA), Intermetatarsal Angle (IMA), the Distal Metatarsal Articular Angle (DMAA) and the
Sesamoid position were measured and compared with pre-operative values. The complication
rate and first metatarsophalangeal joint stiffness were also assessed.
Results: At a mean follow-up of 10+-2 (range, 7-17) years, mean+-standard
deviation AOFAS-FS and VAS were 89+-11 (range, 67-93) and 2.1+-2.8 (range, 0-7) points,
respectively. In 62% of patients there was no pain while in 38% an occasional pain was
referred. In 42 (72%) cases there was no limitation in the choice of footwears.
Radiographically, we found a significant improvement in the HVA (from 33.9°+-6.7 to
18.8°+-5.6, p<0.001), in the IMA (14.2°+-3.1 to 9.4°+-2.7, p<0.001), in the DMAA (from
30.3°+-6.8 to 11.5°+-5.1, p<0.001) and in the sesamoid position (median value from 3 to
1, p<0.001). In 36 (62%) cases the ROM was greater than 75° while in 22 (38%) it ranged
between 30° and 75°. Complications occurred in 6 (10%) cases (3 superficial infections, 1
accidental removal of the K-wire, 1 metatarsal head necrosis and 1 development of
osteoarthritis), which did not require any surgery at the longest follow-up.
Conclusion: Boesh technique provided satisfactory clinical and radiographic
outcomes in the correction of Hallux Valgus which persisted at a mean 10-year follow-up. The
complication rate was not different from more recent techniques described in literature.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00112

## Static vs Dynamic Fixation of Distal Tibiofibular Syndesmosis: A Review of Overlapping
Meta-Analyses

Alessio Bernasconi, MD, PhD, FEBOT; Domenico Marasco, MD; Jacopo Russo, MD; Antonio
Izzo, MD; Salvatore Vallefuoco, MD; Francesco Coppola, MD; Giovanni Balato, MD, PhD;
Francesco Smeraglia, MD, PhD; Francois Lintz, MD MSc FEBOT; Shelain Patel, FRCS

Category: Ankle; Sports
Keywords: Syndesmosis; Suture-button Construct; Syndesmotic Screw
Introduction/Purpose: Multiple Level I meta-analyses have been led comparing
traditional static vs. more recently-introduced dynamic strategies of fixation for injuries
of the distal tibiofibular syndesmosis (TFS). The aim of this review was to assess their
robustness and methodological quality, providing support in the choice of a treatment
strategy in case of TFS injury using the highest level of evidence.
Methods: In this systematic review, conducted in accordance with the PRISMA
guidelines, we identified meta-analyses/systematic reviews comparing static and dynamic
fixation methods after acute TFS injury. Robustness of studies was evaluated using the
Fragility Index (FI) for meta-analysis and the Fragility Quotient (FQ). The risk of bias was
evaluated using the Assessment of Multiple Systematic Reviews(AMSTAR) instrument. Finally,
the Jadad Decision Algorithm was applied to select the study which provided the highest
quality of evidence to develop recommendations for the fixation strategy of these
lesions.
Results: Out of 1302 records, 4 Level I meta-analyses were included in this
study. Analyzing the statistically significant dichotomous outcomes, the median FI was 3.5
(IQR, 2 to 5.5; range, 1 to 9) while the median FQ was 1.9% (IQR, 1 to 3.5; range 0.35 to
4.4). In total, 37% had a FI of 2 or less and 75% of outcomes had a FI of 4 or less.
According to the AMSTAR score and Jadad algorithm, the largest meta-analysis was selected as
the highest evidence provided so far.
Conclusion: We selected the meta-analysis by Grassi et al. as the highest
quality provided so far, which found that dynamic fixation reduced complication rates and
improved clinical outcomes compared to static methods of fixation. We demonstrated that
meta-analyses with statistically significant dichotomous outcomes comparing dynamic and
static fixation for treating injuries of the distal tibiofibular syndesmosis are fragile,
with a change in less than 4 patients or less than 2% of the study population sufficient to
reverse a significant outcome to nonsignificant. Based on these findings, we recommend
caution when interpreting the results of these studies.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00113

## Weightbearing CT Assessment of Foot and Ankle Joints in Pes Planovalgus Using Distance
Mapping

Alessio Bernasconi, MD PhD FEBOT; Cesar de Cesar Netto, MD, PhD; Sorin Siegler, PhD;
Maui Jepsen, BSc; Francois Lintz, MD MSc FEBOT

Category: Hindfoot; Ankle; Other
Keywords: Flatfoot AAFD Computed Tomography Weightbearing CT; AAFD;
Flatfoot
Introduction/Purpose: The goal of this study was to describe the abnormal
joint surface interaction at the ankle, hindfoot and midfoot joints in patients presenting
with Pes Planovalgus (PP) using three-dimensional (3D) distance mapping on weightbearing
computed tomography (WBCT) images by comparing a series of PPs to a series of
normally-aligned feet. We hypothesized that in PPs joint interactions would reveal
significantly increased spaces in the medial side of the ankle, hindfoot and midfoot
joints.
Methods: In this case-control study, ten feet (10 patients) with asymptomatic
PP (cases; N=10) were compared to 10 matched- paired (by age, gender and body mass index)
normally-aligned feet (10 patients) (controls; N=10). Three-dimensional models were produced
from the images and distance maps representing joint surface configuration were generated
for the ankle, hindfoot and midfoot joints. The distance maps for each joint were then
compared between the two groups and between regions in the same group.
Results: In PP patients there was a significantly increased surface-to-surface
distance anteromedially at the ankle joint (+46.3%, p<0.001) along with an increased
distance on the anterior halves of both the medial (+21.3%, p=0.098) and lateral malleoli
(+22.7%, p=0.038). At the posterolateral corner of the posterior facet of the subtalar joint
we found an increased surface-to- surface distance (by 57.1%, p< 0.001), while at the
talonavicular joint there was a reduction of the distance at the superomedial corner (-20%,
p=0.097) along with a significant increase in the upper central (+20%, p=0.039) and lateral
(+30.7%, p=0.015) zones. A reduction of the surface-to-surface distance was also observed in
three of the four zones of the calcaneocuboid joint. Finally, a statistically significant
increase in the mean distance was observed at the naviculocuneiform and tarsometatarsal
joints in a range between 38% and 93.4% (p<0.001 in all cases).
Conclusion: We found significant differences in surface-to-surface interaction
at the foot and ankle joints between Pes Planovalgus and normally-aligned controls. Distance
mapping on WBCT images could be used in clinical practice as a diagnostic support to gauge
the morphological changes of articular spaces occurring in Pes Planovalgus.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00114

## Cost-Effectiveness of Weight-Bearing Computed Tomography in Diagnosing Syndesmotic
Instability

Rohan Bhimani, MD, MBA; Owen F. Searle; Soheil Ashkani-Esfahani, MD; Gregory R.
Waryasz, MD; Gino Kerkhoffs, MD; Christopher W. DiGiovanni, MD; Daniel Guss, MD, MBA; Bart
Lubberts, MD, PhD

Category: Ankle; Sports; Other
Keywords: Economic Analysis; Syndesmosis; Alignment Weight Bearing CT
Introduction/Purpose: To optimize clinical outcomes, accurate diagnosis and
treatment of syndesmotic instability is critical, but subtle instability can be challenging
to identify. Weightbearing computed tomography (WBCT) has proved to be a reliable tool for
diagnosing syndesmotic instability under physiologic load. We aimed to examine the
cost-effectiveness of WBCT with radiographs and/or conventional CT for the diagnosis of
syndesmotic instability from a patient perspective.
Methods: A decision tree model was constructed to examine the
cost-effectiveness of WBCT versus conventional CT (NWB CT) versus weightbearing (WB)
radiographs versus non-weightbearing (NWB) radiographs (base case) as initial imaging with
additional possible imaging for1268 patients with suspected syndesmotic instability.
Patient’s clinical and radiological notes were evaluated until the diagnosis of syndesmotic
instability was established. The decision tree’s probabilities, durations, and image counts
were based on patient data. The main outcomes were 1) total imaging costs needed before
syndesmotic instability was diagnosed, 2) quality-adjusted life-years (QALYs), 3)
incremental cost-effectiveness ratios (ICERs), and 4) overall radiation dose prior to
diagnosis. Imaging costs and radiation dose were derived from National Medicare
reimbursement rates and the American College of Radiology, respectively. An incremental
cost-effectiveness ratio threshold of $50,000 per quality-adjusted life years was used to
evaluate cost-effectiveness. In addition, one-way and two-way sensitivity analyses were
performed to determine the robustness of our findings.
Results: WBCT resulted in 0.057 additional QALY gained per week compared with
NWB radiographs, indicating WBCT to be more effective than NWB radiographs. Costs for WBCT
imaging were $38.71 higher than NWB radiographs for an ICER of $38,563.96/QALY. Applying a
commonly used threshold of $50,000 per QALY, the patient’s willingness-to-pay for the amount
of quality-adjusted life-year gained from using WBCT as an initial imaging modality was
$54.41, suggesting WBCT first imaging strategy was a cost-effective intervention. In our
study, the cost of WBCT imaging was $157.35. Sensitivity analyses demonstrated that WBCT was
more cost effective than NWB radiographs up to a cost of $173.05. Additionally, initial WBCT
resulted in lower overall radiation dosage (6.4 uSv) compared to the use of the other three
imaging modalities as initial imaging strategy (initial NWB radiographs - 12.41 uSv; initial
WB radiographs - 8.30 uSv, NWB CT first - 25 uSv).
Conclusion: WBCT leads to higher QALYs compared to other diagnostic imaging
modalities, resulting in improved outcomes for patients by eliminating redundant
imaging.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00115

## Defining Reference Values for the Anatomical Axis of Syndesmosis and Landmark for the
Clamp Placement to Minimize Malreduction

Rohan Bhimani, MD, MBA; Soheil Ashkani-Esfahani, MD; Bart Lubberts, MD, PhD; Daniel
Guss, MD, MBA; Gino Kerkhoffs, MD; Christopher W. DiGiovanni, MD; Gregory R. Waryasz,
MD

Category: Ankle; Sports; Trauma
Keywords: Alignment Weight Bearing CT; Syndesmotic Injury; Syndesmosis
Screws
Introduction/Purpose: Malreduction of the fibula within the incisura is often
caused by an eccentric clamp or screw placement and short fibular length. Weightbearing
computed tomography (WBCT) has proven to be a reliable method to diagnose syndesmotic
instability and can be used as a template to determine the syndesmotic axis and optimal
position to place the clamp. We aimed to determine the anatomic axis of the syndesmosis, or
the trans-syndesmotic angle (TSA) in healthy individuals on WBCT, and to see if side-to-side
and gender based variations exist. We also aimed to determine the clamp’s medial tine
placement along the trans-syndesmotic axis.
Methods: The study group was made up of patient population without ankle
injury who underwent bilateral foot and ankle WBCT imaging (n = 100; 200 ankles).
Measurements on bilateral WBCT images included: 1) TSA at 1cm, 2cm, and 3cm proximal to
tibial plafond, respectively; 2) Medial tine of the clamp positioning at 1cm and 2 cm along
the syndesmotic axis. The medial tine clamp position was described in terms of the
percentage of anterior to posterior tibial diameter from the anterior cortical boundary. In
addition, the aforementioned TSA measurements were compared to historically defined 30
degrees of syndesmotic axis. Paired t-test was used to compare side to side and gender based
differences. A p-value < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Results: In the uninjured healthy population, the mean trans-syndesmotic
angles were 17.60, 21.60, and 24.10 at 1cm, 2cm, and 3cm proximal to the tibial plafond
respectively. The clamp’s medial tine should be positioned 24.7% and 21.3% of the AP tibial
cortical distance, posterior to the anterior tibial cortex at 1cm and 2 cm proximal to the
tibial plafond. There was no significant side to side or gender based differences for any of
the measurements. Additionally, all three weightbearing TSA measurements were significantly
larger than the historically defined syndesmotic angle of 30 degrees (p<0.001).
Conclusion: Preoperative WBCT imaging provides a reliable template to
determine TSA and to plan optimal clamp tine positioning along the syndesmotic axis. Our
study has established normal ranges for cross-sectional syndesmotic axis measurements during
weight-bearing and established that no differences exist between laterality and gender in
patients without syndesmotic injury.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00116

## The Lateral Hook Test: What is the Amount of Force that Should Be Applied to Evaluate
Syndesmotic Instability Using Arthroscopy?

Rohan Bhimani, MD, MBA; Bart Lubberts, MD, PhD; Noortje Hagemeijer, MD; John Z. Zhao,
MD; Jirawat Saengsin, MD; Go Sato, MD; Gregory R. Waryasz, MD; Christopher W. DiGiovanni,
MD; Daniel Guss, MD, MBA

Category: Ankle; Arthroscopy; Basic Sciences/Biologics
Keywords: Syndesmosis; Syndesmotic Diastasis; Arthroscopy
Introduction/Purpose: The lateral hook test is considered the gold standard
for the diagnosis of coronal plane syndesmotic instability during arthroscopy. The amount of
distal tibiofibular space is directly related to the amount of lateral directed applied
force. This study aims to determine the optimal amount of forced needed during a lateral
hook test to evaluate syndesmotic instability in the coronal plane. The secondary aim was to
determine the amount of displacement variation that occurs when the lateral force is angled
anteriorly or posteriorly.
Methods: Ten fresh-frozen above-knee amputated cadaveric specimens underwent
arthroscopic evaluation of the distal tibiofibular joint. The assessment was done first with
all syndesmotic and ankle ligaments intact and subsequently with transection of the anterior
inferior tibiofibular ligament (AITFL) and the interosseous ligament (IOL). In all
scenarios, a lateral hook test was performed under increasing force from 0N to 120N of
direct force, with increments of 20N. The lateral hook test was performed in: 1) the neutral
position (no angulation), 2) anterior inclination of 15 degrees, and 3) posterior
inclination of 15 degrees under the aforementioned force. Anterior and posterior coronal
plane distal tibiofibular space were arthroscopically measured. Descriptive statistics were
employed to determine the force and the most sensitive method to pull during arthroscopic
evaluation to detect syndesmotic instability.
Results: Among the specimens, after transection of AITFL and IOL, the anterior
and posterior coronal plane space increased with increment in force until 60N and then
displayed no change in these measurements despite the increase in force. In the intact
state, there was an increase in syndesmosis coronal space with increase in force. Of the
three methods of force application, the posteriorly directed force has the largest absolute
value for the anterior and posterior coronal space, suggesting it is the most sensitive in
distinguishing between stable and unstable syndesmotic injury.
Conclusion: Arthroscopic coronal plane evaluation under 60N of direct force is
best suited to distinguish stable from an unstable syndesmosis. Syndesmosis anterior and
posterior coronal plane space measurement demonstrate the largest absolute difference when
subjected to posteriorly directed force, suggesting that this new method of assessment has
the highest potential for diagnosing even subtle syndesmotic instability, along with a lower
propensity for error.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00117

## Allograft Reconstruction for Unsalvageable and Recurrent Tears of Both Peroneal
Tendons

Daniel D. Bohl; James W. Brodsky, MD; Lincoln Dutcher

Category: Ankle; Hindfoot; Sports
Keywords: Peroneal Tendon Tears; Peroneal Tendon Reconstruction; Allograft
Introduction/Purpose: Surgical reconstruction for the complete loss of both
peroneal tendons is challenging, with no established standard. This is true both for
concomitant tears that extend superior to the superior peroneal retinaculum, and for
nonfunctioning, unsalvageable peroneal tendons after prior repair or reconstruction, which
have recurrent tears, tendon degeneration, scarring, and stretching. These cases have in
common that there is no option for retention of the native tendons. Allograft reconstruction
can bridge long defects, reestablishing the insertion of the proximal musculo-tendinous unit
to the lateral foot. However, there are limited published data on allograft reconstruction,
and series are small and heterogenous. This study reports the results of allograft
reconstruction at a mean of 4.1 years follow-up (range 1.5-7.3 years).
Methods: A retrospective study reviewed patients who had allograft
reconstruction for unsalvageable or recurrent tears of both the peroneus brevis and peroneus
longus tendons. In all cases, the unsalvageable segments of both peroneal tendons were
excised. A hamstring allograft tendon with width of >6mm was pre-stretched, then anchored
to the proximal 5thmetatarsal, and also sutured to itself and the adjacent brevis stump, if
viable. The peroneal retinaculae were reconstructed over the allograft tendon. The peroneal
muscle-proximal tendon units were extensively stretched inferiorly using suture loops in the
tendons. They were maximally tensioned and anastomosed to the maximally tensioned allograft
while holding the hindfoot in maximum eversion. Of the 14 eligible patients, 13 had minimum
one-year follow-up and constituted the study population. Mean age was 50.7 years (range
26.3-68.6 years). Ten patients had at least one prior peroneal tendon surgery; four patients
had at least two.
Results: At mean follow-up of 4.1-years, seven patients were ‘very satisfied,’
one ‘satisfied,’ one ‘neutral,’ and two ‘dissatisfied.’ Ten stated they would have the
procedure again, one would not. Two could not be reached to answer these questions. Visual
analogue scale pain score decreased from 4.6 to 3.4 (p=0.150), ankle osteoarthritis scale
(AOS) pain subscale decreased from 36.2 to 13.8 (p=0.013), AOS disability subscale decreased
from 42.8 to 21.9 (p=0.032), and AOS total score decreased from 39.5 to 17.8 (p=0.014). No
statistical change in SF-36 physical function score (p=0.547) or PROMIS physical function
score (p=0.580) was detected. At last examination, 12 of 13 patients had active eversion and
a palpable, tensioned graft. The patient without active eversion underwent triple
arthrodesis; no other patient had additional peroneal or hindfoot surgery.
Conclusion: Allograft interposition is effective to reconstruct unsalvageable
concomitant tears of both peroneal tendons as well as the most difficult revision cases of
nonfunctioning, unsalvageable peroneal tendons after prior repair or reconstruction, which
have recurrent tears, tendon degeneration, scarring, and stretching. There is a high rate of
restoration of peroneal function, a reasonable rate of patient satisfaction, and
statistically significant improvements in ankle-specific patient-reported outcomes.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00118

## Anatomy of the Naviculocuneiform Joint

George J. Borrelli, MD; Mossub Qatu, MD; Christopher J. Traynor; Joseph Weistroffer;
James R. Jastifer, MD

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot; Basic Sciences/Biologics
Keywords: Midfoot; Arthrodesis; Stress Fractures
Introduction/Purpose: The naviculocuneiform (NC) joint has a role in numerous
pathologies of the foot and ankle. There is little in the published literature quantifying
the cartilage of the articulating surface and its unique anatomical features. The purpose of
this study was to quantify and describe the articular surface of the NC joint. Our
hypothesis was that the cartilage surface would have anatomic features that would guide
surgeons when performing procedures such as joint preparation and screw placement.
Methods: Twenty cadaver NC joints were dissected, and the articular cartilage
quantified by calibrated digital imaging software.
Results: The mean dorsal to plantar height of the navicular facets was 18mm,
with a maximum height not exceeding 21mm. The mean height of the medial, middle, and lateral
cuneiform facets was 15mm, 17mm, and 15mm, respectively. The mean length from the medial to
middle navicular facet was 14mm, approximately 41.3% the mean length across all three
navicular facets (34mm). For the distal navicular articulation, 75.4% of the mean surface
area was articular cartilage. For the proximal medial, middle, and lateral cuneiform
articulations, 69.6%, 75.7%, and 75.8% of the mean surface areas were articular cartilage,
respectively.
Conclusion: This study provides an anatomic description of the NC joint to
guide surgeons when operating on the NC joint. Two clinical observations can be made from
this data. First, when preparing the NC joint for arthrodesis from a dorsal approach, the
surgeon should be aware that the cartilage of the NC joint can extend up to 21mm from dorsal
to plantar. This is also a useful estimate of screw length in the subchondral bone. Second,
the central third of the navicular, where the majority of navicular stress fractures occur,
lies in the inter-facet ridge between the medial and middle facets.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00119

## 3-D Generated Anatomic Custom Talar Cement Spacers: A Technical Tip and Literature
Review

Kimberly K. Broughton, MD; Bonnie Y. Chien, MD; Derek S. Stenquist; Caroline Williams,
BA; Christopher P. Miller, MD; John Y. Kwon, MD

Category: Basic Sciences/Biologics; Hindfoot; Trauma
Keywords: Trauma; Foot and Ankle Infection; Ankle Arthroplasty
Introduction/Purpose: Three dimensional printing is an actively emerging field
within the realm of medical devices. This technology expands therapeutic options and
customization of implants to individual patients. The ability to create products that
replicate normal bony anatomy has been a significant advancement in the setting of difficult
clinical scenarios. 3-D generated, custom implants increase the potential for joint and limb
salvage with the goal of improving functional outcomes. We present a technical tip for
utilizing 3-D printing technology to create custom, anatomically-matched antibiotic cement
spacers for limb- salvage applications. We present two illustrative cases and share our
experiences, lessons learned, and a succinct review of the pertinent literature merging 3-D
printing and the use of antibiotic cement as temporary and permanent reconstructive
solutions.
Methods: While the majority of 3-D printing is done for the purpose of
generating devices for implantation, we present a technical tip for designing a 3-D printed
mold from which to create an antibiotic cement spacer for implantation. Two case
illustrations demonstrate comorbid patients presenting with infected implants,
osteomyelitis, bone loss, deformity and wound dehiscense. We describe the process of patient
selection, implant design, fabrication, and implantation of a custom molded antibiotic
cement talus for the purpose of limb salvage.
Results: Case illustrations present two successful limb salvage patients while
giving a thorough explanation of our technique, learned tips and tricks. This applied
technology builds on prior use of antibiotic cement in limb salvage of the lower extremity,
most of which is joint sacrificing. 3-D printing the mold for an anatomic talus cement
spacer results in a joint sparing limb salvage solution.
Conclusion: Utilization of currently available 3-D printing technology as
applied to production of anatomic cement spacers should be considered to enhance limb
salvage. This innovative application of printing technology is merged with current,
pertinent literature regarding antibiotic cement to offer surgeons expanded options for
temporary or definitive reconstructive techniques in some of the most challenging
patients.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00120

## Outcomes of Posterior Malleolar Fixation in Ankle Fractures in A Major Trauma
Centre

Nelson Bua; Luckshmana A. Jeyaseelan; Lee Parker, FRCS(Tr&Orth); Amaury Trockels;
Catrin Sohrabi; Alexandros Vris; Nima Heidari; Francesc Malagelada Romans

Category: Ankle; Trauma
Keywords: Ankle Fracture; Posterior Malleolus Fracture; Syndesmosis
Introduction/Purpose: Ongoing controversy exists over the indications and
benefits of posterior malleolar fixation in ankle fractures. These injuries require careful
evaluation of the bony and ligamentous structures with theoretical benefits of posterior
malleolar fixation now widely accepted as restoration of articular congruity, restoration of
fibular length and stabilisation of the syndesmosis. Surgical and patient report outcomes
are varied in the literature with analysis limited by the lack of standardisation in
functional outcomes and small patient populations. Posterior malleolar fixation does extend
operative time and potentially increases complication rate. The aim of this pragmatic study
was to evaluate the outcomes of posterior malleolar fracture fixation in the setting of a
major trauma centre. Our hypothesis is that posterior malleolus fixation leads to improved
clinical outcomes.
Methods: A total of 320 patients were identified with operatively treated
ankle fractures involving a posterior malleolus component, between January 2012 and January
2018, with minimum 2 year follow-up. Patient electronic records were assessed for
demographic data including age, gender, mechanism of injury, co-morbidities and smoking
status. Pre-operative imaging, including CT was used to evaluate the nature of the injury
and classify the posterior malleolar fracture according to the Mason classification. One
hundred and sixty patients underwent posterior malleolus fixation as part of their surgery
and 160 patients did not. The Manchester-Oxford Foot Questionnaire (MOXFQ) at final
follow-up, was the primary patient outcome measure.Complications were noted to be minor
(superficial infection or delayed wound healing) or major (DVT/PE, deep infection, chronic
regional pain syndrome (CRPS), arthrofibrosis, further intervention for post-traumatic
arthritis, hardware failure or irritation). All cause reoperation rates were also noted.
Results: Fixation of the posterior malleolus was associated with a
statistically significant improvement in patient outcomes. Mean MOXFQ score in the unfixed
posterior malleolus group was 24.03 (0 - 62), compared to 20.10 (0 - 67) in the fixed
posterior malleolus group (p =0.04). Outcomes were worse with increasing size of posterior
malleolar fragment. When compared with either posterior malleolus fixation alone or
syndesmotic stabilisation alone, poorer outcomes were seen when the posterior malleolus
fixed with additional syndesmotic stabilisation, with mean MOXFQ scores of 21.73 (0-60), p
=0.057. Metalwork-related issues were higher in the posterior malleolus fixed group (24/160
(15%) versus 10/160 (6.2%), p=0.03). Re-operation rate was double (34/160 (21.2%) vs 16/160
(10%), p = 0.03). The main cause of this was hardware related issues.
Conclusion: This pragmatic study is one of the largest published series that
assesses patient reported outcomes in posterior malleolar fixation. The key finding is that
posterior malleolar fixation is associated with a statistically significant improvement in
patient reported outcome scores. However, the overall complication rate was 10.7% higher in
the fixation group and the risk of reoperation was over double. Further research should
focus on high quality randomised controlled trials with long term follow-up to assess long
term impacts of this complex ankle injury pattern.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00121

## Development of a Machine Learning Algorithm for Prediction of Complications after Ankle
Arthrodesis

Amador Bugarin; Akash A. Shah; Sai Devana, MD; Changhee Lee; Nelson F. SooHoo,
MD

Category: Ankle Arthritis; Ankle
Keywords: Ankle Arthrodesis; Ankle Fusion; Ankle Arthritis
Introduction/Purpose: Ankle arthrodesis and total ankle replacement are the
most commonly performed procedures for surgical management of ankle arthritis. Arthrodesis
provides effective pain relief but the rate of complications after arthrodesis is higher as
it is more commonly performed in patients with comorbidities that preclude ankle
replacement. Accurately risk- stratifying patients who undergo ankle arthrodesis would be of
great utility, given the significant cost and morbidity associated with developing major
perioperative complications. There is a paucity of accurate prediction models that can be
used to pre- operatively risk-stratify patients for ankle arthrodesis. We aim to develop a
machine learning (ML) algorithm for prediction of major perioperative complication after
ankle arthrodesis as well as compare its performance against traditional predictive models
based on logistic regression.
Methods: This is a retrospective cohort study of adult patients who underwent
ankle arthrodesis at any non-federal California hospital between 2015 and 2017. The primary
outcome was readmission within 30 days or major perioperative complication - venous
thromboembolism within 30 days, myocardial infarction within 7 days, pneumonia within 7
days, systemic infection within 7 days, surgical site bleeding within 90 days, and wound
complications within 90 days. We build ML and logistic regression models that span different
classes of modeling approaches: XGBoost, AdaBoost, Gradient Boosting, and Random Forest.
Discrimination and calibration were assessed using area under the receiver operating
characteristic curve (AUROC) and Brier score, respectively. We utilize a partial dependence
function to measure the importance of an individual feature by assessing the average effect
in predicted risks when its value is altered. We rank the contribution of the included
variables to the prediction of adverse outcomes.
Results: A total of 1,084 patients met inclusion criteria for this study.
There were 131 major complications or readmission (12.1%). The optimized XGBoost algorithm
demonstrates higher discrimination (AUROC: 0.707 + 0.052) compared to LR (0.691 + 0.055).
The receiver operating characteristic curves for the XGBoost and logistic regression models
are visualized in . XGBoost
also outperforms the three other ML models. This model was well calibrated (Brier score:
0.103 + 0.001). The variables most important for the XGBoost model include diabetes, chronic
kidney disease, implant complication, and major fracture. Five of the ten most important
features for XGBoost were markedly less important for the traditional logistic regression
model: male sex, prior hip fracture, cardiorespiratory failure, acute renal failure, and
dialysis status.
Conclusion: We report a ML algorithm for prediction of major perioperative
complications after ankle arthrodesis. The optimized XGBoost model is well-calibrated and
demonstrates superior risk prediction to logistic regression. This tool may identify and
address potentially modifiable risk factors, helping to accurately risk-stratify patients
and decrease likelihood of major complications. Notably, the predictors most important for
XGBoost are different from those for logistic regression. This suggests that the superior
discriminative capability of ML methods stems from their ability to capture complex
non-linear relationships between variables that logistic regression is unable to detect.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00122

## The Medial Gastrocnemius Release: A Safe and Effective Alternative for Treatment of
Isolated Gastrocnemius Contracture

Patrick E. Bull, DO; Antonio M. Malloy, McCoy; Mitchell Thompson; Maria R. McGann, DO;
Gregory C. Berlet, MD

Category: Basic Sciences/Biologics
Keywords: Gastrocnemius Recession; Gastrocnemius Recession; Gastrocnemius
Recession
Introduction/Purpose: Gastrocnemius recession is a popular procedure utilized
to treat a myriad of lower extremitychronic conditions related to isolated gastrocnemius
contracture (IGC). Recent anatomical research detailing the variable relationship between
the distal gastrocnemius and soleus tendons has raised important questions regarding the
safety of some traditional recession procedures. Alternative gastrocnemius recession
strategies may offer comparable clinical results while avoiding the surgical risk related to
conjoint tendon anatomical variability.
Methods: Ten matched pairs of above-knee fresh frozen cadavers were randomized
to receive either a medial gastrocnemius recession (MGR) procedure or a gastrocnemius
intramuscular recession ‘Baumann’ procedure. Postoperative dorsiflexion improvement was
measured and then compared between groups. Detailed post-operative surgical dissections were
performed on all specimens to assess structures at risk, conjoint tendon morphology, and
anatomical symmetry.
Results: MGR and GIAR procedures were equally effective at producing
significant increases in passive ankle dorsiflexion. No sural nerve injuries were observed.
35% of specimens showed direct muscular fusion of at least a portion of the distal
gastrocnemius muscular tissue to the adjacent soleus, with sections of no distal
transactable gastrocnemius tendon present.
Conclusion: The MGR produced comparable results to the Baumann/GIAR in a
cadaver model. We feel that the MGR is an attractive alternative to traditional
gastrocnemius recession techniques due to the simple approach, the region’s predictable
anatomy, its low risk to surrounding vital structures, and its early evidence of
effectiveness. We also concluded that the conjoint tendon anatomy is highly variable and
that surgeons must account for this unpredictability when surgically treating IGC. We
predict that the biggest risk associated with conjoint tendon region recession procedures is
inadvertent soleus transection and subsequent over lengthening related plantar flexion
weakness.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00123

## Infrequent Adventitious Bursitis Associated with A Palpable Metatarsal Mass: Series of
Cases

Virginia M. Cafruni, MD; Ana C. Parise, MD; Jonathan M. Verbner, MD; Daniel S.
Villena, MD; Leonardo A. Conti, MBA,PhD; Pablo Sotelano, MD; Nelly M. Carrasco, MD; Maria
Gala Santini Araujo, MD

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Metatarsalgia; Pain; Forefoot
Introduction/Purpose: Adventitious bursae are structures that appear in
adulthood, as a mechanism for protection. It may develop at sites where subcutaneous tissue
(ST) is exposed to friction and high pressure. In the forefoot, adventitious bursitis is
usually adjacent to bony prominences of the metatarsal heads and is one of the causes of
forefoot pain. There are different stages of the pathology, at the beginning there is a
small bursa without cavity, subsequently this cavity will gradually acquire a larger size,
until becoming independent. The degeneration of the connective tissue which is the
characteristic of the adventitious bursa. .We present four cases of adventitious bursitis in patients who complained
of a fluctuating mass on the forefoot associated with localized pain on palpation and
pressure.
Methods: We reviewed the cases of 4 patients treated by one of us (MGSA) for
forefoot pain associated with a palpable mass. We obtained the information from the medical
records: clinical presentation, radiographs, ultrasound, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI),
treatment, histological diagnosis (if it was available) and outcomes. Pain was assessed with
visual analog scale (VAS).
Results: The four patients complained of a mass on the forefoot associated
with pain. The skin was normal with no signs of infection. Ultrasound and MRI showed
heterogeneous images in the ST in high pressure areas. Patients were diagnosed according to
the previous studies and treated conservatively. The treatment consisted of cryotherapy and
walker boot until they had shoe insoles with metatarsal olive in order to unload the
metatarsus. Forefoot pain improved markedly from an initial VAS of 8.5 to 3.5 in the first
month and the palpable mass decreased. Except in one patient whose studies were not
conclusive and mass does not decrease in size and she required an excisional biopsy. The
anatomopathological diagnosis was consistent with adventitial bursitis.
Conclusion: Adventitious bursitis of the plantar forefoot is not a frequent
pathology and it can be confused with a foreign body granuloma, localized infection or a
tumoral mass among other possible diagnoses due to the clinical and imaging presentations.
It is important to take this diagnosis into account when dealing with metatarsalgia and have
fluent communication with the radiologist in order to avoid an unnecessary surgery and to
establish the appropriate treatment to improve the symptoms.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00124

## Tarsal Tunnel Syndrome Following Medializing Calcaneal Osteotomy

Virginia M. Cafruni, MD; Facundo Bilbao, MD; Facundo Galich, MD; Guillermo Cardone,
MD; Nelly M. Carrasco, MD

Category: Hindfoot
Keywords: Tarsal Tunnel Syndrome; Calcaneal Osteotomy; Medial Displacement
Calcaneal Osteotomy
Introduction/Purpose: The tarsal tunnel syndrome is a compressive neuropathy
that affects either the posterior tibial nerve, within the tarsal tunnel, or one of its
terminal branches. It can be caused by extrinsic or intrinsic factors. Even though the
tarsal tunnel syndrome has been reported as a complication of lateralizing calcaneal
osteotomy, we have not identified in the literature reports of this syndrome associated to
medializing calcaneal osteotomy. We report the case of a 60-year-old female who developed a
tarsal tunnel syndrome, on the third postoperative week, following a medializing calcaneal
osteotomy for flatfoot correction with stage IIB posterior tibial tendon dysfunction.
Methods: We reviewed and obtained the information from the medical records of
this patient: clinical examination, radiographs, computed tomography, magnetic resonance
imaging, and outcome. Pain was assessed with visual analog scale (VAS).
Results: The patient is a 60-year-old female with left stage II posterior
tibial tendon dysfunction who failed to respond to conservative treatment. Medializing and
lengthening (Evans) osteotomies of the calcaneus were performed, together with posterior
tibial tendon repair and spring ligament reconstruction. In the postoperative, after a cast
replacement into a more plantigrade position, the patient developed symptoms that suggested
a compressive neuropathy of posterior tibial nerve within the tarsal tunnel associated to
calcaneal medializing osteotomy. Initial conservative treatment failed and the posterior
tibial nerve was explored under loupe magnification and the tarsal tunnel was released.
 . An immediate
improvement in pain was observed postoperatively and almost full recovery occurred within 6
months.
Conclusion: In our case report, the tarsal tunnel syndrome was a consequence
of the osteotomy fragment displacement that generated a reduction of the tarsal tunnel
volume. It has been described that the tarsal tunnel syndrome symptoms become more evident
with ankle dorsiflexion and eversion, in our patient this can be associated with the symptom
exacerbation presented when the cast was placed into plantigrade position. We conclude that
even though in the literature the tarsal tunnel syndrome has been mainly associated to
lateralizing osteotomies, it is important to take this complication into account when
performing a medializing osteotomy.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00125

## Medium to Long-Term Results of Combined Deltoid and Foot Reconstruction for PCFD (Stage
IV) Valgus Ankle

Kristin C. Caolo, BA; Cesar de Cesar Netto, MD, PhD; Jonathan Garfinkel, MS; Andrew R.
Roney, BA; Jiaqi Zhu; Jonathan T. Deland, MD

Category: Ankle; Hindfoot; Other
Keywords: Adult Acquired Flatfoot Deformity; Deltoid; Joint Preserving
Surgery
Introduction/Purpose: There is limited documentation of the results of the
treatment of advanced progressive collapsing deformity with talar tilt. No article to our
knowledge with pre-and post-operative ankle x-rays has more than eight patients and average
follow up more than three years.
Methods: This article presents the results of twenty consecutive patients with
medium to long term follow up. All patients had deltoid reconstruction with tendon graft
from the talus to the tibia and foot reconstruction to achieve a heel centered under the
lower leg, a stable midfoot and a mild to moderately plantarflexed first metatarsal.
Patients were followed an average 10.8 years (SD = 4.6, Range 4.6-17) and had standing
pre-and post-operative radiographs along with FAOS and PROMIS scores. Radiographs were
assessed for talar tilt preoperatively, early postoperatively and at final follow up. Data
was analyzed with paired t-tests, Mann Whitney U test, fisher’s exact test and univariable
linear regression. All p-values are two-sided and statistical significance was evaluated at
the 0.05 alpha level.
Results: Two patients failed the procedure; one had an ankle fusion and the
second infection eventually required a BKA. The remaining 18 patients were satisfied with
their procedure, maintained significant improvement in outcome scores and talar tilt and
required no other procedure on their ankle. The mean talar tilt preoperatively was 10.9
degrees (SD = 3.9) and at final follow up 4.2 degrees (SD = 2.8) (P<0.0001). Initial
correction of the talar tilt as documented by early post-operative (mean early follow-up
years = 2.2, SD = 1.9) with standing radiograph was maintained within 3 degrees in
comparison to final radiographic follow up (Mean=0.56, 95%CI (-0.40, 1.51) P<0.0001).
Conclusion: Combined deltoid and foot reconstruction, as described, has
acceptable results in majority of patients at medium to long term follow up.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00126

## Prescribing Fewer Opioid Pills to Hallux Valgus Patients Undergoing Minimally Invasive
Bunion Correction: A Prospective Comparative Study

Kristin C. Caolo, BA; Celia Marion; Rebecca Paugh; A. Johnson, MD

Category: Bunion; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Hallux Valgus; Minimally Invasive; Pain
Introduction/Purpose: This study aims to compare opioid usage and patient
satisfaction with postoperative pain management in similar hallux valgus (HV) patients who
underwent minimally invasive distal chevron akin (MIS) correction with patients who
underwent modified Lapidus and scarf corrections. We hypothesized that patients who
underwent minimally invasive bunionectomy would consume fewer opioids and report similar
satisfaction with pain management compared with modified lapidus and scarf patients.
Methods: This study is a single center prospective study of 33 patients
diagnosed with hallux valgus undergoing MIS bunion correction who received a novel opioid
prescribing protocol used by the senior author. Preoperatively, patients undergoing MIS
corrections were counseled on the expectations of pain after surgery, received a take home
pamphlet, and were prescribed opioids for moderate surgery (5-15 pills). These patients were
then compared to a cohort of 25 hallux valgus patients status post Lapidus or scarf
bunionectomy who were prescribed 40-60 opioid pills without preoperative coaching or
handouts. Patients were excluded if they used opioids or muscle relaxants preoperatively or
had a known history of a substance use disorder. Patients completed surveys postoperatively
for eight weeks reporting pain level, number of opioid pills consumed, refill requests, and
satisfaction with their pain management plan.
Results: There was a significant difference (p< 0.001) in mean pills
consumed between MIS patients who averaged 2.5 opioid pills (5mg Oxycodone/pill) and
modified Lapidus and scarf patients who averaged 25.2 opioid pills (5mg Oxycodone/pill) at
all time points (Table 1). There was no significant difference between the ratio of pills
taken to pills prescribed between both groups (p>0.05). Patients had comparable levels of
pain at all time points (p>0.05). MIS patients did not request any refills, whereas
Lapidus and scarf patients requested a total of 5 refills over the course of the study.
Conclusion: HV patients who underwent MIS correction achieved equivalent
analgesic effect when compared to similar HV patients who underwent Lapidus or scarf
procedures. The Lapidus and scarf group received approximately four times the amount of
opioids and consumed 11 times the amount of pills. This study demonstrates that HV patients
undergoing MIS bunion correction require far fewer opioid pills to achieve the same level of
postoperative pain control compared with Lapidus and scarf patients. This study also
suggests that a novel postoperative prescribing protocol utilized by the senior surgeon may
decrease the number of pills both prescribed and consumed by patients.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00127

## Effect of Postoperative Immobilization Time on PROMIS Scores and Clinical Outcomes in
Ankle Fracture Patients

Dwayne D. Carney; Parth S. Vyas, DO; Justin Hicks, BS; Jeffrey E. Johnson, MD; Jeremy
J. McCormick, MD; Sandra E. Klein, MD; Jonathon D. Backus, MD

Category: Ankle; Trauma
Keywords: Ankle Fracture; Patient Reported Outcome Measures (PROMS);
Trauma
Introduction/Purpose: Ankle fractures are among the most common injuries that
Orthopaedic Surgeons treat; yet, little guidance exists in postoperative protocols for ankle
fractures concerning time of immobilization and weightbearing. Results from previous studies
have been mixed; demonstrating improved outcomes, no difference in outcome, or poorer
outcomes including increased wound complications in patients who are mobilized early. Here,
we aim to investigate the association between early immobilization and patient reported
outcomes. Our null hypothesis was that no difference in PROMIS scores would be identified in
patients when comparing the effect of time of immobilization and time of weightbearing.
Methods: A chart review identified ankle fractures that underwent surgical
fixation between 2015 and 2020 at a level 1 trauma center and its associated facilities.
One-hundred nineteen patients from 8 providers met inclusion criteria for our final
analysis. Fifty patients were immobilized for <6 weeks and 69 patients were immobilized
for at least 6 weeks. Our primary outcome measures included the PROMIS questionnaire, time
of immobilization, and time to full weightbearing. Our secondary outcome measures included
time to return to work, wound complications (infection, delayed healing), and complications
associated with fracture fixation (loss of reduction, delayed union, reoperation, hardware
failure). Repeated-measures ANOVAs were used to predict each of the PROMIS outcomes of
anxiety, depression, physical function, and pain interference. Each model included the
predictors of age, sex, race, BMI, payor, provider, time to radiographic union, time to
return to work, time to full weightbearing, and early vs late immobilized groups.
Results: There were no differences in PROMIS scores between mobilization
groups and time to full weightbearing (p>0.05). Furthermore, there were no differences in
wound complications nor complications associated with fracture fixation (p>0.05). Across
our cohort, physical function scores were negatively impacted by higher BMI, increasing age
and longer time to return to work/play (p<0.05). Our analysis further showed that
depression, anxiety, pain interference and physical function levels improve as a function of
time (p<0.05). African Americans showed more pain interference than other groups of
patients (p<0.05). No difference in PROMIS scores were identified between treating
providers (p>0.05).
Conclusion: In this study, the null hypothesis was accepted. Data from our
analysis shows no significant differences between the early and late mobilization and
weightbearing groups in terms of PROMIS outcomes nor with wound complications and
complications associated with fracture fixation. Our study does suggest that early
mobilization after operative treatment of ankle fractures is safe and results in similar
patient reported outcomes with no increased risk of complication. We did find that African
American patients experienced more pain that other groups and we aim to further explore this
topic to find potential modalities to address this disparity.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00128

## Benefits of Ankle Arthroscopic Debridement in Acute and Subacute in Ankle
Fractures

Paolo Ceccarini, MD; Fabrizio Marzano; Lorenzo di Giacomo; Giuseppe Rinonapoli, MD;
Auro Caraffa

Category: Ankle; Arthroscopy; Trauma
Keywords: Ankle Arthroscopy; Ankle Fracture; Ankle Fracture Evaluation
Introduction/Purpose: The purpose of this study was to evaluate the benefits
of ankle arthroscopy at the time of ORIF or after six months in patients with residual
symptoms. The hypothesis was that in patients treated arthroscopically at the time of ORIF,
there were faster and better clinical results than those treated after or untreated with
arthroscopy.
Methods: In this retrospective study, we compared three homogeneous groups of
selected patients with specific inclusion criteria (144in total, mean age 38.2 years). They
have been surgically treated for an ankle fracture (bimalleolar or trimalleolar without
frank syndesmotic injuries) with open technique (ORIF) or arthroscopic ORIF (AORIF), between
2016 and 2019. The AO classification system was used for each patient. The clinical
assessment was based on the Foot and Ankle Outcome Score (FAOS).
Results: At the final follow-up (mean 36 months), both patients treated with
ankle arthroscopic debridement at the time of ORIF and patients treated with arthroscopic
debridement after ORIF showed a significant improvement of the FAOS, which reported84 and 85
respectively at final follow-up.
Conclusion: Through direct visualization of intra-articular structures, ankle
arthroscopy can offer an essential option for patients both in acute and in sequelae after
an ankle fracture. More studies are needed to understand the real effectiveness of the
procedure, especially in acute at the same time of osteosynthesis.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00129

## Effectiveness of Endoscopic Assisted Repair in Achilles Tendon Ruptures Compared to
Percutaneous and Open Repair

Paolo Ceccarini, MD; Fabrizio Marzano; Lorenzo di Giacomo; Giuseppe Rinonapoli, MD;
Auro Caraffa

Category: Arthroscopy; Sports; Trauma
Keywords: Achilles; Achilles Tendon Rupture; Achilles Tendon Repair
Introduction/Purpose: The Achilles tendon rupture is the third most common
tendon’s injury, with an incidence of 16- 18/100000. Various repair’s techniques are
described, however the best surgical treatment remains controversial. Our purpose was to
evaluate the effectiveness of endoscopic assisted repair compared to traditional open repair
and percutaneous technique.
Methods: We carried out a prospective observational study in patient operated
in our Orthopedic Department between 2017 and 2019. We enrolled 47 patients (40 M; 7F), with
a mean age 42,5 y.o with a mean follow up 32 months (12-60). The patients were divided in 3
groups according to the surgical procedures. Group A included 15 patients underwent to
endoscopic assisted repair, Group B: 11 patients with percutaneous repair and group C 21
patients open repair. Demographic data, injury mechanisms, operation’s time and technique
were recorded. At final f-u complications, functional score (VAS, AOFAS AH, ATRS) were
requested. The statistical analysis was performed with the t-student test. IRB approved.
Results: The 78% of injuries occurred during recreational sport activities,
with a majority during football amatorial matches. Operation’s time was 42,5 minutes for
group A, 33,3 for group B, 33,5 for group C. Among group A, 1 patient developed a DVT. In
group B no major complications were reported. In group C a patient suffered from infection
with suture insufficiency. Ankle stiffness was reported in 25% of patients in group C. No
axonotmesis or neurotmesis of suralis was observed; 16 of patients complained transitory
paresthesia in the postoperative. The mean time to return to work’s activity was 44,2 days
for group A, 35,6 days for group B, and group C 91,1 days, while the mean time to return to
drive was in average 72,1 days for group A, 66 days for group B, 92,3 days for group C. ATRS
was 79,3 for group A, 87,6 group B and 72,75 group C.
Conclusion: This technique is safe and achievable with low postoperative pain
and complications, early return to activities, and satisfactory functional outcomes.
Compared to standard percutane-ous repair, endoscopy-assisted repair of Achilles tendon
ruptures may be useful because it ensures precise placement of sutures through the ten-don
and real-time visualization of the gap. Further large-scale, randomized and prospective
clinical trials must be the subject of future prospective study.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00130

## Hallux Valgus Pronation Correction by Scarf Osteotomy: Prospective Case Series with
WB-CT Scan

Felipe R. Chaparro, MD; Cristian A. Ortiz, MD; Raul M. Espinoza Aravena, MD; Manuel J.
Pellegrini, MD; Giovanni M. Carcuro, MD

Category: Bunion; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Hallux Valgus; Scarf Osteotomy; Weight Bearing CT
Introduction/Purpose: Hallux valgus is one of the most prevalent foot
deformities. Coronal metatarsal rotation (pronation) has been recognized as a key element in
hallux valgus deformity and an important prognostic factor for recurrence. New surgical
techniques have been developed in order to specifically address pronation deformity but tend
to be technically demanding. With the advent of weight bearing CT (WBCT), accurate pronation
measurement has improved. Deformity correction by means of metatarsal osteotomies has been
an effective way to correct transverse plane deformity but its capacity for pronation
correction is not well established. Purpose: Assess transverse and coronal plane rotation
deformity correction by WBCT in hallux valgus patients after scarf osteotomy.
Methods: We prospectively analyzed hallux valgus deformity in patients who
underwent Scarf osteotomy for symptomatic hallux valgus with preoperative and at least 3
month postoperative WBCT for comparison. Intermetatarsal angle (IMA), hallux valgus angle
(HVA) and alpha angle (AA) for first metatarsal rotation (pronation) was measured by 3
different observers. The intraclass correlation was determined. Pre and postoperative
measurement change was established by T-test and Wilcoxon for related samples.
Results: 40 feet in 25 patients were included. The interclass correlation
between observers was 0.9 for AA (pronation), 0.92 for IMA and 0.95 for HVA in preoperative
evaluation and 0.94 for AA, 0.65 for IMA and 0.82 for HVA in postoperative evaluation. The
mean preoperative and postoperative AA of the first metatarsal was 8.9 degrees (range
-8.83-24,40, SD 6.8) and 6.3 degrees (range -10.7-28.4, SD 8.3) respectively, resulting in a
significant first ray pronation change of -2.5 degrees (P =.006). The media preoperative and
postoperative IMA was 13.1 degrees (SD 2.9) and 4.9 degrees (SD 2.0) respectively,
demonstrating a significant change (P <.001). The media preoperative and postoperative
HVA was 25 degrees (SD 6.7) and 5.9 degrees (SD 4.2) respectively, demonstrating a
significant change (P <.001)
Conclusion: The Scarf osteotomy for hallux valgus deformity has a significant
power to correct both transverse and coronal plane (pronation) deformity.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00131

## Factors Associated with Surgical Success of End Stage Ankle Arthritis with Minimum
4-Year Follow-Up

Sagar Chawla, MD, MPH; Jane Shofer, MS; Daniel Norvell; William R. Ledoux; Bruce J.
Sangeorzan, MD

Category: Ankle Arthritis; Ankle
Keywords: Ankle Arthritis; Ankle Arthrodesis; Ankle Arthroplasty
Introduction/Purpose: Both total ankle arthroplasty (TAA) and ankle
arthrodesis (AA) are effective treatments for ankle arthritis. This study sought to use a
statistical modeling approach to determine factors associated with success following either
surgery. While a number of studies have explored risk factors associated with complications,
our aim was to guide management based on factors which may be predictive of success.
Methods: We retrospectively analyzed data from a prospective multicenter
cohort study conducted between May 2012 and May 2015. We compared outcomes in 448 patients
who had follow-up of at least 4 years and were treated for ankle arthritis with either TAA
or AA. We collected baseline factors including demographics, pre- and post-operative outcome
scores including the Foot and Ankle Ability Measure (FAAM), Short Form-36 (SF-36) Physical
and Mental Component Summary scores, pain, ankle related adverse events, and radiographs
(coronal tilt and sagittal subluxation). We defined fully Successful as an increase in the
FAAM ADL score by the minimum clinically important difference (MCID) and the absence of
post-operative complications. We performed a multivariate logistic regression model adjusted
for age, sex, BMI, and surgery type to identify associations with success.
Results: Of the 517 patients who consented, had surgery and completed
post-operative surveys, 414 (80.0%) underwent TAA and 103 (19.9%) underwent AA. Of the 517
patients, 448 patients (86.7%) had a minimum of 4-year follow-up. Of the 448 patients, 331
(73.9%) were successful) outcome and 117 (26.1%) were not fully successful. Out
multivariable logistic model found female sex (0.83 +- 0.03, p=0.002), treatment with TAA
(0.80 +- 0.020, p=0.001), and no previous surgery (0.82 +- 0.03, p=0.030) as variable
significantly associated with success. Notably, mental health factors and pre-operative
radiographic measurements, including coronal tilt and sagittal subluxation, were not
significantly associated with success.
Conclusion: Surgeons treating patients with ankle arthritis have two viable
surgical alternatives. Recognizing the factors associated with mid-term success may be as
valuable as knowing risk factors associated with failure. In addition, we also find
variables thought to affect outcomes, mental health and pre-operative radiographic
measurements such as coronal plane misalignment, were not found to significantly affect
outcomes.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00132

## Comparison of Outcomes of Arthroscopic Modified Broström Procedure for CLAI in Patients
with Solitary ATFL Injury and in Patients with ATFL and CFL Complex Injury

Whi Je Cho; Young Koo Lee, MD, PhD

Category: Ankle; Arthroscopy
Keywords: All-inside Arthroscopic Modified Broström Operation; Ligament;
Chronic Ankle Instability
Introduction/Purpose: ATFL (Anterior talofibular ligament) and CFL
(Calcaneofibular ligament) are most commonly injured structures when ankle sprained. There
has been debate about whether CFL should be recovered by surgery. Recently, several studies
have verified that MBP (Modified Broström procedure) with IER (Inferior extensor
retinaculum) augmentation demonstrated good outcomes even in patients with ATFL and CFL
complex injury. However, some studies presented that IER augmentation cannot cover CFL
injuries because of a different vector. If so, we hypothesized that the patients with
solitary ATFL injury would show better outcomes comparing with patients with ATFL and CFL
complex injury when same arthroscopic MBP was performed for each group.
Methods: 208 ankles were included between September 2015 and October 2019. All
the patients were underwent arthroscopic MBP with IER augmentation using knotless suture
anchor technique. Complete ATFL injuries were determined by arthroscopy and CFL injuries
were examined by magnetic resonance image. 26 ankles of which talar tilt angle was less than
9 degrees in ATFL and CFL complex injury group were excluded. Finally, 38 ankles with
solitary ATFL injury and 31 ankles with ATFL and CFL complex injury were enrolled. Clinical
and radiological outcome were measured and compared between two groups. Clinical outcome was
divided into objective and subjective outcome. Objective outcomes were composed of VAS,
AOFAS score and FAOS. Subjective outcome was presented as subjective satisfaction score (1:
Excellent, 2: Good, 3: Fair, 4: Poor). Improvement of degree of anterior talar translation
and talar tilt angle between preoperative and 12 months after surgery was measured as a
radiological outcome.
Results: P-values of VAS score at preoperative, 3 months, 6 months and 12
months after surgery were 0.3761, 0.2609, 0.3893 and 0.2547 respectively (95% confidence
interval[CI]). P-values of AOFAS score at preoperative, 3 months, 6 months and 12 months
after surgery were 0.2079, 0.64, 0.6339 and 0.2683 respectively (95% CI). P-values of FAOS
and subjective satisfaction score at 12 months after surgery was 0.1379 and 0.6338
respectively (95% CI). P-values of anterior talar translation and talar tilt angle were
0.4371 and 0.0002 respectively (95% CI). The degree of talar tilt angle improvement was
-1.91 in solitary ATFL injury group and -5.48 in ATFL and CFL complex injury group.
Conclusion: The outcomes of arthroscopic MBP with IER augmentation for chronic
lateral ankle instability in patients with Solitary ATFL injury and in patients with ATFL
and CFL complex injury showed no differences except talar tilt angle improvement. Though
talar tilt angle improvement showed difference between two groups, the degree of improvement
was even better in ATFL and CFL complex injury group. It means arthroscopic MBP could be a
good treatment options for chronic lateral ankle instability patients regardless of CFL
injury.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00133

## Feasibility of Arthroscopic Anterior Talofibular Ligament Repair and Comparison Between
Arthroscopic and MR Findings for Anterior Talofibular Ligament Injuries

Whi Je Cho; Young Koo Lee, MD, PhD

Category: Arthroscopy; Ankle; Arthroscopy
Keywords: Arthroscopic Broström Repair; Lateral Ankle Instability;
Ligament
Introduction/Purpose: The Modified Broström Operation (MBO) has been
frequently used to treat chronic lateral ankle instability. Recent studies of arthroscopic
anterior talofibular ligament (ATFL) repair found that if the ligament is detached at the
fibular attachment or there is sufficient remnant tissue, it can be directly repaired using
suture anchors. In this study, ATFL injuries were classified and the feasibility of
arthroscopic ATFL repair according to injury type was determined. The diagnostic validity of
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of ATFL injuries was investigated by comparing MRI and
arthroscopic findings.
Methods: The 197 ankles (93 right, 104 left; 12 bilateral) of 185 patients (90
men and 107 women; mean age, 33.5 years, range: 15-68 years) were treated between September
2015 and October 2019. All patients underwent arthroscopic MBO after a diagnosis of chronic
lateral ankle instability. ATFL injuries were classified according to their grade and
arthroscopically determined location (type 2: partial rupture, type 3A: fibular detachment,
type 3B: talar detachment, type 3C: midsubstance rupture, type 3D: absence of ATFL, type 3E:
os subfibulare). Two musculoskeletal radiologists blinded to the surgical findings evaluated
all of the ankle injuries and classified them as described above. An oblique-coronal MRI
sequence was used to improve diagnostic accuracy.
Results: The kappa value for interobserver reliability was 0.82 (95%
confidence interval [CI], 0.76-0.88), indicating excellent interobserver reliability. The
kappa value for the agreement between the arthroscopic findings and MRI findings was also
high (0.85; 95% CI, 0.79-0.91). Among the 197 injured ankles, according to ankle
arthroscopy, 67 were type 2 (34%), 28 were type 3A (14%), 13 were type 3B (7%), 29 were type
3C (15%), 26 were type 3D (13%), and 34 were type 3E (17%).
Conclusion: In this study, arthroscopic ATFL repair was feasible in ~14% of
ATFL injuries related to chronic lateral ankle instability. The ATFL classification system
proposed herein could help surgeons to determine treatment options before surgery in
patients with ATFL injuries, and even evaluate acute injury. Our results also supported the
use of MRI for diagnosing ATFL injuries and showed that it is an informative tool during the
preoperative period.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00134

## Corticosteroid Injection for Morton’s Interdigital Neuroma: A Systematic Review

Jun Young Choi, MD; Min Jin Kim, MD; Jin Soo Suh, MD, PhD

Category: Lesser Toes; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Morton’s Neuroma; Corticosteroid Injection; Forefoot
Introduction/Purpose: This review aimed to evaluate the effects of
corticosteroid injections for Morton’s neuroma using an algorithmic approach to assess the
methodological quality of reported studies using a structured critical framework.
Methods: Several electronic databases were searched for articles published
until April 2020 that evaluated the outcomes of corticosteroid injections in patients
diagnosed with Morton’s neuroma. Data searches, extraction, analysis, and quality
assessments were performed according to the PRISMA guideline, and the clinical outcomes were
evaluated using various outcome measures.
Results: With 3-12 months of follow-up, corticosteroid injections provided a
satisfactory outcome according to Johnson satisfaction scores without two studies. Visual
analogue scale scores showed maximal pain reduction between 1 week and 3 months
post-injection. We found that 140 subjects out of 469 (29.85%) eventually underwent surgery
after receiving corticosteroid injections due to persistent pain.
Conclusion: Corticosteroid injections showed a satisfactory clinical outcome
in patients with Morton’s interdigital neuroma in spite of almost 30% of included subjects
eventually underwent operative treatment. Our recommendation for the future study includes
using more objective outcome parameters, such as foot and ankle outcome scores or foot and
ankle ability measures. Moreover, studies about the safety and effectiveness of multiple
injections at the same site are highly necessary.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00135

## Low Tibial Valgization Osteotomy for More Severe Varus Ankle Arthritis

Jun Young Choi, MD; Jin Soo Suh, MD, PhD

Category: Ankle Arthritis
Keywords: Osteotomies; Ankle Arthritis; Varus Deformity
Introduction/Purpose: Low tibial valgization osteotomy with medial opening
wedge (LTO) is generally indicated for ankle arthritis with a small talar tilt (TT). We
addressed the following research questions: the efficacy of LTO for more significant varus
ankle arthritis, the effect of additional inframalleolar correction followed by LTO, and the
preoperative or operation related factors influencing postoperative TT decrease.
Methods: We retrospectively reviewed the radiographic and clinical findings of
31 patients with more significant varus ankle arthritis (>=8 degrees) who underwent LTO
or LTO plus inframalleolar correction. We grouped the included patients according to
combination with inframalleolar correction and postoperative decreased TT. Furthermore, a
binary logistic regression analysis was performed to determine the factors influencing
postoperative TT decrease.
Results: Even though the mean TT was unchanged postoperatively (from 12.1 to
9.9 degrees, P =.052), clinical parameters were significantly increased. In the group with
concomitant inframalleolar correction, we found that TT was more corrected (3.9 vs 1.8
degrees, P =.023) with a greater lateralization of the talar center and a greater correction
of the hindfoot alignment to valgus. The results of the binary logistic regression analysis
showed a significant relationship between postoperative decreased TT and preoperative talar
center migration (P =.016), hindfoot alignment angle (P =.033), hindfoot moment arm (P
=.041), and hindfoot alignment ratio (P =.016).
Conclusion: LTO in more significant varus ankle arthritis could result in
clinical improvement, although TT was not significantly changed. We recommend adding
inframalleolar correction after LTO for the patients with more significant varus ankle
arthritis.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00136

## Outcomes of Minimally Invasive Proximal Chevron Metatarsal Osteotomy for Moderate to
Severe Hallux Valgus Deformity

Jun Young Choi, MD; Jin Soo Suh, MD, PhD

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Hallux Valgus; Minimally Invasive; Osteotomies
Introduction/Purpose: The effectiveness of minimally invasive surgery
(MIS)-distal chevron metatarsal osteotomy (DCMO) for the correction of moderate to severe
hallux valgus deformity is unclear. Traditionally, proximal chevron metatarsal osteotomy
(PCMO) has been considered a reliable procedure for correcting severe hallux valgus
deformity. This study aimed to clarify the clinicoradiographic outcomes of our novel
MIS-PCMO technique and compared its outcomes to those of MIS-DCMO performed during the same
timeframe. We addressed the following research questions: (1) can the MIS-PCMO technique be
an effective option for correcting moderate to severe hallux valgus deformity?; (2) are
there differences in the extent of deformity correction possible with MIS-PCMO and
MIS-DCMO?; and (3) what points should be considered before performing the MIS-PCMO
technique?
Methods: We prospectively compared the outcomes of patients who underwent
MIS-PCMO (n=20 patients; 22 surgeries) and those of patients who underwent MIS-DCMO (n=23
patients; 26 surgeries) for moderate to severe hallux valgus deformity (hallux valgus angle
[HVA] >=30o) between January 2017 and December 2018. The minimum follow-up duration for
inclusion in this study was 18 months. The HVA, first-to-second intermetatarsal angle (IMA),
distal metatarsal articular angle (DMAA), relative length of the second metatarsal, medial
sesamoid position, and Meary angle were measured preoperatively and at the final follow-
up.
Results: Compared to MIS-DCMO, MIS-PCMO resulted in significantly greater
correction of the HVA (P<0.001) and IMA (P=0.01), along with Meary angle improvement
(P<0.001); however, the DMAA worsened (P=0.01). Furthermore, there was a significantly
greater change in the relative second metatarsal length in the MIS-DCMO group (P=0.01).
There were no significant between-group differences in the correction of the medial sesamoid
position (P=0.445).
Conclusion: MIS-PCMO can be a better option for correcting moderate to severe
hallux valgus deformities than MIS-DCMO. However, this technique should be applied carefully
when the preoperative DMAA is already large because the DMAA can become worse
postoperatively.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00137

## Comparison of Midterm Outcomes Between the Intramedullary Fibular Nail and the Locking
Plate for the Treatment of Unstable Ankle Fractures in Active Young Patients

Seung-myung Choi, MD; Byung-Ki Cho, MD, PhD

Category: Trauma; Ankle
Keywords: Fibular Nail; Internal Fixation; Fibula Fractures
Introduction/Purpose: We aimed to compare the midterm radiological and
clinical outcomes between closed reduction and internal fixation (CRIF) using the fibular
intramedullary nail (IMN) and open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) using plates for
the treatment of unstable ankle fractures in active young patients.
Methods: In this retrospective cohort study, 204 patients treated with CRIF
using the fibular IMN (94 patients) or ORIF using the locking plate (110 patients) were
included after at least 3 years of follow-up. The mean patient age was 41.4 years.
Radiographic evaluation included the quality of reduction assessed by plain radiography and
the three-dimensional (3D) reconstruction model using the CT scan images as well as the
development of posttraumatic ankle osteoarthritis (PTOA) assessed by weightbearing plain
radiography. Clinical evaluation included the American Orthopaedic Foot & Ankle Society
(AOFAS) hindfoot score, Olerud and Molander score (OMAS), the Foot and Ankle Outcome Score
(FAOS) and visual analog scale (VAS) pain score as well as complications.
Results: In an assessment by both plain radiography and the 3D reconstruction
model, the fair or poor reduction was more observed in the IMN group than in the ORIF group
at final follow-up (P <.001). Poor reduction in the IMN group was significantly related
to Weber type C, pronation type injury, and comminuted fibular and trimalleolar fractures (P
<.001). PTOA was observed in 21.3% in the IMN group compared to 9.1% in the ORIF group (P
=.024). There were no significant differences in clinical outcomes between the 2 groups.
There were signiﬁcantly fewer postoperative complications in the IMN group than in the ORIF
group (9.5% vs 39%, P <.001).
Conclusion: Surgeons should consider ORIF for unstable ankle fractures in
active young patients with Weber type C, pronation type injury, and comminuted fibular and
trimalleolar fractures.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00138

## Efficacy of Hook-Type Locking Plate and Cancellous Screw in the Treatment of Displaced
Medial Malleolar Fractures in Elderly Patients

Seung-myung Choi, MD; Byung-Ki Cho, MD, PhD

Category: Trauma; Ankle
Keywords: Trauma; Ankle Fracture; Clinical Outcomes
Introduction/Purpose: We aimed to compare the midterm radiologic and clinical
results between hook-type LCP and conventional malleolar screws for elderly medial malleolar
fractures. We hypothesized that elderly patients treated with the hook- type locking
compression plate (LCP) would have better fracture healing and clinical outcomes than those
treated with cancellous lag screws, with fewer postoperative complications.
Methods: In total, 258 patients treated with a hook-type locking plate (hook
LCP group: 121 patients) or partially threaded cancellous lag screws (screw group: 137
patients) over 65 years of age with at least 36 months’ follow-up were included in this
retrospective study. Radiographic assessments included the union rate and interval to
fracture union. Clinical assessment was performed using the American Orthopaedic Foot &
Ankle Society (AOFAS) hindfoot score, Olerud and Molander score (OMAS), visual analog scale
(VAS) pain score, and postoperative complications.
Results: The comminuted fracture rate was higher in the hook LCP group than in
the screw group (p < .001). The interval to fracture union was
significantly shorter in the LCP group than in the screw group (10.2 +- 7.0 vs. 12.3 +- 6.7,
p =.015). There were no significant differences between the two groups regarding AOFAS,
OMAS, and VAS pain scores at the final follow- up. There was a trend toward a lower rate of
complications, including revision procedures, in the hook LCP group than in the screw group
(19.9% vs. 28.5%, p =.107 and 6.6% vs. 13.9%, p =.074). The overall cost in the hook LCP
group was 5.8% lower than that of the screw group despite the higher cost of the hook-type
LCP.
Conclusion: Hook-type LCP may be an alternative option for treating medial
malleolar fractures with comminution in elderly patients.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00139

## Retrospective Study Analyzing Trends in Antibiotic Use in Patients with Osteomyelitis
of the Ankle and Foot

Shivan N. Chokshi; Tsola Efejuku; Daniel Jupiter, PhD; Jie Chen, MD, MPH; Vinod K.
Panchbhavi, MD, FACS

Category: Ankle; Hindfoot; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Outcomes Measures; Ankle; Bone Orthobiologics
Introduction/Purpose: Antibiotic resistance has quickly become one of the most
pressing current public health challenges. Many studies have analyzed general prescription
trends, but little information exists about how antibiotic therapy is utilized in orthopedic
practice- particularly in patients with Osteomyelitis of the Ankle and Foot. Thus, a
retrospective analysis was performed using EMR data to understand temporal tends in
antibiotic use, as well as the impact of patient-specific factors on antibiotic use.
Methods: Patients with Osteomyelitis of the Ankle and Foot who were given
antibiotics within 12 weeks of their diagnosis were identified in the EMR database using ICD
10 codes (M86.17, M86.67, M86.8X7, M86.171, M86.172, M86.27, M86.679, M86.279, M86.671,
M86.672, M86.07, M86.271, M86.37) for foot and ankle Osteomyelitis and the VA Drug
Classification Code (AM000) for antibiotics. We then stratified these patients by age (0-9,
10-19, 20-29, 30-39, 40-49, 50-59, 60-69,70-79, 80-89, 90-99), gender (male, female), and
year by decade (2001, 2010, 2020). In addition, pre-disposing risk factors of Osteomyelitis,
such as Diabetes, Hypertension, and Chronic Ischemic Heart Disease, were analyzed for
association with antibiotic use.
Results: Our search identified 85,767 patients, of whom 50,043 (58.35%)
received antibiotics within 12 weeks of Osteomyelitis diagnosis. Overall, Males (60.01%)
were slightly more likely than Females (54.88%) to use antibiotics. Stratification by age
revealed a skewed distribution with the highest incidence of antibiotic use seen in 50-59
year-olds (61.93%). This was more than double the incidence of antibiotic use seen among
20-29 year-olds (30.63%). Additionally, we discovered notable increases in antibiotic usage
over time. The most substantial increases occurred from 2001 to 2010 (14.08% to 33.71%,
respectively) and 2010 to 2020 (33.71% to 60.51%, respectively). Lastly, patients with
pre-existing co-morbidities were found to have a higher usage of antibiotics, when compared
to patients without the co-morbidity. Specifically, prior Hypertension increased use by
11.73%, followed by Chronic Ischemic Heart Disease (10.50% increase) and Diabetes (8.40%
increase). The above differences were found to be statistically significant at a p-value of
<.0001.
Conclusion: This analysis provides insight into present and past antibiotic
usage in patients with Foot and Ankle Osteomyelitis. Overall, patients aged 50-59, males,
and with Chronic Ischemic Heart Disease are the most likely to take antibiotics within 12
weeks of their diagnosis. This is all against the background of rising antibiotic use, with
notable increases since 2001. The data necessitates a deeper look into antibiotic use in
patients with foot and ankle injuries as a whole.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00140

## Anterior Capsule Reconstruction in the Setting of PVNS

Aman Chopra; Eric Z. Lukosius; Selene G. Parekh, MD, MBA

Category: Ankle; Other
Keywords: Ankle; Outpatient; Ankle
Introduction/Purpose: Pigmented villonodular synovitis (PVNS) is a rare benign
proliferative disease affecting tendon sheaths and synovial tissue. Most cases of PVNS arise
in the hip and knee joints, while < 5% of total cases occur in the foot and ankle. PVNS
of the ankle has a high rate of recurrence and can be destructive to the affected joints if
incompletely removed. This case series analyzes functional outcomes after PVNS surgical
resection and anterior ankle capsular reconstruction, using a novel technique.
Methods: This case series included three patients who underwent surgery
between 2010 and 2020 for their ankle pain and swelling caused by PVNS. The surgical
technique involved a posterior, midline approach for PVNS resection of the affected ankle
joint, followed by a standard anterior approach for capsular excision. Subsequent anterior
capsular reconstruction was performed with a regenerative tissue matrix and a bioresorbable
anchoring system. Preoperative and postoperative range of motion testing for the ankle and
subtalar joints were assessed along with appropriate radiographs and MRI imaging.
Results: All three surgical procedures for PVNS of the ankle resulted in
successful recovery and promising clinical outcomes. The mean cohort age was 43.7 (R:36-58)
years and follow-up period was 52.3 (R:4-123) months. Preoperative ankle dorsiflexion and
plantarflexion along with subtalar inversion and eversion range of motion were all normal.
Postoperative ankle motion and subtalar motion were recorded at final follow up and found to
be unchanged. No complications or recurrence of PVNS occurred.
Conclusion: This case series demonstrates that PVNS surgical resection and
anterior ankle capsular reconstruction is a safe and effective treatment modality that
allows for maintenance of pre-operative motion. Further investigation is warranted to better
understand the clinical outcomes of this surgical technique on PVNS recurrence.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00141

## Clinical and Patient Reported Outcomes Following Peroneus Brevis Reconstruction with
Hamstring Tendon Autograft

Bopha Chrea, MD; Stephanie K. Eble; Jonathan Day; Oliver B. Hansen; Martin J.
O’Malley, MD; Scott J. Ellis, MD; Mark C. Drakos, MD

Category: Ankle; Other
Keywords: Peroneal Tendon Reconstruction; Peroneal Tendon Tears; Peroneal
Tendon
Introduction/Purpose: Peroneal tendon injuries are a common cause of lateral
ankle pain and instability. While the use of hamstring autograft has been proposed as a
viable surgical option for peroneus brevis reconstruction, reported outcomes with this
technique are limited in the literature. We present patient-reported and clinical outcomes
for patients who underwent peroneus brevis reconstruction with hamstring autograft.
Methods: Thirty-one patients were retrospectively identified who underwent
peroneus brevis reconstruction with hamstring autograft for peroneal tendinopathy between
February 2016 and May 2019. All patients who had a peroneus brevis reconstruction were
included and all concomitant procedures were noted. Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement
Information System (PROMIS) surveys were prospectively collected preoperatively and at a
minimum of 1 year postoperatively (average 24.25, range 12-52.70) months. Retrospective
chart review was performed to evaluate the incidence of postoperative complications and
reoperations at an average of 30.23 (range, 14.62-53.72) months.
Results: When evaluating pre and postoperative patient-reported outcome
surveys (n=26; 84%), on average patients reported improvement in every PROMIS domain
evaluated, with significant improvement in Physical Function (+5.99; p=0.006), Pain
Interference (-8.11; p<0.001), Pain Intensity (-9.02; p<0.001), and Global Physical
Health (+7.29; p=0.001). Three patients reported persistent pain at a minimum of 1 year
postoperatively of which 2 required re-operation. No patient reported persistent pain or
discomfort at the harvest site of the hamstring autograft.
Conclusion: Patients undergoing peroneus brevis reconstruction with hamstring
autograft experienced excellent patient- reported and clinical outcomes. Few postoperative
complications were observed, and patients reported improvements across all patient-reported
outcome domains, with significant improvements for pain and function domains. Reconstruction
with hamstring autograft represents a viable surgical option in the setting of peroneal
tendinitis or tears.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00142

## Comparing Open vs Minimally Invasive Techniques for the Correction of Hallux Valgus:
Clinical and Patient Reported Outcomes

Bopha Chrea, MD; Jonathan Day; Daniel M. Dean, MD; Rose E. Cortina, MD; Megan Reilly,
MD; Kristin C. Caolo, BA; Rebecca A. Cerrato, MD; A. Johnson, MD

Category: Bunion
Keywords: Minimally Invasive; Lapidus; Scarf Osteotomy
Introduction/Purpose: Multiple operative techniques have been developed for
hallux valgus with varying success. While correction has been traditionally achieved through
open surgical approaches, there has been a growing interest in minimally invasive surgical
(MIS) techniques. The purpose of this study was to compare clinical and patient-reported
outcomes for patients undergoing hallux valgus correction with Lapidus, Scarf and MIS. Our
hypothesis was that while a superior clinical correction would be achieved with open
techniques there would be similar patient-reported outcomes among open and MIS
techniques.
Methods: A total of 257 patients who underwent Lapidus (n=82), Scarf (n=82) or
MIS (n=93) hallux valgus correction between January 2017- January 2020 at one of two
academic institutions by 1 of 9 foot and ankle-fellowship trained orthopedic surgeons were
included in this study. Only 3 of 9 performed MIS correction. The average age at the time of
surgery 55.4 (range 14-79). Patients were required to have a minimum baseline and 1-year
postoperative Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information Scores (PROMIS) and minimum
3-month clinical follow-up. Retrospective chart review was performed to assess the incidence
of postoperative complications and reoperations, with an average clinical follow-up of 8
months.
Results: All groups had statistically significant differences between pre- and
post-operative measurements of HVA, IMA, DMAA, and tibial sesamoid position (<0.05). In
addition, the Lapidus group demonstrated change in all parameters measured including Meary’s
angle, sagittal IMA and Seiberg index. All groups had statistically significant improvement
in the PROMIS physical function, pain interference, and global health physical at 1 year
(p<0.05). The Lapidus group had significant improvement in all 6 PROMIS domains measured.
There were no significant differences in PROMIS score changes from pre to post-op for any
PROMIS domain when comparing MIS vs Scarf vs Lapidus. Complications: Minor Complications
were classified as infection, symptomatic hardware, delayed union, nerve irritation,
transfer metatarsalgia (Lapidus n=14 (17.1%), Scarf n=2 (2.4%), MIS n=15 (16.1%)). Major
complications were classified as nonunion, recurrence, hallux varus, recurrence (HVA >20)
(Lapidus n=7 (8.5%), Scarf n=9 (11.0%), MIS n=9 (9.7%)).
Conclusion: In the last decade, there has been a growing interest in the use
of minimally invasive surgical MIS techniques for the treatment of hallux valgus. When
compared with traditional open techniques using Lapidus and Scarf osteotomies MIS presents a
safe and effective approach to treating hallux valgus.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00143

## Influence of Complications and Revision Surgery on Fulfilment of Expectations in Foot
and Ankle Surgery

Bopha Chrea, MD; Jonathan Day; Jensen K. Henry, MD; Elizabeth Cody, MD; Scott J.
Ellis, MD

Category: Other; Ankle; Ankle Arthritis; Bunion; Hindfoot; Midfoot/Forefoot;
Sports; Trauma
Keywords: Patient Reported Outcome Measures (PROMS); Complications; Patient
Comprehension
Introduction/Purpose: Fulfilment of patients’ expectations following foot and
ankle surgery has been previously studied, and shown to be an effective modality in
assessing patient-reported outcomes (PROs). While this assessment has been shown to
correlate well with patient satisfaction and other validated PROs, the impact of
postoperative complications on fulfilment of expectations is unknown. The aim of this study
is to therefore investigate the impact of postoperative complications on fulfilment of
patients’ expectations.
Methods: Preoperatively, patients completed a validated Foot and Ankle
Expectations Survey consisting of 23 questions encompassing domains including pain,
ambulation, daily function, exercise, and shoe wear. At 2 years postoperatively, patients
answered how much improvement they received for each item cited preoperatively. A fulfilment
proportion (FP) was calculated as the amount of improvement received versus the amount of
improvement expected. Chart review was performed to identify patient demographics,
comorbidities, pain management, and postoperative complications, which were classified as
minor (infection requiring antibiotics) or major (return to OR for revision, deep
infection). FP in patients with a complication was compared to patients who did not
experience a complication. In addition, the Foot and Ankle Outcomes Score (FAOS),
satisfaction, and Delighted-Terrible scale (how they would feel if asked to spend the rest
of their life with their current foot/ankle symptom) were collected at final follow-up.
Results: Of the 271 patients (mean age 55.4 years, 65% female), 31 (11.4%,
mean age 53.6, 58% female) had a postoperative complication: 25 major (19 revisions, 6 deep
infections requiring I&D), 4 minor (4 superficial infections requiring antibiotics), and
2 major and minor (revision and superficial infection). Average time from complication to
completion of fulfilment survey was 15 (+- 3.6) months. The groups were similar in
diagnoses. Complications were associated with significantly worse FP (0.69 +- 0.45 vs 0.86
+- 0.40, p=0.02). Having a complication significantly correlated with worse satisfaction,
Delighted-Terrible scale, and FP (p<0.001). FAOS domains were similar between groups
preoperatively; postoperatively, patients without complications had significantly higher ADL
and QoL scores (p<0.05). Demographically, there was no difference in age, sex, BMI,
Charlson Comorbidity Index, depression/anxiety, or pain management between the two
groups.
Conclusion: Our data suggests that postoperative complications following foot
and ankle surgery are associated with worse patient-reported fulfilment of their surgical
expectations even after recovery from the initial surgery and complication. This finding is
independent of preoperative expectations, and correlates with patient satisfaction with
their procedure. Therefore, while patient-perceived fulfilment following foot and ankle
surgery is multifactorial, the incidence of a postoperative complication negatively impacts
fulfilment as well as satisfaction following surgery.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00144

## Do Custom Orthotics Help Improve Pain and Function in Patients with Progressive
Collapsing Foot Deformity

Christy Christophersen, MD; Sean Zeller; Alicia M. Gotcsik; Gabriel A. Ramirez;
Caroline Thirukumaran, MBBS, PhD, MHA; Judith F. Baumhauer, MD, MS, MPH

Category: Hindfoot
Keywords: AAFD; Outcomes Measures; Patient Reported Outcome Measures
(PROMS)
Introduction/Purpose: Progressive collapsing foot deformity presents with
pain, deformity and functional limitations affecting quality of life. The prevalence of this
condition ranges from 3-10% depending on the age and sex of the patient. Sixty percent of
patients have concurrent medical problems that may delay or limit the ability to undergo
surgical intervention. Non-operative treatments such as ankle bracing or custom orthotics
are costly and their value to improve pain and function has not been examined with validated
patient-centered instruments, specifically patient reported outcome measures. The purpose of
this study was to assess if use of a modified UCBL orthosis improved PROMIS pain
interference (PI) and physical function (PF) in patients with progressive collapsing foot
deformity (PCFD).
Methods: Prospective PROMIS data (PF, PI) was obtained from 2015 to 2020 for
all patients who obtained a modified UCBL orthosis for PCFD. Patients with PROMIS data pre-
and post-obtaining an orthotic with a minimal follow up of 90 days were included. Patients
who elected to pursue operative treatment after receiving the orthotic were noted using CPT
codes. Patients without complete evaluations were excluded ( ). The primary outcome was PROMIS Scores (PF
and PI) before and after orthotic usage. Covariate analysis included patient demographics
including age, gender, marital status, race and ethnicity, and orthotic laterality. We
estimated separate mixed effects linear regression models with patient random effects for
each PROMIS outcome.
Results: There were 282 patients included in our cohort with an average age of
57 years. 61% were female and 87.8% were White. Patients had an average follow-up of 467
days +/- 366. Multivariate analysis indicates that there was a 0.94 decrease in PROMIS PF
t-score relative to orthotic usage at final follow up (p = 0.035 +/- 7.47) with an increase
of 0.76 PROMIS PI t-score (p value = 0.085 +/- 7.40). Despite limited measureable impact on
PROMIS outcomes using custom orthotics, only eleven patients subsequently pursued surgery
and underwent operative fixation at an average of 461 days after initial evaluation. There
were no differences in regard to race, ethnicity or orthotic laterality and PROMIS
scores.
Conclusion: Publications have focused on outcomes of operative treatment for
FCFD, with few examining orthotics. Our study demonstrates a lack of pain and functional
improvement with a modified UCBL questioning the potential value of this costly item.
However, despite this only 3.9% of patients subsequently underwent surgery. This work raises
additional questions: ‘What does the patient hope to improve with treatment?’ ‘What is the
role of risk assessment in patients considering treatment choices?’ Patient reported
outcomes can be used in shared decision making, not only to align expectations, but also
when allocating healthcare dollars to durable medical goods.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00145

## Low Tibial Valgization Osteotomy for Varus Ankle Arthritis: Does Age Effect the
Outcome?

Kyung Ah Chun, MD; Jun Young Choi, MD; Jin Soo Suh, MD, PhD

Category: Ankle; Ankle Arthritis
Keywords: Ankle Arthritis; Osteotomies; Varus Deformity
Introduction/Purpose: Evidence-based literature identifying the age limit for
low tibial valgization osteotomy (LTO) is lacking to date. We addressed the following
research questions: (1) is LTO effective for ankle arthritis in patients over 65 years?; (2)
does patients’ age alter the effectiveness of LTO?; and (3) does preoperative Takakura stage
affect the degree of correction in patients over 65 years?
Methods: We retrospectively reviewed the radiographic and clinical findings of
49 cases which underwent LTO. Patients were divided into two groups according to age at
operation (19 cases in group 1 aged >=65 years and 30 cases in group 2 aged <65).
Patients in a single group were regrouped into two subgroups according to preoperative
Takakura stage (stage II+IIIA versus IIIB) to determine if the degree of correction varied
in Takakura stage IIIB.
Results: Significant changes in radiographic parameters were observed with no
significant differences in the amounts of correction between groups 1 and 2. Comparison of
Takakura stage II+IIIA in group 1 to that in group 2 and stage IIIB in group 1 to that in
group 2 revealed no significant differences in the amounts of correction.
Conclusion: LTO could be indicated for patients over 65 years if patient
selection was appropriate. LTO in patients over 65 years showed similar radiographic
improvements to those in younger patients, and the correction was successfully maintained
during the follow-up period. The correctional power of all radiographic parameters did not
vary by preoperative Takakura stage.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00146

## Considering the Normal Tibial Values of Axial Rotation in Adults for Deformity
Correction Osteotomies and Post-Operative Evaluation of Complex Tibial Fractures

Gonzalo Fernandez Clarke, MD; Eduardo Fuentes Morales, MD; Mauricio Cataldo; Humberto
Duran; Florencia Pacheco, MD

Category: Trauma; Other
Keywords: Tibial deformity; Malalignment; Fractures
Introduction/Purpose: Tibial torsion has been mainly analyzed in pediatric
deformities of lower limbs. Nevertheless this parameter has acquired relevancy in treatment
of rotational deformities in adult population, that require axial correction. There are few
articles that report normal values of tibial torsion, mostly in children, parameter that
must be corrected in deformities to improve long term outcomes. Normal values in our
population need to be established for preoperative planning and corrections. Our objective
is to establish a normality parameter of tibial torsion in adults, that helps us in surgical
planning of tibial rotational mal alignment and evaluation of the postoperative axial axis
in complex tibial fractures.
Methods: Descriptive study. We analyzed 18 computed tomography of 18 patients
(35 tibias), through the Horos v.3.3.5 program, specifically in the 3D curved-MPR. Inclusion
criteria: adult patients, without prior knee, leg or ankle deformities, without
post-traumatic sequelae of the limb. Exclusion criteria: severe osteoarthritis of the knee
or ankle, presence of osteosynthesis material in the limb, presence of previous osteotomies.
Measurements were performed in standardized form previously defined by two foot and ankle
orthopedic surgeons. We establish the comparison between both legs of each patient to
determine posible variability and measurement interobserver correlations through kappa
values.
Results: All continuous variables are reported as means +- standard
deviations. Student t-test was performed for continuous variables depending on the normality
of the data distribution. We also performed de paired t-test to identify any significant
differences in left and right tibial measurements. Statistical analyses were carried out by
an independent statistician using Stata 16 statistical software. Measurements were performed
establishing parameters in axial cuts of the tibia and overlapping two images previously
determined. 18 patients (35 tibias) were measured, one limb was deleted for severe
compromise the tibial plafond by osteoarthritis. 15 male and 3 female patients with an
average of 65 years old (62-76 years). Mean external rotation of the distal tibial was 33°
(16.1°-49.8°), difference between left and right tibias was in mean values of 1.95°, not
being considered statistically significant. Interobserver correlation was reported at 97% in
left tibia and 98% in the right, by intraclass correlation.
Conclusion: Tibial torsion is an important component when correcting tibial
axial deformities in adults. Our study shows higher normal values than the ones reported in
current literature, but it is important to mention that the best parameter of evaluation is
the comparison with the contralateral extremity of each patient.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00147

## Presence of Complications in the Transition of a Bone Transport to a Definite Internal
Fixation System without Pin Holiday: Case Report

Gonzalo Fernandez Clarke, MD; Eduardo Fuentes Morales, MD; Florencia Pacheco, MD;
Gonzalo Fernandez Clarke, MD; Mauricio Cataldo; Ignacio Fernández; Humberto Duran

Category: Trauma; Other
Keywords: Tibial deformity; Trauma; External Fixation
Introduction/Purpose: Bone transports are an alternative in the treatment of
severe injuries of lower extremities. They are generally associated to axis problems,
delayed bone union in the docking site and pin infection. There is no evidence in the need
of having a window period between the transport system and the definite internal fixation.
Objetive: Describe the complications seen in a group of 6 patients that went through a
tibial bone transport with circular external fixator and posterior internal fixation without
pin holiday.
Methods: Restrospective and decriptive study of 6 patient that went through
tibial bone transport between 2012-2019, in a level 1 trauma center. Inclusion criteria
considered patients >18 years old, with intra or extramedular internal fixation systems.
We registered different parameters including patients comorbilities, transport time,
transport index, type of internal fixation used and complications during the time of
observation and treatment. We registered our clinical evaluation and both laboratory and
imagenologic exams.
Results: 100% of patients were men, with an average of 35.8 years old (22-48
yo). 66% of injuries compromised distal tibia, 83% considered open fractures. Average
transport length was 7.43 centimeters (3-11cms) in 3.5 months (1.3-6 months), with average
follow up of 52 months (24-72months). Tibial transport index in our study was of
1,2month/cm. The main complication in our study was bone consolidation delay in the docking
site (50%), and 33% presented deep infection, all of them in the open fracture group.
Conclusion: Pin holiday has been justified by the reduction in pin site
infection. In our series there where no pin site infection cases, and only two deep
infections which were associated with an important soft tissue injury that required free
flap coverage.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00148

## Clinical Outcomes of Nano Arthroscopy in the Office Setting for the Treatment of
Anterior Ankle Impingement

Christopher Colasanti; Nathaniel P. Mercer; Jeremie Garcia; Tobias Stornebrink, MD;
Gino Kerkhoffs, MD; Jari Dahmen, BSc,BSc(Med); John G. Kennedy, MD, FRCS(Orth)

Category: Ankle; Arthroscopy
Keywords: Ankle Arthroscopy; Talus; Sports
Introduction/Purpose: The hypothesis was that IONA would provide the patient
with a unique experience of their pathology and facilitate their rapid recovery through an
awareness of their own condition, and that using IONA would accelerate recovery to
sports-specific activities compared to the literature using standard arthroscopic
procedures.
Methods: This was a retrospective cohort study investigating patients who
underwent IONA for anterior ankle impingement between 2019 and 2020. Clinical outcomes were
evaluated using the following methods preoperatively and at final follow-up: The Foot and
Ankle Outcome Scores (FAOS) and Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System
(PROMIS) Pain Interference and Pain Intensity domains. A five-point Likert scale regarding
patient satisfaction was evaluated at final follow-up. Wilcoxon signed-rank test was
performed to compare preoperative and postoperative outcome scores.
Results: Thirty-one patients were included in this study, which included
eighteen males and thirteen females with a mean age of 41.7 +- 15.5 years (range, 17-69
years) and a mean body mass index (BMI) of 27.3 +- 5.7 kg/m2 (range, 19.37-41.5).
The mean follow-up time was 12. +- 1.9 months (range, 11-15 months). There were 27 patients
who participated in sports activity prior to IONA-arthroscopy procedure. Of those, 26
patients (96%) returned to their sports activities. The median time to return to sports was
3.9 weeks (range, 1.5 to 12 weeks). Patients reported an overall positive experience with a
mean rating scale of 9.71 +- .8 (range, 6 to 10). Twenty-seven patients (87%) reported the
highest rating (10/10) for overall positive experience and felt that seeing their procedure
in real-time aided in their understanding of their underlying pathology. Lastly, twenty-nine
patients (94 %) expressed willingness to undergo the same procedure again.
Conclusion: The current study demonstrates that IONA treatment of anterior
ankle impingement results in significant pain reduction, a low complication rate, and
excellent patient-reported outcomes with high rates of return to work/sport. Additionally,
IONA for anterior ankle impingement leads to high patient satisfaction with a significant
willingness to undergo the same procedure again.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00149

## Inter-Rater and Intra-Rater Reliability of the Lawrence and Botte Classification System
of Fifth Metatarsal Base Fractures

Michelle M. Coleman, MD, PhD; Naudereh B. Noori, MD; Mostafa Abousayed, MD, MSc; Neeta
Shenvi; Devin R. Mangold, MD; Patrick M. Kennedy; Casey Kuripla, MD; Walter C. Hembree,
MD; Niall A. Smyth, MD; John Thompson, MD; Stuart D. Miller, MD; Kirk Easley, Gr

Category: Trauma; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Fifth Metatarsal Fractures; Fractures; General Principles /
Context
Introduction/Purpose: Fractures of the proximal fifth metatarsal are common
injuries with a unique history. Treatment of these fractures is controversial, in part due
to confusion regarding the nomenclature of the fracture subtypes. The most commonly utilized
classification system is the Lawrence and Botte classification, which separates fractures
into zones 1, 2, and 3 based on their relationship to the tuberosity and the 4th-5th
intermetatarsal articulation. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the inter-rater and
intra-rater reliability of the Lawrence and Botte classification of fifth metatarsal base
fractures.
Methods: Thirty sets of x-rays representing an equal number of zone 1, zone 2
and zone 3 fractures of varying chronicity were sent to eleven fellowship trained orthopedic
foot and ankle surgeons. Surgeons were asked to classify each fracture according to the
Lawrence and Botte classification system (round 1). No review of the classification system
or visual aids were provided. Two weeks later, the same set of x-rays were reordered and
renumbered in a random fashion. The surgeons then re-classified each fracture in a blinded
fashion under the same conditions (round 2). Inter-rater and intra-rater reliability was
summarized using the kappa statistic. To determine the source of variability between the
zones, additional analyses were performed to determine the kappa statistic for a) combined
zone 1 and 2 fractures versus zone 3 fractures and b) combined zone 2 and 3 fractures versus
zone 1 fractures.
Results: The Lawrence and Botte classification demonstrated substantial
overall inter-rater agreement for both rounds 1 and 2 (kappa = 0.66 and 0.65, respectively).
Zone 1 fractures demonstrated the highest inter-rater reliability (kappa = 0.83 and 0.83).
There was moderate agreement for zone 2 fractures (kappa = 0.51 and 0.50). There was
substantial agreement for zone 3 fractures (kappa = 0.64 and 0.65). Dichotomous evaluation
of the zone 1 vs. combined zones 2-3 boundary yielded excellent agreement (kappa = 0.83,
0.83). The combined zones 1-2 vs. zone 3 boundary yielded a much lower agreement (kappa =
0.66, 0.65). Intra-rater reliability varied by individual, with kappa values ranging from
0.60 to 0.90, corresponding to modest to almost perfect agreement.
Conclusion: The Lawrence and Botte classification system has overall
substantial inter-rater and intra-rater reliability, but assessment of the interface between
zone 2 and zone 3 fractures is much less reliable than that between zone 1 and zone 2.
Previous studies of isolated zone 1 fractures most likely contain a homogenous fracture
cohort, while studies of zone 2 or zone 3 fractures are likely to include a mixture of
fracture types. Future studies may utilize supplemental imaging or modify the classification
to best determine treatment of these more distal fractures.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00150

## Mid-Term Results after Lateral Transfibular Approach Total Ankle Arthroplasty

Michelle M. Coleman, MD, PhD; Mostafa Abousayed, MD, MSc; Cesar de Cesar Netto, MD,
PhD; Moses Lee, MD; Camilla Maccario, MD; Thomas I. Sherman, MD; Lew C. Schon, MD

Category: Ankle Arthritis; Ankle
Keywords: Ankle Arthroplasty; Ankle Arthritis; Patient Reported Outcome
Measures (PROMS)
Introduction/Purpose: Continued improvements in total ankle arthroplasty (TAA)
implant design have led to promising clinical outcomes. The lateral transfibular approach
TAA allows for excellent visualization of the center of rotation of the ankle and allows for
correction of rotational and sagittal deformity by shortening or lengthening of the fibula.
Furthermore, the curved implant design allows for minimal bony resection. The purpose of
this study is to report the medium-term clinical and radiographic results for consecutive
patients who underwent the lateral approach TAA.
Methods: IRB approval was obtained for this study. Consecutive patients who
underwent lateral approach TAA for tibiotalar arthritis by a single surgeon were enrolled on
a prospective basis from January 2013 to June 2015. This time period represented the initial
case series of TAA performed by the surgeon. Patient reported outcomes (PROs) were collected
including the Ankle Osteoarthritis Scale (AOS), 12-item short-form survey (SF-12), and
Visual Analogue Pain Scale (VAS). The need for subsequent procedures was recorded.
Radiographs were evaluated for preoperative and postoperative alignment using the lateral
distal tibial angle (LDTA), tibiotalar surface angle (TTS), anterior distal tibia angle
(ADTA), and the lateral talar station (LTS). Radiographs were also evaluated for the
development of peri-implant lucency and subsidence. Data was tested for normality. T-tests
were used to determine differences between preoperative data and postoperative data. A
p<0.05 was considered significant.
Results: 53 patients who underwent 59 TAA procedures were included. Average
follow-up was 5.7 +/- 0.9 years. Average age was 53 +/- 7.0. Comorbidities included smoking
(11/53), diabetes (6/53), and prior procedures (33/53). Sixteen ankles (27%) underwent one
or more subsequent procedures including gutter debridement (7/59), debridement for
periprosthetic infection (3/59), and removal of hardware (7/59). All fibular osteotomies
healed. Four ankles had asymptomatic peri-implant lucency or cysts (4/59). No patients had
subsidence or required revision of the tibial or talar components. Coronal and sagittal
alignment were significantly improved for all measures (p<0.05). VAS scores improved from
a mean of 7.5 preoperatively to 1 at final follow- up (p<0.0001). SF-12 physical
component scores improved from 34 to 41.5 (p=0.0227). AOS scores improved from 54.8 to 19.1
(p<0.0001).
Conclusion: At medium term follow-up, patient reported outcomes remain
significantly improved in patients after lateral approach TAA. There were very few
radiographic findings of lucency and cyst formation, and all of these were asymptomatic. No
revision of metal implants was required. Excellent deformity correction was achieved. The
rate of subsequent procedures was high, although the rate of actual component revision was
0%. Lateral approach TAA appears to have overall good outcomes at medium term follow-up.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00151

## Risk Factors for Complications Associated with Minimally Invasive Medial Displacement
Calcaneal Osteotomy

Michelle M. Coleman, MD, PhD; Mostafa Abousayed, MD, MSc; John Thompson, MD; Bryan
Bean, MD; Gregory P. Guyton, MD

Category: Hindfoot
Keywords: Medial Displacement Calcaneal Osteotomy; Minimally Invasive;
Valgus
Introduction/Purpose: Several minimally invasive medial displacement calcaneal
osteotomy (MIS MDCO) techniques have been described utilizing differing methods for creating
the osteotomy. However, there are few clinical reports of the safety profile and outcomes
after percutaneous MDCO procedures. The purpose of this study was to describe short-term
outcomes and complications associated with MIS MDCO for the correction of hindfoot valgus
deformities.
Methods: A retrospective study was conducted of all patients who underwent
consecutive minimally invasive MDCO for the treatment of a hindfoot valgus deformity by a
single fellowship-trained foot and ankle orthopaedic surgeon from September 2013 to August
2018. Demographic data, treatment data, and complications were recorded from the electronic
medical record for the duration of the patient’s follow-up. Univariate statistics were used
to determine the relationship between complications and demographic/treatment variables. A
p<0.05 was considered significant.
Results: Patients who underwent 189 MIS MDCO procedures were included in the
study. Median follow-up was 12 months (interquartile range, 7 to 25 months). Osteotomy
healing complications were present in 7% of cases. A 12-month cluster of osteotomy healing
complications was observed. Healing complication rates were 28% during the cluster and 0.7%
outside of the cluster. Osteotomy healing complications were significantly associated with
higher American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) classification, female sex, current
tobacco use, and higher body mass index (BMI). Healing complications were not associated
with osteotomy technique (saw vs. burr) or fixation type. Other complications included wound
dehiscence (3%), surgical site infection (2%), transient nerve symptoms (6%), and persistent
nerve symptoms (2%). Nerve symptoms were significantly associated with an increased number
of concomitant procedures.
Conclusion: Patients with higher ASA classification, current tobacco use, and
higher BMI were at higher risk for osteotomy healing complications after minimally invasive
MDCO procedures. Patients were also more likely to develop nerve complications with more
extensive surgical procedures. These findings may be useful for surgeons when counseling
patients regarding their surgical risks and when optimizing their comorbidities
preoperatively.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00152

## Risk Factors for Nonunion in Pediatric Lateral Column Lengthening (Mosca)
Procedures

Michael J. Conklin; Shane F. Strom; Alexandra H. Seidenstein; Nicholas A. Andrews;
Jared R. Halstrom, BS; John S. Doyle; Ashish Shah, MD

Category: Hindfoot
Keywords: Flatfoot; Clinical Outcomes; Flexible Flatfoot
Introduction/Purpose: The Evans/Mosca procedure remains the most utilized
extra-articular osteotomies for correction of pes planus. This desired lengthening is
created by inserting a graft in the anterior aspect of the calcaneus through a complete
transverse osteotomy. Failure of conservative methods, particularly for rigid pes planus, is
a primary consideration for surgical management. Complications of the Evans procedure
include delayed union, nonunion, malunion, subluxation of the calcaneocuboid joint, and
persistent lateral column pain. Our study analyzes risk factors for development of
non-union.
Methods: After IRB approval 120 patients charts and 157 feet were analyzed for
incidence of non-union which was defined by clinical and radiographic evidence of absence of
union >6 months. Delayed union was diagnosed if there was clinical evidence of healing
without complete union at >6 months. Exclusion criteria included age >18 and revision
lateral column lengthening. Patients’ medical records were reviewed for basic demographics,
complications, and surgical technique.
Results: The cohort consisted of 75 females (47.8%) and 82 males (52.2%). The
median age was 12 with an interquartile range (IQR) of 3. A total of 6 patients (3.7%) had
wound complications or nerve injury. Nonunion occurred in 7 of 157 feet (4.5%) with 2 of 157
feet (1.3%) experiencing delayed union. The median age for patients with nonunion was
significantly higher than those who achieved union (13.2 (IQR 2.75) vs. 11.2 (IQR 3)
respectively). The fixation construct used was associated with increased risk of nonunion.
Patients with screw fixation had the highest rate of nonunion at 50% (2/2) compared to pin
and/or staple fixation at 6.8% (5/73), no fixation at 4% (3/75), and plate fixation at 0%
(0/2). Both delayed union patients were treated with ultrasound bone stimulation, both
patients were able to achieve complete union. Revision was attempted in 5/7 nonunions with
all operative patients achieving union.
Conclusion: Our study analyzed risk factors for developing non-union in
patients undergoing calcaneal lengthening osteotomy for pediatric pes planus. We found age
at time of surgery and graft fixation method to be significant risk factors for development
of non-union. Our study highlighted that those patients who had non-union was on average
>2yrs older at time of surgery. Overall, lateral column lengthening is a well-tolerated
procedure with a complication rate, including non-and delayed union, of 10.8%. Surgeons
should be aware, in the largest cohort of pediatric Evans/Mosca procedures to date, patient
age and type of fixation were associated with nonunion.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00153

## Association of First Metatarsal Pronation with Patient-Reported Outcomes and Recurrence
Rates in Hallux Valgus

Matthew S. Conti, MD; Tamanna Patel, BA; Jiaqi Zhu; Stephen V. Costigliola; Andrew J.
Elliott, MD; Stephen F. Conti, MD; Scott J. Ellis, MD

Category: Bunion
Keywords: Hallux Valgus; Weight Bearing CT; Patient Reported Outcome Measures
(PROMS)
Introduction/Purpose: Hallux valgus (HV) is a triplanar deformity of the first
metatarsal in which the first metatarsal adducts, dorsiflexes, and pronates with an average
increase in pronation between 2° and 8° compared with normal patients (Kimura JBJS, Campbell
FAI). Despite these radiographic changes of the first metatarsal in patients with HV, no
correlation between postoperative two-dimensional radiographic parameters and
patient-reported outcomes has been reported (Thordarson FAI). The purpose of this study was
to determine if a postoperative decrease in first metatarsal pronation (1MTPronation) was
associated with changes in patient-reported outcomes as measured by the PROMIS physical
function, pain interference, and pain intensity domains or recurrence rates in patients with
HV who undergo a first tarsometatarsal fusion (modified Lapidus procedure).
Methods: This study included thirty-nine consecutive HV patients who underwent
a modified Lapidus procedure, had preoperative and >=2-year postoperative PROMIS scores,
and had 1MTPronation measured using the previously described triplanar angle of pronation
(FAI, in press) on preoperative and at least 5-month postoperative weightbearing CT scans.
Multivariable regression analyses were used to investigate differences in the change in
PROMIS domains preoperatively and 2-years postoperatively between patients with ‘no
change/increased 1MTPronation’ and ‘decreased 1MTPronation.’ No differences in preoperative
radiographic parameters or patient characteristics found between two groups. A secondary
analysis using multivariable regression modeling was performed to determine if patients with
a decrease in 1MTPronation between 2°-8° (‘moderate pronation change’) had greater
improvements in PROMIS scores compared with ‘minimal pronation change’ (<2°) and
‘substantial pronation change’ (>8°) groups. A log-binomal regression analysis was
performed to identify if a decrease in 1MTPronation was associated with recurrence of the HV
deformity (postoperative HVA>=20°
Results: The decreased 1MTPronation group (n=26) had a statistically
significant greater improvement in the PROMIS physical function scale by 7.2 points (95%
confidence interval (CI) 2.1-12.3, P=0.007) compared to the no change/increased 1MTPronation
group (n=13). There were no statistically significant differences in PROMIS pain
interference (P=0.380) or pain intensity (P=0.443) scores between the two groups. The
secondary analysis found that patients in the moderate pronation change group (n=15) had
significantly better improvements in the PROMIS physical function and pain intensity domains
than the minimal pronation change group (n=14) (Table 1). The moderate pronation change
group also had greater improvements in the PROMIS pain interference and pain intensity
domains than the substantial pronation (n=10) change group (Table 1). Recurrence rates were
significantly lower in the decreased 1MTPronation pronation group when compared to the no
change/increased 1MTPronation group (11.5% and 46.2%, respectively; risk ratio 0.25, 95% CI
0.07-0.84, P=0.025).
Conclusion: In patients undergoing a modified Lapidus procedure for correction
of their HV deformity, a postoperative decrease in pronation of the first metatarsal,
especially between 2° and 8°, was associated with improvement in PROMIS scores at two- years
postoperatively and a lower recurrence rate. These results suggest that the rotational
component of the hallux valgus deformity may play an important role in outcomes following
surgery, and consequently, surgeons should consider addressing but not overcorrecting the
first metatarsal pronation deformity when performing a surgical procedure for the treatment
of hallux valgus.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00154

## Crista Volume Measured from 3D Reconstructions Shows a Relationship to Sesamoid
Station

Stephen F. Conti, MD; Audrey Clarke; Matthew S. Conti, MD; Mark C. Miller, PhD; Scott
J. Ellis, MD

Category: Bunion
Keywords: Bunion; Sesamoid-metatarsal Joint; Sesamois Pain
Introduction/Purpose: The hallux valgus (HV) deformity results in progressive
subluxation of the sesamoids from their position (station) under the plantar surface of the
first metatarsal head. This subluxation may result in erosion of the crista that separates
the sesamoid grooves due to contact with the tibial sesamoid during weightbearing. While
previous work using weightbearing CT (WBCT) scans has suggested that tibial sesamoid
position is associated with degenerative change of the sesamoid metatarsal joint (Katsui
FAI), no studies have quantified the relationship between sesamoid metatarsal degenerative
changes and sesamoid subluxation. The purpose of the current investigation is to examine the
relationship of the volume of the crista to first metatarsal pronation and sesamoid station,
using three-dimensional models of patients’ deformities created from WBCT scans.
Methods: Thirty-nine HV patients and nine normal subjects underwent
weightbearing or simulated weightbearing CT (WBCT) imaging. Crista volume was determined
using a line drawn to connect the nadir of each sulcus on either side of the intersesamoidal
crista for the length of the crista ( ). The Mann-Whitney U test was used to compare mean crista volume between
HV and normal patients. WBCT scans were used to establish sesamoid position using a
four-stage scale (Kim FAI 2015) and quantify first metatarsal pronation using 3D
reconstructions as previously described (Campbell FAI 2018). Single-factor analysis of
variance (ANOVA) tests were used to compared the crista volume and pronation angle between
the four sesamoid stations. A linear regression was performed to determine whether crista
volume was associated with the pronation angle. Spearman’s rank coefficient (r) was used to
test the relationship of the sesamoid station against the crista volume and pronation
angle.
Results: The mean crista volume in HV patients was 80.10 mm3 +- 35
mm3 and in normal subjects was 150.64 mm3 +- 24 mm3,
which differed significantly between the two groups (P<0.001). Mean crista volumes were
found to be statistically significantly different between the sesamoid stations (P<0.001)
with decreasing crista volumes significantly and strongly correlated with increasing
sesamoid station (r = -0.80, P<0.001). The mean standard deviation values of the crista
volume by sesamoid station were 154.4 mm3 +- 18.7 mm3 for station zero, 98.19 mm3
+- 26.9 mm3 for station one, 78.45 mm3 +- 30.1 mm3 for
station two, and 44.77 mm3 +- 13.5 mm3 for station three. There was no
difference in the mean pronation angle between the four sesamoid stations (P=0.37).
Additionally, no statistically significant relationship was found between sesamoid station
and pronation angle. The pronation angle was not associated with crista volume (P=0.52).
Conclusion: Our study found that HV patients have significantly lower mean
crista volumes compared to normal patients. Crista volume was strongly correlated with
sesamoid subluxation/station, suggesting that tibial sesamoid subluxation results in erosion
of the crista. In contrast, the pronation deformity was not associated with crista volume
demonstrating that the degenerative changes of the sesamoid metatarsal are not related to
the rotational deformity of the first metatarsal. This supports the hypothesis that tibial
sesamoid subluxation may result in osteoarthritis of the sesamoid metatarsal joint and may
be an overlooked source of pain in HV.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00155

## Functionality and Outcomes Following Utilization of an Arizona Brace for Non-Operative
Foot and Ankle Care

Daniel O. Corr, BS; Francis P. Landman; Joseph T. O’Neil, MD; Steven M. Raikin,
MD

Category: Ankle Arthritis; Hindfoot
Keywords: Nonoperative; Ankle Arthritis; Tendon Injuries
Introduction/Purpose: The Arizona ankle foot orthotic (AFO) is a popular
custom-molded orthotic stabilizer often used to treat posterior tibial tendon dysfunction,
chronic Achilles tendonitis, ankle trauma and other pathologies. In the case of ankle injury
or deformity, a resulting proprioceptive deficit may result in functional instability. There
exists little evidence demonstrating the effectiveness of an Arizona brace in the course of
non-operative treatment with regard to alleviation of pain and a return to standard daily
activity. Previous analysis has shown Arizona bracing to be a viable treatment for posterior
tibial tendon dysfunction, but is yet to incorporate a larger spectrum of pathologies.
Furthermore, patient satisfaction with the brace, and continued use of the brace to aid in
function in the longer-term has yet to be assessed.
Methods: Patients who were prescribed an Arizona ankle brace as a means of
non-operative treatment at our institution from 2017-2018 were eligible for retrospective
study for follow up of 2-4 years. Pre-bracing diagnosis was noted. Eligible patients were
contacted via email to complete survey assessments. Patients were asked to use a 5-point
Likert scale (0-4) to rate their overall satisfaction with the brace as a treatment device.
Patients were also asked to report if they eventually proceeded to surgical intervention,
how often they still wear the brace throughout the day, how long they wore the brace if
they’d discontinued use, whether the brace was easy to wear, and - if no - what made the
brace difficult to wear. Patients also completed two VAS pain rating scales - one when
walking with the brace, one when walking without - and the FAAM-ADL subscale to evaluate
their level of function.
Results: Surveys were completed by 118 patients with average age 63.2 years
and average BMI 31.9 kg/m2. Patients reported an average satisfaction of 2.1/4,
with 61 (51.7%) stating they were ‘satisfied’ or ‘very satisfied’ with the brace. At the
time of survey, 74 patients (62.7%) reported that they no longer use the brace at all. Sixty
responded that the brace was easy to wear, while 58 (49.5%) stated that the brace was
difficult to wear, with the most common reason being that the brace was too bulky and
difficult to wear with shoes on. Pain rating was significantly lower when walking with the
brace versus without (44.6 vs. 63.6, p=0.003). Patients braced for valgus ankle deformity
(n=11) had higher FAAM-ADL scores at follow-up than those with ankle arthritis (n=45) or
tendonitis (n=36).
Conclusion: The Arizona ankle brace is a worthy first-line nonoperative
treatment for a number of ankle pathologies, as it may help to avoid the need for surgical
intervention. The brace may be more adept in correcting broad foot/ankle deformities as
opposed to bony or tendinous irregularities, and patients should be counseled with regards
to the varying patient satisfaction and comfort while wearing the brace. Larger cohort
studies are indicated to further investigate diagnostic significance and bracing
efficacy.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00156

## Medicare Bundled Payment Model for Total Ankle Arthroplasty

Daniel O. Corr, BS; Gandhi Riddhi; Joseph T. O’Neil, MD; Steven M. Raikin, MD; Rachel
J. Shakked, MD

Category: Ankle; Other
Keywords: Total Ankle Arthroplasty; Payment Reform; Economic Analysis
Introduction/Purpose: Total ankle arthroplasty (TAA) is included in the
Centers of Medicare and Medicaid Services’ (CMS) Bundled Payments for Care Improvement
(BPCI) initiative for lower extremity joint replacements. This model has been demonstrated
to be for total hip arthroplasty (THA) and total knee arthroplasty (TKA). However, there
remains concern that the model underestimates expected costs for TAA due to the unique
healthcare needs of TAA patients including higher implant costs, longer procedures, and an
increased demand for postoperative acute care services due to non-weightbearing. The purpose
of this study was to analyze the breakdown of costs associated with inpatient and outpatient
care and assess the difference between Medicare beneficiary reimbursements and actual costs
for the episode of care.
Methods: An IRB-approved retrospective review was conducted of patients with
Medicare who underwent TAA between July 2014 and June 2018. The surgeries were performed at
seven facilities affiliated with a singular institution hospital system. Patients undergoing
TAA in this time period were identified using an institutional arthroplasty database and
were eligible for study. Of 99 patients who met this criterion, financial data was available
for 72. Demographics including age, gender, BMI, and comorbidities were collected via chart
review. Episode start and end dates, first post-acute care discharge destination, and total
episode costs were recorded. Total episode cost was subdivided into inpatient facility cost,
surgeon fees, and post-acute care discharge costs (inpatient rehab facility costs, skilled
nursing facility expenses, or home health aide fees). Patients were stratified into two
groups based on 90-day costs of care, a ‘positive group’ not exceeding the bundled payment
allocation and a ‘negative group’ which did exceed.
Results: No statistically significant difference was found among demographics
between the positive and negative patient groups. Average group age was 70.5 years and 72.9
years, respectively, and both groups had average BMI of 29.3 kg/m2. Age-adjusted
Charlson Comorbidity Index was 3.35 for the positive group and 3.40 for the negative group.
Total episode costs were 50% higher in the negative group compared to the positive group
($31,462 vs. $15,845). The total post discharge costs for the negative group were $17,912
which is significantly higher than those of the positive group ($2,502) (P<0.001).
Thirteen patients (18.1%) attended skilled nursing facilities, and 12 of these patients
exceeded the allocated budget. Average SNF cost was $13,089, which nearly matched the entire
inpatient cost (facility + surgeon fees) of $13,400. Home health aide requirement was
significant at 39% (n=28), and 15 of these patients (54%) also came in over budget.
Conclusion: Results suggest that there is a considerable possibility for
patients undergoing TAA to have post-acute care requirements that drive cost over budget,
including admittance to skilled nursing facilities and home health aide, likely sue to the
added necessity for extended immobilization in an older patient population. Such parameters
should be factored into the BPCI reimbursement model for TAA.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00157

## Novel Minimally Invasive Sliding Calcaneal Osteotomy: A Case Series

Daniel O. Corr, BS; William Conaway, MD; Rabun S. Fox, MD; David I. Pedowitz, MD,
MS

Category: Hindfoot; Ankle
Keywords: Calcaneal Osteotomy; Minimally Invasive; Clinical Outcomes
Introduction/Purpose: Sliding calcaneal displacement osteotomy is a mainstay
in the treatment of hindfoot deformity. A lateral oblique or L shaped incision and direct
visualization of the calcaneus is the traditional open approach to this osteotomy.
Complications of this approach are not common and include wound dehiscence, delayed union,
neurovascular damage, tarsal tunnel syndrome, symptomatic bony overhang and peroneal
fibrosis. Several techniques have been developed to address the limitations of the open
approach including osteotomy with a Gigli saw, percutaneous endoscopic assisted osteotomy,
and most recently minimally invasive osteotomy (MICO) with a low speed, high torque burr.
Each of these techniques has limitations. This report presents a simple minimally invasive
technique that may help mitigate wound issues without the technical hurdles of a steep
learning curve.
Methods: Patients undergoing MICO procedures with the senior author from
February 2019 - June 2020 who had not undergone previous foot/ankle surgery were
retrospectively enrolled. Patients underwent clinical and radiographic assessment
preoperatively as well as at 2, 6, 12, and 24 weeks postoperatively. The technique utilizes
a 1.5cm incision along the plane of osteotomy, centered about a K-wire placed through both
cortices of the calcaneus at the midpoint of the osteotomy plane. The plane and K-wire
placement are determined under radiographic guidance. A micro-sagittal saw is rested on the
K-wire and used as a cutting block in the coronal plane. After the osteotomy is created and
mobility of the calcaneus confirmed, the K-wire is removed. The mobile segment is adjusted
as needed, held in placed by dorsiflexing the ankle, and fixed using two
posterior-to-anterior 6.5 cannulated screws, one 1cm superior to the other. The wounds can
then be irrigated and closed.
Results: 37 patients were treated using this technique. 24 (65%) patients were
female, with average age 56.9 years. Osteotomies were performed concomitantly with
procedures including flexor digitorum longus transfer, subtalar fusion, triple arthrodesis,
talonavicular fusion, hallux valgus corrective osteotomy, and Strayer gastrocnemius
recession. Thirty-five (95%) patients achieved radiographic fusion within 1 year
postoperatively with 28 (76%) fusing by 3-month follow up. Two (5%) patients developed a
radiographic non-union without instability and opted to be managed expectantly. Of note, one
patient is a diabetic current smoker with Rheumatoid Arthritis, while the other is a
non-diabetic former smoker. A single patient was readmitted within 90 days for incision and
debridement of a dehisced wound from subtalar fusion performed concomitantly. One patient
underwent eventual removal of the screw compressing the calcaneal osteotomy site due to
hardware prominence. No patients reported peroneal symptoms postoperatively. No patients
reported any other complications related to the osteotomy.
Conclusion: Sliding calcaneal displacement osteotomy is a well-established
component in the treatment of hindfoot deformity. Although larger lateral oblique and L
shaped incisions allow direct visualization of the osteotomy, more minimally invasive
approaches have been used. The proposed technique in the current report offers a low
non-union rate, minimal surgical footprint, easily available surgical instruments, reliable
osteotomy plane, and short surgical time.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00158

## How Has Opioid Prescribing in Total Ankle Arthroplasty Changed with Time and State
Legislation? A National and State-Level Analysis

Daniel J. Cunningham, MD; Colleen Wixted; Nicholas B. Allen; Andrew Hanselman; Samuel
B. Adams, Jr., MD

Category: Ankle; Ankle Arthritis
Keywords: Pain; Outcomes Measures; Total Ankle Arthroplasty
Introduction/Purpose: Total ankle arthroplasty (TAA) is an
increasingly-utilized treatment for ankle arthritis, and opioids are commonly used as part
of perioperative pain control. However, many states have enacted opioid-limiting legislation
to reduce perioperative opioid prescribing. The aim of this study was to evaluate the impact
of time and state legislation on perioperative opioid prescribing in TAA.
Methods: This study is a retrospective, observational review of 90-day
perioperative opioid prescribing in 1,829 patients undergoing TAA throughout the United
States using a large insurance database. Initial and cumulative volumes and rates of opioid
prescription filling were recorded along with baseline patient and operative
characteristics. Dates of state legislation enactment were also recorded. Student t-tests,
analysis of variance (ANOVA), and multivariable linear and logistic regression were utilized
to analyze the impact of time and state legislation on opioid prescription filling.
Results: In the 90-day perioperative time period, initial and cumulative
opioid prescription filling in oxycodone 5-mg equivalents has decreased significantly from
2010 (63.8 initial and 163.3 cumulative oxycodone 5-mg equivalents filled) to 2019 (41.1
initial and 67.2 cumulative oxycodone 5-mg equivalents filled). States with opioid-limiting
legislation saw larger and more significant reductions in initial and cumulative opioid
prescription filling pre-act to post-act (63.3 to 50.6 oxycodone 5-mg equivalents filled
with legislation vs 61.4 to 51.9 oxycodone 5-mg equivalents filled without legislation
initial and 146.4 to 93.3 oxycodone 5-mg equivalents filled with legislation vs 125.1 to
108.6 oxycodone 5-mg equivalents filled without legislation cumulative).
Conclusion: This study demonstrates that orthopaedic surgeons in states with
opioid-limiting legislation have responded by significantly reducing 90-day perioperative
opioid prescribing in TAA. These results encourage states without legislation to enact
opioid-specific laws to reduce opioid prescribing.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00159

## Regional Anesthesia Decreases Early Perioperative Opioid Demand but Increases Late
Opioid Demand in Ankle and Distal Tibia Fracture Surgery

Daniel J. Cunningham, MD; Ariana Paniagua; Isabel DeLaura; Gloria X. Zhang; Billy I.
Kim; Jonathan Kim; Terry Lee; Micaela LaRose; Samuel B. Adams, Jr., MD; Mark Gage; Mark
Gage

Category: Ankle; Trauma
Keywords: Pain; Outcomes Measures; Ankle Fracture
Introduction/Purpose: Regional anesthesia (RA) is commonly used in ankle and
distal tibia surgery. However, the pragmatic effects of this treatment on inpatient and
outpatient opioid demand are unclear. The hypothesis was that RA would decrease inpatient
opioid consumption and have little effect on outpatient opioid demand in patients undergoing
ankle and distal tibia fracture surgery.
Methods: All patients ages 18 and older undergoing ankle and distal tibia
fracture surgery at a single institution between 7/2013 and 7/2018 were included in this
study (n=1,310). Inpatient opioid consumption (0-72 hours post-operative) and outpatient
opioid prescribing (1-month pre-operative to 90-days post-operative) were recorded in
oxycodone 5-mg equivalents (OE’s). Adjusted models were used to evaluate the impact of RA on
inpatient and outpatient opioid demand.
Results: Adjusted models demonstrated decreased inpatient opioid consumption
in patients with RA (12.1 estimated OE’s without RA vs 8.8 OE’s with RA from 0-24 hours
post-op, p<0.001) but no significant difference after that time (9.7 vs 10.4 from 24-48
hours post-op, and 9.5 vs 8.5 from 48-72 hours post-op). Estimated cumulative outpatient
opioid demand was significantly increased in patients receiving RA at all timepoints (112.5
OE’s without RA vs 137.3 with RA from one-month pre-op to two- weeks, 125.6 vs 155.5 OE’s to
6-weeks, and 134.6 vs 163.3 OE’s to 90-days, all p-values for RA <0.001). Figure
demonstrates a histogram of the inpatient opioid consumption in patients with and without
RA.
Conclusion: In ankle and distal tibia fracture surgery, RA was associated with
decreased early inpatient opioid demand but significantly increased outpatient opioid demand
after adjusting for baseline patient and treatment characteristics. These findings provide
information on the real-world impact of RA and temper enthusiasm for perioperative nerve
blockade.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00160

## State Regulation Positively Impacts Opioid Prescribing Patterns in Ankle Fracture
Surgery: A National and State-Level Analysis

Daniel J. Cunningham, MD; Michael Blatter; Samuel B. Adams, Jr., MD; Mark Gage

Category: Ankle; Trauma
Keywords: Ankle Fracture; Pain; Outcomes Measures
Introduction/Purpose: The impact of time and state regulation on opioid
prescribing in orthopaedic trauma is not well known. The purpose of this study is to
evaluate the impact of time and state-level opioid legislation on 90-day perioperative
opioid prescribing in ankle fracture surgery from 2010 - 2019.
Methods: This is a retrospective, cohort study using a national insurance
database including commercial insurance, Medicare, Medicaid, and cash pay patients to
evaluate 90-day perioperative opioid prescription filling in 40,286 patients ages 18 and
older undergoing Current Procedural Terminology codes 27766, 27769, 27792, 27814, 27822,
and/or 27823 between 2010 and 2019 in all 50 United States. The primary study outcome was
initial and cumulative 90-day perioperative opioid prescription filling and rates of filling
and refills.
Results: Mean first prescription volume has not changed dramatically from 2010
(37 oxycodone 5-mg pills) to 2019 (33.3 oxycodone 5-mg pills). However, cumulative
prescriptions within the 90-day perioperative timeframe have decreased considerably from
2010 (128.5 oxycodone 5-mg pills) to 2019 (70.4 oxycodone 5-mg pills, p<0.001), and
cumulative prescription filling in years 2018 and 2019 was significantly less than in 2010.
Legislation targeting duration or duration and volume had the largest impacts on initial and
cumulative opioid prescribing (approximately 14-22 fewer oxycodone 5-mg pills filled in
states with legislation compared to states without legislation, p<0.001). The figure
shows state-level pre-act and post-act cumulative 90-day opioid prescribing in ankle
fracture surgery.
Conclusion: In ankle fracture surgery, cumulative opioid prescribing has
decreased dramatically over time. In addition, states with opioid prescribing legislation
had larger reductions in perioperative opioid prescribing compared to states without opioid
legislation. Legislation targeting duration or duration and volume had the largest impacts
on opioid prescribing.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00161

## Time and State Legislation Have Decreased Opioid Prescribing in Elective Foot and Ankle
Surgery in the United States

Daniel J. Cunningham, MD; Nicholas Kwon; Nicholas B. Allen; Andrew Hanselman; Samuel
B. Adams, Jr., MD

Category: Other; Ankle; Ankle Arthritis; Arthroscopy; Bunion; Hindfoot; Lesser
Toes; Midfoot/Forefoot; Sports
Keywords: Pain; Patient Reported Outcome Measures (PROMS); Preoperative risk
factors
Introduction/Purpose: The opioid epidemic has focused attention on opioid
overprescribing. State legislation has been enacted to reduce acute opioid prescribing.
However, the impact of this legislation on elective foot and ankle surgery is largely
unknown. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the impact of opioid limiting legislation
on opioid prescribing in elective foot and ankle surgery.
Methods: 90-day perioperative opioid prescription filling in oxycodone 5-mg
equivalents was identified in all patients ages 18 and older undergoing non-trauma,
non-arthroplasty foot and ankle surgery from 2010 - 2019 using a commercial database. States
with and without legislation were identified and opioid prescription filling before and
after legislation was tabulated. Unadjusted and adjusted analyses were performed to evaluate
the impact of time and state legislation on perioperative opioid prescribing in this patient
population.
Results: Initial and cumulative opioid prescribing decreased significantly
from 2010 to 2019 (39 vs 35.7 initial and 98.1 vs 55.7 cumulative oxycodone 5-mg
equivalents, p<0.001). States with legislation had larger and more significant reductions
in initial and cumulative opioid prescribing compared to states without legislation over
similar timeframes (41.6 to 35.1 with legislation vs 40.6 to 39.1 without legislation
initial oxycodone 5-mg equivalents prescription filling volume and 87.7 to 62.8 vs 88.6 to
74.1 cumulative oxycodone 5-mg equivalents prescription filling volume, p<0.001). The
figure shows state-level changes in opioid prescription filling from pre-act to
post-act.
Conclusion: State legislation and time have been associated with large,
clinically relevant reductions in 90-day perioperative cumulative opioid prescription
filling although reductions in initial opioid prescription filing have remained low. These
results encourage states without legislation to enact restraints to reduce the impact of the
opioid epidemic.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00162

## Readability of Online Foot & Ankle Patient Resources

Coleman Cush; Brian Foster; Hui Zhang, MD; Gerard J. Cush, MD

Category: Other
Keywords: Patient Education; Ankle; General Principles / Context
Introduction/Purpose: The internet is a popular source of health information
for patients. Professional organizations, such as the American Orthopaedic Foot & Ankle
Society (AOFAS) and the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons (AAOS) have created
patient-directed websites containing high quality information. However, previous studies
have demonstrated that these sites are often written at a level that is too complex for the
average reader. We aimed to investigate the current landscape of the readability of these
websites.
Methods: Online patient resources on foot and ankle topics published by the
AOFAS and AAOS were reviewed. Each page was analyzed using the Flesch Kincaid Grade Level
(FKGL) and Flesch Reading Ease (FRE) formulas. Sites were noted if they were written at or
below an 8th grade reading level, which corresponds to the average US reading level. An
independent two-sample t- test or chi-square test, where appropriate, were used to compare
resource characteristics between the two professional societies.
Results: 162 total sites were reviewed, including 113 from the AOFAS and 49
from the AAOS. Overall, the mean FKGL was 9.4 (range, 6.7 - 15.3) and the mean FRE was 56.3
(range, 24.4 - 73.1). Websites written by the AAOS had significantly lower FKGL scores than
sites written by the AOFAS (9.0 vs 9.5, p=0.01). 31.3% of all sites were written at or below
an 8th grade reading level. Websites published by the AAOS had significantly more sites
published at this level than sites published by the AOFAS (44.9% vs 25.7%, p=0.02).
Conclusion: Online patient information on foot and ankle topics published by
professional organizations are often written at a level that is too complex for the average
reader. There was a statistical but not clinically significant difference between sites
published by the AAOS and AOFAS. Professional organizations should continue to develop their
online patient resources, with emphasis on increasing their readability.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00163

## What are the Injures that Lead to Post-Traumatic Ankle Osteoarthritis? A Long-Term
Retrospective Analysis of 533 Patients

Chris Cychosz, MD; Nacime S. Mansur, MD; Matthieu Lalevee, MD; William J. Lorentzen;
Elijah Auch; Natalie Glass, PhD; Phinit Phisitkul, MD; John E. Femino, MD; Donald D.
Anderson; Cesar de Cesar Netto, MD, PhD

Category: Ankle; Ankle Arthritis
Keywords: Ankle Arthritis; Ankle Fracture; Total Ankle Arthroplasty
Introduction/Purpose: Ankle osteoarthritis (AO) is an incapacitating condition
for patients and an important burden for medical assistance. It is well known that the vast
majority of AO occurs as a sequela of previous trauma, however, it is currently unknown what
types of injuries of the foot and ankle most commonly lead end-stage arthritis. The purpose
of this study was to investigate the etiology of end-stage ankle osteoarthritis in all
patients who underwent ankle fusion or replacement at a tertiary care center over a 20-year
period. Our hypothesis was that the most common injury patterns would correspond to
low-energy lesions.
Methods: The electronic medical record was queried using current procedural
terminology (CPT) codes for ankle fusion or ankle replacement to identify all patients who
underwent either of these procedures at a single tertiary academic center over a 20-year
period. Etiologies were broadly grouped as Pilon/Plafond fracture, ankle fracture, talus
fracture, tibia fracture, single or recurrent sprains, infection/septic joint, systemic
disorder (Charcot arthropathy, rheumatoid arthritis, hemophilic arthropathy) and
idiopathic/primary osteoarthritis. Each fracture pattern was then subclassified using
commonly accepted classification systems by two independent observers in addition to the
grade of arthritis at time of fusion or replacement. Reliability among readers was assessed
by Kleiss kappa. Normative data were analyzed by ANOVA and comparison among groups and
methods by Student’s T- test.
Results: A total of 533 patients were included in this study. The initial
injury patterns were broadly classified as: pilon/plafond (65), ankle (173), sprains (110),
talus (17), tibia (22), tibio-talar dislocation without fracture (1). Other identified
etiologies included rheumatoid arthritis (18), charcot arthropathy (11), progressive
collapsing foot deformity (21), septic arthritis (5), and cavovarus (6). The average time
interval between the initial injury and definitive treatment for end-stage arthritis was 558
days. Ankle fractures classified as 44C1 (14,1%), 44B3 (10.6%), 44B2 (9.3%) followed by
pilon 43C3 (6.5%) and 43C1 (4.1%) were the most prevalent subclassification found in the
fractures group.
Conclusion: The main etiology for AO is secondary, due to trauma. History of
ankle sprains and instability was found in 20.6%. Fractures corresponded to 54,6% of our
cohort, ankle fractures producing most of these lesions. When considering the subtype of
injury, ankle fractures with a 44C1 and a 44B3 classification were the more frequent
presentation. These findings could support the argument that complex low-energy rotational
traumas do not carry a benign course. Comprehension of the AO etiology scenario may guide
prevention policies and specific primary treatment guidelines with the objective of
diminishing disease impact on population and health care system.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00164

## Second-Look Arthroscopy after Surgery for Osteochondral Lesions of the Talus: A
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis

Jari Dahmen, BSc,BSc(Med); Jelmer T. Vreeken; Tobias Stornebrink, MD; Kaj Emanuel;
Sjoerd A. Stufkens, MD, PhD; Gino Kerkhoffs, MD

Category: Ankle
Keywords: Talar Osteochondral Lesions; Arthroscopy; Cartilage
Introduction/Purpose: The primary aim was to assess and compare cartilage
quality after different surgical interventions evaluated by second-look arthroscopy (SLA).
Secondary aims were to report concomitant diagnoses found during SLA, and to correlate the
cartilage quality with clinical- and radiological outcomes.
Methods: A literature search was performed through PubMed, Embase (Ovid), and
Cochrane Library. The primary outcome was the difference of cartilage quality as assessed
with SLA between different surgical interventions. The Moderator analysis was used to
calculate differences between treatment groups. Associated 95% confidence intervals (CI)
were calculated with the Clopper- Pearson interval. Additionally, correlations between the
cartilage quality and clinical- or radiological outcomes were calculated and percentages of
concomitant diagnoses per treatment group were reported.
Results: Nineteen studies comprising 447 ankles having undergone SLA 14 months
after the initial surgery were included. The cartilage quality success rate for bone marrow
stimulation (BMS) was 53% (95% CI 38-68%), for Retrograde Drilling (RD) 100% (95% CI
66-100%, for fixation (FIX) 92% (95% CI 70-89%), for Osteochondral Transplantation (OCT) 94%
(95% CI 69-99%) and Chondrogenesis-Inducing Techniques (CT) this was 81% (95% CI 70-89%).
The success rate of BMS was significantly lower than FIX, OCT and CIT. There were no
significant differences in success rates between the other treatment options. The incidence
of concomitant diagnoses found during second-look arthroscopy differed among different
treatment strategies. For BMS, a positive correlation was found between the International
Cartilage Repair Society score (ICRS) and AOFAS-scores (rc =.67, p <0.01). For OCT, no
significant correlation was found between the MOCART score and the ICRS (rc =.36, p
=.23).
Conclusion: Bone marrow stimulation yields inferior cartilage quality as
assessed with SLA in comparison to fixation, osteo(chondral) transplantation and cartilage
implementation. The role of the quality of the subchondral bone and its repair must be
highlighted concerning correlation with clinical outcomes and long-term success as well as
prevention of development of osteo- arthritis.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00165

## Talar Osteoperiostic Grafting from the Iliac Crest (TOPIC): 2-Year Results of a Novel
Press-Fit Surgical Treatment for Large Talar Osteochondral Lesions

Jari Dahmen, BSc,BSc(Med); Sjoerd A. Stufkens, MD, PhD; Gino Kerkhoffs, MD

Category: Ankle
Keywords: Talar Osteochondral Lesions; Osteochondral Autograft; Ankle
Introduction/Purpose: The purpose of this study was to present the surgical
technique and to evaluate the clinical and radiological outcomes of a new press-fit OATS
technique for large primary and secondary talar osteochondral defects of the talus, Talar
OsteoPeriostic grafting from the Iliac Crest (TOPIC).
Methods: Forty patients underwent a press-fit TOPIC procedure. Mean age was 38
years (SD 4.6). Pre- and postoperative clinical assessment at 12- and 24-months follow-up
included the American Orthopaedic Foot & Ankle Society (AOFAS) score, the Short- Form 36
(SF-36) Mental Component Scale (MCS) and Physical Component Scale (PCS), the Numeric Rating
Scales (NRS) of pain at rest, during walking and stairclimbing, and the Foot and Ankle
Outcome Score (FAOS). Return to work was assessed in time and rate. Remodeling of the
contour of the talus, bone ingrowth and consolidation of the implanted graft were assessed
on computed tomography (CT) one year post-operatively.
Results: All patients were available for the two-year follow-up. The AOFAS
improved from 48 to 90 (p<0.05). All NRS scores improved: the NRS during rest from 3 to 0
(p<0.05), the NRS during walking from 5 to 1 p<0.05), and the NRS during stairclimbing
from 5 to 1 (p<0.05). Both components of the SF-36 improved. The PCS improved from 34 to
47 (p<0.05) and the MCS from 37 to 66 (p<0.05). All FAOS subscales significantly
improved. 70% returned to sport at pre-injury sports level and mean time to return to sports
was 9 months (SD 2.4). All patients showed remodeling of the talus and all grafts showed
consolidation as well as bone ingrowth on the CT scans. All patients returned to work, at a
mean time of 4 months post-operatively (SD 4.4). One patient had a temporary loss of n.
saphenous sensibility.
Conclusion: The TOPIC procedure is a highly promising surgical treatment
option for large primary and secondary talar OCDs. Despite these good mid-terms clinical,
sports and radiological outcomes, longer follow-up is necessary to assess the clinical
outcome and the progression of osteoarthritis at the long term.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00166

## Talar Osteoperiostic Grafting from the Iliac Crest (TOPIC): Return to Sports Outcomes
of A Novel Press-Fit Surgical Treatment for Large Talar Osteochondral Lesions

Jari Dahmen, BSc,BSc(Med); Quinten Rikken; Sjoerd A. Stufkens, MD, PhD; Gino
Kerkhoffs, MD

Category: Ankle
Keywords: Talar Osteochondral Lesions; Osteochondral Autograft; Return to
Play
Introduction/Purpose: The purpose of this study was to evaluate the sports
outcomes of a new press-fit OATS technique for large primary and secondary talar
osteochondral lesions of the talus (OLTs), Talar OsteoPeriostic grafting from the Iliac
Crest (TOPIC).
Methods: The study population included amateur and professional athletes with
a talar osteochondral lesion size of at least 10 mm in diameter as measured
anteroposteriorly or mediolaterally. The surgical intervention in question was the Talar
OsteoPeriostic grafting from the Iliac Crest (TOPIC) procedure, which was performed in a
press-fit way. Sports outcomes at a minimum of 24 months included return to sports rates,
level (return to any level of sports, return to pre-injury levels of sports, and return to
performance), including corresponding return to sports times of the aforementioned
levels.
Results: A total of 30 athletes, including 1 professional athlete, were
assessed. All patients were available for the follow-up at 24 months post-operatively. The
mean follow-up duration was 24 months (SD 4.5). The mean lesion size was 356 mm2.
Return to any level of sports rate was 90% (95% CI 83 - 95) with an associated time of 8.4
months (SD 2.3). Return to pre-injury level of sports rate was 72% (95% CI 60 - 83) with an
associated time of 9.5 months (SD 3.0). Return to performance was 30% (95% CI 20 - 40) with
an associated return to performance time of 12 months (SD 4.6).
Conclusion: Our study suggests that a TOPIC procedure can be considered a good
option in the management of large osteochondral lesions of the talar dome in an active
sports population, with adequate return to sports and work outcomes. Further research is
required to optimize our surgical technique and show long-term outcomes.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00167

## The Incidence of Osteochondral Lesions after Isolated Syndesmotic Injury: A Systematic
Review and Meta-Analysis

Jari Dahmen, BSc,BSc(Med); Sjoerd A. Stufkens, MD, PhD; John G. Kennedy, MD,
FRCS(Orth); Gino Kerkhoffs, MD

Category: Ankle
Keywords: Talar Osteochondral Lesions; Syndesmosis; Syndesmotic Injury
Introduction/Purpose: To determine the incidence of osteochondral lesions of
the ankle (as well as their location and size) incidence after isolated syndesmotic
injuries.
Methods: A literature search was performed to identify studies published using
PubMed (MEDLINE), EMBASE, CDSR, DARE, and CENTRAL. Two authors separately and independently
screened the search results and conducted the quality assessment using the MINORS criteria.
Available full-text studies published in English, Dutch and German were eligible for
inclusion. OCL incidence as well as location after isolated syndesmotic injuries were
extracted from the original articles and subsequently pooled. Whenever possible, OCL
incidence per syndesmotic timing (Acute/subacute/chronic) was calculated, pooled and
compared with a random effects model.
Results: Nine articles were included with 694 syndesmotic injuries. Overall
(O)CL incidence was 21.6% (95% CI 18.7 - 24.8%). This rate was 15.9% (95% CI 12.2 - 20.4),
11.4% (95% CI 5.9 - 21.0), and 54.2% (95% CI 44.2-63.8) for the acute, sub-acute, and
chronic isolated syndesmotic group, respectively, thereby showing a significant difference
in incidence rate between the acute and chronic syndesmotic injuries group (p<0.05).
Concerning overall (O)CL incidence, 74.6% (95% CI 65.9 - 81.2) of the lesions were located
on the talar dome and 16.7% (95% CI 10.9 - 24.6%) of the lesions were located on the distal
tibia (p<0.05). (O)CL size was not reported in any of the studies. Concerning location
difference between the acute and chronic group, the incidence of talar (O)CLs was higher in
the acute group than in the chronic group (100% 95% CI 93.9 - 100% vs. 46.8% 95% CI 33.3 -
60.8%.) (p<0.05).
Conclusion: This meta-analysis showed that (osteo)chondral lesions of the
ankle are frequently associated with isolated syndesmotic injuries. (O)CL incidence was
significantly higher in the chronic isolated syndesmotic injuries group compared to the
acute group (54% versus 16%). The vast majority of (O)CLs were located on the talar
dome.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00168

## Limited Evidence for Biological Adjuvants in Hindfoot Arthrodesis: A Systematic Review
and Meta- Analysis of Clinical Comparative Studies

John Dankert, MD, PhD; Dexter Seow; Youichi Yasui, MD; Wataru Miyamoto; James D.
Calder, MD, MBBS, FFSEM, FRCS(Tr&Orth), PhD; John G. Kennedy, MD, FRCS(Orth)

Category: Hindfoot; Ankle; Ankle Arthritis; Basic Sciences/Biologics;
Trauma
Keywords: Arthrodesis; Biologics; Allograft
Introduction/Purpose: The purpose of this study was to evaluate the efficacy
of biological adjuvants in hindfoot arthrodesis.
Methods: A systematic review of the PubMed and Embase databases was performed
based on the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA)
guidelines using specific search terms and eligibility criteria. Assessment of evidence was
three-fold: level of evidence by criteria published by The Journal of Bone & Joint
Surgery, quality of evidence by the Newcastle-Ottawa scale and conflicts of interest.
Meta-analysis was performed by fixed-effects models for studies of low heterogeneity (I2
<25%) and random-effects models for studies of moderate to high heterogeneity (I2
>=25%).
Results: Hindfeet totaled 1579 patients as protocol and 1503 patients per
protocol. Final reported mean follow-up ranged from 2.8 months to 43 months. Twelve of the
17 included studies were comprised of patients with comorbidities associated with reduced
healing capacity. Based on the random-effects model for non-union rates for autograft versus
allograft, the risk ratio was 0.82 (95% CI, 0.13 to 5.21; I2 = 56%; p = 0.83) in favour of
lower non-union rates for autograft and for autograft versus rhPDGF/ß-TCP, the risk ratio
was 0.90 (95% CI, 0.74 to 1.10; I2 = 59%; p = 0.30) in favour of lower non-union rates for
rhPDGF/ß-TCP.
Conclusion: There is a lack of data to support the meaningful use of
biological adjuvants compared to autograft/allograft for hindfoot arthrodesis. The
meta-analysis favoured the use of autograft when compared to allograft, but favoured
rhPDGF/ß-TCP instead when compared to autograft in the short-term follow-up.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00169

## The Effect of Single vs Serial Platelet-Rich Plasma Injection in Osteochondral Lesions
Treated with Microfracture: An in Vivo Rabbit Model

John Dankert, MD, PhD; Youichi Yasui, MD; Ichiro Tonogai, MD, PhD; Nathaniel P.
Mercer; Margaret B. Goodale, DVM; Lisa A. Fortier, PhD; John G. Kennedy, MD,
FRCS(Orth)

Category: Ankle; Basic Sciences/Biologics
Keywords: Biologics; Platelet Rich Plasma; Cartilage
Introduction/Purpose: Platelet-rich plasma (PRP) has gained increasing
interest as a potential therapeutic augment for decreasing inflammation and enhancing
healing after cartilage injury. However, it remains unknown whether osteochondral repair
outcomes benefit from multiple PRP injections. We performed this animal study to investigate
the effects of serial PRP injections on cartilage repair tissue, subchondral bone
remodeling, and joint inflammation.
Methods: Forty-eight adult New Zealand White rabbits were randomly assigned to
receive either one (1P), two (2P), or three (3P) PRP injections. Cylindrical full-thickness
cartilage defects with subsequent microdrilling were created on the central medial femoral
condyle of both knees. PRP injections were provided on the day of surgery and every 2 weeks
thereafter until the assigned number of injections was achieved for each group. Rabbits in
each group were euthanized at 3, 6, or 12 weeks postoperatively. Cartilage repair tissue was
assessed using the International Cartilage Repair Society (ICRS) macroscopic and modified
ICRS histological scoring systems. Subchondral bone remodeling was evaluated by
micro-computer tomography (µCT) analysis. Joint inflammatory cytokines including IL-1,
IL-1ra, IL-6, IL-8, TNFα, and TGFβ were assessed by quantitative polymerase chain
reaction.
Results: Macroscopic assessment at 3 and 6 weeks demonstrated improved mean
ICRS macroscopic scores in the PRP groups compared with the control group, although this
difference was not significant. The mean ICRS macroscopic score at 12 weeks in Group 3P was
significantly lower than the control, but there was no significant difference compared with
Group 1P and Group 2P (Control: 6.1+-3.3, Group 1P: 3.4+-2.7, Group 2P: 4.2+-2.9, Group 3P:
0.7+-1.5). The mean modified ICRS histological score was significantly higher at each time
point for the PRP groups compared with the control group, but there was no significant
difference in the scores among PRP groups. There were no significant differences in outcomes
for the characteristics evaluated by µCT nor inflammatory cytokine levels among each group
at each time point.
Conclusion: Serial PRP injections, as compared to a single PRP injection, do
not have a significant impact on cartilage repair tissue nor inflammatory cytokine levels at
12 weeks after surgery in an in vivo animal model. Further work is necessary to determine
the effect of single versus serial PRP injections on cartilage repair tissue in humans.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00170

## Sural Nerve Injury in the Achilles Tendon Repair with Dresden Instruments: Anatomical
Study

Anderson E. David, MD; Cesar E. Gamba; Claudia Reyes; Diego F. Feijo; Juan P. Borrero;
Gustavo A. Gil

Category: Trauma; Hindfoot
Keywords: Achilles Tendon Repair; Percutaneous Achilles Repair System;
Achilles Tendon Rupture
Introduction/Purpose: The surgical reconstruction of the Achilles tendon has
evolved in favor of the use of percutaneous techniques over the traditional approach with
wide approaches to reduce the complications inherent to this procedure. These percutaneous
techniques can present lesions of the sural nerve. The objective of this study is to
evaluate the distance of this structure with respect to the instruments used in the Dresden
technique.
Methods: Dissections were made in 16 anatomical pieces (ankles) to which a
reproduction of the complete Achilles lesion was previously made and reconstructed using the
technique to be studied. After this, the distance of the instrument position with respect to
the sural nerve was measured, as well as other relevant measures, and the presence or
absence of nerve injury was evaluated.
Results: None of the pieces there was lesion of the sural nerve neither by
direct injury nor by entrapment, in addition, an approximate distance of 10mm of the nerve
was found with respect to the entry site of the percutaneous needles as described by the
technique. The location of the nerve was always external to the Crural Fascia. We
demonstrate a safety area in which the instruments can be used without lesions of the sural
nerve.
Conclusion: The technique described by Amlang with the use of Dresden
instruments has a low rate of cutaneous complications and infection compared to the
traditional approach for this injury, we find that if the risk of presenting injury is
performed properly of the sural nerve is low and its reproduction, for the repair of
Achilles injuries, should be considered as the first option over traditional open
management.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00171

## Incidence of Deep Vein Thrombosis (DVT) in Patients Using A Knee Scooter

Stuart Davidson; Nina Pogorzelski; Thomas C. Dowd, MD; Jeannie Huh, MD

Category: Ankle; Trauma
Keywords: DVT; Non-Weight Bearing Restrictions; Complications
Introduction/Purpose: Functional limitations after lower extremity injury
often require the use of an assistive device such as a knee scooter. Many patients find
these devices to be easier and more comfortable to use than crutches or walkers. There is
concern regarding the possible correlation between scooter use and DVT. Prior literature
demonstrated decreased venous flow with the knee flexed, and venous stasis is a known risk
factor for DVT1-3. Further, healthy volunteers using a scooter demonstrated a
significant decrease in volumetric blood flow rate at the popliteal fossa4. We
report the incidence of DVTs after prescription of a scooter following lower extremity
injury. We hypothesized that DVT rates would be higher in patients using a scooter compared
to rates of DVT in the NSQIP database
Methods: A retrospective record review of adult patients age 18-74 within the
Military Health System (MHS) database between 2010-2020 was completed to identify the total
number of patients who were prescribed a knee scooter and those who subsequently developed a
DVT. Additional demographic and clinical data were collected on patients who had both a
scooter and a DVT. This was compared with recorded 2015 NSQIP data on DVT incidence in major
orthopaedic surgery procedures.
Results: Between 2010 and 2020, 46,840 of patients within the MHS database
were prescribed a rolling scooter after a lower extremity injury or surgery. Of those
patients who were prescribed a scooter, 377 subsequently developed a DVT within 90 days of
prescription. DVTs were diagnosed on average 26.5 days after scooter prescription. The
incidence of DVT of in this population was 0.8%.
Conclusion: In the Military Health System database, the use of a knee scooter
following lower extremity injury or surgery is associated with a higher incidence of DVT
compared to the 2015 NSQIPS incidence of DVT following major orthopedic surgery (0.80% vs
0.55%), and is most frequently diagnosed within 30 days of scooter prescription. Higher
level study is needed to confirm these findings and identify risk factors of patients who
experience DVTs associated with scooter use after lower extremity injury or surgery.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00172

## Homolateral Lisfranc Fracture/Dislocation of 1st - 5th Metatarsals in a Collegiate
Quarterback: A Case Study

Steven R. Dayton, BA; Kurt M. Krautmann, MD; Michael Boctor; Vehniah K. Tjong, MD;
Anish R. Kadakia, MD

Category: Sports; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: TMT; Lisfranc Injury; Return to Play
Introduction/Purpose: Lisfranc injuries encompass a spectrum of injuries to
the tarsometatarsal (TMT) joint complex from ligamentous sprains to fractures with
dislocation. While studies have shown it is possible to return to sport (RTS) after low-
energy injuries, no literature exists demonstrating RTS after homolateral
fracture/dislocation of all 5 metatarsals. We present a novel surgical technique for repair
of homolateral Lisfranc fracture/dislocation of the 1st-5th metatarsals. Fusion of the 2nd
and 3rd TMT joints provides stability of the middle column. Internal bracing of the 1st TMT
joint gives stability while preserving greater physiologic motion in a high-level
athlete.
Methods: A dorsal approach is used for fusion of the 2nd and 3rd TMT joints
with medial approach for internal bracing of the 1st TMT joint. 2nd and 3rd metatarsals were
denuded of cartilage, and the fusion site was fully prepared. Rigid fixation was applied to
the fusion sites. Guidewire for the cannulated Internal Brace system is inserted into the
base of the 1st metatarsal. Fluoroscopic imaging confirmed positioning and the 3.4mm drill
is passed over the wire, followed by the cannulated tap. A 4.75mm Swivelock anchor with
Fibertape suture is inserted into the metatarsal base. The guidewire is placed in a
reciprocating position on the medial cuneiform. The 2.7 mm drill is passed over the wire,
followed by the 3.5 mm tap. A 3.5 mm Swivelock is then loaded with the Fiberwire from the
1st metatarsal. Tensioning is performed, and the 3.5 mm Swivelock is inserted into the
medial cuneiform.
Results: The athlete was cleared to return to full competition 9 months
following surgery with physical exam demonstrating stability in both dorsiflexion and
abduction. Weight bearing x-rays showed no evidence of hardware failure and no instability
in the 1st TMT joint. CT scan demonstrated solid fusion of 2nd and 3rd TMT joints and
maintained anatomic reduction of the 1st TMT joint. At 1-year post-op, patient was having
pain over the 4th TMT joint. He had a second surgery to remove an exostosis at the 4th TMT
joint as well as remove the screw from the 3rd metatarsal to the middle cuneiform. His pain
had resolved at most recent follow up. He returned to game action in the final game of his
senior season.
Conclusion: The literature demonstrates return to sport is possible for
athletes with Lisfranc injuries though the data focuses on either purely ligamentous
injuries or Myerson type B and C fractures. This case study demonstrates a novel surgical
approach to homolateral fracture/dislocation. While return to sport in this athlete took
longer than lower-energy injuries, it is possible for athletes with homolateral displacement
to return to full competition.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00173

## Implant Related Artifact Around Metallic and Bio-Integrative Screws: A CT Scan 3D
Hounsfield Unit Assessment

Cesar de Cesar Netto, MD, PhD; Nacime S. Mansur, MD; Tutku Tazegul; Matthieu Lalevee,
MD; Hee Young Lee; Andrew Behrens; Francois Lintz, MD MSc FEBOT; Alexandre L.
Godoy-Santos, MD; Kevin N. Dibbern, PhD; Donald D. Anderson

Category: Basic Sciences/Biologics; Hindfoot
Keywords: CT; Implant Cost; Screws
Introduction/Purpose: Implant-related artifact (IRA) represents an important
limitation in Computed Tomography (CT) assessment of osteotomy and fracture healing,
bone-implant integration, and success of fusion procedures. Metallic implants are the most
used in foot and ankle surgery and are recognized as important IRA generators. Absorbable
and bio-integrative (BI) implants are attractive options for bone fixation when
postoperative CT imaging is likely, particularly in procedures with higher risk for
nonunion. However, the literature comparing IRA with metallic and BI implants is scarce. The
objective of this study was to assess the degree of IRA around metallic and BI cannulated
screws. Our hypothesis was that BI implants would demonstrate significantly decreased IRA
around the inserted screws.
Methods: In this cadaveric/CT imaging study, 2 below-knee specimens were used.
Medial displacement calcaneal osteotomy was performed through a 5-cm long lateral heel
approach. Calcaneal tuberosity was displaced medially by 10mm and fixed provisionally with 2
parallel K-wires under fluoroscopic guidance. Specimens were fixed with two headless 4.0
millimeters cannulated screws, either metallic or BI. Cone-beam CT imaging of both specimens
was acquired following osteotomy screw fixation (120kVp, 5.5mA, 0.25mm isotropic). Using a
dedicated software, the overall dispersion of Hounsfield units (HU) in a 3D cube of 30mm
edge length was assessed. Four HU lines were then traced parallel to the screws, crossing
the osteotomy site. Lines 1, 2, 3 and 4 were positioned respectively: In close proximity,
over, inside the cannulation and away from the implant. The HU dispersion in these lines was
measured and compared between metallic and BI implanted specimens, using T-tests/Wilcoxon
analysis. P-values<0.05 were considered significant.
Results: When compared to the BI implant, the average HU was pronouncedly and
significantly increased around metallic implants in the lines with more close proximity
(Line 1), over the screw wall (Line 2) and inside the screw cannulation (Line 3), when
considering both the whole line extension inside the 3D cube as well as in a selected 8mm
line-segment across the calcaneal osteotomy line: Line 1 (entire, 7.26 vs -159; selected, -5
vs -249) Line 2 (entire, 4.846 vs 108; selected, 6286 vs 151.2); Line 3 (entire, 1664 vs
144; selected, -277.7 vs 198.7) selected). However, across Line 4 (away from the implant),
the HU dispersion was interestingly and significantly decreased around the metallic implant
(entire, -49 vs 178.5; selected, -110 vs 221), potentially as result of beam hardening
artifact, concentrating HU close to the metal, and shielding the surrounding cancellous bone
from being accurately reconstructed.
Conclusion: In this cadaveric imaging study, we compared Implant-related
artifact (IRA) around metallic and bio-integrative (BI) implants utilized to fix medial
displacement calcaneal osteotomies. We found metallic implants to demonstrate significantly
and pronouncedly increased HU dispersion in in close proximity with the implants and
significantly decreased dispersion more distantly from the implant, shielding the
surrounding cancellous bone, and potentially hindering the assessment of bone density
quality and bone/osteotomy/fusion healing in its neighborhood. BI implants represent an
alternative to decrease these IRA effects. Additional clinical studies are needed to confirm
and expand our findings.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00174

## Surgical Correction of Peritalar Subluxation and Patient Reported Outcomes: A
Prospective Comparative Outcome Study in Flexible Progressive Collapsing Foot
Deformity

Cesar de Cesar Netto, MD, PhD; Nacime S. Mansur, MD; Matthieu Lalevée; Francois Lintz,
MD MSc FEBOT; Kristian Buedts, MD; Andrew J. Goldberg, OBE MD FRCS (Tr&Orth); Jonathan
T. Deland, MD; John E. Femino, MD; Donald D. Anderson; Kevin N. Dibbern, PhD

Category: Ankle; Hindfoot; Other
Keywords: Flexible Flatfoot Deformity; Flatfoot AAFD Computed Tomography
Weightbearing CT; Outcomes Measures
Introduction/Purpose: Peritalar subluxation (PTS) of the hindfoot is a
critical finding in Progressive Collapsing Foot Deformity (PCFD). Subluxation of the middle
facet and sinus tarsi impingement have recently been shown to represent essential markers of
pronounced and potentially progressive deformity. Weightbearing CT (WBCT) imaging and
three-dimensional (3D) distance (DM) and coverage maps (CM) allow a complete and accurate
assessment of PTS markers across the entire peritalar surface. This prospective comparative
study aimed to assess the effectiveness of joint-sparing realignment surgical treatment for
flexible PCFD in reducing PTS and to correlate the improvement with patient-reported
outcomes (PROs). We hypothesized that surgical treatment would significantly improve PTS
markers, mainly decreasing sinus tarsi coverage/impingement and middle facet subluxation,
and that this improvement would correlate with increased PROs.
Methods: In this IRB-approved prospective and comparative study, we enrolled
patients with flexible PCFD, no prior surgeries, and failed conservative treatment. Included
patients (n=10, 7 females/3 males, mean age 57.2, range 37-74) underwent joint-sparing
surgical realignment procedure by a single surgeon. Standing weightbearing CT (WBCT) was
completed preoperatively and 3- months postoperatively. Following automatic bone
segmentation, 3D distance maps (DMs) of the entire peritalar surface were generated, and
coverage of the subtalar joint articular facets (anterior, middle, and posterior) and sinus
tarsi were assessed as markers of PTS. Joint coverage was defined as the percentage of
articular space where DMs were <5 mm. Coverage Maps (CM) were built highlighting areas of
adequate joint interaction (blue), joint subluxation (pink), and impingement (red). PROs
were evaluated preoperatively and at the latest follow-up. Differences between preop/postop
measurements and PROs were assessed by independent t-tests/Wilcoxon and bivariate analysis.
P-values <.05 were considered significant.
Results: The overall follow-up was 8.2 months (6-13 months). Medial
displacement calcaneal osteotomies, lateral column lengthening, and first ray realignment
procedures (either Cotton osteotomy or Lapidus) were performed in all patients. Foot and
Ankle Offset significantly improved from 10.6% preoperatively to 3.1% postoperatively
(p=0.0005), on average. Significant averaged improvement was also observed in anterior facet
joint coverage (61.6%), as well as a reduction in sinus tarsi coverage/impingement (-43.2%)
(both p<0.001). Middle (19.5%, p=0.08) and posterior facet joint coverage (3.5%, p=0.06)
also demonstrated improvements, however not significant. PROs improved significantly on
average postoperatively, with the European Foot and Ankle Surgery (EFAS) Score increasing
from 3.1 to 7.3 (p=0.02) and the Foot Function Index (FFI) improving from 71.5 to 48.7
(p=0.01). Improvements in EFAS scores and FFI significantly correlated with improvements in
middle facet coverage (R2 0.89, p=0.0154) and anterior facet coverage (R2 0.80, p=0.04),
respectively.
Conclusion: Our study was the first to evaluate WBCT 3D distance mapping’s
role in the assessment of surgical correction of PTS in patients with PCFD. We found
significant improvements in subtalar joint anterior facet coverage and sinus tarsi
impingement following surgical reconstruction, with a trend to significant improvements in
middle and posterior facet joint coverage. More importantly, improvements in middle and
anterior facet coverage correlated significantly with improved PROs (EFAS score and FFI,
respectively). Based on our study results, optimization of subtalar joint coverage and
reduction of PTS should be goals of surgical treatment of PCFD patients.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00175

## Three-Dimensional Coverage Maps in the Assessment of Chopart Subluxation in Progressive
Collapsing Foot Deformity

Cesar de Cesar Netto, MD, PhD; Andrew Behrens; Matthieu Lalevee, MD; Amanda Ehret;
Nacime S. Mansur, MD; Donald D. Anderson; John E. Femino, MD; Francois Lintz, MD MSc
FEBOT; Alessio Bernasconi, MD PhD FEBOT

Category: Basic Sciences/Biologics; Hindfoot; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Adult Acquired Flatfoot Deformity; Midfoot; Biomechanics of the Foot
and Ankle
Introduction/Purpose: Progressive collapsing foot deformity (PCFD), formerly
termed Adult-Acquired Flatfoot Deformity (AAFD), is a complex 3D deformity characterized by
peritalar subluxation (PTS) of the hindfoot through the triple joint complex. In this
context, adjacent structures may adopt different positions and boney relations can change,
producing areas increased contact or subluxation. The objective of this study was to use 3D
distance maps (DMs) and coverage maps (CMs) from weightbearing CT (WBCT) images to assess
subluxation across the Chopart joint in PCFD patients. We hypothesized that CMs would show
decreased coverage indicative of subluxation through certain regions of the Chopart joint in
PCFD patients when compared to the controls.
Methods: In this IRB-approved, retrospective case-control study, we analyzed
WBCT data of 18 consecutive patients with flexible PCFD and 10 controls. Using principle
component analysis, candidate coverage area was divided into nine regions on the talar head
and 4 regions on the calcaneal-cuboid (CC) articular surface. Novel 3D distance mapping (DM)
technique was used to objectively characterize joint coverage across the entire Chopart
joint surface on both the talus and calcaneus. Distance maps were measured in millimeters
and colored to highlight covered areas. Areas with distances less than 4mm were defined to
be covered, while areas with distances greater than 4mm were considered to be uncovered.
Joint coverage was defined as percentage of articular area with DMs lower than 4 mm.
Coverage Maps (CM) were created to highlight areas of coverage (teal) versus non- coverage
(pink). Comparisons were performed with independent t-tests, assuming unequal variances. P
values <.05 were considered significant.
Results: Changes in coverage percentages of PCFD cases relative to controls
are indicated in attached .
The middle lateral region of the talar head was found to have a 9% increase in coverage in
PCFD cases relative to the controls (p = 0.011). The plantar region of the calcaneal-cuboid
joint was found to have a 18% decrease in coverage compared to the controls. Except for the
dorsal medial regions, the medial side of the talar head saw overall decreases in coverage.
However, these values were not statistically significant.
On the calcaneus, the plantar region of the calcaneal-cuboid joint was found to have a
significant coverage decrease of 18% relative to the controls (p = 0.017). There was also a
decrease in coverage observed in the medial region of the calcaneal-cuboid joint and an
increase in the dorsal and lateral areas.
Conclusion: Our results support the occurrence of significant Chopart joint
changes in early flexible PCFD. Increased lateral and decreased medial/plantar talar head
coverage point to internal rotation and plantarflexion of the talus. Associated dorsal
migration of the cuboid where plantar and medial areas have decreased coverage indicate
subluxation through the entirety of the Chopart joint. Novel 3D coverage mapping enabled
objective quantification of subluxation though the Chopart joint in early stage PCFD. These
findings may assist clinical decision making regarding the restoration of normal joint
alignment during PCFD corrections. Further studies are needed to establish thresholds of
change associated with degeneration.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00176

## Three-Dimensional Distance and Coverage Maps in the Assessment of Peritalar Subluxation
in Progressive Collapsing Foot Deformity

Cesar de Cesar Netto, MD, PhD; Shuyuan Li, MD, PhD; Victoria Vivtcharenko, BS; Elijah
Auch; Francois Lintz, MD MSc FEBOT; Scott J. Ellis, MD; John E. Femino, MD; Kevin N.
Dibbern, PhD

Category: Ankle; Basic Sciences/Biologics; Hindfoot; Other
Keywords: Flatfoot; Flexible Flatfoot; Flatfoot AAFD Computed Tomography
Weightbearing CT
Introduction/Purpose: Progressive collapsing foot deformity (PCFD), formerly
termed Adult-Acquired Flatfoot Deformity (AAFD), is a complex 3-dimensional (3D) deformity
characterized by peritalar subluxation (PTS) of the hindfoot through the triple joint
complex. PTS severity is typically measured at the posterior facet of te subtalar joint, but
recent studies have called this into question and presented the middle facet as a more
accurate marker of deformity. The objective of this study was to use 3D distance mapping
(DM) from weightbearing computed tomography (WBCT) images to assess PTS in PCFD patients and
controls across the entire peritalar suface. We hypothesized that 3D DMs would identify the
middle facet as a superior marker for PTS, as well as indicate increased extra-articular
sinus tarsi and subfibular inpingements in PCFD patients.
Methods: In this case control study, we analyzed WBCT data of 20 consecutive
patients with flexible PCFD and 10 controls. Novel 3D distance mapping (DM) technique was
used to objectively characterize joint coverage across the entire peritalar surface,
including both articular (anterior, middle and posterior facets of the subtalar joint) and
nonarticular regions (sisus tarsi and subfibular areas). Distance maps were measured in
millimeters, and colored to highlight regions of interest. Distances from 1-4mm were shown
in blue to indicate expected joint interaction/extra-articular proximity, while distances
under 1mm were highlighted in yellow/red indicating close bone proximity consistent with
joint space narrowing (articular) or impingement (extra-articular). Joint coverage was
defined as percentage of articular area with DMs <4 mm. Coverage Maps (CM) were built
highlighting areas of adequate joint interaction (blue), joint subluxation (pink), and
impingement (red). Comparisons were performed with independent t-tests or Wilcoxon tests. P
values <.05 were considered significant.
Results: Overall, coverage was decreased in articular regions and impingement
was increased in nonarticular regions of PCFD patients. Objectively, a significant 46.6%
average increase in the uncoverage of the middle facet of the subtalar joint was observed in
PCFD patients (p<.001), consistent with signifcant middle facet subluxation when compared
to controls. No significant similar uncoverage was identified in the anterior or posterior
facets. Extra-articularly, an overall 98% increase in sinus tarsi coverage was identified in
PCFD patients (p<.007) with direct sinus tarsi impingement in 6 of 20 patients with PCFD,
and one of the controls. Direct subfibular impingement was noted in only 1 of 20 PCFD
patients, but subfibular space narrowing greater than 2 standard deviations was noted in 17
of 20 PCFD patients. Attached figures demonstrate examples of distance and coverage maps, as
well as a comparative averaged assessment of peritalar surface coverage in PCFD and
controls.
Conclusion: Our study results revealed that when compared to controls PCFD
patients demonstrated that a significant decrease in 3D measures of subtalar joint coverage
was only identified in the middle facet, but not at the anterior or posterior facets. We
also determined significantly decreased inter-bone distances in the sinus tarsi and
subfibular regions of PCFD patients, confirming the occurrence of extra-articular
impingement in those areas. We hope that the use of these 3D accurate and objective measures
of distance (DM) and coverage maps (CM) of middle facet subluxation will support early
detection of PCFD patients at high risk for progressive collapse.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00177

## Does BMI Effect Intermediate Outcomes of Open Brostrom-Gould Repair?

Aseel G. Dib, BS; Nicholas A. Andrews; Timothy Torrez; James Pate, BS; Kalah Ozimba;
Roshan Jacob; Whitt Harrelson; Sameer Naranje; Ashish Shah, MD

Category: Ankle; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Ankle Instability; Broström; Patient Reported Outcome Measures
(PROMS)
Introduction/Purpose: High BMI is a known risk factor for development of CAI
and intraarticular pathology, but few studies have examined BMI’s impact of the outcomes of
lateral ligament reconstruction. The open Brostrom-Gould reconstruction, an anatomic repair,
is the gold standard for repair of the lateral ligamentous complex. We aim to evaluation the
impact of BMI on patient reported outcomes after open Brostrom-Gould repair.
Methods: A total of 201 patients who underwent open Brostrom-Gould Repair were
identified using CPT code. Patients undergoing repair for acute ligamentous injury were
excluded. A completed telephonic survey was required for inclusion yielding 92 patients. The
telephone survey included: PROMIS Physical Function (PF), Pain Interference (PI), and
Depression domains(D) and the Foot and Ankle Ability Measure (FAAM). Medical records were
examined for patient characteristics, operative variables, and complications. Patients were
grouped by BMI <30 and BMI >30.
Results: A total of 28 males (30%) and 61 females (69%) were including in this
study. The average time at completion of survey was 4.1 years (standard deviation of 2.8).
The median age was 44 with an interquartile range (IQR) of 20, while the median BMI was 31.5
with an IQR of 13.4. Obese patients had significantly worse PROMIS PF (Median 44.5 IQR 7.4
vs median 48 IQR 16.5) and FAAM Activity of Daily Living subscale scores (Median 61.6 IQR
30.0 vs. median 82.7 IQR.36). Patients’ FAAM self-reported overall level of function was
significantly lower in obese patients (Median 70.0 IQR 20.0 vs median 85 IQR 29). The BMI
groups did not vary by other PROMIS domains or FAAM subscales.
Conclusion: At intermediate term follow-up, Obese patients report
significantly worse physical function after open Bostrom- Gould repair compared to non-obese
patients. Surgeons should be aware of this when prognosticating the outcomes of anatomic
ankle reconstruction.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00178

## Reduction Quality of Open vs Percutaneous Techniques for the Posterior
Malleolus

David Distefano; Steven Karnyski, MD; Benjamin Kuhns; John P. Ketz, MD; Matthew Barra;
Brittany Haws

Category: Ankle; Trauma
Keywords: Weber B Ankle Fractures; Weber C Ankle Fracture; Operative
Approach
Introduction/Purpose: Ankle fractures with posterior malleolar involvement are
common. Fixation of the posterior malleolus (PM) in these injuries remains controversial
& currently, there is no evidence to guide operative decision making for the PM. This
study compares radiographic & clinical outcomes between percutaneous & open fixation
techniques of the PM.
Methods: All ankle fractures between 01/2010 & 01/2018 with surgical
stabilization of the PM were reviewed from a level 1 trauma center. High-energy (i.e.
pilon), open & pathologic fractures were excluded. Orthopaedic Trauma Association
(AO/OTA) fracture pattern, PM articular surface comminution, incarcerated fragments &
loose bodies were recorded based on pre-operative CT scans. Patients were either treated
with direct reduction (DR) or percutaneous reduction (PR). Intra-operative & serial
post- operative radiographs were used to measure PM articular reduction & graded as
satisfactory (<2mm articular step-off) or poor (>2mm articular step-off). Medical
records were reviewed for fixation technique & complications. Patient-reported outcomes
measurement information system (PROMIS) scores were used to compare clinical outcomes.
Univariate methods including x2, Fischer exact test, One-way ANOVA were used & a
multivariate nominal logistic regression model was constructed to evaluate predictors of a
satisfactory reduction.
Results: A total of 120 patients (ages 19-84) were included. DR through an
open approach was performed in 91 patients & PR in 29. The DR cohort had a higher rate
of satisfactory reduction (92.3% vs 75.9%, p=0.04). Articular comminution was identified in
65 (50.4%) & this morphology had a higher rate of satisfactory reduction with ORIF (94%
vs 66.6%, p=0.04). There was no difference in reduction quality for non-comminuted fractures
treated open or percutaneously (90.2% vs 83.3%, p=0.64). Incarcerated fragments or loose
bodies were identified in 58 (48.3%) of fractures. There was a trend for improved reduction
quality in the DR group for this morphology (p=0.08). Multivariate analysis identified that
open approach is associated with a satisfactory reduction (p=0.02). No difference in
complication rate between groups or PROMIS scores (p>0.05) for 64 patients with average
final follow up of 19 months (range 6-60 months) were found.
Conclusion: This study demonstrates that DR of the PM via an open approach in
low energy ankle fractures leads to improved radiographic outcomes compared to percutaneous
techniques without a difference in complication rate. This study also highlights the utility
of a pre-operative CT scan to better assess the morphology of the posterior malleolus as
articular comminution, interposed fragments or loose bodies were common findings that are
difficult to assess on plain radiographs & may alter surgical plan if present. However,
no difference in PROMIS scores were seen between direct and percutaneous reduction
techiniques.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00179

## Flexor Digitorum Longus Transfer for Posterior Tibial Tendon Dysfunction is the
Standard of Care: Does the Evidence Support It?

Sean W. Dooley; Thomas Evashwick-Rogler; Christopher D. Murawski, MD; Gregory P.
Guyton, MD; Niall A. Smyth, MD

Category: Basic Sciences/Biologics; Hindfoot; Other
Keywords: Posterior Tibial Tendon Dysfunction; Flexible Flatfoot Deformity;
AAFD
Introduction/Purpose: Flexor digitorum longus (FDL) transfer, in conjunction
with osseous procedures, is used routinely for the treatment of posterior tibial tendon
dysfunction (PTTD). It is well established however that the relative power of the FDL tendon
is significantly inferior than that of the native posterior tibial tendon. The purpose of
this study is to systematically evaluate the evidence that supports or refutes the use of an
FDL transfer in the surgical treatment of PTTD.
Methods: A systematic review was performed according to the Preferred
Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta- Analysis. Using the terms ‘flexor digitorum
longus OR FDL AND posterior tibial tendon dysfunction OR PTTD OR adult acquired flatfoot OR
AAFD’ we searched the PubMed/Medline database. Both clinical and biomechanical studies were
eligible for inclusion.
Results: Forty-one studies met the inclusion criteria, including 31 clinical
studies and 10 biomechanical in vitro studies. All 31 clinical studies consisted of Level IV
evidence, and support the use of an FDL transfer. There was significant heterogeneity of the
clinical evidence due to the variety of concomitant procedures. Of the 10 biomechanical in
vitro studies, 2 support the use of an FDL transfer, although these did not assess the
procedure in isolation. 8 biomechanical in vitro studies specifically assessing the effect
on of an FDL transfer contradict its use for PTTD.
Conclusion: There is poor quality clinical evidence to support the use of an
FDL transfer for PTTD and the biomechanical literature refutes the use of the procedure. It
remains unknown if the clinical improvement reported in the literature can be attributed to
the FDL transfer or the concomitant osseous procedures. Additional studies are needed to
assess the validity of the FDL transfer and whether alternatives are available to preserve
the PTT muscle.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00180

## Percutaneous Fixation of Metatarsals Fractures with Kirchner’s Wire, Comparison of
Antegrade and Retrograde Technique

Sebastian R. Drago, MD; Patricio Alfonso Zagal Alvarado, MD; Jaime Ugarte; Vicente
Phillips; Martin Contreras, MD; Gonzalo F. Bastias, MD

Category: Trauma; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Metatarsals; Fractures; K-Wire
Introduction/Purpose: The antegrade intramedullary nailing technique with
Kirchner’s wire (K-wire) (EAK) for the management of metatarsal fractures (MTT) is recent
and with few reports. Our objective was to evaluate and compare the clinical results among
patients operated on in our center for MTT fractures using the EAK technique versus the
traditional retrograde technique (ERK).
Methods: Retrospective, analytical study. We reviewed the cases of patients
with a diagnosis of MTT fracture and surgical indication operated with EAK or ERK between
February 2010 and January 2016. First and fifth metatarsal fractures were excluded from the
analysis, as well as patients in which a fixation method other than K-wire was used.
Demographic data, clinical and radiological results were recorded. A total of 34 patients
(34 feet, 70 metatarsals) were analyzed and were divided into two groups: Group 1, operated
with EAK (15 feet, 22 metatarsals), and Group 2, operated with ERK (19 feet, 48
metatarsals). Statistical analysis was carried out with Fisher’s exact test and Mann-Whitney
U test for non-parametric variables, with fixed statistical significance at p <0.05.
Results: The median age was 37 years [IQR = 51-25.25], p = 0.128. Both groups
presented similar soft tissue involvement (p = 1,000), similar associated injury rate (20.0%
vs 42.1%, p = 0.271), and similar proportions of diaphyseal and neck fractures (p = 0.659
and p = 0.733 respectively). The group operated with the EAK technique presented a lower
report of metatarsalgia (6.7% (1) vs 47.3% (9), p = 0.020), shorter rest time since injury
(94 days [IQR = 129-82] vs 144 days [IQR = 210-122], p = 0.002) and shorter time to full
load (7 weeks [IQR = 9-6] vs 10 weeks [IQR 12.5-8.5], p = 0.002). EAK and ERK did not show
differences in criteria for poor reduction (p = 1.00), number of re-interventions (p =
0.560), infections (p = 0.492), or metatarsophalangeal stiffness (p = 0.451).
Conclusion: Metatarsal fracture fixation with EAK presented a lower rate of
metatarsalgia and shorter rest time compared to ERK, demonstrating similarity in terms of
quality of reduction and complication rate.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00181

## Recovery Position vs Prone Position in the Surgical Treatment of Trimalleolar Ankle
Fractures Using Posterolateral and Medial Approach

Sebastian R. Drago, MD; Patricio Alfonso Zagal Alvarado, MD; Martin Contreras, MD;
Marcelo F. Concha; Juan Pedro Bergeret, MD; Gonzalo F. Bastias, MD

Category: Trauma
Keywords: Fractures; Ankle Fracture; Posterior Malleolus Fracture
Introduction/Purpose: Posterolateral (PL) and medial approaches have been
increasingly used for open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) of trimalleolar ankle
fractures. Traditionally this procedure is performed on the prone position. Nevertheless,
this position itself has been related to general complications as brachial plexus injury and
postoperative visual loss. Moreover, the prone position can provide difficult access for
medial malleolar reduction. Recovery position was recently described as an alternative but
its results have not been evaluated yet. This study aimed to compare the results using
recovery position (RP) versus prone position in the surgical treatment of trimalleolar
fractures.
Methods: A retrospective analytic study was conducted in a Level 1 trauma
center, analyzing patients who underwent ORIF for trimalleolar ankle fractures using
posterolateral and medial approaches over 3 years. 58 ankles were divided according to the
position used in the surgical fixation: Group 1 positioned in RP (27 ankles), and group 2
positioned in prone (31 ankles). Demographics, surgical time, hospital stay, quality of
reduction, surgical site complications and re- interventions were compared between both
groups. Statistical analysis was performed with Shapiro-Wilks test to assess normality in
distribution, Chi-square test, and t-student test for group differences in parametric
variables as Fisher’s exact test and Mann-Whitney U test in non- parametric variables with a
p-value set at 0.05.
Results: Median age was 47 years old (IQR 40-58). Both groups were similar
regarding age (p=0.794), gender (p=0.902), and posterior malleolus Haraguchi (p=0.064) and
Bartonicek-Rammelt (p=0.055) classifications. Surgical median time was 115 (IQR 100-130) and
100 (IQR 75-129) minutes for RP and prone groups respectively (p=0,085), Both groups showed
similar rates of lateral, posterior and medial malleolus insufficient reduction (Table
attached). Median hospital stay was 4 (IQR 2-9 and 2-7 for RP and prone respectively) days
for both (p=0,86) (Table attached). Surgical site complications and re-interventions were
similar between both groups (p=0.349 and p=1.0 respectively).
Conclusion: The RP showed similar results than the prone position while
providing an accessible simultaneous approach to the posterolateral and medial regions of
the ankle.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00182

## Patient Reported and Functional Outcomes for Revision Lateral Ankle Ligament
Reconstruction

Theodora C. Dworak, MD; Bruce E. Cohen, MD; W. Hodges Davis, MD; J. Kent Ellington,
MD, MS; Carroll P. Jones, III, MD; Scott B. Shawen, MD; Todd A. Irwin, MD

Category: Sports; Ankle
Keywords: Ankle Instability; Broström; PRO
Introduction/Purpose: Despite multiple surgical treatment options for revision
lateral ankle ligament reconstruction surgery, few studies describe the functional or
patient reported outcomes. The purpose of this study is to describe the patient reported and
functional outcomes for patient who required revision lateral ankle ligament
reconstruction.
Methods: We present follow-up of 26 patients who underwent revision lateral
ankle ligament reconstruction between January 2010 and December 2019 at a single
institution. Clinical notes and operative reports were reviewed to determine surgical
techniques. Patient reported outcomes were completed using the Foot and Ankle Outcome Score
(FAOS), Visual Analog Scale Pain, Visual Analog Scale for Ankle Instability, and Visual
Analog Scale for Satisfaction. Functional outcome was evaluated with the hop test. Ankle
stability was evaluated on physical exam with anterior drawer and inversion stress test.
Results: Initial ligament reconstruction consisted of Brostrom (n=15),
Brostrom Evans (n=3), Allograft (n=2) and Unknown (n=6). Revision lateral ligament
reconstruction consisted of Brostrom (n=15), Brostrom Evans (n=2) and Allograft (n=9).
Median follow up time after revision was 22 months. At last follow up, 20 patients (76.9%)
had grade 0 inversion stress and anterior drawer test indicating stability. Median FAOS ADL
sub score was 97 and median FAOS Symptom sub score was 79. Median VAS Pain was 3, median VAS
Instability was 3 and median VAS satisfaction was 9.5. The single-leg hop test (Limb
Symmetry Index %) was completed by 18 patients, with median score of 86.4% compared to their
non-operative extremity. Six patients had persistent pain, three of which required
additional surgery.
Conclusion: The high majority of patients that require revision lateral ankle
ligament reconstruction maintain a stable ankle on exam and are satisfied with their
surgical results. Functional outcomes are similar but not symmetrical to their non-operative
extremity.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00183

## Patient Reported Outcome Measures (PROMIS) of Primary Total Ankle Arthroplasty in
Patients Under 50 Years of Age

Pierce Ebaugh, DO; Travis H. Alford; Elizabeth Davis, MD; Kamen J. Kutzarov, MD;
Michael C. Greaser, MD; William C. McGarvey, MD

Category: Ankle; Ankle Arthritis
Keywords: Total Ankle Arthroplasty; Patient Reported Outcome Measures (PROMS);
Ankle Arthritis
Introduction/Purpose: Compared to more prevalent arthritic conditions, ankle
arthritis is complicated by an earlier age of onset. With advancements in 4th generation
primary and revision componentry, total ankle arthroplasty (TAA) is considered an option for
end-stage ankle arthritis in younger patients aligning with paradigm shifts in knee
arthroplasty. Recently published data demonstrates excellent survivorship and complication
rates in short/mid-term follow-up of younger patients who received a primary TAA.
Additionally, older TAA patients display comparable PROMIS relative to hip/knee
arthroplasty. However, there remains a paucity of literature surrounding the PROMIS of
younger patients undergoing TAA. Thus, our aim was to assess PROMIS of individuals less than
50 years of age receiving a primary total ankle arthroplasty
Methods: A retrospective cohort analysis of adult patients < 50 years who
received a primary total ankle replacement at a single academic institution between 2003 and
2019 was conducted. Patient demographics, diagnosis, treatment, and outcome characteristics
were recorded from a chart review of 41 patients with at least one year of post-surgical
follow-up (Table 1). Post- operative PROMIS scores were obtained via telephone interviews.
Primary outcomes that were measured included emotional and physical health, activity
limitation, ambulation, and global health. SF-36, PROMIS Global Health, and Sickness Impact
Profile Ambulation were used. Functional outcomes in our study sample were compared with age
and gender-matched norms from a general US population, and 95% confidence intervals were
calculated for each functional outcome mean. Student t-test was used for continuous
variables, and chi-square analysis was used for categorical variables.
Results: Thirty-one of 41 eligible patients were interviewed. The average age
at surgery was 40 years old. Clinical and radiographic follow-up was a mean of 59.7 months
and 31.2 months following TAA, respectively. General health as measured with the SF-36 was
not significantly different from age/gender-matched norms. Eighty-seven percent of patients
would choose to have a TAR again. While 58% reported being limited in vigorous activities,
61% were able to ambulate frequently for long periods of time. On average the patients did
not report ongoing pain, and only 16% reported fatigue that hindered activities. Eighty-one
percent reported returning to full employment and performing their duties without
difficulty, and 84% reported they resumed all normal social activities. Primary implant
survivorship was 88%.
Conclusion: Despite a younger age and potentially increased demands, patients
younger than 50 years of age undergoing primary total ankle arthroplasty are generally very
satisfied with their index procedure at a mean follow-up of nearly 5 years. Our findings of
positive outcomes on their health and well-being may improve surgeon insight for TAA as a
preferred treatment for younger individuals with end-stage ankle arthritis.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00184

## Retrospective Study Analyzing Risk Factors of Foot and Ankle Amputation in Patients
with Diabetes Diagnosed with Osteomyelitis

Tsola Efejuku; Shivan N. Chokshi; Daniel Jupiter, PhD; Jie Chen, MD, MPH; Vinod K.
Panchbhavi, MD, FACS

Category: Ankle; Diabetes; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Ankle; Diabetes; Diabetic Foot
Introduction/Purpose: Osteomyelitis is an invasive infection of the bone that
commonly afflicts patients with diabetes mellitus. This bacterial infection can lead to the
need for amputation of portions of the foot or ankle. While the association between
Osteomyelitis and amputation has been studied, little is known about additional underlying
health conditions that can predispose diabetic patients to an increased risk of amputation.
Understanding these relationships will be useful in early screening to prevent severe
effects associated with the loss of the foot or ankle. Thus, a retrospective analysis was
performed using EMR data to evaluate the effect of prior Peripheral Vascular Disease (PVD)
or Neuropathy on amputations in Type 2 DM patients with Osteomyelitis.
Methods: Patients with Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus and Osteomyelitis who had a
foot or ankle amputation within 12 weeks of diagnosis, compared to those who also had PVD or
neuropathy were identified. This was done in the EMR database using ICD 10 codes for
Osteomyelitis (M86), Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus diagnosis (E11), Foot or Ankle amputations
(1005524, 1005529, 28810, 1005525, 28805, 1800300006, 371186005, 180040009, 726651003,
723726002, 723731000, 180038004, 78785006, 28800, 180157006, 723312009, 773821000,
773819005, 397218006), Peripheral Vascular Diseases (I73), and Neuropathy (G62). We then
stratified these patients by age (18-29, 30-39, 40-49, 50-59, 60-69,70-79, 80-89), gender
(male, female), and year by decade (2001, 2010, and 2020).
Results: Our search identified 125,741 patients with T2DM and Osteomyelitis,
of whom 10,850 had a foot or ankle amputation within 3 months of diagnosis. 28,242 patients
with T2DM, Osteomyelitis, and prior PVD were identified. These patients were found to be 2.6
times more likely to receive a foot or ankle amputation. 12,860 patients with prior
Neuropathy were identified.. These patients were found to have 1.36 times more likely to
receive a foot or ankle amputation. When stratified by gender, Women were found to be at
greater risk of Amputation than Men, for both prior PVD and Neuropathy (2.9 vs 2.47 times
greater risk, respectively). Age stratification revealed patients aged 50-59 have the
highest risk for a foot or ankle amputation (10% higher risk). This was more than triple the
risk seen in patients aged 18-29. The above differences were found to be statistically
significant at a p-value of <.0001.
Conclusion: This analysis provides insight into the pre-disposing risk factors
of Foot and Ankle amputations in patients who have Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus and
Osteomyelitis. Of the two risk factors analyzed, Peripheral Vascular Disease was associated
with the highest risk of amputation. Overall, females and patients aged 50-59 are at the
highest risk of amputation with underlying PVD. As comorbidities become more frequent and
the number of foot or ankle amputations continues to rise since 2001, more research on
associated risk factors will be necessary to more effectively screen these patients.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00185

## Cyclic Fatigue and Creep Resistance Testing of the PUMA SystemTM

J. Kent Ellington, MD, MS; Kathy Stecco

Category: Ankle; Basic Sciences/Biologics; Trauma
Keywords: Syndesmosis; Biomechanics; Biomechanics of the Foot and Ankle
Introduction/Purpose: The PUMA System (Panther Orthopedics, Sunnyvale, CA) is
an FDA cleared. superelastic, nitinol based fixation device for the ankle syndesmosis which
provides stabilization without over-compression or loosening due to creep from cyclic
loading. Objective The objective of this study was to test resistance to lengthening (creep)
of the PUMA System in cyclic fatigue testing.
Methods: Five PUMA System devices, each having a nitinol Body consisting of
six layers, were cycle-tested between 20/40 pounds per cubic foot (lb/ft3)
polyurethane foam Bone Blocks ( ).[1] The PUMA System devices were set up with an initial device Active Length of
approximately 66 millimeters (mm) between their polyether ether ketone (PEEK) Anchor
buttons. All devices were tightened to a minimum of 11.1 Newtons (2.5 pounds force) and
cycled at 5 cycles per second (5 Hz) for 4500 cycles to 2.4 mm displacement. Device Active
Length was recorded pre- and post-testing. Devices were visually inspected for any break in
the 30 nitinol layers. [1] ASTM F1839: Standard Specification for Rigid Polyurethane Foam
for Use as a Standard Material for Testing Orthopedic Devices and Instruments.
Results: None of the 30 layers incorporated in the 5 PUMA SystemTM
device Bodies failed due to cyclic fatigue. Also, there was little-to-no difference between
pre- and post-testing Active Length ( ). More specifically an average increase of only 0.2% in length with a
with a Standard Deviation of 0.16% evidences no significant creep (Table 1).
 Conclusion: The PUMA SystemTM allows for ankle syndesmosis repair
with an implant that experiences no significant creep as demonstrated in cyclic-fatigue
testing under challenging displacement cycle testing.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00186

## Effectiveness of a Superelastic Nitinol Device for Fixation of Syndesmosis in Ankle
Fracture

J. Kent Ellington, MD, MS; Kenneth J. Hunt, MD

Category: Ankle; Trauma
Keywords: Syndesmosis; Ankle Fracture; Trauma
Introduction/Purpose: Syndesmosis injuries are increasingly common. Available
fixation options are not yet optimal. The PUMA System (Panther Orthopedics, Sunnyvale, CA)
is an FDA-cleared superelastic, nitinol-based fixation device for the ankle syndesmosis
which provides stabilization without over-compression or loosening during cyclical loading.
The spring-like design of the PUMA System allows physiological micro-motion while
maintaining continuous compression and resisting syndesmosis widening, without material
creep. The objective of this prospective study is to assess the effectiveness and
complication rate of the PUMA device for treatment of fracture-associated syndesmosis
injuries.
Methods: We prospectively collected radiographic and clinical data on 32
consecutive patients treated for fracture-associated syndesmotic disruption with the PUMA
SystemTM at 8 centers. Primary outcome measures included adverse event rates,
radiographic evaluations for syndesmosis integrity and implant failure, and rates of
revision surgery.
Results: All 32 patients had successful repair of their ankle syndesmosis
( ). The mean age of
patients at time of operation was 42 years (range 16- 68). There were 13 females (13/32,
40.6%) and 19 (19/32, 59.4%) males. Postoperative radiographic evaluations confirmed
satisfactory syndesmosis healing with maintained reduction in the ankle mortise in 33/33
(100%) ankles. There was no evidence of lysis, device migration or syndesmotic or medial
clear space widening. There were no infections or soft tissue complications. All fractures
healed. No devices required removal and there were no revision surgeries.
Conclusion: The PUMA SystemTM provides physiologic stabilization of
the syndesmosis due to the design features that allow for continuous compression without
creep. We found no device-related complications nor construct failures in our series. The
superelastic implant design allows physiologic motion at the syndesmosis but does not creep
or stretch following displacement. This flexibility obviates the need for routine removal.
The implant’s low-profile buttons without suture and knot tying requirements eliminate the
concern for subcutaneous knot irritation and slippage. Additional biomechanical and clinical
outcomes study of this device may further optimize rehabilitation protocols for patients
treated for syndesmotic injury.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00187

## The Routine Use and Cost Analysis of Acid-Fast Bacilli and Fungal Cultures in Foot and
Ankle Surgery: A Retrospective Study

Zein S. El-Zein, MD; Scott Diamond; Margaret Bohr; Erin A. Baker, PhD; Mackenzie M.
Fleischer; Corinn Gehrke, MS; Paul T. Fortin, MD; Zachary M. Vaupel, MD

Category: Other; Diabetes
Keywords: Foot and Ankle Infection; Cost Effectiveness; Microbiology
Introduction/Purpose: Infections pertaining to orthopaedic surgery play a
major role in patient morbidity and increased healthcare-associated expenses. In the setting
of foot and ankle surgery for infection, it is common practice to send acid-fast bacilli
(AFB) and fungal intraoperative cultures, although there is no standard protocol in place.
In this study, the rate of positive AFB and fungal cultures and associated costs in a
consecutive series of foot and ankle surgeries was retrospectively assessed.
Methods: Under an IRB-approved protocol, CPT codes were used to identify 447
procedures in 320 patients, who underwent foot and ankle surgery for infection by
fellowship-trained foot and ankle orthopaedic surgeons at a Level 1, private, academic
hospital from 2014 to 2019. A medical records review was performed to collect microbiology
and patient demographic data. Materials and labor cost data, which was provided by the
institution, was used to quantify a total culture cost.
Results: In this series, there were 185 male and 135 female patients with an
average age of 57 years (range, 10-105) and average BMI of 31 kg/m2 (range,
13-56). No patients had positive AFB cultures and 20 patients (7.5%) had positive fungal
cultures. There were 434 AFB and 525 fungal cultures performed during these procedures.
Based on total cultures performed, there were 0% (0/434) AFB and 5% (26/525) fungal culture
positivity rates. The total intra-institutional cost (i.e. labor and materials) for AFB
cultures was $23,967. The total labor/materials cost for negative and positive fungal
cultures was $12,428 and $2,371, respectively. The total labor/materials cost for all the
cultures obtained over the time frame of our study was $38,767.
Conclusion: This study highlighted low rates of positive AFB and fungal
cultures in the orthopaedic foot and ankle surgery service in a 6-year retrospective review,
as well as substantial institutional costs of routine use of intraoperative cultures. While
this series included cases from three fellowship-trained foot and ankle orthopaedic
surgeons, this study will be expanded to analyze AFB and fungal culturing practices and cost
in other orthopaedic subspecialties. Creating and implementing a standardized protocol may
achieve cost effectiveness of cultures without diminishing patient outcomes.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00188

## Sesamoidectomy Utilizing a Medial Approach with a Bur: Patient Outcomes and Early
Complications

William M. Engasser, MD; J. Chris Coetzee, MD; Jeffrey D. Seybold, MD; Bryan D. Den
Hartog, MD; Patrick B. Ebeling, MD; Fernando C. Raduan, MD; Kayla Seiffert

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot; Sports
Keywords: Sesamoid; Sesamoid Excision; 1st MTP Joint
Introduction/Purpose: Patients with pathology of the sesamoids can have
significant pain and disability both with activities of daily living and high impact
athletic movements. Sesamoidectomy is a widely used procedure for patients who fail
conservative treatment measures. Traditional dorsal or plantar approaches for sesamoidectomy
have shown to successfully alleviate pain but complications are noted, including hallux
varus deformity, painful plantar incision, and clawing of the hallux. Additionally, the
dorsal approach is technically difficult because of poor visualization, which can lead to
unnecessary disruption of important plantar ligamentous structures. An alternative medial
approach using a bur provides many advantages compared to traditional approaches.
Methods: This was a retrospective chart review of patients undergoing
sesamoidectomy using a bur with a medial approach to the sesamoid metatarsal articulation.
Data collected included patient demographics, radiographic analysis, and outcomes: Veterans
Rand 12 Item Health Survey (VR-12), Foot and Ankle Ability Measure (FAAM), Visual Analog
Scale (VAS), patient satisfaction, and complications.
Results: In patients (10 feet) with an average age of 36.5 (range, 13-77)
years were analyzed. Six patients underwent medial sesamoidectomy, three underwent lateral
sesamoidectomy, and one patient underwent excision of both medial and lateral sesamoids
using a bur. The average latest follow up was 11.9 months. Scores were improved from
pre-operatively to most recent follow-up for VR-12 Physical (29.43 vs 53.86), FAAM ADL (48.8
vs 94.1 points), FAAM Sports (7.8 vs 87.4 points), and VAS (57.8 vs 8.6). Patient
satisfaction with the treatment was 96.4%. There were zero complications or additional
procedures performed.
Conclusion: In this series, sesamoidectomy utilizing a medial approach with a
bur provided excellent pain relief, zero complications, and significantly improved outcome
scores at early follow up. The medial approach is familiar to orthopedic foot and ankle
surgeons, provides adequate exposure, and eliminates the possibility of a painful plantar
incision. Furthermore, this technique allows for maintenance of the plantar plate, flexor
hallucis brevis (FHB) tendon, and all other ligamentous structures that attach to the
sesamoids. Larger studies with longer term follow up are needed to further our knowledge on
this surgical technique.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00189

## Acute Achilles Tendon Rupture, A More Cost-Effective Surgical Technique Option:
Dresden-Calcaneal Tunnel

Gonzalo Enríquez, MD; Mario I. Escudero, MD; Manuel J. Pellegrini, MD; Alfredo
Nuñez

Category: Sports; Ankle
Keywords: Achilles Tendon Rupture; Achilles Tendon Repair; Minimally
Invasive
Introduction/Purpose: Surgical treatment remains the standard of care for
active patients with acute midsubstance Achilles tendon ruptures. Clinical decisions must be
made, often under circumstances of limited resources. The objective of our study was to
describe a reduced cost minimally invasive surgical technique. The use of suture anchor
increases the tensile strength of the repair, allowing to prevent tendon lengthening and
re-ruptures during early rehabilitation, but these present a high cost and are not exempt
from complications such as pullout, local irritation and bone edema. A simple and low-cost
alternative that allows us to replace the function of the anchors is to drill a bone tunnel
in the calcaneus and pass a high-resistance suture through it.
Methods: After obtaining IRB approval, a retrospective review of 12 patients
with acute Achilles tendon rupture treated with the modified Dresden-Calcaneal Tunnel
technique, between January 2019 and August 2020 and followed up for 6 months. Clinical
outcome was assessed using the AOFAS, FAOS and SF-36 scores. Complications, and time to
return to work and light sport activity were assessed.
Results: The AOFAS score was 94 +/- 5, FAOS 95% +/- 2 and SF-36 92 +/- 4 at 6
months postoperatively. The recovery time of the patients was 10-18 weeks. The postoperative
recovery time to exercise was 16-24 weeks. There was only 2 cases with discomfort in
relation to the suture knot near to the calcaneal tunnel, but both case refers spontaneous
relief at the second month postoperative.
Conclusion: This new and minimally invasive technique could be a more
cost-effective option in the management of acute Achilles tendon rupture with good
functional outcomes. These strategy presents a low occurrence of complications, permit a
strong fixation, avoid sural nerve entrapment and respect the biologic environment.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00190

## Extended Chevron Osteotomy in the Management of Mild-Severe Hallux Valgus: Clinical
Results in a Long-Term Follow-Up

Abraham Espinosa-Uribe, MD; Jaime I. Ortiz Garza, MD; Jorge Luis R. Terán; Fernando
Alfredo F. Garza; Eduardo R. Carranza-Cantú, MD; Jorge A. Gutierrez, MD, MA

Category: Bunion
Keywords: Osteotomies; Bunion; Hallux Valgus
Introduction/Purpose: Hallux Valgus (HV) is a forefoot complex deformity. More
than 200 surgical techniques for its treatment have been described, Chevron Osteotomy and
its modifications represent a widely accepted highly reproducible option in the HV
treatment. Since described in 1991 the Extended Chevron Osteotomy (ECO) represents a distal
osteotomy with a plantar diaphyseal extension. Biomechanically the advantages it offers are
even greater stability, early consolidation by increasing the contact surface and correcting
the facet with a minimum shortening. It also offers lower morbidity and a lower rate of
complications. However, there is controversy regarding long-term follow-up for most of these
procedures. This study aims to demonstrate ECO for the correction of moderate to severe HV
in a long-term follow-up.
Methods: We reviewed 25 feet (20 patients) with moderate to severe HV in which
the Intermetatarsal Angle (IMA) greater than 16⁰. The mean age was 64 years and the patients
were followed by a mean of 30 (14 to 59) months. Additionally, 8 patients (N=12 feet) were
followed with a mean of 68 (50 to 86) months. The following scales were applied before and
after surgery: the functional scale of the American Orthopaedic Foot & Ankle Society
(AOFAS) for the forefoot and the Visual Analog Scale (VAS). In the same way, the
radiographic measurements corresponding to HV were made pre and postoperative. This research
study was approved by our institution and hospital research ethics committee. Additionally,
all the patients were reviewed under the Mexican law NOM-004-SSA3-2012 regarding Clinical
file and privacy rights.
Results: In the AOFAS for forefoot and VAS scales an improvement of 51.28
(CI95% 46.34 to 56.21) -6.08 (CI 95%-6.65 to -5.50) points, respectively. Regarding the
angular values, the correction was -9.08⁰ (CI 95% -10.29 to -7.86) for the IMA. There was
one foot with post-surgical infection (4%) and two feet (8%) with transfer metatarsalgia.
Additionally, we documented a mean AOFAS forefoot score of 90.16 (+- 5.27) and a mean of 0.8
(+- 0.4) VAS scale during a second follow-up period of 68 months (range from 50 to 86
months) in 8 patients (N=12 feet). Statistically significant differences (p <0.05) were
documented by the means of these long-term follow-up periods in the AOFAS score and VAS
scale regarding the pre-surgical scores.
Conclusion: According to the results obtained, we consider that the ECO
technique for the treatment of moderate to severe HV provides significant functional
improvement and angular correction (p <0.05) and good clinical outcomes on both long-term
follow-up periods. ECO technique represents a highly reproducible option when performing HV
correction.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00191

## Correction of Ankle Varus Deformity using Patient Specific Dome Shaped Osteotomy Guides
Designed on Weight Bearing CT

Sebastian Faict; Arne Burssens; Kristian Buedts, MD

Category: Ankle Arthritis; Hindfoot
Keywords: Ankle Arthritis; Varus Deformity; Osteotomies
Introduction/Purpose: Dome shaped supramalleolar osteotomies are a
well-established treatment option for correcting ankle deformity. However, the procedure
remains technically demanding and is limited by a two-dimensional (2-D) radiographic
planning of a three-dimensional (3-D) deformity. Therefore, we implemented a weight-bearing
CT-scan (WBCT) to plan a 3-D deformity correction using patient specific guides.
Methods: A 3-D guided dome shaped supramalleolar osteotomy was performed to
correct ankle varus deformity in a cohort of 5 patients with a mean age of 53,8 years
(range: 47-58). WBCT images were obtained to generate 3-D models, which enabled a deformity
correction using patient specific guides. These technical steps are outlined and associated
with a retrospective analysis of the clinical outcome using the EFAS score, Foot and Ankle
Outcome Score (FAOS) and Visual Analog Pain scale (VAS). Radiographic assessment was
performed using the tibial anterior surface angle (TAS), tibiotalar angle (TTS), talar-tilt
angle (TTA), hindfoot angle (HA), tibial lateral surface angle (TLS) and tibial rotation
angle (TRA).
Results: The mean follow-up was 40,8 months (range 8-65) and all patients
showed improvements in the EFAS score, FAOS and VAS (p < 0.05). A 3-month postoperative
WBCT confirmed healing of the osteotomy site and radiographic improvement of the TAS, TTS
and HA (p<0.05), but the TTA and TRA did not change significantly (p>0.05).
Conclusion: Dome shaped supramalleolar osteotomies using 3-D printed guides
designed on WBCT, are a valuable option in correcting ankle varus deformity and mitigates
the technical drawbacks of free-hand osteotomies.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00192

## Retrospective Chart Review: Weight Bearing CT Scans and the Measurement of the Lisfranc
Ligamentous Complex

Spencer Falcon, MD; Thomas J. McCormack; Matthew Mackay, MD; Armin Tarakemeh, BA;
Scott Mullen, MD; Paul Schroeppel, MD; Megan R. Wolf, MD; Bryan G. Vopat, MD

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Lisfranc Ligament; Weight Bearing CT; Lisfranc Ligament Injuries
Introduction/Purpose: Lisfranc Ligamentous Complex injuries are commonly
misdiagnosed due to their unreliable projection on plain films. Many studies have striven to
establish baseline measurements of the frequently injured articulations. While cadaver, MRI,
ultrasound, and non-weight bearing computer tomography (CT) have been utilized, weight
bearing CT (WBCT) scans are a relatively new imaging modality that has not yet been utilized
to establish reproducible and widely-referenced baseline anatomic positions. The hyoptheses
of this study are: 1. Standing, weight bearing CT scan will allow for evaluation and
measurement of the Lisfranc joint complex. 2. There will be no side to side variation or
sex-based differences in the Lisfranc joint complex.
Methods: A retrospective chart review was conducted using the electronic
medical record. Inclusion criteria was applied as follows: patients who have undergone
weight bearing CT of the bilateral lower extremities from 2018 to 2020. One hundred twelve
foot CT scans were acquired for measurements. Measurements were collected by two independent
reviewers twice in order to achieve inter- and intra-reliability. The measurements were then
analyzed in order to establish a baseline for normal anatomy, compare injured to non-injured
side, and observe any sex-based differences.
Results: Measurements of uninjured legs were utilized to define normal
parameters for Lisfranc ligamentous complex (LLC) injuries. Averages were found for
measurements of base 1 to 2 MT 2.7mm (SD=0.7mm), medial cuneiform to 2nd MT [M2-C1] 3.7mm
(SD=0.7mm), intercuneiform distance 1.2mm (SD=0.3mm), sagittal descent 12.2mm
(SD=5.4mm).Patient’s with injury to LLC had a larger base of M1-M2, distance from base of
first metatarsal to base of second metatarsal (Δ=.5903, p <.0001) and M2- C1 interval
(Δ=1.8008, p<0.0001). Males had significantly higher M2-C1 (p=0.0031), intercuneiform
distance (p=0.0039), and sagittal descent (p=0.0008) compared to female patients.No
significant differences were found with regard to left vs right side in any of the
measurements. Intercuneiform distance (p=0.0039) was found to significantly decrease as age
increased, while sagittal descent significantly increased with increased age (p=0.0066).
Conclusion: This study is one of the first investigations aims to assist in
defining baseline anatomic measurements for Lisfranc ligamentous complex parameters on WBCT.
The values and comparisons obtained were able to reinforce that weight bearing CT is
valuable in identifying subtle injuries to the LLC while also demonstrating that there is
male-to-female and age-related differences that should be kept in mind when radiographically
evaluating imaging studies of injured patients.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00193

## Retrospective Chart Review: Weight Bearing CT Scans and the Measurement of the
Tibiofibular Syndesmosis

Spencer Falcon, MD; Thomas J. McCormack; Matthew Mackay, MD; Armin Tarakemeh, BA;
Scott Mullen, MD; Paul Schroeppel, MD; Megan R. Wolf, MD; Bryan G. Vopat, MD

Category: Ankle
Keywords: Tibiofibular Syndesmosis; Weight Bearing CT; Ankle
Introduction/Purpose: Tibiofibular Syndesmosis injuries are commonly
misdiagnosed due to their unreliable projection on plain films. Many studies have striven to
establish baseline measurements of the distal tibial and fibular articulation. While
cadaver, MRI, ultrasound, and non-weight bearing computer tomography (CT) have been
utilized, weight bearing CT (WBCT) scans are a relatively new imaging modality that has not
yet been utilized to establish reproducible and widely-referenced baseline anatomic
positions. The hypotheses of this study are: 1. Standing, weight bearing CT scan will allow
for evaluation and measurement of the tibio-fibular syndesmosis. 2. There will be no side to
side variation or sex-based differences in syndesmosis measurements.
Methods: A retrospective chart review was conducted using the electronic
medical record. Inclusion criteria was applied as follows: Patients who have undergone
weight bearing CT of the bilateral lower extremities from 2018 to 2020. One hundred twenty
ankle CT scans were acquired for measurements. Measurements were collected by two
independent reviewers twice in order to achieve inter- and intra-reliability. The
measurements were then analyzed in order to establish a baseline for normal anatomy, compare
injured to non-injured side, and observe any sex-based differences.
Results: Measurements of uninjured legs were utilized to define normal
parameters for tibiofibular syndesmosis on weight bearing CT. Averages were found for
measurements of anterior incisura 3.2mm (SD=1.1mm), middle incisura 3.9mm (SD=1.1mm),
posterior incisura 5.6mm (SD=1.7mm), alpha angle 16.3° (SD=6.3°), medial clear space 2.2mm
(SD=0.6mm).Patients with syndesmotic injuries had significantly larger measurements for
anterior (p<0.0001), middle (p=0.0007), and posterior incisura (p=0.002) when compared to
uninjured ankles. Males had significantly higher medial clear space widening (p=0.0012)
compared to female patients. Anterior incisura (p <0.0001), posterior incisura (p=0.0005)
were found to significantly decrease as age increased.
Conclusion: This study aims to assist in defining baseline anatomic
measurements for syndesmotic parameters. The values and comparisons obtained were able to
reinforce that weight bearing CT is valuable in identifying subtle injuries to the TFS while
also demonstrating that there is male-to-female and age-related differences that should be
kept in mind when radiographically evaluating imaging studies of injured patients.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00194

## Contact Pressure Reduction in the Anterior Ankle During Placement of Short Leg
Splints

Nicholas Farrar, MD; Kempland C. Walley; Kameron A. Shams, MD; Kristopher Mell; David
M. Walton, MD; James R. Holmes, MD; Paul G. Talusan, MD

Category: Trauma; Ankle
Keywords: Wound Complications; Trauma; Biomechanics of the Foot and Ankle
Introduction/Purpose: Lower extremity splints are commonly used in orthopaedic
care throughout emergency departments, operating rooms, and outpatient clinics. Although the
mainstay of ankle immobilization, they have been associated with ulcers due to high contact
pressures over bony prominences and the anterior ankle. High contact pressures may occur in
the anterior ankle when splint padding is applied while the ankle is in a plantarflexed
position and subsequently dorsiflexed as the plaster or fiberglass hardens. The purpose of
this study is to measure contact pressures in the anterior ankle when cast padding is
applied in a plantarflexed position and subsequently dorsiflexed. We hypothesized, that the
removal of padding over the anterior ankle following dorsiflexion would result in reduced
anterior ankle contact pressures.
Methods: Short leg posterior U-splints were applied to the right lower
extremity in two healthy volunteers with an underlying pressure transducer [Tekscan I-Scan
system (Tekscan Inc, South Boston, MA, USA)] on the skin surface centered over the tibialis
anterior tendon. Anterior ankle surface pressures were measured when the padding was applied
in maximum plantar flexion and dorsiflexed to neutral position as measured by a goniometer.
This was then repeated in the same subjects but prior to dorsiflexion, a 3cm x 3cm square of
padding was removed over the pressure transducer prior to dorsiflexion. Percent change from
initial contact pressure centered on the tibialis anterior with either Webril
(Covidien/Medtronic, Dublin, Ireland), or Specialist Cotton Blend Cast Padding (BSN Medical,
Charlotte, NC, USA) was calculated.
Results: There were 2 limbs analyzed for presentation of this pilot data. The
percent change in anterior ankle contact pressure when padding was applied in plantar
flexion and then placed in neutral was an average increase of 264% with just padding and
238% with padding and plaster. [TP1] Subsequently, the removal of padding from the anterior
ankle resulted in an average decrease of 126% of[TP2] the increased pressure relative to
baseline measurements ( ).
The reduction in contact force with the removal of Webril was greater than Specialist.
Conclusion: In this pilot data, we report increases in anterior ankle contact
pressures when splint padding is applied in plantar flexion and re-positioned into neutral.
However, removal of anterior ankle padding reduces pressure over the anterior ankle and may
reduce the risk of iatrogenic splint related ulcers in this area. Additionally, this
technique may elicit varying reductions in anterior ankle pressure depending on the type of
cast padding utilized. This data, though preliminary, underscores the importance of avoiding
excess padding over the anterior ankle during splint application.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00195

## A Biomechanical Investigation on the Effects of Deep Deltoid Ligament Repair Combined
with Flexible and Rigid Syndesmotic Fixation

John E. Femino, MD; Christina Hajewski; Jessica E. Goetz, PhD; Kyle R. Duchman,
MD

Category: Ankle; Trauma
Keywords: Deltoid Ligament; Syndesmotic Injury; Biomechanics
Introduction/Purpose: The role of deep deltoid ligament (DDL) repair in the
setting of an unstable syndesmotic injury is largely unknown, and the optimal fixation
strategy for syndesmosis stabilization is controversial. The purpose of this study was to
investigate the effect of an augmented, anatomic repair of the DDL combined with flexible or
rigid syndesmotic stabilization using a cadaveric model.
Methods: 10 pairs of fresh-frozen through knee cadaveric specimens were used
for biomechanical testing which included subjecting the specimens to 5 Nm of external
rotation torque while under 750 N of axial compression. Whole-foot rotation angles were
measured and rotation and translation of the fibula, tibia, and talus were tracked with
optical motion capture. Specimens were tested intact and then after destabilization by
sectioning the anterior inferior tibiofibular ligament (AITFL), posterior inferior
tibiofibular ligament, interosseous ligament and membrane extending 7 cm proximal to the
ankle joint, and both bands of DDL. The intact fibula was a surrogate for an anatomically
fixed fibula. Each specimen underwent mechanical testing both with and without DDL
reconstruction added to flexible syndesmotic stabilization using a suture button (SB) plus
AITFL reconstruction. In the final test, the syndesmosis was rigidly stabilized using a 4.5
mm screw.
Results: Destabilization increased the foot rotation under the applied axial
load and torque to 170% (+-49%) of that of the intact case. After flexible syndesmotic
stabilization (AITFL + SB) foot rotation was 109% (+-26%) of intact condition. Addition of
the deltoid ligament reconstruction (AITFL + SB + DD) reduced rotation to 87% (+-31%) of the
intact condition. Fixation with a screw alone came closest to the rotation of the intact
specimen (93% +- 17% of intact), and like the flexible repair, the addition of DDL
reconstruction to the screw increased rotational stability (85% +- 35% of intact).
Conclusion: DDL reconstruction provides improved resistance to external
rotation stress when added to both flexible and rigid syndesmotic stabilization. Although
our results with both the flexible and rigid constructs demonstrated increased constraint to
external rotation stress compared to the intact specimen, these results should be thought of
as time zero data, and the implants likely experience some creep with early motion and
graduated weight bearing. Our demonstration of increased stability with a deltoid ligament
reconstruction suggests that this addition may be beneficial for unstable syndesmotic
injuries.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00196

## Divergent vs Parallel Screw Configurations for Subtalar Arthrodesis: Comparing Clinical
Outcomes

Carlton Fernandes; Eric B. Johnson; Brandon W. Moritz; Matthew R. McDonald, MD; Amgad
M. Haleem Amin, MD, PhD; Paul A. Kammerlocher, MD

Category: Ankle Arthritis; Hindfoot
Keywords: Subtalar Arthrodesis; Subtalar Fusions; Subtalar Joint Arthritis
Introduction/Purpose: Subtalar arthrodesis is a frequently performed surgery
used to treat several hindfoot pathologies. Rigid fixation is essential for successful
fusion and percutaneous screws are most commonly used. Controversy still exists regarding
the most optimal screw configuration. While cadaveric biomechanical studies have shown
diverging screw configuration to be superior to parallel screws, this has never been proven
in the clinical setting. The aim of this study was to compare fusion rates and clinical
outcomes between patients treated with divergent versus parallel screw constructs for
subtalar arthrodesis.
Methods: We conducted a retrospective review of 58 patients that underwent
subtalar arthrodesis during a four-year period at our institutions. Patients were divided
into two groups based on screw construct; diverging versus parallel. Outcomes measured were
radiographic and clinical evidence of fusion at 3 months, American Orthopaedic Foot &
Ankle (AOFAS) ankle-hindfoot and Visual Analog Scale (VAS) scores at final follow up and
post-operative complications.
Results: Thirty patients underwent subtalar fusion with a divergent screw
construct and twenty-four with parallel screws. The mean age was 58.5+-13.9 years and mean
follow up period was 44.5+-20.8 months. The overall fusion rate at 3 months was 94.8%. The
fusion rate for the divergent screw group was 93.3% versus 96.4% for the parallel screw
group, showing no statistical significance (p=0.60). Overall, the mean AOFAS and VAS scores
improved post-operatively by 28.1+-5.49 and 4.27+-1.45 points respectively (p<.0001). In
the divergent group, mean improvement in AOFAS and VAS scores was 28.5+- 4.99 and 4.39+-1.42
versus 27.7+-6.05 and 4.14+-1.48 in the parallel screw group, showing no statistical
significance (p=0.59 and p=0.44). The overall complication rate was 5.2% with no
statistically significant difference between the two groups (6.7% versus 3.6%, p=0.60).
Conclusion: When used for fixation during subtalar arthrodesis, divergent and
parallel screw constructs have similar radiological union rates and clinical outcomes when
it comes to fusion rates at 3 months, post-operative improvement in AOFAS scores and
complication rates. Screw configuration should be determined by surgeon experience and
comfort level.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00197

## Prospective Radiographic Assessment of Intraoperative Range of Motion with Total Ankle
Replacement

Oliver Gagné, MD; Rogerio C. Bitar; Jaeyoung Kim, MD; Kristin C. Caolo, BA; Guilherme
H. Saito, MD; Elizabeth Cody, MD; Jonathan T. Deland, MD; Scott J. Ellis, MD; Constantine
A. Demetracopoulos, MD

Category: Ankle Arthritis
Keywords: Ankle Arthroplasty; Ankle Arthritis; Gait Study Range of Motion
Introduction/Purpose: One of the proposed benefits of total ankle replacement,
when compared to ankle fusion is the preservation of range of motion (ROM) of the ankle.
Preservation of ankle motion may improve quality of life as evidenced by patient-reported
outcome measures (PROMs). However, despite improving dorsiflexion intraoperatively during
TAR, studies have not demonstrated large improvements in dorsiflexion (DF) at final followup
after TAR. The objective of this study was to radiographically evaluate and quantify
preoperative, intraoperative ankle dorsiflexion and plantarflexion (PF), compare it to post-
operative ankle ROM, and determine the effect of Achilles lengthening (TAL) on preserving
dorsiflexion motion that is gained during surgery.
Methods: This prospective study compared 111 patients with an average age of
62.3 years who underwent primary total ankle replacement with one of four different implants
between March and December 2019. A total of 71 patients (64%) had an associated TAL based on
the surgeon’s decision. Intraoperative fluoroscopy was utilized by the primary surgeon to
document the maximal dorsiflexion and plantar flexion at the end of the case. This was
completed after the TAL on a perfect lateral. Standardized weight bearing at maximum ROM
positions lateral radiographs were obtained twelve months postoperatively. The change in
range of motion was analyzed using a paired t-test with a significance level of 0.05.
Results: The cohort’s preoperative range was 22.0° (8.1°DF, 14°PF) and was
increased to 38.5° intraoperatively (12.7°DF, 25.8°PF) as described in Table 1.
Postoperative ROM is 24.9° (11.7°DF, 13.2°PF) which means that 65% of the intraoperative ROM
is preserved. Preoperative and intraoperative range of motion was not different between the
group that had a TAL compared to no TAL. At the year postoperatively, the dorsiflexion was
similar between both groups. The group who did not have a TAL went from 12.8
intraoperatively to 12.2° postoperatively whereas the group who had a TAL went from 12.2° to
11.3° which was statistically equivalent.
Conclusion: This study is the first to assess how much ankle range of motion
is retained after TAR. Overall, we observed that 65% of dorsiflexion was retained after TAR.
TAL as a concomitant procedure did not effect the proportion of dorsiflexion motion that was
retained. Additional studies are needed to determine how to best optimize and increase ROM
after TAR.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00198

## Proximal Fifth Metatarsal Fracture Treated with Plantar Plating: Retrospective
Multi-Surgeon Case Series

Stephanie S. Gardner, MD; Derek M. Klavas, MD; Pedro E. Cosculluela, MD; Travis W.
Hanson, MD; Keith A. Heier, MD; Kevin E. Varner, MD

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot; Sports; Trauma
Keywords: 5th Metatarsal Fractures; ORIF; Trauma
Introduction/Purpose: Proximal fifth metatarsal fractures are a common foot
injury. Previous surgical treatments have consisted of intramedullary screw fixation and a
newer technique of plantar plating due to non-union and refractures seen with screw
fixation. Purpose of this multi-surgeon case series study is to evaluate clinical and
radiographic outcomes and complication rates after fifth metatarsal plating for proximal
fifth metatarsal fractures in recreational and elite athletes.
Methods: Retrospective multiple surgeon case series involving patients who
underwent fifth metatarsal plantar plating for proximal fifth metatarsal fractures with a
mean follow-up of 33.1 months (range, 12-52). Elite and recreational athletes were included.
Demographic data, radiographic evaluation, and clinical notes were analyzed. Patient phone
conversations were made to document complications outside of our electronic medical
record.
Results: Forty-four patients (45 fractures) were treated with plantar plating
technique with a mean age of 37.3 years (range 14- 80). Five patients sustained refractures
(11.1% of patients), 2 at previous fracture site, 1 through a screw hole, 1 proximal to
plate, and 1 distal to plate. All refractures were treated non-operatively. No wound
complications were seen. No secondary revision surgery was needed and union rate was 100% at
final follow up.
Conclusion: With a one year minimum follow up, plantar plating of proximal
fifth metatarsal fractures is a viable option for treatment of both acute and chronic
fractures as well as after failed intramedullary screw fixation with low refracture rates
and without non-unions. Plantar plating allows the surgeon to have direct visualization of
fracture reduction and ease of access for bone grafting. Both elite and recreational
athletes can benefit from the plating technique.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00199

## National Survey of COVID-19 Infections Among Head Surgical Specialists Regarding
Orthopedic Foot and Ankle Surgeons in Mexico

Fernando Alfredo F. Garza; Jaime I. Ortiz Garza, MD; Abraham Espinosa-Uribe, MD;
Eduardo R. Carranza-Cantú, MD; Jorge A. Gutierrez, MD, MA

Category: Other
Keywords: Changes; Health Care; Practice Models
Introduction/Purpose: The health contingency due to COVID19 has represented an
unprecedented state of health contingency with implications for the economy and public
health. There is a concern in the medical community regarding the risk of contagion of
COVID19. Recently, the occupational risk of contagion by COVID19 has been described in
surgical specialties that involve proximity to the face and airway of the patient
Ophthalmology and Otorhinolaryngology and head and neck surgery (ENT). A possibility has
been raised that Foot and Ankle joint surgeons have some occupational protection due to the
distance greater than 1m with respect to the patient’s airway during surgical activities.
The objective of this study is to compare COVID-19 infections referred by different surgical
specialties and subspecialties.
Methods: An observational, cross-sectional, and descriptive study will be
carried out in which a survey will be applied to 134 surgical specialists divided into 3
groups (ophthalmology, ENT, and orthopedic surgeons performing foot and ankle surgery)
during the months of August to September 2020.Percentage prevalences of each variable to be
evaluated will be obtained, likewise, a Chi- square test will be applied to determine
statistical differences between the proportions of referred positivity in the 3 groups. This
research study was reviewed by our institution and hospital research ethics committee. All
participants gave their informed consent at the time of conducting the survey, as well as
allowing the use of their responses for the purposes of this project.
Results: A total of 134 surveys pertaining to 30, 69, and 35 Mexican
ophthalmology, ENT, and orthopedic surgeons who perform foot and ankle surgery respectively
were evaluated. The geographical distribution of the surveys is identified in figure 1.
After the statistical analysis, non-significant statistical differences (p> 0.32) were
documented in the proportion of infections between ophthalmologists or ENTs, with respect to
the proportion of infections referred by COVID-19 in the group of Orthopedic foot and ankle
surgeons surveyed.
Conclusion: When analyzing the results of this survey-type study, it is
possible to establish that the statistically non-significant differences between the
proportions of infections of the groups of specialists evaluated could suggest that the
working distance with respect to the patient’s airway is not a protective factor for
contagion. by COVID-19. Preventive strategies, as well as the vaccination of health
personnel involved in patient care, are essential.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00200

## The Adelaide Experience: Short Term Results with the Use of Cartiva Implant

Gil Genuth, MD; Peter Stavrou, MD, FRACS; Christopher H. Brown, FRACS, MBBS,
FRCSC

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: 1st MTP Joint; Forefoot; Outcomes Measures
Introduction/Purpose: Hallux rigidus is the most common arthritic condition of
the foot. There are only few surgical options that does not require fusing the 1st MTPJ thus
allowing motion in the joint. A new first metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joint hemiarthroplasty
with a polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) hydrogel implant (Cartiva) has demonstrated pain relief and
functional outcomes equivalent to first MTP arthrodesis at 2 and 5 years postoperation in
few studies done in North America. We would like to present the Adelaide short term result
with the use of this implant.
Methods: 40 Patients who underwent first PVA hydrogel MTP hemiarthroplasty in
Adelaide by two senior foot and ankle surgeons (C.B and P.S) and by two international foot
and ankle fellow (G.G and J.P) between 2017 and 2019 were included in this study. The follow
up period was 24 months postoperation. Patients underwent physical examination and
radiographic evaluation and completed a pain VAS, the Short-Form-36 (SF-36), and the Foot
and Ankle Ability Measure (FAAM) sports subscale and activities of daily living (ADL)
subscale. At the time of this study, 40 patients had reached 2 year follow-up.
Results: There were no lost to follow up, leaving 40 patients with mean age
63.4 (range, 40.1-79.9) years. Mean follow-up was 24 months (range, 6-30 months).
Postoperative active MTP natural joint dorsiflexion and peak MTP dorsiflexion were mean 18.2
(range, 10.0- 30.0) and 29.7 (range, 10.0-45.0) degrees, respectively. Pain VAS, SF-36, FAAM
ADL, and FAAM Sports scores demonstrated clinically and statistically significant
improvements. Radiographically, no patient demonstrated changes in implant position, implant
loosening or subsidence, or implant wear. One implant was removed because of persistent pain
7 months post surgery and was converted to fusion 3 months after the removal of the Cartiva
implant.
Conclusion: Short term results for the use of Cartiva implant in Adelaide show
that functional outcomes improved significantly, pain was reduced significantly, and the
implant demonstrated excellent survivorship. Our results are similar for those described in
the North American literature
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00201

## An Anatomical Study of the Sural Nerve: A Review of Cadaveric Data and Comparison with
3 Tesla MRI

Claudio B. Ghetti; Brendon Mitchell; Vrajesh J. Shah; Brady K. Huang; William Kent;
Ian M. Foran, MD

Category: Ankle
Keywords: Achilles; Achilles Tendon Repair; Calcaneal Fractures
Introduction/Purpose: The sural nerve (SN) is a distal cutaneous nerve that
provides sensation to the lateral foot and ankle, and is at risk of iatrogenic injury during
surgery at the foot and ankle.1 Previous anatomic studies of the SN are limited to cadaveric
studies with small sample sizes.2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9 We analyzed a large cohort of high-field 3
Tesla (3T) magnetic resonance images (MRI) of the ankle to obtain a more generalizable,
in-vivo sample of the distal course of the SN. A comparison of this in- vivo method of
measurement vs. cadaveric studies may provide surgeons with a more accurate representation
of SN anatomy and its relation to anatomic landmarks.
Methods: We performed a retrospective review of 3T MRI studies of the ankle
performed at our institution between January 2015 and December 2020. Three blinded reviewers
measured the vertical distance of the SN to the distal tip of the lateral malleolus (DTLM),
the horizontal distance of the SN to the DTLM, and the lateral border of the Achilles tendon
(LBA) at the level of the DTLM. Also measured was the horizontal distance of the SN to the
LBA at the level of superior Achilles insertion (SAI) onto the calcaneus as well, as 5 cm
above the SAI. Intraclass correlation coefficient was calculated to assess reliability
between reviewers. A total of 204 3T MRIs of the ankle were included.
Results: The mean vertical distance from the SN to the DTLM was 2.2 +- 0.5 cm
(ICC, 0.85; range 0.9-3.6 cm). The mean horizontal distance of the SN to the DTLM at the
level of DTLM was 1.7 +- 0.3 cm (ICC, 0.98; range 0.8-3.0 cm). The mean horizontal distance
of the SN to the LBA at the level of DTLM was 1.9 cm +- 0.3 cm (ICC, 0.91; range 1.0-2.9
cm). The mean horizontal distance from the SN to the LBA at the level of the SAI and 5 cm
above the SAI was 2.6 +- 0.4 cm (ICC, 0.85; range 1.4-3.7 cm) and 0.9 +- 0.2 cm (ICC, 0.87;
range 0.4-1.8 cm), respectively. Neither height nor BMI were strongly associated with the
distance of the SN to any of our anatomic landmarks (R2 < 0.08 for all measurements).
Conclusion: Several of our measurements summarized in differed from those
reported in previous cadaveric studies. Although our mean horizontal distance of SN to LBA
at SAI differed notably from cadaveric studies (2.6 cm vs 1.8-2.1 cm), a 2018 ultrasound
study of the SN by Popieluszko et al observed a mean distance of 2.4 cm for this
measurement. This concordance may indicate reliability between in-vivo methods of
measurement vs. cadaveric studies. In-vivo measurements may also provide a more accurate
representation of the anatomy, as these methods are not subject to the effects of embalming
and dissection required of cadaveric studies.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00202

## The Relationship of the Sural Nerve and Anatomic Landmarks Relevant to the Extensile
Lateral and Sinus Tarsi Approaches: A 3T MRI Study

Claudio B. Ghetti; Brendon Mitchell; Vrajesh J. Shah; Brady K. Huang; William Kent;
Ian M. Foran, MD

Category: Hindfoot; Trauma
Keywords: Calcaneal Fractures; Sinus Tarsi Approach; Calcaneus Fractures -
Treatment
Introduction/Purpose: The extensile lateral and sinus tarsi approaches are
commonly used during foot and ankle surgery, and pose a risk of iatrogenic injury to the
sural nerve, a cutaneous nerve that innervates the ankle and lateral foot. Our understanding
of the SN’s location is based primarily on anatomic cadaver studies with small sample sizes.
Our research analyzes a large cohort of high-field 3 Tesla (3T) magnetic resonance images
(MRI) of the ankle to obtain a more generalizable, in-vivo sample of the distal course of
the SN. A better understanding of the course and variability of the sural nerve will allow
surgeons to minimize the risk of iatrogenic injury to the SN.
Methods: High-field 3T MRI studies of the ankle performed at our institution
between January 2015 and December 2020 were analyzed. The vertical distance of the SN to the
distal tip of the lateral malleolus (DTLM), horizontal distance of the SN to the DTLM, and
the lateral border of the Achilles tendon (LBA) at the level of the DTLM were measured by 3
blinded reviewers. Also measured was the horizontal distance of the SN to the LBA at the
level of superior Achilles insertion (SAI) onto the calcaneus, as well as 5 cm above the
SAI. We then analyzed upper and lower quartile ranges to compare the outer anatomic
distribution frequencies of the SN to the locations of common approach incision lines. This
outer limit analysis may serve to quantify the variability of the SN.
Results: A total of 204 3T MRIs of the ankle were included. 1st and 4th
quartile ranges for vertical distance from the SN to the DTLM were 0.9-1.9 cm and 2.5-3.6 cm
respectively. 1st and 4th quartile ranges for horizontal distance of the SN to the DTLM at
the level of DTLM were 0.8-1.5 cm and 2.0-3.0 cm respectively. 1st and 4th quartile ranges
for horizontal distance of SN to the LBA at the level of DTLM were 1.0-1.6 cm and 2.1-2.9 cm
respectively. 1st and 4th quartile ranges for horizontal distance of SN to the LBA at the
level of the SAI were 1.4-2.3 cm and 2.8-3.7 cm respectively. 1st and 4th quartile ranges
for horizontal distance of SN to the LBA, 5 cm above SAI were 0.4-0.8 cm and 1.0-1.8 cm,
respectively.
Conclusion: The vertical distance from SN to DTLM was greater than the
previously reported maximum of 2.6cm in 25% of cases. This highlights the risk of injury to
the sural nerve with the extensile lateral approach. Our first quartile range for vertical
distance of SN to DTLM of 0.9-1.9cm indicates that even at the lowest range of values, the
SN remains clear of the incision line used in the sinus tarsi approach, which extends from
the DTLM to the base of the fourth metatarsal. The sural nerve is still at risk during
posterior extension or retraction of the sinus tarsi incision.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00203

## Autologous Osteochondral Transplantation for Osteochondral Lesions of the Talus: Does
Gender Impact Outcomes?

Arianna L. Gianakos, DO; Olasumnbo Okedele; Sean Flynn; Mary K. Mulcahey, MD; John G.
Kennedy, MD, FRCS(Orth)

Category: Ankle
Keywords: Autograft; Ankle; Osteochondral Lesions of the Talus
Introduction/Purpose: Autologous osteochondral transplantation (AOT) is
commonly used in the treatment of osteochondral lesions (OCL) of the talus. There is limited
data comparing gender differences in the incidence and presentation of talar OCLs and
resultant outcomes following AOT. The purpose of this study is to compare these differences
between male and female patients.
Methods: Eighty-seven consecutive patients who underwent AOT were
retrospectively reviewed. Patients were divided into two groups based on gender. Demographic
data and OCL defect characteristic data were recorded. Functional outcomes were assessed
pre- and post-operatively using the Foot and Ankle Outcome Score (FAOS). The Magnetic
Resonance Observation of Cartilage Repair Tissue (MOCART) score was used to assess cartilage
incorporation.
Results: Fifty-six (64%) males and 31 (36%) females with a mean clinical
follow-up was 47.2 months were included in this study. OCL defect size was significantly
larger in male patients (112.8mm2) when compared with female patients
(88.7mm2) (p<0.0001). Male patients presented with a significantly longer
duration of symptoms (p<0.001) and OCLs were more likely to be associated with a
recognized trauma (p=0.0006) when compared with female patients who typically presented with
associated chronic ankle instability. Mean FAOS improved pre- to postoperatively from 50 to
81(p< 0.001) with a statistically significant increase found in male patients
(p<0.0001). The mean MOCART score was 82.1 in male and 86.7 female patients.
(p<0.0001).No differences were found in knee donor site morbidity, complication rate, or
revision surgery between male and female patients.
Conclusion: Our study demonstrates that male patients typically present with
talar OCLs that are larger in size, associated with a recognized trauma, and with longer
symptom duration when compared with female patients. Talar OCLs in female patients typically
were smaller in size and associated with chronic ankle instability. In addition, male
patients had greater improvement in FAOS scores following AOT. Therefore, understanding
these differences may influence the management and treatment of talar OCLs in male and
female patients.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00204

## Gender May Affect Mid-Term Outcomes Following Bone Marrow Stimulation for Osteochondral
Lesions of the Talus

Arianna L. Gianakos, DO; Emilie Williamson, MD; John G. Kennedy, MD, FRCS(Orth)

Category: Ankle
Keywords: Osteochondral Lesions of the Talus; Lesions of Talus; Clinical
Outcomes
Introduction/Purpose: Bone marrow stimulation (BMS) is typically indicated as
a surgical intervention for patients who have symptomatic osteochondral lesions of the talus
(OLT). Despite differences in ankle biomechanics and cartilage morphology between male and
female patients, there is scant evidence examining whether these differences affect outcomes
following BMS. The purpose of this study was to compare the outcomes in female and male
patients following BMS in the treatment of OLTs.
Methods: A retrospective analysis comparing female and male patients treated
with BMS for OLT between 2007 and 2015 was performed. Clinical outcomes were evaluated using
the Foot and Ankle Outcome Scores (FAOS) and Short-Form 12 (SF-12). Magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) at final follow-up was evaluated with the modified magnetic resonance
observation of cartilage repair tissue (MOCART) score.
Results: Thirty-one females and 38 males were included in this study. The mean
patient age was 39.6+-16.9 for females and 36.5+-14.5 years for males. There was no
significant difference in age, lesion size, follow-up time, and a number of concomitant
procedures. Lateral lesions occurred more frequently in male patients (p=0.034). In female
patients, the mean FAOS pain score improved from 60.2 +- 15.5 preoperatively to 84.0 +- 8.9
at 1-2 year follow-up (p<0.001), and then decreased to 80.0 +- 13.1 at final follow-up at
3-4 years, which was not statistically significant (p=0.191). In male patients, the mean
FAOS pain score improved from 64.7 +- 17.0 preoperatively to 83.1 +- 9.2 at 1-2 year
follow-up (p<0.001), and then decreased to 76.0 +- 14.6 at final follow- up at 3-4 years
(p=0.023). The mean MOCART scores were 59.3 +- 24.0 in female patients and 67.3 +- 23.6 in
male patients (p=0.278).
Conclusion: Lateral lesions were more common in male patients possibly
indicating an acute traumatic etiology. Medial lesions were more common in female patients
indicating potentially a chronic pathology. This may have implications in reducing the
incidence of OLT in female patients. The outcomes following BMS in both female and male
patients were good with no significant differences in FAOS pain score and MOCART score at
short-term follow-up. FAOS scores in male patients were more likely to decrease after 1-2
years post-surgery, implying a possibly faster decline than in female patients.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00205

## Long-Term Outcomes of Autograft Osteochondral Transplantation for Osteochondral Lesions
of the Talus: Eight to Twelve Years Follow-Up

Arianna L. Gianakos, DO; Nathaniel P. Mercer; John Dankert, MD,PhD; John G. Kennedy,
MD, FRCS(Orth)

Category: Ankle
Keywords: Osteochondral Lesions of the Talus; Clinical Outcomes; Ankle
Introduction/Purpose: Autologous osteochondral transplantation (AOT) is a
replacement strategy used to treat osteochondral lesions of the talus (OLT), typically
reserved for the treatment of lesions of larger sizes, highly cystic lesions, or in patients
who have failed previous treatment. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the long-term
(>8 years) clinical and radiographic outcomes of AOT for the treatment of OLT in the form
of a retrospective case series.
Methods: Patients who underwent AOT between 2006 and 2008 were evaluated.
Functional outcomes were assessed pre- and post-operatively using the Foot and Ankle Outcome
Score (FAOS), and Short-Form-12 (SF-12) general health questionnaire. The most recent
post-operative MRI was evaluated with the modified Magnetic resonance Observation of
Cartilage Repair Tissue (MOCART) score.
Results: Twenty-eight patients who underwent AOT were included and evaluated
at a mean follow-up of 122.9 months. The mean FAOS pain subscale improved from 52.7 to 82.9
and the mean SF-12 improved from 30.3 to 58.3 at final follow-up (both, p < 0.01). The
mean FAOS pain subscale then decreased to 77.6 at final follow-up, but this decrease was not
statistically significant (p=0.293). At the final follow-up, the mean FAOS subscale scores
of symptoms, pain, daily activities, sports activities, and quality of life were 66.6, 77.6,
86.0, 60.4, and 53.6, respectively. The mean VAS score was 2.2 at a final follow-up. The
mean MOCART score was 83.8 with a mean MRI follow-up of 82.8 months. Ten patients (35.7%)
had additional surgery, with the most common procedure being arthroscopic anterior ankle
debridement. One patient failed AOT and developed osteoarthritis of the ankle requiring a
total ankle replacement.
Conclusion: AOT appears to be an effective treatment for OLT with good
long-term clinical and radiographic outcomes. Secondary procedures were typically minor and
the overall clinical failure rate was low.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00206

## Outcomes Following Arthroscopy for Anterior Impingement in the Ankle Joint in the
General and Athletic Populations: Does Gender Play a Role?

Arianna L. Gianakos, DO; Axel Ivander; Christopher W. DiGiovanni, MD; John G. Kennedy,
MD, FRCS(Orth)

Category: Ankle; Arthroscopy; Sports
Keywords: Arthroscopy; Athlete; Clinical Outcomes
Introduction/Purpose: To provide an overview of the clinical outcomes of
arthroscopic procedures used as a treatment strategy for anterior ankle impingement and to
determine if gender affects outcomes.
Methods: A systematic literature search of the Medline, Embase, and Cochrane
databases was performed during June of 2019. The combination of search terms utilized
included the following: ‘ankle’, ‘impingement’, ‘talus’, ‘osteophyte’, ‘arthroscopy’,
‘surgery’, ‘procedures’, and ‘treatment’. Two reviewers independently performed data
extraction consisting of demographic data, intraoperative arthroscopic data, functional
outcome scores, patient satisfaction, complications, return to play, and gender
differences.
Results: Twenty-eight articles evaluating a total of 1,506 patients were
included in this systematic review. Sixty percent (17 of 28) and 14% (4 of 28) of studies
assessed anterolateral and anteromedial impingement, respectively. Overall, good to
excellent results were reported following arthroscopic treatment in patients with anterior
ankle impingement with an average success rate of 81.04%. Eleven studies reported return to
sport with an average return to sport of 8 weeks. The most common concomitant pathology
found during arthroscopic evaluation included synovitis, osteophytes, meniscoid lesions, and
AITFL injury. Four studies (15%) failed to report gender as a demographic variable. Only 7
(25%) studies reported gender analysis with four (57%) studies demonstrating differences
when comparing gender outcomes. Female patients have higher rates of traumatic ankle
sprains, chondral injury, and chronic ankle instability associated with anterior ankle
impingement when compared with male patients.
Conclusion: Our systematic review demonstrates that arthroscopic treatment for
anterior ankle impingement provides good to excellent functional outcomes, and good return
to sports rates in the athletic population. This study underscores that lack of statistical
analysis evaluating outcomes comparing male and female populations. Our study does
demonstrate that female patients have higher rates of traumatic ankle sprains, chondral
injury, and chronic ankle instability associated with anterior ankle impingement when
compared with male patients. Therefore, women may benefit from both AMI/ALI resection as
well as lateral ankle ligament repair or reconstruction in order to address both impingement
and chronic lateral ankle instability.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00207

## Standardization of the Foot Sagittal Axis for Measurement of Hindfoot Alignment Using
Weight- Bearing Computed Tomography (WBCT)

Alexandre L. Godoy-Santos, MD; Eduardo A. Pires; Carlos Lobo; Cesar de Cesar Netto,
MD, PhD; Fabio C. Fonseca, MD; Rafael B. Sposeto, MD

Category: Hindfoot; Other
Keywords: Hindfoot; Alignment Weight Bearing CT; Varus Deformity
Introduction/Purpose: The radiographic measurement of hindfoot alignment (HA)
suggested by Saltzman, worldwide accepted, uses the medial aspect of the foot as the
sagittal axis. When defining the medial face of the foot as its axis, the adduction and
abduction deformities of the forefoot are disregarded, making it necessary to rotate the
ankle internally or externally to acquire the radiographic image according to Saltzman
protocol. The emergence of weight-bearing computed tomography (WBCT) allowed immeasurable
advancements for a better understanding of the joints relations of the foot and ankle under
stress. Previous studies using this technology adopted several sagittal axes to measure HA.
Our hypothesis is that the adduction observed in the forefoot of the cavovarus feet
illusively accentuates the real deformity of the hindfoot.
Methods: Two evaluators calculated the HA of twenty-eight feet - 14 cavovarus
and 14 neutral or slightly valgus (control group) - in three different sagittal axes (second
metatarsal axis, calcaneus - second metatarsal axis and talar dome axis). Measurements were
compared by Student’s t-test after normality test by Shapiro-Wilk method. Observers’
agreement was evaluated by intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC). P-values <.05 were
considered significant.
Results: We found excellent intra-observer (0.93) and inter-observer (0.9)
agreements following the measuring assessment. The average Foot and Ankle Offset (FAO) of
the cavovarus feet group was -3.35 (-0.64 - -7.01), while the control group was 2.01 (-1.3 -
6.4). The mean difference in HA when comparing the axis of the talar dome with the axis of
the second metatarsal was 9.88 ° (3.1 ° - 17 °), while in the control group the mean
difference was 3.16 (0.2 ° - 7.5 °). All of these data showed statistical significance.
Conclusion: As a great variability was observed in the measurements of
hindfoot alignment in the cavovarus foot group in the sagittal axes analyzed, this article
suggests standardizing the measurement of hindfoot alignment using the talar dome axis. In
addition, it becomes possible to quantify adaptations of the hindfoot secondary to
modifications of the forefoot in an isolated manner.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00208

## Epidemiology of Ankle Sprain in the Military: A Systematic Review of Literature

Ezra Goodrich; Brandon L. Morris, MD; Christina Hermanns; Ashley A. Herda; Armin
Tarakemeh, BA; Bryan G. Vopat, MD

Category: Ankle; Sports
Keywords: Ankle Sprain; Ankle Instability; Sports
Introduction/Purpose: Ankle sprains occur frequently within the general
population, however, the extent to which this injury impacts the military population remains
unknown. The purpose of this study was to systematically review the literature describing
ankle sprains in the military population.
Methods: Following Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and
Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines, articles were retrieved from PubMed, Embase, and Cochrane
Library using the search terms ‘military,’ ‘epidemiology,’ ‘incidence,’ ‘prevalence,’ ‘ankle
sprain,’ and ‘ankle instability.’ Inclusion criteria consisted of active military duty
status, English language, and levels of evidence I-IV.
Results: Nineteen articles were included, representing 1,671,763 study
participants from six countries and four branches of the military. Among the ten studies
that reported ankle sprain incidence in terms of overall injury incidence, seven studies
reported ankle sprain as the most common injury, with an incidence ranging from 2.20% to
nearly one third of all injuries in the paratrooper population. Ankle sprain was also
reported as the most common injury among lower extremity injuries in two studies, with
incidences of 35% and 38.7%, respectively. Ankle sprain incidence rate per 1,000
person-years was reported in four studies, with values ranging from 15.3 to 58.4. Incidence
rate was also reported for males and females separately in three of these studies, ranging
from 33.89 to 52.7 for males, and 41.17 to 96.4 for females. The number of days lost to
ankle sprain ranged from one to eight days per servicemember.
Conclusion: Ankle sprains are among the most prevalent injuries within the
military population, with a reported incidence that is higher for females than males. This
injury results in time away from active duty, which impacts overall readiness within the
military system.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00209

## Sex-Specific Differences Following Lateral Ankle Ligament Repair

Ezra Goodrich; Matthew Vopat, MD; Jordan Baker; Armin Tarakemeh, BA; Kim Templeton;
Mary K. Mulcahey, MD; Paul Schroeppel, MD; Scott Mullen, MD; Bryan G. Vopat, MD

Category: Ankle; Sports
Keywords: Ankle Instability; Lateral Ankle Instability; Lateral Ligament
Instability
Introduction/Purpose: Chronic ankle instability is a common condition that can
be treated with lateral ankle ligament repair. These procedures have a reported success rate
greater than 85% in the literature, but little has been reported about the differences in
postoperative outcomes between males and females. The purpose of this study was to evaluate
sex-specific outcomes following lateral ankle ligament repair.
Methods: In this systematic review and meta-analysis, we utilized Preferred
Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta- Analyses (PRISMA) criteria to search for
articles on electronic databases. Inclusion criteria consisted of English-language, in-vivo
clinical studies, mean follow-up of at least one year, sex-specific evaluation of outcomes,
and study participants who underwent primary lateral ligament repair. Functional
postoperative outcomes for males and females were recorded and statistically analyzed.
Results: Out of 2,768 studies, eight (0.29%) met inclusion criteria and were
analyzed in this review. These studies included 631 patients (409 males [65%] and 222
females [35%]) who underwent primary lateral ligament repair for ankle instability. There
was no statistically significant difference between males and females in terms of Karlsson
scores (93.5 +- 1.6 for males, 92.7+- 2.3 for females, P =.1582) or American Orthopaedic
Foot & Ankle Society (AOFAS) scores (90.44 +- 4.82 for males, 90.19 +- 3.54 for females,
P =.1586). Postoperative success was defined as a ‘good’ or ‘excellent’ Karlsson score
(>81), and success rate analysis revealed no statistically significant difference between
males and females (86% +- 7.1% for males, 87% +- 3.5% for females, P =.9374).
Conclusion: There was no difference in postoperative mean Karlsson scores,
AOFAS scores, or success rates between males and females who underwent primary lateral ankle
ligament repair. This surgical procedure appears to have comparable outcomes in both sexes;
however, more research is warranted to further assess the impact of patient sex on
postoperative outcomes.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00210

## Treatment of Chronic Ankle Instability in the Military Population

Ezra Goodrich; Ashley A. Herda

Category: Ankle; Sports
Keywords: Ankle Instability; Broström; Ankle Sprain
Introduction/Purpose: The high incidence of ankle sprain within the military
sets the stage for prevalent chronic ankle instability. The purpose of this review was to
compare and evaluate chronic ankle instability treatment strategies in the military
population.
Methods: Electronic databases were systematically searched for
English-language, human studies with a military patient population that had been diagnosed
with and treated for chronic ankle instability. Exclusion criteria were animal, cadaver, and
review studies and case reports.
Results: Eight studies met inclusion criteria and represented 695 military
service members-625 males (89.9%) and 70 females (10.1%). The four treatment strategies
included were Broström-related procedures, modified Watson-Jones procedure, Colville’s
technique, and anatomic lateral ligament reconstruction using semitendinosus tendon
allograft. The percentage of subjective satisfactory outcomes ranged from 80 to 94.7%, and
the percentage of objective satisfactory outcomes ranged from 72 to 100%. The range for
Broström-related procedures was 73.2% (objective) to 94.7% (subjective). The modified
Watson-Jones procedure had a subjective satisfactory outcome of 80% and objective
satisfactory outcome of 72%. Colville’s technique had an objective satisfactory outcome of
100%. No satisfaction outcome was available for the study utilizing the anatomic lateral
ligament reconstruction with semitendinosus tendon allograft. Mean American Orthopaedic Foot
& Ankle Society (AOFAS) scores, anterior drawer displacement, talar tilt, and visual
analogue scale (VAS) scores were also reported.
Conclusion: This review demonstrates that the Bröstrom procedure has
consistently satisfactory outcomes within the military population, and Colville’s technique
is another promising option for this patient population, but would require future studies to
fully support this claim.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00211

## Analysis of Change in Patient Reported Outcome Measures Following Minimally Invasive
Chevron Akin Osteotomies (MICA) in Hallux Valgus Surgery

David Gordon, MD, MB BCh, FRCS(Orth), MRCSEd; Thomas L. Lewis, MB ChB; Robbie
Ray

Category: Bunion
Keywords: Hallux Valgus; Patient Reported Outcome Measures (PROMS); Minimally
Invasive
Introduction/Purpose: There is a need to understand the rate of improvement
following minimally invasive chevron akin osteotomies (MICA) for correction of hallux valgus
deformity using validated patient reported outcome measures (PROMs) and whether this change
is clinically meaningful in order to help counsel patients as to their progress.
Methods: Between July 2014 and November 2018, data was prospectively collected
from consecutive patients pre-operatively and at 6, 12, and 24 months following MICA. The
primary outcome measure was the change in Manchester Oxford Foot and Ankle Questionnaire
(MOXFQ) score at each timepoint following MICA. Secondary outcomes include radiographic
deformity correction, and exploration of cases where PROMs did not improve following
MICA.
Results: 190 feet with complete PROM data at each time point, were identified
from a cohort of 334 feet undergoing third generation MICA. There was a statistically
significant improvement in MOXFQ score for each MOXFQ domain at each time point following
MICA although the majority of the improvement was within the first 6 months. 17 feet had
worse MOXFQ Index scores at the six month timepoint compared to pre-operatively. Of these
feet, 82.4% (n=14) improved over time such that by two years their score had improved
compared to their pre-operative score.
Conclusion: There is a statistically significant improvement in MOXFQ score at
every time point following MICA for hallux valgus. The majority of patients who scores are
worse at 6 months following will go on to have improved function compared to their
pre-operative state.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00212

## Bilateral vs Unilateral Minimally Invasive Hallux Valgus Surgery: A Propensity Matched
Case-Control Study with 2 Year Clinical Patient Reported Outcomes

David Gordon, MD, MB BCh, FRCS(Orth), MRCSEd; Sophie A. Crooks; Thomas L. Lewis, MB
ChB; Robbie Ray

Category: Bunion; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Hallux Valgus; Patient Reported Outcome Measures (PROMS); Minimally
Invasive
Introduction/Purpose: Hallux valgus deformity correction using a
third-generation Minimally Invasive Chevron Akin osteotomy technique (MICA) is becoming
increasingly popular. There is limited patient reported outcome measure (PROM) outcomes for
patients undergoing bilateral hallux valgus corrective MICA surgery during a single
operative case.
Methods: Between July 2014 and May 2018, 59 consecutive patients comprising
118 feet underwent bilateral MICA in a single operative case. 1:1 propensity score matching
based on preoperative PROM assessment, age, and radiographic deformity data was carried out
to match each foot in the bilateral cohort with 118 feet who had undergone unilateral MICA.
The primary outcome measure was the Manchester-Oxford Foot Questionnaire (MOXFQ) which was
prospectively measured pre-operatively, six months and two years post-operatively. Secondary
outcomes included complication rates and radiographic deformity correction with regards to
the hallux valgus angle (HVA) and inter-metatarsal angle (IMA).
Results: At minimum 2 year follow up, the MOXFQ post-operative scores had
significantly improved for every domain (p <0.001) in both unilateral and bilateral
cohorts compared to pre-operative assessment. For all domains of the MOXFQ, there was no
statistically significant difference in 6 month or two year outcomes between patients
undergoing bilateral and unilateral MICA surgery (p >0.05 for all outcome measures).
There was no statistically significant difference between the two cohorts in complication
rate (p=>0.05) or post-operative IMA or HVA (p >0.05).
Conclusion: This study demonstrates that there is no significant difference in
patient reported outcome measured at two year follow-up between patients who underwent
bilateral versus unilateral MICA. This study should reassure surgeons who perform bilateral
hallux valgus surgery in a single case that, in the medium-term, there is no difference in
clinical or radiographic PROMs compared to unilateral surgery. There are potentially
positive health economic benefits of performing bilateral surgery in a single sitting if
clinically indicated.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00213

## The Impact of Hallux Valgus on Function and Quality of Life in Females

David Gordon, MD, MB BCh, FRCS(Orth), MRCSEd; Thomas L. Lewis, MB ChB; Robbie
Ray

Category: Bunion
Keywords: Hallux Valgus; Patient Reported Outcome Measures (PROMS); Clinical
Outcomes
Introduction/Purpose: The effect of hallux valgus (HV) on health-related
quality of life (HRQOL) and the relationship between radiographic severity of deformity and
patient reported outcome measures (PROMs) is poorly understood. The aim of this study was to
compare the HRQOL of female patients with HV to the UK population. The secondary aim was to
assess the correlation between PROMs, including HRQOL, with radiographic severity of
deformity.
Methods: Weight bearing radiographic data (hallux valgus (HVA) angle;
intermetatarsal (IM) angle) were measured in consecutive female patients presenting with
symptomatic HV. Each patient prospectively completed the Euroqol EQ-5D-5L questionnaire (EQ-
5D), Visual Analogue Scale for Pain (VAS-Pain) and Manchester Oxford Foot Questionnaire
(MOXFQ). Data were stratified into age ranges and compared with an EQ-5D United Kingdom
general population reference dataset. Pearson R correlation values were calculated for the
PROMs and radiographic deformity.
Results: Between July 2015 and March 2020, 425 consecutive female patients
presented with symptomatic HV for consideration for surgery. EQ-5D-5L data were
prospectively collected for 396 of these patients (93.2%). EQ-5D-5L Index scores were
significantly worse for females with HV when compared with females in the general
population. There was a moderate correlation with MOXFQ Index score and EQ-5D-5L Index
(R=-0.51, p<0.001) and VAS-Pain scores (R=0.54, p<0.001). There was no correlation
between radiographic HV deformity and HRQOL measures or MOXFQ scores.
Conclusion: Female patients presenting with HV deformity have a significantly
reduced quality of life compared with the UK general population. The radiographic severity
of deformity did not correlate with health-related quality of life measures or foot and
ankle specific PROMs. Foot and ankle specific clinical PROMs do correlate with HRQOL and may
be a better marker of the negative effect of symptomatic hallux valgus deformity on quality
of life.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00214

## Two Year Patient Reported Outcomes of 334 Minimally Invasive Chevron Akin Osteotomies
(MICA) in Hallux Valgus Surgery

David Gordon, MD, MB BCh, FRCS(Orth), MRCSEd; Thomas L. Lewis, MB ChB; Robbie
Ray

Category: Bunion; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Hallux Valgus; Patient Reported Outcome Measures (PROMS); Minimally
Invasive
Introduction/Purpose: There are many different procedures described for the
correction of hallux valgus deformity. Minimally invasive surgery has become increasingly
popular, with clinical and radiological outcomes comparable to traditional open osteotomy
approaches. There is increasing interest in hallux valgus deformity correction using
third-generation minimally invasive chevron akin osteotomy (MICA) technique. Objective: To
assess the radiographic correction and 2-year clinical outcomes of third-generation MICA
using validated outcome measures.
Methods: This is a prospective single-surgeon case series of 420 consecutive
feet undergoing MICA surgery between July 2014 and Jan 2019. Primary clinical outcome
measures included the Manchester-Oxford Foot Questionnaire (MOXFQ), EQ-5D, and the Visual
Analogue Pain Scale. Secondary outcome measures included radiographic parameters, and
complication rates.
Results: Pre-operative and 2 year post-operative patient reported outcomes
were collected for 334 feet (79.5%). At minimum 2 year follow-up, the MOXFQ scores (mean +-
standard deviation (SD)) had improved for each domain: pain; pre-operative 43.9+- 21.0
reduced to 9.1+-15.6 post-operatively (p<0.001), walking and standing; pre-operative
38.2+-23.6 reduced to 6.5+-14.5 post- operatively (p<0.001) and social interaction;
pre-operative 47.6+-22.1, reduced to 6.5+-13.5 post-operatively (p<0.001). At 2 year
follow-up, the VAS Pain score (mean +- SD) improved from a pre-operative of 31.3+-22.4 to
8.3+-16.2 post-operatively (p<0.001). 1-2 intermetatarsal angle (mean +- SD) reduced from
15.4°+-3.5° to 5.8°+-3.1° (p<0.001) and hallux valgus angle reduced from 33.1°+-10.2° to
9.0°+-5.0° post-operatively (p<0.001).
Conclusion: Third-generation MICA showed significant improvement in clinical
outcomes at 2 year follow-up and can be successfully used for correction of a wide range of
hallux valgus deformities.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00215

## Effect of Long and Short Term HgbA1c on Surgical Treatment Outcomes of Diabetic
Patients with Emergent Foot and Ankle Surgery

Sunny Gotewal; Vinod K. Panchbhavi, MD, FACS; Daniel Jupiter, PhD

Category: Ankle; Diabetes; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Diabetic Foot; Complications; Surgical Site Infection
Introduction/Purpose: Elevated HgbA1c are associated with higher postoperative
complications. It is not as well understood whether the HgbA1c levels measured at the time
of surgery, or those measured in the months prior to surgery, are more strongly associated
with complications. We carried out a study of our EMR examining whether historic HgbA1c and
burden of diabetes, are more or less impactful than more proximately measured HgbA1c.
Methods: We identified patients using CPT codes for ankle, tibia, fibula, and
femur fracture repair. Similarly, post-operative complications (infection, dehiscence, DVT,
PE and SSI) were retrieved using ICD 9 and 10 codes. Variables recorded were comorbidities
and complications, age, sex, race, ethnicity, marital status, and HgbA1c. HgbA1c was noted
within a month before and a month after repair, and within 18 months and 6 months before
repair. For each complication, the association with every other variable was assessed using
t-test or chi-squared/Fisher’s exact tests, for continuous and categorical variables,
respectively.
Results: 20 patients had the data needed to carry out the analysis. While
t-test revealed no significant differences between those with and without complications,
either in terms of long or short term HgbA1c, the differences between HgbA1c at a year prior
to surgery appear to be larger.
Conclusion: Given that differences between historic HgbA1c in those with and
without complications appear to be larger than the differences in more recent HgbA1c using
our small sample size, we would like to explore whether these relationships are significant,
using larger data sets.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00216

## Lower Extremity Injury Rates on Artificial Turf and Natural Grass Playing Surfaces: A
Systematic Review

Heath P. Gould; Stephen J. Lostetter; Eric R. Samuelson; Gregory P. Guyton, MD

Category: Sports
Keywords: Athlete; Sports; National Football League
Introduction/Purpose: Artificial turf (AT) playing surfaces have emerged as a
common alternative to natural grass (NG) at all levels of athletic competition from youth to
professional. While several prior articles have compared the lower extremity injury rates on
AT and NG, the heterogeneity of these studies in terms of design and methodology has led to
widely variable results. The purpose of this systematic review was to determine whether any
definitive conclusions can be drawn with regard to the risk of lower extremity injury on AT
and NG playing surfaces.
Methods: A systematic review of the English-language literature was performed
according to the PRISMA guidelines. All included studies presented a direct comparison of
injury rates on AT versus NG playing surfaces. No restrictions were made with regard to
sport, level of competition, level of evidence, or year of publication. Studies that
examined only head injury rates (e.g. concussions) without any comparison of overall injury
rates or lower extremity injury rates were excluded. Systematic reviews and meta-analyses
were also excluded. The following data elements were extracted from each article:
publication year, study design, level of evidence, industry funding, cohort selection
process (ad-hoc vs. systematic), sport, level of competition, number of athletic seasons,
injury setting, AT type, overall injury rate, knee rate, and foot & ankle injury rate.
AT types were classified into Old Generation (1st or 2nd generation) or New Generation (3rd
generation or higher).
Results: 53 articles met inclusion criteria. 31 articles compared overall
injury rates on AT versus NG. Roughly one-half of these studies (51.6%) found no significant
difference between NG and AT, while roughly one-third (35.5%) found a higher overall injury
rate on AT and just 4 studies (12.9%) found a higher overall injury rate on NG. Similarly,
of the 26 articles comparing knee injury rates, 14 studies (53.8%) reported no difference
between AT and NG, 8 studies (30.8%) reported a higher injury rate on AT, and 4 studies
(15.4%) reported a higher injury rate on NG. With regard to foot & ankle injuries,
however, a majority of articles (14/24, 58.3%) reported a higher injury rate on AT.
Comparatively few articles (3/24, 12.5%) reported a higher foot & ankle injury rate on
NG, while the remaining articles (7/24, 29.2%) reported no difference in foot & ankle
injury rate between AT and NG.
Conclusion: The present study is a systematic review of 53 articles in the
English-language literature that compared injury rates on AT and NG. Our findings suggest
that the rates of overall injury and knee injury are similar between these two playing
surfaces, though AT may be associated with a higher rate of foot & ankle injuries
compared to NG.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00217

## The Top 100 Most Impactful Articles on the Achilles Tendon: An Altmetric Analysis of
Online Media

Heath P. Gould; Joseph M. Bano; William Rate; Matthew Civilette; Andrew S. Cohen; Eric
R. Samuelson; Brett Haislup; Blake M. Bodendorfer

Category: Ankle; Hindfoot; Sports
Keywords: Achilles; Achilles Tendon; Achilles Tendon Rupture
Introduction/Purpose: Achilles tendon injuries affect a wide range of
individuals, including both recreational and competitive athletes. In the elite athlete
population, Achilles tendon ruptures are typically season-ending injuries and can be
career-threatening. Due to these impacts on individual players’ careers as well as team
success, Achilles tendon injuries often generate substantial discussion in the mainstream
media and among the general public. However, traditional citation-based metrics fail to
capture the dissemination of Achilles research that occurs outside the realm of scientific
journal publications. Thus, the purpose of this study was to use the Altmetric Attention
Score (AAS) to identify the 100 most impactful articles in online media pertaining to the
Achilles tendon and assess their characteristics.
Methods: The Altmetric database (Digital Science, Holtzbrinck Publishing) was
queried to identify all published articles pertaining to the Achilles Tendon. The articles
were stratified by highest to lowest AAS and the top 100 articles with the highest scores
were included for analysis. Several data elements were extracted for each article: title,
article type, article topic, year of publication, journal name, authors, institutional
affiliations, and online mentions (i.e., the number of times the article was mentioned in
news, blog, Twitter, Facebook and Wikipedia sources). The geographic origin of each article
was also determined by the institutional affiliation of the first author, which was
categorized as American (originating in the United States), European (originating in
Europe), or Other. Linear regression was used to determine the relationship between online
mentions and AAS.
Results: The initial search yielded 3,810 articles published between 1957 and
2021. AAS of the top 100 articles ranged from 37 to 476 with a median of 65 (interquartile
range: 42-110). The selected articles were published in 39 journals. The most prevalent
article type was randomized controlled trial (21.8%), followed by systematic review /
meta-analysis (13.9%). The most prevalent article topics were treatment (39.6%),
rehabilitation and return to play (11.9%), epidemiology (11.9%), and biomechanics (11.9%).
Of the top 100 articles, 25.0% were American, 45.0% were European, and 30.0% were published
outside of the United States or Europe. AAS had a strong correlation to Twitter mentions (r
= 0.81), a moderate correlation to Google Scholar mentions (r = 0.52), and a weak
correlation to Facebook mentions (r = 0.49).
Conclusion: This study used AAS to characterize the 100 most impactful
Achilles articles in online media. As access to research continues to move away from the
conventional printed format, it is critically important to understand how orthopaedic
information is disseminated online. Our findings suggest that alternative metrics broaden
the definition of article impact beyond what is provided by traditional citation-based
metrics and should be considered as a supplemental means of assessing the overall impact of
published scientific literature.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00218

## Transglutaminase Modification of Tendon Collagen

Christopher E. Gross, MD; James C. Rex; Daniel J. Scott, MD, MBA; Amy Bradshaw,
PhD

Category: Ankle
Keywords: Achilles Tendon; Achilles Tendonopathy; Tendinopathies
Introduction/Purpose: Achilles tendinopathy is one of the most common overuse
conditions encountered in foot and ankle surgery. Various etiological risk factors for this
disease have been explored: age, body-mass index, and patient specific biomechanics.
However, the pathogenesis remains poorly understood. Healthy tendon is composed primarily of
type III and I collagen, which undergo post-translationally modification by lysyl oxidase
and transglutaminase (TG) enzymes. The expression and activity in the latter of these two is
poorly characterized in Achilles tendon. This study aims to describe the function of a
specific transglutaminase, TG2, within solubilized collagen and Achilles tenocyte cultures,
and to demonstrate evidence of TG2 activity within pathologic human Achilles tendon
tissue.
Methods: Acellular Collagen: Type I collagen gels were aliquoted into a
silicone well plate. Gels were then seeded with either 2.4 ng of TG2 or a control. Two sets
of gels were prepared; one undergoing a 10% stretch at 2Hz for 24 hours and the other a
static control. TG2 substrates were labelled, and the relative quantity of higher molecular
weight collagens produced by TG2 activity was compared. Tenocytes: Human tenocytes were
grown in 3D cultures as well as traditional cultures in a conditioned fibroblast growth
media. Proteins expressed by tenocytes in both cultures were extracted and examined for TG
modification. Pathologic Tendon: After receiving Institutional Review Board approval, tissue
was collected from patients undergoing debridement of Achilles tendinopathy. Collagen was
extracted in 0.1M acetic acid and Western blot analysis was used to identify TG2 crosslink
epitopes.
Results: In each of three experimental paradigms: acellular, cellular, and
human tendon extracts, evidence for transglutaminase modification of collagen I was noted.
Dynamic conditions increased TG2 modification of collagen in acellular cultures, as
evidenced by higher molecular weight collagen forms. Western blot analysis of protein
expression demonstrated that tenocytes cultured in 3-D produced higher levels of TG-modified
proteins than those in 2-D. Similarly, western blot analysis demonstrated presence of TG2
modification epitopes in the harvested human Achilles tendon tissue. However, the enzyme
itself did not appear to be strongly expressed and could not be detected from the
samples.
Conclusion: Transglutaminase 2 expression by tenocytes in 3D culture and
evidence for transglutaminase-dependent modification of collagen I by TG2 under dynamic
loading supports a key role for transglutaminase in tendon biology and in repair. Though
evidence of TG2 modification was found in diseased human samples, the absence of detectable
TG2 expression suggests that it may play a significant role in the healthy physiologic
turnover of Achilles tendon collagen.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00219

## Calcitonin Gene-Related Peptide in Charcot Foot Neuroarthropathy

Yi Guo; Lew C. Schon, MD; Sharada Paudel, PhD; Tyler Feltham; Lumanti Manandhar; Zijun
Zhang

Category: Basic Sciences/Biologics; Diabetes
Keywords: Charcot Arthropathy; Diabetes; Charcot Foot
Introduction/Purpose: Charcot neuroarthropathy (CNA) is a destructive joint
condition secondary to neuropathic deficiency. For more than a century, the pathogenesis of
CNA has been interpreted as unprotected injury and/or uncontrollable inflammation in a
neuropathic joint, with little understanding its cellular and molecular pathology.
Histologically, a hallmark of CNA is bone and cartilage fragments engulfed by hyperplastic
synovium. Synovium is richly innervated. Neuropeptides, such as calcitonin gene- related
peptide (CGRP), are secreted by neuronal and non-neuronal cells of the nervous, endocrine,
and immune systems, and regulate inflammation. This study investigated the expression of
CGRP in the synovial samples collected from CNA and non-CNA joint conditions, and the
effects of CGRP on the proliferation and collagenolysis of fibroblast-like synoviocytes
(FLS) isolated from CNA synovium in vitro.
Methods: For this study, six CNA and 14 non-CNA synovial samples were
collected during foot and ankle surgery. The donors included 10 male and 10 female, age from
14 to 79 years (mean 48). The non-CNA conditions consisted of osteoarthritis, ankle
instability, Os Trigonum and osteochondritis dissecans.
Western blot and immunohistochemistry of CGRP were performed to detect and localize CGRP
expression in the CNA and non- CNA synovium.
FLS was isolated from CNA synovium and cultured with, or without, human CGRP (10nM) in the
culture media, for comparison of cell proliferation. Additionally, FLS were seeded on the
collagen-coated 24-well plate and simulated with CGRP (10nM) and recombinant human tumor
necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α). After 7 days, the residual collagen on the bottom of the
culture plate were stained and imaged for area measurements.
Data were analyzed with t test or one-way Analysis of Variance, followed with post hoc
Tukey’s test.
Results: By western blot, there was significant CGRP expression in the CNA
synovium (5/6; Fig1). Except of an intense CGRP band in one of the osteoarthritis samples,
only recognizable CGRP bands were shown in the samples of other non-CNA conditions. The
average density of CGRP (in greyscale) in the CNA group was about 2-fold of that in the
non-CNA group (10126 +- 5346 vs. 5377+-3734; p < 0.05). Immunohistochemistry demonstrated
intense CGRP staining in the intimal layer of the CNA synovium (arrows) but not in the
non-CNA synovium (Fig1). Treated with CGRP, the number of FLS in tissue culture increased.
Cell number doubling time was 1.0 day (+-0.4) for the CGRP treated FLS and 2.2 days (+-0.5)
for the control (p < 0.05). When the culture media were supplemented with CGRP and TNF-α,
FLS eroded a larger area of collagen coating comparing with TNF-α alone in the media (p <
0.05).
Conclusion: A knowledge gap in understanding the molecular and cellular
pathology of CNA hampers the development of disease-modifying therapies. This study showed
an increased CGRP, with a concentration in the intimal layer, in the CNA synovium as
compared with the synovium in the non-CNA foot conditions. The increased CGRP expression in
CNA synovium may be part of the unbalanced neuropeptide signaling in the neuropathic
pathology. Functionally, CGRP stimulated FLS proliferation and degrading collagen in vitro.
These effects suggest that CGRP may play a role in bone and joint destruction in the Charcot
foot.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00220

## Conditioned Medium of Mesenchymal Stem Cells Prevents Degenerative Changes in Ankle
Osteoarthritis in Rat Models

Daniel Guss, MD, MBA; Omid Koohi-Hosseinabadi; Moein Zarei; Bart Lubberts, MD, PhD;
Christopher W. DiGiovanni, MD; Nader Tanideh

Category: Ankle; Ankle Arthritis; Basic Sciences/Biologics; Trauma
Keywords: Ankle Arthritis; Stem Cell Transplatation; Biologics
Introduction/Purpose: Osteoarthritis (OA) is the most common degenerative
joint disorder, characterized mainly by progressive articular cartilage degradation,
subchondral bone thickening, osteophyte formation, and synovial inflammation. About 80% of
ankle OA is believed to be post-traumatic and affects the younger population leading to a
higher risk of disabilities during life. Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) have shown promising
effects in preventing the degenerative process of OA via paracrine effect and great
differentiation potential. Recently, using chondrocyte conditioned medium (CCM) that
contains all necessary secretomes was shown to enhance MSC differentiation and regeneration
of the cartilage tissue. In this study, we aimed to assess the effects of intraarticular
injection of MSCs plus CCM on the degenerative process of monoiodoacetate (MIA)-induced
ankle OA in rats.
Methods: Fifty male rats were randomly divided into 5 groups (n=10):
Non-treated control group (C); the group treated with intra-articular Hyaluronic acid (HA).
Hyaluronic acid has shown beneficial effects on the degenerative process of OA in different
reports. The other treatment groups received intraarticular synovial derived MSCs
(5′105), intraarticular CCM, and intraarticular MSCs combined with CCM
(MSC+CCM), respectively. Induction of ankle OA was conducted via 1 mg MIA injection in the
right tibiotarsal joint for two consecutive days. Three months after starting the
treatments, radiological assessments of joint space width (Normal=0, reduced=1, abcent=2)
and osteophytes of the tibia and talus (No osteophyte=0, small=1, moderate=2, severe=3) were
performed. Ankle specimens were obtained for histopathological examination of the joint
surface, matrix, cell distribution, cell viability, subchondral bone, and mineralization;
lower scores indicated more severe damages. Scores for each assessment were recorded.
Mann-Whitney U test was used for comparisons and p-value<0.05 was considered
statistically significant.
Results: Our findings showed significant differences between the controls and
the treatment groups regarding all pathological scores including joint surface, matrix, cell
distribution, cell viability, subchondral bone, and mineralization, that were higher and
radiological scores including joint space width and osteophytes of the tibia and talus that
were lower in the controls (P<0.05; ). Among the treatment groups, HA-treated rats showed significantly lower
pathological and higher radiological scores compared to CCM, MSC, and MSC+CCM (P<0.05).
Among CCM, MSC, and MSC+CCM treated groups, no significant difference was found regarding
the pathological and radiological scores (P>0.05). However, although not statistically
noticeable, the MSC+CCM group showed slightly better outcomes, both radiologically and
histopathologically, compared to the MSC and CCM groups ( ).
Conclusion: Our results showed that the combination of CCM can have a similar
effect on the degenerative changes in ankle OA. However, the combination of MSC+CCM showed
better scores regarding pathological and radiological evaluation. Although further studies
with a greater population seem to be needed to validate these outcomes, our study indicates
the efficacy of CCM in reducing the degenerative rate of OA. CCM is also known as ’secret
factors’ since it is still a ‘black box’ in terms of identifying its content and
effects.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00221

## Deep Learning Improves the Accuracy of Weightbearing CT Scan in Detecting Subtle
Syndesmotic Instability

Daniel Guss, MD, MBA; Reza Mojahed-Yazdi; Soheil Ashkani-Esfahani, MD; Rohan Bhimani,
MD, MBA; Gregory R. Waryasz, MD; Gino Kerkhoffs, MD; Bart Lubberts, MD, PhD; Christopher
W. DiGiovanni, MD

Category: Ankle; Trauma
Keywords: Ankle Instability; Weight Bearing CT; Syndesmosis
Introduction/Purpose: Weightbearing CT (WBCT) scan provides an ability to
compare the ankle joints bilaterally in a 3D manner under physiologic load. According to our
recent investigations, 3D volume measurement of the syndesmosis, if measured up to 5cm
proximal to the tibial plafond, can detect the instability with an accuracy of 90%,
sensitivity of 95.8%, and specificity of 83.3%. However, these values can differ based on
the knowledge and experience of the human interpreter. Deep learning, as a subset of machine
learning, has shown promising potentials in processing and analyzing images and detecting
abnormalities within the images using deep convolutional neural networks (DCNN). Herein, we
aimed to assess the accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity of 3D volume WBCT evaluation
using DCNN algorithms in patients with subtle syndesmotic instability.
Methods: In this study 140 bilateral ankle WBCT scans of patients with subtle
syndesmotic instability who were diagnosed intraoperatively were allocated to the patient
group. The control group comprised 140 bilateral ankle WBCT images of healthy individuals.
We utilized inception V3 model for our DCNN. Data augmentation and transfer learning were
used; however, the images were not preprocessed in terms of change in size and resolution.
The data were divided as 80:10:10 for training, validation, and test subsets, respectively.
The outcome of the study was expressed as sensitivity, specificity, F-score, and the area
under the curve (AUC).
Results: The performance of our DCNN algorithm showed a sensitivity of 99.41%,
specificity of 99.34%, F-score of 99.37%, and 99.99% AUC ( ). The change in loss value of the train data
was plateaued after 40 iterations. Axial images were the most appropriate images that were
used by the algorithm to detect the instability.
Conclusion: In this study we observed that using DCNN in the process of WBCT
image interpretation for diagnosis of syndesmotic instability, particularly in subtle cases,
makes this modality almost perfect with a very small chance of missing a case. Training a
DCNN using a greater number of inputs is still recommended to improve the validity and
reliability of this method. Providing a heat map will also help clinicians discover the
process of decision-making by these algorithms as DCNNs are sometimes called 'black
box'.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00222

## Effect of Pathology on Patient Reported Outcomes of MTP Arthrodesis

Jared R. Halstrom, BS; Nicholas A. Andrews; Sterling Tran; Jessyca Ray; Whitt
Harrelson; James Pate, BS; Austin Hughes; Roshan Jacob; Ashish Shah, MD

Category: Ankle; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: 1st MTP Joint; Patient Reported Outcome Measures (PROMS); Hallux
Rigidus
Introduction/Purpose: Metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joint arthrodesis of the
hallux is a common and reliable procedure performed on patients with various pathologies
including hallux rigidus and hallux valgus. While the effect of foot pathology on MTP
arthrodesis union rates has been previously explored, there is a lack of literature
comparing long term patient reported outcomes between pathology types. The purpose of this
present study was to compare patient reported and clinical outcomes following MTP fusion
between those with hallux valgus and hallux rigidus.
Methods: Patients undergoing primary MTP arthrodesis from 2010-2020 were
identified. Additionally, Radiographic follow-up of >12 weeks, no ongoing ipsilateral
infection, and complete response to a postoperative patient report outcomes (PROMIS AND Foot
Function Index (FFI)) survey were required. After these criteria, 112 patients remained and
were grouped by hallux valgus (HV, 53) and hallux rigidus (HR, 59). Medical records were
examined for patient characteristics, operative variables, and complications. Patients were
grouped by indication and compared.
Results: Nonunion rates and complications including wound dehiscence,
infection, and reoperation were not different between indications. Patients completed the
patient reported outcomes instruments a median of 1.9 years (IQR 2.6) postoperatively. All
patient reported outcomes measures were not significantly different between pathology groups
with PROMIS physical function ((median, IQR) HR 44.6, 9.9 vs. HV 44.1, 12.2), pain
interference (HR 52.8, 9.9 vs. HV 52.4, 12.3), FFI pain scale (HR 33.3, 40.0 vs. HV 28.3,
37.0), FFI disability scale (HR 30.0, 41.0 vs. HV 28.9, 41.0), FFI activity limitation scale
(HR 10.0, 27.0 vs. HV 10.0, 23.0), and FFI total (HR 25.8, 50 vs. HV 37.4, 37).
Conclusion: Arthrodesis of the first MTP joint provides similar nonunion and
complication rates between hallux valgus and rigidus groups. At intermediate follow-up, MTP
arthrodesis provides comparable validated patient reported outcomes scores between these two
groups. Surgeons should be aware of these results when prognosticating the effect of MTP
arthrodesis.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00223

## Toward Preventing Arthritis: A Comparison of Synovial RNA in Osteoarthritic Ankles and
Knees

Mary C. Hamati, MD; Robert Maynard; Jonathan Bartolomei, MS; Michael J. Zuscik, PhD;
Cheryl L. Ackert-Bicknell, PhD; Kenneth J. Hunt, MD

Category: Ankle; Ankle Arthritis; Basic Sciences/Biologics; Trauma
Keywords: Ankle Arthritis; Post-Traumatic Osteoarthritis; Tissue biopsy
Introduction/Purpose: Osteoarthritis (OA) of the lower limb is a debilitating,
incurable, expensive and prevalent condition in people over 45. Although ankle posttraumatic
OA (PTOA) has the highest incidence, primary OA is increasingly recognized. The difference
in OA incidence between lower limb joints is partly driven by differences in cartilage
architecture and chondrocyte function at each site, with ankle chondrocytes showing reduced
responsiveness to inflammatory mediators and more metabolic activity than those in the knee.
Synovium also contributes to the pathogenesis of OA, however its potentially differential
role in knee versus ankle OA remains an unanswered question. We aim to understand the
molecular contribution of synovial dysregulation in the progression of ankle and knee OA to
uncover candidate pathways for the development of targeted therapeutic paradigms.
Methods: After obtaining informed consent from patients undergoing total knee
or ankle replacement, basic surgical, past medical history, and imaging data was collected.
Synovium samples were harvested during surgery and processed for RNA. Bulk 150 bp,
paired-end RNA seq was conducted using standard protocols using the Illumina NovaSeq6000
platform. After quality control trimming, reads were aligned to human reference genome
(GRCh38) using STAR (v 2.5) using the Maximum Mappable Prefix method and HTSeq (V0.6.1) was
used to index mappable reads per gene. Counts were corrected for gene length using the FPKM
method. Differential expression was determined using the edgeR (v 3.16.5) package for R,
after adjustment using a scaling normalization factor and P-values were corrected using the
Benjamini and Hochberg method. Similarities between samples were determined using Spearman
Correlation and degree of similarity was visualized considering the first three Principal
Components (PC).
Results: RNA was obtained from 6 end-stage ankle OA, 1 end-stage knee OA
patients. Of the ankle samples, two were PTOA and the remaining four were primary OA. The
PTOA and the primary OA samples showed high sample correlation regardless of class
(correlation coefficients ranged from 0.844 to 0.941). In contrast, the total knee sample
was less correlated with the ankle samples (correlation coefficients ranged from 0.719 to
0.878). By using the first three PC, we observed that there was no obvious differentiation
among the ankle OA samples, but there was clear separation between ankle and total knee
samples. We observed an enrichment of genes annotated to the Gene Ontology clusters
'Extracellular Structure Organization' and 'Inflammatory Response' when comparing the two
types of OA.
Conclusion: These initial pilot results of an ongoing study support our
hypothesis that synovial transcriptome differs between the knee and ankle in end-stage
osteoarthritis and that anatomic site is a larger driver of synovial expression differences
than OA type. This is supported by previous differences reported between ankle and knee
chondrocytes in end-stage OA. These findings emphasize the importance of investigating
synovial tissue to better understand the microenvironment of the ankle joint and
pathogenesis of all etiologies of OA. The ultimate goal is the development of clinical tests
and therapeutics aimed at slowing or discontinuing the degenerative process in ankle
arthritis.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00224

## Tracking Patient Reported Outcomes in Orthopaedic Surgical Patients at a Single
Institution

Mary C. Hamati, MD; Atlee Witt; Michaele Francesco Corbisiero; Michael Tuffiash;
Kenneth J. Hunt, MD

Category: Ankle; Other
Keywords: Patient Reported Outcome Measures (PROMS); Pain; Outcomes
Measures
Introduction/Purpose: As the American healthcare system evolves into a
value-based reimbursement model, emphasis on tracking and reporting healthcare outcomes has
expounded. Patient reported outcome Measures (PROMs) are exceedingly valuable to
orthopedists as a means to measure improvement and satisfy regulatory requirements. The NIH
Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System (PROMIS) surveys are favored due to
their accessibility, efficiency, and minimal floor and ceiling effects. Furthermore, they
have been shown to predict outcomes after orthopedic surgeries. Psychosocial factors have
also become increasingly important in predicting surgical outcomes. We aim to report the
development and implementation of an institutional PRO data collection platform, including
PRO completion rates and improvements in PROs for patients undergoing orthopaedic
surgery.
Methods: We implemented a secure, HIPAA compliant, automated and EHR
integrated, institutional platform to collect PROMs using a cloud-based tool. Patients
undergoing surgery by sports medicine and foot and ankle surgeons were included and
organized into four surgical pathways: (1) foot and ankle, (2) sports-knee, (3) sports-hip,
and (4) sports-shoulder. PROMIS Physical Function (PF), PROMIS Pain interference (PI),
site-specific (foot and ankle, knee, hip, and shoulder) Single Assessment Numeric Evaluation
(SANE), and the brief resiliency scale (BRS) were collected at the patient’s pre-operative
visit. The PROMIS and SANE surveys were again collected at 3-, 6-, and 12-month
post-operative visits. Surveys were disseminated automatically and patients were able to
complete PROMs onsite on secure tablets or remotely through their personal device. Primary
outcomes included compliance rates, baseline PRO scores, and change in scores at the various
post-operative timepoints for patients in the four surgical pathways.
Results: More than 6,000 patients were included, with majority of patients
from the sports-knee (47%), followed by sports- shoulder (27%), foot and ankle (23%), and
sports-hip (4%) pathways. Average completion rate was highest at the pre-operative timepoint
for all pathways (81%), with completion rates of 62% at 50% at 6 months and 45% at 12MO.
Compliance rates were lowest highest in the foot and ankle pathway at 12 months (62%).
Average baseline scores for all patients were 40.8 for PROMIS PF, 61.1 PROMIS PI, 41 SANE,
and 3.9 for BRS. Baseline scores didn't significantly vary between the surgical pathways.
Scores improved for all patient pathways at all timepoints for PROMIS PF, PI and SANE PROMs
(Table 1). No workflow disruptions were noted for survey administration.
Conclusion: Tracking PROs using an automated platform is feasible in
orthopaedic clinics. Compliance rates are very good and dependent on provider, staff, and
patient buy-in. Patients undergoing surgery had an average baseline PROMIS PI scores >=1
standard deviation from the normal population and all scores improved after surgery.
Importantly, statistical significance doesn't always reflect minimum clinically important
differences (MCIDs). MCIDs for PROMIS PF and PI have been reported to fall between 5-10
points depending on range of values and methods of calculation. Further investigation into
outcomes by procedure type and patient factors is warranted to identify predictive factors
of surgical outcomes.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00225

## Prevalence of Asymptomatic Bone Marrow Edema in the Talus in Professional Ballet
Dancers: Preliminary Data from 2-Year Prospective Study

Ethan R. Harlow, MD; Pranav Khambete; Jason Ina, MD; Shana N. Miskovsky, MD

Category: Ankle; Sports
Keywords: Talus; Bone Stress Injuries; Sports
Introduction/Purpose: Bone marrow edema (BME) appears as increased
interstitial fluid accumulation within the bone marrow on magnetic resonance images (MRI).
Asymptomatic BME has been found incidentally and described in competitive athletes, long-
distance runners, and patients with altered biomechanics where the true etiology remains
unclear. The natural history and clinical implications of asymptomatic BME in the elite and
actively-competing athlete is not well characterized. Moreover, there is debate on how to
manage and counsel patients on these findings in a high-risk bone such as the talus. This
study presents early data from a prospective enrollment study of professional ballet dancers
characterizing the prevalence of asymptomatic BME in the talus.
Methods: Fourteen (14) professional ballet dancers enrolled in the 2-year
prospective, IRB-approved study after informed consent was obtained. Exclusion criteria
included: subjects reporting foot and ankle pain or disability on initial preseason
evaluation, foot and ankle surgery or injury within the last year prior to evaluation, and
any contraindications for MRI. Subjects underwent a physical examination and completed Foot
and Ankle Ability Measure (FAAM) and Foot and Ankle Disability Index scores (FADI).
Bilateral foot and ankle MRIs without contrast were completed upon study enrollment and
interpreted by a blinded, fellowship-trained musculoskeletal radiologist.
Results: Of 14 professional ballet dancers enrolled in the study, 6 were
female, 8 were male, and the mean age was 24.4 years. All dancers reported no pain or
disability in their feet and ankles at the time of evaluation and had physical exam findings
unremarkable for performance-limiting pathology. Of the 14 dancers, 64% (9) had MRI evidence
of talar BME. 6 subjects had bilateral talar BME and 3 had unilateral findings. 53% (8) had
BME localized to the posterior process of the talus, 13% (2) localized in the talar body,
13% (2) localized to the talar head and neck, and 20% (3) subjects had pan-talar BME. All
subjects had BME seen only on T2 sequences with one patient demonstrating bilateral
pan-talar BME on both T1 and T2 sequences. There was no significant correlation using
Welch’s unequal variances t-test (α = 0.05) between talar BME and either FADI or FAAM
scores.
Conclusion: These findings demonstrate a high prevalence (64%) of talar bone
marrow edema in asymptomatic professional ballet dancers with benign physical exams and
normal functional scores. Yet, the long-term clinical significance of these findings are
unknown.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00226

## Clinically Significant Improvement in Pre vs Post-Operative PROMIS Scores after
Cavovarus Reconstruction in Patients with Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease

Edward T. Haupt, MD; Tonya W. An, MD; Giselle M. Porter; Max Michalski, MD; Glenn B.
Pfeffer, MD

Category: Ankle; Hindfoot; Midfoot/Forefoot; Other
Keywords: Charcot Marie Tooth; Outcomes Measures; Cavovarus Foot Deformity
Introduction/Purpose: Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease is an inherited
progressive neurologic disorder characterized by extremity deformities and functional
deficits. Surgery is indicated for substantial functional deficits and severe deformity.
Reconstructive surgery is individualized and multifaceted to correct the cavovarus
deformity, and maximize function with tendon transfers and joint stabilization procedures.
No previous study has reported improvement from pre-operative baseline patient reported
outcome measures to post-operative outcome measures. We studied PROMIS scores and patient
satisfaction surveys to report improvements in physical function, pain interference, and
depression. Our hypothesis was that CMT patients' preoperative baseline would be
significantly worse than the control population in all domains, and that they would
experience demonstrable improvement greater than the minimally clinically important
difference (MCID) for the 3 PROMIS score domains tested post- operatively.
Methods: Prospective PROMIS scores were collected on 147 feet in 89 patients
who had reconstructive foot surgery for CMT during a 40-month period (June 2016-December
2020) by a single surgeon. Radiographic and clinical data were recorded prospectively to
identify complications. Each patient completed a battery of physical function (PROMIS-PF),
pain interference (PROMIS-PI), and mood/depression (PROMIS-M) instruments pre-operatively,
every 3 months for the first post-operative year, and annually thereafter. Pre-operative
PROMIS scores are reported for patients prior to any surgery on either foot to establish a
functional baseline. Post-operative PROMIS values are reported only after the last planned
surgery was completed in the common setting of staged bilateral surgeries. Patient
satisfaction surveys were administered at last follow-up. Post-operative complications were
recorded. Statistical analysis was performed with students t-test for continuous variables
and chi-squared analysis for categorical variables. PROMIS scores are reported as mean (+/-
standard deviation).
Results: 41 patients met inclusion criteria for reporting pre-operative
baseline PROMIS scores, and 57 patient’s post-operative PROMIS data were included after the
final reconstructive surgery within the study window. Mean follow-up was 26 months. Pre-
operative baseline PROMIS demonstrate CMT patients have worse PROMIS-PF, PROMIS-PI, and
PROMIS-M than the population which is statistically and clinically significant. All PROMIS
domains were improved by clinically and statistically significant values. PROMIS-PF improved
from 38 (+/-6) to 46 (+/-5), a 4-5x improvement over MCID (2). PROMIS-PI improved from 59
(+/-8) to 51 (+/-7) representing a 1-2x improvement in the MCID (4). PROMIS M improved from
53 (+/-10) to 49 (+/- 5) achieving MCID 2. >90% were highly satisfied and would undergo
surgery again. There were 7 complications: 1 deep infection, 2 superficial infections, 1
superficial wound dehiscence, and 3 unplanned hardware removals. 5/7 of these patients
experiencing complications remained ’satisfied' or 'very satisfied'.
Conclusion: Patients with CMT disease have baseline functional deficits in
physical and mental health as judged by PROMIS measures that were worse than the population
means in all 3 tested domains. Surgical reconstruction produced clinically significant
improvements in PROMIS-PI, PF, and M domains at up to 4 years of follow-up. Patients were
highly satisfied with the results with an acceptable rate of post-operative
complications.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00227

## Pain Tolerance Self-Assessment vs Objective Pressure Sensitivity: Do Patients
Accurately Estimate Their Own Pain Tolerance?

Edward T. Haupt, MD; Giselle M. Porter; Timothy P. Charlton, MD; David B. Thordarson,
MD

Category: Basic Sciences/Biologics; Other
Keywords: Pain; PROMIS; Clinical Outcomes
Introduction/Purpose: Effective pain treatment remains elusive in the
orthopedic foot and ankle practice as evidenced by the variable experience of pain,
post-operative or otherwise. Intrinsic pain tolerance is likely contributing to this
variability in the patient’s experience of pain. Pressure dolorimetry is a validated,
objective measure to assess pressure sensitivity and is correlated with pain tolerance. No
previous study in the orthopedic foot and ankle literature has attempted to correlate
objective versus subjective pain tolerance. General mental health is associated with central
pain sensitization and may also affect pain tolerance. Our hypothesis was that subjective
self-assessment of pain tolerance would be correlated with objective dolorimetry. We
hypothesized that mental patient-reported outcome scores would also be correlated to
objective pain tolerance.
Methods: Prospectively-collected patient-reported outcome scores (PROMIS),
dolorimetry measurements, and survey data of subjective reported pain tolerance were
collected pre-operatively on 50 consecutive patients by two surgeons in an urban orthopedic
foot and ankle practice. Patients were included if they had normal sensation on the plantar
foot and no prior surgery or plantar heel source of pain. Each patient underwent objective
measurement of their ability to withstand pressure applied to the plantar heel causing 5/10
pain using a hand-held dolorimeter with digital pressure measurement display. Each patient
was administered a preoperative battery of PROMIS physical function (PF), pain interference
(PI), and mood/depression (M) instruments, and a separate survey where they scaled their
subjective tolerance to pain and discomfort. Statistical analysis was performed utilizing
students t-test for continuous variables. Correlations were evaluated with Pearson’s R
coefficient. Data are reported as means (+/- standard deviation) unless otherwise noted.
Results: 50 patients received hand-held dolorimetry measurements, completed
the pain tolerance survey, and completed PROMIS measures. Dolorimetry data from the plantar
heel was normally distributed with mean force 24 N/cm2 (+/-10) to reflect a 5/10
pain experienced by the patient. Patients were shown to estimate their pain threshold with
mean subjective pain threshold 6.8/10 (+/-2) regardless of objective pain data or PROMIS
scores. The mean PROMIS scores of the sample were PF (41+/-8), PI (60+/-7), and M (49+/-9)
reflecting a sample with decreased physical function and increased pain which could be
expected in an outpatient foot and ankle clinic. There was a negative correlation of
R=(-0.432) regarding PROMIS-M with dolorimetry objective pain tolerance which was
statistically significant (p<-0.05). Patients had more features of depression/anxiety
(PROMIS-M score >60) had a statistically significant decrease in pain threshold to 18+/-8
N/cm2 compared to 30 +/- 9 N/cm2 for those who were less depressed
(p<0.01)).
Conclusion: Subjective self assessment of pain tolerance is not well
correlated to objective pain threshold data or other markers of mental health, and should
not influence medical decision-making. Features of depression on PROMIS-M are associated
with an objectively lower pain threshold which is in agreement with prior findings of
central pain sensitization in patients with depression and anxiety in other studies. Future
work is required to correlate dolorimetry data with post-operative medication utilization,
and patient-reported outcome measures after surgery.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00228

## Implementation and Evaluation of a Formal Virtual Medical Student Away Rotation in
Orthopaedic Surgery During the COVID-19 Pandemic

Brittany E. Haws, MD; Sandeep Mannava; Bonnie K. Schuster; Benedict F. DiGiovanni,
MD

Category: Other
Keywords: General Principles / Context; Informed Decision; Health Care
Introduction/Purpose: Away rotations are a valuable experience for medical
students when applying for residency. However, in light of the ongoing coronavirus disease
2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, traditional in-person away rotations were largely suspended during
the 2020-2021 residency application cycle. As such, there has been significant interest in
the development of virtually-based substitutes. The purpose of this study is to evaluate the
utility of a formal virtual fourth year medical student away rotation in orthopaedic surgery
by surveying student, resident, and faculty participants.
Methods: A two-week virtual orthopaedic elective was offered to fourth-year
medical students from outside institutions in lieu of a traditional in-person away rotation.
The course was conducted via online video conferencing and consisted of multiple components
including nightly subspecialty case-based didactics, weekly social events with residents,
assigned resident mentors, student case presentations, and the ability to attend the
residency’s daily conferences. Following course completion, anonymous surveys were
administered to students as well as resident and faculty participants to evaluate the
rotation. 23 of 24 participating students (96%) completed the student survey and 22 of 24
participating faculty and residents (82%) completed the resident/faculty survey.
Results: Most students were very (87%) or somewhat satisfied (9%) with their
experience and found the virtual rotation to be a very (35%) or somewhat useful (61%)
substitute for in-person rotations. Students indicated the virtual rotation very (91%) or
somewhat positively (9%) influenced their perception of the residency. All students
indicated the rotation was very educational. Most students (91%) reported the rotation was
very useful for learning about the program and culture, with the subspecialty didactics and
happy hours being the most useful. Faculty and residents indicated the virtual rotation was
useful for getting to know the students, with resident mentoring and case presentations most
useful. Faculty and residents reported the rotation was useful for assessing student
characteristics such as knowledge base and interpersonal communication skills. Students'
qualitative responses highlighted the small group size, educational value, quality of
interactions with residents/faculty, and opportunities for participation as positive
features of the rotation.
Conclusion: A well organized, formal virtual orthopaedic surgery away rotation
can be a valuable experience for medical students that provides educational value, insight
into a program’s culture, and an opportunity to demonstrate interest in the program. Virtual
rotations can also be useful tool for residencies to share information about their program
and learn more about prospective applicants. Features such as dedicated subspecialty
case-based didactics, resident social events and mentoring, student case presentations, and
small group formats are recommended to maximize value.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00229

## Outcomes Following Intramedullary Nail vs Plate Fixation for Tibiotalocalcaneal
Arthrodesis: A Systematic Review

Erik Hegeman; Thomas C. Dowd, MD; Jeannie Huh, MD

Category: Ankle Arthritis; Hindfoot; Trauma
Keywords: Tibiotalocalcaneal Arthrodesis; TTC; Intramedullary Nail
Introduction/Purpose: Tibiotalocalcaneal arthrodesis (TTCA) is indicated to
treat pain and dysfunction that may result from a variety of ankle and hindfoot pathologies
by achieving fusion of the tibiotalar and subtalar joints. Two common fixation methods exist
to achieve TTCA: retrograde intramedullary nail (IMN) fixation and plate fixation using a
lateral trans-fibular or posterior Achilles-tendon splinting approach. The purpose of this
study is to review the literature and compare the outcomes of TTCA using IMN fixation with
those of plate fixation using a lateral trans-fibular approach.
Methods: A comprehensive search of the PubMed, Cochrane, and EMBASE databases
was performed on 01 February 2021 for studies of all levels of evidence pertaining to TTCA
using IMN and plate fixation. Reasons for exclusion included: no formal joint preparation,
non-English language, concomitant methods of fixation (e.g., IMN with additional plate
fixation) and follow-up less than 12 months.
Results: Fourteen studies (11 level III and 3 level IV) met criteria and were
included. A total of 386 fusions were documented in 356 patients [259 (67%) IMN and 127
(33%) plate fixation]. In the IMN group, union rates at the tibiotalar joint (TTJ) were 84%
(219/259) and subtalar joint (STJ) were 90% (229/259) with an overall complication rate of
20% (53/259). Average initial AOFAS scores were 34.3+-7.9, increasing to 72.4+-9
postoperatively. In the plate fixation group, union rates at the TTJ were 82% (103/127) and
STJ were 86% (108/127) with an overall complication rate of 30% (39/127). Average initial
AOFAS scores were 37.0+-6.9, increasing to 74.4+-12.5 postoperatively. No statistical
differences were noted between the TTCA IMN and plate cohorts when comparing rates of TTJ or
STJ union (p= 0.6, and p=0.2, respectively) and postoperative AOFAS scores (p=0.59).
However, the plating group had a statistically higher overall complication rate
(p=0.02).
Conclusion: A systematic review of the available literature suggests that
there is no statistical difference in union rates or functional outcomes between TTCA using
intramedullary nail or lateral trans-fibular plate fixation. However, the lateral trans-
fibular plate has a statistically higher complication rate when compared to intramedullary
nails. Further comparative prospective cohort studies and randomized controlled trials are
needed to further elicit differences between these groups and confirm the findings of this
systematic review.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00230

## Case Report: Tibiotalocalcaneal Arthrodesis Utilizing a Titanium Mesh Implant for Limb
Salvage after Failed Charcot Reconstruction

Keemia S. Heidari; Trapper Lalli, MD

Category: Other; Ankle; Diabetes; Trauma
Keywords: Tibiotalocalcaneal Arthrodesis; Diabetes; Charcot Arthropathy
Introduction/Purpose: Tibiotalocalcaneal (TTC) arthrodesis has been employed
as a mean to achieve hindfoot fusion and limb salvage. A particular challenge in limb
salvage is achieving successful fusion in the setting of massive bone deficit. Several
augmentation strategies have been trialed in this setting, such as structural allografts, 3D
printed implants, fibular strut grafts, to name a few.
Methods: We present a case describing TTC fusion for limb salvage utilizing a
titanium mesh implant, combined with bone graft in the setting of massive bone deficit in an
individual with Charcot arthropathy from Diabetes Mellitus and HIV after Pilon fracture,
performed as revision procedure after failed Charcot reconstruction with a ringed external
fixator and femoral head allograft with subsequent nonunion.
Results: At last follow-up (22 months postoperative) patient is weight bearing
as tolerated in Charcot Restraint Orthotic Walker boot. CT imaging at 18 months
postoperative demonstrates stable implant and arthrodesis.
Conclusion: Use of a titanium mesh implant is a reasonable option combined
with bone graft for augmentation of TTC fusion in the setting of massive bone deficit.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00231

## Efficacy of Bone Graft on Fusion Rates in Primary Open Ankle Arthrodesis: A Systematic
Review

John Heifner, MD; Joseph G. Monir, MD; Christopher W. Reb, DO

Category: Ankle Arthritis; Basic Sciences/Biologics; Trauma
Keywords: Ankle Arthrodesis; Ankle Fusion; Biologics
Introduction/Purpose: Success in ankle arthrodesis has been reported between
74% and 100%. Despite many recent reports with success rates >95%, the modern literature
details a precipitous increase in the use of biological adjuvants for primary ankle
arthrodesis. These additions raise the cost of the procedure and potentially incur morbidity
related to the donor site or adverse graft response. For these reasons the routine use of
bone graft has come under scrutiny with no consensus regarding its use. The cost - both
direct and indirect - of biological adjuvant should be weighed against its added value to
clinical outcomes. This systematic review aimed to assess the efficacy of bone autograft
versus no graft on achieving a clinically successful primary open ankle arthrodesis fixated
using cannulated screws.
Methods: Included studies were divided into 3 groups based on the use of bone
graft: no bone graft (NBG), fibular onlay with local autograft (FOBG), and the use of
autograft without fibular onlay (BG). Pooled data analysis was performed, and fusion rates
were frequency weighted in order to appropriately judge the impact of each study. Cohen’s d
was used to evaluate effect size for the use of bone graft. Modified Coleman Methodology
Score (MCMS) was calculated to analyze reporting quality.
Results: These selected studies described outcomes for a total of 884 patients
with mean follow up of 46 months. The reviewed literature was of moderate quality, with an
MCMS of 60.6. The weighted mean rate of fusion for the 3 groups was 96% in the NBG group
(n=182), 96% in the FOBG group (n = 257), and 95% in the BG group (n = 445), with no
significant difference between the groups (p=0.98). Use of bone graft resulted in a Cohen’s
d effect size of 0.10 (95% confidence interval 0.07- 0.26). Time to fusion for the 3 groups
was 13.60 weeks for the NBG group, 14.51 weeks for the FOBG group, and 15.10 weeks for the
BG group, with no significant difference between the groups (p=0.87). Number needed to treat
was 7 with the event of interest defined as a fusion rate less than 95%.
Conclusion: Bone graft use in primary open ankle arthrodesis fixated with
cannulated screws did not have a significant effect (p=0.98) on union rates and yielded a
small effect size. Further data demonstrated that 7 ankle arthrodesis patients need to be
treated with bone graft in order to prevent 1 clinically significant nonunion. The current
findings are both clinically and economically relevant, as commercial bone graft carries
additional cost and autologous graft harvest is not consistently a benign endeavor. With
increased cost and potential for complication, bone graft use should demonstrably improve
clinical outcomes in order to validate these additional burdens.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00232

## Evaluation of Union Rates Between Two Fixation Constructs with Use of an Allograft Bone
Wedge in the Lapidus Procedure

John Heifner, MD; Thomas P. San Giovanni, MD

Category: Bunion; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Lapidus Procedure; Hallux Valgus; Midfoot arthrodesis
Introduction/Purpose: The Lapidus procedure is used to treat a painful bunion
deformity by decreasing motion and aligning the first ray of the foot. Although structural
allograft has been previously described as acceptable practice for reconstructive foot and
ankle surgery, outcomes following the addition of an allograft bone wedge at the Lapidus
arthrodesis site are unknown. The biomechanical properties of various internal fixation
constructs for Lapidus have been evaluated in cadaveric models with no consensus on the
superiority of a single fixation method. Our objective was to report union rates for the
Lapidus procedure with and without the use of an allograft bone wedge and to determine if
fixation construct influenced the rates of union.
Methods: Lapidus patients with fixation constructs of 2 crossed compression
screws (CS) and a medial locking plate with single intra-articular screw (LPS), with and
without use of an allograft bone wedge were retrospectively analyzed. Inclusion required a
postoperative CT scan which evaluated union status, with greater than 50% bony bridging
across the arthrodesis site used as determination of bony union. Exclusion criteria included
age younger than 18 years, prior midfoot surgery, concomitant surgical procedures which may
alter the normative healing process, neuropathy and inflammatory disease. Demographic and
radiographic outcomes were analyzed between the wedge and no wedge groups. Pre and post
operative radiographic measurements included intermetatarsal angle (IMA), first
cuneiform-metatarsal length (CML) and relative length of the 1st metatarsal (RLM). Two
sample t tests were used to evaluate the radiographic measurements and risk differences were
calculated to evaluate rates of union. All analyses were executed using SAS Studio version
9.04.
Results: A total of 81 cases were included with 54 cases in the wedge group
and 27 cases in the no wedge group. Preoperative IMA, CML and RLM measurements were not
significantly different between the groups (p >0.05 for each). An overall union rate of
92% was found, with a significant difference (p=0.01) between the wedge group with 87.5%
union and the no wedge group with 100% union (Table 1). With LPS fixation, there was no
significance difference (p>0.05) in rates of union between the wedge (N=25) and no wedge
(N=21) groups. With CS fixation, there was a significant difference (p=0.014) in rates of
union between the wedge (N=29) and no wedge (N=6) groups. Postoperative radiographic
comparisons between the wedge and no wedge groups were not significant for IMA (p=0.89), CML
(p=0.16) and RLM (p=0.32) measurements.
Conclusion: With LPS fixation, rates of union were not significantly different
between the wedge (96% union) and no wedge groups (100% union). This finding highlights the
importance of a robust fixation construct which is an important predictor of union in
Lapidus procedures. Use of an allograft wedge can facilitate intraoperative decisions on the
appropriate amount of bony resection and decrease the risk of metatarsalgia due to
shortening. Lapidus arthrodesis with an allograft bone wedge fixated with a medial locking
plate and intra-articular compression screw provides the ability to maintain first ray
length and achieve greater corrections with satisfactory union rates.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00233

## Syndesmosis Injury Imparts A Large Negative Effect on Patient Reported Outcomes: A
Systematic Review

John Heifner, MD; Jack E. Kilgore; Jennifer A. Nichols; Christopher W. Reb, DO

Category: Trauma; Ankle; Sports
Keywords: Syndesmotic Injury; Ankle Fracture; Return to Play
Introduction/Purpose: Syndesmosis injuries are common, comprising up to 25% of
all ankle sprains and being present in 35% or more of ankle fractures. Within the narrative
of the syndesmosis literature, the substantial negative impact of syndesmosis injury is
commonly described in intuitive yet qualitative terms. Therefore, a constructive criticism
of the literature is to question how often and how well these reports have characterized the
magnitude of the impact of the syndesmosis injury itself compared to confounding factors
like concomitant injury. Indeed, such information particularly in aggregate, has the
potential to influence clinical practice. Within this context, the objective of this
systematic review was to assess how often and how well the literature has characterized the
magnitude of syndesmosis injury.
Methods: Included reports were grouped based on the setting in which
syndesmosis injury was studied: (1) isolated syndesmosis disruption compared to lateral
ankle sprain, (2) isolated syndesmosis disruption, (3) ankle fracture with concomitant
syndesmosis disruption compared to ankle fracture with no syndesmosis disruption, and (4)
ankle fracture with concomitant syndesmosis disruption without a comparison group with no
syndesmosis disruption. Literature quality was assessed via the Modified Coleman Methodology
Score (MCMS). Patients with and without syndesmosis injury were compared by independent
sample t-tests using pooled values for specific patient reported outcome measures.
Additionally, for these datasets, effect sizes were computed using Cohen’s d.
Results: Mean MCMS across all four groups was 59.9, indicating a moderate
level of evidence. MCMS did not differ significantly between groups (p = 0.07). Analysis of
reported outcomes indicated that syndesmosis injury has a significant (p = 0.007) effect and
a large negative effect (effect size = 1.77) ( ) on time to return to play when comparing
athletes with isolated syndesmosis sprain to those with lateral ankle sprain. Additionally,
analysis of ankle fracture patients indicated that syndesmosis injury has a large negative
effect on functional outcomes (effect sizes > 0.80 for Olerud Molander and AOFAS scores),
but little effect on pain (effect size = 0.14 for VAS pain). Studies which reported long
term outcomes (mean 87 months) showed a very large negative effect (effect size 9.24) for
Olerud Molander scores across 95 patients.
Conclusion: In athletic populations, days missed due to syndesmosis disruption
was statistically significant with a large effect size compared to lateral ankle sprain.
Further, among ankle fracture patients, Olerud Molander and AOFAS scores indicate a large
negative impact of syndesmosis disruption on functional outcomes despite a small negative
impact on short term pain. These results indicate that the continued impact of this injury
extends beyond the initial painful period and requires more attention. These
patient-reported outcomes support the qualitative assertions that syndesmosis injury
potentially imparts a large negative effect on clinical outcomes.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00234

## The Prognostic Value of Syndesmosis Malreduction for Revision Surgery: A Systematic
Review

John Heifner, MD; Jack E. Kilgore; Jennifer A. Nichols; Christopher W. Reb, DO

Category: Ankle; Trauma
Keywords: Syndesmotic Injury; Syndesmotic Reduction; Trauma
Introduction/Purpose: Reported rates of syndesmosis malreduction are highly
variable due to applied criteria that differ in imaging modality, threshold for malreduction
and use of the contralateral ankle for comparison. Studies have emphasized the importance of
anatomic reduction while providing inconclusive evidence for the need for revision surgery
in malreduced ankles. With no industry standard for determining malreduction, it is unclear
whether the most commonly used criteria is a valuable discriminator for clinical decision
making. Our objective was to describe the rates of syndesmosis revision that are reported in
the literature and to determine if malreduction diagnoses are reliable in predicting the
need for syndesmosis revision surgery.
Methods: Following PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews
and Meta Analyses) guidelines, a systematic review of the literature was performed in order
to describe revision syndesmosis surgery. Included studies were grouped based on criteria
for determining malreduction - group 1 (N = 954) used unilateral radiograph, group 2 (N =
41) used unilateral CT scan, group 3 (N =531) used bilateral CT scan and group 4 (N = 119)
used bilateral radiograph. Evidentiary quality was graded with the Modified Coleman
Methodology Score (MCMS). Student t tests were used to calculate the differences between
groups for rates of malreduction and revision. For the screening criteria most commonly used
to determine malreduction, the test characteristics sensitivity, specificity and positive
predictive value (PPV) were calculated.
Results: Pooled rates of malreduction and revision for the groups using CT
scan (groups 2 and 3, N = 572, mean follow up 16 months) were 23.5% and 0.25% respectively.
Pooled rates of malreduction and revision for the groups using bilateral imaging (groups 3
and 4, N = 650, mean follow up 20 months) were 18.5% and 0.8% respectively. Significant
differences were found between CT scan and radiograph for malreduction (p<0.001) and for
revision (p=0.02). Significant differences were also found between bilateral and unilateral
imaging for malreduction (p=0.01). The malreduction criteria of a 2mm difference in
tibiofibular space on CT scan between the injured and uninjured side was used in 6 studies
(N = 531, mean follow up 19 months). The sensitivity of this criteria for detecting cases
which required revision was 100%, specificity 78%, and PPV 6%.
Conclusion: It is unclear whether high rates of malreduction are due to
suboptimal surgical repair which lead to clinical detriment or are they solely an imaging
finding which depend heavily on the criteria for diagnosis. The most commonly used criteria
for malreduction - a 2mm side-to-side difference in tibiofibular space on CT scan - is
highly sensitive for reoperations. The specificity and PPV indicate that a threshold of more
than 2mm is needed to better evaluate those ankles which may require revision surgery. Based
on the current findings, malreduction diagnoses do not adequately translate from
disease-oriented information to patient-oriented information.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00235

## Surgical Reconstruction of Progressive Collapsing Foot Deformity Restores Kinematics
during Simulated Level Walking

Jensen K. Henry, MD; Jeffrey W. Hoffman, MS; Jaeyoung Kim, MD; Brett D. Steineman;
Daniel R. Sturnick, MS; Constantine A. Demetracopoulos, MD; Jonathan T. Deland, MD; Scott
J. Ellis, MD

Category: Basic Sciences/Biologics; Hindfoot
Keywords: Biomechanics of the Foot and Ankle; Flatfoot; Gait Study Range of
Motion
Introduction/Purpose: Progressive collapsing foot deformity (PCFD) is a
complex 3-dimensional pathology with a wide variety of surgical treatments. Regardless of
technique, operative management of PCFD aims to restore normal foot architecture with
attention to avoid the consequences of under- or over-correction. However, current methods
of evaluating PCFD correction rely on static measurements, which do not assess dynamic
function of the foot. Recent advances in robotic technology allow for the dynamic assessment
of surgical correction of PCFD. This study sought to assess the effects of 2 osteotomies for
PCFD, the medializing calcaneal osteotomy (MCO) and lateral column lengthening (LCL), on
kinematics and plantar pressure during simulated gait. We hypothesized that the combination
of LCL and MCO would restore joint kinematics and plantar pressure values to normal
levels.
Methods: Twelve cadaveric mid-tibia specimens (mean age 73 years, 8 female)
were loaded on a 6-degree of freedom robotic gait simulator. Ground reaction forces and
muscle forces were optimized utilizing an established iterative process. An 8-camera motion
capture system was utilized to calculate joint kinematics using reflective markers attached
by k-wires into bone. Plantar pressures were recorded using a pedography mat attached to the
force platform. Testing was performed first in the native intact state, and again after
creation of the flatfoot model. After flatfoot testing, surgical reconstruction and testing
were performed in stages with MCO, and LCL with sequential 6mm and 8mm grafts.
Bias-corrected bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals were calculated from the repeated
measures difference between normal, flatfoot, post-MCO, post-MCO and post-reconstructive
conditions. Center of plantar pressure excursion index (CPEI) was calculated and compared
between conditions using a repeated measures ANOVA with Tukey post hoc analysis.
Results: Overall, surgical correction restored kinematics to normal levels
(Figure). MCO alone resulted in statistically significant improvement in subtalar eversion
in the first 20% of stance, and post-MCO subtalar kinematics were statistically similar to
normal. LCL (either 6mm and 8mm) alone did not significantly correct talonavicular abduction
after PCFD. However, in conjunction with MCO, LCL was able to significantly correct
talonavicular kinematics throughout the majority of stance phase, with kinematics
statistically similar to normal levels. Each surgical step (LCL 6mm, LCL 8mm, MCO) resulted
in sequential lateralization of the center of plantar pressure. At the culmination of
surgical reconstruction (MCO + LCL), plantar pressure was significantly corrected compared
to PCFD (P<0.0001). After surgical reconstruction, CPEI was slightly increased
(lateralized) in comparison to normal, but was not significantly different from the normal
state.
Conclusion: The findings from this study support our hypothesis that surgical
reconstruction of PCFD via MCO and LCL restores normal level walking kinematics. While the
isolated effect of MCO and LCL resulted in significant changes in subtalar and talonavicular
kinematics, the synergistic effect of combining MCO and LCL were most effective in restoring
normal kinematics. However, lateralization of plantar pressure after combining MCO and LCL
compared to the normal condition indicates the potential for overload of the lateral column,
as described previously. Therefore, surgeons should be cautious in increasing osteotomy size
at the lateral column to avoid overload.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00236

## The Impact of Progressive Collapsing Foot Deformity on Foot & Ankle Kinematics and
Plantar Pressure During Simulated Gait

Jensen K. Henry, MD; Jeffrey W. Hoffman, MS; Jaeyoung Kim, MD; Brett D. Steineman;
Daniel R. Sturnick, MS; Constantine A. Demetracopoulos, MD; Jonathan T. Deland, MD; Scott
J. Ellis, MD

Category: Basic Sciences/Biologics; Hindfoot
Keywords: Biomechanics of the Foot and Ankle; Flatfoot; Gait Study Range of
Motion
Introduction/Purpose: Progressive collapsing foot deformity (PCFD) is a
3-dimensional pathology associated with insufficiency of the posterior tibial tendon (PTT),
ligamentous failure, joint malalignment, and aberrant plantar force distribution. Existing
knowledge of PCFD consists of static measurements, which provide information about the
structure of the foot but none about its function. Cadaveric gait models provide an
opportunity to measure motion both at the joints primarily affected in PCFD and the adjacent
joints that are at risk for progressive subluxation and arthritis. This study sought to
develop a flatfoot model for a robotic gait simulator and quantify gait kinematics and
plantar pressure between normal and flatfoot conditions, which we hypothesized would be
altered after the creation of a flatfoot deformity model.
Methods: Cadaveric specimens were loaded on a 6-degree of freedom robotic gait
simulator and the extrinsic tendons were attached to linear motors. Ground reaction forces
and muscle forces were optimized utilizing an established iterative process. An 8-camera
motion capture system was utilized to calculate joint kinematics using reflective markers
attached by k-wires into bone. A plantar pressure mat attached to the force platform was
used to calculate the center of pressure excursion index (CPEI) for each condition. The
flatfoot model was created via sectioning of the spring ligament and medial talonavicular
joint capsule followed by cyclic axial compression until 5-15° of talonavicular abduction
was achieved in a static, loaded pose. Testing of the flatfoot state was then performed with
inactivation of the PTT. Bias-corrected bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals were
constructed from the repeated measures difference between flatfoot and normal conditions.
Paired t-tests were used to compare the CPEI between conditions.
Results: Twelve mid-tibia cadaveric specimens (mean age 73 years, 8 female)
with no prior foot/ankle surgery were used. There were significant differences in kinematics
between normal and PCFD conditions at the ankle, subtalar, and talonavicular joints
(Figure). There was significantly increased ankle plantar flexion in flatfoot in the first
80% of stance phase. There was significantly greater subtalar eversion in flatfoot compared
to normal from 10-90% of stance phase. Talonavicular abduction and eversion were also
significantly greater in flatfoot from 10-100% of stance. The CPEI was significantly
decreased in the flatfoot condition (Figure), indicating a medialization in center of
pressure (p<0.0001).
Conclusion: The results from this study support our hypothesis of altered
kinematics and plantar pressure after flatfoot deformity creation and corroborate previous
biomechanical studies of static alignment in PCFD. Increased talonavicular abduction and
subtalar eversion are hallmarks of flatfoot deformity, and increased ankle plantarflexion
may represent the plantarflexed position of the talus in PCFD. In addition, plantar pressure
was significantly medialized with flatfoot deformity. These findings highlight the utility
of the gait simulator as a tool for future study of PCFD, especially for analysis of
deformity patterns and the specific effects of individual interventions.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00237

## Biomechanical Comparison of Cannulated Screws vs Nitinol Staple for Tarsometatarsal
Fusion in A Cadaveric Model

Alexander S. Herrin; Zachary Koroneos; Sherif T. Elakkari; Gregory Lewis, PhD;
Temitope Adebayo; Umur Aydogan, MD

Category: Diabetes; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: 1st MTP Joint; Hallux Valgus; Midfoot arthrodesis
Introduction/Purpose: Patients with hallux abducto-valgus typically require
first-tarsometatarsal arthrodesis procedures for which the method of fixation is
controversial. Nitinol staples have increased in popularity due to their pseudoelastic, and
fatigue resistant properties that allow for shape memory. The objective of this study was to
evaluate the performance of a Nitinol staple and crossed-screws through three-dimensional
diastasis measurements for the first-tarsometatarsal joint in a 4-point bending isolated
cadaveric joint model. We tested the hypothesis that a medially applied Nitinol staple would
provide the same dynamic stability as crossed-screws while allowing for more physiologic
motion.
Methods: Seven matched-pairs of lower limb cadaveric specimens were thawed and
dissected to isolate the first-tarsometatarsal joint including the first-metatarsal, medial
cuneiform, and joint capsule. One specimen from each donor was fixed with a Nitinol staple
placed on the medial side of the joint while the other specimen was fixed with two
cannulated crossed-screws. Specimens were potted and tested in an MTS test frame (MTS
FlexTest 40 MTS, Eden-Prarie, MN) in a 4-point bending setup ( ) while maintaining a temperature of 37°C.
The diastasis between the first-metatarsal and medial cuneiform was measured at two points
on the plantar aspect of each bone near the joint ( ). Specimens were pre-loaded to 10 N, then
stepwise increases in cyclic loading performed at 1 Hz and 50 cycles, at 5 N force intervals
until failure (complete separation) at the joint occurred. Diastasis measurements were
recorded after every 25 N (250 cycles).
Results: 3 of 7 matched pairs of specimens have been tested to date. All
specimens were able to endure loading up to a peak load of 225 N (2000 cycles) ( ). At this peak-load,
specimens fixed with the Nitinol staple had an average diastasis of 0.79 mm +/- 0.70 mm
(average +/- std deviation) versus 0.39 mm +/- 0.16 mm in specimens fixed with screws.
Specimens fixed with the staple construct failed at 277 N +/- 51 N whereas those fixed with
screws failed 315 N +/- 48 N. Results for 4 additional matched pairs are pending.
Conclusion: There has been debate as to whether the rigid fixation of
crossed-screws or the compressive shape memory properties of Nitinol staples are
advantageous for tarsometatarsal arthrodesis. No previous study has compared the two methods
of fixation in a cadaveric model. In this study no significant differences between the two
methods have been detected to date. However, other benefits of the staple construct may
include decreased procedural time, decreased time under anesthesia, and possible permittance
of earlier post-operative weightbearing.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00238

## Vascular Evaluation of Diabetic Patients Presenting with Radiographic Calcified Vessels
of the Foot and Ankle

Dolfi J. Herscovici, Jr., DO, FAAOS; Julia M. Scaduto, APRN

Category: Diabetes
Keywords: Diabetes; Clinical Outcomes; Diabetic Foot
Introduction/Purpose: Calcification of the vessels is a common finding in
patients with peripheral arterial disease (PAD) and can indicate a compromised extremity.
The incidence of PAD disease has been reported in approximately 29% of diabetics and
calcification may also indicate a foot or ankle at risk. The purpose of this study was to
evaluate toe pressures (TP) in patients who presented with radiographic calcification of
vessels in the foot and ankle and determine if adequate flow existed despite the
calcification.
Methods: Using a Diabetic Registry from January, 2011 through February, 2021,
a retrospective review was used to identify patients who presented with x-ray calcifications
of the foot and ankle and was compared to patients who had undergone TP. For the purpose of
this study, the findings of Vitti et al., who demonstrated that no surgical failures
occurred in patients with TP >68 mm Hg, were used to stratify patients as having adequate
(68 mm Hg) or a compromised (<68 mm Hg) blood flow to the foot. The patients' age, body
mass index (BMI), hemoglobin A1C, smoking history, use of insulin, whether they could
adequately detect a 5.07 monofilament and whether they had adequate TP were all
recorded.
Results: A total of 43 patients were identified with radiographic
calcification of the foot and ankle. Within this population the average age was 68.1 years
(45-89), the average BMI was 30. 8 (18.4-51.1), with an average A1C of 7.7 (5.5-14.2). Three
patients (7%) were smokers. Eighteen patients (42%) could adequately detect a 5.07
monofilament and only 20 patients (47%) were on insulin. A TP evaluation was performed on a
total of 53 patients. A total of 13 patients who had calcification of the vessels and who
had TP evaluations were identified. Within this group, 11 patients demonstrated TP values
> 68 mm Hg with only 2 patients demonstrating compromised TP.
Conclusion: Calcification of vessels in the foot and ankle has been stated to
suggest vascular compromise and indicate a foot and ankle at risk. These patients are obese,
older individuals with poor glycemic control who, for the most part, are neuropathic.
However, in this small study group, patients who had calcification of their vessels and had
TP, demonstrated that despite the calcifications, adequate blood flow was achieved into the
foot. This may indicate that combined with improved glycemic control, patients can undergo
elective or semi-elective surgical procedures with adequate healing rates expected.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00239

## Comparison of Clinical Results Between Locking Plate Fixation and Screw Fixation for
Intra-Articular Calcaneal Fractures

Naohiro Hio, MD, PhD; Masanori Taki, MD, PhD

Category: Trauma; Hindfoot
Keywords: Calcaneus Fractures - Treatment; Internal Fixation; Sinus Tarsi
Approach
Introduction/Purpose: The purpose of this study is to compare the results of
the two fixation groups for intra-articular calcaneal fractures based on the hypothesis that
the locking plate group (P-group) can have a less corrective loss but smaller range of
motion due to soft tissue contracture than the screw alone group (S-group).
Methods: P-group included ten feet, five feet of which were categorized as
Sanders classification type 2, four as type 3, one as type 4. S-group included 11 feet, nine
as type 2, two as type 3. In both groups, small incisions such as sinus tarsi approach were
used, and P-group was fixed with a locking plate, and canulated cancellous screws if
necessary, while S-group was fixed with canulated cancellous screws only. We assessed range
of motion of the ankle joint and subtalar joint, Creighton-Nebraska scale (CN scale) and
pre- and postoperative width and height of the calcaneal body and step of subtalar joint
surface.
Results: The mean postoperative range of motion in the P-group / S-group was
15°/46.2° / 13.2°/45.9° for ankle dorsiflexion/plantarflexion, and 5°/13° / 5.5°/16° for
subtalar joint eversion/inversion, respectively. The mean postoperative clinical score was
89.8+-9.5 points / 93.9+-8.0 points on the CN scale, and the mean pre- and postoperative
imaging evaluation showed improvements in the mean width from 120.7+-8.9% to 107+-6.7% /
122.6+-13.4% to 112.9+-10.7%, in the mean height from 88.7+-4.6% to 97.8+-3.3% / 88.3+-5.8%
to 99.4+-5.3%, and in the mean step of subtalar joint surface from 6.2+-5.3 mm to 0.7+-1.1
mm / 10.5+-7.6 mm to 1.5+-2.5 mm. As complications, peroneal tendinopathy and transient
peroneal neuropathy were observed in one case each in the both groups.
Conclusion: There was no significant difference between the two groups in the
corrective loss and postoperative range of motion.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00240

## A Detailed Analysis of Workplace Foot and Ankle Injuries

Caroline P. Hoch; Alexander Caughman; Adam Griffith; Caroline P. Hoch; James C. Rex;
Daniel J. Scott, MD, MBA; Christopher E. Gross, MD

Category: Trauma; Ankle; Hindfoot; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Ankle Sprain; Ankle Fracture; Trauma
Introduction/Purpose: In 2018 over 96,000 foot and ankle injuries resulted in
lost workdays. The average 2017-2018 workers compensation claim for ankle injuries was
$17,210 for medical costs with an additional $13,276 of indemnity. Workplace foot injuries
were similarly expensive, averaging $15,762 in medical costs and $11,866 in indemnity. These
costs highlight the burden workplace foot and ankle injuries place on both workers and
employers. This study analyzes the incidence, rate, and days lost from work due to foot and
ankle injuries across different industries, age groups, and genders and compares these
findings to other musculoskeletal injuries. These findings will help us better understand
which industries are greater impacted by foot and ankle injuries and what factors may
influence the occurrence and severity of these injuries.
Methods: Workplace injury data was obtained using a special query from the
Bureau of Labor Statistics Workplace Injuries and Illnesses Nonfatal Cases Involving Days
Away From Work: Selected Characteristics database. Data included injury incidence, incidence
rate per 10,000 workers, and median days missed from work due to injury. The data was
grouped by injury location (all injuries, ankle injuries, and foot injuries), type of injury
(fracture, sprain, amputation), and industry. Spearman correlation, one-way ANOVA, and
independent samples t-test were used to identify the industries, sex, and ages associated
with the highest rates and median days missed from work for each of these groups. Regression
analysis was used to analyze changes in incidence rate over time. Incidence rate data was
obtained for a seventeen-year period (2003-2019) and days lost from work data was obtained
for a nine-year period (2011-2019). Data analysis was performed using SPSS statistics
software, version 25.0.
Results: The mining (44.85 foot,17.09 ankle), transportation/warehousing
(16.82,16.29), and utilities (24.41,26.69) industries had three of the five highest average
median days missed from work for both foot and ankle injuries. Of these, only
transportation/warehousing (11.06,13.80) was among the five industries with the highest
rates of foot and ankle injuries. There was a strong negative correlation (P<0.001)
between age and rate of both foot and ankle injuries and a strong positive correlation
(P<0.001) between age and median days missed from work. Males had significantly higher
rates of foot injuries (5.31) than females (3.80; P<.0001). Males also had higher rates
of ankle injuries (4.96) than females (4.88; P=.453). Regression analysis showed the
incidence rate of ankle sprains, ankle fractures, foot sprains, and foot fractures decreased
from 2003-2019.
Conclusion: This study demonstrates that the incidence rate and severity of
workplace foot and ankle injuries are influenced by workers' age, gender, and the industry
they work in. It shows that industries with higher days missed often did not have higher
rates of injuries. Our results have the potential to be used to identify industries in need
of additional safeguards to protect workers from injury and provide companies with
information about the industry norm for rates of employee injuries and days missed from work
for these injuries.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00241

## Assessing the Influence of Pain and Resiliency Scores on Post-Operative
Outcomes

Caroline P. Hoch; Jonathan R. Pire; Jonathan R. Pire; Daniel J. Scott, MD, MBA;
Christopher E. Gross, MD

Category: Other; Ankle; Hindfoot; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Patient Reported Outcome Measures (PROMS); Preoperative risk
factors; Pain
Introduction/Purpose: Resilience is defined as the ability to recover after
stressful events and has been shown to correlate with surgical outcomes across multiple
fields. To date, there has been minimal research on the impact of patient resiliency on
outcomes of foot and ankle surgery. Thus, this study aimed to look for an association
between resilience, as measured by the Brief Resilience Scale (BRS); pain, as measured by
the Pain Disability Index (PDI) and Pain Catastrophizing Scale (PCS); and post-operative
outcomes after foot and ankle surgery.
Methods: At a single academic medical center, a retrospective review of
prospectively collected data was conducted on orthopaedic foot and ankle (n=201) and
podiatric (n=7) patients who completed a pre-operative BRS and underwent surgery between
2019 and 2020 (N=208). The cohort consisted of 46 post-operative opioid users and 162
non-users. Data collected included demographics, comorbidities, diagnoses, procedure (i.e.,
removal of implant=22, Brostrom=15, tenolysis of flexor or extensor tendons=11, 1st MTP
fusion=11, cheilectomy=10, etc.), PDI and PCS scores, complications, outcome markers, and
pre- and post-operative opioid and benzodiazepine use. Data was analyzed with one-way ANOVA
and linear and multivariate regressions formulated by SPSS software.
Results: The PDI score significantly correlated with post-operative
benzodiazepine (p=.011) and opioid use (p=.006), the BRS score significantly correlated with
post-operative benzodiazepine use (p=.007), and the PCS score significantly correlated with
longer length of follow-up (p=.011). Pre-operative opioid use was associated with an
increased rate of 30-day readmission (users=6.52%, non-users=2.47%; p<.001). The multiple
regression analysis indicated that the BRS score remained significantly correlated to
post-operative benzodiazepine use (p=.004). Results of the multiple regression analysis also
indicated that higher PCS scores were significantly correlated with increased rates of
30-day readmission (p=.047) and longer length of follow-up (p=.005). No outcome measure was
significantly correlated with PDI score, according to the multiple regression analysis.
Conclusion: In conclusion, the PCS was not shown to be an effective tool for
measuring post-operative outcomes in orthopaedic foot and ankle patients, despite evidence
of the contrary in other fields of orthopaedics. Additionally, the BRS and PDI were only
valuable in their association with post-operative narcotic usage. Pre-operative opioid use
was shown to correlate with worse higher rates of readmission and limited follow up, as
corroborated by numerous previous studies. This study did not find the BRS, PDI, or PCS as
useful indicators of surgical outcomes in foot and ankle patients.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00242

## Does Medicaid Expansion Improve Access to Care for Ankle Sprains?

Caroline P. Hoch; Daniel J. Scott, MD, MBA; Christopher E. Gross, MD

Category: Ankle; Sports; Other
Keywords: Affordable Care Act; Health Care; Ankle Sprain
Introduction/Purpose: Prior research has found Medicaid patients face greater
difficulty scheduling appointments with orthopaedic surgeons compared to those with other
insurance. Recently, a number of states have expanded Medicaid coverage as part of the
affordable care act, although it is unclear how this expansion impacts the ability of these
patients to obtain access to orthopaedic surgeons. We questioned whether Medicaid patients
face additional barriers to care for treatment of ankle sprains, an extremely common
athletic injury. Our goal was to determine whether individual state Medicaid expansion
status, as well as type of insurance accepted, affected access to care for ankle
sprains.
Methods: Four pairs of Medicaid expanded (Kentucky, Louisiana, Iowa, Arizona)
and unexpanded (North Carolina, Alabama, Wisconsin, Texas) states in similar geographic
locations were chosen. Twelve foot and ankle practices from each state (N=96) were randomly
selected from the American Orthopaedic Foot & Ankle Society directory. Each clinic was
called twice to request an appointment for a fictitious 16-year-old with a first-time ankle
sprain with either in-state Medicaid insurance or Blue Cross Blue Shield (BCBS) private
insurance.
Results: An appointment was obtained at 63 (65.6%) clinics when calling with
BCBS and 44 (45.8%) clinics with Medicaid (P=.006). There was a significant difference in
appointment scheduling based on insurance status in Medicaid unexpanded states (Medicaid=21,
43.8% vs. BCBS=34, 70.8%; P=.007). However, this difference was not significant in Medicaid
expanded states (Medicaid=23, 47.9% vs. BCBS=29, 60.4%; P=.219). In addition, in all states
except Iowa, a Medicaid expanded state, more appointments were scheduled using BCBS than
Medicaid. The three most common reasons for appointment denial were inability to provide an
insurance identification number (47.1%), insurance status (23.5%), and lack of referral
(17.6%). The waiting period for an appointment was not significantly different depending on
insurance status or Medicaid expansion status (Medicaid=3.30 days, BCBS=3.43 days,
P=.152).
Conclusion: For patients with first-time ankle sprains, access to care is more
difficult using Medicaid insurance rather than private insurance, especially in Medicaid
unexpanded states. However, when granted an appointment, Medicaid patients waited a
comparable amount of time to the appointment as those using private insurance.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00243

## Effect of Preoperative Ulceration on Outcomes of Tibiotalocalcaneal Arthrodesis

Caroline P. Hoch; William Newton; William Newton; Christopher E. Gross, MD; Daniel J.
Scott, MD, MBA

Category: Hindfoot; Diabetes
Keywords: Tibiotalocalcaneal Arthrodesis; Charcot; Internal Fixation
Introduction/Purpose: Tibiotalocalcaneal (TTC) arthrodesis is commonly
performed for complex deformity, arthritis, or unstable Charcot about the hindfoot. In
patients with neuropathy, hindfoot deformity, and preoperative hindfoot ulceration,
management options can be limited and very challenging. Previously, some authors have
advocated for fine wire circular frames and avoidance of internal fixation in an effort to
decrease the risk of infection in patients with preoperative ulceration, however, there is
very limited data on the outcomes of TTC arthrodesis with internal fixation in this patient
population. We hypothesized that internal fixation of TTC arthrodesis in patients with
preoperative ulceration would lead to higher infection rates compared to patients without
ulceration.
Methods: A retrospective review was conducted on the TTC fusions performed
from 2016-2020 by a single fellowship trained foot and ankle surgeon at an academic medical
center. Preoperative diagnosis and indications, fixation method, clinical success, and
complications were obtained from the patients' charts. Patients were excluded if their
clinical or radiographic data were unavailable for review, or if they had less than 3 months
of follow-up. 34 patients (34 ankles) underwent TTC arthrodesis Mean age was 60.7 years and
mean follow-up was 1.3 years. Statistical analysis was performed using t-Student and
Chi-squared tests with a p-value of 0.05 defining significance. Midline tibiotalar angle
(MTA) was measured before and after surgery to assess position of fusion. Nine patients had
preoperative ulcers at the time of surgery.
Results: Common surgical indications included Charcot neuropathy (n=17),
post-traumatic (n=14), and cavovarus (n=3). All patients with preoperative ulcers underwent
TTC fusion with an intermedullary rod. Of the patients without ulceration, 18 underwent
intermedullary nailing, 5 underwent plating, and 1 had an external fixator placed. There was
no difference in deep wound infection rates between patients with (2/9, 22.2%) and without
(2/25, 8.0%; p=.386) preoperative ulceration; nor was there a difference in rate of fusion,
wound healing, or radiographic alignment. One patient without preoperative ulceration
underwent a below knee amputation due to infection.
Conclusion: TTC arthrodesis with internal fixation appears to be a reasonable
consideration in patients with a preoperative hindfoot ulcer. There was no statistical
difference in infection rate in patients undergoing TTC fusion with and without preoperative
ulceration. Further, the rate of infection in those with an ulcer and internal fixation was
acceptable, and internal fixation can be considered in these patients.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00244

## Increased Complication Rate Associated with Podiatric Surgery

Caroline P. Hoch; Daniel J. Scott, MD, MBA; Daniel L. Brinton; Lizmarie Maldonado;
Christopher E. Gross, MD

Category: Other; Ankle; Bunion; Diabetes; Hindfoot; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Complications; Diabetes; Plantar Fasciitis
Introduction/Purpose: Nationally, there has been an increase in the scope of
practice between orthopaedic surgeons and podiatrists. However, there is a paucity of
studies in the literature comparing outcomes between orthopaedic and podiatric surgeons in
different areas of foot and ankle surgery.
Methods: A retrospective analysis was conducted using 2016-2017 5% US national
sample of the Medicare limited dataset (LDS). This included a total of 527 patients
undergoing one of 14 CPT foot and ankle specific codes. Basic demographics, medical
comorbidities, and 1-year post-surgical complications were reviewed. One-hundred and
eighteen patients were operated on by a podiatrist versus 409 who were operated on by a
physician. Mean age was 69. Common procedures included gastrocnemius recession (n=168),
ankle fracture open reduction internal fixation (168), and Achilles tendon repair (72).
Continuous variables were compared using Wilcoxon-Mann Whitney test and categorical
variables with chi-squared test. In addition, a multivariable regression was performed,
evaluating the impact of various factors on odds of complication.
Results: Between cohorts, there were no statistically significant differences
in demographics, Charlson Score, COPD, hypothyroidism, hypertension, or obesity. There was a
higher rate of peripheral vascular disease in patients treated by a podiatrist versus a
physician (8.5% vs. 2.4%; P=.0025). Univariate analysis showed complication rates were
higher among podiatrist compared to physicians (29.7% vs. 18.8%; P=.0113). Specifically,
there were high rates of complications for bunion correction (4.2% vs. 1.0%; P=.0160),
diabetic wound infection (11.0% vs. 1.5%; P<0.0001), and plantar fascia release (7.6% vs.
0.1%; P=.0001). Multivariable logistic regression showed patients operated on by a
podiatrist had 84.1% greater odds of suffering a complication than those operated on by a
physician (OR: 1.84, 95% CI: 1.15-2.96).
Conclusion: Surgical treatment of multiple types of foot and ankle conditions
by orthopaedic surgeons was associated with lower complication rates when compared with
podiatrists. The reasons for these differences are likely multifactorial, but warrants
further investigation. Our findings have important implications for policymakers, as well as
for large healthcare systems and patients when selecting a treating provider for surgical
problems.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00245

## Radiographic Characterization of Midfoot and Transverse Tarsal Joint
Osteoarthritis

Caroline P. Hoch; Alexander Caughman; David E. Baxley; Katherine M. McGurk; Daniel J.
Scott, MD, MBA; Christopher E. Gross, MD

Category: Ankle Arthritis; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: CT; Midfoot; Nonoperative
Introduction/Purpose: Midfoot osteoarthritis affects over 16% of adults over
the age of 50, interfering with activities of daily living and leisure. Non-operative
management includes anti-inflammatory, carbon fiber shank/custom orthotics, and
cortico-steroid injections. To improve accuracy, these injections are often done under
fluoroscopic guidance. Operative intervention with midfoot fusions is sometimes performed,
though non-union rates and continued pain after surgery can be challenging. Sometimes, there
can be difficulty in determining exactly which midfoot joints are most arthritic/symptomatic
based on radiographs. This study aims to quantify how well surgeons are able to diagnose
midfoot and transverse tarsal joint arthritis on standing radiographs versus advanced
imaging.
Methods: We reviewed the records of 113 patients (144 feet) with midfoot
arthritis, who were treated from 2015 to 2019 at an academic medical center by a single
fellowship trained foot and ankle surgeon. The mean age was 63.0 years, the average BMI was
31.5, and 7 patients eventually underwent surgery. Each patient underwent both plain
radiographs, according to a standardized protocol, and either a CT or MRI scan. Radiographs
and advanced images were graded separately for the presence of joint space narrowing,
subchondral cysts, and other signs of arthritis in the following joints: 1st tarsometatarsal
(TMT), 2nd TMT, 3rd TMT, 4th TMT, 5th TMT, naviculocuneiforms (NC), talonavicular (TN),
calcaneocuboid (CC), subtalar (ST), and 1st metatarsophalangeal (MTP). The sensitivity,
specificity, precision, negative predictive value, and overall accuracy of radiographs
compared to CT scans was calculated for each joint. Statistical significance was assessed
using a paired t-test.
Results: The most common joints affected by arthritis were the 2nd TMT
(radiograph=75.7%, CT=79.9%) and 3rd TMT (radiograph=65.5%, CT=70.4%). Advanced imaging
showed a significantly higher rate of arthritis in the 1st TMT (P<0.01), 4th TMT
(P<0.01), and 5th TMT (P<0.01), as compared to radiograph. Only 16.9% of patients'
radiographs had a direct correlation with the results of their CT scan. A CT scan showed one
or two additional affected joints by 19.7% and 13.0 %, respectively; and rarely showed one
or two less joints affected by arthritis (8.1% and 3.2%, respectively). We found
radiographic sensitivity and specificity to be highly variable (1st TMT=61.3% & 92.3%,
3rd TMT=79.5% & 69.3%).
Conclusion: Radiographs vary drastically in their sensitivities and
specificities in diagnosing arthritic joints in the midfoot and transverse tarsal joints.
When treating midfoot osteoarthritis surgically, we recommend obtaining advanced imaging
preoperatively, rather than relying on plain radiographs alone to determine which joints may
need to be managed surgically.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00246

## Risks of Preoperative Opioid Therapy on Ankle Surgery Success

Caroline P. Hoch; William Newton; Daniel J. Scott, MD, MBA; Christopher E. Gross,
MD

Category: Ankle; Hindfoot
Keywords: Preoperative risk factors; Total Ankle Arthroplasty; Hindfoot
Fusion
Introduction/Purpose: Past studies have found that preoperative chronic opioid
therapy correlates with increased opioid use post-operatively as well as potentially worse
surgical outcomes; however, these trends have not been extensively studied in cases of
hindfoot fusions or ankle replacement (TAA). Therefore, we aimed to fill this gap in the
research and understand the relationship between preoperative opioid use and postoperative
success in order to improve patient outcomes. We hypothesized that patients with chronic
opioid use prior to surgery would have increased likelihood of postoperative opioid use,
complications, and re-operation.
Methods: A retrospective review was conducted of ankle (AA), talo-navicular
(TN), and tibio-talo-calcaneal (TTC) fusions, as well as TAAs from December 2014-August 2020
by a single fellowship trained foot and ankle surgeon. Pre- and postoperative opioid and
other analgesic use, medical history, demographics, and surgical outcomes were reviewed.
Statistical analysis was preformed using correlation, linear multivariate regression,
independent-samples t-test, and one-way ANOVA. One-hundred and fifty-two patients
(female=66, male=86) with mean BMI of 31.7 and mean follow-up of 1.35 years were included.
Thirty-nine underwent isolated AA, 28 TTC, 85 TAA, 9 TAA + other hindfoot fusions, 1
pan-talar fusion, and 1 TN + ankle fusion. Seventeen had a history of substance abuse (i.e.,
EtOH, opioids, benzodiazepines, other substances). Records of preoperative opioid use were
limited to 93 patients, 90-day postoperative opioid use to 81 patients, and 120-day
postoperative opioid use to 73 patients.
Results: Preoperative opioid use was significantly associated with reoperation
rate (P=.027) and continued postoperative opioid use at 90 (P<.001) and 120 days
(P<.001). Preoperative benzodiazepine use was significantly associated with continued
postoperative benzodiazepine use at 90 (P<.001) and 120 days (P<.001). There was no
significant difference in postoperative opioid use, complications, or reoperation rate
between substance abusers and other patients. Female sex (P=.029) and BMI (P=.013) were
significant predictors of postoperative opioid use. Of comorbidities, mental illness was a
significant predictor of postoperative opioid use (P=.022); substance abuse history (P=.006)
and mental illness (P=.001) were significant predictors of postoperative benzodiazepine use.
In addition, postoperative opioid use significantly differed by surgery type (fusion=64.5
MME, TAA=28.0 MME, TAA + fusion=859.6 MME; P<.001), but postoperative benzodiazepine use
did not.
Conclusion: We found that patients with pre-operative opioid use have
statically significantly higher rates of re-operation and continued post-operative opioid
use. We also found that on average, patients undergoing hindfoot fusion require statically
significantly more narcotics than those undergoing total ankle arthroplasty. Patients and
surgeons should be aware of this data to help appropriately council patients on
post-operative expectations.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00247

## Vancomycin Powder Associated with Decreased Surgical Site Infections in Lower Extremity
Trauma

Caroline P. Hoch; Christopher L. Robinson, BS; Christopher L. Robinson, BS; Alex
Rovner, BA; Raines M. Waggett, BS; Ryan Horn, MD; Daniel J. Scott, MD, MBA; Christopher E.
Gross, MD

Category: Ankle; Ankle Arthritis; Arthroscopy; Bunion; Hindfoot;
Midfoot/Forefoot; Sports; Trauma
Keywords: Trauma; Postoperative Infection; Wound Complications
Introduction/Purpose: The use of intraoperative topical vancomycin powder has
recently increased in popularity as a method of theoretically decreasing post-operative
surgical site infections; however, there is limited research in orthopaedic trauma to
support its use. This study evaluates the use of topical vancomycin powder to decrease
post-operative infections following lower extremity trauma. We also investigated
socio-demographic factors and medical comorbidities that were associated with post-
operative surgical site infections.
Methods: We conducted a review of 226 patients at a single Level 1 Trauma
Center following surgery between the years 2015 and 2020. These patients were treated
predominantly by a single fellowship trained foot and ankle orthopaedic surgeon. Demographic
factors, medical comorbidities, postoperative infections, and use of vancomycin powder were
reviewed. Analysis of 4 groups (no infection, superficial infection, deep infection, or
both) was performed using Fischer’s exact test and Student t-test. A logistic regression
model was utilized to identify independent demographic factors and medical comorbidities
that were associated with surgical site infection.
Results: The final cohort included 221 patients, of which 26 received
intraoperative vancomycin powder. There were 23 total post-operative surgical site
infections. Of those, 14 infections were superficial, 3 were deep, and 6 were both
superficial and deep. All but one of these infections were in patients without vancomycin
powder applied. Patients who received intraoperative vancomycin powder were statistically
significantly less likely to acquire post-operative surgical site infections than those who
did not (1 vs. 22, p=0.031). The one postsurgical site infection with vancomycin use was a
deep infection in a patient with chronic kidney disease that had previously undergone three
irrigation and debridement surgeries for a gunshot wound. Male sex was the only demographic
or comorbidity factor associated with postoperative surgical site infection (p=0.009,
OR=4.006).
Conclusion: We found an association between topical vancomycin use and lower
likelihood of developing postsurgical wound infections in lower extremity trauma. This is
consistent with similar studies in spinal surgery. In contrast to previous studies, we did
not find a significant association between medical comorbidities or demographic factors
other than male sex and surgical site infection. Future studies should aim to identify which
patients would have the greatest reduction of risk for postsurgical wound infections with
the use of intraoperative topical vancomycin powder.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00248

## Effect of Achilles Tendon Repair on Performance Outcomes Following Return to Play in
NCAA Division I Basketball Athletes

Blake H. Hodgens; Rafael A. Sanchez; Joseph S. Geller; Samuel R. Huntley, MD, MPH;
Jonathan R. Kaplan, MD; Amiethab A. Aiyer, MD

Category: Sports; Ankle
Keywords: Achilles Tendon Rupture; Basketball; Return to Play
Introduction/Purpose: Achilles tendon ruptures are devastating injuries highly
prevalent among athletes. Despite our understanding of the impact of Achilles tendon rupture
in professional athletes, and in particular its relationship to basketball, no study has
examined the effect of Achilles tendon rupture on performance metrics in National Collegiate
Athletic Association (NCAA) Division I basketball players.
Methods: NCAA Division I basketball players who sustained a surgically
repaired Achilles tendon rupture between the 2000 and 2019 seasons were identified by
systematic evaluation of individual injury reports from the NCAA career statistics and
individual school statistics databases. 65 male and 41 female players were identified.
Athletes were included if they participated in at least one collegiate season before tearing
their Achilles tendon, and at least one season after operative repair. A total of 50 male
and 30 female athletes were ultimately included in the analysis. Each injured athlete was
matched to a healthy control by conference, position, starter-status at time of injury,
class year, and number of games played. Matched controls were healthy players and
experienced no significant injuries during their NCAA careers.
Results: Following Achilles tendon rupture and subsequent surgical repair,
male athletes played significantly more minutes per game (19.7 vs. 22.6, p=0.017), scored
more points per game (6.7 vs 7.9, p=0.024), and had more assists per game (1.4 vs. 1.7,
p=0.036), when compared to their pre-injury statistics. The only area of worsened athletic
performance following injury was total blocks, which significantly decreased post-injury
(18.1 vs. 10.2, p=0.004). Matched healthy controls demonstrated a higher percent change in
assists per game (+39.0% vs +21.8%, p=0.036) and total blocks (+55.1% vs -43.5%, p=0.031)
between the matched pre- injury and post-injury periods. Female athletes scored
significantly more points per game after returning from injury (7.6 vs 6.3, p=0.032) but
demonstrated a significantly lower 3-point shooting percentage (10% vs. 20%, p=0.047).
Conclusion: Male athletes who returned to play following Achilles tendon
rupture demonstrated significant increases in various offensive performance metrics, while
suffering a significant decrease in total blocks. Female athletes demonstrated a significant
improvement in points per game following Achilles tendon rupture, but suffered a significant
decline in 3-point shooting percentage. Despite suffering an Achilles tendon rupture, 14% of
the male cohort reached the NBA, and 16.7% of the female cohort reached the WNBA.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00249

## Radiographic Evaluation of Isolated Continuous Compression Staples for Akin Osteotomy
Fixation

Kevin Horner; Kyle Fiala, DPM; Benjamin Summerhays, DPM; Kyle M. Schweser, MD

Category: Bunion; Other
Keywords: Osteotomies; Staples; Clinical Outcomes
Introduction/Purpose: The use of continuous compression implants (nitinol
staples) in orthopaedic surgery has increased secondary to advances in metal alloy
engineering. Biomechanical studies provide useful data supporting the theoretical use of
nitinol staples in the foot and ankle. However, clinical data is limited. The purpose of
this study was to determine the overall effectiveness, both clinically and radiographically,
of continuous compression implants (nitinol staples) to achieve bony healing in the medially
based, closing-wedge osteotomy of the proximal phalanx of the great toe (Akin
osteotomy).
Methods: A retrospective chart review was performed on 104 patients (107 feet)
who underwent an Akin osteotomy using nitinol staples between January 1st, 2018 and February
20th, 2020. The primary outcome variable was radiographic evidence of healing on x-ray.
X-rays were independently reviewed by three board-certified foot and ankle surgeons. All
investigators were blinded towards the x-rays, and x-rays were randomized in terms of timing
from surgery. Each investigator reviewed digital radiographs independently and recorded
their radiographic finding responses. Osteotomies were deemed healed if greater than 50% of
the osteotomy contained bridging bone. A partially healed osteotomy was defined as some
bridging bone, but less than 50% of the overall osteotomy site, and a nonunion was defined
as no healing seen radiographically, broken hardware, or loss of reduction.
Results: Radiographic union (partial or full) was seen in 95% of Akin
osteotomies (96/101) based on our parameters, with no loss of initial reduction. Only 2.8%
(3/107) of the patient population had unplanned return to the operating room for reasons
associated with the Akin osteotomy: one infection (0.9%), one irritable hardware removal
(0.9%), and one traumatic disruption of fixation (0.9%). None of the eligible staples
(0/106) were found to be fractured upon radiographic analysis. Smokers and diabetics
represented 4.8 and 8.7 percent of the patient population, respectively.
Conclusion: Since its inception in 1925, the Akin osteotomy has been described
using several types of fixation methods. The results of this retrospective study show that
continuous compression implants (nitinol staples) are a viable option for Akin osteotomy
fixation, with low rates of complications (2.8%, 3/107) and high healing rates (95%,
96/101). Staples are lower profile, eliminating hardware irritation and potential secondary
surgeries, are technically less demanding, and time of application is decreased when
compared to other fixation methods. They offer the benefit of continuous compression of the
fusion site, as well, and are rigid enough to maintain reduction.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00250

## Chopart Fractures and Dislocations: Case Series and New Algorithm of Treatment

Maximiliano Hube, MD; Gonzalo F. Bastias, MD; Felipe Amoedo; Matias Harmat; Camilo
Piga, MD; Patricio A. Fuentes

Category: Trauma
Keywords: Midfoot; Trauma; Midfoot arthrodesis
Introduction/Purpose: Chopart fractures and dislocations are one of the most
commonly overlooked injuries of the foot. These injuries are still challenging in both
diagnosis and treatment and result in a high degree of long-term disability. Recent studies
have shown that around 30 to 40% of these injuries are not adequately diagnosed on first
consultation, mainly because of their low incidence and high clinical variability/spectrum
of injuries. Anatomical reduction of Chopart injuries seems to be the most important
prognostic factor of functional outcomes. However, there is still no consensus or clear
evidence-based guidelines on the management of these types of injuries. We report the result
of our current management protocol and propose a new algorithm of management of Chopart
Injuries.
Methods: We present a case series of patients with Chopart fractures and
fracture-dislocations admitted to a Level 1 Trauma center between March 2015 and April 2020.
Demographic data, mechanism of injury, treatment and complications were obtained from
clinical records. Classification of injuries according to Zwipp was performed. Standardized
surgical management was performed in 1 or 2 stages, according to soft tissue status. Open
reduction and internal fixation of associated fractures of the talus, navicular, calcaneus
and cuboid was performed. In cases of severe articular comminution or presence of medial
and/or lateral instability, transarticular bridge plating was indicated. Postoperative
radiological assessment was performed with X-rays and CT scan. Outcomes were determined
using the American Orthopaedic Foot & Ankle Society midfoot score (AOFAS), visual
analogue scale (VAS), foot and ankle ability measure (FAAM) and the 12-item Short Form
Survey (SF-12).
Results: Thirty four patients (12 women) were included in this study with a
mean age of 37 years. Mechanisms of injury were: motor vehicle accidents (n=12), low energy
midfoot torsion (n=12), crushing injuries (n=7), fall from height (n=2) and firearm injury
(n=1). Mean follow up was 39 months (ranging from 8 to 71 months). The mean AOFAS score 84.8
(SD 12.9), mean FAAM of 84.4% (SD 15.4) and mean VAS score was 3/10. In terms of quality of
life, the SF-12 physical component score was 43.59 (SD 9.3), with a mental component score
of 51.98 (SD 12.1). Secondary procedures included: hardware removal (n=23), midfoot fusion
(n=3) and skin coverage procedures by plastic surgery (n=5).
Conclusion: In this case series, a standardized strategy for the treatment of
Chopart injuries including the use of external fixation, ORIF and transarticular plating is
presented. Reestablishment of joint alignment of both columns (medial and lateral) is
crucial to obtain acceptable functional outcomes. Transarticular fixation is a useful
alternative to post-reduction residual instability and bridging of fractures with
periarticular comminution. Functional and quality of life results on this series were
acceptable and comparable to previous reports at minimum one year follow up. Long-term
follow up is needed to further validate the proposed algorithm.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00251

## Effect of Medial Ligament Reconstruction in Flatfoot Deformity: How It Affects the Soft
Tissue Improvement and Radiological Outcome of the Surgery?

Helen Huetteman; Seyed Alireza Mirghasemi, MBBS; Matthew S. Lipphardt; Stephanie
Mrowczynski; Allan M. Grant, MD; Zachary M. Vaupel, MD; Paul T. Fortin, MD

Category: Ankle; Hindfoot; Sports
Keywords: Flatfoot; Ligament; Adult Acquired Flatfoot Deformity
Introduction/Purpose: Surgical treatment of adult flatfoot deformity has
traditionally be driven by tendon transfers and osteotomy. In acquired deformity, injury to
the spring ligament and superficial deltoid ligament is common. The procedures mentioned
previously do nothing to restore the function of the medial ligament complex. Studies have
shown that reconstruction of the medial ligament complex, and thus the medial talonavicular
joint, has benefit to patient outcomes. The question still remains of how much correction
the medial ligament reconstruction confers on its own. The purpose of this study is to
compare isolated medial ligament reconstruction procedures to other flat foot correcting
procedures in the treatment of acquired flat foot deformity.
Methods: 18 patients were identified that underwent procedure for flatfoot
deformity. Of these patients there were 7 patients that underwent isolated medial ligament
complex reconstruction and 11 patients that underwent non-tendon transfer procedure for
correction of flat foot deformity. Imaging was performed on patient’s weight bearing (WB)
and non-weight bearing (NWB) before and after surgery. Measurements included Angles:
calcaneal pitch, talo-1st metatarsal, talocalcaneal, talar declination, calcaneal 1st
metatarsal and Distances: talar height, navicular height, 1st cuneiform height, cuboid
height, and 1st to 5th metatarsal distance in lateral X-ray, and Angles: talonavicular
coverage, talar 1st metatarsal, talar 2nd metatarsal and Distances: talonavicular uncoverage
distance in AP. The differences in measurement between the pre-op and post-op non-weight
bearing are considered as bony correction effect while differences between pre-op and
post-op weight bearingare considered as soft tissue correction
Results: For non-weight bearing; medial ligament reconstruction impact was
seen on calcaneal pitch (19 to 35 degrees, p=0.007), 1st cuneiform height (21 to 28mm,
p=0.016), talonavicular coverage (6 to 3 degrees, p=0.026), and Talar 1st metatarsal angle
(14 to 7 degrees, p=0.008). Other corrections had an impact on calcaneal pitch (15 to 24
degrees, p=0.006), Talo-1st metatarsal angle (11 to 6 degrees, p=0.019), Calcaneal 1st
metatarsal (139 to 129 degrees, p=0.044), Talar height (31 to 42mm, p=0.001), navicular
height (24 to 34mm, p=0.002), and 1st cuneiform height (18 to 22mm, p=0.016). For weight
bearing; reconstruction impact was seen on talocalcaneal angle (36 to 44 degrees, p=0.011),
1st-5thmetatarsal distance (12 to 18mm, p=0.047), and hindfoot moment arm (16 to 6mm,
p=0.031). Other corrections had an impact on talar height (34 to 40mm, p=0.028), navicular
height (26 to 30mm, p=0.031), cuboid height (p=0.021), and hindfoot alignment angle (17 to 7
degrees, p=0.003).
Conclusion: When compared to procedures that only address bony changes in the
foot, it is clear from this study that medial ligament repair plays a different, but
significant, role in correction of flat foot deformity. Interestingly, the non-weight
bearing and weight bearing results show that medial ligament reconstruction affects
different aspects of the correction in these two distinct phases. This study serves to
suggest that medial ligament reconstruction has a role in the correction of flat foot
deformity that is not completely addressed in the more common procedures performed.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00252

## Are Preoperative PROMIS Scores Associated with Postoperative ED Visits?

Austin Hughes; Nicholas A. Andrews; Jared R. Halstrom, BS; Aseel G. Dib, BS; David A.
Patch, MD; Whitt Harrelson; Kenneth J. Fellows; James Pate, BS; Sameer Naranje; Ashish
Shah, MD

Category: Other
Keywords: PROMIS; Outcomes Measures; Preoperative risk factors
Introduction/Purpose: Preoperative Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement
Information System (PROMIS) scores have been shown to be predictive of postoperative success
in orthopedic foot and ankle patients. The purpose of this study was to determine if an
association exists between pre-operative PROMIS scores and patients going to the emergency
department (ED) in the first 60 days following their operation.
Methods: PROMIS scores, including physical function (PF) and pain inference
(PI), were collected from 290 patients prior to foot and ankle procedures. Patients with
presence of ongoing infection were excluded. Electronic medical record (EMR) data was
retrospectively gathered for each patient to determine if they visited the ED for any reason
during the first 60 days following their operation. A Backward Stepwise Logistic Regression
analysis was conducted for postoperative ED visits with p<0.1 in univariate analysis
required for entry into the model.
Results: The median age was 50.0 with an interquartile range (IQR) of 20.0,
while the median BMI was 33.1 with an IQR of 11.6. In univariate analysis, Preoperative
PROMIS PF and PI scores were significantly associated with ED visits within the first 60
days after surgery. Patients who visited the ED had lower preoperative PROMIS PF (median
34.9 (IQR 10.2)) and higher PROMIS PI (median 66.9 (IQR 9.1)) compared to patients who did
not visit the ED, PROMIS PF (median 38.0 (IQR 10.2)) and PROMIS PI (63.6 (IQR 9.0)),
respectively. In multivariate analysis, only PROMIS PF was associated with lower risk of ED
visits OR 0.92 (95% CI.85-.99). Other factors independently associated with ED visits
included non-traumatic surgical indication OR 3.7 (95% CI 1.1- 12.9), any pulmonary disease
OR 4.2 (95% CI 1.4-12.8), ASA classification OR 4.4 (95% CI 1.3-14.9), and wound
complications OR 10.2 (95% CI 2.6-39.9).
Conclusion: Patients with lower PROMIS PF scores preoperatively were
significantly more likely to visit the ED postoperatively. While all of the factors found to
be associated with ED visits are not modifiable by the surgeon, preoperative PROMIS scores
could quickly and easily be used to identify patients for potential interventions. This
study demonstrates the potential of the PROMIS outcomes system outside of quantifying
surgical outcomes. Further study is being conducted to investigate the optimal PROMIS PF
cutoff for best identifying patients at risk for ED visits.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00253

## Trends in Medicare Physician and Facility Fee Reimbursement in Orthopaedic Foot and
Ankle

Clayton Hui; Haroon Kisana; John R. Martin; Chad Stecher; Joshua Hustedt, MD

Category: Ankle; Ankle Arthritis; Arthroscopy; Bunion; Diabetes; Hindfoot;
Lesser Toes; Midfoot/Forefoot; Sports; Trauma
Keywords: Cost; Outpatient; Inpatient
Introduction/Purpose: The purpose of the study was to examine the trends in
physician and facility reimbursement for the orthopaedic foot and ankle subspecialty
utilizing the 23 most common foot and ankle surgeries based on national payment amounts.
Methods: The Current Procedural Terminology (CPT) codes and corresponding
Medicare Severity - Diagnosis Related Group (MS-DRG) codes for the 23 most common
orthopaedic foot and ankle surgeries were identified. With the CPT codes, physician
reimbursement was obtained through querying the Medicare Physician Fee Schedule (MPFS) for
the work, malpractice, and practice expense relative value units (RVU) and then multiplying
the total RVUs by the yearly conversion factor. CPT codes were also utilized to gather
hospital outpatient reimbursement data from the Hospital Outpatient Prospective Payment
System (OPPS) database. Hospital inpatient reimbursement rates were obtained from the
Hospital Inpatient Prospective Payment System (IPPS) database utilizing the MS-DRG codes.
All amounts were then adjusted for inflation using the Consumer Price Index (CPI).
Results: From 2008 to 2021, physician reimbursement for the 23 most common
orthopaedic foot and ankle surgeries decreased by 20%, with a mean Compound Annual Growth
Rate (CAGR) of -1.7%. Hospital inpatient reimbursement increased by 34.7% with a mean CAGR
of 2.3%; while outpatient hospital reimbursement increased by 97.2% with a mean CAGR of
5.1%.
Conclusion: Over the past 13 years, physician reimbursement for common
orthopaedic foot and ankle surgeries has declined while hospital reimbursement has
increased. The larger increase in outpatient reimbursement compared to inpatient
reimbursement highlights how CMS aims to transition surgeries from the inpatient setting to
the more efficient and less expensive outpatient setting. This downward pressure on
physician reimbursement while incentivizing outpatient services could have many unintended
consequences on the landscape of foot and ankle practice in the US.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00254

## Content Expert Lecturers and Their Related Peer Reviewed Publications: An Analysis of
Foot & Ankle Societys' Annual Meetings from 2016 to 2020

Christopher F. Hyer, DPM; Dominick Casciato, DPM; Calvin J. Rushing, DPM; John M.
Schuberth, DPM

Category: Other
Keywords: Healthcare Reform; Economic Analysis; Nonoperative
Introduction/Purpose: Annual national society meetings for the American
College of Foot and Ankle Surgeons (ACFAS) and American Orthopaedic Foot & Ankle Society
(AOFAS) have long provided an important resource to disseminate the latest innovations,
techniques, and research. However, unlike submitted research abstracts which are screened by
a selection committee, there are scant guidelines for selected content experts to present
educational content. To date, the ability to publish in a peer-reviewed journal bestows the
ultimate validity of academic expertise on a particular subject matter and supports the
expertise of the clinician. The purpose of this study was to evaluate for the first time,
the incidence of scholarly publication in a peer reviewed journal for invited speakers from
the ACFAS and AOFAS annual meetings from 2016 to 2020.
Methods: Annual meeting programs for the ACFAS and AOFAS from 2016 to 2020
were compiled by two reviewers. Faculty lists and assigned lecture tract topics from each
meeting were entered into password protected databases. Oral and poster abstracts,
industry/society sponsored presentations, 'competitions', and 'other events' held during the
annual meetings were excluded. Speaker specific variables included: gender, number of peer
reviewed journal publications on the assigned subject matter (publications preceding the
meetings date), study design, weighted total topic publication citations, and H-index. The
weighted total topic publication citations was obtained by dividing the total citation
counts for each manuscript on a particular subject by the number of years since its
publication. The H-index, an author specific metric of both productivity and citation impact
was obtained from searches of an online resource (http://www.scopus.com/freelookup). For the purposes of the present study, only
foot and ankle surgeons (DPM, MD, DO) were included for assessment.
Results: There were a total 1,028 invited presentations combined between AOFAS
(158) and ACFAS (870) at the annual meetings fom 2016-2020. With combined data, 724 (70%)
presentations were given by speakers with no publications in the subject matter while 300
(29.2%) were given by speakers with one or more publications. Lecture topics that had the
highest percentage of speakers with publications in the subject matter included Wound
Care/Limb Salvage (82.8%), Charcot (63.6%) and Total Ankle Replacement/Fusions (50%). Topics
with the highest number of speakers without publications on the topic included Trauma (84%),
Sports (80.3%) and Forefoot Elective (78.7%). Only the Trauma category of speakers had a
statistically significant difference of predicted number of lectures by publication between
no publications (3.7 lectures) and those with 1 or more publications (1.6 lecture) with
p=0.04.
Conclusion: Content expert presentations at national society specialty
meetings are a crucial source of continuing education. What makes a speaker a content expert
has yet to be defined but is important to consider. Perhaps factors such as peer reviewed
publications in subject matter or the speaker’s H-index are characteristics to consider in
selecting content experts. In our survey of ACFAS and AOFAS annual meetings from 2016-2020,
there were many topics were the vast majority of lectures were given by speakers without any
publications and dispersed across the spectrum regardless of the speaker’s H-Index ranking.
Further criteria development is likely needed.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00255

## Coronal Plane Deformity and Total Ankle Replacement: When to Stage with Cement Spacer
Ankle Arthroplasty for Deformity Correction

Christopher F. Hyer, DPM; Antonio M. Malloy McCoy; John M. Thompson; Mitchell
Thompson; Devon Consul, DPM

Category: Ankle Arthritis
Keywords: Ankle Arthritis; Ankle; Ankle Arthroplasty
Introduction/Purpose: Degenerative ankle joint disease is a debilitating
condition that causes significant pain, adversely affects function and quality of life.
Though primary arthritis of the ankle can occur without deformity, frequently soft tissue
imbalances or joint deformities complicate the clinical picture. Often, additional
procedures are required to balance the foot and ankle during the index total ankle
replacement procedure. When large deformities exist a staged approach to first, align the
ankle joint to neutral as stage one and then implantation of the TAR as stage two can be
deployed. This paper will further popularize the cement spacer staged TAR technique in
correction of coronal deformities, share a clinical algorithm on approach, and depict a case
series demonstrating its application.
Methods: A case series was performed of 7 patients and 8 ankles, who underwent
staged primary TAR utilizing a cement spacer to assist with deformity correction, between
the years 2016-2019.
Results: Patients' mean age 58.5 yrs., preoperative varus coronal plane
deformity mean 19.1 degrees, preoperative valgus coronal plane mean 10.25 degrees. Mean time
from stage 1 till 2 was 163.5, +-140.2 days. Stage 1 soft tissue procedures: Chrisman-Snook
procedure with synthetic ligament graft, Brostrum-Gould with synthetic graft, Brostrum-Gould
without graft, FDL transfer, and isolated medial release/peel. Osteotomies performed during
stage one: Dwyer, MDCO, Cotton, and MDCO with medial malleolus osteotomy. Fusions performed
during stage one consisted: Subtalar joint, talonavicular joint (TNJ), and STJ with 1st
Metatarsophalangeal joint (MTPJ). Seven ankles were replaced with Cadence Total Ankle System
(Integra), and one with INBONE II (Wright Medical Technology). Average follow-up time for
included patients was 290.75 days (9.7 months). One revision was performed following index
TAR procedure.
Conclusion: This paper describes a cement wedge spacer staged total ankle
arthroplasty technique for correction and stabilization of deforming forces at the ankle
joint. While not all ankle deformities necessitate a staged approach, the complexity of the
malalignment and the extent of tissue disruption needed to achieve a neutral ankle should be
considered when correcting a given deformity with a staged or non-staged approach.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00256

## Does a “Spot Weld” with a 1st to 2nd Metatarsal Base Screw Maintain Correction of the
Modified Lapidus Procedure? A Retrospective Radiographic Review

Christopher F. Hyer, DPM

Category: Bunion; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Lapidus; Hallux Valgus; Tarsometatarsal Arthrodesis
Introduction/Purpose: The Lapidus 1st tarsometatarsal (TMT) arthrodesis has
gained popularity for its ability to correct large deformities especially in cases of medial
column instability. Even with solid fusion, instability between the 1st and 2nd columns can
result in loss of intermetatarsal (IM) angle correction over time. Anecdotally, a ’spot
weld' between the lateral 1stmetatarsal and medial 2nd metatarsal bases seems to predict
long term maintenance of IM correction. The purpose of the study is to review cases of
Lapidus 1st TMT arthrodesis with supplemental screw fixation from the 1stto 2nd metatarsal
base for maintenance of IM correction and determine whether a ’spot weld' is predictive of
maintenance and identify an optimum position of the 1st to 2nd metatarsal screw to achieve
the ’spot weld.
Methods: A retrospective radiographic review of cases by a single surgeon over
the past five years was performed. All cases of tarsometatarsal fusion were queried and
reviewed. Inclusion criteria included primary arthrodesis of the 1st TMT joint with
supplemental fixation between the 1st and 2nd metatarsal bases, availability of appropriate
radiographic image and at least 4 months follow up. Exclusion criteria included 1st TMT
fusion without 1st-2nd metatarsal screw fixation, multiple TMT or midfoot fusion, Charcot
neuroarthropathy, and revision fusion. A standard surgical technique was utilized with an in
situ joint debridement, specific preparation to the medial 2ndmetatarsal base and adjacent
lateral 1st metatarsal base, autogenous bone grafting and hardware construct at the 1stTMT
joint consisting of compression screw from the 1st metatarsal to the 2nd cuneiform, screw
fixation from 1st to 2ndmetatarsal bases and either locking plate or compression staple
fixation dorsally across the 1st TMT joint.
Results: 90 cases (77 patients) met the inclusion criteria with average follow
up of 309 days. Fusion of the 1st TMT occurred in 87/90 (96.7%) cases with 76 dorsal plate,
10 with dorsal staple and 4 with all screws. There was no incidence of complications related
to the 1-2 screw. The mean pre-operative IM 1-2 angle was 14.90 degrees, with mean
correction to 6.22 degrees post operative and final maintained correction at 7.10 degrees
with mean loss of 0.87 degrees. There were ’spot welds' in 65/90 (72.2%) with a mean loss of
correction of 0.48 degree versus loss of 1.88 degrees in the 'no spot weld' subgroup
(p<0.001). Cases with no spot weld and screw lucency lost 2.25 degrees (p<0.001).
Conclusion: Loss of IM 1-2 correction can occur due to instability between the
1st and 2nd columns even in cases of solid 1st TMT arthrodesis. The achievement of a ’spot
weld' via careful preparation, bone grafting and use of a 1st to 2nd metatarsal base screw
as part of a Lapidus construct was found to maintain correction with minimal loss (0.87
degree) versus cases where no ’spot weld' was achieved. Cases with no ’spot weld' that
developed screw lucency had the greatest loss of correction. No statistical difference in
screw position between groups was found.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00257

## Scope Assisted Ankle Arthrodesis in a Young Male with Hemophilic Arthritis: A Case
Study

Christopher F. Hyer, DPM; Antonio M. Malloy McCoy; Kevin N. Nguyen; Devon Consul,
DPM

Category: Ankle Arthritis; Arthroscopy
Keywords: Ankle Arthrodesis; Arthroscopy; Ankle
Introduction/Purpose: Arthritis is a debilitating condition that negatively
affects an individual’s ability to carry out activities of daily living. While
osteoarthritis is a term many have become familiar with, as it is the most common form of
arthritis encountered, hemophilic arthritis is a condition not frequently seen or discussed.
Hemophilia is a congenital bleeding disorder caused by the absence or decrease of clotting
factor VIII (Hemophilia A) or XI (Hemophilia B). When severe, this X-linked disease commonly
results in intra-articular bleeding which, can progress to joint destruction1-4. This
subsequently leads to the progressive destruction of articular cartilage and bone6-7.
Methods: Arthroscopic assisted ankle arthrodesis with calcaneal autograft was
performed. Calcaneal autograft was acquired through a small linear incision along the
lateral wall of the calcaneus, a power graft harvester was introduced into the medullary
bone to procure the graft. The left lower extremity was then placed into a non-invasive
Gould Ankle distraction system and the standard anteromedial and anterolateral ankle scope
portals were established. A scope and shaver were utilized to extensively debride all
visualized hemorrhagic synovium. The shaver was then exchanged for a burr following
debridement to remove the articular cartilage to both the talus and tibia. Following
adequate preparation of the joint margins for fusion, the ankle joint was filled with the
calcaneal autograft and rhPDGF-BB.
Results: Various treatments have been described for patients suffering from
hemophilic arthritis. While the use of clotting factor concentrations (CFCs) may reduce the
risk of hemarthrosis, the risk of bleeding cannot be completely avoided2. Arthroscopic or
open synovectomies has been described to remove the pathogenic synovium. Chemical or
radioisotopic synoviorthesis is an option for less severe cases, but the treatment of choice
is joint fusion or arthrodesis for advanced stages of arthropathy3.
Conclusion: In patients with hemophilia, regular replacement therapy with
clotting factor concentrates (prophylaxis) is effective in preventing recurrent bleeding
episodes into joints and muscles. However, despite this success, intra-articular and
intramuscular bleeding is still a major clinical manifestation of the disease. The
pathogenesis of hemophilic arthropathy is multifactorial, with changes occurring in the
synovium, bone, cartilage, and blood vessels. Our case report presents a unique pathology
and the successful outcome that can be accomplished through surgical intervention and a
multidisciplinary treatment approach.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00258

## Ankle-Hindfoot Reconstruction by Tibiotalocalcaneal (TTC) Arthrodesis Using Multiple
Cannulated Screws: 32 Cases

Jemin Im; Hong-Geun Jung, MD, PhD; Jung-Won Lim, MD; Won Tae Song, MD

Category: Ankle; Ankle Arthritis
Keywords: Tibiotalocalcaneal Arthrodesis; Hindfoot Arthrodesis; Clinical
Outcomes
Introduction/Purpose: Tibiotalocalcaneal (TTC) arthrodesis is a salvage
procedure that can be used as an alternative to amputation for various pathologic conditions
of the ankle-hindfoot. The aim of this study is to evaluate the clinical-radiological
outcome of TTC arthrodesis performed using the multiple cannulated screws.
Methods: From 2003 to 2018, 32 ankles (31 patients) underwent TTC arthrodesis.
The mean follow-up period was mean 32.5 (12-92) months and the average patient age at
surgery was 59.6 years (43-75). The etiologies of TTC arthrodesis included posttraumatic
osteoarthritis (18.8%), Charcot arthropathy (18.8%), paralytic deformity (21.9%), failure of
total ankle arthroplasty (9.4%), and failure of arthrodesis (9.4%). For all of 32 cases,
transfibular approach was used with or without auto fibular cancellous bone graft. 7.3mm
cannulated screws were used for fixation of arthodesis for all of 32 cases, and in 23 of 32
cases (71.9%), screw- fixation was used exclusively without any additional plate or Ilizarov
fixator. Especially for 11 of 32 cases with large bony defect, fresh-frozen allo-femoral
head structural bone graft was used. Pre- and postoperative visual analog scale (VAS) pain,
the American Orthopaedic Foot & Ankle Society (AOFAS) ankle-hindfoot functional score,
and radiographs including CT images were assessed.
Results: Overall union rate was 81.3% (26/32). Mean VAS score decreased from
6.92 preoperatively to 1.46 postoperatively and the AOFAS score improved from 27.0 to 53.7
(Max=68) at the final follow-up. Complication of TTC arthrodesis included nonunion (18.8%,
6/32), infection (12.5%, 4/32), and one case of skin necrosis. Most frequent nonunion site
was tibiotalar joint (6/32). For 3 of 7 cases with nonunion, patients were painless and
could ambulate without severe functional impairment. There were two cases with infective
nonunion and one case with active Charcot arthropathy after artrhdesis. Union rate of two
groups with/without allo-femoral head bone graft were similar to each other (81.8%, 81.0%,
respectively), however, final AOFAS scores were significantly superior in 'without' femoral
head bone graft group.
Conclusion: This study achieved a fusion rate comparable to other previous
studies and obtained favorable clinical outcomes. Realignment TTC arthrodesis using multiple
cannulated screws is a valid surgical option as a salvage procedure for various deformed or
arthritic conditions of ankle-hindfoot. Allo-femoral head structural bone graft can be
selected as useful option for TTC arthrodesis with large bone defect.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00259

## Clinical and Radiological Outcomes of Modified Lapidus Procedures Using 2 Compression
Cannulated Screws in Hallux Valgus Deformity

Jemin Im; Hong-Geun Jung, MD, PhD; Jung-Won Lim, MD

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot; Bunion
Keywords: Hallux Valgus; Lapidus Procedure; Clinical Outcomes
Introduction/Purpose: Hallux valgus is common disease. Surgical correction is
usually required because, conservative treatment can not correct deformity and lacks
evidence for prevention of progression of deformity. Among the various methods for the
correction of hallux valgus deformity, the modified Lapidus procedure is known to be
performed in less than 10%. The purpose of this study is to investigate the clinical and
radiological outcomes of patients who underwent the modified Lapidus method.
Methods: From January 2010 to December 2019, 34 cases of patients who
underwent the modified Lapidus procedure and followed up for at least 6 months were included
in the study. For clinical evaluation, VAS score, AOFAS score, and patient satisfaction
(very satisfied, satisfied, dissatisfied, very dissatisfied) were used. For radiological
evaluation, hallux angle and 1-2 metatarsal angle on anterior and posterior foot x-ray of
the weight-bearing were used. Furthermore, rate of bone union and the period until bone
union were also evaluated.
Results: The mean follow-up period was 21.0 (6~108) months. The indications
for surgery were: Severe hallux valgus in 30 cases, metatarsus adductus in 17 cases,
recurrent hallux valgus in 4 cases, and hypermobility of the first tarso-metatarsal joint in
10 cases. In terms of VAS score, between pre-operation and the last follow-up was
significantly improved from 5.8+-2.1 to 1.1+-1.4 (p<0.05), and the AOFAS score from
52.8+-15.0 to 92.3+-9.8 (p<0.05). In terms of patient satisfaction, 33 patients (97.1%)
showed overall satisfaction (very satisfied and satisfied). Complications were nonunion in 3
cases (8.8%), incomplete union in 1 case, delayed union in 1 case, and hallux varus in 1
case. There was no additional surgery for these complications. At preoperative and last
follow-up, the hallux angle improved from 46.0°+-10.7° to 5.9°+-11.7°, and the 1-2 IMA
improved from 18.2°+-5.1° to 5.5°+-4.5°. In the cases excluding complications, the average
period to bone union was 3.9(3-8) months.
Conclusion: In our study, the modified Lapidus method using 2 compression
cannulated screws was showed satisfactory clinical, radiological outcomes and relatively
satisfactory bone union (91.2%) in a short follow-up. The modified Lapidus method using 2
compression cannulated screws is a considerable option for severe hallux valgus
deformity.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00260

## A Scoping Review Regarding the Treatment of Foot and Ankle Ganglia

Adil Iqbal; Zaki Arshad; Sofyan A. Shdefat; Maneesh Bhatia, MBBS,
FRCS(Tr&Orth)

Category: Other
Keywords: Clinical Outcomes; Complications; Outcomes Measures
Introduction/Purpose: Ganglion cysts are a well documented phenomena occurring
in a variety of joints. They are described as a tumour like lesion filled with
mucopolysaccharides. The majority occur in the hand and wrist (88%) with a small yet
significant minority occurring in the foot and ankle (11%). Currently, there is a lack of
high-quality literature regarding the management of ganglia in the foot and ankle region.
Therefore this scoping review aims to systematically map and summarise current evidence
regarding the management of ganglia of the foot and ankle, whilst identifying areas for
further research.
Methods: This scoping review follows the methodology outlined by Arksey and
O'Malley, Levac, the Joanna Briggs Institute and PRISMA framework.. A detailed search
strategy was used to identify relevant articles using free text terms such as 'foot' 'ankle'
'ganglion' 'ganglia' 'ganglionic cyst'. This was carried out in four electronic databases;
PubMed, EMBASE, CINAHL and Ovid MEDLINE. A stage two-stage independent screening process
based and title and/or abstract then full-text was carried our by two reviewers. The
a-priori selection criteria included all primary research (observational studies and
randomised control trials) whilst excluding (case reports, letters to editors, editorials,
commentaries and review articles). Studies that did not separate the treatment of foot and
ankle tumours from ganglia were excluded. The MINORS criteria were used to assess
methodological quality of included studies.
Results: In total, 2286 unique articles were initially identified, from which
11 met the criteria for inclusion. A variety of conservative and surgical treatment
strategies were reported. The use of surgical excision was reported in all 11 studies, ten
of which via an open surgical approach, with only one study using an endoscopic approach.
The use of conservative treatments, involving aspiration and/or steroid injection, were
reported in only 5 studies. As for the recurrence rate, 7 studies reported a rate of 5.7% -
65.7%, with an overall pooled recurrence rate of 30.6%. Pooled recurrence rates showed that
surgical excisions were associated with a lower recurrence rate than conservative
treatments. Complications other than occurrence were described in 6 studies. Only 3 studies
performed an analysis of outcomes based on the location or site of origin of ganglia.
Conclusion: The current literature regarding the treatment of foot and ankle
ganglia is of a low-quality, as the articles included in this scoping review are level III
or IV cohort or case series design. The literature alludes to the idea that a surgical
approach provides greater efficacy than a conservative approach. There is also limited
evidence to suggest that factors such as the origin or location of ganglia may affect
treatment outcomes. Alternative approaches utilised in the treatment of wrist ganglia are
yet to be investigated. Further research is required before more definitive conclusions into
any such associations may be drawn.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00261

## Opioid Usage after Hallux Valgus Correction Surgery

J.B. Jackson, MD; Zachary T. Thier; Matthew E. Barfield, BS; Kenna C. Altobello, APRN;
Tyler A. Gonzalez, MD, MBA

Category: Bunion; Other
Keywords: Bunion; Pain; Hallux Valgus
Introduction/Purpose: More than 200,000 surgeries for hallux valgus correction
occur annually in the United States. Due to the post-operative pain associated with the
procedure, opioids are often prescribed to help manage pain. Given the lack of objective
data on opioid use and the difficulty of addressing a patient’s post-operative pain, we
sought to quantify, through a prospective analysis, patient’s narcotic use after hallux
valgus surgery. The purpose of our study was to determine the average quantity and type of
post-operative opioids consumed after hallux valgus surgery and to assess potential
predictive factors for increased opioid consumption.
Methods: Adult patients undergoing primary hallux valgus surgery were
recruited from two foot and ankle fellowship trained orthopedic surgeons at a single
institution. At the pre-operative visit, patients were consented and completed a
demographical questionnaire. Data was collected from the operative and PACU record, as well
as the 2, 6, and 12-week post-operative visits. A statistical analysis was performed to
determine the average quantity of opioid and non-opioid pain medication consumed post-
operatively, as well as any statistically significant correlations.
Results: For the 58 subjects who completed treatment and data collection in
the PACU, 53 consumed opioids. Initial prescriptions for these patients included
Hydrocodone, 39 (73.58%) Oxycodone, 13 (24.52%) and Meperidine, 1 (1.89%). The average
number of opioid pills collectively consumed at the two-week and 12-week post-operative
visit was 19.99 and 22.52, respectively. At the two-week postoperative visit, only patient
BMI showed a statistically significant association with increased opioid use.
Conclusion: On average, patients consumed 22-24 narcotic pain pills after
hallux valgus reconstruction surgery. If a physician prescribed 24 narcotics pills after
surgery to patients that are not currently utilizing narcotic pain medication, there is a
95% chance they will not need additional pain medication during the two-week postoperative
period.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00262

## Anterior-Inferior Tibiofibular Ligament Suture-Tape Augmentation for Isolated
Syndesmotic Injuries

Marissa D. Jamieson, MD; Alex W. Brady; Kira Tanghe; Thomas O. Clanton, MD; Ingrid
Stake

Category: Sports; Ankle
Keywords: Biomechanics; Syndesmosis; Syndesmotic Stability
Introduction/Purpose: Aggressive surgical treatment of isolated syndesmotic
injuries has recently gained some traction in the media and sports world. New developments
in syndesmotic fixation aim to restore native syndesmotic stability and ankle motion with a
goal of returning athletes to sport quickly. However, the best surgical technique is
debated. Dynamic repair with a suture- button (SB) can provide an accurate reduction of the
syndesmotic space but may alter the rotational kinematics of the fibula. Previous studies
have suggested that repair or reconstruction of the anterior-inferior tibiofibular ligament
(AITFL) may restore the dynamics of the syndesmosis better than other devices. The purpose
of this study was to biomechanically compare SB fixation and augmented repair of the AITLF
using suture and suture-tape (ST) in isolated syndesmotic injuries.
Methods: Twelve unpaired lower leg specimens underwent biomechanical testing
in 6 states: 1) intact, 2) AITFL suture repair alone, 3) AITFL suture repair + ST
augmentation, 4) AITFL suture repair + ST augmentation + SB fixation, 5) AITFL suture repair
+ SB fixation, and 6) complete syndesmotic injury. The testing consisted of subjecting the
ankle joint to 6 cycles of 5 Nm internal and external rotation torque under a constant 750 N
axial compression load in a dynamic tensile testing machine. A lower level of torque was
chosen than in previous studies in order to replicate physiologic motion of everyday
activities instead of injury level forces. The spatial relationship between the tibia and
fibula and tibia and talus was continuously recorded using a 5-camera motion capture
system.
Results: AITLF suture repair and suture repair + ST augmentation repair
constructs showed no statistically significant change in fibula kinematics during testing
compared to the intact state. The suture repair + SB construct showed increased external
rotation of the fibula (p<0.001, mean 2.32 degrees) and medial translation (mean 0.72 mm,
p= 0.007) or overtightening compared to the intact state. The suture repair + SB + ST
augmentation state also showed increased external rotation of the fibula compared to the
intact state (p<0.001). Sagittal plane motion of the fibula was not significantly
different in the repair states compared to the intact state. None of the repair states
restored talus rotation back to the intact state; however, the repairs that utilized suture
tape reduced the talus external rotation laxity compared to the complete syndesmotic
injury.
Conclusion: For isolated syndesmotic injuries without significant fibular
displacement, augmentation of the AITFL with suture- tape best restored the rotational
profile of the fibula and ankle joint. Suture-button constructs had a tendency to
over-tighten and externally rotate the fibula when compared to the intact state. Suture-tape
AITFL augmentation may be a good surgical option and alternative to suture-button fixation
for isolated syndesmotic disruptions. Further clinical trials are needed to determine the
role for suture-tape augmentation of the AITLF in syndesmotic injuries.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00263

## Cavovarus Foot: Conservative Management Techniques/Case Studies

Dennis Janisse, CPed

Category: Other
Keywords: Cavovarus Foot; Cavovarus Foot Deformity; Varus Deformity
Introduction/Purpose: The cavovarus foot is a true challenge for both the
patient and the surgeon. This complex deformity can be a result of many different causal
factors including genetics, Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, diabetes and spina bifida. It may
also be caused or worsened by trauma or surgical procedures. The cavovarus foot is difficult
to manage conservatively as it tends to be rigid, is not a good shock absorber and causes
the joints of the foot to process abnormal stresses. The mechanical construct of a cavus
foot makes it susceptible to a multitude of complications and injuries like inversion ankle
sprains and metatarsal stress fractures.
Methods: While foot orthoses would likely be the most commonly considered
conservative treatment option for the symptomatic cavus foot, other modalities like shoe
modification, bespoke and/or therapeutic footwear and bracing have also proven effective.
Oftentimes, a combination of the aforementioned options is employed. Given the individual
complexities of each cavus foot, the conservative treatment plan is typically custom
tailored to fit a particular patient’s foot structure, biomechanical and corrective needs,
and occupational or recreational demands. A so-called 'cookie cutter' approach is not
appropriate for management of the cavovarus foot.
Results: A review of published research demonstrates that foot orthoses - and
other conservative modalities - are effective in the treatment of the cavus foot. These
devices work by correcting the varus foot alignment (when applicable), offloading painful
areas such as ball of the foot or the base of the fifth metatarsal, providing shock
absorption and replacing lost motion. These applications work together to provide a more
normal, safer and energy-efficient gait.
Conclusion: Conservative management, specifically pedorthics, is not only a
viable treatment option for the cavovarus foot but should be considered integral to the
overall management of the cavus foot patient. Pedorthic modalities are successfully used
post-operatively or in lieu of surgical intervention. Modern pedorthics (technological
advances in shoe and orthotic design, construction and materials) allows for cosmetically
pleasing, affordable and comfortable management allowing patients to return to a healthy and
active lifestyle in many cases.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00264

## Weight Bearing CT Analysis of the Transverse Tarsal Joint During Eversion and
Inversion

Clifford L. Jeng, MD; Nicholas Rowe; Cassandra E. Robertson; Stuti Singh; John T.
Campbell, MD

Category: Basic Sciences/Biologics; Hindfoot
Keywords: Biomechanics of the Foot and Ankle; Hindfoot; Weight Bearing CT
Introduction/Purpose: Current understanding of the kinematics of the
transverse tarsal joint continues to evolve. Unfortunately, most prior studies have been in
cadavers or under non-physiologic conditions. Weight bearing CT scans may provide more
accurate in vivo information about the position of the transverse tarsal joint during
eversion and inversion.
Methods: Institutional Review Board approval was obtained. Five normal
volunteers underwent bilateral weight bearing cone- beam PedCAT scans (CurveBeam LLC,
Hatfield, PA) while standing on platforms that positioned both hindfeet in 20o of valgus and
then 20o of varus. The CT scans had a field-of-view diameter of 350 mm and a field-of-view
height of 200 mm. The scan exposure time was 9 seconds, with a total scan time of 54
seconds. The datasets were reconstructed using filtered back projection with 0.37mm
isotropic voxels. The resulting volumes were then segmented, identifying the [x, y, z]
coordinates that comprised each bone. Each bone of the hindfoot was segmented on the scan
images and the motion between the talus and calcaneus was analyzed. A similar analysis was
done for motion between the navicular and cuboid. Two-tailed paired Student’s t- tests were
used to compare the angle and distance measurements between valgus and varus positions.
Results: In the coronal plane, the axis of the talus rotated by 17.0° relative
to the axis of the calcaneus as the hindfoot moved from eversion to inversion (p=0.03). The
distance between the centers of the talar head and the anterior calcaneus also moved closer
to each other by 7.1 mm (p=0.00005). There was no significant change in angle or distance
between the navicular and cuboid when moving from eversion to inversion. The angle between
the navicular and cuboid axes changed 2.1° (p=0.7), while the distance changed 0.8 mm
(p=0.7)
Conclusion: Previous work proposed that the transverse tarsal joint locking
mechanism occurs from the talonavicular and calcaneocuboid joint axes diverging (less
parallel) as the hindfoot inverts. The current weight bearing CT data shows that not only do
the talar and calcaneal axes rotate relative to each other during inversion, but the center
of the talar head and anterior calcaneus translate to move closer together. Because the
navicular and cuboid do not move, transverse tarsal joint locking may occur due to
tightening of the joint capsules and ligaments. Further in vivo study is warranted,
especially under dynamic weightbearing conditions.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00265

## Assessment of Midterm Functional Outcomes Following Talar Extrusion Injuries

Shilpa Jha, MBBS, MRCS; Kate Atkinson, MBBS, MRCS; Matthew R. McFegan; Amit Patel,
FRCS(Orth); Alexandros Vris; Nima Heidari; Lee Parker, FRCS(Tr&Orth); Luckshmana A.
Jeyaseelan; Francesc Malagelada Romans

Category: Ankle; Hindfoot; Trauma
Keywords: Talus; Talus Fractures; Trauma
Introduction/Purpose: Open talar dislocations with complete or partial
extrusion of the talus are rare, high energy injuries associated with major complications
including infection, avascular necrosis and post-traumatic arthritis. These are debilitating
injuries with significant long-term effects including avascular necrosis and post traumatic
arthritis. Functional outcome data in the literature is limited and predominantly consists
of case reports and few single centre case series. Historically these injuries have been
treated with talectomy and tibiocalcaneal arthrodesis, however there has been a subsequent
trend towards debridement and reimplantation with preservation of the extruded talus. Our
aim was to evaluate mid-term functional outcomes, assess complication profile and need for
secondary surgery in a single-centre series of cases treated with reimplantation.
Methods: All talar extrusion injuries presenting between January 2015 and
January 2018 were identified from the trauma database search at our major trauma centre.
Inclusion criteria was defined as open talar dislocations associated with either complete or
partial extrusion of the talus. Case-note review was performed collecting baseline
demographic data including age, gender, injury mechanism, associated injuries,
Gustilo-Anderson grade, smoking and diabetes status, and method and timing of surgical
management. Twelve patients were identified with a mean follow-up of 3 years (minimum 26
months). Primary outcome measure was functional outcome assessed using the Manchester-Oxford
Foot Questionnaire (MOxFQ). Results for each of the three domains were converted to a 0-100
scale for comparison. Secondary outcomes included complication rate and all cause re-
operation rates
Results: Mean age was 37.8 years (17-74 years). Five patients (42%) had total
talar extrusion without fracture and 7/12 (58%) sustained fracture-dislocation with partial
talar extrusion. All were Gustilo-Anderson grade III. All underwent successful
reimplantation with 8/12 (67%) treated with single stage surgery, and 4/12 (33%) in two
stages. The mean MOxFQ scores for total talar extrusions versus partial talar extrusions
with fracture were 79 (range 9-18) vs 41 (range 0-86) for walking domain, 65 (range 45-80)
vs 42 (range 0-90) for pain domain, and 63 (range 38-75) vs 48 (range 19-51) for social
domain. One patient (8%) developed avascular necrosis, 3/12 (25%) developed infection and
1/12 (8%) patient eventually required below knee amputation. One (8%) patient underwent
secondary surgery fusion for post-traumatic arthritis.
Conclusion: Our series demonstrates the serious ramifications of sustaining
talar extrusions. Patients who sustain these injuries should expect persistent functional
deficit and pain at mid-term follow-up. Functional outcomes are relatively poor. The data
demonstrates a trend towards better functional outcomes in patients who have partial
extrusion of the talar dome with associated fractures, compared to ligamentous total talar
extrusion injuries. The incidence of avascular necrosis, deep infection and secondary
surgery in our cohort supports reimplantation as an effective treatment strategy.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00266

## Relative First Metatarsal Length Variation Following Hallux Valgus Surgery and
Association with Postoperative Metatarsalgia

Pablo Justiniano, MD; Pablo E. Mocoçain Mac-iver, MD; Mario López; Ruben D.
Radkievich, MD; Diego H. Zanolli de Solminihac, MD; Andres Keller Díaz, MD; Stephane
Elgueta, MD

Category: Bunion; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Hallux Valgus; Metatarsalgia; Forefoot
Introduction/Purpose: The hallux valgus surgery can be associated with first
metatarsal shortening increasing the occurrence of postoperative transfer metatarsalgia.
There is no consensus regarding the acceptable degree of shortening and it relation with
metatarsalgia. Besides shortening, there are other factors that could be associated with
metatarsalgia like sagittal alignment, deformity correction and surgical technique. The
primary objective of the study was to analyze the relative first metatarsal length variation
following hallux valgus surgery and its association with postoperative metatarsalgia. The
secondary objective was to analyze de first metatarsal length variation and postoperative
metatarsalgia by type of surgical technique.
Methods: We performed a retrospective cohort study of all adult patients who
underwent hallux valgus corrective surgery between 2017 and 2019 in our clinical center. The
inclusion criteria were patients with at least 1 year follow up, without simultaneous lesser
metatarsal procedures or referred preoperative metatarsalgia, and that could be contacted
for the study. For the analysis we evaluated the incidence of post operative metatarsalgia
via phone call and the relation with first metatarsal length variation which was determined
by the relative first metatarsal length (RML) measurement according to Nilsonnne/Morton
technique. All radiographs were measured by two foot and ankle surgeons. We analyzed the
association of postoperative metatarsalgia according to the RML variation. A total of 85
feet were included in the study, with 5 different surgical techniques (16 promo, 19 chevron,
18 scarf, 14 lapidus and 18 MICA)
Results: The average preoperative and postoperative RML were + 0.03 mm and
-2.92 mm, respectively. The average global postoperative RML shortening variation was -2.98
mm (min -10, max +5), and by surgical technique were -4.09 mm, -3.11 mm, - 3.05 mm, -2.93 mm
and -1 mm for lapidus, chevron, scarf, promo and MICA, respectively. Only 9.1% of patients
presented postoperative metatarsalgia, and the average postoperative RML shortening in those
patients was - 4.63mm (min 0, max -10). There was a statistically significant correlation
between RML shortening and postoperative metatarsalgia in patients with shortening higher or
equal to 4 mm (p value <0.05). In relation to the 8 patients with metatarsalgia, 3 of
them had a postoperative elevated first metatarsal (1 promo, 1 chevron and 1 lapidus) and 1
had recurrence of the deformity associated (lapidus).
Conclusion: We found a postoperative RML shortening in hallux valgus
correction, regardless of the selected surgical technique. The RML shortening was associated
with postoperative metatarsalgia in patients with shortening higher or equal to 4 mm.
However, in some of those patients, we found other concomitant factors, such as first
metatarsal elevation or recurrence of the deformity. Therefore, even though we consider that
shortening of the first metatarsal is an important factor, it seems relevant to assess all
other potentials factors in patients with postoperative metatarsalgia.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00267

## Diagnostic Accuracy of MRI in Diagnosing Plantar Plate Tear About Metatarsalgia:
Incidental Finding of A Tear on Routine Magnetic Resonance Imaging

Amir R. Kachooei, MD; Rachel J. Shakked, MD; Johannes B. Roedl; David I. Pedowitz, MD,
MS

Category: Lesser Toes; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Forefoot; Lesser Toe Metatarsophalangeal (MTP) Joint Instability;
Metatarsalgia
Introduction/Purpose: This study aimed to assess the rate of plantar plate
tear finding on MRI study of symptomatic versus asymptomatic patients. We secondarily aimed
to determine the correlation between PP tear grading and symptoms and to assess the
diagnostic accuracy of MRI.
Methods: Based on the physical examination report, patients were divided into
Symptomatic and Asymptomatic groups. Data from the MRI reports were extracted for the second
to fifth plantar plates. All MRIs were studied again by a musculoskeletal radiologist to
measure the inter-rater agreement and MRI reports' reliability. MRI finding of the plantar
plates was categorized as torn vs. intact. We used the anatomical grading system (AGS) to
assess the plantar plate tear grading correlation with symptoms
Results: There was an excellent inter-rater agreement (Kappa=0.92).
Calculating the odds ratio reveals that the odds of finding intact PP in a symptomatic
patient is 16 times more than finding a tear in the same patient. Diagnostic accuracy of MRI
shows that PP tear finding on MRI is highly specific and has a low sensitivity meaning that
the chance of incidental finding of a PP tear is extremely low.
Conclusion: MRI is specific for diagnosing plantar plate tear and is suggested
to confirm the diagnosis and plan for the surgery when the diagnosis is highly probable
concerning the clinical examination.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00268

## Effect of Postoperative Ketorolac Administration on the Union Rate Following First
Metatarsophalangeal Joint Arthrodesis

Amir R. Kachooei, MD; William Hester, III, MD; Tara Gaston, DO; Daniel O. Corr, BS;
Joseph N. Daniel, DO

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: 1st MTP Joint; Arthrodesis; Hallux Rigidus
Introduction/Purpose: To decrease postoperative opioid consumption, nonsteroid
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), including ketorolac, is considered a proper substitute
with few side effects. This study aimed to assess the nonunion rate after the first
metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joint arthrodesis and five-day ketorolac administration. We
secondarily aimed to compare the observed rate of nonunion in our study with the reported
rate of 5.4% in a systematic review.
Methods: In a retrospective cohort study, we included 181 primary MTP
arthrodeses from 2016 to 2020 in a single surgeon practice. The surgical technique was
identical using a dorsal locking plate after preparing the joint with the cup-and-cone
technique. Ketorolac was administered every 6 hours for five consecutive days postoperative.
Patients were placed in a heel weight-bearing CAM boot for a minimum of 6 weeks. Union was
determined radiographically at three months and the final follow- up. Nonunion was
categorized as symptomatic versus asymptomatic.
Results: At three months postoperative, patient characteristics did not show
any statistically significant difference between union and nonunion groups. However, at the
final follow-up, hallux rigidus was significantly associated with a higher rate of the union
in comparison to the preexisting hallux valgus deformity (odds=3.7; P=0.04). of 181 feet, 15
(8.3%) at three months and 12 (6.6%) at the final follow-up revealed nonunion. Of 15, 7
(45%) were asymptomatic, and 8 (55%) were symptomatic. Six (75%) of the ’symptomatic'
nonunion underwent an unplanned secondary surgery. Almost 50% of the asymptomatic nonunions
at three months healed by the final follow-up; however, none of the symptomatic nonunions
healed. Comparing the observed proportion of nonunions at three months (8.3%) and the final
follow-up (6.6%) in our study to the mean nonunion rate of 5.4% found in the literature
revealed no significant difference between our results and the literature (P=0.067 and 0.27,
respectively).
Conclusion: A short course of oral ketorolac does not seem to affect the union
rate after MTP arthrodesis. Ketorolac can be used safely and effectively to decrease
postoperative opioid consumption.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00269

## Soft Tissue Thickness as a Predictor of Wound Complications after Total Ankle
Arthroplasty: A Retrospective Study

Jeremy J. Kalma, MD; Zein S. El-Zein, MD; Denise Koueiter; Paul T. Fortin, MD

Category: Ankle Arthritis; Ankle
Keywords: Ankle Replacement; Surgical Site Infection; Outcomes Measures
Introduction/Purpose: Periprosthetic joint infection following total ankle
arthroplasty (TAA) is a serious complication often related to the surrounding soft tissue
envelope which can lead to poor patient outcomes. The purpose of this study was to determine
the relationship between wound complications following TAA and the overlying soft tissue
envelope thickness using standardized radiographic soft tissue measurements. We hypothesized
that a smaller soft tissue thickness would correlate with an increase in complications.
Methods: 197 patients who underwent primary TAA between October 2014 and
December 2018 at a single institution with preoperative radiographs and 6 months of follow
up were analyzed. We measured the horizontal distance from the posterior tibia to the
overlying anterior skin surface and tibial width 2 cm above the tibiotalar joint on lateral
ankle films. The ratio of the soft tissue thickness to the tibial width was calculated and
named the ankle soft tissue thickness ratio (ASTR). The patients were divided into 2 groups
based upon their ASTR. There were 102 patients in the low ASTR group (ASTR <1.38) and 95
patients in the high ASTR group (ASTR >1.38). Minor complications involved office-based
treatment and/or oral antibiotics. Major complications involved surgical intervention. A
chi-squared test determined complication incidence variance amongst patients in each ASTR
group and an independent t-test determined mean ASTR difference.
Results: Twenty-nine wound complications (14.7%) were identified among 197
patients, 24 (82.8%) minor and 5 (17.2%) major. There were 19 wound complications in the low
ASTR group (17 minor and 2 major) and 10 wound complications in the high ASTR group (7 minor
and 3 major). Complications were more frequent in the low ASTR group compared to high ASTR
group, though not statistically significant (18.6% vs. 10.5%, P=0.158). There was no
difference in the mean ASTR measurement between patients with and without wound
complications (1.36 vs. 1.40, P=0.093).
Conclusion: This study does not demonstrate a statistically significant
difference in post-operative TAA wound complications based on standardized radiographic soft
tissue thickness measurements. Though not statistically significant, complications were more
frequent in patients with a lower ASTR. Lower surgical site soft tissue thickness may be a
predictor of increased risk for wound complications following TAA however further research
including studies with larger patient populations is needed to make this determination.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00270

## Return to Sports and Clinical Outcomes in Suture-Tape Augmentation for Ankle
Instability: A Systematic Review

Ajay C. Kanakamedala; Nathaniel P. Mercer; Alan Samsonov; Raymond J. Walls, MD, FRCS;
Eoghan T. Hurley, MB BCh BAO; John G. Kennedy, MD, FRCS(Orth)

Category: Ankle; Sports
Keywords: Ankle Sprain; Broström; Sports
Introduction/Purpose: There is minimal literature on the use of suture-tape
augmentation in the treatment of chronic lateral ankle instability (CLAI), prompting an
investigation on its use and effect during surgery of the lateral ankle. The purpose of this
systematic review is to evaluate the evidence for the use of suture-tape augmentation in the
treatment of CLAI, and the outcomes following this technique.
Methods: A literature search was performed using the Preferred Reporting Items
for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines. Studies were included if they
evaluated the use of suture-tape for CLAI. Quantitative and qualitative analysis was
performed.
Results: There were 11 studies (LOE II: 2, LOE III: 1, LOE IV: 8) with 334
patients and 334 ankles, and 66.7% were females. The mean age of patients was 27.3 years.
The mean follow-up was 27.6 months (range: 11.5-38.5). Overall, 9 recurrent instability
events (4.1%) were reported for suture-tape augmentation, with no significant difference
between Modified Broström repair and suture-tape augmentation (MD;.81, 95% CI,.19, 3.50, I2
= 0%, p = 0.78). There was no significant difference in talar tilt angle (TTA) improvement
between Modified Broström repair and suture-tape augmentation (MD; -0.07, 95% CI, -0.68,
60.54, I2 = 0%, p = 0.82). There was no significant difference in anterior talar translation
(ATT) improvement between Modified Broström repair and suture-tape augmentation (MD; -0.06,
95% CI, -0.69, 0.56, I2 = 0%, p = 0.84).
Conclusion: Suture-tape augmentation did not significantly improve clinical or
radiological outcomes in the setting of Modified Broström repair for CLAI. Quicker return to
play was the single most important advantage of the suture-tape augmentation procedure
identified in the current study. This indicates that there is a role for suture-tape
augmentation in ATFL repair for athletes and high-demand patients.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00271

## First Metatarsophalangeal Joint Fusion with Orthogonal Memory Staple Fixation

Sarang P. Kasture; Anna S. Walsh; Hari Sugathan; Rakesh Dalal

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: 1st MTP Joint; Fusion; Staples
Introduction/Purpose: First metatarsophalangeal joint (MTPJ) fusion is one of
the most commonly performed procedure for painful symptomatic arthritis. The implants used
for osteosynthesis are variable and depend on surgeon preference. The aim of this paper was
to study the outcome of first MTPJ fusion surgery using fixation with orthogonal shape
memory alloy (Nitinol) staples.
Methods: 75 consecutive patients who underwent first MTPJ fusion with
orthogonal memory staples were included in the study. All patients underwent surgery using
standard surgical technique with fixation of the arthrodesis with two 20 mm shape memory
alloy (Nitinol) staples (Memo staples, Ortho Solutions Inc). The first staple placed
medially and the second staple placed dorsally in orthogonal plane. The arthrodesis surfaces
were prepared and temporarily fixed with K wire. Once the position and bone approximation
was confirmed satisfactory under image intensifier guidance, a flat staple bed was prepared
with saw blade to make sure the staples are not proud after fixation. All patients also
received standard postoperative care with heel weight bearing shoe for six weeks and
follow-up at 3,6 and 12 weeks as standard regimen. Patient demography, time to clinical and
radiological union, early/late complications, rate of non-union, revision surgery and
implant removal were noted.
Results: Average age was 64.6 years. 42 patients had severe radiologic
arthritic changes while 27 patients had associated moderate to severe hallux valgus
deformity. Five patients were known to have inflammatory arthritis. The average follow-up
was 18.3 weeks. There were two early complication of superficial infection treated
successfully with oral antibiotics. Average clinical union was 7.2 weeks and radiological
union at 12 weeks. Five patients (6.6%) had radiological non-union of which four underwent
revision surgery with plate fixation. One patient had delayed union while one had dorsal
staple back-out but did not warrant removal. None required staple removal from hardware
prominence. There was no significant difference in union or complication rates with regards
to gender or presence inflammatory arthritis.
Conclusion: This study demonstrates that the outcome of 1st MTPJ fusion with
two memory staples in orthogonal position is comparable with other modalities of fixation in
terms of rate of union and resurgery. It is safe, simple and easily reproducible technique.
Besides, none of the patients in this series required implant removal for hardware related
complications. This could be advantageous compared to fewer other modalities like plate
fixation, though larger studies are needed to confirm it.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00272

## Fifth Metatarsal Bunionette Correction Using a Stable Intramedullary Device

David B. Kay, MD; James A. Sabetta, PA-C

Category: Lesser Toes
Keywords: Fifth Metatarsal; Forefoot; K-Wire
Introduction/Purpose: Fifth metatarsal osteotomies for correction of a
bunionette deformity are stabilized with a variety of techniques. The fifth metatarsal is a
small bone with a unique blood supply and anatomy. Most of the described osteotomies are
distal, making stable fixation technically demanding. The use of minimal incision surgery
(MIS), also presents further challenges in the placement of stable fixation and current
recommendations are to use either no fixation or intramedullary Kirschner wire fixation.
Extensive translational osteotomies have not had documentation on healing as have first
metatarsal osteotomies. This paper presents the results of 2 fellowship-trained orthopedic
surgeons utilizing a new surgical implant that is both intramedullary and intramedullary.
The patients were assessed with an endpoint of radiographic healing.
Methods: A consecutive series of 21 de-identified patients who underwent a
fifth metatarsal osteotomy for bunionette correction were radiographically followed until
healing. Each patient was pre-operatively classified following the Coughlin classification
of bunionette deformity. Postoperative radiographic assessments were made to include: 1.
Bridging bone 2. The formation of medial bridging from the metatarsal head to the shaft. 3.
Change in the 4-5 Intermetatarsal angle. Also, there was made a notation of complications:
Time to weight-bearing, pain, and function were not assessed. There was only a small sample
of patients that were treated with an isolated bunionette procedure. The other procedures
were impactful and would skew the functional results. We also evaluated for hardware
complaints that would need removal.
Results: 19 patients, 21 feet were evaluated with ages ranging from 51-77
years (Avg 63 years). 17 women and 2 men. Only one patient was a revision of prior surgery.
Only 4 patients had an isolated bunionette correction. The other surgical procedures
including; double osteotomy bunionectomy, distal metatarsal osteotomies (MIS), phalanx
osteotomies of the great and lesser toes, Lapidus bunionectomy, first metatarsophalangeal
arthrodesis. Coughlin grading; one Grade one, ten Grade 2, ten Grade 3. The average time to
radiographic healing was 8 weeks. 5 patients underwent a traditional open incision and a
chevron osteotomy with a saw, the remainder of the osteotomies were percutaneous transverse
osteotomies performed with a 2x12mm Shannon burr.
The mean 4-5 intermetatarsal angle improved from 10 degrees preoperatively to 3 degrees at
follow-up. The amount of shift varied whether the lateral eminence was or was not excised.
The numbers are not large and meaningful statistics are difficult to extrapolate.
Conclusion: This is the first documented use of a novel surgical implant
designed specifically for fifth metatarsal osteotomies used for bunionette correction. The
implant is simple to use, provides for stability to prevent malunion and nonunions. It is
low profile and has not caused irritation requiring removal in this pilot group. It is
versatile and can be used with either an MIS approach and a transverse osteotomy or a
classic open incision with a chevron osteotomy.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00273

## Calcaneal Bone Morphology in Association with Bone Mineral Density Status: A Cadaveric
Study

Jakkrit Keeratiruangrong; Tanawat Vaseenon, MD; Sirianong Namwongprom; Jirawat
Saengsin, MD

Category: Basic Sciences/Biologics; Ankle; Other
Keywords: Calcaneal Fractures; Orthobiologics; Surgical Instrumentation
Introduction/Purpose: Displaced intra-articular calcaneal fractures are mostly
treated by reduction and internal fixation. The calcaneal cortical thickness and regional
bone density play an important role in the stability of the fixation construct. This study
aims to assess the relationship between calcaneal bone morphology and bone mineral density
(BMD) status.
Methods: Seventeen fresh cadaveric specimens underwent a BMD scan at the
femoral neck and were later classified according to WHO criteria into three groups,
including normal five specimens, osteopenic six specimens, and osteoporotic groups six
specimens. The calcaneus bone of each specimen was then dissected and evaluated for the bone
morphology. The sustentaculum tali of the calcaneus was divided into anterior, middle, and
posterior segment. The superior, inferior, and posterior cortices of the calcaneus were
equally divided from medial to lateral into five segments and from anterior to posterior
into three segments ( ). The
cortical thickness (mm) was measured at the center of each divided fragment. The calcaneal
bone density (g/cm3) was quantified at three regions of interest (ROI), including
superior, inferior, and posterior ROI (Figure 2).
Results: The calcaneal cortical thickness and calcaneal bone density of each
fragment or each ROI were demonstrated as the median and interquartile range (IQR) (Table
1-5, Figure 3). The overall cortical thickness and calcaneal bone density values were
significantly lower in the osteopenic or osteoporotic group when compared with the normal
BMD group. Notably, the cortical thickness of the normal group at the lateral one-fifth
and/or lateral two-fifth fragment of the superior, posterior, and inferior cortices of the
calcaneus were not significantly different when compared with the osteopenic or osteoporotic
group. When focusing at the sustenaculum tali, the posterior cortical thickness was
significantly different only when compared between the normal and osteoporotic groups. Inter
and intra-rater reliability of the outcome measurements were all excellent (>0.80).
Conclusion: The cortical thickness of the posterior aspect of the sustenaculum
tali, as well as the cortical thickness of the lateral one-fifth and lateral two-fifth of
the calcaneus, were less likely effected by the decrease in BMD status. However, the
anterior part of sustenaculum tali, anteromedial area of superior and inferior cortex and
inferomedial area of posterior cortex are thicker than others.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00274

## A Historical Analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials in Pediatric Orthopaedic Foot and
Ankle Surgery

Abdulaziz Khurshed; Monther Abuhantash; Jeffrey Kay; Anthony S. Habib; Waleed Kishta,
PhD, MB BCh, FRCS(C), MSc(Orth); Darre De Sa

Category: Ankle; Bunion; Lesser Toes; Midfoot/Forefoot; Trauma
Keywords: Ankle; Trauma; Hallux Valgus
Introduction/Purpose: The primary objective of this systematic review was to
comprehensively assess the quality of reporting of randomized controlled trials (RCTs)
relating to pediatric orthopaedic foot and ankle conditions. Additionally, this current
study looked at factors related to the quality of the RCTs and trends in the quality of
reporting over time
Methods: This systemic review was performed according to an agreed predefined
protocol and conducted according to Preferred Reporting Items for Systemic Reviews and
Meta-analyses (PRISMA) statement standards. PubMed, Ovid (MEDLINE) and Embase were searched
for all RCTs on foot and/or ankle surgery from the database inception until March 31, 2020.
The quality of reporting was evaluated using the Detsky quality index and the Consolidated
Standards of Reporting Trials (CONSORT) checklist for reporting trials of nonpharmacologic
treatments. A multivariate regression analysis was used to assess predictors of quality
reporting.
Results: The online search yielded 3,697 articles, 22 of which met the
inclusion criteria and were assessed for quality of reporting. The earliest identified RCT
was published in 1991. Close to 70% of all RCTs have been produced over the past 10 years
(since 2010), and over 90% have been published in the past 20 years (since 2000). There has
been a significant increase in the number of RCTs published over time (p=0.042). The mean
(SD) Detsky score across all included studies was 69.2% (13.8%). Nine (41%) of the studies
were considered 'high-quality' with a standardized Detsky score greater than or equal to
75%. The strongest predictor of quality reporting was the inclusion of a CONSORT flow
diagram (β-coefficient: 18.4, p=0.0013).
Conclusion: Despite an increase in the quantity of pediatric F&A RCTs over
time, the quality has not significantly improved. The use of a CONSORT flow diagram is a
strong predictor of high-quality reporting. We encourage investigators to devote more
efforts in conducting high-quality RCTs in pediatric orthopaedic foot and ankle, as these
are scarce in the literature.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00275

## Is Arthroscopic Surgery Favorable for Freiberg’s Disease in Metatarsophalangeal
Joint?

Do Yeon Kim; Kwang-Bok Lee, MD, PhD; Gun Joo Park, MD; Jong Kil Kim, MD

Category: Arthroscopy; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Arthroscopy; Freiberg’s Disease; Clinical Outcomes
Introduction/Purpose: Freiberg’s disease is osteochondrosis involving the
metatarsal heads. It is a rare disease, mostly found in the second or third metatarsal. The
surgical treatment regimens for this disease have not yet been completely defined. We report
the outcomes of cases of Freiberg’s disease treated with arthroscopic surgery. To assess the
effectiveness of a minimally invasive procedure with arthroscopic surgery for the treatment
of Freiberg’s disease.
Methods: From 2015 to 2019, 13 patients (15 feet) diagnosed with Freiberg’s
disease were enrolled for arthroscopic surgery. Patients were divided based on the Smillie’s
classification system; 2 stage I, 8 stage II, 3 stage III, 1 stage IV, and 1 stage V.
Arthroscopic procedures included synovectomy, debridement, chondroplasty, microfracture, and
loose body removal. For radiological evaluation, we obtained pre- and post-operative
follow-up X-rays and MRIs. We evaluated clinical outcomes using the American Orthopaedic
Foot & Ankle Society (AOFAS) lesser metatarsophalangeal (MTP)-interphalangeal score, and
the Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) score. The MTP joint range of motion (ROM) was measured pre-
and post-operatively.
Results: Radiological study showed no evidence of osteonecrosis progression in
the post-operative follow-up X-ray images in any of the 15 cases. Postoperative 12-month
MRIs showed reduction of bone-marrow edema, irregularity of subchondral bone, and cartilage
defects in all cases. There were significant improvements in AOFAS scores and VAS scores at
post-operative 2 weeks and 3 and 12 months over the pre-operative scores (p < 0.05). The
MTP joint ROM improved at the last follow-up (p < 0.05).
Conclusion: Arthroscopic surgery applied to Freiberg’s disease showed
excellent results regardless of grades (Smillie’s classification system) in radiological
evaluation, clinical outcomes, and MTP joint ROM. We suggest it as a treatment of choice for
surgeons when they encounter Freiberg’s disease.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00276

## Effect of Total Ankle Arthroplasty Implantation and Adaptive Gait on Ankle and Adjacent
Joint Kinematics During Simulated Gait

Jaeyoung Kim, MD; Jeffrey W. Hoffman, MS; Brett D. Steineman; Daniel R. Sturnick, MS;
Jonathan T. Deland, MD; Constantine A. Demetracopoulos, MD

Category: Ankle; Ankle Arthritis; Basic Sciences/Biologics
Keywords: Ankle Arthroplasty; End-Stage Ankle Arthritis; Gait Study Range of
Motion
Introduction/Purpose: Clinical and functional improvement after total ankle
arthroplasty (TAA) in end-stage ankle arthritis has been well documented. However, despite
the implantation of TAA devices designed to restore normal walking kinematics, patients with
end-stage arthritis develop compensatory walking patterns which do not return to normal,
postoperatively. This discrepancy between the normative and adaptive gait patterns could
influence implant loading and intended function; however, the independent influence of
implant constraints and adaptive gait on joint function is unknown. Therefore, this study
aimed to isolate the individual and combined effects of TAA implantation and gait adaption
from ankle arthritis on foot and ankle kinematics during simulated level walking. We
hypothesized that foot and ankle kinematics would primarily be altered through adaptations
in gait resulting from ankle arthritis.
Methods: Twelve mid-tibia cadaveric specimens were utilized. A validated
six-degree of freedom robotic gait simulator was used to simulate the stance phase [3]. The
specimen was first placed on the simulator in the intact condition, simulated with both
healthy and adaptive gait inputs collected from healthy and post-surgical TAA subjects
(average follow-up: 46 months), respectively. The TAA (Salto Talaris; Integra LifeSciences)
was then implanted, and adaptive and healthy gait trials were conducted in the implanted
condition. Four conditions were collected on each specimen: intact with a healthy walking
trajectory (intact- healthy), intact with an adaptive walking trajectory (intact-adaptive),
implanted with TAA with a healthy walking trajectory (TAA- healthy), and implanted with TAA
with an adaptive gait trajectory (TAA-adaptive). Ankle, subtalar, and talonavicular joint
kinematics in each condition were compared to intact-healthy to isolate the effects of
implantation and adaptive gait on kinematics. Bias-corrected 95% confidence intervals were
calculated for the difference between conditions.
Results: Significant differences were observed in the ankle, subtalar, and
talonavicular joints across all comparisons. In the comparison between the intact-healthy
and intact-adaptive conditions, to isolate the effect of adaptive gait ( ), ankle dorsiflexion and subtalar eversion
increased late in stance, while talonavicular abduction increased in early and late stance.
In the comparison between intact-healthy and TAA-healthy conditions, to isolate the effect
of implant constraints ( ),
ankle plantarflexion, subtalar eversion, and talonavicular abduction significantly increased
in mid-stance after implantation. In the comparison between the intact healthy and the
TAA-adaptive conditions, to evaluate the combined effect of adaptive gait and implantation
( ), ankle plantarflexion
was increased during early stance and decreased in late stance, subtalar eversion increased
during mid-to-late stance, and talonavicular abduction increased throughout most of the
stance phase.
Conclusion: The results from this study indicate that both gait adaption and
implant constraint contributed to changes in ankle and adjacent joint kinematics. The two
factors appear to influence different aspects of the stance phase, where gait adaption
appeared to influence early, and late stance and implantation influenced kinematics in
mid-stance. The synergistic influence of both factors seemed to exaggerate deviations away
from normal kinematics in the subtalar and talonavicular joints while negating deviations
from normal in the ankle joint. This suggests that ankle implants designed to restore
normative walking patterns may not account for the loading environment seen in patients.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00277

## Analyzing Risk Factors for Sequential Above Knee Amputation after Below Knee Amputation
in Surgical Treatment of Ischemic and/or Infectious Foot Disease

Ki Chun Kim, MD; Sung-Jae Kim, PhD; Il-Hoon Sung, MD, PhD; Kiwon Young, MD; Kyung-tai
Lee, MD, PhD; Hong S. Lee, MD

Category: Diabetes
Keywords: Diabetic Foot; Diabetic Foot Ulcer; Diabetic Ulcer
Introduction/Purpose: Some patients with below knee (BK) amputation for
treatment of ischemic and/or infectious foot disease eventually further progress to above
knee (AK) amputation. We aimed to analyze predictors for sequential AK amputation after BK
amputation.
Methods: We retrospectively reviewed medical records and find 55 patients with
BK amputation for surgical treatment of ischemic and/or infectious foot from 2013 to 2018.
Twelve patients with sequential AK amputation after BK amputation were designated as group
I, and 43 patients successfully treated with BK amputation only were designated as group II.
Two groups were compared for various demographic, laboratory and physical state. Then,
multivariate logistic regression analysis was done to find predictors for sequential AK
amputation after BK amputation.
Results: In univariate analysis between two groups, only 'knee contracture'
showed significant difference between two groups (p= 0.003). In multivariate logistic
regression analysis performed with variables showing p <0.1 during univariate comparison,
knee contracture was found to be predictor for sequential AK amputation after BK amputation
(odds ratio= 34.740, p= 0.041).
Conclusion: Patients with intractable ischemic and/or infectious foot disease
with knee contracture, optimal level of amputation may be above knee level. Careful decision
on amputation level can reduce surgical burden for intractable ischemic and/or infectious
foot patients.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00278

## Radiographic Evaluation of the Normal Distal Tibiofibular Syndesmosis in Neutral to
Dorsiflexion on Weight-Bearing

Ki Chun Kim, MD; Kyung-tai Lee, MD, PhD; Kiwon Young, MD

Category: Ankle; Sports
Keywords: Syndesmosis; Tibiofibular Syndesmosis; Ankle
Introduction/Purpose: Reliable landmarks of ankle syndesmosis change in
various position is important for managing ankle injury. The purpose of our study was to
investigate and compare radiographic landmarks of normal ankle in various positions.
Methods: The study involved both ankle radiographs of 30 subjects (15 males,
15 females) without clinical or radiographic abnormality. Tibiofibular clear space (TFCS)
and tibiofibular overlap (TFO) were measured on anteroposterior (AP) and mortise radiographs
in non-standing (NS) and standing (S) neutral and dorsiflexion 10 (DF10) and 20 degrees
(DF20). The radiographic measurements were used to calculate means, standard deviations, and
intra- and interobserver reliabilities, and compare TFCS and TFO in various positions and
genders.
Results: On the AP view, the mean TFCS in NS, S, DF10, and DF20 positions were
4.00+-0.97, 4.00+-0.83, 4.35+-0.95, and 4.45+-0.89 and the mean TFO on the same positions
were 6.58+-2.27, 4.27+-1.90, 3.44+-1.96, and 2.38+-1.91. On the mortise view, the mean TFCS
in NS, DF10, and DF20 positions were 3.62+-0.88, 4.08+-0.86, and 3.88+-0.97 and the mean TFO
on the same positions were 3.57+-2.13, 2.31+-1.77, and 3.57+-2.14. The reliabilities in all
positions except TFCS on some positions were excellent. No measurement was significantly
different between females and males except TFO in NS on mortise view (p=0.006) and DF10 on
AP view (p=0.032).
Conclusion: Increase of TFCS and decrease of TFO on AP view reflects
syndesmosis change from non-standing to DF20 on standing. Clinically, Effect of
weight-bearing and reliability of TFO should be considered.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00279

## Comparison of the Distributions of Mechanoreceptors in the Three Parts of ATFL (Fibula
Attach, Mid- Substance, Talar Attach)

Woo Jong Kim, MD; Young Koo Lee, MD, PhD; Young Cheol Hong

Category: Basic Sciences/Biologics; Ankle
Keywords: Ankle Instability; Ligament; Ankle
Introduction/Purpose: To investigate the functional characteristics of the
anterior talofibular ligament (ATFL) in the ankle, we divided the ligament into three parts
and compare the distribution of mechanoreceptors in each part by type.
Methods: The ATFL were obtained from 20 ankles of 10 fresh-frozen cadavers.
The ligament was divided into three parts: fibula attach, mid-substance, and talar attach.
Historically, mechanoreceptors were identified and classified as Ruffini (type I),
Vater-Pacini (type II), Golgi-Mazzoni (type III) corpuscle, Free nerve ending (type IV).
Difference in receptor density were compared.
Results: The ATFL were obtained from 20 ankles of 10 fresh-frozen cadavers.
The ligament was divided into three parts: fibula attach, mid-substance, and talar attach.
Historically, mechanoreceptors were identified and classified as Ruffini (type I),
Vater-Pacini (type II), Golgi-Mazzoni (type III) corpuscle, Free nerve ending (type IV).
Difference in receptor density were compared.
Conclusion: There were no significant differences in the densities of the four
types of mechanoreceptors among the three parts of the ATFL.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00280

## Apoptosis Occurs in Anterior Talofibular Ligament of Chronic Lateral Ankle Instability:
Biochemical Evidence from Bench to Bed

Yoon-Chung Kim, MD; Sung Hyun Cho

Category: Ankle; Basic Sciences/Biologics; Sports
Keywords: Chronic Ankle Instability; Ligament; Biologics
Introduction/Purpose: Chronic lateral ankle instability (CLAI) is a common
entity that can result in degenerative arthritis if left untreated. CLAI is treated
operatively, while acute ligament injury, so-called 'ankle sprain' is primarily treated
nonoperatively with good clinical outcomes. This widely accepted opinion has been proved by
clinical scoring system, physical examination, stress radiographs, ultrasonography, or
magnetic resonance imaging. However, some surgeons often rush to perform the operative
repair for acute ankle ligament injury. Apoptosis has been demonstrated as a considerable
cause of ligament degeneration. Up to date, there are few reports of biomolecular and
histochemical evidence focused on the 'apoptosis' that occurred in the torn anterior
talofibular ligament (ATFL). The aim of this study is to elucidate the apoptosis that occurs
within the ATFL of CLAI.
Methods: Ligamentous tissues were collected from 15 patients undergoing
modified Broström operation (group C) and 10 patients undergoing distal fibular fracture
surgery as controls (group A). We allocated distal fibular fracture patients as an
alternative to acute lateral ankle ligament injury to harvest acutely injured ATFL tissue.
In both groups, the tissue samples were harvested at ATFL. Apoptotic cells were determined
by TUNEL (terminal deoxynucleotidyltransferase-mediated dUTP-biotin nick end labeling)
assay. Caspase 3/7, 8, 9, and cytochrome c activities were measured to determine the
intracellular apoptosis pathway using Western blot. Immunohistochemistry staining was also
performed to detect the expression of caspases and cytochrome c.
Results: The TUNEL assay revealed a large number of positive staining cells in
group C that included ATFL of CLAI. The apoptotic activities of ligaments from group C were
significantly higher than those of group A (P < 0.05). Immunohistochemistry also revealed
an increase in expression of caspase 3/7, 8, 9, and cytochrome c more in group C than in
group A.
Conclusion: This study demonstrates that the degenerated ATFL following CLAI
showed higher apoptotic activity than acutely sprained ligament. Based on our biochemical
findings, we could remind previous understanding about surgical indication and timing of
lateral ankle ligament injury. We suggest that a clinical relevance between our laboratory
research and previous knowledge Further study should be conducted to focus on biological
augmentation to reverse or prevent further apoptosis within the lateral ankle ligament
complex including ATFL.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00281

## Development of A Risk Stratification Scoring System to Predict General Surgical
Complications in Foot and Ankle Surgery Patients

Haroon Kisana; Clayton Hui; John R. Martin; Chad Stecher; Joshua Hustedt, MD

Category: Ankle; Ankle Arthritis; Arthroscopy; Basic Sciences/Biologics;
Bunion; Diabetes; Hindfoot; Lesser Toes; Midfoot/Forefoot; Sports; Trauma
Keywords: Complications; Preoperative risk factors; Outcomes Measures
Introduction/Purpose: Preventing postoperative complications is crucial for
patients, surgeons, and healthcare facilities. A risk stratification scoring system was
created to help optimize risk factors for general surgical complications in foot and ankle
surgery patients.
Methods: A total of 85,363 patients that underwent foot and ankle procedures
from 2005 to 2017 were identified as part of the American College of Surgeons National
Surgical Quality Improvement Program. Independent risk factors associated with postoperative
complications within 30 days of surgery were identified and used to develop a point-scoring
system to estimate the relative risk for experiencing complications. For validation, the
system was tested on a subset of patients from the database who had foot and ankle
surgery.
Results: The 30-day postoperative complication incidence after foot and ankle
surgery was 19.1%. Risk factors associated with postoperative complications were tobacco
abuse, age (>64), diabetes mellitus, hypertension, elevated creatinine (>1.3 mg/dL),
hypoalbuminemia (<3.5 g/dL), and anemia (male hematocrit <42; female <38). Point
scores from each factor were: anemia, +7; hypoalbuminemia, +4; hypertension, +4; elevated
creatinine, +3; diabetes mellitus, +3; age over 64, +2; and tobacco abuse, +1. In the
validation cohort, patients categorized as low risk (0-5), using the point scoring system
had a 2.5% rate of 30-day complications; patients categorized as medium risk (6-10) had a
7.5% complication rate (relative risk = 2.0; 95% CI, 1.7-2.3 compared with low risk) and
high risk (>=11), 33.1% (relative risk = 3.7; 95% CI, 3.2-4.3).
Conclusion: This point scoring system predicts risk for general postoperative
complications after foot and ankle surgery. These data may help foot and ankle surgeons
identify areas of clinical concern with patients to reduce the risk of experiencing
postoperative complications.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00282

## The Circular Arc Curved Nail for Internal Fixation of Tibio-Talo-Calcaneal
Arthrodesis

Kaj Klaue, MD

Category: Ankle; Ankle Arthritis; Diabetes; Hindfoot; Trauma
Keywords: Ankle Arthrodesis; Tibiotalocalcaneal Arthrodesis; Internal
Fixation
Introduction/Purpose: Normal anatomy demonstrates alignment of the heel, the
subtalar facet, the talus, the ankle joint and the distal tibia on a regular curve. This
curve lies on a vertical plane which is slightly angulated inwards in relation to the
sagittal plane. Today’s hindfoot nails are either straight or bent. The hole which
accommodates the implant is always straight and thus does not respect the normal alignment
of the hindfoot. This technique may cause a plantar neurapraxia, the nail holds poorly the
calcaneus and tends to create a hindfoot varus. Purpose of the study is to optimize the
technique to
Methods: A circular arc bore hole crosses the heel, the posterior subtalar
facet, the tibio-talar joint and the distal tibia metaphysis. The hole is bored using a
motor driven end cutting flexible reamer which is seated within a rigid curved hull. The
nail has the exact same shape than the hull and is impacted up to the distal tibia creating
a bone-nail form fit. A distal locking screw crossing the subtalar joint and a proximal
locking screw within the tibia concludes the central fixation. 47 patients (23 women and 24
men aging 30 to 84 y (mean 52y)) have been treated so far using this technique. The
diagnosis was basically primary and post- traumatic arthritis and includes diabetic
arthropathies (4 cases) and failed TAR (3 cases). After 2 weeks our patients did practise
partial weight bearing using a cam walker for other 6 weeks.
Results: The mean follow-up time of the patient series is 3 years (16-78
months). Two patients with diabetic arthropathy died 2 years and 8 months and the other 8
months post-op after consolidation of the arthrodesis due to their primary disease. 3 cases
sustained a deep infection which requested a below knee amputation in 2 cases and a
calcanectomy in another case. Within the remaining 42 cases, 37 consolidated their
arthrodesis within 2 months; 5 cases had a delayed union and 2 cases had to be revised for a
non-union, one in the ankle, the other one in the subtalar joint. Patients with a good bone
quality and anatomical hindfoot axes could bear their body weight entirely at 2 months. 1
patient reported remaining pain at 2 years post-op and another case was additionally
operated to correct a remaining midfoot deformity (club foot).
Conclusion: The tibio-talo-calcaneal arthrodesis can be successfully treated
using a central circular arc curved nail respecting a form fit interaction between bone and
nail. The anatomical osteo-articular alignment of the hindfoot is corrected or preserved.
Due to the safe approaches and the bone-nail form fit, the technique allows for primary
stability and prevents shortcomings such as neurological complications and non-union. We
expect a shorter period between surgical fixation and full weight bearing.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00283

## Lag Screw with Plantar Plating for Naviculocuneiform Arthrodesis in Progressive
Collapsing Foot Deformity

Derek M. Klavas, MD; Austin E. Wininger; Stephanie S. Gardner, MD; Jason S. Ahuero,
MD; Kevin E. Varner, MD

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Adult Acquired Flatfoot Deformity; Arthrodesis; Midfoot
arthrodesis
Introduction/Purpose: Medial column procedures are a common adjunct to
progressive collapsing foot deformity (PCFD) correction. In particular, naviculocuneiform
(NC) arthrodesis could be performed when degeneration or instability at the NC joint is
contributing to arch collapse. Plantar plate fusion resists gapping along the tension side
of the joint, potentially reducing risk of non-union and recurrent deformity. Additionally,
by placing the hardware in a plantar location there is an increased soft tissue envelope to
function in a protective matter and eliminate the possibility of hardware prominence and
tendon irritation. The purpose of this study was to analyze short-term clinical and
radiographic outcomes of NC fusion using a lag screw with plantar plating technique.
Methods: A single-surgeon retrospective case series was performed on patients
with PCFD and medial arch collapse treated with NC arthrodesis using a lag screw plus
plantar plating technique between January 2016 and December 2019, with a minimum six month
clinical and radiographic follow up. Patients undergoing revision NC joint arthrodesis,
patients with incomplete imaging, or an arthrodesis technique that did not utilize NC joint
plantar plating were excluded. Demographic data, perioperative data, complications, and
reoperations were recorded from electronic medical records. Pre-operative AOFAS midfoot
scores were calculated at the initial clinic visit and then again at the patients' most
recent follow-up. In the case of most recent follow up occurring prior to six months
post-operatively, a telemedicine visit was performed. Anteroposterior (AP) and lateral
talo-first metatarsal angles, talonavicular coverage angle, and calcaneal pitch were
measured independently by three authors. Fusion was confirmed radiographically and computed
topography when union was in question.
Results: Nineteen patients (15 female, 4 male; 11 right, 8 left) with a mean
age of 56.6 years and a mean follow-up of 21.0 +- 13.4 months were reviewed. A mean 3.4
concomitant procedures were performed at the time of NC fusion. AP talo-first metatarsal
angle (18.9° to 5.2°), lateral talo-first metatarsal angel (-18.7° to -4.4°), talonavicular
coverage angle (28.1° to 7.4°), and calcaneal pitch (14.6° to 20.1°) all improved
significantly (p<0.001). Fusion was confirmed in 15 (79%) patients at a mean 6.1 +- 3.5
months. Mean AOFAS midfoot scores improved from 51.7 +- 13.0 preoperatively to 82.6 +-12.8
(p<0.001) at an average 21.0 +- 13.4 months follow up. Two patients experienced broken
hardware, one patient fractured through flexor digitorum longus (FDL) transfer site and
experienced non-union requiring revision at 9.5 months, one patient experienced symptomatic
lateral column hardware requiring removal, and one patient experienced non-union requiring
revision at 13.5 months.
Conclusion: Lag screw with plantar plating is a technique for NC arthrodesis
that is associated with a higher non-union rate (21%) than what is reported in the
literature. Nonetheless, at short term (mean 21 months) follow up, the technique proved
capable of correcting medial arch collapse through the NC joint when used in conjunction
with adjunctive soft tissue and bony procedures. Plantar plating technique resulted in no
instances of symptomatic hardware along the medial midfoot. Addressing medial arch collapse
with NC arthrodesis resulted in significant improvement of both radiographic outcomes and
patient reported clinical outcomes.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00284

## Elevated Body Mass Index Does Not Adversely Influence the Outcomes of Arthroscopic
Treatment for Osteochondral Lesions of the Talus

Don T. Koh, MBBS, MRCS, BSc (Hons); Zhan Xia; Zongxian Li; Kae Sian Tay; Shi Ming Tan;
Nicholas Yeo, MBBS, MRCS, MMed(Ortho), FRCS(Edin), FAMS; Inderjeet S. Rikhraj, FRCS

Category: Ankle; Arthroscopy; Hindfoot; Trauma
Keywords: Osteochondral Lesions of the Talus; Arthroscopy; Cartilage
Defect
Introduction/Purpose: Osteochondral lesion of the talus (OLTs) is a common
condition found in patients with chronic ankle pain after previous ankle sprains.
Conservative measures such as analgesics, activity modification and immobilisation of the
affected ankle are usually applied as first line treatments. Surgical management are
indicated after conservative management have failed. This study evaluates the influence of
body mass index (BMI) on the early clinical outcomes of arthroscopic debridement and
microfracture of OLTs.
Methods: An IRB approved study was conducted between 2007 and 2017. A total of
252 patients with symptomatic OLTs who failed conservative management underwent arthroscopic
debridement and microfracture of OLTs over the affected ankle. Postoperatively, all patients
underwent a standardised postoperative rehabilitation protocol. Patients who underwent
previous fractures, previous infections or associated ligamentous injury of the affected
ankle were excluded from this study. Patients from this cohort were divided into two groups
based on BMI. The normal BMI group (NB-Group) (BMI 18.5-25.0kg/m2) and raised BMI
group (RB-Group) (BMI >=25kg/m2). Visual Analogue Score (VAS), American
Orthopaedic Foot & Ankle Society (AOFAS) Hindfoot Score as well as the Physical and
Mental Components of the Short-Form 36 Questionnaire (PCS and MCS respectively) were
prospectively collected from these cohort during their standard postoperative outpatient
follow up.
Results: A total of 252 patients were reviewed. Patients from either group
were otherwise well matched demographically (Table 1). The operative duration was
significantly shorter for NB-Group compared to RB-Group. Patients from both groups had
significant improvement VAS, AOFAS and PCS scores postoperatively at 6 months and 24 months
after surgery (Table 2).Between both groups, patients had comparable VAS, AOFAS as well as
PCS scores at preoperative, 6 months postoperative and 24 months postoperatively (p >
0.05). However, MCS in the RB-Group showed a gradual deterioration over 24 months
postoperatively and was significantly poorer compared to the NB-Group at 24 months (p =
0.036) ( ).
Conclusion: Arthroscopic debridement and microfracture is a reliable
procedure, providing significant improvement in pain relief and functional improvement in
patients. A raised BMI did not adversely affect pain and functional outcomes. However,
patients with raised BMI required a longer duration of procedure and had significantly
poorer MCS scores at 24 months after surgery.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00285

## Biomechanical Comparison of Fibertape Augmentation with Intercuneiform Adjunct and
Cannulated Screws for Ligamentous Lisfranc Injuries: 3D Visualization of Complex
Movement

Zachary Koroneos; Kristen M. Manto, BS; Brandon Martinazzi, BS; Chris M. Stauch, BS;
Shawn M. Bifano, MD; Gregory I. Pace, MD; Gregory Lewis, PhD; Michael C. Aynardi,
MD

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot; Sports; Trauma
Keywords: Lisfranc Injury; Lisfranc Ligament; Biomechanics of the Foot and
Ankle
Introduction/Purpose: The preferred method of fixation for ligamentous
Lisfranc injuries is controversial, with the traditional method being transarticular screws.
Unfortunately screw removal is often required leading surgeons to seek alternative fixation
methods including fibertape constructs. Our lab has published biomechanical results on the
safety and efficacy of a fibertape construct for the treatment of ligamentous Lisfranc
injuries demonstrating biomechanical superiority with the supplementation of an
intercuneiform limb. The purpose of this biomechanical study is to compare transarticular
screws to a fibertape construct under loading and utilizing 3D visualization software.
Methods: Three matched pairs of cadaveric specimens were dissected to allow
for the placement of three screws on the dorsal aspect of the each bone involved in the
Lisfranc complex. The diastasis between bones were measured at three midfoot joints in the
Lisfranc articulation while each specimen was loaded to 75% of donor bodyweight.
Measurements were obtained for the pre- injured specimens. The MC-2MT joint was sectioned
under fluoroscopic imaging and re-measured to produce at least 2 mm of gapping. Specimens
were then fixed with either transarticular screws or fibertape with an intercuneiform limb
and computed tomography scans were performed. Post-fixation measurements were obtained for
250 N of axial loading with subsequent 100 N increases up to 650 N. CT scans were imported
as DICOM images and the three bones were segmented to analyze the gapping that occurred at
the dorsal, interosseous, and plantar portions of the ligament.
Results: There were no significant differences detected for the diastasis
between bones in the Lisfranc complex between the fibertape and screws. After loading to 650
N, no specimens had reached a diastasis of 2 mm through coordinate digitized measurements
( and B). At 650 N of
loading the fibertape specimens displayed an average diastasis of 0.78 mm while the
specimens fixed with screws also displayed an average diastasis of 0.78 mm. 3D diastasis
measurements showed coordinate digitized measurements were within 0.2 mm of those measured
from 3D reconstruction of CT scans. The largest diastasis occurred at the dorsal aspect of
the ligament.
Conclusion: The use of a fibertape device involving a supplementary
intercuneiform limb appears to provide a biomechanically viable alternative to screws for
ligamentous Lisfranc injuries. Diastasis was verified using 3D computer models. Future
efforts involve increasing the number of specimens, applying cyclic loading, and determining
the effects on each portion of the ligament for each fixation type.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00286

## Establishment of a Neurodegenerative Mouse Model for Charcot Neuropathic
Arthropathy

Zachary Koroneos; Anna Ptasinski; Chris M. Stauch, BS; Laura R. Luick, MD; Julie C.
Fanburg-Smith; Michael C. Aynardi, MD

Category: Basic Sciences/Biologics; Diabetes
Keywords: Charcot Foot; Diabetic Foot; AAFD
Introduction/Purpose: Neuropathic arthropathy (Charcot) is a progressive and
debilitating joint destruction and has neurovascular and neurotraumatic etiologies which are
commonly observed in type II Diabetes. This stems from the loss of protective sensation
through peripheral neuropathy, cartilage loss, and fragmentation. To model this condition,
diabetic obese mice have demonstrated insulin resistance and peripheral neuropathy similar
to that seen in type II diabetes in humans. We hypothesized that exposing these diabetic
induced, neuropathic (DIN) mice to neuro-trauma through a regimented running protocol would
produce a Charcot like, neurodegenerative state seen in human diabetic Charcot when compared
to controls.
Methods: Following IAUCUC approval, 24 DIN wild-type C57BL/6J, and 24 wildtype
control (WTC) C57BL/6J mice were obtained (Jackson Labs, Bar Harbor, ME) at 6-weeks-old.
After a one-week acclimation period, DIN mice consumed a high-fat diet (60% fat by kcal) ad
libitum to facilitate neuropathic diet-induced obesity while WTC mice consumed an
age-matched standard low-fat control diet (10% fat by kcal). At 12-weeks-old, half of the
animals from each group were subjected to a high-intensity inclined treadmill running
protocol (+R), which has been previously shown to induce neurotrauma. The protocol involved
25 minutes of running 4 times per week for 10 weeks for both groups. Von Frey filament
sensory testing, and radiographic analyses were performed at weeks 0,5 and 10. After 10
weeks, animals were sacrificed; histopathologic analyses were performed to evaluate the
navicular-cuneiform joint articular cartilage, sub-chondral and cortical bone, distance to
marrow space, and soft tissue including nerves, and vessels.
Results: DIN+R mice displayed significantly reduced sensory function in Von
Frey filament testing in week 1 (P<0.05) and this worsened over time requiring 22.0% more
force for paw withdrawal by week 10 (P<0.001). Radiographic analysis determined that
DIN+R mice demonstrated greater midfoot subluxation & tarsal instability at all time
points compared to WTC (P<0.001). Pathological analyses of DIN+R mice demonstrated a
significant increase in neurodegenerative destruction of the hind paws compared to controls
(P<0.001). Interestingly, DIN+R subjects demonstrated the presence of hyalinized
arteriolosclerosis and intraneural vacuolization/myxoid/edematous changes with in hind paw
nerves seen in human Charcot histopathologic analysis. Furthermore, these changes were not
observed in controls.
Conclusion: Diabetic induced, neuropathic (DIN) mice, when exposed to a
regimented running protocol, displayed a neurodegenerative state in their hind paws similar
to that seen in human diabetic Charcot foot. In addition, DIN+R mice had both radiogahpic
and pathologic changes akin to early diabetic Charcot changes seen in humans. This is the
first mouse model which has successfully demonstrated that the combination of peripheral
neuropathy and neurotrauma can consistently reproduce early Charcot like changes seen in
humans. This model will serve as the basis for future testing of medical and surgical
interventions for the treatment of diabetic Charcot in humans.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00287

## Histological Findings Upon Patients Undergoing Revision Surgery after AMIC of the
Talus

Fabian Krause, MD; Helen Anwander, MD; Birgit Schaefer

Category: Ankle Arthritis
Keywords: Ankle; Ankle Arthritis; Cartilage Defect
Introduction/Purpose: Failure after AMIC (autologous matrix-induced
chondroplasty) of the talus is relatively rare and ranges between 2-6%. The purpose of the
study was to analyze the histologic quality of the repair cartilage and potentially identify
the mode of failure in 3 patients that underwent revision surgery after primary AMIC
procedures.
Methods: Out of 48 patients treated with AMIC for OLT between 2012 and 2018 at
our institution, three patients (6.2%, average age 27.3 years) required revision surgery for
various reasons. During revision, repair cartilage was evaluated about integration with the
surrounding healthy cartilage and firmness, and specimen were taken for histologic
assessment.
Results: Only one patient that had, next to revision AMIC, a lateral ligament
reconstruction for a secondary supination sprain, improved clinically after revision surgery
(patient no.3). Despite repair SMOT (no.1) or deltoid ligament repair (no.1), the two other
patients did not benefit from revision. Supposed reasons for ongoing symptoms were
progressive posttraumatic arthritis (no.1 and 2) and neuropathic pain (no.2). Three types of
soft connective tissues could be identified: (i) non-vascularized fibrocartilaginous tissue
(patient no. 1-3), (ii) fibrous tissue (patient no. 1 and 2), and (iii) hyaline like
cartilage (patient no. 3).
Conclusion: Overall, data support the theory that patients with hyaline or
hyaline-like repair cartilage tend to better clinical outcome over time. However, the growth
of hyaline or hyaline-like repair cartilage appears to require ligamentous stability,
neutral or even offloading hindfoot alignment, and absence of arthritis.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00288

## Epidemiology of Insertional Achilles Tendinosis in Patients Requiring Surgical
Intervention

Bryce F. Kunkle; Nicholas A. Baxter; Alexander Caughman; John Barcel; Daniel J. Scott,
MD, MBA; Christopher E. Gross, MD

Category: Hindfoot
Keywords: Achilles Tendonopathy; Achilles Tendinosis; Achilles
Introduction/Purpose: While many patients benefit from non-operative treatment
of insertional Achilles tendinosis (IAT), some require surgical debridement and
reconstruction. While numerous studies have looked for factors that may contribute to the
development of IAT, there is a lack of studies that identify factors that contribute to the
need for surgical management.
Identification of these factors could better inform physicians on the progression of IAT
and could help guide doctor and patient decision-making. The purpose of this study is to
determine the relationship of patient demographic characteristics, comorbidity profiles, and
radiological markers with the need for future surgical or non-surgical management of
IAT.
Methods: A retrospective chart review was performed to identify patients who
received either surgical or non-surgical treatment of IAT at an academic institution from
September 2015 - June 2019. Patients were identified using ICD-10 diagnosis codes for
Achilles tendinosis, and all cases of non-insertional tendinosis were excluded (N=226). This
sample was further separated into patients who received surgical treatment (n=48) and those
who were managed conservatively without surgery (178). Demographic and comorbidity data was
collected and compared between groups. Additionally, the presence and magnitude of
radiological markers including Haglund’s deformity, calcaneal enthesophytes, relevant
calcaneal angles, and maximum cross- sectional tendon disease involvement on MRI were
collected and compared between groups ( ). A multivariate, binomial logistic regression model was then constructed
in order to identify independent predictors of the need for surgical management.
Results: There were no significant differences between groups in regard to
age, sex, race, BMI, tobacco or alcohol use, hypertension, diabetes, arthritis, previous
arthroplasty, or previous platelet-rich plasma injection. The surgery group was
significantly more likely to have evidence of Haglund’s deformity on clinical exam (83% vs.
69%; p=.005) and to have depression (27% vs. 12%; p=.012). Patients who received an ankle
MRI were more likely undergo surgery (63% vs. 27%; p=.006), and patients treated surgically
had a higher percentage of maximum cross-sectional tendon disease involvement on MRI (41%
vs. 26%; p<.001). Multivariate logistic regression analysis showed that increased
cross-sectional disease involvement was an independent predictor of the need for surgery,
with involvement of at least 18% being significantly predictive of this need.
Conclusion: Patients who received surgery for IAT were significantly more
likely to have evidence of Haglund’s deformity on clinical exam, have a previous diagnosis
of depression, have received an MRI, and have a higher percentage of cross-sectional tendon
disease involvement. Patients with at least 18% cross-sectional tendon involvement on axial
MRI are more likely to go on to surgery and should therefore be counseled as such. Foot and
ankle surgeons should use this information to facilitate shared decision-making regarding
conservative versus surgical treatment of IAT.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00289

## Minimally Invasive Surgery for Severe Hallux Valgus with Severe Metatarsus Adductus:
Case Reports

Toshinori Kurashige, MD

Category: Bunion; Lesser Toes
Keywords: Minimally Invasive; Metartus Adductus; Hallux Valgus
Introduction/Purpose: Metatarsus adductus (MA) is a congenital transverse
plane deformity with an incidence of approximately 30% in patients with hallux valgus.
Operative treatment of hallux valgus (HV) with MA can be clinically challenging, and the
recurrence rate of HV has been reported as two times higher than in patients without MA.
Minimally invasive surgery (MIS) for the correction of HV is growing in popularity; however,
only one study has been published on MIS for HV with MA using percutaneous proximal
metatarsal osteotomy. We presented our case reports using distal oblique metatarsal minimal
invasive osteotomy (DOMMO) for severe MA.
Methods: We corrected two feet using DOMMO for severe MA. Minimally invasive
chevron Akin osteotomy (MICA) was utilized to correct severe HV. The patient had
subluxations in the second and third metatarsophalangeal joints and hammer toe deformities.
Therefore, those deformities were concurrently corrected using percutaneous procedures. The
patient was allowed immediate full weight bearing postoperatively in a flat rigid shoe for 6
weeks. Radiographic and clinical evaluations were performed preoperatively and one year
after surgery. On the anteroposterior radiograph, the hallux valgus angles (HVA), the first
intermetatarsal angles (IMA), tibial sesamoid positions (TSP) and metatarsus adductusangles
(MAA) were evaluated. On the lateral weight-bearing radiograph, first metatarsal inclination
angles were also evaluated. We also evaluate the Japanese Society for Surgery of the Foot
(JSSF) hallux and lesser toes scales and the Self-Administered Foot Evaluation Questionnaire
(SAFE-Q) both before and after MIS for HV with MA.
Results: In the first case, the HVA improved from 50° to 16°, the IMA from 15°
to 11°, TSP from 7 to 5 using Hardy’s classification, and MAA from 27° to 14.5°, pre- to
postoperatively. In the second case, the HVA improved from 45° to 11°, the IMA from 10° to
6.5°, TSP from grade 7 to 3, MAA from 30 to 12, pre- to postoperatively. The first
metatarsal inclination angles changed from 16.9° and 18.8° to17.7° and 22.0°, respectively.
All subluxations and hammer toe deformities were resolved. Although there were delayed
unions in the lesser metatarsals, unions were achieved finally. Preoperative JSSF hallux
scales and lesser toes scales were 59 points and 64 points, 67 points and 80 points,
respectively. Both hallux and lesser toe scales improved to 100 points one year after
surgery. All SAFE-Q subscores were also improved one year after surgery.
Conclusion: In conclusion, our MIS procedure, consisting of DOMMO of the
second, third, and fourth metatarsals and MICA, could correct severe HV with severe MA. The
patient was allowed immediate full weight bearing postoperatively in a flat rigid shoe.
Although there were delayed unions in lesser metatarsals, unions were finally achieved and
good results were demonstrated both radiographically and clinically.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00290

## Percutaneous Bunionette Correction without Fixation: Clinical Results and Radiographic
Evaluations Including Rotation of Metatarsal Head and Sagittal Angular Change of Fifth
Metatarsal

Toshinori Kurashige, MD

Category: Lesser Toes
Keywords: Minimally Invasive; Fifth Metatarsal; Fifth Metatarsal
Morphology
Introduction/Purpose: Bunionette has been treated as an analogy of hallux
valgus, and the surgical techniques are similar. However, only the anteroposterior image is
generally evaluated pre- and postoperatively. There are few studies that evaluated on the
lateral radiograph, and to the best of our knowledge, no study that evaluated changes in
rotation of fifth metatarsal head. In percutaneous bunionette correction using a burr,
shortening of fifth metatarsal and elevation of metatarsal head are inevitable. In addition,
there is also the possibility of rotational change of metatarsal head without fixation.
Methods: We evaluated 18 consecutive feet performed percutaneous bunionette
correction without internal fixation. Mean age was 54.9 years. Mean follow-up was 10.1
months at least six months followup. On anteroposterior weightbearing radiograph, we
measured the fifth metatarsophalangeal angle (MPA), fourth and fifth intermetatarsal angle
(IMA), the fifth metatarsal head width (MHW), the lateral deviation angle (LDA) of the fifth
metatarsal, and fifth metatarsal shortening. On the lateral weightbearing radiograph, we
measured the lateral inclination angle (LIA) of the fifth metatarsal, the fifth distal
metatarsal height (DMH), mid metatarsal height (MMH), proximal metatarsal height (PMH), and
plantar bowing angle (PBA). To evaluate the rotation of the fifth metatarsal head, we
devised a new original method measured at the medial tubercle location (MTL). Preoperatively
and at the most recent follow-up visit, we applied the Japanese Society for Surgery of the
Foot (JSSF) lesser scale and visual analogue pain scale (VAS).
Results: Except for MTL, DMH and PMH, all parameters showed significant
changes postoperatively.MPA, IMA and LDA reduced from 17.3 degrees to 6.4 degrees, from 9.9
degrees to 4.5 degrees, and from 2.3 degrees to -10.0 degrees, respectively. Shortening of
fifth metatarsal was 2.5 mm. Despite not performing partial head resection, MHW decreased
from 12.1mm to 11.4 mm. LIA decreased from 9.2 degrees to 6.1 degrees. MMH decreased from
11.6 mm to 10.9 mm. PBA decreased from 7.0 degrees to -1.3 degrees. Union was obtained at
6.9 weeks. MTL reduced from 3.4 to 2.8 but not significantly. However, MTL changed in 15 of
18 feet (83.3%) postoperatively. JSSF lesser scale improved from 66.7 to 97.8 points. VAS
also improved from 3.6 to 1.0. One foot had a delayed union and an occasional pain.
Conclusion: Percutaneous bunionette correction without fixation could achieved
good clinical and radiographic results comparable with previously published outcomes of open
and percutaneous surgery with fixation with less complication. The procedure could be
adapted to different types of bunionette deformity. In this surgical method, bunionette is
corrected in three dimensions.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00291

## Percutaneous Surgery for Interdigital and Lateral Fifth Toe Corns

Toshinori Kurashige, MD

Category: Lesser Toes
Keywords: Minimally Invasive; Intermetatarsal space; Joint Preserving
Surgery
Introduction/Purpose: Lateral fifth toe corns (LFC) form as a result of
extrinsic pressure from footwear. Interdigital corns (IDC) form over the condyles of the
phalanx between the toes, and can be soft and very painful in most cases. When conservative
treatment fails, surgical treatment is indicated. Partial condylectomy for interdigital
cornsis difficult because of the narrow webspace and risk of painful postoperative scar. No
prior study has been published on percutaneous surgery for lateral fifth toe and
interdigital corns, with the exception of some publications on the explanation of the
technique.
Methods: We performed percutaneous partial condylectomy for six toes in five
patients with one LFC and five IDCs. The mean age was 71 years. The mean follow-up period
was 16.2 months. All feet, except for one malalignment case after second proximal phalanx
fracture, had both hallux valgus and bunionette. A small incision was made distal to the
corn to allow the insertion of the entire cutting surface of a burr to avoid skin damage.
The periosteum was removed from the eminence by a small rasp and provided an adequate
working area. The bone eminence was then removed with 2-5 or 2-8 mm burrs. For hallux valgus
and proximal phalanx malalignment after fracture, we also corrected them percutaneously. In
some cases, the Japanese Society for Surgery of the Foot (JSSF) lesser toes scales and
self-administered foot evaluation questionnaire (SAFE-Q) were evaluated pre- and
postoperatively.
Results: There was no complication, except for one valgus deformity in the
second proximal interphalangeal joint after partial condylectomy. At the final follow-up
visit, all patients had no recurrence of corns and no symptoms, and were very satisfied with
the results during the follow-up period of one year. In case of IDC, JSSF lesser toes scale
improved from 45 points to 100 points at the final follow-up. All SAFE-Q subscores were
improved with regard to 'Pain and pain-related' sensations from 36.7 to 99.6, 'Physical
functioning and daily living' from 54.5 to 100, 'Social functioning' from 37.5 to 100,
'Shoe-related' from 25 to 100, and 'General health and well-being' from 25 to 95. The visual
analog scale of pain improved from 7 to 0.4.
Conclusion: The percutaneous procedure consisted of partial condylectomy with
correction of associated deformities achieved good results without major complications and
recurrence over the one year follow-up period.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00292

## Percutaneous Tarsometatarsal Arthrodesis of the Lesser Ray with Autograft using a
Cannulated Screw

Toshinori Kurashige, MD

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Tarsal-Metatarsal Arthrodesis; Minimally Invasive; Tarsometatarsal
Joint Arthritis
Introduction/Purpose: Tarsometatarsal (Lisfranc) joint arthritis can be a
painful condition caused by primary osteoarthritis, inflammatory, and posttrauma. When
conservative treatment failed, tarsometatarsal arthrodesis is indicated. There has been no
study on percutaneous tarsometatarsal arthrodesis previously. The purpose of this study is
to report our percutaneous tarsometatarsal arthrodesis technique and the results of case
series.
Methods: We report 11 joints from 6 feet with painful tarsometatarsal
arthritis of lesser ray treated using percutaneous procedure using a wedge burr. The mean
age at surgery was 67 years. The mean follow-up period was 12 months. Five feet of 4
patients had TMTj degeneration with hallux valgus. Another patient suffered from painful
posttraumatic degenerative arthritis. Through 5-10 mm incision, a 2.9 mm-diameter wedge burr
was introduced into the joint. Resection of subchondral bones was performed with the medial,
lateral and plantar cortices preserved. The dorsal cortex except the burr insertion point
was also remained. The iliac-crest bone grafts were taken using a 6-mm diameter trephine.
Preoperatively and at the most recent follow-up visit, we applied the midfoot scale proposed
by Japanese Society for Surgery of the Foot (JSSF). The validity and reliability of the JSSF
scale has been confirmed in previous studies.
Results: Though there was one nonunion with screw breakage, we achieved
successful results with no need of revision surgery during mean one year follow-up period.
Bone unions were achieved in 10 of 11 joints (91%) at the most recent follow-up. JSSF
midfoot scale significantly improved from 62 points preoperatively to 89.6 points at the
most recent follow-up (p= 0.04).
Conclusion: Our percutaneous TMTj arthrodesis was achieved a union rate and
clinical results comparable to other surgical technique. This procedure was an effective
method for treatment of TMTj arthritis.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00293

## Radiographic and Clinical Results of Minimally Invasive Chevron Akin Osteotomy for
Moderate to Severe Hallux Valgus Deformities

Toshinori Kurashige, MD

Category: Bunion
Keywords: Bunion; Minimally Invasive; Outcomes Measures
Introduction/Purpose: Some authors reported the results from the
third-generation minimally invasive chevron Akin osteotomy (MICA) to treat mild to moderate
hallux valgus recently. However, there have been few studies evaluating the results of MICA
for moderate to severe hallux valgus. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the
radiographic and clinical results of MICA for correction of moderate to severe hallux
valgus.
Methods: A prospective review of 30 patients (40 feet) that underwent MICA for
moderate to severe hallux valgus was conducted. The 28 feet (70%) were classified as severe
deformity (hallux valgus angle (HVA) >= 40°and/or first intermetatarsal angle (IMA) >=
18°). Mean followup was 18.6 months. On the anteroposterior weightbearing radiographs, HVA,
IMA, lateral shape of metatarsal head (round sign), tibial sesamoid position, and first
metatarsal shortening were measured. On the lateral weightbearing radiographs, inclination
angle of first metatarsal was measured. American Orthopaedic Foot & Ankle Society hallux
metatarsophalangeal-interphalangeal (AOFAS) scores and Self-Administered Foot Evaluation
Questionnaire (SAFE-Q) were evaluated preoperatively and at the most recent follow-up.
Results: Mean HVA reduced from 39.3° to 12.8°and mean IMA reduced from 18.6°
to 8.4° postoperatively. Incidence of positive round sign of metatarsal head reduced from
57.5% to 5%. Tibial sesamoid position improved from 6.7 to 4.7 using Hardy’s classification.
Average first metatarsal shortening was 2.8mm. Inclination angle did not changed
significantly, from 20.5°to 21.1°. Mean AOFAS score improved from 65.3 points to 97.9
points. All SAFE-Q subscores also significantly improved postoperatively. There were 5
complications required surgeries: 2 metatarsal screw removals and 3 bone eminence
resections. There were some other complications including 3 under-correction cases and one
numbness for at least 6 months.
Conclusion: MICA could improve moderate to severe hallux valgus both
radiographically and clinically. Accordingly, our results suggest that this procedure
provides an effective means of correcting hallux valgus regardless of severity of
deformity.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00294

## 3D Assessment in Posttraumatic Ankle Osteoarthritis

Peter Kvarda; Lukas Heisler; Nicola Krähenbühl, MD; Caspar S. Steiner, MD; Roxa Ruiz,
MD; Roman Susdorf, PhD; Yantarat Sripanich, MD; Alexej Barg, MD; Beat Hintermann,
MD

Category: Ankle; Ankle Arthritis; Hindfoot; Other
Keywords: Ankle Arthritis; Weight Bearing CT; Ankle
Introduction/Purpose: Auto-generated 3-dimensional (3D) measurements based on
weightbearing cone-beam computed tomography (CT) scan technology may allow for a more
accurate hind- and midfoot assessment. The current study evaluated the reliability and
clinical relevance of such measurements in patients with posttraumatic end-stage ankle
osteoarthritis.
Methods: Seventy-two patients treated at our institution for posttraumatic
end-stage ankle osteoarthritis, with available weightbearing conventional radiographs and a
cone-beam CT scan, were analyzed. Twenty healthy individuals aged between 40 and 70 years
served as controls. Seven variables were measured on the conventional radiographs (2D) and
compared to 3D measurements that were based on reconstructions from cone-beam CT scans. The
reliability of each measurement was calculated and subgroups formed according to commonly
observed deformities.
Results: Inter- and intraobserver reliability was superior for 3D compared to
2D measurements. The accuracy of 3D measurements performed on osteoarthritic ankles was
similar to 3D measurements performed on healthy individuals. Thirty-three of the 72 included
patients (46%) evidenced an inframalleolar compensation of a supramalleolar/intra-articular
ankle deformity (78% = varus compensation; 22% = valgus compensation), whereas 24 of those
72 patients (33%) showed no compensation or a further increase of a
supramalleolar/intra-articular ankle deformity (67% = varus deformity; 33% = valgus
deformity).
Conclusion: Auto-generated 3D measurements of the hind- and midfoot are
reliable in both healthy individuals and patients with posttraumatic end-stage ankle
osteoarthritis. Such measurements may be crucial for a detailed understanding of the
location and extent of hindfoot deformities, possibly impacting decision making in the
treatment of end-stage ankle osteoarthritis.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00295

## High Reliability for Weightbearing CT Based Automated 3D Measurements to Assess
Progressive Collapsing Foot Deformity

Peter Kvarda; Nicola Krähenbühl, MD; Roman Susdorf, PhD; Arne Burssens; Roxa Ruiz, MD;
Alexej Barg, MD; Beat Hintermann, MD

Category: Hindfoot; Midfoot/Forefoot; Other
Keywords: Flatfoot AAFD Computed Tomography Weightbearing CT; Weight Bearing
CT; CT Imaging Peritalar Subluxation
Introduction/Purpose: In progressive collapsing foot deformity (PCFD), hind-
and midfoot deformities are paramount. However, an accurate assessment thereof, using
weightbearing radiography, remains challenging. Automated three-dimensional (3D)
measurements derived from weightbearing computed tomography (WBCT) scans may provide a more
accurate approach for deformity assessment. In this study, automated 3D measurements based
on WBCT were compared to two-dimensional (2D) measurements performed on weightbearing
radiographs. Furthermore, it was investigated whether various stages of PCFD could be
identified using automated 3D measurements.
Methods: Twenty patients treated at our institution with either a flexible
(N=10) or rigid (N=10) PCFD were identified, retrospectively analyzed and compared to a
control group of thirty healthy individuals. Four angles and two distances measured on
weightbearing radiographs were compared to the automated 3D measurements derived from WBCT
scans.
Results: In 5 out of 6 variables, the reliability of the measurements derived
from weightbearing radiographs was lower than the automated measurements that derived from
WBCT scans. The automated 3D measurements showed: the talar tilt in the ankle mortise was
more valgus in patients with a rigid PCFD when compared to patients with a flexible PCFD;
medial facet subluxation was present in all but one patient; patients with a sinus tarsi
impingement evidenced a higher overlap between the talus and calcaneus (12.4+-2.6 mm)
compared to patients without impingement (7.8+-3.9 mm; P=0.020).
Conclusion: A higher reliability of automated 3D measurements derived from
WBCT scans, was evident for most variables when compared to measurements based on
weightbearing radiographs. Besides being less prone to errors, automated 3D measurements may
provide more reliable information regarding the hind- and midfoot alignment in patients with
PCFD. Future studies may show to what extent 3D measurements could contribute to current
diagnostic algorithms and treatment concepts of patients with PCFD.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00296

## Are SER-II Ankle Fractures Actually Anatomic? Bilateral CT Demonstrates Subtle
Non-Anatomic Mortise & Syndesmotic Alignment in the Setting of Apparent Normal
Radiographs

John Y. Kwon, MD; Bonnie Y. Chien, MD; Eitan M. Ingall; Steven Staffa, MS; Caroline
Williams, BA; Christopher P. Miller, MD

Category: Ankle; Trauma
Keywords: Ankle; Ankle Fracture; Ankle Fracture Evaluation
Introduction/Purpose: Current treatment of ankle fractures is predicated on
1-2 mm of talar shift leading to abnormal contact pressures. Determination of anatomic
alignment has conventionally been based on plain radiographs. The ability of x-ray to detect
subtle mortise displacement however is unknown. The purpose of this investigation is to
determine if CT scan can detect malalignment undetectable utilizing plain radiography when
assessing injuries assumed to have anatomic mortise alignment. The findings have
implications for utilizing higher resolution diagnostic imaging to assess malalignment and
challenging the validity of previous literature in which conclusions of anatomic mortise
alignment were determined based on plain radiography.
Methods: 24 patients with stress-negative, stable SER-II type ankle fractures
were included. Contralateral ankle mortise radiographs were obtained in addition to static
and gravity stress radiographs of the injured side. Bilateral CT scans were performed once
patients were deemed to have achieved clinical/radiographic healing. Measurements of the
medial clear space (MCS) and syndesmosis were performed by two blinded orthopedic surgeons
at two different time points. Intraclass correlation coefficients (ICC) were calculated to
evaluate the intra- and inter-rater reliability and consistency of measurements. Statistical
analyses were performed to determine any differences between x-ray and CT scan measurements
to detect discrepancies between the injured and normal ankle measurements. Statistical
significance was defined as a two-sided alpha error of less than 0.05 (p < 0.05).
Results: Despite plain radiographs demonstrating no statistical side-to-side
differences and achieving apparent final anatomic alignment in the majority of the cohort,
CT MCS on coronal, axial planes and syndesmosis measurements were significantly different
when comparing the injured to the normal contralateral ankle by on average of about 0.5mm.
There was also excellent intra and interobserver agreement achieved for the
measurements.
Conclusion: CT is superior to plain radiography in detecting subtle
mortise/syndesmotic displacement and side-to-side differences undetectable by x-ray. These
findings challenge conventional assumption of anatomic alignment for SER II injuries and
reliance on x-rays to assess anatomic alignment. While injured ankles uniformly demonstrated
non-anatomic alignment as compared to the uninjured side, the clinical implications of
subtle malalignment are unknown. However, broad reaching implications of this preliminary
study include challenging the validity of x-ray to detect possibly clinically-relevant
mortise malalignment in patients presenting with isolated lateral malleolus fractures.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00297

## A Comparison Between the Bluman et al. Classification and the Progressive Collapsing
Foot Deformity Consensus for Flatfeet Assessment

Matthieu Lalevée; Hee Young Lee; Nacime S. Mansur, MD; Edward O. Rojas; Mark S.
Myerson, MD; Eric M. Bluman, MD, PhD; John E. Femino, MD; Cesar de Cesar Netto, MD,
PhD

Category: Hindfoot; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: AAFD; Adult Acquired Flatfoot Deformity; Flatfoot
Introduction/Purpose: Bluman et al. flatfoot classification (2007) is based on
the posterior tibial tendon (PTT) rupture leading to a chronological appearance of several
foot deformities. Since then, several discordances have been noted in this concept. An
expert consensus met recently to update it. Emphasis on posterior tibial tendon rupture was
shifted to a non-chronological approach focusing on five different independent foot and
ankle deformations and each deformation’s flexibility or rigidity. This concept, named
Progressive Collapsing Foot Deformity (PCFD), was approved with a strong consensus. The aim
of this study was to compare Bluman et al. and PCFD classifications. We hypothesize that
both classifications will be intra and interobserver reliable and that the PCFD
classification will allow a better distribution of the different types of foot.
Methods: We performed a retrospective IRB approved study including 92
flatfeet. Three fellowship trained foot and ankle surgeons studied clinical information and
X-rays and classified them in Bluman and PCFD classifications. One performed a blinded
second assessment. Bluman classification was analyzed one time as initially described and a
second time after removing the Angle of Gissane sclerosis sign. Bluman stage I represents
isolated PTT dysfunction, stage II and III Flexible and Rigid Hindfoot Valgus, and stage IV
Tibio-Talar Valgus. These stages are progressive and don't allow any combinations. PCFD
classifies Hindfoot valgus (A), Midfoot Abduction (B), Forefoot Varus (C), Peritalar
Subluxation (D), and Tibiotalar Valgus (E). Combinations of these deformities is allowed.
Each deformity can be Flexible (1) or Rigid (2). Interobserver and Intraobserver
reliabilities were determined with respectively unweighted Fleiss' and Cohen’s kappa values.
Descriptive analysis was performed on the 276 readings to highlight discrepancies between
classifications.
Results: Inter and Intraobserver reliabilities were respectively moderate
(K=0.55) and substantial (K=0.62) for Bluman and moderate (K=0.56) and very good (K=0.85)
for PCFD. The 276 readings were spread into 10 subgroups in Bluman and 64 in PCFD. 2.9% of
the flatfeet were classified Bluman stage I, 31.5% stage II, 43.8% stage III and 21.7% stage
IV. Bluman stages II and III were mainly composed of PCFD 1ABC (respectively 40.2% and
28.1%). The most represented Bluman subgroup was IIIB (32.6%) whereas after removing the
Angle of Gissane sclerosis sign from the classification it was the IIC subgroup (44.2%).
PCFD A, B and C were mainly composed of Bluman subgroup IIIB (respectively 35.7%, 43.6% and
36.2%) and PCFD D and E of Bluman subgroup IVB (31.9% and 73.3%).
Conclusion: Both classifications showed moderate reliabilities although the
PCFD represented 6 times as many different choices by readers. Bluman stage I was rare,
possibly because it is based on PTT dysfunction with little or no deformity. This entity is
no longer considered in the PCFD. Bluman stage III, assumed to represent rigid hindfoot
varus included numerous flexible PCFD. Main confusion could come from the Angle of Gissane
sclerosis sign, which leads to Bluman stage III. This sign is however a sign of
extraarticular sinus tarsi impingement which should not lead to a triple arthrodesis as
recommended in the Bluman classification.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00298

## Comparison Between Cotton Test and Tap Test for the Assessment of Coronal Syndesmotic
Instability: A Cadaveric Study

Matthieu Lalevée; Ivan C. Giarola; Victoria Vivtcharenko, BS; Fernando S. Martins;
Nacime S. Mansur, MD; Vicenzo Giordano; Andre Wajnsztejn; Shuyuan Li, MD, PhD; Kevin N.
Dibbern, PhD; John E. Femino, MD; Cesar de Cesar Netto, MD, PhD

Category: Ankle; Basic Sciences/Biologics; Sports; Trauma
Keywords: Syndesmosis; Ankle; Tibiofibular Syndesmosis
Introduction/Purpose: Diagnosis of subtle instability of the distal
tibiofibular syndesmosis is challenging. In surgically treated rotational malleolar
fractures, instability is typically assessed with the intraoperative Cotton test. However,
this test can be unreliable due to its dynamic nature and uncontrolled distraction force.
The Tap test is an alternative test where a cortical tap is advanced through the fibula with
a progressive, stable, and unidirectional distraction force. The objective of this cadaveric
study was to compare the DTFS widening when using the Cotton and Tap tests as diagnostic
tools for coronal plane syndesmotic instability.
Methods: Ten below-knee cadaveric specimens were tested in intact
non-stressed, intact stressed, injured non-stressed, and injured stressed conditions, with
stressed conditions utilizing both Cotton and Tap tests. In injured conditions, the
syndesmotic ligamentous complex was sectioned (anterolateral longitudinal approach). Perfect
fluoroscopic Mortise images were acquired for all conditions. For the Tap test, a 2.5 drill
bit was used to drill a hole through both distal fibular cortices. A blunt-edged 3.5mm
cortical tap was advanced toward the tibia. For the Cotton test, a lateral distraction force
was applied to the distal fibula with a towel clamp. Two observers measured Tibiofibular
Clear Space (TFCS) 1cm proximal to the ankle joint line. Intra and interobserver
reliabilities were assessed by Intraclass Correlation Coefficient (ICC). Syndesmotic TFCS
values for all conditions were compared by paired Wilcoxon. Diagnostic performance of the
Cotton and Tap tests was assessed (a relative increase of TFCS>2mm). P-values <0.05
were considered significant.
Results: The intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) for intraobserver and
interobserver reliability was respectively, 0.96 and 0.78.TFCS measurements were similar in
intact non-stressed, intact stressed (both Cotton and Tap tests) and injured non- stressed
conditions: intact non-stressed, 3.5mm (CI, 3.0 to 3.9mm); intact stressed, 3.6mm (CI, 3.1
to 4.1mm) (Cotton test) and 4.0mm (CI, 3.5 to 4.5mm) (Tap test); injured non-stressed, 3.8mm
(CI, 3.3 to 4.3mm). TFCS was significantly increased (p<0.0001) in injured and stressed
ankles for both Cotton and Tap tests, with values of respectively, 6.2mm (CI, 5.8 to 6.7mm)
and 6.1mm (CI, 5.7 to 6.6mm). The Cotton test had 73.3% sensitivity, 100% specificity, and
86.7% diagnostic accuracy. The Tap test had 70% sensitivity, 90% specificity, and 80%
diagnostic accuracy.
Conclusion: Our cadaveric study compared the Cotton and Tap tests for
detection of coronal plane syndesmotic instability. Both tests demonstrated similar
increases in TFCS measurements in stressed injured conditions when compared to intact and
injured non-stressed conditions. Additionally, both tests demonstrated similar diagnostic
accuracy for coronal plane syndesmotic instability, with slight favor for the Cotton test.
In our experience, the Cotton test can be unreliable due to the difficulty in applying a
steady distraction force while maintaining a perfect Mortise view. We recommend the Tap test
as a more stable, controlled, and reproducible intraoperative diagnostic test for coronal
plane syndesmotic instability.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00299

## Prevalence and Pattern of Lateral Impingements in the Progressive Collapsing Foot
Deformity

Matthieu Lalevée; Nacime S. Mansur, MD; Hee Young Lee; Edward O. Rojas; Francois
Lintz, MD MSc FEBOT; Alexandre L. Godoy-Santos, MD; John E. Femino, MD; Cesar de Cesar
Netto, MD, PhD

Category: Hindfoot; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: AAFD; Flatfoot AAFD Computed Tomography Weightbearing CT; Weight
Bearing CT
Introduction/Purpose: Lateral impingements, subdivided into Sinus Tarsi (STI),
Talo-Fibular (TFI), and Calcaneo-Fibular (CFI) impingements, appear to be associated with
the Peritalar Subluxation (PTS) component of the Progressive Collapsing Foot Deformity
(PCFD). This is not yet confirmed, as the chronological place of the different types of
lateral impingements in PTS is unknown. It is also unclear whether STI are associated with
PTS or Midfoot Abduction. Our primary objective was to assess the amount of PTS in STI, TFI
and CFI. Our secondary objective was to determine the position of STI among the PTS and
Midfoot Abduction deformities. We hypothesized that STI and TFI will be associated with a
lower amount of PTS than CFI and that STI will be part involved in both PTS and Midfoot
Abduction deformities.
Methods: A retrospective study including 72 PCFD assessed with Weight Bearing
Computed Tomography (WBCT) was realized. Patients under 15 or with a previous history of
surgery were excluded. Lateral impingements were assessed on WBCT images and subdivided as
STI, TFI and CFI. Both direct and indirect signs of impingement were considered positive.
The amount of PTS was assessed by the percentage of uncoverage and the incongruence angle of
the Middle Facet (MF). Midfoot-Abduction was assessed by Talonavicular coverage angle and
global foot deformity by Foot and Ankle Offset (FAO). These data were collected by two
independent observers and one performed a blinded second assessment. Interobserver and
Intraobserver reliabilities were determined using unweighted Cohen’s kappa values for
lateral impingements and using intraclass correlation coefficients for the measurements.
Impingement groups were compared using Student’s T-tests for normal, and Mann-Whitney for
non-normal variables.
Results: Interobserver and Intraobserver reliabilities ranged from substantial
to almost perfect for all assessments. STI was present in 84.7%, TFI in 65.2% and CFI in
19.4% of PCFD cases. PCFD with STI showed significant increases of MF uncoverage (p=0.0001),
FAO (p=0.0008) and Talonavicular coverage angle (p=0.0197) compared to PCFD without STI.
PCFD with TFI did not show significant difference on measurements compared to PCFD without
TFI. PCFD with CFI had associated STI in 100% and TFI in 64.2% of cases. PCFD with CFI
showed significant decreases of MF incongruence (p=0.0398) and significant higher FAO
(p=0.0058) compared to PCFD without CFI. PCFD with both STI and CFI showed significant
decreases of MF incongruence (p=0.032) and significant higher FAO (p=0.028) compared to PCFD
with isolated STI.
Conclusion: Our hypotheses have not been confirmed. STI was associated with
both PTS and Midfoot Abduction deformities but neither TFI nor CFI were associated with PTS
considering MF subluxation. Conversely, CFI was associated with a reduction of the MF
incongruence angle despite being associated with a higher global deformity. STI may be
associated with earlier PCFD with a concentration of the malignment forces in the subtalar
joint whereas CFI may occur later and be associated with a failure of the deep layer of the
deltoid ligament and a talar tilt. This could explain the relative reduction of the PTS in
CFI.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00300

## Short-Term Outcomes of the Lapicotton Technique in the Treatment of Progressive
Collapsing Foot Deformity

Matthieu Lalevée; Nacime S. Mansur, MD; Alan G. Shamrock, MD; Hee Young Lee; Eli
Schmidt; Victoria Vivtcharenko, BS; Francois Lintz, MD MSc FEBOT; Kevin N. Dibbern, PhD;
Cesar de Cesar Netto, MD, PhD

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: AAFD; Adult Acquired Flatfoot Deformity; Flatfoot AAFD Computed
Tomography Weightbearing CT
Introduction/Purpose: Medial column instability (MCI) in Progressive
Collapsing Foot Deformity (PCFD) is not solely determined by forefoot varus (FV). First ray
hypermobility, hallux valgus, midfoot arthritis, gapping at the tarsometatarsal joint and
dorsal metatarsal migration are findings associated with MCI. Acknowledgement of this
instability requires inclusion of a procedure to the medial column in order to correct the
forefoot varus, stabilize the ray and bring the foot to a plantigrade tripod position.
Cotton opening wedge medial cuneiform osteotomy and Lapidus tarsometatarsal arthrodesis are
procedures of choice in these scenarios. We have combined these 2 procedures into one called
Lapicotton. The purpose of this study was to present the short-term outcomes of this
technique.We hypothesized that Lapicotton will improve both clinical and radiological
outcomes.
Methods: We performed an IRB-approved retrospective study comprising 3 PCFDs
having benefited from a Lapicotton procedure. Clinical outcomes were assessed with the
European Foot and Ankle Society Score (EFAS), the Foot Function Index Score (FFI) and the
Pain Catastrophizing Scale (PCS). Radiographic outcomes were assessed using weight-bearing
computed tomography (WBCT) assessments. Middle Cuneiform Floor distance, Forefoot Arch
Angle, Middle Facet uncoverage percentage, Talonavicular Coverage angle and the Foot and
Ankle Offset (FAO) were measured. All these data were both preoperatively and
postoperatively collected. Comparison between preoperative and postoperative results were
done as described below. The Kruskal-Wallis H-test for independent groups was used to
compare median values of the EFAS. The Wilcoxon signed-rank test for paired samples was used
to compare preoperative and postoperative variables of FFI and PCS. For the radiographic
measurements, normality was assessed using Shapiro-Wilk test. Comparisons were made using
Student tests for normal variables and Mann-Whitney for non-normals.
Results: This small series included 2 female and 1 male, with a mean age of 56
and a mean BMI of 31.8 kg/m2. Mean follow up was 2.9+/-0.2 (range from 2.7 to
3.1) months. 2 out of 3 patients simultaneously benefited of a Medial Calcaneal Displacement
Osteotomy (MDCO 10mm) and a Lateral Column Lengthening (LCL 8mm). The wedge sizes used for
the Lapicotton were 8 mm in all cases. Regarding clinical outcomes, EFAS (p=0.79) and FFI
(p=0.99) did not showed any significant improvement whereas PCS were significantly improved
(Δ=-5.67[-9.2--2.2];p=0.03). Regarding radiological outcomes, fusion was present in all the
cases at the maximal follow-up. Middle cuneiform floor distance and Forefoot Arch Angle were
significantly increase (respectively Δ=6.9;CI95%=[6.4;7.4];p< 0.01 and
Δ=7.5;CI95%=[4.3;10.8]p<0.05). Middle Facet uncoverage was significantly improved (Δ=-
28.8;CI95%=[-33.1;-24.5]p< 0.01). Statistical power of the serie did not allowed
comparison regarding the Talonavicular Coverage Angle (Δ=-14;CI95%=[-24;-3.9]) and the FAO
(Δ=-3.9;CI95%=[-10.7;2.9]).
Conclusion: The Lapicotton procedure showed encouraging outcomes with fusion
in all cases at 3 months postoperatively, improvement in pain, correction of forefoot varus
and of the of the Peritalar subluxation represented by the Middle Facet Uncoverage. These
results should be moderate because other procedures (MDCO and LCL) were performed in 2/3 of
the patients, and the outcomes were issued from a small cohort with short-term follow-up.
Longer follow-up and a larger cohort are needed to confirm these results.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00301

## Functional Outcomes Following Operative Management of Ankle Fractures: Intermediate
Length Follow-Up

Scott M. LaTulip, MD; Alexander S. Rascoe, MD; Megan Audet, MD; Heather Vallier,
MD

Category: Ankle; Ankle Arthritis; Trauma
Keywords: Ankle Fracture; Ankle Outcome Rating Scales; Ankle Pain
Introduction/Purpose: Ankle fractures are among the most commonly surgically
treated orthopaedic injuries, with debate regarding their long-term outcomes and the
clinical benefit of contemporary fixation strategies. The purpose of this study was to
retrospectively evaluate the functional outcomes of patients following surgical management
of ankle fractures, and to determine what, if any, limitations and effects their injury has
on their daily lives. The authors of this study hypothesized that despite patients having
some degree of measurable impairments, these did not cause meaningful disruption in their
everyday lives.
Methods: We retrospectively reviewed a total of 259 patients who underwent
surgical management of their ankle fractures between 2004 and 2012. Two separate patient
reported outcome measures, the Foot Function Index (FFI) and Short Musculoskeletal Function
Assessment (SMFA) were obtained at a minimum of 5 years following time of surgery.
Multivariate linear regression analysis was performed to compare FFI and SMFA against
several patient and injury specific variables.
Results: A total of 259 patients with ankle fractures were included in the
study population. 7 of the demographic and injury- related variables were found to have a
statistically significant relationship to both the FFI and SMFA scores. The multivariate
linear regression analysis using these 7 variables in addition to both sub-group components
of the SMFA to predict the total FFI score yielded an output adjusted-r2 = 0.78.
The SMFA dysfunction sub-category was found to correlate with FFI (standardized beta 0.85,
p<0.001), but the SMFA bothersome sub-category did not (p=0.866). Ankle pain limiting
function and Medicaid insurance status were also predictive of higher FFI scores.
Conclusion: Despite patients, at times, experiencing persistent issues with
pain and mild activity limitations following surgical management of ankle fractures, these
did not lead to measured burdens in daily activities. At a moderate-length follow-up,
patients overall do well from a functional standpoint after sustaining ankle fractures
treated surgically.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00302

## Correlation of Stress Radiographs to Injuries Associated with Lateral Ankle
Instability

Gregory E. Lause, MD; Joshua Sy, DO; Andrew Lopez; J. Banks Deal, MD; Michael Lustik,
MS; Paul M. Ryan, MD

Category: Ankle; Sports
Keywords: Ankle Instability; Ankle Arthroscopy; Talar Osteochondral
Lesions
Introduction/Purpose: Stress radiographs have demonstrated superior efficacy
in the evaluation of ankle instability. The purpose of this study is to determine if there
is a degree of instability evidenced by stress radiographs that is associated with pathology
concomitant with ankle ligamentous instability.
Methods: A retrospective review of 87 consecutive patients aged 18-74 who had
stress radiographs performed at a single institution between 2014 and 2020 was performed.
These manual radiographic stress views were then correlated with MRI and operative
findings.
Results: A statistically significant association was determined for the mean
and median stress radiographic values and the presence of peroneal pathology (p=0.008 for
tendonitis and p= 0.020 for peroneal tendon tears). A significant inverse relationship was
found between the presence of an osteochondral defect and increasing degrees of instability
(p=0.043).
Conclusion: Stress radiographs may assist the surgeon in clinical decision
making.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00303

## Comparative Assessment of Hallux Rigidus using Conventional Radiograph and
Weightbearing CT

Hee Young Lee; Matthieu Lalevee, MD; Nacime S. Mansur, MD; Kevin N. Dibbern, PhD;
Amanda Ehret; Connor Maly; Walter C. Hembree, MD; John E. Femino, MD; Victoria
Vivtcharenko, BS; Cesar de Cesar Netto, MD, PhD

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Hallux Rigidus; 1st MTP Joint; Weight Bearing CT
Introduction/Purpose: The etiology of hallux rigidus (HR) is not well
understood and Its association with first-ray hypermobility, hallux valgus and metatarsus
primus elevatus (MPE) has not been clearly proven. MPE, elevated first metatarsal has been a
topic of debate since Lambrinudi`s first description. Recent studies have supported MPE in
hallux rigidus by measuring with various methods on wightbearing lateral radiographs, but
there are limitations of conventional radiography due to variation in X- ray projection and
superimposed metatarsals regardless of the methods of measurement. Our objective was to
assess MPE and other associated parameters with hallux rigidus via radiography and WBCT for
convergent validity and to evaluate the use of classification system used in conventional
radiography with WBCT.
Methods: This is a single-center, retrospective study from prospectively
collected data. 20 symptomatic hallux rigidus patient with weightbearing radiograph and WBCT
were enrolled from October 2014 to December 2020. Measured parameters included hallux valgus
angle (HVA), intermetatarsal angle (IMA), hallux interphalangeal angle (HIPA), distal
metatarsal articular angle (DMAA), 1st TMT joint version, First and second metatarsal
lengths, Metatarsus adductus angle, 2nd cuneiform-2nd metatarsal angle, Talus-1st Metatarsal
Angel, First and second metatarsal declination angles, and MPE. MPE was measured as the
direct distance between 1st and 2nd metatarsals (modified Horton index). All patients were
graded according to the radiographic criteria of Coughlin and Shurnas classification on
radiographs and WBCT, separately. Paired T-test was performed to compare radiographic
measurements with WBCT.
Results: Mean age was 55.9, 12 males and 8 females. HVA (15.73 in X-ray vs
14.04 in WBCT), AP first TMT version (16.25 vs 16.47), 2nd cuneiform-2nd metatarsal angle
(24.54 vs 26.60), Talus-1st Metatarsal Angel (-7.67 vs -7.89) were not different between
radiograph and WBCT. MPE was measured higher in WBCT by 0.86 mm compared to radiograph.
First metatarsal declination angle was lower in WBCT by 2.9° indicating increased MPE. When
graded with radiographic findings, 5 (25%) patients were grade 1, 5 (25%) patients were
grade 2 and 10 (50%) grade 3, when graded with WBCT, 1 (5%) patient had grade 1, 3 (15%)
patients were grade 2 and 16 (80%) grade 3. Dorsal subluxation/translation of first
metatarsal at first TMT joint was observed 3 (15%) in radiograph and 9 (45%) in WBCT.
Conclusion: HVA, AP first TMT version, 2nd cuneiform-2nd metatarsal angle,
Talus-1st Metatarsal Angel demonstrated consistent measurements in radiograph and WBCT. MPE
was measured higher in WBCT when measured with direct distance (0.86 mm) between the first
and second metatarsals using modified Horton index and first metatarsal declination angle
(2.9°). When graded with WBCT, the subchondral cyst in the proximal phalanx and metatarsal
head were better delineated leading to higher grade in WBCT. Further studies are needed for
inter-rater reliability and discriminant validity of the measurements determined by
differences between different groups (HR vs control).
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00304

## Intra and Inter-Observer Reliability of the New Classification System of Progressive
Collapsing Foot Deformity

Hee Young Lee; Nacime S. Mansur, MD; Matthieu Lalevee, MD; Connor Maly; Kevin N.
Dibbern, PhD; Mark S. Myerson, MD; Scott J. Ellis, MD; Jonathan T. Deland, MD; John E.
Femino, MD; Cesar de Cesar Netto, MD, PhD

Category: Basic Sciences/Biologics; Hindfoot; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Flatfoot; Adult Acquired Flatfoot Deformity; Posterior Tibial Tendon
Dysfunction
Introduction/Purpose: Over the past three decades, the historical notion that
adult acquired flatfoot was attributed to posterior tibial tendon dysfunction (PTTD) has
been questioned. Advances in the understanding of arch stabilizers and biomechanics of the
midfoot joints have led to the new concept of progressively collapsing foot deformity
(PCFD). Most recently, the consensus group proposed a new classification system and
recommended renaming PTTD to PCFD. The proposed PCFD classification system incorporates the
latest understanding of the condition and provides a concise, standardized description of
the deformity. To date, there has been no study reporting the frequency of each subclass of
PCFD with various combination of deformity components and evaluating intra- and interrater
reliability.
Methods: This was a single-center, retrospective study conducted from
prospectively collected registry data. 84 patients (92 feet) were assessed between 2014 and
2020. Classification of each patient was made utilizing clinical and radiographic findings
by three independent observers. Clinical aspects of the deformity included hindfoot valgus,
forefoot/midfoot abduction, forefoot varus deformity, hypermobile medial column, sinus tarsi
impingement, peritalar subluxation and valgus tilting of the ankle joint. Radiographic
evaluation was focused on Hindfoot valgus (A), increased talar head undercoverage,
significant sinus tarsi impingement (B), increased lateral talus-first metatarsal angle,
plantar gapping at first TMT/NC joints (C), significant subtalar joint
subluxation/subfibular impingement with obliterated joint space (D), and ankle joint valgus
tilting with or without arthritic changes (E). Intra- and interrater reliabilities were
analyzed with Cohen’s Kappa and Fleiss' kappa respectively.
Results: Mean age was 54.4, 38% male and 62% female. Mean BMI was 33.6
kg/m2. 1ABC (21 feet, 22.8%) was most common subclass followed by 1AC (12 feet,
13%) and 1ABCD (8 feet, 8.7%). Cumulative percent of frequency of 1ABC, 1AC, and 1ABCD was
44.5%. Only a small percentage of patients had an isolated deformity. 58.7% were flexible,
5.5% were rigid, and 35.8% were combined deformities with flexible and rigid components. A
was most frequent component (93.5%) followed by C in 88% and B in 71.7%. D was in 29.4% and
E was the least frequently observed component in 23.9%. Moderate inter-rater reliability
(Fleiss Kappa=0.561, p<0.001, 95% CI 0.528-0.594) was found. E was the most reliable
between raters (91.3%) followed by A (79.4%). D was least reliable between three raters
(45.7%). Very good intra-rater reliability was found (Cohen`s Kappa=0.851, P<0.001, 95%
CI 0.777-0.926).
Conclusion: Most cases predominantly involved hindfoot with various
combinations of midfoot and forefoot deformity with/without subtalar joint involvement. This
finding suggests most of PCFD exist in combined forms with various deformity components.
Despite the limitation of inherent subjectivity, which may account for moderate inter-rater
agreement, the new system potentially cover all possible combinations of the deformity in
hindfoot, midfoot, forefoot and ankle. This provides a more comprehensive description of
PCFD deformity and can guide treatment in a more systematic and individualized manner.
Future studies in a larger cohort with advanced imaging are warranted to ascertain
reliability and validity of this system.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00305

## Weightbearing CT Analysis of Hallux Rigidus: Does Metatarsus Primus Elevatus Really
Exist?

Hee Young Lee; Nacime S. Mansur, MD; Matthieu Lalevee, MD; Kevin N. Dibbern, PhD;
Connor Maly; Caleb J. Iehl; Walter C. Hembree, MD; Francois Lintz, MD MSc FEBOT; John E.
Femino, MD; Cesar de Cesar Netto, MD, PhD

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Hallux Rigidus; 1st MTP Joint; Weight Bearing CT
Introduction/Purpose: The etiology of hallux rigidus has been unknown.
Metatarsus primus elevates (MPE), elevated first metatarsal has been controversial. Recent
studies have supported significantly elevated first metatarsal in hallux rigidus patients.
Bouaicha reported MPE greater than 5 mm could be a predictive factor of hallux rigidus.
Lateral weightbearing radiographs has been used to evaluate MPE, However, there are
limitations of conventional radiography including variation in X-ray projection angle and
foot position and superimposition of metatarsals. Cheung assessed foot alignment utilizing
3D reconstructions from WBCT and concluded that hallux rigidus patients had increased MPE.
Our objective was to assess MPE and anatomical characteristics in foot alignment of hallux
rigidus patients compared to a control group using WBCT. This is the first study measuring
MPE on WBCT.
Methods: This is a single-center, retrospective study from prospectively
collected data. 20 patients with hallux rigidus and WBCT data were enrolled from October
2014 to December 2020. As a control group, 20 patients with various foot and ankle
pathologies were selected. Measured WBCT parameters included 1st TMT joint version, HVA,
IMA, DMAA, 1st and 2nd metatarsal lengths, Foot width, Sesamoid station and rotation angle,
1st-5th Metatarsal Angle, Metatarsus adductus angle, 2nd cuneiform-2nd metatarsal angle,
Talus-1st Metatarsal Angel, 1st Metatarsal-Proximal Phalanx Angle, 1st and 2nd metatarsal
declination angles and ratio, and MPE. MPE was measured as a direct distance between 1st and
2nd metatarsals using a line tangential to the first metatarsal and another perpendicular
line at the metadiaphyseal junction to reach second metatarsal on parasagittal view. A
Cut-off value of MPE was calculated using receiver operating characteristic curve. Two
investigators independently assessed each WBCT.
Results: Mean age was 43.3 in control group (45% male, 55% female) and 55.9 in
HR group (60% male, 40% female). Significant differences were found in several facets of
foot anatomy between HR and control groups including HVA (7.57 in control vs 14.05 in HR),
DMAA (3.89 vs 8.06), forefoot width (92.96 vs 95.47), 1st MT declination angle (20.17 vs
17.82), 1st/2nd MT declination ratio (83.52 vs 76.02), and MPE (3.24 mm vs 5.40 mm). MPE was
significantly higher in hallux rigidus group in all three parasagittal views (unmodified,
parallel to 1st metatarsal and 2nd metatarsal). Dorsal subluxation/translation of the first
metatarsal was observed at 1st TMT joint in the parasagittal view of WBCT in 9 (45%)
patients of hallux rigidus group suggesting sagittal instability. No patient in control
group had dorsal subluxation/translation. A cut-off value of MPE was 4.56 mm with 80%
sensitivity and 90% specificity.
Conclusion: To evaluate MPE on WBCT, we used a new direct measurement on
parasagittal views. We found a significant difference in MPE in HR. Our WBCT results are
consistent with other studies using conventional radiographs. A cut-off value of WBCT MPE
for diagnosis of HR was 4.56 mm in our cohort. Considering 45% patients of the HR group had
dorsal subluxation/translation of first metatarsal at 1st TMT and increased HVA, Hallux
rigidus may be associated with first ray instability predominantly in sagittal plane with
resultant MPE with varying degree of combined coronal plane instability resulting in
increased HVA.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00306

## Additional Inferior Extensor Retinaculum Augmentation after All-Inside Arthroscopic
Anterior Talofibular Ligament Repair for Chronic Ankle Instability is Not Necessary

Sung Hyun Lee, MD

Category: Ankle; Arthroscopy; Sports
Keywords: Chronic Ankle Instability; Arthroscopic Broström Repair; Ankle
Arthroscopy
Introduction/Purpose: Although several arthroscopic surgical techniques for
the treatment of chronic ankle lateral instability (CAI) have been introduced recently, the
effect of inferior extensor retinaculum (IER) augmentation remains unclear. The purpose of
this study was to compare the clinical outcomes after arthroscopic anterior talofibular
ligament (ATFL) repair according to whether additional IER augmentation was performed or
not.
Methods: Between 2016 and 2018, we performed a retrospective review of
consecutive patients who underwent arthroscopic ATFL repair surgery for CAI. The mean age of
the patients was 35.2 years (range, 19-51 years), and the mean follow-up period was 32.6
months (range, 24-48 months). Patients were divided into two groups according to the
surgical technique used for CAI: Arthroscopic ATFL repair (group A, n = 37), and
arthroscopic ATFL repair with additional IER augmentation (group R, n = 45). The Pain Visual
Analog Scale, American Orthopaedic Foot & Ankle Society (AOFAS) score, Foot and Ankle
Outcome score (FAOS), and the Karlsson Ankle Functional Score were measured as subjective
outcomes, and posturographic analysis was performed using a Tetrax device as an objective
outcome. Radiologic outcome evaluations were performed preoperatively and at 2 years
postoperatively using stress radiographs and axial view MRI.
Results: Out of 101 patients, 19 (18.5%) were excluded based on the exclusion
criteria, and 82 patients were evaluated. We identified a total of six re-tears (7.3%) based
on postoperative MRI evaluation. All patients who had ATFL re-tear on MRI (8.1% [3/37] in
group A, and 6.7% [3/45] in group R) demonstrated recurrent CAI with functional discomfort
and anterior displacement > 3 mm compared to the intact contralateral ankle. All clinical
scores and posturography results were improved after surgery in both groups (P < 0.001).
However, there were no significant differences in the clinical results and radiologic
findings between the two groups.
Conclusion: The clinical and radiologic outcomes of patients with CAI improved
after all-inside arthroscopic ATFL repair. However, additional IER augmentation after
arthroscopic ATFL repair did not guarantee better clinical outcomes.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00307

## Noninvasive Skin Expansion Strips to Decrease Wound Issues after Total Ankle
Replacement

James Lendrum; S. Blake Wallace, MD; Mary C. Hamati, MD; Lindsey Schultz; Joshua A.
Metzl, MD; Daniel K. Moon, MD, MS, MBA; Kenneth J. Hunt, MD

Category: Ankle; Ankle Arthritis; Basic Sciences/Biologics; Other
Keywords: Ankle Arthroplasty; Wound Complications; Cost Effectiveness
Introduction/Purpose: Total ankle arthroplasty through the anterior approach
(TAR-AA) is an increasingly popular treatment for ankle arthritis. This approach carries
significant risk for wound complications. Several products have been investigated to
mitigate this risk, but these are either costly or invasive. Noninvasive skin expansion
strips (NSESs) have two nonelastic adhesive strips, one on either side of the incision, with
an elastic band connecting them. These were designed to induce new skin growth at the edges
of the strips for plastic surgery applications. In the postoperative setting, the NSES
functions to transfer tension away from the site of the incision to the edge of the strips.
We hypothesize that postoperative application of NSESs will decrease unplanned clinic visits
and wound complications after TAR-AA.
Methods: This is a prospective cohort study with retrospectively identified
historical controls designed to evaluate the effectiveness of NSESs. Prospectively enrolled
patients undergoing TAR-AA at a single institution (3 surgeons) received application of
NSESs in the operating room after routine wound closure. At their two-week postoperative
visit, each wound was assessed and new NSESs were applied. No other changes were made to the
surgeons' wound closure technique, immobilization, follow-up cadence, or rehabilitation
protocols. Patients following up with providers outside the institution were excluded.
Thirty five consecutive historical controls were identified for comparison. Primary outcomes
included (1) Additional clinic visit required for wound assessment or suture removal, (2)
superficial wound complication before 8 weeks, and (3) deep infection before 8 weeks.
Z-score test was used to calculate statistically significant (p<=0.05) differences
between the two groups.
Results: To date, 20 patients (62.5 +- 11.8 years; 6 females, 14 males)
received application of NSESs. Baseline demographics did not differ significantly from our
35 consecutively identified historical controls (62.2 +- 13.3 years; 16 females, 19 males).
Additional clinic visits for suture removal were needed for 15% (3/20) of patients in the
treatment group compared to 46% (14/35) of patients in the control group (p=0.021). There
were significantly fewer unplanned visits per patient in the treatment group compared to the
control group (0.15 vs. 0.54, p=0.004). The superficial wound complication rate in the
treatment group vs. control group was 0% and 11%, respectively (p=0.12). There were no deep
infections in either group.
Conclusion: Noninvasive skin expansion strips are an effective means to
improve early wound healing and decrease unplanned clinic visits for wound checks or delayed
suture removal after TAR-AA. There was a trend toward significance for NSESs decreasing
superficial wound complications. Further high volume studies are needed to clarify their
cost effectiveness and effect on deep infections.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00308

## The Metatarsal Cortical Index as an Indicator of Insufficiency Fracture of the
Foot

Christopher G. Lenz; Constance Raith; Lukas Urbanschitz; Timo O. Tondelli; Karim Eid;
Richard Niehaus; Sandro Hodel

Category: Basic Sciences/Biologics; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Stress Fractures; Metatarsals; Outcomes Measures
Introduction/Purpose: The diagnosis of metatarsal stress fractures is
challenging. Standard imaging often shows false negative results. The aim of this study was
to create reliable radiologic outcome parameters to predict insufficiency fractures of the
metatarsals
Methods: We performed an age- and sex-matched case-control study of patients
with (n = 18) and without insufficiency fracture (n = 18) of the foot. To measure the ratio
between the outer cortical border and the endosteal diameter, the MCI was developed as a
novel radiographic measurement on dorsoplantar images. The MT was divided into thirds, and
the width from the outer cortical border to the endosteal diameter was measured at the
junction of the proximal to the middle third (proximal), at the midshaft (middle), and at
the junction of the middle to the distal third (distal). The metatarsal cortical index (MCI)
for each metatarsal was developed to predict an insufficiency fracture. The MTs were
sequentially numbered as MT I-V. To correct for potential bias due to MT length, the
Coughlin index and Maestro method were used in all patients.
Results: The MCI of each metatarsal was significantly decreased in the
insufficiency fracture group compared with the control group (p <.01). The MCI of the
fourth ray yielded the highest area under the curve among the analyzed MCI values (area
under the curve, 0.79; 95% confidence interval, 0.61-0.90). A cut-off value of 1.62 for the
MCI of the fourth ray yielded a sensitivity of 78% and a specificity of 78% to predict
insufficiency fracture of the foot (odds ratio, 12.25; 95% confidence interval, 2.54-58.97),
and enabled accurate allocation to the insufficiency fracture group versus the control group
in 74% of cases.
Conclusion: A decreased MCI is associated with metatarsal insufficiency
fractures and enables an accurate diagnosis in three out of four cases. Despite the highly
variable anatomy and morphology of the MTs, we were able to show that the MCI is a reliable
tool to determine insufficiency fracture of the MT on plain radiography. The MCI might aid
clinicians in identifying insufficiency fracture, and raise the suspicion of the diagnosis
without additional imaging studies.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00309

## Does Sagittal Tibiotalar Alignment of TAR Predict Failure?

Anna-Kathrin Leucht, MD; Peter Salat; Phinit Phisitkul, MD; Annunziato Amendola, MD;
John E. Femino, MD; Andrea N. Veljkovic, MD, MPH, FRCSC

Category: Ankle Arthritis
Keywords: Total Ankle Arthritis; Total Ankle Arthroplasty; Total Ankle
Replacement
Introduction/Purpose: The long term outcome of total ankle replacement is
contingent on restoring the anatomic tibiotalar alignment of the ankle joint. Prior studies
have mainly looked at the effect of coronal and hindfoot alignment of TAR on outcome and
failure with few studies focusing on the effect of sagittal tibiotalar alignment. From
these, we know that sagittal alignment has a greater impact on joint mechanics and that
proper positioning of the talar component in the sagittal plane results in greater
postoperative pain relief and better functional outcome, especially ankle range of motion.
The goal of this study was to define a sagittal radiographic value that predicts failure in
TAR.
Methods: We analyzed the data of a retrospective patient cohort of consecutive
TAR patients, which were treated from 2004 and 2011. Patients with two types of prosthesis
were included, Salto Talaris (fixed bearing) and STAR (mobile bearing). All measurements
were completed by two blinded observers, including the sagittal distal tibial articular
angle (sDTAA), the lateral talar station (LTS) and the talar component inclination angle (γ
angle). A total of 90 patients were included, 51 were male and 39 female patients.
Seventy-seven patients received a Salto and 13 patients a STAR prosthesis. The average age
was 63.7 years.
Results: The mean sDTAA was 83.9 degrees and the mean γ angle was 21 degrees,
both without significant difference in the two different prosthesis designs. A significant
association (p=0.03) between post-op LTS as a continuous variable per unit increase and
clinical failure was demonstrated, which included all the revision cases, with an odds ratio
of 1.25. In addition a significant association (p=0.03) between increased LTS and sDTAA
change of >5°, which is indicative of anterior subsidence, was shown. This was associated
with an odds ratio of clinical TAR failure of 1.27.
Conclusion: The abnormal radiographic post-op lateral talar station appears to
predict clinical TAR failure and correlates with the abnormal sDTAA; the anterior translated
talus loads the anterior tibia leading to anterior subsidence of the prosthesis. Limitation
of this study is the inclusion of two different types of prosthesis designs.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00310

## Proximal Phalanx Osteotomy in Percutaneous Correction of the Lesser Toe Deformities: A
Cadaver Study

Anna-Kathrin Leucht, MD; Martin J. Wiewiorski, MD; Miki Dalmau-Pastor, PhD; Alexandro
Pellegrino, MD

Category: Lesser Toes
Keywords: Hammertoe Correction; Minimally Invasive; Hammertoe Deformity
Introduction/Purpose: The correction of lesser toe deformities has been
traditionally performed in an open fashion. With minimal-invasive foot surgeries becoming
increasingly popular, correction of lesser toe deformities via percutaneous soft-tissue
procedures and osteotomies is frequently performed. The aim of this study was to evaluate
the site of percutaneous proximal phalanx osteotomy of the lesser toes in relation to the
metatarsophalangeal joint line when performed without fluoroscopy guidance.
Methods: In this experimental cadaver study, the metatarsophalangeal joints of
the lesser toes of 20 cadaver samples (=80 toes) were palpated. A plantar skin stab incision
was made just distal to the joint line without fluoroscopic control. Plantar closing
osteotomies of the proximal phalanx were performed with a Shannon burr. Adorsoplantar view
was taken with fluoroscopy. The location of the osteotomy and the relative distance from the
metatarsophalangeal joint line was evaluated.
Results: The majority (78/80; 97.5 %) of the osteotomies were localized in the
metaphyseal region. No osteotomy violated the metatarsophalangeal joint.
Conclusion: Percutaneous osteotomy of the proximal phalanx of the lesser toes
guided by palpation without using the image intensifier is a safe procedure and does not
violate the metatarsophalangeal joint.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00311

## Surgical Outcome of Hindfoot Fusion using a Retrograde Hindfoot Fusion Nail

Anna-Kathrin Leucht, MD; Andrea N. Veljkovic, MD, MPH, FRCSC; Kevin J. Wing, MD,
FRCSC; Murray J. Penner, MD, FRCSC; Alastair S. Younger, MB ChB, ChM, FRCSC

Category: Hindfoot
Keywords: Hindfoot Arthrodesis; Hindfoot; Hindfoot Fusion
Introduction/Purpose: TTC fusions are often performed as a salvage procedure
in patient with severe hindfoot arthritis or hindfoot deformity. Comorbidities in this
patient collective are frequent, leading to increased risk of postoperative complication.
The purpose of this study was to evaluate the surgical outcome regarding union rate,
reoperation rate and adverse events using a retrograde hindfoot fusion nail.
Methods: Patient records of a single center were retrospectively reviewed in
which a retrograde hindfoot fusion nail was utilized for hindfoot fusion between July 1st,
2009 and August 31st, 2018. These records included age, gender, BMI, comorbidities,
indications for surgery, non-union, re-operation rates and adverse events related to the
surgery. The fusions were performed by 4 fellowship trained foot and ankle surgeons at a
tertiary care teaching hospital. 58 cases were identified consecutively, in 51 cases a TTC
fusion was performed, in 7 cases a tibiotalar fusion with preexisting talocalcaneal fusion.
22 fusions were arthroscopic and 36 open. The average age of patients was 59 years, the
average BMI 29. Main indication for the hindfoot fusion were arthritis (55%) and complex
hindfoot deformity (43%).
Results: An overall union rate of 89.66% was achieved, 5 non-union tibiotalar
and 1 non-union tibiotalar + talocalcaneal was documented. In the group of arthroscopic
fusion the non-union rate was 9.09%, in the open group 11.11% respectively. The non- union
group included patient with elevated BMI (50%), Diabetes mellitus (33%) and smoking (33%).
Adverse events were documented in 21%. The reoperation rate was 17%, mostly due to deep
infection or wound complication requiring surgical debridement. No patient in the
arthroscopic fusion group needed a reoperation due to deep infection or wound complication,
whereas in open surgery this rate was 27.78%.
Conclusion: A union rate of 89.66% was achieved using a retrograde hindfoot
fusion nail in a high risk patient population for non- union. Arthroscopic preparation of
the tibiotalar and the subtalar joint seem to prevent postoperative wound complications.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00312

## What are the Risk Factors for Infection after Operative Treatment of Subtalar Fracture
Dislocations?

Eli Levitt, MS; David A. Patch, MD; Michael D. Johnson, MD; Ryan McLynn; Henry DeBell,
BS; James B. Harris; Clay A. Spitler, MD

Category: Ankle; Trauma
Keywords: Ankle Fracture; Wound Complications; Foot and Ankle Infection
Introduction/Purpose: Subtalar fracture dislocations are a rare hindfoot
injury with relatively little evidence to inform surgeons about outcomes and risk factors
for complications. Some previously documented poor prognostic factors include lateral and
complicated dislocations, total talar extrusions, and concomitant fractures. The mechanism
of injury often results from high energy trauma and has been reported as severe inversion
(medial dislocation) or eversion (lateral dislocation) of the foot. The purpose of this
study was to assess the risk factors associated with deep infection after operative
treatment of subtalar fracture dislocations.
Methods: A retrospective cohort study at a single level 1 trauma center was
performed to identify patients who had operative treatment of a subtalar fracture
dislocation over an 11 year period (2008-2019). Patients were identified by review of the
electronic health record and data collected included patient demographics, injury
characteristics, and treatment choices. Deep infection was defined as return to the
operating room for debridement. Minimum follow-up for inclusion was 3 months. Descriptive
analyses (means, medians, standard deviations, ranges, frequency distributions) were used to
assess and describe the group. Chi-square tests of association and independent-sample t
tests were used to assess differences between the infected group and those without
infection.
Results: A total of 154 met criteria for this study. The most common
associated fractures were talus (47%) and calcaneus (33%). Approximately every 1 in 8
patients (12.3%) patients developed a deep infection. The infected group was older (47.2 vs
39.5 years, p=0.03). Tobacco users were found to have a significantly higher rate of
postoperative deep infection (74 vs 34%, aOR=7.4, 95% CI, 2.3-24.1, p=0.001). There was a
significantly higher proportion of infection in patients with Gustilo-Anderson type 3 open
fractures (32 vs 12%, aOR=5.7, 95% CI, 1.6-20.3, p=0.007). The infected group had a higher
proportion of below the knee amputation (47 vs 1%, p<0.001).
Conclusion: Infection after operative management of subtalar fracture
dislocations can be devastating, with 47% of infected patients requiring amputation. Risk
factors for infection after subtalar fracture dislocation include older age, smoking, type 3
open fracture, and freshwater contamination. Ultimately demographic and injury
characteristics seem to drive the risk of infection in subtalar fracture dislocations.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00313

## Surgical Treatment Outcomes of Achilles Tendon Rupture and Tendinosis Augmented with
Synthetic Graft

Jeffrey A. Levy, DO; Steven K. Neufeld, MD; Thomas H. Sanders, MD; Daniel J. Cuttica,
DO

Category: Hindfoot; Sports; Trauma
Keywords: Achilles Tendon; Achilles Tendonopathy; Achilles Tendon Rupture
Introduction/Purpose: Surgical treatments for Achilles tendon ruptures (ATR)
or insertional Achilles tendinitis (IAT) traditionally have prolonged postoperative
recoveries. Patients are typically kept non-weight bearing or protected weight bearing on
the operative extremity for weeks after surgery to protect the repairs. The purpose of this
study is to show that augmentation of typical Achilles tendon repairs with a synthetic
scaffold is safe, allows for early weight bearing while preserving functional outcome and
has a high patient satisfaction.
Methods: A retrospective chart review was performed on all patients surgically
treated for ATR or IAT from 2018 - 2020. The surgeries were performed by two fellowship
trained Foot and Ankle Orthopaedic surgeons. All repairs were augmented with a synthetic
scaffold made of polycaprolactone-based polyurethane urea (PUUR). Achilles tendon ruptures
were direct end-to-end repairs and IAT repairs were performed with double row biocomposite
anchors in the calcaneus after a calcaneus exostectomy. Exclusion criteria included flexor
hallucis longus transfer, non-insertional achilles tendinosis, patients undergoing
additional surgical procedures, and ATR or IAT repairs not treated with PUUR. Patients were
evaluated as a cohort as well as acute ruptures, chronic ruptures (defined as more than 6
weeks old), and IAT subgroups. Primary outcomes were date of weight bearing and patient
satisfaction. Secondary outcomes were final strength and ankle dorsiflexion. The Wilcoxon
signed-rank test (WSR) was used to compare baseline and final follow-up NRS scores.
Results: A total of 33 patients met the inclusion criteria with 12 ATR (9
acute and 3 chronic) and 21 IAT. Mean follow-up length was 150 days (43 - 314). Mean weight
bearing began on postoperative day (POD) 7.33 (6-13) for acute ruptures, 14.33 (6-19) for
chronic ruptures, and 9.9 (5-42) for IAT. Patient satisfaction, based on a binary yes/no
response at final followup, was obtained on 27 of 33 patients with 92.6% positive indicating
satisfaction with surgical outcome. Final strength averaged 5/5 for 83.9% and 4/5 for 16.1%
of all patients. Final active dorsiflexion of at least 10 degrees was obtained in 93.5%.
Mean numerical rating scale (NRS) for pain significantly decreased from 5.2 to 0.6 for all
patients (WSR p<0.001). No patients had loss of fixation or had a re-rupture.
Complications included one patient with sural neuritis and another with minor wound
breakdown that did not require surgical intervention.
Conclusion: Augmentation of Achilles tendon ruptures and insertional Achilles
tendonitis with PUUR graft is safe, allows for early weight-bearing, has a high patient
satisfaction and has acceptable functional outcomes in regards to strength and motion.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00314

## Five-Factor Modified Frailty Index as a Predictor of Complications Following Total
Ankle Arthroplasty

Lauren Lewis, MD; Daniel Jupiter, PhD; Vinod K. Panchbhavi, MD, FACS; Jie Chen, MD,
MPH

Category: Ankle Arthritis; Ankle; Other
Keywords: Ankle Arthroplasty; Ankle Replacement; Complications
Introduction/Purpose: Ankle arthritis can significantly diminish the function
and quality of life of affected individuals. Treatment options for end-stage ankle arthritis
include total ankle arthroplasty (TAA). Ongoing research seeks to identify patient factors
associated with a higher risk of post-operative complications following TAA. A 5-item
modified frailty index (mFI-5) has been found to predict adverse outcomes of multiple
orthopaedic procedures. The aim of this study was to evaluate the suitability of the mFI-5
as a risk stratification tool for patients undergoing TAA.
Methods: A retrospective review of the National Surgical Quality Improvement
Program (NSQIP) database was performed on patients undergoing TAA between the years of 2011
and 2017. Data on patient demographics, post-operative complications, and length of stay
were collected. Bivariate analysis and multivariate logistic regression were subsequently
performed to investigate frailty as a possible predictor of post-operative
complications.
Results: 1035 patients were identified (mean age = 63.9 years). Complication
rates significantly increased with increasing mFI-5 score, from 5.24% in patients with no
mFI-5 variables to 19.38% in patients with two or more mFI-5 variables present (P
<0.0001). When comparing patients with an mFI-5 score of 0 to patients with an mFI-5
score of 2, 30-day readmission rate increased from 0.24% to 3.1% (P> 0.017), length of
stay increased from 1.79 days to 2.18 days (P >0.007), adverse discharge rate increased
from 3.81% to 15.5% (P <0.0001), and wound complications increased from 0.24% to 1.55%
(> 0.02). After controlling for demographic factors, length of stay, and operative time,
mFI-5 score remained significantly associated with patients' risk of developing any
complication and 30-day readmission rate.
Conclusion: Frailty as defined by the mFI-5 is associated with adverse
outcomes following TAA. Implementing the mFI-5 as a risk stratification tool may assist in
identifying patients who are at an elevated risk of sustaining a complication, and may allow
for improved informed decision-making and perioperative care when considering TAA.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00315

## Peritalar Subluxation: A Key Finding for Both Cavovarus and Flatfoot
Deformities

Shuyuan Li, MD, PhD; Mark S. Myerson, MD; Cesar de Cesar Netto, MD, PhD

Category: Hindfoot; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Cavovarus Foot; Weight Bearing CT; Hindfoot Deformity
Introduction/Purpose: Peritalar subluxation in both the talonavicular and
subtalar joints has been described as characteristic markers for adult acquired flatfoot
deformity (AAFD). However, no study has reported these changes in in cavovarus deformity,
and we postulated that peritalar subluxation would apply to both the AAFD as well as the
cavovarus foot deformity but in different directions using the same markers. Furthermore,
the use of calcaneocuboid (CC) joint subluxation as an additional marker for peritalar
subluxation has never been investigated in either flatfoot or cavovarus deformities. This
study used three dimensional images of weightbearing cone beam computed tomography (WBCT) to
evaluate the alignment of the peritalar joints in feet with normal, varus and valgus
hindfoot alignment.
Methods: WBCT scan images and medical charts of 400 patients were
retrospectively reviewed. Thirty cavovarus and 15 flexible AAFD feet were chosen as the
study groups. Fifteen feet without deformities and arthritis, a history of trauma or surgery
in both the hindfoot and ankle were chosen as controls. Hindfoot moment arm (HMA), Foot and
ankle offset (FAO) were used to assess hindfoot alignment. Middle facet subluxation (MFS),
talonavicular joint coverage angle (TNCA), and calcaneocuboid joint subluxation (CCS) were
used as markers of peritalar subluxation. The talocalcaneal (Kite’s) angle in the axial
plane was used to demonstrate the relative position between the talus and the calcaneus. The
arch height index in the sagittal plane was used to assess medial arch height. Positive was
used to reflect lateral subluxations while negative for medial ones. Correlations between
HMA, FAO and each of the above three peritalar subluxation parameters were assessed by
bivariate linear regression.
Results: Patients in both the cavovarus and the AAFD groups showed totally
different hindfoot alignment, peritalar subluxation and the height of the medial arch
compared to the control group. In the order of Cavovarus, AAFD, and Control, the mean HMA-
CR values were -20.43mm, 14.02mm, and 0.03mm, respectively; HMA-WBCT values were -6.34mm,
15.75 mm, and 3.19 mm; FAO values were -11.17%, 7.42%, and 2.63%; TNCA were -16.8 degrees,
22.11, and 6.45; The MFS values were -17%, 42%, and 22%; CCS values were -21%
(IQR=-35%,-0.17%), -7% (IQR=-11%, 0) and 0 (IQR=-4%, 5%); The Kite’s angles were 22.19
degrees, 34.27 degrees, and 28.06 degrees; The arch height index values were 0.25, 0.71, and
0.44. There was a statistically significant difference among the three groups in all the
above parameters. There was a strong positive linear correlation between each parameter of
the peritalar subluxation marks with both hindfoot moment arm and FAO.
Conclusion: This is the first study to bring the concept of peritalar
subluxation to cavovarus deformity assessment, proving that peritalar subluxation is a key
characteristic in both flatfoot and cavovarus foot deformities. The two deformities are
pathologically completely different, and as expected, markers of peritalar subluxation were
in opposite directions. The use of calcaneocuboid joint subluxation as additional marker of
perisubtalar subluxation is novel to assess both deformities. The findings of this study
will provide useful guidelines for future clinical evaluation and decision making in
treating patients with either varus or valgus hindfoot deformities.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00316

## Validation and Reliability of the Progressive Collapsing Foot Deformity (PCFD)
Classification

Shuyuan Li, MD, PhD; Mary C. Hamati, MD; Mingjie Zhu; Kenneth J. Hunt, MD; Cesar de
Cesar Netto, MD, PhD; Mark S. Myerson, MD

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot; Other
Keywords: AAFD; PTTD; Cavovarus Foot Deformity
Introduction/Purpose: Recently, a group of experts proposed Progressive
Collapsing Foot Deformity (PCFD) as a new terminology to describe better the complexity of
this pathology, as well as a new staging system based on rigidity and different patterns of
deformity. The proposed system (Table 1) better incorporates recent data and understanding
of the condition, better allowing for standardization of reporting, and guiding treatment
decision-making to achieve optimal outcomes. The classification includes two Stages:
flexible (1) and rigid (2) deformity each of which may or may not be associated with five
subclasses of deformity including hindfoot valgus (A), midfoot abduction (B), forefoot
supination (C), peritalar subluxation (D), and ankle valgus instability (E). This paper aims
to determine the reliability and the validity of the PCFD classification system.
Methods: This is a survey-based study distributed through REDCap. Participants
were provided with video and case examples explaining how the classification system is used.
Three groups of surgeons (Group 1 fellows in training, Group 2 surgeons in practice for 1-4
years, and Group 3 in practice 5 years or more) classified 20 cases of PCFD. Correct
response rates for the 20 cases, and subclasses and substages of each individual case were
calculated. The mean and 95% confidence interval were used to describe normally distributed
numerical data. Values of the above parameters were compared among the three different
groups using Tukey-Kramer HSD test of Oneway ANOVA. P<0.05 was considered statistically
significant.
Results: Ninety-four of 113 returned surveys were completed and included in
the analysis. There were 18 in Group 1, 23 in Group 2, and 53 in Group 3, with significantly
different overall correct diagnosis rates (75.8%, 51.7%, and 37.6% respectively). There was
no significant difference among the three groups with regard to the correct response ratio
of different Stages. The correct response rates for each Class of deformity were 96.62% (95%
CI=94.02%, 99.23%) for Class A (hindfoot valgus); 77.66% (95% CI=75.06%, 80.26%) for Class E
(ankle instability); 87.98% (95% CI=85.38%, 90.58%) for Class B (midfoot abduction), 87.99%
(95% CI=85.39%, 90.60%) for Class C (forefoot supination) and 57.29% (95% CI=54.70%, 59.90%)
for Class D (peritalar subluxation), with the correct response rates of Class A, B, C and E
being significantly higher than that of Class D.
Conclusion: Three groups of surgeons with varied experience demonstrated a
higher accuracy of responses for hindfoot valgus, and ankle instability and a lower accuracy
for midfoot abduction, forefoot supination and peritalar subluxation. The classification as
presented to the reviewers provided sufficient information to guide accurate decision making
for correct responses, however some classes of deformity, in particular peritalar
subluxation may have been poorly defined in the clinical presentations and may require more
clinical and radiographic information to guide decision making for correct
classification.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00317

## Ankle/Hindfoot Arthrodesis as a Salvage Procedure for Failed Total Ankle
Arthroplasty

Jung-Won Lim, MD; Won Tae Song, MD; Hong-Geun Jung, MD, PhD; Jemin Im

Category: Ankle; Hindfoot
Keywords: TTC; Tibiotalocalcaneal Arthrodesis; Total Ankle Arthroplasty
Introduction/Purpose: High failure rate after total ankle arthroplasty (TAA)
in 10-year follow-up has been reported, ranging from 10 to 20%. Massive bony destruction
after TAA often caused by periprosthetic osteolysis, implant subsidence or loosening, or
periprosthetic infection, and it would be considerable challenge to many orthopedic
surgeons. In some cases, it is difficult to perform revision arthroplasty. For failed TAA,
ankle/hindfoot arthrodesis can be performed as a salvage procedure. In this study, we
evaluate the clinical and radiologic outcomes of the ankle/hindfoot arthrodesis in patients
with failed TAA.
Methods: Ankle/hindfoot arthrodesis was performed in 10 ankles with failed TAA
from October 2003 to March 2019 (at least 6- month follow-up). As for the clinical
evaluation, visual analogue scale (VAS) pain scores, and American Orthopaedic Foot &
Ankle Society (AOFAS) ankle-hindfoot scores were assessed. Postoperative complications such
as skin necrosis, surgical site infection (SSI), or non-union were reviewed through medical
records. Radiographs including CT images at last follow-up were assessed to confirm bone
union.
Results: The average follow-up was 49.1 months (range, 7-89). There were 6
cases performed with tibiotalocalcaneal (TTC) arthrodesis, and 4 cases with ankle
arthrodesis. The operations were performed at mean postoperative 46.6 months (range, 8- 178)
from index TAA. Allo-femoral head structural bone graft was used in 9 cases, and auto
proximal tibia cancellous bone graft was used in 5 cases. Mean VAS pain score decreased from
7.6 pre-operatively to 2.2. AOFAS score increased from 15.6 to 42.0 (subjective assessment
only; maximum score=68). 3 revision surgeries had been performed after initial arthrodesis
(1 case for SSI, 2 cases for non-union), and bone union was obtained in 2 cases (1 case of
SSI, 1 case of non-union).
Conclusion: Ankle/hindfoot arthrodesis after failed TAA can be optimal
surgical option for the patients with massive bony destruction which compromises revision
arthroplasty. It acts as a salvage procedure for failed TAA and could yield favorable
outcome.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00318

## Comparison of the Outcome of the 3-Component Salto Total Ankle Arthroplasty for Ankle
with Preoperative Varus, Valgus and Neutral Alignment in End-Stage Osteoarthritis

Jung-Won Lim, MD; Hong-Geun Jung, MD, PhD; Jemin Im

Category: Ankle; Ankle Arthritis
Keywords: Ankle Arthritis; Total Ankle Arthroplasty; Total Ankle
Replacement
Introduction/Purpose: As the popularity of total ankle arthroplasty (TAA)
increases, indication of TAA also expands. Recently, the ankles more than 20° of varus or
valgus deformity in the coronal plane are treated with TAA. However, severe varus or valgus
deformity should be corrected in the coronal plane to avoid residual mal-alignment that
leads to instability, insert wear, and clinical failure. In this study, we compare the
clinical and radiologic outcome of the Salto mobile bearing 3-component total ankle
prosthesis for ankles with preoperative varus, neutral, and valgus alignment.
Methods: TAA was performed in 101 consecutive ankles (99 patients) by a single
surgeon using 3-component Salto total ankle implant from June 2014 to October 2019. A
prospectively collected database was used to identify all patients who underwent primary TAA
with a minimum 1-year follow-up. We classified the enrolled ankles as neutral, varus, or
valgus groups. More than 10° of tibial anterior surface angle, talta tilt angle, tibial
axis-talar dome angle, talar dome-ground surface angle (TD-GSA), or tibio- calcaneal angle
was defined as varus or valgus groups. All patients were followed up at postoperative three
months, six months, at one year and yearly thereafter. Clinical outcome scoring was done
pre-operatively and post-operatively. American Orthopaedic Foot & Ankle Society (AOFAS)
ankle-hindfoot functional score, pain VAS, satisfaction score and clinical range of motion
(ROM) were collected along with weight-bearing radiographs of the ankle. Post-operative
coronal alignment of the component were evaluated with radiographs.
Results: The average follow-up was 21.6 months (range, 12-71). Preoperatively,
there were 63 ankles (62%) with varus deformity, 27 ankles (27%) with neutral alignment, and
11 ankles with valgus deformity. In preoperative varus group, 13 ankles (21%) were performed
with concomitant lateral sliding calcaneal osteotomy, and 23 ankles (37%) with deltoid
release. No additional procedures for the correction of ankle and hindfoot deformity were
performed in preoperative neutral and valgus groups. VAS pain score and AOFAS score were
significantly improved in all groups (p < 0.05). Overall satisfaction rate was 88%. After
TAA, there were no significant radiologic alignment among the groups (3.9° (range,
0.7°~9.7°) in varus group, 4.1° (range, 0.4°~6.8°) in neutral group, and 2.2° (range,
-0.4°~4.4°) in valgus group; p > 0.05).
Conclusion: There was no significant difference in outcome among the varus,
neutral, and valgus groups postoperatively in the TAA series using single Salto 3-componenet
implant. Postoperative neutral alignment was achieved in all ankles. For favorable long-term
outcomes, coronal alignment should be corrected with proper additional procedures in
TAA.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00319

## Suture Pullout in Human Cadaveric Skin: Evaluation of HEMIGARD® Augmentation vs Suture
Alone

Jason S. Lin, MD; Jacob Pearson; Olivia Pipitone

Category: Other; Ankle; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Wound Complications; Ankle; Wound Complications
Introduction/Purpose: Closure of high-tension surgical wounds is a challenge
frequently encountered during surgical procedures. The use of a novel adhesive augmentation
device, HEMIGARD, has been proposed to decrease tension on wound closure and thereby
increase the amount of force needed for suture pullout. In principle, this may help prevent
wound dehiscence, skin edge necrosis and the sequelae thereof. We hypothesized that HEMIGARD
augmentation of suture placement would require more force for suture pullout from human
cadaveric lower extremity skin when compared to suture alone.
Methods: In this study, HEMIGARD with suture was compared to suture alone on
leg and foot measurements from four cadavers. One side of the incision was used to test the
HEMIGARD according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The other side of the same incision
was used to test the same suture material, passed without HEMIGARD, to allow for direct
comparison. A force gauge was used to measure the Newtons of force required for suture
pullout. A total of 30 measurements were recorded per cadaver; 15 using HEMIGARD and 15
using suture alone.
Results: No difference was observed between HEMIGARD and suture alone in the
amount of force required for suture pullout. When excluding instances of HEMIGARD adhesive
failure, which occurred in 67% of measurements, the HEMIGARD was found to be superior to
suture alone in the cadaveric foot, but not in the leg.
Conclusion: The amount of force required for suture pullout from human
cadaveric lower extremity skin did not significantly differ when using HEMIGARD augmentation
of suture placement versus using suture alone. However, when excluding instances of HEMIGARD
adhesive failure, the HEMIGARD may be superior to suture alone in the cadaveric foot, but
not in the cadaveric leg.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00320

## A Systematic Review of Third-Generation Total Talus Replacements

Benjamin B. Lindsey, MD; Benjamin B. Lindsey, MD; Shumaila Sarfani, MD; Clayton C.
Bettin, MD

Category: Hindfoot; Ankle
Keywords: Talus; Aspetic Necrosis; Joint Preserting Arthroplasty
Introduction/Purpose: Total talus replacement (TTR) has emerged as a novel
treatment for talar avascular necrosis and severe trauma to the talus. Despite TTR first
being described over 35 years ago, many questions still remain regarding the procedure.
The objective of this study was to summarize the evidence on third-generation TTR’s,
focusing on surgical indications, surgical technique, prosthesis design, clinical outcomes,
and postoperative complications.
Methods: MEDLINE and EMBASE were queried and data abstraction was performed by
2 independent reviewers. Inclusion criteria for the articles were (1) peer-reviewed clinical
studies with levels of evidence from I to IV, (2) with at least 5 patients, (3) reporting
clinical outcomes of third-generation TTR’s that were not done in conjunction with a total
ankle arthroplasty, and (4) with a minimum clinical follow-up of at least 6 months.
Results: Five studies met inclusion criteria for analysis including 101 ankles
in 97 patients. The mean reported patient age was 52.8 years. The most common indication for
TTR was avascular necrosis (86%), followed by trauma (10%), and tumor (4%). The mean follow
up was 40 months. 98% of TTR’s were performed through an anterior approach. There was
significant variation in implant material, with 60% alumina ceramic, 27% cobalt chromium, 9%
titanium, and 4% stainless steel. Only 3 studies obtained preoperative outcome measures, but
these all demonstrated improvement at final follow up. Average dorsiflexion after TTR was
6.1 degrees and average plantarflexion was 35.1. Only 5% of ankles had complications
requiring return to the operating room and only 2% of the total taluses were revised.
Conclusion: While evidence is limited, short-term and mid-term results are
promising for TTR as it demonstrates improvement in ankle function and has a low rate of
revision. As the consequences of failure of a TTR are significant, including pantalar fusion
or below knee amputation, higher quality studies and long-term results are needed to further
evaluate this procedure.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00321

## Biomechanics of Ankle Sprains: A 3D Dynamic Analysis of Lateral Tensile Load

Francois Lintz, MD MSc FEBOT; Cesar de Cesar Netto, MD, PhD; Maryama S. Dufrénot, MSc;
Matthieu Lalevée; Ronny Lopes; Céline Fernando; Alessio Bernasconi, MD, PhD FEBOT

Category: Ankle; Sports
Keywords: Ankle Instability; Alignment Weight Bearing CT; Biomechanics of the
Foot and Ankle
Introduction/Purpose: Lateral ankle sprains are the most frequent ankle trauma
and may lead to chronic lateral ankle instability (CLAI). Studies have reported anterior
talofibular (ATFL) and calcaneofibular (CFL) ligaments tensile strengths around 200N and
300N. Cone Beam Weight Bearing CT (WBCT) allows visualization of 3D bony anatomy in
different functional positions. The primary objective of this study was to calculate 3D ATFL
and CFL tensile loads in patients diagnosed with CLAI performing Forced Inversion stance
during WBCT imaging (FI-WBCT) and wearing shoes, and to compare them with a population of
non-CLAI ankles. The secondary objective was to evaluate the relative contribution of shoes.
We hypothesized that ATFL and CFL calculated tensile loads (CTLs) would be close to
previously published data with minimal contribution of shoes.
Methods: This retrospective comparative Level III study included 20 CLAI
ankles and 20 controls with known demographics and available FI-WBCT datasets. Patients
under 18 or with a previous history of trauma or surgery which could affect ankle
architecture were excluded. A mechanical lever arm model was calculated for each case using
the spatial coordinates of the weight bearing surfaces of the shoe and foot (bony landmarks:
5th metatarsal head, base and calcaneus lowest points, distal tip of the medial malleolus,
ATFL and CFL distal insertion points, distal tip of the fibula). The ATFL and CFL CTL were
calculated respectively as the coronal force applied at the distal insertion landmarks of
the ATFL on the talus and CFL on the calcaneus. Normality was assessed using the
Shapiro-Wilk test, then variables were compared using the Student t-test
(normally-distributed) or the Wilcoxon rank sum test (non normally-distributed variables).
Chi-2 was used for categorical variables.
Results: Mean age [42.4+-10.9 vs 40.8+-10.7 years; p=0.317], Body Mass Index
[24.4+-3.3 vs 24.9+-4 kg.m-2; p=0.34], sex (p=0.75), side (p=0.75) and foot alignment (FAO
-1.05%+-5.5 vs 0.08%+-3.6; p=0.22) were not different between CLAI ankles and controls. CTLs
for ATFL were 194N+-149 in CLAI and 192N+-183 in controls (p=0.85), while for CFL they were
311N+-286 and 311N+-361, respectively (p=0.79). Using footwears, CTLs were 406N+-360 in CLAI
vs 608N+-380 in controls (p<0.05) for ATFL, and 703N+-741 vs 958N+-779 (p=0.11) for CFL.
Comparing barefoot and shod values, mean CTLs in the ATFL (193N+-164.8 vs 507N+-379.1,
respectively; p<0.001) and in CFL (311.3N+-321 vs 830.8N+-761.5, respectively;
p<0.001) were significantly different.
Conclusion: We found that the Calculated Tensile Loads for ATFL and CFL using
Forced Inversion-WBCT considering the barefoot weightbearing surface were close to values
described in previous cadaveric studies for those ligaments' tensile strength. A 2.6 and 2.7
fold increase was found when the weight bearing surface of the shoe was considered,
indicating a possible aggravating role of shoewear. The reduced shod ATFL-CTL values found
in unstable cases as compared to controls could suggest a possible active self-protection
mechanism during FI-WBCT in CLAI.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00322

## Distribution of Bone Mineral Density in the Ankle Joint: Correlation with Hindfoot
Alignment

Francois Lintz, MD MSc FEBOT; Matthew J. Welck, MD, FRCS(Orth); Kristian Buedts, MD;
Céline Fernando; Cesar de Cesar Netto, MD, PhD; Alessio Bernasconi, MD PhD FEBOT

Category: Ankle; Basic Sciences/Biologics; Hindfoot
Keywords: Bone Mineral Density; Alignment Weight Bearing CT; Ankle
Osteoarthritis Risk Factor
Introduction/Purpose: Abnormal Hindfoot Alignment (HA) has been correlated
with increased failure rates in ankle fusion or replacement for osteoarthritis (OA). An
altered stress distribution in the surrounding bone and abnormal Bone Mineral Density (BMD)
around the native ankle may be predisposing factors for those unwanted outcomes. Cone Beam
Weight Bearing CT (WBCT) has recently been used to investigate BMD and to correlate the
localization of periprosthetic cysts and alignment in ankle arthroplasty. The objective of
this study was to assess the spatial distribution of BMD around the ankle joint in patients
with normal or abnormal HA. We hypothesized that BMD would be evenly distributed in
normally-aligned ankles whilst increased medially in varus and laterally in valgus
configurations.
Methods: In this retrospective comparative Level III study, 60 ankles (41
adults),without any trauma or surgery affecting HA, with WBCT datasets (PedCat, Curvebeam
LLC, PA-USA) were allocated to 3 groups (comparable by age, p=0.79; BMI, p=0.24; and side,
p=0.93), based on the Foot Ankle Offset (FAO) values: 20 normal (0%-2), 20 varus (FAO<
0%; 35% female, age 48.8+-13 years, BMI 26.2+-2.9 kg.m-2), and 20 valgus (FAO>5%; 40%
female, age 58.9+-14.6 years, BMI 28.6+-4.2 kg.m-2). Semi-Automatic Segmentation (BoneLogic,
Disior Oy, Helsinki-Finland) was applied to identify bones of interest. The tibia and talus
were digitally compartmented in medial (M) and lateral (L) volumes relative to the median
sagittal plane. Mean Hounsfield Unit (HU) value per compartment was used to assess BMD. The
primary outcome measure was the Medial over Lateral HU ratio (M/L-HU).
Comparisons were performed using one-way ANOVA, Kruskal-Wallis and Chi2 tests.
Results: All values of BMD were normally distributed but M/L-HU ratios were
not. Mean +- standard deviation HU values in the compartments in normal cases were 523+-103
(medial tibia), 519+-115 (lateral tibia) 421+-81 (medial talus), 470+-92 (lateral talus) and
725+-109 (fibula). The mean BMD was significantly lower in all compartments in valgus cases
compared to normal (all p<0.05). It was decreased in valgus vs varus in the talus
(p<0.04), specifically in the medial compartment (p<0.01). The tibia M/L- HU ratio was
decreased in valgus vs normal (0.87+-0.16 vs 1.01+-0.07; p=0.001) and vs varus (1.04+-0.09;
p<0.001). The talus M/L-HU ratio was increased in varus cases vs normal (1+-0.22 vs
0.83+-0.09; p<0.01) and valgus (0.07+-0.19; p<0.001).
Conclusion: We found that BMD in distal tibia, fibula and the talus varies
with hindfoot alignment. In valgus configuration, all bone compartments were less dense
compared to normal and varus. The medio-lateral ratio increased in the tibia and in the
talus in varus cases, suggesting medial concentration of bone, and decreased in valgus
cases, suggesting a more lateral concentration. This data supports the role of WBCT in
analyzing BMD distribution. This method could be clinically useful in ankle OA to evaluate
bone quality for such considerations as surgical indications or implant positioning.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00323

## Anatomic Considerations of the Distal Fibula: A Computed Tomography Guided
Analysis

Philip H. Locker; Leah Waldman; Max Michalski, MD

Category: Ankle; Basic Sciences/Biologics; Trauma; Other
Keywords: Anatomic Plating; Ankle Fracture; Structural Anatomy and
Biomechanics
Introduction/Purpose: Ankle fractures are a common injury in the general
population with nearly sixty thousand operations performed in California for fractures
involving the tibiotalar joint over a 10-year span. Reestablishing anatomic fibular
alignment after fracture reduction leads to improved patient outcomes by restoring ankle
mortise congruence. An in-depth understanding of fibular morphology may aid in fracture
reduction, preoperative planning, plate positioning and intra-operative contouring. The goal
of this study is to perform quantitative morphologic analysis of distal fibular anatomy
using computed tomography (CT).
Methods: Using Nuance mPower Clinical Analytics software, a database of CT
tibia-fibula reports for patients ages 18 through 35 performed at our institution were
searched for the term 'normal.' Inclusion criteria was absence of any reported osseous
pathology. Examinations were excluded if the fibula was incompletely imaged. Twenty CTs were
collected and analyzed. Measurements were performed at 5 mm increments from the tip of the
fibula extending proximally to 10 cm. At each level the following measurements were
obtained: lateral and posterior border lengths, lateral to medial (LM) bicortical distances
at &frac14;, &frac12;, and &frac34; the length of the lateral border,
posteroanterior (PA) bicortical distance at the center of the posterior border, and the
angles of the lateral and posterior borders relative to the PA axis of the tibia ( ). The location of the maximal
bicortical distance in the LM direction was recorded at each level.
Results: The posterior border of the fibula broadens from an apex distally to
8.4+-1.6 mm at 10 cm proximal while rotating an average of 97.5 degrees. The lateral border
of the fibula rotates 6.3 degrees from distal to proximal and begins with a width of
12.8+-3.1 mm and comes to an apex at 9 cm. In the distal fibula, the ratio of the maximal LM
to PA bicortical length is 0.56. By 3 cm proximal, the ratio approaches 1 and is 1.6 at 10
cm. The distal 1 cm of the fibula has the largest LM diameter anteriorly and medially but
from 1.5 cm to 10 cm proximal the posterior &frac14; has the largest LM diameter.
Conclusion: The fibula has a complex distal geometry which changes with
progression from the distal tip to 10 cm proximal. The posterior border of the fibula
broadens and rotates over 90 degrees to become the lateral border proximally. The lateral
border distally is broad but comes to an apex proximally with minimal rotation. The ratio of
bicortical distances changes from distal to proximal as the distal posterior border rotates
to face in a LM direction proximally. This information may aid in surgeons' understanding of
the complex distal fibular morphology and assist with intra-operative decision making
regarding hardware size, placement and manipulation.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00324

## Cost of Operative Fixation of Ankle Fractures: Comparing Orthopaedics and
Podiatry

Joshua C. Luginbuhl, MD; Alexa R. Deemer; Eric C. Gokcen, MD

Category: Trauma; Other
Keywords: Ankle Fracture; Cost; ORIF
Introduction/Purpose: Ankle fractures pose a unique situation as both
podiatrists and orthopaedic surgeons are licensed to treat them. Despite increasing emphasis
on value-based medical care, there are few cost analyses focused on the treatment of ankle
fractures. The goal of this study is to determine if there are cost differences between an
orthopaedic surgeon and podiatrist to operatively manage an ankle fracture.
Methods: Retrospective cohort study of patients who underwent ankle fracture
fixation over a 22 month period at an academic level 1 trauma center. Patient data was
subcategorized by surgeon type and treatment groups. Four treatment groups were included:
lateral malleolus open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF), bimalleolar/trimalleolar ORIF
(no posterior malleolus fixation), lateral malleolus ORIF with syndesmotic fixation,
bimalleolar/trimalleolar ORIF (no posterior malleolus fixation) with syndesmotic fixation.
Primary outcome was total (OR time cost + Implant cost) cost per case.
Results: A total of 134 cases met criteria. Eighty-five cases were treated by
a total of 4 orthopaedic surgeons while 49 were treated by 8 podiatrists. There was
significantly longer OR time (minutes) for lateral malleolus ORIF (111 vs 134.92), lateral
malleolus ORIF with syndesmotic fixation (130.53 vs 156.7), and bimalleolar/trimalleolar
ORIF (no posterior malleolus fixation) with syndesmotic fixation (162.13 vs 208) when
podiatry was the treating team. Average total cost per case was significantly more for
lateral malleolus ORIF (+$1188.45), lateral malleolus ORIF with syndesmotic fixation
(+$2259.16), and bimalleolar/trimalleolar ORIF with syndesmotic fixation (+$2837.29) when
podiatry was the treating team.
Conclusion: Lateral malleolus ORIF, lateral malleolus ORIF with syndesmotic
fixation, and bimalleolar/trimalleolar ORIF with syndesmotic fixation costs less per case
when performed by an orthopaedic surgeon based on OR time costs and implant costs.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00325

## Accuracy of Tibia Deformity Correction with a Hexapod Multiplanar External Fixator with
Measurements Taken from Radiographs, CT Scan, and Imaging Software: A Cadaveric
Study

Gregory A. Lundeen, MD, MPH; Abrianna S. Robles; Erin K. Haggerty, MD; Tyler W.
Fraser, MD; Spenser J. Cassinelli, MD; Julie Smith-Gagen; Ally Abbatangelo; Scott R.
Whitlow, MD

Category: Other; Trauma
Keywords: External Fixation; Osteotomies; Malalignment
Introduction/Purpose: The success of hexapod multiplanar external fixators for
correction of tibial deformity has been well described. The ability to correct deformity is
based on the accuracy of the reference and deformity data inputted into the prescription
program. If the data is not accurate, multiple residual programs may be required for final
correction. There are limited papers evaluating i accuracy of intraoperative measurements.
We are unaware of any analysis on the use of CT scan to determine deformity and reference
points. Newer software program allows surgeons to incorporate radiographs into the
correction program to determine deformity and reference points. Our study objective was to
compare deformity and reference point measurements taken from radiographs, CT, and imaging
software to determine which method most accurately corrects tibia deformities.
Methods: Hexapod external fixators were orthogonally applied on four full
length tibia cadavers. Strut lengths were set to the same length. Each cadaver was assigned
a different deformity: proximal quartile, distal quartile, midshaft, and segmental. An
osteotomy was performed and the hexapod struts were loosened to create a multiplanar
deformity. Radiographs and CT were taken orthogonal to the reference ring. Deformity and
reference points were measured off each according to correction software data points.
Pictures of the radiographs were imported into the software program (Stryker, Mahwah, NJ)
and the correction reference points were determined with imaging software. All cadavers had
a correction program for each method. Two surgeons performed the measurements twice to
determine inter and intra-observer accuracy. Corrections were performed and post reduction
radiographs were measured to determine length, angulation and translation. In addition, the
total number of millimeters each strut was off from the pre-deformity position was
recorded.
Results: Line technique on software program was significantly better at
measuring segmental deformity and the Image technique was statistically more accurate to
correct proximal, midshaft and distal deformities (p<0.05). Overall, all methods were
more accurate correcting Midshaft and Proximal deformities (44.8mm and 50.4mm, respectively)
significantly better than Distal and Segmental deformity correction (88.9mm and 121.7mm,
respectively (p<0.001). There was no difference in absolute measurements or
intra-observer error between the four surgeons (p>0.05).
Conclusion: Compared to the traditional method of measuring deformity and
frame reference using radiographs, new imaging software appears to be superior and more
reproducible in correcting tibia deformities. Surgeons should recognize the increased
difficulty in correcting segmental and distal deformities regardless of the method used.
Accuracy of determining deformity and frame reference points has the potential to decrease
time patients are in a frame and reduces the potential for malunions. Further investigation
is needed to determine sites of variation to further improve the process of correcting
complex deformities of the tibia.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00326

## Effect of Packaging on Polyethylene Fractures, Implant Survivorship and Cyst Formation
in Mobile Bearing Total Ankle Replacements

Gregory A. Lundeen, MD, MPH; Tyler W. Fraser, MD; Erin K. Haggerty, MD; Braden
Matthews; Ally Abbatangelo; Scott R. Whitlow, MD; Spenser J. Cassinelli, MD

Category: Ankle Arthritis; Ankle
Keywords: Total Ankle Replacement; Ankle Replacement; Total Ankle Arthroplasty
Prostheses
Introduction/Purpose: The Scandinavian Total Ankle Replacement (STAR) is the
most widely used mobile bearing total ankle arthroplasty (TAA) in the US. The polyethylene
component is ultrahigh molecular weight polyethylene and is designed to articulate with both
the tibial and talar component. Initial data on the STAR in the US reported polyethylene
fracture rates of greater than 10% as well as a concern for cyst formation due to
osteolysis. The manufacturer changed the packaging to foil to prevent potential oxidation of
the polyethylene, which could predispose the polyethylene to failure. The objective of the
study was to evaluate a cohort of patients with STAR performed before and after converting
to foil packaging to determine if there is a difference in polyethylene survivorship and
cyst formation.
Methods: All primary TARs performed by the senior author from 2010-2017 were
reviewed. Patients with a minimum 48 month follow up were included in the study. The two
groups were stratified by those performed prior to August 2014 (PRE) and those performed
after August 2014 (POST). Preoperative and most recent postoperative alignment was
determined on weight bearing radiographs. The outcomes included polyethylene fractures and
cyst formation in the two groups. Cysts were defined as those measuring greater than
1cm2 on plain radiographs. Patients were recommended to have surgery if cyst
volume was greater than 2cm2. Chi-squared tests were used to detect significant
differences in the rate of cyst formation between the two groups. Paired t- tests were used
to determine difference in preoperative versus postoperative alignment, follow up length,
and polyethylene component thickness and patient age at time of procedure between the two
groups.
Results: The PRE group had 35 patients with an average follow up of 75 months
(range 48-118). The POST group had 15 patients with average follow up 55 months (range
48-60). There was no difference in preoperative versus postoperative radiographic alignment
between the groups (p>0.05). Cysts were present in 9 (26%) patients in the PRE group
versus 4 patients (26%) in the POST group. Nine patients (26%) needed a second surgery due
to cyst formation in the PRE group versus two (16%) in the POST group (p>0.05). Four
patients (11%) had a fracture of the polyethylene in the PRE group with an average thickness
of 6.7mm (range 6-9) and 77 months (range 68-84) versus zero in the POST group. The average
time to polyethylene exchange for cyst(s) or polyethylene fracture was 58.3 months.
Conclusion: This study suggests that changes in packaging to limit oxidation
of the polyethylene from plastic to foil did not appear to represent a difference in
periprosthetic cyst formation. However, there was a trend for additional surgery related to
periprosthetic cysts and increased risk for polyethylene fracture in the PRE group. These
results could suggest the potential for oxidation changes that alter the wear
characteristics and fragility of the polyethylene component. Confounding factors could
include postoperative time and component thickness. Further investigation and longer
follow-up will be needed to further delineate oxygenation impacts on TAA polyethylene
components.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00327

## Motion is Maintained at the Tibial and Polyethylene Component Interface in a
Mobile-Bearing Total Ankle Arthroplasty at Mid and Long-Term Follow-Up

Gregory A. Lundeen, MD, MPH; Erin K. Haggerty, MD; Tyler W. Fraser, MD; Braden
Matthews; Scott R. Whitlow, MD; Spenser J. Cassinelli, MD

Category: Ankle Arthritis; Ankle; Hindfoot
Keywords: Total Ankle Arthroplasty; Total Ankle Arthroplasty Prostheses; Total
Ankle Replacement
Introduction/Purpose: Normal biomechanics of the ankle joint includes sagittal
motion, but also anterior-posterior (AP) translation (1mm) as well as axial rotation (5-8
degrees). Sagittal motion is well described in total ankle arthroplasty (TAA), however,
current understanding of mobile-bearing motion at the tibial-polyethylene interface in TAA
is limited to AP motion and short-term data on axial rotation. The purpose of our study was
to determine if polyethylene components maintain mobility adjacent to the tibial component
in mobile bearing TAA at mid and long-term follow-up in both the sagittal and axial planes
in patients more than 48 months post-operatively.
Methods: Patients who were a minimum of 48 months postoperative from a
third-generation mobile-bearing TAAwere identified. Fluoroscopic images perpendicular to the
tibial component were saved at maximum internal and external rotation on AP, and the lateral
images were saved in maximum plantarflexion and dorsiflexion. Sagittal range of motion and
AP translation of the polyethylene component were measured from the lateral images. Axial
rotation was determined by measuring the relative position of the two wires within the
polyethylene component on AP internal and external rotation imaging. This relationship was
compared to a table previously developed from fluoroscopic images taken at standardized
degrees of axial rotation of a nonimplanted polyethylene with the associated length
relationship of the two imbedded wires. Total axial motion was determined by the difference
between angle value determined for maximum internal and external rotation.
Results: Eight patients were included in this investigation, 5 (62.5%) were
female and average age was 72.6 (range, 59-83) years. Time from surgery averaged 94.2
(range, 54.7-118.6) months. Total sagittal range of motion between the talar and the
polyethylene component averaged 20.3 (range, 10-30) degrees. All patients (100%) maintained
motion at the tibia-polyethylene interface. Axial motion for total internal and external
rotation of the polyethylene component articulation on the tibial component averaged 5.3
(range, 2-12) degrees. AP translation of the polyethylene component relative to the tibial
component averaged 1.1 (range, 0.4-2.6) mm during plantarflexion and dorsiflexion. There was
no relationship between axial rotation or AP translation of the polyethylene component and
ankle joint range of motion (P >.05).
Conclusion: To our knowledge, this is the first investigation to measure axial
and sagittal motion of the polyethylene component in mobile bearing TAA at the tibial
implant interface in patients at mid and long-term follow-up. Based on our results, motion
is maintained an average of 8 years post-operatively and concludes that a mobile-bearing TAA
has the potential to fall within the parameters of normal polyaxial ankle motion several
years after implantation. Such maintenance of motion may have a positive influence on gait
pattern, polyethylene wear, joint reaction forces and implant longevity.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00328

## Return to Driving after Elective Foot & Ankle Surgery: A Systematic Review

Alexander Lundy; Andres S. Piscoya; Michael D. Bedrin; Daniel L. Rodkey; Sarah Nelson;
Tobin T. Eckel, MD

Category: Ankle; Arthroscopy; Midfoot/Forefoot; Other
Keywords: Clinical Outcomes; Patient Education; Elective Surgery
Introduction/Purpose: Studies investigating when patients can safely return to
driving are becomingly increasingly numerous in the orthopedic literature because of the
recognition of the importance of the activity to the lives of most adults. Previous
systematic reviews have proven helpful by collecting and summarizing these studies to
establish concise guidelines that can be presented to patients during the counseling
surrounding a procedure. Having these guidelines can be even more crucial when discussing
elective procedures. This systematic review summarizes the available studies investigating
when it is safe to return to driving following elective foot and ankle procedures.
Methods: A systematic review of the literature was performed using PubMed,
Embase, and CINAHL to identify English-language studies from 1999 to present that
investigate return to driving after right-sided elective foot and ankle procedures.
Qualitative assessment of each of the included studies was performed independently by two
authors. Then data from each study was extracted and broken down into distinct categories
for comparison: study details, population, control group, method of evaluation, and
results.
Results: Eight studies met inclusion criteria. All of the studies investigate
brake reaction time (BRT), via a driving simulator, as their primary outcome. A variety of
objective and subjective secondary outcomes were collected. Patients undergoing right ankle
or subtalar arthroscopic procedures have no significant difference in BRT compared to
controls at 2 weeks post-operatively. 92% of patients undergoing right ankle arthroplasty
had a BRT that was not significantly different to the control group at 6 weeks post-
operatively. Patients who had an ankle arthrodesis had significantly delayed BRT compared to
controls even past 1-year post- operatively. The majority of patients after corrective
hallux valgus surgery have no significant difference in BRT at 6 weeks post- operatively
compared to their pre-operative baselines depending upon how they are doing clinically. The
included studies used a variety of patient reported outcomes that were helpful in predicting
which patients would fail the driving simulation at the various timepoints.
Conclusion: The recommendations from these reviewed studies can guide
physicians when counseling their patients on when they can expect to safely return to
driving after a specific, elective foot and ankle procedure. However, these recommendations
are reliant on routine healing post-operatively and may need to be adjusted if a patient is
experiencing any complications. A variety of patient surveys and other subjective scores can
be very helpful in assuring a routine post-operative course.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00329

## Risk Reduction and Perioperative Complications in Diabetics with Multiple Medical
Comorbidities Undergoing Charcot Foot Reconstruction

Madeline M. Lyons, MD; Michael S. Pinzur, MD; Patrick C. McGregor, MD; William Adams;
Lynette Wilkos-Prostran, RN

Category: Diabetes; Other
Keywords: Charcot; Diabetes; Medial Calcaneal Displacement Oseotomy
Introduction/Purpose: Modern Patient Safety Programs focus on medical
optimization prior to surgery, regional anesthesia and hospitalist-orthopaedic co-management
during the perioperative period.
Methods: Eighty-five consecutive diabetic patients with multiple medical
co-morbidities underwent surgical reconstruction for acquired deformities secondary to
Charcot foot arthropathy with circular ring fixation between 2016 and 2019. All patients
participated in a standardized perioperative medical optimization program, which included
medical optimization prior to surgery, regional anesthesia whenever possible and
hospitalist-orthopaedic comanagement during hospitalization. Charts were retrospectively
reviewed for medical comorbidities, complications, and length of stay. The National Surgical
Quality Improvement Program (NSQIP) Risk Calculator was used to retrospectively calculate
their predicted perioperative risk.
Results: On multivariable analysis, longer lengths of stay were associated
with low preoperative hemoglobin values (RR = 1.36; P =.01) and congestive heart failure (RR
= 1.42; P =.02). There were 22 (27%) complications, though only 10 (12%) were serious. These
included acute kidney injury (n = 6), sepsis (n = 2), one cardiac event, and one pulmonary
embolism. Overall, the accuracy of predicting a complication using the NSQIP risk calculator
was 74% (95% CI: 63% - 85%) which was comparable to the accuracy of predicting a
complication using only patients' congestive heart failure and pin-tract infection statuses
(c = 74%, 95% CI: 62% - 86%).
Conclusion: Medical optimization of diabetic patients with multiple medical
co-morbidities prior to elective complex reconstruction orthopaedic surgery leads to
improved clinical outcomes. Preoperative anemia and congestive heart failure are associated
with longer hospitalizations in this patient group. The American College of Surgeons NSQIP
Risk Calculator is a reliable predictor of complications in the perioperative period. This
study demonstrates that reconstructive surgery in this complex patient population can be
accomplished with a reasonable exposure to risk for complication.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00330

## Screws Only Primary Subtalar Arthrodesis for Calcaneus Fractures

David M. Macknet, MD; Ainsley Bloomer, BS; Richard Mcknight, MD; Nicholas Johnson;
Ziqing Yu; Rachel Seymour; Joseph R. Hsu, MD

Category: Hindfoot; Trauma
Keywords: Calcaneus Fracture; Calcaneus Fractures - Treatment; Subtalar
Arthrodesis
Introduction/Purpose: The initial management of displaced intraarticular
calcaneus fractures (DIACFs) is a difficult problem. The results of open reduction internal
fixation (ORIF) have been disappointing. Alternatively, ORIF with primary subtalar
arthrodesis (PSTA) has gained increasing popularity. The purpose of this study is to review
patient-centered and radiographic outcomes of ORIF plus PSTA using screws alone through a
sinus tarsi approach.
Methods: A retrospective study of all patients from 2013-2019 who underwent
ORIF+PSTA for DIACFs was conducted. The same surgical technique was utilized in all cases
consisting of only screws, no plates were utilized. Delayed surgeries past 8 weeks were
excluded. Demographic and radiographic data was collected. Worker’s compensation (WC) claims
were noted and analyzed separately. Plain radiographs were assessed preoperatively and
post-operatively and Sander’s classification was used to characterize injuries. Patient
reported outcomes (PROs), complications, and need for revision surgeries was also noted and
analyzed at final follow-up.
Results: In total, forty-eight DIACFs underwent PSTA with a median follow-up
of 194 days. Median time to weight-bearing was 60 days post-operatively. Three fractures
were documented as Sanders II, 22 as Sanders III, and 23 as Sanders IV. Seventy-five percent
of the WC group returned to work compared to just 58.3% in the non-WC group (p=0.0003).
Patients in the WC group were more likely to have had an abnormal pre-operative Bohler’s
angle (p=0.047) but the two groups did not differ significantly in postoperative Gissane or
Bohler angles. Nearly 85% (N=41) achieved >=2 zones of fusion on radiographs by final
follow up and 95.8% (N=46) had at least one. Four patients had a complication and 3 required
a return to the operative room.
Conclusion: Utilizing Screws only primary subtalar arthrodesis for the
treatment of DIACFs through a sinus tarsi approach shows promising results with high rates
of return to work and fusion, even in the workers' compensation population.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00331

## Complications of Calcaneal Osteotomy: Are They Equal Between Different Osteotomy
Types?

N. Jane Madeley; Chinnasamy Senthil Kumar, MBBS,FRCS(Tr&Orth); Alia Alenezi

Category: Hindfoot; Other
Keywords: Calcaneal Osteotomy; Complications; Internal Fixation
Introduction/Purpose: Calcaneal osteotomy is regularly performed as part of
the surgical management of a number of conditions. Complication rates are thought to be low,
however are these risks the same for different osteotomy types? In our institution a
Lateralising Closing wedge osteotomy is performed for Cavus foot correction and Varus
alignment with instability, whilst Lateral Column Lengthening Osteotomy and Medialising
Displacement Calcaneal Osteotomy (MDCO) are performed for Pes Planus with and without
forefoot abduction respectively. In severe Pes Planus deformities both may be utilised. The
purpose of this study was to examine complication rates in each group.
Methods: This is a retrospective case series of consecutive calcaneal
osteotomies performed at our institution between January 2010 and December 2019. The primary
outcome measures were healing of the osteotomy, metalwork removal and any other reported
complications related to the calcaneal osteotomy including infection and wound problems.
Patient demographics, associated procedures, indication for surgery, incision, and fixation
method were also recorded.
Results: There were 141 patients in the series. 77 patients underwent a
lateralising osteotomy, 55 underwent MDCO and 12 Lateral column lengthening (LCL) with
opening wedge osteotomy of the anterior process of the Calcaneus. Fixation was with
cannulated screws, or specific purpose locking plates. Patients were followed up for a
minimum of three months and discharged from follow-up once a satisfactory level of recovery
was reached..One non-union was seen in each of the Lateralising, MDCO and LCL groups.
Delayed union was seen in 3 lateralising osteotomies, and 1 MDCO. Metalwork irritation
requiring surgery for metalwork removal was 6.5% (4 with screws, 1 plate), 9.1% (all screws)
and 0% for Lateralising, MDCO and LCL osteotomies respectively. Wound problems or sural
nerve irritation were noted in 11.7%, 3.6% and 8.3% of Lateralising and MDCO and LCL
osteotomy respectively. 1 superficial infection was seen in the Lateralising osteotomy
group
Conclusion: One non-union was seen in all groups, with a trend for bone
healing to be slower in those having lateralising procedures. Patients should be advised of
this possibility if undergoing calcaneal osteotomy. Wound problems and sural nerve
irritation were also more common with lateralising procedures. Metalwork removal due to
hardware irritation was common (7% overall), and fixation method rather than osteotomy type
appears to influence this with 9 cases following cannulated screws and 1 following lateral
locking plate fixation. Screw fixation is associated with higher hardware removal rates.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00332

## Middle Facet Subluxation Correlation with Foot and Ankle Offset in the Assessment of
Progressive Collapsing Foot Deformity

Connor Maly; Nacime S. Mansur, MD; Matthieu Lalevee, MD; Christian VandeLune; Chris
Cychosz, MD; Edward O. Rojas; Kevin N. Dibbern, PhD; Scott J. Ellis, MD; Francois Lintz,
MD MSc FEBOT; Alessio Bernasconi, MD PhD FEBOT; Cesar de Cesar Netto, MD PhD

Category: Other; Hindfoot; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: AAFD; Weight Bearing CT; Posterior Tibial Tendon Dysfunction
Introduction/Purpose: Identifying markers of severity and progression in
Progressive Collapsing Foot Deformity (PCFD) provides surgeons with critical information,
possibly aiding in the decision making along the treatment algorithm. Subtalar middle facet
subluxation (MFS), the percent undercoverage of the talus in relation to its calcaneus
counterpart, was recognized as a reliable marker in weight-bearing computerized tomography
(WBCT) for PCFD diagnosis. The Foot and Ankle Offset (FAO), the relative position between
the center of the ankle joint and the foot tripod, is a three-dimensional WBCT tool
predictive of disease severity. Our objective is to assess the relationship between the
amount of MFS and FAO in flexible PCFD patients. We hypothesize that MFS is a reliable
assessment of disease severity and correlates with FAO.
Methods: In this retrospective IRB-approved comparative study, a total of 56
individuals with PCFD (74 feet) who underwent WBCT for baseline assessment were analyzed.
Two blinded fellowship-trained foot and ankle surgeons performed the measurements. MFS was
executed in the coronal-plane, at the midpoint (on sagittal-plane) of the middle facet (see
attached figure). Dedicated software was utilized to perform the FAO, using the most plantar
voxels of the first metatarsal, fifth metatarsal, calcaneal tuberosity and centre of the
ankle. Interobserver agreement was quantified for MFS and FAO using intraclass correlation
coefficient (ICC). Intermethod agreement between MFS and FAO was assessed by Spearman’s
correlation. Bivariate linear regression analysis was used to assess the relationship
between MFS and FAO. A partition prediction model and multivariate analysis were utilized to
assess influence of MFS measurements on FAO values and vice versa.
Results: A total of 56 patients (74 feet) were included in the study. The ICCs
for interobserver reliability was 0.87 for MFS and 0.95 for FAO. In a bivariate analysis,
MFS and FAO were found to be significantly and linearly correlated (P< 0.0001, R2 0.26).
Foot Angle Offset = 2.22 + 0.12*Medial Facet Subluxation (%). In multivariate analysis, FAO
and body mass index (BMI) were significantly correlated with MFS (<0.001 and 0.02,
respectively). The partition prediction model demonstrated that an MFS of 27.5% was an
important threshold for increased FAO, with FAO of 3.4% +-2.4% when MFS was below threshold
and 8.0% +-3.5% when above threshold.
Conclusion: We found a positive linear correlation between MFS and FAO
measurements. An MFS of 27.5% was an important threshold for higher FAO values, which
corresponded to a worst overall alignment. Our results are consistent with the idea that MFS
is a reliable marker for PCFD diagnoses and severity, correlating well with the FAO. This
data may support clinical decisions in PCFD patients. Also, BMI was found to be positively
correlated with MFS. Future prospective and longitudinal studies are needed to confirm the
findings of this study.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00333

## Arthroscopically Assisted Particulated Juvenile Allograft Cartilage Implantation and
Bone Grafting for Treatment of Large Cystic Osteochondral Lesions of the Talus: A Case
Series

Kshitij Manchanda, MD; Joseph E. Manzi; Cary B. Chapman, MD

Category: Ankle; Arthroscopy; Basic Sciences/Biologics; Sports; Trauma
Keywords: Ankle Arthroscopy; Osteochondral Lesions of the Talus; Cartilage
Allografts
Introduction/Purpose: Osteochondral lesions of the talus (OCLT) are common
traumatic injuries and can be difficult to treat. Conventional methods consist of
arthroscopic debridement and bone marrow stimulation techniques including microfracture,
curettage, abrasion chondroplasty and antegrade/retrograde drilling predominantly leading to
fibrocartilage formation. These methods have proved effective for small lesions; however,
larger lesions with accompanying subchondral bone cysts require more invasive treatment with
osteochondral allografts or autologous chondrocyte implantation. These procedures can
require harvesting of osteochondral grafts from the knee or malleolar osteotomies, which
have associated donor site morbidities and complications of osteotomy healing. We describe
an alternative method, an all-arthroscopic technique to treat these large cystic OCLTs, and
sought to determine long-term quality of life metrics for a cohort of patients.
Methods: From 2010-2012, six patients with difficult to treat OCLTs underwent
arthroscopic-assisted implantation of particulated juvenile allograft cartilage with viable
chondrocytes (DeNovo NT) along with autogenous bone grafting from the calcaneus by a single
surgeon. These lesions all had associated cystic changes requiring bone graft to fill the
defect. Other inclusion criteria included at least two of the following: 1) shoulder
lesions, 2) lesion size > 200 mm2, 3) failed previous microfracture treatment,
or 4) age > 40 with a Body Mass Index (BMI) > 25 kg/m2. These six patients
were fully evaluated using physical examination, patient interviews, and outcome score
measures. Follow-up was completed at 2 years, 4 years, and between 6-9 years at their most
recent visit. Pre-operative and post-operative functional outcome scores were compared with
Wilcoxon Signed Ranked Test.
Results: Six patients (age: 43.8 + 14.0 years, BMI: 28.4 + 6.7
kg/m2) had average lesion sizes of 188.5 + 50.9 mm2 (range: 125-260
mm2) and most recent follow-up of 8.4 + 1.2 years (range: 6.0-9.3 years).
Post-operatively, average VAS pain scores decreased by 4.2 points, 95% CI [1.6-6.8]. FAAM
ADL scores improved from 41.8 to 72.5, 95% CI [11.3-50.1]. SF-36 Physical Component Scores
also showed significant improvement by 37.8 points, 95% CI [20.8-54.8]. FAAM Sports (p =
0.055) and AOFAS (p = 0.066) scores clinically improved from 13.3 to 39.2 and 57.7 to 86.3,
respectively, and approached statistical significance. There were no intraoperative or
perioperative complications with calcaneal bone grafting.
Conclusion: A small cohort of patients followed over the course of ~8 years
after implantation of particulated juvenile allograft cartilage (DeNovo NT) and autogenous
calcaneal bone graft for cystic OCLTs had positive post-operative, self-reported functional
outcomes. Patients significantly improved compared to pre-operative measures, with no
complications observed. This may be an effective long-term treatment for patients with
difficult to treat OCLTs.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00334

## Characterization of Motor Performance in 200 Normal Ankles Through Isokinetic
Evaluation

Nacime S. Mansur, MD; Lucas Fonseca; Eduardo S. Maciel; Thiago Inojossa; Cesar de
Cesar Netto, MD, PhD; Diego C. Astur

Category: Ankle; Sports
Keywords: Ankle; Biomechanics of the Foot and Ankle; Functional
Rehabilitation
Introduction/Purpose: The isokinetic test has been used diffusely as a way to
evaluate the functional results after the rehabilitation of musculoskeletal injuries. In the
ankle, in particular, most studies are related to lateral ligament injuries and Achilles
tendon’s injuries. However, different protocols are used and a lack of normative values is
observed in the literature. The aim of this work is to perform a global isokinetic
evaluation on healthy ankles in order to propose reference values for future patients.
Methods: We evaluated 100 participants (200 ankles) using the Biodex 3 System
for the eversion, inversion, dorsiflexion and plantar flexion movements of the ankle. The
sample consisted of individuals aged 20-60 years, with an active life and practice of
recreational physical activity (non-athlete) and without previous injuries. Five repetitions
for strength (N / m) and work (J) at a speed of 30° / sec and 10 repetitions for power (W)
at a speed of 120° / sec were performed in our protocol. Agonist / antagonist ratio and the
Muscle Deficiency Index, which globally assesses the balance between the sides for each
movement, were also evaluated, as well as the demographic variables. Different statistical
analyzes were performed for each parameter.
Results: The mean age was 38.5 years and BMI 25.8 (CI 2.7 and 0.8
respectively). The non-dominant side was consistently stronger (higher peak torque) in all
movements (p <0.001 -). The mean values obtained for force in each movement were 29.9N /
m (CI 1.4) for eversion, 34.8N / m (CI 1.6) for inversion, 48.6N / m (2.0) for dorsiflexion
and 140.2 N / m (CI 6.1) for plantar flexion. There was no correlation between age or BMI
with the maximum torque (N / m). The ratio of eversors / inverters was 88.8% (CI 3.1) and
that of dorsiflexors / plantar flexors was 36.1% (1.3). The Muscle Deficiency Index showed a
balance between the sides for each movement (p 0.062), with an average global difference of
less than 10% between them (eversion 8.66 [CI 3.17], inversion 4.2 [3, 48], dorsiflexion
3.41 [3.04] and plantar flexion 5.18 [2.51].
Conclusion: As far as we know, this is the largest isokinetic assessment of
normal ankles ever performed. The sample, although not stratified, was considered
homogeneous (coefficient of variation <50%), which allows to propose several normative
values for a non-athlete population in the isokinetic evaluation. It would be interesting to
compare these data in the future with the functional results in patients after the treatment
of certain injuries.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00335

## Computerized Tomography Scans for Ankle Fracture: Diagnosis, Management and Surgical
Plan Modifier

Nacime S. Mansur, MD; Fausto Santana Celestino; Caroline Neves; Vinícius F. Pereira;
Pedro Debieux Vargas Silva; Fabio Teruo Matsunaga, MD, PhD; Caio A. Nery; Diego C.
Astur

Category: Trauma; Ankle
Keywords: Ankle Fracture; Operative Approach; ORIF
Introduction/Purpose: Ankle fractures are one of the most operated injuries in
orthopedic practice. The decision upon the best management is based on the displacement of
the bone fragments and the presence of associated lesions (osseous and/or soft tissues). The
therapeutic decision is classically established upon plain radiographs, which might be
temerarious due to the usual difficulty in analyzing those exams. In recent years, some
authors have advocated that computed tomography could be used as an assistant instrument on
the decision-making. Our study aims to demonstrate the superiority of the association
between both methods on diagnosis, therapeutic decision, and surgical plan for these
injuries.
Methods: Patients diagnosed with an ankle fracture, between 2011 and 2016, and
assessed with CT and X-ray were included in our investigation. Seven examiners with
different degrees of experience analyzed the exams, determined the injuries, chose how they
would treat, and the defined surgical strategy when applicable. This was done, at first,
only with radiographs and after with the combination of CT and radiographs. The data were
statistically compared.
Results: Fifty-three patients were included. The medial malleolus fractures
characteristics (posteromedial fragment and anterior colliculus), the presence of posterior
malleolus fracture and its characteristics (displacement, bone fragment greater than 25%,
posteromedial or posterolateral segment), syndesmosis injury, and the absence of deltoid
ligament lesion were more noticeable from the combination of CT and radiography. Concerning
surgical treatment, the prone position, the posterolateral surgical approach (rather than
anterolateral) on lateral malleolus osteosynthesis, the decision to surgically treat the
posterior malleolus fracture (through posterolateral approach with posterolateral plate),
the option to include the syndesmosis approach in the treatment, and not to include deltoid
ligament repair were more noticeable from the combination of CT and radiography, among all
groups of expertise, with high inter-observer reliability.
Conclusion: The usual radiographs may fail to demonstrate subtle lesions, as
posterior malleolus fractures and syndesmotic injuries. The tomographic evaluation increases
the precision of diagnosis and improves the quality of information that the surgeon
receives, providing data that can positively affect patient care.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00336

## Deltoid Ligament Arthroscopic Repair in Ankle Fractures: Case Series

Nacime S. Mansur, MD; Andre Vitor Lemos, MD, MSc; Daniel Baumfeld, MD; Gustavo T.
Sanchez; Fernando C. Raduan, MD; Marcelo P. Prado, MD, PhD; Caio A. Nery

Category: Ankle; Trauma
Keywords: Deltoid Ligament; Ankle Fracture; Arthroscopy
Introduction/Purpose: Diagnosis and treatment of ankle medial ligament lesions
in malleolar fractures has always been a matter of controversy. Even when deltoid
involvement is clear, the direct repair of this structure is not a consensus. Recently,
deltoid reparation through an arthroscopic technique was described aiming to potentialize
better clinical results and minimize complications. We intend to demonstrate safety and
functional results of operated ankle fractures that had an arthroscopic deltoid repair.
Methods: This is a retrospective study in patients diagnosed with ankle
fractures associated with acute deltoid injuries submitted to malleolar fixation and deltoid
arthroscopic repair between June 2016 and January 2020. All patients were evaluated for pain
and function according to the Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) and the American Orthopaedic Foot
& Ankle Society Score (AOFAS) at a minimum of 6 months in follow-up.
Results: Between January 2016 and January 2020, 20 ankles with fractures or
dislocations were operated and the deltoid ligament rupture was repaired arthroscopically. A
mean follow-up of 14.45 months (6-48) was observed, and patients presented an average AOFAS
of 93.5 (SD 7.25) and a VAS of 0.75 (SD 1.05). Three minor complications were noticed and no
signs of medial chronic instability, loss of reduction or osteoarthritis were observed.
Conclusion: The repair of the deltoid complex and the low morbidity of the
arthroscopic technique used may improve the clinical outcomes of these patients. Additional
studies, with a prospective and comparative methodology are required to sustain this
proposal.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00337

## Diagnosis of the Achilles Insertional Tendinopathies by Algometry

Nacime S. Mansur, MD; Vinícius F. Pereira; Henrique C. Monteiro Cunha, MD; André F.
Yamada, MD, PhD; Fabio Teruo Matsunaga, MD, PhD; Marcel J. Sugawara Tamaoki, MD,
PhD

Category: Ankle; Hindfoot
Keywords: Achilles; Achilles Tendonopathy; Tendinopathies
Introduction/Purpose: Diagnosis of Achilles insertional tendinopathies (AIT)
is based on pain by tendon palpation. However, there is no consensus or standard regarding
the amount of force to be used during the evaluation. The algometry is a method of measuring
the pressure applied in a specific region and can be a method for determining diagnosis
values. Goal: To determine a cut-off value for Pain Threshold (PT) in the assessment of
AIT.
Methods: Design: This is a prospective case-control study of diagnostic
accuracy, to develop a diagnostic criterion. Methods: Forty asymptomatic individuals and
forty patients with insertional Achilles tendinopathy, matched by age and sex, were
evaluated, and submitted to algometry for PT and for Visual Analogical Scale (VAS) levels
with 3kg/f at the insertion of the calcaneal tendon by two different evaluators.
Inter-observer reproducibility was accessed through the interclass correlation index (ICC).
Sensitivity and specificity calculation of PT and of VAS were calculated and plotted on a
ROC (Receiver Operator Characteristic) curve.
Results: The lowest ICC found was 0.788. Regarding the diagnosis through TP,
the 4.08 kg/f mark showed the best relation between sensitivity and specificity (92.5% and
92.5%, respectively). Algometry values lower than 4.08 were considered positive for disease.
For the diagnosis of TIA through VAS with 3kg/f, the value of 2.98 was determined
(sensitivity of 92.5% and specificity of 97.5%).
Conclusion: This study showed that algometry is a reliable method in the
assessment of Achilles insertional tendinopathies, having a high intra-observer
reproducibility. The painful threshold for establishing the diagnosis of Achilles
insertional tendinopathies was 4.08 kg/, with values below this number considered
altered.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00338

## Does the Radiographic Lateral View of the Lesser Toe Matter in A Trauma? A
Retrospective Analyses of 378 Radiographs

Nacime S. Mansur, MD; Danilo P. Kitagaki; João P. Gonçalves; Noel O. Foni; Caio
Augustus F. Araujo; Gustavo T. Sanchez

Category: Lesser Toes; Trauma
Keywords: Fractures; Forefoot; Trauma
Introduction/Purpose: To evaluate the importance of a radiographic lateral
view in diagnosing lesser toes traumatic conditions.
Methods: Between January 2018 and March 2018, 378 radiographs of 126 patients
evaluated in an emergency care hospital for trauma in the lesser toe were retrospectively
evaluated for presence of lesser toes traumatic conditions. Patients were selected if a
complete series of radiographs were performed, anteroposterior (AP), lateral (LA) and
Oblique (OB). Radiographs of the same patient were duplicated and divided in two groups:
standard group (AP and OB) and complete group (AP + LA + OB). Images were examined by four
independent examiners with different degrees of experience. Each examiner randomly evaluated
the same patient twice (one for each group). Kappa index was used to evaluate intra and
inter-examiner concordance, and the two- proportion equality test was used to calculate
statistical significance.
Results: Mean age of patients was 37.2 years (4-85yr), 144 injuries were
diagnosed in standard group (28.6%) and 266 injuries (52.8%) in complete group (p<0.001).
Individually, each examiner had an improvement in the number of lesions diagnosed when
comparing group assessment (p<0.001). Kappa index was superior to 0.60 for all examiners
in standard group.
Conclusion: In conclusion, the addition of true lateral view was able to
detect misdiagnosed injuries in lesser toes trauma and improved the number of diagnosed
lesions in 84.6%.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00339

## Influence of Weight-Bearing Computed Tomography in the New Staging System of
Progressive Collapsing Foot Deformity Classification

Nacime S. Mansur, MD; Hee Young Lee; Amanda Ehret; Matthieu Lalevee, MD; Caleb J.
Iehl; Mark S. Myerson, MD; Alessio Bernasconi, MD PhD FEBOT; Kristian Buedts, MD; Francois
Lintz, MD MSc FEBOT; Cesar de Cesar Netto, MD, PhD

Category: Hindfoot; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Adult Acquired Flatfoot Deformity; Instability; Weight Bearing
CT
Introduction/Purpose: The same Consensus that proposed a new nomenclature for
Flatfoot, Progressive Collapsing Foot Deformity (PCFD), also introduced a new classification
system for the disease. The idea of staging was supplemented by the construction of a system
combining deformity classes and its flexibilities, using clinical and radiographic signs.
The capacity of the weight-bearing computed tomography (WBCT) in evaluating PCFD and all
components of peritalar subluxation has been established. The objective of this study was to
compare PCFD classifications performed utilizing clinical and conventional radiographs (CR)
findings with classifications established using clinical and WBCT findings. We hypothesized
that evaluations considering WBCT would significantly change PCFD classifications,
portraying a different picture of the disease.
Methods: This retrospective IRB-approved case-control diagnostic study
evaluated 89 consecutive PCFD feet (84 patients) with different presentations of the
disease. Three fellowship-trained foot and ankle surgeons performed chart reviews and CR
evaluations, determining PCFD classifications for the studied subjects. After a two-week
washout period, the sequence was randomized, and a new classification was executed using
clinical data and WBCT assessment. One of the readers repeated the WBCT evaluation two weeks
later for intrarater reliability purposes. Assessments included presence or absence of
classes, such as hindfoot valgus (A), midfoot abduction/sinus tarsi impingement (B), medial
column instability (C), subtalar joint subluxation/subfibular impingement (D) and valgus of
the ankle joint (E) as well as flexibility (1) and rigidity (2) of existing deformities.
Fleiss kappa was used for interrater and Cohen’s kappa for intrarater agreements.
Differences between studied groups were determined by distribution comparison.
Results: Mean BMI and age were 54.4 (+-17.1) and 33.6 (+-7.6) respectively.
Interrater reliability was found to be moderate (0.55) and intrarater to be excellent
(0.98). Evaluation using CR produced 22.8% of 1ABC, 13% of 1AC, 8,7% of 1ABCD and 7% of
2EABCD as most prevalent classifications. WBCT assessment found 31.5% of 1ABC, 11.2% of
1ABCD, 10.1% of 2ABCDE and 5.6% 1ABCDE. Class A was the most frequent component in CR
(93.5%) and WBCT (94.5%). Class B had a higher prevalence in WBCT (94.38%) than in CR
(71.7%) as well as Classes C (89.9% and 88.0%), D (44.9% and 29.3%) and E (31.5% and 23.9%).
The percentage of combined flexible (1) and rigid (2) deformities was also higher in the
WBCT evaluation (39.3% compared to 35.8%).
Conclusion: As the new classification proposes the combination of different
PCFD components to better support clinical decisions, proper identification of the classes
is mandatory for a complete diagnosis. WBCT showed a different rate of deformity
recognition, which increased the incidence of all classes, especially B (midfoot
abduction/sinus tarsi impingement) and D (peritalar subluxation/subfibular impingement). An
excellent intrarater agreement was found, which infers reliability of patient assessment
combining clinical and WBCT evaluation. The obtained information could help providers to
enhance comprehension of the disease and to supply patients with the most precise individual
care.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00340

## Medial and Lateral Combined Ligament Arthroscopic Repair for Multidirectional Ankle
Instability: Case Series

Nacime S. Mansur, MD; Andre Vitor Lemos, MD, MSc; Daniel Baumfeld, MD; Tiago S.
Baumfeld, MD; Marcelo P. Prado, MD, PhD; Fernando C. Raduan, MD; Caio A. Nery

Category: Arthroscopy; Sports
Keywords: Ankle Arthroscopy; Ligament; Deltoid
Introduction/Purpose: The high prevalence of ankle sprains in the population
produces a significant number of patients with lateral instability. Maintenance of this
condition may lead to the progressive involvement of medial structures, causing a
multidirectional rotational instability.
Methods: This is a retrospective study with patients diagnosed with
multidirectional instability, submitted to an ankle arthroscopy with medial (arthroscopic
tensioning) and lateral repair (arthroscopic Bröstrom) between January 2018 and January
2020. All patients were evaluated for pain and function according to the VAS and the AOFAS
Score at a mean of 14.8 months (5-27 months) in follow-up.
Results: A total of 30 ankles (29 patients) were included in the study. AOFAS
score increase from a 49.7 (CI 5.8) to a 91.9 (CI 2.4) mean (p=0.001) and was followed by
significant improvement in the mean VAS (6.83; CI 0.37 to 0.95; CI 0.31). The majority of
patients had associated procedures (53.3%) and a low complication rate was found
(16.6%).
Conclusion: Combined medial and lateral arthroscopic repair might be an
effective and safe alternative in the treatment of multidirectional instability. Inclusion
of the deltoid ligament complex and the low invasiveness of the arthroscopic technique can
improve the clinical outcomes of these patients.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00341

## Percutaneous Distal Metatarsal Mini-Invasive Osteotomy: Comparison Between Standard vs
Modified Intraosseous Approach: A Cadaveric Study

Nacime S. Mansur, MD; Fernando S. Martins; Elijah Auch; Ivan C. Giarola; Shuyuan Li,
MD, PhD; Matthieu Lalevée; Kevin N. Dibbern, PhD; John E. Femino, MD; Cesar de Cesar
Netto, MD, PhD

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Osteotomies; Minimally Invasive; Metatarsalgia
Introduction/Purpose: Minimally invasive surgery (MIS) of the forefoot has
gained popularity as an alternative to traditional open procedures for the treatment of
metatarsalgia and hammertoe deformity. Distal metatarsal mini-invasive osteotomy (DMMO) is
an extraarticular osteotomy done in a percutaneous manner, with minimal soft tissue
dissection that permits elevation as well as shortening. However, there is concern for
damage to vital structures due to lack of direct visualization. The objective of the study
was to evaluate the structures at risk in standard versus modified DMMO.
Methods: 11 thawed fresh-frozen cadaveric specimens underwent minimally
invasive DMMO using both the standard and modified approach. The standard technique was
performed by moving the burr in a circular motion with an angle of 45° (right- handed
surgeon), which cut sequentially the left, plantar, right and dorsal cortices. It was
compared to a modified intraosseous technique requiring less wrist supination while
remaining intraosseous. After completion of the procedures, the cadavers were fully
dissected and analysed to identify unintentional injury to soft tissue structures and to
verify if cuts were completely extraarticular and performed with proper angulation.
Results: In the standard group the most commonly injured structures were the
metatarsal joint capsules (MJC) (27%), extensor digitorum longus (EDL) (18%), and extensor
digitorum brevis (EDB) (9%). The modified intraosseous group demonstrated injury to the EDL
(27%), while MJC (0%) and EDB (0%) were not damaged. Distances between osteotomies and
structures were 6.08 +- 3.99 mm from the dorsal metatarsal head articular surface (DMHAS),
4.85 +- 2.45 mm from EDB and 0.76 +- 1.72 mm from the EDL in the standard group and 9.92 +-
3.42 mm from the DMHAS, 4.71 +- 3.24 mm from EDB and 1.24 +- 1.84 mm from the EDL in the
modified group. Statistically significant difference was found among osteotomy site and
DMHAS (p=0.02).
Conclusion: The most frequently injured structure was the EDL tendon with both
DMMO techniques used. Intra-articular positioning of the osteotomy was more frequently
observed in the standard technique. There was also a statistically significant difference
between the distance of the osteotomy site and the dorsal metatarsal head articular surface
when comparing the standard group and the modified group. Overall, it appears that the
modified method could be a safer, less complex alternative to the standard DMMO technique,
especially for the inexperienced surgeons.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00342

## Predictors of Deformity in Patients with Progressive Collapsing Foot Deformity and
Valgus of the Ankle

Nacime S. Mansur, MD; Matthieu Lalevee, MD; Victoria Vivtcharenko, BS; Kevin N.
Dibbern, PhD; Scott J. Ellis, MD; Jonathan T. Deland, MD; Alexandre L. Godoy-Santos, MD;
John E. Femino, MD; Elijah Auch; Cesar de Cesar Netto, MD, PhD

Category: Ankle; Hindfoot
Keywords: Flatfoot AAFD Computed Tomography Weightbearing CT; Ankle
Instability; CT Imaging Peritalar Subluxation
Introduction/Purpose: Markers of diagnosis and severity are well studied in
patients with Progressive Collapsing Foot Deformity (PCFD). Medial facet subluxation (MFS)
in weight-bearing computerized tomography (WBCT) has been established as an indicator of
peritalar subluxation and an earlier detector of the disease. When the disease affects the
ankle leading to a valgus talar tilt (class E), structures distal to this topography may
behavior differently, trying to compensate proximal deformity. The aim of this study is to
assess predictors of deformity in PCFD patients with and without valgus of the ankle. Our
hypothesis is that MFS could not be used in class E patients as an accurate value for
estimation and staging of PCFD.
Methods: In this IRB-approved retrospective case-control study we analyzed
WBCT acquisitions of 21 consecutive patients with PCFD presenting valgus of the ankle and 64
controls (flexible PCFD with no ankle involvement). MFS (percentage of uncoverage), middle
facet incongruence angle, middle cuneiform-to-floor distance, forefoot arch angle,
talonavicular uncoverage angle, hindfoot moment arm (HMA), Foot and Ankle Offstet (FAO) and
talar tilt angle (TTA) were obtained and compared between groups using oneway ANOVA. A
multivariate regression analysis was performed to evaluate which of the measurements
influenced the alignment. A partition prediction model was also constructed to find how the
variables contributed to the deformity and its aspects. Statistical significancy was set in
p values <0.05.
Results: We found differences among groups only for MFS, HMA, FAO and TTA,
with a lower mean value of MFS in patients with valgus of the ankle. An inverse relation
between MFS and TTA was obtained in this group, demonstrated by increase in the talar tilt
and decrease in middle facet uncoverage. MFS affected FAO values in the control group (R2:
0.25) but not in the ankle valgus group (R2: 0.001), being that this last one was influenced
mainly by the TTA (R2: 0.53). A FAO value higher than 12.14 was found to be a strong
predictor of deformity at the ankle.
Conclusion: MFS was lower in patients with PCFD and valgus of the ankle,
demonstrated as a weak predictor of deformity severity. In this group of patients (class E),
talar tilt angle and Foot and Ankle Offset should be used as disease markers. A FAO value
above 12.14 must be appreciated as a possible sign of ankle involvement in PCFD
patients.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00343

## Shock Wave Therapy Associated with Eccentric Strengthening vs Isolated Eccentric
Strengthening for Achilles Insertional Tendinopathy Treatment: A Double Blinded Randomized
Clinical Trial

Nacime S. Mansur, MD; Oreste L. Carrazzone; Fabio Teruo Matsunaga, MD, PhD; Flávio
Faloppa, MD, PhD; Marcel Jun Sugawara Tamaoki

Category: Sports; Other
Keywords: Achilles Tendonopathy; Clinical Outcomes; Tendinopathies
Introduction/Purpose: Lack of consensus inhibits Achilles insertional
tendinopathy (AIT) management. The condition is usually treated with eccentric exercises
(EE), despite its absence of satisfactory and standing results. Shock wave therapy (SWT) was
presented as an alternative, but it is still supported by a paucity of studies that shows
moderate outcomes. The purpose of this study is to determine if the association of shock
wave therapy (SWT) with the eccentric exercises (EE) protocol improve rates of pain and
function in patients with AIT.
Methods: This was a single-centre, double blind, placebo-controlled, in
parallel groups, randomized clinical trial. 119 patients diagnosed with AIT, were evaluated,
and enrolled in the study from February 2017 to February 2019. They were divided in two
treatment groups, SWT associated to EE (SWT group) and EE associated to sham (CON group).
Three sessions of radial shockwaves (or sham) separated by 2 weeks and eccentric training
for three months were applied. The primary outcome was the Victorian Institute of Sport
Assessment-Achilles questionnaire (VISA-A) at 24 weeks. Secondary outcomes included the
Visual Analogue Scale (VAS), Algometry, the Foot and Ankle Outcome Score (FAOS) and the 12
Item Short Form Health Survey (SF-12).
Results: Both groups showed significant improvement with the corresponding
treatment in the study period. However, there were no between-group differences (all ps >
0.05) in any of the outcomes. At the 24th week evaluation, the SWT group exhibited a mean
VISA-A of 63.2 (CI 8.0) and the CON group of 62.3 (CI 6.9), p=0.876. Failures were higher in
the SWT (38.3% to 11.5%, p=0.002) and recurrences were superior in the CON side (34.6% to
17.0%, p=0.047). There were no complications.
Conclusion: Extracorporeal shockwave therapy does not potentialize the effects
of eccentric strengthening in the management of Achilles insertional tendinopathy.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00344

## Calculation of Minimally Clinically Important Difference in VAS, SF-36, and LSA Scores
for Hallux Rigidus Correction Via MTP Fusion

Wesley J. Manz; Matthew Lunati; Joel Greenshields; Joel A. Zaldumbide; Rishin J.
Kadakia, MD; Michelle M. Coleman, MD, PhD; Jason T. Bariteau, MD

Category: Bunion; Midfoot/Forefoot; Other
Keywords: 1st MTP Joint; Bunion; Outcomes Measures
Introduction/Purpose: Hallux rigidus is a mobility limiting disease commonly
seen in elderly patient populations. Correction via metatarsophalangeal (MTP) fusion has
been shown to be a safe and effective means of treatment in these populations relative to
younger cohorts. An increasingly important measure of surgical efficacy is the establishment
of patient-reported outcomes for achieving meaningful change through a procedure.
Calculation of a minimally clinically important difference (MCID) has been established to
illuminate these thresholds. The objective of this study was to calculate MCID thresholds
for visual analogue pain (VAS), Short Form 26 Health survey (SF-36), and LifeSpace Mobility
Assessment (LSA) following first MTP fusion.
Methods: A prospective study of all patients undergoing MTP fusion between
August 1, 2015 and July 1, 2018 by a single surgeon was conducted following IRB approval. A
total of 143 patients were included in the study. Demographics and surgical data were
collected from review of the electronic medical record. Patient reported VAS, SF-36, and LSA
scores were collected at routine 6- month and 12-month follow-up clinic appointments, as
well as preoperatively. This study utilized a distribution-based approach for calculation of
MCID for each of the patient reported outcomes. The MCID was defined as 0.5 times the
standard deviation of the pre-operative score, 95% bootstrap confidence intervals were
creating using the bias corrected and accelerated method.
Results: The average age of patients undergoing first MTP fusion was 63.4
years (SD 10.6). Patient demographics were recorded, 25.9% of patients were current or
former smokers, 60.8% had clinically managed hypertension, 9.8% had diabetes, and 31.5%
carried a diagnosis of osteoarthritis. The average patient had 1.9 (SD 1.1) toes operated on
during the procedure, including their MTP fusion. Mean tourniquet time was 65.6 (SD 24.8)
minutes and mean operative time was 89.9 (SD 31.4) minutes. Mean (SD): VAS, 4.7 (2.8); LSA,
86.4 (35.1); SF-36 physical component score, 63.00 (19.9); SF-36 component score, 77.4
(19.8). MCID: VAS, 1.4 (95% CI 1.3 to 1.5); LSA, 17.6 (95% CI 14.4 to 21.4); SF-36 physical
component score, 9.9 (95% CI 9.1 to 11.0); SF-36 mental component score, 9.8 (95% CI 8.7 to
11.4).
Conclusion: This study identifies the MCID for VAS, SF-36, and LSA following
first MTP fusion. The MCID of VAS reveals minimal improvements in pain (>1.5) are
clinically significant. Both SF-36 physical and mental component scores reveal narrow 10-
point differences have clinically significant changes. In contrast, LSA appears to have a
relatively wide MCID value for patients undergoing first MTP fusion, highlighting the need
for a large increase in mobility for significant improvement.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00345

## Elective Foot & Ankle Procedures in the Geriatric Populations: Worth the Mobility
Gains

Wesley J. Manz; Ryan Patton; Philip Oladeji; Joel A. Zaldumbide; Michelle M. Coleman,
MD, PhD; Rishin J. Kadakia, MD; Jason T. Bariteau, MD

Category: Ankle; Hindfoot; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Elective Surgery; Outcomes Measures; Functional Rehabilitation
Introduction/Purpose: Chronic, non-traumatic pathologies of the foot and ankle
can be mobility-limiting for patients of all ages. Given increased rates of perioperative
comorbidities and the heightened risks of intraoperative complications, physicians may be
more inclined to manage elderly patients with longer periods of conservative treatment for
similar pathologies. However, previous work has shown that decreased mobility of elderly
patients affects longevity and is linked to increased rates of all-cause and non- cancerous
morbidity and mortality. Currently, little is known about the effect of elective foot and
ankle procedures on mobility in patients of all ages. Therefore, the objective of this study
was to compare posteroperative changes in LifeSpace Mobility Assessment (LSA) scores of
adult and elderly patients following foot and ankle surgery.
Methods: A prospective study of 184 patients undergoing elective ankle,
hindfoot, and midfoot procedures conducted by a single surgeon between September 1, 2015 and
August 31, 2019 was undertaken following IRB approval. Patient-reported LSA scores were
collected at preoperative and routine 6-month and 12-month follow-up clinic appointments.
Patient demographic and surgical data were recorded, and they were divided into groups by
age over and under 65 years. Demographics and surgical characteristics were compared
utilizing an independent sample t-test for continuous, normally distributed data and a
chi-squared or Fischer’s exact test for categorical data. Alpha and beta were assumed to be
0.05 and 0.8, respectively.
Results: The younger (<65) group included 140 patients (mean age 44.1, SD
13.2), while 44 patients were observed in the elderly (>=65) age group (mean age 70.4
years, SD 8.4 (p<0.0001). The elderly group had significantly more patients with
hypertension requiring medical management (p=0.012), but no other differences in
perioperative comorbidities or demographics were observed. A higher proportion of elderly
patients underwent surgery for conditions of osteoarthric origin, while younger patients
underwent surgery more frequently for soft tissue pathology (p=0.033). The average LSA score
of elderly patients at the preoperative visit was 58.3 (SD 38.0) versus 79.3 (SD 38.8) in
the younger cohort (p=0.041). Both the young and elderly patient cohorts regained and
surpassed their preoperative mobility scores by 6 months and 1-year postop. No difference in
average mobility score was observed between young (85.6, SD 36.1) and elderly (90.1, SD
34.3) cohorts at 1-year follow-up.
Conclusion: This study demonstrates that while elderly patients may begin with
lower mobility than younger patients with foot and ankle pathology, operative treatment can
improve their mobility dramatically up to comparable levels of operatively-treated younger
patients. Our results, in tandem with literature showing the drastic deleterious effects of
decreased mobility in the elderly, suggest that the discussion to pursue or hold on surgical
correction of chronic foot and ankle disease in the patients over the age of 65 must take
into account the mobility benefits of surgery.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00346

## Improvement of Depressive Symptoms Following Surgical Correction of Hallux Valgus and
Hallux Rigidus via 1st MTP Fusion

Wesley J. Manz; Rahul K. Goel; Joel A. Zaldumbide; Rishin J. Kadakia, MD; Michelle M.
Coleman, MD, PhD; Jason T. Bariteau, MD

Category: Bunion; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: 1st MTP Joint; Hallux Rigidus; Hallux Valgus
Introduction/Purpose: Psychiatric comorbidity has been shown to significantly
impact postoperative course, leading to increasingly complicated hospitalizations, increased
pain, and worse overall patient outcomes. Achieving adequate pain management is paramount in
restoring mobility and ultimately reaching treatment goals, making an understanding of the
interplay between psychiatric conditions and orthopedics vitally important. Specifically,
deformity of the first MTP joint has been associated with increased psychiatric symptoms
preoperatively. However, despite this particular population’s vulnerability to depressive
symptoms, the effects of surgical correction on mental function outcomes have not been well
observed. The purpose of this study was to assess the association of psychotropic medication
use in patients with diagnoses of hallux rigidus and hallux valgus undergoing first MTP
fusion and differences in patient-reported pain and functionality scores.
Methods: A retrospective analysis of prospectively collected patient outcomes
for those undergoing MTP fusion for hallux valgus and hallux rigidus between August 1, 2015,
and July 1, 2018, was conducted. A total of 95 patients were included in the study.
Demographics and surgical data were collected from a review of the electronic medical
record, and patients were grouped based on chronic use of psychotropic medications at the
time of surgery. Patient-reported VAS, SF-36 Mental Component Scores (MCS), and Physical
Component Scores (PCS) scores were collected at preoperative and routine 6-month and
12-month postoperative follow-up clinic appointments. Categorical variables were compared
using Pearson’s chi-squared test. For normally distributed data outcome scores were compared
using the independent sample t-test while non-normal data comparisons were made with the
Mann-Whitney U test. For all statistical tests, assumptions of α <.05 and β =.8 were
made.
Results: The average age of the patients in our cohort was 63.3 (range, 39 -
83), with 42 patients in the psychotropic medication (MED) and 53 patients non-psychotropic
medication (NO MED) cohorts. Mean time to final follow-up was similar between NO MED and MED
groups (p=.987). No differences in mean VAS scores were detected at preoperative (p=.455),
6-month (p=.505), nor 1-year (p=.269) visits. Similarly, no differences in SF-36 PCS were
detected at preoperative (p=.087), 6-month (p=.314), nor 1- year (p=.103) postoperative
visits. Patients taking psychotropic medications had significantly lower mean SF-36 MCS at
preoperative and 6-month postoperative visits (p=.004, p=.033, respectively). No difference
in mean mental component score was detected at the 1-year postoperative visit (p=.184).
Conclusion: This study is the first to examine the surgical outcomes of
patients undergoing 1st MTP fusion for hallux rigidus and hallux valgus while concurrently
taking psychotropic medications. SF-36 mental component scores were depressed at
preoperative baseline in the psychotropic medication cohort and improved postoperatively to
a level similar to that of their non- psychotropically medicated peers. These findings
suggest that psychiatric diagnoses should be considered in the discussion of conservative
vs. surgical management of hallux valgus and rigidus, as a secondary benefit of surgical
correction may be partial relief of depressive symptoms.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00347

## Marked Mobility Improvement: Men and Women Respond Similarly to Operative Treatment of
Foot & Ankle Pathologies

Wesley J. Manz; Philip Oladeji; Ryan Patton; Joel A. Zaldumbide; Michelle M. Coleman,
MD, PhD; Rishin J. Kadakia, MD; Jason T. Bariteau, MD

Category: Ankle; Hindfoot
Keywords: Elective Surgery; Outcomes Measures; Informed Decision
Introduction/Purpose: Differences between men and women in the perception,
incidence, and outcomes of various orthopaedic injuries are well-documented. Recent studies
have noted that women display increased ankle ligamentous laxity and double the rate of
ankle sprains in relation to their male peers. Current studies indicate that, in general,
women and men respond similarly to surgical correction of such pathologies. However, a
gender difference in mobility has not been investigated. Given the mobility implications
associated with chronic foot and ankle conditions, a need exists to better characterize
baseline and postoperative functionality in men and women. The objective of this study was
to assess changes in LifeSpace Mobility Assessment (LSA) scores of male and female patients
following surgical correction of non-traumatic ankle, hindfoot, and midfoot conditions.
Methods: A prospective study of elective ankle, hindfoot, and midfoot
procedures conducted by a single surgeon between September 1, 2015 and August 31, 2019 was
undertaken following IRB approval. LSA scores on 184 patients - 137 women and 53 men - were
collected at preoperative, 3-month, 6-month, and 12-month clinic visits. The electronic
medical record was queried for patient demographic and surgical data. Demographics, surgical
factors, and patient-reported LSA scores were compared utilizing an independent sample
t-test for continuous, normally distributed data. All categorical data was analyzed with a
chi- squared or Fischer’s exact tests. Alpha and beta were set at 0.05 and 0.8,
respectively.
Results: The average age of female participants was 51.2 (SD 16.4) years and
48.2 (SD 17.1) years for male participants (p=0.273). There were no significant differences
in frequencies of comorbidities (p>0.05). Men and women in this cohort underwent elective
foot and ankle surgery for a similar diseases processes, most commonly soft tissue
pathology, followed by osteoarthritis (p=0.440). Women had significantly lower LSA scores at
preoperative (63.7 [SD 38.1] vs. 84.8 [SD 35.9], p=0.002), 3 month postoperative (52.5 [SD
33.8] vs. 69.9 [SD 34.5], p=0.006), and 1 year postoperative (81.2 [SD 37.2] vs. 105.5 [SD
18.2], p=0.019) timepoints relative to their male peers. No differences in mobility at 6
months postop were observed (p=0.714). Overall, women and men had similar absolute increases
in postoperative mobility at 1-year after surgery (17.5 vs. 20.7, p>0.05) as well as
similar percentage of increased mobility (27% vs. 24%, p>0.05).
Conclusion: The present study provides further evidence of the gender
differences in chronic foot and ankle pathologies. Both sexes improved similarly pre to
postoperatively, however, women did not reach the same level of absolute mobility as their
male counterparts. Prior studies have shown that women characterize a greater degree of
limitation with foot and ankle conditions as 'normal' relative to men, making it plausible
that they delay treatment until they become more severely symptomatic than men. This
persistent deficit highlights the importance of early recognition of mobility impairment in
order to preserve function among the sexes in foot and ankle care.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00348

## Complications Associated with Anesthetic Choice for Elective Foot and Ankle
Surgery

John R. Martin; Haroon Kisana; Clayton Hui; Chad Stecher; Joshua Hustedt, MD

Category: Ankle; Ankle Arthritis; Arthroscopy; Bunion; Diabetes; Hindfoot;
Lesser Toes; Midfoot/Forefoot; Sports; Trauma
Keywords: Complications; Clinical Outcomes; Preoperative risk factors
Introduction/Purpose: Wide-awake anesthesia (local anesthesia without
sedation) is rarely utilized during elective foot and ankle surgery. As such, the rate of
post-operative complications following wide-awake foot and ankle surgery is unknown. The aim
of this study was to compare rates of early post-operative complications for wide-awake
anesthesia to general/local anesthesia with sedation for elective foot and ankle procedures
conditional on a wide range of observable patient characteristics and risk factors.
Methods: Patients that underwent an elective foot or ankle surgery were
identified in the American College of Surgeon’s National Surgical Quality Improvement
Program (NSQIP) dataset. The rate of thirty-day post-operative complications was compared
between patients who received wide-awake anesthesia and those who received general/local
anesthesia with sedation using logistic regressions that controlled for patient risk
factors.
Results: Between 2005 and 2017, 85,363 patients were identified has having any
foot and ankle procedure. After excluding observations with missing anesthesia type data
information and non-elective foot and ankle procedures, the analytic cohort had 16,743
patients. There were 1,401 (8.4%) patients who underwent wide-awake anesthesia and 15,342
(91.6%) patients who underwent general/local anesthesia with sedation over the entire
sample. Starting in 2007, there was an annual increase in the likelihood of using
general/local anesthesia with sedation for foot and ankle procedures of 0.7 percentage
points (p = 0.001). Overall, general/local anesthesia with sedation increased the odds of
experiencing any complication within the first thirty days by 1.523 (95% CI 1.152 -
2.014).
Conclusion: Although wide-awake surgery is rarely performed for elective foot
and ankle procedures, utilization of local anesthesia without sedation may result in fewer
post-operative complications in the first thirty days. Existing trends in the use of
sedation for foot and ankle procedures show that physicians are increasingly favoring
general/local anesthesia with sedation, but our findings caution against this choice and
suggest that post-operative complication rates may correspondingly increase.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00349

## Arthroscopic Reduction and Internal Fixation of Talus Fractures: An All-Inside
Soft-Tissue Preserving Technique

Kevin D. Martin, DO; Adam T. Groth, MD

Category: Ankle; Hindfoot; Trauma
Keywords: Talus; Arthroscopic; Talus Fractures
Introduction/Purpose: Talus fractures, although rare, can lead to devastating
complications of posttraumatic osteoarthritis (PTA), mal-union, non-unions and avascular
necrosis (AVN). The timing and method of fixation has been controversial, especially for
open and extruded fractures. The purpose of this study is to present short term outcomes
using a posterior talus arthroscopic reduction internal fixation (TARIF) technique.
Methods: We performed a retrospective study on 12 consecutive patients
undergoing primary posterior arthroscopic reduction internal fixation for talus fractures
from August 2020 to January 2021. All cases were performed completely arthroscopically,
utilizing a posterior approach and cannulated screws. Patient demographics, fracture
pattern, perioperative complications, and radiographic findings were collected.
Results: The mean age of our cohort was 37.3 years (range, 19-75), including 6
males and 6 females, with 58% utilizing nicotine. Motor vehicle accidents accounted for 58%
of injuries, followed by falls and gunshot wounds. Fracture location included 7 body
fractures, 5 neck fractures Hawkins type 2 (1), 3 (3), and 4 (1). Five fractures were open
injuries, 2 of which had vascular injuries that underwent irrigation and debridement
followed by external fixation. Intraoperatively, all patients had 2-3 anterior to posterior
3.5mm cannulated headless screws placed with a mean tourniquet time of 87 minutes (range, 0
- 88). Postoperatively, all fractures had the articular surface restored to within 2mm on
radiographs. No patients required antibiotics and no debridement’s were performed. No acute
AVN has been recorded.
Conclusion: Our short-term results indicate posterior arthroscopic reduction
internal fixation of talus fractures are safe and able to restore the articular surfaces. It
also suggests that an all-inside soft-tissue preserving technique may reduce short term
complications.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00350

## Austere Lower Extremity Splinting: A Head-To-Head Comparison of A New Novel 1-Step
Spray-On Splint Verse Standard Splinting

Kevin D. Martin, DO; Tyler Webb; Thuan Ly; Adam T. Groth, MD

Category: Trauma
Keywords: Distal Tibia; Trauma; Tibial Plafond Fractures
Introduction/Purpose: Fracture immobilization in low resource environments is
a critical and common aspect of austere medical care. However, there are few studies that
critically investigate the efficacy and consistency of current practices. The purpose of
this study was to compare austere immobilization techniques for lower extremity fractures
while validating a splint application evlauation score sheet.
Methods: Six orthopaedic surgical residents and 2 medical students
participated in a prospective analysis of austere splinting techniques that utilized a
cadaveric model with a distal third tibia-fibula fracture. Each participant was observed and
scored by 3 Orthopaedic surgeons. All scoring was independent using a Likert scale based on
10 splinting criteria, including quality of radiographic reduction and time to completion.
The participants utilized standard equipment that included structural aluminum malleable
(SAM) splints and 6-inch ACE wraps in their first attempt. A second immobilization attempt
was done with a 1-step spray-on foam splint. After each splinting attempt the reduction was
verified with radiographic imaging.
Results: The 1-step spray-on foam splinting technique was significantly
superior (P <.05) in all parameters. Respectively yielding a mean score of 42.3 (range:
38-50), safety 4.7 (range: 3-5), longitudinal traction 4.5 (range: 3-5), time 136 seconds
(range: 99-162). The standard splinting resulted in a mean score of 34.2 (22 - 46), safety
2.8 (range: 1- 5), longitudinal traction 4.1 (range: 3-5), time 169.5 seconds (range:
94-254). No catastrophic failures were noted in either group. A strong interobserver
reliability was established.
Conclusion: A 1-step spray-on foam splinting technique demonstrated consistent
superiority in reducing fracture motion, potential soft-tissue damage, and sustained
longitudinal traction as compared to the standard technique. Secondly, our results validate
our splinting evaluation criteria allowing for further utilization in training austere
splinting.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00351

## Rates of Complications Following Lower Extremity Amputations: A Retrospective Chart
Review

Brandon Martinazzi, BS; Zachary Koroneos; Chris M. Stauch, BS; Kristen M. Manto, BS;
Anna Ptasinski; Michael C. Aynardi, MD

Category: Ankle; Diabetes; Hindfoot; Lesser Toes; Midfoot/Forefoot; Trauma;
Other
Keywords: Outcomes Measures; Wound Complications; Pain
Introduction/Purpose: Lower extremity amputations are commonly used in the
field of orthopaedics to treat infections, trauma, and severe complications associated with
diabetic foot ulcers. These procedures are often associated with high rates of unplanned
reoperations, hospitalizations, and numerous postoperative complications. As a result, lower
extremity amputations place added physical, emotional and financial stress on patients which
can negatively impact outcomes. The aim of this study was to evaluate types of postoperative
complications and the rate at which they occurred in an effort to improve future patient
outcomes.
Methods: Following institutional board approval, all patients at a single
academic institution that underwent lower extremity amputation, by a single surgeon, from
January 2017 to December 2020 were queried using hospital electronic medical records.
Patient charts were followed from the date of surgery until their last follow up appointment
in order to identify potential complications.
Results: 135 patients underwent lower extremity amputation from 2017-2020. 102
were male (75.5%) and 33 were female (24.4%). The average age of the patients identified was
61.1. The oldest patient was 95 and the youngest patient was 13. The average number of days
to a noted complication following amputation was 93.3. The earliest complication occurred 11
days after surgery, while the longest occurred 396 days. Of the 135 patients, 7 patients had
revision of their amputation (5.2%), 4 had significant wound dehiscence (3%), 7 had delayed
wound healing and excess fluid drainage (5.2%), 4 had postoperative infection (3%), and 4
were noted to have developed phantom limb (3%).
Conclusion: Lower extremity amputations continue to be associated with high
rates of postoperative complications. This data demonstrates that additional surgical
revisions and delayed wound healing were the most common postoperative complications in our
cohort.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00352

## Mini-Invasive Approach and Minor Amputation in the Management of Diabetic Foot Ulcer: A
Retrospective Study of 110 Cases

Fabrizio Marzano; Paolo Ceccarini, MD; Rosario Petruccelli; Lorenzo di Giacomo;
Giuseppe Rinonapoli, MD; Auro Caraffa

Category: Diabetes; Other
Keywords: Diabetic Foot; Minimally Invasive; Diabetic Foot Ulcer
Introduction/Purpose: The diabetic foot is an increasing issue over the last
years. The 25% of diabetic patients have a risk to develop a diabetic foot ulcer (DFU) in
their lifetime, among these, the 28% of patients will result in an amputation. The
amputation is associated with a high rate of complications. Therefore, percutaneous
mini-invasive (PMI) approaches and minor amputations (MA) have a widespread use in the last
years. The aim of our work is to evaluate the clinical and functional outcomes of PMI and MA
in the treatment of recurrences and unhealed DFU after conservative treatment.
Methods: We retrospectively enrolled 110 patients treated in our orthopedic
department in Perugia between January 2012 and October 2019. Included were the patients
underwent to a PMI or MA treatment after failed conservative treatment for 12 weeks. The PMI
technique consist of flexor tenotomy, metatarsal osteotomy and resection arthroplasty sec.
Kessler. DFU were classified according to the Texas Foot Ulcer Classification. Exclusion
criteria were: patient affected by peripheral vasculopathy disease, previous major
amputation, psychiatric disease. The patients were divided in 2 groups. The group A included
57 patients treated with PMI, mean age 62.8 y.o. (range 50-80). The group B included 53
patients treated with MI, mean age 66.2 y.o. (range 53-85). The mean follow up was 18 months
(range 4-40 months). Clinical outcomes, complication’s rate, functional scores (FFI and VAS-
FA) were assessed. The statistical analysis was performed with the t-student test, the
significativity value was set p<0.05.
Results: In the group A, the patients had a healing’s rate in 90,7 % of cases,
the ulcer was healed in average in 5.77 weeks ( range 4-8.1). The postoperative
complications accounts 35% of cases, including 2 cases of osteomyelitis, 1 acute Charcot
foot, 1 case of acute renal insufficiency and pneumonia. Transfer ulcer occurred in 12.96%.
Overall a reintervention with a mini-invasive approach was performed in 2 cases. Group B
healed in 77% of cases, in a mean time of 9.11 weeks (range 8-13.3), no postoperative
complication occurred. In 23% of patients occurred a transfer ulcer after an average time of
30 months, in 1 case a major amputation was mandatory. The mean value at postoperative
follow-up was 78 for VAS-FA for group A and 72.2 for group B, the FFIindex was 70% for group
A and 68% for group B.
Conclusion: The PMI and AM are effective procedures for the treatment of DFU,
associated with low complications rate, fast recovery and ulcer’s healing process, low rate
of recurrences and ulcer transfer. Overall the percutaneous technique show encouraging
results, however, these procedures must be addressed to the patient’s feature. As
prospective, in the future percutaneous treatments might play a role in prevention’s
strategy.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00353

## The UK Foot and Ankle COVID-19 National (FAlCoN) Audit – Regional Variations in
COVID-19 Infection and National Foot and Ankle Surgical Activity

Lyndon W. Mason; Karan Malhotra, MRCS; Jitendra Mangwani,
MBBS,MS(Orth),FRCS(Tr&Orth)

Category: Other; Ankle; Ankle Arthritis; Arthroscopy; Basic
Sciences/Biologics; Bunion; Diabetes; Hindfoot; Lesser Toes; Midfoot/Forefoot; Trauma
Keywords: Trauma; Diabetes; Ankle
Introduction/Purpose: Aims: This paper details the impact of COVID-19 on foot
and ankle activity in the UK. It describes regional variations and COVID-19 infection rate
in patients undergoing foot and ankle surgery before, during and after the first national
lock-down.
Methods: Patients & Methods: This was a multicentre, retrospective,
UK-based, national audit on foot and ankle patients who underwent surgery between 13th
January and 31st July 2020. Data was examined pre- UK national lockdown, during lockdown
(23rd March to 11th May 2020) and post-lockdown. All adult patients undergoing foot and
ankle surgery in an operating theatre during the study period included from 43 participating
centres in England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. Regional, demographic and COVID-19
related data were captured.
Results: 6644 patients were included. In total 0.53% of operated patients
contracted COVID-19 (n=35). The rate of COVID-19 infection was highest during lockdown
(2.11%, n=16) and lowest after lockdown (0.16%, n=3). Overall mean activity during lockdown
was 24.44% of pre-lockdown activity with decreases in trauma, diabetic and elective foot and
ankle surgery; the change in elective surgery was most marked with only 1.73% activity
during lock down and 10.72% activity post lockdown as compared to pre-lockdown. There was
marked regional variation in numbers of cases performed, but the proportion of decrease in
cases during and after lockdown was comparable between all regions. There was also a
significant difference between rates of COVID- 19 and timing of peak, cumulative COVID-19
infections between regions with the highest rate noted in South East England (3.21%). The
overall national peak infection rate was 1.37%, occurring during the final week of
lockdown
Conclusion: National surgical activity reduced significantly for all cases
across the country during lockdown with only a slow subsequent increase in elective
activity. The COVID-19 infection rate and peaks differed significantly across the
country.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00354

## The UK Foot and Ankle COVID-19 National Audit – Rate of COVID-19 Infection and 30 Day
Mortality in Foot and Ankle Surgery in the UK

Lyndon W. Mason; Jitendra Mangwani, MBBS,MS(Orth),FRCS(Tr&Orth); Karan Malhotra,
MRCS

Category: Diabetes; Other
Keywords: Trauma; Diabetes; Postoperative Infection
Introduction/Purpose: The primary objective was to determine the incidence of
COVID-19 infection and 30-day mortality in patients undergoing foot and ankle surgery during
the global pandemic. Secondary objectives were to determine if there was a change in
infection and complication profile with changes introduced in practice.
Methods: Design: Multicentre retrospective national audit. Setting: UK-based
study on foot and ankle patients who underwent surgery between the 13th January to 31st July
2020 - examining time periods pre- UK national lockdown, during lockdown (23rd March to 11th
May 2020) and post-lockdown. Participants: All adult patients undergoing foot and ankle
surgery in an operating theatre during the study period included from 43 participating
centres in England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. Main Outcome Measures: Variables
recorded included demographics, surgical data, comorbidity data, COVID-19 and mortality
rates, complications, and infection rates.
Results: 6644 patients were included. In total 0.52% of operated patients
contracted COVID-19 (n=35). The overall all cause 30- day mortality rate was 0.41%, however
in patients who contracted COVID-19, the mortality rate was 25.71% (n=9); this was
significantly higher for patients undergoing diabetic foot surgery (75%, n=3 deaths).
Matching for age, ASA and comorbidities, the OR of mortality with COVID-19 infection was
11.71 (95% CI 1.55 to 88.74, p=0.017). There were no differences in surgical complications
or infection rates prior to or after lockdown, and amongst patients with and without
COVID-19 infection. After lockdown COVID-19 infection rate was 0.15% and no patient died of
COVID-19 infection.
Conclusion: COVID-19 infection was rare in foot and ankle patients even at the
peak of lockdown. However, there was a significant mortality rate in those who contracted
COVID-19. Overall surgical complications and post-operative infection rates remained
unchanged during the period of this audit. Patients and treating medical personnel should be
aware of the risks to enable informed decisions.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00355

## Does Industry Sponsorship Influence Research Productivity Among Foot and Ankle
Surgeons?

Prashant Matai ; Nicholas Frane; Nick Piniella; Michael Katsigiorgis; Nick Scelzi; Gus
Katsigiorgis; Adam D. Bitterman, DO

Category: Ankle; Basic Sciences/Biologics; Other
Keywords: Research Grant Funding; Ankle; Foot and Ankle Literacy Survey
Introduction/Purpose: Research productivity and success drive academic
promotions in surgeons' careers. While previous studies have shown a strong relationship
between research funding and academic productivity, few have analyzed that relationship in
Foot and Ankle surgery. Furthermore, they have primarily used bibliometric data, such as the
Hirsch index (h-index), which although is representative of an author’s impact, heavily
favors physicians who have been in practice longer. There is a need for more pragmatic
variables that take into account career longevity. Because there is deficient literature in
the analysis of the association between industry sponsorship and research productivity among
foot and ankle surgeons, we sought to narrow the gap.
Methods: A retrospective review of all articles from the 2018 issues of Foot
and Ankle International Journal, Journal of Foot and Ankle Surgery and Clinical Research on
Foot and Ankle Journal were queried for authors. 303 unique United States-based non trainee
Foot and Ankle authors were identified, and ultimately included in the study. They were
analyzed for demographic data including sex, academic title, years in practice, and
specialty. We also collected bibliometric data from Scopus, including total publications,
Hirsch index (h-index), m-index, and publications-to-years in practice ratio. The Center for
Medicare & Medicaid Services Open Payments Database was reviewed, and total payments
were collected for each author. Authors were divided into quartiles based on payment data
(i.e., Quartile 1: 0-25%, etc.) for analysis. Kruskal Wallis and Mann-Whitney U tests were
performed to identify significant differences between groups. A Multivariate logistic
regression was performed to identify independent predictors of high research
productivity.
Results: A total of 253 (83.5%) of authors had received at least one payment.
The payments received by the authors were broken down in the following quartiles.: Quartile
1, (n=77) who had payments of 0 to $171.41; Quartile 2: (n=76) $171.42 to $2515.15; Quartile
3: (n=76): $2515.16 to $34,577.36; and Quartile 4: (n=74) $34,577.37 to $8,530,326.50. Total
Publication Count, H- index, M-index and publications to years in practice ratio all were
significantly different and increasing between quartiles (p<0.001 for all). Multivariate
logistic regressions identified both Academic status (p<0.001) and Total payments
(p<0.05) as contributing factors to total number of publications, publications per year
ratio, h-index and m-index, while Author order also contributed to higher h-index. Physician
Sex or Level of Evidence were not significant independent contributors to the total number
of publications, H-Index, M-Index or publications per year ratio in our study.
Conclusion: We identified that both industry payments and academic status are
significantly correlated with higher research productivity among Foot and Ankle authors.
Being the last author on a research also correlated with increased productivity. While
h-index and total publications measure the research output, they fail to account for time as
a confounding variable, where an individual who has been active longer in research can
potentially have a higher research output. The m-index, (which is H-index divided by number
of years that an author has been active) and publications-per-year ratio takes that into
account, and yet our findings remained significant.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00356

## Hammertoe Correction with Wire Fixation of Varying Length

Patrick Mayolo; Kristin L. Kress; Paul Kang; David E. Jaffe, MD

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot; Lesser Toes
Keywords: Hammertoe Correction; Hammertoe Deformity; Fusion
Introduction/Purpose: Hammertoe deformities are commonly encountered and
frequently require surgical intervention for pain relief and shoewear accommodation. Various
techniques exist for surgical management, but proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joint fusion
with Kirschner (K) -wire fixation remains an inexpensive, popular treatment. The decision to
place a K wire that spans the metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joint versus only fixating the digit
through the proximal phalanx is entirely dependent on provider preference and situational
context. This study was performed to evaluate the effect of length of wire fixation on
clinical outcomes after hammertoe reconstruction.
Methods: A retrospective review of all hammertoe reconstructions by a single
fellowship trained foot and ankle surgeon from 2017-2021 was performed. Hammertoe
reconstructions involved PIP arthrodesis with double wire fixation and other supplemental
balancing procedures as indicated. Pins were routinely removed at between 5-6 weeks and
protected heel weightbearing was generally advised. Wire length was chosen at the discretion
of the surgeon intraoperatively. Patients were excluded if no radiographic follow-up was
available after pin removal. Patient outcomes were evaluated with radiographs and clinic
notes to assess pin length, pin complications/breakage, return to the OR, MTP congruency,
and PIP union rate. A logistic regression was performed to determine the odds ratio for
digit congruency and non-union status.
Results: 88 toes (45 patients) underwent hammertoe reconstruction with K wire
fixation. Of these toes, 47 had wires that spanned the MTP and 41 that did not. There were
65 congruent MTP joints and 23 incongruent joints. 16 of the incongruent joints were pinned
across the MTP while 31 in the congruent group were pinned. One toe in the MTP group
required return to the OR for removal of a broken wire, compared to zero in the phalanx
group (p=1.0). No pins broke in the phalanx group, compared to 3 in the MTP group (p=0.25).
One toe in the proximal phalanx group had their pins pull out early but no return to the OR
was needed. There were 26 (63.4%) PIP radiographic nonunions, compared to 21 (44.7%) in the
MTP group (p=0.12).
Conclusion: Wire failure was a rare occurrence in either group. Breakage only
occurred in the MTP group, but only required one surgical intervention for removal. Pinning
the MTP may allow for improved deformity correction and increased stability of the hammertoe
reconstruction. Pin breakage can occur, but it may be of little clinical significance. The
increased stability and control of MTP correction may be worth the potential risk of pin
breakage. Pin breakage may be avoided potentially by using thicker wires, earlier removal,
and protected weightbearing.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00357

## Quality of Life Improvement Following Reconstruction of Midtarsal Charcot Foot
Deformity: A Five Year Follow-Up

Patrick C. McGregor, MD; Madeline M. Lyons, MD; Michael S. Pinzur, MD

Category: Diabetes
Keywords: Charcot Arthropathy; Charcot Foot; Diabetic Foot
Introduction/Purpose: Previous data has suggested that patients have
significant clinical improvement after reconstruction of diabetes-associated Charcot foot
arthropathy at one year postoperatively. The purpose of this study is to re-evaluate a
cohort of patients who were previously surveyed pre-operatively and 1 year post-operatively
following Charcot foot reconstruction to determine if improvements in quality of life
measures were sustained at a 5-year interval post-operatively.
Methods: Twenty-four patients were contacted to repeat the Short
Musculoskeletal Function Assessment (SMFA) 5 years after their index Charcot foot
reconstruction. The same cohort of patients had completed the SMFA pre-operatively and at 1
year post-operatively. The response to items were summated to establish scores on the
dysfunction and bother indices. The scores were then standardized to range from 0 to 100
with use of the published scoring formula. Poorer function is indicated by higher scores.
Descriptive statistics were utilized to analyze the differences between the preoperative and
five year data for the group. Sixteen of the initial 24 study patients (66.6%) were
successfully contacted and completed the SMFA survey at five years postoperatively; 2 of the
16 had subsequently undergone amputation.
Results: Fourteen patients who had previously completed the SMFA
preoperatively and 1 year postoperatively after Charcot foot reconstruction in a circular
frame were contacted and again completed the SMFA instrument. Improvement was noted in all
domains measured by the SMFA between preoperative scores and five years postoperative
scores; there was a 17-point decrease in the SMFA standardized functional index and a
3.6-point decrease in bother index. Similarly, when looking at individual domains, there was
a 8.7-point decrease in difficulty with daily activities, 4-point improvement in emotion,
and 5.7-point improvement in mobility. There was a statistically significant improvement in
difficulty with daily activities at five years (p = 0.037), All other domains assessed by
the SMFA demonstrated improvement between the two time periods, but did not reach
significance due to the limited sample size.
Conclusion: Successful correction of non-plantigrade midtarsal Charcot foot
arthropathy is associated with a clinically meaningful improvement in health-related quality
of life at both one and five years postoperatively, including independence with daily
activities. This further supports the modern paradigm shift towards operative correction of
this deformity.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00358

## The Influence of Sex on Outcomes at Various Time Points after Total Ankle
Arthroplasty

Katherine M. McGurk; Daniel J. Scott, MD, MBA; Caroline P. Hoch; Luigi Manzi, MD;
Federico Giuseppe Usuelli, MD; Christopher E. Gross, MD

Category: Ankle Arthritis; Ankle
Keywords: Ankle Arthroplasty; Ankle Arthritis; Patient Reported Outcome
Measures (PROMS)
Introduction/Purpose: Total ankle arthroplasty (TAA) is regarded as an
increasingly accepted alternative to ankle arthrodesis in patients with ankle arthritis that
have failed conservative management. While significant focus within orthopedic literature
has been placed on determining various risk factors for particular outcomes, the
stratification of outcomes based on sex has been insufficiently investigated. Moreover, as
the number of TAAs performed continues to increase, there is a growing need to examine the
effects of sex on outcomes after TAA. We sought to compare patient reported outcome measures
(PROMs), ankle range of motion (ROM), and complications at multiple time points in the
post-operative period after TAA as stratified by sex.
Methods: undergoing TAA during the years 2013 to 2018 at a single academic
institution who had minimum follow-up of two years. A total of 133 patients met inclusion
criteria, comprising 55.6% males and 44.4% females. Patients were evaluated pre- operatively
and at 6 months, 1-year, and 2-years post-operatively. PROMs, including the American
Orthopaedic Foot & Ankle Society (AOFAS) Ankle-Hindfoot Score, Visual Analog Scale (VAS)
score, and the Short Form - 12 (SF-12) were administered, and ROM was assessed at all time
points. Post-operative complications were also recorded. Student t-test were used to
determine differences between the outcome measures. Eighty-nine patients received the Zimmer
total ankle (39 females), whereas 44 patients (20 females) received the mobile bearing
Hintegra.
Results: The average age was 53.6 in the male cohort as compared to 53.8 in
the female cohort (p=0.93). Both pre-operatively and at 6-months post-operative, the cohorts
did not differ statistically in any of the measured outcomes. At 1-year post-operative,
females had a lower SF-12 PCS score (44.1 versus 47.1, p=0.019) and less plantarflexion
(20.5 versus 23.5, p=0.029) as compared to males. While both cohorts saw a significant
step-wise increase in AOFAS scores between pre-operative, 6-months, and 1-year
post-operative (p<0.001), the AOFAS score of the female cohort plateaued at 1-year while
the male cohort continued to improve significantly (<0.015). Ultimately by 2-years
post-operative, females had a statistically significant lower AOFAS score as compared to
males (80.3 versus 85.4, p=0.04).
Conclusion: Our results show that while both cohorts experienced significant
improvement in all measured outcomes, women have lower SF-12 PCS scores and AOFAS score at
1- and 2-years post-operative, respectively, as well as less plantarflexion at 1- year
post-operative with a trend towards increased complication rate after TAA. While our results
add to the growing body of literature supporting TAA as a reliable means of treating ankle
arthritis, our results are novel in that they were stratified and analyzed based on sex.
Understanding these differences in outcomes is critically important for effectively managing
expectations and treating both male and female populations.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00359

## The Anatomic Reconstruction for Chronic Lateral Ankle Instability Utilizing Absorbable
Synthetic Graft (ATLAS Procedure): Description and Short Term Follow Up

Bryon J. McKenna, DPM; Antonio M. Malloy McCoy; Bryon J. McKenna, DPM; Calvin J.
Rushing, DPM; Christopher F. Hyer, DPM; Gregory C. Berlet, MD; Tyler Tewilliager

Category: Ankle
Keywords: Ankle Instability; Ankle; Ligament
Introduction/Purpose: The traditional modified Brostrom-Gould has long been
the procedure of choice for addressing chronic lateral ankle instability. However, more
robust techniques including anatomic reconstruction are favored for larger deformity, poor
tissue quality and revision surgery. Given the inherent disadvantages of allograft and
non-elastic synthetic materials, material science has sought to impact the graft choice
providing alternative load sharing, permeable materials with high strength. Our institution
has performed anatomic lateral ligament stabilization, termed the 'ATLAS' procedure, using a
novel synthetic graft (Artelon, Marietta, GA) with anecdotal success in recent years. In
this study, we present our surgical technique and early experience.
Methods: A retrospective cohort review was performed, evaluating the failure
rate, complications and radiographic changes in anatomic alignment. A review of all patients
undergoing the ATLAS procedure was performed, a total of 27 patients were included. The
study included only those patients with at least 1 year follow up from the procedure.
Results: Only one patient had symptoms of early failure of the procedure,
while none of the patients required a revision procedure. The most common complication was
minor wound dehiscence (11.1%). Overall, our short-term results with this procedure were
excellent.
Conclusion: We conclude that the ATLAS procedure is a predictable and
effective lateral ligament reconstruction technique with no donor site morbidity, no donor
tissue transmission risk, low risk of over-constraint and accomplished with a predictable
technique.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00360

## Changes in Plantar Forces and Pressures During Functional Movement with an Intrepid
Dynamic Exoskeletal Orthosis Brace

James E. Meeker, MD; Jason Weiss; Austin R. Thompson, BS; Jing Feng

Category: Ankle; Ankle Arthritis; Midfoot/Forefoot; Trauma
Keywords: Biomechanics; Ankle; Ankle Arthritis
Introduction/Purpose: Non-surgical interventions such as bracing using ankle
foot orthoses (AFO) aim to assist, restore and redirect weightbearing forces with immobility
in mind. We identified a custom carbon fiber specific energy storing AFO that was created to
improve functional performance in veterans after limb salvage procedures. While being
evaluated exclusively in a veteran population, the Intrepid Dynamic Exoskeletal Orthosis
(IDEO) has also been indicated to be a conservative treatment option for veterans with
posttraumatic osteoarthritis of the tibiotalar and subtalar joints. To evaluate the
off-loading properties of the IDEO brace in a civilian population with osteoarthritis of the
ankle.
Methods: Eight civilian patients 18-years or older who were prescribed an IDEO
brace by a single surgeon participated in the study. Foot pressure data were recorded using
Tekscan F-Scan system, an ultra-thin, in-shoe sensor that provides force and pressure
information. Participants were instructed to walk at a self-selected pace along a 20 meter
walkway under three conditions. Using F-Scan Research software, the stances were identified
and averaged. Then, the forefoot and heel areas were identified. Next, the maximal force,
force*time integral (FTI), maximal contact area, maximal contact pressure, pressure*time
integral (PTI), and center of force (COF) excursion were calculated. One-way ANOVA with
repeated measures was performed to detect effects of the condition (three levels: Without,
Under and Over). Pairwise comparison with least significant difference (equivalent to no
adjustments) was performed to detect difference among the conditions.
Results: Compared to the Without condition, the Under condition showed higher
pressure in both the heel and the forefoot areas (especially in the forefoot) in most
subjects; COF excursion was increased in some subjects. Compare to the Without condition,
the Over condition showed reduced pressure in both the heel and the forefoot areas
(especially in the forefoot) in most subjects. The statistical results below only included
the involved side of the six subjects who were tested in all three conditions. Table 1
showed the results of one-way ANOVA with repeated measures of the six subjects.
Conclusion: The results of this study showed that the IDEO is effective in
improving gait function and relieving forefoot pressure in the civilian population. IDEO
generated force (and thus power), especially in the forefoot area in late stance, to provide
more push-off power and propel the body moving forward. While acting as a functional foot,
the IDEO reduced force by 66% and reduced pressure by 49% in the forefoot area, which helped
to relieve pain. IDEO creates functional foot by storing power in the early stance and
release power in late stance.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00361

## Clinical and Radiological Outcomes of Autologous Osteochondral Transplantation with and
without Micronized Allograft Cartilage Matrix Augmentation for Osteochondral Lesions of the
Talus

Nathaniel P. Mercer; Alan Samsonov; John Dankert, MD, PhD; John G. Kennedy, MD,
FRCS(Orth)

Category: Ankle; Basic Sciences/Biologics; Trauma
Keywords: Osteochondral Lesions of the Talus; Clinical Outcomes; Biologics
Introduction/Purpose: Autologous osteochondral transplantation (AOT) using a
cylindrical graft, in the treatment of osteochondral lesions of the talus (OLT) is typically
indicated for patients with larger lesions. However, with lesions that are irregular in
shape, the AOT graft may not completely replace the lesion. For these lesions, we utilize
Extracellular Matrix Cartilage Allograft (EMCA) augmentation in AOT to act as a physiologic
grout between the host and graft interface. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the
clinical and radiological outcomes of AOT with concentrated bone marrow aspirate (CBMA) and
EMCA augmentation in the treatment of OLT.
Methods: A retrospective analysis comparing patients treated with AOT/CBMA
alone and AOT with CBMA/EMCA was performed. Clinical outcomes were evaluated with the use of
the Foot and Ankle Outcome Score (FAOS). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was evaluated with
the use of the Magnetic Resonance Observation of Cartilage Repair Tissue (MOCART) score.
Cyst formation was also evaluated on postoperative MRI.
Results: Twenty-six patients were included in the AOT + CBMA/EMCA group, with
10 males and 16 females. Thirty-four patients were included in the AOT/CBMA group, with 17
males and 17 females. The mean symptoms, pain, ADL, sports activities, and QOL scores in
FAOS significantly improved in both groups (p<0.001), but there was no significant
difference between groups at final follow-up. There was no significant difference between
the mean MOCART scores between groups (p=0.118). In the AOT/CBMA group, 2 patients (7.7%)
complained of knee pain and 5 patients (19.2%) required additional surgery (2 hardware
removals and 3 arthroscopic debridements of scar tissue in the ankle). In the AOT +
CBMA/EMCA group, 3 patients (8.8%) complained of knee pain, and one patient (2.9%) required
hardware removal.
Conclusion: The current study demonstrated that AOT combined with CBMA and
EMCA was an effective surgical treatment for OLT, providing good clinical and radiological
outcomes. However, the benefit of combining ECMA with CBMA in small chondral defects at the
host graft interface may be marginal as the biologic effect is induced by the CBMA and the
mechanical scaffold effect of ECMA may not be required in such small defects.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00362

## Clinical Outcomes of Nano Arthroscopy in the Office Setting for the Treatment of
Posterior Ankle Impingement

Nathaniel P. Mercer; Alan Samsonov; John Dankert, MD, PhD;; Rick J. Delmonte; Tobias
Stornebrink, MD; Arianna L. Gianakos; Gino Kerkhoffs, MD; John G. Kennedy, MD, FRCS(Orth);
Jari Dahmen, BSc, BSc(Med)

Category: Ankle; Arthroscopy
Keywords: Ankle Arthroscopy; Posterior Ankle Impingement; Sports
Introduction/Purpose: The hypothesis of the current study was that IONA in the
treatment of posterior ankle impingement would provide the patient with a unique experience
of their pathology and facilitate their rapid recovery through an awareness of their own
condition and that using IONA would accelerate recovery to sports-specific activities
compared to standard arthroscopic procedures.
Methods: This was a retrospective cohort study investigating patients who
underwent IONA for posterior ankle impingement between 2019 and 2020. Clinical outcomes were
evaluated using the following methods preoperatively and at final follow-up: The Foot and
Ankle Outcome Scores (FAOS) and Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System
(PROMIS) Pain Interference and Pain Intensity domains. A five-point Likert scale regarding
patient satisfaction was evaluated at final follow-up. Wilcoxon signed-rank test was
performed to compare preoperative and postoperative outcome scores.
Results: Ten patients were included in this study, which included 4 males and
6 females with a mean age of 41.9 +- 15.5 years (range, 24-66 years) and a mean body mass
index (BMI) of 28.3 +- 6.3 kg/m2 (range, 17.1 - 39.9). The mean follow-up time
was 13.3 +- 2.9 months (range, 11-17 months). The mean PROMIS Pain Intensity T-score
significantly decreased from 57.5 +- 8.4 preoperatively to 49.5 +- 5.5 at final follow-up
(p<0.001). The mean PROMIS Pain Interference T-score decreased from 69.0 +- 5.8
preoperatively to 63.1 +- 5.8 at final follow-up (p<0.001). There were 7 patients who
participated in sports activity prior to the IONA-arthroscopy procedure. Of those, 7
patients (100%) returned to their sports activities. The median time to return to sports was
4.1 weeks (range, 1 to 14 weeks). Lastly, 10 patients (100%) expressed willingness to
undergo the same procedure again.
Conclusion: The current study demonstrates that IONA treatment of posterior
ankle impingement results in significant pain reduction, a low complication rate and
excellent patient-reported outcomes with high rates of return to work/sport. Additionally,
IONA for posterior ankle impingement leads to high patient satisfaction with a significant
willingness to undergo the same procedure again.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00363

## Clinical Outcomes of Peroneal Tendon Tears: A Systematic Review

Nathaniel P. Mercer; Arianna L. Gianakos, DO; Angela M. Mercurio; John G. Kennedy, MD,
FRCS(Orth)

Category: Ankle; Sports
Keywords: Peroneal Tendon Tears; Peroneal Tendon; Peroneus Longus Tendon
Introduction/Purpose: The purpose of this study was to provide an overview of
the available evidence on peroneal tendon tears and the outcomes after surgical
intervention.
Methods: A systematic review of the literature was performed using MEDLINE,
Embase, and Cochrane. Criteria for inclusion were clinical studies reporting outcomes after
treatment for peroneal tendon tear from August 2010 to August 2020.
Results: Nine studies evaluating 336 patients (146 males/190 females) and 336
ankles were included in this review. The mean age of included patients was 46.3 years
(range, 46.0 - 56.9 years). The weighted mean follow-up was 23.8 months (range 9.2 - 78.0
months. Five surgical interventions were reported: primary repair with tenodesis, primary
repair without tenodesis, FDL tendon transfer, FHL tendon transfer, and allograft
reconstruction. Four studies recorded the AOFAS score, with a weighted mean preoperative
score of 69.6 and a weighted mean postoperative score of 88.8. FAAM score was measured in 3
studies, which showed an improvement from 41.1 preoperatively to 84.4 postoperatively. The
average overall complication rate was 38.7% (130/336) with the most commonly reported minor
complication being ankle pain, which made up 46.2% of all minor complications (56/121).
Primary repair without tenodesis was associated with a higher complication rate compared to
any other surgical intervention (p=.001176).
Conclusion: The current systematic review showed that overall clinical
outcomes were positive in lieu of the different modalities of surgical intervention for
peroneal tendon tears.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00364

## Outcomes of Endoscopic Treatment for Plantar Fasciitis: A Systematic Review

Nathaniel P. Mercer; Leona Ward; Alexander Hoberman; Joseph J. Cronin; Eoghan T.
Hurley, MB BCh BAO; John G. Kennedy, MD, FRCS(Orth)

Category: Other
Keywords: Plantar Fasciitis; Pain; Clinical Outcomes
Introduction/Purpose: Endoscopic plantar fascia release (EPFR) is an
established operative treatment for recalcitrant plantar fasciitis. The purpose of this
systematic review is to provide a comprehensive review on the outcomes of endoscopic plantar
fascia release in the treatment of plantar fasciitis at mid- and long-term follow-up.
Methods: A systematic review was performed using, MEDLINE, EMBASE, and
Cochrane library databases in May 2020 based on the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic
Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines. Studies included were evaluated with regards
to the level of evidence (LOE) and quality of evidence (QoE) using the Coleman
methodological score. Clinical outcomes and complications were also evaluated.
Results: Twenty-five studies including 729 feet were included in this
systematic review with a mean follow-up of 25.1 months. 18 papers used the American
Orthopaedic Foot & Ankle Society (AOFAS) score. The weighted mean preoperative AOFAS
score was 55.6 and the postoperative score was 89.6 out of 100. The total number of patients
who had complications was 117 of 729 (16.1%). The most common complication was a recurrence
of pain experienced by 6.5% of patients (47 of 117).
Conclusion: Endoscopic plantar fascia release provides good clinical and
functional outcomes in patients with refractory plantar fasciitis. However, this procedure
is associated with a moderately high complication rate.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00365

## Return to Play and Clinical Outcomes in the Surgical Treatment of Peroneal Tendon
Dislocation and Subluxation

Nathaniel P. Mercer; Arianna L. Gianakos, DO; Pim van Dijk, BSc(Med); Angela Mercurio;
Gino Kerkhoffs; John G. Kennedy, MD, FRCS(Orth)

Category: Ankle; Sports
Keywords: Peroneal Tendon; Peroneus Longus Tendon; Peronus Longus
Introduction/Purpose: To provide an overview of the available evidence on
peroneal tendon dislocation and subluxation as well as the outcomes after surgical
intervention.
Methods: A systematic review of the literature was performed using MEDLINE,
Embase, and Cochrane. Criteria for inclusion were clinical studies reporting outcomes after
surgical treatment for peroneal tendon dislocation and subluxation within the last 10
years
Results: Fourteen articles evaluating a total of 321 patients were included in
this review consisting of 240 males and 81 females. The weighted mean age of patients was
28.7 years (range 18-47). The weighted mean follow-up was 38.1 months (range 18 - 58). The
weighted mean time to surgery was 5.32 months (range 3 - 9.5). Surgical treatments were
categorized into 4 groups which comprised 13 of the 14 studies. Eleven studies recorded the
AOFAS score with a weighted mean preoperative score of 65.97 and a weighted mean
postoperative score of 92.9. Overall, 90% (145/162) of patients reported their satisfaction
as either 'excellent' or 'good'. Time to return to play (RTP) was faster for patients who
underwent SPR repair alone compared to SPR repair with groove deepening (p=0.001)
Conclusion: The current systematic review showed that overall clinical
outcomes were positive in lieu of the different modalities of surgical intervention for
peroneal tendon dislocation and subluxation. However, patients who received SPR repair with
groove- deepening returned to sport faster than patients who received SPR repair alone.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00366

## The Plantar Fascia Talar Head Correlation: A Radiographic Parameter with a Distinct
Threshold to Validate Flatfoot Deformity and Its Corrective Surgery on Conventional
Weightbearing Radiographs

Marc Merian; Achim H. Kaim

Category: Hindfoot; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Flatfoot; Deltoid Ligament Injury; Adult Acquired Flatfoot
Deformity
Introduction/Purpose: Corrective surgery for flexible flatfoot deformity (FD)
remains controversial, and one of the main reasons for this is the lack of standardised
radiographic measurements to define an FD. Previously published radiographic parameters to
differentiate between a specimen with and without FD do not have a commonly accepted and
distinct threshold. Such a parameter would help validate FDs and the required corrective
surgery. The purpose of this study was to assess a new conventional radiographic parameter
with a distinct threshold that allowed the differentiation between feet with and without an
FD and evaluate its application in corrective surgery for FD.
Methods: The plantar fascia-talar head correlation (PTC) with its defined
threshold was assessed by measuring the distance between the medial border of the plantar
fascia [a connecting line between the medial border of the tibial sesamoid and the calcaneal
insertion of the plantar fascia (mPCal)] and the centre of the talar head (DPT) on
conventional dorsoplantar and lateral weightbearing radiographs; the authors were blinded to
the clinical diagnosis of the 189 patients' first visits. Feet were grouped into specimens
with and without an FD based on clinical examination. Then, the effect of surgical
correction of FD on PTC was retrospectively evaluated on 38 patients. The intra-class
correlation (ICC2) of the intra-observer reliability and the ICC2 of the inter-observer
reliability of DPT measurement of 50 randomly selected specimens were calculated. The
results of PTC were compared to the measurements of the lateral talar-1st metatarsal angle
and the talonavicular uncoverage angle.
Results: The intra-class correlation (ICC2) of the intra-observer reliability
of DPT measurement was 0.95 (95%-confidence interval CI95[0.92, 0.97]), the ICC2 of the
inter-observer reliability was 0.93 (CI95 [0.89, 0.95]). PTC, lateral talar first metatarsal
angle and talonavicular uncoverage angle showed a statistically significant difference
between the specimens with and without a FD (Wilcoxon test p-values <0.001). However,
only the discriminatory power of PTC was distinct. The sensitivity and specificity of PTC
was 0.88 (95%CI: 0.77-0.95) and specificity 0.96 (95%CI: 0.92-0.98), respectively, to
identify an FD, consistent with the clinical examination. The identification of a sagittal
plane FD caused by midfoot osteoarthritis on a lateral conventional weightbearing radiograph
before measuring DPT increased the sensitivity for the combined method to 0.98 (95%CI:
0.9-1). Thirty-five of 38 surgeries successfully corrected the FD and PTC comparable to that
in subjects without an FD. The unsuccessful corrections did not adequately correct the
PTC.
Conclusion: PTC is a unique and reliable radiographic parameter with an
excellent threshold to confirm an FD, can be used intraoperatively to titrate the required
amount for correction of FD under simulated weightbearing fluoroscopic imaging and is
therefore useful to monitor and validate sufficient correction of its reconstructive
surgery.PTC is an objective radiographic measurement to reliably describe the clinical
subjective conclusion of any kind of FD with the exception FDs caused by an explicit midfoot
pathology.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00367

## Isolated Gastrocnemius Recession for Flexible Adult Acquired Flatfoot Deformity

Max Michalski, MD; Christopher P. Chiodo, MD; Brady D. Greene; Kimberly K. Broughton,
MD; Eric M. Bluman, MD, PhD; Jeremy T. Smith, MD

Category: Hindfoot; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Adult Acquired Flatfoot Deformity; Flexible Flatfoot Deformity;
Gastrocnemius Recession
Introduction/Purpose: Adult acquired flatfoot deformity (AAFD) frequently has
an associated gastrocnemius contracture, which is a primary focus of most non-operative
treatment protocols. When conservative measures fail, AAFD reconstruction often includes a
gastrocnemius recession. Most reconstruction procedures involve a period of post-operative
non-weight-bearing, which can be difficult for elderly patients. Beginning in 2011, patients
with flexible AAFD patients and at risk of non-compliance with weight-bearing restrictions,
were offered a staged approach with initial isolated gastrocnemius recession followed by
reconstruction, if required. Gastrocnemius recession may allow passive correction of the
deformity, improve orthotic fit and obviate the need reconstruction (Figure). The goal of
this study was to retrospectively evaluate patient reported outcomes following an isolated
gastrocnemius recession for flexible AAFD.
Methods: A total of 49 patients met the inclusion criteria: isolated
gastrocnemius recession for flexible AAFD, no previous ipsilateral surgery and >6 months
follow-up. Of 49 eligible patients, 29 (31 feet) participated. Pre-operative and
post-operative outcomes were compared for Foot and Ankle Ability Measure activities of daily
living subscale (FAAM-ADL), visual analog scale (VAS), and the PROMIS Physical Function
Short Form 10a (PROMIS PF SF 10a). Additionally, patients were asked about satisfaction,
willingness to undergo the procedure again and whether orthotic provided better relief. Mean
and standard deviation were compared using a two-tailed paired t-test with significance.
Results: FAAM-ADL and PROMIS PF SF 10a significantly improved from 55.9 and
37.3 pre-operatively to 71.6 and 42.0 (p=0.01, p=0.046) respectively. 70% of patients were
either satisfied or very satisfied, 67% would undergo the procedure again, and 64.5% of
patients had improved relief with use of orthotics post-operatively.
Conclusion: A staged approach with initial isolated gastrocnemius recession
for the management of flexible AAFD in elderly patients can be effective. These results for
patient recorded outcomes, patient satisfaction, willingness to undergo the procedure again
and improvement in orthotic relief may guide the shared decision-making process with elderly
patients when offered a reconstruction versus staged approach.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00368

## Endoscopic Insertional Achilles Reconstruction with Double Row Suture Bridge
Reconstruction: A Technique Tip

Christopher P. Miller, MD; Jorge I. Acevedo, MD; James R. McWilliam, MD; Max
Michalski, MD

Category: Ankle; Arthroscopy
Keywords: Achilles Tendinosis; Minimally Invasive; Achilles Reconstruction
Introduction/Purpose: Insertional Achilles tendinopathy can be a debilitating
condition that often fails to improve with non- surgical management such as bracing and
physical therapy. Traditional surgical techniques include an open debridement of the
diseased tendon and resection of calcaneal spurs. This is followed by repair of the tendon.
Suture anchors are often used to secure the tendon, but recent advances in tendon fixation,
including the advent of double row repairs, has allowed better biomechanical repairs and
faster rehabilitation. Additionally, minimally invasive surgery (MIS) and endoscopic
techniques have advanced to allow successful treatment of all aspects of the condition while
minimizing wound complications and infection
Methods: The authors present a technique to treat insertional Achilles
tendinopathy and calcaneal bone spurs using MIS techniques while also incorporating a
percutaneous double row suture anchor repair. The technique utilizes four portals to access
two endoscopic working planes. The burr is inserted deep to the tendon and the
calcaneoplasty is performed. Subsequently, the endoscope is inserted alongside a shaver to
remove bony debris and debulk the anterior aspect of the Achilles areas of tendinopathy.
Following this, the portals are used to place a double row suture anchor repair.
Results: With over 75 surgeries performed, there have been zero wound
complications and patients have been able to return to full weight bearing within 10 days
after surgery. Follow up outcome data is currently being collected and will be reported as a
case series once sufficient patients have completed their follow up.
Conclusion: This study presents double-row repair following an endoscopic
assisted MIS calcaneoplasty and Achilles debridement. The technique combines the benefits of
the double row suture bridge repair with a minimal incision technique to debride the
insertional tendinosis. In order to adequately debride the tendon and the posterior
calcaneal tuberosity, the tendon foot print is elevated as the burr removes the bone at the
insertion. The anterior portion of the tendon, which may be a pain generator as well,
isdebrided endoscopically with the shaver. Finally, a double row suture bridge repair is
performed in order to allow early weight bearing and rehabilitation.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00369

## Evaluation of the Soft Tissue Correction Improvement with Tendon Transfer in Flatfoot
Deformity Reconstruction

Seyed Alireza Mirghasemi, MBBS; Helen Huetteman; Stephanie Mrowczynski; Allan M.
Grant, MD; Zachary M. Vaupel, MD; Paul T. Fortin, MD

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: AAFD; Autograft Tendon Transfer; Tendon Transfer
Introduction/Purpose: An adult flatfoot deformity is a complex pathology that
has been attempted to be addressed surgically with a variety of different procedures.
Transfer of the flexor tendon has been a cornerstone of the treatment of flatfoot deformity
for years. After the procedure, the appearance of the bony correction of the foot is
noticeable on radiography, but after surgery when the patient begins to bear the weight the
soft tissue laxity affects the achieved bony correction when compared to non- weight bearing
images. This study aims to identify the effects of tendon transfer on bony and soft tissue
after weight-bearing to better predict what the outcomes of surgery will be.
Methods: 29 patients were included. there were 18 patients that underwent
tendon transfer as part of their flat foot correction and 11 patients that underwent
non-tendon transfer procedure for correction of flat foot deformity. Imaging was performed
on patient’s weight bearing (WB) and non-weight bearing (NWB) before and after surgery.
X-ray measurements included Angles: calcaneal pitch (ML-CP), talo-1st metatarsal
(ML-T1MT),talocalcaneal (ML-TC), talar declination (ML-Tdec), calcaneal 1st metatarsal
(ML-C1MT) and Distances: talar height (ML-Tal-h), navicular height (ML-Nav-h), 1st cuneiform
height (ML-1CN-h), cuboid height (ML-Cub-h), and 1st to 5th metatarsal distance (ML-1CN/5MT)
in lateral X-ray and Angles: talonavicular coverage (AP-TN), talar 1st metatarsal (AP-T1MT),
talar 2nd metatarsal (AP-T2MT) and Distances: talonavicular uncoverage distance in AP. The
differences in measurement between the pre op post op non weight bearing considered as bony
correction effect The differences in measurement between the pre op post op weight bearing
considered as soft tissue effect.
Results: the results from non-weight bearing imaging, tendon transfer had a
statistically significant impact on calcaneal pitch (, p=0.026), Talo-1st metatarsal
(p=0.048), talar declination ( p=0.038), talar height (p=0.016), navicular height (
p=0.014), 1st cuneiform height (p=0.001), talonavicular coverage (p=0.019), talar-1st
metatarsal angle (p=0.015), and talar to 2nd metatarsal angle ( p=0.001). the results from
WBimaging, tendon transfer had a statistically significant impact on calcaneal pitch (
p=0.000), calcaneal 1st metatarsal (p=0.02), talar height (35 to 39, p=0.003), navicular
height ( p=0.002), 1st cuneiform height (p=0.016), cuboid height ( p=0.016), 1st to 5th The
post-op effect calcaneal pitch was 12 degrees of difference in NWB compared to 6 degrees of
difference in WB The effect on talar height, navicular height, and 1st cuneiform height was
10mm, 9mm, and 8mm, respectively, in NWBimages. This compares to an effect of 4mm, 6mm, and
4mm, respectively, WB imaging.
Conclusion: When comparing NWB to WBimages, the effect of surgery on flat foot
correction is consistently less pronounced inWB. there will be a difference between the bony
correction and soft tissue correction. there is still a significant soft tissue effect seen
in WBimaging. The comparison between NWB, WB changes shows that the soft tissue effect is
around 50% of the bony correction on several key measurements. These include calcaneal pitch
and talar, navicular, and 1st cuneiform height. These results provide a framework for
establishing the soft tissue effect that tendon transfer surgery provides for flat foot
correction surgery.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00370

## Comparing Infection Rates from Using Different Surgical Preparation Solutions and
Techniques in Foot & Ankle Elective Surgery

Andrew P. Molloy, MB ChB, FRCS(Tr&Orth); Ravishanker Tangirala; Shirley A. Lyle,
MBBS, MPhil, BSc; Gavin Heyes

Category: Other
Keywords: Wound Complications; Complications; Changes
Introduction/Purpose: Surgical site infection (SSI) after Foot & Ankle
surgery ranges from 1.2% to 13.2%, higher than any other elective orthopaedic procedure.
Infection is of concern for the patient and expensive for the healthcare system. SSI is
multifactorial and can be divided into host-related and perioperative factors. Skin
preparation is one of the key peri-operative factors in reducing SSI. The current literature
supports a combined chlorhexidine and alcohol preparation technique, although there is some
conflicting evidence. Most studies to date have used proxy outcomes such as growth from
swabs shortly after skin preparation. There are no large scale studies which have looked at
definitive clinical outcomes such as the rate of postoperative SSI.
Methods: A retrospective review of data was undertaken for two longitudinal
cohorts which were using two different skin preparation solutions and techniques due to a
change in hospital protocol. Each cohort was continuous and derived from the same overall
populationIn cohort 1, Povidine-Iodine (Betadinetm) followed by Alcoholic Chlorhexidine was
used on swabs (Double prep group). In cohort 2, 2 Alcoholic Chlorhexidine was used in a prep
stick applicator. Standard criteria for diagnosing surgical site infection were used. All
open injuries, procedures for ongoing infection, amputations for osteomyelitis /diabetic
foot and COVID- 19 positive cases were excluded.
Results: After applying standard exclusion criteria, 919 elective F&A
procedures in the Double prep group and 491 procedures were included for the Single prep
groupAs these were continuous longitudinal cohorts of large scale from the same population,
there is a justifiable presumption of group matchingIn cohort 1 there were 15 superficial
infections (1.6%) and 3 deep (0.3%). In cohort 2 there were 18 superfical infections (3.6%)
and 1 deep (0.3%). The total infections in cohort 1 were 18 (2%) and 19 in cohort 2
(3.9%)There was an increase in superficial, and therefore total infection rates, in the
single prep group compared to the double prep group. These increases were statistically
significant; p <0.05 with regards to superficial infection and total infection rates in
the single prep group.
Conclusion: Double skin preparation, with Povidone-Iodine followed by
alcoholic Chlorhexadine, statistically significantly decreases foot and ankle surgical
infection rates as compared to a single alcoholic chlorhexidine skin preparation
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00371

## Cadaveric Analysis of Plantar Fascia Tension and Windlass Mechanism and Development of
Plantar Fascia-Specific Stretching Device

Kaveh Momenzadeh, MD; Caroline Williams, BA; Patrick M. Williamson; John Y. Kwon, MD;
Ara Nazarian; Christopher P. Miller, MD

Category: Other
Keywords: Plantar Fasciitis; Pain; Functional Rehabilitation
Introduction/Purpose: Plantar fasciitis is the most common cause of heel pain
in adults, affecting 1 out of 10 of the population at some point during their lifetime.
Plantar specific stretching programs are popularity among foot and ankle surgeons consisting
of passively dorsiflexing foot and using thumb to apply pressure. This technique is not
without limitations. Certain patients are unable to properly perform the stretching
techniques, such as limited mobility from advanced age, disability, or simply from
performing stretching exercises incorrectly. The aims of this study are; first, identify
what configuration of plantar-specific stretching combined with applied pressure to the
plantar aponeurosis generates the greatest tensional force in the plantar fascia. And
second, to construct a prototype device that could simulate these forces in a hands-free
technique.
Methods: Six (will be 10) fresh-frozen, morphologically normal cadaver feet
(Medcure, RI) were utilized. Plantar fascia was exposed, ankle was fixed at 90-degree
dorsiflexion using Calcaneo-Tibial Schanz Pin, specimen was then inverted and potted in a
custom-made box (Smooth-Cast 300q, PA). Using an electromagnetic motion tracking system
(Liberty, Polhemus, VT), the motion of sensors was recorded at 120 Hz. Utilizing tissue
adhesive glue (Vetbond, 3M, Minnesota), the first sensor was attached to medial calcaneal
tuberosity, and the second sensor was placed 5 cm distal to the first sensor on the plantar
aponeurosis. Custom- built testing apparatus was made for induction of MTP dorsiflexion
application of pressure on the plantar aponeurosis to mimic current conservative treatments.
Weights were added to the custom build stretcher device in 10Lb increments. Strain
percentage was calculated as the change in length divided by the baseline length position
(condition 1) using the formula: ([L − Lo]/Lo) × 100
Results: Dorsiflexion of 2nd-5th MTPs increases strain percentage more in
comparison with 1st MTP dorsiflexion (Condition 3>4>2). This might show that
dorsiflexing of 1st metatarsal is less effective at straining the plantar fascia because of
the midfoot motion. By adding thumb pressure, strain percentages go higher, up to a point
that in condition 7 (dorsiflexing all MTPs in combination of thumb pressure) it is
significantly higher than our baseline condition (P=0.0385). It is noteworthy that,
stretcher device itself (condition 8), cannot replicate conditions 4 or 7 strain
percentages. When adding direct pressure and weight to the stretcher device (conditions 12
and 13), strains are even higher than condition 7 and also are significantly higher than the
baseline (P= 0.0090 and 0.0291 respectively).
Conclusion: The stretcher device itself is insufficient for stretching the
plantar fascia, supporting the hypothesis of this study that we need a direct forceful
pressure on the plantar aponeurosis as well. Our customized plantar stretcher not only can
replicate the conventional stretching program, but also can produce higher strains on the
plantar aponeurosis than the current manual application of plantar specific stretching. This
device may impact the rehabilitation process in patients with advanced age as well as
patients with spine mobility limitation who cannot perform manual stretching programs.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00372

## Do Closed Suction Drains Affect Postoperative Wound Healing after Total Ankle
Arthroplasty?

Tara G. Moncman, DO; Brian E. Fliegel; Daniel Hameed; Joseph T. O'Neil, MD; David I.
Pedowitz, MD, MS; Joseph N. Daniel, DO

Category: Ankle Arthritis; Ankle
Keywords: Ankle Arthritis; Ankle Arthroplasty; Wound Complications
Introduction/Purpose: Although most studies demonstrate no clear benefit of
closed suction drains after total joint arthroplasty of the hip, knee, and shoulder, there
is no study that has specifically looked at ankle arthroplasty. Despite the paucity of
information regarding the potential benefit or lack thereof with postoperative closed
suction drains after total ankle arthroplasty, they are still utilized in practice. The
purpose of this study is to determine whether or not the use of closed suction drains after
total ankle arthroplasty have an affect on wound complications in the first postoperative
year.
Methods: Following a 3:1 match of patients with-drains to those
without-drains, 78 patients with-drains and 28 without-drains were included for analysis.
The drain group consisted of patients who had drains placed in the immediate postoperative
period and removed prior to discharge from the hospital. The without-drains group acted as
the control. Demographic data including age, sex, tobacco use, alcohol use, and medical
comorbidities (diabetes, bleeding disorders, anemia, neuropathy, kidney disease, peripheral
vascular disease, rheumatoid arthritis, history of leg ulcers or staphylococcus infection)
were obtained. Follow-up data was collected and reviewed at 2 weeks, 6 weeks, 12 weeks, 6
months, and 1 year postoperative, for minor and major wound complications, as well as
wound-related re-operations.
Results: At 2 weeks, 6 weeks, 12 weeks, 6 months, and 1 year postoperative,
there was no statistically significant difference in wound complications with or without the
use of a drain. Within the first postoperative year, a total of 4 (14.3%) patients with-
drains and 24 (30.8%) patients without-drains had a wound complication. This was not
statistically significant (p=0.148). The majority of wound complications were minor. A
single superficial infection and two reoperations for major wound complications were noted,
all of which were in patients who had a drain placed. Age, sex, tobacco use, alcohol use, as
well as a history of diabetes, bleeding disorders, neuropathy, kidney disease, peripheral
vascular disease, rheumatoid arthritis, and history of leg ulcers or staphylococcus
infection were similar between both groups. A history of anemia was significantly higher in
the drain group, however this was not associated with an increased risk of postoperative
wound complications.
Conclusion: The use of a closed suction drain did not have an effect on
postoperative wound complications in the first year after total ankle arthroplasty surgery.
Based on the equivocal results in this study and that there is no clear consensus on the use
of drains after total ankle arthroplasty surgery, the authors feel it is up to the
individual surgeon to determine the necessity of use on a case-by-case basis.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00373

## Single Biotenodesis Screw vs Biotenodesis Screw with Cortical Button Tension Slide
Technique for Flexor Hallucis Longus Transfer: A Biomechanical Analysis

Kaitlin C. Neary, MD; Sarah J. McClish; Anthony N. Khoury; Nick Denove; Coen A.
Wijdicks

Category: Ankle; Hindfoot; Sports; Other
Keywords: Achilles Tendon Rupture; Achilles Reconstruction; Achilles
Tendonopathy
Introduction/Purpose: Restoration of functional plantarflexion of the ankle
joint following chronic Achilles injury is achieved through transfer of the flexor hallucis
longus (FHL) tendon. Fixation of the FHL tendon transfer with a cortical button tension
slide technique is an advancement that has not been measured against traditional methods.
The purpose of this study is to evaluate the biomechanical differences between a single
biotenodesis screw versus biotenodesis screw with cortical button tension slide technique
for the fixation of FHL transfer. The authors hypothesize a biomechanical advantage for the
tension slide technique compared to the biotenodesis screw alone for fixation of the flexor
hallucis longus in chronic Achilles pathology.
Methods: 12 pairs (n=24) of fresh-frozen cadaveric tibia-to-toe samples (6
male, 6 female) were utilized to assess the biomechanics of FHL tendon transfer fixation.
All specimens underwent bone density analysis. Each pair of cadaveric samples were
randomized to receive either the biotenodesis screw or the tension slide technique. FHL
tendon transfer was performed via standard technique using a 6.25x15mm biotenodesis screw
with the foot in 20 degrees plantarflexion. A 2.6x12mm cortical button was inserted and FHL
tendon was introduced with a tension-slide technique. Biomechanical loading was applied
between 20N and 60N at a rate of 1Hz for 100 cycles. Post-cyclic load to failure occurred at
1.25mm/sec. Cyclic displacement, structural stiffness, and ultimate load were derived from
resultant load-displacement curves. Student t-tests were used to evaluate significant
effects between both FHL tendon transfer techniques. Linear regression analysis was
performed to assess interactions between bone density and strength of FHL tendon
transfer.
Results: Average tendon diameter of the 24 FHL samples was 5.44+-0.46 mm.
Average bone density for all 24 calcaneus samples was determined to be 1.06+-0.08
g/cm2. Loading data was normalized with respect to bone density and tendon
diameter to account for inherent anatomical differences between cadaveric specimens. The
addition of a cortical button for FHL transfer to the calcaneus did not significantly affect
cyclic displacement (0.78+-0.52mm vs 0.87+-0.80mm) or structural stiffness (162.11+-
43.34N/mm vs. 167.57+-49.19N/mm). Addition of the cortical button to the FHL tendon transfer
construct resulted in a 34% significant increase in ultimate load (343.72+-68.93 N) compared
to biotenodesis screw alone (255.62+-77.17 N) (p=0.0002). Linear regression analyses did not
reveal any significant interactions between bone density and FHL tendon transfer
technique.
Conclusion: Enhanced strength can be achieved for Achilles pathology repaired
with FHL tendon transfer utilizing a biotenodesis screw and cortical button tension slide
technique demonstrated by a statistically significant 34% increase in ultimate load,
subsequent to cyclic loading. Cortical buttons in the setting of FHL tendon transfer to the
calcaneus offers an additional level of support in the case of extreme tendon transfer
failure.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00374

## Plantar Plating in the Modified Lapidus Procedure: Evaluation of Function and
Impairment of the Tibialis Anterior Tendon

Richard Niehaus; Sandro Hodel; Karim Eid; Christopher G. Lenz

Category: Bunion; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Lapidus Procedure; Hallux Valgus; Tendon Injuries
Introduction/Purpose: Plantar Plating in the Modified Lapidus Procedure (MLP)
to treat severe Hallux Valgus deformities (HVD) or hypermobility of the first ray has become
more popular. Due to biomechanical considerations, early weightbearing can be achieved. The
surgical procedure and some plate designs make a release of the Tibialis Anterior tendon
(TAT) necessary and screws have to be placed through or close to its insertion. We
investigate if there are detectable changes of the tibialis anterior tendon or the function
of the tibialis anterior muscle (TAM).
Methods: We retrospectively reviewed 22 Feet (17 patients) after plantar
plating for a modified Lapidus procedure. All patients underwent a MRI at an average of 27
months (range 12-49 months) postoperatively for evaluation of the tendon. Clinical outcome
was evaluated using the EFAS score. Dorsiflexion strength was measured and compared to the
healthy contralateral extremity. Complications and union rates were assessed.
Results: The subjective satisfaction was rated at a mean of 8.2 (range, 5 -
10; SD +-1.5) on a scale from 0 to 10. Fourteen (82%) patients would undergo the same
surgical treatment again. MRI images showed signs of tendinopathy of the TAT in 13 feet
(59%). There were no ruptures, signs of thinning of the tendon or fatty infiltration
detected. Complication rate was low with only on case with performed revision surgery.
Regarding the Range of Motion, the force data comparing both feet of the patients is
statistically close in comparison to the other side without any statistical differences.
Conclusion: The MLP using a plantar-positioned locking plate leads to high
patient satisfaction rates and provides significant improvement of preoperative deformity in
severe HVD at midterm follow-up. Inversion strength was reduced, and MRI showed signs of
tendinopathy in more than half of the cases. However, these findings did not seem to have
any effect on the clinical outcome. None of the present patients had a high degree of fatty
infiltration of the TAM in accordance with the Goutallier grading. Plantar-positioned
locking plates do not seem to impair the TAM or the TAT.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00375

## Correlation of First Metatarsal Sagittal Alignment with Clinical and Functional
Outcomes Following the Lapidus Procedure

Danilo Ryuko Nishikawa, MD; Fernando A. Duarte, MD; Guilherme H. Saito, MD; Bruno R.
Miranda, MD; Cesar de Cesar Netto, MD, PhD; Marcelo P. Prado, MD, PhD

Category: Bunion; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Hallux Valgus; Lapidus; Clinical Outcomes
Introduction/Purpose: Lapidus procedure (LP) for hallux valgus (HV) requires
an adequate control of first metatarsal (M1) sagittal alignment to avoid dorsiflexion.
Otherwise, clinical and functional impairment, including transfer metatarsalgia may occur.
This study aimed to evaluate the effects of pre- and postoperative measurements of M1
sagittal alignment on clinical and functional outcomes, and whether these variations would
lead to transfer metatarsalgia or not.
Methods: 29 patients (36 feet) with a mean follow-up of 20 months after LP
were reviewed. Clinical and functional data were assessed with the VAS for pain, AOFAS, LEFS
and SF-12. SF-12 comprises physical and mental health scales (PCS-12 and MCS-12,
respectively). Transfer metatarsalgia diagnosis was based on the clinical exam. M1 sagittal
alignment analysis was based on the first metatarsal declination angle (FMDA) and Meary
Angle (MA). Decrease of FMDA means that the M1 dorsiflected ( ). Intermetatarsal angle (IMA) and hallux
valgus angle (HVA) were assessed. Radiographic, clinical and functional measurements were
compared. Intraclass Correlation Coefficients (ICC) were calculated for FMDA and MA. Linear
regression was used to assess the association of Δ-FMDA and Δ-MA with clinical and
functional questionnaires. Based on that, we assessed our sample at different cut-off points
to evaluate whether a given Δ-FMDA and/or Δ-MA measurement was significantly related to the
Δ-Questionnaires.
Results: Pre- and postoperative ICC of FMDA was 0.90 and 0.91 and MA was 0.94
and 0.88, respectively. FMDA showed significant variation after the LP, but MA did not. IMA
and HVA improved significantly. Significant clinical and functional improvement were
observed, except in MCS-12. No patient developed transfer metatarsalgia. A direct
correlation was found between ΔFMDA with Δ-PCS-12 and Δ-LEFS (p=.028 and p=.02,
respectively), meaning that excessive dorsiflexion of M1 as measured by FMDA led to a
decrease in PCS-12 and LEFS. We found that at the cut-off point of quartile 50%, in which
our sample was divided equally, patients with Δ-FMDA below 3.2 degrees of dorsiflexion had
significantly improved results on Δ-PCS-12 compared to those with greater values (p=.029)
(Figure 2).
Conclusion: The present study showed that excessive dorsiflexion of M1 led to
decreased outcome scores as measured by PCS- 12 and LEFS. It supports that M1 dorsiflexion
should be avoided after the LP. However, slight dorsal deviation can occur and, even so,
satisfactory outcomes can be obtained. Further prospective and comparative studies with
larger populations are required to evaluate the effects of M1 inclination on clinical and
functional outcomes.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00376

## Is First Metatarsal Shortening Correlated with Clinical and Functional Outcomes
Following the Lapidus Procedure?

Danilo Ryuko Nishikawa, MD; Fernando A. Duarte, MD; Guilherme H. Saito, MD; Bruno R.
Miranda, MD; Emanoel Jefferson A. Fenelon, MD; Marcelo P. Prado, MD, PhD

Category: Bunion; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Hallux Valgus; Lapidus Procedure; Metatarsal Length
Introduction/Purpose: Lapidus procedure (LP) is a powerful technique to
correct hallux valgus (HV) deformities, with good long-term outcomes. However, postoperative
complications may arise, as undercorrection of the deformity, nonunion, elevation and
shortening of the first metatarsal (M1). The objective of this study was to correlate M1
shortening with transfer metatarsalgia, and clinical and functional outcomes in patients who
underwent the LP.
Methods: a retrospective review of 29 patients (36 feet) who were submitted to
the LP for HV correction was performed. The average follow-up was 20 months. M1 length was
analyzed using the Relative First Metatarsal Length (RML) measurement ( ). When M1 shortens in relation to the second
metatarsal, the RML measurements increase. The intermetatarsal angle (IMA) and hallux valgus
angle (HVA) were also measured. Clinical and functional analyses were based on the VAS for
pain, AOFAS, LEFS and SF-12 health survey. SF-12 is divided into physical and mental health
composite scales (PCS-12 and MCS-12, respectively). Transfer metatarsalgia diagnosis was
based on the clinical exam. Radiographic, clinical and functional measurements were compared
using paired Wilcoxon signed-rank test and Student t test. Interobserver reliability of RML
measurements was calculated using Intraclass Correlation Coefficients (ICC). A linear
regression was performed to assess the correlation between RML and the clinical and
functional questionnaires.
Results: There was a significant M1 shortening of 2.28mm after the LP
(p<.001), with mean preoperative RML of 3.06 mm and mean postoperative of 5.34 mm (Table
1). No patient developed transfer metatarsalgia. Intraclass Coefficient Correlation (ICC) of
the RML measures showed a excellent reliability of 0.94 and 0.98 in the pre- and
postoperative setting, respectively. IMA and HVA presented significant improvements
(p<.001) (Table 1). Clinical and functional improvements were observed in all
questionnaires applied, except in the MCS-12 (Table 2). In the linear regression, RML was
inversely correlated to LEFS (p=<.05), which means that LEFS scores increased as RML
measurements decreased (Table 3). There was no significant correlation with the other
questionnaires.
Conclusion: The present study demonstrated that M1 shortening led to a
decreased LEFS following the LP. Comparative studies with prospective design and larger
populations are required to assess the role of M1 shortening on clinical and functional
outcomes.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00377

## Porous Titanium Wedges in Revision First Metatarsophalangeal Arthrodesis

David M. Noble; Benjamin Small; M. Truitt Cooper, MD; Joseph S. Park, MD; Venkat
Perumal, MD

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot; Other
Keywords: 1st MTP Joint; Fusion; Arthrodesis
Introduction/Purpose: First metatarsophalangeal (MTP) arthrodesis is a common
procedure for hallux MTP pathology. In the setting of prior procedures with resultant bone
loss, porous titanium wedges provide an alternative to allograft or autograft. The purpose
of this study was to report clinical and radiographic outcomes achieved with titanium wedges
used in 1st MTP arthrodesis in a revision setting.
Methods: A retrospective analysis was performed in 10 patients (mean age 65.8)
with prior 1st MTP procedures who underwent 1st MTP arthrodesis with use of porous titanium
wedges from February 2014 to March 2020. Outcomes were assessed using both clinical (Visual
Analogue Scale, Foot and Ankle Ability Measure, Mental Health Continuum Short Form, 36-Item
Short Form Survey, need for revision) and radiographic parameters. Patients were followed
from a minimum of 6 months up to 6 years (mean
31.4 months).
Results: Average Foot and Ankle Ability Measure (FAAM) score was 91.1 +/- 14.7
(75.1 +/- 5.3 FAAM Activities of Daily Living; 17.9 +/- 9.9 FAAM Sports). Average pain
visual analogue scale was 1.9 +/- 1.7. Average Mental Health Continuum-short form score was
34.2 +/- 8.5. Postoperative computed tomography (CT) imaging demonstrated lack of osseous
integration in two of six CT scans obtained. Four patients underwent subsequent revision
procedures, 3 for hardware prominence and 1 for failure of fusion.
Conclusion: To our knowledge, these data represent the first reported clinical
and radiographic outcomes in patients undergoing revision 1st MTP arthrodesis with use of
porous titanium wedges. Further research should focus on comparative data with other
commonly performed operative techniques.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00378

## Pre-Visit Patient Instructional Video for the Virtual Orthopedic Foot and Ankle
Examination: Technique Tip

Naudereh B. Noori, MD; Bonnie Y. Chien, MD; Walter C. Hembree, MD; Zijun Zhang; Jason
Schon; Lew C. Schon, MD

Category: Other; Ankle; Arthroscopy; Bunion; Hindfoot; Lesser Toes;
Midfoot/Forefoot; Trauma
Keywords: Practice Models; Clinical Outcomes; Patient Education
Introduction/Purpose: The COVID-19 pandemic has brought a major increase in
telemedicine utilization to conserve resources and maintain social distancing. The rapid
transition over a short period of time has exposed challenges and limitations of virtual
visits, especially with regards to performing an effective and efficient physical
examination. Within months, orthopedic telemedicine guides were published for patient
education and facilitating the musculoskeletal examination. These publications, however,
included only a short video clip to explain to the patient how to participate in the
examination during a telemedicine visit. In the foot and ankle subspecialty, the closely
adjacent complex anatomy compared to other areas of the body presents unique challenges for
physical exam.
Methods: To optimize the efficiency and efficacy of the examination portion of
the visit for both patients and providers, we designed and recorded an instructional video
that is sent to all patients by email a minimum of 1 week prior to their appointment. This
video consists of a step-by-step guide on how to take suitable photos and videos of their
feet and ankles for the physical examination portion of their visit. These media files are
then directly uploaded by the patients into their EMR or emailed to the physician’s office
to be uploaded for access by the provider before and during the virtual visit. Along with
the video, patients are given a link to test their microphone and camera in advance of the
visit to ensure adequate functionality and positioning.
Results: Our pre-appointment instructional video has been effective to
methodically replicate the most important aspects of an in-person foot and ankle evaluation.
Both physicians and patients appear to benefit from the tutorial video by having more time
during the telemedicine visit to focus on history, assessment, and plan. Patients are more
actively involved in the clinical data collection process because they are educated on what
to expect and how to best prepare and participate in telemedicine visits. Moreover, having a
set of systematic and detailed photos and recordings of the patient’s foot and ankle
beforehand better focuses interaction and discussion with the patient during the
telemedicine encounter. Additionally, these are saved into the patient’s electronic medical
record, available for reference and later review.
Conclusion: Physical examination plays a critical role in diagnosis and
treatment in the orthopedic foot and ankle subspecialty. More research is needed to discern
how best to utilize virtual modalities as they become more commonplace, not just from the
imposition from the COVID pandemic but also from the standpoint of patient convenience and
time efficiency. Here we have described our creation of a pre-visit educational video to
guide and engage patients on acquiring invaluable physical examination information for the
orthopedic foot and ankle telemedicine encounter.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00379

## Ultrasound Stress-Imaging is a Promising Tool to Detect Achilles Tendon Damage

Kathryn O'Connor, MD; Elaine Schmidt; Todd J. Hullfish; Michael W. Hast; Josh R.
Baxter

Category: Sports; Basic Sciences/Biologics
Keywords: Achilles Tendon; Ultrasound Guidance; Biomechanics
Introduction/Purpose: Achilles tendon disorders are among the most common
conditions observed by sports medicine physicians and among the most difficult to diagnose
using current clinical tools. While qualitative imaging is a validated method to grade the
severity of tendinopathy, predicting the risk of these patients progressing or suffering
tendon ruptures remains a major clinical need. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to
determine the efficacy of quantitative ultrasound imaging to explain in vitro
fatigue-induced degradation of Achilles tendon mechanical properties. We hypothesized that
decreases in mean echogenicity would be linked to in vitro tendon fatigue characterized by
decreased mechanical properties.
Methods: In this cadaveric tendon study, we cyclically fatigued 10 cadaveric
Achilles tendons (7 donors; sex: 4M, 3F; age: 60+-15 years) and acquired b-mode ultrasound
images to determine if stress-imaging biomarkers provide new insight into tendon status. We
cut dog-bone shapes to concentrate tendon damage at the mid-substance where we acquired
ultrasound images. In a custom- built testing bath, we cyclically applied 10-20 MPa of
tendon stress at 1 Hz for 150,00 or until the specimen failed. Every 500th cycle, we applied
2 slow (0.25 Hz) tendon stresses of 10-20 MPa while acquiring ultrasound images using an
18MHz transducer. We calculated the change in tendon echogenicity caused by the applied
stress to determine if this stress-imaging biomarker was associated with tendon failure. We
compared these stress-imaging biomarkers from the tendons that failed (N=6) and the tendons
that survived (N=4) cyclic fatigue damage using an unpaired t-test (p < 0.05).
Results: Quantitative analysis of the ultrasound images indicated 2 key
differences between tendons that failed during the cyclic loading protocol and those that
did not ( shows
representative data of tendons with similar demographics but one tendon exhibited increased
change in echogenicity before failing while the other tendon exhibited smaller changes in
echogenicity and did not rupture). First, mean echogenicity decreased before failure.
Second, the average change in mean echogenicity was significantly greater in tendons that
failed (p = 0.031). For most tendons that did fail, mean echogenicity decreased during the
third phase of fatigue life. For the tendons that did not fail, mean echogenicity plateaued
along with strain during the second phase of fatigue.
Conclusion: This study found detectable differences in image echogenicity
during a stress test between tendons that fail during cyclic loading and those that do not.
While preliminary, our findings indicate that B-mode ultrasound has potential as a
clinically viable tool to predict severe tendon injuries. Our future work is focused on
developing computer-based predictive tools to assess Achilles tendon fatigue in patients
with tendinopathy following prolonged tendon loading to establish quantitative imaging
thresholds that can serve as clinical benchmarks.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00380

## Comparison of Physical Function and Pain Levels of Hallux Rigidus Patients before and
after Synthetic Cartilage Implant vs Arthrodesis Surgery

Irvin Oh, MD; Peter Joo, BS; Judith F. Baumhauer, MD, MS, MPH; Jeffrey Houck, PT, PhD;
Jessica M. Kohring, MD; Adolph S. Flemister, MD; John P. Ketz, MD; Benedict F. DiGiovanni,
MD

Category: Bunion; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Hallux Rigidus; PROMIS Physical Function; Synthetic Cartilage Bone
Implant
Introduction/Purpose: Hallux rigidus is a common and painful degenerative
condition of the great toe limiting a patient’s physical function and quality of life. The
purpose of this study was to investigate pre- and postoperative physical function (PF) and
pain interference (PI) levels of patients undergoing synthetic cartilage implant
hemiarthroplasty (SCI) versus arthrodesis (AD) for treatment of hallux rigidus using the
Patient Reported Outcome Measurement Information System (PROMIS).
Methods: Pre- and postoperative PROMIS PF and PI t-scores were analyzed for
patients who underwent either SCI or AD. Postoperative final PROMIS t-scores were obtained
via phone survey. Linear mixed model analysis was used to assess differences in PF and PI at
each follow up point. Final follow-up scores were analyzed using independent sample
t-tests.
Results: Total 181 (59 SCI, 122 AD) operatively managed patients were included
for analysis of PROMIS scores. Final phone survey was performed at mean 33 (14-59) months
postoperatively, with 101 patients (40 SCI, 61 AD) successfully contacted. Mean age of the
SCI cohort was younger than the AD cohort (57.5 versus 61.5 years-old, p = 0.01). Average PF
t-scores were higher in the SCI cohort compared to AD cohort at baseline (47.1 versus 43.9,
respectively; p = 0.01) and at final follow up (51.4 versus 45.9, respectively; p <
0.01). A main effect of superior improvement in PF was detected in SCI group (+4.3) versus
AD group (+2) across time intervals (p < 0.01). PI t-scores were similar between the two
procedures across time points.
Conclusion: The SCI cohort reported superior PF t-scores at all follow-up time
points compared to the arthrodesis group. No differences were found for PI or complication
rates between the two treatment groups during this study timeframe.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00381

## Gender and Geographic Trends Amongst Foot & Ankle Surgeons: Where Are We and Where
Do We Need to Improve?

Robyn Okereke, BS; Cory Janney, MD; Aryan Rezvani; Kiya Shazadeh Safavi, BS

Category: Other
Keywords: AOS; COFAS; Healthcare Reform
Introduction/Purpose: Clinical and elective experiences as well as the
guidance of mentors are all critical factors in the pursuance of orthopedic residencies and
fellowships. Women have historically been underrepresented in orthopedics. Some propose that
the root cause lies in the lack of availability in the aforementioned factors. Previous
studies demonstrated geographic differences in sex representation in orthopedic residency
programs. Studies over geographic distributions of orthopedic foot and ankle (OFA) surgeons
showed high variation in geographic density of OFA surgeons throughout the U.S. This study
seeks to determine both the gender and geographic distributions of OFA surgeons as well as
to determine geographic patterns between their training locations and current practices.
Methods: AOFAS data regarding fellowship completion from 1988 through 2021 was
analyzed with regards to gender and fellowship location. Internet searches were performed
for all those identified within the database for their medical school, residency, and
current practice location. This biographical data was obtained from their front-facing
biographical webpage or hospital affiliation. States were placed into regions and subsequent
divisions as defined according to the US Census Bureau definition: Northeast (New England
and Middle Atlantic), Midwest (East North Central and West North Central), South (South
Atlantic, East South Central, and West South Central) and West (Mountain and Pacific).
Results: 1,088 OFA surgeons were analyzed. 168 (15.3%) were female and 922
(84.7%) were male. Female-held OFA fellowship positions increased over time, currently
sitting at 13 (22% of all fellowship positions), with a maximum of 15 (25%) in 2017.
Geographically, the Pacific had most females (n=26, 15.6% of females), while East South
Central had least (n=10, 6.0%). The South Atlantic had most males (n=193, 20.9% of males)
while East South Central had least (n=59, 5.3%). The region with the most OFA surgeons in
total was the South Atlantic (n=218, 20.0% of the total) whereas the regions with the least
were East South Central and New England (n=59, 5.4% in each).
Conclusion: Although the amount of female OFA surgeons has increased, the
numbers are still low. Geographically, the East South Central division of the U.S
consistently had the least number of OFA surgeons whereas the South Atlantic division had
the highest.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00382

## Functional Outcomes of Dorsal Bridge Plating for Lisfranc Injuries with Routine
Metalwork Retention: A Major Trauma Centre Experience

Elliot I. Onochie; Nelson Bua; Amit Patel, FRCS(Orth); Shilpa Jha, MBBS, MRCS; Nima
Heidari; Alexandros Vris; Lee Parker, FRCS(Tr&Orth); Francesc Malagelada Romans;
Luckshmana A. Jeyaseelan

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot; Trauma
Keywords: Lisfranc Injury; Outcomes Measures; ORIF
Introduction/Purpose: Lisfranc injuries represent a significant disruption to
the complex articulations of the midfoot. Many of these injuries are unstable with
displacement and articular incongruity. This necessitates surgical intervention with the
primary goals of anatomic reduction and midfoot stability. Evidence around surgical
treatments for Lisfranc complex injuries is limited by heterogeneity in outcome measures and
small patient numbers. Dorsal bridge plating is a well-recognized surgical technique with
the benefits of rigid stability and joint preservation. The primary aim of this study is to
assess the midterm functional outcomes for patients treated with this technique at our major
trauma centre. Additionally, we assess the complication profile and review for risk factors
that influence the functional outcome.
Methods: Eighty-five adult patients were identified as undergoing open
reduction and dorsal bridge plate fixation for displaced, unstable Lisfranc injuries at our
major trauma centre between January 2014 and January 2018. Supplemental Kirschner wire
stabilization was used for the lateral column if necessitated by the injury pattern.
Importantly, metalwork was not routinely removed. A retrospective review of case notes and
imaging was conducted in order to collate demographic data including co- morbidities and
smoking status. Patient-reported outcome measures were collected at final follow-up, with a
minimum follow-up of 24 months. The Manchester-Oxford Foot Questionnaire summary index
(MOXFQ-Index) was the primary patient-reported outcome. The American Orthopaedic Foot &
Ankle Society (AOFAS) midfoot scale, complications, and all-cause re-operation rates were
secondary outcome measures. Univariate and multivariate analyses were used to identify risk
factors associated with poorer functional outcomes.
Results: The mean follow-up in this study was 40.8 months (24 - 72). 61/85
patients (72%) had high-energy or crush mechanisms of injury. The mean MOXFQ-Index was 27.0
(SD 7.1). The mean AOFAS score was 72.6 (SD 11.6). 48/85 patients (56%) had injury patterns
that included an intra-articular fracture and this was associated with poorer outcomes, with
worse MOXFQ and AOFAS scores (both p<0.001). There were trends towards poorer outcomes in
diabetic patients (p=0.07), those patients needing supplementary Lisfranc or intercuneiform
screws (p= 0.39 and 0.45 respectively), and as a greater number of tarsometatarsal joints
were stabilized (p=0.12). Overall, eighteen patients (21%) underwent removal of metalwork
for either prominence or stiffness. Female patients were more likely to require metalwork
removal (OR 3.89, 95% CI 1.27 to 12.0, p=0.02). Eight patients (9%) required secondary
arthrodesis for post-traumatic osteoarthritis.
Conclusion: This is the largest series of Lisfranc injuries treated with
dorsal bridge plate fixation reported to-date. Bridge plating is safe and effective in
stabilizing this complex midfoot injury. The presence of an intraarticular fracture is a
poor prognostic indicator. This is the first study to report on outcomes with routine
retention of bridge plates. 21% of patients required removal of metalwork and this was more
likely in female patients. Patient-reported outcomes and secondary arthrodesis rates were
comparable to the existing literature in which bridge plates are routinely explanted. This
suggests that routine removal may not be a necessity.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00383

## The Triplanar Hallux Abducto Valgus Classification System: Is it Valid?

Alexander G. Padovano; Trapper Lalli, MD; Joshua N. Tennant, MD, MPH; Kevin D. Martin,
DO; Robert D. Santrock, MD

Category: Bunion
Keywords: Bunion; Hallux Valgus; Metatarsus Adductus
Introduction/Purpose: Historically, two-dimensional radiographic study
techniques have been used to classify and describe hallux valgus deformities and guided
treatment based on severity of deformity in the transverse plane only. These two-dimensional
radiographic studies and were not able to assess rotational deformity and may explain the
high recurrence and dissatisfaction rates which have been reported. Recently, a triplanar
hallux abducto valgus classification (THAVC) system was proposed. This key elements of this
classification system are the pathologic alignments in all three anatomic planes. The THAVC
system is intended to clarify the deformity and apply a triplanar anatomic algorithm for
treatment. To our knowledge, this classification system has not been validated. Our
objective was to assess the intra-reader and inter-reader reliability of the THAVC.
Methods: After approval by the Institutional Review Board, patients with
hallux abducto valgus (HAV) were identified from a foot and ankle registry. Electronic
medical records and digital radiographs were reviewed by the principal investigator (PI).
Selected radiographs were then deidentified of patient information and assembled in a
digital slide presentation and presented to the reviewers. The eligibility criteria required
complete weightbearing radiographic studies and represented varying degrees of HAV. The
reviewers included three board certified, fellowship trained orthopaedic foot and ankle
surgeons. Images of twenty cases of hallux valgus and five normal cases were distributed
electronically, who independently classified all 25 cases according to the THAVC system for
a total of 75 observations. After an eight week washout period, the order of the HAV cases
was randomized and redistributed to the reviewers. The three reviewers were blinded to the
results of the both radiographic reviews until after statistical analysis had occurred.
Results: We evaluated the intra-reader consistency by Cohen’s kappa for the
agreement between two measurements from the same reader. The average kappa value from three
readers was 0.241 with 95% CI (0.093-0.374), indicating a fair agreement. The inter-reader
agreement was 0.046 with 95% CI (-0.041-0.112), showing poor agreement between readers.
Conclusion: The Triplanar HAV Classification is the first classification
system that utilizes anatomic, multi-plane evaluation. Our results indicate while this is
the first known HAV classification system, by this analysis it lacks reliability. This study
shows that the reading of 2D radiographs still present a difficulty in assessing a 3D
problem. Perhaps a scoring system utilizing advanced imaging such as 3D WBCT could prove
more reliable and applicable.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00384

## Ankle Approach Selection: Defining Eight Ankle Approaches Exposure Segment and
Area

Joaquin Palma, MD; Tomas Urrutia; Jorge Faundez

Category: Ankle; Trauma
Keywords: Operative Approach; Ankle Fracture Evaluation; Pilon Fracture
Introduction/Purpose: Ankle and tibial plafond fractures are a frequent
problems in everyday practice. To achieve the best possible outcome, proper soft tissue
handling and joint surface restoration is mandatory, therefore, approach selection is of
vital importance. Currently, there is no consensus nor evidence-based data regarding this
critical planning step, and published guidelines are based on expert opinion. The aim of
this study was to measure exposure segment and amount of area exposed by 8 different
approaches and to provide objective data to be used as a tool in approach selection.
Methods: We performed a descriptive cadaveric study. We included the following
approaches: anteromedial, anterolateral, direct lateral, posterolateral, posterior
paramedian, posterior modified posteromedial, anterior modified posteromedial and direct
medial approach. Each approach was performed four times. All incisions where standardized in
length and centered 1cm proximal to the tibiotalar joint. After retracting flaps, we took
one picture of each approach at a standardized distance, using a 1cm mark as a witness and
calculated bone exposure area. On a second stage, all specimens where frozen and used to
perform an axial cut 1cm proximal to the tibiotalar joint. A new picture was then obtained
of each approach at a standardized distance. The amount of segment exposed by each approach
was expressed in degrees, using two reference axes: the mediolateral malleolar axis and an
anteroposterior axis at it center. 0° was stablished at the medial malleolus and 90° at the
anterior edge.
Results: We obtained the following median exposed area for the studied
approaches: anteromedial: 18,36cm2, anterolateral: 8,52cm2, direct
lateral: 12,72cm2, posterolateral: 9,40cm2, posterior paramedian:
12,18cm2, posterior modified posteromedial: 10,42cm2, anterior
modified posteromedial: 12,37cm2 and direct medial: 15,66cm2. The
median exposed segment of each approach was: anteromedial: 4°-99°, anterolateral:
50°-170,5°, direct lateral: 137°-200°, posterolateral: 187°-258°, posterior paramedian:
202°-297°, posterior modified posteromedial: 215°-305°, anterior modified posteromedial:
242°-311° and direct medial: 21°- 309,5°. The biggest area of exposure was provided by the
anteromedial approach (18,36cm2) and the greatest exposed segment was that of the
anterolateral approach (120°). On the other hand, the smallest exposed bone area was that of
the anterolateral approach and the smallest segment with the direct lateral approach (63°).
A comparative view of the exposed segments is showed in .
Conclusion: When comparing results focused on posteromedial approaches, the
posterior paramedian approach is the one that best combines exposure area and segment.
Posterior paramedian approach also allows good access to the posterolateral tibial surface.
Based on our results, we propose combining posterior paramedian and posterior modified
posteromedial approach, using a single incision and the FHL tendon as a mobile window to
manage complex posterior tibial fractures with posteromedial and posterolateral extension.
We believe that by defining area and segment exposed by different ankle approaches we
provide surgeon with objective data that could help in approach or approaches selection.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00385

## Medial Approaches to the Posterior Malleolus: A Comparative Cadaveric Study

Joaquin Palma, MD; Tomas Urrutia; Sergio Morales

Category: Ankle; Trauma
Keywords: Structural Anatomy and Biomechanics; Posterior Malleolus Fracture;
Ankle Fracture
Introduction/Purpose: Ankle fractures are the most common fractures of the
lower extremity. In spite of that, there is still no consensus regarding the best way to
approach posterior malleolus (PM) fractures. The aim of this study is to compare the degree
of PM exposure, tension of the flap containing the medial neurovascular bundle (NVB) and
distance between the surgical incision and the NVB using three different posteromedial ankle
approaches.
Methods: Three different posteromedial approaches were compared: direct medial
(DM) modified posteromedial (MPM) and posterior paramedian (PPM). Each approach was
performed four times using a standardized technique. With a digital tensiometer, the minimal
tension of the flap containing the NVB that allowed proper exposure of the PM was measured.
In a second stage, an axial cut 1cm proximal to the tibiotalar joint was performed in nine
frozen pieces and PM exposure degree and distance between the incision and the NVB was
measured.
Results: The median minimal tension was DM: 14,78 N, MPM: 8N and PPM: 5,75N.
The median distance between the incision and the NVB was DM: 17mm, MPM: 6mm and PPM: 28mm.
The median degree of exposure was DM: 51%, MPM: 58% and PPM: 72%.
Conclusion: The PPM approach achieved the highest degree of PM exposure, with
the lowest tension applied to the NVB and allowing the greatest distance between the
incision and the NBV. Thus, we believe it should be considered the approach of choice for
large fractures compromising the posteromedial and posterolateral aspect of the PM.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00386

## Are Outcomes Following Crossed Lag-Screw Modified Lapidus Technique for Hallux
Abductovalgus Comparable to Plate-Screw Fixation Technique? A Study of Costs, Radiographic
and Patient Reported Outcomes

Chinmay S. Paranjape, MD; Trapper Lalli, MD; Joshua N. Tennant, MD, MPH

Category: Bunion; Diabetes
Keywords: Lapidus Procedure; Bunion; Outcomes Measures
Introduction/Purpose: The modified Lapidus (ML) for tri-planar HAV correction
is a powerful procedure for correcting hallux valgus (HV) and metatarsal rotation. We
assessed implant costs, radiographs, and pre and postoperative patient reported outcome
measures of Patient Reported Outcome Information System Physical Function (PROMIS-PF)
Computerized Adaptive Test scores (CAT) at an average of 20.2 months followup.
Methods: We examined patients retrospectively from January 2014 to December
2019. Pre and postoperative PROMIS-PF, radiographic parameters (intermetatarsal angle, IMA
and HV angle, HVA), complications, and total surgical time were reviewed from the medical
chart. Estimated surgical implants costs were obtained from manufacturers.
Results: 83 patients underwent lag screw lapidus. All had radiographs, 71 had
complete PROMIS-PF. Patients were a median age 55.80 (45.55, 53.85), 6.7% male, and 20%
diabetic (median A1c 6.4%). Complications included 6.7% delayed wound healing, 13.3% painful
hardware, 13.3% superficial infections. Others (7/83 or 8.4%) included complex regional pain
syndrome in one, overcorrection in two, paresthesia in one and symptomatic nonunion in
three. Preoperative angles were hallux valgus angle 33 (30, 40), IMA 15 (12, 16) which
improved at final postoperative follow up to HVA 9 (5, 15) and IMA 7 (6, 9). PROMIS-PF was
43 (37,52) preoperatively, 37 (31, 39) at six weeks, 46 (42, 51) at three months, and 49
(41, 53) at > 360 days. The drop in PROMIS- PF between preop and 6 weeks and the rise
from 6 weeks to 3 months were significant. There was no difference between pre and
postoperative PROMIS-PF. Implants averaged $140 USD.
Conclusion: Patients achieved good radiographic correction of HV following ML
by our technique. While physical function, measured by the PROMIS-PF, decreased in the acute
postoperative period, it increased to near final levels by three months postoperatively. Low
complication rate, low cost, and high patient postoperative functional expectations with
excellent radiographic correction were demonstrated.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00387

## Red Blood Cell Distribution Width: A Novel Predictor of Mortality Following Amputation
in Diabetic Foot

Jae Han Park, MD; Kwang Hwan Park, MD, PhD; Yeo Kwon Yoon, MD; Seung Hwan Han, MD,
PhD; Jin Woo Lee, MD, PhD

Category: Diabetes
Keywords: Diabetic Foot; Diabetic Foot Ulcer; Diabetes
Introduction/Purpose: Red blood cell distribution width (RDW), reflects the
degree of heterogeneity of erythrocyte volume, has been found to be a significant prognostic
factor in various human disorders. Herein, we assessed the value of RDW as a prognostic
factor in diabetic foot amputation.
Methods: Data of 415 patients with diabetic foot underwent amputation between
January 2009 and January 2019 were analyzed retrospectively. After establishing a cut-off
point of preoperative RDW for all-cause mortality, Cox proportional hazard model for
mortality and logistic regression analysis for length of hospital stay more than 1 month
were performed with other variable
Results: RDW >14.5% was a significant risk factor for mortality (hazard
ratio, 2.55; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.55 to 4.19) on multivariable-adjusted
regression analysis. Other significant factors associated with mortality were age and kidney
disease. High RDW was also associated with longer hospitalization over 30 days (odds ratio,
2.17; 95% CI, 1.29 -3.66).
Conclusion: High preoperative RDW over 14.5% is an independent prognostic
factor with increased mortality and longer hospitalization, implying that RDW may be a
simple and inexpensive laboratory parameter for risk stratification in diabetic foot
amputation.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00388

## The Course of Tarsal Tunnel Syndrome after Ultrasound-Guided Injections

Joseph S. Park, MD; Kivanc Atesok, MD, MSc; Jennifer Pierce, MD; Benjamin Small;
Venkat Perumal, MD; M. Truitt Cooper, MD

Category: Other; Ankle; Hindfoot; Midfoot/Forefoot; Sports
Keywords: Tarsal Tunnel Syndrome; Ultrasound Guidance; Corticosteroid
Injection
Introduction/Purpose: Local ultrasound (US)-guided injections of anesthetics
with corticosteroids are commonly performed for the conservative treatment of tarsal tunnel
syndrome (TTS). This retrospective study aimed to investigate the course of TTS after
US-guided injections.
Methods: The study included patients who were diagnosed with TTS and received
US-guided injections as their initial conservative treatment. The patients' pain levels were
noted on a scale between zero and ten before and after each injection. The patients were
divided into two groups: nonsurgical and surgical groups. The nonsurgical group included
patients who had received US-guided injections and were not treated surgically, and the
surgical group included those who received US-guided injections and ultimately underwent
surgical tarsal tunnel release (TTR). The two groups were compared in terms of age, gender,
post-injection follow-up time, and the amount of pain reduction immediately after injection
(ΔPN). In the surgical group, the presence or absence of additional foot and ankle
pathologies requiring operative treatment during TTR, and outcomes of surgical treatment
were also assessed.
Results: 218 patients were diagnosed with TTS and received US-guided
injections as their initial treatment. After the injections, 169 patients (77.5%) required
no TTR (nonsurgical group) and 49 patients (22.5%) underwent TTR (surgical group). The
average ages for the nonsurgical and surgical groups were 53.8 and 48.9 years (P = 0.03).
The average time between the injection and final follow-up for the nonsurgical group was 339
days. The average time between the injection and TTR for the surgical group was 145 days.
There were no differences in pain relief after the injections between the nonsurgical and
surgical groups (mean ΔPN: 3.6 and 3.8, respectively). In the surgical group, 16 patients
(32%) presented with additional foot and ankle pathologies that were surgically treated
during TTR. The average post-surgical follow up time was 117 days. At final follow up, 41
patients (84%) in the surgical group had no pain or functional impairment.
Conclusion: US-guided injection can be an effective conservative treatment
option for patients with TTS. Surgical release of tarsal tunnel may improve and resolve the
overall symtoms of TTS in majority of the patients who do not respond to nonsurgical
treatment. Younger age and additional foot and ankle pathologies appear to be associated
with greater likelihood of undergoing TTR.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00389

## Comparison of Medial and Dorsal Approach for Talonavicular Fusion: A Cadaver
Study

David A. Patch, MD; Nicholas A. Andrews; Timothy. Torrez; Charles R. Sutherland; Whitt
Harrelson; Abhinav Agarwal, MBBS; Ashish Shah, MD

Category: Basic Sciences/Biologics; Hindfoot; Other
Keywords: Arthrodesis; Degenerative - Wear and Tear; Midfoot
Introduction/Purpose: Talonavicular (TN) joint arthrodesis is a common
procedure for end stage arthritis. There are two common operative approaches used to expose
the TN joint for articular preparation, the medial and dorsal. Classically, the medial
approach has been the preferred method of TN joint fusion, but recent arguments have been
made for the use of the dorsal approach. Articular surface preparation is a key tenant
required for any joint fusion. To date no physical preparation studies have been done to
compare the two approaches in terms of articular surface preparation.
Methods: Ten fresh frozen cadaver specimens were obtained. Fluoroscopic
radiographs were used to rule out any pre-existing pathology of the talonavicular joint.
Specimens were assigned to receive either a dorsal or medial operative approach to the
talonavicular joint. After joint preparation, the talonavicular joint was disarticulated and
the amount of articular surface preparation was recorded using ImageJ software.
Results: A total of 8 male and 2 female specimens were utilized with an
average age of 64.5 +- 13.1. The dorsal approach had a higher average percentage of talar,
navicular, and total talonavicular joint surface prepared. When examining joint surface area
preparation regardless of approach used, the talar head was significantly less prepared than
the navicular. The inter-observer correlation coefficient was excellent for both navicular
and talar surface area prepared.
Conclusion: The amount of articular surface preparation in the dorsal approach
was consistently higher on average. Given the high rate of nonunion in isolated
talonavicular and triple arthrodesis, surgeons should be aware that the dorsal approach may
offer an increased amount of articular surface preparation. Our study adds to the growing
body of evidence supporting the investigation and use of the dorsal approach when attempting
talonavicular arthrodesis.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00390

## Treatment of Complex Hindfoot Trauma with Hindfoot Nail

David A. Patch, MD; Megan Lameka; Jared R. Halstrom, BS; Jonathan H. Quade, MD; Clay
A. Spitler, MD; Michael D. Johnson, MD

Category: Hindfoot; Trauma
Keywords: Arthrodesis; Pilon Fracture; Trauma
Introduction/Purpose: Pilon fractures are often associated with severe bone
comminution and soft tissue compromise. As a result, surgical salvage procedures such as
hindfoot nailing may be indicated for patients who are not candidates for standard fixation
techniques such as open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF). The purpose of this review
was to access outcomes associated with complex hindfoot trauma acutely treated with hindfoot
nailing.
Methods: A case series at a Level I trauma center was performed to identify
trauma patients with complex hindfoot fractures who underwent hindfoot nailing as definitive
treatment after initial external fixation between 2012 and 2020. Indications included a
combination of patient comorbidities, fracture severity, and soft tissue injury. Exclusion
criteria included follow-up less than 3 months. Post-operative radiographs were interpreted
by a fellowship-trained foot and ankle surgeon. Primary outcome measures included unplanned
reoperation/revision and deep infection. Deep infection was defined as any patient requiring
surgical debridement after definitive fixation with positive cultures or the presence of
positive cultures at the time of planned surgery. Fractures were classified using the AO/OTA
classification and injury characteristics and postoperative complications were recorded via
chart review.
Results: Twenty-six of 29 of identified patients met inclusion criteria. The
most common AO/OTA classification was 43C (62%). The average age was 55 years (range, 31-94)
and the most common mechanism of injury was motor vehicle crash (38%). Thirteen fractures
(50%) were open with Gustilo Anderson grade IIIA fractures being the most common (38%). The
overall deep infection rate was 15% with fifty percent of cases positive for a history of
diabetes mellitus or smoking. Unplanned reoperations occurred in seven (27%) cases. Among
these, a total of four (57%) occurred due to the development of deep infection, two (29%)
were nonunions, and one (14%) was indicated for hardware failure. Below the knee amputation
occurred in one patient with nonunion (4%), which was a grade IIIA open pilon fracture with
significant bone loss. Union was achieved in the majority of patients (92%).
Conclusion: Treatment of complex hindfoot trauma with intramedullary nailing
has a high union rate as a salvage procedure in a poor host. Surgeons should consider this
treatment in patients that are not candidates for standard open reduction and internal
fixation techniques.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00391

## Union Rates of Talar Neck Fractures with Critical Bone Defects Treated with
Autograft

David A. Patch, MD; James T. McMurtrie, MD; Mason Frazier; Bradley Wills; John C.
Prather, MD; Gean C. Viner; Margie J. Hill; Michael D. Johnson, MD

Category: Trauma
Keywords: Talus Fractures; Autograft Repair; Trauma
Introduction/Purpose: The purpose of this study was to evaluate union of talar
neck fractures with critical bone defects treated acutely with autologous tibial bone graft
during primary osteosynthesis. We hypothesized that acute autografting leads to reliable
union rates.
Methods: A case series at a Level I trauma center was performed to identify
patients who underwent open reduction and internal fixation of talar neck fracture with
proximal tibial autograft between 2015 and 2018. Inclusion criteria were age greater than 18
years and displaced talar neck fracture with critical bone defect treated with tibial
autograft. Critical bone defect was defined as a gap greater than 5mm in the sagittal plane
and greater than 1/3 of the width of the talar neck in the coronal plane. Post-operative
foot CT scans were obtained for all patients to assess for union. Primary outcome was union
and secondary outcomes were malunion, avascular necrosis, post-traumatic arthritis, and
patient-reported outcomes (PRO) including PROMIS (Patient Reported Outcomes Measurement
Information System), Foot and Ankle Measurements: Activity of Daily Living and Sports (FAAM
ADL/Sports), Visual Analogue Scale for feet (VAS), Foot Function Index (FFI), and Short
Form-36 (SF-36).
Results: Twelve patients were included in the series. The average age was 34
years (17-59). The Hawkins classification of the fractures were four type II (33%) and eight
type III (67%). Five fractures (42%) were extruded tali. Four fractures (33%) were open
fractures, all being type III fractures. Union was achieved in eleven patients (92%).
Nonunion occurred in one patient (8%), who had an open, extruded talus fracture and was a
heavy smoker. Avascular necrosis occurred in 11 patients (92%). Ten patients (83%) had
radiographic tibiotalar post-traumatic arthritis (PTA), and 12 patients (100%) developed
subtalar PTA. Average PROMIS score was 37 (32-45) and average FAAM ADL and Sports was 61
(31-87) and 31 (0-71), respectively. Average VAS was 5 (0-10) and average FFI was 49 (7-89).
SF-36 scores showed fair to poor outcomes in the majority of patients.
Conclusion: Tibial autograft in primary osteosynthesis of comminuted talar
neck fractures with critical bone defects leads to reliable union rates and is an operative
strategy that should be considered when treating these difficult fractures. Despite high
union rates, secondary outcomes of AVN, PTA, and below-average PRO still occurred in the
majority of patients.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00392

## Research During Foot and Ankle Orthopaedic Fellowship and Association with Careers
Following Fellowship

Tamanna Patel, BA; Benjamin R. Williams, MD; Scott J. Ellis, MD

Category: Other
Keywords: Patient Education; General Principles / Context; Practice Models
Introduction/Purpose: Performing research during fellowship continues to
develop vital critical thinking skills for orthopaedic surgeons as they move into their
careers. As fellowships and academic careers become more competitive, research plays an
important role in fellow selection and future academic appointments. The purpose of this
study was to assess if research during fellowship, measured through journal publications,
was associated with careers in academic medicine and if those who published early in their
training continued to do so into their careers.
Methods: A list of foot and ankle fellows, from 2008-2013, were collected from
the AOFAS website. In February 2021, all collected fellows were searched on pubmed.gov to
generate all orthopaedic publications with a PubMed identifier published before residency,
during residency, during fellowship and after fellowship. Each publication’s 2020 Thomson
Reuters 5-Year Journal Impact Factor and fellows first authorship were noted. The collected
fellows were searched through Doximity.com for the name of their medical school, residency
and fellowship. The fellows were further searched for their current location of employment
and whether it was academic or not. An employment location was considered academic if they
were listed on a department website that also was involved in teaching residents. The number
of publications, journal Impact Factor and number of first authorships were compared between
the academic and non-academic groups during their time before residency, during residency,
during fellowship and after fellowship.
Results: A total of 246 fellows were included, with a mean (+- SD) of 0.8 +-
1.4 publications per fellow during fellowship. During the years in review, 27% (67/246) of
fellows entered a career in academics. Before residency, there was no difference in the
number of publications between those that went into academic and those that did not
[academics 0.54 +- 1.85, non-academic 0.27 +- 1.05 (p=0.154)]. During residency and
fellowship, those that went into academics were statistically significantly more likely to
publish than those that did not go into academics [during residency: academic 2.82 +- 4.53,
non-academic 1.24 +- 2.00 (p=0.0002); during fellowship: academic 1.10 +- 1.57, non-academic
0.69 +- 1.34 (p=0.038)] as well as more first authorships and in journals with higher impact
factors.
Conclusion: As fellowships and academic positions become more competitive, the
quality and number of journal publications are likely to become increasingly more important.
This study noted that an interest in academics likely develops during orthopaedic residency.
This study may help improve mentorship earlier on to those who are more likely to pursue a
career in academics.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00393

## Early Failure of Paragon28 Phantom Hindfoot Fusion Nail: A Case Report

Naveen Pattisapu, MD; Clayton C. Bettin, MD; Elizabeth Friedmann, MD; Michael L. Sims,
MD

Category: Diabetes; Hindfoot; Trauma
Keywords: Charcot Arthropathy; Ankle Fracture; Ankle Arthrodesis
Introduction/Purpose: Tibio-talar-calcaneal (TTC) fusion nails are commonly
used to treated acute ankle fractures in patients with diabetes, Charcot arthropathy or
other comorbidities. Recently, Paragon28 released the Phantom Hindfoot Fusion Nail (Phantom
nail) with a unique design feature-a proximal coil.
Methods: We present the case of a diabetic patient with an ankle
fracture-dislocation treated with the Paragon28 nail who experienced early implant
failure.
Results: A 48-year-old male with HIV, end-stage renal disease requiring
hemodialysis, and insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus with severe peripheral neuropathy
presented a trimalleolar ankle fracture-dislocation treated with a TTC nail. At his first
follow- up, he presented with early implant failure at the nail-coil interface.
Conclusion: The integrity of the Phantom nail, appropriate length, and
placement of the flex coil require further evaluation. Unstable pathologies such as
fractures may be better stabilized with a solid nail construct.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00394

## Reconstructive Surgical Management of Charcot Neuropathy of the Foot and Ankle: A
Retrospective Study

Naveen Pattisapu, MD; Clayton C. Bettin, MD; Jane C. Yeoh, MD; Shumaila Sarfani,
MD

Category: Diabetes
Keywords: Charcot Arthropathy; Charcot Diabetes Outcomes Amputations; Diabetic
Foot Ulcer
Introduction/Purpose: Treatment of Charcot neuropathy (CN) of the foot and
ankle remains a challenge for both patient and surgeon. Non-operative treatment with
immobilization in a cast/orthosis has long been the mainstay of treatment, but more recently
surgical intervention-with attention to internal fixation-has gained interest because of the
poor long-term outcomes with non-operative care.
Methods: To assess long-term outcomes between CN patients managed with
reconstructive surgeries at a tertiary referral center; a retrospective chart review
analyzed comorbidities, demographics, and complications (ulceration, infection, and below
the knee amputation).
Results: Over the last 16 years, 31 patients with CN were treated with
internal fixation (midfoot fusion, open reduction, or hindfoot fusion nail). Average BMI was
33.5, average number of comorbidities was 2.93, and the percentage of patients with a
vascular deficit was 19.3%. The rate of infection and ulceration prior to surgery was 19.4%
(6/31 patients) and 45.2% (14/31 patients) respectively. After surgery, the rate of new
infections was 38.7% (12/31 patients). The rate of new ulcerations was 41.9% (13/31
patients). The rates of below the knee amputation was 19.4% (6/31 patients).
Conclusion: A 16-year retrospective review of operative management of Charcot
neuropathy in 31 patients at a tertiary referral center found high rates of ulceration,
infection, and amputation in patients treated with internal fixation. This study could prove
valuable in counseling CN patients regarding reconstructive surgery.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00395

## Fusion Rates Following First Metatarsophalangeal Arthrodesis using a Dynamic Nitinol
Staple-Plate Construct, Minimum 1-Year Follow-Up

Terrence M. Philbin, DO; Antonio M. Malloy McCoy; Amar Chandra; Devon Consul, DPM;
Mitchell Thompson; Kevin N. Nguyen

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: First MTP Arthrodesis; Arthrodesis; Staples
Introduction/Purpose: Arthrodesis has long been the procedure of choice for
end-stage arthritis of the first metatarsophalangeal joint (MTP). Multiple constructs have
been described through literature with good fusion rates and patient outcomes. Methods
allowing for ease of application and reduction of OR time without sacrificing surgical
outcomes and fusion rates are therefore of considerable interest.
Methods: In this study, we retrospectively reviewed a cohort of 33 patients
undergoing arthrodesis of the first MTP utilizing a dynamic Nitinol staple and plate
construct. The primary focus of our study was to evaluate the fusion rates following the
aforementioned procedure. All patients within the study received a compression staple-plate
construct placed across the first MTP and underwent the same post-operative protocol with
radiographs taken at set intervals to evaluate fusion across the joint.
Results: Our results demonstrated a 100% fusion rate with 3 delayed unions and
no incidences of hardware failure. The time to fusion and fusion rates seen in this study
are comparable to those previously reported in literature.
Conclusion: We conclude that utilization of this construct is a viable option
for arthrodesis of the first MTP, and its ease of application may decrease overall operating
time which could prove advantageous over other, more commonly used methods.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00396

## Delayed Surgery for Ankle Fractures is Associated with Poor Patient Reported
Outcome

Kristian Pilskog, MD; Eivind Inderhaug; Heid Elin J. Odland, MD; Teresa B. Gote; Knut
Fjeldsgaard; Håvard Dale; Jonas M. Fevang

Category: Trauma; Ankle
Keywords: Ankle Fracture; PRO; Posterior Malleolus Fracture
Introduction/Purpose: Several studies discuss the relation between prolonged
time to surgery and postoperative complications in ankle fractures, but little is known
about how a longer wait affects clinical outcomes. The present study, therefore, aims to
assess the association between time from injury to surgery and patient-reported outcomes
after operative treatment of severe ankle fractures.
Methods: Patients treated operatively for low-energy ankle fractures which
also involve the posterior malleolus from 2014 to 2016 were included. Patient charts were
reviewed for patient demographics, type of trauma, fracture characteristics, treatment
given, and complications. Ankle function was evaluated on a follow-up visit by clinical
examination, radiographs and patient- reported outcome measures (SEFAS, RAND-36, VAS of
Pain, VAS of Satisfaction). For analyses, patients were stratified based on time from injury
to definitive surgery; Group 1: within the same day, Group 2: 1 to 7 days after injury, and
Group 3: later than 7 days after injury.
Results: Follow-up visits of 130 patients were performed at median 25
(Interquartile range (IQR), 19-34) months after surgery. Patient demographics and fracture
characteristics were similar between groups. Median SEFAS was 40 in Group 1 (IQR 33-43), 41
(IQR 33-44) in Group 2, and 33 (IQR 27-42) in Group 3. The difference between Group 1 and 3
(p =.03), and between Group 2 and 3 (p =.04) was statistically significant. Group 1 had the
highest rate of mechanical irritation and secondary surgery following malreduced fractures
or missing syndesmotic fixation. Patients operated later than seven days from injury
reported more pain than those treated earlier (p =.03).
Conclusion: Time from injury to final surgery influenced clinical outcomes
after these severe ankle fractures. Patients who waited more than seven days until
definitive surgery had poorer clinical outcomes and more pain compared to those who had
surgery within a week.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00397

## Association of Length of Stay and COVID-19 in Rotational Ankle Fracture Surgery in the
National COVID Cohort Collaborative (N3C)

Charles C. Pitts, MD; Eli Levitt, MS; David A. Patch, MD; Alfredo Terrero, MD; Reed
Butler, MD; Brent A. Ponce; Steven M. Theiss, MD; Clay A. Spitler, MD; Michael D. Johnson,
MD

Category: Ankle; Trauma
Keywords: Ankle; Fractures; Outcomes Measures
Introduction/Purpose: Coronavirus (COVID-19) is an emerging, rapidly evolving
situation. The National COVID Cohort Collaborative (N3C) is an innovative approach to
integrate real-world clinical observations into a harmonized database. To investigate the
outcomes of adults with ankle fracture surgery during the (COVID-19) pandemic, we had the
following research question: What are the outcomes of ankle fracture patients with COVID-19
(invasive ventilation, length of stay, death)? The purpose of this abstract is to introduce
the largest cohort of ankle fracture patients to date with a comparison between lab-
confirmed COVID-19-positive and COVID-19-negative.
Methods: A retrospective cohort of adults with ankle fracture surgery in the
N3C Data Enclave. The N3C Data Enclave is an NIH-funded, secure platform through which the
harmonized clinical data from electronic health records is stored (https://covid.cd2h.org/). COVID-19 status was determined using a set of 55
SARS-CoV-2 polymerase chain reaction and antigen lab tests. Ankle fracture surgery was
defined using SNOMED codes for 'fracture of bone' and one of the following CPT codes '27766,
27769, 27792, 27814, 27822, 27823, 27829' for 'ankle fracture surgery.'
Results: A total population of 3.4 million patient records was queried in the
National COVID Cohort, identifying 2,032 participants with ankle fracture surgery. The age
range of the overall group was 18-98 years. Comparing COVID-19-positive to
COVID-19-negative, the age (48.9 years vs 47.7 years) and gender (66.7% female vs 55.1%
female) distribution of each group were comparable (both p>0.05). COVID-19-positive
comprised 2.4% of the group (n=48). The length of stay was 4.7 days longer in the
COVID-19-positive group (8.7 days vs 4.0 days, p<0.001). Higher proportions of
COVID-19-positive patients who required invasive ventilation (12.5% vs 3.2%, p<0.002).
The number of outcomes for mortality was too few to report.
Conclusion: Based on the initial results, rotational ankle fractures requiring
surgery necessitated longer hospitalizations in COVID-19-positive patients during the
COVID-19 pandemic than in patients without the virus. The average increased length in
hospitalization was, on average, about 6 days. When treated in isolation, ankle fractures
can often be treated on an outpatient basis, and a multiple-day increase in average hospital
stay is substantial. Though the overall complication profiles (with the exception of
pulmonary disease) were similar, lengthy hospital stays could lead to delays in the recovery
and rehabilitative process, and functional outcomes could not be determined in our
study.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00398

## Diabetic Kidney Disease is Associated with Increased Complications Following Operative
Management of Ankle Fractures

William S. Polachek; Hayden P. Baker; James S. Dahm, MD; Jason Strelzow; Kelly K.
Hynes, MD

Category: Trauma; Ankle; Diabetes
Keywords: Ankle Fracture; Diabetes; Complications
Introduction/Purpose: Diabetes mellitus and peripheral neuropathy are
established risk factors for complications in operatively treated ankle fractures.
Generally, the presence of peripheral neuropathy and diabetic nephropathy have been used as
dependent variables in studies of diabetic ankle fracture cohorts, but these factors are
typically treated as binary risk factors. Thus, we sought to quantify additional risk
factors for complication specific to diabetic patients undergoing fracture fixation.
Methods: We identified 617 rotational ankle fractures treated operatively at a
single academic medical center from 2010-2019, of which 160 were identified as diabetic. Of
these, 91 ankle fractures in 90 diabetic patients met criteria for retrospective review of
clinical and radiographic data. Criteria included perioperative laboratory studies,
including Hemoglobin A1c and estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR), as well as
follow-up radiographs in the electronic record. We defined complications in this surgical
cohort as deep surgical site infection, unplanned return to the OR and failure of fixation.
Logistic regression was performed, and odds ratios (OR) calculated.
Results: The overall the complication rate was 24.2% (22/91) in this cohort.
Median follow-up was 29 weeks (range: 5-520 weeks). Mean perioperative Hemoglobin A1c in
patients who experienced postoperative complications was 7.6% (Range: 5.1%- 14.2%) compared
to 7.8% (Range:5.6%-13.5%) who did not (p=0.69). Diabetic patients with chronic kidney
disease (eGFR<60 ml/min/BSA) (OR=5.29, p=0.006) and peripheral neuropathy (OR=4.61,
p=0.003) were at significantly higher risk of all complications compared to diabetic
patients without these comorbidities. Of note, we did not find an association between
perioperative Hemoglobin A1c or Body Mass Index and complication rate.
Conclusion: Patients with diabetes complicated by chronic kidney disease are
at significantly higher risk of complications following operative management of ankle
fractures. Our study also corroborated previous reports that within this high-risk cohort,
the presence of peripheral neuropathy is a significant risk factor for complications. These
sequalae of diabetic disease extends beyond simple glycemic and are manifestations of
microvascular disease, glycosylation of soft tissues and impaired metabolic pathways.
Identifying these risk factors in diabetic patients allows for patient specific risk
stratification, education, and management decisions of ankle fractures.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00399

## Preoperative Opioid Prescription is a Risk Factor for Extended Opioid Filling After
Ankle Arthroscopy

William S. Polachek; Cody Lee; Bryan L. Scott; Kelly K. Hynes, MD

Category: Arthroscopy; Ankle; Sports; Other
Keywords: Ankle Arthroscopy; Osteochondral Lesions; Ankle Pain
Introduction/Purpose: Opioids can be an important tool in the management of
postoperative pain, however, increased prescribing of these medications following
orthopaedic procedures has significantly contributed to the current opioid crisis. Post-
operative opioid utilization and duration varies greatly among surgeons, procedures, and
patients. We sought to investigate patterns of opioid prescription following ankle
arthroscopy and determine patient factors associated with increased postoperative opioid
prescribing.
Methods: A national claims-based database was queried for patients undergoing
first-time ankle arthroscopy. Only patients with continuous database inclusion for at least
one year prior to and one year after index ankle arthroscopy were included. Patients
carrying an International Classification of Diseases (ICD)-9 or ICD-10 code(s) for diagnosis
of septic ankle joint or a CPT code for total ankle arthroplasty prior to index ankle
arthroscopy were excluded from the study. Patients who filled at least 1 opioid prescription
between 1 and 4 months prior to surgery were defined as preoperative opioid-use group.
Monthly relative risk ratios for filling an opioid prescription were calculated for the
first year after surgery. Multiple logistic regression analysis was performed to identify
factors associated with opioid prescription refills at 3, 6, 9, and 12 months after ankle
arthroscopy. For analysis, P<0.05 was defined as significant.
Results: We identified 6,039 patients who underwent primary ankle arthroscopy.
The preoperative opioid-use group consisted of 1,514 patients (25.1%), of which 24 (1.6%)
filled opioid prescriptions at 6 months postoperatively compared to 39 (0.9%) of
opioid-naive patients (relative risk [RR], 1.84 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.11-3.05).
Multivariate analysis determined that the preoperative opioid-use group was at increased
risk of filling prescriptions at 3 (odds ratio [OR], 2.22; 95% CI 1.42-3.48) and 6 months
(OR, 1.74; 95% CI, 1.01-2.95) postoperatively. Patients with Body Mass Index (BMI) > 30
were also at increased risk at 3 months (OR, 1.65; 95% CI, 1.04-2.62) and 6 months (OR,
2.01; 95% CI, 1.17-3.49) postoperatively. Comorbidities such as diabetes, hypertension,
fibromyalgia, alcohol, and tobacco abuse were not associated with opioid filling
(P>0.05).
Conclusion: Preoperative opioid prescription filling and BMI 30 were
associated with an increased risk of extended opioid prescription utilization following
ankle arthroscopy. Overall, prolonged opioid prescribing was not widespread in either group
postoperatively. This may represent the indications and outcomes of ankle arthroscopy.
Patients presenting with preoperative opioid-use and increased BMI may benefit from
multimodal pain management and additional perioperative education around non- pharmacologic
pain-management strategies to decrease risk of prolonged opioid use.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00400

## The STAMP Test: A Novel Clinical Test in Diagnosing Achilles Tendon Ruptures

Giselle M. Porter; Edward T. Haupt, MD; Jonathan R. Kaplan, MD; Timothy P. Charlton,
MD

Category: Ankle
Keywords: Achilles Tendon Rupture; Acute Achilles Injuries; Achilles
Tendon
Introduction/Purpose: Achilles tendon ruptures are common injuries, and an
estimated 20-25% injuries are missed acutely. Chronic and acute Achilles tendon rupture
patients typically present with nonspecific complaints and physical exam findings. Commonly
used physical exam maneuvers such as the Thompson test have variable sensitivity and
reliability for the examiner. The patient with an Achilles tendon rupture will have expected
plantar-flexion weakness, however clinical data utilizing plantarflexion weakness to develop
a physical exam maneuver is lacking. We propose two new tests with sensitivity and
specificity analysis to evaluate this understanding in the clinical setting: the Stand and
Maintain Plantarflexion (STAMP) and Tendo-Achilles Rise (TAR) tests. We hypothesize that the
STAMP and TAR exams maneuvers will have high sensitivity for diagnosis of acute and chronic
Achilles tendon rupture.
Methods: Data was collected from a single surgeon’s practice at two large
urban treatment centers. Data was retrospectively acquired over a period of 7 years and then
prospectively acquired over a period of 5 years. Patients with mid-substance Achilles tendon
rupture confirmed with MRI imaging or operative treatment were included. We examined
clinical data regarding ambulation, resting tension, palpable Achilles gap, Thompson test,
and STAMP and TAR tests on initial presentation. The STAMP test is performed by the patient
attempting a wall assisted double leg heel rise and lifting the uninjured foot off the
ground. It is consistent with an Achilles tendon rupture if the patient is unable to
maintain this position for five seconds. The TAR test is performed by the patient attempting
a wall assisted single leg heel rise. It is consistent with an Achilles tendon rupture if
the patient is unable to maintain this position for five seconds.
Results: 71 patients with complete mid-substance Achilles tendon ruptures that
met inclusion criteria were identified. 45 (63%) presented acutely and 26 patients (37%)
presented chronically. The Thompson test displayed a diagnostic sensitivity of (12 26 46%)
for chronic ruptures and (38 45 84%) for acute ruptures. The STAMP and TAR tests displayed a
diagnostic sensitivity of (22 26 85%) for chronic ruptures and (45 45 100%) for acute
ruptures with a diagnostic specificity of (89%).
Conclusion: Achilles tendon ruptures can be difficult to diagnose due to
inconsistent symptoms and clinical exam findings. The STAMP and TAR physical exam tests have
high sensitivity to clinically diagnose Achilles tendon rupture both in the acute and
chronic setting and are superior to well-described physical exam tests. The findings support
that the addition of the STAMP and TAR diagnostic protocol may be clinically beneficial when
diagnosing Achilles tendon ruptures in both the acute and chronic setting. Future work
should be focused on providing direct comparison to other exam maneuvers as well as
identifying data reliability.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00401

## “In-Situ” Joint Preparation Technique for First Metatarsophalangeal Joint Arthrodesis:
A Retrospective Comparative Study with “Flat-Cuts” Technique

Dan Prat, MD; Brandon A. Haghverdian, MD; Eric Pridgen; Wonyong Lee, MD; Keith L.
Wapner, MD; Wen Chao, MD; Kathryn O'Connor, MD; Daniel C. Farber, MD

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot; Bunion
Keywords: 1st MTP Joint; Hallux Rigidus; First MTP Arthrodesis
Introduction/Purpose: The most common joint preparation techniques mentioned
in literature for 1st metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joint arthrodesis are 'cup and cone' and
'flat-cuts'. A third option of an 'in-situ' technique, has rarely been studied. This study
compares the clinical, radiographic, and patients-reported outcomes of 'in-situ' joint
preparation with a traditional 1st MTP joint preparation technique.
Methods: The 'in-situ' technique utilizes the same dorsal surgical incision as
traditional techniques. Cartilage and osteophyte removal are carried out using standard
techniques without the use of specific reamers or a sagittal saw. The arthrodesis is
performed in-situ with the similar freedom of joint positioning as the cup and cone
technique, and traditional fixation constructs are applied. In this study, A retrospective
chart review was performed for patients who underwent 1st MTP joint arthrodesis between
January 2015 and December 2019. The complication, revision and non-union rates were examined
in a multivariable logistic regression model. Patient reported outcome were analyzed in a
repeated measures general linear model. Analysis of variance and Receiver Operating
Characteristic were used to assess radiographic measurements.
Results: Total of 388 1st MTP joint arthrodesis cases were included. Overall,
262 'Flat-Cuts' and 126 'In-Situ' cases were analyzed. Mean follow-up time was 292 days
(median 174, SD 305). Joint-preparation technique did not have statistically significant
impact on union rates (p=0.311) or revision rates (p=0.898). Diabetes-Mellitus was the most
powerful predictor of non-union (p<0.001, OR 6.558, 95% CI: 2.534-16.969) and revision
(p=0.02, OR 3.662, 95% CI: 1.230-10.905). The rate of transfer- metatarsalgia was
significantly higher in 'flat-cuts' (p=0.015, OR 6.808, 95% CI: 1.460-31.744).
Visual-Analogue-Scale and PROMIS- CAT-Physical significantly improved at 6-weeks, 3-months,
and at last follow-up in both techniques (p<0.001, p=0.001), and the improvement was
comparable between the techniques (p=0.078, p=0.100).'In-situ' technique resulted in
significantly less mean 1st- ray shortening (3.05mm vs 7.64mm, p<0.001). In a
Receiver-Operating-Characteristic analysis of transfer metatarsalgia and 1st ray shortening,
the optimal diagnostic cut-off was 6.87 mm (LR 1.67, AUC 0.652, p=0.005, 95% CI:
0.56-0.74).
Conclusion: 'In-situ' joint preparation technique is a simple, safe, and
cost-effective technique for 1st MTP joint arthrodesis. In our series, 'in-situ' technique
had a similar or better complication profile than the 'flat-cuts', while providing similar
patient- reported outcomes. 'In-situ' technique resulted in significantly less 1st ray
shortening, which was a predictor of transfer metatarsalgia.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00402

## Revision First Metatarsophalangeal Joint Fusion for Non-Union, Implant Failures, and
Failed Hallux Valgus Correction: Does the Indication Matter?

Dan Prat, MD; Brandon A. Haghverdian; Eric Pridgen; Wonyong Lee, MD; Keith L. Wapner,
MD; Wen Chao, MD; Daniel C. Farber, MD

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot; Bunion
Keywords: 1st MTP Joint; First MTP Arthrodesis; Complications
Introduction/Purpose: The most common indications for revision of 1st
Metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joint surgery are symptomatic failures of prior fusion, failed
hallux valgus correction, and failed MTP arthroplasty implants. The outcome of revision 1st
MTP fusion has rarely been studied. The purpose of this study was to compare the clinical,
radiographic, and patient-reported outcomes of revision MTP fusion for different
indications.
Methods: A retrospective chart review was performed for patients who underwent
revision 1st MTP fusion between January 2015 and December 2019 in a single-center, by 4
fellowship-trained foot and ankle surgeons. The complication, revision, and non- union rates
as well as VAS and PROMIS scores and pre-operative and post-operative radiographs were
analyzed and compared between the different indication groups. Univariate and multivariate
analysis and logistic regression models were used to obtain odds ratio of the explanatory
variables for outcome measures.
Results: A total of 79 cases of revision MTP fusion were included.
Thirty-eight cases of hallux valgus corrections salvage, 22 failed MTP arthroplasty
implants, 6 failed polyvinyl alcohol hydrogel implants, 13 prior MTP fusion non-unions. The
mean follow-up time was 350 days (Median 226, SD 306). Seven cases (8.9%) required
structural iliac-crest bone graft during the revision. Seven cases (8.9%) required allograft
augmentation. The overall complication rate was 40.7%. Fifteen patients (18.5%) were
classified as Clavien-Dindo grade 3, which represents a complication that may require a
revision surgery (i.e. non-union, deep infection, loss of correction). Eventually, 7 cases
(8.9%) underwent further revision surgery. The logistic regression model demonstrated that
indication for revision was not significantly related to union rate (p=0.280).
Visual-Analogue-Scale significantly improved at 6 weeks, 3 months, and at last follow-up in
all indications for revision (p=0.001). PROMIS-10 Physical and PROMIS-10 Mental did not
change significantly during follow-up (p=0.860, p=0.589).
Conclusion: Treatment of 1st MTP joint surgery failures is a clinical
challenge in orthopaedic surgery. In our study, revision of 1st MTP joint surgery with MTP
fusion had higher non-union rates and higher overall complication rates compared to primary
1st MTP fusion. Nevertheless, revision rates remained comparable to primary 1st MTP fusion.
Complication rates and patient- reported outcomes were similar between the different
indications for revision groups. Visual-analogue-scale improved significantly during
follow-up in all groups. Diabetes mellitus had a significant impact on non-union rates and
overall complication rates.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00403

## Mortality in Patients after Diabetic Charcot Foot-Related Procedures

Anna Ptasinski; Zachary Koroneos; Chris M. Stauch, BS; Brandon Martinazzi, BS; Michael
C. Aynardi, MD

Category: Diabetes; Hindfoot; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Charcot Arthropathy; Charcot Diabetes Outcomes Amputations;
Charcot
Introduction/Purpose: Diabetic Charcot foot is a chronic and progressive
disease, following neuropathic loss of protective sensation and causing destruction of the
joints. It is classically identified through a rocker-bottom deformity and may also present
with a collapse of the medial arch, bony prominences, and ligamentous instability. Charcot
leads to further morbidities, and patients may require surgeries including below the knee
amputations or limb salvage reconstruction to treat the disease if conservative treatments
fail. Previous literature demonstrated that foot ulceration is associated with mortality in
diabetic patients, but no clear association between Charcot diagnosis and mortality has been
identified. The purpose of this study was to investigate the mortality in patients diagnosed
with acute diabetic Charcot foot.
Methods: After institutional review board approval, all patients at a single
institution that underwent an orthopaedic surgery for the treatment of Charcot during
2015-2020 were queried using hospital and public records. Demographic data, as well as the
30- day, 90-day, 1-year, and 5-year mortality were recorded.
Results: 79 patients were identified, with 57 (72%) males and 22 (28%) females
with Charcot-related surgeries between 2015 and 2020. At the time of surgery, the average
age was 58.2 (28-83) years. At the time of analysis, 61 (77%) patients were still living,
but 18 (23%) patients were deceased with mortality within 30 days (1), 90 days (5), 1 year
(9), and 5 years (18) of the Charcot-related procedure. For deceased patients, the average
age of death was 59.6 years (30-83 years). The average number of days post- operation until
death was 460 days (23-1613 days).
Conclusion: Diabetic Charcot foot is a serious and debilitating complication
of diabetic neuropathy. This data demonstrates that 23% of patients analyzed expired an
average of 1.26 years after Charcot-related surgery. In addition, patients that were
deceased were an average of 59.6 years of age, suggesting that Charcot may be associated
with early mortality. Future studies will include an analysis of possible predictors of
mortality for patients diagnosed with Charcot foot to evolve clinical and surgical
management of patients.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00404

## Anatomy of the Intermetatarsal Facets of the Fourth and Fifth Metatarsals

Mossub Qatu, MD; James R. Jastifer, MD

Category: Basic Sciences/Biologics
Keywords: Fifth Metatarsal; Jones Fracture; 5th Metatarsal Fractures
Introduction/Purpose: The intermetatarsal joint between the fourth and fifth
metatarsals (4-5 IM) is important in defining fifth metatarsal fractures. The purpose of the
current study was to quantify this joint in order to determine the mean cartilage area, the
percentage of the articulation that is cartilage, and to give the clinician data to help
understand the joint anatomy as it relates to fifth metatarsal fracture classification.
Methods: Twenty cadaver 4-5 IM joints were dissected. Digital images were
taken and the articular cartilage was quantified by calibrated digital imaging software.
Results: For the lateral fourth proximal intermetatarsal articulation, the
mean area of articulation was 188 + 49 mm, with 49% of the area composed of articular
cartilage. The shape of the articular cartilage had 3 variations: triangular, oval, and
square. A triangular variant was the most common (80%, 16 of 20 specimens). For the medial
fifth proximal intermetatarsal articulation, the mean area of articulation was 143 + 30 mm,
with 48% of the joint surface being composed of articular cartilage. The shape of the
articular surface was oval or triangular. An oval variant was the most common (75%, 15 of 20
specimens).
Conclusion: This study supports the notion that the 4-5 IM joint is not
completely articular and has both fibrous and cartilaginous components.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00405

## A New Approach for Stage 2 Adult Acquired Flatfoot Deformity

Fernando C. Raduan, MD; J. Chris Coetzee, MD; Bryan D. Den Hartog, MD; Jeffrey D.
Seybold, MD; Paul M. Cammack, MD; Rebecca M. Stone, MS; Jacquelyn E. Fritz, BS; Kayla
Seiffert

Category: Hindfoot
Keywords: Flexible Flatfoot; Arthrodesis; PTTD
Introduction/Purpose: Adult Acquired Flatfoot Deformity (AAFD) is a common
progressive pathology that mainly affects patients after their 50s. Even though it is not
clear yet what causes AAFD, the great majority of patients have their talonavicular (TN)
joint sub dislocated in one or more planes. According to the severity of the deformity and
its flexibility, different surgical procedures can be performed to realign the foot. The
deformities usually happen around the TN joint, making it the center of rotation and
angulation (CORA). Corrections on the CORA realign deformities in different planes and his
concept can be applied to mostly any deformity. The objective of this study is to evaluate
clinically and radiographically patients with stage 2 AAFD submitted to isolated TN
fusion.
Methods: Fifty-four patients (59 feet) from July 2013 to December 2019 with
stage 2 AAFD were submitted to isolated TN fusion. All patients had clinical deformity and
arch foot collapse associated with pain along the medial hindfoot. Weight-bearing x- rays
were performed pre-operatively, the Meary’s and calcaneal pitch angles were measured on
lateral view and the Talar coverage and Simmon’s angle were measured on antero-posterior
view. Angles were measured by a fully trained foot and ankle surgeon. Post-operative
measurements were done with the same set of images by the same surgeon, one month after the
initial measurements. FAAM and VR12 were used to compare patient’s clinical status. Patients
with previous surgeries on the foot or ankle and patients submitted to other fusions or
hindfoot osteotomies were excluded from the study. Gastrocnemius lengthening and toes
corrections were not an exclusion criterion.
Results: Thirty-seven females and seventeen males were evaluated with a mean
age 61 years at the time of surgery. Only the FAAM score significantly improved from
pre-operative (FAAM = 48.48, VR-12 Mental = 55.73, VR-12 Physical = 37.25) to most recent
mean follow-up of 16.2 months (FAAM = 58.45 (p<.001), VR-12 Mental = 57.19 (p=.179),
VR-12 Physical = 37.53 (p=.832). The lateral view X-Rays showed Meary’s and calcaneal pitch
angles mean improving from 27 and 15 degrees pre-operatively to 9 and 18 degrees post
operatively (p<.001), whereas Front view foot X-Rays showed Talo-Naviciular coverage
angle and Simmon’s angle going from 35 and 20 degrees to 5 and 6 degrees respectively
(p<.001)
Conclusion: Isolated talonavicular fusion can correct the deformity on its
multiple planes providing not only significant improvement on radiographic alignment but
also the FAAM clinical outcome score. Comparative studies should be performed to determine
which is the best technique for patients with stage 2 AAFD.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00406

## Weber C Fractures Treated with ORIF, Syndesmotic Dynamic Fixation and Open Deltoid
Repair: Clinical and Radiographic Evaluation after Minimum 12 Months

Fernando C. Raduan, MD; Bryan D. Den Hartog, MD; J. Chris Coetzee, MD; Jeffrey D.
Seybold, MD; William M. Engasser, MD; Paul M. Cammack, MD; Rebecca Stone McGaver;
Jacquelyn E. Fritz, BS; Kayla Seiffert

Category: Trauma; Ankle
Keywords: Ankle Fracture; Deltoid Rupture; Syndesmotic Injury
Introduction/Purpose: Ankle fractures are among the most common fractures in
the body and it can affect not only professional athletes but also lower activity level and
sedentary patients. The standard treatment for displaced fractures is open reduction and
internal fixation. Even though the management for Weber B and C fractures is well stablished
in the literature, deltoid ligament repair is still debatable. Medial ligament instability
is a result of deltoid ligament failure and usually leads to valgus deformity of the ankle
and severe morbidity over time. The primary objective of this study is to analyze clinically
and radiographically, patients with Weber C fractures and deltoid ligament injury who were
submitted to fibular fracture and syndesmotic fixation, associated with deltoid ligament
repair.
Methods: Forty one patients who had Weber C fractures with deltoid ligament
lesion from January 2013 to December 2019 had their medical records and X-Rays reviewed by a
fully trained foot and ankle surgeon. The patients were between 14 and 69 years old and had
their medial clear space wider than 4mm on initial X-Rays (our criteria for deltoid ligament
lesion). Patients with Weber A or B, diabetics and with previous surgeries on the ankle were
excluded. Patients were submitted to open anatomic reduction and fixation of the fibula, the
syndesmosis was fixed with dynamic fixation system and the deltoid was reattached to the tip
of the medial malleolus with one suture anchor. Medial Clear Spcace, Tibiofiluar clear space
and Tibiofibular overlap were measuresd on weight bearing X-Rays done on the last follow up
visit. FAAM sports Subscale17 and VR12 were used to evaluate clinical status of our
patients.
Results: Forty one patients were analyzed on this series after 22 months on
average. The mean age at operation was 37.7 years old. There were 32 males and 9 females.
Mental and Physical VR-12 scores went from 56 and 37 pre-operatively to 57 and 50 on their
final evaluation. Activity Daily Living and Sports FAAM scores improved from 27 and 7 to 19
and 88 respectively. Post- operative mean medial clear space was 3mm, and mean tibio-fibular
clear space was 5mm. The average tibio-fibular overlap percentage was 46%. Patient’s overall
satisfaction rate was 86.7%.
Conclusion: Weber C fractures with Deltoid ligament lesion can be successfully
treated with anatomic reduction, syndesmotic fixation (dyanamic systems) and open deltoid
repairs. Patients show excellent reduction parameters on weight-bearing X-Rays and good
clinical outcomes after a minimum 12 months follow up. Comparative studies with and without
deltoid ligament repair should be performed to compare two techniques. Weight-bearing CT
scan could be used in future studies for more accurate evaluation of the syndesmotic
reduction and medial clear space.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00407

## Surgical Treatment for Septic Ankle Arthritis: A Comparison of Arthrotomy and
Arthroscopy

Pradip Ramamurti; Amil R. Agarwal; Alex Gu, MD; William V. Probasco, MD, MS;
Savyasachi C. Thakkar; Marc D. Chodos, MD

Category: Ankle; Arthroscopy
Keywords: Ankle Arthroscopy; Operative Approach; Arthroscopy
Introduction/Purpose: Ankle joint septic arthritis can result in substantial
morbidity involving cartilage destruction, bone erosion, osteomyelitis and loss of function.
Operative intervention is the preferred method of irrigation and debridement, and options
include both open arthrotomy and arthroscopic debridement. Prior studies have established
both ankle arthroscopy and arthrotomy as effective management strategies for the treatment
of ankle septic arthritis. However, no prior research has compared open arthrotomy verses
arthroscopy to treat septic arthritis of the ankle, and it is unclear if one approach is
superior to the other. The purpose of this study is to compare the rate of reoperation and
90-day perioperative complications between arthroscopy and open arthrotomy for the treatment
of septic ankle arthritis using a national all-payer claims database.
Methods: Patients who were diagnosed with septic arthritis in a native ankle
and underwent irrigation and debridement through arthroscopy or arthrotomy were identified
in the 2010-2019 PearlDiver database using International classification of diseases (ICD)
and current procedural (CPT) codes. Demographic characteristics including age, gender and
Elixhauser comorbidities were obtained for each cohort. The rate of reoperation, defined as
a proxy for failure of initial intervention, was the primary outcome. Secondary outcomes
including readmission, surgical site infection (SSI) and other 90-day complications were
compared between the two cohorts. Univariate analysis using chi-square tests and student
T-tests were performed to analyze any differences in patient demographics, comorbidities and
complications. Multivariate analysis through logistic regression was subsequently conducted
to account for any confounding variables and covariates.
Results: In total, 331 patients undergoing arthroscopy and 886 patients
undergoing arthrotomy for septic ankle arthritis were identified. On univariate analysis,
the incidence of reoperation was higher in the open arthrotomy cohort (12.30%) compared to
the arthroscopy cohort (9.37%), however this result was not statistically significant
(p=.153). There was also no statistically significant difference between the two cohorts in
superficial SSI incidence (3.95% vs. 2.42%, p=.197), readmission rates (36.79% vs. 34.14%,
p=.0.391). However, the incidence of renal failure was higher in the open arthrotomy cohort
(17.83%) compared with the arthroscopy cohort (12.39%) (p=.022). On multivariate analysis,
the incidence of reoperation was higher for those undergoing ankle arthrotomy (OR 1.421; 95%
CI 0.937-2.255; p=.108) relative to arthroscopy, however this result was not statistically
significant (Table 1). The incidence of renal failure was higher in the open arthrotomy
cohort after multivariate analysis (OR 1.615; 95% CI 1.113-2.393; p=0.014).
Conclusion: This study demonstrated similar 90-day rates of reoperation,
postoperative complications and readmissions, suggesting that arthrotomy and arthroscopy
have similar efficacy in treating septic ankle arthritis. Although renal failure was more
prevalent in the cohort undergoing open arthrotomy, differences in the primary endpoint of
reoperation/repeat washout rates were non-significant. Based on these findings, deciding
between these two operative approaches may be determined by patient specific risk factors
and factors not elicited by this study including surgeon comfort with the technique, rather
than the treatment modality itself.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00408

## Ankle Fractures Involving the Posterior Malleolus: 7-Year Results in 100 Cases

Stefan Rammelt, MD, PhD; Annika P. Neumann

Category: Ankle; Trauma
Keywords: Internal Fixation; Posterior Malleolus Fracture; Syndesmotic
Reduction
Introduction/Purpose: The presence of a posterior malleolar (PM) fragment has
a negative prognostic impact in ankle fractures. The best treatment is still subject to
debate and new concepts continue to emerge. The aim of this study was to assess the medium-
to long-term clinical and functional outcome of ankle fractures with a PM fragment in a
larger patient population treated with an individualized treatment approach.
Methods: One hundred patients with ankle fractures involving the PM were
identified retrospectively and reevaluated at an average follow-up of 7.0 years. Fixation of
the PM was tailored to the individual fracture pattern. Bartoníček-Rammelt type I PM
fractures (extraincisural shell-like fragments) were not fixed surgically. Displaced Type II
(posterolateral fragments) and type III PM fractures (two-part with medial extension) were
mostly fixed with direct posterior screw or plate fixation. Intercalary joint fragments were
fixed with lost K-wires or resorbable pins. Type IV PM fractures (large triangular
fragments) were treated with either posterior screw / plate fixation or indirect
anteroposterior screw fixation with direct transfibular control of reduction, if
feasible.
Results: Internal PM fragment fixation was negatively correlated with the need
for syndesmotic screw placement at the time of surgery (p=0.010). At 7 years, the mean Foot
Function Index was 16.5, the Olerud Molander Ankle Score averaged 80.2 and the American
Orthopaedic Foot & Ankle Society ankle/hindfoot score averaged 87.5. The physical (PCS)
and mental health component summary (MCS) scores of the SF-36 averaged 47.7 and 50.5,
respectively. Range of motion was within 3.4 degrees of the uninjured side. The size of the
PM fragment had no prognostic value. There was a trend to lower outcome scores with anterior
or posterior shift of the distal fibula of 1 mm within the tibial incisura. Patients who
underwent primary internal fixation had significantly superior SF-36 MCS than patients who
underwent staged internal fixation (p=0.031). Two patients (2%) needed secondary ankle
fusion following deep infection.
Conclusion: With an individualized treatment protocol, tailored to the
CT-based assessment of PM fractures, favorable medium and long-term results can be expected.
The mere size of the PM fragment is just one of the factors guiding treatment, other
important criteria are fragment displacement, impaction of the tibial plafond and incisura
involvement. PM fixation provides direct bone-to-bone fixation of the syndesmosis and
significantly reduces the need for additional transsyndesmotic fixation with a screw or
flexible implant.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00409

## Quadrimalleolar Fractures of the Ankle: Principles and Medium-Term Results of Surgical
Fixation

Stefan Rammelt, MD, PhD; Livia Kroker; Annika P. Neumann

Category: Ankle; Trauma
Keywords: Ankle Fracture; Clinical Outcomes; Distal Tibia
Introduction/Purpose: Over the last decade, much attention has been paid to
the fractures of the posterior malleolus as it became obvious that the mere presence of a
posterior tibial fragment is associated with a less favorable prognosis in malleolar
fractures. It seems logical to pay the anterior restraints of the ankle joint a similar
attention as to the posterior ones. The anteriolateral distal tibia may be considered a
'fourth' or anterior malleolus. Here, we present a technique of fixation of trimalleolar
fractures with additional fracture of the anterior tibial tubercle ('quadrimalleolar') or
anterior fibular rim ('quadrimalleolar equivalent').
Methods: Twenty-four patients with a mean age of 60 years were treated with
open reduction and internal fixation of all 4 malleoli. There were 17 quadrimalleolar and 6
quadrimalleolar equivalent fractures. One patient had both anterior tibial and fibular
avulsion fractures in addition to a trimalleolar ankle fracture. Surgical approaches and
internal fixation were tailored individually. Twenty patients were operated in prone
position with direct fixation of the posterior malleolus and 4 patients in supine position
with indirect anterior to posterior screw fixation of the posterior malleolus under
transfibular control of reduction.
Results: After fixation of al 4 malleoli, only one patient (4%) required a
syndesmotic screw for residual syndesmotic instability on intraoperative testing. There were
no infections, and no wound healing problems. All patients went on to solid union. No late
fusions were needed. Nineteen patients (79%) could be reevaluated after a mean of 77 months
(range, 15 to 156 months) follow- up. The Foot Function Index averaged 15 (range, 50 to 0),
the Olerud and Molander Score averaged 79 (range, 45 to 100) and the AOFAS Ankle and
Hindfoot Scale averaged 87 (range, 39 to 100).
Conclusion: Fixation of the anterior and posterior tibial fragments increases
syndesmotic stability by providing a bone-to-bone fixation. Reduction of displaced anterior
and posterior tibial rim fractures restores the physiological shape of the tibial incisura
and therefore facilitates fibular reduction. In the majority of cases, this also restores
articular congruity of the lateral tibial plafond. Anatomic reduction of the anterior and
posterior malleolus in addition to medial and lateral malleolar fixation leads to favourable
functional results despite a complex (quadrimalleolar) fracture pattern.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00410

## Clinical Management and Functional Outcomes of Postoperative Achilles Tendon
Infections: How Do These Really Do?

Carson M. Rider, MD; Oliver B. Hansen; Mark C. Drakos, MD

Category: Sports; Other
Keywords: Achilles Tendon; Complications; Wound Complications
Introduction/Purpose: Achilles tendon repairs and reconstructions have
historically been associated with high wound infection rates due to poor vascularity in this
region. The risk of postoperative infection, a potentially devastating complication, has led
surgeons to pursue non-operative treatment when possible for a range of Achilles tendon
pathology. However, new surgical techniques have allowed for smaller incisions and modern,
aggressive infection control strategies have limited the morbidity associated with these
complications. The present study will review a large case series of Achilles infections,
evaluating treatment strategies and outcomes for patients who developed a postoperative
infection following treatment for Achilles pathology.
Methods: This is a retrospective case series including all patients who
experienced a postoperative Achilles tendon infection at a single hospital. Cases from 11
surgeons performed between 2011 and 2020 were reviewed for infection requiring a return to
the operating room for irrigation, debridement, and any other necessary interventions. Cases
that presented to our institution with an existing infection were also included. Thorough
chart review was performed for all patients to determine pathology and initial treatment
method, infection management, and clinical outcomes. For patients undergoing Achilles
reconstruction with a graft, operative notes were reviewed to determine whether the graft
was infected and thus removed during debridement. Clinical follow-up was performed and
Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System (PROMIS) surveys were sent to all
patients who were over 1 year out from surgery.
Results: 33 patients experienced a postoperative Achilles infection, including
10 who developed infection after surgery at an outside hospital. For patients treated
initially at our institution, 8 presented with an acute rupture and 15 with chronic
pathology. 12 of 15 chronic cases underwent reconstruction with a graft. For 3
reconstructions and 1 acute repair (12%) the entire Achilles was infected and removed. The
graft was partially removed in 2 reconstruction cases (6%) and remained fully intact in the
remaining 27 cases (82%). In 2/4 cases in which the Achilles was removed, it ultimately
reconstituted as confirmed on MRI. A skin graft or flap was required in 5 of 33 cases (15%)
for adequate soft-tissue coverage. In 14 cases (42%), the infection was controlled after a
single debridement, 17 cases (52%) required a second debridement, and 2 cases (6%) a third.
Postoperative PROMIS scores were available for 17 patients (Table 1).
Conclusion: To our knowledge, this case series represents the largest number
of postoperative infections analyzed following Achilles tendon surgery. Relatively high
postoperative PROMIS scores indicate that infected patients can ultimately reach high levels
of physical function with minimal pain when managed appropriately. In many cases the
Achilles or graft could be salvaged and in those where it was not, the tendon did at times
reconstitute.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00411

## Differences in the 30 Days vs One-Year Complications and Reoperations after Total Ankle
Replacement and Ankle Arthrodesis: A Large Database Study

Dietrich Riepen, MD; Senthil Sambandam; Varatharaj Mounasamy; Dane K. Wukich,
MD

Category: Ankle; Ankle Arthritis
Keywords: Ankle Arthritis; Ankle Arthroplasty; Ankle Arthrodesis
Introduction/Purpose: Total ankle replacement (TAR) and Ankle arthrodesis (AA)
are two commonly performed procedures for end stage arthritis of ankle joint. Aim of this
study was to analyze the characteristics of the complications and reoperations at 30 days
and 1 year in a matched sample of TAR and AA in a large database population
Methods: Commercially available patient database record (PearlDiver) was used
for this study. Patient undergoing TAR and AA were identified using CPT code. After matching
two groups for diabetes, smoking, obesity and comorbidities scores, the differences in the
risk of complications at 30 days and 1 year and the risk of reoperation at 1 year were noted
in both groups.
Results: There were 1287 patients in each matched group. Four hundred and
thirty patients were diabetic, 102 patients were smokers and 543 patients were obese. The
risk of surgical site infection and wound dehiscence were higher at 30 days in the AA group.
Vast majority of observed complications (More than 50% of complications) happened after 30
days. AA group showed higher risk of SSI, wound dehiscence, mechanical complications and
pneumonia at 1 year. The risk of reoperation was also higher in the AA group at 1 year.
Conclusion: Ankle arthrodesis is associated with higher risk of local and
systemic complications at 30 days and 1 years and higher reoperation rate at 1 year. Most
complications happened after 30 days which highlights the fact that studies reporting 30
days complications after AA and TAR may underestimate the complications.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00412

## Thirty Days vs One-Year Complications and Reoperations after Foot Amputation and Below
Knee Amputation: A Large Database Study

Dietrich Riepen, MD; Senthil Sambandam; Varatharj Mounasamy, MD; Dane K. Wukich,
MD

Category: Diabetes; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Diabetes; Diabetic Foot Ulcer; Diabetic Ulcer
Introduction/Purpose: Below knee amputation (BKA) and Foot amputation (AA) are
two commonly performed procedures for diabetic foot conditions. Aim of this study was to
analyze the characteristics of the complications and reoperations at 30 days and 1 year in a
matched sample of BKA and FA in diabetic patients in a large database population.
Methods: Commercially available patient database record (PearlDiver) was used
for this study. Diabetic Patient undergoing BKA and FA were identified using CPT code. After
matching two groups for smoking, obesity and comorbidities scores, the differences in the
risk of complications at 30 days, 90 days and 1 year and the risk of reoperation at 1 year
were noted in both groups.
Results: There were 8555 patients in each matched group. Most patients were
male (71.6%) and 6891 patients were smokers and 5292 patients were obese. More than 50% of
general and systemic complications happened after 30 days. Incidence of 30 days, 90 days and
1 year general complications including Acute kidney injury, cardiac arrest, Cerebrovascular
event, myocardial infarction, Pulmonary embolism, Pneumonia, sepsis and transfusion were
higher in the BKA group. AKI was the most common general complication and PE was the least
common general complication observed at 30 days, 90 days and 1 year. The risk of wound
dehiscence, surgical site infection and overall wound complications were higher in FA group.
One year reoperation for infection and dehiscence were higher in the FA group and
reoperation for hematoma formation was higher in BKA group. The risk of revision to a BKA in
the FA group at 1 year was 16.4% (1410 patients).
Conclusion: FA is associated with higher risk of local complications at 30
days, 90 days and 1 years and higher reoperation rate at 1 year for local complications.
However, BKA is associated with higher systemic major complications and higher risk of
reoperation for hematoma formation. Most complications in the FA and BKA group happened
after 30 days which highlights the fact that studies reporting 30 days complications after
FA and BKA may underestimate the complications.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00413

## Arthroscopic Bone Marrow Stimulation or Non-Operative Treatment for Osteochondral
Lesions of the Tibial Plafond

Quinten Rikken; Jari Dahmen, BSc,BSc(Med); Sjoerd A. Stufkens, MD, PhD; Gino
Kerkhoffs, MD

Category: Ankle; Arthroscopy
Keywords: Cartilage Defect; Ankle; Arthroscopy
Introduction/Purpose: A paucity of clinical results from osteochondral lesion
of the tibial plafond (OLTP) treatment exists in the literature. The primary purpose of this
study was therefore to compare the patient reported outcomes of OLTPs treated with
arthroscopic bone marrow stimulation (BMS) and non-operative treatment. The secondary
purpose was to compare the reintervention- and complication rates.
Methods: Patients treated either with BMS (BMS group) or any form of
non-operative treatment (non-operative group) at a minimum follow-up of 12 months were
selected from a retrospective database query of patients treated between 1990 and 2020.
Eligible patients were contacted by phone and cross-sectionally included. The primary
outcome was the Numeric Rating Scale (NRS) during weightbearing. Secondary outcomes
included; the NRS in rest, the Foot and Ankle Outcome Score (FAOS), and the Short Form
Health Survey (SF-36) general health questionnaire. Additionally, the reintervention- and
complication rates were collected.
Results: A total of 55 patients were included, which consisted of 15 patients
for the non-operative group and 40 patients for the BMS group were analyzed at a mean 73.2
+- 62.9 and 100.5 +- 72.1 months respectively (Table 1). The median NRS during weightbearing
was 2 (IQR: 1-5) for the non-operative group and 1.5 (IQR: 0-4) for the BMS group (P= 0.43).
The NRS in rest was, similarly, not significantly different between groups. None of the FAOS
subscales were found to be significantly different between treatment groups. No reoperations
or major complications after follow-up treatment were recorded.
Conclusion: Clinical outcomes following arthroscopic BMS and non-operative
treatment yield moderate to good clinical results in this cross-sectional cohort OLTP
patients. Although this study was the first to report outcomes of non-operative treatment of
OLTPs and to compare these to BMS, prospective studies are highly needed for these
understudied lesions.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00414

## Incidence of (Osteo)Chondral Lesions Concomitant to Chronic Lateral Ankle Instability:
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis

Quinten Rikken; Emma Wijnhoud; Jari Dahmen, BSc,BSc(Med); Inger Sierevelt, MSc; Sjoerd
A. Stufkens, MD, PhD; Gino Kerkhoffs, MD

Category: Ankle
Keywords: Talar Osteochondral Lesions; Cartilage Defect; Chronic Ankle
Instability
Introduction/Purpose: To determine the incidence of (osteo)chondral lesions
((O)CLs) in patients with chronic lateral ankle instability (CLAI).
Methods: A literature search was conducted in PubMed (MEDLINE), EMBASE (Ovid),
and the Cochrane Library databases for articles published from January 2000 until December
2020. Two authors independently screened the search results and conducted the quality
assessment using the MINORS criteria. Clinical studies that reported findings on (O)CLs of
the ankle as per preoperative or intraoperative diagnostic measures in patients with CLAI
(> 6 months of symptoms) were included. Chondral and osteochondral lesions were analyzed
altogether for the primary outcome, namely, the incidence of (O)CLs in ankles with CLAI.
Additionally, a subgroup analysis for the incidence of (O)CLs located on the talus.
Secondary outcomes included the study-, patient, and lesion characteristics. Lesions
characteristics included lesion localization and chondral- or osteochondral involvement. A
random-effects model with 95% confidence intervals (95% CI) was used to analyze the primary
outcome and subgroup analysis. Secondary outcomes were pooled using a simplified pooling
method.
Results: 12 studies with a total of 2145 patients with 2170 ankles with CLAI
were included. The overall pooled incidence of (O)CLs in ankles with CLAI was 32.2% (95% CI
22.7 - 41.7). The pooled incidence of talar (O)CLs was 26.5% (95% CI 19.0 - 34.0). Overall
the most common location of OCLs in patients with CLAI is the talus with 85%, of which 68%
of (O)CLs are located on the medial talus and 32% are located laterally. 43% of lesions were
chondral lesions and 57% of lesions were osteochondral in nature.
Conclusion: (O)CLs were found in up to 32% of ankles with CLAI. Furthermore,
most lesions are located on the medial talar dome. These findings will aid physicians in the
early recognition and treatment of ankle (O)CLs in the context of CLAI.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00415

## Long-Term Clinical Results of Arthroscopic Lift-Drill-Fill and Fixation (LDFF)
Treatment for Osteochondral Lesions of the Talus

Quinten Rikken; Jari Dahmen, BSc,BSc(Med); Sjoerd A. Stufkens, MD, PhD; Gino
Kerkhoffs, MD

Category: Ankle; Arthroscopy
Keywords: Cartilage; Talar Osteochondral Lesions; Arthroscopy
Introduction/Purpose: The purpose of this study was to describe the long-term
(> 5 years) clinical results of a novel arthroscopic fixation technique for osteochondral
lesions of the talus (OLT), named the Lift, Drill, Fill and Fix (LDFF) technique.
Methods: 18 ankles (17 patients) underwent an arthroscopic LDFF procedure for
a primary OLT. The mean follow-up was 6.8 years (range: 68 - 96 months). Pre- and
postoperative clinical assessment was prospectively performed by measuring the Numeric
Rating Scale (NRS) of pain at rest, during walking, and when running. Additionally, the Foot
and Ankle Outcome Score (FAOS) including its subscores of pain, symptoms, activities of
daily living, sports, and quality. Additionally, the Short Form-36 (SF-36) was assessed.
Results: The mean NRS during running significantly improved from 7.8
pre-operatively to 3.7 post-operatively (p = 0.006), the NRS during walking from 5.7 to 1.5
(p < 0.001), and the NRS in rest from 2.3 to 1.0 (p = 0.015). The median FAOS at final
follow- up was 80 for pain, 57 for other symptoms, 90 for activities of daily living, 70 for
sport, and 55 for quality of life. A pre- and post- operative score comparison was available
for fifteen patients, and improved significantly in most subscores. The SF-36 physical
component scale significantly improved from 42.9 pre-operatively to 50.1
post-operatively.
Conclusion: Arthroscopic LDFF of fixable primary OLTs results in excellent
pain reduction and improvement of functional outcomes, with sustained results at long-term
follow-up. These results indicate surgeons should consider fixation for a fixable OLT.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00416

## Outcomes of Bone Marrow Stimulation for Secondary Osteochondral Lesions of the Talus
Equal Outcomes for Primary Lesions

Quinten Rikken; Jari Dahmen, BSc,BSc(Med); Christiaan v. Van Bergen; Sjoerd A.
Stufkens, MD, PhD; Gino Kerkhoffs, MD

Category: Ankle
Keywords: Talar Osteochondral Lesions; Arthroscopy; Cartilage Defect
Introduction/Purpose: To compare clinical, sports, work, and radiological
outcomes between primary and secondary OLTs (<15mm) treated with arthroscopic BMS.
Methods: Ethical approval was obtained before the start of the study. A power
analysis was performed for the primary outcome measure, the Numeric Rating Scale (NRS)
during activities. Secondary OLTs were matched to primary OLTs in a 1:2 ratio using lesion
size, patient age, body mass index, and sex as prognostic covariates to control for
confounding. Secondary outcomes included pre- and one-year postoperative clinical assessment
of the NRS at rest, American Orthopaedic Foot & Ankle Society (AOFAS) score, Foot and
Ankle Outcome Score (FAOS) subscales, and the EQ-5D general health questionnaire. The rates
and time to return to work and sports were collected. Radiological examinations were
performed preoperatively and at final follow-up using computed tomography (CT). The
postoperative outcomes were compared with a Wilcoxon rank-sum test; a univariate linear
regression analysis was used to investigate the influence of covariates on clinical outcome
scores.
Results: After matching, 22 and 12 patients with smaller (<15 mm) OLTs were
included in the primary and secondary group, respectively. The NRS during activities was not
different between primary cases (median: 2, IQR: 1 - 4.5) and secondary cases (median: 3,
IQR: 1 - 4), P= 0.5. Both groups showed a significant difference between all pre- and
postoperative clinical outcome scores, except for the FAOS symptoms subscale in the primary
group and NRS at rest in the secondary group. No significant differences in any clinical
outcome scores were found between both groups at one-year follow-up, nor did any covariate
significantly influence the clinical outcome scores. The return to sport rate was 90% for
primary cases and 83% for secondary cases (P= 0.6). All patients returned to work. Lesion
filling on CT was complete (67% - 100%) in 59% of primary cases and 67% of secondary cases
(P= 0.6).
Conclusion: No differences in outcomes were observed between arthroscopic bone
marrow stimulation in primary and secondary OLT at one-year follow-up. Repeat BMS may
therefore be a viable treatment option for failed OLTs in the short term.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00417

## Three-Dimensional Fluoroscopy Influence in Intraoperative Decision-Making Concerning
Syndesmotic Reduction

Maximiliano Rivera, MD; Natalio R. Cuchacovich Mikenberg, MD; Gonzalo F. Bastias, MD;
Patricio A. Fuentes

Category: Ankle; Trauma
Keywords: Ankle Fracture; Syndesmotic Reduction; Syndesmosis
Introduction/Purpose: The use of intraoperative three-dimensional fluoroscopy
to evaluate syndesmotic and articular reduction in ankle fractures is a relatively new tool
demonstrating usefulness in the literature. It has been described that it can detect up to
32.7% of intraoperative malreduction. The objective of this prospective study is to observe
if surgeons, when performing operative treatment in ankle fractures with three- dimensional
fluoroscopy assistance, modify the syndesmotic reduction and/or fixation. The definitive
syndesmotic reduction was assessed with bilateral ankle CT-scan postoperatively.
Methods: Sixteen patients with ankle fracture and syndesmotic instability were
analyzed. After malleolar and syndesmotic fixation, intraoperative three-dimensional
fluoroscopy was performed. The surgeon then analyzed cross-sectional images to evaluate the
reduction of the fracture and syndesmosis. In this scenario, the surgeon decided whether to
make any changes in the reduction of the syndesmosis or in the configuration of the fixation
strategy. Postoperative bilateral computed tomography was carried out to corroborate in
detail if there was any syndesmotic malreduction.
Results: Sixteen patients were included in this study (10 men) with a mean age
of 40 years (range 25-60 years). 62% were supination-external rotation fractures according
to Lauge-Hansen classification. Of all the patients evaluated, only 4 underwent any
modification after performing intraoperative three-dimensional fluoroscopy. From the
previous group, in 3 patients (19% of the total) there was a change in syndesmal reduction
and in only one there was a change of any element of osteosynthesis. When evaluating
syndesmal reduction with postoperative bilateral CT, there were 6 patients in the total
group who presented syndesmal malreduction. In patients in whom a modification to syndesmal
reduction was made, it persisted in 2 of the 3 cases.
Conclusion: In our series, the use of intraoperative three-dimensional
fluoroscopy did not motivate most surgeons to make changes in syndesmotic reduction, unlike
other previously published studies. Even despite making changes in syndesmotic reduction,
the percentage of patients who persists with poor reduction is considerable. In this study,
the percentage of poor syndesmotic reductions was 32.7%. Despite being a figure that is
within what is expected according to the literature, we consider that it is high even using
intraoperative fluoroscopy as support.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00418

## Weightbearing Computed Tomography for Assessment of Foot and Ankle Deformities: The
Iowa Experience

Edward O. Rojas; Nacime S. Mansur, MD; Kevin N. Dibbern, PhD; Eli C. Auch, BS; Eli
Schmidt; Victoria Vivtcharenko, BS; Shuyuan Li, MD, PhD; Phinit Phisitkul, MD; John E.
Femino, MD; Cesar de Cesar Netto, MD, PhD

Category: Ankle; Ankle Arthritis; Other
Keywords: Weight Bearing CT; Ankle; CT
Introduction/Purpose: Weightbearing computed tomography (WBCT) is a reliable
and precise modality for the measurement and analysis of bone position in the foot and
ankle, as well as associated deformities. WBCT to assess three dimensional relationships
among bones allowed the development of new measurements, as the Foot and Ankle Offset (FAO),
which has high inter-rater and intra-rater reliability. This study reports our institution’s
experience utilizing WBCT for the care of foot and ankle patients by describing its utility
across different orthopedic diseases in improving diagnostic assessment, aiding surgical
planning, and expanding the use for objective clinical follow-up.
Methods: The medical records of consecutive patients with various foot and
ankle disorders that underwent WBCT examination as part of the standard of care at a single
institution between November 2014 and August 2020 were retrospectively reviewed. Patient
factors, including body mass index (BMI), sex, and patient comorbidities were collected. 3D
coordinates for calculation of FAO were harvested using the Multiplanar Reconstruction (MPR)
views were calculated from the obtained exams. Descriptive statistics were performed with
Shapiro-Wilk test and the Anderson-Darling tests.
Results: 1175 feet and ankles (820 patients) had a WBCT performed over the
studied 68 months. 53% of the subjects were male and 47% female. 588 of the acquisitions
were from the right side (50.04%) and 587 from the left side (49.96%). Diabetes was present
in 15.47% of, Rheumatic diagnoses in 4.52% and smoking habits in 44.10% of patients. Mean
BMI of the sample was found to be 32.47 (32.03-32.90, 95% CI). The mean Foot and Ankle
Offset (FAO) encountered in the study’s population was 2.43 (2.05- 2.82, 95% CI; min -30.8,
max 37.65; median 2.39).
Conclusion: This study contains the largest cohort of WBCTs with accompanied
FAO measurements to date, which can aid with establishing a new baseline FAO measurement for
multiple pathological conditions. Acquiring WBCTs resulted in more specific diagnoses for
patients with foot and ankle complaints. The ability to utilize WBCT for presurgical
planning, its capability to provide a 3D reconstruction of patient anatomy, and use for
assessment of advanced relational foot and ankle measurements, like FAO, demonstrate how
WBCT may serve as a remarkable utility in clinical practice and has become a standard of
care in our practice at the University of Iowa.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00419

## Foot and Ankle Injury Surveillance of Collegiate Student-Athletes Utilizing the Pac-12
Health Analytics Program

Lexie Ross; Mary C. Hamati, MD; Michael Tuffiash; Kevin Robell; Kenneth J. Hunt,
MD

Category: Ankle; Sports; Other
Keywords: Sports; Return to Play; Outcomes Measures
Introduction/Purpose: In order to monitor student-athlete health, identify
risk factors associated with sports injuries, and develop and evaluate injury prevention
programs at the collegiate level, it is necessary to implement and utilize high quality
sports injury surveillance systems. The Pac-12 Health Analytics Program (HAP) addresses this
need by standardizing electronic medical record entries and common data elements across all
Pac-12 institutions. The literature suggests that collegiate student-athletes are at higher
risk for certain injuries that have chronic effects on their health-related quality of life.
Previous investigations utilizing the HAP database found ankle injuries to be the second
most prevalent lower extremity injury in this population. This study aims to build upon
these previous findings and further characterize below-knee injuries using the HAP
database.
Methods: We retrospectively reviewed archival data from Pac-12
student-athletes followed in the HAP database, a deidentified Pac-12 conference-wide sports
injury surveillance system used to study the epidemiological characteristics of varsity
student- athletes from 2017-2020. Data collection is part of the standard of care provided
by varsity athletic trainers and entered into the Presagia Sports electronic medical record.
This data is then deidentified and automatically sent to the Pac-12 for inclusion in the
HAP. Individual authorization forms were obtained from student-athlete participants prior to
deidentification and inclusion in the HAP database. Student-athletes who sustained a lower
extremity (LE) injury below the knee were included. Data on demographics and injury
characteristics were analyzed.
Results: Foot and ankle injuries account for 20.3% (6,776/33,432) of all
database injuries, representing 23.4% (2,214/9,444) of all student-athletes. Female-athletes
(26.8%) had a higher injury rate than male-athletes (20.9%) (p<0.00001). Lower leg
injuries were categorized as ankle (43.1%), foot (25.3%), lower leg (18.4%), and ankle/heel
(13.2%). Ligament sprain was the most common injury type (38.1%) followed by tendinopathy
(14.4%) and inflammation (7.9%). Males were more likely to sustain an acute injury (81.8%)
than females (63.7%). Injuries most commonly occurred on synthetic (46.0%). Common
mechanisms of injury (MOI) included running (21.6%), contact with another player (18.4%),
and contact with a hard object (14.8%). Injuries most commonly occurred during in-season
(48.9%) compared to off-season (25.5%) and pre-season (20.9%) segments of the competitive
year. Half of injuries (50.0%) resulted in lost time from sport, however only 6.7% of
injuries were season ending and only 2 injuries (<0.01%) resulted in medical
retirement.
Conclusion: Most ankle injuries occurred on synthetic surfaces, suggesting an
opportunity for enhanced monitoring and prehabililitation programs for sports that utilize
these types of surfaces. Further investigations accounting for covariates and risk factors
may inform injury prevention strategies and improve student-athlete wellness. While the
Pac-12 HAP database is early in development, this report demonstrates the potential value
that injury surveillance systems can provide for student-athlete health. The Pac-12 HAP is a
collaborative and effective injury database, setting the standard for other regional
conferences.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00420

## Syndesmotic Overload in 3-Component Total Ankle Replacement

Roxa Ruiz, MD; Peter Kvarda; Roman Susdorf, PhD; Nicola Krähenbühl, MD; Alexej Barg,
MD; Beat Hintermann, MD

Category: Ankle; Ankle Arthritis; Other
Keywords: Ankle Replacement; Syndesmotic Stability; Ankle Arthritis
Introduction/Purpose: Mobile-bearing total ankle replacement (TAR) potentially
enables motion at the tibial implant- polyethylene insert (PI) interface. Such additional
freedom of movement may overload periarticular ligaments and subsequently result in coronal
translation of the talus. The aim of this study was to assess whether syndesmotic overload
affects clinical and radiographic outcomes following mobile-bearing TAR and whether
tibiofibular fusion is an effective treatment option.
Methods: Thirty-one patients who underwent revision surgery for syndesmotic
overload after mobile-bearing TAR were retrospectively analyzed. Clinical and radiographic
outcome, including computed tomography scans, were assessed before and after index TAR,
preoperatively to revision surgery, and at the last follow-up after revision surgery.
Additionally, available computed tomography scans were analyzed.
Results: Ankles with lateral talar translation prior to revision surgery were
about 10 times more likely to have valgus tibial implant position (P =.003). A wide
tibiofibular distance at the level of the syndesmosis after index TAR was associated with an
increased hindfoot moment arm at revision surgery (P =.025). Decrease of PI height at
revision surgery and a PI fracture were evident in 10 (32%) and 4 (13%) cases, respectively.
Talar cyst formation at revision surgery was evident in 12 (39%) cases. Tibiofibular fusion
was effective in restoring function of the replaced ankle and providing pain relief.
Conclusion: Syndesmotic overload impaired clinical and radiographic outcomes
after mobile-bearing TAR. Proper implant positioning and additional realignment procedures
may prevent overload of periarticular soft tissue structures after mobile-bearing TAR.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00421

## Heterotopic Ossification Following Total Ankle Arthroplasty with Fourth- Generation
Prostheses

Calvin J. Rushing, DPM; Antonio M. Malloy McCoy; James M. Steriovski, DPM; Christopher
F. Hyer, DPM; Gregory C. Berlet, MD

Category: Arthroscopy; Hindfoot
Keywords: Ankle Arthroplasty; Ankle Replacement; Hindfoot
Introduction/Purpose: The purpose of the present study was to assess the
radiographic incidence, location, and classification of heterotopic ossification (HO) in
patients who underwent total ankle arthroplasty (TAA) with a 4th generation prostheses at a
minimum of 1-year follow up. Baseline demographic, radiographic, and operative factors
between patents with and without HO were compared.
Methods: Ninety ankles that underwent TAA with a 4th generation protheses,
INFINITY (n = 62) or CADENCE (n = 28) were followed for an average of 23.7 (range, 12-49)
months. Incidence and location of HO was assessed on weight bearing radiographs, and
severity graded according to the modified Brooker classification. Data was compared between
patents with and without HO to identity any predisposing factors.
Results: In 90 ankles that underwent 4th generation TAA, HO incidence was
55.6% (n = 50); 56.5% (n = 35) for INFINITY, and 53.6% (n = 15) for CADENCE. Twenty-five
cases of HO were observed posteriorly, 16 anteriorly, and 9 combined. Severity was as
follows; class I in 19 cases (38%), class II in 20 (40%), class III in 9 (18%) and class IV
in 2 (4%). A single ankle required a non- revisional reoperation for HO debridement;
reoperation rate of 2%.
Conclusion: The present study suggests a similarly high incidence of HO after
TAA with two different 4th generation prostheses (INFINITY 56.5%, CADENCE 53.6%). A trend
for differences in location and severity between the prostheses may also be present. Given
the paucity of literature, additional studies with longer follow-up are warranted to discern
the significance of HO following TAA with 4th generation prostheses.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00422

## The INBONE-2 Total Ankle Prosthesis: Outcomes At 5 to 9 Years Follow-Up

Calvin J. Rushing, DPM; Antonio M. Malloy McCoy; Gregory C. Berlet, MD; Christopher F.
Hyer, DPM

Category: Ankle; Hindfoot; Other
Keywords: Ankle Arthroplasty; Total Ankle Arthroplasty; Hindfoot
Introduction/Purpose: Short and medium term outcomes of the INBONE I and
INBONE II tibial stems have been favorable. The INBONE-2 talus has been shown to have lower
reoperation and failure rates compared to its predecessor, INBONE-1 at short term follow-up.
The purpose of the present study was to assess mid-term outcomes for the INBONE-2 prosthesis
at 5 to 9 years follow-up considering both the tibial and talar components.
Methods: All patients who underwent primary total ankle arthroplasty (TAA)
with INBONE-2 between July 2010 and July 2014 at a single institution and who were at least
5 years postoperative were included. A total of 15 ankles with a mean follow up 85 (range,
61-113) months met the criteria. Radiographs were assessed using coronal and sagittal
alignment parameters preoperatively, at 6 weeks postoperative, and at the most recent
follow-up. Medical records were reviewed and revisions, reoperations, and complications were
classified according to the criteria established by Vander Griend et al. and Glazebrook at
el., respectively.
Results: Survivorship for the INBONE-2 at a mean of 85 months was 93.7%.
Coronal and sagittal tibiotalar alignment improved after surgery (p=0.081, p=0.15), and was
maintained at the most recent follow-up (p=0.684, p=0.837). One ankle (6.7%) required early
component revision; while 4 (26.7%) required a non-implant related revision. Six
complications (2 high grade, 1 intermediate, and 3 low) in 5 ankles (33.3%) were recorded
according to the Glazebrook classification system.
Conclusion: The present study is the first to report midterm follow-up after
TAA with the INBONE-2. High survivorship, maintenance of correction, and a low incidence of
major complications was observed. The most common complication overall was lateral gutter
impingement, which accounted for the majority of the non-revisional reoperations.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00423

## Total Ankle Arthroplasty with Anatomic Lateral Ankle Stabilization (ATLAS) using
Synthetic Graft for Instability in Moderate and Severe Pre-Operative Varus Alignment

Calvin J. Rushing, DPM; Antonio M. Malloy McCoy; Bryon J. McKenna, DPM; Gregory C.
Berlet, MD

Category: Ankle; Other
Keywords: Ankle Replacement; Ankle Instability; Ligament
Introduction/Purpose: More than 50% of patients undergoing Total Ankle
Arthroplasty (TAA) have some degree of coronal deformity, which is the most common reason
for additional procedures. The purpose of the present study was to assess the early clinical
and radiographic outcomes for patients who underwent TAA and Anatomic Lateral Ankle
Stabilization (ATLAS) using synthetic graft for instability in moderate and severe
preoperative varus alignment.
Methods: Seven ankles with moderate or severe varus alignment underwent TAA
with a 3rd generation prosthesis (INBONE-2) and ATLAS using synthetic graft between
September 2018 and February 2019 at a single institution, and were at least 1 year
postoperative (mean 13.3 months, range 12-15). Medical records and charts were reviewed for
any revisions, reoperations, or complications. Weight bearing radiographs were assessed
using coronal and sagittal alignment parameters preoperatively, and during the latest
follow-up.
Results: Survivorship for INBONE-2 with ATLAS was 100%; recurrent instability
was not observed. Symptomatic talonavicular joint arthritis was recorded for a single
patient 12 months postoperatively; there were no revisions, or reoperations. Tibiotalar
coronal alignment improved significantly from 17.7 +- 9.3 (range, 10.1-33.6) to 2.3 +- 1.2
(range, 0.9-4.4) degrees (p<0.006), and all ankles achieved neutral alignment in single
stage. Regarding sagittal tibiotalar alignment, preoperatively 2 ankles (28.5%) were
translated anteriorly and the rest were neutral (71.5%). Significant posterior translation
was observed and during the latest follow- up, 4 ankles were neutral (57.1%) and 3 posterior
(42.9%) (p<0.009).
Conclusion: Satisfactory outcomes were observed at a minimum of 1-year
follow-up for patients with moderate or severe varus alignment who underwent TAA with
INBONE-2 and ATLAS. ATLAS using synthetic graft may afford advantages over previously
described repair techniques. Comparative studies between the Brostrum-Gould and ATLAS are
warranted in the TAA population.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00424

## A Comparison of Portable Ultrasonography and the Fluoroscopy for Evaluating Medial
Ankle Instability: A Cadaveric Study

Jirawat Saengsin, MD; Go Sato, MD; Pongpanot Sornsakrin, MD; Bart Lubberts, MD, PhD;
Gregory R. Waryasz, MD; Daniel Guss, MD, MBA; Christopher W. DiGiovanni, MD

Category: Ankle; Trauma
Keywords: Ankle Fracture; Ultrasound Guidance; Ankle Instability
Introduction/Purpose: Diagnosis of destabilizing deltoid ligament injuries
remains challenging and is best identified with dynamic imaging techniques. This study aims
to assess and compare medial clear space (MCS) distances in various stages of sequentially
created supination external rotation (SER) ankle injury model using portable ultrasound
(P-US) and fluoroscopy. We hypothesize that there is a strong correlation between the P-US
and fluoroscopic measurements for the assessment of medial ankle instability in SER type
ankle injury during the gravity stress test (GST), weight-bearing, or external rotation
stress test.
Methods: Ten cadaveric specimens were used for assessing medial ankle
instability. The assessment was performed with all structures intact, and later with
sequential transection of the anterior inferior tibiofibular ligament (Stage I), fibular
(Weber-B fracture) (Stage II), posterior inferior tibiofibular ligament (Stage III),
superficial deltoid ligament (Stage IVa), and deep deltoid ligament (Stage IVb). In all
scenarios, the GST, external rotation stress test(45N), and Simulated weight-bearing
condition(750N) were performed. The P-US measurement of the MCS was assessed at the
anteromedial and inferomedial aspect of the ankle joint. Three different MCS distances were
measured, as demonstrated in . The fluoroscopic MCS measurements were assessed on a true mortise ankle view
achieved during each loading condition. Spearman rank correlation was used to investigate
the relationship between the P-US and fluoroscopic measurements. The inter- and
intra-observer agreement was assessed using the intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC)
through a two-way mixed-effects model with absolute agreement.
Results: The P-US and fluoroscopic assessed medial ankle instability values
during the GST, weight-bearing, and the external rotation stress test increased as the SER
ankle injury stage progressed. The P-US values measured during all stress tests demonstrated
a moderate to strong positive correlation with those measured with the fluoroscopy
(Spearman’s rank correlation ranged from 0.61-0.93, p-values <0.001). Inter-rater (P-US:
0.97, 95%CI: 0.96-0.98) and intra-rater reliability (P-US, 0.95, 95%CI: 0.94-0.96) for the
P-US measurements were all substantial.
Conclusion: The use of dynamic P-US to measure the MCS appears to be a
reliable and repeatable technique. The P-US MCS measurement values measured in the SER ankle
injury model during the GST, weight-bearing and the external rotation stress test are well
correlated with those values measured with fluoroscopy. Therefore, the dynamic P-US with
stress examination of the ankle has the potential to quantify medial ankle instability in a
radiation-free, non-invasive, low cost, and point of care setting.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00425

## Diagnosing Medial Ankle Instability with Gravity Stress, Weight-Bearing, and External
Rotation Stress Ultrasonography: A Cadaveric Study

Jirawat Saengsin, MD; Pongpanot Sornsakrin, MD; Go Sato, MD; Bart Lubberts, MD, PhD;
Gregory R. Waryasz, MD; Daniel Guss, MD, MBA; Christopher W. DiGiovanni, MD

Category: Ankle; Trauma
Keywords: Ankle Fracture; Ultrasound Guidance; Ankle Instability
Introduction/Purpose: Destabilizing injuries to the deltoid ligament have
historically relied on radiographic stress examination for diagnosis, with a focus on medial
clear space (MCS) widening. Increasingly, Portable ultrasound (P-US) has increasingly been
used in the clinical setting, allowing dynamic and non-invasive evaluation at the point of
care. This study aims to determine whether the P-US assisted MCS evaluation during the
gravity stress (GST), weight-bearing, and external rotation stress test can detect medial
side instability in supination-external rotation (SER) type ankle injuries with sequential
disruption of the anterior inferior tibiofibular ligament (AITFL) (stage I), the fibula
(Weber B fracture) (stage II), the posterior inferior tibiofibular ligament (PITFL) (stage
III), the superficial deltoid ligament (stage IVa) and the deep deltoid ligament (stage
IVb).
Methods: Ten fresh-frozen cadaveric specimens were used. Medial ankle
instability was assessed by the P-US. The assessment was performed with all structures
intact and later with sequential transection of the AITFL, Weber-B fibular fracture, the
PITFL, the superficial and deep deltoid ligament. In all scenarios, three loading conditions
were considered, including the GST, the external rotation stress test (45N), and the
simulated weight-bearing (750N). The P-US measurement of the MCS was assessed at the
anteromedial aspect and inferomedial aspect of the ankle joint. Three different MCS
distances were measured, as demonstrated in . To investigate the correlation between the
P-US measurements and the staging of SER ankle injuries, a Spearman rank correlation was
used. To detect a difference in MCS distances between each injured stage and the intact
stage for each stress test, a Wilcoxon signed-rank test was used. P-values were adjusted for
multiple comparisons using the Holm- Bonferroni method.
Results: MCS values measured with the P-US increased as the SER ankle injury
stage progressed. The Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient ranged from 0.43 to 0.90
(p-values <0.001), which represent moderate to strong positive correlations between the
ultrasonographic MCS measurements, and the sequentially created supination-external rotation
ankle injury model. All MCS values measured with the P-US during; 1) the GST in neutral
ankle position, 2) the GST in plantarflexed ankle position, 3) weight-bearing, and 4) the
external rotation stress test, were significantly different between intact stage vs. stage
IVb (p ranged from 0.02-0.03). When compared between SER ankle injury stage IVa vs. IVb, the
P-US MCS values measured in SER stage IVb were significantly larger (p ranged from
0.005-0.03). Inter-rater (0.97; 95% confidence interval: 0.96-0.98) and intra-rater
reliability (0.95; 95% confidence interval: 0.94-0.96) for the P-US MCS measurements were
all substantial.
Conclusion: Portable ultrasonography is a feasible tool for diagnosing medial
ankle instability in SER ankle injury. The MCS measurements assessed with P-US during the
GST, weight-bearing, and the external rotation stress test well correlated with the SER
ankle injury staging. Besides, the P-US method is capable of differentiating the SER ankle
injury stage IVb from the intact stage, as well as differentiating the stable SER ankle
injury stage from the unstable stage. Therefore, the P-US can be a valuable diagnostic tool
at the point of care due to its ability to dynamically evaluate suspect medial ankle
instability in SER type injury.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00426

## Dynamic Portable Ultrasound Cutoff Values for Diagnosing Medial Ankle Instability in
Supination External Rotation Ankle Injury: A Cadaveric Study

Jirawat Saengsin, MD; Bart Lubberts, MD, PhD; Pongpanot Sornsakrin, MD; Soheil
Soashkani, MD; Gregory R. Waryasz, MD; Daniel Guss, MD, MBA; Christopher W. DiGiovanni,
MD

Category: Ankle; Trauma
Keywords: Ankle Fracture; Ultrasound Guidance; Ankle Instability
Introduction/Purpose: In the setting of an isolated lateral malleolar
fracture, stability is predicated by whether the deep deltoid ligament is intact. Portable
ultrasound (P-US) has also been used in the clinical setting, allowing dynamic and
non-invasive evaluation at the point of care. This study aimed to determine the cutoff
values, as well as its sensitivity and specificity for diagnosing supination external
rotation (SER) ankle injury stage IVb (with complete deltoid ligament rupture) using the
P-US.
Methods: Ten fresh-frozen cadaveric specimens were used. Medial ankle
instability was assessed by the P-US. The assessment was performed with all structures
intact and later with sequential transection of the AITFL, Weber-B fibular fracture, the
PITFL, the superficial and deep deltoid ligament. In all scenarios, three loading conditions
were considered, including the GST, the external rotation stress test (45N), and the
simulated weight-bearing (750N). The P-US measurement of the MCS was assessed at the
anteromedial aspect and inferomedial aspect of the ankle joint. The P-US measurement of the
MCS was assessed by placing the ultrasound probe perpendicularly to the medial gutter at the
anteromedial aspect and inferomedial aspect of the ankle joint. Three different MCS
distances were measured, as demonstrated in . To determine the sensitivity and specificity
of the diagnosis of SER injury type IV using the P-US, a receiver operating characteristic
(ROC) curve analysis was performed.
Results: The MCS optimal cutoff point to distinguish SER ankle injury stage
IVb from other injury stages ranged from 10.4 to 13.8 during the GST, 4.2 to 7.9mm during
the weight-bearing stress, and 10.6-17.9mm during the external rotation stress test (Table
1). All P-US cutoff values provided acceptable sensitivity (60-100%), specificity (84-100%),
and the area under ROC curve (0.8-1.0) for diagnosing SER ankle injury stage IVb.
Conclusion: MCS cutoff points assessed with the P-US under the GST,
weight-bearing, and the external rotation stress test demonstrate high sensitivity and
specificity for detecting SER ankle injury stage IVb. The cutoff values vary depending on
which loading condition is being used. Additional clinical studies are necessary in the in
vivo setting to better understand the implications of these test conditions.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00427

## A Systematic Review of Charcot Neuroarthropathy Misdiagnosis

Kiya Shazadeh Safavi, BS; Joseph S. Torian; Raliat O. Jimoh; Daniel Jupiter,
PhD

Category: Diabetes; Other
Keywords: Charcot Arthropathy; Charcot Foot; Diabetic Foot
Introduction/Purpose: Charcot neuroarthropathy (CN) is a disabling condition
of the foot and ankle with a prevalence of up to 13% of patients with Diabetes Mellitus
(DM). In the acute phase, CN presents as a hot, swollen foot, with mild destruction of bone
and joint structure. If left untreated it can progress to a chronic stage, with bone and
joint destruction, presenting with a classic rocker bottom foot deformity. CN is often
misdiagnosed in its acute phase; as a result the diagnosis is usually made once CN has
progressed to the chronic phase. This delay causes prolonged treatment regimens and poorer
outcomes. This systematic review examines the misdiagnosis of CN and the timeline preceding
a correct diagnosis.
Methods: A review of the literature was performed by searching Ovid Medline,
CINAHL, and Scopus for articles published within the last five years that contained the
terms Charcot and misdiagnosed, antibiotics, deep vein thrombosis, or osteomyelitis. The
database search produced 110 articles, once duplicates were removed. 49 articles were
screened out by title and 18 were screened by abstract; leaving 43 eligible articles. During
the review of the 43 articles an additional 41 articles were added from references because
they provided relevant information. Time of symptom onset to diagnosis was calculated in
days, with 30 days counting as one month.
Results: In total, 230 patients were included in analysis; of these, 27 (12%)
presented with bilateral CN for a total of 257 affected extremities. Type 1 DM was present
in 112/210 (53%) of patients, Type 2 DM in 98/210 (47%) of patients, and an unreported DM
status in 20/230 (9%) patients. The average time from symptom onset to final diagnosis of CN
was 84.8 days, with a range of 25 days to 203 days. Nearly half (110/230; 48%) of the
patients experienced CN misdiagnosis. Of these, 99 specific misdiagnoses were reported, with
the most common including cellulitis (22/99; 22%), fracture/sprain (18/99; 18%), deep vein
thrombosis (13/99; 13%), osteomyelitis (11/99; 11%), and erysipelas and gout (10/99; 10%)
each. A total of 42/146 (29%) of patients could recall an incidence of trauma prior to the
onset of CN.
Conclusion: A diagnosis of CN should be considered in patients with DM who
present with peripheral neuropathy coupled with foot swelling, deformity, ulceration, or
difficulty ambulating. This literature review has identified that nearly half of patients
with CN are misdiagnosed, and many continue to ambulate and do not receive necessary total
contact casting until they are correctly diagnosed later on. Subsequently, awareness of CN
and the frequency of misdiagnoses associated with it is critical to preventing treatment
delay. Further research is necessary to better clarify why CN is so frequently misdiagnosed
and the amount of harm that can result from misdiagnoses.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00428

## Industry Payments to Foot and Ankle Surgeons and Their Effect on Total Ankle
Arthroplasty Outcomes

Kiya Shazadeh Safavi, BS; Aryan Rezvani; Nicholas Healy, MD; Daniel Jupiter, PhD;
Vinod K. Panchbhavi, MD; Cory Janney, MD

Category: Ankle; Other
Keywords: Ankle Arthroplasty; Cost; Payment Reform
Introduction/Purpose: The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS)
Open Payments public (OPP) database provides a means for increased transparency of
physicians' financial relationships with industry. Total ankle arthroplasty is a procedure
with long term clinical implications and variable outcomes published in the existing
literature. We compared physician-reported conflict-of-interest (COI) disclosures in Foot
and Ankle International (FAI) with CMS database information to evaluate for
discrepancies.
Methods: Articles published in FAI reporting clinical outcomes of total ankle
arthroplasty from 2015 and 2019 were reviewed. Payment information in the CMS database was
cross-referenced with disclosure statements and International Committee of Medical Journal
Editors (ICMJE) forms associated with the manuscript. Statistical analysis was performed to
determine if industry payments were appropriately disclosed or influenced outcomes.
Results: We reviewed 173 articles pertaining to ankle arthroplasty with 27
meeting inclusion criteria. Of 120 total authors with 98 unique authors, 114 (95%) disclosed
appropriately in disclosure statements. Twenty-two papers (82%) had appropriate declarations
for the entire manuscript. For the 27 senior authorships, only two discrepancies between
manuscript disclosure and the OPP database were noted, showing 13 total disclosures in the
OPP database vs 11 disclosed in the manuscript. We found there was no relationship between
industry payment and the outcome of the manuscript (P =.725).
Conclusion: The majority of author disclosure statements accurately reflected
the OPP data. Additionally, payments were not significantly associated with positive
outcomes reported for the specific implant. Overall, authors publishing on ankle
arthroplasty in FAI are disclosing appropriately per our review.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00429

## Predisposing Factors for 30-Day Complications Following Leg Amputation

Kiya Shazadeh Safavi, BS; Joseph Villarreal; Doha Hussien, BA, BS; Vinod K.
Panchbhavi, MD, FACS; Daniel Jupiter, PhD

Category: Trauma; Ankle; Diabetes; Other
Keywords: Clinical Outcomes; Complications; Surgical Site Infection
Introduction/Purpose: While amputation rates and amputation-related morbidity
and mortality have been established for select populations, the impact of general
demographic factors on postoperative surgical complications remains little studied. This
study aims to analyze the influence of numerous demographic variables on specific surgical
complications.
Methods: We extracted data from the American College of Surgeons' National
Surgical Quality Improvement Program database from 2012 to 2017 and searched for leg
amputations using CPT codes 27881, 27882, 27884, and 27886, identifying 4,162 patients. The
association of 29 demographic variables with 4 complications (surgical infection, additional
service, deep vein thrombosis [DVT], and sepsis) was analyzed using t tests or chi-squared
tests. A logistic regression allowed determination of independent risk factors for each
outcome, based on results from the bivariate analyses. Variables found to have P < 0.2 on
bivariate analysis were subsequently included in the multivariate analysis of the
corresponding surgical complication.
Results: Preoperative open, 'contaminated,' or 'dirty/infected' wounds, longer
intraoperative times, development of sepsis prior to surgery, and admission of patients
directly from home or from another hospital’s emergency room were found to influence
postoperative surgical infection rates. An individual’s height, weight, total length of
hospital stay, ethnicity, the presence of preoperative open or infected wounds, and wounds
classified as 'dirty/infected' preoperatively affected postoperative additional service
incidence. Preoperative congestive heart failure and large decreases in body weight, as well
as a patient’s total length of hospital stay, influenced postoperative DVT rates. A
patient’s preoperative functional heath status, total length of hospital stay, amputations
conducted as emergency cases, as well as preoperative acute renal failure, open or infected
wounds, sepsis, 'contaminated' or 'dirty/infected' wounds, impacted postoperative sepsis
rates.
Conclusion: Understanding these risk factors may allow providers to anticipate
and address higher rates of complications in certain patient populations.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00430

## Surgical Intervention for 5th Metatarsal Fracture in the Athlete: A Systematic
Review

Alan Samsonov; Julia L. Diamond; Grace Randall; Nathaniel P. Mercer; Hugo Ubillus;
Eoghan T. Hurley, MB BCh BAO; John G. Kennedy, MD, FRCS(Orth)

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot; Sports
Keywords: Fifth Metatarsal Fractures; Fifth Metatarsal; Sports
Introduction/Purpose: To provide an overview and evaluation of the available
evidence on surgical intervention for 5th metatarsal fractures in the athletic
population.
Methods: PubMed, Cochrane, and Embase databases were systematically reviewed
in accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses
(PRISMA) guidelines. The level and quality of evidence (LOE and QoE) were recorded and
assessed. Return to sport/play (RTS/RTP), radiographic outcomes, complications,
reoperations, and revisions were also evaluated.
Results: Twenty-eight studies were included in this review spanning a total of
761 patients and 765 fractures. The weighted mean age of the study population was 24 years,
and the mean follow-up was 33.8 months. Surgical techniques and fracture types varied across
the studies, but the majority (18) used internal fixation. Nonunion occurred in 5.8%
(11/190) of patients who received a surgical treatment other than internal fixation, but
only in 2.3% (11/480) of patients who received surgical treatment with internal fixation.
Patients presenting with acute 5th MTP fractures returned to play significantly faster than
those with delayed union 5th MTP fractures (7.6 weeks vs. 11.2 weeks) (p<.001). However,
reoperation/revision rates were highest in patients who received surgery for acute 5th MTP
fracture, of which 8.3% (16/192) of patients with acute fracture underwent reoperation or
revision after surgical management.
Conclusion: The current systematic review showed favorable outcomes for the
surgical treatment of 5th MTP fractures in the athletic population. Athletes who underwent
surgical treatment for an acute 5th MTP fracture returned to play at a faster rate compared
to other fracture types but were associated with a high complication rate and a higher
reoperation and revision rate.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00431

## Location of the Ankle Osteochondral Lesion of the Talus (OLT) Corresponding to the
Anatomical Axis of the Tibia (Loading Axis) Crosses the Ankle Joint

Maxwell L. Sandberg; Seyed Alireza Mirghasemi, MBBS; Zachary Troiani; Zachary M.
Vaupel, MD; Paul T. Fortin, MD

Category: Ankle; Sports
Keywords: Cartilage; OLT; Joint Preserving Surgery
Introduction/Purpose: studies demonstrated that mechanical axis alignment
affects the clinical outcome of the chondral repair surgery in the knee. Reduction in stress
concentration around chondral defects with HTO has been found to favor cartilage repair in
knee surgery. this study aimed to determine the relationship between the tibia mechanical
axis alignment and OLT size and location.
Methods: 57 patients that underwent OLT repair between 2016-2020 were
included. X-rays and MRIs of the ankle were used to collect data on OLT in the study group.
X-ray measurements included (a)-measured as distance from where vertical line through center
of tibia crosses to center the talar joint in AP view (medial, lateral), (b)- measured as
distance from where vertical line through center of tibia crosses to the center talar body
in lateral view (ant, post). The coverage angle, TLS, TAS, MA, TI, TTI angles were measured.
MRI measurements included distance of the edge of the OLT lesion from the center of the
talar surface, in three plans, and for location of the OLT lesion based on the 9-zone grid
system.
Results: 37.3% of these patients had the mechanical axis of the joint cross
posterolaterally, 15.6% anteromedially, 5.9% anterolaterally, and 3.9% posteromedially.
33.3% had the mechanical axis cross posteriorly along the midline of the lateral axis. Using
the 9-zone grid to localize lesion location, lesions were most often seen in location 6
(37.3%), location 7 (21.6%), location 9 (21.6%), and location 4 (19.6%). Of note, 36.8% of
patients with a posterolateral axis had lesions at location 6 and 26.3% at location 9. For
patients with poster joint axis along the midline of the lateral axis, 47.1% had lesions at
location 6 and 23.5% at location 7. There is a correlation between Lesion Surface Area and
axis location in the AP view (Correlation coefficient: 0.301, P Value: 0.023). we found a
significant difference for coverage angle (P<0.001), TLS (P<0.001), and TTI
(P<0.001) for different groups.
Conclusion: The significant correlation shows that the farther medial the
location of the axis crosses the joint, the larger the surface area of the lesion. there is
no significant difference between lesion length or area and location.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00432

## Symptomatic Hallux Valgus Deformities and 1st Tarsometatarsal Joint Morphology

Robert D. Santrock, MD; Paul Dayton, MS,DPM; Jody McAleer, DPM, FACFAS; Dane K.
Wukich, MD; Daniel J. Hatch, FACFAS; Daniel C. Farber, MD; Abdi Raissi, MD; Deidre
Kile

Category: Bunion; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Hallux Valgus; Bunion; TMT
Introduction/Purpose: The pathogenesis of the hallux valgus deformity is still
poorly understood. Consistent observations of the 1st tarsometatarsal (TMT) joint as the
CORA of hallux valgus raises questions about pathology associated with that joint. Mason and
Tanaka studied the 1st TMT joint in cadaveric specimens in 2012, observing three
morphological subtypes to the 1st cuneiform articular surface. They noted that specimens
with hallux valgus had either a unifacet (37%) or bifacet (63%) appearance, where normal
feet had a trifacet appearance. This observation suggests that these bony differences may be
responsible for 'instability' that generates the metatarsal deviation into varus, and thus
the development of hallux valgus. If true, surgical corrections for hallux valgus deformity
should address this TMT joint pathology.
Methods: This study was designed to correlate the morphological differences of
the TMT joint with symptomatic hallux valgus patients who are seeking surgery. The
hypothesis was that the hallux valgus patients would show a majority unifacet and bifacet
morphology and have an inclination towards unifacet in younger patients and patients with a
larger deformity. The cohort of patients who are in the registered longitudinal study
Align3D had their TMT joints harvested in a standard fashion as part of their surgical
treatment. These specimens were analyzed for the number of facets by the surgeon at the time
of their surgical procedure. This cohort therefore only includes symptomatic hallux valgus
patients and eliminates hallux valgus associated with metatarsus adductus. Standard
weight-bearing x-rays taken pre-operatively were analyzed for severity of deformities.
Functional and Patient Reported Outcome measures were obtained pre-operatively and
post-operatively.
Results: In this study we observed 143 specimens. Unifacet was observed in 116
specimens (81.1%), bifacet was observed in 26 specimens (18.2%), and trifacet was observed
in 1 specimen. Neither X-Ray findings, age, nor Functional Scores suggested a trend in
severity in relation to morphological type. Mason & Tanaka’s cadaveric study was limited
in some respects because of the hardening effect of formaldehyde preservations. Their study
represented an elderly population, mean age 86 years, whereas this study represented a much
younger population, mean age 40.6, in which patients were able to participate in both X-Ray
and clinical scoring. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that morphology
of the TMT joint has been studied in symptomatic hallux valgus patients who underwent
surgery.
Conclusion: Symptomatic hallux valgus deformities are associated with a higher
likelihood of having a unifacet morphology than previously reported in cadavers (81.1% vs
37%). This morphology may predispose patients to decreased stability resulting in more
symptomatic deformity. The number of facets does not seem to correlate with severity of
deformity on X-Ray evaluation, nor does it correlate with age. However, the younger age
group in our study as compared to Mason and Tanaks’s study suggests that morphological
differences may even be congenital, leading to later development of deformity.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00433

## Unsolicited Patient Complaints in Orthopaedic Surgery: An Analysis Utilizing a Large
National Database

Shumaila Sarfani, MD

Category: Other
Keywords: Practice Models; Health Care; Practice Models
Introduction/Purpose: Unsolicited patient complaints (UPCs) about surgeons
have been shown to correlate with surgical complications and malpractice claims in several
specialties. Analysis of UPCs in orthopaedics is limited and using large national databases
of UPCs may prove informative to orthopaedic providers and administrators. Our purpose was
to 1) Evaluate the differences in the number and distribution of UPCs between orthopaedic
surgeons as compared to other surgeons, and non- surgeons. 2) Describe the distribution of
UPCs among orthopaedic sub-specialties. 3) Assess for clinical characteristics that may be
associated with UPCs.
Methods: Patient complaint reports recorded at 36 medical centers between
January 1st, 2015 through December 31st, 2018 were coded using a previously validated coding
algorithm, PARS® (Patient Advocacy Reporting System®). We (1)
evaluated the distribution of UPCs across orthopaedic surgeons, (2) compared orthopaedic
surgeons’ UPC distribution with those of other surgeons and non-surgeons, and (3) analyzed
differences in complaint types across orthopaedic sub-specialties.
Results: A total of 33,174 physicians had four consecutive years of data
across the 36 nation-wide participating medical centers and met other inclusion criteria,
including 1,148 orthopaedic surgeons, 6,747 other surgeons, and 25,279 non-surgeons.
Orthopaedic surgeons experienced more UPCs per physician than non-orthopaedic surgeons and
non-surgeons (5 vs. 2 vs. 1 respectively, p<0.05); the top 20% of orthopaedic surgeons
with UPCs accounted for half of all complaints about orthopaedic surgeons received by the
organizations in the study. The sub-specialties that had significantly more UPCs compared to
general orthopaedic surgeons were Foot and Ankle (OR 2.6 [1.4-4.6], p=.002), followed by
Adult Reconstruction (OR 2.2 [1.3-3.8], p=.002), Spine [OR 2.2 (1.3-3.8), p=.005), and
Trauma (OR 2.2 [1.2-4.0], p =.01). Surgeons in the midwest were less likely to get
complaints that surgeons in the northeast and sex was not a predicting factor.
Conclusion: Orthopaedic surgeons receive comparatively more UPCs than other
surgical and non-surgical specialties. Among orthopaedic surgeons, the subspecialties of
Foot and Ankle, Adult, Reconstruction, Spine, and Trauma received the most UPCs. As
increased UPCs have been linked to higher risk of malpractice claims, individual orthopaedic
surgeons with high numbers of UPCs may benefit from being made aware of their elevated risk
status in ways that invite reflection on underlying causes.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00434

## Open Ankle Fractures in the Elderly: Predisposing Factors and the Associated
Mortality

Haggai Schermann, MD, MPH; Takahisa Ogawa, MD, MPH; Bart Lubberts, MD, PhD; Gregory R.
Waryasz, MD; Philip Kaiser, MD; Christopher W. DiGiovanni, MD; Daniel Guss, MD, MBA

Category: Ankle; Trauma
Keywords: Ankle Fracture; Trauma; Diabetes
Introduction/Purpose: Previous studies raised awareness of high mortality
associated with open ankle fractures in elderly patients. Mortality among this patient
population has been reported about 23-27% during the first year postoperatively. The purpose
of this study was 1) to investigate the association between patient factors and occurrence
of open ankle fractures and 2) to quantify the risk of mortality associated with open ankle
fractures.
Methods: This is a retrospective cohort study of 1,045 patients 65 years and
older, with ankle fractures, who were operated between 2010 and 2020. Background medical
data included patient age, gender, language, race, fracture type and comorbidities.
Case-control approach and logistic regression analysis were used to identify risk factors
for open fractures. Propensity score matching and survival analysis were used to measure the
hazard of mortality with ankle fractures.
Results: There were 128 (12.2%) patients with open ankle fractures in this
cohort. Patients with open ankle fractures higher odds of belonging to the age group of 70
to 79 years (OR=1.7, p=0.03) and 80 to 89 years (OR=1.8, p=0.04), having a diagnosis of
hypertension (OR=2, p=0.006) and chronic kidney disease (OR=2.9, p=0.005), and smoking
(OR=1.7, p=0.049). Open ankle fractures were associated with higher risk of mortality
(HR=1.7, p=0.03). Other variables related to mortality in these patients were ischemic heart
disease (HR=1.9, p=0.009), chronic kidney disease (HR=1.99, p=0.02), peripheral vascular
disease (HR=1.8, p=0.03) and diabetes (HR=2.1, p=0.006).
Conclusion: This study identifies older patients with comorbidities as having
higher risk of open, compared to closed ankle fracture. Open ankle fractures are associated
with higher mortality in this population, possibly indicating the need for control of
comorbidities, reduction of fall risk and barrier protection as means of primary
prevention.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00435

## Initial Experience with a Bioresorbable Polymer Anchor

Adam P. Schiff, MD; Jayanth Kumar; Robert R. Burnham; Kamran S. Hamid, MD, MPH;
Michael S. Pinzur, MD

Category: Ankle; Ankle Arthritis
Keywords: Deltoid Ligament; Lateral Ankle Instability; Ankle Fracture
Introduction/Purpose: Anchors are frequently used in reconstructive orthopedic
surgery to achieve fixation of soft tissue to bone. Anchors vary with respect to material
composition, configuration, and methods of fixation at the site of attachment. The fixation
component of anchoring devices has generally evolved from metal-fabricated implants to
various types of bioresorbable anchors. The SonicAnchorTM (Stryker, Kalamazoo, MI
USA) polymer implant provides a unique form of anchor fixation using
SonicFusionTM technology to achieve interdigitation within cancellous bone
while being radiolucent and providing a small footprint.
Methods: During a four-year period, 116 patients underwent a reconstructive
orthopedic foot and ankle surgical procedure with the use of at least one bioresorbable
polymer anchor (SonicAnchor implant). There were 59 males and 57 females, with an average
age of 42 years (range: 12-83 years).
Results: A total of 233 bioresorbable anchor (SonicAnchor) implants were used
in 116 patients. Of the 116 patients, 108 (93.1%) achieved successful clinical healing of
their surgery at their most recent follow-up. The average follow-up duration was 309 days
(range: 14-1,429 days). Eight (6.9%) patients were lost to follow-up prior to clinical
healing. Two (1.7%) patients underwent reoperation. Also, 65 (56%) patients had at least six
months of follow-up and 36 (31%) had at least one year of follow-up.
Conclusion: This preliminary clinical trial of patients undergoing soft tissue
repair or reconstruction with a bioresorbable polymer appears to perform comparably to other
commercially available devices. The lack of adverse events, mechanical failures, or
infections further supports the safety of this device.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00436

## The Incidence of Deltoid Ligament Interposition in Bimalleolar Equivalent Ankle
Fractures

Adam P. Schiff, MD; Jayanth Kumar; Robert R. Burnham; Kamran S. Hamid, MD, MPH;
Michael S. Pinzur, MD

Category: Ankle
Keywords: Deltoid Ligament; Ankle Fracture; Deltoid Ligament Injury
Introduction/Purpose: When performing surgical fixation of bimalleolar
equivalent ankle fractures, there has been considerable debate regarding fixation of the
deltoid ligament. Many surgeons would agree that deltoid ligament repair should be
undertaken if there is radiographic evidence of medial interposition of the deep deltoid.
The incidence of deltoid ligament interposition has not been addressed in current
literature. This study aims to assess the incidence of deltoid interposition in bimalleolar
equivalent ankle fractures to provide further guidance on the importance of acute deltoid
ligament repair.
Methods: Over a five year time frame, 49 bimalleolar equivalent ankle
fractures were repaired in 30 males and 19 females with a mean age, 37 (15-73) years. There
was no exclusion criteria and patients were consecutively enrolled if they sustained a
bimalleolar equivalent ankle fracture.
Results: During this time frame, 49 patients who sustained a bimalleolar
equivalent ankle fracture underwent surgical fixation with routine repair of the deltoid
ligament. 18 patients (36.73%) had deltoid interposed within the medial gutter. 13 patients
(26.53%) had an osteochondral defect.
Conclusion: The incidence of deltoid interposition seen with medial
exploration within this cohort was 37%. While the benefits of deltoid ligament repair are
still controversial, persistent medial gutter soft tissue interposition could lead to
symptoms of impingement or even result in persistent medial widening. This study supports
increased scrutiny to the relationship of the medial gutter and deltoid ligament in acute
bimalleolar equivalent ankle fractures.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00437

## The Potential of Topical Antibiotic Powder to Decrease Infection Rates in Total Ankle
Arthroplasty

Lew C. Schon, MD; Bonnie Y. Chien, MD; Naudereh B. Noori, MD; Jonathan Day; Zijun
Zhang

Category: Ankle; Ankle Arthritis; Other
Keywords: Ankle; Ankle Arthritis; Ankle Arthroplasty
Introduction/Purpose: Periprosthetic infection is a devastating complication
in total ankle arthroplasty (TAA). Measures that can reduce or eliminate infection
occurrence are warranted for further investigation, particularly if they also minimize added
costs, operative time or potential adverse effects. There remains insufficient evidence to
show definitive benefits or risks associated with use of local antibiotics such as
vancomycin for infection prevention. The purpose of this study was to determine the effects
of topical vancomycin powder application in TAA and whether it may decrease infection rate
in the subacute postoperative period. To our knowledge, this is the first comparative study
in a general population undergoing TAA.
Methods: A retrospective study was conducted based on a consecutive series of
patients who underwent TAA performed by a single senior surgeon. The control group without
vancomycin powder was matched to the study group that received application over the implants
prior to closure, which was based on when the surgeon transitioned to usage in all patients.
Various demographic data for the patients was collected. Only patients with a minimal follow
up of 80 days were included in order to capture the perioperative period of infection.
Infection rate was based on a definition of deep infection necessitating inpatient
hospitalization for IV antibiotics and/or surgical intervention. The associations of various
demographic factors and vancomycin application with infection rate were calculated with chi
square and odds ratio. Significance level was set to 0.05.
Results: A total of 252 patients (n=103 without, and 149 with vancomycin
powder) were included in the study. The overall infection rate was 3.2%, which was not
correlated with a history of diabetes, BMI, additional concurrent surgery, or age, but was
associated with current positive smoking status (p=0.03). The infection rates between the
groups that received or did not receive vancomycin powder were not statistically
significantly different (2.7% vs 3.9%, respectively, p=0.59). The odds ratio (OR) of
infection with vancomycin powder was not statistically significant either, at OR=0.68 (95%
CI 0.17-2.81). However, the vancomycin group did have a significantly higher number of
patients with previous wound issues (12 vs. 2; p=0.04) and infection (7 vs. 0; p=0.04) as
well as concomitant surgeries (81 vs. 41; p=.02).
Conclusion: The consequences of periprosthetic TAA infection are substantial,
and the risks should be mitigated. Although this study did not detect a statistically
significant difference in infection rates between patients who received or did not receive
vancomycin powder, there was a trend towards risk reduction by about 30%. In addition,
current smoking was found to be significantly associated with higher rates of infection and
smoking cessation can serve as another point of intervention. As the complexity of patient
factors and indications for performing total ankle arthroplasty expand, vancomycin powder
offers a relatively cost-effective, safe, and convenient option to potentially reduce
infection.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00438

## Comparing Traditional Lapidus to Newer Triplane Methods for Correction of Hallux
Valgus

Kyle M. Schweser, MD; Anthony Bitar, BS; Jacob W. Cebulko; Kyle Fiala, DPM; Benjamin
Summerhays, DPM

Category: Bunion; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Hallux Valgus; Lapidus; TMT
Introduction/Purpose: Correction of hallux valgus is a common procedure for
foot and ankle specialists. Advances in the understanding of this deformity has shifted
surgical correction back to the first tarsometatarsal joint. Traditional Lapidus methods had
a low recurrence rate and 10% nonunion rate. Recent developments in the correction of hallux
valgus have centered on triplane correction utilizing proprietary systems. These systems are
effective at obtaining, and maintaining, correction. However, they are expensive and there
is a paucity of unbiased literature comparing it to traditional methods. This study aims to
evaluate radiographic outcomes and complications of patients undergoing traditional Lapidus
fixation to triplane corrective procedures. Our hypothesis is that overall correction will
be obtained and maintained at a similar rate, with no difference in overall
complications.
Methods: After IRB approval, a total of 275 patients over the age of 18 were
identified who underwent a total of 294 procedures for first tarsometatarsal joint fusion
for hallux valgus correction between February 2010 to August 2020. A retrospective chart
review was then performed dividing patients into two groups: traditional Lapidus fixation
and triplane correction methods. A total of 191 patients underwent traditional Lapidus, and
103 underwent triplane correction. Charts were evaluated for complications that required a
return to the operating room, specifically nonunion, loss of correction, infection, and
hardware removal. AP foot radiographs were then reviewed from the patient’s preoperative
visit, immediate postoperative, and final follow up. On each film, the first intermetatarsal
angle (IMA) was then measured by two independent observers. Each IMA was recorded and
overall surgical correction, final correction angle, and maintenance of correction were
calculated.
Results: Comparing triplane correction to traditional Lapidus cohorts, there
was no difference in age (50.6 vs 48.9 years, p=0.39), initial deformity (14.66 vs 15.61
degrees, p=0.05), or x-ray follow up (229 vs 393 days, p=0.23). When comparing IMA
correction, there was no difference in initial amount of correction (11.2 vs 11.4 degrees,
p=0.58) or final correction angle (5.22 vs 5.66 degrees, p=0.05). Comparing complications,
there was no difference in secondary surgery rates (9/103, 8.7% vs 11/191, 5.76%, p=0.34),
especially nonunions/loss of correction (4.85% vs 2.62%, p=0.32). Comparing number of cases
that experienced an increased IMA of more than 5 degrees from post-op to final, there was no
difference (10/103, 9.71% vs 12/191, 6.29%, p=0.35). Finally, there was no difference in
infection (p=0.13) or implant removal (p=0.43).
Conclusion: When comparing radiographic correction of IMA, maintenance of
correction, and secondary surgery rates, there appears to be no difference between triplane
correction methods and traditional Lapidus procedures. Recent evidence in the literature
supports correction of hallux valgus through the TMT joint, with a subsequent increase in
proprietary reduction and fusion methods. These proprietary methods are expensive, and
according to this study, offer no improvement over traditional, less expensive methods in
terms of IMA correction and need for secondary surgery. Further study is needed to assess
patient reported outcomes for each and potential radiographic findings that may suggest risk
of recurrence.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00439

## Radiographic Evaluation of Isolated Continuous Compression Staples for Midfoot and
Chopart Arthrodesis

Kyle M. Schweser, MD; Kevin Horner; Kyle Fiala, DPM; Benjamin Summerhays, DPM

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot; Hindfoot
Keywords: Staples; Arthrodesis; Midfoot arthrodesis
Introduction/Purpose: The use of continuous compression implants (nitinol
staples) in orthopaedic surgery has increased secondary to advances in metal alloy
engineering. Biomechanical studies provide useful data supporting the theoretical use of
nitinol staples in the foot and ankle; however, clinical data is limited. There are several
advantages of nitinol staples, including a lower profile when compared to traditional
fixation methods. They are easy to apply and take up a smaller footprint than most plating
techniques, thus decreasing surgical time and dissection. Additionally, continuous
compression across the fusion site is maintained, as opposed to lag screw fixation. The
purpose of this study was to determine the overall effectiveness, clinically and
radiographically, of continuous compression implants (nitinol staples) to achieve stable
arthrodesis in the midfoot and Chopart joints.
Methods: A retrospective chart review was performed on 18 patients (37 joints)
who underwent arthrodesis of the midfoot or Chopart joints utilizing isolated continuous
compression implants between January 2017-December 2019. The primary outcome variable was
radiographic evidence of arthrodesis on x-ray. X-rays were independently reviewed by three
board-certified foot and ankle surgeons. All investigators were blinded towards the x-rays,
and x-rays were randomized in terms of timing from surgery. Each investigator reviewed
digital radiographs independently and recorded their radiographic finding responses. Joints
were deemed fused if greater than 50% of the joint contained bridging bone radiographically.
A partial fusion was defined as some bridging bone, but less than 50% of the joint involved,
and nonunion was defined as no arthrodesis seen radiographically, broken hardware, or loss
of reduction. Smokers and diabetics represented 22% and 11% of the patient population,
respectively.
Results: Radiographic union was seen in 88.8% of TMT joints (16/18) and 83.3%
of midfoot joints overall (20/24). Nonunion rates were 11.2% (2/18) and 16.6% (4/24)
respectively. Diabetes was associated for 50% (3/6) of nonunions. Mean time-to-fusion for
TMT joints was 60 days. In Chopart joint fusions, nonunion rate was 46% (6/13), 2/6 (33%)
were smokers. Overall, diabetes and smoking was associated with 40% (4/10) of all nonunion
cases. TMT joint fusions had a significantly lower proportion of nonunion rates than
hindfoot fusions (p=0.043). Radiographic Interobserver reliability was moderately strong
between reviewers. Clinically, Chopart joint fusion patients had a significantly longer time
course to weight bearing (p = 0.028). 8% (4/50) had broken hardware, all in nonunions, 75%
(3/4) occurring in Chopart joints.
Conclusion: Isolated nitinol staples are a viable option for midfoot
arthrodesis, especially TMT joints, and offer multiple advantages when compared to
traditional fixation methods. Staples are lower profile, eliminating hardware irritation and
potential secondary surgeries, are technically less demanding, and time of application is
decreased when compared to other methods. They offer the benefit of continuous compression
of the fusion site, as well, and are rigid enough to maintain reduction. However, Chopart
joints may require a more rigid fixation than CCI staples can provide, given the higher
nonunion rate, and caution should be exercised in diabetics and smokers.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00440

## Accessory Cuboid Facet Associated with Calcaneonavicular Coalitions

Daniel J. Scott, MD, MBA; Anthony Riccio; Yassine Kanaan; Jacob R. Zide, MD

Category: Hindfoot; Other
Keywords: Tarsal Coalitions; Bone Morphology; CT
Introduction/Purpose: Though resection and soft tissue interposition is the
mainstay of surgical treatment for symptomatic calcaneonavicular coalitions (CNCs) that fail
conservative treatment, some consternation exists as to balancing adequacy of resection with
violation of adjacent talonavicular and calcaneocuboid (CC) articulations. As better
understanding of nearby articular anatomy might be helpful in determining extent of
resection, this study aims to identify differences in the anatomy of the CC articulation
between feet with and without CNCs.
Methods: A retrospective radiographic analysis of patients with symptomatic
CNCs presenting to a single tertiary care pediatric hospital from 2010-2019 was performed.
Patients without computed tomographic (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were
excluded. Using either CT or MRI and standardized anatomic landmarks, the length and
morphology of the calcaneal and cuboid articular surfaces were documented at the CC joint.
When bilateral imaging was available in patients with a unilateral coalition, measurements
were also made on the uninvolved side to provide a cohort of normal controls for
comparison.
Results: 81 CNCs in 55 patients were identified along with18 normal feet. Mean
age was 11.7 years at the time of advanced imaging. In the coalition group, an accessory
cuboid facet was identified articulating with the calcaneal portion of the coalition in
61/81 (75.3%) feet. The mean total length of the cuboid articular surface measured 28.6 mm
(range, 22.4-34.9 mm). The average length of the accessory facet was 10.6 mm (range,
6.0-15.5 mm) while the length of the primary cuboid articulation with the calcaneus was 15.9
mm (range, 6.4-23.2 mm). Thus, the accessory facet comprised 37.2% of the cuboid articular
surface in these patients. Patients without CNCs had a significantly larger primary cuboid
articulation with the calcaneus of 21.6 mm (p<0.0001). An accessory cuboid facet was
identified in only a single foot in the normal cohort.
Conclusion: An accessory cuboid facet is present in over 75% of patients with
CNCs and comprised nearly 40% of the proximal cuboid articular length. Moreover, significant
differences in the shape of the cuboid portion of the CC joint were present in feet with and
without CNCs. This information may be useful when planning the extent of CNC surgical
resection as including the coalition side of the accessory articulation may have value in
restoring hindfoot motion.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00441

## Lesser Tarsal Metatarsal Joint Fusion Using Nitinol Staples, Bone Marrow Aspirate
Concentrate and a Calcaneal Bone Dowel: A Retrospective Comparative Analysis

Jared Scott; Jay Thompson; Mark Johnson, DO; Michael Anderson, BS; Bryan J. Hawkins,
MD

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot; Lesser Toes
Keywords: Arthrodesis; Bone Block Graft; BMAC
Introduction/Purpose: Estimates suggest nonunion rates following lesser
tarsometatarsal (TMT) fusion are up to 11.4%. Various techniques have been employed to
improve fusion rates; however, none have shown significant improvement compared to other
techniques. Autologous bone dowels, bone marrow aspirate concentrate (BMAC) and continuous
compression devices (CCDs), such as nitinol staples, have each shown promising fusion rates
in orthopedic literature. There is limited data that suggests using these techniques in
conjunction with one another has been successfully employed in the fusion of lesser TMT
joints. The aim of this study was to describe our technique using autologous calcaneal bone
graft, CCDs and BMAC for lesser TMT fusion and to investigate whether this method improves
fusion rates and decreases time to fusion in comparison to traditional constructs.
Methods: All patients undergoing arthrodesis of the lesser (2nd/3rd) TMT
joints from January 2015 to January 2020 were identified. Exclusion criteria included
inadequate clinical or radiographic follow-up, those with only 1st TMT joint arthrodesis,
and those less than 18 years old. Chart review allowed patient demographics, risk factors
and surgical approach to be identified. Twenty patients (28 lesser TMT joints) treated with
arthrodesis by the senior surgeon met inclusion criteria. These patients were then divided
into two groups: 1) novel treatment (Nitinol staple, BMAC and calcaneal dowel) and 2)
traditional treatment (compression plate and screw construct). We then assessed for
radiographic union, time to union and complications.
Results: All lesser TMT joints in the novel treatment arm went on to
successful clinical and radiographic fusion. The radiographic union rate of the traditional
treatment arm was 92% (P=.08). Overall time to fusion was 56 and 82 days for the novel and
traditional constructs respectively (P <.05). All patients, regardless of construct, had
returned to full weight bearing and maintained hardware at most recent follow-up (minimum 6
months).
Conclusion: Continuous compression devices such as the nitinol staple and use
of biologic adjuvants appear to decrease nonunion rates and significantly shorten overall
time to fusion in lesser TMT joints. Further investigation towards identifying patient
specific factors for nonunion is warranted.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00442

## Lateral Dorsal Cutaneous Nerve and Anastomotic Branch to the Intermediate Dorsal
Cutaneous Nerve: A Review of Cadaveric Data and Comparison with 3 Tesla MRI

Vrajesh J. Shah; Brendon Mitchell; Claudio B. Ghetti; Brady K. Huang; William Kent;
Ian M. Foran, MD

Category: Other; Hindfoot
Keywords: Sinus Tarsi Approach; Subtalar Fusions; Calcaneal Fractures
Introduction/Purpose: The lateral dorsal cutaneous nerve (LDCN) and
anastomotic branch to the intermediate dorsal cutaneous nerve (AICN) can be injured during
foot and ankle surgery. Cadaveric specimen studies are limited by small sample size.1-11 We
sought to use high-field 3-tesla (3T) magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to examine a
significantly larger cohort and obtain a more representative sample of the course of the
LDCN and AICN. A more generalizable understanding of the course and position of these
structures will aid surgeons intraoperatively in avoiding iatrogenic injury when performing
the sinus tarsi approach, as well as during percutaneous intramedullary fixation of the 5th
metatarsal.
Methods: High-field 3T MRI studies performed between January 2015 to January
2020 were reviewed. Three blinded reviewers at a single academic center measured the coronal
distances of LDCN and AICN from the fifth metatarsal styloid (5MS). Intraclass correlation
coefficients (ICC) were calculated to assess reviewer reliability. Foot and ankle MRIs with
major structural abnormalities, such as tumor or the presence of hardware, were
excluded.
Results: A total of 125 foot and ankle 3T MRIs were identified. Intraclass
correlation coefficient was excellent at 0.87 for LDCN to 5MS and 0.88 for AICN to 5MS. The
mean distance of the LDCN to the 5MS was 0.8 cm (range 0.3-1.4 cm, CI 0.8-0.8 cm) and that
from the AICN to the 5MS was 2.1 cm (range 1.6-3.2 cm, CI 2.0-2.2 cm. Height had no
significant correlation with the nerves' distance from bony landmarks with r values of 0.14
and 0.29 for the LDCN and AICN, respectively. Similarly, we did not find BMI to
significantly correlate, with r values of 0.10 and 0.30 for the LDCN and AICN,
respectively.
Conclusion: Our study demonstrated the LDCN and AICN can be found on average
0.8 cm and 2.1 cm, respectively, above the 5MS with no clear association to patient height
or BMI. Literature studying the range of distances the LDCN is found from the 5MS is scarce,
but one study noted the range to be 0.7-1.2 cm, which is significantly smaller than our
range of 0.3-1.4 cm.3 To our knowledge, our study is first to note the range of distances
the AICN can be found from the 5MS, which is 1.6-3.2 cm.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00443

## Risk of Injury to the LDCN and IACN During Surgical Approaches to the Foot and Ankle:
an Anatomical Study using 3-Tesla Magnetic Resonance Imaging

Vrajesh J. Shah; Brendon Mitchell; Claudio B. Ghetti; Brady K. Huang; William Kent;
Ian M. Foran, MD

Category: Ankle; Other
Keywords: Calcaneal Fractures; Subtalar Joint Arthritis; Sinus Tarsi
Approach
Introduction/Purpose: The dorsomedial branch of the lateral dorsal cutaneous
nerve (dmLDCN) and anastomotic branch to the intermediate dorsal cutaneous nerve (AICN) are
at risk during foot and ankle surgery. Prior studies of the distal sural nerve on cadaveric
specimens are limited by small sample size.1-7 We sought to use high-field 3-tesla (3T)
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to examine a significantly larger cohort and obtain a more
representative sample of the course of the dmLDCN and AICN. A more generalizable
understanding of the course and position of these structures will aid surgeons
intraoperatively in avoiding iatrogenic injury when performing the dorsomedial approach to
the fifth metatarsal, as well as the sinus tarsi and extended sinus tarsi approaches for
calcaneal fractures and subtalar/calcaneocuboid fusions.
Methods: High-field 3T MRI studies performed between January 2015 to January
2020 were reviewed. Three blinded reviewers at a single academic center measured the coronal
distances of dmLDCN and AICN from the fifth metatarsal styloid (5MS). Intraclass correlation
coefficients (ICC) were calculated to assess reviewer reliability. We analyzed the upper and
lower quartile ranges to evaluate the risk of iatrogenic nerve injury with standard surgical
approaches.
Results: A total of 125 foot and ankle 3T MRIs were measured. Intraclass
correlation coefficient was excellent at 0.87 for dmLDCN to 5MS and 0.88 for AICN to 5MS.
1st and 4th quartile range for the dmLDCN to the 5MS was 0.5-0.7 cm and 0.9-1.4 cm,
respectively. 1st and 4th quartile range for the AICN to the 5MS was 1.6-1.9 cm and 2.3-3.2
cm respectively. The AICN was identified in 47.2% of the images.
Conclusion: The dmLDCN, AICN, and SN are vulnerable to iatrogenic injury
during surgical approaches to the fifth metatarsal and calcaneus. Our 1st quartile range for
the dmLDCN to the 5MS of 0.5-0.7 cm suggests that nearly 25% of our values measured by 3T
MRI were lower than the reported range of 0.7-1.2 cm by Fansa, suggesting iatrogenic injury
to the dmLDCN with the 'high and inside approach' to the fifth metatarsal may be higher than
previously thought. The 4th quartile range of the AICN’s distance from the 5MS of 2.3-3.2cm
places it at risk with the sinus tarsi approach.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00444

## Defining Normal Values for Distal Tibiofibular Syndesmotic Space with and without
External Rotation Stress: A Prospective Study with Volunteer Controls

Alan G. Shamrock, MD; Jonathan Day; Kieran Dowley; Nacime S. Mansur, MD; Kevin N.
Dibbern, PhD; Cesar de Cesar Netto, MD, PhD; Martin J. O'Malley, MD

Category: Ankle; Sports
Keywords: Syndesmotic Injury; Weight Bearing CT; Syndesmotic Stability
Introduction/Purpose: The diagnosis and treatment of distal tibiofibular
syndesmosis (DTFS) injury can be challenging, especially in cases of subtle instability that
may be masked on two-dimensional conventional radiographs. Weightbearing computed tomography
(WBCT) has recently emerged as a useful diagnostic tool allowing direct assessment of distal
tibiofibular widening. Needle-Arthroscopic Ankle Lateral Ligament Repair Using a Knotless
Suture AnchorArea measurements of the distal tibiofibular incisura assessed one centimeter
proximal to the ankle joint have been proposed as an accurate diagnostic tool to
differentiate stable and unstable DTFS, however the literature lacks information regarding
normal DTFS area measurements in asymptomatic ankles. The purpose of the current study was
to examine and report normal threshold values for DTFS area measurements in a cohort of
healthy volunteers, assessing the ankles in natural weightbearing position and under
external rotation stress.
Methods: In this prospective study, we enrolled twenty-five healthy volunteers
without a history of DTFS injury or high ankle sprain, previous foot and ankle surgery, or
current ankle pain. Study participants underwent bilateral standing non-stress and external
rotation stress WBCT scans. On non-stress WBCT scans, subjects stood with feet shoulder
width apart in a natural, upright position with body weight evenly distributed. For external
rotation stress images, patients were instructed to position their lower extremity in
maximal internal rotation while the foot was held in a fixed plantigrade position. The DTFS
area (mm2) was semi-automatically quantified on axial-plane WBCT images one
centimeter proximal to the apex of the talar dome using dedicated software ( ). Syndesmosis area values were
compared between non-stressed and stressed ankles, as well as left and right ankles.
Statistical analysis was performed utilizing independent t-tests/Wilcoxon analysis with
statistical significance defined as p<0.05.
Results: The study cohort consisted of 50 ankles in 25 patients (12 males,
48%) with a mean age of 28.7+9.3 years. In the unstressed ankle, the mean pooled DTFS area
was determined to be 99.1+2.8 mm2. The mean syndesmosis area of unstressed left
ankles in the cohort was 96.5+4.0 mm2, while unstressed right ankles had a mean
area of 101.6 mm2 (p=0.378). With external rotation stress, the DTFS area of left
ankles (mean difference 1.2 mm2; CI: -9.8-11.8; p=0.765), right ankles (mean
difference -3.1 mm2; CI: -16.1-6.6; p=0.453), and all ankles (mean difference
-1.2 mm2; CI: -12.4-9.3; p=0.775) remained similar.
Conclusion: This is the first study to assess standing WBCT DTFS area
measurements in a cohort of volunteer controls, with and without external rotation stress.
We found a mean DTFS value of 99+-18.8 mm2. We also observed that in normal
ankles with expected intact ligaments, external rotation stress did not result in
significant widening of the DTFS space. Our hope is that the results of this study can be
utilized in the literature as normal threshold values for DTFS area measurements, fostering
additional investigations of patients with suspected and confirmed DTFS instability.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00445

## Utilization of Arthroscopy During Ankle Fracture Fixation among Early Career Surgeons:
An Evaluation of the American Board of Orthopedic Surgery Part II Database

Alan G. Shamrock, MD; Christopher N. Carender, MD; Annunziato Amendola, MD; Natalie
Glass, PhD; Kyle R. Duchman, MD

Category: Ankle; Arthroscopy; Trauma
Keywords: Ankle Arthroscopy; Ankle Fracture; ORIF
Introduction/Purpose: Rotational ankle fractures are common injuries
associated with high rates of intra-articular injury. Traditional ankle fracture open
reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) techniques provide limited capacity for evaluation of
intra- articular pathology. Ankle arthroscopy represents a minimally invasive technique to
directly visualize the articular cartilage and syndesmosis while aiding with reduction and
allowing joint debridement, loose body removal, and treatment of chondral injuries. The
purpose of this study was to evaluate temporal trends in concomitant ankle arthroscopy
during ankle fracture ORIF surgery amongst early-career orthopaedic surgeons while examining
the influence of subspecialty fellowship training on utilization.
Methods: The American Board of Orthopedic Surgery (ABOS) Part II database was
queried to identify all candidates performing at least one ankle fracture ORIF (Current
Procedural Terminology [CPT] codes 27766, 27769. 27784, 27792, 27814, 27822, 27823, 27829,
27846, 27848) from examination years 2010 to 2019. All ORIF cases were examined to identify
those that carried a concomitant CPT code for ankle arthroscopy (CPT codes 29891, 29892,
29894, 29895, 29897, 29898, 29899). Concomitant ankle arthroscopy cases were categorized by
candidates self-reported fellowship training status and examination year. Descriptive
statistics were performed to report relevant data and linear regression analyses were
utilized to assess temporal trends in concomitant ankle arthroscopy with ORIF for ankle
fractures. Statistical significance was defined as p<0.05.
Results: There were 36,113 cases of ankle fracture ORIF performed of which 388
cases (1.1%) were performed with concomitant ankle arthroscopy. Ankle fracture ORIF was most
frequently performed by trauma fellowship trained Part II candidates (n=8,888; 24.6%),
followed by sports medicine (n=7,493; 20.8%) and foot and ankle (n=6,563; 18.2%).
Arthroscopy was most frequently utilized by foot and ankle fellowship trained surgeon (293/
6,270 cases; 4.5%) followed by sports medicine (29/7,464 cases; 0.4%) and trauma (4/8,884
cases; 0.1%). With respect to total arthroscopic cases, 75.5% were performed by foot and
ankle fellowship trained surgeons while only 1.0% was performed by trauma trained
candidates. Ankle arthroscopy utilization significantly increased from 3.65 cases per 1,000
ankle fractures in 2010 to 13.91 cases per 1,000 ankle fractures in 2019 (p=0.010).
Specifically, foot and ankle fellowship trained surgeons demonstrated a significant increase
in arthroscopy utilization during ankle fracture ORIF over time (p<0.001; OR: 1.101; CI:
1.054-1.151).
Conclusion: Ankle arthroscopy utilization during ankle fracture ORIF has
increased ten-fold over the past decade. Foot and ankle fellowship trained surgeons
contribute most significantly to this trend.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00446

## Influence of Medical Marijuana on Mesenchymal Stromal Cell Osteogenesis: An in Vitro
Study

Jiangyinzi Shang; MaCalus V. Hogan, MD, MBA, FAAOS, FAOA; Jarrett D. Cain, MSc, DPM;
Hang Lin; Peter G. Alexander; Alan Y. Yan, MD

Category: Basic Sciences/Biologics; Basic Sciences/Biologics; Sports;
Other
Keywords: Biologics; Biologics; Biologics
Introduction/Purpose: Recently, purposes of medicinal marijuana including
analgesia and reduction in inflammation. The active component activates the CB1 and CB2
receptors, thus mimicking the action of endogenous cannabinoids. CB1 and CB2 are important
regulators of bone metabollism. In particular, endocannabinoid signaling has shown to
regulate proliferation and differentiation of MSCs and the activities of osteoblasts and
osteoclasts. Cannabinoids may be prescribed to patients suffering bone fractures involving
prolonged immobilization and discomfort. Thus, there is an important need to understand more
completely the role of cannanbinoid signaling in fracture healing. In this study, we examine
the influence of a synthetic cannabinoid agonist, Win-55,212-2 (Win) on adult, human
MSC-derived osteoblast activity. Cell viability and osteogenic phenotype were assessed by
MTS assay, RT-PCR, and alizarin red staining.
Methods: With an IRB approved protocol, MSCs were isolated from healthy human
bone marrow and expanded to the passage five for experimentation. Cells were then plated at
5,200 cells/cm2 (6-well plate) and osteogenically stimulated for 21 days before treatment
with increasing concentrations of Win (0.01, 0.1, or 1 µM) for an additional 48 hours. The
MTS assay was employed to determine the half-maximal (50%) inhibitory concentration (IC50)
at different time points. The cell phenotype was assessed by real-time PCR and alizarin red
staining.
Results: We first used the MTS assay (for metabolism and proliferation) to
test 7 doses of Win-55, from 0.001µM up to 5 µM and determined that the human osteoblast
IC50 of Win-55 over 1-7 days of exposure was ~ 1.5 µM ( ), a dose slightly lower than concentrations
found to affect chondrocytes in a previous study. At 1µM Win-55, RT-PCR revealed that the
expression of inflammatory cytokines IL-1beta and TNF-alpha was significantly reduced, while
that of IL-6 and COX2 was unchanged. The expression of most osteogenic markers was unchanged
by Win, but we did observe significant increases in BMP2, RUNX2 and OPN (Figure 2). Alizarin
Red staining revealed increased calcium deposition and mineralization in the presence of 1µM
Win, corroborating the RT-PCR results (Figure 3).
Conclusion: Win-55,212-2 may be beneficial to osteogenesis. 1 µM Win enhanced
the osteoblastic phenotype over control, untreated MSC-derived osteoblasts, reduced
inflammatory mediators and increased calcium deposition and mineralization. This suggests
that cannabidiol treatment might lead to improvements in fracture healing and provide a
novel therapeutic option for the bone regeneration. Future studies are aimed at
characterizing the CB-1 and CB-2 signaling associated with the changes observed here and the
effects of Win on MSC-derived osteoblasts in the context of inflammation.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00447

## Comparing Bilateral Feet Computed Tomography Scans Can Improve Surgical Decision Making
for Subtle Lisfranc Injury

Dong Woo Shim, MD

Category: Trauma; Midfoot/Forefoot; Sports
Keywords: Lisfranc Injury; CT; Lisfranc Ligament Injuries
Introduction/Purpose: Subtle Lisfranc injuries (SLIs) are challenging to
diagnose. Although weightbearing (WB) radiographs have been suggested to identify SLIs,
approximately 20% are missed on initial radiographic assessment. Computed tomography (CT)
has been suggested as an alternative, but has not provided any diagnostic guideline.
Therefore we compared measurement techniques on radiographs and bilateral foot CT scans for
the efficiency of diagnosis and making surgical decisions for SLI.
Methods: We retrospectively investigated patients diagnosed with SLIs between
January 2014 and January 2020. Distances between both medial cuneiform and second metatarsal
base (C1M2), and the first and second metatarsal bases (M1M2), were measured on bilateral WB
radiographs. Bilateral foot CT scans were taken, and the distances between C1M2 were checked
on the axial and three points of the coronal plane (top, middle, and base) ( ). The surgical indication was
> 1 mm of diastasis on CT scan. Clinical outcomes were evaluated using the American
Orthopaedic Foot & Ankle Society (AOFAS) score at final follow-up. Intraobserver and
interobserver agreements were assessed.
Results: Thirty patients with SLIs were reviewed. Twenty-four patients
underwent surgical fixation (Group A) and six patients were treated conservatively (Group
B). The side-to-side difference (STSD) of C1M2 and M1M2 distances greater than 1 mm showed
91.7% and 54.2% sensitivity, and 66.7% and 16.7% specificity, respectively. Investigating
STSDs of all points on CT scans were informative to discriminate both groups (P <=
0.038). Clinical outcomes showed no significant difference between the groups (P = 0.631).
Intraclass and interclass correlation coefficient values showed good to very good
reliability, except for STSD of WB M1M2 distance and the coronal top plane.
Conclusion: Investigating bilateral foot CT scans was significantly efficient
and reliable for the diagnosis and treatment plan for SLI. On radiographs, STSD of WB C1M2
distance was more sensitive than STSD of WB M1M2 distance.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00448

## Comparison of Newly Designed Three Spike Insole and Total Contact Insole in Refractory
Plantar Fasciitis: A Randomized, Double-Blinded, Non-Inferiority Study

Dong Woo Shim, MD

Category: Ankle; Hindfoot
Keywords: Plantar Fasciitis; Nonoperative; Pain
Introduction/Purpose: Plantar fasciitis is one of the common foot complaints
that is chronic and can induce dysfunction. Total contact insole (TCI) is simple but
effective in treating plantar fasciitis. Nevertheless of the effect, the cost and the long
duration for production have been the major flaws. Therefore, we developed newly designed
three-spike insole (TSI) that can be commercially productive and compared the clinical
outcomes with TCI.
Methods: Patients with plantar fasciitis refractory to conservative treatment
for more than 6 weeks were candidates. We produced insoles with hardness of 58 +- 5 Shore-A.
Twenty-eight patients were randomly allocated to use either TSI or TCI evenly ( ). The following assessment
tools were used: visual analog scale (VAS), American Orthopaedic Foot & Ankle Society
score, Foot and Ankle Outcome Score, Karlsson-Peterson (KP) score, Short Form-36 for quality
of life, and Foot Function Index. Non-inferiority was declared if VAS was within the
statistical variability of minimal important difference. A blinded assessor evaluated the
groups at baseline and after 6, 12, and 24 weeks.
Results: The groups were homogenous for majority of variables at baseline.
Overall patient-reported satisfaction showed improvement from mean 5.2 (range, 1 - 12) weeks
of wearing and all clinical outcome scores showed significant improvements in both groups
over time on the basis of Friedman test (p <.05). TSI showed non-inferiority to TCI at
each time point. Post hoc analysis revealed that many scales showed significant superiority
of TSI at 3 month (p <.0125) and KP score at 6 month (p <.001).
Conclusion: We reaffirmed that semi-rigid insole is effective in refractory
plantar fasciitis and showed TSI restores pedal function more rapidly than TCI. TSI can be
not only effective in deriving better clinical outcomes but also be manufactured for
popularization to lower the price and producing time of orthosis.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00449

## Needle-Arthroscopic Ankle Lateral Ligament Repair Using a Knotless Suture
Anchor

Yoshiharu Shimozono, MD; Hiromu Ito; Hayato Ryoki; Sayako Sakai; Shinichiro Ishie;
Ryuzo Arai; Yutaka Kuroda; Shuichi Matsuda

Category: Arthroscopy; Ankle; Arthroscopy; Sports
Keywords: Ankle Arthroscopy; Ankle Instability; Arthroscopic Broström
Repair
Introduction/Purpose: Arthroscopic techniques have been increasingly used to
repair the anterior talofibular ligament (ATFL) for lateral ankle instability, however there
are still concerns on complications, such as nerve injury, iatrogenic cartilage damage and
wound scar. Additionally, standard suture anchors can cause prominent knots. Recently, a
novel needle-arthroscopic system (NanoScopeTM) has been introduced, with a 1.9-mm
diameter arthroscope and semirigid frame, which can reduce conventional arthroscopic-related
complications by minimizing the skin incisions and provide excellent visualization without
ankle distraction due to its small and semirigid features. The purpose of this surgical
technical note is to describe a new, very minimally invasive surgical technique for the ATFL
repair using this needle-arthroscopy with a knotless suture anchor, which has the potential
to reduce both conventional arthroscopic-related and knot-related complications.
Methods: We have developed a novel surgical treatment of the ATFL repair for
lateral ankle instability in a cadaveric model. The arthroscopic system
(NanoScopeTM, Arthrex, Naples, FL) is used during the procedures. The handpiece
tube is 9.5-cm long, semi-rigid and has a 1.9-mm outer diameter. The scope’s direction of
view is 0°, with a 120° field of view. The patient is placed in a supine position and no
distraction is applied to the ankle joint. Standard anteromedial and anterolateral portals
are first used. An accessory anterolateral (AAL) portal is then created around 1.5 cm
anterior to the tip of the fibula, of which the portal position is determined under the
visualization through the anterolateral portal.
Results: Almost all of the talar and tibial surfaces are reachable without
distraction, due to its small and semirigid features. There is no difficulty problem
obtaining proper visualization of the ATFL and the surrounding structures during the whole
procedures, due to a wide 120°-field of view. The major steps of the procedure are (1)
suture anchor insertion into the distal fibula through the AAL portal using a Knotless
SutureTak Anchor (Arthrex), (2) penetration of suture string into the ATFL remnant using a
Micro SutureLassoTM (Arthrex), (3) capture of the ATFL remnant using a
suture-relay technique, (4) reattachment of the ATFL remnant by pulling out the passing wire
without knot-tying, in the dorsiflexed ankle position (Figure). All skin-incisions are tiny
and require only paper skin closures. This method requires neither blunt dissection of
subcutaneous tissue to pass the suture nor knot-tying to reattach the ATFL.
Conclusion: Our technique is a simple, feasible, and very minimally invasive
anatomic repair of the ATFL for lateral ankle instability using a 1.9-mm diameter
needle-arthroscopy with a knotless suture anchor. However, the long-term clinical results
need to be evaluated in future studies.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00450

## Posterior Hindfoot Endoscopy Using 1.9-mm Diameter Needle Arthroscopy: A Cadaveric
Study

Yoshiharu Shimozono, MD; Hiromu Ito; Hayato Ryoki; Sayako Sakai; Shinichiro Ishie;
Ryuzo Arai; Yutaka Kuroda; Shuichi Matsuda

Category: Ankle; Arthroscopy; Hindfoot; Sports
Keywords: Posterior Ankle Impingement; Flexor Hallucis Longus Tendinosis;
Arthroscopy
Introduction/Purpose: Posterior hindfoot endoscopy is a safe and effective
treatment for posterior ankle impingement syndrome (PAIS) and flexor hallucis longus (FHL)
tendon disorders. As frequent coexistence of PAIS and FHL tenosynovitis has been reported,
it is important to investigate FHL tendon pathology concomitantly when treating PAIS.
However, the visualization of FHL tendon distal to the retinaculum is limited when using
conventional rigid arthroscopy. Additionally, wound-healing problems following hindfoot
endoscopy have been still reported. Recently, a novel 1.9-mm diameter needle-arthroscopic
system has been introduced. Its small and semirigid features can help reduce the risk of
wound complications and can make it easier to perform FHL tendoscopy. The purpose of this
study was to assess whether 1.9-mm diameter needle-arthroscopy was useful for hindfoot
endoscopy in a cadaveric model.
Methods: A 1.9-mm diameter arthroscopic system (NanoScopeTM,
Arthrex) was used to perform a hindfoot endoscopy in 6 human donor ankles (3 pairs). The
arthroscope tube is 9.5-cm long and semi-rigid, and has a 1.9-mm outer diameter. The scope’s
direction of view is 0°, with a 120° field of view. Posteromedial and posterolateral portals
were established. Visualization and operative reach with tailored arthroscopic instruments
were recorded, including posterolateral talar process, posterior talofibular ligament,
intermalleolar ligament, subtalar joint, ankle joint, and flexor hallucis longus (FHL)
tendon. Finally, a conventional 4.0-mm diameter arthroscope with a 30° angle was used to
compare the visualization of FHL tendon.
Results: All significant structures were successfully visualized and reached
in all specimens. In ankle joint, all of the tibial surface was visualized, but
visualization of talar surface was limited. Due to its wide 120° field of view, there was no
difficulty obtaining sufficient visualization in any structures. As this needle-arthroscopic
system has the semirigid frame, FHL tendoscopy was easily performed via the posterolateral
portal. In all specimens, the FHL tendon was visualized from the level of ankle joint to the
Knot of Henry (Zone 1 and 2), and the flexor digitorum longus tendon crossing obliquely over
the FHL tendon was observed (Figure). The conventional arthroscope could not be inserted
into the tunnel underneath the sustentaculum tali in any specimens.
Conclusion: Posterior hindfoot endoscopy using a 1.9-mm diameter
needle-arthroscopy provides effective visualization and surgical reach of all significant
structures for the treatment of PAIS. Its small and semirigid features also make the FHL
tendoscopy less invasive and more accessible than conventional rigid arthroscope.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00451

## Quantification and Comparison of Talar Exposure Utilizing A Posteromedial Approach and
Medial Malleolar Osteotomy

Ademola I. Shofoluwe, MD

Category: Ankle; Hindfoot; Trauma
Keywords: Talus; Trauma; Osteotomies
Introduction/Purpose: Fractures of the talus contain a variety of morphologies
including the head, neck, body, dome, lateral process, posterior process, and medial/lateral
tubercles. Specifically, the posterior medial approach is useful for surgical fixation of
posterior process fractures. The use of the medial malleolar osteotomy is beneficial in more
extensive medial and distal exposure for neck or neck/body fractures. The purpose of this
study was to quantify the area of osseous exposure afforded by a posteromedial approach to
the talus and medial malleolar osteotomy. We believe this can be potentially useful for
preoperative planning. To the authors' knowledge, a quantitative comparison of the talar
access afforded by these two distinct approaches has yet to be described in the
literature.
Methods: Five fresh frozen cadaveric lower extremities were dissected using a
posteromedial approach and medial malleolar osteotomy respectively. Following exposure, the
talar surfaces directedly visualized and demarcated along its boarders using a 2.0 mm drill
bit orthogonal to the talar surface. The surface visualized was labeled and captured using a
calibrated digital image. The digital images were then analyzed using ImageJ software
(National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD) to calculate the surface area of the
exposure.
Results: The average square area of talus exposed using the posteromedial
approach was 9.70 (SD = 2.20, range 7.20 - 12.46) cm2. The average quantity of
talar exposure expressed as a percentage was 9% (SD = 1.58, range 7.03 - 10.40). The average
square area of talus exposed using a medial malleolar osteotomy was 14.32 (SD 2.00, range
11.26 - 16.66) cm2. The average quantity of talar exposure expressed as a
percentage was 12.94% (SD = 1.79, range 9.97 - 14.73). The posteromedial approach provided
superior visualization of the posterior talus, while the medial malleolar osteotomy offered
greater access to the medial body.
Conclusion: The posteromedial approach and medial malleolar osteotomy allow
for significant exposure of the talus, yielding 9.70 cm2 and 14.32
cm2, respectively. Given the differing portions of the talus exposed, surgeons
may prefer to utilize the posteromedial approach for surgical fixation of posterior process
fractures and elect to use a medial malleolar osteotomy in cases requiring more extensive
medial and distal exposure for neck or neck/body fractures.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00452

## Efficacy of Fluoroscopically Guided Corticosteroid Injections for Foot and Ankle
Pain

Tyler Slone; Michael Ciesa; Ania Bartholomew; Nicholas A Cheney, DO; Brian C.
Clark

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot; Ankle; Ankle Arthritis; Hindfoot; Lesser Toes
Keywords: Corticosteroid Injection; Midfoot; Ankle Arthritis
Introduction/Purpose: Arthritis of the foot and ankle can severely hamper
quality of life resulting in decreased mobility and functionality. Conservative treatment
can involve corticosteroid injections into affected joint spaces. Fluoroscopic guided
injections provide confirmation that the injection was successfully applied within the
appropriate joint space. Due to this, they can be of diagnostic value and result in more
accurate injection placement. Current literature focuses on ultrasound guided injections and
does not fully address the efficacy of fluoroscopic injections. Objective: Assess and
determine overall efficacy of fluoroscopically guided corticosteroid injections including
the degree and period of relief provided.
Methods: We retrospectively reviewed patient charts from 2016 through 2020 of
patients that received fluoroscopically guided corticosteroid injections in foot or ankle
joints. 224 injections were reviewed, gathering responses to percent relief, days of relief,
pre-/post-injection VAS pain score and efficacy of repeat injections. Additionally,
Kellgren-Lawrence arthritis scale vs pain relief were analyzed.
Results: Analysis limited by incomplete patient response. 24/83 (28.9%)
injections provided less than 2 weeks of relief while 59/83 (71.1%) injections averaged
109.49 +- 72.03 days of pain relief. Of 127 responses, post-injection relief at first follow
up had an average VAS reduction of 2.87 +- 3.17 with 70.38 +- 30.8 % improvement. 40
subjects with repeat injections had 109.41 +- 64.96 days of relief per injection. No
significant correlation was found between joint injected or degree of arthritis and percent
improvement.
Conclusion: Fluoroscopic guided injections are an effective conservative
option providing prolonged but varying relief of 3-4 months irrespective of the specific
joint or degree of arthritis. Repeat injections show similar efficacy. In contrast to
ultrasound guided injections, fluoroscopy provides additional diagnostic and therapeutic
value. This can be beneficial if the injections fail and the patient must progress to
surgery. Future prospective studies could directly compare different injections modalities
and further analyze efficacy for specific diagnoses.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00453

## Talocalcaneal Interosseous Ligament Provides Greatest Talar Stability in the Sagittal
Plane

Michelle Smith; Emma Knapp, BS; Hani A. Awad, PhD; Irvin Oh, MD

Category: Hindfoot; Ankle
Keywords: Talus; Ankle; Biomechanics
Introduction/Purpose: Talar ANV, trauma, and implant failure or collapse after
TAR are major challenges in foot and ankle surgery. Custom total talar implants are a
promising option for such conditions and have shown promising results. However, there are no
biomechanical studies examining the kinematics of total talus implant. We aimed to
investigate the critical stabilizers of the native talus and the biomechanics of a total
talar replacement. We hypothesize that the stability an implant is less affected by medial
and lateral ligaments, with partial stability provided by the tibiotalar mortise, and the
most instability occurs on the talocalcaneal joint due to absence of plantar restraint.
Total talar implant will be most unstable in the sagittal plane, especially in heel-raise
position.
Methods: Eight cadaveric samples underwent biomechanical testing in a
midstance and seated heel-raise models in an E10000 Instron testing system. An OptiTrack
system was used to record the 3D positions of the tibia, talus, calcaneus, navicular and
first metatarsus throughout testing. The Achilles tendon was loaded in tension, while the
tibia was cyclically loaded. The lateral ligaments, deep deltoid ligaments, talonavicular
joint capsule, and the talocalcaneal interosseous ligament (TCIL) were sequentially released
and underwent cycles in midstance and heel-raise positions after each release. The talus was
removed and replaced to simulate total talar implant. Lastly, TA, EHL, and EDL were sutured
into place to provide static soft tissue coverage of the talus, and final kinematics were
measured. Data was analyzed to determine the joint motion and joint angles. Each ligament
release was compared to one another using a one-way ANOVA, and compared to the initial
condition using a one-sample t-test.
Results: Eight cadaveric foot and ankle models were examined (four left feet
and four right feet). Under maximum force in a simulated seated plantarflexion position,
gradual increase in talonavicular sagittal angle compared to initial condition was noted
with sequential soft tissue releases. The talar dorsiflexion angle showed no significant
change after lateral ligament, deltoid ligament, and talonavicular joint capsular releases.
However, a significant increase in the talar dorsiflexion angle (4.38+/-4.04o ) was noted
after the interosseous ligament release compared to initial condition (p= 0.02). Similarly,
the displacement of the talus relative to the navicular was significantly increased after
the talonavicular joint capsule release (1.47+/-1.33 mm, p = 0.03) and the interosseous
ligament release (5.28+/-3.82 mm, p = 0.01).
Conclusion: In this study, we utilized native talus as a surrogate for a
custom total talar implant to investigate the peritalar kinematics of the total talus
implant. We found that the TCIL provides the most talar stability in the native ankle joint.
Without the TCIL, the talus is most unstable in the sagittal plane, especially during the
simulated heel-raise position. Significant medial and lateral stability of the tibiotalar
joint maybe provided by the mortise of the ankle joint. Taken together, recreation of the
TCIL or plantar stabilization of the implant should be considered to improve stability of a
total talar implant.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00454

## State-Wide COVID-19 Lockdowns Did Not Adversely Affect the Management of Acute Ankle
Fractures

Richard M. Smith; Tonya L. Dixon, MD, MPH; Nihar Shah, MD

Category: Ankle; Trauma; Other
Keywords: Ankle Fracture; Trauma; Clinical Outcomes
Introduction/Purpose: The novel coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic has presented
a unique challenge to orthopaedic trauma and operative fracture management throughout the
United States. Various public health and safety measures imposed during the lockdown lead to
cancelation or rescheduling of non-emergent or non-urgent surgery cases. In order to provide
appropriate standard of care, certain operative cases were deemed urgent and managed on an
inpatient basis. This change in practice had an impact on the management of acute ankle
fractures which has previously reported excellent results and cost-savings with outpatient
operative management. The goal of this study is to determine the impact of the COVID-19
lockdown and barriers to care in treating isolated operative ankle fractures in the
inpatient setting.
Methods: The current IRB approved study is a retrospective review of adult
patients presenting to University of Cincinnati (UC) with isolated, operative ankle
fractures. The study period consisted of patients who presented during the months of January
1st - July 1st 2020 to coincide with pre-, intra and post- COVID lockdown in Southwestern
Ohio. Of note, the official mandated lockdown within the state of Ohio was March 23rd - May
1st with phased business re-openings after May 1st. Similarly, hospital operations including
operative capacity was restricted until a return to full capacity on June 29, 2020. A total
of 464 patient records were reviewed (159, 176, 129 ankle fractures for the respective years
2018-2020). A review of the data from years 2018, 2019 were analyzed for statistical
comparison. Polytraumatized patients, open fractures and those with bilateral injuries were
excluded.
Results: The final cohort included 190 ankles (52, 71, 67, for 2018, 2019,
2020 respectively). This comprised of 71 males (38%), 119 females (62%). The average age of
patients were 48+-19, 51+-18, 48+-20, respectively. There were no significant differences in
BMI, smoking and diabetic status. There was a total of eight isolated ankle fractures during
the immediate lockdown period of 2020, all managed with inpatient surgery. This was compared
to the previous year 2019 (7/16 treated with inpatient management), versus 2018 (4/5
inpatient). Overall, among allcomers, 2020 had the lowest amount of acute fractures treated
as outpatient, elective cases (34%) versus 45% -2019, 58%- 2018; however, this was not
statistically significant. The length of stay for inpatients, time until surgical
management, time to physical therapy clearance, postoperative follow up with index surgeon
or midlevel providers were not significantly different among the 2020 cohort during and
immediately after the state-wide lockdown.
Conclusion: Little has been published about the effect of the coronavirus
lockdown on acute fracture management. In this study of acute ankle fractures, strategic
practice changes to predominantly inpatient management did not adversely affect patient
care. However, there are disadvantages to inpatient versus outpatient management such as:
(1) resource allocation (such as hospital beds during a pandemic) and (2) associated costs
to both patients and hospital. Future efforts will be made to elucidate the cost analysis
within our hospital system (not available at the time of this submission).
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00455

## Minimally Invasive Management of a Rare Giant Cell Tumor of Talus: A Case Report and
Literature Review

Sandip S. Sonawane

Category: Ankle; Hindfoot; Other
Keywords: Talus; Autograft; Minimally Invasive
Introduction/Purpose: Giant cell tumor (GCT) of small bones of hand and feet
is rare. A benign but locally aggressive neoplasm with a tendency for local recurrence with
undifferentiated mesenchymal stromal cells and the presence of abundant, multinucleated
giant cells. It occurs in a slightly younger age group with usually an expansile and
eccentric epiphyseo-metaphyseal region lytic lesion. A 22 yrs. old patient, presenting as
lytic expansile lesion of talus, suspected Giant cell tumor (GCT) of talus preoperatively
and intraoperatively and proven subsequently, is presented along with review of literature.
This patient is the young and nearly 24th case reported in the literature for GCT of
talus.
Methods: Author reviewed the literature for the GCT of talus from 1964 to till
2021. The author reported a case of left ankle joint pain and swelling for 6 months in a 22
yrs. old male, which turns out to be aneurysmal bone cyst of talus on radiographs, Computed
tomography and aspiration cytology. Campanacci grade II lesion was planned for the curettage
and autologous bone grafting.
Results: Retrospectively, the intraoperative biopsy confirmed the lesion as
giant cell tumor with aneurysmal bone cyst. After 4 years the lesion showed the near
complete resolution on radiographs and CT scan. However, because of the historical
recurrence and metastasis reports of GCT, author is continuously monitoring patient’s ankle
with yearly follow up. Author reviwed the literarue for the GCT of talus from 1964 to till
2021. Author found total of 23 reported cases for GCT of talus in literature, out of which 2
cases showed recurrence and distant metastasis to chest which is 8.69 percent of total
cases.
Conclusion: Author concludes that the Campanacci grade I and II can be managed
with mini-open lesional curettage and autologous bone grafting while grade III and IV needed
osteotomy, en-bloc excisions and tibio-calcaneal fusion or below knee amputation in
recurrent or aggressive lesions. As author found 8.69 percent cases of distant pulmonary
metastasis out of total reported cases, he recommends yearly follow up of the lesions and
look for distant metastasis in suspected cases.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00456

## Percutaneous Correction Surgery of Hammer Toes with Biodegradable Pins

Pablo Sotelano, MD; Daniel S. Villena, MD; Ana C. Parise, MD; Leonardo A. Conti, MBA,
PhD; Nelly M. Carrasco, MD; Jonathan M. Verbner, MD; Maria Gala Santini Araujo, MD

Category: Lesser Toes; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Hammertoe Deformity; Hammertoe Correction; Minimally Invasive
Introduction/Purpose: The standard treatment for deformities in lesser toes is
proximal interphalangeal arthrodesis with Kirschner wires. It is relatively inexpensive but
complications have been described such as infection, recurrences and misalignment. New
devices were developed, among them biodegradable pins avoid the need for withdrawal and
exposure to the outside. The objective of this study was to describe the clinical and
radiological results one year after surgery in a group of patients with a diagnosis of rigid
hammer toes, who underwent percutaneous surgical correction with a biodegradable pin.
Methods: Methods: We present a retrospective study in a consecutive series of
cases with a diagnosis of hammer toe operated between January 2016 and December 2018.
Patients older than 18 years of age who underwent a percutaneous proximal interphalangeal
arthrodesis, with a biodegradable pin, were included. The patients were asked through a
survey to rate the results obtained with the intervention (excellent, very good, good, fair
and bad). loss of contact with the ground was evaluated with podobarography. The patients
were evaluated with weightbearing X rays to assess interphalangeal alignment and
consolidation. We used the AOFAS scale to assess clinical results, preoperatively and one
year after surgery. Postoperative complications, infection, wound dehiscence, rupture of
osteosynthesis material, loss of correction were also evaluated.
Results: 117 patients were identified, 23 (16%) underwent bilateral surgery
(140 feet), with a total of 220 lesser toes who underwent proximal interphalangeal
arthrodesis stabilized with percutaneously biodegradable pin. 50% had a minimum follow-up of
1 year. The pre-surgical AOFAS of 52 improved to 95 points in the postoperative period. In
96 (43.63%) fingers, an F1 base osteotomy was performed to correct the alignment in the
coronal plane. We observed pseudo osteoarthritis in 5% of the toes but with good alignment.
We observed 6% of floating fingers, the pin was removed in 5 fingers; without loss of
correction. In 1.36% cases it migrated early, causing a recurrence of the lesion. Patient
satisfaction was excellent or very good in 79 %.
Conclusion: According to our serie results, we consider that percutaneous
technique with biodegradable pins manages to maintain adequate alignment and a consolidation
rate both in radiological and clinical results with good patient satisfaction. No infection
case was reported. We found a low rate of biodegradable pin removal. For its part, the
biodegradable plug allows osteotomies to be performed with the implant already in place, it
does not require routine removal of the implant, reducing the need for a second
intervention.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00457

## Efficacy of 3T MRI vs Diagnostic Arthroscopy for the Diagnosis of Osteochondral Lesions
of the Talus in Patients Undergoing Brostrom Repair for Lateral Ankle Instability

Chris M. Stauch, BS; Zachary Koroneos; Anna Ptasinski; Brandon Martinazzi, BS; Shawn
M. Bifano, MD; Michael C. Aynardi, MD

Category: Ankle; Arthroscopy
Keywords: Osteochondral Lesions of the Talus; Broström; Ankle Arthroscopy
Introduction/Purpose: Osteochondral lesions of the talus (OLT) are commonly
seen in patients with lateral ankle instability. If left undiagnosed, OLTs can lead to
significant ankle pain and progressive osteoarthritis. While arthroscopy has long been the
gold standard for the diagnosis of OLTs, MRI is a useful imaging modality for pre-operative
evaluation and surgical planning in patients undergoing surgery for lateral ankle
instability. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the diagnostic accuracy of 3T MRI for
the diagnoses of OLTs in patients undergoing a Broström Gould procedure for lateral ankle
instability.
Methods: Following institutional review board approval, a database was
obtained for all patients from 2/11/2015 to 1/21/2019 who underwent a Broström Gould
procedure for lateral ankle instability in addition to diagnostic arthroscopy of the
tibiotalar joint. Additionally, patients required a pre-operative 3T MRI for inclusion in
the study. Patients who underwent the Broström Gould procedure but did not have a diagnostic
arthroscopy or did not have a pre-operative MRI were excluded from the study. The average
time from MRI to surgery was 3.5 months. Patient charts were then reviewed to determine the
proportion of MRIs that correctly identified the presence or absence of OLTs compared to
diagnostic arthroscopy.
Results: A total of 80 patients were included for analysis with an average age
of 38.1 +- 14.3 years. 46 (57.5%) patients were female and 34 (42.5%) were male. A total of
39 patients (48.8%) were identified to have an OLT on arthroscopy. Of these 39 patients, 28
patients (71.8%) were correctly identified by the pre-operative 3T MRI as having an OLT and
11 patients (28.2%) had MRIs that failed to identify an OLT. 41 patients had an arthroscopy
that was negative for OLTs. Of these 41 patients, MRI correctly diagnosed 40 patients
(97.6%) as not having an OLT and misdiagnosed 1 patient as a false positive (2.4%).
Conclusion: In patients undergoing Broström Gould procedures with diagnostic
arthroscopy for osteochondral lesions of the talus, 3T MRI demonstrates a sensitivity of
71.8% and a specificity of 97.8%. Thus, pre-operative MRI can be a useful imaging modality
to assess for OLTs prior to surgery and should prompt surgeons to perform an arthroscopy
with subsequent treatment of the OLT. However, a negative MRI does not rule out the
possibility of an OLT being present due to a relatively high false- negative rate.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00458

## Can Bedside Needle Arthroscopy of the Ankle be an Accurate Option in the Office Setting
for Intra- Articular Delivery of Injectable Agents?

Tobias Stornebrink, MD; Sjoerd A. Stufkens, MD, PhD; Nathaniel P. Mercer; John G.
Kennedy, MD, FRCS(Orth); Gino Kerkhoffs, MD

Category: Ankle; Arthroscopy
Keywords: Ankle Arthroscopy; Minimally Invasive; Surgical Instrumentation
Introduction/Purpose: To evaluate accuracy and patient experience of
inspection-injections of the ankle with in-office needle arthroscopy in a relevant clinical
setting - including patients with end-stage ankle pathology and/or a history of prior
surgery.
Methods: This was a prospective study that included adult patients who were
scheduled for an injection with hyaluronic acid to the tibiotalar joint. In our center,
these injections are used as a last resort prior to extensive surgery. The primary outcome
was injection accuracy, which was defined as injecting through the arthroscopic cannula with
intra-articular positioning confirmed by a clear needle arthroscopic view of the joint
space. Secondary outcome measures included a patient reported numeric rating scale (NRS,
0-10) of pain during the procedure and willingness of patients to return for the same
procedure. NRS of ankle pain at rest and during walking was collected during the
intervention and at two-week follow-up. Complications were monitored from inclusion up to a
two-week control visit.
Results: We performed 24 inspection-injections (11 (46%) males, mean age 47.8
+- 14.5 years). The indication was end-stage osteoarthritis in 21 (88%) cases - eight (33%)
Kellgren-Lawrence grade IV, 10 (42%) Kellgren-Lawrence grade III - and an osteochondral
defect in three (13%) cases. Fourteen (58%) patients had had prior ankle surgery - 11 (46%)
patients had had multiple prior surgeries. Accuracy was confirmed in 22 (88%) cases. The
three unsuccessful injections all occurred in patients with Kellgren-Lawrence grade IV
osteoarthritis. Median NRS of pain during the procedure was 1 (IQR 0 - 2). Willingness to
return was 100%. Median NRS of pain in rest decreased from 4 (IQR 2 - 5) at intervention to
3 (IQR 1 - 5) at follow-up (p < 0.01). The median NRS of pain during walking decreased
from 8 (IQR 6 - 8) to 7 (IQR 4 - 8) (p < 0.01). There were no complications.
Conclusion: In-office needle arthroscopy of the ankle under local anesthesia
is a procedure that is well tolerated by patients. It is able to provide intra-articular
delivery of injectable agents with high accuracy. Accuracy can be expected to approach 100%
if patients with total ventral joint obliteration and a history of extensive prior ankle
surgery are excluded.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00459

## Safe and Effective Anterior Ankle Arthroscopy with A 2-mm Diameter Operative
System

Tobias Stornebrink, MD; Nienke Altink; Daniel Appelt, PhD; Coen A. Wijdicks; Sjoerd A.
Stufkens, MD, PhD; Gino Kerkhoffs, MD

Category: Ankle; Arthroscopy; Basic Sciences/Biologics
Keywords: Ankle Arthroscopy; Surgical Instrumentation; Structural Anatomy and
Biomechanics
Introduction/Purpose: The purpose of this study was to assess whether all
significant structures in the ankle could be visualized and surgically reached during 2-mm
diameter operative arthroscopy, without inflicting iatrogenic damage.
Methods: A novel, 2-mm diameter arthroscopic system was used to perform a
protocolled arthroscopic procedure in 10 fresh- frozen, human donor ankles. Standard
anteromedial and anterolateral portals were utilized. Visualization and reach with tailored
arthroscopic instruments of a protocolled list of articular structures were recorded and
documented. A line was etched on the most posterior border of the talar and tibial cartilage
that was safely reachable. The specimens were dissected and distances between portal tracts
and neurovascular structures were measured. The articular surfaces of talus and tibia were
photographed and inspected for iatrogenic damage. The reachable area on the articular
surface was calculated and analysed.
Results: All significant structures were successfully visualized and reached
in all specimens. The anteromedial portal was not in contact with neurovascular structures
in any specimen. The anterolateral portal collided with a branch of the superficial peroneal
nerve in one case, but did not cause macroscopically apparent harm. On average, 96% and 85%
of the talar and tibial surfaces was reachable respectively, without causing iatrogenic
damage.
Conclusion: 2-mm diameter operative arthroscopy provides safe and effective
visualization and surgical reach of the anterior ankle joint. It may hold the potential to
make ankle arthroscopy less invasive and more accessible.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00460

## Safe and Effective Tendoscopy around the Ankle with A 2-mm Diameter Operative
System

Tobias Stornebrink, MD; Sjoerd A. Stufkens, MD, PhD; Daniel Appelt, PhD; Coen A.
Wijdicks; Gino Kerkhoffs, MD

Category: Arthroscopy; Basic Sciences/Biologics
Keywords: Achilles; Peroneal Tendon; Posterior Tibial Tendon
Introduction/Purpose: To assess whether 2-mm-diameter operative tendoscopy of
the tibialis posterior, peroneal, and Achilles tendons was safe and effective in a cadaveric
model.
Methods: A 2-mm-diameter arthroscopic system was used to perform a tendoscopic
procedure in 10 nonpaired, freshfrozen, human ankles. Standard tendoscopic portals were
utilized. Visual examination and operative reach with tailored tendoscopic instruments
within the tendon sheaths were recorded and documented. Adhesiolysis and vincula resections
were performed. After dissection, distances between portal tracts and neurovascular
structures were measured and the tendons were inspected for signs of iatrogenic damage.
Results: The entire tendon sheath and tendon of the tibialis posterior,
peroneus brevis, and Achilles tendons were visualized and reached with tailored operative
instruments. The proximal part of the peroneus longus tendon was visible and reachable from
proximally up to the cuboid bone distally. Adhesiolysis and vincula resections were
successfully performed in all specimens. The mean distances between portal tracts and local
neurovascular structures ranged between 9.4 and 19.2 mm and there were no cases of contact.
None of the tendons showed signs of iatrogenic damage.
Conclusion: Two-millimeter-diameter operative tendoscopy provided safe and
effective visualization and operative reach of the tibialis posterior, peroneal, and
Achilles tendons.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00461

## The Influence of Metatarsus Adductus Angle on Fifth Metatarsal Jones Fractures

Carson D. Strickland, MD; David J. Ruta, MD; Benjamin J. Grear, MD; David R.
Richardson, MD; G. Andrew Murphy, MD

Category: Trauma; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Jones Fracture; Metatarsus Adductus; Fractures
Introduction/Purpose: Previous studies have reported increasing metatarsus
adductus angle (MAA) to be associated with delayed union and refracture following
intramedullary screw fixation of fifth metatarsal Jones fractures. The purpose of this study
was to determine the influence of MAA on postoperative course following intramedullary screw
fixation of Jones fractures. We also sought to identify associations between elevated MAA
and both fracture and patient characteristics.
Methods: We performed a retrospective review of all Jones fractures treated
with primary intramedullary screw fixation by 4 foot and ankle fellowship-trained
orthopaedic surgeons at a single institution from 1995 through 2015. Exclusion criteria
included concomitant foot/ankle procedures and revision surgery. Charts were reviewed for
patient and injury characteristics, implant, and postoperative course. Radiographs were
examined for fracture classification, radiographic union, and MAA. MAA calculations were
performed on standard weight-bearing digital radiographs using the traditional method, with
the 5th metarso-cuboid joint as a reference. Based on severity of MAA, comparative and
correlation analyses were performed. Primary outcomes were the number of surgical failures
(defined as delayed union, nonunion, or refracture) and time to radiographic union, weight
bearing, and pain resolution. Data was analysed using independent T test, one-way ANOVA,
chi-square, and correlation analyses with significance defined as p<0.05.
Results: 59 feet in 58 patients were identified with a mean age of 30 years
and average follow-up of 9.6 months. The pooled union rate was 96.6%. The mean MAA was 20.9
(SD 6.7). Eleven feet had MAA<15, 18 mild (MAA 15-20), 12 moderate (MAA 20- 25), 18
severe (MAA>25), and 1 unknown. 11 patients had failures (18.6%), which consisted of 7
delayed unions (11.9%), 2 delayed unions (3.4%), and 3 refractures (5.1%). Compared to the
uncomplicated unions, there was no significant difference in mean MAA (24.3 vs. 20.1,
p=0.16). Three of the 4 non-union or refracture patients had MAA>25. MAA was correlated
with time to weight bearing (r=0.365, p=0.005), weight (r=0.503, p<0.001), BMI (r=0.280,
p=0.03), and approached significance with age (r=0.230, p=0.082). No significant correlation
was found with time to radiographic union.
Conclusion: To our knowledge, this is the largest series investigating MAA in
fifth metatarsal Jones fracture patients treated with intramedullary screw fixation. Our
mean MAA is consistent with previous reports. We found an association between increased MAA
and postoperative recovery time, given increased time to initiate weight bearing. We did not
find significant associations with prolonged radiographic healing, age, nor failure. The
prolonged time to weight bearing may reflect surgeon preference in patients with higher MAA.
These results suggest that reported associations with MAA may not be as strong as previously
thought.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00462

## Risk Factors for Aseptic Revision of Surgically-Treated Ankle Fractures

Kristen L. Stupay, MD; Steven Staffa, MS; Michael McTague; Michael J. Weaver;
Christopher P. Miller, MD; John Y. Kwon, MD

Category: Trauma; Ankle
Keywords: Ankle Fracture; ORIF; Syndesmosis
Introduction/Purpose: Early revision rates within 12 months after ankle
fracture open reduction internal fixation (ORIF) are fairly low, however remain relevant
given the sheer volume of ankle fractures which occur each year. Understanding these rates
is complex because reoperation due to technical or mechanical complications - such as
malunion, inadequate reduction or fixation failure - are typically reported alongside
returns to the operating room for soft-tissue related problems like wound dehiscence or
infection. There is limited data identifying risk factors specifically for revision of ankle
fracture fixation in the absence of soft-tissue complications. Understanding variables which
predispose to aseptic technical and mechanical failure without this confounder may provide
insight and improve patient care.
Methods: The purpose was to identify risk factors for aseptic revision of
ankle fracture within ORIF 1 year of primary operation. A retrospective cohort study was
performed at two large academic medical centers. Research Patient Data Registry (RPDR) data
available from 2002-2019 was used to identify patients who underwent aseptic revision of
ankle fracture ORIF within 12mo of their primary ORIF. Patients were excluded if <18yo at
primary surgery, or if indications for return to the operating room included surgical
management of a dehisced wound or deep infection. A control group was selected by
identifying sequential patients who underwent ankle fracture ORIF which did not require
revision within 12mo. Primary and revision surgeon characteristics, patient demographics,
comorbidities, fracture characteristics, surgical techniques and post-operative events were
recorded and compared in univariate analysis. Variables which achieved significance in
univariate comparisons were included as candidates for multivariable analysis.
Results: 33 patients were identified for the Revision group. 100 patients were
identified for the Control group (Power = 80% for detecting moderate differences). Groups
did not differ in age or gender. Final multivariable logistic regression modeling, adjusting
for all other variables within the multivariable analysis, demonstrated the following
factors to be independently associated with an increased risk of revision surgery:
Documented falls in the early post-operative period (aOR: 298; 95% CI: 15.4, 5759;
P<0.001), Movement-altering disorders (aOR=81.7; 95% CI: 4.12, 1620; P=0.004), a
non-anatomic mortise (MCS > SCS) on immediate post- operative imaging (aOR=28.4; 95% CI:
5.53, 267; P<0.001), more severe initial fracture displacement (ARCS Type C) (aOR vs Type
A =25.8; 95% CI: 2.81, 237; P=0.004), Substance abuse (aOR=15.7; 95% CI: 2.66, 92.8;
P=0.002), and polytrauma (aOR=12.3; 95% CI: 2.02, 74.8; P=0.006).
Conclusion: Six factors were found to be predictive of the need for aseptic
revision: Documented falls in the early post- operative period (aOR: 298), movement-altering
disorders (aOR=81.7), a non-anatomic mortise (MCS > SCS) on immediate post- operative
imaging (aOR=28.4), more severe initial fracture displacement (ARCS Type C) (aOR=25.8),
substance abuse (aOR=15.7) and polytrauma (aOR=12.3). Identifying these factors may allow
surgeons to better counsel their patients and discuss risk during the informed consent
process. These may also serve as future targets for intervention aimed at improving patient
safety and outcomes follow ankle fracture ORIF.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00463

## Depressive Disorders Lead to Increased Complications after Pilon Fracture
Surgery

Syed Tahmid; Matthew S. Broggi; Jerad Allen, MD; Roberto Hernandez-Irizarry

Category: Trauma; Other
Keywords: Pilon Fracture; Tibial deformity; Complications
Introduction/Purpose: Given the increased survival of the polytrauma patient,
the incidence of tibial pilon fractures has increased. Preoperative depression has been
linked with worse morbidity and mortality following lower extremity surgery, however its
effect on outcomes following tibial pilon fractures has not been studied. This studies
purpose was to investigate the relationship between preoperative depression and potential
complications following tibial pilon fracture surgery.
Methods: This retrospective study utilized the Truven Marketscan claims
database to identify patients who underwent outpatient tibial pilon fracture surgery from
January 2009 to December 2018 based on Common Procedure Terminology (CPT) codes. The two
cohorts entailed patients with and without preoperative depression based on International
Classification of Diseases (ICD codes. The associated between preoperative depression and
common postoperative complications following tibial pilon fracture was analyzed using chi
square testing and multivariate analysis.
Results: In total, 4,795 patients were identified for analysis. In those
patients with preoperative depression, the complications associated with the greatest
increased odds were infection (OR 1.59), wound complication (OR 1.31), ED visit pain (OR
1.29), hardware complications (OR 1.22), and DVT/PE (OR 1.14).
Conclusion: Increased complications and use of healthcare resources have been
associated following tibial pilon fracture surgery in persons with a preoperative diagnosis
of depression. Acknowledgement of patient’s preoperative depression can allow surgeons to
tweak treatment protocols before and after surgery. Additional studies should be conducted
to investigate the degree of modifiability of depression as a risk factor.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00464

## Preoperative Depression is Associated with Increased Complications Following Ankle
Fracture Surgery

Syed Tahmid; Matthew S. Broggi; John Hurt, BS; Rishin J. Kadakia, MD; Jason T.
Bariteau, MD; Michelle M. Coleman, MD, PhD

Category: Ankle; Trauma
Keywords: Ankle; Ankle Fracture; Outcomes Measures
Introduction/Purpose: Ankle fractures are a common injury treated by
orthopaedic surgeons with a rising incidence. Preoperative depression is a known risk factor
for postoperative complications in joint replacement surgery, however its effects on
outcomes following ankle fracture surgery is unknown. The purpose of this study was to
investigate the relationship between preoperative depression and outcomes following ankle
fracture surgery.
Methods: In this retrospective study, the Truven MarketScan claims database
was used to identify patients who underwent outpatient ankle fracture surgery from January
2009 to December 2018 using Common Procedure Terminology (CPT) codes. Patient
characteristics, and medical comorbidities were collected. Patients with and without a
diagnosis of preoperative depression were identified based on International Classification
of Diseases (ICD) codes. Chi-squared and multivariate analyses were performed to investigate
the association between preoperative depression and common postoperative complications
following ankle fracture surgery.
Results: In total, 107,897 patients were identified for analysis, 13,981 of
whom were diagnosed with depression (13%). Preoperative depression was associated with the
increased odds for postoperative infection (OR 1.33, CI 1.20-1.46), wound complications (OR
1.13, CI 1.00-1.28), pain-related postoperative emergency department visits (OR 1.58, CI
1.30-19.1), 30-day and 90-day readmissions (OR 1.08, CI 1.03-1.21 and OR 1.13, CI
1.07-1.18), sepsis (OR 1.39, CI 1.12-1.72) and postoperative development of complex regional
pain syndrome (OR 1.46, CI 1.18-1.81).
Conclusion: Preoperative depression in patients undergoing ankle fracture
surgery is common and associated with increased complications following surgery. An
understanding of patients' preoperative depression diagnosis can allow providers to modify
perioperative and postoperative protocols for these higher risk patients. Further studies
are warranted to investigate the degree to which depression is a modifiable risk factor.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00465

## Elite Athletes Successfully Return to the Preinjury Level of Sport Following Ankle
Syndesmosis Injuries: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis

Eric W. Tan, MD; Ioanna K. Bolia; Jacob Bogdanov; Kyle Schoell; Frank A. Petrigliano;
Alexander E. Weber

Category: Sports; Ankle
Keywords: Ankle Sprain; Syndesmosis; Sports
Introduction/Purpose: No meta-analysis has been conducted to examine the
clinical outcomes following operative and nonoperative management of high ankle sprain
injuries in elite athletes. the purpose of this systematic review was (1) To report the rate
and time to return to sport (RTS) following high ankle syndesmotic injury in elite athletes
(2) To examine the rate and time of RTS as well as the postoperative complications in elite
athletes who underwent surgical treatment of high ankle syndesmotic injury with screw versus
suture button fixation.
Methods: Three electronic databases were searched for eligible articles. Two
reviewers independently screened the titles, abstract and full-text articles using
pre-specified criteria. Eligible articles were those that reported the rate of return to
sport following operative and nonoperative treatment of ankle syndesmotic injuries in elite
athletes (collegiate or professional level). Data collected were type of sport, type of
treatment received (operative versus nonoperative), surgical technique (screw versus suture
button fixation), rate and time to return to the preinjury level of competition, and
complications. A random-effects model was used for meta-analysis.
Results: The estimated overall rate of RTS was 99% (95% CI 95.5-99.9). The
mean time to RTS was 38 +- 18 (range: 14-137) days. Of the 440 athletes, 269 (269/440,61%)
were treated nonoperatively (nonoperative group); the rate of RTS was 99.6% and the athletes
returned at a mean time of 29+-14 (range: 13-45) days. A total of 171 athletes (171/440,39%)
underwent surgical treatment (operative group); All (171/171,100%) athletes returned at a
mean time of 50.3+-13 (range:41-137) days. Almost all athletes who underwent surgery had
suture button fixation (164/171 athletes,96%) and the mean time to RTS was 7 weeks with 9.1%
complication rate.
Conclusion: Elite athletes with ankle syndesmosis injury return to sport at an
extremely high rates, following operative or nonoperative treatment. Suture button fixation
remains the gold standard technique in elite athletes with syndesmotic injury requiring
surgical treatment. Return to the preinjury level of competition should be expected at 4
weeks and 7 weeks in high-level athletes who undergo nonoperative and operative management,
respectively.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00466

## Fifth Metatarsal Injuries in NCAA Division I Athletes: Management and Return to
Play

Eric W. Tan, MD; Ioanna K. Bolia; Alexander E. Weber; Alexander B. Peterson; Hyunwoo
P. Kang; Russel Romano; James Tibone; David B. Thordarson, MD; Seth C. Gamradt

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot; Sports; Trauma
Keywords: Fifth Metatarsal Fractures; Athlete; Return to Play
Introduction/Purpose: Optimal management of metadiaphyseal fifth metatarsal
fractures (Jones fractures) in athletes remains controversial. In high-level athletes,
surgical treatment with intramedullary screw fixation is commonly recommended to minimize
the risk of nonunion and to allow for faster return to sport. The purpose of this study was
to report the rate and time to return to sport in collegiate athletes who sustained an
isolated fracture to the fifth metatarsal bone.
Methods: From 2003 to 2020, we retrospectively reviewed the clinical notes and
imaging studies of all athletes participating in NCAA Division I sports at a single college
and who sustained a fracture of the fifth metatarsal bone. Athletes with a diagnosis of 5th
metatarsal bone fracture were included. Athletes were excluded if they had a fracture in any
of the other metatarsal bones (1st-4th). Data collected were: demographic information (age,
gender), type of sport, date of injury and/or surgery, diagnosis of Jones fracture, type of
treatment received (operative with intramedullary screw fixation versus non operative with
the application of boot or cast of the lower extremity and non- weightbearing activity),
rate of return to sport, and time to return to sport. The rate and time to return to sport
were reported as percentage and mean-standard deviation, respectively. The level of
statistical significance was set at <0.05.
Results: From 2003 to 2020, we retrospectively reviewed the clinical notes and
imaging studies of all athletes participating in NCAA Division I sports at a single college
and who sustained a fracture of the fifth metatarsal bone. Athletes with a diagnosis of 5th
metatarsal bone fracture were included. Athletes were excluded if they had a fracture in any
of the other metatarsal bones (1st-4th). Data collected were: demographic information (age,
gender), type of sport, date of injury and/or surgery, diagnosis of Jones fracture, type of
treatment received (operative with intramedullary screw fixation versus non operative with
the application of boot or cast of the lower extremity and non- weightbearing activity),
rate of return to sport, and time to return to sport. The rate and time to return to sport
were reported as percentage and mean-standard deviation, respectively. The level of
statistical significance was set at <0.05.
Conclusion: Jones fractures of the 5th metatarsal bone are a relatively rare
injury in collegiate athletes at our institution occurring mostly in male football and
basketball players at a rate of about one fracture per year for 21 intercollegiate teams.
These fractures are treated with a high level of success with intramedullary screw fixation.
Given that postoperative recovery may last for approximately 3 months, return to play
following surgical fixation of a Jones fracture is highly dependent on the timing of injury;
an athlete who sustains the injury in-season is unlikely to return to play that same
season.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00467

## Effect of Weight Bearing Variations & Heel Height on Forefoot Width for Orthopaedic
Imaging

Gerald Tan, MBBS; Adel Zarugh; Eugene Toh

Category: Basic Sciences/Biologics; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Metatarsals; Forefoot; Biomechanics
Introduction/Purpose: The biomechanics of a foot when weight bearing change
significantly due to the changes in the function through the gait cycle. Variations in heel
height are known to influence load distribution in weightbearing, thus affecting change in
forefoot widths. Weight bearing in radiographs are commonly used to identify these changes,
which may have clinical relevance. However, there are limited studies that accurately
quantify the extent of these differences in the forefoot to be analysed effectively. Hence,
there is a need to investigate different weight bearing conditions and its influence on
forefoot width changes required for accurate analysis of imaging. This study’s aim is to
evaluate the significance and degree of foot splaying with different modes of weight-bearing
and heel height to achieve optimum increase in forefoot width.
Methods: 32 volunteers with no clinical issues with their feet were selected
for this study. Weight bearing photographs of their feet were reviewed by 2 foot and ankle
surgeons (under blinded conditions) to ensure they were normal morphologically. The forefoot
width is measured using sliding callipers between the medial margin of the first metatarsal
head and lateral margin of the fifth metatarsal head when non weight bearing - NWB, partial
weight bearing - PWB (dual leg stance) and full weight bearing - FWB (single leg stance).
Single leg stance measurement is also taken at increasing heel heights of 2cm (FWB1), 4cm
(FWB2) and 6cm (FWB3) using polyurethrane blocks. Each individual foot non weight-bearing
width will act as its own control for the changes in the differing positions measured.
Results: Statistical analysis of data demonstrated the results with the use of
student t-test analysis via SPSS which showed statistically significant differences in
forefoot width in both genders(p<0.05). There is an increasing trend of forefoot width as
weightbearing conditions increase up to 2cm of elevated heel height. However, forefoot width
decreases as heel height increases beyond 2cm in both genders. Female subjects have a higher
trend of percentage of increase in mean forefoot width compared to males in all
weightbearing conditions except for full weightbearing with 6cm heel height elevation.
Conclusion: In conclusion, there is a linear trend of increase in forefoot
width with increase from non-weightbearing up to 2cm heel height inclination. Full
weightbearing with 2cm heel height inclination produces the widest foot splaying in this
study. Larger future studies will need to be conducted to validate these findings.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00468

## Pes Planus Does Not Negatively Affect Clinical Outcomes after Hallux Valgus
Surgery

Adriel You Wei Tay, MBBS, MRCS (Edin); Graham Goh, MBBS, MRCSEd; Yogen Thever;
Nicholas Yeo, MBBS, MRCS, MMed(Ortho), FRCS(Edin), FAMS; Kevin Koo,
FRCS(Orth)(Edin)

Category: Bunion; Hindfoot; Midfoot/Forefoot; Other
Keywords: Hallux Valgus; Flatfoot; Clinical Outcomes
Introduction/Purpose: Pes planus is associated with hallux valgus development.
Increased forefoot abduction and pressure through the hallux during the heel-rise phase of
the gait in a pes planus foot is believed to contribute to hallux valgus formation. These
abnormal forces through the hallux may result in poorer healing and more residual pain after
surgical correction. We investigated if patients with increasing severity of pes planus
presented with more severe hallux valgus deformity and whether these patients had more
residual pain and poorer function following hallux valgus surgery.
Methods: We evaluated 191 consecutive cases of hallux valgus surgery with
Scarf osteotomy as the primary procedure. American Orthopaedic Foot & Ankle Society
(AOFAS) hallux metatarsophalangeal-interphalangeal scale, visual analog scale (VAS), Short
Form-36 physical component summary (SF-36 PCS), mental component summary (SF-36 MCS) and a
satisfaction questionnaire were assessed at baseline, 6 months and 24 months
postoperatively. Pes planus angles measured were the talonavicular coverage angle (TNCA),
lateral talus-first metatarsal angle (Meary’s angle) and lateral talocalcaneal angle (LTCA).
The cohort was stratified into controls (0°-4.0°), mild (4.1°-14.9°), moderate (15.0°-30.0°)
and severe (>30.0°) pes planus groups according to Meary’s angle. Clinical outcomes were
compared among the groups. Multiple regression was used to determine association between pes
planus angles and outcomes.
Results: There were 78 controls, 95 mild, 18 moderate and no severe cases of
pes planus. Meary’s angle was independently associated with preoperative HVA (beta 0.408,
95% CI 0.104-0.712, P =.009). Patients with mild and moderate pes planus had significantly
greater preoperative HVA (P <.001) compared to controls. Pes planus angles were not
associated with pre- or postoperative VAS, AOFAS score, SF-36 PCS or SF-36 MCS. Among
controls, mild and moderate pes planus groups, there were no significant differences in pre-
or postoperative clinical scores (Table 1), and satisfaction was 84.6, 80.0% and 77.8%,
respectively (P =.667).
Conclusion: Patients with increasing severity of pes planus presented with
greater severity of hallux valgus deformity. However, patients with pes planus had similar
pre- and postoperative clinical outcomes and satisfaction after hallux valgus surgery in
comparison to patients with neutral foot arches.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00469

## Peritalar Kinematics Restored with Combined Subtalar Fusion and Medial Ligament
Reconstruction in a Simulated Advance Progressive Collapsing Flatfoot Deformity
Model

Nahom Tecle; Irvin Oh, MD; Emma Gira; Hani A. Awad, PhD

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot; Other
Keywords: Flatfoot; Subtalar Fusions; Medial Calcaneal Displacement
Oseotomy
Introduction/Purpose: Progressive collapsing flatfoot deformity (PCFD) leads
to a disruption of the medial peritalar ligaments with progressive loss of the medial arch
and further valgus alignment of the subtalar and tibiotalar joints. This ultimately leads to
peritalar instability with subtalar and tibiotalar osteoarthritis. Conventional joint
sparing reconstruction methods alone may not correct the valgus heel alignment. Some have
suggested subtalar fusion (SF) with or without combined medializing calcaneal osteotomy
(MCO) as an option. Although SF provides a more effective correction of hindfoot alignment,
a resultant increase in valgus moment arm with a larger strain on the medial ankle ligament
has been reported. The study aim is to investigate the efficacy of a combined MCO with SF
and medial tibionavicular ligament (TNL) reconstruction on restoring peritalar
stability.
Methods: Ten fresh-frozen cadaveric foot specimens were employed to create a
severe PCFD model. Reflective markers were placed on the tibia, talus, navicular, calcaneus,
and first metatarsal. A multiple-camera motion capture system (OptiTrack, Prime13) was
utilized to document peritalar joint kinematics. Severe AAFD model was created by sectioning
the medial capsuloligamentous complex followed by cyclic axial loading. Sequential surgical
procedures were performed, including MCO, SF, MCO + SF, and MCO + SF + medial tibionavicular
ligament (TNL) reconstruction. Subtalar joint coronal angle, tibiotalar coronal angle,
forefoot abduction axial angle, and talo-first metatarsus (Meary’s) lateral angle were
calculated for each sequential procedure and compared to the severe flatfoot model. The
kinematic changes were calculated between groups utilizing a custom MatLab code and
statistical significance was determined using a one-way ANOVA and a Tukey’s multiple
comparison test.
Results: The subtalar joint valgus angle of the severe PCFD model (mean 8.1°)
was significantly reduced by the MCO+SF+TNL reconstruction (mean 3.2°, p = 0.019). The
tibiotalar joint valgus angle of the severe flatfoot model (mean 4.4°) was significantly
reduced by the MCO (mean 1.0°, p = 0.04), but increased after combined MCO with SF (mean
2.5°, p = 0.01). The increased valgus tibiotalar angle of the MCO+SF was reduced by adding
TNL reconstruction (mean 0.75°, p = 0.027). Forefoot abduction angle was found to be
significantly reduced in all reconstruction methods compared to the severe flatfoot model.
Meary’s angle was also significantly improved after the MCO+SF and MCO+SF+TNL reconstruction
(P= 0.015 and 0.006, respectively).
Conclusion: Although addition of SF to MCO improved forefoot abduction and
Meary’s angles of advanced PCFD model, it resulted in increased tibiotalar valgus angle. The
subsequent increase in medial ligament strain may be reduced by adding TNL reconstruction
which can support medial stability while improve kinematics in all planes. Addition of TNL
may be considered when performing SF for correction of PCFD, especially when a residual
valgus heel alignment remains.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00470

## Quantitative Evaluation of Ankle Instability Using a Capacitance-Type Strain
Sensor

Atsushi Teramoto, MD; Yasutaka Murahashi; Hiroaki Shoji, MD; Tomoaki Kamiya, MD; Kota
Watanabe, MD; Toshihiko Yamashita

Category: Basic Sciences/Biologics; Ankle; Sports
Keywords: Ankle Instability; Lateral Ankle Instability; Lateral Ligament
Instability
Introduction/Purpose: Manual evaluation is an important method for assessing
ankle instability, but it is not quantitative. Capacitance-type sensors can be used to
measure the distance on the basis of the capacitance value. We applied the sensor to the
noninvasive device for measuring ankle instability and showed its utility.
Methods: First, five ankles embalmed by Thiel’s method were used in an
experiment using a cadaver. The capacitance-type sensor was fixed alongside the anterior
talofibular ligament (ATFL) of a specially made brace, and the anterior drawer test was
performed. The test had been performed for the intact ankle, with the ATFL transected, and
with both the ATFL and calcaneofibular ligament (CFL) transected. The anterior drawer
distance was calculated by the sensor. Intra and interinvestigator reliability were also
analyzed. Next, as a clinical study, a brace with a sensor was fitted to 22 ankles of 20
patients with a history of ankle sprain. An anterior drawer test at a load of 150 N was
conducted using a Telos stress device. The anterior drawer distances measured by the sensor
and based on X-ray images were then compared.
Results: The mean anterior drawer distance for the intact cadavers was 3.7 +-
1.0 mm, 6.1 +- 1.6 mm with the ATFL transected (P < 0.001), and 7.9 +- 1.8 mm with the
ATFL and CFL transected (P < 0.001). The intrainvestigator intraclass correlation
coefficients (ICC) were 0.862-0.939, and the interinvestigator ICC was 0.815. In the
experiments on patients, the mean anterior drawer distance measured by the sensor was 2.9 +-
0.9 mm and 2.7 +- 0.9 mm from the X-ray images. The correlation coefficient between the
sensor and the X-ray images was 0.843.
Conclusion: We carried out a quantitative evaluation of anterior drawer laxity
using a capacitance-type sensor and found it had high reproducibility. It was also very
strongly correlated with stress radiography measurements in patients with ankle instability.
Capacitance-type sensors can be used for the safe, simple, and accurate evaluation of ankle
instability.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00471

## Surgical Takedown Approaches to Insertional Achilles Tendinopathy: A Systematic
Review

John M. Thompson; Antonio M. Malloy McCoy; Kevin N. Nguyen; Dominick Casciato, DPM;
Eric So, DPM; Mark A. Prissel, DPM; Jaime A. Ahluwalia; Tyler Tewilliager

Category: Hindfoot
Keywords: Achilles; Achilles Tendonopathy; Achilles Tendinosis
Introduction/Purpose: Various techniques of surgical detachment for treatment
of insertional Achilles tendinopathy have been described, including lateral release, medial
release, central tendon splitting (CTS), and complete detachment.
Methods: A systematic review of electronic databases was performed,
encompassing 17 studies involving 703 patients and 746 feet, to compare outcomes associated
with surgical takedown techniques.
Results: Observed results include wound complication rates (CTS 2.8%; Lateral
0%; Medial 0.4%; Complete 1.3%), post-operative rupture rates (CTS 0.7%; Lateral 0.8%;
Medial 0.7%; Complete 2.6%), rate of revision (CTS 0.4%; Lateral 0.9%; Medial 4.2%; Complete
2.6%), rate of infection (CTS 1.1%; Lateral 1.7%; Medial 3.7%; Complete 6.5%). Lateral
takedown group was found to have a statistically significant lower rate of complications
compared to the complete takedown group (p=0.0029).
Conclusion: In light of these results, it is recommended that patient
characteristics such as case specific tendon pathology and calcaneal morphology take
precedent in determining the surgical approach to Achilles takedown.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00472

## Lateral Extensile Approach to the Calcaneus is Safe after Sinus Tarsi Incision: A
Report of Two Cases

Thiran Udawatta; Lawrence H. Goodnough; Stephen K. Benirschke, MD

Category: Trauma; Hindfoot
Keywords: Calcaneus Fractures - Treatment; Subtalar Arthrodesis; Subtalar
Joint Arthritis
Introduction/Purpose: While the optimal surgical approach for operative
treatment of calcaneus fractures is controversial. Regardless of index approach, post-injury
sequelae such as malunion may require subsequent extensile exposures for reconstruction. In
the tenuous soft tissues overlying the Whether a lateral extensile approach is safe
following a previous sinus tarsi exposure has yet to be demonstrated.
Methods: In this case report, two individuals underwent an initial sinus tarsi
approach for reduction and fixation of calcaneus fractures, but went on to malunion or
subtalar arthritis. A ’sham' surgery consisting of skin incision and initial flap elevation
was performed to evaluate the efficacy of a lateral extensile approach to the calcaneus
after previous sinus tarsi incision.
Results: In each instance, the patients experienced uneventful skin incision
healing, and subsequently had successful reconstruction with distraction subtalar
arthrodesis via lateral extensile exposures.
Conclusion: The lateral extensile approach to the calcaneus may be safely
performed following sinus tarsi exposure.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00473

## Accuracy of CT Derived Patient Specific Instrumentation for Total Ankle Arthroplasty:
The Impact of the Severity of Preoperative Varus Ankle Deformity

Benjamin D. Umbel, DO; Devon Myers, DO; Taylor Hockman; B. Dale Sharpe, Jr., DO;
Gregory C. Berlet, MD

Category: Ankle; Ankle Arthritis
Keywords: Ankle Arthroplasty; Total Ankle Arthroplasty; End-Stage Ankle
Arthritis
Introduction/Purpose: Significant preoperative varus tibiotalar deformity was
once believed to be a contraindication to performing total ankle arthroplasty (TAA). While
correction of ankle deformity has been shown to be possible, the ability to restore neutral
alignment in more severe ankle arthritis is still a concern. Preoperative CT derived
navigation is gaining popularity for its ability to accurately restore neutral alignment in
TAA, in addition to decreasing operative and fluoroscopic times. The primary goal of this
study was to evaluate whether accuracy and reproducibility of final implant positioning
using patient specific guides were influenced as varus deformity became more severe in
patients undergoing TAA.
Methods: A retrospective review of 32 patients with varus end-stage ankle
arthritis who underwent TAA utilizing total ankle implants with CT derived patient-specific
guides was conducted. Preoperative computed tomography (CT) scans were obtained to assess
coronal plane deformity, mechanical and anatomic alignment, and build patient-specific
guides that referenced bony anatomy. Preoperative weightbearing radiographs were used to
measure the tibiotalar and talar tilt angles to assess coronal plane deformity severity and
congruency, respectively. Patients were subcategorized into varying degrees of deformity
based on their tibiotalar angles (<0-5° neutral, 6-10° mild, 11-15° moderate, and >15°
severe). The first postoperative weightbearing radiograph following surgery was used to
measure coronal plane alignment of the tibial implant relative to the target axis determined
by the preoperative CT template.
Results: The average preoperative varus deformity, as determined by the
tibiotalar angle, was 6.06° (range: 0.66- 16.3°) for the entire cohort. Average preoperative
varus deformity was 2.63° for the 'neutral' group, 7.64° for the mild group, 11.5° for the
moderate group and 16.3° for the severe group. Postoperative weightbearing alignments for
96.9% (30/31) of patients demonstrated neutral implant alignment (< 5°). Relative to the
CT derived target axis, the average tibial implant coronal deviation for all patients was
1.54° (range: 0.17-5.7°). The average postoperative coronal alignment relative to the target
axis was 1.61° for the neutral group, 1.78° for the mild group, 0.94° for the moderate
group, and 1.41° for the severe group. There was no statistically significant difference in
final implant alignment relative to the target axis between deformity subgroups (p=
0.256).
Conclusion: The results of our study further support that neutral
postoperative TAA alignment can repeatably be obtained using preoperative CT derived patient
specific instrumentation (PSI). Furthermore, the accuracy and reproducibility of achieving
neutral postoperative radiographic alignment with PSI does not appear to be impacted by
worsening varus ankle deformity. All but one patient (96.9%) achieved neutral postoperative
alignment relative to the predicted target axis, with the only outlier being from the mild
deformity subgroup. Future studies are warranted assessing the effect that even greater
coronal plane deformity (>20 °) has on the accuracy of TAA implantation using PSI.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00474

## Early Results of A Nitinol Dynamic Compression Nail for Subtalar Joint Arthrodesis vs
Two-Screw Fixation Construct

Benjamin D. Umbel, DO; Antonio M. Malloy McCoy; Mitchell Thompson; Devon Consul, DPM;
Gregory C. Berlet, MD; Terrence M. Philbin, DO

Category: Hindfoot
Keywords: Subtalar Arthrodesis; Screws; Ankle Arthrodesis
Introduction/Purpose: Subtalar joint arthrodesis (STJA) for deformity
correction and management of arthritis is a common surgery. STJA is a reliable operation
with high patient satisfaction scores. Securing the talus to the calcaneus, so as to
optimize the physiologic environment for osseous healing, has been achieved with multiple
fixation techniques including one, two, and three screw constructs, plates, and staples. The
goal of our study is to introduce a nitinol nail system with dynamic compression as a novel
fixation method for STJA and compare union rates with a standard 2 screw fixation construct.
The secondary goal was to assess union rates for this subtalar fusion nail when performed
below a previous ipsilateral ankle arthrodesis (AA), with comparison to results from
previously published studies.
Methods: From May 2019 through July 2020, 15 consecutive patients treated with
a novel nitinol nail for STJA were compared to 27 patients undergoing STJA using a two-screw
fixation method. The nail group was subcategorized into cases with (6 patients) or without
(9 patients) ipsilateral AA. Concomitant talonavicular joint arthrodesis was also performed
in patients from each group when indicated. Arthrodesis sites were augmented with autologous
bone graft with or without bone graft substitute in all patients. Standard postoperative
protocols were used. Primary outcomes included subtalar joint union rates determined by
radiographic and clinical assessment. Perioperative complications were compared between
groups. Patient specific risk factors were studied to assess any potential negative effects
on STJA union rates.
Results: Overall, the union rates between the nitinol nail group and screw
group did not demonstrate any significant difference (87% vs 88.9%). The nail group with
ipsilateral AA demonstrated a 67% union rate (4/6) whereas the nail group without previous
AA achieved a 100% union rate (9/9). All patients in our study who underwent STJA with
associated TNJA went on to union. Union rates were similar in both groups despite the
average age of patients in the nail cohort (61.3 years) being greater than the screw cohort
(55.4 years). The average age of patients in the nail group with previous AA was 71 years.
No significant relationship was seen between smoking, diabetes or alcohol consumption and
union rates.
Conclusion: Our data supports the nitinol dynamic compression nail to have
superior union rates to the two-screw fixation group when patients with previous AA were
excluded (100% vs 88). Our data also indicate that the nitinol nail may provide at least
equivalent or better union rates when performed under previous AA when compared to results
from prior studies, despite the patients in our group having a much higher average age at
the time of surgery. The early results of this nitinol nail for STJA are encouraging and
appear to offer an alternative fixation construct with excellent union rates and minimal
complications.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00475

## Early Results of a Novel Intramedullary Fixation Device for Proximal Fifth Metatarsal
Fractures

Benjamin D. Umbel, DO; B. Dale Sharpe, Jr., DO; Taylor Hockman; Terrence M. Philbin,
DO

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot; Sports; Trauma
Keywords: Trauma; Intramedullary Nail; Base of Fifth Metatarsal Fractures
Introduction/Purpose: Proximal fifth metatarsal fractures are commonly treated
surgically due to their poor healing capacity. While intramedullary screws may be the most
popular operative treatment choice, newer fixation methods continue to develop that offer
fracture compression in addition to maintenance of length, alignment and rotation. We
present a case-series utilizing a novel intramedullary fixation device for proximal fifth
metatarsal fractures. To our knowledge, no other study in the literature has assessed the
safety and efficacy of this novel fixation method
Methods: A retrospective analysis was performed for 16 patients with proximal
fifth metatarsal fractures who underwent fixation with the same novel intramedullary device.
Patient charts were reviewed for fracture union, plantar fracture gapping, time to
weightbearing, refracture, perioperative complications, and secondary surgeries.
Results: Sixteen patients with an average age of 43.3 years old underwent
fixation with this novel device from 2015 to 2020. Mean follow-up was 32.4 weeks. Fifteen of
the 16 patients achieved radiographic union at a mean of 8.9 weeks. One patient suffered a
non-union. Mean time to full weight-bearing in, and out of, a walking boot was 6.4 and 9.8
weeks, respectively, for healed fractures. Mean plantar fracture gap improved from 1.22 mm
to 0.88 mm following surgery. There were zero infections, refractures or hardware
complications. Three patients suffered iatrogenic distal diaphyseal fracture during implant
insertion, however postoperative progression to weightbearing was not altered in these
patients relative to the remainder of the cohort.
Conclusion: To our knowledge, this is the first report of early results for
this novel intramedullary device. Excellent union rates, acceptable time to weight bearing,
and a low complication profile can be achieved. Additionally, plantar fracture gapping,
which has been shown to delay time to union, was improved using this novel implant. Based on
our early findings, we propose a viable treatment option that is safe and effective for
proximal fifth metatarsal fracture stabilization.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00476

## Lateral Patient Positioning for Pilon and Trimalleolar Ankle Fractures

Benjamin D. Umbel, DO; Anthony J. Melaragno; Devon Myers, DO; Taylor Hockman;
Christopher Reynolds; Benjamin C. Taylor, MD

Category: Ankle; Trauma
Keywords: Pilon Fracture; Ankle Fracture; Operative Approach
Introduction/Purpose: Preoperative planning for pilon and trimalleolar ankle
fractures can be difficult. Due to fracture complexity, staged open reduction and internal
fixation (ORIF) is performed, resulting in two surgeries. For other situations, definitive
fixation occurs with one surgery. However, patients require both prone and supine
positioning in order to address all fracture components. Repositioning, re-prepping and
re-draping adds to operating room (OR) time and time under anesthesia, increasing the risk
for anesthesia related complications. Additionally, repositioning the patient can
potentially increase fluoroscopy time and radiation exposure to the patient. Lateral patient
positioning obviates many of these concerns. Our study goal was to assess the safety and
effectiveness of lateral positioning for pilon and trimalleolar ankle fracture ORIF compared
with patients placed in standard positioning (i.e supine/prone).
Methods: This was a retrospective cohort analysis of 41 patients who underwent
operative fixation of a pilon or trimalleolar ankle fracture at a single institution level 1
trauma center. This study compared outcome data for those undergoing the procedure in
lateral positioning (n=31) vs. standard (prone/supine) positioning (n=10). Exclusion
criteria included pregnant women, prisoners, patients with less than 6 weeks of follow-up,
previous or bilateral pilon or ankle fracture surgery or patients treated with limited
internal fixation and external fixation. Variables collected included patient demographics,
time to union, time to weightbearing, complications and any repeat surgeries. Additionally,
chart review was performed analyzing OR time, fluoroscopy time and radiation dose to
patient.
Results: The patients fixed in the lateral position underwent significantly
less time in the OR and subsequent time under anesthesia (p= 0.02). The average OR time in
the lateral positioning group was 160 minutes (min) (range: 65-234 min). The average OR time
in the standard positioning group was 193 minutes (range: 143- 263 min). Fluoroscopy time
was less in the lateral group compared with the standard group (1.47 vs 2.09 min), though
this was not statistically significant. Mean patient radiation dose was less in the lateral
position group, but without statistical significance (3.22 vs 3.66 mGy). Compared with the
standard positioning group, the lateral group demonstrated a significantly shorter time to
weightbearing both in (avg 7.8 weeks) and out (avg 11.8 weeks) of the walking boot (p=
0.01). There were no significant differences in complications or time to fracture union.
Conclusion: Our results demonstrated that patients treated in the lateral
position progressed in their weightbearing faster without increased risk of complications or
delayed union, compared with the standard positioning group. Additionally, perhaps the most
intriguing conclusion from our study was that OR time, and therefore time under anesthesia
was significantly improved with lateral positioning. Fluoroscopic time and radiation dose
exposure were also found to be less on average in the lateral positioning group. Our study
suggests that lateral positioning for ORIF of pilon or trimalleolar fractures may not only
improve patient safety but also reliably lead to acceptable patient outcomes.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00477

## Return to Run Rates Following Hallux Valgus Correction: A Retrospective Comparison of
Metatarsal Shaft Osteotomies vs the Modified Lapidus Procedure

Alicia M. Unangst, DO; Paul M. Ryan, MD

Category: Bunion; Other
Keywords: Bunion; Lapidus Procedure; Return to Play
Introduction/Purpose: Hallux valgus affects 23 -36% in general populations.
The purpose of this study was to evaluate return to run following either a modified Lapidus
procedure or a metatarsal osteotomy. We hypothesized that there would be no difference in
the ability to return to running.
Methods: A Retrospective review of a consecutive series of patients at a
single institution with surgical correction was performed. 51 patients were identified. 35
were treated with a metatarsal shaft osteotomy and 16 with a modified Lapidus.
Results: No difference was found between the cohorts in terms of age, sex, or
pre- operative hallux valgus angle (HVA). 27/35 (77%) with metatarsal shaft osteotomy were
able to return to running versus 13/16 (81%) with modified Lapidus. There was no significant
difference in the ability to return to running between cohorts (p=1.00).
Conclusion: Our study showed no statistical difference for the modified
Lapidus versus metatarsal osteotomies relative to return to running.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00478

## Comparison of a Simple Anatomic Landmark-Based Achilles Tendon Measurement with
Ultrasound and MRI Measurements

Daniel Urness, BS; Austin R. Thompson, BS; Emelia Sodders; Erik Ensrud; James E.
Meeker, MD

Category: Ankle; Trauma
Keywords: Achilles Tendon; Achilles Tendon Repair; Achilles Tendon Rupture
Introduction/Purpose: Achilles tendon ruptures (ATRs) occurred with an
incidence of 2.5 per 100,000 person-years in 2016. This rate has been increasing over the
last decade and it has been postulated that this is due to the increasing activity level of
an aging population. With a high and increasing incidence of this significant injury,
further investigation must be done to optimize the treatment of ATRs. The degree of tendon
lengthening has been correlated with clinical outcomes, with greater elongation being
associated with worse outcomes. MRI and ultrasound (US) techniques have been validated in
Achilles tendon measurements. We sought to develop a reliable, reproducible, and accurate
measurement technique utilizing the manual palpation of anatomic landmarks that will be cost
effective as well as convenient to perform, particularly intraoperatively.
Methods: Both lower legs of 10 healthy subjects without history of Achilles
tendon injury were examined. For US and anatomic landmark-based (ALB) measurements,
subjects' ankles were held at 90o with the lateral aspect of the lower leg resting on the
exam table. The length from the medial head of the gastrocnemius to the bottom of the
non-compressed heal pad was measured by three raters using the US and ALB techniques. Two of
those raters repeated the measurements one week later. MRI studies were obtained with ankles
held at 90o. Using imaging software, the above measurements were made in sagittal and
coronal series. A repeated measures mixed model method was utilized to model the measurement
type and the length of the Achilles tendon. The length of the Achilles tendon measured by
each measurement type was estimated with least square means. All pairwise comparisons were
considered.
Results: The Achilles tendon length was similar on the left [23.4 cm (95% CL:
22.3 cm, 24.5 cm)] and right [23.5 cm (95% CL: 22.4 cm, 24.6 cm)] legs. The average Achilles
tendon length measured with the ALB technique was 23.2 cm (95% CL: 21.9 cm, 24.6 cm). The
average Achilles tendon length measured with the US technique was 22.4 cm (95% CL: 21.0,
23.8). The average Achilles tendon length measured on the sagittal view of MRI was 24.1 cm
(95% CL: 22.7, 25.4). The average Achilles tendon length measured on the coronal view of MRI
was 24.2 cm (95% CL: 22.8, 25.5). Pairwise comparisons of the measurement types were not
significantly different from 0.
Conclusion: The ALB measurements were not statistically different from MRI or
US. With orthopaedic surgeons in need of simple, noninvasive, and cost-effective methods to
assess tendon length, the authors propose this ALB technique or US as valid ways to monitor
that variable both during and after repair. These results set the stage for further
evaluation of this measurement technique in the operating room in subjects undergoing ATR
repair.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00479

## For Surgical Treatment of Hallux Limitus Cheilectomy and Recession of the Collateral
Ligaments of the Metatarso-Phalangeal Joint Improves Dorsiflexion 30% More Than Cheilectomy
Alone

Robert A. Vander Griend, MD

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Hallux Rigidus; 1st MTP Joint; Arthritides
Introduction/Purpose: The goal of surgery for hallux limitus is to relieve
pain, correct the dorsal joint impingement and improve ROM, especially MTP joint
dorsiflexion. Obtaining increased dorsiflexion can be achieved by bone resection
(cheilectomy), ostetomy of the proximal phalanx (Moberg), and soft tissue releases (plantar
plate release, capsulotomy, ligament recession). In stiff joints of the hand collateral
ligament recession is commonly done to improve motion. The purpose of this study was to
evaluate the effect of MTPj collateral ligament recession (in addition to cheilectomy) in
improving the range of motion achieved during surgery.
Methods: Twenty consecutive patients undergoing surgical treatment for hallux
limitus were studied. A dorsal approach was used and the extensor tendons protected. The
dorsal capsule was opened and a cheilectomy was done removing about 25% of the dorsal
metatarsal head. The joint was manually distracted and the gap measured with a spacer.
Dorsiflexion of the MTP joint was measured. (Historically our goal was to obtain at least 75
degrees of dorsiflexion-more motion achieved by resecting more bone). Recession of the
medial and lateral collateral ligaments was then done. Prominent medial or lateral condylar
processes were smoothed with a rasp. Dorsiflexion of the MTP joint was again measured. No
release of the plantar structures was done. The capsule and skin were closed in standard
manner and final motion measured before applying a foot dressing.
Results: The average introperative MTP joint dorsiflexion ROM obtained by
chelectomy alone was 65 degrees (range 45 to 90). This motion was measured related to the
plantar surface of the foot. The ROM after cheilectomy and collateral ligament recession was
85 degrees or more in all patients. Collateral ligament recession permitted the joint to be
distracted (increased 'joint space') and facilitated the conversion of the MTP joint from a
gliding to a hinge joint (the mechanical goal of cheilectomy). Also noted was that less bone
needed to be resected from the metatarsal head to obtain the desired correction. After
resection of any osteophytes from the dorsal proximal phalanx - this surface needed to rest
about 5 mm dorsal to the residual surface (after cheilectomy) of the metatarsal head for
optimum recovery of motion. This technique now used in all patients (> 150) with same
intraoperative findings.
Conclusion: For surgical treatment of hallux limitus cheilectomy plus
collateral ligament recession resulted in greater intra- operative dorsiflexion of the MTP
joint than cheilectomy alone. Less bone resection from the dorsal metatarsal head was also
needed to obtain 85+ degrees of intraoperative correction. Intraoperative ROM is the
baseline correction and is related to the surgical techniques used. Maintaining ROM after
surgery is very dependent on the patient and the intensity of their rehabilitation
commitment-so the last clinical follow up ROM did vary from 30 to 90+ degrees.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00480

## Underutilization of Patient Reported Outcomes Data in the Recent Foot and Ankle
Literature

Robert A. Vander Griend, MD

Category: Other
Keywords: Outcomes Measures; Patient Reported Outcome Measures (PROMS);
PROMIS
Introduction/Purpose: The importance of collecting outcomes information was
promoted by Ernest Codman in the early 1900’s. He stated the importance of 'Following every
patient treated long enough to determine whether or not the treatment has been successful,
then inquire-if so or if not- WHY?', ' He stressed the importance of evaluating outcomes for
each patient as an individual and not from groups of patients. Since that time numerous
outcomes measures have been validated and are in current use. The purpose of this study was
to review all publications in Foot and Ankle International from 2019-2020 which included
outcomes data. Then to determine if these principles (use of individual versus group data
and WHY treatment was successful or not) were followed.
Methods: All articles published in Foot and Ankle International during
2019-2020 were reviewed. Articles which included patient outcomes data were selected for
further review. This review then included assessment of outcomes measure(s) used,
organization of outcomes data, utilization of this data by the study, analysis of individual
versus group data, and any assessment of WHY the outcomes scores had improved or not.
Results: Eighty-five publications were selected. Eleven different outcomes
measurement tools were used. All were reportedy validated tools except for the AOFAS scoring
system. Every study reported outcomes data as group means (some with standard deviations,
some with range of scores). These studies then compared group means (of different treatment
groups or preop vs post op). No specific individual patient outcomes data was provided.
There was no specific assessment of WHY scores improved or not. There was also no analysis
of individual questions from these outcomes tools (e.g. can you put on your own shoes?--if
patient answered 'no' there was no further explanation of why this response was selected).
When the range of scores were provided it was common to have scores on the low end of the
scale before and after treatment with overall conclusion of improvement based on group means
but no assessment of why individual patients improved or not.
Conclusion: Outcomes measures are generally considered to be part of the
’standard of care'. They may be considered important by third party payers, used in
evaluation treatment options, and are usually necessary for publication. However trhis data
is being underutilized. It is commonly reported as group means +/- range or standard
deviations with provides little information about the individuals in a group or groups. Even
with methodologies to minimize Type I or II errors evaluation of group means can obscure
significant progress, lack of progress, or decline by individual patients. Methods to more
effectively utilize outcomes measures are needed.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00481

## Does Surgical Placement of Syndesmosis Screws Affect Breakage Rate? A Retrospective
Comparative Study

Josh W. Vander Maten, MS; Matt McCraken, MS; Logan Roebke, BS; Jiayong Liu

Category: Ankle
Keywords: Syndesmosis; Screws; Surgical Instrumentation
Introduction/Purpose: Fixation of syndesmosis disruption with metal screws
remains a frequent and efficacious treatment modality. Screw breakage remains a complication
seen in many patients following metal fixation. Overtime physiologic rotation or the tibia
and fibula can lead to bone erosion and pain in patients with screw breakage. The purpose of
this study is to compare patients with syndesmosis screw breakage and patients with intact
screws based surgically controlled variables.
Methods: A retrospective analysis of patients who underwent syndesmotic screw
fixation from 2008 - 2020 was performed. Ninety-seven patients were found to have
syndesmosis screw breakage, of which 88 met inclusion criteria. A control group of patients
without syndesmosis screw breakage was selected at random and analyzed until 88 patients met
inclusion criteria. The number of screws used, width, length, fracture type and number of
cortices were all collected. Further analysis included radiographic measurement syndesmosis
screw angle and height of placement above the tibial plafond. A regression analysis was
performed to compare to the two groups, including a separate analysis comparing unbroken
screws within syndesmosis screw breakage cohort versus their broken screws, as this provided
an absolute control group. A stratified analysis of screw placement and angle was also
performed based on standard deviation.
Results: The average screw width in the breakage group was 3.67 (SD =.38) and
4.06 (SD =0.04) in the intact group (P =<.001). Average screw angle was 94.82 (SD =
12.75) in the breakage group and 94.67 (SD 12.31) in the intact group (based on 90 degrees
relative to tibial plafond). Screw placement of the tibial plafond was 20.39 (SD =10.389) in
the breakage group and 16. 75 (SD = 9.28) in the intact group. 70.3% of broken screws were
placed > 20mm above the tibial plafond, compared to 64.0% in the control group. Most
screws were placed at angle > 82 degrees relative to the tibial plafond; 76% (n =92) of
broken screws and 81.2% (n=211) of intact screws). Decreased screw width (P =<.001) and
screw placement > 20mm above the tibial plafond (P =<.001) were all associated with an
increased risk of screw breakage.
Conclusion: Metal screw fixation remains an efficacious treatment method of
syndesmotic disruption. Despite extensive research the cause of syndesmosis screw breakage
and the necessity of screw removal remains without consensus. The is study aims to analyze
surgical variables in attempt to find correlation with screw breakage. An increased BMI was
seen to predispose to screw breakage. Placement of the syndesmosis screw <20 mm above the
tibial plafond and increased screw width provide protection against syndesmosis breakage. No
significant differences were found between groups based on screw angle, number of cortices,
screw length, or number of screws used.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00482

## Does Syndesmosis Screw Breakage Affect Patient Outcomes? A Retrospective Comparative
Study

Josh W. Vander Maten, MS; Matt McCraken, MS; Jiayong Liu; Logan Roebke, BS

Category: Ankle
Keywords: Ankle; Screws; Outcomes Measures
Introduction/Purpose: Metal screw fixation remains a common and effective way
to repair syndesmotic injuries. They are inexpensive, familiar, and provide superior
torsional resistance to sagittal translation compared to other fixation modalities.
Symptomatic screw breakage is one of the most common complications of metal screw fixation.
Routine removal remains unsupported by literature. Consequently, many patients retain broken
screws and are at risk for pain; particularly when the breakage occurs within the tibia or
the fibula. The purpose of this study is to analyze outcomes of patients with intact
syndesmosis screws and those with syndesmosis screw breakage.
Methods: A total of 176 patients (260 screws) with syndesmotic disruption
treated with syndesmosis screw fixation were included in the study. Half of the patients had
broken syndesmosis screws while the other half had intact syndesmosis screws. Basic patient
demographic data was collected including BMI, age, and gender. Further collection of patient
comorbidities was compiled using two comorbidity indices (Charlson, Elixhauser). Outcome
analysis included revision rate, removal secondary to pain, complication rate, range of
motion deficits, and patient pain scores. In patients who had their screws removed, further
analysis was conducted to compare strength, range of motion deficits, complication rates,
pain scores and revision rates between the intact and breakage group.
Results: BMI averages of 33.64 (SD=8.77) and 30.64 (SD=6.76) were seen in
breakage and intact group, respectively. A complication rate of 24.0% was seen the breakage
group versus 36.1% in the control group. Revision rates of 12.4% and 20.10% were seen in the
breakage and control group, respectively. Range of motion deficits were seen in 50.2% in the
intact group and 39.7% in the breakage group (P = 0.2253). Removal secondary to pain
occurred in 60.30% (n = 73) in the broken group compared to 24.5% (n = 34) in the control
group. Decreased complication rate (P =.002), increased BMI (P = <.001), and increased
risk of removal secondary to pain (P = <.001) were all associated with screw breakage.
Following screw removal, no difference was seen in range of motion, pain scores (P =.003)
and complications rates (P = 0.147) were higher in the intact group.
Conclusion: Metal screw fixation remains a popular treatment of syndesmotic
disruption. Many patients retain broken screws and intact screws which can be associated
with future complications. Patients with syndesmosis screw breakage are a high comorbid
population. Syndesmosis screw breakage is associated with decreased complication rates,
increased BMI, and increased risk of eventual removal secondary to pain. Range of motion
deficits were seen more commonly when in patients with intact syndesmosis screws.
Additionally, revisions rates were higher in the intact group compared to the breakage
group. Following screw removal, the intact group had a non-statistically significant
increase in complication rate and range.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00483

## Location Matters in Syndesmosis Screw Breakage: Interosseous Breakage and Breakage
Location Within the Tibia Affect Rates of Removal Secondary to Pain

Josh W. Vander Maten, MS; Jiayong Liu; Matt McCraken, MS; Logan Roebke, BS

Category: Ankle; Ankle; Trauma
Keywords: Syndesmosis; Pain; Screws
Introduction/Purpose: Broken or loose syndesmotic screws are typically
reported to be clinically asymptomatic, however, screw breakage can lead to significant pain
depending on location. Syndesmosis screws that span the incisura are particularly at an
increased risk for painful outcomes. In patients with intraosseous screw breakage, normal
physiologic translation where the distal convex of the fibula fits into the concave tibial
incisure can lead to painful bony erosion overtime. The purpose of this investigation is to
assess variables that my predict location of syndesmosis screw breakage and to also assess
the effect of screw breakage location on eventual removal secondary to pain.
Methods: A retrospective analysis of 1,056 patients who underwent syndesmosis
fixation revealed 88 patients (121 screws) who experienced pst-operative syndesmosis screw
breakage and met predetermined inclusion criteria. Patient demographic data, BMI,
comorbidities, pain scores, complication rate, and revision rate were all collected. Screw
length, width, number, placement height above the tibial plafond, angle, location of
breakage, breakage distance location on the screw and implant removal secondary to pain were
also collected. A series of binomial logistic regressions were performed to ascertain the
effects of the collected variables on the likelihood of breakage location and removal
secondary to pain. Regression analysis included intraosseous versus clear space breakage,
tibia versus fibula breakage, and removal secondary to pain in each breakage location group
(tibia, fibula, clear space).
Results: Of the 121 broken screws, 91 (75.2%) broke within an intraosseous
(IO) location (68 patients, 77.3%). Twenty-eight screws (23%.1) (18 patients, 20.5%) broke
exclusively within the clear space (CS). Sixty screws (52 patients, 59.9%), had IO breakage
within the tibia, while 29 screws (24 patients 27.7%) had breakage within the fibula. Two
screws (2 patients, 2.27%) occurred within an intraosseous location and the clear space.
Intraosseous screw breakage was associated with higher risk removal secondary to pain
(P=.020). Multiple screw usage associated with an increased risk for CS breakage (P =.012).
IO and CS screw angle and placement had no effect on screw breakage location (P =.629, P
=.570). Screw breakage closer to the CS (P=.001), increased number of screws used (P=.003),
and higher patient pain scores (P =.003) were associated increased risk of removal due to
pain within the IO tibia breakage group.
Conclusion: Syndesmotic screw breakage location plays a more important role
than previously reported. When compared to clear space, intraosseous breakage is associated
with increased rates of removal due to pain. Breakage location within the tibia occurring
closer to the clear space is associated with higher rates of removal secondary to pain and
higher patient report pain scores. Usage of multiple screws was found to be the only
significant predictor of clear space vs intraosseous breakage; all other variables were
found to be non-contributary, including no appreciated significance of screw placement in
relation to the tibial plafond or screw angle.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00484

## Valgus Drift after Total Ankle Arthroplasty

David Vier, MD; Rasikh N. Hamid; Susan M. Odum, PhD; Carroll P. Jones, III, MD; Bruce
E. Cohen, MD; Todd A. Irwin, MD; W. Hodges Davis, MD

Category: Ankle; Ankle Arthritis
Keywords: Ankle Arthritis; Ankle Arthroplasty; Ankle
Introduction/Purpose: Total ankle arthroplasty (TAA) is a common treatment for
ankle arthritis, but many challenges exist when attempting to correct and balance coronal
plane deformity. Varus ankle arthritis tends to be stiffer and often leads to a more stable
TAA, but valgus ankle arthritis tends to have more laxity especially in the setting of a
progressive collapsing foot deformity. Failure to achieve appropriate deformity correction
and soft tissue balance can result in recurrence of the deformity with valgus drift. The
purpose of this study was to evaluate the longitudinal coronal plane alignment as well as
outcomes in patients treated with TAA with resultant valgus drift.
Methods: 98 patients who underwent TAA for valgus ankle arthritis were
identified through a prospectively collected database. All patients had a minimum of 2 year
follow-up. The tibiotalar angle was measured on preoperative radiographs to include patients
with valgus ankle arthritis five degrees or greater. Radiographic alignment in the
postoperative period was compared to the alignment at final follow-up. Complications,
failures, revisions, and reoperations were recorded. Patients were categorized by severity
of preoperative valgus deformity into 3 groups: 5-10 degrees, 11-20 degrees, and greater
than 20 degrees. Valgus drift was defined as greater than 5 degrees of valgus shift at final
follow-up when compared to the postoperative alignment. Median follow- up was 49.2
(37.2-68.3 inner quartile) months.
Results: Patients with greater than 20 degrees of preoperative valgus
deformity had an initial postoperative alignment of 2 degrees of valgus and ended with an
average of 5.5 degrees of valgus at final follow-up. The groups of patients with 5-10
degrees as well as 11-20 degrees of valgus were corrected to neutral (0 degrees) in the
initial post-op period and ended with a final postoperative valgus alignment of 2.5 degrees
and 2 degrees, respectively. Overall, 16 patients (18%) had greater than 5 degrees of valgus
drift after their surgery, of which 2 failed and were revised (13%) and 5 had reoperations
(31%).
Conclusion: All groups of preoperative valgus deformity severity had some
valgus shift overall at final follow-up. The most severe preoperative valgus deformities
were least likely to be corrected to neutral with the index procedure and also on average
drifted back to over 5 degrees of valgus. Patients with valgus drift after TAA can still
have a good result but should be monitored closely. Overall, they did not have a high
failure rate. This study emphasizes the necessity of correcting both the ankle and foot
deformity when performing TAA for valgus ankle arthritis in order to maintain deformity
correction.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00485

## An Oblique Trans-Syndesmotic Screw to Augment Fixation of Distal Fibula Fractures: A
Technique Guide

Eric D. Villarreal, MD; Carson D. Strickland, MD; David R. Richardson, MD

Category: Trauma; Ankle
Keywords: Distal Fibular Fracture; Osteoporotic Ankle Fracture; Syndesmotic
Screw
Introduction/Purpose: A subset of patients with low, transverse fractures of
the lateral malleolus are at increased risk of malreduction and late loss of reduction. In
patients with poor bone quality and transverse or short oblique fractures at or distal to
the tibiotalar joint, distal fixation is often inadequate with a single interfragmentary lag
screw. Furthermore, these fractures are susceptible to malreduction by pre-contoured locking
plates. To address this, a technique was developed to augment fixation of the distal
fragment and decrease the likelihood of loss of reduction. The senior author’s technique for
this procedure, as well as indications for the technique and a few representative cases, are
provided.
Methods: This technique involves placement of an oblique tricortical or
quadricortical screw from the distal fibula into the tibia in an distal-lateral to
proximal-medial direction. The screw is placed either outside of or through the distal-most
hole of a one-third tubular plate placed in a neutralization position. The screw trajectory
is similar to that of a typical syndesmosis screw in the sagittal plane but is aimed
proximally rather than parallel to the tibial plafond. The screw enters the tibia at
Chaput’s tubercle, just lateral to the joint. The indications for this technique are
transverse and short oblique Danis-Weber B distal fibular fractures in which there is
inadequate purchase between the plate and the distal fragment. While the purpose of this
screw is not to stabilize the syndesmosis, it can be used with other augmentation
techniques, such as trans-syndesmotic screws, in high-risk patients with osteoporosis and/or
neuropathy.
Results: This technique has been used for many years by the senior author.
There have been no implant failures (e.g. broken screws) or major complications associated
with this technique. Three representative cases demonstrate appropriate indications and
outcomes for this technique. These include patients with significant neuropathy or
osteoporosis who present with a particularly troublesome fracture pattern (transverse
fibular fracture at or below the level of the tibiotalar joint). This screw, along with any
other syndesmotic screws, is removed at 3-4 months according to the senior author’s
protocol.
Conclusion: A distal oblique trans-syndesmotic screw can be used to supplement
current fibular fracture fixation constructs. It is easy to place under fluoroscopic
guidance and generally is removed after fracture union, similar to standard syndesmosis
screws. The use of this screw helps prevent the malreduction that can potentially occur when
treating transverse or short-oblique Weber B distal fibular fractures with a locking plate.
In our series of patients at a large urban tertiary referral center, this technique has
produced good outcomes with no reportable complications.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00486

## Defining Return to Sport: A Systematic Review

Bryan G. Vopat, MD; Joshua Doege, MS; Jack M. Ayres; Matthew Mackay, MD; Armin
Tarakemeh, BA; Symone M. Brown, BS; Mary K. Mulcahey, MD

Category: Sports
Keywords: Return to Play; Sports; Outcomes Measures
Introduction/Purpose: Return to sport (RTS) commonly serves as a measure for
assessment of clinical outcomes in orthopaedic sports medicine surgery. Unfortunately, while
RTS is commonly utilized in research for this purpose, currently, there is no widely
accepted or standardized definition for when an athlete has officially returned to his or
her sport. The purpose of this study was to conduct a systematic review to evaluate and
report the differences in specific definitions of return to sport (RTS) utilized in the
orthopaedic surgery literature.
Methods: A systematic review was performed using PubMed, Embase and Cochrane
databases per PRISMA guidelines. Search terms consisted of variations of 'RTS' combined with
variations of 'orthopedic surgery' and 'define' to capture as many relevant articles as
possible. The definition of return to sport was recorded and analyzed.
Results: 718 articles were identified in the initial search, 29 of which met
eligibility criteria, providing a clear definition of RTS. Of the 29 studies included, 20
(69.0%) defined RTS as an athlete competing in a game or other competitive play, and these
definitions are further broken down in Table 1. Three (10.3%) defined this as the athlete
competing in a game or other competitive play, but with an explicitly stated
competition-level modifier of the athlete returning to their pre-injury level of
competition. Two articles (6.9%) included returning to training or practice and the
remaining four articles (13.8%) used terminology other than the standard RTS.
Conclusion: There is variability in the definition of RTS used in the
literature. Most studies refer to the athlete competing in a game or other competitive play.
Other variants include returning to practice/training and explicitly defined competition
levels and objectives. Future studies should aim to standardize the definition of RTS to
facilitate more precise assessment of outcome following sports medicine surgery. Using
terminology that describes components of the recovery and rehabilitation process, such as
'return to participation' and 'return to performance' in addition to RTS will allow us to
better understand the athlete’s recovery and associated level of competition or
performance.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00487

## Traumatic Peroneal Nerve Injuries: A Systematic Review

Bryan G. Vopat, MD; Matthew Mackay, MD; Jack M. Ayres; Ian Harmon, BS; Armin
Tarakemeh, BA; Jacob Brubacher, MD

Category: Trauma
Keywords: Trauma; Fibula Fractures; Tendon Transfer
Introduction/Purpose: The common peroneal nerve (CPN) is the most commonly
injured peripheral nerve of the lower extremity in trauma patients. Traumatic CPN injuries
have historically been associated with relatively poor outcomes and patient satisfaction,
though recent outcome data appear promising. Given the variety of underlying injury
modalities, treatment options, and prognostic variables, this study sought to evaluate and
summarize current literature on traumatic CPN injuries and provide recommendations for
treatment and future research.
Methods: A systematic review was performed using PubMed, Embase and Cochrane
databases per PRISMA guidelines. Search terms consisted of variations of 'peroneal nerve'
and 'fibular nerve' combined with 'injury,' or 'laceration,' or 'entrapment,' or 'repair,'
or 'neurolysis.' Information regarding treatment modality, outcomes and patient demographics
were recorded and analyzed.
Results: 2,301 articles were identified in the initial search, 42 met
eligibility criteria ( ).
Factors associated with better clinical outcomes included shorter pre-operative interval,
shorter graft length when an interposed graft was used, nerve continuity and younger patient
age. Sex or gender did not affect outcomes in any studies in this review. Motor grades of M3
or greater on the MRC scale are typically considered successful outcomes. In studies we
analyzed, this was achieved in 81.2% of patients who underwent neurolysis, 78.8% of patients
who underwent end to end suture, 49.8% of patients who underwent nerve grafting, 62.9% of
patients who underwent nerve transfer, 86.0% of patients who underwent posterior tibial
tendon transfer (PTTT) and 73.9% of patients who underwent surgery with concurrent PTTT.
Conclusion: Included studies were heterogenous, complicating our ability to
further analyze the data. It is not possible to uniformly advocate for the best treatment
option given diverse injury modalities, presentations and prognostic factors. Many studies
do not report outcomes with respect to specific injury modality. Future studies should
clearly report outcomes based on injury modality and surgical treatment option. This would
allow for greater analysis on the most appropriate treatment option for a given mechanism of
injury. Newer surgical techniques, such as addition of growth factors to nerve repairs and
concurrent tendon transfer are promising and should be further explored.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00488

## Importance of Midfoot Ligaments in a Hallux Valgus Cadaveric Model

Emilio Wagner, MD; Pablo Wagner, MD; Florencia Pacheco, MD; Mario López; Felipe H.
Palma, PT; Rodrigo Guzman- Venegas, MSc

Category: Bunion
Keywords: Bunion; Ligament; Hallux Valgus
Introduction/Purpose: Hallux valgus (HV) is of uncertain origin. Even though a
huge amount of treatment options are available, no clear cause for this deformity exist. To
be able to further understand this frequent pathology, a cadaveric model should be
developed. A cadaveric model was developed trying to obtain similar deformities to the ones
observed in Hallux valgus (first ray varus and pronation). The objective of this research is
to recreate some characteristics of a HV deformity, through sequential ligaments
sectioning.
Methods: 8 fresh frozen lower leg specimens were used. Markers were attached
to the medial and middle foot ray bones, including talus. A constant tibial axial load of 25
kg was used. Cyclic tibial rotation (to simulate gait phases) and 5 kg pull on the extensor
and flexor hallucis tendons (EHL and FHL) were applied to the specimen. Limited and
sequential medial and middle column ligamentous sectioning were performed, including the,
dorsal and interosseous naviculo-cuneiform, intercuneiform, metatarso-cuneiform and
intermetatarsal ligaments. After each ligament damage, bony alignment was measured including
frontal (bone divergence) and axial plane (bone rotation).
Results: After intercuneiform, Lisfranc and naviculo-cuneiform ligaments
sectioning, a significant angular increase was found in the naviculo-cuneiform,
intercuneiform and naviculo-metatarsal angles (p=0.001). Specifically, for bone rotation,
the biggest change was found for the intercuneiform and naviculo-cuneiform angles. Regarding
bone divergence, the biggest increase was found in the talo-metatarsal angle. No additional
angular change was found after adding metatarso-cuneiform ligament damage. No change in the
sagittal alignment was found.
Conclusion: This model was able to recreate some parameters of the hallux
valgus deformity. No flatfoot deformity was produced. Surprisingly, no significant angular
change was produced after metatarso-cuneiform ligament damage. Most significant changes were
found after intercuneiform and naviculocuneiform damage. Our findings suggest that midfoot
instability has to be present to recreate a hallux valgus deformity.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00489

## Short Term Results of Treatment of Osteomyelitis in the Diabetic Foot with a Synthetic
Bone Graft Sustitute

Ute Waldecker, MD

Category: Diabetes; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Diabetic Foot; Outcomes Measures; Allograft
Introduction/Purpose: The aim of the study was to evaluate short term results
of osteomyelits of the diabetic foot treated with cerament
Methods: 16 diabetics with a mean age of 61.6 years underwent surgical therapy
of infection of the foot using Cerament and a 6- week resistance-based antibiotic therapy.
The surgical procedures included bony debridement, temporary vacuum therapy, arthrodesis or
resection arthroplasty. Postoperative treatment included clinical investigation and MRI
control of the affected foot. The foot ulcerations were classified preoperatively.
Pathological assessments of osteomyelitis were made. The recurrence rates of osteomyelitis
and ulcerations, the number of surgical procedures, and the complication rates were
determined.
Results: A foot ulcer was found preoperatively in 56.3% of the patients. 10
patients (62.5%) were diagnosed with chronic osteomyelitis, 6 with florid osteomyelitis. The
number of necessary surgical procedures was 2 in 8 patients (50%), 4 in 4 patients (25%), 3
in 3 patients (18.8%) and 1 in 1 patient (6.3%). After a median followup of 8.6 months, no
recurrence of osteomyelitis could be detected in 13 patients (81.3%). With regard to foot
ulcerations, the ulcer healed completely in 15 patients (93.8%). One patient had ulcer
recurrence. The complication rate was 18.8% (3 patients). The statistical analysis also
showed that the patient’s age had no significant influence on the recurrence rate of
osteomyelitis and ulceration.Furthermore, there were significant differences between
patients with chronic and florid osteomyelitis. Patients with chronic osteomyelitis were
more likely to have osteomyelitis recurrences, while patients with a proven florid infection
were more likely to have ulcer recurrences.
Conclusion: The osteomyelitis treatment of the diabetic foot shows good
results in terms of the recurrence rates of osteomyelitis and foot ulceration. With regard
to the differentiated consideration of the results in chronic and florid osteomyelitis,
additional investigations are necessary.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00490

## The Infected Diabetic Foot: A Microbiological Analysis

Ute Waldecker, MD

Category: Basic Sciences/Biologics; Diabetes
Keywords: Diabetic Foot; Microbiology; Diabetic Foot Ulcer
Introduction/Purpose: Diabetic foot infections show increasing prevalence.
Their therapy is time consuming and expensive. Standardized antibiotic treatments do not
exist. Suboptimal antibiotic therapy increases the morbidity of the patient. The aim of the
study was to evaluate the dominating bacterial colonization in the diabetic foot.
Furthermore we evaluated the changes of the colonization during surgical and antibiotic
treatment and the efficiency of the therapy.
Methods: The study included 100 patients with a diabetic foot syndrome and a
pedal ulcer. Ulcers were classified according to Wagner Classification. HbA1c, CRP and
patients BMI were documented. All patients underwent an angiologic investigation with
arterial doppler ultrasonography and TcpO2 measurement. An MRI of the affected foot was
performed to rule out osteomyelitis. All patients underwent surgical and antibiotic
treatment. Surgery included debridement, abscess drainage, VAK therapy, bony resection,
minor amputation, resection arthroplasty, Helal osteotomies. Osteomyelitis was
pathologically verified. Microbiological results of superficial and deep smears, which were
taken during the surgical therapy were analyzed. The antibiotic treatment was adapted to the
bacterial resistance.
Results: The duration of antibiotic treatment varied from 1 to 136 days
(Mean:19.6 days, SD:17.3 ). The mean number of surgical interventions was 2.6. The
dominating initial antibiotic treatment was Clindamycin/ Cefuroxim (48%) followed by
Clindamycin (11%),Cefuroxim (7%), Clindamycin/ Ciprofloxacin (6%), Tazobactam (3%). The
dominating bacteria were gram +. The difference of the percentage distribution compared to
the gram- bacteria was statistically significant. The only significant percentage change of
the antibiotic treatment was seen after the first surgical intervention, when the initial
antibiotic treatment was significantly more effective against gram - bacteria. A change of
the antibiotic treatment was seen with 1. Clindamycin / Ciprofloxacin in 66%, 2. Tazobactam
in 67%, 3.Clindamycin in 36% and Clindamycin/ Cefuroxim in 35%.
Conclusion: The dominating bacteria of the infected diabetic feet were gram +.
The initial i.v. antibiotic treatment with Clindamycin/ Cefuroxim was effective in 66%. An
optimization of the initial antibiotic treatment with greater focus on the gram + bacteria
seems to be necessary.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00491

## Anterior Ankle Skin Surface Pressures in Lower Extremity Splints: Minimizing Insult
after Injury

David M. Walton, MD; Nicholas Farrar, MD; Kameron A. Shams, MD; Kristopher Mell; James
R. Holmes, MD; Paul G. Talusan, MD

Category: Ankle; Trauma; Other
Keywords: Dressing; Complications; Ankle
Introduction/Purpose: Though ubiquitously utilized in orthopaedic trauma,
lower extremity splints are not without their associated iatrogenic risk of morbidity. In
fact, improper splinting not only necessitates replacement, but splint-related soft tissue
complications are the second most common iatrogenic cause for referral to plastic surgery.
Improper splinting techniques include inadequate molding of plaster/fiberglass splints,
inadequate padding over bony prominences, excessive compressive forces from elastic bandages
applied too aggressively, and/or pressure areas created by applying padding and casting
material in varying joint positions. While clinicians commonly pad bony prominences to
minimize skin pressure, the effect of joint position on skin pressure and, more
specifically, changing joint position, is understudied. The purpose of this study is to
evaluate anterior ankle skin pressure secondary to joint position change during
splinting.
Methods: Following ethics approval by our institutional review board, various
constructs of lower extremity, short-leg splints were applied to two healthy subjects (2
limbs total in this preliminary data set) with an underlying pressure transducer (Tekscan I-
Scan system (Tekscan Inc, South Boston, MA, USA) on the skin surface centered on the
anterior ankle on the tibialis anterior tendon. All subjects underwent anterior ankle
surface pressure assessment when padding was applied in maximum plantar flexion and neutral
position for conventional short leg splints application. Percent change from initial contact
pressure centered on the tibialis anterior with either Webril (Covidien/Medtronic, Dublin,
Ireland), or Specialist Cotton Blend Cast Padding (BSN Medical, Charlotte, NC, USA) were
calculated. Neutral position of the foot/ankle will be confirmed with goniometer.
Results: There were 2 limbs total that were analyzed for the presentation of
pilot data for this study. The percent change in anterior ankle contact pressure when
padding was applied in maximum plantarflexion (PF) and then placed in neutral was increased
at least two-fold without the addition of plaster and subsequently with the addition of
plaster in lower extremity short leg splints ( ).
Conclusion: In this pilot data, we report significant increases in anterior
ankle contact pressures when splint padding is applied in plantar-flexion and re-positioned
into neutral during splint application which may precipitate iatrogenic pressure ulcers in
patients sustaining foot/ankle trauma. This data, though preliminary, underscores the
importance in proper splinting techniques for all clinicians that manage lower extremity
trauma (eg, orthopaedic surgery, emergency medicine, urgent care, etc).
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00492

## Disuse Osteopenia Development with Non Weight-Bearing in Lower Extremity Trauma: CT
Hounsfield-Unit-Based Analysis

David M. Walton, MD; Nicholas Farrar, MD; Jack Eichman, BS; Francisco J. Fuster; Aaron
Perdue; Mark Hake; Jaimo Ahn, MD PhD

Category: Trauma; Other
Keywords: Non-Weight Bearing Restrictions; Complications; General Principles /
Context
Introduction/Purpose: Disuse osteopenia develops in individuals with decrease
lower limb use especially after injury necessitating non-weightbearing, hospitalization or
both. However, the nature of this change is not well characterized and, therefore, cannot be
appropriately addressed. Conventional CT produces a reliable evaluation of bone quality as
Hounsfield Units (HU) and offers the opportunity to longitudinally study bone density in
activity-altered patients. The purpose of this study is to estimate the degree of osteopenia
in non-weightbearing hospitalized patients and to identify patient-related factors
associated with this loss.
Methods: Initial screening criteria included patients who presented to the
emergency department between January 1, 2010 to August 1, 2020; baseline lower extremity
orthopaedic trauma evaluated by CT. Further criteria included CT imaging capturing the
ipsilateral hip at the time of admission; a second CT scan, for any indication (eg, small
bowel obstruction, diverticulitis, etc) that include that same hip; strict non-weightbearing
in between scans. Exclusion criteria included change in weightbearing status and CT imaging
changes that would not allow eBMD analysis (eg, intervention). Estimated BMD (eBMD) was
measured at baseline and and at the secondary time point via HU approximation 12mm inferior
to superior aspect of femoral neck on axial CT. The change in eBMD was calculated as a proxy
for disuse osteopenia and the relationship between relative bone loss (as a nominal rate of
osteopenia, eBMD loss/time) and patient-specific factors was explored.
Results: Of 200,000 patients who received CT evaluation including their hip
during the targeted timeframe, seventeen patients met our inclusion and exclusion criteria.
There was an average of 7.3 days (median = 6 days; mode = 4 days; interquartile range: 4 -
8.5 days) between CT scans. The average rate of disuse osteopenia in the cohort was a net
average decrease of 7.5 +- 5.8 HU/day. To place in a standardized clinical context, this
change is estimated to correlate linearly with respect to change in DEXA BMD T-Score and may
be clinically relevant when HU approach values <100. Associated patient factors that may
further precipitate osteopenia whilst non-weightbearing are smoking, female gender, and
diabetes.
Conclusion: We report novel, preliminary data estimating the rate of disuse
osteopenia in admitted, non-weightbearing orthopaedic trauma patients. This data underscores
an important consideration all physicians should make when non- weightbearing status is
being considered or required after injury or admission.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00493

## Patient-Reported Outcomes after Long-Term Follow-Up of Lisfranc Injuries Treated with
Open Reduction Internal Fixation

David M. Walton, MD; Derek J. Semaan; Ronit Shah, BS; Christopher Robbins, PhD; James
R. Holmes, MD; Paul G. Talusan, MD

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot; Trauma
Keywords: Lisfranc Injuries; PROMIS; Trauma
Introduction/Purpose: Lisfranc injuries are thought to contribute to
debilitating outcomes in polytrauma patients. Due to the relative rarity of Lisfranc
injuries, consistent long-term follow-up is a challenge and clinical outcomes are difficult
to assess in this patient population. As a result, there exists a need for further
investigation into patient-related clinical outcomes after Lisfranc injury. The purpose of
this study was to collect long-term clinical outcome data following Lisfranc injuries using
PROMIS Physical Function (PROMIS-PF) and Visual Analogue Scale-Foot and Ankle (VAS-FA).
Methods: A chart review was performed to identify all patients who had
surgical treatment of an acute Lisfranc injury at our institution from 2005 to 2014. Of
forty-five patients identified, we were able to recruit nineteen for a follow-up clinic
visit consisting of a physical exam, administration of questionnaires addressing pain and
medication usage, radiographs, and completion of outcome surveys including PROMIS-Physical
Function and Visual Analogue Scale-Foot and Ankle.
Results: There were 14 female and 5 male patients enrolled in the study with a
mean time of 6.25 years from the time of injury. Within this cohort, the mean PROMIS-PF
score was 52.4+-8.2 and the mean VAS-Foot and Ankle Score was 76.6+-22.3. The risk factors
of age, gender, BMI, smoking status, depression, and time from injury showed no
statistically significant association with PROMIS-PF or VAS-FA scores using p<0.05 (Table
1).
Conclusion: We report satisfactory long-term patient-reported outcomes using
PROMIS-PF and VAS-FA independent of several risk factors. However, the small sample size and
observational nature of our study contributed to the lack of significance in the data and
limit our ability to further infer which patients would be expected to do worse
postoperatively.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00494

## Identifying Risk Factors for Nonunion of the Modified Lapidus Procedure for the
Correction of Hallux Valgus

Benjamin Wang; Kshitij Manchanda, MD; Trapper Lalli, MD; George T. Liu, DPM; Michael
D. VanPelt, DPM; Katherine M. Raspovic, DPM; Dane K. Wukich, MD; Matthew J. Johnson,
DPM

Category: Bunion; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Lapidus; Lapidus Procedure; Tarsometatarsal Arthrodesis
Introduction/Purpose: There is a paucity of literature attempting to
characterize risk factors for nonunion of the modified Lapidus procedure for correction of
hallux valgus. The purpose of this study was to evaluate several patient factors to
determine which may contribute to increased odds of nonunion.
Methods: Patients who underwent modified Lapidus procedure between 2009 to
2018 were retrospectively reviewed. Patient age, sex, body mass index (BMI), history of
previous bunionectomy, history of tobacco use, fixation method, presence of diabetes
mellitus (DM), and presence of hypothyroidism were recorded along with changes in
radiographic parameters. A multiple logistic regression analysis was implemented to estimate
the odds of nonunion.
Results: Of the 222 patients who met inclusion criteria, nonunion with
modified Lapidus procedure was observed in 20 patients (9.01%). Odds of nonunion with
modified Lapidus procedure were greater for patients as BMI increased (OR=1.101, 95% CI:
1.029 to 1.177), tobacco users (OR=3.511, 95% CI: 1.182 to 10.425), had a change in
intermetatarsal angle (IMA) (OR=1.313, 95% CI: 1.099 to 1.569), a change in Meary’s angle
(OR=1.133, 95% CI: 1.024 to 1.255), and a change in calcaneal pitch (OR=1.192, 95% CI: 0.997
to 1.426), but lower for patients who had a change in hallux valgus angle (OR=0.912, 95% CI:
0.846 to 0.983). Compared with the union group, patients with nonunion had lesser mean
degrees correction of IMA (4.25° vs. 7.02°) and greater mean degrees correction of Meary’s
angle (1.62° vs. 0.46°) and calcaneal pitch (1.09° vs. 0.38°). No increased odds of nonunion
were found between fixation methods.
Conclusion: Predicted odds of nonunion with modified Lapidus procedure
increased in patients with high BMI, smokers, and increased change in intermetatarsal angle,
calcaneal pitch, and Meary’s angle pre and postoperatively.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00495

## Comparison of Revolving Scarf Osteotomy and Double Metatarsal Osteotomy for Treating
Severe Hallux Valgus with an Increased Distal Metatarsal Articular Angle

Xinwen Wang; Liang Xiaojun, MD

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Hallux Valgus; 1st MTP Joint; Valgus
Introduction/Purpose: The aim of this study was to introduce a new surgical
procedure defined as revolving scarf osteotomy (RSO) and compare the clinical and
radiological results of RSO and double metatarsal osteotomy (DMO) performed for treating
severe hallux valgus (HV) with an increased distal metatarsal articular angle (DMAA).
Methods: First metatarsal osteotomies were performed in 56 patients (62 feet)
with severe HV with an increased DMAA in Honghui Hospital from January 2015 to December
2017. RSO was performed in 32 feet and DMO was performed in 30 feet. Clinical assessments
were performed using the American Orthopaedic Foot & Ankle Society (AOFAS) score and
visual analog scale (VAS) score. Radiographic evaluations of the hallux valgus angle (HVA),
intermetatarsal angle (IMA), DMAA, and first metatarsal length (FML) were compared
preoperatively and postoperatively in the two groups, and the rates of complications were
also compared.
Results: The mean AOFAS score, VAS score, HVA, IMA, and DMAA showed
significant improvements in both groups after surgery, but with no significant differences
between the two groups. The postoperative FML was significantly larger in the RSO group than
in the DMO group (p<0.001). One of the 30 feet (3.3%) in the DMO group exhibited transfer
metatarsalgia at 12 months postoperatively, while another foot (3.3%) in same group had
avascular necrosis of the metatarsal head. One of the 30 feet (3.1%) in the RSO group had
hallux varus.
Conclusion: No differences in the clinical and radiographic results were
observed between the two groups with severe HV and an increased DMAA. However, RSO may
reduce postoperative complications compared to DMO. A long-term, randomized, controlled
prospective study with a larger sample would provide higher-level evidence for confirming
the clinical efficacy and safety of RSO.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00496

## Staged Hindfoot Fusion for Osteomyelitis of the Distal Tibia and Talus

Peter R. Wasky, MD; Nihar S. Shah, MD; Augusto Roca; Richard T. Laughlin, MD

Category: Ankle; Diabetes; Hindfoot; Trauma
Keywords: Ankle Arthrodesis; Hindfoot Arthrodesis; Charcot
Introduction/Purpose: Management of hindfoot osteomyelitis involves
eradication of infection, deformity correction, and bony stabilization in the setting of
bone loss and poor bone quality. In this case series of 12 patients, we present a two-stage
technique; debridement, deformity correction, joint surface preparation, and intramedullary
reaming with placement of antibiotic rod and ring external fixation followed by a second
stage of external fixator removal and exchange of antibiotic rod for definitive hindfoot
rod. The purpose of this poster is to highlight techniques that can improve the success of
obtaining stable fixation, remission of infection, and ultimately fusion. Techniques
highlighted are ring fixator placement, preparation of the antibiotic rod, intramedullary
canal preparation, rod exchange, and use of blocking screws to enhance compression and axial
loading of the fusion.
Methods: Twelve patients were treated with this two-stage protocol. The most
common indication was post-traumatic osteomyelitis followed by neuropathic (Charcot) joint.
All were treated in a staged manner with an initial debridement of nonviable tissue
including osteomyelitic bone. The tibiotalar and talocalcaneal joints were resected and
prepared for fusion at the initial debridement. Provisional stabilization and compression
were obtained through the use of a ring external fixator. An intramedullary antibiotic
impregnated cement coated rod was introduced through the calcaneus, talus, and the
intramedullary space of the tibia. The patients were kept in the fixator until the skin was
healed and all incisions were dry. At this point, the fixator was removed, and the
antibiotic rod was exchanged for the definitive hindfoot fusion rod.
Results: Cultures were positive for Staphylococcal or Streptococcal species in
58% of cases, fungal in 8%, and Gram negative organisms in 33%. On average patients spent 93
days in the fixator while wounds were healing, and they were receiving systemic antibiotics.
One patient died while in the frame. There have been no amputations in the series. Of the
patients that have completed the protocol, all have gone on to either bony fusion or stable
fibrous union. All are able to walk unaided. And thus far, all are free of active infection.
Secondary procedures are described.
Conclusion: This technique of staged fusion for hindfoot osteomyelitis offers
the following advantages. the first stage involves thorough debridement and deformity
correction. Oftentimes there is extensive scarring and the soft tissue envelope is not
conducive to internal fixation. This technique allows the soft tissues to heal before
placing the definitive internal fixation. It also allows for graduated compression at the
fusion site with the ring fixator. The antibiotic rod not only delivers high concentration
of local antibiotics, but it prevents deformity recurrence during the compression phase. The
definitive rod provides support of pathologic bone and maintains deformity correction.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00497

## Comparison of 3D Surface Rendering CT to Plain Lateral Radiographs for Quantification
and Characterisation of Posterior Malleolar Fracture Fragment Size and Morphology

Lizzy Weigelt; Lyndon W. Mason; Laura-Ann Lambert; Gavin Heyes

Category: Ankle; Trauma
Keywords: Ankle Fracture; Ankle Fracture Evaluation; CT
Introduction/Purpose: The aim of this study was to compare the size of the
posterior malleolar fracture (PMF) fragment on plain lateral radiographs compared to
three-dimensional (3D) surface rendering CT imaging, and to compare both modalities in the
characterisation of PMF morphology.
Methods: Measurements of 180 lateral radiographs of PMF’s were compared to
their respective 3D surface rendering CT reconstructions, by two independent observers
reviewing percentage articular involvement of the PMF fragment. Morphology of the PMF was
categorised initially by the CT scan as classified by Mason and Molloy and was compared to
this classification using radiographs.
Results: When calculating the percentage joint surface involved by the PMF
fragment, inter-observer variability was greater than 0.8 for radiographic and CT
measurement. Significant differences in size of PMF on radiograph compared to CT were found
for type 1 and type 2A fractures (p<0001 type 1, p=.071 type 2A). Radiographs
consistently over-estimated the PMF fragment size, although in type 2B fracture patterns
there was an equivalent number that were under-estimated due to the underappreciation of the
posteromedial fragment. Comparison of fracture fragment morphology found that type 2A and 2B
fractures (rotational Pilon’s) had poor agreement between radiographs and CT (34.15%).
Conclusion: This study shows that the use of a lateral radiograph in a PMF to
estimate fracture size and morphology is poor. Additional CT imaging is imperative to allow
for appropriate treatment planning in the management of PMF.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00498

## Identification and Fixation of Intermetatarsal Coronal Plane Instability Following
Modified Lapidus Procedure

Alex Wetzig; Guillermo R. Pechero; David C. Berken, MD; Pierce Ebaugh, DO; William C.
McGarvey, MD

Category: Bunion; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Bunion; Hallux Valgus; Instability
Introduction/Purpose: There are many described techniques to approach surgical
correction of bunion deformity and prevention of recurrence is still a topic of interest.
Coronal plane instability evidenced by intermetarsal angle (IMA) widening with weight
bearing is a cause for concern with respect to recurrence. The identification of patients
who are at risk for recurrence intraoperatively is challenging and currently there are few
described tests that guide physician treatment. The aim of this study was to demonstrate an
intraoperative intermetarsal coronal plane ’squeeze stress test' utilized by the senior
surgeon along with the clinical and radiographic outcomes of patients who underwent fixation
for their identified instability following the modified Lapidus procedure for hallux valgus
correction.
Methods: All patients included in this study presented with clinical and
radiographic documentation of hallux valgus that was treated by a first tarsometatarsal
arthrodesis with additional middle column fixation following widening on intraoperative
fluoroscopy ’squeeze stress test' ( ) by a single senior surgeon from 2015-2020. Fixation of the middle column was
achieved via endobutton (5), screw (23), or endobutton plus screw (5). Clinical descriptions
were reviewed for the presence of symptomatic recurrence and for the need of revision
surgery. A single observer measured the HVA and the IMA angle of the preoperative and final
post-operative weight-bearing radiographs, respectively. A total of 33 patients were
included with an average age of 58.5 (range, 40-80) years of age and a mean follow-up of
8.3(range, 1.5-30) months. Mean BMI was 29 (range, 19- 54). Statistical analysis of this
data set utilized the chi-square test and two sample t-test.
Results: Pre-operatively, the patients with identified coronal plane
instability had a mean HVA and IMA of 33 (range, 16-74) and 14 (range, 7-23) degrees,
respectively. At final follow-up, these patients maintained a mean HVA of 9.8 (range, 0-32)
and IMA of 4.5 (range, 0-15). No patients sustained clinical recurrence. Two patients
underwent elective removal of hardware. One patient sustained a deep infection that required
removal of hardware and formal debridement, this subsequently resolved.
Conclusion: Coronal plane instability remains one of the unsolved facets of
effectively treating symptomatic hallux valgus. Vigilance is the first step in prevention of
recurrence in these patients and the ’squeeze stress test' is a simple, quick option for
their identification. Our case series demonstrates satisfactory outcomes in terms of
clinical recurrence for these patients utilizing this new evaluation technique. We believe
further investigation of the squeeze stress test as an instability identifier is warranted
in all types of bunion correction procedures.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00499

## Achilles Tendon Rupture Repairs: Clinical Outcomes of a Novel Technique

Caroline Williams, BA; John Z. Zhao, MD; John Y. Kwon, MD; Christopher P. Miller,
MD

Category: Trauma; Ankle; Sports
Keywords: Achilles Tendon Rupture; PROMIS; Tendon Injuries
Introduction/Purpose: Acute Achilles tendon rupture repair has undergone
several changes in the past decade, aiming to minimize complications while maximizing
clinical outcomes. Less invasive approaches have been associated with comparable results and
decreased infection risk compared with traditional open techniques. Patient positioning
during surgery also influences outcomes; prone positioning is associated with increased
operative times as well as risk of neuropraxia and ophthalmologic injuries as compared to
supine positioning. The Medial Mini-Open Supine (MMOS) Achilles Repair technique combines
the benefits of supine positioning and mini-open techniques. This study compares 1-year
clinical outcomes, operative times, and complication rates of patients undergoing repair
with this novel technique to those treated with an open or mini-open approach with prone
positioning.
Methods: Patients undergoing operative acute Achilles rupture repair at our
institution after February 2015 were included in this study. Patients were grouped by
technique used: 1) open repair with prone positioning, 2) mini-open repair with prone
positioning, or 3) the medial mini-open repair with supine positioning. Patients were
followed for a minimum of 1 year postoperatively. Primary outcome measures include
Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System (PROMIS) scores (Physical Function,
Pain Interference and Depression), Foot and Ankle Ability Measure (FAAM) assessments (ADLs
and Sport) and Visual Analog Scale (VAS) pain scores. Secondary outcome measures include
intraoperative times and complication rates. Statistical analysis to assess for significant
differences between the groups was conducted using the Kruskal-Wallis test, Nemenyi test,
ANOVA with posthoc Tukey test and chi-square test as was appropriate.
Results: A total of 56 patients (Group 1: n=18, Group 2: n=14, Group 3: n=24)
were included in this study. Average 1-year PROMIS Physical Function scores were 59.57
(+-12.9), 64.29 (+-13.96) and 63.03 (+-11.69) for Groups 1, 2 and 3 respectively. Average
Pain Interference scores were 46.05 (+-17.65), 42.12 (+-8.75) and 42.48 (+-7.11). Depression
score averages were 40.79 (+-7.61), 36.87 (+-9.35) and 39.81 (+-9.48) for Groups 1, 2 and 3,
respectively. Differences between groups were not significant (p >0.05). Group 3 had
statistically significant differences in total OR time compared to both Groups 1 and 2. The
median difference was 33 min between Groups 1 and 3, and 35 min between Groups 2 and 3
(p<0.01) The majority of time savings arose from pre- incision setup and post-closure
times. Differences in complication rates (5.5% (n=1), 14.3% (n=2), and 12.5% (n=3), for
Groups 1, 2 and 3 respectively) were not statistically significant (p=0.73).
Conclusion: The Medial Mini-Open Supine Achilles Repair technique shows
promise as a viable option for acute Achilles tendon rupture repair; ease of patient
positioning preoperatively translates to decreased set up, operative, and sedation time,
directly benefiting patients. Patient-reported outcomes at 1-year follow-up demonstrate
comparable results with both open and mini-open prone techniques, without an increase in
complication rates.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00500

## Defining an Anatomic and Radiographic Safe Zone for Posterior Malleolar Ankle Hardware
Fixation

Caroline Williams, BA; Kaveh Momenzadeh, MD; Max Michalski, MD; John Y. Kwon, MD;
Christopher P. Miller, MD

Category: Ankle; Trauma
Keywords: Operative Approach; Posterior Malleolus Fracture; Injuries to the
Syndesmosis
Introduction/Purpose: There is a lack of consensus regarding optimal
management of Posterior Malleolar Fractures (PMFs). Indirect reduction and fixation with
posterior-anterior (PA) screw shows promise of avoiding the risks associated with direct
reduction or indirect anterior to posterior (AP) approaches. Some authors have raised
concerns about potential risk to nearby structures with PA technique, including hardware
prominence into the syndesmosis. This study highlights the use of a posteromedial vertical
syndesmotic line as a fluoroscopic landmark, helping surgeons avoid intra-syndesmotic
placement.
Methods: Indirect PA screw placement was completed on ten cadaveric specimens,
followed by fluoroscopy in mortise and lateral views. Dissection was performed to assess
screw placement relative to the posteromedial border of the syndesmosis. The posterior
border of the syndesmosis was marked with a radiopaque wire. Repeat imaging was completed to
validate the fluoroscopic posteromedial vertical syndesmotic line is representative of the
posteromedial border of the tibial incisura.
Results: On dissection, 9 of 10 cadavers had accurate screw placement with no
penetration into the syndesmosis ( , bottom left & bottom right). Corresponding imaging showed the screw head to
be medial to the marker on mortise view. For the specimen with penetration into the
syndesmosis, imaging confirmed that the screw head was lateral to the marker on mortise
views ( , top center &
top right). The radiopaque marker correlated with the posteromedial vertical syndesmotic
line for all specimens when comparing anatomic to radiographic findings. A radiographic safe
zone is defined for the PA screw 12 mm medial to the vertical syndesmotic line to ensure no
iatrogenic injury to the FHL tendon.
Conclusion: This study demonstrated that the posterior incisura tibialis
fluoroscopic landmark is unambiguous in localizing the posterior syndesmotic border ( , top left) and that screws
medial to this line are safely out of the syndesmosis, while screws placed lateral are
either in or at risk of intra-syndesmotic placement. A safe zone is defined for screw
placement.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00501

## Prospective Observational Study of an Integrated Therapeutic Initiative for Extremities
(POSITIVE): Implementation of an Integrated Orthotic and Rehabilitation Program in the
Civilian Setting

Andrew Wohler, MD; Rachel Seymour; Christine Churchill; Tamar Roomian; Michael A.
Jenks; Jeffrey D. Fawcett; Mark L. Elgart; Tarey Strickland; Joseph R. Hsu, MD; EMIT
Collaborative

Category: Trauma; Other
Keywords: Ankle; Pain; Return to Play
Introduction/Purpose: The Return to Run (RTR) pathway currently utilized in
the military have been demonstrated to facilitate return to duty, recreation and physical
activity and decrease pain in high functioning patients who have sustained high energy lower
extremity trauma. A recent study also demonstrated that the processes and outcomes are
translatable across military settings, however, to date there is no evidence on
implementation of this pathway in the civilian setting. We sought to evaluate the
feasibility of implementation of a similar, Return to Performance (RTP), pathway at a high
volume, level I civilian trauma center. RTP combines a custom Variable Cadence Ankle-Foot
Orthosis (VCAFO) with an 8-week exercise program designed to improve performance and reduce
pain.
Methods: A prospective observational study was conducted to enroll all
patients eligible for the VCAFO. Patients were followed from initial referral through one
year. A large, national prosthetic and orthotic company was utilized for brace manufacture
and fitting. Physical therapy services were provided in the outpatient setting.
Results: The RTP pathway has been fully operational for five years. There was
an initial two year run in period for initial training of therapists and prosthetists and
logistic implementation at our institution. 58 patients participated in the full RTP
pathway, and 21 received RTP via remote rehabilitation delivered through a manual. An
additional 6 patients met with the lead PT for at least 1 visit. All expenses for prostheses
as well as therapy sessions have been covered by insurance. 32 prosthetists have been
trained locally in the fabrication of the brace with an additional 70 trained at the brace
manufacturers most recent national meeting. 13 physical therapists have been trained to
perform functional rehabilitation through the RTP pathway.
Conclusion: Implementation of the Return to Performance pathway can be
translated and scaled to the civilian setting. The study has successfully replicated the
brace fabrication necessary for optimal outcome in the RTR pathway, although there are
remaining questions about scaling of physical therapy. This provides evidence that the
process can be de-centralized and the benefits of dynamic bracing in high functioning
patients following lower extremity trauma can be translated to the civilian population.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00502

## Results of an Interim Analysis of a Prospective Multicenter Study Assessing
Radiographic and Patient Outcomes Following Triplanar Tarsometatarsal Arthrodesis with Early
Weightbearing

Dane K. Wukich, MD; Robert D. Santrock, MD; Daniel C. Farber, MD; Abdi Raissi, MD;
Avneesh Chhabra; Daniel J. Hatch, FACFAS; Jennifer Koay; Paul Dayton, MS,DPM; Robert P.
Taylor; Jody McAleer, DPM, FACFAS; Deidre Kile

Category: Bunion; Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Hallux Valgus; Modified lapidus Arthrodesis; TMT
Introduction/Purpose: The majority of hallux valgus corrections are performed
via a two dimensional approach with 1st metatarsal osteotomy and translation in the
transverse plane. This approach has demonstrated high long-term recurrence rates. Recent
research demonstrates that 87% of hallux valgus deformities are three-dimensional with
abnormal frontal-plane rotation of the metatarsal, which cannot be completely addressed with
a two dimensional metatarsal osteotomy alone. While correction at the 1st tarsometatarsal
(TMT) joint may provide the optimal surgical approach for 3D anatomic restoration at the
apex of the deformity, 1st TMT fusion entails an extended period of non-weightbearing. This
study evaluated the clinical, radiographic, and patient-reported outcomes in patients
undergoing instrumented triplanar 1st TMT arthrodesis (TMTA) with a biplanar plating system
and protected near-immediate weightbearing.
Methods: This is a prospective multicenter study that will continue for 60
months post-operatively. Patients between 14-58 years old with symptomatic hallux valgus
(intermetatarsal and hallux valgus angles between 10.0-22.0° and 16.0-40.0°, respectively)
and no prior hallux valgus surgery on the operative foot are eligible for this study.
Patients are treated with an instrumented TMTA procedure using a biplanar plating system
with protected near-immediate weightbearing. Several outcomes (radiographic, range of motion
(ROM), return to weightbearing and activities, pain measured by visual analog scale (VAS),
Manchester-Oxford Foot Questionnaire (MOxFQ), and Patient Reported Outcomes Measurement
Information System (PROMIS)) are evaluated post- operatively. Two independent fellowship
trained musculoskeletal radiologists reviewed all radiographic data. These interim results
are limited to patients completing at least 6 months of follow-up.
Results: At time of analysis, 121 patients had undergone TMTA with at least 6
months of follow-up. Mean age was 40.6 (range:15- 58) years, and 91% of patients were
female. Mean (SD) days to protected weightbearing in CAM boot, return to work, and return to
full work were 8.2 (6.8), 24.0 (29.5), and 51.2 (44.0), respectively. Significant
improvements (p<0.05) from baseline in HVA, IMA, and TSP (Table 1), VAS score, MOxFQ and
PROMIS domains were observed as early as 6 weeks post-procedure. At 12 months, mean (95% CI)
change in VAS score was -4.0 (-4.5, -3.6); Walking/Standing, Pain, and Social Interaction
(MOxFQ domains) change was -38.6 (-43.6, -33.5), -41.0 (-45.8, -36.2), and -40.5 (-45.3,
-35.7), respectively; and physical function (PROMIS) change was 8.7 (6.6, 10.8).
Conclusion: These interim findings support that TMTA with biplanar plating is
successful in correcting the 3D hallux valgus deformity with early return to weightbearing
while demonstrating favorable clinical and patient-reported outcomes. Patients exhibited
meaningful pain reduction after surgery and were able to return to full, unrestricted work
and activities in less than two months, on average. Statistically significant improvements
in patients' health-related quality of life were observed at 6 and 12 months,
post-operatively. Patients will continue to be followed for up to 60 months with additional
evaluations for complications, 24-month recurrence, and patient satisfaction.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00503

## Influence of Medical Marijuana on Interleukin-1Β Treated Cartilage: An in Vitro
Study

Alan Y. Yan, MD; Jiangyinzi Shang; MaCalus V. Hogan, MD, MBA, FAAOS, FAOA; Jarrett D.
Cain, MSc, DPM; Peter G. Alexander; Hang Lin

Category: Basic Sciences/Biologics
Keywords: Cartilage; Cartilage; Cartilage
Introduction/Purpose: Medical marijuana is reported to have potent analgesic,
immunomodulatory and anti-inflammatory properties. Some recent studies have shown that
cannabinoids may attenuate joint damage in animal models of arthritis. However, the
underlying mechanism has not been completely elucidated. Interleukin-1β (IL-1β), a
proinflammatory cytokine that can result in the degradation of cartilage, is known to be
associated with the pathogenesis of osteoarthritis. We hypothesize that cannabinoids can
mitigate the detrimental effect of IL-1β on cartilage, thus slowing the progression of
osteoarthritis. We exposed human chondrocyte-derived engineered cartilage pellet cultures to
IL-1 β for 48 hours or not and then treated the samples with a synthetic cannabinoid
agonist, Win-55,212-2(Win). The tissue phenotypes were thereafter assessed by real time
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), histology and western blotting.
Methods: Medical marijuana is reported to have potent analgesic,
immunomodulatory and anti-inflammatory properties. Some recent studies have shown that
cannabinoids may attenuate joint damage in animal models of arthritis. However, the
underlying mechanism has not been completely elucidated. Interleukin-1β (IL-1β), a
proinflammatory cytokine that can result in the degradation of cartilage, is known to be
associated with the pathogenesis of osteoarthritis. We hypothesize that cannabinoids can
mitigate the detrimental effect of IL-1β on cartilage, thus slowing the progression of
osteoarthritis. We exposed human chondrocyte-derived engineered cartilage pellet cultures to
IL-1 β for 48 hours or not and then treated the samples with a synthetic cannabinoid
agonist, Win-55,212-2(Win). The tissue phenotypes were thereafter assessed by real time
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), histology and western blotting.
Results: RT-PCR revealed persistent increase in the expression of inflammatory
mediators IL-1beta, TNF-alpha and COL2 in IL1beta+ cultures over IL1beta- controls at all
levels of WIN exposure. In contrast there was clear decrease in IL-6 expression at high WIN
doses coincident with a downward trend the other mediators. WIN was unable to rescue
IL-1beta-induced reductions in COL2 and ACN, while inducing ALP, a marker of osteogenesis
and cartilage hypertrophy. Safranin O/Fast Green histology revealed progressive loss in GAG
deposition with increasing doses of WIN (Figure 2). Western blots confirmed reductions in
COL2 and COMP protein, persistent COX2 production, and increasing translation of the
osteogenic transcription factor RUNX2 and p-SMAD1/5/8 (Figure 3).
Conclusion: At doses below 1µM, Win does not impact IL-1beta-induced
chondrocyte inflammation. while inhibiting chondrogenesis and stimulating osteogenesis
through RUNX2 as compared to IL-1β controls. In proper context, BMP2 stimulates osteogenesis
through SMAD1/5/8 and the induction of RUNX2. We did observe an apparent anti-inflammatory
role of WIN at 1µM, but this dose did not rescue a loss in cartilage pellet GAG loss. Our
data suggests that cannabinoids are anti-inflammatory, but are unable to rescue cartilage
degeneration by IL-1β and promote an osteogenic phenotype. However, the data are not
conclusive with regarding the beneficial or detrimental to arthritic bones and cartilage
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00504

## Comparison Between Mini-Invasive Distal and Proximal Chevron Osteotomies in the
Correction of Hallux Valgus Deformity

Ding C. Yang, MD, DPM, PhD

Category: Bunion
Keywords: Osteotomies; Metatarsals; Bunion
Introduction/Purpose: The potential advantages of minimal incision surgery for
hallux aboducto valgus (HAV) correction are to reduce surgical exposure, diminish
soft-tissue stripping, and lessen blood supply impairment. The purpose of this study was to
assess the safety and efficacy of minimally invasive techniques. Currently, there are
insufficient studies to recommend one minimally invasive technique over another.
Methods: From 2018 to 2020, 141 cases with hallux abducto valgus were treated
with minimal incision osteotomy using Kirschner wire fixation. 120 patients had distal
chevron osteotomies and 21 patients had proximal first metatarsal osteotomies. The patient
age range was between 29 yo and 96 yo, with 118 female and 23 male patients. 48 patients
were 65 yo and over, and 93 patients were less than 65yo. The preoperative and postoperative
hallux abducto valgus angles (HVA), intermetatarsal angles (IMA), American Orthopaedic Foot
& Ankle Society (AOFAS) scores were measured and evaluated.
Results: The average AOFAS scores improved from a preoperative median of 41.4
points to a postoperative median of 88.6 points. The mean HVA and IMA angles significantly
decreased after the operation. There were no complications of nonunion or delayed union,
avascular necrosis, infection, or hallux varus. The technique has been largely accepted by
the patients due to the short procedure time, the reduced postoperative pain, and the fast
functional recovery. For the hallux aboducto valgus deformity with HVA over 35 and IMA over
16 degrees, the procedure with proximal chevron osteotomy achieved better corrections.
Conclusion: Both proximal and distal chevron osteotomy techniques showed
comparable results. The distal percutaneous osteotomy was effective for the treatment of
mild to moderate hallux abducto valgus deformity, and the proximal percutaneous osteotomy
was effective for the treatment of severe hallux abducto valgus deformity. This study
indicated that the minimal incision osteotomy was a simple and reliable technique for
treating hallux abducto valgus with minimal complications. Through minimally invasive
approaches, the hallux abducto valgus corrections performed in this study resulted in
minimal soft tissue injury, less postoperative pain, and good cosmetic results.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00505

## Contact Pressures Change According to Displacement Shape in Isolated Medial Malleolar
Fracture: Cadaver Study

Eui Dong Yeo, MD; Young Koo Lee, MD, PhD; Jungtaek Im

Category: Trauma; Basic Sciences/Biologics
Keywords: Ankle; Ankle Fracture; Biomechanics of the Foot and Ankle
Introduction/Purpose: Ankle fractures, representing 9% of all fractures, are
among the most common types of fractures worldwide. 1 of 5 ankle fractures is an isolated
medial malleolar fracture (IMMF). IMMF were treated surgically, but recently it was
concluded that all IMMF(<=2mm) should be treated conservatively. The indication for
surgery or conservative treatment of IMMF remains unclear. The purpose of the present study
is to check the change of pressure in the ankle joint according to the shape and the
displacement in the medial malleolus fractures.
Methods: Twenty pairs of fresh-frozen cadaveric lower legs, disarticulated at
the knee, will be used. Specimen pairs were assigned at random into 1 of 2 groups. This
study measures the pressure change in the ankle joint according to Muller type C and D. The
specimen was mounted in the materials testing machine with the plantar aspect of the foot in
contact with the foot-plate. Load was applied with the ankle in the neutral position.
Contact area and contact pressure were quantitated with low-grade pressure-sensitive film
(Prescale film; Fuji Photo Film, Tokyo, Japan). The color densities were converted to
measurements of pressure. After osteotomy the medial malleolus in Muller type C and D,
displace each 2mm and fix it with diameter 4.0mm and length 45 mm cortical bone screws.
Pressure measurement is done in the same way as above.
Results: The median value and wilconxon singed rank test was used for the
results. The median value of normal ankle contact area was 3.15cm2 [2.61.;3.51],
the mean pressure was 2.18 Mpa(Megapascal) [2.00.;2.43], and the median value of contact
area after transverse osteotomy was 2.89cm2 [2.41.;3.24], mean pressure was
2.37Mpa [2.14.;2.75], and the median value of contact area after oblique osteotomy was
2.72cm2 [2.50.;3.16], mean pressure was 2.50Mpa [2.33.;2.74]. P value of the
mean area and mean pressure change after transverse and oblique was <0.05.
Conclusion: At 2mm transverse and oblique displacement, ankle contact area and
pressure decreased significantly.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00506

## Correlation of Patient Wearable Outcomes to Self-Reported Patient Outcome
Measures

C. Jordan Yergensen; Kristin L. Kress; Otho R. Plummer, PhD; David E. Jaffe, MD

Category: Other; Sports
Keywords: PRO; Achilles Tendon; Ankle Sprain
Introduction/Purpose: Patient reported outcome measures (PROMs), especially
computerized adaptive testing (CAT), are the gold standard for outcome reporting in the
field of orthopaedic surgery. Wearable technology (fitbit, apple watch, etc) and other
health monitoring capabilities available on smart phones applications (i.e. apple health)
are rapidly evolving and being considered as alternative methods of measuring outcomes in
orthopaedics. This patient wearable outcome (PWO) method has yet to be directly compared to
PROMs, nor evaluated as a viable option for outcome measurement in orthopaedics. The purpose
of this study is to directly compare PWOs to PROMs and determine the advantages and
disadvantages of using the health monitoring capabilities of smart phones as outcome
measuring tools in orthopaedics.
Methods: This study is designed as a nonrandomized prospective cohort focused
on a small subset of subjects within the field of orthopaedics. Subjects were recruited from
an orthopaedic foot and ankle clinic with diagnoses of ankle sprain, plantar fasciitis, and
achilles tendonitis. These conditions were chosen as these would generally represent
nonoperative conditions at presentation. Subjects under 16 years of age and surgical
candidates were ineligible. Standard PROM surveys, all of which have been previously
validated by the AOFAS for outcome measurement were administered at enrollment and then
electronically delivered at 3 and 7 weeks. Surveys utilized were the Foot and Ankle Ability
Measure (FAAM), Visual Analog Scale (VAS), and PROMIS physical function, mobility and pain
interference scores. An application (ActiveTrack) is installed on the subjects' smartphones
to pull all past and future health data including step counts, distance traveled, etc.
Statistical analysis was then performed to correlate PWO’s with PROMs.
Results: 28 subjects consented and enrolled in the study. This has provided
strong encouragement for the goals of the study. 21 patients were observed at 3 weeks with a
Pearson correlation of step count of 0.6975 (95% CI: 0.3804-0.8679). 7 subjects were
observed at 7 weeks with a Pearson correlation of step count of 0.8387 (95% CI:
0.2325-0.9756). We found that step counts and FAAM scores generally increased after
treatment, and that the correlation between the changes was positive. The strongest signal
was obtained from the FAAM ADL subscale.
Conclusion: This study shows that there is a correlation between a patient’s
self-reported function (PROMs) and their activity (PWOs). PWO data may represent a more
accurate measurement of a patient’s activity and therefore may be a great tool in assessing
functionality before and after an intervention (be it surgical or nonoperative treatments).
Further analysis of the data obtained from this prospective study over time may help
establish a new standard of care for measuring patients' response to orthopaedic
treatment.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00507

## Posterior Tibial Transfer to the Lateral Cuneiform in a Young, Active Patient with Foot
Drop: A Case Report

Robert G. Yoder; Nicholas Lipari; Adam T. Groth, MD

Category: Ankle; Midfoot/Forefoot; Sports; Other
Keywords: Autograft Tendon Transfer; Posterior Tibial Tendon; Clinical
Outcomes
Introduction/Purpose: We report the case of a 23-year-old male who underwent a
posterior tibial tendon (PTT) transfer after suffering foot drop secondary to a traumatic
knee dislocation five years earlier. The common peroneal nerve is a commonly injured
peripheral nerve due to its anatomic location. Peroneal nerve palsy leads to the inability
to clear the foot during the swing phase of gait due to paralysis of the tibialis anterior-
the strongest dorsiflexor of the foot. In the event that nerve function does not
spontaneously return, tendon transfer surgeries are an established definitive treatment.
Despite this, the optimal method of tendon transfer has not yet been determined. Thus,
pre-operative assessment and planning remains crucial in determining which method is to be
used.
Conclusion: Surgeons must decide which tendon to transfer, which route to
utilize, and where to insert in effort to maximize biomechanical outcomes. Careful
consideration must be made to ensure maximum strength and optimal forefoot balance to allow
patients undergoing tendon transfer to become brace free. Our patient underwent a PTT
transfer via the interosseous route to the lateral cuneiform- a common option for those with
traumatic peroneal nerve injury. By three months post-operation, our patient achieved
adequate dorsiflexion to clear swing phase. By one year post-operation and beyond, our
patient has participated in physical activity brace free without any complications.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00508

## Obesity is an Independent Risk Factor for Achilles Tendon Rupture: A Nationwide
Longitudinal Cohort Study in South Korea

Yeo Kwon Yoon, MD; Jae Han Park, MD; Seung Hwan Han, MD, PhD; Jin Woo Lee, MD, PhD;
Kwang Hwan Park, MD, PhD

Category: Hindfoot; Sports
Keywords: Achilles Tendon Rupture; Achilles Tendon Repair; Obesity
Introduction/Purpose: Obesity is an increasing comorbidity that can negatively
affect the clinical outcomes of various disease in orthopaedics. However, there was no study
to evaluate an association between Achilles tendon rupture and obesity in a nationwide
study. We aimed to investigate the incidence of Achilles tendon rupture through a nationwide
longitudinal cohort in Korea and evaluate the influences of demographic data including body
mass index (BMI).
Methods: Between 2002 and 2015, sociodemographic factors including gender,
age, BMI, income, comorbidities, and sport activity level were retrieved from National
Health Insurance Service-National Sample Cohort (NHIS-NSC). NHIS-NSC database was searched
for individuals treated with ATR. We excluded individuals who were less than 20
years-old.
Results: 736 (0.116%) of total 636,921 individuals in NHIS-NSC database
underwent Achilles tendon repair (ATR). Multivariable logistic regression analysis revealed
that obesity (BMI>= 25kg/m2) was significantly associated with ATR (odds
ratio, 1.99; 95% confidence interval, 1.68 to 2.36). Other significant factors were age,
male, total cholesterol, moderate sport activity, and income. After propensity score
matching of all factors, obesity was significantly associated with ATR with odds ratio 1.95
(95% confidence interval, 1.60 to 2.39).
Conclusion: Obesity is an independent predictive factor for the occurrence of
Achilles tendon rupture followed by ATR.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00509

## A Patient Cohort Comparison of Radiographic Correction and Early Complications Between
Percutaneous and Open Lapidus Procedures for Hallux Valgus

Alastair S. Younger, MB ChB, ChM, FRCSC; Diogo Cardoso; Kevin J. Wing, MD, FRCSC;
Andrea N. Veljkovic, MD, MPH, FRCSC; Murray J. Penner, MD, FRCSC

Category: Bunion
Keywords: Hallux Valgus; Lapidus Procedure; Minimally Invasive
Introduction/Purpose: Hallux valgus can be corrected by a variety of
procedures. The Lapidus procedure corrects the first ray position in three planes using a
first tarsometatarsal fusion (TMTF) and distal release and realignment. In a single surgeon
practice the procedure was performed open until 2017, when burrs became available to perform
the procedure percutaneously. This study compares the early radiographic results and
complications of the percutaneous procedure with the open procedure.
Methods: 47 patients undergoing the percutaneous procedure were compared with
44 patients undergoing the open procedure prior to July 2017. Radiographic measures
preoperatively were compared to the postoperative measures for intermetataral angle (IMA),
Hallux valgus angle (HVA), foot width (FW), distal metatarsal articular angle (DMMA),
sesamoid station, metatarsus adductus angle (MAA), first metatarsal to second metatarsal
length, and elevation of the first metatarsal. Early 30 day complications were recorded, as
well as repeat surgeries. Demographics: There were 81 female and 10 male patients; The
average age was MIS 58+/- 13, open 62+/-13. BMI was 28.4 vs 25.1. 1% of patients had
diabetes, and 15% were smokers. Statistical analysis was performed using ANOVA. Because of
multiple comparisons p<0.005. Error is quoted as 95% standard deviation. Grouped
statistics were compared with a chi square test.
Results: There is less correction in the MIS group in HV angle. The IM angle
reduced from 15.8o+/-4.6 o to 6.3 o +/- 3.3 o compared to 17.7 o to 4.8 o +/- 3.6 o for the
open group (p<0.05 and p>0.005). The change was 9.5 o compared to 12.9 o. HVA in the
MIS group went from 34.6 o +/- 9.1 o to 14.5 o +/- 7.9 o (20.1 o change) compared to the
open group where HVA went from 40.7 o +/- 10.5 o down to 11.6 o +/- 6.1 o (29.1 o change)
(p<0.001). The wound complication rate trended higher in the open group (4 versus 0) out
of 51 in each group (p>0.05). The nonunion rate was higher in the open group (0 MIS vs
4). The revision rate for deformity correction was the same in both groups (2 versus 2).
Conclusion: In this single surgeon series between the two cohorts the MIS
group showed a trend towards less correction than the open group. In particular the
correction of the Hallux valgus angle was less. At the current time the distal release and
realignment may not be as effective as in the open surgery, so more Aitken osteotomies may
be required.However there was a trend for less wound complications and less non unions in
the MIS group. The comparison included the initial experience with MIS as so the correction
may not be as good as the technique evolves.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00510

## Prospective Three-Year Outcomes Comparing Cemented and Cementless Fixation in the
Trabecular Metal Total Ankle Arthroplasty

Alastair S. Younger, MB ChB, ChM, FRCSC; J. Kent Ellington, MD, MS; Steven M. Raikin,
MD; Eric Giza, MD; Donald R. Bohay, MD, FACS; Federico Giuseppe Usuelli, MD; Theodor
Patsalis; Lars H. Frauchiger, MD; Selene G. Parekh, MD, MBA; Fabian Krause, MD

Category: Ankle; Ankle Arthritis
Keywords: Total Ankle Arthroplasty; Fusion; Outcomes Measures
Introduction/Purpose: In total ankle arthroplasty (TAA), the implant can be
inserted with or without cement. The United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
requires cement fixation on most TAAs, whereas cementless TAA can be performed in other
countries. The laterally placed trabecular metal ankle replacement is inserted using a jig
and a fibular osteotomy. The tibia and talus are reamed to match the curved contour of the
replacement. Two rails on the tibial and talar component are used to transfix the cementless
component onto bone. FDA licensing requires a bead of cement applied on the fixation rails
to assist in early component fixation. The purpose of this study was to compare early and
three-year results of TAA with and without rail cement performed in six countries.
Methods: One hundred and twenty-one patients were prospectively enrolled (from
2014 to 2016) across 11 centers in six countries. Patients were assigned cement or no cement
based on the surgeon’s practice. EQ5D, AOS, and AOFAS scores were obtained preoperatively,
six weeks and six months postoperatively, and yearly thereafter. Secondary endpoints were
revision of metal components for infection or loosening. Statistical significance was tested
by the Wilcoxon Signed Rank Test and set at p=0.05.Sixty ankles had cement; 61 ankles were
press fit. Cement augmentation patients were heavier and older. Cement cases had longer
surgical times (173 minutes, 95% CI 162.8 to 183.2, versus 150 minutes, 95% CI 139.9 to
158.4). The sites using cement fixation varied. Of 121 cases, 117 were followed at one year,
96 at two years, and 84 at three years. Three patients underwent revision and five withdrew
(one died, two lost to follow-up, and two requested discontinuation).
Results: The EQ5D scores demonstrated better outcomes for the press fit
component without cement at six weeks (p<0.001), six months (p=0.001), one year
(p=0.005), and two years (p=0.02), but not at three years (p=0.132). The AOS Disability
scale demonstrated better outcomes for the press fit component at six weeks (p=0.008), six
months (p=0.022), one year (p=0.020) and two years (p=0.024). The AOS Pain scale
demonstrated better outcomes for the press fit component at six months (p=0.05). The AOFAS
score demonstrated better outcomes for the press fit component at six weeks (p<0.001),
but no significant differences thereafter. Survivorship for joint replacement (revision of
metal components) was 97.4% for the full cohort. Three metal components were revised in
three ankles in the cementless group (chi square not significant).
Conclusion: Patient-reported outcome measures favored cementless, press fit
fixation through two years postoperatively, with outcomes equalizing between the groups at
three years postoperatively. Given the better early outcomes with the press fit design,
there does not seem to be a need to augment fixation with cement in this total ankle implant
design. There were two metal component revisions and one revision associated with loosening
in the cementless group. The significant demographic differences between the groups indicate
that a randomized clinical trial is needed to comprehensively define differences in early
outcomes and to evaluate long-term results.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00511

## The Impact of Forefoot Alignment and Arthritic Change on Conversion to Fusion after
Synthetic Cartilage Implant Placement for Hallux Rigidus

Alastair S. Younger, MB ChB, ChM, FRCSC; Judith F. Baumhauer, MD, MS, MPH; Christopher
W. DiGiovanni, MD; Timothy R. Daniels, MD, FRCSC; Mark A. Glazebrook, MD, MSc, PhD; David
Fitch

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: Hallux Rigidus; 1st MTP Joint; Structural Anatomy and
Biomechanics
Introduction/Purpose: There are several treatments for hallux rigidus,
including the use of a synthetic cartilage implant (SCI). Level I studies have shown success
with these implants, but some patients do require conversion to arthrodesis for ongoing
symptoms. The purpose of this radiographic review was to examine if baseline bone alignment,
dimensions, and arthritis status are were different for patients who required conversion to
arthrodesis compared to a control group with successful outcome.
Methods: A radiographic review was conducted using data for from 15 hallux
rigidus subjects implanted with an SCI enrolled in a during a previously concluded Level 1
clinical trial. Ten (10) Success subjects were identified as subjects those without
conversion and with the lowest VAS pain levels indicating the most favorable outcome formed
a success (control) group. Five (5) Conversion (study) subjects were identified as those
with a conversion requiring revision to fusion and the with highest VAS scores indicating
the least favorable outcome. Preoperative Weight-bearing AP and lateral radiographs from
baseline visits were reviewed. Using previously validated Quantitative Motion Analysis
software, two radiologists made the following measurements: first interphalangeal angle;
first/second intermetatarsal angle; hallux valgus intraphalangeal angle; metatarsus adductus
angle; metatarsal declination angle; first to second metatarsal length; functional ratio;
and first metatarsal cortical thickness. Preoperative assessments of arthritis grade,
metatarsalus primus elevatuselevation, sesamoid arthritis, and sesamoid station were also
performed.
Results: First metatarsal length was approximately 3% larger longer in the
Conversion group compared to the Success group (85.2% vs. 82.5%). This was driven by the
Conversion group having longer median normalized first metatarsal length (88.5% vs. 86.6%)
and shorter median normalized second metatarsal lengths (104.0% vs. 106.3%). First
metatarsal The second exception was cortical thickness was greater in the conversion group.
This measurement was defined as the combined width of the medial and lateral cortices
measured at the midline of the first metatarsal normalized to the full midline diameter of
the first metatarsal. The median cortical thickness was almost 7% larger in the Conversion
group compared to the Success group (40.1% vs. 33.2%). Nine Success subjects and 2
Conversion subjects had Grade 3 arthritis, while all other subjects had Grade 2. Three (60%)
Conversion subjects and two (20%) Success subjects had evidence of metatarsus primus
elevatus.
Conclusion: Baseline joint alignment did not correlate with the need for
conversion to arthrodesis. Conversion subjects had larger functional ratios longer first
rays and greater cortical thickness. Published literature suggests smaller functional ratios
result in increased second ray loading. It is possible the opposite is occurring in
Conversion subjects, with longer first and shorter second metatarsal lengths resulting in
increased loading of the SCI implant. The result indicates that shortening the first ray may
be required to achieve a successful outcome with SCI. Success patients had a lower incidence
of metatarsus primus elevatus.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00512

## Outcomes and Cost Analysis of Virtual Fracture Clinic Management of 5th Metatarsal Base
Fractures

Nusrat Zahan; Amit Patel, FRCS(Orth); Kate Atkinson, MBBS MRCS; Shilpa Jha, MBBS MRCS;
Nima Heidari; Lee Parker, FRCS(Tr&Orth); Alexandros Vris; Francesc Malagelada Romans;
Luckshmana A. Jeyaseelan

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot; Trauma
Keywords: 5th Metatarsal Fractures; Jones Fracture; Cost Effectiveness
Analysis
Introduction/Purpose: Overwhelming demand for trauma services with increasing
emergency department (ED) attendances, has increased pressure on fracture clinics in many
units, with this demand exceeding capacity. Virtual fracture clinics (VFCs) have been shown
to be safe and cost-effective in many specialties. Optimal treatment of 5th metatarsal base
fractures remains controversial. Complications of base of 5th metatarsal fractures include
delayed union and painful mal/non-union. Surgical fixation has been shown to enable faster
return to sport, with lower faster union times and lower non-union rates than conservative
management. The aims of this study were to assess whether the management of 5th metatarsal
base fractures using a VFC model is safe, cost-effective and accceptable to the patients,
whilst avoiding undesirable outcomes.
Methods: All patients presenting to the VFC at our major trauma centre, with a
5th metatarsal base fracture between January 2019 and December 2019 were included in the
study. One hundred and thirty six patients were identified. All patients had a standardised
VFC treatment protocol including full weight bearing in a walker boot, rehabilitation
planning to wean out of the boot and advice to contact the unit for follow-up if ongoing
pain after 4 months. Minimum follow-up was one year. Patient records were retrospectively
reviewed for baseline demographic data, including co-morbidities and smoking history.
Overall complication rates, including mal and non-union as well as operative intervention
rates were noted. Patients from the cohort who required face to face appointments were
identified and the cause for return was identified. A cost analysis was also performed to
evaluate the financial implications of the service.
Results: Mean age was 41,6 years (18-92). Average time from ED attendance to
VFC review was 2 days (1 - 5). Fractures were classified according to the Torg
Classification with 106 (78%) Type 1 fractures, 15 (11%) Type 2 fractures and 15 (11%) Type
3 fractures. At VFC, 135/136 (99.2%) were discharged with the appropriate 5th metatarsal
base fracture protocol. Twelve patients (8.8%) arranged further follow-up after initial
discharge. The most common reason for return was ongoing pain (6/8 - 75.0%). This subgroup
of the patients required an average of 3 (1-6) further appointments. There was 1 non-union
during the study period. Based on 2 face to face visits on a traditional pathway, 248 clinic
visits were saved with an approximate cost saving of nearly £40,000 ($55,500).
Conclusion: Our study supports the management of 5th metatarsal base fractures
in the VFC setting. We have shown that the VFC model, with well a defined protocol is both
safe and cost effective. Fifth metatarsal base fractures have good outcomes with
conservative management, removing the traditional need to have in-person clinic visits to
confirm the diagnosis, management and prognosis.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00513

## Assessing the Accuracy, Quality, and Readability of Online Patient Resources on Tarsal
Coalition

Hui Zhang, MD; Brian Foster; Jove Graham, PhD; Mark Seeley

Category: Other; Hindfoot
Keywords: Health Literacy; Patient Education; Patient Comprehension
Introduction/Purpose: The internet is an inexpensive and convenient source for
health information. However, without regulation, the quality and accuracy of the information
is unknown. Tarsal coalition is a common cause of pediatric foot pain and disability. We
hypothesized that the online patient information on tarsal coalition is of low accuracy, low
quality, and of poor readability. Additionally, we hypothesized that sources found on the
first search page were of higher quality, greater accuracy, and more readable.
Methods: A cross-sectional review of the internet was performed using the term
'tarsal coalition' on the 3 most popular search engines. Unique sites were categorized based
on authorship and search result order. Websites were evaluated using a novel content score
based on the AAOS OrthoInfo site on tarsal coalition (max score: 20), JAMA Benchmark and
DISCERN scores for quality, and Flesch-Kincaid Grade Level (FKGL) and Flesch Reading Ease
(FRE) for readability.
Results: A total of 47 unique websites were evaluated. They ranged from
professional organization/society websites to websites for individual practices and
professional blogs. The average content score was 13.1 (range: 4-20). The average DISCRN
score was 34.2 (range: 19-57.5). We did find a positive correlation between the content
score and DISCERN scores of the included resources (p=0.04). The average 11.4 (range
8.5-15.5). Only 2 of the websites (4%) were written at or below an 8th grade reading level,
which has been documented as the average reading level of the general population in the
United States. Websites that were authored by physicians had greater DISCRN and readability
scores compared to academic and private practice websites (DISCERN 40.4 vs 32.3 (p=0.001)
and 31.7 (p=0.01), respectively, FKGL 13.0 vs 10.4 (p=0.002) and 11.1 (p=0.03),
respectively, FRE 31.5 vs 48.7 (p=0.0001) and 45.2 (p=0.025), respectively).
Conclusion: Online patient resources on tarsal coalition are of low quality,
inaccurate, and too complex for the average reader. Physician authored websites may serve as
better resources compared to academic or private practice sites. Physicians should caution
patients using the internet for information on tarsal coalition.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00514

## The Lateral Drawer Test: A Novel Clinical Test to Assess Mortise Instability in Weber B
Fibula Fractures

John Z. Zhao, MD; Caroline Williams, BA; Kimberly K. Broughton, MD; Christopher P.
Miller, MD; John Y. Kwon, MD

Category: Trauma; Ankle
Keywords: Ankle Fracture Evaluation; Ankle Fracture; Weber B Ankle
Fractures
Introduction/Purpose: Assessment of mortise stability is paramount in
determining appropriate management of ankle fractures. While instability is readily apparent
in bimalleolar or trimalleolar ankle fractures, determination of instability in the apparent
isolated Weber B fibula fracture often requires further investigations such as stress
radiography. While several authors have previously demonstrated poor predictive value of
physical examination findings such as tenderness, ecchymosis and swelling with instability,
no previous investigation has examined the ability of a translational test to determine
deltoid ligament injury. The goal of this study is to test the validity of a novel clinical
test, the lateral drawer test, in determining mortise instability in a cohort of patients
with Weber B fibula fractures.
Methods: Patients presenting with isolated fibula fractures were prospectively
identified by an orthopaedic nurse practitioner or resident. Three views of the ankle as
well as gravity stress views (GSV) were obtained. Prior to examining radiographs, two foot
& ankle fellowship-trained orthopaedic surgeons (JYK, CPM) performed and graded the
lateral drawer test. (Grade 0: no instability/symmetric to contralateral ankle, Grade I:
translation < 5mm, Grade II: translation >= 5mm) While the surgeons were made aware of
the presence of a Weber B fibula fracture, radiographs were not visualized prior to
conducting the drawer test. Medial clear space (MCS) was measured. VAS pain scores were
obtained before and after testing. The results of the lateral drawer test results were
compared with radiographic measurements of MCS.
Results: The study enrolled 57 consecutive patients with Weber B ankle
fractures. Twenty-nine (51%) patients demonstrated radiographic instability with widening of
the medial clear space >= 5 mm on GSV. When correlated with MCS measurement, the lateral
drawer test demonstrated a sensitivity of 83.3%, specificity of 96%, positive predictive
value (PPV) of 96% and negative predictive value (NPV) of 84% for determining instability.
There was a strong correlation between the lateral drawer test grade and amount of MCS
widening (⍴=0.82, p<0.001). Patients tolerated the lateral drawer test well with an
average increase of 0.8 points on the VAS pain scale after testing.
Conclusion: The lateral drawer test demonstrates high sensitivity,
specificity, PPV and NPV for detecting instability in patients presenting with Weber B
fibula fractures. While further validation is required in a larger cohort of patients, the
lateral drawer test may offer an adjunct tool via physical examination to predict mortise
stability.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00515

## Obesity Increases Risk for Surgical Site Infections and Wound Dehiscence after
Pediatric Foot Surgery: A Retrospective Cohort Review using the NSQIP-Pediatric
Database

Jacob R. Zide, MD; Farzam Farahani, BS; Joel Rodriguez, BS; Dane K. Wukich, MD;
Anthony Riccio

Category: Other
Keywords: Complications; Surgical Site Infection; Obesity
Introduction/Purpose: Both the incidence of childhood obesity and the number
of obese children undergoing surgical procedures are increasing in pediatrics. As such,
pediatric orthopaedic surgeons will likely encounter obese patients more frequently in their
practice and a better understanding of the unique risks associated with obesity is valuable
to maximize patient safety. The purpose of this study is, therefore, to retrospectively
evaluate the relationship between obesity and post-operative outcomes in pediatric
orthopaedic surgery patients across multiple institutions using a large national
database.
Methods: Pediatric patients who had undergone foot surgery were
retrospectively identified by cross-referencing reconstructive foot-specific CPT codes with
ICD-9/ICD-10 diagnosis codes using the American College of Surgeons 2012-2017 Pediatric
National Surgical Quality Improvement (ACS-NSQIP-Pediatric) database. Patients were
stratified into normal weight and obese cohorts based upon Center for Disease Control
BMI-to-age growth charts. Patient demographics, comorbidities, intra-operative, and post-
operative factors were compared between these two cohorts via univariate analysis with false
discovery rate adjustment. Multivariable logistic regression models were then generated to
assess for obesity as an independent predictor of post-operative complications.
Results: Of the 3,924 patients identified, 1,063 (27.1%) were obese. Obese
patients were more often male (64.7% vs 58.7%; p=0.001) and taller (56.3in vs 51.3in;
p<0.001) than normal weight patients. There were no differences in pre-operative
comorbidities between the two cohorts. Obese patients had a higher overall post-operative
complication rate compared to normal weight patients (3.01% vs 1.32%; p=0.001). There was a
significantly higher rate of wound dehiscence in obese patients (1.41% vs 0.59%; p=0.039) as
well as a higher surgical site infection (SSI) rate that trended towards, but did not reach,
statistical significance (1.32% vs. 0.59%; p=0.061). No differences were noted in unplanned
readmissions (1.03% vs 0.9%; p=0.968) or unplanned reoperations (1.03% vs. 0.45%; p=0.175)
within 30 days of surgery between the two groups. In multivariate analysis, obesity was
found to be an independent predictor of both wound dehiscence (adjusted OR=2.16;
95%CI=1.05-4.50; p=0.037) and SSI (adjusted OR=3.03; 95%CI=1.39-6.61; p=0.005).
Conclusion: Obese children undergoing foot surgery had higher overall
complication rates than normal weight patients. Obese children undergoing foot surgery may
be at higher risk for wound complications and surgical site infections than those of normal
weight. This information may be useful in assessing and discussing surgical risks with
patients and their families.
 DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00516

## EXOGEN Mitigates Risk of Fifth Metatarsal Fracture Nonunion: Results of a Novel
Real-World Clinical Study

Robert Zura; Robert B. Anderson, MD; Sonya S. Ahmed, MD; David Hak; Tracy Watson;
Christina Mack; Debra E. Irwin; Greg Maislin, MS, MA; Kim P. Kelly; John T. Jones; Tawana
Wester; Alessandra Pavesio; Kevin Ong

Category: Midfoot/Forefoot
Keywords: 5th Metatarsal Fractures; Complications; Fifth Metatarsal
Fractures
Introduction/Purpose: Fifth metatarsal fractures are the most commonly
fractured metatarsal in adults and are associated with high rates of nonunion. This study
compared the 9-month incidence of nonunion in fifth metatarsal fracture patients using
EXOGEN (Bioventus LLC), low-intensity pulsed ultrasound, versus a control cohort of patients
receiving standard of care.
Methods: Adults (21-80 years) prescribed EXOGEN for any acute or delayed fifth
metatarsal fracture and initiated treatment within 91 days of the fracture were enrolled via
prescription record abstraction and direct-to-patient outreach. Open, closed, surgically
repaired and conservatively managed fractures were eligible. Jones' fractures consisted of
31.2% of the overall EXOGEN population. EXOGEN treatment compliance was assessed using
patient self-report and the device’s software. A control cohort of patients with the same
eligible fractures were extracted from the MarketScanTM national insurance
database (IBM Watson Health). Propensity score (PS) modeling accounting for demographics,
comorbidities, concomitant medication, and type of fracture/fracture treatment was used to
address potential selection bias via three methods: subclassification, 1:1 matching on
individual covariates, and PS weighting. Effectiveness was compared for 1,943 EXOGEN and
10,259 controls. Study endpoint was based on presence or absence of an ICD-10-CM nonunion
diagnosis code in the medical billing records for both groups.
Results: Matched MarketScan controls had a clinically and statistically
significant increase in risk of nonunion compared to patients who used EXOGEN for at least
90 total once-daily treatments (McNemar’s OR = 1.67; p=0.048). Results improved with more
treatments; the nonunion risk was 2.44 times (p=0.0239) and 5.00 times (p=0.008) for the
control patients than EXOGEN patients with at least 120 and 140 total treatments,
respectively. The nonunion rate was reduced by over half in Jones’ fracture patients treated
with at least 90 total once-daily EXOGEN treatments (n=269; 3.3%) as compared to those not
reaching this minimum threshold (n=337, 6.8%); such results approached statistical
significance (p=0.057). Analyses of the treatment effect by nonunion risk factors showed
EXOGEN attenuated the effect of many of these factors on nonunion rates. Early treatment was
found beneficial; treatment delay was associated with increased nonunion risk of ~20% for
every 15 days of latency 45 days post- fracture.
Conclusion: In this large external comparator study, EXOGEN was found to be
effective in mitigating the risk of nonunion in fifth metatarsal fracture patients when used
for a minimum of 90 total treatments, even in the presence of many nonunion risk factors.
Treatment should be initiated as soon as possible following fracture (at least by 45 days
post-fracture) to further reduce the risk of nonunion.
DOI: 10.1177/2473011421S00517