A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
Best Practices for Alchemical Free
Energy Calculations [Article v 1.0]
Antonia S. J. S. Mey1*, Bryce K. Allen7, Hannah E. Bruce Macdonald2, John D.
Chodera2*, Maximilian Kuhn1,10, Julien Michel1, David L. Mobley3*, Levi N.
Naden11, Samarjeet Prasad4, Andrea Rizzi2,8, Jenke Scheen1, Michael R. Shirts6*,
Gary Tresadern9, Huafeng Xu7
1EaStCHEM School of Chemistry, David Brewster Road, Joseph Black Building, The King’s
Buildings, Edinburgh, EH9 3FJ, UK; 2Computational and Systems Biology Program, Sloan
Kettering Institute, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York NY, USA;
3Departments of Pharmaceutical Sciences and Chemistry, University of California, Irvine,
USA; 4National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA; 6University of Colorado Boulder,
Boulder, CO, USA; 7Silicon Therapeutics, Boston, MA, USA; 8Tri-Institutional Training
Program in Computational Biology and Medicine, New York, NY, USA; 9Computational
Chemistry, Janssen Research & Development, Turnhoutseweg 30, Beerse B-2340,Belgium;
10Cresset, Cambridgeshire, UK; 11Molecular Sciences Software Institute, Blacksburg VA,
USA
This LiveCoMS document is
maintained online on
GitHub at https:
//github.com/michellab/
alchemical-best-practices;
to provide feedback,
suggestions, or help
improve it, please visit the
GitHub repository and
participate via the issue
tracker.
This version dated August
24, 2020
Abstract Alchemical free energy calculations are a useful tool for predicting free energy differ-
ences associated with the transfer of molecules from one environment to another. The hallmark
of these methods is the use of "bridging" potential energy functions representing alchemical inter-
mediate states that cannot exist as real chemical species. The data collected from these bridging
alchemical thermodynamic states allows the eﬃcient computation of transfer free energies (or
differences in transfer free energies) with orders of magnitude less simulation time than simulating
the transfer process directly.
While these methods are highly ﬂexible, care must be taken in avoiding common pitfalls to ensure
that computed free energy differences can be robust and reproducible for the chosen force ﬁeld,
and that appropriate corrections are included to permit direct comparison with experimental data.
In this paper, we review current best practices for several popular application domains of alchem-
ical free energy calculations, including relative and absolute small molecule binding free energy
calculations to biomolecular targets.
*For correspondence:
antonia.mey@ed.ac.uk (ASJSM); john.chodera@choderalab.org (JDC); dmobley@mobleylab.org
(DLM); michael.shirts@colorado.edu (MRS)
1 What are alchemical free energy
methods?
Alchemical free energy calculations compute free energy dif-
ferences associated with transfer processes, such as the bind-
1 of 48
arXiv:2008.03067v3
[q-bio.BM]
21
Aug
2020
A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
ing of a small molecule to a receptor, the transfer of a small
molecule from an aqueous to apolar phase [1], or the ef-
fects of protein side chain mutations on binding aﬃnities or
thermostabilities. These calculations use non-physical1
inter-
mediate states in which the chemical identity of some portion
of the system (such as a small molecule ligand or protein
sidechain) is changed by modifying the potential governing
the interactions with the environment for the atoms being
modiﬁed, inserted, or deleted.
Fig. 1 illustrates common free energy changes that may
be diﬃcult to compute with unbiased molecular dynamics
methods, but are more tractable with alchemical methods.
In alchemical simulations, the introduction of intermediate
alchemical states that bridge the high-probability regions of
conﬁguration space between two physical endstates of inter-
est, permits the robust computation of free energy for large
transformations. Alchemical calculations can be used in a
variety of scenarios, such as:
• computing the free energy of a conformational change
for a molecule with a high barrier to interconversion
(Fig. 1 A);
• computing partition (log P) or distribution (log D) coeﬃ-
cients between environments (Fig. 1 B) [3, 4]
• determining partitioning between compartments into
membranes (Fig. 1 C) [5].
Furthermore, alchemical calculations are frequently used
to estimate changes in free energies upon modifying a ligand
or protein:
• a protein residue can be alchemically mutated to probe
the impact on binding aﬃnity (Fig. 1 D)[6, 7] or changes
in protein thermostability [8–11];
• the entire ligand can be alchemically transferred from
protein to solvent in an absolute binding free energy
calculation (Fig. 1 E) [12–14];
• small alchemical modiﬁcations can be made between
chemically related ligands to estimate relative differ-
ences in binding free energies (Fig. 1 F) [15–19].
After an alchemical calculation is performed (which gen-
erally involves multiple simulations at a variety of alchemical
states), the data must be analyzed to compute an estimate
of the free energy for the transformation of interest. Early
work used simple but statistically suboptimal estimators for
this: free energy perturbation (FEP) used a simple (but highly
biased) estimator based on the Zwanzig relation [1] or numer-
ical quadrature via thermodynamic integration (TI), for which
the theory dates back the better part of a century but with
the ﬁrst computational applications emerging in the 1980’s
1
Here, the non-physical nature of the transformation is referred to as "al-
chemical", a term coined by Tembre and McCammon in Ref. [2].
and 90’s [20–24]. More recent developments have seen new,
highly eﬃcient statistical estimators that make better use
of all the data, often building on the more eﬃcient and less
biased Bennett acceptance ratio (BAR) [25], producing mul-
tistate generalizations [26] or removing the need for global
equilibrium [27–29].
Subsequent work in the 2000s led to improved implemen-
tations of alchemical methods in popular biomolecular sim-
ulation packages [15, 30–34]. This foundational work, com-
bined with the methodological, technological, and hardware
improvements of the last 5–10 years, has led to an explo-
sion of interest and direct commercial application of these
technologies [15, 19, 35–38].
As the ﬁeld of molecular simulation can now routinely
access microsecond timescales with the aid of GPUs [39], and
millisecond timescales appear to soon be within reach, accu-
rate alchemical calculations on even more challenging prob-
lems will become reasonable to perform. In the meantime,
today’s users may ﬁnd it diﬃcult to get started with these
complex calculations whilst also keeping up with the fast pace
of change. This Best Practices guide provides current recom-
mendations and tips for users of all experience. Updates and
suggestions are welcomed via our GitHub repository.
2 Prerequisites and Scope
This Best Practices guide focuses on providing a good start-
ing point for new practitioners and a reference for experi-
enced practitioners. For this propose we provide a convenient
checklist (Sec. 12) to help ensure all calculations comply with
currently-understood best practices for alchemical simulation
and analysis. Where the best practices are currently not cer-
tain, we highlight areas where further research is needed to
identify an unambiguous recommendation. It can also serve
as a set of best practices to ensure simulation robustness and
reproducibility which reviewers may wish to consider as they
evaluate papers.
We assume that novice practitioners have at least mod-
erate experience with molecular simulation concepts and
use of simulation packages. Furthermore, basic familiarity
with the principles of molecular mechanics, molecular dynam-
ics simulations, statistical mechanics, and the biophysics of
protein-ligand association are essential. If you feel unfamiliar
with some of these concepts, good starting points can be
found in these references [40–43].
While reading this Best Practices guide, it is important to
bear in mind this is not a review of all free energy calculation
methods at the cutting edge of current research. Instead this
guide aims to answer the following questions:
• Is my problem suitable for an alchemical calculation?
• How do I select an appropriate alchemical protocol?
2 of 48
A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
Membrane
Host
Host
Host
Host
Host
A
B
C
D
E
F
Figure 1. Illustration of common types of free energies differ-
ences that can be calculated using alchemical free energy meth-
ods. A: Change in free energy due to a conformational change of the
molecule across a high barrier. B: Partition coeﬃcient such as log P
or log D depend on a change in free energy between different phases;
here, as an example the partition coeﬃcient between methanol and
water is shown. C: Free energy difference associated with the inser-
tion of a molecule into a membrane. D: Effect of mutations of protein
or host residues on free energies of binding. E: Absolute free ener-
gies of binding of a small molecule to a host (e.g. protein), F: Relative
free energy of binding of one molecule with respect to another, here
toluene and benzyl alcohol.
• What software tools are available to perform alchemical
calculations?
• How should I analyze my data and report uncertainties?
Some other background information may be needed de-
pending on the nature of the alchemical project. For example,
often, if binding poses are not known, docking calculations
can be used to generate an initial small molecule binding pose
to start alchemical simulations. This will require some basic
familiarity on how to perform docking to generate reasonable
simulation starting points [44].
As some of the theoretical background can seem daunt-
ing, we do, however, provide a guide to the essential theory
behind alchemical free energy calculations in Sec. 3. In the
remainder of this paper, we will cover topics that are key to
the preparation( Sec. 6), choice and use of correct protocols
(Sec. 7), and ﬁnally the best practices that should be used
in the analysis of alchemical calculations (Sec. 8). Particular
focus will be given to aspects of the molecular simulations
which are unique to alchemical calculations—these include
the calculation of transfer free energies (hydration free en-
ergies, partition coeﬃcients, etc.), and binding free energies
(absolute and relative).
While we try to address as many methods and practices
as possible, the ﬁeld of free energy calculations is broad, and
there are many advanced topics that are left to future Best
Practices documents focusing on speciﬁc issues. Below, we
provide a non-exhaustive list of topics we have not addressed,
along with some references to provide starting points on
these more advanced topics:
• covalent inhibition [45]
• free energies of mutation of protein side chains [7, 10]
• nonspeciﬁc binding or multiple binding sites [46]
• approximate and often less accurate endpoint free en-
ergy methods such as MM-PBSA [47] and LIE [48]
• Free energy methods that extract the ligand using geo-
metric order parameters and potential of mean force
methods [49]
• forceﬁeld dependence for protein, ligand, ions, co-
solvents, and co-factors. A number of different studies
have looked at the inﬂuence of force ﬁelds and it is
assumed the user has made an adequate choice for the
system under study [50–52].
For convenience we have also compiled a list of common
acronyms and common symbols used throughout this paper.
3 of 48
A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
Acronyms
CPU — Central Processing Unit
BAR — Bennett Acceptance Ratio
FEP — Free Energy Perturbation
GPCR — G-Protein Coupled Receptor
GPU — Graphics Processing Unit
MBAR — Multistate Bennett Acceptance Ratio
MCSS — Maximum Common Substructure
MD — Molecular Dynamics
RMSE — Root Mean Square Error
MUE — Mean unsigned error
SAR — Structure-Activity Relationships
TI — Thermodynamic Integration
List of Symbols
L and R — generic names for ligand and receptor
K◦
b — binding constant
c◦
— standard state concentration
U — potential energy
u — reduced potential describing a thermodynamic
state
∆G — Gibbs free energy (isothermal isobaric ensem-
ble)
∆A — Helmholtz free energy (canonical ensemble)
∆f — reduced (dimensionless) free energy
∆f̂ — estimate from an estimator for the reduced free
energy
Γ — conformation space accessible by simulations
~
q — vector of a single conﬁguration, i.e. x, y, z coordi-
nates of the simulation system
kB — Boltzmann constant
Z — partition function
p — pressure
µ — chemical potential (grand canonical ensemble)
T — temperature
β ≡ (kBT)–1
— inverse thermal energy
~
λ — alchemical progress parameter, which may be
multidimensional
g — statistical ineﬃciency
O — overlap matrix
Ct — discrete-time-normalized ﬂuctuation auto-
correlation function
τeq — integrated auto-correlation time
t0 — equilibration time
3 Statistical mechanics demonstrates
why alchemical free energy
calculations work
Why would you want to run an alchemical free energy cal-
culation and why do they work? In this section, we use the
example of relative free energy calculations to sketch the the-
ory of alchemical simulations and illustrate their utility. The
emphasis here is placed on bridging theoretical foundations
and intuition. A rigorous derivation of the standard (abso-
lute) free energy of binding using the principles of statistical
mechanics can be found in Gilson’s classic work [53].
3.1 Simulating binding events of
receptor-drug systems can be
computationally expensive
Suppose you want to compute the binding aﬃnity, or free
energy of binding, of a ligand L to a receptor R, given by:
R + L RL. (1)
The binding constant (K◦
b ) is given by the law of mass action
as the ratio of concentrations of product [RL] and reactants
[R], [L]:
K◦
b = c◦ [RL]
[L][R]
. (2)
The standard state concentration c◦
depends on the refer-
ence state, but it is usually set to 1 mol/L assuming a constant
pressure of 1 atm (see also Sec. 7.1.2). Thus, the Gibbs free
energy of binding ∆Gbind is given by:
∆Gbind,L = –kBT ln K◦
b , (3)
where kB is the Boltzmann constant and T the temperature
of the system.
The free energy of binding can be expressed as a ratio
of partition functions
A natural, though generally very computationally expensive,
way to estimate the equilibrium constant is by directly simu-
lating several binding and unbinding events and computing
the probability of ﬁnding the receptor-ligand system in the
bound state, P(RL), or the unbound state, P(R + L). Assuming
the volume change upon binding to be negligible, which is
often the case at 1 atm due to the incompressibility of water,
then the Gibbs free energy ∆Gbind,L is approximately equal to
the Helmholtz free energy ∆Abind,L, and we can simulate the
system in a box of volume V to obtain [54]
∆Gbind,L ≈ ∆Abind,L = –kBT

ln
P(RL)
P(R + L)
+ ln c◦
NAvV


, (4)
where NAv is the Avogadro number, and the last term cor-
rects for the simulated concentration being different than the
4 of 48
A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
standard concentration. Let Γbound and Γunbound be the set
of receptor-ligand conformations ~
q that we consider bound
and unbound respectively. The probability of a conformation
~
q is given by the Boltzmann probability density function
P(~
q) =
exp βU(~
q)

R
Γ exp βU(~
q)

d~
q
, (5)
where β = (kBT)–1
is the inverse temperature, U(~
q) is the poten-
tial energy of conformation ~
q, and the integration is over the
set of all possible conformations accessible in the simulation
box volume Γ, with Γbound, Γunbound ⊂ Γ. If the simulation
is long enough, we expect the fraction of conformations ~
q
found in the bound state to converge to
P(RL) =
Z
Γbound
P(~
q) d~
q =
R
Γbound
exp βU(~
q)

d~
q
R
Γ exp βU(~
q)

d~
q
. (6)
After similar considerations for P(R + L), we ﬁnd that the ratio
of visited bound and unbound conformations, in the limit of
long simulations, should converge to
P(RL)
P(R + L)
=
R
Γbound
exp –βU(~
q)

d~
q
R
Γunbound
exp –βU(~
q)

d~
q
=
Z(RL)
Z(R + L)
, (7)
where we have deﬁned the conﬁgurational integral or conﬁgu-
rational partition function as Z(state) ≡
R
Γstate
exp –βU(~
q)

d~
q.
Simulating binding events is computationally expensive
While simulating binding events has been used to estimate
binding aﬃnities [54, 55] or to get insights into the binding
pathways and kinetics of receptor-ligand systems [56–60],
the computational cost of these calculations is usually dom-
inated by the rate of dissociation, which can be on the mi-
crosecond timescale even for millimolar binders [55] and
reaches the micosecond to second timescale for a typical
drug [61, 62]. Depending on system size and simulation set-
tings, common molecular dynamics software packages can
reach a few hundreds of ns/day using currently available
high-end GPUs [63, 64], making these type of calculations
unappealing and irrelevant on a pharmaceutical drug discov-
ery timescale. Other methods compute the free energy of
binding by building potential of mean force proﬁles along a
reaction coordinate [49, 65–67], but these methods require
prior knowledge of a high-probability binding pathway, which
is not easily available, especially in the prospective scenarios
typical of the drug development process.
3.2 Alchemical free energy calculations yield
predictions that do not require direct
simulation of binding/unbinding events
In many cases, the quantity of interest is the change in binding
aﬃnity between a compound A and a related compound B
(e.g., by modifying one the drug scaffold’s substituents, see
(Fig. 1 F), which, by using Eq. 4 and 7 is given by
∆∆Gbind,AB = ∆Gbind,B – ∆Gbind,A
≈ –kBT

ln
Z(RB)
Z(R + B)
– ln
Z(RA)
Z(R + A)

.
(8)
Note that the terms involving the standard concentration can-
cel out when we assume that the volume is identical for A and
B. Predictions of ∆∆Gbind,AB with non-alchemical methods
generally require long simulations of both ligands, possibly
through different binding pathways. Alchemical relative free
energy calculations avoid the need to simulate binding and
unbinding events by making use of the fact that the free en-
ergy is a state function and exploiting the thermodynamic
cycle illustrated in Fig. 2. This is apparent after rewriting Eq. 8
as
∆∆Gbind,AB ≈ –kBT

ln
Z(RB)
Z(RA)
– ln
Z(R + B)
Z(R + A)

= –kBT

ln
Z(RB)
Z(RA)
– ln
Z(B)
Z(A)

= ∆Gbound – ∆Gunbound ,
(9)
where ∆Gbound/unbound is the free energy of mutating A to
B in the bound/unbound state. Eq. 9 and Fig. 2 tell us that
the difference in free energy of binding between toluene (A)
and benzyl alcohol (B) can be computed by running two in-
dependent calculations estimating the free energy cost of
mutating A into B in the binding pocket (∆Gbound) and in sol-
vent (∆Gunbound), saving us the need to simulate the physical
binding process of the two compounds. In particular, the
second line of Eq. 9 is a consequence of ∆Gunbound being in-
dependent of the presence of the receptor in the simulation
box as the deﬁnition of the unbound state assumes receptor
and ligand to be at a suﬃcient distance for them to have no
energetic interactions. Note that, when A and B have differ-
ent number of atoms, Eq. 9 implies the presence of a factor
having units of volume entering both logarithms, which re-
quire unitless arguments. However, the value of this factor is
inconsequential as it cancels out in practice.
How are alchemical transformations performed in
practice?
In practice, the mutation of A to B is carried out by introducing
one or more parameters ~
λ controlling the potential energy
function U(~
q;~
λ) such that the potential of compounds A and
B is recovered at two particular values ~
λA and ~
λB. Brieﬂy, this
is achieved by simulating a “chimeric” molecule composed
of enough atoms to represent both A and B. A subset of the
energetic terms in U(~
q;~
λ) is then modulated by ~
λ so that at
~
λA, the atoms that form molecule A are activated and those
belonging exclusively to B are non-interacting “dummy atoms”,
while the opposite occur at ~
λB (see Sec. 7.1.1 for details).
5 of 48
A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
Host
Host
Figure 2. Thermodynamic cycle for computing the relative free
energy of binding (∆∆G) between two related small molecules
to a supramolecular host or a rigid receptor. The relative binding
free energy difference between two small molecules, ∆∆Gbind,A→B ≡
∆Gbind,B – ∆Gbind,A—here benzyl alcohol (top) to toluene (bottom)—
can be computed as a difference between two alchemical transfor-
mations, ∆Gbound – ∆Gsolvated, where ∆Gbound represents the free
energy change of transforming A → B in complex, i.e. bound to a
host molecule, and ∆Gsolvated the free energy change of transforming
A → B in solvent, typically water.
We can rigorously account for ﬂuctuations in other ther-
modynamic parameters such as changes in volume V when
simulating at constant pressure p or changes in number of
molecules Ni of species i at constant chemical potential µi
(e.g., number of waters or ions) by introducing the reduced
potential [26]
u(~
q;~
λ) ≡ β
"
U(~
q;~
λ) + p V(~
q) +
X
i
µi Ni(~
q) + · · ·
#
. (10)
Here, the collection of thermodynamic and alchemical param-
eters {β,~
λ, p, µ, . . .} deﬁnes a thermodynamic state. In the con-
text of alchemical calculations, in which the thermodynamic
states vary only in their value of ~
λ, these are also referred
to as alchemical states. The free energy of mutating A to B
in any environment (e.g., binding site, solvent) can then be
computed as
∆Genv = –kBT ln
Z(~
λB)
Z(~
λA)
= –kBT ln
R
Γenv
exp

u(~
q;~
λB)

d~
q
R
Γenv
exp

u(~
q;~
λA)

d~
q
.
(11)
While it is generally not feasible to compute the two partition
functions Z(~
λ), several estimators have been devised to ro-
bustly estimate the ratio of partition functions in Eq. 11 (see
Sec. 8.3) from a set of conformations usually collected with
MD simulations from the thermodynamic states deﬁned at
~
λA and ~
λB and intermediates thereof.
Why do alchemical calculations need unphysical
intermediate states?
While it is theoretically possible to estimate the ratio of parti-
tion functions from samples collected only at states ~
λA and ~
λB,
the eﬃciency of the free energy estimators rapidly decreases
as the phase-space overlap between the two states also de-
creases [68, 69]. Roughly, the phase-space overlap between
two thermodynamic states measures the degree to which
high-probability conformations (i.e., those with very nega-
tive potential energy) in one state are also high-probability
conformations in the other state (see Sec. 8.5 and Fig. 7).
To solve the problem of having poor overlap between the
states of interest, multiple intermediate alchemical states are
introduced at values ~
λA = ~
λ0,~
λ1, · · · ,~
λK = ~
λB so that each
pair of consecutive states ~
λk,~
λk+1 share good overlap. Each
intermediate state models a ligand that is neither A nor B
but a mix of the two. Many estimators (e.g., exponential
reweighting (EXP) [1] and Bennet’s acceptance ratio (BAR) [25,
70]) can then be used to compute the free energy as
∆Genv = kBT
K–1
X
k=0
∆f(~
λk,~
λk+1) (12)
from samples collected at all the alchemical states {~
λk}, where
∆f is the unitless free energy difference
∆f(~
λk,~
λk+1) = f(~
λk+1) – f(~
λk) = – ln
Z(~
λk+1)
Z(~
λk)
. (13)
While this strategy usually results in sampling thermodynamic
states whose Boltzmann distributions are very similar, thus
collecting information that is to some degree redundant,
some estimators such as the Multistate Bennett acceptance
ratio (MBAR) [26] can exploit similarities between states to
improve the precision of the estimates. This is achieved by
using the conformations sampled at all alchemical states {~
λk}
to compute the free energy difference ∆f(~
λi,~
λj) between any
pair of states i, j (see Sec. 8.3).
How do absolute free energy calculations differ from
relative?
While absolute and relative free energy calculations have
subtle differences in their practical applications (e.g., use of
restraints, handling of the standard state), the fundamen-
tal ideas and concepts of relative free energy approaches
remain unaltered in other types of alchemical calculations.
Absolute binding, hydration, and partition free energies still
use thermodynamic cycles that enable computing transfer
free energies without actually simulating the physical transfer
from one environment to another.
The main difference in these approaches lies instead in
the thermodynamic cycle to which this strategy is applied.
For example, a typical thermodynamic cycle for an alchemical
6 of 48
A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
absolute binding free energy calculation is represented in
Fig. 6. In this case, two independent calculations compute
the free energy of removing the interactions between the
ligand and its environment in solvent or in the binding site
respectively through a series of intermediate states in which
the energy terms are only partially deactivated.
4 What can be expected from alchemical
simulations?
When starting an alchemical free energy project, a key ﬁrst
step is to decide whether free energy calculations are really
the right tool. Particularly, count the cost of your project: Can
you even hope to tackle the problem with available resources
and, if successful, will it be worth it in terms of human and
computational cost?
4.1 How accurate are alchemical free energy
calculations?
Current alchemical free energy calculations involving small
molecules seem to achieve, in favorable cases, root mean
square (RMS) errors around 1-2 kcal/mol depending on force
ﬁeld, system, and a variety of other factors such as simulation
time, sampling method, and whether the calculations em-
ployed are absolute or relative. A small selection of example
datasets and case studies can be found in Sec. 11 at the end
of this document. However, the domain of applicability is a
signiﬁcant concern [37, 38], especially for relative calculations,
which typically require a high quality and usually experimen-
tal bound structure of a closely related ligand as a starting
point. Additional factors such as slow protein or ligand rear-
rangements, uncertainties in ligand binding mode, or charged
ligands can make these calculations far less reliable and more
of a research effort.
It is worth noting that the accuracy of free energy cal-
culations is highly variable across different protein targets,
and likely across different ligand chemotypes as well. For
instance, FEP+ with OPLS3 achieves an RMSE of 0.62 kcal/-
mol for a set of 21 compounds binding to JNK1 kinase, but
an RMSE of 1.05 kcal/mol for a set of 34 compounds bind-
ing to P38α kinase [71]. Furthermore, perturbations for the
same chemotype in different pockets of the BACE enzyme
gave varied errors [72]. Here the errors refer to the differ-
ence in ∆G derived by ﬁtting the ∆∆G’s to the known ex-
perimental binding free energies [15]. This prompts us to
consider another important aspect. It is important to be clear
on what error to report: ∆G after shifting by a constant to
minimize the RMSE, unshifted ∆G, ∆∆G of computed edges,
or ∆∆G of all edges. (See recommendations for reporting
best practices, Sec. 8.7.) Additionally, as it is possible to per-
form calculations on a set of ligands using different pairwise
comparisons of molecules, the performance of the method
may be biased based on which pairs of comparisons are per-
formed. Additionally, it is possible that the error associated
to the relative free energy between a two ligands that was
not directly computed (however can be deduced using ther-
modynamic paths involving other ligands) will likely be more
uncertain https://github.com/jchodera/jacs-dataset-analysis.
Given the need to understand the performance of the system
with alchemical free energy calculations, we recommend that
retrospective studies for a particular target and a particular
chemical series be performed for each application case.
4.2 How reproducible are alchemical free
energy calculations?
Finite computing resources necessarily limit the generated
number of uncorrelated samples of potential energy surfaces,
and therefore alchemical free energy calculations only give
free energy estimates to within ﬁnite precision. An important
consideration is how reproducible alchemical free energy cal-
culations are in practice. In simple cases such as absolute
hydration free energies of small organic molecules, or relative
hydration free energy calculations between structurally simi-
lar small organic molecules, it should be possible to obtain
highly precise estimates with a given software package (with
a sample standard deviation under 0.01 kcal/mol) [73]. For
more complex use cases such as protein-ligand binding free
energies the repeatability is often substantially worse [73]. A
good practice is to perform two or three runs of the same
perturbation to assess precision with a given protocol. The
sample standard deviation will give a crude estimate of the
reliability of the estimates, and whether the precision is suﬃ-
cient for the problem at hand. When practical, a more strin-
gent test is to use different input coordinates for each repeat
run.
Note that these issues concern calculations carried out
with a single software package, but simulation package vari-
ations can introduce additional issues. Such issues of repro-
ducibility of free energy calculations across different simula-
tion packages have attracted attention recently. Greater vari-
ability is expected due to methodological differences such as
integrators, thermostats, barostats, treatment of long-range
electrostatics, and potentially other factors. For absolute and
relative hydration free energies of small organic molecules
a variability of ca. 0.2 kcal/mol between popular simulation
packages has been reported [50]. In the recent SAMPL6 SAM-
PLing challenge a larger variability of 0.3 to 1.0 kcal/mol was
noted in the computed absolute binding free energies of
host/guest systems even though the study sought to use
identical input and simulation parameters [73] and, in many
cases, single-point energies were identical or nearly so. Fur-
7 of 48
A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
ther work is needed to ensure reproducibility of alchemical
free energy calculations across different software implemen-
tations to guarantee that force-ﬁeld development efforts lead
to transferable potential energy functions.
4.3 Is my problem suitable for alchemical
free energy calculations?
Before even planning free energy calculations to study bind-
ing to a particular target, it is important to assess what is
known about the system and its timescales and its suitability
for free energy calculations, as well as the purpose of the cal-
culations and the amount of available computer resources.
In some cases, predicting accurate binding free energies for
a particular target might be more challenging than simply
measuring them! This is often the case when dealing with
database screening problems, where compounds might be
easily and quickly available commercially for testing and free
energy calculations could consume far more resources. Free
energy calculations thus typically only appeal when (slow or
costly) synthesis would be required or experiments are other-
wise cost-prohibitive.
Sometimes free energy calculations can provide answers
that are not readily available from experiments. For example,
type II kinase inhibitors selectively bind to different kinases in
the so-called DFG-out conformations [74]. The selectivity of
such inhibitors may be attributed either to their differential
binding to different kinases in the DFG-out conformations, or
to different stability of the DFG-out conformations of different
kinases.
Let KC be the equilibrium constant between DFG-in and
DFG-out conformations of one kinase, and K∗
D be the disso-
ciation constant of a type II inhibitor against this kinase, the
apparent binding constant of this inhibitor against this kinase
is then
KD = K∗
D
1 + KC
KC
(14)
Since binding experiments cannot resolve K∗
D and KC indi-
vidually, such experiments cannot address the basis of selec-
tivity of the type II inhibitors. Absolute binding free energy
calculations, in contrast, can take advantage of the slow kinet-
ics of DFG-in/out conversion, and estimate the conformation-
speciﬁc binding constant K∗
D, thus yielding clues as to the
source of selectivity.
4.4 Is the expected accuracy of the
computation suﬃcient?
The requisite level of accuracy is another important considera-
tion. If the goal is to guide lead optimization when many com-
pounds will be synthesized, free energy calculations can be
appealing even with accuracies in the 1–2 kcal/mol range [75],
but if the number of compounds to be synthesized is very
small, this accuracy may not be enough to provide much
value.
Here we provide a simple estimate of the value provided
by alchemical free energy calculations in lead optimization.
Let P(∆∆G) be the probability distribution of the changes in
the binding free energies of a new set of molecules during
one round of lead optimization, and let P(∆∆G†
|∆∆G) be
the conditional probability of the binding free energy change
computed by the free energy calculations, ∆∆G†
, given the
actual change ∆∆G. The latter conditional probability can be
modeled by a normal distribution
P(∆∆G†
|∆∆G) =
1
√
2πσ2
exp –
(∆∆G†
– ∆∆G)2
2σ2
!
, (15)
where σ signiﬁes the accuracy of free energy calculations.
Here we assume that there is no systematic bias in the free
energy calculations, i.e., on average, the free energy change
computed by free energy calculations agrees with the actual
free energy change.
In lead optimization guided by free energy calculations, we
will likely only synthesize and experimentally test molecules
that are predicted to have favorable free energy changes. We
are thus interested in how often that a molecule predicted
to bind stronger actually turns out to bind stronger. In other
words, we are interested in the conditional probability:
P(∆∆G < 0|∆∆G†
< 0). (16)
For illustrative purposes, consider a proposed set of new
molecules, and assume that the changes proposed in these
molecules yield a set of relative binding free energies that fol-
low a normal distribution. That is, assume that the standard
deviation in the relative binding free enrgies for the changes
represented is RT ln 5 (corresponding to a 5-fold change in
the binding aﬃnities), and that 1 in 10 new molecules have in-
creased binding aﬃnity (∆∆G ≤ 0). Under such assumptions,
the conditional probability in Eq. 16 can be easily computed.
If the accuracy of free energy calculations is σ = 1 kcal/-
mol, P(∆∆G < 0|∆∆G†
< 0) = 0.35, which means that out
of every 10 molecules selected for predicted favorable free
energy change, on average 3.5 molecules will have actual
favorable free energy change. In other words, selection by
free energy calculations yields 3.5 times more molecules of
improved aﬃnities than selection without free energy calcula-
tions under these assumptions.
Available computational resources and timescales of mo-
tion also factor into this initial analysis. An individual free
energy calculation involves simulations at many different in-
termediate states (perhaps 20-40 or more) and each of these
must typically be long enough to capture the relevant motions
in the system. If such motions are microsecond events or
longer, the computational cost of running 20-40 microsecond
8 of 48
A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
or longer simulations for each of N ligands will likely be pro-
hibitive for most users with today’s hardware. Alternatively,
if key motions are fast and minimal (as is often assumed in
practice), only much shorter simulations may be necessary.
4.5 Can I afford the calculation?
Furthermore, are available computational resources suﬃcient
that throughput will be reasonable compared to needs of ex-
perimental collaborators working on this system? How many
ligands (N) can you afford to handle given your computational
resources? As cloud computing becomes more available, in-
house GPU clusters may not be necessary if calculations are
not run on a regular basis. This analysis should be done up
front as part of “counting the cost” of involvement in a partic-
ular project. In some cases, the analysis may conclude that
free energy calculations will not be feasible for the proposed
problem. Here, by “cost”, we refer not just to ﬁnancial cost of
the calculations relative to experiments, but also time – can
the calculations be run faster than experiments are done?
How will the relevant resource and opportunity costs factor
in? Both computation and experiment require human time,
supplies (of different sorts), and equipment. In the extreme
limit, for example, it would not make sense to spend a month
running a binding free energy calculation if the equivalent
experiment could be done in a day with resources already on
hand. Such issues should be considered before deciding to
conduct binding free energy calculations.
4.6 Is an exploratory study what I want?
An additional consideration is how much is known about
your particular target, ligand binding modes in the target,
and any relevant motions – essentially, has it been studied
enough to know whether it might be suitable for free energy
calculations? It is important to know if the system has hardly
been studied, because should the initial calculations perform
poorly, the effort may turn into an attempt to understand the
relevant sampling, force ﬁeld, or system preparation prob-
lems.
If you are unsure whether your project is feasible, as men-
tioned above, one recommended option is to conduct a short
exploratory study to assess tractability for a small number of
ligands. This can be suﬃcient to get an initial idea of feasibility
and accuracy of the calculations for the proposed target [36].
5 How should alchemical simulations be
applied to drug discovery?
Many practitioners expect alchemical methods to provide
valuable guidance for drug discovery, and to exhibit accu-
racy superior to most alternative approaches for suitable
targets [76]. Successful application in industry may require
considerable knowledge of the “domain of applicability” of
free energy calculations – where they work well and where
they will not [38]. Successful application also requires robust
protocols for preparing, submitting and analysing alchemi-
cal calculations. In this regard, the issues mentioned in the
previous section such as understanding the suitability and
timescales to capture the structure activity relationships (SAR),
and performing up-front tests of performance are all relevant
to drug discovery applications. Without venturing too far into
details of system setup, which is beyond the scope of this
article, we highlight some critical factors affecting accuracy
and successful application.
5.1 Capturing experimental conditions
The calculations aim to capture the alchemical change from
one ligand to another as accurately as possible. Therefore,
it is necessary to consider details of the experimental setup,
such as pH. Biological assays are usually run at neutral pH
but this is not always the case. For example, some enzymes
exhibit pH-dependent activity and assays may thus be done
in conditions other from neutral pH. Therefore, computa-
tional protein and ligand preparation protocols should reﬂect
experimental pH.
The formal charge and/or tautomeric state of the small
molecules can change within a series of analogs, necessi-
tating care in treatment. Additionally, medicinal chemistry
efforts might deliberately modify the pKa of a series to modify
drug properties, requiring explicit efforts to incorporate these
changes into alchemical calculations.
To ensure modeling matches experiment, we also need
to accurately prepare and simulate the same system – which
requires understanding what protein construct is used in
the bioassay. For instance, does the X-ray structure that is
to be used for the calculations match the construct used
for screening (i.e. only the catalytic domain vs. full length,
monomer vs. dimer, etc.) [77]? Also, were certain co-factors
or partner proteins required in the bioassay?
5.2 Is my binding mode accurate?
As also mentioned, good performance of alchemical calcula-
tions requires an accurate representation of the ligand bind-
ing mode, usually from a high quality X-ray crystal structure.
If more than one structure is available, the modeler should
pay attention to choose the most suitable. The quality of the
structure can be a concern, and the reader is referred to work
of Warren et al. for a detailed discussion of choosing optimal
structures for structure-based modeling [78].
It is also useful to study the structure activity relationship
and understand the expected impact of any mutations on
the binding site, such as whether side chain movement in
the protein will be required, and whether there is evidence
9 of 48
A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
of this in any alternative X-ray structures of the same protein.
Often, only one protein and water conﬁguration is used for a
series of alchemical calculations, so this needs to be capable
of accommodating the smallest through to largest ligands in
a way that allows stable and well behaved simulations. This
can provide a practical limit on the alchemical changes that
are feasible, though a simple work-around can be to separate
compounds into sub-series for different calculations.
If multiple structures are available there is some evidence
the higher aﬃnity complex can give better performance [79],
at least in some cases. However, ligands and proteins can also
undergo unexpected changes in binding mode for related
ligands, which can make these issues more complex to deal
with [16].
5.3 Input setup and scale of calculations
In a drug discovery setting it is normal to consider dozens
(or more) of ligands and it is necessary to align them in the
binding site. There is no detailed study of how different align-
ment approaches may affect results, but the user should be
aware of some practical considerations. Tools are available to
compare the ligands and build the hybrid topologies that de-
ﬁne the changes between one ligand and another [34, 80, 81].
In simple terms, providing poor alignment to these tools will
make this job harder. Docking with restraints is often beneﬁ-
cial in this regard. Particularly, ﬁxing the 3D spatial position
of the scaffold using maximal common substructure (MCSS)
restrained docking can help provide well aligned input for
the topology generation. Nevertheless, in this case careful
attention is still needed to ensure consistency of alignment
for identical substituents. Another alternative is to manu-
ally edit the same core and add/modify the changing sub-
stituents. This provides assurances that coordinates for the
non-perturbed portion of the structure remain identical and
aromatic substituents, for instance, have consistent dihedral
angles. However, it is not feasible for many compounds and
therefore automation is desirable.
Finally, the role of water in ligand binding is not always
well understood and it can be crucial to capture the changes
in binding site solvation during ligand binding. Can crystal-
lographic waters be retained? Do they clash with some of
the larger ligands used in the alchemical perturbation? See
Sec. 6.1 for different strategies that can be applied to dealing
with waters. Generally, before launching large numbers of
alchemical free energy calculations it is always recommended
to test the system using classical MD simulations and limited
numbers of alchemical perturbations. Metrics such as ligand
and protein RMSD and RMSF can be inspected, along with vi-
sual inspection of simulations, to ensure the system is stable
and likely to be suitable for alchemical calculations.
Running binding free energy calculations in a drug discov-
ery application will typically require the use of software or
tools to facilitate the large number of calculations. Commer-
cial implementations such as FEP+, OpenEye Tools, or Flare
allow for a fast setup and deployment to GPU hardware in
minutes, but may have limited ability to customize calcula-
tions [15, 19]. Commercial tools can be expensive in some
cases, but non-commercial tools are becoming more straight
forward to use to run alchemical free energy calculations [17–
19, 34, 80–82].
For relative free energy calculations, various graph topolo-
gies or maps of calculations are possible, and choices may
depend on the target application. For instance, if the goal is to
accurately assess the relative binding energy of a small num-
ber of compounds, possibly with challenging synthesis, the
map of perturbations should contain as many connections
between compounds as affordable. However, when running
calculations on hundreds of compounds a so called star-map
(see Fig. 5 A) can be used that just contains one connection
per compound: perturbing every compound to a central lig-
and, typically the crystal structure ligand [83]. In this way the
top-ranking examples can be readily identiﬁed and submitted
to additional calculations in a second round. Alternatively, if
the goal is to achieve the smallest possible error with mini-
mal computational expense, certain graph topologies provide
beneﬁts [84, 85]
5.4 Making predictions, understanding
errors
For prospective drug discovery applications there are several
other considerations including understanding likely errors
and taking selection bias into account.
It is crucial when proposing compounds for synthesis to
have some idea of the underlying error or uncertainty in the
predictions. A retrospective assessment can give an indica-
tion of prospective performance for similar molecules [86].
Beyond this, several parameters provide useful indicators
of performance. For example error estimates provided by
free energy estimators that are too large can highlight poorly
converged simulations [79]. Hysteresis, within cycles in the
perturbation network or between forward and backward per-
turbations can be checked [87] to indicate problematic per-
turbations involved in cycles connecting many compounds
(See also Secs. 7.1.1 and 8.5). Once synthesis and testing of
compounds is complete a standard strategy is to look back at
how the calculations performed. In this regard it is important
to consider the issue of selection bias upfront. It is tempting
to only synthesize the compounds predicted to be most ac-
tive, thus a narrow range of calculated activity is tested that
imposes limits on the statistical assessment of performance,
ideally example molecules from across the range of predicted
10 of 48
A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
activity can be assessed or corrections can be applied based
on previous recommendations [88]. For a more detailed dis-
cussion on checking the robustness of your alchemcial free
energy calculation see also Sec. 8.5.
In summary, the successful use of alchemical calculations
not only in, but particularly for drug discovery requires work-
ing in the domain of applicability, using a high quality X-ray
structure of the target bound to compounds in the series,
and testing the approach retrospectively to ensure the sys-
tem setup is well-behaved. Always assess your conﬁdence
in the resulting predictions and communicate this when dis-
cussing with experimentalists. Consider performing repeat
calculations for at least some of the perturbations in the
study. There are many accounts of success of alchemical cal-
culations, the methods show good performance towards the
goal of binding energy prediction. However, it is important to
have realistic expectations.
Structure based drug design projects are often capable of
improving potency relatively quickly, even with only limited
application of computational approaches and the range of
activity narrows to just two-to-three log units. It may seem
hard to have impact with substantially different, more potent,
stand-out compounds in this scenario, but binding energy
prediction can still be extremely useful for ensuring activity is
maintained as other properties are optimized. An interesting
cost beneﬁt analysis has shown the value of activity prediction,
see discussion above and articles such as [75]. From a drug
discovery point of view, alchemical calculations are expanding
their domain of applicability, and there are reports of success
using homology models [89] and GPCRs [90, 91] for instance,
as well as enabling charge change and scaffold hopping [92,
93], but these systems are undoubtedly more diﬃcult. In
the meantime, the use cases are expanding to resistance
prediction, selectivity prediction , solubility prediction – an
exciting future for alchemical calculations [6, 94, 95].
6 Simulation prerequisites
Alchemical free energy protocols as discussed below (Sec. 7)
are deﬁned for a speciﬁc type of free energy calculation, i.e. a
free energy of binding or a free energy of hydration. Differ-
ent types of simulations require different choices for ligands,
solvent, and host molecules (in the case of the estimation of
free energies of binding).
6.1 Free energies of binding
In principle, in the limit of suﬃcient conformational sampling,
the free energy changes estimated from an alchemical free en-
ergy calculation should be independent of the system’s initial
coordinates. However, in practice, because simulations are of
ﬁnite duration (typically 1-100 ns per state at present), this is
only true for certain classes of alchemical free energy calcula-
tions such as relative or absolute free energies of hydration
of small and relatively rigid organic molecules. Protein-ligand
complexes typically exhibit slowly relaxing degrees of free-
dom that signiﬁcantly exceed the duration of an alchemical
free energy calculation, and host-guest calculations can be
susceptible to these issues as well, depending on timescale
and system. It is therefore generally important to carefully
select input coordinates to obtain satisfactory results. The
following questions may be relevant before diving into the
simulation setup.
• Do I have one or multiple good receptor structures? (e.g.
a good resolution X-ray crystal of the protein target)
• Do I have information on one or all of the ligand binding
sites (e.g. a X-ray structure)
• Should I include buried waters, or other small molecules
that can be found in an X-ray structure?
• Are my ligands part of a congeneric series? (i.e. simple
R group substitutions around the same scaffold)
Are there good X-ray structures available?
As with any simulation, care should be taken in selecting avail-
able X-ray structures in the Protein DataBank [96]. In some
cases it may be wise to choose multiple starting structures to
account for variability in receptor conformations as well as
the accuracy of available X-ray structures. Typically, clustering
of receptor structures can be used to identify different recep-
tor conformations near the binding site, as well as assessing
relevant side chain placements from the X-ray structure, see
for example [16]. In terms of set up and other choices, follow-
ing general best practice guidelines is advisable [40].
Many free energy calculations focus on a congeneric series
of ligands, which can make these calculations suitable for rela-
tive free energy protocols (see Sec. 7). For relative calculations,
some care has to be taken selecting binding poses for these
ligands. Generally, a common assumption for a congeneric
series is that the binding mode is conserved. Therefore, if an
X-ray structure of one of the ligands is available, this should
be used to position the ligands in the putative binding site
in an energetically reasonable conformation without steric
or electrostatic mismatch with the receptor. Checking the
X-ray structure versus the experimental electron densities
is important, as the position of part of the ligand or impor-
tant sidechains may be based on the interpretation of the
crystallographer rather than the available electron density,
especially in cases of missing density. For example, looking
at a cyclohexane ring density, a chair conformation is vastly
more likely than that of a boat and, if a boat conformation
is present in the structure, it may be worth inspecting the
density to ensure it adequately supports this choice.
11 of 48
A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
Are you prepared to deal with any binding mode
challenges?
Generally, binding modes within congeneric series are con-
served [97], however, exceptions exist [98, 99], as discussed
in more detail in Sec. 7.2.6. Certain functional groups may be
particularly prone to this due to symmetries or near symme-
tries. One such issue involves a 180 degree ﬂip in the dihedral
angle of an aromatic ring, or ﬁve-membered ring leading to
a different spatial position of ortho- or meta- substituents
that otherwise should overlap within a series. The 180 de-
gree ﬂip of the ring may not occur enough during simulations
(due to steric obstructions) to overcome bias due to the start-
ing conﬁguration. Another scenario may be equatorial and
axially substituted saturated rings (e.g. cyclohexane deriva-
tives). This situation may be addressed by explicitly modelling
different binding modes of the same ligand and combining
later computed free energy differences for different binding
modes into a relative free energies of binding [100].
Have you considered sterioisomers and enantiomers?
Congeneric series can contain stereoisomers or enantiomers
which can bind very differently, resulting in large errors if
treated incorrectly. For racemates, the relative abundance
of each stereoisomer is normally not known. Therefore,
the experimental activity associated with just one stereoiso-
mer/enantiomer is more uncertain. However, the modeling
typically uses just the bioactive conformation that best ﬁts the
active site. Clearly this introduces potential for larger errors
compared to experiment. Nevertheless, if all compounds in
the congeneric series are racemic, originating from similar
synthetic procedures with an expected similar abundance
of stereoisomers, then the differences may cancel and the
trend in calculated and observed binding energies may be ro-
bust. Despite this, we can see that care and further testing is
needed in this scenario, and the quality of the predictions may
suffer. Additionally, unexpected changes in what stereoiso-
mer binds experimentally, if they occur, could pose signiﬁcant
challenges for modelling efforts.
Conserved binding site waters can play an important
role in binding free energies
Binding site water molecules may form water mediated
protein-ligand interactions which can pose challenges
whenever exchange with bulk water is slow compared to
simulation timescales. This happens typically in buried
binding sites. Overlaying multiple protein X-ray structures
can identify conserved or additional water molecules that
can be useful to include in calculations. In cases where
water molecules are known to play an important role in the
binding, software implementations that use water sampling
facilitated by Grand Canonical Monte Carlo methods may be
useful, i.e. consider pre-solvation methods such as GCMC
steps [101]. Other tools such as WaterMap or open source
equivalents (SSTMap, GIST, and others) can be used to deﬁne
water structure for systems with no experimental evidence
of water sites [102]. Well known protein systems with water
mediated ligand interactions are for example: HSP90 which
formed part of the D3R grand challenge 2015 [16], A2A [103],
MUP [104], [90], and others [105].
Protonation states depend on the pH of the
experimental assay
Care should be taken when preparing ligands and proteins
to match the pH of the experimental assay, if known. As
mentioned above in Sec. 5.1, the pH of the assay can differ
from neutral pH and will determine the protonation states of
the proteins and ligands. Since the pKa of reference amino
acid sidechain residues is known, but can vary in the pro-
tein environment, many different tools have emerged for
predicting sidechain pKa in proteins, such as the H++ server,
ProPKa, APBS, and Maestro [106–109]. Strongly acidic (Glu,
Asp) or basic (Arg, Lys) sidechains can reliably predicted to
be ionised, but care is still needed as the local environment
can modify expected ionization states (for instance the cat-
alytic Asp dyad in proteases). Histidine is notoriously more
diﬃcult to predict as its pKa suggests it ionizes closer to the
experimental pH range. For ligands often the pKa needs
to be determined, if not known experimentally. There are
many different available tools for this purpose, but com-
mon choices may be propKa [107, 110], Chemicalize (https:
//chemicalize.com/welcome), or Maestro [109]. Still, accurate
pKa prediction for small molecules remains a challenging
problem, even with dedicated tools [111]. While often it can
be assumed that the protonation state of a ligand and protein
will remain the same as a ligand binds, some care needs to be
taken with systems where the protonation state may change
upon binding [112]. BACE, for example, famously undergoes
a protonation state change on ligand binding.
Congeneric series often need alignment
Input coordinates for a congeneric series may be generated
by docking calculations, or by ligand alignment using MCSS
algorithms. The latter tends to produce alignments that are
more conserved and more consistent free energy changes
across a dataset, but will struggle to yield reasonable results
for relative binding free energy calculations that involve a sig-
niﬁcant binding mode rearrangement. This may also lead to
steric clashes with the receptor coordinates of the reference
ligand if structural rearrangements are needed to accommo-
date different members of the congeneric series. Small steric
clashes may be resolved during subsequent simulation equi-
libration prior to data collection, but there is a risk that the
12 of 48
A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
complex relaxes to an alternative metastable state.
An additional consideration arises for single topology rela-
tive free energy calculations. In this class of alchemical free
energy calculations it is necessary to generate a molecular
topology that may describe the initial and ﬁnal states of the
perturbation (see Fig. 3). In cases where the end-states have
high topological similarity and high structural overlap this
is relatively straightforward and typically handled by use of
MCSS calculations. In situations where the end-state topolo-
gies differ signiﬁcantly, or there is relatively little spatial over-
lap between the two end-states some user intervention may
be necessary to produce a satisfactory input topology.
If the binding site location is uncertain but the structure
of the receptor is well deﬁned and plausible binding sites are
identiﬁed, it may be more useful to choose an absolute free
energy protocol to compute the standard free energy of bind-
ing of the ligand to a set of binding sites. This requires the
user to prepare input ﬁles describing the bound conformation
in different putative binding sites [113]. The apparent bind-
ing free energy of the ligand may be obtained by combining
the individual binding site free energies, which also indicate
where the ligand is more likely to bind. In this case a docking
program can generate initial structures. Different commer-
cial and none commercial tools are available, such as rDock,
Autodock Vina, Glide, or Flare, to name a few [19, 114–116].
If the putative binding sites are not apparent, for instance
due to signiﬁcant induced-ﬁt effects, it may be challenging to
obtain meaningful free energies of binding. One may have to
account for the free energy cost of forming a binding site in
the target receptor which may not be feasible on alchemical
simulation timescales.
6.2 Free energies of hydration or partition
coeﬃcients
Preliminary considerations necessary for using free energy
methods to compute partition coeﬃcients are generally more
straight forward. For example, a 3D minimised structure
of the solute can be generated with a simple tool such as
openBabel and solvated to prepare the input to compute
a free energy of hydration [117]. However, in these cases
a careful choice of forceﬁeld, as well as water models or
organic solvents is essential. See for example [3, 4] for a good
discussion of these choices. And, while sampling problems
might seem to be a non-issue for small molecules, this is not
always the case; e.g. even the hydroxyl orientation on neutral
carboxylic acids can occasionally pose a challenge [118, 119].
7 What simulation protocol should I
choose?
Alchemical free energy calculations can be grouped into two
main categories, “absolute” (see Fig. 6) and “relative”2
(see
Fig. 2), which differ in whether they compute properties for a
single molecule (absolute) or compare properties of different,
usually closely related, molecules (relative). To use binding as
a concrete example, in absolute binding free energy calcula-
tions, we compute the binding free energy of a ligand to an
individual receptor relative to a standard reference concen-
tration.
In contrast, in relative binding free energy calculations, we
compare the binding free energy of two related inhibitors to
determine the potency difference.
7.1 Absolute and relative free energy
calculations have some differences
Many of the issues around simulation setup and protocol
choice for alchemical calculations are common, but there
are some differences between absolute and relative calcula-
tions. We will consider protocol differences before treating
the common elements.
7.1.1 Choices unique to relative free energy
calculations
Topologies
A critical ﬁrst step in relative calculations is to select an ap-
proach to these calculations, determining whether to use a
dual topology, single topology, or hybrid topology approach to
relative calculations.
The distinction between these can be illustrated by con-
sidering a hypothetical transformation from molecule A to
molecule B, where both atoms share a common substructure
but differ in their substituents; e.g. consider a transformation
of benzene to benzyl alcohol Fig. 3. In this case the common
substructure is the benzene ring, though the substructure
may be larger depending on how it is deﬁned, as we discuss
below.
In single topology calculations, the overall transformation
is set up to involve as few additional atoms as possible, so
benzene would be typically changed into benzyl alcohol by
changing one of the hydrogens into a carbon. This site will
also be the future home of two additional hydrogen atoms
bound to the new carbon, so these must initially be present
as non-interacting atoms called “dummy atoms”, which retain
their bonded interactions but do not interact with the rest
of the system. Bond parameters as well as partial charges
2
The distinction is a bit of a misnomer, since both compute ratios of partition
functions relative to another state and in that sense are relative, while neither
computes an absolute free energy.
13 of 48
A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
between the changing atoms are adjusted accordingly be-
tween the initial and ﬁnal state. Thus, in a single topology
calculation, atoms may change their type, ensuring minimal
dummy atoms are created. This is illustrated in the left arm
of Fig. 3.
In contrast, in a dual topology alchemical free energy cal-
culation, no atoms are allowed to change type [43]. This
means that the benzene to benzyl alcohol transformation in-
volves starting with benzene plus the non-interacting dummy
atoms making up the hydroxy methyl group, then passing
through an intermediate state where some atoms are partially
interacting— particularly, those atoms which are becoming
dummy atoms or ceasing to be dummy atoms [120]. The
transformation ﬁnally culminates in a state where benzyl alco-
hol is present along with the additional dummy atom which
was previously a corresponding hydrogen of the benzene.
Fig. 3’s right branch depicts how such a dual topology works.
Hybrid topology calculations have seen much less use but
essentially consist of two absolute free energy calculations in
opposite directions at the same time, turning one molecule’s
interactions with the environment off, while turning the other
molecule’s interaction on [121, 122].
Most existing software implementations currently use sin-
gle or dual topology approaches; for example, AMBER TI uses
a dual topology approach, while BioSimSpace uses a single
topology approach. Please make sure to check what approach
is used with your software package of choice, or whether it
supports your choice of approach (GROMACS, for example,
supports both). To our knowledge eﬃciency differences have
not been thoroughly explored, though conventional wisdom
suggests that fewer dummy atoms are better, as introducing
or removing atomic sites is usually more diﬃcult, requiring
more intermediate steps [75, 123].
Atom mapping
Once a particular approach to the topology is selected, a cru-
cial next step is to identify the common atoms which will
not be perturbed. Rigorously, this process typically com-
prises a MCSS search of the molecules involved to identify
the common substructure—though the parameters of the
MCSS search will differ depending on whether single or dual
topology calculations are planned. Speciﬁcally, with a single
topology approach in mind, atom types are allowed to change,
so a permissive MCSS search can be done, whereas with dual
topology a more strict search is required.
There are different tools that allow the generation of MCSS
matches as well as single topology input. A large number of
software tools can compute MCSS matches using different
cheminformatics packages. Some rely on RDKit [124], such
as LOMAP [123], FESetup [80] and partially BioSimSpace [34],
H
M
H
Du
M
Du Du
Du
Du
Du Du
Du
Du
H
M M
M
M
M M
M
M
M
Du
Figure 3. Two common topologies for alchemical calculations:
single and dual topology. Left: A single topology uses softcore po-
tentials to convert from one type of atom to an other. Dummy atoms
(Du) are used when there is no corresponding maximum common
substructure match between the two molecules for certain atoms.
Right: The dual topology does not convert one species to another,
but only converts between Du atoms and an interacting species, but
usually uses softcore potentials for this. The ’mixed’ intermediate
atoms are used in both dual and single topology approaches. Only
the way the transformation occurs and the end states differ. Fol-
lowing the arrow along the left and right illustrate the differences.
Figure adapted from http://www.alchemistry.org/wiki/Constructing_
a_Pathway_of_Intermediate_States
14 of 48
A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
Figure 4. Illustration of maximum common substructure
matches MCSS is shown in green for when (A) a restrictive MCSS
match is used and in (B) ring breaking is allowed.
while others such as fkckombu [125] are standalone tools.
Schrödinger’s FEP+ planning tool was originally based on a
version of LOMAP, and it also uses MCSS matching as well
as 3D considerations to plan the network of single topology
calculations between molecules [15].
MCSS searches can be relatively time consuming, so if
the goal is to assess a library of ligands to identify promising
pairs for relative calculations, it can be helpful to use faster
approaches such as shape similarity to perform an initial
similarity assessment and then use MCSS only to identify
ﬁnal mappings for relative calculations [126–128]. The MCSS
approach, though relatively standard, takes into account only
topological similarity. It is possible that changes in binding
mode could actually require a different choice of mapping, so
in some cases mappings may need to be planned differently
depending on 3D positioning of atoms in space.
Single topology relative calculations, and calculations
based on substructure searches, only work if in fact the
ligands share a common substructure, e.g. are part of a
congeneric series, see Fig. 4. If no common substructure is
shared, then alternative dual or hybrid topology free energy
calculations are needed, where one would co-localize a pair
of compounds in a binding site, exclude their interactions
with one another, and compute the relative binding free
energy by turning one molecule on from being dummy atoms
while turning the other off. To our knowledge no general
pipeline for such calculations yet exists and this would likely
remain a research problem. Using an absolute free energy
approach instead seems more promising in such a case.
Ring breaking and forming.
Relative free energy calculations for ring breaking and form-
ing are particularly challenging/problematic (see Fig. 4 B), in
part because relative calculations rely on the free energy con-
tributions of dummy atoms canceling between different legs
of the thermodynamic cycle, which may not be true whenever
dummy atoms are involved in rings [129]. Some approaches
have attempted to address this [130] but a general solution
is not yet in mainstream use, though FEP+ implements one
solution.
Perturbation maps
Based on the input ligand series, a perturbation map or net-
work can be planned. Recent heuristics have shown the more
connected the perturbation network the better, however,
there is a way to optimize network structure while minimizing
the number of perturbations that need to be computed re-
ducing the resulting computational cost [84, 85]. Sometimes
the introduction of intermediates that are not part of the orig-
inal congeneric series are essential to avoid ring breaking, or
deal with perturbations that would otherwise result in large
numbers of atoms being inserted or deleted. Some commer-
cial tools have good underlying heuristics but may fail with
complicated input, needing user validation in particular when
dealing with chiral compounds.
In some cases, during the lead optimization stage, or for
very large datasets that would beneﬁt from rougher initial
free energy ranking, or in cases where perturbations would
be rather large a star shaped network as seen in Fig. 5 A is
used. However, adding redundancy into the network means
that a better error analysis can be carried out, by looking at
cycle closure errors as discussed in sec. 8.5, with an example
given in Fig. 5 B.
Methods in experimental design have been applied to
the construction of the perturbation maps. Yang et al. [84]
optimized the perturbation map by selecting a ﬁxed num-
ber of calculations from the pairwise perturbations so that
the resulting set of calculations minimize the total variance.
Xu [85] optimized the perturbation map by allocating different
amounts of simulation time to different pairwise perturba-
tions so as to minimize the total variance, given the total
simulation time of all the perturbation calculations. Both ap-
proaches lead to substantial reduction in the statistical error
of the estimated free energies.
Constraints and relative free energy calculations
One issue which requires particular care is the use of
constraints. Commonly, bonds involving hydrogen are
constrained to a ﬁxed length using algorithms such as
SHAKE or LINCS, allowing the use of longer timesteps [131].
However, in single topology relative free energy calculations,
the atoms involved might be mutated to other atom types
– for example, in a mutation of methane to methanol, one
hydrogen might become an oxygen atom. Typical molecular
dynamics engines are not set up to recognize this change,
15 of 48
A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
A
B
Figure 5. Examples of perturbation networks (A) Star shaped net-
work with the crystal structure in the center. (B) Network with cycle
closures (see more on this in Sec. 8.5). Arrows indicate the direction
of the perturbation. Fully converged binding free energy calculations
yield binding free energy changes which sum to zero around any
closed cycle. However, in practice errors may not sum to zero around
closed cycles, providing a way to look for potential sampling prob-
lems. Here in (B), green cycles indicate cycles with hypothetically
good cycle closure, red those with poor cycle closure. The red arrow
indicates a poorly converged simulation that would give rise to bad
cycle closures. The diamond indicates the use of a crystallographic
binding mode.
Figure 6. Thermodynamic cycle required for an absolute free
energy calculation – absolute free energy of binding example
The fully interacting ligand in water (A), has its charges turned off to
pass to (B) followed by turning of van der Waals terms, resulting in a
non-interacting ligand in water in (C). Restraints are used on the fully
interacting ligand in the binding site of a protein or host molecule (D).
The next step is to turn off the charges again (E) followed by the van
der Waals interactions resulting in a non-interacting complex state
(F). Free energyes can be computed as ∆Gbind = (∆Gelec
solv
+ ∆GVdW
solv
) –
(∆Gelec
bound
+ ∆GVdW
bound
).
or at least not to correctly include contributions to the free
energy from changing constraints/constraint length, so
results for a transformation would usually be erroneous. At
present the most general solution to this problem is simply to
avoid the use of constraints (and thus use a smaller timestep
if necessary, usually of around 1 fs) in any relative free energy
calculation involving a transformation of a constrained bond,
as done by GROMACS.
7.1.2 Absolute free energy calculations must handle
the standard state and use restraints
Absolute free energy calculations involve completely remov-
ing the interactions between the ligand or solute and its envi-
ronment, taking it to a non-interacting state that may or may
not retain intramolecular non-bonded interactions. This non-
16 of 48
A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
interacting state can then be shifted between environments
(from the protein to water, or from one solution to another)
without changing its free energy other than that due to the
changing volume of the simulations, and then interactions
can be restored in the new environment.
Absolute free energies are by deﬁnition reported with
respect to a speciﬁc reference or standard state, which effec-
tively determines the arbitrary point at which the free energy
is 0. The role of the standard state is particularly evident from
the expression of the binding free energy between a receptor
R and ligand L
∆G = –kBT ln c◦
Kb

= –kBT ln

c◦ [RL]
[L][R]

. (17)
Here, the reference state concentration c◦
converts the bind-
ing constant Kb into a dimensionless quantity expressed in
reference concentration units. It should be noted that ignor-
ing the term c◦
is equivalent to assuming a reference concen-
tration of 1 D–1
, where D are the units used to express Kb,
and would thus cause the value of ∆G to vary with the choice
of the units. It is convenient to deﬁne a standard state at a
constant pressure of 1 atm and where each chemical species
(i.e., A, B, and AB) in the reaction solvent has a concentration
of c◦
= 1 M = 1 molecule/1660 Å3
but do not interact with
other molecules of R, B, or RL.
Handling the standard state in absolute free energy
calculations.
For solvation free energy calculations, handling the standard
state is typically straightforward, and treating it correctly sim-
ply means ensuring that the non-interacting solute is taken
to the same (or equivalent) ﬁnal reference state in both en-
vironments, e.g. that the transformation involves a 1 M to 1
M equivalent transfer free energy (where the non-interacting
solute still occupies essentially the same volume as the solute
in the interacting system). So typically in such cases no special
care is required to ensure the correct standard state, as long
as the experimental data being analyzed uses the same stan-
dard state. If this is not the case, a simple entropic correction
is needed.
For binding, however, the situation is more complex and
requires special care. Because the simulations are typically
performed using restraints and at concentrations that are
different from 1 M, the expression of the free energy requires
the following correction [53] (see an example of such a ther-
modynamic cycle in Fig. 6)
∆G◦
restr = –kBT ln

c◦
VL

– kBT ln

ξL
8π2

, (18)
where VL and ξL are respectively the volume of the
translational and rotational degrees of freedom of the non-
interacting ligand in the simulation box. When no restraints
are used, the non-interacting ligand is free to translate and
rotate in the simulation box (i.e., VL = Vbox and ξL = 8π2
),
and the rotational term is zero. A suﬃciently thorough
exploration of the simulation box by the non-interacting
ligand is, however, required for the formula to be valid.
This is typically hard to achieve as the exploration process
is governed by diffusion. The addition of a restraint limits
the volume available to the non-interacting ligand, thus
speeding the convergence of the sampling. In addition,
when enhanced sampling methods such as Hamiltonian λ
exchange are used (see Sec. 7.2.4), the use of a restraint is
typically necessary as it keeps the ligand in the binding site
in the interacting state (see also Sec. 7.2.1) and generally
reduce the round-trip time of replicas. When restraint are
employed, the values of VL and ξL are restraint-dependent,
but for commonly employed restraints, these can be usually
easily computed analytically or numerically by solving the
relevant integral.
Several choices of restraints are possible.
In practice, a variety of types of restraints are common, from
simple harmonic distance restraints between the ligand and
the protein [132], to ﬂat-bottom restraints which work sim-
ilarly but only exert a force if the ligand leaves a speciﬁc
region [133]. Because these restraints do not limit the rota-
tional degrees of freedom of the ligand, the rotational term
entering the correction in Eq. 18 is zero.
Alternatively, a set of restraints proposed by Boresch have
also commonly been employed, where all six rigid-body de-
grees of freedom governing the orientation of the ligand
relative to the receptor are restrained [134, 135]. Further re-
straints, such as on the overall ligand RMSD have also been
used [65].
In principle, all of these forms will yield correct binding
free energies in the limit of adequate sampling if their effects
and connection to the standard state are correctly handled,
but they have different strengths and weaknesses. For exam-
ple, with more involved restraints, sampling at intermediate
~
λ values will usually not need to be as extensive but more
computational effort must go to computing the restraining
free energy. Additionally, such restraints would typically keep
the ligand from exploring alternative binding modes. This
restriction may be undesirable when using Hamiltonian λ ex-
change or expanded ensemble techniques where allowing the
ligand to exchange binding modes when it is non-interacting
could provide sampling beneﬁts [136]. More speciﬁcally, ﬂat-
bottom restraints might allow a ligand to explore multiple
binding sites, harmonic restraints multiple binding modes
within a site, while Boresch restraints a single binding mode
within a single site. See additional discussion of the possibility
of multiple binding modes in Sec. 7.2.6 below.
17 of 48
A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
Many choices of restraints involve selecting reference
atoms. Again, in principle this choice is unimportant given
adequate simulation time but practical considerations may
be important. The choice is likely especially important with
Boresch-style restraints, where some relative placements of
reference atoms are likely to be numerically unstable; ad-
ditionally, ligand reference atoms should likely be in a part
of the molecule which deﬁnes the binding orientation well,
rather than in a ﬂoppy solvent-exposed tail, for example.
7.2 Absolute and relative calculations deal
with some of the same issues
7.2.1 Handling weak binders and high dissociation
rates
In binding free energy calculations, only the conformations in
which the receptor and ligand form a bound complex should
be sampled from the bound states (Sec. 3). Determining what
the bound states actually are can be challenging for weakly
bound ligands. For tightly bound ligands, virtually all reason-
able deﬁnitions of the bound state will lead to be equivalent
free energies, since the partition function will be dominated
by a relatively small number of low-energy poses. For weak
binders, this simpliﬁcation breaks down. In fact, the correct
bound state may depend on the type of experiment per-
formed. For example, isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) or
surface plasmon resonance (SPR) measurements effectively
deﬁne a binding state that includes all ligand comformations
that are complexed with the protein, regardless of where on
the protein they bind. In contrast, ﬂuorescence polarization
competition assays measure binding to only a single location,
where the ligand of interest displaces a competing binder.
Therefore, care must be taken to ensure that a reasonable
deﬁnition of the binding site is used [136]. In absolute calcula-
tions, this applies to the fully interacting state in the complex
leg of the thermodynamic cycle (top-right state in Fig. 6), while
in relative calculations this must be true at both end states
of the complex leg (top- and bottom-right states in Fig. 2).
In principle, this requires deﬁning which conformations are
considered to be bound before running the calculation, but
it is common practice to start the simulation with the ligand
already placed in the binding site and rely on kinetic trapping
to maintain the bound complex. This strategy, however, can
fail when the dissociation rate of the ligand has the same
or smaller order of magnitude than the length of the sim-
ulation. This is typical of weak binders such as fragments
binding shallow pockets with µM-mM aﬃnities [55, 137]. In
this case, using a ﬂat-bottom or harmonic restraint between
receptor and ligand in the bound state(s) can prevent dissoci-
ations [73, 137]. We stress that this is normally avoided as it
generally introduces bias in the free energy estimate, which is
why the restraint is usually activated only in the intermediate
states in absolute calculations. The bias can be corrected
through reweighting schemes [73], but this post-processing
step can be avoided if a ﬂat-bottom restraint is used and
the ligand never hits the potential wall during the simulation
in the bound state. It is important to note that the spring
constant and/or radius parameters of the restraint effectively
determine which conformations are considered to be bound.
As a consequence, these parameters must be tuned to the
system so that only the binding site is accessible to the ligand.
Again, this step is particularly important for weak binders as
their free energy of binding is known to be more sensitive to
the deﬁnition of the binding site [53].
In absolute calculations, this restraint can substitute or
be added to the restraint used to handle the standard state
correction (Sec. 7.1.2). In the latter case, to compute the stan-
dard state correction analytically, the bound-state restraint
must be turned off in the decoupled state. Alternatively,
a ﬂat-bottom restraint can be activated also in the decou-
pled state as long as the second restraint (e.g., a harmonic
or Boresch restraint) prevents the ligand to hit the wall of
the ﬂat-bottom potential [73]. Finally, even for tight binders,
dissociation events can be enhanced by methods such as
Hamiltonian replica exchange [136, 138, 139] and expanded
ensemble [140, 141], especially in absolute free energy calcu-
lations using harmonic or ﬂat-bottom restraints. In the latter
case, dissociations can be averted simply by increasing the
spring constant and/or reducing the radius of the restraint
potential to prevent the exploration of ligand conformations
outside the binding site in the decoupled state (bottom-right
state in Fig. 6) that could be propagated to the bound state.
7.2.2 Changes in net charge can be
challenging/problematic.
If the net charge of the system changes as the alchemical
variable changes during the calculation, this can pose major
challenges. Speciﬁcally, ﬁnite-size effects can introduce sig-
niﬁcant charge-dependent artifacts into computed binding
free energies, in part because typical schemes for long-range
electrostatics (including PME and reaction ﬁeld) do not handle
free energy contributions from such changes effectively or
as they would be handled in a hypothetical macroscopic bulk
solution [142–144].
There are two main potential solutions to avoid artifacts
due to changes in net charge: Correcting for the introduced
artifacts, or avoiding changing the net charge.
Many relative free energy planning tools have been set up
to avoid changing the net charge of the systems considered,
including LOMAP [123] and Schrödinger’s FEP+ [15]. Absolute
free energy calculations can also potentially avoid changing
the charge of the system by making a charge perturbation
18 of 48
A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
B
...
λ=0 λ=0.2 λ=0.8 λ=1
λ
A
B
A
B
C D
P(potential
energy)
λ
Figure 7. Alchemical intermediates are created by making the po-
tential energy depend on an additional variable ~
λ that interpolates
between the chemical endpoints. In (A), at ~
λ = 0 the molecule is a
fully interacting phenol and at ~
λ = 1, a fully interacting benzene. (B)
shows an illustration of the probability distribution of the potential
energies as the switching function takes values of ~
λ = 0 to ~
λ = 1.
Intermediates states are required for a suﬃcient overlap in potential
energies to estimate a free energy difference between ~
λ = 0 and
~
λ = 1. Soft-core potentials provide one of the most eﬃcient families
of intermediate pathways, with a ~
λ dependence. In (C) the poten-
tial energy surface is coloured according to ~
λ with blue being ~
λ = 0
and ~
λ = 1 orange. In (D) the potential is coloured according to the
potential energy. Note how as ~
λ approaches 0, the energy smoothly
approaches zero at all r, a necessary requirement for eﬃcient and
stable calculations.
of equal and opposite sign elsewhere in the system; for ex-
ample, as a charged ligand is removed, a charged counterion
of opposite sign could also be removed, or one of the same
sign could be inserted. This is sometimes referred to as an
"alchemical ion" approach for dealing with the needed charge
change, and is also employed by the Yank free energy pack-
age [136]. Charge corrections have also been explored, and
are potentially a viable solution to this problem [145] where
artifacts introduced by ﬁnite-size effects are corrected nu-
merically [92, 143]. However, application of such corrections
typically remains less common than the use of a co-alchemical
ion.
When free energy calculations do need to change the
charge of a ligand or solute, the literature does not yet seem
to indicate what approach should be preferable, so consider-
able care should be taken. We are not yet aware of a careful
comparison of charge corrections versus other approaches
such as decoupling an ion at the same time, so in our view the
issue of proper handling of charge mutations in the context
of alchemical calculations remains a research problem.
7.2.3 The importance of the alchemical pathway
Both absolute and relative calculations must choose an al-
chemical pathway connecting initial and ﬁnal states. In prin-
ciple, because of the path independence of the free energy,
any arbitrary pathway will give the correct free energy change,
but the choice of pathway will greatly affect the eﬃciency of
the calculations.
Some choices are particularly crucial—for example, trans-
formations involving insertions or deletions of atoms should
employ a soft-core potential path for Lennard-Jones or other
interactions with repulsive interactions that go to inﬁnite en-
ergy at small radius [146–148].
The key consideration for choosing alchemical pathways
is that the intermediate states that a given pathway produces
should sample conﬁgurational ensembles that change as
slowly as possible as ~
λ changes, while still managing to go
from the initial state to the ﬁnal state as ~
λ goes from 0 to 1.
Another way of stating this is that intermediate states
should sample molecular conﬁgurations that are as similar
as possible to their neighboring states. The more similar the
conﬁgurations are between intermediate states, the lower
the statistical uncertainty is in the estimate of free energy be-
tween intervals. This can be proven directly from the BAR and
MBAR formulas [25, 42], though the exact same principles
apply for TI. For a ’good’ path to work and give a sequence of
states with maximally similar conﬁgurations, suﬃcient simi-
larity in potential energies is required. Fig. 7 A and B illustrate
this. Fig. 7 A shows in a pictorial way a soft-core potential can
be applied across different ~
λs. Fig. 7 B illustrates the potential
energy distributions at the different ~
λ intermediates, with
suﬃcient overlap between neighboring ~
λ states to ensure
that reweighting estimators such as MBAR can be used for
analysis (see Sec. 8.3). The actual transformation is best han-
dled with soft-core potentials of the form shown in Fig. 7 C
and B, with more details given below.
So what are the options to adjust the potentials between
the two end states based on ~
λ? The simplest possible alchem-
ical pathway is a linear pathway:
U(~
q,~
λ) = ~
λU0(~
q) + (1 – ~
λ)U1(~
q) (19)
so-called because the dependence on ~
λ is linear. This
clearly satisﬁes the basic requirement that it gives the initial
endpoint potential energy U0(~
q) when ~
λ = 0 and ﬁnal endpoint
energy U1(~
q) when ~
λ = 1.
For many energy terms, as long as a repulsive core remains
on, this is a very good approach. For example, it can be shown
that if van der Waals repulsions are left on, then the linear ap-
proach is very nearly the optimal path possible for changing,
removing, or inserting the electrostatic energy terms, with
the path being within about 10–20% of the minimum possible
uncertainty [149] for a ﬁxed amount of simulation, as well as
19 of 48
A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
being nearly optimally eﬃcient for van der Waals attractive
terms with repulsion terms turned on [150]. Although we
are not aware of any quantitative tests for dipolar or higher
multipole terms, theoretically it should behave equally well
for those systems.
However, this approach ends up being terrible for remov-
ing or adding repulsive potentials that go to inﬁnity quickly
at or near the origin. One way to look at this is to examine
how low ~
λ values must go to reduce the energy at 0.5σ (the
atomic size parameter) down to 1 kBT, where thermal ﬂuctu-
ations make it possible for other atomic sites to penetrate
routinely that deep. If we are trying to go from a particle
being present, and desire to make it disappear alchemically,
then if the repulsive terms are of the form σ
r
12
, then if  was
1 kBT at the temperature of interest, and we start with the
particle present, then solving for (1 – ~
λ)(1kBT )

σ
1
2 σ
12
= 1kBT
we get ~
λ = 1 – 2–12
∼ 0.999976. At this point, we have gone
virtually all the way to the end of the transformation, but
there is still an impenetrable post in the middle of our sim-
ulation! This is not very much like the desired ﬁnal state of
no interactions between the particle and its environment.
We can play around with a few ways of modifying this, like
simulating many more intermediate states near ~
λ = 1. How-
ever, various analyses have shown that this is not a very good
strategy [146, 148, 151–153].
What we need instead is a function that smoothly gets
rid of this inﬁnity. A large number of schemes have been
tried [146, 150–155], but the most common strategy that
appears to be the best practice is to use a "soft-core" potential,
of the form:
U(~
rij,~
λ) = 4ij
~
λ
1
(α(1 – ~
λ) + (rij/σij)6)2
–
1
α(1 – ~
λ) + (rij/σij)6
!
,
(20)
where rij is the distance between two particles i and j, ij
and σij are the Lennard-Jones parameters corresponding to
the interaction between particles i and j, and α is a constant
(0.5 is optimal for the speciﬁc functional form shown above).
This functional form has exactly the property we are look-
ing for: it recovers the Lennard-Jones potential when ~
λ = 1,
and the other endpoint (~
λ = 0), it is exactly zero for all rij
everywhere, and as ~
λ goes to zero, the α(1 – ~
λ) term lowers
the inﬁnite energy in the core. There are several different
variants of the same functional form [146, 151, 152], but the
one given in eq. 20 is easy to understand and implement and
fairly numerically stable. This functional form is shown in C
and D of Fig. 7.
It has been shown that more complicated forms are not
signiﬁcantly more eﬃcient than eq. 20 [154]. We therefore
recommend using the softcore potential given in eq. 20, un-
less there is a compelling reason otherwise. Using a similar
equation to eq. 20 may be acceptable in most circumstances
if that is what is supported in your chosen software. However,
if you are inserting or removing entire atomic sites, we heavily
recommend against using the linear approach; it will be very
diﬃcult to get correct and converged results.
So far in this section, we have discussed optimal ways of
disappearing or appearing Lennard-Jones interaction sites
and turning on and off electrostatics terms. What about
performing both transformations at the same time? We can
not turn off the electrostatics linearly at the same time we
turn off the Lennard-Jones terms, as it would leave inﬁnitely
large attractive and repulsive electrostatic terms "bare" at
small ~
λ, resulting in the simulation crashing. It is possible to
apply the same soft core approach to the Coulomb interaction
and this is indeed done in a number of implementations, in
which case it is important that the Coulomb interaction is
softened more rapidly than the Lennard-Jones interaction to
avoid charge penetration issues, which can be tricky to ensure
for all types of perturbations [156].
A safe but potentially more computationally expensive
approach is to perform the transformations in sequence;
ﬁrst, turning off all electrostatics for atoms that must be
removed, inserting and removing Lennard-Jones sites (both
the insertion and removal can be done simultaneously), and
then turning electrostatics for the introduced particles on.
Again, If there are no removals or introduction to atomic sites,
then it is reasonable to change the interactions in the ﬁrst
and third steps linearly.
Other issues, such as whether absolute calculations
should retain or remove intramolecular non-bonded in-
teractions through either annihilation [132, 134, 157–159]
or decoupling [132, 160] must be considered. Reasonable
eﬃciency can be often obtained with either choice even if
some are somewhat better or worse than others, and there is
no consensus on which is better in most given situations. Our
recommendation is to leave the intramolecular interactions
on during the transformation for simplicity if there are no
other known issues with this approach. The key thing to
watch out for is whether the total potential energy, and
therefore the intermediate ensembles sampled, change
smoothly from beginning to end. These problems can be
diagnosed by noticing lack of conﬁguration space overlap
between different simulations (see Sec. 8.5).
Relative calculations introduce additional choices, such
as the order in which to modify nonbonded interactions. A
common process in single topology relative calculations is
to ﬁrst remove electrostatic interactions of any atoms which
will be deleted, then modify other non-bonded interactions,
then restore electrostatic interactions of any atoms which
are being inserted. Although this is a simpler path to un-
20 of 48
A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
derstand cognitively and can take advantage of the soft-core
potential from eq 20, this can lead to more intermediate
steps and thus be more computationally expensive. Other
schemes, such as simultaneously changing electrostatic and
Lennard-Jones interactions with electrostatic “soft-core” po-
tentials [161] may be implemented with fewer intermediate
but could require ﬁne-tuning of electrostatic and Lennard-
Jones softcore parameters to avoid numerical instabilities. At
the time of writing, there has not been conclusive evidence
to suggest one approach is better in general than the other,
so discretion should be left up to the user as to what is vi-
able from both hardware resources, and what the simulation
software supports.
A key additional consideration in choosing the alchemi-
cal pathway is the choice of spacing of intermediate states.
The spacing depends to some extent on the choice of anal-
ysis method, though states should essentially be spaced
equidistant in the relevant thermodynamic length [162, 163].
For BAR/MBAR techniques this means that states should be
spaced so that the statistical uncertainties between neighbor-
ing states be equal; [154, 164] Some schemes to adaptively
optimize the spacing of intermediate states based on ini-
tial exploratory simulations have been proposed [165]. For
molecules changing in dense solvent, then the best path is
roughly independent of molecule size and shape, so what
works for one molecular transformation is likely to be rela-
tively eﬃcient for another [166].
7.2.4 Which sampling scheme will work best for my
problem?
Though all alchemical simulations must sample from multiple
~
λ states, different approaches can be used to achieve this.
Fig. 8 illustrates the four most common schemes. The sim-
plest approach involves running an independent simulation
at each of the predeﬁned ~
λ values (see Fig. 8 A). This type
of scheme is currently used for AMBER TI calculations [17]
and for Sire as implemented in BioSimSpace [34]. However,
if these simulations can be run simultaneously with commu-
nication between them, a simple extension allows mixing
between these replicas. In this approach, the simulation at
each ~
λ can undergo periodic exchanges with neighboring ~
λ
values. This form of replica exchange (Hamiltonian replica
exchange) is based on ideas developed from Monte Carlo sim-
ulations of spin glasses by Swendsen and Wang [167]. With
the Metropolis-Hastings acceptance criterion for exchanges,
the generated ensemble of all replicas still samples from the
Boltzmann distribution, thus this approach has been used in
many different contexts for molecular simulations [138, 168–
170]. The basic idea of the replica exchange scheme is shown
in Fig. 8 B. It is supported in various software packages that
provide alchemical implementations, such as GROMACS [13],
FEP+ [15], and NAMD [121]. A third approach borrows ideas
from simulated tempering [171]. In this scheme a single
replica rapidly explores all of ~
λ space by working out optimal
weights that allow switching between different intermediate
~
λ values, as seen in Fig. 8 C . This approach is also referred
to as self adjusted mixture sampling [140, 141, 172] and
while promising, has so far only been supported in OpenMM
Tools [173]. The last approach makes use of non-equilibrium
simulations [7]. In this approach, only end state ~
λ replicas
(~
λ=0, ~
λ = 1) are simulated at equilibrium; intermediate infor-
mation is generated from non-equilibrium simulations that
rapidly transition between end-states. This approach is avail-
able in GROMACS and appears to be coming online in several
other packages. A schematic of this approach is shown in
Fig. 8 D.
Currently, we recommend using Hamiltonian replica ex-
change type sampling schemes (Fig. 8 B). If these are not
available in the code of choice, running independent sim-
ulations at different ~
λ values can be acceptable, especially
when conformational sampling is fast (Fig. 8 A). Single replica
schemes and non-equilibrium schemes are not as established
yet, but are very promising.
7.2.5 How long should I run my simulation for and
what information should be saved?
Before launching alchemical free energy calculations it is
wise to consider how convergence and completion will be
assessed. Different conditions on when to stop alchemical
free energy calculations should be determined, and this may
require several iterative checks and therefore modiﬁcations
to the calculation protocol. One useful metric to use for termi-
nation is the expected or desired uncertainty of a desired free
energy estimate, though care must be exercised should the
uncertainty estimate prove unreliable. In particular, if the rate
of change in the free energy estimate is signiﬁcant when this
condition is met, the simulation may not be locally converged,
and more sampling may be necessary to determine a stable
free energy estimate which is no longer changing signiﬁcantly
over time. However, this is not the only metric which should
be used, as the uncertainty only captures the information
about the sampled phase space, not necessarily the entirety
of the phase space. For example, convergence of relative free
energy calculations in predictive simulations where the en-
tire phase space is not known in advance, requires sampling
the different kinetically stable states [75]. This highlights the
importance of choosing the correct thermodynamic path to
ensure you sample the required thermodynamic states as
discussed in Sec. 7.2.3.
The condition of minimizing the statistical uncertainty of
different free energy estimators below a suﬃcient threshold
should be one metric monitored over the simulation. This
21 of 48
A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
A
B
C
D
…
λ1
λ2
λΝ
…
λN-1
λ1
λ2
λΝ
λN-1
λ1
λ2
λΝ
λN-1
…
…
… … …
…
neq
MD
ns/µs
https://link.springer.com/protocol/
10.1007%2F978-1-4939-8736-8_2
λ1
λΝ
…
ns
P(-W)
P(W)
Figure 8. Four most common sampling strategies. (A): Multiple
replicas in parallel at different lambda states. Each arrow symbol-
ises an independent ~
λ simulation. (B): Hamiltonian replica exchange
scheme. Each arrow represents a short simulation interval before
an exchange through Metropolis Hastings acceptance (dice) is at-
tempted. A tick means an accepted exchange a cross a rejected
exchange. (C): Single replica scheme sampling from all ~
λ states. After
a short simulation time symbolised by the arrow, the lambda-state
is attempted to change until all N lambda states will be sampled.
(D): Non-equilibrium sampling scheme, where two equilibrium sim-
ulations at the end-states are run as indicated by the blue and pink
arrow. Non-equilibrium simulations are attempted at intervals to
switch between the two end-states.
can be done through the uncertainty estimator built into cer-
tain analysis tools such as MBAR, or can be done though
more general statistical tools like bootstrap sampling. A tar-
get statistical uncertainty should be chosen at the onset of
the simulation to avoid excessively long simulations, or falling
into the trap of running until the free energy estimate is "good
enough," which is subjective and has no deﬁned criteria. This
could be a ﬁxed value such as 0.20kcal/mol, or a functional
quantity such as "below 0.5kcal/mol and 10% of the free en-
ergy estimate." The user does not need to monitor this in-
formation in real-time and can choose to run simulations for
ﬁxed duration (either time or number of samples) and run
analysis on the data collected thus far. If more samples are
needed, the simulations can be resumed, or, started again in
different initial conditions.
Convergence in other alchemical observables should also
be monitored to determine if the deﬁned phase space has
been suﬃciently sampled and enough decorrelated samples
have been drawn. These additional observables include, but
are not limited to, the variance in dU
d~
λ
across all ~
λ values, cal-
culating the variance in free energy using bootstrap analysis,
and comparing differences in free energies calculated using
different percentages of the simulation in both the forward
and reverse directions ( see Fig. 9).
Each of these metrics have demonstrated promising re-
sults for diagnosing when a simulation has a convergence
issue beyond simple convergence of uncertainty estimate.
Results obtained from calculations with convergence issues
should be checked for errors or run for longer before any
conﬁdence should be placed in conclusions drawn from their
analysis. In relative calculations that share similar binding
modes, for example, and do not induce large conformational
changes when in complex with protein, the need to sample
exhaustively to converge estimates in free energy differences
is often not necessary due to the locality of sampling changes
in the molecular topology and shared phase space of the
core atoms. However, even subtly induced changes in protein
binding conﬁguration will require more sampling or cause lo-
cal convergence to a free energy estimate that has high error.
The conﬁdence a user should have in a free energy estimate
is signiﬁcantly improved when both the uncertainty of the
free energy estimate is low, and when other observables have
reached a convergence.
The uncertainty in the free energy, for example, has
multiple ways to be estimated, e.g. through standard error
propagation methods (including MBAR’s estimator, which is
based on the same principles as standard error propagation),
through bootstrap methods, through multiple independent
runs, etc. Independent of how the property is estimated,
its important to remember that they are estimations of the
property, not the true underlying property itself. These
22 of 48
A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
A B
C D
E F
Figure 9. Free energy (in kBT) for two different relative binding
free energy perturbations. Each plot shows the estimated free
energy change using a varying fraction of total simulation time (up
to 5 ns total). Subplots (A), (C), and (E) show a three step protocol
for a perturbation involving 3 perturbed atoms, while (B), (D), and (F)
shows the same protocol for a perturbation involving 10 perturbed
atoms. The ﬁrst step of the protocol is the decharging then removing
van der Waals interactions and then recharging. The difference in
energy between the forward (blue) and reverse (red) free energy
calculations at the midpoint of the simulation time gives an indication
of the overall convergence of the simulation, with differences over 1
kBT indicating poor convergence.
Figure 10. Potential of mean force with respect to ~
λ for TI and
MBAR The estimated PMF for a bound calculation of a Tyk2 ligand
pair of the Wang et al. [15] with respect to ~
λ estimated from TI and
MBAR and showing agreement within errorbars.
estimators are usually consistent estimators, meaning they
will converge to the true answer in the limit of suﬃcient
sampling, not necessarily unbiased ones though. As such, it is
a good idea to subject different estimators to the same data
to see if they yield either the same estimate (within error and
bias), or if they ﬂuctuate wildly. See for example the potential
of mean force with respect to ~
λ estimated from a bound
simulation of a Tyk2 ligand pair of Wang et al. [15] for both
the MBAR and TI estimators, as seen in Fig. 10. This is not
a perfect method as some estimators, such as exponential
averaging, will converge signiﬁcantly more slowly, relative to
more accurate estimators like MBAR. Therefore, it is a good
idea to apply the estimators to different fractions of the data
to see if the main estimator of free energy you have chosen
is stable.
Each method requires different data from the simulation
be collected. If, for instance, the free energy estimator se-
lected is thermodynamic integration, then values of dU
d~
λ
at
uncorrelated data points must be collected. Once a combina-
tion of knowing what type of simulation you will run, which
alchemical topology you will simulate, what alchemical path
you will simulate along, and what your stopping conditions
are, then you are ready to enumerate the information you
should capture. Below is a sample of the minimal information
you need for a set of common estimators (discussed in more
detail in Sec. 8.3):
• Thermodynamic Integration (TI) requires
∂u(~
q)
∂~
λ
.
• Exponential Averaging (EXP) needs either ∆uk,k+1(~
q) or
∆uk,k–1(~
q), depending on the direction its being evalu-
ated in.
23 of 48
A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
• Bennett Acceptance Ratio (BAR) needs both ∆uk,k+1(~
q)
and ∆uk,k–1(~
q).
• Weighted Histogram Analysis Method (WHAM) and Mul-
tistate Bennett Acceptance Ratio (MBAR) both need the
complete set of ∆uk,j ∀ j = {1...K}. WHAM must have this
information binned.
The potential derivative required for TI should generally
be calculated during the simulation; only under very rare cir-
cumstances [149] can it post-processed by a code that does
not evaluate the derivatives. Many codes already have op-
tions for doing this. If that option is unavailable, you can
estimate it through ﬁnite difference (if suﬃcient information
is collected), but this will introduce signiﬁcant error, and is
generally not a best practice. The BAR estimator may be a
better, and simpler choice at that point as you will have at
least the same level of information. The potential energy
differences required for EXP, BAR, MBAR, and WHAM can be
calculated either during the simulation or in post-processing.
It is recommended to calculate the potential differences in
code when possible to avoid extra overhead and possible
errors produced by running the simulation twice, and to re-
duce the amount of stored information. Although TI must
usually be calculated in code, as it requires the derivative,
there is one condition under which it actually has the fastest
computation time. If the alchemical path you have chosen is
a linear alchemical path, then you get du
d~
λ
= u0(~
q)–u1(~
q), which
is the difference between the initial and ﬁnal states. However,
because of the problems with linear paths already discussed
in this paper, this simpliﬁcation is rarely that useful.
Free energy information should generally be saved more
frequently than coordinate data, approximately at the rate
that uncorrelated samples are produced. The on-disk size
of the data for free energy estimation is often signiﬁcantly
smaller than full atomic coordinates, so the information
should be collected frequently. However, the information
should not be collected every time step, as most free energy
techniques are operated at equilibrium, and need equili-
brated and decorrelated samples for an unbiased estimate.
A sample collected every time step will likely result in most
samples being discarded due to decorrelation routines in the
analysis. However, if it is computationally cheap and disk
space is plentiful, do save often. One may safely assume
that the correlation time is greater than 100-200 fs even for
relatively simple systems such as small molecules in solvent,
so saving no more frequently than every 50-100 steps is
recommended. How decorrelation impacts calculations, and
how to compute it is discussed in Sec. 8.2.
7.2.6 Multiple or uncertain binding modes may
require considerable care
In a discovery setting, new ligands can have unknown or at
least uncertain binding modes [100, 174–176], complicating
binding free energy estimation. This uncertainty is because
it is usually not desirable to estimate a binding aﬃnity for a
ligand which already has an available bound structure, since
such a compound has already been tested. To deal with
prospective ligands with unknown binding modes, discovery
projects commonly assume that modiﬁcations of functional
groups on a common scaffold result in a consistent binding
mode across all members of a series. This is not necessarily
always the case [100], as reviewed elsewhere [175] and in
some cases unexpected binding mode changes can be the
origin of apparent non-additivity in structure-activity relation-
ships [176]. Binding modes also tend to be particularly vari-
able in the case of fragments, which often may have multiple
relevant binding modes [177].
Absolute free energy calculations for dissimilar ligands can
have particular challenges because the (potentially incorrect)
assumption of consistent binding modes across a series of
similar ligands is likely to be even less robust than the in the
case of relative calculations. This means that researchers per-
forming absolute binding free energy calculations will have
to pay particular attention to generating reasonable putative
binding modes.
In some cases, it is tempting to simply use docking tech-
niques to generate initial bound structures for starting molec-
ular dynamics simulations. However, timescales for binding
mode interconversion are usually slow compared to MD/free
energy timescales, meaning that simulations started from
different potential binding modes are likely to yield disparate
computed binding free energies [46, 75, 132, 178] . And dock-
ing techniques are good at identifying sterically reasonable
potential binding modes, but still perform relatively poorly at
identifying a single dominant binding mode a priori.
It is worth highlighting a recent SAMPL blind challenge on
HIV integrase as an illustration of this. Many submissions,
using state-of-the-art methods, had diﬃculty even predicting
which binding site ligands would bind in (most submissions
placed more than half of the ligands into the incorrect binding
site), and even given correct binding sites, the binding mode
within each site was also quite diﬃcult to predict [120]. The
best performing submission for predicting binding modes
actually ended up being a human expert (aided by computa-
tional tools) with more than 10 years of experience on the par-
ticular target [179], rather than a fully automated approach.
While free energy calculations on this set had some success,
many of the failures actually ended up being cases where
the binding mode selected as input for free energy calcula-
24 of 48
A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
tions was later found to be incorrect [180], highlighting the
importance of these issues.
One approach which has shown some success is to re-
tain diverse potential binding modes from docking, perform
short MD simulations of these to identify distinct stable bind-
ing modes, and then consider these in subsequent calcula-
tions [12, 132, 180–182].
Routes to handle multiple potential binding modes are
different depending on whether absolute or relative calcula-
tions are selected, unless a method is available to estimate
the relative populations of different stable binding modes in
advance (e.g. such as the BLUES approach currently in devel-
opment [46]), in which case this approach could be applied
to assist both types of calculations.
Handling multiple potential binding modes within
absolute calculations.
Within absolute binding free energy calculations, multiple
potential binding modes can be handled by two main strate-
gies: Consider each binding mode separately (a separation
of states strategy) or sample all binding modes within a sin-
gle simulation [75]. This couples to the choice of restraints
selected, as some restraints will allow transitions between
binding modes and even binding sites (Sec. 7.1.2), and others
do not.
Sampling all potential lignad binding modes within a sin-
gle free energy calculation is usually impractical without some
form of enhanced sampling or at least Hamiltonian replica
exchange [136] because barriers for binding mode intercon-
version result in kinetics which are too slow compared to
simulation timescales [46, 75, 132, 178]. Hamiltonian ex-
change, coupled with appropriate restraints, can allow the
ligand to relatively rapidly exchange between potential bind-
ing modes when non-interacting, accelerating sampling of
binding modes [136]. However, it is not always clear that this
is desirable, since this also increases the size of the conﬁgura-
tion space which must be sampled even if the binding mode
is known.
Separation of states provides a simple though potentially
expensive alternative, where each stable binding mode is
considered separately with a binding free energy calculation
restricted to that binding mode, and then (as long as the bind-
ing modes are non-overlapping) the resulting component
binding free energies can be combined into a total [75, 132].
This approach necessitates a separate binding free energy cal-
culation for each potential binding mode, however, so it can
be computationally quite costly. If relative populations of dif-
ferent stable binding modes were available from some other
technique, it could make this separation of states approach
considerably more eﬃcient [46, 75].
Handling multiple potential binding modes within
relative calculations.
Multiple potential binding modes pose particular problems
for relative free energy calculations, as having multiple start-
ing structures for these calculations could yield substantially
different calculated relative binding free energies for the
same transformation due to kinetic trapping, and, without
additional information (speciﬁcally, the free energy of binding
mode interconversion or, equivalently, the relative popula-
tions of different binding modes) it becomes impossible to
sort out which of the multiple answers is in fact the correct
relative binding free energy.
To deal with this, some practitioners have actually
computed relative binding free energies of different binding
modes of the same ligand [178]. For example, a perturbation
which adds a methyl to an aromatic ring of a larger ligand
might yield one result if the methyl points in one direction,
and a different value if it points in the other due to slow
ring motions [183, 184]. One could compute the free energy
of turning off the methyl group in one orientation and
turning it back on in the other orientation to obtain the free
energy difference between the two potential binding modes.
While this approach has precedent, it is relatively diﬃcult to
automate at present and requires considerable care.
Overall, this likely means that relative free energy calcu-
lations will be susceptible to problems resulting from uncer-
tainty in ligand binding modes until more robust approaches
are available to determine dominant binding modes, or the
relative populations of different potential binding modes, in
advance.
8 Data analysis
Once data has been collected from alchemical intermediates,
it must be analyzed to produce an estimate of the free energy
change (and its associated statistical uncertainty) for each
leg of the thermodynamic cycle. While a number of different
estimators are available that will give consistent results under
optimal circumstances, some approaches are recommended
over others due to their robustness and ability to provide
information on poor convergence.
8.1 Detecting the boundary between
equilibrated and production regions
Much of the infrastructure for analyzing alchemical free en-
ergy calculations relies on the concept of asymptotically un-
biased estimators, which produce unbiased estimates of the
free energy when fed very long simulations [185]. In real-
ity, free energy calculations are often initiated from highly
atypical initial conditions (such as a protein-ligand geometry
obtained from docking and subjected to a heuristic solvent
25 of 48
A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
placement scheme), and simulations are of a ﬁnite length dic-
tated by available computational resources and computing
demands. As a result, these estimators can produce signiﬁ-
cantly biased estimates if fed the entirety of simulation data
generated without further processing [186].
To minimize this effect, an initial portion of the simulation
is often discarded to equilibration [40], with the idea of remov-
ing the most heavily biased initial portion of simulation data
but retaining the unbiased production region that represents
a stationary Markov chain process sampling from the desired
equilibrium target distribution. Because the simulation time
required for the atypical initial sampler state to relax toward
equilibrium is a property of the speciﬁc system being simu-
lated and the speciﬁc initial conditions selected, it is simplest
to collect data for the whole process and use an automated
algorithm to select how much data should be discarded to
equilibration in a post-processing step.
A simple approach to automatically partitioning simula-
tion data into equilibration and production regions is de-
scribed in [186] (illustrated in Fig. 11). Suppose we have a
simulation of length T consisting of correlated data. Here,
the goal of the post-processing step is to select the equilibra-
tion boundary t0 ∈ [0, T] so as to maximize the number of
effectively uncorrelated samples remaining in the production
region N[t0,T], which is deﬁned as
N[t0,T] =
T – t0
g[t0,T]
(21)
where g[t0,T] is the statistical ineﬃciency of a timeseries at,
described in more detail below. Conveniently, this procedure
also produces the information necessary to decorrelate the
simulation data for estimating the free energy differences, a
requisite next step in analysis. This approach is implemented
within the MBAR [187] and alchemlyb [188] packages, and is
highly recommended for standard practice.
For additional discussion of working with correlated data
and autocorrelation analysis, please refer to the work on
Best Practices for Quantiﬁcation of Uncertainty and Sampling
Quality in Molecular Simulations [41].
Computing the timeseries for equilibration detection
Typically, the timeseries of note at analyzed in automated
equilibration detection is the negative logarithm of the proba-
bility density (π(xt;~
λ)) sampled by the MCMC algorithm (up to
an irrelevant additive constant). For simple independent sim-
ulations that sample xt ∼ π(x;~
λ), this is given by the reduced
potential
at ≡ – ln π(xt;~
λ) + c = u(xt;~
λ). (22)
Note that the use of the effective reduced potential is
not guaranteed to pick up on all slow relaxation processes
A
B
C
D
E
Figure 11. Automatic partitioning into equilibration and produc-
tion regions. (A) The average (black line) standard deviation (shaded
region) of the reduced potential u∗ over many independent replicate
simulations started from the same initial conditions show a signiﬁcant
initial transient change before relaxing to the true average potential
energy (B). A cumulative average (red) of the entire simulation data
demonstrates simulation bias not seen when initial simulation data is
omitted (blue). Using an automated approach to detect equilibration
of the boundary t0 using statistical ineﬃciency g (C) for an effective
simulation interval (D). (E) The optimal equilibration boundary t0 is
selected to maximize the number of uncorrelated samples. Figure
adapted from [186].
26 of 48
A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
that may be coupled to the alchemical free energy, but the
simplicity of its computation means it is generally appropriate
for most cases.
Cautions in automating equilibration detection
For simulations that are simply not long enough to contain
a large number of samples from true equilibrium either be-
cause they are very short or contain slow processes, this
procedure cannot completely remove the bias. In such cases,
this approach simply selects the ﬁnal portion of the the sim-
ulation, which may be contained in a single substate of con-
formational space, and may itself lead to biased estimates.
This situation can be detected if the equilibration boundary
t0 is a signiﬁcant fraction of the total simulation length T, with
a good rule of thumb being that T & 20t0. If this is not pos-
sible, advanced analysis techniques that assume only local
equilibrium (rather than global equilibrium) such as the TRAM
estimators [27, 28, 189] may be more appropriate, but are
beyond the scope of this paper.
8.2 Decorrelating samples for analysis
Computing the statistical ineﬃciency
Most estimators require an uncorrelated set of samples from
the equilibrium distribution to produce (relatively) unbiased
estimates of the free energy difference and its statistical un-
certainty. To do this, the production region of the simulation
is generally subsampled with an interval approximately equal
to or greater than the statistical ineﬃciency g ≥ 1 to produce a
set of uncorrelated samples that can be fed to the estimator
machinery [186],
g ≡ 1 + 2τeq (23)
where τeq is the integrated autocorrelation time, formally
deﬁned as
τeq ≡
T–1
X
t=1

1 –
t
T

Ct, (24)
with the discrete-time normalized ﬂuctuation autocorrelation
function Ct deﬁned as
Ct ≡
hanan+ti – hani2
a2
n – hani2
. (25)
The basic concept is that τeq corresponds to the single-
exponential decay time for the autocorrelation process
that generates samples, so the statistical ineﬃciency g
measures the approximate temporal separation between
two effectively uncorrelated samples (where two exponential
relaxation times are presumed to be suﬃcient).
Robust estimation of Ct for t ∼ T is diﬃcult due to growth
in statistical error, so common estimators of g make use of
several additional properties of Ct to provide useful estimates
(see Practical Computation of Statistical Ineﬃciencies in [186]
for a detailed discussion).
We recommend using the robust statistical ineﬃciency
computation routines available within the MBAR [187] and
alchemlyb [188] packages.
Subsampling data to generate uncorrelated samples
Once the statistical ineﬃciency g has been estimated, it is
straightforward to subsample the correlated timeseries sim-
ulation data to produce effectively uncorrelated data that
can be fed to the free energy estimators. Suppose the cor-
related timeseries is {at}T
t=1; we can form a new timeseries
of Neff ≈ T/g effectively uncorrelated samples by selecting a
subset of indices { t = round((n – 1) g) | n ∈ range(1, . . . , N) }
where round(x) denotes rounding to the nearest integer.
If independent simulations are used, the alchemical state
~
λ may have a signiﬁcant impact on the correlation time, and
these simulations should be subsampled independently us-
ing a separate estimate of the statistical ineﬃcinecy g for each
alchemical state. If coupled simulations are used (such as a
Hamiltonian replica exchange simulation), the replicas should
undergo equivalent random walks in alchemical space, and
the replicas can be can be subsampled with the same g to
generate an equal number of uncorrelated samples at each
alchemical state. Conveniently, the approach described above
for automated equilibration detection produces an appropri-
ate estimate of g over the production region for automating
this process.
Cautions and considerations
Reliable estimation of the statistical ineﬃciency is diﬃcult,
and estimates will not generally be as precise (in a relative
error sense) as averages. To ensure there is suﬃcient data
available for reliable decorrelation and estimation of free en-
ergy differences, it is recommended that the effective number
of uncorrelated samples Neff ≥≈ 50 if the BAR or MBAR es-
timators (discussed below in sec 8.3) are used; the number
may need to be much higher with alternate estimators.
8.3 Estimators for free energy differences
Free energy differences between two different states differ-
ing in the energy function are directly related to the ratio of
probabilities of those states. As can be noted, the partition
functions in Eq. 5 are simply the total accumulated probabili-
ties for all possible conﬁgurations of the system. Virtually all
of the ways to estimate this free energy are based in convert-
ing this ratio of integrals to something that can be measured
in one (or several) simulations.
The Zwanzig relationship (EXP)
The simplest method for calculating free energy differences
from simulations is the so-called Zwanzig relationship [1], also
27 of 48
A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
called one-sided exponential re-weighting (EXP), or simply free
energy perturbation, though this ﬁnal term is sometimes used
to encompass all ways of calculating free energy differences.
The (reduced) free energy difference ∆f01 between an
initial state 0 and a ﬁnal state 1 deﬁned by two different
potential energy functions u0(~
q) and u1(~
q) over coordinate
space ~
q can be calculated as:
∆f01 = ln
D
e–(u1(~
q)–u0(~
q))
E
0
= ln
D
e–∆u(~
q)
E
0
(26)
and the average is over all samples from the simulation per-
formed with u0. In the case of NVT (canonical) sampling and
assuming the masses do not change, then u is simply U/kBT,
and f is F/kBT, but it can be generalized to other ensembles
with the proper deﬁnition of f and u. Described in words, we
take the samples generated during our run with the potential
energy function u0(~
q) and calculate what the difference in
energy would be if we switched to potential energy function
u1(~
q), and average the exponential of the negative energy
difference to get the negative of the exponential of the free
energy difference. The original distributions, P(u0) as gener-
ated at ~
λ = 0 and P(u1) would look like those seen in Fig. 8
A-C on the left hand side. Reevaluating requires almost no
extra code functionality to perform; one need only to save
a full precision trajectory, and run an unmodiﬁed molecular
simulation code using the u1 in order to calculate the new
energies of stored snapshots. The analysis can be written
in a line of code. We note that this method is even more
general, in that the instantaneous work to change the po-
tential energy function from u0 to u1 can be replaced by the
non-reversible work W to make the same change under the
same equilibrium conditions at either end state [190–192],
though we do not go into all of the details of non-equilibrium
transformations here, and refer the reader to more advanced
treatments [70, 193–196].
Although the Zwanzig equation is formally correct (as long
as the two states considered sample the same phase space
volume, which is true for standard molecular models), it has
some very important numerical issues that mean that it often
performs badly for standard free energy calculations, even
for small molecules [185, 197]. One can show that if the
standard deviation of the difference ∆u(~
q) = u1(~
q) – u2(~
q) over
all sampled ~
q is large (which in this case, means only several
times kBT), then very few samples contribute to the average,
and the answer will be both biased and extremely noisy [198].
Essentially, the method is dominated by contributions of rare
snapshots [68, 69, 199].
The Bennett Acceptance Ratio (BAR)
If we have the differences in the potential energy sampled
from the distribution deﬁned by u0 to the state deﬁned by
u1, and we also have the differences in potential energies
from the distribution sampled by u1 to the state deﬁned by
u0, we can obtain a signiﬁcantly improved estimate of the
free energy difference compared to that obtained by EXP. This
estimate was ﬁrst derived by Bennett and is hence generally
called the Bennett Acceptance Ratio (BAR). It is solved by
ﬁnding the reduced free energy fij that satisﬁed the following
implicit equation:
ni
X
i=1
1
1 + exp[ln(ni
nj
) + uij(~
q) – fij)]
=
nj
X
i=1
1
1 + exp[ln(ni
nj
) – uij(~
q) + fij)]
, (27)
where ni and nj are the number of samples from each state.
More recent derivations show that this formula is the maxi-
mum likelihood estimate of the free energy difference given
sets of samples from the two states [70].
Many studies have demonstrated both the theoretical and
practical superiority of BAR over EXP in molecular simula-
tions [185, 197], and BAR converges to EXP in the limit that all
samples are from a single state [25, 25, 70]. BAR also requires
signiﬁcantly less overlap between the conﬁgurational space
of each state to converge than EXP, though some overlap
must still exist.
The Bennett acceptance ratio is only deﬁned between two
states. Usually, the endpoints of interest in a free energy
calculation are suﬃciently different that we will need a chain
of states that gradually change the potential energy function
from u0 to u1, as discussed in Sec. 7.2.3. You can simply carry
out BAR between each pair of states ∆f1→N = ∆f1→2 +∆f2→3 +
. . . + ∆fN–1→N.
There is one important thing to note about the uncertainty
estimates when summing multiple free energies together to
calculate an overall free energy estimate. Although BAR itself
gives a free energy estimate that is asymptotically correct in
and is much less biased than the uncertainty estimate for EXP,
the uncertainties in ∆fi–1→i and ∆fi→i+1 are not uncorrelated,
because they both involve the energies ui(~
q). The variances
of each of the free energies will not propagate as variances
usually do (in quadrature) into the variance of the overall
free energy. Instead, some other method for propagating the
uncertainty, such as bootstrapping [41] must be used.
Thermodynamic integration (TI)
By taking the derivative of the free energy with respect to the
variable ~
λ, we ﬁnd that:
df
d~
λ
=
d
d~
λ
"
– ln
Z
exp –u(~
λ,~
q)
Z(~
λ)
d~
q
#
=
*
du(~
λ,~
q)
d~
λ
+
~
λ
. (28)
And than we can then numerically integrate df/d~
λ over an
alchemical transformation, using a range of different well-
28 of 48
A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
established techniques, to obtain:
∆f =
Z 1
0
*
du(~
λ,~
q)
d~
λ
+
~
λ
d~
λ. (29)
This approach to calculating the free energy is called ther-
modynamic integration (TI). Averaging over
D
du
d~
λ
E
requires
fewer uncorrelated samples to reach a given level of relative
error than averaging e–u(~
q)
, as the distribution of values is
usually narrower, with a more Gaussian shape to the distri-
bution. Rather than being limited by overlap, as in the case
of BAR and MBAR (see below), we are instead limited by the
bias in the numerical quadrature, which must be minimized
suﬃciently to be beneath the level of statistical noise.
Various numerical integration schemes are possible, but
the trapezoid rule provides a simple and robust scheme. All
types of numerical integration can be written as:
∆f ≈
K
X
k=1
wk
*
du(~
λ,~
q)
d~
λ
+
k
,
where the weights wk correspond to a particular choice of
numerical integration. Researchers have tried a large num-
ber of different integration schemes [200–202]. However,
many other integration choices require speciﬁc choices of ~
λ
to minimize bias, which makes them unsuitable when the
intermediates have widely-varying levels of uncertainty. For
example, integrating a cubic spline interpolation provided
negligible beneﬁts over a simple trapezoid rule [203]. For
starting researchers, we therefore recommend the simple
trapezoid rule scheme, as it allows for maximal ﬂexibility in
which values of ~
λ are simulated. As ﬁtting to higher order
polynomials can have numerical instabilities for some energy
functions, and because alternate functional forms might only
be appropriate with some types of transformations, expertise
and experience is required to perform such numerical integra-
tion modiﬁcations. In practice, adding 2-3 more intermediate
states is typically suﬃcient to match the performance of these
more complicated numerical quadrature schemes.
One drawback of TI is that it requires derivatives with re-
spect to ~
λ to be calculated directly in the code. Unfortunately,
many problems of interest require using pathways (such as
the soft-core pathways, for removing repulsive interactions)
that are not linear, as we discuss, making this more complex.
Still, if the code of interest does compute du
d~
λ
, then TI is per-
haps the simplest method to use, as it involves a very little
post-processing effort.
The multistate Bennett acceptance ratio (MBAR)
One can generalize Bennett’s logic from two states to multiple
states to obtain a free energy estimator that uses energy
differences between conﬁgurations at all intermediate states
to compute free energy differences between all states. MBAR
gives a system of implicit equations for the free energies fi:
fi = – ln
N
X
n=1
exp(–ui(~
qn))
PK
k=1 Nk exp(fk – uk(~
qn))
, (30)
where there are Nk samples from each of K states, with
P
k Nk = N the total number of samples. Thus, we need
to evaluate the energy function ui for all samples obtained at
all states in the transformation. The equations can be solved
by a number of different standard routines. We note that
there are only K – 1 independent equations, so only K – 1 of
the free energies are independent variables, and one of the fi
must be speciﬁed (usually, without loss of generality, setting
it to zero).
MBAR is provably the lowest variance asymptotically unbi-
ased estimator of the free energy given the energies of the
samples [204], which means that BAR is also the lowest vari-
ance estimator for the free energy difference between only
2 states, as it is mathematically exactly the same as MBAR in
this case. MBAR also provides an uncertainty estimate, de-
rived from standard error propagation methods for implicit
functions, which has been shown to be highly accurate as
long as there are suﬃcient samples at each state [203].
MBAR can also be thought of as the Zwanzig estimator
of the free energy to state i where the sampled distribution
is the mixture distribution of all the other samples thrown to-
gether in one “pot”, deﬁned by pm(~
q) = N–1 P
k Nk exp(fk –uk~
q),
which is the weighted average of all the individual normal-
ized probability distributions from the simulations that are
performed. [205].
Recommendations
• We recommend MBAR if all energy differences are avail-
able. It is the lowest variance unbiased free energy
estimate given samples from multiple states.
• BAR is essentially just as good as MBAR for highly opti-
mized ~
λ intermediates. Speciﬁcally, if the ~
λs are chosen
such that intermediate states have moderate overlap
with their neighbors (i.e. between i and i + 1 and be-
tween i and i – 1, they will not have signiﬁcant overlap
with their next nearest neighbors i + 2 and i – 2. Thus
MBAR does not actually get signiﬁcant information from
these energy differences, so one might as well not even
calculate them, and just perform BAR between nearest
neighbors. [203]
• TI usually gives similar values as MBAR implemented
with suﬃcient numbers of intermediates, but quadra-
ture errors are hard to estimate beforehand can occur
if one is not careful. [203]
• WHAM is an approximation to MBAR, and there are no
compelling reasons it should be used. If careful, it is not
29 of 48
A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
necessarily much worse than the other methods, but it
always introduces some degree if binning error.
• Other variants, especially ones that adaptively deter-
mine the free energies can be useful in certain circum-
stances but beyond the scope of a Best Practices article.
8.4 Uncertainty estimation
It is important to consider the variation in your computed
free energies from your equilibrium simulations, in order to
obtain an estimate of uncertainty of the obtained value for
the free energies of interest. A recent best practices paper by
Grossﬁeld et al., [41] provides substantial detail on how to esti-
mate uncertainties from molecular simulations and is a good
starting point for this topic. In general, the quantiﬁcation of
different error metrics depends on both data generation and
analysis methods used from the ones discussed above.
The computation of free energies using TI (Sec.n 8.3)
is straightforward and the trapezoidal rule is often recom-
mended since it allows unequal spacing of ~
λ states, which is
required to minimize the variance in the free energy estimate,
but in principle any good numerical integration method can
be used. The determination of regions of high curvature
when estimating the integral is helpful to determine regions
of phase space where more sampling and/or more ~
λ states
are necessary to obtain the best approximation of the
integral. Plotting ~
λ with respect to the gradients at each of
the ~
λ values can be be a helpful diagnostic. Additionally,
computation of the overall variance of TI requires the
calculation of the overall variance of integration, rather
than each individual ∆Gi,i+1 and assuming variances add
independently. Therefore, var(∆f) =
PK
i=1 w2
k var( du
d~
λ
)k.
For alchemical changes that result in smooth, low curva-
ture sets of
D
dU
d~
λ
E
, a relatively small number of ~
λ states is
necessary for suﬃcient accuracy and low variance in the free
energy estimate. Depending on the diﬃculty of the pertur-
bation, the bias introduced by discretization of the integral
can become large due to increased curvature, and more ~
λ
intermediate states become necessary to reduce error. It is
recommended that researchers verify that a suﬃcient num-
ber of states are included such that the free energy is essen-
tially invariant to the number of lambda intermediate states
chosen. Good heuristics or measures to assess the ’diﬃculty’
of a given perturbation is still an ongoing research topic.
Compared with TI, the MBAR method (Sec. 8.3) discussed
above provides uncertainty estimation directly from solving a
set of linear equations to compute the variances between all
states. The number of states and amount of sampling should
be optimized to minimize the uncertainty in the MBAR free
energy estimate, while balancing other key considerations
such as computational expense.
If possible, it is advisable to analyze the same set of sim-
ulations with different estimators, providing an opportunity
for synergy. If different estimators agree the free energy esti-
mate is more reliable than if there are differences between
methods that are larger than 1 kcal/mol and would indicate
poor convergence.
Uncertainty can also be assessed for a particular pertur-
bation by repeating calculations with slight changes in initial
conﬁgurations, forceﬁeld parameters, and different random
seeds in the MD engine. The assessment of variability in free
energy calculations due to repeating simulations has been
previously reported [11, 16, 145, 203], and large variance in
free energies estimated from simulations with different ran-
dom seeds should be ﬂagged as issues with convergence.
For relative binding free energy calculations, additional
sensitivity analysis can be performed by changing the initial
conﬁgurations of non-core regions of the perturbation topol-
ogy and determining if this change in conﬁgurations results
in a large differences in the computed relative free energy,
indicating poor sampling of ligand conﬁguration. The pro-
posed changes in conﬁguration are increasingly relevant if no
experimental evidence is available to reduce uncertainty in
where the changing atoms should be positioned.
In addition to statistical uncertainty and sampling, a va-
riety of other factors can impact results from binding free
energy calculations. In addition to the choice of initial con-
ﬁguration, results can depend on the choice of force ﬁeld
for the protein/receptor, water, and small molecule(s), so re-
running calculations with different choices of force ﬁeld can
also be used to assess how sensitive results and conclusions
are to these particular choices. Other factors, like system
preparation (choice of protonation state, tautomer, counte-
rion presence, salt concentration, etc.) can also substantially
impact results [206, 207], so unless modelers are conﬁdent
they have these factors correct, sensitivity to these choices
may also need to be examined.
8.5 Are my simulations any good?
There are different easily measurable indicators that can test
how well converged simulations are, and if all alchemical
states have been suﬃciently sampled for a rigorous analysis.
Furthermore, once you have established that individual per-
turbations are well behaved, there are some tricks to ensure
the overall perturbation network gives reliable results.
Convergence of simulations
Fig. 12 illustrates how looking at the convergence of your data
may be important. In this example, the guest G3 shows differ-
ent convergence behaviour for two different hosts. The CB8
host with guest G3 has a longer correlation time than the octa
acid (OA) host. In some cases, slow correlation time may not
be expected and therefore not a feature known in advance.
30 of 48
A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500
total simulation time [ns]
12
10
8
6
G
[kcal/mol]
CB8-G3 OA-G6
Figure 12. Average binding free energy of 5 replicate Hamilto-
nian replica exchange calculations as a function of total simulation
time (i.e. the sum of the simulation time of all replicas) for the
two host-guest systems CB8-G3 and OA-G3. Shaded areas repre-
sent 95% conﬁdence intervals around the mean computed from
the 5 replicates data. The horizontal dashed lines show the ﬁnal
binding free energy prediction of the two calculations after a to-
tal of 5230 ns for OA-G3 and 6650 ns for CB8-G3. Longer cor-
relation times in CB8-G3 cause the calculation to converge more
slowly. The original data used to generate the plot can be found
at https://github.com/samplchallenges/SAMPL6/blob/master/host_
guest/Analysis/SAMPLing/Data/reference_free_energies.csv.
To this end, you should always look at all simulation data
available check convergence behaviour for each free energy
estimate and if need be extend existing simulations or try an
approach that requires simulations in two separate binding
modes where they interconvert at very slow timescales.
Overlap matrix
One way of assessing reliability of the calculations is checking
the phase space overlap between neighboring ~
λ-windows [68,
69]. For this purpose, a so-called overlap matrix O can be
used. O is a K × K matrix, with K being the number of simu-
lated states, i.e. values of ~
λ. Suﬃcient overlap is important
for reweighting estimators such as BAR or MBAR, but can-
not help assess reliability of estimates when using TI. These
matrices are graphical representations of the phase space
overlap, i.e. the average probability that a sample generated
at state ~
λj can be observed at state ~
λi. As this probability is
computed considering the samples from all states (and not
just the adjacent states), the values in each row and column
add up to 1. In this analysis, the goal is to ensure every state
has overlap with its neighbors in both directions – so that
off-diagonal elements are suﬃciently larger than zero. For ac-
curate calculations, the matrix should be at least tridiagonal.
Details on the calculation and properties of these matri-
ces can be found elsewhere [42]. In an overlap matrix O, the
off-diagonal values (Oi,j,i6=j) are negatively correlated with the
variance of the free energy difference. Accordingly, the uncer-
tainty of the free energy difference between the states i and j
will be smaller when Oi,j,i6=j is larger (and thus the values in the
main diagonal (Oi,j,i=j) are smaller). In order to obtain a reli-
able estimate of the free energy all neighbouring states must
be connected, i.e. there must be suﬃcient overlap between
the samples of these states (general description: Oi,j,i6=j ≥
threshold). However, due to the mathematical derivation it is
diﬃcult to explicitly describe the relation of the overlap matrix
and the variance by formulae. Consequently, the threshold
has to be derived empirically. It has been proposed that the
values of the ﬁrst off-diagonals (i.e. the diagonals above and
below the main diagonal) should at least be 0.03 to obtain a
reliable free energy estimate [42]. Smaller values should be
considered as a warning sign (see Fig. 13 C), as the variance
tends to be underestimated in case of poor overlap.
Fig. 13 A, B, and C shows examples of good, mediocre,
and poor overlap respectively. For Fig. 13 A, the probability to
ﬁnd a sample from state i in its neighbouring state j is about
0.2 for all states adjacent to the main diagonal, and hence the
overall connectivity is good. In the case of Fig. 13 B, the over-
lap is strongly diminishing in the lower right corner, raising
concerns regarding the reliability of the free energy estimate
obtained. For Fig. 13 C, the state at ~
λ index = 6 is connected
to neither of its neighbouring states. While this does not nec-
essarily imply that the result for this perturbation is wrong,
the energy estimate must at least be considered as highly
unreliable. In order to overcome the issue of poor overlap in
this example, additional sampling should be performed by
introducing additional states, i.e. ~
λ values.
Interestingly, as the variance is inversely correlated with
the number of states [42], it can in principle be reduced be-
low any arbitrary threshold with enough simulation time and
a large enough number of ~
λ windows. However, decreas-
ing the variance to a value close to 0 is not feasible, as this
approach would signiﬁcantly increase the calculation time.
While variance can be decreased by increasing simulation
length, if the overlap between states is known to be poor,
increasing the number of ~
λ values, or adjusting the spacing of
those values to better cover regions of poor overlap will likely
provide a larger immediate impact. Different approaches
are described in Sec. 7 and more details can be found in the
literature [208, 209].
Cycle closure error
Relative free energy calculations, which compute the change
in free energy on making a change to a molecule (e.g. adding
a functional group to a ligand) may provide an additional
opportunity for error/consistency checking. Particularly, such
calculations are often done to span a graph or tree of free
energy calculations [85, 87, 123]. In some cases the free
energy change to go between molecules A and B can be
obtained via multiple transformation pathways. This allows a
31 of 48
A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
A
B
C
Figure 13. Overlap matrices: Visualising overlap matrices can help
with assessing the quality of simulation data. (A) shows good over-
lap with all ﬁrst off-diagonal entries well above 0.03, the suggested
threshold, (B) is an example of mediocre overlap with good overlap
at lower ~
λ values and poor overlap at high ~
λ values. (C) shows poor
overlap resulting in disconnected simulations with unreliable MBAR
estimates.
type of consistency checking where we assess how much the
free energy change for that transformation in practice differs
from equivalence.
Signiﬁcant deviations from this typically indicate insuﬃ-
cient conﬁgurational sampling along the lambda schedule of
one or more of the transformations involved. This approach
may be generalised to sets of connected transformations
given the requirement that the sum of free energy changes
along edges of a closed cycle should be zero. This analysis
is called “cycle closure”. In practice, such thermodynamic
cycles do not actually sum to zero, and deviations become
increasingly large as the size of the cycle increases owing
to propagation of error. Though no ﬁrm guidelines have
emerged, it may be judicious to perform additional conﬁgu-
rational sampling along edges of a network that are involved
in cycles closing poorly. This may be done by extending the
duration of simulations, or by averaging free energy changes
over multiple repeats. The latter approach may yield more
reproducible free energy changes, but at the expense of a
stronger bias on the estimated free energies due to repeated
use of the same input coordinates.
A scheme to reduce cycle closure errors is used in FEP+
whereby calculated free energy changes along the nodes of
the network are re-sampled assuming estimates of the calcu-
lated free energy change along a node may be obtained from
a Gaussian distribution centered on the estimated free energy
change and with a standard deviation equal to the estimated
standard deviation of the free energy change. The procedure
then uses a maximum likelihood method to ﬁnd new sets of
free energy changes that minimize cycle closure errors [87].
An alternative approach computes the free energy change
between a target and reference compound as a weighted av-
erage over all unique paths in the network, with the weights
derived from the propagated uncertainties of each node [16].
Approaches as illustrated by Yang et al. for perturbation map
design can also be used to compute relative free energies
between target and reference compounds [84].
Reversible binding simulations
An even more stringent test of the correctness of binding free
energy calculations is to compare the results to the equilib-
rium binding constants derived from long timescale reversible
binding simulations [55]. For small ligands with millimolar
aﬃnities, repeated binding to and unbinding from the protein
can occur for a large number of times in a suﬃciently long un-
biased MD simulation (10-100 µs), and the equilibrium bind-
ing constants can be computed from the ratio of bound to
unbound fractions of the simulation time. The agreement be-
tween the binding free energy calculations and the reversible
binding simulations—given the same system preparation and
the same force ﬁeld parameters—will strongly support the
32 of 48
A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
correctness of both calculations, as the same results are ar-
rived at by two independent methods, and any discrepancy
will suggest some systematic error in one, or both, of the
two methods. As part of validation testing of alchemical free
energy codes a benchmark set to compare alchemical and
direct computation of equilibrium binding constant should
become standard in future.
8.6 Common issues to watch out for during
analysis
It is important to carefully examine output data for common
problems. Some of the most important things to check for
are:
• Sampling of the binding site by the ligand: Make
sure the ligand samples the binding site reasonably
tightly for its expected potency and ﬁt, and that it does
not depart out of binding site in the coupled end state
if it is a moderate to strong binder.
• Consistency of free energy estimates across differ-
ent estimators Signiﬁcant discrepancies (further out-
side the error estimates than would be plausible) be-
tween free energies calculated with different free en-
ergy estimators such as TI, BAR, and MBAR. All of these
estimators converge to the same results with suﬃcient
sampling. Differences between them indicate poor over-
lap or errors in processing.
• Have replicas mixed well? Poor replica mixing (for
replica-exchange) or λ-space sampling for single-replica
methods. If the system is not mixing between states,
then the states are insuﬃciently close for mixing, or else
there are bottlenecks in the conﬁgurational sampling
that limit the accuracy.
• Behaviour of correlation times: Correlation time that
does not vary relatively smoothly as a function of ~
λ. Dis-
continuities indicate that the system is sampling signiﬁ-
cantly different conﬁgurations with only small changes
to the Hamiltonian changes. This usually indicates sam-
pling problems.
• Dependence of the free energy on initial confor-
mation of the system. Ensemble average properties
should not depend on the starting point.
• Torsional sampling Torsions with multiple low-energy
minima where some of these minima are that are visited
rarely or not at all. Which torsions have low energy min-
ima can best be found by comparing to the simulation
in the solvent. There should be clear physical reasons
that simulation in the complex has different torsional
distributions that the ligand in the solvent.
• Free energy dependence on ~
λ The free energy should
vary relatively smoothly with ~
λ. If it varies drastically,
then either there need to be ﬁner sampling in ~
λ in this
region, or there are sampling problems there.
• Convergence of free energy The free energy should
clearly converge as a function or of simulation time (Fig.
9).
• If using nonequilbirum methods, is the result indepen-
dent of the speed at which the nonequilibrium change
is performed? Nonequilibrium methods are in theory
independent of the switching time in the limit of good
sampling unless the switching time is simply too short.
• Visualization of data In general, inspect output data
such as energies and visualize the simulation trajecto-
ries and assess if they match your expectations. Many
issues can be spotted by a straight forward visualiztion.
8.7 Best practices for reporting data
Following best practices for data generation and their analysis
does not mean that data is reported in the optimal way. As
a practitioner of alchemical free energy simulations you also
should use best practices for reporting and plotting your
results. We encourage the following standard set of analyses
and ways to represent data.
Statistics to include
As with any modelling technique, misuse of statistical analysis
can skew the perception of how well models perform in free
energy predictions. First, error estimates should always be
included on your predictions in whatever form you present
your data (scatterplots, barplots, etc; see next paragraph).
We recommend performing triplicates of your predictions
at minimum, with starting points that are expected to be
uncorrelated, to ensure some measure of reliability in your
data. This replication may seem excessive, but uncertainty
estimates often underestimate the true statistical uncertainty.
Where performing multiple replicas of the simulation is not
possible, an error estimate from e.g. MBAR can be used,
though bearing in mind this is likely an underestimated error.
As alchemical free energy methods are used in drug dis-
covery to quantify and rationalise structure activity relation-
ships (SAR), the models ability to (a) correlate well with ex-
periment and (b) rank-order the molecules by aﬃnity, should
both be computed. Conventionally, this means including an
R2
(or Pearson’s R), where R = +1 means high correlation,
R = 0 means no correlation, and R = –1 means high anti-
correlation) and a Kendall τ (with perfect ranking agreement
when τ=1 and perfect disagreement when τ=-1) metric in your
results. Additionally, practitioners may choose to include a
Spearman ρ as well. Brown et al. [210] have provided a use-
ful analysis in terms of upper bounds of expected possible
correlations between experiment and computation with a
given potency range for the compounds. For example, for
33 of 48
A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
potency ranges of 2 log units it would be impossible to get
a higher correlation in R than 0.8 because of experimental
uncertainties [210]. What often is neglected to include is an
error analysis on correlation statistics that arise from the er-
rors of both experimental and computed data. One way to
include such error analysis for correlation metrics is using
bootstrapping on the datasets. The D3R community chal-
lenges follows best practices on their data evaluation with
readily available python scripts online [211], based on work
by Pat Walters [212]. Other analysis software also provide
similar functionality for bootstrapping datasets [213].
Mean unsigned error (MUE, also called mean absolute
error/MAE) is another key statistic to include in your results.
Even though some models’ near-perfect correlation and rank-
ing statistics might suggest excellent accuracy, MUE values
can still have errors of show multiple kcal/mol of error, provid-
ing important additional insight into performance. Further-
more, MUE allows for unbiased comparisons between predic-
tive models as it is less sensitive to dataset size. Other metrics
such as Gaussian Random Aﬃnity Model (GRAM) [214], Pre-
dictive Interval (PI) and Relative Absolute Error (RAE), attempt
to correct for the inherent potency range of a dataset, which
can aid in comparing success between different targets. We
recommend further reading on evaluation of computational
models [210, 212, 215, 216].
Reporting the results of relative free energy calculations
requires care. As shown in Fig. 5, relative free energies can
be performed arbitrarily as a forward or a reverse process,
and thus relative free energies may be reported as either
positively or negatively valued. The consequence of the two
possible signs for relative free energies is that correlation
statistics (such as Pearson’s R and Kendall τ) can be skewed
depending on which sign is analysed. The issue of this incon-
sistency can be circumvented by either plotting all datapoints
within a consistent quadrant [79], or by avoiding the use of
correlation statistics for assessment of relative free energy
calculations and instead measuring accuracy using RMSE and
MUE which are unaffected by choice of sign.
Presenting your data
As essentially all alchemical free energy prediction schemes
are regression problems, the preferred type of plot is a scat-
ter plot (see Fig. 14). Most alchemical free energy projects
will look at 10-50 ligands; any study with <10 ligands is more
suitable for bar plots (with inclusion of error bars), and will
unlikely provide meaningful statistics. Any study with >50
ligands often contains multiple protein targets to which al-
chemical free energies may perform better on some targets
than others. Because of this, it is bad practice to place multi-
ple datasets on the same plot as this can suggest high model
accuracy even though the individual models perform less
Figure 14. An example of recommended practices for graphing
alchemical free energy predictions. This ﬁgure shows the relation
between predicted and experimentally-determined Gibbs free en-
ergy in kcal/mol with standard errors as error bars. The dark and
light-orange regions depict the 1- and 2-kcal/mol conﬁdence bounds.
Statistical metrics for the data are reported, with 95% conﬁdence
intervals determined by bootstrapping analysis. Extra care should be
taken when investigating potential outliers further.
well [216].
As we are interested mainly in the linear relationship be-
tween the alchemical free energy predictions and the experi-
mentally -determined aﬃnity values, plots should be depicted
with the same range on both axes (i.e. x = y) with a 1:1 as-
pect ratio, with units for both experiment and simulation
converted to be the same. If this skews the plot to a point
where it is diﬃcult to read of information, using the same
dimensions, such that e.g. 1 cm is 1 kcal/mol is acceptable.
Furthermore, bounds should be depicted for the 1- and 2-
kcal/mol conﬁdence regions. These regions can serve as tools
to communicate your model performance: any predictions
inside the 1 kcal/mol region can be seen as highly reliable,
any predictions inside the 2 kcal/mol region should be seen
as somewhat reliable, and any predictions outside the conﬁ-
dence regions should be expected to be unreliable (and han-
dled as outliers). In a drug discovery context, this type of data
depiction may suggest the reliability of alchemical FE predic-
tions in the project, and can give an idea of how trustworthy
predictions can be for synthesis ideas. It is also recommended
to included experimental error bars in all plots.
An example of a best practice scatter comparison between
computed and experimental values is shown in Fig. 14, high-
lighting outliers, error bars and conﬁdence intervals. The data
34 of 48
A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
for this plot is artiﬁcially generated for illustration purposes.
9 Conclusions
Alchemical free energy calculations have seen a vast increase
in popularity both in academic research as well as pharma-
ceutical industry applications in structure based drug discov-
ery [36, 38, 217]. Commercial products such as FEP+ and
Flare, which provide a convenient user interface make the
setup and use of these methods a lot easier [15, 19], but this
convenience comes with less ﬂexibility in terms of choice of
simulation protocols. It is also important to understand the
current limitations of the methodology to recognise when
automated workﬂow tools can be used effectively for a given
protein target and when they are likely to fail still. Prospective
prediction challenges such as the Drug Design Data resource
grand challenges provide a community driven platform to
evaluate different free energy protocols against each other on
blinded targets [218, 219]. Such efforts have highlighted that
selection of seemingly identical or similar potential energy
function or simulation package does not guarantee produc-
tion of similar free energies owing to differences in simulation
protocols. We hope that the best practice guide provides a
set of tools that allow a better understanding of how to setup,
run, and reliably interpret alchemical free energy calculations.
10 Selection of available software
packages
There are many different software solutions available for
the setup, running, and analysis of alchemcial free energy
calculations. These will vary in customizability and ways in
which they are ran, e.g. graphical user interface versus com-
mand line tool or python script. The following provides a
non-exhaustive list of commercial and noncommercial tools
available for conducting alchemical free energy calculations.
Simulation software: Commercial
– FEP+ is a tool offered by Schrödinger Inc. under a
commercial license. It has an intuitive GUI which
makes it easier for non-experts to run alchemical
free energy calculations and analyze the results. It
runs the DESMOND MD package under the hood
and hence parallelizes well on GPUs [15].
– Flare is a commercial structure-based drug design
software offered by Cresset. Similar to FEP+ it
has an easily accessible graphical user interface
and strives to facilitate free energy calculations for
non-experts while offering advanced users full con-
trol via a Python API. It only runs on GPUs, using
CUDA or OpenCL [19]. It is build on top of the open
source software packages Sire and BioSimSpace
(cf. below).
– The molecular operating environment (MOE) of-
fered by the Chemical Computing Group (CCG) has
a tool for performing free energy calculations. It is
built on AMBER-TI (cf. below).
All the above tools also provide a convenient setup and
analysis suite and are really a one in all product.
Simulation software: Free/low cost academic and
Commercial
– CHARMM has a variety of tools developed over
the years. The PERT module can be used to de-
ﬁne initial and ﬁnal states and deﬁne the inter-
mediate lambda points. FREN and BAR modules
can be used to analyze the data after the MD run.
Lambda-dynamics-based free energy calculation
can be carried out using the BLOCK module.
– AMBER, including its new pmemd.cuda version sup-
ports free energy calculations [220].
Simulation software: Open Source
– PLUMED is an open source tool which enables
the usage of a variety of MD engines. It is de-
signed as a plugin for MD packages such that it
analyzes the trajectory on the ﬂy. It also offers a
VMD based plugin for the computation of collective
variables [221].
– BioSimSpace is a free, open source, multiscale
molecular simulation framework, written to allow
computational modellers to quickly prototype and
develop new algorithms for molecular simulation
and molecular design [34].
– Sire is a multiscale, molecular simulation frame-
work that provides several applications, including
SOMD, an MD/MC code for performing FEP calcu-
lations via an interface to OpenMM.
– YANK is a tool developed by John Chodera and
group on the top of OpenMM MD package. It al-
lows the users to write their inputs in easy-to-use
YAML format.
– GROMACS is a molecular simulation package with
a signiﬁcant number of free energy methods im-
plementations. The LiveCOMS GROMACS tutorial
includes an example free energy calculation [222].
– PMX, an add-on to GROMACS, offers a mutation
free energy calculation module[223].
– Q is MD code for performing FEP calculations using
a variety of force ﬁelds [224].
Setup tools:
– PMX: GROMACS https://github.com/deGrootLab/
pmx.
35 of 48
A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
– Lomap/Lomap2 : Relative alchemical transforma-
tion graph planning for setting up perturbation
networks [123].
– CHARMM-GUI is a web-based tool for setting up a
variety of MD simulations. It can be used to gen-
erate CHARMM scripts for solvation and ligand-
binding free energy calculations [225].
– QligFEP offers robust and fast setup of FEP calcula-
tions for the software package Q [82].
– ProtoCaller, a setup tool for the automation of Gro-
macs free energy calculations. ProtoCaller [226]
– FESetup has been developed primarily to setup
calculations in AMBER, GROMACS and SIRE [80]
Analysis tools:
– Alchemlyb: Multipackage free energy analysis
https://github.com/alchemistry/alchemlyb [227].
– pymbar: MBAR implementation, but have
to roll your own analysis wrapper https:
//github.com/choderalab/pymbar [26].
– Arsenic: Standardising alchemical free energy anal-
ysis https://github.com/openforceﬁeld/Arsenic
– Free Energy Workﬂows: Sire-speciﬁc free energy
map analysis using weighted path averages https:
//github.com/michellab/freenrgworkﬂows.
Generally, commercial software will offer more com-
plete pipelines in which standalone analysis applica-
tions are not necessarily needed; free and open source
packages often require manual analysis.
11 Alchemical free energy datasets: an
overview
The following contains a non-exhaustive summary of alchemi-
cal free energy datasets that can serve as a starting point
to review approaches or test new implementations. The
ﬁeld is moving towards a more standardised way of gener-
ating protein-ligand benchmark datasets and the progress
of these efforts can be tracked here: https://github.com/
openforceﬁeld/FE-Benchmarks-Best-Practices. Currently lack-
ing an exhaustive set of benchmark datasets, the review by
Williams-Noonan et al. [228] contains an overview of recently
published alchemical free energy studies. For comparison of
FEP+ and Gromacs (using the AMBER99SB-ILDN and GAFF2
force ﬁeld), cf. the recently published study by Pérez-Benito
et al. [79]. An overview of further suggested benchmark sets
can be found in the review by Mobley and Gilson [206] or
on alchemistry.org [229]. These include cyclodextrins, the
Cytochrome C peroxidase (CCP) protein model binding site,
thrombin and bromodomains as well as solvation benchmark
sets [203]. Please refer to table 1, for a small overview of
Table 1. Selection of example datasets
Publication Targets Ligands Force Field
D3R Grand Challenges [230]
GC3 [219] 6 266 various
GC2 [218] 1 102 various
GC2015 [231] 2 215 various
SAMPL Challenges [232]
SAMPL6 [233] 3 21 various
SAMPL5 [234] 3 22 various
SAMPL4 [235] 2 23 various
Schrödinger Datasets
FEP+ Dataset [15] 8 199 OPLS2.1
FEP+ Dataset [71] 8 199 OPLS3
FEP+ Dataset [236] 8 199 OPLS3e
FEP+ Dataset [17] 8 199 GAFF 1.8
FEP+ Dataset [18] 8 199 various
FEP+ Dataset [19] 8 199 GAFF2.1
Fragments [177] 8 96 OPLS2.1
Scaffold Hopping [93] 6 21 OPLS3
Scaffold Hopping [19] 6 21 GAFF2.1
Macrocycles [237] 7 33 OPLS3
Further Suggested Datasets
Cucurbit[7]uril (CB7) [206] 1 15 NA
Deep cavity cavitand [206] 2 19 NA
T4 Lysozyme [206] 2 20 NA
Merck set [238] 5 169 OPSL3
datasets, what forceﬁelds they used, and what the original
study was it came from.
12 Checklist
36 of 48
A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
KNOW WHAT YOU WANT TO SIMULATE
Initial questions you should ask before you set up an alchemical free energy calculation using molecular dynam-
ics simulations
 Do I understand the biology, chemistry and physics of my system?
 Have I properly prepared my protein and ligand systems?
 Does my system contain any structures that require custom parameters?
 What simulation protocol will provide the most evidence to answer my hypothesis?
 Are the projected computational expense and runtime realistic for my goals?
 Will my protocol be reproducible?
 Will my statistics be reliable? If not, would more replicates solve the problem?
 Can I open-source my data?
PREPARING YOUR SIMULATIONS
Steps to getting started setting up your alchemical free energy calculation
 Make sure you know why you have picked your (combination of) force ﬁeld(s)
 Minimize your system
 Equilibrate your system with your choice of thermodynamic ensemble
 Check the stability of your system and whether it behaves the way you believe it should
RUNNING ABSOLUTE SIMULATIONS
Steps to running your absolute alchemical free energy calculations
 Check your ligands have the same, biologically correct binding pose
 Make sure your λ-scheduling is set appropriately
 Check if your ligands are discharging and decoupling correctly
 Set up your restraints correctly
 Make sure you subsample the data in your free energy estimation protocol
 Apply the appropriate correction terms
RUNNING RELATIVE SIMULATIONS
Steps to running your relative alchemical free energy calculations
 Check your ligands have the same, biologically correct binding pose
 Make sure your λ-scheduling is set correctly
 Make sure your molecular transformations are realistic (1-5 heavy atoms for reliable computations)
 Generate a perturbation network by your method of choice; check whether you have enough cycle closures to check
consistency in the results
 Check whether dummy atoms were assigned correctly
 Consider subsampling the data in your free energy estimation protocol
 Apply the appropriate correction terms
37 of 48
A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
HOW DO I KNOW WHICH SIMULATIONS ARE UNRELIABLE?
Situations suggesting your relative alchemical free energy calculations have not run properly (assuming absence
of experimental aﬃnities)
 Standard error (σ) should not be >1 kcal·mol–1
 Simulated systems have not converged - trajectories should be manually checked for consistency; other methods such
as generating RMSD plots are also recommended
Relative:
 If you observe hysteresis in perturbations and incorrect cycle closures
 Energy differences >∼15 kcal·mol–1
are likely unreliable
Absolute:
 Energies <∼-15 kcal·mol–1
are likely unreliable
 The ligand has not sampled most of the intended region after the decoupling step
 The ligand is drifting out of the intended region after the decoupling step
WHY ARE THEY NOT RELIABLE?
Suggestions for ﬁnding out why your alchemical free energy calculations may not be reliable
 Check again whether dummy atoms were assigned correctly
 Inspect the trajectories across the λ-schedule (particularly the endpoints) for problems described in the text
 Inspect the overlap matrices for lack of overlap
DATA ANALYSIS
Steps to analyzing your output data correctly
 Make sure you have run enough replicates to ensure statistical reliability (>3)
 Compute both correlation and ranking coeﬃcients and ranking statistics (e.g. r, ρ, MUE and τ)
 Include error bars in all your visual analyses
38 of 48
A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
Author Contributions
ASJSM: Coordinated the document, contributed to most
sections, and co-designed Figs. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 14,and created
Figs. 7, 1, 13, 10 and replotted 11 and 5.
JS: Created Figs. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 14, and an initial draft of 5.
Wrote Sec. 8.7, the checklist Sec. 12, and contributed to
general formatting discussions and editing.
MK: Contributed to Sec. 8, provided the data for ﬁgure 13,
compiled the dataset for Sec. 11 and helped edit the paper.
DLM: Contributed to the outline, drafted some of the
sections, gave ideas on ﬁgures, and helped edit the paper.
GT: Contributed to Sec. 1 and 5, and helped edit the paper.
AR: Created ﬁgure 12, contributed to sections 3 and 7, and
helped edit the paper.
MRS: Helped create ﬁgure 7, wrote Sec. 7.2.3 describing
choices for alchemical pathways and parts of 8 on the
analysis for free energy calculations. Reviewed and edited
text throughout.
LNN: Helped write the simulation length, stopping condi-
tions, and information saving section. Edited and reviewed
alchemical path section.
BA: Helped write the uncertainty estimation, stopping
conditions, and output analysis sections and created ﬁgure
9.
JM: Contributed to Sec. 4.2, 6, 7.2.3, 8.3, 8.4, and 9
JDC: Wrote Sec. 8.2 and 8.1 discussed structure and design of
the whole document, suggested Figs. 1 and 8
HX: Contributed Sec. 4.4, to Sec. 7.1.1, and to Sec. 8.5.
HBM Contributed to Sec. 8.7 and Fig. 14 and helped edit the
paper.
For a more detailed description of author contribu-
tions, see the GitHub issue tracking and changelog at
https://github.com/michellab/alchemical-best-practices.
Other Contributions
Julia E. Rice participated in the original discussion of the docu-
ment at the Best Practices in Molecular Simulation Workshop
Hosted by at NIST, Gaithersburg, MD, August 24th-25th, 2017
For a more detailed description of contributions
from the community and others, see the GitHub issue
tracking and changelog at https://github.com/michellab/
alchemical-best-practices.
Potentially Conﬂicting Interests
JM is a current member of the Scientiﬁc Advisory Board of
Cresset. MK is employed by Cresset who commercially dis-
tribute a software for performing alchemical free energy cal-
culations. MRS is a Open Science Fellow and consultant for
Silicon Therapeutics.
Funding Information
ASJSM and JM acknowledge funding through an EPSRC
ﬂagship software grant: EP/P022138/1 MK and JM acknowl-
edge funding through Innovate UK by KTP partnership
011120. AR acknowledges partial support from the Tri-
Institutional Program in Computational Biology and Medicine
and the Sloan Kettering Institute. HEBM acknowledges
support from a Molecular Sciences Software Institute
Investment Fellowship and Relay Therapeutics. JDC is
a current member of the Scientiﬁc Advisory Board of
OpenEye Scientiﬁc Software and a consultant to Foresite
Laboratories. A complete funding history for the Chodera
lab can be found at http://choderalab.org/funding. DLM
appreciates ﬁnancial support from the National Institutes
of Health (1R01GM108889-01, 1R01GM124270-01A1 and
R01GM132386), and the National Science Foundation (CHE
1352608).
Author Information
ORCID:
Antonia S. J. S. Mey: 0000-0001-7512-5252
Bryce Allen: 0000-0002-0804-8127
Hannah E. Bruce Macdonald: 0000-0002-5562-6866
John D. Chodera: 0000-0003-0542-119X
Maximilian Kuhn: 0000-0002-2811-3934
Julien Michel: 0000-0003-0360-1760
David L. Mobley: 0000-0002-1083-5533
Levi N. Naden: 0000-0002-3692-5027
Samarjeet Prasad: 0000-0001-8320-6482
Andrea Rizzi: 0000-0001-7693-2013
Jenke Scheen: 0000-0001-9781-0445
Michael R. Shirts: 0000-0003-3249-1097
Gary Tresadern: 0000-0002-4801-1644
Huafeng Xu: 0000-0001-5447-0452
References
[1] Zwanzig RW. High-Temperature Equation of State by a Per-
turbation Method. I. Nonpolar Gases. J Chem Phys. 1954;
22(8):1420–1426.
[2] Tembre BL, Mc Cammon JA. Ligand-Receptor Interactions.
Comput Chem. 1984; 8(4):281–283. doi: 10.1016/0097-
8485(84)85020-2.
[3] Rustenburg AS, Dancer J, Lin B, Feng JA, Ortwine DF, Mobley
DL, Chodera JD. Measuring Experimental Cyclohexane-Water
Distribution Coeﬃcients for the SAMPL5 Challenge. J Comput
Aided Mol Des. 2016; 30(11):945–958. doi: 10.1007/s10822-
016-9971-7.
[4] Bosisio S, Mey ASJS, Michel J. Blinded Predictions of Distribu-
tion Coeﬃcients in the SAMPL5 Challenge. J Comput Aided Mol
Des. 2016; 30(11):1101–1114. doi: 10.1007/s10822-016-9969-1.
39 of 48
A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
[5] Corey RA, Vickery ON, Sansom MSP, Stansfeld PJ. Insights
into Membrane Protein-Lipid Interactions from Free Energy
Calculations. J Chem Theory Comput. 2019; 15(10):5727–5736.
doi: 10.1021/acs.jctc.9b00548.
[6] Hauser K, Negron C, Albanese SK, Ray S, Steinbrecher T, Abel
R, Chodera JD, Wang L. Predicting Resistance of Clinical Abl
Mutations to Targeted Kinase Inhibitors Using Alchemical Free-
Energy Calculations. Commun Biol. 2018; 1(1):70.
[7] Aldeghi M, Gapsys V, de Groot BL. Accurate Estimation of
Ligand Binding Aﬃnity Changes upon Protein Mutation. ACS
Cent Sci. 2018; 4(12):1708–1718.
[8] Seeliger D, De Groot BL. Protein Thermostability Calculations
Using Alchemical Free Energy Simulations. Biophys J. 2010;
98(10):2309–2316.
[9] Gapsys V, Michielssens S, Seeliger D, de Groot BL. Insights
from the First Principles Based Large Scale Protein Thermosta-
bility Calculations. Biophys J. 2016; 110(3):368a.
[10] Gapsys V, Michielssens S, Seeliger D, de Groot BL. Accurate
and Rigorous Prediction of the Changes in Protein Free En-
ergies in a Large-Scale Mutation Scan. Angewandte Chemie
International Edition. 2016; 55(26):7364–7368.
[11] Aldeghi M, de Groot BL, Gapsys V. Accurate Calculation of Free
Energy Changes upon Amino Acid Mutation. In: Computational
Methods in Protein Evolution Springer; 2019.p. 19–47.
[12] Mobley DL, Graves AP, Chodera JD, McReynolds AC, Shoichet
BK, Dill KA. Predicting Absolute Ligand Binding Free Energies
to a Simple Model Site. J Mol Biol. 2007; 371(4):1118–1134.
[13] Aldeghi M, Heifetz A, Bodkin MJ, Knapp S, Biggin PC. Ac-
curate Calculation of the Absolute Free Energy of Binding
for Drug Molecules. Chem Sci. 2015; 7(1):207–218. doi:
10.1039/C5SC02678D.
[14] Aldeghi M, Heifetz A, Bodkin MJ, Knapp S, Biggin PC. Pre-
dictions of Ligand Selectivity from Absolute Binding Free En-
ergy Calculations. J Am Chem Soc. 2017; 139(2):946–957. doi:
10.1021/jacs.6b11467.
[15] Wang L, Wu Y, Deng Y, Kim B, Pierce L, Krilov G, Lupyan D,
Robinson S, Dahlgren MK, Greenwood J, Romero DL, Masse
C, Knight JL, Steinbrecher T, Beuming T, Damm W, Harder E,
Sherman W, Brewer M, Wester R, et al. Accurate and Reliable
Prediction of Relative Ligand Binding Potency in Prospective
Drug Discovery by Way of a Modern Free-Energy Calculation
Protocol and Force Field. J Am Chem Soc. 2015; 137(7):2695–
2703. doi: 10.1021/ja512751q.
[16] Mey ASJS, Juárez-Jiménez J, Hennessy A, Michel J. Blinded Pre-
dictions of Binding Modes and Energies of HSP90-α Ligands for
the 2015 D3R Grand Challenge. Bioorganic & Medicinal Chem-
istry. 2016; 24(20):4890–4899. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2016.07.044.
[17] Song LF, Lee TS, Zhu C, York DM, Merz KM. Using AMBER18
for Relative Free Energy Calculations. J Chem Inf Model. 2019;
59(7):3128–3135. doi: 10.1021/acs.jcim.9b00105.
[18] Gapsys V, Pérez-Benito L, Aldeghi M, Seeliger D, van Vlijmen H,
Tresadern G, de Groot BL. Large Scale Relative Protein Ligand
Binding Aﬃnities Using Non-Equilibrium Alchemy. Chem Sci.
2020; doi: 10.1039/C9SC03754C.
[19] Kuhn M, Firth-Clark S, Tosco P, Mey ASJS, Mackey M, Michel
J. Assessment of Binding Aﬃnity via Alchemical Free-Energy
Calculations. J Chem Inf Model. 2020; 60(6):3120–3130. doi:
10.1021/acs.jcim.0c00165.
[20] Kirkwood JG. Statistical Mechanics of Fluid Mixtures. J Chem
Phys. 1935; 3:300–313.
[21] Jorgensen WL, Ravimohan C. Monte Carlo Simulation of Dif-
ferences in Free Energies of Hydration. J Chem Phys. 1985;
83(6):3050–3054.
[22] Kollman PA. Free Energy Calculations: Applications to Chem-
ical and Biochemical Phenomena. Chem Rev. 1993; 7:2395–
2417.
[23] Wong CF, McCammon JA. Dynamics and Design of Enzymes
and Inhibitors. J Am Chem Soc. 1986; 108(13):3830–3832. doi:
10.1021/ja00273a048.
[24] Merz KM, Kollman PA. Free Energy Perturbation Simulations of
the Inhibition of Thermolysin: Prediction of the Free Energy of
Binding of a New Inhibitor. J Am Chem Soc. 1989; 111(15):5649–
5658. doi: 10.1021/ja00197a022.
[25] Bennett CH. Eﬃcient Estimation of Free Energy Differences
from Monte Carlo Data. J Comput Phys. 1976; 22:245–268.
[26] Shirts MR, Chodera JD. Statistically Optimal Analysis of Sam-
ples from Multiple Equilibrium States. J Chem Phys. 2008;
129(12):124105. doi: 10.1063/1.2978177.
[27] Wu H, Paul F, Wehmeyer C, Noé F. Multiensemble Markov
Models of Molecular Thermodynamics and Kinetics. Proc
Natl Acad Sci. 2016; 113(23):E3221–E3230. doi: 10.1073/p-
nas.1525092113.
[28] Mey ASJS, Wu H, Noé F. xTRAM: Estimating Equilibrium Ex-
pectations from Time-Correlated Simulation Data at Multiple
Thermodynamic States. Phys Rev X. 2014; 4(4):041018. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevX.4.041018.
[29] Wu H, Mey ASJS, Rosta E, Noé F. Statistically Optimal Anal-
ysis of State-Discretized Trajectory Data from Multiple Ther-
modynamic States. J Chem Phys. 2014; 141(21):214106. doi:
10.1063/1.4902240.
[30] Shirts MR, Pitera JW, Swope WC, Pande VS. Extremely Precise
Free Energy Calculations of Amino Acid Side Chain Analogs:
Comparison of Common Molecular Mechanics Force Fields for
Proteins. J Chem Phys. 2003; 119(11):5740–5761.
[31] Shirts MR, Pande VS. Solvation Free Energies of Amino Acid
Side Chains for Common Molecular Mechanics Water Models.
J Chem Phys. 2005; 122:134508.
[32] van der Spoel D, Lindahl E, Hess B, Groenhof G, Mark AE,
Berendsen HJC. GROMACS: Fast, Flexible, and Free. J Comput
Chem. 2005; 26:1701–1718.
40 of 48
A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
[33] Mermelstein DJ, Lin C, Nelson G, Kretsch R, McCammon JA,
Walker RC. Fast and Flexible Gpu Accelerated Binding Free
Energy Calculations within the Amber Molecular Dynamics
Package. J Comput Chem. 2018; 39(19):1354–1358. doi:
10.1002/jcc.25187.
[34] Hedges L, Mey A, Laughton C, Gervasio F, Mulholland A, Woods
C, Michel J. BioSimSpace: An Interoperable Python Frame-
work for Biomolecular Simulation. J Open Source Softw. 2019;
4(43):1831. doi: 10.21105/joss.01831.
[35] Fratev F, Sirimulla S. An Improved Free Energy Perturbation
FEP+ Sampling Protocol for Flexible Ligand-Binding Domains. .
2019; doi: 10.26434/chemrxiv.6204167.v2.
[36] Schindler C, Baumann H, Blum A, Böse D, Buchstaller HP,
Burgdorf L, Cappel D, Chekler E, Czodrowski P, Dorsch D, Eguida
M, Follows B, Fuchß T, Grädler U, Gunera J, Johnson T, Jorand Le-
brun C, Karra S, Klein M, Kötzner L, et al. Large-Scale Assess-
ment of Binding Free Energy Calculations in Active Drug Dis-
covery Projects. . 2020; doi: 10.26434/chemrxiv.11364884.v1.
[37] Cournia Z, Allen B, Sherman W. Relative Binding Free Energy
Calculations in Drug Discovery: Recent Advances and Practical
Considerations. J Chem Inf Model. 2017; 57(12):2911–2937.
doi: 10.1021/acs.jcim.7b00564.
[38] Sherborne B, Shanmugasundaram V, Cheng AC, Christ CD,
DesJarlais RL, Duca JS, Lewis RA, Loughney DA, Manas ES, Mc-
Gaughey GB, Peishoff CE, van Vlijmen H. Collaborating to Im-
prove the Use of Free-Energy and Other Quantitative Methods
in Drug Discovery. J Comput Aided Mol Des. 2016; 30(12):1139–
1141. doi: 10.1007/s10822-016-9996-y.
[39] Salomon-Ferrer R, Götz AW, Poole D, Le Grand S, Walker
RC. Routine Microsecond Molecular Dynamics Simulations
with AMBER on GPUs. 2. Explicit Solvent Particle Mesh
Ewald. J Chem Theory Comput. 2013; 9(9):3878–3888. doi:
10.1021/ct400314y.
[40] Braun E, Gilmer J, Mayes HB, Mobley DL, Monroe JI, Prasad
S, Zuckerman DM. Best Practices for Foundations in Molec-
ular Simulations [Article v1.0]. LiveCoMS. 2019; 1(1). doi:
10.33011/livecoms.1.1.5957.
[41] Grossﬁeld A, Patrone PN, Roe DR, Schultz AJ, Siderius D, Zuck-
erman DM. Best Practices for Quantiﬁcation of Uncertainty
and Sampling Quality in Molecular Simulations [Article v1.0].
LiveCoMS. 2018; 1(1):5067. doi: 10.33011/livecoms.1.1.5067.
[42] Klimovich PV, Shirts MR, Mobley DL. Guidelines for the Analy-
sis of Free Energy Calculations. J Comput Aided Mol Des. 2015;
29(5):397–411. doi: 10.1007/s10822-015-9840-9.
[43] Shirts MR. Best Practices in Free Energy Calculations for Drug
Design. In: Baron R, editor. Computational Drug Discovery and
Design Methods in Molecular Biology, New York, NY: Springer;
2012.p. 425–467. doi: 10.1007/978-1-61779-465-0_26.
[44] Grinter SZ, Zou X. Challenges, Applications, and Re-
cent Advances of Protein-Ligand Docking in Structure-Based
Drug Design. Molecules. 2014; 19(7):10150–10176. doi:
10.3390/molecules190710150.
[45] Lameira J, Bonatto V, Cianni L, Rocho FdR, Leitão A, Monta-
nari CA. Predicting the Aﬃnity of Halogenated Reversible
Covalent Inhibitors through Relative Binding Free Energy.
Phys Chem Chem Phys. 2019; 21(44):24723–24730. doi:
10.1039/C9CP04820K.
[46] Gill SC, Lim NM, Grinaway PB, Rustenburg AS, Fass J, Ross
GA, Chodera JD, Mobley DL. Binding Modes of Ligands Using
Enhanced Sampling (BLUES): Rapid Decorrelation of Ligand
Binding Modes via Nonequilibrium Candidate Monte Carlo. J
Phys Chem B. 2018; doi: 10.1021/acs.jpcb.7b11820.
[47] Genheden S, Ryde U. The MM/PBSA and MM/GBSA Methods
to Estimate Ligand-Binding Aﬃnities. Expert Opin Drug Dis.
2015; 10(5):449–461. doi: 10.1517/17460441.2015.1032936.
[48] Gutiérrez-de-Terán H, Åqvist J. Linear Interaction Energy:
Method and Applications in Drug Design. In: Baron R, editor.
Computational Drug Discovery and Design Methods in Molecular
Biology, New York, NY: Springer New York; 2012.p. 305–323.
doi: 10.1007/978-1-61779-465-0_20.
[49] Heinzelmann G, Henriksen NM, Gilson MK. Attach-Pull-
Release Calculations of Ligand Binding and Conformational
Changes on the First BRD4 Bromodomain. J Chem Theory Com-
put. 2017; 13(7):3260–3275. doi: 10.1021/acs.jctc.7b00275.
[50] Loeﬄer HH, Bosisio S, Duarte Ramos Matos G, Suh D, Roux
B, Mobley DL, Michel J. Reproducibility of Free Energy Calcu-
lations across Different Molecular Simulation Software Pack-
ages. J Chem Theory Comput. 2018; 14(11):5567–5582. doi:
10.1021/acs.jctc.8b00544.
[51] Vassetti D, Pagliai M, Procacci P. Assessment of GAFF2 and
OPLS-AA General Force Fields in Combination with the Water
Models TIP3P, SPCE, and OPC3 for the Solvation Free Energy
of Druglike Organic Molecules. J Chem Theory Comput. 2019;
15(3):1983–1995. doi: 10.1021/acs.jctc.8b01039.
[52] Lopes PEM, Guvench O, MacKerell AD. Current Status of Pro-
tein Force Fields for Molecular Dynamics. Methods Mol Biol.
2015; 1215:47–71. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-1465-4_3.
[53] Gilson MK, Given JA, Bush BL, McCammon JA. A Statistical-
Thermodynamic Basis for Computation of Binding Aﬃnities: A
Critical Review. Biophys J. 1997; 72(3):1047–1069.
[54] Jong DHD, Schäfer LV, Vries AHD, Marrink SJ, Berendsen HJC,
Grubmüller H. Determining Equilibrium Constants for Dimer-
ization Reactions from Molecular Dynamics Simulations. J
Comput Chem. 2011; 32(9):1919–1928. doi: 10.1002/jcc.21776.
[55] Pan AC, Xu H, Palpant T, Shaw DE. Quantitative Char-
acterization of the Binding and Unbinding of Millimo-
lar Drug Fragments with Molecular Dynamics Simulations.
J Chem Theory Comput. 2017; 13(7):3372–3377. doi:
10.1021/acs.jctc.7b00172.
[56] Teo I, Mayne CG, Schulten K, Lelièvre T. Adaptive Multi-
level Splitting Method for Molecular Dynamics Calculation of
Benzamidine-Trypsin Dissociation Time. J Chem Theory Com-
put. 2016; 12(6):2983–2989. doi: 10.1021/acs.jctc.6b00277.
41 of 48
A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
[57] Votapka LW, Jagger BR, Heyneman AL, Amaro RE. SEEKR:
Simulation Enabled Estimation of Kinetic Rates, A Compu-
tational Tool to Estimate Molecular Kinetics and Its Applica-
tion to Trypsin–Benzamidine Binding. J Phys Chem B. 2017;
121(15):3597–3606. doi: 10.1021/acs.jpcb.6b09388.
[58] Doerr S, De Fabritiis G. On-the-Fly Learning and Sampling
of Ligand Binding by High-Throughput Molecular Simula-
tions. J Chem Theory Comput. 2014; 10(5):2064–2069. doi:
10.1021/ct400919u.
[59] Plattner N, Noé F. Protein Conformational Plasticity and Com-
plex Ligand-Binding Kinetics Explored by Atomistic Simulations
and Markov Models. Nat Commun. 2015; 6(1):1–10. doi:
10.1038/ncomms8653.
[60] Dixon T, Lotz SD, Dickson A. Predicting Ligand Binding Aﬃn-
ity Using On- and off-Rates for the SAMPL6 SAMPLing Chal-
lenge. J Comput Aided Mol Des. 2018; 32(10):1001–1012. doi:
10.1007/s10822-018-0149-3.
[61] Basavapathruni A, Jin L, Daigle SR, Majer CRA, Therkelsen CA,
Wigle TJ, Kuntz KW, Chesworth R, Pollock RM, Scott MP, Moyer
MP, Richon VM, Copeland RA, Olhava EJ. Conformational Adap-
tation Drives Potent, Selective and Durable Inhibition of the
Human Protein Methyltransferase DOT1L. Chemical Biology &
Drug Design. 2012; 80(6):971–980. doi: 10.1111/cbdd.12050.
[62] Hyre DE, Trong IL, Merritt EA, Eccleston JF, Green NM,
Stenkamp RE, Stayton PS. Cooperative Hydrogen Bond In-
teractions in the Streptavidin–Biotin System. Protein Sci. 2006;
15(3):459–467. doi: 10.1110/ps.051970306.
[63] Eastman P, Swails J, Chodera JD, McGibbon RT, Zhao Y,
Beauchamp KA, Wang LP, Simmonett AC, Harrigan MP, Stern CD,
Wiewiora RP, Brooks BR, Pande VS. OpenMM 7: Rapid Develop-
ment of High Performance Algorithms for Molecular Dynamics.
PLoS Comput Biol. 2017; 13(7):e1005659. doi: 10.1371/jour-
nal.pcbi.1005659.
[64] Kutzner C, Páll S, Fechner M, Esztermann A, de Groot BL, Grub-
müller H. More Bang for Your Buck: Improved Use of GPU
Nodes for GROMACS 2018. J Comput Chem. 2019; 40(27):2418–
2431. doi: 10.1002/jcc.26011.
[65] Woo HJ, Roux B. Calculation of Absolute Protein–Ligand Bind-
ing Free Energy from Computer Simulations. Proc Natl Acad
Sci. 2005; 102(19):6825–6830. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0409005102.
[66] Velez-Vega C, Gilson MK. Overcoming Dissipation in the
Calculation of Standard Binding Free Energies by Ligand Ex-
traction. J Comput Chem. 2013; 34(27):2360–2371. doi:
10.1002/jcc.23398.
[67] Limongelli V, Bonomi M, Parrinello M. Funnel Metadynamics
as Accurate Binding Free-Energy Method. Proc Natl Acad Sci.
2013; 110(16):6358–6363. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1303186110.
[68] Wu D, Kofke DA. Phase-Space Overlap Measures. I. Fail-
Safe Bias Detection in Free Energies Calculated by Molec-
ular Simulation. J Chem Phys. 2005; 123(5):054103. doi:
10.1063/1.1992483.
[69] Wu D, Kofke DA. Phase-Space Overlap Measures. II. De-
sign and Implementation of Staging Methods for Free-Energy
Calculations. J Chem Phys. 2005; 123(8):084109. doi:
10.1063/1.2011391.
[70] Shirts MR, Bair E, Hooker G, Pande VS. Equilibrium Free En-
ergies from Nonequilibrium Measurements Using Maximum-
Likelihood Methods. Phys Rev Lett. 2003; 91(14):140601. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevLett.91.140601.
[71] Harder E, Damm W, Maple J, Wu C, Reboul M, Xiang JY, Wang L,
Lupyan D, Dahlgren MK, Knight JL, Kaus JW, Cerutti DS, Krilov
G, Jorgensen WL, Abel R, Friesner RA. OPLS3: A Force Field
Providing Broad Coverage of Drug-like Small Molecules and
Proteins. J Chem Theory Comput. 2016; 12(1):281–296. doi:
10.1021/acs.jctc.5b00864.
[72] Keränen H, Pérez-Benito L, Ciordia M, Delgado F, Stein-
brecher TB, Oehlrich D, van Vlijmen HWT, Trabanco AA,
Tresadern G. Acylguanidine Beta Secretase 1 Inhibitors:
A Combined Experimental and Free Energy Perturbation
Study. J Chem Theory Comput. 2017; 13(3):1439–1453. doi:
10.1021/acs.jctc.6b01141.
[73] Rizzi A, Jensen T, Slochower DR, Aldeghi M, Gapsys V, Ntek-
oumes D, Bosisio S, Papadourakis M, Henriksen NM, De Groot
BL, et al. The SAMPL6 SAMPLing challenge: Assessing the relia-
bility and eﬃciency of binding free energy calculations. BioRxiv.
2019; p. 795005.
[74] Schindler T, Bornmann W, Pellicena P, Miller WT, Clarkson
B, Kuriyan J. Structural Mechanism for STI-571 Inhibition of
Abelson Tyrosine Kinase. Science. 2000; 289(5486):1938–1942.
doi: 10.1126/science.289.5486.1938.
[75] Mobley DL, Klimovich PV. Perspective: Alchemical Free Energy
Calculations for Drug Discovery. J Chem Phys. 2012; 137(23).
doi: 10.1063/1.4769292.
[76] Kuhn B, Tichý M, Wang L, Robinson S, Martin RE, Kuglstatter
A, Benz J, Giroud M, Schirmeister T, Abel R, Diederich F, Hert
J. Prospective Evaluation of Free Energy Calculations for the
Prioritization of Cathepsin L Inhibitors. J Med Chem. 2017;
60(6):2485–2497. doi: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.6b01881.
[77] Pérez-Benito L, Keränen H, van Vlijmen H, Tresadern G. Pre-
dicting Binding Free Energies of PDE2 Inhibitors. The Diﬃcul-
ties of Protein Conformation. Sci Rep. 2018; 8(1):1–10. doi:
10.1038/s41598-018-23039-5.
[78] Warren GL, Do TD, Kelley BP, Nicholls A, Warren SD. Es-
sential Considerations for Using Protein–Ligand Structures in
Drug Discovery. Drug Discov. 2012; 17(23):1270–1281. doi:
10.1016/j.drudis.2012.06.011.
[79] Pérez-Benito L, Casajuana-Martin N, Jiménez-Rosés M, van
Vlijmen H, Tresadern G. Predicting Activity Cliffs with Free-
Energy Perturbation. J Chem Theory Comput. 2019; 15(3):1884–
1895. doi: 10.1021/acs.jctc.8b01290.
[80] Loeﬄer HH, Michel J, Woods C. FESetup: Automating Setup
for Alchemical Free Energy Simulations. J Chem Inf Model.
2015; 55(12):2485–2490. doi: 10.1021/acs.jcim.5b00368.
42 of 48
A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
[81] Gapsys V, Michielssens S, Seeliger D, de Groot BL. Pmx: Auto-
mated Protein Structure and Topology Generation for Alchemi-
cal Perturbations. J Comput Chem. 2015; 36(5):348–354. doi:
10.1002/jcc.23804.
[82] Jespers W, Esguerra M, Åqvist J, Gutiérrez-de-Terán H. QligFEP:
An Automated Workﬂow for Small Molecule Free Energy Cal-
culations in Q. J Cheminformatics. 2019; 11(1):26. doi:
10.1186/s13321-019-0348-5.
[83] Konze KD, Bos PH, Dahlgren MK, Leswing K, Tubert-Brohman
I, Bortolato A, Robbason B, Abel R, Bhat S. Reaction-Based
Enumeration, Active Learning, and Free Energy Calculations
To Rapidly Explore Synthetically Tractable Chemical Space
and Optimize Potency of Cyclin-Dependent Kinase 2 In-
hibitors. J Chem Inf Model. 2019; 59(9):3782–3793. doi:
10.1021/acs.jcim.9b00367.
[84] Yang Q, Burchett W, Steeno GS, Liu S, Yang M, Mobley DL, Hou
X. Optimal Designs for Pairwise Calculation: An Application to
Free Energy Perturbation in Minimizing Prediction Variability. J
Comput Chem. 2020; 41(3):247–257. doi: 10.1002/jcc.26095.
[85] Xu H. Optimal Measurement Network of Pairwise Differ-
ences. J Chem Inf Model. 2019; 59(11):4720–4728. doi:
10.1021/acs.jcim.9b00528.
[86] Ciordia M, Pérez-Benito L, Delgado F, Trabanco AA, Tresadern
G. Application of Free Energy Perturbation for the Design of
BACE1 Inhibitors. J Chem Inf Model. 2016; 56(9):1856–1871.
doi: 10.1021/acs.jcim.6b00220.
[87] Wang L, Deng Y, Knight JL, Wu Y, Kim B, Sherman W, Shelley JC,
Lin T, Abel R. Modeling Local Structural Rearrangements Using
FEP/REST: Application to Relative Binding Aﬃnity Predictions of
CDK2 Inhibitors. J Chem Theory Comput. 2013; 9(2):1282–1293.
doi: 10.1021/ct300911a.
[88] Abel R, Wang L, Friesner DLMaRA, A Critical Review of Val-
idation, Blind Testing, and Real- World Use of Alchemi-
cal Protein-Ligand Binding Free Energy Calculations; 2017.
http://www.eurekaselect.com/151616/article.
[89] Cappel D, Hall ML, Lenselink EB, Beuming T, Qi J, Bradner J,
Sherman W. Relative Binding Free Energy Calculations Ap-
plied to Protein Homology Models. J Chem Inf Model. 2016;
56(12):2388–2400. doi: 10.1021/acs.jcim.6b00362.
[90] Deﬂorian F, Perez-Benito L, Lenselink EB, Congreve M, van
Vlijmen HWT, Mason JS, de Graaf C, Tresadern G. Accurate Pre-
diction of GPCR Ligand Binding Aﬃnity with Free Energy Pertur-
bation. J Chem Inf Model. 2020; doi: 10.1021/acs.jcim.0c00449.
[91] Lenselink EB, Louvel J, Forti AF, van Veldhoven JPD, de Vries
H, Mulder-Krieger T, McRobb FM, Negri A, Goose J, Abel R,
van Vlijmen HWT, Wang L, Harder E, Sherman W, IJzerman AP,
Beuming T. Predicting Binding Aﬃnities for GPCR Ligands Using
Free-Energy Perturbation. ACS Omega. 2016; 1(2):293–304. doi:
10.1021/acsomega.6b00086.
[92] Chen W, Deng Y, Russell E, Wu Y, Abel R, Wang L. Accurate
Calculation of Relative Binding Free Energies between Ligands
with Different Net Charges. J Chem Theory Comput. 2018;
14(12):6346–6358. doi: 10.1021/acs.jctc.8b00825.
[93] Wang L, Deng Y, Wu Y, Kim B, LeBard DN, Wandschneider D,
Beachy M, Friesner RA, Abel R. Accurate Modeling of Scaffold
Hopping Transformations in Drug Discovery. J Chem Theory
Comput. 2017; 13(1):42–54. doi: 10.1021/acs.jctc.6b00991.
[94] Albanese SK, Chodera JD, Volkamer A, Keng S, Abel R, Wang
L. Is Structure Based Drug Design Ready for Selectivity
Optimization? bioRxiv. 2020; p. 2020.07.02.185132. doi:
10.1101/2020.07.02.185132.
[95] Mondal S, Tresadern G, Greenwood J, Kim B, Kaus J, Wirtala M,
Steinbrecher T, Wang L, Masse C, Farid R, Abel R. A Free Energy
Perturbation Approach to Estimate the Intrinsic Solubilities
of Drug-like Small Molecules. . 2019; doi: 10.26434/chem-
rxiv.10263077.v1.
[96] Berman H, Henrick K, Nakamura H. Announcing the World-
wide Protein Data Bank. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2003; 10(12):980–
980. doi: 10.1038/nsb1203-980.
[97] Wacker D, Fenalti G, Brown MA, Katritch V, Abagyan R, Chere-
zov V, Stevens RC. Conserved Binding Mode of Human B2
Adrenergic Receptor Inverse Agonists and Antagonist Revealed
by X-Ray Crystallography. J Am Chem Soc. 2010; 132(33):11443–
11445. doi: 10.1021/ja105108q.
[98] Brandt T, Holzmann N, Muley L, Khayat M, Wegscheid-Gerlach
C, Baum B, Heine A, Hangauer D, Klebe G. Congeneric but Still
Distinct: How Closely Related Trypsin Ligands Exhibit Different
Thermodynamic and Structural Properties. J Mol Biol. 2011;
405(5):1170–1187. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2010.11.038.
[99] Nazaré M, Will DW, Matter H, Schreuder H, Ritter K, Urmann
M, Essrich M, Bauer A, Wagner M, Czech J, Lorenz M, Laux
V, Wehner V. Probing the Subpockets of Factor Xa Reveals
Two Binding Modes for Inhibitors Based on a 2-Carboxyindole
Scaffold: A Study Combining Structure-Activity Relationship
and X-Ray Crystallography. J Med Chem. 2005; 48(14):4511–
4525. doi: 10.1021/jm0490540.
[100] Kaus JW, Harder E, Lin T, Abel R, McCammon JA, Wang L. How
To Deal with Multiple Binding Poses in Alchemical Relative
Protein-Ligand Binding Free Energy Calculations. J Chem The-
ory Comput. 2015; 11:2670.
[101] Michel J, Essex JW. Prediction of Protein–Ligand Binding Aﬃn-
ity by Free Energy Simulations: Assumptions, Pitfalls and Ex-
pectations. J Comput Aided Mol Des. 2010; 24(8):639–658. doi:
10.1007/s10822-010-9363-3.
[102] Wang L, Berne BJ, Friesner RA. Ligand Binding to Protein-
Binding Pockets with Wet and Dry Regions. Proc Natl Acad Sci.
2011; 108(4):1326–1330. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1016793108.
[103] Bruce Macdonald HE, Cave-Ayland C, Ross GA, Essex JW. Lig-
and Binding Free Energies with Adaptive Water Networks:
Two-Dimensional Grand Canonical Alchemical Perturbations.
J Chem Theory Comput. 2018; 14(12):6586–6597. doi:
10.1021/acs.jctc.8b00614.
[104] Ross GA, Bodnarchuk MS, Essex JW. Water Sites, Networks, And
Free Energies with Grand Canonical Monte Carlo. J Am Chem
Soc. 2015; 137(47):14930–14943. doi: 10.1021/jacs.5b07940.
43 of 48
A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
[105] Michel J, Tirado-Rives J, Jorgensen WL. Energetics of Displacing
Water Molecules from Protein Binding Sites: Consequences
for Ligand Optimization. J Am Chem Soc. 2009; 131(42):15403–
15411. doi: 10.1021/ja906058w.
[106] Anandakrishnan R, Aguilar B, Onufriev AV. H++ 3.0: Automat-
ing pK Prediction and the Preparation of Biomolecular Struc-
tures for Atomistic Molecular Modeling and Simulations. Nu-
cleic Acids Res. 2012; 40(Web Server issue):W537–W541. doi:
10.1093/nar/gks375.
[107] Søndergaard CR, Olsson MHM, Rostkowski M, Jensen JH. Im-
proved Treatment of Ligands and Coupling Effects in Empirical
Calculation and Rationalization of pKa Values. J Chem Theory
Comput. 2011; 7(7):2284–2295. doi: 10.1021/ct200133y.
[108] Jurrus E, Engel D, Star K, Monson K, Brandi J, Felberg LE,
Brookes DH, Wilson L, Chen J, Liles K, Chun M, Li P, Gohara
DW, Dolinsky T, Konecny R, Koes DR, Nielsen JE, Head-Gordon
T, Geng W, Krasny R, et al. Improvements to the APBS Biomolec-
ular Solvation Software Suite. Protein Sci. 2018; 27(1):112–128.
doi: 10.1002/pro.3280.
[109] Schrödinger Release 2020-2: Maestro,; 2020. Schrödinger, LLC,
New York, NY,.
[110] Olsson MHM, Søndergaard CR, Rostkowski M, Jensen JH.
PROPKA3: Consistent Treatment of Internal and Surface
Residues in Empirical pKa Predictions. J Chem Theory Comput.
2011; 7(2):525–537. doi: 10.1021/ct100578z.
[111] Işık M, Levorse D, Rustenburg AS, Ndukwe IE, Wang H, Wang
X, Reibarkh M, Martin GE, Makarov AA, Mobley DL, Rhodes T,
Chodera JD. pKa Measurements for the SAMPL6 Prediction
Challenge for a Set of Kinase Inhibitor-like Fragments. J Comput
Aided Mol Des. 2018; 32(10):1117–1138. doi: 10.1007/s10822-
018-0168-0.
[112] Onufriev AV, Alexov E. Protonation and pK Changes in Protein-
Ligand Binding. Q Rev Biophys. 2013; 46(2):181–209. doi:
10.1017/S0033583513000024.
[113] Evoli S, Mobley DL, Guzzi R, Rizzuti B. Multiple Binding Modes
of Ibuprofen in Human Serum Albumin Identiﬁed by Absolute
Binding Free Energy Calculations. Phys Chem Chem Phys. 2016;
18(47):32358–32368. doi: 10.1039/C6CP05680F.
[114] Ruiz-Carmona S, Alvarez-Garcia D, Foloppe N, Garmendia-
Doval AB, Juhos S, Schmidtke P, Barril X, Hubbard RE, Morley SD.
rDock: A Fast, Versatile and Open Source Program for Docking
Ligands to Proteins and Nucleic Acids. PLoS Comput Biol. 2014;
10(4):e1003571. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003571.
[115] Trott O, Olson AJ. AutoDock Vina: Improving the Speed and
Accuracy of Docking with a New Scoring Function, Eﬃcient Opti-
mization, and Multithreading. J Comput Chem. 2010; 31(2):455–
461. doi: 10.1002/jcc.21334.
[116] Friesner RA, Banks JL, Murphy RB, Halgren TA, Klicic JJ, Mainz
DT, Repasky MP, Knoll EH, Shelley M, Perry JK, Shaw DE, Fran-
cis P, Shenkin PS. Glide: A New Approach for Rapid, Ac-
curate Docking and Scoring. 1. Method and Assessment of
Docking Accuracy. J Med Chem. 2004; 47(7):1739–1749. doi:
10.1021/jm0306430.
[117] O’Boyle NM, Banck M, James CA, Morley C, Vandermeersch
T, Hutchison GR. Open Babel: An Open Chemical Toolbox. J
Cheminformatics. 2011; 3(1):33. doi: 10.1186/1758-2946-3-33.
[118] Klimovich PV, Mobley DL. Predicting Hydration Free Energies
Using All-Atom Molecular Dynamics Simulations and Multi-
ple Starting Conformations. J Comput Aided Mol Des. 2010;
24(4):307–316. doi: 10.1007/s10822-010-9343-7.
[119] Lim VT, Bayly CI, Fusti-Molnar L, Mobley DL. Assessing
the Conformational Equilibrium of Carboxylic Acid via Quan-
tum Mechanical and Molecular Dynamics Studies on Acetic
Acid. J Chem Inf Model. 2019; 59(5):1957–1964. doi:
10.1021/acs.jcim.8b00835.
[120] Mobley DL, Liu S, Lim NM, Wymer KL, Perryman AL, Forli S,
Deng N, Su J, Branson K, Olson AJ. Blind Prediction of HIV
Integrase Binding from the SAMPL4 Challenge. J Comput Aided
Mol Des. 2014; 28(4):327–345. doi: 10.1007/s10822-014-9723-
5.
[121] Jiang W, Chipot C, Roux B. Computing Relative Bind-
ing Aﬃnity of Ligands to Receptor: An Effective Hybrid
Single-Dual-Topology Free-Energy Perturbation Approach in
NAMD. J Chem Inf Model. 2019; 59(9):3794–3802. doi:
10.1021/acs.jcim.9b00362.
[122] Rocklin GJ, Mobley DL, Dill KA. Separated Topologies—A
Method for Relative Binding Free Energy Calculations Using
Orientational Restraints. J Chem Phys. 2013; 138(8):085104.
doi: 10.1063/1.4792251.
[123] Liu S, Wu Y, Lin T, Abel R, Redmann JP, Summa CM, Jaber VR, Lim
NM, Mobley DL. Lead Optimization Mapper: Automating Free
Energy Calculations for Lead Optimization. J Comput Aided Mol
Des. 2013; 27(9):755–770. doi: 10.1007/s10822-013-9678-y.
[124] RDkit, Rdkit: Open Source Chem Informatics software; 2019.
http://www.rdkit.org, [Online; accessed 9. Dec. 2019].
[125] Kawabata T, Nakamura H. 3D Flexible Alignment Using 2D
Maximum Common Substructure: Dependence of Prediction
Accuracy on Target-Reference Chemical Similarity. J Chem Inf
Model. 2014; 54(7):1850–1863. doi: 10.1021/ci500006d.
[126] Raymond JW, Willett P. Maximum Common Subgraph Iso-
morphism Algorithms for the Matching of Chemical Struc-
tures. J Comput Aided Mol Des. 2002; 16(7):521–533. doi:
10.1023/A:1021271615909.
[127] Klabunde T, Giegerich C, Evers A. MARS: Computing Three-
Dimensional Alignments for Multiple Ligands Using Pairwise
Similarities. J Chem Inf Model. 2012; 52(8):2022–2030. doi:
10.1021/ci3000369.
[128] Jones G, Gao Y, Sage CR. Elucidating Molecular Overlays from
Pairwise Alignments Using a Genetic Algorithm. J Chem Inf
Model. 2009; 49(7):1847–1855. doi: 10.1021/ci900109n.
[129] Liu S, Wang L, Mobley DL. Is Ring Breaking Feasible in Relative
Binding Free Energy Calculations? J Chem Inf Model. 2015;
55(4):727–735. doi: 10.1021/acs.jcim.5b00057.
44 of 48
A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
[130] Clark AJ, Negron C, Hauser K, Sun M, Wang L, Abel R, Friesner
RA. Relative Binding Aﬃnity Prediction of Charge-Changing Se-
quence Mutations with FEP in Protein–Protein Interfaces. J Mol
Biol. 2019; 431(7):1481–1493. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2019.02.003.
[131] Kräutler V, van Gunsteren WF, Hünenberger PH. A Fast SHAKE
Algorithm to Solve Distance Constraint Equations for Small
Molecules in Molecular Dynamics Simulations. Journal of Com-
putational Chemistry. 2001; 22(5):501–508. doi: 10.1002/1096-
987X(20010415)22:5<501::AID-JCC1021>3.0.CO;2-V.
[132] Mobley DL, Chodera JD, Dill KA. On the Use of Orientational
Restraints and Symmetry Corrections in Alchemical Free Energy
Calculations. J Chem Phys. 2006; 125:084902.
[133] Chen J, Brooks CL. Can Molecular Dynamics Simulations
Provide High-Resolution Reﬁnement of Protein Structure?
Proteins: Struct, Funct, Bioinf. 2007; 67(4):922–930. doi:
10.1002/prot.21345.
[134] Boresch S, Tettinger F, Leitgeb M, Karplus M. Absolute Bind-
ing Free Energies: A Quantitative Approach for Their Cal-
culation. J Phys Chem B. 2003; 107(35):9535–9551. doi:
10.1021/jp0217839.
[135] Leitgeb M, Schröder C, Boresch S. Alchemical Free Energy
Calculations and Multiple Conformational Substates. J Chem
Phys. 2005; 122(8):084109. doi: 10.1063/1.1850900.
[136] Wang K, Chodera JD, Yang Y, Shirts MR. Identifying Ligand
Binding Sites and Poses Using GPU-Accelerated Hamiltonian
Replica Exchange Molecular Dynamics. J Comput Aided Mol
Des. 2013; 27(12):989–1007. doi: 10.1007/s10822-013-9689-8.
[137] Georgiou C, McNae I, Wear M, Ioannidis H, Michel J, Walkin-
shaw M. Pushing the Limits of Detection of Weak Binding
Using Fragment-Based Drug Discovery: Identiﬁcation of New
Cyclophilin Binders. J Mol Biol. 2017; 429(16):2556–2570. doi:
10.1016/j.jmb.2017.06.016.
[138] Sugita Y, Kitao A, Okamoto Y. Multidimensional Replica-
Exchange Method for Free-Energy Calculations. J Chem Phys.
2000; 113(15):6042–6051. doi: 10.1063/1.1308516.
[139] Chodera JD, Shirts MR. Replica Exchange and Expanded En-
semble Simulations as Gibbs Sampling: Simple Improvements
for Enhanced Mixing. J Chem Phys. 2011; 135(19):194110. doi:
10.1063/1.3660669.
[140] Lyubartsev AP, Martsinovski AA, Shevkunov SV, Vorontsov-
Velyaminov PN. New Approach to Monte Carlo Calculation of
the Free Energy: Method of Expanded Ensembles. J Chem Phys.
1992; 96(3):1776–1783. doi: 10.1063/1.462133.
[141] Li H, Fajer M, Yang W. Simulated Scaling Method for Localized
Enhanced Sampling and Simultaneous “Alchemical” Free En-
ergy Simulations: A General Method for Molecular Mechanical,
Quantum Mechanical, and Quantum Mechanical/Molecular
Mechanical Simulations. J Chem Phys. 2007; 126(2):024106.
doi: 10.1063/1.2424700.
[142] Lin YL, Aleksandrov A, Simonson T, Roux B. An Overview of
Electrostatic Free Energy Computations for Solutions and Pro-
teins. J Chem Theory Comput. 2014; 10(7):2690–2709. doi:
10.1021/ct500195p.
[143] Öhlknecht C, Lier B, Petrov D, Fuchs J, Oostenbrink C. Correct-
ing Electrostatic Artifacts Due to Net-Charge Changes in the
Calculation of Ligand Binding Free Energies. J Comput Chem.
2020; 41(10):986–999. doi: 10.1002/jcc.26143.
[144] Rocklin GJ, Mobley DL, Dill KA, Hünenberger PH. Calculating
the Binding Free Energies of Charged Species Based on Explicit-
Solvent Simulations Employing Lattice-Sum Methods: An Accu-
rate Correction Scheme for Electrostatic Finite-Size Effects. J
Chem Phys. 2013; 139(18):184103. doi: 10.1063/1.4826261.
[145] Mey ASJS, Jiménez JJ, Michel J. Impact of Domain Knowledge
on Blinded Predictions of Binding Energies by Alchemical Free
Energy Calculations. J Comput Aided Mol Des. 2018; 32(1):199–
210. doi: 10.1007/s10822-017-0083-9.
[146] Beutler TC, Mark AE, van Schaik RC, Gerber PR, van Gunsteren
WF. Avoiding Singularities and Numerical Instabilities in Free
Energy Calculations Based on Molecular Simulations. Chem
Phys Lett. 1994; 222:529–539.
[147] Beutler TC, van Gunsteren WF. Molecular Dynamics Free
Energy Calculation in Four Dimensions. J Chem Phys. 1994;
101(2):1417–1422.
[148] Gapsys V, Seeliger D, de Groot BL. New Soft-Core Potential
Function for Molecular Dynamics Based Alchemical Free Energy
Calculations. J Chem Theory Comput. 2012; 8(7):2373–2382.
doi: 10.1021/ct300220p.
[149] Naden LN, Shirts MR. Linear Basis Function Approach to Ef-
ﬁcient Alchemical Free Energy Calculations. 2. Inserting and
Deleting Particles with Coulombic Interactions. J Chem Theory
Comput. 2015; 11(6):2536–2549. doi: 10.1021/ct501047e.
[150] Naden LN, Pham TT, Shirts MR. Linear Basis Function Ap-
proach to Eﬃcient Alchemical Free Energy Calculations. 1. Re-
moval of Uncharged Atomic Sites. J Chem Theory Comput.
2014; 10(3):1128–1149. doi: 10.1021/ct4009188.
[151] Pham TT, Shirts MR. Identifying Low Variance Pathways
for Free Energy Calculations of Molecular Transformations
in Solution Phase. J Chem Phys. 2011; 135(3):034114. doi:
10.1063/1.3607597.
[152] Zacharias M, Straatsma TP, McCammon JA. Separation-Shifted
Scaling, a New Scaling Method for Lennard-Jones Interac-
tions in Thermodynamic Integration. J Phys Chem. 1994;
100(12):9025–9031.
[153] Blondel A. Ensemble Variance in Free Energy Calculations by
Thermodynamic Integration: Theory, Optimal Alchemical Path,
and Practical Solutions. J Comput Chem. 2004; 25(7):985–993.
[154] Pham TT, Shirts MR. Optimal Pairwise and Non-Pairwise Al-
chemical Pathways for Free Energy Calculations of Molecu-
lar Transformation in Solution Phase. J Chem Phys. 2012;
136(12):124120. doi: 10.1063/1.3697833.
[155] Donnini S, Mark AE, Juffer AH, Villa A. Molecular Dynamics
Free Energy Calculation in Four Dimensions. J Comput Chem.
2005; 26(2):115–122.
45 of 48
A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
[156] Steinbrecher T, Joung I, Case DA. Soft-Core Potentials in Ther-
modynamic Integration: Comparing One- and Two-Step Trans-
formations. J Comput Chem. 2011; 32(15):3253–3263. doi:
10.1002/jcc.21909.
[157] Hermans J, Wang L. Inclusion of Loss of Translational and
Rotational Freedom in Theoretical Estimates of Free Energies
of Binding. Application to a Complex of Benzene and Mutant
T4 Lysozyme. J Am Chem Soc. 1997; 119(11):2707–2714. doi:
10.1021/ja963568+.
[158] Mann G, Hermans J. Modeling Protein-Small Molecule Inter-
actions: Structure and Thermodynamics of Noble Gases Bind-
ing in a Cavity in Mutant Phage T4 Lysozyme L99A11Edited
by B. Honig. J Mol Biol. 2000; 302(4):979–989. doi:
10.1006/jmbi.2000.4064.
[159] Wang J, Deng Y, Roux B. Absolute Binding Free Energy Calcula-
tions Using Molecular Dynamics Simulations with Restraining
Potentials. Biophysical Journal. 2006; 91(8):2798–2814. doi:
10.1529/biophysj.106.084301.
[160] Fujitani H, Tanida Y, Ito M, Jayachandran G, Snow CD, Shirts
MR, Sorin EJ, Pande VS. Direct Calculation of the Binding Free
Energies of FKBP Ligands. J Chem Phys. 2005; 123(8):084108.
doi: 10.1063/1.1999637.
[161] Steinbrecher T, Mobley DL, Case DA. Nonlinear Scaling
Schemes for Lennard-Jones Interactions in Free Energy Cal-
culations. J Chem Phys. 2007; 127(21).
[162] Crooks GE. Measuring Thermodynamic Length. Phys Rev Lett.
2007; 99(10):100602. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.99.100602.
[163] Sivak DA, Crooks GE. Thermodynamic Metrics and Optimal
Paths. Phys Rev Lett. 2012; 108(19):190602. doi: 10.1103/Phys-
RevLett.108.190602.
[164] Shenfeld DK, Xu H, Eastwood MP, Dror RO, Shaw DE. Mini-
mizing Thermodynamic Length to Select Intermediate States
for Free-Energy Calculations and Replica-Exchange Simula-
tions. Phys Rev E. 2009; 80(4):046705. doi: 10.1103/Phys-
RevE.80.046705.
[165] Hayes RL, Armacost KA, Vilseck JZ, Brooks CL. Adaptive Land-
scape Flattening Accelerates Sampling of Alchemical Space in
Multisite λ Dynamics. J Phys Chem B. 2017; 121(15):3626–3635.
doi: 10.1021/acs.jpcb.6b09656.
[166] Monroe JI, Shirts MR. Converging Free Energies of Binding
in Cucurbit[7]Uril and Octa-Acid Host–Guest Systems from
SAMPL4 Using Expanded Ensemble Simulations. J Comput
Aided Mol Des. 2014; 28(4):401–415. doi: 10.1007/s10822-014-
9716-4.
[167] Swendsen RH, Wang JS. Replica Monte Carlo Simulation of
Spin-Glasses. Phys Rev Lett. 1986; 57(21):2607–2609. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevLett.57.2607.
[168] Sugita Y, Okamoto Y. Replica-Exchange Molecular Dynamics
Method for Protein Folding. Chem Phys Lett. 1999; 314(1):141–
151. doi: 10.1016/S0009-2614(99)01123-9.
[169] Woods CJ, Essex JW, King MA. The Development of Replica-
Exchange-Based Free-Energy Methods. J Phys Chem B. 2003;
107(49):13703–13710. doi: 10.1021/jp0356620.
[170] Jiang W, Roux B. Free Energy Perturbation Hamiltonian Replica-
Exchange Molecular Dynamics (FEP/H-REMD) for Absolute Lig-
and Binding Free Energy Calculations. J Chem Theory Comput.
2010; 6(9):2559–2565. doi: 10.1021/ct1001768.
[171] Marinari E, Parisi G. Simulated Tempering: A New Monte
Carlo Scheme. Europhys Lett. 1992; 19(6):451–458. doi:
10.1209/0295-5075/19/6/002.
[172] Tan Z. Optimally Adjusted Mixture Sampling and Locally
Weighted Histogram Analysis. J Comput Graph Stat. 2017;
26(1):54–65. doi: 10.1080/10618600.2015.1113975.
[173] Rizzi A, Chodera J, Naden L, Beauchamp K, Grinaway P, Fass J,
adw62, Rustenburg B, Ross GA, Krämer A, Macdonald HB, Swen-
son DWH, Simmonett A, hb0402, ajsilveira, Choderalab/Open-
mmtools: 0.19.0 - Multiple Alchemical Regions; 2019. doi:
10.5281/zenodo.3532826. Zenodo.
[174] Plount Price ML, Jorgensen WL. Analysis of Binding Aﬃnities
for Celecoxib Analogues with COX-1 and COX-2 from Combined
Docking and Monte Carlo Simulations and Insight into the COX-
2/COX-1 Selectivity. J Am Chem Soc. 2000; 122(39):9455–9466.
doi: 10.1021/ja001018c.
[175] Mobley DL, Dill KA. Binding of Small-Molecule Ligands to Pro-
teins: “What You See” Is Not Always “What You Get”. Structure.
2009; 17(4):489–498. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2009.02.010.
[176] Calabrò G, Woods CJ, Powlesland F, Mey ASJS, Mulholland AJ,
Michel J. Elucidation of Nonadditive Effects in Protein–Ligand
Binding Energies: Thrombin as a Case Study. J Phys Chem B.
2016; 120(24):5340–5350. doi: 10.1021/acs.jpcb.6b03296.
[177] Steinbrecher TB, Dahlgren M, Cappel D, Lin T, Wang L, Krilov
G, Abel R, Friesner R, Sherman W. Accurate Binding Free Energy
Predictions in Fragment Optimization. J Chem Inf Model. 2015;
55(11):2411–2420. doi: 10.1021/acs.jcim.5b00538.
[178] Palma PN, Bonifácio MJ, Loureiro AI, Soares-da-Silva P. Compu-
tation of the Binding Aﬃnities of Catechol-O-Methyltransferase
Inhibitors: Multisubstate Relative Free Energy Calculations. J
Comput Chem. 2012; 33(9):970–986. doi: 10.1002/jcc.22926.
[179] Voet ARD, Kumar A, Berenger F, Zhang KYJ. Combining in
Silico and in Cerebro Approaches for Virtual Screening and
Pose Prediction in SAMPL4. J Comput Aided Mol Des. 2014;
28(4):363–373. doi: 10.1007/s10822-013-9702-2.
[180] Gallicchio E, Deng N, He P, Wickstrom L, Perryman AL, Santiago
DN, Forli S, Olson AJ, Levy RM. Virtual Screening of Integrase
Inhibitors by Large Scale Binding Free Energy Calculations: The
SAMPL4 Challenge. J Comput Aided Mol Des. 2014; 28(4):475–
490. doi: 10.1007/s10822-014-9711-9.
[181] Rocklin GJ, Boyce SE, Fischer M, Fish I, Mobley DL, Shoichet BK,
Dill KA. Blind Prediction of Charged Ligand Binding Aﬃnities in
a Model Binding Site. J Mol Biol. 2013; 425(22):4569–4583. doi:
10.1016/j.jmb.2013.07.030.
[182] Boyce SE, Mobley DL, Rocklin GJ, Graves AP, Dill KA, Shoichet
BK. Predicting Ligand Binding Aﬃnity with Alchemical Free
Energy Methods in a Polar Model Binding Site. J Mol Biol. 2009;
394(4):747–763. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2009.09.049.
46 of 48
A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
[183] Lincoff J, Sasmal S, Head-Gordon T. Comparing Generalized
Ensemble Methods for Sampling of Systems with Many De-
grees of Freedom. J Chem Phys. 2016; 145(17):174107. doi:
10.1063/1.4965439.
[184] Sasmal S, Gill SC, Lim NM, Mobley DL. Sampling Con-
formational Changes of Bound Ligands Using Nonequi-
librium Candidate Monte Carlo and Molecular Dynamics.
J Chem Theory Comput. 2020; 16(3):1854–1865. doi:
10.1021/acs.jctc.9b01066.
[185] Shirts MR, Pande VS. Comparison of Eﬃciency and Bias of
Free Energies Computed by Exponential Averaging, the Bennett
Acceptance Ratio, and Thermodynamic Integration. J Chem
Phys. 2005; 122:144107.
[186] Chodera JD. A Simple Method for Automated Equilibration
Detection in Molecular Simulations. J Chem Theory Comput.
2016; 12(4):1799–1805. doi: 10.1021/acs.jctc.5b00784.
[187] Beauchamp K, Chodera J, Naden L, Shirts M, Martiniani
S, Stern C, McGibbon RT, Gowers R, Dotson D, Choderal-
ab/Pymbar: Critical Bugﬁx Release; 2019. doi: 10.5281/zen-
odo.3559263. Zenodo.
[188] Dotson D, Beckstein O, Wille D, Kenney I, shuail, trje3733, Lee
H, Lim V, brycestx, Barhaghi MS, Alchemistry/Alchemlyb: 0.3.0;
2019. doi: 10.5281/zenodo.3361016. Zenodo.
[189] Nüske F, Wu H, Prinz JH, Wehmeyer C, Clementi C, Noé
F. Markov state models from short non-equilibrium simula-
tions—Analysis and correction of estimation bias. The Journal
of Chemical Physics. 2017; 146(9):094104.
[190] Jarzynski C. Nonequilibrium Equality for Free Energy Differ-
ences. Phys Rev Lett. 1997; 78(14):2690–2693.
[191] Jarzynski C. Equilibrium Free Energies from Nonequilibrium
Processes. Act Phys Pol B. 1998; 29(6):1609–1622.
[192] Crooks GE. Path-Ensemble Averages in Systems Driven Far
from Equilibrium. Phys Rev E. 2000; 61(3):2361–2366.
[193] Maragakis P, Ritort F, Bustamante C, Karplus M, Crooks GE.
Bayesian Estimates of Free Energies from Nonequilibrium
Work Data in the Presence of Instrument Noise. J Chem Phys.
2008; 129(2):024102–8. doi: 10.1063/1.2937892.
[194] Oberhofer H, Dellago C, Geissler PL. Biased Sampling of
Nonequilibrium Trajectories: Can Fast Switching Simulations
Outperform Conventional Free Energy Calculation Methods? J
Phys Chem B. 2005; 109:6902–6915.
[195] Procacci P. Unbiased Free Energy Estimates in Fast Nonequi-
librium Transformations Using Gaussian Mixtures. J Chem
Phys. 2015; 142(15):154117. doi: 10.1063/1.4918558.
[196] Ytreberg FM, Zuckerman DM. Single-Ensemble Nonequilib-
rium Path-Sampling Estimates of Free Energy Differences. J
Chem Phys. 2004; 120(23):10876–9.
[197] Lu ND, Singh JK, Kofke DA. Appropriate Methods to Combine
Forward and Reverse Free-Energy Perturbation Averages. J
Chem Phys. 2003; 118(7):2977–2984.
[198] Lelièvre T, Rousset M, Stoltz G. Free Energy Computations.
IMPERIAL COLLEGE PRESS; 2010. doi: 10.1142/p579.
[199] Jarzynski C. Rare Events and the Convergence of Exponentially
Averaged Work Values. Phys Rev E. 2006; 73:046105.
[200] Resat H, Mezei M. Studies on Free Energy Calculations. I. Ther-
modynamic Integration Using a Polynomial Path. J Chem Phys.
1993; 99(8):6052–6061.
[201] Jorge M, Garrido N, Queimada A, Economou I, Macedo E. Effect
of the Integration Method on the Accuracy and Computational
Eﬃciency of Free Energy Calculations Using Thermodynamic
Integration. J Chem Theory Comput. 2010; 6(4):1018–1027. doi:
10.1021/ct900661c.
[202] Shyu C, Ytreberg FM. Reducing the Bias and Uncertainty of
Free Energy Estimates by Using Regression to Fit Thermody-
namic Integration Data. J Comput Chem. 2009; 30(14):2297–
2304. doi: 10.1002/jcc.21231.
[203] Paliwal H, Shirts MR. A Benchmark Test Set for Alchemical
Free Energy Transformations and Its Use to Quantify Error in
Common Free Energy Methods. J Chem Theory Comput. 2011;
7(12):4115–4134. doi: 10.1021/ct2003995.
[204] Tan Z. On a Likelihood Approach for Monte Carlo Inte-
gration. J Am Stat Soc. 2004; 99(468):1027–1036. doi:
10.1198/016214504000001664.
[205] Shirts MR. Reweighting from the Mixture Distribution as a
Better Way to Describe the Multistate Bennett Acceptance
Ratio. arXiv:170400891 [cond-mat]. 2017; .
[206] Mobley DL, Gilson MK. Predicting Binding Free Energies: Fron-
tiers and Benchmarks. Annu Rev Biophys. 2017; 46(1):531–558.
doi: 10.1146/annurev-biophys-070816-033654.
[207] Mobley DL, Heinzelmann G, Henriksen NM, Gilson MK. Pre-
dicting Binding Free Energies: Frontiers and Benchmarks (a
Perpetual Review). . 2017; .
[208] Dakka J, Farkas-Pall K, Turilli M, Wright DW, Coveney PV, Jha S.
Concurrent and Adaptive Extreme Scale Binding Free Energy
Calculations. arXiv:180101174 [cs]. 2018; .
[209] Hahn DF, Hünenberger PH. Alchemical Free-Energy Calcu-
lations by Multiple-Replica λ-Dynamics: The Conveyor Belt
Thermodynamic Integration Scheme. J Chem Theory Comput.
2019; 15(4):2392–2419. doi: 10.1021/acs.jctc.8b00782.
[210] Brown SP, Muchmore SW, Hajduk PJ. Healthy Skepticism:
Assessing Realistic Model Performance. Drug Discov. 2009;
14(7):420–427. doi: 10.1016/j.drudis.2009.01.012.
[211] Drugdata/Metk; 2018. Drug Design Data Resource.
[212] Walters WP. What Are Our Models Really Telling Us?
A Practical Tutorial on Avoiding Common Mistakes When
Building Predictive Models. In: Chemoinformatics for Drug
Discovery John Wiley & Sons, Ltd; 2013.p. 1–31. doi:
10.1002/9781118742785.ch1.
[213] Antonia M, Michellab/Freenrgworkﬂows; 2019. michellab.
47 of 48
A LiveCoMS Best Practices Guide
[214] Cui G, Graves AP, Manas ES. GRAM: A True Null Model for
Relative Binding Aﬃnity Predictions. J Chem Inf Model. 2020;
60(1):11–16. doi: 10.1021/acs.jcim.9b00939.
[215] Jain AN, Nicholls A. Recommendations for Evaluation of Com-
putational Methods. J Comput Aided Mol Des. 2008; 22(3):133–
139. doi: 10.1007/s10822-008-9196-5.
[216] Walter P, Some Thoughts on Evaluating Predictive Models;.
[217] Wagner V, Jantz L, Briem H, Sommer K, Rarey M, Christ CD.
Computational Macrocyclization: From de Novo Macrocycle
Generation to Binding Aﬃnity Estimation. ChemMedChem.
2017; 12(22):1866–1872. doi: 10.1002/cmdc.201700478.
[218] Gaieb Z, Liu S, Gathiaka S, Chiu M, Yang H, Shao C, Feher VA,
Walters WP, Kuhn B, Rudolph MG, Burley SK, Gilson MK, Amaro
RE. D3R Grand Challenge 2: Blind Prediction of Protein–Ligand
Poses, Aﬃnity Rankings, and Relative Binding Free Energies. J
Comput Aided Mol Des. 2018; 32(1):1–20. doi: 10.1007/s10822-
017-0088-4.
[219] Gaieb Z, Parks CD, Chiu M, Yang H, Shao C, Walters WP, Lam-
bert MH, Nevins N, Bembenek SD, Ameriks MK, Mirzadegan T,
Burley SK, Amaro RE, Gilson MK. D3R Grand Challenge 3: Blind
Prediction of Protein–Ligand Poses and Aﬃnity Rankings. J
Comput Aided Mol Des. 2019; 33(1):1–18. doi: 10.1007/s10822-
018-0180-4.
[220] Salomon-Ferrer R, Case DA, Walker RC. An Overview of the
Amber Biomolecular Simulation Package. WIREs Comput Mol
Sci. 2013; 3(2):198–210. doi: 10.1002/wcms.1121.
[221] Bonomi M, Bussi G, Camilloni C, Tribello GA, Banáš P, Barducci
A, Bernetti M, Bolhuis PG, Bottaro S, Branduardi D, Capelli R,
Carloni P, Ceriotti M, Cesari A, Chen H, Chen W, Colizzi F, De
S, De La Pierre M, Donadio D, et al. Promoting Transparency
and Reproducibility in Enhanced Molecular Simulations. Nat
Methods. 2019; 16(8):670–673. doi: 10.1038/s41592-019-0506-
8.
[222] Lemkul J. From Proteins to Perturbed Hamiltonians: A Suite of
Tutorials for the GROMACS-2018 Molecular Simulation Package
[Article v1.0]. LiveCoMS. 2018; 1(1):5068–. doi: 10.33011/live-
coms.1.1.5068.
[223] Abraham MJ, Murtola T, Schulz R, Páll S, Smith JC, Hess
B, Lindahl E. GROMACS: High Performance Molecular
Simulations through Multi-Level Parallelism from Laptops
to Supercomputers. SoftwareX. 2015; 1-2:19–25. doi:
10.1016/j.softx.2015.06.001.
[224] Åqvist Johan MJ Kamerlin Shina Caroline Lynn Bauer Paul,
Q6: A Comprehensive Toolkit for Empirical Valence Bond and
Related Free Energy Calculations; 2017. doi: 10.5281/zen-
odo.1002739. Zenodo.
[225] Jo S, Kim T, Iyer VG, Im W. CHARMM-GUI: A Web-Based
Graphical User Interface for CHARMM. J Comput Chem. 2008;
29(11):1859–1865. doi: 10.1002/jcc.20945.
[226] Suruzhon M, Senapathi T, Bodnarchuk MS, Viner R, Wall ID,
Barnett CB, Naidoo KJ, Essex JW. ProtoCaller: Robust Automa-
tion of Binding Free Energy Calculations. J Chem Inf Model.
2020; 60(4):1917–1921. doi: 10.1021/acs.jcim.9b01158.
[227] Dotson D, Beckstein O, Wille D, Kenney I, shuail, trje3733, Lee
H, Lim V, Allen B, Barhaghi MS, Alchemistry/Alchemlyb: 0.3.1;
2020. doi: 10.5281/zenodo.3610564. Zenodo.
[228] Williams-Noonan BJ, Yuriev E, Chalmers DK. Free Energy
Methods in Drug Design: Prospects of “Alchemical Perturba-
tion” in Medicinal Chemistry. J Med Chem. 2018; 61(3):638–649.
doi: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.7b00681.
[229] Alchemistry.org;. Accessed: 2019-08-01. http://www.
alchemistry.org/wiki/Test_System_Repository.
[230] D3R Grand Challenges;. Accessed: 2019-08-01. https://
drugdesigndata.org/about/grand-challenge.
[231] Gathiaka S, Liu S, Chiu M, Yang H, Stuckey JA, Kang YN, Delpro-
posto J, Kubish G, Dunbar JB, Carlson HA, Burley SK, Walters
WP, Amaro RE, Feher VA, Gilson MK. D3R Grand Challenge
2015: Evaluation of Protein–Ligand Pose and Aﬃnity Predic-
tions. J Comput Aided Mol Des. 2016; 30(9):651–668. doi:
10.1007/s10822-016-9946-8.
[232] SAMPL Challenges;. Accessed: 2019-08-01. https://
samplchallenges.github.io/.
[233] Rizzi A, Murkli S, McNeill JN, Yao W, Sullivan M, Gilson MK,
Chiu MW, Isaacs L, Gibb BC, Mobley DL, Chodera JD. Overview
of the SAMPL6 Host–Guest Binding Aﬃnity Prediction Chal-
lenge. J Comput Aided Mol Des. 2018; 32(10):937–963. doi:
10.1007/s10822-018-0170-6.
[234] Yin J, Henriksen NM, Slochower DR, Shirts MR, Chiu MW, Mob-
ley DL, Gilson MK. Overview of the SAMPL5 Host–Guest Chal-
lenge: Are We Doing Better? J Comput Aided Mol Des. 2017;
31(1):1–19. doi: 10.1007/s10822-016-9974-4.
[235] Muddana HS, Fenley AT, Mobley DL, Gilson MK. The SAMPL4
Host–Guest Blind Prediction Challenge: An Overview. J Comput
Aided Mol Des. 2014; 28(4):305–317. doi: 10.1007/s10822-014-
9735-1.
[236] Roos K, Wu C, Damm W, Reboul M, Stevenson JM, Lu C,
Dahlgren MK, Mondal S, Chen W, Wang L, Abel R, Friesner
RA, Harder ED. OPLS3e: Extending Force Field Coverage for
Drug-Like Small Molecules. J Chem Theory Comput. 2019;
15(3):1863–1874. doi: 10.1021/acs.jctc.8b01026.
[237] Yu HS, Deng Y, Wu Y, Sindhikara D, Rask AR, Kimura T,
Abel R, Wang L. Accurate and Reliable Prediction of the
Binding Aﬃnities of Macrocycles to Their Protein Targets.
J Chem Theory Comput. 2017; 13(12):6290–6300. doi:
10.1021/acs.jctc.7b00885.
[238] MCompChem, fep-benchmark; 2019. https://github.com/
MCompChem/fep-benchmark, [Online; accessed 9. Dec. 2019].
48 of 48
