
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 Large Scale Study of Ligand–Protein Relative Binding Free Energy Calculations: Actionable Predictions from Statistically Robust Protocols - PMC
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 Skip to main content
 


 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 An official website of the United States government
 
 Here's how you know 
 

 



















 
 
 
 

 
 Here's how you know 
 

 
 
 
 
 


 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 Official websites use .gov 
 
 A
 .gov website belongs to an official
 government organization in the United States.
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 Secure .gov websites use HTTPS 
 
 A lock (
 
 
 Lock 
 
 Locked padlock icon
 
 
 
 ) or https:// means you've safely
 connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
 information only on official, secure websites.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 



 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 



















 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 



 
 
 
 
 
 



















 
 
 
 

 
 



 


 Search
 

 
 
 
 
 


 

 
 
 
 



















 
 
 
 

 
 



 



 Log in 

 
 



 



 
 



 


 

 
 
 
 
 



 
 
 
 
 
 









 
 

 
 Dashboard
 

 
 


 
 
 
 
 









 
 

 
 Publications
 

 
 


 
 
 
 
 









 
 

 
 Account settings
 

 
 


 
 
 
 



















 
 
 
 

 Log out

 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search…
 
 
 



















 
 
 
 

 
 
 Search NCBI
 
 

 
 
 
 
 


 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 Primary site navigation
 

 
 



















 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 



 
 
 
 
 Search
 

 

 



















 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 


 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 Logged in as:
 
 
 
 
 
 









 
 

 
 Dashboard
 

 
 


 
 
 
 









 
 

 
 Publications
 

 
 


 
 
 
 









 
 

 
 Account settings
 

 
 


 
 
 
 
 

 



















 
 
 
 

 Log in

 
 
 
 
 


 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 Search PMC Full-Text Archive 
 
 
 
 
 Search in PMC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journal List
 
 
 
 
 
 
 User Guide
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 


 
 

 
 

 

 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 PERMALINK 
 
 
 
 
 Copy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion in an NLM database does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with,
 the contents by NLM or the National Institutes of Health. 
 Learn more:
 PMC Disclaimer 
 |
 
 PMC Copyright Notice
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 J Chem Theory Comput . 2022 Mar 16;18(4):2687–2702. doi: 10.1021/acs.jctc.1c01288 
 
 
 Search in PMC 
 Search in PubMed 
 View in NLM Catalog 
 Add to search 
 
 Large Scale Study of Ligand–Protein Relative
Binding Free Energy Calculations: Actionable Predictions from Statistically
Robust Protocols 
 Agastya
P Bhati 
 Agastya
P Bhati 
 
 † Centre
for Computational Science, Department of Chemistry, University College London, London WC1H 0AJ, United Kingdom 
 Find articles by Agastya
P Bhati 
 
 
 † , Peter V Coveney 
 Peter V Coveney 
 
 † Centre
for Computational Science, Department of Chemistry, University College London, London WC1H 0AJ, United Kingdom 
 
 ‡ Informatics
Institute, University of Amsterdam, P.O. Box 94323, 1090 GH Amsterdam, Netherlands 
 Find articles by Peter V Coveney 
 
 
 †, ‡, * 
 
 
 Author information 
 Article notes 
 Copyright and License information 
 
 
 
 
 † Centre
for Computational Science, Department of Chemistry, University College London, London WC1H 0AJ, United Kingdom 
 
 ‡ Informatics
Institute, University of Amsterdam, P.O. Box 94323, 1090 GH Amsterdam, Netherlands 
 
 * Email: p.v.coveney@ucl.ac.uk . Phone: +44 (0)20 7679 4560. 
 
 
 Received 2021 Dec 22; Issue date 2022 Apr 12. 
 
 © 2022 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society 
 Permits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained ( https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ). 
 PMC Copyright notice 
 
 
 PMCID: PMC9009079  PMID: 35293737 
 
 Abstract 
 
 The accurate and
reliable prediction of protein–ligand binding
affinities can play a central role in the drug discovery process as
well as in personalized medicine. Of considerable importance during
lead optimization are the alchemical free energy methods that furnish
an estimation of relative binding free energies (RBFE) of similar
molecules. Recent advances in these methods have increased their speed,
accuracy, and precision. This is evident from the increasing number
of retrospective as well as prospective studies employing them. However,
such methods still have limited applicability in real-world scenarios
due to a number of important yet unresolved issues. Here, we report
the findings from a large data set comprising over 500 ligand transformations
spanning over 300 ligands binding to a diverse set of 14 different
protein targets which furnish statistically robust results on the
accuracy, precision, and reproducibility of RBFE calculations. We
use ensemble-based methods which are the only way to provide reliable
uncertainty quantification given that the underlying molecular dynamics
is chaotic. These are implemented using TIES (Thermodynamic Integration
with Enhanced Sampling). Results achieve chemical accuracy in all
cases. Ensemble simulations also furnish information on the statistical
distributions of the free energy calculations which exhibit non-normal
behavior. We find that the “enhanced sampling” method
known as replica exchange with solute tempering degrades RBFE predictions.
We also report definitively on numerous associated alchemical factors
including the choice of ligand charge method, flexibility in ligand
structure, and the size of the alchemical region including the number
of atoms involved in transforming one ligand into another. Our findings
provide a key set of recommendations that should be adopted for the
reliable application of RBFE methods. 1. Introduction 
 With the increasing power
of supercomputers, the use of computational
methods in the field of drug discovery has risen rapidly. In silico methods can support the identification of potential
therapeutics by accelerating the process of screening vast real or
virtual libraries of chemical compounds and/or de novo structures based on their binding strength to a given target protein. 1 The binding affinity, also known as the binding
free energy, is a quantitative measure of the strength of ligand–protein
binding. Thus, computational methods for predicting binding free energies
of ligand–protein complexes can play an important role in drug
discovery. The average cost and time required to develop one drug
stand at over $2 billion and 10 years, respectively. 2 , 3 Improving the reliability of such methods should substantially reduce
the time and cost associated with bringing novel drugs to market.
The urgent need to dramatically accelerate the process of drug discovery
has been made manifest during the COVID-19 pandemic. 
 Relative
binding free energy (RBFE) methods based on classical
molecular dynamics, that enable accurate prediction of protein–ligand
binding affinities, offer an attractive route to optimize ligand–protein
interactions on the drug discovery pathway. 4 They can also be useful in personalized medicine. 5 However, historical challenges such as high computational
costs and consequent lack of sufficient sampling to obtain statistically
robust results, force field accuracy, and time to solution as well
as technical challenges in setting up and performing such calculations
have limited the successful application of RBFE methods. 6 Several recent advances in software as well as
hardware along with methodological improvements have provided a boost
to these methods in terms of their applicability, especially in drug
discovery. 7 Improvements in force field
and ligand parameters, growing efficiency of high performance computing
resources, the advent of GPU accelerators and codes compatible with
them have all made valuable contributions. Automation tools are also
now available for a quick and easy setup of RBFE calculations. 8 − 12 For instance, the FEP+ package 8 introduced
a few years ago shrink-wraps the entire process of the RBFE setup,
providing an impressive user-friendly interface for such calculations.
Its expense and proprietary nature have restricted access to large
pharmaceutical companies as well as its scientific evaluation. 
 Our group has publicly released the TIES toolkit 13 to automate the process of setting up, running, and analyzing
RBFE calculations using the ensemble simulation-based alchemical approach
named Thermodynamic Integration with Enhanced Sampling (TIES). 14 It consists of two components, TIES20 and TIES-MD.
The former can be used to prepare TIES input by automatically identifying
appropriate ligand mapping and building hybrid ligand molecules based
on the TIES approach. The latter can be used to perform calculations
and analyze results. The TIES toolkit thus provides a direct route
for anyone interested in quickly setting up and executing RBFE calculations
free of charge. 
 Another major issue is the lack of reproducibility
and control
of uncertainty in such methods due to the extreme sensitivity of classical
molecular dynamics (MD) simulations to the initial conditions given
their chaotic nature. 15 This is manifested
in the fact that two independent MD trajectories diverge exponentially
with time and explore very different microstates. It is this behavior
that confers the “mixing” ergodic property on MD simulation,
a property stronger than ergodicity which is required to guarantee
that the state of thermodynamic equilibrium may be reached. 15 While one-off simulations, no matter how close
their initial conditions in phase space, produce different results
each time they are run, ensembles of such simulations produce a distribution
of results whose properties (typically moments of the distribution
including mean, variance, and so on) are statistically robust. Remarkably,
the far reaching impact of chaos in MD has not been widely recognized.
The book by Leimkuhler and Matthews 16 is
notable because it does pay attention to chaotic behavior, although
it does not address the impact of dynamical chaos on uncertainty quantification.
The only way to deal with this feature is to use ensemble-based approaches
which ensure the statistical reproducibility of results. 14 , 15 , 17 − 24 Although when we first advocated these methods we encountered resistance,
it is noticeable that many practitioners now acknowledge that results
based on one-off simulations may be grossly unreliable, and it is
becoming more common to read of authors performing several “repeats”
of calculations in order to estimate the uncertainty in their results
(often without recognizing our previous work in this context). 6 , 26 − 79 [In a private communication following the publication of Wan et
al., 22 Schrödinger LLP agreed on
the need for ensembles to produce statistically reliable results.
More recently, they have acknowledged the need to properly handle
uncertainties in their published article. 25 ] For instance, Groot et al. perform 3 repeats in their recent free
energy estimation studies. 26 − 28 , 79 On the other hand, the same authors (the set of people common in
all these studies) advocate 20 repeats when studying the effect of
box sizes on thermodynamic properties 30 which betrays a lack of consistency and systematic approach in addressing
uncertainty estimation. 
 Indeed, for not unrelated reasons we
are still not at a stage where
RBFE methods can be routinely applied with confidence in the pharmaceutical
industry let alone by clinicians to predict drug resistance in personalized
medicine. 5 There are many associated factors
that need to be addressed in order to ensure that these methods can
be employed in a routine fashion by end users. Quality of force field
and ligand parameters, choice of alchemical region and the topology
scheme (single, dual or mixed), handling of charge-changing transformations,
protein starting structure, ligand pose placement, tautomerization,
and ionization states are all issues that affect the quality of results. 
 There are a few recent publications that describe “best
practices” for alchemical free energy methods and discuss some
of the issues mentioned above. 6 , 7 However, the major shortcoming
of such articles is that their proposed guidelines are not based on
statistically robust analysis of free energy predictions. For our
part, we are interested in rendering such simulations actionable;
this requires predictions to be accompanied by full uncertainty quantification. 
 However, there are three published works (including a very recent
one) that include a few hundred ligand transformations studied using
alchemical relative free energy methods. The purpose of these papers
is to demonstrate the applicability of their RBFE methods. 8 , 26 , 79 Neither the aforementioned best
practice articles nor these large scale studies furnish a systematic
analysis of the way in which the factors mentioned affect RBFE predictions. 
 Here, we address these lacunae by performing a statistically robust
analysis of RBFE predictions for a large data set comprising 503 ligand
transformations spanning 305 ligands and 14 target proteins covering
a broad range of molecules and targets relevant for medicinal chemists
and provide definitive recommendations concerning the protocols to
use that can deliver actionable predictions. 
 We should emphasize
here that the use of TIES does not restrict
the validity of our findings. They are true for any RBFE method including,
in particular, the so-called free energy perturbation (FEP) approach.
Indeed, we have conducted a number of studies which confirm the general
power of the approach and agreement with other methods within an ensemble-based
approach. 17 , 22 Moreover, in a recent study, we show that
ensemble-based FEP and TIES can be performed concurrently at little
extra cost, and their results will be statistically identical. 31 
 The same general behavior is also exhibited
by nonequilibrium MD
methods. Indeed, this was reported by Potterton et al. 32 where it was found that an ensemble size of
10 was necessary to reliably predict relative residence times for
ligands. This is equally applicable to other nonequilibrium methods
including free energy methods such as those based on Jarzynski’s
inequality. 26 , 33 , 34 
 Similarly, machine learning (ML) techniques are increasingly
being
employed in the field of free energy predictions. 35 Of particular interest are studies combining ML and physics-based
methods to accelerate free energy predictions for the selection of
potential therapeutics. 36 − 39 Such approaches have considerable potential and may
be applicable to binding free energy predictions too, but they have
many of their own limitations that need to be overcome. One major
limitation is that ML methods are heavily data dependent, and hence,
unless the data distributions of experimental data are understood
and accounted for, such methods produce overconfident predictions. 40 − 42 These methods are beyond the scope of the present paper and will
not be discussed further here. 2. Scope of the Study 
 In this section, we briefly describe the various aspects of alchemical
free energy methods that we have focused on in the present study.
We summarize the prevailing view captured by best practice articles
and comment on the open issues in this domain. 
 2.1. Ensembles
and Distributions 
 It is
an implicit assumption in almost all papers other than our own that
the distribution of RBFEs obtained from different replicas in an ensemble
is Gaussian. It is why, even if just 2 or 3 replica simulations are
performed, those are deemed sufficient. Paliwal et al. claimed that
hydration free energy distributions are Gaussian and deviate from
this behavior at the 95% confidence level only when the ensemble sizes
are increased above 110. 43 However, in
addition to the fact that their study is based on toy models with
simple interactions, the dependence of normality on the ensemble size
that they report raises questions as to the reliability of their interpretation
of the general nature of free energy distributions. We have repeatedly
shown that such distributions deviate from normality for complex protein–ligand
systems. 19 , 23 , 44 , 45 Moreover, this is not just confined to ligand–protein
interactions but valid for many nonlinear systems with long-range
interactions. 45 , 46 Furthermore, a recent paper of
ours demonstrates that the influence of the random number seed used
in each MD simulation completely dominates the uncertainty accruing
from the uncertainty in the parameters used to perform such simulations. 23 The nature of free energy distributions associated
with MD simulations and their important consequences are simply not
touched upon by any of the publications discussed in the Introduction . 
 In the present study, we build
upon our previous work on uncertainty quantification in free energy
methods using ensembles to ensure robustness and reproducibility of
RBFE predictions 14 , 17 − 19 , 22 , 23 , 31 , 44 , 45 and apply our methods to fully quantify the nature of free energy
distributions. We again report the occurrence of non-normal distributions
of free energies obtained using large ensembles. We also discuss some
important consequences of this observation. 2.2. “Enhanced
Sampling” Degrades
Performance 
 Replica exchange with solute tempering (REST2) 47 , 48 is an enhanced sampling method that involves “heating”
a highly localized part of the solute and exchanging information across
concurrent simulations being performed at different intermediate points
along the alchemical path and which have different “effective
temperatures”. It has been claimed that REST2 accelerates local
sampling around the alchemical region and should either improve the
results or leave them unchanged. 8 However,
we have previously reported that the blind application of this method
can degrade the quality of free energy predictions. 18 , 22 In the present study, we report a systematic and statistically robust
assessment of REST2 that establishes beyond doubt the general validity
of our findings. 2.3. Electrostatic Charge Methods
for Ligands 
 AMBER force fields 49 embrace two popular
methods for deriving partial electrostatic charges for ligands, namely
RESP 50 and AM1-BCC. 51 The former involves a restrained fit to an electrostatic
potential calculated with quantum mechanical (QM) methods, while the
latter is a cheaper method based on semiempirical calculations and
bond charge corrections. AM1-BCC charges are generally expected to
provide values closely mimicking the RESP charges calculated at the
Hartree–Fock/6-31G* level of theory but can be obtained much
faster. However, differences have been reported between results emanating
from the two charge systems albeit using only a small data set with
no clear conclusion as to which should be preferred. 52 Here, we perform a comparison on a statistically significant
data set and report robust and conclusive findings. 2.4. Modified Dual-Topology Scheme 
 The
majority of implementations of the alchemical free energy methods
rely on either a single- or a dual-topology scheme for performing
the alchemical transmutations. The strict dual topology scheme requires
duplication of the system with atoms corresponding to the two end-states
present at all stages, albeit not interacting with each other. This
makes it difficult to obtain converged results and requires the application
of spatial restraints. On the other hand, the single topology implementation
requires introducing “dummy” atoms and becomes trickier
as the two molecules become increasingly chemically dissimilar. 80 Specially noteworthy are cases which involve
changing the sizes of rings. 53 To overcome
these issues, a hybrid single-dual-topology approach has been introduced. 54 However, it has a complicated implementation
(currently only available with NAMD) and remains to be tested and
validated using a large data set. The modified dual topology scheme
employed in our TIES protocol 14 , 19 overcomes the above
issues in both the single and the dual topology schemes. It has been
widely validated in our previous work, and we demonstrate its success
in the present study too. 2.5. Size of Alchemical Region 
 When employing
topology schemes such as the hybrid single-dual introduced by Jiang
et al. or our TIES modified dual topology scheme, there is an additional
variable involved: the number of atoms in the alchemical region. Hereafter,
we will refer to it as the size of the alchemical region. We have
shown previously that the precision of our TIES results is inversely
proportional to this quantity due to slow convergence. 14 , 19 In addition, if the alchemical region so defined includes charged
groups, then the error bars become even larger. In the present work,
we provide further related observations and demonstrate successful
ways to deal with such situations. 3. Theory 
 Thermodynamic Integration (TI) is a common alchemical method used
for calculating free energies. 55 , 56 It uses a control variable
λ to define interactions between the two end states such that
its lower and upper limits, 0 and 1, correspond to the initial and
final states of the alchemical transformation studied. The free energy
change corresponding to the said transformation is calculated using
the following equation: 
 
 
 1 
 
 It can be shown that 
 
 
 2 
 
 where U is the potential
energy of the system. It is worth mentioning that the above equation
is only strictly valid in the thermodynamic limit, when both left
and right sides of the equation are unique numbers. However, for finite
systems with limited sampling of phase space, these quantities are
stochastic variables with associated probability distributions. 14 , 23 , 44 This is due to the extreme sensitivity
of MD simulations to their initial conditions, 15 which leads to differences in the configurations sampled
for each repeat simulation and causes fluctuations in free energies
obtained using eq 2 . 14 , 17 , 18 Therefore, when performing a
single MD simulation at each intermediate λ state, every repeat
calculation will yield a different result, which makes it unreliable.
Thus, an ensemble simulation is necessary to bring such stochastic
uncertainties under control. In this study, we employ an ensemble
simulation-based method called “Thermodynamic Integration with
Enhanced Sampling (TIES)” that involves performing an ensemble
of MD simulations at each λ state and integrating the ensemble
averaged energy derivative in eq 2 using stochastic calculus. The resultant free energies are
reported along with proper estimates of associated aleatoric uncertainties.
More details on TIES are available from prior publications. 14 In a recent article, we show that, when employing
ensemble simulations, the free energy predictions from TIES and FEP
produce the same results within statistical error. 31 Thus, ensemble simulations ensure reproducibility across
free energy methods and extend the validity of our findings to other
RBFE methods such as FEP and FEP+, and we expect the nonequilibrium
TI approach. 
 The relative binding affinities for ligand–protein
complexes
can be calculated using a thermodynamic cycle with the following equations 
 
 
 3 
 
 where Δ G L2(1) is
the binding affinity for ligand L2(1), and and are free energy differences for alchemically
transforming ligand L1 into L2 in protein and aqueous environments,
respectively. 4. Methods 
 In this
section, we describe the protein–ligand systems
studied and provide details on the implementation of the various steps
involved in the TIES protocol for calculation of free energies. 
 4.1. Data Set Studied 
 The ligand–protein
systems used in this study are comprised of some selected benchmark
sets that have already been studied with FEP+. 8 , 52 , 53 , 57 − 60 This data set covers a wide range of ligands and target classes
(305 ligands and 14 protein targets). We studied 503 ligand perturbations
that include a wide range of chemical modifications typically seen
in medicinal chemistry efforts. Out of the 14 protein systems studied
here, 8 were part of the previous FEP+ study by Wang et al.: 8 BACE, MCL1, TYK2, thrombin, CDK2, P38, PTP1B,
and JNK1. The remaining 6 have appeared in subsequent FEP+ studies:
PDE2, 57 cMET, 58 Galectin, 52 and three additional BACE
data sets. 53 , 59 , 60 In addition, all of these systems except BACE (scaffold) were also
studied using a nonequilibrium alchemical approach referred to as
“PMX” hereafter in this article. 26 4.2. TIES Approach 
 All free energy calculations
in this study have been performed using the TIES protocol that has
been described in detail in our prior publications. 14 , 19 Briefly, it involves performing an ensemble simulation at each intermediate
alchemical state followed by ensemble averaging of the bootstrapped
potential energy derivatives so obtained. Such averaged energy derivatives
are then integrated using the principles of stochastic calculus to
get the final free energy difference along with associated uncertainties
using eq 2 . The standard
protocol is to perform an ensemble of 5 MD simulations at each λ
window of length 4 ns and uses 13 λ-windows as follows: 0, 0.05,
0.1, ..., 0.9, 0.95, 1. It should be noted that these standard settings
for the TIES protocol were derived through a systematic study of the
dependence of accuracy and precision of the TIES predictions on all
these parameters. 14 However, it should
be noted that these standard values may need to be adjusted in some
cases to control errors/uncertainties. 
 Our approach uses a modified
dual topology scheme. 14 , 19 This scheme involves selecting
the maximal common substructure (MCS) for a given ligand pair which
is structurally and chemically identical between the two ligands within
the thresholds defined. The standard thresholds used are a 0.1e difference
between the two ligands for atomic charges of individual atoms in
MCS as well as their sums. First of all, a structurally identical
MCS is identified. Thereafter, its chemical identicality is ensured
by iteratively removing atoms from it until the charge tolerance criteria
are met. The simplest approach to do so is to remove the atom with
the highest charge difference in each iteration. Alternative approaches
are to prioritize the removal of terminal atoms or atoms bordering
the alchemical region or both. Our automated TIES topology builder
tries all these approaches separately and chooses the one yielding
the largest MCS while achieving the charge tolerance criteria. 13 
 MCS is represented with a unique set of
atoms in the simulation-ready
system, whereas the remainder of the ligand constitutes the alchemical
region. The alchemical regions for ligands corresponding to λ
= 0 and 1 states are named “disappearing” and “appearing”
regions, respectively. In the simulation-ready model, both disappearing
and appearing regions are connected to the unique MCS through single
bonds. Thus, there is no need to use any position restraints in our
simulations unlike the case with the standard dual topology scheme
where the entire ligand is coupled/decoupled with the environment,
nor does it require introducing any dummy atoms (that is atoms introduced
to account for the imbalance in the number of atoms between the two
ligands and which remain fully noninteracting with their neighboring
atoms when the smaller of the two ligands is fully coupled with the
environment) unlike their occurrence within the single topology scheme.
The modified dual topology scheme used in TIES thus overcomes the
drawbacks of both single and dual topology schemes. 
 Initial
structures for the 14 proteins were taken from downloaded
PDB data sets and aligned to those from previous FEP+ studies. For
ligands, they were derived from the supplementary data provided with
prior studies. All crystal water molecules within 5 Å of the
protein were included. Protonation states and tautomeric forms for
histidine residues were kept consistent with previous FEP+ studies.
GAFF (v2) 61 parameters were used to prepare
ligand molecules with charges calculated using AM1-BCC model. 51 The AMBER ff14SBonlysc 49 force field was used to parametrize proteins. Our systems were solvated
in an orthorhombic TIP3P 62 water box with
at least a 14 Å solvent in all directions. Sodium and chloride
ions were used to neutralize the system electrostatically employing
Joung-Cheatham ion parameters. 63 AmberTools20 64 was used to perform parametrizations and prepare
all models. 
 For all transformations, the hybrid ligand in protein
environment
(referred to as “complex”) was first energy minimized,
followed by a 20 ps NVT equilibration and a 2 ns NPT equilibration.
Pressure and temperature were maintained at 1 atm and 300 K using
a Berendsen barostat (compressibility of 4.57 × 10 –5 bar –1 and relaxation time of 100 fs) and a Langevin
thermostat (damping coefficient of 5 ps –1 ), respectively.
The production run time was 4 ns. A time step of 2 fs was used. When
a hybrid ligand in the water environment (referred to as “ligand”)
was simulated, the entire protocol remained the same except that the
NPT equilibration step was only 1 ns long. During both minimization
and equilibration steps, protein backbone atoms were initially constrained
to their initial positions and were slowly allowed to relax. Periodic
boundary conditions were employed with long-range electrostatics handled
by the Particle Mesh Ewald (PME) method. 65 , 66 A nonbonded cutoff of 12 Å was used. The van der Waals interactions
were smoothly switched off between 10 and 12 Å, being linearly
decoupled/coupled between λ value 0 and 1 for disappearing and
appearing atoms, respectively. The standard NAMD soft-core potential 67 , 68 was used for the van der Waals terms with the radius-shifting coefficient
of 5 to avoid singularities. Electrostatic interactions of the disappearing
atoms were linearly decoupled from the simulations between λ
values of 0 and 0.55 and completely turned off beyond that, while
those of the appearing atoms were linearly coupled to the simulations
from λ value 0.45 to 1 and completely extinguished otherwise.
While the coordinates were recorded every 10 ps, energy derivatives
with respect to λ were recorded every 2 ps. When the enhanced
sampling REST2 protocol 47 , 48 was employed, all alchemical
atoms constituted the “hot” region in the ligand simulations,
whereas all alchemical atoms along with all protein residues falling
within 3 Å of the alchemical atoms constituted the “hot”
region in ligand–protein simulations. The maximum “effective”
temperature used was 600 K. 
 All simulations were performed with
NAMD 2.14 69 using up to 96 CPUs per MD
simulation on SuperMUC-NG 70 and up to 128
CPUs on ARCHER2 71 as well as Theta. 72 Some simulations
were also performed on Summit using RADICAL CyberTools, 73 such that CPUs were occupied for TIES simulations
concurrently with GPUs being utilized for other calculations. A typical
TIES calculation (5 MD simulations each at all 13 λ states)
for complex and ligand systems required around 50k and 5k core hours
on SuperMUC-NG, respectively. The wall clock time required to produce
a ΔΔ G value for one transformation involving
proteins of typical size (250–350 residues) is about 6–8
h using CPUs and h using a single
GPU. We note that ensemble-based
workflows allow scale out on emerging exascale architectures so as
to perform hundreds of ΔΔ G calculations
within the same wall clock time as required for a single calculation.
We have been able to exploit the entirety of SuperMUC-NG (ca. 310k
cores) for such purposes several times in the past under so-called
“block operations”. 74 
 All hybrid ligands were built automatically using TIES20. 19 , 75 The TIES toolkit has already been released for open use and can
be accessed at https://www.ties-service.org . 5. Results and Discussion 
 As noted previously,
we have performed TIES calculations to estimate
ΔΔ G values for 503 ligand pairs spanning
305 ligands bound to 14 different target proteins. The performance
of systematic and extensive analysis using such a large data set makes
our study unprecedented. A concise summary of the results obtained
for the entire data set as well as for each protein system individually
is shown in Table 1 and Figure 1 . The
mean unsigned error (MUE) and Pearson’s correlation coefficient
( r p ) for all 503 predictions when compared
with corresponding experimental values are 1.04 ± 0.04 and 0.58
± 0.03 kcal/mol, respectively. For individual protein systems,
these values vary from 0.58 ± 0.18 to 1.41 ± 0.13 kcal/mol
and from 0.24 ± 0.23 to 0.88 ± 0.04 kcal/mol for MUE and r p , respectively. Around 32%, 59%, 77%, and 87%
of our predictions differ from the corresponding experimental ΔΔ G s by less than 0.5, 1, 1.5, and 2 kcal/mol, respectively.
On the other hand, only 19 (∼4%) have experimental values differing
by more than 3 kcal/mol, that is which fall outside the shaded regions
in Figure 1 . It is
worth mentioning here that all these results have been obtained by
a simple application of the standard TIES protocol. As we have mentioned,
the TIES protocol is flexible, and hence the accuracy and/or precision
of results can be improved by adjusting it in specific cases. 14 We will show in the following sections that,
on adapting the standard TIES protocol in various ways for different
systems, one may further improve the reliability of the results yielding
more robust ΔΔ G predictions. 
 Table 1. Summary of TIES Results a . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 system 
 ligand pairs 
 exp. range 
 RMSE 
 MUE 
 
 r p 
 
 
 
 
 BACE 
 58 
 –1.79
to 1.88 
 1.17(0.12) 
 0.91(0.10) 
 0.49(0.09) 
 
 
 BACE (Hunt) 
 60 
 –3.82
to 3.70 
 1.33(0.10) 
 1.10(0.10) 
 0.68(0.06) 
 
 
 BACE (P2) 
 26 
 –0.90
to 0.70 
 1.09(0.11) 
 0.92(0.11) 
 0.51(0.18) 
 
 
 BACE (scaffold) 
 21 
 –4.20
to 2.60 
 1.05(0.13) 
 0.87(0.13) 
 0.88(0.04) 
 
 
 CDK2 
 25 
 –2.07 to 2.81 
 1.15(0.13) 
 0.96(0.13) 
 0.43(0.15) 
 
 
 CMET 
 25 
 –4.94 to 2.35 
 1.80(0.30) 
 1.38(0.23) 
 0.84(0.04) 
 
 
 Galectine-3 
 7 
 –2.68 to 0.96 
 0.75(0.23) 
 0.58(0.18) 
 0.76(0.31) 
 
 
 JNK1 
 31 
 –1.27
to 0.92 
 1.23(0.17) 
 0.98(0.13) 
 0.45(0.17) 
 
 
 MCL1 
 71 
 –2.84 to 1.94 
 1.80(0.18) 
 1.41(0.13) 
 0.40(0.11) 
 
 
 P38 
 56 
 –2.86 to 2.18 
 1.26(0.12) 
 0.98(0.11) 
 0.59(0.08) 
 
 
 PDE2 
 34 
 –2.06
to 2.31 
 1.43(0.25) 
 0.95(0.18) 
 0.54(0.17) 
 
 
 PTP1B 
 49 
 –4.72 to 3.67 
 1.35(0.17) 
 0.99(0.13) 
 0.56(0.14) 
 
 
 thrombin 
 16 
 –0.66 to
0.98 
 1.07(0.15) 
 0.88(0.15) 
 0.24(0.23) 
 
 
 TYK2 
 24 
 –2.36 to 2.49 
 1.08(0.16) 
 0.88(0.13) 
 0.60(0.13) 
 
 
   
   
   
   
   
   
 
 
 All 
 503 
 –4.94 to 3.70 
 1.36(0.05) 
 1.04(0.04) 
 0.58(0.03) 
 
 
 
 Open in a new tab 
 
 a The number of alchemical transformations
studied and corresponding values of several statistical parameters–root
mean square error (RMSE) and mean unsigned error (MUE) for all TIES
predictions as well as Pearson’s r ( r p ) between ΔΔ G TIES and experimental results–are reported.
Standard errors are included in parentheses. Exp. range denotes the
range of experimental ΔΔ G s. The unit
is in kcal/mol. 
 Figure 1. 
 
 Open in a new tab 
 Correlation between experimental
and calculated ΔΔ G values for all systems
studied. The text box includes
statistical measures of agreement–mean unsigned error (MUE),
root mean squared error (RMSE), and Pearson correlation coefficient
(corr) for the entire data set along with their standard errors in
parentheses. The red line denotes the perfect correlation line ( y = x ), and the ±1, ±2, and ±3
regions have been shaded with different colors. All values are in
kcal/mol. Error bars are not available for experimental data. We compared RBFEs from FEP and TIES obtained using
three different
MD engines and found that our results were in agreement only when
using ensemble simulations. This is not the case for results based
on one-off simulations. 31 Therefore, we
expect to get the same results from ensemble-based FEP for this data
set. Gapsys et al. 26 recently reported
the performance of a couple of other alchemical free energy methods
(the nonequilibrium PMX and the proprietary shrink-wrapped FEP+) using
most of this data set. A meaningful comparison of results from different
methods and/or force fields is only possible when uncertainties associated
with such calculations are under control. 31 , 44 Gapsys et al. performed only 3 repeat calculations as opposed to
using an ensemble approach while FEP+ manifests errors arising inter alia from the REST2 protocol (see section 5.6 and Wan et al. 22 ) 
 5.1. Statistical Metrics 
 Utilizing the
wealth of our large data set, we would like to emphasize an important
point here which is often ignored in the literature. First of all,
the range of ΔΔ G exp values
affects the prediction accuracy. The Pearson’s correlation
coefficient is bound to be low for ligand pairs with experimental
relative free energy differences less than 1 kcal/mol as evident from
the data in Table 2 for both the entire data set as well as the subset with |ΔΔ G TIES – ΔΔ G exp | < 1 kcal/mol. It can be clearly seen that r p for the subset of ligand pairs with experimental
relative free energy differences below 1 kcal/mol is always lower
than the corresponding full data set as well as subsets with experimental
values falling between 1 and 2, 2–3, and over 3 kcal/mol. This
is true irrespective of the trend of their corresponding MUEs. This
means that, for a narrow range of ΔΔ G values, smaller MUEs do not always translate into higher correlation
and vice versa . From Table 1 , we can see that thrombin, BACE (P2), and
JNK1 have a narrow range of experimental ΔΔ G s, and all of them have low r p values
despite relatively small MUEs. Gapsys et al. 26 also pointed out such inconsistencies between MUE and r p for the thrombin data set using PMX and FEP+. Such trends
in r p make it a less reliable tool for
quantifying results for a data set which comprises close to 60% of
ligand pairs with experimental |ΔΔ G |
values below 1 kcal/mol, such as the one used in this study and as
is the case in the majority of studies. Furthermore, it should be
noted that MUE values are bound to have associated statistical uncertainty
of similar magnitude as those associated with individual ΔΔ G values ( kcal/mol). This
means that, for ligand
pairs with |ΔΔ G | < 1 kcal/mol, the
percentage fluctuation in MUE values will be large, rendering them
a less robust metric. In other words, since ΔΔ G predictions have associated uncertainties, MUEs will inevitably
fluctuate by a similar amount as the predictions themselves. The key
point is that performing one-off simulations or too few replicas is
not robust, since there is always a substantial probability of making
unreliable predictions. 
 Table 2. Number of Pairs of
Transformations,
MUE, and r p for TIES Predictions with
Ligands Pairs Categorized Based on the Range of Experimental ΔΔ G Values a . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 all 
 
 |ΔΔΔ G | < 1 
 
 
 
 |ΔΔ G exp | 
 no. of pairs 
 MUE 
 
 r p 
 
 no. of pairs 
 MUE 
 
 r p 
 
 
 
 
 
 < 1 
 300 
 0.92(0.04) 
 0.35(0.05) 
 195 
 0.49(0.02) 
 0.64(0.04) 
 
 
 ≥ 1 and < 2 
 145 
 1.13(0.08) 
 0.65(0.04) 
 80 
 0.51(0.03) 
 0.92(0.01) 
 
 
 ≥ 2 and < 3 
 38 
 1.48(0.20) 
 0.64(0.11) 
 16 
 0.41(0.06) 
 0.98(0.01) 
 
 
  ≥
3   
 20 
 1.47(0.22) 
 0.85(0.08) 
 5 
 0.22(0.11) 
 0.99(0.01) 
 
 
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
 
 
 total 
 503 
 1.04(0.04) 
 0.58(0.03) 
 296 
 0.48(0.02) 
 0.89(0.01) 
 
 
 
 Open in a new tab 
 
 a |ΔΔΔ G | denotes the absolute difference
between experimental
and calculated ΔΔ G values. Standard errors
are included in parentheses. All values are in kcal/mol. 
 5.2. Uncertainties in Experimental
Data 
 An important issue that is rarely taken into consideration
is the
uncertainty associated with experimental ΔΔ G predictions and its consequences. The experimental predictions of
relative free energy differences have statistical uncertainties that
often go unreported as is the case here and the vast majority of such
publications. 25 A direct consequence of
this is a phenomenon called regression dilution that is well-known
in statistics. 76 It means that uncertainty
in the known variable (ΔΔ G exp in this case) causes biasing of the linear regression slope toward
zero. This phenomenon has been reported in more detail in a recent
publication where different statistical methods are used to demonstrate
the biased least-squares regression slope and the extent of underestimation
in predicted values has been quantified. 25 It is possible to correct for such deviations when both the known
and unknown variables are normally distributed, but in the case of
free energy predictions (whether calculated or experimental), the
distributions are not guaranteed to be normal (see section 5.3 ). This in turn means that
linear regression models ( r p ) are not
the best metric for quantifying the accuracy of free energy predictions,
especially when the experimental results have large variances. 25 Moreover, uncertainties in experimental predictions
also undermine the reliability of MUEs when these values are small
in magnitude (less than 1 kcal/mol). 5.3. Free
Energy Distributions 
 It has
been reported in numerous published studies 14 , 15 , 17 − 19 , 23 , 31 , 44 , 45 , 77 that MD-based
free energies are sensitive to their initial conditions. Thus, we
get a distribution of free energies on performing ensembles of MD
simulations with identical input except their starting velocities
due to the aleatoric uncertainty in MD. We have shown that aleatoric
uncertainty dominates all other forms of uncertainty and that ensemble
simulations are essential. 23 Parametric
uncertainty is dampened between input and output, further exacerbating
the role of chaos. 23 An additional source
of systematic error for chaotic systems originates from the use of
floating point numbers. 78 This is true
irrespective of the free energy method used including the alchemical
ones. Figure 2 displays
the distributions of both potential energy derivatives at an arbitrary
λ window as well as ΔΔ G values
for a couple of ligand pairs bound to MCL1 using 40 replicas per λ
window. It can be seen that varies by up to 20 kcal/mol and ΔΔ G values by up to 10 kcal/mol across replicas for the chosen
cases. Given the wide spread of these distributions, it is essential
to perform ensemble simulations (often replicas) in order
to control the aleatoric
uncertainty associated with the ΔΔ G estimations
making the results reproducible. This can be demonstrated more clearly
with the data in Table 3 where results using a single replica have been compared with those
using ensemble simulations for the entire data set as well as various
subsets of it. The accuracy of ensemble simulations is substantially
better than any single replica, irrespective of the data set taken.
For instance, the MUE for the entire data set using a single replica
ranges from 1.19 ± 0.05 to 1.24 ± 0.05 kcal/mol, whereas
it is 1.04 ± 0.04 kcal/mol for TIES. The corresponding numbers
for the subset |ΔΔ G exp | <
1 kcal/mol are 1.00 ± 0.05 to 1.06 ± 0.05 kcal/mol versus
0.92 ± 0.04 kcal/mol. Similar trends are observed for r p values. It is worth highlighting that the
number of ligand pairs with |ΔΔΔ G | < 1 kcal/mol (that is, an absolute difference between experimental
and predicted relative free energies of less than 1 kcal/mol) using
ensemble simulations is higher than those using a single replica (296
versus 262–276). Thus, ensemble simulations yield binding free
energy predictions for 20 to 34 more ligands with accuracy better
than the 1 kcal/mol mark compared to one-off simulations. 
 Figure 2. 
 
 Open in a new tab 
 (a) Distributions
of potential energy derivatives and their corresponding
means of bootstrapped resamples for two MCL1 ligand pairs using 40
replicas per λ window; the distributions of energy derivatives
(shown in blue and red as bar and solid line plots) exhibit non-normality,
whereas the distributions of means of resamples of size 5 obtained
using bootstrapping (shown in black as solid line plots) are normal
owing to the central limit theorem. (b) Distributions of ΔΔ G values for the same two ligand pairs (shown in blue and
red as solid line plots with the underlying area shaded). Table 3. Replicawise Variation in Results a . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 all 
 
 |ΔΔ G exp | < 1 
 
 |ΔΔΔ G | < 1 
 
 
 
 replica 
 MUE 
 
 r p 
 
 MUE 
 
 r p 
 
 no. 
 MUE 
 
 r p 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 
 1.24(0.05) 
 0.48(0.04) 
 1.06(0.05) 
 0.29(0.06) 
 262 
 0.50(0.02) 
 0.88(0.01) 
 
 
 2 
 1.21(0.05) 
 0.47(0.04) 
 1.04(0.05) 
 0.29(0.06) 
 272 
 0.47(0.02) 
 0.89(0.01) 
 
 
 3 
 1.20(0.05) 
 0.50(0.04) 
 1.00(0.05) 
 0.34(0.06) 
 272 
 0.48(0.02) 
 0.88(0.01) 
 
 
 4 
 1.20(0.05) 
 0.53(0.04) 
 1.01(0.05) 
 0.32(0.05) 
 269 
 0.47(0.02) 
 0.89(0.01) 
 
 
 5 
 1.19(0.05) 
 0.52(0.04) 
 1.01(0.05) 
 0.29(0.05) 
 276 
 0.47(0.02) 
 0.89(0.01) 
 
 
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
 
 
 TIES 
 1.04(0.04) 
 0.58(0.03) 
 0.92(0.04) 
 0.35(0.05) 
 296 
 0.48(0.02) 
 0.89(0.01) 
 
 
 
 Open in a new tab 
 
 a Replica X denotes results obtained
by taking values corresponding to the replica X of each λ window
for all ligand pairs, whereas TIES means using the data from all 5
replicas to obtain ΔΔ G . “All”
corresponds to the entire data set. Two subsets have also been included–one
with experimental ΔΔ G s less than 1 kcal/mol
and the other one with the difference between predicted and experimental
values less than 1 kcal/mol. MUE is the mean unsigned error, and r p is the Pearson’s correlation coefficient.
Standard errors are included in parentheses. All values are in kcal/mol. 
 Another important observation
from Figure 2 is the
non-normality of the distributions
of energy derivatives as well as the relative free energy differences.
To further substantiate this point, we chose 51 different ligand pairs
and performed ensemble simulations comprising 20 to 40 replicas at
each λ window and obtained ΔΔ G distributions
like the ones shown in the right panel of Figure 2 . Skewness and excess kurtosis coefficients
for each of these 51 ΔΔ G distributions
were calculated. Figure 3 displays distributions of the skewness/excess kurtosis coefficients
so obtained. Nonzero skewness coefficients indicate asymmetry that
favors higher frequency measurements away from the mean. On the other
hand, many of the ligand pairs have positive excess kurtosis indicating
the abundance of outliers. We obtain non-normal distributions of predicted
binding affinities similar to those displayed in Figures 2 and 3 even on extending the ensemble size up to 135 replicas for a few
of these 51 ligand pairs (data yet to be published). It is evident
that one could never understand the behavior of these ensembles by
only running 1−3 replicas. We found that the distribution of
experimental binding free energies obtained from a limited number
of selected ligands which have been subjected to many repeated measurements
over a lengthy period are also non-Gaussian. 81 The underlying implication of non-normal statistics is that more
frequent occurrence of outliers means larger error bars and that graphs
comparing predicted and experimental predictions will deviate from
ideal linear plots with all points lying close to a straight line
with slope 1. This needs to be borne in mind when interpreting the
resultant correlation plots. Statistical tools like bootstrapping
and linear regression should still, in principle, be applicable. However,
their quantitative reliability for non-normal distributions is questionable
for small sample size as the law of large numbers is not then applicable.
It should also be noted that for a Gaussian distribution, more points
should not change the expectation value, and the variance would reduce
with the inverse square root of the number of points included. On
the other hand, for an asymmetric distribution, the more points one
includes the more reliable are both the mean and the variance. The
variance for non-normal distributions usually converges far more slowly,
so the fluctuations persist for much longer. 42 This further supports the importance of performing ensemble simulations
for MD-based methods and highlights that a small number of repeats
is not sufficient. 42 
 Figure 3. 
 
 Open in a new tab 
 Distributions of skewness
and excess kurtosis for ΔΔ G distributions
of 51 different ligand pairs. Data for some
ligand pairs have been taken from Bieniek et al. 19 5.4. Precision
and Accuracy Are Related 
 A unique feature of the ensemble
methodology is that it requires
adapting the ensemble size to improve the precision of results, which
in turn leads to better accuracy in several cases. To further clarify
this point, we picked out the worst performing MCL1 system from our
data set. This protein system has something unique about it that makes
it the worst performing not only with TIES but also with PMX while
being the second worst with FEP+. 8 , 26 This behavior
is likely to be related to the flexible structure of a generic MCL1
ligand with its two ends (one hydrophobic, the other charged) connected
with a 4-membered linker such that the hydrophobic end is buried deep
into the lower pocket, while the charged end interacts with the positively
charged arginine residue (R263). The phenomenon has been described
in more detail in the Supporting Information of the study by Bhati
et al. 14 The intrinsic flexibility of this
ligand leads to larger uncertainties in the predicted ΔΔ G values for many of the MCL1 ligand pairs. 
 Figure 4 (b) shows the variation
of TIES uncertainty with the ensemble size increased to 40 replicas
for 10 MCL1 ligand pairs. It is clear that the uncertainty consistently
drops as the ensemble size is increased for all these cases. A similar
behavior has been reported in several studies. 19 , 31 , 44 , 45 Figure 4 (a) exhibits the variation
of ΔΔΔ G (that is ΔΔ G TIES – ΔΔ G exp ) for the same set of MCL1 ligand pairs. It is interesting
to note that the two cases with the largest uncertainties (l49-l67
in gray and l44-l23 in orange) also have large ΔΔΔ G values. More interestingly, the accuracy improves for
both these cases, as we increase the ensemble size. This suggests
that better precision may lead to better accuracy in systems such
as MCL1 that have flexible structures. To further investigate this,
we selected all MCL1 ligand pairs with uncertainties kcal/mol using
the standard TIES protocol
(ensemble size 5). There were 14 such ligand pairs for which we increased
the ensemble size to 10. Figure 5 compares the results from ensemble sizes 5 and 10
for all these cases. We observe a substantial improvement in the overall
accuracy for this set of 14 ligand pairs simply on increasing the
ensemble size to 10 which can be attributed solely to better precision.
MUE improves from 2.07 ± 0.41 to 1.65 ± 0.42 kcal/mol, and r p increases from 0.28 ± 0.34 to 0.33 ±
0.35 kcal/mol. There is a clear outlier whose accuracy is unchanged
even on increasing the ensemble size. On ignoring this outlier, the
MUE reduces from 1.76 ± 0.32 to 1.30 ± 0.29 kcal/mol, and r p increases from 0.57 ± 0.26 to 0.69 ±
0.20 kcal/mol when the ensemble size is increased from 5 to 10. This
is an excellent example of how improved precision can be lead to better
accuracy for flexible systems. 
 Figure 4. 
 
 Open in a new tab 
 Variation of TIES results with the ensemble
size for a selection
of MCL1 ligand pairs. In (a), ΔΔΔ G refers to the difference between the predicted and experimental
relative binding affinities, while in (b), σ denotes the standard
error of a TIES prediction. Figure 5. 
 
 Open in a new tab 
 Effect
of increasing the ensemble size on the accuracy of predictions
for flexible ligand structures. We display a comparison between results
using ensemble sizes of 5 and 10 for 14 MCL1 ligands pairs with the
largest uncertainties. Statistical metrics along with associated standard
errors are reported in text boxes in the bottom right corner. 5.5. Choice of the Alchemical
Region 
 The
electrostatic interactions of atoms in the alchemical region are scaled
such that in the intermediate λ windows they are very weak.
This makes any charged group in the alchemical region very flexible,
thus prone to high uncertainty and hence lower accuracy. PTP1B is
an interesting case in point with all ligands containing two carboxylate
groups in the active site. Moreover, one of them is attached to a
thiophene ring through three rotatable bonds, and the binding pocket
has enough empty space for it to freely move around. It has been discussed
in more detail in the Supporting Information of our previous article. 14 This provides a charged flexible group in PTP1B
ligands which displays a predisposition for large fluctuations if
included in the alchemical region. This is exactly what we find for
7 ligand pairs bound to PTP1B, where both these carboxylate groups
constitute a part of the alchemical region chosen for our modified
dual topology protocol using the standard charge tolerance criteria
of 0.1e for both individual atoms as well as the entire common region.
The standard error σ TIES for these transformations
varies between 1.4 and 2.3 kcal/mol with our standard protocol of
5 replicas per λ window. 
 There are two routes to deal
with this issue. First, one can increase the ensemble size in order
to better control uncertainty, and second, one may relax the standard
charge tolerance of 0.1e to reduce the size of the alchemical region
so as to exclude the two carboxylate groups. Our results from both
these approaches, compared with the standard one, are shown in Figure 6 . As expected, the
error bars for both are smaller than those for the standard protocol.
σ TIES falls in the range of 0.7–1.7 kcal/mol
for ensemble size 20 using the same alchemical region, compared with
0.2–0.8 kcal/mol for the smaller alchemical region. Thus, TIES
predictions using a smaller alchemical region (keeping ensemble size
as 5) are more precise than those using ensemble size 20 (but the
original alchemical region). However, relaxing the charge tolerance
criteria (up to 0.14e for both individual atomic charges as well as
overall MCS in this case) compromises the accuracy of the predictions.
RMSE increases from 1.91 ± 0.45 to 2.29 ± 0.59 kcal/mol
when using the smaller alchemical region. There are 2 clear outliers
falling outside the ±2 kcal/mol range in Figure 6 . This is despite the much higher precision
of results with this approach. Therefore, this approach needs to be
used cautiously. 
 Figure 6. 
 
 Open in a new tab 
 Comparison of results for 7 PTP1B ligand transformations
that includes
two charged carboxylate groups in the TIES alchemical region. Results
with ensemble size 20 using the original alchemical region and ensemble
size 5 using a smaller alchemical region (both carboxylates excluded)
are compared with those from standard TIES. Shaded regions denote
±1 and ±2 kcal/mol ranges. Standard errors are included
for all RMSE values. All values are in kcal/mol. On the other hand, increasing the ensemble size to 20 reduces RMSE
to 1.73 ± 0.36 kcal/mol despite higher uncertainities on its
predictions as compared to the alternative approach. Larger ensemble
size improves accuracy for 6 out of 7 ligand pairs under consideration
here. The only exception is the one where the standard protocol predicts
ΔΔ G very close to the corresponding experimental
value of −4.72 kcal/mol, whereas the large ensemble prediction
falls outside the ±2 kcal/mol region. On ignoring this exceptional
case, RMSEs for ensemble sizes 5 and 20 are 2.06 ± 0.46 and 1.56
± 0.42 kcal/mol, respectively. 5.6. “Enhanced
Sampling” Degrades
Predictions 
 Replica exchange with solute tempering (REST2)
is an enhanced sampling method that involves heating only a small
region of the solute. 47 Coordinates are
exchanged periodically between replicas so as to allow easier crossing
of energy barriers. It has been claimed that REST2 either improves
free energy estimates or leaves them unchanged as compared to those
obtained without REST2 (using normal MD simulations). 8 Indeed, REST2 is supposed to allow sampling of less accessible
states. However, as we have pointed out in previous studies, REST2
may lead to degradation in the accuracy of ΔΔ G predictions, and hence its uncritical use could be misleading. 18 , 22 In this study, we have obtained consistent results with a statistically
robust data set of 60 randomly selected ligand pairs from our full
data set. We pulled out two mutually exclusive subsets of 30 randomly
selected ligand pairs (denoted as “rand1” and “rand2”)
and repeated TIES calculations with sampling “enhanced”
using the REST2 protocol. The results are compared with those obtained
using the standard TIES protocol (normal MD, that is, without REST2)
in Figure 7 (a). It
is evident that REST2 degrades the accuracy of results for both rand1
and rand2, separately as well as for the combined data set of 60 ligand
pairs. For rand1/rand2, RMSE increases from 1.17 ± 0.13/1.18
± 0.16 to 1.64 ± 0.29/1.40 ± 0.25 kcal/mol, whereas r p decreases from 0.73 ± 0.09/0.66 ±
0.14 to 0.48 ± 0.12/0.47 ± 0.17 kcal/mol. For the combined
data set of 60 ligand pairs, MUE and RMSE increase by 0.12 and 0.34
kcal/mol, respectively, whereas r p decreases
from 0.69 ± 0.07 to 0.48 ± 0.10 kcal/mol. Thus, it can be
concluded that blindly applying REST2 assuming that it will always
have a positive impact and at worst none on the ΔΔ G predictions is wrong. Consequently, in drug discovery
applications, one may risk excluding many potentially useful leads
by simply applying REST2. Note that it is an inbuilt feature of the
proprietary FEP+ package; an earlier study of ours comparing FEP+’s
performance to TIES showed that the former generates worse results
and degrades those further for longer simulation times. 22 It should also be noted here that Khalak et
al. reported degradation in accuracy of the predicted free energies
using the PMX method on extending their simulations up to 1 μs. 27 
 Figure 7. 
 
 Open in a new tab 
 Degradation of results on employing the enhanced sampling
method,
REST2, when compared with normal MD simulations. (a) displays a comparison
of ΔΔ G s obtained from both types of sampling
for two mutually exclusive subsets of 30 randomly selected ligand
pairs. The legend contains RMSEs followed by r p values in brackets for each subset, whereas text boxes in
the top left corner contain MUE, RMSE, and r p values for the combined data set of 60 ligand pairs. (b)
shows the variation of |ΔΔ G REST2 – ΔΔ G normal | with
the corresponding uncertainties in ΔΔ G obtained without REST2 for all 60 ligand pairs. The vertical and
horizontal lines correspond to σ = 0.5 kcal/mol and |ΔΔΔ G | = 1 kcal/mol, respectively. Standard errors are included
for all reported values. This apparently anomalous
effect of REST2 may be explained by considering
the fact that it involves biasing the potential so as to improve the
sampling of otherwise less accessible states. However, this means
that the weights of different accessed states of the ensemble are
also biased. Ensemble averaging properties using such biased weights
leads to inaccuracies in results. To further substantiate this argument,
we have plotted the absolute differences between ΔΔ G predictions obtained with and without REST2 applied against
the corresponding statistical uncertainties in standard TIES predictions
without REST2 sampling, as shown in Figure 7 (b). These two quantities are moderately
correlated with r p of 0.65 ± 0.13.
Nine out of the 60 ligand pairs have uncertainties kcal/mol. The
MUE, RMSE, and r p values for this subset
with and without REST2 applied
are 1.88 ± 0.55, 2.49 ± 0.58, and 0.47 ± 0.21 kcal/mol
and 1.12 ± 0.31, 1.46 ± 0.37, and 0.75 ± 0.17 kcal/mol,
respectively. Thus, the average deviation from normal MD results as
well as the extent of corresponding degradation in accuracy are larger
for this subset than those for the entire set of 60 ligand pairs (over
a 6-fold increase in MUE; 0.76 versus 0.12 kcal/mol). This implies
that, as the number of accessible states/minima (separated by relatively
small energy barriers) for a system increases, the deviation of REST2
results from those obtained without it also increases, and so does
the inaccuracy in results. It may be attributed to the higher bias
introduced in weights due to the higher number of states accessible. 
 Another interesting observation is related to the precision of
REST2 predictions as compared to those of normal MD predictions. It
should be noted that REST2 predictions are more precise than normal
MD predictions in general with lower σ TIES for 53
out of the 60 ligand pairs studied. However, higher precision does
not lead to better accuracy, as we have discussed a number of times. 18 , 22 This is also true when the precision improves substantially. For
instance, there are 3 ligand pairs for which σ TIES reduces by more than 0.5 kcal/mol on applying REST2. However, 2
of them have higher unsigned errors for REST2 predictions than those
for normal MD-based predictions. This suggests that replica simulations
have closer distributions of conformations due to mixing of states
caused by exchange of conformations in REST2. However, the biased
weights are equally present in all replicas and hence lower the accuracy. 
 When focusing on the 7 ligand pairs with σ TIES larger for REST2 predictions, another interesting trend is observed.
Three of the 7 have σ TIES increased by kcal/mol which
is insignificant and may
be ignored. The remaining 4 belong to the BACE (scaffold) system which
has all positively charged alchemical regions. As discussed earlier,
charged groups in the alchemical region lead to large uncertainities
and less accurate results with the standard TIES protocol due to attenuation
of the electrostatic interactions possibly leading to more frequent
sampling of higher energy conformations. This phenomenon is enhanced
with REST2 due to further weakening of electrostatic interactions
in the intermediate λ states. Thus, charged alchemical regions
can be expected to have larger uncertainties when employing the REST2
protocol. In our data set of 60 ligand pairs, 5 have charged alchemical
regions (all binding to the BACE (scaffold) system with a charge of
+1). Four of them have larger uncertainties when using REST2 than
without it. MUEs for these 5 BACE (scaffold) ligand pairs with and
without REST2 are 2.74 ± 0.78 and 0.82 ± 0.21 kcal/mol,
respectively, manifesting the degradation in accuracy on applying
REST2 to this system. It should be noted here that all 5 of these
ligand pairs have uncertainties ranging between 0.75 and 1.3 kcal/mol
and hence form a subset of the 9 ligand pairs with σ TIES > 0.5 kcal/mol as discussed earlier. 
 Thus, we recommend
that the REST2 enhanced sampling method not
be blindly applied. It is evident that the algorithm is not doing
what its creators intended. 5.7. Effect of Transformation
Size 
 In
a previous study using the PDE2 system, the ligands were classified
as small or large based on the size of substituents attached to the
scaffold. 57 Ligands with a hydrogen or
methoxy group as substituents were called “small”, and
those with larger substituents were considered “large”.
It was shown that FEP+ predicted ΔΔ G values
for transformations from small-to-small (s2s) ligands, and large-to-large
(l2l) ligands were relatively more accurate (MUEs less than 1 kcal/mol)
compared to those from small-to-large (s2l) ligands (MUEs over 2 kcal/mol).
We were able to reproduce this behavior in the present study with
small MUEs for s2s and l2l transformations ( kcal/mol), whereas
large MUEs for s2l transformations
(2.79 ± 0.57 kcal/mol) are as shown in Figure 8 (a). 
 Figure 8. 
 
 Open in a new tab 
 (a) Comparison of TIES results for PDE2 ligand
transformations
categorizing them into small to small (s2s; 6 transformations), large
to large (l2l; 23 transformations), and small to large (s2l; 5 transformations).
Corresponding MUEs along with associated standard errors are included
in parentheses within the legend. All values are in kcal/mol. (b)
Variation of unsigned errors with the size of transformation defined
as the absolute difference between the number of disappearing and
appearing atoms. To further investigate
this issue, we pulled out some large transformations
from our data set to see if the same behavior persists. To do so,
we selected all transformations with the absolute difference between
the number of disappearing and appearing atoms greater than 10, which
amounts to 43 ligand pairs including 1 from the PDE2 set. We ignored
the only transformation from the PDE2 data set, and the MUE for the
remainder is 1.07 ± 0.14 kcal/mol. The MUE for the full data
set (503 ligand pairs) is 1.04 ± 0.04 kcal/mol. Thus, the accuracy
for “large” transformations is almost the same as that
for the full data set. Figure 8 (b) displays the variation of unsigned errors for these 42
transformations with the size of transformation (defined as the absolute
difference between the number of disappearing and appearing atoms).
There is no correlation between the two quantities which implies that
the observed errors are independent of the size of the transformation.
This indicates that the issue of less accurate predictions for large
transformations is specific to the PDE2 system and is not a general
one for alchemical methods. 
 Another interesting observation
is the effect of the size of the
alchemical region (defined as the number of atoms in the alchemical
region) on the accuracy and precision of the predicted ΔΔ G values. As shown in a previous TIES study, the precision
of predicted free energies decreases as the size of the alchemical
region increases. 19 On the other hand,
the accuracy of such predictions remains relatively unaffected by
this quantity. 19 In the present study,
we obtain consistent results. We pulled out all transformations with
the sum of the appearing and disappearing atoms greater than 40 from
the full data set (a total of 40 transformations with the sum ranging
from 41 to 68) and compared their |ΔΔΔ G | as well as σ TIES with the sum. The corresponding
Pearson’s ρ for these quantities are 0.18 ± 0.15
and 0.45 ± 0.18, respectively, further confirming the previous
findings. 5.8. Flexibility in Ensemble Size 
 Within
the TIES protocol, we recommend flexibility in the ensemble size to
be used depending on the level of precision desired and the system
being investigated. Precision of results increases with ensemble size.
However, the exact trend is system-specific, and so is the magnitude
of uncertainty associated with the predicted ΔΔ G values. Therefore, a fixed ensemble size yields different
error bars for different systems. This is evident in our current data
set where 69 ligand pairs have uncertainties greater than 0.5 kcal/mol
using ensemble size 5, while 81 are below 0.1 kcal/mol using the same
ensemble size. We have already seen in the previous sections that
increasing the ensemble size reduces uncertainty in predictions. This
is why our protocol leaves the ensemble size parameter adjustable.
However, this does not mean that the ensemble size can be arbitrarily
small as that affects the accuracy of results. For instance, there
are 70 ligand pairs in the current data set where σ TIES is larger for ensemble size 5 compared to ensemble size 3. Similarly,
on closely observing Figure 4 (b), we can see prominent kinks for a few ligand pairs for
ensemble sizes below 5. These observations indicate that, for a substantial
number of systems, an additional replica beyond the second or third
replica may represent a slightly different region of the phase space
and hence increase associated uncertainty. Thus, using an ensemble
size of only 2 or 3 does not capture the full picture, leading to
overconfident predictions. In addition, as we have seen, the distribution
of free energies deviates from Gaussian behavior; 2 or 3 replicas
are simply insufficient to encompass contributions from heavy tails.
One is unlikely to get the correct expectation value either, which
is the quantity that determines accuracy. 
 The ensemble size,
that is the number of replicas to be performed at each λ point,
is the choice that needs further discussion as each added replica
comes with additional computational cost (albeit no additional wall
clock time is required on a supercomputer). So, one needs to find
a trade-off between the computational cost and the level of precision
(and consequently accuracy) desired, especially when the number of
ligand pairs is large. For large-scale free energy calculations, a
suggested way to employ TIES (or any other free energy method of choice)
could be to decide a desired level of precision in terms of a threshold
value of statistical uncertainty (σ). Thereafter, one can start
with a “floor value” of ensemble size and perform calculations
for all ligand pairs, followed by a stepwise increase in the ensemble
size only for those ligands for which the resultant uncertainties
are above the threshold σ. The larger ensemble size should only
be required for a few systems where the ligands have flexible structure
or charged groups in the alchemical regions (such as MCL1 and PTP1B
cases discussed in sections 5.4 and 5.5 ). For instance, in
our data set of 503 ligand pairs, over 86% achieved a precision of kcal/mol using
ensemble size 5. Such a
progressive increase in ensemble size would ensure an optimal use
of computational resources alongside achieving the desired level of
precision for most calculations and resulting improvement in accuracy
of results. One may choose the threshold σ to be 0.5 kcal/mol
and the floor value of ensemble size to be 5. 5.9. Ligand
Charge Methods 
 In this study,
we have compared ΔΔ G values obtained
using RESP charges for ligands with those using AM1-BCC charges. For
this, we use the same two mutually exclusive subsets of 30 randomly
selected ligand pairs that have been used to study the effect of REST2. Figure 9 displays the results
obtained using both these charge models. Overall, the performance
is almost the same with MUEs and RMSEs differing only by 0.01 and
0.07 kcal/mol, respectively, and r p differing
by 0.01 for the combined set of 60 ligand pairs. When the two subsets
are assessed separately, the performances are comparable for the “rand2”
subset with RMSE and r p slightly different
for the two charge models. For the “rand1” subset, AM1-BCC
charges perform slightly better in terms of RMSE and r p than RESP. However, we cannot simply conclude that AM1-BCC
charges are better than RESP charges based on this. 
 Figure 9. 
 
 Open in a new tab 
 Comparison of results
using AM1-BCC and RESP charge models for
ligands. ΔΔ G s obtained using both charge
methods for two mutually exclusive subsets of 30 randomly selected
ligand pairs are shown. The legend at the lower right contains RMSEs
followed by r p values in brackets for
each subset, whereas the legend in the top left corner contains MUE,
RMSE, and r p values for the combined data
set of 60 ligand pairs along with corresponding standard errors. Another interesting fact is that RESP charges are
more sensitive
to chemical changes in ligand structures as compared to AM1-BCC charges.
This is evident from the fact that, using the same charge tolerance
criteria of 0.1e (difference between atomic charges on individual
MCS atoms as well as the overall charge of MCS for the two ligands),
the size of the alchemical region is larger for the RESP case as compared
to AM1-BCC. The average number of disappearing atoms increases from
10.42 to 15.25 on using RESP charges for the 60 ligand pairs studied
here. Similarly, the average number of appearing atoms also increases
from 11.02 to 15.85 for all 60 ligand pairs. This trend is also visible
for both subsets of 30 ligand pairs each separately. This need for
fewer atoms in alchemical regions using AM1-BCC charges indicates
that the effect of a given chemical change in a ligand is more localized
with this charge model. On the other hand, the magnitude of change
in RESP charges is more prominent for distant atoms. Although this
higher sensitivity of RESP charges to chemical modifications in ligand
molecules does not seem to affect the accuracy of results, it is bound
to have an impact on their precision. Out of 60, 14 ligand pairs have
σ TIES ≥ 0.5 kcal/mol using RESP charges against
only 9 using AM1-BCC charges. Similarly, the mean of σ TIES for all 60 ligand pairs increases from 0.30 kcal/mol for AM1-BCC
charges to 0.38 kcal/mol for RESP charges. Given that AM1-BCC-based
models yield more precise results for a fixed amount of computation
without compromising with their accuracy compared to RESP-based models
and that it is much faster to compute charges using the AM1-BCC model,
it should be preferred for free energy calculations. 6. Conclusion 
 This study presents ΔΔ G predictions
using an open-source ensemble simulation-based alchemical free energy
method for a large data set of 503 diverse ligand pairs bound to 14
different targets covering a broad range of protein classes and 305
different ligands. Such a detailed and systematic analysis of the
various factors affecting RBFE predictions enables us to make definitive
recommendations for the implementation of relative free energy calculations. 
 On comparing with the available experimental data, we achieve good
agreement. However, we provide statistically reliable evidence for
why standard metrics such as closeness to the experimental values
and comparison with them using linear regression may not be reliable,
particularly when the results are based on one-off or a few simulations.
Such issues are alleviated by performing ensemble simulations in order
to bring the substantial aleatoric uncertainty under control. Moreover,
we have pointed out that the experimental predictions of free energies
also have uncertainties associated with them and the nature of their
distributions is generally non-normal, making a comparison of the
calculated values with them unreliable. 
 We have confirmed that
the distribution of free energies obtained
from independent replica simulations covers a wide range of values
and exhibits deviation from the Gaussian behavior usually assumed.
This means that performing ensemble simulations is essential for such
calculations. Another important consequence of the non-normal nature
of such distributions is that the ensemble size cannot be arbitrarily
small, and we recommend a minimum should comprise 5 replicas consistent
with all our previous publications. 14 , 31 
 We exploited
the richness of our data set to perform systematic
analyses on various important factors that affect the accuracy and/or
precision of alchemical calculations. Flexible ligand structures and
charged groups in the alchemical region lead to large fluctuations
in the predicted free energies. The error bars in such cases can be
controlled by increasing the ensemble size appropriately which also
translates into improved accuracy of results. Such features substantially
improve the predictive power of RBFE methods which is essential if
they are to be actionable. 
 Using a statistically significant
subset of the full data set studied,
we compared the ΔΔ G predictions obtained
with and without REST2, the enhanced sampling method, employed. We
conclude that the REST2 protocol degrades the accuracy of results,
and hence its routine application is not recommended. This might seem
counterintuitive to those practitioners who assume that the worst
REST2 could do is not affect the accuracy of results, but our findings
raise serious concerns about the general validity of the REST2 protocol.
Similarly, we found that the lightweight AM1-BCC charge model is able
to achieve more precise results compared to the RESP charge model
without compromising their accuracy and is thus preferable. 
 We have shown that the size of transformation does not affect the
accuracy of results in general. We have used transformations with
the absolute difference between the number of disappearing and appearing
atoms up to 21 and found that the results are almost as accurate as
those for the entire data set. Thus, the standard protocol of using
13 λ windows is sufficient for such large transformations. In
addition, we have employed our modified dual topology scheme 14 , 19 in this study, as it overcomes the issues associated with both single
as well as dual topology schemes and combines the pros of them both.
It has been successfully employed on a large data set in this study
further confirming its general applicability. An online tool to automatically
build models with this topology scheme for TIES calculations is freely
available for anyone to use. 75 
 Nonequilibrium
methods based on MD are also known to exhibit dominant
aleatoric uncertainties in the same way as equilibrium methods discussed
in this study. 32 − 34 Although nonequilibrium free energy methods such
as PMX 26 , 79 have not been investigated within this paper,
our findings and previous studies indicate that it is necessary to
perform similar systematic analyses for these methods too. By the
same token, machine learning methods are strongly data-driven, and
hence the underlying distributions of data must be accounted for in
such methods to properly control the accuracy and/or precision of
their predictions. These issues remain open for future research. 7. Data and Software Availability 
 The data underlying
this study are available in the published article.
All input structures and parameter files used in this study along
with experimental and predicted ΔΔ G values
and errors are available at https://github.com/UCL-CCS/LargeScaleTIES . Readers interested in rerunning NAMD simulations using our protocol
with the input files provided should refer to https://www.ks.uiuc.edu/Research/namd/2.14/ug/ . Acknowledgments 
 The authors acknowledge
funding support from the
European Union’s Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Programme
under grant agreement 823712 (CompBioMed2, compbiomed.eu) and NSF
Award ( https://www.nsf.gov/awardsearch/showAward?AWD_ID=1713749 , Award No. NSF 1713749); EPSRC for the UK HighEnd Computing Consortium
(grant no. EP/R029598/1) and for the Software Environment for Actionable
and VVUQ-evaluated Exascale Applications (SEAVEA) (grant no. EP/W007711/1);
the MRC Medical Bioinformatics project (MR/L016311/1); the EU H2020
projects ComPat ( https://www.compatproject.eu/ , Grant No. 671564); and funding from the UCL Provost. We acknowledge
the Gauss Centre for Supercomputing for providing computing time on
the GCS supercomputer SuperMUCNG ( https://doku.lrz.de/display/PUBLIC/SuperMUC-NG ) at Leibniz Supercomputing Centre under project COVID-19-SNG1 and
the very able assistance of its scientific support staff. Furthermore,
the authors made use of the following OLCF and ALCF supercomputers:
Summit, Andes, ThetaGPU, and Theta thanks to a 2021 DOE INCITE award
“COMPBIO”. The authors are grateful to Shunzhou Wan
for useful discussions and Mateusz Bieniek for his help with setting
up and running TIES20 ( https://ccs-ties.org ). The authors
declare no
competing financial interest. References 
 
 
 Chodera J. D.; Mobley D. L.; Shirts M. R.; Dixon R. W.; Branson K.; Pande V. S.
Alchemical free
energy methods for drug discovery:
progress and challenges. Curr. Opin. Struct.
Biol.
2011, 21, 150–160. 10.1016/j.sbi.2011.01.011. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 Sullivan T. https://www.policymed.com/2014/12/a-tough-road-cost-to-develop-one-new-drug-is-26-billion-approval-rate-for-drugs-entering-clinical-de.html (accessed 2021-11-26). 
 
 Wouters O.
J.; McKee M.; Luyten J.
Estimated research and development
investment needed to bring a new medicine to market, 2009–2018. Jama
2020, 323, 844–853. 10.1001/jama.2020.1166. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Mobley D. L.; Klimovich P. V.
Perspective: Alchemical free energy calculations for
drug discovery. J. Chem. Phys.
2012, 137, 230901. 10.1063/1.4769292. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Wan S.; Kumar D.; Ilyin V.; Al Homsi U.; Sher G.; Knuth A.; Coveney P. V.
The effect
of protein mutations on
drug binding suggests ensuing personalised drug selection. Sci. Rep.
2021, 11, 13452. 10.1038/s41598-021-92785-w. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Mey A. S. J. S.; Allen B. K.; Bruce
McDonald H. E.; Chodera J. D.; Hahn D. F.; Kuhn M.; Michel J.; Mobley D. L.; Naden L. N.; Prasad S.; Rizzi A.; Scheen J.; Shirts M. R.; Tresadern G.; Xu H.
Best Practices for Alchemical Free
Energy Calculations [Article v1.0]. Living Journal
of Computational Molecular Science
2020, 2, 18378. 10.33011/livecoms.2.1.18378. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Cournia Z.; Allen B.; Sherman W.
Relative Binding Free
Energy Calculations
in Drug Discovery: Recent Advances and Practical Considerations. J. Chem. Inf. Model.
2017, 57, 2911–2937. 10.1021/acs.jcim.7b00564. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Wang L.; et al. Accurate and Reliable Prediction of Relative Ligand
Binding Potency
in Prospective Drug Discovery by Way of a Modern Free-Energy Calculation
Protocol and Force Field. J. Am. Chem. Soc.
2015, 137, 2695–2703. 10.1021/ja512751q. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 PMX. https://github.com/deGrootLab/pmx (accessed 2021-11-30). 
 
 Loeffler H.
H.; Michel J.; Woods C.
FESetup: Automating Setup for Alchemical
Free Energy Simulations. J. Chem. Inf. Model.
2015, 55, 2485–2490. 10.1021/acs.jcim.5b00368. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Zavitsanou S.; Tsengenes A.; Papadourakis M.; Amendola G.; Chatzigoulas A.; Dellis D.; Cosconati S.; Cournia Z.
FEPrepare: A Web-Based
Tool for Automating the Setup of Relative Binding Free Energy Calculations. J. Chem. Inf. Model.
2021, 61, 4131–4138. 10.1021/acs.jcim.1c00215. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Groen D.; Bhati A. P.; Suter J.; Hetherington J.; Zasada S. J.; Coveney P. V.
FabSim: Facilitating computational
research through automation on large-scale and distributed e-infrastructures. Comput. Phys. Commun.
2016, 207, 375–385. 10.1016/j.cpc.2016.05.020. [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 TIES Toolkit. https://www.ties-service.org (accessed 2021-11-30). 
 
 Bhati A. P.; Wan S.; Wright D. W.; Coveney P. V.
Rapid,
Accurate, Precise, and Reliable
Relative Free Energy Prediction Using Ensemble Based Thermodynamic
Integration. J. Chem. Theory Comput.
2017, 13, 210–222. 10.1021/acs.jctc.6b00979. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Coveney P. V.; Wan S.
On the calculation
of equilibrium thermodynamic properties from molecular
dynamics. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.
2016, 18, 30236–30240. 10.1039/C6CP02349E. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Leimkuhler B.; Matthews C.. Molecular
Dynamics; Interdisciplinary Applied Mathematics; Springer: Cham, 2015; Vol. 39, 10.1007/978-3-319-16375-8. [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Bhati A. P.; Wan S.; Hu Y.; Sherborne B.; Coveney P. V.
Uncertainty Quantification
in Alchemical Free Energy Methods. J. Chem.
Theory Comput.
2018, 14, 2867–2880. 10.1021/acs.jctc.7b01143. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Bhati A. P.; Wan S.; Coveney P. V.
Ensemble-Based Replica
Exchange Alchemical Free Energy
Methods: The Effect of Protein Mutations on Inhibitor Binding. J. Chem. Theory Comput.
2019, 15, 1265–1277. 10.1021/acs.jctc.8b01118. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Bieniek M. K.; Bhati A. P.; Wan S.; Coveney P. V.
TIES 20:
Relative
Binding Free Energy with a Flexible Superimposition Algorithm and
Partial Ring Morphing. J. Chem. Theory Comput.
2021, 17, 1250–1265. 10.1021/acs.jctc.0c01179. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Wan S.; Bhati A. P.; Zasada S. J.; Wall I.; Green D.; Bamborough P.; Coveney P. V.
Rapid and Reliable Binding Affinity
Prediction of Bromodomain Inhibitors: A Computational Study. J. Chem. Theory Comput.
2017, 13, 784–795. 10.1021/acs.jctc.6b00794. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Wan S.; Bhati A. P.; Skerratt S.; Omoto K.; Shanmugasundaram V.; Bagal S. K.; Coveney P. V.
Evaluation and Characterization of
Trk Kinase Inhibitors for the Treatment of Pain: Reliable Binding
Affinity Predictions from Theory and Computation. J. Chem. Inf. Model.
2017, 57, 897–909. 10.1021/acs.jcim.6b00780. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Wan S.; Tresadern G.; Pérez-Benito L.; van Vlijmen H.; Coveney P. V.
Accuracy and Precision of Alchemical Relative Free
Energy Predictions with and without Replica-Exchange. Advanced Theory and Simulations
2020, 3, 1900195. 10.1002/adts.201900195. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Vassaux M.; Wan S.; Edeling W.; Coveney P. V.
Ensembles Are Required to Handle
Aleatoric and Parametric Uncertainty in Molecular Dynamics Simulation. J. Chem. Theory Comput.
2021, 17, 5187–5197. 10.1021/acs.jctc.1c00526. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Bikkina S.; Bhati A. P.; Padhi S.; Priyakumar U. D.
Temperature
dependence of the stability of ion pair interactions, and its implications
on the thermostability of proteins from thermophiles. Journal of Chemical Sciences
2017, 129, 405–414. 10.1007/s12039-017-1231-4. [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Tresadern G.; Tatikola K.; Cabrera J.; Wang L.; Abel R.; van Vlijmen H.; Geys H.
The Impact of Experimental and Calculated
Error on the Performance of Affinity Predictions. J. Chem. Inf. Model.
2022, 62, 703. 10.1021/acs.jcim.1c01214. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Gapsys V.; Pérez-Benito L.; Aldeghi M.; Seeliger D.; van Vlijmen H.; Tresadern G.; de Groot B. L.
Large scale relative protein ligand
binding affinities using non-equilibrium alchemy. Chem. Sci.
2020, 11, 1140–1152. 10.1039/C9SC03754C. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Khalak Y.; Tresadern G.; Aldeghi M.; Baumann H. M.; Mobley D. L.; de Groot B. L.; Gapsys V.
Alchemical absolute protein–ligand
binding free energies for drug design. Chem.
Sci.
2021, 12, 13958–13971. 10.1039/D1SC03472C. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Gapsys V.; Yildirim A.; Aldeghi M.; Khalak Y.; van der
Spoel D.; de Groot B. L.
Accurate absolute free energies for
ligand–protein binding based on non-equilibrium approaches. Communications Chemistry
2021, 4, 61. 10.1038/s42004-021-00498-y. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Aldeghi M.; Heifetz A.; Bodkin M. J.; Knapp S.; Biggin P. C.
Accurate
calculation of the absolute free energy of binding for drug molecules. Chem. Sci.
2016, 7, 207–218. 10.1039/C5SC02678D. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Gapsys V.; Hahn D. F.; Tresadern G.; Mobley D. L.; Rampp M.; de Groot B. L.. Pre-Exascale Computing of Protein−Ligand Binding
Free Energies with Open Source Software for Drug Design. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2022, 10.1021/acs.jcim.1c01445. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Gapsys V.; de Groot B. L.
On the importance
of statistics in molecular simulations
for thermodynamics, kinetics and simulation box size. Elife
2020, 9, e57589 10.7554/eLife.57589. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Wade A.; Bhati A.; Wan S.; Coveney P.
Alchemical Free Energy
Estimators and Molecular Dynamics Engines: Accuracy, Precision and
Reproducibility. ChemRxiv
2021, 10.26434/chemrxiv-2021-nqp8r. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Potterton A.; Husseini F. S.; Southey M. W. Y.; Bodkin M. J.; Heifetz A.; Coveney P. V.; Townsend-Nicholson A.
Ensemble-Based
Steered Molecular
Dynamics Predicts Relative Residence Time of A2A Receptor Binders. J. Chem. Theory Comput.
2019, 15, 3316–3330. 10.1021/acs.jctc.8b01270. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Martin H. S. C.; Jha S.; Howorka S.; Coveney P. V.
Determination
of
Free Energy Profiles for the Translocation of Polynucleotides through
α-Hemolysin Nanopores using Non-Equilibrium Molecular Dynamics
Simulations. J. Chem. Theory Comput.
2009, 5, 2135–2148. 10.1021/ct9000894. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Martin H. S.; Jha S.; Coveney P. V.
Comparative
analysis of nucleotide translocation through
protein nanopores using steered molecular dynamics and an adaptive
biasing force. J. Comput. Chem.
2014, 35, 692–702. 10.1002/jcc.23525. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Knight J. L.; Leswing K.; Bos P.
H.; Wang L.. Free Energy Methods in Drug Discovery:
Current State and Future Directions; ACS
Publications: 2021; pp 205–226, 10.1021/bk-2021-1397.ch008. [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Bhati A. P.; et al. Pandemic drugs at pandemic speed: infrastructure
for accelerating
COVID-19 drug discovery with hybrid machine learning- and physics-based
simulations on high-performance computers. Interface
Focus
2021, 11, 20210018. 10.1098/rsfs.2021.0018. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Saadi A. A.et al. IMPECCABLE: Integrated Modeling PipelinE
for COVID Cure by Assessing
Better LEads. 50th International Conference
on Parallel Processing; New York, NY, USA, 2021; 10.1145/3472456.3473524. [ DOI ] 
 Lee H.et al. Proceedings
of the Platform for Advanced Scientific Computing Conference; Association for Computing Machinery: New York, NY, USA, 2021. 
 
 Scheen J.; Wu W.; Mey A. S. J. S.; Tosco P.; Mackey M.; Michel J.
Hybrid Alchemical
Free Energy/Machine-Learning Methodology for the Computation of Hydration
Free Energies. J. Chem. Inf. Model.
2020, 60, 5331–5339. 10.1021/acs.jcim.0c00600. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 Lakshminarayanan B.; Pritzel A.; Blundell C.. Simple
and Scalable Predictive Uncertainty Estimation Using Deep Ensembles. Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems; Red Hook,
NY, USA, 2017; pp 6405–6416. 
 
 Coveney P. V.; Dougherty E. R.; Highfield R. R.
Big data need big theory too. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical,
Physical and Engineering Sciences
2016, 374, 20160153. 10.1098/rsta.2016.0153. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Succi S.; Coveney P. V.
Big data: the end of the scientific method?. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical,
Physical and Engineering Sciences
2019, 377, 20180145. 10.1098/rsta.2018.0145. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Paliwal H.; Shirts M. R.
A Benchmark Test Set for Alchemical Free Energy Transformations
and Its Use to Quantify Error in Common Free Energy Methods. J. Chem. Theory Comput.
2011, 7, 4115–4134. 10.1021/ct2003995. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Wan S.; Bhati A. P.; Zasada S. J.; Coveney P. V.
Rapid, accurate,
precise and reproducible ligand-protein binding free energy prediction. Interface Focus
2020, 10, 20200007. 10.1098/rsfs.2020.0007. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Wan S.; Sinclair R. C.; Coveney P. V.
Uncertainty quantification in classical
molecular dynamics. Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences
2021, 379, 20200082. 10.1098/rsta.2020.0082. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Sinclair R. C.; Suter J. L.; Coveney P. V.
Graphene-graphene
interactions: friction,
superlubricity, and exfoliation. Adv. Mater.
2018, 30, 1705791. 10.1002/adma.201705791. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Wang L.; Friesner R. A.; Berne B. J.
Replica
Exchange with Solute Scaling:
A More Efficient Version of Replica Exchange with Solute Tempering
(REST2). J. Phys. Chem. B
2011, 115, 9431–9438. 10.1021/jp204407d. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Wang L.; Berne B. J.; Friesner R. A.
On achieving
high accuracy and reliability
in the calculation of relative protein–ligand binding affinities. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.
2012, 109, 1937–1942. 10.1073/pnas.1114017109. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Maier J. A.; Martinez C.; Kasavajhala K.; Wickstrom L.; Hauser K. E.; Simmerling C.
ff14SB: Improving
the Accuracy of
Protein Side Chain and Backbone Parameters from ff99SB. J. Chem. Theory Comput.
2015, 11, 3696–3713. 10.1021/acs.jctc.5b00255. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Bayly C. I.; Cieplak P.; Cornell W.; Kollman P. A.
A well-behaved
electrostatic
potential based method using charge restraints for deriving atomic
charges: the RESP model. J. Phys. Chem.
1993, 97, 10269–10280. 10.1021/j100142a004. [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Jakalian A.; Jack D. B.; Bayly C. I.
Fast, efficient
generation of high-quality
atomic charges. AM1-BCC model: II. Parameterization and validation. Journal of computational chemistry
2002, 23, 1623–1641. 10.1002/jcc.10128. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Manzoni F.; Ryde U.
Assessing the stability
of free-energy perturbation calculations
by performing variations in the method. Journal
of computer-aided molecular design
2018, 32, 529–536. 10.1007/s10822-018-0110-5. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Fleck M.; Wieder M.; Boresch S.
Dummy Atoms
in Alchemical Free Energy
Calculations. J. Chem. Theory Comput.
2021, 17 (7), 4403–4419. 10.1021/acs.jctc.0c01328. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Keränen H.; Pérez-Benito L.; Ciordia M.; Delgado F.; Steinbrecher T. B.; Oehlrich D.; van Vlijmen H. W. T.; Trabanco A. A.; Tresadern G.
Acylguanidine
Beta Secretase 1 Inhibitors: A Combined Experimental and Free Energy
Perturbation Study. J. Chem. Theory Comput.
2017, 13, 1439–1453. 10.1021/acs.jctc.6b01141. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Jiang W.; Chipot C.; Roux B.
Computing
Relative Binding Affinity
of Ligands to Receptor: An Effective Hybrid Single-Dual-Topology Free-Energy
Perturbation Approach in NAMD. J. Chem. Inf.
Model.
2019, 59, 3794–3802. 10.1021/acs.jcim.9b00362. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Straatsma T. P.; Berendsen H. J. C.; Postma J. P. M.
Free energy of hydrophobic hydration:
A molecular dynamics study of noble gases in water. J. Chem. Phys.
1986, 85, 6720–6727. 10.1063/1.451846. [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Straatsma T. P.; Berendsen H. J. C.
Free energy of ionic hydration: Analysis of a thermodynamic
integration technique to evaluate free energy differences by molecular
dynamics simulations. J. Chem. Phys.
1988, 89, 5876–5886. 10.1063/1.455539. [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Pérez-Benito L.; Keränen H.; van Vlijmen H.; Tresadern G.
Predicting
binding free energies of PDE2 inhibitors. The difficulties of protein
conformation. Sci. Rep.
2018, 8, 4883. 10.1038/s41598-018-23039-5. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Dorsch D.; Schadt O.; Stieber F.; Meyring M.; Grädler U.; Bladt F.; Friese-Hamim M.; Knühl C.; Pehl U.; Blaukat A.
Identification and
optimization of
pyridazinones as potent and selective c-Met kinase inhibitors. Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett.
2015, 25, 1597–1602. 10.1016/j.bmcl.2015.02.002. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Ciordia M.; Pérez-Benito L.; Delgado F.; Trabanco A. A.; Tresadern G.
Application
of Free Energy Perturbation for the Design of BACE1 Inhibitors. J. Chem. Inf. Model.
2016, 56, 1856–1871. 10.1021/acs.jcim.6b00220. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Hunt K. W.; et al. Spirocyclic β-Site Amyloid Precursor Protein
Cleaving Enzyme
1 (BACE1) Inhibitors: From Hit to Lowering of Cerebrospinal Fluid
(CSF) Amyloid β in a Higher Species. J.
Med. Chem.
2013, 56, 3379–3403. 10.1021/jm4002154. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Wang J.; Wolf R. M.; Caldwell J. W.; Kollman P. A.; Case D. A.
Development
and testing of a general amber force field. Journal of computational chemistry
2004, 25, 1157–1174. 10.1002/jcc.20035. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Jorgensen W. L.; Chandrasekhar J.; Madura J. D.; Impey R. W.; Klein M. L.
Comparison
of simple potential functions for simulating liquid water. J. Chem. Phys.
1983, 79, 926–935. 10.1063/1.445869. [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Joung I. S.; Cheatham T. E.
Determination of Alkali and Halide Monovalent Ion Parameters
for Use in Explicitly Solvated Biomolecular Simulations. J. Phys. Chem. B
2008, 112, 9020–9041. 10.1021/jp8001614. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 Case D. A.; Belfon K.; Ben-Shalom I. Y.; Brozell S. R.; Cerutti D. S.; Cheatham T. E. III; Cruzeiro V. W. D.; Darden T. A.; Duke R. E.; Giambasu G.; Gilson M. K.; Gohlke H.; Goetz A. W.; Harris R.; Izadi S.; Izmailov S. A.; Kasavajhala K.; Kovalenko A.; Krasny R.; Kurtzman T.; Lee T. S.; LeGrand S.; Li P.; Lin C.; Liu J.; Luchko T.; Luo R.; Man V.; Merz K. M.; Miao Y.; Mikhailovskii O.; Monard G.; Nguyen H.; Onufriev A.; Pan F.; Pantano S.; Qi R.; Roe D. R.; Roitberg A.; Sagui C.; Schott-Verdugo S., Shen J.; Simmerling C. L.; Skrynnikov N. R.; Smith J.; Swails J.; Walker R. C.; Wang J.; Wilson L.; Wolf R. M.; Wu X.; Xiong Y.; Xue Y.; York D. M.; Kollman P. A.. AMBER 2020; University of California: San Francisco, 2020. 
 
 Darden T.; York D.; Pedersen L.
Particle mesh
Ewald: An N.log(N)
method for Ewald sums in large systems. J. Chem.
Phys.
1993, 98, 10089–10092. 10.1063/1.464397. [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Essmann U.; Perera L.; Berkowitz M. L.; Darden T.; Lee H.; Pedersen L. G.
A smooth particle
mesh Ewald method. J. Chem. Phys.
1995, 103, 8577–8593. 10.1063/1.470117. [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Beutler T. C.; Mark A. E.; van Schaik R. C.; Gerber P. R.; van Gunsteren W. F.
Avoiding
singularities and numerical instabilities in free energy calculations
based on molecular simulations. Chem. Phys.
Lett.
1994, 222, 529–539. 10.1016/0009-2614(94)00397-1. [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Zacharias M.; Straatsma T. P.; McCammon J. A.
Separation-shifted scaling, a new
scaling method for Lennard-Jones interactions in thermodynamic integration. J. Chem. Phys.
1994, 100, 9025–9031. 10.1063/1.466707. [ DOI ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Phillips J. C.; et al. Scalable molecular dynamics on CPU and GPU architectures with NAMD. J. Chem. Phys.
2020, 153, 044130. 10.1063/5.0014475. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 SuperMUC-NG. https://doku.lrz.de/display/PUBLIC/SuperMUC-NG (accessed 2021-11-30). 
 ARCHER2. https://www.archer2.ac.uk (accessed 2021-11-30). 
 Theta. https://www.alcf.anl.gov/alcf-resources/theta (accessed 2021-11-30). 
 RADICAL-Pilot
Github Project. https://github.com/radical-cybertools/radical.pilot (accessed 2022-02-27). 
 Giant workflow. https://blog.sciencemuseum.org.uk/supercomputer-bid-to-create-the-first-truly-personalised-medicine (accessed 2022-02-27). 
 TIES20. https://ccs-ties.org (accessed 2021-11-30). 
 
 Hutcheon J.
A.; Chiolero A.; Hanley J. A.
Random measurement error and regression
dilution bias. BMJ.
2010, 340, c2289. 10.1136/bmj.c2289. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Lawrenz M.; Baron R.; McCammon J. A.
Independent-Trajectories Thermodynamic-Integration
Free-Energy Changes for Biomolecular Systems: Determinants of H5N1
Avian Influenza Virus Neuraminidase Inhibition by Peramivir. J. Chem. Theory Comput.
2009, 5, 1106–1116. 10.1021/ct800559d. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Boghosian B. M.; Coveney P. V.; Wang H.
A new pathology in the simulation
of chaotic dynamical systems on digital computers. Advanced Theory and Simulations
2019, 2, 1900125. 10.1002/adts.201900125. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 
 Wan S.; Bhati A.; Wright D.; Wall I.; Graves A.; Green D.; Coveney P. V.. Evaluation and Characterization of Isoxazole Amides
as SMYD3 Inhibitors. ChemRxiv 2022, 10.26434/chemrxiv-2022-hrxqs. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 
 Associated Data 
 This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article. 
 Data Availability Statement 
 The data underlying
this study are available in the published article.
All input structures and parameter files used in this study along
with experimental and predicted ΔΔ G values
and errors are available at https://github.com/UCL-CCS/LargeScaleTIES . Readers interested in rerunning NAMD simulations using our protocol
with the input files provided should refer to https://www.ks.uiuc.edu/Research/namd/2.14/ug/ . 
 Articles from Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation are provided here courtesy of American Chemical Society 

 

 
 
 
 

 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ACTIONS 
 
 
 
 
 
 View on publisher site 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PDF (3.3 MB) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cite 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 Collections 
 
 
 
 
 
 Permalink 
 
 

 
 
 PERMALINK 
 
 
 
 
 Copy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 RESOURCES 
 
 
 
 
 Similar articles
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cited by other articles
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Links to NCBI Databases
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 Cite 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 Copy 
 
 
 
 
 
 Download .nbib 
 .nbib 
 
 
 
 

 
 Format: 
 
 
 
 AMA
 
 
 
 APA
 
 
 
 MLA
 
 
 
 NLM
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 Add to Collections 
 
 
 


 

 

 
 
 
 Create a new collection 
 
 
 
 Add to an existing collection 
 
 

 
 
 
 Name your collection
 * 
 
 
 
 
 
 Choose a collection
 
 
 
 
 Unable to load your collection due to an error 
 Please try again 
 
 
 

 
 
 Add
 
 
 Cancel
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 



 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 Follow NCBI
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NCBI on X (formerly known as Twitter) 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 NCBI on Facebook 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NCBI on LinkedIn 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 NCBI on GitHub 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NCBI RSS feed 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 Connect with NLM
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NLM on X (formerly known as Twitter) 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 NLM on Facebook 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 NLM on YouTube 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 National Library of Medicine
 8600 Rockville Pike Bethesda, MD 20894 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 









 
 

 
 Web Policies
 

 
 


 
 
 
 









 
 

 
 FOIA
 

 
 


 
 
 
 









 
 

 
 HHS Vulnerability Disclosure
 

 
 


 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 









 
 

 
 Help
 

 
 


 
 
 
 









 
 

 
 Accessibility
 

 
 


 
 
 
 









 
 

 
 Careers
 

 
 


 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 









 
 

 
 NLM
 

 
 


 
 
 
 









 
 

 
 NIH
 

 
 


 
 
 
 









 
 

 
 HHS
 

 
 


 
 
 
 









 
 

 
 USA.gov
 

 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 


 
 
 
 


 
 

 
 Back to Top 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
