822acssdChemical ReviewsChem RevPMC1108640111086401110864013862645910.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00705Polymeric Nanoparticles
for Drug Delivery
BeachMaximilian
A NayanatharaUmeka GaoYanting ZhangChanghe XiongYijun WangYufu SuchGeorgina K †School
of Chemistry, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia*Email: gsuch@unimelb.edu.au
1642024124955055505–56161642025© 2024 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits non-commercial access and re-use, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained; but does not permit creation of adaptations or other derivative works (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
 The recent emergence of nanomedicine has revolutionized
the therapeutic
landscape and necessitated the creation of more sophisticated drug
delivery systems. Polymeric nanoparticles sit at the forefront of
numerous promising drug delivery designs, due to their unmatched control
over physiochemical properties such as size, shape, architecture,
charge, and surface functionality. Furthermore, polymeric nanoparticles
have the ability to navigate various biological barriers to precisely
target specific sites within the body, encapsulate a diverse range
of therapeutic cargo and efficiently release this cargo in response
to internal and external stimuli. However, despite these remarkable
advantages, the presence of polymeric nanoparticles in wider clinical
application is minimal. This review will provide a comprehensive understanding
of polymeric nanoparticles as drug delivery vehicles. The biological
barriers affecting drug delivery will be outlined first, followed
by a comprehensive description of the various nanoparticle designs
and preparation methods, beginning with the polymers on which they
are based. The review will meticulously explore the current performance
of polymeric nanoparticles against a myriad of diseases including
cancer, viral and bacterial infections, before finally evaluating
the advantages and crucial challenges that will determine their wider
clinical potential in the decades to come.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoCollection date 2024 May 8.

1.

## Introduction
Nanoparticles have the
potential to drastically improve the therapeutic
efficacy of drugs by providing superior protection and facilitating
drug delivery at specific sites of action. There are many different
types of nanoparticles that have shown promise for drug-delivery applications,
including polymeric-, inorganic-, and lipid-based particles. − This review will focus on polymeric nanoparticles, which are nanoparticles
derived from polymer building blocks. Among other drug-delivery systems,
these nanoparticles are unique in that their polymeric composition
allows for diverse and highly sophisticated designs. A controllable
size, shape, and surface charge are three of the principal advantages
associated with polymeric nanoparticles for drug delivery. Just as
beneficial, however, is the enormous variety of chemical and biological
functionality that can be incorporated into polymeric nanoparticle
designs. Such sophisticated functionality has yielded nanoparticles
with the potential to target specific sites throughout the body and
within individual cellular compartments, as well as the ability to
respond to stimuli associated with specific biological environments,
resulting in highly efficient drug release. As a result of these advantages,
polymeric nanoparticles are attracting significant attention for intelligent
drug-delivery designs and will become increasingly vital as more innovative
therapeutic cargo and treatments develop.
Effective polymeric
nanoparticles must be designed to migrate a
myriad of biological roadblocks throughout both the extracellular
and intracellular environments. These roadblocks are often specific
to a particular drug, delivery route, disease, or endogenous target.
For example, the challenges associated with delivering low molecular
weight drugs, which include solubility, toxicity, and controlled release,
are significantly different to the delivery of larger therapeutics
such as proteins or nucleic acids, which generally require enhanced
stability and targeted release at specific regions within a cell. − Thus, understanding how nanoparticles interact with each biological
barrier, and which barriers are necessary to mitigate for a given
disease/treatment, is crucial to designing highly efficient polymeric
nanoparticles for drug delivery. There has been an immense research
effort over the last twenty years to develop polymeric nanoparticles
that can more effectively respond to these biological challenges and
thus optimize therapeutic efficacy. This research has yielded many
success stories, one of which is Abraxane, an albumin-bound paclitaxel
formulation that was approved by the FDA in 2005. This nanoparticle is based on the conjugation of paclitaxel,
an anti-cancer drug, with albumin, and yields superior pharmacokinetics,
improved tumor inhibition and reduced side effects compared to free
paclitaxel. More recently, injectable formulations have been approved
to prolong the release of drugs for treatment of HIV (Apretude) and
Osteoporosis (Zilretta). Furthermore,
Genexol-PM, a paclitaxel-loaded polymeric micelle, was approved in
Korea in 2007 for the treatment of breast, lung and pancreatic cancer. As well as these commercial products, polymeric
nanoparticles represent many drug-delivery designs currently in early-
and late-stage clinical trials. − 
Despite the extensive research
in this area, there are only a handful
of polymeric nanoparticle designs currently used in wider clinical
applications. There are a number of reasons
for this, one of which is that nanoparticle design is hampered by
a lack of understanding of the series of inherent (endogenous) barriers
that particles need to migrate before reaching a target site. This is a significant design challenge, as the
properties that enhance interactions with some barriers can often
impact negatively on others. To address this problem, more recent
research has focused on designing nanoparticles with a multi-staged
response to biological stimuli. Another problem impacting the wider
application of polymeric nanoparticles is the translation gap between
animal and human studies, as well as the inherent heterogeneity between
and within patient populations. , These two problems
highlight the need to better understand the relationship between nanoparticle
function and the varied and complex biological environments they will
inevitably encounter. Such knowledge
must work in combination with advances in controlled polymer synthesis
to design nanoparticles with more sophisticated architecture and bio-responsive
functionality tailored for specific applications. This review will
provide a comprehensive understanding of the current state of polymeric
nanoparticles for drug delivery, highlighting the critical delivery
pathways and biological barriers that need to be considered for designing
effective polymeric nanoparticles. The review will then comprehensively
outline both the simple and advanced nanoparticle designs, beginning
with the polymers on which they are based, and their preparation methods.
The bulk of the review will appraise the performance of polymeric
nanoparticles against cancers, viral and bacterial infections, and
other diseases over the last decade, before concluding with a summary
and evaluation of the present challenges and future potential of polymeric
nanoparticles as widely applicable drug-delivery vehicles.

2.

## Biological Barriers to Nanoparticle Delivery
The biological barriers applicable to polymeric nanoparticles depend
on a number of factors, including how the nanoparticles are administered,
the therapeutic cargo being delivered, and the disease type. In this
review we will focus on understanding the biological barriers relevant
to the most common systemic delivery routes, which are intravenous
injection, oral delivery and inhalation. The ability to evade the
immune system is one significant challenge consistent across all nanoparticle
delivery routes. However, there are also specific physical barriers
that need to be overcome for particular delivery routes such as oral
delivery or inhalation, as well as barriers associated with specific
target regions of interest such as tumors or the blood–brain
barrier. There are many highly specialized reviews that cover these
biological barriers in great detail. , , − In this review we will give a
brief overview of each particular barrier, and how polymeric nanoparticles
can be tailored to overcome them ( ).
 2.1.

## Clearance and Delivery in the Blood
To optimize delivery to a treatment site, it is necessary to design
a nanoparticle that enables extended circulation in the blood stream,
thus increasing the probability of localization at a target site while
minimizing off-target effects. The mononuclear phagocytic system (MPS)
begins sequestering nanoparticles immediately after ingestion and
thus provides the first barrier to nanoparticle delivery. The MPS
consists of populations of phagocytic cells—a type of white
blood cell capable of ingesting foreign particles—such as macrophages
that are present in the liver, spleen, lymph nodes, bone marrow, and
skin. The elimination of nanoparticles by the immune system is initiated
by opsonization, whereby the particles are coated with plasma proteins
including serum albumin, apolipoproteins, complement components, and
immunoglobulins. This generates a protein corona on the surface of
the particle, impacting its interactions with the environment from
that point onward ( ). The composition of the protein corona is impacted by the
initial surface coating of the nanoparticle and is also subject to
inherent variations in the blood due to patient variability. The corona
composition has been shown to impact nanoparticle trafficking and
clearance, with coronas containing apolipoprotein E (ApoE) acting
as targeting moieties for low-density lipoprotein receptors, leading
to nanoparticle delivery to hepatocytes and in some instances across
the blood–brain barrier. In other
cases, coronas, which include opsonins or pattern recognition receptors,
result in clearance by immune cells as part of the complement cascade.
Controlling the composition of the protein corona and thus the biological
fate of nanoparticles remains poorly understood. , The presence of this protein corona is also problematic for nanoparticles
with specific targeting capability, as following protein corona generation,
their targeting functionality is no longer accessible. Most importantly, a protein corona facilitates
the attachment of the nanoparticle to a phagocytic cell, within either
the MPS or the reticuloendothelial system (RES). This process drastically
reduces circulation time, and results in the clearance and elimination
of the nanoparticle. Understanding how the protein corona can be controlled
or tuned to facilitate specific cellular localization is an important
area of fundamental study and is likely to be critical to optimizing
nanoparticle delivery. There are also strategies to avoid protein
coronas from impacting targeting by designing nanoparticles with releasable
layers, as discussed in .
 The size, shape, and surface chemistry of nanoparticles
significantly
influences circulation time through their respective effects on the
nature of the protein corona and cell ( ). The ideal particle size is typically reported
between 10 and 200 nm. Nanoparticles below 10 nm are subject to elimination
by the kidneys, while particles bigger than 200 nm are recognized
by the complement cascade. One of the most prominent mechanisms of
liver accumulation is cell uptake by Kupffer cells. These cells are located in the liver, specifically on the
surface of the liver sinusoid, a discontinuous capillary with openings
(fenestrations) to facilitate endocytosis. Kupffer cells are the largest
population of tissue-resident macrophages in the body.
 Recognition by the immune system can be modified
by tuning the
surface chemistry of polymeric nanoparticles. Typically, cationic
particles are cleared most rapidly by the immune system, followed
by anionic particles and then uncharged particles, which have the
longest circulation times in vivo.( ) To control these interactions, many nanoparticles incorporate
surface coatings to enhance their “stealth”, i.e., their
ability to avoid detection by the immune system and biological species
such as enzymes and antibodies, which facilitate degradation, secretion,
and clearance. Poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) is a hydrophilic polymer
highly valued for its stealth properties. PEG is employed on the surface
of nanoparticles to enhance circulation, but it cannot completely
shield the particle from macrophages or other cells in the immune
system. In addition, there is a significant collection of literature
that describes how the body can produce anti-PEG antibodies, which
can induce clearance of nanoparticles despite PEG functionalization.
Consequently, polymers such as poly(2-oxazaline) (POx), polypeptides,
and zwitterionic polymers have received attention as possible alternatives
to PEG. Another strategy to imbue polymeric
nanoparticles with stealth properties is to employ biological functionality
that inherently has a longer circulation time. Abraxane, for example,
utilizes human serum albumin, likely prolonging immune recognition
time. Peptide-modified nanoparticle surfaces
have also been investigated to enhance stealth. For example, a polystyrene
based nanoparticle was modified with a “don’t eat me”
glycoprotein sequence (hCD47) and a synthetic self-peptide. These nanoparticles displayed significantly
improved circulation, as macrophages recognized the peptides on the
particle surface as “self” minimizing opsonization.
Another biomimetic strategy that has shown the potential to increase
circulation time by reducing opsonization and phagocytosis is the
use of cell membranes to coat nanoparticle surfaces. These stealthy
cell membranes can include white blood cell or leukocyte membranes. 
Nanoparticle shape is another important
factor that influences
clearance. In , we will discuss the impact of nanoparticle shape on drug
delivery in detail. Generally speaking, previous work has shown that
worm-like micelles with a high aspect ratio (the proportional relationship
between a particle’s height and width) can reduce circulation
time in the body and result in higher localization in the liver and
spleen, suggesting greater particle uptake by the MPS and RES systems. Rigidity has also been shown to impact clearance.
Red blood cells (RBCs), for example, are biconcave disks approximately
8 μm in size. They are highly deformable and thus can migrate
through barriers that are impenetrable to objects less than one tenth
their size. These properties allow red
blood cells to have lifetimes of over three months.

2.2.

## Physical Barriers for Nanoparticle Localization
in Target Regions
Upon intravenous administration, nanoparticles
disperse throughout the circulatory system, and extravasate/accumulate
in different tissues over time. Their concentration in the blood decreases
due to a combination of factors such as elimination and excretion
via the liver and kidneys as discussed above, as well as partitioning
and diffusion into tissue. Extravasation is impacted by nanoparticle
properties including size, whereby smaller particles generally cross
capillary walls more easily than large particles. Nanoparticles are capable of extravasation into all areas
of the body; however, they are often found in high concentrations
in the liver or spleen. Apart from uptake by the immune system, this
accumulation is also caused by the fact that particles can become
trapped by the size of openings (fenestrations) in capillaries within
major organs such as the spleen. Research has shown that the size
of splenic fenestrations is in the order of 200–500 nm. The ability of nanoparticles to avoid being
trapped by these barriers depends on both their size and rigidity.
DeSimone and co-workers investigated the impact of nanoparticle rigidity
in an interesting study involving a library of red blood cell mimicking
nanoparticles (∼6 μm) with variable rigidity. This change
in rigidity was achieved by tuning the nanoparticle’s cross-linking
density. Their work showed that an 8-fold decrease in Young’s
modulus was correlated with a >30-fold increase in the elimination
half-life. This was likely due to the particle’s ability to
deform and thus migrate fenestrations in the lung more effectively. 
2.2.1.

## Gastrointestinal Tract
Oral delivery
is the most attractive route for therapeutic delivery, given it is
simple, convenient, and minimally invasive. However, successful delivery
of cargo using this method requires nanoparticles to migrate through
multiple aggressive environments before accessing the blood stream.
This begins when nanoparticles enter the stomach, where gastric juices
are highly acidic (pH 1.5–3), and contain hydrochloric acid
(HCl), potassium chloride (KCl), and sodium chloride (NaCl). The stomach
also contains enzymes that can break down foreign materials such as
pepsin, which cleaves peptide bonds. Following migration from the
stomach, nanoparticles then reach the duodenum in the gastrointestinal
(GI) tract, which has a pH of 5.5. The pH further increases in later
regions of the GI tract, from pH 6 in the jejunum, to pH 7.2–8
in the ileum, and finally pH 6.4–7 in the colon. Due to the inherent pH variation of these regions,
pH has been commonly used to tune nanoparticle stability and cargo
release. The GI tract is coated with
a brush-like layer of microvilli. This brush-like layer contains sucrase
and several peptidase enzymes that cleave a broad range of peptide
bonds. The enzyme activity is generally greater in the duodenum than
the jejunum or ileum.
Mucus also plays a critical role in the
absorption and bioavailability of orally administered drugs. The mucosal
barrier encompasses the entire GI tract, including the stomach, small
intestine and the colon, and contains multiple protective components.
The first is a compact epithelial lining containing tight junctions
that limit the permeation of foreign species such as nanoparticles.
The second is a mucus blanket composed of 95% water, 0.2–5%
mucin, 0.5% globular proteins, 0.5–1.0% electrolytes, 1–2%
lipids and DNA. Mucin is a key component of mucus and controls its
ability to form cross-linked and entangled fibrous networks, thus
impacting the ability of nanoparticles to migrate within this layer.
Mucin is excreted from the surface of foveolar and goblet cells. This
insoluble mucus forms a gel-like coating over the surface of the gastric
mucosa. Bicarbonate ions secreted from the surface of epithelial cells
are a third protective element. To deliver cargo in this environment,
it is critical that nanoparticles achieve efficient trafficking through
the mucus layer to the epithelial cells that lie beneath. Such trafficking
is a challenge, as the mucus contains many pathways for clearance
of foreign material. Numerous studies report a size range necessary
to pass through the mucus layer based on the mesh-pore spacing of
the mucus, which is between 50 and 1800 nm. Due to the properties of the mucus layer, positively charged or
lipophilic materials also have limited permeability through this environment.
Thus, to penetrate this mucus matrix, nanoparticles should ideally
possess a hydrophilic, nearly electrically neutral surface with a
size small enough to avoid unfavorable interactions with the mucin
network. While the addition of PEG to the surface of nanoparticles
(PEGylation) is commonly used to provide such a surface, another strategy
is the use of zwitterionic surfaces. Shan et al. recently showed that
zwitterionic surfaces were as efficient at trafficking through mucus
as PEGylated systems, but had superior internalization into epithelial
cells. Rigidity is another nanoparticle
property that has been shown to impact penetration through mucus.
In one important study, a series of nanoparticles based on a poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) core and a lipid shell were designed
with three different rigidities. The data showed that the system with
the intermediate rigidity had the fastest penetration. This was thought
to be due to efficient deformation that allowed migration through
the mucus matrix, leading to a higher drug release in vivo. 
To achieve successful delivery,
nanoparticles also have to navigate
the compact epithelial layer in the gastrointestinal tract. There
are two possible pathways for trafficking across the epithelial layer
into surrounding tissue. The paracellular pathway involves trafficking
between the tight junctions of the epithelial cells, which is only
applicable to small materials due to the size of these junctions.
In contrast, the transcellular pathway involves migration through
the epithelial layer by cellular uptake, followed by exocytosis into
the blood stream. This process is based on either specific uptake
mechanisms such as receptor-based endocytosis, or non-specific methods
including clathrin or caveolin-mediated endocytosis, macropinocytosis,
and, in the case of larger particles, phagocytosis. However, there is still little understanding of how different
internalization approaches can be used to tune exocytosis, thus there
is clearly a need for fundamental studies to support improving oral
delivery efficiency.

2.2.2.

## Pulmonary Delivery
Pulmonary drug
delivery has generated significant interest for the treatment of respiratory
diseases. This is due to the extremely high surface area within the
lung, which enhances the absorption of cargo, as well as its relatively
thin epithelial layer. Nanoparticles
can be delivered into the respiratory tract using a range of techniques
such as nebulizers, metered-dose inhalers, and dry powder inhalers.
In order to reach systematic circulation in the blood stream, nanoparticles
must be delivered sufficiently deep into the lung, and migrate a number
of biological barriers into systemic circulation. There are two main
regions within the lung, the conducting airways, and the respiratory
region. The conducting airways region is the upper area of the airway,
and includes the nose, mouth, trachea, bronchi, bronchioles, and terminal
bronchioles (bronchial tree). The respiratory region comprises the
lower areas of respiratory bronchioles, alveolar ducts, and alveolar
sacs. The fate of inhaled nanoparticles depends on where they are
deposited. Two different epithelial cells
are present in the lungs, ciliated epithelial cells, and goblet cells. A mucus layer covers the epithelia of the trachea
and bronchial tree, and this mucus layer can easily entrap inhaled
nanoparticles and sweep them out of the lungs. This mucus is predominately
water (95%), but also contains mucins (2%) and other components (DNA,
proteins, cells, and cellular debris). These mucins are high molecular weight glycoproteins that are cross-linked
with cysteine, and create a physical barrier that restricts nanoparticles
according to size. The mucus layer is also anionic, which facilitates
electrostatic interactions with positively charged nanoparticles.
Shape and rigidity are also important parameters that impact penetration
through mucus as highlighted in the discussion on oral delivery above.
Importantly, this physiological barrier in the respiratory tract is
highly variable in pathological conditions. For example, mucus viscoelasticity
increases in lung diseases such as cystic fibrosis, chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease, and asthma, and this change in elasticity increases
the ability of mucus to trap nanoparticles. 
The epithelial cells present in the lower respiratory region
consist of alveolar epithelial type I (AT-I) cells and alveolar epithelial
type II (AT-II) cells. AT-I cells are larger and thinner than AT-II
cells and comprise 90% of the alveolar surface area. AT-II cells are
much smaller, and their role is to produce pulmonary surfactants,
which protect the surface of the lungs. The lungs also contain immune
cells, specifically alveolar macrophages and dendritic cells, which
provide a barrier to delivery by internalizing nanoparticles. These
cells phagocytose nanoparticles based on their size and surface chemistry.
Pulmonary surfactants are another endogenous material that represent
a barrier to efficient nanoparticle delivery. These surfactants, which
serve to lower the energy required for inhalation by reducing air–liquid
surface tension, form specific protein coronas on the surface of nanoparticles. As well as interacting with nanoparticles in
an undesirable manner, these coronas also impact nanoparticle uptake
and clearance, and can even negatively affect lung function. Ultimately,
nanoparticles require trafficking through epithelial cells to reach
systematic circulation in the blood or be trafficked to lymph nodes.

2.2.3.

## Biofilms
Bacterial infections affect
17 million people annually in the United States, resulting in approximately
550,000 deaths, and costing billions of dollars every year. Up to 80% of these infections are caused by
bacteria that form biofilms. Biofilms
are a heterogenous structure that often contain a large population
of rapidly growing cells and a small population of dormant or slowly
growing bacteria (termed persister cells). Biofilms render bacteria
far more resistant to antibiotic treatment and thus are a critical
biological barrier to improving therapeutic efficacy. Extracellular
polymeric substances (EPS) comprise a key component of biofilms ( ). The composition
of the EPS depends on the type of bacteria, the local mechanical shear
forces, the substrate availability and the host environment. However,
commonalities in the EPS exist across different kinds of biofilms.
The EPS typically contains exopolysaccharides as well as fibrous and
globular proteins including extracellular enzymes, lipids and extracellular
nucleic acids. The EPS provides a scaffold
for mechanical stability and creates a compartmentalized microenvironment
for the bacteria within its structure. This provides a physical barrier
that prevents nanoparticles from easily accessing and eliminating
bacteria. Thus, polymeric nanoparticles tailored to combat biofilms
need to migrate the EPS network before antimicrobial agents can be
efficiently delivered. There are a number of strategies that have
been developed to disrupt the EPS matrix and thus allow more efficient
killing of the bacteria within the biofilm, including nitric oxide
or enzymes such as deoxyribonuclease (DNAse). The biofilm also contains water-filled pores that allow for the
transport of nutrients into the film. Nanoparticle transport has been
shown to occur either through the biofilm or through these water-filled
pores, but is strongly dependent on charge, with cationic materials
favored due to the anionic nature of the biofilm. It is critical that strategies to treat biofilms target
persister cells, as to leave some bacteria alive results in the continued
spread of infection as well as antimicrobial resistance (the generation
of bacteria that are resistant to antimicrobial treatment). Biofilms
also develop a gradient in pH, oxygen, and nutrient concentration
as a result of the metabolic activity of the microorganisms contained
within the film. While the pH of the blood stream is approximately
7.4, it has been reported that the pH of a biofilm is as low as pH
5.0. 
 
2.2.4.

## Blood–Brain Barrier
Neurological
disorders that impact the brain and spinal cord are one of the leading
causes of morbidity and disability globally. Devising efficient treatments for neurological diseases is challenging,
due to the strength of the blood–brain barrier (BBB), which
drastically limits the ability of therapies, including polymeric nanoparticles,
to access the brain. The BBB precisely controls the transport of ions,
nutrients and cells between the blood and the brain. It consists of
a compact layer of cerebral epithelial cells with extremely tight
junctions between each cell. The inter-endothelial space is characterized
by transmembrane complexes containing occludin, claudin and other
junction adhesion molecules. This barrier is critical for safeguarding
the highly specific environment required for proper brain function,
and ensures the maintenance of brain fluids and the protection of
neurons. These transmembrane complexes create homophilic interactions
with each other to form an intricate tight barrier. This barrier is
supported by a basement membrane (30–40 nm thick) composed
of collagen type IV, laminin, heparin sulfate proteoglycans, fibronectin,
and other extracellular matrix proteins. There are also two other important cell types that are associated
with this barrier. Pericytes are smooth muscle cells spanning several
endothelial cell lengths. They serve to regulate endothelial cells
and also act as macrophages during inflammation. Astrocytes play a
critical role in enhancing the BBB integrity by excreting soluble
factors that upregulate the expression level of tight junction proteins
on epithelial cells. 
There are
two pathways by which nanoparticle transport can occur from the blood
into the brain: paracellular and transcellular transport. Paracellular
delivery relies on transport through the miniscule intracellular spaces
in the BBB, and hence is severely limited for polymeric nanoparticles,
which are often larger than these tiny spaces. Thus, only nanoparticles
that release their cargo in the BBB environment, whereby their small
cargo is tiny enough to diffuse, can successfully harness this mechanism.
Transcellular delivery, on the other hand, is more promising, and
can be divided into three distinct categories. Carrier-mediated transcytosis
involves utilizing transporter protein pumps based on the external
(luminal) side of the endothelial cells. There are also pumps located
on the side of endothelial cells closest to the brain (abluminal)
to efflux unwarranted materials. Receptor-mediated transcytosis involves
transport through a specific receptor-mediated pathway. The three
most well studied receptors include insulin, transferrin, and low-density
cholesterol. In receptor-mediated endocytosis, the nanoparticle is
commonly internalized into an endo/lysosomal compartment and then
must escape this compartment and be exocytosed from the cell on the
abluminal side of the BBB. A number of interesting studies have shown
that cleavable targeting ligands can be employed to yield more efficient
transport across the BBB. These targeting groups enhance transport
efficiency by impacting escape from endosomal/lysosomal compartments,
or by dictating exocytosis onto the abluminal side of the BBB. One
such study involved the use of a pH cleavable transferrin that led
to the deshielding of a p-aminophenyl-alpha-d-mannopyranoside, allowing more effective exocytosis on the abluminal
side of the BBB endothelial membrane to target glioma. Later work used a similar approach to treat
Alzheimer’s disease. Endocytosis
can also occur via absorptive-mediated transcytosis. This is based
on the electrostatic interaction between positively charged nanoparticles
and the negatively charged surface of endothelial cells. 
The significant barriers preventing passive
delivery of drug-delivery
vehicles to the brain necessitates more sophisticated polymeric nanoparticle
designs. These designs involve size, shape and surface charge modification,
as well as the incorporation of specific functionality such as targeting
ligands. A 2013 study investigated PEGylated polystyrene nanoparticles
with sizes ranging from 20 to 500 nm in comparison to non-PEGylated
controls. In vivo studies
showed that accumulation in the brain was significantly improved for
nanoparticles below 200 nm. This accumulation was further enhanced
when the nanoparticles were coated with PEG. Such improved uptake
was thought to be due to the variable size and surface coating, which
reduced the interaction of the particles with the RES system, thus
facilitating transport across the BBB. Importantly, though the properties
of the particles were kept consistent in order to observe this trend,
it is likely that other size-dependent clearance mechanisms contributed
to this observed biodistribution. For BBB transport, it is very challenging
to isolate one clear structure–property relationship, and it
is likely that small variations in nanoparticle structure may significantly
alter performance. Shape is another tunable nanoparticle property
that offers the ability to enhance BBB transport. For example, in
one study, rod-like nanoparticles conjugated to an anti-transferrin
receptor antibody showed an approximately 7-fold higher accumulation
in the brain compared to their spherical counterparts. Positive charge is also thought to impact transport
through the BBB due to the negative charge on the luminal side of
the BBB, resulting in favorable electrostatic interactions. However,
these interactions are likely balanced out by the higher immune system
clearance of positively charged nanoparticles, as well as higher toxicity. 

2.2.5.

## Tumors
Tumors are collections of
abnormal or defective cells that, when their growth is unchecked by
the immune system, lead to cancer. The ability to successfully target
and delivery drugs to and throughout tumors is vital for effective
anti-cancer therapy. To reach targets within a tumor environment,
nanoparticles must first translocate the vascular endothelium and
accumulate within tumor tissue. This can be achieved via a number
of mechanisms including diffusion, passing through fenestrations,
and transcytosis through endothelial cells. The tumor environment is inherently heterogenous, and comprises
variations in the vascular density throughout the tumor, with areas
of unstructured branching of vasculature as well as a dense extracellular
matrix. These issues act to restrict interstitial fluid drainage and
thus increase inter-tumor interstitial pressures, ultimately reducing
perfusion (penetration) of the nanoparticles. Tumor vasculature is
generally maximized at the tumor–host interface, while lower
vascular density tends to occur closer to the core of the tumor. Due
to this reduced blood flow, the core of a tumor also tends to have
poor oxygen supply, resulting in necrosis. In solid tumors, high structural
rigidity is supported by extracellular matrix components such as collagen,
fibronectin, hyaluronan, fibrin, and proteoglycans. Tumors are made
up of different cell types such as stroma (non-malignant cells such
as fibroblasts and immune cells) and parenchyma (malignant cells). The physiological conditions within a tumor
environment are also highly variable. For example, the pH within a
tumor is in the range 6.4–6.8, due to cancerous cells metabolizing
glucose through a reaction that produces lactate, an acidic compound. There are also enzymes overexpressed in tumor
environments such as matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). Many polymeric
nanoparticles are designed to take advantage of these variations in
order to induce site-specific and highly targeted drug release.
Tumors are highly heterogenous, and their entire composition varies
widely depending on tumor type and stage. Some of the important tumor
characteristics that impact the migration of nanoparticles through
this environment are vasculature density, interstitial pressure and
the extracellular matrix (ECM) density. To optimize drug delivery
in a tumor, it is necessary for nanoparticles to permeate from the
periphery of the tumor into the central regions, which have a lower
blood supply, higher interstitial pressure, and a denser ECM matrix.
This deep permeation is still a central challenge to efficient drug
delivery. A recent study demonstrated four key nanoparticle indicia
that yield higher tumor accumulation: particle sizes above 100 nm,
rod-shaped architectures, near neutral charges, and inorganic material
compositions. It has been shown that
cationic nanoparticles have reduced diffusivity in tumors due to non-specific
interactions with the ECM network, making neutral or anionic particles
a superior design for deeper penetration. These trends, however, are by no means hard and fast rules, and
there remains a significant disagreement in the literature regarding
the trends and the contexts in which they apply. For each seemingly
clear rule, there are papers that have observed opposing trends. , This disagreement is probably due to the interconnected nature of
many nanoparticle properties, as well as the variety of biological
parameters that affect nanoparticle performance, including circulation,
extravasation, and permeation. Therefore, to consider one parameter
central to highly efficient nanoparticle anti-tumor performance in
isolation is limiting. Furthermore, inherent variations in biological
models used across different studies also need to be carefully considered.
It has been postulated that nanoparticles can more efficiently
extravasate in the leaky vasculature of the tumor, and thus preferentially
accumulate in tumor tissue over time. This phenomenon is known as
the enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect ( ). However, recent studies
have cast some doubt on the effectiveness of the EPR effect. In a
meta-study of 232 independent research papers, it was found that an
average of 0.7% of nanoparticles reach the tumor site. That same study investigated the impact of targeting
on tumor localization, whereby 0.9% of targeted nanoparticles reached
the tumor, as opposed to 0.6% of untargeted (passively accumulating)
nanoparticles. Later work showed these numbers can change dramatically
based on the way in which accumulation is measured, and this is an
important consideration when comparing such studies. The composition of the tumor, and thus the efficacy of
the EPR effect, is also impacted by individual patient factors such
as age, genetics, and lifestyle factors. Previous literature has investigated
functionalizing nanoparticles to target tumor tissue using a number
of different targeting ligands, including small molecules, polysaccharides,
and peptides, which target tumors generally, through to antibodies
or aptamers, which yield more specific targeting toward certain cell
types ( ). , Moreover, our understanding of how to target cells more specifically
continues to improve, leading to an increase in personalized treatment
approaches based on individual tumors. Recent strategies include a
patient’s own tumor-associated antigens (TAAs) being infused
back into their body to enhance T cell activation and tumor killing.
An alternative strategy is the use of tumor expressing mutated proteins
(neoantigens) as these proteins arise from mutations in an individual
tumor and thus are highly specific for targeted immunotherapy. 
 
2.2.6.

## Strategies to Intelligently Migrate Biological
Barriers
As we gain an increased understanding of the varied
and complex interactions between nanoparticles and endogenous environments,
it is becoming clear that a more structured approach to the design
of nanoparticles provides significant benefits; in other words, designing
a particle that has a multi-staged response to biological stimuli
to allow specific response to different biological barriers. Such
nanoparticle designs can combine the ability to be stealthy with targeted
uptake into cells via surface chemistries that are switchable. The following section discusses some advanced
nanoparticle designs that incorporate a multi-staged response to biological
stimuli. One strategy involves designing nanoparticles functionalized
with a PEG surface that can be released through changes in physiological
conditions such as pH or enzyme concentration. A recent study showed
that PEG modified with 2,3-dimethyl maleic anhydride (DMMA) could
be electrostatically associated to a cationic nanoparticle containing
a cell penetrating (TAT) peptide. This
PEG layer protected the nanoparticle and gave it stealth capabilities
until the pH was decreased (to mimic the lower pH in a tumor). The
DMMA functionality was hydrolyzed, causing the TAT peptide to be visible
on the nanoparticle surface and thus the nanoparticle became capable
of efficiently internalizing within cells. The results showed a highly
tunable association based on the pH of the particles with high association
only when the pH was low (pH 6.8). This approach had the added benefit
of noticeably reducing toxicity, which is usually a significant problem
for highly cationic materials. Systems capable of releasing PEG in
a tumor environment have also been designed in response to the overexpressed
enzymes MMP2 and MMP9, by including cleavable peptide sequences such
as Pro-Leu-Gly-Leu-Ala-Gly (PLGLAG) within their structure. 
Moieties such as DMMA can also be used
to transition nanoparticles from anionic to cationic in the presence
of a low pH environment. In a recent study, dual-responsive polymeric
nanoparticles were designed that could first release PEG, and then
degrade into smaller particles via disulfide cleavage, with a reduction
in size from 145 to 40 nm. This decrease in particle size is particularly
useful for deeper penetration into a tumor and yielded a 4-fold enhancement
in penetration within an A549 lung carcinoma compared to a non-responsive
control. More recently a pH-induced charge-switchable
surface (negative to positive) was used to improve the penetration
of biofilms, as they also exhibit a lower pH in some regions. 

2.3.

## Cellular Delivery of Nanoparticles
Most drug-delivery systems need to be internalized within an intracellular
location to achieve effective therapeutic activity. The desired sub-cellular
location is different depending on the nature of the therapeutic cargo.
Thus, nanoparticles must both effectively internalize into a target
cell and traffic throughout different cellular compartments in order
to reach the site of optimal therapeutic activity.
2.3.1.

## Association and Internalization
Effective internalization is the first stage of the intracellular
delivery pathway. Typically, nanoparticles enter the cell via endocytosis.
This process involves the nanoparticle becoming enclosed in a membrane
and engulfed into an intracellular vesicle that then matures through
the endo/lysosomal pathway. There are five main mechanisms whereby
nanoparticles can be taken up into cells: 1) clathrin-mediated endocytosis
(CME); 2) fast endophilin-mediated endocytosis carrier (FEME); 3)
clathrin independent (CLIC)/glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored
protein enriched early endocytic compartment (GEEC) endocytosis; 4)
micropinocytosis; or 5) phagocytosis. A
sixth mechanism of caveolin-mediated endocytosis has been commonly
reported in the literature, but there is emerging evidence suggesting
it is not a major pathway for nanoparticle delivery. For targeted
systems, internalization in non-phagocytic cells is normally associated
with CME, FEME, or CLIC/GEEC, but for particles with non-specific
interactions with the cellular membrane, delivery occurs predominately
through micropinocytosis, and is thought to be associated with membrane
turnover. Nanoparticle size, shape, and
surface charge, as well as the presence of targeting ligands and protein
coronas, have been shown to influence association with cells and thus
impact internalization. Positively charged nanoparticles have been
commonly used to drive higher association and internalization efficiency
due to their stronger interactions with the negatively charged phospholipid
layer of the cell membrane. However, this positive charge can lead
to disruption of the cellular membrane and thus result in greater
toxicity as well as non-specific uptake in non-target cells. Shape has also been shown to impact the association
of nanoparticles to cells. In a seminal study in this area, Kolhar
et al. showed that rod-like polystyrene nanoparticles demonstrated
significantly enhanced attachment to cells both as non-modified particles
and with an antibody surface coating, as compared to a spherical control. Importantly, this was also observed under flow
conditions. Cellular association was also observed to increase when
the aspect ratio of PEG coated worm-like micelles was increased, indicating
that shape was playing a role in these nanoparticle–cell interactions.
Interestingly, modifying the rigidity of the system had a minimal
effect on association. The superior association
of particles with a higher aspect ratio is thought to be due to the
greater probability of association to cells due to a maximized surface
area.
Imbuing nanoparticles with specific targeting capability
is another strategy that can be used to improve their cellular association
and internalization efficiency, while at the same time minimizing
off-target effects. The design of targeted nanoparticles involves
functionalizing the surface of the nanoparticle with ligands that
are designed to target specific receptors exclusive to or upregulated
on the cells of interest. There are four main categories of targeting
moieties that have been widely studied for polymeric nanoparticles:
1) small molecules; 2) peptides; 3) aptamers; and 4) antibodies and
their associated derivatives. The density of targeting moieties needs
to be carefully considered when designing targeted nanoparticles,
as there is a balance between minimizing non-specific effects while
enhancing the benefit of multiple targeting moieties acting in a coordinated
approach (defined as multi-valent interactions). This delicate balance
differs depending on the particle composition and target cell type.
Recent work observed enhanced uptake of worm-like polypeptide micelles
compared to their spherical counterparts, suggesting the benefits
of multi-valency on cell interactions. 
Conjugating small molecules to polymeric nanoparticles is
a simple
and low-cost option to increase accumulation of nanoparticles within
target cells. Folic acid (vitamin B9) is a commonly used moiety for
targeting cancer cells due to the upregulation of the folate receptor
alpha (FRα) on many cancers. In
one interesting study folic acid was conjugated onto an amphiphilic
star polymer that self-assembled into a micelle of approximately 15
nm in size. The folic acid conjugated systems showed significantly
higher association and uptake than the non-targeted controls, as well
as greater killing performance when loaded with a chemotherapeutic
doxorubicin (DOX) cargo. Monosaccharides
are another class of small molecules that have been investigated for
targeting applications, such as galactose, due to potential targeting
of the asialoglycoprotein (ASGP) receptors in the liver. Recent work
demonstrating galactoseamine-modified small interfering RNA (siRNA)
was approved for use in treatment by the FDA. 
Another approach to design nanoparticles with targeting capability
is via the conjugation of peptides. Peptides have similar advantages
to the use of small molecules as they are low-cost and simple to synthesize
but are associated with many more potential targets compared to small
molecules. The use of cell targeting peptides has been explored extensively
in the literature over the last couple of decades. Such materials
can be derived from natural receptor ligands or identified from synthetic
library screens. One of the most well studied examples is arginylglycylaspartic
acid (RGD) that is derived from a sequence in fibronectin that binds
cell membrane integrins. This moiety has garnered interest due to
the role of ανβ3 integrin
in tumor angiogenesis. Importantly, studies
have shown that the structure of the RGD motif is critical for successful
targeting and internalization. More recently,
researchers have started to investigate peptides such as V7, which
changes structure under lower pH and thus facilitates targeted internalization,
for example, in a pancreatic tumor environment. 
More sophisticated biological structures are also
becoming increasingly
important as targeting motifs. Like peptides, DNA and RNA chains can
fold into complex 3D structures and can mediate intracellular functions
and bind to specific targets. Synthetic oligonucleotides (15–100
bases long) that can fold into complex tertiary structures, known
as aptamers, can bind to specific biological targets with high affinity. These nucleotides are normally designed through
the evolution of ligands using exponential amplification (SELEX). For example, Fang et al. designed an aptamer
targeting the cancer membrane protein PTK7 that was coupled to glutathione
(GSH)-responsive micelles for the delivery of cytarabine, a chemotherapeutic
drug, to treat leukemia. The targeted
nanoparticles demonstrated increased cellular uptake and anti-tumor
efficacy compared to the free drug, without any apparent toxicity
to healthy organs.
Antibodies are another useful tool to target
specific cells, as
they are highly stable and demonstrate high targeting specificity.
However, the usefulness of antibodies is somewhat limited by their
large size, making the conjugation of antibodies to nanoparticles
a synthetic challenge. Therefore, research has focused on developing
smaller derivatives that maintain the high specificity of their larger
counterparts. These new technologies include single-chain variable
fragments (ScFv) and single-domain antibodies (sdAb), also referred
to as nanobodies. The use of these specific
technologies for nanoparticle targeting is less advanced than the
use of small molecules or peptides but is expected to gain momentum
in the coming years.

2.3.2.

## Endosomal Escape
Generally, polymeric
nanoparticles are internalized into cells via endocytosis, meaning
they become entrapped in endosomal/lysosomal compartments. These intracellular
compartments are not the site of action for the vast majority of their
encapsulated therapeutics. Thus, there is a need for nanoparticles
and/or their cargo to escape these compartments, a process termed
endosomal escape. As endosomes mature and ultimately fuse with lysosomes,
their pH decreases. The final pH of the endo/lysosome ranges from
4.5 to 5.5 depending on the cell type. Acidification occurs due to the proton pumps and channels that are
associated with the endosomal membrane. There are also enzymes present
within endo/lysosomal compartments that assist with processing foreign
materials. For example, cathepsins, a class of proteases, are predominately
located in these endosomal compartments. It has been shown that cathepsins
are also involved in the initiation and development of cancer, and
are highly upregulated in tumor and tumor associated cells. 
Nanoparticles internalized into cells
must typically escape the endosomal/lysosomal pathway in order to
deliver cargo to an active region within the cell. This is particularly
critical for sensitive therapeutic cargo such as peptides, proteins,
and nucleic acids, which are susceptible to degradation in the low
pH environment of the endo/lysosome. Entrapment in endosomes remains
a significant barrier to efficient cellular delivery, as how to achieve
efficient release from these compartments while minimizing toxicity
is poorly understood. Recent work has shown that even effective drug-delivery
vehicles demonstrate minimal endosomal escape. , For
example, a lipid nanoparticle study showed that ∼2% of encapsulated
siRNA escaped the endosome. One of the
reasons for this limited efficiency is the fact that the mechanisms
underpinning the endosomal escape of nanoparticles are unclear. , Four mechanisms have been proposed for endosome escape of nanoparticles:
1) endosomal membrane fusion; 2) endosomal membrane destabilization;
3) pH-responsive swelling; and 4) the proton sponge effect ( ). Membrane fusion involves nanoparticle materials, usually
lipids, fusing with the endosomal membrane, resulting in an inversion
of the lipid particle, thus releasing the cargo into the cytosol. The second mechanism is more common for polymeric
nanoparticles, and it involves the disassembly of the nanoparticle
based on a decrease in pH, which in turn destabilizes the endosomal
membrane through interactions with the free polymer. Studies have
shown that membrane destabilization could be optimized by tailoring
the fraction of lipophilic moieties, and
by tuning the disassembly pH of the nanoparticles. Recently, we quantified the endosomal escape efficiency
of pH-responsive nanoparticles via a split luciferase endosomal escape
quantification (SLEEQ) assay. This assay was far more sensitive and
accurate than either traditional small-molecule fluorescence-based
endosomal assays, or more recently developed assays such as the split
green fluorescence protein assay, fluorescence correlation spectroscopy,
and Nanoclick. , A number of nanoparticles were
investigated based on pH-responsive poly(2-diethylamino)ethyl methacrylate
(PDEAEMA) and poly(2-diisopropylamino)ethyl methacrylate (PDPAEMA),
with a complementary peptide (HiBiT) conjugated to the nanoparticle
via a disulfide linkage. Following endosomal escape, HiBiT combined
with its complementary protein Large BiT(LgBiT), expressed in the
cytosol, to produce bright luminescence, thus allowing a quantitative
measurement of endosomal escape ( A). In this work, we demonstrated that the
endosomal escape efficiencies varied with the disassembly pH of the
nanoparticles. B shows that a particular nanoparticle design comprising PDPAEMA
and PDEAEMA has far superior endosomal escape efficiency (∼10%)
compared to either another polymeric nanoparticle design (PDPAEMA
alone), other drug-delivery strategies (cell penetrating peptides),
and naked cargo without a drug-delivery vehicle (GFP). This underscores
the power of polymeric nanoparticles as endosomal escape vectors,
as well as how particle properties and chemical functionality affects
escape efficiency.
 The final two endosomal escape mechanisms are the
subject of growing
debate in recent years. The proton sponge
effect relies on the addition of a cationic component that buffers
the endogenous pH decrease in the endosomal compartment. This buffering
causes the cell to pump protons into the endosome until the increase
in osmotic pressure causes the endosome to rupture. This mechanism
is similar to the third mechanism, where nanoparticles that swell
in response to pH first buckle and then rupture the endosome as they
expand. There are, however, a number of studies that cast doubt on
the completeness of these mechanisms. For example, in a recent study
we developed a series of pH-swelling nanoparticles with different
ratios of PDEAEMA and PDPAEMA. These particles displayed up to 200%
swelling, a strong buffering capacity, and high cellular association.
No evidence of endosomal escape was found. Another interesting study, which utilized a protein pH biosensor,
revealed that there was no variation in the pH of endosomes when incubated
with polyethylene imine (PEI) relative to an untreated endosome. This
suggests that PEI has no effect on endosomal pH. The proton sponge
effect, however, dictates that PEI should buffer the endosome, thus
leading to an increase in pH relative to an untreated endosome. 
There is also evidence suggesting that
polymeric nanoparticles
can migrate through cellular barriers without internalization through
endocytosis. Such a nanoparticle represents a highly attractive drug-delivery
vehicle, given its ability to bypass endosomal escape, a limiting
factor in efficient intracellular drug delivery. In recent work, nanoparticles
based on an electrostatic complexation of a cationic guanidinium functionalized
poly(oxanorbornene) imide polymer (PONI-Guan) was shown to complex
with negatively charged protein cargo to form nanoparticles that could
deliver cargo directly into the cytosol. , Initial work employed e-tagged proteins to make the naive protein
negatively charged, and more recently a straight-forward approach
to direct cytosolic delivery was demonstrated based on the modification
of native lysines with citraconic anhydride (CA). A library of nanoparticles comprising six different proteins
was designed with a range of sizes and isoelectric points. Cytosolic
delivery was confirmed by the visualization of EGFP in the cytosol
and nucleus after 40 s, suggesting a membrane fusion type process
for cell internalization. This conclusion was supported by the limited
impact of a range of cellular inhibitors on internalization, as well
as a decrease in internalization when cells were pre-treated with
a cholesterol sequestration agent. One challenge with this approach
is limiting the delivery of cargo to target cells alone, as these
interactions are non-specific; however, designing a releasable surface
represents a plausible solution. This PONI-Guan polymer was also used
more recently to design complex nanoparticles based on PONI-Guan and
nucleic acid cargos, siRNA, and pDNA. , Importantly,
colocalization with endosomal/lysosomal compartments was not observed
in these systems. However, it cannot be ruled out that some of the
nanoparticles localized within these compartments, but endosomal escape
was too rapid to visualize effectively. Regardless, these systems
provide an interesting direction for further work. Other groups have
also used guanidium functionalized polymers to show effective cytosolic
delivery of biological cargo.

2.3.3.

## Delivery to Sub-cellular Locations
There are a number of biological therapeutics that require delivery
to specific sub-cellular locations to achieve therapeutic efficacy.
For example, while RNA target sites are typically in the cytosol,
DNA needs to be delivered intact to the nucleus. Once DNA is delivered
into the nucleus, it is transcribed into mRNA for protein expression.
An advantage of delivering DNA instead of RNA is that a single DNA
template produces multiple copies of mRNA, leading to higher gene
expression. However, it remains very challenging to deliver cargo
to the nucleus. The ability to traffic cargo from the cytosol to the
nucleus is initially determined by the size of the cargo being delivered.
Transport through the double phospholipid bilayer is mediated by the
nuclear pore complex, which allows passive diffusion of materials
45 kDa or approximately 9 nm and below. Delivery of cargo that is above this size relies on an active transport
mechanism. Entry is governed by the nuclear pore complex, a group
of proteins that tightly control nuclear access. Thus, a number of
studies have demonstrated that transport through this system can be
achieved using nuclear localization sequences (NLSs), which comprise
a short peptide sequence 8–40 amino acids long. Most NLSs appear
to achieve delivery to the nucleus via recognition by cytoplasmic
importins that facilitate passing through the nuclear pore complex. In recent work, a polymersome was conjugated
to a NLS sequence, and the localization of this polymersome was compared
to a non-targeted control. It was observed
that significantly more of the NLS conjugated carrier was located
in the nucleus interior (45%), compared to the unmodified system (minimal
in nucleus, 77% observed in the cytosol). Rotello and co-workers also
used a series of NLS sequences to deliver eGFP. 
The mitochondria is another common site for both
nucleic acid and protein delivery. Many biochemical processes are
governed by the mitochondria, which play an important role in human
disease. Mitochondria possess their own genome and limited protein
synthesis machinery. There are a number of different biological conditions
present in the mitochondria that can be used to target release in
this region. They include a higher pH and oxidizing conditions due
to the reactive oxygen species (ROS) generated as a result of the
energy production that occurs there. Previous
work has shown materials can be localized in the mitochondria by modifying
the surface with mitochondrional targeting moieties, they typically
involve the combination of lipophilic properties to cross membranes
as well as positive charge to facilitate binding to the negatively
charged mitochondrial membrane , However, it is likely
that such functionality will lead to non-specific interactions with
other regions of the cell and thus have reduced specificity. Thus,
the development of more targeted sub-cellular localization will be
an important area of research in the future.

3.

## Polymers
Before reviewing the properties
and applications of polymeric nanoparticles,
it is necessary to touch on their constituents—polymers. What
distinguishes polymers from the building blocks associated with other
drug-delivery vectors, such as lipids and metals, is their versatility.
As well as specific size and shape control, this versatility is most
apparent in the incredibly diverse range of potential chemical functionality
that can be readily incorporated into their structure. This functionality,
among other polymer properties, is what imbues nanoparticles with
their tunability and stimuli-responsiveness, as well as their ability
to load therapeutic cargo, thus impacting delivery performance. The
literature generally categorizes these constituent polymers into natural
polymers, which are derived from natural products, and synthetic polymers,
which are produced from monomers. Generally, natural polymers are
non-toxic and biodegradable, but lack tunability, batch-to-batch consistency,
and diverse functionality associated with synthetic polymers. , Furthermore, as polymer synthesis methods develop over time, the
potential for even more sophisticated nanoparticle designs continues
to grow. Recently, the development of reversible deactivation radical
polymerization (RDRP) techniques such as atomic transfer radical polymerization
(ATRP), nitroxide-mediated polymerization (NMP), and reversible addition-fragmentation
chain transfer polymerization (RAFT) have imparted an unprecedented
degree of control over the design of synthetic polymers. The key to this control lies in a fast and reversible
activation/deactivation of propagating chains, which yields polymers
with a narrow polydispersity and a highly controllable molecular weight
(MW). Furthermore, these techniques allow for the controlled synthesis
of exceedingly complex polymer architectures, including di-block and
tri-block copolymers, brush, graft, comb and star polymers, bioinspired
materials containing biological components either synthetically or
naturally derived, as well as polymers conjugated to a wide variety
of functional groups. Highly controlled
polymers are also useful in the design of monodisperse and size-controlled
nanoparticle samples; however, these particle characteristics are
also strongly influenced by their formulation techniques, which are
discussed in . Such advances in polymer synthesis have opened the way to increasingly
diverse and functional nanoparticle design.
Below, we have classified
the various polymers employed in nanoparticle
formation according to type, beginning with predominantly non-responsive
polymers including, but not limited to poly(amino acids), polyesters,
vinyl polymers, and PEG derivatives, followed by stimuli-responsive
polymers, which constitute more sophisticated nanoparticle designs.
It is important to note that the number of different polymer designs
used in the preparation of polymeric nanoparticles is vast and continues
to grow as RDRP techniques gain prominence. An in-depth description
of every single relevant polymer is beyond the scope of this review;
however, we have chosen to highlight certain polymers within each
family that are widely explored or have distinct properties that are
important for successful drug delivery. These polymers are described
below, along with a depiction of their structure and a summary of
their strengths and weaknesses in regard to nanoparticle functionality.
For a more detailed discussion of relevant polymers, we refer the
reader to the following reviews. , − 
3.1.

## Poly(amino acids) and Proteins
Poly(amino
acids) (PAAs) are a class of polymers composed of repeating units
of amino acids, and are among the most important polymers employed
in the design of polymeric nanoparticles. Their significance is underscored
by the fact that PAAs permeate a significant fraction of the clinically
relevant polymeric nanoparticle designs at present. PAAs are versatile,
tunable, biocompatible, biodegradable, functionally diverse, and the
subjects of facile, well-studied and economically viable synthetic
procedures including solid-phase synthesis and ring-opening polymerization
(ROP). , Such attractive properties are derived from
their constituents, amino acids, which are organic molecules containing
both amino and carboxylic functional groups with a side chain moiety
unique to each amino acid. There are hundreds of naturally derived
amino acids, with 20 comprising the proteins found in the human body.
It is from this select group of 20 that PAAs are formed. Among the
myriad of different PAAs, poly(glutamic acid) (PGlu), poly(l-lysine) (PLL), and poly(aspartic acid) (PAsp) are some of the most
prevalent in the design of polymeric nanoparticles for drug delivery
( ). Such nanoparticles can also be derived from
many other PAAs, including, but by no means limited to, poly(histidine),
poly(alanine), poly(serine), poly(valine), poly(leucine), poly(arginine)
(PArg), which carries the guanidine moiety, and poly(cysteine), whose
thiol group makes it a common choice for redox-responsive applications.
Polymers that combine many different amino acids, rather than blocks
of one or two repeating amino acids, are known as polypeptides. As
well as the immense functional versatility already on offer from the
diverse set of amino acids that comprise PAAs, additional functionality
can be easily grafted to these polymers through esterification and
amidation reactions, further enhancing their drug-delivery potential. , 
 The hydrophobic characteristics of PAAs can be
finely tuned through
controlling the amino acid monomer composition and their relative
ratios. Specifically, the hydrophobicity
of PAAs can be adjusted through the combination of different ratios
of leucine, a relatively hydrophobic amino acid, and lysine and glutamic
acid, two relatively hydrophilic amino acids. PAAs also contain cationic or anionic side groups, allowing
them to load oppositely charged therapeutic cargoes through electrostatic
interactions, and self-assemble into nanoparticles. For instance,
PAAs with cationic amino acids, such as PLL and PArg, have been widely
applied in nucleic acid delivery. In
addition, PAAs built from anionic amino acids, including PGlu and
PAsp have been used in delivery of cationic therapeutic cargo, such
as cationic peptides, amine containing
drugs such as DOX, and platinum(II)-based
anti-cancer drugs like cisplatin. 
PAAs contain highly versatile functional groups such as hydroxyl,
carboxyl, amino, and thiol groups that can be readily modified for
appropriate loading and release of therapeutic cargo. , Thus, PAAs can be easily endowed with stimuli-responsive characteristics
to achieve controlled drug release, either by introducing naturally
occurring amino acid residues with innate stimuli-responsive characteristics,
or by introducing responsive linkages to their side chains. For example, PEG-b-PAsp was
functionalized with a pH-responsive hydrazone bond to conjugate epirubicin,
which then self-assembled to form micellar nanoparticles at physiological
pH. This pH-responsive micellar design, known as NC-6300, facilitates
the pH-triggered release of the drug in the low pH of the tumor microenvironment,
and is presently undergoing clinical trials for cancer therapy. Moreover,
PAAs can load drugs through electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions,
owing to pH-responsive ionizable groups such as carboxyl groups, imidazole
groups, primary amines, and tertiary amines that are derived from
amino acids such as glutamic acid, aspartic acid, histidine, and lysine.
It has been reported that charge conversion of these ionizable groups
at a low pH can result in nanoparticle disassembly, resulting in controlled
drug release at targeted therapeutic sites. In addition, redox-responsive PAAs have also been designed by incorporating
disulfide bonds as a linkage to conjugate drugs to their peptide backbones,
or as nanoparticle core cross-linkers, facilitating redox-responsive
drug release. , Cysteine is the most common
amino acid for introducing disulfide bonds, due to its reactive thiol
group. Thioether-containing PAAs, such
as poly(l-methionine), have been employed to design ROS-responsive
nanoparticles. , Thus, the advancement of PAAs
synthesis has led to more sophisticated nanoparticle designs for controlled
drug-delivery applications. , , 
In addition, the chirality of PAAs is another factor that
can affect
the physicochemical properties and biological activity of self-assembled
nanoparticles. However, for most polymeric
nanoparticle studies, the impact of chirality is not carefully considered,
with the majority of previous investigations focusing on PAAs with l-amino acids. , In a recent work, Ding et al.
studied the chirality effect on the anti-tumor efficacy of DOX-loaded
nanoparticles with a P(d,l-leucine) core compared
to those with a P(l-leucine) core but did not show a strong
correlation between the chirality and therapeutic efficacy of PAA-based
nanoparticles. It should be noted that
three-dimensional folding (α-helix, β-folding) significantly
influences the properties of PAA-based nanoparticles, similar to the
folding of proteins. Mochida et al. reported that the α-helix
structure of PGlu prolonged particle stability compared to nanoparticles
made from PEG-b-PGlu with a random conformation,
thus improving their plasma half-life and tumor-targeting efficiency. 
Whereas PAAs are polymers composed of
one or two different amino
acids, natural macromolecules formed from many different amino acids
can self-assemble into a three-dimensional structure known as proteins,
and have also generated interest in the design of polymeric nanoparticles
for drug delivery. Silk fibroin, collagen, and albumin are a few important
protein-based polymers used in drug delivery. As a protein-based biomaterial
derived from silkworms, silk fibroin has garnered increasing attention
for its exceptional biocompatibility, biodegradability, and versatile
mechanical properties. Its amino acids are organized into a repeating
sequence of glycine-alanine-glycine-alanine-glycine-serine (Gly-Ala-Gly-Ala-Gly-Ser),
and their self-assembly yields a crystalline anti-parallel β-sheet
configuration facilitated by hydrogen bonding interactions. These sequences subsequently form nanoparticles,
whereas the hydrophobic core is surrounded by a hydrophilic shell.
The active side chains of silk fibroin allow for additional modification,
such as serine, threonine, and tyrosine grafting, thereby enhancing
the drug-delivery capability or conferring additional advantageous
properties. Furthermore, the anionic
nature of silk fibroin offers the ability to load positively charged
cargo via electrostatic attraction. 
Collagen, an essential protein abundantly present in the extracellular
matrix of various tissues, has also been widely studied in relation
to drug delivery and wound healing. Like silk fibroin, collagen possesses
outstanding biocompatibility and biodegradability. These advantages,
coupled with the unique ability to interact with receptors on the
surface of cells, have made collagen an attractive candidate for incorporation
into drug-delivery vehicles. In the
preceding decade, substantial information has been discovered regarding
the intrinsic characteristics and targeted interactions of collagen
with its molecular counterparts. An array of review articles has summarized
the recent progress in harnessing collagen-based materials as drug-delivery
systems. , 
Albumin is another versatile
protein-based polymer, with advantageous
drug-delivery properties. Albumin can be extracted from a variety
of sources including human serum (human serum albumin), egg white
(ovalbumin), bovine serum (bovine serum albumin), and also from soyabeans,
milk and grains. Its inherent advantages, such as non-toxicity, non-immunogenicity,
biocompatibility, biodegradability, and water-solubility, have made
albumin an ideal candidate in nanoparticle formulations for drug-delivery
applications. , Its unique chemical structure,
conformation, and water solubility can help improve the delivery of
hydrophobic drugs, thus enhancing their pharmacokinetic properties.
In addition, albumin nanoparticles also possess active targeting potential
by interacting with specific receptors present at disease sites without
the need for further modification with external ligands. , Abraxane (albumin bound paclitaxel) is an important FDA approved
albumin-based nanoparticle that is used in the treatment of breast,
pancreatic, and non-small-cell lung cancers. Additionally, there are a number of recent clinical and preclinical
studies exploring the use of albumin nanoparticles in drug delivery,
which have been reviewed elsewhere. , 

3.2.

## Polysaccharides
Polysaccharides are
polymeric materials composed of carbohydrate molecules bound together
through glycosidic linkages ( ). Polysaccharides are derived from renewable sources,
such as plants, algae, and microorganisms, and blend remarkable biocompatibility
and biodegradability with an array of functional groups that can be
modulated for targeted drug delivery. Furthermore, polysaccharides
are highly tunable. Their molecular weight, architecture (branched
or linear), physicochemical properties, and electrostatic charge all
impact drug-delivery performance. Polysaccharides
also exhibit an intrinsic capacity for receptor recognition, particularly
targeting receptors that are overexpressed on the surfaces of pathological
tissues. The distinct binding interactions between these polysaccharides
and specific receptors offer an additional route in the design of
“smart” nanoparticles for drug delivery. Presently, the polysaccharides that have garnered
the most interest as the basis for polymeric nanoparticles are chitosan, hyaluronic acid (HA), and dextran, all of which are biodegradable
through enzymatic degradation. Cyclodextrins
are also a specific type of cyclic sugar molecule that is often incorporated
as a building block in nanoparticles due to its ability to load hydrophobic
cargo in its interior or to facilitate self-assembly. For example,
Li et al. loaded two hydrophobic drugs, DOX and celastrol, into a
pH-responsive, amine-functionalized cyclodextrin nanoparticle. The presence of amine-functionalized cyclodextrin
promoted self-assembly based on electrostatic and supramolecular interactions,
yielding nanoparticles with oral delivery capability. Furthermore,
the functionalized cyclodextrin was pH responsive, allowing the particles
to remain stable in the harsh acidic conditions of the stomach, while
disassembling to release their encapsulated hydrophobic drugs in the
more basic conditions of the intestine.
 
3.3.

## Glycopolymers
Glycopolymers are polymers
that have carbohydrate (saccharide) moieties as pendant groups and
have received significant attention as building blocks for drug delivery
( ). Glycopolymers have variable hydrophilicity
depending on the nature of their saccharide pendants, which yields
more complex behavior than PEG when used as a nanoparticle shell component.
The strong intermolecular hydrogen bonds formed between glycopolymer
chains can lead to cross-linking, aggregation, and the formation of
hydrogels, even when the polymers appear to be soluble in aqueous
solutions. , Glycopolymers are attractive
due to their capacity to bind to lectins, which is a useful feature
for targeted drug delivery. However,
given that glycopolymers are structurally similar to other natural
polymers, such bioactivity can prompt unwanted interactions and a
strong immune response, which can significantly reduce circulation
time in the blood. , Functionalizing glycopolymers
with certain saccharide moieties, such as mannose, fructose, and glucose,
promotes specific targeted drug delivery. Mannose-functionalized glycopolymers are able to target cells with
mannose receptors, including macrophages, dendritic cells, and endothelial
cells. Galactose-based glycopolymers
target asialoglycoprotein receptors (ASGPR) and galectin-3. , Glucose-based glycopolymers are employed as PEG alternatives and are suggested to target the glucose transporter
1 (GLUT-1). Fructose glycopolymers can
target the GLUT-5 transporter and can also improve cellular uptake
of drugs. , Additionally, glycopolymers
have also been used to target viruses and bacteria through nanostructure-based anti-viral coatings and anti-adhesion treatment,
respectively. 
 
3.4.

## Polyesters
Polyesters are polymers
composed of repeating ester moieties, and are some of the most attractive
and widely adopted components for designing polymeric nanoparticles
for drug delivery due to their versatility, biodegradability, and
biocompatibility. Among the myriad of different polyesters, four in
particular are pre-eminent: polylactide or poly(lactic acid) (PLA),
poly(glycolide) or poly(glycolic acid) (PGA), their copolymer poly(lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA), and poly(ε-caprolactone) (PCL)
( ). Specifically,
these polyesters are typically utilized as core components in micelles,
a kind of nanoparticle whereby the core and shell components are based
on one amphiphilic block copolymer. Micelles based on polyester cores
normally employ PEG as a shell, and already represent a number of
FDA-approved products. − Compared to PGA, PLA is slightly
more hydrophobic and resistant to hydrolytic degradation. Hence, their
combination, PLGA, is highly tunable in terms of its hydrophobicity
and degradation profile. PCL is highly
hydrophobic and resistant to endogenous degradation, and therefore
is often applied to manufacture devices for long-term release. The degradation rate of PCL can be increased
significantly through functionalization with oxalate linkages on the
backbone. PLGA and PCL polymers are
hard to modify, and functionalization generally requires advanced
organic synthesis techniques on small scales, which is not cost-effective. On the other hand, polyester synthesis via
polycondensation allows for the addition of a wide variety of functional
moieties. , Similar to PAAs, the importance
of polyesters such as PLGA and PCL as polymeric nanoparticle constituents
is evident by the fact that polyesters comprise a significant fraction
of the nanoparticle designs currently undergoing clinical trials,
as well as those with the most clinical potential.
 Poly(amino esters) (PAEs) are polyesters with amine
or amide moieties
on their backbones. These amines provide sites for functionalization , while the backbone amines themselves offer
the potential for pH-responsiveness. Almutairi and co-workers reported a synthesized random polymer containing
two pH-responsive functional groups: amino ester and ketal. The tertiary amine backbone underwent a hydrophobic-to-hydrophilic
switch in response to a decrease in pH, facilitating acid-catalyzed
hydrolysis of ketal groups. These polymeric materials showed excellent
stability in neutral conditions and rapid degradation in acidic conditions.
In contrast, PAEs bearing secondary amines can be quickly degraded
in neutral or basic conditions via intramolecular nucleophilic attack.
In acidic conditions, the polymer structure is maintained, making
such polymers attractive for release of nucleic acids within cytosolic
conditions. 
Another important
derivative of polyesters are aliphatic polycarbonates
(APCs). APCs have a lower degradation rate in aqueous media, less
crystallinity, and are easier to modify compared to polyesters. , APCs with controlled molecular weight and dispersity can be produced
by ROP, with the addition of alkene pendants a preferred method for
grafting functional groups via the thiol–ene click reaction.
For example, Wang et al. reported a polycarbonate nanoparticle that
was ultra-sensitive to pH due to the amine pendants introduced via
thiol–ene reactions, with the protonation of the amines inducing
nanoparticle disassembly. 

3.5.

## Phosphate-Based Polymers
Polyphosphoesters
(PPEs) are a class of polymers that are versatile and biodegradable
and hence provide a useful platform for the design of polymeric nanoparticles
for drug delivery ( ). , , The versatility of PPEs is due to the fact that they can be designed
as either hydrophilic or hydrophobic, depending on the functional
groups they bear. This allows them to act as both the hydrophobic
core or the hydrophilic shell of micelles and other core–shell
nanoparticle designs. , PPEs generally have faster degradation
profiles than PLGA or PCL under physiological conditions. 
 Poly(phosphonates) (PPNs) are similar to PPEs in
that they utilize
the O–P linkages, and have very strong backbone biodegradability
( ). With
short alkyl side chains attached to phosphorous atom, these PPNs are
water soluble with low cytotoxicity. Even high concentrations (1 mg/mL)
of PPNs show no cytotoxicity in HeLa cells. The length of these alkyl chains can be used to adjust the hydrophilicity
of the resultant polymers. , Simon et al. designed
Polystyrene-b-PPN nanoparticles, and were able to
tune the hydrophilicity of the PPN shell by adjusting the length and
ratio of the PPN alkyl chains. 

3.6.

## Vinyl Polymers
Vinyl polymers are
a class of synthetic polymers with a carbon-based polymer backbone,
derived from substituted vinyl monomers. Among the plethora of vinyl-based polymers, acrylates, methacrylates,
acrylamides, and methacrylamides have gained particular interest in
drug delivery ( ). A few commonly used vinyl polymers
include poly(N-(2-hydroxypropyl) methacrylamide)
(PHPMA), polystyrene (PS), poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA), poly(vinyl
alcohol) (PVA), poly(butyl methacrylate) (PBMA), poly(2-hydroxyethyl
methacrylate) (PHEMA), poly(hydroxyethyl acrylate) (PHEA), and poly(N,N-dimethylacrylamide) (PDMA). , Despite the non-biodegradable backbone, vinyl polymers stand out
as versatile synthetic polymers in therapeutic delivery owing to their
biocompatibility, non-toxicity, low-immunogenicity, and high stability.
For example, PS nanoparticles are typically used as model systems
to study how particle properties impact various aspects of drug-delivery
performance. Dawson and co-workers used PS nanoparticles to understand
the effect of nanoparticle size and surface charge on protein corona
composition. They found that even with similar material types, variability
in particle size and surface charge can impact the nature of the particle’s
corona composition, ultimately affecting biological interaction. In a recent study, the same group utilized
PS nanoparticles to investigate the arrangement of functional protein
motifs on the outer surface of the nanoparticle’s corona, providing
valuable insight into how nanoparticle corona proteins engage with
specific cell receptors. 
 RDRP has enabled the synthesis of well-defined
vinyl polymers with
highly controlled molecular weights and lower dispersity. For instance,
ATRP and RAFT polymerization techniques are commonly used in the polymerization
of a wide variety of vinyl monomers with various functional groups,
and facilitate the synthesis of more advanced and sophisticated vinyl
polymers with tunable molecular weights, chemical compositions (e.g.,
different types of copolymers), and architectures (e.g., linear, branched
polymers such as graft, star, and hyperbranched).
The existence
of numerous reactive functional groups, such as hydroxyl,
carboxyl, amine, and amide groups, along the vinyl polymer structure
enables the creation of copolymers with diverse physicochemical characteristics.
For instance, PHPMA-based copolymers are highly water soluble and
biocompatible, which leads to the design of efficient drug-delivery
vehicles, especially in cancer therapy. , In addition, the presence of distinct functional groups at the chain
ends or otherwise as pendant groups on the vinyl polymer backbone
allows for the attachment of therapeutics or targeting ligands, making
them highly versatile in the field of drug delivery. Similarly, vinyl
polymers have found extensive application in the design of stimuli-responsive
nanoparticles, owing to their ease of modification with a variety
of environmentally responsive functional groups, such as those responsive
to variations in pH, redox, temperature, or enzymes, and this is discussed
in . In addition, hydrophilic polymers derived from
vinyl monomers, such as poly(oligo(ethylene glycol) methyl ether methacrylate)
(POEGMA), poly(vinylpyrrolidone) (PVP), and poly(2-hydroxypropyl methacrylamide)
(PHPMA), have been employed as PEG alternatives to enhance the stealth
properties of polymeric nanoparticles to improve their in
vivo stability and blood circulation time while reducing
non-specific uptake by the immune system. , These vinyl polymers, which can be used as alternatives to PEG,
will be discussed in detail in . Thus, vinyl polymers are highly customizable
materials, making them versatile in controlled and targeted drug delivery.
RDRP techniques produce non-degradable polymers which can be a
challange for delivery applciations. Therefore, recently techniques
hve been developed to introduce degadability into the system. Radical
ring-opening polymerization (rROP) of cyclic ketene acetals (CKAs)
is the most common method to incorporate degradable ester linkages
into the vinyl polymer backbones. , Common CKA
monomers, which have been employed in nanoparticle synthesis and drug-delivery
applications, are summarized in . By using RDRP techniques such as RAFT
polymerization, good control over MW and polydispersity can be achieved;
however, copolymerization with CKA’s can, to a certain extent,
increase the dispersity of the resulting polymers. Polymerization-induced
self-assembly (PISA)—a nanoparticle formulation technique discussed
in —has
been more recently employed to polymerize CKAs in combination with
other polymerization techniques such as ROP to form a new method termed
“ROPISA”. It is important
to note that the final molar incorporation of CKAs is often limited,
and gradient copolymers are usually obtained. In a practical polymer
synthesis, a large excess of the CKA co-monomer is required. In addition,
the rate of degradation is largely affected by the nature of the comonomers—methacrylates
vs vinyl ethers, hydrophobic vs hydrophilic monomers—and, of
course, the content of CKA units. − Recent work has shown
some progress in higher levels of incorporation using alpha-lipoic
acid. Nevertheless, the ability to easily
impart polymer chain degradability offered by CKAs has made them an
attractive subject of research into more efficient drug-delivery designs. 
 
3.7.

## Polyethyleneimine
Polyethyleneimine
(PEI) is a highly versatile synthetic cationic polymer that is widely
studied for drug-delivery applications, particularly in regard to
gene delivery. PEI can be broadly categorized
into two distinct forms: linear PEI and branched PEI ( ). Linear PEI is typically
synthesized by initiating the cationic ROP of 2-oxazoline to form
POx, followed by transformation of POx into linear PEI through hydrolysis,
which is catalyzed under either acidic or basic conditions. However,
branched PEI can be directly synthesized through cationic ROP of aziridine
monomers. , The general chemical structure
of PEI is composed of repeating units of ethylenimine with a high
density of amino groups in the polymeric backbone. Branched PEI contains
primary, secondary, and tertiary amino groups in an approximate ratio
of 1:2:1, while linear PEI only contains primary and secondary amino
groups. Since approximately 20% of its amino groups are protonated
under physiological conditions, PEI can complex with negatively charged
macromolecules, such as nucleic acids and proteins, resulting in compact
nanoparticles, and hyperbranched/dendritic scaffolds or polyplexes
with an enhanced intracellular delivery capability. , − It has been reported that both architecture and molecular weight
strongly impact the intracellular delivery efficiency and cytotoxicity
of PEI-based nanoparticles. , PEI is also frequently
modified with other functionality, aiming to overcome the limitations
associated with unmodified PEI, such as higher cytotoxicity (associated
with molecular weight, and architecture), aggregation under high ionic
strength conditions, and opsonization. For example, polymers such
as PEG, chitosan, and dextran have been widely employed in PEI modification
to enhance biocompatibility and blood circulation time, resulting
in improved transfection efficiency. , 
 PEI is commonly used as a transfection agent for
nucleic acid delivery.
A significant number of studies have proposed that the higher transfection
efficiency of PEI-based nanoparticles is governed by their ability
to facilitate endosomal escape through the proton sponge effect, whose
mechanism remains a hotly debated topic. , For instance, using a pH dependent fluorescent lifetime imaging
microscopy technique, Johnston and co-workers demonstrated that PEI
did not impact the pH of endosomes as would be expected by the proton-sponge
effect. Owing to the presence of highly
functionalized amino groups, PEI has found applications beyond gene
delivery, including the delivery of anti-cancer drugs such as DOX,
PTX, and epirubicin. Moreover, PEI-based
nanoparticles have also been utilized in encapsulating various agents
for imaging and theranostic applications. Thus, PEI is a versatile synthetic polymer that has found extensive
use in a wide range of drug-delivery applications, and has been comprehensively
reviewed in a number of recent publications. , , 

3.8.

## Poly(ethylene glycol) and Alternatives
Poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG), also named poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO),
is a class of synthetic polymer whose primary advantage is strong
water solubility. PEG is also very stable and highly biocompatible.
It is generally regarded as safe by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
(FDA). For these reasons, PEG is sometimes referred to as a “gold
standard” for nanomedicines, and is a vital component for polymeric
nanoparticles. − In fact, a significant fraction of all polymeric nanoparticles utilize
PEG as a hydrophilic shell component. This is because the addition
of PEG (PEGylation) enhances nanoparticle performance by improving
stability, minimizing toxicity, prolonging retention during blood
circulation by avoiding the immune system, and heightening the EPR
effect. , , Such “stealth”
effects are often explained by the presence of a strong hydration
shell at the water–PEG interface due to hydrogen bonding. This
hydration shell acts as a steric barrier to reduce nonspecific protein
adhesion, which is the primary mechanism by which the immune system
recognizes foreign material. , It has become clear
that the density of PEGylation, the molecular weight of the PEG chains
as well as PEG architecture (brush or linear) can significantly affect
protein adsorption. − 
Well-defined linear PEG polymers,
such as methoxy-poly(ethylene glycol) (mPEG), are profoundly influential
in products already on the market. However, branched PEG analogues,
such as POEGMA and similar branched polymers prepared by ring-opening
metathesis (ROMP) polymerization, have been found to reduce recognition
by the immune system compared to linear PEG in regard to protein–polymer
conjugates − , antifouling surfaces, and nanoparticles functionalized with PEG-lipid surfactants . This suggests that engineering nanoparticles
with more complex PEG architectures may be a strategy to combat anti-PEG
immune reactions. , 
A variety of other hydrophilic
synthetic polymers have been investigated
for a variety of drug delivery applications, including poly(glycerol)
(PG), , POx, , PHPMA, and other poly(methacrylamides) such as poly(N,N-dimethyl acrylamide) (PDMA), poly(N-acryloyl morpholine) (PNAM), − and poly(acrylamide) (PAAm) ( A). Much of the
research into these hydrophilic polymers has been motivated by an
attempt to find alternatives to PEG, in order to offset accelerated
blood clearance (ABC). When probing the circulation and ABC effect
of these polymers, certain PEG alternatives, PHPMA, PDMA, PNAM, and
PVP, were shown to display a lower circulation half-life than PEG,
with a significantly higher resistance to ABC.
 Polysarcosine (PSar) is a hydrophilic, biodegradable
polymer that
is a promising candidate to replace PEG as a shell component in prospective
polymeric nanoparticle designs ( A). PSar is a polypeptoid—a kind
of pseudo-peptide that is a polymer composed of N-substituted amino
acids. Studies suggest that PSar is also more biocompatible and less
immunogenic than PEG. − Mao and Ling et al. found that gold nanoparticles
functionalized with PSar had a longer circulation time compared to
a PEGylated control, with both displaying similar levels of low toxicity. Saji et al. reported that PSar had an enhanced
tumor targeting performance compared to PEG, via the synthesis of
a conjugate consisting of PSar and a photoacoustic agent. 
Another major class of synthetic hydrophilic
polymers often used
as the shell of a polymeric nanoparticle are zwitterionic polymers. − These polymers, or polyzwitterions, have zwitterionic functional
groups, meaning that they contain both a negatively and positively
charged moiety. These polymers have displayed many of the benefits
bestowed on nanoparticles by PEG, but seemingly lack the rapid clearance
in the blood associated with PEG, and hence are a promising class
of PEG alternatives. In fact, polyzwitterions resemble the behavior
of PEG in almost every aspect, with high hydrophilicity, strong antifouling
performance, and low immunogenicity. − Carboxybetaine, sulfobetaine,
and phosphobetaine, which consist of both positively and negatively
charged moieties resulting in an overall neutral charge, are some
of the most common choices when synthesizing zwitterionic polymers.
For example, zwitterionic polymers, such as poly(carboxybetaine acrylamide)
(PCBAA), poly(carboxybetaine methacrylate) (PCBMA), poly(sulfobetaine
methacrylate) (PSBMA), and poly(methacryloyloxyethyl phosphorylcholine)
(PMPC), are commonly used in drug-delivery applications ( B). , 

3.9.

## Stimuli-responsive Polymers
The design
of effective polymeric nanoparticles for drug delivery relies on maximizing
therapeutic delivery while minimizing off-target effects. Polymeric
nanoparticles that respond to biologically relevant stimuli are one
of the most promising designs to achieve highly efficient drug delivery.
These kinds of nanoparticles rely on stimuli-responsive polymers or
cross-linkers as the basis for their elevated performance. The stimuli-responsive
capability of these polymers induces physical and/or chemical structural
changes within the polymer backbone, allowing spatial and temporal
control over the release of therapeutic payloads, thereby improving
the site-specific drug release ( ). Stimuli-responsive polymers rely on a
vast array of clever functionality to yield remarkable changes in
their behavior based on slightly altered environmental conditions
either external, or inherent within the body. In the last 20 years,
the advent of controlled polymerization methods has allowed for the
synthesis of more functionally sophisticated polymers. To yield nanoparticles
with stimuli-responsive properties, stimuli-responsive moieties can
be incorporated within the backbone, grafted to the polymer side chains,
attached to the end-caps, or, in the case of advanced nanoparticle
designs, a combination of all three.
 3.9.1.

## pH
pH is one of the most important
endogenous stimuli, and thus a significant number of polymeric nanoparticle
designs have sought to achieve improved drug-delivery performance
by utilizing it. These designs generally respond to changes in pH
by transforming their size, shape, or morphology in order to achieve
clearance of a particular biological barrier, or to deliver drugs
at a specific site. Strategies to introduce
pH responsiveness usually involve employing polymers that can alter
their hydrophilicity/hydrophobicity or cleave a particular linkage.
Many pH-responsive polymers alter their solubility through the
protonation/deprotonation of acidic or basic moieties at a given pH.
As a result, these polymers are generally referred to as charge shifting
polymers. The polymers with weakly basic groups contain amino groups,
such as tertiary amines like morpholine, pyrrolidine, imidazole, piperazine,
and pyridine moieties. Another example is the PAE bearing tertiary
amine backbone. These polymers can be protonated and become positively
charged when the pH is below their respective pKa. This results in the polymers transforming from hydrophobic
to hydrophilic, leading either to the disassembly of nanoparticles
when the charge shifting element forms the hydrophobic component of
a self-assembled system, or to the swelling of the nanoparticles when
a charge-shifting system is cross-linked. , Examples of well-known tertiary amine-containing monomers used in
the preparation of pH-responsive polymers include (2-dimethylamino)ethyl
methacrylate (DMAEMA), (2-diethylamino)ethyl methacrylate (DEAEMA),
and (2-diisopropylamino)ethyl methacrylate (DPAEMA) ( A). Using these charge shifting
polymers, the pH transition point can be precisely tuned either by
using a polymer with a single tertiary amine, , a combination of polymers with different tertiary amines, , , or the same tertiary-amine containing
polymer blended with other non-ionizable moieties at varying ratios. 
 In contrast, polymers that contain weakly acidic
groups such as
carboxylic acid or sulfonic acid can be ionized when the pH is above
their respective pKa ( B). The most commonly used
polymers with carboxylic functional groups are poly(methacrylic acid)
(PMAA), poly(acrylic acid), poly(propylacrylic acid) (PPAA), poly(butyl
acrylic acid) (PBAA), poly(4-vinyl benzoic acid) (PVBA), and PGA.
Boronic acid, phosphonic acid, and sulfonamide-functional groups containing
polymers are another class of anionic polymers that have been applied
in designing responsive polymeric nanocarriers for drug-delivery applications. , 
Another strategy to design pH-responsive materials involves
the
incorporation of pH cleavable linkers either as cross-linkers within
a polymer or nanoparticle structure, as a component of the backbone,
or as part of pendant groups linking cargo to the polymer backbone.
pH-responsive linkages normally work by rapid hydrolysis in an aqueous
biological environment. Such linkages
include: 1) ester derivatives such as acetals, N/O-aminals, , ortho-esters, borates, and β-thiopropionates; 2) C=N double bond derivatives such as hydrazones, oximes, and imines; 3) maleic amide derivatives including cis-aconityls and 2-propionic-3-methylmaleic anhydride (CDM); and 4)
trityl-based protecting groups or linkers ( ). , When choosing a pH
cleavable linker, it is important to consider the stability in physiological
conditions (pH 7.4) as many linkers will have partial cleavage even
at this pH. The rate of cleavage can often be tuned by modifying the
substituents on the linkers. Stability
needs to be investigated not only in vitro but also in vivo as biological molecules can impact the stability
of responsive linkages. The hydrazone
linkage is one of the most commonly used linkers in drug delivery.
It has been applied to a range of backbones to attach drugs such as
DOX. Thurecht and co-workers used this linkage to conjugate DOX to
hyperbranched nanoparticles, showing an 80% release at pH 5.0 compared
to less than 10% at pH 7.4. , Such linkages have
also been used to design releasable PEG coatings.
 Maleic acid derivatives including cis-aconityls
and 2-propionic-3-methylmaleic anhydride (CDM) are also important
pH cleavage linkages. 2,3-Dimethylmaleic amide has been extensively
used to induce charge reversal in materials by fragmentation to positively
charged amines from negatively charged carboxylate. , Interestingly, work has centered around this member of the maleic
acid family, possibly as the hydrolysis rate was shown to be faster
than those for other variants. Acid-responsive
linkages can also be used as protecting groups to release functional
groups at lower pH values, thus changing the solubility or function.
Frechet and co-workers demonstrated the use of acetal-modified dextran
particles to release a range of cargos via the hydrolysis of the acetal
groups that results in the polymer’s transition from hydrophobic
to hydrophilic, thus inducing particle disassembly and cargo release.
The disassembly rate could be tuned by the use of cyclic vs acyclic
acetals. , Many other functionalities can
be used as pendants to induce a change in particle properties to cause
disassembly or drug release. Tetrahydropyran esters are more prone
to hydrolysis than ordinary acetals and can be used as carboxylate
protecting groups that release carboxylic acid at a lower pH, a higher
temperature, or exposure to ultrasonication. , Vinyl ethers are also sensitive and degradable under acidic conditions. − pH-responsive linkages can also be incorporated into the backbone
of polymers to tune the properties of nanoparticles such as toxicity
or drug release. In one study ortho-esters were incorporated
into low-molecular weight PEI and demonstrated lower toxicity in a
number of cell lines, yet demonstrated higher transfection efficiency. 
Boronic acids bind to vicinal diols and
form a reversible boronate
complex that is more stable at higher pH values while less stable
at lower pH values, thus allowing pH-triggered association/dissociation
of nanoparticle components. For example, Kang and Liu et al. designed
“immunomodulating nanoparticles” with encapsulated bovine
serum albumin (BSA) modified with boronic acid functionality and IgG.
This core was coated with zwitterionic shell polymers which were linked
with dynamic pH-responsive boronate bonds between boronic acid and
the glucose pendants. In the tumor environment,
the shell dissociated and the boronic acid surface containing the
IgG was free to bind to the surface of tumor cells via the stronger
boronate recognition of the sialic acid overexpressed on the surface
of tumor cells. This led to a modification of the tumor surface with
the IgG, thus providing immune-activating signals at the tumor site.

3.9.2.

## Redox
Similar to pH, redox environment
is a stimulus that has been widely studied in the design of stimuli-responsive
nanoparticles for drug delivery. Specifically, endogenous redox environments
vary across different drug target sites, often involving either the
overproduction of ROS, which results in an oxidizing environment,
or the presence of excess glutathione (GSH), which results in a reducing
environment. Polymers that utilize this variation in redox environment
normally bring about nanoparticle morphological changes or bond cleavage,
yielding either clearance of a particular biological barrier or targeted
drug delivery.
The concentration of GSH varies in the range
of 2–100 μM in the blood, and 1–10 mM in the cytosol. Disulfide functionality is reducible through
cellular thiols like GSH and cysteine, and is widely employed as a
linker for drug–polymer conjugation and even as the backbone
of degradable polymers ( ). , When combined with self-immolative
chemistry, the disulfide linkage allows traceless release with GSH. It should be noted that if the disulfide bond
links two macromolecules, it is susceptible to ultrasonic (US) forces
to allow US-triggered release. Trisulfides
or polysulfides that a have higher number of continuous sulfur atoms
are also responsive to GSH reduction and release hydrogen sulfide
(H2S) that also regulates cancer cell growth. As a result,
polysulfide bonds can not only be utilized as a GSH-responsive linkage,
but also themselves can act as a drug moiety to release small-molecule
anti-cancer drug H2S. − These disulfide containing
polymers will be discussed in detail in .
 Polythioethers are polymers that contain sulfide/thioether
bonds
within either their backbone or as pendant groups. These bonds can
be oxidized through exposure to endogenous oxidants such as hydrogen
peroxide (H2O2). Oxidation results in the hydrophobic
sulfide bonds transitioning into hydrophilic sulfoxides, resulting
in the whole polymer’s solubility shifting. , The sulfide bonds can be incorporated into the backbone, for example
in poly(propylene sulfide), or as pendant
groups on various platforms such as polyacrylamides, polyphosphoesters, and certain
peptides (cysteine and methionine). These
polythioethers can act as reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavengers, , − and as moieties to enhance therapeutic delivery
by responsively altering nanoparticle solubility and morphology. , , Similarly, selenoethers have
similar oxidative potential, as they form water soluble selenoxides
when exposed to H2O2. This process, unlike sulfide-based
polymers, is reversible under physiological conditions. For instance,
selenoxide can be reduced back to selenoether under mild reducing
conditions or in the presence of endogenous reducing agents such as
vitamin C. , Tellurium has lower electronegativity
than selenium, making it even more sensitive to oxidants than selenide.
The oxidative properties of telluriumII-containing polymers
are less well studied, but still a promising method to design redox-responsive
nanoparticles, particularly for cancer therapy ( ). − 
In addition to a redox-induced solubility transition, a variety
of functional groups can be cleaved either by cellular H2O2 or other biological ROS. Boronates, specifically the phenylboronic acid pinacol ester moiety,
are well known for their ROS-responsiveness, while at the same time
being responsive to changes in pH. These boronate moieties can be
oxidized by cellular ROS such as H2O2 to form
borate esters. As an electron receptor, boronate also forms complexes
with amine-containing moieties, and hence can be employed to form
ROS-responsive drug–polymer conjugates, facilitating targeted
and highly efficient drug release. , Thioketal-based
polymers are also responsive to ROS and can be integrated with self-immolative
chemistry to allow the release of the drug without any remnants of
the parent conjugate—a process known as traceless release ( ). , 

3.9.3.

## Enzymes
Certain polymers can be
engineered to make use of intracellular enzymatic environments to
achieve precise and controlled drug release via moieties that can
cleave or degrade in the presence of certain enzymes ( ). Enzymatic responsiveness
is also a useful strategy to reduce toxicity by minimizing off-target
effects. − Enzymes can be used to cleave linkers, release
therapeutic cargo, or to unmask functional groups, yielding a change
in polymer properties such as solubility or electrostatic charge.
Membrane γ-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT) and aminopeptidase
N (APN) are two enzymes that are overexpressed in tumors, and hence
can be utilized to design enzyme-responsive polymeric nanoparticles
with targeted drug-delivery performance. Specifically, GGT and APN
catalyze the hydrolysis of glutamine containing polymers. , Another family of enzymes that are overexpressed in tumors are cathepsins,
toward which the tetra-peptide GFLG (Gly-Phe-Leu-Gly) is responsive.
Polymers that utilize this tetra-peptide have been used to form polymeric
nanoparticles that are responsive to cathepsin B. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are another enzyme family
associated with the growth and progression of cancer, which is overexpressed
in the tumor microenvironment. Polymers built from polypeptides such
as PLGLAG and GPLGIAGQ are responsive to MMPs, and hence can be used
as building blocks to design MMP-responsive polymeric nanoparticles. , 
 
3.9.4.

## Temperature
Polymers that respond
to temperature changes are some of the most well studied stimuli-responsive
polymers in the field of drug delivery, due to slight temperature
variations that exist across endogenous environments. These polymers
are known as thermoresponsive polymers. Thermoresponsive polymers
can be classified into two main groups: negative temperature-sensitive
systems, where polymers exhibit a hydrated state through hydrogen
bonds formed when temperatures fall below their lower critical state
temperature (LCST); and positive temperature-sensitive polymers, which
experience hydration above their upper critical state temperature
(UCST) and dehydration below this temperature. , , Integrating these polymers into
the composition of nanoparticles renders them responsive to temperature
fluctuations, leading to remarkable changes in their structure, and
ultimately facilitating the controlled release of their therapeutic
cargo.
Poly(N-isopropyl acrylamide) (PNIPAm)
is the most prominent temperature-responsive polymer. Its ability
to undergo reversible transitions in response to slight changes in
temperature has garnered it substantial attention as a building block
for temperature-responsive nanoparticles. This polymer exhibits a LCST behavior. Above 32 °C, water molecules
are pushed out of the polymeric network, inducing a contraction due
to the dehydration of the isopropyl groups. PNIPAm also displays another
important characteristic, whereby its LCST can be modulated through
the introduction of surfactants, salts, or by copolymerization with
a variety of hydrophilic/hydrophobic moieties. Incorporating hydrophilic
segments into the polymer chain can elevate the LCST, while copolymerization
with hydrophobic monomers can lower the LCST. 
Non-ionic ABA tri-block copolymers such as PEG-b-PPO-b-PEG and PEG-b-PLGA-b-PEG, known as poloxamers, are two other widely studied
thermoresponsive polymers that are often used to form temperature
sensitive cross-linked hydrophilic polymer nanoparticles, known as
hydrogels. Upon variations in temperature, these polymers cause the
hydrogel to undergo a sol-to-gel or gel-to-sol transition, yielding
stimuli-responsive drug release. 

3.9.5.

## Light
Polymers that respond to
light irradiation have long been the subject of extensive research,
due to the fact that light is a localized and controllable stimulus
that rarely requires additional reagents, thus limiting undesirable
by-products. Irradiation can result in either reversible or irreversible
changes to polymeric properties, which can include the cleavage of
conjugated therapeutic cargo or a hydrophobic–hydrophilic transition
of polymer segments. Polymeric nanoparticles composed of these polymers
can undergo a light-responsive morphological change to enhance the
efficiency of drug delivery. Photoresponsive polymers are composed
of functional groups that can include ortho-nitrobenzyl
esters, pyrenylmethyl esters, coumarinyl esters, and p-methoxyphenacyl esters ( ). 
 Most light-responsive polymers require UV irradiation
to trigger
certain changes in polymer properties. Utilizing polymers that employ
this higher energy irradiation presents safety challenges for the
biomedical industry, as UV light can damage healthy cells depending
on how it is applied, as well as having limited penetration through
tissue. This low penetration depth (∼10
mm) is mainly due to the strong UV–vis scattering properties
of soft tissue. Thus, recent research
has focused on developing polymers that are responsive to near-infrared
(NIR) light, as the longer wavelengths do not cause tissue damage
and have higher tissue penetration. In an important study, Yan et
al. modified an ortho-nitrophenyl functionalized
block copolymer with inorganic particles that were able to upconvert
external IR light (980 nm) to UV light, yielding photocleavage and
light-induced drug release in a micellular system. 

3.9.6.

## Self-Immolative Polymers
More recently,
polymers with prompt and on-demand degradability have been explored
as building blocks for polymeric nanoparticles. Self-immolative polymers
(SIPs) are a class of synthetic macromolecules with a unique depolymerization
mechanism in which one reaction, normally triggered by a specific
stimulus, spontaneously causes the whole polymer chain to disassemble
(immolate) through repeated bond cleavage. The immolation of these polymers can be tailored to occur in response
to a specific stimulus by cleavage of a responsive end-cap to start
the self-immolation process. Previous work has demonstrated the potential
of these materials to respond to pH, redox and light. , − The self-immolation of polymer chains is
step-wise, and analogous to the domino effect. Three classes of SIPs
have been studied as drug-delivery vehicles, including quinone methide
(QM)-based SIPs, poly(glyoxylates) including poly(ethyl glyoxylate)
(PEtG) and poly(glyoxylamide) (PGAm), and poly(disulfide)-based SIPs
( ).
 Quinone methide (QM)-based self-immolative linkages
are capable
of triggering disassembly of polymer chains from head to tail ( A). , These polymers comprise repeating QM-based units either within their
backbone or grafted to spacers, and can undergo a self-immolative
cascade reaction, such as cyclization and CO2 elimination. The synthesis of these polymers is not straightforward,
requiring a multi-step preparation of the monomers. Furthermore, their
water-solubility is relatively hard to tailor, and the QM byproducts
can also be toxic. Nevertheless, some
studies have utilized QM based polymers to design drug-delivery vectors
that self-immolate via redox, light, and UV stimuli. 
SIPs based on poly(glyoxylate) have been studied
in depth by Elizabeth
Gillies’ group, who first reported this new class of SIP ( B). This group
demonstrated poly(ethyl glyoxylate) (PEtG) could be functionalized
with a variety of end-caps that were responsive to stimuli including
pH, light, ROS, as well as GSH, and were able to undergo head-to-tail
depolymerization. , , These polymers can be used as building blocks to form nanoparticles
that undergo stimuli-responsive self-immolation, promising to enhance
the targeting potential and efficiency of drug delivery. Furthermore,
the byproducts of the immolated PEtG polymers are non-toxic glyoxylate
esters, which further degrade to alcohol and glyoxylic acid in endogenous
conditions. − Polyglyoxylamides (PGAms) are self-immolative
polymers whereby the pendant ethyl ester in PEtG is substituted with
an amine moiety ( B). PGAms also undergo end-to-end depolymerization, but the
added amine functionality can be used to tune the rate of depolymerization,
as well as other important polymer properties such as solubility.
PGAm can be combined with PEG to form self-assembled nanoparticles
that can undergo tunable disassembly in acidic conditions, potentially
through two mechanisms, i.e., depolymerization and solubilization
of polymers. Interestingly, recent work showed these systems had limited
endosomal escape compared to other charge-shifting nanoparticles suggesting
depolymerization might impact effective membrane interactions. The introduction of certain end-caps can also
introduce stimuli-responsive self-immolation to PGAms; some of the
stimuli include pH, temperature, and redox environment. , These nanoparticles showed potential for successful nucleic delivery,
which is possibly enhanced by the ability to release cargo as a result
of the polymer depolymerization. 
Poly(disulfides) are redox-responsive polymers that can undergo
rapid and complete self-immolation in biological reducing environments
such as the cytosol, which contains significant levels of GSH, an
endogenous reducing agent. Poly(lipoic acid) (PLp) and its derivatives
can depolymerize (self-immolate) via its backbone, where thiol-induced
chain scission takes place ( C). The polymers from
other cyclic disulfides like asparagusic acid derivatives can self-immolate
in a similar way. The polymerization
of 6-membered cyclic disulfide has not been reported; however, the
corresponding polymer was achieved via a different approach, i.e.,
through solid-state oxidative polymerization of dithiothreitol (DTT). The controlled polymerization method for lipoic
acid esters is thiolate-initiated anionic ROP or thiol-initiated ROP
of aggregated amphiphilic lipoic acid esters/amides in water at room
temperature, reported by research from Moore and Lu co-workers, respectively. , The thiolate-free polymerization of lipoic acid derivatives can
be triggered by various factors, including high temperature, − light, acid, and thiol initiators when the monomers are at a high concentration,
either achieved by aggregation of amphiphilic monomers in water or low-temperature-induced phase separation
(also termed cryopolymerization). Cell-penetrating
poly(disulfides) are based on lipoic acid or related molecules with
a 1,2-dithiolane structure (e.g., asparagus acid). They are of interest
as they have low cytotoxicity and can undergo complete degradability
after delivery. , − These poly(disulfides) have found use as components of polymeric
nanoparticles for drug delivery when coupled with other polymers,
as well as oligonucleotides, miRNA, small-molecule drugs like DOX, and proteins. 

4.

## Nanoparticle Preparation Methods
Polymeric
nanoparticles are colloidally stable nanometer structures
formed through the self-assembly of their component polymers. This
process can be achieved through a wide array of techniques, each suited
to the variable chemistry of the polymers, and yielding specific and
controllable nanoparticle properties. These properties include shape,
size, concentration, functionality, stability, and drug-loading efficiency.
The following section outlines the various nanoparticle preparation
methods and how they impact specific nanoparticle parameters, before
evaluating the general strengths and weaknesses of each technique,
which we have summarized in . and discuss more specific particle
design challenges concerning spherical nanoparticles and non-spherical
nanoparticles, respectively.
 4.1.

## Self-Assembly
The spontaneous ordering
of disparate polymer chains into a highly controlled suspension of
particles is known as self-assembly, and is by far the most common
process for creating polymeric nanoparticles. It is a complex balance
between the internal energy (enthalpy) of the system, which involves
covalent and supramolecular attractive and repulsive forces such as
electrostatic interactions, hydrogen bonding, and van der Waals forces,
and the entropy of the system. At first,
it appears that self-assembly is entropically disfavored, as the rotational,
translational, and vibrational degrees of freedom of the polymer chains
are massively reduced when confined in a nanoparticle. However, using the self-assembly of amphiphilic
polymers in an aqueous environment as an example, the water molecules
at the interface between the hydrophobic polymer and the bulk solution
are forced into a unique, well-ordered state. These water molecules
have significantly fewer degrees of freedom than the water molecules
that comprise the bulk, and represent a low-entropy system. Thus, the minimization of these surface interactions,
via the formation of nanoparticles, is an entropically favorable process.
This is a simplification of what is known as the hydrophobic effect.
The mechanisms that govern the entropy of nanoparticle self-assembly
are highly complex, and understanding them remains an active area
of research. The hydrophobic effect
is a dominating contribution to the spontaneous self-assembly of amphiphilic
polymers into nanoparticles. In 1995, Eisenberg et al. utilized the
concept of a packing parameter to predict how amphiphilic block copolymers
with varying block lengths would self-assemble into different nanoparticle
morphologies. In simple terms, the packing
parameter (p) can be defined by the following equation:
 Where l and v are effectively the hydrophobic block length and volume, respectively,
and a is the cross-sectional area of the hydrophilic
block. Generally, if p < 1/3, spherical micelles
are favored, if 1/3 ≤ p ≤ 1/2, cylindrical
particles are favored, and if p > 1/2, vesicles
(polymersomes)
are favored ( ). Increasingly diverse polymer architectures,
as well as the incorporation of functional chemistry, have allowed
for the development of more complex nanoparticle designs well beyond
amphiphilic block copolymer self-assembly. It is important to note that this packing parameter equation is
a simplified model, and the reality of polymer self-assembly is complex.
A polymer’s concentration, MW, and chemical functionality all
dictate the process of self-assembly, as does the temperature and
conductivity of the environment. The nature of the solvent itself,
as well as the presence of any other additives, also plays a large
role in self-assembly. 
 
4.2.

## Nanoprecipitation
Nanoprecipitation,
also known as solvent displacement or desolvation, is a simple and
commonly used method for preparing nanoparticles of different morphologies
and functionalities. Nanoprecipitation relies on pre-made polymers
self-assembling into nanoparticles. These polymers are dissolved in
a miscible organic solvent and slowly added into an aqueous environment.
Due to the fast displacement of the miscible organic solvent, the
polymers self-assemble immediately via the hydrophobic effect, forming
nanoparticles characterized by a well-defined size and narrow distribution
( ). Surfactants or amphiphilic copolymers can be
included in either the organic or aqueous phase to stabilize the nanoparticles.
Subsequent purification techniques such as dialysis are required to
completely remove miscible organic solvent and free polymer building
blocks, from the resulting nanoparticle dispersion. Nanoprecipitation
is one of the most widely used particle synthesis techniques, particularly
in the pharmaceutical industry, due to its speed, its simplicity,
and its capacity to form a wide variety of architectures including
core–shell nanoparticles and polymersomes. Challenges still remain, however, regarding particle stability
and loading drugs into nanoparticles at high efficiencies without
potential cargo leakage. The size, shape, surface charge, and dispersity
of particles created via nanoprecipitation are highly dependent on
a number of factors, including the nature of the organic solvent,
the amount of organic solvent relative to the aqueous phase, the ionic
strength and temperature of the environment, the nature and properties
of the polymers, the relative concentration of the polymers, the presence
of any other additives such as surfactants or drugs, and even the
way in which the two phases are mixed. Flash nanoprecipitation makes use of vortex mixing or high velocity
opposing jets to generate turbulent flow in a confined volume, yielding
diffusion rates faster than the growth rate of particles and locally
supersaturated areas of insoluble material. This results in the sudden
precipitation and formation of particles, hence the use of the word
“flash”. Flash nanoprecipitation generally results in
both superior reproducibility, and a greater degree of control over
particle size and distribution. This method also enhances the loading
efficiency of hydrophobic drugs, due to local supersaturation. A more recently developed variant of nanoprecipitation
involves mixing via molecular diffusion in a laminar flow environment.
This technique is known as microfluidic nanoprecipitation, and allows
for precise tailoring of nanoparticle properties such as size and
shape through controlling the flow rate. Microfluidic nanoprecipitation
also occurs at a small volume, which is advantageous for loading more
expensive drugs. 
 
4.3.

## Dialysis
Dialysis is a simple and
effective method to prepare polymer nanoparticles that, like nanoprecipitation,
relies on solvent displacement. Unlike nanoprecipitation, however,
where the solvent is displaced immediately, dialysis removes solvent
gradually. In general, the polymers are dissolved in an organic solvent
and added to a dialysis membrane with pore sizes appropriate to the
MW of the polymer. The membrane is then added to an aqueous solution
such that only the organic solvent is slowly removed from the membrane
via diffusion. This gradual transition to an aqueous environment causes
the polymers to self-assemble into nanoparticles. Dialysis is a robust technique and can also be used to
form pH-responsive nanoparticles by exploiting a slow change, not
in the solvent environment, but the pH environment, for example, slowly
increasing the pH of the environment from acidic to basic conditions
(e.g., moving from low to high pH). , 

4.4.

## Emulsion-Based Self-Assembly
An emulsion
is a blend of two or more immiscible liquids, where one liquid is
present in the mixture as tiny droplets dispersed continuously throughout
the other. The term “emulsion” encompasses a wide variety
of similar techniques that, taken together, represent the most common,
well-studied, and widely applicable method for forming nanoparticles.
In general, nanoparticles are formed via an oil-in-water (o/w) emulsion.
The polymer is dissolved in an organic solvent that constitutes the
oil phase, and is then added to an aqueous phase that can contain
a stabilizer. Shear force is applied via vigorous stirring, homogenization,
or sonication to form an emulsion of organic droplets dispersed in
the aqueous phase. As the organic solvent evaporates, the dissolved
polymers in the oil phase self-assemble to avoid the water molecules
in the aqueous phase ( ). This process is known as
solvent evaporation. Sometimes a partially miscible organic solvent
is used as the organic phase, rather than one that is immiscible.
Subsequent dilution of the aqueous phase induces the solvent to disperse
from the droplets, leaving behind only an aqueous nanoparticle dispersion.
This technique is known as solvent diffusion, and requires higher
volumes of water. Certain miscible solvents
such as acetone or ethanol can form an emulsion in water when the
aqueous phase (either a liquid or a gel) contains a salting out agent
and surfactant, which serves to stabilize the emulsion. Once the aqueous
phase is sufficiently diluted, the effect of the salting out agent
is minimized, allowing the dispersion of the solvent and formation
of nanoparticles. This technique is referred to as the salting-out
method. Emulsion techniques are most
widely used for the formation of micelles.
 
4.5.

## Emulsion Polymerization
Unlike emulsion-based
self-assembly, which requires preformed polymers, emulsion polymerization
involves the preparation of nanoparticles based on the polymerization
of monomers. In an o/w emulsion, a hydrophobic monomer forms emulsified
oil droplets, while stabilizers form micelles in the aqueous phase.
The monomer transports through the aqueous phase to the micelles and,
in the presence of an initiator, polymerizes within the micelles to
form a nanoparticle ( ). Drug-delivery nanoparticles
can be prepared by conventional emulsion polymerization, as well as
more exotic forms of the technique. Pickering emulsions, for example,
yield nanoparticles with generally superior stability and low toxicity
by using inorganic particles as stabilizers. Interfacial polymerization is used to create drug-containing nanocapsules
through the polymerization of monomers only on the interface between
the monomer droplets and the aqueous phase. Emulsion polymerization is a highly industrially applicable technique,
as it is able to be scaled up easily due to the fact that it is a
very well understood technique, and the underlying infrastructure
already exists. Furthermore, emulsion polymerization yields highly
consistent nanoparticle properties in comparison to other techniques,
particularly in regard to batch-to-batch reproducibility, as well
as highly controlled particle size and dispersity. Emulsion polymerization,
however, generally does not yield highly sophisticated polymeric nanoparticle
designs. The necessary reaction conditions limit, to a large extent,
both the incorporation of sensitive therapeutic cargo such as nucleic
acids, as well as highly functional chemical moieties and monomers.
 
4.6.

## Ion Gelation/Sol–Gel Method
Ionic gelation, also known as ionotropic gelation, is a simple and
cost-effective method to synthesize nanoparticles via electrostatic
cross-linking. Ionic gelation involves
the combination of a polyelectrolyte with either a suitable counter
ion or counterionic macromolecule in an aqueous medium. The electrostatic
attraction between the two polyions results in a highly cross-linked
polyelectrolyte complex (nanoparticle) and the formation of a nanoparticle
gel. The nanoparticles are then purified and isolated by centrifugation.
Ionic gelation is a common technique to form nanoparticles based on
biodegradable polymers. Chitosan, for example, exists as polycations
in an acidic aqueous environment, and will form spherical nanoparticles
when mixed with a solution of anionic phosphate polymers. Alginate, on the other hand, is an anionic
polymer due to its negatively charged carboxylate groups. Ionic gelation
is commonly used to form chitosan-alginate nanoparticles due to the
electrostatic attraction between the cationic chitosan and anionic
alginate. Such a nanoparticle assembled
from electrostatic interactions is known as a polyion complex. Dextran,
glycerol, and poly(lysine) are other polymers commonly employed to
form polyion complexes with chitosan via ionic gelation. Chitosan alone can be used to form polyion
nanoparticles via ionic gelation. Zue et al., for example, employed
ionic gelation to assemble an anionic chitosan polymer functionalized
with carboxymethyl groups, and a thiolated cationic chitosan polymer
to form a nanoparticle. This polyion
nanoparticle was used to load DOX, and underwent morphological changes
when exposed to a decrease in pH and a reducing environment. Polyion
complexes are also a common strategy to load biological cargo such
as nucleic acids through the electrostatic interaction between their
negatively charged backbone with positively charged polymers.

4.7.

## Polymerization-Induced Self-Assembly
Polymerization-induced self-assembly (PISA) combines both the synthesis
of polymers and their subsequent self-assembly into a simplified one-pot
strategy. This streamlined strategy yields significant cost and scalability
advantages over other two-step techniques, and allows for high polymer
concentrations of up to 50 wt %. PISA
is a form of dispersion polymerization, where solvophilic monomer
and a solvophilic precursor/stabilizer are mixed in a continuous phase
of either water or organic solvent. The polymerization of monomer
over time leads to the formation of a solvophobic block that induces
phase separation, and the self-assembly of nanoparticles ( ). As the degree
of polymerization increases, the solvophobic block occupies a larger
volume relative to the solvophilic block, resulting in a higher packing
parameter, p. This in turn leads to the formation
of spherical nanoparticles, followed by rods and other exotic morphologies
such as toroids and worms, and ultimately vesicles/polymersomes. PISA employs various controlled polymerization
techniques, but most often utilizes RAFT, due to its mild reaction
conditions and wide set of applicable monomers. In this context, a soluble macro-RAFT agent acts as the
precursor from which the solvophobic block grows. Though often termed
a dispersion polymerization, PISA does allow for the polymerization
of insoluble/immiscible monomers, usually through an emulsion polymerization-based
strategy. PISA of immiscible monomers
can also occur due to chemical modification of the monomers before
polymerization. Highly hydrophobic styrene, for example, was polymerized
into a polystyrene-PEG block copolymer in an aqueous environment through
a PISA strategy that utilized styrene-cyclodextrin host–guest
complexes. 
 
4.8.

## Spray Drying
Unlike other nanoparticle
formation methods, which rely on physicochemical changes to induce
nanoparticle formation, spray drying is a mechanical process that
converts a fluid into a fine powder through atomization. The fluid
in question is generally either an emulsion or a suspension of nanoparticles
in a liquid (most often water). This liquid is first atomized into
tiny droplets (spray). The droplets are then passed through a hot
gas (most often air) to evaporate the liquid and form dry particles,
which are then separated from the gas and collected ( ). Spray drying is an industrial technique commonly used in the cosmetics,
food and pharmaceutical industry, and produces particles on the micrometer
scale. Nano-spray drying, a relatively recent technique, allows for
the synthesis of sub-micron nanoparticles, which are most often favored
for drug-delivery applications. Such small nanoparticles (less than
200 nm) are achieved via enhancements to the atomization process,
which yields smaller nanometer droplets, and an electrostatic particle
collector. Generally, protein nanoparticles
and nanoparticles based on polymers such as alginate, cyclodextrin,
and chitosan are prepared via nano-spray drying. Spray drying and
nano-spray drying are almost always used in the preparation of nanoparticles
for oral delivery and respiratory delivery via inhalation.
 There are a number of advantages associated with
spray drying as
a nanoparticle formulation technique, including its scalability, its
speed, its batch-to-batch reproducibility, and its narrow particle
dispersity. Furthermore, spray drying
is a continuous process that generally avoids the freeze drying and
cooling steps associated with other pharmaceutical preparation methods. As previously alluded to, however, spray drying
is most commonly used for the synthesis of microparticles, not nanoparticles.
Spray drying also involves atomization and elevated temperatures,
which constitute harsh conditions for certain thermally sensitive
material. Moreover, on smaller laboratory scales, particle yield actually
decreases, as a greater fraction of particles relative to the total
feed volume is lost during the drying stage. Finally, spray drying is generally not suited to the synthesis of
functionally sophisticated polymeric nanoparticle designs that involve
either active drug loading or stimuli-responsive behavior.

4.9.

## Templated Assembly
Another important
method to design polymeric nanoparticles is the use of templated assembly.
This technique involves the use of a template as the base, which can
then be coated with polymeric components ( ). The principal advantage of templated
assembly is that the size and shape of the template can be readily
tuned, and thus so can the properties of the nanoparticle. Templates
that are commonly employed include inorganic nanoparticles such as
silica or gold. Recently, however, more diverse models such as cells
have been used as templates in the design of polymeric nanoparticles. A well-known templated assembly method is layer-by-layer
(LbL) assembly. This method relies on the sequential addition of components
based on complementary interactions such as electrostatic attraction,
hydrogen bonding or highly efficient covalent reactions. One advantage
of LbL assembly is that, depending on the choice of template, polymeric
capsules can be prepared based on the use of degradable templates
such as pH-responsive calcium carbonate capsules, to name one example. In addition, the characteristics of a multi-layer
structure mean that the properties of the polymer coating, including
its charge, hydrophilicity and functionality, can be easily tuned.
Recently, a LbL capsule was designed incorporating fibrinogen that
could bind to platelets. These hybridized platelets remained dormant
in the blood until a vascular injury, where they bound to the fibrin
network causing contraction and subsequent rupture of the polymer
capsule, releasing the pro-clotting drug biotherapeutic factor VIII.
Templated assembly can also be achieved through the use of specific
molds with specific shapes and sizes. This feature is attractive as
it is one of the only straight-forward strategies to design non-spherical
particles in a reproducible manner. It can also facilitate straight-forward
fundamental studies on the impact of nanoparticle properties by designing
libraries of materials with a single property tuned, e.g., size or
shape. Particle replication in non-wetting templates (PRINT) is a
well-studied preparation technique in this regard and is discussed in more detail in .
 Recent work has demonstrated techniques to simplify
the coating
process using a one-step assembly strategy. One approach to synthesize
polymer coatings in one-step involves the polymerization of polydopamine
(PDA). PDA coatings have the advantage of being reactive to a range
of functional groups such as amines and thiols, thus allowing post
modification for drug loading or PEGylation. Another important one-step assembly approach was reported by Caruso
and co-workers in 2013: it involved the formation of polymer coatings
by the use of tannic acid, a ubiquitous natural phenol and Fe3+. Later work showed these films
could be tuned by using different metals or polyphenols and could be engineered to have stimuli-responsive
properties. 

4.10.

## Drug Loading and Release
The encapsulation
of drugs within nanoparticles is generally a far more advantageous
drug-delivery strategy than methods that involve passive accumulation
of a free drug. This is not only because nanoparticles can protect
drugs from degradation due to the variety of harsh endogenous environments
within the body, but also because nanoparticles, via sophisticated
functionality, have the potential to achieve targeted drug release
and hence yield higher drug performance while minimizing potentially
toxic off-target effects. Thus, when designing a polymeric nanoparticle
that aims to maximize its drug-delivery efficiency, it is important
to examine the strategies used to encapsulate drugs. There are generally
two strategies associated with nanoparticle drug loading: passive
loading, which can involve the hydrophobic effect or electrostatic
attraction, and active loading, which is based on covalent conjugation
( ).
 4.10.1.

## Passive Loading
Passive loading
involves entrapping drugs via physical interactions within the nanoparticle.
These physical interactions include the hydrophobic effect, which
is the tendency of hydrophobic substances to aggregate in an aqueous
environment, and is discussed in , or electrostatic interaction, whereby
oppositely charged drugs and nanoparticle components attract. The
efficiency with which drugs are loaded and subsequently released from
polymeric nanoparticles is determined by a variety of factors: the
inherent properties of the drug, the characteristics of the polymeric
matrix, the method by which the drug is incorporated into the nanoparticles,
and the physical attributes of resulting nanoparticles. These all
play critical roles in dictating the overall loading capacity and
release kinetics. Presently, small-molecule drugs are often loaded
into the core of nanoparticles through hydrophobic interactions, resulting
in an enhanced solubility and targeting capability, as well as reduced
biotoxicity. Consequently, the compatibility between polymers and
drugs is crucial for the stability and drug-delivery performance of
the resulting nanoparticles. Liu et al. selected Ellipticine as a
model drug and used a series of amphiphilic polymers with varying
degrees of compatibility with this drug to study their loading efficiency
and release profiles. Their results indicated that a drug’s
encapsulation efficiency into nanoparticles correlated with higher
levels of interaction between the polymer and the drug; however, the
release of the drug from the particle was slower. 
As well as interaction strength, the density/porosity
of the nanoparticle also impacts drug release behavior. Sant et al.
prepared a series of nanoparticles with varying Propafenone content
using the emulsion-solvent evaporation method. The pore size distribution
of these nanoparticles was measured using nitrogen adsorption porosimetry. In vitro release revealed that nanoparticles with denser
structures and smaller pores exhibited slower drug release rates. Additionally, for biodegradable polymer matrixes,
the drug release process is influenced by the degradation rate of
the polymer and the specific surface area of the nanoparticles. If
the degradation rate of the nanoparticle is slow, drug release primarily
occurs through concentration gradient diffusion as well as osmotic
pressure. Conversely, if the degradation
rate is fast, the drug may exhibit a burst release pattern. Furthermore,
a larger specific surface area can also enhance the diffusion rate
of small molecules into the environment. 
The rate of drug release in passively loaded systems is often
correlated
with a drug’s half-life (the amount of time the concentration
of a drug is reduced by half in the body), and this rate is highly
variable. For passively loaded systems, half-lives can range from
a few hours to days, depending on the size, steric hinderance and
chemical nature of the drug, its interaction with the polymeric nanoparticle,
and the wider environment. The hydrophobic
effect is the most common method to encapsulate drugs, and its efficiency
is determined by the compatibility between a nanoparticle’s
hydrophobic core and the hydrophobicity of the encapsulated drug.
Some of the predominant techniques involved in loading hydrophobic
drugs into nanoparticles include emulsion (particularly solvent evaporation),
nanoprecipitation, and dialysis. As
a well-established drug loading strategy, several comprehensive review
articles have systematically summarized the relevant studies and discussed
the progress of these techniques. − 
Electrostatic
interactions arise from the attraction between opposite
charges, and are generally a slightly more controllable and efficient
means to achieve drug loading. For macromolecular, charged biopharmaceuticals,
such as peptides, proteins, and nucleic acids, it is nearly impossible
to effectively load them into nanoparticles solely through hydrophobic
interactions. Instead, a more prudent delivery method involves neutralizing
surface charges through electrostatic interactions. The strength of
these interactions is generally higher than the hydrophobic effect,
yielding minimal leakage and higher loading efficiency. In contrast
to the hydrophobic effect, ionic interactions can encapsulate charged
therapeutics such as proteins, peptides, and nucleic acids at very
high efficiencies in polymeric nanoparticles. Polyion complexes (PICs),
which are formed either through the interaction between two oppositely
charged polyelectrolytes or through a single copolymer and an oppositely
charged therapeutic, have received significant attention due to their
ability to load charged therapeutics at high efficiencies. , Under ideal conditions, cargo and ionic block copolymers at equimolar
charged amounts should lead to the formation of well-defined PICs.
However, in practice, because the spatial distribution of surface
charges on biopharmaceuticals may not perfectly align with that of
the polymers, varying ratios are required to balance the overall charge
in different studies. Another significant
bottleneck in the practical application of PICs is their stability
under high ionic concentrations. Given that the ionic strength of
biological particles typically remains around 150 mM, enhancing the
stability of PICs is essential. This can be achieved by incorporating
hydrophobic groups, adding homopolymers
carrying a charge similar to the payload, or even through internal cross-linking within the PICs. It is important to mention that the ionic attraction
established between the copolymer and the associated charged cargo
is subject to a range of influencing factors, including pH environment,
the length of the charged segment within the copolymer, and the ionic
strength of the solution. Passively
loading drugs either through the hydrophobic effect or ionic interactions
is a process that can occur at the beginning of nanoparticle formation,
known as pre-loading, during nanoparticle formation, known as co-loading,
or after the nanoparticle has already been formed, referred to as
post-loading.
Passive loading is facile, one-pot, and cost-effective,
and hence
is by far the most common drug loading strategy for polymeric nanoparticles
either in late-stage clinical trials or on the market currently. The
downsides of passive loading are related to drug loading efficiency,
which can be reduced in passive systems mainly via drug leakage and
weaker hydrophobic or electrostatic effects. Typically, the drug loading
efficiency of passive system is only a few weight percent. There are a number of strategies to enhance
drug loading efficiency, which can include small alterations to the
loading process. In nanoprecipitation, for example, drug loading efficiency
is highly dependent on the mixing time, and the introduction of surfactant
coupled with highly tailored mixing can yield drug loading efficiencies
>49%. The creation of drug dimers,
whereby
two drugs are attached via a linkage, is another highly successful
strategy to increase drug loading efficiency. The dimerization of
drugs significantly enhances their aggregation properties while reducing
size-dependent leakage, and is particularly useful when loading hydrophobic
drugs into polymeric micelles. Conjugating two drugs together with
a stimuli-responsive linkage is a method that can enhance drug loading
efficiency, as well as therapeutic efficacy, to an even greater extent.

4.10.2.

## Active Loading and Controlled Release
Active loading involves the connection of a drug to the nanoparticle
through a covalent linkage. This can be achieved by the design of
a drug–polymer conjugate, the inclusion of a drug functional
linker, a drug template, or by postmodification using functionality
present within the system. , This kind of drug
loading is sometimes referred to as co-loading, and most often this
occurs through a cleavable covalent bond between a fragment of polymer
and the drug, which can range from a small organic compound to large
biomacromolecules such as proteins and nucleic acids. The principal
advantage of active loading, as opposed to passive loading, is high
drug loading efficiency. This efficiency is due to the strength of
the covalent attachment between the drug and the polymer, which minimizes
drug leakage, poor solubility, and undesirable aggregation. Moreover,
the number of possible chemical moieties that can make up a drug–polymer
conjugate is vast, and many of these moieties perform a functional
role in drug delivery, such as stimuli-responsiveness, which further
enhances therapeutic efficacy. For highly sensitive macromolecular
therapeutics such as peptides, proteins, and nucleic acids, covalent
conjugation to a polymeric nanoparticle is often the delivery mode
of choice, due both to high loading efficiency as well as the enhanced
cargo protection. It is important to note that the conjugated systems
that provide drug loading efficiencies of essentially 100% are not
universal, and require careful knowledge and selection of both the
drug and polymer. Unlike passive loading, active loading is generally
more complex, often requiring a multi-step synthetic process and drug
modification. These modified drug–polymer conjugates almost
always have a reduced therapeutic efficacy compared to the free drug. Conjugating a drug to a polymeric nanoparticle
via a cleavable linkage is a well-studied solution to this problem;
however, the reversibility inherent in such a system can result in
drug leakage or off-target release. Prodrugs
are another plausible solution to the loss of drug potency when conjugated
to a polymer. A prodrug is an inert material that, when undergoing
a metabolic or endogenous enzymatic reaction, releases the pharmacologically
active ingredient as a biproduct.
The choice of an appropriate
linker between therapeutic cargo and polymer is important to the overall
performance of the delivery system, and depends on the nature of both
the drug and polymer, as well as intended delivery site and biological
barriers that need to be navigated. The number of different linkers
is significant, and provides a selection of some of the most widely used chemistries.
Ester and amide linkages are commonly employed to form drug–polymer
conjugates, particularly for amino acid-based therapeutics, and are
cleavable through hydrolysis. Imine, hydrazone, and ketal/acetal moieties
provide pH-induced cleavage and drug delivery, while disulfide bonds
and coumarin esters respond to redox and light stimuli, respectively.
Michael addition and various “click” reactions are also
used to quickly and efficiently synthesize conjugates with robust
linkages. For drug delivery, it is useful to mask the biological activity
of cargo before reaching the targeted sites, and then release the
cargo without chemical attachments that could impede therapeutic activity.
Self-immolative linkages (SILs) or spacers that degrade spontaneously
in response to specific stimuli have been employed in a variety of
biological applications to provide this functionality. , While various cleavable spacers have been comprehensively reviewed
in , this
section will pivot its attention toward SILs.
 Two types of SILs are generally employed in drug-delivery
systems.
QM-based SILs require a benzyl alcohol or similar structure with a
protected electron-rich functional group like −OH, −NH2, and −SH at the para- and/or ortho- positions. The elimination of para and ortho substituents can happen at the same time,
leading to amplified release. , , A depicts
the elimination mechanism using the ROS-responsive phenylboronate
as an example. The cyclization-based SILs make use of the driving
force of intramolecular nucleophilic cyclization. The cyclization
kinetic is a combination of Baldwin’s rules (ring size, 5-membered
rings are preferred), the Thorpe–Ingold effect (substitutions),
and reactive rotameric effects (gem-substations). , , B depicts the release mechanism of a GSH-responsive
SIL with a disulfide bond. Even minor
structural and chemical variations can markedly influence the rate
of cargo release. For instance, Sengee et al. investigated the impact
of different linker types on cargo release, specifically comparing
mercaptoalkanol (MCA)-type linkers and aminoalkanethiol (AAT)-type
linkers. They observed that MCA-type
linkers were capable of releasing up to 90% of the encapsulated drug
within 2 h. However, due to the enhanced stability of AAT-type linkers,
the drug release within the same timeframe was significantly lower,
falling below 10%. The rate of fragmentation of the SILs also directly
affects the potency of the drug-delivery system. To illustrate this,
Caruso and co-workers compared two disulfide-based SILs and found
that the QM-based one displayed overwhelmingly more toxicity to cancer
cells compared to the cyclization-based one. 
 Many drugs have multiple functional groups that
can be used to
incorporate into polymeric building blocks. Studies have shown that
the drugs can be integrated as the backbone of polymers, which act
as both the drug-delivery vehicles and prodrugs ( ). The advantage of this strategy
is that such polymers have high drug loading capacity and generate
minimal waste after delivery. Complete degradation is required for
efficient delivery and maximal activity so that self-immolative chemistries
for traceless release and fast degradation are ideal for these systems. , − Cheng and co-workers reported a study on
a drug polymer, coined as chain-shattering polymeric therapeutics
(CSPTs), integrating amino or dihydroxy CSPT derivatives (9-aminocamptothecin
and SN-38) as the backbone with alternating stimuli-responsive SILs
( A). The
former, under UV light exposure for ten minutes, achieved a 59% release
of 10-hydroxycamptothecin, whereas the latter, in a 20mM DTT environment,
released the vast majority of SN-38 within 48 h. , Oupický and co-workers reported a study for cancer therapy
based on the combination of polyamine and miRNA. The polymer was made of N1,N11-bis(ethyl)norspermine (BenSpm) linked by
disulfide-based SIL, acting as both miRNA carrier before degradation
and polyamine prodrug that released the anti-cancer agent BenSpm in
the presence of GSH with complete degradability within 24 h ( B). Shi and Farokhzad
et al. used the thioketal SIL to link mitoxantrone (MTO) into a polymer
that was responsive to ROS ( C). Yang et al. incorporated
an antimicrobial cinnamaldehyde agent into a pH-responsive polymer
linked by acid-labile acetal and pH-responsive aminoethylpiperazine
moieties ( D). At a neutral pH of 7.4, only a limited release was observed.
However, in a more acidic environment with a pH of 5.5, there was
a significant release of the cinnamaldehyde agent, with approximately
40% being released after 60 h. 
 

5.

## Spherical Nanoparticles
“Polymeric
nanoparticle” is a broad term that roughly
describes a particle between 1 and 1000 nm composed mainly of polymers.
Under this umbrella term there are a number of different kinds of
polymeric nanoparticles with varying architectures, properties, advantages,
drawbacks, and applications. Polymeric nanoparticles that take the
shape of a sphere are the most widespread and well-studied design.
The following section introduces, categorizes, and describes the different
kinds of spherical nanoparticles, with a focus on structure, characteristics,
and sophisticated (state-of-the-art) designs ( ).
 5.1.

## Micelles
Micelles have shown great
potential as drug-delivery vehicles due to their simplicity, ability
to protect and solubilize hydrophobic drugs in their core, and capacity
to respond to physiological stimuli through the addition of functional
chemistry. Micelles are solid spherical nanoparticles formed through
the self-assembly of a single amphiphilic polymer in an aqueous environment.
The polymer is normally an AB diblock copolymer, where A and B represent
hydrophilic and hydrophobic blocks, respectively. However, tri-block copolymers such as poloxamers (PEG-b-PPG-b-PEG), as well as graft copolymers
can also be used to form micelles. The
hydrophobic block of the polymer comprises the core of the micelle,
while the hydrophilic block serves as a stabilizer, making up the
shell of the micelle ( ). Given that they are composed of a single amphiphilic polymer,
micelles are typically small, ranging from 5 to 100 nm in size, with
most falling between 20 and 60 nm. Micelles
are most frequently used to solubilize small hydrophobic drugs, as
their size, to a certain extent, limits the encapsulation of large
macromolecules. This small size, however,
yields a superior tissue penetrating ability compared to larger nanoparticle
designs, and is crucial to exploiting the EPR effect, whereby micelles
passively accumulate at tumor sites. Furthermore, of all the polymeric nanoparticle designs based on
self-assembly, micelles are the simplest, and hence most feasible
for large-scale manufacturing. Micelles
are most commonly synthesized via emulsion techniques including solvent
evaporation, but can also be formed through nanoprecipitation and
dialysis.
 The self-assembly of amphiphilic polymers into
micelles is spontaneous
and entropically favored, mainly due to the hydrophobic effect. This self-assembly occurs above what is known
as the critical micelle concentration (CMC). The CMC is the concentration
at which the water–air interface of the solution is completely
saturated with an amphiphilic polymer, which forces the remaining
polymer into the bulk aqueous solution, forming micelles. The CMC is the primary determinant of micelle
stability and in vivo circulation time, as a high
CMC implies disassembly when diluted in biological fluid. The CMC of polymeric micelles is often a thousand
times lower than traditional lipid-based micelles and surfactant systems.
This superior CMC is often attributed to a longer hydrophilic polymer
block, as opposed to a lipid/surfactant’s short hydrophilic
head. A viable strategy for further
decreasing the CMC is increasing the length of the hydrophobic block
to enhance hydrophobic interactions. This strategy, however, is a
balancing act, as increasing the hydrophobic block increases the size
of the particle, which may affect its delivery efficacy, and will
eventually result in morphological changes. Cross-linking is the most popular and effective technique to decrease
a micelle’s CMC while leaving certain important parameters
such as size, shape, and concentration unaffected. Covalent cross-linking between the polymers within either
the core or the shell of a micelle is most often employed to increase
stability, given the relative strength of the covalent bond. However
non-covalent cross-linking based on supramolecular interactions are
also widely used in the design of cross-linked micelles. Of these
interactions, hydrogen bonding and electrostatic interactions via
the incorporation of polyelectrolytes, are significant. It is important
to note that cross-linking does affect many important micelle properties,
and hence is a parameter that must be carefully considered. For example,
Stenzel and co-workers, showed that micelle cross-linking strongly
impacts both drug release efficiency and cellular uptake efficiency. 
PEG is frequently used as a micelle’s
hydrophilic block
due to its versatility, efficient bioavailability, strong antifouling
properties, and favorable FDA safety regulation. The molecular weight of the PEG shell is normally quite
low, <20 kDa, and plays a vital role in stability, toxicity, and
stealth properties of the resultant micelle. Other hydrophilic blocks include zwitterionic polymers , poly(oxazolines), and biodegradable polymers including dextran and chitosan, which
have hydrophilicity and stealth properties similar to PEG, but lack
any risk of accelerated blood clearance associated with PEG exposure. The two most widespread and well-studied hydrophobic
blocks are poly(amino acids), including derivatives of glutamic acid,
aspartic acid and lysine, and polyesters, including derivatives of
polylactides, poly(glycolic acid), and ε-caprolactone. These hydrophobic cores are favored due to
their low toxicity and biodegradability, their synthetic accessibility
via ring-opening polymerization, and their ability to load small hydrophobic
drugs.
Micelle drug loading most often occurs through passive
solubilization,
whereby a small hydrophobic drug is held within the hydrophobic core
of the micelle, surrounded by the hydrophilic shell. Encapsulated
drugs can impact the size of the micelle, and generally stabilize
the hydrophobic core and lower CMC. Though
initially attributed to the hydrophobic effect, drug loading in micelles
is in reality a complex system that can involve hydrogen bonding,
steric cross-linking, π–π stacking, and van der
Waals forces. Theoretical and computational
models have been employed to predict this complex interaction between
drug and micelle, including Hansen’s solubility parameter,
Flory–Huggins theory, and Quantitative structure-property relationships
(QSPRs). Hydrotropes, compounds that
enhance the solubility of hydrophobic compounds by factors >100,
have
also been employed to increase the drug loading efficiency of micelles
without significantly altering their structure. Passive loading of drugs into micelles is a powerful technique
given it is applicable to a wide variety of hydrophobic drugs regardless
of their exact chemical structure or functionality. However, such
systems typically have some non-specific release due to leakage from
the polymer structure. PEG-b-PAA and PEG-b-polyester micelles have shown significant potential as anti-cancer
therapeutics due to their ability to load large amounts of small drugs
such as DOX and paclitaxel and deliver them to tumor cells via the
EPR effect.
More active loading methods, whereby the drug is
conjugated to
the micelle, offer the ability to encapsulate hydrophilic and macromolecular
therapeutics and enhance the loading efficiency of hydrophobic drugs.
For example, Ashford and co-workers were able to load the extremely
insoluble anti-cancer hormone fulvestrant via conjugation with lysine
telodendrimers that comprised the micelle core. Such conjugation can also be used to enhance the targeting
efficiency of micelles as shown by Stenzel and co-workers, who conjugated
estrone, a targeting hormone for breast cancer, to the shell of PEG-b-Poly(tert-butyl methacrylate) micelles. Drug dimers, whereby two drugs are conjugated,
have been observed to significantly enhance the loading capability
of poorly soluble therapeutics. Wooley
and co-workers designed a disulfide linked dimeric PTX prodrug that
formed part of polycarbonate micelles. These micelles had a high surface charge for enhanced tumor penetration,
and redox responsiveness for stimuli-induced drug release.
Polymers
that respond to stimuli such as temperature, pH, light,
redox environment, and enzyme activity have also allowed for the design
of micelles with superior targeting and drug releasing efficiency.
Ramirez et al. designed a pH-responsive micelle based on a PDPAEMA
core that, at pH < 6.1, protonates and becomes charged, resulting
in the disassembly of the micelle. This
design was used to deliver a pain killing agonist to endosomes, whose
environment is acidic. Ji et al. designed a complex thermo/redox dual-responsive
micelle based on a single amphiphilic polymer comprising a targeting
folate ligand conjugated to a PEG shell block that was connected to
a temperature-responsive PEI-b-poly(acrylamide-co-acrylonitrile) core block via a redox active disulfide
linkage. The resultant micelle encapsulated
a near-IR photosensitizer, and upon IR irradiation (λ = 800
nm) was able to release DOX in a controlled fashion. The disulfide
bond, which is cleavable under reducing conditions, is a common motif
of redox-responsive drug-delivery vectors, and was employed by Cameron
Alexander’s group to design a redox cleavable PEG-b-PLGA micelle with anti-lung cancer performance ( A). 
 Degradable cross-linking is another method to imbue
micelles with
stimuli-responsiveness, increased stability, and biodegradability.
For example, Qu et al. designed a 50 nm micelle whose core was cross-linked
via carboxylic acid and disulfide functionality, resulting in pH and
redox-responsive behavior, respectively. The pH and reducing environment of the endosome resulted in micelle
disassembly and the rapid release of DOX. Ganguly et al. also designed
a cross-linked micelle based on pH-responsive chemistry, but utilized
iron-catechol supramolecular coordination bonds that were acid labile,
as opposed to acid cleavable linkers. This design also employed a tri-block copolymer composed of polydopamine,
PNIPAm, and a zwitterionic polymer component to form micelles that
underwent morphological changes at pH levels relevant to the endosome.
Temperature-responsive cross-linked micelles were designed by Chen
et al., who utilized the thermoresponsive behavior of PNIPAm ( B). This design employed supramolecular cross-linking
in the form of 2-ureido-4-[1H]pyrimidinone (UPy), which forms strong
self-complementary quadruple hydrogen bonds and is a common motif
in self-healing materials. Crucially,
this strong hydrogen bonding enhanced micelle stability, even at a
low cross-linker concentration, and allowed the nanoparticles to undergo
temperature-induced swelling/shrinking.
Generally, the polymeric
blocks that micelles are derived from,
such as poly(esters) and vinyl polymers, degrade very slowly due to
hydrolysis, and hence are poorly biodegradable. Thus, synthesising
micelles with biodegradable functional groups has the potential to
minimize toxicity and off-target effects. For example, phospho-esters
have been studied as moieties for micelle cores, due to the degradability
of the O–P bond under mild conditions. For example, Wooley
and co-workers utilized a PPE core with a variety of different shells
to create biodegradable micelles that were 6 times less toxic than
a commercial transfection agent. Researchers
have also utilized thiol-ester and cyclic ketene acetal moieties to
drastically increase the rate of hydrolytic degradation for traditionally
non-degradable micelle components, such as vinyl copolymers. − , , Self-immolative polymers have also been employed to design micelles,
which, under certain stimuli, can depolymerize completely. , , Such a design represents the
combination of stimuli-responsive drug release and reduced toxicity
through complete biodegradability.
Research has also focused
on employing nucleic acids to form part
of the amphiphilic block copolymers that create the micelle structure.
Such a design promises to reduce toxicity, enhance both DNA uptake
and biodegradability, and impart dual functionality, as DNA can act
as both the component and therapeutic cargo of a micelle. , Furthermore, various studies have suggested that DNA–polymer
conjugate micelles both enhance cellular uptake of DNA, , and minimize enzymatic (nuclease) degradation, possibly due to denser
DNA packing as part of a micellular shell. Initial work by Park and co-workers focused on DNA-b-PLGA micelles, and subsequently a range of core components have
been analyzed. , In 2015, Chad Mirkin’s
group designed DNA–polymer conjugates whereby the DNA was in
a brush-like architecture, as opposed to a linear form. These conjugates
assembled into micelles, and were observed to have superior in vitro uptake compared to linear DNA. Inspired by this DNA–polymer conjugate design, Tan
et al. replaced the polymer with the chemotherapeutic PTX, creating
a DNA–drug amphiphile, which self-assembled into micelles. The DNA and drug were connected by a redox-cleavable
disulfide moiety, yielding a nanoparticle that had high targeting
efficiency, resistance to DNA/drug degradation, and stimuli-responsive
drug release.
5.1.1.

## Core–Shell Nanoparticles
The fact that micelles are composed of a single polymer component,
often an amphiphilic block copolymer, allows for simple designs and
scalable synthesis, but limits, to a certain extent, their complexity
and functional power. Nanoparticles that comprise a distinct core
polymer and a distinct shell polymer generally yield a larger, more
stable and generally more sophisticated design ( ). These kinds of nanoparticles, which we have termed a “core–shell”
nanoparticle, are often referred to as “micelles”, “micellular”,
and “micelle-like” in the literature. Such nanoparticles
are typically formed through nanoprecipitation, or gradual environmental
changes that induce self-assembly, such as dialysis. They are in a
sense similar to micelles; however, they are generally larger, between
100 and 200 nm, able to incorporate a wider range of complex chemical
functionality as well as larger therapeutic macromolecules, and are
more stable to dilutions, with very low CMCs. Core–shell nanoparticles are almost always designed
with a sophisticated targeting and stimuli-responsive behavior, and
thus often display powerful drug-delivery efficiency compared to other
strategies.
 pH-responsive nanoparticles, for example, are a
well-studied drug-delivery
vehicle composed of charge shifting polymers such as PDMAEMA, PDEAEMA,
and PDPAEMA. These particles undergo pH-induced chemical, structural,
and morphological changes that enhance their targeting and delivery
capabilities. For example, pH-responsive
nanoparticles whose core is based on a blend of PDEAEMA and PDPAEMA
groups have shown the capacity to encapsulate hydrophilic peptides
via conjugation and escape endosomes with efficiencies as high as
10%, a noticeable improvement over both lipid nanoparticles and other
endosomal escape vectors such as cell penetrating peptides. Kermaniyan et al. utilized such pH-responsive
polymers to design a nanoparticle that can undergo swelling at pH
levels relevant to endosomal escape ( A). Crucially,
this nanoparticle could be synthesized via emulsion polymerization,
a technique that lends itself to low-cost, highly efficient, and easily
scalable nanoparticle production, and hence more applicable for widespread
commercial application. Seeking to design a biodegradable, efficient,
stimuli-responsive drug-delivery vector, Gillies and co-workers explored
the potential of nanoparticles formed from self-immolative polymers.
Their design employed the self-immolative PGAm moiety as a core component,
which, when combined with a pH-responsive PEG-based shell polymer,
yielded a nanoparticle that was able to release cargo via UV, redox,
or pH triggered immolation. , Core–shell
nanoparticles offer the ability to enhance drug-delivery efficiency
by conjugating a wide variety of biological macromolecules as therapeutic
agents or targeting motifs. Guo et al. illustrated the degree to which
these nanoparticles can be functionalized, by designing a redox- and
enzyme-responsive nanoparticles formed from the self-assembly of a
star-based ε-caprolactone-tricarballylic acid core loaded with
curcumin, and a PEG shell conjugated to both a cell penetrating peptide
and a tumor targeting peptide ( B). These
nanoparticles showed a superior tumor penetrating efficiency and resulted
in 80% in vivo tumor growth inhibition. Deloney et
al. investigated a dual temperature and GSH-responsive hollow core–shell
nanoparticle for dynamic peptide loading. The hollow nanoparticles were derived from PNIPAm and were cross-linked
by a disulfide-containing cystamine cross-linker that was redox-responsive.
Below the LCST of PNIPAm, the nanoparticle expanded in size to allow
the loading of a cationic peptide. However, while at body temperature,
the nanoparticle retracted, thus protecting the peptide. A loaded
immunosuppressant peptide was shown to suppress IL-6 production via
redox-responsive release. Gong et al. designed a nanoparticle that
underwent a morphological change from a sphere into a sheet. This shape change was induced by a decrease
in pH, and was posited to enhance endosomal escape and drug-delivery
performance.
 

5.2.

## Polyion Complex
Polyion complexes
(PICs) are nanoparticles formed via the self-assembly of oppositely
charged polymers due to electrostatic interactions ( ). These polymers include
ionomers, which are polymers that contain both charged and neutral
units, or polyelectrolytes, which can carry repeating units of positive
charges (polycations), negative charges (polyanions), or a combination
of both, known as zwitterionic polymers. Many macromolecular therapeutics
are themselves polyelectrolytes, which makes them especially suited
to encapsulation within and complexation to PICs. Nucleic acids such as DNA and RNA are anionic due to phosphate
groups in their nucleotide backbones, and proteins are often charged
depending on their size, chemistry and the pH environment. PICs have
also shown the capacity to encapsulate and release a wide variety
of neutral hydrophobic drugs, albeit with greater difficulty. 
 The formation and colloidal stability of PICs is
dictated by electrostatic
interactions, specifically opposite charge attraction; however, van
der Waals forces, hydrogen bonding, and the hydrophobic effect also
contribute somewhat to PIC stability. As well as solvent molecules, there are also many more counterions
associated with the interface of the charged polymers, and their liberation
into solution during polymer precipitation provides a significant
entropic driving force for PIC formation. Given the additional electrostatic bonding, PICs generally lack
the need for chemical cross-linking; however, they are dynamic systems
that exist in equilibrium with free ions in solution and thus are
sensitive to the electronic composition of the environment. Dilution,
pH, salt content, and the addition of charges species can break this
equilibrium, leading to a loss of PIC stability. Of course, under certain circumstances, this loss of stability
due to the environment, if controllable, can be beneficial for targeted
drug delivery. PIC stability is strongly correlated with charge density,
which can be maximized by increasing the molecular weights of the
respective polyelectrolytes, adding a greater number of charge moieties
per polymer chain, or by using more exotic dendritic/branched/star
polymer architectures. These polymer
architectures have shown a greater RNA encapsulation efficiency than
their respective linear counterparts, likely due to greater density
of charged monomer units.
PICs can take on various morphologies
dictated by the relative
ratio, stoichiometry, and density of charged sections, as well as
the chemical and ionic nature of the environment. A 1:1 mixture of
oppositely charged polyelectrolytes will generally attract and precipitate
into structures, but too uneven a ratio of charged sections will result
in the excess polyelectrolyte totally enveloping its counter polyelectrolyte,
thus maintaining solubility. PIC micelles
involve the addition of two block copolymers, each containing either
a polycation or polyanion connected to a neutral hydrophilic block.
The self-assembly of the two polyions forms an electrostatic insoluble
core stabilized by a hydrophilic shell. One example of this is the
combination of polybases and polyacids to form the core of PIC micelles.
Pham et al. designed PIC micelles that were formed from the combination
of PEGylated block copolymers containing cationic PS-b-PDMAEMA and anionic PS-b-poly(styrene sulfonate). These PIC micelles were stable to significant
changes in the salt concentration of the environment due to the additional
π–π stacking interactions of the styrene groups.
Often, PIC micelles will involve the complexation of a PEG-polycation
with an anionic therapeutics such as DNA or RNA. These kinds of PICs
are called polyplexes. PEG is by far
the most common shell segment for PIC micelles, and cationic core
segments such as PEI, PLL, and various PAAs have been extensively
studied in tandem with anionic DNA/RNA. In 2021, Kataoka and co-workers
developed a cationic polyplex micelle with a PEG shell and a modified
PAsp core ( ). This PIC was able to encapsulate
two separate sets of RNA (mRNA and single guide RNA (sgRNA)) via electrostatic
interactions, and induced genome editing in mouse neurons via CRISPR/Cas9
technology. Amongst the various PIC core segments, PEI is the most
well studied and widely utilized cation, due to its strong complexation
with anionic nucleic acids, and its pH-responsive endosomal escape
capabilities. Gao et al. designed a
120 nm PIC composed of PEG-b-PLA-b-poly(histidine) conjugated to pH-responsive PEI via a redox cleavable
disulfide bond. This polyion nanoparticle
showed a successful multi-drug-delivery capability, as it was able
to both encapsulate DOX within its poly(histidine) core and complex
siRNA via electrostatic attraction with PEI. Seeking to design PIC
micelles that reduce the cytotoxic effects of cationic PEI, Jundi
et al. designed a PIC that incorporated double hydrophilic polymers;
that is, a polymer that contains two separate water-soluble blocks. These polymers were functionalized with carboxylic
acid groups and the non-toxic cationic polymer poly(lysine). The resultant
nanoparticle formed highly efficient complexes with hydrophobic drugs
and showed high siRNA loading efficiency >75%. Another method to reduce toxicity is to utilize biodegradable
functionality. Sirianni et al. designed a PIC that was based on self-immolative
PGAm rather than PEI, and was able to undergo endogenous pH-responsive
depolymerization. This biodegradable
PIC encapsulated plasmid DNA and provided similar gene expression
levels to PEI functionalized PICs, but was notably less toxic. Oupický
et al. reported a PIC consisting of anionic RNA and a cationic anti-cancer
prodrug, which was functionalized with disulfide moieties. The resultant redox-responsiveness of the PIC
allowed for strong in vitro and in vivo anti-tumor performance, due to the posited enhancement of endosomal
escape and drug release.
 
5.3.

## Polymersomes
Polymersomes are spherical
vesicles that comprise an aqueous core surrounded by a bilayer membrane
of amphiphilic polymers ( ). First proposed as a drug-delivery vehicle in the
mid 1990s, polymersomes were specifically designed to mimic the lipid
bilayer structure of liposomes, a highly successful delivery system. Unlike liposomes, however, the tunability of
the polymeric membrane confers polymersomes with size and shape control,
membrane thickness, stability, mechanical strength, and a wide variety
of stimuli-responsive functionality. , Polymersomes
are formed via the self-assembly of amphiphilic polymers into vesicles.
The common polymer architectures are AB, ABA, or occasionally ABC
di-/tri-block copolymers, where A and C represent hydrophilic blocks
and B represents the hydrophobic block. The polymers self-assemble such that the hydrophilic blocks face
inward to the aqueous core and outward to the aqueous phase, while
the hydrophobic block comprises the membrane surrounding the hydrophilic
core. In terms of the packing parameter model, polymersomes are formed
when p > 1/2, which in practice normally equates
to increasing the fraction of the hydrophobic block B, relative to
A and C. Cross-linking between the polymers
that comprise the membrane is a useful method to increase the stability
of polymersomes for transport through robust physiological conditions. This cross-linking is often achieved through
the incorporation of stimuli-responsive linkers, yielding a polymersome
that can undergo a morphological change across specific endogenous
environments, which is important for more efficient drug delivery.
Polymersomes contain an amphiphilic membrane, which allows them to
act as a delivery vector for both hydrophilic drugs such as enzymes,
peptides/proteins, and DNA/RNA, as well as poorly soluble hydrophobic
drugs, which can be encapsulated in the polymersome’s hydrophobic
shell. Film rehydration is the most common technique for synthesizing
polymersomes, as it is a facile technique that is relatively inexpensive
and solvent free. Emulsion techniques,
nanoprecipitation, and gradual dialysis are also used to form polymersomes,
while PISA has received more recent attention as polymersomes can
be formed in situ by tuning only the degree of polymerization. 
 PEG is generally favored as the hydrophilic block,
given its high
hydrophilicity, synthetic accessibility, and its in vivo “stealth properties” that allow the polymersome to
avoid opsonization. Other hydrophilic blocks such as POx and charged
PAAs have shown potential as PEG replacements. The important functionality
of most polymersome designs comes in the form of its hydrophobic block,
and biodegradable PAAs and polyesters have received the most attention
as hydrophobic sections. Non-biodegradable polymers such as poly(butadiene)
(PB), poly(ethyl ethylene) (PEE), PS, and poly(dimethyl siloxane)
(PDMS) have also been employed to enhance polymersome mechanical strength
and stability relative to liposomes. While most polymersomes are composed of amphiphilic di-/tri-block
copolymers, more complex polymer designs have been recently investigated,
including star brush and graft architecture. For example, Stayton
and co-workers used RAFT polymerization to design a polymersome formed
from the self-assembly of PEG-co-HEMA polymers grafted
with PDMAEMA and PHPMA. Their design encapsulated the antibiotic drug
ceftazidime, and displayed the capability to escape the endosome through
pH-responsive particle changes. 
Recent research has centered around developing polymersomes with
greater drug-delivery efficiency and minimal off-target effects. One
way to achieve this is to utilize natural differences in the intracellular
environment as stimuli for targeted delivery. Polymersomes have been
designed to respond to a broad range of such stimuli, including pH,
light, temperature, enzyme, and redox environment. Fenghua Meng and
co-workers developed a dual pH and redox-responsive polymersome utilizing
the charge shifting polymer PDEAEMA and thiol-functionalized poly(acrylic
acid). This PDEAEMA-disulfide multi-functional
polymersome design was utilized by Shae et al., who was able to encapsulate
highly sensitive cyclic dinucleotide cargo inside a polymersome that,
through stimuli-responsive endosomal escape, provided a platform for
enhanced cancer immunotherapy ( A). Wei et
al. utilized PDEAEMA and poly(methoxyethyl methacrylate) (PMEMA) to
form a PEG-b-PDEAEMA-stat-PMEMA
polymersome that responded to both pH and ultrasound stimulation. This polymersome showed superior in
vivo DOX release upon non-invasive sonication, compared to
un-sonicated polymersomes and free DOX. Zhong and co-workers developed
a multi-functional, highly cross-linked chimeric polymersome that
encapsulated RNA within the hydrophilic core. In their system, the polymersomes comprised a disulfide
functionalized PEG-b-polycarbonate-b-PEI tri-block copolymer conjugated to a tumor targeting peptide.
The rapid de-cross-linking of the polymersome in the presence of glutathione
facilitated the fast release of RNA in the cytoplasm. Deng et al.
synthesized a napthylboronate-based polymersome that responded to
endogenous ROS such as H2O2. The oxidation of these boronate moieties resulted in the
self-immolation of the polymer assembly and the polymersome membrane’s
switch from hydrophobic to hydrophilic facilitated drug release. Bruns
and co-workers developed a light-responsive polymersome functionalized
with donor–acceptor Stenhouse adducts. These photochromic compounds are hydrophobic in the dark
but become more polar upon irradiation of specific wavelengths (525,
630 nm) yielding a polymersome whose membrane permeability can be
efficiently controlled in the presence of light.
 The functionality of polymersomes can be even further
enhanced
by utilizing the high specificity of biomacromolecules through peptide–polymer
conjugates. Meng and co-workers developed a BBB penetrating polymersomes
formed from PEI and peptide-functionalized PEG, decorated with angiopep2
(ANG) and apolipoprotein E peptide (ApoE). These peptides mediated BBB transcytosis, and in the case of ApoE,
yielded polymersomes that crossed the BBB over twice as efficiently
as unconjugated polymersomes. Kataoka and co-workers utilized an MMP
cleavable peptide and guanidine to create a functionalized cancer
targeting PEG-b-PCL polymersome, containing the anti-tumor
drug, cochicine ( B). MMP, overexpressed in tumor
associated tissue, de-PEGylates the polymersome, inducing a conformational
change that exposes the guanidine moieties for improved cell targeting
and differentially releases colchicine.
Liu’s research
group, seeking to design stimuli-responsive
degradable polymersomes, focused on functionalizing their polymeric
vesicles with self-immolative moieties. They designed a polymersome
that is responsive to two different enzymes—penicillin G amidase
and β-lactamase (Bla)—produced by the bacteria S. aureus. These polymersomes
were strain selective, and able to achieve sustained release of antibiotics,
with minimized side-effects. Similarly, cytosolic enzyme responsiveness
was employed to design a self-immolative polymersome. In the cytosol, this polymersome underwent
an enzyme-induced morphological change into a micellular nanoparticle,
from where a variety of therapeutic cargo was effectively released.
Liu et al. synthesized another enzyme-responsive polymersome based
on the self-assembly of PDMA-b-PBC-b-PDMA tri-block copolymers functionalized with benzyl carbamate moieties. This design, however, was triply stimuli responsive,
and underwent self-immolation through both UV and visible light, as
well as enzymatic reductive milieu. The polymersomes were termed “self-immolative
polymersomes” (SIPsomes), and were able to release a variety
of cargo including DOX.

5.4.

## Nanogels
Nanogels are nanosized,
three dimensional networks of highly cross-linked hydrophilic polymers
that do not dissolve in water ( ). They have the capacity to swell through
the absorption of water, and thus combine the advantages of both nanoparticles
and hydrogels. Nanogels are typically soft, stable, and based on biodegradable
materials with a wide size range (20–200 nm) and a high biocompatibility
due to their hydrophilic chemistry as well as their water absorption
properties, which mirrors the structure and behavior of tissue. Nanogels are composed of hydrophilic polymers
that are highly cross-linked either through chemical covalent bonds
or through supramolecular interactions including electrostatic, host–guest,
and hydrophobic interactions, as well as hydrogen bonding. This cross-linking
allows them to resist destabilization due to dilution during blood
circulation. , RDRP has allowed for the synthesis
of covalently cross-linked nanogels with enhanced functionality and
structure. For example, Xin et al. utilized RAFT polymerization to
synthesize a photocleavable nanogel based on a nitrobenzyl acrylate
cross-linker and PEGMA. Importantly,
this RAFT method allowed for strong control over the size and dispersity
of the nanogels, and resulted in a drug loading efficiency that was
correlated with the size and dispersity of the nanogels. Furthermore,
nanogels also contain hydrophilic pendant groups, including alcohols,
carboxylic acids, and amides, which are particularly well suited to
grafting stimuli-responsive and pH-responsive moieties. Nanoprecipitation,
aqueous self-assembly, cross-linking, as well as various emulsion
techniques are commonly used for the formation of nanogels. Unfortunately,
the difficulties in scaling up production, as well as imperfect batch
reproducibility limits the applicability of nanogels as drug-delivery
vehicles relative to micelles. Nanogels
formed through supramolecular interactions typically involve the self-assembly
of micelles followed by non-covalent cross-linking. Such nanogels
can be formed in mild conditions, but are generally weaker than their
covalently cross-linked counterparts. 
 Nanogel drug loading is typically a passive mechanism,
with the
drug either transporting into the polymer matrix via osmotic pressure,
or becoming encased by the nanogel during self-assembly. Drugs can
also be conjugated to the nanogel covalently through drug–polymer
conjugates. Nanogels, due to their water solubility and swellability,
are able to more efficiently load hydrophilic drugs as opposed to
standard micelle configurations; indeed, they are particularly appealing
as delivery vectors for hydrophilic macromolecules such as DNA and
RNA, which can be loaded at levels >50%. , RNA cross-linking and DNA/enzyme incorporation into the nanogel
are motifs that have gained significant attention in recent years.
For example, Ding et al. designed a nanogel that was formed from DNA-g-PCL micelles cross-linked with siRNA linkers and coated
with a thin layer of PEGylated polydopamine, a photothermal moiety. This 90nm nanogel was able to both protect
and deliver siRNA, as well as display endosomal escape and apoptosis
inducing capability via a low-temperature photothermal mechanism.
De Backer et al. used mini emulsion polymerization to synthesize a
siRNA-loaded dextran nanogel cross-linked with the cationic trimethyl
ammonium moieties, and stabilized with a commercial pulmonary surfactant. This pulmonary surfactant imbued the nanogel
with the ability to target human lung cells, and resulted in greater
RNA delivery efficacy relative to uncoated nanogels by a factor of
five. Further studies revealed these nanogels could be delivered via
aspiration into the lungs as opposed to injection while maintaining
their siRNA delivery capability. 
As well as nucleic acids, hydrogels have gained attention as a
therapeutic protein delivery vehicle due to their hydrophilicity,
porosity and biocompatibility. For example,
Zhiyuan Zhong’s research group have investigated hyaluronic
acid-based nanogels for protein encapsulation and stimuli-responsive
delivery. In one design, they designed a nanogel based on hyaluronic
acid and functionalized with cysteine, a redox-responsive moiety,
and the pH-responsive, endosome-disrupting peptide GALA. These ∼80 nm stimuli-responsive nanogels
were formed through catalyst free, tetrazole-alkene click cross-linking,
and display an endosomal escape capability as well as the ability
to load a range of proteins including cyctochrome C, herceptin, immunoglobin
G, and bovine serum albumin. Another study employed a similar HA nanogel
to load saporin, a clinically active anti-cancer protein. The nanogel displayed strong cellular uptake
due to the conjugation of the GE11 peptide (a targeting ligand) and
demonstrated tumor inhibition activity in mice.
Though less
well studied, nanogels have also shown significant
potential as hydrophobic drug-delivery vehicles. For example, Song
et al. designed a nanogel formed from the combination of two different
chitosan derivatives cross-linked with hydroxypropyl-β-cyclodextrin
that was able to encapsulate two poorly soluble drugs: a chemotherapeutic
agent PTX and an immunotherapeutic agent (IL-2). Qian et al. designed a nanogel that efficiently loaded
the hydrophobic drug PTX (TAX) via drug–polymer conjugation
with poly(acrylic acid), and cross-linking with cyclodextrin ( ). The inclusion of poly(acrylic acid), a mucoadhesive
polymer, yielded a nanogel with strong targeting and anti-tumor performance
in a cervical cancer model.
 Stimuli-responsiveness is a highly desired trait
to increase the
therapeutic efficiency of nanogels. This responsiveness expresses
itself through the swelling or deswelling of the nanogel due to external
environmental changes, including but not limited to variations in
pH, temperature, and redox environment. Tian et al. designed a 200
nm redox-responsive nanogel composed of PEG, diglycidyl ether and
hyaluronic acid (HA) cross-linked via disulfide bonds. This nanogel showed promise as an anti-cancer
delivery system as tumor cells overexpress both HA receptors and GSH,
triggering the preferential release of DOX. Qu et al. designed a redox-responsive
hydrogel that conjugated camptothecin (CPT), an extremely insoluble
anti-tumor drug, to an acrylamide cross-linked methacrylic acid hydrogel
via a disulfide linkage. This nanogel
combined both redox- and pH-responsive behaviors through the disulfide
and methacrylic acid moieties, and showed significant in vivo anti-tumor activity with little side effects. Ju et al. synthesized
a pH-responsive DOX-loaded nanogel based on N-lysinal-N′-succinyl chitosan that was able to swell from
200 nm at neutral conditions, to over 2 μm at a low pH (∼4.5). This swelling was reversible, and served not
only to enhance the endosomal escape capabilities of the nanogel but
also to allow for repeated DOX delivery to different tumor cells.
The theorized mechanism for this cycling behavior involved: (1) nanogel
endocytosis and swelling in the endosome; (2) nanogel release into
the cytosol and subsequent contraction due to the neutral cytosolic
pH; (3) nanogel exocytosis/escape from the dead tumor cell; and (4)
endocytosis of the nanogel into a new tumor cell, resulting in the
release of the remaining encapsulated DOX. This is a particularly
interesting nanoparticle design as it offers the potential to treat
multiple cells with the one nanoparticle and thus increase efficiency.
In 2021, Zhang et al. designed a thermoresponsive nanogel whereby
the protein BSA was covalently conjugated to the particle via self-immolative
carbamate linkages. RAFT was employed
to synthesize a copolymer containing PEG, and carbamate functionalized,
disulfide containing polymeric component, which formed a nanogel.
The nanogel was able to achieve traceless release of BSA in the presence
of GSH, which mirrors the reducing conditions of the endosome.

5.5.

## Star and Hyperbranched Polymers
Star
polymers and hyperbranched polymers (HBPs) are examples of polymeric
systems composed of many “arms” that form a matrix,
either by growth from a central core, in the case of stars, or by
random irregular ordering in the case of hyperbranched materials.
At higher molecular weights, these polymer systems form globular,
spherical, or quasi-spherical three-dimensional structures potentially
dozens of nanometers in diameter. , Though not
always referred to in the literature as such, stars and hyperbranched
polymers are, in the authors’ view, a kind of polymeric nanoparticle.
As opposed to micelles and vesicles, these kinds of polymeric nanoparticles
are sometimes described as unimolecular containers, since they do
not rely on self-assembly and hence benefit from robust stability
due to their covalent reinforced structure. Furthermore, unlike self-assembly systems, stars and HBPs do not
require multi-step fabrication methods, and can instead be synthesized
via a one-step approach. Ring-opening and ring-opening metathesis
polymerization (ROP/ROMP), as well as the development of RDRP methods
such as ATRP and RAFT polymerization, has allowed for the creation
of highly controlled and structurally sophisticated polymers, greatly
enhancing the power and potential of star and HBPs. , Stars and HBPs have displayed an efficient drug-delivery capability
as unimolecular vectors alone, but they have also been used as building
blocks to design a wide variety of functional micelles, core shell
particles and vesicles. 
Star polymers
are polymer architectures composed of multiple “arms”
(linear or block copolymers) emanating out of a central core in the
shape of a star ( E). More recent research has focused on asymmetric star polymers
with a variety of arms (≥3) with different molecular weights
and chemical functionalities. These systems are known as miktoarm
stars. Star polymers can be synthesized
either through the polymerization and growth of linear polymers from
a central multi-functional initiator (core first), or by the formation
of linear polymers first, followed by their subsequent grafting/cross-linking/conjugation
to a central core to form a star (arm first). In this way star polymers are structurally similar to dendrimers,
which are large organic macromolecules formed from a few repeating
units (generations), which at their largest (∼5 nm) can form
globular structures. However, unlike dendrimers, whose laborious synthesis
limits scalability, star polymers can be synthesized via more facile
polymerization techniques. Furthermore,
the greater size and lower density of star polymers allows for the
loading of larger, more diverse therapeutics. We will not include
dendrimers in our description of polymeric nanoparticles; however,
for the reader's interest, two reviews into dendrimers for drug
delivery
are presented here. , 
Star polymers are capable
of delivering both hydrophobic and hydrophilic
drugs. Kostka et al., for example, designed star polymers based on
a polyester hyperbranched core grafted with PHPMA arms with tunable
size (13–31 nm). DOX was conjugated
to the arms via a pH-responsive hydrazone link, and the DOX-stars
were able to prevent tumor growth in mice. Teo et al. designed a ∼30
nm star polymer with PEG and PDMAEMA arms cross-linked to form stars
via the arms first approach. This star
was able to electrostatically complex RNA, and showed therapeutic
potential against pancreatic cancer and lung cancer in an aerosol
form. Song and co-workers took this
design further, synthesizing a miktoarm star polymer based on a β-cyclodextrin
core with PEG and PDMAEMA arms. This
star was able to encapsulate DOX within its core via host–guest
interactions, while complexing RNA to its PDMAEMA arms, resulting
in a dual component system with superior anti-tumor efficacy. Nayanathara
et al., seeking to understand how star polymers affect nanoparticle
behavior, designed a pH-responsive nanoparticle whose core constituted
either a charge-shifting star polymer or a charge-shifting linear
polymer. This nanoparticle was also
able to efficiently encapsulate DOX via drug–polymer conjugation.
Interestingly, the star and linear polymers yielded similar physiochemical
properties for the nanoparticles, but the linear polymer system had
superior toxicity. Qiao and co-workers designed star polymer peptide–polymer
conjugate arrays termed “structurally nanoengineered antimicrobial
peptide polymers” (SNAPPs). These
SNAPPS, containing a poly(amidoamine) (PAMAM) core with PLA and poly(valine)
arms, showed the greatest bactericidal properties when functionalized
with 8 arms. Durmaz et al. sought to
employ stimuli-responsiveness, and designed a pH-responsive cyclodextrin
star polymer for gene delivery. pH responsiveness
was imbued by hydrazone moieties, with the star able to detach half
of its arms in only 1 h at pH 5.8. Zhang et al. designed star polymers
based on self-immolative PEtGs. The
star polymers underwent highly tunable pH-induced depolymerization,
providing a design strategy for both a stimuli-responsive and biodegradable
drug-delivery vehicle with reduced off-target effects.
Hyperbranched
polymers, as opposed to stars, are matrixes comprising
highly branched and randomly distributed polymers that manifest as
a three-dimensional globular particle ( F). HBPs are the smallest kind of polymeric
nanoparticle, with sizes usually below 10 nm, and are in some sense
the most structurally simplistic. They are characterized by small
size, low viscosity, high solubility, and low polymer entanglement,
resulting in large intramolecular cavities. Furthermore, the unique topology of HBPs results in the high surface
density of functional groups, making subsequent modification and functionalization
easier and more powerful. The properties of HBPs are determined by
chemical functionality and monomer ratios, MW and dispersity, and
the degree of branching. As drug-delivery
vehicles, a high surface density of functional groups endows HBPs
with significant drug conjugation capability, while the existence
of cavities within the matrix allows for drug loading via physical
host–guest interactions. Functionalized
hyperbranched polyethyleneimines, polyesters, polyethers, polyacrylamides,
and β-cyclodextrins have been well studied as vehicles to encapsulate
and more efficiently deliver a wide range of hydrophobic and hydrophilic
drugs. For example, Wei et al. functionalized nanodiamonds, another
promising biotherapeutic agent, with β-cyclodextrin HBPs, resulting
in a system with a very high DOX loading capacity. Thurecht and co-workers designed a 25 nm dual pH- and redox-responsive
PEGylated HBP that conjugated both DOX, via a pH-responsive hydrazone
linkage, and RNA, via a disulfide linkage. Their HBP was able to achieve very high RNA coupling >80%. Wei
et
al. designed a similar dual-functional HPMA-based HBP, but employed
a redox cleavable peptide linkage to load therapeutic cargo. In 2018, Tan and co-workers designed a light-responsive
HBP composed of UV degradable nitrobenzyl groups with DNA conjugated
to the HBP via an azide linkage ( ). This HBP
was also able to conjugate DOX within hydrophobic cavities forming
larger 40 nm spherical nanoparticles. Under 365 nm irradiation, this
dual component HBP showed controlled drug release and tumor inhibition.
Gao et al. sought to imbue a cinnamaldehyde-based HBP with pH responsiveness
from its backbone. This was achieved
through pH labile aminoethylpiperazine moieties, and it was shown
that the resultant biodegraded polymer fragments were able to inhibit
the growth of bacteria by generating ROS. ROS responsiveness was also
utilized by Zhang et al. who imbued a PEG-based HBP with ROS responsiveness
via tellurium. H2O2 caused the HBPs to swell from ∼28 to ∼66 nm. The mechanism
was posited to be caused by the change in chemical environment of
the oxidized tellurium atoms.
 By virtue of their tunability, versatility, ability
to load a diverse
range of drugs, and, most importantly, their unparalleled functional
power, polymeric nanoparticles are perhaps the most promising class
of non-lipid-based drug-delivery vehicles. Polymeric nanoparticles
have shown levels of drug loading efficiency, bioavailability, and
targeted delivery unrivalled by other delivery vectors. However, the
difference between what can be synthesized by cutting edge research
laboratories and what can be produced in a commercially viable manner
illustrates the principal reason why polymeric nanoparticles are still
relatively rare in clinical medicine. Batch-to-batch consistency,
toxicity, cost, and long-term stability are four hurdles polymeric
nanoparticles must overcome before they can be considered a force
in the drugs market. Furthermore, the diversity of structure, chemical
functionality and stimuli-responsive behavior across different nanoparticle
designs is vast, and there remains no clear agreement regarding which
designs are the most fruitful moving forward. Finally, there remains
a surprising dearth of research comparing the various polymeric nanoparticle
designs with other drug-delivery vectors, specifically liposomes and
lipid nanoparticles. Greater study is required comparing the performance
of polymeric nanoparticles to these designs. Nevertheless, polymeric
nanoparticles are uniquely suited to address the inevitable future
challenges of delivering extremely sensitive or insoluble drugs and
minimizing toxic off target drug effects, particularly in the case
of cancer therapy. In terms of synthetic simplicity, cost and scalability,
micelles show the most promise, and will likely be the first polymeric
nanoparticles to significantly impact the market. As drug-based therapies
become more complex and demanding of highly precise performance, it
is expected that the applicability and importance of polymeric nanoparticles
will only increase over time.

5.6.

## Hybrid Nanoparticles
Hybrid nanoparticles
involve the combination of different components to provide a sophisticated,
multi-functional design that displays promise as a drug-delivery vehicle.
Comprehensive reviews on hybrid nanoparticles that solely comprise
organic constituents, such as lipid–polymer hybrid nanoparticles,
have been published in the last decade. − Therefore, this section will focus on polymeric nanoparticles with
specific inorganic constituents ( ). By combining the unique properties of
diverse materials, these inorganic-based hybrid nanoparticles offer
a versatile platform that can be tailored to encapsulate, protect,
and efficiently deliver therapeutic agents to their intended targets.
However, these hybrid designs are highly complex and the current research
is focused on more fundamental aspects of these materials. Though
hybrid nanoparticles have displayed strong efficacy in in
vitro and animal models, more work is needed to translate
these benefits to clinical trials and beyond.
 5.6.1.

## Preparation Methods
5.6.1.1.

## Surface Modification
Surface
modification involves coating an inorganic core with single/multiple
layers of polymers to form a hybrid nanoparticle. These polymers can
be deposited onto the surface of the core via two separate methods. The first is through non-covalent bonding,
such as hydrophobic interactions and electrostatic attraction. For
example, layer-by-layer deposition has been widely used to form highly
controlled hybrid nanoparticles by adding charged polymers to a suspension
of oppositely charged inorganic particles. The morphology and the thickness of the polymeric layers can be
easily adjusted, and this surface modification also serves to enhance
biocompatibility and colloidal stability of the inorganic components. 
The second method is to graft/grow polymer
chains on the surface of the inorganic core through covalent bonding.
The grafting approach often involves coupling techniques and requires
embedding certain functional groups onto the surface of the inorganic
core, allowing subsequent chemical reactions to attach the polymers
to the surface to form the polymeric shell. “Click chemistry”,
such as azide–alkyne addition and thiol–ene reactions,
has been widely used to modify the surface of inorganic nanoparticles
under mild reaction conditions. Initiating
polymerization directly on the surface of the inorganic core is known
as a bottom-up approach, and allows for the synthesis of more stable
hybrid particles, with higher grafting densities compared to non-covalent
adsorption. More advanced polymerization
methods yield a high degree of control over polymer density, composition,
the thickness of the shell, and even exotic architectures, such as
brushes. In this kind of system, specific functional groups need to
be pre-anchored to the surface of the inorganic core. These include
an immobilized ruthenium catalyst in the case of ROMP , immobilized azo initiator groups in the case
of RAFT , and an immobilized alkyl halide
in the case of ATRP. 
Surface modification
allows polymeric components to encapsulate
and protect functional inorganic cores, thus improving their biocompatibility
and water solubility. For hybrid nanoparticles prepared via this strategy,
the diameter of the inorganic core is usually much larger than the
thickness of the polymer shell.

5.6.1.2.

## In Situ Precipitation
In situ precipitation involves the spontaneous
self-assembly of amphiphilic block copolymers into polymeric nanoparticles
through non-covalent interactions, and provides a cost-effective route
for the preparation of structured materials. Smaller inorganic particles are encapsulated into the polymeric
nanoparticles during this self-assembly process, and the resulting
hybrid materials retain the functionality of both their polymer and
inorganic components, while demonstrating synergistic effects that
differ from each individual component. , When compared
to surface modification, where the hybrid nanoparticle is grown from
a single inorganic core, nanoparticles prepared via this method normally
encapsulate multiple smaller inorganic particles.
The distribution
of inorganic cargo within these hybrid nanoparticles can be adjusted
by the interaction between the cargo and the polymer matrix. Specifically,
when the interaction is unfavorable, inorganic cargos tend to form
closely packed clusters within nanoparticle cores, whereas they will
be more evenly dispersed throughout the particle when the interactions
with the polymer matrix are more favorable. , A series of studies from Park’s group have shown that rational
design of starting materials and their relative concentrations can
govern the distribution of inorganic cargos into different anisotropic
arrays. , One study details a three-layered hybrid
nanoparticle composed of CdSe/ZnS interfaces formed during the self-assembly
of poly(acrylic acid)-b-PS block copolymers and hydrophobic
CdSe/ZnS quantum dots (QDs). The distribution of QDs can be regulated
by changing the relative concentrations of reactants. An increased
polymer concentration led to the radial position of QDs shifting toward
the center, which was explained by the smallest possible loss of conformational
entropy of polymer chains. In another
study, the choice of solvent also affected the cargo locations when
QDs were replaced with iron oxide particles. Assemblies in DMF/water
generated an organic interface, but assemblies in THF/water produced
typical core–shell nanoparticles with a uniform dispersion
of iron oxide throughout the polymer matrix ( ). 
 Loading small inorganic cargos into polymeric nanoparticles
through
non-covalent interaction is the most widely used strategy for preparing
hybrid nanoparticles with unique morphologies and properties. There
are, however, notable challenges when utilizing precipitation to form
hybrid inorganic–polymeric nanoparticles. For instance, cargo
loading efficiency is usually lower than 1% w/w, and cargo leakage can occur, due to the fact that the cargo
is generally bound to the nanoparticle via hydrophobic interactions. Forming a covalently bound conjugate between
the inorganic cargo and the polymer is one method to alleviate this
problem. Recently, we reported the design of pH-responsive core–shell
hybrid nanoparticles that incorporate [BIIIW11O39CoIII]6– cargos. This
was achieved by forming a coordination bond between CoIII and the pyridyl pendant of the polymer chains. Cryo-EM was conducted
on the hybrid nanoparticles at pH 8, 7, and 6 to observe the distribution
of [BIIIW11O39CoIII]6– as well as the particle’s structural rearrangement
in response to acidification. Generally,
pre-modification is a feasible strategy to improve the loading efficiency
and overall stability of hybrid assemblies. Although it provides a
more controlled means of loading and release, more research is needed
in terms of better characterization techniques and the incorporation
of cleavable bonds between polymer chains and inorganic cargo.

5.6.1.3.

## In Situ Polymerization
Another preparation method for hybrid nanoparticles is the in situ encapsulation of small inorganic cargo during the
polymerization process. There are two main routes to attain hybrid
nanoparticles by in situ polymerization: miniemulsion
polymerization and PISA. In miniemulsion polymerization, nucleation
occurs within monomer droplets, as opposed to micelles in conventional
emulsions. Generally, inorganic particles are modified to become hydrophobic
nucleation sites within monomer droplets, from where they become part
of a hybrid nanoparticle following polymerization. Emulsifying inorganic
cargo in monomer droplets pre-polymerization is a central challenge
of this process, as droplets containing inorganic cargo are often
highly viscous and abrasive. , Utilizing high pressure
in both the monomer feed step and during homogenization can successfully
break up particle-loaded droplets, leading to a more efficient preparation
process. 
PISA allows for the synthesis
of polymer–inorganic hybrid nanoparticles with very high solids
content. As previously discussed, the
formation of block copolymers and their self-assembly into nanoparticles
occurs at the same time during PISA. Nanoparticle morphology generally
evolves from small spherical micelles to linear wormlike intermediates
as the polymerization progresses. The final stages of PISA yield highly
branched networks and partially coalesced worms, which eventually
enclose to form vesicles with almost 100% monomer conversion. Given the vesicles are hollow nanospheres with
hydrophilic cores, it is possible to encapsulate hydrophilic inorganic
particles into these polymersomes via PISA. Some studies have reported
the preparation of hybrid vesicles with more than 10% w/w inorganic
content by a one-pot PISA approach, encapsulating up to hundreds of
silica nanoparticles per vesicle. For
example, Tan et al. used photoinitiated PISA to prepare hybrid vesicles
with 25% w/w silica. The silica nanoparticles (20 nm) were added before
the PISA reaction and loaded in situ into the polymeric
vesicles. TEM and SEM images confirmed the successful encapsulation
of silica into the lumen of vesicles. Overall, PISA is an attractive strategy to synthesize polymer-inorganic
hybrid nanoparticles. However, for now, only SiO2 and TiO2 have been loaded into polymeric vesicles via PISA.

5.6.2.

## Inorganic Cargos
Inorganic particles
and scaffolds are a promising candidate for the design of more sophisticated
drug-delivery nanoparticles, due to their diverse biological functionality.
For a comprehensive summary of these inorganic materials, the reader
is directed to these recent publications. − This section aims to highlight an important subclass of polymeric
nanoparticles where inorganic materials are encapsulated or integrated
within a greater polymeric matrix. Currently, the most commonly studied
inorganic cargos are silica, QDs, gold nanoparticles, and metal oxides.
Hybrid nanoparticles that can encapsulate these kinds of cargo are
of high interest for biological applications, since they usually demonstrate
higher solubility, better cytotoxicity, and more sensitive stimuli-response
compared with their individual starting materials.
5.6.2.1.

## Silica
Silica is a useful platform
for many drug-delivery applications due to its extensive surface area,
porous structure, low toxicity, and biodegradability. However, the usefulness of silica is strongly
diminished via unfavorable interactions with red blood cells (hemolysis),
due to the silanol group on its surface. Silica-based hybrid nanoparticles are a feasible strategy to solve
this problem. Polymer-modified mesoporous silica nanoparticles (MSNs)
are the subject of significant interest due to their outstanding stability
under extreme environments and strong encapsulation capability, and
are the focus of a number of comprehensive reviews. , 
Zhao et al. described an ultra-small silica–polymer
hybrid nanoparticle, prepared by the self-assembly of PEG-b-PPG-b-PEG tri-block polyoxamers and a
silica precursor. The diameter of the silica core was <5 nm and
the total size of the hybrid nanoparticle was 14 nm. This particle
comprised a brush-like PEG corona as its shell, which yielded superior
stealth and non-specific binding properties when compared to linear
PEG-modified silica dots. More importantly, animal experiments indicated
that brush PEG-modified particles could be excreted faster compared
to the linear PEG-modified silica dots. Specifically, more than 90%
of injected nanoparticles with the brush-like PEG shell were excreted
within 5 days, along with a prolonged blood-circulation half-life
of 19 h. These features benefit tumor targeting through the EPR effect,
displaying great potential for further biomedical applications. 
Modifying the surface of MSNs via covalently
conjugated polymers
is another widely used strategy to prepare hybrid nanoparticles. For
example, Wang and co-workers utilized enzymatic radical polymerization
to prepare hybrid nanoparticles with redox responsive polymeric shells
and MSN cores. The MSNs were first modified with a coupling agent
(3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane) to obtain amine groups on the surface.
These amines were then further reacted with N-acryloyloxy
succinimide to obtain vinyl-functionalized MSNs. Finally, the hybrid
nanoparticles were prepared via laccase-mediated polymerization of
dimethylacrylamide and a redox-responsive bis(acryloyl)cystamine cross-linker.
During this preparation, the diameter of particles was observed by
TEM and DLS to increase from 55 to 180 nm. In vitro drug loading and release tests indicated that DOX was encapsulated
into the particles with a high loading capacity (∼34%). The
hybrid nanoparticles showed significant DOX release under physiological
reducing conditions. Similarly, Ribeiro
et al. designed a thermoresponsive hybrid nanoparticle composed of
a fluorescent MSN core and a poly(2-(2-methoxyethoxy)ethyl methacrylate)-co-(oligo(ethylene glycol)methacrylate) shell. The surface
of MSNs was functionalized with a RAFT agent to undergo RDRP, allowing
for control over the density and thickness of the polymeric shell.
Sulforhodamine B was then used as a model cargo to test the nanoparticles’
loading and release behavior over different temperatures. At low temperatures,
the fluorescent cargo successfully diffused into the polymer shell,
to be released at a high temperature above the polymer’s LCST
(37° C). More work needs to be done to increase the LCST to better
mimic the higher temperatures associated with the tumor microenvironment. 

5.6.2.2.

## Quantum Dots
Quantum dots (QDs)
are semiconducting nanoparticles 2–10 nm in size, with size-dependent
optical and electronic properties. Usually,
∼5–6 nm QDs emit longer wavelengths of visible light
(red or orange), while ∼2–3 nm QDs emit shorter wavelengths
(blue and green). QDs exhibit notable advantages when compared with
traditional organic dyes, such as a narrow emission spectrum, high
resistance to photobleaching and a high photoluminescence quantum
yield. However, QDs generally exhibit
poor water solubility, cytotoxicity, and a tendency to aggregate in
aqueous solutions. Thus, encapsulation in hybrid nanoparticles is
a vital method to convert QDs into promising bioimaging and theranostic
tools.
QDs with NIR fluorescence have been actively studied
mainly for cancer imaging due to their high quantum yields and tunable
emission. Wang et al. reported an indium phosphate core/zinc sulfide
shell (InP/ZnS) QD-loaded micelle that was modified with anti-epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) nanobodies. This hybrid micelle was
designed to target EGFR, which is overexpressed in cancers. The surface
of the InP/ZnS QDs was functionalized with carboxyl groups, and PEG-b-PLA block polymers were grafted to the QDs via esterification.
Then, the anti-EGFR nanobodies were selectively conjugated to the
end of the PEG arm through a thiol-maleimide reaction. In subsequent in vitro and in vivo tests, the QD cores
showed stable NIR fluorescent signals, helping to monitor the localization
of the hybrid nanoparticles. 
As
well as imaging, QDs are also promising theranostic agents due
to being donors for the Forster resonance energy transfer (FRET) process. , Recently, CdSexS1–x/ZnS QDs and zinc(II) phthalocyanines (photosensitizers)
were loaded into polymeric nanoparticles via a solvent/evaporation
method. The shortening of the QD’s fluorescence lifetime confirmed
that the average distance between QDs and phthalocyanines inside the
hybrid nanoparticles was suitable for FRET even without chemical linkage.
This successful FRET generated ROS from the photosensitizers upon
NIR irradiation, which is an important stimulus for many drug-delivery
applications. 

5.6.2.3.

## Gold Nanoparticles
Gold nanoparticles
(Au NPs) have been widely investigated across a variety of medical
applications due to their unique electronic and optical properties,
as well as their biocompatibility. Modification of Au NPs with organic
ligands under physiological conditions occurs via the Au–S
bond. Given that this bond is responsive under endogenous redox conditions,
specifically due to the presence of GSH in the cytoplasm of cells,
Au NPs are a very attractive drug-delivery vector. 
Plasmonic nanostructures possess the ability to efficiently
transform incident light within the spectral range of surface plasmon
resonance (SPR) into thermal energy, resulting in the localized heating
of the surrounding medium. Particularly for in vivo applications, nanostructures exhibiting SPR bands within the NIR
spectral window are desirable, as this spectral range experiences
comparatively minimal light attenuation by blood and soft tissue.
Therefore, Au NPs have emerged as promising candidates for photothermal
applications, given their capacity to readily adjust their longitudinal
plasmon resonance into the NIR region through alterations in their
aspect ratio. Duan and co-workers have
designed a class of hybrid plasmonic vesicles assembled from polymer
brush coated Au NPs. These hybrid nanoparticles were conjugated with
a hydrophilic PEG brush shell, as well as both ATRP and ROP initiators
through the Au–S bond, allowing for highly controlled surface
modification. The obtained hybrid vesicles
displayed the optical and spectroscopic properties of gold nanoparticles,
as well as an enclosed cavity structure similar to polymersomes. These novel vesicles showed promise as theranostic
platforms, traceable intracellular drug
carriers, and for imaging-guided photothermal/photodynamic
therapeutics. 
Gu et al. reported
a facile approach to encapsulate Au NPs and
indocyanine green into polymeric nanocarriers based on a double emulsion
process (w/o/w). Hydrophilic Au NPs were loaded into the vesicle cavity,
while hydrophobic indocyanine green was loaded into the polymeric
shell. The surface of this hybrid polymersome could be further functionalized
by bio-targeting agents such as RGD peptides, facilitating targeted
delivery to the tumor cells. These hybrid nanoparticles demonstrated
strong tumor imaging performance ( ). 
 Hyperbranched nanoparticles are attractive drug
carrier candidates
due to their modifiable surfaces and inherent internal cavities. Au NPs loaded into dendrimers have been developed
and systematically studied, showing excellent biocompatibility and
promising imaging capability. − For example, Wang et al. developed
a GSH-triggered drug-delivery system based on dendrimer-encapsulated
Au NPs. Drugs that contained a thiol or could be post-modified with
a thiol were covalently conjugated to the dendrimer interiors via
the Au–S linkage, exhibiting controlled drug release behavior
in response to thiol-reducing agents, such as GSH. 

5.6.2.4.

## Iron Oxide
Magnetite (Fe3O4) and maghemite (γ-Fe2O3) are two common iron oxides that display superparamagnetic
properties at sizes below 20 nm, and are widely employed in the preparation
of hybrid nanoparticles. In the presence
of an applied magnetic field, these iron oxides can be used for a
variety of biomedical applications, including targeted therapy, hyperthermal
therapy, contrast agents for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and
the ability to induce ferroptosis. However,
superparamagnetic nanoparticles tend to aggregate into micro-size
clusters, especially in the presence of an external magnetic field,
which severely limits their bioapplicability. Modification with polymeric materials is one of the most
promising approaches to radically enhance the biocompatibility and
water solubility of iron oxide particles.
Ling et al. successfully
encapsulated small iron oxide nanoparticles (∼3 nm) into pH-responsive
self-assembled nanoparticles by forming coordination bonds with catechol
ligands. These hybrid magnetic nanoparticles demonstrated two-stage
pH responsiveness: surface charge reversal and nanoparticle swelling
at pH 7.0–6.5 (from 60 nm to 70 ± 5 nm); and disassembly
and drug release below pH 6.5. During this process, the particle’s
fluorescence signal and photoactivity were turned on after the disassembly,
and MRI contrast was quenched at pH 7.4, but recovered at pH 5.5.
The following in vivo tests of these hybrid nanoparticles
demonstrated effective tumor diagnosis and greater therapeutic efficacy
in both human colorectal carcinoma xenografts and highly heterogeneous
drug-resistant tumors. 
Because
of the inherent magnetic properties of iron oxide particles,
applied ultrasound and magnetic fields have imbued the resultant hybrid
nanoparticles with targeted drug-delivery capabilities. One study
has shown that core–shell nanoparticles made from PVA and magnetic
nanoparticles displayed strong magnetothermal chemotherapy, while
releasing a drug when exposed to a high frequency magnetic field. Beyond this, magnetic PLGA nanoparticles have
been shown to actively accumulate around tumor tissue under an applied
magnetic field, leading to an increased concentration of the drug
in the targeted region. This approach exhibited excellent anti-tumor
activity for ultrasound accessible tumors with perfused vascularity,
such as colon cancer. Kim et al. designed
a nanoparticle whereby DNA block copolymers self-assembled to form
a shell around FeIII ions. These DNA–polymer–iron particles were highly tunable
and displayed efficient cellular association and endosomal escape,
allowing for enhanced siRNA delivery.

6.

## Non-spherical Nanoparticles
Polymer
nanoparticles exhibiting diverse shapes and exotic architectures
are commonly referred to as non-spherical or anisotropic nanoparticles,
and have garnered increasing attention over the past decade ( ). − These diverse particle morphologies offer the ability to enhance
the drug-delivery capability through superior internalization, circulation,
and targeting. However, the majority of studies on non-spherical nanoparticles,
given the relative novelty of the area, focus on fundamental properties
concerning fabrication and intracellular behavior. Thus far, only
a few non-spherical nanoparticles have entered early clinical trials,
and none have been approved for clinical use. Recently, scientists have published several proof-of-concept
studies that demonstrate the unique advantages of non-spherical particles
for combination chemotherapy, cancer immunotherapy, and vaccination.
Herein, we outline the various architectural designs of polymeric
nanoparticles currently under investigation and evaluate the emerging
applications of these non-spherical nanoparticles. To provide a perspective
on the emerging utility of non-spherical particles in disease treatment,
we explore how the shape of nanoparticles influences drug delivery.
 6.1.

## Preparation Methods
Various top-down
and bottom-up methods have been proposed to design non-spherical nanoparticles.
Generally, bottom-up approaches are cost-effective and easy to handle,
but they show relatively weak control of nanoparticle morphology and
size distribution. In contrast, top-down approaches are more reproducible
and demonstrate strong control over shape, but usually require sophisticated
instruments and processing techniques. Detailed descriptions of the
preparation and characterization techniques for non-spherical organic
and inorganic nanoparticles can be found in various reviews. , 
6.1.1.

## Self-Assembly for Non-spherical Nanoparticles
Self-assembly is a widely used bottom-up method for fabricating
non-spherical nanoparticles. A myriad of non-spherical morphologies
can be obtained through block copolymer self-assembly, such as rods,
lamellas, cones, fibers and other multi-lamellar assemblies. As previously
described, the packing parameter, p = v/al, mainly determines the morphology of the assemblies. , Self-assembly provides a straightforward method to synthesize non-spherical
nanoparticles under mild conditions, which allows for a wide variety
of delicate therapeutic cargo to be loaded, such as proteins and nucleic
acids. However, nanoprecipitation, the most common self-assembly method,
often results in batch-to-batch inconsistency and a relatively broad
size distribution, which limits its clinical potential somewhat. Moreover,
because the polymer chains are bound together mainly by the hydrophobic
effect rather than stronger covalent bonds, the stability of nanoparticles
can be suspect, depending on the different external environments. 

6.1.2.

## Mechanical Deformation
In the fabrication
of non-spherical nanoparticles, mechanical deformation serves as a
critical technique, particularly within the framework of top-down
methodologies. This approach involves
the application of macroscopic manipulations to environments already
containing nanoscale objects, facilitating the production of particles
with diverse shapes and morphologies. In one such study, PS nanoparticles were dispersed within a PVA
solution. Subsequently, the dispersion underwent solvent evaporation
to form a PVA thin film containing spherical PS nanoparticles, and
from this starting formulation varying shapes can be formed via two
different methods. The first method involves melting nanoparticles
either by heating them above their glass transition temperature (Tg), or dissolving them in a suitable solvent.
They can then be stretched in one or two directions to form different
shapes. The second method involves first creating small voids by stretching
the PVA film, and then adding extra liquid PS, either heated above
its melting point or dissolved in an organic solvent into these voids.
After reaching determined aspect ratios and shapes, PS nanoparticles
are formed either by cooling or solvent evaporation. Finally, the
non-spherical nanoparticles are obtained by dissolving the supporting
substrates, often yielding a highly uniform morphology. A series of shapes can be achieved by this
means, which includes but is not limited to rods, worms, disks, and
ellipses. 
The Tg and the solubility of the component polymers are the
two key parameters that allow the soft particles to set into new shapes.
Optimizing these two parameters also represents a major limitation
of this technique. Therefore, although mechanical deformation can
produce highly uniform non-spherical nanoparticles, most studies have
thus far focused either on PS or PLGA. 

6.1.3.

## Molding Techniques
Photolithography,
microfluidic fabrication, and nanoimprint
lithography are three commonly used
top-down molding techniques to fabricate non-spherical polymeric particles.
The first two approaches normally yield microscale particles (>20
μm) due to limitations associated with both the equipment and
manufacturing process.
Nanoimprint lithography involves “imprinting”
polymer solutions or precursors into the holes of a template. Over
time the nanoparticles solidify and are collected following the removal
of the template. The resulting particles are non-spherical, and can
be tailored to a variety of shapes using this technique. Nanoimprint
lithography is generally regarded as a low-cost and efficient molding
technique, while also allowing for a diverse set of particle morphologies.
Residual scum layers, however, represent a bottleneck for this technique,
and can result in an embossed film instead of separate nanoparticles.
Significant research has been undertaken to solve this problem. Particle replication in non-wetting templates
(PRINT), for example, represents a breakthrough in this endeavor.
PRINT was first reported in 2005 by Rolland et al., and it has been used to prepare uniform nanoscale particles
with a range of morphologies such as cylinders, cubes, and rods ( ). The major novelty of PRINT is the use of photocurable
perfluoropolyether (PFPE) molds instead of traditional polydimethylsiloxane
molds. Highly fluorinated molds are non-wetting and non-swelling to
both organic and inorganic liquids, which eliminates the residue layer
between products and enables the production of isolated nanosized
non-spherical particles. PRINT has been
used to encapsulate a range of cargo, from small molecules and prodrugs
to biological macromolecules and nucleic acids. 
 

6.2.

## Impact of Nanoparticle Shape on Therapeutic
Delivery
Non-spherical particles have gained attention in
recent years as drug-delivery vehicles. In general, studies suggest
that particle morphology is a key parameter affecting drug-delivery
performance. Thus far, numerous nanoparticle morphologies and architectures
have been designed and synthesized via the methods mentioned above.
These designs have demonstrated an enhanced ability to migrate various
biological barriers, including biological distribution, metabolism
and clearance, cellular internalization, and cytotoxicity. Inorganic nanoparticles, such as gold nanoparticles
and silica nanoparticles, are often employed to study the impact of
shape on drug delivery in vivo because of their well-defined
morphologies, and these proof-of-concept studies have been reviewed
in detail. , Therefore, this section will
introduce and discuss some recent progress in non-spherical nanoparticles
and shape-shifting nanoparticles based on polymeric materials in the
field of drug delivery. However, it is premature to claim non-spherical
nanoparticles represent an obviously superior platform for drug delivery
based on the current body of research. Notable challenges, such as
synthesis complexity and the need for sophisticated characterization
methods, significantly limit their widespread applicability. Moreover,
the majority of explorations remain at the in vitro or cellular experimental stage. The mechanisms by which different
nanoparticle shapes influence their performance in vivo are not yet fully elucidated, nor is it clear whether they can demonstrate
enhanced therapeutic effects in general. Therefore, a comprehensive
understanding of the physicochemical properties of different nanoparticles
(such as rigidity, aspect ratio, surface area, and surface charge)
is essential. Further exploration into the interactions and biotoxicity
between various nanoparticles and cells in practical scenarios is
crucial, which will provide a solid foundation for designing more
effective nanoparticles.
6.2.1.

## Rods
As one of the most common
non-spherical nanoparticles, rod-like nanoparticles have been widely
studied in recent years. Rod-like morphology has yielded nanoparticles
with increased cellular internalization, enhanced specific binding,
and prolonged circulation. 
During
the last decade, Mitragotri and co-workers investigated the role of
nanoparticle shape and size in drug delivery and immune response.
They showed that antibody coated polystyrene nanorods exhibited higher
affinity and specificity toward the endothelium compared with spherical
polystyrene nanoparticles ( ). This effect was not
only observed in synthetic microvascular networks, static cell cultures,
and in vivo distribution, but was also described
by a shape dependent mathematical model of particle–surface
interactions. The same group employed
carboxylate polystyrene nanorods with different surface coating and
compared them to their spherical counterparts, examining oral drug-delivery
capability and immune responsiveness. In both cases, the rod-shaped
nanoparticles showed unique characteristics, which suggests that nanoparticle
morphology needs to be considered in tandem with size and surface
chemistry for the rational design of drug carriers. , Most recently, Mitragotri and co-workers reported that macro-sized
rod particles demonstrated better injectability and penetrability
than spherical macro particles, along with diminished cardiotoxicity
on cells when loaded with DOX. 
 Chilkoti and co-workers developed a simple approach
to prepare
cylindrical micelles from high molecular weight elastin-like polypeptides
(64 kDa) by introducing a short (1.5 kDa) hydrophobic amino acid block
to one end of the polypeptides. In their
following work, a cysteine-rich segment was added as the third block
to provide eight thiol groups for conjugating small molecules. This
asymmetric tri-block polypeptide amphiphile self-assembled into rod-like
nanoparticles, and hydrophilic chemotherapeutics were loaded into
the core via covalent conjugation with the added thiol groups. Their
study showed that mice treated with the free drug exhibited a tumor
volume three times higher than mice treated with the drug-loaded nanorods
12 days after incubation. Moreover, mice treated with the free drug
had a median survival time of 21 days, while the nanorods increased
survival to 30 days. 
Wu et al.
designed and synthesized a brush-type polymer with a
cleavable polyacetal backbone and biodegradable PCL-b-PEG side chains. This polymer self-assembled into rod-shaped nanoparticles
with an average length of 200 nm and a diameter of 80 nm. DOX was
encapsulated into the rods via hydrophobic interactions with the PCL
side chain, and the drug-loaded nanorods exhibited cellular uptake
efficiency twice that of free DOX. 

6.2.2.

## Disks
Polymeric nanoparticles with
a disk morphology are known as nanodisks, and are inspired by disk
shaped lipid carriers in the blood stream, such as high-density lipoproteins
(HDLs). Ideally nanodisks can make use of the biogenicity of HDLs
to more effectively avoid the immune system and increase circulation
time in the blood. Nanodisks may also improve microvascular adhesion
and cell internalization. 
Synthetic
high-density lipoprotein (sHDL) nanodisks have been prepared with
peptide-based cancer vaccines and chemotherapeutic drugs in mind.
Recently, sHDLs loaded with both antigen peptides and adjuvants were
reported to have dramatically improved the drug-delivery capability
to lymphoid organs, as well as enhanced presentation on dendritic
cells. These nanodisks triggered broad-spectrum
anti-tumor T cell responses, resulting in the ultimate elimination
of tumors. Such a strategy provides the opportunity for personalized
vaccines, due to the simple preparation of the nanodisks, as well
as the robust therapeutic efficacy. The same group also synthesized
a pH-cleavable lipid–DOX conjugate that was successfully loaded
into sHDLs via co-incubation in PBS (pH 7.4) for 5 min at 37 °C.
DOX-carrying sHDLs showed a 2.8-fold increase in the cellular uptake
of DOX within tumors, compared with free DOX treatment. Generally,
the sHDL-DOX treatment exhibited significant anti-tumor efficacy without
any overt side effects. Advanced murine tumor models were utilized
to test the therapeutic efficacy of sHDL-DOX treatment, demonstrating
that 80 to 88% of established tumors were eliminated after the combination
treatment with sHDL-DOX and immune checkpoint inhibitors. A similar strategy was exploited for chemo-immunotherapy
against glioblastoma multi-forme. DTX and CpG, a Toll-like receptor
9 (TLR9) agonist, were loaded into sHDLs for targeted drug delivery
and tumor regression. Combination treatment with these drug-loaded
nanodisks and radiation resulted in an effective anti-tumor response
and also prevented glioblastoma multi-forme recurrence. 
Lin et al. successfully loaded DOX into
nanodisks composed of organoalkoxysilane
and dihexanoyl phosphatidylcholine. This
hybrid assembly was thought to provide higher stability than conventional
phospholipid bicellular disks owing to their siloxane surface. Their nanodisks showed a pH-responsive drug
release behavior, high cytotoxicity, and strong stability. In addition, in vitro and in vivo analysis showed that
the drug-loaded nanodisks passively accumulated in tumors and successfully
inhibited tumor growth. In a further study, PEGylated nanodisks were
compared to non-PEGylated nanodisks, with the former demonstrating
superior biocompatibility and improved anti-tumor efficacy. The drug release rate was observed to increase
with a higher ratio of PEG. Ge et al. reported a hydrophobic guest
transport system based on biogenic macrocycle nanodisks to deliver
hypocrellin B, a hydrophobic, photodynamic, poorly water-soluble drug.
The nanodisks exhibited strong biocompatibility and internalization
performance, while retaining the inherent photodynamic therapy activity
of hypocrellin B. This design showed
strong theranostic potential.

6.2.3.

## Worms and Fibers
While nanorods
and nanodisks comprise the two most highly studied non-spherical polymeric
nanoparticles, worm-like nanoparticles (nanoworms) and nanocubes are
two other morphologies that have recently garnered significant attention
as drug-delivery vehicles. The high aspect ratio of nanoworms has
been shown to improve specific accumulation within cells. This was
demonstrated in early work by Geng et al, showing worm-like micelles
demonstrated better biodistribution than spherical counterparts. Later work showed this led to increased specificity
for localization within a tumor, potentially due to improved biodistribution
and being entrapped within the tumor environment more effectively
via the EPR effect. 
Block copolymers
are utilized to prepare different morphologically asymmetric assemblies,
such as nanoworms, through rational molecular engineering. For example,
PEG-b-PDLLA can assemble into spherical micelles
in PBS and then transform into nanoworms through exposure to high
salt concentrations (≥5 mM NaCl). The length of these worms
can be further adjusted by varying the electrolyte concentration.
Introducing azido-modified copolymers allows these nanoworms to be
functionalized through surface modification using bio-orthogonal “click”
chemistry. Another design introduced
quaternary ammonium as a third block to achieve an ionically induced
morphology switch from nanospheres to nanoworms of different aspect
ratios. DOX was efficiently loaded into these nanoworms, and their
worm-shape allowed for selective interactions with cancer cells and
increased tumor penetration. 
Borteh
et al. synthesized ribbon-like fibrous nanometer scaffolds
composed of acetylated dextran, a biodegradable polymer. These scaffolds
were loaded with the drug resiquimod, and their degradation rate (hydrolysis)
was tuned by varying both the cyclic acetal coverage of the polymers
and the molecular weight of dextran. Recently, the same group also used dextran scaffolds to encapsulate
PTX and resiquimod for the treatment of glioblastoma and vaccine applications,
respectively. In both cases, the dextran scaffolds displayed high
tunability and strong biocompatibility. , 

6.2.4.

## Shape-Shifting Nanoparticles
As
research into the impact of nanoparticle shape on drug-delivery efficiency
has progressed, it has become evident that nanoparticles of different
shapes exhibit distinct characteristics during circulation, accumulation,
penetration, and cellular internalization. , However, it is challenging to identify a single nanoparticle shape
that consistently outperforms all other designs as there are many
factors that affect drug-delivery efficiency. Therefore, rather than
compromising on certain needs, such as extending circulation time
at the expense of cell uptake efficiency, recent research has focused
on the development of a promising new type of shape-shifting drug-delivery
system. , By triggering the transformation of nanoparticles
at an appropriate time or location via a suitable mechanism, it is
possible to enhance drug delivery and therapeutic efficiency. Currently,
there are three main stimuli used to induce shape changes in nanoparticles:
endogenous pH, enzymes, and exogenous light. These stimuli disrupt the kinetic or thermodynamic equilibrium of
the original nanoparticle assembly, altering covalent/non-covalent
intermolecular or intramolecular interactions, thus driving the formation
of a new equilibrium state.
pH-responsive shape-switching nanoparticles
undergo changes in their intra- and intermolecular forces in environments
with varying pH levels. These alterations can pertain to electrostatic
interactions, hydrophilicity/hydrophobicity, and hydrogen bonding
modification, yielding different structures and shapes. For example,
Han et al. developed a chimeric peptide that responds to the acidic
environment outside tumor cells and undergoes a change in shape to
enhance its uptake into tumors. The
peptide, modified with dimethylmaleic anhydride and composed of the
sequence (Ala-Glu-Ala-Glu-Ala-Lys-Ala-Lys)2, spontaneously
forms spherical nanoparticles under normal physiological conditions.
Upon encountering an acidic environment, the removal of the dimethylmaleic
anhydride moiety leads to the self-assembly of the peptide into rod-like
nanoparticles, driven by electrostatic interactions among the polypeptide
chains. This transformation from spheres into rods significantly increases
peptide tumor uptake, resulting in improved photodynamic therapy effectiveness
and minimal side effects both in vitro and in vivo.
Due to the abundance of abnormal enzymatic
activity within the
tumor microenvironment, enzyme-responsive polymeric nanoparticles
have emerged as prominent candidates for enhanced cancer therapy.
MMPs are overexpressed in various tumors to facilitate invasion and
metastasis, and have been widely used to design tumor-targeted delivery
systems. Kalafatovic et al. introduced a category of enzyme-responsive
micelles formed by peptides (PhAc-FFAGLDD) through hydrophobic interactions. These micelles can be hydrolyzed by MMP-9,
resulting in a shift in their amphiphilic balance, leading to a shape
transition from micelles into nanofibers. The nanofibers formed after
this transformation exhibited enhanced capabilities for sustained
drug release compared to the free drug, yielding significantly higher
effective drug concentrations and therapeutic outcomes.
Light,
as a non-invasive exogenous stimulus utilized in drug-delivery
systems, is categorized into three main types based on its wavelength:
ultraviolet (UV) (200–400 nm), visible light (vis) (400–700
nm), and near-infrared (NIR) (700–1000 nm). UV and visible
light have limited tissue penetration and the former’s high
energy contributes to its phototoxicity, making NIR-responsive nanoparticles
a central focus of research. Recently, nanoparticles based on amphiphilic
aza-BODIPY dyes have been developed that self-assemble into nanofibers
with a diameter of approximately 27 nm under physiological conditions,
facilitating prolonged circulation in blood. These nanofibers transitioned into nanoparticles with a diameter
of 20–30 nm upon NIR laser stimulation, enhancing their ability
to penetrate tumors. Benefiting from this in situ shape transformation strategy, these nanoparticles offer a promising
therapeutic strategy for extended blood circulation and deep tumor
penetration.

7.

## Applications
Owing to the versatility
of polymeric materials to design more
sophisticated systems with diverse functionalities, polymeric nanoparticles
have exhibited greater potential in overcoming specific biological
barriers associated with individual diseases. This requires designing
nanoparticles that combine the ability to migrate generic barriers
for all nanoparticle delivery systems as described above, with functionality
that can target specific disease conditions. The target locations
for different diseases are varied as are the types of cargo that are
required to achieve therapeutic outcomes and thus these factors need
to be considered when designing a nanoparticle to target a specific
disease. Here, we will provide a detailed description of different
drug-delivery applications of polymeric nanoparticles that have been
reported recently and highlight how they can overcome biological barriers
associated with individual diseases.
7.1.

## Cancer
Cancer is perhaps the most
burdensome class of disease affecting humanity worldwide, with a severe
mortality rate, and an absolute death toll that continues to increase
year over year. According to Global Cancer Observatory, almost 10
million deaths occurred in 2020 alone, along with 19.3 million estimated
new cases, which is expected to grow to almost 40 million by 2040. Cancer is characterized by uncontrolled cellular
growth and multiplication that occurs due to the mutation of proto-oncogenes
and tumor suppressor genes, which are responsible for controlling
cell division. Consequently, abnormal masses of defective cells (tumors)
are created. Metastasis occurs when these cells grow and spread into
the other parts of the body. As previously
described, a tumor’s microenvironment is a complex structure
defined by numerous blood vessels and different types of cells enclosed
within a protein-rich extracellular matrix. These cells include proliferating
cancer cells and non-malignant stromal cells, fibroblasts, endothelial
cells, immune cells, and cancer stem cells. In addition, the composition
of this tumor microenvironment varies according to the type of tumor,
and continuously changes with the progression of cancer. , Therefore, development of effective cancer therapies remains a significant
challenge due to the complexity and heterogeneity of different types
of tumors. Although the administration of unmodified anti-cancer drugs
is the primary method for cancer treatment, most of these free therapeutics
have their own limitations, including low specificity toward tumor
tissues, poor solubility, unfavorable drug pharmacokinetics, and undesirable
side effects. , Therefore, creating novel strategies
that can promote selective delivery of these drugs by navigating biological
barriers is essential for more effective cancer treatment.
The
recent progress of nanomedicine has opened up new opportunities for
the development of targeted and safe drug-delivery carriers for cancer
therapy. , There are various types of nanoparticles
that have been employed for cancer treatment, including lipid nanoparticles,
polymeric nanoparticles, inorganic nanoparticles, and protein nanoparticles. , Among these designs, polymeric nanoparticles have shown tremendous
potential in cancer therapy owing to their sophistication and high
degree of control over important particle properties, which allows
for more selective delivery of therapeutics while avoiding off-target
toxicity in healthy cells. Specifically,
the physicochemical properties of polymers can be easily tuned to
design nanoparticles that can transport a wide range of anti-cancer
drugs including hydrophobic and hydrophilic drugs, as well as larger
macromolecular cargo such as peptides, proteins, and nucleic acids. , , Moreover, the ease of surface
modification of polymeric nanoparticles offers the ability to more
efficiently target tumor tissue, increasing the selective accumulation
of therapeutics without affecting healthy cells. As a result, a significant amount of clinical and pre-clinical
studies have been reported that utilize a diverse and sophisticated
range of polymeric nanoparticle designs.
7.1.1.

## Clinical Translation of Polymeric Nanoparticles
in Cancer Therapy
Though the pre-clinical research into polymeric
nanoparticles is vast and growing, only a few nanoparticle formulations
have been approved for anti-cancer clinical trials, let alone approved
for commercial consumption. Most of these designs are simple polymeric
micelles, prepared via the self-assembly of amphiphilic block copolymers
comprising a hydrophilic PEG shell and various hydrophobic core polymers.
Specifically, biodegradable polymers such as polyesters (PGA, PDLLA)
and PAAs (PGlu, PAsp) comprise the majority of hydrophobic blocks,
owing to their reduced toxicity in physiological conditions. Only
two polymeric nanoparticles are currently on the market as anti-cancer
drug-delivery vehicles ( ). However, neither of these are approved by FDA and both
are still undergoing phase II/III clinical trials. Genexol-PM is a
micelle formed from a PEG-b-PDLLA block copolymer
that loads the chemotherapeutic drug paclitaxel (PTX) and has been
approved for the treatment of metastatic breast cancer and advanced
non-small cell lung cancer in South Korea. Genexol-PM has demonstrated
strong anti-tumor efficacy, improved pharmacokinetic properties and
lower toxicity, with a maximum tolerated dose (MTD) 40 times higher
than conventional PTX. , , Apealea, known as Paclical in Russia, is another micelle that loads
PTX, and has been approved by European Medicines Agency (EMA) in 2018
for the treatment of ovarian cancer. It is formulated with a novel-surfactant-based
derivative of retinoic acid (XR-17), which is a mixture of two isoforms
of N-retinoyl-l-cysteic acid methyl ester
sodium salt. , , Conventional PTX is a poorly water-soluble anti-cancer drug. Therefore,
by incorporating PTX into micelles (Genexol-PM and Paclical), its
solubility and pharmacokinetic performance is radically enhanced.
 There are also a growing number of polymeric nanoparticles
in clinical
trials. NC-6300 is a promising micellular design whereby the drug
epirubicin is covalently conjugated to the block copolymer PEG-b-PAsp via a pH-responsive hydrazone linkage. This design
forms a micelle with pH-responsive drug release capability. Furthermore,
NC-6300’s polymer backbone is partially modified with benzyl
groups to improve the stability of its micellar structure. In vitro drug release experiments confirmed the stability
of NC-6300 in blood conditions (pH 7.4) and accelerated drug release
in acidic conditions due to the pH-responsive nature of the hydrazone
linkage. Thus, in preclinical studies,
NC-6300 demonstrated superior anti-tumor activity with less side effects
owing to selective and efficient drug release in acidic conditions
of the endosome and lysosome of cancer cells. , In Japan, Phase I trials found that NC-6300 was well tolerated in
patients with advanced and recurrent solid tumors, and the patients
displayed less side effects compared to free epirubicin. NC-6300 is currently undergoing phase I/II
trials to investigate the anti-tumor activity and tolerability in
patients with soft tissue sarcoma. As well as NC-6300, several other
polymeric nanoparticles have been translated into human clinical trials
to evaluate their safety and efficacy for various types of cancers
( ). The majority
of these nanoparticles are micelles that encapsulate small chemotherapeutic
drugs such as DOX, PTX, cisplatin, and docetaxel. These micelles offer
several advantages over the delivery of free drugs, including enhanced
solubility, longer circulation time in the blood, higher tumor accumulation,
and reduced toxicity. CALAA-01 is the only polymeric nanoparticle
that has been approved for clinical trials regarding the delivery
of siRNA. The clinical history of these nanoparticles ( ) can be found in recently published
review articles with detailed information regarding their chemical
structures, preparation methods, clinical outcome, and challenges. , , , , 
 
7.1.2.

## Site-Targeted Drug Delivery
Polymeric
nanoparticles are ideal candidates for delivering drugs to specific
target sites due to their tunable physiochemical properties and the
ability to incorporate sophisticated functionality, including the
opportunity for efficient targeting capability. Selective targeting
offers an enhancement over traditional anti-cancer drug treatment,
as it bears superior therapeutic efficacy and, just as importantly,
reduces side effects and off-target toxicity. Furthermore, the selective
accumulation of anti-cancer drugs within tumor sites improves the
unfavorable drug pharmacokinetics of conventional chemotherapeutics. , , To date, there is a tremendous
ongoing research effort regarding polymeric nanoparticles with tumor
targeting properties. The following section will outline the recent
progress of polymer nanoparticles that have been used in targeted
drug delivery for cancer therapy.
7.1.2.1.

## Passive Targeting
Passive targeting
is the selective accumulation of nanoparticles within the tumor microenvironment
based on the EPR effect. This is possible due to the distinct pathophysiological
features associated with a tumor’s microenvironment. For example,
tumor growth requires an adequate supply of nutrients and oxygen to
ensure rapid proliferation of cells. In order to meet this nutrient
uptake demand, new blood vessels form via a process called angiogenesis.
These new vessels, however, are structurally and functionally abnormal,
and contain leaky pores due to their incomplete endothelial lining
or basement membrane. , The result is a leaky vasculature
with increased permeability, allowing nanoparticles to extravasate
into the tumors through this permeable tumor vasculature. Moreover,
nanoparticles can be retained in the tumor due to impaired lymphatic
drainage. This phenomenon is referred to as EPR effect, which was
first described by Matsumara and Maeda in 1986, and forms the basis
of passive tumor targeting. − The EPR effect is mainly governed
by certain physicochemical properties of nanoparticles, including
size, shape and surface properties. However,
more recent literature claims that the EPR effect is obscure in humans,
despite its consistency across small animal models. , One study utilized canine tumor models, which closely resemble human
tumors, to investigate variations in the EPR effect across different
tumor histologies. The findings revealed
that liposomal nanoparticles exhibited excellent accumulation in most
carcinomas but not in soft tissue sarcomas, indicating that tumor
histology significantly impacts the efficiency of the EPR effect.
Nevertheless, a recent study demonstrated a substantial EPR effect
in human renal tumors using the ex vivo perfusion
model, and validated a positive correlation with in vivo rabbit models. However, the EPR effect was still heterogeneous in
humans across various factors such as development stage, tumor size,
and the gender of patients. 
Primarily,
nanoparticle size is the most crucial factor that determines the efficacy
of passive accumulation in tumors. For this purpose, it has been found
that the optimum particle size is roughly between 10 and 200 nm. This
size range yields enhanced tumor accumulation via the EPR effect,
along with prolonged blood circulation and reduced clearance by the
immune system. , Kataoka and co-workers reported
that PEG-b-PGlu polymeric micelles with sizes between
50 and 100 nm displayed superior penetration in permeable hypervascular
tumors compared to micelles smaller than 50 nm, which only penetrated
through poorly permeable tumors. Recently,
Kang et al. reported smaller size PEG nanoparticles (<20 kDa, 12
nm) that showed enhanced tumor accumulation via the EPR effect and
reduced nonspecific uptake. Larger PEGylated nanoparticles accumulated
in major organs such as the lungs, liver, and pancreas. Thus, the exact size of nanoparticles required
to fully maximize the EPR effect and to avoid clearance mechanisms
is still somewhat unclear, with studies yielding conflicting results
over the past few years. This is likely due to other nanoparticle
properties that also play a role in localization, such as rigidity
and surface chemistry. Surface charge plays a significant role in
determining the blood circulation time and tumor accumulation. A slightly
negative or neutral surface charge maximizes blood circulation, as
foreign cationic materials are rapidly cleared by the immune system,
and simultaneously improves the tumor accumulation, as more nanoparticles
extravasate through the leaky vasculature of tumor tissues via the
EPR effect. , Therefore, to maximize circulation
time, polymeric nanoparticles are often engineered with stealthy hydrophilic
polymers in their shell, including PEG and other biocompatible polymers.
Kataoka and co-workers demonstrated longer circulation times for anionic
and neutral micellar surfaces, while anionic micelles resulted in
lower uptake into liver and spleen, suggesting that slightly negatively
charged micellar surfaces could avoid non-specific organ uptake. Despite the fact that most studies conclude
that anionic and neutral nanoparticles are highly efficient at penetrating
tumors, some research has claimed that positively charged nanoparticles
exhibit superior tumor penetration and cellular uptake, resulting
in enhanced anti-tumor efficacy. In one interesting study, Wang and
co-workers demonstrated that cationic PEGylated nanoparticles, composed
of a PDLLA core, are more effective in tumor penetration and inhibiting
tumor growth than their anionic or neutral counterparts. Thus, the correlation between surface charge
and anti-tumor efficacy should be carefully considered to maximize
the therapeutic effect while avoiding non-specific uptake by the immune
system.
PEGylation, the most common method to imbue nanoparticles
with
higher levels of stealth activity, can result in poor uptake by cancer
cells due to the steric hindrance of the PEG segments, leading to
inefficient therapeutic delivery. This is known as the “PEG
dilemma”. Shedding the stealthy
PEG layer upon association with cancerous cells (dePEGylation) is
an attractive approach to promote cellular uptake by reducing steric
hinderance. One method to achieve this is by adding a detachable PEG
layer that is responsive to the intrinsic pathophysiological features
of a tumor microenvironment. This strategy of shedding PEG has been
comprehensively reviewed. , Wang and co-workers
developed PEG detachable polymeric nanoparticles by incorporating
a pH-cleavable DMMA linkage for siRNA delivery. , They designed a functionalized maleimide acid amide derivative,
2-propionic-3-methylmaleic anhydride, to fabricate a PEG-cleavable
nanoparticle for siRNA delivery that was responsive to the acidic
environment associated with tumors. The
amphiphilic copolymer PEG-Dlinkm-R9-PCL
was synthesized by incorporating a degradable bridged bond (Dlinkm), CDM in between PEG and a cell-penetrating
peptide containing non-arginine residues (R9). This polymer can self-assemble
into micelles and complex with siRNA to form a micelleplex delivery
system ( ).
PEG was rapidly released at pH 6.5 (nearly 60% within 20 h) with minimal
non-specific release at pH 7.4 (less than 20%), demonstrating the
cleavability of CDM linker at the lower pH of the tumor microenvironment.
Pharmacokinetic profiles demonstrated this micelleplex had a prolonged
blood circulation time and extended the half-life (t1/2) of siRNA to nearly 12 h (for both nanoparticles with
and without Dlinkm). However, the nanoparticle
with Dlinkm displayed a superior tumor
accumulation in A549 tumor-bearing mice, yielding pronounced tumor
growth inhibition. It is postulated that the presence of the outer
PEG layer supports longer blood circulation of the micelleplex, and
tumor acidity triggers the loss of PEG to expose the R9 layer, yielding
enhanced cellular uptake and more effective siRNA delivery. However,
these types of delivery systems based on pH-cleavable maleic acid
amide chemistry are only studied on primary tumors, and their activity
on metastatic cancers is not fully understood. 
 As an alternative to PEGylation, zwitterions have
been employed
in designing stealth nanoparticles for anti-cancer drug delivery.
Zwitterions exhibit superior surface hydration due to their ability
to bind with water molecules via strong electrostatic interactions,
as opposed to PEG, which relies on hydrogen bonding. Thus, zwitterionic
polymeric nanoparticles have demonstrated higher resistance to non-specific
protein adsorption, leading to an increase in blood circulation time. , In particular, Duvall and co-workers demonstrated the impact of
different surface properties by developing a library of siRNA polyplexes
with the same core composition (PDMAEMA-co-PBMA),
but with varied shell compositions: PEG (5 and 20 kDa), brush-like
poly (oligo (ethylene glycol) methyl ether methacrylate) (POEGMA)
(10 and 20 kDa), and zwitterionic phosphorylcholine-based polymers
(PMPC) (10 and 20 kDa). Both the PMPC
and PEG (20 kDa) polyplexes exhibited improved pharmacokinetic properties
with longer half-lives of ∼25 min. These half-lives were higher
than those of all other polyplexes (t1/2 <10 min), while material properties in terms of size and surface
charges were kept similar. In vivo studies showed
a higher tumor uptake (2-fold higher than 20 kDa PEG) and significantly
increased luciferase gene knockdown (roughly 80%) for polyplexes with
zwitterionic shells (20 kDa) compared to PEG shells. Thus, high molecular
weight zwitterionic shells were found to provide enhanced tumor cell
uptake for siRNA polyplexes rather than traditional PEG-based surfaces,
due to their improved association with cell membranes. In general,
zwitterionic moieties offer a promising strategy to develop nanoparticles
with improved pharmacokinetic properties and superior tumor accumulation. , − However, the development of zwitterionic
polymer-based nanoparticles is still in its infancy owing to the challenges
associated with their controllable, reproducible, and scalable synthesis. 
Polymeric micelles such as Genexol-PM,
NK-105, NC-6004, NK-911,
NC-6300, and NC-4016 are capable of passive targeting and have displayed
promising performance in clinical trials. These nanoparticles all
encapsulate chemotherapeutic drugs in their core, have a size range
of 10–100 nm, are imbued with stealth properties to prolong
blood circulation, and display controlled drug release within the
tumor cells. , Furthermore, there is an extensive
body of preclinical research that focuses on the passive targeting
capability of polymer nanoparticles. Most of these systems trigger
drug release in response to specific stimuli present within tumor
tissue, such as pH, redox potential, and the presence of specific
enzymes. We will highlight these systems
in .
Presently, passive targeting represents the primary method
by which
polymeric nanoparticles, particularly micelles, accumulate at tumor
sites and thus perform their anti-cancer therapy. However, it is important
to underscore that there are notable limitations associated with passive
targeting. For instance, passive targeting is highly dependent on
tumor biology, specifically the permeability of the tumor vasculature,
the efficiency of lymphatic drainage, blood perfusion rates, interstitial
fluid pressure, the nature of the extracellular matrix, and tumor
cell density. , Furthermore, tumors are highly
heterogeneous, and certain solid tumors do not exhibit EPR effect. In fact, the challenges associated with physiological
barriers of tumor microenvironments and their heterogeneity within
and between different tumors have had a significant impact on the
clinical development of the passively targeted polymeric nanoparticles.

7.1.2.2.

## Active Targeting
Active targeting
has the potential to offset some of the limitations associated with
passive targeting. Active targeting involves synthesizing nanoparticles
with one or more targeting ligands. These targeting ligands can bind
to specific receptors that are overexpressed in tumor cells, thereby
improving the retention and selective internalization of nanoparticles
within targeted tumor cells. Moreover, targeting ligands can be employed
to promote the accumulation of nanoparticles within tumor vasculature
by targeting angiogenic endothelial cells of tumor blood vessels. , Therefore, functionalizing polymeric nanoparticles with targeting
moieties is a useful strategy to enhance the selective delivery of
anti-cancer therapeutics while minimizing off-target toxicity. However,
it is also crucial to maintain control over fundamental nanoparticle
properties such as size, shape and charge, to achieve an optimum therapeutic
outcome. Nanoparticles must also remain stable and include stealth
properties to avoid non-specific interactions with the immune system
and maximize blood circulation time. Furthermore, it is critical to
better understand the impact of the protein corona on targeting efficiency,
and ultimately develop strategies to tune this impact using specific
targeting approaches. One strategy to achieve this is to employ releasable
PEG, which de-shields a targeting ligand only at the target site.
Therefore, how specific targeting ligands are arranged on the surface
of nanoparticles, as well as their density, must be considered to
avoid the non-specific clearance by immune system. , 
A wide range of ligands have been employed to imbue polymer
nanoparticles with tumor targeting performance, a selection of which
are listed in . These ligands include proteins such as antibodies, transferrin,
lactoferrin, antibody fragments and growth factors, peptides such
as cyclic arginine-glycine-aspartic acid (cRGD), aptamers (A10 and
AS1411), polysaccharides, and small biomolecules such as folic acid
and biotin. Targeting ligands can be
attached to the surface or shell of polymeric nanoparticles either
by conjugation with the amphiphilic polymer backbone prior to self-assembly,
or by direct conjugation to the outer surface of the preformed nanoparticle.
Click chemistry is the most common synthetic approach for this purpose,
and has been extensively reviewed by Moreau and co-workers. A useful targeting ligand should be chosen
to bind with specific receptor sites that are overexpressed in tumor
cells but relatively absent in healthy cells. Moreover, choosing a
specific targeting site is mainly governed by the mechanism of action
of therapeutic cargo that needs to be delivered. In addition, recent
research has focused on targeting tumor vasculature in order to enhance
the retention and accumulation of nanoparticles within the tumor site.
The vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR), integrin
αvβ3 and vascular cell adhesion
molecule-1 (VCAM-1), are the most common tumor vascular endothelium
receptors that have been considered in the design of tumor vasculature-targeting
polymeric nanoparticles. 
 Small biomolecules such as folic acid (vitamin B9)
and biotin (vitamin
B7) have been widely employed as targeting ligands for cancer therapy. − They are readily available, non-toxic, inexpensive, non-immunogenic,
and easy to modify and characterize. Folic acid binds to the glycosylphosphatidylinositol-linked
folate receptor, which is overexpressed in tumor cells compared to
healthy cells. , , Liu et al. developed a folic acid-modified chitosan-based polymeric
micelle loaded with both DOX and all-trans-retinoic acid. In vivo studies indicated that these targeting micelles
resulted in 85.5% tumor inhibition in 4T1 tumor bearing mice, which
was an improvement compared to non-targeted micellar formulations. Zhao and co-workers designed a folic acid-conjugated
pH-responsive polymeric nanoparticle based on a DOX prodrug and encapsulating
a NIR dye (IR825) for combined photothermal-chemotherapy. Confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) images
revealed that DOX was successfully delivered to the cytoplasm of HeLa
cells. In vitro experiments showed much lower half
maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) values with NIR
light irradiation on both DOX-sensitive HeLa cells and DOX-resistant
A2780/DOXR cells (2.0 and 1.7 μg/mL, respectively)
compared to no NIR irradiation (6.7 and 12.6 μg/mL, respectively).
Moreover, in vivo studies demonstrated significantly
reduced tumor volume (50% over 1 day) confirming the combinational
therapeutic efficacy of these IR825-loaded DOX prodrug nanoparticles.
Unfortunately, folate receptor expression is also higher in the normal
healthy cells of the liver and kidneys, and this could result in off-target
toxicity. Giorgio and co-workers addressed this issue by developing
a dual MMP7-activated and folate receptor targeted micellar nanoparticle
comprising a pH-responsive core (PDMAEMA-b-PDMAEMA-co-PBMA-co-poly(propylacrylic acid)) and
a PEG shell with matrix metalloproteinase-7 (MMP7) cleavable peptide
and folic acid functionality for siRNA delivery. This system was designed to deliver siRNA via two stages.
PEGylation enhanced the tumor accumulation of the nanoparticles by
extending their circulation time in the blood. Following tumor accumulation,
the PEG shell was removed by the action of MMP7 enzyme, a type of
enzyme that is overexpressed in highly aggressive and metastatic cancers.
This resulted in the exposure of folic acid to bind with the folate
receptors, thereby enhancing the cellular uptake in targeted tumor
cells and minimizing the off-target effects. This nanoparticle design
showed limited cellular uptake in an MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell
line without MMP7, but MMP7 pretreated cells yielded higher nanoparticle
uptake, highlighting folate receptor-dependent accumulation. Furthermore,
both MMP7 activation and folate receptor engagement resulted in significant
knockdown (greater than 50%) of a model gene, luciferase, demonstrating
the efficiency of dual-targeting nanoparticle formulations. This highlights
the advantages of a novel dual-targeting method to improve the cellular
uptake of polymeric nanoparticles while minimizing the off-target
effects in healthy cells.
Small peptide molecules have also
gained significant attention
as targeting agents owing to their scalable and facile synthesis,
low production cost, and resistance to enzymatic degradation and the
immune system. − The cRGD peptide is one of the more promising
targeting ligands in the design of tumor targeting polymeric nanoparticles.
cRGD has a higher binding affinity with integrin αvβ3 receptors that are overexpressed on both activated
endothelial cells in tumor neovasculature and many types of solid
tumor cells. Chen and co-workers designed
cRGD-modified pH-responsive polymeric nanoparticles for targeted delivery
of DOX to neovascular cells and tumor cells. The DOX-loaded nanoparticle was prepared via the self-assembly of
cRGD conjugated PEG-b-poly(2,4,6-trimethoxybenzylidene-pentaerythritol
carbonate) (PEG-b-PTMBPEC). The cRGD-targeted nanoparticle
with a ligand density of 10% exhibited higher in vitro cytotoxicity in B16 and HUVEC cells compared to a non-targeted nanoparticle
control. In vivo studies showed significantly enhanced
tumor growth inhibition for the cRGD-targeted nanoparticle compared
to the unfunctionalized control. In 2016, Zhong and co-workers designed
a cRGD-functionalized, redox-responsive, shell-sheddable, and biodegradable
PEG-SS-PCL micelle for the enhanced delivery of DOX. The conjugation of cRGD significantly improved the cellular
internalization and association of DOX by a factor of 2.3 compared
to a non-targeted control in αvβ3 integrin receptor overexpressed tumor cells. There was no difference
in αvβ3 negative MCF-7 cells for
both targeted and non-targeted micelles. The in vivo anti-tumor efficacy was evaluated on U87MG glioma bearing nude mice,
and revealed that RGD-targeted micelles had greater potential to suppress
tumor growth compared to non-targeted micelles. In another study,
Zhong and co-workers developed DOX-loaded cRGD-modified polymersomes
with a disulfide cross-linked vesicular membrane as a targeted nanomedicine
for the treatment of lung cancer. The
polymersomes were prepared by self-assembling two block copolymers:
PEG-b-poly(trimethylene carbonate-co-dithiolane trimethylene carbonate) (PEG-b-P(TMC-co-DTC)) and cRGD-functionalized PEG-b-P(TMC-co-DTC). The average hydrodynamic diameter was around ∼100
nm for both targeted and non-targeted polymersomes. In vitro experiments confirmed that both polymersomes had rapid drug release
behavior (more than 70% in 24 h) in the presence of GSH. The cRGD-targeted
polymersomes exhibited higher cytotoxicity toward αvβ3 integrin overexpressed human lung cancer cells,
with an IC50 of 3.2 μg/mL, which was 4.1-fold lower
than an unfunctionalized polymersome control. In comparison with the
non-targeted control, the targeted polymersome showed a 2-fold enhanced
tumor accumulation, and in vivo studies in lung-tumor
bearing mice demonstrated higher tumor growth inhibition for the cRGD-targeted
design, with minimal side effects at a DOX dose of 12 mg/kg.
Another promising approach to design tumor targeting polymeric
nanoparticles is to employ monoclonal antibodies, which are highly
specific and have high affinity toward certain receptors. Epidermal
Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) is a cell surface receptor protein that
is overexpressed in several types of solid tumors, such as pancreatic
cancer, breast cancer, ovarian cancer, kidney, prostate, and non-small
cell lung cancer. It is responsible for cell signaling pathways that
control cell proliferation and survival. The anti-EGFR monoclonal antibody cetuximab (CTX) has the ability
to inhibit the EGFR signaling pathway by blocking binding of EGFR
ligands to their receptor site. Thus, CTX has been investigated as
a specific targeting molecule in the search for more efficient drug-delivery
designs. Mondal et al. developed an EGFR targeted, gemcitabine (GEM)-conjugated,
miRNA complexed micelle for enhanced codelivery of GEM and miRNA (miR205)
in the treatment of pancreatic cancer. These micelles were functionalized with cetuximab (C225) to target
EGFR receptors, and 30% (w/w) of the micelles resulted in significantly
higher uptake compared to non-targeted micelles. Moreover, the same
concentration of micelles showed enhanced tumor suppression against
a pancreatic tumor model, compared to non-targeted micelles. In a
previous study, the same researchers used a GE11 peptide as their
EGFR targeting ligand to prepare micelles for the delivery of GEM
to EGFR-overexpressing pancreatic cancer. These GE11-conjugated micelles demonstrated significant tumor growth
inhibition, indicating the significance of EGFR targeting for superior
pancreatic cancer treatment. McDaid et al. reported a CTX-functionalized
polymeric nanoparticle for the treatment of CTX-resistant pancreatic
cancer cells that express mutated Kirsten rat sarcoma (KRAS). The CPT-loaded, CTX-functionalized, PEGylated
PLGA nanoparticles were prepared with a size of approximately 200
nm. These CTX-functionalized nanoparticles induced cell apoptosis
more efficiently than non-targeted nanoparticles in mutant KRAS cell
line, PANC-1. In vivo results showed enhanced anti-tumor
efficacy for CTX-targeted nanoparticles in a PANC-1 xenograft model,
demonstrating effective and efficient targeting ability of CTX-conjugated
nanoparticles for CTX-resistant cancers. Trastuzumab is another specific
monoclonal antibody that has been used to target the human epidermal
growth factor (HER2) receptor, which is overexpressed in breast cancers.
Hoang et al. achieved a 5-fold increase in tumor uptake for trastuzumab-functionalized
PEG-b-PCL block copolymer micelles in HER2 overexpressed
BT-474 tumors, compared to unfunctionalized control micelles. An interesting extension to targeted nanoparticles
is the use of dual targeting. Koul and co-workers reported that dual-targeting
nanoparticles displayed superior cellular uptake and apoptosis compared
to individually targeted formulations. They designed a trastuzumab, and folic acid-conjugated redox-responsive
polymersome based on a PEGMA-b-PCL-ss-PCL-b-PEGMA tri-block copolymer for receptor-mediated DOX delivery.
These dual-functional polymersomes exhibited higher cellular uptake
in BT-474 and MCF-7 breast cancer cell lines compared to singly targeted
or non-targeted polymersomes. In vivo studies showed
an ∼82% reduction in tumor volume in mice compared to a free
DOX control (∼42% tumor regression), along with reduced toxicity
toward major organs (heart, liver, kidney).
Hyaluronic acid
(HA) is a natural polysaccharide that can bind
to the CD44 receptors overexpressed in various types of cancers including
ovarian, lung, and breast cancers. Due
to its excellent biocompatibility and biodegradability, HA has been
extensively utilized for developing polymeric nanoparticles for targeted
delivery of anti-cancer drugs. − Thurecht and co-workers developed
what they termed a multi-component drug-delivery system by encapsulating
CD44-targeting micelles within an alginate microcapsule for targeted
treatment of colorectal cancer. The
alginate capsule acted as a protective sheath to overcome the multiple
harsh obstacles encountered within the stomach following oral administration.
The encapsulated curcumin-loaded micelles were prepared through the
self-assembly of HA-conjugated PEGMA-b-PMMA. These
functionalized micelles exhibited a 6-fold higher cellular association
than non-targeted micelles in CD44 positive HCT-116 cells, but no
distinct difference was observed in CD44 negative Caco-2 cells ( ). Moreover, the
HA-targeted micelles yielded improved toxicity in HCT-116 cells, implying
that the HA targeting functionality improved the delivery of curcumin. In vivo studies demonstrated site-specific degradation properties
for the alginate microcapsule in an orthotopic tumor bearing mouse
model, and the HA-modified micelles showed enhanced tumor accumulation
and targeting efficiency compared to a non-targeted micelle control.
Zhong et al. developed an acid-responsive PTX prodrug micelle with
an HA shell based on HA-b-dendritic oligoglycerol
block copolymers (HA-dOG-PTX-PM). This micelle was designed for active
targeting of breast cancers overexpressed with CD44 receptors. HA-shelled micelles displayed a higher cell
killing efficiency against MCF-7 compared to a PTX control, with a
low IC50 value of 0.93 μg/mL compared to PTX (IC50 ∼ 1.63 μg/ml). The in vivo pharmacokinetics of these HA-shelled micelles demonstrated significantly
longer circulation time than free PTX, resulting in enhanced tumor
suppression with minimal side effects in a mouse model.
 Functionalizing polymeric nanoparticles with a
wide variety of
tumor targeting ligands is a promising strategy to enhance the selective
tumor accumulation and therapeutic efficacy, while minimizing the
off-target toxicity of chemotherapeutics. These designs, however,
are still in their infancy in regard to clinical application, as only
two actively targeted polymeric nanoparticles (CALAA-01 and BIND-014)
have been approved for clinical trials ( ). CALAA-01 is a cyclodextrin-based polymeric
nanoparticle functionalized with a transferrin ligand, and was the
first polymeric nanoparticle to be designed with active targeting
functionality. BIND-014 is a PEG-b-PLGA nanoparticle
tailored for docetaxel delivery, and employs a ligand targeting the
prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA), a protein specific for
prostate cancer. , It should be noted that most
of the preclinical studies are limited to in vitro investigations, focusing on nanoparticle design and their interactions
with specific cell lines, rather than assessing the in vivo therapeutic efficacy. Additionally, some of these receptors overexpressed
in disease sites are also expressed in normal healthy cells, limiting
the effectiveness of active targeting. Moreover, the tumor mice models used in vivo studies
do not fully resemble human cancers, and this heterogeneity will also
limit the clinical investigation of these actively targeted nanoparticles. The existence of a protein corona, which is
generated in vivo, is also likely to impact the efficacy
of targeting, and the extent of this effect is still poorly understood.
Most preclinical research has focused on designing polymeric nanoparticles
that target individual tumor cells or their intracellular organelles
to radically enhance nanoparticle uptake. However, the presence of
dormant cancer cells (DCCs) and cancer stem cells (CSCs) plays a crucial
role in cancer metastasis, recurrence, tumor heterogeneity and multi-drug
resistance, and can lead to poor therapeutic outcomes. − Thus, targeting dormant cancer cells and cancer stem cells is a
promising approach for cancer treatment. CSCs are a small subpopulation
of cancer cells that show resistance to most drugs and have the ability
to self-renew, differentiate, and proliferate. DCCs, on the other
hand, usually remain in a non-dividing quiescent state within the
tumor, but can become active after a certain period, initiating tumor
recurrence. , Currently, nanoparticle-mediated
targeting of CSCs is an active research area, with a primary focus
on targeting specific biomarkers (e.g., CD123, CD44, CD133, CD90,
ALDH, and EpCAM) and signaling pathways, such as Notch, Hedgehog,
and transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β). − In one interesting study, Rao et al. investigated the application
of chitosan-decorated Pluronic F127-cross-linked DOX-encapsulated
polymeric nanoparticles to target CD44 receptors on CSCs. These nanoparticles (IC50 = 0.35
μg/mL) exhibited a 6-fold increase in cytotoxicity compared
to free DOX (IC50 = 2.0 μg/mL) for eliminating CD44+ CSCs residing in 3D mammary tumor spheroids. The authors
claimed that chitosan can target CD44 receptors on CSCs to enhance
their anti-tumor efficacy, as chitosan partially resembles the chemical
structure of HA, which is the most common targeting ligand for CD44
receptors. CSC targeting designs have been comprehensively discussed
in recent reviews. , Thus, additional research efforts
should focus on designing efficient drug-delivery systems that not
only target solid tumors but also selectively eliminate metastatic
tumor cells, drug-resistant tumor cells, and cancer stem cells. 

7.1.2.3.

## Stimuli-responsive Release
Both
active and passive targeting can only enhance the accumulation of
nanoparticles at a tumor site by altering their pharmacokinetic properties.
However, despite the incorporation of targeting functionality, uncontrollable
drug release is a major challenge that limits the therapeutic efficacy
of many anti-cancer nanoparticle designs. Premature or non-specific
release of encapsulated therapeutics can result in dangerous off-target
toxicity. Moreover, insufficient intracellular release generally reduces
the therapeutic efficacy of anti-cancer drugs. Over the past few decades,
stimuli-responsive nanoparticles combined with either active or passive
targeting functionalities have garnered significant interest because
they can be designed to provide site-specific “on-demand”
drug release in response to a given stimulus. Generally, stimuli-responsive nanoparticles utilize a wide
variety of functional moieties that undergo structural or conformational
change in response to certain stimuli, yielding more efficient drug
release and reduced off-target toxicity. A wide range of stimuli have been employed to develop polymeric
nanoparticles for cancer therapy. These include endogenous stimuli
such as pH, redox environment, and enzymatic environment, or exogenous
stimuli including temperature, light, ultrasound, and a magnetic field. provides a detailed description of the respective
functional moieties that provide this stimuli-responsiveness. Many
stimuli-responsive polymeric nanoparticles have been investigated
in pre-clinical research and are the subject of multiple systematic
reviews. , 
Nanoparticles that take
advantage of the pH variation inherent in a tumor environment (6.4–6.8)
compared to the blood environment (∼7.4) are a promising strategy
to enhance cancer therapy. There are two main strategies to induce
pH-triggered drug release from polymeric nanoparticles: 1) use of
charge-shifting polymers that can undergo solubility or conformational
change in response to pH variation; and 2) conjugating drugs to a
nanoparticle via an acid labile linkage, which can be cleaved depending
on the pH, resulting in controllable drug release. Increasingly, such systems are being used to load multiple
therapeutics for improved therapeutic efficacy. Nanoparticles that
utilize combination therapy by co-delivering both siRNA and chemotherapeutics
are a promising strategy to combat multi-drug resistance. Shuai and co-workers developed a pH-responsive
polymeric nanoparticle from a tri-block copolymer, PEG-b-PLL-b-PAsp functionalized with a pH-responsive
diisopropylaminoethyl moiety. This particle co-loaded both DOX and
BCL-2 siRNA to treat multi-drug resistant hepatic carcinoma. At pH 5 (endosomal pH), DOX was rapidly released
due to the protonation of the tertiary amine group. In vitro cellular uptake studies showed efficient co-delivery of siRNA and
DOX in both HEPG2 and HEPG2/ADM cells. In comparison to scrambled
siRNA complexed nanoparticles (D/SCR-CP), nanoparticles with BCL-2
siRNA (D/siR-CP) exhibited higher in vitro toxicity
in HEPG2/ADM cells. The authors suggested that the downregulation
of the BCL-2 gene improved the therapeutic efficacy of DOX to achieve
a synergistic anti-cancer effect. Furthermore, in vivo studies demonstrated enhanced tumor suppression for siRNA complexed
nanoparticles in tumor bearing mice, illustrating the efficacy of
a pH-responsive co-delivery system for the treatment of multi-drug
resistant hepatic carcinoma.
pH-responsive polymeric nanoparticles
formulated with cationic
functionalities have displayed potential in delivering anionic RNA
for the treatment of cancer. Huang and co-workers developed a quaternary
ammonium-based pH-responsive polymeric micelle for the efficient delivery
of siRNA. The micelles (PDDT-Ms) were
formed by self-assembly of a tri-block copolymer (PEG45-b-P(DPAEMA50-co-DMAEMA56)-PT53) composed of positively charged poly(N,N,N-trimethylammonium
ethyl methacrylate) (PT, also known as PTDMAEMA), a pH-sensitive copolymer
(P(DPAEMA50-co-DMAEMA56)) and
hydrophilic PEG. Negatively charged siRNA was complexed via electrostatic
attraction to highly positively charged quaternary ammonium moieties
( ). The pH
was tuned by tailoring the ratio of charge-shifting monomers DPAEMA
and DMAEMA, with particle disassembly occurring at pH 6.5–6.8.
This stimuli-responsive morphological change released siRNA, yielding
86.9% gene silencing of a polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1) proto-oncogene.
In addition, these particles exhibited strong tumor growth inhibition
in liver cancer models, underscoring the enhanced anti-tumor efficacy
of pH-responsive micellar nanoparticles for siRNA-mediated cancer
treatment. Xu and co-workers developed a pH-responsive polymer–prodrug
hybrid nanoparticle for combinational cancer therapy through both
siRNA-mediated gene silencing and the release of the anti-cancer drug
mitoxantrone (MTO). The amphiphilic,
cationic, MTO-based prodrug interacted with negatively charged siRNA
to form a siRNA–prodrug polyion complex. This complex was assembled
with a pH-responsive polymer, methoxyl-poly(ethylene glycol)-b-poly(2-(pentamethyleneimino)ethyl methacrylate) (mPEG-b-PPMEMA). The polymer–prodrug hybrid nanoparticles
were able to disassemble at pH 6.8, highlighting their potential to
release siRNA–prodrug complexes in response to the lower pH
of a tumor microenvironment. Furthermore, the overexpressed esterase
in the tumor hydrolyzed the amphiphilic prodrug structure, inducing
the destabilization of the siRNA–prodrug complex for efficient
release of both siRNA and MTO in tumor cells. In vivo analysis revealed longer blood circulation for siRNA-loaded nanoparticles
(t1/2 ∼ 1 h) compared to naked
siRNA or free MTO (t1/2 ∼ less
than 10 min). In addition, the nanoparticles yielded a >7-fold
increase
in tumor accumulation for tumor-bearing nude mice as well as superior
gene silencing efficiency (70% knockdown of PLK1 gene expression).
Ultimately, these hybrid nanoparticles yielded high tumor growth inhibition
compared to both naked siRNA and free MTO ( ). These systems highlight the potential
use of pH-responsive nanoparticles for efficient siRNA delivery, and
their careful optimization into clinical studies would address major
challenges associated with other nanoparticle designs, such as poor
endosomal escape and cytosolic delivery.
 Reactive oxygen species (ROS) can be overproduced
in cancer cells,
resulting in higher ROS (up to 100 × 10–6 M)
levels than in normal tissues (20 × 10–9 M).
ROS are chemically reactive, single electron reduction products of
oxygen, and include superoxide (O2•–), nitric oxide (NO•), hydroxyl (•OH) radicals, hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), and
singlet oxygen (1O2). Endogenous ROS in cancer
cells are mainly linked with an increase in metabolic activity, mitochondrion
dysfunction due to hypoxia, and oncogene activity. , Thus, ROS-responsive polymeric nanoparticles have been extensively
investigated to achieve site-specific drug delivery in response to
higher ROS levels in cancer cells. , Ge and co-workers
designed polymersome nanoreactors with a pH-permeable membrane to
activate a cascade reaction for cooperative cancer therapy. The polymersome was prepared from a PEGylated
block copolymer prodrug, PEG-b-P(CPTKMA-co-PEMA), which comprises ROS-responsive thioketal-linked CPT methacrylate
(CPTKMA) and pH-responsive 2-(pentamethyleneimino)ethyl methacrylate
(PEMA). Glucose oxidase (GOD) was encapsulated within the inner aqueous
cavity, while ultrasmall iron oxide nanoparticles were encapsulated
in the polymersome’s membrane. The authors suggested that within
the acidic tumor microenvironment, a sequence of cascade reactions
is initiated following the enhancement of membrane permeability through
the protonation of PEMA moieties. These reactions are: 1) glucose
consumption to generate H2O2 under the catalysis
of GOD; 2) acid-triggered release of Fe2/3+ions; 3) production
of •OH radicals through the Fenton reaction between
H2O2 and Fe2/3+ions; and 4) •OH-triggered release of CPT via cleavage of ROS-responsive
thioketal linkers. In vivo anti-tumor studies demonstrated
higher tumor growth suppression in A549 tumor-bearing mice indicating
the suitability of this system for cooperative cancer therapy involving
chemotherapy, chemodynamic therapy and starvation therapy.
Recently,
there has been extensive exploration of how to activate
the protein stimulator of interferon genes (STING) to enhance anti-tumor
immunity. This includes promoting dendritic cell maturation, increasing
the presence of tumor-infiltrating antigen-presenting cells and CD8+ T cells, and enhancing the cytotoxicity of natural killer
cells. In one study, a ferrocine-containing polymersome nanoreactor
(D/G@PFc) was engineered by co-loading STING agonist, symmetry-linked
amidobenzimidazole (DiABZI) and GOD to enhance anti-tumor immunity
through STING activation and combination chemodynamic-immunotherapy
( ). The authors revealed that upon intravenous
administration, tumor acidity triggered the membrane permeability
of the polymersome, owing to the protonation of PEMA moieties, initiating
a series of cascade reactions. Thus, H2O2 was
generated through the catalysis of GOD, which was then transformed
into the highly toxic •OH via the Fenton reaction
through the catalysis of ferrocene moieties. •OH
promoted cell apoptosis as well as the release of tumor-associated
antigens and fragmented DNA, reversing the immunosuppressive tumor
microenvironment and promoting STING activation. Simultaneously, released
DiABZI was internalized by dendritic cells to activate the STING pathway,
which promoted the maturation of dendritic cells and finally recruited
CD8+ T cells to enhance the anti-tumor immunity via synergistic
chemodynamic-immunotherapy. In vivo anti-tumor studies
revealed significantly enhanced tumor growth inhibition in primary
and metastatic tumors when treated with polymersomes co-loaded with
both GOD and STING agonist, as opposed to individually loaded systems,
demonstrating the synergistic effect of STING agonist and chemodynamic
therapy. However, given the complexity of these designs, scalability
and cost are clear challenges hampering clinical applications. Primarily,
greater emphasis on nanoparticle stability is necessary before reaching
the targeted tumor site; otherwise, the initiation of non-specific
reactions may compromise therapeutic efficacy.
 Advances in nanomedicine and materials science
have led to the
design of polymeric nanoparticles that are responsive to external
stimuli. These stimuli can be controlled in a precise way to trigger
drug release at the targeted site, achieving both a more efficient
therapeutic outcome, as well as reducing toxicity in parts of the
body not exposed to such stimuli. Photodynamic therapy is one of the
most widely investigated exogeneous stimuli-responsive strategies
employed in cancer treatment. However, most biologically relevant
and safe wavelengths of light have low tumor penetration and lack
the energy needed to cleave chemical bonds, which hinders the application
of light-responsive systems. To address these challenges, and to achieve
light-controlled drug release, photosensitizers that can induce the
formation of singlet oxygen (1O2) species have
been applied to polymeric nanoparticle systems. Lin and co-workers
developed a singlet oxygen-responsive polymeric nanoparticle by introducing
a singlet oxygen-responsive aminoacrylate linker to a mPEG-b-PCL block copolymer. Boron dipyrromethene (BDP), a photosensitizer,
and the anti-cancer drug PTX were co-loaded. The nanoparticles showed enhanced 1O2 generation
under light irradiation, confirming that the photosensitivity of BDP
was retained even after encapsulation within a nanoparticle. Moreover,
these particles exhibited light-triggered disassembly and enhanced
PTX release (∼50%) after 1 h of laser light irradiation (660
nm, 5 mW cm–2), underscoring their light-responsive
drug release behavior. In vitro cell viability studies
demonstrated a higher cell killing efficiency for nanoparticles co-loaded
with both BDP and PTX. Furthermore, in vivo studies
revealed that the nanoparticles, upon light irradiation, yielded more
potent tumor inhibition in tumor bearing mice compared to a control
nanoparticle without a light-responsive linker. The mechanism suggested
for this strong cancer performance was that upon light irradiation,
the photosensitizer generates singlet oxygen species, which cleaves
the aminoacrylate linker, releasing PTX to kill the cancer cells via
a synergistic effect from both chemotherapy and photodynamic therapy.
Stimuli-responsive polymeric nanoparticles display very promising
anti-cancer performance, alas their clinical translation remains elusive.
The complex chemistry involved in these highly sophisticated systems
do not easily lend themselves to scalability or low-cost mass production,
and likely also negatively affect reproducibility and batch-to-batch
consistency. In addition, endogenous stimuli often slightly vary between
preclinical and clinical tumor models, as well as between patient
populations, which are inherently heterogeneous. External triggers
can be precisely controlled, but poor tumor penetration and non-specific
exposure also limit the applicability of nanoparticles that utilize
these triggers. The next step in applying multi-functional systems
that combine both targeting functionalities and stimuli-responsiveness
involves reproducible designs whose preparation is facile. , 

7.2.

## Vaccines
Vaccination plays a critical
role in preventing infectious diseases by providing long-lasting acquired
immunity. In the last half-century,
vaccines have contributed to controlling the spread of many infectious
diseases including smallpox, measles, tetanus, and polio, and have
played a significant role reducing the morbidity of influenza and
the corona virus (SARS-CoV-2) disease (COVID-19). Live attenuated
vaccines, which employ a weakened form of the virus (antigen) that
can still replicate, and inactivated vaccines, which utilize the destroyed
genetic material of the antigen, are the most common vaccine formulations
that have been developed thus far. However, both can cause adverse
side effects due to their insufficient inactivation processes, and
the fact that “dead” viruses can sometimes revert to
their pathogenic forms. To tackle these safety issues, subunit vaccines
have been developed by utilizing a specific antigenic component of
the pathogens, such as a particular protein, peptide, or polysaccharide. However, poor immunogenicity remains a major
obstacle that can hinder the therapeutic efficacy of these subunit
vaccines when using antigens alone. Thus, these kinds of vaccines
have been formulated with delivery systems and adjuvants to enhance
their antigen-specific immune response. Adjuvants are substances that
stimulate the immune response of co-delivered antigens by activating
the immune system and enhancing the durability of an immune response. Thus, the development of more efficient delivery
systems and adjuvants can induce a strong immune response by improving
the immunogenicity of antigens while reducing the vaccine dosage and
production cost. 
It is critical
to understand the mechanism and pathways of antigen-specific immune
responses when designing an effective delivery system for subunit
vaccines. Vaccination aims to provide long-term protection by triggering
the adaptive immune response. Humoral immunity and cellular immunity
are the two main mechanisms of the adaptive immune response. The humoral
immune response is primarily driven by B-lymphocytes and produces
antigen-specific
antibodies in response to extracellular pathogens. However, cellular
immune response does not depend on antibodies and is primarily mediated
by mature T cells, macrophages, and the release of cytokines in response
to intracellular pathogens. Adaptive immunity is slowly developed
against an infection, but is ultimately highly specific to the invading
pathogen, providing long-term protection. Upon vaccine administration,
the antigen is first taken up by the antigen presenting cells (APCs).
Dendritic cells (DCs) are the most potent APCs, and are responsible
for antigen uptake and transport through the lymphatic system. Inside
the lymph nodes, antigens are processed to form major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) molecules that are then transported to the surface of
DCs to induce interaction with T-lymphocytes (T cells). DCs with antigen-MHC
I molecules activate the CD8+ T cells to kill the infected/mutated
cells, whereas MHC II molecules activate the CD4+ T cells
( ). Activated CD4+ T cells can be differentiated
into T-helper (Th) type cells (Th1, Th2, Th17) and T follicular helper
(Tfh) cells). Th1 cells produce various
cytokines to stimulate the cellular immune response and activated
Th2 cells interact with B-lymphocytes (B cells) to stimulate the humoral
immune response. Plasma cells and memory cells are two types of B
cells that are vitally important to long-term immunity. Plasma cells
are capable of producing antibodies against specific antigens, whereas
memory cells can memorize characteristics of previously encountered
antigens, thus providing an immune response against any future infections
along with long-term protection. 
 Polymeric nanoparticles have shown enormous potential
in subunit
vaccine development, as they can optimize the immune response by controlling
the antigen release at APCs. Both synthetic and natural polymers such
as PLGA, HA, chitosan, and alginate have been widely explored in vaccine
preparation due to their biocompatibility and non-toxic nature. Polymeric nanoparticles have the potential
to deliver a wide range of antigens including proteins, peptides,
or nucleic acids via encapsulation or covalent conjugation. Such encapsulation
protects the antigen from enzymatic degradation, while enhancing blood
circulation time to reach DCs. Furthermore, polymer nanoparticles
can be easily functionalized with targeting moieties that recognize
the specific receptors present on the surface of DCs to enhance site-specific
antigen uptake and activate specific immune-response pathways. Polymer nanoparticles also have self-adjuvanting
properties, and they can act as adjuvants to enhance the immune response
of co-loaded antigens. , Thus, polymeric nanoparticles
can be easily manipulated to deliver a lower dose of antigen and adjuvants,
while generating a comparatively strong immune response with minimal
side effects. However, the field of polymeric nanoparticles for application
in vaccine development is still relatively new, and only a few nanoparticle
formulations have shown promise regarding clinical trials. DermaVir,
a mannosylated PEI polyplex vaccine loaded with DNA-encoded HIV antigens,
has
completed phase I/II clinical trials for HIV immunotherapy. In addition,
cancer vaccines based on PLGA, such as WDVAX, a PLGA scaffold vaccine
for melanoma, and PRECIOUS-01, a PLGA nanoparticle loaded with natural
killer T cell activators and tumor antigens for the treatment of solid
tumors, are currently in phase I clinical trials. , 
7.2.1.

## Mucosal Vaccines
Oral, nasal, rectal,
or vaginal mucosal surfaces are the basic entry points for the majority
of pathogens. Mucosal tissue is composed of highly compartmentalized
mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) that is responsible for providing
a mucosal immune response. Antigens delivered via mucosal vaccines
can interact with MALT to induce both a mucosal and systematic immune
response. Thus, they can neutralize the pathogens at mucosal sites
before a serious infection progresses. , 
Mucosal
vaccines based on biodegradable polymeric nanoparticles have shown
tremendous potential to induce humoral, cellular, and mucosal immune
responses. In addition, they can both control and prolong the release
of antigens at mucosal sites and protect the stability of antigens
against degradation. PLGA and PLA are the most well-studied, FDA approved
biodegradable polymers that have been used in antigen delivery. , It has been reported, however, that PLGA nanoparticles are not as
successful for nasal vaccination due to their lack of mucoadhesiveness,
coupled with their rapid nasal clearance. Thus, to reduce the mucosal
clearance of PLGA nanoparticles, chitosan and glycol chitosan derivatives
are often functionalized to their surface. Pawar et al. designed chitosan and glycol chitosan coated PLGA nanoparticles
to understand the mucosal immune response for nasal vaccine delivery. These glycol chitosan coated PLGA nanoparticles
demonstrated a relatively strong immune response due to their enhanced
mucoadhesive properties. In addition, PLGA- and PLA-based nanoparticles
can encapsulate hydrophobic molecules such as pattern recognition
receptor (PRR) ligands that are capable of specifically stimulating
DCs that act as the bridge between innate and adaptive immune responses.
Pavot et al. prepared a PLA nanoparticle to enhance the delivery of
nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain (NOD) ligands, a type of
cytosolic PRR ligand, which are responsible for stimulating DCs to
provide immune response. Each PLA nanoparticle
was coated with HIV-1 gag p24 antigen, and NOD-loaded PLA nanoparticles
exhibited enhanced HIV-specific T cell activation in HIV positive
patients. In addition, enhanced p24-specific immune responses, both
systemic and mucosal, were observed following both mucosal and parenteral
administration.
Chitosan has also been widely applied in mucosal
vaccine development.
Chitosan is cationic in nature, and chitosan-based nanoparticles can
increase the cellular uptake efficiency of antigens by interacting
with anionic nasal epithelial cells. Moreover, chitosan has shown
adjuvant properties in vaccine formulations, improving both humoral
and cellular immune response. However,
poor solubility at physiological pH is one of the major limitations
of chitosan for pharmaceutical applications. Thus, chitosan is often
modified with other functional groups to overcome this solubility
problem, thereby enhancing its effectiveness as a mucosal vaccine
strategy. Nanoparticles prepared from chitosan derivatives are some
of the most promising designs to enhance mucosal immunity. , To evaluate the adjuvant properties and mucosal immune response
of chitosan derivative nanoparticles, Zhao and co-workers developed
bovine serum albumin (BSA)-loaded N-2-hydroxypropyl
trimethyl ammonium chloride chitosan/N,O-carboxymethyl chitosan nanoparticles (N-2-HACC/CMCS/BSA NPs). Both in vitro and in vivo studies revealed enhanced BSA antigen uptake in
dendritic cells for these chitosan nanoparticles, as opposed to the
antigen alone. The nanoparticles exhibited prolonged antigen retention
in mucosal tissues even after 8 h post immunization, confirming the
antigen-protective quality of the nanoparticle. Moreover, the nanoparticles
exhibited a higher ratio of activated DCs (CD11c+) in the
splenocytes of mice, together with a greater level of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells. This suggests that chitosan (N-2-HACC/CMCS
NPs) nanoparticles have a greater ability to promote antigen presentation
in DCs, and yield an enhanced mucosal and systematic immune response.
PEI is a well-studied cationic polymer, which is employed to deliver
a wide range of cargo, including nucleic acids and proteins. It has
been recently reported that polycationic PEI can form nanocomplexes
that are capable of simultaneous delivery of adjuvants and antigen
molecules to induce cross-protective influenza immunity. Wang and
co-workers fabricated PEI nanoparticles (PEI-H3/CpG) incorporating
both an influenza vaccine antigen hemagglutinin (H3), and the adjuvant
CpG. PEI-H3/CpG nanoparticles demonstrated
a considerably enhanced local and cellular immune response, which
did not decay even after 6 months post-immunization. Furthermore,
in comparison to PEI/H3, the PEI-H3/CpG nanoparticle exhibited a multi-faceted
immune response, ensuring improved cross-protection against influenza
infection. In a recent study, Lei et al. investigated the effectiveness
of cationic nanocarriers—PEI, chitosan, and N-[1-(2,3-dioleoyloxy)propyl]-N,N,N-trimethylammonium chloride (DOTAP)—as
adjuvants for the recombinant S-RBD vaccine for SARS-CoV-2. Anionic
and neutral liposomes were used as controls. This study reported enhanced cellular and humoral immune responses
for cationic nanoparticles, especially PEI cationic nanoparticles,
which exhibited significantly improved antigen uptake and activation
of dendritic cells compared to chitosan and other control nanoparticles.
However, the choice of PEI and chitosan in mucosal delivery may depend
on several other factors, such as the targeted mucosal site, the type
of antigen to be delivered, and the administration route. PEI may show efficient transfection compared
to chitosan, however, high molecular weight PEI can be more cytotoxic,
limiting its clinical applicability. − Polymeric nanoparticulate-based
vaccines have also been developed to treat bacterial infections. Hu
and co-workers published a thorough review of various nanomaterial-based
antibacterial vaccines against bacterial infections. 

7.2.2.

## Cancer Vaccines
Despite the considerable
progress of traditional cancer treatment methods, cancer immunotherapy
has recently emerged as a promising treatment choice for various types
of cancers. Cancer immunotherapy involves boosting the body’s
inherent immune system to attack cancer cells via natural mechanisms.
Vaccination is one of the most promising immunotherapy strategies,
as it can induce a tumor-specific immune response, as well as bestow
long-term immunity to suppress the tumor growth, recurrence, and metastasis. − Prophylactic cancer vaccines are administered as a preventive measure
to reduce the development of cancer by initiating a specific immune
response. In contrast, therapeutic vaccines are administered to an
established tumor, aiming to induce an immune response for tumor regression,
establish lasting anti-tumor memory, and avoid non-specific adverse
reactions. , Therapeutic cancer vaccination
normally involves the delivery of antigens and appropriate adjuvants
to APCs, followed by the activation of APCs and the presentation of
antigens to tumor-specific T cells, capped-off by the trafficking
of tumor specific T cells into tumors, which eradicate the cancer
cells. , However, it is evident that there are numerous
challenges that need to be overcome to improve the immune response
of conventional subunit vaccine formulations. The poor activation
of APCs and the ineffective presentation of antigens to T cells can
prevent the effective clinical translation of these conventional cancer
vaccines.
Nanoparticle-based vaccines have shown enormous promise
as vaccine delivery systems, as they can more efficiently deliver
antigens and adjuvants to provide tumor-specific immunity, and establish
long-term immune response that prevent tumor reoccurrence. − Due to their highly tunable characteristics and potential for functionally
sophisticated designs, nanoparticles can more efficiently promote
site-specific delivery, thereby improving the activation of DCs to
enhance the cross-presentation of antigens to T cells, ensuring enhanced
tumor suppression. , Following the successful delivery
of antigens to DCs, they are processed and presented to the CD8+ T and CD4+ T cells via MHC I and MHC II molecules,
respectively. Activation of CD8+ T cells into cytotoxic
T lymphocytes initiates a cellular immune response and promotes the
elimination of antigen specific tumor cells. 
Optimizing the delivery of antigens to DCs is essential for
polymeric
nanoparticles to yield a more efficient immune response. To achieve
this, the surface of polymer nanoparticles can be modified with specific
ligands that bind to receptors overexpressed on DCs. Upon excretion
into lymph nodes, the particles can bind with these specific receptors
on DCs to improve their cellular uptake and thereby enhance the antigen
delivery. Different types of receptors such as Fc receptor (FcR),
mannose receptor, DEC-205, CD40, and CD11c receptors have been employed
in engineering DC-targeted nanoparticles. − Conniot et al. designed two PLGA/PLA nanoparticles, one non-mannosylated,
and the other mannosylated, for the efficient co-delivery of a melanoma-associated
antigen and Toll-like receptor (TLR) agonist to DCs. Unsurprisingly, the targeted, mannosylated nanoparticle
exhibited higher cellular internalization compared to the non-mannosylated
nanoparticle. In combination with ibrutinib and αPD-1/αOX40,
the mannosylated nanoparticle demonstrated distinct remission of tumor
growth and prolonged survival in tumor bearing mice compared to its
unfunctionalized counterpart. These results suggest that mannose receptor
targeting is a useful strategy for enhancing antigen cross-presentation
and the activation of tumor-antigen specific T cells. Recently, Pun
and co-workers reported a mannosylated polymer nanoparticle (P-I/II
micelle) for anti-cancer peptide antigen delivery ( ). The amphiphilic polymer was designed with a hydrophilic mannose
methacrylate block and a hydrophobic pH-responsive PDPAEMA block,
and MHC-I and MHC-II antigens were conjugated to the pH-responsive
block via reversible disulfide linkages to initiate selective delivery
of peptide antigens after DC internalization. The micelles were stable
at physiological pH but disassembled in the acidic environment of
the endosome (pH < 6.5–6.6) demonstrating enhanced endosomal
delivery of antigens. In vivo studies revealed both
the enhanced retention of the mannosylated nanoparticle within lymph
nodes, as well as improved DC internalization in CD11c+ and MHC11+ cells compared with free peptide and non-targeted
particles. Moreover, enhanced DC (CD8+) activation was
observed with the targeted nanoparticles, inducing significant increase
in the number of IFN-γ- and TNF-α-producing
CD8+ T cells in the splenocytes demonstrating the correlation
of DC maturation and T cell activation. Thus, these results emphasized
the significantly enhanced anti-tumor performance bestowed by mannosylated
nanoparticles as opposed to the free antigen, further reinforcing
the significance of targeting functionalities for efficient delivery
of peptide cancer vaccines.
 TLR agonists are potent immune stimulators that
have been employed
in cancer vaccines. , TLRs, however, can cause severe
side effects when administrated in their free form, and they are also
prone to elimination very quickly by the circulatory system. Thus,
polymeric nanoparticles have been developed to improve the accumulation
of TLR agonists in lymph nodes. − Moreover, nanoparticles
can be designed to deliver TLR agonists to their receptor sites, located
at the inner endosomal membrane. Xia et al. reported a pH- and enzyme-responsive
TLR7/8 agonist conjugated nanoparticle that could activate the TLR7/8
signaling pathway to achieve robust cancer immunotherapy. The selected TLR7/8 agonist, imidazoquinoline
(IMDQ), was covalently conjugated to the pH-responsive PEG-b-PDPAEMA block copolymer via an enzyme-responsive linkage
GLy-Phe-Leu-Gly (GFLG), and the antigen OVA was physically loaded
within the nanoparticle during self-assembly. Upon nanoparticle internalization
within DCs, pH induced disassembly into unimers occurred, and the
degradation of GFLG linkage released IMDQ, stimulating the TLR7/8
receptors. In vivo studies demonstrated an excellent
anti-tumor immune response against both mouse melanoma and colon cancer,
owing to the controlled delivery of TLR7/8 agonist to its receptor
sites at the endosomal membrane.
Antigen cross-presentation
to CD8+ T cells via MHC I
molecules is essential for activating a cytotoxic T cell response. However, nanoparticles become trapped in endosomes
following internalization within DCs. It is essential to develop strategies
to improve the endosomal escape of nanoparticles, as the cytosolic
delivery of antigens is necessary for efficient antigen cross-presentation
to T cells. Thus, engineering pH-responsive
nanoparticles that are able to escape the endosome is a promising
strategy to improve the cytosolic delivery of antigens. , Stayton and co-workers reported a pH-responsive micellar nanoparticle
with endosomolytic activity to control the cytosolic delivery of an
antigen while enhancing CD8+ T cell response. The micellar structure comprised a pH-responsive
PDMAEMA core, propylacrylic acid, PBMA and a hydrophilic HPMA shell
containing pyridyl disulfide moieties for the conjugation of an antigen.
Protonation of the pH-responsive polymer block disrupted the endosomal
membrane, enhancing the cytosolic delivery of the antigen. These antigen-conjugated
pH-responsive nanoparticles exhibited significantly enhanced antigen-cross
presentation relative to a non-responsive control, free antigen, and
physical mixture of antigen and the particle. Furthermore, the antigen-conjugated
pH-responsive nanoparticles demonstrated enhanced antigen specific
CD8+ T cell responses compared to the non pH-responsive
control nanoparticles. In addition, pH-responsive polymer nanoparticles
have been investigated to enhance the co-delivery of neoantigens and
STING agonists for tumor immunotherapy, as their stimuli-responsiveness
enhances the release efficiency and cytosolic delivery of these therapeutics. These types of sophisticated stimuli-responsive
polymeric nanoparticles notably enhance the precise delivery of antigen
and adjuvants to their targeted sites, indicating their potential
for clinical translation.

7.3.

## Antimicrobial Therapy
Despite the
discovery and utility of antibiotics in the early 20th century,
treating bacteria remains a challenge to global health. The efficacy
of conventional antibiotic treatment is seriously threatened by the
recent emergence of antimicrobial resistance, as well as the various
barriers that lower the efficiency of medication, including biofilms
and hard-to-reach infection sites. Therefore, there is a strong incentive
in medical research to develop new platforms that can better overcome
these challenges. Polymeric nanoparticles are one of the more promising
platforms in this regard, primarily due to their sophisticated design
capability, which allows for enhanced targeting, penetration and drug
loading, as well as the addition of functionality and stimuli-responsiveness.
7.3.1.

## Intracellular Infections
Phagocytes,
including neutrophils, macrophages, and dendritic cells, are activated
by the immune system in response to foreign microorganisms (pathogens).
These pathogens are then eliminated through phagocytosis, which involves
the phagocytes “ingesting” and ultimately destroying
the pathogens. During this process, phagosomes acidify, generate reactive
oxygen and nitrogen species, and release antimicrobial proteins and
peptides that together eliminate pathogens. However, certain intracellular
bacteria are able to survive this process. These bacteria can be divided into two groups: obligate intracellular
bacteria, which encompasses many species of Anaplasma, Chlamydia, Coxiella
burnetiid, etc; and facultative intracellular bacteria,
which includes Staphylococcus aureus, Listeria monocytogenes, and Legionella pneumophila. The former category requires
a eukaryotic host to replicate, while the latter can replicate both
inside and outside host cells. Once inside a host cell, intracellular
bacteria can eventually exit through extrusion or lysis. This intracellular penetration can result in
a persistent bacterial infection, which, in the case of Helicobacter pylori in gastric mucosa, can be life-long. S. aureus, one
of the most prevalent kinds of bacteria, can survive phagocytosis
by secreting protective substances inside phagosomes such as α-toxin,
which induces endosomal escape. S. aureus is also able to manipulate the cell death pathways of neutrophils
to exit the host cell and cause a local infection. Moreover, antibiotics
such as β-lactams and glycopeptides are not capable of entering
eukaryotic cells, and other antibiotics such as rifampicin become
less effective due to the acidic environment within phagolysosomes.
Intracellular S. aureus can therefore
be protected from antibiotics by its own host. In order to overcome this major problem, significant research
has centered on a myriad of intracellular antibiotic drug-delivery
vectors, including polymeric nanoparticles that are described in detail
below.
In one study, phosphatidylcholine-chitosan nanoparticles
loaded with gentamicin (a bactericide) were designed, and effectively
killed L. monocytogenes and P. aeruginosa in RAW264.7 cells. This is due to the
fact that the nanoparticles were effectively engulfed by phagocytes,
resulting in higher intracellular concentration of gentamicin. Jiang et al. used PLGA nanoparticles to passively
target intracellular Klebsiella pneumoniae. By using a w/o/w emulsion formulation, high loading of gentamicin
(135 μg per mg PLGA) was achieved. The nanoparticles killed
intracellular bacteria more effectively compared to free gentamicin,
and also reduced inflammatory responses. 
Given that phagocytes play a vital role in eliminating pathogens,
modulating the physical properties of nanoparticles for preferential
uptake by phagocytes is a common strategy employed to increase the
therapeutic efficacy of antibiotics. Research suggests that particle
sizes from 500 to 1000 nm promote uptake by phagocytes. For example,
Elnaggar et al. synthesized a 600 nm PLGA nanoparticle modified with
an iron-tannic acid supramolecular complex. The nanoparticles were
loaded with pexiganan (a cationic antimicrobial peptide) and silver
(Ag) nanoparticles (famous for their antimicrobial activity) via attachment
to the supramolecular complex. These nanoparticles displayed preferential
uptake by macrophages, enhancing intracellular Ag accumulation and
pexiganan release. Pei et al. synthesized
an 800 nm nanoparticle consisting of PLGA, PEG-b-PLGA,
Eudragit E 100—a cationic polymer based on PDMAEMA—and
a modified zwitterionic chitosan derivative (ZWC). Vancomycin was
loaded through electrostatic attraction with Eudragit E 100, and was
released in an acidic environment via the charge shifting properties
of the modified ZWC. Due to the selective uptake of 500 to 1000 nm
nanoparticles by macrophages, and the pH-responsive release of vancomycin,
these nanoparticles achieved a ten-fold increase in the concentration
of vancomycin inside macrophages. This yielded strong antibacterial
activity against a series of intracellular bacteria. 
Phagocytes utilize receptor-mediated internalization.
Sugar moieties
are a useful strategy to target such receptors and thus increase intracellular
accumulation, and include mannose, HA, and galactose. The mannose
receptor, a transmembrane glycoprotein from the C-type lectin family,
can recognize and bind to a variety of bacteria that are coated with
mannose-containing structures, while also functioning as an endocytic
receptor, making it an attractive target for intracellular delivery. Yang et al. used a mannosylated exosome (intracellular
membrane-based vesicles secreted by cells) for delivery of both lysostaphin
(antimicrobial enzyme) and vancomycin. According to flow cytometry,
mannosylated exosomes showed a high uptake in RAW264.7 cells, while
uptake was poor in the case of unmodified exosomes and in A549 cells
(human bronchial epithelial cell that has no expression of mannose
receptor). Pretreatment with d-mannosamine to inhibit the
receptor resulted in no uptake, which further emphasized that the
selective internalization of nanoparticles was through the interaction
of the modified mannose on the surface. Using mannosylated exosomes
to deliver both lysostaphin and vancomycin resulted in a significant
reduction of intracellular methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
aureus (MRSA) due to multiple bactericidal mechanisms
involved. Lunn et al. used surfactant-free
emulsion polymerization to synthesize a nanoparticle composed of a
tri-block copolymer containing mannopyran-1-oxyethyl acrylamide, PDPAEMA,
and diacetone acrylamide-hydrazone-isoniazid. The uptake of these
mannose-functionalized nanoparticles was significantly enhanced compared
to a PEG-functionalized control, due to preferential endocytosis of
mannose. After endocytosis, the nanoparticle disassembled due to the
protonation of PDPAEMA, and isoniazid was then released by acidic
hydrolysis of the hydrazone linker. These nanoparticles showed improved
activity against intracellular Mycobacterium bovis BCG. 
Functionalizing nanoparticles
with HA offers a promising strategy
to enhance their cell targeting capabilities and thus improve therapeutic
efficacy. Zhang et al. modified a tetracycline-loaded
zeolitic imidazolate framework-8 (ZIF-8) with a HA coating via conjugation
between the coordination bond of Zn2+ and the carboxyl
group on HA. The HA-functionalized nanoparticles were found to enter
macrophages at a significantly higher level than particles without
any HA. Once inside the cell, the pH-responsive ZIF-8 then released
a combination of antibiotics and zinc ions, resulting in a 98% clearance
of intracellular S. aureus. 
Macrophage galactose-type calcium-type
lectin (MGL) is a type 2
transmembrane glycoprotein that has a calcium-dependent carbohydrate
recognition domain. These proteins are expressed exclusively on macrophages
and dendritic cells. As opposed to mannose-specific lectins, these
lectins recognize galactose and N-acetylgalactosamine. A clarithromycin-loaded nanoparticle was designed
that comprised a hydrophilic mannose- and galactose-modified shell
polymer, and a PCL block copolymer core functionalized with phenylboronic
acid groups and glycosyl groups. This nanoparticle displayed strong
uptake capability in cells with mannose and galactose receptors, as
well as specific interaction with bacterial membranes, attributed
to the phenylboronic acid groups. Degradation of the PCL core released
clarithromycin, resulting in strong bactericidal activity against S. aureus both in vitro and in vivo. 
Cell membranes
are biocompatible, and can also be employed to target
intracellular pathogens. Gao et al. coated a PLGA nanoparticle with
extracellular vesicles of S. aureus. These nanoparticles showed enhanced uptake compared to PEGylated
and lipid-based vehicles in both S. aureus infected phagocytes and E. coli infected
macrophages. This suggests that the proteins on bacterial membranes
are critical for bacteria-host and bacteria-bacteria interactions.
Furthermore, these nanoparticles were loaded with either vancomycin
or rifampicin, and displayed significantly improved antimicrobial
efficacy in kidneys and lungs. Li et
al. encapsulated an amphiphilic antibiotic conjugate of triclosan
and ciprofloxacin with a membrane from mouse J774A.1 cells. The resultant
nanoparticles showed superior engulfment by infected mouse J774.1
macrophages compared to liposomes. Moreover, the nanoparticles were
selectively engulfed by infected macrophages rather than sterile macrophages.
Finally, these nanoparticles showed significantly higher antimicrobial
efficiency in S. aureus infected mouse
cells in vivo compared to ciprofloxacin alone. 
To identify peptides targeting S. aureus, in vivo screenings of
phage-display peptide libraries
were employed. A 9-amino acid cyclic peptide (CARGGLKSC) was synthesized,
based on this screening, which could bind to S. aureusin vitro. Vancomycin-loaded porous silicon nanoparticles
coated with the peptide showed >4-fold higher accumulation in the
infected lung with a 10-fold increase of vancomycin efficacy against
intracellular S. aureus. 
During phagocytosis, the phagosome becomes more acidic over
time,
reaching pH levels as low as 4.5 in the phagolysosome. Utilizing this
pH change, Su et al. synthesized a streptomycin-loaded polymer–liposome
hybrid nanoparticle that included PDEAEMA for pH responsiveness, and
a mannose-functionalized methacrylate monomer for enhanced targeting.
Upon a pH decrease, PDEAEMA shifted from hydrophobic to hydrophilic,
disrupting the lipid bilayer and causing a burst release of streptomycin.
Overall, these nanoparticles yielded a 13-fold increase in the elimination
of intracellular F. novicida compared
to a control. Li et al. functionalized
a moxifloxacin-loaded mesoporous silica nanoparticle using a nanovalve
consisting of a 1-methyl-1-H-benzimidazole stalk
(pKa ∼ 6) and β-cyclodextrin.
The stalk was covalently attached to the pore entrance of silica and
capped by cyclodextrin through hydrophobic interactions. When the
pH dropped below 6, the stalk became protonated and the interaction
declined, leading to nanoparticle disassembly. These nanoparticles
displayed a 2- to 4-fold increase in antibiotic efficacy compared
to free moxifloxacin in F. tularenisis infected macrophages in the lung. Feng
et al. fabricated a cascade targeting rifampicin-loaded nanoparticle
composed of poly(α-N-acryloyl-phenylalanine)-b-(β-N-acryloyl-d-aminoalanine)
conjugated to mannose via a pH-responsive linker ( ). Mannose acted as a targeting ligand, promoting the internalization
of nanoparticles into phagosomes. pH-triggered cleavage of mannose
exposed the d-aminoalanine moieties, which allowed the nanoparticle
to escape into the cytoplasm and specifically bind to methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA). Through this targeting, the nanoparticles
outperformed a myriad of nanoparticle controls, as well as free rifampicin
both in vivo and in vitro.
 Enzymes such as phosphatase, lipase, and esterase
can also be employed
as a stimulus to trigger antibiotic drug delivery through nanoparticle
disassembly. For example, Xiong et al. synthesized a vancomycin-loaded
PPE cross-linked nanogel with a mannose-conjugated PEG shell. Phosphatase
and phospholipase secreted by MRSA stimulated the degradation of the
nanogel, leading to the release of vancomycin. The nanoparticles showed
a 50-fold increase in the elimination of intracellular MRSA in RAW264.7
macrophages compared to a control. Chen
et al. synthesized a nanoparticle comprising a mannose-modified poly(ethyl-bis[2-(acryloxy)-ethyl]
phosphate-co-2-propenoic acid tetraphenylethylene
ester) and encapsulating an antibiotic conjugate of ciprofloxacin
and deferoxamine complexed with Fe3+ (DFeC).
After internalization through mannose-mediated phagocytosis, the polymer
was degraded by lipase and phospholipase enzymes secreted by bacteria,
which resulted in the release of DFeC. These nanoparticles
eliminated intracellular S. aureusin vivo, such that infected mice survived. Su et al. designed an inhalable polymeric prodrug (drugamer),
which featured mannose for enhanced alveolar macrophage uptake, and
a prodrug of ciprofloxacin with a protease-cleavable valine-citrulline
(VC) linker. This VC linker was designed to rapidly hydrolyze by human
liver cathepsin B enzyme at lysosomal pH. When investigated in an
airborne F. novicida infection experiment in vivo, these drugamers displayed a strong retention time
and strong antimicrobial performance. 
The redox environment is another well studied endogenous stimuli
for the design of antimicrobial polymeric nanoparticles. Zhang et
al. synthesized a vancomycin-loaded redox-responsive nanoparticle
by employing cystine dimethacrylate as a cross-linker. Red blood cell
(RBC) membranes were employed both as a nanoreactor and also as a
coating material. These RBC membranes were posited to neutralize toxins
secreted by bacteria and to promote nanoparticle uptake. The nanoparticles
rapidly released vancomycin, which resulted in superior antibacterial
activity compared to both the free drug and non-responsive control. Kang et al. designed a multi-functional redox-responsive
nanoparticle for tumor-resident intracellular E. coli. This nanoparticle featured HA for tumor receptor targeting, guanidine
functionality for tumor penetration and membrane destabilization activity,
redox-responsive disulfide bonds on its core polymers, and a loaded
photothermal agent along with gemcitabine, an antibiotic. Overall,
these nanoparticles achieved very high levels of therapeutic efficacy
on tumor-resident bacteria through the combination of chemotherapy,
phototherapy, and stimuli-responsiveness. 
Instead of directly killing bacteria, drug-delivery systems
that
promote antimicrobial immunity have also received the attention of
researchers. For example, Pi et al. synthesized mannose-conjugated,
chitosan stabilized selenium nanoparticles that encapsulated isoniazid—an
antimicrobial drug. The nanoparticles were specifically internalized
through mannose-receptor dependent and clathrin-mediated endocytosis,
and released isoniazid in the lysosome. These particles could not
only kill the intracellular Mycobacteiaum tuberculosis (Mtb) by direct contact, but also induce antimicrobial immunity. 

7.3.2.

## Biofilm Infection
Biofilms are
a survival strategy adopted by bacteria to provide a surface for growth
and protection from hostile environments. Biofilms are mainly formed by extracellular polymeric substances
such as exopolysaccharides, extracellular proteins, and DNA. Due to their protective properties, biofilms
render bacteria resistant against antibiotics due to a variety of
different mechanisms. Therefore, traditional
antibiotics generally fail to treat bacteria in biofilms, and very
high concentrations of antibiotics are usually required to achieve
therapeutic efficacy. Roughly 60% of bacterial infections involve
biofilms, which is of significant concern, and incentivizes the development
of antibiotic strategies that are targeted for this environment. Polymer nanoparticles are a potential solution
to this problem, given their sophisticated functionality and site-specific
targeting capability.
To penetrate biofilms, ideal polymeric
nanoparticles are generally small and positively charged, given the
anionic nature of biofilms. However,
nanoparticles that are stimuli-responsive, shifting from stealth to
positively charged, can be even more effective as they allow greater
penetration through the biofilm before binding. Horev et al. developed
a pH-responsive nanoparticle for the treatment of oral biofilms. Their
nanoparticle was loaded with farnesol, and composed of PDMAEMA-b-(PDMAEMA-co-PBMA-co-poly(propylacrylic
acid)). The nanoparticle could bind to biofilms through the electrostatic
interaction between positively charged PDMAEMA and the negatively
charged biofilm and tooth surface. This nanoparticle was able to load
22 wt % of Farnesol, which represents a more than 400-fold improvement
compared to the poorly soluble free Farnesol. pH-responsive release
of Farnesol was achieved in a rapid manner: 75% after 12 h at pH 4.5.
This high loading, rapid release, and superior binding affinity yielded
strong antibiofilm activity. Liu et
al. developed a mixed-shell polymeric micelle that consisted of PEG-b-PCL and PAE-b-PCL. These micelles displayed
pH- and lipase-responsive release of encapsulated triclosan. Micelles
containing only a PEG shell displayed stealth properties, enhanced
circulation time, and significant biofilm penetration. At pH 5, PAE
became positively charged, which allowed electrostatic targeting of
the negatively charged S. aureus. This
resulted in biofilm accumulation at pH 5 that did not occur in nanoparticles
lacking PAE. Subsequently, lipase secreted by bacteria degraded the
micelles, releasing triclosan at the vicinity of the bacteria to yield
strong antibacterial effects. Similarly,
Xi et al. fabricated a dual corona polymersome that was composed of
PCL-b-poly(Lysine-co-Phenylalanine)
and PEG-b-PCL. Poly(Lysine-co-Phenylalanine)
represented a cationic antibacterial polypeptide that could bind,
and damage negatively charged bacterial membranes. Fluorescence microscopy
images and CLSM images of S. aureus biofilm confirmed the penetration and disruption of the biofilm
by these dual corona vesicles. 
To improve biofilm penetration, hybrid particles containing magnetic
nanoparticles such as superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles (SPIONs)
have been investigated. Geilich et al. encapsulated SPIONs into a
methicillin-loaded polymersome formed from mPEG-b-PDLLA. The iron oxide-encapsulating polymersomes displayed strong
penetration against S. epidermidis biofilms
only when they were exposed to a magnetic field. Complete eradication
of the biofilm was observed for iron oxide encapsulated nanoparticles
with methicillin. Moreover, the polymersomes did not exhibit off-target
toxicity when a range of magnetic fields were applied. 
Recently, Yu et al. designed a host–guest
system for the
co-delivery of melittin, an antimicrobial peptide, and the antibiotic
ofloxacin. The host (H) was a large-pore mesoporous silica nanoparticle
(MSN) modified by PEI and capped by β-cyclodextrin, while the
magnetic-responsive guest (G) was an adamantane coated MSN capped
by Cucurbituril. Melittin was loaded with cyclodextrin, while ofloxacin
was loaded with cucurbituril. Guest and host co-assembled into a host–guest
supramolecular cluster through the interaction between β-cyclodextrin
on G and adamantane on the host. Electrostatic interactions, an applied
magnetic field, or the presence of heat was able to release loaded
cargo from this host–guest nanoparticle, eradicating >97%
of
the biofilm and 100% of the bacteria P. aeruginosa. This host–guest nanoparticle represents a design with extremely
strong in vivo antibacterial activity. 
Nitric oxide (NO) is an important signaling
molecule in the biofilm
lifecycle. Several NO generating nanoparticles have been scrutinized
as potential drug-delivery designs. Nguyen et al. conjugated gentamicin
to a PEG-vinylbenzaldehyde copolymer through a hydrolysable Schiff
base linker. NO was then reacted with a secondary amine on gentamicin
to form the nanoparticle. These nanoparticles demonstrated superior
bactericidal efficacy and anti-biofilm activity compared to either
an NO donor or gentamicin alone. 90% of the bacteria in the biofilm
was eliminated after treatment of 10 μM nanoparticles in 1 h
compared to only 7% and 5% by using gentamicin or an NO donor alone
( ). Shen et al. developed an NO releasing nanoparticle
composed of PEG-b-PCouNO, which was responsive to
visible light. The monomer CouNO contained an N-nitrosoamine-based
NO donor and a coumarin chromophore. Upon visible light irradiation,
NO was released and observed via an increase in coumarin fluorescence.
Thus, this nanoparticle was dual functional, releasing and monitoring
the release of NO concurrently. In vitro experiments
against P. aeruginosa biofilm using
this design demonstrated a 3.5-fold reduction of bacteria after light
irradiation. 
 Photothermal therapy and photodynamic therapy utilize
photosensitizers,
which can generate heat and ROS under irradiation, terminating bacteria
and biofilms. Chen et al. utilized photodynamic therapy for treatment
of endophthalmitis. Nanoparticles comprising a pH-responsive poly(acrylic
acid) coated ZIF-8 were functionalized with polydopamine and Ag nanoparticles,
and further modified with vancomycin and aminated PEG. Vancomycin
on the surface of the particles facilitated bacteria targeting, and
bactericidal activity was generated by both Ag nanoparticles and ROS
produced by laser irradiation. This synergistic effect resulted both
in the eradication of a biofilm and a 2-fold reduction in bacteria
in an endophthalmitis model. 

7.3.3.

## Antimicrobial Resistance
Antimicrobial
resistance (AMR) is the ability of microbes to survive and spread
despite the presence of antimicrobial therapies. The Organization
for Economic Co-operation and Development estimates that AMR will
result in over 2 million fatalities in Europe, North America, and
Australia alone in the next 30 years, and cost upwards of US$3.5 billion
per year. The mechanisms of AMR are
diverse, and include drug efflux (mechanisms to pump drugs out of
active region), poor therapeutic uptake, and microbe-induced drug
modification or inactivation. Therefore,
discovering new ways to treat drug-resistant bacteria, or prevent
the onset of AMR, represents a vital global health challenge over
the coming century. Combining two separate therapies into one delivery
system is a plausible solution to AMR, given the probability that
bacteria develop resistance to both therapies concurrently is extremely
low. Focusing on methods that disrupt bacterial membranes is another
strategy worthy of investigation, given bacteria cannot easily alter
their membrane composition.
NO-generated nanoparticles have
been utilized to combat AMR. Liu et al. co-delivered NO and methicillin
in a chitosan-graft-PAMAM polymer vector to treat MRSA. Conjugation
of PAMAM to chitosan reduced toxicity while maintaining a high degree
of loaded NO. The initial burst release of NO had strong antimicrobial
and membrane disrupting performance, reducing the biofilm by 67% and
MRSA by 80%. Furthermore, in vivo studies showed
that the nanoparticles eliminated most of the MRSA in an infected
skin model, due to the synergistic effect of released methicillin. 
Photothermal therapy triggered by NIR
has strong bactericidal properties
due to membrane disruption and protein/enzyme denaturation. Several
nanoparticles have been studied to treat resistant bacteria on skin.
Xiao et al. employed a zeolite-based imidazolyl skeleton (ZIF-8) coated
with the photothermally active polydopamine and loaded with vancomycin
to design a synergistic hybrid nanoparticle. SEM images illustrated
the destruction of bacterial membranes when treated with this design. In vivo experiments against vancomycin-resistant E. coli showed a significantly superior healing effect upon
nanoparticle treatment with NIR light. 
Strain selective delivery is advantageous, as it minimizes
the
dosages necessary to achieve similar therapeutic outcomes. Li et al.
synthesized two polymers that self-assembled into polymersomes and
were selectively responsive to penicillin G amidase and β-lactamase
(Bla) through self-immolative cleavage. Both polymersomes encapsulated
antimicrobial agents that were released via selective enzymatic degradation.
The vancomycin-loaded Bla-responsive polymersomes exhibited MRSA strain-selective
release and in vivo healing capabilities. 
Nucleic acids have also been explored
as therapeutic cargo that
can inhibit certain genes related to AMR. For example, Sun et al.
synthesized a tetrahedral framework of nucleic acids for the delivery
of ampicillin to methicillin-resistant MRSA. This nucleic acid scaffold
reduced murA and murZ, genes related
to the production of bacterial membranes, thus promoting membrane
fusion and damage and yielding strong antimicrobial activity against
MRSA. 
Cationic polymers are also
capable of causing membrane disruption,
and designs that combine these polymers with antibiotics have been
scrutinized. Ye et al. designed a pH and ROS-responsive nanoparticle
consisting of poly(β-amino ester) (PBAE)-guanidine-phenylboronic
acid and dextran ( ). Dextran served both to bind to planktonic bacteria and
to improve uptake by cells. At the infection site, these nanoparticles
dissembled due to the low pH and high level of ROS, releasing both
rifampicin and the cationic guanidine polymer, which is a membrane-perturbing
moiety. This nanoparticle was observed to bind and kill rifampicin
resistant P. aeruginosa with a 40-fold
increase in efficiency compared to free rifampicin. A tetracycline encapsulated PLA-b-PEG-b-PEI nanoparticle was examined as a drug-delivery vehicle
against tetracycline-resistant E. coli. The nanoparticle not only exhibited a much lower tetracycline minimum
inhibitory concentration, but also enhanced biofilm penetration and
macrophage uptake. The improved activity was attributed to the positively
charged PEI on the surface of the nanoparticle, which was able to
electrostatically bind to the negatively charged bacterial membrane. In vivo tests showed that the antimicrobial properties of
the nanoparticle were over twice as efficient as its non-charged counterpart. Landis et al. synthesized a redox and enzyme-responsive
nanoparticle comprising poly(oxanorborneneimide), guanidine, maleimide,
tetraethylene glycol monomethyl ether, and a dithiol-disulfide cross-linker.
Carvacrol oil was loaded into these particles, and was released in
the presence of GSH and porcine liver esterase. In vitro results showed that the particles had broad-spectrum activity against
both Gram-positive and Gram-negative biofilms. Moreover, where E. coli rapidly develops resistance in only a few
passages (treatment cycles), nanoparticle treatment yielded no E. coli resistance even after 20 passages. 
 
7.3.4.

## Helicobacter pylori Infections
Helicobacter pylori is a type of
Gram-negative bacteria that is responsible for one of the most prevalent
infections worldwide. This bacteria causes diseases such as peptic
ulcer disease, gastric mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma,
gastric adenocarcinoma, and gastric cancer. To treat an H. pylori infection,
drug-delivery systems must overcome the harsh gastric environment
(pH ∼ 1), penetrate mucosal membranes and biofilms, and perform
targeted drug release at specific bacterial sites.
Jing et al.
synthesized a polyion complex using negatively charged sodium tripolyphosphate
and positively charged ureido-conjugated chitosan to encapsulate amoxicillin.
This nanoparticle could withstand pH levels of ∼1 and exhibited
pH-responsiveness at neutral pH levels (∼7) for a sustained,
targeted release of amoxicillin at pH 6 and 7. Furthermore, the ureido
group was found to target the urea transport protein on H. pylori, resulting in an 87% reduction of bacterial
growth in 24 h in vitro. Similarly, Cong et al. modified a carboxymethyl chitosan-based micelle
with this ureido functionality. Their micelle was stable in gastric
fluid and was able to release clarithromycin gradually, yielding a
92% elimination of bacteria in only 30 minutes. Arif et al. functionalized a chitosan-based nanoparticle
with a thiol moiety via cysteine conjugation. These particles were
stable at pH ∼ 1 but became unstable at neutral pH, releasing
amoxycillin, while the added thiol group improved bacterial mucosal
adherence. Compared to an un-thiolated control, these nanoparticles
were twice as efficient at inhibiting bacterial growth (77% inhibition
at 24 h). 
Other H. pylori targeting strategies
include using natural cell membranes or biosurfactants. Angsantikul
et al. coated a clarithromycin-loaded PLGA nanoparticle with the plasma
membranes from a gastric epithelial cell. Such membranes preferentially bind to H. pylori, and the resultant nanoparticles had a 10-fold higher bacterial
binding capacity than their PEGylated counterparts. These membrane-functionalized
nanoparticles also demonstrated improved bacterial reduction in vivo ( ). Li et al. synthesized clarithromycin-loaded chitosan nanoparticles.
This nanoparticle was coated with rhamnolipids and DSPE-PEG 2000 that
bestowed prolonged blood circulation and improved the mucus penetration
capability. Rhamnolipids are biosurfactants produced by P. aeruginosa and are capable of biofilm disruption.
The rhamnolipid-functionalized nanoparticles reduced biofilm mass
by 89% and eliminated more than 97% of H. pylori within the biofilm. This design was twice as efficient as non-PEGylated
nanoparticles with the same composition. In vivo,
the biosurfactant-functionalized nanoparticles exhibited a biofilm
reduction efficiency of 90%. 
 Magnetic polymer nanoparticles have also received
attention for H. pylori treatment due
to their mucus penetration
capability. Yang et al. modified a superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticle
(SPION) with chitosan and poly(acrylic acid) to form a hybrid nanoparticle
loaded with amoxicillin. This particle was both pH-responsive and
had improved mucoadhesive properties, while the presence of SPIONs
facilitated mucus penetration under an applied magnetic field. When
a magnetic field was applied for only 30 minutes, the hybrid nanoparticles
eliminated 60% H. pylori, in contrast
to only 20% when treated with free amoxicillin. 

7.3.5.

## Pulmonary Infections
Lungs are
exposed to many external pathogens that can cause a wide range of
diseases. One of the most historically relevant diseases is tuberculosis
(Mycobacterium tuberculosis), which
is still one of the leading causes of death worldwide. Pulmonary bacterial infections are also associated
with pneumonia, sepsis, and cystic fibrosis. Biofilms and mucosal membranes generally reduce
the efficacy of conventional treatment by preventing antibiotics from
reaching target sites within the lungs. For this reason, polymeric
nanoparticle-based drug-delivery systems have been the subject of
recent investigations, due to their high therapeutic efficacy and
sophisticated targeting capability.
pH-responsive nanoparticles
are at the forefront of this research, given that the pH at pulmonary
infectious sites is between 5 and 6.5, which is lower than the general
physiological environment. Chai et al. encapsulated the drug polymyxin
B into a polyion complex nanoparticle consisting of DMMA-modified
chitoligosaccharide. Polymyxin is an excellent pulmonary antibiotic
for Gram-negative bacteria; however, it also causes nephrotoxicity
and neurotoxicity. The encapsulation of this drug in a polyion complex
resulted in a design almost three times less toxic to mice than the
drug in its free form. Furthermore, the nanoparticles disassembled
at low pH (pH 5.5), facilitating targeted drug release and yielding
a higher bactericidal efficiency compared to a non-pH-responsive nanoparticle
in an infected lung model. Similarly,
Gao et al. fabricated a PAMAM azithromycin (AZM) conjugate (PAMAM-AZM)
loaded into a DMMA-modified PEG-b-Polylysine (Plys)
nanoparticle ( ). At pH 6.0, DMMA was cleaved, causing
nanoparticle disassembly and releasing the PAMAM-AZM conjugate. PAMAM-AZM,
due to its small size and positive charge, exhibited a 3-fold increase
in biofilm penetration compared to an unresponsive nanoparticle control.
Furthermore, the nanoparticle eliminated bacteria three times more
efficiently than free AZM. In vivo tests using a
chronic lung infection model exhibited strong nanoparticle accumulation
and bacterial elimination of over 99.5%.
 Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) have been investigated
for the treatment
of pulmonary bacterial infections in lieu of antibiotics. Casciaro
et al. encapsulated an AMP—a frog skin-derived esculentin-1a
(Esc(1-21)) and its diastereoisomer Esc(1-21)-1c—into a nanoparticle
based on PVA and PLGA. These 250 nm particles displayed improved mucus
and biofilm penetration, while in vivo tests showed
a 17-fold increase in anti-bacterial performance, which was attributed
to the protection of AMPs from lung proteases by the nanoparticle. 
Antibiotics can also be used as targeting
moieties to deliver nanoparticles
to bacterial targets, as they have specific interactions with bacteria
that can be utilized. Chen et al. designed a pH and lipase-responsive,
ciprofloxacin encapsulating nanoparticle, whereby PEG-b-PCL was conjugated with vancomycin via a pH-cleavable hydrazone
bond. Vancomycin was able to target the d-Ala-d-Ala
group on the bacterial membrane, while pH levels below 6 caused the
disruption and disassembly of the nanoparticles, releasing ciprofloxacin.
The particles could be further degraded by lipase secreted by P. aeruginosa to promote release. This nanoparticle
design exhibited a significant reduction of bacteria in lungs compared
to free vancomycin and ciprofloxacin. Zhang et al. synthesized a nanoparticle composed of biotinylated
PEG-b-PAE-b-PEG grafted with the
antibody ICAM-1, which can act as a targeting moiety. The nanoparticles
showed pH and enzyme-responsive release through swelling and degradation,
with increased targeting efficiency. In vivo tests
showed that the co-delivery of ciprofloxacin and the anti-inflammatory
agent (2-[amino-carbonyl]amino-5-(4-fluorophenyl)-3-thiophenecarboxamide)
by antibody coated nanoparticles significantly reduced the bacterial
burden in lung and reduced inflammation, resulting in an improved
survival rate of 90%. 
P. aeruginosa is another bacteria
that can cause pulmonary infections such as pneumonia, septicemia,
and endocarditis. Wan et al. synthesized d-α-tocopheryl
PEG-succinate (TGPS)-coated PLGA nanoparticles. These nanoparticles
were found to have a faster mucus penetration compared to PLGA nanoparticles
alone. Against P. aeruginosa biofilms,
the encapsulation of azithromycin in these TGPS particles increased
the drug’s therapeutic efficacy almost 3-fold compared to free
azithromycin. Deacon et al. loaded tobramycin
via ionic cross-linking into an alginate/chitosan nanoparticle functionalized
with DNase. DNase was able to cleave DNA in the mucus reducing its
viscoelasticity and thus improving the nanoparticle’s mucus
penetration and bactericidal performance against P.
aeruginosa. Baelo et
al. prepared nanoparticles based on PLL and PLGA that were further
functionalized by DNase. Cationic PLL stabilized the nanoparticles
and protected the encapsulated antibiotic ciprofloxacin, resulting
in a slower drug release profile. DNase degraded extracellular DNA
within the biofilm matrix, improving the penetration of the nanoparticles.
Ultimately, this nanoparticle eradicated over 99.8% of a biofilm. 
For the purpose of highly efficient antimicrobial
therapy, polymeric
nanoparticles possess several key advantages compared to traditional
antibiotics. First, therapeutic cargo is protected when encapsulated
in nanoparticles. This is crucial in order to deliver fragile macromolecular
therapeutics such as peptides, proteins, and nucleic acids. Second,
polymeric nanoparticles allow for the delivery of higher concentrations
of antimicrobial drugs as well as the codelivery of multiple therapies,
significantly increasing therapeutic efficacy. Third, the sophistication
and versatility of polymeric nanoparticles allow for efficient navigation
of a wide variety of hostile bodily environments, as well as targeted
delivery via stimuli-responsiveness. In the case of biofilms, which
seriously inhibit—or even eliminate entirely—the efficacy
of traditional antimicrobial drugs, robust stimuli-responsive polymeric
nanoparticles offer a promising new method for highly efficient biofilm
penetration.
However, there remain significant challenges that
prevent the full
proliferation of polymeric nanoparticles as an antimicrobial drug-delivery
vehicle. Currently, there exists a lack of adequate comparison studies
between nanoparticles and traditional antimicrobial strategies, and
the majority of designs are confined to targeting specific bacteria
strains, rather than being generally effective over a wide range of
species. Moreover, studies probing the efficiency of any polymeric
nanoparticle design should employ a traditional antimicrobial therapy
as a control, to fully understand the efficacy of any new design.
The efficiency of antimicrobial polymeric nanoparticle designs would
no doubt be improved by a more complete understanding of the mechanisms
by which these particles interact with bacterial cells and other biological
barriers preventing direct drug delivery, although this shortcoming
is certainly not limited to antimicrobial nanoparticles. Despite these
challenges, polymeric nanoparticles, due to their sophistication,
ability to encapsulate a diverse set of therapeutics, stimuli-responsiveness,
and overall versatility, represent one of the foremost strategies
to enhance the efficiency of antimicrobial drug delivery, and are
expected to become more vital as the efficacy of traditional antibiotic
treatment becomes less effective over time.

7.4.

## Other Diseases
7.4.1.

## Cardiovascular Diseases
Cardiovascular
diseases (CVDs) are among the leading causes of death worldwide. They
encompass a group of disorders that impact the heart and blood vessels,
with the most prevalent conditions including atherosclerosis, myocardial
infarctions, strokes, deep vein thrombosis, pulmonary embolisms, and
coronary heart diseases. , The limitations associated
with conventional CVD treatment methods have generated enthusiasm
for more sophisticated therapeutic and diagnostic platforms, of which
polymeric nanoparticles are some of the most promising. Nanoparticles
to treat CVDs are generally designed based on their intended clinical
application, which can include therapeutic delivery to the heart or
the vasculature, delivery of imaging agents for diagnostics and theranostics,
or even the creation of nanoengineered biomaterials. 
Atherosclerosis—the thickening or hardening
of arteries—is the principal cause of many cardiovascular diseases.
The most prevalent methods for treating atherosclerosis involve the
delivery of statins, which are a group of therapeutic agents widely
recognized to reduce blood cholesterol levels and hence manage atherosclerotic
cardiovascular diseases. Polymeric nanoparticles
exhibit enormous potential in achieving site-specific delivery of
statins, thereby enhancing their oral bioavailability and promoting
target specific interaction, while minimizing undesired side effects. − Oxidative stress is a key contributor to the development of atherosclerosis,
specifically due to the excessive production of ROS. Moreover, monocytes and macrophages play a key role in
the initiation and progression of atherosclerosis. Therefore, polymeric
nanoparticles that are responsive to changes in the redox environment
offer the ability to enhance atherosclerosis treatment via site-specific
drug delivery. Zhang and co-workers designed an ROS-responsive, simvastatin-loaded
biodegradable micelle composed of an HA-coated PEG-b-poly(tyrosine-ethyl oxalyl). This
micelle was designed to achieve site-specific delivery of simvastatin
to reduce atherosclerotic plaque, resulting in remarkable therapeutic
effects. The hydrophobic poly(tyrosine-ethyl oxalyl) block was able
to react with overexpressed H2O2 present in
the plaque area, reducing the ROS concentration and releasing simvastatin
to exert its anti-inflammatory action. In addition, in vivo studies demonstrated that the HA-coated micelles effectively reduced
the plaque content compared to the non-targeted micelles, simultaneously
inhibiting macrophages by targeting CD44 receptors and decreasing
the level of ROS to treat atherosclerosis. Moreover, polymeric nanoparticles
loaded with other anti-inflammatory drugs that respond to the oxidative
microenvironment of atherosclerotic plaques have also been developed,
yielding site-specific drug delivery. Wu et al. reported andrographolide-loaded micelles based on the
block copolymer, poly(ethylene glycol)-b-poly(propylene
sulfide) (PEG-b-PPS). In this context, the thioether functionality of PPS undergoes oxidation
when exposed to ROS, resulting in a transition to a hydrophilic state,
and prompting particle disassembly within an oxidative environment.
This disassembly facilitated drug release and enabled a synchronized
therapeutic effect to alleviate both inflammation and oxidative stress.
Cardiovascular diseases can also stem from excessive inflammation,
prompting significant interest in anti-inflammatory therapies that
resolve inflammation. , Typically, this resolution is
facilitated by proresolving lipids (e.g., lipoxins, resolvins, protectins,
and maresins) and protein mediators (e.g., interleukin-10 (IL-10),
transforming growth factor-β (TGFβ), and annexin A1).
These therapeutic agents inhibit the accumulation of inflammatory
cells while facilitating their removal. They also serve to eliminate
pathogens, cellular remnants, and inflammatory cytokines, aiding in
the restoration of damaged tissues. , Polymer nanoparticles
capable of delivering these resolution-enhancing agents offer the
ability to enhance their therapeutic efficacy by achieving systemic
circulation, site-specific delivery, and controlled release. For example,
Farokhzad and co-workers designed biodegradable PLGA-b-PEG nanoparticles coated with collagen IV ligands, which effectively
addressed the unfavorable characteristics of advanced atherosclerotic
lesions by delivering the anti-inflammatory peptide Ac2-26—an
annexin A1/lipocortin 1-mimetic peptide. , In a subsequent study, a similar type of Col IV-targeted PEG-b-PLGA nanoparticle was engineered to enable the controlled
release of the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 to atherosclerotic
plaques specifically. These nanoparticles
were able to suppress the mRNA expression levels of the proinflammatory
cytokine TNF-α (Tnfa) in RAW 264.7 macrophages, thus confirming
the efficiency of IL-10 controlled release. As a result, inflammation
in a self-limited peritonitis model was significantly reduced compared
to the native IL-10. Moreover, the nanoparticles were capable of effectively
preventing the development of vulnerable (rupture prone) plaques by
reducing plaque thickness and decreasing necrotic cores after 4 weeks
of weekly injections in mice with existing atherosclerosis ( ).
 Biomimetic polymeric nanoparticles coated with
biological cell
membranes represent a drug-delivery vector with unique advantages
including high biocompatibility, prolonged circulation half-life,
and disease-specific targeting. Wang
et al. developed rapamycin-loaded PLGA nanoparticles camouflaged with
RBCs, aiming to reduce clearance by the mononuclear phagocytic system
and yield more efficient atherosclerosis treatment. These nanoparticles exhibited sustained drug-release kinetics,
effective inhibition of macrophage proliferation invitro, and a long blood circulation time in vivo. Additionally, the nanoparticles were able to diffuse
through vascular walls and accumulate within pathological lesions
more efficiently. This phenomenon is more pronounced in atherosclerotic
lesions due to the presence of a leaky endothelium in inflamed environments
and leaky micro vessels within atherosclerotic plaques. The biomimetic
nature of these nanoparticles enhanced their accumulation within established
atherosclerotic plaques in a mouse model, while also reducing macrophage-mediated
phagocytosis, thereby facilitating targeted drug release. Thus, the
RBC membrane cloaked nanoparticles demonstrated strong therapeutic
efficacy against atherosclerosis progression, reducing the plaque
area ratio from 20.1% to 6.2%, in contrast to control nanoparticles
without RBC coating, which only decreased to 14.8%. In another study,
Liang et al. developed biomimetic RBC-cloaked PLGA-based nanoparticles
for the controlled delivery of probucol, a compound with anti-inflammatory,
antioxidative and hypolipidemic effects. These nanoparticles exhibited sustained drug release kinetics, good
biocompatibility and anti-inflammatory effects in vitro, and led to delayed blood circulation in vivo,
significantly delaying the progression of atherosclerosis.
Heart
failure and myocardial infarction are critical cardiovascular
events that frequently result in mortality. For instance, during a
single episode of myocardial infarction, the heart may lose up to
∼25% of its cardiomyocytes (cells responsible for heart contraction).
As a result, the regeneration of new cardiomyocytes is crucial to
the proper functioning of the heart. However, the rate of cardiomyocyte
proliferation in adults is relatively poor, rendering the heart incapable
of regenerating its lost cells. As a consequence, the heart initiates
a self-healing mechanism termed ventricular remodeling, involving
the formation of fibrotic scar tissue. This process gradually induces
a weakening of heart muscles, resulting in a progressive decline in
muscle strength that ultimately leads to congestive heart failure
and death. , Thus, there is a strong incentive
for drug-delivery vehicles, including polymeric nanoparticles, to
more efficiently deliver cardioprotective drugs directly into the
infarcted myocardium and cardiovascular system for the diagnosis,
treatment and ultimate prevention of heart failure. − Oxygen therapy via sustained delivery of oxygen following myocardial
infarction can effectively rescue cardiac cells and restore cardiac
function. Recently, Guan et al. engineered
an oxygen-releasing core–shell polymeric nanoparticle to address
the current limitations of oxygen delivery in treating myocardial
infarctions. The oxygen-releasing nanoparticles
were fabricated with a degradable polymer, poly(N-isopropylacrylamide-co-hydroxyethyl methacrylate-co-acrylate-oligolactide-co-N-acryloxysuccinimide) as the shell, and a polyvinylpyrrolidone/H2O2 complex as the core. The nanoparticle was functionalized
with a layer of catalase immobilized on the shell. Furthermore, the
nanoparticle’s surface was cloaked with a platelet membrane
to decrease the non-specific clearance by the immune system, and conjugated
with the peptide CSTSMLKAC to improve accumulation in the cardiac
ischemia site. Upon degradation of the shell, H2O2 is converted to H2O and O2 by catalase, allowing
the nanoparticles to achieve a 4-week continuous release of oxygen,
which is notably longer than the 2 weeks associated with typical oxygen-releasing
systems. Despite some limitations, this system is a promising strategy
to alleviate cardiac hypoxia by delivering oxygen, subsequently enhancing
the survival of cardiomyocytes through ATP generation, stimulating
angiogenesis (the formation of new blood vessels), and reducing cardiac
fibrosis without inducing substantial inflammation.

7.4.2.

## Neurological Disorders
Neurological
disorders encompass a wide range of diseases that affect the central
nervous system, which primarily comprises the brain and the spinal
cord. Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, Huntington’s
disease, multiple sclerosis, motor neuron diseases, traumatic brain
injury, stroke, and brain cancers are some common neurological disorders
that impact millions of people worldwide. The blood–brain barrier
(BBB) plays a huge role in pathogenicity of neurological disorders
while also preventing the efficient delivery of therapeutics to the
nervous system. Thus, novel and efficient drug-delivery vectors are
essential to combat these conditions due to the severe limitations
of the current and widely available methods. , 
Polymeric nanoparticles, given their versatility, tunability
and sophisticated design capability, have the potential to address
the complex and multi-factorial limitations of current treatments,
which include penetrating the BBB and controlling the delivery of
drugs at the site of action. , − Kataoka and co-workers developed a BBB crossing polymeric micelle
that targeted highly expressed glucose transporter-1 (GLUT1) molecules
on brain capillary endothelial cells These polymeric micelles were formulated through the self-assembly
of negatively charged glucose-modified PEG-b-PAsp
and positively charged CH3O-PEG-b-poly([5-aminopentyl]-α,β-asparatamide) (PEG-b-P(Asp-AP)) ionomers. The surface of polymeric micelles
was decorated with glucose to optimize the GLUT1-mediated transport
across the brain capillary endothelial cells (BCECs) layer. The glucose density on the surface of nanoparticles
was successfully regulated to improve their distribution within the
brain. They also highlighted that the delivery of nanoparticles through
the BBB and their accumulation in the brain can be efficiently manipulated
by controlling blood glucose levels through external stimulation.
In a subsequent study, glucose-decorated polyion complexes were developed
to enhance the efficient brain accumulation of antisense oligonucleotides
(ASO). These nucleotides are therapeutics used for the treatment of
disorders associated with the central nervous system, such as Alzheimer’s
disease, Huntington’s disease, and Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. A polyion complex micelle was prepared through
the self-assembly of PEG-b-PLL modified with a block
copolymer composed of 3-mercaptopropyl amidine and 2-thiolaneimine.
The antisense nucleotides were encapsulated within the micellar core
through electrostatic interactions ( ). This polymeric nanoparticle, decorated
with multiple glucose molecules, achieved enhanced brain accumulation
owing to multi-valent binding with GLUT1 transporter molecules on
the plasma membrane of BCECs, in response to an increase in blood
glucose level after a fasting period. As a result, the nanoparticles
exhibited significant knockdown of a target non-coding RNA (MALT1)
in the major regions of the brain, such as the cerebral cortex, hippocampus,
midbrain, and hypothalamus, thus demonstrating that the ASO was successfully
delivered to the appropriate area of the brain. These studies indicate
that a sophisticated polymeric nanoparticle design is able to traverse
the BBB through the inclusion of functional groups and targeting ligands.
For more information on BBB, the reader is directed to the following
reviews. , , 
 Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative
disorder
that can be clinically diagnosed by the symptoms of memory loss as
well as related cognitive impairment such as poor judgment and decision
making. It is characterized by the formation of extracellular senile
plaques and intracellular neurofibrillary tangles, mainly composed
of amyloid-β (Aβ) peptide and hyperphosphorylated tau
protein, respectively, although this remains an active area of study. Among the different therapeutic strategies
to treat AD, the clearance of Aβ peptide from the brain is one
of the most widely researched. It should
be noted that the buildup of Aβ proteins in the brain as a direct
cause of AD, particularly in their oligomeric form, has come under
recent scrutiny. Brambilla et al. developed
an anti-Aβ1–42 monoclonal antibody decorated
PEGylated poly[hexadecyl cyanoacrylate-co-methoxypoly(ethylene
glycol) cyanoacrylate] (P(HDCA-co-MePEGCA)) nanoparticle.
This particle was capable of effectively binding with Aβ peptide
present in both blood and serum. In
a subsequent study, Carradori et al. demonstrated that this system
could be further enhanced to reduce brain Aβ peptide levels
by binding to circulating Aβ peptides in the blood stream and
facilitating their elimination through classical nanoparticle clearance
pathways. In vivo studies
reported that these anti-Aβ1-42-functionalized
nanoparticles decrease the Aβ peptide and its oligomer levels
in the brain by ∼20%, resulting in a substantial increase in
plasma Aβ levels and the complete recovery of memory loss in
an AD-like mouse model.
Research has centered on functionalizing
the surface of polymeric
nanoparticles with specific ligands such as surfactants, antibodies,
and peptides to effectively target BBB receptors and promote transport
to the nervous system. Meng et al. developed Huperzine A (HupA)-loaded
PLGA nanoparticles with surface modification of lactoferrin-conjugated N-trimethylated chitosan (TMC) for the efficient intranasal
delivery of HupA to the brain for AD treatment. These targeted nanoparticles exhibited significantly higher
mucin adsorption (∼87%) compared to the non-targeted PLGA nanoparticles
(∼32%), verifying their excellent mucosal adsorption efficiency. In vivo studies demonstrated that these targeted nanoparticles
were highly distributed in the brain over a prolonged period through
the active targeting of lactoferrin and the mucoadhesion of TMC, compared
to non-targeted nanoparticles. Moreover, the concentration of HupA
was significantly higher in various regions of brain, compared to
the non-targeted nanoparticles, demonstrating that lactoferrin and
TMC modification facilitated the enhanced access of HupA to the brain.
In another study, Liu et al. reported a multi-functional polymeric
nanoparticle for AD treatment, aiming to improve the co-delivery of
a therapeutic gene and a peptide drug across the BBB. The nanoparticles were based on PEGylated dendrigraft
PLL, and consisted of: 1) RVG29, a brain-targeting peptide known for
its ability to bind to the specific n-acetylcholine receptors found
in both the BBB and brain parenchyma cells; 2) Plasmid DNA encoding
BACE1-AS shRNA, intended for delivery into the brain to facilitate
the down-regulation of BACE1, a molecule closely associated with the
formation of Aβ plaques; and 3) d-peptide, an inhibitor
composed entirely of d-amino acids, which has proven effective
in disrupting the formation of Tau fibrils in the
progression of AD. Similarly sophisticated polymeric nanoparticle
designs for AD treatment have been recently reviewed. , , 
Parkinson’s disease
is a neurodegenerative disorder associated
with the progressive loss of dopaminergic neurons, mainly in the substantia
nigra pars compacta, leading to a decreased level of dopamine in the
striatum—a region of the brain related to movement and reward.
Recently, polymeric nanoparticles have been developed to deliver exogenous
dopamine and levodopa (l-DOPA) into the brain. Entrapment of dopamine within polymeric nanoparticles
can replace the reduced amounts of the endogenous dopamine in a sustained
and controlled manner. Pahuja et al. successfully developed dopamine-loaded
PLGA nanoparticles to enhance dopamine delivery to the brain. Fluorescent microscopy demonstrated that these
nanoparticles were capable of crossing the BBB and capillary endothelium
in the striatum and substantia nigra in a rat model. Systemic intravenous
administration of these nanoparticles delivered a considerable level
of dopamine (∼45 ng/mL within 6 h) compared to the basal plasma
dopamine level in the rats (<0.5 ng/mL). Plasma half-life of dopamine
was increased from 1.22 h to 2.53 h in comparison to bulk dopamine
administration. Furthermore, it was reported that neurobehavioral
abnormalities, such as locomotor activity, were significantly reversed
due to nanoparticle-mediated dopamine delivery, suggesting that dopamine
was successfully delivered. In another study, dopamine was loaded
within polymeric nanoparticles comprising albumin and PLGA. Albumin was employed to enhance the BBB crossing
via endogenous albumin pathways involving gp60 receptor-mediated transcytosis.
The therapeutic efficacy of these nanoparticles was tested in a rat
model (20 mg per animal), resulting in a significant improvement in
motor coordination and balance compared to a non-lesioned animal model,
indicating the successful delivery of dopamine. Moreover, Vong et
al. developed a polymeric nanoparticle to enhance the delivery and
therapeutic efficacy of l-DOPA in a mouse model. l-DOPA is a dopamine precursor that
can easily cross the BBB compared to dopamine. However, l-DOPA demonstrates significantly poor pharmacokinetic properties
compared to dopamine, with a short half-life and undesirable side
effects due to frequent administration and higher doses. To overcome
these limitations, the nanoparticles were prepared via the self-assembly
of an l-DOPA-conjugated amphiphilic block copolymer, PEG-b-poly(O,O′-diacetyl-l-DOPA). It was postulated that the peptide bonds in the polymer
backbone could be hydrolyzed by physiological enzymes such as protease
and esterase to slowly liberate l-DOPA into the bloodstream.
Improved pharmacokinetic profiles were observed in mice when treated
with these nanoparticles compared to free l-DOPA. Specifically,
the plasma level of l-DOPA was maintained up to 12 h after
nanoparticle administration, compared to only 0.5 h after the injection
of free l-DOPA. Moreover, the nanoparticles did not induce
any dyskinesia symptoms, a complex and undesirable side effect that
limits the clinical use of free l-DOPA.
Overall, the
application of polymeric nanoparticles for cardiovascular
diseases and neurological diseases is still in its early stages of
development. Thus, further research is necessary to advance the design
of polymeric nanoparticles for clinical applications. Mainly, the
anatomical differences between human and small animal models have
substantially hindered the clinical translation of current research. , However, the sophisticated design capabilities of polymeric nanoparticles
offer possible solutions to challenging delivery barriers of these
particular diseases that are not available to other drug-delivery
vectors.

7.5.

## Theranostics
Theranostic nanoparticles
integrate therapy and diagnostics into a single nanoscale platform,
with the aim of providing patients with more precise and personalized
healthcare. Polymeric nanoparticles
exhibit unique advantages as efficient theranostic systems. First,
polymeric nanoparticles possess strong biocompatibility, allowing
them to interact with biological tissues in the body with minimal
clearance by the immune system. Second, polymeric nanoparticles offer
tunability, enabling precise designs tailored to various diseases
and therapeutic requirements. This section will delve into the application
of polymeric nanoparticles in the field of theranostics over the past
decade, with a particular emphasis on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI),
phototherapy, radionuclide imaging techniques such as positron emission
tomography and single photon emission computed tomography.
7.5.1.

## MRI
7.5.1.1.

## 19F MRI
MRI is a widely
employed radiological method for tissue analysis, offering exceptional
spatial resolution without the associated risks of ionizing radiation.
In MRI, an appropriate resonant frequency magnetic field is applied,
inducing the excitation of specific atoms within the tissues. These
excited atoms emit a radiofrequency signal upon returning to their
equilibrium state, which is then captured and translated into an image.
Fluorine MRI, a heteronuclear MRI imaging technique, was first reported
in 1970 and has developed into a promising imaging technique for cancer
diagnosis. As an MRI probe, the fluorine
(F) atom has several advantages: the 19F isotope is naturally
abundant, very sensitive, and has an advantageous signal-to-noise
ratio. Moreover, fluorine in the human body is mainly stored in solid
form throughout bones and teeth, resulting in very little background
noise for the fluorine probe. 
Given these advantages, versatile fluorine-containing exogenous tracers
have been constructed and used in the diagnosis and treatment of disease.
Normally, MRI signal intensity is proportional to the concentration
of fluorine content, spin-spin relaxation time (T2), and inversely proportional to spin-lattice relaxation
time (T1). Therefore, researchers have
tried to increase the fluorine concentration in contrast agents. However,
due to the aggregation of fluorine atoms, the heteronuclear dipole
interaction is enhanced when the fluorine content is increased, resulting
in a decrease in T2, which leads to MRI
signal reduction. In biological systems, fluorine atoms also aggregate
due to hydrophobicity, which further reduces MRI signal intensity. In order to develop fluorine-containing contrast
agents suitable for biological systems, fluorinated polymeric nanoparticles
have garnered increasing attention in recent years.
Fluorine
aggregation, which represents a challenge to strong signal
intensity, can be drastically minimized by linking hydrophilic polymer
chains to fluorinated polymer chains. This both increases the actual
amount of fluorine, and reduces fluorine aggregation through the formation
of flexible, more hydrophilic polymer chains. In 2014, Thurecht and
co-workers pioneered hyperbranched fluorine-functionalized polymeric
nanoparticles by using RAFT polymerization. These polymers use trifluoroethyl monomers to generate 19F MRI signals, and PEG to enhance the hydrophilicity and biocompatibility
of the nanoparticles. Furthermore, the hyperbranched backbone facilitated
subsequent modification with fluorophores and targeting ligands. This
adaptibility is crucial in theranostic applications, where targeting
specific tissues or pathologies is a necessary diagnostic tool. 19F MRI signal expression was observed in tumors after injecting
mice with the fluorine-functionalized nanoparticles. To further increase
the fluorine content in fluorinated polymers, Whittaker and co-workers
employed perfluoropolyether as the contrast agent. A RAFT agent was functionalized with approximately 40 equivalents
of fluorine atoms allowing for the synthesis of hydrophilic, fluorine-functionalized
(30 wt %) PEG polymers. This notable increase in fluorine content
directly correlates with enhanced MRI signal intensity, demonstrating
the importance of fluorine density in imaging efficiency. In a subsequent
study, hyperbranched polymer nanoparticles composed of trifluoroethyl
acrylate were functionalized with perfluoropolyether for superior in vivo imaging of breast cancer ( ). The hyperbranched
particles had a high fluorine content, and were linked to a peptide
aptamer for breast cancer targeting. These nanoparticles yielded superior
tumor accumulation and excellent in vivo19F MRI sensitivity.
 Thayumanavan and co-workers designed a fluorine
functionalized
nanogel to improve the T2 relaxation time
and 19F MRI signal intensity. First, they synthesized amphiphilic polymers containing fluorinated
monomers that subsequently self-assembled into micelles. Then, the
nanogel was cross-linked to preserve and strengthen its structure.
Finally, the polymer in the core was decomposed to reduce the core
density. These fluorinated nanogels displayed increased T2 relaxation times and elevated MRI signal intensity.
This increase in the T2 relaxation time
and signal intensity is a notable achievement, as it directly translates
to improved imaging quality and diagnostic accuracy in MRI. The elevated
signal intensity also suggests potential for lower doses of the contrast
agent to be used, which could reduce potential side effects.
In order to further enhance the potential of 19F MRI
for the diagnosis and treatment of diseases, researchers have also
prepared stimuli-responsive polymeric nanoparticles. Thurecht and
co-workers designed a system that can be used to detect drug release. DOX, docetaxel, and CPT were attached to a
polymer backbone via dynamic covalent bonds. Relaxation measurements
by 19F NMR showed that the addition of the hydrophobic
drugs reduced the mobility of the fluorinated fragments, thus decreasing
the T2 relaxation time and hence reducing
image intensity. However, upon drug release this quenching effect
disappears, and the 19F MRI intensity was significantly
enhanced. This dynamic response to drug release is crucial for real-time
monitoring of drug delivery and efficacy, offering potential for optimizing
therapeutic regimens. Based on this same principle, Gao and co-workers
designed multi-chromatic pH-activatable 19F nanoparticles
through a combination of pH-responsive polymers and fluorinated monomers. Upon a pH drop, the polymers transitioned from
hydrophobic to hydrophilic, leading to nanoparticle disassembly and
generating strong 19F MRI signals. This probe had a sensitive
response (ON/OFF ∼ 0.25 pH) and allowed for highly specific
endogenous pH measurements. Meanwhile, Tang et al. designed a 19F MRI multi-responsive nanoparticle with cascade signal activation/amplification. This system was composed of an amphiphilic
polymer with hydrophilic groups, trifluorotoluene groups, and disulfide
bonds for conjugation. These trifluorotoluene groups and the NIR-absorbing
dye indocyanine green led to the formation of nanoparticles due to
π–π stacking, which is a type of supramolecular
interaction. Initially, the 19F MRI signal generated by
the fluorine-functionalized nanoparticle was almost zero. However,
after exposure to a reducing environment, the cleavage of disulfide
bonds led to the disassembly of the nanoparticles, which activated
the 19F MRI signal. Under infrared irradiation, the dye
molecules absorbed light energy to generate heat. This photothermal
effect provides a mechanism for the destruction of tumors, and enhances 19F MRI signal by further dispersing the nanoparticles into
smaller soluble sections. This multi-faceted approach, combining therapeutic
and diagnostic capabilities, exemplifies the potential of polymeric
nanoparticles in revolutionizing cancer treatment and imaging.

7.5.1.2.

## MRI with Paramagnetic Metal
With
the exception of fluorine atoms, the most common MRI method is based
on hydrogen atoms. MRI uses a magnetic field to excite hydrogen atoms
in tissue at an appropriate resonance frequency. These excited hydrogen
atoms emit a radiofrequency signal when they return to equilibrium,
which is then translated into an image. However, it is sometimes necessary
to use MRI contrast agents that contain substances that are paramagnetic
or superparamagnetic. These agents, by interacting with an external
magnetic field, alter the relaxation times of atoms in the tissue
to enhance the visibility of internal structures. For example, contrast agents can make blood vessels, tumors,
or specific organs appear more clearly in an image. Commonly used
contrast agents for MRI include gadolinium (Gd) and superparamagnetic
iron oxide (SPIO).
Currently, commercial gadolinium(III) ion
complexes, including megluminian gatoterate (Gd-DOTA; Dotarem) and
dimegluminian gadopentetatu (Gd-DTPA; Magnevist), have been developed
for widespread use as MRI contrast agents. Meanwhile, researchers have successfully combined these materials
with polymer nanoparticles to create MRI-compatible nanoparticles.
One straightforward approach involves modifying the nanoparticle surface
using chelator derivatives (e.g., DOTA-NHS) through click chemistry.
This surface modification technique is critical as it enables the
stable attachment of Gd chelates to the nanoparticles, ensuring their
efficacy as contrast agents while potentially reducing systemic toxicity.
Gd chelates have been added to the surface of polymeric nanoparticles
through the complexation of Gd(III). , Another approach
is to synthesize macromolecules containing Gd(III) ion complexes,
which then self-assemble into nanoparticles. Cai et al. synthesized
a branched polymer, PHPMA, containing DOTA side chains via RAFT, and
subsequently formed Gd-containing macromolecules through complexation
with Gd(III) ( ). They further assembled these macromolecules
into nanoparticles through nanoprecipitation. Kim et al. synthesized
PEG-b-poly(histidine) amphiphilic block copolymers
containing DTPA end groups with DTPA at the hydrophobic end. These amphiphilic copolymers self-assembled
into pH-responsive micelles upon complexation with Gd(III). The Gd(III)
complexes were located in the hydrophobic core, resulting in a reduced T1 relaxation rate. However, upon the protonation
of poly(histidine)’s imidazole groups, the micelles disassembled,
leading to an increase in the T1 relaxation
rate. This dynamic response to pH enhances the utility of these nanoparticles,
potentially allowing for more precise imaging of specific pathological
sites.
 Enhancing the MRI signal intensity of Gd(III) ion
complexes with
polymeric nanoparticles has been the subject of more recent research.
Compared with commercially available small-molecule Gd(III) ion complexes,
macromolecule-complexed gadolinium chelates have the advantage of
high relaxation rates and long retention times in the bloodstream. Li et al. used RAFT polymerization to synthesize
linear, hyperbranched, and star-shaped macromolecular ligands and
complexed them with Gd(III) to obtain macromolecular gadolinium contrast
agents with higher relaxation rates. The diversity in the shapes of these macromolecules (linear, hyperbranched,
and star-shaped) potentially impacts their pharmacokinetics and biodistribution,
which is a critical aspect of their functionality as contrast agents.
Hydrogels and polymersomes have also been employed to enhance MRI
signal, as they can load high amounts of gadolinium very efficiently. , These polymeric nanoparticles have also been shown to effectively
reduce cytotoxicity. This improved safety profile could potentially
expand the applicability of MRI contrast agents to a broader patient
population.
Another widely studied MRI contrast agent are SPIONs,
which have
a magnetic core composed of iron oxide. Researchers have developed
various methods for synthesizing SPIONs and functionalizing them through
both covalent and non-covalent approaches. Huang et al. synthesized SPIONs from a solution of Fe(acac)3 using the thermal decomposition method. Subsequently, folic acid was conjugated to the surface
to enhance the targeting capability of these SPIONs. Malekzadeh et
al. modified Fe3O4 nanoparticles with dendritic
polymeric citric acid and PEG, successfully preparing MRI contrast
agents for drug loading. Liao et al.
used a layer-by-layer assembly approach to combine folic acid-coated
SPIONs with cyanine dye and paclitaxel, creating magnetic targeted
therapy nanoparticles. 
Meanwhile,
researchers have also attempted to assemble SPIONs into
micelles, vesicles, or core–shell nanoparticles for theranostic
applications. Yang et al. developed
novel magneto-vesicles with accumulated SPIONs in the polymer membrane,
where the SPION content increased with the membrane thickness. This
design not only achieved enhanced MRI contrast but also demonstrated
the potential for dose control in drug-delivery systems. Liu et al. prepared contrast agents with a
high relaxation rate by in situ generation within
vesicles. Zhu et al. encapsulated SPIONs
and drug molecules within degradable PLGA shells. This nanoparticle disassembled under mildly acidic conditions,
resulting in a concurrent release of both the SPIONs and the encapsulated
drug, enabling in vivo therapy and drug monitoring.
Additionally, SPIONs themselves possess therapeutic effects, which
can be achieved through inducing cell apoptosis or hyperthermia therapy. , The dual
functionality of SPIONs as both therapeutic agents and contrast enhancers
underscores their potential as versatile tools in the realm of cancer
therapy and imaging.

7.5.2.

## Phototherapy
In recent years, phototherapy
has developed into an important tool in the theranostic treatment
of tumors. Phototherapy can be divided into photodynamic therapy (PDT)
and photothermal therapy (PTT). PDT
and PTT differ from other methods of drug delivery in that their corresponding
nanoparticles contain photosensitizers that can generate heat (PTT)
or reactive oxygen species (PDT) when irradiated with certain wavelengths
of light. This generated heat can then eliminate cells within a specific
area. Photosensitizers can be used in a variety of optical imaging
techniques, such as fluorescence imaging and photoacoustic imaging.
In fluorescence imaging, photosensitizers absorb specific wavelengths
of light and emit fluorescent photons, enabling visualization of molecules,
cells, and tissues within biological samples. In photoacoustic imaging,
the light-absorbing properties of photosensitizers induce localized
heating, resulting in the generation of acoustic signals that are
used to create deep-tissue images. This combination of diagnostics
and simultaneous in situ therapy has attracted great
interest among researchers looking to design sophisticated drug-delivery
vehicles. Polymers are one of a myriad of photosensitizers, but their
strong biocompatibility and synthetic diversity have made them an
attractive choice for designing therapeutic vectors. This section
will highlight designs whereby the polymer component is acting as
the primary phototherapy functionality. It is also possible to include
small molecules within a polymer nanoparticle to conduct PDT and PTT,
as previously highlighted.
In order to design phototherapeutic
nanoparticles, researchers have employed different strategies to enhance
the efficacy of the optical reagents used. For example, semiconductor
polymer nanoparticles (SPNs) have attracted increasing interest in
biomedicine due to their optical activity and low cytotoxicity. Lyu
et al. developed an intraparticle molecular orbital engineering approach
to enhance PTT effects and acoustic signals. In this work, SPNs were synthesized by nanoprecipitation, where
molecular orbital alignment between semiconductor polymers and fullerenes
allowed for photoinduced electron transfer. Specifically, the fluorescence
of the semiconductor polymer was completely quenched, meaning that
the vast majority of energy was released as heat. The photoacoustic
signal and photothermal temperature were increased by a factor of
2.6 and 1.3, respectively, compared to the system without fullerene.
This study provides a strategy to construct intramolecular photoinduced
electron transfer by incorporating a quencher, which enhances non-radiative
heat generation.
Guo et al. utilized planar electron acceptors
(A) and electron
donors (D) to construct conjugated polymer, which self-assembled via
nanoprecipitation into nanoparticles. This rigid D-A structure effectively introduces intramolecular charge
transfer (ICT), which increases infrared absorption. The higher D-A
intensity resulted in a stronger ICT, which yielded faster photothermal
heating and a stronger photoacoustic signal. Similarly, Liu et al.
also designed photothermal nanoparticles that utilized a planar D-A
conjugate structure. This conjugate
was functionalized with long alkyl chains to suppress intermolecular
interactions, as well as triphenylamine, which acted as a molecular
rotor. The overall design facilitated an excited-state electron transfer
process known as twisted intramolecular charge transfer (TICT), which
significantly enhanced the photothermal and photoacoustic properties
of the nanoparticles. The surface of these photothermal nanoparticles
was modified with a polymeric cationic shell, which enhanced nanoparticle
uptake in tumors, resulting in strong anti-tumor efficacy.
In
seeking to design more efficient photothermal nanoparticles,
research has focused on increasing the wavelength of light needed
to stimulate heat generation, improving the overall efficiency of
photothermal conversion, and developing phototherapeutic nanoparticles
with multiple modalities. NIR light can be divided into two different
“windows”, the first between 650 and 950 nm (NIR-I)
and the second between 1000 and 1700 nm (NIR-II). Most photothermal
nanoparticles absorb in NIR-I, while few utilize NIR-II. In photoacoustic
imaging, the background signal from the NIR-II interval is greatly
diminished, and thus research has sought to design more nanoparticles
that absorb light in this range. Jiang et al. developed a new semiconductor
polymer nanoparticle that allows photoacoustic imaging in both the
NIR-I and NIR-II regions. Their polymer
adopts an alternating D-A structure in the form of D-A1-D-A2, where
A1, A2 refer to two different electron acceptors, and A2 has a stronger
electron absorption capability. The introduction of the A2 monomer
with a stronger electron absorption capability is a key factor in
achieving absorption in the NIR-II region, and demonstrates the importance
of molecular design in tuning optical properties. These semiconductor
polymers were subsequently encapsulated into nanoparticles via amphiphilic
self-assembly. The resulting nanoparticle had an absorption of 1253
nm, well within NIR-II, due to the electron-absorbing A2 monomer.
The control without the A2 monomer showed no absorption in the NIR-II
region. Subsequent photoacoustic measurements showed that the signal
generated using the NIR-II light source had a lower background noise,
a higher signal-to-noise ratio, and a deeper detection capability.
Guo et al. designed photothermally active nanoparticles based on polymers
with a D-A structure, as well as a tumor-targeting peptide conjugated
to the particle surface. These nanoparticles
had a photothermal conversion efficiency of 30% under 1064 nm irradiation.
Such a long wavelength allowed superior penetration of a mouse skull,
and the nanoparticle displayed strong anti-tumor efficacy. This research
details an effective paradigm for the treatment of brain tumors through
the use of phototherapeutic nanoparticles.
Enhancing photothermal
conversion efficiency is the subject of
significant research. Zhang et al. reported the concept of a light
trapping unit to enhance the photothermal conversion efficiency of
polymers. Their design was based on
electron D-A conjugated semiconducting polymers functionalized with
light trapping units on their side chains. These functionalized semiconducting
polymers formed nanoparticles via self-assembly, and the particles
exhibited a 62.3% photothermal conversion efficiency while achieving
complete tumor regression. Tang and co-workers synthesized a novel
aggregation-induced emission (AIE)-active luminogen (AIEgen) ( ). This AIEgen maintained a D-A structure but
comprised a rotor-like, twisted structure. This twisted structure
allowed for efficient intramolecular motion, which enhanced thermal
energy generation. After co-incubation with amphiphilic polymers,
stable nanoparticles were obtained via nanoprecipitation. The particles
had a photothermal conversion efficiency of 51.2%. Additionally, the
small singlet-triplet energy gap in these nanoparticles facilitated
efficient ROS production, making them dual-functional for both photothermal
therapy and ROS-based tumor treatment. It is also important to note
that the excitation wavelengths used in the two examples above were
around 635 nm. This wavelength falls within the NIR-I window, which,
while offering less tissue penetration than NIR-II, still provides
significant advantages in terms of reduced photodamage and increased
safety for clinical applications.
 Seeking to further enhance photothermal efficiency,
Li et al. designed
a D-A-D conjugated small molecule in which the sulfur atoms were replaced
by heavier selenium atoms. As the atoms
were replaced, the molecular energy gap decreased, and the absorption
peak shifted from NIR-I to NIR-II. After assembling these small molecules
into nanoparticles with amphiphilic block copolymers, they achieved
a 77% photothermal conversion efficiency under 1064 nm light excitation.
Furthermore, these particles exhibited excellent photoacoustic properties,
deep tissue penetration, and high PTT efficiency. The same group also
designed oligomeric materials with high photothermal conversion efficiency
through an A-D-A structure containing one strong electron donor, and
two strong electron acceptors. This
strong A-D-A structure leads to a narrow energy gap and facilitates
light trapping, and the resulting intramolecular charge transfer also
leads to fluorescence quenching. On the other hand, the flexible D-A
linkage is able to undergo intramolecular rotation, which promotes
nonradiative decay. This material was loaded into nanoparticles, which
subsequently exhibited a photothermal conversion efficiency of 82%
under the irradiation of 808 nm light. These nanoparticles were tested in vivo and were able to completely eliminate a tumor, demonstrating
their potential as powerful agents for cancer therapy with minimal
invasiveness and high specificity.
Multimodal treatment systems
represent the most complex form of
photothermal nanoparticles, but have garnered significant interest
due to their potentially high clinical efficiency. Li et al. synthesized
a semiconducting polymer functionalized with cell membranes of activated
fibroblasts. These nanoparticles not
only targeted cancer-associated fibroblasts, but also exhibited NIR
fluorescence, photoacoustic, photothermal, and photodynamic properties.
This multi-modal functionality allows for a comprehensive therapeutic
approach, combining diagnosis, imaging, and treatment in one system.
In addition, Tang and co-workers synthesized multi-functional, stimuli-switchable
nanoparticles that employed a light-controlled molecule dithienylethene
(DTE). Under external UV/vis light irradiation,
the DTE molecule can reversibly switch its structure between an open-ring
isomer and a closed-ring isomer, which each have different energy
levels. When DTE is in the ring-closed form, it can act as a quencher
and ultimately generate a photoacoustic signal. When the DTE is in
its ring-opened form, fluorescence is produced along with ROS. These
switchable nanoparticles were injected into mice preoperatively, and
tumors were imaged through photoacoustic imaging (ring-closed form).
For residual tumors post-surgery, the incision site can be irradiated
for 5 min at 610 nm, which converts DTE to its ring-opened form, allowing
for the tumor to be fluorescently imaged. This approach highlights
the potential for personalized, on-demand therapy, adapting to the
changing needs of the patient during the course of treatment. These
nanoparticles are also photothermally active, providing a mechanism
for tumor suppression.

7.5.3.

## Radionuclide Imaging and Positron Emission
Tomography
Radionuclides are unstable isotopes that emit
radiation primarily through radioactive decay, including alpha (α)
particles, charged beta particles (positrons, β+; electrons,
β−), gamma (γ) rays, or electron (e) radiation. Researchers combine these radionuclides with
biologically relevant molecules to develop radiopharmaceuticals, which
are then applied to visualize organs or identify infected tissues. Depending on the specific decay processes of
radionuclides, two primary nuclear imaging modalities have been developed:
single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) and positron emission
tomography (PET). SPECT is designed for gamma-emitting radionuclides,
while PET is specifically used for positron-emitting radionuclides. SPECT and PET offer high sensitivity and the
ability to penetrate deep tissues, with detection limits ranging from
a billionth to a trillionth of a molar. 
Furthermore, in clinical settings, SPECT and PET can be integrated
with anatomic imaging methods, such as computed X-ray tomography (CT),
to develop hybrid systems like SPECT/CT and PET/CT. These combinations
are instrumental in generating three-dimensional images, enabling
precise localization. , Consequently, SPECT and PET
are not only valuable in monitoring drug metabolism but also play
a crucial role in the diagnosis and staging of cancer. A variety of radionuclides are utilized in
clinical applications. For SPECT, these include technetium-99m (half-life
= 6 h), indium-111 (half-life = 67.2 h), and iodine-123 (half-life
= 13.2 h). In contrast, PET employs radionuclides such as fluorine-18
(half-life = 110 min), gallium-68 (half-life = 1.13 h), zirconium-89
(half-life = 78.41 h), and copper-64 (half-life = 12 h). Generally, nonmetallic radionuclides are bonded
covalently to organic molecules, whereas metal radionuclides are attached
to their parent compounds using chelating agents. 
In one study, Zhou et al. developed a polymersome
capable of SPECT/CT
imaging and efficient anti-tumor drug delivery. This polymersome was formed via the self-assembly of the
polymer PCL-b-PGlu-stat-(l-glutamic acid-alendronic
acid), which incorporates alendronic acid units in its chain. These
acid units can chelate the radionuclide 99mTc, enabling
SPECT visualization of the polymersomes. In vivo tests,
which included loading the polymersomes with DOX, demonstrated the
ability to track drug distribution dynamically via SPECT/CT imaging
and facilitate real-time diagnostics. Similarly, Yang et al. synthesized
iodine-125 (125I)-labeled ICG-decorated polymer PEG-poly(l-tyrosine-125I)-(indocyanine green), which self-assembled
into micelles. Upon NIR irradiation,
these micelles, accumulating in tumor tissues, enabled simultaneous
fluorescence/photoacoustic/SPECT imaging for precise tumor localization.
Furthermore, they could be used for PTT to treat the tumor.
To further enhance the signal strength in SPECT imaging, Zhong’s
group developed polymersomes with exceptionally high iodine content. First, they utilized iodine-functionalized
trimethylene carbonate as a monomer to synthesize PEG-b-poly(iodine trimethylene carbonate) via ring-opening polymerization.
Remarkably, this polymer contains an ultra-high iodine content of
60.4 wt%. Then, after being labeled with iodine-125, this polymer
self-assembled into polymersomes that were characterized by iso-osmolality,
low viscosity, and non-toxicity. These properties are important to
ensure biocompatibility and patient safety during imaging and therapy.
In a subsequent study, iodine-131 was used for labeling, whereby released
beta radiation exhibited significant toxicity toward 4T1 cells, thus
yielding strong performance as a therapeutic agent in radiopharmaceutical
therapy for tumors. , 
PET is a widely employed
nuclear medical imaging technique that
offers high spatial resolution and sensitivity. PET imaging has found
extensive application in molecular imaging, for disease diagnosis
and treatment response monitoring. In PET, radioactive isotopes are
administered into the body and their emitted radiation is captured
by a camera to generate images. Researchers have integrated radioactive
nuclides with polymeric materials, designing nanoparticles applicable
to a variety of biomedical contexts. Fletcher et al. utilized a hyperbranched
polymer based on PEG to load zirconium-89 (89Zr), enabling
quantitative 89Zr-PET imaging. This approach demonstrates the potential for highly precise and
targeted imaging, facilitating better disease monitoring and management.
Ediriweera et al. employed a hyperbranched polymer that conjugated
copper-64 (64Cu) for real-time detection and quantification
of drug release. Chen et al. designed
a radioactive nanoscale metal–organic framework (MOF). In this
design, 89Zr-UiO-66 was surface-engineered with pyrene-modified
polyethylene glycol (Py-PEG) for enhanced tumor targeting and drug
delivery. This MOF exhibited excellent radiochemical stability and
material integrity, allowing for the efficient loading of DOX. By
incorporating the F3 peptide as a targeting ligand, specific and significantly
improved tumor targeting was achieved in vivo, along
with no notable in vivo toxicity. This research highlights
the potential of radioactive nanoscale PEGylated metal-organic frameworks
to improve biocompatibility and serve as the basis for diverse applications
in cancer diagnosis and therapy ( ). 
 Theranostics yields a more detailed understanding
of the characteristics
of a particular therapeutic target site, and thus allows for rapid
and efficacious disease treatment. Polymeric nanoparticles can generally
enhance the performance of theranostic materials, either by incorporating
a greater amount of diagnostic functionality, or by more efficiently
targeting disease sites. The versatility of polymeric nanoparticles
in encapsulating various diagnostic or therapeutic agents, combined
with their ability to target specific sites, makes them promising
candidates for the development of advanced theranostic systems. Phototherapy
for cancer treatment, which combines the diagnostic capabilities of
photo-active compounds with their anti-tumor photothermal efficacy,
is a particularly attractive concept. However, research into polymeric
nanoparticles for theranostics is still in its infancy, with the focus
currently on fundamental studies, rather than widely applicable systems.
This emerging field holds great promise, but further research and
ultimately clinical trials are necessary to fully realize the potential
of polymeric nanoparticles in theranostic applications. To date, there
are no theranostic polymeric nanoparticles designs that have received
clinical approval, underscoring the need for continued innovation
and rigorous evaluation in this area.

8.

## Conclusions and Perspective
Drug delivery
is one of the most important and extensively investigated
challenges in medical research. An optimized drug-delivery system
has the potential to radically enhance therapeutic efficacy, minimize
potentially toxic off-target effects, and even open-up new strategies
to treat previously untreatable diseases. Furthermore, as therapeutics
begin to shift generally from small-molecule drugs to larger biomacromolecules
such as peptides, proteins, monoclonal antibodies, and nucleic acids,
the need for drug-delivery vehicles will become even more pronounced.
Among the myriad of currently relevant drug-delivery vectors, polymeric
nanoparticles, in our view, sit at the forefront. Polymeric nanoparticles
are unique in that their functional complexity allows for well-tailored,
responsive, and highly targeted designs ( ). Such a level of complexity is simply
not available for other drug-delivery designs. The enormous drug-delivery
potential of polymeric nanoparticles is dictated by five primary features.
 First, polymeric nanoparticles can be tailored
to very specific
sizes (1–1000 nm), with a high degree of monodispersity around
their average diameter. Such a monodisperse sample of particles is
important, given that size plays a vital role in modulating interactions
with various biological environments.
Second, polymeric nanoparticles
can be designed with exotic architectures
such as rods, worms, disks, and many others. The impact that particle
architecture has on drug delivery is still an active research area,
but evidence suggests that drug delivery can be enhanced significantly
by specific alterations to nanoparticle shape.
Third, polymeric
nanoparticles can be designed to respond to specific
endogenous stimuli, chief among which are pH, redox environment, enzymatic
environment, and temperature. Stimuli-responsiveness is a powerful
feature of any delivery vehicle, as it allows for the release of a
drug exclusively at the target site, which increases therapeutic efficacy
while minimizing potential off-target effects. The complexity and
tunability of polymer functionality, upon which these nanoparticles
are based, allows for very well-tailored stimuli-responsiveness, which
can discriminate between very slight changes in biological environments.
There continues to be new techniques developed that improve the specificity
of stimuli-responsive capabilities to control cargo release, while
minimizing off-target effects. Recent advances of note are self-immolative
systems and the design of multi-stage-responsive systems.
Fourth,
polymeric nanoparticles can be functionalized with biological
adducts of various sizes, such as targeting ligands and receptors.
This allows the nanoparticle to potentially co-opt the body’s
own mechanisms to enhance its targeting capabilities and hence improve
its drug-delivery efficacy.
Fifth, polymeric nanoparticles can
be loaded with a great variety
of therapeutic cargos at very high loading efficiencies. These therapeutics
include both hydrophobic and hydrophilic drugs, as well as large biomacromolecules
such as proteins and nucleic acids. Such diverse cargo opens the door
to new kinds of treatment that at present are inefficient or unachievable.
Furthermore, these therapeutics can be loaded either passively, or
by chemical conjugation to the nanoparticle, which may better protect
the cargo and minimize off-target effects.
As well as these
five principal features, polymeric nanoparticles
have other advantages too, including increased thermodynamic stability,
self-immolating capability, which provides a further mechanism to
reduce toxicity, and the fact that polymer nanoparticles themselves
can act as adjuvants. Some of the most powerful and efficacious drug-delivery
designs are polymeric nanoparticles that combine aspects of all the
aforementioned advantages. In short, polymeric nanoparticles, due
to their tunability, versatility and functionality, represent a drug-delivery
vehicle with great drug loading capacity and therapeutic efficacy.
Surveying the clinical history of particle-based drug delivery,
one can loosely identify three generations of nanoparticle. Lipid
nanoparticles comprise the first generation. After 20 years, these
particles are now achieving widespread clinical success, as demonstrated
by the fact that the therapeutic cargo (mRNA) across multiple COVID-19
vaccines is delivered by lipid nanoparticles. These kinds of nanoparticles
are not covered here, but are described in great detail elsewhere.
Polymeric nanoparticles that employ an amphiphilic block copolymer
that self-assembles into micelles represent the second generation.
These somewhat basic designs are widely used in clinical trials, with
the first anti-cancer products beginning to permeate the market. The
third generation of nanoparticles are more functionally diverse, being
“smart” polymeric nanoparticles that can respond to
stimuli or target specific endogenous sites, resulting in high levels
of pre-clinical therapeutic efficacy. Both the second and third generations
of nanoparticles are covered in depth in this review. As the second
generation progresses through late-stage clinical trials and into
commercial relevance, research is shifting toward optimizing the design
and scalability of these more sophisticated third generation nanoparticles.
Given their strong preclinical performance, why are polymeric nanoparticles,
particularly the highly sophisticated designs, not more relevant in
clinical trials and the wider pharmaceutical industry? The fact that
polymeric nanoparticles can be imbued with exotic functionality and
architecture implies that their synthesis and formulation is also
complex. Hence, there are a number of challenges involved with commercially
viable production. Scalability and cost are the two primary concerns.
For example, nanoprecipitation is one of the most important particle
synthesis procedures, but occurs under highly dilute conditions with
very low solids content, and thus cannot easily be scaled-up. Furthermore,
to synthesize nanoparticles with an enhanced targeting or stimuli-responsive
capability, more expensive monomers/ligands are required. Such an
expense entails higher production costs that can only be offset by
outsized clinical benefits. Finally, many of the conventional synthesis
techniques for polymeric nanoparticles yield batch-to-batch variability
when upscaled, which is undesirable for commercial production. As
a result of these challenges, almost all the highly efficacious and
sophisticated nanoparticle designs are synthesized on small scales
in university laboratories. It is no coincidence that the polymeric
nanoparticles that have advanced to late-stage clinical trials and
into wider commercial application, are the simplest designs—block
copolymer micelles.
As well as commercial production challenges,
adequate characterization
methods and intracellular assays that can probe the behavior of polymeric
nanoparticles throughout the body’s varied and complex environments
are lacking. This lack of characterization is challenging for all
drug-delivery vehicles, but for polymeric nanoparticles, which are
specifically designed to utilize the variability inherent in biological
environments, such an absence is an acute problem. In addition to
characterization issues, many of the quality control tests associated
with polymeric nanoparticles are at present unfamiliar to large pharmaceutical
companies. It is also noted that polymeric nanoparticles, which have
displayed high drug-delivery performance under in vitro conditions, seem to lose this efficacy in animal models and clinical
trials. This phenomenon is also not unique to polymeric nanoparticles,
and its exact causes are unknown. Some of the causes likely involve
batch-to-batch inconsistency, the inherent heterogeneity across different
patients and cell-lines, differences between in vitro and in vivo conditions, and the fact that slight
changes in particle shape and composition are observed to alter nanoparticle
performance.
In addition to characterization methods, our understanding
of the
body’s complex biological environments is also deficient. Nanoparticles
are subjected to biological roadblocks as soon as they are injected,
and must overcome several different endogenous environments to reach
their target sites, which are normally intracellular. The body’s
varying environment is well understood in a general sense; however,
a truly robust and specific understanding of each roadblock remains
elusive. It is likely that polymeric nanoparticles, which are finely
tuned to take advantage of varying biological environments, are significantly
impacted by this lack of knowledge. Some have suggested reframing
the design of polymeric nanoparticles around specific endogenous pathways
or diseases, rather than a composition-driven “bottom up”
approach. In practice, this means dedicating
more resources to understanding specific biological hurdles or diseases,
and how they interact with nanoparticles.
Finally, the field
of polymeric nanoparticles for drug delivery
would benefit substantially from research that compares the efficiencies
of different polymeric nanoparticle designs and evaluates the performance
of polymeric nanoparticles with other drug-delivery vectors, such
as lipid nanoparticles or cell penetrating peptides. Currently, the
vast majority of scientific literature regarding polymeric nanoparticles
are novel designs that only report powerful delivery capability, either
through enhanced drug loading, intracellular targeting, or stimuli-responsiveness.
Such research is vital, but there remains a lack of agreement over
which designs are best optimized in terms of production and cost for
more widespread clinical and commercial application. Comparison studies
between different nanoparticle designs would help remedy this problem.
As well as such comparison studies, standardized testing methods for
polymeric nanoparticles across different labs and commercial environments
would also go a long way to furthering their clinical potential.
Polymeric nanoparticles are slowly graduating from foundational
research to clinical trials, and block copolymer micelles represent
the first wave of widely available polymeric drug-delivery vehicles.
Despite the challenges that so far have impeded the progression of
polymeric nanoparticles as commercial products, the benefits of these
nanoparticles, whose sophisticated design allows for radically enhanced
targeting, drug loading, and stimuli-responsiveness, is potentially
enormous. Polymeric nanoparticles will have a profound influence as
drug-delivery vehicles for increasingly sophisticated therapy over
the course of this century.

## Acknowledgments
This
work was supported by the Australian Research
Council (DP210103174). Umeka Nayanathara also acknowledges Dr. Albert
Shimmins Postgraduate Writing-Up Award for the funding support.

## Glossary

## Abbreviations
ABCAccelerated
blood clearance
AMPAntimicrobial peptide
AMRAntimicrobial resistance
APCAntigen presenting cell
APNAminopeptidase N
ATRPAtom transfer radical polymerization
BBBBlood–brain
barrier
CMCCritical
micelle concentration
CVDCardiovascular disease
DCDendritic cell
DLSDynamic light scattering
DOXDoxorubicin
DTTDithiothreitol
DTXDocetaxel
DMMA2,3-Dimethyl maleic anhydride
EGFREpidermal growth
factor receptor
ECMExtracellular matrix
EPREnhanced permeability and retention
FRETForster resonant energy transfer
GIGastrointestine
GODGlucose oxidase
GSHGlutathione
HAHyaluronic acid
HBPsHyper branched polymers
IC50Half
maximal inhibitory
concentration
LCSTLowest critical state temperature
MHCMajor histocompatibility complex
MMPMatrix metalloproteinase
mRNAMessenger RNA
MRSAMethicillin-resistant S. aureus
MSNMesoporous silica nanoparticles
MTOMitoxantrone
MWMolecular weight
NIRNear-infrared
NPNanoparticle
PAAPoly(amino acid)
PAAmPoly(acrylamide)
PAEPoly(amino ester)
PAMAMPoly(amido amine)
PANPoly(acrylonitrile)
PAspPoly(l-aspartic
acid)
PBMAPoly(butyl
methacrylate)
PBSPhosphate buffer saline
PCLPoly(ε-caprolactone)
PDEAEMAPoly(2-(diethylamino)ethyl methacrylate
PDMAEMAPoly(2-(dimethylamino)ethyl
methacrylate
PDPAEMAPoly(2-(diisopropylamino)ethyl
methacrylate
PDLLAPoly(d,l-lactide)
PDMAPoly(N,N-dimethyl acrylamide)
PDMSPoly(dimethyl siloxane)
PEGPoly(ethylene glycol), aka PEO
mPEGMethoxy poly(ethylene glycol)
PEGMAPoly(ethylene
glycol) methacrylate
PEIPolyethyleneimine
PEOPoly(ethylene oxide), aka PEG
PEtGPoly(ethyl glyoxylate)
PGAmPoly(glycoxylamide)
PGAPoly(glycolic acid)
PGluPoly(glutamic
acid)
PHEAPoly(hydroxyethyl
acrylate)
PHEMAPoly(hydroxyethyl methacrylate)
PHPMAPoly(N-(2-hydroxypropyl)
methacrylamide)
PICPolyion complex
PISAPolymerization-induced self-assembly
PLAPoly(lactic acid)
PLGAPoly(lactic-co-glycolic
acid)
PLLPoly(l-lysine)
PMMAPoly(methyl methacrylate)
PMOxPoly(2-methyl-2-oxazoline)
PNIPAmPoly(N-isopropyl
acrylamide)
POEGMAPoly(oligo (ethylene glycol)
methyl methacrylate)
POxPolyoxazoline
PPEPoly(phosphate ester)
PPNPoly(phosphonate)
PPGPoly(propylene glycol)
PNAMPoly(N-acryloyl
morpholine)
PRINTParticle replication in non-wetting
templates
PSPolystyrene
PSarPolysarcosine
PDTPhotodynamic therapy
PTTPhotothermal therapy
PTXPaclitaxel
PVAPoly(vinyl acetate)
PVPPoly(vinylpyrrolidone)
QDQuantum dot
QMQuinone methide
QSPRsQuantitative structure
property
relationships
RDRPReversible deactivation radical
polymerization
RAFTReversible addition-fragmentation
chain transfer (polymerization)
RBCsRed blood cells
RESReticuloendothelial system
RGDArginylglycylaspartic acid
ROPRing-opening polymerization
ROMPRing-opening metathesis
polymerization
ROSReactive oxygen species
SEMScanning electron microscopy
SPIONsSuperparamagnetic iron oxide
nanoparticles
TEMTransmission electron microscopy
sgRNASingle guide RNA
siRNASmall interfering RNA
SILSelf-immolative linker/linkage
SIPSelf-immolative
polymer
SNAPPsStructurally
nanoengineered antimicrobial
peptide polymers
SPIONsSuperparamagnetic iron oxide
nanoparticles
TEMTransmission electron microscopy
STINGStimulator of interferon genes
UCSTUpper critical state temperature
H2O2Hydrogen
peroxide

## Biographies
Maximilian A. Beach obtained his M.Sc. from the
University of Melbourne
in 2019 with a focus on pH-responsive nanoparticles, peptide–polymer
conjugates, drug delivery and endosomal escape. He is currently a
Ph.D. candidate in A/Prof. Georgina Such’s functional materials
lab at the University of Melbourne, working on self-healing coatings,
supramolecular chemistry, hydrogen bonding, and emulsion polymerization.

Umeka Nayanathara completed her B.Sc. (Honors)
in Chemistry at
the University of Sri Jayewardenepura, Sri Lanka in 2017. She is currently
a Ph.D. student at the University of Melbourne, under the supervision
of A/Prof. Georgina Such. Her research interest includes designing
functional polymeric materials, such as star polymers, stimuli-responsive
polymers and nanomaterials for drug-delivery applications.

Yanting Gao received her B.Sc. (2017) in Material
Chemistry from
Sun Yat-sen University, China, and M.Sc. (2019) in Chemistry from
the University of Melbourne, Australia. She is currently a Ph.D. candidate
in the groups of A/Prof. Georgina Such and Dr. Chris Ritchie, interested
in the design and development of inorganic–organic hybrid-responsive
materials and fluorophore-labeled nanoparticles for monitoring drug
release behavior.

Changhe Zhang received
his Ph.D. degree in Organic Chemistry at
Monash University in 2018 under the supervision of Prof. David Lupton.
In 2019, he joined the group of A/Prof. Georgina Such, which investigates
polymeric nanoparticles for drug delivery at the University of Melbourne,
and spent one year working with Prof. Michael Monteiro at the Australian
Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology (AIBN) of the University
of Queensland on antimicrobial materials. He is now working on drug
delivery and biosensors with Prof. Nicolas Voelcker at the Monash
Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences of Monash University. Changhe
is interested in using synthetic toolboxes to solve problems in materials
science.

Yijun Xiong obtained his M.Sc.
from the University of Melbourne
in 2020. He is currently a Ph.D. candidate in A/Prof. Georgina Such’s
group at the University of Melbourne, working on antimicrobial polymers
and nanoparticles.

Yufu Wang obtained
his B.Sc. from the College of Chemistry at Nankai
University in 2017 and finished his M.Sc. at the University of Melbourne
in 2020 with a focus on the synthesis of polymeric nanoparticles.
He is currently a Ph.D. candidate in A/Prof. Georgina Such’s
group and also co-supervised by Dr. Chris Ritchie, working on the
synthesis of dual-responsive nanoparticles via emulsification and
encapsulation of drug or functional materials for drug delivery.

Georgina K. Such obtained her B.Sc. (Hons)
from the University
of Melbourne and her Ph.D. from the University of New South Wales.
She is now an associate professor at the University of Melbourne,
running a research team focused on the design of stimuli-responsive
polymer nanoparticles for therapeutic delivery as well as understanding
how nanoparticle structure impacts migrating biological barriers such
as endosomal escape.

## Author Contributions
This review
was written through the contribution of all authors. Maximilian
Beach and Umeka Nayanathara have contributed equally
to the writing of this review and are co-first authors. CRediT: Yanting Gao writing-original draft, writing-review & editing; Changhe Zhang writing original draft; Yijun Xiong writing-original draft, writing-review & editing; Yufu
Wang writing-original draft, writing-review & editing; Georgina K. Such funding acquisition, writing-original draft,
writing-review & editing.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## References