3954cellrepsmedCell Reports MedicineCell Rep MedElsevierPMC1197039411970394119703944005690710.1016/j.xcrm.2025.102017Interferon-γ-stimulated antigen-presenting cancer-associated fibroblasts hinder neoadjuvant chemoimmunotherapy efficacy in lung cancer
CaoZhengqi MengZhouwenli LiJian TianYu LuLi WangAnni HuangJia WangJingze SunJing ChenLixuan LuShun LiZiming 1Shanghai Lung Cancer Center, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University, School of Medicine, Shanghai 200030, P.R. China∗Corresponding author shunlu@sjtu.edu.cn
∗∗Corresponding author liziming1980@shsmu.edu.cn
2These authors contributed equally
3Lead contact
73202563102017102017542025© 2025 The Author(s)This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Summary
Conventional neoadjuvant chemotherapy provides limited benefit for patients with resectable non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Recently, neoadjuvant chemoimmunotherapy (NCIT) has transformed the perioperative management of NSCLC by priming systemic anti-tumor immunity before surgery, yet it remains ineffective for at least 50% of patients. Through single-cell sequencing analysis of our NCIT cohort, we identify that antigen-presenting cancer-associated fibroblasts (apCAFs) can impede the efficacy of NCIT. Using a custom cancer-associated fibroblast biobank, we uncover that interferon (IFN)-γ stimulates apCAF expansion via the JAK1/2-STAT1-IFI6/27 pathway. Mechanistically, apCAFs significantly contribute to PD-L2 expression in the tumor microenvironment (TME), triggering the accumulation of FOXP1+regulatory T cells (Tregs) through the PD-L2-RGMB axis. Reprogramming apCAFs by inhibiting the IFN-γ pathway or blocking the PD-L2-RGMB axis substantially mitigates apCAFs-mediated FOXP1+Tregs’ expansion. In summary, we reveal the role of apCAFs in compromising NCIT efficacy and propose applications for anti-PD-L2/RGMB regimens to synergize with anti-PD1 therapies by targeting apCAFs.
Keywords: non-small cell lung cancer, neoadjuvant chemoimmunotherapy, antigen-presenting cancer-associated fibroblasts, interferon, regulatory T cells

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•apCAFs are associated with unfavorable outcomes in NSCLC patients receiving NCIT
•apCAFs’ expansion is triggered by IFN-γ via the JAK1/2-STAT1 pathway
•apCAFs promote the formation of FOXP1+Tregs through the PD-L2-RGMB axis
•Targeting apCAFs by the blockade of the PD-L2-RGMB axis improves immunotherapy efficacy

Cao et al. reveal that antigen-presenting cancer-associated fibroblasts (apCAFs) hinder NCIT effectiveness in NSCLC. IFN-γ induces apCAF expansion, which promotes FOXP1+Treg formation through the PD-L2-RGMB axis. Targeting this pathway enhances immunotherapy outcomes, offering a potential therapeutic strategy.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2024 Jul 6; Revised 2024 Dec 6; Accepted 2025 Feb 14; Collection date 2025 Mar 18.

## Introduction
Neoadjuvant therapy has revolutionized perioperative regimens for cancer patients. , , One notable example is neoadjuvant chemoimmunotherapy (NCIT), which was associated with significantly greater event-free survival than neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NCT) alone. The efficacy of neoadjuvant therapy is primarily assessed by the major pathological response (MPR) rate, defined as less than 10% residual viable tumor in the resected specimen. Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) was the first cancer type reported to benefit from neoadjuvant immune checkpoint inhibitors (neo-ICIs). Meanwhile, NCIT has become the dominant therapeutic approach in the neoadjuvant setting, extending its use in clinical practice due to its promising clinical response rates compared to either NCT or neo-ICIs alone. The NADIM-2 phase 2 randomized trial highlighted that the pathologically complete regression (pCR) rate improved to 37% in the nivolumab plus chemotherapy group compared to 7% with chemotherapy alone. Furthermore, the KEYNOTE-671 and AEGEAN trials indicated that neoadjuvant anti-PD1/L1 regimens plus chemotherapy confer greater benefits compared to NCT alone. , Despite these promising results, the non-MPR rate remains high, reaching approximately 60% in the CheckMate 816 trial. Furthermore, the LCMC3 trial reported a higher non-MPR rate of 80%, with 9% experiencing progressive disease (PD). However, the specific mechanisms responsible for non-MPR remain largely unknown. This clinical evidence underscores the need to develop new strategies to overcome resistance to NCIT.
Cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) are the predominant type of stromal cells in the tumor microenvironment (TME). CAFs can induce immunosuppressive effects by interacting with T cells and tumor-associated macrophages, among others. Numerous studies have demonstrated their tumor-promoting behaviors. Recently, a few studies exploring their role in immunotherapy resistance have emerged. Liang et al. unveiled that autophagy-enhanced CAFs could compromise immunotherapy by up-regulating PD-L1. Similarly, Lin et al. identified biglycan-secreting CAFs as a barrier to anti-PD1 efficacy. However, the role of specific CAF subtypes in inducing anti-PD1 resistance in NSCLC, particularly in the context of NCIT, remains unexplored. In this study, using single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq), digital spatial profiling (DSP) spatial sequencing, and bulk RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) of patients’ tumor samples during NCIT, we identified that antigen-presenting cancer-associated fibroblasts (apCAFs) are associated with NCIT non-MPR in NSCLC patients.
apCAFs are a newly identified CAF subcluster characterized by major histocompatibility complex (MHC)II expression. Brekken et al. reported apCAFs in the pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) TME and confirmed that apCAFs could induce regulatory T cell (Treg) expansion in ex vivo assays, although the exact mechanism remained unclear. Jiang et al. further reported that apCAF accumulation also depended on the interleukin (IL)-1-IL-1R2 signaling pathway in Tregs. However, their specific function in NSCLC, particularly in the context of NCIT, was largely unknown. Through our previously developed cell-communication analysis pipeline and a 3D ex vivo co-culture platform, we discovered that the expansion of apCAFs, which relied upon anti-PD1, could promote FOXP1+ Treg accumulation via the PD-L2-repulsive guidance molecule b (RGMB) axis, thereby dampening anti-PD1 efficacy in NSCLC, in turn. Mechanistically, we discovered that anti-PD1 could augment apCAF expansion dependent on interferon (IFN)-γ, which stimulated the JAK1/2-STAT1-IFI6/27 axis, ultimately leading to the upregulation of MHCII and PD-L2.
PD-L2, another PD1 ligand, showed limited efficacy with anti-PD-L2 therapies for a long time. Sharpe et al. recently found RGMB as a new key PD-L2 partner, and combining anti-RGMB with anti-PD1 may overcome microbiome-mediated immunotherapy resistance. However, the specific cell cluster responsible for RGMB expression remained unknown. In our study, we identified Tregs as the major contributors to RGMB expression in the TME. Additionally, we found that apCAFs were the primary source of PD-L2 expression. Utilizing murine tumor models and organoid platforms, we confirmed that, in apCAF-enriched lung tumors, targeting the PD-L2-RGMB axis could significantly overcome anti-PD1 resistance. This finding not only provides additional therapeutic options for addressing NCIT resistance but also opens potential application opportunities for anti-PD-L2 regimens in clinical settings.

## Results

## Antigen-presenting CAFs specifically enriched in the TME of post-non-MPR
The TME is a complex ecosystem composed of tumor, immune, and stromal cells. Recently, Ye et al. identified fibroblasts as the dominant stromal cells subtype. Moreover, several studies have demonstrated the influence of fibroblasts on immunotherapy. , Coincidentally, we uncovered that higher expression of the CAF signature was significantly correlated with worse progression-free survival in a public NSCLC cohort treated with immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) as well ( A). To deeply explore fibroblasts in NCIT, we conducted scRNA-seq on tumor specimens from 10 NSCLC patients and DSP spatial sequencing on specimens from 6 patients, either before or after NCIT ( A). Smooth-muscle actin (SMA) was a typical marker of CAFs, and we therefore selected SMA+ cells within the TME for DSP spatial sequencing ( B). To comprehensively analyze the phenotypic changes within different TME components during NCIT treatments, we collected, sorted, and cultured primary CAF cell lines (37 patients), tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs), and organoids (11 patients). CAF cell lines were cultured in a 3D manner in the non-immunogenic hydrogel that was developed by us, , followed by various readouts ( A).
 During the scRNA-seq analysis, we used COL1A1 and COL3A1 as exclusive markers for CAFs and excluded contamination by other cell types using digital flow cytometry sorting (fluorescence-activated cell sorting [FACS]) ( B–S1E). In total, we identified 6,987 CAF cells and categorized them into 6 distinct subtypes ( C). Differential gene (DEG) analysis revealed unique expression patterns across these subtypes ( F and S1G). To investigate the potential changes within different CAF subtypes during NCIT, we conducted DEG analysis systematically in all CAFs, comparing specimens before (pre-non-MPR and pre-MPR) and after NCIT (post-non-MPR and post-MPR).
Interestingly, we found that the signature genes of apCAFs were significantly upregulated in post-non-MPR samples compared to both pre-non-MPR and post-MPR samples ( D). Conversely, these genes were downregulated in post-MPR samples compared to pre-MPR samples ( D). To validate this, we utilized another NSCLC NCIT dataset (GEO: GSE207422). Major subclusters identified in GEO: GSE207422 were well-mapped to the CAF subtypes in our dataset ( H and S1I). Due to the limited MPR patient cells in GEO: GSE207422 (73/1,063 CAFs), we focused on non-MPR patients. Besides, the fraction of apCAFs was larger in post-non-MPR samples compared to pre-non-MPR samples ( J). Additionally, the expression levels of CD74, histocompatibility complex, class II, DR alpha (HLA-DRA) and histocompatibility complex, class II, DR belta 1 (HLA-DRB1) were higher in post-non-MPR samples compared to pre-non-MPR samples ( K). However, whether the fraction of apCAFs was indeed upregulated in post-non-MPR samples remained unclear. We thus collected an additional NCIT cohort consisting of 14 samples for validation ( A). By integrating the in-house supplementary dataset and GEO: GSE207422 with our discovery dataset, we gathered an adequate sample size and found that apCAFs were the only subcluster to exhibit significant enrichment in post-non-MPR samples ( A–S2C). Moreover, Luo et al. proposed that apCAFs likely originate from macrophages, and we further corroborated their findings through trajectory analysis, demonstrating that apCAFs indeed share transcriptional similarities with macrophages ( D–S2G).
During single-cell analysis, subcluster “contamination” can occur, although it is rare. We double-checked the expression of typical CAF markers on apCAFs, including Podoplanin (PDPN), COL1A1, and platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha (PDGFRA) ( A), confirming that apCAFs are indeed a distinct subcluster of CAFs. Additionally, we conducted bulk RNA-seq on primary CAF cell lines derived from patients’ tumors ( A). Using morphological analysis and quantitative reverse-transcription PCR (RT-qPCR), we ensured the purity of the CAFs ( B). Among these, there were 4 cell lines each for post-non-MPR and post-MPR. We created a signature by intersecting characteristic genes of apCAFs from the integrated single-cell dataset, naming it the “apCAF NCIT signature.” Indeed, the apCAF NCIT signature was significantly upregulated in post-non-MPR compared to post-MPR ( C and S3D). Moreover, the apCAF NCIT signature also showed exclusive enrichment in post-non-MPR specimens within SMA+ CAFs as revealed by DSP spatial sequencing ( E and S3F).
In summary, through multi-omics analysis, we identified a specific CAF subcluster, apCAFs, as a potential indicator of post-non-MPR.

## apCAFs expanded during immunotherapy and dampened anti-PD1 efficacy
Although our in silico analysis suggested that apCAFs might have expanded in post-non-MPR samples, its direct influence on immunotherapy efficacy and the factors responsible for its expansion remained unclear. We first conducted multiplexed immunofluorescence (mIF) to profile the distribution pattern of apCAFs. Notably, apCAFs were enriched in non-MPR samples compared to MPR samples. Moreover, after NCIT, the number of apCAFs was upregulated in post-non-MPR compared to pre-non-MPR. ( G).
Next, we constructed an orthotopic Lewis lung carcinoma (LLC) lung tumor model in C57BL/6 mice and sorted apCAFs and non-apCAFs from the tumors on day 27. These CAFs were mixed with LLC cells, followed by the construction of subcutaneous tumor models ( H). We noticed that tumor growth curves were unaffected by non-apCAFs ( E, I, and S3J). Besides, apCAFs alone, without anti-PD1 intervention, did not exhibit pro-tumorigenic effects ( E and I). On the contrary, apCAFs significantly accelerated tumor growth during anti-PD1 regimens ( E, I, and S3J). Additionally, the granzyme B (GZMB) degranulation of CD8+ TILs was dampened by apCAFs as well ( K). This indicated that apCAFs could directly dampen the efficacy of anti-PD1 therapy. Nevertheless, LLC is considered insensitive to anti-PD1 therapy, and, in our study, anti-PD1 treatment indeed failed to induce significant tumor shrinkage ( E and I). Therefore, we utilized two additional cell lines, SJT1601 and KrasG12DTp53−/− (KP), both of which have been reported to respond to anti-PD1 therapy. Using the same methodology as in the LLC models, we demonstrated that, in anti-PD1-sensitive tumor models, apCAFs significantly induced immunotherapy resistance ( ). In contrast, in non-apCAF settings, tumor growth remained largely unaffected, regardless of anti-PD1 treatment ( ).
However, in vivo models could not provide insights into the driving force behind apCAF expansion during NCIT. We then questioned whether apCAFs could be stimulated during anti-PD1 treatments. To explore this, we adopted an ex vivo 3D platform naming as patient-derived tumor fragments (PDTFs). PDTFs were encapsulated in the same hydrogel used in the 3D culture of CAFs, and multiplexed flow cytometry (mFC) was conducted on them after 48 h of anti-PD1 treatment ( F–1H). We found that post-non-MPR samples had the largest fraction of apCAFs at baseline ( F and A). Furthermore, anti-PD1 treatment significantly enhanced apCAF expansion in both pre-non-MPR and post-non-MPR samples, but not in MPR samples ( F and A).
To determine whether direct contact or soluble factors led to apCAF marker upregulation, we first sorted CAFs and non-CAFs and then used the transwell assay to profile changes in apCAFs ( G and 1H). Besides, non-CAFs could stimulate apCAF accumulation in a non-contact manner ( H). Additionally, supernatants from non-CAFs had the same effect ( F–1H). Moreover, the non-MPR-specific expansion of apCAFs was also effectively recapitulated in CAFs cultured with supernatants from non-CAFs ( B).
In summary, we concluded that anti-PD1 directly stimulated apCAF expansion in non-MPR samples, and apCAFs served as a direct cause of resistance to immunotherapy.

## Anti-PD1 stimulated apCAF expansion dependent upon overexpressed IFN-γ in non-MPR
Although we discovered that apCAF accumulation in post-non-MPR samples was dependent on anti-PD1 treatment, the specific pathway responsible remained unclear. Re-analysis of scRNA-seq data revealed that IFN receptors, such as interferon alpha and beta receptor subunit 2 (IFNAR2) (for type I IFN), interferon-gamma receptor 1/2 (IFNGR1/2) (for type II IFN), and IL-10RB (for type III IFN), were significantly upregulated in apCAFs compared to non-apCAFs ( A). Pathway enrichment analysis confirmed that IFN-related pathways were upregulated in apCAFs ( B), verified by gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) in the NCIT dataset GEO: GSE207422 ( C). Additionally, in the previously described bulk RNA-seq of CAFs and DSP spatial sequencing data, the IFN-γ pathway also showed significant enhancement in post-non-MPR samples ( D and 2E).
 To verify the in silico findings, we collected supernatants from PDTF culture for ELISA profiling ( F and 2G). Indeed, all three types of IFN, including IFN-α/β, IFN-γ, and IFN-λ, showed upregulation in the post-non-MPR PDTF supernatants ( F). We then transitioned from ex vivo to in vitro assays. We used the previously described human primary CAF biobank for downstream experiments ( G). We found that traditional 2D culture settings largely lost HLA-DRA expression compared to PDTF at the baseline time point. Meanwhile, 3D culture of CAFs could recover HLA-DRA expression ( H). Previous reports have also noted that CAFs lose MHCII molecule expression in 2D settings, emphasizing the necessity of our 3D culture system. Regardless of the culture method, IFN-γ, but not IFN-α/β or IFN-λ, was the major IFN responsible for apCAF expansion, as confirmed by immunocytochemistry (ICC) ( I and 2J). As previously mentioned, we showed that anti-PD1 could enhance apCAF expansion. Using an IFN-γ neutralizing antibody (emapalumab), we further confirmed that IFN-γ was necessary for the stimulation of apCAFs by anti-PD1 ( K and 2L). Supplementation with emapalumab largely blocked the upregulated apCAF fraction following anti-PD1 treatment, as corroborated by ICC ( K and 2L). To further investigate whether IFN-γ contributes to apCAF expansion in vivo, we generated primary apCAFs with stable interferon-gamma receptor (IFNGR) knockdown (KD), negative control knockdown (NCKD) group and utilized the previously described co-transplantation models for validation ( C). Compared to NCKD, KD apCAFs exhibited reduced expansion under anti-PD1 treatment ( I). Moreover, KD largely abolished apCAF-mediated resistance to anti-PD1 in vivo ( E–S5H), indicating that the IFN-γ-IFNGR axis plays a critical role in anti-PD1-induced apCAF expansion.
Although we concluded that the anti-PD1-IFN-γ axis was responsible for the expansion of apCAFs and that apCAFs served as important mediators of anti-PD1 resistance, the widespread expression of IFN-γ and IFNGR1/2 posed challenges for developing drugs targeting the “origin” of apCAFs due to the risk of off-target effects. Therefore, after addressing the questions of “what are apCAFs” and “where do they come from,” we set out to investigate “where do they go,” aiming to identify “targetable” axes centered around apCAFs.

## Spatial co-localization of apCAFs with Tregs indicated their potential interactions
Using CellChat analysis, we found that CAFs exhibited the strongest cell-cell communication among major cell types within the TME ( J). We hypothesize that apCAFs contribute to ICI resistance through interactions with other cell types. TILs, the primary ICI responders, showed stronger interaction with apCAFs than non-apCAFs ( K), including CD8 TILs and Tregs. We previously proposed that non-CAF-secreted IFN-γ was responsible for apCAF expansion. Here, we identified a certain CD8 subtype, BAG3+ T cells, as the most probable source of IFN-γ ( M–S5S). Additionally, compared to other known interaction partners of Tregs, such as macrophages and tumor cells, apCAFs exhibited even more interactions ( L). Brekken et al. found that apCAFs from mice orthotopic PDAC tumors could lead to Tregs formation in in vitro assays. However, such immune-modulating effects have not been reported in other tumors or in in vivo scenarios. We hypothesized that apCAFs might also induce Tregs formation in the NSCLC TME. First, we tested if apCAFs were closely located near Tregs. Using mIF, we found that Tregs were more prevalent in post-non-MPR compared to pre- or post-MPR ( A) and were in direct contact with antigen-presenting cells (APCs) (CD74+ cells) ( A), which are indispensable for Tregs differentiation. While apCAFs are considered non-classic APCs, the number of Tregs was positively correlated with the number of apCAFs ( B and 3C), which is not the case for non-apCAFs ( B). In post-non-MPR samples, the distances between Tregs and apCAFs were much shorter ( D and C), which is not observed in non-apCAFs either ( D). Although the number of APCs within a 25 μm radius around Tregs showed no difference between post-non-MPR and post-MPR ( E), the number of apCAFs and the ratios of apCAFs to APCs were significantly higher ( F and 3G). Thus, among all APCs, apCAFs likely played a more important role in Treg formation in post-non-MPR compared to post-MPR or pre.
 The advent of scRNA-seq has revealed significant heterogeneity in TME-infiltrated Tregs. Ley et al. identified a cytotoxic Tregs subset (exTreg) that promotes pro-inflammatory responses rather than suppressing them. Therefore, a detailed analysis of Tregs is necessary to identify the specific subtypes interacting with apCAFs. We closely examined the CD4+ TILs and found that, among the seven well-distinguished subclusters ( H, E, and S6F), five were also present in the CD4+ TILs from GEO: GSE207422, showing excellent similarity ( I, 3J, and G). We then found that IL-1R1_Tregs were exclusively enriched in non-MPR both in our dataset and in GEO: GSE207422 ( K, 3L, and H). In contrast, another Tregs subtype, LEF1_Tregs, showed no significant changes in either dataset ( K and H). Therefore, we concluded that IL-1R1_Tregs, not LEF1_Tregs, is an important marker of non-MPR.
Nevertheless, the potential interactions between IL-1R1_Tregs and apCAFs remained unclear. Using our previously developed cell-communication pipeline, we found that apCAFs were the only subset showing enhanced communication with Tregs compared to non-Tregs ( M). Furthermore, apCAFs demonstrated stronger communication with IL-1R1_Tregs compared to non-apCAFs ( N), indicating potential interactions. IL-1R1_Tregs is a newly discovered suppressive CD4+ subset. We uncovered, using publicly available datasets, , that IL-1R1 is specifically expressed on Tregs from NSCLC patients’ PBMC both in vitro and ex vivo ( O). To distinguish IL-1R1_Tregs from LEF1_Tregs, we conducted pseudotime analysis and found that LEF1_Tregs is a transitional subcluster along the differentiation trajectory from naive CD4+ T cells (ANXA1_CD4 and CCR7_CD4) to IL-1R1_Tregs ( P–3Q). Interestingly, IL-1R1_Tregs was predominant in state 2, which showed higher expression of exhaustion markers ( Q, I–S6K, A, and S7B). However, IL-1R1 expression on Tregs was undetectable in our LLC mice models and Prlic et al.’s head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) mouse models, likely due to potential intratumoral microbiome colonization. This dilemma remains unresolved, prompting us to consider surrogate markers for IL-1R1_Tregs through other multimodal analyses to better investigate apCAF-Tregs relationships in vivo.

## apCAF-stimulated Tregs were characterized by FOXP1 expression
To identify markers equivalent to IL-1R1, we used single-cell regulatory network inference and clustering (SCENIC) analysis to pinpoint intrinsic transcription factors (TFs) driving IL-1R1_Tregs differentiation ( C). Notably, as cells transitioned from state 3 (dominated by naive CD4+ TILs) to state 2 (dominated by IL-1R1_Tregs), FOXP1 activity increased ( A). Additionally, FOXP1 was more active in IL-1R1_Tregs compared to LEF1_Tregs ( B) and showed significantly higher expression in post-non-MPR samples ( C). Since FOXP1 can be reliably detected in mouse LLC models, we used FOXP1+Tregs as a surrogate for IL-1R1_Tregs.
 FOXP1 is crucial for FOXP3-mediated expression of CTLA-4 and CD25 on Tregs. , , Deleting FOXP1 in FOXP3+ Tregs leads to spontaneous inflammatory diseases in mice. However, the biological roles of FOXP1+ Tregs in tumor immunology remain largely unknown. First, we examined whether FOXP1 is exclusively expressed on CD4+ TILs in the NSCLC TME. Deconvolution analysis of The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) data showed that FOXP1 indeed has the highest expression in CD4+ TILs ( D and D). Furthermore, Tregs exhibited significantly higher FOXP1 expression compared to conventional T cell (Tconv) or CD8+ T cells in NSCLC PBMC ( E). We then investigated the spatial relationship between FOXP1+ Tregs and apCAFs. Using publicly available spatial transcriptomics datasets , , , (ST-data), we found that the spatial distribution of apCAFs coincided with FOXP1+ Tregs ( F). Additionally, FOXP1+ Treg fractions were more correlated with apCAF fractions in ST-data spots compared to LEF1+ Tregs ( G).
We thus hypothesized that apCAFs might induce the expansion of FOXP1+Tregs. Besides, compared to CD4+ TILs from apCAF-knockout mice (Col1a2 CreER+I-Abfl/fl), CD4+ TILs from the control group (I-Abfl/fl) showed upregulation of FOXP1_Tregs signature genes (Foxp3, Il1rl1, Il1rl2, etc.) and diminished expression of stem CD4+ T cells signature genes (Tcf7, Il7r, Gzmk, etc.) ( H), suggesting that apCAFs might directly stimulate FOXP1+ Treg expansion in vivo. In co-transplantation models, the TME of apCAF-enriched tumors also exhibited significantly more FOXP1+ Tregs, as well as a higher overall number of Tregs ( I and E). Tregs sorted from the TME of apCAF-enriched tumors (termed “FOXP1high Tregs”) showed the strongest suppressive function on the cytotoxic behavior of CD8+ TILs ex vivo ( J and F). We then co-cultured apCAFs or non-apCAFs sorted from patient-derived CAFs with corresponding autologous naive CD4+ TILs. Additionally, Tregs, including FOXP1+Tregs, exhibited substantial expansion in the apCAF co-culture groups, regardless of anti-PD1 stimulation ( K and 4L).
Taken together, we identified that FOXP1+Tregs could well-represent IL-1R1+Tregs and uncovered that apCAFs could directly stimulate FOXP1+Treg expansion, both in vivo and in vitro.

## Anti-PD1 induced exclusive expression of PD-L2 on apCAFs relying upon IFN-γ
The primary objective of our investigation into the interaction between apCAFs and FOXP1+ Tregs was to identify “targetable” axes to counteract apCAFs-mediated NCIT resistance. We first examined whether neutralizing HLA-DRA expression on apCAFs could inhibit Tregs differentiation. Besides, αMHCII only partially reduced the effect of apCAFs on Tregs and FOXP1+ Tregs, indicating that additional mechanisms were involved ( A). To explore potential mediators beyond MHCII, we conducted Virtual Inference of Protein-activity by Enriched Regulon (VIPER) analysis, a protein-activity quantification algorithm, on our single-cell data of CAFs. The re-clustering of CAFs based on protein activity was highly consistent with transcriptomic data ( A and 5B). Crucially, VIPER-derived apCAFs uniquely expressed PD-L1 and PD-L2 ( A–5C). This finding was significant as Akbari et al. recently demonstrated that PD-L2 is crucial for Tregs maintenance and stability. Thus, beyond MHCII/T cell receptor signaling, the co-inhibitory axis of PD-L1/2 may also contribute to apCAF-mediated Tregs expansion. Despite the low RNA levels of PD-L1/2 and the sparse nature of single-cell transcriptomics, which limited the identification of PD-L1/L2 on apCAFs, VIPER analysis successfully highlighted their presence. mFC analysis confirmed that apCAFs, rather than non-apCAFs, were indeed the primary CAF sub-cluster expressing PD-L1/L2 ( E).
 We next questioned the biological value of PD-L1/2+ CAFs. First, in TCGA lung cancer data, CAFs contribute comparable PD-L2 expression in the TME as macrophages, while this is not the case for PD-L1 ( D and B–S8D). Additionally, we found that CAFs manifested the highest PD-L1/2 expression compared to tumor cells and immune cells ( F). We then conducted RT-qPCR upon FACS-sorted organoids, CAFs, and TILs from the same individual. While anti-PD1 diminished PD-L1 expression on TILs, it significantly upregulated HLA-DRA and PD-L2 expression on both organoids and CAFs, with the latter showing a much greater increase ( G). Taken together, we suggested that CAFs were pivotal contributors to PD-L1/2 expression in the TME during anti-PD1 treatments.
Theoretically, anti-PD1 blocks PD1/L1-mediated effects, leading us to hypothesize that, in the case of NCIT resistance, PD-L2 might be responsible. TCGA analysis confirmed that PD-L1 expression is relatively low in CAFs ( D), and anti-PD1 treatment did not further up-regulate PD-L1 expression on CAFs ( G). Therefore, we focused on PD-L2 expression fluctuations in apCAFs using the previously mentioned PDTF obtained during NCIT. Additionally, PD-L2+ apCAFs were significantly enriched in post-non-MPR specimens ( H and 5I). After anti-PD1 treatments ex vivo, their fractions increased further in both pre- and post-non-MPR ( H and 5I). As mentioned earlier, PD-L2 is exclusively expressed by apCAFs, whose expansion depends on IFN-γ. Since IFN-γ was reported to be responsible for PD-L2 expression on tumor cells, we investigated whether this was also the case for CAFs. Additionally, IFN-γ significantly upregulated HLA-DRA and PD-L2 expression on CAFs ( K). Neutralization of IFN-γ, knockdown of IFNGR, or inhibition of JAK1/2 or STAT1 largely rescued these effects ( K and D). Notably, neither other CAF subsets such as inflammatory CAFs (iCAFs) and myofibroblast CAFs (myCAFs) nor co-stimulatory molecules (CD80/86) were controlled by the IFN-γ signaling pathways in CAFs ( K). Western blot (WB), ICC, and mFC analyses of patient-derived CAFs cell lines further corroborated our RT-qPCR findings ( J, 5L, and E). We further used a human fibroblast cell line (HFL1) and a murine fibroblast (MF) to double-check our results, which remained consistent ( F and S8G). Altogether, we concluded that anti-PD1 stimulated PD-L2+apCAFs expansion in an IFN-γ-dependent manner, offering perspectives on apCAFs-Tregs interactions.

## Reprogramming apCAFs and anti-PD-L2 (clone 3.2) overcame anti-PD1 resistance
No detailed research has been conducted on the specific regulatory axis responsible for PD-L2+apCAFs until now. We discovered that IFN-γ can stimulate PD-L2+apCAFs via the JAK1/2-STAT1-IFI6/27 pathway ( A). Through WB and RT-qPCR analyses of patient-derived CAF cell lines, we confirmed that IFN-γ directly upregulated the phosphorylation of the JAK1/2-STAT1 pathway ( B and 6C). Ruxolitinib, a selective JAK1/2 inhibitor, significantly inhibited the total amount of JAK1/2 and STAT1 protein expression, as well as their phosphorylation ( B and 6C). Similarly, fludarabine, a STAT1 activation inhibitor, showed the same effects ( B and 6C). Additionally, emapalumab, an IFN-γ neutralization antibody, reduced JAK1/2-STAT1-IFI6/27 expression at the RNA level to some extent ( C). We further verified these findings in the HFL1 cell line ( A and S9B). We previously identified IFI6/27 as markers of apCAFs through multi-omics analysis, which were traditionally considered downstream responders to IFN-α/β-mediated STAT1 activation. However, few studies have reported their correlation with IFN-γ signaling. Using RT-qPCR and ICC, we confirmed that JAK1/2-STAT1 also controls the expression of IFI6/27 ( C and 6D). On the other hand, since the JAK3-STAT3 axis is also under IFNs’ control and receptors for IFNα/β were exclusively enriched in apCAFs, we questioned whether there could be bypass activation of STAT3 or IFNα/β receptors signaling pathways in PD-L2+apCAFs. However, neither IFNAR1/2 inhibitors (anifrolumab and IFNAR-IN-1) nor the STAT3 inhibitor (NSC74859) could reverse the effects of IFN-γ ( C and S9D). Finally, inhibition of the IFN-γ-JAK1/2-STAT1 pathway significantly downregulated PD-L2 and HLA-DRA expression on CAFs ( J–5L). In general, we uncovered that the IFN-γ-JAK1/2-STAT1-IFI6/27 axis was responsible for PD-L2+apCAF expansion.
 Aforementioned work led us to identify interventions targeting apCAFs. Considering methods targeting the IFN-γ-JAK1/2-STAT1-IFI6/27 axis may not be cost-effective or easily translatable ( A–S10H), we next investigated whether anti-PD-L2 (clone 3.2) could overcome anti-PD1 resistance in an apCAF-enriched TME. Besides, anti-PD-L2 significantly decelerated tumor growth even in the presence of apCAFs ( E, 6F, A–S11C, and S11F–S11H). Furthermore, anti-PD-L2, or the combination of anti-PD-L2 and anti-PD1, largely rescued the expansion of FOXP1+Tregs and total Tregs ( G, D, and S11I), resulting in reactivation of CD8+ TILs ( H, E, and S11J). Interestingly, in ex vivo co-culture assays, although αMHCII could diminish Treg expansion to some extent, it had limited effects on FOXP1+ Tregs ( H and 6I). In contrast, the addition of anti-PD-L2 further reduced Treg formation and significantly inhibited FOXP1+Treg expansion, indicating that FOXP1+Tregs might be specifically induced by the PD-L2 signaling pathway ( H and 6I). Moreover, both in vivo and in vitro, anti-PD-L2 combined with anti-PD1 restored the anti-tumor capacity of CD8+ TILs, which was originally dampened by the apCAF-FOXP1+Tregs axis. Altogether, we concluded that, since a considerable amount of PD-L2 was attributed to apCAFs, apCAF-enriched TME resistant to anti-PD1 could significantly benefit from the addition of anti-PD-L2 (clone 3.2).

## The PD-L2-RGMB axis was indispensable for apCAFs-FOXP1+Tregs interaction
Recently, Sharpe et al. identified RGMB as another indispensable binding partner of PD-L2. They found that TILs from mice transplanted with gut microbiome from non-responders to anti-PD1 had higher expression of RGMB. The clone 3.2 of anti-PD-L2 blocks both PD-L2-RGMB and PD1-PD-L2 interactions, thus synergizing with anti-PD1. We also found that, in an apCAF-enriched TME, anti-PD-L2 (clone 3.2) could significantly reverse resistance to anti-PD1. Since these effects were accompanied by a reduction in FOXP1+Tregs, we hypothesized that RGMB might be involved in apCAFs-FOXP1+Tregs communication.
Currently, the differences in RGMB expression among major clusters of TILs remain unclear. Interestingly, we found that CD4+ TILs exhibited higher RGMB expression compared to B cells, CD8+ T cells, or natural killer cells in the NSCLC TME ( D; A). Additionally, Tregs showed significantly higher RGMB levels compared to Tconv and CD8+ TILs ( B). This indicates that Tregs are the major contributors to RGMB expression among TILs. Next, our analysis of publicly available RNA-seq data of FOXP1KO Tregs not only confirmed that FOXP1 is essential for FOXP3 but also revealed that FOXP1 might positively regulate RGMB ( C). We verified these findings through mFC analysis, which showed that CD4+ TILs indeed exhibited significantly higher RGMB expression ( E). Although apCAFs did not up-regulate RGMB expression on FOXP1+Tregs ( G), RGMB expression on FOXP1+Tregs was notably higher than that on FOXP1−Tregs ( F). Furthermore, anti-PD1 treatment increased the fraction of RGMB+Tregs ( G). Finally, we observed increased chromatin accessibility of RGMB, IL-1R1, and FOXP1 in Tregs compared to CD8+ T cells or Tconv, highlighting their potential influence on Treg formation ( H and B).
 In the apCAF-enriched TME, anti-RGMB could also overcome resistance to anti-PD1 ( I–7K). When combined with anti-PD1 or anti-PD-L2 (clone 3.2), anti-RGMB significantly reduced tumor growth and volumes ( I–7K, A–S13C, and S13F–S13H), as well as the fractions of FOXP1+Tregs and total Tregs ( L, C, D, and S13I). Besides, either in vivo or in the PDTF platforms, the addition of anti-RGMB enormously increased GZMB secretion by CD8+ TILs ( M, E, and S13J). Although the shrinkage of FOXP1+Tregs under anti-RGMB was not significant in vitro (Figure 7N), likely due to the absence of the gut microbiome, we could still conclude that anti-RGMB together with anti-PD1/L2 managed to successfully overcome apCAF-mediated resistance to anti-PD1.

## Discussion
NCIT has provided a valuable opportunity to investigate the mechanisms underlying immunotherapy resistance. Accordingly, we conducted a multi-omics analysis of NSCLC patient samples treated with NCIT. Our focus on CAFs led to the identification of apCAFs as key mediators of the resistance to NCIT.
Although apCAFs had been previously identified, the mechanisms of their formation remained poorly understood. In PDAC, apCAFs were thought to differentiate from mesothelial cells. Later, Jiang et al. demonstrated that IL-1R2+Tregs could maintain apCAFs by inhibiting IL-1-IL-1R1 signaling in colon cancers. However, our single-cell data of NSCLC revealed comparable IL-1R1 expression on both Tregs and apCAFs, suggesting that additional factors are involved. Using 3D culture settings, we identified IFN-γ as another crucial mediator of apCAF expansion. Furthermore, we clarify that the JAK1/2-STAT1-IFI6/27 axis is the primary pathway driving apCAF expansion. This finding significantly advances the understanding of apCAFs.
IFNs have traditionally been considered crucial to anti-tumor immunity. On the contrary, we found that IFN-γ can reduce NCIT efficacy by specifically stimulating apCAFs. This discovery stemmed from observing increased IFNs in post-non-MPR samples, which might seem counterintuitive since IFNs are typically considered markers of “hot” tumors. However, recent studies demonstrate that “hot” tumors are actually more susceptible to acquired immunotherapy resistance. For example, IFN-γ can promote Yes-associated protein (YAP) phase separation in cancer cells, leading to resistance to anti-PD1. What is more, Hellmann et al. found persistent IFN-γ signaling in the TME of stage IV NSCLC patients with acquired anti-PD1 resistance. Our research further confirms that the IFN-γ-apCAF axis contributes to NCIT resistance in stage I/II NSCLC as well. Both our study and Hellmann et al.’s support the idea that a persistently inflamed, rather than immune-desert, TME might drive acquired immunotherapy resistance.
We further identified a potential mechanism of IFN-γ-mediated immunotherapy resistance: the exclusive expression of PD-L2 on apCAFs. PD-L2+ CAFs manifested cancer-type-specific, context-dependent roles. PD-L2 expressed by CD29+FAP+ CAFs mediate Treg retention in breast cancer, while PD-L2+CAFs accelerate CD8+ T cells’ apoptosis in melanoma. However, the relationship between apCAFs and PD-L2 in NSCLC was still unclear. We revealed that apCAFs, not other CAF subtypes, are the primary source of PD-L2 in the NSCLC TME. Although anti-PD1 blocked the PD1/PD-L2 axis, the PD-L2/RGMB axis emerged to dampen anti-PD1 efficacy. Sharpe et al. reported that RGMB on T cells contributes to T cell anergy. We further confirmed that FOXP1+Tregs are the main contributors to RGMB within TILs. FOXP1 is indispensable for FOXP3 chromatin accessibility and Treg homeostasis. , , However, the role of FOXP1 in Tregs within the context of NCIT was previously unknown. We discovered that FOXP1 acts as a TF marker for a post-non-MPR-responsive Treg subcluster, IL-1R1+Tregs, and may positively regulate RGMB expression on Tregs. Interestingly, as previously reported, FOXP1 could facilitate CTLA-4 expression on Tregs, and RGMB binding enhanced its suppressive activity. Taken together, we believed that, as the “executioner” of apCAF-mediated resistance to NCIT, RGMB+FOXP1+Tregs warrant further investigation.
Lastly, our research highlights pivotal translational aspects and future research directions. First, in co-culture assays, we found that inhibiting the JAK1/2-STAT1 pathway in CAFs not only reduced PD-L2 expression but also restored CD80/86, thereby reversing FOXP1+ Treg expansion through co-stimulatory signaling. This suggests another potential strategy to counter apCAF-mediated resistance, though further in vivo validation is needed. For instance, the JAK1/2 inhibitor ruxolitinib has shown synergy with nivolumab in phase 1/2 trials for NSCLC and Hodgkin’s lymphoma. , Thus, whether JAK1/2 inhibitors may also be able to reprogram apCAFs in vivo warrants further investigation. Finally, we also observed enrichment of apCAFs in pre-non-MPR, suggesting additional mechanisms for apCAF residency before anti-PD1 therapies. Given that apCAF expansion is IFN-γ dependent, we hypothesized that certain subclusters enriched in pre-non-MPR with high expression of IFN-γ might contribute to it and identified BAG3+CD8+TILs as a key source. Therefore, further investigation into the interplay between apCAFs and BAG3+CD8+TILs will be of great significance to further target apCAFs.

## Limitations of the study
The central mechanism we identified—apCAFs driving immunotherapy resistance via FOXP1+ Treg induction—requires further contextualization within broader immune cell interactions. The role of apCAFs as non-professional APCs in modulating other immune cells, such as CD8+T cells and dendritic cells (DCs), remains unclear. Therefore, future studies using advanced approaches, such as lineage-specific genetically engineered models, are essential to elucidate the cell-cell communication between apCAFs and immune cells beyond Tregs. These insights could uncover novel therapeutic targets beyond the PD-L2/RGMB axis and further enhance our understanding of apCAF-mediated resistance to neo-ICIs.

## Resource availability

## Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and regents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Dr. Ziming Li (liziming1980@shsmu.edu.cn).

## Materials availability
This study did not generate any new unique reagents, plasmids, or mouse lines. All unique/stable reagents used in this study are available from the with a completed Materials Transfer Agreement.

## Data and code availability

•All data generated or analyzed during this study are included in this manuscript (and its supplementary information files). Raw human sequencing data including RNA-seq, DSP spatial sequencing, and scRNA-seq in this paper will be shared by the upon request. This paper also analyzes existing, publicly available data (deposited data of STAR Methods). Sequencing datasets generated in this article without human information are available publicly (deposited data of ).
•scRNA-seq datasets were deposited into the Zenodo Database: https://zenodo.org/records/14249268.
•DSP spatial sequencing datasets were deposited into the Zenodo Database: https://zenodo.org/records/14249266.
•Bulk RNA-seq of CAF cell lines were deposited into the Zenodo Database: https://zenodo.org/records/14249260.
•This study did not generate any original code.
•Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.

## Acknowledgments
We thank the patients and their families for their valuable and generous contributions to this study. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (82072564), Program of Shanghai Academic Research Leader (22XD142280), Shanghai Municipal Health Commission (2022XD029), National Multi-disciplinary Treatment Project for Major Diseases (2020NMDTP), Lian Yun Gang Shi Hui Lan Public Foundation (HL-HS2020-65), Yangtze River Delta joint sci-tech innovation and research projects (2023CSJZN0600), and Shanghai Chest Hospital Science and Technology Development Foundation (2021YNZYJ03).

## Author contributions
Z.C. designed and performed experiments, analyzed data, and wrote the manuscript. Z.M. designed and performed bioinformatics analyses and wrote the manuscript. J.L. designed and performed in vivo experiments, analyzed data, and wrote the manuscript. Y.T. and L.L. collected patient samples and clinical information. A.W. and J.H. analyzed the data. J.W., J.S., and L.C. participated in discussions. S.L. and Z.L. conceived and supervised the study and wrote the manuscript. All authors read, reviewed, and revised the manuscript.

## Declaration of interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

## STAR★Methods

## Key resources table

 

## Experimental model and study participant details

## Patient samples
Patient samples were collected from Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai, China. Patients were considered eligible for inclusion in this study if they met the following criteria: aged 20–75 years; clinical stage IIA to IIIB disease based on the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) Lung Cancer Staging, 8th edition (2017); an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance-status score of 0 or 1; histologically confirmed NSCLC; and no previous anticancer therapy. Patients with a pathological type of small cell lung cancer or for whom tissue samples for scRNA-seq or DSP-seq were not available were excluded. Written informed consent was obtained from all patients participated in this study and the use of patients’ specimens was conducted with the approval of the Ethics Committee of Shanghai Chest Hospital [Approval ID: KS1971].

## Animals
C57BL/6J mice, aged 6 and 8 weeks, were purchased from Shanghai Model Organisms. All mice were housed in a specific pathogen-free Animal Center of Shanghai Chest Hospital with 24 h access to food and water. The temperature of the housing environment ranged from 24°C to 26°C and the humidity ranged from 50% to 70%. All animal procedures were received approval from the Animal Ethics Committee of Shanghai Chest Hospital [Approval ID: KS23014-(A)].

## Cell-lines and cell culture
Primary CAFs were isolated from lung tumor samples obtained from patients and the details see method (Patient-derived CAFs 3D culture). The lung cancer cell-lines A549 and LLC, and human fibroblast cell-line (HFL1) were purchased from the Shanghai Institute for Biological Sciences Chinese Academy of Sciences (Shanghai, China). The C57BL/6J fibroblast cell-line (MF) were obtained from iCell Bioscience (Shanghai, China). SJT1601 and KP cell on a C57BL/6 background were kindly provided by Prof. Deng from Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine. All the mentioned cell-lines were cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Gibco) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (P/S, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 37°C with 5% CO2 atmosphere.

## Method details

## Quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR)
Organoids (EPCAM+CD45−), TILs (CD45+EPCAM−) and CAFs (CD45−EPCAM-PDPN+) were sorted (detailed in STAR Methods: biobank of patients TME) and then RT-qPCR was conducted upon them respectively (related to G). In other situations, RT-qPCR was conducted as needed. Total RNA was isolated from cells using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen). cDNA was synthesized from 500ng of total RNA using a reverse transcription kit (Takara). RT-qPCR was using SYBR Green PCR Master Mix (Takara) and monitored in real-time using an ABI 7500 System (Applied Biosystems). Relative gene expression levels were analyzed using the 2-ΔΔCt method. The primers used for RT-qPCR are listed in .

## Western blot assay
Cells were lysed on ice in RIPA buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) containing protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (TargetMol) for 30 min. Lysates were subsequently centrifuged at 15000 x g and protein concentration was determined using the BCA kit (Takara). Cell lysates were subjected to 10% sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and thereafter transferred onto polyvinylidene difluoride membranes (Millipore). The membranes were blocked using 5% Bovine Serum Albumin (BSA) at room temperature (RT) for 1 h and then incubated with primary antibodies overnight at 4°C. After incubation with appropriate HRP-linked secondary antibodies (Cell Signaling) for 1 h at RT, chemiluminescence was detected using an Amersham Imager 6000 (GE) with enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) solution (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

## Flow cytometry
For 2D or 3D culture, the flow cytometry experiments were conducted at passage4; for PDTFs, it was conducted on day2 since the establishment. For the analysis on surface markers, cells were resuspended in FACS buffer (PBS containing 2% FBS) and stained with fluorescent-conjugated antibodies at 1:400 dilution on ice for 30 min in the dark. Stained cells were washed once with FACS buffer and fixed in PBS containing 1% paraformaldehyde. For intracellular cytokine detection, cells were stimulated with Cell Activation Cocktail (Biolegend) for 4 h. After the stimulation, surface antigen staining was performed in FACS buffer, followed by intracellular staining using the Cyto-Fast Fix/Perm Buffer Set (Biolegend) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. For intracellular transcriptional factor staining, cells were harvested and washed with FACS buffer for twice. Cells were firstly labeled with surface markers before permeabilized and stained with True-Nuclear Transcription Factor Buffer Set (Biolegend). Stained cells were washed twice with FACS buffer and acquired on a BD FACSFortessa (BD Bioscience). Data were analyzed with FlowJo (v10.8.1). To sort apCAFs or non-apCAFs, single-cell suspension from tissues were freshly stained with Fixable Viability Dye, EpCAM, CD45, CD31, PDPN, I-A/I-E for 30 min at 4°C in the dark. Cells were then washed and resuspended in FACS buffer. The suspension was sorted on a BD FACS Arialll (BD Bioscience) gated on live, EpCAM−, CD45−, CD31−, PDPN+, I-A/I-E+ for apCAFs and live, EpCAM−, CD45−, CD31−, PDPN+, I-A/I-E- for non-apCAFs. The flow cytometry staining panel was listed in , and the gating strategy was presented in .

## Multiplexed immunofluorescence assay
Fresh tumor tissues were fixed in 4% polyformaldehyde for more than 24 h and then kept in 70% ethanol at 4°C until processed into paraffin blocks. 5–10 μM sections were sliced on clean slides and performed immunofluorescence assay. Briefly, after the procedures of deparaffinization, rehydration, antigen retrieval, PBS with 3% BSA was added to the tissues to block non-specific binding at RT for 1 h. After blocking, slides were incubated with primary antibodies overnight at 4°C in a wet box, followed by horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody incubation and tyramide signal amplification by using a multiple fluorescent immunohistochemical staining kit (Absin, Shanghai, China). The slides were microwave heat-treated after each TSA operation. Nuclei were stained with DAPI after all tumor antigens had been labeled. For immunochemistry staining for cells, 2% polyformaldehyde was using to fix the cells, following a 10 min permeabilization step. Then the cells were blocked for 30 min, and stained with primary antibodies at 4°C overnight. On the next day, fluorescently labeled secondary antibodies were incubated at RT for 1 h. To obtain multispectral images, the stained slides were scanned using the PerkinElmer Vectra 3 system (PerkinElmer) and analyzed by using ImageJ software.

## In vivo study
C57BL/6J mice, aged 6 and 8 weeks, were housed under standard special pathogen-free conditions. All animal procedures were received approval from the Animal Ethics Committee of Shanghai Chest Hospital. For orthotopic lung tumor models, we anesthetized the mice using inhalation anesthesia with isoflurane. A 1 cm incision was made along the upper edge of the rib cage to exposure the lung tissue. We then generated mouse tumor by injection of 5 × 105 Lewis lung cancer (LLC) cells resuspended in 50ul PBS containing 50% Matrigel (Corning). After injection, the incision and the skin were closed with absorbable sutures. Four weeks after injection, the mice were euthanized and lungs were removed for use in subsequent experiments. For cotransplantation models, cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) sorted as CD45−CD31−EpCAM-PDPN+MHCII+ or MHCII−CAFs from mouse orthotopic LLC tumor. MHCII+ or MHCII− CAFs were combined with LLC tumor cells in a 10:1 ratio (5,000,000 CAFs/500,000 cancer cells, resuspended in 100ul PBS containing 50% Matrigel) and injected subcutaneously (s.c.) into C57BL/6J mice. Tumor volumes were monitored periodically using calipers from Day 7 and were calculated by applying the formula: (length x width2)/2. For in vivo anti-PD-1 treatment, anti-PD-1 or PBS were administered intraperitoneally (i.p.) at a dose 200ug per mouse on day 7, 10, 13, 16 in cotransplantation mice (tumor cells were injected on Day 0). For anti-PD-L2, anti-RGMB, the dosage every time was 100ug. For mice in the control group, rat IgG2b isotype control or rat IgG2a isotype control were used as indicated. 21 days after LLC and CAFs co-injection, tumors were harvested for flow cytometry and immunofluorescence staining.

## ELISA
Cell culture supernatants were harvested, concentrated and used for enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kit (Servicebio, Wuhan, China). PDTF were cultured ex vivo for 24hrs to collect supernatants for ELISA measurements of IFNs. All experiments were performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

## Patient-derived CAFs 3D culture
All human NSCLC samples involved in this study were obtained with approval from the Ethics Committee of Shanghai Chest Hospital. Cancer and para-cancer tissues were collected from patients with NSCLC who underwent pathological biopsy or surgical resection at the Shanghai Chest Hospital with permission from the patients. All experimental procedures commenced within 30 min of sample collection. To improve the success rate of CAF cells isolation and culture, we employed two methods. Briefly, samples were mechanically minced into 1–2 mm3 fragments with sterile disposable scalpels. A portion of the tissues were placed in 6-well uncoated culture plates with DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS to allow for CAF cells to grow out from tissues and expand until cells became confluent before passaging. The remaining tissues were dissociated using human Tumor Dissociated Kit (Miltenyi Biotec) with the gentleMACS instrument according to the manufacture’s procedures. After digestion, the suspension was filtered through a 70μm sterile cell strainer (Miltenyi Biotec) to collect a single-cell suspension. The filtrate was centrifuged at 2000 rpm for 5 min. The cell pellet was resuspended with 1mL DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS and plated on 6-well uncoated culture plates. The non-adherent cells were removed after culturing for 1 h at 37°C to acquire purer CAF cells, because the adhesion time of fibroblasts was much shorter than tumor cells. The purity of fibroblasts was evaluated with WB and RT-qPCR. Primary CAFs were positive for FAP and α-SMA and negative for EpCAM, CD45 and CD31. After quality control and stabilization during passage 0 (the first 10 cm dish after dissociation from tumor tissue), CAFs were encapsulated in a GelMA-PEO phase-separation hydrogel (GelMA: 5 g/L; PEO: 0.1 g/L). PEO was washed away three times with sterile PBS. As established in our previous manuscript, GelMA-PEO is non-immunogenic, which is crucial for co-culturing CAFs with autologous CD4+ T cells to prevent non-specific immune activation. Following the removal of PEO, CAFs remained in GelMA (5,000 cells/10 μL) and were cultured in the same medium used for 2D settings. Each passage was defined by reaching a cell concentration of 50,000 cells/10 μL GelMA. GelMA was dissociated by treating with 0.1 mg/mL collagenase I for 5 min at 37°C. CAFs were used in subsequent experiments within 4 passages.

## RNA sequencing for patient-derived CAFs
Patient-derived primary CAF cell-lines were extracted, passaged, and maintained as previously described. For this investigation, only CAF cell-lines within passage 4 were used for downstream experiments, including co-culture with CD4+ T cells, and molecular biology assays. To exclude environmental influences, bulk RNA sequencing was performed only on CAFs at passage 0 (RNA was extracted as soon as CAFs were sorted by FACS). Total RNA was extracted from 1 million CAFs following the manufacturer’s protocol using the TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen). The purity and quantity of the RNA were measured with the NanoDrop 2000 spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). RNA integrity was assessed using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies). Subsequently, libraries were prepared using VAHTS Universal V6 RNA-seq Library Prep Kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The libraries were sequenced on Illumina Novaseq 6000 platform, generating 150 bp paired-end reads. The law reads in fastq format were initially processed using fastp, where low-quality reads were removed to obtain the clean reads. The clean reads were mapped to the reference genome using HISAT2. FPKM of each gene was calculated and the read counts of each gene were obtained by HTSeq-count. PCA were performed using R (v4.4.1) to evaluate the biological duplication of samples. Clinical information of patients from whom CAFs were isolated was listed in .

## Single-cell RNA sequencing
For single-cell sequencing, all cells freshly dissociated from patients’ tumors were sequenced, without sorting through FACS. Fresh NSCLC lung tumor tissues were transferred in MACS Tissue Storage Solution (Miltenyi Biotec) and kept on ice. The tube was centrifuged at 50 g for 1 min at 4°C, followed by the addition of 2 mL preheated digestion solution (Miltenyi Biotec) after discarding the tissue storage buffer. The tubes containing the lung cancer tissue were incubated in a 37°C water bath, with gentle pipetting performed 3 times every 5 min. Enzymatic incubation time was about 45 min. Once the incubation was completed, 10% FBS was added, and the solution was filtered using a 40 μm cell strainer (Corning). The suspension was centrifuged at 300 g for 3 min at 4°C and the red blood cells were removed using ACK lysis buffer (Roche). The suspensions were centrifuged at 300 g for 3 min at 4°C, and the pellets were resuspended in PBS with 0.01% Bovine serum albumin (Sigma). The cells were then loaded into microfluidic chip of Chip A Single Cell Kit v2.1 (MobiDrop, Zhejiang, China) to generate droplets with MobiNova-100 (MobiDrop, Zhejiang, China). Each cell was involved into a drop containing gel bead linked with up to millions oligos (cell unique barcode). After encapsulation, the drops underwent light cut by MobiNovaSP-100 (MobiDrop, Zhejiang, China), allowing the oligos to diffuse into the reaction mix. The mRNAs were captured by cell barcodes with cDNA amplification in droplets. Following reverse transcription, the cDNAs with barcodes were further amplified and a library was constructed using the High Throughput Single-Cell 3′ Transcriptome Kit v2.1 (MobiDrop, Zhejiang, China) and the 3′ Dual Index Kit (MobiDrop, Zhejiang, China). The resulting libraries were sequenced on an Illumina NovaSeq 6000 System. The raw data (fastq format) from the single-cell 3′ transcriptome was pre-analyzed using MobiVision (version 3.0, MobiDrop). The reads were aligned to the Homo sapiens reference genome GRCh38. A filtered cell-gene matrix was obtained using MobiVision. For further analysis, low-quality cells were filtered out according to the specified methods of disclosure. The clinical information for patients undergoing single-cell RNA sequencing was listed in .
The cell count and sequencing quality metrics were presented in and , respectively.

## DSP spatial sequencing
For DSP spatial-sequencing, at least 2 patients for each group (pre, post-Non-MPR, post-MPR), and at least 4 visions for each patient were adopted for sequencing. This technology allows us to gate SMA+ cells in the specific regions we designated to perform bulk-RNA sequencing. Three criteria need to be met to define fibrotic “hotspots”: 1) In a certain region, fraction of SMA+ cells within all nucleated cells is over 70%; 2) it is not a tracheal structure determined by pathologists; 3) it is within NSCLC TME, instead of locating at the tumor border area. Formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tumor samples were preserved at the time of surgical. Serially sectioned FFPE sections (5 μm) from each tissue was stained for histological analysis of hematoxylin and eosin (HE) and used as a reference for regions of interest (ROIs) selection. For ROIs selection, slides were baked at 60°C for 1 h, deparaffinized, rehydrated, and antigen-retrieved in Tris-EDTA buffer at 100°C for 15 min. This was followed by digestion with proteinase K for 15 min at 37°C to expose RNA targets. The slides were then postfixed with polyformaldehyde at RT for 5 min, hybridized over night at 37°C with a UV-photocleavable barcode-conjugated RNA in situ hybridization probe set. After hybridization, the slides were washed to remove off-target probes and counterstained with morphology markers at RT for 1 h in the dark. For DSP morphological labeling to select ROIs for three single-cell ROIs, the slides were labeled using fluorescently antibodies for total immune cells (anti-CD45, Nanostring), epithelial cell marker (anti-panCK, Nanostring), and fibroblasts (anti-αSMA, NBP2-34522AF647), along with syto13 (Nanostring). Immunofluorescence images, ROIs selection, segmentation into marker specific areas of interest (AOIs), and spatially indexed barcode cleavage and collection were performed on a GeoMx DSP instrument (Nanostring). A total of 35 ROIs were collected for 6 NSCLC tumor samples (2 naive, 2 MPR, 2 non-MPR), followed by UV light to cleave the probe tags (oligo) within the selected ROIs. The cleaved oligos were collected into a 96-well plate via capillary action and then transferred to a PCR plate for library preparation and sequencing. Each well of the PCR plate contained primers with specific barcodes, adding a unique library tag to each ROI. The prepared libraries were subjected to high-throughput paired-end sequencing using the Illumina sequencing platform. In Read 1, the sequences included a 14 bp unique molecular identifier (UMI) for quantifying expression levels; in Read 2, the sequences included probe tag fragments for aligning the probe library to determine the corresponding genes. The clinical information for patients undergoing DSP-spatial sequencing was presented in .

## Single-cell data analysis
Cell Ranger Single-Cell toolkit (version 6.1.2) was applied to align reads against the GRCh38 human reference genome and generate the preliminary unique molecular identifier (UMI) matrix. The R package Seurat (version 4.4.1) was used to analyze the scRNA-seq data. We performed stringent quality control from Prof. Zhang to filter out low-quality cells. Cells with (1) less than 600 or more than 25,000 UMI counts, (2) less than 600 detected genes, or (3) more than 5% mitochondrial genecounts, (4) doublets (calculated using DoubletFinder (version 2.0.4). In each sample, the threshold for determining whether a cell is doublets is calculated by multiplying the cell count by 5∗1e−6.), (5) ambient RNA if below 0.2 (calculated using decontX (version 1.4.0)) were filtered out. We then adopted the Seurat-implemented NormalizeData function to perform the library-size correction and logarithm transformation, with the obtained expression matrix used for downstream analyses.
We then adapted the workflow of Seurat to perform dimension reduction and unsupervised clustering. First, the top 2000 highly variable genes (HVGs) were selected by the FindVariableFeatures function (Seurat) with the parameter selection.method = "vst". Effects of the total UMI count and mitochondrial gene percentage were then regressed out from the HVG expression matrix with the ScaleData function (Seurat). The principal component analysis was then performed by the RunPCA function (Seurat) on the scaled HVG expression matrix, retaining the top 50 components for downstream analyses. Because the single-cell library was constructed for each patient at each treatment time point separately, we regarded the combination of patient and treatment point as the batch indicator and removed the batch effect from different experiments with the harmony algorithm. In the batch-corrected space, UMAP implemented by the RunUMAP function (Seurat) was adopted for dimension reduction, with the resulting cell embedding coordinates used for visualization. The harmony components was selected as dimensional reduction technique to use in construction of Shared Nearest-Neighbor (SNN) graph. We systematically performed a two-round unsupervised clustering based on the FindClusters function (Seurat) to uncover the cellular population structure with the resolution 0.1 and 0.2. During the first round of clustering, we annotated each cluster by the expression of canonical cellular makers, including CD3E, CD4, CD8A, EPCAM, COL1A1, FCGR2A, PECAM, IGKC, MS4A1, TPSAB1 ( C). Then for CD4+T cells, CD8+T cells and CAF, we performed a second round of unsupervised clustering to identify fine-grained cell subtypes with the above-described procedure but only on the expression matrix of cells from the analyzed major cell type, and further defined them with references to literatures. The proportion of each fine-grained cell subtypes relative to the major cell type in each patient will be used for subsequent subcluster change analysis.
For In-house supplementary dataset (14 samples), we used In-house discovery dataset (10 samples) as reference UMAP structure to query a projection. This was achieved by calling the FindTransferAnchors and MapQuery function (Seurat V5). The gene markers for the annotation of CAFs subtypes was listed in .

## Deconvolution based on GEPIA2021
In D, D, and D, the expression of PDCD1, PDCD1LG2, and CD279 was analyzed in a cell-subcluster-specific manner using TCGA bulk RNA sequencing datasets (TCGA-LUAD, TCGA-LUSC). The boxplots were generated at http://gepia2021.cancer-pku.cn/sub-expression.html. Li et al. established cell type-level differential expression through a deconvolution method and reference mapping based on single-cell data. The in-browser ANOVA module was used to perform the analysis.

## Publicly-available bulk-RNA sequencing datasets analysis
In O, E, 4H, B, and 7C, publicly available datasets were re-analyzed, specifically GEO: GSE253540, GEO: GSE211044, and GEO: GSE121251, using R. If the bulk RNA expression data in these datasets were already normalized, they were directly used for downstream analysis. For original count data, batch effects across different datasets and samples were removed using the removeBatchEffect function in the R package limma before downstream analysis. GEO: GSE253540 contains bulk RNA sequencing data of conventional CD4+ T cells (Tconv) and Tregs from various human donors, stimulated ex vivo with anti-TNFR2 and anti-CD28 before sequencing. During our re-analysis, samples were regrouped into Tregs or Tconv, with effects from different treatments regressed out, followed by DEGs analysis. GEO: GSE211044 comprises bulk RNA-seq data of different immune cell subtypes (including Tconv, Tregs, and CD8+ T cells) sorted from the PBMC/TME of healthy donors or NSCLC patients without ex vivo stimulation. In our manuscript, GEO: GSE211044 is considered as in vivo data and GEO: GSE253540 as ex vivo data. GEO: GSE121251 includes FOXP1 KO Tregs sorted from mice PBMC (FOXP3Cre−FOXP1−/−), with control Tregs sorted from FOXP3Cre−FOXP1−fl/fl mice. Activated Tregs (aTregs) refer to Tregs stimulated ex vivo with anti-CD3/28.

## Public spatial transcriptomics analysis
GEO: GSM5420749, GSM5420750, GSE181300, and CRC_10X datasets visualization was conducted at: https://www.spatialtme.yelab.site/#!/browse. The featureplots of specific cell-type signature genes expression were produced by the “analysis” module online. The signature genes of apCAFs and FOXP1+Tregs were the average expression of the top 20 marker genes of their corresponding cell-subsets in our own single-cell dataset, calculated by AddModuleScore and FindAllMarkers function in the R package Seurat.

## Biobank of patients TME
3D culture of patient-derived organoids or CAFs in gelatin methacryloyl (GelMA)–poly (ethylene oxide) (PEO) based hydrogel was accomplished as previously described. GelMA-PEO phase-separation hydrogel was proved by us before to have the non-immunogenicity nature, making it compatible for co-culture of immune cells and tumor cells. We first separate the tumor specimens from one patient into three equal parts (A, B, C) at day0. For A, we generate organoids from it in Matrigel as previously-described. For B, we dissociate it and sorted TILs out (CD45 (TIL) Microbeads, human, cat: Miltenyi 130-118-780), then used the anti-CD28/CD3 beads (Dynabeads Human T-Activator CD3/CD28, cat: 11161D) to expand them into at least 3 × 106 cells and cryopreserved them, used within 1 month. For C, we applicated it to get the CAF cell-line, and the CAF cell-line was constructed as described in the method “patient-derived CAF 3D culture”. At day28, we used mechanic dissociation (without any enzymes) to extract organoids, and accutase (StemCell: 07920) to extract CAFs, and recovered TILs. We FACS-sorted them respectively (organoids: CD45−EPCAM+; TILs: CD45+EPCAM−; CAFs: CD45−EPCAM-CD31−) then performed RT-qPCR upon them respectively.

## Construction of PDTF platform
PDTF platform was established as previously described. Tumor fragments from biopsy or surgery of patients undergoing NCIT were collected immediately within 2 h after surgery for subsequent PDTF cultures. They were manual cut into small tumor pieces of 1–2 mm3 size on ice. After processing, all PDTFs were cryopreserved in liquid nitrogen until further usage. For a specific patient, we performed downstream analyses such as mFC until we had got his/her post-treatment tumor samples, together with pre-treatment samples recovered from liquid nitrogen preservation, to avoid batch effects. To prevent lymphocyte efflux, individual PDTFs were embedded in the same hydrogel we used for patient-derived CAF 3D culture. One PDTF per well was placed on top of the GelMA-PEO matrix, after which a second layer of 40-μL matrix was added. Where indicated, tumor medium was supplemented with anti-PD-1 antibody (nivolumab; Bristol Myers Squibb) at 20 μg/mL final concentration. Control cultures were carried out in the presence of control human anti-β-Gal-hIgG4 (S228P; InvivoGen) at 10 μg/mL. Eight to ten PDTFs were used per condition. Unless indicated otherwise, PDTF cultures were kept at 37°C for 48 h before readout.

## Co-culture of CD4+ T cells with CAFs
The co-culture of CD4+ T cells with autologous primary CAF cell-line from the same patient was accomplished as previously-described. Naive CD4+ T cells were sorted from PBMC (MojoSort Human CD4 Naive T cell Isolation Kit, com: Biolegend, cat: 480042) and then cultured in the following medium setting for 24hrs: 25ul/ml anti-CD3/28 (ImmunoCult Human CD3/CD28 T cell Activator, com: StemCell, cat: 10971), 400 ng/ml human IL-2 (Peprotech, cat: 200-02), 4 ng/ml human TGF-β (Peprotech: 100-21), 200 nM/ml retinoic acid (MedChemExpress, cat: HY-14649), RPMI 1640 Medium (Thermo, cat: 11875093), 10%FBS (Gibco, cat: 10099141), 1%Penicillin-Streptomycin (Thermo, cat: 15140122). CAFs from the same patient was dissociated from 3D culture settings using accutase as described aforementioned, and then sorted to apCAFs (PDPN+HLA-DR+) or non-apCAFs (PDPN+HLA-DR-). apCAFs or non-apCAFs were co-cultured with autologous naive CD4+ T cells (after incubation for 24hrs) at the ratio of 1:20, for 48hrs, with the supplement of 200 nM/ml rapamycin (MedChemExpress, cat: 53123-88-9). As indicated, medium was supplemented with anti-PD-1 antibody (nivolumab; Bristol Myers Squibb) at 20 μg/mL final concentration before mFC or FACS profiling. For murine CD8+ T cells function profiling in J, FOXP1high Tregs meant Tregs sorted from tumors of the “apCAFs+tumor+anti-PD1” group, and FOXP1low Tregs meant Tregs sorted from tumors of the “non-apCAFs+tumor+anti-PD1” group. The criteria for determination of high expression of FOXP1 was 10% of CD4+ TILs. Tregs were sorted by FACS (CD45+CD4+CD25+). FOXP1high Tregs or FOXP1low Tregs were co-cultured with CD8+ T cells sorted from murine spleens using FACS at the ratio of 2:1. After 4hrs, the cell activation cocktail (Biolegend; No. 423303) was used to conduct stimulation for 6hrs (1:500), and then GZMB was profiled by mFC immediately.

## Quantification and statistical analysis
The sample size, statistical methods, and relevant details are provided in the figure legends, main text, or methods section. Data were analyzed using R (version 4.3.1 or version 4.4.1). Results with p < 0.05 were considered statistically significant. Sample size estimation was based on assay sensitivity, expected heterogeneity, published literature, and pilot studies. Data are presented as means with either standard error of the mean (SEM) or standard deviation (SD), and error bars represent SEM or SD from at least three independent experiments. Statistical analyses included 2-tailed Student’s t test, one-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett’s tests, chi-square test, nonparametric Mann-Whitney U-test, and Kaplan-Meier survival analysis with log rank (Mantel-Cox) test, as appropriate. Detailed statistical information for each experiment is provided in the corresponding figure legends. ∗∗∗∗p < 0.0001; ∗∗∗p < 0.001; ∗∗p < 0.01; ∗p < 0.05; ns, no significance.

Published: March 7, 2025

## Footnotes
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrm.2025.102017.

## Contributor Information
Shun Lu, Email: shunlu@sjtu.edu.cn.
Ziming Li, Email: liziming1980@shsmu.edu.cn.

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S14 and Tables S3, S5, S6, and S7

## Table S1. Clinical information for patients undergoing sequencing, related to Figures 1–7 and STAR Methods

## Table S2. Clinical information of patients from whom PDTFs were cultured or primary CAFs were isolated, related to Figures 1, 2, and 5–7 and STAR Methods

## Table S4. Gene markers for the annotation of CAF subtypes, related to Figures 1 and 2–5 and STAR Methods

## Document S2. Article plus supplemental information

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Document S1. Figures S1–S14 and Tables S3, S5, S6, and S7

## Table S1. Clinical information for patients undergoing sequencing, related to Figures 1–7 and STAR Methods

## Table S2. Clinical information of patients from whom PDTFs were cultured or primary CAFs were isolated, related to Figures 1, 2, and 5–7 and STAR Methods

## Table S4. Gene markers for the annotation of CAF subtypes, related to Figures 1 and 2–5 and STAR Methods

## Document S2. Article plus supplemental information

## Data Availability Statement

•All data generated or analyzed during this study are included in this manuscript (and its supplementary information files). Raw human sequencing data including RNA-seq, DSP spatial sequencing, and scRNA-seq in this paper will be shared by the upon request. This paper also analyzes existing, publicly available data (deposited data of STAR Methods). Sequencing datasets generated in this article without human information are available publicly (deposited data of ).
•scRNA-seq datasets were deposited into the Zenodo Database: https://zenodo.org/records/14249268.
•DSP spatial sequencing datasets were deposited into the Zenodo Database: https://zenodo.org/records/14249266.
•Bulk RNA-seq of CAF cell lines were deposited into the Zenodo Database: https://zenodo.org/records/14249260.
•This study did not generate any original code.
•Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.