2814apsbActa Pharmaceutica Sinica. BActa Pharm Sin BElsevierPMC1015016210150162101501623713942310.1016/j.apsb.2022.07.010Progress in non-viral localized delivery of siRNA therapeutics for pulmonary diseases
GaoJingjing XiaZiting VohidovaDilrasbonu JosephJohn LuoJames N JoshiNitin aCenter for Nanomedicine, Department of Anesthesiology, Perioperative and Pain Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USAbHarvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USAcDepartment of Surgery, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA∗Corresponding author. njoshi@bwh.harvard.edu
†These authors made equal contributions to this work.
197202213414001400–1428252023© 2022 Chinese Pharmaceutical Association and Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V.This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
Emerging therapies based on localized delivery of siRNA to lungs have opened up exciting possibilities for treatment of different lung diseases. Localized delivery of siRNA to lungs has shown to result in severalfold higher lung accumulation than systemic route, while minimizing non-specific distribution in other organs. However, to date, only 2 clinical trials have explored localized delivery of siRNA for pulmonary diseases. Here we systematically reviewed recent advances in the field of pulmonary delivery of siRNA using non-viral approaches. We firstly introduce the routes of local administration and analyze the anatomical and physiological barriers towards effective local delivery of siRNA in lungs. We then discuss current progress in pulmonary delivery of siRNA for respiratory tract infections, chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases, acute lung injury, and lung cancer, list outstanding questions, and highlight directions for future research. We expect this review to provide a comprehensive understanding of current advances in pulmonary delivery of siRNA.
Key words: siRNA, Non-viral delivery, Injection routes, Respiratory tract infections, Particle pharmacokinetics, Pulmonary inflammation, Acute lung injury, Lung cancer

## Graphical abstract
Non-viral pulmonary delivery of siRNA (naked or in delivery vehicle) to three of the most prevalent lung diseases: lung infections, inflammation, and cancer.
 
statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2022 Feb 2; Revised 2022 May 10; Accepted 2022 Jun 13; Issue date 2023 Apr.

1.

## Introduction
Respiratory diseases are among one of the most widespread and deadliest diseases affecting the global population. In a recent report from the World Health Organization, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, lower respiratory infections, and lung cancer are the top 3, 4, and 6 causes of death, respectively . Despite high fatality and huge burden on economy and healthcare, there is still a lack of effective treatments. Among novel therapies that are currently under development for these deadly diseases, RNA interference (RNAi) therapies mediated by small interfering RNA (siRNA) stand out because of their ability to silence abnormal genes with high selectivity, which is otherwise not possible with small molecule and protein or antibody-based drugs.
Naked siRNA injected systemically are often susceptible to degradation by serum nucleases and are rapidly cleared . As a result, viral and non-viral delivery vectors have been developed to facilitate a more efficient delivery of siRNA towards cells. Viral delivery utilizes different strains of genetically modified viruses (e.g., retrovirus, lentivirus, and adeno-associated virus) to encapsulate siRNA and eject their nucleic acid payload after cell binding and membrane fusion . On the other hand, non-viral delivery vectors mainly rely on synthetic biomaterials such as polymeric and lipid nanoparticles, nucleic acid bioconjugates, inorganic particles to complex or encapsulate siRNA . The greatest advantage of viral compared to non-viral vectors is their superior gene transduction efficiency, due to their intrinsic capability of cell infection . In addition, different strains of viruses enable different levels of transgene expression. While retrovirus enables long-term gene transfer, adenovirus only mediates transient gene transfer, giving researchers the flexibility to control the length of such transduction. Despite these desirable qualities of non-viral delivery platforms, the greatest hurdle they face in clinical translation is the innate and adaptive immune response the host's body initiates in the presence of the viral vectors and their transgene products . Such high immunogenicity often leads to cytotoxicity and triggers adverse reactions. Non-viral vectors, despite having a lower transfection efficiency, utilizes biocompatible and biodegradable materials, which tend to minimize immunogenicity. In addition, their physical and chemical properties, along with their surface properties, can all be modified to enable more precise cell-specific targeting to reduce off-target toxicity . For instance, by tuning the size of the particles from sub-100 nm to micron-scale, one can control the location of particle deposition within the lung . The advantages and disadvantages of viral vs. non-viral delivery platform are included in , , , , .
 For the purpose of this review, we will focus our attention to non-viral platforms used in pulmonary siRNA delivery ( ) and discuss their progress and challenges. In 2018, the first siRNA therapy (Onpattro®, patisiran) was approved for treating hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis, marking the beginning of a new era. Within 3 years of Onpattro's approval, 28,369 papers related to siRNA were published (key term in PubMed search: siRNA), more than two dozen siRNA candidates entered clinical trials, and three more siRNA-based products were approved, including Givlaari®, Leqvio®, Oxlumo™. However, targeted delivery of siRNA beyond liver still remains a major challenge and has prevented the translation of siRNA-based therapeutics for diseases associated with other organs such as lungs.
 The unique anatomy of lungs provides access for localized administration of siRNA via inhalation or intranasal routes, thereby bypassing the anatomical barriers associated with systemic delivery. In multiple pre-clinical studies, localized delivery of siRNA to lungs has shown to result in severalfold higher lung accumulation than systemic route, while minimizing non-specific distribution in liver, spleen, etc . However, to date, only 2 clinical trials have explored localized delivery of siRNA for pulmonary diseases . ALN-RSV01 (Alnylam® Pharmaceutics) is an anti-viral therapeutic against respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) and silences its nucleocapsid (N) protein . While phase IIa clinical trial on healthy volunteers showed a 44% decline in RSV infection, phase IIb trial performed in RSV infected patients showed no statistically significant difference of viral load between intranasal ALN-RSV01 and placebo . Another siRNA therapeutic, Excellair™ (ZaBeCor Pharmaceuticals) targets spleen tyrosine kinase (Syk) for the treatment of asthma. It entered phase II trials in 2009, but there are no results available .
In this review, we provide a systematic summary of recent advancements in the field of localized delivery of siRNA for treatment of different pulmonary disease, including respiratory tract infections, inflammatory lung diseases and lung cancer ( ). We also discuss different routes for localized administration of siRNA-based therapeutics for lung diseases and summarize anatomical barriers that limit siRNA delivery. Lastly, we conclude the review with outstanding questions and future directions for research to address them. Overall, we expect this review to provide an exhaustive summary of latest advancements and remaining gaps in the field of localized, non-viral delivery of siRNA for respiratory diseases.
 
2.

## Routes of administration and barriers
Pulmonary drug delivery can be achieved via three different routes of administration: inhalation, intranasal, and intratracheal. Inhalation is the most common route and mainly relies on normal breathing to administer aerosolized therapeutics through the airway . There are three types of inhalation devices: pressurized metered dose inhalers (pMDI), dry powder inhalers (DPI) and nebulizers . MDIs are the most popular inhaler devices due to their portability, and ease of use. Therapeutic agents are either dissolved or suspended in propellant
such as chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and hydrofluoroalkane (HFA) that provide the driving pressure for aerosolization . However, one major drawback of MDI is high velocity (up to 30 m/s) of the aerosol , which could compromise the stability of siRNA and deposit a major fraction of the formulation in the oropharyngeal region instead of deeper lungs . Conti et al. were the first group to use pMDI to successfully deliver an aerosol formulation of siRNA to lung epithelium. They developed an siGFP-polymer conjugate that preserved silencing efficiency for up to 40% dispersed in HFA using a 4th generation dendrimer poly(amidoamine) (PAMAM) and a mannitol or CSLA co-oligomer shell to achieve microparticle formation upon aerosolization. The polyplex also showed promising aerosol performance with 46%–49% (w/w) of inhaled siRNA reaching the lower respiratory tract to be therapeutically beneficial .
Dry powder inhalers utilize spray drying techniques to deliver nucleic acids in dry aerosols , and provide greater stability and sterility compared to pMDIs . However, spray drying requires extensive optimization of particles size and moisture content, which is usually achieved by addition of carbohydrate excipients, such as trehalose, lactose, and mannitol. For instance, Jensen et al. evaluated the impact of nanoparticle concentration, type of carbohydrate excipients, and the ratio of nanoparticles to excipient on moisture content, particle morphology, particle size and powder yield. Higher concentration of nanoparticles was found to have a positive impact on particle size while mannitol decreased water content the most. Similarly, Keil et al. developed a formulation of siGFP-transferrin-polyethylenimine (PEI) conjugate and found that addition of trehalose facilitated full siRNA recovery while mannitol resulted in 20% loss of siRNA. It is likely that during spray drying, the anhydrous state of trehalose stabilizes biomacromolecules via formation of hydrogen bonds. Mannitol's crystalline structure on the other hand, could be less stable for biomacromolecules. Lastly, nebulizers have also been reported for localized delivery of siRNA in lungs . However, high shear stress is often required to generate liquid aerosol suspension which results in siRNA degradation and recycling back into the reservoir .
Despite the high clinical translatability of inhalation as a route for localized administration of siRNA, its application in pre-clinical models have a few setbacks. One of such challenges is the lack of ways to accurately determine the portion of siRNA deposited in different regions of the lung. Different anatomy of the airways between animal models further increases the variability of particle deposition and makes inter-studies comparison difficult. Additionally, different methods of exposures, such as the use of nebulizers, mask, inhalation chamber, etc. also complicate the calculation of therapeutic efficacy as it is hard to account for the therapeutic amount actually being inhaled by the animals . Therefore, intratracheal and intranasal administrations are used as alternatives , as they ensure all initial dosage reaches the local pulmonary sites.
For instance, Zafra et al. utilized an intranasally administered naked siRNA against a suppressor of cytokine signalling protein 3 (SOCS3) in a mouse model of chronic asthma and confirmed intact siRNA localization in lungs. Improvements in mucus secretion and lung collagen reduction were observed, signifying airway remodelling. Miwata et al. intratracheally injected dry powder siRNA against vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in mice with lung metastasis. A single intratracheal injection reduced VEGF in both bronchoalveolar lavage fluid and tumor tissues. Albeit their prevalence in animal studies, intratracheal and intranasal administrations have their own pitfall as well. For instance, the lack of mimicking formulation deposition due to aerodynamics makes the results hard to extrapolate into human applications. In addition, intranasal administration often generates promising data in mice which are obligate nose breathers . In humans, intranasal administration might result in sub-optimal lung depositions of therapeutics. In addition, the use of anesthetics in mice often sequesters mucociliary clearance, leading to a lower estimate of siRNA elimination . Similarly, intratracheal delivery is an invasive procedure and is not suitable for pulmonary delivery of therapeutics in humans . Therefore, more attention should be put into the development of inhalation techniques and devices compatible with small animals.
In spite of overwhelming advantages of pulmonary delivery of siRNA for respiratory diseases, there still remain a few anatomical and physiological barriers that are yet to be overcome ( ). Respiratory tract is a highly branched passage with airways of varying length and diameters. This intricate anatomy makes up a prominent barrier for pulmonary drug delivery. Distribution of inhaled therapeutics in lungs is determined by aerodynamic diameter (AD) of siRNA loaded . Multiple reviews have summarized that the optimal aerodynamic dimensions for accumulation in the lower respiratory tract are AD< 100 nm or 1 μm ≤ AD ≤ 5 μm, while for intracellular uptake , , , , , , AD should be less than 150 nm to avoid alveolar macrophage phagocytosis .
 Another interesting approach to reach deep lung distribution is to utilize porous sub-micron particles with a small aerodynamic diameter to avoid impaction at upper respiratory tract. In the meantime, these particles have higher geometric diameter which simultaneously helps them escape phagocytosis by macrophages . This work was pioneered by Edwards et al. who developed large (>5 μm) porous poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) particles for pulmonary insulin delivery back in 1997. This discovery inspired many recent works related to pulmonary delivery of siRNA. For instance, Xu et al. developed an anti-multidrug protein-1 (MRP-1) siRNA-loaded nanoparticle encapsulated in poly-l-lactide (PLLA) porous microspheres. The platform not only showed optimal aerodynamic properties, but also resulted in sustained release of both Dox and siRNA-CS NPs.
Another barrier towards efficient pulmonary delivery of therapeutics is the mucus lining, which offers an excellent first defence mechanism against pathogens and particulate matter. siRNA-loaded nanoparticles can get trapped in the mucus layer, and are either swallowed or coughed out, during mucociliary clearance . To overcome the mucus barrier, mucolytic or mucus-penetrating particle coatings have been developed. Poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) coating, for instance, has been studied extensively for its interaction with glycosylated mucin. High density of low molecular weight PEG on nanoparticles minimize their interaction with mucus, and facilitate faster diffusion , . This fundamental finding inspired many subsequent PEG-coated vehicles for siRNA delivery to lungs. For instance, 2% (w/w) PEG coating was applied to cationic and phospholipid-based nanoparticles intended to co-deliver anti-BCL2/anti-MRP1 siRNA and chemotherapy drug in lungs . Besides PEGylation, other mucus penetrating moieties have also been explored. For instance, Yang et al. utilized a pro-peptide of the RAGE-binding peptide to coat their cationic dendritic poly-l-lysine nanoparticles and used it for intratracheal delivery of anti-TNF siRNA to treat inflammatory pneumonia. After penetrating through mucus, the pro-peptide dissociates upon protonation by the acidic local site, leaving the dendrimer-siRNA complex free to transfect alveolar macrophages. Fluorination of polypeptides can also drastically increase its mucus penetration capability . Ge et al. delivered a fluorinated polypeptide-siRNA conjugate to treat acute lung injury and achieved significant anti-inflammatory effect and an impressive ∼96% knockdown of TNF- .
Finally, pulmonary surfactant, which contains 90% lipid and 10% proteins and is produced by alveolar cells, is another barrier that significantly impedes the transfection efficiency of siRNA-loaded lipid nanoparticles . Interaction of lipid nanoparticles with alveolar surfactant often leads to pre-mature release of siRNA. On the contrary, polymeric particles are seldom affected . More importantly, the hydrophilic protein components of the surfactant often lead to opsonization of the siRNA-loaded nanoparticles and result in biomolecular corona effect , . As the original surface of the nanoparticles gets masked by these proteins, the interaction of nanoparticles with target cells may be significantly altered , .
An interesting strategy to overcome the surfactant barrier involves decorating pulmonary surfactant on the nanocarriers to increase their colloidal stability and intracellular uptake in lung . For instance, anti-CD45 siRNA-nanogel was coated with the clinically approved surfactant, Curosurf®, via electrostatic interaction . Another subsequent study performed by the same group identified 1,2-dipalmitoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DPPC) and surfactant protein-B (SP-B) as the key components of the pulmonary surfactants that instill colloidal stability in nanoparticles. Coating density was optimized between 0.2% and 0.4% (w/w) for SP-B for a maximal TNF- silencing in a mouse model of acute lung injury . Overall, pulmonary delivery of siRNA must consider these anatomical barriers while engineering siRNA delivery platforms.

3.

## siRNA delivery for respiratory tract infections
Respiratory tract infections are among the top five causes of deaths worldwide. Viruses and bacteria can cause a range of infections from rhinitis to pneumonia, which represent a large global burden of diseases. Outbreaks of emerging viruses such as SARS-CoV-1 in 2003, the H1N1 “Swine Flu” in 2009, or the currently ongoing SARS-CoV-2, have triggered dramatic impact on global health and economy . Viruses infect epithelial cells in respiratory tract after binding to distinct cell surface receptors . One of the most attractive approaches to fight viral infection in lungs is via RNAi therapy, which can degrade the viral mRNA and inhibit the expression of critical viral proteins. RNAi therapy is also useful to fight infections that are difficult to treat due to antimicrobial resistance. Here in this section, we summarize the recent successful attempts of pulmonary delivery of therapeutic siRNA to treat 4 major types of the viral and bacterial respiratory infections.
3.1.

## Respiratory syncytial virus infections
Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is the most common cause of infant hospitalization and can lead to bronchiolitis . Currently there are no available vaccines for RSV. RSV replicates in the superficial layer of respiratory epithelium and causes damage and inflammation of the bronchioles. Among the 11 virus encoding proteins, F and G proteins are the most important surface epitopes for neutralisation. Using siRNA to knock down these proteins could provide huge potential to treat the RSV infection ( ).
 In 2001, Bitko and Barik were the first to demonstrate that nanomolar concentration of siRNA can result in 10–20-fold reduction of RSV mRNA translation . Later in 2004, Bitko et al. showed that infection by RSV and parainfluenza virus (PIV) can be specifically prevented and inhibited by siRNAs, administered with transit-TKO transfection reagent intranasally to infected mice. Ten years of efforts following this work led to the first clinical trial of using siRNA to treat RSV in human subjects. ALN-RSV01, a 19 bp RNA duplex with two (2′-deoxy) thymidine overhanging on both 3′ ends, targets a highly conserved region in the mRNA of RSV nucleocapsid protein . In a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study against RSV, a nasal spray of ALN-RSV01 or saline placebo was administered for two days before and for three days after RSV inoculation. Intranasal ALN-RSV01 administration was safe and well tolerated and resulted in a 38% decrease in the number of infected people and a 95% increase in the number of uninfected subjects . Another clinical report showed that ALN-RSV01 can reduce the risk of bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome after RSV infection in lung transplant patients . However, it failed to achieve the primary endpoint—a drop in the rate of new or progressive bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome at 180 days after RSV infection. Therefore, the clinical study of ALN-RSV01 was terminated.
More recently, Chin and coworkers designed siRNAs that aim to silence RSV M2-2 gene , as it has been shown before that absence of this gene can led to inefficient replication of the virus , . The engineered siRNAs showed effective silencing against the RSV M2-2 gene both at protein level and mRNA level . In another study, Khaitov et al. evaluated siRNAs targeted to interleukin-4 (IL-4) and RSV P protein-encoding gene in a mouse model of virus-induced asthma exacerbation. Combined intranasal administration of anti-IL-4 and anti-RSV significantly downregulated IL-4 mRNA expression and RSV viral RNA, which reduced eosinophils in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid and airway inflammation.

3.2.

## Severe acute respiratory syndrome
Started at the end of 2019, coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) quickly turned into a global pandemic . Although multiple vaccines against SARS-CoV-2 have been approved in different countries, there is no specific treatment for those that were already infected with SARS-CoV-2, which spurred huge demand and interest for developing anti-virals. RNAi-based approach is especially useful for targeting the SARS-CoV-2 RNA genome to inhibit mRNA translation and expression. Recent comparative analyses suggest that SARS-CoV-2 is extremely homologous (95%–100%) to SARS-CoV at the protein level, and share ∼79% sequence identity at the whole genomic level . Previous studies already demonstrated the potential of RNAi against SARS in 2003. For example, Wang et al. expressed siRNAs that can specifically target the viral RNA polymerase, block the cytopathies effects, and inhibited the viral replication of SARS-CoV. Li et al. screened 48 siRNA candidates targeting elements throughout the entire SARS coronavirus. Two chemically synthesized naked siRNAs that specifically targeted the NSp12 protein-encoding regions showed prominent prophylactic and therapeutic activity in established Rhesus macaque SARS model after intranasal administration.
SARS-CoV-2 express four structural proteins after infection which includes spike (S), envelope (E), membrane (M), and nucleocapsid (N), all are potential siRNA targets. For instance, Khaitov et al. screened 15 siRNAs and found that the most efficient siRNA inhibiting viral replication targets the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) of SARS-CoV-2 in vitro, the siRNA was then formulated with a peptide dendrimer and showed significant reduction of virus titer and lung inflammation in a Syrian Hamster model through inhalation delivery. Ambike et al. also systematically analyzed which SARS-CoV-2 replication steps are accessible for RNAi, and they found that siRNAs were not active against intermediate negative sense transcripts but can target the genome of incoming SARS-CoV-2-terminating replication after cell entry and preventing cytopathy. Based on their finding, siRNAs that can target open reading frame 1 (ORF1) showed the most effective suppression of viral replication and infection .

3.3.

## Influenza
Influenza virus is one of the most prevalent infections in humans and animals, which is a major cause of mortality worldwide. Pandemics caused by influenza A (H1N1) in 1918, A (H2N2) in 1957, A (H3N2) in 1968 and A (H1N1) in 2009 resulted in huge economic and healthcare burden. Although A (H1N1) and A (H2N2) viruses have disappeared, A (H1N1) pdm09 and A (H3N2) viruses together with influenza B virus (Yamagata and Victorian lineages) are still causing epidemics as seasonal influenza . Antiviral drugs, including M2 ion-channel protein inhibitors (adamantanes) and neuraminidase inhibitors (zanamivir and oseltamivir), have been approved to treat influenza, but drug resistance was found in a few virus strains , . Three kinds of vaccines including inactivated, live attenuated and recombinant hemagglutinin (HA) are currently available in multiple countries. However, vaccine efficacy is limited due to high chance of antigenic mismatch between vaccine candidates and circulating strains . Extensive studies towards the biology of influenza viruses have provided clear understandings of viral proteins and amino acids that are involved in the pathogenicity, which really facilitated the development of RNAi therapies.
One of the earliest studies of applying siRNA against influenza is reported by Ge et al. They designed and tested a total of 20 siRNAs specific for NP, PA, PB1, PB2, M, and NS genes, and showed that inhibition by the most potent siRNAs is a result of both sequence-specific interference with viral mRNA accumulation and broad inhibition of all viral RNA transcription in cell lines and embryonated chicken eggs . Other reports have also designed siRNAs that target PB2, NS1 as well as a combinatorial viral gene , . For instance, Wu et al. designed an siRNA targeting the conserved region of non-structural protein gene 1 (NS1) of the H5N1 avian influenza flu virus. A transfection reagent, Lipofectamine 2000, was mixed with siRNA and intranasally injected into infected chicken and decreased the virus-induced death rate by 87.5%. Viral mRNA and plaque are also significantly decreased in the lung tissues of the animals. In addition to the design and identification of potential siRNAs candidates, recent efforts have also focused on improving the delivery efficiency of siRNA against influenza virus with a variety of materials. For example, Brodskaia et al. applied layer-by-layer technique and sol-gel method to make SiO2-coated microcapsules to load a cocktail of three siRNAs (targeting NP, NS and PA) and achieved effective inhibition of replication in several IAV subtypes (H1N1, H1N1pdm, H5N2, and H7N9. Liang et al. formulated spray-dried powders of siRNA and pH-responsive peptides complex and demonstrated significant inhibition of viral replication in cells transfected with H1N1 influenza virus. Jamali et al. formulated chitosan/siRNA nanoparticles to inhibit influenza virus replication in BALB/c mice after intranasal delivery. Other materials such as hybrid polyarginine-inorganic microcapsules have also been developed for siRNA delivery against influenza .

3.4.

## Tuberculosis
Tuberculosis (TB) is a bacterial lung infection caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) and has been one of the major health challenges to society for thousands of years ( ). Currently, there are ten drugs approved by U.S. Food & Drug Administration (FDA) for treating TB . TB treatment usually requires a cocktail of various antibacterial agents lasting a minimum of 6 months. The long-time of treatment phase and adverse effects of drugs have made the treatment of TB challenging. In addition, multidrug resistance (MDR), and extensive-drug resistance (XDR) have been reported since 1990s . There is clearly an urgent need for a safer and more effective TB treatment. RNAi approaches against MTb, typically known as the host-directed therapeutics (HDT), aim to modulate the gene expression of host-dependent survival factors or host immune response instead of targeting the microorganism directly. One of the major strategies involve targeting the macrophage functions including arresting phagosome maturation and promoting autophagy. BFL-1/A1, a transcriptional nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) dependent anti-apoptotic regulatory protein, was reported as a negative regulator of autophagy in mycobacteria-infected macrophages . siRNA targeting BFL-1/A1 has demonstrated autophagy induction and inhibition of intracellular Mtb growth in vitro . Another protein family related to phagosomal maturation in Mtb infection is Rab proteins, which are small GTP binding proteins for control of homotypic and heterotypic vesicle fusion . siRNA that targets RAB22A expression in mycobacterial phagosomes has been shown to enhance the maturation of phagosomes but limited inhibition of bacterial infection . Currently these studies have been validated only in vitro using naked siRNA, further investigation in vivo is needed to demonstrate the potential towards effective treatment of MTb.
 siRNA-based immunotherapy provides another approach to combat tuberculosis. After infection with Mtb, the immune system generates a “wall” around the bacterium with granuloma, which consists of macrophages, lymphocytes and other highly differentiated cells such as multinucleated giant cells, epithelioid cells and foamy cells, which act to constrain the infection but also leads to bacteria dormancy that might reactivate and proliferate later . One way to inhibit the bacteria growth is to target the immunosuppressive cytokines with siRNAs. Lymphotactin chemokine XCL1, is known to be produced by activated CD8 T cells during Tb infection, plays an important role in the maintenance of the granuloma structure . It is reported that aerosolized siRNA-targeting XCL1 was delivered through an intratracheal microsprayer to an Mtb-infected mice model and induced local and transient suppression of XCL-1 by 50% . Reduced XCL1 expression in the lungs was also associated with decrease of T lymphocytes, IFN- , disorganized granulomatous lesions and higher fibrosis compared with control mice, however, no significant therapeutic effect was observed in this study . Pulmonary steady-state protein levels of IL-10, IFN-g, and bioactive TGF-b were found significantly elevated in TB patients and are associated with TB reactivation . Rosas-Taraco showed that 5 days after the last non-invasive, aerosolized intrapulmonary delivery of naked siRNA that targets TGFβ1, the levels of tgfb1 transcripts were reduced to 65.5% in C57BL/6 mice when compared with expression of the same transcript in controls groups, which lead to reduction of the pulmonary bacillary load in mice chronically infected with M.tuberculosis . This study also found that the downregulation of both TGF-β and IL-10 can further reduce the bacterial load by delivering anti-TGFβ siRNA to IL-10 knockout mice , suggesting a potential approach to target Mtb with multiple siRNAs. Other key cytokines involved in the immune pathology of TB also include TNF-α, IL-1, type I IFNs, siRNAs targeting these cytokines to regulate the immune response after TB infection could provide more potential applications. A list of siRNA targets reported for respiratory tract infection, see .
 

4.

## siRNA delivery for obstructive pulmonary disease
Chronic or acute obstructive pulmonary diseases are among the top causes of deaths as reported by World Health Organization. Obstructive pulmonary diseases are characterized by airway inflammation and subsequent infiltration of pro-inflammatory immune cells such as eosinophils, activated T cells, and macrophages, obstruction of the airway, and mucus hypersecretion . Three common categories include cystic fibrosis (CF), asthma, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Pathogenesis of CF has been revealed to a greater extent compared to asthma and COPD, which are heterogeneous with complicated molecular pathway interplays. Therefore, targeted gene therapies have developed more rapidly for CF while treatments for asthma and COPD remain largely symptomatic. For instance, corticosteroids, bronchodilators (e.g., β2-adrenergic antagonist), etc. have been used to suppress airway inflammation . However, long-term use of these treatments is reported to cause adverse systemic side effects while still being unable to solve the underlying disease roots . In the following sections, we summarize recent advancement in siRNA-based therapeutic strategies for attenuating obstructive pulmonary diseases. We also discuss siRNA delivery strategies explored in the context of obstructive pulmonary diseases.
4.1.

## Cystic fibrosis
Cystic fibrosis is a multi-organ genetic disease caused by mutation at the CF transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene, located on chromosome 7 . The CFTR protein works as a chloride transporter channel on the apical side of the airway epithelial cells to balance chloride secretion and sodium reabsorption . In the case of mutation, the homeostasis between electrolyte and water is disrupted, leading to a lack of water hydrating the cell surface and the built-up of abnormally thick and viscous mucus. Additionally, the presence of mucus impedes mucociliary clearance which is an important defense mechanism of the body to remove pathogens. The warm and humid environment within the mucus in fact favors the microbial colonization, further leading to airway infections, inflammations, and obstruction, further exacerbating the respiratory disease states . For a long time, treatment strategies for CF have focused on therapeutics for symptom management ( ). These include antibiotics against pulmonary infections, mucus thinning reagents and corticosteroids against airway inflammation . However, more recently, there has also been a significant surge in efforts towards developing therapeutics that focus on genetic corrections and aim to treat the underlying disease cause. For instance, Trikafta (elexacaftor/tezacaftor/ivacaftor), consisting of 3 CFTR-modulating small molecules developed by Vertex Pharmaceuticals, is the first triple combination therapy approved in 2019 by the FDA for treating CF patients , . With the advancement of gene therapies, increasing efforts has been put into siRNAdelivery to target airway epithelial cells for CFTR gene correction and repair. However, a major barrier for CF gene therapy is the use of an effective delivery system that is able to navigate the complex lung anatomy, avoid lung clearance and innate immunity, as well as penetrate the thick mucus . Orphan drug MRT5005 (Translate Bio) is the first clinical-stage mRNA product for CFTR gene encapsulated in a proprietary lipid nanoparticle to treat all CF patients , . For a list of siRNA targets reported for inflammatory lung diseases, see .
 In conjunction with genome correction, siRNA-mediated silencing of the defective proteins or disease-relevant genes has shown promise. For instance, the loss-of-function of CFTR gene leads to the upregulation of epithelium sodium channel (ENaC) resulting in sodium hyperabsorption and thus depleted airway surface liquid . Manunta et al. developed a receptor-targeted nanocomplex (RTN) consisting of cationic liposomes and peptide E, which was previously identified through phage display and functions similar to rhinovirus to target the intercellular adhesion molecule-1 elevated in inflamed epithelium. Within the RTN, the peptide E complexes with siNaC through a cationic oligolysine domain while targeting the epithelial cells through a seven amino acids motif, SERSMNF , . Treatment of RTN on an air-liquid interface model of human CF showed over 45% of silencing efficiency while the transfected cells displayed significantly reduced net fluid absorption rate compared to control. ENaC expression was reduced by over 50% and significantly lower than control groups and mice treated with negative siRNA. Manunta et al. 's study also resonated with this finding. siRNA against ENaC gene was incorporated in a liposome functionalized with the same epithelial targeting peptide. Oropharyngeal administration of the siRNA-loaded liposomes in mice also resulted in significant silencing in the -subunit of ENaC. d'Angelo et al. proposed an alternative way of encapsulating ENaC siRNA by using a hybrid lipid [dipalmitoyl phosphatidylcholine (DPPC)] and polymer (PLGA) nanoparticles functionalized with PEI. The hybrid NPs showed a triphasic release of siRNA sustaining for up to 5 days which was prolonged in the presence of PEI and high stability in airway mucus. Aerosolization of hybrid NPs on a triple cell co-culture model, which was composed of epithelial, macrophages and dendritic cells, showed high intracellular uptake, silencing of over 60% of ENaC proteins and low cytotoxicity.

4.2.

## Asthma
Asthma is a common chronic lung disorder characterized by recurrent airway inflammation and hyper-responsiveness . Histopathology studies have also showed elevated infiltration of neutrophils, eosinophils, lymphocytes, mast cell activation and epithelial cells injury . In particular, CD4+ T helper 2 (Th2) cells predominantly drive inflammatory response and allergic sensitization . Transcription factors involved in assisting Th2 cytokine secretion include NF- B, signal transducer and activator of transcription factor 6 (STAT6), and GATA-binding protein 3 (GATA-3) while tyrosine kinases involved include epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR), and spleen tyrosine kinase (SYK) , . Lastly, targeting dendritic cells (DCs) also constitutes a promising asthma treatment strategy as DCs are actively correlated to Th2 cell differentiation . The most common form of asthma is allergic asthma, and is often caused by inhalation of irritants such as house dust or pollen . Upregulated genes such as SOCS3, IL-13, IL-4, IL-17 and IL-23 are often inflammatory mediators and potential targets for RNAi therapeutics , , , . In the following section, we summarize previous attempts of delivering therapeutic siRNA to treat asthma ( ). Numerous research groups have explored silencing relevant genes involved in infiltration of immune cells in the airway and airway hyperresponsiveness (AHR). Huang et al. were among the first groups to use siRNA to target interleukin-5 (IL-5) gene, which is supposedly associated with AHR. Previously, IL-5 cytokine was shown to promote the differentiation, maturation, and recruitment of eosinophils, which induce airway inflammation through secretion of granular basic proteins and membrane-derived lipid mediators . By administering an IL-5 siRNA-expressing lentivirus intratracheally to mice with ovalbumin (OVA)-induced airway inflammation, they showed that airway inflammation and hyperresponsiveness were significantly reduced upon challenge with methacholine aerosols. Eosinophil chemo-attractive chemokine and eotaxin level also dropped significantly . Besides IL-5, IL-4 is another pro-inflammatory cytokine secreted by allergen-specific helper T type 2 (Th2) cells and is coupled with increased level of IgG and eosinophil localization. Khaitov et al. created an RSV-virus-induced asthma exacerbation model and intranasally delivered IL-4 siRNA and RSV siRNA, which reduced the eosinophil count by over 4-fold.
 Other studies have examined the role of Janus kinase/signal transduction and activator of transcription (JAK–STAT) signaling pathway in asthma, as it facilitates signal transduction to elevate the level of pro-inflammatory cytokines . For instance, in 2009, Darcan-Nicolaisen et al. intranasally administered siRNA against STAT6 in OVA/pollen-challenged mice and observed significant reduction in eosinophil, CD4+ T cell count, as well as in the expression level of IL-4 and IL-13. In a fungal infection-induced asthma model, Bonifazi et al. administered inhalable siRNA targeting mTOR and STAT3, which respectively disrupts the PI3K/Akt/mTOR and STAT3/IDO pathways. The results confirmed that the PI3K pathway is responsible to direct dendritic cells (DCs) towards pathogenic inflammation while STAT3 signaling pathways acts as a tolerogenic/anti-inflammatory pathway in DC . Qiu et al. used a unique approach to encapsulate siRNA against STAT5. They used packaging RNA (pRNA), which is a nanomotor of bacteriophage with a secondary structure capable of nanostructure formation by bottom-up assembly. Assembled heterodimers of pRNA/siSTAT5 and pRNA aptamer/CD-4 were formed, where pRNA aptamer/CD-4 functioned as a ligand to target CD4+ T lymphocytes. The novel nanovehicle barely showed any cytotoxicity and effective STAT5b mRNA inhibition in asthmatic spleen lymphocytes. The suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 (SOCS3) is known to be a negative feedback regulator of the JAX/STAT signaling pathway. Specifically, it is a potent inhibitor of STAT-3 . SOCS plays a crucial role in modulating the cytokine profile and maintain the balance between pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines. For example, SOCS-1 deficient mice die prematurely due to systemic inflammation stemming from uncontrolled production of IFN- . Paradoxically, an overexpression of SOCS3 has been correlated with an increasing severity of inflammation . Moriwaki et al. were the first to demonstrate that SOCS3 plays a role in Th2 cell differentiation from CD4+ T cells. By transfecting primary CD4+ T cells with SOCS3-siRNA using electroporation, they showed attenuated Th2 response even when the primary T cells were treated with OVA. Additionally, adoptive transfer of CD4+ T cells transfected with SOCS3-siRNA to mice after OVA challenge exhibited markedly suppressed AHR along with reduced eosinophil and Th2 cells accumulation. Another study on the role of SOCS3 in asthma pathogenesis was conducted by Zafra et al. who intranasally administered siRNA against SOCS3 in an chronic murine model of asthma. The treatment not only reduced eosinophil cell count and AHR, but concomitantly resulted in reduced mucus secretion and collagen deposition as well.
Other studies targeting a single protein or cytokine have also been completed to push the limit of our understanding of asthma. For instance, Miyamoto et al. investigated the pathological role of plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) which is elevated in sputum of asthmatic patients and correlate with transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) activity, another cytokine with intimate relationship with inflammation. Through intra-airway administration of PAI-1-siRNA in a chronic ovalbumin-induced asthmatic mice model, the authors demonstrated reduced AHR and eosinophilia in acute asthma and suppressed airway remodelling in chronic asthma . Another disease target, Receptor-interacting protein 2 (RIP2), a transcription factor involved in NF- B activation, was identified by Goh et al. Upon intra-tracheal administration of RIP2-siRNA, an impressive amelioration of allergic airway inflammation was achieved, accompanied with reduction in mucus secretion, NO synthase level and a wide array of pro-inflammatory cytokines including IL-1β. Additionally, Huang et al. initiated a joint investigation on disease targets for both rheumatoid arthritis and inflammatory lung diseases. The selected target for inhibition was tyrosine kinase SYK, which was found to play an important role in the inflammation signaling via a wide array 1 stimuli, including IL-1, Il-6, liposaccharides, etc , . Lastly, vitamin D binding protein (VDBP), a glycosylated -globulin carrier protein for vitamin D, has been implicated in the pathogenesis of both asthma and COPD . Choi et al. made dual delivery of a corticosteroid and disease-modifying siRNA possible by creating a dexamethasone-PEI/siRNA (DEXA-PEI/siRNA) complex to VDBP. Intratracheal instillation of the nanocomplexes to OVA-induced mice showed predominant uptake by macrophages and eosinophils among the bronchial lavage cells, while in the lung tissues, epithelial and Type I pneumocytes showed major uptake. Additionally, DEXA-PEI/siRNA reduced inflammatory cell count by 57% compared to dexamethasone alone which only reduced inflammatory cell by 27% in asthmatic mice.
Among the group of potential protein targets, high mobility group (HMG) proteins are one of the top candidates. HMGs are a group of chromosomal proteins involved in regulation of DNA processes including transcription and recombination . A member of the HMG box (HMGB) proteins superfamily, HMGB-1 has shown intimate correlations with inflammatory process. Secreted by virtually all cells during necrosis, HMGB-1 acts as an alarmin once in extracellular environment and binds to macrophage receptors such as receptors for advanced glycosylation end products (RAGE) and toll-like receptors (TLRs) to activate immune response and secretions of IFN- and TFN- . Di Gioia et al. proposed silencing of HMGB-1, as its elevated level has also been found in both asthmatic and COPD patients and correlates with neutrophil cell counts. A cationic polymeric material consisting of poly(N-2-hydroxyethyl)-d,l-aspartamide (PHEA) was proposed to complex HMGB1 siRNA. Functionalization by spermine side chain, an oligoamine protonatable at physiological pH, and PEG chains (PHEA-PEG-Spm) resulted in significantly greater HMGB1 silencing efficiency in epithelial cells of the nanocomplex . Interestingly, PEGylation of PEG-Spm slightly lowered the intracellular uptake compared to PEG-Spm alone . Choi et al. proposed another interesting angle of targeted siRNA delivery. Recognizing the high-affinity binding of HMGB-1 to RAGE and TLR, which are overexpressed on activated macrophages, the authors used HMGB-1 as a targeting ligand for macrophage-specific delivery. HMG-siRNA conjugates were formed and further loaded into oligoarginine micelles to target CHIL3/CHIL4 which are chitinases involved in Th2 cells facilitated inflammation in rodents. Intratracheal administration of this ternary complex in asthmatic mice showed significant reduction in airway inflammation and goblet cell hyperplasia.
More targeted deliveries have been developed since 2016. Among them, activated T cells which mediate asthma pathogenesis have been commonly investigated as the target cell type. However, one of the major hurdles is the lack of targeting strategies as T cells do not exhibit caveolin-mediated endocytosis for nanoparticles . Xie et al. proposed a clever solution. Since the expression of transferrin receptors increases in activated T cells, they created a transferrin-PEI (Tf-PEI) polyplex for selective T-cell targeting and fast internalization. GAPDH-siRNA-loaded polyplexes were shown to be stable in pulmonary surfactant with a significantly higher intracellular uptake compared to non-targeted polyplexes. To further increase the transfection efficiency in T cells, other studies have constructed designs for more efficient endosomal escape. For instance, Feldmann et al. used a virus-inspired polymer for endosomal release (VIPER), a block co-polymer with a cationic block for siRNA condensation and a pH-sensitive block which exposes membrane-lytic peptide melittin in acidic environment for endosomal escape. Intratracheal instillation of VIPER particles in mice resulted in >75% GAPDH gene knockdown. One year after this discovery, the same group combined the advantage of targeting moiety and endosomal escape and created a Tf-PEI polyplex blended with melittin peptide (Tf-Mel-PEI), which was modified with dimethylmaleic anhydride (DMMAn) to minimize its toxicity at neutral pH . The results showed that melittin-conjugated Tf-PEI demonstrated superior binding affinity to Tf receptor and led to 2.8-fold increase in endosomal release and significantly greater GAPDH knockdown compared to Tf-PEI alone.
Lastly, some research groups focused particularly on the material design aspects to increase the compatibility of their formulation with inhalation device, enabling downstream clinical translation. For instance, Luo et al. constructed an inhalable aerosol formulation using positively charged guanidinylated chitosan (GCS) to condense siRNA against enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) and protect it from shear force generated by the nebulizer. Further, surface modification with salbutamol, a β2-adrenergic agonist, enabled highly targeted delivery. Salbutamol-GCS showed superior intracellular uptake and significant EGFP knockdown in both airway and alveolar epithelial cells in EGFP transgenic mice . As the expedition progresses, more and more gene targets have been proposed as potential therapeutic target for knockdown, including CD86 , CD117 , and many more. Combining with the advancement of pulmonary delivery strategies, these exciting new discoveries brings people hope for bringing a cure for asthma. Indeed, Excellair (ZaBeCor Pharmaceuticals), a naked inhalable siRNA targeting Syk for asthma, has already successfully cleared phase I clinical trials .

4.3.

## Chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases (COPD)
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is an incurable chronic disease characterized by airway inflammation, airflow obstruction, as well as damages to the lung parenchyma . Primary pathological impacts on the airway include airway wall remodelling and mucus hypersecretion, which ultimately leads to deterioration of lung function . The exact pathogenesis of COPD that leads to chronic inflammation and emphysema still remains unclear. However, recent insights that stem from molecular biology have provided us a few directions. The first one is the redox state imbalance characterized by an increase in oxidative stress in COPD patients which leads to lung infiltration of pro-inflammatory immune cells such as neutrophils and macrophages , . An increase in proteases, such as matrix metalloproteinases (MMP)-2, 9, 12, has also been associated with inflammation as well as extracellular matrix (ECM) degradation and tissue remodelling. Signaling pathways related to COPD progression include the NF- B and PI3K/Akt pathways, which putatively lead to inflammatory cell activation and airway remodelling , .
Identifications of disease-triggering pathways and gene targets for COPD has opened a window of opportunity for RNAi therapeutics. However, clinical translation has remained limited due to insufficient understanding of the intricate disease mechanism, and a lack of robust and predictive animal models . TPI 1100 (Topigen Pharmaceuticals Inc.), which consists of an ASO targeting phosphodiesterases (PDE4 and PDE7), is the only reported RNAi-based product launched into phase I clinical trial to treat COPD , . However, the pipeline was soon terminated. Recent pre-clinical experiments have been mainly dedicated to targeting inflammatory cytokines. For instance, Lokras et al. optimized a lipidoid-polymer formulation using Lipidoid 5 (L5) and poly(lactic-co-glycolic) acid (PLGA) to encapsulate siRNA against TNF- . L5 content of 15 and 20% (w/w) and L5: siRNA ratio of 15:1 led to optimal gene silencing in macrophages. Fischer et al. also targeted TNF- but constructed a rod-shaped amorphous silica microparticles using a layer-by-layer technique. The cylindrical construct has been previously shown to exhibit deep lung deposition and alveolar macrophage transfection . Although the construct facilitated sustained release of siRNA (up to 10 days), TNF- expression in alveolar macrophages was only reduced by 30%. Another study conducted by Frede et al. who created a polymeric nanocarrier with inner core made of calcium phosphate showed predominant accumulation in lung and bronchial lymph nodes. Further, administration of nanocarrier-encapsulated siRNA against CCL2, IP-10 and IFN-γ significantly reduced lung inflammation and tissue damage in mice.

4.4.

## Acute lung injury
Acute lung injury (ALI), or more broadly known as acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), originates form a variety of direct (e.g., pneumonia, gastric acid aspirations, etc.) and indirect (e.g., trauma, sepsis) pulmonary injuries. ALI/ARDS can be broken down into 3 phases: exudative, proliferative, and fibrotic . The exudative phase is signified by the polarization of alveolar resident macrophages and dendritic cells to pro-inflammatory phenotypes, in response to foreign particles . The inflammatory tissue state consequently leads to disruption of airway epithelium, compromising gas exchange and alveolar fluid clearance ( ). The proliferative phase initiates as the alveolar type II cells differentiates into alveolar type I cells to restore the epithelial architecture and functions. However, if no proper treatment is received during this self-healing period, ALI/ARDS may further progress into fibrotic phase which is characterized by over-proliferating fibroblasts . Despite the gravity of ALI/ARDS, no pharmacological interventions have been proposed to target the underlying disease mechanism. Currently, the best practice still remains to be protective ventilation (e.g., limitation of tidal volume and airway pressure), long term use of which may in fact exacerbate lung injury . Under such context, siRNA arises to be a promising therapeutic approach for ALI/ARDS. In the following section, we will highlight important pulmonary deliveries of siRNA for the treatment of ALI/ARDS.
 Before delivery vehicles become a prominent means to boost therapeutic efficacy of RNAi, the local administrations of naked siRNA were chiefly used to discover novel disease targets that can attenuate the progression of ALI/ARDS. Zhang et al. were one of the first groups that delineated the important role of heme oxygenase (HO-1), a cytoprotective enzyme, in lung ischemia reperfusion (I-R) injury, which is a common form of ALI following transplantation, surgery and shock. In a mouse model of I-R, intranasal delivery of HO-1 significantly increased the expression of Fas and caspase 3 signaling complex, which is associated with cell apoptosis in ALI/ARDS. Overexpression of HO-1 attenuated the Fas/caspase-3-induced apoptosis . This finding corroborated with that of Perl et al. , who intra-tracheally administered Cy5-Fas-siRNA to hemorrhage-induced septic ALI mice model and confirmed its preferential localization in pulmonary epithelial cells. FAS-siRNA significantly diminished lung tissue TNF- , IL-6, IL-10, IFN- , IL-12 and caspase-3. Together, these two studies were the first to show the critical involvement of Fas receptor-driven pathway in ALI/ARDS. Around the same time, Lomas-Neira et al. aimed to understand the role of the migrating polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMN), which are in high abundance in patients with ALI/ARDS. By knocking down keratinocyte-derived cytokine (KC) and macrophage inflammatory protein-2 (MIP-2) using intrathecally administered siRNA, the authors showed significantly lower neutrophil influx following septic challenge . Interestingly, MIP-2 siRNA achieved superior performance in reducing tissue IL-6 and TNF- compared with KC-siRNA. Ye et al. focused on a different cardinal feature of ALI/ARDS, the dysfunction of endothelial barrier of lung which leads to the increase of alveolar-capillary permeability. siRNA against Pre-B-cell-colony-enhancing factor (PBEF), a novel biomarker of ALI/ARDS, rescued the endothelial cell barrier function after the treatment of thrombin, an edemagenic agent. Additionally, PBEF siRNA significantly inhibited thrombin-induced IL-8 secretion, which is known to increase fenestration gap between endothelial cells . Together, these results suggested the important role that PBEF plays in pulmonary-vascular dysfunction of ALI/ARDS and the therapeutic potential exerted by siRNA. Fast forwarding to 2012, Lomas-Neira et al. conducted another study to investigate the cell type responsible for TNF- priming of myeloid and non-myeloid cells, which contribute to increased susceptibility of lungs to injury following shock. A clever approach was taken where siRNA was intratracheally and intravenously injected to mice prior to hemorrhagic shock and sepsis challenge. By varying the routes of administration, the authors were able to detect if TNF- priming of local tissue is attributed to alveolar epithelial cells or endothelial cells. Mice treated intra-venously with TNF- siRNA showed significantly less ALI indicative genes (e.g., IL-6, IL-8, KC, etc.), suggesting endothelial cells' role in mediating TNF- priming . Later in 2019, Dong et al. identified a novel therapeutic candidate, receptor-interacting protein 2 (RIP2) for treating cigarette smoke (CS)-induced ALI. Intratracheal administration of RIP2 siRNA into CS-challenged mice showed significant suppression of CS-induced inflammation as well as oxidative damage markers. More importantly, RIP2 siRNA ablated neutrophil counts in BALF. Most recently, Xu et al. also delineated the role of epithelial and endothelial cells in programmed death ligand (PD-L1)/PD-1 driven pathogenesis of ALI/ARDS by through different uses of delivery methods (e.g., intratracheal vs. intravenous). Naked PD-L1 siRNA were directly administered intratracheally while siRNA encapsulated in liposomes were intravenously injected into ALI mice model. Since only intravenous injection of PD-L1 siRNA led to recovery of lung function, alleviation from lung edema and reduced neutrophil influx, the authors demonstrated the unique PD-L1-dependent role of lung vascular endothelial cells in aiding ALI/ARDS disease progression.
Starting in 2014, the use of non-viral vectors for siRNA delivery have gained increasingly more popularity due to their improvements in siRNA targeting and retention. For instance, both sphingosine-1-phosphate lyase (S1PLyase) and HMGB1 have been associated with the progression of ALI/ARDS. S1Plyase degrades S1P with other treatment groups . Another study by Ju et al. targeted the intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1), which is expressed on the surface of airway endothelial cell and facilitates firm adhesion of, an anti-inflammatory molecule capable of alleviating ALI/ARDS while HMGB1 is an inflammatory mediator and causes ALI through release of pro-inflammatory cytokines . Oh et al. investigated the effect of blocking both S1PLyase and HMGB1 through a ternary complex. The complex is made of micellar amphiphilic R3V6 peptides which electrostatically complex with S1PLyase siRNA. Additionally, the micelle is coated with HMGB1 antagonist (HMGB1A) peptides. The ternary complex reduced IL-6 expression significantly better than si-S1PLyase or HMGB1A peptide alone. Further, the intracellular uptake of the complex was ∼20% and 50% higher than PEI or lipofectamine-mediated delivery. Intratracheal instillation of the nanocomplex in a mouse model of ALI showed profound reduction of IL-6 and TNF- compared to migrated PMNs, further exacerbating ALI/ARDS. The authors reprogrammed urine-exfoliated renal epithelial cells into human induced pluripotent stem cells (huiPSCs), and purified exosomes for siRNA encapsulation. ICAM-1 siRNA was incorporated into exosome via electroporation and the exosome/ICAM-1 siRNA complex effectively disrupted the PMN-endothelial cell adhesion upon lipopolysaccharide (LPS) stimulation. Myeloid differentiation primary response protein 88 (MyD88) is another promising gene target as it is involved in TLRs and IL-1 receptor family signalling to control innate immune response and inflammation . Zhang et al. used serum-derived exosomes to load MyD88 siRNA and delivered intratracheally to LPS-induced mice inflammation model. The results showed exclusive uptake by activated macrophages and effectively reduced immune cells infiltration and pro-inflammatory cytokines (e.g., IL-2, IL-3, IL-6, CCL-2).
Besides targeting genes involved in inflammation, research groups also focused on genes involved in pulmonary fibrosis, an end-stage hallmark of ALI/ARDS. For instance, Wang et al. targeted both CXCR4/Stromal cell-derived factor-1 (SDF-1) axis and plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1), both of which were upregulated in patients of ALI and pulmonary fibrosis and correlated with increased morbidity rates , . A perfluorocarbon nano-emulsion system was created to carry fluorinate PAMD, a polymeric CXCR4 antagonist and PAI-1 siRNA. Intratracheal instillation of the nanoemulsion formulation in ALI mice model showed effective reduction in pulmonary edema and neutrophil infiltration. Additionally, the nanoemulsion showed anti-fibrotic effects in an early-stage fibrotic model, and significantly reduced collagen deposition and cell infiltration in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF). Survival was also improved in late-stage fibrotic model . A few studies have also dedicated attention to creating delivery vectors solely for enhancing the transfection and therapeutic efficacy of siRNA in ALI. For instance, Ge et al. utilized a fluorinated and guanidinated bifunctional polypeptide for mucus and cell membrane penetration. While the fluorine domain exhibit unique resistance to mucin glycoprotein adsorption and dramatically increased mucus penetration by ∼240-fold, the guanidine domain facilitates effective trans-membrane siRNA delivery. Intrathecal delivery of TNF- siRNA polyplexes to an LPS-induced ALI mice model showed an astonishing ∼96% knockdown and pronounced anti-inflammatory effects. In addition to peptide-based complexes, Bohr et al. investigated the use of two phosphorus-based dendrimer in complexation with TNF- siRNA. Two terminal protonated amino groups on dendriplexes, pyrrolidinum and morpholinium were compared for their ability to complex siRNA. Pyrrolidinum showed superior performance due to its higher pKa value. Intranasal delivery in mice with short-term ALI using dendriplexes showed stronger TNF- silencing (55%) compared to non-complexed siRNA (17%). Around 3 years later, the same group investigated the use of generation 3 poly(amidoamine) (PAMAM) dendrimer for carrying TNF- siRNA which showed strong complexation and high internalization by pulmonary macrophages . Interestingly, intranasal administration of dendrimer-siRNA to mice with LPS-induced ALI showed superior silencing 4 h after injection but the effects diminished after 72 h compared to naked siRNA. Furthermore, polymeric nanoparticles and hydrogel-based siRNA delivery systems have also shown promising results, as they enable surface coating for additional moieties for improved targeting and particle stabilization. For instance, Raemdonck and colleagues have previously developed a hybrid nanoparticle with a cationic polysaccharide hydrogel core and a proteolipid shell of Curosurf®, a commercial pulmonary surfactant . In a subsequent study, the group identified surfactant protein B (SP–B), one of the components of the pulmonary surfactants, as the main enhancer of particle stability in the lung and intracellular uptake. Intratracheal delivery of TNF- siRNA nanogel with a lipid coat of l-α-phosphatidylglycerol (eggPG) and 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DOPC), supplemented by SP-B in ALI mice model showed an impressive >20-fold of TNF- silencing compared to PBS group. Interestingly, the presence of DOPC instead of the more rigid 1,2-dipalmitoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DPPC) promoted intracellular uptake significantly.

5.

## siRNA delivery for lung cancer
Lung cancer is the second most common cancer for both men and women and has two main subtypes which are non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and small cell lung cancer (SCLC). NSCLC is the most common type of lung cancer and accounts for 85% of lung cancers whereas SCLC accounts for 13%. Current treatments for lung cancer including chemotherapy, radiation, immunotherapy, targeted drug therapy and surgery have shown various limitations such as high-systemic toxicity, multidrug resistance, and limited efficacy. siRNA therapies provide a novel approach to address these limitations . NBF-006 is an siRNA-based therapeutic for lung cancer (specifically for NSCLC) and is now recruiting for phase 1 clinical trial. NBF-006 is GSTP siRNA encapsulated in lipid nanoparticles and targets KRAS mutant lung cancer . The pre-clinical study with NBF-009 showed that KRAS mutant NSCLC xenograft model was able to internalize 70%–80% of the dose resulting in tumor suppression . In addition to clinical studies, several pre-clinical methods that selectively target precise pathways driving the development of NSCLC have been developed. In this section, we discuss latest advancements in siRNA therapeutics that target genes that are associated with lung cancer-related cell growth, multidrug resistance, immune cells, and metastasis will be discussed.
5.1.

## Targeting multidrug resistance (MDR)
MDR is a significant barrier in the treatment of several recurring cancers, including lung cancer. Emergence of RNA silencing therapy has enabled to fight drug resistance by knocking down the genes involved with the development of MDR . Some of the genes that are often targeted to reduce drug resistance are TUBB3, PLK1, ABCC3, CDK4, Survivin and IGF1R, MRP-1. Kirsten rat sarcoma viral oncogene homolog (KRAS) mutation-related genes are the most common targets, since it is the most frequently mutated gene in human cancers that are associated with resistance to traditional anticancer treatment drugs including epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) . KRAS mutation happens due to GTP-bound active proteins that activate oncogenic pathways ( ). In 2019, Mehta et al. delivered siRNA targeting the G12S mutation of KRAS using bovine serum albumin (BSA) NPs in vitro to A549 lung cancer cells. G12S mutation happens due to glycine(G) to serine (S) substitution at position 12 in KRAS, as suggested by its name. Mehta et al.’s approach was unique in specificity of knockdown of mutant allele of KRAS. Moreover, albumin affinity to gp60 receptor, which is abundant in tumor tissues, enhanced cellular uptake of NPs. In vitro delivery of NPs encapsulated siKRAS G12S to A459 lung adenocarcinoma cells demonstrated reduction in signaling via P13K-AKT and RAF-ERK1/2 pathways which are important in KRAS mutation . This resulted in apoptosis of cancerous cells since it was previously shown that cancerous cells are dependent on extreme signaling levels . The same year Zarredar et al. delivered naked KRAS siRNA and EGFR inhibitor AZD8931 alone or in combination. Although EGFR-TKIs are effective in patients with EGRF mutations, it is not necessarily as effective in patients with both EGFR and KRAS mutations. In addition, it was shown that EGFR mutations develop acquired resistance against EGFR-TKIs. Zarredar et al. suggested that combinational therapy can decrease expression of KRAS and EGFR and were able to demonstrate that knockdown of KRAS and EGFR reduced proliferation and induced apoptosis in A549 lung adenocarcinoma cells. For a list of siRNA targets reported for lung cancer, see .
 Some other targeted genes are survivin, IGF1R and TUBB3. In 2019, Li et al. delivered insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF1R) siRNA in combination with doxorubicin (DOX) using folate-biotin-quaternized starch nanoparticles (FBqS). IGF1R is a transmembrane protein highly expressed in patients with lung cancer . In the past, it was shown that dysregulation of IGF1R can contribute to resistance of tumor cells to anticancer chemotherapy or radiotherapy . It was also implied that downregulation of IGF1R can inhibit cancer cell proliferation since IGF1R is involved with regulating cell apoptosis, growth and proliferation . FBqS nanoparticles loaded with IGF1R siRNA were added to A549 cells and showed significant IGF1R knockdown in a dose-dependent manner . Also, FBqS nanoparticles demonstrated effective delivery, as earlier studies showed that folate receptors were overexpressed in A549 cells . A year after that, Chen et al. delivered paclitaxel (PTX) with SURVIVN siRNA using liposome-based nano system. This study had a unique approach since their goal was down regulating survivin to lower apoptotic threshold of cancerous cells by accumulating PTX in cells to decrease the dose of PTX and decrease overall toxicity of the treatment. Knockdown of SURVIVN can induce apoptosis since it inhibits apoptosis protein, and its overexpression is associated with suppression of PTX-induced apoptosis . Treating NCI-H460 lung cancer cells with liposome-PTX-protamine/SURVIVN (PSur) siRNA complex showed higher cellular uptake and apoptosis compared to control group. Conte et al. also co-delivered DOX and TUBB3 siRNA using redox responsive nanoparticles that were formulated from PEG-PLGA copolymer and oligo (β-aminoesters) (OBAE). Previously it was discovered that TUBB3, which is a microtubule protein, is overexpressed in various cancers including NSCLC . Overexpression of TUBB3 was linked to reduced response to taxanes since its alteration can contribute to chemotherapy resistance . In vitro studies on A549 and H1299 cells showed that redox responsiveness of the nanoparticles leads to higher silencing efficiency of β-tubulin-encoding genes and cellular uptake. When administered intratracheally, nanoparticles did not demonstrate redox-responsive activity but were able to reach lungs and show silencing activity in A549-luc lung cancer model . For a list of siRNA targets reported for lung cancer, see .

5.2.

## Targeting genes that inhibit cell proliferation
Cell proliferation plays a key role in carcinogenesis. It is manifested by modified expression or activity of proteins involved in cell cycle. In addition, activation of signal transduction pathways also increases cell growth. In early states of tumorigenesis, alteration of cell metabolism happens to aid in survival and proliferation of cancer stem cells. Several pathways that contribute to cancerous cell proliferation such as hypoxia inducible factor 1, nuclear factor kappa B, phosphoinositide 3 kinase/Akt, insulin-like growth factor receptor 1 and Wnt are often inhibited to control cell proliferation . For instance, in 2008 Jere et al. demonstrated that aerosol delivery of AKT1 siRNA in poly (b-amino ester) (PAE) carrier to BALC/c mice reduced cell proliferation, malignancy, and metastasis in lung. Akt1 is one of the isoforms of serine-threonine kinase. Overexpression of Akt1 is associated with numerous cancers therefore it is often silenced to inhibit cancer cell proliferation . A year after their successful silencing of Akt1 onco-protein, Jere et al. improved their aerosol formulation for in vivo delivery. They used chitosan-graft-polyethyleneimine (CHI-g-PEI) copolymer for AKT1 siRNA delivery and demonstrated higher knockdown of AKT1 and 1.5 times reduction in lung cancer cells compared to control group. Although this study showed better results in vitro compared to their previous study, it did not demonstrate in vivo efficacy. Xu et al. also targeted AKT1 to supress tumorigenesis and reported that aerosol delivery of siRNA in poly (ester amine) carrier inhibited tumorigenesis by suppressing cell cycle regulating proteins such as cyclin D1, cyclin D3, cyclin A, cyclin E, CDK4 and CDK2 in KRAS-driven lung cancer mice model. Moreover, it was previously shown that AKT activation is correlated with EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor resistance, making EGFR not only a target for multidrug resistance but also for cell proliferation . Thus, Capel et al. developed intratracheal aerosol formulation using water-soluble piperazine chitosan to silence EGFR. In vivo studies showed that treatment with aerosol caused significant silencing of EGFR and reduced tumor growth in A540-luc xenograft model. In addition to EGFR, mTOR was also targeted to inhibit P13K-Akt pathway. Activation of mTOR by P13-Akt leads to downstream pathway where mTORC1 and mTORC2 complexes are triggered. When mTORC1 is activated, it promotes tumorigenesis and inhibition of apoptosis while mTORC2 causes activation of Akt . Gandhi et al. demonstrated that silencing mTOR resulted in decreased cell proliferation. Their team delivered siRNA using bioreducible poly (amino esters) to lung cancer cells. Although the study showed cell proliferation inhibition, it did not demonstrate whether P13K-Akt pathway was inhibited or if the AKT expression was silenced as well.
Some other genes that are targeted to inhibit cell proliferation are B-cell lymphoma/leukemia 2 (BCL2), NPT2b, MAPK and SUR. Among the pre-clinical studies, cell proliferation suppression target by Hong et al. seems especially interesting since they targeted sodium-dependent phosphate co-transporter 2b (NPT2b) which plays a crucial role in maintaining phosphate homeostasis and is not a conventional target to prevent cell proliferation. The study showed that aerosol delivery of siNPT2b to KRAS-driven lung cancer in mice diminished cell proliferation and angiogenesis. The increased levels of BAX and BAD protein levels suggested that siNPT2b can facilitate apoptosis. Zhang et al. also demonstrated downregulation of cell proliferation by delivering BCL2 siRNA encapsulated in hyaluronic-acid-modified chitosan nanoparticles to A549 cells expressing receptor CD44. Likewise, to Ganesh et al. hyaluronic acid was used due to CD44 specific targeting. BCL2 was targeted since it is an essential oncogene involved in preventing cell apoptosis.

5.3.

## Targeting immune cells
In tumor microenvironment (TME) immune cells are targeted to either improve immune cells function or inhibit immunosuppressive activity. Previously it was discovered that there is a link between inflammation and oncogenes. Cancer and inflammation are linked by extrinsic and intrinsic pathways. These inflammatory pathways cause inflammation and activate transcription factors such as nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB), signal transducer and activator of transcription 3(STAT3) and hypoxia-inducible factor 1α (HIF1α) in cancerous cells which eventually lead to chronic inflammation that promotes tumor growth . Moreover, growth factors and cytokines are released by activated immune cells altering myelopoiesis in bone marrow which will create a generation of immunosuppressive immature myeloid cells called myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs). These cells are then recruited to tumor site in response to chemokines to continue their alteration and differentiate into tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) or monocytic MDSCs . In addition to TAMs and MDSCs there are also regulatory T cell (Tregs), tumor endothelial cells (TECs) and cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) that are exhibit immunosuppressive behaviours . Overall, cancer-related inflammation and immunosuppression in TME are essential for cancer progression.
Discovery of cancer immunotherapy opened the doors for developing various approaches to block immunosuppression or enhance anti-tumor responses. Immunotherapy can be categorized into multiple subtypes such as immune cell therapy, anti-cancer vaccines and immune checkpoint blockades . Currently, the most clinically recognized immunotherapy treatments for lung cancer are immune check point inhibitors that target programmed death 1 (PD-1/PDL-1) pathway . Despite the recognition that these inhibitors received, the overall response rate (ORR) suggests low effectiveness . The existing PD-1/PDL-1 immune checkpoint blockade drugs are not effective since they use blocking antibody instead of silencing PD-1/PDL-1. Moreover, using immunotherapy can increase autoimmune side effects for some patients. Lastly, TMEs have various mechanisms of immunosuppression, therefore it requires a system that can target various oncogenes . These challenges can be addressed with siRNA delivery to target oncogenes involved with immunosuppressive immune cells. There is substantial number of pre-clinical studies targeting oncogenes involved with immune cells such as TNF-α, CXCR4, CD47, VEGF and PD-L1 to silence immunosuppression; however, most of these are not performed in lung cancer cells or models. In 2015, Conde et al. hypothesised that delivery of VEGF siRNA using M2 macrophage-binding peptide coupled with PEG-Au nanoparticles can target inflammatory tumor M2 macrophages and enhance tumor inhibition. Since VEGF is involved in angiogenesis via macrophage recruitment, it is great for targeting TAMs. Since TAMs play an essential role in maintaining TME, they are the most targeted immune cells. To evaluate their hypothesis, nanoparticles loaded with siRNA were delivered to A549-luc-C8 cells and isolated CD11b+F4/80hi TAMs in vitro. After ensuring silencing efficacy, nanoparticles were administered via intratracheal installations to lung cancer orthotopic mice model. The finding of this study showed that silencing VEGF not only reduced tumor size but also led to immune modulation of TAMs to stimulate host immune response. This platform also demonstrated the potential for long-lasting gene therapy since long-term dosing also reduced recruitment of TAMs in lung tumor tissues .
In addition to oncogenes mentioned earlier, STAT3 is also often silenced for targeting immune cells. STAT3 plays a significant role in pathway for cancer-related inflammation. Moreover, STAT3 is involved in inducing and regulating expression of cytokines and chemokines that are crucial for maintaining cancer-promoting inflammatory environment . STAT3 is also related to activation of immunosuppressive cells such as Tregs and MDSCs. Activation of STAT3 leads to both immunosuppression and tumor cancer-related inflammation, thus STAT3 is a very desired silencing target. For instance, Li et al. used perfluorocarbon (PFC) nano emulsion for co-delivery of STAT3 siRNA and CXCR4 antagonist to lung metastasis model of breast cancer. The nano emulsion was administered intratracheally or intravenously. Their team reported that intratracheal administration is superior, as it resulted in higher animal survival compared to intravenous administration. The knockdown of STAT3 decreased the expression of PD-L1 and CXCR4 inhibition increased T cell infiltration, which in combination improved anti-tumor immunity and promoted apoptosis of metastatic tumor. Another study by Li et al. delivered the same nano emulsion via intratracheal administration to lung metastasis model of osteosarcoma. Treatment with emulsion decreased number of regulatory T cells and myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs). These cells are essential for development of TME so their downregulation along with increased IFNγ secretion can diminish immunosuppressive cancerous behavior . Analogous to Conde et al. , Chen et al. delivered siRNA to both tumor cells and macrophages. Chen et al. used siRNA delivery system consisting of folic acid-conjugated carboxymethyl chitosan nanoparticles (FA-OCMCS) for targeting and cationic chitosan derivatives (N-2-HACC) for siRNA package for STAT3 knockdown. Their team also silenced STAT3 since it is involved in regulating the TAM phenotype. TAMs tend to show M2 (pro-tumor) phenotype in TME. Due to FA targeting, nanoparticles showed high uptake efficiency in Lewis's lung cancer (LLC) cells and M2 macrophages which were isolated from C57BL/6 mice. Silencing STAT3 resulted in shift from M2 to M1(anti-tumor) phenotypes in both cells .
As previously implied most pre-clinical studies focus on targeting macrophages. Despite that, there are a few teams that investigate targeting other immune cells to overcome immunosuppression and enhance immune responses in TME. For example, Adjei et al. delivered TGF-β receptor 2 (TGFBR2) siRNA into NK cells to activate them against cancerous cells. TGF-β plays an essential role in tumor suppression by inhibiting cancer recognizing NK receptors and chemokine production by NK which is needed for recruitment of other immune cells into tumor site. In addition to TGF-β, immunosuppressive cytokines, Tregs and TAMs also contribute to NK cell inactivation in TME. TGF-β siRNA delivery to NK-92 cells restored NK cell function by overcoming TGF-β-induced immunosuppression.

5.4.

## Targeting lung metastasis
Lung metastasis persists as a barrier to successful cancer therapy and is a main cause of high lung cancer mortality. Some of the micro-environment interactions that are important in metastasis are cancer cell intrinsic responses, tumor stromal cell-based interactions, tumor stromal extra cellular matric (ECM) dependent interactions and autocrine/paracrine signaling interactions. Key target genes to decrease the lung metastasis include VEGF, PLK1, EGFR, AKT, MAPK, MDM2, c-Myc, (myeloid cell leukemia sequence 1) Mcl1, Bcl2 and survivin. Conde et al. reported that delivery of c-Myc siRNA using cyclic arginine–glycine–aspartate peptide (RGD) gold NPs to reduce tumor size and suppress tumor cell proliferation. NPs were delivered by intratracheal installation to lung tumor-bearing mice. Previous findings demonstrated that RGD can recognize integrin avb3 receptors, which play a key role in tumor metastasis and angiogenesis and can deliver molecules via endocytosis . c-Myc was shown to be involved with lung tumor development and progression; hence, it is a promising target for suppressing Ras-dependent tumors . Later on, Shim et al. delivered siMcl1 using cationic dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-ethylphosphocholine and cholesterol (ECL)-based nanoliposomes and reported significant knockdown of MCL1 in mRNA and protein level inhibiting growth of metastasis cancers in both LLC and B16F10 cells-bearing mice. Moreover, silencing MCL1 resulted in reduced formation of melanoma tumor nodules in group with B16F10 cells.
A few studies targeted genes involved in metastasis and concurrently delivered chemotherapeutics alongside. As an instance, Xu et al. co-delivered BCL2 siRNA with DOX and demonstrated inhibition of tumor growth in B16F19 melanoma-bearing mice. The PEI-cis-aconitic anhydride (CA, pH-sensitive linker)-DOX/siBCL2 conjugate was sprayed directly into mice lungs. Due to local administration and prolonged residence time, DOX showed low side effects. In addition to inhibiting cell apoptosis, BCL2 is also involved in tumor invasion and lung metastasis and is therefore a great target for treating lung cancer . A year later, Xu et al. co-delivered SURVIVIN-siRNA with DOX again but this time they used PEI-3-maleimidopropionic acid hydrazide (BMPH, hydrazine bond)-DOX conjugate via a micro sprayer. Co-delivery of DOX and survivin siRNA to the B16F10 tumor-bearing mice demonstrated enhanced antitumor affinity of DOX and inhibited tumor growth in a mouse model of metastatic lung cancer. Moreover, due to the pH-sensitive hydrazone bond, drug release was improved which led to higher DOX accumulation in lungs .

6.

## Conclusions and outlook
Pulmonary maladies include world's most severe diseases such as ALI/ARDS and COPD. Current therapeutic strategies remain focused on managing symptoms and do not offer disease cure , . There is therefore a pressing need for new therapeutic strategies such as RNAi-based interventions. The therapeutic potential of siRNA is being rapidly realized as it can virtually target any disease with overexpressing genes by post-transcriptional silencing. The ability to drug the “undruggable targets” has brought new hope to patients with diseases that cannot be easily treated otherwise. Besides its versatile inhibitory actions, siRNA can also target genes with high selectivity and potency enabling personalized treatment for patients with polymorphic diseases with intricate molecular mechanisms, such as COPD . In this review, we have summarized the use of local pulmonary deliveries of siRNA for treating 3 major categories of pulmonary diseases: respiratory tract infections, inflammatory pulmonary diseases, and ALI/ARDS.
Despite the blooming pre-clinical discoveries, clinical translation of localized siRNA therapeutics remains limited, only two trials by Alnylam® Pharmaceutics and ZaBeCor Pharmaceuticals with none being FDA-approved. We recognize several hurdles that barricaded the path of non-viral delivery platforms towards clinical translation. Unwanted off-target silencing effects is a significant factor especially when the target gene play an integral role in normal cellular function. For instance, STAT3 is a promising silencing target for lung cancer as it is frequently activated in tumor cells and regulate key genes that cause inflammation in the tumor microenvironment . However, STAT3 is also a crucial factor in maintaining the homeostasis in cell proliferation and differentiation in healthy cells . Non-specific silencing of STAT3 will therefore cause severe side effects in healthy tissues, potentially inducing toxic phenotype . Additionally, insufficient intracellular uptake and unsuccessful endosomal escape compromise the therapeutic efficacy of siRNA, leading to only transient silencing and sub-optimal efficacy . Therefore, to better accelerate the clinical translation of non-viral platforms, rigorous material screening and optimization should be conducted to maximize gene silencing efficiency. Another major hurdle is the use of mice as the animal model in majority of the in vivo investigations. Due to major differences in lung physio-anatomy between mice and humans, the pre-clinical data cannot be easily extrapolated to human patients. For instance, human windpipe is longer (8.5 cm vs. ∼2 cm) , compared to that of mice and is more intricate (17 tracheobronchial branches in human vs. 10 in mice) . Such complex anatomical pattern will further increase the barriers towards the clinical translation of siRNA therapeutics to human patients. Further, human trachea will have greater mucus secretion due to the presence of submucosal glands covering both trachea and bronchioles, while for mice, these glands are only found in trachea . We therefore recommend the use of larger animal model as well as developing more inhalation-based RNAi-therapeutic to increase the probability of future use in clinics.

## Acknowledgments
We acknowledge funding support from Department of Defense (Award Number: W81XWH-21-1-0048, USA) and from the Department of Anesthesiology, Perioperative and Pain Medicine at the Brigham and Women's Hospital (USA).

## Author contributions
Jingjing Gao, Ziting Xia, and Nitin Joshi conceived the idea and the outline of this manuscript. Jingjing Gao, Ziting Xia, Dilrasbonu Vohidova and John Joseph wrote the manuscript. Ziting Xia and Dilrasbonu Vohidova drew the figures and organized tables. Jingjing Gao, James N Luo and Nitin Joshi edited and revised the manuscript.

## Conflicts of interest
The authors do not have any conflict of interests.

## Footnotes
Peer review under responsibility of Chinese Pharmaceutical Association and Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences.

## References