4427acsenvauACS Environmental AuACS Environ AuAmerican Chemical SocietyPMC1227228112272281122722814068750210.1021/acsenvironau.4c00149Surface-Enhanced
Raman Spectroscopy (SERS) Based Biological
and Environmental 2D and 3D Imaging
HuangQishen GuoHuiyuan WangWei KangSeju VikeslandPeter J 
†
School
of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Beijing
Institute of Technology, Beijing
100081, China

‡
Department
of Chemistry, State University of New York
at Binghamton, Binghamton, New York
13902, United States

§
School
of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia
30332, United States

∥
Eawag,
Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic Science and Technology, Dübendorf
CH-8600, Switzerland

⊥
Civil
and Environmental Engineering and Institute of Critical Technology
and Applied Science (ICTAS) Sustainable Nanotechnology, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, Virginia
24061, United States
*
Email: qishenh@bit.edu.cn.
*
Email: pvikes@vt.edu.
305202554342342–3621972025© 2025 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyThis article is licensed under CC-BY 4.0

## Abstract
Surface-enhanced
Raman spectroscopy (SERS) imaging is a highly
sensitive, spatially resolved tool for biological and environmental
analysis. SERS imaging combines molecular fingerprinting with real-time,
in situ detection, with the capacity to address key questions around
analyte identification, concentration, and distribution. In biological
systems, SERS imaging has enabled sensitive detection of nucleic acids,
proteins, and biomarkers. Notable progress includes the detection
of miRNAs through nanoassembly and disassembly techniques, as well
as bioorthogonal chemistry and antibody-conjugated methods for protein
and enzyme imaging. These approaches, along with integration of complementary
imaging techniques, have improved SERS imaging for in vivo studies
in plant and animal cells. Additionally, SERS imaging of pathogens
reveals their distribution and behavior in cellular environments.
For environmental applications, SERS imaging has been used to track
pesticides, nanoparticles, and heavy metal ions, providing critical
insights into contaminant transport and transformation. Furthermore,
SERS-based pH and reactive oxygen species (ROS) imaging delivers spatially
resolved data on reactive species in biological and environmental
microenvironments, aiding in understanding their dynamic roles in
various processes. Despite its advantages, SERS imaging faces several
challenges. By addressing its limitations, SERS imaging holds promise
for broad application in contaminant monitoring, clinical diagnostics,
and real-time biological analysis.
Keywords: SERS, imaging, nanoprobes, nanostructures, biological sensing, environmental sensing, microenvironments, analytical
methods

 
 
statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2024 Dec 17; Accepted 2025 May 21; Revised 2025 May 15; Collection date 2025 Jul 16.

1.

## Introduction
Raman spectroscopy, discovered
by C.V. Raman in 1928, has become
an essential tool in the biological and environmental analytical chemistry
due its ability to provide rich molecular fingerprint information
with exceptional sensitivity. As an advancement
of Raman spectroscopy, surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS)
imaging leverages nanostructured substrates or colloidal nanoparticles
to enhance Raman signals, enabling spatially resolved, highly sensitive
detection of target analytes. Initially
developed for biological applications, SERS imaging has advanced in
fields such as biomolecular detection, in vivo cellular analysis,
and pathogen tracking. Inspired by these advancements, SERS imaging
has expanded into environmental research, where it faces unique challenges, including contaminant identification
in complex matrices, tracking the spatial and temporal evolution of
pollutants, and adapting to ever-changing environmental conditions,
which limit replicability in complex open systems such as actual environmental
scenarios. Despite these differences, the underlying principles remain
interconnected, both biological and environmental SERS imaging rely
on highly sensitive, nondestructive detection methods to visualize
molecular interactions, making SERS imaging a powerful technique for
investigating complex systems across disciplines.
Biological
and environmental analytical methods typically attempt
to address one of four fundamental questions: (1) What analytes are
present in a given sample? (2) What are their concentrations? (3)
What are their spatial distributions? and (4) How do they change over
time? Many techniques have been developed for biological or environmental
analysis; however, the majority of these techniques only answer one
or two of these questions at a time. For example, chromatography methods,
such as gas chromatography (GC) and liquid chromatography (LC), are
widely used to identify analytes and determine their concentrations
by separating complex mixtures; however, these methods cannot readily
provide spatial information about analyte distributions within a sample.
Fluorescence spectroscopy is often used to detect molecules and measure
their concentrations based upon their intrinsic luminescence. However,
many environmental contaminants are not luminescent and many luminescent
molecules are not necessarily present in biological and environmental
samples, and the use of external fluorophores may cause photobleaching
and chemical degradation. Accordingly,
the molecular information provided by fluorescence spectroscopy is
often limited. Similar challenges beset
other spatially resolved techniques such as magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI), computed tomography (CT), and ultrasound.
Raman spectroscopy
has the potential to address all four of these
questions simultaneously. However, the universal application of traditional
Raman spectroscopy is limited by its low sensitivity and potentially
interferent high fluorescence backgrounds. Through the advancement of nanotechnology and nanomaterials, the
coupling of Raman spectroscopy and nanotechnology gave rise to surface-enhanced
Raman spectroscopy (SERS)50 years old as of 2024. This hybrid
approach retains the advantages of Raman spectroscopy and overcomes
many of its limitations thanks to the enhanced Raman scattering that
occurs for target molecules in the vicinity of nanostructures and
nanostructured (i.e., roughened) materials. SERS enhancement arises
due to electromagnetic and chemical effects.
,
 Electromagnetic
enhancement occurs when noble metal surfaces (e.g., Ag, Au, and Cu)
are in close proximity to an analyte and amplify the electromagnetic
field by orders of magnitude. Electromagnetic enhancement is highly
dependent on interparticle distance, which can often be optimized
to achieve high Raman enhancement. Chemical enhancement relies on
charge transfer between a nanosubstrate and the target analyte. In
addition to these well-established mechanisms, additional signal enhancement
mechanisms have been proposed and are currently under investigation.
,
 The overall signal enhancement of SERS relative to normal Raman
spectroscopy is defined by the enhancement factor (EF): . Here, I
SERS and I
Raman denote the measured
signal
intensity in the SERS vs normal Raman sampling volumes, and N
SERS and N
Raman reflect
the analyte concentration within the sampling volume.

Coupled with confocal Raman microscopy, SERS imaging
is one of
the few analytical techniques that can answer all four questions demanded
by biological and environmental analysis. The confocal pinhole along
with microscope objectives of various magnitudes and numerical apertures
(NA) determines the spatial resolution of the confocal point. Switching
between different lasers (typically 532, 633, and 785 nm) provides
optimization of SERS signals relative to the ever-present fluorescent
background. In addition, the grating of the spectrometer determines
the spectral range and the spectral resolution. Optimization of optical
parameters, along with sample preparation, laser power, and integration
time are key for successful imaging. On top of these, SERS is able
to detect and discriminate analytes from complex unknown systems due
to the high sensitivity and high signal-to-noise ratios of the molecular
fingerprints of individual molecules. Further, SERS can track molecular reactions, with minimal sample
preparation and high temporal resolution, due to its capability to
detect reactants, intermediates, and products within short data collection
times. SERS can map molecular distributions
in two-dimensional (2D) and three-dimensional (3D), and thus can serve
as a platform for chemical imaging within micron and submicron scale
environments (e.g., single living cells,
,
 individual microdroplets
−

). Properly functionalized SERS nanoprobes can be readily encapsulated
into other materials (e.g., silica, poly­(ethylene glycol) (PEG), bovine
serum albumin (BSA)
,
) to enable both high photostability
and biocompatibility such that SERS probes are suitable for noninvasive
and precise biomolecule tracking within live cells and environmental
samples. SERS can also be utilized for real-time imaging, through
which molecular dynamics, such as molecular movement and molecular
transformations over time, can be observed at high spatial resolution,
even at the single molecule level.
−

 Overall, SERS imaging provides sufficient resolution
to monitor microenvironments and track molecular distributions.
The aim of this review is to provide a critical discussion of the
current state of the field of SERS imaging. We start with the workflow
for SERS imaging and then discuss the current research status of SERS
imaging for biological and environmental analysis. Given the chronological
development and maturity of the field, we begin with SERS imaging
of biological analytes in biological matrices, followed by the imaging
of reactive species, which have recently gained interest in both biological
and environmental systems, and then move on to SERS imaging of environmental
contaminants for environmental analysis. We identify limitations and
challenges of previous studies, and propose potential solutions to
guide future research. Furthermore, we provide new perspectives on
knowledge and analytical gaps that need to be filled. Compared to
extensive applications of SERS imaging for biological analysis, fewer
publications can be found in the environmental realm. The progress
of SERS applications in environmental imaging has lagged behind while
tremendous advances have been made in biological imaging over decades.
Accordingly, this review article emphasizes the potential translation
of SERS imaging techniques developed for biological systems to those
for environmental systems so that the full potential of SERS imaging
for environmental analysis can be reached.

2.

## Typical
Workflow for SERS Imaging
The workflow for SERS imaging typically
includes four steps: (1)
design and synthesis of the imaging nanoprobe/substrate; (2) introduction
of the nanoprobe/substrate into the imaging system; (3) instrument
setup and image/spectrum collection; and (4) data analysis and map
construction ( ).
 2.1.

## Design and Synthesis of Imaging Nanoprobes
Herein,
we define a nanoprobe (i.e., nanosensor) as a composite
nanostructure that is either indicator-free (i.e., label-free) or
indicator-functionalized (i.e., labeled). Depending on the desired
application, nanostructures that are available for SERS imaging include:
colloidal nanoparticles (including nanospheres,
,
 nanostars, nanorods, or core–shell structures), nanoprobes immobilized on a surface, nanoprobes produced in situ, and microneedles. Commonly used base materials that provide high
EF include gold, silver, gold/silver hybrids, as well
as other elements (e.g., silica).

If the goal of SERS detection is to detect the nonspecific intrinsic
signals arising from molecules in the imaging system, then indicator-free
nanoprobes should be used for direct SERS imaging. In many cases,
however, target molecules exhibit minimal or no Raman signals and
thus indicator-assisted SERS imaging is required for target-specific
detection. We note that, in some articles, the term “Raman
reporter” instead of “indicator” is used. The
two terms are generally interchangeable across most scenarios. These
terms reflect molecules whose Raman signals provide a desired capability.
Herein, we will use the term “indicators” to represent
such molecules. The labeled indicator can be multifunctional, to provide
high sensitivity and/or molecular specificity if the analyte interacts
with the indicator specifically and modifies its SERS signal. Three
designs are typical: (1) indicator for signal detection; (2) molecules
for target recognition and specific detection; and (3) stabilizing
agents to increase nanoprobe stability and biocompatibility.
Regardless of which nanoprobe is chosen for SERS imaging it must
generally meet three requirements.
2.1.1.

## Capacity
to Generate Sufficient SERS Hotspots
SERS hotspots form when
the frequency of the excitation laser couples
with (i.e., overlaps with) the localized surface plasmon resonance
(LSPR) frequency of the nanoprobes and generates an enhanced Raman
signal of an analyte.
,
 Engineering of sufficient numbers
of SERS hotspots is required to ensure high quality SERS imaging.
SERS hotspots can be created various ways. Two basic principles are
that (a) nanoparticles within close vicinity of one another exhibit
higher SERS enhancements than single isolated nanoparticles; and (b)
EF increases with a decrease in interparticle distance. Accordingly, nanoparticle aggregation, achieved
by introduction of aggregating agents, is a commonly used strategy
to generate hotspots. External agents and the target analyte itself
can be used as aggregating agents. Target-induced “off/on”
aggregation not only creates hotspots, but also has been used for
SERS detection due to the significant increase in signal intensity.
,
 Aggregation is a stochastic process that is difficult to reproducibly
control and thus many aggregation assays are susceptible to signal
inhomogeneity. Nanoparticles can also be fabricated onto surfaces
or tips and consequently the interparticle gap can be precisely controlled.
These types of nanosensors are usually fabricated via top-down lithographic
techniques, such as e-beam lithography, photolithography, nanoimprint
lithography, or 3D printing.
−

 Further details and examples
of SERS hot spots can be found in another recent review.

2.1.2.

## Even Spatial Distribution
of Nanoprobes
Homogeneously distributed nanoprobes ensure
that SERS imaging describes
the analyte distribution instead of being biased by the spatial heterogeneity
of the nanoprobes. This requirement is critical for improving quantitative
nanoprobe performance (i.e., low variation and high reproducibility).
It is relatively simple to achieve an even distribution of nanoprobes
fixed to a surface, but it is inherently more challenging for colloid-based
nanoprobe suspensions. Nanogap-enhanced SERS probes are designed to
achieve controlled and uniform enhancements using colloids. Various
linker molecules, such as DNA, block copolymers, etc., as well as
different morphologies, including nanoparticle packing, nanodumbbells,
and core–shell structures, have been developed to achieve uniform
nanogap enhancements.
,
 The recently developed hot-spot
normalization method normalizes the SERS signal from the indicator/analyte
to that of the elastic scattering peak, which is cutoff by the notch
filter at low wavenumbers. Since both the elastic peak and the SERS
signal share the same enhancement effect from the hot-spot, the hot-spot
normalization method can potentially correct biases resulting from
heterogeneous nanoprobe distributions.
,
 Nonetheless,
the production of spatially uniform colloidal nanoprobes needs to
be addressed in the future.

2.1.3.

## Close
Contact with Analytes in the Imaging
Environment
The EF decreases by orders of magnitude a few
nanometers beyond the hotspot and thus it is crucial to control the
distance between nanoprobes and analytes either via direct covalent
bonding or cross-linking. In addition, the intended imaging environment
plays a decisive role in the design and synthesis of nanoprobes: colloidal
probes that can enter cells may not work well when mapping extracellular
components or cellular activities due to the possible signals arising
from the intracellular area. Similarly, nanoprobes fixed on a substrate
are not suitable for intracellular imaging. Therefore, to design effective
nanoprobes, factors such as the imaging environment and the location
of the analytes need to be considered a priori.

2.2.

## Introduction of Nanoprobes into the Imaging
System
The efficacy of nanoprobes for SERS imaging is not
only dependent on the design and synthesis of the nanoprobes, but
also on their efficient introduction into the imaging system. The
ideal imaging condition is that the nanoprobe concentration is sufficient
to evenly cover all targets. Taking intracellular imaging as an example,
nanoprobe internalization and target recognition by the nanoprobe
are important questions to address. These needs should be considered
prior to the design and synthesis of nanoprobes. For instance, prior
work has utilized cell-penetrating peptides to functionalize pH nanoprobes
and facilitate their entrance into cells. Further, organelle-targeting peptides have been used to modify nanoprobes
to achieve pH imaging in specific organelles (e.g., nucleus, mitochondria,
and lysosome). In the absence of cell-targeting
peptides and organelle-targeting peptides, nanoprobes often exhibit
low internalization efficiency and end up primarily found within endosomes. Another knowledge gap is that few studies to
date have quantified the percentage of analytes detected by nanoprobes,
which is arguably due to lack of standards and the complexity of the
different imaging environments. Accordingly, there is high potential
that the accessibility of nanoprobes to analytes often influences
imaging. To address this bottleneck, further investigation and improvement
are required.

2.3.

## Instrument Setup and Image/Spectrum
Collection
Due to its high spatial resolution and sensitivity,
benchtop Raman
spectroscopy coupled with a confocal microscope is the typical setup
providing the capacity for 2D and 3D imaging. Nonconfocal Raman spectroscopy is potentially able to perform 2D
scans. To achieve the best performance with confocal Raman spectroscopy,
parameters including laser wavelength, laser power, integration time,
microscope objective lens, and spatial resolution should be optimized.
Moreover, machine-learning assisted methods have been recently developed
for SERS imaging for improved efficiency and capability for classification. Interested readers can refer to a published
review on how to use experimental and computational approaches to
optimize SERS setup and parameters.

2.4.

## Data Analysis and Image Construction
Following
image collection, the next question is how to analyze the
data and use it to create SERS images that reflect reality as closely
as possible. In indicator-assisted SERS, the method to convert the
indicator signal into analyte concentration is a key question. In
indicator-free SERS, the spectral peaks originate from the analytes
directly; however, signal intensity does not necessarily correlate
with analyte concentration because the SERS hotspot distribution can
affect the signal intensity. To improve the quantitative capacity
of SERS imaging, internal standards are commonly required. Peaks independent
of the analytes, but dependent on the hotspots can be used for calibration.
Previous studies have shown that a low wavenumber peak reflecting
elastic scattering can be used as an internal standard to reduce the
variation caused by spatial hotspot heterogeneity.
,,
 Data analysis also influences the quality
of the constructed maps. SERS map resolution is dependent on the spatial
resolution of the instrument; however, the map resolution can be improved
via data analysis. For example, Ravindranath et al. used a 100×
objective with spatial resolution of ∼1 μm2. They scanned a 6 × 6 μm2 area with a 40 × 40 grid and a step size of 125 nm.
In many cases, the data sets acquired via SERS imaging are large and
complex, which requires effective ways to extract the desired information.
Historically, one of the most apparent peaks for a given analyte has
been selected to build SERS images. However, molecules often have
multiple characteristic peaks and whether the selected peak is the
most stable and representative needs to be considered. So far, only
a limited number of papers have provided justification of their peak
selection for imaging. Incorporating data processing tools, such as
machine learning approaches into SERS imaging analysis may help achieve
full use of the rich molecular information stored within SERS spectra.
Thrift and Ragan applied a convolutional neural network (CNN) model
to perform concentration regression on bundles of SERS maps in the
single-molecule detection regime, achieving a limit of quantification
down to 10 fM for Rhodamine 800. These results pave the way for unambiguous
analysis of large spectral data sets and the use of SERS in ultralow
concentration chemical detection. A thorough
and insightful review was published recently on the applications of
machine learning and artificial intelligence for Raman spectral analysis.

3.

## Applications of SERS Imaging
in Biological Sensing
SERS imaging of a variety of biological
analytes including nucleic
acids, proteins, enzymes, pathogens, and living cells has attracted
great interest across the medical, analytical, agricultural, pharmaceutical,
and environmental sectors. The bioactivity of pathogens and cells
can often be explained by detection of associated biomolecules. High-resolution
images of biomarkers associated with a specific disease, or precise
images of tumors are key for diagnostic decision making and image-guided
therapy, which is highly important as a diagnostic tool for biomedical
applications.

3.1.

## SERS
Imaging of Nucleic Acids
Nucleic
acids, DNA and RNA, are polymers of nucleotides. Studies have shown
that adenine, a nucleobase, plays an important role in the SERS spectra
of gene sequences,
,
 and is capable of identifying
DNA or RNA fragments.
−

 By imaging the SERS map according to the distinct
vibrational signatures of two isotopologues of adenine (14NA and 15NA), Zong et al. tracked nucleotide degradation
due to starvation stress. They found
that adenine was most concentrated in the pericellular region near
the outer cell wall under starvation conditions.
Micro RNAs
(miRNAs), whose discovery was honored with the 2024 Nobel Prize in
Physiology or Medicine, are crucial short nucleic acid sequences involved
in biological processes.
,
 For example, RNA interference
(RNAi), where micro (miRNA) and small interfering RNA decrease mRNA
(mRNA) activity by preventing translation. SERS imaging methods based on nanoassembly between nanoprobes and
target miRNA have been developed to detect the presence of miRNA.
Zhou et al. utilized 4-mercaptobenzonitrile and 4-ethynylbenzene-thiol
modified gold nanoparticles as SERS probes for real-time multiplexed
imaging of intracellular miRNA ( A). Specific binding between
locked nucleic acid (LNA) sequences on the SERS probes and target
miRNA molecules formed dimeric nanostructures, significantly enhancing
Raman scattering and enabling high-resolution imaging of multiple
miRNA distribution within cells. Crawford et al. developed an inverse
molecular sentinel (iMS) nanoprobe for in vivo SERS imaging of miRNA
in plants. The 5′ end of the iMS
sequence was modified on the surface of nanoparticles and the 3′
end was labeled with Cy7 dye. Upon binding with target miR156, the
iMS sequence formed a hairpin (i.e., single strand DNA with stem-loop
structure) conformation, bringing the Cy7 functionalized end into
close proximity with the nanoparticle surface thus significantly enhancing
the SERS signal. Lu et al. reported a single plasmonic microbead functionalized
with the S9.6 antibody and DNA probe for universal and specific binding
DNA/miRNA for multiplex miRNA analysis. Sub-pM target miRNA on this single microbead was successfully imaged
with multiplexed capability.
 Building on catalytic hairpin
assembly (CHA), researchers have
developed various SERS probes for improved nucleic acid resolution.
Wang et al. developed gold nanocages (GNCs) induced by CHA using single
strand hairpin DNA (hpDNA1 and hpDNA2). The hollow interiors and perforated walls of the GNC provided ample
space for Raman-sensitive molecules, significantly enhancing SERS
sensitivity. These GNCs have excellent biocompatibility and can protect
the DNA structure bound to the surface. Using Cy5 as a Raman reporter,
the hpDNA1-hpDNA2-GNC nanoprobes enabled SERS imaging of miR-125a-5p
in both a normal lung epithelial cell line (BEAS-2B cells) and a lung
cancer cell line (A549 cells) ( B). In another study,
a similar structure was used to achieve long-term monitoring of intracellular
miRNA. Liu et al. developed target miRNA-triggered
CHA-induced AuNP-Au nanodumbbell core–satellites, which allow
the detection of low-abundance miRNAs in living cells, revealing higher
expression of mir-1246 in HeLa cells compared to MCF-7 cells. In the presence of target miRNA, hybridization
between hairpin 1 (H1) on the AuNPs and hairpin 2 (H2) on the Au nanodumbbells
can form a stable H1–H2 duplex and generate new hot spots that
provide intensely enhanced SERS signals.
The disassembly of
nanomaterials can also enable high-resolution
SERS imaging. Liu et al. created a multifunctional integrated nanoplatform
with a hexagonal boron nitride nanosheet (h-BNN) substrate and copper
phthalocyanine (CuPc) as the Raman indicator for SERS imaging of miR-21
( C). The presence of miR-21 breaks the interaction
between CuPc and h-BNNS leading to a decreased CuPc signal, thereby
allowing quantification and imaging of miR-21 in cell. Using a similar
method, Li et al. developed arrowhead nanorod (NR) dimers, functionalized
with two single-stranded DNA probes (DNA01 and DNA02) and a Raman
indicator (4-aminothiophenol, 4-ATP) for in situ SERS imaging of miRNA
in living cells. The reduction in SERS
intensity due to dimer disassembly was applied in SERS mapping to
accurately quantify and locate intracellular miR-21 and miR-203b.
SERS can be combined with other techniques to obtain rapid and
direct visualization of intracellular miRNA. Ye et al. designed dual-signal
switchable (DSS) nanoprobes using a fluorescence-Raman signal switch.
,
 In the absence of miRNA, the probe was in a state of fluorescence
signal-on and SERS signal-off. In the presence of target miRNA molecules,
the probe was switched to the state of fluorescence signal-off and
SERS signal-on. Mapping of the fluorescence signal was used to show
cellular uptake and distribution of the probes whereas the maps based
on the SERS signal were used to show the distribution of target miRNA
molecules. This design can be utilized to track the intracellular
behavior of the probe and quantitatively determine miRNAs in situ.

3.2.

## SERS Imaging of Proteins, Enzymes, and Small
Biomolecules
Certain proteins, enzymes, and small biomolecules
(smaller than nucleic acids) are often recognized as biomarkers of
normal biological, pathogenic, and pharmacological processes. In SERS
imaging of bioanalytes, interference-free imaging strategies are desired.
Most Raman vibrational modes from such endogenous biological molecules
are found in the mid- to low-wavenumber region (<1800 cm–1). Accordingly, Raman reporters with intense Raman signals in the
high-wavenumber region (>2000 cm–1) have been
designed
and applied for noninvasive SERS imaging of living cells.

Following the principle of bioorthogonal
chemistry (i.e., chemical reactions occur inside living cells without
interference from biomolecules), alkyl-modulated Raman reporters were
designed for live cell imaging, since
alkynes exhibit a distinct and strong Raman signal in the silent region
of 1800–2800 cm–1 where most cellular components
do not show Raman signals ( A). Using 4-mercaptophenylboronic
acid (MPBA) modified silver nanoparticles (AgNPs), Cong et al. distinguished
higher levels of sialic acid expression in cancer cell lines via the
detection of sialic acid due to the specific binding between MPBA
and sialic acid. Using various bioorthogonal
Raman indicators such as azides, alkynes, and carbon-deuterium (C–D)
bonds, Wang et al. successfully obtained SERS images of cell surface
proteins, glycans, and lipids using arrays of AuNPs as SERS-active
substrates. In this work, the Raman indicator,
instead of functionalization on nanoparticles, was added to the culture
media and was internalized by cells through their metabolic activity.
 The formation of nanoparticle dimers induced by
target biomolecules
is another strategy to image biomolecules by SERS. Wissler et al.
synthesized SERS-inactive AuNP monomers modified with Raman indicators. In the presence of the GST-Survivin-His6 protein,
AuNP dimer formation is induced thus activating SERS response due
to plasmonic coupling between AuNPs. Ardini et al. linked colloidal
silver nanoparticles with alkyne-dopamine adducts to induce formation
of clusters with high electric field enhancement and strong SERS signals
for alkynes and dopamines. The strong
alkyne signal in the cell silent region distinguished dopamine across
the cytoplasm with high spatial resolution. Membrane protein (i.e.,
Met and TβRII) dimerization on living cells was imaged using
SERS tags and AuNPs-based dual-recognition probes and SERS tags. The dimerization of proteins resulted in the
proximity ligation-assisted CHA-based networking of probes and SERS
tags to form nanostructures with significantly enhanced SERS effect.
SERS imaging based on antibody-conjugated immunoassays is promising
to measure biomolecule distribution and internalization in cells,
,
 and has been widely used to detect a variety of biomolecules.
−

 By modifying GNRs with 4-mercaptobenzoic acid (4-MBA) and an antibody,
Xiao et al. revealed the spatial distribution and the dynamic change
in epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) levels in living breast
cancer cells. They detected an overexpressed
receptor, tyrosine kinase, in human cancer cells. Using a similar
method, SERS imaging of EGFR and human epidermal growth factor 2 (HER2)
on the lumenal surface of the rat esophagus was obtained. The distribution of the tumor-associated surface
biomarker (CD44) was characterized on the surface of HCT116 cells
using hyaluronic acid functionalized high narrow nanogap-containing
Au@Au core–shell SERS tags. Furthermore,
imprinted polymer layers on the SERS probe can act as an artificial
antibody and specifically bind with biomolecules in the cells.

SERS probes can also be designed to detect
biomolecules through
cleavage, typically by linking Raman indicators and nanostructures
through aptamers or peptides. In the presence of target biomolecules,
the linkage can be cleared, and Raman indicators are released from
the SERS probe reducing its SERS intensity. Si et al. developed a
ratiometric SERS nanosensor, Au/Ag nanoparticles modified with 3-[4-(Phenylethynyl)­benzylthio]
propanoic acid (PEB) using a ssDNA linkage, to probe endonuclease
activity under in vitro and living cell conditions. In this study, overexpression of endonuclease during cell
apoptosis was identified via a decreased SERS signal. Through a similar
approach, substituting ssDNA with a peptide as the linker, SERS imaging
of caspase 3 in live cells and tissues was obtained. Guo et al. designed the tetrahedron probe to detect telomerase
(TE) and epithelial cell-adhesion molecule (EpCAM) simultaneously
in living cells and differentiated the cancer cell lines HeLa, MCF-7,
and normal primary uterine fibroblast cells. Assembled by DNA frames, the tetrahedron probe consisted of three
15 nm AuNPs and two 30 nm AuNPs. Raman indicators, 4-nitrothiophenol
(NTP) and 4-methoxybenzyl mercaptan (MATT) linked with a TE or EpCAM
aptamer respectively, were functionalized onto two 30 nm AuNPs. Fifteen
nm AuNPs modified with 4-ATP was regarded as an internal reference
and located in the middle of the tetrahedron probe. In the presence
of TE or EpCAM, the designated building blocks disassembled, the release
of the 30 nm AuNPs led to a decrease in the SERS intensity of NTP
or MATT.
Label-free SERS imaging is also applicable for characterizing
the
intracellular distribution of biomolecules, and investigating metabolic interactions between microbial populations.
−

 Li et al. used label-free SERS imaging and revealed the distribution
of CD36 protein on the plasma membrane and in lung tumor-bearing mice.
CD36 protein–ligand (KOdiA-PC) was used to recognize a transmembrane
receptor (CD36) that is greatly repressed in carcinoma-associated
fibroblasts (CAFs). Using Au@agar substrate,
Bodelón et al. detected violacein and pyocyanin produced by
bacterial colonies of (, CV026) and (, PA14), respectively ( B). They also observed the production
and spatial distribution of indole and pyocyanin in cocultured populations
of and . For extracellular
metabolites, Lussier reported a plasmonic nanosensor decorated with
gold nanoraspberries that can be placed near the vicinity of the living
cells at a distance of 30 μm. Dynamic SERS was monitored continuously
on a single region near the tip of the nanosensor and achieved pyruvate,
lactate, ATP, and urea identification with low interference in a complex
and biologically relevant medium.

3.3.

## In Vivo SERS Imaging of Animal and Plant Cells
Delineation
of living cells through the collection of accurate
images is of clinical significance for preoperative and intraoperative
surgical processes. Generally, live cell imaging is conducted in one
of two ways: in vitro or in vivo. For in vitro studies, the target
analytes are isolated from their biological context and further experiments
are conducted in a test tube. Conversely, for in vivo studies, the
biological entities are tested inside a cell without extraction.
Raman indicators active in the near-infrared (NIR) region have been
discovered for in vivo SERS imaging within cells. NIR excitation lasers
(e.g., 785 nm) enable noninvasive detection and deep penetration into
cells or human tissues. The Chang group
recently synthesized a tricarbocyanine derivative (CyNAMLA-381) with
large NIR absorption and good chemical stability, using it as a Raman
indicator for in vivo cancer cell imaging. They obtained SERS images of HER2-positive CSKBR-3 cells with high
sensitivity and specificity. The same group further conducted multiplex
targeted in vivo cancer cell detection ( C) using three different tricarbocyanine
derivatives (CyNAMLA-381, Cy7LA, Cy7.5LA). CyNAMLA-381- and Cy7LA-AuNPs were functionalized with antiepidermal
growth factor receptor (anti-EGF) antibody for selective SERS imaging
of oral squamous carcinoma cell (OSCC) and Cy7.5LA-AuNPs were conjugated
with an anti-HER2 antibody as a negative control. Based on the characteristic
peaks of CyNAMLA-381, Cy7LA, and Cy7.5LA (523, 503, and 586 cm–1), the images at the tumor sites showed high SERS
intensities for anti-EGFR antibody conjugated CyNAMLA-381 and Cy7LA
nanotags, but low intensities for anti-HER2 antibody conjugated Cy7.5LA
nanotags. The images showed passive localization of all three nanotags
at the liver site. To illustrate the potential of multiplexed SERS
imaging for multiple living cells and biomarkers, Zavaleta et al.
designed ten Raman indicator functionalized gold core and silica shell
NPs was applied in living mice. All
SERS spectra from the ten SERS nanoprobes were spectrally separated.
Zeng et al. used AuNPs functionalized with two different alkyl-modulated
Raman indicators (OPE1 and 4-MBN) and an aptamer against EGFR for
multiplex SERS HeLa cellular imaging. Organometallic osmium carbonyl clusters (OM), Os3­(CO)­10­(μ-H)­2
were coupled with the AuNPs for SERS imaging of living cells. Based on the SERS images of 2030 cm–1 peak, they showed the specificity to the EGFR positive-OSCC, but
not to EGFR negative-human ovary cancer cell line (SKOV-3).
For in vivo imaging, the photostability of the imaging agent during
laser illumination is critical to ensure accurate live cell imaging.
Therefore, silica encapsulated AuNPs have been used for delineation
of tumor cells in the liver and spleen to increase the photostability
of the SERS imaging agents. Silica coated
AuNPs were conjugated with BPE as the Raman indicator, showing consistently
high SERS signals for a long period. Such nanoprobes confer SERS imaging
a huge advantage over fluorescence-based imaging technique due to
the photobleaching of fluorophores (e.g., indocyanine green) upon
laser illumination. With high photostability, nanoprobes can be used
to identify cancerous lesions by contrast. With the same gold core
and silica shell SERS nanoprobes functionalized with 44DP as the Raman
indicator, a hand-held Raman scanner was applied to provide a SERS
image of malignant brain tumors, in particular glioblastoma multiforme
(GBM).

SERS images of living cells
can be improved though nanostructure
design and incorporation of protective coatings. Gold nanobipyramid
core and silver nanorod shell nanoparticles (AuNBP@AgNRs), modified
with 4-MBA and FA, demonstrated excellent specificity of the SERS
nanoprobes toward FA receptor-positive MGC-803 cells. Liu et al. developed folate-targeted hollow
AuNPs (HAuNPs) as SERS nanoprobes to achieve clear SERS images for
selective FA receptor-positive human nasopharyngeal epidermal carcinoma
cell line (KB) and HeLa cells. Yang
et al. investigated different ligand functionalized AuAg nanohollows
for bladder normal (NIH/3T3 and SV-HUC1) and cancer RT4 (low-grade)
and T24 (high-grade) cells. Using the
CPBA or anti-EGFR/4-ATP/AuAg nanohollows, the SERS image of 1079 cm–1 from 4-ATP successfully identified the antigen distribution
of T24 cells. To further increase the intensities of the Raman reporters,
AuNPs with uniform intrananogaps (Au-NNPs) modified with DNA oligonucleotide
spacer (e.g., subsequent 10 thymine, T10) were synthesized
to achieve high-resolution/speed imaging for live HSC-3 cells using
three different Au-NNPs probes targeting specific intracellular organelles
(cytoplasm, mitochondria, and nucleus). Due to their high surface affinity to proteins, bare plasmonic NPs
can develop a protein corona, which may alter the SERS spectra of
living cells and impair image quality; however, applying a surface
protective coating can minimize this nonspecific binding and improve
SERS imaging quality. Sloan-Dennison et al. coated the surface of
AuNSs with a small cyclic arginine-glycine-aspartic acid-phenylalanine-cysteine
(RGDFC) peptide to prevent the formation of PC on the NP surface. This peptide provides a zwitterionic surface
that hinders protein corona formation and enables specific detection
of αvβ3 integrin on fixed cells.
The results show that the cyclic peptide protected against aggregation
and amino acid adsorption to the AuNSs.
SERS imaging can be
coupled with other imaging techniques to complement
each limitation and provide additional information about living cells.
The Gambhir group developed SERS and photoacoustic (PA) coupled imaging
approaches for ovarian tumors using AuNRs. AuNRs show great promise
as SERS and PA imaging agents. PA-based tumor imaging was used for
presurgical tumor visualization and intraoperative SERS imaging allowed
complete resection of tumor margins. They also synthesized triple modality MRI/PA/SERS imaging NPs for
preoperative and intraoperative imaging of brain tumors. Brain tumor enhanced GFP-transfected human
gliomablastoma cells (eGFP+U87MG) were visualized by the
MRI/PA/SERS images using the synthesized NPs injected into the mice
via the tail vein. For brain-tumor surgery, the MRI/SERS imaging of
the tumor was developed using pH-responsive AuNPs. Cancer cell invasion acidifies the tumor extracellular
fluid, causing polymer cleavage on AuNPs. This triggers AuNP aggregation
via azide–alkyne click reactions in the acidic fluid, enabling
highly sensitive MRI/SERS tumor imaging.
Compared to 2D imaging,
3D living cell imaging offers a more realistic
view of cellular environments, enhancing our understanding of cellular
complexity. Aberasturi et al. demonstrated this using Au nanostars
(AuNSs) and nanorods (AuNRs) tuned to NIR absorption to achieve SERS
imaging of dermal fibroblast (HDF) cells. The elongated HDF cells grew into skin-like 3D structures, actively
internalizing and retaining positively charged SERS tags functionalized
with poly-l-arginine hydrochloride. Imaging across the z-axis captured six layers of alternating SERS-labeled and
nonlabeled cells, highlighting the power of 3D SERS imaging to reveal
complex cellular arrangements. Similarly, Wang and Vikesland incorporated
AuNPs to a hydrogel matrix to achieve a SERS-based hydrogel for 3D
cell culture and imaging. The label-free
SERS signal was collected in three dimensions and a random forest
binary classifier was developed to discriminate Vero cell signals
from the hydrogel background. Both 2D and 3D SERS images were obtained
with a resolution of ∼3 μm and the maps obtained matched
well with the cell optical images.

3.4.

## SERS
Imaging of Pathogens
Pathogenssuch
as bacteria, viruses, protozoa, and fungiare disease-causing
organisms that can threaten human health when present in food or environmental
settings. Public health demands have created an urgent need for rapid,
sensitive pathogen detection techniques. SERS imaging offers significant
advantages in this area, as it provides intrinsic fingerprint information
directly related to the structure and spatial distribution of pathogens.
Label-free methods generate SERS images simply by mixing a SERS
substrate with a pathogen, greatly enhancing the Raman signals of
cellular components such as polysaccharides, amino acids, nucleic
acids, lipids, and proteins. By mapping characteristic cellular component
peaks, a clear image of a pathogen can be obtained that reflects morphology,
component location, and concentration. Arnob et al. synthesized 3D
SERS substrates for label-free imaging of and , achieving
SERS maps that closely matched specific morphologies observed in microscopic
images. By summing the spectral intensity
of 50 SERS image pixels (each pixel contains the SERS spectrum from
a 1.5 μm × 1.5 μm area that accommodates ∼50%
of a bacterial cell), single-cell level detection limits were achieved.
Huang et al. used AuNPs as surrogates for bacteriophage Phi6 to map
its spatial distribution during microdroplet evaporation using SERS
imaging. The study revealed a correlation between Phi6 infectivity
and the coffee-ring effect during microdroplet evaporation based on
the spatial distribution of AuNPs.

To avoid interferences in label-free SERS imaging, biomolecule
linkers that specifically attach nanostructures to a given pathogen
have been developed. Fan et al. obtained SERS maps of Salmonella DT104 by modifying the surface of a nanoparticle with Salmonella DT104-specific antibody, M3038. Wang
et al. used a trans-cyclooctene derivative of vancomycin, which binds
Gram-positive bacteria by forming hydrogen bonds with the d-Ala-d-Ala motif of peptidoglycan on the bacterial cell
wall, resulting in strong Raman signals from AuNP aggregation on the
bacterial surface and suggesting potential for antimicrobial photothermal
therapy. To further enhance the binding
between SERS probes and pathogens, Zhou et al. developed an in situ
synthesis method to produce AgNPs on the cell wall of bacteria to
form Bacteria@AgNPs. This approach leveraged
the negative charge of cell walls (due to teichoic acid in Gram-positive
or lipopolysaccharides in Gram-negative bacteria) to adhere Ag+ ions, which were then reduced to AgNPs, increasing the Raman
signal approximately 30-fold oversimple colloid suspensions. This
spatially resolved SERS imaging of bacteria enabled precise SERS mapping
of DSM 1116 in drinking water.
Furthermore, such SERS images allowed discrimination between live
Bacteria@AgNPs (showing strong SERS signals) and dead dead Bacteria@AgNPs
(showing minimal signals, A,B).

 While label-free SERS imaging can provide fingerprint
information,
indicator-assisted SERS provides strong and distinct SERS signals.
Ko et al. used the Raman indicator MGITC on 3D Ag@Au core–shell
nanopillar arrays, fabricated via argon plasma etching and metal deposition,
to map and quantify without culturing and enrichment. SERS
signals from nanotags, created by immunoassays between Salmonella antibodies and the bacteria, allowed accurate statistical analysis.
Building on a similar Au–Ag core–shell nanoparticle
probe, we developed a digital SERS enabled lateral flow test dipstick.
Through image processing methods, the substrate achieved ultrasensitive,
rapid quantification of SARS-CoV-2 virus in real-world environmental
settings ( C,D). He et al. developed
3,3′-diethylthiatricarbocyanine iodide DTTC-conjugated gold–silver
nanoshells for real-time SERS imaging of multidrug-resistant bacteria,
enabling sensitive, noninvasive tracking of residual bacteria during
wound healing. Bae et al. employed aryl-alkyne-based
Raman tags to observe dynamic interactions between vancomycin and biofilms, demonstrating the
value of indicator-assisted SERS in monitoring the inhibitory effects
of antibiotics on biofilm growth in vivo. Zhou et al. incorporated terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT)-catalyzed
DNA into nanoprobes to create tunable nanogaps, enhancing SERS hotspots
for high-resolution imaging. These nanogap-enabled
probes provided high specificity and sensitivity for O157:H7 detection, with SERS images that
were consistent with the distribution of cells in optical images.
SERS images of pathogens can also
be used to probe cellular behavior
and their interactions with proximal organisms. For example, Polisetti
et al. used SERS imaging to visualize the distribution of the rhizosphere
bacterium Pantoea sp. YR343 on the roots of . The SERS images revealed that high-intensity regions in the Arabidopsis heat map aligned with low-intensity regions
in the Pantoea heat map, indicating a nonuniform
distribution of the bacteria on the Arabidopsis root.
Garg et al. developed Au–SiO2–Au nanolaminated
plasmonic crystals (NLPCs) to conduct in situ spatiotemporal label-free
SERS measurements of biofilms during biofilm development and upon infection by bacteriophage
Phi6. Spatiotemporal of different biomolecules
observed in the SERS spectra from lysed bacterial cell components,
such as amino acids, nucleic acids, and lipids, can reflect the virus-specific
alteration of the metabolism of host bacteria. Extending this approach,
some researchers have combined SERS imaging with other technologies.
Olson et al. obtained a high spatial resolution image of both Gram-positive
and Gram-negative bacteria through an ultrathin silver substrate combined
with SERS and stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy (STORM). These SERS-STORM images of bacteria showed
excellent agreement with scanning electron microscope images, exhibited
high spatial resolution at <50 nm, and showed that it was possible
to correlate spectral SERS content to different regions of the bacterial
cells. By comparing the SERS signatures of different bacteria, they
found that Gram-negative bacteria exhibited greater lipid signatures
than Gram-positive species due to their phospholipid lipopolysaccharide
outer membrane.

4.

## SERS Imaging of Reactive
Species in Biological
and Environmental Matrices
Reactive species are critical
due to their instability and high
reactivity, which allows them to interact with and significantly influence
their surrounding environments. These interactions play a key role
in numerous biological and environmental processes, where they can
drive important reactions, regulate cellular functions, and affect
the stability and behavior of complex systems. Therefore, understanding
reactive species is essential for both biological and environmental
matrices. This section focuses on the characterization and quantification
of two crucial categories of reactive species: protons (i.e., pH)
and reactive oxygen species (ROS) since they dictate many biological
and environmental processes. pH is defined as pH = −log10
a
H+
 = −log­(γH+

m
H+
), where a

H
+
 denotes proton
activity, γH+
 represents the ionic strength
dependent activity coefficient, and m

H
+
 represents proton concentration. pH
plays a pivotal role in chemical and biological processes in many
biological and environmental systems. ROS typically includes singlet
oxygen, superoxide radical, hydroxyl radical, and hydrogen peroxide.
,
 In biological matrices, hypochlorite ion, nitric oxide, and reactive
nitrogen species are sometimes also considered ROS. Further, in environmental matrices, carbonate radicals
are sometime regarded as ROS. SERS has
enabled advanced detection and imaging of pH and ROS, typically through
indicator-assisted methods. As shown in A, the design and optimization of pH and
ROS involves specific reactions between nanosensors and the target
molecules (H+ or specific ROS) and must ensure compatibility
within the target system. Recently, new SERS probes have been developed,
one example being a SERS-borrowing-strategy-based nanoprobe (Au@Pt
core–shell nanoparticles), which enables the simultaneous and
direct identification of different mitochondrial ROS based on their
distinct Raman fingerprints.
,

 4.1.

## SERS Imaging for pH
pH nanoprobes
are typically made from Au or Ag colloids with a pH-sensitive indicator
molecule selected for its pK
a to match
the desired pH range. Specific binding between protons and indicators
causes changes in the SERS spectrum thus indicating the pH in the
vicinity of nanoprobe. Talley et al. first applied AgNPs functionalized
with 4-mercaptobenzoic acid (4-MBA) for intracellular pH measurement
in 2004 ( B,C). Later, Kneipp
et al. substituted AgNPs with AuNPs due to their increased biocompatibility
and stability. They reported a pH response
range of 2–8 for 4-MBA-functionalized AuNPs, which then became
widely used. Amine-based indicators
such as 4-ATP and 2-ATP, with higher pK
a values, extended the effective range to ∼4–10.
,,,
 Jensen et al. demonstrated that both amine and pyridine groups (e.g.,
in 4-mercaptopyridine) could serve as pH indicators. Kong et al. developed a gold-coated nanoroughened planar
substrate with arene chromium tricarbonyl linked aminothiophenol (Cr­(CO)3-ATP) being the pH indicator. The substrate-based sensor avoids nanoparticle aggregation; however,
the immobilized nanoprobe cannot be used for intracellular study.
Nanoprobe stability is crucial for reliable SERS pH sensing in biological
matrices, since nanoparticle aggregation and biomolecule adsorption
can affect signal quality. Protective layers are often applied to
enhance stability and prevent aggregation. Chen et al. developed a
hybrid structure with core–shell Au@AgNPs and multiwalled carbon
nanotubes (MWCNT). This hybrid pH nanoprobe
increased the number of SERS hotspots and expanded the pH measurement
range while maintaining stability. Wang et al. coated the pH sensitive
core with BSA as a protective layer to improve biocompatibility and
stability. A similar approach was adopted
by Zheng and colleagues for AuNP-4-Mpy-BSA nanoprobes for pH imaging. However, the cell internalization efficiency
of the BSA-coasted nanoprobes remained low, and the nanoprobe was
trapped in lysosomes thus resulting in heterogeneous distribution
of the nanoprobe. To address this, the Zhang group conjugated BSA-coated
nanoprobes with a cell-penetrating peptide (cysteine-terminated Tat
peptide), allowing long-term pH studies in cells. The cationic Tat peptide can penetrate the negatively charged
plasma membrane of human cervical cancer cells directly without the
participation of endocytosis, which greatly enhance the uptake of
pH probes without sacrificing the pH response. Other strategies, including
ultrasound-mediated method and electroporation technique, have also
been reported to improve nanoprobe internalization efficiency. The stability and sensitivity of the pH nanoprobes
can be affected by the presence of certain ions in the surrounding
environment. Guo et al. found that interference
from halide ions on 4-Mpy nanoprobes was minimized by prefunctionalizing
with bromide ions before applying a polyethylene glycol layer, electrostatically
stabilizing the protonated 4-Mpy.

Intracellular studies demonstrates that SERS imaging is a valuable
tool for studying microenvironments. In environmental matrices, the
pH of microenvironments such as individual atmospheric aerosols can
be quantified.
,
 Our group developed a pH-sensitive
AuNP-based nanoprobe with 4-MBA and polyethylene glycol, achieving
3D pH mapping in phosphate-buffered microdroplets and revealing a
pH gradient from a centroid pH of ∼11, decreasing toward the
surface (bulk pH ∼ 7.4). We applied
the pH nanoprobe to ammonium-based aerosol droplets, observing a homogeneous
pH increase with ammonium concentration, which reveals the role of
ammonium in aerosol pH. We also employed
flash-freezing for pH measurement in environmental water droplets, advancing knowledge of ion distribution. While
SERS offers sufficient spatial resolution for micrometer-sized systems,
its application to submicron aerosol droplets remains limited.
,
 Recent studies have advanced SERS spatial resolution for finer aerosols;
for example, Craig et al. resolved chemical variations within 0.5
μm in 1 μm aerosol particles using a 50 nm Ag nanosphere-coated
quartz substrate, underscoring the potential of SERS for single-particle
imaging of fine-mode aerosols. However,
debate persists over aerosol droplet pH distribution: Li et al. observed
homogeneity in phosphate and ammonium sulfate droplets using optical
tweezers and Raman imaging, while stimulated
Raman spectroscopy (SRS) revealed a heterogeneous pH distribution
at the air–water interface due to HSO4
–. These contrasting observations highlight
the need for further research to reconcile findings and ensure consistency
across SERS and related Raman imaging techniques.

4.2.

## SERS Imaging for Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS)
ROS
play essential roles in cellular activities, including metabolism,
signaling, gene expression, and immune responses, and serve as indicators
of oxidative stress.
,
 Ideal SERS probes for ROS detection
incorporate indicators that specifically react with target ROS to
enable precise detection, identification, localization, and quantification. SERS-based ROS sensing is typically reliant
on Au/AgNP colloids with functional groups that react with ROS, though
development is challenging due to ROS’s high reactivity and
short lifetimes.

Chen et al. detected
H2O2 and the H2O2 scavenging
activity of tannic acid and L-Malic acid by applying SiO2/AuNP nanoshells as nanoprobes. This
study utilized the reductive ability of H2O2 on Au3+ and found a correlation between H2O2 concentration and SERS intensity upon the formation
of Au0 on the SiO2 surface. In living cells,
boronate-based ratiometric nanoprobe, such as 3-mercaptophenylboronic
acid (3-MPBA), 4-mercaptophenylboronic
ester (MPBE), and 4-carboxyphenylboronic
acid (4-CA), have been applied as H2O2 indicator, since boronated molecules can specifically
react with hydrogen peroxide. Upon reaction with H2O2, the correlation between the H2O2 concentration
and the peak-ratio between the ROS-responsive and ROS-nonresponsive
peaks can be used to quantify H2O2. In the study
with MPBE, SERS imaging of H2O2 was overlaid
with a dark-field microscopic (DFM) image to generate a 2-D profile
in live HeLa cells ( D). Z-scan SERS imaging further
assessed H2O2 penetration depth in rat cervical
tumor tissue slices, with high H2O2 response
correlating to the HeLa cell edge. Dong et al. developed another method
detecting H2O2 and glucose by quenching the
SERS signal through a specific reaction between ROS and methylene
blue (MB) absorbed onto starch-coated Au nanoshells (GNSs), presenting
a novel approach to ROS detection.

Other types of ROS have been detected using nanoprobes with appropriately
designed indicators. Superoxide anion radicals were detected due to
their ability to modify oxidized cytochrome c (Cyt c) on AuNPs. An
intermediate molecule, 3-mercaptopropionic acid (3-MPA), was used
to bridge the Cyt c and AuNPs. Molecules
containing phenol groups, such as 2-mercapto-3methoxy-phenol and 4-mercaptophenol,
,
 have been applied for hypochlorite sensing. Cao et al. achieved
carbon monoxide (CO) sensing by modifying the AuNP surface with synthesized
palladacycles. The CO nanoprobe was
used for the observation of CO-dependent carbonylation.
Changing
from biological matrices into environmentally relevant
systems, spontaneous production of OH radicals was observed using
a phthalhydrazide-functionalized AgNP probe in water microdroplets. However, the application of SERS imaging for
mapping ROS in environmental matrices remains largely underexplored.
Given the critical role of ROS in various environmental processes,
there is significant potential for expanding the use of SERS imaging
to study ROS-driven reactions and mechanisms in environmental systems.

5.

## Applications of SERS Imaging in Environmental
Sensing
Building on the advancements in SERS imaging for
biological and
reactive species analysis, the application of SERS in environmental
research faces unique challenges due to the complexity of environmental
systems. While several review articles have addressed the application
of SERS for analyzing environmental pollutants, few have explored
the SERS imaging potential for environmental sensing.
−

 This gap can be attributed to two main reasons: (1) in general,
environmental monitoring studies have focused on whether or not a
pollutant is present and how high its concentration is, which usually
can be achieved without imaging. However, the spatial distribution
of environmental pollutants can have significant implications for
environmental fate and safety; (2) despite the widespread use of SERS
imaging in biological applications, it remains relatively underexplored
in the environmental field. Despite these challenges, SERS imaging
has been successfully applied to detect and map three major types
of environmental contaminants: pesticides, noble metal nanoparticles,
and heavy metal ions.
5.1.

## Pesticides
Pesticides
are commonly
used agrochemicals due to their capacity to reduce crop losses, improve
overall food productivity, and increase agricultural profit. However,
during or after application, pesticides may result in environmental
contamination, such as the residues on crops and vegetables. To evaluate
pesticide risk to environmental safety and public health, it is important
to evaluate their uptake, translocation, and degradation within agricultural
products.
SERS imaging has become an effective tool for tracking
pesticide penetration in plants. For example, SERS depth mapping was
used to monitor two pesticides in spinach leaves: the systemic pesticide
thiabendazole, which penetrates plant tissues, and the nonsystemic
pesticide ferbam, which remains on the surface. Depth mapping revealed that thiabendazole signals were
detectable within leaf cross sections, while ferbam was only observed
on the surface, confirming their respective properties ( A). Similar penetration behaviors were found in basil leaves, with differences
in speed and depth between live and harvested samples. Extending this approach, researchers tracked
four pesticides (thiabendazole, acetamiprid, ferbam, and phosmet)
in apples, grapes, and spinach, finding that nonsystemic pesticides
penetrated produce, but at less rapid and shallower levels compared
to systemic pesticides. Additionally,
SERS surface and depth imaging evaluated different washing methods
for pesticide removal from apple surfaces, showing that NaHCO3 solution was most effective, though internalized pesticides
remained unaffected. Since pesticides
such as thiabendazole and ferbam can adsorb onto AuNPs via strong
Au–S bonds, AuNPs may serve as carriers, potentially altering
penetration patterns within plant tissues.
,
 Based on this, an AuNPs (50 nm) mirror was developed to map pesticides
on tomato leaves, fruits, and mouse skin via SERS imaging ( B).

 
5.2.

## Nanoparticles
Nanoparticles (NPs),
including heavy metal NPs and nanoplastics are considered potential
contaminants, but their characterization and quantification are challenging
due to their small size and matrix complexity. SERS is an innovative
tool for NP imaging, especially for noble metal NPs due to their significant
Raman enhancements. SERS imaging of NPs in complex materials (e.g.,
plant matrices) can be indicator-free or indicator-assisted. Indicator-free
methods are ideal for studying NP chemical transformations, surface
chemistry, or interactions within the matrix, while indicator-assisted
approaches are preferred for sensitive identification and quantification
of NPs.
In indicator-free SERS imaging, the enhanced Raman signals
of molecules surrounding NPs indicate the presence of NPs, and deliver
important information on the interactions between NPs and localized
environments. Zhang et al. used SERS imaging for in situ qualitative
detection and characterization of AuNPs on and in spinach leaves, identifying AuNPs by Raman signals from leaf
biomolecules like chlorophylls and carotenoids. SERS mapping revealed
AuNPs distributed on the leaf surface and penetrating leaf tissues,
where they interacted with plant biomolecules. In single-cell applications,
Kawata et al. demonstrated in vivo real-time SERS monitoring of AuNP
transport within single living algal cells.
,
 The Brunner group used 3-D SERS maps to study AuNP uptake by the
diatom (), observing size-dependent localization:
AuNPs smaller than 50 nm remained near the cell wall, while larger
particles penetrated the diatom. SERS
signals from pigments such as chlorophyll a, fucoxanthin, and β-carotene
helped map the chloroplast locations, aligning closely with cell shape
and allowing detailed cell dimension analysis. SERS imaging can also
track the in situ formation of AuNPs within cells. Our group applied
SERS to monitor AuNP biosynthesis in algae exposed to HAuCl4 under
various pH conditions. Two- and three-dimensional
SERS maps revealed the location and local molecular environment of
the synthesized AuNPs, with surface-associated biomolecules identified
as glutathione, chlorophyll a, hydroxyquinoline, NAD, and reductase
enzymes. This method was faster and less invasive than traditional
electron microscopy, with minimal sample preparation required. Similarly,
Pytlik et al. used in vivo SERS imaging to study AuNP formation in , finding
that AuNPs formed primarily inside the diatom, surrounded by biomolecules
such as hydroxyurea and retinol, distinct from those in green algae.
Indicator-assisted SERS imaging is required when the original ligands
on NPs are not Raman active. To image NPs in real environments, selection
of indicators with strong binding ability to the NPs is crucial to
minimize interference and improve detection sensitivity. The basic
rationale for indicator selection is that the indicator should have
(1) high and distinct Raman peaks to achieve high sensitivity; and
(2) strong binding ability with nanosubstrates to enhance specific
adsorption and minimize interference. Indicator-assisted SERS imaging has been used to track the internalization
and localization of heavy metal nanoparticles in living animals. For
instance, Zavaleta et al. labeled Au/silica
core/shell structure with 10 different types of Raman-active indicators
in between the core and shell. They achieved multiplexed SERS imaging
of differently labeled NPs simultaneously in the skin and liver of
a live mouse. This study provides versatile nanocarriers that offer
multiple loading/delivery options with sensitive SERS imaging.
SERS imaging can also be used to track nanoplastics. A recent study
examined the intestinal barrier translocation of nanoplastic pollutants
in Daphnia through confocal SERS imaging. The nanoplastics were made
of Raman-indicator-labeled AuNPs as the core and polystyrene as the
shell. This new approach enables in situ tracking of the nanoplastic
translocation across the gut in the organism. In another work, the authors characterized the penetration
of organic pollutants into microplastics using SERS imaging. By employing
AuNPs as signal enhancers, the study visualized the spatial and temporal
dynamics of pollutant penetration into microplastic matrices. The
methodology improves our understanding of contaminant sorption processes
and their distributions in the environment.

5.3.

## Heavy Metal Ions
Heavy metal ions
exist in many natural and man-made environments, with some essential
for life, but toxic at high concentrations, and some poisonous even
at low concentrations. To track the environmental fate and behavior
of heavy metal ions, it is necessary to monitor their transport and
transformation in biological cells. However, different from noble
metal nanoparticles, metal ions are more challenging to detect due
to the lack of significant Raman enhancement.
Some heavy metal
ions, such as Cr­(VI) and Cr­(III), have apparent SERS bands. Using
Cr­(VI) functionalized AuNPs, Ravindranath et al. created an intracellular
sensing platform that mapped sites of reduced Cr­(III) and unreacted
Cr­(VI). However, detection was limited
by the localization of internalized AuNPs. To address this, they developed
a platform combining confocal Raman imaging with in situ biosynthesized
gold nanoislands, which acted as SERS nanostructures. This approach allowed for the identification of both Cr­(VI)
and Cr­(III) within a single bacterial cell by enhancing characteristic
peaks through the nanoislands. The major breakthrough of this work
was its ability to differentiate between Cr­(VI) and Cr­(III) and to
map Cr­(VI) reduction to Cr­(III) at single-cell resolution.
Indicator-assisted
SERS methods have been developed for heavy metal
ions that do not produce distinguishable SERS fingerprints, though
few studies currently focus on their application in heavy metal ion
imaging.
,,,
 Heavy metal ions can be quantified based on the changes
in indicator signal patterns or intensities upon interaction with
heavy metal ions.
,
 For example, 4-Mercaptopyridine-labeled
AuNPs (4-MPy-AuNPs) enabled the detection of Hg2+ and CH3Hg+ due to the distinct SERS peaks of 4-Mpy, 4-Mpy-Hg2+ and 4-Mpy-(Hg-CH3)+. Another strategy uses peak intensity changes,
,
 as seen with Cd­(II), where the addition of Cd­(II) causes AuNP aggregation,
creating more SERS hotspots and enhancing alizarin dye signals. Selective coordination of Cd­(II) with surface
molecules like 3-mercaptopropionic acid on AuNPs promotes aggregation
and detection specificity. Future research may explore these strategies
in SERS imaging to study heavy metal ion uptake, distribution, and
transformation in living cells or microenvironments.

6.

## Conclusions and Future Perspectives
SERS imaging has
emerged as a powerful analytical tool, providing
high-sensitivity, photostable biomolecular fingerprinting with precise
localization, ideal for both biological and environmental applications.
The current state of the art in SERS imaging is reflected in the following
aspects: (1) Significant advances in SERS nanoprobes, optimized for
pH stability, low toxicity, and effective NIR Raman reporters, demonstrates
great potential for multiplexed imaging and targeted biomarker detection,
including human cells. Additionally, target-specific functionalization
enables SERS imaging of reactive species in biological and environmental
microenvironments (e.g., proton/pH and ROS) with high sensitivity,
selectivity and stability. (2) Integration with complementary imaging
techniques (e.g., PA, MRI) along with the development of flexible
hand-held scanners, further expands its applicability. (3) The multifunctionality
of SERS enables applications in drug delivery and theranostics, which
promises advancements in clinical diagnostics. (4) In environmental
sensing, SERS imaging has proven effective in contaminant trapping
and mapping (e.g., pesticides, heavy metal nanoparticles, and ions),
providing valuable insights into their transport and transformation
in complex environmental systems.
The applications of SERS imaging
in biological and environmental
systems offer several key advantages: (1) in situ and real-time detection,
(2) high sensitivity to a wide range of analytes, (3) fluorescence-free
nondestructive analysis, and (4) resolve spatial distribution and
temporal evolution. However, some limitations remain and require further
optimization:
(1)Dependence on nanoprobes. Colloid-based
SERS imaging relies heavily on the presence of Au nanoprobes, meaning
that without nanoprobes, analytes cannot be detected. Consequently,
SERS maps reflect areas where nanoprobes and analytes, such as pesticides,
coexist rather than showing the analyte distribution alone.
(2)Potential alteration of
analyte. The
introduction of nanoprobes can potentially alter analyte distribution,
which must be considered in SERS imaging studies. Colloidal Au nanoprobes
may form arbitrary aggregates upon introduction, leading to uneven
distribution and heterogeneous penetration in plant tissues, which
can bias SERS imaging results. Further, SERS spectra may change upon
the addition of nanoparticles (NPs), due to condition-dependent NP-cell
interactions and the ROS generation caused by the NP dose.

(3)Selectivity in complex systems. Achieving
selectivity in complex systems is challenging. For example, pH-sensitive
nanoprobes like 4-MBA may coordinate with metal ions, while ROS sensors
relying on redox reactions may be confounded by other ROS with similar
redox potentials.
(4)Challenges
in quantitative analysis.
Quantitative SERS imaging is underexplored, as calibration standards
created in solution in lab may not be directly applicable to real
imaging environments. Improved quantification strategies are needed
to enhance the accuracy of SERS imaging.
Specifically, SERS imaging for biological analytes also
faces several
challenges that need to be addressed for further development:
(1)Challenges in label-free
SERS imaging.
Label-free SERS imaging generates spectra that capture signals from
all present biomolecules, which can complicate interpretation in the
complex and dynamic intracellular environment of living cells. This
may lead to missed or distorted findings. Advanced algorithms, such
as machine learning, could be applied to extract meaningful patterns
from spectral data and improve the reliability of label-free SERS
imaging in such intricate settings. AI-assisted
spectral analysis and modeling have been reported to monitor real-time
interactions between the SARS-CoV-2 and human ACE2 based on their
IR spectra. However, how it can be used
for real-time SERS spectral analysis in biological samples is unexplored.
In the future, it is worthwhile to develop SERS-specific machine learning
models to facilitate the SERS imaging data interpretation. For example,
machine learning methods can be used to identify different biomarkers
and characterize their distributions based on their SERS spectra and
microscopic maps in biological samples.
(2)Pathogen Detection Sensitivity. The
relatively large size of many pathogens compared to the SERS hot spots
generated by substrates or nanoprobes can result in reduced sensitivity
and inconsistent results; therefore, the reproducibility needs to
be improved for large target analytes. Additionally, certain biomolecules
of interest, such as proteins or lipids, have low Raman cross sections,
further limiting sensitivity. To address these challenges, strategies
to enhance SERS signals, such as developing adaptable, 3D-structured
SERS substrates, may improve compatibility with pathogen dimensions,
thereby enhancing detection sensitivity and reproducibility.
(3)Capturing rapid biomolecular
changes.
The highly dynamic nature of living cells, where biomolecules can
redistribute or transform within seconds due to various physiological
activities, poses a challenge for SERS platforms in capturing rapid,
spatial, and temporal changes accurately. Ensuring that SERS imaging
can reflect these variations in real-time is critical for its effectiveness
in cellular studies. Moreover, the SERS signals of biological samples
have been observed vary over time due to the changes in the surrounding
environment.
,
 Therefore, maintaining a stable
environmental condition and implementing rapid scanning are essential
for ensuring data reliability, particularly in large areas or 3D imaging
applications.
(4)Nanoparticle
accumulation and elimination.
Ensuring normal cell viability during SERS imaging is the trend for
single living cell studies which reveals the true nature of life.
However, current development for SERS probes functionalization (e.g.,
new cell-penetrating peptides) focus mostly on the internalization
efficiency, little attention has been paid to the toxicity and elimination
of SERS imaging agents within organisms. Even though many SERS-active
nanoparticles are considered low in toxicity, their potential accumulation
within living cells or tissues raises concerns about long-term effects.
Developing strategies for the safe elimination of accumulated nanoparticles
should be a focus in future research to ensure biocompatibility. Other
challenges for SERS imaging in intracellular sensing includes the
spectra change caused by the addition of nanoparticles (NPs), condition-dependent
NP-cell interactions and the ROS generation caused by the NP dose.

For environmental
applications, SERS imaging remains in its early
stages but holds significant potential to improve in situ, real-time
investigation of contaminants. As environmental systems are open and
dynamic, SERS imaging must overcome challenges like complex sample
matrices and tracking the spatial and temporal evolution of pollutants.
Addressing these issues will expand the potential of SERS for more
comprehensive environmental analysis. Additionally, future research
should expand SERS imaging to include emerging contaminants, such
as endocrine-disrupting chemicals (EDCs), pharmaceuticals and personal
care products (PPCPs), brominated flame retardants, and microplastics.
Through continued analytical advances, SERS imaging has potential
to become a robust tool for tracking contaminants and assessing environmental
impacts.

## Acknowledgments
Q.H.,
W.W., S.K., and P.V. acknowledge funding support from
the Virginia Tech Graduate School Sustainable Nanotechnology Interdisciplinary
Graduate Education Program and the Virginia Tech Fralin Life Science
Institute. Q.H. also acknowledges support from the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (No. 22406010), and Beijing Natural Science
Foundation (No. 8244070). The dissertation of Q.H. is acknowledged
for laying the foundation of this review.

#.Q.H., H.G., W.W.,
and S.K. contributed equally to this work. CRediT: Qishen Huang writing - original draft, writing - review &
editing; Huiyuan Guo writing - original draft; Wei Wang writing - original draft; Seju Kang writing
- original draft; Peter J. Vikesland conceptualization,
supervision, writing - original draft, writing - review & editing.

The
authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## References