379blackwellopenAdvanced Materials (Deerfield Beach, Fla.)Adv MaterPMC1216068112160681121606813974511710.1002/adma.202414882Engineering CAR‐T Therapeutics for Enhanced Solid Tumor Targeting
ZhuDanqing KimWon Joon LeeHyunjin BaoXiaoping KimPilnam 
1
Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, School of Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST), Kowloon, Hong Kong SAR, 999077, China
2
State Key Laboratory of Molecular Neuroscience, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST), Kowloon, Hong Kong SAR, 999077, China
3
Department of Bio and Brain Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, 34141, Republic of Korea
4
Davidson School of Chemical Engineering, Purdue University, 480 Stadium Mall Drive, West Lafayette, IN, 47906, USA
5
Purdue University Institute for Cancer Research, West Lafayette, IN, 47907, USA*
E‐mail: dqzhu@ust.hk; bao61@purdue.edu; pkim@kaist.ac.kr

✉Corresponding author.
2120253723241488224148821362025© 2025 The Author(s). Advanced Materials published by Wiley‐VCH GmbHThis is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non‐commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made.

## Abstract
Cancer immunotherapy, specifically Chimeric Antigen Receptor (CAR)‐T cell therapy, represents a significant breakthrough in treating cancers. Despite its success in hematological cancers, CAR‐T exhibits limited efficacy in solid tumors, which account for more than 90% of all cancers. Solid tumors commonly present unique challenges, including antigen heterogeneity and complex tumor microenvironment (TME). To address these, efforts are being made through improvements in CAR design and the development of advanced validation platforms. While efficacy is limited, some solid tumor types, such as neuroblastoma and gastrointestinal cancers, have shown responsiveness to CAR‐T therapy in recent clinical trials. In this review, it is first examined both experimental and computational strategies, such as protein engineering coupled with machine learning, developed to enhance T cell specificity. The challenges and methods associated with T cell delivery and in vivo reprogramming in solid tumors is discussed. It is also explored the advancements in engineered organoid systems, which are emerging as high‐fidelity in vitro models that closely mimic the complex human TME and serve as a validation platform for CAR discovery. Collectively, these innovative engineering strategies offer the potential to revolutionize the next generation of CAR‐T therapy, ultimately paving the way for more effective treatments in solid tumors.
Keywords: cancer immunotherapy, Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR), drug delivery, nanoparticle

CART cell therapy has proven effective for blood cancers but struggles with solid tumors due to diverse antigens and complex environments. Recent efforts focus on improving CAR design and validation platforms. Advances in protein engineering, machine learning, and organoid systems aim to enhance CAR‐T therapy against solid tumors. Some solid tumors, like neuroblastoma, have responded well in trials.

 
statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoRevised 2024 Dec 2; Received 2024 Sep 30; Issue date 2025 Jun 12.

1.

## Introduction
Cancer immunotherapy harnesses the potential of the innate immune system to combat the tumors. With a recently approved clinical product for the treatment of lymphoma,[
 
] CAR‐T cell therapy has demonstrated transformative precision and effective anti‐tumor immunity. Conventional CAR designs consist of three essential elements, extracellular domain that consists of single‐chain variable fragment (scFv) or ligand‐receptor interaction fragment, transmembrane, and intracellular domains for stimulating signaling pathways in T cells for activation (Figure  ). CAR engineering aims to repurpose the natural signaling components of T cells to target antigens of cancer cells for specificity. However, current attempts to harness the power of engineered T cells mostly focus on treating hematological malignancies with limited efficacy in other cancer types, especially solid tumor, which accounts for more than 90% of cancers.[
 
]

 Compared with hematological cancers, solid tumors present unique obstacles to CAR‐T therapeutics. The primary challenge is the heterogeneity of antigen distribution in cancer cells within solid tumors across patients. Tumor antigen heterogeneity developed through diverse clonal evolution patterns and complex tumor microenvironments (TMEs), both genomically and transcriptomically, vary significantly across patients.[
 , 
] In addition, cellular heterogeneity is also important as it is associated with drug resistance and patient prognosis.[
 
] For example, cell types other than cancer cells constituting the TME, such as stromal cells like cancer‐associated fibroblasts,[
 
] vascular cells,[
 
] and immune cells like macrophages,[
 
] exhibit considerable diverse molecular subtypes. The clinical response of anticancer CAR‐T therapeutics is mainly determined by antigen location, persistence, and downstream signaling cascade. Thus, the TME cellular, transcriptomic,[
 
] and antigen heterogeneity altogether creates substantial challenges in developing universally suitable antigen targets that are stably and specifically expressed in individuals’ cancer cells.
Single‐cell transcriptomics technology can provide conducive clues for evaluating antigen selection. First, single‐cell RNA sequencing (scRNA‐seq) enables us to identify and characterize heterogeneous cell types within tumors, revealing the set of specific cell markers they express.[
 
] Moreover, scRNA‐seq can also predict cell‐cell interactions based on differential gene expression across cell types, offering insights for designing not only specific antigen‐targeting receptors but also strategies that regulate these cellular interactions.[
 
] As single‐cell transcriptomics continuesto advance, the potential for identifying novel antigen targets has also expanded significantly. Recent developments in high‐throughput platforms and computational algorithms have led to an increase in the number of candidate antigens for targeting, with over a hundred tumor antigens currently undergoing clinical testing trials.[
 
] For example, one recent study demonstrated the identification of optimal target antigens for CAR‐based therapy by constructing a single‐cell expression atlas from over ≈1.4 million cells and employing machine learning (ML) algorithm to discover genes that differentiate malignant from normal cells in tumors, with subsequent validation in ovarian and colorectal cancer models.[
 
] These developments further reinforce the growing importance of such technology in enhancing the precision and efficacy of antigen identifications.
While transcriptomics provides valuable insights, it is important to acknowledge its limitations in fully representing protein levels. As transcriptomic data only offers a snapshot of the mRNA, post‐transcriptional modifications (PTMs), protein degradation, and other regulatory mechanisms can all lead to discrepancies between mRNA and protein abundance,[
 
] as well as the function of the proteins.[
 
] For example, researchers previously identified a tumor‐associated antigen (TAA), namely mesothelin (MSLN), a surface protein overexpressed in several types of solid tumors, as a promising target for CAR‐T therapy.[
 
] This identification was largely determined based on gene expression data that indicated high levels of MSLN in tumor cells compared to that of normal tissues.[
 , 
] However, when CAR‐T cells were engineered to target only the MSLN, early clinical trials observed limited antitumor efficacy if not combined with other strategies such as Programmed cell death Protein 1 (PD1) targeting monoclonal antibodies.[
 
] Despite high MSLN expression levels revealed by transcriptomic data, the actual protein expression on the surface of targeted cells still varies significantly. In some cases, the MSLN protein was present in low abundance or was shielded by other molecules in the TME, rendering engineered CAR‐T cells much less effective.[
 , 
] Moreover, MSLN was also found to be expressed at certain but lower levels in some normal tissues, leading to off‐target effects and undesirable toxicities.[
 
] Therefore, relying solely on single‐cell transcriptomics data to guide the development of specific antigen CARs can be insufficient.
To overcome these limitations, it is crucial to employ additional considerations for designing CAR specificity as well as validation platforms that can 1) expand large‐scale examination of T cell phenotypes for specificity targeting and antitumor potency, 2) directly assess protein expression levels on the surface of targeted cancer cells, and 3) evaluate the undistorted antigen‐recognition and binding through development of high‐fidelity model systems.
Here, we first review synthetic and computational advancements that have successfully developed to improve the targeting specificity of CAR design, along with recent high‐throughput screening platforms that have enabled novel target identification for enhancing and potentiating T cell functions. We next discuss challenges posed by the clinical CAR‐T therapy and engineering strategies aimed at in vivo reprogramming of T cells using nanoparticles that seek to overcome these transport hurdles. Finally, we provide a brief overview of biomaterial‐based validation platforms that have been established to serve as high‐fidelity models for recapitulating complex TMEs in order to evaluate the delivery and therapeutic efficacy accurately. Since there are several published reviews previously on the targetable tumor antigens, the combination of therapeutic strategies, and different CAR‐expressing immune cells,[
 , , 
] our review mainly focuses on discussing recent technology and platform advances in the three areas: CAR molecular construct design, delivery vehicle engineering, and validation platform development. These interdisciplinary endeavors aim to address solid tumor targeting challenges through biomaterial‐based strategies. In addition to summarizing existing CAR designs and clinical combination strategies, here we mainly explore and summarize the current prospects of micro‐ and nanotechnology engineering methodologies – including advances in protein engineering, high‐fidelity model development, and the application of ML algorithms for high‐throughput material optimizations.

2.

## Engineering of CAR‐T Specificity
To ensure that the therapies achieve the intended effects, the CAR design must account for two critical factors. First, it is essential to ensure that the target antigen, which is selected to be unique to the target cell, is not or is minimally expressed in off‐target cells. Such specificity is critical to designing antigen‐recognition domains (scFv) that minimize off‐target effects of unintended damage to surrounding healthy tissues and cells, thereby ensuring that the therapy only selectively targets the cancer cells. Second, it is important to confirm that the target cells express the antigen sufficiently on their surface to allow for effective interactions. Adequate antigen expression and binding affinity need to be validated accurately so that the designed antigen‐scFv paired interaction is tight and specific to produce the intended therapeutic effects. Previous work has explored several possibilities of incorporating multiple receptors that can only activate T cells in the presence of a specific combination of antigens (Figure  ). Through Boolean AND‐gate logic with two separately expressed CARs targeting selected but different antigens expressed on cancer cells, researchers can increase the level of specification for tumor targeting as well as lowering the off‐target toxicity in surrounding healthy cells. Such design splits the primary activation and co‐stimulation signals of T cells, so they are only activated when both CARs are simultaneously engaged with their antigen targets.[
 
] In situations where off‐target is spatially distant from the intended cancer cells, sequential activation can also be designed through a different logic‐gating strategy (Figure  ).[
 
] Recent work has developed a synthetic Notch (synNotch) platform that enabled multi‐antigen prime‐and‐kill circuits. Specifically, a synNotch receptor that recognizes a specific priming antigen (e.g., Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Variant III, EGFRvIII) which is heterogeneously expressed on cancer cells, can subsequently drive the expression of a bispecific CAR design targeting the dual‐antigen (e.g., EphA2 and IL13Rα2) co‐expressing glioblastoma (GBM) cancer cells. This prime‐and‐kill circuit can only induce CAR‐driven cytotoxicity restricted to the priming cells and, therefore, increased specificity with minimal off‐target killing in the context of heterogeneous antigen presentation. Such a strategy can also prevent cancer relapse when there's a loss of antigen in some solid tumor treatment.[
 
]

Another example explored the inhibitory CARs (iCARs) construct that diverts off‐target responses by targeting a self‐antigen present in healthy cells (Figure  ). Such an inhibitory signal enhances the specificity by preventing T cell activation when encountered by the healthy cells’ antigens.[
 
] More recently, researchers developed a split, universal, and programmable (SUPRA) CAR system, in which T cells are engineered with a modular zipCAR that comprises a leucine zipper ectodomain fused to transmembrane and intracellular signaling domains (Figure  ).[
 
] The zipCARs can be activated by binding to exogenous zipFv proteins, which consist of scFvs fused to a matching zipper for activating T cells in the presence of a TAA. To make the activation specific, one can simultaneously design a competitive binding reaction of zipFv molecules to prevent other self‐antigens.
In addition to engineering T cell constructs directly for enhancing specificity, strategies that target cancer cells have also been actively explored. For example, oncolytic viruses (OV) can be engineered for tumor selectivity and targeting,[
 
] with strong immune‐stimulating effects in the TMEs (Figure  ). Previous work has exploited the delivery of OVs for infecting and driving tumor‐specific expression with truncated CD19 (CD19t). The infected cancer cells would subsequently signal and be targeted by the engineered CD19 CAR‐T cells.[
 
] Such a strategy enables greater tumor cell killing compared to that of non‐OV‐delivered cancer cells in both human tumor xenograft models and murine immunocompetent tumor models. Using OV to introduce validated antigen targets to cancer cells could broaden the capacity of CAR T targeting, especially for solid tumors that lack amenable tumor antigens. Another example targeting the cancer cells with oncolytic adenoviruses for secretion of a bispecific T cell engager (BiTE), which can subsequently direct T cells to antigens heterogeneously expressed on the cancer cells. Such a combination offers less off‐target killing of healthy cells in vitro.[
 
] A more recent study developed dual‐specific CAR‐T cells to target cancer cells in combination with OVs in the TMEs.[
 
] By potentiating and stimulating the native T cell receptor with OVs of encoded epitopes, both CAR‐T antitumor function and T cell memory phenotypes are boosted and expanded.
Leveraging the versatility of CAR design, various combinations of mechanisms can also be targeted for synergistic effects in specificity enhancement. For example, researchers harnessed the granzyme‐mediated cell death pathway by directly inducing apoptosis through intracellular proteases in cancer cells with co‐delivery in programmed T cells.[
 , 
] Moreover, indirect targeting of the surrounding stroma components to regulate cytokines secretion is also actively explored. For example, cytokines (IL‐6),[
 
] chemokines (CXCL12),[
 
] and growth factors (LIF)[
 
] derived from cancer‐associated fibroblasts (CAFs) that support cancer cells or promote a pro‐tumor microenvironment can be inhibited for enhancing the therapeutic advantage.

3.

## High‐Throughput Screening for Target Identifications
TME is complex and presents multiple inhibitory signals and factors that can compromise engineered T‐cell performance in antitumor efficiency. To decrease the risk of off‐targeting and potential relapse after CAR T‐cell treatment, novel antigens and susceptibility targets for enhancing T‐cell capabilities can be identified through high‐throughput screening.[
 
] Many solid tumors have limited T cells and those that present display an exhausted phenotype, thus leading to the exploration of co‐stimulation in combination with CARs in preclinical models. Recently, a deeper understanding of the mechanisms by which cancer cells suppress immune cells, including T cells,[
 
] has spurred the development of immune‐oncology molecules designed to inhibit these mechanisms. Most of these drugs are being developed in the form of antibodies.[
 
] Notable FDA‐approved immune‐oncology drugs include ipilimumab (Yervoy), a CTLA‐4 antibody;[
 
] pembrolizumab (Keytruda) and nivolumab (Opdivo), which are PD‐1 antibodies;[
 , 
] and atezolizumab (Tecentriq), avelumab (Bavencio), and durvalumab (Imfinzi), which are PD‐L1 antibodies.[
 , , 
]

In addition to supplementing monoantibodies for co‐stimulating T cells, several studies have reported the feasibility of reprogramming gene expressions for fueling and augmenting T cells for enhanced antitumor efficacy. For example, knocking out metabolic regulator REGNASE‐1 and CD3‐signaling regulator diacylglycerol kinase (DGK) have been shown to improve T‐cell antitumor function,[
 , 
] while overexpressing phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase 1 (PKC1) in T cells has been shown to restrict tumor growth in a melanoma‐bearing cancer mouse model.[
 
] More recently, an increasing number of studies have utilized clustered regularly interspaced palindromic repeats (CRISPR)‐based screening platforms to determine or identify potential therapeutic targets and regulators for boosting antitumor responses of engineered T cells (Figure  ). Targeted gene knockout or repression enabled by the single‐guided RNA libraries and DNA endonuclease enzyme Cas9 can direct site‐specific editing.[
 , 
] These engineering approaches and unbiased screening provide a systematic interrogation of causal relationships between T cell phenotype to its corresponding genotype. These newly discovered targets that regulate T cell functions and performance can further provide us with valuable insights for enhancing downstream clinical efficacy.
 3.1.

## In Vitro Screening
Utilize whole‐genome two‐cell type‐CRISPR screening in patient‐derived GBM stem cells cocultured with CAR‐T cells, researchers revealed that two critical genes RELA and NPLOC4 are crucial modulators of CAR‐mediated killing.[
 
] With proper deletion of these screened genes, antitumor responses can be enhanced. Another study by Julia et al. conducted multiple CRISPR‐based knockout (KO) screens on primary human T cells under immunosuppression to discover that the expression of RASA2 is largely related to T‐cell receptor activation and chronic antigen stimulation.[
 
] By strategically ablating RASA2 in engineered CAR‐T cells, they were able to achieve increased activation and metabolic activities that prolong the survival of mice xenografted with solid tumors.
A recent study has reported a high‐throughput discovery pipeline for personalized major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I‐restricted and MHC class II‐restricted tumor‐reactive T cell receptors (TCR) screening on an individual patient basis.[
 
] Specifically, the technology platform couples the assembly of large‐scale synthetic and personalized TCR libraries with pooled reporter expressions and functional genetic screening. Reusable germline‐encoded TCR variable genes (TRAV, TRBC, and TRBV, collectively named “VCV”) were synthesized with fragmented oligonucleotides that contain a unique, orthogonal hybridization sequence (Zip) to each specific TCR. Such barcoding enables each molecule to contain the complete VCV fragments paired to the individual TCRs by their respective Zip sequences, which will be subsequently amplified and selected after the screening for identification.

3.2.

## In Vivo CRISPR Screening
Compared to in vitro systems, in vivo screening enables more natural recapitulation of the TME context for cellular interrogation. Recent work reported a pooled mutagenic screening with CRISPR‐mediated genetically engineered mouse models (CRISPR‐GEMM).[
 
] Such a platform enables the identification of the histone methyltransferase (Kmt2d) as a major modulator for immune checkpoint blockade response across several cancer types. CRISPR expressing Cre recombinase was introduced through an AAV vector into inducible Cas9‐expressing mice, and two specific sgRNA cassette libraries targeting Trp53 and an mTSG were screened following either PD‐1 or CTLA‐4 administration.
Although in vivo screening provides a more faithful emulation of TME, there are several considerations.[
 
] First, viral vector transduction and distribution within organs and tissues in animals can be variable or insufficient. Such random sampling errors may present challenges in selecting the appropriate size for the sgRNA library to limit false‐positive hits resulting from off‐target edits or false‐negative hits from incomplete editing/delivery efficiency. Second, there is a limited quantity of cells in native organs, and bias exists in retrieving viable cells from endogenous tissues due to anatomical accessibility and immune rejection.
To provide a more comprehensive and accurate representation of the component cells involved in TME, recent work has integrated scRNA‐seq into in vivo screening through technologies such as Perturb‐seq, etc.[
 , 
] The reported study employed an engineered AAV vector for highly efficient delivery of in vivo Perturb‐seq library for massively parallel screening of more than 30000 cells in one experiment.[
 
] AAVs for in vivo delivery offers several advantages including the systemic delivery route with a wide range of tissues and cell types of tropism.
Though conventional Cas9 technology using DNA as substrate can offer insights into causative drivers for perturbating cell functions, such direct DNA editing and manipulation can sometimes induce potentially undesirable effects.[
 , , 
] Recent work has reported a versatile CRISPR‐based platform (multiplexed effector guide arrays, MEGA) for programmable and scalable regulation of the T cell transcriptome directly.[
 
] The technology enables quantitative and reversible gene knockdown in primary human T cells using the RNA‐guided, RNA‐targeting activity of CRISPR‐Cas13d, which is not associated with undesirable and potential genotoxicity. By introducing the graded perturbations, the combinatorial screen identified paired hits that can enhance CAR‐T cell function. Furthermore, through metabolic engineering of T cells with glycolytic disruption through knock‐down repression screens, MEGA further advances the T cell fitness and anti‐tumor activity by identifying additional targets that can be utilized as future interventions.
3.2.1.

## Computational Strategies for Target Prediction
With the advent of next‐generation sequencing (NGS), data‐guided ML algorithms are also being developed actively for predicting antigen recognition and binding interactions from massively parallel sequencing datasets. To make the design of CAR more quantitative and predictive, Daniels et al. tested thousands of combinations of signaling motifs found in such receptors and used ML to predict the corresponding effectiveness. Specifically, a library of CARs containing ≈2300 synthetic costimulatory domains was constructed by randomizing motif combinations. Such a library produced a variety of cellular phenotypes with distinctive cytotoxicity and stemness profiles. Leveraging the trained convolutional neural networks (CNN) followed by a long, short‐term memory (LSTM), researchers were able to map the cell phenotype based on one‐hot encoded costimulatory domain identity and arrangement, and decoded the combinatorial relationship (including the overall contribution of each motif, pairwise combination, and positional dependence) of signaling motifs and their corresponded outputs.[
 
] Such extracted design rules would be valuable guidance for designing non‐natural costimulatory domains with improved phenotypes of CAR‐T cells. Another study explored an alternative readout using oscillations of intracellular calcium (Ca2+) as a proximal label for antigen‐specific T cell identification.[
 
] By leveraging trained CNNs using input features of known specificity, intracellular Ca2+ concentration, and imaging tracking, one can rapidly identify antigen‐specific T cells with predicted reactivity from a polyclonal pool on a single‐cell level. Such classification would enable future identification of specific receptor sequences of T cells that are engaged in specific antigen interactions.

4.

## In Vivo‐Reprogramming CAR‐T Cells
For conventional CAR‐T therapy, T cells are first taken from a patient's blood and then genetically programmed using viral vectors such as lentiviruses to express an engineered CAR, and then undergo proliferation before infusing back into the patient for targeting and eliminating cancer cells. However, the generation of CAR‐T cells relies heavily on purification and ex vivo transduction, which limits the accessibility of such treatment and carriers’ significant cost and risk and requires extensive infrastructure.[
 , , 
] Additionally, many patients cannot benefit from this therapy because of difficulties in collecting sufficient autologous T cells due to ongoing chemotherapy or lack of capacity for memory T cell proliferation. This prolonged process may not suit patients with rapidly advancing cancers.[
 
] Therefore, methods that could be used to avoid removing T cells from the patient by packaging them into delivery vehicles, such as viral vectors or lipid nanoparticles (LNP), are preferable. Genetic modifications of T cells have advanced significantly in immunotherapies for cancer, yet the delivery of biologics specifically to T cells remains challenging. Here, we review recent efforts in engineering these nanoparticle modalities to enable in vivo reprogramming of CAR‐T cells (Figure  ).
 4.1.

## Viral Vectors
Lentiviruses have been pseudotyped with various strategies to enable infection of many cell types.[
 
] For example, vesicular stomatitis virus G protein (VSV‐G) is the most common pseudotype among all.[
 
] To make lentivirus infection cell‐type dependent, several engineering approaches have explored the co‐expression of specific receptor‐targeting moieties, such as viral envelop glycoproteins for cell‐specific entry.[
 , , 
] However, these approaches are generally limited by the ligand‐receptor topology for efficient entry. Recent work reported a modular screening platform for developing scalable antigen‐receptor pairs for lentiviral‐specific targeting. Using a structure‐based approach, two key mutations are introduced to divert affinity from the native receptor of VSV‐G. To retarget the mutant viruses, a variety of surface‐bound molecules were introduced during viral packaging, and a specific surface architecture yielding the highest infection was determined.[
 
] Using such a method, one is capable of simultaneously delivering multiple synergistic signals when targeting specific cell populations.
Another viral‐based vector widely applied for in vivo engineering of T cells is the AAV. AAV has become an essential vehicle for therapeutic gene delivery in recent years, with its safe profile and low immunogenicity in clinical trials.[
 
] AAV tropism is mainly determined by the capsid proteins, which can be engineered through either rational design or directed evolution. To date, AAVs have been successfully engineered to achieve some tropism, for example, for myocytes and the brain.[
 , 
] Using a DNA shuffling technology, researchers have generated a chimera AAV variant (parent serotypes of AAV 2/8/9) for delivery of CD4‐CAR antigen fused with CD28 in vivo. Direct reprogramming of immune effector cells to generate CAR T cells was subsequently achieved with effective tumor regression and antitumor characteristics observed in mice.[
 
] A more recent study employed a directed evolution‐based approach – which involves the development of genetically diversified AAV library pools followed by iterative rounds of selection targeting specific T cells isolated from C57BL/6J mice for improved cell entry. A murine T cell‐specific AAV variant (Ark313) was successfully generated that enabled efficient transgene delivery and targeting in murine T cells.[
 
] Compared with the previous method of low targeting (<10%) and high toxicity (50%‐85%) in transduction, this enhanced AAV variant achieved a 30‐fold increase in efficiency with low multiplicity of infection (MOI) and up to 46‐fold at higher MOIs.

4.2.

## Virus‐Like Particles
Viral glycoproteins are essential for enabling efficient transduction as seen in the lentiviral pseudotyping strategy. Therefore, by varying surface glycoproteins, one can theoretically retarget pseudotyped virus‐like particles (VLPs) for delivery to predetermined cell types specifically. Lentivirus‐like particles have previously been engineered to introduce Cas9 ribonucleoproteins (RNPs) and CAR transgene into primary human T cells. Specifically, Cas9‐VLPs pseudotyped with CD4‐tropic HIV‐1 envelope glycoprotein drove the specific and exclusive transduction of CD4+ T cells while sparing the co‐cultured CD8+ cells.[
 
]

Using elements from envelope viruses, such as lentiviral vectors, tropism can also be altered by presenting viral fusion proteins on the surface of these nanoparticles. The selection of fusion protein is critical for enabling host cell membrane fusion and specific cell‐type receptor binding. Therefore, recent work on the modular platform, namely DIRECTED (Delivery to Intended Recipient Cells Through Envelope Design), is developed for achieving programmable cell targeting through engineering components of fusion and binding domains. The modularity of the DIRECTED platform allows for different targeting approaches to be screened. For example, researchers tested multiple targeting strategies through fusion protein AG (insertion between the secretion and transmembrane domains), scFv, and SNAP‐tag, with robust detection of selected antibodies in all strategies. With different antibodies immobilized through various strategies, one can achieve a wide range of potential antibody‐mediated specific delivery designs, including primary human T cells.[
 
] Such flexibility enables a wide exploration of fusion protein components from different viral families and alternative enveloped modalities. To leverage predictable antibody‐antigen interactions, another recent study has exploited the specific antibody fragments displayed on membrane‐derived particles for recognizing targeted cell surface markers. Paired with the display of VSV‐G mutant, the scFv antibody displayed enveloped delivery vehicle (EDV) achieved high selective cell transduction and subsequently enabled the generation of genome‐edited CAR T cells (≈80%) in humanized mice.[
 
]

4.3.

## Lipid Nanoparticles
In addition to the aforementioned viral‐based delivery, lipid nanoparticles (LNPs) are also emerging as a cargo carrier to potently deliver CAR mRNAs, particularly modified mRNAs (modRNAs), into T cells or other immune cells ex vivo, in vivo, or in situ.[
 
] While the LNP‐mRNA system generally induces transient CAR expression in targeted cells, this platform enables efficient in vivo engineering of CAR‐T cells that can bypass the tedious cell manufacturing process currently used and mitigate cytokine release syndrome (CRS). Initial efforts involved screening or rationale design of LNP formulation for improved mRNA delivery to T cells ex vivo with minimal cytotoxicity as compared to the classic electroporation method.[
 , , 
]

Ex vivo CAR‐T production usually involves three steps: leukapheresis, T cell activation with anti‐CD3 and CD28 magnetic beads, and CAR introduction. To simplify this process, Metzloff et al. developed activating LNPs that mimic antigen‐presenting cells and merged T cell activation and mRNA transfection into one step to produce >80% CAR‐T cells ex vivo.[
 
] For in vivo engineering of CAR‐T cells, CD3, CD5, CD7, and other T cell antibodies are commonly used to coat optimized LNP formulations for improved CAR mRNA delivery into T cells. For instance, Billingsley et al. used CD3 antibody‐coated LNPs to deliver CAR mRNA into circulating T cells and produced ≈17% CAR‐T cells in circulation.[
 
] In another independent study, Kheirolomoom et al. used CD3‐targeted LNPs to deliver mCherry mRNA into the spleen via systemic administration and produced 2%–4% mCherry+ T cells in the spleen as well as 2%–7% mCherry+ T cells in peripheral blood.[
 
] By using a CD5‐targeted LNP, Rurik et al. produced 20% splenic CAR‐T cells in vivo, which reduced cardiac fibrosis and restored heart function after injury.[
 
] The efficiency of in vivo CAR‐T cell production via LNP/mRNA could also be further improved by pre‐treating mice with systemic IL7,[
 
] which selectively improves protein translation in T cells. Given its important role as a secondary lymphatic organ, the spleen is an important tissue target for in vivo LNP screening or design for improved in vivo CAR‐T cell engineering.[
 
] Zhang et al. performed a high‐throughput in vivo screening of LNP library and identified that helper lipid 1,2‐distearoyl‐sn‐glycero‐3‐phosphocholine (DSPC)‐containing LNP increased mRNA delivery to the spleen by five‐fold.[
 
] By using spleen‐specific selective organ targeting (SORT) LNPs, Álvarez‐Benedicto et al. delivered anti‐CD19 CAR mRNA into spleen T cells with minimal mRNA delivery to lung and liver, leading to ≈7% CAR‐T cells in the spleen and ≈2% in peripheral blood.[
 
] Zhang et al. also designed one‐component cationic lipids for selective delivery of mRNA into the spleen and produced ≈7% tdTomato+ cells in vivo.[
 
] Lymph nodes are another tissue of interest for in vivo T cell engineering, and zwitterionic phospholipidation of cationic polymers has significantly increased mRNA delivery to spleen and lymph nodes, resulting in ≈6% and 2% tdTomato+ CD4 and CD8 T cells, respectively.[
 
]

4.4.

## Cell‐Derived Nanovesicles
Cell‐derived nanovesicles, which could be classified as endogenous extracellular vesicles (EVs), such as exosomes and microvesicles, and artificial cell‐engineered vesicles, are emerging as an alternative carrier to deliver protein, mRNA, and other therapeutics into targeted recipient cells. Wahlgren et al. first demonstrated the successful delivery of siRNA into human monocytes and T cells via plasma EVs.[
 
] Later, Stranford et al. engineered EVs with anti‐CD2 scFvs and viral glycoproteins and significantly improved Cas9 RNPs in T cells.[
 
] In another study, Si et al. expressed anti‐CD3/CD28 scFv on exosomes to deliver mRNAs into T cells with an in vitro production efficiency of ≈12% CAR‐T cells.[
 
] Instead of using EVs, Zhao et al. implemented a virus‐mimetic fusogenic nanovesicle to deliver CAR constructs into T cells, enabling ≈2% in vivo CAR‐T cell production in both peripheral blood and spleen.[
 
] While not directly delivering CARs into T cells, Fan et al. engineered EVs from tumor antigen‐stimulated DCs with anti‐CD3 and anti‐EGFR antibodies to bridge T and tumor cells,[
 
] mimicking CAR‐T cell therapy. Since EVs contain cell‐specific protein and RNA compositions, T cell‐derived EVs, which contain TCR subunits, adhesion molecules, src‐like tyrosine kinases, and specifically enriched miRNAs,[
 , 
] partially resemble T cell function.[
 
] For instance, CD4+ CD25+ Treg cell‐secreted EVs inhibited the function of CD8+ T cells and enhanced transplantation tolerance in rats.[
 
] Activated CD3+ T cell‐derived EVs cooperated with IL2 to enhance the proliferation of CD3+ T cells and the differentiation of CD8+ T cells.[
 
] The function of EVs secreted by CAR‐T cells was also explored recently. Notably, EVs derived from anti‐Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) or anti‐human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) CAR‐T cells retain CAR expression and potent anti‐tumor activity without causing cytokine release syndrome in mice.[
 
] CAR‐EVs secreted by MSLN‐targeting CAR‐T cells could also be loaded with paclitaxel (PTX) drugs with or without lung‐targeted liposomes, which accumulated within orthotopic lung tumor area after inhalation administration, remodeled tumor microenvironment and prolonged animal survival with minimal toxicity.[
 , 
]

4.5.

## Biomaterials‐Assisted Delivery
In addition, research has also explored several biomaterial‐assisted delivery using injectable materials such as hydrogel that contains tumor‐targeting nanoparticles. Using an injectable hydrogel as a drug reservoir, particularly in the surrounding tumor resection cavity, specific CAR genes can be locally introduced to immune effector cells, such as macrophages, for tumor‐targeted immunotherapy without off‐target effects on hematopoietic stem cells usually associated with system infusion.[
 
] Another study has developed an implantable scaffold material that enables rapid in vivo reprogramming of T cells. With co‐delivered CD19‐retroviral particles and the T cells, the transduction of functional CAR‐T cells can be locally expanded and target tumors with a more controlled and sustainable release profile.[
 
] Another study has demonstrated that with implanted patient‐derived lyophilized lymph nodes, CAR‐T cells can be effectively delivered on‐site to inhibit tumor growth and maintain a phenotype that prevents future tumor recurrence.[
 
] In addition to delivery following tumor resection, one study also demonstrated a simple‐to‐implement injectable nanoparticle (PEG‐PLA) polymer complex design acting as an inflammatory niche. In addition to delivering the engineered CAR‐T cells, the hydrogel can also enable stimulatory cytokine release that improves solid tumor treatment, curing 70% of treated mice.[
 
]

4.6.

## Computational Strategies for Vector Engineering
Recent advances in deep sequencing technologies allow millions of sequences to be assayed and used for training ML models for the prediction of protein properties. Established ML methods can be harnessed to identify important patterns found in viral vector‐related protein sequences so that sequence‐dependent cell‐specificity targeting can be achieved. Currently, ML has been mainly used to build predictive models for vector properties (such as assembly, viability, and cell‐specific delivery) from sequences and structures, and then to leverage such models to design individual sequences with enhanced properties. For example, previous work has developed several supervised ML algorithms for predicting AAV assembly and packaging properties[
 , , 
] with library designs that balanced multiple traits, including diversity and desirable fitness.[
 
] Herein, the supervised models were trained on a paired dataset where an individual protein sequence is an input and the property of interest is the supervisory label output. By “learning” the mapping relationship between these input and output, one can eventually predict labels from data that were not “seen” by the model previously in the training set. Using such a method, several important properties determining vector performance, such as cell‐type specific transduction,[
 
] crossing physical barriers,[
 
] and evading neutralization,[
 
] were optimized.
In addition to the supervised model strategy, unsupervised models, especially representation learning from evolutionary scale modeling, have also been actively explored.[
 , 
] Fundamentally different from the supervised models, unsupervised learning does not always have measured labels but, at most, similarities to evolutionary data sequences.[
 
] By identifying the internal characteristics of unlabelled data through extracting embeddings (statistical summary), one can potentially divide them into multiple sub‐clusters in the latent space based on various methods,[
 
] including but not limited to distance‐based and graph‐based.[
 , 
] For example, a recent study on viral protein folding has identified structurally and non‐structurally distinct analogs that revealed key functions through clustering.[
 
]

5.

## Validation Models for Antigen Specificity
Most CAR‐T therapies are developed to target overexpressed receptors on the surface of cancer cells, such as HER2 and EGFR.[
 
] Recently, delivery platforms targeting a variety of receptors, including Cluster of Differentiation (CD) proteins and transmembrane glycoproteins like ICAM‐1,[
 , 
] have also been actively researched, depending on the type of cancer and the mechanism of action (MoA). The specificity of targeting cells is a crucial performance aspect concerning the delivery efficiency and MoA for both carriers and therapeutics. Analyzing this targeting specificity is essential to ensuring the efficacy of these therapies. Such analysis is conducted through various methods before the production of optimized antigen‐targeting fragments (or antibodies). Table  summarizes various methods used for analyzing recognition and binding specificity, highlighting their principles, advantages, and typical applications.
 Obtaining a cell line that expresses the target antigen is crucial for antigen‐antibody screening. This allows for the effective evaluation of specificity and affinity, facilitating the identification of optimal antibodies that bind to the target antigen, thereby enhancing the development of therapeutic designs.[
 , 
] The most actively used system for anticancer drug development is the mammalian cell expression system. This system is widely employed in the production of therapeutic proteins, vaccines, and diagnostic antigens because it can provide PTMs that are most similar to those of human proteins. Indeed, PTMs are well known to alter protein binding sites or modulate the structural stability of proteins, thereby influencing protein‐ligand interactions and protein‐protein interactions.[
 
]

HEK293 cells and CHO cells are the two most widely used mammalian cell lines in protein expression systems.[
 
] HEK293 cells, being human‐derived, perform a variety of PTMs in a manner similar to human proteins.[
 
] In addition, their main advantages include rapid growth rates and ease of genetic manipulation (e.g., CRISPR/Cas9).[
 
] In contrast, CHO cells, derived from Chinese hamster ovary cells, are optimized for biopharmaceutical production. These cells exhibit high productivity and genetic stability and can perform complex PTMs. In addition to HEK293 and CHO cells, various cancer cell lines are also widely used for expressing specific antigens and evaluating efficacy.[
 , , , 
]

However, during cell line cultivation, there can be discrepancies in the PTMs presented by the targeted cells within actual tissues.[
 , 
] For instance, prolonged exposure to culture conditions can result in the accumulation of genetic mutations in cell lines, leading to epigenetic modifications in PTMs.[
 
] Furthermore, it is essential to maintain precise environmental factors such as pH and oxygen levels to closely mimic physiological states, as these conditions have a direct influence on PTM processes in cells.[
 
] Therefore, for accurate and effective evaluation of targets, it is necessary to utilize validation platforms based on patient‐derived cells cultured in highly biomimetic microenvironments, in addition to cell lines suitable for high‐throughput screening.

6.

## Engineered Organoid System
Recent research has been actively exploring patient‐derived organoids and tissue explants, which serve as excellent examples of high‐fidelity in vitro model systems for validation (Figure  ). Research has focused extensively on these models because of their ability to mimic the complex TME and cellular interactions.[
 , , 
] For example, pancreatic cancer organoids have been integrated into the inVADE (integrated vasculature for assessing dynamic events) platform, a 96‐well perfusable plate featuring an integrated polymeric blood vessel that connects a set of three wells.[
 
] Using this system, the researchers have demonstrated the importance of studying the dynamic synergistic interactions between patient cells and stromal fibroblasts within a 3D‐perfused vascular network to understand and replicate the TME accurately. This engineered organoid model provides a more accurate representation of the TME than cell lines.
 Recent studies demonstrated the potential of organoids to provide more accurate analyses of PTMs in cancer cells compared to traditional cell lines. For example, single‐cell signal analysis has been employed to simultaneously measure 28 PTMs in intestinal organoid cells, thereby elucidating signal networks specific to cell types and states.[
 
] In colorectal cancer organoids, mutations such as shApc, KrasG12D
, and Trp53R172H
 have been shown to autonomously mimic signaling states induced by stromal fibroblasts and macrophages.[
 
] This was demonstrated through co‐culture conditions of colorectal cancer organoids with stromal fibroblasts and macrophages. These findings reveal that the PTMs in the same organoid can vary significantly depending on the culture conditions, ultimately affecting the structure of the expressed proteins (Table
 ).
 Organoid models frequently rely on basement membrane extract (BME), a material rich in basement membrane components, to support the stable growth of epithelial tissues.[
 , 
] However, the use of BME presents two significant challenges in the context of antigen‐antibody validation within organoid models.
First, the dominant interaction between stromal cells — such as immune cells and fibroblasts—and the basement membrane can create an environment that does not accurately reflect their native behavior, potentially compromising the reliability of the antibody validation process.[
 
] In this setting, stromal cells could lose their original properties, leading to skewed results that do not accurately represent the complex interactions present in real‐life human tissues.
Second, most commercially available BME products are derived from murine tumors. As a result, they contain proteins that differ from those found in humans, which can lead to misleading immune responses during antibody testing. For example, in organoid models using Geltrex, it has been observed that CD4+ T cells exhibit activity not in response to tumor antigens, but rather to foreign antigens present in the Geltrex. This foreign antigen interference complicates the validation of antibodies designed to interact with tumor‐specific proteins, leading to potential inaccuracies in assessing their therapeutic potential.[
 
]

To address these issues, it is essential to explore alternative approaches to culture organoids. By engineering the organoid culture conditions, researchers can create more physiologically relevant environments that better mimic the human tissue microenvironment. This may involve the use of synthetic or human‐derived matrices that more closely resemble the human ECM,[
 
] or the incorporation of microfluidic systems that allow for the dynamic interaction of different cell types within the organoid.[
 , 
] Such innovations can help mitigate the limitations posed by traditional BME‐based organoid models, thereby enhancing the accuracy and reliability of antibody validation in these systems.
6.1.

## Synthetic Material in Organoid Model
In organoid models, synthetic materials offer a promising alternative to traditional BME in enhancing reproducibility and providing a more controlled environment for tissue growth. Unlike BME, which has a batch‐to‐batch effect and is often derived from non‐human sources,[
 
] synthetic materials can be precisely engineered to consistently replicate desired properties.[
 
] Moreover, synthetic materials can also be tailored to mimic the biophysical barriers encountered in native tissues.[
 
] By adjusting factors such as functional group composition,[
 , , 
] porosity,[
 
] stiffness,[
 
] and stress relaxation,[
 
] researchers can create environments that closely mimic the mechanical and chemical conditions within the human body. These tunable properties allow synthetic materials to better support the complex interactions between cells in an organoid model, making them highly suitable alternatives to BME. Additionally, the ability to fine‐tune these parameters enables the modeling of organ‐specific TME, which is crucial for the accurate study of disease processes and the validation of therapeutic antibodies in a more physiologically relevant context.

6.2.

## Human‐Derived Materials in Organoid Model
In addition to the synthetic materials, human‐derived materials offer another valuable alternative to the BME, particularly in reducing the impact of inter‐species foreign antigens and better replicating the in vivo proteomic environment.[
 , , 
] Unlike BME, which can introduce non‐human proteins that trigger unintended immune responses,[
 
] patient‐derived materials reduce these risks by closely mimicking the composition and structure of the human ECM. This alignment with human biology reduces the likelihood of foreign antigen interference, thereby enhancing the accuracy of studies involving immune responses and antibody validation. Additionally, human‐derived materials can replicate more effectively the complex proteomic components and barriers found in vivo. These materials inherently include human‐specific proteins and extracellular matrix components that closely mimic the native tissue environment, providing a more physiologically relevant scaffold for organoid culture. By incorporating these in vivo‐like elements, human‐derived materials can support more accurate modeling of cancer TME, ultimately leading to more reliable experimental outcomes and better insights into human disease processes and therapeutic interventions.

7.

## Concluding Remarks
With clinical successes in hematological cancers, the future of CAR‐T therapy for solid tumors appears highly promising. While efficacy is limited in solid tumors, some tumor types, such as neuroblastoma, diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma (DIPG), gastrointestinal cancers, and sarcoma, have shown responsiveness to CAR‐T therapy in recent clinical trials. Current clinical trials investigating CAR‐T therapy in solid tumors are yielding encouraging yet varied results across different cancer types. In high‐risk neuroblastoma, a phase 1–2 trial with GD2‐specific CAR T cells in pediatric patients reported a 63% response rate, suggesting significant potential.[
 
] Similarly, advanced sarcoma in most pediatric cases demonstrated positive outcomes with HER2‐targeting CAR T cells following lymphodepletion.[
 
] These findings (Table  ) underscore the growing application of CAR‐T therapies in solid tumors despite the existing challenges.
 However, significant challenges remain in the broad pursuit of CAR‐T for specific targeting and delivery to solid tumors. First, future improvements are needed to optimize delivery vehicles for more efficient, safe, and targeted gene transfer in T cells. Traditional CAR‐T therapies, which rely on ex vivo processing and viral‐based transduction, face limitations such as manufacturing and cell yield. Newly developed nanotechnology engineering approaches, including VLPs and LNPs, offer scalable and targeted solutions for reprogramming T cells in vivo. Additionally, advancements in ML frameworks, particularly generative models for protein engineering, are driving new engines for predicting protein properties to enhance delivery efficiency. These models, trained on evolutionary datasets, can capture the probability density of a vast protein space.[
 
] With learned representations, global and evolutionary information, combined with experimentally labeled datasets, can be used to fine‐tune protein fitness prediction in delivery vehicle design.[
 
] When integrated with reservoir materials such as hydrogels, these optimized and targeted strategies will undoubtedly enable more specific and controlled delivery of engineered cells or vectors to target solid tumors.
Second, identifying novel biomarkers is crucial for overcoming T cell‐intrinsic deficiencies. Recent studies using various CRISPR‐Cas9 libraries for screens in human T cells have shown considerable potential for addressing T cell fitness issues. There is also a need to develop more diverse functional libraries and targeted sites, including knock‐in libraries,[
 
] in order to expand the scope of molecular target search. High‐fidelity platforms that mimic inhibitory TMEs are also essential for screening and identifying extrinsic factors that compromise T cell functions and therapeutic outcomes. These analyses will be invaluable tools for optimizing T cell potency and efficacy in targeting. Third, translating proof‐of‐concept studies from in vitro or animal models into human clinical trials poses substantial challenges across species. Recent advances in personalized medicine, supported by an expanding body of multimodal patient datasets and prediction algorithms for neoantigen binding and reactivities,[
 , 
] offer the potential to guide more tailored designs.[
 
] Together, these incorporated endeavors will likely require highly interdisciplinary contributions and will undoubtedly promise to revolutionize cancer treatments by improving the precision, accessibility, and efficacy of future immunotherapies.

## Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Acknowledgements
The work was supported by the Innovation and Technology Commission (ITCPD/17‐9, D.Z.), the National Research Foundation of Korea (RS‐2024‐00338828, H.L., and P.K.), and the ASPIRE League Seed Fund (D.Z., P.K., and W.J.K.). W.J.K. was supported by the Bai Xian Asia Institute Asian Future Leaders Scholarship Program (BXAI AFLSP). Schematic illustrations were created with BioRender.com.

## Biographies

Danqing Zhu is currently assistant professor at the Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering (CBE) at the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST). Dr. Zhu completed her Ph.D. at Stanford University in Bioengineering with a focus on materials chemistry, protein engineering, and stem cell approaches to develop models of tissue development that capture the dynamic complexity of cell‐ECM interactions. She then continued her training as CIRM Postdoctoral Fellow and Siebel Scholar at UC Berkeley and UCSF. Her group currently focuses on using protein engineering and computational approaches to engineer safe and targeted therapeutic gene delivery vectors for disease treatment.
 

Xiaoping Bao is the William K. Luckow Associate Professor of Chemical Engineering at Purdue. Dr. Bao earned his B.S. degree in Chemical Engineering from Tsinghua University in 2011 and his Ph.D. in Chemical and Biological Engineering from University of Wisconsin‐Madison in 2016. Prior to Purdue, Dr. Bao was an American Heart Association postdoc fellow at the University of California‐Berkeley. His research program at Purdue focuses on stem cells and immunoengineering, and develops innovative cell and gene therapies to treat currently incurable diseases, including brain cancers and disorders. Dr. Bao has published over 60 peer‐reviewed papers and 10 pending/issued patents.
 

Pilnam Kim is an Associate Professor in the Department of Bio and Brain Engineering at KAIST (Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology). She earned her Ph.D. in Mechanical Engineering from Seoul National University and completed postdoctoral training at Princeton University. Dr. Kim's research focuses on biomaterials, mechanobiology, and cancer microenvironment modelling. She has developed pioneering in vitro platforms that mimic the tumor microenvironment, significantly advancing our understanding of cancer progression, metastasis, and drug resistance. Her work has been published in top‐tier journals, including Nature Biomedical Engineering, Nature Materials, Advanced Materials, and ACS Nano, underscoring her impactful contributions to tissue engineering and cancer biology.
 

Zhu D., Kim W. J., Lee H., Bao X., Kim P., Engineering CAR‐T Therapeutics for Enhanced Solid Tumor Targeting. Adv. Mater.
2025, 37, 2414882. 10.1002/adma.202414882

## Contributor Information
Danqing Zhu, Email: dqzhu@ust.hk.
Xiaoping Bao, Email: bao61@purdue.edu.
Pilnam Kim, Email: pkim@kaist.ac.kr.

## References