440plosonePLOS ONEPLoS OnePLOSPMC1122607811226078112260783896818610.1371/journal.pone.0304194Tumor immune microenvironment permissive to metastatic progression of ING4-deficient breast cancer
TsutsumiEmilyData curation, Formal analysis, Methodology, Visualization, Writing – review & editing MacyAnne MData curation, Formal analysis, Methodology, Visualization, Writing – review & editing LoBelloJanineData curation, Methodology HastingsKaren TFormal analysis, Resources, Supervision, Writing – review & editing KimSuwonConceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Funding acquisition, Investigation, Methodology, Resources, Software, Supervision, Validation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing GuptaYashEditor 1Department of Basic Medical Sciences, University of Arizona College of Medicine-Phoenix, Phoenix, Arizona, United States of America2Cancer and Cell Biology Division, Translational Genomic Research Institute, Phoenix, Arizona, United States of America3Department of Dermatology, University of Arizona College of Medicine-Phoenix, Phoenix, Arizona, United States of America4Phoenix Veterans Affairs Health Care System, Phoenix, Arizona, United States of America5Cancer Genomics Division, Translational Genomics Research Institute, Phoenix, Arizona, United States of America6Penn State Health Milton S Hershey Medical Center, UNITED STATESCompeting Interests: The authors have declared that no competing interests exist.
¤Current address: Exact Sciences, Phoenix, Arizona, United States of America
✉* E-mail: suwon@arizona.edu
572024197e0304194e0304194572024This is an open access article, free of all copyright, and may be freely reproduced, distributed, transmitted, modified, built upon, or otherwise used by anyone for any lawful purpose. The work is made available under the Creative Commons CC0 public domain dedication.

## Abstract
Deficiencies in the ING4 tumor suppressor are associated with advanced stage tumors and poor patient survival in cancer. ING4 was shown to inhibit NF-kB in several cancers. As NF-kB is a key mediator of immune response, the ING4/NF-kB axis is likely to manifest in tumor-immune modulation but has not been investigated. To characterize the tumor immune microenvironment associated with ING4-deficient tumors, three approaches were employed in this study: First, tissue microarrays composed of 246 primary breast tumors including 97 ING4-deficient tumors were evaluated for the presence of selective immune markers, CD68, CD4, CD8, and PD-1, using immunohistochemical staining. Second, an immune-competent mouse model of ING4-deficient breast cancer was devised utilizing CRISPR-mediated deletion of Ing4 in a Tp53 deletion-derived mammary tumor cell line; mammary tumors were evaluated for immune markers using flow cytometry. Lastly, the METABRIC gene expression dataset was evaluated for patient survival related to the immune markers associated with Ing4-deleted tumors. The results showed that CD68, CD4, CD8, or PD-1, was not significantly associated with ING4-deficient breast tumors, indicating no enrichment of macrophages, T cells, or exhausted T cell types. In mice, Ing4-deleted mammary tumors had a growth rate comparable to Ing4-intact tumors but showed increased tumor penetrance and metastasis. Immune marker analyses of Ing4-deleted tumors revealed a significant increase in tumor-associated macrophages (Gr-1loCD11b+F4/80+) and a decrease in granzyme B-positive (GzmB+) CD4+ T cells, indicating a suppressive and/or less tumoricidal immune microenvironment. The METABRIC data analyses showed that low expression of GZMB was significantly associated with poor patient survival, as was ING4-low expression, in the basal subtype of breast cancer. Patients with GZMB-low/ING4-low tumors had the worst survival outcomes (HR = 2.80, 95% CI 1.36–5.75, p = 0.0004), supportive of the idea that the GZMB-low immune environment contributes to ING4-deficient tumor progression. Collectively, the study results demonstrate that ING4-deficient tumors harbor a microenvironment that contributes to immune evasion and metastasis.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2024 May 6; Accepted 2024 Jun 20; Collection date 2024.

## Introduction
The tumor immune microenvironment (TIME) plays a critical role in all stages of tumorigenesis including initiation, progression, and metastasis [ – ]. Studies have shown that tumors developing in the absence of host immune components are more immunogenically diverse than tumors in immune-intact hosts, providing evidence that tumor clones are immunologically eliminated during the early stages of tumorigenesis and that tumors arise from having evaded immune recognition [ , ]. Moreover, the TIME of established tumors exhibit suppressive and/or exhausted immune phenotypes, indicating that tumor-immune modulation toward inactive immunity enables tumor progression [ , ]. Reactivation of immune cells via immune-checkpoint blockade has been shown effective as therapy in several cancers [ , ], further validating that immune cells exert pivotal effects of tumor elimination vs promotion. Accordingly, characterization of the immune cell types and their functional states in the TIME has been the focus of many studies [ , ].
In breast cancer, the histopathologic presence of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) has been associated with good prognosis [ – ]. Studies have further characterized that TILs consisting of an increased CD8+/CD4+ T cell ratio and of natural killer (NK) cells correlated with patient survival and therapy response in breast cancer [ – ], suggesting that cytotoxic immunity favors tumor destruction. More recently however, tumor transcriptomics and single cell analyses have revealed complex landscapes of immune cells and various signatures depending on tumor subtypes, stages, and/or therapy [ – ]. Thus, deciphering specific immune compositions of the TIME associated with tumor parameters remains a challenge [ , ]. This is undoubtedly due to the multiple factors that govern tumor-immune interactions, including the heterogeneity of tumor mutations. Indeed, driver mutations in several oncogenes and tumor suppressors have been directly implicated in tumor-immune modulation [ – ]. Further characterization of the TIMEs associated with specific tumor genotypes may provide insight into the mechanisms of tumor-immune modulation and enable therapy strategies targeting immune components.
ING4 is a member of the Inhibitor of Growth (ING) family and has been shown to play a role in diverse cellular processes including cell proliferation, apoptosis, DNA damage response, angiogenesis, hypoxia, cell differentiation, and stem cell maintenance [ , ]. Accordingly, ING4 deficiencies have been implicated in many cancer types and several non-neoplastic diseases [ , ]. In breast cancer, ING4 is deleted and/or downregulated in up to 34% of tumors correlating with advanced stage, lymph node positivity, and poor patient outcomes [ – ]. Expression of a dominant negative ING4 mutant increased mammary tumor metastasis in mice, corroborating the tumor suppressive function of ING4 in breast cancer [ ]. ING4 has been shown to inhibit NF-kB in various cancer types including breast cancer, melanoma, glioma, squamous cell carcinoma, and hepatocellular carcinoma [ ]. Dysregulated NF-kB due to ING4 deficiencies resulted in aggressive tumor behaviors such as increased cell survival, migration, and angiogenesis [ , – ]. Since NF-kB is a mediator of immune response [ ], the ING4/NF-kB axis is likely to elicit tumor-immune modulation resulting in a TIME that may contribute to disease progression, but the immune composition in ING4-deficient tumors has not been characterized to date.
In this study, we investigated the TIME in ING4-deficient breast cancer by characterizing patient samples and mouse mammary tumors. The immune markers associated with Ing4-deleted mouse mammary tumors were evaluated for patient survival using the METABRIC breast cancer gene expression dataset [ , ]. The study results provide the first evidence that ING4-deficient tumors harbor an immune-evasive tumor microenvironment that contributes to metastatic progression and poor patient survival in breast cancer.

## Materials and methods

## Tumor Tissue Microarray (TMA)
TMAs containing double or triple punches of 249 independent breast tumor samples were described previously [ ]. In brief, TMAs were constructed by extracting 0.6 mm diameter cores from the ‘‘donor” tumor tissue blocks and transferring tissue cores into a ‘‘recipient” paraffin block. TMAs contained 598 tissue punches from 249 independent tumor samples. TMA sections of a 5mm thickness were used for immunohistochemical staining.

## Immunohistochemistry (IHC)
IHC staining of TMA sections was performed using BOND-MAX autostainer (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany) as described previously [ , ]. Antibodies used for IHC were against ING4 (1:100, BTIM-4, Millipore Sigma), pp65RelA(S276) (1:40, Cell Signaling Technology (CST), Danvers, MA), CD4 (1:500, Abcam, Cambridge, MA), and PD-1 (1:500, Abcam). Pre-dilute antibodies for CD68 and CD8 were purchased from Leica Microsystems and used according to the manufacturer’s instructions. IHC scores for ING4 and pp65/RelA staining obtained in the previous study [ ] were used to correlate with the presence of the immune markers in this study. IHC staining for CD68, CD4, CD8, and PD-1 was scored manually by two trained personnel including a board-certified pathologist (J.L) in a quartile scale of 0 to +3. Each tumor was assigned an IHC score by averaging the scores of double or triple punch samples on TMA sections. IHC scores ≥1.5 were considered positive for the marker. Due to the limited tissue availability left on TMAs, the percentage of evaluable tumor IHC staining was 76–77% (189–193 out of 249 tumor samples) for CD68, CD4, and CD8, and 46% (115 out of 249 tumor samples) for PD-1.

## Mice
Female FVB/n mice were purchased from Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME) and housed in static micro-isolation cages in a pathogen-free facility at the University of Arizona Animal Care (UAC) facility fully accredited by the Association for the Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care (AAALAC). Mice were provided with water and irradiated feed. All handling of mice, including mouse transfer to clean cages, was done in a Class II biosafety cabinet. Cages were checked daily, 7 days a week, by the UAC facility staff and veterinary care was provided by the UAC veterinarians as needed. All experiments including procedures, monitoring, and endpoint criteria were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) at the University of Arizona (protocol #16–107). Subcutaneous injection of cells into the mammary fat pads was carried out using 21 ½ gauge needle syringes under inhalant anesthesia, 2–4% isoflurane in oxygen. Mice were placed on a heating pad during the quick recovery from anesthesia. Injectable carprofen (2-5mg/kg, Putney Inc. Portland, ME) was available to alleviate pain as needed. Mice were monitored for tumors every 2–3 days; tumors were measured at the longest axis with a caliper. Mice with tumors ≤2–2.5 cm in diameter or with one or more moribund conditions were euthanized. The range of endpoint tumor size was approved with the consideration that caliper measurements of the longest axis over the skin fur of live animals approximated tumor diameters. Tumor growth was rapid in this study model and reached the maximum tumor size in ~3 weeks, both of which, the tumor size and duration, were necessary to allow distant metastasis to occur. Tumor mice at the endpoint criteria showed no signs of distress or discomfort, exhibiting normal behaviors of grooming, eating, drinking, and mobility. Moribund conditions for euthanasia included the following: greater than 10% weight loss, inactivity (failure to move freely, to eat or to drink), diarrhea, labored respiration, excessive sensitivity to touch or handling, rash and/or skin desquamation that interferes with normal activity and does not respond to conservative treatment. Euthanasia was carried out by carbon dioxide inhalation followed by cervical dislocation as a secondary method to ensure death, in compliance with the recommendation of the American Veterinary Medical Association.

## Generation of the p53MT mouse mammary tumor cell line
FVB.p53LoxP/LoxP mice, the p53LoxP/LoxP transgenic mouse line [ , ] bred into the FVB strain background [ ] were kindly provided by Dr. Inge (Norton Thoracic Institute, St. Joseph’s Hospital and Medical Center, Phoenix, AZ). Mammary glands isolated from two FVB.p53LoxP/LoxP homozygous female mice were processed to generate primary mammary epithelial cells (MECs) as described previously [ ]. MECs were incubated overnight in the F12:DMEM MEC media containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 1x Penn-Strep antibiotics, 10 ng/ml murine EGF (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA), 10 ng/ml bovine pancreas insulin (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO), and 10 mg/ml hydrocortisone (Sigma-Aldrich). Adherent cells were infected with 5 x 106 plaque forming units of adeno-Cre virus (purchased from University of Iowa adenoviral core) in the F12:DMEM media containing 2% FBS for 6 hours as described previously [ ]. MECs were placed in the fresh MEC media and incubated for 2 days before trypsinized and washed with Dulbecco’s phosphate-buffered saline (DPBS, Thermo Fisher Scientific); 5 x 105 cells in 50–100 mls DPBS (Ca2+/Mg2+ free, Thermo Fisher Scientific) were implanted into the #4 mammary fat pads of 21 days-old FVB/n female recipient mice (Jackson Laboratory) via subcutaneous injection using 21½ gauge needle syringes under inhalant anesthesia, 2–4% isoflurane in oxygen. A single tumor developed out of 4 implants and was harvested at 6 weeks post-implant when the tumor diameter reached ~2 cm by caliper measurement. Tumor was mechanically minced, digested with 10 mg/ml collagenase IV (Worthington Biochemical, Lakewood, NJ) in the RPMI media containing 2% FBS and 1x Penn Strep (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 40 minutes at 37°C shaking, and washed several times until the wash was clear. Digested tumor was plated in multiple 10 cm dishes in the MEC media, incubated for 7 days, and cryo-preserved in the MEC media containing 20% FBS and 10% DMSO (Sigma-Aldrich). These cells were referred as p53MT p.1 (p53 mammary tumor passage 1). The p53MT cell line was established by passaging p53MT p.1 for additional 10 days (p53MT p.2 and p.3). p53MT p.3 cells were subsequently maintained in the F12:DMEM media supplemented with 10% FBS.

## CRISPR/CAS9-mediated deletion of the mouse Ing4 gene
Two guide RNA (gRNA) sequences targeting the exon 1 and exon 3 of the mouse Ing4 gene were selected according to the orthologous sequence in the human ING4 gene [ ]. The gRNA sequences were: R1, 5’-GATGGCTGCTGGGATGTATT; and M1, 5’-CTGAATATATGAGTAGCGCC. Custom-made oligonucleotides (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were cloned into the lentiCRISPRv2 plasmid (Addgene, Watertown, MA), referred as “v2” here, following the Zhang lab protocol [ , ]. Lentiviral particles containing v2, v2R1, or v2M1, were produced in HEK293(F)T cells (American Type Culture Collection, Manassas, VA) using the pVSVg and psPAX2 viral packaging plasmids (Addgene) and Effectene transfection agent (Qiagen, Germantown, MD) as described previously [ ]. p53MT cells were infected with viral particles in the presence of 2 mg/ml polybrene (Sigma-Aldrich) and were selected in the F12:DMEM media containing 10% FBS and 2 mg/ml puromycin (Sigma-Aldrich) for 10–14 days.

## p53MT tumor implants in mice
Recipient mice were 21–23 days old female FVB/n mice purchased from Jackson Laboratory. Fifty thousand p53MT v2, v2R1, or v2M1 cells in 50–100 μl sterile PBS (Ca2+Mg2+ free) were injected subcutaneously into the #4 mammary fat pads of recipient mice using 21 ½ gauge needle syringes under inhalant anesthesia, 2–4% isoflurane in oxygen. A total of 30 mice were implanted with p53MT cells, 10 mice per group (v2, v2R1, v2M1). Tumor size was measured at the longest axis using a caliper every 2–3 days in 21 mice that grew tumors. Four tumor mice developed skin lesions due to overgrooming and were euthanized before the endpoint was reached as part of the effort to alleviate suffering. Tumor and lung were harvested from mice at the endpoints, minced to ~1 mm3 tissue bits, resuspended in a cryopreservation media containing 10% DMSO and 20% FBS in F12:DMEM, and stored in a -80°C freezer until ready for subsequent analyses.

## Quantification of lung metastases in mice
Lung tissue bits cryopreserved at the time of tumor harvest were thawed in a 37°C water bath, washed with the RPMI media containing 2.5% FBS and 1x Penn Strep (wash media), and minced with No. 2 scalpel for 2 minutes. Lung tissue bits were resuspended in the wash media containing 1 mg/ml collagenase I (Worthington) and 1 mg/ml collagenase IV (Worthington) and incubated at 37°C shaking for 40–50 minutes. Cells were washed 3 times and plated in the F12:DMEM media supplemented with 10%FBS and 1x Penn Strep for 3 days. Adherent cells were trypsinized and plated in two 10 cm dishes in the media containing 2 mg/ml puromycin for 7 days. Cells were counted (1–10 x 106 cells yield per lung tissue) and 103 cells were plated in 60 mm dishes in triplicates in the media containing 2 mg/ml puromycin for 14 days. Cell foci were fixed with ice cold methanol (Fisher Scientific, Pittsburg, PA) for 10 minutes and stained with 0.5% crystal violet (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in 25% methanol at room temperature for 10 minutes. Plates were washed with dH2O until the rinse was clear, dried overnight, and foci were counted.

## Western blot
Cell lysate fractionation and Western blot were performed as described previously [ ]. Antibodies used in Western blots were against: ING4 (BTIM-4 hybridoma supernatant, 1:4 [ ]), pp65/RelA (Ser536) (93H1, 1:1,000; CST), histone H3 (1:5000, CST), and a-tubulin (DM1A, 1:5000, Sigma-Aldrich). HRP-conjugated anti-mouse and anti-rabbit secondary antibodies were used (1:5000, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and detected using Immobilon ECL Ultra Western HRP Substrate reagents (Millipore Sigma, St. Louis, MO). Western blot images were acquired and analyzed using the LI-COR Odyssey Fc Imaging System and the LI-COR software Image Studio Lite (LI-COR Biosciences, Lincoln, NE).

## Flow cytometry (FACS)
Fluorescence-conjugated antibodies used in FACS were purchased from BioLegend (San Diego, CA). Antibodies in the myeloid and NK cell panel were: PerCP-Cy5.5/CD45 (30-F11 clone, 1:1000), FITC/CD11b (M1/70 clone, 1:1000), PE/CD274 (10F.9G2, 1:40), BV421/Granzyme b (QA18A28 clone, 1:20), PE-Cy7/NKp46 (29A1.4 clone, 1:20), APC/Gr-1 (RB6-8C5 clone, 1:800), and BV510/F4/80 (BM8 clone, 1:40). Antibodies in the T cell panel were: PerCP-Cy5.5/CD45 (30-F11 clone, 1:1000), PE-Cy7/CD3ε (145-2C11 clone, 1:40), APC/FoxP3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, FJK-16s clone, 1:20), BV421/Granzyme B (QA18A28 clone, 1:20), PE/PD-1 (29F.1A12 clone, 1:20), FITC/CD8α (53–6.7 clone, 1:50), and BV510/CD4 (GK1.5 clone, 1:40). In addition, Fixable Viability Stain (BD Biosciences, Bedford, MA, 1:2000) was used for dead cell exclusion and FcγR III/II receptors were blocked with FcX TruStain (BioLegend) using the manufacturer’s instructions. To obtain a single cell suspension for flow cytometry analysis, minced tumors were digested with 2 mg/ml collagenase IV (Worthington) and 20 IU/ml Roche DNase I (Millipore Sigma) by incubating for 20–30 minutes in a 37°C shaking water bath. To enable intracellular staining, True-Nuclear Transcription Buffer Set (BioLegend) was used to prepare cells according to the manufacturer’s specifications. UltraComp eBeads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were used for compensation. Unstained and Fluorescence-Minus-One controls were used as needed. FACS samples were run on Canto II (BD Biosciences) and analyzed using FlowJo (BD Biosciences, v10.7.1) software. Samples were gated on FSC vs. SSC to remove debris, single cells were selected by gating on FSC-A vs. FSC-H, and dead cells were excluded using live/dead staining.

## Reverse transcription quantitative PCR (RTqPCR)
RTqPCR was performed using Taqman Gene Expression Assays (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with FAM-labeled probes for mIL6 (Mm00446190_m1) and VIC-labeled mGAPDH (Mm99999915_g1). Fluorescence probe amplification was detected by QuantStudioTM 6 Flex Real-Time PCR System (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data were analyzed by DDCt calculation normalized to mGAPDH.

## Transwell migration assay
Cell migration assays were performed using transwell inserts as described previously [ ]. In brief, 50,000 cells were placed in the inserts containing a semipermeable membrane with 8 μm-sized pores (Fisher Scientific). Recombinant TNFa (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN) or IL-1b (R&D Systems) was dissolved in PBS to a 10 mg/ml 1000x stock concentration. Migrated cells on the bottom side of the membrane were fixed using 100% cold methanol (Fisher Scientific), stained with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI, Vector Labs, Burlingame, CA), and visualized under a fluorescence microscope. Cell numbers were determined by averaging cell counts from a minimum of 6 field images per membrane.

## METABRIC gene expression dataset and statistical analysis
The METABRIC [ , ] dataset was downloaded from cBioPortal for Cancer Genomics (www.cbioportal.org). The mean expression values of each gene were used as the cut-offs for comparing patient survival. Kaplan-Meier survival analyses were performed using the GraphPad Prism 8 software and the log-rank test (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA); p < 0.05 was considered significant. For other analyses, Fisher’s Exact Probability test, Student t-test, or One-way ANOVA was used to determine statistical significance; p < 0.05 was considered significant or specific p values were shown in the figures when appropriate.

## Results

## Immune cell markers in ING4-deficient breast tumors
Studies have shown that ING4 inhibits NF-kB in various cancer types [ , ]. In breast cancer, NF-kB activation was prevalent among ING4-deficient tumors, associated with advanced stage, lymph node positivity, and poor patient survival [ ]. Since NF-kB is a key transcription factor that mediates inflammatory response including cytokine production [ ], we hypothesized that ING4-deficient tumors may harbor an immune microenvironment resulting from aberrant NF-kB activity, which in turn contributes to aggressive tumor progression. To determine whether specific immune cell types were enriched in the ING4-deficient tumor microenvironment (TME), we first employed immunohistochemical (IHC) staining of breast tumor tissue microarrays (TMAs) for selective immune markers: CD68 (macrophages), CD4 (helper T cells), CD8 (cytotoxic T cells) and PD-1 (an immune checkpoint molecule on lymphocytes). These markers were chosen because of the well-documented roles for macrophages and exhausted T cells in breast cancer pathogenesis [ , ].
The TMAs used in this study have been characterized previously, consisting of 246 independent primary breast tumors [ ]. We stained the TMA subset (n = 198) because of the limited tissue availability, with the antibodies against CD68, CD4, CD8, and PD-1, and correlated each immune marker with ING4 and/or pp65/RelA(Ser276) (an activated marker for the p65 subunit in the p65/p50 NF-kB heterodimer) staining. Examples of the positive IHC staining for each antibody are shown in (a, b, and c are the sections from different tumors; c-f are the serial sections from the same tumor). IHC staining was scored in a scale of 0–3 and each tumor was assigned a number by averaging IHC scores between double or triple punches on TMAs as described previously [ ]. An average score ≥1.5 was considered positive for the marker; the percentages of tumors positive for each marker are shown in . The results showed that 37% of tumors (92/246) were ING4-deficient and 34% (84/245) were positive for pp65/RelA. Notably, 89% of tumors (171/193) were positive for CD68, indicating the ubiquitous presence of macrophages in breast tumors. In contrast, T cells were present in tumor subsets, 26% for CD4 (50/193) and 40% for CD8 (75/189). Tumors containing PD-1+ leukocytes consisted of 18% (24/132).
 We also determined the percentage of tumors that were double- or triple-positive for the immune markers. The results showed that tumors positive for all three CD68, CD4, and CD8 markers comprised of 20.4% (38/186), while tumors negative for all three markers were 8.6% (16/186, ). Tumors positive for CD68+ macrophages without T cell presence consisted of 47.8% (89/186). In contrast, tumors positive for CD4+ or CD8+ T cells without CD68+ macrophages were rare, comprising less than 1% ( ). The Venn diagram analysis showed that CD68+ macrophages and CD8+ T cells were present in the same tumors irrespective of CD4+ T cells, whereas CD4+ T cells were present when both CD68+ and CD8+ cells were present ( ). Whether PD-1+ leukocytes were prevalent in tumors positive for CD4+ or CD8+ T cells could not be determined because the number of PD-1+ tumors was small.
We examined if any of the four immune markers was associated with ING4 or pp65/RelA. As shown previously [ ], a significantly high proportion of ING4-low tumors were positive for pp65/RelA (44% vs 28%, p = 0.018, left graph), indicating that ING4-deficient tumors have a propensity for NF-kB activation [ ]. In comparison, CD68, CD4, CD8, or PD-1 was not associated with ING4 or pp65/RelA ( ). These results indicated that ING4 deficiency or NF-kB activation alone may not result in a TME enriched for macrophages or specific T cell types.
We next evaluated whether the combination of ING4 deficiency and NF-kB activation together fostered recruitment of macrophages or T cells. The results showed a significant association between ING4-low/pp65-high tumors and CD8+ T cells (58.6% vs 31.6%, p = 0.046, ). The PD-1 positivity was lower in this ING4-low/pp65-high tumor cohort but statistical significance could not be determined due to the small cohort size ( ). In addition, double staining for CD8 and PD-1 could not be performed due to the limited availability of tissue sections. Thus, it is presently not known whether CD8+ T cells in ING4-low/pp65-high tumors exhibit PD-1+ immune exhausted phenotype.
We next examined the clinical significance of ING4-low/pp65-high status by evaluating an association with the lymph node positivity. The results showed that a high percentage of ING4-low/pp65-high tumor patients were lymph node-positive, compared to the other ING4/pp65 expression combination tumor groups (50% vs 26–38%, ). This association between the ING4-low/NF-kB-high status and lymph node positivity was more pronounced in estrogen receptor-negative (ER-) breast cancer (75% vs 25–29%, , right panel). In summary, the breast tumor IHC results showed that ING4-low/pp65-high tumors were associated with CD8+ T cells and lymph node metastasis in ER- breast cancer. The presence of CD8+ T cells correlating with metastasis is counterintuitive, as CD8+ T cells are generally associated with a tumoricidal activity and good prognosis [ , ]. It may indicate that the CD8+ T cells in ING4-low/NF-kB-high tumors are dysfunctional and/or tumor promoting but requires characterization.

## Aberrant NF-kB activity in Ing4-deleted mouse mammary tumor cells
To better characterize the TIME associated with metastatic ING4-deficient breast cancer, we sought to utilize an immune-competent mouse model of ER- breast cancer. Mouse models of triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) exist, namely 4T1 and 66.1, that are widely used. Both cell lines were derived from a single mammary tumor that arose spontaneously in a BALB/cfC3H strain mouse that carried mouse mammary tumor virus, MMTV [ ]. Tumors resulting from these cell implants were fast-growing, spontaneously metastasized to distant sites, and were associated with immune-suppressive phenotypes [ – ]. Moreover, the recent multi-omics study of 4T1 tumors showed numerous driver gene mutations as well as complex epigenetic changes [ ]. Because of their complex genetic background and spontaneous metastasis, we reasoned that deciphering a single gene effect on the immune TME associated with metastasis may be difficult in these models without a large mouse cohort size and systematic multivariate analyses. Thus, we decided to devise a TNBC mouse model with a simpler genetic background utilizing the p53loxP/loxP conditional knock-out transgenic mouse line [ , ]. The choice of p53 deletion for modeling TNBC was because TP53 tumor suppressor mutations are the single most prevalent driver mutation in the TNBC subtype of breast cancer [ ].
To establish a Tp53-deleted mammary tumor model, we isolated primary mammary epithelial cells (MECs) from two FVB.p53loxP/loxP homozygous female mice and transduced the Cre recombinase using adeno-Cre virus in culture (see ). One million MECs were implanted into the mammary fat pads in four recipient FVB mice, from which a single mammary tumor developed in 6 weeks. The tumor was dissociated and cultured for 17 days, establishing a cell line, herein referred to as p53MT (p53-deleted mammary tumor). Subsequent orthotopic implants of 105 p53MT cells grew to tumors of >2cm diameter in 3 weeks but no lung metastatic nodules were detected under a dissecting microscope examination, providing an appropriate model to investigate the metastatic and immune TME effects of ING4 deficiencies in TNBC.
The mouse Ing4 gene in p53MT cells was deleted using a CRISPR/CAS9 system (see ). Guide RNA sequences targeting the Ing4 gene at exon 1 and exon 3 (R1 or M1, a schematic diagram in ) were cloned into the lentiCRISPRv2 plasmid and used to establish the cell lines, namely p53MT v2 (the vector control), v2R1, and v2M1. Western Blot showed >99% and >90% reduction of the Ing4 protein in v2R1 and v2M1 cells, respectively ( ). To determine whether Ing4-deleted cells showed aberrant activation of NF-kB, v2, v2R1, or v2M1 cells were treated with TNF-a or IL-1b for 1 hour in serum free media. Western blot showed increased pp65/RelA(Ser536) in the nuclear fraction of Ing4-deleted v2R1 or v2M1 cells treated with TNFa or IL-1b compared to v2 cells, indicating increased activation of NF-kB in Ing4-deleted cells ( ). Additionally, Il6, an NF-kB transcription target gene, was aberrantly expressed in v2R1 or v2M1 cells compared to v2 cells in response to TNFa and/or IL-1b ( ). Lastly, TNFa or IL-1b induced migration of Ing4-deleted v2R1 and v2M1 cells, but not of the vector control v2 cells ( ). These results demonstrated that Ing4 deletion in p53MT cells resulted in aberrant activation of NF-kB.
 

## Increased penetrance and metastasis of Ing4-deleted mouse mammary tumors
To determine whether increased migration of Ing4-deleted cells in vitro correlated with tumor metastasis in vivo, we implanted v2, v2R1, or v2M1 p53MT cells into the mammary fat pads of recipient mice. In a cohort of 10 mice each group, 50% of v2 implanted mice developed tumors, whereas 80% of v2R1 or v2M1 implanted mice did by 36 days of post-implant follow up ( ). Comparable growth rates were observed by comparing the longest axis measurements of v2, v2R1 and v2M1 tumors using a caliper in the mice that formed tumors (n = 4 each group shown in ). Resected tumors at the endpoints were within the IACUC approved size range. These results indicated that Ing4 deletion did not impact tumor growth but increased tumor penetrance. Increased tumor penetrance suggested that Ing4-deleted cells may be better “fit” to form tumors potentially via cell survival mechanisms including immune evasion (see below and ).
 We compared tumor metastasis to the lung between v2, v2R1, and v2M1 tumor mice. As tumor metastases in the lungs were not readily visible under a dissecting microscope, we devised a protocol to quantify tumor cells disseminated to the lung tissues by modifying Pulaski et al. [ ]. In brief, the lungs harvested from tumor-bearing mice were mechanically dissociated, digested with collagenases I and IV, and plated in the media containing puromycin for selection of the CRISPR constructs in tumor cells. After 3 weeks, the foci were stained with crystal violet and counted. The results showed that the lungs from a wildtype mouse yielded no puromycin-resistant foci as expected, whereas 1 to 22 puromycin-resistant foci formed per plate from v2 tumor mouse lung tissues ( ). In comparison, the lungs from v2R1 or v2M1 tumor mice yielded an increased number of foci ranging from 8 to 208 in the selective media ( ), indicating an 8- to 9-fold increase. Although the statistical significance could not be reached due to the small cohort size, the trend showed that Ing4-deleted tumors were more metastatic, consistent with the hypothesis that ING4 deficiencies promote metastatic progression in breast cancer.

## Immune composition in Ing4-deleted mammary tumors
To characterize the immune components in Ing4-deleted mammary tumors, we employed flow cytometry and evaluated myeloid and lymphoid cell populations within the tumors. Single cells isolated from tumors were labeled with antibodies and a viability dye as described previously [ ]. Live cells were gated to evaluate myeloid and natural killer (NK) cells as presented in the schematic diagram ( ): myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSC) were defined as CD45+CD11b+Gr-1hi, whereas tumor associated macrophages (TAM) were CD45+CD11b+Gr-1loF4/80+. CD45+ cells were also gated for NKp46 and granzyme B (GzmB) to assess the NK cell population (CD45+NKp46+GzmB+) [ , ]. The results showed that the percentages of MDSC and NK cells were comparable between the v2 vector control and Ing4-deleted v2R1 or v2M1 tumors. In contrast, the frequency of TAMs was significantly increased by 2- or 3-fold in Ing4-deleted tumors ( ). These results suggested that TAMs may contribute to ING4-deficient tumor progression but will require further characterization (see ).
 PD-L1 expression in tumors or in TAMs has been shown as a mechanism of the immune-suppressive TME [ , ]. Thus, we determined the percentage of PD-L1+ cells in the tumor/stroma compartment (CD45- cells) as well as in the intratumoral immune compartment (CD45+ cells). The results showed no differences in PD-L1+ cell populations between Ing4-deleted and the vector control tumors ( ). These data suggested that PD-L1-mediated immune suppression may not be the major mechanism contributing to the aggressiveness of Ing4-deleted tumors.
We next evaluated tumor samples with a T cell marker panel ( ). In brief, CD45+CD3+ T cells were gated for the expression of CD4 vs CD8 (Tc, cytotoxic T cells). CD4+ T cells expressing FoxP3 were considered regulatory T cells (Treg) and cells lacking FoxP3 were considered helper T cells (Th) [ ]. All T cell subsets were stained for GzmB and PD-1. The results showed that the percentages of CD4+ or CD8+ T cells were comparable between tumors ( ). Strikingly, Ing4-deleted tumors contained a significantly reduced percentage of CD4+GzmB+ T cells compared to the vector control tumors, but the percentage of CD8+GzmB+ T cells were comparable between tumors ( ). GzmB+CD4+ T cells have recently been shown to play a role in immune-mediated killing and therapy response in cancer [ – ]. Thus, these results suggested that the Ing4-deleted TME may be less tumoricidal with a reduced frequency of GzmB+CD4+ T cells, more permissive toward tumor development and progression.
 It is noteworthy that the proportion of GzmB+ CD4+ T cells were decreased in Ing4-deleted tumors in both FoxP3- effector and FoxP3+ regulatory CD4+ T cell populations ( ). Studies have shown that GzmB+FoxP3+ Treg cells have activities that kill CD4+ T effector cells as part of the mechanism of Treg-mediated immune suppression [ ]. In this scenario, a decrease in GzmB+FoxP3+ Treg cells would result in an increase in Th effector cells contributing to a tumoricidal TME. To evaluate the opposing tumor immune effects of GzmB+ Treg vs GzmB+ Th cells, we determined the ratio of GzmB+FoxP3+/GzmB+FoxP- CD4 T cells. The results showed that v2 tumors had the ratio of 2.6±0.8, whereas v2R1 and V2M1 tumors had the ratio of 5.4±2.7 and 4.8±2.2, respectively. These data indicated that Ing4-deleted tumors contained excess GzmB+ Tregs that may contribute to the decrease in Th effector cells, resulting in an immune-evasive TME and tumor promotion.
Of note, we observed that a significant portion of T cells in tumors expressed PD-1 but showed no difference between Ing4-deleted and the vector control tumors ( ), indicating that Ing4 deletion in tumors did not affect PD-1-mediated checkpoint regulation of T cells in the TME.

## Clinical significance of decreased granzyme B expression in ING4-deficient breast cancer
As the immune marker evaluation of Ing4-deleted mouse tumors showed increased TAMs (Gr-1loCD11b+F4/80+) and decreased GzmB+CD4+ T cells, we sought to determine the clinical significance of these findings by analyzing the METABRIC (Molecular Taxonomy of Breast Cancer International Consortium) gene expression data set [ , ]. We focused the analyses on the basal subtype tumors (n = 209) as the p53MT mouse model was derived from Tp53 deletion, the molecular lesion associated with TNBC [ ]. We stratified patient samples using the mean values of each gene expression and performed Kaplan-Meier survival analyses. The results showed that low expression of GZMB (the gene encoding granzyme B) was significantly associated with poor patient survival (HR = 1.58, 95% CI 0.99–2.53, p = 0.035, ) as was ING4-low expression (HR = 1.71, 95% CI 1.14–2.58, p = 0.010, ). These supported the tumor suppressive roles for granzyme B and ING4 in the basal subtype breast cancer. Strikingly, patients with tumors expressing the ING4-low/GZMB-low combination had the worst survival outcomes compared to the other gene expression combinations (ING4-low/GZMB-low vs ING4-high/GZMB-high: HR = 2.80, 95% CI 1.36–5.75, p = 0.0004, ). These results suggested that reduced granzyme B expression exacerbated the aggressiveness of ING4-deficient breast cancer.
 Expression of the other immune markers such as FOXP3, ADGRE1 (the gene encoding F4/80), PDCD1 (PD-1 gene), CD274 (PD-L1 gene) alone or in combination with ING4 did not correlate with patient survival ( ), highlighting the unique relationship between GZMB and ING4 expression in the basal subtype of breast cancer. ITGAM encoding CD11b related to TAMs could not be evaluated for patient survival because the gene expression was not available in the METABRIC dataset. Further characterization of TAMs in Ing4-deleted mammary tumors will be necessary to ascertain the phenotypes and functional contribution of TAMs in ING4-deficient breast cancer progression.
Taken together, the METABRIC data analyses provided clinical evidence for the functional relationship between ING4 and GZMB in the basal subtype of breast cancer and supported the conclusion that the decrease in GzmB+CD4+ T cells in the TME contributes to metastatic tumor progression of ING4-deficient breast cancer.

## Discussion
The results presented in this study provided the first evidence that ING4-deficient tumors harbor a TIME that contributes to metastatic progression and poor patient survival outcomes in breast cancer. Intriguingly, the TIME of Ing4-deleted mouse mammary tumors consisted of increased tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) and decreased GzmB+CD4+ T cells. Low expression of the Granzyme B gene (GZMB) in combination with ING4-deficiencies was significantly associated with poor patient survival in the basal subtype of breast cancer, supportive of the clinical significance of granzyme-B-positive immune cell depletion in ING4-deficient tumors.
Contribution of TAMs in tumor development and progression has been well documented [ ]. Especially M2-polarized TAMs were shown to secrete pro-tumor factors that can directly promote tumor growth, angiogenesis, and metastasis in cancer [ ]. Additionally, TAMs have been shown to orchestrate the TIME by commencing various activities such as recruiting tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs), modulating the CD8+/CD4+ T cell ratio, increasing the immune suppressive Treg cell population, and upregulating immune checkpoint molecules such as PD-L1 and PD-1 [ , , ]. Interestingly, these TAM-associated TIME phenotypes were not apparent in Ing4-deleted tumors, indicating that the phenotypes and functional consequences of TAMs in Ing4-deleted tumors are yet to be defined.
Ing4-deleted mouse mammary tumors contained a significantly reduced number of GzmB+CD4+ T cells. Granzyme B (GzmB) is a member of the serine protease family, that immune cells directly inject into the target cells via perforin-formed pores following MHC-mediated cell-cell conjugation [ ]. GzmB in the target cell cytoplasm cleaves and activates caspases inducing apoptosis, thus providing a powerful arm of cytocidal immune response during infection and disease [ , ]. Granzymes have been considered the main arsenal of CD8 cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) and Natural Killer (NK) cells [ ]. In comparison, GzmB+CD4+ T cells, also known as CD4 CTLs, were mainly associated with viremic states and autoimmune diseases [ ]. Subsequent studies showed that CD4 CTLs could eliminate tumors in an MHC class II-dependent manner in experimental models [ , ]. More recently, scRNAseq of TILs in human bladder cancer samples revealed the presence of CD4 CTLs expressing granzymes and perforin [ ]. Moreover, the CD4 CTL gene signature was correlated with anti-PD-L1 therapy response in patients, supportive of the CD4 CTL function in anti-tumor immune response [ ]. Our results showing decreased CD4 CTLs in Ing4-deleted tumors correlating with metastasis and poor patient survival are consistent with the roles of CD4 CTLs in anti-cancer immunity.
How CD4 CTLs are regulated in the TME is not well understood. In vitro, CD4 CTLs could be induced from naïve T cells as well as from other CD4+ T subtypes (e.g. Th1, Th2, Th17, Treg) by several cytokines and MHC class II-restricted antigens, indicating multiple routes of CD4 CTL maturation [ – ]. Our study presents a novel mechanism of CD4 CTL fate regulation driven by ING4 in a cell non-autonomous manner. How tumor expression of ING4 regulates the CD4 CTL fate in the TME is unclear. Potentially, ING4 could regulate the expression of cytokines required for CD4 CTL lineage differentiation; the absence of ING4 renders CD4 CTL differentiation less effective. Investigation of ING4-regulated cytokines may provide insight into the GzmB+CD4+ T cell differentiation mechanism(s).
Another possible mechanism of ING4 may involve the regulation of MHC class II expression in tumors. Tumor expression of MHC class II has been associated with favorable patient outcomes in several cancers including breast cancer [ , ]. In the absence of ING4, downregulation of MHC class II may occur in tumors, resulting in limited CD4 CTL activation in the TME. Of note, elevated MHC class II expression in lymph node metastases was correlated with increased Tregs resulting in decreased Th cells [ ]. Since Ing4-deleted tumors in our study did not show an increase in Tregs, MHC class II-mediated Treg expansion does not appear to be a mechanism of ING4-driven TIME modulation. Future investigation in the regulation of specific cytokine and/or MHC class II expression by ING4 may provide insight into the mechanism of CD4 CTL lineage regulation in the TME.
It is notable that our initial hypothesis was based on regulation of NF-kB by ING4 in cancer. Currently it is not clear whether aberrant NF-kB is directly responsible for the CD4 CTL-poor TIME of Ing4-deleted tumors. For example, would aberrant activation of NF-kB in tumors be sufficient to deplete CD4 CTL in Ing4-intact TME? By the same token, would inhibition of NF-kB in Ing4-deleted tumors restore the CD4 CTL population in the TME? We are currently investigating whether NF-kB impacts CD4 CTL differentiation/activation.
In conclusion, we found the unique tumor immune composition resulting from the absence of Ing4 in mammary tumors, consisting of decreased CD4 CTLs indicative of an immune-evasive TME, correlating with increased penetrance (fitness for survival) and metastasis. Supportive of the functional contribution of the TIME in ING4-deficient tumor progression, low GZMB gene expression together with low ING4 expression was significantly associated with poor patient survival outcomes in the basal subtype of breast cancer. Taken together, the study results present a novel mechanism of ING4-driven tumor-immune modulation and may offer potential opportunities for therapeutic intervention harnessing CD4 CTLs in ING4-deficient breast cancer.

## Supporting information
S1 Fig

## Uncropped images of Western blots in .
(PDF)

## Acknowledgments
We thank the Translational Genomics Research Institute for the tumor tissue microarray and histology support. We acknowledge the Flow Cytometry Core facility at the University of Arizona College of Medicine-Phoenix for the resource. We also thank the members of the Kim lab and Hastings lab for helpful discussions.

## Data Availability
All relevant data are within the manuscript.

## Funding Statement
The work was supported by National Health Institute/National Cancer Institute R03 CA270486 (SK), Valley Research Program P1 #VRP68 (SK, ET), and the Fidelity Charitable Donor-Advised Yoo Family fund grant (SK). The funders had no role in the study design, data collection, analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.

## References
 

PLOS ONEPLoS One10.1371/journal.pone.0304194.r001Author response to previous submission
572024197e0304194e0304194Collection date 2024.

6 May 2024

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Tsutsumi et al Response to reviewer comments_050424.pdf
PLOS ONEPLoS One10.1371/journal.pone.0304194.r002Decision Letter 0
GuptaYashAcademic Editor© 2024 Yash GuptaThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
5 Jun 2024

PONE-D-24-17957Tumor immune microenvironment permissive to metastatic progression of ING4-deficient breast cancerPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Kim,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process. Please submit your revised manuscript by Jul 20 2024 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Yash Gupta, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and 

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

Additional Editor Comments:
Authors need to add clarity to the methodology and adress reviewers' comments regarding clarity of Gating strategy for flow cytometry in detail. I agree with the reviewer to furnish Western Blot images in the supplementary section. I encourage the authors to elaborate the method section as it is too condensed for readers comfort point of view.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Partly
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: No
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: The manuscript submitted by Kim et al, explores the role of ING4 tumor suppressor gene in breast cancer. With a series of mouse experiments supported by analysis of METABRIC gene expression dataset, authors have deciphered the role of ING4 in breast cancer. The manuscript is well written and is easy to comprehend. Interpretation of this paper is well supported by the data. The role of ING4 in cancer in general has been hypothesized in previously published literature, and this work represents a considerable effort to address some of the open questions in this area of research. I recommend this paper to be published in it's current format.
Reviewer #2: In the study entitled "Tumor immune microenvironment permissive to metastatic progression of ING4-
deficient breast cancer" authors have made an excellent effort to understand the mechanism of how ING4-driven tumor-immune modulation creates an immune-evasive tumor microenvironment in breast cancer contributing to metastatic progression and poor patient survival.
But few concerns need attention to meet the publication standard of the journal.
1. Materials and Methods section: please make separate subsections for each and every techniques used for ease of readability and better clarity. For instance, "Tumor Tissue Microarray (TMA) and Immunohistochemistry (IHC)" should be splitted into two separate sub-sections. Same to be followed for rest for the portions in this section where applicable.
2. The IHC images in Figure 1 are low resolution and pixelated. Please replace the same with high resolution clear images.
3. Please explain the 1-3 scoring system of IHC images. Is it done manually or using any specific software to eliminate the bias in scoring.
4. Please include the images of western blots along with protein ladder in supplementary section.
5. Please include the detailed and complete panel of flowcytometry data in supplementary section. the gating strategy is confusing.
6. Please remake figure 5 for better understandability. figure 5B is very confusing.
7. Please include the foldchange readouts of the gene expression data for better clarity and conclusion.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: Yes: Shwetank
Reviewer #2: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
PLOS ONEPLoS One10.1371/journal.pone.0304194.r003Author response to Decision Letter 0
572024197e0304194e0304194Collection date 2024.

18 Jun 2024

We uploaded a letter file responding to the reviewers and editor comments as "Response to Reviewers."
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Tsutsumi et al Response to reviewers_061824.pdf
PLOS ONEPLoS One10.1371/journal.pone.0304194.r004Decision Letter 1
GuptaYashAcademic Editor© 2024 Yash GuptaThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
21 Jun 2024

Tumor immune microenvironment permissive to metastatic progression of ING4-deficient breast cancer
PONE-D-24-17957R1
Dear Dr. Kim,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice will be generated when your article is formally accepted. Please note, if your institution has a publishing partnership with PLOS and your article meets the relevant criteria, all or part of your publication costs will be covered. Please make sure your user information is up-to-date by logging into Editorial Manager at Editorial Manager® and clicking the ‘Update My Information' link at the top of the page. If you have any questions relating to publication charges, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Yash Gupta, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
PLOS ONEPLoS One10.1371/journal.pone.0304194.r005Acceptance letter
GuptaYashAcademic Editor© 2024 Yash GuptaThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
25 Jun 2024

PONE-D-24-17957R1 
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Kim, 
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now being handed over to our production team.
At this stage, our production department will prepare your paper for publication. This includes ensuring the following:
* All references, tables, and figures are properly cited
* All relevant supporting information is included in the manuscript submission,
* There are no issues that prevent the paper from being properly typeset
If revisions are needed, the production department will contact you directly to resolve them. If no revisions are needed, you will receive an email when the publication date has been set. At this time, we do not offer pre-publication proofs to authors during production of the accepted work. Please keep in mind that we are working through a large volume of accepted articles, so please give us a few weeks to review your paper and let you know the next and final steps. 
Lastly, if your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at customercare@plos.org.
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Yash Gupta 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
S1 Fig

## Uncropped images of Western blots in .
(PDF)
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Tsutsumi et al Response to reviewer comments_050424.pdf
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Tsutsumi et al Response to reviewers_061824.pdf

## Data Availability Statement
All relevant data are within the manuscript.