2933advsciAdvanced ScienceAdv Sci (Weinh)WileyPMC1142308911423089114230893907612010.1002/advs.202406309TIPRL Regulates Stemness and Survival in Lung Cancer Stem Cells through CaMKK2‐CaMK4‐CREB Feedback Loop Activation
SongIn‐Sung JeongYu‐Jeong YunJae Kwang LeeJimin YangHae‐Jun ParkYoung‐Ho KimSun‐Uk HongSeung‐Mo LeePeter CW LeeGeun Dong JangSung‐Wuk 
1
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Brain Korea 21 Project, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, 138‐736, Republic of Korea
2
Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, 138‐736, Republic of Korea
3
Futuristic Animal Resource & Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Chungchenongbuk‐do, 28116, Republic of Korea
4
Department of Functional Genomics, KRIBB, School of Bioscience, Korea University of Science and Technology (UST), Daejeon, 34113, Republic of Korea
5
Department of Pathology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, 138‐736, Republic of Korea*
E‐mail: geundy@hanmail.net; swjang@amc.seoul.kr

✉Corresponding author.
30720241136240630924063092692024© 2024 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley‐VCH GmbHThis is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

## Abstract
Frequent recurrence and metastasis caused by cancer stem cells (CSCs) are major challenges in lung cancer treatment. Therefore, identifying and characterizing specific CSC targets are crucial for the success of prospective targeted therapies. In this study, it is found that upregulated TOR Signaling Pathway Regulator‐Like (TIPRL) in lung CSCs causes sustained activation of the calcium/calmodulin‐dependent protein kinase kinase 2 (CaMKK2) signaling pathway by binding to CaMKK2, thereby maintaining stemness and survival. CaMKK2‐mediated activation of CaM kinase 4 (CaMK4) leads to phosphorylation of cAMP response element‐binding protein (CREB) at Ser129 and Ser133, which is necessary for its maximum activation and the downstream constitutive expression of its target genes (Bcl2 and HMG20A). TIPRL depletion sensitizes lung CSCs to afatinib‐induced cell death and reduces distal metastasis of lung cancer in vivo. It is determined that CREB activates the transcription of TIPRL in lung CSCs. The positive feedback loop consisting of CREB and TIPRL induces the sustained activation of the CaMKK2‐CaMK4‐CREB axis as a driving force and upregulates the expression of stemness‐ and survival‐related genes, promoting tumorigenesis in patients with lung cancer. Thus, TIPRL and the CaMKK2 signaling axis may be promising targets for overcoming drug resistance and reducing metastasis in lung cancer.
Keywords: CaMKK2‐CaMK4‐CREB feedback loop activation, cancer stem cell, drug resistance, lung cancer, metastasis, TIPRL

The CREB‐TIPRL positive feedback regulation loop helps maintain the stemness and survival of lung CSCs. TIPRL induces sustained activation of the CaMKK2‐CaMK4‐CREB axis. In turn, the activated CREB upregulates the expression of TIPRL, Bcl2, and HMG20A to maintain the stemness and survival of CSCs, thus promoting tumorigenesis in lung cancer.

 
statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoRevised 2024 Jul 12; Received 2024 Jun 7; Collection date 2024 Sep.

1.

## Introduction
Lung cancer is a major cause of mortality worldwide. In 2021, 235760 new cases of lung cancer were diagnosed in the United States, with over 100 000 mortalities.[
 
] Fortunately, due to advancements in cancer biology and techniques, the incidence and mortality of lung cancer have declined over the past two decades.[
 
] Specifically, the development and introduction of inhibitors of well‐known protein kinases, such as epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), mitogen‐activated protein kinase kinase 1/2, cyclin‐dependent kinase 4/6, and anaplastic lymphoma kinase, have considerably improved outcomes.[
 
] These drugs have remarkable advantages over classical chemotherapeutic agents since they act on disease‐specific pathways related to signal transduction.[
 
] Imatinib was the first protein kinase inhibitor to receive US Food and Drug Administration approval in 2001. Since then, 76 drugs have been approved for clinical use as of 2021, mainly for the treatment of various cancers.[
 
] However, despite the development of tailored anticancer drugs and treatments, recurrence and metastasis of lung cancer are still frequent because of the properties of tumor cells. Moreover, lung cancer cells can acquire resistance to kinase inhibitors within ≈12–18 months through kinase mutations or alternative pathways.[
 , 
]

Initially, tumorigenic ability, heterogeneity, and adaptive plasticity were considered general properties of solid tumors,[
 , , 
] but these are now considered characteristics of cancer stem cells (CSCs), which sets them apart from bulk tumor cells. CSCs have been implicated in cancer relapse, metastasis, multidrug resistance, and radiation resistance. The fate of CSCs can be altered by microenvironmental signals. As a result, anticancer drugs may activate quiescent CSCs into proliferating CSCs, initiating tumor growth and recurrence.[
 
] Thus, therapeutic agents must target both quiescent and proliferating CSCs, as well as CSC populations arising from specific mutations and cells with acquired mutations that eliminate dependence on a single stem cell pathway.[
 
]

The activation of protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) was recently reported to suppress small cell lung CSCs via protein kinase A inhibition,[
 
] thus inhibiting the expansion of breast CSCs.[
 
] The combined inhibition of a kinase and activation of a phosphatase, rather than targeting the kinase alone, can possibly yield more durable and potent inhibition. PP2A is a major tumor suppressor that plays an important role in cell cycle progression, DNA damage response, and apoptosis. In cancer cells, PP2A is rarely mutated and is predominantly inactivated by non‐genetic mechanisms.[
 
] The non‐genetic and selective inhibition of PP2A by inhibitor proteins allows for therapeutic reactivation of the tumor suppressor activity of PP2A.[
 , 
]

TOR signaling pathway regulator‐like (TIPRL) is a negative regulator of the catalytic subunit of PP2A (PP2Ac). It forms a complex together with a4, which is independent of the scaffold and regulatory subunits of PP2A.[
 , , 
] TIPRL appears to play a complex role in various cellular processes, including mammalian target of rapamycin signaling, DNA damage, autophagy, and cell death. Its interaction with PP2Ac and various signaling pathway‐related kinases suggests that it may be involved in the regulation of multiple signaling pathways in different types of cancers. The identification of novel TIPRL binding partners could provide valuable insights into the regulatory mechanisms underlying these cellular processes and further our understanding of the properties of lung CSCs.
This study aimed to identify and characterize specific CSC targets in order to design prospective targeted therapies that can overcome the frequent recurrence and metastasis of lung cancer due to CSCs. We identified a novel binding partner of TIPRL, calcium/calmodulin‐dependent protein kinase kinase 2 (CaMKK2). We found that TIPRL regulates the CaMKK2‐calcium/calmodulin‐dependent protein kinase 4 (CaMK4)‐cAMP response element‐binding protein (CREB) signaling axis by blocking the interaction between PP2A and CaMKK2 in lung CSCs. We believe that our findings can elucidate the regulatory mechanisms underlying the action of TIPRL in lung CSCs, as well as provide potential therapeutic targets for the treatment of lung cancer.

2.

## Results
2.1.

## TIPRL is Upregulated in Lung Cancer and Involved in CaMKK2 Signaling
To determine whether TIPRL involved in stemness and anticancer drug resistance as a target for eliminating lung CSCs, we examined its expression in lung cancer tissues, including lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD), lung squamous cell carcinoma (LUSC), and small cell lung cancer (SCLC). Cancerous tissues displayed an increase in both the mRNA and protein levels of TIPRL (Figure  , Supporting Information; Figure  ). TIPRL also displayed high expression in several lung cancer cell lines, as compared to that in normal epithelial cell lines (Figure  ; Figure  , Supporting Information). Furthermore, we confirmed whether the level of TIPRL expression affects the survival rate of patients with lung cancer, as determined via cohort analysis of The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). Patients with high TIPRL expression had a lower survival rate compared to those with low TIPRL expression (Figure  , Supporting Information).
 TIPRL expression was examined in lung CSCs to investigate whether it is a potential regulator of CSC stemness and survival. TIPRL expression was significantly increased in CSCs isolated from lung cancer cell lines using cluster of differentiation (CD)133 and CD44 antibodies, compared to non‐CSCs (Figure  ; Figure  , Supporting Information). Next, we compared the patterns of TIPRL expression between the cells isolated using an anti‐CD133 antibody and a combination of CD133 and CD44 antibodies, which yielded similar results (Figure  ; Figure  , Supporting Information). Additionally, we demonstrated that tumorigenic ability was similar between the CD133+ population and CD44+CD133+ population cells (Figure  , Supporting Information). These findings indicate that CD133+ CSCs are identical to cells highly positive for CD44. Therefore, the cell populations isolated with CD133 antibody were used to conduct functional studies in the lung CSCs, such as western blotting, mitochondrial activity, quantitative reverse‐transcription PCR (qRT‐PCR), and immunocytochemistry. Fluorescence‐activated cell sorting analysis after co‐staining with CD133‐allophycocyanin and TIPRL‐fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) antibodies revealed elevated TIPRL expression in CD133+ cells (Figure  , Supporting Information). Additionally, qRT‐PCR demonstrated increased TIPRL expression in CD133+ CSCs freshly isolated from patients with lung cancer (Figure  ). TIPRL and CD133 mRNA expression levels in cells from patient tissues were strongly correlated (Figure  , Supporting Information). Finally, immunohistochemistry was used to demonstrate that the TIPRL protein correlated with the strong signal observed in the adjacent tumor region stained with an anti‐CD133 antibody (Figure  ; Figure  , Supporting Information). These findings suggest that TIPRL plays a critical role in lung CSCs and lung carcinogenesis.
We then investigated which kinases are regulated upon TIPRL depletion using a Phospho Explorer antibody array (Full Moon BioSystems, Sunnyvale, CA) and bioinformatics analysis. TIPRL depletion was confirmed to inactivate CaMK4, AKT1, AMPKα, and CREB1 (Figure  , Supporting Information). A schematic diagram based on the array data was used to illustrate the signaling pathway regulated by TIPRL (Figure  , Supporting Information). The CaMKK2‐CaMK4‐CREB signaling axis might contribute to maintaining the stemness and survival of lung CSCs.

2.2.

## TIPRL Binds CaMKK2, Which is also Upregulated in Lung CSCs
To investigate the role of TIPRL as a negative regulator of the catalytic subunit of PP2A in the CaMKK2‐CaMK4‐CREB signaling axis, we conducted co‐immunoprecipitation assays to assess the interaction between CaMKK2 and TIPRL under physiological conditions in A549 cells. Additionally, we verified whether TIPRL blocks the interaction between CaMKK2 and PP2Ac, thereby preventing PP2Ac from inactivating CaMKK2. Immunoprecipitation using an endogenous antibody against TIPRL and CaMKK2 revealed that TIPRL binds to CaMKK2 (Figure  , Supporting Information). Moreover, the binding of TIPRL to CaMKK2 was demonstrated using a co‐immunoprecipitation assay (after transfection with His‐tagged TIPRL and hemagglutinin‐tagged CaMKK2), as well as an in vitro GST pull‐down assay (Figure  ).
 To identify the binding regions of CaMKK2, we first generated deletion constructs of CaMKK2 (Figure  , Supporting Information). CaMKK2 constructs containing the C‐terminal region (amino acids 447–540) were precipitated using TIPRL (Figure  ). Co‐immunostaining confirmed the co‐localization of TIPRL and the C‐terminal region of CaMKK2 (Figure  ). We then examined the changes in the interaction of PP2Ac with CaMKK2 in siTIPRL‐transfected A549 cells. The interaction between CaMKK2 and PP2Ac was stronger after siTIPRL transfection (Figure  , Supporting Information), whereas the interaction was reduced after TIPRL overexpression (Figure  , Supporting Information). In addition, immunoprecipitation and immunostaining revealed PP2Ac bound to the C‐terminal region of CaMKK2 (Figure  , Supporting Information). Finally, we confirmed the interaction between TIPRL and CaMKK2 via co‐immunostaining of lung CSCs (Figure  ). These results suggest that TIPRL blocks the interaction between CaMKK2 and PP2Ac, which may contribute to the maintenance of stemness and survival of lung CSCs.
To determine the role of CaMKK2 as a binding partner of TIPRL in lung CSCs, we evaluated its mRNA expression levels using qRT‐PCR. The mRNA level of CaMKK2 was higher in patients with SCLC and LUAD versus adjacent normal tissues (Figure  , Supporting Information); in CSCs isolated from several lung cancer cell lines (e.g., A549, H460, H1299, and H1793) versus non‐CSCs (Figure  , Supporting Information); and in CSCs freshly isolated from tissues of patients with lung cancer versus non‐CSCs (Figure  , Supporting Information). Using TCGA cohorts, we also confirmed that CaMKK2 expression was associated with the survival rate of patients with lung cancer, with a higher CaMKK2 expression associated with a decreased patient survival rate (Figure  , Supporting Information). To demonstrate the clinical significance of TIPRL and CaMKK2 in lung CSCs, we evaluated the expression of two proteins in CSCs freshly isolated from tissues of patients with lung cancer. TIPRL and CaMKK2 protein expression levels in lung CSCs were increased (Figure  , Supporting Information). Additionally, immunostaining of CaMKK2 and TIPRL in a similar tumor region stained strongly (Figure  , Supporting Information). Finally, the correlation between TIPRL and CaMKK2 expression was assessed among CSCs isolated from patients with lung cancer and in the data of patients with lung cancer from the TCGA cohort (Figure  , Supporting Information). Our findings suggest that the interaction between TIPRL and CaMKK2, which are both highly expressed in lung CSCs and bulk tumor cells, could be related to the poor prognosis of patients with lung cancer.

2.3.

## CaMKK2‐Induced Activation of CaMK4 Leads to the Phosphorylation of CREB and Maximum Transcriptional Activation of Target Genes in Lung Cancer
To determine the role of TIPRL in the CaMKK2 signaling axis of lung CSCs, we first evaluated the alteration in CaMKK2 phosphorylation and its downstream kinase CaMK4 after TIPRL depletion via immunoprecipitation with antibodies against CaMKK2 and CaMK4 proteins. TIPRL depletion resulted in decreased CaMKK2 phosphorylation and, subsequently, CaMK4 phosphorylation (Figure  ). In addition, using an in vitro kinase assay, we confirmed that TIPRL depletion decreased the phosphorylation of CaMK4 and its downstream transcription factor CREB (Figure  ).
 CREB is a transcription factor that binds at the cAMP response element (CRE) of its target genes. CREB is phosphorylated at Ser133 by various receptor‐activated protein kinases, such as protein kinase A, mitogen‐activated protein kinases, and CaMK.[
 , 
] It remains unknown whether CaMKK2‐induced CaMK4 phosphorylates Ser133 or other CREB sites in lung cancer.
To identify the sites at which CREB is phosphorylated by CaMK4, we generated mutant CREBs in which serine residues at known phosphorylation sites, including Ser121, Ser129, Ser133, and Ser142/143, were changed to alanine. Mutant CREBs were first tested in a CRE‐driven reporter assay, and Ser129 was identified as the second site phosphorylated by CaMK4 (Figure  , Supporting Information). Maximum activation of CREB occurred when it was phosphorylated by CaMK4 at both Ser129 and Ser133. Moreover, we assessed the phosphorylation of one of the mutant CREBs through immunoprecipitation with a His antibody against CREB‐His and revealed that CaMK4 phosphorylated both Ser133 and Ser129 on CREB (Figure  , Supporting Information).
To determine the effects of TIPRL depletion on CREB phosphorylation, we stimulated siTIPRL‐transfected A549 cells with Ca2+ after 12 h of serum and Ca2+ starvation. TIPRL depletion decreased CREB phosphorylation at both Ser129 and Ser133 (Figure  ). Under physiological conditions, TIPRL depletion decreased the phosphorylation of both CREB sites in several lung cancer cell lines (Figure  ). Subsequently, decreased CREB phosphorylation after TIPRL depletion resulted in limited CREB translocation into the nucleus (Figure  ). Furthermore, a CRE‐driven reporter assay revealed that the transcriptional activity of CREB decreased after TIPRL depletion in several lung cancer cell lines (Figure  ). Finally, in lung CSCs, TIPRL knockdown decreased the phosphorylation of CREB at Ser129 and Ser133 (Figure  ). In summary, TIPRL prolongs CaMKK2‐CaMK4‐CREB activation mediated by Ca2+ stimulation. This sustained activation may be crucial in maintaining the stemness and survival of lung CSCs.
To determine whether the reduction in CREB activity caused by TIPRL depletion resulted from the downregulation of CaMKK2, we evaluated the effect of CaMKK2 knockdown on CREB phosphorylation. As expected, there was reduced phosphorylation of CREB at Ser129 and Ser133 after CaMKK2 depletion. In contrast, CaMKK2 overexpression led to increased CREB activity (Figure  , Supporting Information). Additionally, a CRE‐driven reporter assay showed that CaMKK2 depletion in several lung cancer cell lines resulted in decreased CREB activity, whereas CaMKK2 overexpression increased it (Figure  , Supporting Information). These results indicate a direct link between TIPRL and decreased CaMKK2‐CaMK4‐CREB activity.

2.4.

## TIPRL Contributes to Stemness and Survival of Lung CSCs through the Maintenance of Mitochondrial Function
To investigate the role of TIPRL in CSCs, TIPRL was depleted using siRNA and single guide RNA (sgRNA) molecules. As expected, the CSC population percentage was significantly decreased in siTIPRL‐transfected cells and the stable TIPRL‐depleted A549‐sgTIPRL cell line versus controls (Figure  ). In these cells, a decreased overall expression of stemness‐related genes was noted (Figure  ). Moreover, an anchorage‐independent growth assay revealed that TIPRL‐depleted cells displayed a significant reduction in sphere and colony‐formation versus controls (Figure  ). TIPRL depletion in several lung cancer cell lines also reduced migration and wound‐healing activity versus controls (Figure  , Supporting Information). A rescue experiment using a TIPRL‐expressing lentivirus effectively restored the TIPRL knockdown‐induced reduction in CSCs (CD133+ cells) and the migrating population (Figure  , Supporting Information).
 Mitochondrial activity regulates stemness and pluripotency, which are properties of CSCs.[
 , , , 
] To assess whether inhibition of the CaMKK2‐CaMK4‐CREB axis upon TIPRL depletion in lung CSCs led to the disruption of mitochondrial function, we measured changes in membrane potential, mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels, and calcium levels using tetramethylrhodamine (TMRE), Mito‐SOX, and Rhod2‐AM dyes, respectively, in siTIPRL‐depleted cells.
TIPRL depletion in lung CSCs and non‐CSCs decreased the mitochondrial membrane potential but increased ROS and calcium levels (Figure  ). CD133+ cells had notably higher ATP levels than non‐CSCs, but these decreased after TIPRL depletion (Figure  ; Figure  , Supporting Information). Taken together, these results suggested that TIPRL plays a critical role in maintaining lung CSCs properties and mitochondrial function.

2.5.

## TIPRL Knockdown Leads to Downregulation of CREB Target Genes (Bcl2, HMG20A) through Inactivating the CaMKK2 Signaling Axis
We investigated the molecular mechanisms underlying the crosstalk between the CaMKK2 signaling pathway and lung CSCs. Liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry analysis was done to identify the proteins affected by CREB inactivation in TIPRL‐depleted CSCs (Figure  , Supporting Information). Several potential target genes were identified; we hypothesize that these are modulated by the TIPRL‐CaMKK2 signaling axis. Additionally, these genes are postulated to play a pivotal role in maintaining stemness and enhancing survival in lung CSCs. To test this hypothesis, we first investigated if the TIPRL‐CaMKK2 signaling pathway regulates these genes. TIPRL depletion significantly reduced the mRNA and protein levels of Bcl2 and HMG20A, among various potential target genes, in several lung cancer cell lines (Figure  ). However, the decrease in Bcl2 and HMG20A expression caused by TIPRL depletion was rescued after infecting the cells with TIPRL‐expressing lentiviral particles (Figure  , Supporting Information). TIPRL depletion in CD133+ cells isolated from lung cancer cells also decreased the expression of Bcl2 and HMG20A (Figure  ).
 We investigated whether CREB, a transcription factor in the CaMKK2‐CaMK4‐CREB axis, transcriptionally regulates HMG20A and Bcl2. A bioinformatics analysis revealed that the human Bcl2 and HMG20A promoters contained CREB‐binding sites (Bcl2: TGACGTTA and HMG20A: CGTCA) located 89 and −1790 bp upstream from the transcriptional start site, respectively (Figure  , Supporting Information). A CREB‐binding reporter assay revealed that the promoter activity of Bcl2 and HMG20A was increased significantly alongside increasing CREB expression (Figure  , Supporting Information) but was decreased after TIPRL depletion versus controls, indicating that CREB is a component of the CaMKK2 signaling axis regulated by TIPRL (Figure  , Supporting Information). Cut‐and‐run assays confirmed that CREB directly binds to the Bcl2 and HMG20A promoter regions containing a CREB‐binding site (Figure  , Supporting Information). Meanwhile, rescue experiments with Bcl2‐ and HMG20A‐expressing lentiviral particles were conducted to determine whether the decrease in tumor progression caused by TIPRL depletion was directly linked to the expression of Bcl2 and HMG20A in TIPRL‐depleted cells. The lentiviral infection led to the overexpression of Bcl2 and HMG20A, which ameliorated the reduction in cell proliferation and CD133+ cell population caused by TIPRL depletion (Figure  , Supporting Information; Figure  ) and enhanced anchorage‐independent growth in TIPRL‐depleted A549 and control cells (Figure  ). In addition, the membrane potential, ROS levels, and calcium levels were also restored by the overexpression of Bcl2 and HMG20A (Figure  , Supporting Information). In short, TIPRL contributes to the activation of the CaKK2‐CaMK4‐CREB signaling axis, leading to a sustained expression of CREB target genes such as Bcl2 and HMG20A. In turn, these contribute to the stemness and tumorigenic ability of CSCs, as well as the maintenance of mitochondrial function.

2.6.

## TIPRL Depletion Enhances the Sensitivity of Lung CSCs to Afatinib and Impairs Tumor Growth and Metastasis through CaMKK2 Signaling Inhibition In Vitro and In Vivo
To investigate the role of increased CaMKK2/CaMK4/CREB signaling activity in lung CSC survival, we conducted cell death‐inducing experiments by treating cells with afatinib (an EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor) alone or in combination with TIPRL depletion. CSC subpopulations are more resistant to afatinib than non‐CSC cells.[
 , 
] TIPRL depletion plus afatinib treatment resulted in a significant increase in CD133+ cell death, as seen on flow cytometry with Annexin V‐FITC/propidium iodide staining (Figure  ; Figure  , Supporting Information). Additionally, combination treatment also led to an increase in CSC death, as seen on the Cell Counting Kit‐8 assay (Figure  , Supporting Information). To confirm that the effects of the combination treatment were due to apoptosis, we measured the sub‐G1 phase DNA content. A significant increase was seen in the sub‐G1 hypodiploid population in CSCs given combination therapy versus afatinib alone (Figure  , Supporting Information). Moreover, increased levels of cleaved procaspase‐3 and poly‐(adenosine diphosphate ribose) polymerase were observed in TIPRL‐depleted cells treated with low‐dose afatinib versus control cells (Figure  , Supporting Information). This result demonstrated that knockdown of TIPRL sensitizes CSCs to afatinib‐induced cell death via inhibition of the CaMKK2 signaling axis, which is a consequence of TIPRL depletion as shown in Figure  . Next, the effect of the combination treatment on CSC‐mediated tumorigenesis was observed using an anchorage‐independent growth assay. Colony‐formation was significantly reduced in cells treated with combination therapy versus control cells (Figure  , Supporting Information). Furthermore, in sphere‐formation assays, cells treated with combination therapy also exhibited reduced sphere‐formation versus control cells (Figure  ).
 To evaluate the in vivo effects of TIPRL depletion, a mouse xenograft model was generated by injecting CD133+ cells sorted from A549‐sgTIPRL or A549‐sgCont cells. CD133+ A549‐sgTIPRL cells had a greatly reduced tumor volume versus A549‐sgCont cells (Figure  ). Furthermore, terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase‐mediated deoxy‐uridine triphosphate nick‐end labeling revealed that this effect was due to increased apoptosis in the sgTIPRL+afatinib‐treated tumors (Figure  ). To confirm that these effects were due to a decreased TIPRL expression, the TIPRL expression in xenograft tumors was analyzed via immunostaining. TIPRL expression decreased in xenograft tumors generated by A549‐sgTIPRL cells compared to that in tumors generated by A549‐sgCont cells (Figure  , Supporting Information).
Lung cancer often metastasizes to the brain, bones, and the liver.[
 , 
] We evaluated the effect of TIPRL depletion on metastasis in an orthotopic xenograft model generated by injecting CSCs into the lungs of mice. The positron emission tomography‐magnetic resonance imaging (PET‐MRI) scan revealed significantly reduced local invasion and metastasis in the TIPRL‐depleted group compared with those in the control group. Specifically, injecting A549‐sgCont‐CD133+ cells into the left lung resulted in liver metastasis in 50% (5/10) of the mice, whereas injecting A549‐sgTIPRL‐CD133+ cells resulted in liver metastasis in 20% (2/10) (Figure  ). Finally, the effect of TIPRL depletion on survival rate was examined. The survival rate was higher in mice that received TIPRL‐depleted cells versus controls, likely due to the decreased tumor frequency observed in the TIPRL‐depleted group (Figure  ). These in vivo results suggest that TIPRL regulates the CaMKK2 signaling axis, which contributes to anticancer drug resistance and stemness in lung CSCs.

2.7.

## TIPRL is Transcriptionally Activated by CREB in Lung CSCs
The regulatory mechanism of TIPRL expression in cancer cells remains unknown. A bioinformatics analysis was performed to investigate the transcription factors which bind to the TIPRL gene promoter. A CREB‐binding site (TGACGTCA) was identified −231 bp upstream of the TIPRL transcriptional start site. In a TCGA cohort study, a positive correlation was found between TIPRL and CREB1 mRNA expression (Figure  ). Moreover, the activity of the TIPRL promoter (−500 to +20) was significantly increased with CREB overexpression, indicating that TIPRL is a transcriptional target of CREB (Figure  ). A cut‐and‐run assay in CREB mutant‐overexpressing cells showed that CREB binds directly to the TIPRL promoter containing a CREB‐binding site (Figure  ). Furthermore, we found that the binding of CREB to the TIPRL promoter was considerably decreased after TIPRL depletion, suggesting that TIPRL plays a critical role in regulating the CaMKK2 signaling axis and is a transcriptional target of CREB regulated by the signaling axis at the same time (Figure  ). Additionally, TIPRL protein and mRNA levels were increased alongside CREB overexpression in HEK293 cells with lower TIPRL expression (Figure  ). By contrast, the combined treatment of afatinib and 665‐15 (CREB inhibitor) in A549 cells considerably downregulated TIPRL by reducing CREB phosphorylation compared with that observed in vehicle‐ or afatinib‐treated control cells and then induced apoptosis (Figure  ). Finally, flow cytometry using Annexin V‐FITC/propidium iodide staining revealed a significant increase in CD133+ CSC death following combination treatment with 666‐15 and afatinib (Figure  ). In summary, TIPRL induces sustained activation of the CaMKK2‐CaMK4‐CREB axis. CREB activation upregulates the expression of TIPRL, Bcl2, and HMG20A to maintain the stemness and survival of CSCs, thus promoting tumorigenesis in lung cancer.
 

3.

## Discussion
Our study revealed that TIPRL is upregulated in lung CSCs and identified CaMKK2 as its novel binding partner. TIPRL binds to the C‐terminal region of CaMKK2, resulting in its sustained activation. CaMKK2 is a key regulator of cellular and whole‐body energy metabolism which protects cells from ferroptosis in melanoma,[
 
] regulates mitochondrial function,[
 
] and is upregulated in hepatocellular carcinoma and prostate cancer.[
 , 
] Previous studies on CSCs have reported the importance of mitochondrial function in the alteration of CSC fate.[
 , , , 
] In present study, we found that CaMKK2 was also upregulated in lung CSCs and bulk tumor cells, and TIPRL depletion allowed PP2Ac to bind to the C‐terminal region of CaMKK2, leading to inactivation of the CaMKK2 signaling pathway. We showed that CaMK4, which is activated by CaMKK2, phosphorylates CREB at Ser129 and Ser133 to fully activate it in lung CSCs. CREB is a ubiquitous transcription factor that regulates cell proliferation and survival.[
 
] It is regulated by several distinct pathways that can become activated in cancer cells[
 , , 
] and is activated through the phosphorylation of Ser133 in response to cAMP, Ca2+, and other stimuli.[
 
] CREB Ser133 phosphorylation was found to be essential, but not sufficient, to ensure CRE‐related gene transcription.[
 , , , 
] In the present study, phosphorylation at Ser129 and Ser133 positively affected CREB transcriptional activity, whereas that at Ser111 and Ser121 completely blocked CREB‐related gene expression. Using CREB mutants (serine residues with well‐known phosphorylation sites for alanine, including Ser121, Ser129, Ser133, and Ser142/143), we investigated the CREB sites phosphorylated by CaMK4 and showed that phosphorylation at Ser129 and Ser133 is required for the maximum activation of CREB by the CaMKK2/CaMK4 signaling pathway in lung CSCs. TIPRL depletion resulted in a decrease in the phosphorylation of CREB Ser129 and Ser133, thereby compromising the stemness and survival of lung CSCs.
CREB plays a role in various cellular processes such as proliferation, survival, and glucose metabolism, depending on the gene expression in cancer cells.[
 
] The target genes of CREB are differentially expressed according to the type of cancer and the upstream kinases that regulate them.[
 
]
Bcl2 is a known CREB target gene that encodes a protein that mediates the pro‐survival effects of CREB and acts as an inhibitory binding partner of Bax, forming a channel or other structure in the mitochondrial outer membrane.[
 , 
] In this study, we identified Bcl2 and HMG20A as CREB target genes in lung CSCs and showed that TIPRL depletion rescued the reduction in stemness and survival of lung CSCs through the overexpression of Bcl2. Therefore, a reduction in Bcl2 levels can lead to apoptotic cell death and mitochondrial dysfunction. We also showed that TIPRL depletion resulted in mitochondrial dysfunction, including decreased mitochondrial membrane potential and increased ROS and calcium levels. This can be attributed to a decrease in Bcl2 protein and the formation of a Bax channel in the mitochondrial membrane. Furthermore, the collapse of the CaMKK2 signaling pathway after TIPRL depletion led to significantly reduced ATP levels in CSCs, with only a marginal decrease in non‐CSCs. A rescue experiment involving Bcl2 overexpression in TIPRL‐depleted cells confirmed that TIPRL tightly regulates mitochondrial function via CREB activation.
Combination treatment with afatinib and TIPRL depletion was able to induce apoptosis in lung CSCs, thus reducing their tumorigenic ability. TIPRL depletion caused a decrease in the expression of HMG20A, a novel target gene of CREB in lung CSCs. HMG20A is a high‐mobility group domain‐containing protein which is homologous to HMG20B.[
 
] It regulates inflammatory responses and the epithelial‐mesenchymal transition, as well as enhances DNA damage repair.[
 , , , 
] Therefore, TIPRL‐induced reduction of HMG20A in lung CSCs probably abolishes resistance to the EGFR inhibitor afatinib. Lastly, TIPRL depletion combined with an anticancer drug could also be a promising approach against anticancer drug resistance, recurrence, and metastasis.
In liver and lung cancers, TIPRL is upregulated and plays a role as a tumor progressor.[
 , , 
] However, the mechanism that regulates TIPRL gene expression remains unknown. In this study, we found that CREB directly binds to the TIPRL promoter. In turn, increased TIPRL maintains sustained activation of the CaMKK2‐CaMK4‐CREB signaling axis by binding to the C‐terminal region of CaMKK2. CREB acts as a positive feedback controller by binding to the promoter of TIPRL and stimulating its transcription. This CREB‐TIPRL positive feedback regulation loop contributes to the maintenance of stemness and survival of lung CSCs (Figure  ).

4.

## Conclusion
TIPRL is a promising therapeutic target for lung cancer, particularly for CSCs. Our study elucidates the molecular mechanisms underlying the crosstalk between the CaMKK2 signaling pathway and CSCs in lung cancer, which can aid in the development of novel treatment strategies.

5.

## Experimental Section

## Cell Culture and Antibodies
Human lung cancer (A549, H23, and H1793 for LUAD; H2170 and Calu‐1 for LUSC; H1299 and H460 for large cell carcinoma; H1688 and H69 for SCLC) and normal epithelial (HEL299, LL24, and Beas‐2B) cell lines were obtained from the Korean cell Line Bank (Seoul, South Korea). The lung cancer cell lines represent different types and subtypes of lung cancer, including non‐small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and small cell lung cancer (SCLC). The histological type and genetic alteration of all cell lines used are presented in Table  (Supporting Information). This diversity was selected to allow for a broader understanding of how different lung cancer subtypes and genetic background respond to TIRPL and exhibit cancer stem cell characteristics. A549, H460, H1299, and H1793 cells were cultured in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM)/F12 supplemented with 4 mg mL−1 bovine serum albumin, 10 ng mL−1 basic fibroblast growth factor, 20 ng mL−1 epidermal growth factor, 1× B27, 2 µg mL−1 heparin, and 25 mg mL−1 insulin, to obtain spheroids. All cell cultures were carried out at 37 °C, in a humidified incubator containing 5% CO2. All antibodies used are listed in Table  (Supporting Information). Briefly, antibodies against the following proteins were used: poly(adenosine diphosphate ribose) polymerase, caspase‐3, CaMKK2, and Histone H3 (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA); CD133, including those conjugated to magnetic beads, allophycocyanin and CD44‐FITC (Miltenyi Biotec, Bergisch Gladbach, Germany); TIPRL (Bethyl Laboratories, Montgomery, TX, USA); PP2Ac, tubulin, CaMKK2, CREB, p‐CREB (S133), GST, and mouse and rabbit IgG‐HRP (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA); hemagglutinin epitope (Roche, Nutley, NJ, USA); and p‐CREB (S129) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The mouse monoclonal anti‐His tag antibody was from Qiagen (Hilden, Germany).

## Tissue Collection and Cell Isolation from Patients with Lung Cancer
Human tissues were obtained from patients with lung cancer who participated in this study and provided written informed consent. All experimental protocols were approved by the Institutional Boards of Asan Medical Center and the University of Ulsan College of Medicine (approval nos. 2020‐1117 and 2021‐1264). Human lung tissues were obtained from the Asan Bio Resource Center, Korea Biobank Network [2021‐13(230)], from 11 patients (age range, 30–83 years) who underwent surgery for non‐small cell lung cancer. In the 11 tissue pairs, cells from each tissue sample were sorted as CD133+ or CD133–, and their total RNA was extracted. Patient case descriptions are presented in Table  (Supporting Information).

## Transfection, Transduction, and Stable Cell Line Construction
For TIPRL knockdown, siRNAs (5′‐CCTAATGAAATATCCCAGTAT‐3′) were constructed based on the TIPRL sequence, which exhibited >80% TIPRL knockdown efficiency. To generate a stable TIPRL knockdown, an sgRNA sequence targeting the TIPRL gene was subcloned into Tet‐On 3G all‐in sgRNA‐Cas9 plasmids (ToolGen, Seoul, South Korea), which were used to transfect A549 cells. For knockout validation, genomic DNA from the selected clones was sequenced after amplifying a nearby DNA sequence complementary to the TIPRL sgRNA. The optimal scoring guide target site, GCCCGAAGCAGAAATCCCGG[TGG] (PAM sites indicated in brackets), was selected for CRISPR gene editing via Cas9. The transfected cells were selected in a medium containing 2 µg mL−1 puromycin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and then maintained in a medium containing 0.5 µg mL−1 puromycin. For TIPRL overexpression, A549 cells were transfected with 4 µg of pCGN‐HA or pCGN‐HA‐TIPRL using the Lipofectamine LTX reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For the TIPRL rescue experiment, A549‐sgCont and A549‐sgTIPRL cells were infected with lentiviral particles expressing TIPRL or the control. TIPRL was subcloned into pLVX‐zsGreen‐N1 (TaKaRa Bio, Shiga, Japan) from pCGN‐HA‐TIPRL. To produce the recombinant lentivirus, pLVX‐TIPRL was co‐transfected with MISSION Lentiviral Packaging Mix (Sigma‐Aldrich, MA, USA) into HEK 293FT cells (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Viral particles were collected by carefully removing the medium at 48 h post‐transfection.

## Fluorescence‐Activated Cell Sorting, Magnetic‐Activated Cell Sorting, and Flow Cytometry
A549, H460, H1299, and H1793 human lung cancer cell aggregates were dissociated into single cells, washed with PBS, and stained with fluorescent antibodies specific for CD133/1‐allophycocyanin and CD44‐FITC (Miltenyi Biotec). Mouse IgG1 conjugated to allophycocyanin was used as the isotype control. The cells were sorted using a BD FACSAria flow cytometer (BD Biosciences, Franklin lakes, NJ, USA). Magnetic cell separation of the tumor cell populations was performed using microbeads conjugated with CD133/1 (AC133, mouse IgG, Cell Isolation Kit; Miltenyi Biotec). The magnetic separation step was repeated twice, using a positive selection column (LS column) once and a negative selection column (LD column) after, following which the eluted cells were applied to a new positive selection column. After magnetic sorting, the cell viability was assessed using a Trypan Blue exclusion assay. Sorting quality in both CD133+ and CD133‐depleted cell populations was assessed by flow cytometry using an antibody against CD133/2 (293C3‐phycoerythrin; Miltenyi Biotec).

## Phospho‐Specific Protein Antibody Array Assay
After adding 75 µL of labeling buffer to the protein sample (50 µg), the sample was treated with 3 µL of the 10 µg µL−1 biotin/DMF solution. The antibody microarray slide (Full Moon Biosystems) was treated with 30 mL of blocking solution in a Petri dish, incubated on a shaker at 60 rpm for 30 min at room temperature, and washed with distilled water. The labeled sample was mixed with 6 mL of coupling solution. The blocked array slide was incubated with coupling mixture on a shaker at 60 rpm for 2 h at room temperature in a coupling dish. Then, 30 µL of 0.5 mg mL−1 Cy3‐streptavidin (GE Healthcare, Chalfont St. Giles, UK) was mixed in 30 mL of detection buffer. The coupled array slide was treated with detection mixture in a Petri dish on a shaker at 60 rpm for 20 min at room temperature. The slide scanning was performed using a GenePix 4100A scanner (Axon Instrument, Sunnyvale, CA, USA). The slides were scanned at 10 µm resolution, optimal laser power, and PMT. After obtaining the scan image, they were grided and quantified using GenePix 7.0 Software (Axon Instrument). The protein information was annotated using UniProt DB. The phosphorylation ratio was calculated using the following formula:

(1)phophorylationratio=phosphoexperimentunphosphoexperiment/phosphocontrolunphosphocontrolData mining and graphic visualization were performed using ExDEGA (Ebiogen Inc., Seoul, South Korea).

## In Vitro Cell Death Assays
Unsorted or magnetically sorted CD133+ and CD133– A549 lung cancer cells were cultured in DMEM/F12 supplemented with 20 ng mL−1 epidermal growth factor and 10 ng mL−1 basic fibroblast growth factor. The cells were treated with afatinib at the indicated doses for 24 h (Selleck Chemicals, Huston, TX, USA). Similarly, the spheroids were cultured in the presence or absence of afatinib in DMEM/F12 supplemented with epidermal growth factor and basic fibroblast growth factor. The viability of unsorted, CD133+, and CD133– cells was evaluated using the Annexin V‐FITC/PI Staining Kit (BD Biosciences) or CCK‐8 Assay Kit (Dojindo, Kumamoto, Japan). The effect of the spheroid culture system on sphere‐formation was evaluated using colony counting and microscopy.

## Immunohistochemistry of Tissue Samples
Patient tissues were fixed overnight with 10% neutral‐buffered formalin, embedded in paraffin, and processed into 5‐µm‐thick sections. The sections were deparaffinized in xylene, followed by antigen retrieval by boiling the sections in an antigen‐unmasking solution. Next, the sections were pre‐treated with 3% H2O2 in 0.1 m Tris‐buffered saline (TBS, pH 7.4) for 30 min to quench the endogenous peroxidases. The sections were then treated with blocking solution (DAKO, Carpinteria, CA, USA) for 20 min and incubated with anti‐TIPRL or anti‐CD133 antibodies for 30 min in a humidified chamber. After washing with 0.1 m TBST (0.1 m TBS containing 0.1% Tween 20), the sections were incubated with the EnVision anti‐mouse polymer (DAKO) for 30 min. The peroxidases bound to the antibody complex were visualized after treatment with 3,3′‐diaminobenzidine chromogenic substrate solution (DAKO). The 3,3′‐diaminobenzidine reaction was monitored microscopically to determine the optimal incubation time and was stopped with several washes of 0.1 m TBS. The immunolabeled sections were dehydrated in a graded ethanol series, defatted in xylene, and mounted. The sections were examined using an Olympus BX51 microscope (Olympus, Shinjuku‐ku, Tokyo, Japan) under bright‐field illumination, and images were acquired using an Olympus DP70 camera (Olympus).

## Immunofluorescence Microscopy
A549 cells were transfected with hemagglutinin‐tagged CaMKK2‐expressing plasmids [including full‐length N‐terminal (1–165) and C‐terminal (447–540)], siRNAs against TIPRL, or control siRNA. The cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde and analyzed by immunofluorescence staining, as described previously,[
 
] using anti‐TIPRL, anti‐CaMKK2, or anti‐PP2Ac antibodies. The images were captured using a confocal microscope (Carl Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany).

## Protein Isolation, Immunoblotting, and Immunoprecipitation
Cells were lysed in lysis buffer A (20 mm
N‐2‐hydroxyethylpiperazine‐N′−2‐ethanesulfonic acid [pH 7.5], 150 mm NaCl, 1 mm EDTA, 2 mm ethylene glycol tetra‐acetic acid, 1% Triton X‐100, 10% glycerol, and protease cocktail I/II; Sigma), and cellular debris were removed by means of centrifugation at 10000 × g for 10 min. Proteins were separated using sodium dodecyl sulfate‐polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, transferred onto nitrocellulose membranes, blocked with 5% skim milk in 0.01 m TBS (pH 7.5) containing 0.5% Tween 20, and blotted with the appropriate primary antibodies. Antigen‐antibody complexes were detected using a chemiluminescence analyzer (Western Bright ECL; Advansta, Seoul, South Korea). A549 cells were transfected with an siTIPRL using Lipofectamine RNAiMAX (Thermo Fisher Scientific), according to the manufacturer's protocol, and then subjected to immunoprecipitation. Briefly, cells were rinsed once with cold PBS and then lysed in lysis buffer A. The cell lysates obtained were precleared with 10 µL of protein G sepharose beads (GE Healthcare, Dornstadt, Germany) for 1 h. The cleared lysates were then incubated with 1 µg of antibodies against TIPRL, CaMKK2, or PP2Ac or normal IgG antibodies for 2 h, mixed with 30 µL of Protein G sepharose beads, and then incubated overnight at 4 °C. The beads were washed four times with 1 mL of lysis buffer A, and the precipitated proteins obtained were subjected to immunoblotting.

## qRT‐PCR
Total RNA of human lung cancer tissues, non‐cancerous tissues, and CD133+ and CD133– cells was extracted using Trizol reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific). RNA (1 µg) was reverse‐transcribed using a First‐Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Fermentas, Grand Island, NY, USA). All reactions were performed in triplicate, and the B2M gene was used as a control. Using the comparative threshold cycle (Ct)[
 
] or standard method, the relative quantification of gene expression was calculated as the ratio of CD133+ cells to CD133– cells, after normalizing each sample against B2M. All qRT‐PCR data represent the mean ± SD of two replicates from one of three independent sets of experiments. The primer sequences used in this study are listed in Table  (Supporting Information).

## Cut‐And‐Run Assay
Cut‐and‐run experiments were performed according to the manufacturer's protocol (Cut‐and‐run kit; Cell Signaling Technology). Briefly, the cells were harvested, and 250 000 cells per sample were incubated for 10 min with 10 µL of concanavalin A‐coated beads at room temperature. Cells bound to beads were permeabilized and incubated with the appropriate antibody for 1 h, at 4 °C. Protein A‐MNAse at a final concentration of 700 ng mL−1 was mixed and incubated with cells for 1 h, at 4 °C. Protein A‐MNAse was activated with 2 µL of 100 mm CaCl2, and digestion was performed at 4 °C for 30 min. Release of the fragments was achieved at 37 °C in 15 min, and then the DNA was extracted using Spin columns (Qiagen) and eluted in 30 µL of elution buffer. The extracted DNA was used for qRT‐PCR analysis using SYBR Green Master Mix and CFX96 Touch Real‐Time PCR (Bio‐Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). Data represent the mean ± SD of two replicates from one of three independent experiments. The primers used for qRT‐PCR are listed in Table  (Supporting Information).

## Colony‐Formation Assay and Sphere‐Formation Culture
Anchorage‐independent growth was assessed by performing colony‐formation assays in soft agar and sphere‐formation culture. For the colony‐formation assays, cells were suspended in 1 mL of cell growth medium containing 0.3% agar and plated on a layer of 0.6% agar in growth medium. Cells were grown at 37 °C with 5% CO2, and the colonies were stained with 0.01% Crystal Violet (Sigma‐Aldrich) for 10 min and counted at 15 days post‐inoculation. In the case of stable cell lines (A549‐sgCont and A549‐sgTIPRL cells), the EGFP gene was inserted with sgRNA against the TIPRL gene as a selection tool for gene editing using CRISPR/Cas9. The generated colonies and spheroids were analyzed using fluorescence microscopy. For the sphere‐formation culture, the cells were seeded in ultralow‐attachment 6‐well plates, at a density of 103 cells mL−1. Sphere cultures were grown in serum‐free DMEM/F‐12 supplemented with 20 ng mL−1 epidermal growth factor and 10 ng mL−1 basic fibroblast growth factor. Data represent the mean ± SD of three replicates from one of three independent experiments.

## Measurement of Mitochondrial Activity and ATP Production
The specific fluorescent probes MitoSOX, TMRE, and Rhod‐2AM were obtained from Invitrogen. Unsorted and magnetically sorted CD133+ and CD133– lung cancer cells were cultured and then incubated with 1 µm MitoSOX for 20 min or with 5 µm TMRE or Rhod2‐AM for 30 min at 37 °C. The signals from the fluorescent probes were quantified using a FACSCanto II flow cytometer (BD Biosciences). Data represent the mean ± SD of two replicates from one of three independent sets of experiments. ATP levels were measured and analyzed using an ATP determination kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific), according to the manufacturer's protocol. Briefly, CD133+ and CD133– cells were sorted from lung cancer cell lines and plated at a density of 5 × 104 cells/well in a 12‐well plate. Next, 1 mL of fresh medium (10 mm glucose in fetal bovine serum‐free DMEM/F12) was added for total ATP level measurements. The plates were incubated at 37 °C in a humidified incubator for 90 min. The cells were harvested, lysed, and subjected to an ATP determination assay. ATP levels were quantified using a luminometer (Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, CA, USA). Data represent the mean ± SD of three replicates from one of three independent experiments.

## Luciferase Assay
Luciferase assays were performed using the Dual‐Luciferase Reporter Assay System (Promega, Madison, WI, USA), according to the manufacturer's specifications. Cells were co‐transfected with TIPRL promoter‐luciferase reporter or CRE minimal promoter plasmids, as well as control Renilla luciferase plasmids, for 24 h and then harvested. The relative luciferase activity was calculated by measuring the luciferase activity and normalizing it to the Renilla luciferase activity. To generate luciferase reporter constructs, the TIPRL promoter (0.5 kb to +20 bp) was PCR‐amplified from normal human genomic DNA (Takara Bio), using primers containing KpnI or HindIII linker sequences, and the PCR products obtained were cloned into the corresponding sites of the pGL4.14 vector (Promega). All reporter assay data represent the mean ± SD of two replicates from one of three independent experiments.

## Evaluation of Tumorigenicity and Toxicity
Tumorigenicity was determined by subcutaneously injecting A549‐sgCont and A549‐sgTIPRL CD133+ cells (1 × 105), isolated using magnetic‐activated cell sorting, into the flanks of 6‐week‐old female nude mice. All the institutional and national guidelines for the care and use of laboratory animals were followed (approval no. 2023‐12‐022). All animal procedures were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the Asan Institute for Life Sciences (Seoul, South Korea). After 10 d, well‐established tumors, with a volume of ≈100 mm3 were detected. Four groups (A549‐sgCont, A549‐sgCont+afatinib, A549‐sgTIPRL, and A549‐sgTIPRL+afatinib) were established by pooling five mice from each group. Experimental mice were intraperitoneally injected with afatinib (50 mg kg−1 d−1, 3 days/week, for 2 weeks), whereas control mice were injected with PBS. The tumor size was measured every 2 days using a digital caliper. Tumor volume (V) was calculated from the measured length (l) and width (w), using the following formula: V = lw2/2. The mice were euthanized and sacrificed 28 days after injection, and the tumor samples were analyzed using the DeadEnd Colorimetric TUNEL System (Promega).
For injection of CD133+ CSCs into the lungs, the mice were first anesthetized using isoflurane inhalation, and a small nick was made in their skin. The lung was exteriorized, and the lung wall was slightly injected. CD133+ cells isolated from A549‐sgCont or A549‐sgTIPRL cells were injected, and the skin was sutured. After 7 weeks, PET‐MRI fusion imaging was performed to assess the tumor burden or number using a NanoPET‐MRI system (1T, Mediso, Budapest, Hungary). The mice were intravenously administered 7.4±1.0 MBq in 0.2 mL of fludeoxyglucose under anesthesia (1.5% isoflurane in 100% O2 gas), via the tail vein. MR whole‐body imaging was used to obtain a T1‐weighted with a gradient‐recalled echo 3D sequence (TR = 25 ms, TEeff = 3.4, FOV = 64 mm, matrix = 220 × 220) during the fludeoxyglucose uptake period. Static PET images were acquired over 10 min in a 1–5 coincident in a single field of view with an MRI range. 3D volume of interest (VOI) analysis of the reconstructed images was performed using the InterView Fusion software package (Mediso) and standard uptake value (SUV) analysis. A VOI fixed at a diameter of 2 mm was drawn for the tumor and muscle sites. The SUV of each VOI was calculated using the following formula: SUVmean = [tumor radioactivity in the tumor volume of interest with the unit of Bq/cc × body weight (g)] divided by injected radioactivity.

## Statistical Analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using Student's t‐test and SigmaPlot (version 12.0; Systat Software, San Jose, CA, USA). Statistical significance was defined as follows: *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and ***P < 0.001. All the data in the study are expressed as mean ± SD of three independent experiments.

## Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Author Contributions
I.‐S.S., Y.‐J.J., and J.K.Y. contributed equally to this work. I.‐S.S. and S.‐W.J. designed the research. I.‐S.S., Y.J.J., J.K.Y., J.L, H.‐J.Y., Y.‐H.P., S.‐U.K., S.‐M.H., G.D.L, and S.‐W.J. performed the experiments. I.‐S. S., Y.J.J., J.K.Y., H.‐J.Y., Y.‐H.P., S.‐U.K., S.‐M.H., P.C. L., G.D.L., and S.‐W.J. analyzed the data. I.‐S.S. and S.‐W.J. wrote the manuscript.

## Supporting information
Supporting Information

## Acknowledgements
The authors thank the Bioimaging Center Core Facility at the ConveRgence mEDIcine Research Center (CREDIT), Asan Medical Center, for their help with the animal PET‐MRI and analysis. This work was supported by National Research Foundation of Korea grants funded by the Korean government (Ministry of Science and ICT; Ministry of Education) (grant nos. 2022R1A2B5B01001782, 2020R1A6A3A01098464, RS‐2023‐00246447, RS‐2023‐00207868, and RS‐2023‐00247255). This research was also supported by the Asan Institute for Life Sciences, Seoul, Republic of Korea (2022IL0025‐1).

Song I.‐S., Jeong Y.‐J., Yun J. K., Lee J., Yang H.‐J., Park Y.‐H., Kim S.‐U., Hong S.‐M., Lee P. C., Lee G. D., Jang S.‐W., TIPRL Regulates Stemness and Survival in Lung Cancer Stem Cells through CaMKK2‐CaMK4‐CREB Feedback Loop Activation. Adv. Sci.
2024, 11, 2406309. 10.1002/advs.202406309

## Contributor Information
Geun Dong Lee, Email: geundy@hanmail.net.
Sung‐Wuk Jang, Email: swjang@amc.seoul.kr.

## Data Availability Statement
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
Supporting Information

## Data Availability Statement
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.