pmcAdv Sci (Weinh)Adv Sci (Weinh)2933advsci101664569ADVSAdvanced Science2198-3844WileyPMC11425834PMC11425834.111425834114258343897315410.1002/advs.202400066ADVS89551Research ArticleResearch ArticleEGR3 Inhibits Tumor Progression by Inducing Schwann Cell‐Like Differentiation
ChenCai‐hong ChenYang LiYi‐nan ZhangHeng HuangXiu LiYing‐ying LiZhi‐yang HanJing‐xia WuXin‐ying LiuHui‐juan SunTaohttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-8962-2193 tao.sun@nankai.edu.cn

1

Tianjin Nankai University State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology and College of Pharmacy
Tianjin
300350
China

2

Tianjin International Joint Academy of Biomedicine
Tianjin
300450
China

*E‐mail: tao.sun@nankai.edu.cn

077202492024113447148310.1002/advs.v11.342400066
3152024
0312024
070720242709202427092024© 2024 The Author(s). Advanced Science published by Wiley‐VCH GmbHhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

## Abstract
The mechanism and function of the expression of Schwann characteristics by nevus cells in the mature zone of the dermis are unknown. Early growth response 3 (EGR3) induces Schwann cell‐like differentiation of melanoma cells by simulating the process of nevus maturation, which leads to a strong phenotypic transformation of the cells, including the formation of long protrusions and a decrease in cell motility, proliferation, and melanin production. Meanwhile, EGR3 regulates the levels of myelin protein zero (MPZ) and collagen type I alpha 1 chain (COL1A1) through SRY‐box transcription factor 10 (SOX10)‐dependent and independent mechanisms, by binding to non‐strictly conserved motifs, respectively. Schwann cell‐like differentiation demonstrates significant benefits in both in vivo and clinical studies. Finally, a CD86‐P2A‐EGR3 recombinant mRNA vaccine is developed which leads to tumor control through forced cell differentiation and enhanced immune infiltration. Together, these data support further development of the recombinant mRNA as a treatment for cancer.

In vitro, EGR3 induces melanoma cells to differentiate into Schwann cell‐like cells, leading to reduced migration, proliferation, and melanin secretion capability. In vivo, the development of a CD86‐P2A‐EGR3 recombinant mRNA vaccine not only triggers melanoma cells to undergo Schwann cell‐like differentiation but also augments immune infiltration via the NK‐cDCs‐CD8+
T‐cell axis, ultimately resulting in effective tumor control.
 

EGR3melanomamRNA vaccineschwann cell‐like differentiationNational Natural Science Foundation of China
10.13039/50110000180982272934Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities
10.13039/501100012226Nankai University
10.13039/50110000494563241645 
2.2

## EGR3 drives LCC and Induces Cell Phenotype Transformation
To further explore the driving factors of the LCC, we employed the Genome‐Wide CRISPR Knockout (GeCKO) screening system. This system integrates single‐guide RNAs (sgRNAs) with the endonuclease Cas9. Through the synthesis of specific sgRNAs, Cas9 can be precisely directed to genomic sites, inducing cleavage in nucleotide chains and generating DNA double strand breaks. This process ultimately leads to the destruction and knockout of target genes. Utilizing sgRNA libraries, we conducted CRISPR knockouts on the entire genome, enabling the subsequent screening of target genes.[
 , , 
] We infected A375 LCC with a GeCKO lentivirus library and screened using a dropout screening model with culture conditions without concentration gradient differences. The GeCKO‐LCC that migrated through the transwell were isolated, amplified, and sequenced to identify enriched sgRNAs (Figure
 ). Genes were scored using an algorithm to calculate the enrichment level of sgRNAs in the separated cells, allowing for the identification of genes that can broadly restrict migration. Many of the top‐scoring genes were involved in cell motion processes, including energy acquisition, cell skeleton, and extracellular structure, a condition that supported the effectiveness of the screening (Figure  ). Transcription factors have the basic function of controlling gene expression, so we compared the transcription factors enriched through transcriptome sequencing in the LCC transcriptome (Figure  ) with the 552 genes enriched by GeCKO screening. We found that transcription factor EGR3 was in the intersection of the two types (those enriched by GeCKO screening or by LCC transcriptome sequencing) (Figure  ). EGR3 belongs to the early growth response (EGR) family of C2H2 zinc finger proteins and plays a role in a variety of processes, including muscle development, lymphocyte development, and neuron development. EGR3 is significantly up‐regulated in both B16‐F10 and A375 LCC (Figure , Supporting Information). Rescue of cell migration and proliferation capabilities was achieved by knocking out EGR3 in LCC (Figure , Supporting Information). We further constructed an overexpression plasmid with an EGFP label to observe the effects of the EGR3 gene on cell morphology and migration (Figure  ). Interestingly, after EGR3 overexpression, the cells exhibited a morphology with multiple protrusions and an increase in the number and length of cellular protrusions with time, with the average length of protrusions per cell extending by 184.5 µm per 24 h (Figure  ; Figure , Supporting Information). This phenotypic change is accompanied by a decrease in cell proliferation capacity, and cells are arrested in the G1 phase (Figure  ; Figure , Supporting Information). It is worth mentioning that under electron microscopy observation, the long protrusions exhibit short, filamentous, high electron‐density structures on both sides (indicated by white arrows) (Figure  ), as well as a regular actin cytoskeleton structure within the protrusions in cell skeleton fluorescent staining (indicated by white arrows) (Figure , Supporting Information). This may contribute to increased cell adhesion ability (Figure  ), decreased migration (Figure  ), and reduced motility ability (Figure  ).
 
2.3

## MPZ and COL1A1 are Involved in EGR3‐Induced Schwann Cell‐Like Differentiation of Melanoma Cells
Transcriptome sequencing of EGR3‐expressing A375 melanoma cells revealed significant up‐regulation of multiple genes associated with the extracellular matrix (ECM), such as COL1A1, COL5A3, and FN1, thereby confirming the regulatory role of EGR3 in the remodeling of the extracellular space. Interestingly, synaptic‐related genes, such as ARC, SYP, and SYT12, were up‐regulated in cells (Figure
 ). Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) further enriched pathways related to the extracellular matrix and glial cell differentiation (Figure  ). Note that glial cells, such as astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, and Schwann cells, have protrusion structures. We observed that B16‐F10 and A375 cells overexpressing EGR3 exhibited morphologies similar to those of in vitro cultured Schwann cells. The fact that EGR3 regulates myelin‐related proteins, such as PMP2, PMP22, and MBP, rather than the transcription levels of neuroendocrine markers (Figure , Supporting Information), further supports its association with Schwann cells. The expression of myelin‐related proteins is a primary hallmark of Schwann cell maturation.[
 
] Additionally, we did not observe any regulatory influence on myelin sheath dedifferentiation‐related molecules (Figure , Supporting Information). In recent studies, it has been reported that melanocytes originate from additional Schwann cell precursors.[
 , , , , 
] This discovery led us to speculate whether EGR3 induces melanoma cells to differentiate into Schwann cell‐like cells. As the regulatory mechanism of melanocyte differentiation remains unclear, we cannot exclude the possibility that this phenotype change is involved in normal melanocyte differentiation. However, Schwann cell‐like features have been detected during the maturation of nevi. We compared the overlap of DEGs between EGR3‐overexpressing melanoma cells and the gene expression profiles associated with differentiation in Schwann cells and melanocytes. Eight genes are found within the intersection of the three, these genes may be involved in the development of shared characteristics following the differentiation of SOX10+ lineage cells. (Figure  ).
 Due to the positioning of COL1A1 and MPZ genes as the top two in this gene list and their known regulation by early growth response 2 (EGR2),[
 , 
] we proceeded with a more detailed analysis of these two genes. The up‐regulation of COL1A1 and MPZ caused by EGR3 overexpression was validated in both A375 and B16‐F10 melanoma cell lines (Figure  ). Immunofluorescence showed that COL1A1 and MPZ had similar cellular localizations (Figure  ; Figure , Supporting Information). The expression of extracellular matrix and myelin‐related genes is essential for Schwann cell axon extension, myelination, and stability. Therefore, we further constructed siRNA for these two genes to analyze their effects on cellular protrusion formation, extension, and mobility of cells. After overexpressing EGR3 in B16‐F10 cells, live cell imaging revealed that the position of the cells was relatively fixed, and they extended back and forth in a unipolar manner, resulting in a bipolar shape (Figure  ). Simultaneously knocking down the COL1A1 expression level while overexpressing EGR3 caused cells to form a multipolar shape with an increase in the number and total length of long protrusions. Correspondingly, knocking down MPZ expression level while overexpressing EGR3 resulted in cells that lack protrusion, indicating the importance of MPZ in protrusion formation (Figure  ; Figure , Supporting Information). Meanwhile, reducing the COL1A1 level but not the MPZ partially restored the cell's mobility, indicating that self‐secreted COL1A1 as the extracellular matrix partially restricts cell movement (Figure  ). Furthermore, the simultaneous knockdown of MPZ and COL1A1 does not further rescue the enhanced cell migration capability caused by COL1A1 knockdown, indicating that the expression of MPZ is not a limiting factor for cell motility (Figure , Supporting Information). As expected, knockdown of COL1A1 also restored the migration capability of B16‐F10 LCC (Figure , Supporting Information). In fact, pathways, including focal adhesion, regulation of actin cytoskeleton, and PI3K‐AKT signaling pathway, are significantly enriched in EGR3 overexpressing cells (Figure , Supporting Information). The limitation in movement and the elongation of protrusions may be partly attributed to the enhanced pFAKTyr397 and pAKTSer473 caused by COL1A1 (Figure , Supporting Information).

2.4

## EGR3 Regulates the Levels of MPZ and COL1A1 in a SOX10‐Dependent and SOX10‐Independent Manner, Respectively, Through Non‐Strict Conservative Motifs
The above results suggest that EGR3 may partially drive the differentiation state of melanoma cells. We used HiCuT experiments to detect B16‐F10 LCC, and the analysis of the transcription start site (TSS) and gene body showed that the main peak of EGR3 binding sites is biased toward the downstream of the TSS (Figure
 ), especially in the first intron (Figure , Supporting Information). Specific identification of EGR3 established a total of 11241 chromatin loops. Further analysis of the promoter–promoter (P–P) and promoter–other (P–O) chromatin loops showed that EGR3‐mediated loops are mainly involved in neural‐related differentiation and dedifferentiation pathways (Figure  ). Members of the EGR family are significantly enriched in motif analysis, indicating the conservation of binding sites (Figure , Supporting Information). The motif of SOX10 is also enriched in motif analysis (Figure , Supporting Information). EGR2 collaborates with SOX10 to facilitate the lineage differentiation of Schwann cells and the formation of myelin genes.[
 
] We demonstrate that EGR3 interacts with SOX10 (Figure  ). Further, reporter gene vectors were designed for the fragment wherein the EGR3 binding peak occurs in the CUT&RUN experiment to verify the main binding sites and activation levels of EGR3 on MPZ and COL1A1 (Figure  ). The 293T cell line was employed for the experiment as it does not express endogenous SOX10, thereby allowing us to observe the synergistic effects between exogenous EGR3 and SOX10. The activating effect of EGR3 was observed in the −700/+60 region and the first intron +1084/+1849 region of the MPZ gene. These two fragments contain multiple conserved elements of SOX10, and the activation is strongly up‐regulated through synergy with SOX10. No individual activating effect of SOX10 was detected in these fragments (Figure  ). We also observed the activation of EGR3 in the −1501/−701 and −700/+60 region of the upstream of the start of COL1A1 gene and the +360/+1330 region of the first intron, but not in synergy with SOX10 (Figure  h).
 Previous studies have shown that EGR family members bind to the 5′→3′ “GCGTGGG” motif, but further studies on EGR2 in myelin genes confirmed that motifs containing high‐affinity sites for EGR2 are rare, and motifs such as 5′→3′ “GGGTGGG” and “GTGTGGG” are also involved in the EGR2 regulation of myelin.[
 
] Therefore, we further mutated the five fragments with activating effects, and mutated all 5′→3′ “GNGTGGG” motifs in each fragment to “TTTTTTT” motifs to analyze their effects on activation levels (Figure  ). Mutations at the +1294/+1300 and +1329/+1335 sites in the first intron of MPZ significantly reduced the activation level of EGR3 and its synergistic effect with SOX10 (Figure  ). Meanwhile, the mutation at the −1316/−1310, −1307/−1301 and −253/−247 site of COL1A1 reduced the activation level of EGR3 (Figure  ). The +1294/+1300 and +1329/+1335 sites of MPZ, as well as the −1316/−1310 site of COL1A1, have been reported to be regulated by EGR2,[
 , , 
] in line with the regulatory location of EGR3. This further highlights the similarity of EGR family binding sites.
Interestingly, our investigation into the regions where EGR3 regulates MPZ and COL1A1 unveiled a common motif, “GTGTGGG”. This motif's regulatory effect appears to lack selectivity for genes upstream or downstream. This prompted us to investigate whether EGR3 binding sites could serve as potential enhancer elements. We focused on the “M‐3” fragment within the first intron of MPZ, which harbors EGR3 binding sites that are conserved in humans, mice, and rats.[
 
] To test the enhancer potential of this element, we ligated the “M‐3” sequence upstream and downstream of the M‐1‐b reporter vector, respectively (Figure  ). Surprisingly, both ligation methods did not enhance the activation of EGR3 for the M‐1‐b reporter vector and instead resulted in a reduction of activity (Figure  ). Additionally, no further enhancement of synergy with SOX10 was observed (Figure  ). We hypothesize that EGR3 promotes transcription initiation by altering the extent of duplex opening, either through helicase or topoisomerase activity, and that this enzymatic activity requires stabilization by SOX10. However, further study is needed to confirm this hypothesis.
Notably, it is worth mentioning that this mechanism is not subject to species‐specific influences. HeLa cells, the human cell line, which exhibits characteristic epithelial‐like structural features and does not express SOX10, underwent a morphological transition from regular epithelial‐like to spindle‐shaped cells with protrusion features upon co‐transfection of SOX10 and EGR3 (Figure , Supporting Information). Analysis of the endogenous transcription levels of MPZ and COL1A1 revealed that the sole overexpression of EGR3 upregulated the endogenous COL1A1 gene, but not the MPZ gene. However, upon co‐transfection of EGR3 and SOX10, MPZ exhibited a significant upregulation, providing further evidence for the dependence and independence of SOX10 in regulating MPZ and COL1A1 (Figure , Supporting Information).

2.5

## EGR3 Exhibits Inhibitory Effects in Clinical and Melanoma Model In Vivo
Although preliminary reports indicate a potential association between EGR3 and tumors, the precise biological functions and mechanisms by which EGR3 influences tumor development are still not well understood.[
 , , , , 
] We hypothesize that EGR3, as a tumor suppressor gene, exerts an influence on tumor progression in clinical melanoma patients. Accordingly, we analyzed the DEGs between EGR3HI and EGR3LO patients in the The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) cohort (Figure
 ). Survival analysis showed a positive correlation between EGR3 and survival rates in melanoma cases, and patients with high EGR3 expression had significantly better survival rates than those with low expression (Figure  ). A positive correlation between the expressions of COL1A1 and MPZ with EGR3 expression in melanoma patients was also observed (Figure  ). Pathway analysis revealed that EGR3HI patients in melanoma exhibited reduced proliferation signals, such as MYC (Figure , Supporting Information). ECM‐related pathways were significantly enriched in EGR3HI patients, including multiple ECM components such as collagen binding, laminin binding up‐regulated (Figure , Supporting Information). Meanwhile, GSEA, in addition to enriched pathways related to glial cell differentiation, further enriched pathways related to Schwann cell differentiation (Figure , Supporting Information).
 Meanwhile, we collected and analyzed 87 clinical tissue samples (Table , Supporting Information), including 7 nevus and 80 melanomas (39 primary and 41 metastatic lesions). EGR3 expression was observed in dermal nevi (type C region) and some primary melanomas (indicated by white arrows in Figure  ), with the lowest expression observed in metastatic lesions (Figure  ). The positivity of T‐cells within different regions was further subjected to statistical analysis. The proportion of T‐cells gradually decreased in nevi, primary melanomas, and metastatic lesions (Figure  ). However, further analysis of the 80 melanomas showed a negative correlation between T‐cells and EGR3 levels (Figure  ). In line with this, within nevi, we observed the appearance of T‐cells near type B rather than in the type C nevi region (Figure  ). This suggests that EGR3 may be associated with a reduced immune response. In vitro, EGR3 overexpression in B16‐F10 cells down‐regulated the expression levels of multiple chemokines, including CXCL9, CXCL10, and CXCL11, an outcome which may weaken the chemotactic ability of immune cells (Figure , Supporting Information). As we could not screen for stable overexpression of EGR3 in melanoma cell lines, the adenovirus vector expressing EGR3 was constructed for intratumoral injection of B16‐F10 melanoma in mice (Figure , Supporting Information). Compared to mice injected with the empty vector, those injected with the EGR3 adenovirus exhibited smaller tumor volume and weight (Figure  ) increased collagen content (Figure  ), and decreased expression levels of tyrosinase required for melanin formation (Figure  ). No differences were observed between the two groups in terms of the T‐cells in the tumor (Figure  ) or the cytokines IFN‐γ and TNF‐α in their respective sera (Figure  ).

2.6

## Lipid Nanoparticles (LNPs) Encapsulating Recombinant CD86‐P2A‐EGR3 mRNA Vaccine Mediate Tumor Control of Melanoma
In vivo studies indicate that IL6RIL6 can induce the glial cell transdifferentiation of melanoma cells and inhibit the progression of melanoma.[
 , , 
] As described earlier, we observed a clear change in the cell phenotype upon addition of IL6RIL6 (Figure
 ). Immunofluorescence showed that IL6RIL6 induced MPZ expression without inducing COL1A1 expression (Figure  ). Although IL6RIL6 did not increase the expression level of EGR3, MPZ expression was significantly reduced when we knocked down EGR3 (Figure  ). This outcome may be attributed to the up‐regulation of SOX10 (Figure  ), which enhances the basal transcriptional activity of EGR3 toward MPZ. Another feature of Schwann cell‐like differentiation in melanoma cells is the degradation of melanin production ability. On the basis of the observed decrease in tyrosinase expression levels in vivo, we further analyzed the effect of EGR3 on melanin production in vitro. Consistent with the IL6RIL6 finding, EGR3 expression resulted in a decrease in tyrosinase activity and cellular melanin levels through down‐regulation of the melanin production pathway of PAX3‐MITF‐TYR (Figure  ).
 Recently, mRNA vaccines have generated new directions for tumor treatment. Compared with viral and non‐viral gene therapy vectors, mRNA intratumoral injection vaccines avoid potential risks such as genomic rearrangements, carrier immunity, and backbone effects, which means that these vaccines have great potential in tumor treatment.[
 
] We considered developing an mRNA vaccine that induces Schwann‐cell like differentiation in melanoma cells while simultaneously triggering immune activation. IL6RIL6 has shown favorable clinical efficacy as a whole‐cell melanoma vaccine,[
 
] but it directly activates STAT3 phosphorylation, potentially inhibiting the IFN‐γ‐STAT1 pathway. IFN‐γ‐STAT1 is an important pathway for anti‐tumor immunity after immune infiltration, and the inhibition of its pathway may limit the potential of IL6RIL6 as an mRNA vaccine intratumoral injection for melanoma treatment. By contrast, EGR3 does not directly activate STAT3 phosphorylation (Figure , Supporting Information). To bolster the intratumoral immune response, we introduced the CD86 gene. It has been reported that solitary CD86 exhibits the capability to directly activate NK cells, independent of other co‐stimulatory molecules.[
 
] Concurrently, as a co‐stimulatory signal, CD86 can strengthen the anti‐tumor immune response by enhancing the activity of CD8+
T‐cells.[
 , 
] Notably, recent findings indicate that NK cells, through the NK‐cDCs‐T‐cell axis, play a pivotal role in recruiting T‐cells, thereby amplifying the cytotoxic impact on tumors.[
 , 
] In light of these discoveries, we designed a recombinant plasmid, connecting the CD86 and EGR3 genes through the P2A peptide. Utilizing the self‐cleaving property of the P2A peptide within cells, this enabled simultaneous expression of both genes. In vitro, the overexpression of CD86‐P2A‐EGR3 in B16‐F10 cells significantly enhances their interaction with NK cells compared to the control or overexpression of CD86 alone (Figure , Supporting Information). Therefore, we further designed a recombinant CD86‐P2A‐EGR3 mRNA vaccine to induce melanoma cell Schwann cell‐like differentiation and enhance immune response.
We used uridine 5′‐triphosphate with N1‐methylpseudouridine triphosphate (m1ψTP) nucleotides to transcribe the recombinant CD86‐P2A‐EGR3 mRNA. The mRNA is encapsulated with LNPs to enhance the in vivo transfection efficiency (Figure  ). The standalone subcutaneous injection demonstrates good safety of the vaccine, with no observed abnormal changes in body weight (Figure  ), biochemical markers (Figure , Supporting Information), or organs (Figure , Supporting Information). The recombinant mRNA vaccine effectively controls tumor growth (Figure  ). Further analysis reveals that at the injection site (within the white dashed lines), SOX10‐positive melanoma cells successfully express EGR3 (Figure ). Treatment with the mRNA vaccine induces extensive immune infiltration (Figure  ), particularly by T‐cells (Figure  ). Simultaneously, T‐cell invasion into the cancer nests can be observed (Figure  , white arrow). As anticipated, there is recruitment of NK cells (Figure  ; Figure , Supporting Information) and DC cells (Figure  ; Figure , Supporting Information) within the region of recombinant mRNA injection. Outside the injection area, a substantial influx of CD8+
T‐cells (Figure  ; Figure , Supporting Information) rather than CD4+
T‐cells (Figure , Supporting Information) is observed. This is accompanied by elevated levels of IFN‐γ and TNF‐α in the mouse serum (Figure  ). The recombinant mRNA therapy is well‐tolerated in B16‐F10 tumor‐bearing mice, with no observed animal weight loss during the study, resulting in an increased long‐term survival rate (Figure , Supporting Information).
In vivo experiments were further conducted using the highly immunogenic B16‐OVA cell line to investigate whether the efficacy of the vaccine would be impacted by the tumor's intrinsic immune microenvironment. The therapeutic application of recombinant mRNA reduced the number of NK cells in the spleen (Figure , Supporting Information) and effectively controlled tumor growth (Figure , Supporting Information). After depleting NK cells using anti‐Asialo‐GM1, there was no difference in tumor volume compared to the group treated with EGR3 mRNA alone (Figure , Supporting Information), indicating the crucial role of NK cells in the initial activation of the immune response to the recombinant mRNA. Simultaneously, there was a significant upregulation of MPZ and COL1A1 levels and a decrease in Ki‐67 levels in the tumor tissue treated with recombinant mRNA, demonstrating the acquisition of Schwann cell‐like characteristics within the tumor (Figure ). Collectively, these findings illustrate that recombinant mRNA vaccine triggers a Schwann cell‐like differentiation in melanoma cells via the EGR3 gene and bolster immune infiltration through the CD86 gene, ultimately resulting in effective tumor control.

3

## Discussion
Skin melanocytes have been reported to originate from the SOX10+/EGR2− trunk ventral migration pathway of SCPs. Tracking using EGR2−Cre/Rosa26−YFP confirmed that neurogenic melanocytes do not differentiate from Schwann cells that undergo early myelination and myelin formation in the normal development process,[
 
] indicating relatively independent differentiation pathways of Schwann cells and melanocytes originating from SCPs. BRAFV600E is the most common mutation in nevi and melanoma, and BRAFV600E transgenic mice are commonly used as models for observing nevi. This strain of mice exhibits increased proliferation of skin melanocytes, excessive pigment deposition, and low frequency of melanoma formation. Interestingly, the tumors that form usually resemble neurofibromas, which are benign nerve sheath tumors originating from Schwann cells.[
 , , 
] Schwann cell‐like tumors in mice rarely develop into malignancy and remain benign throughout the animal's lifespan.[
 
] Multiple studies have also demonstrated a negative correlation between the maturity of nevi and malignant tumors.[
 , 
] The Schwann cell‐like feature may be like a “trap” that nevus cells fall into during the maturation process,[
 
] blocking the migration of melanoma cells with oncogenic mutations deeper into the epidermis, along with cell cycle exit and a decrease in melanin production ability. After EGR3 overexpression in melanoma cells, cell cycle arrest was observed in the G1 phase, accompanied by decreased levels of TYR expression and enzyme activity within the cells, resulting in reduced melanin production.
Senescence may be involved in melanocyte Schwann cell‐like differentiation in vivo. Multiple cell lineages, including melanocytes, have been observed in vitro to undergo RS/OIS (including BRAFV600E and H‐RASG12V) that can lead to degradation of nuclear envelope (NE) proteins.[
 , 
] One effect of NE degradation is the disturbance of the interaction between the genome and the nuclear lamina, resulting in changes in the three‐dimensional chromatin organization in the nucleus.[
 
] In vivo, senescent nevus melanocytes exhibit decreased expression of lamin B1 compared to neighboring keratinocytes and melanocytes.[
 
] Note that according to prior research, during the maturation of neurons, as the expression level of lamin B1 decreases, the genomic locus that contains EGR3 and is located at 14qD2L relocates from the nuclear periphery to the interior, accompanied by the expression of related genes.[
 
] In the skin, lamin B1 expression levels also decrease from the basal layer to the granular layer as keratinocytes differentiate. The EGR3 gene is strongly expressed in skin granular cells, and EGR3 is therefore considered a late epidermal differentiation regulator in the skin.[
 
] In addition, EGR3 is reported to be involved in forced growth arrest and senescence in response to oncogenic stress through the Arf‐Egr‐C/EBPβ pathway.[
 
] All these findings suggest a potential regulatory role of EGR3 in cell maturation/differentiation, which may coordinate with the cell's epigenetic information, ultimately affecting cell function and morphological characteristics. Remarkably, data analysis reveals a significant increase in the expression of the EGR3 gene in melanocytes undergoing differentiation in vivo (GSE147299, data not shown), as well as in melanocytes transfected with BRAFV600E in vitro (GSE46818, data not shown). EGR3 expression in histological sections of clinical patient nevi implies that the regulatory involvement of EGR3 may serve as a universal mechanism for melanocyte maturation and senescence. However, it remains unclear whether in vivo melanocytes undergo NE degradation, which could subsequently impact chromatin spatial remodeling, gene expression changes, and lead to cell differentiation and profound senescence. Further in‐depth studies are needed to elucidate this. Interestingly, another simple and plausible in vivo hypothesis is the BRAF/NRAS mutations, which directly activate the MAPK/ERK pathway and downstream EGR family, leading directly to the occurrence of Schwann cell‐like phenotypes and cell cycle arrest. Therefore, there is reason to suspect that the escape from oncogene‐induced inhibitory differentiation and eventual tumorigenesis inevitably involves the functional transformation of these pathways.
The extracellular matrix is indispensable for Schwann cell myelin sheath formation. The basement membrane provides structural support for anchoring axonal membranes.[
 
] Interaction between Schwann cells and the basement membrane is mediated by layer adhesion protein receptors.[
 
] Additionally, collagen has the capacity to regulate Schwann cell function by modulating intracellular signaling, and it may be crucial for myelin sheath formation.[
 
] EGR family members are important transcription factors involved in extracellular matrix regulation, and EGR1/2 has been reported to regulate the expression of collagen genes such as COL1A1 and COL3A1 through binding to non‐strict conserved regulatory elements in the proximal promoter.[
 , 
] In addition, the EGR family plays an essential role in neurogenesis, with EGR2 involved in regulating the expression of genes related to myelination and maintenance in Schwann cells.[
 , , 
] In this study, we observed that EGR3 significantly up‐regulates extracellular matrix‐related genes and induces long protrusions on cellular morphology. This outcome is attributable, in part, to the COL1A1 and MPZ genes. Although it remains unclear whether COL1A1 is secreted in the form of a homotrimer or heterotrimer and what arrangement it takes, similar bipolar cellular morphology and restricted cell motility were observed when melanoma cells were cultured on an exogenous type I collagen matrix.[
 , 
] Therefore, we speculate that when trapped by type I collagen, cells extend in a unipolar manner back and forth, producing a cellular morphology similar to that of Schwann cells cultured in vitro.
In this study, we confirmed that EGR3 regulates the expression levels of MPZ by binding non‐strict conserved 5′→3′ “GNGTGGG” motifs, similar to the EGR2. EGR3 regulates the expression of MPZ and COL1A1 in both SOX10‐dependent and ‐independent manners. We observed a closely adjacent pair of non‐strictly conserved motifs with EGR3 regulatory activity in both genetic loci of MPZ and COL1A1. However, it is currently unknown whether this structure can enhance the formation of EGR3 dimers. Further research is needed to examine the regulatory mechanism of this structure. Notably, an inverted orientation and spacing structure similar to the +1084/+1849 intron has been observed in the −5 kb upstream region of MPZ (two reverse EGR sites adjacent to one SOX10 dimer site), which is involved in regulating MPZ transcription levels by EGR2.[
 
] The binding sites of EGR3 appear to only enhance transcriptional activity within specific regions and do not act synergistically as enhancer elements with the transcription start region in vitro. Typically, these active regions are situated upstream of the promoter or within the first intron, and they are frequently spaced apart from one another by a long interval. EGR1 binds to conserved motifs located within the grooves of double‐stranded DNA, using its three zinc finger DNA‐binding domains.[
 
] These domains are conserved among all members of the EGR family, including EGR3.[
 
] Meanwhile, studies on myelin genes have shown that these genes have few high‐affinity EGR2 sites,[
 
] which suggests that the EGR family has evolved a more sophisticated method of regulation. However, the specific mechanism by which the EGR family regulates transcription remains unknown. The similar C2H2‐type member SP1 has been reported to change DNA conformation by DNA unwinding rather than DNA bending.[
 
] Thus, we posit that EGR family members may stabilize the binding of these weaker sites by interacting with the lateral SOX10 dimer, thereby promoting DNA conformational changes and the initiation of transcription. Finally, our study, along with previous research, indicates that as a transcription factor shared by melanocytes and Schwann cells, SOX10 interacts with the EGR family in the form of a complex to participate in gene expression regulation, which is a necessary condition for driving specific lineage differentiation gene transcription.
The development of preventive and therapeutic mRNA strategies has emerged as a novel direction in current cancer management research. Two main approaches, encoding antigens or cytokines, constitute the primary avenues for therapeutic mRNA development in oncology. While mRNA itself has demonstrated sufficient safety, challenges persist in the safety and efficacy of cytokine‐encoding strategies, with concerns about potential systemic immune risks yet to be addressed.[
 
] On the other hand, multiple mRNA cancer vaccines based on tumor‐specific antigens and tumor‐associated antigens have advanced to clinical development stages. However, these two approaches represent distinct active or passive immunotherapy strategies. In contrast, mRNA therapeutic strategies based on tumor cell remodeling hold promise in concurrently addressing both active and passive immunotherapy strategies while reducing the malignant potential of the tumor itself. This may pave the way for new frontiers in mRNA‐based cancer therapy. As a tumor suppressor gene, EGR3 expression in melanoma tissue is associated with longer patient survival. Meanwhile, in vivo experiments demonstrate that EGR3 delays melanoma growth. Due to the potential anti‐proliferative and differentiating capabilities of EGR3, we further developed a recombinant mRNA vaccine for melanoma treatment. CD86 and EGR3 genes were connected using a P2A peptide to prepare a recombinant mRNA vaccine to enhance T‐cell activation through NK‐cDCs‐CD8+
T‐cell axis. Finally, we observed that melanoma tumor‐bearing mice treated with the recombinant mRNA showed an improvement in the survival rate and tumor control. This improvement appears to depend on Schwann cell‐like differentiation and a robust immune response.
LNPs are commonly used carriers for mRNA delivery, but their lack of targeting specificity raises concerns about off‐target toxicity,[
 
] which may limit the routes of administration for recombinant mRNA. Various strategies have emerged to enhance mRNA targeting and reduce side effects, including the modification of LNPs and the use of alternative carriers such as extracellular vesicles, bacterial outer membrane vesicles, and virus‐like particles.[
 , , , 
] The development of these strategies promises to improve mRNA targeting while maintaining safety. This provides more options for mRNA‐based cancer therapies via intraperitoneal injection, intravenous administration, and inhalation. For example, in a mouse lung cancer model, inhalation of IL‐12 mRNA encapsulated in extracellular vesicles effectively reduced systemic side effects and enhanced lung targeting.[
 
] The continued development of these strategies holds great potential for expanding the applications of mRNA therapeutics. In conclusion, these data support the further development of recombinant mRNA as a cancer treatment method.

4

## Experimental Section

## Mice
All animal procedures were approved by the Animal Ethics Committee of Nankai University Laboratory Animal Center (Issue No. 2023‐SYDWLL‐00249). Female C57BL/6J mice were purchased from Charles River. The mice were certified by the Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care. The animals were fed a standard laboratory diet and maintained under a 12 h light/dark cycle. All analyses were double‐blinded and randomized.

## Cell Culture and Treatment
Cells were purchased from KeyGen Biotech (CN) and MeisenCTCC (CN). The murine melanoma cell line (B16‐F10 and B16‐OVA), the human melanoma cell line A375, the human renal epithelial cell line 293T, and the human cervical cancer cell line HeLa were cultured in DMEM (HyClone, USA), supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (HyClone, USA) and 1% penicillin–streptomycin.

## siRNA and Plasmid Transfection
Cell lines were transfected using Lipo8000 transfection reagent (Beyotime, CN) for the siRNA and plasmid. The concentrations of the siRNA, plasmid, and transfection reagent followed the manufacturer's protocol.

## Quantitative Realtime PCR
RNA was isolated using the Eastep Total RNA Extraction Kit (Promega, CN) and reverse transcribed using 1st Strand cDNA Synthesis SuperMix for qPCR (Yeasen, CN). The accumulation of PCR products was measured by SYBR green fluorescence (Yeasen, CN).

## Western Blot and Co‐Immunoprecipitation
Proteins were extracted using RIPA lysis buffer, and their concentrations were determined via the BCA assay (ThermoScientific, USA). Protein extracts were separated using 10% SDS–polyacrylamide gel and then incubated with primary antibodies (1:1000) at 4 °C overnight. GAPDH (1:5000, Affinity, USA) was used as the loading control, followed by further incubation with horseradish peroxidase‐conjugated secondary antibodies (1:5000, Affinity, USA). Detection was performed using an enhanced chemiluminescence kit (Vazyme, CN). For co‐immunoprecipitation experiments, 50 µL of Protein A/G agarose (Beyotime, CN) was incubated with antibodies against EGR3 overnight at 4 °C with continuous rotation. The lysates were centrifuged at 12 000 rpm for 10 min at 4 °C, and then incubated with the antibody‐conjugated beads overnight at 4 °C. After incubation, the beads were washed three times with a cold lysis buffer. The precipitated proteins were separated from the beads by resuspending the beads in 1×SDS‐PAGE loading buffer and boiling at 99 °C for 10 min. Consequently, the boiled proteins were analyzed by Western blot.

## Multiple‐Round Migration Screening Model and Dropout Screening Model
The melanoma cell lines A375 and B16‐F10 were used in the multiple‐round migration screening model, segregating LCC and HMC in a three‐round migration screening model. Specifically, as illustrated in Figure  and Figure (Supporting Information), during the first round, cells were seeded with a cell density of 2 × 105 cells into transwell chambers within six‐well plates. The top and bottom chambers were supplemented with 10% FBS‐DMEM. After 48 h, cells were dissociated using 0.25% trypsin‐EDTA, separating migrated and non‐migrated cells, which were subsequently transferred to 12‐well plates for cultivation and expansion. Upon reaching confluence, the second round of screening was conducted, with cells seeded at a density of 2 × 105 cells into transwell chambers within 6‐well plates. The top and bottom chambers were filled with medium containing 10% FBS‐DMEM, and chemoattractants LPA (1 µm) and EGF (25 ng mL−1) were additionally supplied to the bottom chamber's medium.[
 
] After 48 h, cells were dissociated as in the first round, and the screening process was repeated similarly. The third round of screening followed a comparable protocol with cells seeded in transwell chambers. The top chamber was supplied with serum‐free DMEM, while the bottom chamber contained 10% FBS‐DMEM. After 48 h, cells were dissociated using 0.25% trypsin‐EDTA, separating migrated and non‐migrated cells, which were transferred to 12‐well plates for cultivation and expansion, ready for subsequent experiments.
The low chemotactic A375 cells isolated were used in the GeCKO‐mediated dropout screening model. The GeCKO lentivirus library virus was obtained from OBIO Technology (CN). Specifically, as the low chemotactic A375 cells in 6 cm culture dishes reached a 40% confluence, transduction with the GeCKO lentivirus library was carried out at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.3, and the medium was changed the following day. After 48 h, cells were passaged, and 2 µg mL−1 of puromycin was added to the medium. Following a 7‐day puromycin screen, GeCKO library‐transduced LCC cells were used in the dropout screening model. As illustrated in Figure  , GeCKO‐LCC cells were seeded with a density of 2 × 105 cells into transwell chambers within six‐well plates. Both the top and bottom chambers were supplemented with 10% FBS‐DMEM. After 48 h, the GeCKO‐HMC cells, which originated from GeCKO‐LCC cells and had migrated to the other side of the transwell membrane, were dissociated using 0.25% trypsin‐EDTA. Subsequently, these cells were transferred to 12‐well plates for cultivation and expansion. GeCKO‐LCC cells that did not undergo dropout screening served as a negative control. Sequencing was performed on DNA extracted from the negative control cells and GeCKO‐HMC cells.
For each sample, guide counts were normalized to the total count of that sample. The counts of guide detected in GeCKO‐HMC cells were compared to the input distribution of guide from negative control to obtain fold‐change values for each guide. The most enriched guide for each gene was identified, and genes were ranked based on their enrichment, with a rank of 1 indicating the highest enrichment. Graphs were generated based on the fold‐change values and ranking of gene.

## Transwell Migration Assay
The experimental methods were as previously described with some modifications.[
 
] Specifically, transwell migration assays were performed by using 8 µm PET transwell (Corning, USA) inserts in 24‐well plates. A total of 1 × 104 cells in serum free‐DMEM were placed in the upper chamber and 10% FBS‐DMEM were added in the lower chamber. After incubation at 37 °C in a humidified 5% CO2 atmosphere for 18 h, cells that migrated to another side of the membrane were fixed with methanol, and the non‐migrated cells were mechanically removed with a cotton swab. Cells adherent on the membrane were stained with crystal violet solution. Cell numbers were examined under light microscopy at 200× magnification.

## Single‐Cell Motility Analyses
The experimental methods were as previously described with some modifications.[
 
] For single‐cell motility analyses, the control and treated cells were seeded at 2 × 104 cells in six‐well plates after transfection. Time‐lapse video microscopy images were obtained 24 h after plating, and the cells were manually tracked using the Manual Tracking plugin for the ImageJ software (version 1.49v, Fiji, NIH). At least 20 cells/conditions were tracked in individual experiments.

## Colony Formation and Cell Adhesion Assay
Colony formation assays were used to monitor cellular clonogenic potential. In brief, the control and treated cells were plated in 6‐well plates at 1 × 103 cells/well in triplicate following transfection. After 8 days of incubation, the cells were washed twice with PBS, fixed with methanol for 10 min, stained with 0.1% crystal violet solution for 10 min, and analyzed. For the cell adhesion assay, the cells were plated in six‐well plates at 1 × 106 cells/well. The cells were allowed to adhere for 30 min. Then, the cells were washed twice with PBS and stained with DAPI for 5 min. The number of stained cells per field was counted using a microscope at × 200 magnification.

## Cell Cycle Analysis
For EdU/Hoechst cell cycle analysis, the control and EGR3‐overexpressing B16‐F10 cells were incubated with 10 µm EdU for 2 h at 37 °C. The cells were then fixed with 4% PFA and treated with the EdU Cell Proliferation Kit (Beyotime, CN) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Hoechst 33 342 (Invitrogen, USA) was added at a concentration of 20 µg mL−1 for 30 min. The cells were analyzed using BD LSR Fortessa flow cytometer (BD Biosciences, USA), and the data were processed with the FlowJo (version 10) software.

## H&E and Immunohistochemistry
Tumors and multiple organs were fixed in formalin. The tumors and tissues were embedded in paraffin and cut into 5 µm sections. For H&E analysis, the formalin‐fixed paraffin‐embedded tissue slides were stained with H&E for evaluation. For imunohistochemistry analysis, antigen retrieval was performed using citrate‐buffered antigen retrieval solution. The slides were washed and blocked for 30 min with 5% goat serum. The sections were incubated with primary antibodies over night at 4 °C and with secondary antibodies for 1 h at room temperature. Aminoethyl carbazole (AEC) (MXB, CN) was used as the peroxidase substrate. The sections were then washed, counterstained with hematoxylin, mounted, and photomicrographed. Following the previously outlined methodology,[
 
] independent analysis of CD3 and EGR3 expression in sample images was conducted using ImageJ software along with the Colour Deconvolution2 and IHC Profiler plugins.[
 , 
] Scores of high positive (3+), positive (2+), low positive (1+), and negative (0), as well as an overall judgment (positive/negative) were assigned. The H score for each sample, representing the level of EGR3 expression, was calculated using the formula: H score = (High Positive * 3) + (Positive * 2) + (Low Positive * 1).

## Immunofluorescent Staining
Immunofluorescent staining was performed in tissues and cultured cells. Briefly, the cultured cells or tumor sections were fixed in 4% PFA for 15 min and then washed with PBS twice. The samples were permeabilized with blocking buffer (Beyotime, CN) for 30 min at room temperature and then incubated with the indicated primary antibody overnight at 4 °C followed by the fluorescent second antibody (1:200) at room temperature for 2 h. The nuclei were counterstained with DAPI for 30 min, and then sections were mounted on glass and subjected to microscopy. The confocal imaging data were obtained using a Zeiss LSM 800 confocal microscope.

## RNA‐Sequencing
RNA was extracted with the Trizol reagent. Sequencing libraries were generated using the NEBNext Ultra RNA Library Prep Kit for Illumina (NEB, USA) following the manufacturer's instructions. The pooled libraries were sequenced on an Illumina NextSeq sequencer.

## HiCuT and CUT&RUN
HiCuT experiments were completed and analyzed by the Frasergen Bioinformatics Company (CN). CUT&RUN was performed using the CUT&RUN assay kit (CST, USA). Cells were first coated with magnetic beads, followed by permeabilization with digitonin. Antibodies against EGR3 were then incubated with the permeabilized cells. pAG‐MNase enzyme was then added to digest exposed genomic DNA. Finally, the DNA complex was released into the supernatant and was purified for next‐generation sequencing.

## Reporter Assay
Cells were transfected with the indicated reporters and pRL‐TK reporter. At 48 h post transfection, the cells were subjected to the luciferase assay. Luciferase was determined using the Dual‐Lumi Luciferase Assay Kit (Beyotime, CN) by following the manufacturer's instructions.

## Melanin Content and Intracellular Tyrosinase Activity Assay
For the melanin content assay, cells were lysed in 1 n NaOH by heating at 80 °C for 2 h, then absorbance was measured at 405 nm. For the intracellular tyrosinase activity assay, cells were solubilized in a phosphate buffer (0.1 m, pH 6.8) containing Triton X‐100 (0.1%). Cellular lysates were centrifuged at 12 000 rpm at 4 °C for 20 min. The cellular extract was incubated with L‐DOPA (1.25 mm), and the absorbance was identified spectrophotometrically at 475 nm until the reaction was finished.

## NK Cell Selection and Co‐Culture Assay
NK cells were purified using the MagniSort Mouse NK cell Enrichment Kit (Invitrogen, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions. The NK cells were cultured with the control, EGR3‐overexpressing, CD86‐overexpressing, and EGR3‐P2A‐CD86‐overexpressing B16‐F10 cells at a ratio of 3:1 and were recorded by light and time‐lapse video microscopy.

## Recombinant IL6IL6R Protein, Adenoviruses, and mRNA
Recombinant IL6IL6R protein was purchased from the R&D Systems (USA). Adenoviral reagents Recombinant pcADV‐CMV‐EGR3 and pcADV‐CMV‐MCS adenoviral stocks were obtained from OBIO Technology (CN). Recombinant EGR3‐P2A‐CD86 mRNA was obtained from Azenta Life Sciences (CN). One‐methylpseudouridine (m1Ψ)−5′‐triphosphate instead of UTP was used to generate modified nucleoside‐containing mRNA. The sequence of the CDS region of the recombinant adenovirus and recombinant mRNA is consistent with that of the corresponding plasmid CDS region.

## Encapsulation of mRNA in LNPs
Preparation of aqueous phase: dissolve mRNA powder in deionized water to a concentration of 1 mg mL−1. Further, dilute the mRNA solution to 0.17 mg mL−1 using a 100 mmol pH 4.0 sodium citrate buffer. The organic phase consists of the FlowOrigin M1 liposomal nanoparticle kit (Mingtai, CN). Load the diluted aqueous phase and organic phase into separate BD syringes, and secure both syringes to the inlets below the FlowTech S microfluidic chip (Mingtai, CN). Synthesis is performed using the MingTai Microflow S microfluidic nanomedicine preparation system (Mingtai, CN).

## Mouse Model Induction and Treatment
Murine melanoma cells were suspended in Dulbecco's phosphate‐buffered saline (DPBS), and 2 × 106 cells in 100 µL were implanted subcutaneously into the right flank of C57BL/6J mice. After 7 days, intratumoral injection was used to administer adenoviruses or mRNA. The mice were anesthetized with 2.5% isoflurane and then intratumorally injected with 5 × 108 pfu adenoviruses or 50 µL mRNA into the right tumor every 3 days for a total of three doses. For the NK cell‐depleted mouse group, on the 6th day after subcutaneous tumor implantation, 100 µL of anti‐Asialo‐GM1 (BioLegend, USA) was intraperitoneally administered. Subsequently, with each recombinant mRNA treatment, 100 µL of anti‐Asialo‐GM1 was intraperitoneally administered.

## Flow Cytometry Analysis
On the second day after the first mRNA treatment, mouse spleens were isolated, homogenized, and passed through a 70‐micron filter to obtain a single‐cell suspension. Cells were then stained with anti‐CD8 Pacific Blue (Invitrogen, USA) and anti‐NK1.1 PE (Proteintech, CN) in the dark at 4 °C for 30 min. The cells were analyzed using BD LSR Fortessa flow cytometer (BD Biosciences, USA), and the data were processed with the FlowJo (version 10) software.

## Cytokine Concentration Analysis
The concentration of IFN‐γ and TNF‐α in mice serum was determined with the mouse IFN‐γ and mouse TNF‐α ELISA Kits (Proteintech, CN).

## Quantifications of Protrusion Number and Length
The number and length of protrusions were manually quantified using ImageJ software. The line tool was employed to measure the length of protrusions of randomly selected B16‐F10 and HeLa cells. Given that B16‐F10 cells exhibited inherent short protrusions, protrusions with a length less than 20 µm were excluded.

## Bioinformatics Analysis
The clinical information and gene expression data of melanoma in TCGA were downloaded using the R package “TCGAbiolinks” and analyzed by the R packages “ggplot2”, “survival” and “survminer”. GSEA was performed using the R package “clusterProfiler”. Patient sample analysis was performed using data from 458 samples in the TCGA melanoma (SKCM) cancer dataset. Groups for EGR3 expression were designated from the top and bottom quintiles of RNA expression.

## Statistical Analysis
Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism 9 (La Jolla, USA), and the results are expressed as the mean ± SD. Differences between groups were assessed via unpaired two‐tailed t‐tests (for simple two‐sample comparison) or one‐way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Dunnett's test (for multiple comparisons). Kaplan–Meier survival plots and log‐rank tests were used to compare survival between treatment groups. Statistical significance was set at *
p < 0.05 or **
p < 0.01.

## Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

## Supporting information
Supporting Information

## Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (82272934) and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, Nankai University (Grant Number: 63241645).

## Data Availability Statement
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.