pmceLifeElife1894elifeeLifeeLife2050-084XeLife Sciences Publications, LtdPMC4764582PMC4764582.1476458247645822656541810.7554/eLife.09419094191Research ArticleCancer BiologyThe chemokine CXCL13 in lung cancers associated with environmental polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons pollution
WangGui-Zhen ;  ). Air pollution is a global environmental health risk that affects the populations in developed and developing countries alike, and satellite observations suggest that 80% of the global population resides in locations where the ambient pollutant concentrations exceed the World Health Organization (WHO) Air Quality Guideline ( ). Outdoor air pollution in cities and rural areas was estimated to cause 3.7 million premature deaths annually worldwide in 2012, including 220,000 deaths due to lung cancer ( ). Recently, outdoor ( ) and indoor ( ) air pollution has been classified as a Group 1 carcinogen in humans by the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) of WHO. Indeed, the risk of lung cancer rises by 18% for every increase of 5 μg/m3 of PM smaller than 2.5 μm in diameter (PM2.5) in the environment; the risk increases by 22% for every increase of 10 μg/m3 in PM smaller than 10 μm (PM10) ( ). There have been efforts to investigate how air pollution causes human cancers by exposing cells and animals to PM or related chemicals ( ), but the carcinogenic mechanism remains elusive, at least in part, due to the difficulty of identifying human lung cancers that are causally associated with air pollution.
Xuanwei City of the Yunnan Province in China provides a significant association between air pollution and lung cancer ( ; ; ). Until the 1970s, residents of this region used smoky coal in unvented indoor fire pits for domestic cooking and heating, which are processes that release high concentrations of PM2.5/PM10 that contain high concentration PAHs ( ). Indoor air pollution in Xuanwei is associated with a significant increase in the absolute lifetime risk of developing lung cancer ( ), and the lung cancer incidence in this region is among the highest in China ( ; ;  ). In particular, nearly all women in this region are non-smokers and cook food on the household stove, and the lung cancer incidence in women is high. In Xuanwei, the male-to-female ratio of lung cancer incidences is 1.09:1, while that of China’s national average reaches 2.08:1 ( ). Tobacco smoke was weakly and non-significantly associated with lung cancer risk in this region ( ). In the 1990s, a reduction in the lung cancer incidence was noted after stove improvement, supporting the association between indoor air pollution and lung cancer ( ). These findings had been cited by the IARC monograph to classify indoor emissions from household coal combustion as ‘carcinogenic to humans (Group 1) ( ). However, lung cancer incidence in Xuanwei is still increasing ( ), possibly due to pollutants generated by coal-burning industrial plants that have moved into the area ( ). Therefore, the population in this highly polluted region (HPR) provides a unique opportunity to dissect air pollution-related lung carcinogenesis. Furthermore, the key carcinogens of smoky coal combustion are PAHs ( ), which are also the key carcinogens of tobacco smoke that causes more than 85% of global lung cancer deaths ( ). Xuanwei lung cancer is, therefore, applicable to elucidate tobacco smoke-induced lung carcinogenesis.
Chronic inflammation can promote cancer formation, progression and metastasis by inducing oncogenic mutations, genomic instability, and enhanced angiogenesis ( ). Studies show that PAHs can cause immune suppression ( ) and induce the secretion of cytokines/chemokines, including tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, interleukin (IL)-1β, IL-6, IL-8, CC chemokine ligand 1 (CCL1), chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 1 (CXCL1), and CXCL5 ( ; ; ; ). These factors may facilitate cancer initiation and progression. However, most of these factors were identified in cellular and animal PAH exposure models. Clinically relevant inflammation factors should be identified to shed insights into PAH-related carcinogenesis and provide novel therapeutic targets for lung cancer.
To systematically investigate air pollution-induced lung carcinogenesis, we used Xuanwei lung cancers to analyze the abnormalities in the cancer genomes ( ), genome-wide DNA methylation, non-coding RNAs (miRNAs [ ] and lncRNAs), and inflammation factors. The abnormalities found in the HPR lung cancers were tested in patients from control regions (CRs) where smoky coal was not used, to compare the difference between HPR and control region (CR) lung cancers. In this study, we explored the abnormal inflammatory factors in HPR non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLCs).

## Results

## Abnormal inflammatory factors in HPR NSCLCs
Using a microarray analysis of 84 cytokines/chemokines in tumor samples and their adjacent normal lung tissues of eight HPR NSCLCs, we found that the expression of four cytokines (IL-1F5, IL-1F9, MIF, and SPP1) and seven chemokines (CXCL13, CCL7, CCL20, CCL26, CXCL6, CXCL9, and CXCL14) was increased in tumors compared with their counterpart normal lung tissues ( ). Among them, CXCL13 was the most significantly up-regulated gene, with an average of 63-fold (10.48–173.65) higher expression in the tumor samples than in the normal controls. The expression of three cytokines (IL-1α, IL-5, and TNF-α) and nine chemokines (CCL4, CCL17, CCL18, CCL21, CCL23, CXCL1, CXCL2, CXCL3, and CXCL5) was lower in the tumor samples than in the normal controls ( ). 

## Overexpression of CXCL13 in NSCLCs
We expanded these observations, and found that the expression of CXCL13 was elevated in the tumor tissues from 63/70 (90%) HPR patients ( ) and 71/131 (54.2%) CR patients ( ) compared with their normal controls. CXCL13 expression was much higher in the HPR patients than the CR cases (p<0.002; ). Using immunohistochemistry (IHC) and immunoreactivity scoring, we showed that the expression of the CXCL13 protein was significantly higher in the tumor samples than their adjacent normal controls ( ). CXCL13 expression was higher in the HPR NSCLCs than the CR patients, and the CR smoker NSCLCs had higher CXCL13 levels than the CR non-smoker patients ( , and ). Using Western blot assays, we found that CXCL13 was much higher in the tumor samples than their adjacent normal lung tissues ( ). ELISA showed that the CXCL13 serum concentration was higher in the HPR patients compared with the CR patients, while the latter was higher than the healthy donors ( ). 

## Analysis of association between CXCL13 expression and clinical characteristics
CXCL13 expression was not significantly different in smoker and non-smoker HPR patients (p=0.17; ), suggesting that severe air pollution had a carcinogenic effect on humans. In NSCLCs from CRs, however, the expression of CXCL13 was significantly higher in smokers (44/71, 62%) than in non-smokers (27/60, 45%, p=0.04; ), suggesting a potential association between tobacco smoke and CXCL13 expression. The multivariate logistic analyses showed that among the 201 NSCLCs, CXCL13-high was associated with HPR (p=4.6×10–6) and tobacco smoke (p=0.032; ). 
To investigate CXCL13 expression in NSCLCs of other cohorts, a cancer microarray database Oncomine ( ) (www.oncomine.org) was applied. We found that in several works of this database ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ), CXCL13 in tumor samples was elevated compared with their paired normal lung tissues or other normal controls ( ). CXCL13 was also higher in smoker NSCLCs than non-smoker patients in some studies ( ;  ;  ) ( ). In microarray data sets GSE6135 ( ), GSE21581 ( ), and GSE54353 ( ) deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO; http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) from genetically engineered mouse models of lung cancer, Cxcl13 was increased in KrasG12DStk11-/- mice (especially in metastatic tumors), as compared with KrasG12DStk11wt mice ( ). These results suggest that CXCL13 overexpression was not specific to the Chinese cohorts, and Cxcl13 may play a role in Stk11-related lung tumorigenesis.
We showed patients of both HPR and CR regions with relatively earlier disease (stages I and II) had lower CXCL13, while those with advanced disease (stages III and IV) had higher CXCL13 ( ), and multivariate logistic analyses showed that CXCL13-high was associated with TNM stage ( , p=0.003). In 54 CR patients whose survival information was available ( ), the median survival time of CXCL13-high patients (965 days) was much shorter than the CXCL13-low cases (1193 days, p=0.03; ). Kaplan-Meier estimates of survival of patients with NSCLC according to age ( ), cancer stage ( ), and histology ( ) confirmed that patients with stages III–IV lung cancer had shorter survival time than those with earlier stages of NSCLCs. 

## BaP induces CXCL13 production in vitro and in vivo
PAHs were reported to be the major carcinogens in the PM2.5/PM10 in HPR, as well as in the PM at urban locations in Beijing, Shanghai, Guangzhou and Xi’an in China during January 2013 ( ). Clinically, a long latency is required for individuals to develop lung cancer since they were first exposed to smoking or air pollution. To test the effects of PAHs on cytokine/chemokine production, the normal human lung epithelial 16HBE cells ( ) were exposed to a representative PAH compound benzo(a)pyrene (BaP) at 1 μM for a long period of time (30 days). We found that CXCL13 was the most significantly up-regulated gene among the 84 cytokines/chemokines ( ). We confirmed that BaP up-regulated CXCL13 at both the mRNA and protein levels in a dose- and time-dependent manner in 16HBE and A549 lung cancer cells ( ). 

To test the in vitro observations in vivo, A/J mice were treated with vehicle control (corn oil) or 50–100 mg/kg BaP ( , modified from previous studies ( ). All BaP-treated animals developed lung cancer within 6 months, as detected by a microCT scan ( ) and histopathology ( ). We found that Cxcl13 was significantly up-regulated in the tumor samples compared with their normal counterparts at both the mRNA ( ) and protein ( ) levels, which paralleled the increase in Cxcl13 serum concentrations ( ). Notably, BaP increased Cxcl13 concentrations in peripheral blood of the mice at 1 month after the beginning of the treatment ( ), at which point no tumors were observed ( ).
To determine the source of Cxcl13, we performed IHC and immunofluorescence assays in lung cancer tissues of the mice. To do this, thyroid transcription factor-1 (Ttf-1) which is expressed in the lung epithelial cells ( ), was used to mark lung cancer cells, and Cd68 stain was employed to mark macrophages which can produce Cxcl13 in inflammatory lesions with lymphoid neogenesis ( ). By IHC assay, we found that both the Ttf1-positive lung cancer cells and Cd68-positive macrophages were stained positive for Cxcl13, but Ttf1-positive cells constituted more than 95% of the cellular component of the lung tumor tissues of the mice ( ). This observation was confirmed by immunofluorescence assay ( ) using antibodies against Cxcl13 (green), Cd68 (red), and Ttf1 (white). These results indicate that Ttf1 positive lung cancer cells were the main source of Cxcl13 in mice exposed to BaP.
We further showed that the anti-inflammatory drug dexamethasone (DEX) ( ) down-regulated Cxcl13 mRNA and protein, and reduced the Cxcl13 serum concentration ( ). DEX reduced the tumor burden ( , ) and prolonged the survival ( ) of the mice. Cxcl12, which was shown to be associated with lung cancer ( ), was not significantly changed in the BaP-treated mice ( ).

## BaP induces CXCL13 production by facilitating AhR translocation to the nucleus
We screened for transcription factors that could regulate CXCL13, and found potential aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) ( ) and V-Rel Avian Reticuloendotheliosis Viral Oncogene Homolog A (RelA) (data not shown) binding sites in its promoter. AhR is a ligand-activated transcription factor that binds the xenobiotic-responsive element (XRE) or aryl hydrocarbon response element (AHRE) to regulate genes in response to the planar aromatic hydrocarbon 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) ( ; ; ). The potential XRE-like sequence, 5’-GCCCAGGCTGGAGTGCAG-3’, is located at 1.7 kb downstream from the transcription start site (TSS; ). The potential interaction between AhR and CXCL13 was analyzed by the chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay, and the results showed that AhR could not bind CXCL13 in A549 cells without BaP treatment. Interestingly, AhR-CXCL13 interaction was detected and CXCL13 was significantly up-regulated in the presence of BaP, revealed by quantitative PCR (qPCR) ( ). However, significant interaction between AhR and CXCL12, CXCL14, CXCL11, or CXCL2 was not detected ( ). BaP significantly induced luciferase activity driven by the CXCL13 promoter containing XRE-like sequence; deletion of the XRE-like element, co-incubation with the AhR antagonist α-NF ( ) or transfection of an AhR-specific siRNA significantly reduced luciferase activity ( ). 
TCDD can activate AhR by inducing its translocation from the cytoplasm to nucleus ( ). We reported that α-NF and siAhR drastically inhibited BaP caused translocation of AhR to nucleus in 16HBE cells ( ). These results might explain why α-NF and siAhR significantly decreased CXCL13 expression ( ) and concentration in the supernatant ( ) in BaP-treated 16HBE cells.

## Knockdown of Cxcl13 attenuates BaP-induced lung cancer
To uncover the role of CXCL13 in BaP-induced lung cancer, Cxcl13 knockout mice ( ) were treated with 100 mg/kg BaP twice a week for 8 weeks ( ), and the tumor burden of the mice was evaluated. First, tumor nodules in histologic sections of mice upon BaP treatment were analyzed as described ( ), and the results showed that at treatment time points of 120 days, 180 days, and 240 days, Cxcl13-/- mice had much fewer lesions than Cxcl13+/- and Cxcl13+/+ mice ( ). Then, microCT was used to detect visible tumors in mice 240 days after BaP treatment. We found that Cxcl13-/- mice harbored much fewer lung tumors than Cxcl13+/- and Cxcl13+/+ mice ( ). Consistent with this observation, the tumor volume of Cxcl13-/- mice was significantly smaller than Cxcl13+/- and Cxcl13+/+ mice ( ). In Cxcl13+/+ and Cxcl13-/+ mice, the Cxcl13 serum concentrations were elevated 3 months after BaP treatment, at which time point no tumors were detected ( ). Moreover, the life span of BaP-treated Cxcl13-/- mice was prolonged compared with the Cxcl13+/+ and Cxcl13-/+ mice ( ). These results indicate that CXCL13 is required for BaP-induced lung cancer. 

## CXCL13-CXCR5 signaling is critical for BaP-induced lung cancer
CXCL13 primarily functions by binding to the G protein coupled receptor CXCR5, and CXCL13 is currently the only known ligand of CXCR5 ( ;  ). We tested the expression of CXCR5 in 24 NSCLCs, and found that it was expressed by the tumor samples but was not significantly higher than in paired normal lung tissues (p=0.089; ). In A/J mice treated with BaP, Cxcr5 was slightly up-regulated (p=0.07; ). To further show the role CXCR5 plays in lung carcinogenesis, Cxcr5-/- mice ( ) were treated with BaP at 100 mg/kg BaP twice a week for 8 weeks ( ). We showed that BaP treatment induced lung cancer in Cxcr5+/+ mice ( ). However, BaP-treated Cxcr5+/- mice developed fewer tumors, and BaP-treated Cxcr5-/- mice had much ewer lung tumors ( ). Consistently, the tumor volume of Cxcr5-/- mice was significantly lower than Cxcr5+/- and Cxcr5+/+ mice ( ). Furthermore, Cxcr5-/- mice had a prolonged life span compared with the wild-type and Cxcr5+/- mice ( ). These results demonstrate that CXCR5 is also critical for BaP-induced lung cancer.

## CXCR5-expressing macrophages promote lung cancer progression
CXCR5 is expressed by B cells, T cells and macrophages ( ;  ). We investigated which cells were involved in BaP-induced lung cancer by analyzing cell surface markers in the tumor microenvironment using antibodies against CD45, CD19, CD4, and CD68. Flow cytometry analysis showed a significant increase in Cd68+ macrophages in the lung tumor samples from BaP-treated A/J mice ( ), which was confirmed by IHC ( ). We found that 94.7% of these macrophages strongly expressed Cxcr5 ( ). However, B cells and T cells were not enriched in the tumor microenvironment ( ). Moreover, CD68+ macrophages were enriched in human lung tumor tissues revealed by IHC ( ) and immunofluorescence assays ( ). The Tamm–Horsfall protein (THP-1) macrophage cell line also expressed high levels of CXCR5 and CD68 ( ). 

We investigated the potential role for these macrophages in promoting lung cancer. In a trans-well migration assay, THP-1 cells induced the migration of A549-Luciferase (Luc) cells and H1975 cells from the upper chamber to the lower chamber ( ). Stable transfection of CXCL13 into A549-Luc cells (designated A549-Luc-CXCL13 cells) significantly enhanced the migration activity, which was antagonized by an anti-CXCR5 antibody ( ). Addition of CXCL13 to THP-1 cells enhanced the migration of H1975 cells, while an anti-CXCR5 antibody inhibited this effect ( ).
A549-Luc-CXCL13 cells were injected into the right lung of the non-obese diabetic/severe combined immunodeficiency (NOD/SCID) mice (whose macrophages were functionally immature), and bioluminescence was recorded 30 days later. We showed that compared with the A549-Luc cells, the A549-Luc-CXCL13 cells significantly increased the tumor burden in the recipient mice ( ). Furthermore, tail vein-injection of THP-1 cells increased the volume of tumors formed by the A549-Luc-CXCL13 cells ( ) and caused obvious metastases to the left lung of the mice ( ).

## CXCL13 induces SPP1 production by macrophages
The above results suggested that CXCL13 may induce macrophages to produce critical factors that promote lung cancer progression/metastasis. To identify these factors, a whole genome gene expression assay was performed in the eight patients ( ), and 436 genes were found to be associated with CXCL13 (a coefficient >0.5 or <−0.5; ). These genes were enriched in cytokine-cytokine receptor interactions, the Wnt signaling pathway, the calcium signaling pathway, and others ( ). Among the secretion-related genes, MMP12, secreted phosphoprotein 1 (SPP1), which encodes a macrophage-secreted cytokine SPP1 or osteopontin ( ), and MMP7 had the highest coefficient values for interacting with CXCL13 ( ). We tested 11 secretion-related genes in THP-1 cells, and found that the expression of SPP1 was the highest ( ). Therefore, it was chosen for further investigation. In THP-1 cells, CXCL13 treatment significantly increased SPP1 concentrations in the supernatant ( ). In trans-well assays, the addition of CXCL13 to THP-1 cells in the lower chamber enhanced the migration of H1975 cells, while SPP1 silencing by siSPP1 in THP-1 cells attenuated this effect ( , left). Transfection of CXCL13 into A549 cells increased their migration activity, while SPP1 silencing in THP-1 cells inhibited A549-CXCL13 cell migration ( , right panel). In BaP-treated A/J mice, the Spp1 serum concentration was significantly increased ( ), and the tumor samples showed significantly increased Spp1 IHC staining compared with the control mice ( ). By IHC assay, we found that Cd68 positive macrophages were also strongly stained by Spp1, whereas Ttf1-positive lung cancer cells were only weakly stained positive for Spp1 ( ). This observation was confirmed by immunofluorescence assay ( ) using antibodies against Spp1 (green), Cd68 (red), and Ttf (white). These results indicate that Cd68-positive macrophages were the main source of Spp1 in mice exposed to BaP. 

## CXCL13-CXCR5-SPP1 signaling induces an EMT phenotype
At least two tumors were found in left and/or right lungs of each BaP-treated mouse ( ), and CXCL13 induced cancer cell migration and metastasis ( , ). We tested the epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) phenotypes that are associated with cancer progression and metastasis ( ) in tumor samples from the BaP-treated A/J mice, and found that the expression of E-Cadherin was down-regulated, while N-Cadherin, Vimentin, Slug and Snail were up-regulated ( ). At protein level, E-Cadherin was down-regulated, while N-Cadherin and Vimentin were up-regulated in the tumors ( ). β-catenin transport to the nucleus is critical for cells to enter into an EMT and acquire an invasive phenotype ( ). We showed that the nuclear β-catenin levels were increased in the tumor samples from A/J mice ( ). In the tumor samples from NOD/SCID mice injected with A549-Luc-CXCL13 cells ( ) and BaP-treated Cxcr5+/+ mice ( ), the expression of E-Cadherin was low, while the N-Cadherin and nuclear β-catenin were high.
SPP1 was shown to activate β-catenin ( ). To study the role of SPP1 in promoting the progression of lung cancer, A549 cells were transfected with pcDNA3.1-flag-SPP1. We found that SPP1 overexpression decreased the cytoplasmic expression but increased the nuclear expression of β-catenin ( ). SPP1 overexpression in cancer cells led to the down-regulation of E-Cadherin and up-regulation of N-Cadherin and Slug at both the mRNA and protein levels ( ), and up-regulation of Vimentin and Snail at the mRNA level ( ). These findings were also observed in A549 cells supplemented with supernatants from THP-1 cells that were co-incubated with CXCL13 ( ). These results suggest that SPP1 may transactivate β-catenin to induce an EMT in BaP-treated mice.

## Discussion
In this study, we took the advantage of the epidemiology profile of Xuanwei lung cancer to systematically explore the abnormalities in inflammatory factors that are critical to air pollution-induced lung cancer, and reported that CXCL13 was up-regulated in 63/70 (90%) HPR NSCLCs ( ). BaP induced lung epithelial cells to secret CXCL13 ( ), which recruited tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) and induced SPP1 production ( , ). SPP1 activated β-catenin by facilitating its translocation to the nucleus and promoted an EMT, leading to the progression of lung cancer ( ). CXCL13-CXCR5 signaling was required for PAH-induced lung cancer, because knockdown of Cxcl13 or Cxcr5 attenuated BaP-induced lung cancer in mice ( ). These results suggest that the ubiquitous carcinogen BaP may induce tumor-promoting inflammation to facilitate the invasive growth and metastasis of lung cancer, shedding new insights into the carcinogenic mechanisms of air pollution.
CXCL13 may be associated with lung cancer risk in smokers ( ). We showed that in HPR, smoker and non-smoker NSCLCs had approximately equal expression levels of CXCL13, suggesting a carcinogenic effect of air pollution. In CR, however, smoker patients had higher CXCL13 expression than non-smoker cases ( and ). Moreover, high CXCL13 expression was associated with advanced stage cancer and poor prognosis ( ). These results indicate that CXCL13 is a common and critical factor in air pollution-induced and tobacco smoke-induced lung carcinogenesis. Furthermore, the serum concentration of CXCL13 was elevated in mice before the emergence of detectable lung tumor by microCT ( and ), suggesting that this chemokine may represent a biomarker for early diagnosis, which warrants further investigation.
PAHs are key carcinogens in air pollution and tobacco smoke ( ;  ), and cause mutations in TP53 and K-RAS, resulting in uncontrolled cell growth ( ). PAHs also perturb the immune system and induce production of the inflammatory factors to facilitate cancer progression in cellular and animal models ( ; ; ; ; ). By treating 16HBE cells with a relatively low concentration (1 μM) of BaP for a long time course (30 days) to mimic BaP-induced lung cancer in humans, we showed that CXCL13 was the most significantly up-regulated gene among the 84 cytokines/chemokines ( ). Furthermore, CXCL13 was increased in 134/201 (66.7%) NSCLCs ( ), suggesting the clinical relevance of CXCL13 in BaP-induced lung cancer. AhR is critical for the carcinogenic action of BaP ( ). We found that CXCL13 was a direct target of AhR ( ), and deficiency in CXCL13 or its receptor, CXCR5, abrogated BaP-induced lung cancer ( ), while an anti-CXCR5 antibody significantly inhibited lung cancer cell migration ( ). These results further demonstrate CXCL13’s critical role in environmental pollutant-induced lung cancer, but its role in pre-malignancy and cell transformation remains to be addressed.
Cross-talk between cancer cells and cells of the neoplastic stroma is involved in the acquired ability for invasive growth and metastasis ( ). Using a whole -genome gene expression array ( ), we discovered that TAMs secreted SPP1, which activates β–catenin and is regulated by this transcription factor ( ;  ). SPP1 induced the nuclear localization and activation of β–catenin in epithelial and cancer cells, resulting in an EMT phenotype ( ). At this stage, the detailed mechanisms of CXCL13-CXCR5-induced SPP1 production were unclear. However, our results suggested that SPP1-β–catenin could form a positive feedback loop to promote EMT and lung cancer progression. CXCL13 was shown to be able to induce an EMT in breast cancer via RANKL and Src activation ( ). We found that BaP or CXCL13 treatment or SPP1 overexpression in lung epithelial or cancer cells did not up-regulate RANKL or Src (data not shown), but did activate β–catenin ( ), suggesting that CXCL13 may induce an EMT via different mechanisms in different settings.
Chemokines can modulate tumor cell proliferation, survival, angiogenesis, senescence and metastasis ( ). For example, CCL20 is induced by another important carcinogen in tobacco smoke, nicotine-derived nitrosaminoketone, and is overexpressed in smoker lung cancers and inversely associated with prognosis. CCL20 promotes lung cancer cell proliferation and migration ( ). CXCL12 and CCR7 regulate the metastasis of breast cancers and NSCLCs ( ; ; ), while CXCL1/2 enhance cell survival and promote chemoresistance ( ). CXCL13 is overexpressed in breast cancer ( ) and mediates prostate cancer cell proliferation ( ). Given their critical roles in cancer, pharmaceutical development pipelines are filled with new chemokine-targeting drugs to treat malignancies ( ). DEX is a synthetic glucocorticoid used to counteract certain side effects of chemotherapies or as a direct chemotherapeutic agent in certain malignancies. It reduces lung tumor multiplicities in the tobacco smoke-exposed and non-exposed mice ( ). We showed that DEX inhibited CXCL13 production by epithelial cells and SPP1 production by TAMs ( and ), inhibited the EMT ( ), reduced the tumor burden and prolonged the life span of the mice ( ), revealing a new mechanism for this existing drug. Because DEX is a wide-spectrum anti-inflammatory drug that may cause severe side effects, more specific, CXCL13/CXCR5-targeting antibodies or small molecules should be developed to combat lung cancer, the leading cause of cancer-related mortality accounting for 1.59 million deaths worldwide in 2012 ( ).

## Materials and methods

## Patient samples
The study was approved by the local research ethics committees of all participating sites; all lung cancer samples were collected with informed consent. A total of 201 previously untreated NSCLCs from HPRs or CRs were included ( ). The HPR patients were diagnosed in the last 5 years in participant hospitals in Yunnan Province, and the diagnosis of lung cancer was confirmed by at least three pathologists. Those who fulfilled the following criteria were selected for this study: (1) Residents of Xuanwei where the smoky coal was used. (2) Resided in their communities and never stayed in other regions for a long time (6 months or more). (3) Previously untreated primary lung cancer. (4) The tissue samples were taken at the time of surgery and quickly frozen in liquid nitrogen. The tumor samples contained a tumor cellularity of greater than 60% and the matched control samples had no tumor content. Serum samples were obtained from 80 untreated NSCLCs (40 from HPR and 40 from CR) and 40 healthy donors.

## Antibodies and reagents
The antibodies used in this work were: recombinant human CXCL13, human CXCL13 Quantikine ELISA Kit, mouse CXCL13 Quantikine ELISA Kit, mouse CXCL12 Quantikine ELISA Kit, mouse anti-human CXCR5-PE mAb, goat anti-human CXCL13 polyclonal Ab, goat anti-mouse CXCL13 polyclonal Ab (R&D, Minneapolis, MN), rat anti-mouse CD68-PE, rat anti-mouse CD45-APC, rat anti-mouse CD4-PerCP-CY5.5, rat anti-mouse CD19-FITC, rat anti-mouse CXCR5-PE/CY7 mAb (Biolegend, San Diego, CA), mouse anti-human CD68 mAb (Dako, Glostrup, Denmark), rabbit anti-mouse SPP1 polyclonal Ab (Proteintech, Chicago, IL), anti-TTF1 (Abcam, Cambridge, UK), rabbit anti-mouse E-Cadherin mAb, EMT Antibody Sampler Kit (Cell Signaling Technology, Beverly, MA), rabbit anti-human AhR polyclonal Ab, goat anti-human Lamin B polyclonal Ab, mouse anti-human ɑ-tubulin mAb (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA), mouse anti-human β-actin antibody (Sigma, St. Louis, MO), Alexa Fluor 488 Donkey anti-Goat IgG (H+L), Alexa Fluor 555 Donkey Anti-Mouse IgG (H+L), Alexa Fluor 647 Donkey anti-Rabbit IgG (H+L) (Life Technology, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Basingstoke, UK), and mouse SPP1 ELISA Kit (Shanghai GenePharma, Shanghai, China). BaP and DEX were purchased from Sigma.

## Assessment of CXCL13 expression
The expression of inflammatory factors in eight HPR patients ( ) was determined using the Human Inflammatory Cytokines & Receptors RT2 Profiler PCR Array, which contains 84 cytokines/chemokines and their receptors. CXCL13 expression was detected in additional 193 HPR and CR patients, in BaP-treated cells, and in BaP-treated A/J, Cxcl13-/-48 or Cxcr5-/-50 mice by real-time PCR, Western blot analysis, ELISA, or IHC using anti-CXCL13 and anti-SPP1 antibodies. The immunoreactivity score (IRS) was calculated as IRS (0–12)=CP (0–4)×SI (0–3), where CP is the percentage of CXCL13-positive epithelial cells and SI is the staining intensity ( ).

## Cell culture and preparation of conditioned medium
The lung adenocarcinoma cancer cell lines A549 and NCI-H1975 were obtained from ATCC (Manassas, VA, USA). Human normal bronchial epithelial cell line 16HBE was obtained from Clonetics (Walkersville, MD) and cultured according to standard protocols. The macrophages were obtained by incubation of THP-1 cells (ATCC) with 100 ng/mL phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) for 24 hr and then the culture medium was refreshed with serum-free Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) for another 24 hr ( ). For preparation of conditioned medium, PMA-differentiated THP-1 cells were plated in six-well plates and co-cultured with CXCL13 for 48 hr. The medium was then centrifuged at 200×g for 10 min at 4°C to remove cell debris and stored at −80°C until use. For the analysis of EMT signaling by western blot analysis, supernatants were ultrafiltered for protein enrichment using a centrifugal filter device (Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany).

## Plasmids and transfections
We screened for transcription factors that could regulate CXCL13 by website-based prediction (http://www.sabiosciences.com/chipqpcrsearch.php?species_id=0&factor=Over+200+TF&gene=CXCL13&nfactor=n&ninfo=n&ngene=n&B2=Search), and CXCL13 promoter with wild-type or deletion mutation XRE-like element was cloned into pGL3-Basic vector. SPP1 was cloned into pcDNA3.1-flag vector. Cells were transfected with plasmids or siRNA using the Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen, Frederick, MD) or lentivirus according to manufacturer’s instruction. CXCL13 was cloned into the retroviral vector pGC-FU-GFP-IRES-Puromycin, and then transfected into the virus-packaging Phoenix cells. The supernatant was used to infect A549-Luc cells, and the infected cells were selected with 0.5 μg/mL Puromycin (Gene Oparation, Ann Arbor, MI) and 500 μg/mL G418 (Calbiochem, San Diego, CA).

## RT-PCR
The total RNA was isolated using the TRIZOL reagent (Invitrogen) and the phenol-chloroform extraction method according to the manufacturer’s instruction. Total RNA (2 μg) was annealed with random primers at 65°C for 5 min. The cDNA was synthesized using a 1st-STRAND cDNA Synthesis Kit (Fermentas, Pittsburgh, PA). Quantitative real-time PCR was carried out using SYBR Premix ExTaq (Takara). The primer sequences for real-time PCR are listed in . Each sample was analyzed in triplicate three times.

## Migration
Trans-wells with 8-μm pores were incubated at 37°C in a CO2 incubator for at least 1 hr. The differentiated THP-1 cells were seeded in the lower chamber, and A549-Luc-CXCL13 or H1975 cells (1×104) with serum-free DMEM/RPMI 1640 were added to the upper chamber and allowed to migrate for 24 hr. Cells on the inserts were fixed with 90% ethanol, stained with 0.0005% Gentian Violet Solution, and washed with PBS. Non-migrated cells on the upper side of the inserts were wiped off with a cotton swab. Migrated cells were counted in five microscopic fields at 4× magnification, and the counts were averaged ( ).

## Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay
A549 cells (5×106) were seeded onto 10-cm dishes and treated with or without BaP (5 μM) for 2 h, and ChIP assay was performed as described ( ). Both input and immunoprecipitated DNA samples were analyzed by qPCR to determine the relative amounts of DNA from the CXCL13 gene promoter region present in the samples. The primer pairs used here were listed in .

## Flow cytometry
Mouse lung cancer tissues were dissected into 2-mm fragments, followed by collagenase IV (0.2%, Sigma) digestion for 40 min at 37°C. A single-cell suspension was generated through a 200-mm-stainless steel wire mesh. The dissociated cancer cells labeled with indicated cell surface markers were sorted by MoFlo XDP Cell Sorter (Beckman Coulter, Brea, CA), and the data were analyzed on the Summit Software v5.0 (Beckman Coulter). All FACS analyses and sorting were paired with matched isotype control. Dead cells were excluded based on scatter profile.

## Immunofluorescence microscopy
Cells grown on coverslip (24 mm×24 mm) were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 15 min, washed with 150 mM glycine in PBS, and permeabilized with 0.3% Triton X-100 in PBS for 20 min at room temperature. After blocking with 5% BSA, the cell smears were incubated with the indicated primary antibodies overnight at 4°C, washed, and FITC/PE-labeled secondary antibody in PBS was added to the cell smears. Images were taken by a laser scanning confocal microscopy (Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany).

## Immunohistochemistry analysis
IHC assay was performed using anti-CXCL13 and anti-SPP1 antibodies as previously described ( ). Briefly, formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded human or mouse lung cancer tissue specimens (5 µm) were deparaffinized through xylene and graded alcohol, and subjected to a heat-induced epitope retrieval step in citrate buffer solution. The sections were then blocked with 5% BSA for 30 min and incubated with indicated antibodies at 4°C overnight, followed by incubation with secondary antibodies for 90 min at 37°C. Detection was achieved with 3, 3'-diaminobenzidine (DAB, Zhongshan Golden Bridge Biotechnology, Beijing, China) and counterstained with hematoxylin, dehydrated, cleared and mounted as in routine processing. The scoring of immunoreactivity was performed as described ( ).

## ELISA
Concentration of CXCL13 in serum and cell culture supernatant was determined by ELISA using a commercially available ELISA kit (R&D). The absorbance of the plates was read at 450 nm using an automated microplate reader (Bio-Tek, Winooski, VT, USA).

## Microarray experiment and analysis
Eight pairs of human lung cancer tissues and their adjacent normal lung tissues were homogenized by Biopulverizer (Biospec, Bartlesville, OK). Total RNA was extracted from homogenized samples using the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). Total RNA (1 µg) was labeled and hybridized with a One-ColorQuick Amp Labeling Kit and Gene Expression Hybridization Kit (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA). Hybridization signals were detected using a DNA microarray scanner G2565BA (Agilent Technologies), and all scanned images were analyzed using Agilent Feature Extraction Software. Quantile normalization and subsequent data processing were performed using the GeneSpring GX v11.5.1 software package (Agilent Technologies). Quality assessment of mRNA data after filtering was carried out by Box Plot and Scatter-Plot. To identify differentially expressed mRNAs with statistical significance, Volcano Plot filtering between the two groups (fold change ≥ 1.5, p values ≤ 0.05) was performed. Pathway analysis was performed using the KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) database. The genes correlated with CXCL13 were analyzed by Pearson’s correlation coefficient, and the results were listed in .

## Western blotting
Cells were lysed on ice for 30 min in RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 1% deoxycholate, 1% Triton X-100, 1 mM EDTA, 5 mM NaF, 1 mM sodium vanadate, and protease inhibitors cocktail), and protein extracts were quantitated. Proteins (20 μg) were subjected to 10–15% sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE), electrophoresed and transferred onto a nitrocellulose membrane. After blocking with 5% non-fat milk in Tris-buffered saline, the membrane was washed and incubated with the indicated primary and secondary antibodies and detected by Luminescent Image Analyzer LSA 4000 (GE, Fairfield, CO, USA).

## Animal studies
The animal studies were approved by the Institutional Review Board of Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences. All animal studies were conducted according to protocols approved by the Animal Ethics Committee of the Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Female NOD/SCID mice (5–6 weeks old) were purchased from Vital River Laboratory Animal Technology (Beijing, China). A/J mice (5–6 weeks old, female), homozygous Cxcl13-deficient, and homozygous Cxcr5-deficient mice were purchased from the Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, Maine, USA). The exposure protocols were modified from previous studies ( ;  ). The A/J mice were exposed to BaP (0 mg/kg, 50 mg/kg, 100 mg/kg twice per week for 5 weeks) in corn oil via oral gavage, and treated with or without DEX (0.5 mg/kg per day for 10 weeks in diet; ). The Cxcl13-/- and Cxcr5-/- mice were treated with BaP at 100 mg/kg twice per week for 8 weeks ( ). For microCT (PerkinElmer, Waltham, MA) and bioluminescence (using an IVIS Spectrum In Vivo Imaging System, PerkinElmer) analyses, mice were anesthetized by mixture of oxygen/isoflurane inhalation and positioned with legs fully extended, and assayed according to manufacturers’ instruction. Survival of the mice was evaluated from the first day of treatment until death or became moribund, at which time points the mice were sacrificed.

## Statistical analysis
All statistical analyses were conducted using GraphPad Prism 5 (GraphPad Software, La Jolla, CA) and SPSS 12.0 software for Windows (Chicago, IL). Statistically significant differences were determined by Student’s t-test, Wilcoxon rank sum test, one-way analysis of variance, the chi-squared test, or multivariate logistic analysis. P values less than 0.05 were considered statistically significant in all cases.

## Funding Information
This paper was supported by the following grants:

The National Natural Science Funds for Distinguished Young Scholar

81425025 to Guang-Biao Zhou.

The National Key Program for Basic Research

2012CB910800 to Guang-Biao Zhou.

http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100001809National Natural Science Foundation of China

81171925 to Guang-Biao Zhou.

http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100001809National Natural Science Foundation of China

81201537 to Xin Cheng.

Grants from the State Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics
 to Guang-Biao Zhou.

## Acknowledgements
The authors thank Dr. Fu Jia of PerkinElmer and Mrs. Qing Meng of our institute for their technical support. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Funds for Distinguished Young Scholar (81425025), the National Key Program for Basic Research (2012CB910800), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (81171925 and 81201537), and grants from the State Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.

## Additional information

## Competing interests
The authors declare that no competing interests exist.

## Author contributions
G-ZW, Acquisition of data.
XC, Acquisition of data.
BZ, Acquisition of data.
Z-SW, Acquisition of data.
Y-CH, Acquisition of data.
H-BC, Acquisition of data.
G-FL, Acquisition of data.
Z-LH, Acquisition of data.
Y-CZ, Acquisition of data.
LF, Acquisition of data.
M-MW, Acquisition of data.
L-WQ, Acquisition of data.
YC, Acquisition of data.
G-BZ, Conception and design, Analysis and interpretation of data, Drafting and revising the article.

## Ethics
Human subjects: The study was approved by the local research ethics committees of all participating sites; all lung cancer samples were collected with informed consent.
Animal experimentation: Animal studies were conducted according to protocols approved by the Animal Ethics Committee of the Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, with the approval ID of AEC2010070202.

 10.7554/eLife.09419.019Decision letter
BarbieDavidReviewing editorDana-Farber Cancer Institute, United StatesIn the interests of transparency, eLife includes the editorial decision letter and accompanying author responses. A lightly edited version of the letter sent to the authors after peer review is shown, indicating the most substantive concerns; minor comments are not usually included.
Thank you for submitting your work entitled "The chemokine CXCL13 in lung cancers associated with environmental polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons pollution" for peer review at eLife. Your submission has been favorably evaluated by Sean Morrison (Senior editor) and three reviewers, one of whom served as Guest Reviewing editor.
The reviewers have discussed the reviews with one another and the Reviewing editor has drafted this decision to help you prepare a revised submission.
Summary:
All three reviewers felt the work was interesting and of importance, but had concerns about several aspects of the paper that need to be addressed before considering publication. In particular, all three reviewers asked for more detailed analysis of Cxcl13 and Cxcr5 mouse knockout studies, an essential component of the paper. In addition, analyses of CXCL13 levels in orthogonal datasets were requested for , and additional controls were recommended for ChIP data in . Another issue raised was the source of CXCL13, whether it was derived from epithelial cells or associated immune cells.
Essential revisions:
1) – is CXCL13 enriched in orthogonal datasets or is this specific to the Chinese cohorts? We would suggest analysis of TCGA data of tumor versus normal tissue and smokers versus non-smokers. It would also be of interest to perform a similar comparison in microarray data deposited from genetically engineered mouse models of lung cancer to see whether in these models, which are not carcinogen induced, if CXCL13 is not enriched. For example, mouse GEO datasets GSE6135, GSE21581, GSE54353 are from lung tumors derived following LKB1 inactivation. It would be interesting to know whether or not CXCL13 is involved in this context.
2) What are the expression levels of CXCR5 in human and mouse samples with lung cancers?
3) It is unclear which cell type is staining positive for CXCL13 in . It would be useful to add IHC panels to help determine whether it is being produced from tumor cells or tumor associated macrophages. The authors could use TTF1 stain to mark lung cancer cells, and CD68 stain to mark macrophages. Alternatively they could perform flow cytometry and sort by EPCAM or CD68.
4) needs additional controls. The authors should use qPCR instead of PCR to present the ChIP data. In addition, although the specific induction of binding by BAP is nice, the authors also need to test another gene without the XRE element, perhaps CXCL12, which was used in another experiment. For the EMSA, it seems that the lane with the shift is overloaded. This blot is not convincing and needs to be repeated. Alternatively, if the results are not robust, they should be removed from the paper, since it erodes confidence in the ChIP result.
5) which is a key component of this paper should include quantification of tumor burden by microCT (as presented in ). In the CT images presented it appears there are tumors in Cxcl13-/- mice. Also at what time point were CTs performed? There should also be more rigorous quantification of tumor nodules in histologic sections between mouse groups (e.g. see Tan et al. PLOS One 2013; PMID 24260500). This data needs to be presented for the Cxcr5 mice as well. Also for Figure 3—figure supplement 1 that is used to document Cxcl13 inactivation; which band is it? If it is the lower band why is it higher in the hetereozygous mice? Same for Cxcr5 mice.
6) As in point 2, additional IHC controls for would help to confirm that macrophages are indeed the cell type positive for SPP1 in the BaP induced tumors. As above, the authors could use TTF1 stain to mark lung cancer cells and CD68 stain to mark macrophages, or perform flow cytometry and sort by EPCAM or CD68.
10.7554/eLife.09419.020Author response
Summary:

All three reviewers felt the work was interesting and of importance, but had concerns about several aspects of the paper that need to be addressed before considering publication. In particular, all three reviewers asked for more detailed analysis of cxcl13 and cxcr5 mouse knockout studies, an essential component of the paper. In addition, analyses of CXCL13 levels in orthogonal datasets were requested for , and additional controls were recommended for ChIP data in . Another issue raised was the source of CXCL13, whether it was derived from epithelial cells or associated immune cells.

We performed additional and more detailed analysis in Cxcl13 and Cxcr5 knockout mice, analyzed CXCL13 levels in orthogonal datasets, investigated the source of CXCL13, and used additional controls for ChIP data. In addition to the above revisions, 14 new references were added to the paper, which now has 3 tables, 6 figures, 77 references, 2 supplementary tables and 5 supplementary figures.

Essential revisions:

1) – is CXCL13 enriched in orthogonal datasets or is this specific to the Chinese cohorts? We would suggest analysis of TCGA data of tumor versus normal tissue and smokers versus non-smokers. It would also be of interest to perform a similar comparison in microarray data deposited from genetically engineered mouse models of lung cancer to see whether in these models, which are not carcinogen induced, if CXCL13 is not enriched. For example, mouse GEO datasets GSE6135, GSE21581, GSE54353 are from lung tumors derived following LKB1 inactivation. It would be interesting to know whether or not CXCL13 is involved in this context.

We thank the reviewers for the important suggestions, and evaluated the expression of CXCL13 in tumor versus normal tissue and smokers versus non-smokers in TCGA data and a cancer microarray database Oncomine (www.oncomine.org). In two works of TCGA (Nature 2014; Nature 2012), CXCL13 expression was assessed by microarray or RNA-seq, and the results showed that CXCL13 was not up-regulated in tumor samples compared to normal tissues (data not shown). Nevertheless, CXCL13 in tumor samples of smokers was not increased compared to that in nonsmokers (data not shown). However, in several works documented in the Oncomine database, CXCL13 was elevated in tumor compared to normal tissues ( ), and was increased in smokers compared to non-smokers ( ). These results suggested that overexpression of CXCL13 was not specific to the Chinese cohorts.
In mouse GEO dataset GSE54353, Cxcl13 expression in wild type (normal), KrasG12D, and Lkb1(Stk11)-/-Pten-/- mice was not significantly different ( ). In GSE6135, Cxcl13 in KrasG12DStk11L/+, -/-, L/- mice was slightly but not statistically significantly higher than in KrasG12DStk11wt mice (p=0.08; ). In GSE21581 dataset, Cxcl13 was slightly elevated in primary tumors and significantly increased in metastatic tumors of the KrasG12DStk11-/- mice, as compared to that of the KrasG12D mice ( ). These results suggested that Cxcl13 might play a role in Stk11-related lung carcinogenesis which warrants further investigation.
2) What are the expression levels of CXCR5 in human and mouse samples with lung cancers?

We tested the expression of CXCR5 in 24 NSCLCs by qPCR, and found that in tumor samples it was slightly higher than in paired normal lung tissues ( ). In tumor samples of mice treated with BaP at 50 or 100 mg/kg, Cxcr5 was also slightly up-regulated ( ).

3) It is unclear which cell type is staining positive for CXCL13 in . It would be useful to add IHC panels to help determine whether it is being produced from tumor cells or tumor associated macrophages. The authors could use TTF1 stain to mark lung cancer cells, and CD68 stain to mark macrophages. Alternatively they could perform flow cytometry and sort by EPCAM or CD68.

We thank the reviewers for the comments and performed IHC and immunofluorescence assays to determine the source of Cxcl13. By IHC assay, we found that both the Cd68 positive macrophages and Ttf1 positive lung cancer cells were stained positive for Cxcl13, but Ttf1 positive cells constituted more than 95% of the cellular component of the lung tumor tissues of the mice ( ). This observation was confirmed by immunofluorescence assay ( ) using antibodies against Cxcl13 (green), Cd68 (red), and Ttf1 (white). DAPI was used to counter stain the nucleus. These results indicate that Ttf1 positive lung cancer cells were the main source of Cxcl13 in mice exposed to BaP.
4) needs additional controls. The authors should use qPCR instead of PCR to present the ChIP data. In addition, although the specific induction of binding by BAP is nice, the authors also need to test another gene without the XRE element, perhaps CXCL12, which was used in another experiment. For the EMSA, it seems that the lane with the shift is overloaded. This blot is not convincing and needs to be repeated. Alternatively, if the results are not robust, they should be removed from the paper, since it erodes confidence in the ChIP result.

We thank the reviewers for the comments, and performed qPCR to test the expression of CXCL13, CXCL12, CXCL14, CXCL11 and CXCL2 in ChIP experiment of cells co-incubated with or without BaP. The results showed that among these chemokines, only CXCL13 was enriched and significantly up-regulated by BaP treatment ( here and of the paper). We used this data to replace the PCR results of the original . The EMSA result was removed from the paper.
5) which is a key component of this paper should include quantification of tumor burden by microCT (as presented in ). In the CT images presented it appears there are tumors in cxcl13-/-
mice. Also at what time point were CTs performed? There should also be more rigorous quantification of tumor nodules in histologic sections between mouse groups (e.g. see Tan et al. PLOS One 2013; PMID 24260500). This data needs to be presented for the cxcr5 mice as well. Also for Figure 3–figure supplement 1 that is used to document cxcl13 inactivation; which band is it? If it is the lower band why is it higher in the hetereozygous mice? Same for cxcr5 mice.

We thank the reviewers for the important comments and suggestions, and evaluated the tumor burden of the Cxcl13- and Cxcr5-deficiency mice. Firstly, tumor nodules in histologic sections of mice upon BaP treatment were analyzed as describe (Tan et al. PLOS One 2013), and the result showed that at treatment time points of 120, 180, and 240 days, Cxcl13-/- mice had much less lesions than Cxcl13+/- and Cxcl13+/+ mice ( ). For microCT analysis of the mice treated with BaP for 240 days, the tumor volume of Cxcl13-/- mice was significantly lower than Cxcl13+/- and Cxcl13+/+ mice ( ). Tumor burden of Cxcr5-/- mice, reflected by tumor nodules and microCT assays, was also significantly lower than Cxcr5+/- and Cxcr5+/+ mice ( ).
The Cxcl13-/- mice were obtained from the Jackson Laboratory (https://www.jax.org/strain/005626). The mice were also called B6.129X1-Cxcl13tm1Cys/J. A targeting vector was constructed in which base pairs 18-116 of exon 2 from the endogenous gene were replaced with an in-frame stop codon, a Mengo virus internal ribosome entry site, an enhanced green fluorescent protein gene (EGFP), and a loxP-flanked neomycin resistance gene. The construct was electroporated into 129X1/SvJ derived JM-1 embryonic stem (ES) cells. Correctly targeted ES cells were injected into C57BL/6J blastocysts and the resulting chimeric males were backcrossed for germ-line transmission to C57BL/6J females. Offspring were mated with Cre-expressing C57BL/6J to remove the neomycin resistance gene. The neo-excised heterozygotes were backcrossed to C57BL/6J for ten generations before being made homozygous. Mice that are homozygous for the targeted mutation are viable, fertile and normal in size. No endogenous gene product (mRNA or protein) is detected, EGFP is not expressed. The primers to detect Cxcl13 were designed by the Jackson Laboratory, and the expected results were: mutant=~240 bp, heterozygote =~240 bp and ~200 bp, wild type=~200 bp (https://www2.jax.org/protocolsdb/f?p=116:2:::NO:2:P2_MASTER_PROTOCOL_ID,P2_JRS_CODE:945,005626). Our results were in consistent with the references provided by the Jackson Laboratory, e.g., the higher one of was the inactivation band.
For Cxcr5-/- mice (https://www.jax.org/strain/006659), a targeting vector was designed to replace the 350 bp coding region of exon 2 of the targeted gene with a neomycin resistance gene. The construct was electroporated into 129S2/SvPas-derived D3 embryonic stem (ES) cells. Correctly targeted ES cells were aggregated with morulae from outbred CD-1 mice and then transferred into pseudopregnant CD-1 females. Chimeric mice were bred with CD-1. The donating investigator reported that mutant mice were backcrossed to C57BL/6 mice for 8 generations prior to arrival at The Jackson Laboratory. Homozygous (CXCR5-deficient) mice are viable and fertile. No endogenous gene product (mRNA or protein) is detected. In , our results were in consistent with the references provided by the Jackson Laboratory, e.g., the lower one was the inactivation band.
6) As in point 2, additional IHC controls for would help to confirm that macrophages are indeed the cell type positive for SPP1 in the BaP induced tumors. As above, the authors could use TTF1 stain to mark lung cancer cells and CD68 stain to mark macrophages, or perform flow cytometry and sort by EPCAM or CD68.

We thank the reviewers for the comments and performed IHC and immunofluorescence assays to determine the source of Spp1. By IHC assay, we found that the Cd68 positive macrophages were strongly stained by Spp1, whereas Ttf positive lung cancer cells were weakly stained by Spp1 ( ). This observation was confirmed by immunofluorescence assay (Figure 7B) using antibodies against Spp1 (green), Cd68 (red), and Ttf (white). DAPI was used to counter stain the nucleus. These results indicate that Cd68 positive macrophages were the main source of Spp1 in mice exposed to BaP.