S-MED: Sarcoma microRNA Expression Database
Aaron L Sarver 1,2,5, Rasik Phalak 3,4,5, Venugopal Thayanithy 1,4,5 and Subbaya Subramanian 1,4
Human sarcomas are a heterogeneous group of over 50 different malignant tumors for which very few diagnostic
markers currently exist. MicroRNA (miRNA) transcript levels have been proposed for use in the diagnosis, classification and
prognosis of tumors. Over 700 miRNAs are identified in humans and miRNA are considered attractive candidates for
developing novel biomarkers in sarcomas. However, miRNA expression patterns found in sarcomas are poorly understood
and no central resource exists to contain this information. To systematically address the gap in both biological knowledge
and bioinformatics infrastructure, we generated miRNA expression profiles for over 300 tumor tissue samples
representing 22 different sarcoma types and developed a web-accessible database to enable facile access to the data.
Sarcoma microRNA Expression Database (S-MED) is a repository that describes the patterns of miRNA expression in
various human sarcoma types. S-MED provides both basic and advanced data search options for exploration of the data
in heat map and text/numerical formats. The database also provides statistical details such as fold changes and P-values
for differentially expressed miRNAs in each sarcoma type and corresponding normal tissue. Further, we have
experimentally validated differentially expressed miRNAs in angiosarcoma and other sarcoma types. This comprehensive
database is the first of its kind specifically devoted to miRNA expression patterns in sarcomas is available through the URL
link http://www.oncomir.umn.edu/.
Laboratory Investigation (2010) 90, 753–761; doi:10.1038/labinvest.2010.53; published online 8 March 2010
KEYWORDS: expression profiles; database; miRNA; sarcoma
Sarcomas are a highly heterogeneous group of aggressive and
invasive mesenchymal tumors. Over 50 histological subtypes
exist and their diagnostic classification is a major challenge. 1
Sarcomas can be found throughout the body but the majority
of them occur in the extremities. Many types are named after
the type of cell, or tissue involved, as in angiosarcoma, chon-
drosarcoma, fibrosarcoma, liposarcoma and osteosarcoma.
Sarcoma tumors can also be of pleomorphic subtypes of cryptic
origins, such as malignant fibrous histiocytoma (MFH). Sar-
comas are associated with a significant risk of developing dis-
tant metastasis depending on the tumor type and grade.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a recently identified class of small
noncoding RNAs that have been proposed for use in the diag-
nosis, classification and prognosis of tumors.2 More than 700
miRNAs are identified in humans,3 and they are attractive can-
didates for developing novel diagnostic and prognostic markers
for a wide variety of sarcomas. The miRNAs nega-
tively regulate gene expression by binding to the 3 0 UTRs of
messenger RNA.4 Extensive study of miRNA biogenesis and
computational analysis of miRNAtarget genes has resulted in the
development of miRNA-related target prediction software and
predicted target database.5–7 Furthermore, miRNAs deregulated
in various human diseases have been cataloged. 8 Analysis of
miRNA expression has been extensively carried out in carcinomas
and other hematological tumors.9–13 However, there is no com-
prehensive expression analysis that catalogs miRNA expression
patterns in the wide variety of existing sarcoma types with suf-
ficient sample size to carry statistical power. In our earlier studies,
we have reported preliminary analysis of miRNA expression levels
in a small series of sarcomas14 as well as in colon cancer.15
Exhaustive analysis of miRNA expression patterns in sar-
comas will accelerate the identification and development of
novel miRNA-based biomarkers for these tumors. T o achieve
this goal, we have created a comprehensive database con-
taining miRNA expression patterns for 22 different types of
human sarcomas and corresponding normal tissue types.
Received 23 October 2009; revised 7 December 2009; accepted 11 December 2009
1Masonic Cancer Center, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA; 2Department of Biostatistics and Informatics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA;
3Department of Computer Science, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA and 4Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN, USA
Correspondence: Dr S Subramanian, PhD, Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Minnesota Medical School, 14-271 Moos Tower (Mail code:
MMC 206), 515 Delaware St, SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.
E-mail: subree@umn.edu
5These authors contributed equally to this work.
Laboratory Investigation (2010) 90, 753–761
& 2010 USCAP, Inc All rights reserved 0023-6837/10 $32.00
www.laboratoryinvestigation.org | Laboratory Investigation | Volume 90 May 2010 753
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Tumor Samples
Snap-frozen patient tumor tissue samples were collected
through the tissue procurement facility and from our colla-
borators at the Masonic Cancer Center, University of Min-
nesota, and stored at /C0801C until used. Institutional review
board approved this study.
miRNA Expression Profiling
miRNA was isolated using the miRvana RNA isolation kit
(Ambion, Austin, TX, USA) following the manufacturer’s
protocol. RNA was quantified using a Nanodrop spectro-
photometer (Theromo Fisher, Wilmington, DE, USA) and
quality was determined by denaturing agarose gel electro-
phoresis as well as on Agilent 6000 nanochip (Agilent T ech-
nologies, Palo Alto, CA, USA). Only samples with RNA index
number (RIN) of X5 were subjected to miRNA analysis
using miRNA BeadArrays (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA).
The miRNA BeadArray procedure is similar to the cDNA-
mediated annealing, selection, extension and ligation (DASL)
method reported earlier. 16 After hybridization, the arrays
were imaged using an Illumina BeadArray Reader and the
fluorescent intensity of miRNA probes were analyzed using
BeadStudio version 3.1.1(Illumina).
Data Analyses
Raw miRNA expression data were quantile normalized 17 on a
phase-by-phase basis. Differential expression was analyzed
using a two-group t-test to determine miRNAs that were
differentially expressed between a specific sarcoma and the
other sarcomas included in a particular phase of analysis.
When analyzing tumors types from different phases, for use
in the advanced search, expression data from all phases were
once again quantile normalized together. Quantile normal-
ization, unsupervised hierarchical clustering and statistical
analyses were carried out using GeneData Expressionist
Software (Genedata, San Francisco, CA, USA).
Web Application
The application was created using the LAMP software bundle
(Linux, Apache2, MySQL 5.0 and PHP) and HTML. The
entire application is hosted on the web for researchers across
the globe to access and review the information stored in the
data set. An Apache web server is used to host the web
application. PHP is used to generate the user interface and
used to communicate with the MySQL database at the
backend. Normalized expression data, statistical results and
annotation data are stored within the database. A user-
friendly graphical interface is provided to assist the users for
ease of data retrieval and for selection of different criteria for
data analysis. PHP is used to generate the HTML content
through a database-driven architecture that was designed for
incorporation of additional information.
Quantitative Real-Time PCR Analysis
RNAs isolated from patient tissues were reverse transcribed
and PCR amplified with miScript reverse transcription kit
and miScript SYBR PCR kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA)
using ABI 7500 real-time PCR system following the manu-
facturer’s protocols. Values from duplicate reactions were
averaged and normalized to the level of U6 SnoRNA. Relative
expression levels were calculated following comparative Ct
method.18
RESULTS
Data Content
Sarcoma microRNA Expression Database (S-MED) is a
comprehensive repository that contains the patterns of
miRNA expression found in over 300 sarcoma samples
representing 22 tumor types and select normal tissue samples
(Table 1). The web-accessible interface (http://www.oncomir.
umn.edu) allows users to determine the transcript level of
Table 1 Sarcoma tumors and normal tissue in S-MED
Phase Sarcoma/tissue type Number of
cases/samples
I Fibromatosis 16
Gastrointestinal stromal tumor 13
Malignant fibrous histiocytoma 30
Osteosarcoma 15
Synovial sarcoma 15
II Ewing’s sarcoma 7
Leiomyosarcoma 25
Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor 25
Neurofibroma 14
Schwannoma 16
Solitary fibrous tumor 5
III Angiosarcoma 5
Embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma 22
Alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma 19
Liposarcoma well differentiated 10
Liposarcoma dedifferentiated 12
Skeletal muscle (normal) 7
Smooth muscle (normal) 10
IV Chondrosarcoma 5
Epithelioid sarcoma 5
Fibrosarcoma 8
Histiocytoma 9
Leiomyoma 8
Bone tissue (normal) 6
Spindle cell sarcoma 3
Total 310
MicroRNA signatures in sarcomas
AL Sarver et al
754 Laboratory Investigation | Volume 90 May 2010 | www.laboratoryinvestigation.org
specific miRNAs of interest contained within the database.
S-MED provides both ‘Basic search’ and ‘ Advanced search’
options for exploration and visualization of the data in heat
map and numerical formats. The database also provides
statistical details such as fold changes and P-values for dif-
ferentially expressed miRNAs in each sarcoma and normal
tissue type.
Accessing the Database
‘Basic search’ allows the retrieval of the expression level for a
specific miRNA of interest (Figure 1a). Selecting one or
multiple miRNA from the list of all miRNA available in the
database returns a heat map sorted by sarcoma type and
experimental phase (Figure 1b). The initial result returned to
the user provides the data in heat map form based on the
overall intensity of the signal in which the value returned is
represented by a color ranging from black to blue to yellow
with a range of values from o250 to 432000. A key is
provided in the upper right hand corner of the data view. The
user is then given the additional options of seeing the data in
numerical format or as a relative intensity heat map (Figures
1c and d). The relative intensity heat map shows the relative
expression level in fold change relative to the average across
the phase range of normalized values from 0.125- to 8-fold.
miRNA, which are decreased relative to the average, are
shown in progressive more intense green and miRNA, which
show increased levels relative to the average, are shown in
progressively more intense red. Each of the phases (sets of
experiments carried out simultaneously) are both normalized
and averaged separately in basic search to allow for future
integration of unrelated data sets and additional platform
types such as direct sequencing. In all, 735 miRNAs were
analyzed in the first phase, whereas 1146 miRNAs were
analyzed in the second, third and fourth phases. Should a
miRNA not be present in a particular phase or group of the
analysis, no data will be shown for the group or phase.
Clicking on the miRNA name in any of the expression
tables will take the user to a page that describes the associated
annotation such as miRNA name, Illumina probe ID, chro-
mosomal location, coordinates (if a single genomic location
is available) and sequences of the probe (Figure 1e).
In addition, the user can return to the ‘expression data’
views for the probe, statistical data as discussed below, pre-
dicted mRNA 3 0 UTR targets available at miRDB, 19 as well as
a Google Scholar literature search keyed by the name of the
miRNA. As an added feature, by clicking on ‘colocalized
miRNA ’ , the user can visualize and analyze the expression
patterns for miRNA found within common chromosomal
regions.
‘ Advanced search’ allows the user to directly define both
the miRNA of interest and tissue types and examine direct
comparisons of the data. Similar to the basic search, absolute,
relative and numerical view options are also available for the
selected data (Figure 2a). Uniqueness of advanced search is
that, the data have been quantile normalized across all data
sets, and the selected data are available on the same x axis.
Importantly, only the data selected are used to generate the
relative view allowing for direct visualization of differential
expression between selected tissue types. In both basic and
advanced modes, relative values are not stored in the data
repository, but are computed as and when the user desires to
visualize certain cases against each other.
Statistical results are also included in S-MED. The user can
select a miRNA and obtain all the statistical results for that
miRNA that are contained within the statistical results table
of the database. Following selection, an html table is gener-
ated, which provides the tissue type, phase, P-value for a two
group t-test comparing all tissue types available in a parti-
cular experimental phase and the average fold change for the
relevant miRNA (Figure 2b).
For additional statistical function, the user can select a
tissue type, a statistical threshold and fold change cutoff to
return all miRNA that are differentially expressed in a specific
tissue type with the cutoffs defined by the user. A table is then
returned that provides tissue comparison, phase of the ex-
periment, miRNA, P-value for a two group t-test between the
selected tissue and all other tissues within the phase, and fold
change between the average of the selected tissue and other
experiments included in the phase, sorted by the magnitude
of the fold change (Figure 2c). Heat maps for each of these
miRNA individually can be examined by clicking on the
name of the miRNA within the table or the entire set of
miRNA by clicking on the ‘RNA expression’ link provided at
the top of the page. Once the user has navigated to the
expression view, all three methods of visualizing the data,
relative, absolute or as text, can then be generated on de-
mand. The data maintain the fold change sort from the
statistical view within the heat maps. Except for MFH (high-
grade undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma, not otherwise
specified), each of the different sarcomas and normal tissue
exhibit distinct and characteristic miRNA signatures that are
significant beyond the Bonferroni correction.
Additional evidence attesting to the quality of the data can
be obtained by examining unsupervised hierarchical cluster-
ing of the data. Average linkage correlation-based un-
supervised clustering of all data, available for each phase
mean centered by phases, reveals that the vast majority of the
tissue profiles cluster based on the tumor type. (Figure 3)
Several specific examples exist within the data, in which tu-
mors of the same type clustered in separate groups. For
example, in phase 1, the MFH are found in three distinct
groups. In addition, examples exist in which single samples
cluster within groups made predominantly of a different
specific tumor type. For example, one of the osteosarcoma
samples clustered within a group primarily derived from
MFH tumors.
T o provide a useful case to demonstrate the utility and
quality of both the data contained within this database
and the database interface, we focused on examining and
verifying the information contained within S-MED for
MicroRNA signatures in sarcomas
AL Sarver et al
www.laboratoryinvestigation.org | Laboratory Investigation | Volume 90 May 2010 755
MicroRNA signatures in sarcomas
AL Sarver et al
756 Laboratory Investigation | Volume 90 May 2010 | www.laboratoryinvestigation.org
angiosarcoma. Soft tissue angiosarcomas are malignancies
showing endothelial differentiation and are highly aggressive.
They vary in appearance and at extremes may resemble
fibrosarcomas or undifferentiated carcinomas. T o begin, we
searched the S-MED statistical results by tissue group
selecting only miRNA that met the Bonferroni correction to
the multiple testing problem associated with microarray
statistical analysis, tissue-type ‘angiosarcoma’ and miRNA
that showed a 410-fold change. In total, 41 miRNA were
identified and exhibited close chromosomal proximity in a
cluster on chromosome 19. Examining the absolute values in
heat map format revealed that, for the most part, these
showed low expression levels across all the other sarcoma
types and other tissues studied, with the exception of an-
giosarcoma. The ‘relative data’ view also showed this unique
pattern of miRNA expression in angiosarcoma. It is inter-
esting that one of the MFH tumors also showed very high
levels of the chromosome 19 miRNA cluster.
In previous work, we have shown high correlations be-
tween miRNA levels measured by Illumina array profiling
and quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR). 15 T o further
validate the unique expression pattern seen in angiosarcomas
for chromosome 19 miRNA, we quantified the level of the
differentially expressed miRNAs in selected tumor samples
using qRT-PCR. qRT-PCR results confirmed the over-
expression of miRNAs miR-515-3p, miR-515-5p, miR-517a,
miR-517c, miR-518b, miR-519a and miR-522 in angio-
sarcoma relative to other sarcoma types (gastrointestinal
stromal tumors, MFH and epithelioid sarcoma) included in
the analysis (Figure 4). miR-515-3p and miR-517c are ex-
pressed over 12-fold in angiosarcoma relative to other sar-
comas (Supplementary Figure 1). These findings suggested
that miR-515-3p and miR-517c can be investigated as po-
tential diagnostic markers for angiosarcoma.
DISCUSSION
Sarcomas are rare tumors and the availability of good quality,
frozen tumor tissue samples is a major challenge in studying
their gene/miRNA expression patterns. Availability of high
quality, easily accessible miRNA expression data in the public
domain from a significant number of sarcoma samples
should accelerate the comprehension of data, which in turn
should aid in better understanding of the biology, diagnosis
and treatment of sarcomas. Recently, miRNA functional
analyses of rhabdomysosarcoma (RMS) identified several
miRNAs that are associated with RMS development and
progression.20,21 miRNAs such as miR-29 20 and mir-206 21
have significant role in muscle cell differentiation and
deregulation of these miRs is implicated in RMS. Further,
mutation and location-dependent miRNA expression pat-
terns in gastrointestinal stromal tumors has been identified. 22
However, a comprehensive miRNA expression database that
will serve as a resource for comparing various sarcomas is still
lacking. S-MED contains the expression patterns of miRNAs
for 310 tissue samples, which represent 22 different sarcoma
types. In addition, the database also contains miRNA
expression data from normal tissues such as bone, smooth
muscle and skeletal muscle allowing for comparison of
sarcoma tissues with respective normal tissues. We have also
included benign tumors such as neurofibroma and leio-
myoma for comparative studies with their malignant coun-
terparts. The presence of unique expression patterns among
sarcoma types suggests that miRNAs may have a significant
role in their onset and progression. Further, these miRNA
signatures can be explored to identify diagnostic biomarkers
and also to identify novel therapeutic targets. T o this end, we
have identified miRNAs, which are specifically overexpressed
and downregulated in specific sarcoma types. The miRNA
expression signatures from 22 different sarcoma types that
are made available through S-MED will now serve as an
important resource to (1) understand sarcoma biology, (2)
develop novel miRNA-based biomarkers and (3) provide
improved medical treatment of these rare and diagnostically
challenging diseases.
Comprehending the numerical values in either absolute or
normalized format is difficult. T o aid interpretation and
analysis, the option of visualizing the data as a heat map is
provided. Different color codes are used to represent data in
absolute and relative format. Further, user-defined data
processing is possible by starting with the text values ob-
tainable through the user interface. An advantage of this data
repository is that instead of providing previously analyzed
relative data to the end user, the database allows normal-
ization of expression data for the selected sarcoma types. This
allows the user to define the relationships they are interested,
making data comprehension easier. An additional advantage
is that, in our database, the statistical results are tightly in-
tegrated with the data that generated them.
In addition to generating the vast amount of expression
data and making it available, we have also experimentally
validated unique miRNA expression levels observed in an-
giosarcoma. Angiosarcoma showed unique miRNA expres-
sion patterns compared with other sarcoma types included in
the analysis. We have validated this unique expression pattern
Figure 1 Screen shots of information flow in S-MED. Flowchart shows an example of information retrieval from S-MED. Arrows indicate where a click
will lead within the web application. ( a) Initial basic search selection option. Selection of one or more miRNA and clicking on the submit button will transfer
the user to the screen shown in panel b. ( b) Absolute intensity data view. From here the user can navigate to view the numeric data used to generate
the heat map by clicking ‘Show numeric data’ link, the relative intensity view by clicking ‘Show relative data view’, or the database and annotation pa ge
by clicking on the name of the miRNA as shown by the arrows. ( c) Absolute data view in text format. ( d) Relative intensity data view. ( e) Database
annotation and external links.
MicroRNA signatures in sarcomas
AL Sarver et al
www.laboratoryinvestigation.org | Laboratory Investigation | Volume 90 May 2010 757
Figure 2 Screen shots of advanced search and statistical search. ( a) Advanced search options allow the user to define miRNA and tissues of interest
by visualizing on a single experimental axis. ( b) Statistical result search starting from an miRNA of interest. This option allows the user to determine
which tissue samples show changes in an miRNA of interest by considering the P-value and or the fold change for a tissue relative to others in an
experimental phase. ( c) Statistical result search starting with a specific tissue of interest. This access option allows the user to define a statistical threshold,
a tissue type of interest and a fold change to identify miRNA that are of potential interest.
MicroRNA signatures in sarcomas
AL Sarver et al
758 Laboratory Investigation | Volume 90 May 2010 | www.laboratoryinvestigation.org
Figure 3 Unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis of miRNA expression profiles in various sarcoma types. Average linkage correlation-based
unsupervised hierarchical clustering was carried out on each phase using all expression data available for each phase. Branch points closer to the bo ttom of
the tree correspond to higher correlations between profiles. ( a) Phase 1. ( b) Phase 2. ( c) Phase 3. ( d) Phase 4. It can be noted that all the miRNA expression
data points are used in the generation of these dendrograms; a tighter clustering patterns may be obtained by further filtering the miRNAs.
MicroRNA signatures in sarcomas
AL Sarver et al
www.laboratoryinvestigation.org | Laboratory Investigation | Volume 90 May 2010 759
observed in our miRNA microarray approach using qRT-
PCR. Thus, we believe that the differential expression data
has significant biological relevance.
Chromosome 19 miRNAs are one of the largest
clusters ever reported and expressed at a high level in the
placenta.23 It is not entirely surprising then to find them
expressed at a high level in tumors associated with vessel
formation. The rationale for why chromosome 19 miRNA are
found at such a high level in angiosarcomas is beyond the
scope of this paper. However, their expression in the placenta
and in angiosarcoma is consistent with a potential role in
regulating vessel growth, which may allow the sarcoma to
grow unchecked.
One of the tumors labeled as MFH showed a high level of
expression of miRNA specific to angiosarcoma. It is likely
that this may represent an angiosarcoma mislabeled in the
database. Owing to the complexity of sarcomas, molecular
diagnostic separation through miRNA expression levels of
tumors with similar histological indicators is an important
next step in this study.
Both unsupervised hierarchical clustering and the statis-
tical analyses show that unique patterns exist in the miRNA
expression profiles obtained from various sarcoma types. The
unsupervised hierarchical clustering patterns suggest (1) that
additional molecular subtypes as defined by miRNA expres-
sion patterns may exist for several of the sarcoma types
Figure 4 (a) Heat map of absolute values for selected miRNA derived from angiosarcoma, GIST, MFH and epithelioid sarcoma. ( b) Heat map of relative
values contained in the database for selected miRNAs and tissues from a. ( c) Quantitative PCR validation of expression of selected miRNA in GIST, MFH,
angiosarcoma and epithelioid sarcoma. Ct values from two independent experiments per sample were normalized to the endogenous levels of U6. Two
samples were tested for each sarcoma subtype and average values were shown for each sarcoma type. Error bars show the s.d. in two different samples per
tested subtype.
MicroRNA signatures in sarcomas
AL Sarver et al
760 Laboratory Investigation | Volume 90 May 2010 | www.laboratoryinvestigation.org
currently defined as single diagnostic entity based on
histological features, and (2) that some of the sarcoma
specimens may be misdiagnosed, which need further mole-
cular diagnostic verifications. Further understanding of the
relationship of these molecularly defined subtypes with
patient treatment and outcomes is an important next step of
this study.
We are currently working toward the understanding
of the biological relevance of these expression patterns to
sarcomagenesis. For instance, in osteosarcomas, we noticed
significant downregulation of miRNAs, which were asso-
ciated with chromosome 14 (V enugopal Thayanithy, un-
published observation), whereas in rhabdomyosarcomas, we
observed differential expression of miRNA involved in
muscle differentiation (Aaron L. Sarver, unpublished). In
both these sarcomas, mRNA profiles obtained from identical
tumors show tight correlations with the miRNA profiles.
In conclusion, we have compiled a comprehensive miRNA
expression database for a variety of human sarcoma types.
We believe this database will be a valuable resource for the
academic community working on sarcoma and other tumor
types, and should allow users to identify and develop novel
biomarkers for various sarcoma types. In addition, our da-
tabase should allow researchers in the solid tumor commu-
nity (breast, colon and prostate) to determine the specificity
of their potential miRNA biomarkers at early stages of
research and better understand the common mechanisms of
tumorigenesis in a wide variety of samples. Improved under-
standing of the molecular basis underlying sarcomagenesis
will hasten the identification of novel therapeutic targets and
decipher the signaling pathways that are affected in these
sets of tumors. In the future, we will expand this resource to
incorporate miRNA expression data from various sarcoma
mouse models, which will promote comparative genomic
studies by allowing the direct comparison of human tumor
tissue data with mouse tumor tissue data to identify the most
relevant mouse models for studying human sarcoma biology
and treatment.
Supplementary Information accompanies the paper on the Laboratory
Investigation website (http://www.laboratoryinvestigation.org)
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Drs Andrew Fire, Clifford Steer, Jaime Modiano, Lei Li, Matt van de
Rijn and Reena Kartha for their comments and suggestions. We also thank
Dr Amy Skubitz and Sarah Bowell of the tissue procurement facility for their
help. The S-MED was developed with funding from Karen Wyckoff Sarcoma
Foundation, Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, and
Academic Health Center, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis. We also
acknowledge the Minnesota Supercomputing Institute for providing
extensive computational resources (hardware and systems administration
support). The S-MED database is available through the URL link http://
www.oncomir.umn.edu/
DISCLOSURE/CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
1. Weiss S, Goldblum J. Soft tissue tumors. Elsevier: Mosby, St Louis, 2008.
2. Calin GA, Croce CM. MicroRNA signatures in human cancers. Nat Rev
Cancer 2006;6:857–866.
3. Griffiths-Jones S, Saini HK, van Dongen S, et al. miRBase: tools for
microRNA genomics. Nucleic Acids Res 2008;36(Database issue):
D154–D158.
4. Bartel DP. MicroRNAs: target recognition and regulatory functions. Cell
2009;136:215–233.
5. Xiao F, Zuo Z, Cai G, et al. miRecords: an integrated resource for
microRNA-target interactions. Nucleic Acids Res 2009;37(Database
issue):D105–D110.
6. Lewis BP, Shih IH, Jones-Rhoades MW, et al. Prediction of mammalian
microRNA targets. Cell 2003;115:787–798.
7. Sethupathy P, Corda B, Hatzigeorgiou AG. TarBase: a comprehensive
database of experimentally supported animal microRNA targets.
RNA 2006;12:192–197.
8. Jiang Q, Wang Y, Hao Y, et al. miR2Disease: a manually curated
database for microRNA deregulation in human disease. Nucleic Acids
Res 2009;37(Database issue):D98–D104.
9. Calin GA, Ferracin M, Cimmino A, et al. A microRNA signature
associated with prognosis and progression in chronic lymphocytic
leukemia. N Engl J Med 2005;353:1793–1801.
10. Calin GA, Liu CG, Ferracin M, et al. Ultraconserved regions encoding
ncRNAs are altered in human leukemias and carcinomas. Cancer Cell
2007;12:215–229.
11. Ma L, Teruya-Feldstein J, Weinberg RA. Tumour invasion and
metastasis initiated by microRNA-10b in breast cancer. Nature
2007;449:682–688.
12. Takagi T, Iio A, Nakagawa Y, et al. Decreased expression of
microRNA-143 and -145 in human gastric cancers. Oncology
2009;77:12–21.
13. Schetter AJ, Leung SY, Sohn JJ, et al. MicroRNA expression profiles
associated with prognosis and therapeutic outcome in colon
adenocarcinoma. JAMA 2008;299:425–436.
14. Subramanian S, Lui WO, Lee CH, et al. MicroRNA expression signature
of human sarcomas. Oncogene 2008;27:2015–2026.
15. Sarver AL, French A, Borralho PM, et al. Human colon cancer profiles
show differential microRNA expression depending on mismatch repair
status and are characteristic of undifferentiated proliferative states.
BMC Cancer 2009;9:401.
16. Chen J, Lozach J, Garcia EW, et al. Highly sensitive and specific
microRNA expression profiling using BeadArray technology. Nucleic
Acids Res 2008;36:e87.
17. Bolstad BM, Irizarry RA, Astrand M, et al. A comparison of normalization
methods for high density oligonucleotide array data based on variance
and bias. Bioinformatics 2003;19:185–193.
18. Schmittgen TD, Livak KJ. Analyzing real-time PCR data by the
comparative Ct method. Nat Protoc 2008;3:1101–1108.
19. Wang X. miRDB: a microRNA target prediction and functional
annotation database with a wiki interface. RNA 2008;14:1012–1017.
20. Wang H, Garzon R, Sun H, et al. NF-kappaB-YY1-miR-29 regulatory
circuitry in skeletal myogenesis and rhabdomyosarcoma. Cancer Cell
2008;14:369–381.
21. Taulli R, Bersani F, Foglizzo V, et al. The muscle-specific microRNA miR-
206 blocks human rhabdomyosarcoma growth in xenotransplanted
mice by promoting myogenic differentiation. J Clin Invest
2009;119:2366–2378.
22. Haller F, von Heydebreck A, Zhang JD, et al. Localization- and
mutation-dependent microRNA (miRNA) expression signatures in
gastrointestinal stromal tumours (GISTs), with a cluster of co-expressed
miRNAs located at 14q32.31. J Pathol 2009;220:71–86.
23. Bentwich I, Avniel A, Karov Y, et al. Identification of hundreds of
conserved and nonconserved human microRNAs. Nat Genet
2005;37:766–770.
MicroRNA signatures in sarcomas
AL Sarver et al
www.laboratoryinvestigation.org | Laboratory Investigation | Volume 90 May 2010 761