SOURCE URL: https://rarediseases.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/05/NORD-comments-on-Considerations-for-the-Design-and-Conduct-of-Externally-Controlled-Trials-for-Drug-and-Biological-Products-Guidance-for-Industry-FINAL.pdf
FINAL URL: https://rarediseases.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/05/NORD-comments-on-Considerations-for-the-Design-and-Conduct-of-Externally-Controlled-Trials-for-Drug-and-Biological-Products-Guidance-for-Industry-FINAL.pdf
HTTP: 200
CONTENT-TYPE: application/pdf
======================================================================
 
 
Patrizia Cavazzoni, M.D. 
Director, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
10001 New Hampshire Ave 
Silver Spring, MD 20903  
 
May 2, 2023 
Re: Docket No. FDA-2022-D-2983-0002 for “Considerations for the Design and Conduct of 
Externally Controlled Trials for Drug and Biological Products Guidance for Industry”   
 
Dear Dr. Cavazzoni, 
 
On behalf of the more than 25 million Americans living with one of the over 7,000 known rare diseases, 
the National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) thanks the Food and Drug Administration (FDA or 
Agency) for the opportunity to provide comments on the Agency’s draft guidance “Considerations for the 
Design and Conduct of Externally Controlled Trials for Drug and Biological Products.”  
 
NORD is a unique federation of non-profits and health organizations dedicated to improving the health 
and well-being of people with rare diseases by driving advances in care, research, and policy. NORD was 
founded 40 years ago, after the passage of the Orphan Drug Act (ODA), to formalize the coalition of 
patient advocacy groups that were instrumental in passing this landmark law. Since that time, NORD has 
been advancing rare disease research and funding to support the development of effective treatments and 
cures; raised awareness and addressed key knowledge gaps; and advocated for policies that support the 
availability of and access to safe and effective therapies.  
 
The vast majority of the more than 7,000 known rare diseases do not yet have an FDA-approved 
treatment, making continued progress in rare disease research and drug development critically important.1 
The unique challenges associated with rare disease research complicate both traditional randomized, 
double-blinded, placebo-controlled trials as well as alternative research approaches including 
observational studies, single-arm trials, and studies with external control arms. At the same time, nothing 
is more devastating to the rare disease community than dedicating considerable time and resources to a 
rare disease study only to find its flawed design and/or execution compromises the interpretability of the 
data to a point where it is inadequate to serve its regulatory purpose. In addition, the limited patient 
populations and financial realities of rare disease drug development generally make repeating a fatally 
flawed study impossible. Therefore, appropriately designing and conducting clinical studies the first time 
is often a matter of life and death for our patients. 
 
Rare disease patients depend on robust evidence to trust in the safety and effectiveness of FDA-approved 
therapies and given the severity of unmet need, time is of the essence. NORD first and foremost 
appreciates FDA’s efforts to provide guidance on the considerations for using externally controlled trials 
for drug development. While traditional randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled trials are the 
gold standard for clinical evidence of safety and effectiveness, they are not always feasible or ethical in 
 
1 FDA. (2022, March 4). CDER continues to make rare diseases a priority with drug approv als. U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration. Retrieved April 28, 2023, from https://www .fda.gov/news-events/fda-voices/cder-
continues-make-rare-diseases-priority-drug-approvals-a nd-programming-speed-therapeutic  

NORD comments on Docket No. FDA-2022-D-2983-0002                                                                  Page 2 of 12 
 
 
rare disease drug development.2  In fact, both FDA and the International Conference for Harmonization 
(ICH) have previously released guidance on the use of external controls in drug development, 
emphasizing the role of external controls in situations where it is "unethical to run a placebo trial, the 
disease is well understood, and the trial has a measurable outcome.” 3 Additional specific and actionable 
guidance on how to design the best possible externally controlled study when it is the only feasible option 
will be tremendously valuable to the rare disease community. As outlined in the guidance, the potential 
for uncontrolled residual bias and confounders are a significant concern with any externally controlled 
study. Unfortunately, the heterogeneity in disease manifestation, the small sample sizes, and the 
frequently scarce data on natural history and disease progression make controlling for these biases and 
confounders particularly challenging for rare diseases – and arguably limit the feasibility and applicability 
of the draft guidance in its current form to the rare disease field.  
 
NORD also appreciates that the draft guidance is one of several guidance documents that have been 
developed on an interrelated range of topics such as Real-world data (RWD) and Real-world evidence 
(RWE), data standards, registries, Electronic Health Record (EHR) data, and common issues in rare 
disease drug development.4 Finally, NORD appreciates FDA’s engagement of patients through a variety 
of communication channels including the Reagan-Udall Foundation’s Real-World Data Webinar series.5 
NORD values the opportunity to provide comments to ensure the draft guidance will provide meaningful 
and actionable advice to the rare disease community and would be delighted to support FDA in any 
efforts to further engage the rare disease community on this critically important issue.  
 
Recommendation 1: Empower the rare disease community to design the best possible externally 
controlled trial given the unique challenges associated with rare disease drug development  
 
External control arms and other types of RWD play an increasingly important role in rare disease drug 
development.6  For instance, in a study analyzing approvals using historical data from 1999 to 2014, the 
FDA approved 60 new indications without the use of randomized controlled trials.7 Similarly, another 
study found that 116 FDA approvals between 2019 and 2021 leveraged some form of real-world 
evidence.8 Lack of available therapies for comparison, as is common for rare diseases, is one of the key 
 
2  Rare diseases: Common issues in drug development guidance for indust ry. Food and Drug Administration. (2019, 
February). Retrieved April 28, 2023, from https://www.fda.gov/me dia/120091/download  
3 Jahanshahi, M., Gregg, K., Davis, G., Ndu, A., Miller, V., Vockley, J., Olli vier, C., Franolic, T., & Sakai, S. (2021, 
September). The use of external controls in FDA Regulatory Decision making . Therapeutic innovation & 
regulatory science. Retrieved April 28, 2023, from https://www.nc bi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8332598/  
4 Real-World Data Webinars. Reagan-Udall Foundation. (2023). Retrieved April 28, 2023, from 
https://reaganudall.org/programs/research/real-world-data-web inars  
5 Real-World Data Webinars. Reagan-Udall Foundation. (2023). Retrieved April 28, 2023, from 
https://reaganudall.org/programs/research/real-world-data-web inars  
6 Thorlund, K., Dron, L., Park, J. J. H., & Mills, E. J. (2020, May 8). Synthetic and external controls in clinical trials 
- A Primer for researchers. Clinical epidemiology. Retrieved April 28, 2023, from 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7218288/  
7 Hatswell AJ, Baio G, Berlin JA, Irs A, Freemantle N. Regulatory ap proval of pharmaceuticals without a 
randomised controlled study: analysis of EMA and FDA approval s 1999-2014. BMJ Open. 2016 Jun 
30;6(6):e011666. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-011666. PMID: 27363818; P MCID: PMC4932294. 
8 Purpura, C., Garry, E., Honig, N., Case, A., & Rassen, J. (2022). The role of real-world evidence in FDA-approved 
new drug and Biologics License Applications. Clinical pharmacology and therapeutics. Retrieved April 28, 
 

NORD comments on Docket No. FDA-2022-D-2983-0002                                                                  Page 3 of 12 
 
 
areas where external control designs are most persuasive to FDA, further reinforcing the importance of 
this type of guidance for rare disease drug development.9 
 
In fact, the vast majority of clinical trials with external control arms submitted to the FDA for purposes of 
drug approval involve rare diseases. A study of non-oncology FDA approvals from 2000 to 2019 
identified 45 approvals where FDA accepted external control arm data to support pivotal trials, with 80% 
involving rare diseases.10 Interestingly, half of the approvals for non-rare indications relied on previously 
conducted clinical studies or other published data as the external control while only three used 
retrospective natural history studies. In contrast, among the 36 rare disease approvals, retrospective 
natural history studies accounted for approximately half of the drug approvals, followed by ‘baseline 
controls,’ indicating that the types of external controls used to support rare disease drug approvals may be 
profoundly different from those used for non-rare diseases. In fact, a separate analysis identified 14 FDA 
approvals between 2018 and 2022 that incorporated RWE to support efficacy, all for orphan indications.11 
As a study of 49 oncology drugs approved by FDA and EMA from 1999 to 2014 without a randomized 
controlled trial demonstrates, this trend is also true internationally.12,13 
 
Despite this very close link between rare diseases and external control arms, as it is written, the draft 
guidance is mostly applicable to non-rare diseases. Throughout the guidance, the topic of rare diseases is 
barely mentioned; in fact, a search of the document identified a single use of the term ‘rare disease’ – in a 
footnote on page 2. As a result, the unique challenges encountered when leveraging external controls in 
rare disease drug development are not considered nor addressed sufficiently in the guidance. For instance, 
the table on pages 12 and 13 of the draft guidance (see Table 1) provides a potentially useful reference 
summary of the considerations for assessing the comparability of the external control data but is lacking 
any specific guidance for how to apply the concepts or address these challenges in the rare disease space. 
Table 1 below outlines some of rare disease specific concerns that are currently missing from the 
guidance and that require additional guidance.   Greater clarity about how the rare disease community can 
 
2023, from 
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34726771/#:~:text=Finally%2C%20we %20qualified%20FDA's%20docume
nted,evidence%20of%20safety%20or%20effectiveness.  
9 Jahanshahi, M., Gregg, K., Davis, G., Ndu, A., Miller, V., Vockley, J., Olli vier, C., Franolic, T., & Sakai, S. (2021, 
September). The use of external controls in FDA Regulatory Decision making . Therapeutic innovation & 
regulatory science. Retrieved April 28, 2023, from https://www.nc bi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8332598/  
10 Jahanshahi, M., Gregg, K., Davis, G., Ndu, A., Miller, V., Vockley, J., Olli vier, C., Franolic, T., & Sakai, S. 
(2021, September). The use of external controls in FDA Regulatory Decision making . Therapeutic innovation 
& regulatory science. Retrieved April 28, 2023, from 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8332598/  
11 Silverman, B. (2022, September 12). RWE's biggest role in US FDA approvals: External Controls for 
Breakthrough Rare Disease Therapies. Pink Sheet. Retrieved April 28, 2023, from 
https://pink.pharmaintelligence.informa.com/PS146970/RWEs-Biggest-Role-In-US-FDA-Approvals-
External-Controls-For-Breakthrough-Rare-Disease-Therapies  
12 Jahanshahi, M., Gregg, K., Davis, G., Ndu, A., Miller, V., Vockley, J., Olli vier, C., Franolic, T., & Sakai, S. 
(2021, September). The use of external controls in FDA Regulatory Decision making . Therapeutic innovation 
& regulatory science. Retrieved April 28, 2023, from 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8332598/  
13 Hatswell, A. J., Baio, G., Berlin, J. A., Irs, A., & Freemantle, N. (2016 , June 30). Regulatory approval of 
pharmaceuticals without a randomised controlled study: Analysis  of EMA and FDA approvals 1999-2014 . 
BMJ open. Retrieved April 28, 2023, from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.g ov/pmc/articles/PMC4932294/  
 

NORD comments on Docket No. FDA-2022-D-2983-0002                                                                  Page 4 of 12 
 
 
best navigate these challenges when applying the guidance framework in designing rare disease trials with 
external controls is urgently needed.  
 
Table 1: Rare disease drug development challenges not currently addressed in FDA’s draft 
guidance 
Content from FDA Draft Guidance Text NORD Comments 
Focus of 
Comparison 
Considerations for Data Comparability Rare Disease Specific Consid erations 
that remain to be addressed in FDA’s 
external control arm guidance:  
Time periods  Various aspects of clinical care may 
change over time, such as the standard of 
care for the condition of interest, types of 
treatments, supportive care regimens, and 
criteria for determining disease response 
or progression. Such temporal differences 
are difficult to address using statistical 
analyses alone. It is important to consider 
whether and how different time frames in 
the treatment arm and the external control 
arm impact the interpretability of study 
findings. 
- Retrospective Natural History studies 
are the most commonly used type of 
external control arm in rare disease 
trials 14 
- Patient registries, natural history 
studies, and clinical trials often 
capture a relatively large fraction of 
the overall rare disease patient 
population  
- A small number of providers are 
specialized in any given rare disease 
and tend to see a large fraction of the 
patient population   
Geographic 
region 
Standards of care and other factors (e.g., 
access to care) that affect health-related 
outcomes can vary across geographic 
regions and health care systems. A 
balance of participants or patients across 
geographic regions and health care 
systems in an externally controlled trial, 
when possible, can help reduce the impact 
of confounding based on such differences. 
- Around 40% of rare disease patients 
travel more than 60 miles for 
specialized care and 17% have moved 
or considered moving to be closer to 
care. 15 
- Small patient populations limit the 
number of rare disease patients in any 
specific geographic region 
- Concentration of rare disease 
specialists at large academic medical 
centers limits the number of health 
systems providing specialized care to 
rare disease patients 
 
14 Jahanshahi, M., Gregg, K., Davis, G., Ndu, A., Miller, V., Vockley, J., Olli vier, C., Franolic, T., & Sakai, S. 
(2021, September). The use of external controls in FDA Regulatory Decision making . Therapeutic 
innovation & regulatory science. Retrieved April 28, 2023, from 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8332598/  
15 NORD. (2019). Barriers to rare disease diagnosis, care and treatment in the US: A 30 Year Comparative 
Analysis. National Organization for Rare Disorders . Retrieved May 1, 2023 , from 
https://rarediseases.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/10/NRD-208 8-Barriers-Survey-
Report_Infographic_FNL.pdf  
 

NORD comments on Docket No. FDA-2022-D-2983-0002                                                                  Page 5 of 12 
 
 
Diagnosis The criteria used to establish a diagnosis 
may differ based on practice variation or 
may have changed in the interval between 
when the treatment arm of the trial was 
conducted and when the data for the 
external control arm were collected. 
Sponsors should consider the diagnostic 
standards used and whether relevant 
clinical tests to establish a diagnosis were 
conducted and reported equally across the 
compared arms 
- Many rare disease patients endure a 
diagnostic odyssey of 5 -7 years 
before the correct diagnosis 
- Most rare diseases are genetic; initial 
diagnosis may lead to screening and 
diagnosing cases in additional family 
members  
- New diagnostic tests, including 
whole-genome sequencing and exome 
sequencing, as well as additions to the 
newborn screening panel impact 
diagnosis 
- New rare diseases continue to be 
diagnosed and rare disease subtypes 
defined 
Prognosis Based on demographic and clinical 
characteristics—and if sufficient 
knowledge of relevant prognostic factors 
is available—prognostic indicators for the 
participants or patients in each arm of the 
trial should be evaluated and shown to be 
of sufficient similarity to permit an 
unbiased assessment of the treatment-
outcome association. 
- The natural history and disease 
progression of most rare disease is 
incompletely understood, and often 
highly heterogenous16  
- The small sample sizes complicate 
statistically rigorous comparisons  
Treatments Attributes of the treatment of interest—
including drug formulation, dose, route of 
administration, timing, frequency, and 
duration as well as specific rules for dose 
modifications, interruptions, 
discontinuations, and adherence—will 
have been prespecified or measured in the 
treatment arm. In contrast, specific 
aspects of a comparator treatment (as 
applicable) in the external control arm 
may not have been protocol-driven 
depending on the data source. 
Accordingly, sponsors should assess 
whether the external control arm data can 
be meaningfully compared to the 
treatment arm data 
- Most rare diseases lack disease-
specific ICD-10 codes, complicating 
the use of RWD 
- The small sample sizes complicate 
statistically rigorous comparisons 
Other 
treatment-
Various treatment-related considerations, 
when relevant, include (1) previous 
treatments received (e.g., lines of therapy 
- Many rare disease patients are 
medically complex and rare diseases 
 
16 Rare diseases: Common issues in drug development guidance for ind ustry. Food and Drug Administration. (2019, 
February). Retrieved April 28, 2023, from https://www.fda.gov/me dia/120091/download  
 

NORD comments on Docket No. FDA-2022-D-2983-0002                                                                  Page 6 of 12 
 
 
related 
factors 
in patients with cancer), (2) medications 
received concomitantly that can affect the 
outcome of interest, or (3) predictive 
biomarkers (e.g., genomic testing) related 
to the treatment of interest. When 
differentially distributed across groups 
being compared, such factors can threaten 
an assessment of the drug-outcome 
association. 
often affect multiple organ systems 
concomitantly 
- Off-label use is common among rare 
disease patients  
- Rare disease communities tend to be 
tight-knit and new therapy adoption 
tends to be rapid  
- Predictive (and qualified) biomarkers 
are scarce for many rare disease  
Follow-up 
periods 
Designation of the index date should be 
consistent between the treatment arm and 
the external control arm, and the duration 
of follow-up periods should be 
comparable across compared arms 
- Rare disease communities tend to be 
tight-knit and many rare disease 
registries are operated by and for 
patients, making longitudinal follow-
up more feasible  
Intercurrent 
events 
The relevance of intercurrent events 
across treatment arms should be assessed, 
including differential use of additional 
therapies after initiation of the treatment 
of interest. 
- Rare disease patients tend to see 
multiple providers including several 
specialists to manage their condition 
and often use a number of different 
therapies at the same time  
Outcome Whether endpoints used in an externally 
controlled trial can be reliably and 
consistently measured across the external 
control arm and the treatment arm will be 
influenced by several factors, including 
the definitions of the endpoints, the data 
source for the external control arm, and 
the potential for the outcome to be 
influenced by knowledge of treatment 
received. In addition, sponsors should be 
able to apply the same criteria for the 
evaluation and timing of outcome 
assessments across both arms of the 
externally controlled trial 
- Clinical outcome assessments are 
quite commonly used in rare disease 
drug development 
- Established and validated endpoints 
tend to be scarce for rare diseases17  
Missing data The extent of missing data in the external 
control arm should be assessed before 
conducting an externally controlled trial 
to evaluate feasibility (when such data are 
available). When analyzing results from 
such a trial, the extent of missing data in 
both the treatment and external control 
arms should be assessed to examine the 
potential impact of missing data. 
- Small sample sizes potentially 
increase the impact of missing data 
and complicate sensitivity analyses 
and assessments of non-random 
missingness  
- Rare disease patients often seek care 
from multiple providers, increasing 
interoperability and data 
completeness challenges  
  
 
 
17 Rare diseases: Common issues in drug development guidance for ind ustry. Food and Drug Administration. (2019, 
February). Retrieved April 28, 2023, from https://www.fda.gov/me dia/120091/download  

NORD comments on Docket No. FDA-2022-D-2983-0002                                                                  Page 7 of 12 
 
 
Based on these concerns, NORD offers the following specific recommendations:  
 
1.a. Given the substantial number of externally controlled trials that are conducted for rare 
diseases, tailor this draft guidance to be compatible with the unique challenges of rare disease drug 
development. NORD recognizes that some of these rare disease specific issues are partially addressed in 
other FDA guidance documents.”18,19 Where more specific and relevant guidance for rare diseases is 
available from other sources, it would be beneficial to provide a concrete reference and briefly summarize 
the pertinent information relevant to rare diseases in this guidance. Moreover, where multiple guidance 
documents may seemingly contradict each other, clarify the relationship among the guidance documents 
and how the Agency’s thinking on the issue may have evolved over time. Finally, where concrete and 
practical guidance on applying the guidance in a way that addresses the unique challenges associated with 
rare diseases is lacking, we urge FDA to add this specificity to the guidance. 
 
1.b. Provide an appendix or supplementary materials with additional details and illustrative 
examples to further clarify the Agency’s thinking and to provide actionable advice for drug 
sponsors on how to successfully apply the concepts in rare disease drug development. FDA should 
include examples and use cases that highlight how drug sponsors and FDA have successfully navigated 
these challenges in the past and how specifically the Agency may weigh the factors outlined in the 
guidance given the unique challenges in rare disease drug development. Where the Agency has 
incorporated further details and examples like this in other relevant guidance documents, it has usually 
proven exceedingly helpful for our community; see for instance PFDD Guidance 1: Collecting 
Comprehensive and Representative Input;20 PFDD Guidance 3: Selecting, Developing or Modifying Fit-
for-purpose Clinical Outcome Assessments;21 Submitting Documents using real-world Data and Real-
world evidence to FDA for Drug and Biological Product;22 Recommendations for the Submission of 
LOINC Codes in Regulatory Applications to the US Food and Drug Administration.23 Discussion of 
illustrative examples referencing specific drugs and their completed FDA reviews should not be impeded 
by confidentiality considerations, since discussion of such examples can rely upon the summary basis for 
approval, advisory committee proceedings, and other publicly available information.  
 
18 Center for Drug Evaluation and Research. (2019, March). Rare disease s: Natural history studies for drug 
development. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Retrieved May 2, 2023, fr om 
https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/rare-diseases-natural-history-
studies-drug-development 
19 Rare diseases: Common issues in drug development guidance for ind ustry. Food and Drug Administration. (2019, 
February). Retrieved April 28, 2023, from https://www.fda.gov/me dia/120091/download 
20 Center for Drug Evaluation and Research. (2023). Patient-focused  drug development guidance series. U.S. Food 
and Drug Administration. Retrieved April 28, 2023, from https://ww w.fda.gov/drugs/development-
approval-process-drugs/fda-patient-focused-drug-development- guidance-series-enhancing-incorporation-
patients-voice-medical 
21 Center for Drug Evaluation and Research. (2023). Patient-focused  drug development guidance series. U.S. Food 
and Drug Administration. Retrieved April 28, 2023, from https://ww w.fda.gov/drugs/development-
approval-process-drugs/fda-patient-focused-drug-development- guidance-series-enhancing-incorporation-
patients-voice-medical 
22 Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER). (2022, September). Su bmitting documents using real-world 
data and real-world evidence to ... U.S. Food and Drug Administrati on. Retrieved April 28, 2023, from 
https://www.fda.gov/media/124795/download 
23 Recommendations for the submission of LOINC codes in regulator y ... U.S. Food and Drug Administration. (2017, 
November). Retrieved April 28, 2023, from https://www.fda.gov/me dia/109376/download  

NORD comments on Docket No. FDA-2022-D-2983-0002                                                                  Page 8 of 12 
 
 
 
Recommendation 2: Not all external data sources and use cases are created equal, and external 
controls can support clinical trials in multiple ways; a framework and more nuanced guidance is 
needed to adequately guide sponsors through the external control trial design process  
 
Ultimately, studies including external control arms must be fit for purpose, just like other regulatory 
studies. As mentioned in the draft guidance, “the suitability of an externally controlled trial design 
warrants a case-by-case assessment […].”24 NORD strongly agrees with this sentiment. For instance, not 
all studies leveraging external control arms may be intended as pivotal studies. Moreover, external data 
may be used to augment, rather than replace, internal control arms, and each external control data type has 
its unique set of strengths, limitations, and inherent biases that in combination may provide a richer and 
more accurate and complete assessment of a drug’s safety and effectiveness. Rather than establishing a 
seemingly arbitrary dichotomy between randomized placebo-controlled trials and externally controlled 
trials, FDA should create a framework that allows sponsors to adequately consider these nuances as they 
apply to their specific use case.  
 
In fact, various studies in recent years have assessed how external or hybrid control designs, which 
supplement an underpowered control group with real-world data, compare to traditional randomized 
controlled trials across a variety of use cases spanning numerous populations, organ systems, and rare as 
well as non-rare indications. For instance, Chen et al. (2019) developed a propensity-score based method 
to augment clinical trial data with RWD while down-weighing the specific information contributed by the 
RWD based on the propensity of each patient to be included in the RCT rather than the RWD, and 
demonstrated the value of this approach through simulation studies.25 Similarly, Magaret et al. assessed 
the feasibility of leveraging external historical controls to augment or replace traditional concurrent 
placebo controls in trials evaluating the efficacy of azithromycin in reducing exacerbation risk among 
cystic fibrosis patients.26 After adjusting for baseline differences between the populations, hazard ratios in 
the augmented and externally controlled trials appeared qualitatively comparable to those in the original 
placebo-controlled trial, albeit both the comparability of the controls and the statistical methodology 
impacted the residual bias in the estimation of the treatment effect.27 Chen et al. (2021) used RWD from a 
large clinical research network to simulate a Phase III double-blinded Alzheimer’s disease trial with 
parallel control groups that compared two donepezil formulations.28 Specifically, the authors compared 
 
24Considerations for the Design and Conduct of Externally Control led Trials for Drug and Biological Products 
Guidance for Industry. Food and Drug Administration. (2023, February). Retrieved April 28, 2023, from 
https://www.fda.gov/media/164960/download 
25 Chen, W.-C., Wang, C., Li, H., Lu, N., Tiwari, R., Xu, Y., & Yue, L. (2019, Septe mber 4). Propensity score-
integrated composite likelihood approach for augmenting the control arm o f a randomized controlled trial by 
incorporating real-world data. Taylor & Francis. Retrieved April 28, 2023, from 
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/10543406.2020.1730877  
26 Magaret, A., Warden, M., Simon, N., Heltshe, S., Retsch-Bogart, G., Ra msey, B., & Mayer-Hamblett, N. (2022, 
March). A new path for CF clinical trials through the use of historical controls. NIH National Library of 
Medicine. Retrieved March 9, 2023, from https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34879997/ 
27 Magaret, A., Warden, M., Simon, N., Heltshe, S., Retsch-Bogart, G., Ra msey, B., & Mayer-Hamblett, N. (2022, 
March). A new path for CF clinical trials through the use of historical controls. NIH National Library of 
Medicine. Retrieved March 9, 2023, from https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34879997/ 
28 Chen, Z., Zhang, H., Guo, Y., George, T. J., Prosperi, M., Hogan, W. R., He, Z., S henkman, E. A., Wang, F., & 
Bian, J. (2021, May 14). Exploring the feasibility of using real-world data from a large clinical data 
 

NORD comments on Docket No. FDA-2022-D-2983-0002                                                                  Page 9 of 12 
 
 
the performance of a simulated trial with an external control arm based on standard-of-care and a two-arm 
simulation to the actual clinical trial data (i.e., NCT00478205), and found similar serious adverse events 
rates albeit the rates in the simulations were somewhat higher than in the original trial.29 Focusing on 
glioblastoma data, Ventz et al. (2019) compared the statistical performance of externally controlled trials 
to that of randomized and single-arm trials, and found that external control data reduced bias by up to 30 
percent compared to single-arm trials while improving the study’s power compared to a traditional 
randomized trial design.30 Schroeder et al. successfully replicated a phase III randomized controlled trial 
for metastatic colorectal cancer using electronic health record (EHR) data.31 Ventz et al. (2022) further 
proved the value of hybrid controlled trials using simulations and data from small cell lung cancer and 
glioblastoma patients, and found hybrid trial designs potentially advantageous compared to externally 
controlled as well as randomized trials. 32 Similarly, Shan et al. recently published a simulation study 
comparing different single and hybrid control methods and found several of the evaluated statistical 
methods effective at reducing potential biases, at least under the evaluated conditions, albeit at a cost of 
statistical efficiency.33 As these results show, blended approaches hold a tremendous promise, and a 
dichotomous view of internal vs. external controls unnecessarily restricts the usefulness of external data 
sources in clinical trials. Further guidance is needed, however, on how these more novel approaches fit 
into FDA’s thinking about external control arms, and how these approaches can be appropriately 
leveraged specifically in rare disease drug development.   
 
At the same time, not all externally controlled trials are created equal. As several recent reviews on the 
topic point out, a variety of data types and approaches have been used in regulatory decision-making in 
 
research network to simulate clinical trials of alzheimer's disease. Nature News. Retrieved April 28, 2023, 
from https://www.nature.com/articles/s41746-021-00452-1  
29 Chen, Z., Zhang, H., Guo, Y., George, T. J., Prosperi, M., Hogan, W. R., He, Z., S henkman, E. A., Wang, F., & 
Bian, J. (2021, May 14). Exploring the feasibility of using real-world data from a large clinical data 
research network to simulate clinical trials of alzheimer's disease. Nature News. Retrieved April 28, 2023, 
from https://www.nature.com/articles/s41746-021-00452-1  
30 Ventz, S., Lai, A., Cloughesy, T. F., Wen, P. Y., Trippa, L., & Alexander,  B. M. (2019, August 15). Design and 
evaluation of an external control arm using prior clinical trials and real-world data. American Association 
for Cancer Research. Retrieved April 28, 2023, from 
https://aacrjournals.org/clincancerres/article/25/16/4993/125037/Design-and-Evaluation-of-an-External-
Control-Arm  
31 Schroeder, C., Lawrence, M., Li, C., Lenain, C., Mhatre, S., Reyes-Rivera, I ., & Bretscher, M. (2021, April 23). 
Building External Control Arms From Patient-Level Electronic Health Record Data to Replicate the 
Randomized IMblaze370 Control Arm in Metastatic Colorectal Cancer . JCO Clinical Cancer Informatics. 
Retrieved April 28, 2023, from https://ascopubs.org/doi/10.1200/C CI.20.00149  
32 Ventz, S., Khozin, S., Louv, B., Sands, J., Wen, P., Rahman, R., Comment, L ., Alexander, B., & Trippa, L. (2022, 
October 2). Design and evaluation of an external control arm using prior clin ical trials and real-world data. 
Clinical cancer research : an official journal of the American Association for Cancer Research. Retrieved 
April 28, 2023, from https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31175098/  
33 Shan, M., Faries, D., Dang, A., Zhang, X., Cui, Z., & Sheffield, K. M. (2022 , February 16). A simulation-based 
evaluation of statistical methods for hybrid real-world co ntrol arms in clinical trials - statistics in 
biosciences. SpringerLink. Retrieved April 28, 2023, from https://link.sprin ger.com/article/10.1007/s12561-
022-09334-w  

NORD comments on Docket No. FDA-2022-D-2983-0002                                                                  Page 10 of 
12 
 
 
the US and other countries, each use case with its unique strengths and limitations. 34,35,36 Numerous 
factors including the type of external control, selected time frame and prospective or retrospective nature 
of data collection, type of comparator arm, type of endpoint, selected outcome measure, expected effect 
size, patient population, frequency of intercurrent events and censoring, and many other factors, are 
tightly interconnected and together determine the quality of the study design. Similarly, not all statistical 
approaches to external control arms are created equal. Loiseau et al., for instance, compared several 
common propensity score based and outcome modelling based techniques for trial replication, swapping 
trial arms from five different clinical trials, and found that outcome prediction-based approaches reduced 
estimation error and increased statistical power compared to propensity score-based approaches.37  
 
Based on these concerns, NORD offers the following specific recommendations:  
 
2.a. Add granularity, depth, and nuance to the guidance by recognizing the complementary nature 
of external and internal control data and provide more specific guidance on how to successfully 
leverage external controls including a summary of the strengths and limitations of different data 
types and analysis approaches. NORD appreciates that the benefits and drawbacks of the different data 
sources and techniques are highly context-specific, that designing externally controlled trials involves a 
unique set of trade-offs that must be weighted carefully, and we understand why “FDA does not 
recommend a particular approach to analyzing data from externally controlled trials. No single statistical 
or analytical method will be suitable for all trials involving external control arms, and potential 
approaches should be discussed with the appropriate FDA review division.”38 However, the current 
guidance does not provide nearly sufficient detail to begin a meaningful discussion of the trade-offs 
involved; even if there is not a single best approach to designing external control arm trials, FDA should 
develop further guidance to help identify the strengths and weaknesses of each approach, to describe how 
different data types and approaches can complement each other, and to meaningfully guide sponsors in 
the selection of the most appropriate approach or approaches for a given drug development program. 
 
2.b. As the review of the recent literature shows, the field of RWD and RWE for regulatory 
decision-making is rapidly maturing and the understanding of the specific tradeoffs in each use 
 
34 Mishra-Kalyani, P. S., Amiri Kordestani, L., Rivera, D. R., Singh,  H., Ibrahim, A., DeClaro, R. A., Shen, Y., 
Tang, S., Sridhara, R., Kluetz, P. G., Concato, J., Pazdur, R., & Beave r, J. A. (2022, January 9). External 
Control Arms in oncology: Current use and future directions . Annals of Oncology. Retrieved April 28, 2023, 
from https://www.annalsofoncology.org/article/S0923-7534(22 )00006-0/fulltext  
35 Yap, T., Jacobs, I., Baumfeld Andre, E., Lee, L., Beaupre, D., & Azoulay, L . (2021, December 10). Application of 
real-world data to external control groups in Oncology Clinical Tr ial Drug Development. Frontiers. 
Retrieved April 28, 2023, from https://www.frontiersin.org/artic les/10.3389/fonc.2021.695936/full  
36 Kim, T.-E., Park, S.-I., & Shin, K.-H. (2022, September). Incorporation of real-world data to a clinical trial: Use 
of external controls. Translational and clinical pharmacology. Retrieved April 28, 2023,  from 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9532857/  
37 Loiseau, N., Trichelair, P., He, M., Andreux, M., Zaslavskiy, M., Wainrib, G ., & Blum, M. G. B. (2022, 
December 28). External Control Arm Analysis: An evaluation of propensity score ap proaches, G-
computation, and doubly debiased machine learning - BMC Medical Researc h methodology. BioMed 
Central. Retrieved April 28, 2023, from 
https://bmcmedresmethodol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/ s12874-022-01799-z  
38 Considerations for the Design and Conduct of Externally Contr olled Trials for Drug and Biological Products 
Guidance for Industry. Food and Drug Administration. (2023, February). Retrieved April 28, 2023, from 
https://www.fda.gov/media/164960/download 

NORD comments on Docket No. FDA-2022-D-2983-0002                                                                  Page 11 of 
12 
 
 
case is evolving; to complement the guidance documents, FDA should regularly review the 
literature and develop and refine best practices, including those specific to use cases among rare 
diseases. Publishing this information in peer-reviewed literature rather than in guidance will allow FDA 
to provide more timely and nuanced updates while meaningfully shaping the academic field.  
 
Recommendation 3: Meaningfully engage the rare disease patient, provider, and academic 
community in the discussion of appropriate external control arm use  
 
As outlined above, external control arms play a vital role in rare disease drug development. At the same 
time, conducting clinical trials with external control arms is often particularly challenging for rare 
diseases given the limited natural history data, small populations, and complex disease pathology.39 In the 
draft guidance, the Agency therefore recommends that, “sponsors should consult with the relevant FDA 
review division early in a drug development program about whether it is reasonable to conduct an 
externally controlled trial instead of a randomized controlled trial.”40  
In the rare disease space, patient advocacy groups, academic researchers, and small biotech companies in 
the pre-revenue phase play an outsized role in research and data collection including patient-led disease 
registries and other RWD sources that often serve as external controls or at least meaningfully inform 
clinical trial design. It is vitally important that these stakeholders understand FDA’s current thinking on 
external control arms, have realistic expectations about the acceptability of RWD sources to support 
approvals, and that they are equipped with the information and tools needed to collect regulatory-grade 
data. These groups need additional outreach to effectively understand and leverage FDA’s guidance 
documents.  
 
Many of these stakeholders do not have ample experience interacting with FDA review divisions; they 
often lack awareness of the need to engage early, lack the understanding of FDA organizational structures 
to identify the appropriate contacts, and often do not have the tools and knowledge to engage effectively. 
In fact, in NORD’s recent membership survey, 21% of queried patient advocacy groups identified 
guidance for how to request a meeting with FDA as a key gap, and 23% wanted guidance on how to 
prepare for a meeting with FDA. As a result, critical rare disease stakeholder groups are unlikely to 
proactively and effectively consult with the relevant FDA division early and often in the drug 
development process, increasing the risk of externally controlled studies and data that ultimately fail to 
meet FDA’s regulatory standards. 
 
Based on these concerns, NORD offers the following specific recommendations:  
 
3. NORD strongly encourages the Agency to engage rare disease patients, providers, and academic 
researchers more proactively on this topic by hosting webinars, workshops, and partnering with 
trusted advocacy organizations to cover topics to give better guidance on the use of these external 
controls. FDA’s LEADER 3-D program provides one meaningful and timely avenue to create awareness 
 
39 FDA. (2022, December 31). Rare diseases at FDA. U.S. Food and Drug Adm inistration. Retrieved March 9, 2023, 
from https://www.fda.gov/patients/rare-
diseasesfda#:~:text=Drug%2C%20biologic%2C%20and%20device%20development ,make%20conducting
%20clinical%20trials%20difficult. 
40 Considerations for the Design and Conduct of Externally Contr olled Trials for Drug and Biological Products 
Guidance for Industry. Food and Drug Administration. (2023, February). Retrieved April 28, 2023, from 
https://www.fda.gov/media/164960/download  

NORD comments on Docket No. FDA-2022-D-2983-0002                                                                  Page 12 of 
12 
 
 
and disseminate the relevant information to this stakeholder group. However, combining a variety of 
approaches, based on successful existing programs, will likely be most successful. For instance, on April 
13, 2023, representatives from the FDA and the Reagan-Udall Foundation partnered to discuss in a 
webinar the draft guidance and were met with various questions on how to use external controls and best 
mitigate confounding evidence and bias. 41 This webinar provided a forum to answer questions from 
advocates, pharma representatives, and individuals who had questions regarding the use of external 
controls by having FDA representatives accessible and available. Similarly, on May 2 and 3, 2023 FDA 
and Johns Hopkins University partnered on a public workshop on Addressing Challenges in the Design 
and Analysis of RARE Disease Clinical Trials: Considerations and Tools.42  
 
In hosting webinars specific to engaging rare disease stakeholders on the use of external control arms and 
other types of RWD and RWE, some topics to consider include: 
 
1. The benefits, mechanisms, and best practices of early engagement with FDA in rare disease drug 
development  
2. How to assess for bias and confounding evidence when using external control arms for rare 
disease drug development 
3. Best practices for using external control arms and how to assess when to use external controls 
specifically in rare disease drug development  
4. Considerations for the various types of external controls and their strengths and weaknesses 
specifically for rare disease dug development  
5. Considerations and best practices for the collection and use of Natural History Studies and other 
RWE/RWD in rare disease drug development 
 
NORD again thanks FDA for the opportunity to provide comments on this important draft guidance, and 
we look forward to continuing the dialogue around external control arms, RWE/RWD, as well as other 
strategies to bring safe and effective rare disease drugs to market. For questions regarding NORD or the 
above comments, please contact Karin Hoelzer. Director of Policy and Regulatory Affairs, at 
khoelzer@rarediseases.org or Hayley Mason. Policy Analyst, at hmason@rarediseases.org 
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Karin Hoelzer, DVM, PhD 
Director, Policy and Regulatory Affairs 
National Organization for Rare Disorders 
 
41 Real-world evidence Webinar series: Considerations for the d esign and conduct of externally controlled trials for 
drug and Biological Products Draft Guidance for Industry . Reagan-Udall Foundation. (2023). Retrieved 
April 28, 2023, from https://reaganudall.org/news-and-events/events/real-world-evidence-webinar-series-
considerations-design-and-conduct  
42 Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER), & Johns Hopkins Uni versity’s Center of Excellence in 
Regulatory Science and Innovation. (2023, May). FDA CDER & JHU CERSI Workshop. U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration. Retrieved May 2, 2023, from https://www.fda .gov/drugs/news-events-human-drugs/fda-cder-
jhu-cersi-workshop-addressing-challenges-design-and-analysis -rare-disease-clinical-trials  
 
Hayley Mason, MPA 
Policy Analyst 
National Organization for Rare Disorders 
 
