Environ Health Perspect253envhperEnvironmental Health Perspectives0091-67651552-9924American Chemical SocietyPMC1569423PMC1569423.115694231569423652599610.1289/ehp.845891ArticlesA carcinogenic potency database of the standardized results of animal bioassays
GoldLois SwirskySawyerCharles B.MagawRenaeBackmanGeorganne M.De VecianaMargaritaLevinsonRobertHooperN. KimHavenderWilliam R.BernsteinLesliePetoRichardPikeMalcolm C.AmesBruce N.121984581347079319011219841809200604092018The preceding paper described our numerical index of carcinogenic potency, the TD50 and the statistical procedures adopted for estimating it from experimental data. This paper presents the Carcinogenic Potency Database, which includes results of about 3000 long-term, chronic experiments of 770 test compounds. Part II is a discussion of the sources of our data, the rationale for the inclusion of particular experiments and particular target sites, and the conventions adopted in summarizing the literature. Part III is a guide to the plot of results presented in Part IV. A number of appendices are provided to facilitate use of the database. The plot includes information about chronic cancer tests in mammals, such as dose and other aspects of experimental protocol, histopathology and tumor incidence, TD50 and its statistical significance, dose response, author's opinion and literature reference. The plot readily permits comparisons of carcinogenic potency and many other aspects of cancer tests; it also provides quantitative information about negative tests. The range of carcinogenic potency is over 10 million-fold.

pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightyespmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articleyespmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyes
 
Environmental Health Perspectives 
Vol. 58, pp. 9-319, 1984 
 
A Carcinogenic Potency Database of the 
 
Standardized Results of Animal Bioassays 
 
Lois Swirsky Gold,** Charles B. Sawyer,* Renae Magaw,* 
Georganne M. Backman,* Margarita de Veciana,* 
 
Robert Levinson,* N. Kim Hooper,t William R. Havender,* 
Leslie Bernstein,? Richard Peto**, Malcolm C. Pike?, 
and Bruce N. Amestt 
 
The preceding paper described our numerical index of carcinogenic potency, the TD54, and the statistical 
procedures adopted for estimating it from experimental data. This paper presents the Carcinogenic Potency 
Database, which includes results of about 3000 long-term, chronic experiments of 770 test compounds. Part 
II is a discussion of the sources of our data, the rationale for the inclusion of particular experiments and 
particular target sites, and the conventions adopted in summarizing the literature. Part III is a guide to the 
plot of results presented in Part IV. A number of appendices are provided to facilitate use of the database. 
The plot includes information about chronic cancer tests in mammals, such as dose and other aspects of 
experimental protocol, histopathology and tumor incidence, TD5o and its statistical significance, dose 
response, author's opinion and literature reference. The plot readily permits comparisons of carcinogenic 
potency and many other aspects of cancer tests; it also provides quantitative information about negative 
tests. The range of carcinogenic potency is over 10 million-fold. 
 
Part 1: Introduction 
 
This paper presents the Carcinogenic Potency Data- 
base, which includes data on approximately 3000 long- 
term, chronic animal experiments with about 770 
chemicals. The preceding paper (1) described our nu- 
merical index of carcinogenic potency, the TD50, and the 
statistical procedures adopted for estimating it from 
experimental data. In a simplified way, TD50 may be 
defined as follows: for a given target site(s), if there 
are no tumors in control animals, then TD50 is that 
chronic dose rate in mg/kg body weight/day which 
would induce tumors in half the test animals at the end 
of a standard lifespan for the species. Since the tumor(s) 
 
of interest often does occur in control animals, TD50 is 
 
more precisely defined as: that dose rate (in mg/kg body 
 
*Biology and Medicine Division, Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, 
Berkeley, CA 94720. 
 
tDepartment of Biochemistry, University of California, Berkeley, 
CA 94720. 
 
tAuthors to whom correspondence should be addressed, at the 
Department of Biochemistry, University of California, Berkeley, CA 
94720. Copies of this issue are available from the U. S. Government 
Printing Office. 
 
?Department of Preventive Medicine, University of Southern 
California School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90033. 
 
**I.C.R.E Cancer Studies Unit, Nuffield Department of Clinical 
Medicine, Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford OX2 6HE, United Kingdom. 
 
weight/day) which, if administered chronically for the 
standard lifespan of the species, will halve the probabil- 
ity of remaining tumorless throughout that period. A 
TD50 can be computed for any particular type of 
neoplasm, for any particular tissue, or for any combina- 
tion of these. 
 
Part II of this paper discusses the sources of bioassay 
results and the rationale for including particular experi- 
ments and particular target sites in the database. The 
conventions adopted in summarizing and standardizing 
the literature are also described. In Part IV we present 
a plot of the database. In order for the reader to use this 
plot most effectively, Part III includes a full description 
of the contents, variable by variable. Several appendi- 
ces which define codes and give additional details about 
particular tests are included after the plot. 
 
Efforts to use animal bioassays in the evaluation of 
the potential health risks of chemicals to humans have 
been hampered by the lack of a standardized method to 
compare experimental results. Experimental protocols 
as well as the type of information reported in the 
literature are quite diverse. Moreover, quantitative 
estimates of carcinogenic potency have not yet been 
applied to the results of tests on a broad range of 
chemicals. 
 
Our Carcinogenic Potency Database is an attempt to 
quantify and standardize the animal bioassay literature 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
and to organize it systematically. It has become clear 
that the dose levels of different chemicals which induce 
tumors in rats and mice vary enormously, i.e., some 
chemicals are observed to be more powerful carcinogens 
than others. Moreover, the total number of known and 
suspected carcinogens, both natural and man-made, to 
which humans are exposed is much larger than pre- 
viously thought (2). Therefore, quantifying the carcino- 
genic potency of various chemicals is one important 
aspect of developing a policy response to the problem of 
chemical hazards to humans. 
 
Ideally, for human risk assessment and regulatory 
policy, one would like to have quantitative information 
about the potency of various chemicals in man, but with 
rare exceptions this information is not available. The 
next best source of information is the extensive litera- 
ture on animal bioassays. Although it is clear that 
animal models are not a completely satisfactory model 
for man, it is essential to examine the published animal 
literature in a more organized and quantitative way. 
 
We would like to emphasize the complexities of animal 
bioassay results, and to caution that no single number 
such as the TD50 fully describes the data. We have 
included in the database presented in Part IV, informa- 
tion about a variety of factors which are important in 
the interpretation of bioassays, such as: the TD50 and its 
statistical significance, the species and strains which 
have been tested chronically, the route and duration of 
compound administration, the tumor types, the propor- 
tion of animals with specific types of tumors in dosed 
and control groups, the shape of the dose-response 
curve and the author's opinion about carcinogenicity. 
 
Future analyses of this database should help to 
identify similarities and differences in response among 
strains and species. In addition, quantitative estimates 
of carcinogenic potency should be useful in determining 
the extent to which potency in animals is predictable 
from mutagenic potency calculated from short-term 
tests. 
 
A word of caution is necessary about the limitations 
of the database. We have not attempted to evaluate 
whether or not a compound is a carcinogen; rather, we 
report the opinions of the authors whose data we 
present, as well as the statistical significance of the 
TD50 calculated from their results. Moreover, the 
database contains only long-term tests which fit a set of 
criteria designed to measure potency, and therefore 
does not cover all cancer tests or all carcinogens. The 
limitations and criteria are discussed further in Part II. 
 
Part II: Materials and Methods of the 
Carcinogenic Potency Database 
Sources of Data 
 
One major goal of the Carcinogenic Potency Database 
has been to obtain data which would give the best 
estimates of carcinogenic potency, i.e., experiments for 
 
which detailed time-to-tumor data would permit adjust- 
ment for the gross effects of intercurrent mortality (see 
preceding paper). Full lifetable information was avail- 
able for the calculations of potency from the Carcinoge- 
nesis Bioassay Program of the National Cancer Insti- 
tute (NCI)/National Toxicology Program (NTP) and 
from a set of bioassays of aromatic amines (3-5). For all 
other estimates of potency from the published literature, 
we have calculated TD50 using the final proportions of 
animals with tumors, since only this summary informa- 
tion is consistently published. A description of each of 
these two sources of data, (1) NCI/NTP Bioassays and 
(2) bioassays in the published literature, is given below. 
 
NCIINTPBioassays. The Carcinogenesis Bioassay 
Program of the NCI/NTP was designed to use a similar 
experimental protocol for a large number of compounds, 
and to report results in a consistent format including 
full histopathology. We obtained computer tapes contain- 
ing the individual animal pathology tables from the 
Chemical Package Report of the Carcinogenesis Bioas- 
say Data System (6) for which Technical Reports were 
published prior to July 1980. These tapes contain 
information about the time of death (in weeks) and full 
histopathology for each animal in each experiment. By 
using the tapes in combination with the series of 
technical reports (Appendix 15) published by NCI/NTP 
we have been able to estimate a TD50 for each site which 
was evaluated as treatment-related, as well as for each 
site found to be statistically significant but not consid- 
ered evidence for carcinogenicity, in the text of the 
technical report. 
 
The Carcinogenesis Bioassay Program protocol rec- 
ommends that tests be conducted in two species of 
rodents (rats and mice) with both sexes tested indivi- 
dually at the maximally tolerated dose and half that 
dose, and includes a control group (vehicle control 
where appropriate) (7). The actual conduct of the 
bioassays published prior to July 1980 varied from one 
experiment to another, and details about each are given 
in the plot in Part IV (An experiment is defined here as 
the dose groups and control group for one sex in one 
species from a single research report.) Comparisons of 
results from the 776 NCI/NTP experiments are particu- 
larly useful for the following reasons: our analyses 
utilized full lifetable data; each compound was usually 
tested in both sexes of rats and mice; the same mouse 
hybrid, B6C3F1, was used throughout; the rat bioas- 
says utilized mostly the Fischer F344 strain, and less 
frequently either the Osborne-Mendel or Sprague- 
Dawley stocks; test agents were usually administered 
by an oral route, and dosing continued for the majority 
of the animals' lives (18-24 months); and terminal 
sacrifice was usually performed after 21 to 25 months on 
test. For many of the reports, the quality of the 
pathology was monitored by a detailed review system 
(8). For the others, target sites were always selectively 
reviewed to verify the conclusions in the Report. 
 
Bioassays in the Published Literature. In the 
literature at large, experimental designs as well as the 
 
10 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
authors' choice of information to report, are quite 
diverse. For the Carcinogenic Potency Database, we 
have developed a set of standard criteria, and experi- 
ments from the literature have been included only if 
they meet all of the following conditions: (A) animals on 
test were mammals; (B) administration was begun early 
in life (100 days of age or less for rats, mice and 
hamsters); (C) route of administration was diet, water, 
gavage, inhalation, intravenous or intraperitoneal injec- 
tion (i.e., where the whole body was more likely to have 
been exposed rather than only a specific site, as with 
subcutaneous injection or skin painting); (D) test agent 
was administered alone, rather than in combination 
with other chemicals; (E) exposure was chronic, with 
not more than 7 days between administrations; (F) 
duration of exposure was at least one-fourth the stan- 
dard lifespan for that species; (G) duration of experi- 
ment was at least half the standard lifespan for that 
species; (H) research design included a control group; 
(I) research design included at least 5 animals per 
group; (J) surgical intervention was not performed; (K) 
pathology data were reported for the number of animals 
with tumors rather than the total number of tumors; (L) 
results reported were original data, rather than second- 
ary analyses of experiments already reported by other 
authors. 
 
A search of the published literature through July 
1981 was conducted for all bioassays which met the 
standard criteria, whether or not the authors consid- 
ered the test agent related to tumor induction. The 
literature search covered the Public Health Service 
publication, Survey of Compounds Which Have Been 
Tested for Carcinogenic Activity 1948-1973 and 1978 
(9). Since the years 1974-1977 and 1979-1981 are not 
covered by the PHS Survey, a search of the cancer 
journals which contain most of the bioassay literature 
was conducted for those years, including Carcinogenesis 
Abstracts and the following journals through July 1981: 
British Journal of Cancer, Cancer Letters, Cancer 
Research, Carcinogenesis, Chemosphere, Environmen- 
tal Health Perspectives, European Journal of Cancer, 
Food and Cosmetics Toxicology, Gann, International 
Journal of Cancer, Journal of Cancer Research and 
Clinical Oncology (formerly Zeitschrift fur Krebsfor- 
schung und Klinische Onkologie), Journal of Environ- 
mental Pathology and Toxicology, Journal of Toxicol- 
ogy and Environmental Health, Journal of the Nation- 
al Cancer Institute, and Toxicology and Applied Phar- 
macology. The monographs on chemical carcinogens 
prepared by the International Agency for Research on 
Cancer (1972-1981) and Current Contents (1976-1981) 
were also used. 
 
From the literature search, more than 2000 experi- 
ments on approximately 600 chemicals met the inclusion 
criteria and are in the database. Most experiments used 
rats or mice, many used hamsters, and a small number 
used dogs, monkeys, tree shrews or bush babies. For 
any single chemical, the number of experiments in the 
database may vary. For example, some chemicals may 
 
have only one test in one sex of one species, while others 
may have multiple tests including both sexes of a few 
strains of rats and mice, utilizing different protocols. 
Similarly, the number of TD50 values reported for an 
experiment may vary, depending upon the results of the 
test and what the author reported. 
 
Because we have adhered quite strictly to the stan- 
dard inclusion criteria and the publication date of July 
1981, a number of well-known carcinogens are not in the 
database. There are no single injection or skin painting 
tests, and no experiments on initiation-promotion. 
Bioassays of particulate or fibrous matters are not 
included, e.g., asbestos, cigarette smoke and dusts. For 
a few carcinogens, the only tests which met the 
inclusion rules were negative, and therefore no positive 
results are given in the plot*. 
 
Although we have excluded mixtures of chemicals 
from the database, some commercial preparations such 
as pesticides and drugs to which humans are frequently 
exposed have been included. A few exceptions have 
been made about the cutoff date of July 1981, either 
because partial results were published before that date 
or because the data were relevant for our own analyses 
already in progress. 
 
For the relatively small literature on the long-lived 
nonhuman primates, we have relaxed some of our 
standard rules in order to include the maximum number 
of experiments (see Appendix 13). 
 
Selection of Tissue and Tumor lypes for 
Calculation of Carcinogenic Potency 
 
In order to standardize the very diverse bioassay 
literature, a great many decisions have had to be made 
in the construction of the database. Such decisions were 
based on two major considerations: to provide the most 
accurate estimates of TD50 and to provide a large 
resource with comparable data to facilitate the analysis 
of the results of animal cancer tests. 
 
Our choice of which sites and pathology to report 
from the published literature is limited by what individ- 
ual authors have reported, and this varied considerably 
from paper to paper. The precision of pathology analy- 
ses has increased over the years, and nomenclature has 
changed, thus creating further differences in the 
literature. 
 
For reasons of both accuracy and consistency through- 
out the database, our general approach has been to 
calculate a TD50 for each category of neoplasm, benign 
or malignant, which an author evaluated as treatment- 
related, regardless of the statistical or biological basis 
for the evaluation. (Hyperplasia and non-neoplastic 
 
*For seven chemicals evaluated as having sufficient evidence for 
carcinogenicity by IARC, only negative tests met the inclusion rules: 
cadmium chloride, cadmium sulfate, epichlorohydrin, glycidaldehyde, 
isosafrole, mestranol, 2-nitropropane (10). These are flagged in the 
plot of the database with a double asterisk (**) after the chemical 
name. 
 
11 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
lesions are not included in the database.) In addition, a 
TD50 has been estimated for the category "all tumor- 
bearing animals" (TBA) wherever this was reported. 
 
In order to provide information which would permit 
comparisons of target sites across experiments, an 
additional category of histopathology was developed for 
the database-"mandatory sites." Whenever there is 
adequate documentation in the published paper or 
report, a TD50 is estimated for tumors of the liver in 
rats and mice, and for tumors of the lung in mice. These 
tissues were selected as mandatory because they oc- 
curred most often in a frequency count of the positive 
sites in the NCI/NTP bioassays. From the general 
literature, whenever possible, we have also taken both 
the liver and lung as mandatory sites in hamsters, dogs 
and monkeys. 
 
In summary, for each experiment in the database, a 
TD50 is calculated whenever documentation is adequate 
for the following categories: (1) each target site evalu- 
ated by the author as treatment-related; (2) mandatory 
sites; (3) all tumor-bearing animals (TBA). 
 
Some special considerations about selection of pathol- 
ogy for the calculation of TD50 from each source of data 
are as follows. 
 
NCIINTPBioassays. From the NCI/NTP Techni- 
cal Reports, TD50 values have been calculated for all 
categories of tissues and tumors listed in the Tables of 
Analyses of Primary lTmors as positively related to 
dose. (See description of statistical tests in Technical 
Reports.) For our plot we always report a target site 
when there was a positive evaluation in the text of the 
report; however, in the absence of a positive evaluation, 
sites that are reported in the statistical tables but that 
are not considered treatment-related, are included only 
if the TD50 itself is significant at the p < 0.05 level 
(two-tailed p-value for the test that the slope of the dose 
response is different from zero). We refer to these cases 
as "statistical sites" to indicate that the report did not 
evaluate them as evidence for carcinogenicity.t 
 
Because the computer tapes from the Individual 
Animal Pathology Thbles of the NCI/NTP contain 
individual pathology results, it has been possible to 
calculate a TD50 for a composite category of all tumors 
which the report evaluated as associated with admini- 
stration of the test compound. For purposes of risk 
assessment this seems prudent, despite the bias which 
this can, in principle, cause. It has not been possible to 
formulate such a composite category for other experi- 
ments in the database. 
 
tIn a few cases, a compound was evaluated in the Technical Report 
as negative in rats and mice of both sexes, yet the statistical 
significance associated with a TD5, "statistical site" is p < 0.01. For 
these cases which raise questions about the evaluation of the com- 
pound, we have forwarded our findings to the NTP For the NCI 
bioassay of Kepone, the Technical Report's positive evaluation of 
hepatocellular carcinomas in male and female rats was based on 
pooled controls. No TD,5 values were calculated for these sites 
however, because the lifetable data for the pooled controls were not 
available. Therefore, on the plot the negative opinion for male and 
female rats reflects only the evaluation for matched controls. 
 
In the NCI/NTP data, for each mandatory site, a 
TD50 is estimated for a specific combination of tumors. 
These were selected because they are the common 
histopathology reported for the specified tissue by the 
NCI/NTP For the liver, neoplastic nodule, hepatocel- 
lular adenoma, and hepatocellular carcinoma are com- 
bined in the mandatory TD50. For the lung, alveolar/ 
bronchiolar adenoma and alveolar/bronchiolar carci- 
noma are combined. In all cases, the incidence repre- 
sents the proportion of animals with any of the tumors; 
animals with multiple tumors of the given tissue are 
counted only once. For the category TBA, we have 
excluded interstitial-cell tumors of the testis for Fischer 
344 rats, since these tumors occur spontaneously in 
nearly all male animals by the end of their standard 
 
lifpqnnn 
 
Bioassays in the Published Literature. Authors 
of papers published in the general literature rarely indi- 
cate which animals were diagnosed as having more than 
one tumor. Therefore, it has been generally impossible 
for us to combine data on various tumors within a single 
tissue, or to specify particular tumor types which 
should be included in mandatory sites. To attempt to 
combine incidence data would risk multiple counting of 
animals. 
 
For the mandatory sites from the published literature, 
a TD50 is estimated for individual tumor types reported 
in the mandatory tissue, as well as for any combination 
of tumors which is reported or could be created for that 
tissue without risking multiple counting. 
 
In the interest of completeness, we have added to the 
database results for tissues and tumors in the literature 
which the authors did not consider treatment-related, 
but which we calculate as statistically significant 
(standard chi-square test, one-sided p < 0.05). 
 
Throughout the database, when we report results 
separately for benign and malignant tumors at a given 
site in a single experiment, we often do not know 
whether the author counted animals only for the most 
malignant tumor. For example, we may not know 
whether the proportion of animals with adenomas 
represents only those animals which did not have 
carcinomas. 
 
Estimation of Average Daily Dose Level 
 
Because a variety of routes of administration, dosing 
schedules, species, strains, and sexes are used in 
carcinogenesis bioassays, some standardization of dose 
is required for a single index of potency. Our convention 
in estimating TD50 is to determine for each dose group 
in an experiment the daily dose rate (in mg/kg of body 
weight) averaged over the duration of the experiment. 
It may be that a different measure of dose (such as 
mg/cm2 surface area) will prove to be most similar 
across species (11). 
 
Tb convert parts per million (ppm) or percent in the 
food, water or air, into milligrams per kilo body weight 
during the dosing period, we assume 100% absorption 
and then use a set of standard values for each sex of 
 
12 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
each species, including body weight and average intake 
per day (Table 1). Using standard values, the daily dose 
rate is calculated as follows: 
 
Dose rate = dose x intake/day x number of doses/week 
 
animal weight x 7 days/week 
or, equivalently, 
Dose rate = 
 
dose x intake/day as a proportion of body weight 
 
x proportion of week dose is administered 
 
In an experiment where the animals were dosed the 
entire time on test this value would equal the average 
daily dose level. For example, in a bioassay of male mice 
fed 50 ppm of some test agent in the diet for the entire 
time on test, the calculation would be: 
Dose rate = 50 ppm x 0.12 x 1 
 
= 6 mg/kg body weight/day 
 
In this example, the exposure time is equal to the 
experiment time. 
 
In using standard values we recognize that there is no 
single factor which precisely reflects the entire experi- 
mental literature. For example, strains within a species 
will vary in weight; younger animals have lower body 
weight and food intake than adults; some test agents 
will reduce appetite due to taste; or illness may result in 
loss of appetite. However, the values used here are 
 
within reasonable limits of those usually found in the 
published literature and are unlikely to produce substan- 
tial error. 
 
In many experiments the administration of the test 
compound is stopped before the terminal sacrifice or 
before the death of the last animal. In such cases, 
averaging the dose over the course of the experiment 
will lower the daily dose level. By convention we take 
the total dose administered and spread this over the 
entire experimental period; thus, for male mice which 
are dosed at 50 ppm in the feed for 70 weeks and then 
continued on test to 100 weeks, the dose is considered as 
equivalent to 35 ppm for the entire 100 weeks, (i.e., 50 
ppm x 70/100), resulting in a 4.2 mg/kg body weight/day 
average dose. In calculating the dose, we utilize the 
concept of exposure time (the period of active treatment) 
and experiment time (the actual time on test). When 
terminal sacrifice is performed, the experiment time is 
the length of time from the start of the experiment to 
sacrifice. When, however, animals are permitted to 
survive to natural death, we define experiment time by 
using the time of the death of the last dosed animal. 
Extrapolation of TD50 to the Standard 
Lifespan 
 
TD50 is defined in terms of the dose rate that will 
halve the probability of remaining tumor-free at the end 
of a standard lifespan. For each species the assumed 
value for the standard lifespan is given in Table 1; these 
values are within reasonable limits usually found in the 
 
Table 1. Standard values for dose calculation: animal lifespans, weights, and intake by diet, water, and inhalation.a 
 
Experimental Standard lifespan, Weight Food/day, Food as % body Water, Inhalation 
 
animal Sex yrb kgc gc weight/day mL/dayd volume, L/mine 
Rodents 
 
Mouse Male 2 0.03 3.6 12.00 5 0.03 
 
Female 2 0.025 3.25 13.00 5 0.03 
Rat Male 2 0.5 20 4.00 25 0.10 
 
Female 2 0.35 17.5 5.00 20 0.10 
Hamster Male 2 0.125 11.5 9.20 15 0.06 
 
Female 2 0.110 11.5 10.45 15 0.06 
Monkeys 
 
African green Both 20 
 
(Cercopithecus aethiops) 
 
Cynomolgus Both 20 
 
(Macaca fascicularis) 
 
Rhesus Both 20 
 
(Macaca mulatta) 
Prosimians 
 
Bush babies Both 10 
 
(Galago crassicaudatus) 
 
Tree shrews Both 4.5 
 
(7hpaia glis) 
 
Dog Both 11 16 400 2.50 500 
 
aAlthough values sometimes vary depending on the source, those given here are within reasonable limits of those usually found in the 
published literature. No value is given when this information was not necessary for our dose calculation. 
 
bRat and mouse: data based on NCI trichloroethylene bioassay(12); hamster: data of Williams (13); nonhuman primates: data of S. M. Sieber 
(Laboratory of Chemical Pharmacology, NCI, National Institute of Health, Bethesda, MD.), personal communication; bush babies: ages adapted 
from Dittmer (14); tree shrews: data of D. J. Reddy (Northwestern University, Chicago, IL.) personal communication; dog: data of M. S. 
Redfearn (Division of Animal Resources, University of California, Berkeley, CA.) personal communication. 
 
cRat and mouse: data based on NCI trichloroethylene bioassay (12); hamster and dog: data of D. Brooks (University of California, Davis) 
personal communication. 
 
dMouse, rat and dog: data from NIOSH (15); hamster: data from Hoeltge, Inc. (16). 
 
eMouse: data of Sanoskij (17); rat: data of Baker et al. (18); hamsters: data of Guyton (19). 
 
13 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
published literature. The use of two years as standard 
for rats and mice reflects both the standard NCI/NTP 
protocol and values that appear frequently in the 
literature. 
 
When an experiment is terminated before the stan- 
dard lifespan, animals are not at risk of developing 
tumors later in life. Thus the number of tumors found 
will be reduced, and the TD50 will be greater than the 
true TD50, i.e., the compound will appear to be less 
potent than it actually is. Because tumor incidence 
increases markedly with age, our convention has been 
to adopt as a correction factorf2, wheref = experiment 
time/standard lifespan. The basis for selecting f2 is 
discussed in the preceding paper (1). 
 
Note that the correction factorf2 is based on the time 
the animals are on test, rather than upon age. In an 
experiment which began when the animals were 6 
weeks of age and which terminated when the animals 
were 100 weeks of age, the experiment time is 94 weeks. 
Thus, TD50 is defined in terms of the dose rate which 
would be administered throughout life, from birth to 
death, or the entire standard lifespan. 
 
By omitting from the database any experiments 
lasting less than half the standard lifespan for that 
species, the necessity for great extrapolation has been 
reduced. Few bioassays in any species are continued for 
much longer than the period we have adopted for a 
standard lifespan, so the reverse correction is minimal. 
 
Taking the example above of male mice fed some test 
agent at 50 ppm for 70 weeks and then continued on test 
for 30 more weeks, the experiment time would be 100 
weeks. The standard lifespan for mice is 104 weeks, so 
the extrapolation factor would be (100/104)2, or 0.92. 
Further details about the estimation of TD50 can be 
found in the preceding paper (1). 
 
We have made an exception to the experiment-length 
rule by including in the database bioassays of four 
compounds in nonhuman primates for which the results 
were positive in a short time and the standard lifespan 
is quite long. For these experiments, considerable 
extrapolation has been required, thus making the 
estimate of TD50 less reliable (see Appendix 13). 
 
Range of Carcinogenic Potency 
 
The TD50 values we have estimated according to the 
rules and conventions just described are presented in 
Part IV The plot format provides a systematic means of 
distinguishing among the carcinogenic potencies of a 
variety of chemicals. The range of TD50 values is more 
than 10 million-fold. 
 
For male rats, the range of carcinogenic potency is 
shown in Figure 1, where we present the most potent 
TD50 values for a selected group of compounds which 
were evaluated as tumorigens in either an NCI/NTP 
Technical Report or the general literature. In each case, 
we have indicated the value for the most potent TD50 for 
a target site(s) which was considered positive, and for 
which the statistical significance of TD50 is less than 
 
0.01. At the two extremes are the most potent TD50 
values for 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), 
TD50 = 101 ng, and for FD&C Green No. 1, TD50 = 
5.98 g. 
 
It is our intention to present analyses of potency in 
future publications which will discuss such issues as 
comparisons of potency across species and strains, and 
among different bioassays of the same chemical. 
 
Part III: Guide to the Plot of the 
Carcinogenic Potency Database 
 
The results of our estimates of TD50 and the standard- 
ization of the bioassay literature are summarized and 
presented graphically below in the plot of the database. 
This plot includes information on many aspects of the 
2944 experiments it summarizes. The following descrip- 
tion of the plot, in conjunction with the appendices, is 
intended as a guide for the reader to facilitate use of the 
data. Because so much information is included in the 
 
XO0ng 
 
0 
IN. 
 
0 
 
0; 
 
0 U 
 
10mg 
 
, 0 
 
@; 1 0mg 
 
o 100mg 
oE 
 
4g 
0 
Io 
 
C' 
 
X c) 
 
10 _g 
 
- - TCDD 
 
cActinomycin D 
---Aflatoxin Bi 
 
Bis-(chloromethyl) ether 
 
Sterigmatocystin 
-/DBCP 
 
-"'Diethylstilbestrol 
 
Procarbazine. HCI 
- EDB 
 
2-AAF 
 
- Auramine-0 
 
_Aniline. HCI 
-DDT 
 
_2 ,4,6-Trichlorophenol 
Metronidazole 
 
-FDaC Red No.1 
 
FDaC Green No.1 
 
FIGURE 1. Range of carcinogenic potency in male rats. 
 
14 
 
I 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
output, the reader may find it helpful to go over the 
description once and to refer back to specific variables 
when using the plot. 
 
The plot covers two facing pages and is organized 
alphabetically by chemical name. The left side includes 
a logarithmic scale of TD50 values on which is plotted 
the TD50 for the most potent site in each experiment. 
Experiments are listed under the name of the test 
agent, and each experiment can be identified by a 
unique number in the plot. 
 
Figures 2 and 3 show an example from the plot of one 
experiment on 1,2-dibromoethane from the NCI/NTP 
bioassays, which will be used to describe the variables 
included in the plot, the codes and conventions, and the 
appendices. At the top of the example, as at the top of 
the plot of the entire database, is a two-line header 
describing the type of information in each field. The 
header should be read across using both lines together, 
first top line "Spe," then bottom line "Sex," then top line 
"Strain", etc. Each title in the header begins where the 
data it describes begins, with the exception of "AuOp" 
and "Brkly Code" which are in the last column on each 
side. Immediately beneath the header in this example, 
we have inserted a set of numbers (1)(28) which will be 
used in the text to give details of the information in each 
field; this set of numbers does not appear in the actual 
output. 
 
(1) The chemical name in capitals is indicated under 
(1) in the top line for a set of experiments. An 
alphabetical list of all chemicals in the plot is given in 
Appendix 1. Common synonyms are also provided 
which refer the reader to the compound name used in 
the plot e.g., ethylene dibromide (see 1 ,2-dibromo- 
ethane). A list of the chemicals sorted by Chemical 
Abstracts Service (CAS) registry number is presented 
in Appendix 2. Also under the number (1), immediately 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
 
(1) (2)(3)(4)(5) (6) (7) (8)(9)(10) (11) 
 
1 ,2-DIBROMOETHANE 
 
N N f b6c gav NXB MXB 
a N f b6c g5v Sto sqc 
b N f b6c gav Lun NXA 
c N f b6c gav Lun a/a 
d N f b6c gav TBA NXB 
e N f b6c gav Liv NXB 
f N fb6c gav Lun NXB 
 
below the chemical name, is the unique plot number for 
each experiment, i.e., one sex of one species from one 
research report. Since only one experiment is used in 
this example, it is assigned the number one. In the 
larger output, each new number indicates a separate 
experiment. A set of lower case letters -in the example 
"a" through"f"-identifies each TD50 calculated for that 
same experiment using a different set of sites and/or 
histopathology; only the most potent site is plotted on 
the graph. 
 
(2) The species used in this experiment is indicated 
in the column headed by "Spe' The letter "M" refers to 
mice, "R" to rats, "H" to hamsters and "D" to dogs. 
Other test animals are indicated by an "N" for prosimi- 
ans and a "P" for monkeys. 
 
(3) The sex is indicated by "f" for female, "im" for 
male. Occasionally an author will report data only for 
both sexes together, and in these cases the notecode "b" 
for both is used. 
 
(4) The strain or stock of animal is reported as a 
three-letter code under "Strain"; a list of all strain codes 
and definitions appears in Appendix 3. Strains are 
coded just as they are referred to in the original 
publication. No attempt has been made to standardize 
the strain names; therefore, if different nomenclature is 
used by two authors who actually tested the same 
strain, then two different codes are used in the database. 
For monkeys and prosimians, this column is used for the 
species code, e.g., "rhe" for rhesus. 
 
(5) The route of administration is indicated in the 
header line by "Route" and reported as a three-letter 
code. In the example, "gav" stands for gavage. Other 
routes are listed in Appendix 4 and use mnemonic codes 
like "eat" for administration in the diet. 
 
(6,7) The site and histopathology used in the calcula- 
tion of the TD50 are reported in these columns, and are 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
(12) (13) (14)(15)16) 
 
FIGURE 2. Left side of database plot. 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf CntrL lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
(17)(18)(19) (20) (21) (22) (23) (24) (25) (26) 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
(27) 
 
1,2-DIBRONOETHANE (ethyLene dibromide, EDB. c00522 is MCI 
I c00522 2.58mg 6.93mg 0/20 26.0mg 46/50 52.0mg 
 
a c00522 2.81mg 8.09mg 0/20 26.0mg 46/50 52.0mg 
b c00522 8.06mg n.s.s. 0/20 26.0mg 11/50 52.0mg 
c c00522 8.85mg n.s.s. 0/20 26.0mg 10/50 52.0mg 
d c00522 2.42mg 6.31mg 0/20 26.0mg 47/50 52.0mg 
a c00522 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/20 26.0mg 1/50 52.0mg 
f c00522 8.06mg n.s.s. 0/20 26.0mg 11/50 52.0mg 
 
FIGURE 3. Right side of database plot. 
 
TR# 86; c00523 is NCI/NTP TR* 210) 106-93-4 
30/50 
28/50 
 
6/50 
6/50 
31/50 
 
0/50 
6/50 
 
100. l :ug . : 10. :100 .. :.lg . : 10. :100 .. :Ig . :10 
 
53w78 sv 3+ 374mg * P<.0005 
53w78 sv 4.07mg * P<.0005c 
53w78 sv 15.4mg * P<.04 c 
53w78 sv 17.3mg * P<.03 c 
53w78 sv 3.52mg * P<.0005 
53w78 sv no dre P-1. 
 
53w78 sv 15.4mg * P<.04 
 
Brkly Code 
 
(28) 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c; sto:sqc. C 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
15 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
marked in the header line by "Site" and "Hist" Each is 
indicated by a three-letter code, and the respective 
codes and definitions are provided in Appendices 5 and 
6. Three-letter codes have been created so that they are 
similar to the words they represent; for example line la 
reports "sto sqc" which stands for stomach, squamous- 
cell carcinoma; and line lc reports "lun a/a" for lung, 
alveolar/bronchiolar adenoma. 
 
For the NCI/NTP bioassays, the pathology nomencla- 
ture is identical to, that reported in the Technical 
Reports and/or on the computer tapes. For the general 
literature, the nomenclature reflects exactly the termi- 
nology employed by the original authors in their pub- 
lished papers. The operational rule has been to retain 
what is in the published paper and not to reinterpret or 
rename any diagnostic categories. Thus, when authors 
use different nomenclature for the same tissue or 
morphologic type of tumor, two different codes are used 
in the database. Occasionally it has been necessary to 
replace an adjective used for a tissue with a noun, e.g., 
the database uses kidney when renal is used in a paper. 
Some special considerations about the reporting of site 
and histopathology information from each source of 
data are as follows. 
 
NCIINTP Bioassays. In the 1,2-dibromoethane ex- 
ample (Figs. 2 and 3), certain tissue and tumor codes 
are given in capital letters; these denote particular 
mixes of sites or tumor types from the NCI/NTP 
bioassays; capital letters are not used for other sources 
of data. When these capitals appear, additional informa- 
tion about the specific pathology is presented on the 
right side of the plot, where the header line reads 
"Citation or Pathology" in field (27). These special 
capitalized codes are used in the plot when the 
calculation of TD50 is based on special mixes of tissue 
and tumor types from the NCI/NTP bioassays. 
 
1. The mandatory sites are denoted by "MXB" (for 
"Mix Berkeley") to indicate that the site was created 
especially for the database and is not based upon the 
NCI/NTP evaluations in the Technical Reports. For 
every NCI/NTP experiment, the same sites are given 
per species: liv MXB (liver mandatory), lun MXB (lung 
mandatory) and TBA MXB (all tumor-bearing animals) 
for mice; liv MXB and TBA MXB for rats. For the 
NCI/NTP bioassays, these mandatory sites are always 
listed as the last TD50 values for the experiment, in the 
order TBA, liv, and lun. Thus in the example given 
here, lines ld, e, and f, report for mice the TBA MXB, 
liv MXB, and then lun MXB. The specific pathology is 
given for liv MXB and lun MXB under column (27). 
 
2."MXA" (for "Mix Author") is used to denote a 
combination of sites or pathologies which is taken 
directly from the Technical Report Tables of Analyses of 
Primary Thmors, and denotes a mix of tissues or 
tumors created in those tables. In the example, the site 
and histopathology for line 16, "lun MXA" are listed in 
column (27). Whenever MXA appears, as in line lb "lun 
MXA," the sites and/or histopathology which were 
combined are listed in column (27). 
 
3. "MXB MXB" denotes that a combination of tissues 
and tumors has been created for the database, which 
consists of the aggregate of all sites and histopathology 
considered to be treatment-related in the NCI/NTP 
Technical Reports. In the example, in field (27) of 
line 1, MXB MXB is described as a combination of 
"lun: a/a, a/c; sto: sqc." (This stands for lung alveolar/ 
bronchiolar adenoma, lung alveolar/bronchiolar carci- 
noma, and stomach squamous-cell carcinoma.) 
 
Bioassays in the Published Literature. The site 
and pathology information from the literature experi- 
ments is given in the plot for individual tissues and 
tumors just as it is for the NCI/NTP bioassays. As 
described earlier, it is usually not possible to combine 
sites from the published literature because, unlike the 
data available from the NCI/NTP bioassays, informa- 
tion is seldom reported about multiple tumor incidence 
in the same animal. When an author does give informa- 
tion about aggregated tissue or tumor types, the code 
"mix" is used in the plot to denote that the specific 
sites or tumors are described in the paper. When the 
tumor types are not specified, the code "tum" is used. 
Mandatory sites from experiments in the literature are 
included in the database for the same tissues as the 
NCI/NTP bioassays. A TD50 is calculated for any mix of 
tumors reported in the mandatory site and for individ- 
ual tumor types as well;* see, for example, "hydrazine 
sulfate" for female mice, lines 1434 and 1434a and b in 
the large plot. All codes are in lower case letters. 
Whenever an author reported results for all animals 
with malignant tumors separately from all animals with 
benign tumors, we have included a TD50 for each 
category of "tba". 
 
(8,9) The exposure and experiment times are indicated 
in the header line by "Xpo + Xpt" Exposure time is the 
period over which the test agent is administered; if 
administration was once a week for 40 weeks, for 
example, the exposure time is 40 weeks. Experiment 
time is the total time on test; it is not the age of the 
animals. It is measured from the start of the experi- 
ment to the time of death of the last dosed animal. 
Within a single experiment, all TD50 values have the 
same exposure time and the same experiment time. 
Both times are always reported in the same units. When 
both are less than 100 weeks, exposure and experiment 
times are reported as "w" for weeks; when greater than 
this, "m" for months is used. For tests in long-lived 
experimental animals like dogs and nonhuman primates, 
"y" for years may also be used. When exposure time and 
experiment time are equal, then the duration of dosing 
was for the entire experiment. In Figure 2 lines la-if, 
the mice were dosed for 53 weeks, and the experiment 
lasted a total of 78 weeks. 
 
(10) Notes, indicated in the header line in (10), pro- 
 
*If an author reported many individual types of tumors in a 
mandatory tissue, and all are statistically nonsignificant, we have 
calculated TD50 values for the tumor types with the highest inci- 
dence among dosed animals. 
 
16 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
vide additional information about the experiment in 
single-letter codes which are defined in Appendix 7. 
This supplementary information is helpful in evaluating 
the experimental data. In the example, for instance, the 
notecode "s" is used to denote that survival was poor 
due to toxicity or disease and the notecode "v" that 
dosing was variable or irregular, e.g., dose level changed 
during the course of the experiment. 
 
(11) The logarithmic scale is used for presenting the 
values of TD50 and its confidence limits (in units/kilo- 
gram body weight/day). The plot extends from 100 
nanograms to 10 grams. On the scale itself, the location 
of 100 ng, 1 R,g, 10 R,g, etc., is indicated by under- 
scoring; the points for 5, 50, 500 are denoted by a colon 
(":"). For each experiment, only the TD50 for the "most 
potent site" is plotted; this TD50 is listed first. For other 
sites within an experiment, the TD50 is not plotted, but 
all other information about it is given in the plot. 
 
The "most potent site" is determined by ordering the 
TD50 values in each experiment by statistical signifi- 
cance. If any TD50 values are significant at the p < 0.01 
level, then these are listed first, in order of potency; 
then follow all TD50 values with p < 0.10 sorted in order 
of potency. Last, all other TD50 values are listed in order 
of potency. We have excluded the category TBA from 
this sorting of the target sites and have listed it last. For 
the NCI/NTP bioassays, the mandatory sites are also 
excluded from this sorted order, and are listed at the 
end in the order TBA MXB, liv MXB, and lun MXB. 
 
In the example of 1,2-dibromoethane (Fig. 2), there 
are two TD50 values (excluding TBA) with statistical 
significance of p < 0.01. The TD50 for MXB MXB is the 
more potent and thus appears first. The plotted point 
for this most potent site lies between 1 mg and 10 mg on 
the scale, and the estimated TD50, 3.74 mg, appears in 
the column to the right of the scale under the header 
title"TD50" These results indicate that 3.74 mg/kg body 
weight/day would halve the proportion of tumorless 
survivors at the end of a standard lifespan for mice (in 
the absence of all other causes of death). 
 
(12) The TD50 value on the plot is indicated by one of 
three symbols: "+" "?" or ">", depending upon the 
p-value associated with the TD50 for the most potent 
site. In an experiment where the statistical significance 
of the TD50 is p < 0.01, the symbol a + " is used, and the 
plotted point is the most potent estimate of TD50, i.e., 
the smallest value of TD50 from among those with p < 
0.01. In an experiment where the statistical significance 
is between 0.01 and 0.10 a "" symbol is used to plot the 
most potent site. If there is no evidence for any 
statistical association, i.e., for all TD50 values, p > 0.10, 
then the symbol ">" appears just to the right of the 
lower confidence limit. For these statistically nonsignifi- 
cant experiments, the symbol ">" provides a lower 
bound for TD50, i.e., it is extremely unlikely that TD50 
could be less than (more potent than) the value plotted. 
 
A special symbol " < + " is used for cases where 100% 
of all dosed animals had the tumor(s) of interest and the 
TD50 was calculated with summary data; the " < + " 
 
appears at the upper confidence limit. With summary 
data, only an upper bound, but no TD50, can be 
estimated in such cases. 
 
Occasionally, the symbol for the most potent TD50 is 
plotted with parentheses around it to indicate that the 
test did not meet our standard criteria; usually the 
experiment time was too short. All NCI/NTP bioassays 
have been included in the database, and some do not 
meet the criteria. For experiments in nonhuman 
primates, the criteria have been relaxed. (See Appendix 
13.) For an example of such a case, see C. I. Direct 
Brown 95 for female rats, line 404 in the large plot. 
 
The plot symbol is a convenient way to determine 
quickly the number of experiments reported for any 
particular test agent, since each experiment will have 
one symbol for its most potent TD50. 
 
Since there are both statistical and nonstatistical 
uncertainties in the estimation of TD50, we have calcu- 
lated 99% confidence intervals for it. A discussion is 
given in the preceding paper (1). Whenever the TD50 
calculation is based on lifetable data, as in the NCI/NTP 
bioassays and a set of experiments on aromatic amines, 
the symbol " : " denotes the confidence limits. When 
the TD50 calculation is based on summary data, then 
the symbol "." denotes the confidence limits. 
 
In an experiment where the statistical significance of 
TD50 is p < 0.01, both the lower and upper confidence 
limits are plotted. The calculated values for these 
intervals are presented on the right side of the plot in 
columns (20) and (21) (Fig. 3), where the header line 
reads "LoConf" and "UpConf" for lower confidence and 
upper confidence limits. In the example, the plotted 
confidence interval is 2.58-6.93 mg (Fig. 3), suggesting 
that the lower value would not reduce the proportion of 
tumorless survivors by half, while 5.55 mg/kg body 
weight/day would more than halve it. 
 
In an experiment where the statistical significance of 
TD50 is p > 0.01, the confidence interval will be open at 
the upper end. In such a case, the lower limit dose rate 
would be unlikely to halve the proportion of tumor-free 
survivors, but no statement can be made about the 
carcinogenic effect of higher doses. In such cases, there 
is no : " or " . " to the right of the TD50 on the plot. 
 
When the plotted symbol is " < + " because 100% of 
the animals had tumors and we estimated TD50 with 
summary data, the " < + " appears at the upper 
confidence limit. In such cases, the upper limit dose rate 
would induce tumors in all animals and the rate which 
would reduce the proportion of tumorless survivors by 
half cannot be estimated with only summary informa- 
tion. 
 
Occasionally, for a TD50 with statistical significance p 
< 0.01, the upper confidence limit is too large to be 
printed within the range up to 10 grams; in such rare 
instances the symbol for the upper confidence level also 
will not appear, although the value will be printed in the 
field headed UpConf (21). 
 
(13) The value of each TD50 is presented just to the 
right of the plot range (13) and includes the appropriate 
 
17 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
units (per kg) of body weight per day. The symbol " no 
TD50 " appears instead of a numerical value whenever 
100% of the dosed animals had the tumor(s) of interest 
and the TD50 was calculated with summary data. The 
symbol "no dre," for no dose-related effect, indicates 
that TD50 is not estimable for some other reason. For 
statistically non-significant TD50 values the numerical 
value may be impossibly large. 
 
(14) The shape of the dose-response curve for each 
TD50 appears in column (14) under the header "DR." The 
codes and definitions for the curvatures are listed in 
Appendix 8. The shape of the dose-response has been 
determined by a test for departure from linearity. If 
there was no significant departure from a linear dose 
response, then the curve shape is listed as linear, and 
the asterisk symbol "*" appears. For experiments with 
three groups of animals including controls, a significant 
departure from linearity with upward curvature is 
denoted by a bar slanting to the right (the symbol "/"). If 
there was a significant departure from linearity with 
downward curvature, then the TD50 is calculated with- 
out the data from the highest dose group, and a bar 
slanting to the left (the symbol "\") appears. We have 
adopted this convention to obtain the best estimate of 
TD50 by using only the linear portion of the dose- 
response curve in the calculation. 
 
When there are more than three dose groups (includ- 
ing controls) in the TD50 calculation and there is a 
significant departure from linearity, the symbol "Z" is 
listed in column (14). When there is a blank space for 
the shape of the dose-response, there are two possible 
reasons. First, there may be only one dose group and a 
control group in the experiment, in which case there is 
not enough information to determine a curve shape. 
Most tests in the general literature have only a control 
and one dose group. Second, there may be no dose- 
related effect, in which case the code "no dre" appears in 
column (13) and "P = 1" appears in column (15). 
 
(15) The two-tailed p-value appears in column (15), 
under the header "2Tailpvl. This value indicates the 
statistical significance associated with testing whether 
the slope of the dose-response curve is different from 
zero. All values are given to one significant figure. 
When there is no dose-related effect or the slope is 
negative, then "P = 17 appears in column (15). Due to 
rounding, the lowest p-value reported is p < 0.0005; a 
calculated p-value which is > 0.0005 and < 0.001 is 
reported as p < 0.001. Note that the significance level 
listed in this column determines which symbol will be 
plotted for the most potent site in each experiment. 
 
(16) The opinion of the original author, as to the 
tumorigenicity of the test agent at the site for which the 
TD50 was calculated, is given in the last column on the 
left side of the plot (16) under the heading "AuOp" for 
author's opinion. Our rule for reporting opinions from 
all sources of data has been to record all clearly stated 
evaluations of tumorigenicity at the site(s) included in a 
TD50 calculation. Some special considerations about our 
codes for the opinions of authors from various sources 
are as follows. 
 
NCIINTP Bioassays. Our conventions for coding 
the author's opinions from the NCI/NTP Technical 
Reports are based upon the text of the Report, includ- 
ing the el luation of the Clearinghouse on Environmen- 
tal Carcinogens (Data Evaluation/Risk Assessment 
Subgroup), and the Tables of Analyses of Primary 
Tumors. An author's opinion is listed for all target sites 
except: Berkeley Mixes (MXB) and the statistical sites, 
i.e., those included in the Tables of Analyses but not 
considered evidence for carcinogenicity in the text of 
the Technical Report. For these cases, the opinion 
column is blank, as in lines 1, ld, le, and lf of the 
1,2-dibromoethane example (Fig. 2). 
 
A "c" in the author's opinion column indicates that the 
Clearinghouse evaluation or the text of the Report 
stated that at the site(s) on which TD50 is based, the 
compound was carcinogenic under the conditions of the 
bioassay. See for example, the opinion column in the 
example for lines la, lb, and lc. An "a" indicates an 
opinion that the incidence of tumors at that site(s) was 
associated with administration of the compound under 
the conditions of the bioassay, or that the evidence for 
carcinogenicity was suggestive. 
 
The symbol "-" will appear in the opinion column for 
the most potent site in an NCI/NTP bioassay to denote 
the evaluation that the compound was not carcinogenic 
in that sex of that species under the conditions of the 
bioassay. In most cases, the "-" appears for the TD50 
calculated for TBA, which is our convention whenever 
there is no evidence for carcinogenicity. For experi- 
ments evaluated as inadequate in the Technical Report, 
the opinion column is always blank. For a list of ex- 
periments evaluated as inadequate, see Appendix 12. 
 
There are some cases when the "-" appears for a 
statistical site, i.e., one not evaluated as evidence for 
carcinogenicity in the Report, but which was statisti- 
cally significant according to the Tables of Analyses of 
Primary Tumors and also had a TD50 significance level of 
p < 0.05. When this TD50 is the only evidence for a 
treatment-related effect, and thus the most potent site, 
we have indicated this by placing a "- in the opinion 
column and flagging the TD50 with a # sign in the plot 
just to the left of the TD50 value. For example, refer 
to "calcium cyanamide," for female mice, line 697 in 
the large graphic output. Note that the p-value associ- 
ated with the TD50 determines the symbol plotted for 
the TD50; this is independent of the author's opinion. 
 
For bioassays in which some target sites were evalu- 
ated as treatment-related, the statistical sites are also 
reported but the opinion column is left blank. In order 
to make it clear that the Report itself did not contain 
positive evaluations of any statistical sites, we put an 
"S" for statistical in the last column on the right side of 
the plot, column (28), under the header "Brkly Code"* 
 
*For some chemicals, the NCI/NTP Technical Report indicated that 
experiments in one or more sex-species groups were inadequate 
carcinogenesis bioassays, primarily based on the insufficient survival 
of the animals on test. We have indicated this opinion by placing 
an asterisk (a*") after the chemical name on the left side of the 
plot. See Appendix 12 for a list of the particular sex-species groups. 
 
18 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
Bioassays in the Published Literature. In the 
general literature whenever the author evaluated the 
proportion of animals with tumors at a particular site as 
treatment-related, a "+" will appear in the opinion 
column (16) for the TD50 calculated for that site. Such 
stated opinions as "positive," 'carcinogenic," "active," 
and "tumorigenic," fit this category. The symbol " + " will 
only appear in the opinion column for a TD50 in one of 
the following two cases: either, the author gave a 
positive opinion for the particular target sites included 
in the TD50, or in the occasional case where an author 
evaluated the compound as carcinogenic without specify- 
ing the target site, and we have indicated this with a " + X 
symbol in the opinion column for the category "all tumor 
bearing animals (tba)" 
 
Similarly, the opinion column will contain a "-" only 
when either the author stated an opinion that the 
particular sites included in the TD50 are negative, or the 
author concluded that there was no treatment-related 
effect in the experiment, in which case all sites report- 
ed for the experiment have a "-" in the opinion column. 
 
Thrget sites which an author did not evaluate as 
positive are included in the database only when the 
statistical significance associated with an increased 
percentage of dosed animals with tumors is p < 0.05 
(standard chi-square test, one-sided p-value), or when 
the tissue is a mandatory site (liver and lung for mice 
and hamsters; liver for rats). 
 
When no opinion about carcinogenicity is stated for 
sites which are nevertheless used for TD50 calculations, 
the author's opinion column is left blank. This may 
occur either for mandatory sites, or for included sites 
which were not unequivocably evaluated by the author. 
In those rare cases where the author provided enough 
information to permit the combining of tissues and 
tumors into a mandatory site, the author's opinion 
column is also blank, since the mix was created espe- 
cially for the database. 
 
In summary, the symbol for the author's opinion 
column in the general literature reflects what the 
author actually stated in the paper. Sites evaluated as 
positive are given a " + ". Sites evaluated as negative are 
given a "-". A " + " is used for tba when the compound 
was evaluated as positive, and no specific target site was 
evaluated as positive. For all other opinions the author's 
opinion column is blank. 
 
Occasionally, when there is a "c" or an "a" in the 
opinion column for an NCI/NTP bioassay, or a " + " for a 
test from the general literature, the positive evaluation 
was made because the incidence among dosed animals 
was high in comparison to historical control incidences; 
this occurs, for example, when there is a rare tumor 
among the dosed animals. The actual numbers of 
animals bearing such tumors may be quite low, thus 
making the estimate of TD50 unreliable. In such cases, 
we have indicated that the author's opinion was based 
on historical control comparisons by putting the words 
"+historical" in the TD50 column. See, for example, 
"allyl chloride" for female mice, line 152 in the large 
plot. 
 
(17,18) The plot continues on the right side (Fig.3), 
by first repeating the identification numbers given for 
each line on the left side of the output, e.g., 1, la, lb, 
etc. In field (17) the chemical name is also repeated, 
followed by common synonyms, in some cases. In the 
example, "ethylene dibromide" and "EDB" are given as 
synonyms for 1,2-dibromoethane. The Chemical Ab- 
stracts Service registry number (CAS#) is reported in 
field (18); in the example, 106-93-4 (Fig.3). 
 
(19) Under the header "RefNum", is the unique 
reference number assigned to each paper in the data- 
base. For NCI/NTP bioassays, this is the number used 
in the computer tapes; here, c00522. In the case of 
1,2-dibromoethane, NCI/NTP conducted two bioassays: 
in one, the compound was administered by gavage and 
in the other, by inhalation. In such cases, we have 
assigned a consecutive number to distinguish the sec- 
ond bioassay and have included the appropriate Techni- 
cal Report number. NCI/NTP uses a single number for 
both bioassays. 
 
(20, 21) The lower and upper confidence limits for 
each TD50 are presented in (20) "LoConf" and (21) 
"UpConf," respectively. When the abbreviation "n.s.s" 
appears for either the lower or upper confidence limit, it 
denotes "not statistically significant." Whenever the 
statistical significance of TD50 is p > 0.01, then the 
upper 99% confidence limit will not be calculated; see, 
for example, line lf for 1,2-dibromoethane (Fig.3). 
When the lower confidence limit is "n.s.sJ" this usually 
indicates that there were no tumors or only one tumor 
of the specified type in the experiment, and the lower 
confidence limit was not estimable; most often this 
occurs for mandatory sites as in le in the 1,2-dibromo- 
ethane example. Occasionally the n.s.s. occurs for the 
lower confidence limit because 100% of dosed animals 
had the tumor(s) of interest and hence no lower con- 
fidence limit could be estimated with summary data. 
 
(22-26) Beginning in (22) on the right side, and 
extending through (26), we report the proportion of 
animals with tumors and the average dose level in 
mg/kg body weight/day which we have calculated for 
each dose group in the experiment. The proportion of 
animals with tumors for TD50 values which have been 
calculated with lifetable data are presented here in 
summary form, i.e., the number of animals with tumors 
by the end of the experiment. 
 
Reading across (22)-(26), under "Cntrl" (22), we list 
the proportion of control animals with the tumor types 
in the TD50 calculation; the average dose in the lowest 
dose group. is given under "iDose" (23); the proportion 
of animals in that group with the tumor(s) is listed 
under "lInc," for incidence, (24); the next highest 
average dose 2Dose" (25) and the proportion of those 
animals with the tumor(s) "2Inc" (26) is given next, etc., 
for as many dose groups as there are in the experiment. 
 
Whenever the TD50 was calculated without the data 
from the high dose group (i.e., there was a significant 
downward departure from linearity), we have indicated 
this fact with parentheses around the data which were 
omitted from the final calculation. Thus, whenever the 
 
19 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
shape of the dose-response on the left side of the plot is 
"\" column (14), the parentheses appear on the right 
side around the appropriate data. See, for example, 2- 
aminoanthraquinone for male rats, line 202 in the large 
plot. Whenever there were more than three groups 
(including controls), and the dose-response was non- 
linear, there is a "Z" in column (14) on the left side; if the 
departure from linearity in such cases was downward, 
then this fact is indicated by parentheses around the 
group that was excluded from the TD50 calculation. 
 
NCIINTP Bioassays. For the data on the propor- 
tion of animals with tumors, the number of animals in 
each group is the number at the start of the experiment. 
In the example, there were 20 in the control group, and 
50 in both the low and high dose groups. When pooled 
controls have been used as evidence for carcinogenicity 
in the Technical Report, we have calculated TD50 values 
MTith those controls as well as the matched controls. 
(This convention has also been followed for the lifetable 
calculations of the experiments of aromatic amines.) 
Data using the pooled controls are indicated by the 
letter "p" following the control incidence in column (22); 
see, for example, "aldrin" for male mice in the large 
plot, line 135. The use of pooled controls is also reflected 
on the left side of the output by the word "pool" 
following the notes in column (10) and by assigning a 
different line number to the pooled data. 
 
In the conduct of several of the NCI/NTP bioassays, 
the dose level administered to the high dose group was 
sufficiently toxic to necessitate starting a new dose 
group and a new control group. For some of the 
bioassays in which this was done, the statistical analysis 
in the Technical Report was performed separately for 
the control and dose groups which were started later. 
For these cases, we compared the proportion of animals 
with tumors in the earlier and later control groups, and 
since we found no significant difference, we combined 
the data from the control groups and analyzed the 
experiment as one dose response, using both the high 
and low dose groups. Appendix 10, "NCI/NTP Bioas- 
says with Combined Controls," lists all such cases. 
 
In some instances, the data for the proportion of 
animals with tumors is slightly different from what is 
reported in the Technical Report because the pathology 
diagnoses were updated after the Report was published; 
the revised data were on the computer tapes provided to 
us. These cases are listed in Appendix 11, "NCI/NTP 
Bioassays with Revised Data:" 
 
Bioassays in the Published Literature. The pro- 
portion of animals with tumors presented here reflects 
exactly the number of animals used in the TD50 
calculation. Many authors have reported only the start- 
ing number of animals. Whenever additional informa- 
tion was given, i.e., number of animals alive at the time 
of appearance of the first tumor, or number examined 
histologically, then this number is used in the denomina- 
tor of the proportion of animals with tumor. This is a 
more accurate description of the number of animals at 
risk of tumor. These data were used in the TD50 
calculation and are reflected in columns (22), (24) and 
 
(26). In these cases, the notecode "e" for "effective 
number" appears on the left side of the plot under 
"Notes" in column (10). Otherwise, the data reflect the 
number of animals started in each group. Since experi- 
mental designs vary in the literature, the incidence and 
dose-rate data may include a control and only one dose 
group or perhaps, a control and several dose groups. 
 
In the general literature, pooled control data re- 
ported by the author are used in TD50 calculations only 
when no matched data were reported. Our conventions 
for plotting pooled data are the same as those described 
for the NCI/NTP bioassays. 
 
(27) Reading across the right side of the plot, under 
"Citation or Pathology" for the NCI/NTP bioassays, we 
present the three-letter codes for all of the sites and 
histopathology which are "Author's Mix" (MXA) or 
"Berkeley Mix" (MXB). This includes the MXB manda- 
tory liver and lung pathologies, our combinations of 
sites which were individually evaluated as positive in 
the Report (MXB), the statistical sites which included 
more than one site in the Tables of Analyses (MXA), 
and any combination of sites evaluated as treatment- 
related in the Technical Report (MXA). The three-letter 
code for each tissue in the TD50 calculation is followed by 
a ":" and then by the three-letter codes for each 
category of neoplasm included in the calculation. A "." 
follows the last three-letter tumor code in each mix. The 
definitions for these codes are given in Appendices 5 
and 6. 
 
For the published literature, a citation to the paper is 
provided, giving the first author, code for the journal or 
book title, volume number, pages, and year. The full 
titles of the four-letter codes for the names of references 
are listed in Appendix 9, "Reference Codes and 
Definitions" The abbreviation "pers.comm." indicates 
that additional data for the TD50 calculation were 
acquired through personal communication with the 
author(s). On the plot a new citation for a published 
paper is listed whenever there is a change in paper. 
When the following experiment is an NCI/NTP bioassay, 
then codes for pathology appear in field (27) instead 
of a citation. In Appendices 14 and 15 we have provided 
a complete bibliography of all papers in the database. 
Appendix 14 includes the articles, books, and reports in 
the general literature; Appendix 15 lists the NCI/NTP 
Technical Reports. 
 
(28) The last column of the plot, is used only for 
NCI/NTP bioassays. Under the header "Brkly Code," 
we indicate that a TD50 has been included in the 
database because of a decision by the Carcinogenic 
Potency Project (Berkeley) rather than because the 
sites were evaluated as treatment-related in the NCI/ 
NTP Technical Report. 
 
The letters "C," 'A" and "T" are used in the Berkeley 
Code column for Berkeley Mixes (MXB). The letter "C" 
denotes a TD50 calculated for all sites evaluated in 
the Technical Report as evidence for carcinogenicity. 
(Fig. 3). The letter 'A" denotes a combination of tumors 
evaluated as associated with administration of the 
compound. The letter "T," for together, denotes a 
 
20 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 21 
 
combination of all sites evaluated as "C" or "A' in a 
bioassay where the weaker "associated" opinion and the 
stronger "carcinogenic" opinion were both reported. 
The letter "S" indicates that the TD50 has been included 
in the plot because the sites were statistically significant 
in the Tables of Analyses of Primary Thmors and the 
TD50 was significant at the p < 0.05 level; however, no 
positive opinion was provided in the Report. An "S" may 
appear for either a mix of sites or a single site. For all 
mandatory sites, the column for "Brkly Code" is blank. 
 
The information in the plot is ordered systematically 
to facilitate use of the data. All bioassays of a particular 
chemical are organized under the chemical name, and 
these names are ordered alphabetically. Within each 
compound, the bioassays are ordered alphabetically by 
species code, so that dogs would appear first, then 
hamsters, mice, prosimians, monkeys, and finally rats. 
Within a species, the bioassays are ordered by the code 
for the strain or stock. (For monkeys and prosimians, 
the tests are ordered by the code for the species.) If 
there is an NCI/NTP bioassay of the chemical, then all 
experiments using that strain are reported first, fol- 
lowed by the strain used in any other experiments 
providing lifetable data, and finally by any remaining 
strains ordered alphabetically. Within the strain, the 
bioassays of females are reported first. Thus, when 
there is an NCI/NTP bioassay, "b6c" mice will appear 
first, and all experiments using "b6c" female mice would 
be reported before any experiments using "b6c" males. 
 
The reader may find it convenient, when utilizing the 
plot, to refer back to this guide. Abbreviations and 
symbols are defined in detail in the Appendices. When 
using the database, readers may find that we have not 
identified an experiment which does meet the standard 
inclusion criteria. Therefore, we welcome information 
about additional tests, as well as corrections of any 
errors in the database. 
 
We wish to thank Jerrold Ward and Kenneth Chu for their valuable 
and consistent expertise in pathology and toxicology during the 
course of our work. For their significant contributions we would like to 
acknowledge Cathy St. Hilaire and Robert Harris in the early stages 
of this project, and Mary Argus, Susan Sieber, and Joan Staats more 
recently. Numerous experimentalists have assisted us in the interpre- 
tation and details of their published papers, and we are grateful for 
their time and work. 
 
This work was completed with the assistance also of D. Ang, 
J. Bertucelli, M. Blumenthal, M. DaCosta, A. Friedman, K. Gould, 
T. Haggin, E. Higgins, H. Hurd, P Kato, T. Liou, P M. MacLeod, 
M. Needels, M. Nichols, M. Rosenfeld, W E. Rouse and M. Smith. 
 
This work was supported by NIEHS/DOE Interagency Agreement 
222-YO1-AS-10066 and EPA-NCI/DOE Interagency Agreement 
Y01-CP-15791 through the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, and by 
DOE Contract DE-AT03-80EV70156 to B.N.A. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
1. Peto, R., Pike, M. C., Bernstein, L., Gold, L. S., and Ames, B. A. 
 
The TD50: a proposed general convention for the numerical de- 
 
scription of the carcinogenic potency of chemicals in chronic- 
exposure animal experiments. Environ. Health Perspect. 58: 
1-8 (1984). 
 
2. Ames, B. N. Dietary carcinogens and anti-carcinogens. Science 
 
221: 1256-1264 (1983). 
 
3. Russfield, A. B., Homburger, F., Boger, E., Van Dongen, C. G., 
 
Weisburger, E. K., and Weisburger, J. H. The carcinogenic effect 
of 4,4'-methylene-bis-(2-chloroaniline) in mice and rats. TIoxicol. 
Appl. Pharmacol. 31: 47-54 (1975). 
 
4. Russfield, A. B., Homburger, F, Boger, E., Van Dongen, C. G., 
 
Weisburger, E. K., and Weisberger, J. H. Carcinogenicity of 
Chemicals Present in Man's Environment. Final Report, Contract 
No. NIH-NCI-E-68-1311. Bio-Research Consultants Inc., Cam- 
bridge, MA, 1973. 
 
5. Weisburger, E. K., Russfield, A. B., Homburger, F, Weisburger, 
 
J. H., Boger, E., Van Dongen, C. G., and Chu, K. Testing of 
twenty-one aromatic amines or derivatives for long-term toxicity 
or carcinogenicity. J. Environ. Pathol. Toxicol. 2: 325-356 (1978). 
6. Linhart, M., Cooper, J., Martin, R., Page, N., and Peters, J. 
 
Carcinogenesis bioassay data system. Comp. Biomed. Res. 7: 
230-248 (1974). 
 
7. Sontag, J. A., Page, N. P, and Saffiotti, U. Guidelines for 
 
carcinogen bioassay in small rodents. Carcinogenesis Technical 
Reports Series 1, DHEW Pub. No. (NIH) 76-801 Bethesda, 
MD, 1976. 
 
8. Ward, J. M., Goodman, D. G., Griesmer, R. A., Hardisty, J. F, 
 
Schueler, J. D., Squire, R. A., and Strandberg, J. D. Quality 
assurance for pathology in rodent carcinogenesis tests. J. Environ. 
Pathol. Ibxicol. 2:371-378 (1978). 
 
9. U. S. Public Health Service. Survey of Compounds Which Have 
 
Been Tested for Carcinogenic Activity, 1948-1973. Shubik and 
Hartwell, DHEW Pub. No. (NIH) 75 PH.S. Pub. No. 149 (NIH 
Pub. No. 80-453, formerly PH.S. 149), 1978. 
 
10. IARC Monographs. Evaluation of the Carcinogenic Risk of 
 
Chemicals to Humans. Chemicals, Industrial Processes and 
Industries Associated with Cancer in Humans, Supplement 4. 
IARC, Lyon, France, 1982, pp. 267-270. 
 
11. Freireich, E. J., Gehan, E. A., Rall, D. P , Schmidt, L. H., and 
 
Skipper, H. E. Quantitative comparison of toxicity of anticancer 
agents in mouse, rat, hamster, dog, monkey, and man. Cancer 
Chemotherapy Reports 50: 219-244 (1966). 
 
12. National Cancer Institute. Carcinogenesis Bioassay of Trichloro- 
 
ethylene. Technical Report Series No. 2. DHEW Pub. No. (NIH) 
76-802, 1976. 
 
13. Williams, C. S. F Practical Guide to Laboratory Animals. C. V 
 
Mosby, St. Louis, 1976. 
 
14. Dittmer, D. S. Biology Data Book, 2nd ed., Vol. I (R Altman, 
 
Ed.), Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology, 
Bethesda, MD, 1973. 
 
15. NIOSH. Registry of Toxic Effects of Chemical Substances, 
 
Publication 79-100 (R. Lewis and R. Tatken, Eds.), National 
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, Cincinnati, OH 
1980, p. xxxii. 
 
16. Hoeltge Inc. Animal Care Equipment Catalog. Cincinnati, OH, p. 
 
15. 
 
17. Sanockij, I. V (Ed.) Methods for Determining Toxicity and 
 
Hazards of Chemicals. Medicina, Moscow, 1970, pp. 62-63 (in 
Russian); cited in Principles and Methods for Evaluating the 
Toxicity of Chemicals, Part I. World Health Organization, Geneva, 
1971. 
 
18. Baker, H. J., Lindsey, J. R., and Weisbroth, S. H. (Eds.) Selected 
 
normative data. In: The Laboratory Rat, Vol. I., Academic Press, 
New York, 1979. 
 
19. Guyton, A. C. Measurement of the respiratory volumes of 
 
laboratory animals. Am J. Physiol. 150:70-77 (1947). 
 
20. Maltoni, C. Vinyl chloride carcinogenicity: an experimental model 
 
for carcinogenesis studies. In: Origins of Human Cancer, Book A, 
Vol. 4 (H. H. Hiatt, J. D. Watson and J. A. Winsten, Eds.), Cold 
Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY, 1977, pp. 
119-146. 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Part IV: Plot of the Carcinogenic Potency Database 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
ACETAMIDE 00ng . . .:ug. :10. :100. g : ..g :10. :100. :Ig . :10 
 
I N f cb6 eat Lun ala 52w69 a pooL .> no dre P-1. - 
 
a N f cb6 eat Liv hpc 52w69 a no dre P-I. - 
2 N * cb6 eat into s qp 52269 a pooL . + . 1.89g. \ P<.0005 
 
a N m cb6 eat Ln ono 5269 * 2.669 m \ P<.002 
 
b N cb6 sat --- mi x 52w69 3.01m * P<.0005+ 
c N. cb6 eat -- no 52w69 3.05g \ P<.002 
d N m cb6 eat - - mLh 52w69 * 6.24gm P<.002 
* 1 cb6 sat mLn h 52w69 * 9.52gm * P<.02 
 
f M m cb6 eat Liv hpc 52w69 * 57.5g. * P<.7 - 
g N m cb6 eat Lun a/a 52w69 * no dre P-1. - 
3 R f f34 eat Liv hpc 52w69 a . + . 230.mg P<.0005+ 
 
a R f f34 eat Liv nnd 52w69 a 4.15gm P<.04 + 
4 R m f34 eat Liv hpc 52w69 s . + . 104.mg P<.0005+ 
 
a R m f34 mat Liv nnd 52w69 ms 9.96gm P<.3 + 
5 R u wis sat Liv hpt 52w65 * k . 372.mg P<.02 + 
 
ACETANINOPHEN 
 
6 H f swi mat --- Lou 3252 v 
 
a N f swi mat Liv tum 32u52 v 
b N f swi mat lun tur 32u52 v 
7 R m sda mat Liv tum 27.27 
ACETOHEXANIDE 
 
8 N f b6c mat TBA NXB 24.25 sv 
 
a N f b6c sat liv NXB 24.25 sv 
b N f b6c oat Lun NXB 24.25 sv 
9 N m b6c at TBA NXB 24m25 v 
 
a N m b6c mat liv NXB 24.25 v 
b N o b6c sat Lun NXB 24m25 v 
10 R f f34 mat TBA NXB 24.25 
 
a R f f34 sat Liv NXB 24.25 
11 R a f34 sat - L-- lu 24.24 
 
a R m f 34 mat TBA NXB 24.24 
b R m f34 mat Liv NXB 24.24 
 
oong..:..ug. 10.:..Io .. 100... g...10 no . 100.. 
 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
.> no dre 
 
pI. 1 
 
P-I. 
P-I. 
P-I. 
 
100ng .:. .ug. :10. :100. g :. 1g :10. :100..g.10 
 
nno dre P-1. 
 
no drm P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
2.37gm \ P<.7 - 
no drm P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-.1 
no dre P-I. 
 
+ :#527.mg \ P<.008 - 
 
2.12gm * P<.6 
16.6gm * P<.4 
 
ACETONE[4-(5-NITRO-2-FURYL)-2-THIAZOLYL]HYDRAZONE..:..10. :100.. :.1lg.. : 10. :100.. :Ig. : 10 
 
12 R f hza mat for sqp 36w54 ms . 11.0mg 
 
a R f hza mat liv tum 36w54 ms no dre 
 
13 R f hza mat for sqp 44w60 ma . e . 6.05mg 
 
a R f hza mat liv tum 44u60 ms no dre 
1'-ACETOXYSAFROLE 1 00ng..:..Iug. : 10. 1 :100.. g : .1. :10 : . 100.1 :0 1 :10 
 
14 N m cdl mat liv car 56w69 s .> no dre 
 
a N m cdl mat lun tum 56w69 a no dre 
b N m cdl mat tba mix 56w69 s no dre 
15 N m cdl mat liv car 30u69 s .> no dre 
 
a N m cdl mat lun tum 30u69 s no dre 
b N m cdl mat tba mix 30u69 a no dre 
 
16 R a cdr mat for pam 47w69 mv . + . 30.7mg 
 
a R m cdr mat liv car 47w69 sv no dre 
b R m cdr mat tba mix 47w69 sv 32.4mg 
17 R m cdr mat for pam 36w52 s . + . 21.1mg 
 
a R a cdr mat Liv hpc 36u52 s 348.mg 
b R m cdr mat tba mix 36u52 a 21.1mg 
 
N'-ACETYL-4-(HYDROXYNETHYL)PHENYLHYDRAZINE..ug. :10. :100.. g : . . :10. :100.. : . :10 
 
18 N f saa wat bLv mix 27m27 a . + . 287.mg 
 
a N f swa wat lun mix 27m27 a 329.mg 
b N f smu wat liv tum 27m27 no dre 
19 N sawa wet lun mix 27.27 a . + . 208.mg 
 
a N m mwu wet bLv mix 27.27 a 252.mg 
b N m swa uat liv hpt 27m27 m no dre 
 
1-ACETYL-2-ISONICOTINOYLHYDRAZINE 10Ong .. : lug. 1 :10 : . 100. lg : . 1. :10 : . 100.1 :0 1 :10 
 
20 N f swa wat lun mix 94u94 a . + . 319.mg 
 
a N f swa wat liv mix 94u94 a 55.7gm 
21 N * swa wut lun mix 92u92 m + 342.mg 
 
a N m swa uat liv ha. 92w92 * no dre 
3-ACETYL-6-NETHYL-2,4-PYRANDIONE 10Ong. . 1..ug.... 10 . 100. 1 mg. 10.. 100 . Ig . 10 
 
22 N f b6a orl liv hpt 76u76 mvx > no dre 
 
a N f b6a orl Lun ads 76u76 mvx no dre 
b N f b6a orl tba mix 76u76 mvx no dre 
23 N m b6a orl lun adm 76u76 mvx > no dre 
 
a N m b6a orl Liv hpt 76u76 mvx no dre 
b N m b6a orl tba mix 76u76 mvx no dre 
24 N f b6c orl Liv hpt 76u76 evx > no dre 
 
a N f b6c orl lun mix 76u76 evx no dre 
b N f b6c orl tba tum 76u76 *vx no dre 
 
22 
 
P<. 05 
P-I. 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P-1. 
 
P-I. 
P-I. 
P-I. 
P-I. 
P-I. 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P-I.- 
P<. 0005 
 
P<.0005+ 
P<. 3- 
P<. 0005 
 
P<. 0005. 
P<. 004 + 
PaI. 
 
P<. 003 + 
P<. 0005 + 
P-I. - 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 9 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P-I.- 
 
P-I.- 
P-I.- 
P-I.- 
P-I.- 
P-I.- 
P-I.- 
PI. -. 
P-I.- 
P-I.- 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose llnc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
ACETAMIDE 60-35*5 
 
1 1343 2.22gm n.s.s. 
 
a 1343 6.96gm n.s.s. 
2 1343 717.mg 7.92gm 
 
a 1343 1.01gm 13.2gm 
b 1343 1.62gm 6.739m 
c 1343 1.169m 14.19m 
d 1343 2.70gm 23.9gm 
a 1343 3.299m n.s.s. 
f 1343 6.319m n.s.s. 
g 1343 1.55gm n.s.s. 
3 1343 147.mg 382.mg 
 
a 1343 1.269m n.s.s. 
4 1343 65.2mg 171.mg 
 
a 1343 1.62gm n.s.s. 
5 2 158.mg n.s.s. 
 
2/89p 
I /89p 
0/82p 
0/74p 
0/95p 
0/95p 
0/95p 
0/79p 
2/91p 
1/87p 
0/49 
0/49 
0/50 
0/50 
0/7 
 
1. 15gm 
1. 15gm 
1. 07gm 
1. 07gm 
1. 07gm 
1. 07gm 
1. 07gm 
1. 07gm 
1. 07gm 
1. 07gm 
888. mg 
888. mg 
710. mg 
710 .mg 
800. mg 
 
0/34 2.319m 
2/41 2.31gm 
5/32 (2.13gm 
5/44 (2.13gm 
7/50 2. 13gm 
5/50 (2.13gm 
2/50 2. 13gm 
1/44 2.13gm 
0/50 2. 13gm 
0/24 2.13gm 
33/48 
 
3/48 
41/47 
 
1/47 
7/16 
 
ACETAMINOPHEN (TyLenoL, paracetamoL) 103-90-2 
 
6 1118 805.mg n.s.s. 1/30 863.mg 1/30 
 
a 1118 1.33gm n.s.s. 0/30 863.mg 0/30 
b 1118 1.33gm n.s.s. 0/30 863.mg 0/30 
7 1459 1.659m n.s.s. 0/30 214.mg 0/30 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
Brkly Code 
 
Fleischman;jept,3, 149-170;1980 
 
0/28 
0/46 
0/22) 
0/39) 
7/46 
1/46) 
5/46 
3/39 
2/46 
0/24 
 
Weisburger;txap, 14,163-175; 1969 
 
Cohen;canr,38, 1398-1405; 1978 
Johansson; i jcn,27,521-529; 1981 
 
ACETOHEXAMIDE 968-81-0 
 
8 c03247 939.mg n.s.s. 
 
a c03247 1.78gm n.s.s. 
b c03247 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
9 c03247 348.mg n.s.s. 
 
a c03247 3.66gm n.s.s. 
b c03247 2.349m n.s.s. 
10 c03247 751.mg n.s.s. 
 
a c03247 n. .s. n.s.s. 
11 c03247 256.mg 7.11gm 
 
a c03247 386.mg n.s.s. 
b c03247 2.70gm n.s.s. 
 
2/15 
1/15 
0/15 
6/15 
3/15 
2/15 
9/15 
0/15 
0/15 
7/15 
0/15 
 
568.mg 7/35 1.14gm 
568.mg 1/35 1.14gm 
568.mg 1/35 1.14gm 
525.mg 14/35 (1.05gm 
525.mg 2/35 1.05gm 
525.mg 3/35 1.05gm 
348.mg 23/35 694.mg 
348.mg 0/35 694.mg 
278.mg 10/35 (561.mg 
278.mg 19/35 561.mg 
278.mg 0/35 561.mg 
 
ACETONE[4-(5-NITRO-2-FURYL)-2-THIAZOLYL]HYDRAZONE 18523-69-8 
12 1063m 3.23mg n.s.s. 0/5 33.3mg 3/7 
 
a 1063m 13.0mg n.s.s. 0/5 33.3mg 0/7 
13 1063n 3.10mg 13.3mg 0/16 36.8mg 15/20 
 
a 1063n 50.5mg n.s.s. 0/16 36.8mg 0/20 
 
1' -ACETOXYSAFROLE 34627-78-6 
 
14 1042b 92.9mg n.s.s. 3/35 
a 1042b 92.9mg n.s.a. 0/35 
b 1042b 92.9mg n.s.s. 3/35 
15 1042c 83.3mg n.s.s. 3/35 
 
a 1042c 83.3mg n.s.s. 0/35 
b 1042c 83.3mg n.s.s. 3/35 
16 1042b 14.2mg 81.2mg 0/18 
 
a 1042b 152.mg n.s.s. 0/18 
b 1042b 14.5mg 107.mg 1/18 
17 1042c 10.2mg 52.6mg 0/18 
 
a 1042c 56.7mg n.s.s. 0/18 
b 1042c 10.2mg 52.6mg 0/18 
 
29.3mg 
29.3mg 
29.3mg 
26.3mg 
26.3mg 
26.3mg 
112. mg 
112.mg 
112.mg 
116.mg 
116.mg 
116.mg 
 
Morris;canr,29,2145-2156; 1969 
Borch.rt;canr,33,590-600; 1973 
 
0/35 
0/35 
0/35 
0/35 
0/35 
0/35 
10/15 
0/15 
10/15 
11/18 
 
1/18 
11/18 
 
N' -ACETYL-4-(HYDROXYMETHYL)PHENYLHYDRAZINE 65734-38-5 
18 410 143.mg 950.mg 8/96 125.mg 16/44 
a 410 148.mg 3.059m 15/96 125.mg 17/44 
b 410 1.57gm n.s.s. 0/99 125.mg 0/50 
19 410 98.6mg 1.38gm 22/92 104.mg 24/48 
a 410 127.mg 762.mg 5/88 104.mg 15/45 
b 410 997.mg n.s.s. 2/62 104.mg 0/38 
1-ACETYL-2-ISONICOTINOYLHYDRAZINE 1078-38-2 
 
20 1055 196.mg 567.mg 14/104 800.mg 37/47 
 
a 1055 2.66gm n.s.s. 3/73 800.mg 2/41 
21 1055 202.mg 664.mg 11/91 667.mg 29/42 
 
a 1055 968.mg n.s.s. 2/40 667.mg 0/9 
 
3-ACETYL-6-METHYL-2,4-PYRANDIONE (dehydroacetic acid) 520-46-5 
22 1294 67.2mg n.s.s. 0/17 33.9mg 0/18 
 
a 1294 67.2mg n.s.s. 1/17 33.9mg 0/18 
b 1294 32.0mg n.s.s. 2/17 33.9mg 2/18 
23 1294 38.9mg n.s.s. 2/18 31.6mg 1/17 
 
a 1294 59.1mg n.s.s. 1/18 31.6mg 0/17 
b 1294 41.6mg n.s.s. 3/18 31.6mg 1/17 
24 1294 67.2mg n.s.s. 0/16 33.9mg 0/18 
 
a 1294 67.2mg n.s.s. 0/16 33.9mg 0/18 
b 1294 67.2mg n.s.s. 0/16 33.9mg 0/18 
 
Toth;canr,38, 177-180; 1978 
 
Toth;ej ca,9,285-289; 1973 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
23 
 
3/35 
1/35 
0/35 
5/35) 
1/35 
2/35 
18/35 
0/35 
4/35) 
21/35 
 
1/35 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
S 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
24 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
 
25 N m b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx 
 
a N m b6c orL Lun mix 76w76 evx 
b N m b6c orL tba mix 76w76 evx 
 
1 -ACETYL-2-PHENYLHYDRAZINE 
 
26 N f swa wat Liv mix 26.26 * 
 
a N f swa wat bLv mix 26m26 a 
b N f swa wat Liv agm 26m26 m 
c N f swa wat Liv ang 26m26 m 
d M f swa wat blv ang 26m26 a 
m M f swa wat blv agm 26m26 m 
f M f swa wat Lun ads 26m26 e 
g M f swa wat Lun mix 26m26 m 
27 M m swa wat bLv mix 25m25 m 
 
a M m swa wat Liv mix 25m25 a 
b N m awa wat bLv agm 25m25 m 
c M m swa wat Liv agm 25m25 m 
d N m swa wat Liv ang 25m25 a 
a M m swa wat bLv ang 25m25 a 
f M m swa wat Lun adc 25m25 a 
g M m swa wat Lun ado 25m25 m 
h N m swa wat Lun mix 25.25 m 
 
4- ACETYLANI NOB I PHENYL 
 
28 R f nss eat mgL adc 43w65 
 
a R f nss eat Liv tum 43w65 
 
1 -ACETYLAMINOFLUORENE 
 
29 R f buf eat pit ado 47w88 a 
 
a R f buf eat --- iLe 47w88 m 
b R f buf eat ova gcc 47w88 m 
c R f buf eat utm cas 47w88 a 
d R f buf eat adr car 47w88 a 
2 -ACETYLAMINOFLUORENE 
 
30 H m nss mat Liv bdc 32w56 
31 H m nss ipj smi adc 34w69 
 
a H m nss ipI per sar 34w69 
b H m nss ipj for pam 34w69 
 
32 H f syg eat Liv cac 26w68 m 
33 H m syg mat Liv cac 40w84 m 
34 H m syg eat Liv cac 26w80 m 
35 M f asw mat tba mix 84w84 m 
 
a M f asw mat tba maL 84w84 m 
36 N m asw mat tba mal 84w84 m 
 
a N m asw eat tba mix 84w84 m 
 
37 N f bcn mat ubL tcc 65w78 ski 
 
a M f bcn mat Liv hpc 65w78 iki 
38 N f bcn mat Liv hpc 15m24 mk 
 
a M f bcn mat ubL tcc 15m24 mk 
39 N f bcn mat ubL tcc 52w52 mk 
 
a M f bcn mat Liv hpc 52w52 mk 
40 N f bcn eat ubL tcc 60w60 mk 
 
a M f bcn eat Liv hpc 60w60 mk 
41 M f bcn mat ubL tcc 65w65 mk 
 
a M f bcn mat Liv hpc 65w65 mk 
42 N f bcn mat ubL tcc 69w69 mk 
 
a N f bcn eat Liv hpc 69w69 mk 
43 N f bcn eat ubL tcc 73w73 mk 
 
a N f bcn mat Liv hpc 73w73 mkr 
44 M f bcn sat ubL tcc 78w78 mkr 
 
TD5O 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
no dre P-I. - 
no dre P-I. - 
202. mg P<. 3 - 
 
lOOng .. :.lug. : .100. lg. 10. :100.. :Ig . :10 
 
+ . 44.8mg 
 
49.0mg 
105 .mg 
105 .mg 
117.mg 
117.mg 
413 .mg 
no dre 
59.8mg 
62.1mg 
113.ug 
128.mg 
146.mg 
161.mg 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
 
bO0ng. ... :1ug.10. :100.. :g ..:10. :100. :Ig . :10 
 
+ . 1.18mg 
 
no dre 
 
lOOng .:. .lug. :10. :100. g :. . :10. :100. :Ig . :10 
 
43.5mg 
54 .8mg 
54.8mg 
54.8mg 
54.8mg 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<. 0005 
P<.0005 
P<. 005 
P<.005 
 
P<.5 - 
P-I. 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
P<.01 
P<.01 
 
P<. 008 
P<.03 
 
P-1. - 
P-1 . - 
P-I. 
 
P<.0005+ 
P-I. 
 
P<. 6 
P<. 3 
P<. 3 
P<. 3 
P<. 3 
 
lOOng . . .ug. :10. :100.. g : . . :10. :100. : g . :10 
 
A 17.4mg P<.04 + 
 
7.26mg P<.3 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
* 17.3mg P<.03 
 
+ . 15.3mg P<.003 
 
31.5mg P<.2 
 
no dre P-1. + 
51.1mg P<.3 
 
+ . 17.4mg P<.006 
 
21.7mg P<.2 + 
r . + . 66.5mg Z P<.0005+ 
r 120.mg * P<.0005+ 
r . + . 30.6mg * P<.0005+ 
r 95.5mg Z P<.0005+ 
r . + . 150.mg Z P<.0005+ 
r 226.mg * P<.2 + 
r . + . 68.8mg Z P<.0005+ 
r 747.mg * P<.2 + 
r . + . 45.8mg Z P<.0005+ 
r 199.mg * P<.07 + 
r .+ . 62.1mg Z P<.0005+ 
r 218.mg * P<.05 + 
r . +. 64.1mg Z P<.0005+ 
 
147.mg * P<.05 + 
 
101.mg Z P<.0005+ 
154.mg * P<.0005+ 
 
a M f bcn mat Liv hpc 78w78 mkr 
45 M f bcn mat Liv hpc 24m24 mkr 
 
a M f bcn eat ubL tcc 24m24 mkr 
 
46 N f bcn eat liv hpc 33m33 mkr 
 
a N f bcn eat ubL tcc 33m33 ekr 
 
41.7mg Z P<.0005+ 
 
96.0mg Z P<.0005+ 
19.6mg * P<.008 + 
82.1mg Z P<.0005+ 
 
47 N f bcn mat liv hpc 39w78 mkr 
 
a N f bcn eat ubL tcc 39w78 ekr 
48 N f bcn eat Liv hpc 9m24 mkr 
 
a N f bcn eat ubL tcc 9m24 mkr 
49 N f bcn eat ubL tcc 52w78 mkr 
 
a N f bcn eat Liv hpc 52w78 ekr 
 
110.mg * P<.002 + 
142.mg * P<.004 + 
19.1mg * P<.0005+ 
97.2mg Z P<.0005+ 
82.8mg Z P<.0005+ 
156.mg Z P<.009 + 
 
K 
K 
K 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lIne 2Dose 21nc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
25 1294 62.6mg n.s.s. 0/16 31.6mg 0/18 
 
a 1294 62.6mg n.s.s. 0/16 31.6mg 0/18 
b 1294 32.9mg n.s.s. 0/16 31.6mg 1/18 
 
I -ACETYL-2-PHENYLHYDRAZINE 
26 1054 23.8mg 106.mg 
 
a 1054 24.9mg 140.mg 
b 1054 45.1mg 463.mg 
c 1054 45.1mg 463.mg 
d 1054 46.9mg 1.19gm 
0 1054 46.9mg 1.19gm 
 
f 1054 65.8mg n.s.s. 
g 1054 78.8mg n.s.s. 
27 1054 27.8mg 245.mg 
 
a 1054 29.1mg 217.mg 
b 1054 42.9mg 9.84gm 
c 1054 47.1mg 9.32gm 
d 1054 52.1mg 3.67gm 
 
a 1054 53.7mg n.s.s. 
f 1054 158.mg n.s.s. 
9 1054 97.2mg n.s.s. 
h 1054 112.mg n.s.s. 
 
114-83-0 
 
4/94 30.0mg 
8/94 30. 0mg 
2/94 30. 0mg 
2/94 30. 0mg 
4/94 30.0mg 
4/94 30.0mg 
10/89 30 .0mg 
15/89 30.Omg 
5/87 25.0mg 
3/87 25.0mg 
3/87 25.0mg 
2/87 25. 0mg 
1/87 25. 0mg 
2/87 25. 0mg 
6/87 25. 0mg 
17/87 25. 0mg 
22/87 25.0mg 
 
16/37 
16/37 
8/37 
8/37 
8/37 
8/37 
5/31 
5/31 
12/40 
11/40 
7/40 
6/40 
5/40 
5/40 
1/40 
5/40 
5/40 
 
4-ACETYLANINOBIPHENYL (4' -phsnyLacetani lide) 4075-79-0 
28 1424 .444mg 3.21mg 0/15 11.3mg 12/13 
 
a 1424 11.9mg n.s.s. 0/15 11.3mg 0/13 
 
1-ACETYLANINOFLUORENE (N-1-fLuorenylacetamide) 28314-03-6 
29 144 6.02mg n.s.s. 2/18 6.77mg 3/17 
 
a 144 8.92mg n.s.s. 0/18 6.77mg 1/17 
b 144 8.92mg n.s.s. 0/18 6.77mg 1/17 
c 144 8.92mg n.s.s. 0/18 6.77mg 1/17 
d 144 8.92mg n.s.s. 0/18 6.77mg 1/17 
 
2-ACETYLANINOFLUORENE (N-2-fluorenylacetamide) 53-96-3 
30 308m 5.24mg n.s.s. 0/17 15.9mg 3/18 
31 308n 1.18mg n.s.s. 0/8 3.21mg 1/8 
 
a 308n 2.33mg n.s.s. 0/8 3.21mg 0/8 
b 308n 1.34mg n.s.s. 1/8 3.21mg 1/8 
32 347n 4.02mg n.s.s. 1/59 16.0mg 2/8 
33 347. 3.65mg 211.mg 0/39 17.5mg 2/5 
34 347n 5.10mg n.s.s. 0/16 12.0mg 1/7 
35 213b 8.63mg n.s.s. 14/16 39.0Omg 15/18 
 
a 213b 13.2mg n.s.s. 6/16 39.0mg 10/18 
36 213b 7.28mg 200.mg 1/10 36.0mg 9/14 
 
a 213b 6.89mg n.s.s. 4/10 36.0Omg 10/14 
 
37 1344a 40.3mg 123.mg 1/400 6.50mg 1/196 8.13mg 
 
a 1344a 61.6mg 389.mg 1/401 6.50mg 4/196 8.13mg 
38 1344b 19.7mg 55.2mg 9/383 4.88mg 15/114 6.09mg 
 
a 1344b 48.6mg 234.mg 1/384 4.88mg 0/114 6.09mg 
39 1344m 70.7mg 457.mg 0/140 7.80mg 0/268 9.75mg 
 
a 1344m 92.4mg n.s.s. 0/140 7.80mg 2/268 9.75mg 
40 1344n 41.1mg 128.mg 0/113 7.80mg 0/221 9.75mg 
 
a 1344n 184.mg n.s.s. 0/113 7.80mg 0/224 9.75mg 
41 13440 29.4mg 77.0mg 0/88 7.80mg 0/181 9.75mg 
 
a 1344o 86.2mg n.s.s. 0/88 7.80mg 1/182 9.75mg 
42 1344r 42.0mg 97.3mg 0/183 5.85mg 1/271 7.80mg 
 
a 1344r 97.9mg n.s.s. 1/183 5.85mg 2/272 7.80mg 
43 1344s 44.1mg 98.2mg 0/127 4.55mg 1/389 5.85mg 
 
19.5mg 36/65 
 
a 1344s 86.0mg n.s.s. 0/128 4.55mg 2/389 5.85mg 
 
19.5mg 0/65 
 
44 1344t 76.4mg 139.mg 1/400 3.90mg 4/1573 4.55mg 
 
a 1344t 105.mg 310.mg 
45 1344u 3S.1mg 51.4mg 
 
a 1344u 77.4mg 121.mg 
46 1344v 10.1mg 409.mg 
 
a 1344v 44.2mg 179.mg 
47 1344w 49.1mg 585.mg 
 
a 1344w 57.7mg 1.16gm 
48 1344x 12.1mg 35.2mg 
 
a 1344x 40.8mg 388.mg 
49 1344y 44.8mg 185.mg 
 
a 1344y 67.6mg 4.459m 
 
Toth;bjca,39,584-587; 1979 
 
NiLLIr;jnci,15,1571-1590;1955 
 
Norris; jnci ,24,149-180;1960 
Mi L ler;canr,24,2018-2026;1964 
Della Porta; jnci,22,463-471;1959 
 
Prier;txap,5,526-542;1963 
 
0/130 10.8mg 
5/130 10.8mg 
 
14/86 8.13mg 
0/86 8. 13mg 
0/137 13.0mg 
0/137 13.0mg 
0/110 13.0mg 
0/110 13.0mg 
 
1/94 13. 0mg 
1/94 13. 0mg 
0/265 9.75mg 
4/265 9.75mg 
1/264 7.80mo 
 
5/264 7.80mg 
1/796 5.85mg 
 
13.0mg 5/131 19.5mg 62/121 
 
1/401 3.90mg 17/1573 4.55mg 7/792 5.85mg 
 
13.0mg 6/131 19.5mg 7/121 
 
9/383 3.90mg 55/900 4.55mg 55/639 5.85mg 
 
13.0mg 47/160 19.5mg 56/130 
 
1/384 3.90mg 0/900 4.55mg 2/638 5.85mg 
 
13.0mg 25/160 19.5mg 100/130 
 
8/23 3.90mg 44/92 4.55mg 20/45 5.85mg 
 
13.0mg 8/10 
 
0/24 3.90mg 1/92 4.55mg 0/45 5.85mg 
 
13.0mg 8/10 
 
1/401 3.90mg 1/186 4.88mg 3/128 6.50mg 
1/400 3.90mg 0/184 4.88mg 2/128 6.50mg 
9/383 2.93mg 13/108 3.66mg 10/66 4.88mg 
1/384 2.93mg 1/108 3.66mg 0/66 4.88mg 
1/400 5.20mg 0/190 6.50mg 0/132 8.67mg 
1/401 5.20mg 1/190 6.50mg 6/132 8.67mg 
 
0/64 16.3mg 
1/64 16.3mg 
6/35 12.2mg 
1/35 12.2mg 
0/138 19.5mg 
3/138 19.5mg 
0/117 19.5mg 
1/117 19.5mg 
0/89 19.5mg 
4/90 19.5mg 
0/175 13.0mg 
5/174 13.0mg 
0/206 9.75mg 
 
6/206 9.75mg 
1/383 7.80mg 
7/383 7.80mg 
57/445 7.80mg 
 
1/445 7.80mg 
5/12 7.80mg 
0/12 7.80mg 
 
1/64 9.75mg 
1/64 9.75mg 
5/35 7.31mg 
0/35 7.31mg 
1/65 13.0mg 
0/65 13.0mg 
 
22/65 Littlefield;j.pt,3,17-34;1980 
 
4/65 
6/28 
11/28 
9/141 
1/141 
21/114 
 
1/114 
 
28/90 
 
1/90 
 
1/90 19.5mg 36/85 
1/90 19.5mg 3/86 
0/134 13.0mg 4/67 
 
5/134 13.0mg 1/67 
3/269 9.75mg 1/267 
7/268 9.75m9 6/267 
7/415 9.75mg 62/311 
3/415 9.75mg 3/311 
7/11 9.75mg 8/12 
1/11 9.75mg 4/12 
 
4/63 
4/63 
9/33 
6/33 
14/63 
 
2/63 
 
25 
 
Brkly Code 
 
26 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
 
50 N f bcn sat Liv hpc 12m24 ekr 
 
a N f bcn sat ubL tcc 12m24 skr 
51 N f cdl eat Liv hpt 78w78 a 
 
a N f cdl sat Liv nod 78w78 s 
b N f cdl sat Lun ads 78w78 s 
52 N m cdl sat Liv hpt 78w78 a 
 
a N m cd1 sat Lun ads 78w78 a 
53 N f cfl sat mgL car 52w52 s 
 
a N f cfl sat Liv Lcc 52w52 s 
b N f cfl sat Lun tum 52w52 a 
54 N m cfl sat Liv lcc 52w52 s 
 
a N m cfl sat Lun ads 52w52 s 
55 N f ifc sat Liv mix 64w64 
 
a N f ifc sat Liv hpt 64w64 
b N f ifc sat ubL car 64w64 
c N f ifc sat ubL pam 64w64 
56 N a ifc sat Liv mix 64w64 
 
a N m ifc sat ubi car 64w64 
b N m ifc sat Liv hpt 64w64 
c N a ifc sat ubl pam 64w64 
57 N f ifm sat Liv mix 60w60 
 
a N f ifm sat Liv hpt 60w60 
b N f ifm sat ubl mix 60w60 
58 N f ifm gav Liv ada 60w60 
59 N m ifi aat Liv mix 60w60 
 
a N m ifm sat Liv hpt 60w60 
60 N m ifm gav ubl mix 60w60 
 
a N m ifm gav Liv mix 60w60 
61 N f r3m sat ubL mix 60w60 
 
a N f r3m mat Liv mix 60w60 
62 N i r3m sat ubl mix 60w60 
 
a N m r3m aat ubl car 60w60 
b N m r3m sat liv mix 60w60 
 
63 R f cdr mat mgl mix 15m24 as 
 
a R f cdr sat Liv hpc 15m24 as 
64 R m cdr sat Liv hpc 15m24 as 
65 R f hza sat mai tum 36w54 ms 
 
a R f hza sat sac car 36w54 es 
b R f hza sat Liv tum 36w54 as 
66 R f hza sat mai tum 44w60 as 
 
a R f hza sat sac car 44w60 es 
b R f hza sat Liv tum 44w60 as 
 
4-ACETYLANINOFLUORENE 
 
67 R f buf sat --- iLe 62w97 a 
 
a R f buf sat mgl adf 62w97 a 
b R f buf eat uts sar 62w97 a 
 
4. 
4. 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
24.3mg * P<.0005+ 
101.mg Z P<.0005+ 
21.3mg P<.0005 
76.2mg P<..0005 
354.mg P<.6 
 
22.5mg P<.0005 
no dre P-1. 
 
14.6mg P<.0005 
16.5mg P<.0005+ 
no dre P-i. 
 
31.4mg P<.006 + 
149.mg P<.5 
 
4.78mg P<.0005+ 
5.95mg P<.0005 
 
565.mg P<.4 + 
565.mg P<.4 + 
36.1mg P<.005 + 
36.1mg P<. 005 + 
43.7mg P<.01 
 
69.8mg P<.04 + 
19.6mg P<.0005+ 
31.5mg P<.0005 
 
44.9mg P<.0005+ 
91.2mg P<.2 
 
42.9mg P<.002 + 
77.8mg P<.004 
 
12.9mg P<.0005+ 
57.2mg P<.3 
 
104.mg P<.07 + 
no dre P-1. 
 
51.0mg P<.04 + 
86.0mg P<.1 
 
no dre P-1. + 
4.75mg * P<.0005+ 
26.9mg * P<.02 + 
3.78mg * P<.0005+ 
.841mg P<.0005+ 
13.8mg P<.4 
no dre P-1. 
 
.981mg P<.0005+ 
8.75mg P<.02 
no dre P-1. 
 
A. 
 
boong.. : .ug. :10. :100..m :g .:10. :100. . : g :10 
 
.> 59.4mg 
 
59.4mg 
59.4mg 
 
ACETYLATED DIANYLOPECTIN PHOSPHATE ..: . .lug. :10 :. 100. g :. . :10. 1 :100... :19 :10 
 
68 R f wis sat Liv tum 24m24 a no dre 
 
a R f wis sat tba mix 24m24 a no dre 
69 R m wis sat Liv tum 24m24 a no dre 
 
a R m wis sat tba mix 24m24 a no dre 
 
P<. 2 
P<. 2 
P<. 2 
 
P-1. - 
P-1. - 
P-1. - 
Pal. - 
 
ACETYLATED DISTARCH ADIPATE 
 
70 R f ofs sat liv tum 24m24 ag 
 
a R f ofs sat tba mix 24m24 s9 
71 R m of. sat liv hem 24m24 a 
 
a R m ofs sat tba mix 24m24 a 
 
ACETYLATED DISTARCH GLYCEROL 
 
72 R f of s at liv tum 24m24 sg 
 
a R f of. sat tba mix 24m24 sg 
73 R m of s at Liv hem 24m24 a 
 
a R * ofs sat tba mix 24m24 a 
 
lOOng .. : lug. :10. :100. g : 1.g :10. :100. :Ig .:10 
 
no Ore 
no are 
no dre 
14.0gm 
 
lOOng .. : lug. :10. :100. g :..g :10. :100. :Ig . :10 
 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
26.19m 
 
ACETYLATED DISTARCH PHOSPHATE lOOng.. ..l :1ug . 10. :100.. : mg . :10. :100.. : g :10 
 
74 R f wis sat liv tum 24m24 a no dre 
 
a R f wis sat tba mix 24m24 a 20.49m 
75 R m wis sat liv tum 24m24 a no dre 
 
a R m wis sat tba mix 24m24 a 37.69m 
 
P-1. - 
P-1. - 
P-1. - 
P<.06 - 
 
P-1. - 
P-1. - 
P-1. - 
P<.3 - 
 
P-1. - 
P<.4 - 
P-1. _ 
P<.8 - 
 
ACRONYCINE* 
 
76 N f b6c ipJ TBA NXB 48w78 as 
 
a N f b6c ipJ liv NXB 48w78 as 
b N f b6c ipj lun NXB 48w78 as 
77 N m b6c ipj TBA NXB 66w78 as 
 
a N m b6c ipj Liv NXB 66w78 as 
b N m b6c ipj lun NXB 66w78 as 
 
100ng..: ..ug. :10. :100. g :. . :10. :100.. : g :10 
 
:> no dre P-I. 
 
2.46mg * P<.3 
2.46mg * P<.3 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf 
 
50 1344z 15.6mg 43.4mg 
 
a 1344z 46.6mg 306.mg 
51 66a 13.5mg 37.3mg 
 
a 66a 37.1mg 218.mg 
b 66a 56.0mg n.s.s. 
52 66a 12.7mg 56.5mg 
 
a 66a 155.mg n.s.s. 
53 469 7.28mg 36.3mg 
 
a 469 7.98mg 43.7mg 
b 469 60.3mg n.s.s. 
54 469 11.9mg 290.mg 
 
a 469 22.3mg n.s.s. 
55 1447 2.16mg 9.44mg 
 
a 1447 3.13mg 11.1mg 
b 1447 92.0mg n.s.s. 
c 1447 92.0mg n.s.s. 
56 1447 15.5mg 260.mg 
 
a 1447 15.5mg 260.mg 
b 1447 17.7mg 1.949m 
c 1447 24.0mg n.s.s. 
57 1069m 10.9mg 39.8mg 
 
a 1069m 16.1mg 74.4mg 
b 1069m 21.1mg 131.mg 
58 1069n 14.8mg n.s.s. 
59 1069m 19.3mg 183.mg 
 
a 1069. 29.5mg 475.mg 
60 1069n 5.23mg 46.5mg 
 
a 1069n 11.2mg n.s.s. 
61 1069m 35.7mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1069. 134.mg n.s.s. 
62 1069. 23.0mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1069. 32.6mg n.s.s. 
b 1069m 54.4mg n.s.s. 
63 1112 2.48mg 10.4mg 
 
a 1112 9.24mg n.s.s. 
64 1112 1.78mg 9.52mg 
65 1063m .286mg 2.98mg 
 
a 1063m 2.24mg n.s.s. 
b 1063m 5.00mg n.s.s. 
66 1063n .367mg 2.96mg 
 
a 1063n 3.00mg n.s.s. 
b 1063n 12.1mg n.s.s. 
 
Cntrl lDose llnc 2Dose 21nc 
 
9/383 
1/384 
1/57 
0/57 
6/57 
4/47 
8/47 
0/29 
0/29 
0/29 
0/31 
1/31 
0/17 
0/17 
0/17 
0/17 
0/13 
0/13 
0/13 
0/13 
0/31 
0/31 
0/31 
0/31 
1/42 
0/42 
0/42 
1/42 
0/15 
0/15 
0/10 
0/10 
1/10 
0/32 
0/32 
1/32 
0/5 
0/5 
0/5 
3/16 
0/16 
0/16 
 
Citationi or Pathology 
 
Br kly Code 
3.90mg 11/118 4.88mg 14/74 6.50mg 5/33 9.75mg 9/29 
3.90mg 0/118 4.88mg 1/74 6.50mg 1/33 9.75mg 7/29 
 
32.5mg 30/66 EpstsinCraview) {irdc};stev,6,103-154;1976 
32.5mg 10/66 
32.5mg 9/66 
30.0mg 24/53 
30.0mg 1/53 
 
39.0mg 11/30 Nswbsrne;txap,41,535-546;1977 
39.0mg 10/30 
39.0mg 0/30 
36.0mg 5/28 
36.0mg 2/28 
 
65.0mg 33/34 Wood;ejca,6,433-440;1970 
65.0mg 32/34 
65.0mg 1/34 
65.0mg 1/34 
60.0mg 7/20 
60.0mg 7/20 
60.0mg 6/20 
60.0mg 4/20 
 
65.0mg 17/32 Wood;.jca,5,41-47;1969 
65.0mg 12/32 
65.0mg 9/32 
22.9mg 1/18 
60.0mg 9/31 
60.0mg 5/31 
19.0mg 6/21 
19.0mg 2/21 
65.0mg 4/30 
65.0mg 0/30 
60.0mg 8/34 
60.0mg 5/34 
60.0mg 3/34 
 
3.00mg 8/16 12.5mg 7/10 Weisburger;jnci,67,75-88;1981 
3.00mg 2/16 12.5mg 2/10 
2.40mg 3/16 10.0mg 10/10 
 
10.0mg 8/9 Norris;canr,29,2145-2156;1969 
10.0mg 1/8 
10.0mg 0/9 
11.0mg 15/16 
11.0mg 4/16 
11.0mg 0/16 
 
4-ACETYLANINOFLUORENE (N-4-fluorenylacetamide) 28322-02-3 
67 144 9.67mg n.s.s. 0/18 7.98mg 1/13 
 
a 144 9.67mg n.s.s. 0/18 7.98mg 1/13 
b 144 9.67mg n.s.s. 0/18 7.98mg 1/13 
 
ACETYLATED DIANYLOPECTIN PHOSPHATE 
68 1407 86.6gm n.s.s. 0/29 
 
a 1407 12.69m n.s.s. 21/29 
69 1407 69.29m n.s.s. 0/30 
 
a 1407 4.629m n.s.s. 26/30 
 
15.0gm 0/28 
15. 0gm 18/28 
12.0gm 0/28 
12.0gm 24/28 
 
Norris; Jnci ,24,149-180;1960 
 
de Groot;fctx,12,651-663;1974 
 
ACETYLATED DISTARCH ADIPATE -- 
 
70 1408 179.gm n.s.s. 0/24 31.09m 0/28 
 
a 1408 20.6gm n.s.s. 24/24 31.09m 23/28 
71 1408 107.gm n.s.s. 1/25 24.89m 0/21 
 
a 1408 4.44gm n.s.s. 17/25 24.89m 19/21 
 
ACETYLATED DISTARCH GLYCEROL --- 
 
72 1408 172.9m n.s.s. 0/24 31.09m 0/27 
 
a 1408 20.9gm n.s.s. 24/24 31.0gm 22/27 
73 1408 123.9m n.s.s. 1/25 24.89g 0/24 
 
a 1408 7.289m n.s.s. 17/25 24.89m 20/24 
ACETYLATED DISTARCH PHOSPHATE --- 
 
74 1407 92.7gm n.s.s. 0/29 15.0gm 0/30 
 
a 1407 5.129m n.s.s. 21/29 15.09m 25/30 
75 1407 69.29m n.s.s. 0/30 12.0gm 0/28 
 
a 1407 3.489m n.s.s. 26/30 12.09m 25/28 
 
Truhaut;fctx,17,11-17;1979 
 
Truhaut;fctx,17,11-17;1979 
de Groot;fctx,12,651-663;1974 
 
ACRONYCINE* 7008-42-6 
 
76 c01536 .866mg n.s.s. 20/30 .850mg 9/40 (2.57mg 0/35) 
 
a c01536 .400mg n.s.s. 0/30 .850mg 1/40 2.57mg 0/35 
b c01536 .400mg n.s.s. 0/30 .850mg 1/40 2.57mg 0/35 
77 c01536 1.13mg n.s.s. 18/30 .850mg 14/40 (2.57mg 0/35) 
 
a c01536 2.77mg n.s.s. 2/30 .850mg 0/40 2.57mg 0/35 
b c01536 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/30 .850mg 1/40 2.57mg 0/35 
 
Liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
27 
 
28 GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt TD50 2T'ailpvI 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
78 Rfisda ipjmogt MXA52w80e a. .395mngZP<.003 c 
 
a R f sda ipj mgL fbi 52w80 * .455mg Z P<.005 c 
b R f sda ipj MXB NXB 52w80 a .873mg Z P<.0005 
 
IC R f ada ipi per NXA 52w80 * 5.86mg * P<.0005c 
d R f sda ipj per amn 52w80 a 11.4mg Z P<.003 c 
a R f sdi ipj TBA MXB 52w80 a .568mg Z P<.0005 
f Rft s da ipj Liv NXB 52w80 a 8.75mg * P<.06 
 
79 R m sda ipj NXB MXB 51w80 is + .497mg Z P<.0005 
 
a R madaiipj --- oat 5lw8Oiso .698mg Z P<.0005c 
b ft m ada ipj MXA MXA 51w0 aso 1.03mg * P<.0005c 
c ft m ada ipj per MXA 51w8 ase 1.49mg * P<.0005c 
d ft m sda ipj adr coo 51w80 ie 1.85mg Z P<z.0005 
a ft m mda ipj TBA NXB 51w80 ae .227mg Z P<.0005 
f ft m ada ipj liv NXB 5IwBO as 2.11mg * P<.06 
ACRtYLONITRtILE loOng. - ..lug... .10 ...:. 100.. 1m:.Ig... .10 .... 100... .Ig ...:. 10 
 
80 ft f sss inh cna mast 24m24 aes + -49.6mg * P<.0005+ 
 
a Rft ass inh ccx ast 24m24 ise 62.0mg * P<.0005 
 
b ft f sama inh zym mix 24i24 ses 81.5mg * P<.0005+ 
c ft f ama inh zym mac 24m24 isa 89.0mg * P<.0005 
d ft f mae inh bra east 24m24 acm 123.mg * P<.002 
 
a ft f saim inh ntu rsc 24m24 sam 52.0mg * P<.06 + 
 
ft R amas inh egi adc 24.24 acm 69.1mg * P<.02 + 
g ft f asm inh Liv cho 24m24 ace 362.mg * P<.9 
h Rft asa inh tiv cLc 24m.24 i.e 362.mg * P<.9 
 
i Rft sama inh igi aff 24.24 aes no dre P-1. + 
 
ftR f ama inh tba mix 24.24 asm no dre P1..I 
 
81 ft f saim wet cna east 24m25 aesv -+ -5.31mg Z P<.0005+ 
 
a Rft ssai wit mci muc 24.25 aesv 8.19mg Z P<.0005+ 
b ft f asa wit bra east 24.25 oaev 11.4mg Z P'.0005 
 
c ft f ama wet stn mix 24.,25 mcmv 13.3mg * P<.0005+ 
d ft f ama wet ccx east 24m25 acsv 13.6mg * P<.0005 
a ft f ama wet stn mop 24.25 easy 13.8mg * P<.0005 
 
ftR f saim wit zyc mix 24.25 mcmv 22.6mg * Pz.0005+ 
g Rft ssaa wet zym masc 24.25 eeav 31.4mg * P<.0005 
 
h ft f ama wet mgt met 24m,25 sesv 42.6mg * P<.004 + 
 
i Rft ssas wet stn sqc 24m25 eeav 46.1mg Z P<.0005 
 
Rft ssam wet crL eat 24.25 oesv 65.9mg * P<.002 
k ft f sac wet spd east 24.25 aeasy 90.8mg * P<.0005 
 
ftR f ams wet zym ad. 24.25 aesv 93.7mg * P<.004 
a ft f ama wet Liv mix 24.25 mcmv 169.mg * P<.2 
 
n R f ama wet igi mix 24.25 aosv no dre P-1. + 
o ft s as wet tba mix 24m25 acsv 1.75mg * P<.l 
 
82 Rft ss ama wt ton mix 22m25 cmv -+ -34.5mg P<.0005+ 
 
a Rft ssam wet ton sqc 22m25 cmv 42.6mg P<.0005 
 
83 R m ama inh cns east 24m24 asms + -32.4mg * P<.0005+ 
 
a ft m asm inh itL mix 24.24 acm 37.8mg * P<.0005 
b ft a sama inh ccx east 24m24 acm 38.8mg * P<.0005 
c ft a sai inh zym masc 24.24 acm 50.1mg * P<.0005 
 
d ft m sams inh zym mix 24m24 asm 53.0mg * P<.003 + 
* ft mamas inh stn mix 24.24 asm 99.0mg * P<.02 + 
1ft m ama inh Liv hpc 24m24 asm 403.mg * Pc.2 
g ft m ama inh tba mix 24m24 asm no dre P=I. 
 
84 ft mama inh smi muc 24.24. -s + -37.7mg P<.0005+ 
 
a ft m ama inh ton sqp 24m24 em 73.0mg P<.007 
 
b R mamas inh ton mix 24.24 em 89. 1mg P<.02 + 
85 ft m ama wet stn mix 24m25 sesv . .6.36mg * P<.0005+ 
 
a ft m ama wet cns east 24m25 aesv 10.7mg * P<.0005+ 
b ft sas amawt ccx east 24m25 aesv 12.0mg * P<.0005 
c ft a ama wet stn sqp 24m25 aesv 12.2mg * P<.0005 
d ft m ama wet stn sqc 24m25 aesv 14.1mg * P<.0005 
* ft m aim wet bra mast 24.25 aesv 18.6mg Z P<.0005 
 
f ft a ama wet zym mac 24m25 seasy 34.1mg * P<.0005+ 
g ft m ama wet smin muc 24m25 sesv 128.mg Z P<.3 
h ft m ama wet Liv hpc 24m25 aesv no dre P-I. 
 
ft m amas wet tba mix 24.25 acsv 5.55mg * P<.005 
 
86 ft m ama wet ton mix 96w96 cmv A 66.6mg P<.02 + 
 
a ft m assmawt ton sqc 96w96 mv 66.6mg P<.02 
ACTINOMYCIN C lOOng..:. .lug...:. 10... .100 . 1m:.Ig... .10 .... 100...:. Ig ...:. 10 
 
87 ft m b46 ivj tba mix 12.24 cm A 1.68mg P<.08 
 
a ft m b46 ivj tba ben 12m24 cm 2.23mg P<.07 
b ft m b46 ivj tba not 12m24 cm 10.8mg P<.7 
 
ACTINONYCIN 0 boOng. -.:..ug .. ..10.....100 . 1m:.Ig... .10 .... 100 ...I: g ...:. 10 
 
88 Rft cdr ipi per mar 26w78e .+ -1.99ug * P<z.0005+ 
 
a Rftfcdr ipj tun ado26w78eo 50.1ug * P<.03 
 
b R f cdr ipj Liv tun 26w78 a no dre P-1. 
 
c R f cdr ipj tba maL 26w78 a 1.2lug * P<.0005 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl IDose lInc 2Dose 21nc 
 
78 c01536 .200mg 2.10mg 
 
a c01536 .222mg 3.99mg 
b c01536 .495mg 3.02mg 
c c01536 2.80mg 17.7mg 
d c01536 4.20mg 61.8mg 
* c01536 .353mg 1.24mg 
f c01536 2.98mg n.s.s. 
79 c01536 .290mg .843mg 
 
a c01536 .390mg 1.21mg 
b c01536 .551mg 1.95mg 
c c01536 .573mg 6.91mg 
d c01536 .624mg 9.40mg 
a c01536 .135mg .412mg 
f c01536 .519mg n.s.s. 
ACRYLONITRILE 107-13-1 
 
80 1251n 29.6mg 94.2mg 
 
a 1251n 35.2mg 130.mg 
b 1251n 42.0mg 193.mg 
c 1251n 44.7mg 217.mg 
d 1251n 55.6mg 444.mg 
* 1251n 12.8mg n.s.s. 
f 1251n 31.7mg 13.1gm 
9 1251n 58.9mg n.s.s. 
h 1251n 58.9mg n.s.s. 
i 1251n 21.6mg n.s.s. 
j 1251n 9.07mg n.s.a. 
81 1268n 3.52mg 8.79mg 
 
a 1268n 3.07mg 34.3mg 
b 1268n 6.74mg 22.5mg 
c 1268n 9.08mg 20.8mg 
d 1268n 9.11mg 24.1mg 
* 1268n 9.38mg 21.7mg 
f 1268n 14.1mg 43.5mg 
9 1268n 18.3mg 71.7mg 
h 1268n 20.2mg 353.mg 
i 1268n 23.7mg 108.mg 
j 1268n 33.1mg 285.mg 
k 1268n 41.1mg 280.mg 
l 1268n 42.4mg 798.mg 
a 1268n 34.0mg n.s.s. 
n 1268n 11.0mg n.s.s. 
o 1268n .287mg n. .s. 
82 12680 17.7mg 80.9mg 
 
a 12680 20.7mg 110.mg 
83 1251m 18.9mg 63.8mg 
 
a 1251m 20.0mg 117.mg 
b 1251m 21.7mg 80.1mg 
c 1251m 25.3mg 174.mg 
d 1251m 25.4mg 310.mg 
e 1251m 38.9mg n.s.s. 
f 1251m 65.7mg n.s.s. 
9 1251m 10.9mg n.s.s. 
84 1251o 19.0mg 127.mg 
 
a 1251o 25.2mg 1.03gm 
b 1251o 35.1mg n.s.s. 
85 1268m 4.58mg 9.11mg 
 
a 1268m 7.33mg 17.9mg 
b 1268m 8.03mg 21.0mg 
c 1268m 8.40mg 18.6mg 
d 1268m 9.38mg 22.6mg 
* 1268m 9.34mg 49.5mg 
f 1268m 18.3mg 93.5mg 
9 1268m 29.9mg n.s.s. 
h 1268m 82.9mg n.s.s. 
i 1268m 2.31mg 70.8mg 
86 1268r 23.5mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1268r 23.5mg n.s.s. 
 
4/20 
4/20 
4/20 
0/20 
0/20 
7/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
1/20 
4/20 
0/20 
 
0/99 
0/99 
0/93 
0/93 
0/93 
0/11 
9/99 
0/72 
0/72 
79/99 
97/99 
 
1/80 
0/79 
0/78 
1/80 
1/80 
1/80 
1/80 
1/80 
6/80 
0/79 
0/79 
0/78 
0/80 
1/68 
57/80 
78/80 
0/78 
0/78 
0/96 
4/96 
0/96 
1/96 
2/96 
1/95 
0/74 
 
86/100 
 
2/96 
0/72 
1/95 
0/79 
1/73 
1/73 
0/79 
0/73 
0/73 
3/73 
3/73 
1/50 
67/80 
 
1/68 
1/68 
 
1. 04mg 
1. 04mg 
1. 04mg 
1. 04mg 
1. 04mg 
1. 04mg 
1. 04mg 
1. 04mg 
1. 04mg 
1. 04mg 
1. 04mg 
1. 04mg 
1. 04mg 
1. 04mg 
 
3. 24mg 
3. 24mg 
3.24mg 
3.24mg 
3. 24mg 
3. 24mg 
3. 24mg 
3. 24mg 
3. 24mg 
3. 24mg 
3.24mg 
2. 00mg 
2. 00mg 
2. 00mg 
2. 00mg 
2. 00mg 
2. 00mg 
2. 00mg 
2. 00mg 
2. 00mg 
2. 00mg 
2. 00mg 
2. 00mg 
2. 00mg 
2. 00mg 
2. 00mg 
2. 00mg 
15.4mg 
15.4mg 
2. 27mg 
2. 27mg 
2. 27mg 
2.27mg 
2.27mg 
2.27mg 
2.27mg 
2.27mg 
9. 1 0mg 
 
9. 1 0mg 
9. 1 0mg 
1. 75mg 
1. 75mg 
1. 75mg 
1. 75mg 
1. 75mg 
1. 75mg 
1. 75mg 
1. 75mg 
1. 75mg 
1. 75mg 
14.9mg 
14.9mg 
 
22/35 (2.09mg 
20/35 (2.09mg 
23/35 2.09mg 
 
1/35 2.09mg 
0/35 2.09mg 
31/35 2.09mg 
0/35 2.09mg 
9/35 2.09mg 
4/35 2.09mg 
3/35 2.09mg 
5/35 2.09mg 
1/35 2.09mg 
18/35 2.09mg 
2/35 2.09mg 
 
4/100 13.0mg 
3/99 13. 0mg 
1/98 13. 0mg 
0/98 13.0mg 
1/96 13. 0mg 
0/10 13.Omg 
8/100 13.0mg 
1/68 13. 0mg 
1/68 13. 0mg 
96/100 13.0mg 
99/100 13.0mg 
17/48 5.69mg 
 
1/7 5.69mg 
9/48 5.69mg 
1/47 5.69mg 
10/48 5.69mg 
 
1/47 5.69mg 
5/48 5.69mg 
4/48 5.69mg 
7/48 5.69mg 
0/46 5.69mg 
2/47 5.69mg 
0/48 5.69mg 
1/48 5.69mg 
0/34 5.69mg 
42/48 5.69mg 
47/48 5.69mg 
12/44 
10/44 
 
4/93 9.10mg 
3/93 9.10mg 
2/93 9.10mg 
3/93 9.10mg 
4/93 9.10mg 
2/93 9.10mg 
0/64 9.10mg 
75/100 9.10mg 
14/81 
4/48 
7/89 
 
3/46 4.98mg 
8/45 4.98mg 
8/45 4.98mg 
2/46 4.98mg 
1/44 4.98mg 
3/44 4.98mg 
4/45 4.98mg 
6/16 4.98mg 
1/31 4.98mg 
37/47 4.98mg 
 
5/37 
5/37 
 
16/35 4. 20mg 
13/35 4.20mg 
17/35 4.20mg 
2/35 4.20mg 
0/35 4.20mg 
20/35 4.20mg 
4/35 4.20mg 
13/35 6.40mg 
13/35 6. 40mg 
11/35 6.40m9 
1/35 6.40mg 
2/35 6.40mg 
16/35 6.40mg 
0/35 6.40mg 
 
17/99 
14/99 
11/89 
11/89 
7/88 
2/10 
20/99 
0/23 
0/23 
75/99 
93/99 
 
22/48 (15.4mg 
4/10 (15.4mg 
11/47 (15.4mg 
12/48 15.4mg 
17/47 15.4mg 
12/48 15.4mg 
8/48 15.4mg 
6/48 15.4mg 
9/48 15.4mg 
0/45 15.4mg 
3/48 15.4mg 
2/47 15.4mg 
3/48 15.4mg 
1/25 15.4mg 
42/48 15.4mg 
48/48 15.4mg 
 
5/35) 
3/35) 
12/35 
7/35 
5/35 
25/35 
 
0/35 
13/35 
12/35 
8/35 
2/35 
4/35 
16/35 
0/35 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
Br kly Code 
mgL :acn,ccn,cyn,fba,pac. 
 
mgl:acn,ccn,cyn,fba,pac; per:fbs,msm,srn. C 
 
per: fbs,msm,srn. 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
- - :ost; bon:ost; per:fbs,men,msm,srn; ver:ost. C 
 
bon:ost; ver:ost. 
per:fbs,men,msm,srn. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Quast ;dcrp; 1980 
 
Quast ;dcfr; 1980 
 
24/47) 
 
4/34) 
8/46) 
30/47 
21/47 
29/47 
18/47 
14/47 
13/47 
12/34 
6/46 
6/46 
4/47 
1/11 
35/47 
48/48 
 
15/82 
17/82 
14/82 
11/82 
11/82 
6/81 
1/48 
 
80/100 
 
Quast;dcrp; 1980 
 
Quast ;dcfr; 1980 
 
23/47 14.9mg 39/47 
19/47 14.9mg 23/44 
18/47 14.9mg 21/44 
17/47 14.9mg 25/47 
10/47 14.9mg 25/43 
8/47 (14.9mg 6/44) 
3/47 14.9mg 15/44 
1/11 14.9mg 6/42 
0/31 14.9mg 0/18 
47/48 14.9mg 46/48 
 
ACTINONYCIN C (sanamycin) 8052.16.2 
 
87 1017 .504mg n.s.s. 7/65 .500mg 6/22 
 
a 1017 .635mg n.s.s. 3/65 .500mg 4/22 
b 1017 1.03mg n.s.s. 4/65 .500mg 2/22 
 
SchmahL ;arzn,20, 1461-1467;1970 
 
ACTINONYCIN D 50-76-0 
 
88 1336 1.14ug 3.87ug 0/182 3.15ug 
 
a 1336 8.16ug n.s.s. 0/182 3.15ug 
b 1336 3.24ug n.s.a. 0/182 3.15ug 
c 1336 658.ng 2.74ug 44/182 3.15ug 
 
18/30 7.93ug 1/5 
0/30 7.93ug 1/5 
0/30 7.93ug 0/5 
25/30 7.93ug 3/5 
 
Skipper;srfr;1976/Weisburger 1977/Prejean pers.comm. 
 
29 
 
S 
 
30 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
d R f cdr ipj tba mix 26w78 a 
* R f cdr ipj tba ben 26w78 a 
89 R m cdr ipJ per sar 26w78 a 
 
a R m cdr ipj --- pLc 26w78 e 
b R * cdr ipJ -- Lys 26w78 a 
c R m cdr ipj Liv hem 26w78 e 
d R m cdr ipj tba mix 26w78 a 
* R m cdr ipj tba meL 26w78 e 
f R m cdr ipI tba ben 26w78 e 
 
ADIPANIDE 
 
90 N f cb6 eat lun a/a 52w69 a 
 
a N f cb6 eat Liv hpc 52w69 a 
91 N m cb6 eat Liv hpc 52w69 a 
 
a N a cb6 eat Lun a/a 52w69 a 
92 R f f34 eat Liv tur 52w69 a 
93 R a f34 eat Liv hpc 52w69 * 
AF -2 
 
94 H f syg eat for mix 94w94 * 
 
a H f syg eat for sqc 94194 a 
b H f syg eat oes pam 94w94 a 
c H f syg eat Liv tur 94w94 a 
d H f syg eat Lun tur 94w94 e 
95 H m syg eat for mix 94w94 * 
 
a H m syg eat for sqc 94w94 a 
b H m syg eat oes mix 94w94 a 
c H ms yg eat oes sqc 94w94 a 
d H m syg eat Liv tur 94w94 a 
a H m syg eat Lun tur 94w94 a 
96 N f cdf eat for pam 18m24 
 
a N f cdf eat for sqc 18m24 
b N f cdf eat Lun tur 18m24 
97 N m cdf eat for pam 18m24 
 
a N m cdf eat for sqc 18m24 
b N m cdf eat Lun tur 18m24 
98 N a ddy eat for mix 44w80 
 
a N m ddy eat for sqc 44w80 
b N m ddy eat lun ad. 44980 
c N m ddy eat Liv tum 44180 
d N m ddy eat tba mix 44w80 
99 N f icr eat for mix 62w62 
 
a N f icr eat for sqc 62w62 
b N ficr oat --- Lou 62w62 
c N f icr eat Liv tum 62162 
100 N f icr eat Liv hct 24m24 
101 N m icr eat for mix 62w62 
a N m icr eat for sqc 62w62 
b N m icr eat Liv tur 62w62 
102 N m icr eat Liv hct 24m24 
 
103 R f sda eat mgL mix 46w66 a 
a R f ada eat mgL adc 46w66 a 
104f R f wis eat mgL mix 18m24 
 
a R f wis eat for pam 18m24 
b R f wis eat Liv hms 18m24 
105 R m wis eat for pam 18m24 
 
a R m wis eat mgL mix 18m24 
b R m wis eat liv hms 18m24 
AFLATOXICOL 
 
106 R m f34 eat Liv hpc 12m24 
 
a R m f34 eat kid adc 12m24 
 
TD5O 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
1.45ug * P<.003 
no dre P-1. 
 
769.ng P<.0005+ 
20.1ug P<.008 
20.1ug P<.008 
40.7ug P<.06 
 
501.ng P<.0005 
708.ng P<.0005 
no dre Pal. 
 
lOOng ..l:1ug.. : 10. :100.. :.1g... : 10. :100.. : Ig . :10 
 
pooL > 8.55gm \ P<.2 - 
 
no dre P-I. 
pool > no dre P-. 
 
no dre Pl.1 
> no dre P-I. 
 
+ 6.42gm * P<.007 
 
bOng..1. 1ug. 10 . 100. 1g. 10 .. 100 .Ig ....10 
 
+ 59.1m9 * P<.0005 
 
2.349m * P<.3 + 
2.349m * P<.3 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
+ . 30.5mg * P<.0005 
 
164.mg * P<.0005+ 
328.mg * P<.003 
 
2. 189m * P<.3 + 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
+ 714.mg * P<.0005+ 
 
2.549m * P<.002 + 
16.49m * P<.7 
 
+ 753.mg * P<.0005+ 
 
928.mg * P<.0005+ 
9.27gm * P<.5 
 
* . 60.8mg P<.005 
 
72.9mg P<.002 + 
299.mg P<.09 
no dre P-1. 
 
60.8mg P<.005 
 
95.0mg * P<.0005+ 
225.mg / P<.0005+ 
1.80gm * P<.3 
no dre P-1. 
 
7.079m * P<.9 - 
+ 90.3mg * P<.0005+ 
 
208.mg / P<.0005+ 
no dre P-1. 
 
no dre P-1. - 
* . 11.4mg P<.0005+ 
 
26.4mg P<.0005+ 
+ . 74.7mg * P<.0005+ 
 
424.mg * P<.0005 
2.00gm * P<.02 
 
+ 409.mg * P<.0005 
 
1.20gm * P<.05 + 
1.609m * P<.02 
 
bOng. .:..ug. 10 . 100. 1g. 10 . 100 .Ig 10 
 
+ 2.47ug * P<.0005+ 
 
32.9ug * P<.06 
 
AFLATOXIN BI bOng. .:..ug.. 10.. 100.. 1 g. 10 . 100.. g . 10 
 
107 N b tat eat liv hpc 40m40 or + 26.9ug 
108 P b cym mix g/b adc 14y14 aruw . 107mg 
a P b cym mix Liv hbs 14y14 emuw .145mg 
b P b cym mix --- ost 14y14 emuw .301mg 
c P b cym mix tba maL 14y14 amuw 43.8ug 
109 P b rho mix liv hms 14y14 smuw 71 .4ug 
a P b rh, mix g/b adc l4yl4 emuw .108mg 
b P b rho mix pan adc 14y14 emuw .194mg 
c P b rho mix liv hpc 14y14 emuw .194mg 
d P b rho mix ... oat 14y14 amuw .398mg 
* P b rho mix tba oal 14y14 emuw 30.2ug 
110 R r buf eat Liv hpc 35w65 *kr <+ noTD50 
a R m buf eat Liv mix 35w65 ekr noTD50 
b R m buf eat Liv nnd 35165 *kr noTD50 
111 R m cdr oat Liv mix 24m24 r + 4. 19ug 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 06 + 
P<. 03 + 
P<. 2 + 
P<. 002 
 
P<. 003 + 
P<. 06 + 
P<. 06 + 
P<. 06 + 
P<. 2 + 
P<. 0005 
 
P<. 004 + 
P<. 004 + 
P<. 004 + 
P<. 0005+ 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl IDose lnc 2Dose 21nc 
 
Citation oi Pathology 
 
d 1336 618.ng 10.OOug 103/182 3.15ug 26/30 7.93ug 4/5 
* 1336 11.8ug n.s.s. 59/182 3.15ug 1/30 7.93ug 1/5 
89 1336 456.ng 1.38ug 0/177 3.15ug 27/34 
 
a 1336 4.93ug .571mg 0/177 3.15ug 2/34 
b 1336 4.93ug .571mg 0/177 3.15ug 2/34 
c 1336 6.63ug n.s.s. 0/177 3.15ug 1/34 
d 1336 244.ng 1.10ug 59/177 3.15ug 32/34 
* 1336 394.ng 1.4lug 32/177 3.15ug 29/34 
f 1336 6.99ug n.s.s. 27/177 3.15ug 3/34 
 
ADIPANIDE 628-94-4 
 
90 1343 1.99"gm n.s.s. 
 
a 1343 8.839m n.s.s. 
91 1343 3.05gm n.s.s. 
 
a 1343 8.139m n.s.s. 
92 1343 2.15gm n.s.s. 
93 1343 2.44gm 71.79m 
 
2/89p 1.57gm 
1/89p 1.579m 
2/91p 1. 44gm 
1/87p 1.449m 
0/49 903.mg 
0/50 722.mg 
 
3/40 (2.359m 0/39) 
 
1/40 2.359m 
0/38 2.179m 
1/38 2.179m 
0/34 2. 18gm 
0/35 1. 759m 
 
0/39 
0/40 
0/40 
0/48 
5/49 
 
Fleischman; jept,3, 149- 170;1980 
 
AF-2 (furytfuramide) 3688-53-7 
 
94 1315 34.5mg 110.mg 0/16 
 
a 1315 381.mg n.s.s. 0/16 
b 1315 381.mg n.s.s. 0/16 
c 1315 160.mg n.s.s. 0/16 
d 1315 160.mg n.s.s. 0/16 
95 1315 17.6mg 55.0mg 0/19 
 
a 1315 81.7mg 452.mg 0/19 
b 1315 133.mg 1.66gm 0/19 
c 1315 355.mg n.s.s. 0/19 
d 1315 156.mg n.s.s. 0/19 
 
a 1315 156.mg n.s.s. 0/19 
96 1316 415.mg 1.38gm 0/50 
 
a 1316 1.03gm 10.29m 0/50 
b 1316 1.739g n.s.s. 1/50 
97 1316 426.mg 1.52gm 0/50 
 
a 1316 499.mg 2.039m 0/50 
b 1316 1.53gm n.s.s. 2/50 
98 455 22.7mg 629.mg 1/10 
 
a 455 28.2mg 309.mg 0/10 
b 455 73.2mg n.s.s. 0/10 
c 455 201.mg n.s.s. 0/10 
d 455, 22.7mg 629.mg 1/10 
99 359 65.6mg 143.mg 0/65 
 
a 359 140.mg 393.mg 0/65 
b 359 464.mg n.s.s. 2/65 
c 359 317.mg n.s.s. 0/65 
100 362 501.mg n.s.s. 6/30 
101 359 62.6mg 151.mg 0/25 
a 359 129.mg 363.mg 0/25 
b 359 293.mg n.s.s. 0/25 
102 362 489.mg n.s.s. 9/30 
103 517 6.31mg 22.8mg 2/29 
a 517 14.2mg 56.5mg 0/29 
104 1316 49.9mg 125.mg 3/50 
a 1316 223.mg 962.mg 0/50 
b 1316 606.mg n.s.s. 0/50 
105 1316 205.mg 1.04gm 0/50 
a 1316 415.mg n.s.s. 0/50 
b 1316 485.mg n.s.s. 0/50 
AFLATOXICOL 29611*03-8 
 
106 1083 1.38ug 4.97ug 0/20 
 
a 1083 8.08ug n.s.a. 0/20 
 
83.6mg 10/17 
83.6mg 0/17 
83.6mg 0/17 
83.6mg 0/17 
83.6mg 0/17 
73.6mg 13/20 
73.6mg 3/20 
73.6mg 0/20 
73.6mg 0/20 
73.6mg 0/20 
73.6mg 0/20 
78.0mg 2/50 
78.0mg 0/50 
78.0mg 2/50 
72. 0mg 2/50 
72. Og 0/50 
72.Og 1/50 
165.mg 7/10 
165.mg 6/10 
165.mg 2/10 
165.mg 0/10 
165.mg 7/10 
104.mg 13/50 
104.mg 1/50 
104.mg 5/50 
104.mg 0/50 
16.3mg 2/30 
96.Omg 15/50 
96.Omg 1/50 
96.Omg 0/50 
15.Og 6/30 
69.7mg 24/29 
69.7mg 15/29 
30.Omg 17/50 
30. 0mg 1/50 
30. 0mg 0/50 
24.0mg 1/50 
24.Omg 1/50 
24. 0mg 0/50 
 
167. mg 
167. mg 
167. mg 
167. mg 
167. mg 
147.mg 
147. mg 
147 . mg 
147.mg 
147.mg 
147. mg 
390.mg 
390 mg 
390.mg 
360.mg 
360.mg 
360 mg 
 
520.mg 
520. mg 
520 mg 
520 mg 
65. 0mg 
480.mg 
480. mg 
480.mg 
60. 0mg 
 
150. mg 
150 .mg 
150. mg 
120.mg 
120.mg 
120.mg 
 
13/17 
 
1/17 
1/17 
0/17 
0/17 
17/17 
8/17 
6/17 
1/17 
0/17 
0/17 
17/50 
6/50 
2/50 
15/50 
14/50 
3/50 
 
Kinebuchi ;fctx, 17,339-341; 1979 
 
Takayama;ctet,3, 115- 120;1977 
 
Sano;zkko,89,61 *68; 1977 
 
36/50 
25/50 
 
5/50 
0/50 
 
6/30 260.mg 5/30 
34/50 
25/50 
 
0/50 
 
14/30 240.mg 6/30 
 
37/50 
12/50 
3/50 
10/50 
3/50 
3/50 
 
1000.ng 4/20 4.00ug 14/20 
1000.ng 0/20 4.00ug 2/20 
 
Yokoro;gann,68,825-828; 1977 
 
Niyaj i ;t jem, 103,331-369; 1971 
Yokoro;gann,68,825-828; 1977 
 
Miyaj i;tjsm,103,331-369;1971 
 
Cohen;gann,68,473-476; 1977 
Takayama;cLet,3, 115-120; 1977 
 
Nixon; Jnci ,66,1159-1163;1981 
 
AFLATOXIN SI 1162-65-8 
 
107 1439 11.5ug 80.9ug 
108 2000 29.2ug n.a.s. 
 
m 2000 35.7ug n.s.s. 
b 2000 49.Oug n.s.s. 
c 2000 17.Oug .236mg 
109 2000 27.Oug .364mg 
 
a 2000 33.1ug n.s.s. 
b 2000 47.7ug n.s.s. 
c 2000 47.7ug n.s.s. 
d 2000 64.8ug n.a.s. 
 
a 2000 13.6ug .128mg 
 
110 1071 n.s.s. 6.75ug 
a 1071 n.s.s. 6.75ug 
b 1071 n.s.s. 6.75ug 
111 1454 2.55ug 7.52ug 
 
0/8 
1/38 
0/38 
0/38 
1/38 
0/32 
1/32 
0/32 
0/32 
0/32 
3/32 
0/8 
0/8 
0/8 
0/50 
 
99.7ug 9/12 
54.6ug 3/16 
54.6ug 2/16 
54.6ug 1/16 
54.6ug 6/16 
54.6ug 5/21 
54.6ug 4/21 
54.6ug 2/21 
54.6ug 2/21 
54.6ug 1/21 
54.6ug 11/21 
21.5ug 6/6 
21.5ug 6/6 
21.5ug 6/6 
4.OOug 24/50 
 
Reddy;canr,36, 151-160; 1976 
Adamson;ossc,129-156;1982/Siebsr pers.com. 
 
Angasubhakorn;bj ca,43,881-883; 1981 
 
Nawbarne ; nci,50,439-444; 1973 
 
31 
 
Brkly Code 
 
32 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
 
112 R f f34 mat col mix 
113 R m f34 sat liv hpc 
a R . f34 eat kid adc 
114 R m f34 mat col mix 
115 R f fis mat liv hpt 
116 R m fis eat liv hpt 
117 R * fis *at liv hpc 
 
75w75 a 
12.24 
12.24 
 
75w75 a 
24.24 a 
24.24 a 
 
22m24 ae 
 
118 R f por eat liv hpc 24.24 a 
119 R m por eat liv hpc 24.24 a 
120 R b sda eat liv sar 95w95 a 
a R b ada mat tba mat 95w95 a 
 
121 R . wag mat Liv hpt 69w69 or 
122 R f wio mat Liv hpt 24.24 m 
123 R m wio mat tiv hpt 24.24 a 
 
124 R m wis aat kid car 55w55 or 
 
AFLATOXIN, CRUDE 
125 N m swi gav 
a N swi gav 
126 R m cdr mat 
127 R m chi sat 
a R m chm at 
128 R m lyv mat 
a R m ltv sat 
b R m ltv sat 
 
... Lyk 52w52 m 
Liv hpt 52w52 a 
Liv tum 52w52 m 
Liv car 68w68 
Liv nod 68"w68 
ktu ade 58w78 
Liv nod 58w78 
Liv hpc 58w78 
 
ALDICARB 
 
129 N f b6c mat TBA NXB 24m24 
a N f b6c eat Liv NXB 24m24 
b N f b6c mat Lun NXB 24m24 
130 N * b6c mat TBA NXB 24.24 
 
a N m b6c eat Liv NXB 24m24 
b N m b6c mat Lun NXB 24m24 
131 R f f34 mat TBA NXB 24.24 
 
a R f f34 eat Liv NXB 24m24 
132 R m f34 eat TBA NXB 24m24 
 
a R m f34 eat Liv NXB 24.24 
 
ALDRIN 
 
133 N f b6c eat 
a N f b6c sat 
b N f b6c sat 
134 N m b6c mat 
 
a N m b6c sat 
b N a b6c eat 
c N * b6c eat 
d N m b6c sat 
135 N m b6c mat 
136 N b c3e eat 
a N b c3e sat 
b N b c3ea*t 
137 N b c3h eat 
a N b c3h sat 
b N b c3h sat 
c N b c3h sat 
138 R b osm sat 
 
* + 
* . 
 
* 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
TD5O 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
.148mg P<.05 + 
1.34ug P<..0005+ 
13.4ug P<.3 
 
55.8ug P<.06 + 
9.93ug P<.3 + 
1.13ug P<.003 + 
932.ng * P<.0005+ 
12.5ug * P<.0005+ 
3.52ug * P<.0005+ 
12.Oug P<.3 
 
+historical P<.03 + 
 
noTD50 P<.0005+ 
7.49ug * P<.0005+ 
6.76ug * P<.0005+ 
36.6ug * P<.006 + 
 
bO0ng . . .:ug. :10. :100. :mg.. :. 100.... :I1g . :10 
 
+ * .343mg P<.002 + 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
+ . 7.48ug P<.002 + 
* + * 1.87ug P<.00054. 
 
6.96ug P<.002 + 
.+ . 3.44mg * P<.0005 
 
6.18mg * P<.002 
14.5mg * P<.05 
 
lOOng..: ..ug. :10. :100. g : ..g :10. :100.. : g :10 
 
:> no dre P-1. - 
 
52.7mg / P<.9 
no dre P-1. 
 
:> 1.74mg * P<.3 - 
 
2.83mg * P<.4 
14.8mg a P<.8 
 
:> no dre P-1. - 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
:> 10.4mg I P<1. - 
 
1.33mg * P<.2 
 
loong .:..:ug. : 10. :100. g :. 1g :10. : 100.. : g :10 
 
TBA NXB 80w90 s :> no dre P-1. 
liv NXS 80w90 s no dre P-1. 
lun NXB 80w90 s 9.02mg * P<.6 
 
Liv hpc 80w90 : + .741mg * P<.007 c 
Lun NXA 80w90 3.20mg * P<.05 
TBA NXB 80w90 1.01mg * P<.08 
liv NXB 80w90 .741mg * P<.007 
lun NXB 80w90 3.20mg * P<.05 
 
Liv hpc 80w89 pooL : .861mg * P<.0005c 
Liv hpa 24m24 . + . 4.41mg P<.0005+ 
Lun car 24m24 a 129.mg P<.3 
Lun ads 24m24 a no dre P-1. 
 
liv hpt 24m24 . + . 3.45mg P<.0005 
Liv hpc 24m24 no dre P-1. 
 
tba ben 24m24 4.25mg P<.0005 
tba mat 24.24 no dre P-1. 
Lun lys 24m24 ms .> 42.3mg * P<.5 
 
a R b osa eat tba mix 24m24 es 
 
no dre P-1. + 
 
139 R f osa eat TBA NXB 19m26 
a R f osa eat liv NXB 19m26 
 
140 R f osa eat adr coa 19m25 pooL 
141 R f osm eat liv tum 26m27 mv 
a R f oam mat tba mix 26m27 mv 
142 R f osa mat Lmr tum 24m24 ms 
 
a R f osa mat Liv tum 24m24 ms 
b R f osa mat tba tum 24m24 ms 
c R f osa mat tba mal 24m24 ms 
143 R f osa mat liv tum 25m25 
a R f osam at tba mix 25m2' 
144 R m osm mat TBA NXB 17m26 
a R m osa mat liv NXB 17m26 
 
*at liv hem 29m31 mv 
 
mat tba mix 29m31 mv 
mat liv tum 25m25 
mat tbm mix 25.25 
mat tba tum 24m24 
mat tba tum 24m24 
 
no dre P-1. 
466.mg * P<1. 
 
#3.12mg \ P<.0005- 
no dre P-1. - 
no dre P-1. - 
4.35mg \ P<.03 - 
no dre P.1o - 
1.69mg \ P<.3 
no dre P-1. 
 
no dre P-1. - 
no dre P-1. - 
16.4mg * P<.9 - 
no dre P-1. 
 
no dre 
no drm 
 
no dre 
4.21mg 
no dre 
no dre 
 
P-I. 
P-I. 
 
P-1. 
P<.6 
P.I. 
P.1. 
 
145 R m aam 
 
a R m osm 
146 R m oam 
 
a Rmaoam 
147 R f nias 
148 R m nss 
 
: + 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl 
 
112 17 44.5ug n.s.s. 
113 1083 600.ng 4.24ug 
a 1083 2.17ug n.m.s. 
114 17 13.3ug n.s.s. 
115 1041 1.62ug n.s.s. 
116 1041 422.ng 6.52ug 
117 18 614.ng 1.49ug 
 
118 13 7.83ug 21.2ug 
119 13 2.1lug 6.Olug 
120 1070 1.96ug n.s.s. 
 
a 1070 1.20ug n.s.s. 
121 1075 n.s.s. 2.13ug 
122 1041 3.36ug 22.lug 
123 1041 2.89ug 21.9ug 
124 15 18.7ug .392mg 
 
AFLATOXIN, CRUDE ... 
 
125 309 .133mg 2.34mg 
a 309 1.72mg n.s.s. 
126 16 2.90ug 31.7ug 
127 333 1.12ug 3.38ug 
a 333 3.38ug 25.8ug 
128 1514 1.92mg 6.89mg 
a 1514 3.05mg 23.5mg 
b 1514 5.91mg n.s.s. 
ALDICARB (Temik) 116-06-3 
129 c08640 1.27mg n.sa.s. 
a cP8640 2.83mg n.s.s. 
b c08640 3.30mg n.s.s. 
130 c08640 .508mg n.s.s. 
a c08640 .776mg n.s.s. 
b c08640 1.53mg n.s.s. 
131 c08640 .178mg n.s.s. 
a c08640 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
132 c08640 .194mg n.s.s. 
a c08640 .411mg n.s.s. 
ALDRIN 309-00-2 
 
133 c00044 .844mg n.s.s. 
a c00044 1.14mg n.s.s. 
b c00044 2.22mg n.s.s. 
134 c00044 .411mg 10.0mg 
a c00044 1.45mg n.s.s. 
b c00044 .433mg n.s.s. 
c c00044 .411mg 10.0mg 
d c00044 1.45mg n.s.s. 
135 c00044 .467mg 3.01mg 
136 20a 2.55mg 12.3mg 
 
a 20a 21.0mg n.s.s. 
b 20a 28.4mg n.s.s. 
137 22a 2.13mg 7.96mg 
 
a 22a 24.4mg n.s.s. 
b 22a 2.43mg 13.8mg 
c 22a 24.7mg n.s.s. 
138 23 7.89mg n.s.s. 
 
a 23 10.0mg n.s.s. 
139 c00044 1.55mg n.s.s. 
 
a c00044 9.99mg n.s.s. 
140 cOO044 1.41mg 10.2mg 
141 1004 5.05mg n.s.s. 
a 1004 5.18mg n.s.s. 
142 1040 1.76mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1040 7.36mg n.s.s. 
b 1040 .487mg n. .s. 
c 1040 5.80mg n.s.s. 
143 21 1.67mg n.s.s. 
 
a 21 .298mg n.s.s. 
144 c00044 .875mg n.s.s. 
a c00044 6.34mg n.s.s. 
145 1004 5.75mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1004 22.9mg n.s.s. 
146 21 1.33mg n.s.s. 
 
a 21 .579mg n.s.s. 
147 1002 8.27mg n.as. 
148 1002 8.67mg n.s.s. 
 
0/12 
0/20 
0/20 
0/6 
0/15 
0/16 
0/18 
0/34 
0/46 
0/90 
0/90 
0/10 
0/18 
0/17 
0/9 
 
11/37 
0/37 
0/10 
0/20 
0/20 
0/10 
1/10 
0/10 
 
15/25 
3/25 
1/25 
8/25 
5/25 
1/25 
21/25 
 
0/25 
16/25 
 
1/25 
 
IDose lnc 2Dose 21nc 
 
Citation oi Pathology 
 
Brkly Code 
100.ug 3/14 Ward; jnci,55,107-110;1975 
1000.ng 8/20 Nixon;Jnci,66,1159-1163;1981 
1000.ng 1/20 
 
80.Oug 2/5 Ward; jnci, 55,107-110; 1975 
1000.ng 1/15 Nixon; jnci,53,453-458;1974 
800.ng 5/13 
 
40.Ong 2/22 200.ng 1/22 600.ng 4/21 2.00ug 20/25 4.00ug 28/28 Wogan; 
 
fctx, 12,681-685; 1974 
5.00ug 5/30 25.Oug 26/33 Butler;fctx,6,135-141;1968 
4.00ug 17/34 20.Oug 25/25 
 
279.ng 1/76 Fong;fctx, 19,179-183; 1981 
279.ng 3/76 
 
1O.Oug 12/12 Burt in;bj ca,43,684-688; 1981 
1000.ng 0/19 5.00ug 8/18 Nixon; jnci,53,453-458;1974 
800.ng 0/20 4.00ug 7/17 
 
40.Oug 3/12 80.Oug 3/12 .120mg 6/12 Merkow;canr,33,1608-1614;1973 
 
2.38mg 11/14 
2.38mg 0/14 
40.Oug 6/10 
8.00ug 25/35 
8. O0ug 10/35 
.368mg 0/10 
.368mg 0/10 
.368mg 0/10 
 
.260mg 21/50 
.260mg 0/50 
.260mg 4/50 
.240mg 27/50 
.240mg 14/50 
.240mg 6/50 
100.ug 45/50 
100.ug 0/50 
80.Oug 23/50 
80.Oug 1/50 
 
1/10 .330mg 
0/10 .330mg 
0/10 .330mg 
3/20 .470mg 
0/20 .470mg 
7/20 .470mg 
3/20 .470mg 
0/20 .470mg 
17/95p .470mg 
9/134 1.25mg 
0/134 1.25mg 
3/134 1.25mg 
27/200 1.25mg 
4/200 1.25mg 
30/200 1.25mg 
21/200 1.25mg 
 
1/17 22.5ug 
6.75mg 1/9 
3/17 22.5ug 
6.75mg 1/9 
5/10 1.07mg 
1/10 1.07mg 
0/60p 1.07mg 
0/88 .956mg 
60/88 .956mg 
 
2/50 1.00mg 
0/50 1.00mg 
35/50 1.00mg 
10/50 1.00mg 
0/30 .250mg 
13/30 .250mg 
9/10 .800mg 
1/10 .800mg 
1/75 .765mg 
19/75 .765mg 
0/30 .200mg 
1/30 .200mg 
6/60 .125mg 
3/60 100.ug 
 
2.45mg 1/10 7.36mg 7/10 9.81mg 10/15 
2.45mg 1/10 7.36mg 5/10 9.81mg 7/15 
2.45mg 2/10 7.36mg 0/10 9.81mg 4/15 
 
.780mg 22/50 
.780mg 4/50 
.780mg 1/50 
.720mg 30/50 
.720mg 18/50 
.720mg 5/50 
.300mg 46/50 
.300mg 0/50 
.240mg 28/50 
.240mg 5/50 
 
11/50 .640mg 
5/50 .640mg 
1/50 .640mg 
16/50 .840mg 
3/50 .840mg 
18/50 .840mg 
16/50 .840mg 
3/50 .840mg 
16/50 .840mg 
35/151 
 
1/151 
1/151 
65/200 
 
3/200 
61/200 
 
9/200 
 
5/19 90.Oug 
10/19 90.Oug 
35/50 2.14mg 
 
1/50 2.14mg 
8/50 (2.14mg 
0/47 1.44mg 
20/47 1.44mg 
 
9/50 (2.50mg 
0/50 2.50mg 
40/50 (2.50mg 
14/50 2.50mg 
0/30 
13/30 
 
30/50 1.60mg 
 
1/50 1.60mg 
0/45 1.15mg 
5/45 1.15mg 
0/30 
2/30 
 
1/40 .625mg 
1/40 .500mg 
 
5/50 
 
2/50 
 
1/50 
25/50 
5/50 
28/50 
25/50 
5/50 
25/50 
 
Louria;sabo, 12,371-375;1974 
Newborne; l ivt, 15,962-969;1966 
Newberne;asnh, 19,489-498; 1969 
 
Lee; Jnc i,43,1037-1041; 1969 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
t iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. S 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Davis;txap,4, 187-189;1962 
EpsteinCraview) {H J Davis};stev,4,1-52;1975 
 
2/19 .450mg 2/22 
7/19 .450mg 8/22 
32/50 
 
3/50 
1/50) 
 
0/44 2.38mg 0/31 
 
24/44 (2.38mg 11/31) 
 
4/50) 
0/50 
18/50) 
10/50 
 
30/50 
 
1/50 
 
0/46 1.93mg 0/45 
7/46 1.93mg 4/45 
 
3/40 1.25mg 1/40 
0/40 1.00mg 1/40 
 
2.25mg 2/18 4.50mg 4/11 
 
Fitzhugh;fctx,2,551-562; 1964 
2.25mg 5/18 4.50mg 5/11 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
S 
Deichmann; imed,39,426-434; 1970 
 
Doi chmann; txoc,407-413; 1979 
 
D.ichmann;txap,11,88-103;1967 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Deichmann; imed,39,426-434;1970 
 
Dsichmann;txap, 11,88-103; 1967 
C.eve.and;a.nh, 13,195-198; 1966 
 
33 
 
34 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
149 R f sda oat Liv tur 24.24 es 
a R f sda oat tba tur 24.24 as 
b R f sda oat tba maL 24.24 es 
 
TD5O 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
no dre P-I. - 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
ALKYLBENZENESULFONATE, LINEAR Ong. .ug :10. :100 . lg. :10 . 100 . Ig. :10 
 
150 R f sLs oat pro mix 33.34 or .> no dre P-1. 
151 R . sLs oat pro mix 29.32 or .> no dre P-1. 
 
ALLYL CHLORIDE* 
 
152 N f b6c gav ito MXA 78w91 dv 
 
a N f b6c gav TBA MXB 78w91 dv 
b N f b6c gav Liv MXB 78w91 dv 
c N f b6c gav Lun MXB 78w91 dv 
153 N * b6c gav sto MXA 67w91 ads 
 
a N . b6c gav TBA NXB 67w91 ado 
b N * b6c gav Liv MXB 67w91 adi 
c N * b6c gav Lun MXB 67w91 ado 
154 R f osm gav TBA MXB 18.26 sv 
 
a R f osm gav Liv MXB 18.26 iv 
155 R . oau gav TBA MXB 18.26 sv 
 
a R m osm gav Liv MXB 18.26 sv 
ALLYLHYDRAZINE . HCL 
 
156 N f swa wat Lun mix 24.24 0 
 
a N f swa wat Lun ado 24.24 o 
b N f swa wat Lun adc 24.24 o 
c N f iwa wat btv mix 24.24 o 
d N f swa wat blv ago 24.24 o 
o N f iwo wat Liv mix 24.24 o 
157 N m sw wiat Lun ado 93w93 o 
 
a N m swa wat Lun mix 93w93 o 
b N m awa wat Liv hpt 93w93 a 
c N m swa wat Liv mix 93w93 o 
ALUMINUM POTASSIUM SULFATE 
 
158 M f cdl wat --- Lkm 31.31 o 
a M f cdl wat Lun tur 31.31 o 
b M f cdl wat tba maL 31.31 o 
c M f cdl wat tba mix 31.31 o 
159 M m cdl wat Lun tur 35.35 o 
 
a M m cdl wat tba .aL 35m35 o 
b M a cdl wat tba mix 35.35 o 
160 R f Lob wat tba mix 38.38 a 
a R f Lab wat tba maL 38.38 a 
161 R m Lob wat tba mix 36.36 a 
a R m Lob wat tba maL 36.36 o 
 
la 
 
iv 
iv 
iv 
iv 
 
OOng. . : 1lug . 0 . 100 . mg.. :10 :. 100 . : 1"g ..... :Igo10 
 
:> +historical * P<.2 
 
343.mg * P<.3 
2.189m * P<.4 
1.25gm * P<.6 
:> +historicaL * P<.4 
 
184.mg * P<.4 
457.mg * P<.6 
no dre P-1. 
:> 35.2mg * P<.2 
 
no dre P-1. 
:> 28.1mg * P<.2 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
lOOng . . .:ug. :10. :100. g :. 1g :10. :100.. : g :10 
 
+ * 38.4mg 
 
46.1mg 
96.0mg 
119.mg 
163 .mg 
234.mg 
+ 28.9mg 
 
30 .9mg 
274.mg 
no dre 
 
lOOng .. : lug. :10. :100. 1g :. . :10. :100. :Ig. :10 
 
A 5.32mg 
 
11.4mg 
4.42mg 
4. 23mg 
11.4mg 
6.29mg 
10.7mg 
4.68mg 
no dre 
.663mg 
1.93mg 
 
3-AMINO-1,4.DINETHYL-5H-PYRIDO[4,3-b]INDOLE ACETATE ..10. :100. g : . . :10. :100 ...10 
 
162 M f cdf oat Liv mix 88w88 . + . 25.0mg 
 
a M f cdf oat Liv hpc 88w88 29.6mg 
b M f cdf oat Lun adc 88w88 no dre 
c M f cdf eat Lun ado 88w88 no dre 
163 M m cdf oat Liv mix 88w88 . 109.mg 
 
a M m cdf oat Liv hpc 88w88 112.mg 
b M m cdf oat lun adc 88w88 no dre 
c M m cdf oat Lun ade 88w88 no dre 
 
a 
a 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 002 
P<. 003 
 
P<.02 + 
P<.02 
P<.09 
 
P<. 0005 
 
P<.005 + 
P<.04 - 
P-I. 
 
P<.02 - 
P<.4 - 
P<.02 - 
P<.2 - 
P<.4 - 
P<.03 - 
P<.5 - 
P<.9 9 
 
P-1. _ 
P<. 006 - 
P<.2 - 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
P-I. 
P-I. 
 
P<.08 + 
P<.02 + 
P-I. 
P-I. 
 
3-AMINO-4-ETHOXYACETANILIDE 
 
164 M f b6c oat pit NXA 78w93 
a M f b6c oat TBA MXB 78w93 
b M f b6c oat Liv MXB 78w93 
c M f b6c oat Lun MXB 78w93 
165 M m b6c oat thy NXA 78w93 
 
a M m b6c oat thy fcc 78w93 
b M m b6c oat thy MXA 78w93 
c M m b6c eat TBA MXB 78w93 
d M m b6c oat Liv MXB 78w93 
o M m b6c oat Lun MXB 78w93 
166 R f f34 oat adr MXA 18.25 
a R f f34 oat TBA MXB 18.25 
b R f f34 oat Liv MXB 18m25 
167 R m f34 oat thy ccr 18.25 
a R m f34 oat TBA MXB 18.25 
b R m f34 oat Liv MXB 18.25 
 
3-AMINO-9-ETHYLCARBAZOLE . HCL 
 
168 M f b6c eat Liv hpc 78w95 
 
a M f b6c eat TBA MXB 78w95 
b M f b6c eat Liv NXB 78w95 
c M f b6c oat Lun MXB 78w95 
 
jOOng.. :. .ug. . :10. :100. g :.g :10. :100.. :Ig ..:10 
 
+ #1.05g \ P<.009 - 
 
569.mg \ P<.02 
no dre P-1. 
8.63gm * P<.4 
 
+ 2.07gm P<.0005c 
 
3.77gm P<.0005c 
4.02gm * P<.02 c 
no dre P-1. 
8.99gm \ P<.9 
no dre P-1. 
 
+ #415.mg \ P<.005 - 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
717.mg \ P<.002 
 
* #610.mg \ P<.05 - 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
lOOng .. . lug. 1 0 . :1m . 10.. :100.. :Ig . :10 
 
: + : 33.0mg 
 
41.8mg 
33. 0mg 
1.78gm 
 
P<. 0005c 
P<. 0005 
P<. 0005 
P<. 6 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl IDose llnc 2Dose 21nc 
 
149 1040 7.36mg n.s.s. 0/50 1.00mg 0/50 2.50mg 0/50 
a 1040 11.5mg n.s.s. 9/50 1.00mg 8/50 2.50mg 5/50 
b 1040 17.8mg n.s.s. 2/50 1.00mg 2/50 2.50mg 1/50 
 
35 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
Brkly Code 
Dsichmann;txoc ,407-413; 1979 
 
ALKYLBENZENESULFONATE, LINEAR -.- 
 
150 570 1.099m n.s.s. 1/13 20.0mg 3/15 80.0mg 
151 570 1.049m n.s.s. 1/12 16.0mg 2/12 64.0mg 
ALLYL CHLORIDE* (chLoropropens) 107-05-1 
 
152 c04615 288.mg n.s.s. 0/20 78.0mg 3/50 156.mg 
 
a c04615 106.mg n.s.s. 4/20 78.0mg 18/50 156.mg 
b c04615 536.mg n.s.s. 0/20 78.0mg 1/50 156.mg 
c c04615 258.mg n.s.s. 1/20 78.0mg 5/50 156.mg 
153 c04615 176.mg n.s.s. 0/20 106.mg 2/50 198.mg 
 
a c04615 46.9mg n.s.s. 5/20 106.mg 19/50 198..g 
b c04615 83.8mg n.s.s. 2/20 106.mg 8/50 198.mg 
c c04615 144.mg n.s.s. 3/20 106.mg 6/50 198.mg 
154 c04615 13.4mg n.s.s. 12/20 27.9mg 26/50 37.1mg 
 
a c04615 175.mg n.s.s. 2/20 27.9mg 0/50 37.1mg 
155 c04615 8.98mg n.s.s. 9/20 28.8mg 15/50 39.8mg 
a c04615 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/20 28.8mg 0/50 39.8mg 
 
ALLYLHYDRAZINE.HCL 52207-83-7 
 
156 1051 19.3mg 156.mg 21/99 
a 1051 22.3mg 232.mg 18/99 
b 1051 41.4mg 688.mg 4/99 
c 1051 46.5mg n.s.s. 5/99 
d 1051 59.1mg n.s.s. 2/99 
a 1051 69.6mg n.s.s. 3/99 
157 1051 14.4mg 112.mg 15/99 
a 1051 14.2mg 312.mg 23/99 
b 1051 67.4mg n.s.s. 0/99 
c 1051 95.1mg n.s.s. 6/99 
 
ALUMINUM POTASSIUM SULFATE 
158 1395 2.19mg n.s.s. 
a 1395 2.55mg n.s.s. 
b 1395 1.90mg n.s.a. 
c 1395 1.48mg n.s.s. 
159 1395 2.95mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1395 2.52mg n.s.s. 
b 1395 2.21mg n.s.s. 
160 1456 .305mg n. .s. 
a 1456 .795mg n.s.s. 
161 1456 .295mg 7.63mg 
a 1456 .615mg n.s.a. 
 
3/47 
9/47 
4/47 
14/47 
5/38 
2/38 
11/38 
17/24 
8/24 
4/26 
2/26 
 
3/13 300.mg 1/15 
1/12 240.mg 0/12 
 
Hiraga;gann,68,369-370; 1977 
 
3/50 
15/50 
 
1/50 
4/50 
0/50 
3/50 
1/50 
0/50 
11/50 
0/50 
4/50 
0/50 
 
sto:sqc,sqp. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
sto:sqc,sqp. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
25.0mg 25/50 
25.0mg 22/50 
25.0mg 10/50 
25. 0mg 9/50 
25. 0mg 6/50 
25. 0mg 5/50 
20. 8mg 21/49 
20.8mg 23/49 
20.8mg 2/49 
20.8gg 2/49 
 
1.00mg 
1 .00mg 
1. 00mg 
1. 00mg 
.833mg 
.833mg 
.833mg 
.286mg 
.286mg 
.250mg 
.250mg 
 
10/41 
11/41 
12/41 
19/41 
9/41 
9/41 
15/41 
14/19 
6/19 
13/25 
6/25 
 
3-AMINO-1,4-DINETHYL-5H-PYRIDO04,3-b]INDOLE ACETATE (trp-P-1 acetate) 75104-43-7 
162 1224 13.8mg 51.7mg 0/40 26.0mg 16/40 
a 1224 15.8mg 64.8mg 0/40 26.0mg 14/40 
b 1224 110.mg n.s.s. 3/40 26.0mg 1/40 
c 1224 153.mg n.s.s. 1/40 26.0mg 0/40 
163 1224 35.5mg n.s.s. 1/40 24.0mg 5/40 
a 1224 38.6mg n.s.s. 0/40 24.0mg 4/40 
b 1224 59.4mg n.s.s. 3/40 24.0mg 3/40 
c 1224 142.mg n.s.s. 1/40 24.0mg 0/40 
 
Toth;bjca,34,90-93;1976 
Schromder; jnut,105,452-458;1975 
Schro.der; Jnut, 105,421 -427; 1975 
Matsukura;scie,213,346-347; 1981 
 
3-AMINO-4-ETHOXYACETANILIDE 17026-81-2 
 
164 c01887 452.mg 39.2gm 
 
a c01887 253.mg n.s.s. 
b c01887 2.949m n.s.s. 
c c01887 1.929m n.s.a. 
165 c01887 1.04gm 6.70gm 
a c01887 1.639m 12.69m 
b c01887 1.609m n.s.a. 
c c01887 879.mg n.s.s. 
d c01887 660.mg n.s.s. 
* c01887 3.479m n.s.s. 
166 c01887 175.mg 5.029m 
 
a c01887 763.mg n.s.a. 
b c01887 272.mg 3.45gm 
167 c01887 213.mg n.s.a. 
 
a c01887 142.mg n.s.s. 
b c01887 2.66gm n.s.s. 
 
7/100 432.mg 
27/100 432.mg 
 
5/100 432.mg 
4/100 432.mg 
2/100 398. mg 
0/100 398. mg 
2/100 398. mg 
41/100 398.mg 
20/100 398.mg 
17/100 398.mg 
5/100 138.mg 
80/100 138.mg 
 
0/100 138.mg 
3/99 110.mg 
62/99 110.mg 
6/99 110.mg 
 
14/50 (845.mg 3/50) 
32/50 C845.mg 21/50) 
 
4/50 845.mg 2/50 
6/50 845.mg 3/50 
2/50 780.mg 12/48 
0/50 780.mg 7/48 
1/50 780.mg 7/48 
28/50 780.mg 19/48 
13/50 (780.mg 2/48) 
7/50 780.mg 3/48 
11/48 (552.mg 0/50) 
37/48 552.mg 30/50 
 
5/48 (552.mg 2/50) 
7/50 (442.mg 4/50) 
34/50 (442.mg 24/50) 
 
5/50 442.mg 1/50 
 
pit:adn,can,cra. S 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
thy:acn,adn,fca,fcc. 
 
thy:acn,fcc. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
adr:coa,coc. S 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
S 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
3-AMINO-9-ETHYLCARBAZOLE.HCL 6109-97*3 
 
168 c03043 22.2mg 54.1mg 1/50 127.mg 43/50 
a c03043 25.4mg 86.2mg 10/50 127.mg 46/50 
b c03043 22.2mg 54.1mg 1/50 127.mg 43/50 
c c03043 256.mg n.s.s. 3/50 127.mg 4/50 
 
l iv:hpm,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
36 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
169 N m b6c eat Liv hpc 78w95 
 
a N m b6c eat Liv MXA 78w95 
b N m b6c eat TBA MXB 78w95 
c N m b6c eat Liv MXB 78w95 
d N m b6c eat Lun MXB 78w95 
170 R f f34 eat MXB MXB 18.25 
 
a R f f34 eat ut. acn 18.25 
b R f f34 eat zym MXA 18.25 
c R f f34 eat zym sqc 18.25 
d R f f34 eat liv NXA 18m25 
e R f f34 eat TBA NXB 18a25 
f R f f34 eat Liv NXB 18.25 
171 R m f34 eat NXB MXB 18.25 
 
a R m f34 eat Liv MXA 18.25 
b R m f34 eat Liv hpc 18.25 
c R m f 34 eat NXA NXA 18.25 
d R m f 34 eat zym MXA 18.25 
* R m f34 eat MXA NXA 18.25 
f R m f34 eat TBA MXB 18.25 
9 R m f34 eat Liv NXB 18.25 
 
3-ANINO-9-ETHYLCARBAZOLE MIXTURE 
172 N f b6c eat Liv hpc 78w95 
 
a N f b6c eat TBA NXB 78w95 
b N f b6c eat Liv NXB 78w95 
c N f b6c eat Lun MXB 78w95 
173 N m b6c eat liv hpc 78w94 
 
a N m b6c eat TBA MXB 78w94 
b N m b6c eat liv NXB 78w94 
c N m b6c eat Lun MXB 78w94 
174 R f f34 eat zym MXA 18m24 
a R f f34 eat zym sqc 18m24 
b R f f34 eat zym can 18.24 
c R f f34 eat TBA MXB 18m24 
d R f f34 eat Liv MXB 18m24 
175 R m f34 eat MXB MXB 18m24 
 
a R m f34 eat Liv NXA 18.24 
b R m f34 eat Liv hpc 18m24 
c R m f34 eat ski MXA 18m24 
d R m f34 eat ski MXA 18m24 
a R f f34 eat zym MXA 18m24 
f R m f34 eat TBA MXB 18m24 
g R f f34 eat Liv MXB 18m24 
 
TD5O 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
46.4mg 
49.8mg 
70 .6mg 
49.8mg 
no dre 
55. 1mg 
106. mg 
151 . mg 
212. mg 
237. mg 
44.7mg 
237. mg 
28. 1mg 
39. 2mg 
156.mg 
203. mg 
240. mg 
257. mg 
42. 7mg 
39. 2mg 
 
lOOng . . .lug. :10. :100. g :. 1g :10. :100. :Ig . :10 
 
30.5mg 
59.7mg 
30.5mg 
7.49gm 
+ 50.4mg 
 
64.9mg 
50. 4mg 
4.13gm 
+ 58.0mg 
 
95 .4mg 
148. g 
18. 2mg 
no dre 
11.8mg 
17.1mg 
42.6mg 
45.0mg 
62 .8mg 
104.mg 
10.6mg 
17.1mg 
 
3-AMINO-1-NETHYL-5H-PYRIDOI4,3-b]INDOLE ACETATE .... : 10. :100. 1g : . . :10. :100.. : g . :10 
 
176 N f cdf eat liv hpc 88w88 e . + . 6.81mg 
 
a N f cdf eat lun adc 88w88 no dre 
b N f cdf oat Lun ad. 88w88 no dre 
177 N m cdf eat Lun adc 88w88 . 81.1mg 
 
a N m cdf eat Liv hpc 88w88 e 88.2mg 
b N m cdf eat Liv mix 88w88 e 83.2mg 
c N m cdf eat lun ad. 88w88 224.mg 
178 R f aci eat Liv nnd 29.29 e . + . 5.32mg 
 
a R f aci oat Liv mix 29m29 e 5.32mg 
b R f aci eat Liv hms 29m29 e 46.2mg 
c R f aci eat jej adc 29m29 e 46.2mg 
d R f aci eat iLm ad. 29m29 e 46.2mg 
179 R m aci eat liv tum 29m29 a .> no dre 
 
P<. 0005c 
P<. 0005c 
P<. 005 
 
P<. 0005 
P-1. 
 
P<. 0005 
P<. 0005c 
P<. 0005c 
P<. 0005c 
P<. 002 c 
P<. 007 
P<. 002 
 
P<. 0005 
P<. 0005c 
P<.007 c 
P<.003 c 
P<.003 c 
P<.007 c 
P<.03 
 
P<. 0005 
 
P<. 0005c 
P<. 008 
P<. 0005 
P<1 . 
 
P<. 0005c 
P<. 007 
P<. 0005 
P<1 . 
 
P<. 0005c 
P<.006 c 
P<.01 c 
P<.04 
P-I. 
 
P<. 0005 
P<. 0005c 
P<. 002 c 
P<. 0005c 
P<. 003 c 
P<.009 c 
P<. 0005 
P<. 0005 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P-I. 
P-I. 
P<. I 
 
P<.04 + 
P<.2 + 
P<. 3 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
P<.1 + 
P<.1 + 
P<.1 + 
P-I. 
 
1-ANINO-2-METHYLANTHRAQUINONE 1 O0ng..: ..ug. 1 :10 :..100.. g : . 1. :10 . :100.1 :0 1 :10 
 
180 N f b6c eat Liv MXA 70w97 aesv : 174.mg * P<.07 c 
a M f b6c eat TBA MXB 70w97 aesv no dre P-1. 
 
b M f b6c eat Liv MXB 70w97 aesv 174.mg * P<.07 
c N f b6c eat lun MXB 70w97 aesv no dre P-I. 
181 M m b6c eat TBA MXB 70w97 aesv :> no dre P-I. 
 
a M m b6c eat Liv MXB 70w97 aesv no dre P-1. 
b M m b6c oat Lun MXB 70w97 aesv no dre P-1. 
 
182 R f f34 eat Liv MXA 18m24 v : + : 115.mg * P<.003 c 
 
a R f f34 eat Liv hpc 18m24 v 182.mg * P<.002 c 
b R f f34 eat TBA MXB 18m24 v no dre P-1. 
 
c R f f34 eat Liv MXB 18m24 v 115.mg * P<.003 
 
183 R m f34 eat MXB MXB 18m24 v + : 34.1mg * P<.0005 
 
a R m f34 eat Liv MXA 18m24 v 39.9mg * P<.0005c 
b R m f34 eat kid MXA 18m24 v 131.mg * P<.0005c 
c R m f34 eat pit MXA 18m24 v 136.mg * P<.006 
 
d R m f34 *at Liv hpc 18m24 v 150.mg * P<.008 c 
a R f f34 eat kid tLa 18.24 v 196.mg * P<.003 
f R m f34 eat thy MXA 18.24 v 283.mg * P<.007 
g R f f34 eat kid MXA 18m24 v 441.mg * P<.02 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lnc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
Brkly Code 
 
169 c03043 28.6mg 95.0mg 
a c03043 29.8mg 111.mg 
b c03043 34.7mg 688.mg 
c c03043 29.8mg 111.mg 
d c03043 277.mg n.s.s. 
170 c03043 32.7mg 105.mg 
a c03043 50.9mg 339.mg 
b c03043 75.5mg 355.mg 
c c03043 96.9mg 616.mg 
d c03043 93.9mg 1.04gm 
* c03043 21.2mg 699.mg 
f c03043 93.9mg 1.04gm 
171 c03043 17.7mg 49.7mg 
a c03043 22.8mg 82.3mg 
b c03043 64.8mg 2.669m 
c c03043 81.4mg 1.13gm 
d c03043 102.mg 1.06gm 
* c03043 95.5mg 3.17gm 
f c03043 18.7mg n.s.s. 
9 c03043 22.8mg 82.3mg 
 
6/50 
8/50 
22/50 
8/50 
10/50 
 
1/50 
1/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
38/50 
 
0/50 
1/49 
1/49 
1/49 
0/49 
0/49 
0/49 
32/49 
 
1/49 
 
118. 9 
118.m9 
118.m9 
118.m9 
118.m9 
73. 0mg 
73. 0mg 
73. 0mg 
73. 0mg 
73. 0mg 
73. 0mg 
73. 0mg 
58.4mg 
58.4mg 
58.4mg 
58.4mg 
58.4mg 
58.4mg 
58.4mg 
58.4mg 
 
41/50 
41/50 
45/50 
41/50 
 
7/50 
25/50 
11/50 
12/50 
9/50 
6/50 
45/50 
6/50 
33/50 
22/50 
 
8/50 
6/50 
7/50 
5/50 
46/50 
22/50 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Liv:hpc,nnd; ute:acn; zym:can,sqc. C 
 
zym:can,sqc. 
L iv:hpc,rnnd. 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
liv:hpc,nnd; ski:bcc,sqc,sqp; sub:sqc; zym:can,sqc. C 
 
L iv:hpc,nnd. 
 
ski:bcc,sqc,sqp; sub:sqc. 
 
zym:can,sqc. 
ski:sqc,sqp; sub:sqc. 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
3-ANINO-9-ETHYLCARBAZOLE MIXTURE (3-amino-9-ethyLcarbazoLe and 3-amino-9-ethyLcarbazoLe.HCL. CAS# 132-32-1 and 6109-97-3) mixture 
172 c01898 20.0mg 52.1mg 1/50 85.8mg 37/50 
a c01898 28.1mg 1.26gm 20/50 85.8mg 38/50 
 
b c01898 20.0mg 52.1mg 1/50 85.8mg 37/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
c c01898 204.mg n.s.s. 4/50 85.8mg 4/50 Lun:a/a,a/c. 
173 c01898 28.7mg 130.mg 7/50 79.2mg 32/50 
a c01898 30.9mg 914.mg 17/50 79.2mg 35/50 
 
b c01898 28.7mg 130.mg 7/50 79.2mg 32/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
c c01898 165.mg n.s.s. 6/50 79.2mg 6/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
174 c01898 26.2mg 163.mg 0/50 30.0mg 10/50 zym:can,sqc. 
 
a c01898 33.1mg 1.05gm 0/50 30.0mg 5/50 
b c01898 55.4mg 7.12gm 0/50 30.0mg 5/50 
c c01898 7.42mg n.s.s. 32/50 30.0mg 40/50 
 
d c01898 95.3mg n.s.s. 2/50 30.0mg 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
175 c01898 6.73mg 22.6mg 0/50 24.0mg 22/50 Liv:hpc,nnd; ski:bcc,sqc,sqp; zym:can,sqc. 
a c01898 8.64mg 41.7mg 0/50 24.0mg 12/50 Liv:hpc,nnd. 
b c01898 16.8mg 189.mg 0/50 24.0mg 6/50 
 
c c01898 19.2mg 150.mg 0/50 24.0mg 8/50 ski :bcc,sqc,sqp. 
d c01898 24.0mg 324.mg 0/50 24.0mg 6/50 ski :sqc,sqp. 
a c01898 37.4mg 3.31gm 0/50 24.0mg 5/50 zym:can,sqc. 
f c01898 5.45mg 41.8mg 20/50 24.0mg 37/50 
 
9 c01898 8.64mg 41.7mg 0/50 24.0mg 12/50 liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
3-AMINO-1-NETHYL-SH-PYRIDO[4,3-bJINDOLE ACETATE (trp-P-2 acetate) 72254-58-1 
176 1224 3.70mg 13.3mg 0/24 26.0mg 22/26 
a 1224 64.3mg n.s.s. 3/40 26.0mg 3/40 
b 1224 93.1mg n.s.s. 1/40 26.0mg 1/40 
177 1224 27.3mg n.s.s. 3/40 24.0mg 8/40 
a 1224 26.6mg n.s.s. 0/25 24.0mg 3/24 
b 1224 23.7mg n.s.s.- 1/25 24.0mg 4/24 
c 1224 49.4mg n.s.s. 1/40 24.0mg 3/40 
178 1225 2.06mg 19.5mg 0/30 5.00mg 6/10 
a 1225 2.06mg 19.5mg 0/30 5.00mg 6/10 
b 1225 7.51mg n.s.s. 0/30 5.00mg 1/10 
c 1225 7.51mg n.s.s. 0/30 5.00mg 1/10 
d 1225 7.51mg n.s.s. 0/30 5.00mg 1/10 
179 1225 11.7mg n.s.s. 0/30 4.00mg 0/10 
1-AMINO-2-NETHYLANTHRAQUINONE 82-28-0 
 
180 c01901 68.1mg n.s.s. 
a c01901 112.mg n.s.s. 
b c01901 68.1mg n.s.s. 
c c01901 325.mg n.s.s. 
181 c01901 89.9mg n.s.s. 
a c01901 129.mg n.s.s. 
b c01901 189.mg n.s.s. 
182 c01901 60.8mg 602.mg 
 
a c01901 89.9mg 832.mg 
b c01901 78.4mg n.s.s. 
c c01901 60.8mg 602.mg 
183 c01901 22.8mg 64.6mg 
 
a c01901 25.8mg 83.7mg 
b c01901 73.2mg 270.mg 
c c01901 70.5mg 1.619m 
d c01901 72.9mg 3.569m 
 
e c01901 98.4mg 929.mg 
f c01901 127.mg 3.06gm 
 
9 c01901 167.mg n.s.s. 
 
4/50 
22/50 
4/50 
1/50 
21/50 
10/50 
11/50 
2/50 
1/50 
45/50 
 
2/50 
3/50 
3/50 
0/50 
1/50 
2/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
 
61. 1mg 
61. 1g 
61. 1mg 
61. 1mg 
56.4mg 
56.4mg 
56.4mg 
37. 0mg 
37. 0mg 
37.0m 
37 .0mg 
30.4mg 
30.4mg 
30.4mg 
30.4mg 
30.4mg 
30.4mg 
30.4mg 
30.4mg 
 
12/49 58.5mg 2/50 
16/49 58.5mg 4/50 
12/49 58.5mg 2/50 
0/49 58.5mg 1/50 
18/50 54.0mg 1/50 
8/50 54.0mg 1/50 
5/50 (54.0mg 0/50) 
11/45 74.0mg 11/48 
3/45 74.0mg 10/48 
31/45 74.0mg 28/48 
11/45 74.0mg 11/48 
27/50 60.0mg 28/50 
25/50 60.0mg 24/50 
6/50 60.0mg 10/50 
10/50 60.0mg 8/50 
7/50 60.0mg 10/50 
5/50 60.0mg 6/50 
3/50 60.0mg 5/50 
1/50 60.0mg 4/50 
 
Natsukura;scie,213,346-347; 1981 
 
Hosaka;cLet, 13,23-28; 1981 
 
l iv:hpc,nnd. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
tun: a/a, a/c. 
l iv:hpc,nnd. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
kid:acn,tla,uac; Iiv:hpc,nnd. C 
 
l iv:hpc,nnd. 
kid:acn,tla,uac. 
 
pit:adn,cra. S 
 
S 
 
thy:cca,ccr. S 
kid:acn,uac. S 
 
37 
 
C 
 
38 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
h R m f34 at TBA NXB 18m24 v 
i R m f34 sat Liv NXB 18m24 v 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
64.4mg * P<.07 
 
39.9mg * P<.0005 
 
2-ANINO-5-(5-NITRO-2-FURYL)-1,3,4-OXADIAZOLE .... 0. :100... g . : 1.9 : 10. :100.. :I . : 10 
 
184 R f sda mat mgL mix 46w"66 v . + . 3.67mg 
 
a R f sda mat mgL adc 46w"66 v 7.98mg 
b R f sda mat for sqp 46w"66 v 37.0mg 
c R f sda eat k/p tcc 46w"66 mv historicaL 
d R f ada mat Lun aLc 46w"66 v 242.mg 
* R f sda mat Liv tum 46w66 mv no dre 
f R f sda mat tba mix 46w66 mv 2.74mg 
 
2-ANINO-5-(5-NITRO-2-FURYL)*1,3,4-THIADIAZOLE .... .:10. :100. g : ..g :10. :100. :I . :10 
 
185 R f sda mat mgL mix 45w"66 * . + . .662mg 
 
a R f sda mat mgL adc 45w"66 v 1.20mg 
b R f sda mat for aqp 45w"66 v 23.7mg 
c R f 1da mat Lun alc 45w66 mv 73.4mg 
d R f ada mat k/p tcc 45w"66 v historicaL 
a R f ada mat Liv tum 45w66 mv no dre 
f R f sda mat tba mix 45w66 mv .662mg 
 
2-ANINO-4- (5-NITRO-2-FURYL)THIAZOI 
186 N f swi mat for mix 46w55 a 
 
a N f swi mat for sqp 46w55 a 
b N f swi mat Liv tum 46w55 a 
c N f swi mat Lun tum 46w55 a 
d N f swi mat tba mix 46w55 a 
 
4-ANINO-2-NITROPHENOL 
 
187 N f b6c mat TBA NXB 24m24 
 
a N f b6c mat Liv NXB 24m24 
b N f b6c mat Lun NXB 24m24 
188 N a b6c mat TBA NXB 24m24 
 
a N m b6c mat Liv NXB 24m24 
b N a b6c mat lun NXB 24m24 
189 R f f34 mat ubL tcc 24m24 
 
a R f f34 mat TBA NXB 24m24 
b R f f34 mat Liv NXB 24m24 
190 R m f34 mat ubL tcc 24m24 
 
a R a f34 mat TBA NXB 24m24 
b R a f34 mat Liv NXS 24m24 
 
LE 
 
..:..lug...:-. 10o.....:-. 100....:.. lag-...:-. 10.....:. 100 .. g .1:019-....:--10 
 
. + . 7.87mg 
 
11.5mg 
no dre 
no dre 
6.83mg 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005 
P-1. 
P-I. 
 
P<. 0005 
 
bO0ng.. :. .ug. :10. :100. g :1g. :10. :100.. :. :10 
 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
3.65gm * P<.3 
no dre P-1. 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
2.25gm * P<.7 
no dre P-1. 
 
:> +historical * P<.3 a 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
+ 309.mg / P<.002 c 
 
270.mg / P<.4 
no dre Pal. 
 
2-ANINO-4-(p-NITROPHENYL)THIAZOLE Ong. .: ..ug. :10. :100. g :. .. :10. :100. :Ig . :10 
 
191 N f swi mat --- LLm 46w66 a . 9.95mg P<.03 + 
 
a N f swi mat Liv tum 46w66 a no dre P-I. 
b N f swi mat Lun tum 46w66 a no dre Pal. 
 
c N f swi mat tba mix 46w66 a 9.95mg P<.03 
 
2-ANINO-.5NITROTHIAZOLE lOng. . ..ug. :10. :100. g :. g. :10. :100. :Ig . :10 
 
192 N f b6c mat TBA NXB 24m24 :> no dre P-I. 
 
a ! f b6c mat Liv NXB 24m24 109.mg * P<.4 
 
b N f b6c mat Lun NXB 24m24 63.5mg * P<.09 
193 N a b6c mat TBA NXB 24m24 :> no dre P-1. 
a N a b6c mat Liv NXB 24m24 no dre PaI. 
b N a b6c mat Lun NXB 24m24 no dre P-1. 
 
194 R f f34 mat uta sap 26m26 : #57.2mg \ P<.03 - 
 
a R f f34 mat TBA NXB 26m26 326.mg * P<. 9 
b R f f34 mat Liv NXB 26a26 no dre P-1. 
 
195 R m f34 mat ... NXA 26a26 + 27.6mg * P<.003 a 
 
a R a f34 mat NXB NXB 26m26 27.6mg * P<.003 
 
b R m f34 at muL grL 26m26 90.2mg a P<.02 a 
c R a f34 mat NXA NXA 26m26 445.mg * P<.7 a 
d R a f34 mat TBA NXB 26m26 32.3mg * P<.2 
 
a R a f34 mat Liv NXB 26m26 318.mg P<.2 
 
196 R f ada mat mgL mix 46w66 mv 44.6mg P<.03 + 
 
a R f ada mat k/p tcc 46w66 v +historical P<.09 + 
b R f ada mat Lun alc 46w66 v 157.mg P<,09 + 
c R f sda at Liv tum 46w66 v no dre P-I. 
 
d R f ada mat tba mix 46w66 v 32.5mg P<.006 
 
2-ANINO-5-PHENYL-2-OXAZOLIN-4-ONE + Ng(OH)2.lug. :10. :100. g :. . :10. :100.. : g . :10 
 
197 R f sda mat Liv tum 46w"66 .> no dre 
 
a R f sda mat tba mix 46w66 a 3.01mg 
198 R f sda mat Liv tum 46w66 a .> no dre 
a R f ada mat tba six 46w66 * no dre 
 
Pe -. 
 
P<.04 - 
P.1. 
 
P-I. _ 
 
2-ANINOANTHRAQUINONE 
 
199 N f b6c mat NXB NXS 79w94 
a N f b6c mat Liv hpc 79w94 
 
bO0ng. . .ug. :10. :100.l. : g .:10. :100. :Ig . :10 
 
: + 1.49gm * P<.0005 
 
2.829g * P<.004 c 
 
P<. 0005. 
P<. 0005 
 
P<.009 + 
P<.02 + 
P<.3 + 
P-I. 
 
P<. 0005 
 
P<.0005+ 
P<. 0005 
 
P<.07 + 
P<.3 + 
P<.3 + 
Pal. 
 
P<.0005 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lnc 2Dose 21nc 
 
h c01901 26.1mg n.e.s. 26/50 30.4mg 42/50 60.0mg 35/50 
i c01901 25.8mg 83.7mg 3/50 30.4mg 25/50 60.0mg 24/50 
2-AMINO-5-(5-NITRO-2-FURYL)-1,3,4-OXADIAZOLE 3775-55-1 
184 1126 2.06mg 7.05mg 2/24 26.9mg 29/33 
 
a 1126 4.59mg 15.4mg 0/24 26.9mg 20/33 
b 1126 15.1mg 855.mg 0/24 26.9mg 6/33 
c 1126 17.1mg n.e.s. 0/24 26.9mg 5/33 
d 1126 39.3mg n.s.s. 0/24 26.9mg 1/33 
 
e 1126 73.8mg n.e.s. 0/24 26.9mg 0/33 
f 1126 1.41mg 5.35mg 2/24 26.9mg 31/33 
 
2-AMINO-5-(5-NITRO-2-FURYL)-1,3,4-THIADIAZOLE 712-68-5 
185 1126 .293mg 1.36mg 2/24 8.18mg 32/33 
 
a 1126 .695mg 2.16mg 0/24 8.18mg 28/33 
b 1126 7.17mg n.s.s. 0/24 8.18mg 3/33 
c 1126 11.9mg n.s.s. 0/24 8.18mg 1/33 
d 1126 11.9mg n.s.s. 0/24 8.18mg 1/33 
 
e 1126 22.4mg n.s.s. 0/24 8.18mg 0/33 
f 1126 .293m9 1.36mg 2/24 8.18mg 32/33 
2-AMINO-4-(5-NITRO-2-FURYL)THIAZOLE 38514-71-5 
 
186 1076 4.20mg 15.3mg 0/29 90.2mg 24/27 
a 1076 6.42mg 22.3mg 0/29 90.2mg 21/27 
b 1076 140.mg n.s.s. 0/29 90.2mg 0/27 
c 1076 140.mg n.s.s. 0/29 90.2mg 0/27 
d 1076 3.40mg 14.0mg 2/29 90.2mg 25/27 
 
Citation oi Pathology 
 
Brkly Code 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Cohen;Jnci,54,841-850;1975 
 
Cohen; jnci,54,841-850;1975 
Cohen;canr ,33,1593-1597; 1973 
 
4-AMINO-2-NITROPHENOL 119-34-6 
 
187 c03963 558.mg n.s.s. 8/20 
 
m c03963 1.26gm n.s.s. 0/20 
b c03963 1.73gm n.s.s. 2/20 
188 c03963 301.mg n.s.s. 12/20 
a c03963 336.mg n.s.s. 6/20 
b c03963 863.mg n.e.s. 5/20 
189 c03963 563.mg n.s.s. 0/20 
a c03963 140.mg n.s.s. 13/20 
b c03963 n.e.s. n.s.s. 0/20 
190 c03963 155.mg 1.14gm 0/20 
a c03963 71.2mg n.s.s. 12/20 
b c03963 604.mg n.s.s. 0/20 
2-ANINO-4- (p-NITROPHENYL)THIAZOLE 
191 1076 3.42mg n.e.s. 1/28 
 
a 1076 15.0mg n.s.s. 0/28 
b 1076 15.0mg n.s.s. 0/28 
c 1076 3.42mg n.s.s. 1/28 
2-AMINO-5-NITROTHIAZOLE 121-66-4 
192 c03065 15.3mg n.s.s. 26/50 
 
a c03065 29.0mg n.s.s. 2/50 
b c03065 24.6mg n.e.s. 2/50 
193 c03065 10.5mg n.s.s. 39/50 
 
a c03065 19.5mg n.e.s. 20/50 
b c03065 20.8mg n.s.s. 14/50 
194 c03065 22.8mg n.s.s. 2/50 
a c03065 21.1mg n.e.s. 40/50 
b c03065 n.s.s. n.e.s. 0/50 
195 c03065 14.6mg 147.mg 13/50 
a c03065 14.6mg 147.mg 13/50 
b c03065 40.1mg n.s.s. 2/50 
c c03065 56.5mg n.s.s. 6/50 
d c03065 11.7mg n.s.s. 36/50 
 
e c03065 78.3mg n.s.s. 0/50 
196 1126 17.4mg n.s.s. 2/39 
 
a 1126 38.6mg n.s.s. 0/39 
b 1126 38.6mg n.s.s. 0/39 
c 1126 97.1mg n.s.s. 0/39 
d 1126 14.2mg 371.mg 2/39 
 
159.mg 17/50 319.mg 16/50 
159.mg 2/50 319.mg 2/50 
159.mg 3/50 319.mo 2/50 
147.mg 32/50 294.mg 28/50 
147.mg 18/50 294.mg 19/50 
147.mg 10/50 294.mg 7/50 
61.3mg 1/49 123.mg 2/50 
61.3mg 34/49 123.mg 28/50 
61.3mg 0/49 123.mg 0/50 
49.0mg 0/50 98.1mg 11/50 
49.0mg 22/50 98.1mg 35/50 
49.0mg 1/50 98.1mg 0/50 
 
2104-09-8 
 
9.06mg 5/20 
9.06mg 0/20 
9.06mg 0/20 
9.06mg 5/20 
 
6. 50mg 
6.50mg 
6. 50mg 
6. 00mg 
 
6. 00mg 
6. 00mg 
14.9mg 
14.9mg 
14.9mg 
11. 9mg 
11. 9mg 
I 1. 9mg 
11. 9m 
 
11. 9mg 
11.9m9 
33.4mg 
33.4mg 
33.4mg 
33.4mg 
33.4mg 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun: a/c, /c. 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
tun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpe,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Cohen;canr,33, 1593*1597; 1973 
 
L iv:hpe,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/e,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
S 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
-- -:leu,Lym. 
 
... :Leu,LLe,Lym,mly; oul:grl,ule. A 
 
--- -:l le,mlyf mul uL*. 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Cohen; Jnci ,54,841-850;1975 
 
31/50 13.0mg 28/50 
6/50 13.0mg 5/50 
4/50 13.0mg 8/50 
32/50 12.0mg 34/50 
16/50 12.0mg 15/50 
12/50 12.0mg 12/50 
9/50 (29.7mg 3/50) 
44/50 29.7mg 44/50 
 
0/50 29.7mg 0/50 
19/50 23.8mg 28/50 
19/50 23.8mg 28/50 
4/50 23.8mg 9/50 
4/50 23.8mg 6/50 
37/50 23.8mg 39/50 
 
1/50 23.8mg 1/50 
8/35 
2/35 
2/35 
0/35 
10/35 
 
2-ANINO-5-PHENYL-2-OXAZOLIN-4-ONE + Ng(OH)2 (magnesium pemoLine) 18968-99-5 
197 200mm 8.10mg n.s.s. 0/35 2.79mg 0/35 
a 200mm 1.18mg n.s.s. 4/35 2.79mg 11/35 
198 200an 162.mg n.s.s. 0/35 55.8mg 0/35 
a 200an 122.mg n.s.s. 4/35 55.8mg 1/35 
 
2-AMINOANTHRAQUINONE 117-79-3 
 
199 c01876 805.mg 4.969m 11/100 539.mg 9/50 1.089m 23/50 
a c01876 1.339m 23.7gm 5/100 539.mg 5/50 1.08gm 12/50 
 
Cohen;Jnci,51,403-417;1973 
 
---:Lym; Liv:hpc. C 
 
39 
 
40 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
b N f b6c *at --- lym 79w94 
c N f b6c sat TBA MXB 79w94 
d N f b6c mat Liv MXB 79w94 
a N f b6c mat Lun NXB 79w94 
200 N m b6c sat Liv hpc 79w93 
 
a N m b6c eat Liv NXA 79w93 
b N m b6c oat TBA NXB 79w93 
c N m b6c eat Liv NXB 79w93 
d N m b6c mat Lun NXB 79w93 
 
201 R f f34 sat TBA NXB 18.25 s 
 
a R f f34 eat Liv NXB 18.25 s 
202 R m f34 mat Liv NXA 18.25 v 
 
a R m f34 eat Liv hpc 18.25 v 
b R m f34 mat TBA NXB 18.25 v 
c R m f34 sat Liv NXB 18.25 v 
 
a. ANINOAZOTOLUENE 
 
203 N m cfl eat lun ad. 26w65 a 
 
a N m cfl eat liv mix 26w65 a 
 
204 R f alb eat liv mix 63w63 ems 
 
a R f aLb eat liv hpn 63w63 emi 
 
b R f aLb eat liv lca 63w63 ems 
205 R m aLb mat Liv mix 67w67 emi 
 
a R m alb eat Liv hpn 67w67 emi 
b R m aLb oat Liv lca 67w67 min 
4-ANINODIPHENYL 
 
206 N f abi gav ubL car 39w94 
 
a N f abi gav liv hpt 39w94 a 
207 M m abi gav Liv hpt 39w94 a 
 
a N m abi gav ubl car 39w94 a 
208 N f cif gav Liv mix 50w70 r 
 
a N f cif gav Liv mhp 50w70 r 
209 M m cif gav Liv mix 50w70 r 
 
a M m cif gav liv mhp 50w70 r 
b M m cif gav ubL car 50w70 r 
2-AMINODIPHENYLENE OXIDE 
 
210 N f cif mat Liv mhp 52w58 r 
 
a N f cif mat Liv mix 52w58 r 
211 M m cif mat Liv mix 52w67 r 
 
a M m cif mat Liv mhp 52w67 r 
b N m cif mat ubl car 52w67 r 
 
3-AMINOTRIAZOLE 
 
212 M f b6a orl Liv hpt 59w59 avx 
 
a M f b6a orL lun mix 59w59 mvy 
 
b M f b6a orL tba mix 59w59 avx 
213 N m b6a orl Liv hpt 52w52 mvy 
 
a N m b6a orL lun ado 52w52 mvy 
b N m b6a orL tba mix 52w52 mvy 
214 M f b6c orL Liv hpt 57w57 mvy 
 
a N f b6c orL lun ada 57w57 mvx 
b N f b6c orL tba mix 57w57 mvy 
215 M m b6c orl Liv hpt 53w53 mvy 
 
a M m b6c orl Lun ada 53w53 mvx 
b M m b6c orL tba mix 53w53 mvy 
216 R b nss mat thy ada 24.24 or 
217 R f wis wat tyf maL 16m24 r 
 
TD5O 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
3.169m * P<.02 c 
1.62gm P<.02 
 
2.82g * P<.004 
33.4gm * P<.7 
 
+ 755.mg * P<.0005c 
 
798.mg * P<.0005c 
952.mg / P<.008 
798.mg * P<.0005 
19.4gm * P<.8 
 
124.mg P<.6 - 
no dre P-1. 
 
101.mg \ P<.0005c 
268.mg \ P<.002 c 
759.mg * P<.6 
 
101.mg \ P<.0005 
 
lOOng . . .lug.. : 10. :100.. :l1ug.. :.10.. :100.. : Ig . :10 
 
*> 80.2mg 
 
no dre 
B . + . 3.70mg 
 
8.49mg 
21.4mg 
B . + . 4.46mg 
 
11.5mg 
15.2mg 
 
lOOng.. : .ug. :10. :100. g :. 1g :10. :100..g.10 
 
A 5.94mg 
 
no dre 
3.84mg 
11.6mg 
.993mg 
3. 05mg 
+ . 3.91mg 
 
7. 50mg 
32.5mg 
 
bO0ng..:. .ug.. : 10. :100.. :1.mg.. : 10. :100.. : Ig . :10 
 
<+ noTD50 
 
noTD50 
+ . 5.73mg 
 
8.67mg 
22.3mg 
 
P<. 6 
P-1. 
 
P<.002 + 
P<.02 + 
P<.2 + 
P<.005 + 
P<.06 + 
P<.1 + 
 
P<.05 + 
P-a. _ 
P<.5 - 
P<.4 + 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005 
 
P<.002 + 
P<.02 
 
P<.3 + 
 
P<. 0005 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005 
 
P<.004 + 
 
!OOng..:. .lug.. : 10. :100.. :1mg. : 10. :100.. : Ig . :10 
 
x . + . 24.5mg P<.0005+ 
x no dre P-1. 
 
x 25.6mg P<.0005 
 
x . + . 26.0mg P<.0005+ 
x no dre P-1. 
 
x 28.0mg P<.0005 
x <+ noTD50 P<.0005 
x no dre P-1. 
 
x noTD50 P<. 0005 
 
x . + . 25.4mg P<.0005+ 
x no dre P-1. 
 
x 30.8mg P<.002 
 
. + . 3.74mg * P<.0005 
 
+ . 102.mg P<.002 
 
AMMONIUM CHLORIDE O0ng. . .. : ...1ug .1.0 :100 .:g 10 . .. :100.. : 10 :10 
 
218 N f ifc wat ubl car 93w93 r .no dre 
219 N f ifc wat ubl tum 52i52 ekr .> no dre 
 
P-I. 
P-I. 
 
AMMONIUM CITRATE 1 OOng. . .. : 1ug 0. 1 m :. 10 1 : 1 00.. :Ig . ..10 
 
220 R m wias at Liv tum 52w65 *k .> no dre P-1. 
 
AMMONIUM HYDROXIDE 
 
221 N f c3h wat mgL adc 24m24 
 
222 N f swi wat Lun mix 28m28 am 
 
a M f swi wat Liv mix 28.28 am 
223 M sw i wat Lun adc 28.29 ae 
 
a M sw i wat Lun mix 28.29 am 
b M m swi wat Liv mix 28m29 ae 
 
1 -ANYL- 1 -NITROSOUREA 
 
224 R f don wat mso tum 65w65 
 
a R f don wat dgt mix 65w65 
b R f don wat for tum 65w65 
 
bOOng .:. .:ug.. : 10. :100.. :.1mg.. : 10. :100.. :ig ..:10 
 
no dre P-I. 
.> no dre P-1. 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
* 7.33gm * P<.03 - 
 
15.3gm * P<.7 - 
26.7gm * P<.7 
 
1OOng .:. .Iug. :10. :100. g :. 1g :10. :100. :Ig. :10 
 
+ . .967mg Z P<.0005 
 
1.15mg * P<.0005+ 
1.35mg * P<.0005 
 
. + 
 
* @ 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
b c01876 1.38gm n.s.s. 7/100 
c c01876 742.mg n.s.s. 27/100 
d c01876 1.33gm 23.7gm 5/100 
a c01876 3.75gm n.s.s. 4/100 
200 c01876 449.mg 1.83gm 18/100 
 
a c01876 463.mg 2.11gm 20/100 
b c01876 458.mg 20.0gm 41/100 
c c01876 463.mg 2.11gm 20/100 
d c01876 1.94gm n.s.s. 17/100 
201 c01876 18.9mg n.s.s. 19/25 
 
a c01876 89.0mg n.s.s. 2/25 
202 c01876 57.8mg 204.mg 0/50 
 
a c01876 121.mg 1.13gm 0/50 
b c01876 145.mg n.s.s. 20/50 
c c01876 57.8mg 204.mg 0/50 
 
o-AMINOAZOTOLUENE 97*56-3 
 
203 103 11.5mg n.s.s. 95/288 
 
a 103 22.7mg n.s.s. 58/288 
204 30 1.16mg 16.9mg 0/5 
 
a 30 2.77mg n.s.s. 0/5 
b 30 5.18mg n.s.s. 0/5 
205 30 1.91mg 27.7mg 0/4 
 
a 30 4.27mg n.s.s. 0/4 
b 30 5.20mg n.s.s. 0/4 
4-ANINODIPHENYL 92-67-1 
 
206 1165 .957mg n.s.s. 0/28 
 
a 1165 1.99mg n.s.s. 4/26 
207 1165 .761mg n.s.s. 5/13 
 
a 1165 1.88mg n.s.s. 0/5 
208 31 .544mg 1.94mg 1/31 
 
a 31 1.58mg 6.92mg 0/31 
209 31 1.67mg 16.2mg 0/19 
 
a 31 2.58mg n.s.s. 0/19 
b 31 5.28mg n.s.s. 0/19 
 
539 mg 
539. mg 
539.mg 
539 mg 
498.mg 
498. mg 
498.mg 
498. mg 
498.mg 
71.0mg 
71.0mg 
102 . mg 
102.mg 
102.mg 
102. mg 
 
28.8ga 
28. 8mg 
28.6mg 
28.6mg 
28.6mg 
21.7mg 
21.7mg 
21.7mg 
 
2.37mg 
2.37mg 
1. 97mg 
1.97mg 
6.12mg 
6.12mg 
5. 10mg 
5. 10mg 
5. 10mg 
 
2-AMINODIPHENYLENE OXIDE 3693-22-9 
 
210 31 n.s.s. 3.31mg 0/31 35.0mg 
 
a 31 n.s.s. 3.36mg 1/31 35.0mg 
211 31 2.94mg 12.6mg 0/19 27.9mg 
 
a 31 4.32mg 20.7mg 0/19 27.9mg 
b 31 9.02mg 126.mg 0/19 27.9mg 
 
3-ANINOTRIAZOLE (amitroL) 61-82-5 
212 35a 9.88mg 58.2mg 0/17 
 
a 35a 384.mg n.s.s. 0/17 
b 35a 10.0mg 66.8mg 2/17 
213 35a 11.5mg 72.3mg 3/18 
 
a 35a 283.mg n.s.s. 2/18 
b 35a 11.8mg 98.4mg 5/18 
214 35a n.s.s. 37.3mg 0/18 
 
a 35a 359.mg n.s.s. 1/18 
b 35a n.s.s. 42.2mg 3/18 
215 35a 11.6mg 61.4mg 1/17 
 
a 35a 294.mg n.s.s. 2/17 
b 35a 12.5mg 146.mg 6/17 
216 1513 2.17mg 8.86mg 0/5 
 
217 35 58.9mg 299.mg 0/10 
 
321 mg 
321 . mg 
321. mg 
306.mg 
306. mg 
306. mg 
323. mg 
323. mg 
323. mg 
305. mg 
305.mg 
305. mg 
.450mg 
96.2mg 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
6/50 1.089m 12/50 
16/50 1.08gm 29/50 
5/50 1.08gm 12/50 
2/50 1.089m 3/50 
20/50 1.019m 36/50 
20/50 1.01gm 36/50 
28/50 1.01gm 42/50 
20/50 1.01gm 36/50 
8/50 1.01gm 11/50 
17/50 
 
1/50 
 
18/50 (203.mg 18/50) 
8/50 (203.mg 5/50) 
26/50 203.mg 30/50 
18/50 (203.mg 18/50) 
 
Walker;fctx,11,415-432;1973 
 
9/23 
4/23 
6/7 
4/7 
2/7 
 
9/12 
5/12 
4/12 
 
1/5 
 
0/5 
 
7/13 
1/11 
24/28 
13/28 
7/21 
4/21 
1/21 
 
Waters;yjbm, 10,179-184; 1937 
 
Clayson;bjca,19,297-310;1965/Williamas 1962 
 
CLayson;bJca,21,755-762;1967 
 
CLayson;bJca,21 ,755-762; 1967 
 
30/30 
30/30 
15/20 
12/20 
6/20 
 
17/18 
0/18 
17/18 
16/18 
0/18 
16/18 
18/18 
0/18 
18/18 
16/18 
0/18 
16/18 
 
1/10 
19/40 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
2.25mg 2/15 4.50mg 17/26 
 
Jukes;scis,132,296-297;1960 
Tsuda; jnci ,57,861-864;1976 
 
ANMONIUN CHLORIDE 12125-02-9 
 
218 142a 8.579m n.s.s. 0/26 2.009m 0/26 
219 142b 2.689m n.s.s. 0/26 2.00gm 0/26 
 
AMMONIUM CITRATE 3012-65-5 
 
220 2 2.10gm n.s.s. 0/7 1.54gm 0/17 
 
AN1ONIUM HYDROXIDE 1336-21-6 
 
221 1117 264.mg n.s.s. 23/30 
 
222 1117 2.78gm n.s.s. 14/109 
 
a 1117 7.33gm n.s.s. 3/89 
223 1117 2.99"gm n.s.s. 0/86 
 
a 1117 2.36gm n.s.s. 10/86 
b 1117 3.47gm n.s.s. 2/67 
 
200. mg 
200 .mg 
200. mg 
167. mg 
167. mg 
167. mg 
 
24/40 
12/50 
 
1/47 
2/49 
5/49 
1/46 
 
400.mg 
400. mg 
333.mg 
333. mg 
333 9mg 
 
8/48 600.mg 
2/41 600. mg 
2/48 500.mg 
5/48 500.mg 
3/28 500 mg 
 
Ftaks;bj ca,31,585-587; 1975 
Flaks;Jnci,51,2007-2008;1973 
 
Weisburger;txap, 14,163-175;1969 
 
Toth;ijcn,9,109-118;1972/1969a 
 
4/42 
0/42 
2/44 
7/44 
1/43 
 
1-ANYL-1-NITROSOUREA 10589-74-9 
 
224 1328 .559mg 1.86mg 0/20 3.06mg 
 
a 1328 .835mg 1.77mg 0/20 3.06mg 
b 1328 .982mg 2.17mg 0/20 3.06mg 
 
20/35 (6.12mg 15/33 12.2mg 18/33) 
24/35 6.12mg 27/33 12.2mg 27/33 
21/35 6.12mg 27/33 12.2mg 25/33 
 
Fuj ii ;gann,71,464-470; 1980 
 
41 
 
Brkly Code 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
tun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun: a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
l iv:hpc,nnd. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
42 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
c R f don wat Liv hpa 65w65 
d R f don wat --- my 65w65 
* R f don wat mgL mix 65w65 
f R f don wat tba mix 65w65 
225 R m don wat for tur 65w65 
 
a R m don wat dgt mix 65w65 
b R m don wat 0so tur 65w65 
c R u don wat --- my. 65w65 
d R m don wat Liv hpa 65w65 
* R m don wat tba mix 65w65 
 
ANHYDROGLUCOCHLORAL 
 
226 N f b6a orL Lun ad. 76w76 mv 
 
a N f b6a orl Liv hpt 76w76 *v 
b N f b6a orl tba mix 76w76 mv 
227 N m b6a orL Lun ads 76w76 mv 
 
a N m b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 mv 
b N m b6a orL tba mix 76w76 mv 
228 N f b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 mv 
 
a N f b6c orL Lun mix 76w76 mv 
b N f b6c orL tba tum 76w76 mv 
229 N m b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 *v 
 
a N m b6c orL Lun ado 76w76 mv 
b N m b6c orL tba mix 76w76 iv 
 
ANILAZINE 
 
230 N f b6c mat TBA NXB 24m25 
 
a N f b6c mat Liv NXB 24m25 
b N f b6c mat Lun NXB 24m25 
231 N m b6c mat TBA NXB 24m25 
 
a N m b6c mat Liv NXB 24m25 
b N m b6c mat Lun NXB 24m25 
232 R f f34 mat TBA NXB 24m24 
 
a R f f34 mat Liv NXB 24m24 
233 R m f 34 mat TBA NXB 24m24 
 
a R m f34 mat Liv NXB 24m24 
 
ANILINE 
 
234 R m wis wat for pam 80w80 
 
a R m wis wit ubL tum 80w80 
 
ANILINE.HCl 
 
235 N f b6c mat TBA NXB 24m25 
 
a N f b6c mat Liv NXB 24m25 
b N f b6c mat Lun NXB 24m25 
236 N m b6c mat TBA NXB 24m25 
 
a N m b6c mat Liv NXB 24m25 
b N m b6c mat Lun NXB 24m25 
237 R f f 34 mat NXA NXA 24m25 
 
a R f f34 mat TBA NXB 24m25 
b R f f34 mat Liv NXB 24m25 
238 R m f34 mat NXB NXB 24m25 
 
a R m f34 mat NXA NXA 24m25 
b R m f34 mat spL hes 24m25 
c R m f34 mat NXA NXA 24m25 
d R m f34 mat spL NXA 24m25 
* R A f 34 mat NXA NXA 24m25 
f R m f34 mat adr NXA 24m25 
9 R m f 34 mat TBA NXB 24m25 
h R m f34 mat Liv NXB 24m25 
 
o-ANISIDINE.HCL 
 
239 N f b6c mat ubl NXA 24m24 
 
a N f b6c mat ubl tcc 24m24 
b N f b6c mat TBA NXB 24m24 
c N f b6c mat Liv NXB 24m24 
d N f b6c mat Lun NXB 24m24 
240 N m b6c mat ubl NXA 24m24 
 
a N m b6c mat ubL tcc 24m24 
b N m b6c mat TBA NXB 24m24 
c N m b6c mat Liv NXB 24m24 
d N m b6c mat Lun NXB 24m24 
 
241 R f f34 mat ubL NXA 22m24 as 
 
a R f f34 mat ubL tcc 22m24 as 
b R f f34 mat ubL tpp 22m24 as 
c R f f34 mat TBA NXB 22M24 as 
d R f f34 mat Liv NXB 22m24 as 
242 R f134 mat NXB NXB 22m24 as 
 
a R m f34 mat ubL NXA 22m24 as 
 
I 
K 
K 
K 
K 
K 
K 
K 
K 
K 
Kx 
Kx 
Ix 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
TD5O 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
13.3mg * P<.0005 
 
19.9mg * P<.005 + 
11.9mg * P<.3 + 
1.93mg * P<.002 
 
.532mg Z P<.0005 
 
.532mg Z P<.0005+ 
1.44mg Z P<.0005 
 
9.17mg * P<.005 + 
no dre P-l. 
 
.541mg Z P<.0005 
 
1oong.. . .. :lug 10. :100. :1mg . :10. :100 .. :Ig . :10 
 
19.5mg 
no dre 
17.3mg 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
7.27mg 
11.2mg 
4.07mg 
 
P<.6 - 
P-1. _ 
P<.6 - 
P-I. _ 
Pal. _ 
P-1. _ 
P-1. _ 
P-1. _ 
Pal. _ 
P<.05 - 
P<.2 - 
P<. 009 - 
 
boong..: ..ug. :10. :100. g :. 1g :10. :100.. : g :10 
 
A 99.2mg \ P<.02 - 
 
2.559m * P<.5 
1.699m * P<.2 
:> no dre P1. 
 
no dre P-I. 
no dro P-I. 
:> no dri P-1. 
 
1.05gm * P<.5 
 
:> 246mg * P<.7 - 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
100ng..:. .ug. : 10. :100. m : g . :10. :100.. : g :10 
 
587.mg * P<.2 - 
no dre P-1. 
 
100ng .:. . ug. :10. :100.. :1g . :10. :100.. : g :10 
 
:> 9.15gm * P<.6 - 
 
8.85gm * P<.2 
no dre P-1. 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
no dre Pal. 
no dre P-1. 
 
A 1.749m * P<.02 c 
 
no dre P-I. 
13.09m * P<.4 
 
:+ 88.0mg * P<.0005 
 
146.mg * P<.0005c 
160.mg * P<.0005c 
263.mg * P<.0005c 
451.mg * P<.006 c 
572.mg * P<.002 c 
556.mg * P<.05 
 
124.mg * P<.005 
no dri P-1. 
 
bO0ng .. : lug. :10. :100. g :. 1g :10. :100.. : g :10 
 
+ 1.00gm / P<.0005c 
 
1.34gm / P<.0005c 
21.1gm * P<1. 
no dre P-I. 
no dre P-I. 
 
+ 935.mg I P<.0005c 
 
1.62gm P<.0005c 
no dre Pal. 
no dre Pal. 
no dre P-1. 
 
; + 27.8mg / P<.0005c 
 
29.1mg / P<.0005c 
693.mg * P<.002 
 
37.0mg / P<.0005 
no dre P-1. 
 
+: 31.9mg / P<.0005 
 
31.9mg / P<.0005c 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
c 1328 7.01mg 37.2mg 
d 1328 9.35mg 172.mg 
* 1328 3.80mg n.s.s. 
f 1328 1.01mg 10.2mg 
225 1328 .367mg .840mg 
 
a 1328 .367mg .840mg 
b 1328 .926mg 3.19mg 
c 1328 4.93mg 69.6mg 
d 1328 21.7mg n.s.s. 
* 1328 .359mg 1.03mg 
 
0/20 
0/20 
6/20 
8/20 
0/14 
0/14 
0/14 
0/14 
0/14 
1/14 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
3.06mg 0/35 6.12mg 5/33 12.2mg 8/33 
3.06mg 1/35 6.12mg 2/33 12.2mg 6/33 
3.06mg 12/35 6.12mg 15/33 12.2mg 15/33 
3.06mg 27/35 6.12mg 28/33 12.2mg 28/33 
2.14mg 29/35 4.29mg 27/35 (8.57mg 20/35) 
2.14mg 29/35 4.29mg 27/35 (8.57mg 22/35) 
2.14mg 13/35 4.29mg 18/35 (8.57mg 13/35) 
2.14mg 1/35 4.29mg 6/35 8.57mg 7/35 
2.14mg 5/35 4.29mg 0/35 8.57mg 0/35 
 
2.14mg 29/35 4.29mg 28/35 (8.57mg 26/35) 
 
ANNYDROGLUCOCHLORAL (WLpha-chLoraLose) 15879-93-3 
 
226 1297 2.86mg n.s.a. 
 
a 1297 6.85mg n.s.s. 
b 1297 2.41mg n.s.s. 
227 1297 4.75mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1297 7.17mg n.s.s. 
b 1297 3.75mg n.s.s. 
228 1297 7.28mg n.s.a. 
 
a 1297 7.28mg n.s.s. 
b 1297 7.28mg n.s.s. 
229 1297 2.19mg n.s.a. 
 
a 1297 2.76mg n.s.s. 
b 1297 1.54mg 89.3mg 
 
ANILAZINE 101-05-3 
 
230 c08684 47.6mg n.s.s. 
 
a c08684 628.mg n.s.a. 
b c08684 511.mg n. .s. 
231 c08684 224.mg n.s.s. 
 
a c08684 365.mg n.s.a. 
b c08684 391.mg n.s.s. 
232 c08684 32.9mg n.s.s. 
 
a c08684 257.mg n.s.s. 
233 c08684 34.2mg n.s.s. 
 
a c08684 n.s.s. n.s.a. 
 
1/17 
0/17 
2/17 
2/18 
1/18 
3/18 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
 
4/25 
0/25 
0/25 
15/25 
9/25 
4/25 
22/25 
0/25 
12/25 
0/25 
 
3.89mg 
3.89mg 
3.89mg 
3.62mg 
3.62mg 
3.62mg 
3.89mg 
3.89mg 
3.89mg 
3.62mg 
3.62mg 
3.62mg 
 
2/16 
0/16 
3/16 
1/18 
0/18 
2/18 
0/17 
0/17 
0/17 
3/18 
2/18 
5/18 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
62.0mg 22/50 (124.mg 18/50) 
62.0mg 1/50 124.mg 1/50 
62.0mg 1/50 124.mg 2/50 
57.7mg 20/50 114.mg 25/50 
57.7mg 6/50 114.mg 12/50 
57.7mg 7/50 114.mg 6/50 
25.0mg 42/50 50.0mg 43/50 
25.0mg 1/50 50.0mg 1/50 
20.0mg 26/50 40.0mg 28/50 
20.0mg 0/50 40.0mg 0/50 
 
ANILINE 62.53-3 
 
234 1460 144.mg n.s.s. 0/28 
 
a 1460 29.3mg n.s.s. 0/28 
 
15.0mg 0/28 30.0mg 1/28 60.0mg 1/28 
15.0mg 0/28 30.0mg 0/28 60.0mg 0/28 
 
Hgiwmara;txtt,6,71 -75; 1980 
 
ANILINE.HCl 142-04-1 
 
235 c03736 1.619m n.s.s. 
 
a c03736 3.279m n.a.s. 
b c03736 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
236 c03736 2.45gm n.s.s. 
 
a c03736 5.789m n.s.s. 
b c03736 5.159m n.s.s. 
237 c03736 786.mg 248.m 
 
a c03736 265.mg n.s.s. 
b c03736 2.129m n.s.s. 
238 c03736 64.2mg 133.mg 
 
a c03736 99.9mg 277.mg 
b c03736 108.mg 344.mg 
c c03736 168.mg 565.mg 
d c03736 251.og 4.10gm 
* c03736 312.mg 2.019m 
f c03736 249.mg n.s.s. 
g c03736 65.9mg 1.259m 
h c03736 2.389m n.a.s. 
 
21/50 
 
1/50 
0/50 
24/50 
12/50 
4/50 
0/25 
17/25 
0/25 
0/25 
0/25 
0/25 
0/25 
0/25 
0/25 
2/25 
10/25 
1/25 
 
741.mg 22/50 
741 .mg 5/50 
741.mg 0/50 
693.mg 27/50 
693.mg 9/50 
693.mg 8/50 
144.mg 1/50 
144.mg 32/50 
144. mg 0/50 
115.mg 27/50 
115.mg 19/50 
1 15.mg 19/50 
115.mg 11/50 
115.mg 7/50 
1 15.mg 4/50 
1 15.mg 6/50 
115.mg 42/50 
115.mg 0/50 
 
1.509m 28/49 
1. 509m 5/49 
1. 509m 0/49 
1.399m 22/50 
1. 399m 7/50 
1. 399m 3/50 
286.mg 7/50 
286.mg 35/50 
286gmg 1/50 
229.mg 38/50 
229.mg 23/50 
229.mg 20/50 
229.m9 18/50 
229.mg 9/50 
229.mg 11/50 
229.mg 12/50 
229.mg 45/50 
229.mg 0/50 
 
o-ANISIDINE.HCl (NCI uses CAS# 134-29-0) 134-29-2 
 
239 c03747 611.mg 1.819m 0/55 319.mg 1/55 638.mg 22/55 
 
a c03747 771.mg 2.649m 0/55 319.mg 0/55 638.mg 18/55 
b c03747 761.mg n.s.s. 34/55 319.mg 20/55 638.mg 33/55 
c c03747 4.37gm n.s.s. 11/55 319.mg 1/55 638.mg 4/55 
d c03747 4.67gm n.s.s. 4/55 319.mg 2/55 638.mg 1/55 
240 c03747 575.mg 1.67gm 0/55 297.mg 2/55 589.mg 22/55 
 
a c03747 888.mg 3.469m 0/55 297.mg 0/55 589.mg 15/55 
b c03747 1.14gm n.s.s. 43/55 297.mg 27/55 589.mg 30/55 
c c03747 1.08gm n.s.s. 28/55 297.mg 13/55 (589.mg 7/55) 
d c03747 824.mg n.s.s. 12/55 297.mg 9/55 (589.mg 2/55) 
241 c03747 11.0mg 48.6mg 0/55 248.mg 46/55 500.mg 50/55 
 
a c03747 11.2mg 52.9mg 0/55 248.mg 41/55 500.mg 50/55 
b c03747 208.mg 3.85gm 0/55 248.mg 5/55 500.mg 0/55 
c c03747 21.0mg 62.0mg 52/55 248.mg 50/55 500.mg 51/55 
d c03747 n.s.s. n.s.s. 1/55 248.mg 0/55 500.mg 0/55 
242 c03747 20.6mg 48.8mg 0/55 198.mg 52/55 400.mg 52/55 
 
a c03747 20.6mg 48.8mg 0/55 198.mg 52/55 400.mg 52/55 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Iun:a/a,a/c. 
mul:fbs,srn; spL:fbs,srn. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
bod:men; ouL:fbs,hes,srn; spl:fbs,hes,srn. C 
 
bod:men; muL:hes; spL:has. 
 
bod:m.n; mul:fbs,srn; spL:fba,srn. 
 
spL:fbs,srn. 
bod:men; ouL:fbs,srn. 
 
adr:phm,phm. S 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
ubl:tcc,tpp. 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
ubl:tcc,tpp. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
ubl :tcc,tpp. 
 
S 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
k/p:tcc; thy:cyn,fca,fcc,pcn,pcy; tyf:pcn,pcy; ubl:tcc,tpp. C 
 
ubl :tcc,tpp. 
 
43 
 
Brkly Code 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
44 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
 
b R a f34 
c R m f34 
d R m f34 
a R a f34 
f R a f34 
9 R f f34 
 
eat ubl tcc 22m24 as 
eat thy NXA 22m24 as 
set NXA NXA 22m24 as 
eat k/p tcc 22m24 as 
oat TBA NXB 22m24 as 
eat liv NXB 22m24 as 
 
p-ANISIDINE.HCL 
 
243 N f b6c eat TBA NXB 24m24 
 
a N f b6c eat Liv NXB 24m24 
b N f b6c eat Lun NXB 24m24 
244 N m b6c eat TBA NXB 24m24 
 
a N m b6c eat Liv NXB 24.24 
b N m b6c eat lun NXB 24m24 
245 R f f34 eat TBA NXB 24.24 
 
a R f f34 eat liv NXB 24m24 
246 R m f34 eat pro NXA 24m24 
 
a R a f34 eat NXB NXB 24m24 
b R m f34 eat Lun a/a 24m24 
c R m f34 sat ski sqc 24.24 
d R a f34 sat TBA NXB 24m24 
o R m f34 sat Liv NXB 24m24 
 
ANTHRANILIC ACID 
 
247 N f b6c eat TBA NXB 
 
a N f b6c eat liv NXB 
b N f b6c eat Lun NXB 
248 N m b6c eat TBA NXB 
 
a N m b6c eat Liv NXB 
b N a b6c eat Lun NXB 
249 R f f34 oat TBA NXB 
 
a R f f34 eat Liv NXB 
250 R m f34 eat TBA NXB 
 
a R m f34 eat Liv NXB 
 
18.24 
18.24 
18.24 
18m24 
18.24 
18.24 
18.24 
18.24 
18.24 
18.24 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
32.7mg / P<.0005c 
235.mg / P<.0005c 
535.mg * P<.0005c 
1.04gm * P<.002 c 
30.9mg / P<.0005 
483.mg * P<.002 
 
loong. g. : .ug . :10 . :100. :. 1g : 100.. g . : 1 g :.10 
 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
no dre P-1. 
12.69m * P<.6 
no dre P-1. 
6.839m * P<.5 
 
493.mg \ P<.02 a 
942.mg * P<.05 
 
3.59gm * P<.06 a 
3.729m * P<.06 a 
no dre P-1. 
 
1.56gm * P<.03 
100ng..: ..ug. :10. :100. g :.1g :10. : 100.. : g :10 
 
:> 68.49m * P<.9 - 
 
26.4gm * P<.4 
80.7gm * P<.4 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P.a1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
9,10-ANTHRAQUINONE 100ng..: ..ug. :10. :100. g : ..g :10. :100.. : . :10 
 
251 N f b6s orl Lun ad. 76w76 *vx .> 847.mg 
 
a N f b6a orl liv hpt 76w76 *vx no dre 
b N f b6a orl tbs mix 76w76 *vx 749.mg 
252 N a b6a orl Liv hpt 76w76 *vx .> no dre 
 
a N m b6a orl lun ad. 76w76 evx no dre 
b N a b6a orl tbs mix 76w76 *vx no dre 
253 N f b6c orL lun ad. 76w76 *vx . 494.mg 
 
a N f b6c orL liv hpt 76w76 *vx no dre 
b N f b6c orl tba mix 76w76 *vx 494.mg 
254 N m b6c orl Liv hpt 76w76 *vx . 460.mg 
 
a N m b6c orL lun mix 76w76 evx no dre 
b N m b6c orl tba mix 76w76 evx 460.mg 
ANTIMONY POTASSIUN TARTRATE 1 00ng .. :.lug. :10. :100.. g : . . :10 . :100.. g . 10 
 
255 N b cdl wat lun tur 33m33 a .> no dre 
 
a N b cdl wat liv tum 33m33 a no dre 
b N b cdl wet tba tum 33m33 a no dre 
c N b cdl wat tba maL 33.33 a no dre 
 
ARANITE 
 
256 N f b6a orL 
 
a N f b6a orL 
b N f b6a orL 
257 N m b6a orl 
 
a N m b6a orL 
b N m b6a orL 
258 N f b6c orL 
 
a N f b6c orL 
b N f b6c orl 
259 N m b6c orL 
 
a N m b6c orL 
b N m b6c orl 
c N m b6c orL 
260 R b cfn sat 
 
a R b cfn eat 
261 R b fds eat 
262 R f osm eat 
 
a R f osm sat 
263 R f osm eat 
 
a R f os sat 
b R f osm eat 
264 R m os. sat 
 
a R f oss eat 
b R m osm at 
 
lOOng . : ..ug. :10. :100. g : ng. :10. :100. :Ig . :10 
 
lun ad. 80w80 *vx .> 432.mg P<.3 
liv hpt 80w80 *vx no dre P-1. 
tba mix 80w80 *vx 391.mg P<.4 
liv hpt 77w77 evx .> 15.9gm P<1. 
lun ad. 77w77 evx no dre P-1. 
tba mix 77w77 evx no dre P-1. 
liv hpt 77w77 evx .> 973.mg P<. 3 
Lun ado 77w77 *vx 973.mg P<.3 
 
tba mix 77w77 evx 92.7mg P<.0005 
Liv mix 80w80 *vx . + . 126.mg P<.003 
 
liv hpt 80w80 evx 158.mg P<.006 + 
Lun mix 80w80 evx no dre P-1. 
 
tba mix 80w80 *vx 103.mg P<.002 
 
liv hnd 24m24 . + . 61.8.g * P<.0005+ 
biL ad. 24m24 1.01gm * P<.05 + 
Liv mix 22m24 agrs . . 430.mg * P<.002 + 
Liv hem 27m27 .> 256.mg P<.3 - 
tba mix 27m27 no dre P-1. - 
liv tus 24m24 a .> no dre P-1. - 
tba ben 24m24 a 31.5mg P<.6 - 
tba maL 24.24 a no dre P-1. - 
liv tum 27m27 .> no dre P-1. - 
tba maL 27m27 101.mg P<.1 - 
tba mix 27m27 198.mg P<.6 - 
 
P<.6 - 
P-1. - 
P<.6 - 
P-1. - 
Pal. - 
Pal. - 
P<.1 - 
P-1. - 
P<.1 - 
P<.1 - 
P.I. - 
P<.1 - 
 
Pal. - 
P-I. . 
 
P-1. _ 
Pal. - 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
b c03747 21.0mg 50.4mg 0/55 
c c03747 98.9mg 595.mg 0/55 
d c03747 191.mg 1.90g. 0/55 
* c03747 304.mg 5.619m 0/55 
f c03747 20.3mg 49.2mg 39/55 
9 c03747 148.mg 3.15gm 0/55 
 
p-ANISIDINE.HCI 20265.97-8 
 
243 c03758 2.32gm n.s.s. 34/55 
 
a c03758 4.699m n.s.s. 11/55 
b c03758 5.159m n.s.s. 4/55 
244 c03758 2.19gm n.s.s. 43/55 
 
a c03758 2.78gm n.s.s. 28/55 
b c03758 2.35gm n.s.s. 12/55 
245 c03758 568.mg n.s.s. 52/55 
 
a c03758 1.41gm n.s.s. 1/55 
246 c03758 202.mg n.s.s. 1/55 
 
a c03758 428.mg n.s.s. 1/55 
b c03758 1.09gm n.s.s. 0/55 
c c03758 1.12gm n.s.s. 0/55 
d c03758 424.mg n.s.s. 39/55 
* c03758 673.mg n.s.s. 0/55 
 
ANTHRANILIC ACID 118-92-3 
 
247 c01730 4.539m n.s.s. 1/15 
 
a c01730 7.839m n.s.s. 0/15 
b c01730 13.19m n.s.s. 0/15 
248 c01730 1.489m n.s.s. 0/15 
 
a c01730 1.799m n.s.s. 0/15 
b c01730 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/15 
249 c01730 361.mg n.s.s. 10/15 
 
a c01730 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/15 
250 c01730 867.mg n.s.s. 6/15 
 
a c01730 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/15 
 
9,10-ANTHRAQUINONE 84-65-1 
 
251 1229 124.mg n.s.s. 1/17 
 
a 1229 297.mg n.s.s. 0/17 
b 1229 104.mg n.s.s. 2/17 
252 1229 312.mg n.s.s. 1/18 
 
a 1229 312.mg n.s.s. 2/18 
b 1229 312.mg n.s.s. 3/18 
253 1229 121.mg n.s.s. 0/16 
 
a 1229 316.mg n.s.s. 0/16 
b 1229 121.mg n.s.s. 0/16 
254 1229 113.mg n.s.s. 0/16 
 
a 1229 294.mg n.s.s. 0/16 
b 1229 113.mg n.s.s. 0/16 
 
198.m9 
198.mg 
198.mg 
198. mg 
198. mg 
198.mg 
 
638. mg 
638.mg 
638.mg 
589.mg 
589.mg 
589.mg 
146.mg 
146. mg 
 
I18.mg 
I18.mg 
 
I18.Mg 
I18.mg 
 
18.mg 
I18.mg 
 
1. 73gm 
1. 73gm 
1. 73gm 
1. 59gm 
1. 59gm 
1. 59gm 
402. mg 
402. mg 
318.mg 
318.ag 
 
169.mg 
169. mg 
169. mg 
157.mg 
157. mg 
157.mg 
169. mg 
169. mg 
169. mg 
157.mg 
157.mg 
157. mg 
 
50/55 400.mg 51/55 
7/55 400.mg 6/55 
4/55 400.mg 4/55 
2/55 400.mg 4/55 
53/55 400.mg 53/55 
 
4/55 400.mg 0/55 
 
33/55 1.28gm 
 
10/55 1. 28gm 
5/55 1. 28gm 
 
29/55 1. 18gm 
22/55 1. 18gm 
8/55 1. 18gm 
38/55 291.mg 
 
1/55 291.mg 
8/55 (233.mg 
8/55 233.mg 
0/55 233.mg 
0/55 233.mg 
36/55 233.mg 
 
3/55 233-mg 
 
5/35 3.45gm 
1/35 3.45gm 
0/35 3.459m 
13/35 3. 18gm 
6/35 3.189m 
5/35 (3.18gm 
19/35 (804.mg 
0/35 804.mg 
14/35 643.mg 
0/35 643.mg 
 
thy:cyn,fca,fcc,pcn,pcy. 
 
thy:fca; tyf:pcn,pcy. 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
24/55 
6/55 
3/55 
36/55 
23/55 
17/55 
42/55 
 
3/55 
3/55) 
7/55 
3/55 
3/55 
31/55 
 
4/55 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a, a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
pre:adn,can. 
 
lun:a/a; pre:adn,can; ski:sqc. A 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
5/35 
2/35 
1/35 
6/35 
5/35 
0/35) 
11/35) 
0/35 
11/35 
0/35 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
2/16 
0/16 
3/16 
0/18 
0/18 
0/18 
2/17 
0/17 
2/17 
2/17 
0/17 
2/17 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
ANTIMONY POTASSIUM TARTRATE 28300-74-5 
 
255 1036 9.12mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1036 19.7mg n.s.s. 
b 1036 6.83mg n.s.s. 
c 1036 9.91mg n.s.s. 
ARANITE 140-57-8 
 
256 40a 99.0mg n.s.s. 
 
a 40a 305.mg n.a.s. 
b 40a 85.9mg n.s.s. 
257 40a 166.mg n.a.s. 
 
a 40a 281.mg n.s.s. 
b 40a 145.mg n.s.s. 
258 40a 158.'mg n.a.s. 
 
a 40a 158.mg n.s.s. 
b 40a 41 lmg 295.mg 
259 40a 50.7mg 617.mg 
 
a 40a 59.4mg 1.569m 
b 40a 285.ag n.s.s. 
c 40a 43.6mg 375.mg 
260 42 38.4mg 122.mg 
 
a 42 248.mg n.s.s. 
261 1133 202.mg 1.99gm 
262 21 41.7mg n.s.s. 
 
a 21 16.1mg n.s.s. 
263 84a 24.7mg n.s.s. 
 
a 84 5.40mg n.s.s. 
b 84a 13.0mg n.s.s. 
264 21 62.6mg n.s.s. 
 
a 21 24.7mg n.s.s. 
b 21 27.2mg n.s.s. 
 
15/71 
4/71 
24/71 
 
8/71 
 
1/17 
0/17 
2/17 
1/18 
2/18 
3/18 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
5/180 
0/180 
0/22 
0/30 
13/30 
 
1/30 
6/30 
6/30 
0/30 
0/30 
1/30 
 
.877mg 10/76 
.877m9 1/76 
.877mg 18/76 
.877m9 6/76 
 
3/16 
0/16 
4/16 
1/17 
0/17 
2/17 
1/17 
1/17 
8/17 
6/16 
5/16 
0/16 
7/16 
 
3/93 9.00mg 10/90 18.0mg 22/96 
0/93 9.00mg 0/90 18.0mg 2/96 
1/20 71.1mg 2/21 225.mg 6/20 
1/30 
12/30 
0/30 
8/30 
3/30 
0/30 
2/30 
2/30 
 
157. mg 
157. mg 
157. mg 
146. mg 
146.mg 
146.mg 
157.mg 
157. mg 
157.mg 
146. mg 
146. mg 
146. mg 
146. mg 
4.50mg 
4.50mg 
22.5mg 
10.Omg 
10.0mg 
4. 00mg 
4. 00mg 
4. 00mg 
8.00mg 
8. 00mg 
8. 00mg 
 
Kanisawa;canr,29,892-895; 1969 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
Popper;canc, 13,1035-1046; 1960 
 
Oser;txap,2,441 -457; 1960 
Dsichmann;txap, 11,88-103; 1967 
 
Radomaki;txap,7,652*656;1965 
Doichmann;txap, 11,88-103; 1967 
 
45 
 
Brklv Code 
 
46 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
265 R a oso eat Liv tum 24.24 a 
 
a R m osm set tbe ben 24.24 * 
b R * osm eat tba maL 24.24 o 
266 R b ada eat Liv hnd 24.24 
267 R b wid eat liv hnd 24.24 
 
a R b wid eat bil ads 24.24 
b R b wid eat Liv hpc 24.24 
 
AROCLOR 1254 
 
268 N * baj eat liv hpt 47w47 o 
269 N m baj oet liv hpt 26w47 a 
270 R f f34 eat liv adn 24.24 a 
 
a R f f34 eat NXS NXB 2424 a 
b R f f34 eat sto acn 2424 a 
c R f f34 ot TBA NXB 2424 a 
d R f f34 eat liv NXB 24.24 a 
271 R m f34 eat --- NXA 24.24 
 
a R m f34 et --- 1eu 24m24 
b R m f 34 eat NXB NXB 24.24 
c R m f34 eat liv NXA 24.24 
d R m f34 oat NXA NXA 24.24 
* R m f 34 eat TBA NXS 24.24 
f R m f34 eat liv NXB 24.24 
AROCLOR 1260 
 
272 R f shc eat liv mix 89w95 a 
 
a R f shc set liv nnd 89w95 o 
b R f shc eat liv hpc 89w95 * 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
no dre P-1. - 
64.7mg P<.3 - 
no dre P-1. - 
760.mg * P<.3 
 
79.9m9 Z P<.0005+ 
397.mg * P<.002 + 
+historical * P<.04 . 
 
lOOng . . .ug. :10. :100. g :. 1g :10.. :100. :I g. :10 
 
.Ce+) . 9.58m9 P<.0005+ 
 
C.>) 64.6mg P<.2 
 
: Ahistoricat * P<.07 * 
 
21.7mg * P<.2 
 
*historical P-1. a 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-l. 
 
: + : 5.94mg * P<.004 
 
6.75mg * P<.009 
10.4mg * P<.004 
 
historicat * P<.008 a 
historicaL * P<.3 a 
 
3.23mg * P<.004 
20.8mg * P<.03 
 
bO0ng. . .ug. :10. :100.1. :g .:10. :100. :I . :10 
 
. + . 1.04mg 
 
1.76mg 
18.3mg 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
 
ARSENATE, SODIUM 1 Ong .:. .Iug. :10. :100. 1m : g .:10. :100. : g. :10 
 
273 R b osa set tba maL 24m24 s .> no dre P-1. 
 
a R b osm eat tba mix 24.24 s 
ARSENIOUS OXIDE 
 
274 N b cbl wet liv tum 23m23 sv 
 
a N b cbL wet tbe mix 23m23 sv 
275 N m sse wat sbg pam 24m24 
 
276 N f swi wat lun ad 65w65 e 
 
a N f swi wat Liv hpt 65w65 e 
277 N m swi wat Lun ad. 65w65 e 
 
a N m swi wat Liv hpt 65w65 a 
 
ARSENITE, SODIUN 
 
278 N b cdl wet lun mix 24m24 e 
 
a N b cdl wat Liv mix 24m24 e 
b N b cdl wat tbe maL 24m24 a 
c N b cdl wat tba mix 24m24 e 
d N b cdl wat tba ben 24.24 a 
279 R b Lob wet Liv tum 39.39 e 
 
a R b Lob wt tb mL 39m39 e 
b R b lb wattbe tu 39m39 e 
280 R b ose eat tba meL 24.24 s 
 
a R b ose eat tbe mix 24m24 s 
 
no dre Pl.. 
 
100ng . .:1ug. :10. :100.1. :g .:10. :100. . : g :10 
 
no dre 
no dre 
54.8mg 
215.mg 
no dre 
31.4mg 
no dre 
 
P.1. 
P-I. 
P<. 3 
P<.9 
Pal. 
 
P<. 06 
P-l. 
 
1O0ng . . .ug. :10. :100. g :. 1g :10. :100.. : . :10 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P.1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
10.6mg P<.2 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
626.mg Z P<1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
ASPARTANE bO0ng . . :lug. 1 :10 : . 100. lg. . :10 . :100..1 :01g :. 
 
281 R f sLa eat bra tum 52w52 ekr .> no dre P-1. 
282 R f sLs eat bra mix 24m24 er .> no dre P-1. 
283 R m sLs set bra tum 52w52 skr .> no dri P-1. 
284 R m sLs eat bra mix 24m24 or .> 7.43gm * P<.5 
 
ASPIRIN 1Ong .:. .:ug. :10. :100.. :1g .:10. :100. . : . :10 
 
285 N f cb6 eat Liv tum 77w77 e .> no dre P-1. 
286 N m cb6 eat Liv tum 77w77 e .> no dre P-1. 
ASPIRIN, PHENACETIN, AND CAFFEINE bO0ng.. :. .ug. :10. :100. 1m : g . :10. :100. : g. :10 
 
287 N f b6c eat TBA NXB 78w94 :> no dre P-1. 
 
a N f b6c eat Liv NXB 78w94 18.0gm * P<.4 
b N f b6c eat Lun NXB 78w94 no dre Pul. 
288 N m b6c eat TBA NXB 78w94 :> 3.01gm * P<.3 
 
a N m b6c eat liv NXB 78w94 44.5gm * P<.9 
 
b N m b6c eat lun NXB 78w94 3.689m * P<.07 
289 N f cb6 eat Liv hnd 77w77 e .> 8.769m P<.3 
 
a N f cb6 eat Liv hpc 77w77 e no dre P-1. 
290 N m cb6 eat Liv hnd 77w77 e .> 9.54gm P<.3 
 
a Nm cb6 eat Liv hpc 77w77 e no dre P-1. 
291 R f f34 set TBA NXB 18m25 :> no dre P-1. 
 
a R f f34 eat Liv NXB 18m25 3.05gm * P<.07 
 
r 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl IDose llnc 2Dose 21nc 
 
265 84a 19.8mg n.s.s. 
 
a 84a 10.5mg n.s.s. 
b 84a 10.6mg n.s.s. 
266 42 187.mg n.s.s. 
267 42 48.2mg 155.mg 
 
a 42 151.mg 1.86gm 
b 42 246.mg n. .s. 
 
0/30 
0/30 
3/30 
0/82 
2/193 
0/193 
0/193 
 
3.20mg 
3.20mg 
3.20mg 
4. 50mg 
4.50mg 
4. 50mg 
4. 50mg 
 
0/30 
1/30 
2/30 
 
0/46 9.00mg 
2/93 9. 00mg 
0/93 9. 00mg 
0/93 9. 00mg 
 
1/41 18.0mg 1/92 
3/100 18.0mg 20/90 
0/100 18.0mg 5/90 
0/100 18.0mg 2/90 
 
47 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
Brkly Code 
Radomski ;txap,7,652-656; 1965 
 
Popper;canc, 13,1035-1046; 1960 
 
AROCLOR 1254 (PCB) 27323-18-8 
 
268 1029 4.46mg 26.3mg 0/58 
269 1029 10.5mg n.s.s. 0/58 
270 c02664 10.5mg n.s.s. 0/24 
 
a c02664 8.23mg n.s.s. 0/24 
b c02664 15.2mg n. .s. 0/24 
c c02664 4.25mg n. .s. 11/24 
d c02664 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/24 
271 c02664 2.78mg 52.3mg 3/24 
 
a c02664 3.01mg 275.mg 3/24 
b c02664 4.19mg 36.4mg 0/24 
c c02664 5.21mg 338.mg 0/24 
d c02664 8.40mg n.s.s. 0/24 
* c02664 1.60mg 23.4mg 7/24 
f c02664 6.29mg n.s.s. 0/24 
 
36.0mg 
19.6mg 
1. 30mg 
1. 30mg 
1. 30mg 
1. 30mg 
1. 30mg 
1 . 00mg 
1.00mg 
1. 00mg 
1. 00mg 
1.00mg 
1 . 00mg 
1 . 00mg 
 
9/22 
1/24 
 
0/24 2.50mg 
1/24 2.50mg 
1/24 2.50mg 
18/24 2.50mg 
0/24 2.50mg 
2/24 2. 00mg 
2/24 2. 00mg 
0/24 2.00mg 
0/24 2. 00mg 
0/24 2. 00mg 
7/24 2.00mg 
0/24 2.00mg 
 
Kimbrough; jnci,53,547-549; 1974 
 
1/24 
2/24 
1/24 
13/24 
0/24 
5/24 
5/24 
3/24 
1/24 
2/24 
12/24 
 
1/24 
 
5. 00mg 
5. 00mg 
5. 00mg 
5. 00mg 
5. 00mg 
4.00mg 
4. 00mg 
4 . 00mg 
4. 00mg 
4. 00mg 
4. 00mg 
4. 00mg 
 
2/24 
2/24 
0/24 
12/24 
0/24 
9/24 
8/24 
3/24 
3/24 
0/24 
13/24 
2/24 
 
AROCLOR 1260 (PCB) 11096-82-5 
 
272 1320 .804mg 1.35mg 0/173 4.69mg 170/184 
 
a 1320 1.39mg 2.24mg 0/173 4.69mg 144/184 
b 1320 11.3mg 34.3mg 1/173 4.69mg 26/184 
 
liv:adn; sto:acn. A 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
---:Lmu,Lym. S 
 
S 
cmc:acn; jej:acn; Liv:adn,hpc; sto:acn. A 
 
Liv:adn,hpc. 
c.c:acn; jeJ:acn; sto:acn. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Kimbrough; jnci,55,1453-1456;1975 
 
ARSENATE, SODIUM 7631-89-2 
 
273 1507 116.mg n.s.s. 8/50 
 
a 1507 121.mg n.s.s. 17/50 
 
1.41mg 14/50 2.81mg 8/50 5.63mg 10/50 11.3mg 6/50 18.0mg 5/50 
1.41mg 21/50 2.81mg 15/50 5.63mg 16/50 11.3mg 13/50 18.0mg 6/50 
 
Byron; 
txap, 10,132-147; 1967 
 
ARSENIOUS OXIDE 1327-53-3 
 
274 1505 39.4mg n.s.s. 0/50 
 
a 1505 39.4mg n.s.s. 1/50 
275 1506 12.1mg n.s.s. 1/50 
 
276 1509 8.52mg n.s.s. 34/137 
 
a 1509 24.2mg n.s.s. 4/137 
277 1509 11.4mg n.s.s. 18/133 
 
a 1509 80.5mg n.s.s. 2/133 
 
4.13mg 0/50 
4.13mg 0/50 
3.33mg 3/50 
20.0mg 4/15 
20.0mg 0/15 
16.7mg 15/60 
16.7mg 0/60 
 
Husper;aenh,5,445-462; 1962 
 
Sanderson;becc ,39,628-629; 1961 
Baroni;aenh,7,668-674;1963/Shubik 1962 
 
ARSENITE, SODIUM 7784-46-5 
 
278 1512 14.2mg n.s.s. 26/170 
 
a 1512 14.6mg n.s.s. 7/170 
b 1512 7.97mg n.s.s. 15/170 
c 1512 10.9mg n.s.s. 55/170 
d 1512 14.5mg n.s.s. 29/170 
279 1036 3.35mg n.s.s. 1/82 
 
a 1036 8.08mg n.s.s. 9/82 
b 1036 2.90mg n.s.s. 31/82 
280 1507 13.8mg n.s.s. 8/50 
 
a 1507 60.2mg n.s.s. 16/50 
ASPARTAME 22839-47-0 
 
281 1327m 23.6mg n.s.s. 0/16 
282 1327n 2.29gm n.s.s. 1/60 
283 1327m 18.8mg n.s.s. 0/16 
284 1327n 1.41gm n.s.s. 0/59 
 
ASPIRIN 50-78-2 
 
285 1028 1.77gm n.s.s. 0/36 
286 1028 1.949m n.s.s. 0/35 
ASPIRIN, PHENACETIN, AND CAFFEINE 
287 c02697 2.92gm n.s.s. 20/50 
 
a c02697 4.46gm n.s.s. 1/50 
b c02697 3.65gm n.a.s. 4/50 
288 c02697 975.mg n.s.s. 17/50 
 
a c02697 2.35gm n.s.s. 7/50 
b c02697 1.46gm n.s.s. 6/50 
289 1028 1.439m n.s.s. 0/36 
 
a 1028 2.679m n.s.s. 0/36 
290 1028 1.559g n.s.s. 0/35 
 
a 1028 2.91gm n.s.s. 0/35 
291 c02697 222.mg n.s.s. 42/50 
 
a c02697 1.329m n.s.s. 0/50 
 
.877mg 3/103 
.877mg 1/103 
.877mg 6/103 
.877mg 11/103 
.877mg 3/103 
.265mg 5/91 
.265mg 3/91 
.265mg 25/91 
 
.703mg 8/50 1.41mg 
 
Kanisawa;canr,27,1192-1195;1967 
 
Kanisawa;canr,29,892-895; 1969 
 
9/50 2.81mg 15/50 5.63mg 7/50 (11.3mg 1 
 
.703mg 14/50 1.41mg 15/50 2.81mg 18/50 5.63mg 15/50 11.3mg 6 
 
50.0mg 0/16 100.mg 
50.0mg 0/60 100.mg 
40.0mg 0/16 80.0mg 
40.0mg 1/59 80.0mg 
 
0/16 200.mg 
2/60 200.mg 
0/16 160.mg 
0/60 160.mg 
 
0/16 
0/60 
0/16 
1/60 
 
382.mg 0/41 
382.mg 0/45 
 
(APC) 8003-03-0 
 
755.mg 17/50 1.51gm 14/50 
755.mg 2/50 1.51gm 3/50 
755.mg 7/50 1.51gm 4/50 
697.mg 24/50 1.39gm 21/50 
697.mg 11/50 1.39gm 6/50 
697.mg 9/50 1.39gm 12/50 
696.mg 1/34 
696.mg 0/34 
696.mg 1/37 
696.mg 0/37 
 
245.mg 41/50 (485.mg 32/49) 
245.mg 4/50 485.mg 3/49 
 
1/50) Byron; 
 
txap, 10,132-147; 1967 
S/50 
 
Ishi i ;txtt,7,433-437; 1981 
 
Mackl in;dact,3, 135-163;1980 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
tun:a/a,a/c. 
t iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
nackt in;dact,3,135-163;1980 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
292 R m f34 eat TBA NXB 18.25 
 
a R m f34 sat Liv MXB 18.25 
 
ATRAZINE 
 
293 N f b6a 
 
a M f b6ae 
b N f b6ae 
294 N m b6a 
 
a M m b6a 
 
b N m b6a( 
295 N f b6c 
 
a M f b6c4 
b M f b6c( 
296 N m b6c4 
 
a N m b6c 
b M m b6c 
 
ATROPINE 
 
297 R f sda 
298 R m sda 
 
a R m sda 
 
ort lun ad. 76w76 *vx 
orl liv hpt 76w76 evx 
ort tba mix 76w76 *vx 
orl Lun ado 76w76 evx 
orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx 
orl tba mix 76w76 *v 
ort Liv hpt 76w76 evx 
orL Lun mix 76w76 *vx 
orL tba mix 76w76 ev 
orL Liv hpt 76w76 *vx 
orl Lun mix 76w76 *vx 
orl tba mix 76w76 *vx 
 
ipj tba maL 24m24 a 
ipj Liv ha. 24m24 S 
ipj tba maL 24m24 a 
 
AURAMINE -0 
 
299 N f atb eat liv hpt 52w79 a 
300 N m atb eat Liv hpt 52w84 a 
301 N f cba oat Liv hpt 52w99 a 
302 N m cba oat Liv hpt 52w79 a 
 
303 R m wsw sat liv hpt 20m29 a 
5-AZACYTIDINE* 
 
304 N f b6c ipJ NXA NXA 52w81 
 
a N f b6c ipj muL NXA 52w81 
b H f b6c ipj --- Lym 52w8I 
 
c N f b6c ipj TBA NXB 52w81 
d N f b6c ipj liv NXB 52w81 
* N f b6c ipj Lun NXB 52w81 
 
305 N m b6c ipJ TBA NXB 52w81 s 
 
a N m b6c ipj Liv NXB 52w81 s 
b N m b6c ipj lun NXB 52w81 s 
306 R f sda ipj TBA NXB 34w80 s 
 
a R f sda ipI Liv NXB 34w80 s 
307 R m sda ipj TBA NXB 34w80 s 
 
a R m sda ipI Liv NXB 34w80 s 
AZASERINE 
 
308 R b wis ipi pae car 26w78 * 
 
a R b wis ipj kid tum 26w78 a 
b R b wis ipj Liv tur 26w78 a 
 
AZIDE, SODIUM 
 
309 R f cdr eat 
 
a R f cdr eat 
310 R m cdr eat 
 
mgL tum 18.24 6 
 
pit cra 18.24 a 
pit cra 18m24 a 
 
AZINPHOSNETHYL 
 
311 N f b6c eat TBA NXB 80w92 
 
a N f b6c eat Liv NXB 80w92 
b N f b6c eat Lun NXB 80w92 
312 N m b6c eat Liv hpc 80w92 
 
a N m b6c eat TBA NXB 80w92 
b N m b6c eat Liv NXB 80w92 
c N m b6c sat Lun NXB 80w92 
313 R f osm eat TBA NXB 19m27 
 
a R f osm eat Liv NXB 19m27 
314 R f osm eat pit acn 19.25 
 
a R f osm eat thy NXA 19m25 
b R f os. eat adr coa 19m25 
 
315 R m osm eat pni NXA 19m27 v 
 
a R m osm eat TBA NXB 19m27 v 
b R m osm eat Liv MXB 19.27 v 
316 R m osm eat pit NXA 19.25 v 
 
a R m osm eat pit cra 19.25 v 
b R m osm eat thy NXA 19m25 v 
c R m oam at thy -- 19m25 v 
d R m osm eat thy NXA 19m25 v 
* R m osm sat adr NXA 19.25 v 
f R m os. eat pit MXA 19m25 v 
g R f os. eat Liv hpa 19.25 v 
h R m osm eat pni MXA 19m25 v 
i R m osm eat adr acn 19m25 v 
 
TD5O 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
no dre P.1. - 
no dre P. 1. 
 
jOOng..: ..ug.. : 10. :100... :.mg... :10.. :100.g. :. 1 :10 
 
K .> no dre 
 
no dre 
K 58.8mg 
K .> 28.2mg 
K no dre 
K 54.6mg 
K .> no dre 
K no dre 
K 71.0mg 
K . As 15.0mg 
K no dre 
K 9.29mg 
 
1OOng . : ..ug. :10. :100.. :g .:10. :100.. :g . :10 
 
90.7mg 
no dre 
no dre 
 
1O0ng. . .ug. :10. :100. g : .. :10.. :100.. :. :10 
 
94.3mg 
+ . 39.2mg 
 
+ . 67.7mg 
+ . 77.5mg 
+ . 11.0mg 
 
P-I. _ 
P-1. _ 
 
P<.7 7 
 
P<.4 - 
 
P-1. _ 
 
P<.7 - 
 
P-I. _ 
P-1. _ 
 
P<.3 - 
P<.02 - 
 
P-1. _ 
 
P<. 004 - 
 
P<1. _ 
 
P-I. 
 
P-I. - 
 
P<.08 + 
P<.008 + 
P<. 0005+ 
P<.004 + 
P<. 0005+ 
 
lOOng . . .:ug. :10. :100. g : 1.. :10. :100. :Ig . :10 
 
+ .256mg * P<.0005a 
 
.520mg * P<.008 a 
.615mg * P<.03 a 
.219mg * P<.003 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
:> 1.05mg * P<.2 
 
15.7mg * P<.9 
61.4mg * P<1. 
 
A .487mg / P<.09 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
+ : .328mg * P<.004 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
lOOng . . .lug. :10. :100. g :1g. :10. :100. :Ig . :10 
 
+ . .793mg P<.0005+ 
 
.942mg P<.0005 
3.02mg P<.03 
 
lOOng.. : ..lug. :.10. :.1 mg.10..100. . :. . :10 
 
+ . 3.01mg \ P<.003 
 
16. lg * P<.5 - 
.> no dre P-1. 
 
loong g.. : .ug . :10 . :100. :.1mg. :10. :100. :Ig . :10 
 
:> 2.58gm P<1. - 
 
no dre P-1. 
118.mg * P<.3 
 
+ #14.3mg * P<.007 - 
 
46.6mg * P<.8 
12.6mg * P<.2 
no dre P-1. 
:> no dre P-I. 
 
164.mg I P<.9 
 
pool : + #6.93mg \ P<.0005- 
 
15.9mg * P<.004 
16.4mg * P<.02 
 
22.9mg * P<.04 a 
5.42mg * P<.3 
52.7mg * P<.6 
 
pooL + : 3.99mg \ P<.008 
 
3.99mg \ P<.008 
 
6.06mg * P<.0005a 
7.87mg * P<.003 
 
10.5mg * P<.006 a 
15.3mg * P<.006 
7.43mg * P<.02 
23.3mg * P<.02 
 
30.6mg * P<.03 a 
44.3mg * P<.02 
 
48 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl 
 
292 c02697 406.mg n.s.s. 30/50 
 
a c02697 2.759m n.s.s. 5/50 
 
lDose lInc 2Dose 21nc 
 
Citation oi Pathology 
 
196.mg 37/50 388.mg 33/50 
196.mg 4/50 388.mg 1/50 
 
Brkly Code 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
ATRAZINE 1912-24-9 
 
293 1244 12.4mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1244 20.7mg n.s.s. 
b 1244 7.41mg n.s.s. 
294 1244 5.90mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1244 20.4mg n.s.s. 
b 1244 6.40mg n.s.s. 
295 1244 22.0mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1244 22.0mg n.s.s. 
b 1244 11.6mg n.s.s. 
296 1244 5.16mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1244 20.4mg n.s.s. 
b 1244 3.75mg 56.8mg 
 
ATROPINE 51-55-8 
 
297 1134 2.23mg n.s.s. 
298 1134 5.30mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1134 5.30mg n.s.s. 
AURAMINE-0 2465-27-2 
 
299 45 28.2mg n.s.s. 
300 45 12.8mg 860.mg 
301 45 30.5mg 197.mg 
302 45 30.3mg 666.mg 
303 45 4.06mg 31.2mg 
 
5-AZACYTIDINE* 320-67-2 
 
304 c01569 .138mg .716mg 
 
a c01569 .243mg 6.56mg 
b c01569 .249mg n.s.s. 
c c01569 .112mg 1.35mg 
d c01569 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
 
a c01569 1.65mg n.s.s. 
305 c01569 .360mg n.s.s. 
 
a c01569 .919mg n.s.s. 
b c01569 1.36mg n.s.s. 
306 c01569 .164mg n.s.s. 
 
a c01569 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
307 c01569 .156mg 2.32mg 
 
a c01569 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
 
AZASERINE 115-02*6 
 
308 1172 .342mg 2.54mg 
 
a 1172 .384mg 3.38mg 
b 1172 .742mg n.s.s. 
AZIDE, SODIUM 26628-22-8 
309 1112 1.45mg 19.1mg 
 
a 1112 3.92mg n.s.s. 
310 1112 13.5mg n.s.s. 
 
AZINPHOSNETHYL (Gusathion) 
 
311 c00066 18.2mg n.sa.s. 
 
a c00066 96.3mg n.s.s. 
b c00066 40.6mg n.s.s. 
312 c00066 7.82mg 169.mg 
 
a c00066 4.69mg n.s.s. 
b c00066 5.18mg n.s.s. 
c c00066 16.8mg n.s.s. 
313 c00066 2.58mg n.s.s. 
 
a c00066 12.0mg n.s.s. 
314 c00066 3.14mg 20.4mg 
 
a c00066 7.20mg 123.mg 
b c00066 6.72mg n.s.s. 
315 c00066 9.81mg n.s.s. 
 
a c00066 1.68mg n.s.s. 
b c00066 10.5mg n. .s. 
316 c00066 1.77mg 90.0mg 
 
a c00066 1.77mg 90.0mg 
b c00066 3.69mg 11.0mg 
c c00066 3.98mg 44.0mg 
d c00066 4.92mg 143.mg 
 
a c00066 6.93mg 183.mg 
f c00066 3.32mg n.c.s. 
g c00066 9.63mg n.s.s. 
h c00066 11.3mg n.s.s. 
i c00066 15.3mg n. .s. 
 
1/17 
0/17 
2/17 
2/18 
1/18 
3/18 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
 
11. 1mg 
11 .1mg 
11.1mg 
10. 3mg 
10. 3mg 
10. 3mg 
11 .1mg 
11 .1mg 
11.1mg 
10. 3mg 
10. 3mg 
10 .3mg 
 
1/17 
0/17 
3/17 
4/18 
0/18 
4/18 
0/18 
0/18 
1/18 
4/18 
0/18 
6/18 
 
0/35 
0/35 
0/35 
1/35 
0/35 
0/35 
5/35 
1/35 
1/35 
3/35 
0/35 
1/35 
0/35 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
Schmaht ;zkko,86,77-84;1976 
 
3/33 .857mg 3/31 
1/36 .857mg 0/30 
1/36 .857mg 0/30 
 
0/6 
0/7 
3/41 
1/14 
0/12 
 
0/14 
0/14 
0/14 
2/14 
0/14 
2/14 
2/16 
1/16 
1/16 
7/15 
0/15 
1/15 
0/15 
 
85. 0mg 
74.3mg 
136.mg 
157.mg 
27.7mg 
 
.610mg 
.610mg 
.610mg 
.610mg 
.610mg 
.610mg 
.600mg 
.600mg 
.600mg 
.470mg 
.470mg 
.470mg 
.470mg 
 
3/10 
4/7 
11/15 
7/12 
11/12 
 
17/35 
10/35 
7/35 
22/35 
0/35 
0/35 
6/35 
1/35 
0/35 
15/35 
0/35 
11/35 
0/35 
 
1. 60mg 
1. 60mg 
1. 60mg 
1.60mg 
1.60mg 
1. 60mg 
1. 20mg 
1. 20mg 
1. 20mg 
1. 68mg 
1. 68mg 
1. 72mg 
1. 72mg 
 
0/76 .475mg 7/34 
0/76 .475mg 6/34 
0/76 .475mg 2/34 
 
3/16 3.75mg 17/26 (7.50mg 10/26) 
6/16 3.75mg 19/26 7.50mg 14/26 
3/16 3.00mg 6/26 6.00mg 3/26 
 
86-50-0 
 
5/10 7.02mg 10/50 14.3mg 
1/10 7.02mg 0/50 14.3mg 
0/10 7.02mg 1/50 14.3mg 
0/10 3.24mg 3/50 6.48mg 
4/10 3.24mg 23/50 6.48mg 
2/10 3.24mg 11/50 6.48mg 
2/10 3.24mg 8/50 6.48mg 
7/10 2.17mg 37/49 4.34mg 
2/10 2.17mg 2/49 4.34mg 
0/105p 2.17mg 8/49 (4.34mg 
1/105p 2.17mg 6/49 4.34mg 
5/105p 2.17mg 4/49 4.34mg 
0/10 2.18mg 1/50 4.35mg 
7/10 2.18mg 40/50 4.35mg 
1/10 2.18mg 3/50 4.35mg 
15/105p 2.18mg 21/50 (4.35mg 
15/105p 2.18mg 21/50 (4.35mg 
0/105p 2.18mg 10/50 4.35mg 
8/105p 2.18mg 14/50 4.35mg 
7/105p 2.18mg 10/50 4.35mg 
4/105p 2.18mg 4/50 4.35mg 
20/105p 2.18mg 21/50 4.35mg 
 
1/1O5p 2.18mg 3/50 4.35mg 
2/105p 2.18mg 1/50 4.35mg 
0/105p 2.18mg 1/50 4.35mg 
 
WiL liams;bjca,16,87-91;1962 
 
---:Lym; mul:grL,gsa. 
 
mul :grl ,gsa. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Longnacker;canc,47,1562-1572;1981 
 
Weisburger;jnci,67,75-88;1981 
 
17/50 
1/50 
3/50 
12/50 
23/50 
19/50 
4/50 
26/50 
 
5/50 
1/50) 
4/50 
8/50 
6/50 
41/50 
 
5/50 
15/50) 
13/50) 
13/50 
14/50 
12/50 
10/50 
20/50 
 
5/50 
6/50 
3/50 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
tun:a/a,a/c. 
 
S 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
S 
thy:adn,cyn. S 
 
S 
pni:isa,isc. 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
pit:cra,crc. S 
 
S 
 
thy: acn, cyn,pcn. 
 
S 
thy:adn,cyn, fca. 
 
adr:acn,coa. S 
pit:adn,cra,crc,cyn. S 
 
S 
 
pni: isa,isac. 
 
S 
 
49 
 
50 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Nol 
AZOBENZENE 
 
317 N f b6c mit TBA NXB 24m24 v 
 
a N f b6c mat liv NXB 24m24 v 
b N f b6c sat Lun NXB 24m24 v 
 
318 N f b6c orl tun mdo 76w76 mv) 
 
m N f b6c ortl Liv hpt 76076 mv) 
b N f b6c orL tba mix 76w76 ev) 
319 N m b6c mat TBA NXB 24m24 
 
m N m b6c eat liv NXB 24m24 
b N m b6c mat Lun NXB 24m24 
 
320 N m b6c orl Liv mix 76w76 mv) 
 
a N m b6c ort liv hpt 76w76 mv) 
b N m b6c ort Lun mix 76w76 mvy 
 
c N m b6c ort tba mix 76w76 mv) 
321 N f b6m ort tun mdo 76w76 mv) 
 
a N f b6m ort Liv hpt 76w76 av) 
b N f b6a ort tbm mix 76w76 av) 
322 N m b6a orl liv hpt 76w76 mv) 
 
a N m b6a orl Lun ado 76w76 av) 
b N m b6a orl tba mix 76w76 av 
323 R f f 34 mat NXA NXA 24m24 
 
m R f f 34 mat NXB NXB 24m24 
b R f f34 oat spl ost 24m24 
c R f f34 mat spl fba 24m24 
d R f f34 sat TBA NXB 24m24 
a R f f34 sat Liv NXB 24m24 
 
324 R a f34 mat NXA NXA 24m24 a 
 
a R a f 34 eat NXB NXB 24m24 a 
b R a f34 mat mut fbs 24m24 a 
c R a f34 mat spL fbs 24m24 a 
d R a f34 mat TBA NXB 24m24 a 
a R a f34 mat liv NXB 24m24 a 
 
BARIUN ACETATE 
 
325 N f cdl wat --- lk 27m27 a 
 
a N f cdl wat Lun tum 27m27 a 
b N f cdl wat tba mat 27m27 a 
c N f cdl wat tba mix 27m27 a 
326 N a cdl wat tun tum 27m27 a 
 
a N a cdl wat tba mix 27m27 a 
b N a cdl wat tba mat 27m27 a 
327 R f Lab wat tba mix 37m37 a 
 
a R f lob wat tba maL 37m37 a 
328 R a lob wat tba mix 37m37 a 
 
a R a Lab wat tba mat 37m37 a 
 
BENZENE 
 
329 N a aks inh --- mly 72w72 a 
330 N a c56 inh thm tym 69w69 
 
a N m c56 inh -- mix 69w69 
b N m c56 inh --- LcL 69w69 
 
331 R f sda gav zym car 12m33 a 
 
a R f sda gav ski car 12m33 a 
b R f sda gav mgl car 12m33 a 
c R f sda gav Liv hpt 12m33 a 
d R f da gav --- lou 12m33 a 
332 R a sda gay mam fib 12m33 a 
 
a R a sda gav --- lou l2m33 a 
b R a sda gav liv hpt 12m33 a 
c R a ada gav sub ang 12m33 a 
d R a sda gav zym car 12m33 o 
333 R a sda inh liv tum 98w98 
 
a R a ada inh tba tum 98w98 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
tes 
 
iOOng .:. .:ug. :10. :100. g :.g :10.. :100.. : g :10 
 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
no dre P.1. 
no dre P-1. 
x .> 47.3mg P<.3 
x no dre P.1. 
x 47.3mg P<.3 
 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P.1. 
 
x . + . 3.85mg P<.0005 
x 4.54mg P<.0005 
x no dre P-1. 
 
x 3.85mg P<.0005 
x .> 39.3mg P<.6 
x no dre P-1. 
x 343.mg P<1. 
x .> 44.1mg P<.6 
x no dre P-1. 
x no dre P.1. 
 
: + : 32.3mg * P<.0005c 
 
32.3mg * P<.0005 
 
90.5mg * P<.008 c 
102.mg * P<.02 c 
51.5m9 * P<.5 
276.mg * P<.3 
 
: + : 19.2mg / P<.0005c 
 
19.2mg / P<.0005 
43.9mg / P<.0005 
 
44.4mg I P<.004 c 
11.4mg I P<.0005 
122.mg * P<.07 
 
boong . . .:ug. :10. :100. g :. 1g :10. :100.. : . :10 
 
A 4.28mg 
 
no dra 
7.21mg 
no dre 
no dre 
14.6mg 
5.98mg 
no dre 
no dre 
2.87mg 
2.87mg 
 
P<. 05 - 
P-I. _ 
P<.3 - 
P-1. _ 
P. 1. 
 
P<.8 - 
P<.2 - 
P-I. _ 
P-1. - 
P<.4 - 
P<.2 - 
 
1O0ng..:. .ug. 10 . 100. g. 10 . 100.. .19 10 
 
114.mg P<.3 - 
+ ..historicaL P<.004 + 
 
*historicaL P<.04 + 
ehistoricaL P<.2 + 
+ . historical * P<.0005+ 
 
*historicaL * P<.06 + 
 
545.mg * P<.2 + 
no dre P-1. 
 
no dre P-1. + 
+ . 77.5mg \ P<.007 
 
697.mg * P<.009 + 
*historicaL a P<<2 + 
*historicaL * P<.2 + 
 
no drt P-1. 
 
no dre P-1. - 
no dre P-1. - 
 
BENZENESULPHONOHYDRAZIDE 10Ong. ...ug . .10 . 100 . 1 mg. 10 . 100 . .19 10 
 
334 N f swi gav liv tct 50w60 mv A 46.6mg P-,1 
 
a N f swi gav tun tum 50w60 mv 46.6mg P<.1 
 
BENZIDINE Ong. .1..ug. 10 . 100. g. 10 . 100. 1g 10 
 
335 R b *lb inh - myl 20m28 a A 2.08mg 
 
a R b alb inh mgL car 20m28 a 5.51m9 
b R b alb inh Liv hpt 20m28 a 11.2mg 
c R b aLb inh tba mix 20m28 a 1.73mg 
BENZO(a)PYRENE bOng. .1..ug. 10 . 100. g. 10. 100. 1 10 
 
336 N f aLb mat for pam 60w60 ar & 1.86mg 
337 N a cfl wat mso pam 95w95 + 11.0mg 
 
a N a cfl wat for pam 95w95 12.4mg 
b N a cfl wat mso car 95w95 119mg 
 
P<. 02 + 
P<. 2 + 
P<. 3 + 
P<.l + 
 
P<. 05 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 03 
 
P<. 3 + 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lIne 2Dose 2Inc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
AZOBENZENE 103-33-3 
 
317 c02926 78.4mg n.s.s. 
 
a c02926 247.mg n.s.s. 
b c02926 232.mg n.s.s. 
318 1104 7.70mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1104 14.7mg n.s.s. 
b 1104 7.70mg n.s.s. 
319 c02926 34.6mg n.s.s. 
 
a c02926 43.6mg n.s.s. 
b c02926 287.mg n.s.s. 
320 1104 1.78mg 11.1mg 
 
a 1104 2.02mg 14.9mg 
b 1104 14.5mg n.s.s. 
c 1104 1.78mg 11.1mg 
321 1104 5.76mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1104 13.8mg n.s.s. 
b 1104 6.39mg n.s.s. 
322 1104 6.12mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1104 9.58mg n.s.s. 
b 1104 5.74mg n.s.s. 
323 c02926 19.8mg 69.9mg 
 
a c02926 19.8mg 69.9mg 
b c02926 42.7mg 1.399m 
c c02926 46.2mg n.s.s. 
d c02926 13.0mg n.s.s. 
* c02926 83.5mg n.s.s. 
324 c02926 11.4mg 39.1mg 
 
a c02926 11.4mg 39.1mg 
b c02926 22.9mg 110.mg 
c c02926 20.8mg 121.mg 
d c02926 6.61mg 37.1mg 
* c02926 41.4mg n.s.s. 
 
BARIUN ACETATE 543-80-6 
325 1395 1.34mg n.a.s. 
 
a 1395 2.63mg n.s.s. 
b 1395 1.65mg n.s.s. 
c 1395 2.10mg n.s.s. 
326 1395 3.28mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1395 1.53mg n.s.s. 
b 1395 1.88mg n.s.s. 
327 1456 1.14mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1456 1.18mg n.s.s. 
328 1456 .738mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1456 .844mg n.s.s. 
 
BENZENE 71-43-2 
 
329 1048 32.4mg n.s.s. 
330 1048 190.mg 2.81gm 
 
a 1048 167.mg n.s.s. 
b 1048 212.mg n.s.s. 
331 1047 125.mg 916.mg 
 
a 1047 347.mg n.s.s. 
b 1047 156.mg n.s.s. 
c 1047 116.mg n.s.s. 
d 1047 425.mg n.s.s. 
332 1047 29.4mg 1.11gm 
 
a 1047 241.mg 27.4gm 
 
b 1047 473.mg n.s.s. 
c 1047 473.mg n.s.s. 
d 1047 110.mg n.s.s. 
333 518 415.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 518 415.mg n.s.s. 
 
9/20 
0/20 
2/20 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
13/20 
8/20 
2/20 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
1/17 
0/17 
2/17 
1/18 
2/18 
3/18 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
10/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
10/20 
0/20 
 
3/47 
9/47 
4/47 
14/47 
5/38 
11/38 
2/38 
17/24 
8/24 
4/26 
2/26 
 
24/50 
 
0/40 
2/40 
2/40 
0/30 
0/30 
3/30 
0/30 
1/30 
0/28 
0/28 
0/28 
0/28 
0/28 
0/27 
0/27 
 
27. 0mg 
27. 0mg 
27.0mg 
7.84mg 
7.84mg 
7.84mg 
24. 0mg 
24. 0mg 
24.0mg 
7.30mg 
7.30mg 
7.30mg 
7.30mg 
7.84mg 
7.84mg 
7.84mg 
7.30mg 
7.30mg 
7.30mg 
10. 0mg 
10.0m9 
10. 0mg 
10. 0mg 
10.0g9 
1 0. 0mg 
8.00m9 
8. 00mg 
 
8. 00m9 
8. 00mg 
8. 00mg 
8. 009g 
 
1.00m9 
1.00mg 
 
1 . 00mg 
1. 00mg 
.833mg 
.833mg 
.833mg 
.286"mg 
.286mg 
.250mg 
.250mg 
 
83.7mg 
251 mg 
251 mg 
251.mg 
11.6mg 
11.6mg 
11.6mg 
11. 6mg 
11. 6mg 
11.6mg 
11.6mg 
11.6mg 
11.6mg 
11.6mg 
50.4mg 
50.4mg 
 
20/50 70.8mg 12/50 
 
2/50 70.8mg 0/50 
2/50 70.8mg 2/50 
1/17 
0/17 
1/17 
 
25/50 (48.0mg 20/50) 
16/50 (48.0mg 2/50) 
4/50 48.0mg 1/50 
9/18 
8/18 
0/18 
9/18 
2/16 
0/16 
2/16 
2/18 
1/18 
3/18 
 
5/50 20.0mg 19/50 
5/50 20.0mg 19/50 
1/50 20.0mg 8/50 
1/50 20.0mg 7/50 
32/50 20.0mg 33/50 
 
1/50 20.0mg 2/50 
6/50 16.0mg 16/50 
6/50 16.0mg 16/50 
0/50 16.0mg 13/50 
2/50 16.0mg 7/50 
19/50 16.0mg 43/50 
 
1/50 16.0mg 3/50 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
I iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
tun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Inn.s;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
j.j:srn; mul:sar; spc:fbs; spl:hpa,ost,sar. 
 
jsj:srn; mul:sar; spc:fbs; spL:fbs,hpm,ost,sar. C 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
abc:h.s; tiv:hes; mey:srn; muL:msm; spl:npm,sar. 
 
abc:hes; liv:hes; mey:srn; mul:msm; spl:fbs,npm,sar. C 
 
S 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
5/21 
3/21 
4/21 
5/21 
4/37 
12/37 
6/37 
15/33 
9/33 
8/30 
6/30 
 
29/49 
6/40 
8/40 
6/40 
 
2/30 58.Omg 
0/30 58. 0mg 
4/30 58.0mg 
0/30 58. 0mg 
2/30 58.Omg 
5/28 (58.0mg 
0/28 58.0mg 
0/28 58.0mg 
0/28 58.0mg 
0/28 58. 0g 
0/45 
0/45 
 
Schroeder; Jnut, 105,452-458; 1975 
 
Schroeder; Jnut, 105,421-427;1975 
 
Snyder;txap,54,323-331; 1980 
 
8/32 
2/32 
7/32 
0/32 
1/32 
2/33) 
4/33 
1/33 
1/33 
0/33 
 
BENZENESULPHONOHYDRAZIDE (BSH) 5351-65-5 
 
334 1060 13.7mg n.s.s. 1/29 30.1mg 4/24 
 
a 1060 13.7mg n.s.s. 1/29 30.1mg 4/24 
 
Maltoni;ImdL ,70,352-357;1979 
 
Snyder; j txe,4,605-618; 1978 
Cremlyn;fctx,9,319-321; 1971 
 
BENZIDINE 92-87-5 
 
335 598 .786mg n.s.s. 0/21 .440mg 
 
a 598 1.35mg n.s.s. 0/21 .440mg 
b 598 1.83mg n.s.s. 0/21 .440mg 
c 598 .610mg n.s.s. 2/21 .440mg 
 
5/28 
2/28 
1/28 
8/28 
 
BENZO(a)PYREIE 50-32-8 
 
336 1274 .707mg n.s.s. 0/40 .520mg 5/81 
337 1129 5.37mg 29.3mg 0/67 3.34mg 10/63 
 
a 1129 5.10mg n.s.s. 5/67 3.34mg 13/63 
b 1129 19.4mg n.s.s. 0/67 3.34mg 1/63 
 
Zabezhinski i ;bebm,69,72-74;1970 
 
Chouroul inkov;bdca,54,67-78; 1967 
 
Hor ie;gann,56,429-441; 1965 
 
51 
 
Brkly Code 
 
52 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
 
BENZOATE, SODIUM 101 
338 R f f 34 mat tba mix 24.25 a 
 
a R f f34 mat tba mal 24.25 a 
339 R m f34 mat tba mix 24.25 a 
 
a R m f34 mat tba mal 24.25 a 
 
BENZOGUANAMINE 10' 
340 N f chi mat Liv mix 77w94 
 
a N f chi mat lun mix 77w94 
b N f chi mat tba mix 77v94 
 
341 N m chi mat lun mix 73v94 a 
 
a N m chi mat liv mix 73v94 a 
b N m chi mat tba mix 73v94 a 
342 R m cdr aat liv mix 77w94 
 
a R m cdr aat tba mix 77w94 
 
1,2-BENZOPYRONE 10' 
343 H f syg aat liv tur 22m24 am 
 
a H f syg aat tba mix 22.24 am 
344 H m syg mat liv tum 24.24 a 
 
a H m syg mat tba mix 24m24 a 
 
BENZOTHIAZYL DISULFIDE 10( 
345 N f b6a or lun ado 76v76 evx 
 
a N f b6a orL liv hpt 76v76 evx 
b N f b6a orl tba mix 76v76 mvx 
346 N m b6a orl lun ado 76w76 mvx 
 
a N m b6a orl liv hpt 76w76 mvx 
b N m b6a orl tba mix 76w76 mvx 
347 N f b6c orl Lun adm 76w76 mvx 
 
a N f b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 mvx 
b N f b6c ort tba mix 76w76 mvx 
348 N m b6c orl liv hpt 76w76 evx 
 
a N m b6c orl Lun mix 76w76 *vx 
b N m b6c orl tba mix 76w76 evx 
 
IH-BENZOTRIAZOLE 104 
349 N f b6c mat lun NXA 24.25 v 
 
a N f b6c mat lun a/c 24.25 v 
b N f b6c eat TBA NXB 24.25 v 
c N f b6c mat liv NXB 24.25 v 
d N f b6c mat Lun MXB 24.25 v 
350 N m b6c oat TBA NXB 24.25 v 
 
a N m b6c mat liv NXB 24.25 v 
b N m b6c mat lun NXB 24.25 v 
351 R f f34 mat bra gLn 18.24 v 
 
a R f f34 mat TBA MXB 18.24 v 
b R f f34 mat liv NXB 18.24 v 
352 R m f34 mat liv nnd 18.24 v 
 
a R m f34 mat bra NXA 18.24 v 
b R m f34 mat TBA NXB 18.24 v 
c R m f34 mat Liv NXB 18.24 v 
 
BENZOYL HYDRAZINE 101 
353 N f awa wat Lun ada 26.26 a 
 
a N f ewa wat Lun mix 26.26 a 
b N f swa wat lun adc 26.26 a 
c N f swa wat --- Ly 26m26 e 
d M f swa wat liv mix 26.26 a 
354 N m swa wat lun mix 92w92 a 
 
a N m swa wat lun ada 92w92 a 
b N m swa wat lun adc 92w92 a 
c N m swa wat --- Ly 92v92 o 
d N m swa wat liv hem 92w92 a 
355 N f swi gav lun tum 40v55 
 
BENZYLHYDRAZINE.2HCL 101 
356 N f swa wat lun mix 28m28 a 
 
a N f vwo wat liv ang 28a28 a 
b N f swa wat liv mix 28m28 a 
357 NM e wa wat liv mix 23.23 a 
 
a M m swa wat lun ada 23.23 a 
b N m swa wat lun mix 23m23 a 
 
BERYLLIUN SULFATE 10t 
358 N f cdl wat Lun tum 33.33 a 
 
a N f cdl wat tba mix 33m33 a 
b M f cdl wat tba mal 33m33 a 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
lOng. . ..ug. :10. :100. g :. 1g :10. :100.. : g . :10 
 
.> 24.9gm * P<.9 - 
 
104.gm * P<1. - 
.> no dre P-I. - 
 
no dre P-1. - 
 
lOng. . ..ug. :10. :100.. : mg. :10. :100. :Ig . :10 
 
:> 2.04gm * P<.3 - 
 
9.34gm * P<.9 - 
932.mg * P<.5 - 
A * 304.mg * P<.03 - 
 
3.20gm * P<.7 - 
439.mg * P<.2 - 
:> no dre P-1. - 
 
16.3mg \ P<.2 - 
lOng.. : .ug. :10. :100.. :1.mg.. : 10. :100.. : Ig . :10 
 
no dre P-I. - 
5.52gm * P<.9 - 
no dre P-I. - 
603.mg a P<.04 - 
 
Ong. . ..lug. :10. :100.. m : g . :10. :100.. :g . :10 
 
.> no dre 
 
no dre 
1.38gm 
1.13gm 
no dre 
511.mg 
.> 669.mg 
 
no dre 
432 .mg 
*> 621.mg 
 
no dre 
401.mg 
 
P-I. 
P-1. 
P<. 7 
P<. 7 
P-1. 
P<. 5 
P<. 2 
P-1. 
 
P<.05 
P<. 2 
P-I. 
 
P<. 05 
 
0ng..:-..ug....:--10. :-100....:1mg.-I :--10.....:--100.. g . 10 
 
+ 3.89gm \ P<.0005a 
 
4.39gm \ P<.002 a 
18.99g \ P<.8 
no dre P-1. 
 
3.899m \ P<.0005 
 
:> no dre P-I. - 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
+historicaL * P<.3 a 
 
no dre P-1. 
10.19m * P<.2 
A 2.72gm * P<.02 
 
+historicaL P-1. a 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
2.729m * P<.02 
 
Ong. .:..lug -.10 ......100.. g.... 10 ..... 100.... g.1--g.:-10 
 
+ . 13.4mg 
 
13.8mg 
39.0mg 
52.1mg 
no dre 
7.35mg 
8. 52mg 
24.1mg 
52.0mg 
no dre 
no dre 
 
Ong.. :. ug. :10. :100.. :1"mg.. : 10. :100.. : Ig .--:--10 
 
A 85.3mg 
 
252.mg 
304.mg 
A * 86.2mg 
 
711. mg 
no dre 
 
ng.. : .ug. :10. :100.. g :. . :10. :100.. : . :10 
 
no dre 
9.42mg 
36.9mg 
 
P<. 0005 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005 
 
P<.004 + 
P-I. 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005 
P<. 0005 
 
P<.07 + 
P-1. - 
p-1. - 
 
P<.02 + 
P<.2 - 
P<. 3 
 
P<.08 
 
P<.8 - 
P-1. 
 
P-1. - 
P<.4 - 
P<.7 - 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 21nc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
BENZOATE, SODIUM 532-32-1 
 
338 1319 2.039m n.s.s. 8/43 480.mg 
 
a 1319 4.00gm n.s.s. 3/43 480.mg 
339 1319 2.789m n.s.s. 9/25 384.mg 
 
a 1319 7.17gm n.s.s. 0/25 384.mg 
 
16/52 960.mg 11/52 
5/52 960.mg 4/52 
7/50 768.mg 11/50 
1/50 768.mg 0/50 
 
Sodemoto; jept,4,87-95; 1980 
 
BENZOGUANAMINE 91-76-9 
 
340 381 503.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 381 433.mg n.s.s. 
b 381 200.mg n.s.s. 
341 381 119.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 381 378.mg n.s.s. 
b 381 131.mg n.s.s. 
342 381 144.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 381 5.02mg n.s.s. 
 
0/20 223.mg 
6/20 223smg 
 
17/20 223.mg 
5/18 240 mg 
3/18 240.mg 
12/18 240.mg 
 
1/22 17. 1mg 
14/22 17.1mg 
 
1,2-BENZOPYRONE (coumarin) 91-64-5 
 
343 1340 222.mg n.s.s. 0/12 105.mg 
 
a 1340 350.mg n.s.s. 5/12 105.mg 
344 1340 174.mg n.s.s. 0/12 92.0mg 
 
a 1340 212.mg n.s.s. 1/12 92.0mg 
BENZOTHIAZYL DISULFIDE (ALtax) 120-78-5 
 
345 1301 256.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1301 426.mg n.s.s. 
b 1301 155.mg n.s.s. 
346 1301 142.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1301 396.mg n.s.s. 
b 1301 102.mg n.s.s. 
347 1301 164.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1301 426.mg n.s.s. 
b 1301 130.mg n.s.s. 
348 1301 153.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1301 396.mg n.s.s. 
b 1301 121.mg n.s.s. 
 
IH-BENZOTRIAZOLE 95-14-7 
349 c03521 2.219g 7.779g 
 
a c03521 2.439m 9.15gm 
 
b c03521 2.219m n.s.s. 
c c03521 25.89m n.s.s. 
d c03521 1.89gm 11.6gm 
350 c03521 1.689m n.s.s. 
 
a c03521 9.88gm n.s.s. 
b c03521 7.629g n.s.s. 
351 c03521 3.31gm n.s.s. 
 
a c03521 535.mg n.s.s. 
b c03521 2.48gm n.s.s. 
352 c03521 1.039m n.s.s. 
 
a c03521 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
b c03521 368.mg n.s.s. 
c c03521 1.03gm n.s.s. 
 
1/17 
0/17 
2/17 
2/18 
1/18 
3/18 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
 
0/50 
0/50 
21/50 
 
1/50 
0/50 
24/50 
12/50 
4/50 
0/50 
27/50 
 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
28/50 
0/50 
 
BENZOYL HYDRAZINE 613-94-5 
 
353 48 8.18mg 24.9mg 12/89 
 
a 48 8.29mg 26.1mg 14/89 
b 48 21.0mg 89.4mg 2/89 
c 48 23.6mg 463.mg 16/106 
d 48 145.mg n.s.s. 3/88 
354 48 4.40mg 13.7mg 10/86 
 
a 48 5.05mg 16.5mg 10/86 
b 48 12.7mg 54.5mg 0/86 
c 48 16.4mg n.s.s. 2/40 
d 48 67.2mg n.s.s. 2/40 
355 1095 10.8mg n.s.s. 8/85 
BENZYLHYDRAZINE.2HCl 20570-96-1 
356 1056 36.8mg n.s.s. 21/90 
 
a 1056 61.4mg n.s.s. 2/56 
b 1056 63.8mg n.s.s. 3/56 
357 1056 24.8mg n.s.s. 6/71 
 
a 1056 59.5mg n.s.s. 15/99 
b 1056 70.9mg n.s.s. 23/99 
 
215.mg 
215 mg 
215.mg 
200.mg 
200.mg 
200.mg 
215.mg 
215 mg 
215.mg 
200. mg 
200. mg 
200.mg 
 
1. 509m 
1. 509g 
 
1. 509m 
1.509g 
 
1. 509m 
1. 38gm 
1. 38gm 
1. 38gm 
 
250.mg 
250. mg 
250.mg 
202 mg 
202. mg 
202 mg 
202.mg 
 
20 .0mg 
20.0m9 
20. 0mg 
20.0m9 
20 .0mg 
16.7mg 
16.7mg 
16.7mg 
16.7mg 
16.7mg 
10 .4mg 
 
1/17 446.mg 
 
2/17 446.mg 
8/17 446.mg 
2/13 411.mg 
0/13 411.mg 
3/13 411.mo 
0/20 34.3mg 
13/20 (34.3mg 
 
0/13 523.mg 
3/13 523.mg 
0/11 460.mg 
2/11 460.mg 
 
1/18 
3/18 
9/18 
7/14 
2/14 
9/14 
0/21 
9/21) 
 
Weisburger; jept,2,325-356; 1978/pers.com./RussfieLd 1973 
 
0/10 
4/10 
0/11 
5/11 
 
1/18 
0/18 
3/18 
3/18 
0/18 
5/18 
2/18 
0/18 
3/18 
2/18 
0/18 
3/18 
 
10/50 (2.99gm 
9/50 (2.999m 
25/50 (2.999m 
 
2/50 2.999m 
10/50 (2.99gm 
23/50 (2.769m 
12/50 2.769m 
7/50 2.76gm 
0/50 450.mg 
27/50 450.mg 
 
0/50 450.mg 
0/50 360.mg 
3/50 360.mg 
 
20/50 (360.mg 
 
0/50 360.mg 
 
4/50) 
3/50) 
14/50) 
 
1/50 
4/50) 
18/50) 
7/50 
5/50 
1/50 
30/50 
 
2/50 
5/50 
0/50 
18/50) 
 
5/50 
 
Ueno;fctx, 19,353-355; 1981 
 
Innos;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
tun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
bra:gLn,ol i. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Toth;.j ca,8,341-345; 1972/1969a 
 
34/47 
34/47 
16/47 
18/49 
 
1/47 
31/42 
29/42 
13/42 
5/25 
0/25 
1/25 
 
Roe;natu,216,375-376; 1967 
 
30.0mg 21/47 
30. 0mg 3/22 
 
30.0mg 
25 .0mg 
25. 0mg 
25. 0mg 
 
Toth;zkko,87,267-273; 1976/1974 
 
3/22 
5/21 
8/47 
9/47 
 
BERYLLIUM SULFATE 13510-49-1 
 
358 1395 9.07mg n.s.s. 9/47 1.00mg 5/52 
 
a 1395 2.34mg n.s.s. 14/47 1.00mg 20/52 
b 1395 5.36mg n.s.a. 4/47 1.00mg 6/52 
 
Schroeder; jnut, 105,452-458;1975 
 
53 
 
Brkly Code 
 
54 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
359 N * cdl wit tun turn 41.41 a 
 
a N m cdl wet tbe mix 41.41 a 
b N m cdl wit tba mat 41m41 a 
360 ft f Lob wit tba mix 47.47 a 
 
a Rft Lob wet tba met 47.47 a 
361 ft m lob wet tba mix 38.38 a 
 
a ft m Lob wet tba meL 38.38 a 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
98.8mg 
17. 1 mg 
49.6mg 
1. 48mg 
3.24mg 
2.78mg 
S. 56mg 
 
p<. 9 
P<. 6 
p<. 6 
P<. 4 
p<. 4 
P<z. 3 
P<. 6 
 
BIPHENYL boOng..:.. lug... .10 ...:. 100.. 1m:.lg... .10 .... 100... .Ig ...:. 10 
 
362 N f b6e ort Liv hpt 76w76 evx .>no dre 
 
a N f b6a ort Lun ad. 76w76 evx no dre 
b N f b6e ort tba mix 76w76 mvx 187.mg 
363 N m b6a ort Liv hpt 76w76 evx .>182.mg 
 
a N m b6a orL Lun ad. 76w76 evx no dre 
b N m b6e orL tba mix 76w76 evx 290.mg 
364 N f b6c art Lun ad. 76w76 evx .>467.mg 
 
a N f b6c art Liv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b N f b6c orL tba mix 76w76 *vx 227.mg 
365 N m b6c ort tun ad. 76w76 mvx .128.mg 
 
a N m b6c ort Liv hpt 76w76 *vx 199mg 
b N m b6c ort tba mix 76w76 mvx 71.5mg 
 
p-I.- 
P=.1- 
P<. 4- 
P<. 3- 
p-I.- 
P<. 7- 
P<. 3- 
p-I.- 
P<. 2- 
P<. 04 - 
P<.1 I 
 
P<. 007 - 
 
BIS(2-CHLORtO-1-NETHYLETHYL) ETHERt lOOng. .:..O ...lug . 10 .... 100 . 1m:.lg... 10..O...:.100...:. Ig ...:. 10 
 
366 R ft f 34 gay TBA NXB 24m24 s + 65.6mg I P<.006 - 
 
a ft f f34 gay Liv NXB 24m24 a no dre P-1. 
 
367 ft m f34 gay TBA NXB 24m24 sa 101.mg I P<.02 - 
 
a ft m 134 gav Liv NXB 24m24 a no dre P-1. 
 
BIS.2-CHLORtOETHYLETHERt lOOng. .: .. lug...:. 10 ...:. 100. 1. :.mg...:. 10 ...:. 100...:. Ig ...:. 10 
 
368 N f b6a ort Liv hpt 79w79 evx .> no dre 
 
a N f b6e ort tun mix 79w79 evx no dre 
b N f b6a ort tbe mix 79w79 evx no dre 
369 N m b6e ort Liv hpt 79w79 evx . + .20.2mg 
 
a N m b6e ort tun ad. 79w79 mvx no dre 
b N m b6e ort tbe mix 79w79 mvx 21.6mg 
370 N f b6c ort Liv hpt 79w79 mvx A 65.0mg 
 
a N f b6c art tun ad. 79w79 mvx no dre 
b N f b6c ort tba mix 79w79 evx 122.mg 
371 N m b6c ort Liv hpt 79w79 evx . + 8.19mg 
 
a N m b6c ort Lun ado 79w79 mvx no dre 
b N m b6c ort tba mix 79w79 evx noTD5O 
 
BIS-1,4-CCHLORtONETHOXY)BUTANE lOOng.. :.. lug...:. 10 ...:. 100 .. 1:mg...:. 10 ...:. 100...:.Ig . 10.:.I 
 
372 N f hic ipj abd sar 81w81 .> no dro 
BIS-1,2-(CHLORtONETHOXY)ETHANE lOOng. .:.. lug...:. 10 .... 100 .. 1 : mg...:. 10 ...:. 100 ... g1 ...:. 10 
 
373 N f hic ipj ebd mix 78w78 A 4.62mg 
 
BIS-1,6-(CHLORtONETHOXY)HEXANE lOOng..:.. lug...:. 10 ...:. 100 . 1.:mg...:. 10 ...:. 100...:. Ig ...:. 10 
 
374 N f hic ipj abd sar 81w81 .> no dre 
 
BIS-1,4-(CHLORtONETHOXY)-p-XYLENE bOOng. .:. .ug...:. 10 ...:. 100 . 1..mg...:. 10 ...:. 100...:. Ig ...:. 10 
 
375 N f hic ipj abd sar 77w?? A 3.11mg 
 
p-I. 
p-I. 
p-I. 
 
P<. 0005+ 
p-I. 
 
P<. 01 
P<. 02 
p-I. 
P<. 4 
 
P<. 0005+ 
p-I. 
 
Psz. 007 
 
p-I1. - 
P<. 02 + 
p-I1. - 
p<. 1 + 
 
BIS. (CHLORONETHYL) ETHERt 
 
376 N f hic ipj abd mar 60w60 
 
377 N a hic inh tun mix 6m25 mes 
 
a N m hic inh tun ado 6m25 mes 
b N m hic inh Liv mix 6m25 mes 
c N m hic inh Liv hpc 6m25 as 
378 ft m eass inh nap non WS2 a 
 
a Rftmsss inh tunead. 6m28 
 
b ft m sss inh nap car 6m2 a 
c ft m sea inh Liv bht 6.2 a 
d Rtm sssinh tbe mix WS28m 
 
lOOng. .:..o ...lug . 10 .... 100.. 1m:.lg...:. 10 ...:. 100...:. Ig....:. 
 
10 
 
.182mg P<. 02 + 
1.16mg * P<.4 + 
1.26mg * P<.3 + 
no dre P-1. - 
no dre P-I. - 
3.57ug Z P<.0005+ 
.196mg * P<.002 + 
.795mg * P<.2 + 
no dre P-1. - 
2.34ug * P<.0005 
 
4*BIS(2-HYDROXYETHYL)ANINO-2-(5*NITRO*2-THIENYL)QUINAZOLINE.. :. .100 .. 1 : mg...:. 10 ...:. 100...:. Ig ... -10 
 
379 ft mdad met emi ear 50w52 a . + . 3.14mg 
 
a ft m sda met smi Lui 50w52 a 3.60mg 
b ft m sda eat mgt mix 50w52 a 6.45mg 
c ft m sda mat mgt adc 50w52 a 11.5mg 
d ft m sda met tba mix 50w52 a 1.10mg 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 007 + 
P<. 0005 
 
4-BIS(2-HYDROXYETHYL)ANINO-2-(2-THIENYL)QUINAZOLINE . .10 ...:. 100...:. 1mg...:. 10 ...:. 100...:.Ig...:. 10 
 
380R ft s da mat tbe mix 46w66 a .> 60.1mg P<.3 
 
BIS-2-HYDRtOXYETHYLDITHIOCARtBANIC ACID, POTASSIUN ..:. 10 .... 100 . 1m:.lg...:. 10 ...:. 100 ... Igl ...:. 10 
 
381 N f b6e ort Liv hpt 79w79 mvx A 298.mg 
 
a N f b6a ort tun ad. 79w79 evx 850.mg 
b N f b6a ort tbe mix 79w79 *vx 138.mg 
 
P<. 04 
P<. 6 
P<. 04 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
359 1395 6.34mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1395 3.29mg n.s.s. 
b 1395 7.70mg n.s.s. 
360 1456 .298mg n.a.s. 
 
a 1456 .689mg n.s.s. 
361 1456 .768mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1456 1.33mg n.s.s. 
BIPHENYL 92-52.4 
 
362 1307 137.mg n.s.s. 
 
* 1307 137.mg n.s.s. 
b 1307 39.1mg n.s.s. 
363 1307 41.6mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1307 83.7mg n.s.s. 
b 1307 39.1mg n.s.s. 
364 1307 76.1mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1307 145.ng n.s.s. 
b 1307 55.7mg n.s.s. 
365 1307 38.7mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1307 48.8mg n.s.s. 
b 1307 26.9mg 966.mg 
 
5/38 
11/38 
2/38 
17/24 
8/24 
4/26 
2/26 
 
0/17 
1/17 
2/17 
1/18 
2/18 
3/18 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
 
BIS(2-CHLORO 1-METHYLETHYL) ETHER 
366 c50044 30.7mg 907.mg 39/50 
 
a c50044 n. .s. n.s.s. 0/50 
367 c50044 45.3mg n.s.s. 30/50 
 
a c50044 366.mg n.s.s. 1/50 
BIS-2-CHLOROETHYLETHER 111-44-4 
368 1227 U8.4mg n.s.s. 0/15 
 
a 1227 88.4mg n.s.s. 0/15 
b 1227 53.7mg n.s.s. 1/15 
369 1227 9.25mg 56.1mg 0/18 
 
a 1227 40.0mg n.s.s. 3/18 
b 1227 8.80mg 1.099m 3/18 
370 1227 22.4mg n.s.s. 0/18 
 
a 1227 88.4mg n.s.s. 1/18 
b 1227 25.6mg n.s.s. 2/18 
371 1227 3.46mg 27.6mg 3/15 
 
a 1227 73.1mg n.s.s. 2/15 
b 1227 n.s.s. 12.7mg 5/15 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
.833mg 7/48 
.833mg 17/48 
.833mg 4/48 
.286mg 14/17 
.286mg 8/17 
.250mg 9/33 
.250m9 4/33 
 
73. 0mg 
73.0mg 
73.0mg 
68. 0mg 
68.0mg 
68. 0mg 
73.0mg 
73 .0mg 
73. 0mg 
68.0mg 
68. 0mg 
68. 0mg 
 
Brkly Code 
 
Schroeder; Jnut, 105,421-427; 1975 
 
0/17 
0/17 
4/17 
3/17 
1/17 
4/17 
1/18 
0/18 
2/18 
3/17 
2/17 
5/17 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
108-60-1 
 
70.1mg 32/50 140.mg 15/50 
70.1mg 0/50 140.mg 0/50 
70.7mg 30/50 141.mg 18/50 
70.7m9 1/50 141.mg 0/50 
 
41.3mg 
41.3mg 
41.3mg 
38.4mg 
38.4mg 
38.4mg 
41.3mg 
41.3mg 
41 .3mg 
38.4mg 
38.4mg 
38.4mg 
 
0/18 
0/18 
1/18 
9/17 
2/17 
10/17 
4/18 
0/18 
4/18 
14/16 
0/16 
16/16 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
BIS-1,4-(CHLORONETHOXY)BUTANE - 
 
372 582 2.14mg n.s.s. 0/30 .571mg 0/30 
BIS-1,2-(CHLORONETHOXY)ETHANE 13483-18-6 
 
373 582 1.59mg n.s.s. 0/30 1.71mg 4/30 
BIS- 1,6. (CHLORONETHOXY)HEXANE ... 
 
374 582 6.43mg n.s.s. 0/30 1.71mg 0/30 
BIS-1,4-(CHLORONETHOXY)-p-XYLENE 56894-91-8 
 
375 582 .765mg n.s.s. 0/30 .571mg 2/30 
BIS-(CHLORONETHYL) ETHER (BCME) 542-88-1 
 
376 582 62.8ug n.s.s. 0/30 .114mg 4/30 
 
377 1086 .253mg n.s.s. 10/157 295.ng 7/138 2.95ug 
 
a 1086 .291mg n.s.s. 6/157 295.ng 4/138 2.95ug 
b 1086 1.17mg n.s.s. 4/157 295.ng 1/138 2.95ug 
c 1086 1.17mg n.s.s. 3/157 295.ng 1/138 2.95ug 
378 1086 2.63ug 4.90ug 0/104 52.8ng 0/105 528.ng 
 
a 1086 67.7ug 1.09mg 0/104 52.8ng 0/105 528.ng 
b 1086 .129mg n.s.s. 0/104 52.8ng 0/105 528.ng 
c 1086 .234mg n.s.s. 0/104 52.8ng 1/105 528.ng 
d 1086 1.43ug 3.88ug 56/104 52.8ng 48/105 528.ng 
 
Van Duuren;canr,35,2553-2557;1975 
Van Duuren;canr,35,2553-2557; 1975 
Van Duuren;canr,35,2553-2557;1975 
Van Duuren;canr,35,2553-2557; 1975 
 
3/143 33.6ug 10/144 
2/143 33.6ug 7/144 
0/143 33.6ug 0/144 
0/143 33.6ug 0/144 
0/103 7.78ug 96/103 
0/103 7.78ug 4/103 
0/103 7.78ug 1/103 
0/103 7.78ug 0/103 
43/103 7.78ug 102/103 
 
Van Duuren;canr,35,2553-2557;1975 
 
L.ong;txap,58,269-281; 1981 
 
4-BIS(2-HYDROXYETHYL)ANINO-2-(5-NITRO-2-THIENYL)QUINAZOLINE - -- 
379 1390 1.59mg 7.25mg 0/20 19.2mg 13/20 
 
a 1390 1.79mg 8.58mg 0/20 19.2mg 12/20 
b 1390 2.88mg 20.4mg 0/20 19.2mg 8/20 
c 1390 4.32mg 132.mg 0/20 19.2mg 5/20 
d 1390 .452mg 2.52mg 0/20 19.2mg 19/20 
 
4-BIS(2-HYDROXYETHYL)AMINO-2-(2-THIENYL)QUINAZOLINE --- 
380 1390 12.7mg n.s.s. 6/84 17.4mg 4/28 
 
Cohen; jnci,57,277-282;1976 
Cohen; Jnci ,57,277-282;1976 
 
BIS-2-HYDROXYETHYLDITHIOCARBANIC ACID, POTASSIUM 23746-34-1 
381 1217 90.0Om n.s.s. 0/17 157.mg 3/16 
 
a 1217 124.mg n.s.s. 1/17 157.mg 2/16 
b 1217 49.5mg n.s.s. 2/17 157.mg 7/16 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
55 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
 
382 N * b6a orl 
 
a M m b6a orl 
b M m b6a orL 
383 N f b6c ort 
 
a M f b6c orl 
b M f b6c orl 
384 M m b6c orl 
 
a M m b6c orl 
b M m b6c orl 
 
Liv hpt 79w79 evx 
Lun ad. 79w79 evx 
tba mix 79w79 evx 
liv hpt 79w79 evx 
Lun ad. 79w79 evx 
tba mix 79w79 evx 
Liv hpt 79w79 *vx 
Lun mix 79w79 evx 
tba mix 79w79 evx 
 
TD5O 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
41. 5mg 
no dre 
45 .6mg 
56.4mg 
1. 08gm 
48.4mg 
34. 5mg 
no dre 
27.8mg 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P-1. 
 
P<. 0005 
P<. 0005 
P<. 3 
 
P<. 0005 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P-1. 
 
P<. 0005 
 
P<. 6 - 
 
P-1. - 
P-1. - 
P-1. - 
P-1. - 
P-1. - 
P-1. - 
P-1. - 
P-1. - 
P<. 1 - 
 
P<. 3 - 
P<. 007 - 
 
+ 
 
BISMUTH DIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE lOOng.. ..lug... 10 . 100. 1g.. 10 . 100. 1g . 10 
 
385 N f b6a orl Lun ad. 76w76 *vx > 26.3mg 
 
a N f b6a orl Liv hpt 76w76 *vx no dre 
b N f b6a orl tba mix 76w76 evx no dre 
386 N m b6a orL Lun ad. 76w76 *vx > no dre 
 
a N m b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b N m b6a orl tba mix 76w76 *vx no dre 
387 M f b6c orl Liv hpt 76w76 evx > no dre 
 
a N f b6c orl lun mix 76w76 *vx no dre 
b N f b6c orl tba tum 76w76 *vx no dre 
388 N m b6c orl Lun ad. 76w76 *vx . 12.6mg 
 
a N m b6c orl Liv agm 76w76 evx 26.0mg 
b N m b6c orl tba mix 76w76 evx 4.53mg 
 
BISMUTH OXYCHLORIDE 
 
389 R b bdr eat mgt fba 24m28 
 
a R b bdr eat mgl car 24m28 
b R b bdr eat hpt ad. 24m28 
 
BLACK PN 
 
390 N f cws eat liv tum 80w80 a 
 
a N f cws eat lun ad. 80w80 a 
 
391 N m cws eat lun ad. 80w80 a 
 
a N m cws oat Liv tum 80w80 o 
 
392 R f cfe eat liv tum 24m24 es 
393 R m cfe aat Liv tum 24m24 as 
C.I. DIRECT BLACK 38 
 
394 R f f34 eat Liv nnd 13w13 
 
a R f f34 eat TBA NXB 13w13 
b R f f34 eat Liv MXB 13w13 
395 R m f34 eat Liv NXA 13w13 
 
a R m f34 eat liv hpc 13w13 
b R m f34 eat TBA NXB 13w13 
c R m 134 eat Liv NXB 13w13 
 
bO0ng .. : lug . : 10. :100 . 1m :1g .:10. :100 . . :. : 10 
 
150.gm * P<.8 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
lOOng. . .. : lug .10. :100. 1m : g . :10. :100. :.19 :10 
 
no dre 
no dre 
3 3.66gm 
 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
 
P-1. - 
P-1. - 
* P<. - 
 
P-1. _ 
P-1. _ 
 
P.1 . _ 
 
100n. . ..l :1ug 10. :100. :. g . :10. :100. :Ig . :10 
 
(+) 2.61mg * P<.003 c 
 
2.61mg * P<.003 
2.61mg * P<.003 
 
: (+) .945mg Z P<.0005c 
 
2.22mg * P<.004 
 
.945mg Z P<.0005 
.945mg Z P<.0005 
 
C.I. DIRECT BLUE 
396 R f f34 eat 
 
a R f f34 sat 
b R f f34 eat 
c R f f34 eat 
397 R m f34 eat 
 
a R f f34 eat 
b R m f34 eat 
 
6 
 
liv MXA 13w13 
Liv hpc 13w13 
TBA MXB 13w13 
Liv NXB 13w13 
Liv MXA 13w13 
TBA MXB 13w13 
Liv MXB 13013 
 
FD S C BLUE NO. 1 
 
398 R b osm eat liv hpt 24m24 
 
a R b osm eat tba mix 24m24 
 
FD & C BLUE NO. 2 
 
399 N f cdl eat I 
 
a M f cd1 eat l 
400 N m cdl mat I 
 
a M m cdl eat l 
401 R b os eat l 
 
liv nod 84w84 es 
tun ada 84w84 es 
liv nod 84w84 es 
lun ada 84w84 es 
tba mix 24m24 
 
BROMATE, POTASSIUM 
 
402 M f the eat Liv hem 80w80 a 
403 M m the eat Liv tum 80w80 a 
 
a N m the eat tba mal 80w80 a 
 
C.I. DIRECT BROWN 95 
 
404 R f f34 eat Liv MXA 13w13 
 
a R f f34 eat TBA MXB 13w13 
b R f f34 eat Liv MXB 13w13 
405 R m f34 eat TBA MXB 13w13 
 
a R m f34 eat Liv MXB 13w13 
 
lOOng..: ..lug. :10. :100. g : 1g. :10. :100. . :. :10 
 
: ( + ) : 3.21mg Z P<.0005c 
 
5.97mg * P<.003 
3.21mg Z P<.0005 
3.21mg Z P<.0005 
 
1.18mg Z P<.0005c 
1.18mg Z P<.0005 
1.18mg Z P<.0005 
 
lOOng .. : lug. :10. :100. g : 1g. :10. :100. . :.g :10 
 
62.1gm * P<.2 
 
no dre P-1. - 
 
lOOng . :. .ug. :10. :100. 1m :g .:10. :100. . :.g :10 
 
; .> no dre 
 
no dre 
 
.> 20.2gm * 
 
no dre 
 
* 5.43gm * 
 
P.I. - 
P-1. - 
P<.4 - 
P-1. - 
P<.06 - 
 
bO0ng .. : lug. :10. :100.. :mg . :10. :100. :Ig . :10 
 
347.mg * P<.6 - 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-I. 
 
lOOng. . . : lug .10. :100.. :mg . :10. :100.. :g . :10 
 
: (+) : 2.07mg Z P<.002 c 
 
2.07mg Z P<.002 
2.07mg Z P<.002 
no dre P-I. 
no dre P-1. 
 
56 
 
. + - 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl IDose lnc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
382 1217 19.7mg 110..g 
 
a 1217 194.mg n.s.s. 
b 1217 20.5mg 170.mg 
383 1217 27.7mg 136.mg 
 
a 1217 176.mg n.s.s. 
b 1217 23.9mg 113.mg 
384 1217 16.2mg 82.7mg 
 
a 1217 278.mg n.s.a. 
b 1217 12.5mg 66.5mg 
 
1/18 
2/18 
3/18 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
Brkly Code 
 
146.mg 13/17 
146.mg 1/17 
146. mg 13/17 
157.mg 12/18 
157.mg 1/18 
157.mg 13/18 
146.mg 13/16 
146.mg 0/16 
146.mg 14/16 
 
BISMUTH DINETHYLDITHIOCARBANATE (bismate) 21260-46-8 
 
385 1218 3.66mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1218 8.68mg n.s.a. 
b 1218 4.08mg n.s.s. 
386 1218 4.03mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1218 5.10mg n.s.s. 
b 1218 3.39mg n.s.s. 
387 1218 9.19mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1218 9.19mg n.s.s. 
b 1218 9.19mg n.s.s. 
388 1218 3.10mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1218 4.24mg n.s.s. 
b 1218 1.71mg 61.2mg 
 
1/17 
0/17 
2/17 
2/18 
1/18 
3/18 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
 
4.64mg 
4.64mg 
4.64mg 
4.31mg 
4.31mg 
4.31mg 
4.64mg 
4.64mg 
4.64mg 
4.31mg 
4.31mg 
4.31mg 
 
2/17 
0/17 
2/17 
2/18 
1/18 
3/18 
0/18 
0/18 
0/18 
2/17 
1/17 
5/17 
 
BISMUTH OXYCHLORIDE 7787-59-9 
 
389 432 11.99m n.s.s. 2/60 391.mg 
 
a 432 2.559g n.s.s. 1/60 391.mg 
b 432 22.09m n.s.s. 2/60 391.mg 
 
BLACK PN (brittiant bLack BN) 2519-30-4 
 
390 378 262.mg n.s.s. 0/58 130.mg 
 
a 378 2.009m n.s.s. 14/58 130.mg 
391 378 1.02gm n.s.s. 9/54 120.mg 
 
a 378 234.mg n.s.s. 0/54 120.mg 
392 1321 177.mg n.s.s. 0/22 50.0mg 
393 1321 144.mg n.s.s. 0/21 40.0mg 
 
C.I. DIRECT BLACK 38 1937-37-7 
394 c54557 .992mg 14.8mg 0/10 
 
a c54557 .992mg 14.8mg 0/10 
b c54557 .992mg 14.8mg 0/10 
395 c54557 .438mg 2.58mg 0/10 
 
a c54557 .755mg 10.1mg 0/10 
b c54557 .438mg 2.58mg 0/10 
c c54557 .438mg 2.58mg 0/10 
 
C.I. DIRECT BLUE 6 2602-46-2 
 
396 c54579 1.37mg 10.2mg 0/10 
 
a c54579 2.05mg 37.3mg 0/10 
b c54579 1.37mg 10.2mg 0/10 
c c54579 1.37mg 10.2mg 0/10 
397 c54579 .532mg 3.59mg 0/10 
 
a c54579 .532mg 3.59mg 0/10 
b c54579 .532mg 3.59mg 0/10 
 
9. 50mg 
9. 50mg 
9. 50mg 
7.60mg 
7.60mg 
7.60mg 
7.60mg 
 
9. 50mg 
9. 50mg 
9. 50mg 
9. 50mg 
7.60mg 
7.60mg 
7.60mg 
 
2/40 802.mg 1/40 1.989m 
0/40 802.mg 0/40 1.989m 
0/40 802.mg 0/40 1.989m 
 
0/28 325.mg 
6/28 325.mg 
1/27 300. mg 
0/27 300.mg 
0/22 250.mg 
0/23 200.mg 
 
0/10 
0/10 
0/10 
0/10 
0/10 
0/10 
0/10 
 
0/10 
0/10 
0/10 
0/10 
0/10 
0/10 
0/10 
 
18. 7mg 
18. 7mg 
18. 7mg 
15.0mg 
 
15. 0mg 
15.0m9 
15.0m9 
 
18. 7mg 
18. 7mg 
18. 7mg 
18. 7mg 
15. 0mg 
15.0g 
15 .09g 
 
0/28 650.mg 
3/28 650.mg 
8/28 600.mg 
0/28 600.mg 
0/23 500.mg 
0/22 400 mg 
 
0/10 37.5mg 
0/10 37.5mg 
0/10 37.5mg 
0/10 30.0mg 
0/10 30.0mg 
0/10 30.Omg 
0/10 30.0mg 
 
0/10 37.5mg 
0/10 37.5mg 
0/10 37.5mg 
0/10 37.5mg 
0/10 30. 0mg 
0/10 30. 0mg 
0/10 30. 0mg 
 
2/40 
0/40 
1/40 
 
0/28 1. 30gm 
5/28 1. 30gm 
5/26 1. 20gm 
0/26 1. 20gm 
0/24 
0/21 
 
0/10 75 .0mg 
0/10 75.0mg 
0/10 75.0mg 
0/10 60. 0mg 
0/10 60.Omg 
0/10 60.0mg 
0/10 60.0mg 
 
0/10 75.Omg 
0/10 75.Omg 
0/10 75.0mg 
0/10 75.0mg 
0/10 60. 0mg 
0/10 60. 0mg 
0/10 60. 0mg 
 
0/29 
6/29 
7/29 
0/29 
 
Preussmann;fctx, 13,543-544; 1975 
 
Drake;fctx, 15,503-508; 1977 
 
Gaunt;fctx, 10,17-27; 1972 
 
5/10 150.mg 
5/10 150.mg 
5/10 150.mg 
9/10 (120.mg 
4/10 120.mg 
9/10 (120.mg 
9/10 (120.mg 
 
0/10 150.mg 
0/10 150.mg 
0/10 150.mg 
0/10 150.mg 
8/10 (120.mg 
8/10 (120.mg 
8/10 (120.mg 
 
0/10 
0/10 
0/10 
0/10) 
0/10 
0/10) 
0/10) 
 
7/10 
4/10 
7/10 
7/10 
1/10) 
1/10) 
1/10) 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
liv:hpc,nnd. 
 
S 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
L iv:hpc,nnd. 
 
S 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
l iv:hpc,nnd. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
FD & C BLUE NO. I (brilLiant blue FCF) 3844-45-9 
 
398 415 10.19m n.s.s. 0/24 225.mg 0/24 450.mg 
 
a 415 3.75gm n.s.s. 7/24 225.mg 10/24 450.mg 
 
0/24 900.mg 0/24 2.259m 1/24 
7/24 900.mg 9/24 2.259m 6/24 
 
Hans.n;txap,8,29-36; 1966 
 
FD & C BLUE NO. 2 (indigo carmine) 860-22-0 
 
399 411 432.mg n.s.s. 0/50 260.mg 0/28 
 
a 411 6.04gm n.s.s. 3/50 260.mg 0/28 
400 411 3.49gm n.s.s. 1/42 240.mg 1/23 
 
a 411 4.04gm n.s.s. 3/42 240.mg 7/23 
401 415 1.989m n.s.s. 6/24 225.mg 5/24 
 
520 mg 
520.mg 
480.mg 
480.mg 
450. mg 
 
BROMATE, POTASSIUM 7758-01-2 
 
402 719 56.4mg n.s.s. 0/53 6.50mg 1/54 9.75mg 
403 719 21.3mg n.s.s. 0/35 6.00mg 0/46 9.00mg 
 
a 719 63.9mg n.s.s. 1/35 6.00mg 1/46 9.00mg 
 
C.I. DIRECT BROWN 95 16071-86-6 
 
404 c54568 .765mg 9.32mg 0/10 9.50mg 
 
a c54568 .765mg 9.32mg 0/10 9.50mg 
b c54568 .765mg 9.32mg 0/10 9.50mg 
405 c54568 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/10 7.60mg 
 
a c54568 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/10 7.60mg 
 
0/10 
0/10 
0/10 
0/10 
0/10 
 
18. 7mg 
18. 7mg 
18.7mg 
15 .0mg 
15. 0mg 
 
0/19 1. 04gm 
 
0/19 1. 049m 
1/17 960.mg 
0/17 960.mg 
5/24 900.mg 
 
0/18 2.089m 
1/18 2.089m 
0/18 1.92gm 
1/18 1.92gm 
4/24 2.25gm 
 
0/25 
1/25 
2/24 
2/24 
11/24 
 
0/52 
0/53 
0/53 
 
0/10 37.5mg 
0/10 37.5mg 
0/10 37.5mg 
0/10 30.Omg 
0/10 30.09g 
 
0/10 75.0mg 
0/10 75.0mg 
0/10 75.0mg 
0/10 60.0mg 
0/10 60.09g 
 
5/10 (150.mg 
5/10 (150.mg 
5/10 (150.mg 
0/10 120.mg 
0/10 120.mg 
 
Hooson;fctx, 13,167-176; 1975 
 
Hansen;txap,8,29-36; 1966 
 
Ginocchio;fctx, 17,41-47; 1979 
 
0/10) 
0/10) 
0/10) 
0/10 
0/10 
 
l iv:hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
57 
 
Innes;ntis,1968/1969 
 
58 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
TD5O 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
2-asc-BUTYL-4,6-DINITROPHENOL l1Ong..:..... .10 . .lag.... :10 100 .:10 
 
406 N f b6a orl Lun ada 76w76 .vx .> no dre 
 
a N f b6a orl Liv hpt 76w76 *vx no dre 
b N f b6a orL tba mix 76w76 evx no dre 
407 N m b6a orL lun ada 76w76 evx .> 2.17mg 
 
a N m b6a orl Liv hpt 76w76 evx 94.1mg 
b N m b6a orL tba mix 76w76 *vx 1.29mg 
408 N f b6c orL Lun ad. 76w76 *vx .> 6.14mg 
 
a N f b6c orl liv hpt 76w76 *vx no dre 
b N f b6c orL tba mix 76w76 avx 6.14mg 
409 N m b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 *vx . 1.30mg 
 
a N m b6c orL Lun ada 76w76 *vx 2.77mg 
b N m b6c orl tba mix 76w76 mvx .662mg 
 
N - N-BUTYL - N- FORNYLHYDRAZINE 
 
410 N f owa wat lun mix 92w92 a 
 
a N f swa wat cli mix 92w92 a 
b N f swa wat cLi sqc 92w92 m 
c N f swa wat liv mix 92w92 a 
 
411 N m swa wat Lun mix 90w90 a 
 
a N m awa wat pro mix 90w90 a 
 
b N m awa wat pro sqc 90w90 a 
c N m ewa wat pro fbs 90w90 a 
d N m awa wat pro ang 90w90 a 
 
m N m swa wat Liv ago 90w90 m 
 
lOOng..:. .ug. :10. :100. g : .. :10. :100. :Ig . :10 
 
. + . 19.4mg 
 
252.mg 
321.mg 
no dre 
. + . 19.2mg 
 
28.2mg 
35.6mg 
304.mg 
519.mg 
no dre 
 
N-BUTYL-N-(4-HYDROXYBUTYL)NITROSANINE .:. .lug. :10 : . 100.. : g . 1 :10 : . 100 ... 10 
 
412 R a sda wat ubl car 24m24 . + . 3.30mg 
 
a R m sda wat liv Lcc 24m24 271.mg 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<.004 + 
P<.01 
Po.1. 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<. 0005 
P<.002 
P<.02 
 
P-1. - 
 
P<.0005+ 
P<.3 
 
DI-tmrt-BUTYL-4-HYDROXYNETHYL PHENOL ..: ..lug. :10. :100 . 1mg . 1 :. 1 0 : . 1 0 0.1 :0 1 :10 
 
413 R f nbw mat mgl fba 24m24 .> 3.71gm * P<.3 
 
a R f nbw mat liv tum 24m24 no dre P-1. 
b R f nbw mat tba mix 24m24 3.719m * P<.3 
414 R m nbw mat liv tum 24m24 .> no dre P-1. 
 
a R m nbw mat tba tum 24m24 no dre P-1. 
N-BUTYL-N'-NITRO-N-NITROSOGUANIDINE ..:..lug. :10. :100. g : .. :10. :100. :.19 :10 
 
415 R m wis wat stg tum 52w78 or .> no dre P-1. 
 
BUTYLATED HYDROXYTOLUENE 
 
416 N f b6c mat lun NXA 25m25 a 
 
a N f b6c mat TBA NXB 25m25 a 
b N f b6c mat Liv NXB 25m25 a 
c N f b6c mat Lun NXB 25m25 a 
417 N m b6c mat TBA NXB 25m25 a 
 
a N m b6c mat Liv NXB 25m25 a 
b N m b6c mat Lun NXB 25m25 a 
418 N f baL mat Lun tum 69w69 
 
a N f baL mat liv tum 69w69 
419 N m baL mat Lun tum 69w69 
 
a N m baL mat liv mix 69w69 
 
420 N m baL mat Lun ppa 69w69 a 
 
a N m baL mat ito sqc 69w69 a 
b N m baL mat -- rts 69w69 m 
 
c N m baL mat Liv tur 69w69 a 
421 R f f34 mat TBA NXB 24m24 
 
a R f f34 mat Liv NXB 24m24 
422 R m f34 mat TBA NXB 24m24 
 
a R m f34 mat liv NXB 24m24 
 
423 R f wis mat pit ads 24m24 a 
 
a R f wis mat Liv hnd 24m24 a 
b R f wis mat tbe mix 24m24 a 
424 R m wis mat Liv hnd 24m24 a 
 
a R a wis mat tba mix 24m24 a 
 
1,10D I-n-BUTYLHYDRAZINE 
 
425 N f swa wat Lun ada 25m25 ms 
 
a N f awe wat Lun mix 25m25 ms 
b N f awe wet for mix 25m25 ms 
c NI f swa wet for sqp 25m25 ms 
d N f swa wat Lun adc 25m25 ms 
 
m N f swa wat for sqc 25m25 ms 
f N f swa wat Liv egm 25m25 ms 
426 N a swa wet Lun mix 25m25 ms 
 
a N a swe wat lun ada 25m25 ms 
b N a swa wat Lun adc 25m25 ms 
c N a swe wet for mix 25m25 ms 
d N a swa wat Liv mix 25m25 es 
 
100ng . ..ug. :10. :100. g :. g. :10. :100.. : g :10 
 
A ^ #715.mg \ P<.02 - 
 
no dre P-1. 
10.7gm P<.6 
715.mg \ P<.02 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
7.33gm P<.8 
no dre P.1. 
 
A 368.mg P<.03 . 
 
2.03gm P<.09 _ 
no dre P-1. 
no dre PI.. 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
no drn P-1. 
:> no dra P-1. 
 
2.30gm * P<.4 
 
A 613.mg \ P<.02 - 
 
5. 99gm * P<.4 _ 
2.31gm * P<.5 - 
.> no drm Pl.. 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
loong..:. .ug. : 10. :100. g : . :10. :100. : g. :10 
 
* + . 51.5m9 
 
55.5mg 
71. 5mg 
95.9mg 
133.mg 
152.mg 
no dre 
* + 38.1mg 
 
44.9mg 
82.3mg 
84.2mg 
105.mg 
 
P<.0005 
P<. 0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<. 0005 
P<. 0005 
P<.0005 
 
Pal. - 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005, 
 
Po. 1. 
 
P-1. _ 
P-1. _ 
P<.4 4 
 
P<1. _ 
P<.3 - 
P<.3 - 
P-I. 1 
 
P<.3 - 
P<.02 - 
P<.2 - 
P<. 002 - 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl IDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
2-sec-BUTYL-4,6-DINITROPHENOL 88-85-7 
 
406 1289 1.07mg n.s.s. 1/17 .959mg 
 
a 1289 1.79mg n.s.s. 0/17 .959sm 
 
b 1289 .843mg n.s.s. 2/17 .959mg 
407 1289 .475mg n.s.s. 2/18 .891mg 
 
* 1289 .987mg n.s.s. 1/18 .891mg 
b 1289 .351mg n.s.s. 3/18 .891mg 
408 1289 .999mg n.s.s. 0/16 .959mg 
 
* 1289 1.90mg n.s.s. 0/16 .959mg 
b 1289 .999mg n.s.s. 0/16 .959mg 
409 1289 .446mg n.s.s. 0/16 .891mg 
 
a 1289 .680mg n.s.s. 0/16 .891mg 
b 1289 .282mg 2.70mg 0/16 .891mg 
 
N-N-BUTYL-N-FORNYLHYDRAZINE --- 
410 1057 11.2mg 35.3mg 25/99 
 
a 1057 95.7mg 1.789g 0/40 
b 1057 111.mg 25.8gm 0/40 
c 1057 184.mg n.s.s. 6/47 
411 1057 11.4mg 35.8mg 26/100 
 
a 1057 18.0mg 47.0mg 0/85 
b 1057 22.4mg 60.9mg 0/85 
c 1057 115.mg 1.44gm 0/85 
d 1057 157.mg n.s.s. 0/85 
* 1057 123.mg n.s.s. 7/70 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
1/17 
0/17 
2/17 
4/17 
1/17 
6/17 
1/18 
0/18 
1/18 
4/18 
2/18 
7/18 
 
Brkly Code 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
Toth;carc, 1,589-593;1980 
 
80.0mg 45/49 
80. 0mg 5/32 
80. 0mg 4/32 
80.0mg 5/41 
66.7mg 42/48 
66.7mg 33/47 
66.7mg 29/47 
66.7mg 5/47 
66.7mg 3/47 
66.7mg 2/23 
 
N-BUTYL-N-(4-HYDROXYBUTYL)NITROSANINE 3817-11-6 
412 1192 1.98mg 5.64mg 0/40 10.0mg 35/40 
 
a 1192 44.1mg n.s.s. 0/40 10.0mg 1/40 
 
DI *trt-BUTYL-4-HYDROXYNETHYL PHENOL ... 
413 127 604.mg n.s.s. 0/20 100.mg 
 
a 127 262.mg n.s.s. 0/20 100.mg 
b 127 604.mg n.s.s. 0/20 100.mg 
414 127 210.mg n.s.s. 0/20 80.0mg 
 
a 127 210.mg n.s.s. 0/20 80.0mg 
 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
 
175.m9 
175.m9 
175. mg 
140. mg 
140.mg 
 
1/20 
0/20 
1/20 
0/20 
0/20 
 
N-SUTYL-N' -NITRO-N-NITROSOGUANIDINE 13010-08-7 
415 1082 1.99mg n.s.s. 0/9 2.14mg 0/8 
 
Schaahi ;arzn,28,49-51; 1978 
Dacre;txap, 17,669-678; 1970 
Matsukura;gann,70, 181-185; 1979 
 
BUTYLATED HYDROXYTOLUENE (BHT) 128-37-0 
 
416 c03598 357.mg n.s.s. 1/20 
 
a c03598 336.mg n.s.s. 14/20 
b c03598 2.18gm n.s.s. 1/20 
c c03598 357.mg n.s.s. 1/20 
417 c03598 355.mg n.s.s. 17/20 
 
* c03598 531.mg n.s.s. 11/20 
b c03598 1.239g n.s.s. 7/20 
418 1006 1.159m n.s.s. 13/50 
 
* 1006 4.429m n.s.s. 0/50 
419 1006 711.mg n.s.s. 45/100 
 
* 1006 8.16gm n.s.s. 2/100 
420 53 122.mg n.s.s. 6/25 
 
* 53 330.mg n.s.s. 0/25 
b 53 509.mg n.s.s. 14/25 
c 53 898.mg n.s.s. 0/25 
421 c03598 374.mg n.s.s. 12/20 
 
a c03598 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/20 
422 c03598 210.mg n.s.s. 17/20 
 
a c03598 796.mg n.s.s. 0/20 
423 1087 250.mg 171.gm 0/32 
 
* 1087 1.45gm n.s.s. 0/32 
b 1087 476.mg n.s.s. 11/32 
424 1087 2.239m n.s.s. 2/26 
 
a 1087 1.12gm n.s.s. 6/26 
 
1,1-DI-n-BUTYLHYDRAZINE --- 
 
425 1438 30.3mg 107.m9 20/99 
 
a 1438 31.5mg 128.mg 25/99 
b 1438 41.4mg 147.mg 4/71 
c 1438 52.5mg 227.mg 4/71 
d 1438 69.3mg 371.mg 6/99 
* 1438 77.9mg 355.mg 0/71 
f 1438 474.mg n.s.s. 5/71 
426 1438 21.7mg 84.7mg 26/96 
 
a 1438 26.1mg 93.8mg 16/96 
b 1438 43.3mg 235.mg 12/96 
c 1438 46.7mg 174.mg 0/96 
d 1438 39.4mg 437.mg 0/40 
 
390. mg 
390. mg 
390 mg 
390.mg 
360.mg 
360 mg 
360.mg 
975.mg 
975 mg 
900. mg 
900.mg 
900. mg 
900 mg 
900.mg 
900. mg 
150. mg 
150.mg 
120. mg 
120.mg 
125. mg 
125. mg 
125.mg 
100.mg 
100.mg 
 
62. 5mg 
62. 5mg 
62.5mg 
62.5mg 
62.5mg 
62. 5mg 
62. 5mg 
52. 1mg 
52. 1mg 
52. 1mg 
52. 1mg 
52. 1mg 
 
16/50 (780.mg 7/50) 
32/50 (780.mg 23/50) 
4/50 780.mg 5/50 
16/50 (780.mg 7/50) 
39/50 (720.mg 32/50) 
23/50 (720.mg 13/50) 
21/50 720.mg 17/50 
11/50 
0/50 
47/100 
 
0/100 
7/11 
1/8 
1/8 
0/11 
 
36/50 300.mg 26/50 
 
0/50 300.mg 0/50 
36/50 240.mg 35/50 
 
2/50 240.mg 2/50 
6/46 (500.mg 3/51) 
3/46 500.mo 3/51 
25/46 500.mg 25/51 
 
2/43 400.mg 1/38 
13/43 400.mg 10/51 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. S 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
CLapp;Jnci,61,177-180;1978 
 
CLapp;fctx, 12,367-371;1974 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Hirose;fctx, 19,147-151; 1981 
 
Toth;carc,2,651 -654; 1981 
 
34/50 
34/50 
23/45 
19/45 
17/50 
12/45 
 
1/45 
34/46 
30/46 
21/46 
16/43 
 
5/16 
 
59 
 
60 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
* N m swe wat for sqp 25.25 es 
 
f N m swe wat Liv bhp 25.25 es 
g N m swa wat for sqc 25.25 es 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
109.mg P<.0005 
189.mg P<.006 
317.mg P<.0005 
 
1,2-DI,n-BUTYLHYDRAZINE.2HCl 1 uOng..: . 1 .ug... 10. 10.lg.. 10. 100. g. 1 
 
427 N f swa wet Lun mix 93w93 + 699.8mg 
 
a N f swa wat --- * ly 93w93 e 198.mg 
b N f swa wat Liv eng 93w93 o no dre 
c N f ewa wat liv egm 93w93 o no dre 
428 N m ewe wet tun mix 87w87 a . 34.5mg 
 
e N m ewe wet kid mix 87w87 * 449.mg 
b Mm esw wat --- Ly 87U * o 8868mg 
c N m swa wat liv aeg 87w87 o no dre 
d M m sew wat Liv ang 87w87 o no dre 
n-BUTYLHYDRAZINE.HCL lOOng. .:..ug. 10 . 100. 1 g.. 10 . 100. Ig . 10 
 
429 N f swe wat lun mix 28.28 * + 18.4mg 
 
a e f mw wat lun ad 28m28 e 19.3mg 
b N f swa wat lun edc 28m8 8 * 50.6mg 
c H f sw wat liv mix 28.28 * no dre 
430 H m swa wat lun edo 23m23 * + 8.40mg 
 
a N m sew wat lun mix 23m23 * 9.03mg 
b Mm eswa wat liv mix 23.23 * no dre 
N-BUTYLUREA Ong. .:..ug. 10 . 100. 1m g. 10 . 100.. 19 . 10 
 
431 N f cb6 eat Liv hpc 52w69 e > no dre 
 
a H f cb6 oat Lun ede 52w69e no dre 
b N f cb6 eat tb mix 52w69 * no dre 
432 N m cb6 eat lun ado 52w69 e > 5 5.51gm 
 
e m a cb6 eat liv hpc 52w69 o no dre 
b M * cb6 ettb emix 52w69 * 699.mg 
433 R f f34 eat liv tum 52w69 e > no dre 
 
e R f f34 oat tba mix 52w69 o no dre 
434 R m f34 eat Liv tum 52w69 e > no dre 
 
e R f f34 eet tbe mix 52w69 * no dre 
 
bete-BUTYROLACTONE lOng. .:..ug . 10 . 100 . 1 mg.. 10 . 100 .Ig . 10 
 
435 R f sad gev for sqc 70w70 A 13.8mg 
CADMIUM ACETATE lOng. .:..ug . 10 . 100 . 1 mg.. 10 . 100 .Ig. 10 
 
436 N f cdl wat lun cer 30.30 * > no dre 
 
e N f cdl wt tb tum 30m30 * no dre 
437 H m cdl wat lun car 28.28 o > no dre 
 
e N a cdl wat tbe tum 28m28 no dre 
438 R b Lob wat liv tue 41.41 es > 37.7mg 
 
e R b Lob wat tbe tun 41m41 es 1.81mg 
b R b lob wat tbe meL 41m41 as 5.10mg 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<.003 + 
P-I. _ 
P-I. _ 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 004 + 
P<.4 + 
P-I. _ 
P-I. _ 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005 
P<.00005 
P-I. 
 
P<. 0005 
 
P<. 0005 + 
 
P-1. - 
P-1. _ 
P-1. _ 
P<.4 4 
 
P-1. _ 
 
P<.02 - 
P-1. _ 
P-1. _ 
P-I. _ 
Pal. _ 
 
P<.02 + 
 
P-a. _ 
P-1. _ 
P-I. _ 
P-1. _ 
P<.8 - 
P<.2 - 
P<.2 - 
 
CADMIUM CHLOR IDE MONOHYDRATE** 1 Ong. ... lug. :10. :100.. g : . 1g :10 :..100.1 :0 1 :10 
 
439 R f wws eat liv hpt 24m24 * .> no dre Pal. - 
 
a R f wws eat tba mix 24m24 0 21.6mg * P<.7 
b R f wws oat tbe ban 24m24 * 44.Omg * P<.8 
 
c R f wwe eat tbe oaL 24m24 * 124.mg * P<.9 - 
440 R m wwe eat edr pho 24.24 * . 1.33mg Z P<.04 - 
 
a R m wws eat liv hpt 24m24 * no dre P.1. 
b R m wws eat tba meL 24s24 o 47.4mg * P<.5 
c R m ww oat tba ben 24m24 e no dre P-1. 
d R wws eat tba mix 24.24 o no dre P-1. 
 
CADMIUM DIETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE lOOng..: u. : lug 10 . . :100. g : . 1g. :10 :..100... :19 :10 
 
441 M f b6a orl lun edo 76w76 ovx .> no dre 
 
a N f b6a orl liv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b N f b6e orl tbe mix 76w76 evx 47.5mg 
442 N a b6e orl liv hpt 76w76 *vx .> no dre 
 
e N m b6e orl lun edo 76w76 evx no dre 
b N m b6e orl tbe mix 76w76 ovx no dre 
443 N f b6c orl lun ado 76w76 *vx .> 57.4mg 
 
a N f b6c orl liv hpt 76w76 *vx no dre 
b N f b6c orl tba mix 76w76 evx 18.0mg 
444 M m b6c orl liv hpt 76w76 *vx . 16.7mg 
 
e N m b6c orl lun edo 76w76 ovx 25.9mg 
b Mm b6c orl tba mix 76w76 evx 6.20mg 
 
P<I.7 - 
P-1. - 
P<. 7- 
P-1. - 
P-1. - 
P<. 3 - 
P-1I. - 
P<.05 - 
P<.05 - 
P<.2 - 
P<. 002 - 
 
CADMIUM SULPHATE** 
 
445 H m swi gev lun mix 78w78 e 
 
e M m swi gev liv mix 78w78 e 
446 R m cbo gev Liv Lca 24.26 
 
lOOng. .:.. lug...:.10 .... 100...:.Img...:.10... .100...:.Ig ...:.10 
 
.> 1.78mg * P<.6 - 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
A 1.17mg * P<.07 - 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose llnc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
* 1438 57.2mg 246.mg 0/96 52.1mg 13/43 
f 1438 56.9mg 2.40gm 0/40 52.1mg 3/16 
9 1438 120.mg 1.379m 0/96 52.1mg 5/43 
 
1,2-DI-n-BUTYLHYDRAZINE.2HCL 7422-80-2 
 
427 1116 40.5mg 149.mg 25/99 125.mg 
 
a 1116 93.2mg 1.299m 18/100 125.mg 
b 1116 379.mg n.s.s. 3/47 125.mg 
c 1116 517.mg n.s.s. 3/47 125.mg 
428 1116 20.2mg 67.3mg 26/100 104.mg 
 
a 1116 155.mg 3.519m 0/70 104.mg 
b 1116 186.mg n.s.s. 8/100 104.mg 
c 1116 416.mg n.s.s. 5/70 104.mg 
d 1116 420.mg n.s.s. 3/80 104.mg 
 
n-BUTYLHYDRAZINE.HCl 56795-65-4 
429 252 10.7mg 37.6mg 21/90 
 
a 252 11.3mg 38.5mg 18/90 
b 252 27.2mg 121.mg 4/90 
c 252 101.mg n.s.s. 3/56 
430 252 4.21mg 19.9mg 15/92 
 
a 252 4.36mg 24.1mg 23/92 
b 252 47.6mg n.s.s. 6/71 
 
N-BUTYLUREA 592-31-4 
 
431 1361 1.249m n.s.s. 
 
a 1361 1.24gm n.s.s. 
b 1361 501.mg n.s.s. 
432 1361 682.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1361 1.23gm n.s.s. 
b 1361 244.mg n.s.s. 
433 1361 317.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1361 127.mg n.s.s. 
434 1361 253.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1361 84.4mg n.s.s. 
 
1/92 
2/92 
17/92 
 
1/95 
2/95 
8/95 
0/44 
20/44 
 
0/50 
30/50 
 
betm-BUTYROLACTONE 3068-88-0 
 
435 55 3.85mg n.s.s. 0/5 
 
CADMIUM ACETATE 543-90-8 
436 56 4.71mg n.s.s. 
 
a 56 4.14mg n.s.s. 
437 56 11.0mg n.s.s. 
 
a 56 9.55mg n.s.s. 
438 1036 3.29mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1036 .668mg n.sa.s. 
b 1036 1.56mg n.s.s. 
 
9/60 
22/60 
8/44 
11/44 
 
1/34 
10/34 
2/34 
 
25. 0mg 
25. 0mg 
25. .0g 
25. 0mg 
20.8 mg 
20. 8mg 
20.8 g 
 
567. mg 
567 mg 
567. mg 
523 mg 
523.mg 
523 mg 
218.mg 
218.mg 
175 .mg 
175 .mg 
 
36/50 
21/50 
 
2/36 
1/36 
38/46 
 
4/38 
6/46 
1/38 
1/42 
 
Toth;expa,37,773-775; 1981 
 
Nagol;ejca,11,473-478;1975/Toth 1974 
 
34/44 
33/44 
17/44 
0/15 
19/23 
19/23 
 
1/18 
 
0/24 
0/24 
4/24 
1/26 
0/26 
7/26 
0/16 
5/16 
0/16 
7/16 
 
40.8 g 3/5 
 
1. 00mg 
 
1.00mg 
.833mg 
.833mg 
.265mg 
.265mg 
.265mg 
 
Murthy; i jcn,23,253-259; 1979 
 
Van Duuren;jnci,37,825-838;1966 
 
5/39 
10/39 
0/48 
1/48 
2/47 
22/47 
 
7/47 
 
Schroeder; jnut,83,239-250; 1964 
 
Kanisawa;canr,29,892-895; 1969 
 
CADMIUM CHLORIDE MONOHYDRATE** 35658-65-2 
 
439 1139 .343mg n.s.s. 0/94 49.5ug 0/48 
 
a 1139 2.74mg n.s.s. 54/94 49.5ug 23/48 
b 1139 3.56mg n.s.s. 46/94 49.5ug 19/48 
c 1139 6.66mg n.s.s. 10/94 49.5ug 6/48 
440 1139 .432mg n.s.s. 2/98 39.6ug 0/50 
 
a 1139 24.2mg n.s.s. 0/98 39.6ug 1/50 
b 1139 7.94mg n.s.s. 4/98 39.6ug 4/50 
c 1139 6.32mg n.s.s. 40/98 39.6ug 18/50 
d 1139 5.23mg n.s.s. 43/98 39.6ug 21/50 
 
.149mg 
.149mg 
.149mg 
.149mg 
.119mg 
.119m9 
.1 19mg 
.119mg 
.1 19mg 
 
0/48 .495mg 0/48 2.48mg 0/46 
17/48 .495mg 31/48 2.48mg 25/46 
16/48 .495mg 22/48 2.48mg 21/46 
7/48 .495mg 11/48 2.48mg 6/46 
5/50 (.396mg 2/50 1.98mg 2/50) 
0/50 .396mg 0/50 1.98mg 0/50 
2/50 .396mg 1/50 1.98mg 4/50 
25/50 .396mg 23/50 1.98mg 15/50 
26/50 .396mg 24/50 1.98mg 18/50 
 
Loser;clet,9, 191-198; 1980 
 
CADMIUM DIETHYLDITHIOCARBANATE (ethyL cadmate) 14239-68-0 
441 1140 9.99mg n.s.s. 1/17 8.96mg 1/17 
 
a 1140 16.8mg n.s.s. 0/17 8.96mg 0/17 
b 1140 5.99mg n.s.s. 2/17 8.96mg 3/17 
442 1140 16.5mg n.s.s. 1/18 8.34mg 0/18 
 
a 1140 16,5mg n.s.s. 2/18 8.34mg 0/18 
b 1140 11.7mg n.s.s. 3/18 8.34mg 1/18 
443 1140 9.34mg n.s.s. 0/16 8.96mg 1/18 
 
a 1140 17.8mg n.s.s. 0/16 8.96mg 0/18 
b 1140 5.43mg n.s.a. 0/16 8.96mg 3/18 
444 1140 5.05mg n.s.s. 0/16 8.34mg 3/18 
 
a 1140 6.36mg n.s.s. 0/16 8.34mg 2/18 
b 1140 2.64mg 25.2mg 0/16 8.34mg 7/18 
CADMIUM SULPHATE** 7790-84-3 
 
445 1044 .307mg n.s.s. 33/149 62.9ug 14/50 .126mg 9/50 .250mg 14/49 
 
a 1044 .492mg n.s.s. 50/149 62.9ug 18/50 .126mg 18/50 .250mg 11/49 
446 1045 .359mg n.s.s. 1/90 26.2ug 2/30 52.3ug 0/30 .105mg 3/30 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
Levy;anoh, 17,213-220; 1975 
Levy;anoh, 17,205-211; 1975 
 
61 
 
Brkly Code 
 
62 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
 
CAFFEINE 
 
447 N f cb6 sat liv tur 77w77 a 
448 N m cb6 eat liv hnd 77w77 a 
449 R m sda eat liv tur 25.25 a 
CAPTAN 
 
450 N f b6c eat TBA NXB 80w91 
 
a N f b6c eat liv NXB 80u91 
b N f b6c eat Lun NXB 80u91 
451 N f b6c eat duo sca 80w90 
 
452 N f b6c orl Liv hpt 76076 *v 
 
a N f b6c orl lun mix 76u76 *v 
b N f b6c orL tba mix 76076 *v 
453 N m b6c mat TSA NXS 80u91 
 
a N m b6c eat Liv NXB 80w91 
b N m b6c eat Lun NXB 80w91 
454 N m b6c sat duo ad. 80w90 
 
a N o b6c eat duo ca 80w90 
 
455 N o b6c ort Liv hpt 76u76 mv 
 
a N m b6c ort lun ad 76w76 ev 
b N m b6c orl tba mix 76u76 mv 
456 N f b6a orl Liv hpt 76u76 mv 
 
a N f b6a orl lun ad. 76u76 mv 
b N f b6a orl tba mix 76u76 mv 
457 N m b6a orl liv hpt 76u76 mv 
 
a N m b6a ort lun ad. 76u76 mv 
b N m b6a ort tba mix 76u76 mv 
458 R f osm mat TBA NXB 19.26 v 
 
a R f osm mat Liv NXB 19.26 v 
459 R f osm mat adr NXA 19.25 v 
460 R m osm eat TBA NXB 19.26 v 
 
a R m osm m at liv NXB 19.26 v 
 
CARBANYL HYDRAZINE . HC L 
 
461 N f swa wat Lun mix 27m27 m 
 
a N f sma wat lun ade 27.27 m 
b N f swa uat btv mix 27m27 m 
c N f smu wat Liv mix 27.27 a 
d N f smu wat btv ang 27.27 a 
m N f smu wat blv agO 27m27 a 
462 N m sma wat liv hpt 27m27 m 
 
a N m smu wat Lun adm 27.27 a 
b N m smu wat Lun mix 27.27 m 
c N m smu wat liv mix 27M27 o 
 
1- CARBfANYL -2- PHENYLHYDRAZINE 
 
463 N f usm mat Lun adm 79w79 m 
 
a N f swm wat lun mix 79u79 m 
b N f smu wat lun adc 79w79 o 
c N f smu wat Liv ang 79u79 m 
d N f smu wat Liv agm 79u79 o 
464 N m smu wat Lun adm 79u79 m 
 
a N m smu wat Lun mix 79u79 m 
b N m smu wat Liv mix 79w79 m 
c N m mua wet Liv ang 79w79 m 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
bOng. 
 
l..: 1ug .... :10. :1:100 . :1jg. :10.10. Ig.10 
 
.> no drm 
.> 775.mg 
 
.> no dre 
 
P-1. _ 
P<.3 - 
P-1. _ 
 
boong . . .:ug. : 10. :100. g : .g :10.. :100. . :-g :10 
 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
no drm P-I. 
no drm PaI. 
 
pooL 21.6gm * P<.03 a 
fx > no dre P-1. 
fx no drm P.1. 
 
fx 244.mg P<.2 - 
 
:> no drm PI.1 
 
no drm P-1. 
no drm P-1. 
 
pooL : + 7.39gm * P<.003 a 
 
15.19m * P<.03 a 
fx . v 86.1mg P<.02 - 
rx 187.mg P<.09 - 
rx 42.5mg P<.0005- 
rx > no dre P-1. - 
Fx no drm Pal. - 
rx no drm P-1. - 
x .> 195.ug P<.3 - 
rx 3.629g P<1. - 
Fx 161.mg P<.4 - 
 
:> no dre P-1. - 
 
no drm P-1. 
 
pooL A #253.mg \ P<.02 - 
 
:> 4.78gm a P<1. - 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
lOOng.. : .ug. :10. :100. g :. 1g :10. :100.. : g :10 
 
+ 223.mg P<.002 + 
 
333mg P<.007 
 
395.mg P<.003 + 
798.mg P<.04 
798.mg P<.04 
975.m9 P<.05 
 
A 1.42gm P<.03 - 
 
745.mg P<.2 
 
833.mg P<.4 + 
933.mg P<.2 
 
bO0ng . . .:ug. :10. :100. g :..g :10. :100.. :ig . :10 
 
+ 150.Mg P<.0005 
 
155.m9 P<.0005+ 
1.25gm P<.007 
 
1.98gm P<.03 - 
2.67gm P<.06 - 
* . 158.m9 P<.0005 
 
176mg P<.0005+ 
1.79gm P<.3 
 
2.00gm P<.3 - 
 
CARBARSONE 
 
465 R f fdr mat 
466 R m fdr mat 
 
CARBARYL 
 
467 N f b6a ort 
 
a N f b6 ort 
b N f b6a ort 
468 N m b6a ort 
 
a N o b6a ort 
b N m b6a ort 
469 N f b6c ort 
 
a 1 f b6c ort 
b N f b6c orl 
470 N m b6c ort 
 
a N o b6c ort 
b N m b6c ort 
471 R b mgr gav 
 
a R b gr gav 
 
... tyk 22.24 msi 
thi rts 22m24 msi 
 
lun adm 76u76 *vx 
liv hpt 76u76 mev 
tba mix 76u76 mvx 
liv hpt 76w76 evx 
Lun ado 76u76 cvx 
tbm mix 76u76 evx 
liv hpt 76u76 mvx 
lun mix 76u76 evx 
tba mix 76u76 mvx 
liv hpt 76u76 mvx 
tun adm 76u76 mvi 
tba mix 76u76 evx 
Liv tum 22.24 m 
tba mix 22m24 m 
 
bO0ng. ... :1ug. 10. :100. 1m :g .:10. :100. . : g :10 
 
s > 4.59gm * p<4 _ 
| > 4.50gm * P<.4 - 
 
1O0ng. .1..ug. 10 . 100. 1g. 10 . 100....10 
 
no dre 
no drm 
no dre 
.s > no dre 
K no drm 
K no drm 
K > no dre 
 
no dre 
12.4mg 
3.39mg 
3.39mg 
1.51m9 
no dre 
14. 1mg 
 
P-I. _ 
P-1. _ 
P-I. 1 
Pal. 1 
P-I. 1 
 
P-1. _ 
Pal. 1 
 
Pal. _ 
P<.3 - 
P<.04 - 
P<.04 - 
P<. 003 - 
PM.1. 
 
P<.003 * 
 
CARBON TETRACHLORIDE lOOng.. :. .ug. :10. :100. 1m : g . :10. :100 .. : 1 g :10 
 
472 N f b6c gav Liv hpc 78u91 mrs pooL . + . 165.mg * P<.0005+ 
473 N m b6c gav Liv hpc 78w84 mrs pooL . + . 114.mg * P<.0005+ 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
CAFFEINE 58-08-2 
 
447 1028 230.mg n.s.s. 
448 1028 126.mg n.s.s. 
449 1459 267.sg n.s.s. 
 
CAPTAN 133-06-2 
 
450 c00077 4.11gm n.s.s. 
 
a c00077 11.0gm n.s.s. 
b c00077 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
451 c00077 6.539m n.s.s. 
452 1092 155.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1092 155.mg n.s.s. 
b 1092 59.8mg n.s.s. 
453 c00077 3.94gm n.s.s. 
 
a c00077 8.87gm n.s.s. 
b c00077 3.04gm n.s.a. 
454 c00077 3.35gm 38.5gm 
 
a c00077 5.22gm n.s.s. 
455 1092 29.5mg n.a.s. 
 
a 1092 45.8mg n.s.s. 
b 1092 18.0mg 149..g 
456 1092 147.sg n.s.s. 
 
a 1092 147.mg n.s.s. 
b 1092 97.0mg n.s.s. 
457 1092 44.6mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1092 63.5mg n.s.s. 
b 1092 34.3mg n.s.s. 
458 c00077 170.mg n.s.s. 
 
a c00077 888.mg n.s.s. 
459 c00077 109.mg n.s.s. 
460 c00077 124.mg n.s.s. 
 
a c00077 798.mg n.s.s. 
 
0/36 55.0mg 0/37 
0/35 55.0mg 1/38 
0/30 40.8mg 0/30 
 
3/10 914.mg 
1/10 914.mg 
0/10 914.mg 
0/79p 914.mg 
 
0/16 78.4mg 
0/16 78.4mg 
0/16 78.4mg 
5/10 844.mg 
3/10 844.mg 
2/10 844.mg 
0/80p 844.mg 
0/80p 844.mg 
0/16 73.Omg 
0/16 73.0mg 
0/16 73.0Omg 
0/17 78.4mg 
1/17 78.4mg 
2/17 78.4mg 
1/18 73.Omg 
2/18 73.0mg 
3/18 73.0mg 
8/10 89.0mg 
0/10 89.0mg 
4/75p 89.0mg 
5/10 71.2mg 
1/10 71.2mg 
 
CARBAMYL HYDRAZINE.HCI 563-41-7 
461 60 111.mg 950.mg 21/90 
 
a 60 149.mg 5.61gm 18/90 
b 60 164.mg 2.889m 5/81 
c 60 256.mg n.s.s. 3/81 
d 60 256.mg n.s.s. 3/81 
* 60 292.mg n.s.s. 2/81 
462 60 350.mg n.s.s. 0/87 
 
a 60 224.mg n.s.s. 15/99 
b 60 207.mg n.s.s. 23/99 
c 60 240.mg n.s.s. 6/87 
 
125.mg 
125. mg 
125. mg 
125. mg 
125. mg 
125. mg 
104.mg 
104.mg 
104.mg 
104.mg 
 
I -CARBANYL-2-PHENYLHYDRAZINE 103*03-7 
 
463 60a 92.1mg 273.mg 18/100 500.mg 
 
a 60. 93.7mg 289.mg 21/100 500.mg 
b 60. 513.mg 19.6gm 4/100 500.mg 
c 60a 682.mg n.s.s. 0/34 500.mg 
d 60a 807.mg n.s.s. 0/34 500.mg 
464 60a 94.8mg 305.mg 15/96 417.mg 
 
a 60. 101.mg 388.mg 23/96 417.mg 
b 60a 429.mg n.s.s. 3/40 417.mg 
c 60. 477.mg n.s.s. 2/40 417.mg 
 
MackL in;dact,3,135-163;1980 
Johansson; i jcn,27,521 -529;1981 
 
5/50 1.83gm 8/50 
1/50 1.839m 1/50 
0/50 1.839m 0/50 
0/50 1.83gm 3/50 
0/18 
0/18 
2/18 
 
7/50 1.699g 10/50 
1/50 1.699m 3/50 
3/50 (1.699m 1/50) 
3/50 1.69gm 5/50 
1/50 1.69gm 3/50 
4/15 
2/15 
7/15 
0/17 
0/17 
1/17 
3/17 
2/17 
5/17 
 
39/50 212.mg 36/50 
3/50 212.mg 1/50 
13/50 (212.mg 7/50) 
32/50 170.mg 25/50 
 
1/50 170.mg 1/50 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun: a/a,a/c. 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
adr:coa,coc. S 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
25/47 
20/47 
9/31 
5/31 
5/31 
4/31 
2/32 
12/48 
15/48 
5/32 
 
39/50 
39/50 
9/50 
4/42 
3/42 
33/47 
33/47 
 
5/32 
4/32 
 
Toth;ej ca, 11,17-22;1975/1974 
 
Toth;jnci,52,241.251;1974 
 
CARBARSONE 121-59-5 
 
465 65 747.mg n.s.s. 
466 65 732.mg n.s.s. 
 
0/89 25.0mg 0/43 50.0mg 1/45 69.2mg 0/49 
0/85 25.0mg 0/39 50.0mg 1/43 69.2mg 0/50 
 
Oser;txap,9,528-535; 1966 
 
CARBARYL (Sevin) 63-25-2 
467 1228 2.30mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1228 3.82mg n.s.s. 
b 1228 1.82mg n.s.s. 
468 1228 2.12mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1228 2.36mg n.s.s. 
b 1228 1.86mg n.s.s. 
469 1228 3.82mg n.s.s. 
a 1228 3.82mg n.s.s. 
b 1228 2.01mg n.s.s. 
470 1228 1.02mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1228 1.02mg n.s.s. 
b 1228 .609mg 8.19mg 
471 1426 19.5mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1426 4.62mg 139.mg 
 
1/17 
0/17 
2/17 
1/18 
2/18 
3/18 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/46 
1/46 
 
1.93mg 
1. 93mg 
1.93mg 
1. 80m 
 
1.80mg 
 
1.80mg 
1.93mg 
1.93mg 
1.93mg 
1.80mg 
1.80mg 
1.80mg 
7.889g 
7.88mg 
 
1/18 
0/18 
2/18 
1/18 
1/18 
2/18 
0/18 
0/18 
1/18 
3/17 
3/17 
6/17 
0/12 
4/12 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
Andrianova;vpit,29,71-74; 1970 
 
CARBON TETRACHLORIDE 56-23-5 
 
472 1469 101.mg 258.mg 1/80p 
473 1469 63.7mg 188.g 5/77p 
 
824.mg 40/40 1.52gm 43/45 
824.mg 49/49 1.65gm 47/48 
 
National Cancer Institute;bccr;1976 
 
63 
 
Brkly Code 
 
64 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
474 R f nss ivi Liv tum 47w69 
 
a R f nsa ivi mgL mix 47w69 
b R f nss ivj tba mix 47w69 
 
475 R f os. gav Liv hpc 18.26 or pool 
 
a R f osm gav Liv nnd 18.26 or 
 
476 R a osm gav Liv nnd 18.26 or pooL 
 
a R a oem gav Liv hpc 18.26 or 
 
CARBOXYNETHYLNITROSOUREA 
 
477 R m mrw wat *pi mix 17.30 
 
a R m mrw wat Liv tum 1730 
b R m mrw wat tba mix 1730 
 
CARBRONAL 
 
478 N f b6c eat Lun NXA 18.24 
 
a N f b6c eat TBA NXB 18.24 
b N f b6c eat liv NXB 18.24 
c N f b6c eat lun NXB 18.24 
479 N m b6c eat TBA NXB 18.24 
 
a N m b6c eat Liv NXB 18.24 
b N m b6c eat Lun NXB 18.24 
480 R f f34 eat TBA NXB 24m24 
 
a R f f34 eat liv NXB 24.24 
481 R m f34 eat TBA NXB 24.24 
 
a R m f34 eat Liv NXB 24m24 
CARRAGEENAN, ACID -DEGRADED 
 
482 R b sda wat cLr mix 65w65 or 
 
a R b ada gav cLr mix 65w65 or 
CARRAGEENAN, NATIVE 
 
483 H f syg eat Liv hem 78w78 
 
a H f syg eat tba mix 78w78 
 
484 H m syg eat Liv hom 25m26 a 
 
a H m syg eat tba mix 25m26 a 
485 R f .rc eat pns tum 33.34 a 
 
a R f .rc oat ski tum 33.34 a 
486 R m .rc eat tba mix 32m33 a 
 
*+ 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
.877mg P<. I 
 
.765mg P<.3 + 
.176mg P<.007 
365.mg \ P<.004 
1.469m * P<.3 
 
A 900.mg * P<.08 
 
952.mg * P<.2 
 
lOOng. .. 1ug. :10. :100. 1m : g . :10 ..... : 100. :Ig. :10 
 
134.8mg 
no dre 
13. 1mg 
 
P<.02 + 
P-1. 
 
P<.09 
 
bOOng .:. . lug.. :10. :100.. :.1g... : 10. :100.. : .19 .:10 
 
: * #553.mg * P<.05 - 
 
5.32gm * P<1. 
 
1.95gm * P<.09 
553.mg * P<.05 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
1.58gm * P<.6 
no dre P-1. 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
:> 1.03gm * P<.8 - 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
lOOng . . .:ug . : 10. :100 . 1m :. g . : 10. :100 . : g. : 10 
 
+ . 2.20gm P<.0005+ 
 
5.16gm * P<.0005+ 
 
bO0ng. .. 1ug. :10. :100 . 1m : 1g . : 10. :100 . :Ig.. :10 
 
.> no dre P-1. - 
 
177.gm * P<.9 - 
.> no dre P-1. - 
 
54.1gm * P<.3 - 
35.4gm * P<.03 - 
no dre P-1. - 
.>no dre P-1. - 
 
CHENODEOXYCHOLIC ACID l1Ong . . .:ug. 1 :10 :..100. . : g.1g :10 :..100 ...10 
 
487 N b cba eat itn tum 54w54 r .> no dre P-1. 
CHLORANBEN bOng.. . : lug. 1 :10 :..100. . :lmg. : 10 :..100.1 :0 1 :10 
 
488 N f b6c eat TBA NXB 80w91 :> 3.62gm * P<.2 - 
 
a N f b6c eat liv NXB 80w91 3.97gm * P<.2 
b N f b6c eat lun NXB 80w91 58.0gm * P<.8 
 
489 N f b6c eat Liv hpc 80W90 pooL + 5.23gm * P<.006 c 
490 N m b6c eat TBA NXB 80w91 :> 9.80gm * P<.7 
 
a N m b6c eat Liv NXB 80w91 no dre P-1. 
b N m b6c eat Lun NXB 80w91 18.0gm * P<.1 
 
491 N m b6c eat Liv hpc 80W90 pooL * 4.96gm * P<.07 a 
492 R f osm eat TBA NXB 19m26 :> no dro P-1. 
 
a R f osm eat Liv NXB 19.26 no dre P-1. 
493 R m oem eat TBA NXB 19.26 :> 1.289m * P<.5 
 
a R m osm eat Liv NXB 19.26 no dre P-1. 
 
494 R os. eat --- hem 19.25 pooL * #3.03gm * P<.02 - 
CHLORANBUC IL 1Ong.. :. .lug. :10. : 100. 1g : . . : 10. : 100. :Ig. :10 
 
495 N f swi ipj Lun mix 26w78 e .+ . 97.Oug * P<.0005+ 
 
a N f swi ipJ --- Lys 26w78 * .709mg * P<.003 
b N f swi ipJ Liv Lys 26w78 a no dre P-I. 
 
c N f swi ipj tba mix 26w78 * 30.6ug * P<.0005 
d N f swi ipj tba maL 26w78 a 60.4ug * P<.0005 
* N f swl ipJ tba ben 26w78 e 3.60mg * P<.7 
 
496 N m swi ipJ Lun mix 26w78 e . + . .210mg * P<.0005+ 
 
a No swi ipJ --- Lys 26w78 * .435mg * P<.0005+ 
b N m swi ipj Liv mix 26w78 e no dre P-1. 
 
c N m swi ipJ tba mix 26w78 e .102mg * P<.0005 
d N m swi ipJ tba mal 26w78 a .126mg * P<.0005 
* N m swi ipJ tba ben 26w78 e no dre P-1. 
 
497 R m cdr ipJ ... Leu 26w78 . + . 1.41g * P<.004 + 
 
a R m cdr ipJ --- Lys 26w78 * 1.73mg * P<.0005 
b R m cdr ipJ Liv tum 26w78 e no dre P-1. 
 
c R m cdr ipJ tba mix 26w78 e .603mg * P<.07 
d R m cdr ipJ tba mal 26w78 e .712mg * P<.03 
* R m cdr ipJ tba ben 26w78 * no dre P-1. 
CHLORANPHENICOL lOng..: ..ug. : 10. : 100. g :1g : 10.. : 100. : g. : 10 
 
498 R f ada eat Liv hpt 66w75 * .> 278.mg P<.2 - 
 
a R f ada eat tba mix 66w75 * no dre P-1. - 
 
I 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose llnc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
474 1515 .265mg n.s.s. 0/34 .157mg 
 
a 1515 .214mg n.s.s. 1/34 .157mg 
b 1515 87.Oug 2.27mg 2/34 .157mg 
475 1469 126,mg 2.579m 0/98p 40.5mg 
 
a 1469 383.mg n.s.s. 2/98p 40.5mg 
476 1469 272.mg n.s.s. 0/99p 23.8mg 
 
a 1469 251.mg n.s.s. 1/99p 23.8mg 
 
3/57 
5/57 
16/57 
 
4/49 (81.0mg 
2/49 81.0mg 
2/50 47.6mg 
2/50 47.6mg 
 
CARBOXYMETHYLNITROSOUREA (CNNU) 60391-92-6 
 
477 1246 14.2mg n.s.s. 0/26 5.29mg 6/40 
 
a 1246 68.1mg n.s.s. 0/26 5.29mg 0/40 
b 1246 5.06mg n.s.s. 10/26 5.29mg 24/40 
CARBRONAL (bromodiethylacetylures) 77-65*6 
 
478 c03805 314.mg n.s.s. 0/20 122.mg 8/50 244.mg 
 
a c03805 210.mg n.s.s. 7/20 122.mg 30/50 244.mg 
b c03805 739.mg n.s.s. 0/20 122.mg 1/50 244.mg 
c c03805 314.mg n.s.s. 0/20 122.mg 8/50 244.mg 
479 c03805 344.mg n.s.s. 12/20 112.mg 16/49 225.mg 
 
a c03805 321.mg n.s.s. 4/20 112.mg 8/49 225.mg 
b c03805 748.mg n.s.s. 7/20 112.mg 4/49 225.mg 
480 c03805 138.mg n.s.s. 10/20 61.9mg 24/50 124.mg 
 
a c03805 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/20 61.9mg 0/50 124.mg 
481 c03805 125.mg n.s.s. 8/20 49.5mg 14/50 99.0mg 
 
a c03805 886.g n.s.s. 1/20 49.5mg 0/50 99.0mg 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
Brkly Code 
Tourkevitch; ij cn,20, 1446-1449;1964 
 
1/49) 
3/49 
1/50 
2/50 
 
9/49 
25/49 
 
4/49 
9/49 
21/50 
13/50 
8/50 
26/50 
 
0/50 
24/50 
 
1/50 
 
National Cancer Institute;bccr;1976 
 
BuLay; jnci ,62,1523-1528;1979 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. S 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
CARRAGEENAN, ACID-DEGRADED ... 
 
482 611 1.109m 5.929m 0/30 
 
a 611 2.339g 15.2gm 0/30 
 
2.659m 11/40 
 
1.009m 0/30 5.00gm 8/29 
 
Wakabayashi ;cLet,4, 171-176;1978 
 
CARRAGEENAN, NATIVE 9000-07-1 
 
483 1330 1.40gm n.s.s. 1/100 
 
a 1330 11.09m n.s.s. 5/100 
484 1330 2.499m n.s.s. 1/100 
 
a 1330 12.89m n.s.s. 6/100 
485 1330 11.79m n.s.s. 2/100 
 
a 1330 35.2gm n.s.s. 1/100 
486 1330 6.349m n.s.s. 56/100 
 
523.mg 
523. mg 
460 mg 
460.mg 
250. mg 
250. mg 
200.mg 
 
0/30 2.619g 
 
0/30 2.61gm 
 
0/30 2.309m 
2/30 2.30gm 
1/30 1. 259m 
3/30 1. 25gm 
 
15/30 1.009m 
 
CHENODEOXYCHOLIC ACID 474-25-9 
 
487 1445 17.4mg n.s.s. 0/10 31.3mg 0/10 
 
CHLORAMBEN 133-90-4 
 
488 cOO055 1.80gm n.s.s. 0/10 1.149m 12/50 
 
a cOO055 2.289m n.s.s. 0/10 1.14gm 8/50 
b cOO055 9.57gm n.s.s. 0/10 1.14gm 1/50 
489 cOO055 2.58gm 57.4gm 2/69p 1.14gm 7/50 
490 cOO055 1.53gm n.s.s. 2/10 1.059m 20/50 
 
a cOO055 2.26gm n.s.s. 2/10 1.059m 18/50 
b cOO055 6.229m n.s.s. 0/10 1.059m 0/50 
491 cOO055 2.019m n.s.s. 9/70p 1.05gm 16/50 
492 cOO055 616.mg n.s.s. 6/10 354.mg 36/50 
 
a cOO055 2.90gm n.s.s. 0/10 354.mg 2/50 
493 cOO055 339.mg n.s.s. 2/10 286.mg 25/50 
 
a cOO055 1.799m n.s.s. 0/10 286.mg 4/50 
494 cOO055 1.319m n.s.s. 0/75p 286.mg 4/50 
 
CHLORANBUCIL 305-03-3 
 
495 1336 51.4ug .225mg 
 
a 1336 .229mg 8.39mg 
 
b 1336 .215mg n.s.s. 
c 1336 11.8ug 77.2ug 
d 1336 30.9ug .136mg 
 
a 1336 .350mg n.s.s. 
496 1336 .108mg .567mg 
 
a 1336 .194mg 1.61mg 
b 1336 .308mg n.s.s. 
c 1336 54.3ug .256mg 
d 1336 67.7ug .305mg 
 
a 1336 .535mg n.s.s. 
497 1336 .456mg 19.3mg 
 
a 1336 .524mg 12.4mg 
b 1336 .412mg n.s.s. 
c 1336 .198mg n.s.s. 
d 1336 .252mg n.s.s. 
* 1336 .681mg n.s.s. 
 
20/154 
3/154 
1/154 
42/154 
29/154 
13/154 
9/101 
2/101 
2/101 
28/101 
19/101 
9/101 
2/177 
0/177 
0/177 
59/177 
32/177 
27/177 
 
.213mg 
.213mg 
.213mg 
.213mg 
.213mg 
.213mg 
.213mg 
.213mg 
.213mg 
.213mg 
.213mg 
.213mg 
.314mg 
.314mg 
.314mg 
.314mg 
.314mg 
.314mg 
 
0/30 
3/30 
0/30 
2/30 
1/30 
0/30 
19/30 
 
5.239m 
5.23gm 
4.60gm 
 
4.609m 
2.509g 
 
2. 509m 
2. 00gm 
 
Rustia;clet,11,1-10;1980 
 
0/30 
1/30 
0/30 
4/30 
4/30 
0/30 
12/30 
 
Martin;bjca,43,884-886;1981 
 
2.26gm 
 
2.269m 
2.26gm 
2.26gm 
2.099m 
2.09gm 
2.09gm 
2.09gm 
708.mg 
708. M 
566 mg 
566. mg 
566.mg 
 
16/19 .426mg 
 
1/19 .426mg 
0/19 .426mg 
18/19 .426mg 
16/19 .426mg 
2/19 .426mg 
10/26 .42609 
6/26 .426mg 
0/26 .426mg 
18/26 .426mg 
14/26 .426mg 
4/26 .426mg 
2/21 .643mg 
1/21 .643mg 
0/21 .643mg 
9/21 .643mg 
5/21 .643mg 
4/21 .643mg 
 
13/50 
10/50 
 
1/50 
10/50 
20/50 
14/50 
4/50 
14/50 
34/50 
 
1/50 
24/50 
 
1/50 
3/50 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun: a/a, a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
S 
 
Skipper;srfr;1976/Weisburger 1977/Preiman pers.com. 
 
4/8 
3/8 
0/8 
8/8 
7/8 
1/8 
7/12 
3/12 
0/12 
10/12 
10/12 
0/12 
2/12 
2/12 
0/12 
7/12 
6/12 
1/12 
 
CHLORANPHENICOL (Chloromycetin) 56-75-7 
 
498 200a 45.3mg n.s.s. 0/71 22.0mg 1/36 
 
a 200a 22.2mg n.s.s. 18/71 22.0mg 9/36 
 
Cohen;Jnci ,51,403-417;1973 
 
65 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
 
TD5O 2Zhilpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
CHLORANIL l1Ong..:. . lug. :10. :100. g :. g. :10. :100. :Ig . :10 
 
499 N f b6a orl lun ado 76w76 *vx .> no dre 
 
a N f b6a orl liv hpt 76w76 evx no drm 
 
b N f b6a orl tba mix 76w76 *vx no dre 
500 N m b6a orl lun ad. 76w76 evx .> no dre 
 
a N m b6a orl liv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b N m b6a orl tba mix 76w76 *vx 440.mg 
501 N f b6c orl liv hpt 76w76 *vx . 261.mg 
 
a N f b6c orl lun mix 76w76 mvx no dre 
b N f b6c orl tba mix 76w76 *vx 261.mg 
502 N m b6c orl liv hpt 76w76 *vx . . 57.2mg 
 
a N m b6c orl lun ad. 76w76 evx 113.mg 
b N m b6c orl tba mix 76w76 mvx 34.2mg 
 
PM1.- 
Pal. 
P-I. 
P-I. 
P-I. 
P<.7 
P<.1 
P-I. 
P<.1 
 
P<.002 
P<. 02 
 
P<. 0005 
 
CHLORDANE 00ng.. :. .1ug. :10. :100. g :. g. :10. : 100. :Ig . :10 
 
503 N f b6c mat liv hpc 80w90 v :+ 4.89mg / P<.0005c 
 
a N f b6c mat TBA NXB 80w90 v 5.16mg / P<.0005 
b N f b6c mat Liv NXB 80w90 v 4.89mg / P<.0005 
c N f b6c eat lun NXB 80w90 v 228.mg * P<.4 
 
504 N f b6c mat Liv hpc 80w89 v pooL + 5.28mg / P<.0005c 
505 N m b6c mat Liv hpc 80w90 mv + : 2.15mg / P<.0005c 
 
a N m b6c mat TBA NXB 80w90 mv 2.31mg * P<.0005 
b N m b6c mat liv NXB 80w90 mv 2.15mg I P<.0005 
c N o b6c mat lun NXB 80w90 mv 656.mg * P<1. 
 
506 N m b6c mat liv hpc 80w89 mv pooL :+ : 2.48mg / P<.0005c 
507 N f cdl mat liv nod 78w78 a . + . 1.78mg Z P<.0005 
 
a N f cdl mat Liv hpt 78w78 a 71.8mg * P<.2 
b N f cdl mat Lun ada 78w78 a no dre P-1. 
 
508 N m cdl mat liv nod 78w78 . +. 1.45mg * P<.0005 
 
a N m cdl mat Liv hpt 78w78 a no dre P-1. 
b N m cdl oat Lun mix 78w78 a no dre P-1. 
 
509 R f osm mat TBA NXB 19m25 mv :> 18.4mg * P<.5 - 
 
a R f osm mat liv NXB 19m25 mv 121.mg * P<.9 
 
510 R f oam mat utm NXA 19m25 mv pool : #101.mg * P<.05 - 
511 R m osm mat thy NXA 19m25 v : #41.6mg * P<.04 - 
 
a R m osm at --- fih 19m25 v 42.5mg * P<.03 
b R a osm mat TBA NXS 19m25 v 21.6mg * P<.4 
c R m osm mat Liv NXB 19m25 v no dre P-1. 
 
512 R a osm mat --- fih 19m25 v pool : #60.4mg * P<.05 - 
CHLORINE 100ng..:. .1ug. :10. :100. g :. g. :10. : 100. :Ig . :10 
 
513 R b bd2 wet tba mix 35m35 g .> no dre P-1. 
 
a R b bd2 wt tb mL 35m35 g no drm P-1. 
b R b bd2 wat tba ben 35m35 g no dre P-1. 
 
CHLORNADINONE ACETATE 
 
514 N f c3h mat mai tum 24m24 mr 
515 N f crf eat mai tum 24m24 mr 
516 N f r3m mat man tum 24m24 or 
 
100ng. . : ..1ug. :10. :100.1. :g .:10. :100. . :.g :10 
 
.> 3. 
 
pool 
 
nc 
 
no 
 
.77mg * P<.5 - 
o dr P-1. 
 
nadre P-1. 
 
4-CHLORO-4'-ANINODIPHENYLETHER l1Ong..:..Iug. :10. :100. g :1g. :10. :100. :Ig . :10 
 
517 N f chi mat liv mix 68w86 mv : 905.mg * P<.05 
 
a N f chi mat lun mix 6w86 av no drm P-1. 
b N f chi mat tba mix 68w86 mv 598.mg * P<.4 
 
518 N f chi mat ... vsc 68w86 mv pool t + 346.mg * P<.0005+ 
 
a N f chi mat ubl mix 68w86 mv 1.13gm * P<.0005+ 
519 N m chi mat liv mix 5lw55 v no dre P-1. - 
 
a N m chi mat lun mix Sw55 v no dre PaI. - 
b N m chi mat tba mix Sw55 v no dre P-1. - 
520 R m cdr mat liv hpt 77w98 v + 37.9mg \ P<.005 + 
 
a R f cdr mat liv mix 77w98 v 37.9mg \ P<.005 + 
b R m cdr mat tba mix 77w98 v 25.1mg * P<.004 
 
521 R m cdr mat liv hpt 77w98 v pool : 37.6mg \ P<.0005+ 
2-CHLORO-5-(3,5-DINETHYLPIPERfIDINOSULPHONYL)BENZOIC ACID .. : 100. g : g.. :10. :100. : .19 :10 
 
522 R m f34 mat liv hpc 70071 mrv . + . 4.85mg P<.0005+ 
 
I -CHLORO-2,4-DINITROSENZENE 
 
523 N f chi mat lun mix 77w94 v 
 
a N f chi mat Liv mix 77w94 v 
b N f chi mat tba mix 77w94 v 
524 N m chi mat liv mix 77w94 v 
 
a N m chi mat Lun mix 77w94 v 
b N m chi oat tba mix 77w94 v 
525 R m cdr mat Liv mix 18m24 v 
 
a R m cdr eat tba mix l8m24 v 
 
lOOng.. : .ug. :10. :100. 1m : g . :10. :100.. :. :10 
 
+ 150.mg \ P<.007 - 
 
1.52gm * P<.3 - 
124.mg * P<.004 - 
A 365.mg * P<.03 - 
 
541.mg * P<.06 - 
255.mg \ P<.09 - 
no dre P-1. 
 
12.3mg \ P<.01 - 
 
1-CHLORO-2-NITROBENZENE lbOng..:. ..ug :.10. :100. g :. g . :10 .:. 100.. : g . :10 
 
526 N f chi mat Liv hpt 77w98 v : + 289.mg \ P<.007 + 
 
a N f chi mat Liv mix 77w98 v 289.mg \ P<.007 
 
66 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
CHLORAlIL (tetrachioro-p-benzoquinone) 118-75-2 
499 1241 106.mg n.s.s. 1/17 89.1mg 1/18 
 
* 1241 177.mg n.s.s. 0/17 89.1m9 0/18 
b 1241 84.1mg n.s.s. 2/17 89.1mg 2/18 
500 1241 77.5mg n.s.s. 2/18 82.9mg 2/18 
 
a 1241 98.0mg n.s.s. 1/18 82.9mg 1/18 
b 1241 51.5mg n.s.s. 3/18 82.9mg 4/18 
501 1241 64.0m9 n.s.s. 0/16 89.1mg 2/17 
 
a 1241 167.mg n.s.s. 0/16 89.1mg 0/17 
b 1241 64.0omg n.s.s. 0/16 89.1mg 2/17 
502 1241 24.3mg 220.mg 0/16 82.9mg 7/17 
 
* 1241 38.9mg n.s.s. 0/16 82.9mg 4/17 
b 1241 16.1mg 89.9mg 0/16 82.9mg 10/17 
 
CHLORDANE 57-74-9 
 
503 c00099 3.28mg 7.88mg 
 
a c00099 3.28mg 11.7m9 
b c00099 3.28mg 7.88mg 
c c00099 37.1m9 n.s.s. 
504 c0009 3.41mg 9.30mg 
 
505 c0009 1.45mg 4.08mg 
 
a c00099 1.47m9 5.55mg 
b c00099 1.45mg 4.08mg 
c c00099 9.98mg n.s.s. 
506 c00099 1.61mg 4.44mg 
507 66s 1.15mg 2.94mg 
 
a 66a 19.0mg n.s.a. 
b 66a 13.1mg n.s.s. 
508 66a 1.07mg 2.05mg 
 
a 66a 14.5mg n.s.s. 
b 66. 32.7mg n.s.s. 
509 c0009 4.46mg n.s.s. 
 
a c00099 11.2mg n.s.s. 
510 c00099 30.4mg n.s.a. 
511 c0009 17.9mg n.s.s. 
 
a c00099 18.9mg n.s.a. 
b c00099 6.13mg n.s.s. 
c c00099 40.9mg n.s.a. 
512 c0009 22.3mg n.s.s. 
CHLORINE 7782-50-5 
 
513 1421 52.6mg n.s.a. 
 
a 1421 64.6mg n.s.s. 
b 1421 69.1mg n.s.s. 
 
0/20 
2/20 
0/20 
0/20 
 
3/80p 
2/18 
4/18 
2/18 
1/18 
17/95p 
0/57 
1/57 
6/57 
1/47 
4/47 
8/47 
7/10 
1/10 
 
0/60p 
0/10 
0/10 
3/10 
0/10 
 
2/60p 
 
3.51mg 
3.51mg 
3.51mg 
3.51mg 
3.51mg 
3.12mg 
3.12mg 
3.12mg 
3.12mg 
3.12mg 
.650mg 
.650mg 
.650mg 
.600mg 
.600mg 
.600mg 
4.40mg 
4.40mg 
4.40mg 
5.96mg 
5.96mg 
5.96mg 
5.96mg 
5.96mg 
 
3/50 7.41mg 34/50 
6/50 7.4189 35/50 
3/50 7.41mg 34/50 
0/50 7.41mg 1/50 
3/50 7.41mg 34/50 
16/50 6.00mg 43/50 
19/50 6.00mg 43/50 
16/50 6.00mg 43/50 
6/50 6.00mg 3/50 
16/50 6.00mg 43/50 
 
0/62 3.25mg 32/51 (6.50mg 36/51) 
0/62 3.25mg 2/51 6.50mg 2/51 
 
2/62 3.25mg 2/51 (6.50mg 0/51) 
6/58 3.00mg 34/52 6.00mg 38/50 
6/58 3.00mg 10/52 6.00mg 2/50 
7/58 3.00mg 2/52 6.00mg 2/50 
34/50 8.90mg 29/50 
11/50 8.90mg 6/50 
 
1/50 8.90mg 2/50 
1/50 11.9mg 6/50 
1/50 11.9mg 7/50 
21/50 11.9mg 23/50 
 
2/50 11.9mg 0/50 
1/50 11.9mg 7/50 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
tun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Epstein(roview) { irdc} ;stev,6,103-154;1976 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
ute:adc,ssr. S 
thy:fca,fcc. S 
 
S 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Druckrsy;fctx,6, 147-154; 1968 
 
3/20 5.29mg 5/60 
2/20 5.29mg 3/60 
1/20 5.29mg 2/60 
 
CHLORNADINONE ACETATE 302-22-7 
 
514 1175 .713mg n.s.a. 54/92 .104mg 
515 1175 .966m9 n.s.s. 161/167p .104mg 
516 1175 1.11mg n.s.s. 50/73 .104mg 
 
4-CHLORO-4' -ANINODIPHENYLETHER 101-79-1 
 
517 381 225.mg n.s.s. 1/15 287.mg 
 
a 381 286.mg n.s.s. 5/15 287.mg 
b 381 126.mg n.s.s. 10/15 287.mg 
518 381 130.mg 1.49gm 8/102p 287.mg 
 
* 381 389.mg 5.829m 0/102p 287.mg 
519 381 n.s.s. n.s.s. 1/14 300.mg 
 
* 381 n.s.s. n.s.s. 3/14 300.mg 
b 381 110.mg n.s.s. 7/14 300.mg 
520 381 11.8mg 381.mg 0/16 38.2mg 
 
a 381 11.8mg 381.mg 0/16 38.2mg 
b 381 8.14mg 248.mg 10/16 38.2mg 
521 381 12.1mg 258.mg 2/I1p 38.2mg 
 
RudaL i; Jnci ,49,813-819;1972 
 
28/43 1.04mg 24/36 
45/46 1.04mg 34/40 
10/19 1.04mg 18/30 
 
1/17 624.mg 
2/17 624.mg 
7/17 624.mg 
5/17 624. mg 
0/17 624.mg 
0/16 600.mg 
0/16 600. mg 
3/16 600.mg 
4/13 (84.0mg 
4/13 (84.0mg 
9/13 84.0mg 
4/13 (84.0mg 
 
2/18 
0/18 
5/18 
3/18 
4/18 
0/9 
0/9 
0/9 
 
1/23) 
1/23) 
9/23 
1/23) 
 
2*CHLORO-5*(3,5-DINETHYLPIPERIDINOSULPHONYL)BENZOIC ACID - 
522 1331 2.15mg 9.78mg 0/30 52.1mg 30/31 
 
I .CHLORO-2,4-DINITROBENZENE 
523 381 51.7mg 2.379m 
 
* 381 247.mg n.s.s. 
b 381 57.4mg 1.03gm 
 
524 381 138.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 381 203.mg n.s.s. 
b 381 79.2mg n.s.a. 
525 381 66.5mg n.s.a. 
 
a 381 5.05mg 1.78gm 
 
97-00-7 
 
3/13 169.mg 
0/13 169. mg 
9/13 169.mg 
2/16 207. mg 
2/16 207.mg 
9/16 207.mg 
1/17 17.6mg 
13/17 17.6mg 
 
5/19 (306.mg 
 
0/19 306.mg 
9/19 306. mg 
2/15 354.mg 
 
3/15 354.mg 
6/15 (354.mg 
2/18 32.2mg 
12/18 (32.2mg 
 
5/16) 
1/16 
11/16 
 
4/21 
3/21 
 
10/21) 
0/18 
14/18) 
 
1-CHLORO-2-NITROBENZENE 88-73-3 
 
526 381 109.mg 3.78gm 0/20 241.mg 5/22 (461.mg 5/19) 
 
a 381 109.mg 3.78gO 0/20 241.mg 5/22 (461.mg 7/19) 
 
Weisburger;jept,2,325-356;1978/pers.comm./Russf ilid 1973 
 
Reddy;natu,283,397-398; 1980 
Weisburg.r;j*pt,2,325-356;1978/p.rs.co_m./Russfi*Ld 1973 
 
Woisburgor;j.pt,2,325-356;1978/pors.comm./Russf laid 1973 
 
67 
 
Brkly Code 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
68 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
b N f chi sat Lun mix 77w98 v 
c N f chi eat tba mix 77w98 v 
 
52? N f chi oat tiv hpt 77w98 v pooL 
528 N m chi oat tiv mix 73w81 my 
 
a N m chi oat Lun mix 73w81 ay 
b N m chi eat tba mix 73w81 iv 
 
529 N m chi oat tiv hpt 73w81 av pooL 
530 R m cdr oat tiv mix 77w98 v 
 
a R m cdr oat tba mix 77w98 v 
 
+ 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
10.9gm * P<1. - 
287.mg \ P<.2 
 
289.mg \ P<.0005. 
113.mg * P<.003 
no dre P-I. 
 
186.mg * P<.07 
 
108.mg * P<.0005+ 
no dre P-1. - 
no dre P-1. 
 
1-CHLORO-4-NITROBENZENE lOOng. .:. .ug... .10.... 100.. 1m:.lg... -10 .... 100... .Ig .... 10 
 
531 N f chi mat --- vac 73w90 a + 526.mg * P<.0005. 
 
a N f chi oat Lun mix 73w90 a 539.mg * P<.08 - 
b N f chi mat Liv mix 73w90 a 1.44gm * P<.04 - 
c N f chi mat tba mix 73w90 a 125.mg * P<.0005 
 
532 N f chi oat ..vsc 73w90 a pooL + 634.mg * P<.0005+ 
533 Nmochi mat --vsc 73w86 a + 430.mg * P<.006 + 
 
a N m chi eat Liv mix 73w86 a 262.mg a P<.03 
 
b Nmochi eat Lun mix7?3wS6 a 1.69gm IP<.4 - 
c N mchi mat tba mix 73w86 a 215.mg *P<.02 
 
534 N m chi eat --- vac 73w86 a pooL . + 483.mg *P<.0005. 
 
a N m chi oat Liv hpt 73w86 a 558.mg* P<.02 + 
535 R m cdr eat Liv mix 77w98 v no dre P-I. - 
 
~a R m cdr mat tba mix 77w98 v 60.4mg *P<.5 - 
4-CHLORO-m-PHENYLENEDIANINE l00ng. .:. .ug... .10 ...:. 100.. 1 :.mg... .10 ...:. 100... Ig1 ...:. 10 
 
536 N f b6c mat Liv NXA 78w95 v + 1.23gm \ P<.0005c 
 
a N f b6c mat Liv hpc 78w95 v 1.78gm \ P<.002 c 
b N f b6c eat TBA NXB 78w95 v 15.4gm *Pcz.8 
 
c N f b6c eat Liv NXB 78w95 v 1.23gm P<.0005 
d N f b6c mat Lun NXB 78w95 v no dre P-1. 
 
537 N m b6c oat TBA NXB 78w94 v :>7.32gm *P<.7 - 
 
a N m b6c eat Liv NXB 78w94 v 7.05gm *P<.5 
b N mb6c mat Lun NXB 78w94 v no drm P-1. 
 
538 Rft f34 sat ut emap 18.24 + #175.mg \P<.007- 
 
a R f f34 mat TBA NXB 18.24 479.mg *P<.5 
b ft f 134 eat Liv NXB 18.24 2.68gm P<.1 
 
539 R m 134 mat adr ph. 18.24 A 315.mg *P<.03 c 
 
a ft m 134 mat TBA NXB 18.24 422.mg /P<.5 
b R m 134 eat Liv NXB 18.24 1.57gm *Psz.2 
4-CHLORO.o-PHENYLENEDIANINE boOng. .. . lug... .10 ...:. 100.. 1 :.mg... .10 ...:. 100... Ig1 ...:. 10 
 
540 N f b6c eat Liv NXA 78w95 v + 2.24gm *P<.0005c 
 
a N f b6c mat Liv hpc 78w95 v 5.06gm *P<.006 c 
b N f b6c mat TBA NXB 78w95 v 4.09gm *P<.4 
 
c N 1 b6c oat Liv NXB 78w95 v 2.24gm * P<.0005 
d N f b6c mat Lun NXB 78w95 v no drm P-1. 
 
541 Nmo b6c mat Liv NXA 78w95 v +957.mg * P<.002 c 
 
a N m b6c oat Liv hpc 78w95 v 1.37gm * P<.002 c 
b N m b6c mat TBA NXB 78w95 v 905.mg * P<.005 
c N m b6c mat Liv NXB 78w95 v 957.mg a P<.002 
d N mb6ceat Lun NXB 7Sw9S v 21.3gm * P<.8 
 
542 R f 134 mat NXB NXB 18.24 .+212.mg I P<.0005 
 
a Rft 1 34 mat ubL NXA 18.24 212.mg I P<.0005c 
b R f 134 mat ubL NXA 18.24 429.mg I P<.0005c 
c R f 134 mat thy NXA 18.24 2.16gm * P<.02 
 
d Rft 1 34 mat ito sqp 18.24 5.27gm * P<.04 c 
i ft 1 34 mat TBA NXB 18.24 351.mg * P<.03 
f1 ft 1 34 mat Liv NXB 18.24 6.50gm * P<.08 
 
543 ft m 134 oat NXB NXB 18.24 :+197.mg * P.c.0005 
 
a ft m 134 mat ubL NXA 18.24 216.mg * P<.0005c 
b ft m 134 mat ubL tcc 18.24 363.mg * P<.0005c 
c ft m 134 mat ito NXA 18.24 *historicaL * P<.02 c 
d ft m 134 mat thy NXA 18.24 3.38gm * P<.04 
 
m ft m 134 mat ubL sqc 18.24 3.78gm * P<.04 c 
f ft m 134 mat TBA NXB 18.24 362.mg * Psz.07 
g ft m 134 oat Liv NXB 18.24 1.24gm * P<.02 
 
2-CHLORtO.p-PHENYLENEDIANINE SULFATE . .:.. lug... .10 ...:. 100.. 1m:.lg... .10 .... 100... Ig1 ...:. 10 
 
544 N f b6c mat TBA NXB 22m24 a :>1.43gm * P<.5 - 
 
a N f b6c mat Liv NXB 22m24 a 1.59gm * P<.07 
b N f b6c mat Lun NXB 22.24 a 3.33gm * P<.2 
 
545 N m b6c eat TBA NXB 22.24 a :>4.38gm IP<.8 - 
 
a N m b6c mat Liv NXB 22m24 a 1.31gm *P<.2 
b N m b6c oat Lun NXB 22m24 a no drm P-1. 
 
546 Rft 1 34 eat TBA NXB 24.24 a :>no drm P-1. - 
 
a Rft 1 34 mat Liv NXB 24m24 a 3.60gm P<.6 
 
547 ft m 134 oat TBA NXB 24o24 a :>244.mg *P<.2 - 
 
a ft m 134 mat Liv NXB 24m24 a 665mg *P<.4 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose llnc 2Dose 21nc 
 
b 381 395.mg n.s.s. 6/20 241.mg 
c 381 86.3mg n.s.s. 17/20 241.mg 
527 381 109.mg 1.199m 1/102p 241.mg 
528 381 46.0mg 885.mg 3/18 260.mg 
 
a 381 246.mg n.s.s. 5/18 260.mg 
b 381 56.4mg n.s.s. 12/18 260.mg 
529 381 45.2mg 352.mg 7/99p 260.mg 
530 381 46.2mg n.s.s. 1/22 20.9mg 
 
a 381 15.3mg n.s.s. 14/22 20.9mg 
1-CHLORO-4.NITROBENZENE 100-00-5 
 
531 381 208.mg 1.889m 0/15 351.mg 
 
a 381 46.8mg n.s.s. 8/15 351.mg 
b 381 338.mg n.s.s. 0/15 351.mg 
c 381 31.3mg 512.mg 11/15 351.mg 
532 381 240.mg 2.39gm 8/102p 351.mg 
533 381 146.mg 4.99gm 0/14 341.mg 
 
a 381 96.2mg n.s.s. 1/14 341.mg 
b 381 293.mg n.s.s. 4/14 341.mg 
c 381 83.9mg n.s.s. 8/14 341.mg 
534 381 158.mg 2.629m 5/99p 341.mg 
 
a 381 153.mg n.s.s. 7/99p 341.mg 
535 381 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/16 22.6mg 
 
a 381 12.0mg n.s.s. 9/16 22.6mg 
 
4/22 461.mg 
12/22 (461.mg 
5/22 (461.mg 
 
8/17 540.mg 
1/17 540.mg 
9/17 540.mg 
7/17 540.mg 
2/22 43.6mg 
14/22 43.6mg 
 
2/20 780.mg 
3/20 780.mg 
1/20 780.mg 
10/20 780.mg 
2/20 780.mg 
2/14 720.mg 
5/14 720.mg 
0/14 720.mg 
7/14 720.mg 
2/14 720.mg 
4/14 720.mg 
0/14 45.2mg 
10/14 45.2mg 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
Brkly Code 
 
4/19 
11/19) 
5/19) 
3/16 
0/16 
4/16 
3/16 
0/19 
8/19 
 
7/18 
4/18 
2/18 
12/18 
7/18 
4/14 
1/14 
3/14 
7/14 
4/14 
0/14 
0/15 
10/15 
 
Weisburger;jept,2,325-356;1978/pers.comm./RussfieLd 1973 
 
4-CHLORO-m-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 5131-60-2 
 
536 c03305 620.mg 3.25gm 0/50 732.mg 
 
a c03305 804.mg 6.61gm 0/50 732.mg 
b c03305 1.499m n.s.s. 14/50 732.mg 
c c03305 620.mg 3.25gm 0/50 732.mg 
d c03305 9.28gm n.s.s. 4/50 732.mg 
537 c03305 1.20gm n.s.s. 22/50 676.mg 
 
a c03305 1.53gm n.s.s. 15/50 676.mg 
b c03305 5.75gm n.s.s. 7/50 676.mg 
538 c03305 79.8mg 3.15gm 2/50 75.0mg 
 
a c03305 105.mg n.s.s. 27/50 75.0mg 
b c03305 660.mg n.s.s. 0/50 75.0mg 
539 c03305 144.mg n.s.s. 4/50 60.0mg 
 
a c03305 97.9mg n.s.s. 28/50 60.0mg 
b c03305 474.mg n.s.s. 0/50 60.0mg 
4-CHLORO-o-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 95-83-0 
 
540 c03292 1.349m 6.00gm 
 
a c03292 2.47gm 42.9gm 
b c03292 1.159g n.s.s. 
c c03292 1.349m 6.00gm 
d c03292 6.11gm n.s.s. 
541 c03292 521.mg 4.25gm 
 
a c03292 729.mg 7.14gm 
 
b c03292 460.mg 8.99gm 
c c03292 521.mg 4.25gm 
d c03292 2.41gm n.s.s. 
542 c03292 148.mg 318.mg 
 
a c03292 148.mg 318.mg 
b c03292 270.mg 740.mg 
c c03292 878.mg n.s.s. 
d c03292 1.58gm n.s.s. 
 
a c03292 157.mg n.s.s. 
f c03292 1.60gm n.s.s. 
543 c03292 136.mg 301.mg 
 
a c03292 146.mg 337.mg 
b c03292 224.mg 650.mg 
c c03292 862.mg n.s.s. 
d c03292 1.02gm n.s.s. 
 
a c03292 1.13gm n.s.s. 
f c03292 147.mg n.s.s. 
g c03292 558.mg n.s.s. 
 
0/50 
0/50 
14/50 
0/50 
4/50 
15/50 
10/50 
22/50 
15/50 
7/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
27/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
28/50 
 
0/50 
 
752 .mg 
752. mg 
752. mg 
752.mg 
752. mg 
701 .mg 
701 .mg 
701.mg 
701 .mg 
701 .mg 
184. mg 
184. mg 
184m. g 
184. mg 
184. mg 
184. mg 
184. mg 
149.mg 
149. mg 
149. mg 
149.mg 
149. mg 
149. mg 
149.mg 
149.mg 
 
11/50 (1.469m 
8/50 (1.469m 
21/50 1.46gm 
 
11/50 (1.469m 
 
1/50 1.469m 
19/50 1.359m 
10/50 1.359m 
4/50 1.359m 
12/50 (149.mg 
33/50 149.mg 
 
0/50 149.mg 
7/50 119.mg 
21/50 119.mg 
 
1/50 119.mg 
 
11/50 1.50gm 
4/50 1. 50gm 
24/50 1.50gm 
 
11/50 1.509m 
2/50 1. 50gm 
 
28/50 1.399m 
18/50 1. 399m 
37/50 1.39gm 
28/50 1.39gm 
9/50 1. 39gm 
15/50 368.mg 
15/50 368.mg 
5/50 368 mg 
2/50 368.mg 
0/50 368.mg 
35/50 368.mg 
 
0/50 368.mg 
15/49 294. mg 
15/49 294 mg 
7/49 294.mg 
0/49 294.mg 
0/49 294.mg 
0/49 294.mg 
31/49 294. mg 
4/49 294. mg 
 
2-CHLORO-p-PHENYLENEDIAMINE SULFATE 61702-44-1 
 
544 c03316 359.mg n.s.s. 12/20 390.mg 27/50 646.mg 
 
a c03316 656.mg n.s.s. 2/20 390.mg 5/50 646.mg 
b c03316 1.26gm n.s.s. 0/20 390.mg 3/50 646.mg 
545 c03316 527.mg n.s.s. 12/20 360.mg 21/50 596.mg 
 
a c03316 543.mg n.s.s. 4/20 360.mg 12/50 596.mg 
b c03316 1.55gm n.s.s. 3/20 360.mg 7/50 596.mg 
546 c03316 112.mg n.s.s. 17/20 75.0mg 26/50 (150.mg 
 
a c03316 886.mg n.s.s. 0/20 75.0mg 1/50 150.mg 
547 c03316 95.0mg n.s.s. 7/20 60.0mg 21/50 120.mg 
 
a c03316 301.mg n.s.s. 0/20 60.0mg 5/50 120.mg 
 
8/49) 
5/49) 
16/49 
8/49) 
1/49 
25/50 
19/50 
3/50 
5/50) 
30/50 
 
2/50 
14/49 
36/49 
 
2/49 
 
Liv:hpa,hpc. 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
10/50 
6/50 
21/50 
10/50 
3/50 
34/50 
26/50 
39/50 
34/50 
 
7/50 
32/50 
32/50 
22/50 
 
4/50 
3/50 
37/50 
 
2/50 
29/50 
25/50 
18/50 
4/50 
3/50 
3/50 
39/50 
 
4/50 
 
liv:hpa,hpc. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun: a/a,a/c. 
liv:hpa,hpc. 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
sto:sqp; ubl:pas,ppc,ppn,tcc,tpp. C 
 
ubl :pas,ppc,ppn,tcc,tpp. 
 
ubl :ppc,tcc. 
 
thy:fca,fcc. S 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
sto:sqc,sqp; ubl:ppn,sqc,tcc,tpp. C 
 
ubL :ppn,tcc,tpp. 
 
sto:sqc,sqp. 
 
thy:fca,fcc. S 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
22/50 
9/50 
2/50 
30/50 
20/50 
6/50 
19/50) 
 
1/50 
27/50 
3/50 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
69 
 
70 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Nol 
3-CHLORO-p-TOLUIDINE 
 
548 N f b6c sat TBA NXB 78w90 
 
a N f b6c mat Liv NXB 78w90 
b N f b6c mat Lun MXB 78w90 
549 N m b6c mat TBA NXB 78w90 
 
a N m b6c mat liv MXB 78w90 
b N m b6c mat lun NXB 78w90 
 
550 R f f34 eat ut. msp 18.24 v 
 
a R f f34 sat TBA NXB 18.24 v 
b R f f34 mat Liv NXB 18.24 v 
551 R m f34 mat TBA MXB 18.24 v 
 
a R m f34 sat liv MXB 18.24 v 
5-CHLORO-o-TOLUIDINE 
 
552 N f b6c sat NXB MXB 78w91 
 
a N f b6c sat Liv NXA 78w91 
b N f b6c sat Liv hpc 78w91 
c N f b6c sat .- hes 78w9l 
d N f b6c mat TBA MXB 78w91 
* N f b6c mat Liv NXB 78w91 
f N f b6c mat Lun MXB 78w91 
553 N a b6c mat NXB NXB 78w91 
 
a N m b6c eat --- hes 78w9I 
b N m b6c eat Liv MXA 78w91 
c N m b6c mat liv hpc 78w91 
d N m b6c sat TBA MXB 78w91 
* N m b6c mat Liv NXB 78w91 
f N m b6c eat lun MXB 78w91 
554 R f f34 mat TBA MXB 18.24 
 
a R f f34 mat Liv MXB 18.24 
555 R a f34 mat adr phe 18.24 
 
a R a f34 mat TBA MXB 18.24 
b R a f34 mat Liv MXB 18.24 
4-CHLORO-o-TOLUIDINE .HCL 
 
556 N f b6c mat --- NXA 95w99 as 
 
a N f b6c eat --- hes 95w99 as 
b N f b6c mat TBA MXB 95w99 as 
c N f b6c mat Liv MXB 95w99 as 
d M f b6c mat Lun MXB 95w99 as 
557 N a b6c mat --- NXA 99w99 s 
 
a N m b6c mat --- hes 99w99 s 
b M a b6c mat TBA MXB 99w99 s 
c M a b6c mat Liv NXB 99w99 a 
d N a b6c mat Lun MXB 99w99 s 
558 N f chi mat --- vsc 51w60 a 
 
a M f chi mat Liv mix 51w60 a 
b N f chi mat Lun mix 51w60 a 
c N f chi mat tba mix 51w60 a 
559 N f chi mat -.. vac 51w60 a 
560 N a chi mat Lun mix 55w60 
 
a N a chi mat - - - vac 55w60 
b N a chi mat Liv mix 55w60 
c N a chi mat tba mix 55w60 
561 N a chi mat -.- vsc 55w60 
562 R f f34 mat TBA MXB 25.25 
 
a R f f34 mat Liv MXB 25.25 
563 R a f34 mat pit cra 25.25 
 
a R a f34 mat TBA NXB 25.25 
b R a f34 mat Liv NXB 25.25 
 
564 R a cdr mat liv mix 77w98 v 
 
a R a cdr eat tba mix 77w98 v 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
TD5O 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
tes 
 
100ng..:..lug. 10. 100.... :.lag.. : 10. :100.. :I1og . : 10 
 
:> 1.98gm * P<.8 - 
 
919.mg * P<.6 
5.119m P<.8 
 
:> 3.11gm * P<1. - 
 
no dre P-1. 
733.mg * P<.3 
 
A * #406.mg * P<.02 - 
 
365.mg * P<.4 
5.68gm * P<.4 
:> no dre P-I. 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
lOOng.. :. .ug. :10. :100. g : . 1g :10. :100. :Ig . :10 
 
: + : 143.mg * P<.0005 
 
180.mg * P<.0005c 
217.mg * P<.0005c 
373.mg / P<.0005c 
164.mg * P<.0005 
180.mg * P<.0005 
7.48gm * P<.5 
 
: +: 134.mg / P<.0005 
 
213.mg P<.0005c 
249.mg * P<.0005c 
271.mg * P<.002 c 
132.mg / P<.0005 
249.mg * P<.0005 
no dre P-1. 
 
:> no dre P-1. - 
 
no dro P-1. 
 
A * #714.mg * P<.03 - 
 
1.02gm * P<.7 
3.349m * P<.6 
 
lOOng . . .:ug.. : 10. :100.. : l1g.. : 10.. :100.. : Ig . :10 
 
: +: 40.0mg I P<.0005c 
 
42.3mg I P<.0005c 
38.8mg I P<.0005 
754.mg * P<.3 
798.mg * P<.01 
 
:+: 743.mg I P<.0005c 
 
911.mg I P<.0005c 
537.mg P<.0005 
3.26gm P<.03 
no dre P-1. 
 
+ 15.7mg * P<.0005+ 
 
139.mg * P<.02 - 
153.mg * P<.06 - 
15.6mg * P<.0005 
 
pooL : + 18.4mg * P<.0005+ 
 
+ 8.85mg \ P<.0005- 
 
15.4mg * P<.0005+ 
95.7mg * P<.04 - 
7.72mg * P<.0005 
 
pooL + 15.4mg * P<.0005+ 
 
:> no dre P-1. - 
 
no dre Pal. 
 
A * #576.mg * P<.05 - 
 
no dre P-1. 
6.18gm P<.8 
 
:> 123.mg * P<.2 - 
 
24.9mg * P<.03 - 
 
14-CHLORO-6-(2,3-XYLIDINO)-2-PYRIMIDINYLTHIO]ACETIC ACID .. : 100. g : . . :10. :100 .. : 1 : 10 
 
565 R a f34 mat Liv hpc 65w65 * <+ noTD50 P<.0005+ 
 
a R a f34 mat tba mix 65w65 a noTD50 P<.005 
4-CHLORO-6-(2,3-XYLIDINO).2-PYRIMIDINYLTHIO(N-beta-HYDROXYETHYL)ACETAMIDE.1 g. : 10. :100.. : . :10 
 
566 N f csb mat liv hpc 82w82 mr . + . 44.6mg P<.0005+ 
567 R a f34 mat Liv hpc 75w82 aer . + . 6.49mg * P<.0005+ 
 
CHLOROACETALDEHYDE 
 
568 N f hic gav for tum 90w90 
569 N a hic gav for tum 90w90 
 
lOOng. . ... : ug 10. :100.. a : g . :10. :100. :Ig . :10 
 
.> 13.6mg P<.4 - 
 
.> no dre P-1. 
 
4'-(CHLOROACETYL)-ACETANILIDE 1 OOng..:..Iug . . :10. :100. g : . . :10. :100.. : . :10 
 
570 N f b6c mat Liv hpa 21.24 v : 4 4.70gm * P<.02 a 
 
a N f b6c mat TBA NXB 21.24 v 3.50gm \ P<.7 
b N f b6c mat Liv MXB 21.24 v 4.70gm * P<.02 
c N f b6c mat Lun NXB 21.24 v 3.02gm \ P<.09 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl IDose lIne 2Dose 2Inc 
 
3-CHLORO-p.TOLUIDINE 95-74-9 
 
548 c02040 220.mg n.s.s. 5/20 
 
a c02040 310.mg n.s.s. 0/20 
b c02040 483.mg n.s.s. 2/20 
549 c02040 148.mg n.s.s. 5/20 
 
a c02040 261.mg n.s.s. 4/20 
b c02040 299.mg n.s.s. 0/20 
550 c02040 214.mg n.s.s. 0/20 
 
a c02040 102.mg n.s.s. 7/20 
b c02040 925.mg n.s.s. 0/20 
551 c02040 196.mg n.s.s. 9/20 
 
a c02040 761.mg n.s.s. 0/20 
5-CHLORO-o-TOLUIDINE 95.79.4 
 
552 c02051 104.ag 221.mg 0/20 
 
a c02051 128.mg 290.mg 0/20 
b c02051 151.mg 379.mg 0/20 
c c02051 237.mg 676.mg 0/20 
d c02051 103.ag 446.mg 4/20 
* c02051 128.mg 290.ag 0/20 
f c02051 1.39gm n.s.s. 1/20 
553 c02051 88.6mg 269.mg 5/20 
 
a c02051 145.mg 356.mg 1/20 
b c02051 146.mg 876.mg 4/20 
c c02051 155.mg 1.16gm 4/20 
d c02051 85.9mg 279.mg 6/20 
a c02051 146.mg 876.ag 4/20 
f c02051 1.18gm n.s.s. 2/20 
554 c02051 218.mg n.s.s. 8/20 
 
a c02051 1.44gm n.s.s. 0/20 
555 c02051 336.mg n.s.s. 0/20 
 
a c02051 166.mg n.s.s. 8/20 
b c02051 821.mg n.s.s. 0/20 
 
67.6mg 
67.6mg 
67.6mg 
62. 4ag 
62. 4mg 
62.4mg 
62. 0mg 
62. 0mg 
62. 0mg 
49.6mg 
49.6mg 
 
222. mg 
222.mg 
222. mg 
222. mg 
222.mg 
222 mg 
222. mg 
205. mg 
205 mg 
205. mg 
205 .mg 
205 .mg 
205 .mg 
205 mg 
94. 0mg 
94.Omg 
75.2mg 
75.2mg 
75. 2mg 
 
6/50 135. mg 
4/50 135.mg 
0/50 135.mg 
15/50 125.mg 
10/50 125.mg 
3/50 125.mg 
4/50 124.mg 
22/50 124.mg 
0/50 124.mg 
21/50 100.mg 
 
1/50 100.mg 
 
26/50 446.mg 
21/50 446. mg 
19/50 446.mg 
6/50 446. mg 
32/50 446.mg 
21/50 446.mg 
 
0/50 446.mg 
29/50 412.mg 
11/50 412.mg 
20/50 412.mg 
19/50 412.mg 
31/50 412.mg 
20/50 412.mg 
 
2/50 412.mg 
22/50 189.mg 
 
1/50 189.mg 
2/50 151.mg 
17/50 151.mg 
 
1/50 151.mg 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
11/50 
2/50 
4/50 
14/50 
7/50 
3/50 
9/50 
28/50 
 
1/50 
17/50 
0/50 
 
35/50 
31/50 
26/50 
22/50 
38/50 
31/50 
 
3/50 
45/50 
37/50 
27/50 
25/50 
46/50 
27/50 
 
2/50 
23/50 
 
0/50 
7/50 
24/50 
 
1/50 
 
Brkly Code 
 
Liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
S 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
--- :hes; liv:hpa,hpc. C 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
tun:a/a, a/c. 
 
- - :hes; liv:hpa,hpc. C 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc. 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
S 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
4-CHLORO-o-TOLUIDINE.HCl 3165-93-3 
 
556 c02368 26.9mg 62.0mg 
 
a c02368 28.6mg 64.0mg 
b c02368 25.6mg 63.4mg 
c c02368 191.mg n.s.a. 
d c02368 217.mg 76.0gm 
557 c02368 507.mg 1.13gm 
 
a c02368 605.mg 1.449m 
b c02368 336.mg 1.099m 
c c02368 1.29gm n.s.s. 
d c02368 2.15gm n.s.a. 
558 381 6.23mg 37.4mg 
 
a 381 24.8mg n.s.a. 
b 381 25.0mg n.s.s. 
c 381 6.21mg 36.4mg 
559 381 7.46mg 41.3mg 
560 381 2.51mg 55.6mg 
 
a 381 8.35mg 30.2mg 
b 381 17.2mg n.s.s. 
c 381 4.02mg 15.1mg 
561 381 8.35mg 27.4mg 
562 c02368 299.mg n.s.s. 
 
a c02368 1.90gm n.s.s. 
563 c02368 239.mg n.s.s. 
 
a c02368 209.mg n.s.s. 
b c02368 452.mg n.s.s. 
564 381 36.2mg n.s.s. 
 
a 381 10.7mg n.s.s. 
 
1/20 
0/20 
5/20 
1/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
11/20 
4/20 
4/20 
0/15 
0/15 
8/15 
11/15 
 
8/102p 
4/14 
0/14 
1/14 
8/14 
5/99p 
12/20 
 
1/20 
2/20 
13/20 
0/20 
0/16 
9/16 
 
162.mg 43/50 650.mg 
162.mg 40/50 650.mg 
162.mg 45/50 650.mg 
162.mg 4/50 650.mg 
162.mg 2/50 650.mg 
450.mg 6/50 1.80gm 
450.mg 3/50 1.80gm 
450.mg 28/50 1.809m 
450.mg 7/50 1.80gm 
450.mg 14/50 1.80gm 
260.mg 18/19 520.mg 
260.mg 1/19 520.mg 
260.mg 1/19 520.mg 
260.mg 18/19 520.mg 
260.mg 18/19 520.mg 
90.0mg 7/20 (180.mg 
90.0mg 12/20 180.mg 
90.0mg 0/20 180.mg 
90.0mg 18/20 180.mg 
90.0mg 12/20 180.mg 
62.5mg 34/50 250.mg 
62.5mg 0/50 250.mg 
50.0mg 6/50 200.mg 
50.0mg 30/50 200.mg 
50.0mg 5/50 200.mg 
24.6mg 2/19 49.1mg 
24.6mg 12/19 49.1mg 
 
39/50 
39/50 
42/50 
 
0/50 
3/50 
41/50 
37/50 
45/50 
10/50 
3/50 
12/16 
 
1/16 
0/16 
13/16 
12/16 
2/20) 
13/20 
2/20 
16/20 
13/20 
32/50 
 
1/50 
15/50 
33/50 
 
4/50 
1/13 
10/13 
 
- * :hmm,hesa. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
- - - :ham,hes. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Weisburger;j*pt,2,325-356;1978/pers.comm./Russfi*Ld 1973 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Weisburger;jept,2,325-356;1978/pers.com./Russf ield 1973 
 
14-CHLORO-6-(2,3-XYLIDINO).2-PYRIMIDINYLTHIO]ACETIC ACID 50892-23-4 
565 1332 n.s.s. 13.8mg 0/12 80.0mg 14/14 
 
a 1332 n.s.s. 17.8mg 3/12 80.0mg 14/14 
 
4-CHLORO-6- (2,3-XYLIDINO) -2-PYRIMIDINYLTHIO(N-beta-HYDROXYETHYL)ACETAMIDE - - - 
566 1331 16.4mg 126.mg 0/15 260.mg 11/12 
 
567 1331 2.77mg 14.7mg 0/30 20.0mg 7/10 80.0mg 20/20 
 
CHLOROACETALDEHYDE 107*20-0 
 
568 1011 2.43mg n.s.s. 5/100 1.43mg 3/30 
569 1011 4.29mg n.s.s. 8/60 1.19mg 1/30 
 
4'-(CHLOROACETYL)-ACETANILIDE 140-49-8 
 
570 c03770 2.299m n.s.s. 0/20 557.mg 2/50 1.11gm 8/50 
 
a c03770 590.mg n.s.a. 6/20 557.mg 21/50 (1.11g 12/50) 
b c03770 2.29gm n.s.s. 0/20 557.mg 2/50 1.119m 8/50 
c c03770 1.14gm n.s.s. 0/20 557.mg 5/50 (1.119g 1/50) 
 
LaLwani ;carc,2,645-650; 1981 
Reddy;natu,283,397-398; 1980 
Van Duuren;jnci,63,1433-1439;1979 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
71 
 
S 
 
72 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
571 N a b6c eat TBA NXB 21.24 v 
 
a N m b6c eat Liv MXB 21.24 v 
b N m b6c eat Lun NXB 21.24 v 
572 R f f34 eat TBA NXB 20.24 v 
 
a R f f34 eat Liv NXB 20.24 v 
573 R m f34 oat TBA NXB 20.24 v 
 
a R m f34 eat Liv NXB 20.24 v 
 
TD5O 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
no dre P- 1. - 
no dre P.1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
no dre P-1. - 
no dre P-1. 
 
325.mg * P<.7 - 
2.47gm * P<.8 
 
p-CHLOROANILINE 00ng. ...lug.. :110. :100. g : ..g :10. :100. I : g . :10 
 
574 N f b6c eat --- MXA 78w91 + 1.48gm * P<.01 a 
 
a N f b6c eat -- hes 78w9I 1.65gm * P<.02 a 
b N f b6c eat Liv MXA 78w91 2.359m * P<.02 
c N f b6c eat TBA MXB 78w91 889.mg * P<.05 
d M f b6c oat liv MXB 78w91 2.35gm * P<.02 
a N f b6c eat Lun NXB 78w91 no dre P-1. 
 
575 M m b6c oat - - NXA 78w91 :> +historical * P<.2 a 
 
a M m b6c eat TBA NXB 78w91 no dre P-I. 
b N m b6c eat liv NXB 78w91 no dre P-1. 
c N m b6c eat lun MXB 78w91 no dre P-1. 
576 R f f34 eat TBA MXB 18.24 :> 60.7mg * P<.4 
 
a R f f34 eat Liv MXB 18.24 867.mg * P<.4 
 
577 R m f34 eat spL MXA 18.24 + +historicaL / P<.009 a 
 
a R m f34 eat NXA NXA 18.24 72.0mg / P<.03 
b R m f34 eat spL fib 18.24 101.mg * P<.02 
c R m f34 eat TBA MXB 18.24 31.4mg * P<.09 
d R m f34 eat liv MXB 18.24 609.mg * P<.4 
CHLOROBENZILATE lOOng ..:. l ug. 1 :10 :..100.. g : . 1. :10 :..100.1 :0 1 :10 
 
578 N f b6c eat Liv hpc 78w90 dv + 848.mg * P<.004 c 
 
a N f b6c eat TBA NXB 78w90 dv 3.93gm * P<.7 
 
b N f b6c eat liv MXB 78w90 dv 848.mg * P<.004 
c N f b6c eat lun NXB 78w90 dv no dre P-I. 
579 M f b6c orl lun ads 82w82 evx .> 621.mg P<.3 
 
a N f b6c orl Liv hpt 82w82 *vx no dre P-1. 
b M f b6c orl tba mix 82w82 evx 302.mg P<.2 
 
580 M m b6c eat Liv hpc 78w90 dv : k 235.mg \ P<.03 c 
 
a N m b6c eat TBA MXB 78w90 dv 256.mg \ P<.05 
b N m b6c eat liv NXB 78w90 dv 235.mg \ P<.03 
c N m b6c eat Lun MXB 78w90 dv no dre P-1. 
 
581 N m b6c orL Liv hpt 82w82 evx . + . 43.8.g P<.0005+ 
 
a N m b6c orL lun mix 82w82 *vx no dre P-1. 
 
b M m b6c orL tba mix 82w82 *vx 31.7mg P<.0005 
582 N f b6a orL Lun ado 82w82 evx .> 621.mg P<.6 
 
a N f b6a orL liv hpt 82w82 evx no dre P-1. 
b N f b6a orl tba mix 82w82 evx 621.mg P<.7 
 
583 N m b6a orL liv hpt 82w82 evx . + . 69.8.g P<.01 + 
 
a M m b6a orl Lun ads 82w82 evx no dre P-1. 
 
b M m b6a orl tba mix 82w82 evx 72.8mg P<.06 
 
584 R f oam eat adr coa 18.26 dv + 0490.mg a P<.01 - 
 
a R f osa eat TBA NXB 18m26 dv no dre P-1. 
b R f osm eat Liv MXB 18m26 dv no dre P-1. 
 
585 R m oem eat adr coa 18.26 dv + #186.mg \ P<.007 - 
 
a R m osm eat TBA MXB 18.26 dv no dre P-1. 
b R m osm eat Liv NXB 18.26 dv 1.609m * P<.4 
 
586 R f cwf eat mgl adf 24m24 .> no dre P-1. - 
(2-CHLOROETHYL)TRIMETHYLANMONIUN CHLORIDE .. lug. :10. :100. g : . 1g :10. :100.. : g :10 
 
587 N f b6c eat TBA MXB 24m24 :> no dre P-1. - 
 
a N f b6c eat liv MXB 24m24 no dre P-1. 
b N f b6c eat Lun MXB 24m24 no dre P-1. 
588 N f b6c orl liv hpt 76w76 evx .> no dre Pul. 
 
a N f b6c orL lun mix 7fw76 evx no dre P-1. 
b N f b6c orl tba mix 76w76 evx 57.4mg P<.3 
 
589 N m b6c eat TBA MXB 24m24 :> 3.24gm * P<.9 - 
 
a M m b6c eat liv MXB 24m24 599.mg * P<.2 
b N m b6c eat lun MXB 24m24 no dre P-1. 
 
590 M m b6c orl liv hpt 76w76 evx . + . 9.38.g P<.009 
 
a N m b6c orL lun mix 76w76 evx no dre P-1. 
 
b N m b6c orL tba mix 76w76 *vx 5.19mg P<.0005 
591 N f b6a orl Liv hpt 76w76 evx .> no dre P-1. 
 
a N f b6a orL lun ad. 76w76 evx no dre P-1. 
b M f b6a orL tba mix 76w76 evx 33.5mg P<.6 
592 M m b6a orl liv hpt 76w76 *vx . 11.4mg P<.07 
 
a M m b6a orl Lun ad. 76w76 evx no dre P-1. 
b N m b6a orl tba mix 76w76 evx 21.3mg P<.5 
 
593 R f f 34 mat TBA MXB 25m25 :> no dre P-I. - 
 
a R f f34 eat Liv MXB 25.25 8.09gm * P<.4 
 
594 R f134 eat pni isa 25m25 A #458.mg * P<.02 - 
 
a R m f34 eat TBA NXB 25m25 3.369m * P<1. 
b R m f34 oat liv MXB 25m25 no dre P-1. 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
571 c03770 877.mg n.s.s. 9/20 
 
a c03770 1.519m n.s.s. 3/20 
b c03770 3.719m n.s.s. 3/20 
572 c03770 90.1mg n.s.s. 11/20 
 
a c03770 616.mg n.s.s. 1/20 
573 c03770 54.6mg n.s.s. 9/20 
 
a c03770 242.mg n.s.s. 1/20 
p-CHLOROANILINE 106-47-8 
 
574 c02039 744.mg 86.19m 0/20 
 
a c02039 802.mg n.s.s. 0/20 
b c02039 1.029m n.s.s. 0/20 
c c02039 405..g n.s.s. 3/20 
d c02039 1.02gm n.s.s. 0/20 
 
a c02039 1.89gm n.s.s. 1/20 
575 c02039 332.mg n.s.s. 2/20 
 
a c02039 374.mg n.s.s. 9/20 
b c02039 1.01gm n.s.s. 3/20 
c c02039 2.25gm n.s.s. 2/20 
576 c02039 16.0mg n.s.s. 7/20 
 
a c02039 141.mg n.s.s. 0/20 
577 c02039 37.0mg 2.23gm 0/20 
 
a c02039 31.4mg n.s.s. 1/20 
b c02039 41.3mg n.s.s. 0/20 
c c02039 13.1mg n.s.s. 7/20 
d c02039 99.2mg n.s.s. 0/20 
 
514.mg 
514. mg 
514.mg 
42. 2mg 
42.2mg 
33.8mg 
33.8gg 
 
278.mg 
278. mg 
278.mg 
278.mg 
278.mg 
278. mg 
257.mg 
257 mg 
257.mg 
257. mg 
9.60mg 
9.60mg 
7.70mg 
7.70mg 
7.70mg 
7.70mg 
7.70mg 
 
19/50 (1.039m 5/50) 
6/50 (1.039g 0/50) 
6/50 1.03gm 4/50 
31/50 84.5mg 29/50 
 
1/50 84.5mg 1/50 
27/50 67.6mg 28/50 
 
2/50 67.6mg 3/50 
 
3/50 558.mg 8/50 
3/50 558.mg 7/50 
1/50 558.mg 6/50 
11/50 558.mg 18/50 
 
1/50 558.mg 6/50 
2/50 558.mg 2/50 
10/50 275.mg 14/50 
18/50 275.mg 19/50 
7/50 275.mg 2/50 
1/50 275.mg 1/50 
24/50 19.0mg 25/50 
 
0/50 19.0mg 1/50 
0/50 15.2mg 7/50 
0/50 15.2mg 10/50 
0/50 15.2mg 6/50 
14/50 15.2mg 26/50 
0/50 15.2mg 1/50 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
* - *:hom,hs. 
 
liv:hpa,hpc. S 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
- - :h.m,hes. 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun: a/a, a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
spL:fbs,f ib. 
 
spc:srn; spL:fbs,fib,hes,ost. S 
 
S 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
CHLOROBENZILATE 510-15-6 
 
578 c00408 523.mg 4.519m 0/20 
 
a c00408 623.mg n.s.s. 5/20 
b c00408 523.mg 4.51gm 0/20 
c c00408 2.93gm n.s.s. 2/20 
579 67a 101.mg n.s.s. 0/16 
 
a 67a 192.mg n.s.s. 0/16 
b 67a 74.1mg n.s.s. 0/16 
580 c00408 114.mg n.s.s. 4/20 
 
a c00408 117.mg n.s.s. 5/20 
b c00408 114.mg n.s.s. 4/20 
c c00408 4.20gm n.s.s. 1/20 
581 67a 20.1mg 124.mg 0/16 
 
a 67a 169.mg n.s.s. 0/16 
b 67a 15.2mg 79.6mg 0/16 
582 67a 81.7mg n.s.s. 1/17 
 
a 67. 192.mg n.s.s. 0/17 
b 67. 69.7mg n.s.s. 2/17 
583 67a 27.6mg 4.099g 1/18 
 
a 67a 169.mg n.s.s. 2/18 
b 67a 25.8mg n.s.s. 3/18 
584 c00408 211.mg 28.59m 0/50 
 
a c00408 81.4mg n.s.s. 36/50 
b c00408 635.sg n.s.s. 1/50 
585 c00408 75.1mg 2.25gm 0/50 
 
a c00408 145.mg n.s.s. 28/50 
b c00408 395.mg n.s.s. 0/50 
586 67 73.2mg n.s.s. 3/20 
 
356. mg 
356.mg 
356.mg 
356.mg 
83.4mg 
83.4mg 
83.4mg 
440. mg 
440. mg 
440.mg 
440. mg 
77.6mg 
77.6mg 
77.6mg 
83.4mg 
83.4mg 
83.4mg 
77.6mg 
77.6mg 
77.6mg 
41.0mg 
 
41. 0mg 
41.0mg 
45.6mg 
45.6mg 
45.6mg 
25. 0mg 
 
11/50 658.mg 13/50 
18/50 658.mg 15/50 
11/50 658.mg 13/50 
2/50 658.-mg 2/50 
1/18 
0/18 
2/18 
 
32/50 (773.-mg 22/50) 
34/50 (773.-mg 25/50) 
32/50 (773.mg 22/50) 
 
1/50 773.mg 1/50 
9/17 
0/17 
11/17 
2/18 
0/18 
3/18 
7/17 
0/17 
8/17 
 
2/50 78.0mg 5/50 
38/50 78.0mg 34/50 
 
0/50 78.0mg 1/50 
6/50 (84.8mg 3/50) 
31/50 84.8mg 23/50 
 
1/50 84.8mg 1/50 
1/20 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Innes;ntis,1968/1969 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
S 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
S 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Horn;agfc,3,752-756; 1955 
 
(2-CHLOROETHYL)TRIMETHYLAMONIUM CHLORIDE (CCC) 999-81-5 
 
587 c02960 404.mg n.s.s. 
 
a c02960 1.119m n.s.s. 
b c02960 1.15gm n.s.s. 
588 1103 17.8mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1103 17.8mg n.s.s. 
b 1103 9.34mg n.s.s. 
589 c02960 218.mg n.s.s. 
 
a c02960 214.mg n.s.s. 
b c02960 806.mg n.s.s. 
590 1103 3.53mg 206.mg 
 
a 1103 16.5mg n.s.s. 
b 1103 2.31mg 17.1mg 
591 1103 14.8mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1103 14.8mg n.s.s. 
b 1103 5.11mg n.s.s. 
592 1103 3.73mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1103 10.9mg n.s.s. 
b 1103 4.25mg n.s.s. 
593 c02960 135.mg n.s.s. 
 
a c02960 1.329m n.s.s. 
594 c02960 216.mg n.s.s. 
 
a c02960 83.9mg n.s.s. 
b c02960 487.mg n.s.s. 
 
14/20 
4/20 
1/20 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
12/20 
7/20 
4/20 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/17 
1/17 
2/17 
1/18 
2/18 
3/18 
13/20 
0/20 
0/20 
16/20 
 
1/20 
 
65.0mg 25/50 260.mg 26/50 
65.0mg 7/50 260.mg 4/50 
65.0mg 3/50 260.mg 2/50 
8.96mg 0/18 
8.96mg 0/18 
8.96mg 1/18 
 
60.0mg 29/50 240.mg 29/50 
60.0mg 13/50 240.mg 23/50 
60.0mg 9/50 240.mg 5/50 
8.34mg 5/18 
8.34mg 0/18 
8.34mg 8/18 
8.96mg 0/15 
8.96mg 0/15 
8.96mg 3/15 
8.34mg 5/18 
8.34mg 1/18 
8.34mg 5/18 
 
75.0mg 41/50 150.mg 37/50 
75.0mg 0/50 150.mg 1/50 
60.0mg 2/50 120.mg 7/50 
60.0mg 37/50 120.mg 36/50 
60.0mg 2/50 120.mg 2/50 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:&/a,a/c. 
 
Innas;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
S 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
73 
 
Brkly Code 
 
74 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Nol 
CHLOROFORM 
 
595 D f beg eat Liv tue 87m92 e 
 
a D f beg eat tbe mix 87m92 e 
596 D m beg eet Liv tum 87m92 e 
 
e D m beg eat tba mix 87m92 e 
597 N f b6c gev Liv hpc 78w92 v 
 
a N f b6c gev TBA NXS 78w92 v 
b N f b6c gev Liv NXB 78w92 v 
c N f b6c gav Lun NXB 78w92 v 
598 N m b6c gev Liv hpc 78w92 v 
 
a N m b6c gvTBANXB 78w92 v 
b N m b6c gav Liv NXB 78w92 v 
c N m b6c gev Lun NXB 78w92 v 
599 N m c5L gav Lun mix 19m24 e 
 
a N m c5L gevLiv tum 1924 e 
b N m c5L gv tb mix 19e24 e 
600 N m cba gav Liv mix 19e24 e 
 
a N m cb gavLunmix 19e24 o 
b N m cba gev tba mix 19e24 e 
601 N m cf1 gav Lun mix 80w93 e 
 
a N m cfl gav Liv tum 80w93 e 
b N m cfl gav tba mix 80w93 e 
602 N m cfL gav kid mix 19e24 e 
 
a N m cfL gav Lun tum 1924 e 
b N m cfLgavLiv tum 1924 
 
c NmcfLgav tba mix 19e24 e 
603 N f ici gav Lun tue 80w96 e 
 
a N f ici gav Liv tue 80w96 e 
b N f ici gav tba mix 80w96 a 
604 N m ici gav kid mix 80w96 e 
 
a N m ici gav Liv tue 80w96 e 
b N m ici gav Lun tue 80w96 e 
c N m ici gav tba mix 80w96 e 
605 N m ici gav kid mix 80W98 o 
 
a N m ici gav lun mix 80w98 e 
b N m ici gav Liv mix 80N98 e 
c N m ici gav tba mix 80w98 e 
606 N m ici gav kid mix 80w98 e 
 
a N m ici gev Liv mix 80w98 e 
b N m ici gav Lun mix 80N98 e 
c N m ici gav tba mix 80w98 e 
607 R f oem gav thy NXA 18e26 v 
 
a R foamgavTBANXB 18e26 v 
b R f os gavLiv NXB l8e26 v 
608 R m ose gav kid NXA 18e26 
 
a R m osm gav TBA NXB 18e26 
b R m osm gav Liv NXB 18e26 
 
609 R f sda gav Liv cye 80w95 e 
 
a R f ada gev tba mix 80w95 e 
b R f ada gav tba eaL 80w95 e 
610 R m ada gav Liv tue 80w95 a 
 
a R fm ad gev tba mix 80w95 e 
b R * ada gav tbe eeL 80w95 e 
CHLORONETHYL NETHYL ETHER 
 
611 H * syg inh mix mix 26m29 
 
a H * syg inh Lun adc 26e29 
612 R * ada inh mix mix 26m28 
2- (CHLORONETHYL)PYRIDINE.HCL 
 
613 N f b6c gav TBA NXB 23m24 
 
a N f b6c gav Liv NXB 23M24 
b N f b6c gav Lun NXB 23M24 
614 N m b6c gav TBA NXB 23M24 
 
a N e b6c gav Liv NXB 23M24 
b N m b6c gav Lun NXB 23M24 
615 R f f34 gav TBA NXB 23M24 
 
a R f f34 gav Liv NXB 23M24 
616 R * f34 gav sub fib 23M24 
 
a R m f 34 gav TBA NXB 23M24 
b R * f34 gav Liv NXB 23m24 
 
3- (CHLORONETHYL)PYRIDINE.HCL 
 
617 N f b6c gav sto NXA 21m24 as 
 
a N f b6c gev TBA NXB 21m24 as 
b N f b6c gav Liv NXB 21m24 as 
c N f b6c gav Lun NXB 21m24 as 
618 N * b6c gav sto NXA 21m24 as 
 
a N m b6c gav TBA NXS 21m24 as 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
tes 
 
bO0ng . .:1ug. :10. :100. :.g : 10.. :100... :Ig . :10 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
10.0mg \ P<.3 _ 
no dre P.1. 
 
13.3mg * P<.008 - 
48.0mg * P<.0005c 
54.1mg * P<.0005 
48.0mg * P<.0005 
no dre PaI. 
 
* 56.2mg / P<.0005c 
 
71.1mg* P<.004 
56.2mg / P<.0005 
no dre P-1. 
 
728.mg P<.5 - 
no dre P-1. - 
no dre Pal. - 
no dre P-1. - 
no dre P-1. - 
no dre P-1. - 
376.mg P<.6 - 
1.439m P<.9 - 
140.mg P<.4 - 
153.mg P<.0005+ 
4.35gm p<1. - 
no dre P-1. - 
no dre P-1. 
 
316.mg * P<.3 - 
no dre P-1. - 
no dre P-1. - 
139.mg * P<.0005+ 
324.mg * P<.4 - 
9.839m * P<1. - 
45.4mg * P<.006 
 
278.mg P<.08 + 
336.mg P<.3 - 
437.mg P<.6 - 
88.5mg P<.2 
 
+ . 95.5mg P<.0005+ 
 
no dre P-I. - 
no dre P-1. - 
no dre P-1. 
 
+ : #126.mg * P<.004 - 
 
68.2mg * P<.05 
1.13m* P<.7 
 
+ 119.mg I P<.0005c 
 
194.mg * P<.5 
 
455.mg * P<.08 
 
1.20gm P<.3 - 
78.3mg P<.2 - 
276.mg P<.2 - 
no dre P-I. - 
no dre P-1. - 
no dre P-1. - 
 
bO0ng..: ..ug. :10. :100. g :. . :10. :100. . : . :10 
 
16.4mg 
32.9mg 
5.50mg 
 
P<.1 
P<. 3 
P<.1 
 
100ng . .:1ug. :10. :100. g :..g :10. : 100. :Ig . :10 
 
:> 9.79gm * P<1. - 
 
no dre P-1. 
2.17gm * P<.6 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
no dre P-1. 
23949g * P<. 9 
 
:> 114.mg * P<.4 - 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
* #515.mg * P<.03 - 
 
671.mg * P<.9 
no dre P-1. 
 
bO0ng .. : lug.. : 10. :100.. :.leg.. : 10. :100.. :Ig. : 10 
 
: *historicaL * P<.04 c 
 
141.mg * P<.2 
16.3gm * P<d. 
1.97gm * P<.7 
 
+ 161.mg / P<.003 c 
 
64.9eg * P<.02 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
CHLOROFORM 67-66-3 
 
595 1003 6.52mg n.s.s. 0/16 
 
a 1003 2.22mg n.s.s. 4/16 
596 1003 6.52mg n.s.s. 0/16 
 
a 1003 5.39mg 230..g 0/16 
597 c02686 35.2mg 68.0mg 0/20 
 
a c02686 37.8mg 91.8mg 2/20 
b c02686 35.2mg 68.0mg 0/20 
c c02686 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/20 
598 c02686 38.7mg 118.mg 1/20 
 
a c02686 40.4mg 491.mg 4/20 
b c02686 38.7mg 118.mg 1/20 
c c02686 490.mg n.s.s. 1/20 
599 710m 134.mg n.s.s. 2/46 
 
a 710m 416.mg n.s.s. 2/46 
b 710m 112..g n.s.s. 16/46 
600 710s 70.7mg n.s.s. 37/51 
 
a 710m 155.mg n.s.s. 13/51 
b 710. 64.7mg n.s.s. 42/51 
601 710. 64.2mg n.s.s. 9/45 
 
a 710m 111.mg n.s.s. 4/45 
b 710m 37.2mg n.s.s. 16/45 
602 710. 66.6mg 613.mg 6/240 
 
a 710m 65.8mg n.s.s. 102/240 
b 710m 189.mg n.s.s. 69/240 
c 710. 68.4mg n.s.s. 170/240 
603 710. 81.3mg n.s.s. 5/59 
 
a 710. 59.2mg n.s.s. 1/59 
b 710m 71.5mg n.s.s. 29/59 
604 710m 62.8mg 407.mg 0/72 
 
a 710m 73.5mg n.s.a. 5/72 
b 710m 95.4mg n.s.s. 7/72 
c 710m 21.0mg 643.mg 20/72 
605 710n 91.2mg n.s.s. 1/49 
 
a 710n 83.7mg n.s.s. 4/49 
b 710n 78.3mg n.s.s. 7/49 
c 710n 31.8mg n.s.s. 17/49 
606 710O 47.1mg 325.mg 1/50 
 
a 710o 105.mg n.s.s. 9/50 
b 710o 182.mg n.s.s. 5/50 
c 710o 66.8mg n.s.s. 24/50 
607 c02686 65.8mg 936.mg 1/20 
 
a c02686 28.8mg n.s.s. 12/20 
b c02686 156.mg n.s.s. 2/20 
608 c02686 65.5mg 334.mg 0/20 
 
a c02686 43.5mg n.s.s. 9/20 
b c02686 157.mg n.s.s. 0/20 
609 711 196.mg n.s.s. 0/50 
 
a 711 27.1mg n.s.s. 22/50 
b 711 86.0mg n.s.s. 2/50 
610 711 365.mg n.s.s. 0/48 
 
a 711 115.mg n.s.s. 12/48 
b 711 195.mg n.s.s. 6/48 
 
12.2mg 0/8 24.4mg 0/8 
12.2mg 4/8 (24.4mg 0/8) 
12.2mg 0/8 24.4mg 0/8 
12.2mg 4/8 24.4mg 2/8 
144.mg 36/50 289.mg 39/50 
144.mg 37/50 289.mg 39/50 
144.mg 36/50 289.mg 39/50 
144.mg 1/50 289.mg 0/50 
83.6mg 19/50 168.mg 44/50 
83.6mg 26/50 168.mg 44/50 
83.6mg 19/50 168.mg 44/50 
83.6mg 3/50 168.mg 2/50 
39.6mg 4/51 
39.6mg 0/51 
39.6mg 13/51 
39.6mg 29/51 
39.6mg 8/51 
39.6mg 33/51 
44.2mg 12/48 
44.2mg 5/48 
44.2mg 22/48 
39.6mg 9/49 
39.6mg 21/49 
39.6mg 8/49 
39.6mg 30/49 
 
12.1mg 2/35 42.9mg 6/38 
12.1mg 0/35 42.9mg 0/38 
12.1mg 10/35 42.9mg 15/38 
12.1mg 0/37 42.9mg 8/38 
12.1mg 6/37 42.9mg 5/38 
12.1mg 7/37 42.9mg 4/38 
12.1mg 20/37 42.9mg 21/38 
42.0mg 5/47 
42.0mg 7/47 
42.0mg 9/47 
42.0mg 24/47 
42.0mg 12/48 
42.0mg 8/48 
42.0mg 3/48 
42.0mg 20/48 
 
50.2mg 8/50 100.mg 11/50 
50.2mg 24/50 100.mg 25/50 
50.2mg 4/50 100.mg 3/50 
45.2mg 4/50 90.3mg 12/50 
45.2mg 24/50 90.3mg 20/50 
45.2mg 1/50 90.3mg 3/50 
43.3mg 1/49 
43.3mg 29/49 
43.3mg 6/49 
43.3mg 0/49 
43.3mg 9/49 
43.3mg 3/49 
 
CHLOROMETHYL METHYL ETHER (CMME) 107-30-2 
 
611 348 4.02mg n.s.s. 0/88 .377mg 2/90 
 
a 348 5.36mg n.s.s. 0/88 .377mg 1/90 
612 348 1.35mg n.s.s. 0/74 .160mg 2/74 
 
2-(CHLOROMETHYL)PYRIDINE.HCL 6959*47*3 
 
613 c03907 174.mg n.s.s. 5/20 51.0mg 
 
a c03907 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/20 51.0mg 
b c03907 368.mg n.s.s. 1/20 51.0mg 
614 c03907 162.mg n.s.s. 9/20 51.0mg 
 
a c03907 266.mg n.s.s. 3/20 51.0mg 
b c03907 210.mg n.s.s. 2/20 51.0mg 
615 c03907 32.8mg n.s.s. 12/20 30.3mg 
 
a c03907 n.s.s. n.s.a. 0/20 30.3mg 
616 c03907 194.mg n.s.s. 0/20 30.3mg 
 
a c03907 54.0mg n.s.s. 13/20 30.3mg 
b c03907 743.mg n.s.s. 3/20 30.3mg 
3-(CHLOROMETHYL)PYRIDINE.HCL 6959-48-4 
 
617 c03838 161.mg n.s.s. 0/20 42.0mg 
 
a c03838 56.8mg n.s.s. 5/20 42.0mg 
b c03838 376.mg n.s.s. 1/20 42.0mg 
c c03838 269.mg n.s.s. 1/20 42.0mg 
618 c03838 81.9mg 683.mg 0/20 42.0mg 
 
a c03838 32.3mg n.s.s. 7/20 42.0mg 
 
11/50 
 
1/50 
1/50 
18/50 
6/50 
5/50 
35/50 
 
0/50 
0/50 
28/50 
 
0/50 
 
Heywood; Jept,2,835*851; 1979 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Roe; jspt,2,799-819; 1979 
 
thy:cca,ccr,fca,fcc. S 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
kid:tLa,uac. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
PaLmer; jept,2,821-833; 1979 
 
Laskin;aenh,30,70-72; 1975 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
S 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
102.mg 10/50 
102.mg 0/50 
102 mg 3/50 
102.mg 13/50 
102. mg 4/50 
102.mg 5/50 
60.6mg 39/50 
60.6mg 0/50 
60.6mg 5/49 
60.6mg 29/49 
60.6mg 0/49 
 
1/50 66.8mg 5/50 
15/50 66.8mg 20/50 
0/50 66.8mg 2/50 
1/50 66.8mg 3/50 
2/50 66.8mg 10/50 
20/50 66.8mg 28/50 
 
sto:sqc,sqp. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
sto:sqc,sqp. 
 
75 
 
Brkly Code 
 
76 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
b N m b6c gav Liv NXB 21.24 as 
c N m b6c gav Lun NXB 21.24 as 
619 R f f34 gav TBA NXB 22.24 as 
 
a R f f34 gav Liv NXB 22.24 as 
620 R m f 34 gav sto NXA 22.24 as 
 
a R m f 34 gav TBA NXB 22.24 as 
b R m f34 gav Liv NXB 22.24 as 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
324.mg * P<.4 
624.mg * P<.6 
 
160.mg * P<.6 - 
no dre P-1. 
 
A ^ f+historicaL * P<.07 c 
 
no dre Pal. 
no dre P-1. 
 
p-CHLOROPHENYL-p-CHLOROBENZENE SULFONATE.: . . lug. :10. :100. g :..g :10. :100..g.10 
 
621 N f b6a orl Lun ado 76w76 *vx .> no dre 
 
a N f b6a orL Liv hpt 76076 *vx no dre 
b N f b6a orl tba mix 76w76 *vx no dre 
622 N m b6a orl Lun ado 76w76 *vx .> no dre 
 
a N m b6a orl Liv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b N * b6a orL tba mix 76w76 *vx no dre 
623 N f b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 *vx .> 931.mg 
 
a N f b6c orL Lun mix 76w76 *vx no dre 
b N f b6c orL tba mix 76w76 *vx 931.mg 
624 N m b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx .> 422.mg 
 
a N m b6c orL Lun ad. 76w76 *vx 869.mg 
b N m b6c orL tba mix 76w76 *vx 84.5mg 
 
3- (p-CHLOROPNENYL) -1,1 -DINETHYLUREA 
625 N f b6a orL Lun ad. 76w76 *vx 
 
a N f b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 *vx 
b N f b6a orL tba mix 76w76 *vx 
626 N m b6a orL Lun ad. 76w76 *vx 
 
a N m b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 *vx 
b N a b6a orL tba mix 76w76 *vx 
627 N f b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx 
 
a N f b6c orL Lun mix 76w76 evx 
b N f b6c orL tba tum 76w76 *vx 
628 N m b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 svx 
 
a N m b6c orL Lun ads 76w76 svx 
b N m b6c orL tba mix 76w76 evx 
 
1 - ( 4-CHLOROPHEYL)--PHENYL-2-PROPYNYL 
629 R m hrL sat JiJ adc 72w94 ae 
 
a R m hrL sat duo adc 72w94 ae 
b R m hrL sat Liv mix 72w94 as 
c R m hrL sat bra mix 72w94 ae 
d R * hrL sat tba mix 72w94 ae 
 
..l:.1ug. :10. :100. g :. . :10. : 100. :Ig . :10 
 
414.mg 
no dre 
387.mg 
70.7mg 
no dre 
86.6mg 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
112.mg 
174.mg 
39.6mg 
 
P<..6 
P-1. 
P<. 7 
 
P<.07 
P-1. 
P<. 2 
P-I. 
P-1. 
P-1. 
 
P<.04 
P<.09 
 
P<. 0005 
 
CARBANATE ....10.. :.0100 .. m : 1g . : 10. :100 .. :. : 10 
 
. + . 8.78mg * P<.0005+ 
 
24.9mg * P<.0005+ 
58.5mg * P<.2 
 
+historical * P<.8 + 
 
3.88mg * P<.0005 
 
p-CHLOROPHENYL-2,4,5-TRICHLOROPHENYL SULFIDE .... . . :100 . 1g 10 : 1.. : 10 : 100.. : .19 :10 
 
630 R f wis sat liv tum 27m27 .> no dre P-1. 
631 R f wis sat Liv tum 24.24 .> no dre P-1. 
632 R m wis sat liv hpt 27m27 .> 4.599m * P<.2 
633 R m wis sat Liv tum 24m24 .> no dre P-1. 
 
CHLOROPICR IN* 
 
634 N f b6c gav TBA NXB 78w91 v 
 
a N f b6c gav Liv NXB 78w91 v 
b N f b6c gav Lun NXB 78w9I v 
635 N m b6c gav TBA NXB 78w91 v 
 
a N m b6c gav Liv NXB 78w9I v 
b N m b6c gav lun NXB 78w91 v 
 
636 R f osm gav TBA NXB 18626 dsv 
 
a R f osi gav Liv NXB 18626 dsa 
637 R m osm gav TBA NXB 18626 dsa 
 
a R m osm gav Liv NXB 18626 dsv 
2- CHLOROPROPANAL 
 
638 N f hic gav for tum 89w89 
639 N m hic gav for tum 89w89 
1- CHLOROPROPENE 
 
640 N f hic gav for tum 89w89 
641 N m hic gav for tum 89w89 
CHLOROTHALONIL 
 
642 N f b6c sat TBA NXB 80w91 v 
 
a N f b6c sat Liv NXB 80w91 v 
b N f b6c sat Lun NXB 8Ow9l v 
643 N a b6c *at TBA NXB 80w91 v 
 
a N a b6c sat Liv NXB 80w91 v 
b N a b6c sat Lun NXB 80w9I v 
644 R f osm sat TBA NXB 19m26 v 
 
a R f osm sat liv NXB 19m26 v 
645 R f osm sat kid NXA 19m25 v 
 
a R f osm sat kid NXA 19m25 v 
 
lOOng .:. .:ug.. : 10. :100. g :. g. :10. :100..g.10 
 
:> 82.0mg * P<.2 - 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
111.mg * P<.06 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
v :> no dre P-1. 
v no dre P-1. 
v :> no dre P-1. 
v no dre P-1. 
 
bO0ng . . .:ug.. : 10. :100. 1g. :.lg.. :10. :100... :Ig . :10 
 
+ . 12.9mg P<.004 + 
 
A 22.7mg P<.04 
 
bOOng .. :. ug . : 10. :100 .. :1mg . : 10. : 100 .. :Ig . :10 
 
* + . 5.05mg 
 
16.7mg 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<.02 
 
1OOng..: ..ug. : 10. : 100 mg. : . :10 . :100 . ig. :10 
 
:> no dre P-I. 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
:> 1.58gm * P<.7 - 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
pool + 2.51gm * P<.009 c 
 
4.979m * P<.04 c 
 
P-1. _ 
P-1. _ 
P-1. _ 
P-1. _ 
P-1. _ 
P-1. _ 
P<.3 - 
P-1. _ 
P<.3 - 
P<.2 - 
P<.3 - 
P<. 0005- 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl IDose lnc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
b c03838 93.6mg n.s.s. 
c c03838 122.mg n.s.s. 
619 c03838 32.3mg n.a.s. 
 
a c03838 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
620 c03838 148..g n.s.s. 
 
a c03838 70.7mg n.s.s. 
b c03838 377.mg n.s.s. 
 
3/20 
2/20 
14/20 
0/20 
0/20 
14/20 
 
1/20 
 
42.0mg 5/50 66.8mg 9/50 
42.0mg 4/50 66.8mg 5/50 
31.8mg 31/49 51.3mg 23/50 
31.8mg 0/49 51.3mg 0/50 
31.8mg 1/50 51.3mg 3/50 
31.8mg 21/50 51.3mg 11/50 
31.8mg 1/50 51.3mg 0/50 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
Brkly Code 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
sto:sqc,sqp. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
p-CHLOROPHENYL-p-CHLOROBENZENE SULFONATE (ovex) 80-33-1 
621 1287 162.mg n.s.s. 1/17 145.mg 1/17 
 
a 1287 272.mg n.s.s. 0/17 145.mg 0/17 
b 1287 128.mg n.s.s. 2/17 145.mg 2/17 
622 1287 127.mg n.s.s. 2/18 136.mg 2/18 
 
a 1287 160.mg n.s.s. 1/18 136.mg 1/18 
b 1287 107.mg n.s.s. 3/18 136.mg 3/18 
623 1287 152.mg n.s.s. 0/16 145.mg 1/18 
 
a 1287 288.mg n.s.s. 0/16 145.mg 0/18 
b 1287 152.mg n.s.s. 0/16 145.mg 1/18 
624 1287 104.mg n.s.s. 0/16 136.mg 2/18 
 
a 1287 141.mg n.s.s. 0/16 136.mg 1/18 
b 1287 37.6mg 278.mg 0/16 136.mg 8/18 
 
3-(p-CHLOROPHENYL)-1,1-DINETHYLUREA (TeLvar, monuron) 150-68-5 
625 1278 57.6mg n.s.s. 1/17 73.0mg 2/17 
 
a 1278 137.mg n.s.s. 0/17 73.0mg 0/17 
b 1278 48.8mg n.s.s. 2/17 73.0mg 3/17 
626 1278 23.3mg n.s.s. 2/18 68.0mg 6/16 
 
a 1278 120.mg n.s.s. 1/18 68.0mg 0/16 
b 1278 24.5mg n.s.s. 3/18 68.0mg 6/16 
627 1278 145.mg n.s.s. 0/16 73.0mg 0/18 
 
a 1278 145.mg n.s.s. 0/16 73.0mg 0/18 
b 1278 145.mg n.s.s. 0/16 73.0mg 0/18 
628 1278 33.6mg n.s.s. 0/16 68.0mg 3/15 
 
a 1278 42.7mg n.s.s. 0/16 68.0mg 2/15 
b 1278 16.7mg 139.mg 0/16 68.0mg 7/15 
 
1-(4-CHLOROPHENYL)-1-PHENYL-2-PROPYNYL CARBANATE 10473-70-8 
 
629 1348 4.78mg 18.3mg 0/10 10.0mg 6/10 20.0mg 5/10 40.0mg 
 
a 1348 12.2mg 65.5mg 0/10 10.0mg 1/10 20.0mg 2/10 40.0mg 
b 1348 23.8mg n.s.s. 0/10 10.0mg 2/10 20.0mg 2/10 40.0mg 
c 1348 39.7mg n.s.s. 0/10 10.0mg 2/10 20.0mg 0/10 40.0mg 
d 1348 1.73mg 10.9mg 2/10 10.0mg 9/10 20.0mg 9/10 40.0mg 
 
p-CHLOROPHENYL-2,4,5-TRICHLOROPHENYL SULFIDE (tetrasuL) 2227-13-6 
 
630 281m 15.6mg n.s.s. 0/32 2.50mg 0/32 10.0mg 0/32 50.0mg 
631 281n 2.36mg n.s.s. 0/32 .500mg 0/32 1.25mg 0/32 
 
632 281m 747.mg n.s.s. 0/32 2.00mg 0/32 8.00mg 0/32 40.0mg 
633 281n 1.88mg n.s.s. 0/32 .400mg 0/32 1.00mg 0/32 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
10/10 
8/10 
2/10 
1/10 
10/10 
 
0/32 150.mg 0/32 
0/32 120.mg 1/32 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
Harris;txap,21,414-418;1972 
 
Verschuuren;txcy, 1,63-78; 1973 
 
CHLOROPICRIN* 76-06-2 
 
634 c00533 29.9mg n.s.s. 
 
a c00533 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
b c00533 44.2mg n.s.s. 
635 c00533 36.5mg n.s.s. 
 
a c00533 63.8mg n.s.s. 
b c00533 67.7mg n.s.s. 
636 c00533 7.12mg n.s.s. 
 
a c00533 n.s.s. n.sa.s. 
637 c00533 9.97mg n.s.s. 
 
a c00533 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
 
4/20 
0/20 
1/20 
5/20 
2/20 
3/20 
11/20 
0/20 
5/20 
0/20 
 
2-CHLOROPROPANAL 683-50-1 
 
638 1011 5.23mg 73.7mg 0/30 
639 1011 6.86mg n.s.s. 0/30 
 
1 -CHLOROPROPENE 590-21-6 
 
640 1011 2.63mg 11.5mg 0/30 
641 1011 5.76mg n.s.s. 0/30 
 
CHLOROTHALONIL 1897-45-6 
642 c00102 1.38gm n.s.s. 
 
a c00102 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
b cOO102 2.16gm n.a.s. 
643 c00102 460.mg n.s.s. 
 
a c00102 1.42pm n.s.s. 
b c00102 634.mg n.s.s. 
644 c00102 240.mg n.s.s. 
 
a c00102 1.19gm n.s.s. 
645 c00102 1.02gm 58.1gm 
 
a c00102 1.50gm n.s.s. 
 
3/10 
0/10 
1/10 
3/10 
2/10 
1/10 
5/10 
0/10 
0/65p 
0/65p 
 
20. 0mg 
20. 0mg 
20. 0mg 
20. 0mg 
20. 0mg 
20. 0mg 
10. 0mg 
10. 0mg 
12.4mg 
12.4mg 
 
9/50 40. 0mg 
0/50 40. 0mg 
3/50 40.0mg 
7/50 34.Omg 
4/50 34.Omg 
1/50 34. 0mg 
14/50 11.0mg 
0/50 11.0mg 
3/50 (13.0mg 
0/50 13.Omg 
 
10/50 
0/50 
6/50 
9/50 
2/50 
5/50 
9/50 
0/50 
0/50) 
0/50 
 
5.71mg 6/30 
4. 76mg 3/30 
 
5.71mg 13/30 
4.76mg 4/30 
 
343. mg 
343. mg 
343 .mg 
283. mg 
283. mg 
283. mg 
184. mg 
184.mg 
184 .mg 
184. mg 
 
6/50 679. mg 
0/50 679. mg 
2/50 679. mg 
9/50 (560.mg 
1/50 (560.mg 
4/50 (560.mg 
25/49 368.mg 
 
3/49 368. mg 
1/49 368. mg 
0/49 368.mg 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Van Duuren;jnci,63,1433-1439;1979 
 
Van Duuren;jnci,63,1433-1439;1979 
 
8/50 
0/50 
3/50 
1/50) 
1/50) 
0/50) 
34/50 
 
2/50 
5/50 
3/50 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
kid:adn,can,tla,uac. 
 
kid:adn,tLa. 
 
77 
 
78 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
646 R . osm eat TBA NXB 19.26 v 
 
a R m oas eat Liv NXB 19.26 v 
 
647 R * os. eat kid NXA 19.25 v pooL 
 
a R m osm eat kid NXA 19.25 v 
b R m osm at sub fih 19a25 v 
 
CHLOROZOTOC IN 
648 R f ada 
 
a R f sda 
649 R m sda 
 
a R m sda 
 
ipJ pec mix 20.26 ass 
ipj tba meL 2026 ae 
ipj pec mix 16823 aes 
ipj tba maL 18.23 ass 
 
CHLORPROPANIDE 
 
650 N f b6c eat TBA NXB 24.24 sv 
 
a N f b6c eat liv NXB 24.24 sv 
b N f b6c eat Lun NXB 24.24 sv 
651 N . b6c eat TBA NXS 24.24 sv 
 
a N m b6c eat Liv NXB 24.24 sv 
b N m b6c eat Lun NXB 24m24 sv 
652 R f f34 eat TBA NXB 24.24 a 
 
a R f f34 eat Liv NXB 24.24 a 
653 R m f34 eat TBA NXB 24.24 a 
 
a R m f34 eat Liv NXB 24.24 a 
CHOCOLATE BROWN FB 
 
654 N f cws eat Liv tum 80w80 a 
 
a N f cws eat Lun ada 80w80 a 
655 N m cws eat Lun ada 80w80 a 
 
a " m cws eat liv tum 80w80 a 
656 R f cfe eat Liv tum 24m24 a 
657 R m cfe eat Liv tum 24m24 a 
CHOCOLATE BROWN NT 
 
658 N f tfl eat ... Lys 80w80 a 
 
a N f tfl eat Liv hnd 80w80 a 
b N f tfl eat lun ada 80w80 a 
659 N m tfl eat Liv hnd 80w80 a 
 
a N m tfl eat Liv Lca 80w80 a 
b N m tfl eat Lun ada 80w80 a 
CHRONIC OXIDE PIGNENT 
 
660 R b bdr eat mgL fba 20m43 
 
a R b bdr eat mgL car 20m43 
b R b bdr eat hpL ada 20m43 
CHRONIUN (III) ACETATE 
 
661 N f cdl wat Lun tum 34.34 a 
 
a N f cdl wat tba tum 34m34 o 
662 N m cdl wat lun tum 32m32 a 
 
a N m cdl wat tba tum 32m32 a 
663 R b Lab wat liv tum 42m42 a 
 
a R b Lab wat tba tum 42m42 a 
b R b Lab wat tba maL 42m42 a 
 
CLIVORINE 
 
664 R b aci wat 
 
a R b aci wat 
b R b aci wat 
 
liv mix 48w68 a 
liv nnd 48w68 a 
Liv hms 48w68 a 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
20.1gm * P<l. - 
no dre P-I. 
 
1.18g. * P<.003 
 
2.08gm * P<.02 c 
2.81g. * P<.02 
 
loong. . ....lug 10 . 100 . lg 10 . 100 . 1 10 
 
. + . 84.4ug * P<.0005+ 
 
.108mg * P<.0005+ 
. + 24.1ug \ P<.0005+ 
 
52.1ug * P<.0005+ 
 
10Ong. .:..ug. 10 . 100. 1mg. 10 . 100. Ig . 10 
 
:> no dre 
 
no dre 
1.44g. 
:> no dre 
 
no dre 
no dre 
:> no dre 
 
no dre 
:> no dre 
 
no dre 
 
jOOng. .:..ug ..10 . 100. 1g. 10 . 100. .19 10 
 
no dre 
no dre 
3.67gm 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
 
P-I. 
P-I. 
* P<.2 
 
Po.1. 
P-I. 
P-I. 
P-I. 
P-I. 
P-I. 
P-I. 
 
P-I. 
P-I. 
* P<. 3 
 
P-I. 
P-I. 
P-I. 
 
joong . . .ug. :10. :100. g :..g :10. :100.. : . :10 
 
+ . 36.3mg Z P<.007 - 
 
8.44g * P<.6 
no dre P-1. 
106.gm * P<1. 
no dre PI. 1 
no dre P-1. 
 
Ong. .g. : ug. :10. :100. g :.g :10. :100. : g. :10 
 
237.gm * P<.8 
no dre P-I. 
no dre P-I. 
 
OOng. . . : lug :10. :100. g :..g :10. :100.. : . :10 
 
.> no dre 
 
no dre 
.> no dre 
 
no dre 
.> no dre 
 
1.61mg 
7.62mg 
 
OOng. . ... l . 100 .. :m g. : 10. :100.. . : . :10 
 
. + .+historical 
 
+historical 
+historical 
 
CLOFIBRATE O0ngq..:. .ug.. :10. :100. m :g .:10. :100. . : g :10 
 
665 R . f34 eat Liv hpc 28m28 a . + . 169.mg 
 
a R a f34 eat pan acc 28628 a +historicaL 
 
P-1. - 
P.I. - 
P-1. - 
P-1. - 
P.1. - 
P<.06 - 
P<.3 - 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
P<.06 + 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<.09 + 
 
CLONIPHENE CITRATE 
 
666 N f csc gav Lun tum 69w69 *k 
 
a N f cac gav tba mix 69w69 *k 
667 N f cac gav tba mix 69w82 *k 
 
CLONITRALID* 
 
668 N f b6c *at TBA NXB 78w91 sv 
 
a N f b6c eat Liv NXB 78w91 sv 
b N f b6c eat Lun NXB 78w91 sv 
669 N m b6c eat TBA NXB 78w91 sv 
 
a N m b6c eat Liv NXB 78w91 sv 
b N m b6c eat Lun NXB 78w91 sv 
670 R f osm eat uta asp 18m26 v 
 
a R f osm at thy NXA 1826 v 
b R f osm eat TBA NXB l8626 v 
c R f osm eat Liv NXB 16826 v 
 
100ng .. : ..ug. :10. :100. g :.lg :10. :100. :Ig . :10 
 
.> 5.00mg 
 
3.62mg 
*> no dre 
 
P<.3 - 
P<.7 7 
 
P-1. - 
 
lOOng . . .ug. :10. :100. g :.g : 10. :100.. : g :10 
 
no dre P-I. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
175.mg * P<.7 
no dre P.1. 
no dre P-I. 
 
* 5.069m * P<.03 - 
6.67gm P<.04 
2.07gm P<.4 
13.39m P<.3 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lIne 2Dose 21nc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
646 c00102 212.mg n.s.s. 
 
a c00102 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
647 c00102 500.mg 6.609m 
 
a c00102 701.mg n.s.s. 
b c00102 835.mg n.s.s. 
 
4/10 
0/10 
0/65p 
0/65p 
0/65p 
 
CHLOROZOTOCIN 54749-90-5 
 
648 1195 44.6ug .199mg 1/17 
 
a 1195 50.6ug .370mg 4/17 
649 1195 11.9ug 55.1ug 0/20 
 
a 1195 26.9ug .140mg 2/20 
 
CHLORPROPAMIDE 94-20-2 
 
650 c01752 425.mg n.s.s. 
 
a c01752 693.mg n.s.s. 
b c01752 546.mg n.s.s. 
651 c01752 642.mg n.s.s. 
 
a c01752 952.mg n.s.s. 
b c01752 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
652 c01752 115.mg n.s.s. 
 
a c01752 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
653 c01752 313.mg n.s.s. 
 
a c01752 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
 
1/15 
0/15 
0/15 
4/15 
2/15 
0/15 
13/15 
0/15 
7/15 
0/15 
 
CHOCOLATE BROWN FB 12236-46-3 
 
654 1335 98.7mg n.s.s. 0/60 
 
a 1335 3.07gm n.s.s. 19/60 
655 1335 907.mg n.s.s. 13/53 
 
a 1335 89.0mg n.s.s. 0/53 
656 1334 205.mg n.s.s. 0/29 
657 1334 158.mg n.s.s. 0/29 
CHOCOLATE BROWN HT 4553-89-3 
 
658 1337 13.8mg 447.mg 0/39 
 
a 1337 1.21gm n.s.s. 2/39 
b 1337 1.76gm n.s.s. 6/39 
659 1337 956.mg n.s.s. 8/42 
 
a 1337 2.55gm n.s.s. 1/42 
b 1337 1.35gm n.s.s. 5/42 
 
CHRONIC OXIDE PIGMENT 1308-39-9 
660 413 20.7gm n.s.s. 2/60 
 
a 413 5.16gm n.s.s. 1/60 
b 413 45.7gm n.s.s. 2/60 
 
147.mg 
147. mg 
147.mg 
147.mg 
147.mg 
 
57. lug 
57. lug 
57. lug 
57. lug 
 
301 mg 
301 mg 
301 .mg 
284.mg 
284.mg 
284.mg 
107. mg 
107.mg 
85.6mg 
85.6mg 
 
39 .0mg 
39. 0mg 
36.Omg 
36.Omg 
50. 0mg 
40. 0mg 
 
13. 0mg 
13. 0mg 
13. 0mg 
12 .0mg 
12 .0mg 
12 .0mg 
 
22/50 292.mg 
 
0/50 292.mg 
3/50 292.mg 
1/50 292.mg 
0/50 292.mg 
 
10/16 .286mg 
10/16 .286mg 
14/18 (.286mg 
15/18 .286mg 
 
9/35 616.mg 
4/35 616.mg 
3/35 616.mg 
7/35 569.mg 
3/35 569.mg 
1/35 569.mg 
21/35 (214.mg 
 
0/35 214.mg 
4/35 (171.mg 
0/35 171.mg 
 
0/30 130.mg 
13/30 130.mg 
2/29 120.mg 
0/29 120.mg 
0/29 150.mg 
0/28 120.mg 
 
5/37 (130.mg 
1/37 130.mg 
3/37 130.mg 
4/39 120.mg 
1/39 120.mg 
2/39 120.mg 
 
215.mg 3/60 459.mg 
215.mg 0/60 459.mg 
215.mg 0/60 459.mg 
 
16/49 
0/49 
4/49 
3/49 
3/49 
 
16/18 
16/18 
13/16) 
14/16 
 
2/35 
0/35 
2/35 
5/35 
2/35 
0/35 
8/35) 
0/35 
3/35) 
0/35 
 
0/30 
9/30 
5/29 
0/29 
0/30 
0/28 
 
3/41 
3/41 
4/41 
6/43 
2/43 
4/43 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
kid:adc,can,ppa,tla,uac. S 
 
kid:adc,can,uac. 
 
Habs;cL.t,8, 133-137; 1979 
 
Liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
390. mg 
390.mg 
360 .mg 
360.mg 
500.mg 
400.mg 
 
650.mg 
650 mg 
650.mg 
600.mg 
600.mg 
600.mg 
 
0/26 
6/26 
8/29 
0/29 
0/29 
0/29 
 
1. 30gm 0/30 
1. 309m 4/30 
1. 20gm 8/29 
1. 20g 0/29 
1. 509m 0/29 
1. 209m 0/30 
 
1/42) 
3/42 
3/42 
6/40 
0/40 
3/40 
 
1/60 1.09gm 3/60 
0/60 1.09gm 0/60 
0/60 1.09gm 1/60 
 
Gaunt;fctx, 11,375-382;1973 
 
Gaunt;fctx, 10,3-15; 1972 
 
Drake;txcy, 10,17-27; 1978 
 
Ivankovic;fctx, 13,347-351; 1975 
 
CHROMIUM (III) ACETATE 1066-30-4 
661 56 4.60mg n.s.s. 9/60 
 
a 56 3.34mg n.s.s. 22/60 
662 56 4.06mg n.s.s. 8/44 
 
a 56 4.87mg n.s.s. 11/44 
663 1036 5.96mg n.s.s. 1/34 
 
a 1036 .681mg n.s.s. 10/34 
b 1036 2.09mg n.s.s. 2/34 
 
1.00m9 
1.00mg 
.833mg 
.833mg 
.265mg 
.265mg 
.265mg 
 
4/29 
9/29 
6/39 
6/39 
1/56 
28/56 
7/56 
 
Schroeder; jnut,83,239-250; 1964 
 
Kanisawa;canr,29,892-895; 1969 
 
CLIVORINE - - - 
 
664 1338 .213mg 1.51mg 0/17 1.88mg 8/12 
 
a 1338 .274mg 2.56mg 0/17 1.88mg 6/11 
b 1338 .738mg n.s.s. 0/17 1.88mg 2/12 
 
Kuhara;clet,10,117-122;1980 
 
CLOFIBRATE 637-07-0 
 
665 1339 77.9mg 447.mg 0/15 200.mg 10/15 
 
a 1339 318.mg n.s.s. 0/15 200.mg 2/15 
 
CLONIPHENE CITRATE 43054-45-1 
 
666 585m .813mg n.s.s. 0/15 1.14mg 1/15 
 
a 585m .413mg n.s.s. 4/15 1.14mg 5/15 
667 585n .367mg n.s.s. 8/15 .962mg 8/15 
 
Reddy;bj ca,40,476-482; 1979 
 
Poet;canr,28,845-859;1968 
 
CLONITRALID* (niclossaide) 1420-04-8 
 
668 c00431 275.mg n.s.s. 9/20 29.9mg 
 
a cOO431 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/20 29.9mg 
b c00431 493.mg n.s.s. 3/20 29.9mg 
 
669 c00431 24.8mg n.s.s. 1/20 27.6mg 
 
a c00431 44.1mg n.s.s. 0/20 27.6mg 
b c00431 28.5mg n.s.s. 0/20 27.6mg 
670 c00431 2.299m n.s.s. 0/20 504.mg 
 
a c00431 2.72gm n.s.s. 0/20 504.mg 
b c00431 607.mg n.s.s. 11/20 504.mg 
c c00431 4.019m n.s.s. 0/20 504.mg 
 
5/50 61. 1mg 
0/50 61. 1mg 
0/50 61. 1mg 
5/50 56.4mg 
1/50 56.4mg 
1/50 56.4mg 
2/50 999.mg 
1/50 999.mg 
33/50 999.mg 
 
1/50 999.g 
 
5/50 
0/50 
1/50 
5/50 
0/50 
0/50 
6/50 
5/50 
37/50 
2/50 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun: a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
tun: a/a,a/c. 
 
S 
thy:cca,ccr. S 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
79 
 
Brkly Code 
 
80 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
671 R m osm mat TBA NXB 18.26 v 
 
a R * osa sat liv MXB 18.26 v 
 
COLCENID 
 
672 R m b46 ivi tba mix 12.24 es 
 
a R a b46 ivJ tba meL 12.24 es 
b R a b46 ivJ tba ben 12.24 as 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
:> no dre P-I. - 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
lOOng .. :. .ug. :10. :100. g :. . :10. :100. :Ig .:10 
 
.> 78. 7ug 
 
.129mg 
.248mg 
 
COPPER DINETHYLDITHIOCARBANATE 1 00ng. ...ug.............0......g........... 100. .. : 10g ..... :..lo 
 
673 N f b6a orL Lun bro 76w76 evx .> 146.mg 
 
a N f b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b N f b6a orL tba mix 76w76 *vx no dre 
674 N m b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 ovx .> 655.mg 
 
a N a b6a orL Lun ado 76w76 evx no dre 
b N a b6a orL tba mix 76w76 evx no dre 
675 N f b6c orL liv hpt 76w76 evx .> no dre 
 
a N f b6c orL Lun mix 76w76 evx no dre 
b N f b6c orL tba mix 76w76 evx 70.8mg 
676 N m b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 *vx . 34.7mg 
 
a N m b6c orL Lun ado 76w76 evx 112.mg 
b N m b6c orL tba mix 76w76 evx 19.1mg 
 
P<.5 - 
P<.6 - 
P<.7 - 
 
P<.3 - 
P-1. _ 
P-1. - 
P<.9 9 
 
P-1. _ 
P-1. _ 
P-1. _ 
P-1. _ 
P<.2 - 
P<.04 - 
P<.3 - 
P<. 005 - 
 
COPPER -8- HYDROXYQUINOL INE 
 
677 N f b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx 
 
a N f b6a orl Lun ado 76w76 mv 
b N f b6a orL tba mix 76w76 mv 
678 N a b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx 
 
a N m b6a orL Lun ado 76w76 ev 
b N a b6a orL tba mix 76w76 ev 
 
679 N f b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 *vx 
 
a N f b6c orL Lun mix 76w76 *vI 
b N f b6c orL tba mix 76w76 evx 
680 N m b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 mvx 
 
a N a b6c orL Lun mix 76w76 evx 
b N a b6c orL tba mix 76w76 mvy 
COUNAPHOS 
 
681 N f b6c mat TBA NXB 24m24 
 
a N f b6c mat Liv NXB 24m24 
b N f b6c mat lun NXB 24.24 
682 N a b6c eat TBA NXB 24m24 
 
a N m b6c mat Liv NXB 24m24 
b N a b6c mat Lun NXB 24.24 
683 R f f34 mat TBA NXB 24m24 
 
a R f f34 mat Liv NXB 24m24 
684 R a f 34 mat TBA NXB 24m24 
 
a R m f34 mat Liv NXB 24m24 
 
m-CRESIDINE* 
 
685 N f b6c gav liv NXA 53w93 sv 
 
a N f b6c gav TBA MXB 53w93 sv 
b N f b6c gav Liv NXB 53w93 mv 
c N f b6c gav Lun NXB 53w93 sv 
686 N a b6c gav TBA NXB 53w93 sv 
 
a N m b6c gav Liv NXB 53w93 sv 
b N m b6c gav Lun NXB 53w93 sv 
687 R f f 34 gav mgL fba 18.25 
 
a R f f34 gav ubL tcc 18m25 
b R f f34 gav TBA NXB 18m25 
c R f f34 gav Liv NXB 18.25 
688 R m f34 gav ubl tcc 18.25 
 
a R a f34 gav TBA NXB 18.25 
b R m f34 gav Liv NXB 18.25 
 
p-CRESIDINE 
 
689 N f b6c 
 
a N f b6c 
b N f b6c 
c N f b6c 
d N f b6c 
 
a N f b6c 
f N f b6c 
g N f b6c 
690 N m b6c 
 
a N m b6c 
b N m b6c 
c N m b6c 
691 R f f34 
 
a R f f34 
b R f f34 
 
loong. . .. : lug . 10. :100. g :. . :10. :100.. : . :10 
 
no dre 
no dre 
2.49gm 
967.mg 
no dre 
11.2gm 
no dre 
no dre 
2.49gm 
no dre 
no dre 
2.059m 
 
P-I. 
P-I. 
P<. 7 
P<. 3 
P-I. 
P<1 . 
P-1. 
P-1. 
P<. 3 
P-1. 
Pal. 
P<. 3 
 
100ng .. :. ug. :10. :100. g :. 1g :10. :100.. : g . :10 
 
:> 10.1mg * P<.5 
 
11.6mg * P<.08 
42.6mg * P<.7 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
:> 98.1mg P<1. 
 
6.99mg * P<.2 
:> 1.58mg * P<.3 
 
12.3mg * P<.4 
 
lOOng .. : lug. :10. :100.. :lag. : 10. :100.. : g. : 10 
 
A s #206.mg * P<.02 
 
69.2mg * P<.03 
206.mg * P<.02 
250.mg * P<.08 
:> 72.2mg * P<.6 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
A e 52.7mg \ P<.03 
 
+historicaL * P<.2 
 
51.5mg \ P<.3 
1.10gm * P<.4 
 
470.mg * P<.02 
368.mg * P<.7 
506.mg * P<.4 
 
bO0ng .. : lug. :10. :100. g :. g. :10. :100. :Ig . :10 
 
mat ubl NXA 97w97 sv +: 69.0mg / P<.OOOSc 
mat NXB MXB 97w97 sv 69.0mg / P<.0005 
mat ubl MXA 97w97 sv 70.1mg / P<.0005c 
mat liv NXA 97w97 cv 301.mg * P<.0005c 
 
mat liv hpc 97w97 sv 315.mg * P<.0005c 
mat TBA NXB 97w97 sv 75.0mg P p<.0005 
mat liv NXB 97w97 cv 301.mg * P<.0005 
mat lun NXS 97w97 mv 3.81gm * P<.6 
 
mat ubl MXA 97w97 sv 44.7mg / P<.0005c 
mat TBA NXS 97w97 sv 46.4mg I P<.0005 
mat liv NXB 97w97 sv 255.mg * P<.01 
mat lun MXB 97w97 cv 1.17gm / P<.4 
 
mat ubl NXA 24.24 a 110.mg / P<.0005c 
mat NXB MXB 24m24 a 110.mg / P<.0005 
mat utm map 24m24 s 913.mg * P<.007 
 
C 
C 
 
1 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
 
K 
x 
K 
K 
x 
 
I 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl IDose lInc 2Dose 21nc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
671 c00431 1.44gm n.s.s. 10/20 403.mg 20/50 799.mg 20/50 
 
a c00431 n.s.a. n.s.a. 0/20 403.mg 0/50 799.mg 0/50 
 
COLCENID 477-30-5 
 
672 1017 14.2ug n.s.s. 7/65 7.86ug 5/30 
 
a 1017 18.4ug n.s.a. 4/65 7.86ug 3/30 
b 1017 22.4ug n.s.s. 3/65 7.86ug 2/30 
 
COPPER DINETHYLDITHIOCARBANATE (cumate) 137-29-1 
673 1203 23.$mg n.s.s. 0/17 22.8mg 1/18 
 
a 1203 45.2mg n.s.s. 0/17 22.8mg 0/18 
b 1203 30.1mg n.s.s. 2/17 22.8mg 1/18 
674 1203 20.4mg n.s.s. 1/18 21.2mg 1/15 
 
a 1203 22.6mg n.s.s. 2/18 21.2mg 1/15 
b 1203 17.4mg n.s.s. 3/18 21.2mg 2/15 
675 1203 45.2mg n.s.s. 0/16 22.8mg 0/18 
 
a 1203 45.2mg n.s.s. 0/16 22.8mg 0/18 
b 1203 17.4mg n.s.s. 0/16 22.8mg 2/18 
676 1203 10.5mg n.s.s. 0/16 21.2mg 3/15 
 
a 1203 18.3mg n.s.s. 0/16 21.2mg 1/15 
b 1203 7.18mg 151.mg 0/16 21.2mg 5/15 
 
Brkly Code 
 
COPPER-8- HYDROXYQUINOLINE 
 
677 1295 771.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1295 771.mg n.s.s. 
b 1295 279.mg n.s.s. 
678 1295 221.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1295 677.mg n.s.s. 
b 1295 263.mg n.s.s. 
679 1295 771.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1295 771.mg n.s.s. 
b 1295 405.mg n.s.s. 
680 1295 638.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1295 638.mg n.s.s. 
b 1295 334.mg n.s.s. 
COUNAPHOS 56-72-4 
 
681 c08662 2.50mg n.s.s. 
 
a c08662 5.46mg n.a.s. 
b c08662 7.02mg n.s.s. 
682 c08662 3.31mg n.s.s. 
 
a c08662 5.22mg n.s.s. 
b c08662 6.82mg n.s.s. 
683 c08662 .635mg n.s.s. 
 
a c08662 2.65mg n.s.s. 
684 c08662 .471mg n.s.s. 
 
a c08662 3.02mg n.s.s. 
m-CRESIDINE* 102-50-1 
 
685 c02993 83.9mg n.s.s. 
 
a c02993 32.9mg n.s.s. 
b c02993 83.9mg n.s.s. 
c c02993 95.1mg n.s.s. 
686 c02993 12.5mg n.sa.s. 
 
a c02993 23.8mg n.s.s. 
b c02993 26.9mg n.s.s. 
687 c02993 24.9mg n.s.s. 
 
a c02993 232.mg n.s.s. 
b c02993 17.1mg n.s.s. 
c c02993 270.mg n.s.s. 
688 c02993 178.mg n.s.s. 
 
a c02993 56.4mg n.s.s. 
b c02993 191.mg n.s.s. 
 
p-CRESIDINE 120-71-8 
 
689 c02982 49.9mg 97.7mg 
 
a c02982 49.9mg 97.7mg 
b c02982 50.5mg 99.5mg 
c c02982 172.mg 587.mg 
d c02982 177.mg 627.mg 
 
a c02982 51.5mg 117.mg 
f c02982 172.mg 587.mg 
9 c02982 573.mg n.s.s. 
690 c02982 28.7mg 70.9mg 
 
a c02982 29.3mg 78.2mg 
b c02982 95.5mg 32.7gm 
c c02982 207.mg n.s.s. 
691 c02982 79.6mg 157.mg 
 
a c02982 79.6mg 157.mg 
b c02982 401.mg 14.2gm 
 
10380-28-6 
 
0/17 389.mg 
1/17 389.mg 
2/17 389.mg 
1/18 362.mg 
2/18 362.mg 
3/18 362.mg 
0/16 389.mg 
0/16 389.mg 
0/16 389.mg 
0/16 362. mg 
0/16 362. mg 
0/16 362. mg 
 
8/25 
0/25 
1/25 
15/25 
7/25 
4/25 
17/23 
0/23 
12/25 
0/25 
 
0/25 
3/25 
0/25 
0/25 
9/25 
5/25 
4/25 
3/25 
0/25 
12/25 
0/25 
0/25 
14/25 
0/25 
 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
14/50 
0/50 
4/50 
0/50 
22/50 
15/50 
7/50 
0/50 
0/50 
2/50 
 
1.30mg 
1.30mg 
1. 30mg 
1. 20mg 
1. 20mg 
1. 20mg 
.500mg 
.500mg 
.400mg 
.400mg 
 
22.6mg 
22.6mg 
22.6mg 
22.6mg 
22.9mg 
22.9mg 
22.9mg 
40.4mg 
40.4mg 
40.4mg 
40.4mg 
40.4mg 
40.4mg 
40.4mg 
 
281.mg 
281 .mg 
281. mg 
281.mg 
281.mg 
281.mg 
281 mg 
281 . mg 
260.mg 
260. mg 
260.mg 
260.mg 
245.mg 
245. mg 
245. mg 
 
0/18 
0/18 
3/18 
3/17 
0/17 
3/17 
0/18 
0/18 
1/18 
0/16 
0/16 
1/16 
 
20/50 
 
4/50 
4/50 
26/50 
14/50 
 
4/50 
41/50 
 
2/50 
32/50 
 
1/50 
 
2.60mg 
2.60mg 
2.60mg 
2 .40mg 
2.40mg 
2.40mg 
1.00mg 
1.00mg 
. 800m9 
. 800mg 
 
1/50 45.3mg 
10/50 45.3mg 
 
1/50 45.3mg 
2/50 45.3mg 
10/50 54.6mg 
3/50 54.6mg 
4/50 54.6mg 
21/49 (80.0mg 
 
1/49 80.0mg 
38/49 (80.0mg 
 
1/49 80.0mg 
0/50 80.0mg 
30/50 80.0mg 
 
4/50 80.0mg 
 
24/50 
 
5/50 
4/50 
22/50 
9/50 
6/50 
38/50 
3/50 
32/50 
 
1/50 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
Liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
tun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
liv:hpa,hpc. S 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun: a/a, a/c. 
 
5/50 
15/50 
5/50 
3/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
8/50) 
2/50 
20/50) 
 
1/50 
5/50 
21/50 
 
1/50 
 
42/50 563.mg 45/50 
42/50 563.mg 45/50 
41/50 563.mg 44/50 
14/50 563.mg 6/50 
13/50 563.mg 6/50 
45/50 563.mg 45/50 
14/50 563.mg 6/50 
4/50 563.mg 1/50 
40/50 552.mg 31/50 
42/50 552.mg 32/50 
11/50 552.mg 3/50 
2/50 552.mg 1/50 
31/50 491.mg 43/50 
31/50 491.mg 43/50 
 
8/50 491.mg 4/50 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
ubL :can,nen,npm,sqc,tcc. 
 
liv:hpa,hpc; ubl:can,nan,npo,sqc,tcc. C 
 
ubl:can,sqc,tcc. 
 
Liv:hpa,hpc. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
ubL :sqc,tcc. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
ubL :nen,ppc,sqc,tcc. 
 
nas:oLn; ubL:nen,ppc,sqc,tcc. C 
 
S 
 
81 
 
Liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
SchmahL ;arzn,20, 1461*1467;1970 
 
Innes;nt is, 1968/1969 
 
82 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
c R f f 134 eat nos otn 2424 a 
d R f 134 eat adr coa 24.24 s 
e R ft 34 mat TBA NXB 24.24 s 
 
f ft 34 eat Liv NXB 24.24 s 
692 f m f 34 oat NXB NXB 24.24 a 
 
a R m f34 eat ubt NXA 24.24 a 
b R f f 34 mat tes ict 24.24 a 
c R f f 34 emat nos XA 24.24 a 
d R . f34 oat Liv NXA 24m24 a 
a R f f 34 mat nos NXA 24m24 s 
f R f f 34 e at NXA NXA 24m24 s 
g ft m 134 mat NXA NXA 24.24 s 
h R f f 34 oat TBA NXB 24m24 s 
i R m f 34 oat Liv NXB 24m24 s 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
1.199gm P<.0005c 
1.49g. P<.02 
 
93.8mg / P<.0005 
2.18g. P<.06 
 
76.3mg I P<.0005 
 
88.4mg I P<.0005c 
165.mg / P<P006 
 
397.mg I P<.0005c 
406.mg P .0 .0005c 
450.mg I P<.0005c 
3.51gm / P<.02 
 
4.62gm P .0 .03 c 
98.0mg I P<.0005 
443.mg * P<.0005 
 
CUPFERRON lOOng .. : lug. 1 :10 :..100.. g : . 1. :10 : . 100.. : . :10 
 
693 N f b6c mat NXB NXB 78w95 v + 253.mg * P<.0005 
 
a N f b6c oat l iv NXA 78w95 v 413.mg * P<.0005c 
b N f b6c at -- NXA 78w95 v 419.mg \ P<.003 c 
c N f b6c mat Liv hpc 78w95 v 564.mg * P<.0005c 
d N f b6c oat hag adn 78w95 v 1.279m * P<.002 c 
* f b6c eat lun NXA 78w95 v 798.mg * P<.04 
fI Nf b6c * eat -- hs 78w95 v 1.33g * P<.03 
 
9 N f b6c mat zym NXA 78w95 v 3.939m * P<.04 c 
h N f b6c mat TBA NXB 78w95 v 211.mg * P<.0005 
i N f b6c mat Liv NXB 78w95 v 413.mg * P<.0005 
j N f b6c eat Lun NXB 78w95 v 798.mg * P<.04 
 
694 N m b6c mat ... hes 78w95 v + :1.009m * P<.005 c 
 
a N m b6c mat hag adn 78w95 v 1.04gm * P<.004 
b N m b6c mat TBA NXB 78w95 v 252.mg * P<.004 
c N m b6c mat Liv NXB 78w95 v 5.45gm * P<.9 
d N m b6c mat Lun NXB 78w95 v 2.39gm * P<.6 
 
695 R f f34 mat NXB MXB 18.25 : + : 14.1mg * P<.0005 
 
a R f f34 mat -- hs 18.25 17.4mg I P<.0005c 
b R f f34 mat Liv NXA 18.25 17.7mg a P<.0005c 
c R f f34 mat liv hpc 18.25 20.1mg * P<.0005c 
d R f f34 mat sto NXA 18.25 27.8mg I P<.0005c 
a R f f34 mat sto sqc 18.25 31.3mg I P<.0005c 
f R f f34 at zym NXA 1825 +historical * P<.002 c 
9 R f f 34 mat TBA NXB 18.25 11.2mg / P<.0005 
h R f f34 mat Liv NXB 18.25 17.7mg * P<.0005 
696 R m f34 mat NXC NXB 18.24 : +: 5.33mg / P<.0005 
 
a R m f34 mat * has 18.24 5.49mg I P<.0005c 
b R * f34 mat sto NXA 18.24 6.28mg / P<.0005c 
c R * f34 mat eto sqc 18.24 6.94mg I P<.0005c 
d R m f34 mat Liv NXA 18.24 9.28mg * P<.0005c 
a R f f34 mat sub fib 18.24 10.5mg P<.0005 
 
f R t f34 mat Liv hpc 18.24 30.7mg * P<.0005c 
g R f f34 mat bod NXA 18.24 139.mg * P<.002 
h R * f34 mat TBA NXB 18.24 8.85mg / P<.0005 
1 R m f34 mat Liv NXB 18.24 9.28mg * P<.0005 
 
CYANANIDE, CALCIUN l1Ong .. : lug. :10. :100. g : . 1g :10. :100..g.10 
 
697 N f b6c mat --- NXA 23m23 : #478.mg * P<.03 - 
 
a N f b6c mat TBA NXB 23m23 no dre Pal. 
b N f b6c mat Liv NXB 23.23 no dre Pal. 
c N f b6c mat Lun NXB 23.23 4.04g / P<.6 
698 N f b6c orl Liv hpt 76w76 *vx .> no dre P-1. 
 
a N f b6c orL lun mix 76w76 *vx no dre P.1. 
 
b N f b6c orl tba mix 76w76 *vx 68.0mg P<.05 
 
699 N m b6c mat --- has 23.23 : + #766.mg a P<.009 - 
 
a N m b6c mat TBA NXB 23m23 909.mg a P<.6 
b N m b6c mat liv NXB 23m23 no dre P-1. 
c N m b6c mat lun NXB 23m23 no dre P-1. 
 
700 N m b6c orl --- rts 76w76 *vx . . 30.9mg P<.006 
 
a N m b6c orl liv hpt 76w76 evx 55.7mg P<.04 
b N m b6c orL Lun mix 76w76 *vx no dre P.1. 
 
c N m b6c orL tba mix 76w76 *vx 16.7mg P<.0005 
701 N f b6a orL liv hpt 76w76 *vx .> no dre Pal. 
 
a N f b6a orL Lun ada 76w76 *vx no drm P-1. 
b N f b6a orl tba mix 76w76 *vx no dre P-1. 
702 N m b6a orL liv hpt 76w76 *vx .> 191.mg P<.6 
 
a N m b6a orL lun adm 76w76 *vx no dre P.1. 
b N * b6a orl tba mix 76w76 *vx no dre P-l. 
 
703 R f f34 mat TBA NXB 25m25 :> 267.mg * P<.9 - 
 
a R f f34 mat Liv NXB 25m25 no dre P-1. 
 
704 R * f34 mat ... NXA 25m25 : #7.45mg \ P<.05 - 
 
a R m f34 mat TBA NXB 25m25 no dre P-1. 
b R * f34 mat liv NXB 25.25 no dre P-1. 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl 
 
c c02982 568.mg 2.89gm 
d c02982 578.mg n.s.s. 
 
* c02982 62.4mg 162.mg 
f c02982 712.mg n. .s. 
692 c02982 55.7mg 107.mg 
 
* c02982 63.9mg 126.mg 
b c02982 81.1mg 2.05gm 
 
c c02982 236.mg 711.mg 
d c02982 220.mg 968.mg 
* c02982 260.mg 836.mg 
f c02982 942.mg n.s.s. 
g c02982 1.35gm n.a.s. 
h c02982 63.6mg 181.mg 
i c02982 235.mg 1.11gm 
 
0/50 
0/50 
27/50 
 
0/50 
0/50 
 
0/50 
37/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
28/50 
 
0/50 
 
lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
245m.g 0/50 491.mg 
245.mg 5/50 491.mg 
245.mg 48/50 491.mg 
245.mg 4/50 491.mg 
198.mg 35/50 396.mg 
198.mg 30/50 396.mg 
198.mg 45/50 396.mg 
198.mg 2/50 396.mg 
198.mg 13/50 396.mg 
198.mg 1/50 396.mg 
198.mg 0/50 396.mg 
198.mg 0/50 396.mg 
198.mg 44/50 396.mg 
198.mg 12/50 396.mg 
 
11/50 
 
1/50 
44/50 
 
0/50 
46/50 
 
44/50 
23/50 
23/50 
 
2/50 
21/50 
 
3/50 
3/50 
46/50 
 
2/50 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
Brkly Code 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
Liv:hpc,mhc,nnd; nas:adn,can,nau,npm,oLn; nsp:acn; 
 
ubl:ppc,sqc,tcc,tpp,uLc. C 
ubL :ppc,sqc,tcc,tpp,ulc. 
 
S 
nas:adn,can,nou,npm,oLn. 
 
liv:hpc,mhc,nnd. 
 
nas:neu,otn. 
 
bra:gLn; brs:gLn. S 
nss:can,npm; nsp:acn. 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
CUPFERRON 135-20-6 
 
693 c03258 163.mg 495.mg 3/50 
 
a c03258 243.mg 1.05gm 2/50 
b c03258 192.mg 2.209m 1/50 
c c03258 309.mg 1.969m 2/50 
d c03258 576.mg 5.56gm 0/50 
* c03258 344.mg n.s.s. 4/50 
f c03258 582.mg n.s.s. 1/50 
9 c03258 1.199m n.s.s. 0/50 
h c03258 125.mg 591.mg 12/50 
i c03258 243.mg 1.059m 2/50 
J c03258 344.mg n.s.s. 4/50 
694 c03258 451.mg 8.409m 1/50 
 
a c03258 450.mg 6.199m 0/50 
b c03258 128.mg 1.78gm 20/50 
c c03258 416.mg n.s.s. 15/50 
d c03258 449.mg n.s.s. 7/50 
695 c03258 9.23mg 21.8mg 2/50 
 
a c03258 10.9mg 27.9mg 0/50 
b c03258 10.6mg 31.2mg 1/50 
c c03258 11.9mg 36.0mg 1/50 
d c03258 17.0mg 45.7mg 0/50 
* c03258 18.3mg 53.9mg 0/50 
f c03258 53.9mg 1.189m 1/50 
g c03258 7.18mg 18.9mg 31/50 
h c03258 10.6mg 31.2mg 1/50 
696 c03258 2.06mg 9.79mg 0/50 
 
* c03258 2.09mg 10.4mg 0/50 
b c03258 2.17mg 13.1mg 0/50 
c c03258 2.24mg 16.5mg 0/50 
d c03258 2.40mg 28.6mg 0/50 
* c03258 2.43mg 35.7mg 1/50 
f c03258 10.8mg 80.8mg 0/50 
g c03258 54.4mg 571.mg 0/50 
h c03258 5.01mg 14.6mg 31/50 
i c03258 2.40mg 28.6mg 0/50 
 
CYANAMIDE, CALCIUN 156-62-7 
 
697 c02937 213.mg n.s.s. 1/20 
 
a c02937 264.mg n..sa. 11/20 
b c02937 685.mg n.s.s. 0/20 
c c02937 716.mg n.s.s. 3/20 
698 1066 67.2mg n.c.s. 0/16 
 
a 1066 67.2mg n.s.s. 0/16 
b 1066 20.5mg n.s.s. 0/16 
699 c02937 349.mg 26.99m 1/20 
 
a c02937 174.mg n.s.s. 13/20 
b c02937 675.mg n.s.s. 8/20 
c c02937 411.mg n.s.s. 7/20 
700 1066 11.6mg 305.mg 0/16 
 
* 1066 16.8mg n.s.s. 0/16 
b 1066 55.6mg n.s.s. 0/16 
c 1066 7.37mg 51.7mg 0/16 
701 1066 63.4mg n.s.s. 0/17 
 
a 1066 63.4mg n.s.a. 1/17 
b 1066 29.8mg n.s.s. 2/17 
702 1066 26.5mg n.s.s. 1/18 
 
a 1066 41.5mg n.s.s. 2/18 
b 1066 24.8mg n.s.s. 3/18 
703 c02937 13.8mg n.s.s. 18/20 
 
a c02937 138.mg n.s.s. 1/20 
704 c02937 3.39mg n.s.s. 2/20 
 
a c02937 5.39mg n.s.s. 18/20 
b c02937 40.5mg n.s.s. 1/20 
 
200.mg 18/50 405-mg 
200.mg 12/50 405.mg 
200.mg 10/50 (405mg9 
200.mg 9/50 405.mg 
200.mg 2/50 405.mg 
 
200.mg 11/50 405.mg 
200.mg 5/50 405.mg 
200.mg 0/50 405.mg 
200.mg 33/50 405.mg 
200.mg 12/50 405.mg 
200.mg 11/50 405.mg 
185.mg 3/50 374.mg 
185.mg 3/50 374.mg 
185.mg 25/50 374.mg 
185.mg 9/50 374.mg 
185.mg 8/50 374.mg 
55.2mg 40/50 110.mg 
55.2mg 28/50 110.mg 
55.2mg 26/50 110.mg 
55.2mg 24/50 110.mg 
55.2mg 19/50 110.-g 
55.2mg 14/50 110.mg 
55.2mg 5/50 110.mg 
55.2mg 42/50 110.mg 
55.2mg 26/50 110.mg 
45.0mg 42/50 96.5mg 
45.0mg 38/50 96.5mg 
45.0mg 32/50 96.5mg 
45.0mg 19/50 96.5mg 
45.0mg 12/50 96.5mg 
45.0mg 15/50 96.5mg 
45.0mg 8/50 96.5mg 
45.0mg 5/50 96.5mg 
45.0mg 45/50 96.5mg 
45.0mg 12/50 96.5mg 
 
65. 0mg 
65. 0mg 
 
65. 0mg 
65 .0mg 
33.9mg 
33.9mg 
33.9mg 
60. 0mg 
60. 0mg 
60. 0mg 
60. 0mg 
31.6mg 
31.6mg 
31.6mg 
31.6mg 
33.9mg 
33.9mg 
33.9mg 
31.6mg 
31.6mg 
31.6mg 
5.00mg 
5.00mg 
4.00mg 
4.00mg 
4. 00mg 
 
25/50 
16/50 
6/50) 
13/50 
6/50 
9/50 
6/50 
3/50 
31/50 
16/50 
9/50 
7/50 
4/50 
26/50 
9/50 
5/50 
40/50 
37/50 
12/50 
10/50 
24/50 
22/50 
 
4/50 
42/50 
12/50 
38/49 
35/49 
24/49 
17/49 
5/49 
5/49 
4/49 
1/49 
41/49 
 
5/49 
 
-h - hsme,h.s; hag:adn; Liv:hpa,hpc; zym:sac,sqc. C 
 
liv:hpa,hpc. 
- - :hem,hess. 
 
Lun:s/s,a/c. S 
 
S 
zym:sac,sqc. 
 
L iv:hps,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
- - - hes; Liv:hpc,nnd; sto:sqc,sqp; zym:cuc,sqc. C 
 
l iv:hpc,nnd. 
sto:sqc,sqp. 
zym:cuc,sqc. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
--- :hs; Liv:hpc,nnd; sto:sqc,sqp. C 
 
sto:sqc,sqp. 
 
L iv:hpc,nnd. 
 
S 
 
bod:men,mso. S 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
---:leu,Lym. S 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
S 
 
Liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
11/50 260.mg 18/50 
25/50 260.mg 27/50 
6/50 260.mg 3/50 
1/50 260.mg 6/50 
0/18 
0/18 
3/18 
 
2/50 240.mg 10/50 
29/50 240.mg 30/50 
11/50 240.mg 7/50 
11/50 240.mg 11/50 
5/16 
3/16 
0/16 
8/16 
0/17 
0/17 
2/17 
2/18 
1/18 
3/18 
 
40/50 20.0mg 42/50 
 
0/50 20.0mg 1/50 
18/50 (8.00mg 7/50) 
43/50 8.00mg 45/50 
3/50 8.00mg 1/50 
 
Liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
- L- :lou,Lym,n.n. S 
 
l iv:hps,hpc,nnd. 
 
83 
 
84 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
 
CYCLAMATE, SODIUM 
 
705 M f asp eat reL Lys 80w82 s 
 
a M f asp set Lun ads 80w82 s 
b M f asp sat liv tur 80w82 s 
706 M a asp set Liv tum 80w82 s 
 
a M m asp sat Lun ads 80w82 s 
707 M f c3h wat Liv tur 24.24 a 
 
a M f c3h wat Lun tum 24.24 s 
b M f c3h wat tba mix 24m24 s 
708 M r c3h wat Liv six 24r24 s 
 
a M r c3h wat Lun rix 24m24 s 
b M r c3h wat tba mix 24m24 a 
709 M f cdl sat Liv tum 24m24 a 
 
a M f cdl eat Lun tur 24r24 s 
b M f cdl eat tba mix 24m24 s 
710 M r crf wat Liv rix 24m24 s 
 
a M m crf wat Lun mix 24.24 a 
b M r crf wat tba mix 24.24 s 
711 M r r3c wat lun mix 24r24 a 
 
a M m r3. wat Liv tum 24.24 s 
b M m r3r wat tba mix 24r24 a 
712 M f swa eat Liv hpt 76w76 s 
 
713 M f swi eat ubl epc 91w91 @g 
714 M r swi sat ubL tum 91w91 s 
715 M f xvi wat Lun mix 24r24 a 
 
a M f xvi wat Liv mix 24r24 s 
b M f xvi wat tba mix 24r24 s 
716 R b sda sat ubL pac 30r30 s 
 
a R b sda sat ubL tcc 30r30 s 
b R b sda sat tba maL 30r30 s 
 
717 R b wis sat ubL tum 24m24 or 
CYCLOCHLOROTINE 
 
718 M m ddn sat Liv mix 37m37 s 
 
a M r ddn sat Liv lca 37r37 s 
b M r ddn sat Liv Lcc 37m37 s 
c M r ddn sat Liv hpt 37m37 e 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
TD5O 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
loong .:. .:ug. :10. :100... :1g 10 100. . : . :10 
 
16.7g * P<.04 - 
228.g9 * P<1. - 
no dre P-I. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
.no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
1.42gm P<.09 + 
4.38gr P<.2 
 
772.rg P<.03 + 
4.67gm P<.05 
no dre P-1. 
 
4.67gm P<.05 
no dre P-1. 
.no dre P-I. 
no dre P-1. 
 
587.mg P<.0005 
16.Ogr P<.3 
 
587.mg P<.0005+ 
no dre PnI. - 
no dre P-1. - 
30.7gm * P<.3 - 
83.9gmn * P<.2 
 
100ng. . .. :1ug. 10. :100... : g . :10. :100. :Ig . :10 
 
A 23.6mg * P<.1 
 
48.6mg * P<.2 
98.9mg * P<.4 
99.5mg * P<.9 
 
N-CYCLOHEXYL-2-BENZOTHIAZOLE SULFENAMIDE .: .ug.............. 1...100. . :. g. 1 :10 :..100..1 :0 . :10 
 
719 M f b6a orl Liv hpt 76w76 svx .> no dre 
 
a M f b6a orL Lun ads 76w76 evx no dre 
b M f b6a orL tba mix 76w76 svx no dre 
720 M r b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 *vx .> no dre 
 
a M r b6a orL Lun ads 76w76 evx no dre 
b M r b6a orl tba rix 76w76 svx no dre 
721 M f b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 svx .> no dre 
 
a M f b6c orL Lun mix 76w76 *vx no dre 
b M f b6c orL tba mix 76w76 svx 243.mg 
722 M r b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 *vx . + . 92.7rg 
 
a M r b6c orL Lun ads 76w76 *vx 532.mg 
b M m b6c orL tba cix 76w76 svx 50.8eg 
 
+ 
 
P-I.- 
P-I1. 
P-I1. 
P-I1. 
 
P-I.- 
 
P-1. - 
 
P-i. _ 
P<.09 - 
P<. 007 - 
P<.3 - 
P<. 0005- 
 
CYCLOHEXYLANINE.HC l Ong .. :. .ug. :10. :100... : g. :10. :100.. :19 :10 
 
723 M f asp sat lun ads 80w84 * .> no dre P-1. 
 
a M f asp sat Liv nod 80w84 * no dre P-1. 
b M f asp sat tba mix 80w84 s no dre P-1. 
 
724 M c asp sat Liv nod 80w84 * . 231.cg Z P<.02 - 
 
a M r asp sat Lun adc 80w84 * no dre P-1. 
b M r asp sat lun ads 80w84 a no dre P-1. 
c M m asp sat tba cix 80w84 s no dre P-1. 
725 R b fdr sat Liv mix 24c24 9 .> no dre P-1. 
 
a R b fdr sat tba mix 24.24 9 no dre P-1. 
726 R b sda sat Liv lca 30.30. .> 14.5gm P<.2 
 
a R b sda sat ubL tur 30.30 a no dre P-1. 
b R b sda set tba caL 30.30 a no drs P-1. 
 
727 R f wis eat Liv he. 24.24 a . 1.339g Z P<.04 - 
728 R m wis sat Liv nod 24.24 a .> 47.Og o P<1. 
 
a R r wis sat Liv he. 24.24 * no dre P-I1. 
CYCLOHEXYLAMINE SULFATE 1 OOng . . .:ug. 1 :10 :..100.... :g0 100.. : 10 :10 
 
729 M f swi sat ubL apc 91w91 eg .> no dre P-1. 
730 M c swi sat ubL tum 91w91 a .> no dre P-1. 
731 R f csa sat ubL tur 24c24 r .> no dre P-1. 
732 R c csa sat ubL tcc 24c24 r .> 280.rg * P<.2 
CYCLOPHOSPHAMIDE 1 Ong .:. .:ug. :10. :100.. : ng. :10. : 100. :Ig . :10 
 
733 M f swi ipj --- Lys 26w79 a * + 7.09g * P<.003 + 
 
a M f swi ipJ ski sqc 26w79 * 11.1cg * P<.002 
 
b M f swi ipj Lun mix 26w79 a 6.15g * P<.06 + 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl 
 
CYCLAMATE, SODIUM 139-05-9 
 
705 1341 6.459m n.s.s. 3/45 
 
a 1341 9.13gm n.s.s. 6/45 
b 1341 1.29gm n.s.s. 0/45 
706 1341 1.39gm n.s.s. 0/46 
 
a 1341 12.4gm n.s.s. 15/46 
707 1275 2.47gm n.s.s. 0/19 
 
a 1275 2.47gm n.s.s. 0/19 
b 1275 201.mg n.s.s. 18/19 
708 1275 652.mg n.s.s. 3/9 
 
a 1275 1.85gm n.s.s. 2/9 
b 1275 795.mg n.s.s. 5/9 
709 1450 8.27gm n.s.s. 0/17 
 
a 1450 16.2gm n.s.s. 4/17 
b 1450 10.5gm n.s.s. 11/17 
710 1275 528.mg n.s.s. 12/28 
 
a 1275 1.449m n.s.s. 2/28 
b 1275 314.mg n.s.s. 16/28 
711 1275 1.41gm n.s.s. 0/19 
 
a 1275 4.53gm n.s.s. 0/19 
b 1275 1.41gm n.s.s. 0/19 
712 1090 24.3gm n.s.s. 3/45 
713 1349 9.41gm n.s.s. 1/41 
714 1349 11.1gm n.s.s. 0/40 
715 1275 277.mg 1.95gm 3/16 
 
a 1275 2.61gm n.s.s. 0/16 
b 1275 277.mg 1.959m 3/16 
716 1416 56.6gm n.s.s. 0/98 
 
a 1416 56.6gm n.s.s. 0/98 
b 1416 9.59gm n.s.s. 13/98 
717 1465 25.4gm n.s.s. 0/98 
 
CYCLOCHLOROTINE 12663-46-6 
 
718 1346 8.15mg n.s.s. 0/11 
 
a 1346 12.0mg n.s.s. 0/11 
b 1346 16.1mg n.s.s. 0/11 
c 1346 16.2mg n.s.s. 0/11 
 
lDose lnc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
888.mg 
888.mg 
 
8.8mg 
820.mg 
820 mg 
1. 209m 
1. 209m 
1. 20gm 
1.00gm 
1.00gm 
1.00gm 
1. 30gm 
1. 30gm 
1. 30gm 
1. 00gm 
1. 00gm 
1. 00gm 
1. 00gm 
1. 00gm 
1. 00gm 
 
6. 50gm 
2.60gm 
2.40gm 
1.20gm 
1. 209m 
1. 20gm 
900.mg 
900 mg 
900. mg 
1 . 00gm 
 
1.33mg 
1. 33mg 
1. 33mg 
1. 33mg 
 
2/19 2.229m 3/18 
2/19 2.229m 6/18 
0/19 2.229m 0/18 
0/21 2.059m 0/27 
5/21 2.059m 6/27 
0/10 
0/10 
9/10 
3/9 
0/9 
3/9 
 
0/38 6.509m 0/33 
6/38 6.509m 5/33 
19/38 6.509m 14/33 
22/34 
7/34 
28/34 
3/22 
0/22 
3/22 
1/47 
 
0/30 6.509g 0/39 
0/41 6.009m 0/41 
16/20 
 
1/20 
16/20 
 
1/97 2.259m 0/101 
1/97 2.25g. 0/101 
16/97 2.259m 20/101 
 
1/84 2.00gm 2/143 
 
1/18 2.00mg 
0/18 2.00mg 
0/18 2.00mg 
1/18 2.00mg 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
4.44gm 
4. 44gm 
 
4.44gm 
 
4. 109m 
4.10gm 
 
4/21 8.88gm 
6/21 8.88gm 
0/21 8.88gm 
0/23 8. 20gm 
1/23 8.20gm 
 
6/25 
3/25 
0/25 
0/24 
7/24 
 
Brkly Code 
 
Brantom;fctx, 11,735-746; 1973 
Rudal i ;adsc,269,1910-1913;1969 
 
Homburger;ctxf,359-373; 1978 
Rudal i ;adsc,269,1910-1913;1969 
 
Roe;fctx,8, 135-145; 1970 
Kroes;txcy,8,285-300; 1977 
RudaL i ;adsc,269, 1910-1913;1969 
 
Schmaht ;arzn,23, 1466-1470;1973 
 
Hicks;carm,2,475-489; 1978 
 
3/19 
2/19 
1/19 
0/19 
 
Uraguchi ;fctx, 10,193-207;1972 
 
N-CYCLOHEXYL-2-BENZOTHIAZOLE SULFENAMIDE (Durax) 95-33-0 
 
719 1299 177.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1299 177.mg n.s.s. 
b 1299 83.4mg n.s.s. 
720 1299 104.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1299 116.mg n.s.s. 
b 1299 69.4mg n.s.s. 
721 1299 157.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1299 157.mg n.s.s. 
b 1299 59.5mg n.s.s. 
722 1299 34.9mg 1.259m 
 
a 1299 86.7mg n.s.s. 
b 1299 22.5mg 161.mg 
 
0/17 
1/17 
2/17 
1/18 
2/18 
3/18 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
 
94.9mg 
94.9mg 
94.9mg 
88. 2mg 
88. 2mg 
88. 2mg 
94.9mg 
94.9mg 
94.9mg 
88. 2mg 
88. 2mg 
88.2mg 
 
0/17 
0/17 
2/17 
1/18 
1/18 
3/18 
0/15 
0/15 
2/15 
5/17 
1/17 
8/17 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
CYCLOHEXYLAtINE.HCI 4998-76-9 
 
723 398 875.mg n.s.s. 6/44 
 
a 398 1.72gm n.s.s. 1/44 
b 398 595.mg n.s.s. 11/44 
724 398 95.1mg n.s.s. 5/46 
 
a 398 1.54gm n.s.s. 0/46 
b 398 1.00gm n.s.s. 14/46 
c 398 665.mg n.s.s. 16/46 
725 1458 1.91gm n.s.s. 0/60 
 
a 1458 324.mg n.s.s. 16/60 
726 1416 2.35gm n.s.s. 0/98 
 
a 1416 4.389m n.s.s. 0/98 
b 1416 1.81gm n.s.s. 13/98 
727 396 404.mg n.a.s. 0/38 
728 396 1.439g n.s.s. 2/34 
 
a 396 2.54gm n.s.s. 3/34 
 
37. 1mg 
37. 1mg 
37. mg 
34.3mg 
34.3mg 
34.3mg 
34.3mg 
15.0mg 
15.0mg 
200. mg 
200. mg 
200. mg 
30. 0mg 
24. 0mg 
24.Omg 
 
CYCLOHEXYLANINE SULFATE 19834-02-7 
 
729 1349 3.49gm n.s.s. 1/41 650.mg 
730 1349 3.98gm n.s.s. 0/40 600.mg 
731 1350 .696mg n.s.s. 0/25 .150mg 
732 1350 45.6mg n.s.s. 0/25 .150mg 
CYCLOPHOSPHAMIDE (Endoxan) 50-18-0 
 
733 1336 2.50mg 61.3mg 3/154 1.69mg 
 
a 1336 3.35mg 81.6mg 0/154 1.69mg 
b 1336 1.97mg n.s.s. 20/154 1.69mg 
 
9/46 124.mg 7/42 371.mg 5/44 
3/46 124.mg 0/42 371.mg 1/44 
15/46 124.mg 15/42 371.mg 10/44 
3/45 114.mg 10/31 (343.mg 3/46) 
0/45 114.mg 1/31 343.mg 0/46 
10/45 114.mg 4/31 343.mg 7/46 
14/45 114.mg 10/31 343.mg 11/46 
2/60 50.0mg 0/60 100.mg 0/60 
 
18/60 50.0mg 15/60 100.mg 14/60 4 
 
1/68 
0/68 
6/68 
 
0/43 100.mg 3/47 (300.mg 0/41) 
1/40 80.0mg 0/39 240.mg 2/46 
1/40 80.0mg 1/39 240.mg 0/46 
 
0/34 
0/42 
 
0/25 1.50mg 0/25 15.0mg 0/25 
0/25 1.50mg 0/25 15.0mg 1/25 
 
1/19 3.52mg 4/16 SI 
1/19 3.52mg 2/16 
4/19 3.52mg 5/16 
 
150. mg 1/60 
(150.mg 3/60) 
 
Hardy;fctx, 14,269-276; 1976 
 
Oser;txcy,6,47-65; 1976 
SchmahL ;arzn,23, 1466-1470; 1973 
 
Gaunt;fctx, 14,255-267; 1976 
 
Kro.s;txcy,8,285-300; 1977 
Price;scie,167,1131-1132;1970 
 
kipper;srfr;1976/W.isburger 1977/Prejean pers.com. 
 
85 
 
I 
I 
1 
3 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
 
c " f swi 
d N f swi 
* N f swi 
f " f swi 
734 N a swi 
 
a Naiwi 
b N m swi 
c " N swi 
d N i swi 
* " N iwi 
735 R m b46 
 
a R m b46 
b R m b46 
736 R f sda 
 
a R f sda 
737 R a sds 
 
a R m sd 
 
ipj liv Lys 26w79 a 
ipJ tbs mix 26w79 S 
ipj tba maL 26w79 0 
ipj tbs ben 26w79 S 
 
ip -.-. Lou 26w79 a 
 
ipj lun mix 26w79 S 
ipj liv mix 26w79 S 
ipj tba mix 26w79 S 
ipj tba maL 26w79 a 
ipj tbs ben 26w79 S 
 
ivJ tbs mix 12m24 es 
ivj tba maL 12m24 es 
ivJ tbs ben 12m24 es 
ipj aim maL 24m24 es 
ipj tba maL 24m24 es 
ipj liv hae 25m25 es 
ipJ tbs maL 25m25 es 
 
DACARBAZINE 
 
738 N f swi ipJ lun mix 26w61 e 
 
a N f swi ipJ ut. adc 26w61 e 
b N f swi ipJ --- Lys 26w6le 
 
c N f swi ipJ spL has 26w61 e 
 
d N f swi ipJ Liv lys 26w61 e 
* N f swi ipJ tba maL 26w61 e 
f N f swi ipJ tba ben 26w61 e 
9 N f swi ipJ tba mix 26w61 e 
 
739 N a swi ipJ lun mix 26w78 e 
 
a N a swi ipJ spL mix 26w78 e 
b N i swi ipJ --- Lyk 26w78 e 
c N i swi ipJ ... Lys 26w78 e 
 
d N a swi ipJ Liv mix 26w78 e 
* N a swi ipJ tba mix 26w78 e 
f N a swi ipj tba maL 26w78 e 
 
9 N a swi ipj tba ben 26w78 e 
740 R f sda oat mgl sdf 46w60 
 
a R f sda oat thi lys 46w60 
b R f ads set ute Lei 46w60 
DANINOZIDE 
 
741 N f b6c set TBA NXB 24m24 
 
a N f b6c set Liv NXB 24m24 
b N f b6c oat Lun NXB 24.24 
742 N a b6c eat liv hpc 24m24 
 
a N a b6c oat Liv NXA 24.24 
b N a b6c oat TBA NXS 24.24 
c N a b6c oat Liv NXB 24m24 
d N a b6c oat lun NXB 24.24 
 
743 N f swa wat bLv mix 92w92 e 
 
a N f awe wet Lun mix 92w92 e 
b N f sw wt liv tum 92w92 e 
744 N a siw wet bLv mix 81w81 e 
 
a N maiw wat lun mix 81w81 e 
b N a siw wet kid ad. 81w81 e 
 
c N a siw wet Liv hpt 81w81 e 
745 R f f34 set lun a/a 24.24 
 
a R f f34 oat NXB NXB 24m24 
b R f f34 oat uto acn 24m24 
c R f f34 sat ute lsi 24.24 
d R f f 34 set TBA NXB 24.24 
* R f f34 oat liv NXB 24.24 
746 R a f 34 set TBA NXB 24.24 
 
a R f f34 oat Liv NXS 24.24 
 
DAPSONE 
 
747 N f b6c set TBA NXB 18m25 
 
a N f b6c set Liv NXS 18m25 
b N f b6c at lun NXB 1m25 
748 N a b6c oat TBA NXB 18m25 
 
a N a b6c eat liv NXS 18m25 
b N m b6c set Lun NXS 1m25 
749 R f f34 oat TBA NXB 18m24 
 
a R f f34 set Liv NXB 18m24 
750 R o f34 set spL NXA 16m24 
 
a R f f34 oat spL fib 16m24 
b R a f34 eat TBA NXS 18m24 
c R a f34 oat Liv NXS 16m24 
751 R a f34 oat spL NXA 16m24 
 
a R f f34 oat spL fib 18m24 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
no dre 
1 .78mg 
1.78mg 
no dr. 
 
8.69mg 
5.78m 
 
40.9mg 
3.66mg 
3.77mg 
no dr. 
 
3.01mg 
5.36mg 
9.02mg 
1.70mg 
 
1. 26mg 
no dre 
2.87mg 
 
100ng1..:..lug. 10 . 100 .lg.. 10 . 100 .I . 10 
 
+ . .595m9 
 
3.20mg 
8.00m9 
 
14.5mg 
 
no dre 
.807mg 
7.03mg 
noTD50 
2.57mg 
5. 17mg 
13.0mg 
16. lag 
98.6mg 
.813mg 
 
1.54mg 
 
10.6mg 
.710mg 
4.21mg 
6. 55mg 
 
Pal. 
 
a P<.0005 
* P<.0005 
 
P-I. 
 
* P<.004 
 
? P<.07 + 
 
P<. 5 
* P<.09 
a P<.05 
 
P-I. 
 
P<.04 + 
P<.1 + 
 
P<.3 
P<.05 
 
P<.02 + 
P.1. 
 
P<.06 + 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
P<.05 + 
P<.03 + 
P-I. 
 
P<.0005 
P<. 2 
P<. 2 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 004 + 
P<.07 + 
P<.7 
 
P<. 0005 
P<. 0005 
P<. 2 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<.02 + 
P<.05 + 
 
1oong.. ..ug. 10. 100. g. 10 . 100. : . 10 
 
:> 56.4g * P<. - 
 
6.829m \ P<.5 
 
2.92g * P<.06 
 
+ 2.159m * P<.005 a 
 
2.45g * P<.05 a 
1.50g * P<.2 
 
2.459m * P<.05 
3.409m * P<.4 
 
+ 1.24gm P<.0005+ 
 
1.379m P<.0005O 
no dre P-I. 
 
+ U880m9 P<.0005O 
 
1.119m P<.0005+ 
10.9gm P<.002 + 
38.8gm P<.3 - 
A 4.899m * P<.05 
 
1.84gm * P<.2 
 
.historicaL * P<.3 c 
 
*historicaL * P<.2 c 
 
3.45gm * P<.8 
9.649m * P<.5 
 
:> no dre P-I. - 
 
no dre P-I. 
 
100ng.. ..lug. 10 . 100 .lg. 10 . 100 .I . 10 
 
:> no dri PaI. - 
 
no dri P-I. 
no dre P-I. 
 
:> no dre P-1. - 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-I. 
 
:> no dre P-1. - 
 
no dre P-I. 
 
+ 22.4mg * P<.0005c 
 
28.5mg * P<.004 c 
22.4.g * P<.1 
no dre P-I. 
 
pooL + 22.4mg * P<.0005c 
 
28.5mg * P<.0005c 
 
86 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
c 1336 2.43mg n.s.s. 1/154 
d 1336 .815mg 8.25mg 42/154 
 
a 1336 .858mg 5.93mg 29/154 
f 1336 6.99mg n.s.s. 13/154 
734 1336 2.63mg 84.8mg 0/101 
 
a 1336 1.78mg n.s.s. 9/101 
b 1336 4.60mg n.s.s. 2/101 
c 1336 1.15mg n.s.s. 28/101 
d 1336 1.27mg n.s.s. 19/101 
a 1336 4.42mg n.s.s. 9/101 
735 1017 1.12mg n.s.s. 7/65 
 
a 1017 1.62mg n.s.s. 4/65 
b 1017 2.12mg n.s.s. 3/65 
736 1134 .660mg n.s.s. 3/33 
 
a 1134 .549mg n.s.s. 3/33 
737 1134 3.91mg n.s.s. 1/36 
 
a 1134 .956mg n.s.s. 1/36 
DACARBAZINE (DIC) 4342-03*4 
 
738 1336 .249mg 1.74mg 20/154 
 
a 1336 1.09mg 16.5mg 0/154 
b 1336 1.76mg n.s.s. 3/154 
c 1336 2.36mg n.s.s. 0/154 
d 1336 4.53mg n.s.s. 1/154 
a 1336 .336mg 2.84mg 29/154 
f 1336 1.50mg n.s.s. 13/154 
9 1336 n.s.s. n.a.s. 42/154 
739 1336 1.26mg 7.71mg 9/101 
 
a 1336 2.23mg 16.6mg 0/101 
b 1336 3.94mg 114.mg 0/101 
c 1336 4.16mg n.s.s. 2/101 
d 1336 7.22mg n.s.s. 2/101 
 
a 1336 .419mg 1.86"9 28/101 
f 1336 .796mg 4.06mg 19/101 
9 1336 2.97mg n.s.s. 9/101 
740 1412 .316mg 2.38mg 4/28 
 
a 1412 1.27mg n.s.s. 0/28 
b 1412 1.61mg n.s.s. 0/28 
 
1.69mg 
1.69mg 
1.69mg 
1. 69mg 
1.72mg 
1.72mg 
1.72mg 
1. 72mg 
1.72mg 
1. 72mg 
.929mg 
.929mg 
.929mg 
.571mg 
.571mg 
.571mg 
.571mg 
 
4.56mg 
4. 56mg 
4. 56mg 
4.56mg 
4. 56mg 
4. 56mg 
4. 56mg 
4.56mg 
3.56mg 
3.56mg 
3.56mg 
3.56mg 
3.56mg 
3.56mg 
3.56mg 
3.56mg 
3.83mg 
3.83mg 
3.83mg 
 
0/19 3.52mg 
9/19 3.52mg 
7/19 3.52mg 
2/19 3.52mg 
2/22 3.52mg 
5/22 3.52mg 
0/22 3.52mg 
8/22 3.52mg 
7/22 3.52mg 
1/22 3.52mg 
10/36 
6/36 
4/36 
10/36 
12/36 
0/32 
5/32 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
0/16 
11/16 
11/16 
0/16 
1/9 
2/9 
1/9 
5/9 
4/9 
1/9 
 
Brkly Code 
 
SchmahL ;arzn,20, 1461-1467;1970 
 
SchmahL ;zkko,86,77-84;1976 
 
12/14 
4/14 
2/14 
1/14 
0/14 
11/14 
3/14 
14/14 
14/30 
7/30 
3/30 
3/30 
1/30 
26/30 
20/30 
 
6/30 
12/16 
3/16 
2/16 
 
Skipper;srfr;1976/Weisburger 1977/PrIjean pers.comm. 
 
BeaL; nci ,54,951-957; 1975 
 
DANINOZIDE (succinic acid 2,2-dimethyL hydrazide, DNASA) 1596-84-5 
741 c03827 1.04gm n.s.s. 13/20 644.mg 27/50 1.299m 25/50 
 
a c03827 1.36gm n.s.s. 1/20 644.mg 4/50 (1.299m 0/50) 
b c03827 1.35gm n.s.s. 1/20 644.mg 8/50 1.299m 10/50 
742 c03827 1.269g 14.99m 0/20 594.mg 7/50 1.199m 13/50 
 
a c03827 1.20gm n.s.s. 1/20 594.mg 9/50 1.199m 14/50 
b c03827 588.mg n.s.s. 8/20 594.mg 28/50 1.19gm 37/50 
c c03827 1.20gm n.s.s. 1/20 594.mg 9/50 1.19gm 14/50 
d c03827 1.019m n.s.s. 4/20 594.mg 15/50 1.19gm 18/50 
743 401 757.mg 2.16gm 8/96 4.009m 36/43 
 
a 401 831.mg 2.479g 15/99 4.009m 37/45 
b 401 29.09m n.s.s. 0/71 4.00gm 0/45 
744 401 552.mg 1.49gm 5/89 3.33gm 37/46 
 
a 401 649.mg 2.21gm 22/92 3.33gm 36/46 
b 401 4.159g 51.1gm 0/77 3.33gm 5/42 
c 401 7.399m n.s.s. 1/77 3.33gm 2/42 
 
745 c03827 1.699m n.s.s. 0/20 248.mg 0/50 495.mg 4/50 
 
a c03827 922.mg n.s.s. 0/20 248.mg 6/50 495.mg 5/50 
b c03827 1.13gm n..a.s 0/20 248.mg 5/50 495.mg 3/50 
c c03827 1.81gm n..a.s 0/20 248.mg 1/50 495.mg 3/50 
d c03827 404.mg n.s.s. 11/20 248.mg 32/50 495.mg 28/50 
 
a c03827 2.379m n.s.s. 0/20 248.mg 1/50 495.mg 1/50 
746 c03827 771.mg n.s.s. 10/20 198.mg 21/50 396.mg 19/50 
 
a c03827 3.379m n.s.s. 0/20 198.mg 1/50 396.mg 0/50 
 
DAPSONE 80-08-0 
 
747 c01718 45.8mg n.s.s. 
 
a c01718 n.s.s. n..a.s 
b c01718 262.mg n..a.s 
 
748 c01718 67.2mg n.s.s. 
 
a c01718 106.mg n.s.s. 
b c01718 133.mg n..a.s 
 
749 c01718 35.7mg n.s.s. 
 
a c01718 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
750 c01718 13.1mg 61.0mg 
 
a c01718 15.7mg 157.mg 
b c01718 8.91mg n.s.s. 
c c01718 n.s.s. n.sa.s 
 
751 c01718 13.1mg 42.8mg 
 
a c01718 15.7mg 62.2mg 
 
6/14 
0/14 
1/14 
0/14 
0/14 
0/14 
8/15 
0/15 
0/15 
0/15 
6/15 
0/15 
0/45p 
0/45p 
 
33.8mg 
33.8mg 
33.8Bg 
31 .2mg 
31 .2mg 
31. 2mg 
16.Omg 
16. 0mg 
12.8mg 
12.8g 
12.8Bg 
12.8 g 
12.8 g 
12.8mg 
 
4/35 (67.6mg 
0/35 67.6mg 
0/35 67.6mg 
11/35 62.4mg 
6/35 62.4mg 
5/35 62.4mg 
15/35 32.0g 
0/35 32. 0mg 
6/35 25.6mg 
6/35 25.6mg 
23/35 25.6mg 
 
0/35 25.6mg 
6/35 25.6mg 
6/35 25.6mg 
 
Liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
Liv:hpa,hpc. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Toth; canr,37, 3497-3500; 1977 
 
S 
 
ute:Lai; utm:acn. C 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
2/36) 
0/36 
0/36 
5/34 
2/34 
1/34 
14/35 
0/35 
14/35 
10/35 
24/35 
 
0/35 
14/35 
10/35 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
spL :fbs,fib,srn. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
spt:fbs,fib,arn. 
 
87 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
 
b R m f34 
c R m f34 
d R m f34 
* R m f34 
f R m f34 
9 R m f34 
 
eat - - lyE 
eat per NXA 
eat per srn 
eat per fbs 
eat apl f bs 
eat spl srn 
 
18m24 
18.24 
18.24 
18.24 
18.24 
18.24 
 
TD5O 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
50.1mg \ P<.008 
 
56.3mg * P<.002 c 
91.3mg * P<.02 
 
148.mg * P<.03 c 
167.mg * P<.03 c 
170.mg * P<.03 c 
 
o,p' -DDD 
 
752 N f b6a orL 
 
a N f b6a orL 
b N f b6a orL 
753 N m b6a orL 
 
a N m b6a orL 
b N m b6a orL 
c M m b6a ort 
754 N f b6c orl 
 
a N f b6c orl 
b N f b6c orL 
755 N m b6c orL 
 
a N m b6c orL 
b N m b6c orl 
c N m b6c orL 
 
100ng .. . lug. :10. :100. g :. 1g :10. : 100. :Ig . :10 
 
Lun ade 76w76 evx .> 236.mg 
Liv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
tba mix 76w76 evx 102.mg 
lun ade 76w76 evx .> 414.mg 
Lun car 76w76 evx 467.mg 
liv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
tba mix 76w76 *vx 187.mg 
Liv hpt 76w76 evx .> no dre 
Lun mix 76w?6 evx no dre 
tba tum 76w76 evx no dre 
--- rts 76w76 evx . + . 82.1mg 
liv hpt 76w76 evx 147.mg 
Lun ade 76w76 evx 467.mg 
tba mix 76w76 evx 38.5mg 
 
p,p' -DDD 
 
756 N f b6c eat TBA NXB 78w90 v 
 
a N f b6c eat Liv NXB 78w90 v 
b N f b6c eat Lun NXB 78w90 v 
 
757 N f b6c orL Lun ade 76w76 evi 
 
a N f b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 ev, 
b N f b6c orL tba mix 76w76 cvi 
758 N m b6c eat TBA NXB 78w90 v 
 
a N m b6c eat Liv NXB 78w90 v 
b N m b6c eat Lun NXB 78w90 v 
 
759 N m b6c orl Liv hpt 76w76 cvx 
 
a N m b6c orL Lun ade 76w76 cvx 
b N m b6c orL tba mix 76w76 cvx 
760 N f b6a orL Lun ad. 76w76 cvx 
 
a N f b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 cvi 
b N f b6a orL tba mix 76w76 cvx 
761 N m b6a orL Lun ade 76w76 cvx 
 
a N m b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 cvx 
b N m b6a orL tba mix 76w76 cvx 
762 N f cfl eat Lun mix 29m29 
 
a N f cfl eat Liv hpt 29m29 
b N f cfl eat tba mix 29m29 
763 N m cfl eat Lun mix 29m29 
 
a N m cfl cat Liv hpt 29m29 
b N m cfl eat tba mix 29.29 
764 R f osm eat TBA NXS 18.26 
 
a R f osm eat Liv NXB 18.26 
 
765 R m osm eat thy NXA 18.26 v 
 
a R m osa eat TBA NXB 18m26 v 
b R m osm eat Liv NXB 18.26 v 
 
p,p -DDE 
 
766 N f b6c eat Liv hpc 78w92 dv 
 
a N f b6c eat TBA NXB 78w92 dv 
b N f b6c eat Liv NXB 78w92 dv 
c N f b6c eat Lun NXB 78w92 dv 
767 N m b6c eat liv hpc 78w92 dsa 
 
a N m b6c eat TBA NXB 78w92 dsa 
 
b N m b6c eat Liv NXB 78w92 dsv 
c N m b6c cat Lun NXB 7Aw92 dsv 
768 N f cfl eat Liv hpt 25m25 
 
a N f cfl eat Lun mix 25m25 
b N f cfl eat tba mix 25m25 
769 N m cfl cat Liv hpt 25m25 
 
a N m cfl eat Lun mix 25m25 
b N m cfl eat tba mix 25m25 
 
770 R f osm eat thy NXA 18.26 dev 
 
a R f oam eat TBA NXB 18.26 dev 
b R f osm eat Liv NXB 18.26 dev 
771 R m osa eat TBA NXS 18.26 dv 
 
a R m osa eat Liv NXB 18.26 dv 
 
DDT 
772 
 
a 
 
773 
 
H f syg eat 
H f ayg eat 
H f syg eat 
 
Liv tum 28.28 e 
tba mix 28.28 e 
tba mix 48w88 e 
 
l00ng .:. . lug. 10 : lO :l.100.1. g :..lg ::10.100. I.. 10 
 
:> 108.mg \ 
 
493.mg * 
no dre 
x .> 250.mg 
x no dre 
x 250.mg 
 
:> 997.mg * 
 
116.mg * 
no dre 
 
K + 43.3mg 
 
120.mg 
34.8m9 
73.0mg 
no dre 
37.4mg 
82.9mg 
no dre 
49.0mg 
* 39.9mg 
 
4.839m 
67.1mg 
24.9mg 
86.8mg 
33.2mg 
:> no dre 
 
2.089m * 
A * 75.8mg \ 
 
82.6mg \ 
no dre 
 
lOOng. .1..ug. 10 . 100. 1g : . 10 . 100. ig 10 
 
:+ 9.45mg / P<.0005c 
 
11.9mg / P<.0005 
9.45mg / P<.0005 
no dre P-1. 
 
v A 11.1mg * P<.03 c 
v 7.48mg * P<a05 
v 11.1mg * P<.03 
v 119.mg * P<.5 
 
+ 10.5mg P<.0005O 
 
no dre P-1. - 
14.8mg P<.0005 
 
+ 33.9mg P<.0005+ 
 
no dre P-1. - 
no dre P-1. 
 
v #33.2mg * P .04 - 
v 58.0mg * P<.7 
v no dre PaI. 
 
:> 48.1mg * P<.4 - 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
1OOng. .:..ug. 10 . 100. 1 mg. 10 . 100. .19 10 
 
.> no dre P-1. 
 
639mg * P<.4 - 
no dre P-1. - 
 
88 
 
P<. 4 
P-a. 
P<. 2 
P<. 7 
P<. 3 
P-I. 
P<. 5 
p-I1. 
P-I. 
P-1. 
 
P<. 009 
P<.05 
P<. 3 
 
P<.0005 
 
P<.2 - 
P<.1 
P-1. 
P< 3 
P-I. 
P<. 3 
P<.9 9 
P<. 2 
p.1. 
 
P<. 009 
P<. 2 
 
P<. 004 
P<. 2 
P-1. 
 
P<. 05 
P<. 3 
P-I. 
P<. 2 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<.8 - 
P<. 3 
 
P<. OOOS+ 
P<. 02 + 
P<. 2 
 
P.1. - 
P<. 7 
 
P<. 05 a 
P<.4 
Pal. 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl IDose llne 2Dose 2Inc 
 
b c01718 16.9mg 1.09gm 
 
c c01718 27.8mg 202.mg 
d c01718 38.7mg n.s.s. 
 
* c01718 50.0mg n.s.s. 
f c01718 50.0mg n.s.s. 
g c01718 50.7mg n.s.s. 
o,p'-DDD 53-19-0 
 
752 1202 51.4mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1202 155.mg n.s.s. 
b 1202 31.8mg n.s.s. 
753 1202 52.0mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1202 76.1mg n.s.s. 
b 1202 86.3mg n.s.s. 
c 1202 37.2mg n.s.s. 
754 1202 155.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1202 155.mg n.s.s. 
b 1202 155.mg n.s.s. 
755 1202 30.9mg 1.80gm 
 
a 1202 44.2mg n.s.s. 
b 1202 76.1mg n.s.s. 
c 1202 17.8mg 111.mg 
 
0/45p 
0/45p 
0/45p 
0/45p 
0/45p 
0/45p 
 
1/17 
0/17 
2/17 
2/18 
0/18 
1/18 
3/18 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
 
12 .8mg 
12 .8go 
12.8go 
12 .8mg 
12.8mg 
12.8mg 
 
78.4mg 
78.4mg 
78.4mg 
73. 0mg 
73. 0mg 
73. 0mg 
73. 0mg 
78.4mg 
78.4mg 
78.4mg 
73. 0mg 
73. 0mg 
73. 0mg 
73. 0mg 
 
4/35 (25.6mg 
5/35 25.6mg 
4/35 25.6mg 
1/35 25.6mg 
0/35 25.6mg 
0/35 25.6mg 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
0/35) 
6/35 
3/35 
3/35 
3/35 
3/35 
 
3/18 
0/18 
6/18 
3/18 
1/18 
1/18 
5/18 
0/18 
0/18 
0/18 
5/18 
3/18 
1/18 
9/18 
 
Brkly Code 
per:fbs,srn. 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
p,p'-DDD (TDE) 72-54-8 
 
756 c00475 40.9mg n.s.s. 
 
a c00475 201.mg n.s.s. 
b c00475 240.mg n.s.s. 
757 79 40.7mg n.s.s. 
 
a 79 77.4mg n.s.s. 
b 79 40.7mg n.s.s. 
758 c00475 53.0mg n.s.s. 
 
a c00475 48.5mg n.s.s. 
b c00475 173.mg n.s.s. 
759 79 16.3mg 950.mg 
 
a 79 29.4mg n.s.s. 
b 79 14.0mg 212.mg 
760 79 20.7mg n.s.s. 
 
a 79 77.4mg n.s.s. 
b 79 13.2mg n.s.s. 
761 79 19.0mg n.s.s. 
 
a 79 67.8mg n.s.s. 
b 79 13.9mg n.s.s. 
762 80 21.8mg 115.mg 
 
a 80 328.mg n.s.s. 
b 80 18.5mg n.s.s. 
763 80 13.5mg 68.6mg 
 
a 80 37.6mg n.s.s. 
b 80 9.92mg n.s.s. 
764 c00475 59.0mg n.s.s. 
 
a c00475 295.mg n.s.s. 
765 c00475 35.9mg n.s.s. 
 
a c00475 25.3mg n.s.s. 
b c00475 450.mg n.s.s. 
 
p,p'-DDE 72-55-9 
 
766 cOO555 6.69mg 14.3mg 
 
a cOO555 7.31mg 32.8mg 
b cOO555 6.69mg 14.3mg 
c cOO555 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
767 cOO555 6.68mg n.s.s. 
 
a cOO555 4.86mg n.s.s. 
b cOO555 6.68mg n.s.s. 
c cOO555 35.8mg n.s.s. 
768 80 6.80mg 16.3mg 
 
a 80 231.mg n.s.s. 
b 80 8.34mg 32.3mg 
769 80 18.4mg 103.mg 
 
a 80 136.mg n.s.s. 
b 80 35.9mg n.s.s. 
770 cOO555 15.5mg n.s.s. 
 
a cOO555 9.00mg n.s.s. 
b cOO555 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
771 cOO555 13.6mg n.s.s. 
 
a cOO555 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
 
DDT 50-29-3 
 
772 1179 59.9mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1179 154.mg n.s.s. 
773 1400 34.8mg n.s.s. 
 
2/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
8/20 
2/20 
1/20 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
1/17 
0/17 
2/17 
2/18 
1/18 
3/18 
37/97 
 
1/97 
79/97 
53/101 
33/101 
89/101 
17/20 
 
1/20 
1/20 
7/20 
1/20 
 
0/20 
5/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
1/97 
37/97 
48/97 
33/101 
53/101 
89/101 
 
2/20 
16/20 
0/20 
9/20 
0/20 
 
45.5mg 13/50 (89.7mg 6/50) 
45.5mg 2/50 89.7mg 4/50 
45.5mg 4/50 89.7mg 1/50 
41.4mg 1/17 
41.4mg 0/17 
41.4mg 1/17 
 
42.0mg 19/50 84.0mg 19/50 
42.0mg 12/50 84.0mg 14/50 
42.0mg 4/50 84.0mg 2/50 
38.5mg 5/18 
38.5mg 2/18 
38.5mg 6/18 
41.4mg 4/17 
41.4mg 0/17 
41.4mg 7/17 
38.5mg 4/16 
38.5mg 0/16 
38.5mg 6/16 
32.5mg 43/60 
32.5mg 1/60 
32.5mg 53/60 
30.0mg 51/60 
30.0mg 31/60 
30.0mg 57/60 
 
29.0mg 35/50 59.0mg 36/50 
29.0mg 0/50 59.0mg 3/50 
45.6mg 16/50 (91.2mg 11/50) 
45.6mg 33/50 (91.2mg 25/50) 
45.6mg 1/50 91.2mg 2/50 
 
15.6mg 
15.6mg 
15.6mg 
15.6mg 
15.6mg 
15.6mg 
15.6mg 
15.6mg 
32.5mg 
32. 5mg 
32.5mg 
30. 0mg 
30. 0mg 
30. 0mg 
8. 40mg 
8.40mg 
8.40mg 
12. 0mg 
12. 0mg 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun: a/a, a/c. 
 
Innes;ntis,1968/1969 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
Tomatis; jnci ,52,883-891; 1974 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
thy:fca,fcc. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
19/50 28.6mg 34/50 
25/50 28.6mg 35/50 
19/50 28.6mg 34/50 
0/50 28.6mg 0/50 
7/50 26.4mg 17/50 
15/50 26.4mg 22/50 
7/50 26.4mg 17/50 
1/50 26.4mg 2/50 
54/60 
9/60 
54/60 
39/60 
19/60 
48/60 
 
9/50 14.4mg 12/50 
36/50 14.4mg 29/50 
 
0/50 14.4mg 0/50 
21/50 23.2mg 20/50 
 
0/50 23.2mg 0/50 
 
0/39 13.1mg 0/28 26.1mg 0/28 52.3mg 0/40 
5/39 13.1mg 3/28 26.1mg 2/28 52.3mg 8/40 
3/6 28.5mg 3/17 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Tomatis; Jnci ,52,883-891; 1974 
 
thy:fca,fcc. S 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Cabral ;tumo,68,5- 10;1982 
Agthe;pseb, 134,113-116;1970 
 
89 
 
90 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
774 H N syg set Liv mix 28e28 e 
 
a H msyg *ttb n mix 28m28 e 
775 H m syg eat tba mix 48w85 e 
776 N f b6c eet ... Lym 78w92 v 
 
a Nfb6c set TBA NXB 78w92 v 
b N f b6c eat liv NXB 78w92 v 
c Nfb6c eat lun NXB 78w92 v 
 
777 N f b6c orl liv hpt SOwBO evx 
 
a N f b6c orl lun mix 80w80 evx 
b N f b6c orl tbe mix 80w80 evx 
778 N m b6c eat TBA NXB 78w91 cv 
 
a N m b6c eat liv NXB 78w91 cv 
b N m b6c eat Lun NXB 78w91 sv 
 
779 N m b6c orl liv hpt 80w80 evx 
 
a N m b6c orL Lun ad 80W80 evx 
b N m b6c orl lun car 80w80 evx 
c N m b6c orl tba mix 80w80 evx 
780 N f b6 orL --- rts 80w80 evx 
 
a N f b6a orl liv hpt 80w80 *vx 
b N f b6a orL lun ods 80w80 evx 
c N f b6a orl tba mix 80w80 evx 
781 N m b6a orl liv hpt 80w80 *vx 
 
a N m b6a orl lun ade 80w80 evx 
b N m b6a orl tba mix 80w80 evx 
782 N f bal eat liv Lct 31m31 eg 
 
a f bal eat lun ado 31m31 9 
b N f bal oat tba mix 31m31 9 
783 N f cfl et liv hpt 7m28 
 
a N f cfl at tba tum 7W28 
784 N f cfl eat liv hpt 30w95 
 
a N f cfl at tba tum 3095 
785 N f cfl eat liv hpt 30w65 
 
a N f cfI oat tba tum 30w65 
 
786 N f cfI at Liv mix 26m26 e 
 
a N f cfl eat liv Lpb 26m26 e 
b N f cfl eat lun ode 26m26 e 
c N f cfl at lun car 26m26 e 
787 N f cfl eat liv mix 26m26 e 
 
a N f cfl eat liv Lct 26m26 e 
b N f cfl eat lun tum 26m26 e 
 
788 f cfl eat liv hpt 31m31 og 
 
a N f cf1 oat Lun tum 31m31 eg 
b N f cfl et uto tum 31m3I eg 
c N f cfl eat tba mix 31m31 eg 
789 N m cfI eat liv hpt 7m28 
 
a N a cf1 set tba tum 7m28 
790 N m cfl at liv hpt 30w95 
 
a N a cfi eat tba tum 30w95 
791 N m cfi set liv hpt 30w65 
 
a N a cfl eat tbe tum 30w65 
 
792 N m cfl eat liv mix 26m26 e 
 
a N m cfl eat liv Lpb 26m26 e 
b N*cf oat lun ade 26m26 e 
c Nmcfl et lun car 26m26 e 
793 N m cfl eat liv mix 26m26 e 
 
a N cf1 eat Liv Lct 26m26 e 
b N m cfl eat lun tum 26m26 e 
794 N m cfl eat liv hpt 29m31 e 
 
a N*cfl eat lun tum 29m3l 
 
b N*cfl oat tba mix 29m3l e 
795 R f os eat TBA NXB 18626 v 
 
a R f os eat liv NXS 18626 v 
796 R f os et liv hpt 27m27 
 
a R f os eat tba mix 27m27 
797 R f os eat liv mal 24m24 
 
798 R oem et TBA NXB 18626 v 
 
a R a osm at liv NXB 18626 v 
799 R m osm eat liv tum 27m27 
 
a R m os eat tba mix 27m27 
800 R m osm eat Liv mal 24m24 
 
801 R b alb eat liv tum 60w60 k 
802 R f por eat liv tct 33m33 
 
a Rf por eat tba mix 33m33 
803 Rf por eat Liv Lct 33033 
 
a R m por eat tba mix 33m33 
 
804 R f wis eat liv hpt 34m34 ev 
 
a Rfwis set tb mix 34m34 v 
805 R m wias eat liv hpt 34m34 e 
 
a R wis eat tba mix 34m34 
 
TD5O 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
311.mg Z P<.03 
 
145.mg * P<.02 - 
113.mg P<.2 - 
#61.2mg * P<.02 - 
 
59.2mg * P<.2 
 
151.mg * P<.09 
no dre P.1. 
 
31.1mg P<.02 
no dre P-1. 
 
24.0mg P<.009 
 
2.04mg \ P<.4 - 
no dre P-I. 
no dre P-I. 
 
8.95mg P<.0005+ 
127.mg P<.3 
127.mg P<.3 
 
7.69mg P<.0005 
 
19.3mg P<.003 + 
137.mg P<.3 
no dre PaI. 
 
21.3mg P<.07 
 
16.7mg P<.02 + 
no dre Pal. 
 
17.9mg P<.07 
 
59.5mg * P<.0005+ 
no dre Pl.1 
no dre P-I. 
 
34.2mg P<.0005+ 
no dre P-I. 
 
26.3mg P<.0005+ 
17.9mg P<.4 
 
52.2mg P<.0l + 
150.mg P<.9 
 
9.11mg * P<.0005. 
76.5mg * P<.007 
 
no dre PaI. - 
no dre P-I. - 
5.82mg P<.0005+ 
20.0mg P<.0005+ 
no dre Pal. - 
43.0mg * P<.0005+ 
121.mg * P<.04 - 
no dre P-I. - 
106.mg * P<.5 
 
12.5mg P<.002 + 
no dre P-1. 
 
6.70mg P<.0005+ 
4.59mg P<.02 
 
4.55mg P<.0005+ 
5.35mg P<.02 
 
15.0mg * P<.0005+ 
72.6mg * P<.02 
 
49.3mg * P<.4 - 
no dre P-I. - 
8.04mg P<.0005+ 
30.3mg P<.003 + 
no dre Pal. - 
34.7mg * P<.0005+ 
no dre P-1. - 
no dre P.1. 
 
no dre P-1. - 
no dre Pal. 
 
256.mg P<.3 - 
no dre P-1. - 
no dre P-I. - 
no dre P-I. - 
no dre P-I. 
 
no dre P-I. - 
no dre PaI. - 
no dre PaI. - 
no dre PaI. - 
140.mg * P<.002 + 
no dre P-I. 
 
902.mg * P<.4 - 
90.1mg * P<.3 
 
57.2mg P<.0005+ 
116.mg P<.4 
 
92.6mg P<.0005+ 
no dre PaI. 
 
*+ 
 
*+ 
*+ 
 
* + 
 
*+ 
 
* + . 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf 
 
774 1179 94.1mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1179 68.7mg n.s.s. 
775 1400 34.1mg n.s.s. 
776 c00464 29.8mg n.s.s. 
 
a c00464 22.4mg n.s.s. 
b c00464 52.1mg n.s.s. 
c c00464 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
777 133 10.7mg n.s.s. 
 
a 133 42.3mg n.s.s. 
b 133 9.05mg 526.mg 
778 c00464 .345mg n.a.s. 
 
a c00464 4.67mg n.s.s. 
b c00464 4.67mg n.s.s. 
779 133 4.24mg 23.7mg 
 
a 133 20.7mg n.s.s. 
b 133 20.7mg n.s.s. 
c 133 3.72mg 19.2mg 
780 133 7.78mg 106.mg 
 
a 133 22.2mg n.s.s. 
b 133 42.3mg n.s.s. 
c 133 7.42mg n.s.s. 
781 133 6.56mg n.s.s. 
 
a 133 18.5mg n.s.s. 
b 133 6.21mg n.s.s. 
782 88 37.8mg 101.mg 
 
a 88 238.mg n.s.s. 
b 88 73.1mg n.s.s. 
783 1012 16.7mg 99.9mg 
 
a 1012 13.0mg n.s.s. 
784 1012 13.2mg 64.3mg 
 
a 1012. 4.65mg n.s.s. 
785 1012n 18.0mg 5.13gm 
 
a 1012n 9.20mg n.s.s. 
786 103 5.53mg 18.6mg 
 
a 103 31.2mg 895.mg 
b 103 52.1mg n.s.s. 
c 103 48.8mg n.s.s. 
787 89 3.06mg 13.0mg 
 
a 89 10.2mg 47.1mg 
b 89 40.4mg n.s.s. 
788 90 28.1mg 71.8mg 
 
a 90 47.7mg n.s.s. 
b 90 334.mg n.s.s. 
c 90 20.1mg n.s.s. 
789 1012 6.40mg 53. 1mg 
 
a 1012 8.22mg n.s.s. 
790 1012m 3.86mg 15.9mg 
 
a 1012m 1.90mg n.s.s. 
791 1012n 2.76mg 9.13mg 
 
a 1012n 2.39mg n.s.s. 
792 103 8.40mg 43.3mg 
 
a 103 29.6mg n.s.s. 
b 103 12.9mg n.s.s. 
c 103 30.6mg n.s.s. 
793 89 4.17mg 21.3mg 
 
a 89 13.1mg 195.mg 
b 89 29.5mg n.s.s. 
794 90 19.4mg 86.6mg 
 
a 90 151.mg n.s.s. 
b 90 24.9mg n.s.s. 
795 c00464 16.8mg n.s.s. 
 
a c00464 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
796 21 41.7mg n.s.s. 
 
a 21 24.3mg n.s.s. 
797 84a 24.7mg n.s.s. 
798 c00464 14.2mg n.a.s. 
 
a c00464 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
799 21 62.6mg n.s.s. 
 
a 21 37.8mg n.s.s. 
800 84a 19.8mg n.s.s. 
801 1457 .148mg n.a.s. 
802 1178 74.0mg 552.mg 
 
a 1178 47.0mg n.s.s. 
803 1178 174.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1178 24.5mg n.s.s. 
804 85 31.1mg 122.mg 
 
a 85 29.5mg n.s.s. 
805 85 43.5mg 272.mg 
 
a 85 42.6mg n.s.s. 
 
Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
0/40 
3/40 
0/11 
0/20 
2/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
4/20 
2/20 
1/20 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/17 
0/17 
1/17 
2/17 
1/18 
2/18 
3/18 
0/50 
20/62 
56/62 
 
1/90 
77/90 
 
0/72 
52/72 
 
0/69 
27/69 
 
8/47 
0/47 
19/47 
3/47 
10/44 
0/44 
27/44 
 
2/56 
13/56 
2/56 
45/56 
33/98 
83/98 
24/83 
65/83 
12/70 
42/70 
 
6/47 
0/47 
18/47 
0/47 
11/45 
 
2/45 
27/45 
12/55 
23/55 
46/55 
16/20 
0/20 
0/30 
13/30 
 
1/30 
10/20 
0/20 
0/30 
1/30 
0/30 
0/6 
0/38 
32/38 
 
1/38 
20/38 
 
0/32 
19/35 
0/35 
19/36 
 
11.5m9 
11.5m9 
26. 0mg 
9. 50mg 
9. 50mg 
9. 50mg 
9.50g9 
19.3mg 
19.3mg 
19.3mg 
2.30mg 
2.30mg 
2.30mg 
17.9mg 
17.9mg 
17.9mg 
17.9mg 
19.3mg 
19.3mg 
19. 3mg 
19.3mg 
17.9mg 
17.9mg 
17.9mg 
.260mg 
.260mg 
.260mg 
8.13mg 
8.13mg 
10. 3mg 
10.3mg 
15.0mg 
15.Omg 
6. 50mg 
6. 50mg 
6. 50mg 
6. 50mg 
12.6mg 
12.6mg 
12.6mg 
.260mg 
.260mg 
.260mg 
.260mg 
7. 50mg 
7. 50mg 
9.47mg 
9.47mg 
13 .8mg 
13.8mg 
6. 00mg 
6. 00mg 
6. 00mg 
6. 00mg 
11.7mg 
11.7mg 
11.7mg 
.240mg 
.240mg 
.240mg 
7.40mg 
7.40mg 
10. 0mg 
 
1 0. 0mg 
4. 00mg 
8.80mg 
8.80mg 
8. 00mg 
8. 00mg 
 
3.20mg 
.360mg 
6.25mg 
6.25mg 
5.00mg 
5.00mg 
 
25. 0mg 
25. 0mg 
20.0mg 
20 .0mg 
 
0/30 23.0mg 3/31 (46.0mg 0/39) 
5/30 23.0mg 8/31 46.0mg 11/39 
3/30 
 
3/50 19.5mg 7/50 
8/50 19.5m9 10/50 
1/50 19.5mg 3/50 
1/50 19.5mg 0/50 
4/18 
0/18 
5/18 
 
6/50 (4.40mg 4/50) 
1/50 4.40mg 1/50 
1/50 4.40mg 0/50 
10/18 
 
1/18 
1/18 
11/18 
6/18 
1/18 
0/18 
7/18 
7/18 
2/18 
8/18 
 
0/58 2.60mg 1/50 32.5mg 28/57 
20/63 2.60mg 20/61 32.5mg 14/63 
51/63 2.60mg 48/61 32.5mg 48/63 
11/54 
41/54 
11/55 
44/55 
 
4/54 
22/54 
 
15/30 13.0mg 24/32 
2/30 13.0mg 4/32 
6/30 13.0mg 7/32 
5/30 13.0mg 1/32 
26/30 
12/30 
9/30 
 
3/56 1.30mg 2/59 6.50mg 7/55 32.5mg 31/49 
17/56 1.30mg 22/59 6.50mg 23/55 32.5mg 23/49 
8/56 1.30mg 3/59 6.50mg 4/55 32.5mg 2/49 
50/56 1.30mg 52/59 6.50mg 48/55 32.5mg 44/49 
37/60 
49/60 
41/60 
56/60 
38/60 
48/60 
 
12/32 12.0mg 17/32 
3/32 12.0mg 3/32 
13/32 12.0mg 16/32 
0/32 12.0mg 0/32 
23/30 
 
9/30 
11/30 
 
25/58 1.20mg 28/53 6.00mg 24/53 30.0mg 38/50 
38/58 1.20mg 29/53 6.00mg 27/53 30.0mg 19/50 
53/58 1.20mg 48/53 6.00mg 49/53 30.0mg 44/50 
38/50 15.0mg 27/50 
 
0/50 15.0mg 0/50 
1/30 
9/30 
0/30 
 
29/50 18.4mg 32/50 
 
0/50 18.4mg 0/50 
0/30 
1/30 
0/30 
0/6 
 
2/30 12.5mg 4/30 25.0mg 7/38 
26/30 12.5mg 27/30 25.0mg 27/38 
 
0/30 10.0mg 1/30 20.0mg 2/38 
19/30 10.0mg 18/30 20.0mg 25/38 
15/34 
23/35 
9/36 
19/37 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
Brkly Code 
CabraL ;tumo,68,5- 10;1982 
 
Agths;psmb, 134,113-116;1970 
 
S 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun: a/a,a/c. 
 
Innms;ntis,1968/1969 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
Tarracini; i jcn,11,747-764;1973 
 
Tomatis;zkko,82,25-35; 1974 
 
Walker;fctx, 11,415.432;1973 
Thorps;fctx, 11,433-442;1973 
Tomatis;i jcn,10,489-506;1972 
 
Tomatis;zkko,82,25-35;1974 
Walkmr;fctx,11,415-432;1973 
Thorpe;fctx, 11,433-442;1973 
Tomatis; i jcn, 10,489-506;1972 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
D.ichmann;txap, 11,88-103;1967 
 
Radomski;txap,7,652-656;1965 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Dsichmann;txap, 11,88-103;1967 
 
Radomaki;txap,7,652-656; 1965 
 
Cammron;bmj L ,2,819-821; 1951 
 
Cabral;tumo,68,11-17;1982 
 
Rossi;i jcn,19,179.185;1977 
 
91 
 
92 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
TD5O 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
DESERPIDINE bO0ng. . ... : ug 10. :100.. :lg . :10. :100. :Ig . :10 
 
806 R b wis eat mix mix 78w78 r .> 1.28mg 
N-1-DIACETAMIDOFLUORENE lOOng. .... l :ug . 10. :100. : g... : 10. :100.. : . :10 
 
807 R f buf eat pit ado 53w93 a . * 8.63mg 
 
a R f buf eat mgL adc 53w93 a 19.0mg 
b R f buf oat liv hem 53w93 a 61.2mg 
c R f buf mat *du sqc 53w93 m 61.2mg 
DIALLATE lO0ng .. :.Iug.... : 10. : 100. : .g :10... :100. : Ig . : 10 
 
808 M f b6a ort Liv hpt 85w85 evx .> 516.mg 
 
a M f b6a ort lun ad. 85w85 evx 4.26gm 
b N f b6a orl tba mix 85w85 evx 1.99gm 
809 N m b6a orl Liv hpt 84w84 mvx . + . 43.0mg 
 
a N a b6a ort lun ad. 84w84 mvx 243.mg 
b N a b6a ort tba mix 84w84 mvx 35.4mg 
810 N f b6c ort Liv mix 83w83 evx . 164.mg 
 
a N f b6c ort lun ad. 83w83 evx 255.mg 
b N f b6c ort tba mix 83w83 mvx 90.8mg 
811 N m b6c ort liv hpt 84w84 *vx . + . 19.4mg 
 
a N a b6c ort lun ad. 84w84 *vx 113.mg 
b N a b6c ort tba mix 84w84 evx 15.6mg 
4,6.DIAMINO-2-(5-NITRO-2-FURYL)-s-TRIAZINE.. ......10 ... ...A........lmg.... ::100 .ag . :10 . 100. : Ig . : 10 
 
812 R f sda oat mgt mix 46w66 * . + . 1.71mg 
 
a R f ada mat mgt adc 46w66 a 4.49mg 
b R f ada mat liv tum 46w66 a no dre 
c R f sda eat tba mix 46w66 * 1.71mg 
 
2,4-DIAMINOANISOLE SULFATE 
 
813 M f b6c mat --- lym 78w96 
 
a N f b6c mat thy MXA 78w96 
b N f b6c mat thy f ca 78w96 
c N f b6c mat TBA NXB 78w96 
d N f b6c mat Liv NXB 78w96 
 
a N f b6c mat lun MXB 78w96 
814 N a b6c mat thy fca 78w96 
 
a N m b6c mat TBA MXB 78w96 
b N a b6c mat liv NXB 78w96 
c N a b6c mat lun MXB 78w96 
 
815 R f f34 mat MXB NXB 18m25 v 
 
a R f f34 sat MXA MXA I8m25 v 
b R f f34 eat cli NXA 18m25 v 
c R f f34 sat thy MXA 18m25 v 
d R f f34 eat zym sc l8m25 v 
 
a R f f34 sat TBA NXB 18m25 v 
f R f f34 sat Liv NXB 18m25 v 
816 R f f34 mat cli mix 83w86 am 
 
a R f f34 mat cli smc 83w86 am 
 
b R f f34 mat thy mix 83w86 ae 
c R f f34 mat thy fca 83w86 mo 
d R f f34 mat mgl mix 83w86 am 
 
a R f f34 mat tba mix 83w86 am 
817 R a f34 oat MXB MXB 18m25 v 
 
a R m f34 eat thy MXA 18m25 v 
b R m f34 sat thy acn l8m25 v 
c R f f34 eat thy MXA l8m25 v 
d R * f34 sat pr MXA 18m25 v 
* R f f34 sat ski MXA l8m25 v 
f R m f34 eat pr MXA l8m25 v 
g R f f34 sat NXA NXA 18m25 v 
h R f f34 sat TBA NXB 18m25 v 
i R m f34 eat Liv MXB 18m25 v 
 
lOOng .. : lug. :10. :100. g :1g. :10.. :100.. :. :10 
 
+ 262.mg \ P<.005 
 
1.069m / P<.0005c 
1.45gm * P<.002 c 
311.mg * P<.02 
7.359m * P<.6 
10.9gm * P<.9 
 
+ 791.mg / P<.0005c 
 
354.mg * P<.04 
926.mg * P<.2 
2.569m P<.5 
 
+ 301.mg * P<.0005 
 
408.mg * P<.0005 
416.mg * P<.003 
 
425.mg * P<.0005c 
665.mg * P<.0005c 
181.mg * P<.09 
14.5gm * P<.8 
 
113.mg Z P<.0005+ 
162.mg Z P<.0005+ 
162.mg Z P<.0005+ 
296.mg Z P<.0005 
 
1.29gm * P<.5 + 
67.3mg * P<.0005 
72.6mg * P<.0005 
 
192.mg * P<.0005c 
252.mg * P<.0005c 
319.mg * P<.0005c 
351.ag * P<.0005c 
358.mg * P<.0005c 
530.mg * P<.002 c 
709.mg * P<.0005c 
135.mg * P<.03 
1.61gm * P<.3 
 
2,4-DIAMINOTOLUENE l1Ong... . lug. :10. :100. g : ng. :10. :100.. : . :10 
 
818 N f b6c mat NXB NXB 23m23 + : 7.18mg \ P<.002 
 
a N f b6c at ...NXA 23m23 10.6mg \ P<.004 a 
b N f b6c mat Liv hpc 23m23 26.7mg * P<.002 c 
c N f b6c mat TBA NXB 23a23 8.64mg \ P<.01 
 
d N f b6c mat Liv MXB 23m23 26.7mg * P<.002 
 
m N f b6c mat lun MXB 23m23 no dre P-1. 
 
819 M n b6c mat Lun a/c 23a23 A #35.8mg \ P<.02 - 
 
a N m b6c mat TBA NXB 23m23 105.mg * P<.7 
b N a b6c mat liv NXB 23m23 no dre P-1. 
 
c N a b6c mat lun NXB 23m23 35.8mg \ P<.02 
 
820 R f f34 mat NXB NXB 22m24 asv + 1.43mg I P<.0005 
 
a R f f34 mat agl ada 22m24 asv 1.46mg a P<.OOOSc 
b R f f34 mat agl NXA 22m24 asv 5.54mg * P<.0005c 
 
P<.6 - 
 
P<.03 
 
P<.03 + 
P<. 3 
 
P<.3 + 
 
P<. 3 
P<1 . 
P<.9 
 
P<.002 + 
P<. 4 
 
P<. 003 
P<.04 
P<.09 
 
P<. 006 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<.02 
 
P<. 0005 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005 
P-I. 
 
P<. 0005 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
DESERPIDINE 131-01-1 
 
806 1188 .272mg n.s.s. 17/130 100.ug 36/230 
N-1-DIACETAMIDOFLUORENE - - - 
 
807 144 3.14mg n.s.s. 2/18 7.21mg 7/16 
 
a 144 5.74mg n.s.s. 0/18 7.21mg 3/16 
b 144 9.96mg n.s.s. 0/18 7.21mg 1/16 
c 144 9.96mg n.s.s. 0/18 7.21mg 1/16 
 
DIALLATE (Avadex) 2303-16-4 
 
808 1219 84.0mg n.s.s. 0/17 
 
a 1219 94.1mg n.s.s. 1/17 
b 1219 73.2mg n.s.s. 2/17 
809 1219 19.5mg 172.mg 1/18 
 
a 1219 50.7mg n.s.s. 2/18 
b 1219 15.6mg 210.mg 3/18 
810 1219 49.4mg n.s.s. 0/16 
 
a 1219 62.5mg n.s.s. 0/16 
b 1219 34.1mg 898.mg 0/16 
811 1219 9.11mg 46.4mg 0/16 
 
a 1219 38.7mg n.s.s. 0/16 
b 1219 7.03mg 37.3mg 0/16 
 
77.8mg 
77.8mg 
77. 8mg 
72.5mg 
72.5mg 
72.5mg 
77.9mg 
77.9mg 
77.9mg 
72.5mg 
72. 5mg 
72.5mg 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
93 
 
Brklv Code 
 
Tuchmann-Duplessis;adsc,254, 1535*1537;1962 
 
Morris;jnci ,24,149-180;1960 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
1/15 
1/15 
2/15 
10/18 
4/18 
12/18 
3/16 
2/16 
5/16 
13/16 
4/16 
14/16 
 
4,6-DIAMINO-2-(5-NITRO-2-FURYL)-s-TRIAZINE 720-69-4 
812 200a .895mg 3.23mg 2/39 17.4mg 33/35 
 
a 200a 2.66mg 8.28mg 0/39 17.4mg 23/35 
b 200a 50.6mg n.s.s. 0/39 17.4mg 0/35 
c 200a .895mg 3.23mg 2/39 17.4mg 33/35 
 
2,4-DIANINOANISOLE SULFATE 
813 c01989 116.mg 2.51gm 
 
a c01989 480.mg 3.18gm 
b c01989 591.mg 5.879m 
c c01989 145.mg n.s.s. 
d c01989 1.039m n.s.s. 
o c01989 716.mg n.s.s. 
814 c01989 383.mg 2.47gm 
 
a c01989 148.mg n.s.s. 
b c01989 296.mg n.s.s. 
c c01989 480.mg n.s.s. 
815 c01989 155.mg 785.mg 
 
a c01989 191.mg 1.11gm 
b c01989 184.mg 2.88gm 
c c01989 195.mg 1.62gm 
d c01989 284.mg 2.08gm 
o c01989 65.1mg n.s.s. 
f c01989 773.mg n.s.s. 
816 1027 68.8mg 206.mg 
 
a 1027 91.4mg 336.mg 
b 1027 107.mg 267.mg 
c 1027 178.mg 545.mg 
d 1027 297.mg n.s.s. 
a 1027 47.3mg 103.mg 
817 c01989 48.0mg 123.mg 
 
a c01989 107.mg 430.mg 
b c01989 131.mg 648.mg 
c c01989 154.mg 1.27gm 
d c01989 171.mg 954.mg 
o c01989 177.mg 875.mg 
f c01989 228.mg 2.44gm 
g c01989 305.mg 2.51gm 
h c01989 57.5mg n.s.s. 
i c01989 356.mg n.s.s. 
 
2,4-DIAMINOTOLUENE 95-80-i 
818 c02302 4.32mg 24.3mg 
 
a c02302 5.93mg 75.5mg 
b c02302 17.3mg 99.8mg 
c c02302 4.52mg 629.mg 
d c02302 17.3mg 99.8mg 
a c02302 134.mg n.s.s. 
819 c02302 16.9mg n.s.s. 
 
a c02302 17.4mg n.s.s. 
b c02302 34.9mg n.s.s. 
c c02302 16.9mg n.s.s. 
820 c02302 .984mg 2.24mg 
 
a c02302 1.00mg 2.33mg 
b c02302 3.14mg 11.5mg 
 
Cohon; Jnci ,51,403-417;1973 
 
(NCI uses CAS# 615-05-4) 39156-41-7 
 
7/100 126.mg 14/50 (253.mg 9/50) S 
0/100 126.mg 0/50 253.mg 8/50 thy:fca,fcc. 
0/100 126.mg 0/50 253.mg 6/50 
30/100 126.mg 25/50 253.mg 30/50 
 
2/100 126.mg 1/50 253.mg 2/50 L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
7/100 126.mg 5/50 253.mg 4/50 Lun:a/a,a/c. 
1/100 116.mg 0/50 234.mg 11/50 
39/100 116.mg 24/50 234.mg 33/50 
 
15/100 116.mg 14/50 234.mg 12/50 L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
16/100 116.mg 3/50 234.mg 12/50 Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
3/100 44.0mg 1/50 182.mg 14/50 thy:acn,fcc,pcn; zym:sec. C 
0/100 44.0mg 4/50 182.mg 5/50 cli:can; utm:acn,can,ppc. S 
3/100 44.0mg 5/50 182.mg 8/50 cLi:adn,can,cyn,sqc,sqp. S 
3/100 44.0mg 1/50 182.mg 10/50 thy:acn,fcc,pcn. 
0/100 44.0mg 0/50 182.mg 7/50 
70/100 44.0mg 44/50 182.mg 37/50 
 
2/100 44.0mg 0/50 182.mg 1/50 L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
0/37 60.0mg 8/47 120.mg 15/33 (250.mg 9/40) Evarts;jnci,65,197-204;1980 
0/37 60.0mg 5/47 120-mg 12/33 (250.mg 9/40) 
1/37 60.0mg 2/47 120.mg 3/33 250.mg 31/40 
0/37 60.0mg 0/47 120.mg 1/33 250.mg 21/40 
2/37 60.0mg 7/47 120.mg 8/33 250.mg 5/40 
3/37 60.0mg 14/47 120.mg 19/33 250.mg 36/40 
 
4/99 35.2mg 11/50 146.mg 36/50 eac:sec,sqc; ear:sqc; pro:adn,can,cyn,ppa; ski:bcc,soc; 
 
thy:acn,ccr,fcc,pac,pcn; zym:soc. C 
2/99 35.2mg 2/50 146.mg 17/50 thy:acn,fcc,pac,pcn. 
 
2/99 
2/99 
0/99 
0/99 
0/99 
0/99 
52/99 
1/99 
 
2/20 
2/20 
0/20 
5/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
10/20 
5/20 
0/20 
1/20 
1/20 
0/20 
 
35.2mg 
35.2mg 
35.2mg 
35.2mg 
35.2mg 
35 .2mg 
35. 2mg 
35. 2mg 
 
13. 0mg 
13. 0mg 
13. 0mg 
13. 0mg 
13. 0mg 
13. 0mg 
12. 0mg 
12. 0mg 
12.0mg 
12. 0mg 
3.95mg 
3.95mg 
3.95mg 
 
1/50 146.mg 
4/50 146.mg 
2/50 146.mg 
2/50 146.mg 
2/50 146.mg 
1/50 146.mg 
35/50 146.mg 
 
2/50 146.mg 
 
36/50 (26.0mg 
29/50 (26.0mg 
13/50 26.0mg 
40/50 (26.0mg 
13/50 26.0mg 
2/50 26.0mg 
9/50 (24.0mg 
31/50 24.0mg 
17/50 24.0mg 
9/50 (24.0mg 
34/50 8.55mg 
34/50 8.55mg 
11/50 8.55mg 
 
14/50 
10/50 
8/50 
9/50 
5/50 
6/50 
41/50 
 
2/50 
 
thy: cca, ccr-. 
pre: adn, can, cyn,ppa. 
 
ski :bcc,soc,sqc. 
pro:adn,cyn,ppa. 
oac:sec,sqc; oar: sqc; zym:sec. 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
24/50) 
11/50) 
18/50 
26/50) 
18/50 
0/50 
6/50) 
30/50 
13/50 
6/50) 
41/50 
38/50 
14/50 
 
---:Lou,Lym; tiv:hpc. T 
 
--- :Lou, Lym. 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
liv:hpc,nnd; mgL:ado,ado,car. C 
 
mgL:ado,car. 
 
7 
 
94 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
c R f f34 *at mgL car 22.24 amv 
d R f f34 *at sub fib 22.24 asv 
a R f f34 eat Liv NXA 22.24 asv 
f R f f 34 eat TBA NXB 22.24 asv 
g R f f34 eat Liv NXB 22.24 asv 
821 R m f34 oat sub fib 21.24 asv 
 
a R m f34 eat --- uso 21.24 asv 
b R m f34 eat liv NXA 21.24 Isv 
c R m f34 eat sub Lip 21.24 ssv 
d R m f34 oat TBA NXB 21.24 ssv 
a R m f34 sat Liv NXB 21.24 asv 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
TD50 2Thilpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
8.98mg * P<.002 
16.4mg * P<.002 
 
58.0mg * P<.02 c 
1.46mg / P<.0005 
58.0mg * P<.02 
 
2.52sg / P<.0005 
6.81mg P<.0005 
8.11mg P<.0005c 
13.2mg * P<.002 
 
.991mg I P<.0005 
8.11mg I P<.0005 
 
2,4-DIANINOTOLUENE.2HCL lOOng.. : . lu g 10. :100. g :1 .. :10. :100. : .19 :10 
 
822 N f chi eat Lun mix 77w90 + 72.0mg \ P<.007 - 
 
a N f chi sat Liv mix 77w90 180.09 * P<.09 
b N f chi eat tba mix 77w90 100.mg \ P<.4 
 
823 N f chi eat Liv hpt 77w90 pooL + 206.mg * P<.006 + 
824 N m chi eat Liv mix 77w90 :> 191.mg P<.2 
 
a N m chi eat Lun mix 77w90 no dre P-1. 
b N m chi eat tba mix 77w90 no dre P-1. 
 
825 N m chi eat Liv hpt 77w90 pooL 201.mg * P<.1 + 
 
a N m chi eat ... vsc 77w9O 317.mg * P<.2 + 
826 R m cdr eat sub fib 64w73 av + 5.42mg I P<.0005+ 
 
a R m cdr eat Liv mix 64w73 av 26.2mg * P<.02 
 
b R m cdr eat tba mix 64w73 *v 2.98mg I P<.0005 
 
827 R m cdr eat sub fib 64w73 av pooL + 4.42mg / P<.0005+ 
 
a R f cdr eat Liv hpt 64w73 av 22.2mg * P<.003 * 
2,5-DIANINOTOLUENE SULFATE 100ng.. :. .ug. :10. :100.. g : .9 :10. :100.. :19 :10 
 
828 N f b6c eat Lun NXA 78w94 : #364.mg * P<.03 - 
 
a N f b6c eat TBA NXB 78w94 33.2gm * P<1. 
b N f b6c eat Liv NXB 78w94 1.969m * P<.6 
c N f b6c eat Lun NXB 78w94 364.mg * P<.03 
 
829 N m b6c eat TBA NXB 78w94 :> 272.mg * P<.3 - 
 
a N m b6c eat Liv NXB 78w94 288.g I P<.06 
b N m b6c eat Lun NXB 78w94 3.56g. * P<.9 
830 R f f34 eat TBA NXB 18M25 v :> no dre P-1. 
 
a R f f34 eat liv NXB 18m25 v no dre P-1. 
831 R m f34 eat TBA NXB 18m25 v :> no dre P-1. 
 
a R f f34 eat Liv NXS 18m25 v 233.mg \ P<.09 
DIAZINON 100ng..: ..ug. :10. :100. g : .g :10.. :100.. :1g :10 
 
832 N f b6c eat TBA NXB 24m24 :> 230.mg * P<.7 - 
 
a N f b6c eat Liv NXB 24m24 no dre P-1. 
b N f b6c eat Lun NXB 24m24 6.23gm * P<1. 
833 N m b6c eat TBA NXB 24m24 :> no dre P-1. 
 
a N m b6c eat liv NXB 24m24 26.8mg \ P<.2 
b N * b6c eat Lun NXB 24m24 no dre P-1. 
 
834 R f f34 *st.TBA NXB 24m24 :> 51.3mg * P<.4 - 
 
a R f f34 eat liv NXB 24m24 no dre P-1. 
 
835 R f134 eat --- NXA 24m24 A #20.4mg \ P<.03 - 
 
a R f f 34 eat TSA NXB 24m24 53.4mg \ P<.7 
b R m f34 eat Liv NXB 24m24 no dre P-I. 
 
DIBENZ(a,h)ANTHRACENE 
 
836 N m dba wat lun aLc 60w60 
 
DIBENZO.p-DIOXIN 
 
837 N f b6c eat TBA NXB 90"W91 a 
 
a N f b6c eat Liv NXS 90w91 s 
b N f b6c eat Lun NXB 90w9l s 
 
838 N m b6c set Lun a/c 88w92 as 
 
a N o b6c eat TBA NXB 88w92 as 
b N m b6c eat Liv NXB w92 as 
c N m b6c eat Lun NXB w92 as 
839 R f os. eat TBA NXB 26.26 s 
 
a R f osm eat Liv NXB 26.26 a 
840 R m os. eat TBA NXB 26.26 
 
a R f osm eat Liv NXS 26.26 
3. DIBENZOFURANANINE 
 
841 R m wis eat Liv hpt 89w89 a 
 
a R f wis eat tba ban 89w89 e 
b R . vis eat tba meL 89w89 a 
 
1,2.DIBRONO.3-CHLOROPROPANE 
 
842 N f b6c gav sto sqc 53w59 iv 
 
a N f b6c gav TBA NXB 53w59 iv 
b N f b6c gav Liv NXB 53v59 iv 
c N f b6c gav Lun NXS 53w59 av 
 
lOOng..: ..ug. :10.:100. g :. . :10.: 100. . : 1g :10 
 
. + . 5.88g P<.0005+ 
 
lOOng. .: ..ug :10. :100. g :.g :10. :100. :I . :10 
 
:> no dre Pl.. 
 
no dre P-1. 
8.09g * P<.2 
 
+ #2.84m \ P<.01 - 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
5.37gm * P<.08 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
100ng .. : lug. :10. :100..m :g .:10. :100 .. :ig .:10 
 
.> 9.44mg 
 
1.57mg 
2.48mg 
 
P<. 3 
 
P<. 06 
 
P<.02 + 
 
bOng.. :. .ug. :10. :100. 1m :g .:10. :100. :ig . :10 
 
: +: 4.29mg / P<.0005c 
 
4.29mg / P<.0005 
1.42gm * P<.3 
 
150.m9 * P<.04 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
c c02302 4.53mg 32.3mg 
d c02302 7.85mg 55.9mg 
a c02302 23.6mg n.s.a. 
f c02302 .918mg 2.96mg 
g c02302 23.6mg n.s.s. 
821 c02302 1.50mg 4.48mg 
 
a c02302 3.13m9 18.9mg 
b c02302 3.81mg 21.2mg 
c c02302 5.48mg 49.3mg 
d c02302 .627mg 1.85mg 
a c02302 3.81mg 21.2mg 
 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
13/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
13/20 
0/20 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
3.95mg 9/50 8.55mg 8/50 
3.95mg 4/50 8.55mg 10/50 
3.95mg 0/50 8.5509 6/50 
3.95mg 49/50 8.55mg 49/50 
3.95mg 0/50 8.55mg 6/50 
3.20mg 15/50 7.00mg 19/50 
3.20mg 5/50 7.00mg 8/50 
3.20mg 5/50 7.00mg 10/50 
3.20mg 3/50 7.00mg 8/50 
3.20mg 42/50 7.00mg 44/50 
3.20mg 5/50 7.00mg 10/50 
 
Brkly Code 
 
S 
 
liv:hpc,nnd. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Liv:hpc,nnd. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
2,4-DIAMINOTOLUENE.2HCL (2,4-toLu.nediamin..2HCL) 636-23-7 
 
822 381 29.3mg 894.mg 5/22 58.5mg 6/19 (111.mg 2/17) 
 
a 381 58.7mg n.s.s. 1/22 58.5mg 1/19 111.mg 5/17 
b 381 24.6mg n.s.s. 18/22 58.5mg 12/19 (111.mg 10/17) 
823 381 65.9mg 3.37gm 1/102p 58.5mg 1/19 111.mg 3/17 
824 381 54.2mg n.s.s. 1/18 54.0mg 2/22 103.mg 4/17 
 
a 381 118.mg n.s.s. 8/18 54.0mg 1/22 (103.mg 2/17) 
b 381 45.1mg n.s.s. 13/18 54.0mg 7/22 103.mg 11/17 
825 381 54.8mg n.s.s. 7/99p 54.0mg 2/22 103.mg 4/17 
 
a 381 76.7mg n.s.s. 5/99p 54.0mg 0/22 103.mg 4/17 
826 381 2.81mg 10.7mg 0/24 12.4mg 6/19 25.7mg 15/24 
 
a 381 6.43mg n.s.s. 0/24 12.4mg 1/19 25.7mg 3/24 
b 381 1.58mg 7.35mg 7/24 12.4mg 12/19 25.7mg 20/24 
827 381 2.27mg 10.2mg 14/hI1p 12.4mg 6/19 25.7mg 15/24 
 
a 381 5.70mg 263.mg 2/I1p 12.4mg 1/19 25.7mg 3/24 
 
Weisburger;jept,2,325-356;1978/pers.con ./RussfimLd 1973 
 
2,5-DIANINOTOLUENE SULFATE 
828 c01832 152.mg n.s.s. 
 
a c01832 128.mg n.s.s. 
b c01832 307.mg n.s.s. 
c c01832 152.mg n.s.s. 
829 c01832 83.9mg n.s.s. 
 
a c01832 113.mg n.s.s. 
b c01832 211.mg n.s.s. 
830 c01832 27.0mg n.s.s. 
 
a c01832 520.mg n.s.s. 
831 c01832 102.mg n.s.s. 
 
a c01832 57.1mg n.s.s. 
DIAZINON 333-41-5 
 
832 c08673 33.4mg n.s.s. 
 
a c08673 143.mg n.s.s. 
b c08673 139.mg n.s.s. 
833 c08673 29.6mg n.s.s. 
 
a c08673 9.56mg n.s.s. 
b c08673 126.mg n.s.s. 
834 c08673 14.7mg n.s.s. 
 
a c08673 231.mg n.s.s. 
835 c08673 9.49mg n.s.s. 
 
a c08673 7.64mg n.s.s. 
b c08673 203.mg n.s.s. 
 
(2,5-toLuenediamine sulfate) 6369-59-1 
5/100 64.7mg 6/50 104.mg 8/50 
42/100 64.7mg 15/50 104.mg 22/50 
 
5/100 64.7mg 2/50 104.mg 4/50 
5/100 64.7mg 6/50 104.mg 8/50 
38/100 59.8mg 19/50 96.5mg 27/50 
17/100 59.8mg 8/50 96.5mg 18/50 
17/100 59.8mg 6/50 96.5mg 10/50 
51/75 21.9mg 34/50 (71.6mg 33/50) 
 
4/75 21.9mg 1/50 71.6mg 1/50 
36/75 17.1mg 20/50 57.8mg 25/50 
 
0/75 17.1mg 2/50 (57.8mg 0/50) 
 
9/25 
2/25 
1/25 
12/25 
 
5/25 
2/25 
20/25 
 
1/25 
5/25 
20/25 
 
1/25 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. S 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
12.7mg 14/50 25.5mg 21/50 
12.7mg 0/50 25.5mg 3/50 
12.7mg 1/50 25.5mg 2/50 
11.8mg 30/50 23.5mg 24/50 
11.8mg 20/50 (23.5mg 13/50) 
11.8mg 3/50 23.5m9 1/50 
19.8mg 44/50 39.6mg 41/50 
19.8mg 1/50 39.6mg 0/50 
15.7mg 25/50 (31.4mg 12/50) 
15.7mg 41/50 (31.4mg 33/50) 
15.7mg 2/50 31.4mg 0/50 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
Liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
- -:Leu,Lym. S 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
DIBENZ(a,h)ANTHRACENE 53*70-3 
 
836 1128 3.03mg 13.2mg 0/25 
 
28.3mg 14/21 
 
Snot l;jnci, 28,1043-1051;1962 
 
DISENZO-p-DIOXIN 262-12-4 
 
837 c03656 1.74gm n.s.s. 15/50 
 
a c03656 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/50 
b c03656 2.28gm n.s.s. 3/50 
838 c03656 1.089m 289.9m 0/50 
 
a c03656 1.679m n.s.s. 19/50 
b c03656 3.33gm n.s.s. 8/50 
c c03656 2.58gm n.s.s. 8/50 
839 c03656 500.mg n.s.s. 26/35 
 
a c03656 1.32gm n.s.s. 0/35 
840 c03656 1.13gm n.s.s. 21/35 
 
a c03656 3.529m n.s.s. 1/35 
 
636.mg 12/50 1.29gm 9/50 
636.mg 1/50 1.29gm 0/50 
636.mg 2/50 1.299m 5/50 
557.mg 5/50 (1.12gm 1/50) 
557.mg 19/50 1.12gm 16/50 
557.mg 8/50 1.129m 5/50 
557.mg 11/50 1.129m 6/50 
250.mg 19/35 500.mg 13/35 
250.mg 0/35 500.mg 2/35 
200.mg 11/35 400.mg 11/35 
200.mg 0/35 400.mg 0/35 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
3-DIBENZOFURANANINE 410666- 5 
 
841 1420 1.53mg n.s.a. 0/6 
 
a 1420 .329mg n.s.s. 0/3 
b 1420 .825mg n.s.s. 0/6 
 
3.43mg 1/6 
3.43mg 2/3 
3.43mg 4/8 
 
Hackmann;zkko,61 ,45-54; 1956 
 
1,2-DIBROMO-3-CHLOROPROPANE (DBCP. MCI uses CAS# 1836-75-5. cOO500 is the NCI TR# 28; cOO501 is NCI/NTP TR* 206) 96-12-8 
842 c00500 2.79mg 6.57mg 0/20 79.0mg 50/50 149.mg 47/50 
 
a cOO500 2.79mg 6.57mg 0/20 79.0mg 50/50 149.mg 47/50 
 
b cOO500 231.mg n.s.a. 0/20 79.0mg 0/50 149.mg 1/50 1iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
c cOO500 29.4mg n.s.s. 0/20 79.0mg 1/50 149.mg 2/50 tun:a/a,a/c. 
 
95 
 
S 
S 
S 
 
96 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
843 N f b6c inh NXB MXB 21m24 a 
 
a N f b6c inh MXA MXA 21m24 a 
b N f b6c inh NXA NXA 21m24 a 
c N f b6c inh Lun NXA 21m24 a 
d N f b6c inh nas can 21m24 a 
* N f b6c inh Lun a/a 21m24 a 
f N f b6c inh hag adn 21m24 a 
9 N f b6c inh nas NXA 21m24 a 
h N f b6c inh nas acn 21m24 a 
i N f b6c inh nas sqc 21m24 a 
j N f b6c inh nas cas 21m24 a 
k N f b6c inh nas fbs 21m24 a 
L N f b6c inh l/b ppc 21m24 a 
m N f b6c inh TBA NXB 21m24 a 
n N f b6c inh Liv NXB 21m24 a 
o N f b6c inh Lun NXB 21m24 a 
 
844 N a b6c gav sto sqc 53w59 av 
 
a N m b6c gav TBA NXB 53w59 av 
b N m b6c gav Liv NXB 53w59 av 
c N m b6c gav Lun NXB 53w59 av 
845 N a b6c inh NXB NXB 76w76 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
TD5O 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
1.28mg / P<.0005 
 
2.13mg / P<.0005c 
2.27mg / P<.0005c 
5.21mg / P<.0005c 
6.49mg / P<.0005c 
7.89mg / P<.0005c 
8.21mg * P<.003 
 
10.2mg * P<.0005c 
14.5mg * P<.0005c 
19.0mg * P<.0005c 
40.0mg * P<.003 c 
46.8mg * P<.003 c 
72.2mg * P<.02 a 
.945mg I P<.0005 
9.84mg * P<.02 
 
5.21mg I P<.0005 
 
4.62mg I P<.0005c 
4.64mg I P<.0005 
no dre P-1. 
1.119 * P<.3 
 
1.44mg * P<.0005 
 
a N m b6c inh NXB NXB 76w76 
b N m b6c inh NXA NXA 76w76 
c N m b6c inh NXB NXB 76w76 
d N m b6c inh Lun --- 76w76 
a N m b6c inh Lun NXA 76w76 
f N m b6c inh nas apn 76w76 
9 N m b6c inh nas can 76w76 
h N m b6c inh nas sqc 76w76 
i N m b6c inh Lun a/a 76w76 
j m m b6c inh nas hes 76w76 
k N m b6c inh sto NXA 76w76 
L N m b6c inh sto sqp 76w76 
m N m b6c inh TBA NXB 76w76 
n N m b6c inh Liv NXB 76w76 
o N m b6c inh lun NXB 76w76 
 
846 R f f 34 inh NXB NXB 22m24 a 
 
a R f f34 inh NXA NXA 22m24 a 
b R f f34 inh mgl --- 22m24 a 
c R f f34 inh mgl fba 22m24 a 
d R f f34 inh nas sqp 22m24 a 
 
a ft f 134 inh adr coa 22.24 a 
f R f f34 inh nas adn 22m24 a 
9 R f f34 inh nas apn 22m24 a 
h R f f34 inh ton NXA 22m24 a 
i R f f 34 inh nas can 22.24 a 
j ft f 134 inh ntu apn 22m24 a 
k Rf f 134 inh ton sqp 22m24 a 
L R f f34 inh nas sqc 22m24 a 
 
m R f f34 inh nas acn 22m24 a 
n R f f34 inh phr NXA 22.24 a 
o R f f34 inh phr sqp 22m24 a 
p Rf f 134 inh ton sqc 22m24 a 
q R f f34 inh TBA NXB 22m24 a 
r R f f34 inh Liv NXB 22m24 a 
847 R m f34 inh NXB NXB 22m24 a 
a R m f34 inh NXA NXA 22m24 a 
b R m f34 inh nas apn 22m24 a 
c R m f34 inh nas adn 22.24 a 
d R m f34 inh nas acn 22m24 a 
 
a R f f34 inh ntu apn 22m24 a 
f R m f34 inh nas sqp 22.24 a 
g R f f 34 inh nas can 22.24 a 
h R m f34 inh nas sqc 22m24 a 
i R m f34 inh ton NXA 22m24 a 
J R a f34 inh tnv mso 22m24 a 
k R m f34 inh ton sqp 22m24 a 
l R m f34 inh ski tri 22m24 a 
 
m R f f 34 inh tnv man 22m24 a 
n R m f34 inh tnv man 22m24 a 
o R a f34 inh ton sqc 22m24 a 
p R m f34 inh TBA 1XB 22m24 a 
q R a f34 inh liv NXB 22m24 a 
 
848 R f osm gav NXB NXB 68w72 av 
 
a R f osm gav sto sqc 68w72 av 
b R f oss gav ygL NXA 68w72 av 
 
1.44mg * P<.0005 
 
1.82mg * P<.0005c 
2.05mg * P<.0005 
 
2.48mg * P<.0005a 
3.95mg * P<.002 c 
4.75mg * P<.002 c 
6.09mg * P<.0005c 
7.05mg * P<.002 c 
7.38mg * P<.003 c 
16.3mg * P<.02 a 
16.8mg * P<.02 a 
21.5mg * P<.05 a 
1.32mg * P<.0005 
32.4mg * P<.7 
 
3.95mg * P<.002 
 
.199mg / P<.0005 
 
.252mg / P<.OOOSc 
.727mg / P<.0005 
.896mg * P<.0005 
.948mg * P<.OOOSc 
1.20mg * P<.OOO5c 
1.51mg * P<.OOOSc 
1.70mg * P<.OOO5c 
1.80mg * P<.OOO5c 
1.83mg I P<.OOOSc 
2.08mg * P<.002 
 
2.46mg * P<.OOO5c 
2.90mg / P<.0005c 
3.55mg * P<.0005c 
4.70mg / P<.0005c 
5.86mg / P<.0005c 
6.75mg * P<.003 c 
.164mg / P<.0005 
5.52mg * P<.4 
 
.106mg / P<.0005 
.107mg I P<.OOOSc 
.567mg * P<.OOO5c 
.837mg * P<.OOO5c 
.864mg * P<.OOOSc 
.976mg * P<.002 
 
.978mg * P<.0005c 
1.15mg / P<.OOOSc 
1.44mg I P<.0005c 
2.08mg I P<.0005c 
2.73mg * P<.002 
 
2.75mg * P<.0005c 
3.25mg / P<.0005 
3.70mg * P<.0005 
3.70mg * P<.0005 
9.14mg * P<.005 c 
.112mg / P<.0005 
5.65mg * P<.03 
 
.855mg / P<.0005 
.909mg / P<.OOOSc 
2.33mg / P<.0005c 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf 
 
843 c00501 
 
a c00501 
b c00501 
c c00501 
d c00501 
 
a c00501 
f c00501 
g c00501 
h c00501 
i c00501 
j c00501 
k c00501 
I c00501 
* c00501 
n c00501 
o c00501 
844 c00500 
 
a c00500 
b c00500 
c c00500 
845 c00501 
 
a c00501 
b c00501 
c c00501 
d c00501 
 
a c00501 
f c00501 
g c00501 
h c00501 
i c00501 
j c00501 
k c00501 
L c00501 
* c00501 
n c00501 
o c00501 
846 c00501 
 
a c00501 
b c00501 
c c00501 
d c00501 
 
a c00501 
f c00501 
g c00501 
h c00501 
i c00501 
j c00501 
k c00501 
L c00501 
* c00501 
n c00501 
o c00501 
p c00501 
q c00501 
r c00501 
87 c00501 
a c00501 
b c00501 
c c00501 
d cOO501 
 
a c00501 
f c00501 
g c00501 
h c00501 
i c00501 
j cOO501 
k cOO501 
I c00501 
* c00501 
n c00501 
o c00501 
p c00501 
q c00501 
U8 c00500 
a c00500 
b c00500 
 
.851mg 2.03mg 
1.35mg 3.43mg 
1.33mg 4.37mg 
2.54mg 13.8mg 
3.28mg 12.7mg 
3.39mg 25.9mg 
3.19mg 50.0mg 
3.99mg 33.2mg 
5.14mg 51.6mg 
6.40mg 69.0mg 
11.3mg 346.mg 
14.1mg 395.mg 
17.6mg n.a.s. 
.629mg 1.53mg 
3.41mg n.s.s. 
2.54mg 13.8mg 
2.96mg 7.21mg 
2.98mg 7.51mg 
50.6mg n.s.s. 
181.mg n.s.s. 
.847mg 2.61mg 
 
.847mg 2.61mg 
1.03mg 3.42mg 
1.12mg 4.32mg 
1.26mg 6.41mg 
1.81mg 20.5mg 
1.85mg 26.7mg 
2.48mg 20.9mg 
2.70mg 28.8mg 
3.06mg 42.1mg 
4.77mg n.a.s. 
4.85mg n.s.s. 
5.20mg n.s.s. 
.735mg 3.11mg 
3.68mg n.s.s. 
1.81mg 20.5mg 
.139mg .295mg 
 
.172mg .382mg 
.392mg 1.79mg 
.444mg 3.03mg 
.486mg 2.19mg 
.586mg 2.93mg 
.683mg 4.25mg 
.750mg 4.88mg 
.828mg 4.33mg 
1.05mg 3.36mg 
.830mg 10.1mg 
.985mg 7.58mg 
1.13mg 11.4mg 
1.27mg 12.9mg 
1.71mg 22.1mg 
2.14mg 24.2mg 
1.96mg 54.8mg 
.110mg .264mg 
1.17mg n.s.s. 
75.6ug .154mg 
76.4ug .156mg 
.301mg 1.29mg 
.399mg 2.46mg 
.424mg 2.09mg 
.442mg 3.71mg 
.456mg 2.72mg 
.625mg 2.01mg 
.684mg 3.18mg 
1.01mg 4.85mg 
.947mg 18.0mg 
1.23mg 7.53mg 
1.07mg 18.8mg 
1.19mg 16.3mg 
1.19mg 16.3mg 
2.47mg 104.mg 
75.9ug .179mg 
1.30mg n.s.s. 
.544mg 1.38mg 
 
.568mg 1.47mg 
1.35mg 4.15mg 
 
Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
4/50 
 
0/50 
4/50 
4/50 
0/50 
3/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
23/50 
 
2/50 
4/50 
0/20 
2/20 
2/20 
0/20 
0/50 
 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
3/50 
3/50 
0/50 
1/50 
1/50 
5/50 
4/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
1/50 
0/50 
1/50 
0/50 
0/50 
33/50 
 
2/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
1/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
30/50 
0/50 
1/20 
0/20 
1/20 
 
1.80mg 20/50 
1 .80mg 11/50 
1 .80mg 13/50 
1 .80mg 5/50 
1 .80mg 3/50 
1 .80mg 3/50 
1. 80mg 5/50 
1 .80mg 3/50 
1. 80mg 2/50 
1. 80mg 1/50 
1 .80mg 0/50 
1 .80mg 0/50 
1 .80mg 0/50 
1.80mg 32/50 
1. 80mg 5/50 
1. 80mg 5/50 
81.0mg 43/50 
81.Omg 43/50 
81.0mg 1/50 
81.Omg 0/50 
1. 50mg 4/50 
 
1. 50mg 4/50 
1. 50mg 1/50 
1. 50mg 3/50 
1. 50mg 3/50 
1. 50mg 3/50 
1. 50mg 1/50 
1. 50mg 0/50 
1. 50mg 0/50 
1. 50mg 1/50 
1. 50mg 0/50 
1. 50mg 0/50 
1. 50mg 0/50 
1. 50mg 7/50 
1. 50mg 2/50 
1. 50mg 3/50 
.429mg 32/50 
 
.429mg 26/50 
.429mg 14/50 
.429mg 13/50 
.429mg 10/50 
.429mg 7/50 
.429mg 6/50 
.429mg 5/50 
.429mg 4/50 
.429mg 0/50 
.429mg 5/50 
.429mg 3/50 
.429mg 2/50 
.429mg 2/50 
.429mg 0/50 
.429mg 0/50 
.429mg 1/50 
.429mg 44/50 
.429mg 4/50 
.300mg 41/50 
.300mg 40/50 
.300mg 13/50 
.300mg 9/50 
.300mg 8/50 
.300mg 8/50 
.300mg 7/50 
.300mg 2/50 
.300mg 2/50 
.300mg 1/50 
.300mg 2/50 
.300mg 1/50 
.300mg 1/50 
.300mg 1/50 
.300mg 1/50 
.300mg 0/50 
.300mg 48/50 
.300mg 1/50 
10.0mg 43/50 
10.0mg 38/50 
10.0mg 24/50 
 
9. 00mg 
9.00m9 
9.00m9 
9. 00mg 
9. 00g 
9. 00mg 
9.00m9 
9. 00mg 
9.00m9 
9.00m9 
9. 00mg 
9.00m9 
9. 00mg 
9. 00mg 
9. 00mg 
9.00g9 
156. mg 
156. mg 
156. mg 
156. mg 
7. 50mg 
 
7. 50mg 
7. 50mg 
7. 50mg 
7. 50mg 
7. 50mg 
7.50mg 
7. 50mg 
7. 50mg 
7. 50mg 
7. 50mg 
7. 50mg 
7. 50mg 
7. 50mg 
7. 50mg 
7. 50mg 
2.14mg 
2.14mg 
2.14mg 
2.14mg 
2.14mg 
2.14mg 
2. 14mg 
2. 14mg 
2. 14mg 
2. 14mg 
2. 14mg 
2. 14mg 
2.14mg 
2. 14mg 
2.14mg 
2. 14mg 
2. 14mg 
2. 14mg 
2.14mg 
1. 50mg 
1. 50mg 
1. 50mg 
1. 50mg 
1. 50mg 
1. 50mg 
1. 50mg 
1. 50mg 
1. 50mg 
1. 50mg 
1. 50mg 
1. 50mg 
1. 50mg 
1. 50mg 
1. 50mg 
1. 50mg 
1. 50mg 
1. 50mg 
20 .0mg 
20 .0mg 
20. 0mg 
 
43/50 
 
38/50 
20/50 
13/50 
17/50 
10/50 
 
1/50 
6/50 
6/50 
6/50 
3/50 
3/50 
2/50 
45/50 
 
2/50 
13/50 
47/50 
47/50 
 
0/50 
1/50 
22/50 
22/50 
21/50 
15/50 
11/50 
7/50 
5/50 
7/50 
6/50 
6/50 
3/50 
3/50 
2/50 
23/50 
3/50 
7/50 
45/51 
42/51 
 
9/51 
4/51 
3/51 
5/51 
5/51 
5/51 
9/51 
23/51 
 
1/51 
6/51 
7/51 
6/51 
6/51 
5/51 
3/51 
47/51 
 
0/51 
40/49 
39/49 
 
1/49 
1/49 
 
6/49 
0/49 
3/49 
22/49 
11/49 
11/49 
5/49 
8/49 
3/49 
5/49 
5/49 
3/49 
47/49 
 
1/49 
42/50 
29/50 
30/50 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
Brkly Code 
b/l:ppa,ppc; L/b:ppc,sqc; Lun:a/a,a/c,sqc; 
 
nas:---,acn,can,cas,fbs,sqc,sqp; ntu:apn. C 
 
nas: -- -; ntu:apn. 
b/l:ppa,ppc; L/b:ppc,sqc; lun:a/a,a/c,sqc. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
S 
 
nas:sqc,sqp. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
L/b:sqc; lun:---,a/a,a/c; nas:---,apn,can,hes,sqc; sto:sqc,sqp; 
 
trh:---. T 
L/b:sqc; lun:a/a,a/c; nas:---,apn,can,sqc; trh:---. C 
 
l/b:sqc; nas:---; trh:---. 
 
tun: --- ; nas:hes; sto:sqc,sqp. A 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
sto:sqc,sqp. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
adr:coa; nas:acn,adn,apn,csn,sqc,sqp; ntu: -- -; phr:sqc,sqp; 
 
ton:sqc,sqp. C 
nas:acn,adn,apn,can,sqc,sqp; ntu:---. 
 
S 
S 
 
ton:sqc,sqp. 
 
S 
 
phr:sqc,sqp. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
nas:acn,adn,apn,can,cas,sqc,sqp; nsm:sqc; ntu:---; ton:sqc,sqp. C 
 
nas:acn,adn,apn,can,cas,sqc,sqp; nsm:sqc; ntu:---. 
 
S 
 
ton:sqc,sqp. 
 
S 
 
S 
S 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
mgL:acn,fba; sto:sqc,sqp. C 
 
*gl :acn,fba. 
 
97 
 
98 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
c R f osm gav mgl acn 68w72 iv 
d R f osm gyv sto sqp 68w72 av 
* R f osa gav TBA NXB 68w72 av 
f R f osa gay Liv NXB 68w72 iv 
849 R f osm gav sto sqc 71w83 av 
 
a R a os gv --- NXA 7lw83 v 
b R m oa gav TBA NXB 71w83 iv 
c R f osm gav Liv NXB 71w83 iv 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
TD50 2T1ilpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
2.37mg * P<.0005c 
30.1mg / P<.002 c 
.892mg / P<.0005 
90.3mg * P<.4 
 
.967mg / P<.0005c 
4.23mg * P<.02 
 
.988mg / P<.0005 
no dre P-1. 
 
DIBRONODULCITOL 1 OOng.. :. .ug. :10. :100.... :.. . :10. :100. :.19 :10 
 
850 N f swi ipi lun mix 26w78 a . + . 9.23mg * P<.003 + 
 
a N f sw ipJ ..- lys 26w78 12.2mg * P<.0005. 
b N f swi ipJ --- Lou 26w78 * 46.3mg * P<.006 
c N f swi ipJ Liv Lys 26w78 a no dro P-1. 
 
d N f swi ipJ tba mix 26w78 a 2.45mg * P<.0005 
a N f swi ipJ tba met 26w78 a 4.75mg * P<.0005 
f N f swi ipJ tba ban 26w78 a 24.5mg * P<.09 
 
851 N a swi ipJ --- Lys 26w78 a . + . 17.6ag * P<.002 + 
 
a N a swl ipJ --- lyk 2678 * 32.4mg * P<.002 + 
b N m awi ipJ lun mix 26w78 a 13.5mg \ P<.05 + 
c N a saw ipi Liv mix 26w78 a no dre P-1. 
 
d N m awi ipJ tba mix 26w78 a 12.7mg a P<.06 
a N a swi ipJ tba maL 26w78 a 15.2mg * P<.04 
f N m awi ipi tba ban 26w78 a no dra P-1. 
 
852 R m cdr ipJ ski mix 26w78 a . . 8.37mg * P<.0005. 
 
a R m cdr ipJ par sar 26w78 a 59.2mg * P<.002 
b R m cdr ipj mgL sqc 26w78 182.mg * P<.04 
c R m cdr ipJ --- lys 26w78 * 182.mg * P<.04 
d R m cdr ipJ Liv tum 26w78 a no dra P-1. 
 
a R m cdr ipJ tba mix 26w78 a 3.13mg * P<.0005 
f R t cdr ipJ tba maL 26w78 a 5.05mg * P<.0005 
g R f cdr ipJ tba ban 26w78 * no dro P-1. 
 
1,2-DIBRONOETHANE lOOng.. : .Iug. :10. :100. g :.g :10. :100. :I g. :10 
 
853 N f b6c gav NXB NXB 53w78 sv :+ 3.74mg * P<.0005 
 
a N f b6c gav sto sqc 53w78 sv 4.07mg * P<.0005c 
b N f b6c gav Lun NXA 53w78 sv 15.4mg * P<.04 c 
c N f b6c gav lun ala 53w78 sv 17.3mg * P<.03 c 
d N f b6c gav TBA NXB 53w78 av 3.52mg * P<.0005 
a N f b6c gav Liv NXB 53w78 av no dre P-1. 
 
f N f b6c gav Lun NXB 53w78 mv 15.4mg * P<.04 
 
854 N f b6c inh NXB NXB 22m24 s :+ 9.60mg / P<.0005 
 
a N f b6c inh Lun NXA 22m24 s 
b N f b6c inh Lun NXA 22m24 s 
c N f b6c inh -- NXA 22m24 s 
d N f b6c inh ... has 22m24 s 
a N f b6c inh mgL *cn 22m24 a 
f I f b6c inh Lun a/c 22m24 s 
g N f b6c inh Lun /a 22m24 a 
h N f b6c inh sub fbs 22m24 s 
i N f b6c inh L/b NXA 22M24 s 
J N f b6c inh ns ... 22m24 s 
k N f b6c inh --- ho 22m24 s 
L N f b6c inh L/b can 22m24 a 
* N f b6c inh L/b NXA 22m24 s 
n N f b6c inh nas NXA 22m24 s 
o NI f b6c inh ns NXA 22m24 s 
p N f b6c inh l/b adn 22m24 s 
q N f b6c inh ns can 22m24 a 
r N f b6c inh nas apn 22m24 a 
a N f b6c inh TBA NXB 22m24 a 
t N f b6c inh liv NXB 22m24 s 
u N f b6c inh Lun NXB 22m24 a 
 
855 N m b6c gav NXB NXB 53w78 msv 
 
a N m b6c gov ato NXA 53w78 asv 
b N m b6c gav sto sqc 53w78 esv 
c N m b6c gav Lun ala 53w78 asv 
d N m b6c gav TBA NXB 53w78 asv 
a N m b6c gav Liv NXB 53w78 msv 
f N m b6c gav Lun NXB 53w78 mav 
856 N m b6c inh NXB NXB 78w78 
 
a N * b6c inh Lun ...78w78 
b N m b6c inh Lun NXA 78w78 
c N m b6c inh Lun a/c 78w78 
d N m b6c nh Lun a/a 78w78 
a N a b6c inh L/b NXA 78w78 
f N m b6c inh NXA NXA 78w78 
g N m b6c inh --- NXA 78w78 
 
18.4m I P<.0005c 
18.7m9 I P<.OOOSc 
24.1mg I P<.OOOSc 
25.7mg I P<.0005c 
26.2mg * P<.OOOSc 
30.3*9 / P<.OOOSc 
38.6m9 / P<.OOOSc 
90.7mg * P<.OOOSc 
169.mg * P<.0005 
187.mg I P<.OOOSc 
245.mg * P<.0005 
259.mg * P<.002 
272.mg / P<.0005 
 
337.mg * P<.OOOSc 
353.mg * P<.OOOSc 
361.mg * P<.0005 
 
443.mg * P<.OOOSc 
470.mg * P<.004 c 
6.83mg / P<.0o05 
107.mg * P<.07 
 
18.7mg / P<.0005 
2.34m a P<.0005 
2.36mg * P<.OOOSc 
2.38mg * P<.0005c 
13.4mg * P<.003 c 
2.66mg a P<.0005 
no dra P-1. 
 
13.4mg * P<.003 
 
18.0mg * P<.0005 
18.2mg * P<.0005c 
21.0mg a P<.OOOSc 
24.7mg * P<.OOOSc 
60.1mg P<.0005c 
124.mg * P<.02 
124.mg * P<.02 
 
200.mg * P<.03 c 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
c c00500 1.39mg 3.84mg 
d c00500 13.5mg 117.mg 
* c00500 .560mg 1.49mg 
f c00500 14.7mg n.s.s. 
849 c00500 .584mg 1.55mg 
 
* c00500 1.71mg n.s.s. 
b c00500 .600mg 1.61mg 
c c00500 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
 
0/20 
0/20 
4/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
1/20 
0/20 
 
10. 0g 
 
10. 0mg 
10. 0mg 
10. 0mg 
 
10.0mg 
10.0mg 
10. 0mg 
10.0m9 
 
24/50 20.0mg 30/50 
 
1/50 20.0mg 9/50 
44/50 20.0mg 43/50 
 
1/50 20.0mg 0/50 
47/50 21.0mg 47/50 
13/50 21.0mg 2/50 
49/50 21.0mg 48/50 
0/50 21.0mg 0/50 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
Brkly Code 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
--- :heu,hes. S 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
DIBROWODULCITOL 10318-26-0 
 
850 1336 3.83mg 79.3mg 20/154 
 
a 1336 5.05mg 46.7mg 3/154 
b 1336 11.4mg 1.06gm 0/154 
c 1336 7.19mg n.s.s. 1/154 
d 1336 1.23mg 6.20mg 42/154 
* 1336 2.28mg 15.2mg 29/154 
f 1336 6.95mg n.s.s. 13/154 
851 1336 7.37mg 97.0mg 2/101 
 
a 1336 11.2mg 179.mg 0/101 
b 1336 4.45mg n.s.s. 9/101 
c 1336 10.4mg n.s.s. 2/101 
d 1336 4.53mg n.s.s. 28/101 
* 1336 5.56mg n.s.s. 19/101 
f 1336 16.1mg n.s.s. 9/101 
852 1336 4.50mg 18.2mg 4/177 
 
a 1336 17.9mg 435.mg 0/177 
b 1336 29.6mg n.s.s. 0/177 
c 1336 29.6mg n.s.s. 0/177 
d 1336 14.0mg n.s.s. 0/177 
* 1336 1.58mg 7.35mg 59/177 
f 1336 2.69mg 11.4mg 32/177 
9 1336 21.6mg n.s.s. 27/177 
 
6.40mg 
6.40mg 
6.40mg 
6.40mg 
6.40mg 
6.40mg 
6.40mg 
6.40mg 
6.40mg 
6.40mg 
6.40mg 
6.40mg 
6.40mg 
6.40mg 
10. 7mg 
10. 7mg 
10. 7mg 
10. 7mg 
10.7mg 
10.7mg 
10.7mg 
10. 7mg 
 
9/21 12.8mg 
2/21 12.8mg 
1/21 12.8 g 
 
0/21 12.8mg 
14/21 12.8 g 
10/21 12.8mg 
4/21 12.8mg 
6/29 15.8mg 
2/29 15.8mg 
7/29 (15.8mg 
0/29 15 .8g 
14/29 15.8 g 
 
9/29 15.8Bg 
5/29 15.8Bg 
8/23 21.5mg 
2/23 21.5mg 
0/23 21.5mg 
0/23 21.5mg 
0/23 21.5mg 
18/23 21.5mg 
12/23 21.5mg 
6/23 21.5mg 
 
Skipper;srfr;1976/Weisburger 1977/Prejean pers.com. 
 
3/9 
5/9 
1/9 
0/9 
9/9 
7/9 
2/9 
2/11 
2/11 
 
0/11) 
0/11 
 
5/11 
5/11 
0/11 
8/11 
 
1/11 
1/11 
1/11 
0/11 
11/11 
11/11 
0/11 
 
1,2-DIBROMOETHANE (thyLen dibromide, EDS. c00522 is MCI TR# 86; c00523 is NCI/NTP 
853 c00522 2.58mg 6.93mg 0/20 26.0mg 46/50 52.0mg 30/50 
 
a c00522 2.81mg 8.09mg 0/20 26.0mg 46/50 52.0mg 28/50 
b c00522 8.06mg n.s.s. 0/20 26.0mg 11/50 52.0mg 6/50 
c c00522 8.85mg n.s.s. 0/20 26.0mg 10/50 52.0mg 6/50 
d c00522 2.42mg 6.31mg 0/20 26.0mg 47/50 52.0mg 31/50 
* c00522 n..s.. n.s.s. 0/20 26.0mg 1/50 52.0mg 0/50 
f c00522 8.06mg n.s.s. 0/20 26.0mg 11/50 52.0mg 6/50 
854 c00523 6.41mg 14.8mg 6/50 23.9mg 31/50 95.6mg 47/50 
 
a c00523 11.3mg 30.9mg 
 
b c00523 11.4mg 31.6mg 
c c00523 14.1mg 41.6mg 
d c00523 14.7mg 45.6mg 
 
a c00523 13.7mg 61.7mg 
f c00523 18.0mg 50.3mg 
9 c00523 18.6mg 98.3mg 
h c00523 41.5mg 201.mg 
i c00523 64.5mg 470.mg 
J c00523 89.0mg 425.mg 
k c00523 81.6mg 1.18gm 
I c00523 74.7mg 1.51gm 
 
a c00523 105.mg 968.mg 
n c00523 148.mg 978.mg 
o c00523 122.mg 1.579m 
p c00523 129.mg 1.559g 
 
q c00523 173.mg 1.67gm 
r c00523 133.mg 4.809m 
 
* c00523 4.55mg 10.9mg 
t c00523 31.4mg n.s.s. 
u c00523 11.4mg 31.6mg 
 
855 c00522 1.07mg 4.23mg 
 
m c00522 1.07mg 4.32mg 
b c00522 1.08mg 4.43mg 
c c00522 4.58mg 55.8mg 
d c00522 1.19mg 5.83mg 
* c00522 51.5mg n.s.s. 
f c00522 4.58mg 55.8mg 
856 c00523 11.3mg 32.5mg 
 
a c00523 11.4mg 33.6mg 
b c00523 13.0mg 40.2mg 
c c00523 14.7mg 53.7mg 
d c00523 29.9mg 146.mg 
 
a c00523 47.1mg n.s.s. 
f c00523 47.1mg n.s.s. 
9 c00523 67.2mg n.s.s. 
 
4/50 
4/50 
0/50 
0/50 
2/50 
1/50 
3/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
23/50 
2/50 
4/50 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
2/20 
2/20 
0/20 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
 
23.9mg 
23.9mg 
23.9mg 
23.9mg 
23.9mg 
23.9mg 
23.9mg 
23.9mg 
23.9mg 
23.9mg 
23.9mg 
23.9mg 
23.9mg 
23.9mg 
23.9mg 
23.9mg 
23.9mg 
23.9mg 
23.9mg 
23.9mg 
23.9mg 
30 .0mg 
30 .0mg 
30.0mg 
30.0mg 
30. 0m 
30. 0mg 
30 .0mg 
19.9mg 
19.9m9 
19.9m9 
19.9mg 
19.9mg 
19.9m9 
19.9mg 
19.9m9 
 
11/50 95.6mg 42/50 
11/50 95.6mg 41/50 
12/50 95.6mg 25/50 
11/50 95.6mg 23/50 
14/50 95.6mg 8/50 
5/50 95.6mg 37/50 
7/50 95.6mg 13/50 
4/50 95.6mg 11/50 
1/50 95.6mg 8/50 
0/50 95.6mg 12/50 
1/50 95.6mg 4/50 
1/50 95.6mg 4/50 
0/50 95.6mg 6/50 
0/50 95.6mg 8/50 
0/50 95.6mg 5/50 
0/50 95.6mg 5/50 
0/50 95.6mg 6/50 
0/50 95.6mg 3/50 
45/50 95.6mg 49/50 
6/50 95.6mg 1/50 
11/50 95.6mg 41/50 
45/50 53.0mg 33/50 
45/50 53.0mg 31/50 
45/50 53.0mg 29/50 
4/50 53.0mg 10/50 
45/50 53.0mg 33/50 
 
1/50 53.0mg 1/50 
4/50 53.0mg 10/50 
3/50 79.5mg 26/50 
3/50 79.5mg 25/50 
3/50 79.5mg 23/50 
3/50 79.5mg 19/50 
0/50 79.5mg 11/50 
0/50 79.5mg 5/50 
0/50 79.5m9 5/50 
0/50 79.5mg 4/50 
 
' TR# 210) 106-93-4 
 
lun:a/a,a/c; sto:sqc. C 
 
Lun: a/a a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:&/a,a/c. 
-:--hem,hes; Lun:a/a,a/c,adn,apn,con; *gl:acn; 
 
nas:---,adn,apn,con; sub:fbs. C 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c,adn,apn,can. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
- h- e:h, hhs. 
 
l/b:adn,can. S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
L/b:adn,apn. S 
nas:adn,can. 
nms:adn,apn. 
 
S 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Lun:a/a; sto:sqc,sqp. C 
 
sto:sqc,sqp. 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
-:ham,h.s; Lun:---,a/a,a/c. C 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
L/b:adn,apn. S 
b/L:apn; l/b:apn. S 
 
- :h.,hes. 
 
99 
 
100 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
h N * b6c inh L/b apn 78w78 
i N . b6c inh TBA NXB 78w78 
I N * b6c inh Liv NXB 78w78 
k N m b6c inh Lun NXB 78w78 
 
857 R f f34 inh NXB NXB 23.24 as 
 
a R f f34 inh nas -.- 23m24 as 
b R f f34 inh .gL fba 23.24 as 
c R f f34 inh nas acn 23.24 as 
d R f f34 inh pit adn 23.24 as 
a R f f34 inh nas adn 23.24 as 
f R f f34 inh nas can 23.24 as 
g R f f34 inh nas apn 23.24 as 
h R f f34 inh nas sqc 23.24 as 
i R f f34 inh Liv hpc 23.24 as 
J R f f34 inh lun NXA 23.24 as 
k R f f34 inh spL hes 23m24 as 
L R f f34 inh --- hes 2324 as 
* R f f34 inh Lun a/c 23.24 as 
n R f f34 inh sub NXA 23.24 as 
o R f f34 inh sub fib 23.24 as 
p R f f 34 inh *gl acn 23.24 as 
q R f f34 inh TBA NXB 23.24 as 
r R f f34 inh Liv NXB 23.24 as 
858 R m f34 inh NXB NXB 22.24 as 
 
a R m f34 inh NXA NXA 22.24 as 
b R m f34 inh nas acn 22.24 as 
c R m f34 inh nos apn 22.24 as 
d R m f34 inh tnv mao 22.24 as 
a R f f 34 inh tnv men 22.24 as 
f R t f 34 inh nas adn 22.24 as 
g R f134 inh pit adn 22.24 as 
h R f f34 inh spL hes 22.24 as 
i R 1 f34 inh nas can 22.24 as 
J R 1 f34 inh muL ms. 22.24 as 
k R o f34 inh sLg sar 22.24 as 
l R f f34 inh thy NXA 22.24 5s 
. R f f34 inh TBA NXB 22.24 5s 
n R m f34 inh Liv NXB 22.24 5s 
 
859 R f osm gav NXB NXB 50w61 odes 
 
a R f oss gav sto sqc 50w61 ades 
b R f os. gav Liv NXA 50w61 ades 
c R f os. gav Liv hpc 50w61 ades 
d R f os. gav adr NXA 50w61 ades 
a R f oss gav TBA NXB 50w61 ad.s 
f R f osm gav Liv NXB 50w61 odes 
860 R f oss gav NXB NXB 40w49 adsv 
 
a R a osm gav sto sqc 40w49 adsv 
b R m osm gav --- has 40w49 adsv 
c R f oss gav thy NXA 40w49 adsv 
d R f osa gav TBA NXB 40w49 adsv 
a R f osm gav Liv NXB 40w49 adsv 
861 R f cdr inh nos tum 78w78 e 
 
a R f cdr inh nas ben 78w78 a 
b R f cdr inh nas .aL 78w78 a 
c R f cdr inh agl car 78w78 
d R f cdr inh liv hpc 78w78 
a R f cdr inh spL has 78w78 
 
862 R . cdr inh nas tum 78w78 a 
 
a R m cdr inh nas ben 78w78 a 
b R . cdr inh nas maL 78w78 a 
c R m cdr inh spL has 78w78 
d R a cdr inh bra mng 78w78 
a R f cdr inh Liv hpc 78w78 
 
DIBRONONANNITOL 
 
863 N f swi ipJ lun mix 26w78 a 
 
a N f swi ipJ --- Lys 26w78 a 
 
b N f swi ipJ sub car 26w78 a 
c N f swi ipJ - lyk 26w78 a 
 
d N f swi ipJ adr cos 26w78 a 
 
a N f swi ipJ Liv Lys 26w78 a 
f N f swi ipJ tba mix 26w78 a 
9 N f swi ipJ tba maL 26w78 a 
h N f swi ipJ tba ban 26w78 a 
864 N m swi ipj lun mix 26w78 a 
 
a N a swi ipj Liv mix 26w78 a 
b N a swi ipj tba mix 26w78 a 
c N a swi ipJ tba mal 26w78 a 
d N m swi ipJ tba ben 26w78 a 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
217.mg * P<.05 
 
21.2mg * P<.0005 
no dre P-1. 
 
21.0.g * P<.0005 
1.81g / P<.0005 
 
2.33mg / P<.0005c 
3.60.g / P<.0005c 
4.28mg / P<.0005c 
7.46.g * P<.0005c 
10.8.g * P<.0005c 
21.6.g I P<.0005c 
22.9mg * P<.0005c 
54.2.g I P<.002 c 
66.4mg * P<.002 
 
83.5mg * P<.0005c 
87.3mg * P<.0005c 
87.3ag * P<.0005c 
99.9mg * P<.002 c 
170.mg * P<.008 
170.mg * P<.008 
98.8.g / P<.02 
 
2.02mg / P<.0005 
45.6mg / P<.003 
 
1.10mg I P<.0005 
1.23mg / P<.0005c 
2.73mg I P<.0005c 
3.97mg * P<.0005c 
5.63mg I P<.0005c 
6.06mg I P<.0005c 
7.66mg * P<.0005c 
13.8mg * P<.0005c 
16.5mg I P<.0005c 
18.0mg I P<.0005c 
18.5mg * P<.003 
58.8mg * P<.004 
86.1mg * P<.004 
1.34mg I P<.0005 
78.5mg * P<.06 
 
1.26mg * P<.0005 
1.26mg * P<.0005c 
5.38mg I P<.0005c 
5.52mg / P<.0005c 
20.9mg / P<.02 
 
1.19mg * P<.0005 
5.38mg I P<.0005 
1.64mg I P<.0005 
1.65mg / P<.0005c 
9.62mg * P<.002 c 
10.4mg I P<.002 
1.56mg / P<.0005 
23.8mg * P<.03 
 
2.20mg P<.0005+ 
5.02mg P<.0005+ 
8.59mg P<.0005+ 
19.9mg P<.0005+ 
59.4mg P<.02 
122.mg P<.1 
 
1.19mg P<.0005+ 
2.52mg P<.0005+ 
3.52mg P<.0005+ 
12.6mg P<.0005+ 
56.1mg P<.b04 
85.1mg P<.1 
 
*.4. 
 
bO0ng.. :. .ug. :10 :.100. g. 10. 100.. : 1Ig . : 10 
 
+ . 21.4mg * P<.002 + 
 
38.4mg * P<.0005+ 
66.0mg * P<.0005 
89.8mg * P<.002 
136.mg * P<.006 
no dre P-1. 
 
7.67mg * P<.0005 
11.2mg * P<.0005 
130.mg * P<.4 
 
4- + . 11.4mg P<.002 + 
 
65.7mg P<.2 
 
6.03mg P<.0005 
8.53mg P<.002 
92.8mg P<.6 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl 
 
h c00523 
i c00523 
I c00523 
k c00523 
857 c00523 
 
65.7mg n.s.s. 
11.7mg 65.5mg 
87.5mg n.s.s. 
13.0mg 40.2mg 
1.27mg 2.71mg 
 
a c00523 1.64mg 3.43mg 
b c00523 2.37mg 5.91mg 
c c00523 2.81mg 6.78mg 
d c00523 4.25mg 16.0mg 
 
a c00523 5.67mg 24.0mg 
f c00523 13.0mg 38.3mg 
9 c00523 10.0mg 62.4mg 
h c00523 18.6mg 358.mg 
i c00523 20.4mg 461.mg 
I c00523 30.9mg 350.mg 
k c00523 31.8mg 319.mg 
L c00523 31.8mg 319.mg 
m c00523 33.6mg 555.mg 
n c00523 47.7mg 4.00gm 
o c00523 47.7mg 4.00gm 
p c00523 26.5mg 27.19m 
q c00523 1.36mg 3.30mg 
r c00523 16.0mg 364.mg 
858 c00523 .787mg 1.60mg 
 
a c00523 .872mg 1.79mg 
b c00523 1.78mg 4.36mg 
c c00523 2.34mg 7.45mg 
d c00523 3.36mg 10.1mg 
 
a c00523 3.61mg 10.6mg 
f c00523 3.84mg 19.7mg 
g c00523 6.07mg 46.3mg 
h c00523 8.48mg 33.7mg 
i c00523 10.4mg 33.2mg 
J c00523 7.21mg 109.mg 
k c00523 17.3mg 528.mg 
L c00523 24.6mg 856.mg 
m c00523 .904mg 2.14mg 
n c00523 15.3mg n.s.s. 
859 c00522 .665mg 2.14mg 
 
a c00522 .665mg 2.14mg 
b c00522 1.51mg 32.8mg 
c c00522 1.52mg 38.6mg 
d c00522 5.40mg n.s.s. 
* c00522 .628mg 2.23mg 
f c00522 1.51mg 32.8mg 
860 c00522 1.18mg 2.33mg 
 
a c00522 1.18mg 2.35mg 
b c00522 4.98mg 21.1mg 
c c00522 5.20mg 34.2mg 
d c00522 1.12mg 2.22mg 
* c00522 8.97mg n.s.s. 
861 1032 1.31mg 3.75mg 
 
a 1032 3.09mg 8.79mg 
b 1032 4.96mg 16.7mg 
c 1032 9.95mg 49.5mg 
d 1032 20.5mg n.s.s. 
* 1032 29.9mg n.s.s. 
862 1032 .645mg 2.11mg 
 
a 1032 1.57mg 4.27mg 
b 1032 2.17mg 6.15mg 
c 1032 6.47mg 29.7mg 
d 1032 17.0mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1032 20.9mg n.s.s. 
 
0/50 
3/50 
3/50 
0/50 
6/50 
 
1/50 
4/50 
0/50 
1/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
1/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
1/50 
33/50 
2/50 
1/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
1/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
30/50 
 
0/50 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
2/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/47 
0/47 
0/47 
0/48 
0/48 
0/48 
0/47 
0/47 
0/47 
0/48 
0/48 
0/48 
 
lDose lIne 2Dose 21nc 
 
19.9m9 
19.9mg 
19.9mg 
19.9mg 
5.71mg 
 
5.71mg 
5.71mg 
5.71mg 
5.71mg 
5.71mg 
5.71mg 
5.71mg 
5.71mg 
5.71mg 
5.71mg 
5.71mg 
5.71mg 
5.71mg 
5.71mg 
5.71mg 
5.71mg 
5.71mg 
5.71mg 
4. 00mg 
4. 00mg 
4. 00mg 
4.00mg 
4.00mg 
4.00mg 
4. 00mg 
4. 00mg 
4. 00mg 
4. 00mg 
4. 00mg 
4. 00mg 
4.00mg 
4.00mg 
4.00mg 
26.7mg 
26.7mg 
26.7mg 
26.7mg 
26.7mg 
26.7mg 
26.7mg 
27.4mg 
27.4mg 
27.4mg 
27.4mg 
27.4mg 
27.4mg 
13.4mg 
13.4mg 
13.4mg 
13.4mg 
13.4mg 
13.4mg 
9.39mg 
9.39mg 
9.39mg 
9.39mg 
9.39mg 
9.39mg 
 
0/50 
5/50 
1/50 
3/50 
44/50 
 
34/50 
29/50 
20/50 
18/50 
11/50 
0/50 
5/50 
1/50 
1/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
49/50 
 
1/50 
43/50 
39/50 
20/50 
18/50 
8/50 
7/50 
11/50 
7/50 
1/50 
0/50 
5/50 
1/50 
0/50 
48/50 
 
1/50 
40/50 
40/50 
 
1/50 
1/50 
0/50 
40/50 
 
1/50 
45/50 
45/50 
11/50 
5/50 
46/50 
 
3/50 
38/42 
27/42 
19/42 
11/48 
4/48 
2/48 
40/42 
32/42 
27/42 
12/48 
3/48 
2/48 
 
79.5mg 
79.5mg 
79.5mg 
79.5mg 
22.8 mg 
22.8mg 
22. 8mg 
22. 8g 
22.8 g 
22.8 mg 
22.8 g 
22 .8gg 
22. 8gg 
22.8 mg 
22.8 g 
22. 8mg 
22.8mg 
22.8mg 
22.8mg 
22.8 g 
 
22 .8mg 
22. 8mg 
22 .8 g 
15.9mg 
15.9mg 
15.9mg 
15.9mg 
15.9mg 
15.9mg 
15.9mg 
15.9mg 
15.9mg 
15.9mg 
15.9mg 
15.9mg 
15.9mg 
15.9mg 
15.9mg 
28. 1mg 
28. 1mg 
28.1mg 
28. 1mg 
28. 1mg 
28. 1mg 
28. 1mg 
29. 2mg 
29.2mg 
29.2mg 
29.2mg 
29.2mg 
29.2mg 
 
3/50 
27/50 
3/50 
23/50 
45/50 
 
43/50 
24/50 
29/50 
 
4/50 
3/50 
25/50 
 
5/50 
5/50 
3/50 
5/50 
5/50 
5/50 
4/50 
3/50 
3/50 
4/50 
48/50 
 
5/50 
48/50 
41/50 
28/50 
 
5/50 
25/50 
25/50 
0/50 
2/50 
15/50 
21/50 
 
1/50 
3/50 
3/50 
49/50 
 
1/50 
29/50 
29/50 
6/50 
5/50 
4/50 
29/50 
6/50 
34/50 
33/50 
 
4/50 
8/50 
35/50 
 
2/50 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
Brkly Code 
 
S 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun: a/a, a/c. 
--- :h.s; Lun:a/a,a/c; mgt:fba; nas:---,acn,adn,apn,can,sqc; 
 
pit:adn; spL:hes. C 
 
S 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
sub:fbs,fib. S 
 
S 
 
S 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
nas:--.,acn,adn,apn,can; nse:sqp; pit:adn; spL:hes; tnv:men,mso. C 
 
nas: -- -; nse:sqp. 
 
S 
 
thy:fca,fcc. S 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
liv:hpc,nnd; sto:sqc. C 
 
l iv:hpc,nnd. 
 
adr:coa,coc. S 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
--- -hes; sto:sqc. C 
 
thy:fca,fcc. S 
I iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Wong;txap,63,155.165;1982/PLotnick pers.comm. 
 
DIBRO9OANNITOL (DBM) 488-41.5 
 
863 1336m 9.53mg 136.mg 20/154 
 
a 1336m 15.8mg 162.mg 3/154 
b 1336m 22.8mg 340.mg 0/154 
c 1336m 27.2mg 684.mg 0/154 
d 1336m 33.4mg 2.869m 0/154 
* 1336m 20.4mg n.s.s. 1/154 
f 1336m 4.05mg 19.2mg 42/154 
9 1336m 5.76mg 30.7mg 29/154 
h 1336m 25.3mg n.s.s. 13/154 
864 1336m 4.75mg 60.4mg 9/101 
 
a 1336m 13.4mg n.s.s. 2/101 
b 1336m 2.64mg 28.7mg 28/101 
c 1336m 3.62mg 50.3mg 19/101 
d 1336m 12.4mg n.s.s. 9/101 
 
12. 8mg 
12.8mg 
12 .8mg 
12.8mg 
12 .8mg 
12.8 mg 
12.8mg 
12.8mg 
12.8 mg 
12.8 g 
 
12.8mg 
12.8 mg 
12.8 mg 
12.8 mg 
 
11/23 25.7mg 
 
1/23 25.7mg 
1/23 25.7mg 
1/23 25.7mg 
0/23 25.7mg 
0/23 25.7mg 
12/23 25.7mg 
10/23 25.7mg 
2/23 25.7mg 
9/22 
2/22 
15/22 
12/22 
3/22 
 
5/17 
6/17 
3/17 
2/17 
2/17 
0/17 
15/17 
12/17 
3/17 
 
Skipper;srfr;1976/Weisburger 1977/Prjejan pers.comm. 
 
101 
 
102 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
865 R f cdr ipj mgL adc 26w78 s 
 
a R f cdr ipj per sar 26w78 s 
b R f cdr ipJ Lun car 26w78 s 
c R f cdr ipJ Liv tur 26w78 s 
d R f cdr ipJ tba meL 26w78 s 
* R f cdr ipJ tba mix 26w78 s 
f R f cdr ipJ tbs ban 26w78 s 
866 R m cdr ipJ per smr 26w78 s 
 
* R m cdr ipJ ski mix 26w78 s 
b R m cdr ipJ mgL fbs 26w78 s 
c R m cdr ipj Liv tur 26w78 s 
d R m cdr ipj tbs mix 26w78 s 
s R f cdr ipJ tbs bsn 26w78 s 
f R m cdr ipJ tba maL 26w78 s 
 
1,3-DIBUTYL- 1 -NITROSOUREA 
 
867 R f don wat mai fba 75w75 m 
 
a R f don wet mai mix 75w75 m 
b R f don wet mgl mdc 75w75 5 
c R f don wat uts mix 75w75 5 
d R f don wet l. u 75w75 s 
a R f don wat liv ads 75w75 5 
f R f don wat tbm mix 75w75 e 
 
DIBUTYLTIN DIACETATE* 
 
88 N f b6c mat liv hpa 78w92 mv 
 
a N f b6c set TBA NXS 78w92 mv 
b N f b6c mat liv NXB 78w92 *v 
c N f b6c mat Lun NXB 78w92 mv 
869 N * b6c mat TBA NXB 78w92 v 
 
a N m b6c sot liv NXB 78w92 v 
b N * b6c eat lun NXB 78w92 v 
870 R f f34 mat TBA NXB 18m24 v 
 
a R f f34 sat Liv NXB 18m24 v 
871 R * f34 mat TBA NXS 18m24 v 
 
a R f f34 mat Liv NXS 18m24 v 
 
2,3-DICHLORO-p-DIOXANE 
 
872 N f hic ipJ lun ptm 64w64 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
TD50 2Thilpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
24.9mg P<.003 + 
79.2mg P<.004 + 
84.6mg P<.03 
no dre P-1. 
 
11.5mg P<.002 
12.5mg P<.08 
no dre P.1. 
 
30.9mg \ P<.0005+ 
103.mg * P<.03 + 
255.mg * P<.2 
no drs P-1. 
 
7.95mg \ P<.0005 
16.6mg \ P<.003 
no drs P-1. 
 
l00ng..:..lug. 10. 100. mg .. :g10 .:100... : g :10 
 
+ . 2.23mg Z P<.0005 
 
4.28mg * P<.002 + 
22.7mg * P<.002 
15.3mg Z P<.03 
 
32.0mg * P<.06 + 
303.mg * P<.6 
 
2.67mg * P<.0005 
 
100ng..: ..ug.. : 10. :100.. :.1mg.. : 10. :100.. :I1g :. 10 
 
+ #31.6mg * P<.006 - 
 
29.6mg P<.07 
 
31.6mg * P<.006 
no dre P-1. 
 
178.mg * P<.9 - 
29.2mg * P<.06 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
94.4mg * P<.5 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
jOOng .. . : ug. ..10. :100.. :1g . :10 .: 100 . :1Ig . :10 
 
7.04mg 
 
eLphe,bmte-DICHLORO-bote-FORNYLACRYLIC ACID.lug.... : 10. :100.. g : . . :10. :100.. : . :10 
 
873 N f b6a orl liv hpt 76w76 *vx .> no dre 
 
a N f b6a orL Lun de 76w76 evx no drm 
b N f b6e orL tbe mix 76w76 evx no dre 
874 N * b6e orL Lun mix 76w76 evx .> 17.8mg 
 
a N a b6a orl Liv hpt 76w76 evx 771.mg 
b N a b6a orL tbm mix 76w76 evx 16.1mg 
875 N f b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 *vx .> no dre 
 
e N f b6c orL Lun mix 76w76 *vx no dre 
b N f b6c orl tbe mix 76w76 evx 24.4mg 
876 N m b6c oril Liv hpt 76w76 evx .> 44.1mg 
 
a N m b6c orL Lun ads 76w76 *vx 44.1mg 
b N m b6c orL tbe mix 76w76 evx 5.03mg 
 
P<.6 
 
P-I. _ 
P-1. _ 
PaI. _ 
P<.4 4 
 
P<I. _ 
P<.4 4 
 
P-I. _ 
PaI. _ 
P<.2 - 
P<.3 - 
P<.3 - 
P<. 002 - 
 
3,4W 'DICHLORO-2-NETHYLACRYLANILIDE 
877 N f b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 mvx 
 
a N f b6a orL Lun ads 76w76 *vx 
b N f b6a orL tba mix 76w76 evx 
878 N m b6a orl Liv hpt 76w76 evx 
 
a N m b6a orL Lun ads 76w76 *vx 
b N m b6a orL tba mix 76w76 *vx 
879 N f b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx 
 
a N f b6c orL Lun mix 76w76 *vx 
b N f b6c orL tba tum 76w76 *vx 
880 N m b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx 
 
a N m b6c orL Lun ads 76w76 evx 
b N m b6c orL tba mix 76w76 *vx 
 
..l:.1ug. :10. :.1 mg.10. 100.. . : g :10 
 
.> no dre 
 
no dre 
no dre 
27.1mg 
no dre 
49. 1lg 
.> no dre 
 
no dre 
no dre 
A 15.2mg 
 
23.7mg 
5.39mg 
 
2,3-DICHLORO-.1,4-NAPHTHOQUINONE 10Ong ..:..:ug. : 10. : 100. g :. .. : 10. : 100.. : . : 10 
 
881 N f b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 *vx .> 26.5mg 
 
a N f b6e orL Lun ads 76w76 *vx no dre 
b N f b6a orL tba mix 76w76 *vx no drm 
882 N * b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 *vx .> no drm 
 
a N * b6a orL Lun ado 76w76 *vx no dre 
b N * b6e orL tba mix 76w76 evx no drm 
 
883 N f b6c orL Lun ado 76w76 *vx .> 26.5mg 
 
a N f b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx no drm 
 
b N f b6c orL tba mix 76w76 *vx 8.31mg 
 
P-1. _ 
P-I. 1 
 
P-I1. _ 
 
P<.3 - 
P-1. _ 
P<.7 _ 
 
P-I . _ 
 
P-1. _ 
P-1. _ 
P<.04 - 
P<.09 - 
P<. 0005- 
 
P<.3 - 
P-1. - 
P-1. - 
P-I. - 
P-I. - 
P-I. - 
p<. 3 - 
PaI. - 
P<.05 - 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
865 1336n 9.35mg 232.mg 12/182 17.9mg 
 
a 1336n 19.5mg 1.19gm 0/182 17.9mg 
b 1336n 19.8mg n.s.s. 1/182 17.9mg 
c 1336n 49.8mg n.s.s. 0/182 17.9mg 
d 1336n 4.92mg 68.1mg 44/182 17.9mg 
* 1336n 3.95mg n.s.s. 103/182 17.9mg 
f 1336n 27.8mg n.s.s. 59/182 17.9m9 
866 1336n 11.7mg 129.mg 0/177 17.9mg 
 
a 1336n 32.5mg n.s.s. 4/177 17.9mg 
b 1336n 52.7mg n.s.s. 1/177 17.9mg 
c 1336n 30.4mg n.s.s. 0/177 17.9mg 
d 1336n 3.57mg 34.3mg 59/177 17.9mg 
* 1336n 6.83mg 125.mg 27/177 17.9mg 
f 1336n 44.3mg n.s.s. 32/177 17.9mg 
 
7/24 
2/24 
2/24 
0/24 
14/24 
18/24 
4/24 
 
5/25 (53.0mg 
4/25 53. 0mg 
2/25 53. 0mg 
0/25 53.0mg 
18/25 (53.0mg 
 
11/25 (53.0-g 
7/25 53-0mg 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
0/12) 
1/12 
0/12 
0/12 
2/12) 
1/12) 
1/12 
 
1, - I BUTYL-1-NITROSOUREA 
867 1216 1.31mg 4.93mg 
 
a 1216 2.26mg 18.1mg 
b 1216 11.7mg 86.6mg 
c 1216 7.22mg n.s.s. 
d 1216 13.0mg n.s.s. 
* 1216 49.4mg n.s.s. 
f 1216 1.45mg 7.88m9 
 
56654-52-5 
 
5/25 5.71mg 21/26 11.4mg 
8/25 5.71mg 21/26 11.4mg 
0/25 5.71mg 1/26 11.4mg 
0/25 5.71mg 6/26 11.409 
1/25 5.71mg 3/26 11.4mg 
0/25 5.71mg 0/26 11.4mg 
10/25 5.71mg 23/26 11.4mg 
 
19/24 (22.9mg 11/19) 
20/24 22.9mg 15/19 
7/24 22.9mg 4/19 
3/24 (22.9mg 2/19) 
5/24 22.9mg 4/19 
1/24 22.9mg 0/19 
22/24 22.9mg 17/19 
 
Ogiu;zkko,96,35-41; 1980 
 
DIBUTYLTIN DIACETATE* 1067-33-0 
868 c02028 16.1mg 313.mg 1/20 
 
a c02028 12.8mg n.s.s. 3/20 
b c02028 16.1mg 313.mg 1/20 
c c02028 69.4mg n.s.s. 2/20 
869 c02028 15.4mg n.s.s. 6/20 
 
a c02028 13.3mg n.s.s. 2/20 
b c02028 47.6mg n.s.s. 2/20 
870 c02028 3.35mg n.s.s. 12/19 
 
a c02028 23.2mg n.s.a. 0/19 
871 c02028 5.12mg n.s.s. 8/20 
 
a c02028 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/20 
 
8. 30mg 
 
8. 30mg 
8.30mg 
8.30mg 
7.70mg 
7.70m9 
7.70mg 
2. 50mg 
2.50mg 
2.00mg 
2.00mg 
 
4/50 16. 8Bg 
12/50 16.8Bg 
4/50 16.8mg 
4/50 16.8 g 
19/50 15.5mg 
11/50 15.5mg 
8/50 15.5mg 
26/50 (5.00mg 
 
1/50 5.00mg 
20/50 4.00mg 
 
2/50 4.00mg 
 
12/50 
13/50 
12/50 
0/50 
16/50 
15/50 
2/50 
13/50) 
 
1/50 
11/50 
0/50 
 
2,3-DICHLORO-p-DIOXANE 3883-43-0 
 
872 1143 1.11mg n.s.s. 10/30 2.86mg 12/30 
 
S 
 
Liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Van Duuren;jnci,53,695-700;1974 
 
alpha,beta-DICHLORO-beta-FORNYLACRYLIC ACID 
873 1296 15.5mg n.s.s. 0/17 7.84mg 
 
a 1296 15.5mg n.s.s. 1/17 7.84mg 
b 1296 10.3mg n.s.s. 2/17 7.84mg 
874 1296 3.89mg n.s.s. 2/18 7.30mg 
 
a 1296 8.09mg n.s.s. 1/18 7.30mg 
b 1296 3.43mg n.s.s. 3/18 7.30mg 
875 1296 15.5mg n.s.s. 0/16 7.84mg 
 
a 1296 15.5mg n.s.s. 0/16 7.84mg 
b 1296 5.98mg n.s.s. 0/16 7.84mg 
876 1296 7.17mg n.s.s. 0/16 7.30mg 
 
a 1296 7.17mg n.s.s. 0/16 7.30mg 
 
b 1296 2.14mg 19.3mg 0/16 7.30mg 
 
(mucochloric acid) 87-56-9 
0/18 
0/18 
1/18 
4/17 
1/17 
5/17 
0/18 
0/18 
2/18 
1/17 
1/17 
7/17 
 
Innes;ntis,1968/1969 
 
3,4' -DICHLORO-2-NETHYLACRYLANILIDE (dicryL) 2164-09-2 
877 1279 18.6mg n.s.s. 0/17 9.96mg 0/17 
 
a 1279 18.6mg n.s.s. 1/17 9.96mg 0/17 
b 1279 18.6mg n.s.s. 2/17 9.96mg 0/17 
878 1279 6.05mg n.s.s. 1/18 9.26mg 3/18 
 
a 1279 18.3mg n.s.s. 2/18 9.26mg 0/18 
b 1279 5.75mg n.s.s. 3/18 9.26mg 4/18 
879 1279 19.7mg n.s.s. 0/16 9.96mg 0/18 
 
a 1279 19.7mg n.s.s. 0/16 9.96mg 0/18 
b 1279 19.7mg n.s.s. 0/16 9.96mg 0/18 
880 1279 4.58mg n.s.s. 0/16 9.26mg 3/15 
 
a 1279 5.81mg n.s.s. 0/16 9.26mg 2/15 
b 1279 2.28mg 18.9mg 0/16 9.26mg 7/15 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
2,3-DICHLORO-1,4-NAPHTHOQUINONE (dichlone) 117-80-6 
881 1240 4.31mg n.s.s. 0/17 4.14mg 1/18 
 
a 1240 4.92mg n.s.s. 1/17 4.14mg 1/18 
b 1240 3.91mg n.s.s. 2/17 4.14mg 2/18 
882 1240 7.63mg n.s.s. 1/18 3.85mg 0/18 
 
a 1240 7.63mg n.s.s. 2/18 3.85mg 0/18 
b 1240 7.63mg n.s.s. 3/18 3.85mg 0/18 
883 1240 4.31mg n.s.s. 0/16 4.14mg 1/18 
 
a 1240 8.20mg n.s.s. 0/16 4.14mg 0/18 
b 1240 2.51mg n.s.s. 0/16 4.14mg 3/18 
 
Innss;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
103 
 
Brkly Code 
 
104 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
 
884 N m b6c orl Lun ade 76w76 mv) 
 
a N m b6c orl liv hpt 76w76 *v) 
b N m b6c orl tba mix 76w76 mv) 
 
2,6-DICHLORO-4-NITROANILINE 
 
885 N f b6a ort Lun ad. 76w76 mv) 
 
m N f b6a orl Liv hpt 76w76 mv) 
b N f b6a orL tbc mix 76w76 mv) 
886 N f b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 mv) 
 
a N f b6a orL Lun ad. 76w76 mv) 
b N f b6a orL tba mix 76w76 mv) 
887 N a b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 mvy 
 
a N m b6a orL Lun ad. 76w76 mv: 
b N m b6a orL tba mix 76w76 *vy 
888 N m b6a orL liv hpt 76w76 mv: 
 
m N m b6a orl Lun ad. 76w76 mv; 
b N m b6a orL tbm mix 76w76 mv: 
889 N f b6c orL Lun ado 76w76 mv: 
 
a N f b6c orL Liv hpt 76u76 mvy 
b N f b6c orL tba mix 76w76 *vm 
890 N f b6c orL lun ad. 76w76 mvy 
 
a N f b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 mvy 
b N f b6c orL tba mix 76w76 mvy 
891 N m b6c orl Liv mix 76w76 mvy 
 
a N m b6c orL Lun ado 76w76 mvy 
b N m b6c orL tba mix 76w76 mvy 
892 N m b6c orL Liv ago 76w76 mvy 
 
a N m b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 mvy 
b N m b6c orL Lun ad. 76w76 mvy 
c N m b6c orL tba mix 76w76 mvy 
 
3,3' -DICHLOROBENZIDINE 
 
893 D f beg cap Liv mix 86m86 mv 
 
a D f bog cap ubL mix 86m"86 v 
b D f beg cap tba mix 86m86 v 
894 R f cdr sat mgL adc 69w69 
 
a R f cdr sat Liv tum 69w69 
895 R m cdr eat zym sqc 69w69 
 
a R m cdr mat mgL adc 69w69 
b R m cdr oat --- grL 69w69 
c R m cdr mat Liv tum 69w69 
trans- 1,4-DICHLOROBUTENE-2 
 
896 N f hic ipJ abd sar 76w76 
 
2,7.DICHLORODICENZO.p.DIOXIN 
 
897 N f b6c eat TBA NXB 90w91 
 
a N f b6c mat Liv NXB 90w91 
b N f b6c sat Lun NXB 90w91 
898 N m b6c sat NXB NXB 90w92 
 
a N m b6c oat --- NXA 9Ow92 
b N m b6c mat --- NXA 9Ow92 
c N m b6c mat Liv NXA 90w92 
d N m b6c mat TBA NXB 90w92 
m N m b6c mat Liv NXB 90w92 
f N m b6c mat Lun NXB 90w92 
899 R f osm mat TBA NXB 26m26 
 
a R f osm mat Liv NXS 26m26 
900 R m osm mat TBA NXB 26m26 
 
a R m osm mat Liv NXB 26m26 
 
1,1 DDICHLOROETHANE 
 
901 N f b6c gay TBA NXB 7ev90 sv 
 
a N f b6c gav Liv NXB 78w90 sv 
b N f b6c gav Lun NXB 78w90 sv 
902 N f b6c gav utm map 78w90 sv 
903 N m b6c gav TBA NXB 78w90 msc 
 
a N m b6c gav Liv NXB 78w90 msc 
b N m b6c gav lun NXB 78w90 msc 
904 R f oem gav NXB NXB 18m26 dsc 
 
a R f osm gav *gL adc 18m26 ds% 
b R f om gav ... hos 18m26 dsi 
c R f osm gav TBA NXB 18626 dsc 
d R f osm gav liv NXB 18626 dsc 
905 R f osm gav ... hes 18626 dsc 
906 R m oem gav TBA NXB 18626 dsc 
 
a R m osm gyv Liv NXB 18626 dci 
 
x 
K 
K 
 
TD50 2Thilpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
7.26mg P<. 04 - 
23.2mg P<.3 - 
3.24mg P<.003 - 
 
100ng..:. .ug. :10. :100. g :..g :10. : 100. :Ig ..:10 
 
x .> no dre 
x no dre 
x 182.mg 
x .> no dre 
x no dre 
x no dre 
x .> no dre 
x no dre 
x no dre 
x .> 471.mg 
x no dre 
x no dre 
x .> 602.mg 
x no dre 
x 188.mg 
x .> 506.mg 
x no dre 
x 114.mg 
x . . 104.mg 
x 594..g 
x 57.7mg 
x .> 499 mg 
x 499 mg 
x f4m99mg 
x 156.mg 
 
100ng.. :. .ug. :10. :100. g :. 1g :10.. :100.. :Ig :10 
 
<+ noTD50 
 
noTD50 
noTD50 
* . 18.3mg 
 
no dre 
+ . 60.1mg 
 
69.6mg 
66.2mg 
no dre 
 
1OOng .. : lug. :10. :100. g :. 1g :10. :100. :.19 :10 
 
A 1.52mg 
 
Pal. _ 
P-I. _ 
P<.3 - 
Pal. _ 
P-1. _ 
P-1. _ 
P. 1. 
 
P-I. _ 
Pal. _ 
P<.6 - 
P-1. _ 
Pal. 1 
 
P<.3 - 
P-1. _ 
P<.04 - 
P<.3 - 
P-1. - 
P<.02 - 
P<. 009 - 
P<.3 - 
P<. 0005- 
P<.3 - 
P<.3 - 
P<.3 - 
P<.05 - 
 
P<.008 + 
P<.008 + 
P<.6 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P-a. - 
P<.002 + 
P<.002 + 
P<.03 + 
P-1. - 
 
P<.1 + 
 
bO0ng .. : lug. :10. :100. g : . 1g :10. :100..g.10 
 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
+ 640.mg \ P<.003 
 
1.92gm \ P<.003 a 
2.759m \ P<.01 a 
2.12gm * P<.07 a 
2.919m * P<.4 
 
2.129m * P<.07 
no drm P-1. 
:> no drm P-1. 
 
no dre P-1. 
:> no dre P-I. 
 
12.99m P<.8 
 
iO0ng.. :. .ug. :10. :100. g :. 1g :10. :100.. : g. : 10 
 
:> 8.40gm / P<.5 - 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
pooL 11.2gm P<.004 a 
v : A* 1.37m * P<.07 - 
v 2.04g * P<.05 
v 7.32gm * P<.04 
 
v : + : 535.mg * P<.005 
 
v 986.mg * P<.04 a 
v 1.35gm * P<.05 a 
v 336.mg * P<.2 
v 4.65gm * P<.4 
 
v pooL A 1.36gm * P<.02 a 
v :> no dre P-1. 
v no dre P-1. 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
884 1240 2.19mg n.s.s. 0/16 3.85mg 3/17 
 
a 1240 3.78mg n.s.s. 0/16 3.85mg 1/17 
b 1240 1.31mg 17.6mg 0/16 3.85mg 6/17 
 
2,6-DICHLORO-4-NITROANILINE 
885 1291 119.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1291 198.mg n.s.s. 
b 1291 47.7mg n.s.s. 
886 1292 157.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1292 157.mg n.s.s. 
b 1292 157.mg n.s.s. 
887 1291 184.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1291 184.mg n.s.s. 
b 1291 130.mg n.s.s. 
 
88 1292 65.3mg n.s.s. 
a 1292 102.mg n.s.s. 
b 1292 61.3mg n.s.s. 
889 1291 98.0mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1291 187.mg n.s.s. 
b 1291 56.7mg n.s.s. 
890 1292 82.3mg n.a.s. 
 
a 1292 157.mg n.s.s. 
b 1292 39.3mg n.s.s. 
891 1291 39.3mg 2.29gm 
 
a 1291 96.6mg n.s.s. 
b 1291 25.7mg 190.mg 
892 1292 81.2mg n.a.s. 
 
a 1292 81.2mg n.s.s. 
b 1292 81.2mg n.s.s. 
c 1292 47.2mg n.s.s. 
 
(Botran) 99-30-9 
 
1/17 99.7mg 1/18 
0/17 ".7mg 0/18 
2/17 99.7mg 5/18 
0/17 83.8mg 0/17 
1/17 83.8"m 0/17 
2/17 83.8mg 0/17 
1/18 92.7mg 0/18 
2/18 92.7mg 0/18 
3/18 92.7mg 1/18 
1/18 78.0mg 2/18 
2/18 78.0mg 1/18 
3/18 78.0mg 3/18 
0/16 99.7mg 1/17 
0/16 99.7mg 0/17 
0/16 99.7mg 3/17 
0/16 83.8mg 1/17 
0/16 83.8mg 0/17 
0/16 83.8mg 4/17 
0/16 92.7mg 5/18 
0/16 92.7mg 1/18 
0/16 92.7mg 8/18 
0/16 78.0mg 1/18 
0/16 78.0mg 1/18 
0/16 78.0mg 1/18 
0/16 78.0mg 3/18 
 
Innes;nt is, 1968/1969 
 
3,3'-DICHLOROBENZIDINE (DCB) 91-94-1 
 
893 1379 n.s.s. 1.78mg 0/6 4.42mg 
 
a 1379 n.s.s. 1.78mg 0/6 4.42mg 
b 1379 n.s.s. n.s.s. 5/6 4.42mg 
894 192 10.8mg 36.6mg 3/44 50.0mg 
 
a 192 200.mg n.s.s. 0/44 50.0mg 
895 192 27.2mg 203.mg 0/44 40.0mg 
 
a 192 30.0mg 290.mg 0/44 40.0mg 
b 192 26.9mg n.s.s. 2/44 40.0mg 
c 192 160.mg n.s.s. 0/44 40.0mg 
 
5/5 
5/5 
5/5 
26/44 
 
0/44 
8/44 
7/" 
9/44 
0/44 
 
trans-1,4-DICHLOROSUTENE-2 110-57-6 
 
896 582 .373mg n.*.s. 0/30 .286mg 2/30 
 
2,7-DICHLORODIBENZO-p-DIOXII (DCDD) 33857-26-0 
 
897 c03667 2.30gm n.s.s. 15/50 636.mg 18/50 1.19gm 
 
a c03667 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/50 636.mg 1/50 1.199m 
b c03667 8.399m n.s.s. 3/50 636.mg 2/50 1.199m 
898 c03667 321.mg 4.179m 8/50 540.mg 26/50 (1.099m 
 
a c03667 831.mg 9.58gm 0/50 540.mg 7/50 (1.099m 
b c03667 1.04gm 281.gm 0/50 540.mg 5/50 (1.09gm 
c c03667 885.mg n.s.s. 8/50 540.mg 20/50 1.09gm 
d c03667 787.mg n.s.s. 19/50 540.mg 30/50 1.09gm 
 
a c03667 885.mg n.s.s. 8/50 540.mg 20/50 1.09gm 
f c03667 3.95gm n.s.s. 8/50 540.mg 5/50 1.09gm 
 
899 c03667 456.mg n.s.s. 26/35 250.mg 22/35 500.mg 
 
a c03667 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/35 250.mg 0/35 500.mg 
900 c03667 131.mg n.s.s. 21/35 198.mg 14/35 (396.mg 
 
a c03667 716.mg n.s.s. 1/35 198.mg 0/35 396.mg 
 
1,1-DICHLOROETHANE 75-34-3 
901 c04535 2.03gm n.s.s. 
 
a c04535 10.39m n.a.s. 
b c04535 8.169m n.s.s. 
902 c04535 3.89gm 86.3gm 
 
903 c04535 588.mg n.s.s. 
 
a c04535 936.mg n.s.s. 
b c04535 2.67gm n.s.s. 
904 cO4535 248.mg 3.68g" 
 
a c04535 377.mg n.s.s. 
b c04535 450.mg n.s.s. 
c c04535 119.mg n.s.s. 
d c04535 758.mg n.s.s. 
905 c04535 456.mg n.s.s. 
906 c04535 258.mg n.s.s. 
 
a c04535 926.mg n.s.s. 
 
6/20 1. 02gm 
1/20 1. 02gm 
1/20 1. 029g 
 
0/80p 1.02gm 
 
4/20 883.mg 
1/20 883.mg 
0/20 883.mg 
0/20 238.mg 
0/20 238.mg 
0/20 238.mg 
 
4/20 238.mg 
0/20 238.mg 
0/4Op 238.mg 
6/20 192.mg 
1/20 192.mg 
 
6/50 2.049g 
 
1/50 2.04gm 
 
2/50 2.049m 
0/50 2.049m 
19/50 1.779m 
8/50 1.77gm 
1/50 1.77gm 
 
1/50 477.mg 
1/50 477.mg 
0/50 477.mg 
12/50 477.mg 
0/50 477.mg 
0/50 477.mg 
6/50 383.mg 
0/50 383.mg 
 
StuLa; Jept, 1,475-490;1978 
StuLa;txap,31,159-176;1975/pers.com. 
 
Van Duuren;canr,35,2553-2557;1975 
 
9/50 
0/50 
0/50 
20/50) 
3/50) 
1/50) 
17/50 
25/50 
17/50 
5/50 
16/35 
0/35 
6/35) 
1/35 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
--- :h.m,hes,tlu,tym; tiv:hpa,hpc. A 
 
--- :lu,tym. 
- h- -:hm,hes. 
t iv:hpa,hpc. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
t iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
t iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
12/50 
0/50 
0/50 
4/50 
15/50 
8/50 
4/50 
9/50 
5/50 
4/50 
18/50 
 
1/50 
4/50 
5/50 
0/50 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
tun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
--- :hes; ngl:adc. A 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
105 
 
Brkly Code 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
 
TD50 2Thilpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
1,2-DICHLOROETHANE l1Ong .. : lug. :10. :100. g :. .. :10. :100. :.19 :10 
 
907 N f b6c gav NXB NXB 78w90 v + 61.2mg / P<.0005 
 
a N f b6c gav lun a/a 78w90 v 118.mg / P<.0005c 
b N f b6c gav ugi acn 78w90 v 133.mg / P<.0005c 
c N f b6c gav TBA NXB 78w9O v 36.0mg / P<.0005 
d N f b6c gav liv NXB 78w90 v 4.74gm / P<.8 
 
* N f b6c gav lun NXB 78w9O v 112.mg / P<.0005 
 
908 N f b6c gav lun a/a 78w90 v pool + 116.mg / P<.0005c 
 
a N f b6c gav mgt cn 78w90 v 133.mg / P<.0005c 
b N f b6c gav uteN XA 78w90 v 230.mg / P<.0005c 
c N f b6c gav sto sqc 78w90 v 438.mg / P<.003 
 
909 N m b6c gav lun a/a 78w90 v + 89.7mg * P<.0005c 
 
a N m b6c gav Liv hpc 78w90 v 133.mg * P<.04 
b N m b6c gav TBA NXB 78w9O v 57.7mg * P<.02 
c N m b6c gav Liv NXB 78w9O v 133.mg * P<.04 
 
d N m b6c gav lun NXS 7'8w90v 89.7mg * P<.0005 
 
910 N m b6c gav lun a/a 78w90 v pool + 89.7mg * P<.0005c 
 
a N m b6c gav Liv hpc 78w90 v 148.mg * P<.02 
 
911 N f swi inh liv mix 18m25 *v .> 16.9gm * P<.7 - 
 
a N f swi inh lun ada 18m25 av 55.4gm * P<1. - 
b N f swi inh liv ang 18a25 *v no dre P-1. - 
c N f swi inh liv hpt 18m25 *v no dro P-1. - 
d N f swi inh tba mix 18a25 *v no dre P.1. - 
912 N m swi inh Liv hpt 18m25 av .> no dre P-1. - 
 
a N swi inh Liv ang 18a25 av no dre P-1. - 
b N m swi inh liv mix 18a25 *v no dre P-1. - 
c N m swi inh lun ada 18m25 mv no dre P-1. - 
d N m swi inh tba mix 18m25 mv no dre P-1. - 
913 R f osm gav *gL NXA 18m26 dsv + 5.49mg / P<.0005c 
 
a R f osm gav mgl fba 18m26 dsv 5.84mg / P<.0005 
b R f osa gav mgL acn 18m26 dav 74.8mg / P<.0005c 
c R f osm gav TBA NXB 18m26 dsv 3.19mg / P<.0005 
d R f osm gav Liv NXB 18m26 dsv 60.6mg * P<.2 
 
914 R f osa gav ygL NXA 18a26 dsv pool + 5.63mg I P<.0005c 
 
a R f oam gav *gl fba 18m26 dsv 6.38mg / P<.0005 
b R f os gav --- hos 18a26 dsv 19.5mg * P<.0005 
c R f osm gav mgL acn 18m26 dsv 54.0mg / P<.0005c 
915 R m osm gav NXB NXB 18m26 dsv : : 11.5mg / P<.0005 
 
a R m os gav --- hs l8m26 dav 15.0mg * P<.0005c 
b R m osm gav sto sqc 18m26 dsv 46.3mg I P<.0005c 
c R m osm gav TBA NXB 18m26 dsv 3.18mg / P<.0005 
d R m osm gav Liv NXB 18m26 dsv 132.mg P<.07 
 
916 R m osm gav --- hes 18m26 dav pooL : + 18.4mg * P<.0005c 
 
a R m osm gav sub fib 18m26 dav 43.2mg I P<.0005c 
b R m osm gav sto sqc 18m26 dav 46.3mg / P<.0005c 
917 R f sda inh liv mix 18m31 mv .> no dre P-1. - 
 
a R f sda inh mai mix 18m31 mv no dre P-1. - 
b R f ada inh tba mix 18m31 mv no dre P.1. - 
918 R f sda inh mai mix 18m31 av . 38.1mg Z P<.07 - 
 
a R f ada inh liv mix 18m31 *v no dre P-1. - 
b R f sda inh tb mix 18m31 mv 48.8mg Z P<.2 - 
919 R m sda inh liv mix 18m33 mv .> no dra P-1. - 
 
a R m sda inh tba mix 18m33 av 2.409m Z P<. - 
920 R m ada inh liv mix 18m33 av .> no dre P.1. - 
 
a R m sda inh tba mix 18033 *v no dra P-1. - 
 
aLpha-(2,4-DICHLOROPHENOXY)PROPIONIC ACID ..lug 10 . 100 .1 .10 .100 .1g 
921 N f b6a orl liv agm 76w76 evx 
 
a N f b6a orl Lun ada 76w76 avx 
b N f b6a orL tba mix 76w76 avx 
922 N f b6a orl Lun ada 76w76 avx 
 
a N f b6a orl Liv hpt 76w76 evx 
b N f b6a orl tba mix 76w76 evx 
923 N m b6a orl Liv hpt 76w76 avx 
 
a N m b6a orL Lun ado 76w76 avx 
b N m b6a orl tba mix 76w76 avx 
924 N m b6a orl Lun mix 76w76 avx 
 
a N a b6a orl liv hpt 76w76 evx 
b N m b6a orL tba mix 76w76 evx 
925 N f b6c orl lun ada 76w76 evx 
 
a N f b6c orl Liv hpt 76w76 evx 
b N f b6c orl tba mix 76w76 avx 
926 N f b6c orl iv hpt 76w76 avx 
 
a N f b6c orl Lun mix 76w76 avx 
b N f b6c orL tba tua 76w76 evx 
927 N m b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 * vx 
 
a N m b6c orl Lun mix 76w76 evx 
b N m b6c orL tba mix 76w76 * vx 
 
.10 
 
233 mg 
no dra 
 
66.5mg 
364 mg 
no dre 
no dre 
3.58gm 
no dre 
no dra 
no dra 
no dre 
 
9.26mg 
220. mg 
no dre 
106. mg 
no dre 
no dre 
 
no dre 
"91.mg 
no dre 
 
99.1mg 
 
P<.3 
P-1. 
P<. 3 
P<1. 
P-1. 
 
P-I. 
 
P<1 . 
 
p<1. 
 
p-I. 
 
p<. 5 
P<. 3 
p-I. 
 
P.1 I 
 
p-I. 
 
P<.5I 
 
P-1. 
P<.1 
 
P<.1 
P.1I. 
P<.1 
 
106 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
1,2-DICHLOROETHANE (ethylene dichloride, EDC) 107-06-2 
 
907 c00511 38.2mg 113.mg 1/20 92.5mg 16/50 183.mg 
 
a c00511 65.2mg 280.mg 1/20 92.5mg 7/50 183.mg 
b c00511 71.4mg 312.mg 0/20 92.5mg 9/50 183.mg 
c c00511 23.5mg 65.4mg 6/20 92.5mg 33/50 183.mg 
d c00511 349.mg n.s.s. 1/20 92.5mg 0/50 183.mg 
 
* c00511 63.2mg 253.mg 1/20 92.5mg 7/50 183.mg 
908 c00511 64.5mg 244.mg 2/60p 92.5mg 7/50 183.mg 
 
a c00511 71.4mg 280.mg 0/60p 92.5mg 9/50 183.mg 
b c00511 108.mg 598.mg 0/60p 92.5mg 5/50 183.mg 
c cOO511 170.mg 3.27gm 1/60p 92.5mg 2/50 183.-m 
909 cOO511 49.7mg 230.mg 0/20 60.0mg 1/50 120.mg 
 
a cOO511 62.1mg n.s.s. 1/20 60.0mg 6/50 120.mg 
b cOO511 29.3mg n.s.s. 4/20 60.0mg 15/50 120.mg 
c cOO511 62.1mg n.s.s. 1/20 60.0mg 6/50 120.mg 
d cOO511 49.7mg 230.mg 0/20 60.0mg 1/50 120.mg 
910 cOO511 49.7mg 186.mg 0/60p 60.0mg 1/50 120.mg 
 
a cOO511 67.0mg n.s.s. 4/60p 60.0mg 6/50 120.mg 
911 100m 2.76gm n.s.s. 0/133 5.31mg 0/89 11.9mg 
 
a 1001m 1.809m n.s.s. 4/133 5.31mg 4/89 11.9mg 
b 1001m 67.7mg n.s.s. 0/133 5.31mg 0/89 11.9mg 
c 100m 67.7mg n.s.s. 0/133 5.31mg 0/89 11.9mg 
d 100m 1.52gm n.s.s. 27/133 5.31mg 19/89 11.9mg 
912 1001m 47.1mg n.s.s. 4/111 4.43mg 0/69 9.19mg 
 
a 1001m 47.1mg n.s.s. 0/111 4.43mg 0/69 9.19mg 
b 1001m 47.1mg n.s.s. 1/111 4.43mg 0/69 9.19mg 
c 1001m 2.69gm n.s.s. 4/111 4.43mg 1/69 9.19mg 
d 1001m 285.mg n.s.s. 14/111 4.43mg 4/69 9.19mg 
913 cOO511 1.98mg 13.7mg 0/20 24.0mg 15/50 48.0mg 
 
a cOO511 2.02mg 17.2mg 0/20 24.0mg 14/50 48.0mg 
b cOO511 40.8mg 147.mg 0/20 24.0mg 1/50 48.0mg 
c cOO511 1.47mg 7.60mg 7/20 24.0mg 24/50 48.0mg 
d cOO511 10.4mg n.s.s. 0/20 24.0mg 2/50 48.0mg 
914 cOO511 2.27mg 13.8mg 6/60p 24.0mg 15/50 48.0mg 
 
a cOO511 2.42mg 18.9mg 5/60p 24.0mg 14/50 48.0mg 
b cOO511 4.35mg 99.1g 0/60p 24.0mg 4/50 48.0mg 
 
c cOO511 20.3mg 125.mg 1/60p 24.0mg 1/50 48.0mg 
915 cOO511 3.91mg 27.3mg 0/20 24.0mg 12/50 48.0mg 
 
a cOO511 4.16mg 56.2mg 0/20 24.0mg 9/50 48.0mg 
b cOO511 17.4mg 153.mg 0/20 24.0mg 3/50 48.0mg 
c cOO511 1.12mg 10.7mg 4/20 24.0mg 20/50 48.0mg 
d cOO511 23.8mg n.s.s. 0/20 24.0mg 0/50 48.0mg 
916 cOO511 4.98mg 61.0mg 1/60p 24.0mg 9/50 48.0mg 
 
a cOO511 17.6mg 108.mg 0/60p 24.0mg 5/50 48.0mg 
b cOO511 17.4mg 121.mg 0/60p 24.0mg 3/50 48.0mg 
917 1001m 19.7mg n.s.s. 0/90 1.08mg 0/90 2.15mg 
 
a 100m 117.mg n.s.s. 52/90 1.08mg 65/90 2.15mg 
b 1001m 111.mg n.s.s. 56/90 1.08mg 65/90 2.15mg 
918 100n 14.6mg n.s.s. 38/90 1.08mg 65/90 2.15mg 
 
a 100ln 19.7mg n.s.s. 0/90 1.08mg 0/90 2.15mg 
b 100ln 16.4mg n.s.s. 38/90 1.08mg 65/90 2.15mg 
919 1001m 15.9mg n.s.s. 0/90 .670mg 0/90 1.79mg 
 
a 1001m 45.6mg n.s.s. 14/90 .670mg 30/90 1.79mg 
920 100ln 15.9mg n.s.s. 0/90 .670mg 0/90 1.79mg 
 
a 100ln 51.5mg n.s.s. 17/90 .670mg 30/90 1.79mg 
 
19/50 
15/50 
7/50 
29/50 
 
1/50 
16/50 
15/50 
7/50 
5/50 
5/50 
15/50 
12/50 
28/50 
12/50 
15/50 
15/50 
12/50 
 
0/88 53.1mg 1/87 195.mg 0/84 
2/88 53.1mg 2/87 195.mg 3/84 
0/88 53.1mg 0/87 195.mg 0/84 
0/88 53.1mg 0/87 195.mg 0/84 
17/88 53.1mg 15/87 195.mg 11/84 
0/89 49.7mg 0/87 156.mg 0/81 
0/89 49.7mg 0/87 156.mg 0/81 
0/89 49.7mg 0/87 156.mg 0/81 
4/89 49.7mg 3/87 156.mg 0/81 
 
12/89 49.7mg 9/87 (156.mg 2/81) 
24/50 
8/50 
18/50 
33/50 
0/50 
24/50 
8/50 
4/50 
18/50 
14/50 
7/50 
9/50 
20/50 
2/50 
7/50 
6/50 
9/50 
 
0/90 10.4mg 0/90 39.8mg 0/90 
43/90 10.4mg 58/90 39.8mg 52/90 
43/90 10.4mg 56/90 39.8mg 54/90 
43/90 10.4mg 58/90 (39.8mg 52/90) 
0/90 10.4mg 0/90 39.8mg 0/90 
43/90 10.4mg 56/90 (39.8mg 54/90) 
 
0/89 7.09mg 0/90 26.8mg 0/89 
13/89 7.09mg 20/90 (26.8mg 15/89) 
0/89 7.09mg 0/90 26.8mg 0/89 
13/89 7.09mg 20/90 (26.8mg 15/89) 
 
lun:a/e; gl :acn. C 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/e,a/c. 
 
ute:esp,ess. 
 
S 
 
S 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
S 
el toni ;banb,5,3-33; 1980 
 
mgl :acn,fba. 
 
S 
 
Lliv:hpe,hpc,nnd. 
 
mgl :acn,fba. 
 
S 
S 
 
- h- -:hs; sto:sqc. C 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Haltoni ;banb,5,3-33;1980 
 
alpha-(2,4-DICHLOROPHENOXY)PROPIONIC ACID (2-(2,4-dichlorophsnoxy)propionic acid) 120-36-5 
921 1230 37.9mg n.s.s. 0/17 36.4mg 1/18 
 
a 1230 43.3mg n.s.s. 1/17 36.4mg 1/18 
b 1230 17.4*9 n.s.s. 2/17 36.4mg 5/18 
922 1238 4.05mg n.s.s. 1/17 3.89mg 1/16 
 
a 1238 6.85mg n.s.s. 0/17 3.89mg 0/16 
b 1238 4.49mg n.s.s. 2/17 3.89mg 1/16 
923 1230 37.6mg n.s.s. 1/18 33.9mg 1/17 
 
a 1230 41.7mg n.s.s. 2/18 33.9mg 1/17 
b 1230 32.7mg n.s.s. 3/18 33.9mg 2/17 
924 1238 3.38mg n.s.s. 2/18 3.62mg 2/18 
 
a 1238 4.28mg n.s.s. 1/18 3.62mg 1/18 
b 1238 1.84mg n.s.s. 3/18 3.62mg 5/18 
925 1230 35.8mg n.s.s. 0/16 36.4mg 1/17 
 
a 1230 68.1mg n.s.s. 0/16 36.4mg 0/17 
b 1230 26.1mg n.s.s. 0/16 36.4mg 2/17 
926 1238 7.71mg n.s.s. 0/16 3.89mg 0/18 
 
a 1238 7.71mg n.s.s. 0/16 3.89mg 0/18 
b 1238 7.71mg n.s.s. 0/16 3.89mg 0/18 
927 1230 24.3mg n.s.s. 0/16 33.9mg 2/17 
 
a 1230 63.4mg n.s.s. 0/16 33.9mg 0/17 
b 1230 24.3mg n.s.s. 0/16 33.9mg 2/17 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
107 
 
Brkly Code 
 
108 GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain site Xpo + Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
928 Nmo b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx . 4.27mg P<.02 - 
 
a N m b6c orL Lun mix 76w76 evx no dres P-1. - 
b N m b6c or'L tba mix 76w76 evx 2.59mg P<.002 - 
 
aLpha-C2,5-DICHLOROPHENOXY)PROPIONIC ACID . .ug....:.10 ...:. 100... 1:.mg... .10 ...:. 100... g . 10. 
 
929 N f b6a orL Lun ad. 76w76 evx .>no dr'. P-1. - 
 
a N f b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx no dre P-1. - 
b N f b6a orL tba mix 76w76 *vx no dre P-1. - 
930 N m b6a or'L Lun ado 76w76 *vx .>no dres P-1. - 
 
a N m b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx no dre. P-1. - 
b N m b6a orL tba mix 76w76 evx no dre. P-1. - 
931 N f b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx .>no dre. P-1. - 
 
a N f b6c orL Lun mix 76w76 *vx no dre. P-1. - 
b N f b6c orL tba tum 76w76 evx no dre. P-1. - 
932 N a b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx A 36.7mg P<.1 - 
 
a N a b6c orL Lun ad. 76w76 evx 36.7mg P<.1 - 
b N m b6c orL tba mix 76w76 *vx 10.5mg P<.003 - 
2,4-DICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ACID boOng. .: . .ug... .10 ...:. 100... 1:.mg... .10 ...:. 100... Ig1 ...:. 10 
 
933 N f b6a orL Lun ad. 76w76 evx .> 2.75gm * P<1. - 
 
a N f b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 *vx no dre P-1. - 
b N f b6a orL tba mix 76w76 *vx 1.07gm * P<.9 - 
934 N a b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 *vx .>no dre. P-1. - 
 
a N m b6a or'L Lun ad. 76w76 *vx no dre. P-1. - 
b N a b6a orL tba mix 76w76 evx no dre. P-1. - 
935 N f b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx .>123.mg P<.3 - 
 
a N f b6c orL Lun mix 76w76 evx no dre. PnI. - 
b N f b6c orL tba mix 76w76 avx 123.mg P<.3 - 
936 N m b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 avx .>no dre P-1. - 
 
a N m b6c orL Lun mix 76w76 evx no dre. P-1. - 
b N m b6c or'L tba mix 76w76 avx 55.5mg P<.1 - 
 
2,4.DICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ACID, n-SUTYL ESTER . 10 .I ...:. 100. 1mg.. ...:. 10 ...:. 100... .Ig .:10 
 
937 N4 f b6a or'L Liv hpt 76w76 avx .> no drea P-1. - 
 
a N f b6a or'L Lun ada 76w76 evx no dre. P-1. - 
b N f b6a orL tba mix 76w76 evx no dre. PaI. - 
938 N m b6a orL Lun ad. 76w76 avx .> no dre. P.1. - 
 
a N m b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx no dre. P-I. - 
b N m b6a ort tba mix 76w76 avx no dr'. P-I. - 
939 N f b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 *vx .>no dre. P-I. - 
 
a N f b6c or'L Lun mix 76w76 *vx no dra P-I. - 
b N f b6c or'L tba mix 76w76 avx 29.7mg P<.02 - 
940 N m b6c or'L Lun ad. 76w76 evx .>59.0mg P<.2 - 
 
a N m b6c or'L Liv hpt 76w76 avx 122.mg P<.3 - 
b N m b6c orL tba mix 76w76 evx 38.1mg P<.05 - 
2,4-DICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ACID, ISOOCTYL ESTER ... 10.I ...:. 100. 1mg . 1I...:.0.. 1.:.00... .Ig...:. 10 
 
941 N f b6a or'L Liv hpt 76w76 evx .>no dr's P-I. - 
 
a N f b6a orL Lun ad. 76w76 evx no dr'. P-I. - 
b N f b6a ort tba mix 76w76 evx no dre. P-I. - 
942 N m b6a orL Lun mix 76w76 *vx .>no dr'. P-I. - 
 
a N m b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 ovx no dre P-I. - 
b N a b6a orL tba mix 76w76 evx no dre. P-I. - 
943 N f b6c orL Lun ada 76w76 *vx A 34.0mg P<.04 - 
 
a N f b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx no dre. P-I. - 
b N f b6c orL tba mix 76w76 *vx 24.6mg P<.02 - 
944 N m b6c or'L Liv hpt 76w76 avx A 31.7mg P<.04 - 
 
a N m b6c or'L Lun mix 76w76 evx no dre. P-1. - 
b N m b6c or'L tba mix 76w76 *vx 17.7mg Psz.007 - 
2,4.DICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ACID, ISOPROPYL ESTER... ..10 ...:. 100. 1m :.Ig.... 10... ..100...:. Ig...:. 10 
 
945 N f b6a or'L Liv hpc 76w76 avx .>94.7mg P<.3 - 
 
a N f b6a orL Lun ada 76w76 *vx no dre. P-1. - 
b N f b6a orL tba mix 76w76 avx 83.2mg P<.7 - 
946 N a b6a orL Lun ad. 76w76 *vx .>no dre. P-I. - 
 
a N m b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx no dre. P-I. - 
b N m b6a orL tba mix 76w76 evx no di'e P-1. - 
947 N f b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx .>100.mg P<.3 - 
 
a N f b6c orL Lun ado 76w76 evx 100.mg P<.3 - 
b N f b6c orL tba mix 76w76 *vx 48.7mg P<.2 - 
948 N m b6c orL Lun ada 76w76 evx . 21.3mg P<.02 - 
 
a N m b6c or'L Liv hpt 76w76 evx 93.6mg P<.3 - 
b N a b6c orL tba mix 76v76 avx 16.4mg P<.009 - 
3-(3,4.DICHLOROPHENYL).1,I-DINETHIYLUREA. .: . .ug... .10 .... 100... .1mg.. . 10 ...:. 100... Ig1 ...:. 10 
 
949 N f b6a ortL Lun ad. 76w76 evx . no dre P-I. - 
 
a N f b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 avx no dre. P-1. - 
b N f b6a orL tba mix 76w76 evx no dr'. P-1. - 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl IDose lInc 2Dose 21nc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
928 1238 1.46mg n.s.s. 0/16 3.62mg 4/15 
 
a 1238 5.98mg n.s.s. 0/16 3.62mg 0/15 
b 1238 1.04mg 11.7mg 0/16 3.62mg 6/15 
 
alpha-(2,5-DICHLOROPHENOXY)PROPIONIC ACID 
929 1231 16.0mg n.s.s. 1/17 13.4mg 
 
a 1231 26.6mg n.s.s. 0/17 13.4mg 
b 1231 17.7mg n.s.s. 2/17 13.4mg 
930 1231 15.4mg n.s.s. 2/18 12.5mg 
 
a 1231 23.5mg n.s.s. 1/18 12.5mg 
b 1231 16.5mg n.s.s. 3/18 12.5mg 
931 1231 25.1mg n.s.s. 0/16 13.4mg 
 
a 1231 25.1mg n.s.s. 0/16 13.4mg 
b 1231 25.1mg n.s.s. 0/16 13.4mg 
932 1231 9.00mg n.s.s. 0/16 12.5mg 
 
a 1231 9.00mg n.s.s. 0/16 12.5mg 
b 1231 4.25mg 57.2mg 0/16 12.5mg 
 
6965-71 -5 
 
1/18 
0/18 
1/18 
1/17 
0/17 
1/17 
0/17 
0/17 
0/17 
2/17 
2/17 
6/17 
 
Inn.s;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
2,4-DICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ACID (2,4-D) 94-75-7 
 
933 1232 64.6mg n.s.s. 1/17 20.4mg 0/16 44.3mg 1/15 
 
a 1232 24.1mg n.s.s. 0/17 20.4mg 0/16 44.3mg 0/15 
b 1232 43.4mg n.s.s. 2/17 20.4mg 1/16 44.3mg 2/15 
934 1232 22.2mg n.s.s. 1/18 19.0mg 0/18 41.2mg 0/12 
 
a 1232 40.0mg n.s.s. 2/18 19.0mg 2/18 41.2mg 1/12 
b 1232 45.0mg n.s.s. 3/18 19.0mg 2/18 41.2mg 1/12 
935 1232 20.1mg n.s.s. 0/16 20.4mg 1/17 
 
a 1232 38.2mg n.s.s. 0/16 20.4mg 0/17 
b 1232 20.1mg n.s.s. 0/16 20.4mg 1/17 
936 1232 35.5mg n.s.s. 0/16 19.0mg 0/17 
 
a 1232 35.5mg n.s.s. 0/16 19.0mg 0/17 
b 1232 13.6mg n.s.s. 0/16 19.0mg 2/17 
 
2,4-DICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ACID, n-BUTYL ESTER 94-80-4 
937 1237 36.0mg n.s.s. 0/17 20.4mg 0/16 
 
a 1237 36.0mg n.s.s. 1/17 20.4mg 0/16 
b 1237 36.0mg n.s.s. 2/17 20.4mg 0/16 
938 1237 24.9mg n.s.s. 2/18 19.0mg 1/18 
 
a 1237 37.6mg n.s.s. 1/18 19.0m9 0/18 
b 1237 14.9mg n.s.s. 3/18 19.0mg 3/18 
939 1237 40.5mg n.s.s. 0/16 20.4mg 0/18 
 
a 1237 40.5mg n.s.s. 0/16 20.4mg 0/18 
b 1237 10.2mg n.s.s. 0/16 20.4mg 4/18 
940 1237 14.5mg n.s.s. 0/16 19.0mg 2/18 
 
a 1237 19.8mg n.s.s. 0/16 19.0mg 1/18 
b 1237 11.5mg n.s.s. 0/16 19.0mg 3/18 
 
Innes;ntis,1968/1969 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
2,4-DICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ACID, ISOOCTYL ESTER 25168-26-7 
941 1236 33.8mg n.s.s. 0/17 18.1mg 0/17 
 
a 1236 33.8mg n.s.s. 1/17 18.1mg 0/17 
b 1236 22.3mg n.s.s. 2/17 18.1mg 1/17 
942 1236 15.7mg n.s.s. 2/18 16.8mg 2/18 
 
a 1236 19.9mg n.s.s. 1/18 16.8mg 1/18 
b 1236 13.2mg n.s.s. 3/18 16.8mg 3/18 
943 1236 10.3mg n.s.s. 0/16 18.1mg 3/17 
 
a 1236 33.8mg n.s.s. 0/16 18.1mg 0/17 
b 1236 8.46mg n.s.s. 0/16 18.1mg 4/17 
944 1236 9.56mg n.s.s. 0/16 16.8mg 3/17 
 
a 1236 31.4mg n.s.s. 0/16 16.8mg 0/17 
b 1236 6.65mg 239.mg 0/16 16.8mg 5/17 
 
2,4-DICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ACID, ISOPROPYL ESTER 94-11-1 
945 1235 15.4mg n.s.s. 0/17 15.7mg 1/17 
 
a 1235 29.3mg n.s.s. 1/17 15.7mg 0/17 
b 1235 10.5mg n.s.s. 2/17 15.7mg 3/17 
946 1235 13.7mg n.s.s. 2/18 14.6mg 2/18 
 
a 1235 29.0mg n.s.s. 1/18 14.6mg 0/18 
b 1235 11.5mg n.s.s. 3/18 14.6mg 3/18 
947 1235 16.3mg n.s.s. 0/16 15.7mg 1/18 
 
a 1235 16.3mg n.s.s. 0/16 15.7mg 1/18 
b 1235 12.0mg n.s.s. 0/16 15.7mg 2/18 
948 1235 7.32mg n.s.s. 0/16 14.6mg 4/18 
 
a 1235 15.2mg n.s.s. 0/16 14.6mg 1/18 
b 1235 6.20mg 361.mg 0/16 14.6mg 5/18 
 
3-(3,4-DICHLOROPHENYL)-1,1.DINETHYLUREA (Karimx, diuron) 330-54-1 
949 1276 215.mg n.s.s. 1/17 193.mg 1/17 
 
a 1276 361.mg n.s.s. 0/17 193.mg 0/17 
b 1276 170.mg n.s.s. 2/17 193.mg 2/17 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
109 
 
Brkly Code 
 
110 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
950 N m b6a orl Lun ad. 76w76 evx 
 
a N m b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx 
b N m b6a orl tba mix 76w76 *vx 
951 N f b6c orl lun ade 76w76 *vx 
 
a N f b6c orl Liv hpt 76w76 *vx 
b N f b6c orl tba mix 76w76 *vx 
952 N m b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 *vx 
 
a N m b6c orl lun ade 76w76 *vx 
b N m b6c orL tba mix 76w76 *vx 
 
2,4-DICHLOROPHENYLBENZENE SULFONA 
953 N f b6a orL Lun mix 76w76 ev 
 
a N f b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 *v 
b N f b6a orL tba mix 76w76 *v 
954 N m b6a orL Lun ad. 76w76 *v 
 
a N m b6a orL liv hpt 76w76 *v 
b N m b6a orl tba mix 76w76 ev 
955 N f b6c orL Lun ad, 76w76 *v 
 
a N f b6c orL liv hpt 76w76 *v 
b N f b6c orL tba mix 76w76 av 
956 N m b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 ev 
 
a N m b6c orL Lun ada 76w76 ev 
b N m b6c orL tba mix 76w76 *v 
DICHLORVOS 
 
957 N f b6c set TBA NXB 80w92 v 
 
a N f b6c eat Liv NXB 80w92 v 
b N f b6c eat Lun NX8W92 v 
958 N m b6c eat TBA NXB 80w92 v 
 
a N m b6c eat Liv NXB 80w92 v 
b N m b6c eat Lun NXB 80w92 v 
959 R f ose set TBA NXB 19m26 v 
 
a R f osm eat Liv NXB 19m26 v 
960 R m osm eat TBA NXB 19m26 v 
 
a R m osm eat Liv NXB l9m26 v 
961 R f cfc inh pit tum 24m24 a 
 
a R f cfe inh Liv tum 24m24 a 
b R f cfo inh tba mix 24m24 a 
962 R m cfi inh pit tum 24m24 a 
 
a R m cf inh Liv tum 24m24 e 
b R * cfe inh thy tum 24m24 a 
c R cfe inh tba mix 24m24 e 
DICOFOL 
 
963 N f b6c eat TBA NXB 78w91 v 
 
a N f b6c eat Liv NXB 78w9l v 
b N f b6c eat Lun NXB 78w9l v 
964 N m b6c eat Liv NXA 78w91 v 
 
a N m b6c eat Liv hpc 78w9l v 
b N m b6c eat TBA NXS 78w9l v 
c N a b6c eat Liv NXS 78w91 v 
d N * b6c eat Lun NXB 78w9l v 
965 R f oam eat TBA NXB 18.26 
 
a- R f osm eat Liv NXB 18.26 
 
966 R m ose oat TBA NXB 18.26 v 
 
a R m om eat liv NXS l8m26 v 
 
N,N' -DICYCLOHEXYLTHI(OLJREA 
 
967 N f b6c eat TBA NXS 25m24 
 
a N f b6c eat Liv NXB 25m24 
b N f b6c eat Lun NXB 25m24 
968 N m b6c eat TBA NXB 25m24 
 
a N m b6c eat Liv NXB 25m24 
b N m b6c oat Lun NXB 25m24 
969 R f f 34 eat TBA NXB 25m25 
 
a R f f34 eat Liv NXB 25m25 
970 R m f34 eat thy cca 25m25 
 
a R m f34 eat thy NXA 25m25 
b R m f34 eat ski bcc 25m25 
c R m f34 eat TBA NXB 25m25 
d R m f34 eat Liv NIXB 25m25 
DICYCLOPENTADIENE DIOXIDE 
 
971 N f chi eat Lun mix 64w86 a 
 
a N f chi eat Liv mix 64w86 a 
b N f chi eat tb mix 64w86 a 
972 N m chi eat Lun mix 77w86 
 
a N m chi eat Liv mix 77w86 
b N m chi eat tba mix 77w86 
 
TE 
fx 
fx 
rx 
Fx 
rx 
Fx 
rx 
rx 
ix 
rx 
Fx 
rx 
 
TD50 2Thilpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
437.mg 
no dre 
260. mg 
600.mg 
no dre 
388.mg 
1. 15gm 
1.15gm 
361.mg 
 
l. : 1ug.: 10 .: 100. g :..g :10. :100.. . :1..10 
 
1.929m 
no dre 
867.mg 
866.mg 
no dre 
1.689m 
1.929m 
no dro 
929.mg 
266.mg 
924.og 
218.mg 
 
P<.4 - 
P-1. _ 
P<.3 - 
P<.2 - 
Pal. _ 
P<.05 - 
P<.3 - 
P<.3 - 
P<.05 - 
 
P<.6 - 
Pal. 1 
P<.4 4 
P<.4 4 
 
P-1. _ 
P<.7 - 
P<.3 - 
P-1. _ 
P<.09 - 
P<. 003 - 
P<.1 
 
P<. 002 - 
 
l00ng..:..lug. 10. 100.... :1mg. : 10... 100.I :g1.:.10 : 100 :..Io 
 
7.859 * P<. - 
no dre P-1. 
1.539m * P<.8 
 
40.3mg \ P<.08 - 
no dre PaI. 
725.mg * P<.8 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-.1 
no dre P-1. 
 
+ 4.65mg * P<.009 - 
 
no dre PI.. 
 
24.5mg * P<.9 _ 
11.3mg * P<.3 - 
50.0mg * P<.2 - 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
bO0ng..: ..ug. :10. :100. g :1g : 10. :100.. :.g. :.10 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
32.9mg * P<.04 c 
34.8mg * P<.04 c 
59.2mg * P<.4 
32.9mg * P<.04 
616.mg * P<.6 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
517.mg * P<.7 
 
lOOng . . .ug. :10. :100. 1g :1g :10. :100. . : :.10 
 
:> 122.9m * PM. - 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre PaI. 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
#5.48gm * P<.03 - 
7.41gm * P<.04 
26.19m * P<.04 
3.91m * P<.3 
15.6gm * P<.09 
 
lOOng .: ..ug. :10. :100. g :..g :10 100.:. 1 g . :10 
 
1 .66"gm * P<.2 - 
no dre P-1. 
 
789.mg * P<.2 - 
373.mg \ P<.009 - 
930.mg * P<.05 - 
149.mg \ P<.003 - 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
950 1276 95.6mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1276 336.mg n.s.s. 
b 1276 70.7mg n.s.s. 
951 1276 147.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1276 382.mg n.s.s. 
b 1276 117.mg n.s.s. 
952 1276 187.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1276 187.mg n.s.s. 
b 1276 109.mg n.s.s. 
 
2/18 
1/18 
3/18 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
 
180.m9 
180.m9 
180. 9 
193. mg 
193. mg 
193. mg 
180.mg 
180 .mg 
180.mg 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
4/17 
0/17 
6/17 
2/18 
0/18 
3/18 
1/18 
1/18 
3/18 
 
2,4-DICHLOROPHENYLBENZENE SULFONATE (Genits-R99) 97-16-5 
953 1288 267.mg n .s.. 1/17 339.mg 2/17 
 
a 1288 634.mg n.s.s. 0/17 339.mg 0/17 
b 1288 182.mg n.s.s. 2/17 339.mg 4/17 
954 1288 181.mg n.s.s. 2/18 316.mg 4/18 
 
a 1288 626.mg n.s.s. 1/18 316.mg 0/18 
b 1288 196.mg n.s.s. 3/18 316.mg 4/18 
955 1288 313.mg n.s.s. 0/16 339.mg 1/16 
 
a 1288 597.mg n.s.s. 0/16 339.mg 0/16 
b 1288 228.mg n.s.s. 0/16 339.mg 2/16 
956 1288 107.mg 1.449m 0/16 316.mg 6/17 
 
a 1288 227.mg n.s.s. 0/16 316.mg 2/17 
b 1288 92.7mg 837.mg 0/16 316.mg 7/17 
 
DICHLORVOS (DDVP, Vapona) 62-73-7 
957 c00113 86.5mg n.s.s. 1/10 
 
a c00113 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/10 
b c00113 277.mg n.s.s. 0/10 
958 c00113 20.1mg n.s.s. 1/10 
 
a c00113 76.1mg n.s.s. 0/10 
b c00113 103.mg n.s.s. 0/10 
959 c00113 5.73mg n.s.s. 8/10 
 
a c00113 75.7mg n.s.s. 1/10 
960 c00113 8.10mg n.s.s. 6/10 
 
a c00113 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/10 
961 96 1.97mg 172.mg 7/47 
 
a 96 .165mg n.s.s. 0/47 
b 96 1.48mg n.s.s. 36/47 
962 96 2.76mg n.s.s. 4/50 
 
a 96 8.14mg n.s.s. 0/50 
b 96 5.04mg n.s.s. 2/50 
c 96 1.97mg n.s.s. 18/50 
 
35.1g 
35.1mg 
35.1mg 
32.4mg 
32.4mg 
32.4mg 
5.50mg 
5.50m9 
4.40mg 
4.40mg 
18.9ug 
18.9ug 
18.9ug 
13.3ug 
13.3ug 
13.3ug 
13.3ug 
 
11/50 70.2mg 
 
0/50 70.2mg 
1/50 70.2mg 
22/50 (64.8mg 
12/50 64.8mg 
7/50 64.8mg 
34/50 (11.9mg 
 
3/50 11.9mg 
21/50 9.50mg 
 
0/50 9.50mg 
5/47 .189mg 
0/47 .189mg 
28/47 .189mg 
10/50 .133mg 
0/50 .133mg 
9/50 .133mg 
30/50 .133mg 
 
9/50 
0/50 
1/50 
14/50) 
7/50 
5/50 
30/50) 
 
1/50 
33/50 
 
0/50 
12/47 
0/47 
36/47 
 
6/50 
0/50 
5/50 
26/50 
 
1.89mg 
1.89m9 
1.89m9 
1. 33mg 
1. 33mg 
1. 33mg 
1. 33mg 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
BLair;artx,35,281 -294; 1976 
 
16/46 
0/46 
33/46 
10/50 
 
1/50 
5/50 
24/50 
 
DICOFOL (KeLthan.) 115-32-2 
963 c00486 65.1mg n.s.s. 
 
a c00486 309.mg n.s.s. 
b c00486 296.mg n.s.s. 
964 c00486 15.9mg n.s.s. 
 
a c00486 16.8mg n.s.s. 
b c00486 16.1mg n.s.s. 
c c00486 15.9mg n.s.s. 
d c00486 114.mg n.s.s. 
 
965 c00486 46.3mg n.s.s. I 
 
a c00486 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
 
966 c00486 13.4mg n.s.s. I 
 
a c00486 103.mg n.s.s. 
 
N,Nl'-DICYCLOHEXYLTHIO9JREA 1 
967 c04524 4.84gm n.s.s. 3 
 
a c04524 30.1gm n.s.s. 
b c04524 23.99g n.s.s. 
 
968 c04524 4.43gm n.s.s. 3 
 
a c04524 6.61gm n.a.s. 2 
b c04524 13.69m n.s.s. 
 
969 c04524 3.029m n.s.s. 4 
 
a c04524 15.2gm n.s.s. 
970 c04524 2.459m n.s.s. 
 
a c04524 3.32go n.s.s. 
b c04524 7.90gm n.s.s. 
 
c c04524 1.18gm n.s.s. 3 
d c04524 5.929m n.s.s. 
 
DICYCLOPENTADIENE DIOXIDE 8 
971 381 407.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 381 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
b 381 232.mg n.s.s. 
972 381 140.mg 12.19m 
 
* 381 380.mg n.s.s. 
b 381 66.5mg 962.mg 
 
5/20 
1/20 
1/20 
3/20 
3/20 
5/20 
3/20 
1/20 
16/20 
0/20 
10/20 
0/20 
 
1212-29 
36/49 
5/49 
4/49 
39/50 
26/50 
9/50 
48/50 
1/50 
4/50 
1/50 
0/50 
36/50 
0/50 
 
11*21*0 
3/13 
0/13 
9/13 
2/16 
2/16 
9/16 
 
13.0mg 6/50 26.0mg 
13.0mg 0/50 26.0mg 
13.0mg 0/50 26.0mg 
26.4mg 23/50 54.0mg 
26.4mg 22/50 54.0mg 
26.4mg 34/50 54.0mg 
26.4mg 23/50 54.0mg 
26.4mg 2/50 54.0mg 
13.0mg 27/50 26.0mg 
13.0mg 0/50 26.0mg 
12.8mg 23/50 (26.4mg 
12.8mg 1/50 26.4mg 
.9 
 
3.25gm 37/50 6.50gm 
3.25gm 2/50 6.509m 
3.25gm 2/50 6.509m 
3.00gm 37/50 6.00gm 
3.00gm 18/50 6.00gm 
3.009m 5/50 6.00gm 
1.25gm 31/50 2.50gm 
 
1.25gm 1/50 2.50gm 
1.009m 9/50 2.00gm 
1.00gm 7/50 2.00gm 
1.00gm 0/50 2.00gm 
1.00gm 36/50 2.009m 
1.00gm 3/50 2.00gm 
 
493.mg 2/19 1.049m 
493.mg 0/19 1.04gm 
493.mg 7/19 1.04gm 
455.mg 5/15 (909.mg 
455.mg 3/15 909.mg 
455.mg 13/15 (909.mg 
 
8/50 
0/50 
0/50 
36/50 
35/50 
38/50 
36/50 
 
5/50 
28/50 
 
0/50 
16/50) 
 
1/50 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:s/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun: a/a, a/c. 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
L iv:hpm,hpc,nnd. 
 
37/50 
 
3/50 
4/50 
39/50 
25/50 
 
9/50 
43/50 
 
1/50 
12/50 
6/50 
3/50 
43/50 
 
2/50 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
tun:a/m,m/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
S 
thy:fca,fcc. S 
 
S 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
0/15 
0/15 
1/15 
2/16) 
3/16 
8/16) 
 
Weisburger;jept,2,325-356;1978/pmrs.com./Russfisld 1973 
 
111 
 
Brkly Code 
 
112 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
973 R m cdr mat liv mix 18X25 
 
a R m cdr sat tba mix 18.25 
 
TD5O 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
3.91gm * P<.8 - 
176.mg * P<.03 - 
 
DIELDRIN lOOng.. :. .lug... .10 ...:. 100. 1m :.lg .:10 ...:. 100... Ig.9 -10 
 
974 H I syg oat Liv hpt 23.26 * . 176.mg * P<.3 - 
 
a H f syg oat Lun turn 23.26 e no dre P-1. - 
b H f syg mat tba mix 23m26 * 355.mg * P<.6 - 
975 H m syg eat Liv hpt 26.26 * . 198.mg * P<.4 - 
 
a* Hm yg eattun ads 26m26 m 732.mg * P<.2 - 
b NHmsyg eat tbasix 26a26e 69.9mg * P<.05- 
976 N f b6c oat TBA NXB 80w91 s a no dre P-1. - 
 
a N f b6c eat Liv NXBS M9 a 1.09mg \P<.06 
b NIf b6c sat Lun NXBS8Ov91s 5.05mg *P<.4 
 
977 N m b6c mat TBA NXS 80w91 a : 1.06mg *P<.2 - 
 
a N a b6c mat Liv NXB 80w91 a 1.04mg *P<.2 
b N ab6c mat Lun NX 8Ow9Ias 24.7mg *P<.9 
 
976 N m b6c eat Liv hpc 80w89 a pooL A1.35mg *P<.08 a 
979 N b c3e mat Liv hpa 24m24 a + 4.09mg P<.0005+ 
 
a N b c3m mat Lun ad. 24m24 a no dre P-1. 
b N bc3e oat Lun car 24.24.o no dre P-l. 
 
980 N b c3h mat Liv hpt 24.24 .+ .3.08mg P<.0005 
 
a N b c3h oat Liv hpc 24m24 167.mg P<.8 
 
b N b c3h mat tba ben 24m24 3.10mg P<.0005 
c N b c3h mat tba meL 24m24 no dre P-I. 
 
981 N f cfl mat Lun ad. 26.3 am + .606mg Z P.c.002 - 
 
a N f cfl eat Liv mix 26.32 am .642mg * P<.0005+ 
b N I cfi eat Liv Lpb 28.32 am 1.96mg Z P<.0005 
 
c N I cfl mat Lun cat 28.32 am 1.78mg Z P<.06 - 
982 N f cfl eat Liv mix 25m30 asa + 1.49mg * P<.0005. 
 
a N f cfl mat Liv Lpb 25m30 ama 9.72mg * P<.0005 
 
b N f cfl mat Lun adm 25m30 ama no dtm P-1. - 
c N f cfl mat Lun cat 25m30 ama no dtm P-1. - 
983 N f cfl mat Liv Lpb 90w90 m + 2.59mg P<.007 
 
a N I cfl mat Liv mix 90w90 m 1.05mg P<.02 . 
b N f cli mat Lun adm 90w90 m no dtm P-1. - 
c N I cfl mat Lun cat 90w90 m no dtm P-1. - 
984 N f cli mat Liv mix 30.30 m A 3.11mg P<.02 . 
 
a N I cfi mat Liv Lpb 30.30 m 12.1mg P<.06 
 
b N I cfl mat Lun adm 30m30 m no dtm P-1. - 
c N f cfl mat Lun cat 30.30 m no dtm P.1. - 
985 N f cfl mat Liv mix 25m25 m + .1.16mg P<.002 . 
 
a N I cfl mat Liv Lpb 25.25 m 3.96mg P<.007 
 
b N f cfl mat Lun adm 25m25 m 5.69mg P<.4 - 
c N f cli mat Lun cat 25m25 m no dtm P-1. - 
986 N f cfl mat Liv mix 26.26 a + .567mg Pcz.0005. 
 
a N I cfl mat Liv Lct 26.26 m 1.59mg P<.0005. 
b N f cfl mat Lun tum 26m26 a no dtm P-1. - 
987 N a cfl mat Liv mix 28m31 am .+. .547mg * P<.0005. 
 
a N m cfi mat Liv Lpb 26.31 am 1.68mg * P<.0005 
 
b N m cfl mat Lun adm 26.31 ame 2.13mg z P<.5 - 
c N . cfl mat Lun cat 28.31 so 3.71mg Z P<.4 - 
988 N m cfl mat Liv mix 26m30 ama .+ .1.12mg Z P<.0005. 
 
a N m cfi mat Liv Lpb 26.30 ama 4.66mg *P<.0005 
 
b N m cfl mat Lun ad. 26.30 ama no dtm P-I. - 
c N m cfl mat Lun cat 26.30 ama no dtm P-1. - 
989 N.o cli mat Liv mix 30m30 m + ..913mg P<.002 4 
 
a N . cli mat Liv Lpb 30m30 a 5.12mg P<.04 
 
b N m cfl mat Lun adm 30m30 a no dtm P-1. - 
c N m cfl mat Lun cat 30m30 m no dre P-1. - 
990 N m cfl mat Liv mix 30m30 m . 1.91mg P<.04 4 
 
a N m cfl mat Liv Lpb 30m30 a 6.58mg P<.2 
 
b N m cfl mat Lun adm 30m30 a no dtm P-1. - 
c N m cfl mat Lun cat 30m30 a no dtm P-1. - 
991 N o cfl mat Liv mix 26m29 a . + .713mg P<.002 . 
 
a N m cfl mat Liv Lpb 26.29 m 4.02mg P<.006 
 
b N m cli mat Lun adm 26m29 a no dtm P-1. - 
c N acfl mat Lun cart26.29m no dtm P-1. - 
992 N m cfl mat Liv mix 26.26 m <. noTDSO P<.0005. 
 
a N m cfl mat Liv Lct 26.26 m 1.28mg P<.0005. 
b N m cfl mat Lun tum 26m26m no dtm P-I. - 
993 ft 1 34 mat TBA NXS 24m24 a :>489.mg *P<i. - 
 
a ft f 134 mat Liv NXB 24m24 a no dtm P-I. 
 
994 ft m 134 mat TBA NXB 24m24 a :>7.28mg *P<.4 - 
 
a ft m 134 mat Liv NXB 24m24 a no dtm P-1. 
995 ft b osm mat Lun Lys 24m24 mas. no dtm P-1. 
 
a R b omm mat tba mix 24m24 ms 
 
no dre P-1. + 
 
996 Rt I om mat TBA NXB 21m26 sv 
 
a R f oI mat Liv NXB 21m26 sv 
 
no dre P-1. 
38.4mg * P<.8 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
973 381 309.mg n.s.s. 1/17 120.mg 1/19 240.mg 1/13 
 
a 381 74.5mg n.s.s. 13/17 120.mg 10/19 240.mg 9/13 
 
DIELDRIN (HEOD. c00124 is NCI TR# 21; c00125 is NCI TR# 22) 60-57-1 
974 1000 28.7mg n.s.s. 0/6 2.09mg 0/2 6.27mg 0/8 18. 
 
a 1000 11.8mg n.s.s. 0/39 2.09mg 0/32 6.27mg 0/34 18. 
b 1000 54.3mg n.s.s. 5/39 2.09mg 1/32 6.27mg 5/34 18. 
975 1000 32.2mg n.s.s. 0/2 1.84mg 0/3 5.52mg 0/5 16. 
 
* 1000 119.mg n.s.s. 0/40 1.84mg 0/32 5.52mg 0/32 16. 
b 1000 26.5mg n.s.s. 3/40 1.84mg 5/32 5.52mg 5/32 16. 
976 c00124 .878mg n.s.s. 3/20 .290mg 13/50 .560mg 9/50 
 
a c00124 .446mg n.s.s. 0/20 .290mg 6/50 (.560mg 2/50) 
b c00124 1.75mg n.s.s. 0/20 .290mg 2/50 .560mg 2/50 
977 c00124 .399mg n.s.s. 4/20 .260mg 14/50 .520mg 18/50 
 
a c00124 .422mg n.s.s. 3/20 .260mg 12/50 .520mg 16/50 
b c00124 1.30mg n.s.s. 1/20 .260mg 4/50 .520mg 3/50 
978 c00124 .508mg n.s.s. 17/95p .260mg 12/50 .520mg 16/50 
979 20. 2.40mg 10.6mg 9/134 1.25mg 36/148 
 
a 20. 27.8mg n.s.s. 3/134 1.25mg 1/148 
b 20. 38.1mg n.s.s. 0/134 1.25mg 0/148 
980 22a 1.95mg 6.43mg 27/200 1.25mg 69/200 
 
a 22a 16.8mg n.s.s. 4/200 1.25mg 5/200 
b 22. 1.94mg 6.79mg 30/200 1.25mg 71/200 
c 22a 24.7mg n.s.s. 21/200 1.25mg 9/200 
 
981 103a .300mg 2.84mg 48/297 12.8ug 23/90 .124mg 30/87 (1.3 
 
a 103a .481mg .870mg 39/297 12.8ug 24/90 .124mg 32/87 1.3 
b 103a 1.49mg 2.66mg 0/297 12.8ug 4/90 .124mg 5/87 1.3 
c 103a .624mg n.s.s. 18/297 12.8ug 12/90 .124mg 12/87 (1.3 
982 103b .959mg 2.69mg 8/78 .162mg 5/30 .325mg 12/28 .65 
 
a 103b 4.87mg 29.5mg 0/78 .162mg 0/30 .325mg 1/28 .65 
b 103b 2.03mg n.s.s. 24/78 .162mg 7/30 .325mg 3/28 (.65 
c 103b 30.6mg n.s.s. 8/78 .162mg 0/30 .325mg 0/28 .65 
983 103c .978mg 31.8mg 0/22 1.30mg 5/22 
 
a 103c .438mg n.s.s. 5/22 1.30mg 13/22 
b 103c 2.93mg n.s.s. 7/22 1.30mg 2/22 
c 103c 4.41mg n.s.s. 0/22 1.30mg 0/22 
984 103d 1.20mg n.s.s. 3/28 1.30mg 8/19 
 
a 103d 2.98mg n.s.s. 0/28 1.30mg 2/19 
b 103d 7.71mg n.s.s. 5/28 1.30mg 0/19 
c 103d 7.71mg n.s.s. 0/28 1.30mg 0/19 
985 103s .548mg 5.32mg 4/24 1.30mg 15/24 
 
a 103. 1.50mg 51.4mg 0/24 1.30mg 5/24 
b 103. 1.41mg n.s.s. 4/24 1.30mg 7/24 
c 103. 6.68mg n.s.s. 3/24 1.30mg 0/24 
986 89 .298mg 1.27mg 10/44 1.30mg 26/30 
 
a 89 .842mg 3.48mg 0/44 1.30mg 14/30 
b 89 4.36mg n.s.s. 27/44 1.30mg 8/30 
 
987 103a .416mg .729mg 58/288 11.8ug 32/124 .118mg 34/111 1.1 
 
a 103a 1.29mg 2.25mg 12/288 11.8ug 5/124 .118mg 9/111 1.1 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
.8 g 1/9 
.8 g 0/38 
.8mg 5/38 
.6mg 1/13 
.6mg 1/40 
.6mg 10/40 
 
50mg 15/148) 
50mg 136/148 
50mg 81/148 
50mg 0/148) 
50mg 18/30 
50mg 5/30 
50mg 3/30 
s0mg 1/30 
 
15mg 165/176 
15mg 100/176 
 
Brkly Code 
 
CabraL ;cLt,6,241-246; 1979 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
tun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Davis;txap,4, 187-189;1962 
Epsteincreview) IH J Davis};stev,4,1-52;1975 
 
1.30mg 9/17 2.60mg 
1.30mg 2/17 2.60mg 
1.30mg 1/17 2.60mg 
1.30mg 0/17 2.60mg 
 
b 103a .439mg n.s.s. 95/288 11.8ug 47/124 .118mg 42/111(1.15mg 32/176) 
c 103a .844mg n.s.s. 23/288 11.8ug 14/124 .118mg 13/111(1.15mg 2/176) 
 
988 103b .714mg 2.09mg 9/78 .150mg 6/30 .300mg 13/30 .600mg 26/30 1.20mg 5/11 2.40mg 
 
a 103b 2.59mg 9.94mg 0/78 .150mg 2/30 .300mg 1/30 .600mg 3/30 1.20mg 1/11 2.40mg 
b 103b 3.96mg n.s.s. 45/78 .150mg 17/30 .300mg 11/30 .600mg 14/30 1.20mg 2/11 (2.40mg 
c 103b 14.7mg n.s.s. 1/78 .150mg 1/30 .300mg 1/30 .600mg 1/30 1.20mg 0/11 2.40mg 
989 103c .420mg 3.87mg 8/23 1.20mg 20/24 
 
a 103c 1.85mg n.s.s. 1/23 1.20mg 6/24 
b 103c 4.13mg n.s.s. 7/23 1.20mg 4/24 
c 103c 8.99mg n.s.s. 0/23 1.20mg 0/24 
990 103d .589mg n.s.s. 7/30 1.20mg 6/10 
 
a 103d 1.41mg n.s.s. 1/30 1.20mg 2/10 
b 103d 2.93mg n.s.s. 13/30 1.20mg 1/10 
c 103d 3.75mg n.s.s. 1/30 1.20mg 0/10 
991 103. .305mg 3.96mg 10/24 1.06mg 19/22 
 
a 103. 1.52mg 35.7mg 0/24 1.06mg 5/22 
b 103. 1.93mg n.s.s. 11/24 1.06mg 8/22 
c 103. 6.86mg n.s.s. 1/24 1.06mg 0/22 
992 89 n.s.s. .469mg 11/45 1.20mg 30/30 
 
a 89 .682mg 3.03mg 2/45 1.20mg 16/30 
b 89 2.87mg n.s.s. 27/45 1.20mg 11/30 
 
93 c00125 1.62mg n.s.s. 17/24 100.ug 17/24 .500mg 16/24 2.50mg 14/24 
a c00125 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/24 100.ug 0/24 .500mg 0/24 2.50mg 0/24 
994 c00125 1.64mg n.s.s. 5/24 80.Oug 9/24 .400mg 7/24 2.00mg 9/24 
 
a c00125 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/24 80.Oug 0/24 .400mg 0/24 2.00mg 0/24 
 
95 23 35.4mg n.s.s. 1/17 22.5ug 4/22 90.Oug 2/23 .450mg 2/18 2.25mg 1/20 4.50mg 
 
6.75mg 0/11 
 
a 23 23.3mg n.s.s. 3/17 22.5ug 8/22 90.Oug 8/23 .450mg 4/18 2.25mg 4/20 4.50mg 
 
6.75mg 0/11 
 
996 c00124 .635mg n.s.s. 7/10 1.10mg 39/50 (1.70mg 27/50) 
 
a c00124 9.44mg n.s.s. 0/10 1.10mg 1/50 1.70mg 1/50 
 
Walker;fctx, 11,415-432; 1973 
 
16/21 
3/21 
 
0/21) 
0/21 
 
Thorp.;fctx, 11,433-442; 1973 
Walker;fctx, 11,415-432; 1973 
 
12/17 
9/17 
1/17) 
0/17 
 
Thorpe;fctx, 11,433-442; 1973 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
0/18 
 
Fitzhugh;fctx,2,551 -562;1964 
 
3/18 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
113 
 
114 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
 
997 R f osm *at adr HXA 21.25 sv pool 
998 R f osm eat Liv tur 28.29 ov 
 
a R f osm eat tbm mix 28.29 *v 
99 R * osm mat TBA NXB 21.26 sv 
 
a R m oes eat Liv NXB 21.26 sv 
1000 R . om. oat liv hom 29-29 ov 
a R * oam oat tbe mix 29.29 ov 
1001 R f cfo at tba mix 24.24 * 
1002 R m cfm oat tba mix 24.24 a 
1003 R f nss eat tba tur 24m24 
1004 R m nss oat tba tur 24m24 
 
TD5O 2TIailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
#4.42mg \ P<.003 - 
no dre PaI. - 
no drm P-1. - 
3.34mg * P<.6 - 
no dre P-1. 
 
no drm PaI. - 
no drm P-1. - 
no drm P-1. - 
2.01mg * P<.5 - 
57.2mg * P<.9 - 
40.5mg * P<.8 - 
 
DIELDRIN, PHOTO- j00ng.. .. :lug . 10. :100.. :1mg. :10. :100. :Ig :. 10 
 
1005 N f b6c oit TBA NXS 80w92 :> .743mg * P<.6 - 
a N f b6c oat liv NXS 80w92 2.53mg * P<.4 
b H f b6c at lun NXB 8Ow92 6.78mg * P<.9 
 
1006 N m b6c mit TBA NXB 80w93 :> .494mg * P<.7 - 
a M m b6c oat liv NXB 80w93 1.96m9 * P<l. 
 
b H m b6c oat lun NXB WM3 .465mg * P<.09 
 
1007 R f osm mat mgl NXA 16.26 iv : #.612mg * P<.04 - 
a R f osm et TBA NXB l6a26 *v .327mg * P<.4 
b R f oss oet liv HXB 16.26 iv no dre P-1. 
1008 R m ois mat TBA NXB 19.26 :> no dri P-1. 
a R * osi set liv NXS 19.26 7.72mg * P<.4 
 
1009 R * osi oet --- hem 19.25 pool #2.89mg * P<.02 - 
D,L-DIEPOXYBUTANE 100ng. ..:. lug. :10. 1 :100 . 1mg : .. : 10. 1 :100 .. : 1 : 10 
 
1010 R f *md gav sto tum 52w52 .> no drm P-1. 
DIETHYL-bmtai,gima-EPOXYPROPYLPHOSPHONATE ..lug. : 10 : . 100. : 1.mg.: 10 : . 100 .: 1g . 10 
 
1011 H f hic ipJ lun pt. 64w64 . A 12.4mg P<.02 
 
N,N-DIETHYL-4-(4'-[PYRIDYL-1'.OXIDEjAZO)ANILINE . 1:10. g : . 10 . .... ::100.. : g :10 
 
1012 R m sda oat Liv tur 52w52 bfr <+ noTD50 P<.0005+ 
 
O,O-DIETHYL-O-(3,5,6-TRICHLORO-2-PYRIDYL)PHOSPHOROTHIOATE.. :100.. g : . . :10. :100 .. g . : 10 
 
1013 R f she oat Liv tum 24.24 a .> no dre P-1. - 
 
a R f sh at tb mix 24w24 
 
1014 R f she mat liv bdi 24.24 m 
 
a R m she at tba mix 2424 m 
 
DIETHYLACETAHIDE 
 
1015 R * wis gav kid ptc 73w73 m 
a R * wis gav Liv tum 73w73 m 
b R * wis gmv tba mix 73w73 o 
 
no dre Pl.. 
 
70.6mg * P<.4 _ 
203.mg * PM-. - 
 
o00ng.. :. .ug. :10. :100. 1m : g . : 10 .:100.. : g :10 
 
.> 8.85m9 P<.5 
 
no dre PaI. 
11.8m9 P<.9 
 
+ 
 
DIETHYLENE GLYCOL !OOng ..:. l ug. :10. :100.1. :g .:10. :100. :ig . :10 
 
1016 R f osm *at ubl mix 24.24 r . + . 1.66gm * P<.002 + 
DIETHYLFORNAHIDE 1 O0ng. .: .. ug.:10. :100. g :g... :.10. :100.. : . :10 
 
1017 R m mis gmv Liv tur 73w73 a .> no dre P-1. 
a R f mis gav tba mix 73073 a no dri P-1. 
 
DIETHYLSTILBESTROL 
 
1018 H * c3c mit mgl car 24.24 mr 
1019 H * c3c mat mgl car 24.24 mr 
1020 H * c3c mat mgl car 24.24 or 
1021 H f c3h mat mgl car 85v85 r 
 
1022 H f c3h mat mgl mdc 24.24 r 
 
1023 N f c3J met mgl *dc 52w52 mk 
1024 H I c3J eat ova tue 78v78 *k 
a H f c3J mat mgl mdc 78378 mk 
1025 H f c3j mat *gl *dc 24.24 mk 
a H f c3j eat ova tus 24.24 mk 
1026 H f cbj mat mgL tur 52w52 mk 
1027 H f cbj set mgl *dc 78v78 *k 
 
a H f cbj mat ova tus 78078 *k 
1028 H f cbJ eat ova tue 24.24 *k 
1029 H f cbj mit ova tue 30-30 *k 
a f cbj eat mgL de 30M30 k 
 
1030 R f cdr c at liv hpt 21.24 nis 
1031 R m cdr c at Liv tur 21.24 ses 
1032 R * cdr mat pit er 66"66 
a R m cdr oat adr co 66"w66 
b R cdr eat Liv nod 66"66 
c R * cdr oet liv car 66u66 
 
1oong ..: .ug. :10. :100. g :. :10. : 100.. : . :10 
 
35.9ug * P<.0005+ 
42.1ug \ P<.0005+ 
78.9ug * P<.0005+ 
29.2ug * Pe.0005+ 
 
A 
 
26.Oug P<.0005+ 
82.5ug * P<.03 
22.2ug * P<.3 
no dre P-1. 
14.2mg * P<l. 
no dri P-1. 
no dri P-1. 
 
.295mg * P<.04 
.329mg * P<.3 
.597mg * P<.8 
no dri P-1. 
no dre P-I. 
 
.130mg \ P<.1 - 
no dre P-1. - 
.114mg P<.002 + 
.390mg P<. 07 . 
.390mg P<.07 
1.21mg P<.3 
 
A 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lIne 2Dose 2Inc 
 
997 c00124 1.80mg 22.2mg 0/60p 
998 1004 6.19mg n.s.s. 0/U8 
 
a 1004 15.1mg n.s.s. 60/88 
999 c00124 .774mg n.s.s. 5/10 
 
a c00124 7.38mg n.s.s. 1/10 
1000 1004 4.90mg n.s.s. 1/75 
 
a 1004 8.93mg n.s.s. 19/75 
1001 100 .388mg n.s.s. 18/43 
1002 100 .384mg n.s.s. 12/43 
1003 1002 3.29mg n.s.s. 6/60 
1004 1002 4.09mg n.s.s. 3/60 
 
DIELDRIN, PHOTO- 13366-73-9 
 
1005 c00599 .147mg n.s.s. 3/20 
 
a c00599 .412mg n.s.s. 0/20 
b c00599 .368mg n.s.s. 1/20 
1006 c00599 73.1ug n.s.s. 3/20 
a c00599 97.7ug n.s.s. 3/20 
b c00599 .176mg n.s.s. 0/20 
1007 c00599 .327mg n.s.s. 0/10 
 
a c00599 .106mg n.s.s. 4/10 
b c00599 1.30mg n.s.s. 0/10 
1008 c00599 .263mg n.s.s. 5/10 
 
a c00599 1.26mg n.s.s. 0/10 
1009 c00599 .868mg n.s.s. 0/75p 
 
1.10mg 6/50 (1.70mg 2/50) 
 
.960mg 0/48 1.44mg 0/41 2.40mg 0/41 
.960mg 23/48 1.44mg 16/41 2.40mg 16/41 
.880mg 24/50 1.36mg 22/50 
.880mg 0/50 1.36mg 1/50 
 
.768mg 0/48 1.15mg 0/38 1.92mg 0/44 
.768mg 4/48 1.15mg 7/38 (1.92mg 1/44) 
5.00ug 18/23 50.Oug 16/23 .500mg 13/23 
4.00ug 9/23 40.Oug 5/23 .400mg 9/23 
.125mg 7/40 .625mg 7/40 1.25mg 5/40 
100.ug 1/40 .500mg 3/40 1.00mg 2/40 
 
38.Oug 3/50 71.5ug 8/50 
38.Oug 0/50 71.5ug 1/50 
38.Oug 0/50 71.5ug 2/50 
34.Oug 14/50 66.Oug 13/50 
34.Oug 10/50 66.Oug 10/50 
34.Oug 1/50 66.Oug 4/50 
.120mg 5/50 .200mg 9/50 
.120mg 29/50 .200mg 29/50 
.120mg 1/50 .200mg 0/50 
.140mg 23/50 .290mg 21/50 
.140mg 0/50 .290mg 1/50 
.140mg 0/50 .290mg 3/50 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
Brkly Code 
 
adr:cos,coc. S 
Deichmann; imed,39,426-434; 1970 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Dsichmann; imed,39,426-434; 1970 
 
Stevenson; txap,36, 247- 254; 1976 
Cleveland;aenh, 13,195-198;1966 
 
Liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
tun:a/a,a/c. 
 
mgl:ade,fba. S 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
S 
 
D,L-DIEPOXYBUTANE 298-18-0 
 
1010 55 .506mg n.s.s. 0/5 2.04m9 0/5 
 
DIETHYL-bota,,gma .-EPOXYPROPYLPHOSPHONATE 7316-37-2 
1011 1143 5.23mg n.s.s. 10/30 28.6mg 19/30 
 
N,N-DIETHYL-4-(4'-IPYRIDYL-1'-OXIDEJAZO)ANILINE 7347-49-1 
1012 1176 n.s.s. 1.63mg 0/10 12.0mg 10/10 
 
Van Duuren;jnci,37,825-838;1966 
Van Duuren;Jnci,53,695-700;1974 
 
Brown; Jnci ,37,365-367;1966 
 
O,O-DIETHYL-O-(3,5,6-TRICHLORO-2-PYRIDYL)PHOSPHOROTHIOATE 2921-88-2 
 
1013 1333 35.6ug n.s.s. 0/25 10.Oug 0/25 30.Oug 0/25 100.ug 0/25 1.00mg 0/25 3.00mg 0/25 McCollister; 
 
fctx, 12,45-61; 1974 
a 1333 4.60mg n.s.s. 12/25 10.Oug 6/25 30.Oug 11/25 100.ug 4/25 1.00mg 8/25 3.00mg 8/25 
1014 1333 11.5mg n.s.s. 0/25 10.Oug 0/25 30.Oug 0/25 100.ug 0/25 1.00mg 1/25 3.00mg 0/25 
a 1333 6.32mg n.s.s. 4/25 10.Oug 2/25 30.Oug 3/25 100.ug 6/25 1.00mg 3/25 3.00mg 4/25 
DIETHYLACETANIDE 685-91-6 
 
1015 104 1.44mg n.s.s. 0/9 .889mg 1/30 Argus;Jnci,35,949-958;1965 
 
a 104 2.71mg n.s.s. 0/9 .889mg 0/30 
b 104 .854mg n.s.s. 1/9 .889mg 4/30 
 
DIETHYLENE GLYCOL 111-46*6 
 
1016 105 824.mg 5.28gm 0/12 400.mg 0/12 800.mg 6/12 1.609m 5/12 
DIETHYLFORNANIDE 617-84-5 
 
1017 104 2.14mg n.s.s. 0/9 .780mg 0/27 
a 104 1.40mg n.s.s. 1/9 .780mg 1/27 
 
Fitzhugh;j iht,28,40-43;1946 
Argus; Jnci ,35,949-958;1965 
 
DIETHYLSTILBESTROL (DES) 56-53-1 
1018 109m 27.9ug 46.9ug 0/78 
1019 109n 27.7ug 68.1ug 0/78 
1020 109o 57.1ug .113mg 0/78 
1021 106. 19.4ug 48.1ug 40/121 
 
65.0 
1022 1131 15.7ug 55.6ug 16/64 
1023 1468m 30.2ug n.s.s. 2/43 
1024 1468n 5.68ug n.s.s. 2/14 
a 1468n 11.8ug n.s.s. 1/13 
1025 1468o 35.5ug n.s.s. 4/24 
a 1468o 35.7ug n.s.s. 12/24 
1026 1468r 2.06ug n.s.s. 0/17 
1027 1468s 89.2ug n.s.s. 0/31 
a 1468s 70.9ug n.s.s. 0/34 
1028 1468t 48.1ug n.s.s. 9/29 
1029 1468u 2.14ug n.s.s. 4/11 
a 1468u 3.54ug n.s.s. 3/11 
1030 108 32.Oug n.s.s. 0/20 
1031 108 74.9ug n.s.s. 0/20 
1032 333 53.3ug .391mg 0/20 
a 333 .118mg n.s.s. 0/20 
b 333 .118mg n.s.s. 0/20 
c 333 .198mg n.s.s. 0/20 
 
30.Oug 48/92 60.Oug 58/94 
30.Oug 34/88 (60.Oug 35/92) 
30.Oug 26/93 60.Oug 32/89 
 
1 813.ng 27/56 1.63ug 26/60 3.25ug 
Dug 50/59 .130mg 50/58 
 
32.5ug 45/66 
 
1.30ug 0/29 13.Oug 3/35 65.Oug 
1.30ug 5/24 13.Oug 6/18 
1.30ug 7/22 13.Oug 2/16 
 
1.30ug 10/38 13.Oug 3/9 65.Oug 
1.30ug 19/40 13.Oug 7/11 65.Oug 
1.30ug 0/38 13.Oug 0/18 65.Oug 
1.30ug 0/40 13.Oug 1/33 65.Oug 
1.30ug 5/42 13.Oug 3/34 65.Oug 
1.30ug 10/31 13.Oug 12/36 65.Oug 
1.30ug 3/12 
1.30ug 1/12 
 
20.Oug 2/20 (.200mg 0/20) 
20.Oug 0/20 .200mg 0/20 
.160mg 9/28 
.160mg 3/28 
.160mg 3/28 
.160mg 1/28 
 
Okey; Jnci ,40,225-230;1968 
 
26/60 6.50ug 36/68 13.Oug 42/64 
 
ass; Jnci ,33,971-977;1964 
 
Sass;obgy,5,477; 1977 
6/41 Highman;jept,4,81-95;1980/pers.com. 
 
1/5 
2/6 
0/30 
2/29 
4/31 
4/11 
 
Gibson;txap, 11,489-510; 1967 
N.wberne;aenh, 19,489-498; 1969 
 
115 
 
116 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Nol 
N,N' -DIETHYLTHIOUREA 
 
1033 N f b6c eat TBA NXB 24.24 
 
a N f b6c eat Liv NXB 24.24 
b N f b6c mat Lun NXB 24.24 
1034 N * b6c mat TBA NXB 24.24 
a N * b6c eat Liv NXS 24.24 
b N . b6c *et Lun NXS 24m24 
1035 R f f34 met thy NXA 24.24 
a R f f34 eat thy fcc 24.24 
b R f f34 oet TBA NXB 24.24 
c R f f34 eat Liv NXB 24m24 
1036 R m f34 set thy NXA 24.24 
a R m f34 *et thy fcc 24.24 
b R m f34 eat TBA NXB 24.24 
c R m f34 eat Liv NXB 24.24 
1,2-DIFORNYLHYDRAZINE 
 
1037 N f ewe wet Lun ad. 83w83 a 
a N f sue wet Lun mix 83w83 a 
b N f see wet lun adc 83w83 a 
c N f ewe wat Liv hpt 83w83 w 
d N f swe wet Liv mix 83w83 a 
1038 N m swe wet Lun ad. 83w83 o 
a N m sew wat Lun mix 83w83 a 
b N m swe wat Lun adc 83w83 a 
c N m awe wat Liv mix 83w83 a 
d N m awe wet Liv hpt 83w83 a 
 
TD5O 2'Iilpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
tes 
 
1oong .. : lug. : 10. :100. g :.o : 10. :100.. : . :10 
 
no dre P-I. 
687.mg * P<.3 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P.1 
 
no dre PaI. 
 
+ 23.8mg * P<.0005c 
 
57.9mg * P<.008 c 
21.5mg * P<.3 
no dre P-I. 
 
+ 24.3mg / P<.0005c 
 
33.6mg * P<.003 c 
12.9mg * P<.04 
no dre P-I. 
 
100ng. . .. . lu :10. :100. g :. 1g :10. :100.. : . :10 
 
* + . 561.mg 
 
571m.g 
2.17gm 
7.82gm 
89.2gm 
+ . 779.mg 
 
806.mg 
4.53gm 
8.14g. 
11.3gm 
 
1,2-DINYDRO-2-(5-NITRO-2-THIENYL)QUINAZOLIN-4(3H)-ONE.10 .......100. g : . :10.. :100 . g.10 
 
1039 R f sde met mgL edc 46w66 a . + . 13.3mg 
 
e R f ade met tbe mix 46w66 * 1.53mg 
 
3,6-DIHYDRO-2-NITROSO-2H-1,2-OXAZINE .. :. .ug. :10. :100. g :. . :10. : 100.. : 9 :10 
 
1040 R b ida wat Liv hpt 20.23 .> 417.mg 
a R b sda wat tbe meL 20m23 90.6mg 
b R b sde wat tbe mix 20m23 110m.g 
 
P<. 0005 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005 
 
P<.07 - 
P<.8 
 
P<. 0005 
 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.02 
 
P<. 02 - 
 
P<. 0005 
P<.0005+ 
 
P<.3 - 
P<.07 + 
P<. 3 
 
DIHYDROSAFROLE 10Ong ..:. l ug. 1 :10 :..100. g :. . :10.. :100.. : .. :10 
 
1041 N f b6e orl sto pam 81w81 evx . + . 84.7mg P<.0005 
 
e N f b6e orl Lun ad. 81w81 *vx 739.mg P<.6 
b N f b6a orl liv aeg 81w81 *vx 1.409m P<.3 
c N f b6e orl liv hpt 81w81 evx no dre P-I. 
d N f b6e orl tba mix 81w81 *vx 305.mg P<.2 
 
1042 N m b6e orl liv hpt 81w81 *vx . + . 117.mg P<.0005+ 
 
e N m b6e orl Lun edo 81w81 *vx 323.mg P<.2 
b N m b6e orL lun mix 81w81 *vx 448.mg P<.4 
 
c N m b6a orl tbe mix 81w81 *vx 86.6mg P<.004 
 
1043 N f b6c orl Lun ado 81w81 evx . + . 230.mg P<.006 + 
 
e N f b6c orL liv hpt 81w81 *vx no dre P-1. 
 
b N f b6c orL tba mix 81w81 evx 170.mg P<.02 
 
1044 N m b6c orL Liv hpt 81w81 evx . . 90.0mg P<.0005+ 
e N m b6c orL lun ede 81w81 *vx 358.mg P<.2 
 
b N m b6c orL tbe mix 81w81 evx 107.m9 P<.09 
 
1045 R b ose mat mso mix 24m24 . + . 143.mg * P<.0005+ 
 
DINETHOATE 
 
1046 N f b6c mat TBA NXB 80w93 
e N f b6c mat Liv NXB 80w93 
b N f b6c mat Lun NXB 80w93 
1047 N m b6c mat TBA NXB 69w93 
e N m b6c met Liv NXB 69w93 
b N m b6c met Lun NXB 69w93 
 
1048 R f ose met TBA NXB 19m26 sv 
 
e R f osm mat Liv NXB 19m26 sv 
1049 R m ose mat TBA NXB 19.26 sv 
e R m osm mat Liv NXB 19.26 iv 
 
DINETHOXANE 
 
1050 R m wis wet Liv hpt 20m23 e 
a R m wis wet kid ptc 20m23 m 
b R wis wet --- mLk 2Om23 o 
c R m wies wt ski *pc 20m23 m 
d R wis wet sub fbs 20m23 o 
* R m wiws et ... Lys 20m23 m 
f R * wis wat Lun tum 20M23 o 
g R m wis wet tbe mix 20m23 a 
 
100ng . . .ug. :10. :100. g :..g :10. :100..g.10 
 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
no dre P.1. 
222.mg * P<.4 
:> no drm P-1. 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
:> 92.4mg * P<.8 
 
126.mg * P<.3 
:> no drm PaI. 
 
215.mg * P<.8 
 
bO0ng..: ..ug. :10. : 100.. m : g .:10. :100 . g.10 
 
* + . 716.mg 
 
6.779m 
6.779m 
6.77gm 
6.779m 
29.8gm 
no dro 
419.mg 
 
P<.005 + 
P<.4 + 
P<.4 + 
P<.4 + 
Pc.4 + 
P<1. + 
P-I. 
 
P<. 004 
 
2,5-DINETHOXY-4'-ANINOSTILBENE bOOng..:..Iug. :10. 10.g. :. 100... : g :10 
 
1051 N f chi met lun mix 77w90 A 152.mg \ P<.09 - 
 
e N f chi met liv mix 77w90 no drm P-1. 
 
I 
I 
I 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl IDose lnc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
N,N'-DIETHYLTHIOUREA 105-55-5 
 
1033 c03816 102.mg n.s.s. 11/20 
a c03816 208.mg n.s.s. 0/20 
b c03816 472.mg n.s.s. 1/20 
1034 c03816 77.7mg n.s.s. 8/19 
a c03816 94.1mg n.s.s. 5/19 
b c03816 163.mg n.s.s. 2/19 
1035 c03816 14.2mg 55.0mg 0/20 
 
a c03816 27.3mg 774.mg 0/20 
b c03816 6.90mg n.s.s. 13/20 
c c03816 n.s.s. n..s.. 0/20 
1036 c03816 13.5mg 50.0mg 0/20 
a c03816 17.3mg 136.mg 0/20 
b c03816 6.15mg n.s.s. 5/20 
c c03816 n.s.s. n. s.. 0/20 
1,2-DIFORNYLHYDRAZINE 628-36-4 
 
1037 491 307.mg 987.mg 10/100 
 
a 491 310.mg 1.02gm 15/100 
b 491 1.339m 3.98gm 6/100 
c 491 1.26gm n.s.s. 0/19 
d 491 7.47gm n.s.s. 3/46 
1038 491 469.mg 1.38gm 17/98 
 
a 491 479.mg 1.489m 22/98 
b 491 2.259g 14.5gm 6/98 
c 491 2.86gm n.s.s. 3/69 
d 491 3.62gm n.s.s. 1/69 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
32.2mg 23/50 64.3mg 15/50 
32.2mg 1/50 64.3mg 2/50 
32.2mg 1/50 64.3mg 0/50 
29.8mg 21/50 59.4mg 23/50 
29.8mg 7/50 (59.4mg 3/50) 
29.8mg 4/50 59.4mg 6/50 
6.20mg 4/50 12.4mg 17/50 
6.20mg 1/50 12.4mg 8/50 
6.20mg 33/50 12.4mg 41/50 
6.20mg 0/50 12.4mg 0/50 
5.00mg 1/50 9.90mg 15/50 
5.00mg 1/50 9.90mg 11/50 
5.00mg 23/50 9.90mg 31/50 
5.00mg 0/50 9.90mg 0/50 
 
Brkly Code 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
tun:a/a, a/c. 
thy:fca,fcc. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
thy:fca,f cc. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Toth;zkko,92, 11-16; 1978 
 
4.00gm 48/50 
4.009m 48/50 
4.009m 29/50 
4.00gm 1/5 
 
4.009m 3/36 
3.339m 41/47 
3.339m 41/47 
3.339m 15/47 
3.339m 6/30 
3.339m 4/30 
 
1 ,2-DIHYDRO-2- (5-NITRO-2-THIENYL)QUINAZOLIN-4(3H) -ONE 33389-33-2 
1039 1390 5.76mg 48.5mg 2/84 17.4mg 8/25 
a 1390 .647mg 3.36mg 6/84 17.4mg 24/25 
 
3,6-DIHYDRO-2-NITROSO-2H-1,2-OXAZINE (N-nitroso-3,6-dihydrooxazine-1,2) 3276-41-3 
1040 1417 67.9mg n.s.s. 0/20 33.1mg 1/20 
a 1417 29.7mg n.s.s. 1/20 33.1mg 5/20 
b 1417 28.5mg n.s.s. 3/20 33.19g 6/20 
 
DIHYDROSAFROLE 94-58-6 
 
1041 111 41.0mg 212.mg 
 
a 111 128.mg n.s.a. 
b 111 228.mg n.s.a. 
c 111 263.mg n.as. 
d 111 89.7mg n.s.a. 
1042 111 51.9mg 358.mg 
 
a 111 89.7mg n.s.s. 
b 111 95.6mg n.s.s. 
c 111 37.0mg 685.mg 
1043 111 86.5mg 2.379m 
a 111 409.mg n.s.s. 
b 111 66.8mg n.s.s. 
1044 111 40.6mg 352.mg 
 
a 111 101.mg n.s.s. 
b 111 36.1mg n.s.s. 
1045 110 98.5mg 215.mg 
 
60-51-5 
 
85.1mg n.s.s. 
632.mg n.s.s. 
102.mg n.s.a. 
48.0mg n.s.s. 
51.0mg n.s.s. 
101.mg n.s.s. 
9.18mg n.s.s. 
35.8mg n.s.s. 
9.62mg n.s.s. 
39.5mg n.s.s. 
 
828-00-2 
 
322.mg 4.88gm 
1.109m n.s.s. 
1.109m n.s.s. 
1.109m n.s.s. 
1.109m n.s.s. 
946.mg n.s.s. 
2.089m n.s.s. 
203.mg 2.46gm 
 
0/15 
2/15 
0/15 
1/15 
2/15 
0/18 
2/18 
3/18 
3/18 
0/17 
0/17 
1/17 
1/17 
1/17 
7/17 
0/20 
 
3/10 
1/10 
0/10 
6/7 
4/7 
3/7 
7/10 
1/10 
7/10 
0/10 
 
0/14 
0/14 
0/14 
 
0/14 
 
0/14 
1/14 
0/14 
1/14 
 
192. mg 
192 mg 
192.mg 
192 . mg 
192. mg 
179. mg 
179.mg 
179.mg 
179. mg 
192 .mg 
192 .mg 
192. mg 
179 .mg 
179. mg 
179. No 
225 mg 
 
28. 0mg 
28.0mg 
28. 0mg 
22.3mg 
22.3mg 
22.3mg 
6.70mg 
6.70mg 
4.30mg 
4.30mg 
 
436.mg 
436.mg 
436 mg 
436.mg 
436.mg 
436.mg 
436.mg 
436. mg 
 
11/18 
4/18 
1/18 
1/18 
6/18 
8/17 
5/17 
5/17 
11/17 
5/17 
0/17 
7/17 
10/17 
4/17 
12/17 
 
37/50 450.mg 15/20 
 
Cohen; jnci,57,277-282;1976 
Wiessaer;zkko,79,114-117;1973 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
Hagan;txap,7, 18-24; 1965 
 
15/50 55.4mg 12/50 
0/50 55.4mg 0/50 
4/50 55.4mg 5/50 
11/50 (38.3mg 11/50) 
8/50 (38.3mg 6/50) 
2/50 (38.3mg 1/50) 
30/50 13.4mg 21/50 
 
1/50 13.4mg 5/50 
23/50 8.60mg 24/50 
 
1/50 8.60mg 1/50 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
t iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Hoch-Ligeti;jnci,53,791-793;1974 
 
8/25 
1/25 
1/25 
1/25 
1/25 
2/25 
0/25 
13/25 
 
2,5-DINETHOXY-4' -AMINOSTILSENE 5803-51-0 
 
1051 381 39.1mg n.s.s. 5/15 234.mg 6/16 (468.mg 3/17) 
 
a 381 n.s.a. n.s.s. 1/15 234.mg 0/16 468.mg 0/17 
 
Weisburger;j*pt,2,325-356;1978/pers.co_m./Russfield 1973 
 
117 
 
DINETHOATE 
 
1046 c00135 
 
a c00135 
b c00135 
1047 c00135 
a c00135 
b c00135 
1048 c00135 
a c00135 
1049 c00135 
 
a c00135 
DINETHOXANE 
1050 112 
 
a 112 
b 112 
c 112 
d 112 
a 112 
f 112 
9 112 
 
118 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
b N f chi eat tba mix 77w90 
1052 N m chi eat Lun mix 77w90 
a N . chi set Liv mix 77w90 
b N m chi set tba mix 77w90 
 
1053 N m chi set Lun mix 77w90 pool 
a N m chi *at Liv hpt 77w90 
 
1054 R m cdr eat eto mix 47w51 v 
a R m cdr eat emi mix 47w51 v 
b R m cdr eat ear mix 47w51 v 
c R a cdr eat Liv mix 47w51 v 
d R m cdr eat tba mix 47w51 v 
 
1055 R m cdr eat sto mix 47w51 v pool 
 
a R m cdr eat mni mix 47w51 v 
b R m cdr eat ski mix 47w51 v 
c R m cdr eat ear mix 47w51 v 
 
2,4-DINETHOXYANILINE.HCL 
 
1056 N f b6c set TBA NXB 24m24 
a N f b6c eat Liv NXB 24m24 
b N f b6c eat Lun NXB 24m24 
1057 N m b6c eat TBA NXB 24m24 
a N m b6c eat Liv NXB 24m24 
b N m b6c eat Lun NXB 24m24 
1058 R f f34 eat TBA NXB 24m24 
 
a R f f34 eat Liv NXS 24m24 
1059 R m f34 eat TBA NXB 24a24 
a R a f34 eat Liv NXB 24m24 
 
:(.) : 
 
TD50 2Thilpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
118.mg\ P<.06 - 
95.9mg \ P<.02 + 
329.mg P<.04 
126.mg P<-09 
 
115.mg \ P<.0005+ 
376.mg \ P<.005 + 
.721m9 * P<.0005+ 
.866mg * P<.0005+ 
1.45mg * P<.0005+ 
2.61mg * P<.02 
 
.269mg * P<.0005 
 
.721mg * P<.0005+ 
.866mg * P<.0005+ 
1.48mg * P<.0005+ 
1.54mg * P<.0005+ 
 
:Ce) : 
 
boong.. :. .ug. : 100. lag . :.lg : 10 : 100. :Ig . :10 
 
: s 986.mg * P<.08 - 
 
2.799m * P<.4 
50.6gm * P<.9 
 
:> 1.65gm / P<.3 - 
 
1.399g / P<.09 
no dre P.1. 
:> no drt P-1. 
 
no dre P-1. 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
3,3'-DINETHOXYBENZIDINE-4,4'-DIISOCYANATE ..lug. :10. :100.. g :. . :10. :100.. : . :10 
 
1060 N f b6c eat TBA NXB 18a24 :> 32.89m * P<.8 - 
 
a N f b6c set liv NXB 18a24 no dre P-1. 
b N f b6c set lun NXB 18624 no dre P-1. 
 
1061 N m b6c eat TBA NXB 18624 :> 24.09m * P<.7 - 
a N m b6c eat liv NXB 18624 12.1gm * P<.2 
b N m b6c eat Lun NXB 18624 87.9gm * P<.9 
 
1062 R f f34 orL NXB NXB 18624 v + 1.219m * P<.0005 
 
a R f f34 ort NXB NXB 18624 v 1.45gm * P<.0005 
 
b R f f34 ortl --- NXA 1824 v 2.28gm * P<.004 c 
c R f f34 orl utee sp l8624 v 2.749m * P<.003 c 
d R f f34 ort NXA NXA 18624 v 2.59gm \ P<.02 a 
a R f f34 orL TBA NXB 18624 v 773.mg * P<.006 
f R f f34 ortl liv NXB 18624 v 17.19m * P<.2 
 
1063 R m f34 ortl NXB NXB 1824e v : 662.mg * P<.0005 
 
a R f f34 orL NXB NXB 18624 ev 
b R f f34 orL --- NXA I8624 ev 
c R m f34 orl NXA NXA 18624 ev 
d R m f34 orL NXA NXA 18624 ev 
a R f f34 orL NXB NXB 18624 ev 
f R t f34 ortl XA NXA 18624 ev 
9 R m f34 orL TBA NXB 18624 ev 
h R m f34 orL Liv NXB 18624 ev 
 
742.mg * P<.0005 
 
1.279m * P<.0005c 
1.33gm * P<.002 c 
1.779m * P<.006 c 
7.019m * P<.02 
 
7.01gm * P<.02 a 
809.mg * P<.005 
6.60gm * P<.5 
 
5,7-DINETHOXYCYCLOPENTENE[cICOUNARIN ..:..lug. :10. :100. g :. . :10. :100.. :19 :10 
 
1064 R m fis gav liv tum 52w87 r .> no dre P.1. 
 
5,7-DINETHOXYCYCLOPENTENONE[2,3-cjCOUNAR IN..Iug :..10 . 100. : 1lg : . 10 : . 100.. : 19 : 10 
 
1065 R m fis gav liv tum 52w74 r .> no dre P-1. 
 
5,7-DINETHOXYCYCLOPENTENONE[3,2-c]COUNAR IN..1ug. : 10 :. 100. : 1g. : 1.0 : . 100:.1.:. I . 10 
 
1066 R m fis gav Liv tum 52w87 r .> no dre P.1. 
 
N,N-DINETHYL-4.ANINOAZOBENZENE l1Ong. .. . : ug . 10. :100. : g ..:10.. :100.. : g :10 
 
1067 R f waL eat Liv hpt 33w56 fv . + . 3.31mg 
 
a R f waL *at liv bdt 33w56 fv 4.90mg 
b R f waL eat Liv cca 33w56 fv 7.42mg 
 
P<.002 + 
P<. 006 + 
P<.03 + 
 
N,N'-DINETHYL-N,N'-DINITROSOPHTHALANIDE..:..lug......Io . .... :g10 100. m : g . : 10. :100.. : g :10 
 
1068 R m wis gav liv tum 67w67 ev .> no dre P-1. 
a R m wis gav tba mix 67w67 ev no dre P-1. 
 
4,6-DINETHYL-2-(5-NITRO-2-FURYL)PYRINIDINE. .ug. :10. :100. g :. . :10. :100.. : :10 
 
1069 R f sda set for sqc 42w59 * <+ noTD50 
a R f sda eat itn ear 42w59 a 2.61mg 
b R f sda eat itn hms 42w59 a 3.43mg 
c R f ada eat mgl adc 42w59 e 6.45mg 
d R f ada eat kid tcc 42w59 a 45.5mg 
a R f sda eat tba mix 42w59 a noTD50 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.03 + 
P<. 0005 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
381 39.2mg n.s.s. 
381 41.6mg n.s.a. 
381 111.mg n.s.s. 
381 44.5mg n.s.s. 
381 50.2m9 389.39 
381 119.mg 5.61gm 
381 .361mg 1.69mg 
381 .369mg 2.82mg 
381 .712mg 4.51mg 
381 .777mg n.s.a. 
381 .162mg .458mg 
381 .361m9 1.61mg 
381 .369mg 2.54mg 
381 .601mg 4.01mg 
381 .759mg 3.35mg 
 
2,4-DINETHOXYANILINE.HCL 54150-69-5 
 
1056 c02255 427.mg n.s.s. 5/20 325.mg 
a c02255 805.mg n.s.s. 3/20 325.mg 
 
b c02255 3.019m n.s.s. 1/20 325.mg 
1057 c02255 521.mg n.s.s. 11/20 300.mg 
 
a c02255 573.mg n.s.s. 7/20 300.mg 
b c02255 1.03gm n.s.s. 4/20 300.mg 
1058 c02255 124.mg n.s.s. 16/20 75.0mg 
a c02255 n.s.s. n..sa. 0/20 75.0mg 
1059 c02255 143.mg n.s.s. 11/20 60.0mg 
a c02255 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/20 60.0mg 
3,3'-DINETHOXYBENZIDINE-4,4' DIISOCYANATE 
 
1060 c02175 4.03gm n.s.s. 6/20 1.67gm 
 
a c02175 24.29m n.s.s. 1/20 1.679m 
b c02175 18.6gm n.s.s. 3/20 1.67gm 
1061 c02175 3.71gm n.s.s. 7/20 1.67gm 
a c02175 4.879m n.s.s. 1/20 1.67gm 
 
b c02175 6.799m n.s.s. 2/20 1.679m 
1062 c02175 759.mg 3.64gm 1/20 819.mg 
a c02175 869.mg 4.779m 1/20 819.mg 
b c02175 1.25gm 16.19m 1/20 819.mg 
c c02175 1.479m 11.9gm 0/20 819.mg 
d c02175 1.14gm n.s.s. 0/20 819.mg 
* c02175 405.mg 8.45gm 10/20 819.mg 
f c02175 4.21gm n.s.s. 0/20 819.mg 
1063 c02175 456.mg 1.249m 1/20 819.mg 
a c02175 498.mg 1.56gm 1/20 819.mg 
 
b c02175 826.mg 2.97gm 
c c02175 775.mg 6.21gm 
 
d c02175 954.mg 17.99m 
 
a c02175 3.07gm n.s.s. 
f c02175 3.07gm n.s.s. 
9 c02175 430.mg 7.28gm 
h c02175 1.76gm n.s.s. 
 
0/20 
1/20 
1/20 
0/20 
0/20 
10/20 
1/20 
 
819.mg 
819.g9 
819.g9 
819.m9 
819.m9 
819.mg 
819.m9 
 
25/50 650.mg 
12/50 650.mg 
 
1/50 650.mg 
15/50 600.mg 
9/50 600.mg 
6/50 (600.mg 
31/50 (150.mg 
0/50 150.mg 
 
28/50 120.mg 
 
0/50 120.mg 
 
91.93-0 
 
14/50 3.339m 
 
1/50 3.339m 
2/50 3.33gm 
17/50 3.339m 
8/50 3.339m 
8/50 3.33gm 
20/50 1.64gm 
13/50 1.64gm 
8/50 1.64gm 
5/50 1.64gm 
8/50 (1.64gm 
40/50 1.64gm 
 
0/50 1.649m 
31/50 1.64gm 
29/50 1.64gm 
 
18/50 1.649m 
17/50 1.64gm 
12/50 1.64gm 
2/50 1.64gm 
2/50 1.649m 
42/50 1.649m 
 
8/50 1.649m 
 
24/50 
11/50 
2/50 
33/50 
27/50 
 
2/50) 
21/50) 
0/50 
25/50 
0/50 
 
13/50 
0/50 
1/50 
21/50 
10/50 
7/50 
24/49 
20/49 
15/49 
10/49 
6/49) 
44/49 
 
2/49 
32/50 
 
27/50 
 
16/50 
15/50 
12/50 
6/50 
6/50 
38/50 
3/50 
 
5,7-DINETHOXYCYCLOPENTENEfc]COUNARIN 1146-71-0 
1064 1455 .591mg n.s.s. 0/9 .512mg 0/8 
5,7-DINETHOXYCYCLOPENTENONE[2,3-c COtJARIN ... 
1065 1455 .566mg n.s.s. 0/9 .602mg 0/9 
5,7-DIMETHOXYCYCLOPENTENONE[3,2-c ]COUNARIN ... 
1066 1455 .665mg n.s.s. 0/9 .512mg 0/9 
 
N,N-DINETHYL-4-.AINOAZOBENZENE (DAB) 60-11-7 
 
1067 27 1.12mg 16.3mg 0/8 20.9mg 5/7 
 
a 27 1.60mg 56.0mg 0/8 20.9mg 4/7 
b 27 2.18mg n.s.s. 0/8 20.9mg 3/7 
 
N,N'-DINETHYL-N,N'-DINITROSOPHTHALANIDE 3851-16-9 
1068 104 8.28mg n.s.s. 0/9 3.46mg 0/28 
 
a 104 5.45mg n.s.s. 1/9 3.46mg 1/28 
 
4,6-DINETHYL-2-(5-NITRO-2-FURYL)PYRINIDINE 59-35-8 
1069 1390 n.s.s. 1.39mg 0/84 14.2mg 30/30 
 
a 1390 1.49mg 4.99mg 0/84 14.2mg 21/30 
b 1390 1.92mg 6.85mg 0/84 14.2mg 18/30 
c 1390 3.21mg 16.8mg 2/84 14.2mg 12/30 
d 1390 11.2mg n.s.s. 0/84 14.2mg 2/30 
 
a 1390 n.s.s. 1.44mg 6/84 14.2mg 30/30 
 
l iv:hps,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,s/c. 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,m/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:m/a,a/c. 
 
---:Lou,Lym; ear:sec,sqc,tri; uts:ssp; zym:soc,sqc,tri. T 
 
--- -:Lu,Lym; uts:asp. C 
 
---:lou,Lym. 
.ar:sec,sqc,tri; zym:sec,sqc,tri. 
 
l iv:hps,hpc,nnd. 
-.--:Lu,Lym; sar:sqc; aft:ker; skb:bct,k.r; skf:bct; 
 
ski:bct,kor,ppn,sss,seb,sqc,tri; zym:sqc. T 
- I- -:Lu,Lym; sft:k.r; skb:bct,ker; skf:bct; 
 
ski:bct,ker,ppn,ss,seb,sqc,tri. C 
 
-- -:Lou,Lym. 
sft:ker; skb:bct,ker; skf:bct; ski:bct,ker,ppn,sob,sqc,tri. 
 
sft:ker; skb:bct,ker; skf:bct; ski:bct,ker,ppn,sas,tri. 
 
.ar:sqc; zym:sqc. A 
.ar:sqc; zym:sqc. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Wogan;canr,31, 1936-1942; 1971 
Wogan;canr,31, 1936-1942;1971 
 
Wogan;csnr ,31,1936-1942; 1971 
 
Kirby; jpat,59, 1-18;1947 
 
Argus; Jnci,35,949-958;1965 
 
Cohn; Jnci,57,277-282; 1976 
 
b 
 
1052 
 
a 
 
b 
 
1053 
 
c 
d 
 
1055 
 
b 
 
c 
 
119 
 
10/15 234.mg 
3/14 227.mg 
1/14 227.mg 
7/14 227.mg 
23/99p 227.mg 
7/99p 227.mg 
0/16 3.20m9 
0/16 3.20mg 
0/16 3.20mg 
0/16 3.20m9 
10/16 3.20mg 
2/lI1p 3.20mg 
0/I1p 3.20mg 
0/I1p 3.20mg 
I/hI1p 3.20mg 
 
Brkly Code 
 
12/16 (468.-mg 
11/17 (432-mg 
4/17 (432.mg 
14/17 (432.mg 
11/17 (432.mg 
4/17 (432.mg 
6/23 6.40m9 
3/23 6.40mg 
8/23 6.40m9 
2/23 6.40mg 
18/23 6.40mg 
6/23 6.4009 
3/23 6.4009 
4/23 6.40mg 
8/23 6.40mg 
 
10/17) 
7/20) 
3/20) 
10/20) 
7/20) 
2/20) 
8/24 
6/24 
8/24 
2/24 
22/24 
8/24 
6/24 
5/24 
8/24 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
 
TD5O 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
1,2-DINETHYL-5-NITROINIDAZOLE lOOng..:. .ug. 10. :100 . lg. :10 . 100 . 10 
 
1070 R f ada sat mgL fba 46w66 * . + . 17.0mg P<.0005+ 
a R f sda eat liv tur 46w66 * no dre P-1. 
 
b R f sda eat tba six 46w66 a 17.0mg P<.0005 
 
DINETHYL TEREPHTHALATE 
 
1071 N f b6c eat TBA NXB 24.24 
a N f b6c oat liv NXB 24m24 
b N f b6c eat lun NXB 24m24 
1072 N * b6c eat lun NXA 24m24 
a N m b6c eat TBA NXB 24m24 
b N m b6c sat Liv NXB 24m24 
c N m b6c eat lun NXB 24m24 
1073 R f f34 eat TBA NXB 24m24 
a R f f34 set liv NXB 24m24 
1074 R m f34 set TBA NXB 24m24 
 
a R m f34 eat liv NXS 24m24 
 
100ng .:..lug. 10. 100. 1g. 10 . 100. 1 10 
 
:> 4.34gm / P<.7 - 
 
no dre P-1. 
44.0gm \ P<1. 
 
+ #1.16gm * P<.002 - 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
1.16gm * P<.002 
 
:> 342.mg \ P<.5 - 
 
no dre P-I. 
:> no dre PI.1 
 
no dr* P.1. 
 
trans-2 [(DINETHYLANINO)NETHYLININO.-5-12.(5-NITRO-2-FURYL)VINYLI-1,3,4-OXADIAZOLE.. 10 100 . g . 10 
 
1075 R f sda set mgL adc 46w66 * . + . 20.4mg 
a R f ads set mgl mix 46w66 * 22.4mg 
b R f sda eat for sqp 46w66 a 221mg 
c R f ada set duo adp 46w66 a 336 mg 
d R f ada set duo adc 46w66 * 336.mg 
* R f sd at lun alc 46w"66o +historical 
f R f sda sat liv tum 46w"6 * no dre 
g R f sda eat tba mix 46w66 a 20.6mg 
 
4-DINETHYLANINO-3,5-XYLENOL 10Ong. ...lug. 10 . 100. 1 g. 10 . 100 . Ig . 10 
 
1076 N f b6a orL Lun ad. 76w76 evx > no dre 
a N f b6a orL ltv hpt 76w76 *vx no dre 
b N f b6a orl tba mix 76w76 *vx 220.mg 
1077 N m b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx > 207.mg 
a N m b6a orL Lun ada 76w76 *vx no dre 
b N m b6a orL tba mix 76w76 *vx 1.19gm 
1078 N f b6c orl Lun ad. 76w76 evx > 265.mg 
a N f b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 *vx no dre 
b N f b6c orL tba mix 76w76 evx 265.mg 
1079 N m b6c orL Lun ade 76w76 evx A 56.1mg 
a N m b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx 247.mg 
b N m b6c orL tba mix 76w76 evx 34.8mg 
DINETHYLARSINIC ACID lOOng. ...lug. 10 . 100. 1mg. 10 .. 100 . Ig . :10 
 
1080 N f b6a orL Lun ade 76w76 evx > 108.mg 
a N f b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b N f b6a orL tba mix 76w76 *vx 34.0mg 
1081 N m b6a orL lun ado 76w76 evx > 95.2mg 
 
a N m b6a orL liv hpt 76w76 *vx no dre 
b N m b6a orL tba mix 76w76 evx no dre 
1082 N f b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 *vx > no dr. 
a N f b6c orL Lun ado 76w76 *vx no dre 
b N f b6c orL tba mix 76w76 *vx no dre 
1083 N m b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx > no dre 
a N m b6c orl Lun mix 76w76 *vx no dre 
b N m b6c orL tba mix 76w76 avx no dre 
 
7,12-DINETHYLBENZ(a)ANTHRACENE lOOng. .:..u lug .10. 100 . 1g . 10 . 100 . g.10 
 
1084 N f aLb set mei ane 60w60 or . + . 84.Oug 
 
a N f aLb eat for pam 60w60 or .287mg 
 
DINETHYLCARBANYL CHLORIDE 
 
1085 H m syg inh nas sqc 26m26 or 
1086 N f hic ipi abd mix 64w64 
a N f hic ipi abd smr 64w64 
b N f hic ipJ lun pt 64"w64 
 
lOOng.: . .ug. :.10. : 100. :g ... :10. :100. :. 10 
 
.+ . +historicaL 
 
+ .4.59mg 
 
5.37mg 
6.65mg 
 
DINETHYLDITHIOCARBANIC ACID, DINETHYLANINE. .ug... 10 . 100 . 19. :10.. :100. :. 10 
 
1087 N f b6a orL Liv age 76w76 evx > 233.mg 
a N f b6a orL Lun ad. 76w76 evx no dre 
b N f b6a orL tba mix 76w76 *vx no dre 
1088 N m b6e orL liv hpt 76076 evx > 99.1mg 
 
a N m b6a orL Lun ada 76w76 *vx no dre 
b N m b6a orL tba mix 76w76 evx 180.mg 
1089 N f b6c orl Liv hpt 76w76 evx > 233.mg 
a N f b6c orL Lun mix 76w76 *vx no dre 
b N f b6c orL tba mix 76w76 evx 113.mg 
1090 N m b6c orL Lun ad, 76w76 evx . 63.9mg 
 
a N m b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx 99. 1mg 
b N m b6c orL tba mix 76w76 evx 19.5mg 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 004 
 
P<. 008 + 
P<. 3 
 
P<. 3 - 
 
P-1. - 
Pal. - 
 
P<. 3 - 
 
P-1. - 
 
P<. 7 - 
P<. 3 - 
 
P-1. - 
 
P<. 2 - 
 
P<.04 - 
 
P<. 1 - 
 
P<. 0005- 
 
120 
 
P<. 0005 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 08 + 
P<. 2 + 
P<. 2 + 
P<. 4 + 
P-I. 
 
P<. 0005 
 
P-I. _ 
P-1. _ 
P<.7 - 
P<.6 - 
P-. - 
P<1. _ 
P<.3 - 
PI. - 
P<.3 - 
P<. 02 - 
P<.3 - 
P<. 004 - 
 
P<.3 - 
P-1. - 
P<. 04 - 
P<.3 - 
Pl. _ 
P-. - 
P-I. _ 
P-I. 1 
 
P-1. - 
P-I. _ 
P-1. _ 
P-1. _ 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
1,2-DINETHYL-5-NITROIMIDAZOLE 551-92-8 
 
1070 200. 9.67mg 35.9mg 4/35 69.7mg 25/35 
a 200a 202.mg n.s.s. 0/35 69.7mg 0/35 
b 200a 9.67mg 35.9mg 4/35 69.7mg 25/35 
 
Brkly Code 
 
Cohn; Jnci ,51,403-417; 1973 
 
DINETHYL TEREPHTHALATE (DMT) 120-6 
1071 c50055 660.mg n.s.s. 29/50 
 
a c5OO55 2.219m n.s.s. 5/50 
b c50055 926.mg n.s.s. 4/50 
1072 c50055 640.mg 5.49gm 1/50 
 
a c5OO55 731.mg n.s.s. 36/50 
b c50055 1.33gm n.s.s. 19/50 
c c50055 640.mg 5.499m 1/50 
1073 c50055 75.7mg n.s.s. 38/50 
a c50055 2.039m n.s.s. 1/50 
1074 c50055 168.mg n.s.s. 40/50 
a c50055 1.919m n.s.s. 4/50 
 
319.mg 20/50 638.mg 32/50 
319.mg 1/50 (638.mg 0/50) 
319.mg 5/50 (638.mg 0/50) 
294.mg 8/50 589.mg 13/50 
294.mg 33/50 589.mg 34/50 
294.mg 13/50 589.mg 16/50 
294.mg 8/50 589.mg 13/50 
123.mg 38/50 (245.mg 29/50) 
123.mg 1/50 245.mg 0/50 
98.2mg 28/50 (196.mg 26/50) 
98.2mg 0/50 196.mg 1/50 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun: a/a,a/c. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. S 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
trans-2-[(DINETHYLANINO)METHYLININO -5- 12-(5-NITRO-2-FURYL)VINYLI-1,3,4-OXADIAZOLE 55738-54-0 
1075 1126 12.0mg 37.9mg 0/24 69.7mg 22/36 
a 1126 12.6mg 53.5mg 2/24 69.7mg 22/36 
b 1126 66.9mg n.s.s. 0/24 69.7mg 3/36 
c 1126 82.7mg n.s.s. 0/24 69.7mg 2/36 
d 1126 82.7mg n.s.s. 0/24 69.7mg 2/36 
* 1126 111.mg n.s.s. 0/24 69.7mg 1/36 
f 1126 208.mg n.s.s. 0/24 69.7mg 0/36 
9 1126 11.7mg 46.8mg 2/24 69.7mg 23/36 
 
4-DIMETHYLAMINO-3,5-XYLENOL 
1076 1248 46.1mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1248 77.4mg n.s.s. 
b 1248 27.7mg n.s.s. 
1077 1248 30.2mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1248 47.4mg n.s.s. 
b 1248 28.0mg n.s.s. 
1078 1248 43.1mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1248 82.0mg n.s.s. 
b 1248 43.1mg n.s.s. 
1079 1248 19.3mg n.s.s. 
a 1248 40.1mg n.s.s. 
b 1248 14.0mg 212.mg 
 
6120-10-1 
 
1/17 41.4mg 
0/17 41.4mg 
2/17 41.4mg 
1/18 38.5mg 
2/18 38.5mg 
3/18 38.5mg 
0/16 41.4mg 
0/16 41.4mg 
0/16 41.4mg 
0/16 38.5mg 
0/16 38.5mg 
0/16 38.5mg 
 
1/17 
0/17 
3/17 
2/17 
1/17 
3/17 
1/18 
0/18 
1/18 
4/18 
1/18 
6/18 
 
DINETHYLARSINIC ACID (cacodylic acid) 75-60-5 
 
1080 1198 17.6mg n.s.s. 0/18 16.9mg 1/18 
 
a 1198 33.5mg n.s.s. 0/18 16.9mg 0/18 
b 1198 10.3mg n.s.s. 0/18 16.9mg 3/18 
1081 1198 15.5mg n.s.s. 0/18 15.8mg 1/17 
a 1198 29.5mg n.s.s. 1/18 15.8mg 0/17 
b 1198 19.4mg n.s.s. 2/18 15.8mg 1/17 
1082 1198 33.5mg n.s.s. 0/18 16.9mg 0/18 
 
a 1198 33.5mg n.s.s. 1/18 16.9mg 0/18 
b 1198 33.5mg n.s.s. 2/18 16.9mg 0/18 
1083 1198 17.1mg n.s.s. 3/14 15.8mg 1/14 
a 1198 24.3mg n.s.s. 0/14 15.8mg 0/14 
b 1198 10.3mg n.s.s. 4/14 15.8mg 3/14 
7, 12-DINETHYLBENZ(a)ANTHRACENE 57-97-6 
 
1084 1274 58.2ug .126mg 0/40 .390mg 49/75 
 
a 1274 .169mg .563mg 0/40 .390mg 20/75 
DINETHYLCARBANYL CHLORIDE 79-44-7 
 
1085 1142 .439mg .928mg 0/50 .553mg 50/99 
1086 1143 2.02mg 34.7mg 1/30 5.71mg 9/30 
 
a 1143 2.25mg 134.mg 1/30 5.71mg 8/30 
b 1143 1.76mg n.s.s. 10/30 5.71mg 14/30 
 
DINETHYLDITHIOCARSANIC ACID, DINETHYLANINE 
1087 1222 37.9m9 n.s.s. 0/17 36.4mg 
 
a 1222 43.3mg n.s.s. 1/17 36.4mg 
b 1222 34.4mg n.s.s. 2/17 36.4mg 
1088 1222 22.1mg n.s.s. 1/18 33.9mg 
 
a 1222 44.5mg n.s.s. 2/18 33.9mg 
b 1222 21.1mg n.s.s. 3/18 33.9mg 
1089 1222 37.9mg n.s.s. 0/16 36.4mg 
a 1222 72.1mg n.s.s. 0/16 36.4mg 
b 1222 27.8mg n.s.s. 0/16 36.4mg 
1090 1222 19.3mg n.s.s. 0/16 33.9mg 
a 1222 24.3mg n.s.s. 0/16 33.9mg 
b 1222 8.66mg 62.1mg 0/16 33.9mg 
 
Cohen; Jnci ,54,841-850; 1975 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
Chouroul inkov;bdca,54,67-78; 1967 
 
Se Lakumar; Jept,4, 107-115;1980 
Van Duuren;jnci,53,695-700;1974 
 
598-64-1 
1/18 
1/18 
2/18 
3/18 
1/18 
4/18 
1/18 
0/18 
2/18 
3/17 
2/17 
8/17 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
121 
 
122 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Nol 
1,1 -DINETHYLHYDRAZINE 
 
1091 H f syg wat cec mix 79w79 e 
 
a H f syg wat blv mix 79w79 e 
b H f syg wat liv mix 79w79 e 
c H f syg wat Lun tur 79w79 e 
1092 H * syg wat cec mix 91w91 e 
 
a H * syg wat Liv mix 91w91 e 
b H m syg wat blv mix 91w91 e 
c H a syg wet liv ang 91w91 e 
d H * syg wat cec adc 91w91 e 
* H m syg wat cec pLa 91w91 e 
f H m syg wat Liv age 91w91 e 
g H m syg wit Lun tun 91w91 e 
1093 N f sia wat bLv ang 72w72 e 
a N f siw wit bLv mix 72w72 e 
b N f sew wat lun ade 72w72 e 
c N f siw wit lun mix 72w7Z e 
d N f iws wat lun adc 72w72 e 
* N f sew wit kid ade 72w72 e 
f N f swa wat Liv tur 72w72 e 
1094 N m swi wat blv ang 62w62 e 
a N m wsi wat bLv mix 62w62 e 
b N m sewe wt Lun ide 62w62 e 
c N m sewe wt Lun mix 62w62 e 
d N m awe wat kid ade 62w62 e 
e N m sewe wt Liv hpt 62w62 e 
f N m swe wat Lun adc 62w62 e 
1095 N f swi giv Lun tun 40w55 
1 ,2-DINETHYLHYDRAZINE .2HCl 
 
1096 H f syg wat bLv ang 67w67 e 
a H f syg wit Liv ang 67w67 e 
b H f syg wat Lun eng 67w67 e 
c H f syg wat coc mix 67w67 e 
d H f syg wet Liv mix 67w67 e 
e H f syg wat mus eng 67w67 e 
f H f syg wet Liv hpt 67w67 e 
g H f syg wat cec ple 67w67 e 
h H f syg wat hee ang 67w67 e 
i H f syg wat coc edc 67w67 e 
j H f syg wat pan ang 67w67 e 
1097 H * syg wit bLv eng 71w71 e 
a H m syg wat liv ing 71w71 e 
b H m syg wat lun ang 71w71 e 
c H m syg wat mus ang 71w71 
 
d H m syg wet Liv mix 71w71 e 
e H m syg wat hei eng 71w71 e 
f H m syg wat cec pta 71w71 e 
g H m syg wat pan eng 71w71 e 
1098 N f sea wat blv eng 52w52 e 
a N f sew wat lun ade 52w52 e 
b N f sew wat liv hpt 52w52 e 
1099 N a sew wat bLv ang 52w52 e 
 
a N m sew wat prn ang 52w52 e 
b N * swc wat mus ng 52w52 e 
c N m ews wet fat ing 52w52 e 
d N m swe wat pop eng 52w52 e 
e N * sew wet liv ang 52w52 e 
f N m sew wet sub eng 52w52 e 
g N m sew wet Lyd eng 52w52 e 
h N m swe wat Lun mix 52w52 e 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
tes 
 
.i0ng..:..lug. 10. 100.... :1ug. : 10. :100.. :Ig . :10 
 
+ . 104.mg 
 
620.mg 
620.mg 
no dre 
+ . 155.mg 
 
183. mg 
183. g 
242.mg 
322.mg 
372.mg 
975.mg 
no dre 
3.57mg 
3.65mg 
5.58mg 
5.69mg 
51.6mg 
148.mg 
no dre 
2.09mg 
2.11mg 
2 .62mg 
2 .62mg 
19.5mg 
30.4mg 
46.6mg 
16.0mg 
 
bO0ng . . .:ug. :10. :100. g :. 1g :10. :100.. : g :10 
 
.156mg 
.156mg 
.395mg 
.864mg 
.917mg 
1.03mg 
1.40mg 
2.08mg 
2.13mg 
2.84mg 
18.4mg 
.211mg 
.211mg 
.685mg 
1.36mg 
2.05mg 
2.49eg 
2.42mg 
18.6mg 
noTD50 
.559mg 
13.9mg 
.102mg 
.180mg 
.203mg 
.215mg 
.337mg 
.377mg 
.781mg 
1.02mg 
1.81mg 
 
2-(2,2-DINETHYLHYDRAZINO)-4-(5-NITRO-2-FURYL)THIAZOLE.10 . . . .... ...... ..........g..... :...g...... : 10 
 
1100 R f ads sat *gl mix 46w66 e <+ noTD50 
a R f sda t mgL dc 46w66 * .391mg 
b R f sd eat --- lbl 46w"66 +historicaL 
c R f ads eat liv tum 46w"6 e no dre 
d R f sda sat tba mix 46w66 e noTD50 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<.04 
P<.04 
P-1. 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005 
P<. 0005 
P<. 0005 
P<. 0005 
P<. 0005 
P<. 02 
P-I. 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 007 
P<. 2 
P-I. 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005 
 
P<. 005 + 
P<. 005 
 
P<.2 + 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 003 
P<. 004 
 
P<. 004 + 
P<. 02 
 
P<.4 + 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
P<.006 + 
P<.008 + 
P<.02 + 
P<.4 + 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 5 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005 
P<. 0005 
P<. 0005 
P<. 0005 
P<. 0005 
P<. 0005 
P<. 0005 
 
P<.06 + 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005 
 
P<.09 + 
P-I. 
 
P<. 0005 
 
DINETHYLNITRANINE 
 
1101 R f nzd wet Liv tum 12m24 
a R f nzd wet biL ide 12m24 
b R f nzd wat tba mix 12m24 
1102 R m nzd wet Liv tum 12m24 
 
a R m nzd wat tbe mix 12m24 
 
!oong .. : ug. : 10. :100. :ng .: 10. :100.. : :.10 
 
+ .256mg 
 
1. 65mg 
.321eg 
+ . .322mg 
 
.403mg 
 
DINITRO1I-NETHYLHEPTYL)PHENYL CROTONATE ........ 10.. . ....... : 100. . :1mg. :10 . :100. : .19 :10 
 
1103 N f b6a orl liv hpt 76w76 evx .> no dre 
a N f b6a orL lun ide 76w76 evx no dre 
b N f b6a orL tbe mix 76w76 evx no dre 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005- 
P<. 002 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 002 
 
P-1. - 
P-1. - 
P-1. - 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
1,1-DINETHYLHYDRAZINE 57-14-7 
 
1091 367 49.0mg 301.mg 1/50 
 
a 367 152.mg n.s.s. 0/50 
b 367 152.mg n.s.s. 0/50 
c 367 519.mg n.s.s. 0/100 
1092 367 84.8mg 329.mg 0/64 
 
a 367 98.0mg 399.mg 0/85 
b 367 98.0mg 399.mg 0/85 
c 367 121.mg 592.mg 0/85 
d 367 145.mg 957.mg 0/64 
* 367 161.mg 1.25gm 0/64 
f 367 295.mg n.s.s. 0/85 
9 367 909.mg n.s.s. 0/88 
1093 117 2.23mg 5.94mg 0/47 
 
a 117 2.26mg 6.17mg 4/104 
b 117 3.38mg 10.3mg 12/104 
c 117 3.41mg 10.7mg 14/104 
d 117 19.2mg 1.11gm 2/104 
* 117 24.1mg n.s.s. 0/32 
f 117 94.8mg n.s.s. 0/109 
1094 117 1.33mg 3.37mg 0/50 
a 117 1.34mg 3.44mg 2/91 
b 117 1.63mg 4.53mg 10/86 
c 117 1.63mg 4.53mg 10/86 
d 117 9.19mg 59.3mg 0/45 
* 117 12.4mg 218.mg 0/45 
f 117 16.1mg 391.mg 0/86 
1095 1095 4.00mg n.s.s. 8/85 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
136.mg 10/24 
136.mg 2/24 
136. mg 2/24 
136.mg 0/32 
120.mg 15/45 
120. mg 14/48 
120.mg 14/48 
120.mg 11/48 
120.mg 8/45 
120. mg 7/45 
120.mg 3/48 
120.mg 0/48 
20.0mg 37/44 
20.0mg 37/44 
20.0mg 32/44 
20.0mg 32/44 
20.Omg 6/44 
20.Omg 1/23 
20. 0mg 0/48 
16.7mg 42/49 
16.7mg 42/49 
16.7mg 39/48 
16.7mg 39/48 
16.7mg 9/48 
16.7mg 6/48 
16.7mg 4/48 
10.4mg 5/25 
 
Brkly Code 
 
Toth;canc,40,2427-2431; 1977 
 
Toth;jnci ,50,181-194;1973 
 
Roe;natu,216,375-376; 1967 
 
1 ,2-DINETHYLHYDRAZINE.2HCL 
1096 1108 94.9ug .258mg 
 
a 1108 94.9ug .258mg 
b 1108 .250mg .670mg 
c 1108 .487mg 1.76mg 
d 1108 .444mg 2.51mg 
* 1108 .566mg 2.27mg 
f 1108 .604mg 6.57mg 
9 1108 .940mg 11.0mg 
h 1108 .962mg 11.8mg 
i 1108 1.16mg n.s.s. 
J 1108 3.00mg n.s.s. 
1097 1108 .135mg .342mg 
 
a 1108 .135mg .342mg 
b 1108 .406mg 1.28mg 
c 1108 .701mg 3.69mg 
d 1108 .883mg 18.3mg 
 
a 1108 1.07mg 37.5mg 
f 1108 .987mg n.s.s. 
9 1108 3.03mg n.s.s. 
1098 119 n.s.s. .128mg 
 
a 119 .334mg 1.11mg 
b 119 2.26mg n.s.s. 
1099 119 60.3ug .171mg 
 
a 119 .116mg .291mg 
b 119 .131mg .330mg 
c 119 .139mg .351mg 
d 119 .211mg .580mg 
* 119 .233mg .662mg 
f 119 .427mg 1.66mg 
9 119 .522mg 2.49mg 
h 119 .655mg n.s.s. 
 
306-37*6 
 
0/32 1.36mg 44/48 
0/32 1.36mg 44/48 
0/32 1.36mg 30/48 
0/32 1.36mg 17/47 
0/25 1.36mg 10/29 
0/32 1.36mg 15/48 
0/25 1.36mg 7/29 
0/32 1.36mg 8/47 
0/32 1.36mg 8/48 
0/32 1.36mg 6/47 
0/32 1.36mg 1/48 
0/31 1.20mg 41/49 
0/31 1.20mg 41/49 
0/31 1.20mg 21/49 
0/31 1.20mg 12/49 
0/28 1.20mg 7/41 
0/31 1.20mg 7/49 
0/28 1.20mg 6/41 
0/31 1.20mg 1/49 
4/109 2.00mg 49/49 
0/18 2.00mg 22/48 
0/15 2.00mg 1/41 
0/40 1.67mg 46/49 
0/40 1.67mg 39/49 
0/40 1.67mg 37/49 
0/40 1.67mg 36/49 
0/40 1.67mg 28/49 
0/40 1.67mg 26/49 
0/40 1.67mg 15/49 
0/40 1.67mg 12/49 
11/95 1.67mg 12/49 
 
2-(2,2-DINETHYLHYDRAZINO)-4-(5-NITRO-2-FURYL)THIAZOLE 
1100 200 n.s.s. .410mg 2/39 3.48mg 35/35 
a 200a .219mg .707mg 0/39 3.48mg 32/35 
b 200a 4.02mg n.s.s. 0/39 3.48mg 2/35 
c 200a 10.1mg n.s.s. 0/39 3.48mg 0/35 
d 200 n.s.s. .41O9g 2/39 3.48mg 35/35 
DINETHYLNITRANINE 4164-28-7 
 
1101 119a 89.8ug .796mg 0/107 .860mg 9/10 
 
a 119s .494mg 11.9mg 0/107 .860mg 3/10 
b 119. 96.7ug 2.35mg 40/107 .860mg 9/10 
1102 119m .126mg 1.02mg 1/107 .753mg 8/10 
 
a 119. .137mg 3.12mg 30/107 .753mg 8/10 
 
26049-69-4 
 
Toth;canr,32,804-807; 1972/1967a 
 
Toth;ajpa,64,585-600; 1971 
 
Cohen; Jnci ,51,403-417;1973 
GoodaL l ;clet, 1,295-298;1976 
 
DINITRO(I-NETHYLHEPTYL)PHENYL CROTONATE (Karmthmns) 6119-92-2 
1103 1290 .774mg n.s.s. 0/17 .414mg 0/17 
a 1290 .774mg n.s.s. 1/17 .414mg 0/17 
b 1290 .774mg n.s.s. 2/17 .414mg 0/17 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
123 
 
124 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
1104 N m b6a orl Liv hpt 76w76 *vx 
 
a N * b6a ort lun ado 76w76 *vx 
b N m b6a orl tba mix 76w76 *vx 
1105 N I b6c ort liv hpt 76w76 evx 
a N f b6c orL lun mix 76w76 *vx 
b N f b6c ort tba mix 76w76 *vx 
1106 N m b6c ort Liv hpt 76w76 *vx 
a N * b6c ort lun mix 76w76 *vx 
b N m b6c ort tba mix 76w76 evx 
 
TD5O 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
2.07mg 
19. 1mg 
11.9mg 
2. 50mg 
no dre 
1.21mg 
2.32mg 
no dre 
.405mg 
 
P<.6 - 
P<1. _ 
P<1. _ 
P<.3 - 
P-1. _ 
P<.1 I 
 
P<.3 - 
Pal. _ 
P<. 007 - 
 
2,4-DINITROPHENOL lOOng.. :. .ug. :10. :100. m :g .:10. :100.. :. :10 
 
1107 N b c5l oat pit ado 73w73 or .> no dre PnI. 
DINITROSOHONOPIPERAZINE l1Ong .:. .:ug. :10. :100. 1m :g .:10. :100.. : g :10 
 
1108 R f f34 wat ugi car 7m31.-s . + . .240mg Z P<.0005. 
 
a R f f34 wat *so mix 7m3l es 
 
b R f f34 vat ugi mix 7031 es 
c Rt f 34 wat liv mix 7m31 es 
 
.253mg Z P<.0005+ 
.708mg Z P<.0005+ 
no dre P-1. + 
 
d R f f34 vat nam otc 7m31 es 
 
no dre P-1. + 
 
1109 R f f34 wat ugi mix 60w82 as 
 
a R f f34 wat ugi car 60w82 as 
b R f f34 wat mso mix 60v82 as 
c R f f34 wvt nas olc 60v82 es 
1110 R f f34 wvt ugi mix 28m31 *s 
a R f f34 wat Liv mix 28m31 ** 
b R f f34 vat aso mix 28.31 as 
c R f f34 vat ton bcp 28.31 as 
 
29.7ug P<.0005+ 
46.9ug P<.0005+ 
55.3ug P<.0005+ 
.207mg P<.002 + 
91.4ug * P<.0005. 
97.3ug \ P<.006 + 
.105mg * P<.0005+ 
.630mg * P<.004 + 
 
N,N-DINITROSOPENTANETHYLENETETRANINE ..: ..lug. :10. :100. g :. . :10. :100. : :10 
 
1111 R a cbr ipj liv hpt 6a23 a .> no dre P-1. 
 
DINITTROSOPIPERAZINE 
 
1112 N f c17 gay for sqc 9m24 a 
a N f c7 gav uto rna 9m24 o 
1113 N m c17 gav for sqc 9m24 a 
1114 N f svi vat lun ado 12m23 a 
 
a N f swi vat Liv hpc 12m23 a 
b N f swi wat tba mix 12m23 a 
1115 N a swi vat Lun ado 12m23 a 
 
a N m swi vat liv hpc 12m23 a 
b N * swi vat tba mix 12m23 a 
 
2,4-DINITROTOLUENE 
 
1116 N f b6c *at TBA NXB 78w93 
 
a N f b6c oat Liv NXS 78v93 
b N f b6c oat Lun NXB 78w93 
1117 N m b6c oat T8A NXB 78v92 
a N m b6c oat Liv NXB 78w92 
b N m b6c oat lun NXS 78w92 
 
1118 R f f34 oat gl Iba 18.25 v 
a R f f34 at TBA NXB 18.25 v 
b R f f34 oat Liv NXS 18.25 v 
1119 R f f314 at NXA NXA 18.25 v 
a R * f34 at TA NXB S8.25 v 
b R m f34 oat Liv NXB 18.25 v 
1 ,4-DIOXANE 
 
1120 N f b6c wat Liv NXA 90v90 
 
a N f b6c vat Liv hpc 90w90 
b N f b6c vat TBA NXB 90v90 
c N f b6c wat liv NXB 90v90 
d N f b6c vat Lun NXB 90w90 
1121 N m b6c wat Liv hpc 90w91 
a N m b6c vat Liv NXA 90m91 
b N m b6c wt --- NXA 909I 
c N m b6c wat--- Lym 9091 
d N m b6c wat TBA NXB 90w91 
* N * b6c vat Liv NXB 90w91 
f N m b6c vat Lun NXB 90w91 
1122 R f osm vat NXB NXB 26m26 
a R f oms wat Liv hpa 26m26 
b R f osm vat ntu sqc 26m26 
c R f o1 m wat TBA NXB 26m26 
d R f osI wat Liv NXB 26m26 
 
bO0ng . . .Iug. :10. :100. m : g ..:10.. :100. :Ig . :10 
 
+ 4.66mg 
 
4.13mg 
+ . 2.01mg 
 
.> no dre 
 
no dre 
no dre 
8.70mg 
51.9mg 
8.24mg 
 
P<.003 + 
P<. 02 
 
P<. 0005+ 
Pal. 
P-a. 
 
P.1. + 
P<. 0005 
P<.2 
 
P<.02 + 
 
lOOng . . .:ug.. : 10. :100. g : ..g :10. :100.. :1g . 10 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
68.0mg \ P<.2 
no dre P-1. 
no dro P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
12.7mg * P<.02 a 
no dro Pal. 
no dre P.1. 
 
+ 9.35mg 0 P<.0005a 
 
43.7mg P<.8 
31.1mg* P<.04 
 
OOng.. :. .Iug. :10. :100. g :. 1g :10. :100. :Ig :.10 
 
594.mg 0 P<.0005c 
938.mg / P<.0005c 
847.mg * P<.0005 
594.mg 0 P<.0005 
71.99m P<.8 
 
1.42gm * P<.OOOSc 
1.469m * P<.0005c 
3.15gm \ P<.005 
3.93gm \ P<.009 
1.88gm * P<.03 
 
1.46gm * P<.0005 
no dro P-1. 
 
126.mg * P<.0005 
160.mg * P<.0005c 
476.mg * P<.OOOSc 
40.5mg \ P<.0005 
124.mg 0 P<.0005 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lIne 2Dose 2Inc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
1290 .302mg n.s.s. 
1290 .335mg n.s.s. 
1290 .280mg n.s.s. 
1290 .407mg n. .s. 
1290 .774mg n.s.s. 
1290 .297mg n.s.s. 
1290 .378mg n.s.s. 
1290 .721mg n.s.s. 
1290 .152mg 5.47mg 
 
1/18 
2/18 
3/18 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
 
.385mg 2/17 
.385mg 2/17 
.385mg 3/17 
.414mg 1/17 
.414mg 0/17 
.414mg 2/17 
.385mg 1/17 
.385mg 0/17 
.385mg 5/17 
 
2,4-DINITROPHENOL 51-28-5 
 
1107 257 241.mg n.s.s. 0/28 62.5mg 0/38 
 
King;pseb, 112,365-366; 1963 
 
DINITROSOHONOPIPERAZINE 55557-00-1 
 
1108 1375m .144mg .501mg 
 
1375m .151mg .538mg 
1375m .398mg 1.43mg 
1375m 29.3mg n.s.s. 
1375m 26.8mg n.s.s. 
 
1375n 12.2ug 68.1ug 
1375n 23.4ug .102mg 
1375n 28.2ug .120mg 
1375n U8.4ug .783mg 
1375o 52.8ug .173mg 
1375o 40.6ug 1.20mo 
1375o 59.4ug .203mg 
1375o .239mg 4.43mg 
 
0/20 10.lug 1/20 26.4ug 
 
2.93mg 14/20) 
 
0/20 10.lug 1/20 26.4ug 
 
2.93mg 14/20) 
 
0/20 10.lug 1/20 26.4ug 
 
2.93mg 19/20 
 
1/20 10.lug 6/20 26.4ug 
2.93mg 0/20 
 
0/20 10.lug 0/20 26.4ug 
 
2.93mg 0/20 
 
0/20 .209mg 19/20 
0/20 .209mg 17/20 
0/20 .209mg 16/20 
0/20 .209mg 7/20 
 
0/20 39.9ug 5/20 .116mg 
1/20 39.9ug 8/20 (.116mg 
0/20 39.9ug 3/20 .116mg 
0/20 39.9ug 0/20 .116mg 
 
3/20 72.Oug 
3/20 72. Oug 
4/20 72. Oug 
4/20 72. Oug 
0/20 72. Oug 
 
7/20 .269mg 
6/20 .269mg 
9/20 .269mg 
1/20 .269mg 
7/20 .269mg 
 
13/20 (1.180g 10/20 
 
Lij insky;oaese,6, 513-527;1982/pers.comm. 
13/20 (1.18g9 10/20 
16/20 1.18mg 15/20 
0/20 1.18mg 0/20 
0/20 1.18mg 0/20 
 
17/20 
6/20) 
17/20 
5/20 
 
N,N-DINITROSOPENTAMETHYLENETETRAMINE 101-25-7 
 
1111 1258 4.93mg n.s.s. 1/22 1.86mg 1/23 
 
DINITROSOPIPERAZINE 140-79-4 
 
1112 1347 1.59mg 28.1g 0/22 
 
a 1347 1.36mg n.s.s. 2/22 
1113 1347 .831mg 7.00mg 0/12 
1114 1250 11.7mg n.s.s. 7/29 
 
a 1250 27.8mg n.s.s. 4/29 
b 1250 5.26mg n.s.s. 25/29 
1115 1250 4.07mg 27.6mg 3/50 
 
a 1250 12.2mg n.s.s. 2/50 
b 1250 3.17mg n.s.s. 19/50 
 
3. 08mg 
3. 08mg 
2.56mg 
10. 4mg 
10.4mg 
10 .4mg 
8.67mg 
8.67mg 
8.67mg 
 
BoyLand;ejca,4,233-239; 1968 
 
4/11 
5/11 
7/12 
3/14 
0/14 
10/14 
11/22 
3/22 
15/22 
 
Pai ;carc,2, 175-177;1981 
Borzsonyi;canr,40,2925-2927;1980 
 
2,4-DINITROTOLUENE 121-14-2 
 
1116 c01865 18.6mg n.s.s. 39/100 
a c01865 234.mg n.s.s. 8/100 
b c01865 18.6mg n.s.s. 2/100 
1117 c01865 86.7mg n.s.s. 40/100 
a c01865 86.7mg n.s.s. 22/100 
b c01865 39.4mg n.s.s. 18/100 
1118 c01865 5.78mg n.s.s. 13/75 
a c01865 5.97mg n.s.s. 57/75 
b c01865 35.0mg n.s.s. 3/75 
1119 c01865 5.49mg 19.1mg 0/75 
 
a c01865 4.84mg n.s.s. 40/75 
b c01865 12.6mg n.s.s. 0/75 
 
1,4-DIOXANE (p-dioxan.) 123-91-1 
1120 c03689 426.mg 861.mg 0/50 
a c03689 639.mg 1.459m 0/50 
b c03689 501.mg 2.199g 15/50 
c c03689 426.mg 861.mg 0/50 
d c03689 6.349m n.s.s. 3/50 
1121 c03689 863.mg 3.66"gm 4/50 
a c03689 833.mg 5.11gm 8/50 
b c03689 1.29gm 22.1gm 0/50 
c c03689 1.499m 16.3gm 0/50 
d c03689 841.mg n.s.s. 19/50 
 
a c03689 833.mg 5.11gm 8/50 
f c03689 8.27gm n.s.s. 8/50 
1122 c03689 69.7mg 218.mg 0/35 
a c03689 79.1mg 323.mg 0/35 
b c03689 249.mg 970.mg 0/35 
c c03689 20.0m9 108.mg 26/35 
d c03689 60.1mg 263.mg 0/35 
 
8.80mg 
8.80mg 
8.80mg 
8.20mg 
8. 20mg 
8.20mg 
3.00mg 
3.00mg 
3.00mg 
2.40mg 
2.40mg 
2.40mg 
 
984.mg 
984.mg 
984.mg 
984.mg 
984.mg 
820.mg 
820 mg 
820.mg 
820.mg 
820.mg 
820.mg 
820.mg 
284.mg 
284.mg 
284.mg 
284U.mg 
284.mg 
 
14/50 (44.2mg 11/50) 
 
1/50 44.2mg 1/50 
4/50 (44.2mg 0/50) 
13/50 40.8mg 13/50 
6/50 40.89g 9/50 
3/50 (40.8mg 2/50) 
12/50 7.50mg 23/50 
41/50 7.50m9 40/50 
 
0/50 7.50mg 2/50 
7/50 6.00mg 13/50 
29/50 6.00mg 35/50 
 
3/50 6.00mg 3/50 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
t iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
tun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
ski:fib; sub:fib. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
21/50 1.99"gm 35/50 
12/50 1.99"gm 29/50 
31/50 1.99gm 35/50 
21/50 1.99"gm 35/50 
 
0/50 1.99gm 3/50 
18/50 1.65gm 24/50 
19/50 1.65gm 28/50 
6/50 (1.65gm 3/50) 
5/50 (1.65gm 2/50) 
28/50 1.65gm 33/50 
19/50 1.65gm 28/50 
3/50 1.65gm 3/50 
18/35 569.mg 18/35 
10/35 569.mg 11/35 
10/35 569.mg 8/35 
28/35 (569.mg 22/35) 
10/35 569.mg 12/35 
 
liv:hpa,hpc. 
 
I iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
liv:hpa,hpc. 
 
--:ham,hes. S 
 
S 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun: a/a,a/c. 
 
Liv:hpa; ntu:sqc. C 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
1104 
 
a 
b 
 
1105 
a 
b 
 
1106 
a 
b 
 
125 
 
Brkly Code 
 
a 
b 
 
c 
 
d 
 
1109 
 
a 
b 
 
c 
 
1110 
 
a 
b 
 
c 
 
126 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
1123 R m os. mat ntu sqc 26.26 
 
a R * osm wet TBA NXB 26.26 
b R * os. wet Liv NXB 26.26 
 
1124 R m cdr wat nos sqc 56w69 r 
1125 R b she wet Liv mix 24.24 e 
 
a R b she wet Liv hpc 24.24 a 
b R b she wet ntu sqc 24.24 * 
c R b she wet tbe mix 24.24 e 
1126 R b wis wet Liv hpt 63w64 
 
a R b wis wet tbs mix 63w64 
 
DIOXATHION 
 
1127 N f b6c *et TBA NXB 78w90 v 
 
a e f b6c et liv NXB 78w9O v 
b N f b6c et lun NXB 78w9O v 
1128 N m b6c set TBA NXB 78w"90 v 
 
e N m b6c et liv NXB 78w9O v 
b N m b6c eat lun NXB 78w9O v 
1129 R f oe set TBA NXB 18.26 v 
 
e R f oem *et liv NXB 18.26 v 
1130 R m osm eat TBA NXB 18.26 v 
 
a R m osm set liv NXB 18.26 v 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
168.mg * P<.0005c 
114.mg * P<.0005 
796.mg * P<.2 
 
&khistorical * P<.07 + 
* + . 2.12gm * P<.0005+ 
 
2.50gm * P<.0005+ 
15.9gm * P<.006 + 
no dre P-1. 
 
515.mg P<.05 + 
690.mg P<.4 
 
loong. ...Iug. :110. :100. g :..g :10. :100.. . : :10 
 
2.59gm * P<.9 
no dre P-1. 
1.82gm * P<.5 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-I. 
628.mg * P<.5 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P.1. 
 
DIPENTANETHYLENETHIURAN HEXASULFIDE .. : .lug. 1 :10 . :100.. g :.19 :10 . :100. Ig : :. 10 
 
1131 N f b6s orL Lun edo 76w76 evx .> no dre 
 
a N f b6e orl Liv hpt 76w76 ovx no dre 
b N f b6a orl tbe mix 76w76 *vx 120.mg 
1132 N m b6a orl lun edo 76w76 evx .> no dre 
 
a N m b6e orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b N m b6a orl tbe mix 76w76 *vx no dre 
1133 N f b6c orl lun ado 76w76 evx . 83.1mg 
 
a N f b6c orl liv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b N f b6c orl tba mix 76w76 evx 83.1mg 
1134 N m b6c orl liv hpt 76w76 *vx . 113.mg 
 
a N m b6c orL tun ado 76w76 *vx 113.mg 
b N m b6c orl tba mix 76w76 *vx 52.5mg 
 
DIPHENYL-p-PHENYLENEDIANINE Ong. .: ..Iug. :10. : 100.. g : .g :10. : 100... g :. :10 
 
1135 N f b6e orl lun ado 76w76 evx .> 2.799g 
 
a N f b6a orl liv hpt 76w76 * vx no dre 
b N f b6a orl tbe mix 76w76 evx 2.79gm 
1136 N m b6e orl lun edo 76w76 evx . 1.33g 
 
e N m b6e orl liv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b Nm b6a orl tba mix 76w76 * vx no dre 
1137 N f b6c orl liv hpt 76w76 evx .> no dre 
 
a N f b6c orl lun eo 76w76 * vx no dre 
b N f b6c orl tbe mix 76w76 evx no dre 
1138 N m b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx .> no dre 
 
e N m b6c orl lun mix 76w76 * vx no dre 
b N m b6c orl tbe mix 76w76 ovx 4.119 m 
 
DIPHENYLACETONITRILE Ong. . ..ug. : 10. : 100. g : .1g :10. : 100.... g :. 10 
 
1139 N f b6a orl lun ado 76w76 * vx .> no dr e 
 
a N f b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx no dr e 
b N f b6a orl tb e mix 76w76 * vx no dre 
1140 N m b6a orl l un edo 76w76 evx .> 3. 62gm 
 
e N m b6e or L Liv hpt 76w76 evx no dr e 
b N m b6e orl tbe mix 76w76 evx no dre 
1141 N f b6c orl Lun mix 76w76 * vx 229.mg 
 
a N f b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 * vx no dre 
b N f b6c orL tbe mix 76w76 * vx 148mg 
1142 N m b6c orl l un ado 76w76 vx . 129.mg 
 
a N m b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 * vx 200.mg 
b N m b6c orL tbe mix 76w76 evx 46.4mg 
DIPHENYLCARBONATE l1Ong ..:. l ug. 1 : 10 :..100.. mg : .1 : 10 ..: 100.. :.10 : 10 
 
1143 N f b6e orL Lun edo 76w76 evx .> 206. mg 
 
a N f b6a or L Liv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b N f b6r orl tbe mix 76w76 evx no dre 
1144 N m b6b orl l un edo 76w76 vx .> no dre 
a N * b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 * vx no dre 
b Mm b6* orL tbe mix 76w76 * vx no dre 
1145 N f b6c orL Liv hem 76w76 evx .> 233.mg 
 
e N f b6c orL Lun ad. 76w76 * vx 233.mg 
b N f b6c orL tbe mix 76w76 evx 73.1mg 
1146 N m b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx . 68.0mg 
 
a N m b6c orL Lun ad. 76w76 evx 217.mg 
b N m b6c orL tbe mix 76w76 evx 25.2mg 
 
P<.5 
P-1. 
P-1. 
P-1. 
 
P<.05 - 
P-1. _ 
 
P<.05 - 
P<. 1 I 
P<.1 I 
 
P<.02 - 
 
P<.3 - 
 
P<.3 - 
P<.09 - 
 
P -I1. _ 
 
P-1I. - 
 
P-1I. - 
P-1I. - 
P-I. _ 
 
P-1 . _ 
P<.9 _ 
 
P. 1. _ 
 
P-I. _ 
P. 1 . _ 
P<1 1. _ 
P. 1. _ 
 
P<.1 _ 
 
P<.04 - 
 
P<.0 -4 
P<.0 09- 
P<..022 - 
 
P-I.- 
P-I. I 
 
P-I.- 
P<.30 - 
P<. 04 - 
P<. 09 - 
P<. 002 - 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl IDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
1123 c03689 94.3mg 304.mg 
 
* c03689 59.3mg 339.mg 
b c03689 190.mg n.s.s. 
1124 124 1.209m n.s.s. 
1125 125 1.08gm 5.36gm 
a 125 1.22gm 6.73gm 
 
b 125 4.829m 231.gm 
c 125 4.33gm n.s.s. 
1126 104 209.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 104 206.mg n.s.s. 
D IOXATHION 78-34-2 
 
1127 c00395 207.mg n.s.s. 
a c00395 623.mg n.s.s. 
b c00395 447.mg n.s.s. 
1128 c00395 77.0mg n.s.s. 
a c00395 128.ag n.s.s. 
b c00395 141..g n.s.s. 
1129 c00395 3.98mg n.s.s. 
a c00395 36.3mg n.a.s. 
1130 c00395 6.81mg n.s.s. 
a c00395 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
 
0/35 250.mg 
21/35 250.mg 
 
1/35 250.mg 
0/30 305.mg 
2/106 5.29mg 
1/106 5.29mg 
0/120 5.29mg 
31/120 5.29mg 
 
0/9 521.mg 
1/9 521.mg 
 
2/20 
0/20 
0/20 
7/20 
4/20 
1/20 
36/50 
 
1/50 
28/50 
 
0/50 
 
12/35 500.mg 
18/35 500.mg 
2/35 500.mg 
 
1/30 406.mg 
0/110 52.9mg 
0/110 52.9mg 
0/120 52.9mg 
34/120 52.9mg 
6/26 
7/26 
 
52.5mg 6/50 105.mg 
52.5mg 1/50 105.mg 
52.5mg 1/50 105.ng 
29.5mg 10/50 58.8mg 
29.5mg 4/50 58.8mg 
29.5mg 1/50 58.8mg 
1.60mg 27/50 3.00mg 
1.60mg 0/50 3.00mg 
2.40mg 23/50 4.80mg 
2.40mg 0/50 4.80mg 
 
16/35 
27/35 
 
1/35 
 
1/30 569.mg 2/30 731.mg 2/30 
1/106 529.mg 12/66 
1/106 529.mg 10/66 
 
0/120 529.mg 3/120 
28/120 529.mg 21/120 
 
6/50 
0/50 
1/50 
13/50 
6/50 
4/50 
29/50 
 
0/50 
21/50 
 
0/50 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Hoch-Ligeti ;bjca,24,164-167;1969 
 
Kociba;txmp,30,275-286;1974 
 
Argus; Jnci ,35,949-958;1965 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Iun:a/a,a/c. 
Liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun: a/i,a/c. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
DIPENTAMETHYLENETHIURAN HEXASULFIDE (Culfads) --- 
1131 1221 49.2mg n.s.s. 1/17 41.4mg 1/18 
 
a 1221 82.0mg n.s.s. 0/17 41.4mg 0/18 
b 1221 23.9mg n.s.s. 2/17 41.4mg 4/18 
1132 1221 47.4mg n.s.s. 2/18 38.5mg 1/17 
a 1221 72.1mg n.s.s. 1/18 38.5mg 0/17 
b 1221 50.7mg n.s.s. 3/18 38.5mg 1/17 
1133 1221 25.1mg n.s.s. 0/16 41.4mg 3/18 
a 1221 82.0mg n.s.s. 0/16 41.4mg 0/18 
b 1221 25.1mg n.s.s. 0/16 41.4mg 3/18 
1134 1221 27.6mg n.s.s. 0/16 38.5mg 2/17 
a 1221 27.6mg n.s.s. 0/16 38.5m9 2/17 
b 1221 18.1mg n.s.s. 0/16 38.5mg 4/17 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
DIPHENYL -p-PHENYLENEDIANINE 
1135 1158 454.mg n.s.s. 
a 1158 864.mg n.s.s. 
b 1158 454.mg n.s.s. 
1136 1158 328.mg n.s.s. 
* 1158 851.mg n.s.s. 
b 1158 401.mg n.s.s. 
1137 1158 915.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1158 915.mg n.s.s. 
b 1158 915.mg n.s.s. 
1138 1158 306.mg n.s.s. 
* 1158 756.mg n.s.s. 
b 1158 213.mg n.s.s. 
 
(Agerite DPPD) 74-31-7 
0/18 462.mg 1/17 
0/18 462.mg 0/17 
0/18 462.ng 1/17 
0/18 430.mg 2/18 
1/18 430.mg 0/18 
2/18 430.mg 2/18 
0/18 462.mg 0/18 
1/18 462.mg 0/18 
2/18 462.mg 0/18 
3/14 430.mg 3/16 
0/14 430.mg 0/16 
4/14 430.mg 5/16 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
DIPHENYLACETONITRILE 86-29-3 
 
1139 1311 93.2mg n.s.s. 1/17 
a 1311 155.mg n.s.s. 0/17 
b 1311 74.0mg n.s.s. 2/17 
1140 1311 63.5mg n.s.s. 2/18 
a 1311 137.mg n.s.s. 1/18 
b 1311 70.3mg n.s.s. 3/18 
1141 1311 56.3mg n.s.s. 0/16 
a 1311 147.mg n.s.s. 0/16 
b 1311 44.6mg n.s.s. 0/16 
1142 1311 38.8mg n.s.s. 0/16 
 
a 1311 49.1mg n.s.s. 0/16 
b 1311 19.7mg 170.mg 0/16 
 
DIPHENYLCARBONATE 102-09-0 
 
1143 1313 28.7mg n.s.s. 1/17 
* 1313 68.1mg n.s.s. 0/17 
b 1313 32.0mg n.s.s. 2/17 
1144 1313 38.9mg n.s.s. 2/18 
a 1313 59.7mg n.s.s. 1/18 
b 1313 41.6mg n.s.s. 3/18 
1145 1313 37.9mg n.s.s. 0/16 
a 1313 37.9mg n.s.s. 0/16 
b 1313 22.0m9 n.s.s. 0/16 
1146 1313 20.5mg n.s.s. 0/16 
a 1313 35.3mg n.s.s. 0/16 
b 1313 10.7mg 103.mg 0/16 
 
78.4mg 
 
78.4mg 
78.4mg 
73. 0mg 
73 .0mg 
73.0mg 
78.4mg 
78.4mg 
78.4mg 
73.09g 
73.0mg 
73. 0mg 
 
36.4mg 
36.4mg 
36.4mg 
33.9mg 
33.9mg 
33.9mg 
36.4mg 
36.4mg 
36.4mg 
33.9mg 
33.9mg 
33.9mg 
 
1/18 
0/18 
2/18 
2/17 
0/17 
2/17 
2/17 
0/17 
3/17 
3/16 
2/16 
7/16 
 
2/17 
0/17 
2/17 
1/16 
0/16 
1/16 
1/18 
1/18 
3/18 
3/18 
1/18 
7/18 
 
Innos;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
127 
 
Brkly Code 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
 
TD5O 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
5,5-DIPHENYLHYDANTOIN l1Ong .. . l :1ug .1.0. : 100 .. g : ... :. 10. 1 :100 . :. 1 : 10 
 
1147 R f hza eat --- mly 60w60 ms .> 422.mg P<.3 
 
a R f hza eat Liv tur 60w60 ms no dre P-1. 
b R f hza oat mai tur 60w60 as no dre P-1. 
 
N,N-DIPROPYL-4-(4f'-PYRIDYL-1'-OXIDEIAZO)ANILINE. :10. :. 100. g :. . :10. :100 .. Ig : ..... 10 
 
1148 R m sda eat liv tur 52w52 bfr .> no dre P-1. 
 
2,5-DITHIOBIUREA 
 
1149 N f b6c mat liv hpc 94w94 
a N f b6c mat TBA NXB 94w94 
b N f b6c mat liv NXB 94w94 
c N f b6c eat Lun NXB 94w94 
1150 N m b6c eat TBA NXB 94w94 
a N m b6c eat liv NXB 94w94 
b N m b6c mat lun NXB 94w94 
1151 R f f34 mat TBA NXB 25.25 
 
a R f f34 mat liv NXB 25.125 
1152 R m f34 mat pit can 25.25 
 
a R m f 34 at TIA NXB 25.25 
b R m f34 mat Liv NXB 25.25 
 
!00ng..:..lug. 10. 100.... :.lug. :10. :100.. :. . :10 
 
: 5.67gm * P<.03 a 
 
4.35gm * P<.2 
 
5.67gm * P<.03 
22.9gm * P<.6 
 
:> 20.0gm * P<.8 - 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dra P-1. 
 
:> 842.mg * P<.3 _ 
 
131.gm * P<1. 
 
* #2.62g. * P<.02 - 
 
960.mg / P<.4 
 
5.01gm * P<.09 
 
DITHIOOXANIDE lOOng.. :. .ug. :10. :100. :.g .:10. :100.. :. :10 
 
1153 R f cdr mat ngL tum 18.24 av . 12.6mg \ P<.02 
 
n-DODECYLGUANIDINE ACETATE 
 
1154 N f b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 mv 
a N f b6a orL Lun ada 76w76 mv 
b N f b6a orL tba mix 76w76 mv 
1155 N m b6a orL Lun mix 76w76 mv 
 
a N m b6s orL Liv hpt 76w76 mv 
b N * b6a orL tba six 76w76 mv 
1156 N f b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 mv 
a N f b6c orL Lun mix 76w76 mvy 
b N f b6c orL tba mix 76w76 *v 
1157 N a b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 mv 
a N m b6c orL Lun ada 76w76 mv 
b N m b6c orl tba mix 76w76 mvy 
 
EDIFAS A 
 
1158 N f aps mat Liv tum 23.23 a 
a N f aps mat Lun ada 23.23 a 
b N f aps mat tba mix 23.23 a 
1159 N m aps mat Liv hpt 23.23 a 
a N m aps mat Lun ad 23m23 a 
 
b N m aps mat tba mix 23.23 a 
1160 R f aps mat Lun ada 24.24 a 
 
a R f aps mat Liv mix 24.24 a 
b R f aps sat tba mix 24.24 a 
1161 R a aps sat Liv tum 24.24 a 
a R m aps mat Lun ada 24.24 a 
b R m aps mat tba mix 24m24 a 
 
EDIFAS B 
 
1162 N f aps mat Liv hpt 23.23 a 
 
a N f aps mat Lun ada 23.23 a 
b N f aps mat tba mix 23.23 a 
1163 N m aps mat Lun ada 23.23 a 
a N m aps mat liv hpt 23.23 a 
 
b N m aps mat tba mix 23.23 a 
1164 R f aps mat Liv tur 24.24 a 
a R f aps mat tba mix 24.24 a 
1165 R m aps mat Liv hpt 24.24 a 
a R m aps mat tba mix 24.24 a 
EDTA, TRISODIUN SALT TRIHYDRATE 
1166 N f b6c mat TBA NXS 24.24 
a N f b6c mat Liv NXB 24.24 
b N f b6c mat Lun NXB 24.24 
1167 N m b6c mat TBA NXB 24.24 
a N m b6c mat Liv NXB 24.24 
b N a b6c mat Lun NXB 24.24 
1168 R f f 34 mat TBA NXB 24.24 
a R f f34 mat Liv NXB 24.24 
1169 R a f34 mat TBA NXB 24.24 
 
a R f f34 mat Liv NXB 24.24 
ENETINE.2HCLm 
 
1170 N f b6c ipJ TBA NXB 4078 ms 
a N f b6c ipj Liv NXB 4078 ms 
 
I 
Kx 
Kx 
Kx 
Kx 
Kx 
K 
K 
K 
K 
K 
K 
K 
 
100ng.. :. .ug. :10. :100. g : 1g .:10. :100. . :. :10 
 
.> no dre 
 
no dre 
no dre 
41.9mg 
no dre 
149.mg 
54.7mg 
no dre 
54.7mg 
A 19.4mg 
 
30.1mg 
10.8mg 
 
P-1. 
P-1. 
P-I. 
P<.6 
P-I. 
P<. 9 
P<. 3 
P-I. 
P<. 3 
 
P<. 04 
P<. 1 
 
P<. 007 
 
100n. . ..ug. :10. :100. g :. g. :10. :100......Io . .... 10 
 
.> no dre P-1. 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
254.gm * P<.9 
no dre P-1. 
19.4gm * P<.4 
161.9m * P<.2 
375.gm * P<.7 
113.gm * P<.9 
.> no dre P-1. 
 
no dre P.1. 
27.3gm * P<.4 
 
lOOng.... :1ug . 10. :100. g :1g. :10. :100.... Ig.. .10 
 
538.gm * P<.7 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
132.gm * P<.9 
.> no dre P-I. 
 
7.79gm * P<.2 
133.gm * P<.2 
no dre P-1. 
 
lOOng.. : .ug. :10. :100. g :. g. :10. :100.. :. :10 
 
:> no drm P-1. 
 
18.8gm * P<.5 
5.29gm * P<.2 
:> 4.92gm * P<.7 
 
12.3gm * P<.8 
3.19gm * P<.2 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
no dra P-1. 
1.86gm * P<.7 
6.59gm * P<.6 
 
bO0ng..:. .ug :10. :100. 1g : g. :10. :100.. :.g :10 
 
A : s 1.20mg * P<.03 
 
no dre P.1. 
 
128 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
5,5-DIPHENYLHYDANTOIN 57-41-0 
 
1147 1063 68.7mg n.s.s. 0/16 100.mg 1/19 
 
a 1063 130.mg n.s.s. 0/16 100.mg 0/19 
b 1063 93.9mg n.s.s. 3/16 100.mg 1/19 
 
N,N-DIPROPYL-4-(4'- [PYRIDYL-1'-OXIDEJAZO)ANILINE --- 
1148 1176 6.18mg n.s.s. 0/10 12.0mg 0/10 
 
Brkly Code 
 
Norris;canr,29,2145-2156;1969 
 
Brown; Jnci ,37,365-367;1966 
 
2,5-DITHIOBIUREA 142-46-1 
1149 c03009 2.609m n.s.s. 
a c03009 1.58gm n.s.s. 
b c03009 2.60gm n.s.s. 
c c03009 4.47gm n.s.s. 
1150 c03009 1.94gm n.s.s. 
a c03009 5.70gm n.s.s. 
b c03009 3.98gm n.s.s. 
1151 c03009 262.mg n.s.s. 
a c03009 3.07gm n.a.s. 
1152 c03009 905.mg n.s.s. 
a c03009 251.mg n.s.s. 
b c03009 1.46gm n.a.s. 
 
DITHIOOXANIDE 79-40-3 
 
1153 1112 5.72mg n.s.s. 
 
2/50 
12/50 
2/50 
4/50 
20/50 
15/50 
7/50 
31/50 
 
1/50 
0/50 
31/50 
0/50 
 
1.089g 
 
1 .089m 
1 .08gm 
1. 089g 
 
996.mg 
996.g 
M6.mg 
215.mg 
215.mg 
172.mg 
172.mg 
172. mg 
 
8/50 2.16gm 9/50 
24/50 2.169m 20/50 
8/50 2.16gm 9/50 
5/50 2.16gm 6/50 
23/50 1.99g 18/50 
9/50 1.99gm 7/50 
13/50 1.99"gm 4/50 
36/50 429.mg 32/50 
 
0/50 429.mg 1/50 
0/50 343.mg 4/50 
28/50 343.mg 30/50 
 
1/50 343.mg 2/50 
 
3/16 12.0mg 15/26 (24.0mg 9/27) 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:s/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hp.,hpc,nnd. 
 
Weisburger;jnci ,67,75-88;1981 
 
n-DODECYL6UANIDINE ACETATE 
1154 1293 22.0mg n.s.s. 
a 1293 22.0mg n.s.s. 
b 1293 10.5mg n.s.s. 
1155 1293 6.32mg n.s.s. 
a 1293 18.1mg n.s.s. 
b 1293 6.90mg n.s.s. 
1156 1293 8.90mg n.s.s. 
a 1293 17.1mg n.s.s. 
b 1293 8.90mg n.s.s. 
1157 1293 5.85mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1293 7.39mg n.s.s. 
b 1293 4.07mg 146.mg 
 
2439-10*3 
 
0/17 1 1. 1mg 
 
1/17 11.1mg 
2/17 1 1. 1mg 
2/18 10 .3mg 
 
1/18 10.3mg 
3/18 10.3mg 
0/16 11.1mg 
 
0/16 11.1mg 
0/16 11.1mg 
 
0/16 10.3mg 
0/16 10-3mg 
 
0/16 10.3mg 
 
Innes;ntis,1968/1969 
 
0/18 
0/18 
2/18 
3/16 
0/16 
3/16 
1/14 
0/14 
1/14 
3/17 
2/17 
5/17 
 
EDIFAS A (methyl ethyl cellulose) 9004-59-5 
 
1158 127a 5.78gm n.s.s. 0/35 1.30gm 0/25 
 
a 127a 38.9gm n.s.s. 1/35 1.309m 3/25 
b 127a 12.69m n.s.s. 16/35 1.309m 16/25 
1159 127a 14.8gm n.s.s. 4/29 1.209m 6/24 
a 127. 18.3gm n.s.s. 8/29 1.209g 2/24 
b 127. 4.17gm n.s.s. 18/29 1.209m 16/24 
1160 127a 26.2gm n.s.s. 0/43 500.mg 0/44 
a 127a 28.3gm n.s.s. 1/43 500.mg 0/44 
b 127. 5.189g n.s.s. 22/43 500.mg 26/44 
1161 127. 3.26gm n.s.s. 0/46 400.mg 0/43 
a 127a 3.269m n.s.s. 1/46 400.mg 0/43 
b 127a 6.71gm n.s.s. 6/46 400.mg 10/43 
 
13.0gm 0/35 
13.0gm 2/35 
13.0gm 18/35 
12.0gm 4/20 
12.0gm 4/20 
12.0gm 15/20 
5.00gm 1/43 
5.009m 1/43 
5.00gm 24/43 
4. 00gm 0/49 
4. 009m 0/49 
4.009m 12/49 
 
EDIFAS B (cellulose carboxymethyl ether, sodium) 9004-32-4 
 
1162 127a 42.9gm n.s.s. 0/23 1.30gm 1/32 13.09m 1/35 
 
a 127a 44.7gm n.s.s. 1/23 1.309m 5/32 13.09m 2/35 
b 127a 17.39m n.s.s. 12/23 1.309m 25/32 13.09m 18/35 
1163 127a 18.9gm n.s.s. 5/31 1.209m 9/27 12.09m 7/31 
a 127. 51.19m n.s.s. 3/31 1.20gm 1/27 12.0gm 1/31 
b 127a 9.17gm n.s.s. 18/31 1.209m 14/27 12.09m 18/31 
1164 127a 4.46gm n.s.s. 0/43 500.mg 0/48 5.00gm 0/44 
a 127a 2.57gm n.s.s. 27/43 500.mg 29/48 5.00gm 33/44 
1165 127. 21.79m n.s.s. 0/49 400.mg 0/42 4.00gm 1/45 
 
a 127a 8.70gm n.s.s. 21/49 400.mg 14/42 4.00gm 15/45 
 
NcEl l igott;fctx,6,449-460; 1968 
NcEL l igott;fctx,6,449-460; 1968 
 
EDTA, TRISODIUN SALT TRIHYDRATE (EDTA) 150-38-9 
 
1166 c03974 1.22gm n.s.s. 12/20 483.mg 24/50 966.mg 23/50 
 
a c03974 4.629m n.s.s. 0/20 483.mg 1/50 966.mg 1/50 
b c03974 2.29gm n.s.s. 0/20 483.mg 3/50 966.mg 4/50 
1167 c03974 739.mg n.s.s. 9/20 446.mg 24/50 891.mg 27/50 
a c03974 1.41gm n.s.s. 3/20 446.mg 10/50 891.mg 10/50 
b c03974 1.16gm n.s.s. 2/20 446.mg 8/50 891.mg 12/50 
1168 c03974 563.mg n.s.s. 14/20 186.mg 28/50 371.mg 27/50 
a c03974 2.969m n.s.s. 0/20 186.mg 1/50 371.mg 0/50 
1169 c03974 263.mg n.s.s. 9/20 149.mg 25/50 297.mg 30/50 
a c03974 1.62gm n.s.s. 0/20 149.mg 1/50 297.mg 1/50 
ENETINE.2HCt* (MCI uses CAS# 483-18-1) 316-42-7 
 
1170 c01605 .298mg n.s.s. 0/25 .460mg 2/35 1.40mg 0/35 2.70mg 1/35 
a c01605 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/25 .460mg 0/35 1.40mg 0/35 2.70mg 0/35 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
Iliv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hps,hpc,nnd. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
129 
 
130 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
 
b N f b6c ipJ Lun NXB 40w78 as 
1171 N m b6c ipj TBA NXB 44w78 as 
a N m b6c ipi liv NXB 44w78 as 
b N . b6c ipi Lun NXB 44w78 ms 
1172 R f sda ipJ TBA NXB 52w83 a 
 
a R f ada ipJ Liv NXB 52w83 s 
1173 R m sda ipj TBA NXB 52w83 a 
 
a R m sda ipJ liv NXB 52w83 s 
 
EMULSIFIER YN 
 
1174 N f nsa mat Liv tum 80w80 m 
a N f nas mat lun ada 80w80 a 
1175 N * nss mat Lun ada 80w80 a 
a N m nss eat Liv adm 80w80 m 
1176 R f wis mat pit cra 24m24 a 
a R f wis sat Liv nod 24m24 a 
1177 R m wis eat liv cho 24m24 a 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
49.4mg * P<.2 
 
.552mg * P<.09 
1.30mg * P<.3 
1.19mg * P<.2 
.235mg * P<.3 
no dre P-1. 
.382mg * P<.5 
no dre P-1. 
 
loong . :. .ug. : 10. :100. :1g .:10. :100. :.19 :10 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-I1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
+ 5.54gm * P<.009 - 
 
511.gm * P<.9 _ 
no dre P-I. 
 
ENDOSULFAN* 10 
1178 N f b6c mat TBA NXB 78w91 v 
a N f b6c mat Liv NXB 78w91 v 
b M f b6c sat Lun NXB 78w9l v 
 
1179 N f b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 *vx 
a N f b6c orL Lun ada 76w76 *vx 
b N f b6c orL tba mix 76w76 *vx 
1180 N a b6c mat TBA NXB 78w91 av 
a N a b6c mat Liv NXB 78w91 av 
b N m b6c mat Lun NXB 78w91 mv 
1181 N a b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx 
a N m b6c orL Lun ada 76w76 evx 
b N m b6c orL tba mix 76w76 *vx 
1182 N f b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 *vx 
a N f b6a orL Lun ada 76w76 *vx 
b N f b6a orL tba mix 76w76 *vx 
1183 N m b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 *vx 
a N * b6a orL Lun ada 76w76 *vx 
b N m b6a orL tba mix 76w76 evx 
1184 R f osa mat TBA NXB 18m26 dv 
a R f osm mat Liv NXB 18m26 dv 
 
1185 R * osa mat TBA NXB 70074 adsv 
 
a R m osa mat Liv NXB 70w74 adsv 
 
DOng... . :ug. 10. :100. 1m : g . :10. 1 :00.. : : 
 
10 
 
no dre P. 1. 
15.9mg * P<.4 
no drm P-1. 
no dre P-I. 
no dre P-I. 
 
.425mg \ P<.02 - 
6.36mg a P<.9 
no dre P-1. 
1.70mg a P<.2 
 
.584mg \ P<.03 - 
.914mg \ P<.08 - 
.319mg \ P<.004 - 
no dre P-1. 
no drm P-1. 
no drm P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
224.mg a P<.4 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
ENDRIN 
 
1186 N f b6c mat TBA NXB 80w90 
 
a N f b6c mat Liv NXB 80w90 
b N f b6c mat Lun NXB 80w90 
 
1187 N * b6c mat TBA NXB 80w90 dsv 
 
a N m b6c mat Liv NXB 80w90 dav 
b N m b6c mat Lun NXB 80w90 dsv 
1188 R f osm mat TBA NXB 19m26 mv 
a R f osm mat Liv NXB 19m26 sv 
1189 R f osa mat adr NXA 19m25 av 
 
a R f osm mat pit adn 19m25 sv 
1190 R f oam mat Liv ham 27m28 mv 
a R f osa mat tba mix 27m28 mv 
1191 R m osa mat TBA NXB 19m26 
 
a R m osa mat Liv NXB 19m26 
1192 R m osa mat adr NXA 19m26 
 
a R m oam mat mdr adn 19m26 
b R m osa at --- hem l9m26 
c R m osa mat pni isc 19m26 
 
1193 R m oam mat Liv ham 28629 mv 
 
a R m osa mat tba mix 28629 mv 
ENOVID 
 
1194 N f aah mat Lun tum 24m24 g 
a N f aah mat Liv hpt 24m24 g 
1195 N f aah mat Lun tum 24m24 
a N f aah mat Liv hpt 24m24 
1196 N f aah mat Lun tum 24m24 
 
1197 N f baL mat mix sqc 86w86 r 
1198 N f bcm mat Lun tum 24m24 9 
1199 N f bca mat Lun tum 24m24 9 
1200 N f bcm mat Lun tum 24m24 
 
1201 N f c7L gav pit tum 89w89 a 
 
1202 N f cfL mat Liv hct 78w78 ar 
1203 N m cfL mat Liv hct 78w78 ar 
1204 N f chi mat Lun tum 24m24 g 
1205 N f chi mat hpL cra 24m24 
 
lOOng .. : lug. :10. :100.. :Ig. :10. :100.. : g :10 
 
:> 6.88mg * P<.8 - 
 
no dre P-1. 
67.0mg * P<1. 
 
.546mg * P<.04 _ 
.854mg * P<.2 
 
1.27mg * P<a08 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
7.44mg * P<.8 
 
pooL + : #.227mg \ P<.003 - 
 
.579mg * P<.02 
 
42.3mg * P<.4 - 
no dre P-1. 
 
:> ..776mg a P<.8 - 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
pooL #.553mg * P<.04 - 
 
.660mg * P<.04 
.661mg * P<.03 
1.75mg * P<.04 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
100ong. . .. :1ug. 10. :100.. m : g . :10. :100.. : g :10 
 
.> 4. 
 
* 
 
*+ 
 
.62mg 
 
25 .2mg 
4.31mg 
no dre 
no dre 
2.00mg 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
.151mg 
no dre 
no dre 
20.7mg 
1.75mg 
 
P<.6 - 
P<.3 - 
P<.2 - 
P-1. _ 
P-I. _ 
P<.1 
 
P-1. _ 
P-1. _ 
P-1. _ 
* P<.0005+ 
 
P-1. - 
P-I. - 
P<.3 - 
P<. 008 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
b c01605 8.05mg n.s.s. 0/25 
1171 c01605 .175mg n.s.s. 3/25 
a c01605 .293mg n.s.s. 1/25 
b c01605 .279mg n.s.s. 1/25 
1172 c01605 71.5ug n.s.s. 6/10 
 
a c01605 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/10 
1173 c01605 96.7ug n.s.s. 3/10 
 
a c01605 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/10 
 
EMULSIFIER YN 55965-13-4 
 
1174 425 10.19m n.s.s. 0/41 
 
a 425 n.s.s. n.s.s. 1/41 
1175 425 15.89m n.s.s. 2/25 
a 425 32.59m n.s.s. 1/25 
1176 1359 2.589m 214.9m 13/47 
 
a 1359 21.7gm n.s.s. 1/47 
1177 1359 14.79m n.s.s. 0/41 
 
ENDOSULFAN* (Thiodan) 115.29.7 
 
1178 c00566 .250mg n.s.s. 7/20 
a c00566 2.59mg n.s.s. 0/20 
b c00566 .497mg n.s.s. 2/20 
1179 283 .353mg n.s.s. 0/16 
a 283 1.09mg n.s.s. 0/16 
b 283 .127mg n .s.. 0/16 
1180 c00566 .364mg n.s.s. 4/20 
a c00566 .408mg n.s.s. 1/20 
b c00566 .576mg n.s.s. 0/20 
1181 283 .176mg n.s.s. 0/16 
 
a 283 .224mg n.s.s. 0/16 
b 283 .120mg 2.11mg 0/16 
1182 283 .506mg n.s.s. 0/17 
a 283 1.68mg n.s.s. 1/17 
b 283 1.29mg n.s.s. 2/17 
1183 283 .433mg n.s.s. 1/18 
 
a 283 .620mg n.s.s. 2/18 
b 283 .637mg n.s.s. 3/18 
1184 c00566 10.5mg n.s.s. 15/20 
 
a c00566 55.0mg n.s.s. 0/20 
1185 c00566 15.3mg n.s.s. 12/20 
a c00566 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/20 
 
.460mg 
.460mg 
.460mg 
.460mg 
.130mg 
.130mg 
.130mg 
.130mg 
 
2.60gm 
 
2.60gm 
2.409m 
2.409m 
1.00gm 
1.00gm 
 
800.m9 
 
.210mg 
.210mg 
.210mg 
.414mg 
.414mg 
.414mg 
.350mg 
.350mg 
.350mg 
.385mg 
.385mg 
.385mg 
.414mg 
.414mg 
.414mg 
.385mg 
.385mg 
.385mg 
6.60mg 
6.60mg 
15.7mg 
15.7mg 
 
0/35 1.40mg 
7/35 1.00mg 
3/35 1. 00mg 
3/35 1 . 00mg 
26/35 .270mg 
0/35 .270mg 
13/35 .270mg 
2/35 .270mg 
 
0/41 7.809m 
0/41 7.809m 
4/34 7.20gm 
1/34 7.20gm 
9/45 3. 009g 
 
0/45 3. 00gm 
 
1/39 2.409m 
 
18/50 (.430mg 
0/50 .430mg 
5/50 (.430mg 
 
0/10 .834mg 
1/10 .834mg 
3/10 (.834mg 
 
8/50 .700mg 
 
6/50 .700mg 
2/50 .700mg 
3/14 (.776mg 
2/14 (.776mg 
5/14 (.776mg 
0/16 .834mg 
1/16 .834mg 
3/16 .834mg 
0/16 .776mg 
4/16 .776mg 
5/16 .776mg 
30/50 15.6mg 
 
1/50 15.6mg 
8/50 (32.9mg 
 
0/50 32.9mg 
 
0/35 
0/35 
0/35 
0/35 
22/35 
 
0/35 
5/35 
0/35 
 
2.70mg 
2.70mg 
2.70mg 
2.70mg 
 
1/35 
0/35 
0/35 
0/35 
 
0/47 
1/47 
2/37 
0/37 
23/44 
 
1/44 
0/39 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
Brkly Code 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
Liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Gaunt;fctx, 15,1-5; 1977 
 
Brantom;fctx, 11,755-769; 1973 
 
8/50) 
1/50 
0/50) 
0/17 
0/17 
0/17) 
7/50 
2/50 
2/50 
0/16) 
0/16) 
0/16) 
0/18 
0/18 
0/18 
0/14 
1/14 
1/14 
24/50 
 
1/50 
3/50) 
0/50 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
Liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
ENDRIN 72-20-8 
 
1186 cOO157 .956mg n.s.s. 
a cOO157 .973mg n.s.s. 
b cOO157 1.83mg n.s.s. 
1187 c00157 .261mg n.s.s. 
a cOO157 .335mg n.s.s. 
b cOO157 .520mg n.s.s. 
1188 cOO157 .214mg n.s.s. 
 
a c00157 1.21mg n.s.s. 
1189 cOO157 .110mg 1.27mg 
 
a cOO157 .277mg n.s.s. 
1190 1004 6.88mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1004 1.77mg n.s.s. 
1191 cOO157 .101mg n.s.s. 
 
a cOO157 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
1192 cOO157 .233mg n.s.s. 
a cOO157 .265mg n.s.s. 
b cOO157 .298mg n.s.s. 
c cOO157 .529mg n.s.s. 
1193 1004 .706mg n.s.s. 
a 1004 2.08mg n.s.s. 
 
2/10 
2/10 
0/10 
1/10 
1/10 
0/10 
8/10 
0/10 
4/60p 
4/60p 
0/88 
60/88 
 
5/10 
0/10 
2/60p 
2/60p 
0/60p 
0/60p 
1/75 
19/75 
 
.290mg 
.290mg 
.290mg 
.170mg 
.170mg 
.170m9 
. 1 10mg 
. 1 10mg 
.1 10mg 
.1 10m 
 
95 .6ug 
95 .6ug 
70 .Oug 
70.Oug 
70. Oug 
70 . Oug 
70. Oug 
70.Oug 
76. 5ug 
76.5ug 
 
5/50 .570mg 
3/50 (.570mg 
2/50 .570mg 
3/50 .340mg 
3/50 .340mg 
1/50 .340mg 
37/50 .210mg 
 
1/50 .210mg 
16/50 (.210mg 
11/50 .210mg 
0/48 .287mg 
37/48 .287mg 
25/50 .140mg 
 
0/50 .140mg 
4/50 .140mg 
2/50 .140mg 
5/50 .140mg 
0/50 .140mg 
0/47 .230mg 
11/47 .230mg 
 
8/50 
1/50) 
1/50 
14/50 
10/50 
 
5/50 
33/50 
 
1/50 
6/50) 
13/50 
 
1/45 .575mg 0/49 
26/45 .575mg 27/49 
27/50 
 
0/50 
8/50 
8/50 
3/50 
3/50 
 
0/44 .461mg 0/42 
6/44 .461mg 10/42 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
adr:adn,can. S 
 
S 
D.ichmann; imed,39,426-434; 1970 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
adr:adn,can. S 
 
S 
S 
S 
Deichmann; imd,39,426-434; 1970 
 
ENOVID (nor.thynodreL/mestranol [66:1]) 8015-30-3 
1194 1367m .763mg n.s.s. 28/61 .650mg 29/57 
a 1367m 4.10mg n.s.s. 0/61 .650mg 1/57 
1195 1367n 1.42mg n.s.s. 21/59 1.30mg 30/63 
a 1367n 16.9mg n.s.s. 1/59 1.30mg 0/63 
1196 1367o 6.12mg n.s.s. 17/49 2.60mg 16/54 
1197 1472 .492mg n.s.s. 0/20 .450mg 2/20 
1198 1367m 4.21mg n.s.s. 18/52 .650mg 6/55 
1199 1367n 3.77mg n.s.s. 15/53 1.30mg 11/50 
1200 13670 19.8mg n.s.s. 12/55 2.60mg 3/55 
 
1201 230 52.7ug .995mg 1/8 .200mg 6/11 2.00mg 7/7 
 
1202 1453 23.8mg n.s.s. 0/39 .125mg 1/40 1.50mg 1/40 5.00mg 0/38 
1203 1453 17.8mg n.s.a. 6/39 .125mg 4/40 1.50mg 5/39 5.00mg 1/40 
1204 1367m 3.37mg n.s.s. 0/50 .650mg 1/47 
it@5 1367n .830mg 40.3mg 17/50 1.30mg 32/53 
 
Heston; Jnci, 51, 209-224;1973 
 
Nunoz;canr,38, 1504-1508; 1973/Dunn 1969 
 
Heston; nci,51,209-224;1973 
 
PoeL ;scie, 154,402-403; 1966 
Berrows; j txe,3,219-230; 1977 
 
Heston; Jnci ,51,209-224;1973 
 
131 
 
132 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
1206 N f che sat hpt cra 24.24 
a N f che sat liv hpt 24.24 
 
1207 N f chf eat --- fbs 24.24 9 
 
a N f chf eat Lun tur 24.24 g 
b N f chf eat Liv hpt 24.24 g 
1208 N f chf eat Lun tum 24.24 g 
 
a N f chf sat Liv hpt 24.24 9 
1209 N f chf eat Lun tum 24.24 
 
a N f chf sat liv hpt 24.24 
 
1210 N f chh sat liv hpt 24.24 9 
 
1211 N f csc gav lun tur 69w69 *k 
 
a N f csc gav tba mix 69w69 *k 
1212 N f csc gav tba mix 69w82 *k 
1213 N f r3m eat mam tun 24.24 r 
 
ENOVID - E 
 
1214 N f cfl sat Liv hct 78w78 er 
1215 N m cfl eat liv hct 78w78 or 
1216 N f 5ww gyv liv hct 65w80 or 
EPICHLOROHYDRIN** 
 
1217 N f hic ipj Lun ptm 64w64 
 
1218 R m ada inh --- mLy 30m32 as 
a R m sda inh liv tum 30m32 as 
ESTRADIOL 
 
1219 N f c3h eat mgl adc 24m24 r 
 
1220 N f c3j eat mgL adc 52w52 ek 
1221 N f c3j eat ova tua 78w78 ek 
1222 N f c3j eat mgL adc 24m24 ek 
 
ESTRADIOL MUSTARD 
 
1223 N f b6c gav NXB NXB 52w84 s 
 
a M f b6c gav Lun NXA 52w84 s 
b N f b6c gv --- lym 52w84 s 
c N f b6c gav myc srn 52w84 s 
d N f b6c gv sto sqc 52w84 s 
* N f b6c gav mgL MXA 52w84 s 
f N f b6c guv TBA NXB 52w84 s 
g N f b6c gav Liv MXB 52w84 s 
h N f b6c gav lun NXB 52w84 s 
1224 N f b6c gyv lun MXA 52w82 s 
 
a M f b6c gv --- lym 52w82 a 
b N f b6c gav lun a/c 52w82 s 
c N f b6c gv myc srn 52w82 s 
d N f b6c gev mgL NXA 52w82 s 
1225 N m b6c gav NXB NXB 52w83 s 
 
a NM b6c gav .-. NXA 52w83 s 
b N m b6c gav ato sqc 52w83 a 
c N m b6c gav TBA NXB 52w83 s 
d N m b6c gav liv NXB 52w83 s 
* N m b6c gav lun NXB 52w83 s 
1226 N m b6c gav Lun NXA 52w81 s 
a N m b6c gv Lun a/c 52w81 s 
b N m b6c gav --- NXA 52w81 s 
c N m b6c gav myc srn 52w81 s 
1227 R f sda gmv TBA MXB 52w85 
a R f Ida gav Liv NXB 52w85 
1228 R m ada gav TBA NXB 52w85 
a R m sda gyv liv NXB 52w85 
1229 R m sda guv mgL fbs 52w85 
 
ETHIONANIDE 
 
1230 N f b6c 
 
a N f b6c 
b N f b6c 
1231 N m b6c 
 
a N m b6c 
b N m b6c 
1232 N f baL 
a N f baL 
b N f baL 
1233 R f f34 
 
a R f f34 
1234 R m f34 
 
a R f f34 
 
eat TSA NXB 18m24 s 
set Liv NXB 18m24 s 
eat Lun NXB 18m24 s 
eat TBA NXS 18m24 s 
eat Liv NXS 18m24 s 
eat Lun NXB 18m24 a 
guv thy car 50w69 a 
gay lun ado 50w69 a 
gav Liv ppc 50w69 e 
eat TBA NXS 18m24 s 
oat Liv NXB 18m24 s 
eat TBA NXB 18m24 
set Liv NXB 18m24 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
1. 82mg 
no dre 
3.93mg 
27.6mg 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
.332mg 
no dre 
 
P<. 0005+ 
Pal. - 
P<. 005 - 
P<.8 - 
P-1. - 
p-1. - 
P-1. - 
p-1. - 
P-1. - 
P-1. - 
P-I. - 
P-1. - 
P<.8 - 
P-l. - 
 
* + 
 
lOOng..:. .ug. :10. :100. 1m : g . :10. :100 .. : 1g . :10 
 
143.mg * P<.8 - 
no dre P-1. 
 
20.8mg P<.6 - 
 
100ng.. : .ug. :10. : 100. 1m : g . :10. :100.. : g :10 
 
28.9mg P<.8 
 
462.mg * P<.4 - 
no dre P-1. 
 
lO0ng..:. .ug. :10. :100. 1m : g . :10. :100.. : g :10 
 
.282mg P<.7 + 
A .904mg * P<.02 
 
no dre P-1. 
2.75mg * P<.6 
 
bO0ng.. : .ug. :10 :.100. mg. 10. 100.. . : g :10 
 
+ .682mg * P<.0005 
 
1.14mg * P<.0005c 
2.34mg * P<.0005c 
3.01mg * P<.006 c 
*historicaL * P<.009 c 
 
13.4mg * P<.02 
 
.562mg * P<.0005 
no dre P-1. 
 
1.14mg * P<.0005 
 
pool 1.28mg * P<.0005c 
 
2.23mg * P<.0005c 
2.87mg * P<.002 
 
3.22mg * P<.0005c 
12.8mg * P<.007 
: + : 4.10mg * P<.0005 
 
4.39mg * P<.0005c 
ihistoricaL * P<.08 c 
 
1.96mg * P<.0005 
no dre P-1. 
 
2.34mg \ P<.02 
 
pooL + 1.99"mg \ P<.0005c 
 
3.61mg \ P<.0005c 
4.31mg * P<.0005c 
5.55mg \ P<.003 c 
:> ..189mg * P<.2 - 
 
no dr. P-1. 
 
:> 3.85mg * P<.9 - 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
POOL # .756mg * P<.02 - 
 
1OOng..: ..ug. :10. :100. 1m : g . :10. :100.. : g :10 
 
:> fa 450.mg * P<.5 - 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
:> no dre P-1. - 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
+ . 69.3mg P<.01 + 
 
124.mg P<.4 - 
240.mg P<.2 - 
:> no dre P-1. - 
 
508.mg * P<.2 
 
:> no dre P-1. - 
 
623.mg * P<.5 
 
ETHIONINE bOng. .. : lug. :10. :100. m :g ..:10. :100.. : g :10 
 
1235 R o wis eat liv car 34w52 * <+ noTO50 P<.0005+ 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl IDose lIne 2Dose 2Inc 
 
1367o 1.03mg 4.55mg 15/51 
1367o 26.3mg n.s.s. 1/51 
1367. 1.60mg 26.9mg 0/54 
1367. 2.21mg n.s.s. 5/54 
1367. 4.36mg n.s.s. 46/54 
1367n 10.2mg n.s.s. 3/52 
1367n 11.4ag n.s.s. 34/52 
13670 12.5mg n.s.s. 6/50 
1367o 24.0omg n.s.s. 37/50 
1367o 28.4mg n.s.s. 2/55 
585. .194mg n.s.s. 0/15 
585. 83.4ug n.s.s. 4/15 
585n 36.7ug n.s.s. 8/15 
1463 1.93mg n.s.s. 50/73 
 
2.60mg 
2.60mg 
.650mg 
.650mg 
.650mg 
1.30mg 
1. 30mg 
2.60mg 
2.60mg 
2.60mg 
.143mg 
.143mg 
.120mg 
1.95mg 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
36/49 
 
0/49 
6/56 
6/56 
13/56 
 
1/53 
4/53 
4/52 
3/52 
0/53 
0/15 
3/15 
9/15 
12/21 
 
Brkly Code 
 
Poe l;canr,28,845-859; 1968 
RudaL i ;gmcr,17,243-252;1975 
 
ENOVID-E (norathynodraL/mostranol [25:11) )-- 
 
1214 1453m 9.95mg n.s.s. 0/39 .130mg 1/39 1.56mg 
1215 1453m 8.87mg n.s.s. 6/39 .130mg 8/40 1.56mg 
1216 1453n 2.84mg n.s.s. 1/50 1.06mg 2/50 
 
EPICHLOROHYDRIN** 106-89-8 
 
1217 1143 2.54mg n.s.s. 10/30 5.71mg 
1218 1167 114.mg n.s.s. 0/100 1.98m9 
a 1167 52.4mg n.s.s. 0/100 1.98mg 
ESTRADIOL (astradio-l17bata) 50-28-2 
 
1219 1131 38.1ug n.s.s. 11/23 
1220 1468 .338mg n.s.s. 2/43 
1221 1468m .525mg n.s.s. 2/14 
1222 1468n .368mg n.s.s. 4/24 
 
ESTRADIOL MUSTARD 22966-79-6 
 
1223 c01570 .330mg 1.38mg 0/16 
a c01570 .409mg 5.29mg 0/16 
b c01570 .991mg 5.45mg 0/16 
c c01570 .925mg 35.0mg 0/16 
d c01570 1.43mg 178.mg 0/16 
 
a c01570 2.93mg n.s.s. 0/16 
f c01570 .298mg .998"m 0/16 
g c01570 n.a.s. n.s.s. 0/16 
h c01570 .409mg 5.29mg 0/16 
1224 c01570 .442mg 6.82mg 1/31p 
 
a c01570 .944mg 4.65mg 0/31p 
b c01570 .807mg 22.7mg 0/31p 
c c01570 1.09mg 11.0mg 0/31p 
d c01570 2.79mg 272.mg 0/31p 
1225 c01570 2.41mg 8.00mg 0/14 
a c01570 2.56mg 8.90mg 0/14 
b c01570 7.13mg n.s.s. 0/14 
c c01570 1.12mg 6.77mg 4/14 
d c01570 5.23mg n.s.s. 2/14 
 
a c01570 1.01mg n.s.s. 2/14 
1226 c01570 .929mg 7.16mg 2/29p 
a c01570 1.46mg 12.7mg 0/29p 
b c01570 2.54mg 7.89mg 0/29p 
c c01570 2.18mg 27.4mg 0/29p 
1227 c01570 65.7ug n.s.s. 5/10 
a c01570 n.a.s. n.s.s. 0/10 
1228 c01570 .234mg n.s.s. 4/10 
a c01570 n.s.s. n.m.s. 0/10 
1229 c01570 .327mg n.s.s. 0/20p 
 
56.8ug 
13.Oug 
13.Oug 
13. Oug 
 
3.98mg 
3.98mg 
3.98mg 
3.98mg 
3.98mg 
3.98mg 
3.98mg 
3.98mg 
3.98mg 
3.98mg 
3.98mg 
3.98mg 
3.98mg 
3.98mg 
3.98mg 
3.98mg 
3.98mg 
3.98mg 
3.98mg 
3.98mg 
3.98mg 
3.98mg 
3.98mg 
3.98mg 
.160mg 
.160mg 
.160mg 
.160mg 
.160mg 
 
11/30 
 
1/100 5.95mg 
0/100 5.95mg 
 
12/22 
 
1/34 .130mg 
0/5 .130mg 
5/23 .130mg 
 
21/36 8.80mg 
7/36 8. 80mg 
9/36 8.80mg 
8/36 8.80mg 
2/36 8.80mg 
0/36 8.80mg 
25/36 8.80mg 
 
0/36 8.80mg 
7/36 8.80mg 
7/36 8.80mg 
9/36 8.80mg 
4/36 8.80mg 
8/36 8.80mg 
0/36 8.80mg 
6/34 8.20mg 
6/34 8. 20mg 
0/34 8. 20mg 
24/34 8.20mg 
 
5/34 8.20mg 
12/34 (8.20mg 
12/34 (8.20mg 
6/34 (8.20mg 
6/34 8.20mg 
6/34 (8.20mg 
27/35 .330mg 
 
0/35 .330mg 
10/35 .330mg 
0/35 .330mg 
2/35 .330mg 
 
0/38 2.60mg 1/39 
7/40 2.60mg 1/39 
 
1/100 
0/100 
 
1/34 .650mg 7/45 
2/16 .650mg 0/7 
5/18 .650mg 2/7 
 
14/35 
 
1/35 
11/35 
 
1/35 
2/35 
3/35 
20/35 
 
0/35 
1/35 
1/35 
11/35 
0/35 
1/35 
3/35 
18/35 
17/35 
2/35 
23/35 
 
1/35 
5/35) 
5/35) 
1/35) 
17/35 
 
2/35) 
26/35 
 
0/35 
10/35 
0/35 
5/35 
 
Barrows;jtxe,3,219-230;1977 
 
Van Duuren;jnci,53,695-700;1974 
 
Laskin; Jnci ,65,751-757;1980 
 
Gass;obgy,5,477; 1977 
Highman;japt,4,81 -95;1980/pers.comm. 
 
-L- :lym; tun:a/a,a/c; myc:srn; sto:sqc. C 
 
lun: a/a, a/c. 
 
mgl:acn,can. S 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun: a/a, a/c. 
lun: a/a, a/c. 
 
S 
mgL:acn,can. S 
--- :Lou,Lym; sto:sqc. C 
 
- - :tau,lym. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun: a/a, a/c. 
lun: a/a, a/c. 
---:leu,lym. 
 
Liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
S 
 
ETHIONANIDE 536-33-4 
 
1230 c01694 113.mg n.m.s. 
a c01694 n.s.s. n.m.s. 
b c01694 650.mg n.s.s. 
1231 c01694 101.mg n.s.s. 
a c01694 159.mg n.a.s. 
b c01694 192.mg n.s.s. 
1232 1014 29.9mg 7.429m 
a 1014 31.8mg n.a.s. 
b 1014 58.9mg n.s.s. 
1233 c01694 49.5mg n.a.s. 
a c01694 175.mg n.s.s. 
1234 c01694 33.4mg n.s.s. 
a c01694 153.mg n.s.s. 
ETHIONINE 13073-35-3 
 
1235 1373 n.a.s. 4.97mg 
 
4/15 
0/15 
1/15 
7/15 
3/15 
2/15 
0/20 
2/18 
0/18 
12/15 
0/15 
10/15 
0/15 
 
70.2mg 7/35 139.mg 
70.2mg 0/35 139.mg 
70.2mg 0/35 139.mg 
64.8mg 16/35 128.mg 
64.8mg 6/35 128.mg 
64.8mg 5/35 128.mg 
49.7mg 7/36 
49.7mg 7/33 
49.7mg 2/33 
 
40.0mg 26/35 81.0mg 
40.0mg 1/35 81.0mg 
32.0mg 16/35 (64.8mg 
32.0mg 1/35 64.8mg 
 
14/35 
0/35 
1/35 
10/34 
4/34 
2/34 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
tun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Biancifiori;lapp,24,145-165;1964 
 
25/35 
 
3/35 
4/34) 
1/34 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Argus;zkko,75,201 -208; 1971 
 
1206 
a 
 
1207 
 
ba 
b 
 
1208 
a 
 
1209 
a 
 
1210 
1211 
 
a 
 
1212 
1213 
 
133 
 
0/30 65.4mg 30/30 
 
134 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist No 
ETHYL ALCOHOL 
 
1236 R f nbr wet Liv tum 64w64 
1237 R m nbr wet Liv tum 64w64 
 
1238 R b ada wat tba mal 26m26 e 
ETHYL BRONOACETATE 
 
1239 N f hic ipj lun pto 64w64 
S-ETHYL-L-CYSTEINE 
 
1240 R m wis eat abd Lps 58w89 se 
* R m wis eat liv tim 58w89 ae 
b R m wis eat tba mix 58w89 ae 
p,p' -ETHYL-DDD 
 
1241 N f b6c eat liv NXA 24m24 v 
a N f b6c eat liv hpc 24m24 v 
b N f b6c at TBA NXS 24m24 v 
c N f b6c eat Liv NXB 24m24 v 
d N f b6c eat Lun NXB 24m24 v 
 
1242 N f b6c orl liv hpt 76w76 ev. 
 
a N f b6c orl lun mix 76w76 ev. 
b N f b6c orl tba mix 76w76 ev, 
1243 N m b6c eat lun a/a 24m24 
 
a N m b6c eat TBA NXB 24m24 
b N a b6c eat liv NXB 24m24 
c N a b6c set lun NXB 24.24 
 
1244 N m b6c orl liv hpt 76w76 ev) 
a N m b6c orl lun ads 76w76 ev) 
b N a b6c orl tba mix 76w76 ev) 
1245 N f b6a orl liv hpt 76w76 ov) 
a N f b6e orl lun ado 76w76 ev) 
b N f b6a orl tba mix 76w76 ev) 
1246 N m b6a orl lun ade 76w76 ev) 
a N m b6a orl liv hpt 76w76 ev) 
b N m b6a orl tba mix 76w76 ev) 
1247 R f f 34 set TBA NXB 24.24 
a R f f34 eat liv NXB 24m24 
1248 R m f34 eat TBA NXB 24.24 
a R f f34 eat liv NXB 24.24 
N-ETHYL-N-FORNYLHYDRAZINE 
 
1249 N f swa wet blv mix 61w61 e 
a N f awe wet lun mix 61w61 a 
b N f awe wat liv tum 61w61 a 
1250 N m saw wet lun mix 60w60 e 
a N m swe wet blv mix 60w60 e 
b N m awe wet liv mix 60w60 e 
c N m aws wet gal mix 60w60 a 
d N m awe wet pre mix 60w60 e 
 
TD50 ZIailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
tes 
 
lOOng .: .1.ug. : 10. :100.. : g . : 10. :100. : g . :10 
 
.no dre P.1. 
.>no dre P-1. 
 
no dre P-.1 
 
lOOng. . .. : 1ug . 10 .:100.. : g . : 10. :100.. : :.10 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
iO0ng. :. .ug. :10. :100... : g . :10. :100.. : g :10 
 
IV.> 3.63gm * P<.4 - 
IV no dre PI.. 
 
Iv 3.63gm * P<.4 - 
 
iO0ng. . . : lug . 10. :100. g :. . :10. :100. :Ig . :10 
 
A 2.67g. * P<.04 a 
 
3.16g. * P<.04 a 
2.369m * P<.4 
2.67gm * P<.04 
no dre P-1. 
x .> 665.mg P<.3 
x no dre P-I. 
x 322.mg P<.1 
 
A #1.649g * P<.02 - 
 
no dre P-1. 
9.16g. * P<.9 
5.079g * P<.6 
 
x . + . 65.1mg P<.002 
x 581.mg P<.3 
 
x 54.1mg P<.0005 
x .> no dre P-1. 
x no dre P-I. 
x no dre P-1. 
x .> 581.mg P<.7 
x no dre P-1. 
x 543.mg P<.7 
 
:> no dre PI.. 
 
8.54g. * P<.8 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
lOOng. . : lug.10. :100. g :. . :10. :100. . : :10 
 
* . 2.49mg 
 
2.52mg 
no dre 
3.19mg 
3.55mg 
17.7mg 
47.4mg 
50.8mg 
 
N-ETHYL-N'-NITRO-N-NITROSO6UANIDIHE .... :1ug . 10 . 100 . 1 :m . . 100.. g . : 1.. :..o10 
 
1251 N b cbh wet duo mix 43w69 e . + . 2.84mg 
a N b cbh wet eso mix 43w69 e 3.85mg 
b N b cbh wt duo adc 43w69 * 4.20mg 
c N b cbh wat eso sqc 43w69 e 5.60mg 
d N b cbh wet sto mix 43w69 e 8.03mg 
e N b cbh wet liv hms 43w69 e 70.3mg 
f I b cbh wat lun ade 43w69 no dre 
g N b cbh wat liv hpt 43w69 e no dre 
h N b cbh wet tba mix 43w69 e 284.mg 
 
P<. 0005, 
P<.0005O 
P-1 . 
 
P<.0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<. 005 + 
P<. 003 + 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<.0005, 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005, 
P<.002 
P<.3 
P-I. 
P-I. 
P<1 . 
 
ETHYL TELLURAC !OOng .. : lug. :10. :100. g :..g :10. :100.. : g :. 10 
 
1252 N f b6c eat TBA NXB 25m25 v :> 1.03gm * P<.3 _ 
a N f b6c eat liv NXB 25m25 v 2.279g * P<.2 
b N f b6c eat lun NXB 2Sm25 v 3.40g. * P<.5 
1253 N f b6c orl lun ade 76w76 *vx .> 131.mg P<.3 
a N f b6c orl liv hpt 76w76 evx no dre P-1. 
b N f b6c orl tba mix 76w76 evx 63.5mg P<.2 
 
1254 N m b6c sat eye adn 25m25 v : * 201.mg \ P<.002 a 
a N * b6c eat lun NXA 2Sm25 v 228.mg \ P<.002 
b N * b6c eat lun a/c 2Sm25 v 260.mg \ P<.003 
c N o b6c eatTSA NXB 25m25 v 902.mg * P<.5 
d N a b6c set liv NXB 25m25 v no dre P-I. 
 
a N * b6c eat lun NXB 2Sm25 v 228.mg \ P<.002 
1255 N m b6c orl liv hpt 76w76 evx . 24.2mg P<.02 
 
a N m b6c orl lun mix 76w76 evx 52.1mg P<.09 
b N m b6c orl lun car 76w76 evx 108.mg P<.3 
c N m b6c orl lun ade 76w76 evx 108.mg P<.3 
 
d N a b6c orl tba mix 76w76 evx 8.41m9 P<.0005 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
ETHYL ALCOHOL 64-17-5 
 
1236 162a 8.92gm n.s.s. 0/20 5.71gm 0/20 
1237 162. 7.80gm n.s.s. 0/20 5.009m 0/20 
1238 1264 39.9gm n.s.s. 4/48 9.45gm 4/48 
ETHYL BRONOACETATE 105-36-2 
 
1239 1143 .390mg n.s.s. 12/30 .571mg 9/30 
 
Brkly Code 
 
Yamamoto; i jcn,2,337-343; 1967 
 
Sch.ahL ;cLet, 1,215-218;1976 
Van Duuren;Jnci,53,695-700;1974 
 
S-ETHYL-L-CYSTEINE 2629-59-6 
 
1240 1373 592.mg n.s.s. 0/30 
 
a 1373 275.mg n.s.s. 0/30 
b 1373 592.mg n.s.a. 0/30 
 
116.mg 0/30 127.mg 1/30 
116.mg 0/30 127.mg 0/30 
116.mg 0/30 127.mg 1/30 
 
Argus;zkko,75,201-208; 1971 
 
p,p' -ETHYL-DDD (Parthans) 
1241 c02868 1.23gm n.s.s. 
a c02868 1.39gm n.s.s. 
b c02868 617.mg n.s.s. 
c c02868 1.23gm n.s.s. 
d c02868 2.94gm n.s.s. 
1242 1098 108.mg n.s.s. 
a 1098 206.mg n.s.s. 
b 1098 79.1mg n.s.s. 
1243 c02868 866.mg n.s.s. 
 
a c02868 430.mg n.s.a. 
b c02868 508.mg n.s.s. 
c c02868 988.g n.s.a. 
1244 1098 27.6mg 238.mg 
a 1098 94.5mg n.s.s. 
b 1098 23.9mg 167.mg 
1245 1098 218.mg n.s.s. 
a 1098 218.mg n.s.s. 
b 1098 104.mg n.s.s. 
1246 1098 72.9mg n.s.s. 
 
* 1098 121.mg n.s.s. 
b 1098 63.6mg n.s.s. 
1247 c02868 166.mg n.s.s. 
a c02868 1.59gm n. .s. 
1248 c02868 286.mg n.s.a. 
a c02868 1.59gm n.s.s. 
H-ETHYL-H -FORHYLHYDRAZINE 
1249 1052 1.17mg 4.67mg 
a 1052 1.17mg 4.76mg 
b 1052 142.mg n.s.s. 
1250 1052 1.76mg 6.03mg 
a 1052 2.04mg 6.45mg 
b 1052 9.07mg 45.6mg 
c 1052 16.4mg 452.mg 
d 1052 19.3mg 290.mg 
 
72-56-0 
 
1/20 
1/20 
7/20 
1/20 
0/20 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/20 
11/20 
8/20 
4/20 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/17 
1/17 
2/17 
2/18 
1/18 
3/18 
15/20 
0/20 
13/20 
0/20 
 
368.mg 
368.mg 
368.mg 
368.mg 
368.mg 
110m.g 
110m.g 
110.g 
300. mg 
300 mg 
300. mg 
300. mg 
102 mg 
102.mg 
102.mg 
110m.g 
I10.mg 
10m.g 
102.mg 
102. mg 
102 .mg 
175 .mg 
175 mg 
140 .mg 
140.mg 
 
74920-78-8 
 
8/96 40. 0mg 
15/99 40.0mg 
0/21 40.0m 
22/98 33.3mg 
 
5/88 33.3mg 
1/52 33.3mg 
0/44 33.3mg 
0/52 33.3mg 
 
N-ETHYL-N' -NITRO-N-NITROSOGUANIDINE -- 
 
1251 600 1.64mg 5.50mg 0/38 5.48mg 
 
a 600 2.10mg 8.18mg 0/38 5.48mg 
b 600 2.25mg 9.20mg 0/38 5.48mg 
c 600 2.80mg 14.3mg 0/38 5.48mg 
d 600 3.63mg 29.5mg 0/38 5.48mg 
m 600 11.4mg n.s.s. 0/38 5.48mg 
f 600 21.4mg n.s.s. 3/38 5.48mg 
g 600 13.8mg n.s.a. 19/38 5.48mg 
h 600 2.37mg n.s.s. 22/38 5.48mg 
 
3/50 806.mg 11/50 
2/50 806.mg 10/50 
24/50 806.mg 26/50 
3/50 806.mg 11/50 
3/50 806.mg 1/50 
1/17 
0/17 
2/17 
 
4/50 600.mg 9/50 
38/50 600.mg 33/50 
27/50 600.mg 25/50 
 
5/50 600.mg 12/50 
7/16 
1/16 
8/16 
0/18 
0/18 
2/18 
3/18 
1/18 
4/18 
 
32/50 (350.mg 21/50) 
 
2/50 350.mg 1/50 
36/50 280.mg 30/50 
 
2/50 280.mg 0/50 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc. 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
tun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Innes;nt is, 1968/1969 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
47/48 
49/50 
 
0/50 
39/42 
32/36 
13/36 
4/27 
5/36 
 
19/43 
15/43 
14/43 
11/43 
8/43 
1/43 
0/43 
5/43 
25/43 
 
Toth;carc,1,61-65;1980 
Nakamura; jnci ,52,519-522;1974 
 
ETHYL TELLURAC 20941-65-5 
 
277. mg 
277. mg 
277. mg 
20.4mg 
20.4mg 
20.4mg 
151 .mg 
151 .mg 
151 mg 
151 mg 
151 .mg 
151 . mg 
19. 0mg 
19. 0mg 
19. 0mg 
19. 0mg 
 
19. 0mg 
 
36/50 639.mg 36/50 
 
7/50 639.mg 10/50 
9/50 639.mg 12/50 
1/18 
0/18 
2/18 
 
16/50 (376.mg 10/50) 
16/50 (376.mg 11/50) 
14/50 (376.mg 11/50) 
39/50 376.mg 35/50 
15/50 376.mg 16/50 
16/50 (376.mg 11/50) 
4/16 
2/16 
1/16 
1/16 
9/16 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. S 
 
S 
 
t iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
135 
 
1252 c02857 
 
m c02857 
b c02857 
1253 132 
 
a 132 
b 132 
1254 c02857 
 
a c02857 
b c02857 
c c02857 
d c02857 
* c02857 
1255 132 
a 132 
b 132 
c 132 
d 132 
 
325.mg n.s.s. 
908.mg n.s.s. 
856.mg n.s.s. 
21.3mg n.s.s. 
40.5mg n.s.s. 
15.6mg n.s.s. 
112.mg 617.mg 
127.mg 706.mg 
140.mg 1.029m 
198.mg n.s.a. 
518.mg n.s.a. 
127.mg 706.mg 
8.30mg n.s.s. 
12.8mg n.s.s. 
17.5mg n.s.a. 
17.5mg n.s.a. 
3.84mg 23.6mg 
 
8/20 
1/20 
3/20 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
10/20 
8/20 
0/20 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
TD5O 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
1256 N f b6a orL Lun ad. 76w76 *vx 
a N f b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 *vx 
b N f b6a orL tba mix 76w76 *vx 
1257 N m b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx 
 
a N m b6a orL lun ad. 76w76 *vx 
b N m b6a orL tba mix 76w76 *vx 
1258 R f f34 sat pit adn 24.24 
a R f f34 sat TBA NXB 24.24 
b R f f34 mat Liv NXB 24.24 
1259 R m f34 sat - -- men 24.24 
a R m f34 eat NXB NXB 24.24 
b R a f34 eat bod men 24.24 
c R m f 34 mat TBA NXB 24.24 
d R m f34 sat Liv NXB 24.24 
 
28.2mg 
no dre 
26.7mg 
55.5mg 
no dre 
31.2mg 
#12.3mg 
 
no dre 
 
650.mg * 
77.6mg * 
77.6mg * 
181.m * 
no dre 
no dre 
 
ETHYLENE GLYCOL . Ong .. : lug. :10. :100. 1m :g .:10. :100. :Ig .:10 
 
1260 N f hic ipj lun ptm 64w64 .> no dre 
 
P<. 08 
P-a. 
P<. 2 
P<. 3 
P-I. 
P<.3 
 
P<.04 - 
P-I. 
P<. 4 
 
P<.009 a 
P<. 009 
 
P<.05 a 
Pal. 
P.1. 
 
P-1. 
 
ETHYLENE ININE 
 
1261 N f b6a ort Lun ada 76w76 mvx 
 
a N f b6a ort Liv hpt 76w76 mvx 
b N f b6a ort tba mix 76w76 mvx 
1262 N m b6a ort Lun ads 76w76 evx 
 
a N m b6a ort Liv hpt 76w76 mvx 
b N m b6a ort lun bro 76w76 evx 
c N m b6a ort tba mix 76w76 mvx 
1263 N f b6c ort lun ada 76w76 evx 
a N f b6c ort Liv hpt 76w76 evx 
b N f b6c ort tba mix 76w76 evx 
1264 N m b6c ort Liv hpt 77w77 evx 
 
a N m b6c ort tun mix 77w77 evx 
b N m b6c ort lun ads 77w77 evx 
c N m b6c orl tba mix 77w77 mvx 
 
ETHYLENE THIOUREA 
 
1265 N f b6a orl liv hpt 81w81 mvx 
a N f b6a orl tun ada 81w81 avx 
b N f b6a ort tba mix 81w81 avx 
1266 N m b6a ort Liv hpt 81w81 mvx 
 
a N m b6a orl lun ada 81w81 avx 
b N m b6a orl tba mix 81w81 evx 
1267 N f b6c orl liv hpt 81w81 evx 
a N f b6c ort tun da 81w81 myv 
 
b N f b6c orl tba mix 81w81 vx 
1268 N m b6c ort liv hpt 82w82 mvy 
 
a N m b6c orl lun ada 82w82 myv 
b N m b6c ort tba mix 82w82 mvx 
1269 R b cdr mat --- fbs 24m24 a 
 
loong. . ..ug. : 10 ..... :10100. : . 10 ..... : . 10 
 
K . .283mg 
 
3.29mg 
K noTD5O 
K . + . .485mg 
 
.800mg 
2. 14mg 
noTD5O 
s <+ noTDSO 
 
.500mg 
noTDSO 
K + .295mg 
 
.295mg 
.364mg 
.223mg 
 
P<.0005+ 
P<.05 
 
P<. 003 
 
P<. 0005 
 
P<. 002 + 
P<. 02 
P<.002 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<. 0005 
P<.0005, 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
 
lOOng . .: ug. :10. :100. g :1. :10.. :100.. :. :10 
 
+ . 44.7mg P<.0005 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
K 29.3mg P<.0005 
K <+ noTDSO P<.0005 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
noTD5O P<.0005 
<+ noTDSO P<.0005 
 
203.mg P<.05 
 
K noTDSO P<.0005 
 
K . + . 16.9mg P<.0005+ 
K 545.mg P<.3 
 
16.9mg P<.0005 
+ . 13.2mg Z P<.003 
 
a R b cdr mat thy mix 24m24 a 
 
b R b cdr mat thy ada 24m24 a 
 
c R b cdr mat Liv hpt 24m24 a 
d R b cdr mat mgt adc 24m24 a 
 
a R b cdr mat tbm mix 24m24 a 
f R b cdr mat tba mal 24m24 a 
1270 R f cdr mat thy fcc 18m24 a 
1271 R f cdr mat thy car 18m24 
a R f cdr mat thy sca 18m24 
b R f cdr mat liv hnd 18m24 
 
1272 R m cdr mat thy fcc 18m24 a 
1273 R m cdr mat thy car 18m24 
a R m cdr mat Liv hnd 1"24 
 
16.6mg Z P<.0005+ 
33.9mg Z P<.0005+ 
330.mg * P<.04 + 
no dre Pal. 
 
7.23mg * P<.0005 
13.4mg Z P<.0005 
 
39.8mg * P<.03 + 
34.4mg * P<.002 + 
98.9mg * P<.2 + 
304.mg * P<.6 
 
12.8mg / P<.0005+ 
10.8mg I P<.0005+ 
79.1mg * P<.2 
 
* A 
 
*+ 
*+ 
 
ETHYLENE UREA l1Ong. ... lug. : 10. : 100. g :. g. : 10. : 100.. : . : 10 
 
1274 N f b6a ort tun ada 76w76 *vx .> 505.mg 
a N f b6a orl Liv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b N f b6a orl tba mix 76w76 *vx 473.mg 
1275 N m b6a ort tiv hpt 76w76 *vx .> 500.mg 
 
a N m b6a orl tun ada 76w76 evx no dre 
b N m b6a orl tba mix 76w76 *vx no dre 
1276 N f b6c orl Liv hpt 76w76 *vx .> no dre 
 
a N f b6c orl lun mix 76w76 *vx no dre 
b N f b6c orl tba tum 76w76 *vx no dre 
1277 N m b6c orl liv hpt 76w76 *vx . 242.mg 
 
a N * b6c orl lun ada 76w76 evx 242.mg 
b N * b6c orl tba mix 76w76 *vx 87.1mg 
 
P<.6 - 
 
P-1. _ 
 
P<.7 - 
P<.6 - 
 
P-1. _ 
p. 1. 
 
P-1. _ 
 
P. 1. _ 
 
P<. I 
P<.1 I 
 
P<. 007 - 
 
ETHYLENEBISDITHIOCARBANATE, DISODIUN. ..:.. lug. :10. 1 :100. g :. . :10. 1 :100.. :. :10 
 
1278 N f b6a orl liv hpt 76w76 evx .> no dre P-1. 
 
136 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
1256 132 9.17mg n.s.s. 
 
* 132 40.5mg n.s.s. 
b 132 8.28mg n.s.s. 
1257 132 12.4mg n.s.s. 
 
* 132 17.6mg n.s.s. 
b 132 8.12mg n.s.s. 
1258 c02857 5.78mg n.s.s. 
a c02857 11.7mg n.s.s. 
b c02857 106.mg n.s.s. 
1259 c02857 37.1mg 2.43gm 
 
a c02857 37.1mg 2.439m 
b c02857 61.8mg n.s.s. 
c c02857 12.7mg n.s.s. 
d c02857 119.mg n.s.s. 
 
1/17 
0/17 
2/17 
1/18 
2/18 
3/18 
2/20 
15/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
17/20 
 
1/20 
 
20.4mg 
20.4mg 
20.4mg 
19. 0g 
19.0mg 
19.0mg 
 
7.509g 
 
7.50m9 
7.50m9 
12.0mg 
12. 0mg 
 
12. 0mg 
12. 0Omg 
12. 0-9 
 
ETHYLENE GLYCOL (glycol suLfate) 1072-53-3 
 
1260 1143 .169mg n.s.s. 10/30 
 
ETHYLENE ININE 151-56-4 
1261 1245 .100mg .900mg 
 
a 1245 .806mg n.s.s. 
b 1245 n.s.s.,.551mg 
1262 1245 .219mg 1.59mg 
 
* 1245 .349mg 3.45mg 
b 1245 .734mg n.s.s. 
c 1245 n.s.s. .419mg 
1263 1245 n.s.s. .409mg 
a 1245 .233mg 1.27mg 
b 1245 n.s.s. .409mg 
 
1264 1245 .135mg .688mg 
* 1245 .135mg .688mg 
b 1245 .174mg .847mg 
c 1245 88.7ug .540mg 
 
1/17 
0/17 
2/17 
2/18 
1/18 
0/18 
3/18 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
 
ETHYLENE THIOUREA (ETU) 96-45-7 
 
1265 1141 20.4mg 124.mg 0/17 
* 1141 178.mg n.s.s. 1/17 
b 1141 13.2mg 99.9mg 2/17 
1266 1141 n.s.s. 20.0mg 1/18 
* 1141 87.7mg n.s.s. 2/18 
b 1141 n.s.s. 21.8mg 3/18 
1267 1141 n.s.s. 20.7mg 0/16 
 
* 1141 61.1mg n.s.s. 0/16 
b 1141 n.s.s. 20.7mg 0/16 
1268 1141 7.63m9 40.5mg 0/16 
 
m 1141 88.7mg n.s.s. 0/16 
b 1141 7.63mg 40.5mg 0/16 
1269 139 5.00mg 75.7mg 0/72 
 
a 
 
b 
 
C 
 
d 
 
; 
 
f1 
 
1270 
1271 
 
b 
 
1272 
1273 
 
a 
 
139 12.5mg 22.9mg 
139 20.0mg 70.6mg 
 
139 117.mg n.s.s. 
139 100.mg n.s.s. 
139 4.58mg 13.5mg 
139 9.62mg 19.9mg 
 
1112 18.0mg n.s.s. 
141m 15.6mg 149.mg 
141m 29.9mg n.s.s. 
141m 49.4mg n.s.s. 
1112 7.21mg 28.7mg 
141m 6.03mg 21.8mg 
141m 23.9mg n.s.s. 
 
2/72 
2/72 
1/72 
2/72 
51/72 
15/72 
0/10 
0/32 
0/32 
0/32 
0/10 
0/32 
0/32 
 
5/18 
0/18 
6/18 
3/18 
2/18 
6/18 
 
19/50 (15.0m9 
40/50 15.0mg 
 
0/50 15.0m9 
2/50 24.0mg 
2/50 24.0m9 
0/50 24.0mg 
43/50 24.0mg 
 
2/50 24.0mg 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
9/50) 
39/50 
 
1/50 
8/50 
8/50 
4/50 
39/50 
 
0/50 
 
Brkly Code 
 
S 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
---:men; bod:m.n. A 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
.286mg 9/30 
 
1.81mg 
 
1.81m9 
1.81mg 
1.68mg 
1.68mg 
1.68mg 
 
1.6J-s 
1.81m9 
1.81m9 
1.81mg 
 
1.68mg 
1.68mg 
 
1.68mg 
1.68mg 
 
88.8m9 
88.8m9 
88.8"g 
82.6mg 
82.6mg 
82.6mg 
88.8mg 
88.8m9 
88.8mg 
82. 5mg 
82. 5mg 
82. 5mg 
.225mg 
 
.225mg 
.225mg 
.225mg 
.225mg 
.225mg 
.225mg 
6.56m9 
6.56mg 
 
6.56mg 
6.56mg 
 
5. 25mg 
S .25mg 
5.25mg 
 
Van Duur*n;jnci,53,695-700;1974 
 
10/11 
2/11 
11/11 
12/16 
9/16 
4/16 
16/16 
15/15 
11/15 
15/15 
15/17 
15/17 
14/17 
16/17 
 
9/16 
0/16 
12/16 
18/18 
2/18 
18/18 
18/18 
3/18 
18/18 
14/16 
 
1/16 
14/16 
 
0/75 1.13m9 
 
2/75 
0/75 
1/75 
14/75 
49/75 
23/75 
 
2/26 
3/26 
2/26 
1/26 
2/26 
3/26 
2/26 
 
1.13mg 
1.13mg 
1.13mg 
1. 13mg 
1. 13mg 
1. 13mg 
13. 1mg 
13. lag 
13. 1mg 
13. 1mg 
10. 5mg 
 
10. Smg 
10.5mg 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
Inns;ntis,1968/1969 
 
5/73 (5.63mg 4/73 11.3mg 5/69 22.5mg 3/70) Graham; 
 
fctx, 13,493.499; 1975 
 
1/73 5.63mg 
5/73 5.63mg 
 
1/73 5.63mg 
 
4/73 5.63mg 
45/73 5.63mg 
13/73 5.63mg 
6/26 
5/21 
1/21 
0/21 
15/26 
14/21 
 
1/21 
 
ETHYLENE UREA (2-imidazolidinone) 120-93-4 
 
1274 1197 70.3mg n.s.s. 1/17 89.1mg 2/17 
a 1197 167.mg n.s.s. 0/17 89.1mg 0/17 
b 1197 59.5mg n.s.s. 2/17 89.1mg 3/17 
1275 1197 69.5mg n.s.s. 1/18 82.9mg 2/18 
a 1197 109.mg n.s.s. 2/18 82.9mg 1/18 
b 1197 65.2mg n.s.s. 3/18 82.9mg 3/18 
1276 1197 167.mg n.s.s. 0/16 89.1mg 0/17 
a 1197 167.mg n.s.s. 0/16 89.1mg 0/17 
b 1197 167.mg n.s.s. 0/16 89.1mg 0/17 
1277 1197 59.5mg n.s.s. 0/16 82.9mg 2/17 
a 1197 59.5mg n.s.s. 0/16 82.9mg 2/17 
b 1197 32.8mg 1.18gm 0/16 82.9mg ,5/17 
 
ETHYLENEBISDITHIOCARBANATE, DISOOJUN (Dithane, nabm) 142-59-6 
1278 1215 19.7mg n.s.s. 0/17 9.96mg 0/18 
 
2/73 11.3m9 16/69 22.5mg 62/70 
1/73 11.3mg 21/69 (22.5mg 3/70) 
2/73 11.3mg 1/69 22.5mg 5/70 
2/73 11.3mg 5/69 (22.5mg 0/70) 
54/73 11.3mg 61/69 22.5mg 68/70 
16/73 11.3mg 31/69 22.5mg 63/70 
 
Wi.sburger;Jnci,67,75-88;1981 
 
UL lt*nd; Jnci,49,583-584;1972 
 
Weisburger; Jnci ,67,75-88;1981 
 
UL Land; Jnci ,49,583-584;1972 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
137 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
TD50 ZTilpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
a N f b6a orl lun mix 76w76 evx 
b N f b6a orl tba mix 76w76 evx 
1279 N a b6a orl lun ad 76w76 evx 
a N m b6a orl liv hpt 76w76 evx 
b N * b6a orl tba mix 76w76 evx 
1280 N f b6c orl liv hpt 76w76 *vx 
a N f b6c orl lun ad. 76w76 evx 
b N f b6c ort tba mix 76w76 evx 
1281 N m b6c orl liv hpt 76w76 evx 
a N a b6c ort lun ado 76w76 evx 
b N m b6c orl tba mix 76w76 evx 
 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
866.mg 
no dre 
no dre 
 
1-ETHYLENEOXY-3,4-EPOXYCYCLONEXANE .. : .lug. :10 . 100. :19 . 10 .. 100 . :. 10 
 
1282 R f ead gav ito tum 84w84 .> no dre 
 
P-1. _ 
P.1. _ 
PM. 1. 
P-I. 1 
 
Pal. _ 
P-1. _ 
P-I. 1 
P-I. 1 
 
mp. _ 
Pal. 1 
P-I. 1 
 
PM. 1. 
 
ETHYLNYDRAZINE . HCt 
 
1283 N f awe wet lun mix Rw82 a 
a N f ws wat lun de 82w82 e 
b N f awe wet btv mix 82w82 a 
c N f awe wet liv mix 82w82 a 
d N f law wat lun adc 82w2 
 
a N f va wet blv ang 8w82 
 
f N f awe wet liv ang 82w82 a 
9 N f sw wt liv agm 82w82 
h N f wea wt blv ag 82w2 2 
 
1284 N m awe wet lun a 72w72 a 
a N m awe wet lun mix 72w72 a 
b -Nm awe wet blv mix 72w72 a 
c N m awe wet blv ong 72w72 a 
d N aws wat liv ang 72w72 
 
a N m ews wet Liv mix 72w72 a 
 
ETHYLNITROSOCYANANIDE 
 
1285 R f mrw wat roe tum 52w90 
a f f mrw wat liv tum 52w90 
b R f mrw wat tb mix 52w90 
1286 R m mrw wet res tue 52w90 
a R f mrw wet liv tum 52w90 
b R m mrw wet tba mix 52w90 
 
OOng . :.. ...g. 10 . 100... :1mg . 10 :. 100. : g.. :. 10 
 
. + . 5.22mg 
 
5.62mg 
11.6mg 
13.0mg 
14.0mg 
 
27.6mg 
27.6ag 
42.9mg 
42.9mg 
7.82m9 
8.81m9 
38.6ag 
46.9mg 
46.9m9 
48.1mg 
 
1O0ng .:. .:ug. :10. :100.... :1g 10. :100.... g :.10 
 
2.91mg 
no dre 
3. 17mg 
+ . 4.99m9 
 
no dre 
no dre 
 
4-ETHYLSULPHONYLNAPHTHALENE-1-SULFONAMIDE ..ug.............100. g :. . :10:.. 100. :. :10 
 
1287 N f sif eat ubl car 23e23 e . * . 34.2mg 
 
a N f i *eat lun ad 2323 * 53.4mg 
1288 N f ifc eat ubl car 92w92 r . + . 15.3mg 
ETHYNODIOL DIACETATE 1 0Ong .. : ug. :10. :100. g :. . :10. :100.. :. :10 
 
1289 N f crf eat man tue 24a24 er pool .> no dre 
 
P<.0005, 
P<.0005 
 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
 
P<.0005+ 
P<. 09 + 
P<.08 
P<.08 
P<.2 
 
P<.0005, 
Pal. 
P<.2 
 
P<.005 . 
P-I. 
PSI. 
 
P<.0005+ 
P<.005 
 
P<.0005, 
 
P-1. - 
 
EUCALYPTOL 
 
1290 N a cfl gv lun tue 19m24 a 
a N cfl gav liv tum 19m24 e 
b N cfl gav tba mix 19m24 
 
c N m cfl gav tba mal 19m24 e 
FENMINOSULF, FORMULATED 
 
1291 N f b6c eat liv NXA 78w95 v 
 
a N f b6c eat TA NXS 78w95 v 
b N f b6c eat liv NX 78w95 v 
c N f b6c eat lun NX 78w95 v 
1292 N m b6c eat TSA NXI 78w94 v 
 
a N * b6c eat liv NX 78w94 v 
b N * b6c eat lun NXB 78w94 v 
1293 R f f34 eat TEA NXS 18624 v 
 
a R f f34 eat liv NXSI 8m24 v 
1294 R a f34 eat TBA NXE 18624 v 
a f * f34 eat liv NXS 18624 v 
 
FENTHION 
 
1295 N f b6c eat TBA NXS 24a24 
a N f b6c eat liv NXS 24a24 
b N f b6c eat lun NXB 24m24 
1296 N m b6c eat NXA NXA 24m24 
a N m b6c eat TBA NXB 24a24 
b N * b6c at liv NX 24m24 
c N m b6c eat lun NXB 24m24 
1297 f f f34 eat TEA NXS 24a24 
a R f f34 eat liv NX 2424 
1298 f m 134 eat TBA NXB 24a24 
a R a f34 eat liv NX 2424 
 
1OOng..:.. :ug. :10. :100. g : . .. : 10. :100.. g .10 
 
no dre Pal. 
no dre P.1. 
119.m9 C P<.7 
no dre P-1. 
 
1O0ng.. :. .ug. :10. :100.. mg :.j. :10. :100... :1 :10 
 
#152.mg \ P<.02 - 
259.mg C P<.2 
152.mg \ P<.02 
1.7Sg C P<<7 
no dre P.1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P.1. 
no dre Pi.. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P.1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
bOng..:. .ug. :10.. 10 0 ..1mg.. :.10. : 100.. :.. :10 
 
17.8mg * p<.7 _ 
no dre Pal. 
no dre Pal. 
 
6.12mg * P<.02 a 
1.03mg \ P<.02 
9.44mg P<.5 
13.3mg C P<.3 
 
29.4mg P<1. - 
no dre P-1. 
no dre PI.. 
10.3mg P<.7 
 
138 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
* 1215 19.7mg n.s.a. 0/17 9.96mg 0/18 
b 1215 19.7mg n.s.s. 2/17 9.96mg 0/18 
1279 1215 12.2mg n.s.s. 2/18 9.26mg 1/18 
 
* 1215 18.3mg n.s.s. 3/18 9.26mg 0/18 
b 1215 14.1mg n.s.s. 5/18 9.26mg 1/18 
1280 1215 17.5mg n.s.s. 0/18 9.96mg 0/16 
a 1215 17.5mg n.s.s. 1/18 9.96mg 0/16 
b 1215 17.5mg n.s.s. 3/18 9.96m9 0/16 
1281 1215 9.63mg n.s.s. 1/17 9.26mg 1/16 
 
a 1215 10.7mg n.s.a. 2/17 9.26mg 1/16 
b 1215 10.1mg n.s.s. 6/17 9.26mg 2/16 
 
I -ETHYLENEOXY-3,4-EPOXYCYCLOHEXANE 106-87-6 
 
1282 55 27.4mg n.s.s. 0/5 40.8mg 0/5 
 
ETHYLHYDRAZINE.HCl 18413-14-4 
 
1283 
 
cb 
d 
 
a 
 
f1 
 
9 
h 
 
1284 
 
cb 
 
d 
 
a 
 
142 3.11mg 9.34mg 
142 3.40mg 9.90mg 
142 7.37mg 19.6mg 
142 8.13mg 22.3mg 
142 8.54mg 25.8mg 
142 15.4mg 57.0mg 
142 15.4mg 57.0mg 
 
142 21.5mg 111.mg 
142 21.5mg 111.mg 
142 4.62mg 15.7mg 
142 4.93mg 21.1mg 
 
142 13.7mg n.s.s. 
142 16.3mg n.s.a. 
142 16.3mg n.s.s. 
142 15.4mg n.s.a. 
 
21/97 
18/97 
0/43 
0/43 
4/97 
0/43 
0/43 
0/43 
0/43 
15/100 
23/100 
2/28 
1/28 
1/28 
2/28 
 
25.0mg 44/49 
25.0mg 43/49 
25.0mg 30/50 
25.0mg 28/50 
25.0mg 27/49 
25.0mg 16/50 
25.0mg 16/50 
25.0mg 11/50 
25.0mg 11/50 
20.8mg 31/48 
20.8mg 31/48 
20.8mg 8/36 
20.8mg 6/36 
20.8m" 6/36 
20.8mg 7/36 
 
ETHYLNITROSOCYANAMIDE (nltroso.thanscarbamonitriLa) 38434-77-4 
1285 1246 1.35mg 8.02mg 0/25 3.40mg 9/20 
a 1246 10.5mg n.s.s. 0/25 3.40mg 0/20 
b 1246 .981mg n.s.s. 12/25 3.40mg 14/20 
1286 1246 1.88mg 36.2mg 0/22 2.97mg 5/19 
a 1246 8.71mg n.s.s. 0/22 2.97mg 0/19 
b 1246 1.67mg n.z.a. 12/22 2.97mg 10/19 
 
4 -ETHYLSULPHONYLNAPHTHALENE-1 -SULFONAMIDE 842.00-2 
1287 142c 16.1mg 102.mg 0/40 13.0mg 9/42 
a 142c 21.8mg 360.mg 0/40 13.0mg 6/42 
1288 142m 8.89mg 31.0mg 0/26 13.0mg 19/52 
 
ETHYNODIOL DIACETATE 297-76-7 
 
1289 1175 .190mg n.s.s. 161/167p 9.7Sug 30/32 .130mg 46/56 
 
EUCALYPTOL 470-82-6 
 
1290 710 38.5mg n.s.s. 102/240 5.27mg 30/52 21.1mg 18/47 
 
a 710 72.8mg n.s.s. 69/240 5.27mg 5/52 21.1mg 12/47 
b 710 16.2mg n.s.s. 170/240 5.27mg 36/52 21.1mg 35/47 
c 710 67.8mg n.s.s. 75/240 5.27mg 18/52 21.1mg 11/47 
 
FENAMINOSULF, FORMULATED ("thyl orange B) 140-56-7 
 
1291 c03010 47.6mg n.s.s. 2/100 54.3mg 4/50 (103.mg 
 
a c03010 82.6mg n.s.s. 26/100 54.3mg 10/50 103.mg 
b c03010 47.6mg n.s.s. 2/100 54.3mg 4/50 (103.mg 
c c03010 210.mg n.s.s. 8/100 54.3mg 3/50 103.mg 
1292 c03010 137.mg n.s.s. 20/50 94.7mg 20/50 189.mg 
a c03010 265.mg n.s.s. 15/50 94.7mg 9/50 189.mg 
b c03010 249.mg n.s.s. 7/50 94.7mg 7/50 189.mg 
1293 c03010 36.7mg n.s.s. 31/50 19.3mg 33/50 34.4mg 
a c03010 325.mg n.s.s. 1/50 19.3mg 1/50 34.4mg 
1294 c03010 19.3mg n.s.s. 31/50 15.4mg 18/50 (27.5mg 
 
a c03010 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/50 15.4mg 1/50 27.5mg 
 
Brkly Code 
 
Van Duursn;jnci,37,825.838;1966 
 
Shimizu; i jcn, 13,500-505;1974 
 
Bulay;jnci,62,1523-1528;1979 
 
FLaks;bjca,28,227-231;1973 
FLaks;bjca,31 ,585-587; 1975 
 
RudaL i; Jnci ,49,813-819;1972 
 
Roe; jept,2,799-819; 1979 
 
Liv:hpa,hpc. S 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
3/49) 
16/49 
3/49) 
4/49 
3/50 
2/50 
1/50 
30/50 
0/50 
17/50) 
0/50 
 
FENTHION 55-38-9 
 
1295 c08651 2.57mg n.s.s. 
a c06651 11.0mg n.s.s. 
b c08651 11.2mg n.s.a. 
1296 c08651 3.34mg n.s.a. 
a c08651 .500mg n.s.s. 
b c08651 2.37mg n.s.a. 
c c08651 4.15mg n.s.s. 
1297 c08651 .581mg n.s.a. 
a c08651 9.77mg n.s.a. 
1298 c08651 1.04mg n.s.a. 
a c08651 2.82mg n.s.a. 
 
12/25 
2/25 
3/25 
0/25 
10/25 
6/25 
2/25 
18/25 
1/25 
17/25 
0/25 
 
1.30mg 22/50 2.60mg 
1.30m9 4/50 2.60mg 
1.30mg 3/50 2.60mg 
1.20mg 7/50 2.40mg 
 
1.20mg 35/50 (2.40mg 
1.20mg 17/50 2.40mg 
1.20mg 5/50 2.40mg 
 
.500mg 44/50 1.00mg 
.500mg 0/50 1.00mg 
.400mg 32/50 .800mg 
 
.400mg 2/50 .800mg 
 
24/50 
2/50 
3/50 
8/50 
26/50) 
17/50 
8/50 
39/50 
0/50 
26/50 
 
1/50 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
ski:fbs,arn; sub:fbs,rhb,srn. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
t iv:hpm,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
139 
 
140 GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
FERRIC DINETHYLDITHIOCARBANATE bO0ng. .:. .lug... .10 ...:. 100... .lug...:.10 ...:. 100... Ig1 ...:. 10 
 
1299 N f b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx .>no dre P-1. - 
 
a N f b6a orl Lun ado 76w76 *vx no dre P-I. - 
b N f b6a orL tba mix 76w76 evx no dre P-I. - 
1300 N m b6a orL Lun ad. 76w76 *vx .>11.2mg P<.4. - 
 
a N * b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx no dre P-I. - 
b N . b6a orL tba mix 76w76 evx 21.6mg P<.7 - 
1301 N f b6c orL Lun ad. 76w76 *vx .>24.9mg P<.3 - 
a N f b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx no dre Pul. - 
b N f b6c orL tbs mix 76w76 evx 12.0mg P<.09 - 
1302 N m b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx A 5.57mg P<.02 - 
 
a N m b6c orL Lun ad. 76w76 evx 11.9mg P<.1 - 
b N m b6c orL tbs mix 76w76 evx 2.81mg P<.002 - 
 
N-(2-FLUORENYL)-2,2,2-TRIFLUOROACETANIDE.:. .lug...:. 10 .... 100 ... 1m.lg... .10 ...:. 100...:. Ig ...:. 10 
 
1303 R f buf eat mgL adc 53w54 e . 1.62mg P<.0005+ 
a R f but eat Liv hpt 53w54 e 1.90mg P<.0005+ 
b R f but eat edu sqc 53w54 e 4.94mg P<.002 + 
 
FLUORIDE, SODIUN boOng... . lug...:. 10 ...:. 100 . 1.:.lg... .10 .... 100 ... I: g ...:. 10 
 
1304 N b cdl wet Lun tum 30m30 s . no dre P-1. - 
 
a N b cdl wit Liv tum 30m30 e no dre P-I. - 
b N b cdl wet tba tum 30m30 e no dre P-I. - 
c N b cdl wet tba meL 30m30 s no dre P-I. - 
4'-FLUORO-4-ANINODIPHENYL iOOng..:..iug...:. 10 ...:. 100 .. 1 : mg...:. 10 ...:. 100 ... g1 ...:. 10 
 
1305 N f cbs gay Liv hpt 6m26 e .. 1.09mg P<.0005+ 
1306 N m cbs gay Liv hpt 6m24 a + .1.19mg P<.005 + 
 
a N m cbs gay Liv mix 6.24 e 1.19mg P<.005 
N-4-(4'-FLUOROBIPHENYL)ACETANIDE bOOng..:..Iug...:. 10 ...:. 100...:..1mg ....10 ...:. 100 ... g1 ...:. 10 
 
1307 R m f34 eat kid adc 52w52 okr . + .1.01mg P<.0005+ 
5-FLUOROURACIL lOOng..:. .lug...:. 10 .... 100. 1.:.lg...:. 10 ...:. 100...:. Ig ...:. 10 
 
1308 R m b46 ivj Liv ads 12m24 as A 34.7mg P<.1 - 
 
a R m b46 ivj tba ben 12m24 eo 16.3mg P<.2 - 
b R m b46 ivj tba mix 12m24 es 18.6mg P<.4 - 
c R m b46 ivj tba meL 12in24 es no dre P-I. - 
 
FORMIC ACID 2-[4.(2-FURYL)-2-THIAZOLYLINYDRAZIDE ..:. 10 .... 100 .. 1:mg...:. 10 ...:. 100...:. Ig ...:. 10 
 
1309 R f ads eat Liv tum 46w64 ev .>no dre P-1. 
 
a R f sda eat tba mix 46w64 ev no dre P-I. - 
 
FORNIC ACID 2-(4-NETHYL-2-THIAZOLYL)HYDRAZIDE ...:. 10 ...:. 100 ... 1.mg ....10 ...:. 100...:. Ig ...:. 10 
 
1310 R f sda seat mgL adf 46w64 ev A 14.4mg P<.03 + 
 
a R f ads eat Liv tum 46w64 ev no dre P-I. 
 
b R f ada eat tba mix 46w64 ev 14.4mg P<.03 
 
FORNIC ACID 2.14.(5-NITRO.2-FURYL)-2-THIAZOLYLJHYDRAZIDE .... .100 .. 1 : mg...:. 10... ..100...:. Ig ...:. 10 
 
1311 H m syg eat ubL tcc 48w70 ea + .16.6mg P<.0005+ 
a H m syg eat for sqp 48w70 a 25.1mg P<.0005+ 
b H m syg eat Lun tum 48w70 e no dre P-1. 
c H a syg eat Liv tum 48w70 e no dre P-I. 
 
1312 N f swi eat for sqp 33w52 e + 8.85mg P<.0005+ 
a N f swi eat-- LI. 33w52 e 11.4mg P<.0005+ 
b N f swi eat Lun sic 33w52 e 67.1mg P<.06 
c N f swi eat Liv tum 33w52 e no dre Pal. 
 
d N f swi eat tba mix 33w52 e 2.42mg P<.0005 
 
1313 N f swi eat for pam 33w52 .+ .13.8mg P<.0005* 
a N f wieoat--- Lou 33w52 25.6mg P<.008 
b N f swi eat Liv tum 33w52 no dre P-I. 
c N f swi eat Lun tus 33w52 no dre P-I. 
 
1314 R f but eat mgL mix 46w64 e + .5.54mg P<.0005+ 
 
a R f but eat mgL adc 46w64 e 13.1mg P<.0005+ 
b R f but eat kid mix 46w64 5 17.5mg P<.0005+ 
c R f but eat Liv cye 46w64 e 39.1mg P<.0005+ 
d R f but eat kid usc 46w64 e 44.1mg P<.0005+ 
e R f but eat mgL edt 46w64 e 80.5mg P<.003 + 
f R f but eat kid turn 46w64 e 98.6mg P<.007 + 
g R f but eat tba mix 46w64 e noTD5O P<.0005 
 
1315 R f hza eat main tum 44w60 es + 5.50mg P<.0005+ 
 
a R f hza eat kid ado 44w60 es 17.6mg P<.0005+ 
b R f hza eat sini adc 44w60 as 78.5mg P<.03 . 
c R f hza eat kid car 44w60 es 78.5mg P<.03 . 
d R f hza eat sac sqc 44w60 es *historicaL P<.05 + 
e R f hza eat cec adc 44w60 as 210.mg P<.2 + 
f R f hza eat Liv hms 44w60 es 428.mg P<.4 - 
1316 R t asA eat mgL mix46w64wA e . 5.85- <000MM_ 
 
a R f ads eat kid mix 46w64 * 9.96mg P<.0005+ 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lIne 2Dose 2Inc 
 
FERRIC DINETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE (forbs.) 14484-64-1 
1299 1209 8.21mg n.s.s. 0/17 4.39mg 0/17 
 
a 1209 8.21mg n.s.s. 1/17 4.39mg 0/17 
b 1209 5.43mg n.s.s. 2/17 4.39mg 1/17 
1300 1209 2.34mg n.s.s. 2/18 4.08mg 4/18 
 
a 1209 4.82mg n.s.s. 1/18 4.08mg 1/18 
b 1209 2.54mg n.s.s. 3/18 4.08mg 4/18 
1301 1209 4.05mg n.s.a. 0/16 4.39m9 1/16 
 
a 1209 7.73mg n.r.s. 0/16 4.39mg 0/16 
b 1209 2.95mg n.s.s. 0/16 4.39mg 2/16 
1302 1209 1.91mg n.s.s. 0/16 4.08mg 4/17 
 
a 1209 2.93mg n.s.s. 0/16 4.08mg 2/17 
b 1209 1.20mg 10.8mg 0/16 4.08mg 7/17 
 
N-(2-FLUORENYL)-2,2,2-TRIFLUOROACETAMIDE 363-17-7 
1303 144 .800mg 3.71mg 0/18 13.2mg 14/18 
 
a 144 .940mg 4.44mg 0/18 13.2mg 13/18 
b 144 2.11mg 18.4m9 0/18 13.2mg 7/18 
 
FLUORIDE, SODIUM 7681-49-4 
 
1304 1036 11.0m9 n.s.s. 15/71 1.75mg 12/72 
 
a 1036 15.3mg n.s.s. 4/71 1.75mg 4/72 
b 1036 7.10mg n.s.s. 24/71 1.75mg 22/72 
c 1036 17.4mg n.s.s. 8/71 1.75mg 5/72 
4' -FLUORO-4-AMINODIPHENYL 324-93-6 
 
1305 1165 .663mg 1.96mg 0/18 1.30mg 25/40 
1306 1165 .601og 8.97mg 2/15 1.19mg 18/32 
 
a 1165 .601"og 8.97mg 2/15 1.19mg 18/32 
-4--(4' -FLUOROBIPHENYL)ACETANIDE 398-32-3 
 
1307 1150 .392mg 2.58mg 0/15 16.0mg 14/15 
5-FLUOROURACIL 51-21-8 
 
1308 1017 5.65mg n.s.s. 0/65 2.36mo 1/22 
 
a 1017 3.65mg n.s.s. 3/65 2.36mg 3/22 
b 1017 3.37mg n.s.s. 7/65 2.36mg 4/22 
c 1017 6.96mg n.s.s. 4/65 2.36mg 1/22 
 
FORMIC ACID 2-14-(2-FURYL)-2-THIAZOLYLIHYDRAZIDE 31873-81-1 
1309 1073 52.9mo n.s.s. 0/29 29.5mg 0/23 
 
a 1073 52.9mg n.s.s. 2/29 29.5mg 0/23 
 
FORMIC ACID 2-(4-METHYL-2-THIAZOLYL)HYDRAZIDE 32852-21-4 
1310 1073 5.54mg n.s.a. 2/29 14.7mg 8/28 
 
a 1073 32.1mg n.s.s. 0/29 14.7mg 0/28 
b 1073 5.54mg n.s.s. 2/29 14.7mg 8/28 
 
FORMIC ACID 2- 14-(5-NITRO-2-FURYL)-2-THIAZOLYLJHYDRAZIDE (FNT) 3570-75-0 
1311 1077 7.32mg 46.9mg 0/17 63.1mg 9/13 
 
a 1077 12.9mg 57.3mg 0/24 63.1mg 13/24 
b 1077 141.mg n.s.s. 0/24 63.1mg 0/24 
c 1077 141.mg n.s.s. 0/24 63.1mg 0/24 
1312 1076 4.33mo 21.9mg 0/29 41.3mg 11/20 
a 1076 5.09mg 47.4mg 2/29 41.3mg 10/20 
b 1076 16.5mg n.s.s. 0/29 41.3mo 2/20 
c 1076 42.5mg n.s.s. 0/29 41.3mg 0/20 
d 1076 .980mg 5.76mg 2/29 41.3mg 19/20 
1313 1116 7.06mg 32.6mg 0/30 41.3mg 12/30 
 
a 1116 10.7mg 639.mg 1/30 41.3mg 8/30 
b 1118 63.8mg n.s.s. 0/30 41.3mg 0/30 
c 1118 63.8mg n.s.s. 0/30 41.3mg 0/30 
1314 1073 2.43mg 11.4mo 0/30 71.9mg 28/29 
 
a 1073 7.48mg 25.0mo 0/30 71.9mg 22/29 
b 1073 9.87mg 34.5mg 0/30 71.9mg 19/29 
c 1073 19.5mg 96.4mg 0/30 71.9mg 11/29 
d 1073 21.3mg 116.mg 0/30 71.9mg 10/29 
* 1073 32.7mg 434.mg 0/30 71.9mg 6/29 
f 1073 37.3mo 1.20gm 0/30 71.9mg 5/29 
g 1073 n.s.s. 8.39mg 0/30 71.9mg 29/29 
1315 1063 2.286m 13.1mg 3/16 73.6mg 25/26 
 
a 1063 9.51mg 37.0mg 0/16 73.6mg 16/26 
b 1063 29.7mg n.s.s. 0/16 73.6ms 5/26 
c 1063 29.7mg n.s.s. 0/16 73.6mg 5/26 
d 1063 34.6mg n.s.s. 0/16 73.6mg 4/26 
* 1063 51.5mg n.s.s. 0/16 73.6mg 2/26 
f 1063 69.6mg n.s.s. 0/16 73.6mg 1/26 
1316 1073 2.49mg 12.6mg 2/29 71.9mg 25/26 
a 1073 5.42mg 19.5mg 0/29 71.9mg 22/26 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
Brkly Code 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
Morris;Jnci,24,149-180;1960 
Kanisamw;canr,29,892-895; 1969 
Clayson;bjca,19,297-310;1965/Wittiams 1962 
 
Hinton;bsct,23,464-469;1979 
Schmhl ;arzn,20, 1461-1467;1970 
Erturk;jnci ,47,437-445;1971/1970a 
Erturk;jnci,47,437-445;1971/1970a 
 
Croft; Jnci ,51,941-949;1973 
Coh.n;canr,33,1593-1597; 1973 
Coh*n;conr,38, 1398-1405;1978 
Erturk;jnci,47,437-445;1971/1970a 
 
norris;canr,29,2145-2156; 1969 
 
Erturk; nci ,47,437-445; 1971/1970. 
 
141 
 
142 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
b R f sda oat mgL adc 46w64 e 
c R f sda oet Liv mix 46w64 a 
d R f ads sat kid uSc 46w64 * 
* R f sda sat Liv cys 46w64 * 
f R f sda oat kid tus 46w64 * 
g R f d at mgL adf 46w64 
 
h R f ads at tb mix 46w64 e 
1317 R f ada oat ugl adc 45075 *v 
 
a R f sda oat kid rcc 45w75 *v 
b R f sda eat for sqp 45w75 *v 
c R f sda oat k/p tcc 45w75 *v 
 
d R f sd eat --. lbl 45w75 *v 
* R f ada oat Liv tu 450w75 *v 
f R f sda oat tba mix 45w75 *v 
 
1318 R * sda eat kid mix U wv or 
 
a R * ada eat kid uac 46w4 or 
b R ads t Liv cyo 46"w64 
c R m ad at mgL df 46w64 
 
d R m ada oat kid tus 46w64 or 
* R m ads oat k/p tcc 46"w64 or 
f R m sda oat tba mix 46w64 a 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
19.5mo P<.0005+ 
30.1mg P<.0005+ 
33.9mg P<.0005+ 
43.9mg P<.0005+ 
50.7mg P<.0005+ 
52.8mg P<.009 + 
noTD50 P<.0005 
3.54mg P<.0005+ 
65.4mg P<.0005 
65.4mg P<.0005 
 
+historicaL P<.008 . 
+historicaL P<.03 + 
 
no dre Pal. - 
3.79mo P<.0005 
5.82mg P<.0005+ 
19.3mg P<.0005* 
35.3mg P<.0005+ 
*historicaL P<.0005+ 
 
47.6mg P<.002 + 
69.9mg P<.006 + 
noTD50 P<.0005 
 
* + 
 
1-FORtNYL-3-THIOSENICARfAZIDE 1Ong .. :.lug.:10. : 100. :mg . : 10. :100. ..10 
 
1319 R f ode *at tiv tum 46w64 o .> no dre 
 
a R f adat tba mix 4w64 140.mg 
 
FORNYLHYDRAZINE 
 
1320 N f *we wet lun mix 83w83 o 
 
a N f was wat Liv mix 83w83 o 
1321 N m swe wet lun mix 83w83 o 
a N * awe wet liv mix 3w83 o 
 
10Ong.. . .1ug . 10 . :100 . 1mg . :_10 . .100. g : . : 10 
 
* + . -36 .0 g 
 
6.86gm 
 
<+ noTDSO 
 
1.1SM 
 
2-FURALDEHYDE SENICARSAZONE 1 Ong... ..ug :.10. :100. g : . .. : 10. :100. :. :10 
 
1322 R f ads *at mgL fbs 46w" or .> 48.8m 
 
FURFURAL 10Ong. .: ..ug. :10. :100. g :. . :10. :100..g.10 
 
1323 H f syg inh liv tum 52w81 ov .> no dro 
 
a H f syg inh lun tum 52w81 ov no dro 
1324 H m syg inh Liv tum 52w81 v .> no dre 
 
a H m syg inh lun tum 52w81 *v no dre 
 
GERNANATE, S1001t bOng.. :. .Iug. :10. :100. :. :10. :100. : . :10 
 
1325 N b cdl wet lun mix 24m24 o .> no dre 
 
a N b cdl wat Liv mix 24m24 o no dre 
b N b cdl wt tb mix 2424 o no dre 
c N b cdl wat tba ben 2424 no dre 
d N b cdl wat tba mL 24a24 o no dre 
1326 R b lob wet Liv tum 35m35 o .> no dre 
 
a R b lob wttb tu 35n3S o no dre 
b R b lob wattb ma35m35 o no dre 
 
GIBBERELLIC ACID O0ng. .:. .lu. :10. :100.. g :. . :10. :100.. : .1 :10 
 
1327 N f b6a orl Liv hpt 76w76 ovx .> no dre 
 
a N f b6a orl lun *d 76w76 evx no dre 
b N f b6a orl tba mix 76w76 ovx no dro 
1328 N m b6a orl Liv hpt 76w76 ovx .> 316.mg 
 
a N m b6a orl lun mix 76w76 ovx 460.mg 
b N m b6a orl tba mix 76w76 ovx 151.m9 
1329 N f b6c orl Liv hpt 76w76 ovx .> no dro 
 
a N f b6c orl lun mix 76w76 ovx no dre 
b N f b6c orl tba mix 76w76 ovx 1.15gm 
 
1330 N m b6c orl Liv hpt 76w76 ovx . 460.mg 
 
a N * b6c orl lun ado 76w76 vx 952.mg 
b N * b6c orl tba mix 76w76 ovx 214.mg 
 
P<.0005+ 
P<.9 
 
P<. 0005 
P<.2 
 
P<.2 - 
 
P-. 
P-. 
 
pI 1. 
P-1. 
 
P-1. 
P-I1. 
 
Ps 1. 
 
P<. - 
 
p-I. 4 
 
P<. 07 - 
 
P-1. _ 
P-1. _ 
P<. 3 
 
P<.09 - 
 
P<.3 3 
 
P<.02 - 
 
GLYCEROL sLpha.NONOCHLOftOHYDRIN 100ng..: ..ug. : 10. :100. : no . :10.. : 100. :. :10 
 
1331 ft t cdr gav pty ado 17m24 ov .> no dre Pal. 
 
1332 R m cdr gav pty ad 17.24 ov . A 116.mg * P<.06 
 
6LYCIDALDEHYDE** 
 
1333 R f Iod gav ato tum 70w70 
 
GLYCOL SULFITE 
 
1334 N f hic ipi lun pt 64w64 
 
FD S C GREEN NO. 1 
 
1335 N f cbj *at Liv mix 24.24 
a N f cbJ *at luna 24m24 
b N f cbj *at tbr meL 24m24 
c N cbj t tba mix 24m24 
 
bOng. . ..ug . . 10 . ..... :..100 .... :...log .... !!!!!!.....!! :100 . 1 mg :.10 . .100 . .... : 10 
 
.> no dro P-1. 
 
Ong. . ..Iug :10. :100. : . :10. :100. :. :10 
 
A 1.03mg P<.07 
 
100n. . :. 1ug.10. :100.. :g . :10. :100. :. :10 
 
146.gm * P<.6 - 
146.m * P<.6 - 
18.4gm \ P<.1 
no dro P-1. 
 
Ps2 - 
 
<. 2_ 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl IDose lInc 2Dose 
 
1073 10.6mg 41.0mg 
1073 15.3mg 71.1mg 
1073 16.8mg 83.4mg 
 
1073 20.5mg 123.mg 
1073 22.8mg 157.mg 
1073 22.0mg 2.37gm 
 
1073 n.s.a. 9.13m9 
200m 1.95mg 6.19mg 
 
200a 29.6mg 196.mg 
200. 29.6mg 196.g 
200a 47.2m9 3.07gm 
 
200. 55.7mg n.s.s. 
200a 171.mg n.s.s. 
200. 2.02mg 7.04mg 
1073 2.92mg 11.7mg 
1073 10.2mg 42.6mg 
1073 17.1mg 92.9mg 
 
1073 20.8mg 151.mg 
1073 20.4mg 177.mg 
1073 26.4mg 690.mg 
1073 n.s.s. 6.71mg 
 
0/29 
0/29 
0/29 
0/29 
0/29 
2/29 
2/29 
6/71 
0/71 
0/71 
0/71 
0/71 
0/71 
18/71 
0/28 
0/28 
0/29 
0/29 
0/28 
0/28 
0/29 
 
71.9mg 
71.9mg 
71.9mg 
71.9mg 
71.9mg 
71.9mg 
 
71.9mg 
31.3mg 
31.3mg 
31.3mg 
 
31.3mg 
31.3mg 
31.3mg 
31.3mg 
 
57. 5mg 
57.5m9 
57.5m9 
57.5mg 
57.5mg 
57.5mg 
57.5mg 
 
2Inc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
16/26 
12/26 
11/26 
9/26 
8/26 
9/26 
26/26 
49/51 
8/51 
8/51 
4/51 
3/51 
0/51 
49/51 
24/26 
14/26 
10/29 
8/29 
7/26 
5/26 
29/29 
 
1-FORNYL-3-THIOSENICARBAZIDE 2302-84-3 
 
1319 1073 151.mg n.s.s. 0/29 71.9mg 0/27 
 
a 1073 38.6mg n.s.s. 2/29 71.9mg 5/27 
 
Brkly Code 
 
Cohmn; nci ,51,403-417;1973 
 
Erturk; Jnci ,47,437-445; 1971/1970a 
Erturk; Jnci ,47,437-445;1971/1970a 
 
FORNYLNYDRAZINE 624-84-0 
 
1320 397 19.5mg 64.9mg 15/96 250.mg 47/49 
 
a 397 292.mg n.s.s. 3/33 250.mg 2/19 
1321 397 n.s.s. 36.9mg 22/92 208.mg 50/50 
a 397 316.mg n.s.s. 3/69 208.mg 5/43 
 
2-FURALDEHYDE SENICARBAZONE 2411-74-7 
 
1322 1120 15.1mg n.s.s. 
 
Toth;bjca,37,960-964; 1978 
 
Erturk;canr,30, 1409-1412; 1970 
 
2/29 26.8mg 6/30 
 
FURFURAL 98-01-1 
 
1323 1078 92.4mg n.s.s. 
a 1078 216.mg n.s.s. 
1324 1078 81.3mg n.s.s. 
a 1078 203.mg n.s.s. 
GERNANATE, SODIUM --- 
 
1325 1512 7.48mg n.s.s. 
a 1512 10.5mg n.s.s. 
b 1512 7.84mg n.s.s. 
c 1512 8.97mg n.s.s. 
d 1512 10.0mg n.s.s. 
1326 1036 6.82mg n.s.s. 
a 1036 2.70mg n.s.s. 
b 1036 8.11mg n.s.s. 
 
GISBERELLIC ACID 77-06-5 
1327 1281 318.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1281 318.mg n.s.s. 
b 1281 208.mg n.s.s. 
1328 1281 89.6mg n.s.s. 
a 1281 96.2mg n.s.s. 
b 1281 52.6mg n.s.s. 
1329 1281 357.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1281 357.mg n.s.s. 
b 1281 188.mg n.s.s. 
1330 1281 113.mg n.s.s. 
a 1281 155.mg n.s.s. 
b 1281 73.3mg n.s.s. 
 
0/6 
0/14 
0/6 
0/15 
 
26/170 
7/170 
55/170 
29/170 
15/170 
 
1/82 
31/82 
9/82 
 
0/17 
1/17 
2/17 
1/18 
2/18 
3/18 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
 
123.mg 0/6 
123.mg 0/14 
108.mg 0/6 
108.mg 0/15 
 
.877mg 
.877m9 
.877mg 
.877mg 
.877mg 
.265mg 
.265mg 
.265mg 
 
180.mg 
180 .mg 
 
180.Mg 
168.mg 
168.mg 
168.mg 
180.mg 
180.mg 
180.mg 
168.mg 
168.mg 
168.mg 
 
14/131 
4/131 
25/131 
13/131 
7/131 
1/98 
25/98 
2/98 
 
Fsron;txcy, 11,127-144; 1978 
 
Kanisawa;canr,27,1192-1195;1967 
 
Kanisawa;canr,29,892*895; 1969 
 
0/16 
0/16 
1/16 
4/18 
4/18 
8/18 
0/18 
0/18 
1/18 
2/16 
1/16 
4/16 
 
Innos;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
GLYCEROL aLpha*NONOCHLOROHYDRIN 96-24*2 
 
1331 1112 24.2mg n.s.s. 0/20 6.79mg 
1332 1112 35.1mg n.s.a. 0/20 6.79mg 
 
0/26 13.6mg 0/26 
0/26 13.6mg 3/26 
 
Wmisburger; Jnci ,67,75 *88;1981 
 
GLYCIDALDEHYDE"* 765-34-4 
 
1333 55 6.29mg n.s.s. 0/5 13.5mg 0/5 
 
GLYCOL SULFITE 3741-38.6 
 
1334 1143 .385mg n.s.s. 10/30 1.71mg 17/30 
 
Van Duuren;jnci,37,825-838;1966 
Van Duur.n;Jnci,53,695-700;1974 
 
FD & C GREEN NO. I (guinea gicrn B) 4680-78-8 
 
1335 143 18.2gm n.s.s. 1/101 1.309m 1/53 2.60gm 1/49 
a 143 18.2gm n.s.s. 1/101 1.309m 1/53 2.60gm 1/49 
b 143 4.84gm n.s.s. 1/101 1.309m 3/53 (2.609m 0/49) 
c 143 16.59m n.s.s. 6/101 1.309m 3/53 2.609m 2/49 
 
Hmns*n;fctx,4,389-410; 1966 
 
143 
 
b 
c 
d 
0 
 
f 
9 
h 
 
1317 
 
ba 
b 
c 
d 
. 
 
f 
 
1318 
a 
b 
c 
d 
 
f 
 
144 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
1336 14 cbj set liv mix 24.24 
a N m cbj sat lun mix 24.24 
b N m cbj eat tba mix 24.24 
c N m cbj eat tba maL 24.24 
 
1337 R f osm eat liv mix 24.24 a 
a R f os. eat tba mix 24.24 a 
b R f os. eat tba mel 24.24 a 
1338 R m ose eat liv mix 24.24 a 
 
a R m osm eat tba mix 24.24 a 
b R m os sat tba maL 2424 e 
1339 R b wis eat mix uly 93w93 or 
 
a R b wis eat mds mly 93w93 or 
b R b wis eat abd mLy 93w93 or 
 
FO & C GREEN NO. 2 
 
1340 N f cbj eat lun mix 24.24 
 
a N f cbj eat liv mix 24m24 
b N f cbj set tba mix 24m24 
c N f cbj eat tba mil 24m24 
1341 N m cbj eat Liv mix 24m24 
a N a cbj eat Lun mix 24m24 
b N m cbJ eat tba mel 24m24 
c N m cbj set tba mix 24m24 
 
1342 R m nsa eat liv tum 65w65 a 
 
a R m nss eat tba tum 65w65 a 
1343 R f osm eat Liv tue 24m24 a 
a R f oem oat tba mix 24m24 a 
b R f o eattb maL 2424 e 
1344 R f osm set liv hpa 24a24 a 
a R m oem eat tba mix 24m24 a 
b R m oem set tba oal 24m24 a 
 
1345 R b wis oat coc *Ly 95w95 or 
 
FD & C GREEN NO. 3 
 
1346 N f cbj eat Lun ado 24m24 
a N $ cbj eat Liv hpa 24m24 
b N f cbj set tba meL 24m24 
c N f cbj eat tba mix 24.24 
1347 N a cbJ eat Liv mix 24m24 
a N * cbj eat Lun ad. 24m24 
b N * cbj set tba mix 24m24 
c N * cbj eat tba mal 24m24 
 
1348 R f osa eat Liv tum 24m24 a 
 
a R f osa eat mgL fba 24m24 a 
b R f osm eat tba mix 24m24 a 
c R f osm eat tba maL 24a24 a 
1349 R m osm set Liv hpa 24a24 a 
a R m oem eat tba mix 24m24 a 
b R f osm eat tba maL 24m24 a 
 
GRISEOFULVIN 
 
1350 H f syg eat Lun tum 23.23 ae 
a H f syg eat liv clc 23m23 as 
b H f syg eat liv mix 23m23 as 
 
1351 H m syg eat Liv tum 29m29 as 
a H m syg set lun tue 29m29 ae 
1352 N f swi eat lun tum 27m27 a 
a N f swi sat liv hem 27m27 a 
1353 N a swi oat Liv hpt 27.27 a 
a N m swi *at Liv hem 27.27 a 
b N m swi eat Lun tue 27.27 a 
HCDD MIXTURE 
 
1354 N f b6c gav liv NXA 24m24 
a N f b6c gav liv hpa 24.24 
b N f b6c gav TBA NXB 24m24 
c N f b6c gav liv NXB 24m24 
d N f b6c gav Lun NXB 24m24 
1355 N m b6c gav liv NXA 24.24 
a N a b6c gav liv hpa 24m24 
b N m b6c gav TIA NXS 24m24 
c N m b6c gav liv NXB 24m24 
d N * b6c gav lun NXB 24m24 
1356 R f osm gav Liv NXA 24m24 
a R f oem gav TBA NXB 24.24 
b R f ose gav Liv NXB 24.24 
1357 R * osm gav liv NXA 24a25 
 
a R m ose gov TBA NXB 24m25 
b R f osa gav Liv NXS 24m25 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
.>26.1gm * P<.5 - 
 
59.29m * P<.3 
 
20.8gm * P<.4 - 
no dre P.1. - 
13.89m * P<.003 + 
97.59m * P<1. 
 
no dre P-1. - 
+ 5.98gm * P<.003 + 
 
11.49m * P<.4 
 
no dre P-1. - 
+ 3.92gm P<.006 + 
 
8.37gm P<.05 + 
8.37gm P<.05 + 
 
1oong.. : .ug. :10 . 100. 1 10 . 100.. g. 10 
 
43.89m * P<.04 
no dre P-I. 
148.gm * P<.9 
152gm * P<.8 
18.9gm P<.4 
58.2gm *P<3 
49.3m * P<.5 
318.9m * P<. 
no dre P-I. 
no dre Pal. 
no dre P-I. 
no dre P-I. 
no dre PaI. 
no dri P-I. 
no dre P-I. 
no dre P-I. 
 
5.64gm P<.04 
 
4 
 
loong . . .:ug. : 10. :100.1 :. g : 100.... : Ig . :10 
 
133.gm * P<.5 
no dre P-I. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-I. 
no dre P-I. 
no dre P-I. 
18. 1gm P<c5 
no dre P-I. 
no dre P-I. 
no dre P-1. 
18.5gm P<.8 
46.7gm * P<.9 
no dre P-I. 
no dre PaI. 
no dre P-I. 
 
lOOng... .lug . 10 100 . 1g . 10 . 100. :19 10 
 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dri 
no dri 
1 .66m 
no dre 
no dre 
 
P-I. 
Pal. 
P-l. 
Pal. 
P-I. 
P.1. 
P-I. 
P<. 2 
P-I. 
P-1. 
 
+ 
 
boong.. : .ug. : 100.. 1m :.lg. : 10. :100.. : g. : 10 
 
+ 3.87ug * P<.005 c 
 
4.3lug * P<.005 c 
6.60ug * P<.5 
 
3.87ug * P<.005 
63.Oug * P<.9 
 
876.ng * P<.007 c 
1.26ug * P<.005 c 
102ug * P .2 
 
876.ng * P<.007 
40. ug * P<1 
 
596.ng * P<.0005c 
no dre P-I. 
 
596.ng * P<.0005 
 
#2.30ug * P<.02 - 
no dre P-I. 
 
2.30ug * P<.02 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl IDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
143 5.50gm n.s.s. 
143 13.49m n.s.a. 
143 4.84gm n.s.s. 
143 9.44gm n.s.s. 
143 5.239m 85.1gm 
143 2.54gm n.s.s. 
143 5.099g n.s.s. 
143 2.829m 31.69m 
143 2.59gm n.s.a. 
143 4.77gm n.s.s. 
1136 958.mg 76.89m 
1136 1.36gm n.s.a. 
1136 1.36gm n.s.a. 
 
12/101 
 
1/101 
15/101 
11/101 
0/25 
12/25 
6/25 
0/25 
4/25 
2/25 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
 
1. 209g 
1. 209m 
1. 20gm 
1.20g. 
250.mg 
250.m9 
250.mg 
200.mg 
200.mg 
200.mg 
1.809g 
1.809g 
1.80gm 
 
13/50 2.409m 
 
1/50 2.409m 
15/50 2.409m 
9/50 2.40gm 
0/25 500.m9 
10/25 500.m9 
5/25 500mg9 
0/25 400.mg 
7/25 400.09 
5/25 400.mg 
2/9 
1/9 
1/9 
 
FD & C GREEN NO. 2 (Light gren SF yeLLowish) 5141-20-8 
 
143 13.3gm n.s.s. 
143 22.39m n.s.s. 
143 11.09m n.s.a. 
143 14.59m n.s.a. 
143 3.68g n.s.s. 
143 13.2gm n.s.s. 
143 9.39gm n.s.s. 
143 9.31gm n.s.s. 
176. 5.75mg n.s.s. 
176a 5.75mg n.s.s. 
 
143 696.mg n.s.s. 
143 4.739m n.s.s. 
143 4.819m n.s.s. 
143 557.mg n.s.s. 
143 4.579m n.s.s. 
143 4.999m n.s.s. 
1136 913-mg n.s.s. 
 
0/100 
3/100 
7/100 
3/100 
6/100 
1/100 
3/100 
7/100 
0/5 
0/5 
 
0/25 
10/25 
6/25 
1/25 
8/25 
4/25 
0/50 
 
1.30gm 
1.30gm 
1. 30gm 
 
1.309m 
1.209m 
1. 209m 
1. 209m 
1. 209m 
12. 0mg 
12 .0mg 
250.mg 
250.mg 
250.mg 
200.mg 
200.mg 
200.mg 
1.809g 
 
1/50 2.60gm 
 
1/50 2.609m 
4/50 2.60gm 
 
2/50 2.60gm 
5/50 (2.409m 
1/50 2.409m 
5/50 2.40gm 
 
7/50 2.40gm 
 
0/6 1. 209m 
0/6 1. 20gm 
 
0/25 500.mg 
15/25 500.mg 
6/25 500.mg 
0/25 400.mg 
 
7/25 400-mg 
3/25 400.mg 
1/6 
 
7/51 
2/51 
9/51 
4/51 
 
0/25 1.009m 1/25 2.509m 4/25 
13/25 1.009m 9/25 2.50gm 12/25 
8/25 1.009m 4/25 2.50gm 5/25 
2/25 800.mg 2/25 2.009m 5/25 
2/25 800.mg 5/25 2.00gm 7/25 
1/25 800.wg 5/25 2.009m 2/25 
 
2/50 
1/50 
4/50 
2/50 
0/50) 
2/50 
2/50 
3/50 
0/8 
0/8 
 
0/25 1.00gm 0/25 2.50gm 0/25 
16/25 1.00gm 10/25 2.50gm 8/25 
9/25 1.00gm 6/25 2.509m 5/25 
0/25 800.mg 0/25 2.00gm 0/25 
10/25 800.mg 6/25 2.00gm 5/25 
4/25 800.mg 3/25 2.00gm 3/25 
 
Wi L Lheim;gaga,23, 1-19;1953 
Hansen;fctx,4,389-410;1966 
 
AL Lmmrk; Jphp,8,417-424; 1956 
 
Hanson;fctx,4,389-410; 1966 
 
Wi L Lheim;gag,23, 1-19;1953 
 
FD & C GREEN NO. 3 (fast groon FCF) 2353-45-9 
 
1346 143 21.7gm n.s.s. 0/100 1.30gm I/ 
a 143 25.6gm n.s.s. 2/100 1.30gm O/ 
b 143 25.49m n.s.s. 3/100 1.30gm 2/ 
c 143 19.2gm n.s.s. 5/100 1.30gm 3/ 
1347 143 19.1gm n.s.s. 8/100 1.20gm 4/ 
 
m 143 21.3gm n.s.s. 2/100 1.209m 2/ 
b 143 3.21gm n.s.s. 10/100 1.20gm 7/ 
c 143 23.5gm n.s.s. 8/100 1.20gm 2/ 
1348 143 696.mg n.s.s. 0/25 250.mg 0/ 
 
a 143 2.70gm n.s.s. 6/25 250.mg 6/ 
b 143 1.90gm n.s.s. 13/25 250.mg 1O/ 
c 143 3.30gm n.s.s. 7/25 250.mg 6/ 
1349 143 10.6gm n.s.s. 0/25 200.mg O/ 
 
a 143 5.039m n.s.s. 2/25 200.mg 3/ 
b 143 5.37gm n.s.s. 1/25 200.mg 2/ 
 
GRISEOFULVIN 126-07-8 
 
1350 402 1.019m n.s.s. 
 
a 402 3.34gm n.a.s. 
b 402 4.25gm n.s.s. 
1351 402 1.139m n.s.a. 
a 402 1.139m n.s.a. 
1352 402 471.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 402 845.mg n.s.s. 
1353 402 270.mg n.s.s. 
 
m 402 525.mg n.s.s. 
b 402 326.mg n.s.s. 
 
0/29 
0/16 
1/16 
0/22 
0/22 
19/89 
5/76 
0/32 
6/86 
16/79 
 
314.mg 
314.mg 
314.mg 
276.mg 
276.mg 
130.mg 
130.mg 
120.mg 
120.mg 
120.mg 
 
O/ 
I/ 
I/ 
O/ 
O/ 
6/ 
I/ 
 
I/ 
 
2/ 
6/ 
 
/50 2.609m 
/50 2.60gm 
/50 2.60gm 
50 2.60gm 
/50 2.40gm 
 
/50 2.409m 
/50 (2.409m 
/50 2.40gm 
/25 500.mg 
 
/25 500.m9 
/25 500.m9 
/25 500.m9 
/25 400.mg 
/25 400.mg 
/25 400.mg 
 
/21 1.579m 
/9 1. 57gm 
/9 1. 57gm 
/16 1.38gm 
/16 1.38m 
/37 
/36 
/17 
/33 
/32 
 
0/50 
1/50 
0/50 
1/50 
1/50 
0/50 
1/50) 
1/50 
 
0/25 1.00gm 
10/25 1.00gm 
11/25 1.00gm 
3/25 1.009g 
 
1/25 800mgN 
5/25 800.g9 
3/25 800 mg 
 
0/24 3.14gm 
 
0/5 3.14gm 
0/5 3.149m 
0/23 2.76gm 
 
0/23 2.769m 
 
Hans.n;fctx,4,389-410; 1966 
 
0/25 2.509m 0/25 
15/25 2.509m 6/25 
18/25 2.50gm 12/25 
11/25 2.509m 6/25 
0/25 2.009m 0/25 
3/25 2.009m 2/25 
3/25 2.00gm 1/25 
 
Rustia;bjca,38,237-249; 1978 
 
0/22 
0/5 
0/5 
0/24 
0/24 
 
HCDD MIXTURE (1,2,3,7,8,9-h.xachLorodib.nzo-p-dioxin and 1,2,3,6,7,8-isomor. CAS# 19408-74-3 and 57653-85-7) mixture 
 
1354 c03703 1.86ug 36.Oug 3/75 344.ng 4/50 688.ng 6/50 1.39ug 10/50 Liv:hpa,hpc. 
 
a c03703 2.05ug 42.4ug 2/75 344.ng 4/50 688.ng 4/50 1.39ug 9/50 
b c03703 1.42ug n.s.s. 36/75 344.ng 24/50 688.ng 22/50 1.39ug 28/50 
 
c c03703 1.86ug 36.Oug 3/75 344.ng 4/50 688.ng 6/50 1.39ug 10/50 Liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
d c03703 4.S7ug n.s.s. 2/75 344.ng 2/50 688.ng 5/50 1.39ug 1/50 Lun:m/m,a/c. 
1355 c03703 420.ng 16.6ug 15/75 172.ng 14/50 347.ng 14/50 688.ng 24/50 liv:hpa,hpc. 
 
a c03703 612.ng 11.9ug 7/75 172.ng 5/50 347.ng 9/50 688.ng 15/50 
b c03703 350.ng n.s.s. 40/75 172.ng 33/50 347.ng 29/50 688.ng 38/50 
 
c c03703 420.ng 16.6ug 15/75 172.ng 14/50 347.ng 14/50 688.ng 24/50 L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
d c03703 1.04ug n.s.s. 10/75 172.ng 11/50 347.ng 10/50 688.ng 7/50 Lun:a/a,a/c. 
1356 c03703 369.ng 1.33ug 5/75 174.ng 10/50 347.ng 12/50 694.ng 30/50 Liv:hpc,nnd. 
a c03703 756.ng n.s.s. 54/75 174.ng 36/50 347.ng 33/50 694.ng 41/50 
 
b c03703 369.ng 1.33ug 5/75 174.ng 10/50 347.ng 12/50 694.ng 30/50 Liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
1357 c03703 842.ng n.s.s. 0/75 175.ng 0/50 347.ng 1/50 694.ng 4/50 Liv:hpc,nnd. S 
a c03703 807.ng n.s.s. 40/75 175.ng 22/50 347.ng 22/50 694.ng 25/50 
 
b c03703 842.ng n.s.s. 0/75 175.ng 0/50 347.ng 1/50 694.ng 4/50 Liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
1336 
 
c 
 
1337 
 
. 
b 
 
1338 
. 
b 
 
1339 
 
b 
 
145 
 
Brkly Code 
 
1340 
 
ba 
b 
 
c 
 
1341 
 
ba 
b 
 
c 
 
1342 
a 
 
1343 
 
b 
 
1344 
 
ba 
b 
 
1345 
 
146 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
TD5O 21bilpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
HENATOXYLIN l1Ong. . .. : 1ug . :10 . :100.. g : . :10. :100.1 :0 1 :10 
 
1358 R b wis oat mix mLy 78w78 or . + 1.00g. P<.002 + 
a R b wis oat fhd mly 78v78 or 2.419m P<.02 + 
b R b wis oat abd mLy 78v78 or 2.419m P<.02 + 
HEPTACHLOR 1Ong . . .:ug. :10. :100. : g ..:10.. :100 ... g :. 10 
 
1359 N f b6c oat liv hpc 80v89 v + 1.47mg / P<.0005c 
a N f b6c at TBA NXB 8Ov89 v 1.46mg / P<.007 
 
b N f b6c oat liv NXB 80w89 v 1.47mg / P<.0005 
c N f b6c oat lun NXB 8Ow89 v 26.5mg 0 P<.6 
 
1360 N f b6c oat liv hpc 80v89 v pool + 1.37mg / P<.0005c 
1361 N m b6c oat liv hpc 73w89 iv + 1.09mg I P<.006 c 
a N a b6c oat TBA NXB 73v89 iv 1.35mg / P<.03 
 
b N m b6c oat liv NXB 73v89 av 1.09mg / P<.006 
c N o b6c oat lun NXB 73v89 iv 7.15mg * P<.2 
 
1362 N m b6c oat liv hpc 73v89 av pool + 1.09mg I P<.0005c 
1363 R f osa oat thy NXA 19m26 v :#4.11/mg P<.02 - 
a R f os sat TBA NXB l9a26 v 125.mg 0 P<1. 
b R f os at liv NXB l9m26 v no dre P-1. 
 
1364 R f osa sat thy NXA 19m25 v pool + : #4.05mg I P<.002 - 
a R f oamsat thy fcc l9m25 v 10.5mg 0 P<.04 
 
1365 R a osm oat TBA NXB 19m26 v :> no dro P-1. - 
a R a osa oat Liv NXB 19m26 v 18.1m9 0 P<.5 
 
1366 R f cfr oat tba tum 26.26 r .> 1.25mg 0 P<.2 - 
 
a R f cfr sat tba aL 26m26 r 1.87mg 0 P<.2 - 
b R f cfr sat tba ben 26m26 r 3.07mg 0 P<.4 - 
1367 R a cfr oat tba tum 26.26 r .> no dro P-1. - 
a R m cfr eat tb ame 26m26 r no dro P-1. - 
b R m cfr oat tba ban 26026 r no dre P-1. - 
 
HEPTANETHYLENEININE 100ng..:. .1ug. :10. :100. g : ..g :10. :100.. : g :10 
 
1368 R f mrc wat liv tum 17o24 a .> no dro P-1. 
a R f arc wat tba mix 17o24 a 15.8mg P<.3 
1369 R m arc vat Liv tum 17m24 a .> no dre P-1. 
 
a R m arc vat tba mix 17m24 a 6.37mg P<.07 
 
HEPTYLANINE 1O0ng. ... ug. : 10. :100. g : g.. :10. :100.. : g :10 
 
1370 R a wis wvt liv tum 61v61 a .> no dre Pal. 
 
a R a wis wat tba mix 61v61 * no dro P-1. - 
 
HEXACHLOROBENZENE 
 
1371 H f syg oat Liv hpt 24m24 
a H f syg oat Liv has 24m24 
b H f syg oat tba mix 24m24 
1372 H * syg oat Liv hpt 24a24 
a H m syg oat Liv haoe 24m24 
b H m syg oat thy *Ld 24m24 
c H m syg oat tba mix 24m24 
 
1373 N f swi oat liv Lct 86w93 0s0 
a N f swi oat lun tum 86"93 0s 
b N f sai oat tba mix 86v93 0s0 
1374 N a swi oat Liv Lct 23m25 0s0 
 
a N a swi oat Lun tum 23.25 aoe 
b N m svi oat tba mix 23m25 oes 
1375 R f agu oat Liv Lct 90w90 r 
HEXACHLOROBUTADIENE 
 
1376 R f sss oat kid mix 24m24 a 
a R f sss oat Liv mht 24m24 a 
b R f sss oat tba mix 24m24 a 
 
1377 R m aaa oat kid mix 95w95 0s 
 
a R * sss oat Liv hpc 95v95 0s 
b R m sss oat tba mix 95v95 0s 
 
1OOng. . :.ug. :10. :100. g :. - :10. :100.. : . :10 
 
7.42mg * P<.0005. 
125.mg * P<.003 + 
7.68mg * P<.0005. 
5.48mg * P<.0005+ 
32.3ag * P<.0005. 
108.mg * P<.002 + 
3.72mg * P<.0005+ 
 
* 4 
 
46.4mg * P<.0005+ 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
109.0g * P<.0005+ 
no dro P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
noTDSO P<.0005+ 
 
00ng. :. .lu. :10. :100. g :..g :10. :100.. : :10 
 
+ . 94.4ag * P<.0005+ 
 
no dre P-1. - 
9.84mg * P<.1 
 
+ . 50.5mg * P<.0005+ 
 
no dro P-1. - 
no dro P-1. 
 
aLpha-1,2,3,4,5,6-HEXACHLOROCYCLONEXANE..: ..ug. : 10. 100.. 1n .g. 10. : 100.:.:.I.: 10 
 
1378 N m ddy oat Liv mix 36v72 *kr <+ noTD50 P<.0005+ 
1379 R a buf oat Liv mix 35v65 okr .> no dre P-1. - 
1380 R * vis oat Liv nod 72v72 ekr . + . 11.2mg * P<.0005+ 
a R a vis oat Liv hpc 72v72 okr 107.og * P<.09 * 
bEOt11,2,3,4,5,6-HEXACHLOROCYCLOHEXANE . .:. .lug.... : 10. :100. 1g : .j :10. :100.. g :.:10 
 
1381 N f cf1 oat Liv Lct 26m26* . + . 139.mg P<.007 + 
a N f cfl oat Liv mix 26.26 a 64.3ag P<.07 + 
b N f cfl oat lun tur 26m26 a no dre P.1. - 
1382 N a cfl oat liv mix 26.26 a . + . 17.7mg P<.0005+ 
a N a cfl oat Liv Ict 26.26 a 51.1-m P<.002 + 
b N m cfl oat lun tu 26n26 o no dre P-1. - 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
517-28-2 
 
231.mg 13.69g 
386.mg n.s.a. 
386.mg n.s.a. 
 
76-44-8 
 
.887mg 3.94mg 
.779mg 24.9mg 
.87mg 3.94mg 
6.52m9 n.s.a. 
.866mg 2.47mg 
.586mg 12.2mg 
.645"mg n.s.s. 
.586mg 12.2mg 
2.51mg n.s.a. 
.628mg 2.83m9 
2.03mg n.s.s. 
.998mg n.s.s. 
3.28mg n.a.s. 
2.05mg 16.1mg 
4.01mg n.s.s. 
2.33mg n.s.s. 
4.46mg n.s.a. 
.426mg n.s.s. 
 
.695mg n. .s. 
.728mg n.s.a. 
1.34mg n.s.a. 
1.46mg n.s.s. 
1.82mg n.s.a. 
 
0/50 1.80gm 2/4 
0/50 1.80gm 1/4 
0/50 1.80gm 1/4 
 
2/10 
4/10 
2/10 
0/10 
3/80p 
5/20 
7/20 
5/20 
1/20 
17/95p 
 
1/10 
9/10 
1/10 
3/60p 
1/60p 
7/10 
1/10 
6/20 
 
1/20 
5/20 
10/20 
5/20 
5/20 
 
1.00mg 3/50 
1.00mg 12/50 
1.00mg 3/50 
1 .00mg 1/50 
1.00mg 3/50 
.650mg 11/50 
.650mg 11/50 
.650mg 11/50 
.650mg 1/50 
.650mg 11/50 
.920mg 3/49 
.920mg 37/49 
.920mg 9/49 
.920mg 3/49 
.920mg 2/49 
1.10mg 24/50 
1.10mg 3/50 
75.Oug 7/20 
 
75.Oug 3/20 
75.Oug 4/20 
60.Oug 2/20 
60.Oug 1/20 
60.Oug 1/20 
 
2. 10mg 
2.10 g 
2.10 g 
2.10 g 
2. 10mg 
1.30mg 
1.30mg 
1.30mg 
1.30mO 
1.30mg 
1.85m9 
1.85m9 
1 .85mg 
1.85m9 
1 .85mg 
 
2.20mg 
2.20mg 
. 150g 
 
. 150m9 
.150-9 
. 120mg 
. 120mg 
. 120mg 
 
30/50 
31/50 
30/50 
 
1/50 
30/50 
34/48 
34/48 
34/48 
 
7/48 
34/48 
14/50 
33/50 
 
5/50 
14/50 
5/50 
20/50 
6/50 
7/20 
 
2/20 
5/20 
6/20 
5/20 
1/20 
 
.250mg 
 
.250mg 
.250mg 
.200mg 
.200mg 
.200mg 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
Brkly Code 
 
Wi L Lheim;gaga,23, 1-19;1953 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
thy:fca,fcc. S 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
thy:fca,fcc. S 
 
S 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
6/20 .350mg 11/20 .500m9 9/20 
 
EpstsinCreview) {S Witherup);stev,6,103-154;1976 
4/20 .350mg 6/20 .500mg 3/20 
2/20 .350mg 6/20 .500mg 7/20 
6/20 .280mg 4/20 .400mg 3/20 
2/20 .280mg 1/20 .400mg 3/20 
4/20 .280m9 3/20 .400mg 0/20 
 
NEPTANETHYLENEININE 1121-92-2 
 
1368 216 22.7mg n.s.s. 0/15 
a 216 4.09mg n.s.s. 4/15 
1369 216 19.9mg n.s.s. 0/15 
 
a 216 2.17mg n.s.s. 5/15 
 
HEPTYLANINE 1241-27-6 
 
1370 104 2.72mg n.s.s. 0/9 
a 104 1.74mg n.s.s. 1/9 
 
7.36mg 0/15 
7.36mg 7/15 
6.44mg 0/15 
6.44mg 10/15 
 
1.92mg 0/20 
1.92mg 1/20 
 
Garcia;zkko,79, 141-144;1973 
 
Argus; Jnci,35,949-958; 1965 
 
HEXACHLOROBENZENE (HCS) 118-74-1 
1371 151a 5.47mg 10.3mg 0/40 
 
a 151a 58.8mg 577.mg 0/40 
b 151a 5.41mg 11.9mg 5/40 
1372 151a 4.05mg 7.55mg 0/40 
a 151a 20.4mg 56.1mg 0/40 
b 151a 50.9mg 382.mg 0/40 
c 151a 2.62mg 5.40mg 3/40 
1373 384 26.3mg 93.4mg 0/49 
a 384 32.2mg n.s.s. 14/49 
b 384 63.5mg n.s.s. 39/49 
1374 384 53.3mg 329.mg 0/47 
 
a 384 189.mg n.s.s. 13/47 
b 384 86.7m9 n.s.s. 22/47 
1375 1180 n.s.s. 1.65mg 0/12 
 
HEXACHLOROBUTADIENE 87-68-3 
 
1376 373 38.5mg 338.mg 0/90 
a 373 1.49mg n.s.s. 1/90 
b 373 2.42mg n.s.s. 82/90 
1377 373 23.4mg 148.mg 1/90 
a 373 1.24mg n.s.s. 1/90 
b 373 34.8mg n.s.s. 39/90 
 
5. 23mg 14/30 
5.23mg 0/30 
5.23mg 16/30 
4.60mg 14/30 
4.60mg 1/30 
4.60mg 0/30 
4.60mg 18/30 
6.50mg 0/30 
6.50mg 4/30 
6.50mg 21/30 
6.00mg 0/30 
6.00mg 4/30 
6.00mg 15/30 
5.00mg 14/14 
 
.200mg 0/40 
.200mg 0/40 
.200mg 35/40 
.200mg 0/40 
.200mg 0/40 
.200mg 24/40 
 
10.5mg 17/30 20.9mg 51/60 
10.5mg 2/30 20.9mg 7/60 
10.5mg 18/30 20.9mg 52/60 
9.20mg 26/30 18.4mg 49/59 
9.20mg 6/30 18.4mg 20/59 
9.20mg 1/30 18.4mg 8/59 
9.20mg 27/30 18.4mg 56/59 
13.0mg 3/30 26.0mg 14/41 
 
13.0mg 6/30 (26.0mg 2/41) 
13.0mg 13/30 26.0mg 19/41 
12.0mg 3/29 24.0mg 7/44 
12.0mg 0/29 24.0m9 4/44 
12.0mg 10/29 24.0mg 12/44 
 
2.00mg 0/40 20.0mg 6/40 
2.00mg 0/40 20.0mg 0/40 
2.00mg 37/40 20.0mg 39/40 
2.00mg 0/40 20.Om 9/39 
2.00mg 0/40 20.0mg 0/39 
2.00mg 13/40 20.0mg 15/39 
 
CabraL ;natu,265,510-511;1977 
 
Cabral; i jcn,23,47-51; 1979 
 
Smith;cLst,11,169-172;1980 
Kociba;mih,38,589-602;1977 
 
aLpha-1,2,3,4,5,6-HEXACHLOROCYCLOHEXANE (aLpha-lindana) 319-84-6 
1378 1149n n.s.s. 6.62mg 0/18 30.0mg 13/13 
1379 1071 6.07mg n.s.s. 0/8 10.8m9 0/7 
 
1380 45a 6.37mg 23.3mg 0/8 40.0mg 12/16 60.0mg 10/13 
 
a 45a 37.0mg n.s.s. 0/8 40.0mg 1/16 60.0mg 3/13 
bota-1,2,3,4,5,6-NEXACHLOROCYCLONEXANE (beta-Linden.) 319-85-7 
1381 89 48.1mg 1.92gm 0/44 26.0mg 4/30 
 
a 89 23.2mg n.s.s. 10/44 26.0mg 13/30 
b 89 116.mg n.s.s. 27/44 26.0mg 5/30 
1382 89 9.03mg 51.0mg 11/45 24.0mg 22/30 
a 89 23.1mg 231.mg 2/45 24.0mg 10/30 
b 89 79.6mg n.s.s. 27/45 24.0mg 8/30 
 
Ito;canr,36,2227-2234; 1976 
Angsubhmkorn;bJca,43,881 -883; 1981 
 
Ito; Jnci ,54,801-804; 1975 
 
Thorps;fctx, 11,433-442; 1973 
 
147 
 
HEMATOXYLIN 
1358 1136 
 
a 1136 
b 1136 
 
HEPTACHLOR 
 
1359 c00180 
a coolso 
b c00180 
c cOolso 
1360 c00180 
1361 c00180 
a c00180 
b cOO180 
c c00180 
1362 cOO180 
1363 c00180 
a coolSO 
b cOO180 
1364 c00180 
a c00180 
1365 c00180 
a c00180 
1366 66b 
a 66b 
b 66b 
1367 66b 
a 66b 
b 66b 
 
148 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
gamma-1,2,3,4,5,6-HEXACHLOROCYCLOHEXANE. . ..ug. : 1 0 . 100 :1lg.9 : 10. : 1 00 g: . 1 . : 10 
 
1383 N f b6c mat TBA MXB 80w90 :> no dre P-1. 
 
a N f b6c mat liv NXB 80w90 no dre P-1. 
b N f b6c mat lun NXB 80w90 no dre P-1. 
1384 N m b6c mat TBA MXB 80w90 :> no dre P-1. 
a N m b6c mat liv NXB 80w90 no dre P-1. 
b N m b6c mat Lun NXB 80w90 no dre P-1. 
 
1385 N a b6c mat Liv hpc 80w90 pooL : + #12.0mg \ P<.004 - 
 
a N m b6c mat Liv NXA 80w90 15.3mg \ P<.04 
 
1386 N f cfl mat Liv mix 26.26 a . + . 43.7mg P<.0005+ 
 
a N f cfl mat liv lct 26.26 a 94.3mg P<.0005+ 
b N f cfl mat lun tur 26.26 a no dre P-1. - 
1387 NM cfl mat Liv mix 26.26. . + . 15.4mg P<.0005+ 
 
a N m cfl mat liv Lct 26m26 a 48.6mg P<.0005+ 
b N a cfl mat Lun tum 26m26 a no dre P-1. 
1388 N f nmr mat Liv mix 80w80 r .> 803.mg * P<1. 
1389 N m nmr mat Liv mix 80w80 r .> no dre P-1. 
 
a N m nmr mat Liv ret 80w80 r no dre P-I. 
1390 R f omm eat TBA MXB 19m25 sv :> no dre P-I1. 
 
a R f osm mat liv NXB 19.25 sv no dre P-I. 
1391 R f osm mat TBA NXB 19m25 v :> 38.4mg * P<.6 
 
a R m osm mat Liv NXB 19m25 v 143.mg * P<.8 
 
1392 R m osm mat --- hem 19m25 v pooL A #131.mg * P<.03 - 
 
HEXACHLOROETHANE bO0ng. ... lug. 1 :10 :..100. g : . 1g. :10 : . 100... :.1 :10 
 
1393 N f b6c gav liv hpc 78w90 v :> 873.mg * P<.2 c 
 
a N f b6c gav TBA NXB 78w90 v 1.19gm * P<.4 
b N f b6c gav Liv NXB 78w90 v 873.mg *P<.2 
c N f b6c gav Lun NXB 78w90 v 6.95gm P<.4 
 
1394 N f b6c gav L iv hpc 78w90 v pooL : + 319.mg \ P<.0005c 
1395 N m b6c gav Liv hpc 78w90 v :> 585.mg * P<.2 c 
 
a N m b6c gav TBA NXB 78w90 v 675.mg * P<.4 
b N m b6c gav Liv NXB 78w90 v 585.mg * P<.2 
c N m b6c gav Lun MXB 78w90 v 23.6gm * P<i. 
 
1396 N m b6c gav Liv hpc 78w90 v pooL + 359.mg * P<.0005c 
1397 R f osm gav TBA NXB 18.26 dv :> no dre P-1. - 
 
a R f omm gav Liv MXB 18m26 dv no dre P-1. 
 
1398 R m osm gav TBA NXB 18m26 dv :> no dre P-1. - 
 
a R m omm gav liv NXB 18m26 dv no dre P-1. 
HEXACHLOROPHENE lOOng.. :.. ug. 1 :10 :..100. 1g : .1g :10 : . 100..1 :0 . :10 
 
1399 N f c5L mat Liv hpt 24m24 .> 434.mg P<.3 - 
 
a N f c5L mat tba mix 24m24 no dre P-1. - 
1400 N m c5L mat liv tum 24m24 .> no dre P-1. - 
 
a N m c5L mat Lun tum 24m24 no dre P-1. - 
b N m c5L mat tba mix 24m24 900.mg P<1. - 
1401 N f xvi mat Lun tum 24m24 .> 33.4mg P<.2 - 
 
a N f xvi mat Liv tum 24m24 no dre P-1. - 
b N f xvi mat tba mix 24m24 39.4mg P<.3 - 
1402 N m xvi mat lun tum 24m24 . 17.8mg P<.07 - 
 
a N m xvi mat liv ada 24m24 450.mg P<.3 - 
b N m xvi mat tba mix 24m24 17.8mg P<.07 - 
1403 R f f34 mat TBA MXB 25m25 :> no dre P-1. - 
 
a R f f 34 mat liv NXB 25m25 no dre P-I. 
 
1404 R m f34 mat sub fbs 25m25 A #41.3mg * P<.02 - 
 
a R m f34 mat tnv men 25m25 57.5mg * P<.05 
b R m f34 mat TBA NXB 25m25 30.4mg * P<.5 
c R a f34 mat Liv NXB 25m25 no dre P-1. 
 
3-(HEXAHYDRO-.4,7-NETHANOINDAN-5SYL)-1,1-DINETHYLUREA ..10. :100. g : .1g :10. :100.. :1g :10 
 
1405 N f b6a orl Liv hpt 76w76 mvx .> no dre 
 
a N f b6a orL Lun adm 76w76 mvx no dre 
b N f b6a orL tba mix 76w76 mvx no dre 
1406 N m b6a orL Lun ada 76w76 mvx .> no dre 
 
a N a b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 mvx no dre 
b N m b6a orL tba mix 76w76 mvx no dre 
 
1407 N f b6c orL Lun adm 76w76 mvx .> 1.23gm 
 
a N f b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 mvx no dre 
 
b N f b6c orL tba mix 76w76 mvx 1.23gm 
1408 N m b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx . 359.mg 
 
a N a b6c orL Lun mix 76w76 mvx no dre 
b N m b6c orL tba mix 76w76 mvx 259.mg 
 
P-1. - 
P-I. - 
 
P-1. - 
P-1. - 
P-1. - 
P-1. - 
P<.3 - 
P-1. - 
P<.3 - 
 
P<.04 - 
P-1. - 
 
P<.02 - 
 
HEXANETHYLENETETRANINE 
 
1409 N f c3d wat Liv ago 14m24 m 
 
a N f c3d wat Liv hpt 14m24 m 
b N f c3d wat Lun adm 14m24 a 
c N f c3d wat tba mix 14m24 m 
 
loong .. : lug. :10. :100. g :. . :10. :100. :Ig ..-10 
 
.> 51.9gm 
 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
 
P<.7 - 
P-1. - 
P-1. - 
P-1. - 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose llnc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
gm.ma-1,2,3,4,5,6-HEXACHLOROCYCLOHEXANE (Lindan.) 58-89-9 
 
1383 c00204 46.4mg n.s.s. 4/10 9.20mg 7/50 18.5mg 8/50 
a c00204 56.9mg n.s.s. 1/10 9.20mg 4/50 18.5mg 3/50 
b c00204 86.0mg n.s.s. 1/10 9.20mg 1/50 18.5mg 2/50 
1384 c00204 19.9mg n.s.s. 4/10 8.50mg 21/50 17.0mg 15/50 
a c00204 25.8mg n.s.s. 3/10 8.50mg 19/50 17.0mg 10/50 
b c00204 65.5mg n.s.s. 2/10 8.50mg 2/50 17.0mg 3/50 
1385 c00204 5.84g 95.4mg 5/50p 8.50mg 19/50 (17.0mg 9/50) 
a c00204 6.39mg n.s.s. 8/50p 8.50mg 19/50 (17.0mg 10/50) 
1386 89 21.9mg 140.mg 10/44 52.0mg 20/29 
a 89 45.6mg 243.mg 0/44 52.0mg 10/29 
b 89 133.mg n.s.s. 27/44 52.0mg 10/29 
1387 89 7.43mg 34.4mg 11/45 48.0mg 27/29 
a 89 25.8mg 114.mg 2/45 48.0mg 16/29 
b 89 95.0mg n.s.s. 27/45 48.0mg 12/29 
 
1388 1119 16.7mg n.s.s. 6/100 1.63mg 7/50 3.25mg 2/50 6.50mg 4/50 
1389 1119 22.9mg n.s.s. 7/100 1.50mg 5/50 3.00mg 1/50 6.00mg 3/50 
a 1119 25.2mg n.s.s. 0/100 1.50mg 3/50 3.00mg 0/50 6.00mg 0/50 
1390 c00204 3.27mg n.s.s. 9/10 4.90mg 44/50 (9.80mg 34/50) 
a c00204 24.7m9 n.s.s. 0/10 4.90mg 4/50 9.80mg 2/50 
1391 c00204 7.29mg n.s.s. 3/10 6.90mg 21/50 13.6mg 19/50 
a c00204 27.8mg n.s.s. 0/10 6.90mg 3/50 13.6mg 2/50 
1392 c00204 39.5mg n.s.s. 0/55p 6.90mg 0/50 13.6mg 3/50 
 
Brkly Code 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
S 
 
Liv:hpc,nnd. S 
Thorpe;fctx, 11,433-442; 1973 
 
HMrbst;txcy,4,91 -96; 1975 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
Liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
S 
 
HEXACHLOROETHANE 67-72-1 
1393 c04604 362.mg n.s.s. 
 
a c04604 313.mg n.s.s. 
b c04604 362.mg n.s.s. 
c c04604 1.65gm n.s.s. 
1394 c04604 178.mg 760.mg 
1395 c04604 236.mg n.s.s. 
a c04604 216.mg n.s.s. 
b c04604 236.mg n.s.s. 
c c04604 883.mg n.s.s. 
1396 c04604 213.mg 958.mg 
1397 c04604 169.mg n.s.s. 
a c04604 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
1398 c04604 118.mg n.s.s. 
a c04604 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
 
2/20 
8/20 
2/20 
1/20 
2/60p 
3/20 
4/20 
3/20 
0/20 
6/60p 
14/20 
0/20 
9/20 
0/20 
 
361.mg 
361 mg 
361 mg 
361 mg 
361.mg 
361.mg 
361.mg 
361.mg 
361.mg 
361 .mg 
105 .mg 
105g.M 
105.mg 
105. mg 
 
20/50 722.mg 15/50 
32/50 722.mg 26/50 
20/50 722.mg 15/50 
 
1/50 722.mg 4/50 
20/50 (722.mg 15/50) 
15/50 722.mg 31/50 
17/50 722.mg 34/50 
15/50 722.mg 31/50 
2/50 722.mg 3/50 
15/50 722.mg 31/50 
33/50 210.mg 20/50 
 
0/50 210.mg 0/50 
17/50 210.mg 11/50 
0/50 210.mg 0/50 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
HEXACHLOROPHENE 70-30*4 
1399 706 70.7mg n.s.s. 
 
a 706 31.2mg n.s.s. 
1400 706 130.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 706 130.mg n.s.s. 
b 706 37.0mg n.s.s. 
1401 706 10.7mg n.s.s. 
 
a 706 161.mg n.s.s. 
b 706 11.1mg n.s.s. 
1402 706 6.56mg n.s.s. 
 
a 706 73.3mg n.s.s. 
b 706 6.56mg n.a.s. 
1403 c02653 9.82mg n.s.s. 
a c02653 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
1404 c02653 12.4mg n.s.s. 
 
a c02653 14.1mg n.s.s. 
b c02653 5.68mg n.s.s. 
c c02653 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
 
0/25 
7/25 
0/25 
1/25 
4/25 
21/38 
 
0/38 
22/38 
23/37 
 
0/37 
23/37 
21/24 
 
0/24 
0/24 
0/24 
11/24 
0/24 
 
19.5m9 1/33 
19.5mg 9/33 
18.0mg 0/35 
18.0g 0/35 
18.0mg 6/35 
19.5mg 28/40 
19.5mg 0/40 
19.5mg 28/40 
18.0mg 30/37 
18.0mg 1/37 
18.0mg 30/37 
 
.850mg 17/24 2.50mg 21/24 7.50mg 13/24 
.850mg 0/24 2.50mg 0/24 7.50mg 0/24 
.680mg 0/24 2.00mg 0/24 6.00mg 3/24 
.680mg 0/24 2.00mg 0/24 6.00mg 2/24 
.680mg 5/24 2.00mg 7/24 6.00mg 11/24 
.680mg 0/24 2.00mg 0/24 6.00mg 0/24 
 
RudaL i ;cLet,5,325-332; 1978 
 
l iv:hps,hpc,nnd. 
 
S 
 
S 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
3-(HEXAHYDRO-4,7M-ETHANOINDAN-5-YL)-1,1-DINETHYLUREA (MHrcuLes*7531) 2163-79-3 
1405 1277 383.mg n.s.s. 0/17 205.mg 0/17 
 
a 1277 383.sg n.s.s. 1/17 205.mg 0/17 
b 1277 253.mg n.s.s. 2/17 205.mg 1/17 
1406 1277 250.mg n.s.s. 2/18 190.mg 1/18 
 
a 1277 377.mg n.s.s. 1/18 190.mg 0/18 
b 1277 197.mg n.s.s. 3/18 190.mg 2/18 
1407 1277 201.mg n.s.s. 0/16 205.mg 1/17 
 
a 1277 383.mg n.s.s. 0/16 205.mg 0/17 
b 1277 201.mg n.s.a. 0/16 205.mg 1/17 
1408 1277 108.mg n.s.s. 0/16 190.mg 3/17 
a 1277 356.mg n.s.s. 0/16 190.mg 0/17 
b 1277 89.2mg n.s.s. 0/16 190.mg 4/17 
 
HEXAMETHYLENETETRANINE 100-97-0 
1409 155m 4.76gm n.s.s. 2/63 
 
a 155m 5.98"gm n.s.s. 15/63 
b 155m 6.38gm n.s.s. 12/63 
c 155m 3.019m n.s.s. 46/63 
 
1. 14g 2/43 
1. 14gm 4/43 
1. 14gm 3/43 
1. 14g 20/43 
 
Inn.s;ntis, 1968/1969 
DeLLa Porta;fctx,6,707-715;1968 
 
149 
 
150 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
1410 N m c3d wet liv agm 14.24 a 
a N m c3d wet lun ad. 14.24 a 
b N * c3d wet liv hpt 14.24 a 
c N e c3d wet tba mix 14.24 a 
1411 N f ctn wet mix tue 12.23 as 
a N f ctn wet hag tun 12.23 as 
b N f ctn wet lun ade 12.23 am 
c N f ctn wat liv age 12m2S am 
d N f ctn wet tba mix 12.23 am 
1412 N m ctn wet Lun ad. 12.23 am 
a N * ctn wet liv age 12.23 as 
b N m ctn wet tba mix 12m23 am 
1413 N f ewr wet lun ad. 14.24 a 
a N f swr wet Liv tu 14m24 e 
b N f awr wet tba mix 14.24 a 
1414 N e swr wet lun ad. 14.24 a 
a N swr a wet liv age 14.24 a 
b N m swr wet tba mix 14.24 a 
1415 R f wis wat liv tue 24.34 a 
a R f wis wat tba mix 24.34 a 
1416 R e wis wet liv Lcc 24.34 a 
a R wis wettb emix 24m34 e 
 
HEXANETHYLNELANINE 
 
1417 R f ada eat *gl adc 44w66 mv 
a R f ada eat mgl mix 44w66 mv 
b R f sda eat k/p tcc 44w66 *v 
c R f ada mat liv tum 44w" mv 
d R f sda eat tba mix 44w66 mv 
HEXANANIDE 
 
1418 N f cb6 eat sto sqp 52w69 * 
a N f cb6 sat lun / 52w69 . 
b N f cb6 sat liv hpc 52w69 . 
1419 N m cb6 eat --- mix 52w69 a 
a N * cb6 eat --- mLh 52w69 
 
b N a cb6 at oul mlh 52w69 a 
c N o cb6 at lun a/a 52w69 a 
d N m cb6 eat liv hos 52w69 a 
a N * cb6 eat liv *lh 52w69 a 
1420 R f f34 eat liv tue 52w69 a 
1421 R o f34 eat liv tue 52w69 * 
HYDRAZINE 
 
1422 N f swi gav lun tue 40w55 
 
1423 N I swi wet lun mix 26.26 a 
a N f swi wat lun ad 2626 
 
b N f swi wat lun adc 26m26 e 
c N f saw wet liv mix 26e26 . 
1424 N m swi wat lun mix 26e26 a 
a N swi wet lun ado 26m26 e 
b N swi wat lun adc 26e26 e 
c N * swi wat --. ty 26e26e 
d N swi wet liv mix 26e26 e 
 
HYDRAZINE SULFATE 
 
1425 H f syg wet coc tue 25.25 c 
a H f syg wet thy ad. 25e25 e 
b N f syg wet lun tue 25.25 e 
c H f syg wat liv tum 25e25 e 
1426 H m syg wat coc tue 28e28 e 
a H m syg wet liv h" 28e28 e 
b H m syg wt lun tum 28e28 e 
1427 N f akr wet liv tue 69w69 e 
a N f akr wet Lun tue 69w69 e 
1428 N * akr wet lun ad. 69w69 a 
a N m *kr wet liv hem 69w69 e 
1429 N f c3h wet Lun ad. 92w92 a 
1430 N f cbc gav Lun mix 36w74 a 
a N f cbc gv ltiv hpt 36w74 a 
1431 N m cbc gav lun mix 36w8 a 
a N m cbc gv liv hpt 36w84 e 
1432 N f ic3 gav lun adc 73w73 
 
a N f ic3 gav liv tue 73w73 
1433 N m ic3 gay lun adc 73w73 
a N m ic3 gav liv tum 73w73 
 
1434 N f sue wat Lun mix 95w95 a 
a N f saw wat lun ad. 95w95 a 
b N f swa wet Lun edc 95w95 a 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
.> 32.39g P<.4 - 
 
293. g P<1. - 
no dre P-1. - 
no dre PoI. - 
.20.99m * P<.02 - 
26.39m Z P<05 - 
no dre P-1. - 
no dre Pal. - 
11.69g * P<.6 - 
no dre P.1. - 
no dre P-1. - 
no dre Pal. - 
.> no dre Pal. - 
 
no dre PuI. - 
no dre P.1. - 
.> no dre P-1. - 
 
no dre P.1. - 
no dre P-1. - 
.>no dre P-I. - 
 
no dre P-1. - 
.>no dre P-I. - 
 
no dre P.1. - 
 
100ng.. :. .ug . 10. :100 . . 10. 100. g. ..10 
 
+ 10.2mg 
 
11.9m9 
+historical 
 
no dre 
6.82mg 
 
P<. 003 + 
P<. 03 . 
P<. 09 + 
Pal. 
 
P<. 003 
 
100ng. .:..ug. :10 . 100. g. 10. :100 .I ...10 
 
pool *8.9090 * P<.07 
 
37.2ge * P<.7 _ 
no dre P.1 
 
pool + 1.959m * P<.0005+ 
 
2.149g * P<.0005 
2. 66g * P<.0005 
 
3.49ge \ P<.06 - 
25.3ge * P<.2 - 
25.3g * P<.2 
 
.> no dre P-I. - 
 
no dre P-I. - 
 
100ng.:. :.lug. 10 . 100 .lg. 10. :100.. 10 
 
A 5.67mg 
* . 2.54mg 
 
2.81mg 
9.00m9 
no dre 
+ 2.20mg 
 
2.77mg 
6.19mg 
9.52mg 
29.8mg 
 
1OOng..:. .ug. :10. :100.. :e. ..10. :100.. : . :10 
 
115.mg 
124.mg 
no dre 
no dre 
136.mg 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
k 109.m9 
+ 3.35mg 
 
6.27mg 
+ . 5.10mg 
 
8.43mg 
* . 10.3mg 
 
no dre 
79.5mg 
no dre 
23.8mg 
26.7mg 
146.ng 
 
P<. 08 + 
P< 0005+ 
P<. 0005 
P<. 0005 
Pal. 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005 
P<. 0005 
P<. 007 
P<. 5 
 
P<. 004 - 
P<. 004 - 
Po.1. 
P-I. 
 
P<. 02 - 
P-1. _ 
P-I. 
 
P-I. _ 
P-I. _ 
P-1. _ 
P-I. 1 
 
P<. 05 + 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
P-1. - 
P<. 2 * 
P-I. - 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005 
P<. 03 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl 
 
lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
1410 
 
b 
 
c 
 
1411 
 
ba 
 
c 
d 
 
1412 
 
b 
 
1413 
 
b 
 
1414 
 
b 
 
1415 
 
1416 
 
a 
 
155. 5.25g. n.s.s. 
155. 3.16gm n.s.s. 
155. 3.24gm n.s.s. 
155. 2.21gm n.s.s. 
155. 9.06gm n.s.a. 
155. 9.65gm n.s.s. 
155. 8.34gm n.s.s. 
155. 14.7g. n.s.a. 
155. 1.97gm n.s.s. 
155. 10.3gm n.s.s. 
155. 12.6gm n.s.a. 
155m 5.51gm n.s.s. 
155. 1.77g. n.s.s. 
155. 6.369g n.s.s. 
155. 1.619m n.s.s. 
155. 1.33gm n.s.s. 
155. 5.69gm n.s.s. 
155. 1.34go n.s.s. 
155n 7.949g n.s.s. 
155n 1.56gm n.s.s. 
155n 6.94gm n.s.s. 
155n 627.mg n.s.s. 
 
0/30 
3/30 
20/30 
21/30 
 
1/99 
3/99 
17/99 
3/99 
67/99 
19/99 
9/99 
55/n 
15/30 
0/30 
18/30 
19/45 
1/45 
22/45 
0/48 
37/48 
 
1/48 
39/48 
 
HEXAMETHYLNELANINE 531-18.0 
 
1417 200a 4.13mg 52.4mg 0/25 
 
a 200a 4.33mg n.s.s. 1/25 
b 200a 8.27mg n.s.s. 0/25 
c 200s 21.1mg n.s.a. 0/25 
d 200. 3.01mg 40.7mg 1/25 
 
HEXANANIDE 628.02.4 
 
1418 1343 2.699m n.s.s. 
 
a 1343 3.949m n.s.s. 
b 1343 2.09gm n.s.s. 
1419 1343 1.00gm 4.569m 
a 1343 1.08gm 5.28gm 
b 1343 1.25gm 7.72gm 
c 1343 952.mg n.s.s. 
d 1343 4.11gm n.s.s. 
 
a 1343 4.119m n.s.s. 
1420 1343 1.89gm n.s.s. 
1421 1343 655.mg n.s.s. 
HYDRAZINE 302-01-2 
 
1422 1095 1.71mg n.s.s. 
1423 1117 1.45m9 5.59mg 
a 1117 1.59mg 6.34mg 
b 1117 4.00mg 37.2mg 
c 1117 13.1mg n.s.s. 
1424 1117 1.23mg 5.11mg 
a 1117 1.47mg 7.69mg 
b 1117 2.91mg 16.9mg 
c 1117 3.73mg 180.mg 
d 1117 4.90mg n.s.s. 
 
0/86p 
2/89p 
1 /89p 
0/95p 
0/95p 
0/91p 
1/87p 
0/91p 
0/91p 
0/49 
0/50 
 
8/85 
14/108 
12/108 
2/108 
3/88 
10/86 
10/86 
0/86 
2/86 
2/41 
 
HYDRAZINE SULFATE 10034*93-2 
 
1425 1108 39.6mg 813.mg 0/79 
a 1108 42.8mg 895.mg 0/84 
b 1108 156.mg n.s.s. 0/84 
c 1108 156.mg n.s.s. 0/84 
1426 1108 41.0mg 241.gm 0/64 
a 1108 23.3mg n.s.s. 1/22 
b 1108 194.mg n.s.a. 0/86 
1427 158 87.1mg n.s.s. 0/30 
 
m 158 87.1mg n.s.s. 0/30 
1428 158 22.9mg n.s.a. 1/11 
 
a 158 52.6mg n.s.s. 1/16 
1429 158 37.7mg n.s.s. 0/22 
1430 1074 1.58mg 7.60mg 4/47 
 
a 1074 3.19mg 14.5mg 2/47 
1431 1074 2.62mg 11.3mg 1/37 
 
a 1074 4.01mg 26.7mg 4/37 
1432 156 5.58mg 21.6mg 0/12 
 
a 156 91.9mg n.s.s. 0/12 
1433 156 19.5mg n.s.s. 0/12 
 
a 156 51.1mg n.s.a. 0/12 
 
1434 158 13.1mg 57.1mg 14/109 
a 158 14.5mg 66.4mg 12/109 
b 158 49.0mg n.s.s. 2/109 
 
952.mg 1/49 
952.mg 5/49 
952.mg 16/49 
952.mg 22/49 
600.mg 1/48 
600.mg 4/48 
600.og 10/48 
600.mg 2/48 
600.mg 36/48 
500.mg 10/50 
500.mg 3/50 
500.mg 27/50 
1. 17m 10/27 
1. 17g 0/27 
1. 17gm 12/27 
971. mg 11/29 
971.mg 0/29 
971.mg 12/29 
407.mg 0/48 
407.mg 27/48 
356.mg 0/48 
356.mg 36/48 
 
10. 6mg 
10.6mg 
10. 6mg 
10.6mg 
10.6mg 
 
978.m 
 
978.mg 
978.mg 
903.mg 
903.mg 
903.mg 
903.mg 
903.mg 
903.mg 
564.mg 
452.mg 
 
6/24 
6/24 
2/24 
0/24 
9/24 
 
1.209m 6/102 3.009m 4/50 
1.20gm 1/102 3.009g 7/50 
1.20gm 21/102 3.00gm 8/50 
1.20gm 7/102 3.009m 1/50 
1.20gm 77/102 3.00gm 36/50 
1.009m 19/94 2.509g 1/29 
1.00gm 10/94 2.50g. 0/29 
1.00gm 57/94 2.50gm 8/29 
 
Cohn; Jnci ,51,403-417;1973 
 
3/41 1.47gm 
0/41 1.47gm 
 
0/41 1.479m 
6/35 1. 359m 
6/35 1. 359m 
5/35 1.359m 
3/35 (1.359m 
0/35 1. 35gm 
0/35 1. 35gm 
0/37 
0/16 
 
FLeischman; jept,3, 149-170;1980 
 
0/34 
2/37 
0/37 
6/39 
5/39 
4/39 
0/39) 
1/39 
1/39 
 
Roo;natu,216,375-376; 1967 
Toth; i jcn,9, 109-118;1972/1969a 
 
5.19mg 6/25 
2.00mg 27/50 
2.00mg 25/50 
2.00mg 9/50 
2.00mg 1/41 
1.67mg 24/46 
1.67mg 21/46 
1.67mg 9/46 
1. 67mg 7/46 
1. 67mg 3/33 
 
16.4mg 
16.4m9 
16.4mg 
16.4mg 
14.4mg 
14.4mg 
14.4mg 
24.0mg 
24.0mg 
20.0mg 
20.0mg 
24 .0mg 
21.8 g 
21.8"m 
 
16. 0mg 
16. 0mg 
37.7mg 
37.7mg 
31.4mg 
31.4mg 
24.0mg 
24. 0mg 
24.09g 
 
Toth;canr,32,804-807;1972/1967a 
Toth;jnci,42,469-475;1969a/1966a 
 
4/40 
4/43 
0/43 
0/43 
3/33 
0/6 
0/50 
0/40 
0/40 
1/20 
0/29 
4/36 
19/21 
15/21 
16/21 
13/21 
17/24 
0/24 
2/16 
0/16 
24/47 
22/47 
5/47 
 
Biancifiori ;bjca,18,543-550;1964 
 
Bhide; i jcn, 18,530-535;1976 
 
Toth;jnci ,42,469-475;1969a/1966a 
 
151 
 
Brkly Code 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
c N f swa wat liv hem 95w95 a 
1435 N m awa wat lun mix 94w94 a 
a N m swa wat lun ad. 94w94 a 
b N m swa wat Lun adc 94w94 a 
 
c N m awe wat liv mix 94w94 a 
1436 R f cbs gav lun mix 68w94 
 
a R f cbs gav liv mix 68w94 a 
1437 R m cbs gav Liv mix 68w94 c 
a R m cbs gav lun mix 68w94 
 
no dre 
18.7m9 
23.1mg 
74.2mg 
78.4mg 
42.4mg 
no dre 
+historical 
 
60.1mg 
 
2-HYDRAZINO-4-(p-AMINOPHENYL)THIAZOLE ..:..lug. 10 . 100. 1 mg.. 10 . 100. 1g . 10 
 
1438 N f swi sat --- LLc 46w66 a . 11.3mg 
a N f swi cat Liv tum 46w66 * no dre 
b N f swi cat Lun tum 46w66 * no dre 
c N f swi cat tba mix 46w66 * 11.3mg 
1439 R f ada cat mgL adc 46w75 a + 1.02mg 
 
a R f ada sat mgl mix 46w75 a 1.03mg 
b R f sda sat -- lbL 46w75 * historicaL 
c R f sda eat Liv tum 46w75 * no dre 
d R f ada cat tba mix 46w75 a .582mg 
 
2-HYDRAZINO-4-(5-NITRO-2-FURYL)THIAZOLE. . ..ug.... 10 . 100. 1g.. 10 ... 100. 1g . 10 
 
1440 N f swi sat for sqp 46w55 a + 16.4mg 
a N f swi cat Liv tum 46w55 * no dre 
b N f swi cat Lun tue 46w55 a no dre 
c N f swi cat tba mix 46w55 * 7.57mg 
1441 R f sda cat mgL mix 46w57 cv . + . 2.83mg 
a R f sda cat mgL adc 46w57 cv 7.79mg 
b R f sda oat mgL adf 46w57 *v 25.2mg 
c R f sda cat kid mix 46w57 ev 36.8mg 
d R f ada cat Liv tum 46w57 cv no dre 
 
a R f sda cat tba mix 46w57 *v 2.83mg 
1442 R f sda cat mgL mix 46w66 a .+ . 3.66mg 
a R f ada cat mgL adc 46w66 a 10.9mg 
b R f sda cat sLg adc 46w66 a 145.mg 
c R f ada cat Liv cyc 46w66 a 295.mg 
d R f sda sat tba mix 46w66 * noTD50 
 
P-1. _ 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005 
P<. 0005 
P<. 2 
 
P<.004 + 
P<. 002 + 
P<. 009 + 
 
P<.04 + 
P-1 . 
 
P<.04 
 
P<. 0005 
P<. 0005+ 
P<.002 + 
P-I. 
 
P<. 0005 
 
P<. 0005+ 
 
p-I. 
 
P<. 0005 
P<.000 
P<. 000' 
P<. 04 
P<. 02 
 
p-I. 
 
P<.0OC 
 
P<.0, o5, 
 
P<.O 05+ 
P<. 0 5 
 
P<. 0005 
 
2-HYDRAZINO-4- (p-NITROPHENYL)THIAZOLE 
1443 N f swi oat L-- Ll 46w"66 
 
a N f swi oat Lun aLc 46w66 a 
b N f swi cat Liv tum 46w66 a 
c N f swi cat tba mix 46w66 a 
 
144 R f sda cat mgl mix 45w52 *v 
a R f sda cat mgL adc 45w52 ov 
b R f sda oat aLg adc 45w52 cv 
c R f sda cat Liv tum 45w52 *v 
d R f sda cat tbe mix 45w52 *v 
1445 R f sda cat mgL mix 46w75 a 
 
a R f sda cat mgL adc 46w75 a 
b R f sda cat for sqp 46w75 a 
 
c R f sda cat Liv tum 46w75 a 
d R f sda oat tba mix 46w75 a 
 
lug . 10 . 100 . 1 ...10 . . 100.. : . . : 10 
 
10.6mg 
25.0mg 
no dre 
8.33mg 
+ . 8.66mg 
 
9.51mg 
21.7mg 
no dre 
noTD50 
1.97mg 
3.78mg 
9.00mg 
no dre 
.743mg 
 
2-HYDRAZINO.4-PHENYLTHIAZOLE Ong..: ..ug... :1 10. :100.. :1mg. :10 . :100. :.19 :10 
 
1446 R f sda cat liv tum 46w66 cv .> no dre 
 
a R f sda sat tba mix 46w66 *v 311.mg 
 
P<.03 + 
P<.07 
P-I. 
 
P<. 02 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
P<.0005 
P-I. 
 
P<. 0005 
 
P<.002 + 
P<. 004 
P<. 003 
Pal. 
 
P<. 0005 
 
P-I. 
 
P<.8 - 
 
p-HYDRAZINOBENZOIC ACID 
 
1447 N f swi gav lun tum 40w55 
 
HYDRAZOBENZENE 4 
 
1448 N f b6c cat liv NXA 78w95 
 
a N f b6c cat Liv hpc 78w95 
b N f b6c cat TBA NXB 78w95 
c N f b6c cat liv NXB 78w95 
d N f b6c cat Lun NXB 78w95 
 
1449 N m b6c cat TBA MXB 78w95 v 
a N a b6c cat liv NXB 78w95 v 
b N m b6c eat Lun NXB 78w95 v 
1450 R f f34 cat NXB NXB 18m25 
 
a R f f34 cat mgl acn 18m25 
b R f f34 cat Liv nnd 18m25 
c R f f 34 cat TBA NXB 18m25 
d R f f34 cat liv NXB 18m25 
 
1451 R m f34 cat NXB NXB 18m25 v 
a R m f34 *at Liv NXA 18m25 v 
b R m f34 cat Liv hpc 18m25 v 
c R m f34 *at adr ph, 18m25 v 
 
lOOng .. : ..ug . :10. :100 .. :.1g . : 10. :100 .. :1g . :10 
 
.> no dre 
 
Pal. . 
 
boong . . .:ug. :10. :100. : g. : 10 . : 100. g. : 9 . :10 
 
+ 26.0mg * P<.0005c 
 
29.7mg * P<.0005c 
31.5mg * P<.0005 
26.0mg * P<.0005 
8.76gm * P<1. 
 
no dre P-1. - 
1.09gm * P<.9 
no drc P.1. 
 
6.74mg * P<.0005 
11.4mg * P<.002 c 
18.1mg * P<.0005c 
4.50mg * P<.2 
 
18.1mg * P<.0005 
3.55mg * P<.0005 
3.70mg * P<.0005c 
4.67mg / P<.0005c 
16.2mg a P<.007 
 
152 
 
* + 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose llnc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
158 97.1mg n.s.s. 
158 10.8mg 39.8mg 
158 12.7mg 55.2mg 
158 32.0mg 237.mg 
158 18.7mg n.s.s. 
157 16.0mg 274.mg 
157 54.0mg n.s.s. 
157 13.5mg 231.mg 
157 18.1mg 1.95go 
 
3/78 
10/110 
10/110 
0/110 
2/40 
0/22 
0/22 
0/28 
0/28 
 
24 .0mg 
20.0mg 
20 .09g 
20.0mg 
20.09g 
24.7mg 
24.7mg 
25.9mg 
25.9mg 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
1/36 
25/50 
22/50 
7/50 
3/17 
5/18 
0/13 
4/13 
3/14 
 
2-HYDRAZINO-4-(p-AMINOPHENYL)THIAZOLE 26049-71-8 
1438 1076 3.84mg n.s.s. 1/28 9.06mg 5/22 
a 1076 16.5mg n.s.s. 0/28 9.06m9 0/22 
b 1076 16.5mg n.s.s. 0/28 9.06mg 0/22 
c 1076 3.84mg n.s.s. 1/28 9.06mg 5/22 
1439 200. .587mg 2.05mg 6/71 3.07mg 24/35 
a 200. .548mg 2.56mg 18/71 3.07mg 26/35 
b 200. 2.69mg 31.4mg 0/71 3.07mg 5/35 
c 200. 11.5mg n.s.s. 0/71 3.07mg 0/35 
d 200a .315mg 1.21mg 18/71 3.07mg 31/35 
 
2-HYDRAZINO-4-(5-NITRO-2-FURYL)THIAZOLE (HNT) 26049-68-3 
 
1076 7.27mg 48.5mg 
1076 53.3mg n.s.s. 
1076 53.3mg n.s.s. 
1076 3.58mg 20.0mg 
1073 1.09mg 7.37mg 
1073 3.64mg 20.5mg 
 
1073 8.18mg n.a.s. 
1073 11.1mg n.s.s. 
1073 36.8mo n.s.s. 
1073 1.09mg 7.37mg 
 
1121 2.00mg 7.00mg 
1121 6.26mg 21.3mg 
 
1121 35.8mg n.s.s. 
1121 48.1mg n.s.a. 
1121 n.s.s. 3.77mg 
 
0/29 
0/29 
0/29 
2/29 
2/29 
0/29 
2/29 
0/29 
0/29 
2/29 
4/35 
0/35 
0/35 
0/35 
4/35 
 
54.4mg 8/17 
54.4mg 0/17 
54.4mg 0/17 
54.4mg 13/17 
37. 1mg 15/16 
37. 1mg 10/16 
37. 1mg 5/16 
37. 1mg 3/16 
37. log 0/16 
37. 1mg 15/16 
31.0 m 32/35 
31.0mg 19/35 
31.0 m 2/35 
31.0mg 1/35 
31.0mg 35/35 
 
2-HYDRAZIIO-4-(p-NITROPHENYL)THIAZOLE 26049-70-7 
1443 1076 3.63m9 n.s.s. 1/28 9.06mg 5/21 
a 1076 6.14mg n.s.s. 0/28 9.06mg 2/21 
b 1076 15.8mg n.s.s. 0/28 9.06m9 0/21 
c 1076 3.13mg n.s.s. 1/28 9.06mg 6/21 
1444 1121 4.95mg 17.3mg 4/35 73.8mg 27/34 
a 1121 5.64g 17.3mg 0/35 73.8mg 25/34 
b 1121 11.8mg 46.3mg 0/35 73.8mg 15/34 
c 1121 129.mg n.s.s. 0/35 73.8m 0/34 
d 1121 n.s.s. 5.63mg 4/35 73.8mg 34/34 
1445 200. .917mg 11.6mg 18/71 3.07mg 20/35 
a 200. 1.62mg 34.6mg 6/71 3.07mg 11/35 
b 200. 3.11mg 61.2mg 0/71 3.07mg 4/35 
c 200. 11.5mg n.s.s. 0/71 3.07mg 0/35 
d 200 .406mg 1.62mg 18/71 3.07mg 29/35 
2-HYDRAZINO-4-PHENYLTHIAZOLE 34176-52*8 
 
144 200a 70.9mg n.s.s. 0/25 26.7mg 0/32 
a 200. 31.5mg n.s.s. 1/25 26.7mg 2/32 
 
p-HYDRAZINOBENZOIC ACID 619*67-0 
 
147 1095 21.7mg n.s.s. 8/85 20.8mg 1/25 
 
HYDRAZOBENZENE (MCI uses CASS 530-50-7) 122-66-7 
1448 c01854 15.2mg 53.2mg 3/100 4.30mg 4/47 
a c01854 16.9mg 63.7mg 3/100 4.30mg 4/47 
b c01854 15.7mg 126.mg 29/100 4.30mg 19/47 
c c01854 15.2mg 53.2mg 3/100 4.30mg 4/47 
d c01854 100.mg n.s.s. 5/100 4.30mg 3/47 
1449 c01854 49.6mg n.s.s. 45/100 7.90mg 18/50 
a c01854 61.0mg n.s.s. 20/100 7.90mg 11/50 
b c01854 148.mg n.s.s. 15/100 7.90mg 2/50 
1450 c01854 3.S58g 15.9mg 1/100 1.40mg 3/50 
a c01854 5.11mg 50.7mg 1/100 1.40mg 3/50 
b c01854 7.27mg 64.9mg 0/100 1.40mg 0/50 
c c01854 1.61mg n.s.s. 80/100 1.40mg 39/50 
d c01854 7.27mg 64.9mg 0/100 1.40mg 0/50 
1451 c018S54 2.37mg 5.97mg 6/99 2.30mg 14/50 
a c01854 2.44mg 6.30mg 6/99 2.30mg 13/50 
b c01854 3.05mg 7.77mg 1/99 2.30mg 5/50 
c c01854 7.08mg 323.mg 15/99 2.30mg 7/50 
 
Brkly Code 
 
Severi;Jnci,41,331-349;1968 
 
Coh.n;canr,33,1593-1597;1973 
 
Cohen;Jncl,51,403-417;1973 
Cohon;canr ,33,1593-1597; 1973 
Erturk; Jnci ,47,437-445; 1971/1970a 
 
Coh.n;canr,30,897-901; 1970 
Cohen;canr,33, 1593.1597;1973 
 
Coh.n;canr ,30,897-901; 1970 
Cohen;Jnci,51,403-417;1973 
Cohn; Jnci ,51,403-417;1973 
 
Roe;natu,216,375-376; 1967 
 
42.2mg 22/50 
42.2mg 20/50 
42.2mg 29/50 
42.2mg 22/50 
42.2mg 2/50 
39.4mo 17/50 
39.4mo 9/50 
39.4mg 3/50 
3.60mg 12/50 
3.60mg 6/50 
3.60mg 6/50 
3.60mg 36/50 
3.60mg 6/50 
8.80mg 38/50 
8.80mg 37/50 
8.80mg 31/50 
8.80mg 16/50 
 
liv:hpa,hpc. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:./a,a/c. 
 
Liv:nnd; mgL:acn. C 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
t iv:hpc,nnd; zym:sqc. C 
 
L iv: hpc,nnd. 
 
C 
 
1435 
 
a 
b 
 
1436 
 
a 
 
1437 
 
a 
 
153 
 
1440 
b 
c 
 
1441 
 
b 
C 
d 
 
ba 
b 
d 
 
154 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
d R m f34 sat NXA NXA 18m25 v 
* R m f34 eat zym sqc l8m25 v 
f R m f34 at TBA NXBI 8u25 v 
g R m f34 mat Liv NXB 18u25 v 
 
HYDROCORTISONE 
 
1452 R f sda gav tba maL 26m26 m 
1453 R m ada gav Liv hao 24m24 a 
 
a R m sda gav tba maL 24m24 a 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
35.8mg * P<.003 
 
38.5mg * P<.0005c 
6.85mg * P<.01 
 
3.70mg * P<.0005 
 
lOOng..:. .ug. :10. :100. m :g .: 10. :100 .. :ig .:10 
 
.> no dre PI.1 
.> no dre P-I. 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
HYDROGEN PEROXIDE bOng..:. . lu :g10. :100. g :.g :10. : 100. . : . :10 
 
1454 N b c56 wat duo car 23m23 or . +9.01gm * P<.006 + 
 
HYDROQUINONE NOHOBENZYL ETHER Ong. .: ..ug.. :10. :100. g : ..g :10. :100. :ig :. 10 
 
1455 N f b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx .> no dre 
a N f b6a orL Lun ads 76w76 evx no dre 
b N f b6a orl tba mix 76w76 evx no dre 
1456 N m b6a orl Lun ads 76w76 evx .> no dre 
a N m b6a orl Liv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b N m b6a orL tba mix 76w76 evx no dre 
1457 N f b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 *vx .> no dra 
 
a N f b6c orL Lun mix 76w76 evx no dre 
b N f b6c orL tba mix 76w76 evx 1.23gm 
1458 N m b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx . 382.mg 
a N m b6c orl lun ad. 76w76 evx 382.mg 
b N m b6c orL tba mix 76w76 *vx 141.mg 
3-HYDROXY-4-ACETYLANINOBIPHENYL 10Ong.. :. .ug. : 10 . 100 .: 1 mg :. 10.: 100.g . ...10 
 
1459 R f nsa eat Liv tum 43w65 .> no dre 
 
N-HYDROXY-2-ACETYLANINOFLUOREE 100ng. .: .. ug.. :10. :100. : .g .:10. :100.. :.g :10 
 
1460 H m nsa sat for mix 32w56 . + . 2.10mg 
a H m nss eat Liv bda 32w56 20.8mg 
1461 H m nss ipi por fbs 34w69 . 2.20mg 
 
a H m nss ipi for pam 34w69 no dra 
b H a nsas ipj mi adc 34w69 no dre 
1462 R f nbr eat Liv mix 64w64 . + . 1.74ug 
a R f nbr sat Liv cho 64w64 2.03ug 
1463 R m nbr eat Liv mix 64w64 . . 690.ng 
a R m nbr eat Liv cho 64w64 16.2ug 
 
P-1 . - 
PaI. - 
P-1. - 
P.I. - 
P.1. - 
Pal. - 
P-1. - 
P-1. - 
P<.3 - 
P<.05 - 
P<.05 - 
P<. 002 - 
 
P.I. - 
 
P<.0005+ 
P<.05 + 
P<.03 
P-I. 
P-I. 
 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 + 
P<.0005+ 
P<.3 
 
3 -HYDROXY-4-ANIHOSIPHEHYL 
 
1464 R f nss eat Liv tum 43w65 
 
bO0ng. :. .lug. :10. :100. :1mg. :10. :100. . : :10 
 
.> no dre 
 
1-(2-HYDROXYETHYL)-3- 3 (5-NITROFURFURYLIDENE)ANINOJ .2.INIDAZOLIDIHONE...:.g.... :19 10 .... :100 ... : : 10 
 
1465 R f oda sat mgl adc 46w"66 . + . 16.7mg 
a R f ada eat Liv tue 46w66 a no dre 
b R f sda eat tba mix 46w"66 18.0m 
1-(2-HYDROXYETHYL)-1-NITROSOUREA 0Ong.. ..ug. 10 . 100. 1g 10 . 100 . g :10 
 
146 R a mrw wet bon oat 52w70 . + . 1.52mg 
a R m rw wat ... mLy 52w70 2.03mg 
b R m mrw wt --- lcl 52w70 2.03mg 
c R a mrw wat tba mix 52w70 .360mg 
 
4-(2-HYDROXYETHYLANINO)-2-(5-NITRO-2-THIENYL)QUINAZOLINE ..... 100 . g .1.. 100 : 1ng : 10 : 100 0.. : 10 
 
1467 R f sda eat itn Lei 46w"66 .+ . 3.84mg 
 
a R f sda eat Liv bda 46w"66 * 132.mg 
b R f sds at tba ix 46w"66 1.87mg 
 
2-HYDROXYETHYLHYDRAZINE Ong..: ..ug. 10. 100.. :lg. 10.. :100 .. 10 
 
1468 H f syg wat Liv hpt 84w84 a A 148.mg 
 
a H f syg wt Lun tu 84w84 no dre 
1469 H a syg wat Liv hpt 84w84 a A 84.4mg 
 
a H a syg wt Lun tu 84w84 no dra 
1470 N f b6a orl Lun ada 78w78 evx > no dre 
 
a N f b6a orL Liv hpt 78w78 evx no dre 
b N f b6a orL tba mix 78w78 evx 5.34mg 
1471 N a b6a orL Liv hpt 78w78 evx . 314mg 
a N a b6a orL Lun ad. 78w78 evx no dre 
b N a b6a orL Lun mix 78v78 evx no dra 
c N a b6a orL tba mix 78078 *vx .404mg 
1472 N f b6c orL Liv hpt 78w78 evx > 4.77mg 
 
a N f b6c orL Lun ado 78w78 *vx 4.77mg 
b N f b6c orL tba mix 78w78 *vx 4.77mg 
1473 N a b6c orL Liv hpt 78w78 evx . 541mg 
 
a N a b6c orL Lun ad. 78w78 evx no dra 
b N a b6c orL tba mix 78w78 *vx .713mg 
 
P-1. - 
 
P<.0005+ 
P-I. 
 
P<.0005 
 
P<.002 + 
P<. 0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<. 0005 
 
P<.0005 
P<.1 
 
P<.0005, 
 
P<.02 - 
P-I. 
 
P<.02 - 
P-I. 
P-I. 
P-I. 
P<.8 
 
P<. 0005 
P-I. 
P-I. 
 
P<. 02 
P<.3 
P<. 3 
P<.6 
 
P<.02 + 
P-I. 
P<.4 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
d c01854 14.6mg 258.mg 1/99 2.30mg 2/50 8.80mg 6/50 
* c01854 15.5mg 157.mg 0/99 2.30mg 1/50 8.80m9 5/50 
f c01854 3.13mg 342.mg 62/99 2.30mg 36/50 8.80mg 43/50 
g c01854 2.44mg 6.30mg 6/99 2.30mg 13/50 8.80mg 37/50 
 
HYDROCORTISONE (cortisoL) 50-23-7 
 
1452 1134 27.5mg n.s.s. 3/33 5.36mg 2/40 
1453 1134 32.0m9 n.s.s. 1/36 5.36mg 0/29 
a 1134 32.0mg n.s.s. 1/36 5.36mg 0/29 
 
HYDRO6EN PEROXIDE 7722-8-41 
 
1454 1381 3.68gm 98.2gm 0/98 175.mg 1/101 702.mg 5/99 
HYDROQUINONE NOBOSENZYL ETHER (Agerit elba) 103-16-2 
1455 1308 383.mg n.s.s. 0/17 205.mg 0/17 
* 1308 383.mg n.s.s. 1/17 205.mg 0/17 
b 1308 180.mg n.s.s. 2/17 205.mg 2/17 
1456 1308 178.mg n.s.s. 2/18 190.mg 2/18 
a 1308 225.mg n.s.s. 1/18 190.mg 1/18 
b 1308 150.mg n.s.s. 3/18 190.mg 3/18 
1457 1308 383.mg n.s.s. 0/16 205.mg 0/17 
a 1308 383.mg n.s.s. 0/16 205.mg 0/17 
b 1308 201.mg n.s.s. 0/16 205.mg 1/17 
1458 1308 115.mg n.s.s. 0/16 190.mg 3/18 
a 1308 115.mg n.s.s. 0/16 190.mg 3/18 
b 1308 60.3mg 576.mg 0/16 190.mg 7/18 
3-HYDROXY-4-ACETYLANINOBIPHENYL 4463-22-3 
 
1459 1424 7.94m9 n.s.s. 0/15 12.3mg 0/8 
 
N-HYDROXY-2-ACETYLANINOFLUORENE (hydroxy-N-2-fluoronylecetemide) 53-95-2 
1460 308m 1.07mg 4.56mg 0/17 17.0mg 16/20 
a 308u 6.27mg n.s.s. 0/17 17.0mg 3/20 
1461 308n .652mg n.s.s. 0/8 3.43mg 3/8 
a 308n 2.49mg n.s.s. 0/8 3.43mg 0/8 
b 308n 2.49mg n.s.s. 0/8 3.43mg 0/8 
1462 162a 805.ng 4.90ug 0/20 4.00ug 9/20 
a 162e 908.ng 6.43ug 0/20 4.00ug 8/20 
1463 162e 352.ng 1.5Sug 0/20 3.20ug 14/20 
a 162a 2.64ug n.s.s. 0/20 3.20ug 1/20 
 
3-HYDROXY-4-ANINOBIPHENYL (4-mino*-3-hydroxybiphonyL) 4363-03-5 
1464 1424 5.45mg n.s.s. 0/15 9.67mg 0/7 
 
1-(2-HYDROXYETHYL)-3-[(5-NITROFURFURYLIDENE)ANINOI -2-INIDAZOLIDINONE 5036-03-3 
1465 200a 8.90mg 36.9mg 0/25 34.8mg 14/32 
a 200e 92.6mg n.s.s. 0/25 34.8mg 0/32 
b 200a 9.19mg 56.5mg 1/25 34.8mg 14/32 
1-(2-HYDROXYETHYL)-1-NITROSOUREA 13743-07-2 
 
1466 124 .786mg 5.40mg 1/26 2.10mg 15/40 
a 1246 1.02mg 5.89mg 0/26 2.10mg 11/40 
b 1246 1.02mo 5.89mg 0/26 2.10mg 11/40 
c 1246 .190mg .903mg 10/26 2.10mg 36/40 
 
4-(2-HYDROXYETHYLANINO)-2-(S*NITRO-2-THIENYL)QUINAZOLINE 33389-36-5 
1467 1390 2.16mg 7.49mg 0/84 17.4mg 20/28 
 
a 1390 21.5mg n.s.s. 0/84 17.4mg 1/28 
b 1390 .939mg 3.79mg 6/84 17.4mg 26/28 
 
2-HYDROXYETHYLHYDRAZINE (SON) 109-84-2 
 
1468 160 44.7mg 28.1gm 0/100 20.5mg 
a 160 137.mg n.s.s. 0/100 20.5mg 
1469 160 29.9mg 49.0gm 1/100 18.0mg 
 
a 160 121.mg n.s.s. 0/100 18.0mg 
 
1470 159 .670mg n.s.a. 2/15 .708mg 
a 159 1.39mg n.s.s. 1/15 .708mg 
b 159 .508mg n.s.s. 2/15 .708mg 
1471 159 .148"g .820mg 0/18 .660mg 
a 159 .912mg n.s.s. 2/18 .660mg 
b 159 .975mg n.s.s. 3/18 .660mg 
c 159 .163mg n.s.s. 3/18 .660mg 
1472 159 .777mg n.s.s. 0/17 .706mg 
 
a 159 .777mg n.s.s. 0/17 .708mg 
b 159 .626mg n.s.s. 1/17 .708mo 
1473 159 .212mg n.s.s. 1/17 .660mg 
a 159 .774mg n.s.s. 1/17 .660mg 
 
b 159 .177mg n.s.s. 7/17 .660mg 
 
3/50 
0/50 
5/50 
0/50 
2/17 
0/17 
3/17 
10/18 
 
1/18 
1/18 
10/18 
 
1/18 
 
1/18 
 
2/18 
7/17 
1/17 
10/17 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
Brkly Code 
eac:sqc,sqp; zym:sqc. S 
 
L iv:hpm,hpc,nnd. 
 
Schahl ;zkko,86,77-4; 1976 
 
Ito;genn,72, 174-175;1981 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
Nit11r;Jnci,15,1571-1590;1955 
Nit L.r;canr,24,2018-2026; 1964 
 
Yomeoto; I jcn,2,337-343; 1967 
 
Niller;Jnci,15,1571-1590;1955 
 
Cohen; nci ,51,403-417;1973 
BuLay; Jnci ,62,1523-1528;1979 
 
Cohn; Jnci ,57,277-282;1976 
 
Shimizu;jnci,52,903-906;1974 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
155 
 
156 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
1474 N f sil wat lun tur 75w75 s 
a N f swl wat liv mix 75w75 a 
1475 N * swi wat Lun tur 75w75 s 
a N a swi wet liv mix 75w75 s 
 
TD50 2Iailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
 
HYDROXYPROPYL DISTARCH GLYCEROL 1Ong. .. lug. :10. :100. g :. - :10. :100.. : 9 :10 
 
1476 ft f wis mat liv tur 24a24 a no dre 
a R f wis *at tba mix 24m24 a 930.9m 
1477 R o wis eat liv hpt 24.24 a 243.9. 
 
a R a wis eat tba mix 24.24 a no drm 
 
8-HYDROXYQUINOLINE 
 
1478 R a f34 alt liv tur 52w52 a 
1479 R m f34 eat tea Ldc 78w78 
a R f f34 eat Liv tur 78w78 
 
1' - HYDROXYSAFROLE 
 
1480 N f cdl mat Liv hpc 51w73 mv 
a N f cdl at sub ang 51w73 v 
b N f cdl mat Lun tur 51w73 *v 
1481 N a cdl mat Liv car 51w73 mv 
 
a N a cdl met Lun tur 51w73 mv 
1482 N a cdl mat isp ang 56w69 
a N a cdl mat Lun ad 56w69 
b N a cdl mat Liv car 56w69 
 
1483 R a cdr mat Liv hpc 58w95 am 
1484 R f cdr mat Liv car 43w69 
a R f cdr mat for pam 43w69 
1485 R a cdr mat Liv car 36w52 
 
a R a cdr mat for pam 36w52 
ICRtF-159 
 
1486 N f b6c ip ... NXB 52w86 
a N f b6c ipJ --- NXA 52w86 
b N f b6c ipJ --- Lhc 52w86 
c N f b6c ipj TSA NXS 52w86 
d N I b6c ipj Liv NXS 52w"8 
a 1 f b6c ipj Lun NX8 52w86 
1487 N f b6c ipj ...NXA S2w"86 
a N f b6c ipj ... Lhc S2w"86 
1488 N a b6c ipj TSA NXS 52w86 
a N * b6c ipj Liv NXS S2w86 
b N m b6c ipJ lun NXBS 52w86 
1489 R f Ida ipj utc acn 52w81 
a R f Ida ipj TIA NXS 52w81 
b R f ada ipj Liv NXS 52w81 
1490 R I ada ipJ utm acn 52w79 
 
1491 R a sda ipJ TIA NXB 52w81 a 
a R f sda ipJ Liv NXB 52w81 s 
 
bOOng ... . : ug.10. :100.. :g .: 10. :100. . : g :10 
 
.> no dre 
 
,, 398.mg 
 
no dri 
 
P-I. 1 
P-I. 
P-I. 1 
 
P-1. _ 
 
P-1. _ 
P<1. _ 
P<.3 - 
P-1. _ 
 
P-1. _ 
P<.02 - 
P-1. _ 
 
j00ng..:..lug. 10. 100... :lag. :10... :100.. :ig :. 10 
 
+ . 68.0mg P<.0005O 
 
1.559m P<.007 
no dre P-1. 
no dre Pal. 
no drm P-1. 
 
+ . 429.mg * P<.0005+ 
 
5.479m * P<.5 
18.99m * P<.9 
 
+ . 47.8mg * P<.0005+ 
+ . 16.7mg P<.0005* 
 
59.8mg P<.002 + 
+ . 12.1mg P<.0005+ 
 
65.8mg P<.003 * 
00ng. :. .lug. :10. :100. g : .-g :10..:100..g.10 
 
: + : 23.7mg * P<.005 
 
23.7mg * P<.005 c 
53.7mg * P<.03 c 
16.8mg * P<.003 
no drm P-1. 
no drm P-1. 
 
pool : 25.9mg * P<.0005 
 
53.7mg * P<.003 c 
:> 262.mg * P<.8 - 
 
no dri P-I. 
212.mg * P<.3 
 
+ 11.3mg * P<.002 c 
 
6.48mg * P<.005 
no drm P.1. 
 
pool : + 10.7mg * P<.OOOSc 
 
A * 9.55mg * P<.03 - 
 
105.mg * P<.5 
 
3,3'-INIIOSIS-1-PROPANOL DINETHANESULFONATE (ESTER).HCL (IPD) ..100... :1 :10.. :100.. g . 10 
 
1492 N f b6c ipJ TIA NXS 52w86 a + 1.17mg * P<.0005- 
 
a N f b6c ipi liv NXB 52w86 a no dri Pal. 
 
b N f b6c ipi lun NXB 52w86 * 6.88mg * P<.04 
 
1493 N a b6c ipJ .-. lym 52w78 A #37.7mg * P<.04 - 
a N a b6c ipi TBA NXB 52w78 2.07mg / P<.0005 
b N a b6c ipJ liv NXB 52w78 no dre PaI. 
c N a b6c ipj lun NXB 52w78 no dre P-1. 
 
1494 ft f ad ipi per NXA 36w80 as + 2.74mg Z P<.003 a 
a R f ada ipJ TBA NXB 36w80 ms .616mg * P<.006 
b R f sda ipj Liv NXS 36w80 as 5.01mg * P<.05 
 
1495 R f sda ipJ pmr NXA 36w80 as : + .915mg * P<.003 a 
a R f ada ipJ TBA NXS 36w80 as 1.30mg * P<.0005 
b R a ada ipJ liv NXB 36w80 as no dri P-1. 
 
ININODIACETIC ACID, NOSODIUN l00ng..: ..lug. :10. :100. 1g : .. : 10. :100.. :19 :10 
 
1496 f f arc wet tba mix 20m24 a . 143.mg P<.03 - 
1497 R a arc wet tba mix 20m24 m .> no dri Pal. - 
 
INDOLE-3-ACETIC ACID l1Ong.. :. .ug. :10. :100.. g : . : 10. : 100.. g . 10 
 
1498 N f b6a orl Lun adm 76w76 mvx .> no dri 
a N f b6a orl Liv hpt 76w76 mvx no dri 
b N f b6a orl teba mix 76w76 evx no dri 
1499 N a b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 *vx .> no dri 
a N a b6a orL Lun adm 76w76 *vx no dri 
b N n b6a orl tba mix 76w76 *vx no dre 
1500 N f b6c orl Lun ads 76w76 mvx .> 538.mg 
 
a N f b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 mvx no dri 
b N f b6c orl tba mix 76w76 mvx 538.mg 
 
P-I. 
P-I. 
P-a. 
Pal. 
P-I. 
P-I. 
P<.3 
Pal. 
P<.3 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl IDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
1474 160 65.1mg n.s.s. 21/100 30.0mg 7/50 
 
* 160 107.og n.s.s. 3/100 30.0mg 1/50 
1475 160 84.2mg n.s.s. 23/100 25.0mg 4/50 
a 160 100.mg n.s.s. 6/100 25.0Omg 1/50 
 
HYDROXYPROPYL DISTARCH GLYCEROL --- 
 
1476 1407 80.4gm n.s.s. 0/30 1! 
a 1407 7.41g. n.s.s. 23/30 1! 
1477 1407 39.5gm n.s.s. 0/23 12 
a 1407 14.8gm n.s.s. 21/23 12 
8-HYDROXYQUINOLINE 148-24-3 
 
1478 166. 165.mg n.s.s. 0/10 32 
1479 166n 136.mg n.s.s. 0/15 32 
a 166n 556.mg n.s.s. 0/15 32 
 
1' -HYDROXYSAFROLE 5208-87-7 
 
1480 1035c 37.7mg 125.mg 0/53 
 
a 1035c 587.mg 17.2gm 0/55 
b 1035c 2.45gm n.s.s. 0/55 
1481 1035c 1.13gm n.s.s. 0/44 
 
a 1035c 2.049m n.s.s. 0/55 
1482 1042. 245.mg 972.mg 1/50 
* 1042a 1.05gm n.s.s. 1/50 
b 1042. 872.mg n.s.s. 4/50 
1483 1035c 28.2mg 88.3mg 0/18 
1484 1042. 6.14mg 47.1mg 0/12 
 
* 1042a 23.7mg 269.mg 0/12 
1485 1042c 5.64mg 27.7mg 0/18 
 
a 1042c 26.6mg 334.mg 0/18 
 
ICRF-159 21416-87-5 
 
1486 c01627 12.7mg 187.mg 0/15 
a c01627 12.7mg 187.mg 0/15 
b c01627 21.9mg n.s.s. 0/15 
c c01627 9.72mg 86.4mg 0/15 
d c01627 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/15 
* c01627 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/15 
 
1487 c01627 13.2mg 90.5mg 1/45p 
a c01627 21.9mg 268.mg 0/45p 
1488 c01627 23.0mg n.s.s. 2/15 
a c01627 65.8mg n.s.s. 2/15 
b c01627 34.5mg n.s.s. 0/15 
1489 c01627 6.67mg 34.9mg 0/10 
 
a c01627 3.48mg 66.8g 4/10 
b c01627 n.s.s. n.s.a. 0/10 
1490 c01627 6.34mg 20.1mg 0/40p 
1491 c01627 4.34mg n.s.a. 1/10 
 
a c01627 17.2mg n.s.a. 0/10 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
Brkly Code 
Shimizu; Jnci ,52,903-906;1974 
 
de Groot;fctx,12,651-663;1974 
 
S.0gm 0/26 
 
.0 gm 20/26 
2.0gm 1/30 
2.0gm 19/30 
 
Ymmoto;txsp, 19,687-698; 1971 
 
20.mg 0/10 
20.mg 4/15 
20.mg 0/15 
 
483.mg 
483.mg 
483.mg 
446.mg 
446.mg 
429.mg 
429.mg 
429.mg 
77.3mg 
138.mg 
138.mg 
156.mg 
156.mg 
 
10.0mg 
10.0mg 
10.0mg 
10.0mg 
 
10.0mg 
10.0mg 
10.0mg 
10.0mg 
 
10.0mg 
10.0mg 
10.0mg 
13.0mg 
 
13.0mg 
13.0mg 
 
13.09m 
13.0mg 
13.0 m 
 
30/33 
 
5/50 
0/50 
0/25 
0/45 
 
7/25 536.mg 
1/25 536.mg 
3/25 536.mg 
7/18 100.mg 
11/12 
6/12 
16/18 
6/18 
 
5/35 21.0mg 
 
5/35 21.0mg 
1/35 21.0g 
8/35 21.0 m 
 
0/35 21.0 g 
0/35 21.0mg 
 
5/35 21.0mg 
1/35 21.0mg 
2/35 21.0Og 
0/35 21.0mg 
 
0/35 21.0 g 
10/34 26.0mg 
24/34 26.0mg 
0/34 26.0mg 
10/34 26.Omg 
11/36 26.0mg 
 
1/36 26.009 
 
Wistocki ;canr,37, 1883-1891; 1977 
 
13/40 
2/40 
3/40 
16/18 
 
Borchert;canr,33,590-600;1973 
 
Wislocki;canr,37,1883-1891;1977 
 
Borchort;canr,33,590-600;1973 
 
---:leu,lhc,Lym. C 
 
---:Leu,Lys. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
---:leu,Lym. S 
 
9/35 
9/35 
5/35 
11/35 
0/35 
0/35 
9/35 
5/35 
3/35 
0/35 
1/35 
11/35 
22/35 
 
0/35 
11/35 
4/35 
0/35 
 
3,3'-ININOBIS-1-PROPANOL DINETHANESULFONATE (ESTER).NCt (IPD) 3458-22-8 
1492 c014S7 .541mg 3.20mg 3/15 5.20mg 13/36 11.6mg 14/35 
a c01547 n.s.s. n.s.a. 0/15 5.20mg 0/36 11.6mg 0/35 
b c01547 1.77mg n.s.s. 1/15 5.20mg 2/36 11.6mg 2/35 
1493 c01547 9.01mg n.s.s. 0/15 5.80mg 0/34 14.0mg 3/35 
a c01I547 .728mg 7.51mg 1/15 5.80mg 6/34 14.0mg 4/35 
b c01I547 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/15 5.80mg 0/34 14.0mg 0/35 
c c01547 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/15 5.80mg 0/34 14.0mg 0/35 
 
1494 c01547 .722mg 27.7mg 0/20 3.30mg 0/35 4.90mg 3/35 21.0mg 0/35 
a c014S7 .228mg 9.06mg 12/20 3.30mg 8/35 4.90mg 3/35 21.0mg 0/35 
b c01547 .816mg n.s.s. 0/20 3.30mg 0/35 4.90mg 1/35 21.0mg 0/35 
1495 c01547 .160mg 23.9mg 0/20 4.90mg 3/70 21.0mg 0/35 
 
a cO1S47 .226m9 11.1mg 5/20 4.90mg 7/70 21.0mg 1/35 
b c01I547 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/20 4.90mg 0/70 21.0mg 0/35 
ININODIACETIC ACID, NOSODIUN 32607-00-4 
 
1496 213 53.5mg n.s.a. 4/15 165.ng 10/15 
1497 213 134.mg n.s.s. 8/15 115.mg 5/15 
 
INDOLE-3-ACETIC ACID (heteroauxin) 87-51-4 
1498 1280 ".3mg n.s.s. 1/17 89.1-m 
 
a 1280 167.mg n.s.s. 0/17 89.1m9 
b 1280 78.3mg n.s.s. 2/17 89.1mg 
1499 1280 98.0mg n.s.s. 1/18 82.9mg 
a 1280 109.mg n.s.s. 2/18 82.9mg 
b 1280 65.2mg n.s.s. 3/18 82.9mg 
 
1500 1280 87.5mg n.s.s. 0/16 89.1mg 
a 1280 167.mg n.s.s. 0/16 89.1mg 
b 1280 87.5mg n.s.s. 0/16 89.1mg 
 
1/17 
0/17 
2/17 
1/18 
1/18 
3/18 
1/17 
0/17 
1/17 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun: /a, a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
t iv:hps,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
p*r:fbs,san. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
per:fbs,fib,srn. 
Liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lij insky; nci,50,1061- 1063;1973 
 
Inns;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
157 
 
158 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
1501 N * b6c orl Liv hpt 76w76 *vx 
 
a N1 m b6c orl lun ads 76w76 *vx 
b N m b6c orl tba mix 76w76 *vx 
 
TD50 21bilpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
113.mg P<.02 - 
500.mg P<.3 - 
40.3mg P<.0005- 
 
IODOFORN l1Ong . . .:ug. :10. :100. 1m : g :. 10. :100... : :10 
 
1502 N f b6c gav TBA NXS 78w90 v :> no dre P-1. 
a N f b6c gav Liv NXB 78w9O v no dre P-1. 
b N f b6c gv Lun NXB 78w9O v no dre P-1. 
 
1503 N a b6c gav TIA NXB 78w90 v :> 73.8mg * P<.2 - 
a N n b6c gav Liv NXB 78w9O v 1.66gm * P<.9 
b N m b6c gav Lun NXS 78w9O v 630.mg * P<.7 
 
1504 R f ose gav TSA NXB 18m26 v : 11.3mg \ P<.05 - 
a R f os gav Liv NXs l8m26 v no dre P-1. 
 
1505 R m ose gav thy NXA 18m26 v A #82.2mg * P<.02 - 
a R * os gav TSA NXB 8m26 v 113.mg P<.4 
b R * o-emg vLiv NXB 18m26 v no dre P-1. 
 
1506 R * oem gav thy NXA 18.26 v pooL A #116.mg * P<.05 - 
N-ISOBUTYL-N'-NITRO-N-NITROSO6UANIDINE ..:..lug.... 10.. . ....... :0100... g :1 . :.10. : 100..g.10 
 
1507 R m wis wat etg tum 52w78 er .> no dre P-1. 
 
ISONIAZID 
 
1508 H f syg wat for pam 28.28 a 
a H f syg mat tiv tu 28i28 e 
b H f syg wat lun tum 28a28 e 
1509 H m syg wat liv hem 30M30 e 
a H * syg wat lun tum 30m30 a 
1510 N f akr wet lun tue 70w70 a 
 
a N f akr wat Liv tum 70w70 
 
1511 N * ekr wet lun tue 59w59 a 
a N * ekr wet Liv hem 59w59 e 
1512 N m am gav Liv car 79w79 r 
a N a am gov lun car 79w79 r 
b N m am gv mix car 79w79 r 
1513 N f c3h wat lun ade 72w72 e 
1514 N m c3h wet lun ade 72w72 e 
1515 N f cbc gay lun mix 36w84 e 
a N f cbc gev liv hpt 36w84 e 
1516 N * cbc gav lun mix 36w74 e 
a N * cbc gev Liv hpt 36w74 
 
1517 N b nss gav lun ado 52w52 e 
a N b nse gav mgl mdc 52w52 a 
b N b nss gav tbe mix 52w52 e 
1518 N f ewe wet lun mix 80w80 a 
a N f swe t Lun ade 80w80 e 
b N f wsw wat Lun adc 0w80e 
c N f swa wet Liv ho 80w80 
 
1519 N f swe wet Lun ade 23m25 ae 
 
a N f swe wet Liv he 23m25 ae 
1520 N m sewe wt Lun ado 80w80 e 
 
a N m sew wat lv hem 80w80e 
 
1521 N m *we wet lun ado 86w87 ase 
 
a N s ewa wet Liv mix 86w87 ses 
1522 N f swi gav mix car 83w83 r 
 
a N f saw gav Lun car 83w83 r 
b N f swl gav Liv car 83w83 r 
 
1523 N f swi gav mix car 81w83 gr 
 
a N f swi gav Lun car 81w83 gr 
b N f ewi gav Liv car 81w83 gr 
1524 N * saw gav mix car 85w85 r 
a N * swl gav lun car 85w85 r 
b N * saw gav Liv car 85w85 r 
 
1525 N m saw gav mix car 79w79 fr 
 
a N m saw gav Lun car 79w79 fr 
b N * saw gav Liv car 79w79 fr 
1526 N m saw gav mix car 79w79 br 
a N o swl gav Lun car 79w79 br 
b N m saw gav Liv car 79w79 br 
1527 R f cbs wet mgL fba 48w64 s 
a R f cbe wat lun tum 48w64 
 
b R f cbs et Liv t U48w64 s 
 
1528 R * cbs wet liv tue 48w84 es 
a R f cbs wet Lun mix 48w84 s 
 
ISONICOTINIC ACID 
 
1529 H f syg wat cec tue 28.28 e 
a H f syg wt Liv tum 2282 
 
b N f syg wet Lun tu 28.28 e 
 
100ng.:..1ug. :10 . 100. 1 mg. 10 .... 100...10 
 
A 575.mg P<.02 - 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P.1. 
 
89.6mg P<.4 - 
no dre P-1. 
 
202.mg P<.2 - 
no dre P-1. 
159.mg \ P<.2 
206.mg * P<.4 
 
219.mg P<<5 + 
755.mg P<.5 
219.mg P<.2 
 
+ . 11.2mg P<.0005+ 
 
187.mg P<.4 - 
+ . 12.2mg P<.0005+ 
 
165.mg P<.6 - 
* . 19.3mg P<.0005+ 
 
80.9mg P<.06 + 
14.1mg P<.0005+ 
* . 153.mg P<.0005+ 
 
189.mg P<.0005+ 
435.mg P<.01 
 
no dre P-I. - 
386.mg P<.0005+ 
no dre P-1. - 
+ . 124.mg P<.0005. 
 
no dre P.1 - 
* . 104.mg \ P<.0005+ 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
* . 53.1mg P<.0005+ 
 
53.1mg P<.0005 
no dre P-1. 
 
+ . 39.9mg P<.0005+ 
 
88.6mg P<.008 
88.6mg P<.008 
 
* . 24.0mg * P<.0005+ 
 
28.9mg P<.0005 
211.mg P<.3 
 
+ . 25.7mg * P<.003 + 
 
41.1mg * P<.007 
88.8mg * P<.3 
 
* . 21.2mg P<.005 + 
 
39.2mg P<.05 
71.3mg P<.05 
 
* . 120.mg P<.002 + 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
A 199. mg P<.07 * 
 
1.079m P<.2 + 
 
100ong. ... :1ug.10. :100.1g : .. : 10. :100.. :. :10 
 
A8. Os" 
 
no dre 
no dre 
 
P<. 03 - 
P-I. 
P-I. 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
1501 1280 38.9mg n.s.s. 0/16 82.9mg 4/17 
a 1280 81.5mg n.s.s. 0/16 82.9mg 1/17 
b 1280 18.5mg 114.mg 0/16 82.9mg 9/17 
 
IOOOFORN (triiodomethmns) 75-48-8 
1502 c04568 40.2mg n.s.s. 7/20 
 
* c04568 418.mg n.s.s. 1/20 
b c04568 418.mg n.s.s. 1/20 
1503 c04568 30.0mg n.s.s. 5/20 
 
a c04568 81.1mg n.s.s. 3/20 
b c04568 91.4mg n..sa. 1/20 
1504 c04568 4.66mg n.s.s. 10/20 
a c04568 241.mg n.s.s. 1/20 
1505 c04568 40.8mg n.s.s. 0/20 
a c04568 28.4mg n.s.s. 7/20 
b c04568 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/20 
1506 c04568 46.2mg n.a.s. 2/40p 
 
28.5mg 14/50 (56.3mg 5/50) 
28.5mg 1/50 56.3mg 0/50 
28.5mg 1/50 56.3mg 0/50 
28.5mg 14/50 56.9mg 23/50 
28.5mg 5/50 56.9mg 7/50 
28.5mg 4/50 56.9mg 4/50 
13.6mg 27/50 (27.1mg 23/50) 
13.6mg 0/50 27. 1mg 0/50 
35.2mg 8/50 70.4m9 4/50 
35.2mg 17/50 70.4mg 10/50 
35.2mg 0/50 70.4mg 0/50 
35.2mg 8/50 70.4mg 4/50 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,m/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:s/s,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
thy:fca,fcc. S 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
thy:fca,fcc. S 
 
N-ISOSUTYL-N'-NITRO-N.NITROSOGUANIDINE 5461-85-8 
 
1507 1082 2.24mg n.s.s. 
ISONIAZID (INN) 54-85-3 
 
1508 170 195.mg n.s.a. 
 
a 170 1.37gm n.s.s. 
b 170 1.37gm n.s.s. 
1509 170 425.mg n.s.a. 
 
a 170 1.51gm n.s.s. 
1510 169 13.2mg n.s.a. 
 
a 169 560.mg n.s.s. 
1511 169 32.6mg n.s.s. 
 
a 169 155.mg n.s.s. 
1512 54m 48.2mg n.s.s. 
 
a 584m 64.0mg n.s.s. 
b 58m 55.8mg n.s.s. 
1513 1115 123.mg n.s.s. 
1514 1115 71.3mg n.s.s. 
1515 1074 5.26mg 29.8m 
 
a 1074 32.3mg n.s.a. 
1516 1074 5.80mg 32.7mg 
a 1074 22.1mg n.s.s. 
1517 1425 11.1mg 47.4mg 
a 1425 30.1mg n.s.s. 
b 1425 8.62mg 29.9mg 
 
1518 1127 82.3mg 426.mg 
 
a 1127 97.3mg 635.mg 
 
b 1127 165.mg 27.1gm 
c 1127 534.mg n.s.s. 
1519 169 201.mg 1.37gm 
a 169 413.mg n.s.a. 
1520 1127 67.5mg 311.mg 
* 1127 203.mg n.s.a. 
1521 169 49.2mg 437.mg 
 
a 169 555.mg n.s.a. 
1522 5Mm 23.9mg 174.mg 
 
* 5Mm 23.9mg 174.mg 
b 584m 149.mg n.s.s. 
1523 5Un 19.3mg 105.mg 
a 584n 33.6mg 1.32gm 
b 5U4n 33.6mg 1.32gm 
 
1524 SUm 13.9mg 53.4mg 
* 58m 16.2mg 70.0mg 
b 5Um 63.8mg n.s.s. 
1525 5Uo 14.1mg 107.mg 
 
a 5Uo 20.0mg 420.mg 
b 584o 33.7mg n.s.a. 
1526 5Mr 10.1mg 158.mg 
a 5Ur 15.4mg n.s.a. 
b 5Ur 24.6mg n.s.a. 
1527 157 60.1mg 39.mg 
* 157 465.mg n.s.a. 
b 157 465.mg n.s.a. 
1528 157 32.1mg n.s.a. 
* 157 262.mg n.s.a. 
 
0/9 2.14mo 0/9 
 
136.mg 
136.mg 
136.mg 
120.mg 
120.mg 
200.mg 
200.mg 
167.mg 
167.mg 
31.4mO 
31.4mg 
31.4mg 
200.mg 
167.mg 
34. 1mg 
34. 1mg 
32.2mg 
32.2mg 
30. 1mg 
30. 1mg 
30. 1mg 
200.mg 
200.mg 
200.mg 
200.mg 
100.mg 
100.mg 
167.mg 
167.mg 
83.3mg 
83.3mg 
37.7mg 
37.7mg 
37.7mg 
37.0 mg 
37.0mg 
37.09g 
15.7mg 
15.7mg 
15.7mg 
15.7mg 
15.7mg 
15.7mg 
31.4mg 
31.4mg 
31.4mg 
149.mg 
149.mg 
149.mg 
99.4mg 
99.4mg 
 
2/54 
0/72 
0/72 
2/25 
0/67 
0/1 
 
0/30 
0/9 
1/14 
0/20 
1/20 
1/20 
0/4 
1/12 
4/47 
2/47 
1/37 
4/37 
5/94 
2/94 
7/94 
9/68 
8/68 
1/48 
3/48 
14/108 
3/88 
8/80 
2/35 
10/90 
2/85 
0/30 
0/30 
0/30 
0/30 
0/30 
0/30 
1/30 
1/30 
0/30 
0/15 
0/1S 
0/15 
1/15 
1/1S 
0/15 
0/22 
0/22 
0/22 
0/21 
0/28 
 
Matsukura;gann,70, 181-185; 1979 
 
5/22 
0/36 
0/36 
0/11 
0/39 
1/2 
0/30 
1/6 
0/14 
 
3/40 (62.9mg 0/40) 
7/40 62.9mg 6/40 
10/40 62.9mg 6/40 
1/12 
6/21 
13/17 
2/17 
11/18 
3/18 
27/98 
8/98 
35/98 
23/47 
20/47 
6/32 
1/32 
 
17/39 300.mg 13/32 
0/30 300.mg 0/18 
21/44 
0/10 
 
15/38 (250.mg 3/14) 
 
1/38 250.mg 0/10 
8/30 
8/30 
0/30 
10/30 
5/30 
5/30 
 
6/30 31.4mg 16/30 
4/30 31.4mg 15/30 
2/30 31.4mo 1/30 
6/25 31.4mg 9/25 
3/25 31.4mg 7/25 
3/25 31.4mg 2/25 
12/25 
8/25 
4/25 
11/40 
0/40 
0/40 
1/5 
2/49 
 
Toth;*jca,5,165-171;1969 
Toth; i Jcn,2,413-420; 1967 
Bhid.; ij cn,21,381-386;1978 
Toth;sci*, 152,1376- 1377;1966a 
Bioncifiori;bjca,18,543-550;1964 
 
Pershin;vopr,XVIII,50-53;1972 
 
Toth;canr,26, 1473-1475; 1966 
 
Toth; i jcn,2,413-420; 1967 
Toth;canr,26, 1473-1475; 1966 
 
Toth; i Jcn,2,413-420; 1967 
Shide; i Jcn,21,381-386; 1978 
 
Severi;Jnci,41,331-349;1968 
 
ISONICOTINIC ACID 55-22-1 
 
1529 1108 1.99"gm n.s.s. 0/66 
 
a 1108 6.369m n.s.s. 0/72 
b 1108 6.369m n.s.s. 0/72 
 
Toth;canr,32,804-807;1972/1967. 
 
682.mg 2/27 
682.mg 0/34 
682.mg 0/34 
 
159 
 
Brkly Code 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
TD5O 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
1530 H m syg wet Liv Lcc 28.28 a 
a H m syg wat Liv mix 28.28 c 
b H m syg mat Lun tum 28m28 e 
 
1531 N f cbc gav Liv hpt 36w89 * 
* N f cbc gav Lun ad. 36w89 a 
 
1532 N m cbc gav Lun ad. 36w89 * 
 
a N m cbc gav Liv hpt 36w89 a 
 
* 6.95gm 
 
10.39g 
 
no dre 
612.mg 
no dre 
101 .m9 
no dre 
 
ISONICOTINIC ACID VANILLYLIDENEHYDRAZIDE.: ..1ug. :10. :100. . : . :10. :100.. : . :10 
 
1533 N b nsf gav lun adc 52w52 * . 45.0mg 
a N b nss gav mgl adc 52w52 a 86.6mg 
b N b nsas gv tba mix 52w52 * 27.4mg 
 
P<.1 - 
P<. 5 
P-I. 
 
P<.8 - 
P-1. - 
P<.3 - 
 
P-I. 1 
 
P<.03 + 
P<.07 + 
P<. 003 + 
 
ISOPHOSPHANIDE 
 
1534 N f b6c ipj --- lhc 52w79 s 
 
a 1 f b6c ipJ TSA NXB 52w79 s 
b N f b6c ipJ Liv NXB 52w79 s 
c N f b6c ipj lun NXS 52w79 s 
1535 N f b6c ipJ --- lhc 52w79 s 
1536 N m b6c ipI TBA NXB 52w79 a 
a N m b6c ipi Liv NXB 52w79 s 
b N m b6c ipi lun NXB 52w79 a 
1537 N a b6c ipj liv NXA 52w79 a 
1538 R f ada ipj NXB NXS 52w83 a 
 
a R f ada ipj mgL fba 52w83 a 
b R f sda ipJ ut. Lei 52w83 s 
c R f da ipJ TBA NXB 52w83 a 
d R f Wdm ipJ Liv NXS 52w83 s 
1539 R f ada ipJ mgL fba 52w80 a 
a R f sda ipj ute Lei 52w80 a 
b R f sd ipj m9l XA 52w s 
1540 R a ada ipJ TBA NXB 52w79 a 
a R * ada ipJ Liv NXB 52w79 s 
1541 R m ads ipij -- NXA 52w79 a 
p- ISOPROPOXYDIPHENYLANINE 
 
1542 N f b6a orl Liv agm 76w76 cvi 
 
a N f b6a orL lun ade 76w76 ovi 
b N f b6a orl tba mix 76w76 cv] 
1543 N * b6a orl Liv hpt 76w76 cv] 
a N * b6a orL lun ad. 76w76 cv] 
b N m b6a orL tba mix 76w76 cv] 
 
1544 N f b6c orl liv hpt 76w76 cv) 
a N f b6c orl lun mix 76w76 evx 
b N f b6c ar1 tba mix 76w76 cv] 
1545 N a b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 cv] 
a N m b6c orl Lun de 76w76 cv] 
b N m b6c orL tba mix 76w76 ev] 
ISOPROPYL N- (3-CHLOROPHENYL)CARBAI 
1546 H f syg eat Liv tum 33m33 e 
a H g sy st lun sqc 33m33 c 
 
1547 H a syg et liv hpc 33.33 c 
 
1548 N f b6a orl Lun ad. 76w76 cvy 
a N f b6a orl Liv hpt 76w76 cvy 
b N I b6a orL tba mix 76w76 ev] 
1549 N a b6a or1 liv hpt 76w76 cv] 
 
a N a b6a orl lun ad. 76w76 cv] 
 
b N m b6. or1 tba mix 76w76 cv] 
1550 N f b6c ort Liv hpt 76w76 cv] 
a N f b6c orl Lun mix 76w76 cv] 
b N f b6c orl tba tum 76w76 cv] 
 
1551 N * b6c or1 Liv hpt 76w76 cv) 
a N m b6c orl lun ad 76w76 ev] 
 
b N m b6c orL tba mix 76w76 cv) 
1552 N b awi eat tun ad. 27m27 a 
a N b swi eat Lun adc 27m27 * 
 
b N b awi cat liv tue 27.27 a 
1553 R f alb eat mix mly 24m24 
 
1554 R a alb eat liv tum 24.24 s 
 
a R Lb eat md ly 2424 a 
 
100n 
 
POOr 
 
poa 
 
poc 
poo 
 
poa 
 
ng.. 1 .iug . 10 . 100. 1 mg. 10 . 100 . I . 10 
 
+ 5.06mg * P<.0005c 
 
3.63mg * P<.0005 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
ot : + 5.06mg * P<.0005c 
 
:> no dre P-1. - 
 
no dre P-1. 
37.6mg * P<.5 
 
* #2.42mg \ P<.02 - 
+ .284mg a P<.0005 
 
.301mg * P<.0005a 
.739mg * P<.003 c 
.383mg / P<009 
17.2mg ' P<.5 
 
ol + .358mg 9 P<.0005a 
 
.814mg * P<.0005c 
2.96mg * P<.007 
 
1 .01mg P<.02 - 
no dre P-1. 
 
D l : 4t : #3.23mg P<.0005- 
 
lOOng.. : .Iug. :10. :100. g :1g. :10. :100. :Ig . :10 
 
x > 2.65gm 
x no dre 
x 1.209m 
x > 1.139m 
x 2.189m 
x 985.mg 
x > 2.65gm 
x no dre 
x 1.299m 
x A 679.mg 
x 2.189m 
x 300.mg 
 
NATE ..:..lug. 10 . 100. : . 10 . 100. . 10 
 
> no dre 
 
no dre 
.> no drc 
 
x > no dra 
 
x no drc 
x no drc 
 
x > no dre 
x no drc 
 
x no dre 
x > no dre 
x no drc 
 
x no dre 
x ^ 258.mg 
x 830.mg 
x 114.mg 
 
682.mg 
4.959m 
no drc 
 
> no dre 
 
no drc 
 
no dre 
 
1-ISOPROPYL-3-NETHYL-s-PYRAZOLYLDINETHYL CARBANATE.: .. .......100. 1g : ... :10 . 100 . Ig. 10 
 
1555 N f b6a orl tiv hpt 76w76 *vx .> no drc 
 
a N f b6a or1 Lun mix 76476 cvx no dre 
b N f b6a ar1 tba mix 76w76 *vx 23. Oug 
1556 N m b6a orl lun ad. 76w76 cvx * 14.7ug 
 
a N a b6a or1 liv hpt 76w76 cvx 41 .9ug 
b N a b6a orl tba mix 76w76 cvx 12. 4ug 
 
P<.3 - 
 
PoI. _ 
 
P<.S - 
 
P<.3 - 
 
P<.7 7 
 
P<.S - 
 
P<. 3 - 
 
P-1. _ 
 
P<.2 - 
 
P<.04 - 
 
P<.3 - 
P<. 003 - 
 
P-I. 
 
P-1. _ 
PaI. 1 
P-I. 1 
p. 1. 
 
P-1. _ 
p-I. _ 
P-I. 1 
PaI. 1 
P-I. 1 
 
P-1. _ 
P-I. _ 
 
P<.04 - 
 
P<.3 - 
P<. 003 - 
P<.2 - 
P<.3 - 
P-I. 
 
P-I. 1 
 
Pal. 
 
Pal. 1 
 
P-I. 1 
PaI. 1 
 
P<. 08 - 
 
P<.04 - 
 
P<.6 - 
P<.2 - 
 
160 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
1/13 
1/13 
0/29 
1/17 
1/16 
1/12 
2/18 
 
ISONICOTINIC ACID VANILLYLIDENEHYDRAZIDE (phthivezld) --- 
1533 1425 19.2mg n.s.s. 5/94 30.1mg 14/90 
a 1425 30.3mg n.s.s. 2/94 30.1mg 7/90 
b 1425 13.6mg 174.mg 7/94 30.1mg 21/90 
 
ISOPHOSPHANIDE 3778-73-2 
1534 c01638 2.81mg 14.1mg 
a c01638 2.18mg 9.48mg 
b c01638 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
c c01638 n.s.s. n.s.a. 
1535 c01638 2.81mg 10.9mg 
1536 c01638 1.85mg n.s.s. 
a c01638 2.70mg n.s.s. 
b c01638 6.13mg n.s.s. 
1537 c01638 .900"mg n.s.s. 
1538 c01638 .152mg .872mg 
a c01638 .158mg 1.01mg 
b c01638 .375mg 3.07mg 
c c01638 .175mg 17.4mg 
d c01638 2.79mg n.s.s. 
1539 c01638 .199mg .841mg 
 
a c01638 .429mg 1.76mg 
b c01638 .977m9 49.3mg 
1540 c01638 .476m9 n.s.a. 
a c01638 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
1541 c01638 1.37mg 11.2mg 
 
0/15 
0/15 
0/15 
0/15 
 
0/30p 
0/15 
0/15 
0/15 
 
0/30p 
3/10 
3/10 
0/10 
9/10 
0/10 
 
8/30p 
0/30p 
0/30p 
5/10 
0/10 
0/30p 
 
2.80mg 
2.80mg 
 
2.80mg 
2.80mg 
2.80mg 
2.80mg 
 
2.80mg 
2.80mg 
2.80mg 
 
1.60mg 
 
1.60mg 
1.60mg 
1.60m9 
1.60mg 
1.60mg 
1.60mg 
1 .60mg 
 
1.60mg 
1.60m9 
1.60mg 
 
3/35 5.60mg 
7/35 5.60mg 
1/35 5.60mg 
 
0/35 5.60mg 
3/35 5.60mg 
6/35 5.60mg 
5/35 5.60mg 
0/35 5.60mg 
5/35 (5.60m9 
30/35 3.30mg 
28/35 3.30mg 
15/35 3.30mg 
 
32/35 3.30mg 
 
1/35 3.30mg 
28/35 3.30mg 
15/35 3.30m9 
3/35 3.30mg 
 
17/35 3.30mg 
0/35 3.30mg 
3/35 3.30mg 
 
Brkly Code 
 
Biancifiori ;bjca, 18,543-550;1964 
 
Pershin;vopr,XVI II,50-53;1972 
 
13/35 
15/35 
0/35 
0/35 
13/35 
4/35 
2/35 
1/35 
2/35) 
6/35 
6/35 
1/35 
9/35 
0/35 
6/35 
1/35 
1/35 
12/35 
0/35 
5/35 
 
p-ISOPROPOXYDIPHENYLANINE (Agerit 150) 101-73-5 
1542 1306 431.mg n.s.s. 0/17 414.mg 1/18 
a 1306 492.mg n.s.s. 1/17 414.mg 1/18 
b 1306 239.mg n.s.s. 2/17 414.mg 4/18 
1543 1306 252.mg n.s.s. 1/18 385.mg 3/18 
a 1306 274.mg n.s.s. 2/18 385.mg 3/18 
b 1306 196.mg n.s.s. 3/18 385.mg 5/18 
1544 1306 431.mg n.s.s. 0/16 414.mg 1/18 
a 1306 820.mg n.s.s. 0/16 414.mg 0/18 
b 1306 316.mg n.s.s. 0/16 414.mg 2/18 
1545 1306 205.mg n.s.s. 0/16 385.mg 3/16 
a 1306 355.mg n.s.s. 0/16 385.mg 1/16 
b 1306 121.mg 1.47gm 0/16 385.mg 6/16 
 
ISOPROPYL-N-(3-CHLOROPHENYL)CARBAATE (CIPC, chlorpropham) 101-21-3 
 
1546 171. 2.12gm n.s.s. 
 
a 171a 2.12g9 n.s.s. 
1547 171a 1.65gm n.s.s. 
1548 1196 175.mg n.s.s. 
a 1196 294.mg n.s.s. 
b 1196 138.mg n.s.s. 
1549 1196 258.ng n.s.s. 
a 1196 258.mg n.s.s. 
b 1196 180.mg n.s.s. 
1550 1196 311.mg n.s.s. 
a 1196 311.mg n.s.s. 
b 1196 311.mg n.s.s. 
1551 1196 77.8mg n.s.s. 
a 1196 135.mg n.s.s. 
b 1196 45.9mg 559.mg 
 
1552 171. 209.mg n.s.s. 
a 171. 807.mg n.s.s. 
b 171a 1.51gm n.as. 
1553 170. 4.86gm n.s.s. 
1554 170a 37.1mg n.s.s. 
a 170a 3.11gm n.s.s. 
 
0/27 
1/27 
1/22 
1/17 
0/17 
2/17 
1/18 
2/18 
3/18 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
10/49 
0/49 
0/49 
1/25 
0/25 
0/25 
 
209.mg 
209.mg 
184.mg 
157.mg 
157.mg 
157.mg 
146.mg 
146.mg 
146.mg 
157.mg 
157.mg 
157.mg 
146.mg 
146.mg 
146.m 
 
125. mg 
125.mg 
125.mg 
10.0mg 
8.00mg 
 
8.00m9 
 
0/26 
0/26 
0/23 
1/17 
0/17 
2/17 
0/16 
0/16 
1/16 
0/18 
0/18 
0/18 
3/16 
1/16 
6/16 
15/47 
 
1/47 
0/47 
 
0/25 100.mg 1/25 1.009m 0/25 
0/25 80.0mg 0/25 800.mg 0/25 
0/25 80.0mg 1/25 800.mg 0/25 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:m/a,a/c. 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
liv:hpa,hpc. S 
mgL:fbc; ut:tLei. T 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
mgL:ccn,cyn. S 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
---:Lou,Lym. S 
 
Inns;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
Van Esch;fctx, 10,373-381; 1972 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
Van Esch;fctx,10,373-381;1972 
 
Larson;txap,2,659-673; 1960 
 
I-ISOPROPYL-3-NETHYL-s-PYRAZOLYLDINETHYL CARSANATE (Isolan) 119-38-0 
1555 1247 14.7ug n.s.s. 0/18 8.38ug 0/16 
 
a 1247 14.7ug n.s.s. 0/18 8.38ug 0/16 
b 1247 5.63ug n.s.s. 0/18 8.38ug 2/16 
1556 1247 4.43ug n.s.s. 0/18 7.80ug 3/17 
a 1247 6.12ug n.s.s. 1/18 7.80ug 2/17 
b 1247 3.44ug n.s.s. 2/18 7.80ug 5/17 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
1530 1108 1.139g n.s.s. 
 
* 1108 1.199m n.s.s. 
b 1108 4.85gm n.s.s. 
1531 1074 31.4mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1074 32.6mg n.s.s. 
1532 1074 16.3mg n.s.s. 
a 1074 24.6mg n.s.s. 
 
0/39 
1/39 
0/64 
2/47 
4/47 
0/13 
4/27 
 
600.mg 
600.oi 
600.mg 
20.9mg 
 
20.9mg 
17.4mg 
17.4mg 
 
161 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
TD5O 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
1557 N f b6c or1 liv hpt 76w76 evx 
 
a N f b6c orl lun ad. 76.76 *vx 
b N f b6c orl tba mix 76.76 *vx 
1558 N m b6c rl lun *d. 76.76 *vx 
 
a N m b6c orl liv hpt 76w76 *vx 
b N m b6c rL tba mix 76w76 *vx 
 
no dre 
no dre 
 
no dre 
 
15.6ug 
no dre 
41 .3ug 
 
ISOPROPYL-N-PHENYL CARBANATE 10Ong . :.. ug. : 10. : 100... g . :. 10. : 100.. g . 1 : 10 
 
1559 H f syg * at liv tur 33.33 a .> no dre 
 
a H f syg aat lun sqc 33m33 no dra 
 
1560 H m syg eat liv hpc 33.33 a .> no dre 
1561 N f b6a orl lun ad. 76w76 *vx .> 444.mg 
 
a N f b6a or1 liv hpt 76w76 *vx no dre 
b N f b6a or1 tba mix 76w76 *vx 416.mg 
1562 N * b6a orl Liv hpt 76w76 *vx .> 350.mg 
 
a N a b6a orl Lun ad. 76.76 *vx 1.70gm 
 
b N * b6a orl tba mix 76w76 *vx 254..g 
1563 N f b6c orl lun ad. 76.76 *vx .> 244.mg 
 
a N f b6c orl liv hpt 76.76 *vx 502.mg 
b N f b6c orl tba mix 76w76 *vx 88.1mg 
1564 N m b6c orl liv hpt 76.76 *vx . 120.mg 
 
a N m b6c rl lun ad. 76.76 *vx 387.mg 
b N m b6c orl tba mix 76w76 *vx 52.3mg 
 
ISOSAFROLE** 1O0ng.. :. .ug. :10. :100. g :. .. :10. :100.. : .g :10 
 
1565 N f b6a or1 liv hpt 81w81 evx .> no dre 
 
a N f b6a orl lun ad. 81w81 *vx no dr. 
 
b N f b6a orl tba mix 81w81 *vx no dre 
1566 N * b6a orl liv hpt 81w81 *vx . 225.mg 
 
a N m b6a orl lun mix 81.81 *vx no dre 
b N a b6a orl tba mix 81.81 *vx 327.mg 
1567 N f b6c orl liv hpt 81.81 *vx .> 468.g 
 
a N f b6c or1 lun ad 81l.S *vx 468.mg 
b N f b6c orl tba mix 81.81 evx 414.mg 
1568 N m b6c orl liv hpt 81w81 *vx . 106.mg 
 
a N * b6c orl lun ado 81.81 *vx 231.mg 
b N * b6c orl tba mix 81.81 *vx 492.mg 
 
Ps 1. 
P 1. 
 
P<.06 - 
 
P-I. 1 
 
P<.8 - 
 
p-I. - 
P<I.6 - 
p-I. _ 
P<.7 6 
 
P<.5 - 
P<1. _ 
 
P<.6 - 
P<.2 - 
P<.3 - 
 
P<. 009 - 
P<.04 - 
P<.3 - 
 
P<. 002 - 
 
PM.1. 
 
P<.09 
 
P<.7 
P<. 3 
P<. 3 
P<.6 
P<.08 
P<.4 
P<.9 
 
KEPONE 
 
1569 N f b6c *at liv hpc 80.90 v 
 
a N f b6c sat TBA NXB 90 v 
b N f b6c st liv NXB SOw90 v 
c N f b6c at tun NXB W90 v 
1570 N * b6c sat liv hpc 80.89 dv 
 
a N m b6c eat TBA NXB O089 dv 
b N m b6c sat liv NXB 80.89 dv 
c N m b6c sat lun NXS 80.89 dv 
1571 R f oam eat TBA NXB 19m25 v 
 
a R f osc mat liv NXB 19m25 v 
1572 R f os eat TBA NXB 19m25 v 
 
a R * osm at liv NXB 19m25 v 
1573 R f sda mat liv nnd 91w91 
 
00ng..: . u. :10. :100. g :.g :10. :100 .. g . 
 
LO 
 
1.62mg \ P<.003 c 
1.57mg \ P<.003 
1.62mg \ P<.003 
no drm Pal. 
 
.705mg P<.0005c 
.705m9 * P<.0005 
.705mg * P<.0005 
29.3mg * P<.3 
 
1.83mg * P<.5 - 
2.96mg / P<.08 
 
1.42mg ' P<.4 - 
2.49mg * P<.2 
.199mg P<.3 
 
LASIOCARPINE 10Ong.. :. .ug . 10 . 100..1. :g. 10 . 100.. : . 10 
 
1574 R f f34 sat NXB NXB 21%24 as + .141mg Z P<.0005 
 
a R f f34 sat mul NXA 21%24 as .325mg * P<.0005c 
b R f f34 sat liv ang 21m24 as .355mg * P<.0005c 
c R f f34 mat *ul NXA 21m24 as .387mg * P<.0005c 
d R f f34 eat liv NXA 21m24 as .453mg Z P<.0005c 
* R f f34 *)t TBA NXB 21m24 as .102mg Z P<.0005 
f R f f34 *at liv NXB 21m24 as 22.7mg * P<.2 
 
1575 R m f34 oat liv NXB 23m24 as + .250mg Z P<.0005 
 
a R f f34 eat liv ang 23m24 as .355mg Z P<.0005c 
b R * f34 at --- NXA 23m24 as .514mg Z P<.0005 
c R * f34 eat liv NXA 23m24 as .908mg Z P<.0005c 
d R m f34 mat TBA NXB 23.24 as .152mg Z P<.0005 
* R f f34 mat liv NXS 23.24 ms 7.43mg Z P<.03 
 
1576 R m f34 ipJ liv mix 56.76 mv . . .341mg P<.0005+ 
 
a R f f34 ipj liv hpc 56.76 mv .397mg P<.0005+ 
b R f f34 ipJ ski sqc 56.76 *v .794mg P<.002 + 
c R m f34 ipj lun ada 56.76 mv 1.33m9 P<.09 
 
d R m f34 ipJ smi adc 56.76 mv *historical P<.06 + 
* R f f34 ipI tba mix 56.76 mv .152mg P<.0005 
 
1577 R m f34 mat liv ang 55w59 * . . .688mg P<.004 + 
 
a R * f34 mat liv car 55w59 m .954mg P<.02 + 
b R * f34 mat tba mix 55.59 m .217mg P<.0005 
 
LEAD ACETATE !OOng.. :. .ug. :10. :100.. m : g . .:10 .:. 100. :Ig . :10 
 
1578 N f cdl wat lun tum 28m28 m . 7.56mg P<.05 - 
a N f cdl vat tba mix 28M28 a 45.3mg P<.9 - 
 
162 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
:247 14.7ug n.s.s. 
1247 14.7ug n.s.s. 
1247 14.7ug n.s.s. 
1247 4.72ug n.s.s. 
1247 11.2ug n.s.s. 
1247 3.8lug n.s.s. 
 
ISOPROPYL-N-PHENYL CARSANATE (IPC) 122-42-9 
 
1559 171. 2.12g. n.s.s. 0/27 209.mg 0/26 
a 171a 2.12gm n.s.s. 1/27 209.mg 0/26 
1560 171a 995.mg n.s.s. 1/22 184.mg 1/23 
1561 171 61.8mo n.s.s. 1/17 78.4mg 2/17 
 
a 171 147.mg n.s.s. 0/17 78.4mg 0/17 
b 171 52.4mg n.s.s. 2/17 78.4mg 3/17 
1562 171 53.4mg n.s.s. 1/18 73.0mg 2/16 
a 171 58.9mg n.s.s. 2/18 73.0mg 2/16 
b 171 38.6mg n.s.s. 3/18 73.0mg 4/16 
1563 171 59.8mg n.s.s. 0/16 78.4mg 2/18 
 
a 171 81.7mg n.s.s. 0/16 78.4mg 1/18 
b 171 33.2mg 1.93gm 0/16 78.4mg 5/18 
1564 171 36.1mg n.s.s. 0/16 73.0mg 3/15 
a 171 63.0mg n.s.s. 0/16 73.0mg 1/15 
b 171 21.0mg 236.mg 0/16 73.0mg 6/15 
 
ISOSAFROLE** 120-58-1 
 
1565 172 145.mg n.s.a. 
 
a 172 145.mg n.s.s. 
b 172 145.mg n.s.s. 
1566 172 55.2mg n.s.s. 
a 172 144.mg n.s.s. 
b 172 44.2mo n.s.s. 
1567 172 76.2mg n.a.s. 
a 172 76.2mg n.s.s. 
b 172 60.7mg n.s.a. 
1568 172 34.5mg n.a.s. 
 
a 172 50.4mo n.s.s. 
b 172 31.4mg n.s.s. 
 
1/15 
2/15 
2/15 
0/18 
3/18 
3/18 
0/17 
0/17 
1/17 
1/17 
1/17 
7/17 
 
KEPONE (chlordecons) 143-50-0 
 
1569 c00191 1.01mg 6.36mg 0/10 
a c00191 .992mg 5.65mg 0/10 
b c00191 1.01mg 6.36mg 0/10 
c c00191 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/10 
1570 c00191 .462mg 1.59mg 6/20 
 
a c00191 .462mg 1.59mg 6/20 
b c00191 .462mg 1.59mg 6/20 
c c00191 7.21mg n.s.s. 0/20 
1571 c00191 .469mg n.s.s. 7/10 
 
a c00191 1.30mg n.s.s. 1/10 
1572 c00191 .459mg n.s.s. 3/15 
a c00191 1.22mg n.s.s. 0/15 
1573 1160 32.4ug n.s.s. 0/10 
 
LASIOCARPINE 303.34-4 
 
1574 c01478 85.9ug .247mg 
a c01478 .165mg .822mg 
b c01478 .183mg .741mg 
c c01478 .186mg 1.04mg 
d c01478 .195mg 1.26mg 
 
a c01478 60.1ug .205g9 
f c01478 3.70mg n.s.s. 
1575 c01478 .149mg .428mg 
 
a c01478 .208mg .621mg 
b c01478 .256mg 1.45mg 
c c01478 .329mg 3.21mg 
 
d c01478 97.2ug .257mg 
 
a c01478 1.82mg n.s.a. 
1576 1013 .165mg .851mg 
a 1013 .188mg 1.04mg 
b 1013 .321mg 3.10mo 
c 1013 .406mo n.s.a. 
d 1013 .671mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1013 69.2uo .372mg 
1577 390 .319mg 3.32mg 
a 390 .408mg 170.mg 
b 390 .108mo .469mg 
 
2/24 
2/24 
0/24 
1/24 
0/24 
18/24 
0/24 
0/24 
0/24 
4/24 
0/24 
7/24 
0/24 
0/25 
0/25 
0/25 
2/25 
0/25 
2/25 
0/10 
0/10 
0/10 
 
LEAD ACETATE 301-04-2 
 
1578 1395 2.54mo n.s.a. 1/45 
a 1395 2.62mg n.s.s. 9/45 
 
72.7mg 
72.7mg 
72.7mg 
67.7mg 
67.7mg 
67.7mg 
72.7mg 
72.7mg 
72.7mg 
67.7mg 
67.7mg 
67.7mg 
 
2.30mg 
2.30mg 
2.30mg 
2.30mg 
2.40mg 
2.40mg 
2.40mg 
2.40mg 
.640mg 
.640"m 
 
.230mg 
.230mg 
40.Oug 
 
.350mg 
.350mg 
.350mg 
.350mg 
.350mg 
.350mg 
.350mg 
.280mg 
.280mg 
.280mg 
.280 
.280mg 
.280mo 
 
.880mg 
 
.880mg 
.880m 
 
.880mg 
 
.880mg 
 
1.860mg 
 
1.86mg 
1.86mg 
 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
2/17 
0/17 
4/17 
1/16 
1/16 
2/16 
5/18 
3/18 
8/18 
 
26/50 (4.70m9 
27/50 (4.70mg 
26/50 (4.70mg 
 
0/50 4.70mg 
 
43/50 2.20mg 
43/50 2.20mg 
43/50 2.20mo 
2/50 2.20mo 
29/50 .930mg 
 
1/50 .930mg 
24/50 .690mg 
3/50 .690mg 
1/10 
 
17/24 .750mg 
9/24 .750mg 
8/24 .750mg 
7/24 .750mg 
5/24 .750mg 
 
22/24 .750mg 
0/24 .750mg 
5/24 .600mg 
5/24 .600mg 
3/24 .600mg 
0/24 .600mg 
14/24 .600mg 
0/24 .600mg 
11/18 
10/18 
6/18 
5/18 
2/18 
16/18 
9/20 
7/20 
17/20 
 
23/50) 
25/50) 
23/50) 
 
0/50 
39/50 
39/50 
39/50 
 
0/50 
29/50 
12/50 
16/50 
3/50 
 
19/24 
11/24 
7/24 
8/24 
1/24 
22/24 
 
0/24 
14/24 
11/24 
11/24 
3/24 
22/24 
 
0/24 
 
Van Esch;fctx,10,373-381;1972 
 
Innms;ntis,1968/1969 
 
Inn.s;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:m/a,a/c. 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Chu; txap, 59,268-278;1981 
 
1.50m9 
1.50m0 
1.50mg 
1.500g 
 
1.50mg 
1.50m9 
1.50 g 
1.20mo 
1.20mg 
1.20mg 
1.20og 
1.20mg 
1.20mg 
 
8/24 
1/24 
2/24 
1/24 
7/24 
8/24 
1/24 
17/24 
13/24 
7/24 
5/24 
23/24 
 
2/24 
 
liv:adn,ang,hpc; mul:grt,t.u,LsL,tym,uLs. C 
 
ul: Lou, lym. 
 
mul:grl,lIl,uLs. 
 
l iv:adn,hpc. 
 
t iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Liv:adn,ang,hpc. C 
 
---:Leu,Lym. S 
l iv:adn,hpc. 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Svoboda;canr,32,908-911; 1972 
 
Rao;bj ca,37,289-293; 1978 
 
1.00mg 5/37 
1.00mg 8/37 
 
Schrooder; Jnut, 105,452-458;1975 
 
1557 
 
b 
 
1558 
 
a 
 
b 
 
0/18 
1/18 
2/18 
0/14 
3/14 
4/14 
 
8.38ug 
8.38ug 
8.38ug 
7.8Oug 
7.SOug 
 
7.80ug 
 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
3/18 
1/18 
6/18 
 
163 
 
Brkly Code 
 
164 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
b N f cdl mat tba mL 28r28 . 
1579 N f cdl wit lun tur 30.30 * 
a N f cdl wat tba tur 30.30 * 
1580 N m cdl wat Lun tum 25.25 * 
a N m cd1 wat tba maL 25.25 a 
b N m cdl wit tbr mix 25.25 o 
1581 N m cd1 wet Lun tur 29.29 o 
 
o N * cdl wit Liv ser 29.29 o 
b N m cdl wt tb mix 2929 o 
 
1582 R m f34 *et kid *dc 52w52 *kr 
 
* R-e f34 *et liv hpc 52w52 ekr 
1583 R b Lob wet Liv tum 41.41 es 
a R b Lob wat tba tur 41.41 es 
b R b Lob wet tba maL 41m41 es 
 
LEAD ACETATE, BASIC 
 
1584 H f syg eat liv tum 23.25 is 
1585 H * oyg sot Liv tum 24.24 s 
 
1586 N f rwi *t kid car 24.24 -v 
o N f swi sat kid do 2424 sv 
b N f swi sat Liv hpt 24.24 sv 
c N f swi *t Lun ado 24.24 iv 
1587 N * swi *t kid car 20.24 sai 
a N m swi sat kid ado 20.24 si 
b N * swi oit liv hpt 20r24 isi 
c N o swi o at lun ado 20.24 asi 
1588 R f wis *t kid mix 29.29 o 
1589 R f wis eat kid mix 24.24 4 
1590 R m wis eat kid mix 29.29 o 
1591 R m wis *t kid mix 24.24 o 
LEAD DINETHYLDITHIOCARBANATE 
 
1592 N f b6c *t TBA NXB 24m24 
a N f b6c *t liv NXB 24r24 
b N f b6c sat Lun NXB 24m24 
 
1593 N f b6c orl Liv hpt 76w76 ov) 
o N f b6c orL lun mix 76w76 iv] 
b N f b6c orl tbo mix 76w76 iv) 
1594 N m b6c *t TBA NXB 24m24 
o N m b6c *t liv NXB 24.24 
b N m b6c iat Lun NXB 24m24 
 
1595 N * b6c orl ... rts 76w76 ov) 
 
a N m b6c orl Liv hpt 76w76 ivi 
b N m b6c orL lun mix 76w76 iv] 
c N m b6c orl tbi mix 76w76 evi 
1596 N f b6i orl liv hpt 76w76 ivi 
 
i N f b6a orl lun ido 76w76 iv] 
b N f b6i orl tbi mix 76w76 iv) 
1597 N m b6a orl Lun ado 76w76 iv] 
a N * b6i orl Liv hpt 76w76 iv] 
b N m b6s orl tbr mix 76w76 iv] 
1598 R f f34 eat TBA NXB 24.24 
a R f f34 eat Liv NXS 24.24 
1599 R m f 34 eat TBA NXB 24.24 
a R o f34 *t liv NXB 24.24 
 
LEUPEPTIN 
 
1600 N f aJJ *t lun mix 68w68 e 
o N f ajj st liv lpb 68w68 o 
1601 N m aJJ eat Liv mix 68"w68 o 
 
a N mijJ st Lun mix 6w68 e 
 
LITHOCHOLIC ACID 
 
1602 N f b6c gav TBA NXB 24.24 
 
o N f b6c gyv Liv NXS 24.24 
b N f b6c giv Lun NXB 24.24 
1603 N m b6c gav TBA NXB 24.24 
 
o N * b6c gv liv NXB 2424 
b N * b6c gv lun NXS 2424 
1604 R f f34 giv TBA NXS 24.24 
a R f f 34 giv Liv NXB 24m24 
1605 R m f34 gav TBA NXB 24.24 
a R * f34 giv Liv NXB 24.24 
 
LUTEOSKYRfIN 
 
1606 N f ddn *t Liv mix 37.37 o 
 
o N f ddn eat liv Lc 37m37 o 
b N f ddn e*t liv lcc 37m37 a 
1607 N m ddn *t Liv mix 37.37 o 
i N m ddn st liv lc 37m37 e 
 
TD5O 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
no dro 
no dro 
51.5mg 
7.78mg 
4.04mg 
6.22mg 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
993.g 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
133.mg 
 
P-1. _ 
P-1. _ 
P<1. _ 
P<.4 4 
 
P<.04 - 
P<.5 - 
P-1. _ 
P-1. _ 
Pal. 1 
P<. 3 
P-I. 
 
p-I. _ 
P-1. _ 
P<1. _ 
 
0Ong .. : lug. :10. :100. 1mg :... :10. :100.. :Ig . :10 
 
no dre P-I. 
no dre P-I. 
 
> 14.89gm P<.2 + 
 
no dre P-I. + 
no dre P-I. 
no dre Pal. 
 
v A 472.mg \ P<.02 + 
v 986mg \ P<.1 + 
v no dre P-I. 
v no dre P-I. 
 
+ 107.mg P<.003 + 
 
+ 339.mg P<.0005+ 
+ 107.m9 P<.008 + 
 
* . 443.mg P<.002 + 
 
100ng. ...lug. 10 . 100. 1mg. 10 .. 100.. g 10 
 
:> no dre P.1. 
 
149.g " P<.6 
no dre P-I. 
x > no dre P-1. 
x no dre P-I. 
x 116.mg P<.3 
 
:> no dre P-I. 
 
no dre P.1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
x + 16.4mg P<.006 
x 95.3mg P<.3 
x no dre P-1. 
 
x 10.7mg P<.002 
x > no dre Pal. 
x no dre P-I. 
x no dre P-I. 
x > 833mg P<. 
x no dre P-1. 
x no dre P-I. 
 
:> 27.8mg * P<.9 - 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
:> no dro P-1. - 
 
72.6mg * P<.4 
 
OOng . . .:ug. :10. :100.. g : .. : 10 .: 100.g. : ..10 
 
.> 229.mg 
 
933-mg 
* + 55.89 
 
422.mg 
 
P<.3 - 
P<.3 - 
P<. 006 + 
P<.9 9 
 
100ng1....lug. :10. :100.. mg :. 10. :100.. g . 10 
 
960.m9 * P<.8 - 
1.14go * P<.2 
1.039m * P<.2 
no dro P-I. 
no dre Pal. 
834.mg * P<.6 
 
686.mg * P.6 - 
1.899m * Pc 3 
 
501.mg * P<.3 - 
2.25g. * P<.2 
 
1O0ng. ...ug. 10. :100. :g. 10 .. 100.. . :10 
 
79.4mg P<.3 + 
122.mg P<.4 + 
248.mg P<.5 + 
+ . 14.8mg Z P<.0005+ 
 
83.7mg * P<.03 + 
 
11 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose llnc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
b 
 
1579 
 
a 
 
1580 
 
a 
 
b 
 
1581 
 
b 
 
1582 
 
1583 
b 
 
1395 3.06mg n.s.s. 
 
56 3.58mg n.s.s. 
56 1.90mg n.s.s. 
1395 1.98mg n.a.s. 
1395 1.59mg n.s.s. 
1395 1.39mg n.s.s. 
 
56 8.23mg n.s.s. 
56 9.99m9 n.a.s. 
56 8.57mg n.s.s. 
1150 162.mg n.s.s. 
1150 309.mg n.s.a. 
1036 5.00mg n.s.s. 
1036 1.67mg n.s.s. 
1036 2.40mg n.s.a. 
 
9/45 
9/60 
22/60 
4/43 
2/43 
10/43 
8/44 
1/44 
11/44 
0/15 
0/15 
1/34 
10/34 
2/34 
 
LEAD ACETATE, BASIC 1335*32-6 
 
1584 176 456.mg n.s.s. 0/23 
1585 176 348.mg n.s.s. 0/22 
1586 176 2.42gm n.s.s. 0/25 
a 176 2.93gm n.s.s. 0/25 
b 176 2.93gm n.s.s. 0/25 
c 176 2.58g n.s.s. 3/25 
1587 176 163.mg n.s.s. 0/25 
a 176 242.mg n.s.s. 0/25 
b 176 529.mg n.s.s. 0/25 
c 176 2.75gm n.s.s. 3/25 
1588 175m 43.1mg 571.mg 0/15 
1589 175n 138.mg 1.13gm 0/13 
1590 175m 40.4mg 2.21gm 0/14 
1591 175n 176.mg 2.049m 0/13 
 
1.00m9 
1.00m9 
1.00mg 
.833mg 
.833mg 
.833mg 
.833mg 
.833mg 
.833mg 
400.mg 
400.mg 
.265mg 
.265mg 
.265mg 
 
105.mg 
92.0g 
130.mg 
130.mg 
130.mg 
130.mg 
120.mg 
120.mg 
120.mg 
120.mg 
50.0mg 
 
500.mg 
40.0mg 
400.mg 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
7/37 
4/29 
11/29 
8/49 
9/49 
15/49 
1/39 
0/39 
1/39 
1/15 
0/15 
0/32 
7/32 
2/32 
 
0/24 523.mg 
0/22 460.mg 
0/25 751.mg 
1/25 751.mg 
1/25 751.mg 
5/25 751.mg 
 
4/25 (713.mg 
2/25 (713.mg 
0/25 713.mg 
1/25 713.mg 
6/16 
7/11 
5/16 
6/13 
 
Brkly Code 
 
Schroadar; jnut,83,239-250;1964 
Schroader; Jnut, 105,452-458;1975 
 
Sch roador; jnut,83,239-250; 1964 
 
Hinton;boct,23,464-469; 1979 
Kanisawa;canr,29,892-895; 1969 
 
Van Esch;bjca,23,765-771;1969 
 
0/24 
0/22 
1/25 
0/25 
0/25 
1/25 
0/25) 
0/25) 
0/25 
1/25 
 
Van Esch;bJca,16,289-297;1962 
 
LEAD DINETHYLDITHIOCARBANATE (t*dat.) 19010-66-3 
 
1592 c02891 
a c02891 
b c02891 
1593 1093 
a 1093 
b 1093 
1594 c02891 
a c02891 
b c02891 
1595 1093 
a 1093 
b 1093 
c 1093 
1596 1093 
a 1093 
b 1093 
1597 1093 
a 1093 
b 1093 
1598 c02891 
 
a c02891 
159 c02891 
a c02891 
 
11.9mg n.s.a. 
36.6mg n.s.s. 
23.0mg n.s.a. 
35.8mg n.s.s. 
35.8mg n.s.s. 
18.8mg n.s.s. 
5.92mg n.s.s. 
16.0mg n.s.a. 
12.0mg n.s.s. 
6.17mg 162.mg 
15.5mg n.s.s. 
29.6mg n.s.s. 
4.54mg 39.0mg 
35.8mg n.s.s. 
35.8mg n.s.s. 
35.8mg n.s.s. 
14.6mg n.s.s. 
31.4mg n.s.s. 
16.2mg n.s.s. 
1.82mg n.s.s. 
16.3mg n.s.s. 
1.40mg n.s.s. 
11.8mg n.s.s. 
 
9/20 
0/20 
3/20 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
12/20 
4/20 
9/20 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/17 
1/17 
2/17 
2/18 
1/18 
3/18 
15/20 
1/20 
17/20 
0/20 
 
LEUPEPTIN ... 
 
1600 1432 59.6mg n.s.s. 3/20 
a 1432 152.mg n.s.s. 0/20 
1601 1432 25.2mg 641.mg 4/23 
a 1432 29.0mg n.s.s. 15/23 
LITHOCHOLIC ACID 434-13-9 
 
1602 c03861 111.mg n.s.s. 6/20 
a c03861 392.mg n.s.s. 0/20 
b c03861 357.mg n.s.s. 0/20 
1603 c03861 132.mg n.s.s. 12/20 
 
a c03861 187.mg n.s.s. 6/20 
b c03861 180.mg n.s.s. 1/20 
1604 c03861 129.mg n.s.s. 14/20 
 
a c03861 653.mg n.s.s. 0/20 
1605 c03861 150.mg n.s.s. 9/20 
a c03861 778.mg n.s.s. 0/20 
LUTEOSKYRIN 2188-44-6 
 
1606 1346m 24.0mg n.s.s. 0/7 
a 1346m 29.9mg n.s.s. 0/7 
b 1346m 40.4mg n.s.s. 0/7 
1607 1346m 7.71mg 45.5mg 0/10 
 
a 1346m 42.0omg n.s.s. 0/10 
 
3.25mg 
3.25mg 
3.25mg 
18. 1m9 
18.1mg 
18. 1mg 
 
3.00mg 
3.00mg 
3.00mg 
16.8 mg 
16.8mg 
16.8mg 
 
16.8mg 
18. 1m9 
18. 1mg 
18. 1mg 
 
16.8mg 
16.8mg 
16.8mg 
1.25mg 
1. 25m9 
1.00mg 
1.000g 
 
18/50 6.50mg 18/50 
1/50 6.50mg 1/50 
4/50 6.50m9 5/50 
0/18 
0/18 
1/18 
 
32/50 6.00mg 28/50 
11/50 6.00mg 7/50 
14/50 6.00mg 15/50 
5/16 
1/16 
0/16 
7/16 
0/18 
0/18 
0/18 
2/17 
0/17 
2/17 
 
33/50 2.50mg 36/50 
 
1/50 2.50mg 1/50 
40/50 2.00mg 37/50 
0/50 2.00mg 1/50 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Iun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
130.mg 7/25 Hosaka;gann,71,913-917; 1980 
130.mg 1/25 
120.mg 14/25 
120.mg 17/25 
 
52. 5mg 
52.5mg 
52.5mg 
52.5mg 
52.5mg 
52.5mg 
106.mg 
106.mg 
106.mg 
106.mg 
 
6.00mg 
6.00mg 
6.00mg 
1.67mg 
1.67mg 
 
20/50 105.mg 23/50 
 
1/50 105.mg 3/50 
1/50 105.mg 3/50 
26/50 105.mg 20/50 
17/50 105.mg 9/50 
7/50 105.mg 5/50 
35/49 212.mg 35/50 
2/49 212.mg 2/50 
26/50 212.mg 30/50 
 
1/50 212.mg 3/50 
 
3/26 
2/26 
1/26 
 
2/18 5.00m9 11/24 (16.7mg 11/29) 
0/18 5.00mg 5/24 16.7mg 6/29 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Uraguchi ;fctx, 10,193-207;1972 
 
165 
 
166 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
b N . ddn et liv hpt 37m37 e 
c N m ddn set Liv lcc 37.37 * 
d N m ddn eat liv akt 37.37 * 
1608 N m ddn eat Liv Lca 37.37 e 
a N m ddn eat Liv hpt 3737 e 
b N m ddn eat liv akt 37.37 * 
1609 N m ddn eat Liv hpt 37.37 . 
 
a N m ddn eat Liv Lce 37.37 e 
 
LUTESTRAL 
 
1610 N f c3h eat mae tue 24m24 ar 
1611 N f crf eat mm tue 24m24 er 
1612 N m crf eat mai tue 24m24 r 
 
1613 N f r3m eat moa tum 24m24 or 
 
NALAOXON 
 
1614 N f b6c eat TIA NXB 24m24 
 
a N f b6c eat Liv NXS 24m24 
b N f b6c eat lun NXB 2424 
1615 N m b6c set TBA NXB 24m24 
 
a N m b6c set liv NXS 24m24 
b N m b6c eat lun NXB 24m24 
1616 R f f34 set thy NXA 24m24 
 
a R f f 34 eat TBA NXS 24m24 
b R f f34 eat liv NXB 24.24 
1617 R m f34 eat TBA NXB 24m24 
 
a R m f34 eat Liv NXB 24.24 
 
NALATHION 
 
1618 N f b6c eat TBA NXB 80w94 
a N f b6c eat Liv NXB 80w94 
b N f b6c set lun NXB 80w94 
1619 N m b6c set liv nnd 80w94 
a N m b6c eat TBA NXB 80w94 
b N m b6c eat Liv NXB 80w94 
c N m b6c eat Lun NXB 80w94 
1620 R f f34 eat TBA NXB 24.24 
 
a R f f34 eat Liv NXB 24m24 
1621 R m f34 eat edr phe 24m24 
a R m f34 eat TBA NXB 24m24 
b R m f34 eat Liv NXB 24.24 
 
1622 R f ose eat TBA NXB 19.25 v 
 
a R f ose eat Liv NXB 19.25 v 
1623 R f ose eat thy NXA 19.25 v 
1624 R m osm eat TBA NXB 19.25 v 
 
a R m osm eat Liv NXB 19m25 v 
 
NALEIC HYDRAZIDE 
 
1625 N f b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 evy 
 
a N f b6o orL Lun ada 76w76 ev: 
b N f b6a orL tba mix 76w76 mvy 
1626 N m b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx 
 
a N m b6a orL Lun ada 76w76 mvy 
b N m b6a orL tba mix 76w76 ev: 
1627 N f b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 evi 
 
a N f b6c orL lun mix 76w76 evx 
b N f b6c orL tba mix 76w76 ev: 
1628 N m b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx 
a N m b6c orL Lun mix 76w76 ev: 
b N m b6c orL tbe mix 76w76 evx 
1629 R f nss et Liv hpt 23.23 e 
a R f nss et tb ix 23m23 e 
1630 R m nes eat Liv hpt 23m23 e 
a R m nss et tba mix 23m23 e 
 
NANGANESE ETHYLENEBISTNIOCARBANATI 
1631 N f b6a orL Lun ade 76w76 ev: 
 
a N f b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 av: 
b N f b6a orl tba mix 76w76 evz 
1632 N m b6a orL Lun ade 76w76 ev: 
 
a N m b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 ev: 
b N m b6o orL tbe mix 76w76 ev) 
1633 N f b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 ev) 
a N f b6c orL Lun mix 76w76 ev) 
b N f b6c orL tba tue 76w76 ev) 
1634 N m b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 ev) 
a N m b6c orl Lun ada 76w76 *v) 
b N m b6c orL tba mix 76w76 av) 
1635 R b mgr gav Liv tue 22m24 e 
a R b *gr gv tba mix 22m24 e 
 
1O0ng. 
pool 
 
TD5O 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
89.5mg * P<.08 + 
332.mg * P<.2 + 
no dre P-1. + 
25.1mg P<.03 + 
74.3mg P<.2 + 
113.mg P<.3 + 
113.mg P<.3 + 
231.mg P<.5 + 
 
.. : .lug. :10.: 100. g :. . :10. :100 . g.10 
 
5.98g9 
no dre 
1.76mg 
2.12mg 
 
P<.7 7 
 
P-1. _ 
P<.0005 
P<.4 4 
 
lOOng..: . : ug :10. :100. :.mg . :10. :100. : g. :10 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
2.76gm * P<.3 
 
472.mg * P<.4 - 
579.mg / P<.2 
3.23gm * P<.8 
 
#296.mg * P<.02 - 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre PI.. 
1.56gm * P<.3 
 
00ng. .: ..lug. :10. :100.. g : . . :10. :100.. :19 :10 
 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
31.7gm * P<.3 
no dre P-1. 
 
#10.2gm * P<.04 - 
 
5.19gm * P<.3 
4.40gm * P<.2 
44.7gm * P<.8 
 
293.mg * P<.3 - 
no dre P-1. 
 
#145.mg * P<.0005- 
66.6mg * P<.002 
411.mg * P<.05 
 
434.mg * P<.2 - 
3.87gm * P<.2 
 
pool A #2.969m * P<.03 - 
 
335.mg * P<.2 - 
3.079m * P<.7 
 
1oong . . .ug. : 100.. 1m :g . 1.. 10. :100... g :.:10 
 
x .> 2.35gm 
x 38.7gm 
x 932.mg 
x .> 2.07gm 
x no dre 
x 11.99m 
x .> no dre 
x no dre 
x no dre 
x . 1.06gm 
x no dre 
x 679.mg 
 
.> no dre 
 
3.72gm 
no dre 
12.39m 
 
l . . : 1ug . : 10 . : 100 .:_mg.: 10 .: 100.. g . :..10 
 
x .> no dre 
x no dre 
x 138.mg 
x .> 54.9mg 
x no dre 
x 106.mg 
x .> no dre 
x no dre 
x no dre 
x .> 128.mg 
x 128.mg 
x 62.3mg 
 
no dre 
157.mg 
 
P<.3 - 
P<1. _ 
P<.4 4 
 
P<.6 - 
P-1. _ 
P<1. _ 
PM. 1. 
 
P-1. _ 
P-I. 1 
 
P<.09 - 
P-I. _ 
P<. 04 - 
P-M. _ 
P<.8 - 
P-I. _ 
P<1. _ 
 
P-I. 
 
P-1. _ 
P<.7 7 
P<.4 4 
 
P-1. _ 
P<.7 _ 
P 1. 
 
Pal. _ 
P-1. _ 
P<.3 - 
P<.3 - 
P<.2 - 
P.1. 
 
P<.02 + 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
b 1346. 34.0mg n.s.s. 
c 1346. 100.mg n.s.s. 
d 1346. 108.mg n.s.s. 
1608 1346n 11.3mg n.s.s. 
a 1346n 22.5mg n.s.s. 
b 1346n 27.9mg n.s.s. 
1609 13460 27.9mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1346o 37.6mg n.s.s. 
 
0/10 
0/10 
0/10 
0/9 
0/9 
0/9 
0/10 
0/10 
 
1. 67mg 
1.67mg 
1. 67mg 
5. 00mg 
5. 00mg 
5. 00mg 
5. 00mg 
5. 00mg 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
Brkly Code 
 
1/18 5.00mg 7/24 16.7mg 7/29 
0/18 5.00m9 1/24 16.7mg 2/29 
1/18 5.00mg 3/24 16.7mg 1/29 
8/29 
3/29 
2/29 
2/29 
1/29 
 
LUTESTRAL 8065*91-6 
 
1610 1175 .759mg n.s.s. 54/92 1.04mg 19/30 
1611 1175 .487mg n.s.s. 161/167p 1.04mg 28/31 
1612 1463 .851mg 4.52mg 0/76 .960mg 10/32 
1613 1175 .531og n.s.s. 50/73 1.04mg 31/40 
 
RudaL i; jnci ,49,813-819;1972 
RudaL i ;gmcr, 17,243-252;1975 
RudaL i; Jnci ,49,813-819;1972 
 
MALAOXON (malathion-0-0natog) 1634-78-2 
 
1614 c08628 265.mg n.s.s. 15/50 65.Omg 
 
a c08628 263.mg n.s.s. 6/50 65.0mg 
b c08628 680.mg n.s.s. 0/50 65.0mg 
1615 c08628 127.mg n.s.s. 23/50 59.4mg 
a c08628 183.mg n.s.s. 12/50 59.4mg 
b c08628 315.mg n.s.s. 6/50 59.4mg 
1616 c08628 120.mg n.s.s. 0/50 25.Omg 
 
a c08628 41.9mg n.s.s. 45/50 25.0mg 
b c08628 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/50 25.0mg 
1617 cOU628 27.7mg n.s.s. 44/50 20.0mg 
a cOU628 254.mg n.s.s. 0/50 20.0mg 
 
15/50 130.ng 15/50 
3/50 (130.mg 1/50) 
1/50 130.mg 1/50 
18/50 119.mg 26/50 
 
5/50 119.mg 17/50 
5/50 119.mg 6/50 
1/50 49.5mg 5/50 
44/50 49.5mg 44/50 
 
3/50 49.5mg 0/50 
43/50 40.0mg 40/50 
 
0/50 40.0mg 1/50 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
tun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
thy:cca,ccr. S 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
MALATHION (c00215 is NCI TR# 24; c00216 is NCI TR# 192) 121-75-5 
1618 c00215 4.12gm n.s.s. 1/10 884.mg 5/50 1.759m 5/50 
a c00215 7.80gm n.s.s. 0/10 884.mg 0/50 1.75gm 2/50 
b c00215 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/10 884.mg 0/50 1.75gm 0/50 
1619 c00215 4.179m n.s.s. 0/10 816.mg 0/50 1.62gm 6/50 
a c00215 1.66gm n.s.s. 3/10 816.mg 9/50 1.62gm 19/50 
b c00215 1.74gm n.s.s. 2/10 816.mg 7/50 1.629m 17/50 
c c00215 7.809m n.s.s. 0/10 816.mg 1/50 1.62gm 1/50 
1620 c00216 82.4mg n.s.s. 43/50 97.2mg 45/50 194.mg 45/50 
a c00216 1.16gm n.s.s. 2/50 97.2mg 0/50 194.mg 1/50 
1621 c00216 64.8mg 587.mg 2/50 78.5mg 11/50 157.mg 6/49 
a c00216 32.0mg 340.mg 32/50 78.5mg 30/50 157.mg 26/49 
b c00216 101.mg n.s.s. 0/50 78.5mg 2/50 157.mg 0/49 
1622 c00215 175.mg n.s.s. 7/15 166.mg 28/50 299.mg 32/50 
a c00215 1.179m n.s.s. 0/15 166.mg 0/50 299.mg 3/50 
1623 c00215 1.029m n.s.s. 0/55p 166.mg 0/50 299.mg 4/50 
1624 c00215 139.mg n.s.s. 4/15 133.mg 23/50 239.mg 25/50 
a c00215 851.mg n.s.s. 0/15 133.mg 2/50 239.mg 1/50 
MALEIC HYDRAZIDE (1,2-dihydro-3,6-pyridazinedione) 123-33-1 
1625 1193 382.mg n.s.s. 0/17 414.mg 1/16 
a 1193 431.mg n.s.s. 1/17 414.mg 1/16 
b 1193 205.mg n.s.s. 2/17 414.mg 4/16 
1626 1193 302.mg n.s.s. 1/18 385.mg 2/17 
a 1193 721.mg n.s.s. 2/18 385.mg 0/17 
b 1193 280.mg n.s.s. 3/18 385.mg 3/17 
1627 1193 774.mg n.s.s. 0/16 414.mg 0/17 
 
a 1193 774.mg n.s.s. 0/16 414.mg 0/17 
b 1193 774.mg n.s.s. 0/16 414.mg 0/17 
1628 1193 259.mg n.s.s. 0/16 385.mg 2/16 
a 1193 678.mg n.s.s. 0/16 385.mg 0/16 
b 1193 205.mg n.s.s. 0/16 385.mg 3/16 
1629 1109 1.339m n.s.s. 0/9 500.mg 0/14 
a 1109 393.mg n.s.s. 2/9 500.mg 4/14 
1630 1109 1.07gm n.s.s. 0/8 400.mg 0/14 
 
a 1109 467.mg n.s.s. 1/8 400.mg 2/14 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:&/a,a/c. 
 
S 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:s/a,s/c. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
S 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
thy:fca,fcc. S 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Inns;ntis, 1968/1969 
Barnos;natu, 180,62-64; 1957 
 
MANGANESE ETHYLENEBISTHIOCARBAMATE 
1631 1214 25.6mg n.s.s. 1/17 
 
a 1214 42.7mg n.s.s. 0/17 
b 1214 15.5mg n.s.s. 2/17 
1632 1214 11.5mg n.s.s. 2/18 
a 1214 39.7mg n.s.s. 1/18 
b 1214 12.4mg n.s.s. 3/18 
1633 1214 40.3m9 n.s.s. 0/16 
 
a 1214 40.3mg n.s.s. 0/16 
b 1214 40.3mg n.s.s. 0/16 
1634 1214 20.9mg n.s.s. 0/16 
a 1214 20.9mg n.s.s. 0/16 
b 1214 15.3mg n.s.s. 0/16 
1635 1426 109.mg n.s.s. 0/46 
a 1426 36.3mg n.s.s. 1/46 
 
(maneb) 12427-38-2 
21.6mg 1/18 
21.6mg 0/18 
21.6mg 3/18 
20.0mg 4/18 
20.0mg 0/18 
20.0mg 4/18 
21.6mg 0/17 
21.6mg 0/17 
21.6mg 0/17 
20.0mg 1/18 
20.0Om 1/18 
20.0mg 2/18 
$8.0mg 0/6 
88.0mg 2/6 
 
Inn.s;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
Andrianova;vpit,29,71 -74;1970 
 
167 
 
168 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Nol 
NANNITOL NITROGEN MUSTARD 
 
1636 R m b46 ivJ tba mix 12.24 es 
 
a R m b46 ivJ tba *al 12.24 es 
b R * b46 ivJ tba ben 12.24 ma 
NELPHALAN 
 
1637 N f swi ipJ Lun mix 26w79 a 
 
a N f swi ipJ mgL ad. 26w79 a 
b M f swi ipJ --- lys 2679e 
c N f swi ipJ adr fbs 26w79 a 
d N f swi ipJ liv lys 26w79 a 
a N f swi ipJ tba mix 26w79 a 
f N f sai ipJ tba mal 26w79 a 
g N f swi ipJ tba ban 26w79 a 
1638 N a swi ipJ lun mix 26w77 a 
 
a Na swi ipj ... lys 26w77? 
 
b N a swi ipJ liv mix 26w77 a 
c N a swi ipj tba mix 26w77 a 
d N a swi ipJ tba mel 26w?7 a 
a N a swi ipJ tba ben 26w77 a 
1639 R f cdr ipJ per sar 26w78 a 
a R f cdr ipJ pan mdc 26w78 a 
b R f cdr ipJ lun a/a 26w78 
c R f cdr ipj ... Lys 26w78 
 
d R f cdr ipJ liv tum 26w78 a 
* R f cdr ipj tba mal 26w8 a 
f R f cdr ipj tba mix 26w78 a 
g R f cdr ipj tba ban 26w8 a 
1640 R a cdr ipj per mix 26w67 a 
 
a R m cdr ipj - Lys 26w67 
 
b R a cdr ipJ liv tum 26w67 a 
c R a cdr ipJ tba mix 26w67 a 
d R a cdr ipJ tba maL 26w67 a 
* R m cdr ipJ tba ban 26w67a 
dl -NENTHOL 
 
1641 N f b6c eat TBA NXB 24m24 
 
a N f b6c eat liv NXB 24m24 
b N f b6c oat lun NXB 24m24 
1642 N a b6c oat TBA NXB 24a24 
 
a N a b6c eat liv NXB 24.24 
b N * b6c st lun NXB 2424 
1643 R f f 34 mat TSA NXB 24.24 
 
a R f f34 mat liv NXB 24.24 
1644 R a f 34 mat TBA NXB 24m24 
 
a R a f34 mat liv NXS 24.24 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
)tes 
 
bO0ng. . .. :1ug . 10. :100. l. : g . :10. :100.. : 9 :10 
 
3.11mg P<.5 
3.85mg P<.5 
23.5mg P<.9 
 
100n.. :. .ug. :10. :100.. la : g. : 10. :100. :19. :10 
 
.165mg * P<.007 + 
.617mg * P<.004 
.702mg * P<.06 
1.26mg * P<.03 
no dre P-1. 
 
51.Oug * P<.0005 
.104mg * P<.002 
.365mg * P<.08 
 
+ . 137mg P<.005 + 
 
.302mg P<.02 + 
no dre P-1. 
 
91.4ug P<.02 
.115mg P<.02 
2.02mg P<.8 
 
.135mg * P<.0005+ 
1.44mg * P<.02 
1.44mg * P<.02 
1.54mg * P<.09 
no dre P.1. 
 
78.1ug * P<.0005 
.106mg * P<.07 
no dre Pal. 
 
71.9ug P<.0005+ 
.359mg P<.003 
no drt P-1. 
 
23.6ug P<.0005 
47.Oug P<.0005 
.493mg P<.5 
 
O0ng .. :. .ug. :10. :100. lg : . . :10. :100... :1 :10 
 
no dre P-1. - 
5.199m * P<.3 
3.17gm * P<.06 
 
2.75gm * P<.7 - 
1.96gm * P<.3 
no drt P-1. 
 
no dre Pal. - 
no drt P.1. 
 
1.419m * P<.7 - 
5.69gm * P<.6 
 
NER.25 b Ong..:. . lug. :10 ..... : 100. : g . 10 : 10 10 
 
1645 R f nis gv moa tum 5252 ar .> no d 
2-NERCAPTOBENZOTHIAZOLE 100ng..:.. lug.... . . ..10 ..... :1:0100 .. . . :10 : 100 : . : 10 
 
1646 N f b6a orl Lun ada 76w76 *vx .> no dre 
 
a N f b6a orL liv hpt 76w76 avx no drt 
b N f b6a orl tba mix 76w76 *vx no dre 
1647 N a b6a orl lun ado 76w76 *vx .> no drt 
 
a N a b6m orl liv hpt 76w76 *vx no dte 
b N a b6a orl tba mix 76w76 *vx 105.mg 
1648 N f b6c orl Lun ad. 76w76 *vx .> 283dr 
 
a N f b6c orL liv hpt 76w76 *vx no d3m 
b N f b6c orl tba mix 76w76 *vx 283mg 
1649 N a b6c orl liv hpt 76w76 *vx . 56.2mg 
 
a N a b6c orl lun ado 7kw76 *vx 120m9 
b N a b6c orl tba mix 76w76 avx 17.0mg 
 
2.NERCAPTOBENZOTHIAZOLE, ZINC 1 Ong. ... lug.... : 110 :. 100.. mg :_ . 10 . :100 . nog : r10 
1650 N f b6a orl Lun ado 76w76 *vx .> no dre 
 
a N f b6a orl liv hpt 76w76 *vx no dre 
b N f b6s orl tba mix 76w76 *vx no dre 
1651 N m b6a orl lun ado 76w76 *vx .> no drt 
 
a N a b6a orL liv hpt 76w76 *vx no dre 
b N m b6a orl tba mix 76w76 evx no dre 
1652 N f b6c orl Liv hpt 76w76 *vx .> no drt 
 
a N f b6c orl lun mix 76w76 *vx no dtr 
b N f b6c orL tba mix 76w76 *vx 2.793 g 
1653 N m b6c orl liv hpt 76w76 *vx . 7. 388g 
 
a N m b6c orl lun ado 76w76 *vx 2.75gm 
b N a b6c orl tba mix 76w76 *vx 319mg 
 
6-NERCAPTPURIHNE 1 O0ng . : 1lug. :10. :100." mg :. . :100 . : g . 10 
 
1654 R m b46 ivi tba mix 12m24 ms .> 58.1mg 
 
PI. -. 
 
P lI. - 
Ps 1. 
P-1. 
P-1. 
P-1. 
P<.5 
P<.3 
 
PI. 1. - 
 
P<.3 - 
P<.02 - 
P<.1 I 
 
P<. 0005- 
 
P-I. - 
P-I. - 
P-1. - 
P-1. - 
P-1. - 
P-I. - 
P-I. - 
Pal. - 
P<.3 - 
P<. 004 - 
P<.3 - 
P<. 002 - 
 
P<.9 9 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lnc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
MANNITOL NITROGEN MUSTARD (DegranoL) 576-68-1 
 
1636 1017 .583mg n.s.s. 7/65 .286mg 6/37 
a 1017 .706mg n.s.s. 4/65 .286"9 4/37 
b 1017 1.05mg n.s.s. 3/65 .286n9 2/37 
 
MELPHALAN (L-sarcoLysin) 148-82-3 
 
1637 1336m 61.7ug 4.11mg 20/154 .106mg 
* 1336m .152mg 10.1mg 0/154 .106mg 
b 1336m .154mg n.s.s. 3/154 .106mg 
c 1336m .204mg n.s.s. 0/154 .106mg 
d 1336m 97.5ug n.s.s. 1/154 .106mg 
* 1336m 23.3ug .167mg 42/154 .106mg 
f 1336m 43.4ug .617mg 29/154 .106mg 
9 1336m .100mg n.s.s. 13/154 .106mg 
1638 1336m 54.6ug 1.57mg 9/101 .108mg 
 
a 1336m 94.4ug n.s.s. 2/101 .108mg 
b 1336m .341mg n.s.s. 2/101 .108mg 
c 1336m 36.2ug n.s.s. 28/101 .108mg 
d 1336m 44.9ug n.a.s. 19/101 .108mg 
* 1336m .140mg n.s.s. 9/101 .108m9 
1639 1336n 63.2ug .371mg 0/182 .129mg 
a 1336n .234mg n.s.s. 0/182 .129mg 
b 1336n .234mg n.s.s. 0/182 .129mg 
c 1336n .236mg n.s.s. 1/182 .129mg 
d 1336n .112mg n.s.s. 0/182 .129mg 
 
a 1336n 35.2ug .310mg 44/182 .129mg 
f 1336n 33.1ug n.s.s. 103/182 .129mg 
9 1336n .319mg n.s.s. 59/182 .129mg 
1640 1336n 32.Oug .212mg 0/177 .149mg 
 
a 1336n 88.1ug 4.84mg 0/177 .149mg 
b 1336n .229mg n.s.s. 0/177 .149mg 
c 1336n 9.76ug 77.1ug 59/177 .149mg 
d 1336n 20.7ug .171mg 32/177 .149mg 
 
a 1336n 74.1ug n.s.s. 27/177 .149mg 
 
6/15 
1/15 
0/15 
0/15 
0/15 
10/15 
7/15 
3/15 
9/28 
4/28 
0/28 
15/28 
12/28 
3/28 
8/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
13/16 
 
.212mg 
.212mg 
.212mg 
.212mg 
.212mg 
.212mg 
.212mg 
.212mg 
 
.304mg 
.304mg 
.304mg 
.304mg 
.304mg 
.304mg 
 
14/16 .304mg 
 
1/16 .304mg 
8/18 
2/18 
0/18 
16/18 
12/18 
4/18 
 
dl-MENTHOL (NCI uses CAS# 89-78-1) 15356-70-4 
 
1641 c5OOOO 723.mg n.s.s. 30/50 257.mg 20/50 
 
a c5OOOO 1.549a n.s.s. 1/50 257.mg 3/50 
b c5OOOO 1.22gm n..s.. 1/50 257.mg 3/50 
1642 c5OOOO 357.mg n.s.s. 29/50 238.mg 28/50 
a c50000 601.mg n.s.s. 8/50 238.mg 8/50 
b c5OOOO 1.109m n.s.s. 6/50 238.mg 7/50 
1643 c5OOOO 462.mg n.s.s. 41/50 184.mg 36/50 
a c5OOOO 2.119m n.s.s. 1/50 184.mg 1/50 
1644 c5OOOO 200.mg n.s.s. 32/50 147.mg 41/50 
a c5OOOO 932.mg n.s.s. 1/50 147.mg 3/50 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
Brkly Code 
 
Sch.ahl ;arzn,20, 1461-1467;1970 
Skipp*r;srfr;1976/Weisburger 1977/Projoan pers.com. 
 
3/8 
1/8 
2/8 
1/8 
0/8 
7/8 
5/8 
2/8 
 
1/6 
1/6 
1/6 
1/6 
0/6 
3/6 
4/6 
1/6 
 
515.mg 24/50 
515.mg 3/50 
515.m9 5/50 
475.mg 33/50 
475.mg 14/50 
475.mg 6/50 
368.mg 32/50 
368.mg 1/50 
294.mg 37/50 
294.mg 2/50 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
MER-25 67-98-1 
 
1645 481 13.9mg n.s.s. 0/9 12.2mg 0/22 
2-NERCAPTOBENZOTHIAZOLE (Captax, rotax) 149-30-4 
1646 1302 49.3mg n.s.s. 1/17 44.3mg 1/17 
 
a 1302 82.8mg n.s.s. 0/17 44.3mg 0/17 
b 1302 54.8mg n.s.s. 2/17 44.3mg 1/17 
1647 1302 38.5mg n.s.s. 2/18 41.2mg 2/18 
 
a 1302 48.7mg n.s.s. 1/18 41.2mg 1/18 
b 1302 21.0mg n.s.s. 3/18 41.2mg 5/18 
1648 1302 46.1mg n.s.s. 0/16 44.3mg 1/18 
 
* 1302 87.7mg n.s.s. 0/16 44.3mg 0/18 
b 1302 46.1mg n.a.s. 0/16 44.3mg 1/18 
1649 1302 19.3mg n.s.s. 0/16 41.2mg 4/17 
 
a 1302 29.5mg n.a.s. 0/16 41.2mg 2/17 
b 1302 7.99mg 44.6mg 0/16 41.2mg 10/17 
2-MERCAPTOBENZOTHIAZOLE, ZINC (zetax) 155-04-4 
 
1650 1300 515.mg n.s.s. 1/17 462.mg 1/17 
 
a 1300 864.mg n.s.s. 0/17 462.mg 0/17 
b 1300 572.mg n.s.s. 2/17 462.mg 1/17 
1651 1300 564.mg n.a.s. 2/18 430.mg 1/18 
a 1300 851.mg n.s.s. 1/18 430.mg 0/18 
b 1300 603.mg n.s.s. 3/18 430.mg 1/18 
1652 1300 864.mg n.s.s. 0/16 462.mg 0/17 
 
a 1300 864.mg n.a.s. 0/16 462.mg 0/17 
b 1300 454.mg n.s.s. 0/16 462.mg 1/17 
1653 1300 157.mg 2.37gm 0/16 430.mg 6/18 
 
a 1300 448.mg n.s.s. 0/16 430.mg 1/18 
b 1300 136.mg 1.309m 0/16 430.mg 7/18 
 
6-MERCAPTOPURINE 50-44-2 
 
1654 1017 2.51mg n.s.s. 7/65 1.18mg 3/25 
 
Shay;mpoc,305-318;1962 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
Innos;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
Schmahl ;arzn,20, 1461-1467;1970 
 
169 
 
170 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Nol 
MERCURIC CHLORIDE 
 
1655 N f cdl wet --- lkm 27.27 e 
a e f cdl mt lun tu 27m27 e 
b N f cdl wet tbe mix 27m27 e 
c N f cdl wet tbe meL 27m27 e 
1656 M m cdl wet lun tum 28m28 e 
e M m cdl wt tba mix 28m28 e 
b M * cdl wttb eml 28m28 e 
 
MERCURY (II) ACETATE 
 
1657 M f b6a orl Liv hpt 76w76 evx 
a M f b6a orl Lun ade 76w76 evx 
b M f b6a orl tba mix 76w76 evx 
1658 M m b6e orl lun ide 76w76 evx 
a M m b6e orl liv hpt 76w76 evx 
b M m b6a orl tbe mix 76w76 evx 
1659 M f b6c orl liv hpt 76w76 evx 
a M f b6c orl lun ode 76w76 evx 
b M f b6c orl tbe mix 76w76 qvx 
1660 M m b6c orl lun ade 76w76 dvx 
a M m b6c orl liv hpt 76w76 evx 
b M m b6c orl tbe mix 76w76 evx 
MERCURYMETHYLCHLORIDE 
 
1661 M f cdl wet lun tum 33m35 esv 
a M f cdl wat tbe mix 33m35 eav 
b M f cdl wat tbe mel 33e35 sav 
1662 M m cdl wat lun tum 31m37 eav 
a M m cdl wet tbe mix 31037 msv 
b M m cdl wat tbe mal 31m37 esv 
MESTRANOL** 
 
1663 M f cfl et liv hct 78w78 or 
1664 M m cfl met Liv hct 78w78 or 
1665 M f crf met moi tum 24m24 r 
1666 M f r3m eat mao tum 24m24 r 
 
TD50 2Zailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
tes 
 
ioong .. : ug. : 10. :100. :. 1g : 100... :..g10 
 
3.58mg 
no dre 
2.42mg 
5.55mg 
11.2mg 
3.20mg 
no dre 
o00ng .. :.1lug. :10. :100.. g :. . :10. :100.. : . :10 
 
K .> no drm 
K no dre 
K no drm 
 
no dre 
no dre 
no dri 
21.7mg 
K 21.7mg 
K 10.5mg 
K . ^ 9.24mg 
 
no drm 
9.24mg 
 
P<. 009 - 
P-1. _ 
P<.05 - 
P<.08 - 
P<.5 - 
P<.2 - 
P-I. 1 
 
P-I. . 
P-I. 1 
 
P-I. _ 
P-I. _ 
P-1. _ 
P-1. _ 
P<.3 - 
P<.3 - 
P<.2 - 
P<.1 I 
 
P-1. - 
P<.1 I 
 
OOng..:..lug. 10. 100. 1mg. : g :10 . :100.... :Ig : 10 ..... :..I 
 
no dre P-1. 
2.13mg \ P<.5 
no dre Pal. 
no dre P-I. 
5.63mg * P<.8 
f 9.64mg * P<.6 
lOOng. . :lug. :10. :100. g :..g :10. :100.. : g :10 
 
6.27mg * P<.7 
1.81mg * P<.5 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
METEPA 1Ong .. : ..lug. 10 . :mg . 10. :100... : g :10 
 
1667 R m she gav --- lyk 60w60 * . 4.46mg * P<.02 + 
 
METHIMAZOLE 1Ong. .. . : ug . 10. :100. 1m : g . :10. :100. :Ig . :10 
 
1668 R f hrl met thy foe 24m24 ms . + . 1.57mg Z P<.0005+ 
 
e R f hrl met thy fdc 24m24 ms 9.47mg Z P<.007 + 
1669 R m hrl met thy foa 24m24 ms . + . .900mg Z P<.0005+ 
a R m hrl met thy fdc 24m24 ms 37.6mg * P<.05 + 
 
METHOTREXATE lOOng. ... lug. 1 :10 . :100.. g : . 1. :10 . :100.. : . :10 
 
1670 H f syg mat liv hpe 23m24 s .> 51.1mg * P<.2 - 
 
a H f syg met liv mix 23m24 as 167.mg * P<.8 
b H f syg met lun tum 23m24 ms no dre P-1. 
 
c H f syg mat tba mix 23m24 ms no dre P-1. - 
1671 H N syg mt liv tum 25m27 s .> no dre P-1. - 
 
e H m syg met lun tum 25m27 as no dre P-1. 
 
b H m syg met tbe mix 25m27 ms no dre P.1. - 
1672 M f swl met liv hpc 28m28 .> 65.2mg * P<.4 - 
a M f saw mat lun mix 28m28 no dre P.1. 
 
b M f saw mat tbe mix 28m28 48.0mg * P<. - 
1673 m swl met liv hem 27m28 a .> no dre P.1. 
 
a M * saw met lun mix 27m28 e no dre P-1. 
b M * saw mat tba mix 27m28 e no drm P-1. 
1674 R m b46 ivj tba ben 12m24 ms . .409mg P<.1 
 
e R m b46 ilv tbe mix 12m24 as .330mg P<.2 - 
b R * b46 ivj tba mel 12m24 ms 2.96mg P<.8 - 
1675 R f ads ipj tbe mel 24m24 * .> no dre P-1. - 
1676 R a ade ipj liv hem 24m24 * .> no dri P-1. 
 
e R m sde ipj tbe mel 24m24 * no dre P-I. - 
 
2-METHOXY-3-AMINODIBENZOFURAN 1Ong. . ..ug :. 10 . 100.. 1m :g. 10 . 100.. : 1 . 10 
 
1677 R f fis mat ubl mix 75w75 * . + . 25.7mg 
 
a R f fis mat ubl tcc 75w75 * 43.9mg 
b R f fle eat suc sqc 75w75 * 43.9mg 
c R f fis mat mgl mdc 75w75 * 205.mg 
d R f fis mat liv tum 75w75 * no dre 
e R f fis met tbe mel 75w75 * 33.1mg 
1678 R i fis met ubl mix 75w75 * . + . 26.4mg 
a R m fis mat ubl tcc 75w75 * 78.2mg 
b R o fis mat suc sqc 75w75 * 78.2mg 
c R i fis mat liv tum 75w75 * no dre 
d R o fls met tbe mel 75w75 * 78.2mg 
 
P<.002 + 
P<.02 + 
P<.02 + 
P<.3 + 
P-I. 
 
P<.005 
 
P<.005 + 
P<.09 + 
P<. 09 + 
P-I. 
 
P<.09 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lIne 2Dose 2Inc 
 
MERCURIC CHLORIDE 7487-94-7 
 
1655 1395 1.55mg 105.mg 3/47 
a 1395 3.36mg n.s.s. 9/47 
b 1395 .973mg n.s.s. 14/47 
c 1395 1.95mg n.s.s. 4/47 
1656 1395 2.25mg n.s.s. 5/38 
a 1395 1.09mg n.s.s. 11/38 
b 1395 7.43mg n.s.s. 2/38 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
1.00mg 11/41 
1.00mg 7/41 
1.00mg 21/41 
1.00mg 9/41 
.833mg 9/48 
.833mg 21/48 
.833mg 1/48 
 
Brkly Code 
 
Schroeder; Jnut, 105,452-458;1975 
 
MERCURY (II) ACETATE (phenyltercuric acetate) 62-38-4 
1657 1286 6.34mg n.s.s. 0/17 3.39mg 0/17 
 
a 1286 6.34mg n.s.s. 1/17 3.39mg 0/17 
b 1286 6.34mg n.s.s. 2/17 3.39mg 0/17 
1658 1286 3.89mg n.s.s. 2/18 3.16mg 1/17 
a 1286 5.91mg n.s.s. 1/18 3.16mg 0/17 
b 1286 3.04mg n.s.s. 3/18 3.16mg 2/17 
1659 1286 3.53mg n.s.s. 0/16 3.39mg 1/18 
a 1286 3.53mg n.s.s. 0/16 3.39mg 1/18 
b 1286 2.59mg n.s.s. 0/16 3.39mg 2/18 
1660 1286 2.27mg n.s.s. 0/16 3.16mg 2/17 
a 1286 5.91mg n.s.s. 0/16 3.16mg 0/17 
b 1286 2.27mg n.s.s. 0/16 3.16mg 2/17 
 
MERCURYMETHYLCHLORIDE (mthyL.ercuric acetate) 115-09-3 
 
1661 1395 3.28mg n.s.s. 9/47 
 
a 1395 .446mg n.s.s. 14/47 
b 1395 4.64mg n.s.s. 4/47 
1662 1395 1.57mg n.s.a. 5/38 
a 1395 .727mg n.s.s. 11/38 
b 1395 1.53m9 n.s.s. 2/38 
 
.200mg 
.200mg 
.200mg 
.167mg 
.167mg 
.167mg 
 
3/31 .253mg 
12/31 (.253mg 
 
2/31 .253mg 
4/25 .208mg 
9/25 .208mg 
 
3/25 .208mg 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
Schroeder; Jnut, 105,452-458;1975 
 
3/40 
4/40) 
0/40 
3/32 
10/32 
2/32 
 
MESTRANOL** 72-33-3 
 
1663 1453 .551mg n.s.s. 1/40 
1664 1453 .335mg n.s.s. 2/40 
1665 1174 60.3ug n.s.s. 145/160 
1666 1174 12.2ug n.s.s. 12/15 
METEPA 57-39-6 
 
1667 179 1.35mg n.s.s. 0/20 
METHIMAZOLE 60-56-0 
 
1668 180 .834mg 3.46mg 0/50 
a 180 2.86mg 150.mg 0/50 
1669 180 .500m9 1.85mg 1/50 
a 180 11.5mg n.s.s. 1/50 
 
5. OOug 
5. OOug 
.130mg 
13.Oug 
 
0/40 30.Oug 
4/40 30.Oug 
30/34 
26/40 
 
1/40 60.Oug 1/39 .200mg 1/39 
4/40 60.Oug 0/40 .200mg 5/40 
 
.625mg 0/20 2.50mg 3/20 
 
.250mg 
.250mg 
.200mg 
.200mg 
 
0/25 1.50mg 
0/25 1.50mg 
1/25 1.20mg 
0/25 1.20mg 
 
Burrows; j txe,3,219-230;1977 
RudaL i ;reec, 16,425-429;1971 
 
Geines;bwho,34,317-320; 1966 
 
14/25 (9.00mg 
3/25 (9.00mg 
17/25 (7.20mg 
 
2/25 7.20mg 
 
12/25) 
2/25) 
5/25) 
3/25 
 
Owen;fctx, 11,649-653; 1973 
 
METHOTREXATE 59-05-2 
 
1670 1324 8.32mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1324 9.14mg n.s.s. 
b 1324 1.30mg n.s.s. 
c 1324 6.01mg n.s.s. 
1671 1324 1.38mg n.s.s. 
a 1324 1.38mg n.s.s. 
b 1324 12.8mg n.s.s. 
1672 1324 10.6mg n.s.s. 
a 1324 3.57mg n.s.s. 
b 1324 1.35mg n.s.s. 
1673 1324 3.20mg n.s.s. 
a 1324 3.45mg n.s.s. 
b 1324 1.99mg n.s.s. 
1674 1017 .111mg n.s.s. 
a 1017 90.2ug n.s.s. 
b 1017 .181mg n.a.s. 
1675 1134 .406mg n.s.s. 
1676 1134 .552mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1134 .552mg n.s.s. 
 
0/49 
1/49 
0/49 
7/49 
0/49 
0/49 
8/49 
0/70 
14/70 
34/70 
6/70 
13/70 
29/70 
 
3/65 
7/65 
4/65 
3/33 
1/36 
1/36 
 
.261mg 
.261mg 
.261mg 
.261mg 
.230mg 
.230mg 
.230mg 
.195mg 
.195mg 
.195mg 
. 180m 
. 180mg 
. 180m 
71 .4ug 
71 .4ug 
71 .4ug 
89.3ug 
89.3ug 
89.3ug 
 
2-METHOXY-3-AMIODIBEENZOFURAN 5834-17-3 
1677 183n 10.2mg 115.mg 0/12 50.0mg 
a 183n 15.0mg n.s.s. 0/12 50.0mg 
b 183n 15.0mg n.s.s. 0/12 50.0mg 
c 183n 33.3mg n..sa. 0/12 50.0mg 
d 183n 64.3mg n.s.s. 0/12 50.0mg 
 
a 183n 12.3mg 265.mg 0/12 50.0mg 
1678 183n 9.84mg 212.mg 0/12 40.0mg 
a 183n 19.2mg n.s.s. 0/12 40.0mg 
b 183n 19.2mg n.s.s. 0/12 40.0mg 
c 183n 51.4mg n.s.s. 0/12 40.0mg 
d 183n 19.2mg n.s.s. 0/12 40.0mg 
 
0/42 .523mg 
0/42 .523mg 
0/42 .523mg 
4/42 .523m9 
0/42 .460mg 
0/42 .460m" 
 
1/42 .460mg 
0/36 .325mg 
8/36 .325mg 
21/36 .325mg 
 
2/36 .300mg 
6/36 .300mg 
15/36 .300mg 
4/26 
6/26 
2/26 
1/31 
0/30 
0/30 
 
0/42 1. 05mg 
0/42 1.05mg 
0/42 1.05mg 
2/42 1.05mg 
0/42 .920mg 
0/42 .920mg 
0/42 .920mg 
0/36 .520mg 
8/36 .520mg 
13/36 .520mg 
 
6/36 .480mg 
3/36 .480mg 
17/36 .480mg 
 
1/39 
1/39 
0/39 
3/39 
0/40 
0/40 
1/40 
 
1/42 .650mg 0/48 
6/42 .650mg 8/48 
19/42 .650mg 26/48 
 
1/42 (.600mg 0/48) 
9/42 .600mg 6/48 
18/42 .600mg 15/48 
 
Rust ie;txap,26,329-338;1973 
Schaht ;arzn,20, 1461-1467;1970 
 
SchmahL ;zkko,86,77-84; 1976 
 
6/12 
4/12 
4/12 
1/12 
0/12 
5/12 
5/12 
2/12 
2/12 
0/12 
2/12 
 
Redomaki ;jnci ,39,1069-1080;1967 
 
171 
 
172 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
1679 R f ada eat ubl mix 75w75 a 
 
a R f ada nat auc sqc 75075 a 
b R f ads eat *gl adc 75w75 a 
c R f sda eat ubl tcc 75w75 a 
d R f sda eat liv tur 75w75 a 
* R f sda eat tba mel 75w75 a 
1680 R m ads eat kid sqc 75w75 a 
 
a R u da eat ubl tpp 75w75 e 
b R m ads eat liv tun 75w75 a 
c R m sda eat tba mal 75w75 a 
1681 R f wis eat ubl mix 75w75 a 
 
a R f wis eat egl adc 75w75 a 
b R f winset ubl tcc 75075 
 
c R f wis eat liv cys 75w75 a 
d R f wi eat tba le 75w75 e 
1682 R m wis eat ubl mix 84w84 a 
 
a R * wis eat tba al 4w84 e 
b R wis set tbebn 84w4e 
1683 R f wis eat ubL mix 75w75 a 
 
a R m wis eat auc sqc 75w75 a 
b R * wis aat ubl tcc 75w75 
 
c R * wis eat kid sqc 75075 a 
d R f wis eat Liv tur 75w75 a 
* R f ia seat tba mel 75w75 a 
 
TD50 2Thilpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
43.9mg P<. 02 + 
61.9mg P<.04 + 
61.9mg P<.04 + 
205.mg P<.3 + 
no dre P.1. 
 
25.7mg P<.002 
 
164.mg P<.3 + 
164.mg P<.3 + 
no dre P.I. 
 
78.2mg P<. 09 
 
43.9mg P<. 02 + 
97.7mg P<.09 + 
97.7mg P<. 09 + 
205.mg P<. 3 
 
43.9mg P<.02 
 
noTD50 P<.004 + 
noTD50 P<.004 + 
53.3mg P<.07 
 
35.2mg P<.02 + 
78.2mg P<.09 + 
78.2mg P<.09 + 
164.m9 P<.3 + 
no dre Pal. 
 
26.4mg P<.005 
 
NETHOXYCHLOR 10Ong.. . .Iug.. : 10. : 100. :1mg. 10.. : 100 ..I 10 
 
1684 N f b6c eat TBA NXB 78v92 v > no dre 
 
a N f b6c eat liv NXB 78w92 v no dre 
b N f b6c eat lun NXB 78w92 v no dre 
1685 N a b6c eat TBA NXB 78w91 v :> no dre 
 
a N a b6c at liv NXB 78w9I v no dre 
b N m b6c eat lun NXB 78w9l v no dre 
1686 R f oem eat TBA NXB 18626 dv > no dre 
 
a R f oem eat Liv NXB 18626 dv no dre 
1687 f f ose eat liv tum 27m27 > no dre 
 
a R f oam eat tba mix 27m27 no dre 
1688 R f osm eat liv tun 24m24 > no dre 
 
a R f oem eat tbe ben 24m24 no dre 
b R f oem eat tbe nat 24m24 no dre 
1689 R m oam eat TBA NXB 18m26 dv :> no dre 
 
a R f oam eat liv NXB 18626 dv no dre 
1690 R m oem set liv tun 27m27 > no dre 
 
a R f osa eat tba mix 27m27 234.mg 
1691 R * ose et liv tum 24a24 > no dre 
 
a R f osa eat tbe ben 24m24 31.8mg 
b R n ose eat tba mal 24e24 no dre 
 
NETHOXYPHENYLACETIC ACID lOng..: ..ug. :10. :100. 1. g :10. :100.g . : :10 
 
1692 N f b6a orl lun ade 76076 ovx > 236.mg 
 
a N f b6a orl liv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b N f b6a orl tbe mix 76w76 evx 227.mg 
1693 N o b6a orl lun ada 76w76 *vx > 157.mg 
 
a N m b6a orl liv hpt 76w76 * vx 3.62gm 
b N * b6a orl tbe mix 76w76 evx 139.mg 
1694 N f b6c orl lun ade 76w76 evx > 244.mg 
 
a N f b6c orl liv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b N f b6c orl tba mix 76w76 evx 157.mg 
1695 N a b6c orl ... rts 7676 *vx + 82.1mg 
 
a N * b6c orl liv hpt 76w76 evx 227.mg 
b N a b6c orl lun mix 76w76 oevx no dre 
c N * b6c orl tba mix 76v76 evx 54.2mg 
 
NETHYL CARBAZATE 1 0Ong. . u. :u 10 .. :100. g :10. :100.. g :.:10 
 
1696 R f wis eat tba tum 24m24 > no dre 
1697 R is eat tbe tum 24m24 > no dre 
 
1-NETHYL.1,4-DIHYDRO-7-.12-(5-NITROFURYL)VINYLI- 4-OXO-1,8-NAPHTHYRfIDINE-3-CARBOXYLATE, POTASSIUN .... .Ig . : 10 
 
1698 N b icr et lun ade 54w54 a . + . 8.03mg 
 
a N b icr eat for aqc 54w54 a 10.3m9 
 
b N b icr eat lun ccar 5454 a 21.9mg 
c N b icr eat thi lyk 54v54 s 26.5mg 
 
N-NETRYL.NI4.DINITROSOANILINE bOng..:. .Iug. :10. :100. 1m : g . : 10. :100.. :. :10 
 
1699 R m cbr ipj pec mix 26v86 e .> 1.30mg 
 
a R f cbr ipj liv hpt 26w86 e 1.50mg 
 
N-NETHYLN -FORNYLNYDRAZINE 
 
1700 H f syg wet ... h 2424 e 
 
a H f syg wvt Liv mix 2424 e 
 
Ong. . . : _ . ..10 . :100. g : . . : 10. :100 .. :. : 10 
 
. + . 4.71 mg P<.0005+ 
 
11.3mg P<.0005+ 
 
PMI. - 
P-I. 
 
P-I1. - 
P-I1. - 
 
P-I. - 
P-I. - 
P-I. - 
 
P<.1 - 
 
P<.08- 
P-1. _ 
P<.5 1 - 
 
P<.3 _ 
 
P-1. - 
P<.4 - 
P<.3 - 
P-I. _ 
 
P<.05 - 
P<. 009 - 
P<.2 - 
P-I. _ 
P<. 002 - 
 
P-I. _ 
P-I. _ 
 
P<.0005+ 
P<. 002 + 
P<.03 + 
P<.OS + 
 
P<.2 + 
P<.3 - 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
183. 15.0mg n.s.s. 
183. 18.6mg n.s.s. 
183. 18.6mg n.s.s. 
183. 33.3mg n.s.s. 
183. 64.3mg n.s.s. 
183. 10.2mg 115.39 
183. 26.6mg n.s.s. 
183. 26.6mg n.s.s. 
183. 51.4mg n.s.s. 
183. 19.2mg n.s.s. 
183n 15.0mg n.s.s. 
183n 23.9mg n.s.s. 
183n 23.9mg n.s.s. 
183n 33.3mg n.s.s. 
183n 15.0mg n.s.s. 
1420 n.s.s. 17.9mg 
1420 n.s.s. 17.9mg 
 
1420 13.0mg n.s.s. 
183n 12.0mg n.s.s. 
183n 19.2mg n.s.s. 
183n 19.2mg n.s.s. 
183n 26.6mg n.s.s. 
183n 51.4mg n.s.s. 
183n 9.84mg 212.mg 
 
0/12 
0/12 
0/12 
0/12 
0/12 
0/12 
0/12 
0/12 
0/12 
0/12 
0/12 
0/12 
0/12 
0/12 
0/12 
0/7 
0/7 
0/9 
0/12 
0/12 
0/12 
0/12 
0/12 
0/12 
 
50.0m9 
50. 0mg 
50. 0mg 
50. 0mg 
50.0mg 
 
50. 0mg 
40.0mg 
40 .0mg 
40. 0mg 
40.0g 
50. 0mg 
50.0.g 
 
50.0m9 
50. 0mg 
50 .0mg 
 
34.3mg 
34.3mg 
34.3mg 
40. 0mg 
40. 0mg 
40. 0mg 
40 .0mg 
40 .0mg 
40 .0mg 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
4/12 
3/12 
3/12 
1/12 
0/12 
6/12 
1/12 
1/12 
0/12 
2/12 
4/12 
2/12 
2/12 
1/12 
4/12 
6/6 
6/6 
2/8 
4/12 
2/12 
2/12 
1/12 
0/12 
5/12 
 
Brkly Code 
 
Hackmann;zkko,61 ,45-54; 1956 
Radomaki; Jnci ,39,1069-1080;1967 
 
METHOXYCHLOR 72.43.5 
 
1684 c00497 828.mg n.s.s. 
 
a c00497 1.41gm n.s.s. 
b c00497 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
1685 c00497 466.mg n.s.s. 
a c00497 664.g n.s.s. 
b c00497 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
1686 c00497 63.8mg n.s.s. 
a c00497 329.mg n.s.s. 
1687 21 391.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 21 181.mg n.s.s. 
1688 84a 24.7mg n.s.s. 
a 84a 7.36mg n.s.s. 
b 84. 8.82mg n.s.s. 
1689 c00497 44.6mg n.s.s. 
a c00497 145.mg n.s.s. 
1690 21 313.mg n.s.s. 
a 21 76.3mg n.s.s. 
1691 84a 19.8mg n.s.s. 
 
a 84a 7.81mg n.s.s. 
b 84. 19.8mg n.s.s. 
 
3/20 
0/20 
0/20 
3/20 
3/20 
0/20 
12/20 
 
1/20 
0/30 
13/30 
 
1/30 
6/30 
6/30 
11/20 
0/20 
0/30 
1/30 
0/30 
0/30 
3/30 
 
METHOXYPHENYLACETIC ACID 1701-77-5 
1692 1312 51.4mg n.s.s. 1/17 7 
a 1312 155.mg n.s.s. 0/17 7 
b 1312 45.2mg n.s.s. 2/17 7 
1693 1312 35.9mg n.s.s. 2/18 7 
a 1312 n.s.s. n.s.s. 1/18 7 
b 1312 31.5mg n.s.s. 3/18 7 
1694 1312 59.8mg n.s.s. 0/16 7 
a 1312 155.mg n.s.s. 0/16 7 
b 1312 47.5mg n.s.s. 0/16 7 
1695 1312 30.9mg 1.80g. 0/16 7 
a 1312 55.7mg n.s.s. 0/16 7 
b 1312 145.mg n.s.s. 0/16 7 
c 1312 23.1mg 221.mg 0/16 7 
 
109.m9 
109.m9 
109.mg 
 
178.mg 
178.mg 
178.mg 
26.4mg 
26.4mg 
50.0mg 
 
50.0m9 
4.00mg 
4.00mg 
4.00mg 
12.6mg 
12.6mg 
40. 0mg 
40 .0mg 
3.20mg 
3.20mg 
3.20mg 
 
78.4mg 
78.4mg 
78.4mg 
73. 0mg 
73.Omg 
73.Omg 
78.4mg 
78.4mg 
78.4mg 
73. Omg 
73.Omg 
73.Omg 
73.Omg 
 
6/50 217.mg 3/50 
1/50 217.mg 0/50 
0/50 217.mg 0/50 
5/50 352.mg 9/50 
3/50 352.mg 6/50 
0/50 352.mg 0/50 
30/50 48.2mg 30/50 
 
1/50 48.2mg 2/50 
0/30 
6/30 
0/30 
6/30 
5/30 
 
23/50 23.8mg 21/50 
 
2/50 23.8mg 0/50 
0/30 
5/30 
0/30 
2/30 
0/30 
 
3/18 
0/18 
4/18 
4/16 
1/16 
5/16 
2/18 
0/18 
3/18 
5/18 
2/18 
0/18 
7/18 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Deichmsnn;txap, 11,88-103; 1967 
 
Radomaki;txap,7,652*656; 1965 
 
Iliv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
D.ichmann;txap, 11,88*103; 1967 
 
Redomaki;txap,7,652*656;1965 
 
Innes;ntis,1968/1969 
 
METHYL CARBAZATE 6294-89-9 
 
1696 1389 8.26mg n.s.s. 16/24 2.50mg 11/24 
1697 1389 17.5mg n.s.s. 7/24 2.50mg 6/24 
 
5.00mg 15/24 10.0mg 14/24 
5.00mg 8/24 10.0mg 5/24 
 
Truhaut;txcy,22,219-221; 1981 
 
1-METHYL-1,4-DIHYDRO-7-12-(5-NITROFURYL)VINYLI4-OXO-.1,8-NAPHTHYRIDINE-3-CARBOXYLATE, POTASSIUM ... 
 
1698 211 4.40mg 19.9mg 0/30 12.5mg 15/60 Matauzaki;gann,66,259-267;1975 
a 211 5.33m9 34.8mg 0/30 12.5mg 12/60 
b 211 8.94mg n.s.s. 0/30 12.5mg 6/60 
c 211 10.1mg n.s.s. 0/30 12.5mg 5/60 
 
N-METHYL-N,4-DINITROSOANILINE 99-80-9 
 
1699 1258 .319mg n.s.s. 0/10 .429mg 2/14 
a 1258 .244mg n.s.s. 0/7 .429mg 1/8 
N-METHYL*N-FORMYLHYDRAZINE 758-17-8 
 
1700 716 2.73mg 8.73mg 0/13 10.6mg 24/31 
a 716 6.50mg 21.9mg 0/79 10.6mg 19/41 
 
Boyland;j ca,4,233-239; 1968 
 
Toth;zkko,93, 109-121; 1979 
 
173 
 
1679 
a 
b 
 
c 
 
d 
 
. 
 
1680 
 
ba 
b 
 
c 
 
1681 
 
ba 
b 
 
c 
 
d 
 
1682 
 
ba 
 
1683 
 
b 
c 
d 
S 
 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
i 
i 
5 
5 
A 
4 
4 
1 
1 
4 
4 
3 
3 
3 
 
174 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
b H f syg wat liv lcc 24m24 e 
c H f syg wat liv hpt 24m24 e 
d H f syg wat gat mix 24m24 e 
e H f syg wat lun tum 24m24 e 
f H f syg wet tbe mix 24m24 e 
1701 H m syg wet liv mix 24m24 e 
a H yg wat ... mhs 24m24 e 
b H m syg wat Liv hpt 24m24 e 
c H m syg wet bil mix 24m24 e 
d H m syg wet gaL mix 24m24 e 
e H m syg wat liv lcc 24m24 e 
f H m syg wat gal ppe 24m24 e 
g H m syg wet lun tum 24m24 e 
h H m syg wat tbe mix 24m24 e 
 
1702 N f ewe wat lun mix 65w73 ese 
 
a N f ewa wet Liv mix 65w73 ese 
b N f sew wet liv hpt 65w73 ese 
c N f sew wet Liv lcc 65w73 ese 
d N f sew wat geL ode 65w73 ese 
 
1703 N f sew wet lun mix 23m23 ees 
a N f sew wet blv mix 23m23 ees 
b N f sew wat gaL mix 23m23 ese 
c N f sew wat liv bhp 23m23 ese 
1704 N f swe wat lun mix 92w92 es 
e N f ews wat liv mix 92w92 cs 
b N f sew wat blv mix 92w92 es 
c N f ews wet liv bhp 92w92 cs 
d N f sewe wt Liv lcc 92w92 cs 
e N f sew wet gaL mix 92w92 es 
f N f sew wat geL ade 92w92 cs 
1705 N m swe wat liv mix 65w72 eea 
e N * ewe wet bil mix 65w72 ese 
b N a ewe wet geL ade 65w72 ses 
c N m sew wet lun six 65w72 ese 
1706 N m ewe wat lun six 22m23 cs 
e N m sew wet blv mix 22m23 so 
b N m swe wet liv mix 22m23 cc 
c N m sew wet gaL mix 22.23 ac 
d N * eaw wet geL ads 22m23 eo 
1707 N m eaw wet liv mix 82w82 es 
e N m swe wat tun mix 82w82 cs 
b N m swe wet bil cho 82w82 es 
c N m ews wat geL ade 82w82 cs 
d N m swe wet scv ado 82w82 cs 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
25.1mg P<.0005 
28.3mg P<.0005 
 
29.1mg P<.5 + 
no dre P-1. 
 
6.04mg P<.0005 
 
7.55mg P<.0005+ 
12.7mg P<.002 + 
13.3mg P<.0005 
 
19.7mg P<.007 + 
25.3mg P<.002 + 
30.0mg P<.0005 
42.5mg P<.01 
no dre P-1. 
 
4.89mg P<.0005 
 
6.44mg \ P<.0005+ 
10.4mg * P<.0005+ 
19.5mg * P<.0005+ 
19.9mg \ P<.0005+ 
31.5mg * P<.008 + 
.921mg * P<.0005+ 
6.04mg * P<.0005+ 
57.9mg * P<.02 
24.7mg * P<.2 
 
2.16mg P<.0005+ 
8.66mg P<.0005+ 
12.2mg P<.0005+ 
17.5mg P<.0005 
22.4mg P<.0005 
 
31.3mg P<.003 + 
39.7mg P<.006 
 
16.8mg \ P<.0005+ 
36.2mg * P<.003 + 
38.0mg \ P<.002 + 
14.2mg \ P<.02 + 
1.72mg * P<.0005+ 
3.47mg \ P<.0005+ 
5.47mg * P<.0005+ 
9.10mg * P<.0005+ 
9.88mg * P<.0005 
1.03mg P<. 0005. 
1.87mg P<.0005+ 
12.4mg P<.0005+ 
15.2mg P<.0005+ 
20.7mg P<.009 - 
 
.4. 
 
4. 
 
* + 
 
NETHYL NETHANESULFONATE 1 Ong. .. . : ug . 10. :100. 1. : g . :10. :100.. : g :. 10 
 
1708 N m rfm wet tun ado 24m24 * . + . 31.8mg 
a N m rf. wat thn tym 24m24 * 185.mg 
b N m rf. wet liv tum 24e24 * 3.98gm 
N-NETHYL-N'-NITRO-N-NITROSO6UANIDINE ..:..lug. :10. :100. g : . n :10. :100.. : . :10 
 
1709 R m bfm wet stg ivc 52w52 or .> no dre 
 
e R * bfm wet stg pvc 52w52 or no dre 
1710 R f wis wet bit cyc 35w60 r . o. .178mg 
a R f wis wet stg cnd 35w60 or 2.38mg 
1711 R m wis wet stg cnd 35w60 or .> 2.09mg 
a R * wis wet bit cyc 35w60 or no dre 
1712 R m wis wat stg mix 77w7? * . + . .693mg 
a R * wis wat stg ad 77w77 * 1.13mg 
b R m wis wet stg dc 77w77 * 3.06mg 
c R * wis wet liv hpa 77w?7 * 14.3mg 
1713 R m wis wet stg *dc 30w65 r . o. .523mg 
1714 R m wf wet stg ivc 52w52 or .> 6.75mg 
1715 R m wsr wat stg ivc 52w52 or .+ . 1.03mg 
 
a R a wsr wet stg pvc 52w52 or 2.72mg 
 
P<.0005+ 
P<.02 + 
P<.9 - 
 
P-I. - 
P-I. - 
P<. 0005 
 
P<.2 + 
P<.2 + 
P-1. 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 003 + 
P<. 06 + 
P<. 4 
 
P<.002 + 
P<. 2 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 00054+ 
 
2-NETHYL-1-NITROANTHRAQUINONE 100ng..: ..ug. :10. :100.. g :. . :10 .: 100....10 
 
1716 N f b6c set cub hes 49w49 (4) 1.88m9 * P<.0005c 
e N f b6c oat TBA NXB 49w49 1.76mg * P<.0005 
b N f b6c set liv NXS 49w49 no dre Pal. 
 
c N f b6c oet lun NXB 49w49 97.3mg * P<.06 
 
1717 N m b6c *et sub hes 46w46 (+): 1.34mg / P<.0005c 
a N m b6c *et TBA NXB 46w46 1.02mg / P<.0005 
b N m b6c set liv NXB 46w46 no dre P-1. 
 
c N m b6c set lun NXB 46w46 45.5mg * P<.08 
 
1718 R f f34 eat NXB NXS 18m25 s :. 59.6mg / P<.0005 
a R f f34 st NXB NXB 18m25 s 70.3mg / P<.0005 
 
b R f f34 oat sub fib 8 m25 131.mg / P<.0005a 
c R f f34 *at ubl NXA l8m25 s 224.mg * P<.01 a 
d R f f34 eat pit *d l8m25 s 63.4mg * P<.04 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
716 12.2mg 64.5mg 
716 13.3mg 77.2mg 
716 8.75mg n.s.s. 
716 92.8mg n.s.s. 
716 3.63mg 11.3mg 
716 4.57mg 13.6mg 
716 6.13mg 41.1mg 
716 7.35mg 27.4mg 
716 8.45mg 218.mg 
716 11.4mg 89.1mg 
716 13.5mg 88.4mg 
716 16.1mg 1.95gm 
716 85.4mg n.s.s. 
716 3.04mg 8.58mg 
1110 3.77mg 13.3mg 
1110 6.44mg 18.8mg 
1110 10.7mg 47.2mg 
1110 9.67mg 59.0mg 
1110 11.9m9 510.m9 
1265 .636mg 1.37mg 
1265 3.49mg 14.5mg 
1265 17.5mg n.s.s. 
1265 4.02mg n.sa.s. 
1314 1.32mg 3.73mg 
1314 4.95mg 17.1mg 
1314 6.17mg 39.7mg 
1314 8.50mg 45.0mg 
1314 10.1mg 66.6mg 
1314 11.9mg 164.mg 
1314 13.7mg 449.mg 
1110 8.19mg 48.2mg 
1110 13.8mg 203m.g 
 
1110 14.4mg 186.mg 
1110 6.00mg n.s.s. 
1265 1.12mg 3.09mg 
1265 1.64mg 14.5mg 
1265 3.10mg 12.2mg 
1265 4.90mg 20.0mg 
1265 5.21mg 22.8mg 
1314 .527mg 1.99"mg 
1314 1.07mg 3.78mg 
 
1314 5.05mg 44.5m9 
1314 5.75mg 64.6mg 
1314 6.27mg 618.mg 
 
0/79 
0/79 
0/1 
 
0/100 
13/100 
0/65 
0/16 
0/65 
0/16 
0/34 
0/65 
0/34 
0/88 
7/88 
15/100 
0/33 
0/33 
0/33 
0/29 
15/99 
8/95 
0/82 
0/32 
15/99 
0/68 
8/99 
0/68 
0/68 
0/63 
0/63 
1/81 
0/75 
0/81 
22/98 
22/98 
 
5/78 
2/78 
0/90 
0/90 
1/69 
22/88 
0/69 
0/69 
0/51 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
10.6mg 10/41 
10.6mg 9/41 
10.6mg 3/14 
10.6mg 0/44 
10 .6mg 32/44 
9.36mg 24/43 
9.36mg 10/26 
9.36mg 16/43 
9.36mg 7/26 
9.36mg 8/37 
9.36mg 8/43 
9.36mg 5/37 
9.36mg 0/46 
9.36mg 34/46 
 
15.6mg 30/48 (31.2mg 9/37) 
15.6mg 22/43 31.2mg 3/11 
15.6mg 12/43 31.2mg 3/11 
 
15.6mg 10/43 (31.2mg 0/11) 
15.6mg 4/23 31.2mg 1/5 
2.00mg 39/49 4.00mg 47/50 
2.00mg 10/44 4.00mg 20/48 
2.00mg 0/44 4.00mg 3/48 
2.00mg 1/10 4.00mg 0/5 
7.80mg 43/49 
7.80mg 18/47 
7.80mg 17/49 
7.80mg 10/47 
7.80mg 8/47 
7.80mg 5/40 
7.80mg 4/40 
 
13.0mg 11/47 (26.0mg 3/26) 
13.0mg 5/29 26.0mg 0/8 
 
13.0mg 5/47 (26.0mg 0/26) 
13.0mg 20/47 (26.0mg 4/26) 
1.67mg 36/49 3.33mg 31/46 
1.67mg 13/42 (3.33mg 7/36) 
1.67mg 6/42 3.33mg 14/36 
1.67mg 6/46 3.33mg 8/43 
1.67mg 6/46 3.33mg 7/43 
6.50mg 28/30 
6.50mg 34/41 
6.50mg 6/30 
6.50mg 5/30 
6.50mg 3/24 
 
METHYL METHANESULFONATE (MS) 66-27-3 
 
1708 195 16.0mg 113.mg 63/162 33.3mg 33/47 
 
a 195 67.5mg n.s.s. 6/162 33.3mg 7/47 
b 195 160.mg n.a.s. 6/162 33.3mg 2/47 
 
N-METHYL-N'-NITRO-N-NITROSOGUANIDINE (MNN6) 70-25-7 
1709 196 10.7mg n.s.s. 0/20 4.15mg 0/50 
 
a 196 10.7mg n.s.s. 0/20 4.15mg 0/50 
1710 1105 73.1ug .411mg 0/5 2.33m9 19/20 
a 1105 .821mg n.s.s. 0/5 2.33mg 4/20 
1711 1105 .510mg n.s.s. 0/5 2.04mg 2/10 
 
a 1105 1.40mg n.s.s. 0/5 2.04mg 0/10 
1712 199 .289mg 2.05mg 0/6 3.30mg 10/12 
 
a 199 .480mg 5.31mg 0/6 3.30mg 8/12 
b 199 1.04mg n.s.s. 0/6 3.30mg 4/12 
c 199 2.32mg n.s.s. 0/6 3.30mg 1/12 
1713 435 .186m9 2.54mg 0/10 1.92mg 5/8 
1714 196 1.66mg n.s.s. 0/16 4.15mg 2/20 
1715 196 .684mg 1.63mg 0/40 4.15mg 37/74 
a 196 1.54mg 5.91mg 0/40 4.15mg 17/74 
 
Brkly Code 
 
Toth; Jnci ,60,201-204;1978 
 
Toth;npLm,27,25-31; 1980 
Toth;myco,68, 121-128; 1979 
Toth; Jnci ,60,201-204;1978 
 
Toth;nplm,27,25-31; 1980 
Toth;myco,68, 121-128; 1979 
CLapp;scim, 161,913-914; 1968 
 
BraLow;onco,27, 168-180; 1973 
 
Tahara;zkko, 100,1-12; 1981 
Sugimura;canr,30,455-465; 1970 
 
Natsukura;jnci ,61,141-143;1978 
 
Bralow;onco,27, 168-180; 1973 
 
2-NETHYL-1-NITROANTHRAQUINONE 129-15-7 
 
1716 c01923 1.12mg 3.17mg 0/50 32.0mg 
 
a c01923 1.07mg 2.85mg 10/50 32.0mg 
b c01923 n.s.s. n.s.s. 1/50 32.0mg 
c c01923 15.9mg n.a.s. 3/50 32.0mg 
1717 c01923 .780mg 2.31mg 0/50 29.5mg 
a c01923 .621mg 1.65mg 22/50 29.5mg 
b c01923 n.s.s. n.s.s. 8/50 29.5mg 
c c01923 7.41mg n.s.s. 10/50 29.5mg 
1718 c01923 36.0m9 119.mg 1/50 21.0mg 
a c01923 41.1mg 150.mg 1/50 21.0mg 
b c01923 66.1mg 403.mg 1/50 21.0mg 
c c01923 96.4mg 28.3gm 0/50 21.0mg 
d c01923 27.4mg n.s.s. 17/50 21.0mg 
 
29/50 64.0mg 38/50 
34/50 64.0mg 44/50 
 
0/50 64.0mg 0/50 
0/50 64.0mg 1/50 
25/50 59.0mg 36/50 
42/50 59.0mg 46/50 
 
0/50 59.0m9 0/50 
1/50 59.0m9 0/50 
4/50 43.0mg 21/50 
3/50 43.0mg 19/50 
0/50 43.0mg 13/50 
3/50 43.0mg 4/50 
26/50 43.0mg 25/50 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
liv:hpc,nnd; sto:sqc; sub:fib; ubl:ppn,arn,tpp. T 
 
sto:sqc; sub:fib; ubl:ppn,srn,tpp. A 
 
ubl :ppn,srn,tpp. 
 
S 
 
175 
 
b 
 
c 
 
d 
 
. 
 
f 
 
1701 
 
ba 
b 
 
c 
 
d 
 
f 
9 
h 
 
1702 
a 
b 
 
c 
 
d 
 
1703 
 
a 
b 
 
c 
 
1704 
a 
b 
 
c 
 
d 
 
. 
 
f 
 
1705 
a 
b 
 
c 
 
1706 
a 
b 
 
c 
 
d 
 
1707 
a 
b 
c 
d 
 
176 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
* R f f34 eat Liv MXA 18.25 s 
f R f f34 eat sto sqc 18m25 a 
9 R f f34 eat Liv hpc 18m25 s 
h R f f34 eat TBA MXB 18m25 s 
i R f f34 eat Liv MXB 18m25 s 
1719 R m f34 eat MXB MXB 18.25 
 
a R m f34 eat sub fib 18.25 
b R * f34 eat Liv MXA 18.25 
c R m f34 eat Liv hpc 18m25 
d R m f34 eat Liv nnd 18.25 
* R . f34 eat TBA NXB 18m25 
f R t f34 oat Liv MXB 18m25 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
324..g * P<.02 c 
507.mg * P<.03 a 
547.mg * P<.04 c 
47.1mg * P<.08 
324.mg * P<.02 
 
19.7mg / P<.0005 
25.8mg / P<.0005a 
48.8mg * P<.0005c 
89.2mg * P<.005 c 
133.mg * P<.004 
31.9mg * P<.05 
 
48.8mg * P<.0005 
 
4-METHYL-1-. (5-NITROFURFURYLIDENE)AMINOI -2-IMIDAZOLIDINONE . . ... ...... ...........0 . .... :...g... ... : 10 
 
1720 R f ada sat mgl adc 46w66 a . + . 5.34mg 
a R f Ida sat Liv tur 46w66 a no dre 
b R f sda eat tba mix 46w66 a 5.59mg 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P-1. 
 
P<. 0005 
 
4-(4-N-METHYLL-N-NITROSAMINOSTYRYL)QUINOLfNE.lug ............. ...... ...........0. .... :...9.. . . . :Ig10 
 
1721 R f fis mat liv hnd 34w52 . + . .468mg P<.0005+ 
1722 R f fis mat liv hnd 34w52 . 1.38mg P<.04 + 
 
a R m fis 1 at Liv car 34w52 4.37mg P<.3 + 
 
N-METHYL N-NITROSOBENZAMIDE 
 
1723 R f mrw wat Liv tum 1230 
a R f mrw wat tba mix 1230 
1724 R m mrw wat for mix 12I30 
a R m mrw wat for sqp 1230 
b R m mrw wat for sqc 12m30 
c R m mrw wat liv tum 1230 
d R * mrw wat tba mix 1230 
 
lOOng..:. .ug. :10. :100.. :mg .:10. :100. :Ig .:10 
 
.> no dre 
 
11.2mg 
+ . 3.23mg 
 
7.73mg 
9.66mg 
no dre 
2.49mg 
 
N-(N-METHYL-N-NITROSOCARBANOYL).-L-ORNITHINE.lug......10 . .... :10 . 100. 1g : .. :10. :100. :Ig. :10 
 
1725 R f waL ipJ kid *pn 26w52 es . + . .633mg 
a R f waL ipJ kid mnp 26w52 es .633mg 
b R f waL ipJ ski neo 26w52 ms 1.42mg 
c R f waL ipJ pan aca 26w52 es 11.0mg 
d R f waL ipJ mai mix 26w52 as no dre 
1726 R m waL ipJ kid *pn 26w52 as . 1.04mg 
 
a R m waL ipJ ski neo 26w52 as 1.04mg 
b R m waL ipJ kid mnp 26w52 as 1.57mg 
c R m waL ipj pan mix 26w52 as 5.25mg 
d R m waL ipj pan adc 26w52 as 11.0mg 
* R m waL ipJ zym car 26w52 as 11.8mg 
 
R(-)-2-METHYL-N-NITROSOPIPERIDINE 1O0ng. . ... : ug 10. :100. g : . . :10. :100 . : g. : 10 
 
1727 R b sda wat noL *pd 24m24 . + . 22.1mg 
a R b sda wat Liv hpa 24m24 108.mg 
b R b sda wat tba maL 24.24 20.4mg 
 
S(+)-2-METHYL-N-NITROSOPIPERIDINE lOOng..:. .:ug. :10. :100. 1. : g . :10. :100. : g. :10 
 
1728 R b sda wat mix epd 24m24 . + . 34.5mg 
a R b sda wat Liv mix 24m24 49.4mg 
b R b sda wat Liv Lcc 24.24 61.2mg 
c R b sda wat tba maL 24s24 13.2mg 
 
P-1. _ 
P<.4 + 
P<.0005+ 
P<. 002 
P<. 003 
 
P-1. _ 
P<.02 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
P<.002 + 
P<.3 + 
P-1. + 
P<.02 + 
P<.02 + 
P<.06 + 
P<.3 + 
P<.5 + 
P<.5 + 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<.04 
 
P<. 0005+ 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 003 
P<. 007 
 
P<. 0005+ 
 
METHYL PARATHION 
 
1729 M f b6c mat TBA MXB 24.24 
 
a M f b6c eat Liv MXB 24m24 
b M f b6c eat Lun MXB 24m24 
 
1730 M m b6c eat TBA MXB 24m24 v 
 
a M m b6c eat Liv MXB 24m24 v 
b M m b6c eat Lun MXB 24m24 v 
1731 R f f34 eat TBA MXB 24.24 s 
a R f f34 eat Liv MXB 24.24 s 
1732 R m f34 mat TBA MXB 24m24 
 
a R m f34 eat Liv MXB 24.24 
 
(N-6) )METHYLADENINE 
 
1733 M f scd wat lun tum 
a M f scd wat Liv hct 
1734 M m mcd wat Liv hct 
 
a M m scd wat Lun tum 
 
(N-6) -NETHYLADENOSINE 
 
1735 M f mcd wat Liv mix 
a M f scd wat Lun tum 
 
1736 M m scd wat Lun tum 
 
a M m scd wet Liv mix 
 
6m24 a 
6m24 a 
 
6.25 s 
6m25 s 
 
8m27 s 
8m27 a 
8m27 s 
8m27 s 
 
100ng .:. .:ug. :10. :100. g :..g :10. :100. :Ig . :10 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
125.mg * P<.5 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
58.1mg * P<.5 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
lOOng .:. .:ug. :10. :100. g :. 1g :10. :100. : g. :10 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
bO0ng.. : .ug.. : 10. :100.. :1.mg.. : 10. :100.. : g. : 10 
 
364.mg P<.9 
no dre P-1. 
55.6mg P<.6 
108.mg P<.8 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
* c01923 123.mg n.s.s. 
f c01923 154.mg n.s.s. 
9 c01923 165.mg n.s.s. 
h c01923 18.6mg n.s.s. 
i c01923 123.mg n.s.s. 
1719 c01923 13.1mg 35.5mg 
a c01923 16.8mg 47.4mg 
b c01923 28.0mg 130.mg 
c c01923 43.8mg 879.mg 
d c01923 60.2mg 779.mg 
* c01923 13.6mg n.s.s. 
f c01923 28.0mg 130.mg 
 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
38/50 
 
0/50 
4/49 
3/49 
1/49 
1/49 
0/49 
32/49 
 
1/49 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
21.0mg 1/50 43.0mg 4/50 
21.0mg 0/50 43.0mg 3/50 
21.0mg 0/50 43.0mg 3/50 
21.0mg 43/50 43.0mg 44/50 
21.0mg 1/50 43.0mg 4/50 
16.8mg 17/50 34.4mg 38/50 
16.8mg 10/50 34.4mg 34/50 
16.8mg 7/50 34.4mg 15/50 
16.8mg 5/50 34.4mg 9/50 
16.8mg 2/50 34.4mg 6/50 
16.8mg 41/50 34.4mg 47/50 
16.8mg 7/50 34.4mg 15/50 
 
Brkly Code 
Liv:hpc,nnd. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Liv:hpc,nnd; sub:fib. T 
 
l iv:hpc,nnd. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
4-METHYL-1- (5-NITROFURFURYLIDENE)AMINO] -2-IMIDAZOLIDINONE 21638-36-8 
1720 200a 3.04mg 10.5mg 0/25 17.4mg 19/32 
 
a 200a 46.3mg n.s.s. 0/25 17.4mg 0/32 
b 200a 3.11mg 12.4mg 1/25 17.4mg 19/32 
 
4-(4-N-METHYL*N-NITROSAMINOSTYRYL)QUINOLINE 16699-10-8 
1721 1162 .217mg 1.32mg 0/20 1.63mg 9/20 
1722 1162 .416mg n.s.s. 0/20 1.31mg 3/20 
 
a 1162 .711mg n.s.s. 0/20 1.31mg 1/20 
 
N-METHYL-N-NITROSOBENZAMIDE 63412-06-6 
 
1723 1246 22.0mg n.s.s. 0/25 3.59mg 0/19 
a 1246 2.67mg n.s.s. 12/25 3.59mg 12/19 
1724 1246 1.55mg 8.10mg 0/22 3.14mg 11/17 
a 1246 3.12mg 31.1mg 0/22 3.14mg 6/17 
b 1246 3.64mg 56.4mg 0/22 3.14mg 5/17 
c 1246 17.2mg n.s.s. 0/22 3.14mg 0/17 
d 1246 .856mg n.s.s. 12/22 3.14mg 15/17 
 
N-(N-METHYL-N-NITROSOCARBANOYL)-L-ORNITHINE (nitrosourea amino acid) --- 
1725 1317 .271mg 1.81mg 0/14 5.12mg 9/12 
a 1317 .271mg 1.81mg 0/14 5.12mg 9/12 
b 1317 .565mg 6.13mg 0/14 5.12mg 6/13 
c 1317 1.78mg n.s.s. 0/14 5.12mg 1/13 
d 1317 1.88mg n.s.s. 5/14 5.12mg 3/15 
1726 1317 .452mg n.s.s. 0/4 5.12mg 8/14 
a 1317 .452mg n.s.s. 0/4 5.12mg 8/14 
b 1317 .628mg n.s.s. 0/4 5.12mg 6/14 
c 1317 1.29mg n.s.s. 0/4 5.12mg 2/13 
d 1317 1.78mg n.s.s. 0/4 5.12mg 1/13 
 
a 1317 1.93mg n.s.s. 0/4 5.12mg 1/14 
 
R-) -2-METHYL-N-NITROSOPIPERIDINE 
1727 1418 10.8mg 54.7mg 0/20 
a 1418 32.7mg n.s.s. 0/20 
b 1418 9.83mg 61.1mg 1/20 
S(+) -2-METHYL-N-NITROSOPIPERIDINE 
1728 1418 15.4mg 109.mg 0/20 
a 1418 20.0mg 258.mg 0/20 
b 1418 23.1mg 706.mg 0/20 
c 1418 6.62mg 31.9mg 1/20 
METHYL PARATHION 298-00-0 
 
1729 c02971 7.79mg n.s.s. 14/20 
a c02971 58.5mg n.s.s. 1/20 
b c02971 47.3mg n.s.s. 0/20 
1730 c02971 10.0mg n.s.s. 13/20 
a c02971 8.86mg n.s.s. 10/20 
b c02971 13.9mg n.s.s. 1/20 
1731 c02971 1.49mg n.s.s. 18/20 
 
a c02971 7.80mg n.s.s. 2/20 
1732 c02971 1.52mg n.s.s. 16/20 
a c02971 19.7mg n.s.s. 2/20 
 
(N-6)-NETHYLADENINE --- 
 
1733 1255 6.08mg n.s.s. 3/16 
a 1255 15.2mg n.s.s. 1/16 
1734 1255 5.70mg n.s.s. 5/21 
a 1255 6.92mg n.s.s. 4/21 
(N-6)-METHYLADENOSINE ... 
 
1735 1255 16.9mg n.s.s. 1/16 
a 1255 14.1mg n.s.s. 3/16 
1736 1255 8.65mg n.s.s. 4/21 
a 1255 9.22mg n.s.s. 5/21 
 
14026-03-0 
 
25.7mg 11/20 
25.7mg 3/20 
25.7mg 12/20 
36702-44-0 
 
25.7mg 8/20 
25.7mg 6/20 
25.7mg 5/20 
25.7mg 15/20 
 
Cohen;nci ,51,403-417;1973 
Yamamoto;jnci,51,1313-1315;1973 
 
BuLay; jnci ,62,1523-1528;1979 
Longn.cker; j.pt,4,117-129;1980 
 
WiessLer ;zkko,79, 118-122;1973 
Wiessler;zkko,79, 118-122;1973 
 
8.10mg 30/50 (16.2mg 20/50) 
8.10mg 4/50 16.2mg 2/50 
8.10mg 3/50 16.2mg 2/50 
4.20mg 31/50 9.20mg 28/50 
4.20mg 14/50 (9.20mg 12/50) 
4.20mg 10/50 9.20mg 8/50 
1.00mg 33/50 2.00mg 20/50 
1.00mg 5/50 2.00mg 0/50 
.800mg 37/50 1.60mg 32/50 
.800mg 0/50 1.60mg 0/50 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a, a/c. 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
4.33mg 3/17 
4.33mg 0/17 
3.52mg 3/17 
3.52mg 2/17 
 
Anderson; i jcn,24,319-322;1979 
 
Anderson; ij cn,24,319-322; 1979 
 
9.76mg 1/12 
9.76mg 2/12 
7.89mg 4/14 
7.89mg 4/14 
 
177 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt TD50 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes D 
NETHYLAZOXYNETHANOL ACETATE AND CYCASIN MIXTURE.... : 10. :100... :.I :10. :100... :. :10 
 
1737 P b rho ipJ liv hpc 8y9 ouw . C+) . 72.2ug 
 
a P b rho ipj kid car 8y9 ouw .521mg 
b P b rho ipj *so sqc 8y9 ouw .521mg 
c P b rho ipj cmi odc 8y9 ouw .521mg 
d P b rho ipj tba m*l 8y9 ouw 77.Oug 
1738 P b rho oat kid adc 14y14 omuw . 25.3mg 
a P b rho oat Liv hpc 14y14 omuw 25.3mg 
b P b rho oat kid car 14y14 omw 25.3mg 
c P b rho oat pan adc 14yI4 omuw 25.3mg 
d P b rho oat biL adc 14y14 omuw 31.9mg 
* P b rho oat tba mal 14y14 ouw 16.4mg 
 
3-NETHYLCHOLANTHRENE 
 
1739 R f nss gav mom tum 52w52 or 
1740 R f wis gav mgL adc 52w52 m 
 
1741 R f wis gav moa tum 52w52 r 
1742 R f wias gv mgL adc 26w52 r 
1743 R f wis gav mgL adc 39w52 r 
1744 R f wis gav mgL adc 52w52 r 
1745 R f wis gav mgL adc 52w52 r 
1746 R f wis gay mgl adc 52w52 r 
1747 R f wis gav mgl adc 52w52 r 
1748 R f wis gav mgL adc 52w52 r 
1749 R f wis gav mgL adc 52w52 r 
 
4,4-' NETHYLENE-BIS(2-CHLOROANILINE) 
1750 D f beg oat ubl ptc 9y9 *mv 
a D f beg oat Liv hnd 9y9 omv 
b D f bog eat mgL mix 9y9 amv 
1751 R f cdr oat Lun adc 67w67 of 
a R f cdr oat mgL adc 67w67 of 
b R f cdr oat Liv hpa 67w67 of 
c R f cdr oat Liv hpc 67w67 of 
1752 R f cdr oat lun dc 24m24 a 
a R f cdr oat Liv hpc 24m24 a 
b R f cdr oat Liv hpa 24m24 a 
c R f cdr oat Liv cho 24m24 a 
 
1753 R m cdr oat Lun noo 18.24 *0 
 
a R f cdr oat Lun mix 18.24 es 
b R m cdr oat mgL adc 18.24 es 
c R m cdr oat Liv hpc 18.24 es 
d R m cdr oat zym car 18.24 0s 
o R * cdr oat ... kor 18m24 es 
f R m cdr oat ski sqc 18m24 es 
9 R m cdr oat tba mix 18m24 os 
 
1754 R f cdr oat Lun noo 18.24 ofs 
 
a R f cdr oat Lun mix 18m24 ofs 
b R m cdr oat zym car 18m24 ofs 
c R m cdr oat Liv hpc 18m24 ofs 
d R m cdr oat mgL mdc 18m24 ofs 
* R * cdr oat ... has 18m24 ofs 
f R m cdr oat ski sqc 18m24 ofs 
9 R m cdr oat tba mix 18.24 ofs 
1755 R m cdr oat Liv hpc 67w67 of 
 
a R f cdr oat Liv hpa 67w67 of 
b R m cdr oat Lun adc 67w67 of 
1756 R m cdr oat Lun adc 24.24 a 
 
a R f cdr oat Liv hpc 24.24 a 
 
b R * cdr oat Liv hpa 24m24o 
1757 R f wi2 oat Liv mix 16m28 a 
 
a R f wi2 oat mgL mix l6m28 o 
b R f wi2 oat Lun mix l6m28 o 
c R f wi2 at tba mix l6m28 o 
1758 R m wi2 oat Liv mix 16.29 a 
 
a R * wi2 st Lun mix l6m29 o 
b R * wi2 eat tb mix 16m29 o 
 
Ong. . .:. ug. :10. :100. g :. . :10. : 100.. :. :10 
 
* + * .5 
 
.+ . 1. 
* + * .6 
+ . .2 
. + .7. 
 
+ * .7 
 
. + . .6 
. + . .S 
 
506ag 
.25mg 
669mg 
202mg 
304mg 
764mg 
506mg 
 
TD50 
 
714mg 
689m9 
590mg 
 
2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
P<.0005+ 
P<.05 + 
P<.05 + 
P<.05 + 
P<.002 
 
P<. 06 + 
P<. 06 + 
P<. 06 + 
P<.06 + 
P<.3 + 
P<. 3 
 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<. 00054 
 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
 
l. : 1ug . : 10 .:. 100. g :. g. :10. :100.... :.. :10 
 
+ . 2.12mg P<.003 + 
 
3.72mg P<.02 . 
no dro P-1. 
 
+ . 42.3mg P<.003 + 
 
42.3mg P<.003 + 
142.mg P<.1 - 
291.mg P<.3 - 
+ . 34.7mg P<.0005+ 
 
467.mg P<.04 - 
708.mg P<.1 - 
1.439m P<.3 - 
4 +. 20.8mg * P<.0005+ 
 
29.2mg * P<.0005+ 
87.6mg * P<.0005+ 
92.2mg Z P<.0005+ 
107.mg * P<.0005+ 
144.mg Z P<.01 
286.mg * P<.2 
 
10.4mg * P<.0005 
 
* . 35.1mg * P<.0005+ 
 
60.9mg * P<.0005+ 
112.mg * P<.0005+ 
124.mg Z P<.0005+ 
162.mg * P<.006 . 
 
138.mg * P<.02 + 
263.mg * P<.03 
 
14.8g * P<.0005 
* . 15.3m9 P<.0005. 
 
41.8mg P<.007 + 
41.8mg P<.007 + 
+ . 42.3mg P<.0005+ 
 
388.mg P<.04 - 
388.mg P<.04 - 
.+ . 15.8mg P<.0005+ 
 
51.4mg P<.003 
 
104.mg P<.005 + 
11.6mg P<.0005+ 
4 . 10.8m9 P<.0005+ 
 
59.5mg P<.0005+ 
9.09mg P<.0005+ 
 
4,4'-NETHYLENE-BIS(2-CHLOROANILINE).2HCL.:..Iug.............100. g : . . . : 10. : 100.. : . : 10 
 
1759 N f chi oat Liv hpt 77w90 + 66.6mg / P<.0005. 
 
a N f chi oat Liv mix 77w90 66.6mg / P<.0005+ 
b N f chi oat Lun mix 77w90 556.mg 0 P<.4 - 
c N f chi oat tba mix 77w"90 52.8mg I P<.0005 
 
1760 N m chi oat Lun mix 77w94 :> 342.mg P<.2 - 
a N m chi oat liv mix 77w94 471.mg * P<.4 
 
b N m chi oat tba mix 77w94 97.9mg * P<.02 
1761 R m cdr oat Liv mix 77w98 :> 70.1mg 0 P<.2 
a R * cdr at tba mix 77w98 33.4mg P<0 5 
 
178 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
NETHYLAZOXYMETHANOL ACETATE AND CYCASIN MIXTURE (CAS# 592-61-1 and 14901-08-7) mixture 
1737 2000 20.Oug .403mg 0/32 .910mg 4/5 
a 2000 84.Oug n.s.s. 0/32 .910mg 1/5 
b 2000 84.Oug n.s.s. 0/32 .910mg 1/5 
c 2000 84.Oug n.s.s. 0/32 .910mg 1/5 
d 2000 20.3ug .693mg 3/32 .910m9 4/5 
1738 2000. 4.10mg n.s.s. 0/32 11.1mg 1/7 
a 2000. 4.10mg n.s.s. 0/32 11.1mg 1/7 
b 2000. 4.10mg n.s.s. 0/32 11.1mg 1/7 
c 2000. 4.10mg n.s.s. 0/32 11.1mg 1/7 
d 2000m 4.23mg n.s.s. 1/32 11.1mg 1/7 
 
a 2000m 3.01mg n.s.s. 3/32 11.1mg 2/7 
 
3*NETHYLCHOLANTHRENE 56*49-5 
 
1739 481 .261mg 1.08mg 0/9 
1740 1130. .808mg 2.04ag 1/54 
1741 1130n .363mg 1.39mg 1/54 
1742 18gbm 91.4ug .485mg 0/20 
1743 188bn .137mg .727mg 0/20 
1744 188bo .375mg 1.8mg 0/20 
1745 188br .261mg 1.08mg 0/20 
1746 188bs n.s.s. .486mg 0/20 
1747 188bt .343mg 1.53mg 0/20 
1748 188bu .28mg 1.55mg 0/20 
1749 188bv .336mg 1.12mg 0/20 
 
4.90mg 17/21 
8.57mg 37/53 
4.90mg 18/25 
2.46mg 14/16 
3.69mg 14/16 
4.90mg 12/18 
4.90mg 17/21 
4.90mg 17/17 
9.80mg 19/21 
12.2mg 20/21 
4.90mg 22/29 
 
4,4'-METHYLENE-BIS(2-CHLOROANILINE) (3,3'-dichLoro-4,4'-disminodiphanyLmathane, MOCA) 101-14-4 
1750 1030 .586mg 14.8mg 0/6 7.31mg 4/5 
a 1030 1.04mg n.s.s. 0/6 7.31mg 3/5 
b 1030 2.29m9 n.s.s. 4/6 7.31mg 2/5 
 
1751 192m 17.1mg 223.mg 0/21 50.0mg 6/21 St 
 
a 192m 17.1mg 223.mg 0/21 50.0mg 6/21 
b 192m 34.9mg n.s.s. 0/21 50.0mg 2/21 
c 192m 47.4mg n.s.s. 0/21 50.0mg 1/21 
1752 192n 21.4mg 60.5mg 0/44 50.0mg 27/44 
a 192n 141.mg n.s.s. 0/44 50.0mg 3/44 
b 192n 174.mg n.s.s. 0/44 50.0mg 2/44 
c 192n 233.mg n.s.s. 0/44 50.0mg 1/44 
 
1753 1031m 15.7mg 28.6mg 1/100 7.53mg 23/100 15.1mg 28/75 34.0mg 35/50 
 
a 1031 21.5mg 41.1mg 0/100 7.53mg 14/100 15.1mg 20/75 34.0mg 31/50 
b 1031m 53.7mg 174.mg 1/100 7.53mg 5/100 15.1mg 8/75 34.0m9 14/50 
c 1031m 56.8mg 164.mg 0/100 7.53mg 3/100 15.1mg 3/75 34.0mg 18/50 
d 1031m 61.4mg 288.g 1/100 7.53mg 8/100 15.1mg 5/75 34.0mg 11/50 
 
a 1031m 63.9mg 6.58g 1/100 7.53mg 3/100 15.1mg 7/75 (34.0mg 1/50) 
f 1031m 109.mg n.s.s. 1/100 7.53mg 4/100 15.1mg 7/75 34.0m9 2/50 
9 1031m 6.48mg 21.1mg 58/100 7.53mg 80/100 15.1mg 61/75 34.0mg 48/50 
1754 1031n 22.7mg 58.9mg 0/100 3.76m9 6/100 7.53mg 11/75 15.1mg 13/50 
 
a 1031n 35.0mg 127.mg 0/100 3.76mg 3/100 7.53mg 7/75 15.1mg 8/50 
b 1031n 54.5mg 298.mg 0/100 3.76mg 0/100 7.53mg 4/75 15.1mg 6/50 
c 1031n 58.3mg 337.mg 0/100 3.76mg 0/100 7.53mg 0/75 15.1mg 9/50 
d 1031n 70.1mg 1.519m 0/100 3.76mg 1/100 7.53mg 3/75 15.1mg 3/50 
 
a 1031n 58.8m n.s.s. 1/100 3.76mg 2/100 7.53mg 4/75 15.1mg 4/50 
f 1031n 90.3mg n.s.s. 1/100 3.76mg 0/100 7.53mg 1/75 15.1mg 4/50 
9 1031n 8.87mg 37.5mg 37/100 3.76mg 34/100 7.53mg 40/75 15.1mg 36/50 
 
1755 192m 7.53mg 38.0mg 0/21 40.0mg 11/21 St 
 
a 192m 15.8mg 498.mg 0/21 40.0mg 5/21 
b 192m 15.8mg 498.mg 0/21 40.Omg 5/21 
1756 192n 25.0mg 79.2mg 0/44 40.0mg 21/44 
a 192n 117.mg n.s.s. 0/44 40.0mg 3/44 
b 192n 117.mg n.s.s. 0/44 40.0mg 3/44 
1757 1018 8.23mg 32.9mg 0/25 29.9mg 18/22 
 
a 1018 22.5mg 352.mg 2/25 29.9mg 10/22 
b 1018 39.4mg 827.mg 0/25 29.9mg 5/22 
c 1018 5.53mg 25.9mg 2/25 29.9mg 20/22 
1758 1018 5.69mg 21.6mg 0/25 22.5mg 22/25 
 
a 1018 26.8mg 192.mg 0/25 22.5mg 8/25 
b 1018 4.52mg 18.4mg 0/25 22.5mg 23/25 
 
4,4'-NETHYLENE-BIS(2-CHLOROANILINE).2HCL 64049-29-2 
 
1759 191 35.3mg 147.mg 0/20 117.mg 9/21 246.mg 
 
a 191 35.3mg 147.mg 0/20 117.mg 9/21 246.mg 
b 191 108.mg n.s.s. 6/20 117.mg 3/21 246.mg 
c 191 26.1mg 196.mg 17/20 117.mg 16/21 246.mg 
1760 191 86.4mg n.s.s. 5/18 108.mg 3/13 206.mg 
a 191 112.mg n.s.s. 3/18 108.mg 4/13 206.mg 
b 191 28.0mg n.s.s. 12/18 108.-m 7/13 206.mg 
1761 191 18.6mg n.s.s. 1/22 18.0mg 1/22 31.3mg 
 
a 191 6.57mg n.s.s. 14/22 18.0mg 13/22 31.3mg 
 
7/14 
7/14 
2/14 
12/14 
4/20 
4/20 
16/20 
4/19 
14/19 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
Brkly Code 
 
Adamson;ossc,129-156;1982/Siaber pers.co_ . 
 
Shay;mpoc,305-318;1962 
Gruenstein;canr,24, 1656-1658; 1964 
 
Shay;jnci ,27,503-513;1961 
 
Stula; jept, 1,31 -50;1977 
 
tula;txap,31, 159-176; 1975/pers.com. 
 
Kommineni; japt,2, 149-171; 1979 
 
tula;txap,31, 159-176;1975/pars.comm. 
 
Grundmann;zkko,74,28-39;1970 
 
RussfiaLd;txap,31,47-54;1975 
 
179 
 
180 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt TD50 2T2ilpvl 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
4,4'-NETHYLENE-BIS(2-NETHYLANILINE) ... .lug. :10. 1 :100.. g : . . :10. :100.. : . :10 
 
1762 R f cdr eat liv hpc 82w82 v . + 7.92mg P<.0005. 
 
a R f cd t et Liv hpa 82w82 v 30.5mg P<.004 
b R f cdr eat Liv cdc 82w82 v 96.3mg P<.1 
 
1763 R * cdr eat mg* fbb 68w68 v . + 6.91mg P<.0005+ 
 
a R m cdr eat ski fib 68w68 v 8.19mg P<.002 + 
b R m cdr oat liv hpc 68w68 v 12.4mg P<.002 + 
c R m cdr oat liv hpa 68w68 v 17.0mg P<.004 
d R . cdt oat Liv hem 68w68 v 35.2mg Pz.04 
4,4'-NETHYLENEBIS(N,N-DINETHYL)BENZENANINE.. ........ .....100......g............. .... 1 u g : .10 :1:00 . 1g . 10 
 
1764 N f b6c eat tiv NXA 78w91 : 207.mg * P<.003 c 
 
a N f b6c eat TBA NXB 78w91 280..g * P<.07 
 
b N f b6c eat Liv NXB 78w91 207.mg * P<.003 
c N f b6c set tun NXB 78w91 1.08m \ P<.2 
 
1765 N m b6c eat TBA NXB 78w91 :> 367.mg * P<.2 - 
 
a N b6c eat l iv NXS 78w91 558.mg * P<.2 
b N m b6c eat l un NXB 78w91 1.419m * P<.4 
 
1766 R f f34 eat thy NXA 14m24 + 16.4mg / P<.0005c 
 
a R f f34 eat thy fcc 14m24 27.7mg / P<.0005c 
b R f f34 eat Liv nnd 14m24 203.mg * P<.05 
c R f f34 eat TBA NXB 14m24 41.7mg / P<.4 
 
d ft f f34 eat liv NXB 14m24 203.mg * P<.05 
 
1767 R m f34 eat thy NXA 14m24 + 16.5mg / P<.0005c 
 
a R m f34 eat thy fcc 14m24 28.6mg I P<.002 c 
b R m f34 eat TBA NXB 14m24 42.9mg * P<.5 
c R m f34 eat liv NXB 14m24 no dre Pal. 
 
NETHYLGUANIDINE 1 Ong.. :. .ug. :10. 1 :100. g :..g :10. :100. . : :10 
 
1768 R m wis *at liv hem 68w68 * .> 84.0mg 
 
P<. 2 
 
7-NETHYLGUANINE 
 
1769 R b b46 ivJ tba mat 25m29 
 
NETHYLNYDRAZINE 
 
1770 H f syg wit liv mhs 86w86 m 
 
a H f syg mat cc mix 86w86 i 
b H f syg wat coc pta 86w86 i 
c H f syg wat liv mix 86w86 m 
d H f syg wat tun ng 86w86 i 
1771 H m syg wat liv ohs 23m23 e 
 
a H m syg wat coc mix 23m23 m 
b H m syg wat coc pta 23m23 e 
c H m syg wat lun tum 23m23 m 
1772 N f swi wit tun ad. 62w62 es 
 
a N f swi wat bit mix 62w62 es 
b N f swi wat bit cho 62w62 es 
 
c N f swi wit tun mix 62w62 es 
d N f swi wit liv hpt 62w62 es 
1773 N m swi wat tiv mix 69w69 es 
 
a N m iwi wit liv hpt 69w69 ms 
b N m swi wat tun ado 69w69 es 
c N m iwi wit bit mix 69w69 as 
 
NETHYLHYDRAZINE SULFATE 
 
1774 N f swi gay lun tum 
1775 N f swi wit lun mix 
 
a N f swi wit lun ad. 
 
b N f swi wit lun adc 
c N f swi wit liv mix 
1776 N m swi wit lun mix 
 
a N m swi wat lun ad. 
 
b N m swi wat lun adc 
c N m swi wit ... -Ly 
d N m swi wit Liv mix 
 
40w55 
 
26m26 a 
26m26 a 
26m26 e 
26m26 a 
26m26 a 
26m26 a 
26m26 e 
26m26 a 
26m26 a 
 
(N-6) - (NETHYLNITROSO)ADENINE 
 
1777 N f icd wit Liv mix 24m24 
 
a N f mcd wit tun tum 24m24 
1778 N m mcd wat lun tum 24m24 
 
a N m mcd wit Liv mix 24m24 
 
(N-6) (NETHYLNITROSO)ADENOSINE 
1779 N f scd wit rep mix 24X24 
 
a N f mcd wat tun tum 24a24 
b N f ecd wit *gt car 24m24 
c N f mcd wat ute tum 24m24 
d N f mcd wat liv mix 24m24 
1780 N m mcd wit tun tum 24m24 
 
a N m scd wit liv mix 24m24 
 
lOOng.. :. .ug...:.10 ...:.100 . 1m:.lg... .10 ....100...:.Ig ...:.10 
 
.> 8.24mg 
 
iOOng . . .:ug . :10.100. : .....100 .. g :1g . : 10 
 
+ . 15.4mg 
 
25.8mg 
29.8mg 
30.8mg 
297.mg 
+ . 9.20mg 
 
42.1mg 
50.7mg 
no dre 
+ . 19.6mg 
 
24.6mg 
29.2mg 
21.4mg 
51.1mg 
+ . 4.58mg 
 
7. 25mg 
10.1mg 
22. 5mg 
 
lOOng .. : lug. :10. :100. g :.1g :10. :100.. : g :10 
 
no dre 
+ . 2.98mg 
 
4.02mg 
5.63mg 
47.2mg 
+ . 2.51mg 
 
2.93mg 
12.0mg 
7.85mg 
no dre 
 
100ng..:. .ug. :10. :100.. g :. . :10. : 100.. : . :10 
 
63.2mg 
909.mg 
A 18.0mg 
 
62.6mg 
 
iOOng .. : lug. :10. :100..1.g. .:10.. :100.. : g :10 
 
+ . 15.8mg 
 
17.4mg 
28.7mg 
84.9mg 
no dre 
+ . 21.6mg 
 
no dre 
 
P<. 2 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
P<.002 
P<. 006 
P<.2 - 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 004 + 
P<.01 
P-I. 
 
P<. 008 
 
P<.003 + 
P<. 006 
 
P<.02 + 
P<.05 + 
P<.0005+ 
P<. 0005 
P<. 0005 
 
P<.002 + 
 
Pal. - 
P<. 0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<. 5 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005 
P<.002 
P<. 02 
P-a. 
 
P<. 2 
P<1. 
 
P<.02 + 
P<.4 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
P<.02 + 
P-l. 
 
P<.002 + 
P-I. 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
4,4'-METHYLENE-BIS(2-METHYLANILINE) 838-88-0 
 
1762 192 4.58mg 15.4mg 0/44 10.5mg 19/44 
 
a 192 12.4mg 187.ig 0/44 10.5mg 6/44 
b 192 23.7mg n.s.s. 0/44 10.5mg 2/44 
1763 192 3.58mg 19.2mg 1/44 8.49mg 14/44 
 
* 192 3.97mg 37.4mg 2/44 8.49mg 13/44 
b 192 5.61mg 41.8mg 0/44 8.49mg 8/44 
c 192 6.92mg 104.mg 0/44 8.49mg 6/44 
d 192 10.7mg n.s.s. 0/44 8.49mg 3/44 
 
4,4' -METHYLENEBIS(N,N-DINETHYL)BENZENANINE 101-61-1 
 
1764 c01990 126.mg 1.149m 1/20 139.mg 19/50 278.mg 23/50 
a c01990 122.mg n.s.s. 6/20 139.mg 26/50 278.mg 30/50 
b c01990 126.mg 1.14gm 1/20 139.mg 19/50 278.mg 23/50 
c c01990 328.mg n.s.s. 0/20 139.mg 3/50 (278.mg 0/50) 
1765 c01990 140.mg n.s.s. 7/20 128.mg 24/50 257.mg 31/50 
a c01990 216.mg n.s.s. 5/20 128.mg 12/50 257.mg 22/50 
b c01990 437.mg n.s.s. 1/20 128.mg 6/50 257.mg 7/50 
1766 c01990 11.2mg 25.8mg 0/20 11.0mg 4/50 21.0mg 36/50 
a c01990 17.4mg 51.4mg 0/20 11.0mg 3/50 21.0mg 23/50 
b c01990 70.2mg n.s.s. 0/20 11.0mg 0/50 21.0mg 4/50 
c c01990 10.8mg n.s.s. 17/20 11.0mg 33/50 21.0mg 44/50 
d c01990 70.2mg n.s.s. 0/20 11.0mg 0/50 21.0mg 4/50 
1767 c01990 10.7mg 33.5mg 1/20 8.80mg 4/50 16.8mg 34/50 
a c01990 16.5mg 117.mg 1/20 8.80mg 4/50 16.8mg 21/50 
b c01990 10.2mg n.s.s. 14/20 8.80mg 29/50 16.8mg 44/50 
c c01990 76.0mg n.s.s. 3/20 8.80mg 5/50 16.8mg 3/50 
 
METHYLGUANIDINE 471-29-4 
 
1768 1471 13.5mg n.s.s. 0/10 
 
7-NETHYLGUANINE 578-76-7 
 
1769 1443 2.03mg n.s.s. 0/20 
 
NETHYLHYDRAZINE 60-34-4 
1770 194 8.53mg 31.7mg 
a 194 11.7mg 93.3mg 
b 194 12.9mg 132.mg 
c 194 9.28mg 418.mg 
d 194 48.4mg n.s.s. 
1771 194 5.72mg 16.0mg 
 
a 194 17.1mg 359.mg 
b 194 19.2mg 4.28gm 
 
c 194 110.mg n.s.s. 
1772 1117 8.03mg 558.mg 
a 1117 10.6mg 119.mg 
b 1117 11.9mg 247.mg 
c 1117 8.30mg n.s.s. 
d 1117 15.5mg n.s.s. 
1773 1117 1.43mg 24.5mg 
a 1117 2.10mg 52.8mg 
b 1117 4.45mg 44.8mg 
c 1117 6.79mg 167.mg 
 
0/85 
1/67 
1/67 
0/39 
0/85 
0/72 
1/59 
1/59 
0/87 
12/107 
0/34 
0/34 
14/107 
0/31 
0/45 
0/45 
10/91 
0/64 
 
METHYLHYDRAZINE SULFATE 302-15-8 
 
1774 1095 10.8mg n.s.s. 8/85 1 
1775 1117 1.58mg 8.60mg 14/88 2 
 
a 1117 1.99mg 15.7mg 12/88 2 
b 1117 2.78mg 16.3mg 2/88 2 
c 1117 8.16mg n.s.s. 3/88 2 
1776 1117 1.37mg 6.32mg 10/86 1 
a 1117 1.54mg 8.52mg 10/86 1 
b 1117 4.57mg 57.4mg 0/86 1 
c 1117 3.12mg n.s.s. 2/55 1 
d 1117 7.98mg n.s.s. 2/41 1 
 
(N-6)-(NETHYLNITROSO)ADENINE - -- 
 
1777 1255 19.8mg n.s.s. 1/16 2 
 
a 1255 28.5mg n.s.s. 3/16 2 
1778 1255 7.37mg n.s.s. 4/21 1 
a 1255 13.8mg n.s.s. 5/21 1 
 
(N-6) - (METHYLNITROSO)ADENOSINE ... 
 
1779 1255 7.88m9 38.3mg 1/16 3 
a 1255 8.22mg 58.0mg 3/16 3 
b 1255 13.7mg 101.mg 1/16 3 
c 1255 32.1mg n.s.s. 0/16 3 
d 1255 89.9mg n.s.s. 1/16 3 
1780 1255 9.65mg 115.mg 4/21 2 
a 1255 54.0mg n.s.s. 5/21 2 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
Brkly Code 
 
StuLa;txap,31, 159-176; 1975/pers.com. 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun: a/a,a/c. 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
thy:fca,fcc. 
 
S 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
thy:fca,fcc. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
64. 0mg 1/5 
 
Natsukura;zkko,90,87-94; 1977 
 
.565mg 2/30 
 
13.6mg 
13.6mg 
13.6mg 
13.6mg 
13.6mg 
12. 0mg 
12.0mg 
12.0mg 
12.0mg 
20. 0mg 
20. 0mg 
20.0mg 
20. 0mg 
20 .09g 
16.7mg 
16.7mg 
16.7mg 
16.7mg 
 
10.4mg 
2.00mg 
2. 00mg 
2. 00mg 
2. 00mg 
1. 67mg 
1. 67mg 
 
1. 67mg 
1. 67mg 
1. 67mg 
 
Kruger;zkko,75,253-254; 1971 
 
16/47 
9/39 
8/39 
3/16 
1/47 
27/48 
7/39 
6/39 
0/48 
12/39 
7/39 
6/39 
12/39 
3/33 
4/6 
3/6 
11/24 
3/15 
 
Toth;canr,33,2744-2753; 1973 
 
Toth;ijcn,9,109-118;1972/1969& 
 
Roe;natu,216,375-376; 1967 
Toth; i jcn,9, 109-118;1972/1969a 
 
1/25 
23/45 
19/45 
12/45 
3/45 
23/48 
21/48 
 
5/48 
8/43 
2/41 
 
20.6mg 5/20 
20.6mg 4/20 
17. 1mg 11/19 
17. 1mg 7/19 
 
35.7mg 
35.7mg 
35.7mg 
35.7mg 
35.7mg 
29.7mg 
29.7mg 
 
Anderson; i jcn,24,319-322; 1979 
 
Anderson; i jcn,24,319-322;1979 
 
16/20 
16/20 
12/20 
5/20 
1/20 
13/19 
3/19 
 
181 
 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
1 
1 
1 
1 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
 
TD50 2Thilpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
NETHYLTHIOURACIL lOOng ..:. l ug. :10. :100. g :. . :10 : ; . 100 .... :Ig .. :10 
 
1781 H f nss wet thy mix 52w52 sk 53.4mg P*k.006 
 
NETIAPINE 
 
1782 R f aLb eat mgL fbi 78w78 e 
 
1783 R m aLb set pit ad. 78w78 e 
 
100n . . .lug. :10. :100. g :.g .:10. :100. : . :10 
 
.> no dre P-1. 
.> no dre P-1. 
 
NETRONIDAZOLE 100ng,.:. .lug... .10 ...:. 100... lu-jg .:10 ...:. 100... .Ig....:.10 
 
1784 N f swi seat Lun mix 28.30 e + 937.mg * P<.0005. 
 
a Nt f wieat --- Ly 2Sm3Oso 1.30gm * P<.002 + 
b N f awl eat Liv mix 28m30 e 24.2gm * P<.6 - 
1785 N m swi seat Lun mix 27.29 e + .347.mg * P<.0005. 
 
a N m swi eat tiv mix 27m29 e 20.7gm * P<.8 - 
1786 R f sda eat ute amy 66w75 e 180.mg P<.004 - 
a ft f ads eat Liv tum 66w75 e no dre P-I. 
 
b Rf afsdeat tbamix66w75 e 61.1mg P<c.03 - 
1787 R f sew eat mgl fbi 34.,35 seo 431.mg * P<.0005+ 
 
a R f smw sat mgt mix 34.35 is 446.mg * P<.0005+ 
b R f sow eat Liv hpc 34.35 aso 1.86gm * P<.0005. 
c R f smw sat sub mix 34m35 a 4.05gm * P<.03 
 
d R f smw eat ute mix 34.35 a 2.97gm * P<.2 - 
 
* ftfsow sat pit mix 34.35 a no dre P-I. - 
f R f amw seat tba mix 34.35 a 139.mg * P<.c0005 
 
1788 R m sow eat pit mix 33.33 a . 731.mg *P<.004 + 
 
a Rtm amw eat tea mix 33.33 a 993mg * P<.01 + 
b Rt .smw eat sub mix 33m,33 a 2.36gm * P<.06 
c Rmasow eat mgLfbhe33m33 a 2.49gm Z P<.02 
d RfmaowseatLiv hpc 33.33 a 45.9gm * P<.8 
 
e stamweat tbamix 33.33 a 211.mg * P<.0005 
 
NEXACARBATE l00ng. .:.. lug... .10 ...:. 100.. 1m:.lg...:.10 ...:. 100.. g . 1 
 
1789 N f b6c eat TBA NXB 78w92 v :>no-die PaI. - 
a N f b6c eat Liv NXS 78w92 v no die PaI. 
b N fb6c eat Lun NXB78w92 v no die P-I. 
 
1790 N f b6c oil Lun ad. 76w76 evx A 2.93mg P<.04 
 
a N f b6c oiL Liv hpt 76w76 evx no die P-Ii. 
 
b N f b6c oil tbe mix 76w76 evx 2.12mg P<.02 
 
1791 Nmo b6c eat Liv NXA 78w91 esv A#76.4mg * P<.03 - 
a N m b6c eat Liv hpc 78w91 eav 85.5mg * P<.02 
b N m b6c eat TBA NXB 78w91 eav 53.2mg * P<.3 
c N m b6c eat Liv NXB 78w91 isv 76.4mg * P<.03 
d N m b6c eat tun NXB 78w91 eav 391..g * P<.6 
 
1792 N m b6c eat aub fba 78w90 esv pooL #137.mg * P<.05 - 
 
a N m b6c eat ski fib 78w90 sav 242..g * P<.03 
 
1793 N m b6c oiL Liv hpt 76w76 evx . + 1.42mg P<.006 
 
a N m b6c oiL Lun asd 76w76 evx 1.84mg P<.02 
 
b N m b6c oil tba mix 76w76 evx .642mg P<.0005 
1794 N f b6o oiL Liv hpt 76w76 evx . no die P-I. 
 
a N f b6a oiL Lun ade 76w76 evx no die P-I. 
b N f b6a oiL tba mix 76w76 evx no die P-I. 
1795 N m b6o oiL Liv hpt 76w76 evx .>7.80mg P<.6 
 
a N a b6o oil Lun ide 76w76 evx no die P-I. 
b N m b6s oiL tba mix 76w76 evx 44.8mg PdI. 
 
1796 R f osm eat TBA NXB 18.26 v : no die P-I. - 
a ft f osm eat Liv NXB 18.26 v 1.06gm *P<.4 
 
1797 R m osm eat TBA NXB 18.26 v :>24.7mg \P<.8 - 
 
a ft m oa seat Liv NXS 18.26 v no die P-I. 
NICHLER'S KETONE bOOng. .:.. lug... .10 .... 100...1:.mg...:. 10 ...:. 100... Ig-9 :. 10 
 
1798 N f b6c eat liv NXA 78w91 I 53.0mg P<.0005c 
 
a N fb6c seat Liv hpc 78w91 111.mg IP<.OOOSc 
b N fb6c eat TSR NXB 78w91 69.1mg * P<.0005 
c N f b6c eat Liv NXS 78w91 53.0mg * P<.0005 
d N fb6c set Lun NXS7Sw9I no die P-I. 
 
17 9N m b6c eat ...NXA 78w91 203.mg I P<.0005c 
a N mb6c eat --- hoe 7Sw9l 233.mg / P<.0005c 
b N mb6c eat NXANXA 78w9I 753.mg *P<.008 
c N m b6c eat TBA NXS 78w91 99.3.g IP<.0005 
d N m b6c eat liv NXB 78w91 459.mg P<.07 
 
s Nmb6ceoat Lun NXB78w9I 1.14gm P<.3 
 
1800 R f f34 seat Liv NXA 18.25 :+ 4.87mg IP<.0005c 
 
a R f f34 eat Liv hpc 18.25 5.47mg IP<.0005c 
b R f f34 seat TBA NXB 18.25 5.97mg /P<.0005 
c ft f f34 eat Liv NXB 18.25 4.87mg /P<.0005 
 
1801 ft m f34 seat Liv NXA 18.25 .+: 6.69mg /P<.0005c 
 
a ft m f34 eat Liv hpc 18.25 8.86.g /P<.000Oc 
b ft m f34 seat TBA NXB 18.25 7.29mg /P<.0005 
c ft m f34 eat Liv NXS 18.25 6.69mg /P<.0005 
 
182 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
METHYLTHIOURACIL 56-04-2 
1781 1385 22.1mg 507.mg 
METIAPINE 5800-19-1 
 
1782 200 38.9mg n.s.s. 
1783 200 8.00mg n.s.s. 
 
NETRONIDAZOLE 443-48-1 
 
1784 201 498.mg 3.549m 
 
a 201 654.mg 6.489m 
b 201 3.34gm n.s.s. 
1785 201 217.mg 635.mg 
 
a 201 2.069m n.s.s. 
1786 200a 62.0mg 1.27gm 
 
a 200s 229.mg n.s.s. 
b 200a 24.3mg n.s.s. 
1787 1064 231.mg 1.25gm 
a 1064 232.mg 1.46gm 
 
b 1064 842.mg 5.46gm 
c 1064 1.549m n.a.s. 
d 1064 855.mg n.s.s. 
* 1064 761.mg n.s.s. 
f 1064 53.2mg 720.mg 
1788 1064 338.mg 6.36gm 
 
a 1064 424.mg 178.gm 
b 1064 816.mg n.s.s. 
c 1064 989.mg n.a.s. 
d 1064 2.70gm n.s.s. 
* 1064 112.mg 592.mg 
 
0/6 273.mg 7/12 
 
Christov;zkko,77, 171-179; 1972 
 
1/22 3.00mg 6/20 10.0mg 1/21 30.0mg 2/20 
3/18 3.00mg 7/20 10.0m9 3/19 (30.0mg 0/20) 
 
14/65 78.0mg 
16/68 78. 0mg 
2/53 78. 0mg 
13/67 72.0mg 
6/64 72.0mg 
0/71 59.4mg 
0/71 59.4mg 
18/71 59.4m9 
30/95 30.0mg 
34/95 30.0mg 
 
0/58 30.0mg 
0/100 30. 0mg 
13/100 30.0mg 
61/100 30.0mg 
80/100 30.0mg 
20/100 24.0mg 
18/100 24.0mg 
5/100 24. 0mg 
0/100 24. 0mg 
2/100 24. 0mg 
47/100 24.0mg 
 
NEXACARBATE (Zectran) 315-18-4 
 
1789 c00544 11.2mg n.s.s. 5/20 
a c00544 57.7mg n.s.s. 1/20 
b c00544 28.4mg n.s.s. 1/20 
1790 1102 .885mg n.s.s. 0/16 
s 1102 2.91mg n.s.s. 0/16 
b 1102 .729mg n.s.s. 0/16 
1791 c00544 45.5mg n.s.s. 0/20 
a c00544 49.8mg n.s.s. 0/20 
b c00544 20.2mg n.s.s. 0/20 
c c00544 45.5mg n.s.s. 0/20 
d c00544 109.mg n.s.s. 0/20 
1792 c00544 72.2mg n.s.s. 0/40p 
 
a c00544 105.mg n.s.s. 0/40p 
1793 1102 .533mg 14.0mg 0/16 
a 1102 .633mg n.s.s. 0/16 
b 1102 .293mg 1.80mg 0/16 
1794 1102 2.91mg n.s.s. 0/17 
 
a 1102 2.91mg n.s.s. 1/17 
b 1102 1.93mg n.s.s. 2/17 
1795 1102 1.14mg n.s.s. 1/18 
 
a 1102 1.78mg n.s.s. 2/18 
b 1102 1.06mg n.s.s. 3/18 
1796 c00544 23.7mg n.s.s. 12/20 
a c00544 173.mg n.s.s. 0/20 
1797 c00544 3.26mg n.s.s. 6/20 
a c00544 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/20 
 
7. 50mg 
7.50mg 
7. 50mg 
1.56mg 
1. 56mg 
1. 56mg 
33.6mg 
33.6mg 
33.6mg 
33.6mg 
33.6mg 
33.6mg 
33.6mg 
1.45mg 
1.45mg 
1.45mg 
1. 56mg 
1.56mg 
1.56mg 
1. 45mg 
1. 45mg 
1.45mg 
11. 9mg 
11. 9mg 
5.80mg 
5.80mg 
 
4/10 195.mg 
3/10 195.mg 
0/10 195.m9 
3/8 180.mg 
 
0/8 180.mg 
4/36 
0/36 
17/36 
 
17/29 150.mg 
17/29 150.mg 
0/28 150.mg 
1/30 150.mg 
9/30 150.mg 
 
24/30 150.mg 
27/30 150.mg 
11/30 120.mg 
9/30 120.mg 
2/30 120.mg 
 
2/30 120.mg 
0/30 120.mg 
22/30 120.mo 
 
10/20 390.mg 14/19 650.mg 16/32 
5/20 390.mg 10/19 650.mg 18/34 
0/18 390.mg 2/19 650.mg 1/25 
11/15 360.mg 12/16 600.mg 27/34 
3/14 360.mg 3/16 600.mg 3/32 
 
14/28 300.mg 23/29 
15/28 300.mg 23/29 
 
1/21 300.mg 7/25 
3/30 300.mg 1/30 
8/30 300.mg 7/30 
19/30 300.mg 17/30 
28/30 300.mg 30/30 
10/30 240.mg 15/30 
6/30 240.mg 14/30 
5/30 240.mg 4/30 
1/30 240.mg 3/30 
0/30 240.mg 1/30 
21/30 240.mg 27/30 
 
16/50 (14.9mg 13/50) 
 
1/50 14.9mg 3/50 
2/50 (14.9mg 1/50) 
3/17 
0/17 
4/17 
 
6/50 66.0mg 15/50 
4/50 66.0mg 15/50 
24/50 66.0mg 28/50 
6/50 66.0mg 15/50 
3/50 66.0mg 4/50 
6/50 66.0mg 7/50 
1/50 66.0mg 6/50 
5/16 
4/16 
9/16 
0/17 
0/17 
1/17 
2/17 
1/17 
3/17 
 
33/50 23.6mg 28/50 
 
0/50 23.6mg 1/50 
21/50 (11.8mg 16/50) 
 
0/50 11.8mg 0/50 
 
Gibson;txap,25,220-229; 1973 
Rustia;Jnci,48,721-729;1972 
 
Cohen;Jnci,51,403-417;1973 
Rustia;jnci ,63,863-868;1979 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
Liv:hpa,hpc. S 
 
S 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
S 
S 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
NICHLER'S KETONE 90-94-8 
1798 c02006 40.5mg 77.0mg 
a c02006 79.2mg 168.mg 
b c02006 45.6mg 159.mg 
c c02006 40.5mg 77.0mg 
d c02006 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
1799 c02006 126.mg 349.ng 
a c02006 141.mg 425.mg 
b c02006 331.mg 13.1gm 
c c02006 63.1mg 207.mg 
d c02006 183.mg n.s.s. 
* c02006 310.mg n.s.s. 
1800 c02006 3.53mg 6.86mg 
a c02006 3.93mg 7.81mg 
b c02006 4.06mg 10.1mg 
c c02006 3.53mg 6.86mg 
1801 c02006 4.85mg 9.78mg 
 
a c02006 6.24mg 13.3mg 
b c02006 4.74mg 16.3mg 
c c02006 4.85mg 9.78mg 
 
0/20 
0/20 
4/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
7/20 
3/20 
2/20 
0/20 
0/20 
7/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
5/20 
0/20 
 
139.mg 41/50 278.mg 49/50 
139.mg 16/50 278.mg 38/50 
139.mg 43/50 278.mg 49/50 
139.mg 41/50 278.-mg 49/50 
139.mg 0/50 278.mg 0/50 
128.mg 5/50 257.mg 23/50 
128.mg 5/50 257.mg 20/50 
128.mg 2/50 257.mg 6/50 
128.mg 21/50 257.mg 39/50 
128.mg 8/50 257.mg 9/50 
128.mg 2/50 257.mg 4/50 
18.0mg 46/50 37.0mg 48/50 
18.0mg 41/50 37.0mg 44/50 
18.0mg 47/50 37.0mg 48/50 
18.0mg 46/50 37.0mg 48/50 
7.40mg 17/50 14.4mg 43/50 
7.40mg 9/50 14.4mg 40/50 
7.40mg 26/50 14.4mg 48/56 
7.40mg 17/50 14.4mg 43/50 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc. 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun: a/a, a/c. 
-- :h.,hes. 
 
ski:fbs; sub:fbs,srn. S 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
liv:hpc,nnd. 
 
liv:hps,hpc,nnd. 
 
L iv:hpc,nnd. 
 
Liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
183 
 
Brkly Code 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
 
TD5O 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
NIREX bO0ng..:............... ......g.... 10..... :0100... :1g :10 
 
1802 N f b6a ort liv hpt 68w68 evx . + . 1.10mg 
 
a N f b6a ort lun ads 68w68 avx no dre 
b N f b6a ort tba mix 68w68 *vx 1.26mg 
1803 N m b6a ort liv hpt 58w58 avx . 2.13mg 
 
a N m b6a ort tun ads 58w58 *vx no dre 
b N m b6a orl tba mix 58w58 *vx 3.32mg 
1804 N f b6c ort Liv hpt 69w69 avx . . 1.60mg 
 
a N f b6c ort tun mix 69w69 avx no dre 
b N f b6c orl tbm mix 69w69 evx 1.60mg 
1805 N m b6c ort Liv mix 58w58 vx . . 1.50mg 
 
a N m b6c orl liv hpt 58w58 avx 1.83mg 
b N m b6c ort lun mix 58w58 *vx no dre 
c N m b6c ort tba mix 58M58 evx 1.50mg 
1806 R m *da sat liv nnd 91w91 .> no dre 
 
NIREX, PHOTO- 
 
1807 R m sda *at thy ada 91w91 
 
a R m ada eat liv nnd 91w91 
 
oong .. :. .ug. :10. :100. 1m :g . : 10. :100 . . : 1 : 10 
 
+ .t1.46m *P<.007 + 
 
6.68mg a P<.5 
 
NITONYCIN-C 1Ong..:. . ug.. : 10 .:100. l.. :.jag . 0:110 
 
1808 R f cdr ipJ per mar 26w78 a . + . 981.ng 
 
a R f cdr ipi liv tum 26w78 a no dre 
 
b R f cdr ipJ tba maL 26w78 a 1.13ug 
c R f cdr ipJ tba mix 26w78 a 1.23ug 
d R f cdr ipj tba ben 26w78 a no dre 
 
1809 R m cdr ipJ per smr 26w63 a . + . 1.07ug 
 
a R m cdr ipJ Liv Lys 26w63 a 39.3ug 
b R m cdr ipJ tba mal 26w63 a 732.ng 
c R m cdr ipJ tba mix 26w63 a 805.ng 
d R m cdr ipJ tba ban 26w63 a no dre 
NONOCHLOROACETIC ACID lOOng ..:. l ug. 1 :10 : . 100. g : .g :10.. :100..1 :0g :10 
 
1810 N f b6a ort Lun ada 76w76 avx . 59.7mg 
 
a N f b6a orl Liv hpt 76w76 avx no dre 
b N f b6a orl tba mix 76w76 avx 38.5mg 
1811 N m b6a ort tun ado 76w76 avx .> 115.mg 
 
a N a b6a ort Liv hpt 76w76 avx 2.01gm 
b N m b6a orl tba mix 76w76 avx 942.mg 
1812 N f b6c orl Liv hpt 76w76 avx .> no dre 
 
a N f b6c orL lun ada 76w76 avx no dre 
 
b N f b6c orl tba mix 76w76 *vx 1.01gm 
1813 N a b6c orL lun ado 76w76 avx .> 122.mg 
 
a N m b6c orl Liv hpt 76w76 avx no dre 
b N m b6c orl tba mix 76w76 avx no dra 
 
4-NORPHOLINO-2-(5-NITRO-2-THIENYL)QUINAZOLINE .... .:10. :100. 1. :. . : 10. :100 .. : 1. :10 
 
1814 R f sda aat tba mix 46w66 a . + . 5.03mg 
L-5-NORPHOLINONETHYL-3-1(5-NITROFURFURYLIDENE)ANINO] -2-OXAZOLIDINONE.HCL..img . :10. :100.. :1g :10 
 
1815 R f ada mat mgt mix 46w6" . + . 2.81mg 
 
a R f sda mat mgt mdc 46w66 a 6.33mg 
b R f sda at --- tbb 46w6 * historica 
 
c R f ma a * t k/p tcc 46w6 a *historicaL 
d R f ado t Liv tum 46w66 a no dra 
a R f s da eatt xmix 46w66, 2.81mg 
 
NYLERAN bOng... . lu :g. 10. :100. g : ..g :10. : 100.. : . :10 
 
1816 R m b46 gay tba mix 12m24 am .> 93.lug 
 
a f m b46 gay tba mat 12m24 am .117mg 
b f m b46 gay tba ban 12m24 am .642mg 
 
I-NAPHTHALENE ACETANIDE Ong..: .lug . 0 :.10 0 :.100 . 1m . 10:10 . g 
 
1817 N f b6a art Liv hpt 76w76 avx > no dra 
 
a N f b6a art tun ada 76w76 avx no dra 
b N f b6a art tba mix 76w76 evx 956.mg 
1818 N m b6a art Liv hpt 76w76 evx > no dre 
 
a N m b6a art tun ado 766w76 vx no dre 
b N m b6a art tba mix 76w76 * vx no dra 
1819 N f b6c art tun ada 76w76 * vx A 461.mg 
 
a N f b6c ort Liv hpt 76w76 * vx 956.mg 
b N f b6c orL tba mix 76w76 avx 213.mg 
1820 N m b6c art Liv hpt 76w76 avx A 316.mg 
 
a N m b6c or L Lun ada 76w76 * vx 1.01gm 
b N m b6c o rt tba mix 76w76 avx 141.mg 
 
I-NAPHTHALENE ACETIC ACID 100ng . 1..lug.0 :10 . 100. :. :10 . 100.. 10 
 
1821 N f b6a art Liv agm 76w76 avx A 213.mg 
 
184 
 
P<.0005+ 
Pal. 
 
P<.003 
 
P<.04 + 
P-I. 
P<. 3 
 
P<. 0005 
P-1. 
 
P<. 0005 
P<. 002 
P<. 004 
P-I. 
 
P<. 002 
P-I. 
 
P<. 0005+ 
PaI. 
 
P<. 0005 
P<.0005 
P-I. 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<.04 
 
P<.0005 
P<. 0005 
p-I. 
 
P<.09 - 
P-1. _ 
 
P<.04 - 
P<.3 - 
P<1. _ 
P<1. _ 
P-1. _ 
P-1._ 
 
P<I. _ 
 
P<.3 - 
P-1. _ 
P. 1. _ 
 
P<. 0005+ 
 
P<.0005 
p<.0005+ 
P<.004 + 
P<.2 + 
p-I. 
 
P<. 0005 
 
P<. 6 
p<. 5 
P<. 9 
 
pPI. _ 
 
P<. 7 
 
pI. -. 
p-I. _ 
pP I 09 
 
P<.09 - 
P<. 3- 
P<. 02 - 
P<. 04 - 
P<. 3- 
P<. 003 - 
 
P<. 09 - 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose llnc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
MIREX 
1802 
 
ba 
 
1803 
 
ba 
 
1804 
 
b 
 
1805 
 
a 
b 
c 
 
2385-85-5 
 
202 .512mg 2.89mg 
202 5.18mg n.s.s. 
202 .540mg 7.45mg 
202 .718mg n.s.s. 
202 3.34mg n.s.s. 
202 .797mg n.s.s. 
202 .705mg 4.95mg 
202 5.32mg n.s.s. 
202 .705mg 4.95mg 
202 .641mg 6.13mg 
202 .738mg 11.2mg 
202 4.01mg n.s.s. 
202 .641mg 6.13mg 
1160 52.6ug n.s.s. 
 
0/17 
1/17 
2/17 
1/18 
2/18 
3/18 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/10 
 
3.67mg 
3.67mg 
3.67mg 
3.48mg 
3.48mg 
3.48mg 
3.67mg 
3.67mg 
3.67mg 
3.48mg 
3.48mg 
3.48mg 
3.48mg 
40. Oug 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
Brkly Code 
 
Inn.s;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
10/16 
0/16 
10/16 
 
5/15 
0/15 
5/15 
8/16 
0/16 
8/16 
7/18 
6/18 
0/18 
7/18 
 
0/10 .200mg 0/10 
 
Chu;txap,59,268-278; 1981 
 
MIREX, PHOTO- 39801-14-4 
 
1807 1160 .474m9 28.7mg 1/10 8.0Oug 
a 1160 1.06mg n.s.s. 0/10 8.0Oug 
MITOHYCIN-C 50-07-7 
 
1808 1336 516.ng 1.95ug 0/182 5.40ug 
a 1336 15.6ug n.s.s. 0/182 5.40ug 
b 1336 553.ng 2.67ug 44/182 5.40ug 
c 1336 490.ng 5.4lug 103/182 5.40ug 
d 1336 13.8ug n.s.s. 59/182 5.40ug 
1809 1336 575.ng 2.16ug 0/177 6.65ug 
a 1336 6.40ug n.s.s. 0/177 6.65ug 
b 1336 346.ng 1.66ug 32/177 6.65ug 
c 1336 361.ng 2.1lug 59/177 6.65ug 
d 1336 12.1ug n.s.s. 27/177 6.65ug 
 
MONOCHLOROACETIC ACID 79-11-8 
 
1810 1263 14.7mg n.s.s. 0/18 
a 1263 38.2mg n.s.s. 0/18 
b 1263 11.6mg n.s.s. 0/18 
1811 1263 18.7mg n.s.s. 0/18 
a 1263 21.0mg n.s.s. 1/18 
b 1263 16.5mg n.s.s. 2/18 
1812 1263 38.2mg n.s.s. 0/18 
a 1263 38.2mg n.s.s. 1/18 
b 1263 17.8mg n.s.s. 2/18 
1813 1263 19.8mg n.s.s. 0/14 
 
a 1263 20.5mg n.s.s. 3/14 
b 1263 11.3mg n.s.s. 4/14 
 
20.4mg 
20.4mg 
20.4mg 
19. 0mg 
19. 0mg 
 
19. 0mg 
20.4mg 
20 .4mg 
20.4mg 
19 .0mg 
19.0mg 
 
19.09m 
 
0/10 40.Oug 0/10 .200mg 0/10 1.00mg 4/10 
1/10 40.Oug 0/10 .200mg 1/10 1.00m9 1/10 
 
22/25 
 
0/25 
22/25 
23/25 
 
1/25 
19/24 
 
1/24 
22/24 
22/24 
 
0/24 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
2/17 
0/17 
3/17 
1/17 
1/17 
2/17 
0/17 
0/17 
2/17 
1/18 
2/18 
5/18 
 
Chu;txap,59,268-278; 1981 
 
4-NORPHOLINO-2-(5-NITRO-2-THIENYL)QUINAZOLINE 58139-48-3 
1814 1390 2.70mg 11.2mg 6/84 17.4mg 18/28 
 
1-5-NORPHOLINONETHYL-3-[(5-NITROFURFURYLIDENE)ANINOJ -2-OXAZOLIDINONE.HCL 3031-51-4 
1815 200s 1.25mg 5.71mg 1/25 34.8mg 31/32 
a 200a 3.70mg 11.6mg 0/25 34.8mg 25/32 
b 200a 16.8mg 219.mg 0/25 34.8mg 7/32 
c 200a 36.6mg n.s.s. 0/25 34.8mg 2/32 
d 200a 92.6mg n.s.s. 0/25 34.8mg 0/32 
 
a 200a 1.25mg 5.71mg 1/25 34.8mg 31/32 
 
NYLERAN (busuLfan) 55-98-1 
 
1816 1017 12.7ug n.s.s. 7/65 9.29ug 3/18 
a 1017 15.1ug n.s.s. 4/65 9.29ug 2/18 
b 1017 20.6ug n.s.s. 3/65 9.29ug 1/18 
 
1-NAPHTHALENE ACETANIDE 86-86-2 
1817 1156 337.mg n.s.s. 0/17 
 
a 1156 337.mg n.s.s. 1/17 
b 1156 120.mg n.s.s. 2/17 
1818 1156 314.mg n.s.s. 1/18 
a 1156 314.mg n.s.s. 2/18 
b 1156 314.mg n.s.s. 3/18 
1819 1156 113.mg n.s.s. 0/16 
a 1156 156.mg n.s.s. 0/16 
b 1156 73.0mg n.s.s. 0/16 
1820 1156 95.4mg n.s.s. 0/16 
a 1156 165.mg n.s.s. 0/16 
b 1156 56.9mg 765.mg 0/16 
 
180 .m9 
180 .m9 
180.mg 
 
168.*9 
168. Ng 
 
168.mg 
180 .mg 
180.mn 
180 .m9 
168. mg 
168.mg 
168.mg 
 
0/17 
0/17 
3/17 
0/17 
0/17 
0/17 
2/15 
1/15 
4/15 
3/17 
1/17 
6/17 
 
1-NAPHTHALENE ACETIC ACID (Planofix) 86-87-3 
 
1821 1157 52.4mg n.s.s. 0/17 73.0mg 2/17 
 
Cohen; Jnci,57,277-282; 1976 
Cohen;Jnci,51,403-417;1973 
 
Schmahl ;arzn,20, 1461-1467;1970 
 
Innes;ntis,1968/1969 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
185 
 
Skipper;srfr;1976/Weisburger 1977/Prejean pers. com. 
 
TD5O 2Thilpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
* N f b6a orl Lun ad. 76w76 *vx 
b N f b6a orl tbe mix 76w76 evx 
1822 N m b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 *vx 
a N m b6a orL Lun ad. 76w76 *vx 
b N m b6a orl tba mix 76w76 *vx 
1823 N f b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 *vx 
 
a N f b6c orl Lun mix 76w76 *vx 
b N f b6c orL tba tur 76w76 *vx 
1824 N m b6c orl Liv hpt 76w76 ovx 
a N m b6c orl Lun mix 76w76 evx 
b N m b6c orl tbe mix 76w76 evx 
 
1 ,5-NAPHTHALENEDIANINE 
 
1825 N f b6c eat NXB NXS 24.24 
a N f b6c eat liv hpc 24.24 
b N f b6c eat Liv NXA 24.24 
c N f b6c eat thy NXA 24.24 
d N f b6c eat lun NXA 24m24 
* N f b6c eat thy NXA 24.24 
f N f b6c eat thy ccr 24m24 
9 N f b6c eat TBA NXB 24.24 
h N f b6c eat Liv NXB 24.24 
i N f b6c eat lun NXB 24.24 
1826 N * b6c eat thy NXB 24.24 
a N * b6c eat thy NXA 24.24 
b N * b6c eat thy NXA 24.24 
c N m b6c eat thy ccr 24.24 
d N * b6c eat TBA NXB 24.24 
* N * b6c eat liv NXB 24.24 
f N m b6c eat Lun NXB 24.24 
1827 R f f34 eat NXB NXB 24.25 
a R f f 34 sat ute gsp 24m25 
b R f f34 eat cli NXA 24.25 
c R f f 34 eat thy NXA 24.25 
d R f f 34 eat TBA NXB 24.25 
* R f f34 eat Liv NXB 24.25 
1828 R m f34 eat TBA NXB 24.25 
a R m f34 eat liv NXB 24.25 
 
N- ( -NAPHTHYL)ETHYLENEDIMINE.2HCL 
1829 N f b6c eat TBA NXS 24.25 cv 
* N f b6c eat Liv NXB 24.25 cv 
b N f b6c eat lun NXB 2425 sv 
1830 N * b6c eat TBA NXB 24.24 
* N m b6c eat liv NXB 24.24 
b N * b6c eat Lun NXS 24.24 
1831 R f f34 eat Liv NXA 24.25 
a R f f34 eat TBA NXB 24.25 
b R f f34 eat liv NXB 24.25 
1832 R m f34 eat TBA NXB 24m25 
a R * f34 eat liv NXS 24.25 
 
o00ng.. :. .ug. :10. :100. g :1. g :10 .:100.. : g :10 
 
+ 66.6mg \ P<.0005 
 
115.m9 \ P<.0005c 
129.mg * P<.0005c 
327.mg * P<.002 c 
331.mg \ P<.0005c 
936.mg * P<.002 c 
1.32gm * P<.005 c 
223.mg * P<.03 
 
129.9 * P<.0005 
331.mg \ P<.0005 
: + : 217.mg * P<.0005 
 
276.mg P<.0005c 
1.269m * P<.02 c 
1.91gm C P<.02 c 
583.mg * P<.5 
1.649m * P<.6 
no dre PaI. 
 
: " : 50.8m9 * P<.002 
 
69.6mg * P<.009 c 
137.mg * P<.009 c 
57.6mg \ P<.03 
55.8mg C P<.2 
236.mg P<.2 
 
:> 48.1mg C P<.2 - 
 
1.049m C P<.9 
 
lug . 10 . 100 . 1 ...10 . 100... :19 :10 
 
:> no dre PaI. 
 
25.69m * P<.8 
4.39gm * P<.2 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
A #93.5mg \ P<.02 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
93.5mg \ P<.02 
:> 41.6mg \ P<.3 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
sym. dibete-NAPHTHYL-p-PHENYLENEDIANINE .... lug.... :g10. :100. g : .1g :10..:100.. : g :10 
 
1833 N f b6a orL lun ade 76w76 evx .> 221.mg 
a N f b6a orl Liv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b N f b6a orl tba mix 76w76 evx 63.8mg 
1834 N m b6a orl Lun ads 76w76 evx .> no dre 
a N m b6a orl Liv hpt 76w76 *vx no dre 
b N m b6a orl tba mix 76w76 evx no dre 
1835 N f b6c orl Liv hpt 76w76 evx .> no dre 
 
a N f b6c orl lun mix 76w76 evx no dre 
b N f b6c orl tba mix 76w76 evx 235.mg 
1836 N m b6c orl liv hpt 76w76 evx . 59.4mg 
 
a N m b6c orl lun de 76w76 evx 192.mg 
b N m b6c orl tba mix 76w76 evx 25.9mg 
 
1-(1-NAPHTHYL)-2-THIOUtREA 1 O0ng.. :. .ug. :10. :100.. g : . . :10. :100.. g . 10 
 
1837 N f b6a orl Lun ads 76w76 evx .> no dre 
 
* N f b6a orl liv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b N f b6a orl tba mix 76w76 evx no dre 
1838 N m b6a orl Lun ado 76w76 evx .> no dre 
 
a N m b6a orl liv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b N m b6a orl tba mix 76w76 evx no dre 
1839 N f b6c orl Liv hpt 76w76 evx .> no dre 
 
* N f b6c orl Lun mix 76w76 evx no dre 
b N f b6c orl tba mix 76w76 evx 5.34mg 
1840 N m b6c orl lun ado 76w76 evx . 1.27mg 
 
* N m b6c orl liv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b N m b6c orl tba mix 76w76 evx .700mg 
 
186 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
no dre 
387 mg 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
199mg 
no dre 
71.5mg 
 
Pal. _ 
P<.7 - 
P-.1 - 
P-1. _ 
P-I. 1 
Pal. 1 
 
P-I. _ 
P-I. 1 
P<.1 I 
 
P-1. _ 
P<. 007 - 
 
P<.6 - 
P-I. 1 
 
P<.2 - 
P-1. - 
Pal. _ 
Pal. _ 
Pal. _ 
P-1. _ 
P<.3 - 
P<.04 - 
P<.3 - 
P<.002 - 
 
P-I. 1 
 
P-1. _ 
P-1. _ 
P-I. 1 
 
P-I. - 
Pal. 1 
Pal. 1 
 
P-1. - 
P<.3 - 
P<.04 - 
P-I. _ 
P<. 005 - 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntri lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
1157 81.4mg n.s.s. 
1157 48.8mg n.s.s. 
1157 80.4mg n.s.s. 
1157 89.3mg n.s.s. 
1157 53.5mg n.s.s. 
1157 129.mg n.s.s. 
1157 129.39 n.s.s. 
1157 129.mg n.s.s. 
1157 48.8mg n.s.s. 
1157 127.mg n.s.s. 
1157 26.9mn 966.mg 
 
1,5.NAPHTHALENEDIAMINE (1,5-diaminonsphthal.ns) 2243-62-1 
 
1825 c03021 42.1mg 129.mg 3/50 127.mg 38/50 (253.mg 34/50) 
a c03021 69.5mg 236.mg 1/50 127.mg 25/50 (253.mg 16/50) 
b c03021 89.8mg 223.mg 1/50 127.mg 28/50 253.mg 27/50 
c c03021 186.mg 1.46gm 2/50 127.mg 17/50 253.mg 14/50 
d c03021 161.mg 1.00gm 0/50 127.mg 10/50 (253.mg 5/50) 
 
a c03021 455.mg 3.26gm 0/50 127.mg 2/50 253.mg 8/50 
f c03021 571.mg 9.23gm 0/50 127.mg 1/50 253.mg 6/50 
g c03021 102.mg n.s.s. 21/50 127.mg 41/50 253.mg 37/50 
h c03021 89.8mg 223.mg 1/50 127.mg 28/50 253.mg 27/50 
i c03021 161.ng 1.00gm 0/50 127.mg 10/50 (253.mg 5/50) 
1826 c03021 139.mg 373.mg 0/50 118.mg 10/50 235.mg 19/50 
 
a c03021 170.mg 510.mg 0/50 118.mg 8/50 235.mg 16/50 
b c03021 515.mg n.s.s. 0/50 118.mg 2/50 235.mg 4/50 
c c03021 661.mg n.s.s. 0/50 118.mg 0/50 235.mg 4/50 
d c03021 131.mg n.s.s. 24/50 118.mg 40/50 235.mg 25/50 
 
a c03021 291.mg n.s.s. 12/50 118.mg 13/50 235.mg 13/50 
f c03021 607.mg n.s.s. 4/50 118.mg 9/50 235.mg 2/50 
1827 c03021 29.5mg 242.mg 3/25 24.3mg 16/50 48.1mg 28/50 
a c03021 37.7mg 2.04gm 2/25 24.3mg 14/50 48. 1mg 20/50 
b c03021 69.1m9 4.53gm 1/25 24.3mo 3/50 48.1mg 13/50 
c c03021 26.2mg n.s.s. 1/25 24.3mg 12/50 (48.1mg 4/50) 
d c03021 19.7mg n.s.s. 17/25 24.3mg 41/50 48.1mg 49/50 
 
a c03021 107.mg n.s.s. 0/25 24.3mg 4/50 48.1mg 4/50 
1828 c03021 19.2mg n.s.s. 10/25 19.4mg 32/50 38.9mg 38/50 
a c03021 86.4mg n.s.s. 1/25 19.4mg 7/50 38.9mg 4/50 
 
liv:hpa,hpc; Lun:a/a,a/c; thy:cce,ccr,fca,pcy,ppa. C 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc. 
thy: fca,pcy,ppa. 
 
Lun:s/a,a/c. 
thy:cca,ccr. 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
thy:cca,ccr,fca,pcy,ppa. C 
 
thy:fca,pcy,ppa. 
 
thy:cca,ccr. 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
cLi:adn,con; ute:esp. C 
 
cli :adn,con. 
 
thy:cca,ccr. S 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
N-C( -NAPHTHYL)ETHYLENEDIANINE.2HCl 
1829 c03281 851.mg n.s.s. 21/50 
a c03281 1.94gm n.s.s. 1/50 
b c03281 1.339m n.s.s. 0/50 
1830 c03281 119.mg n.s.s. 24/50 
a c03281 368.mg n.s.s. 12/50 
b c03281 384.mg n.s.s. 4/50 
1831 c03281 42.3mg n.s.s. 0/25 
a c03281 69.2mg n.s.s. 17/25 
b c03281 42.3mg n.s.s. 0/25 
1832 c03281 12.5mg n.s.s. 10/25 
a c03281 265.mg n.s.s. 1/25 
 
1465.25-4 
 
253.mg 15/50 392.mg 9/50 
253.mg 1/50 392.mg 1/50 
253.mg 2/50 392.mg 1/50 
60.0mg 19/50 (120.mg 16/50) 
60.0mg 5/50 120.mg 9/50 
60.0mg 7/50 120.mg 3/50 
25.0mg 8/50 (50.0mg 1/50) 
25.0mg 36/50 50.0mg 30/50 
25.0mg 8/50 (50.0mg 1/50) 
20.0mg 35/50 (40.0mg 27/50) 
20.0mg 2/50 40.0m9 1/50 
 
Liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
tun:a/a,a/c. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Liv:hpc,nnd. S 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
sym .-dibet-.NAPHTHYL-p-PHENYLENEDIANINE (Agerits white) 93-46-9 
1833 1305 30.7mg n.s.s. 1/17 38.9mg 2/17 
a 1305 72.8mg n.s.s. 0/17 38.9mg 0/17 
b 1305 17.3mg n.s.s. 2/17 38.9mg 5/17 
1834 1305 47.Smg n.s.s. 2/18 36.2mg 1/18 
a 1305 71.7mg n.s.s. 1/18 36.2mg 0/18 
b 1305 37.5mg n.s.s. 3/18 36.2mg 2/18 
1835 1305 72.8mg n.s.s. 0/16 38.9mg 0/17 
a 1305 72.8mg n.s.s. 0/16 38.9mg 0/17 
b 1305 38.2mg n.s.s. 0/16 38.9mg 1/17 
1836 1305 17.9mg n.s.s. 0/16 36.2mg 3/15 
 
a 1305 31.2mg n.s.s. 0/16 36.2mg 1/15 
b 1305 10.4mg117.mg 0/16 36.2mg 6/15 
 
1-(1-NAPHTHYL)-2-THIOUREA (ANTU) 86-88.4 
 
1837 1155 ."1mg n.s.s. 1/17 .834mg 
 
a 1155 1.65mg n.s.s. 0/17 .834mg 
b 1155 1.10mg n.s.s. 2/17 .834mg 
1838 1155 1.02mg n.s.s. 2/18 .776mg 
 
a 1155 1.54mg n.s.s. 1/18 .776mg 
b 1155 .803mg n.s.s. 3/18 .776mg 
1839 1155 1.65mg n.s.s. 0/16 .834mg 
a 1155 1.65mg n.s.s. 0/16 .834mg 
b 1155 .869mg n.s.a. 0/16 .834mg 
1840 1155 .383mg n.s.s. 0/16 .776mg 
a 1155 1.28mg n.s.s. 0/16 .776mg 
b 1155 .263mg 5.52mg 0/16 .776mg 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
Inn.s;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
1/18 
0/18 
1/18 
1/18 
0/18 
2/18 
0/18 
0/18 
1/18 
3/15 
0/15 
5/15 
 
a 
 
b 
 
1822 
 
ba 
b 
 
1823 
 
ba 
b 
 
1824 
a 
 
b 
 
1/17 
2/17 
1/18 
2/18 
3/18 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
 
73.09g 
73.09g 
68.0mg 
68.0mg 
68.0mg 
73.0mg 
73.09g 
73.0mg 
68.0mg 
68.0mg 
 
68.09g 
 
187 
 
1/17 
3/17 
1/18 
1/18 
3/18 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
2/17 
0/17 
5/17 
 
Brkly Code 
 
188 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Nol 
2-NAPHTHYLAMINE 
 
1841 N f bat oat Liv hnd 40v55 or 
 
a N f baL oat Liv ado 40w55 or 
b N f bat oat Liv mix 40v55 or 
c N f baL oat Liv hpt 4Ow55 or 
d N f bL at ubt tum 4Ow55 or 
1842 N b cba gav Liv hpt 79w79 o 
 
1843 P f rho mix ubl mix 60.60 omr 
a P f rho mix ubl pam 60m60 " 
b P f rho mix ubL tec 60m60o * 
 
c P f rho ix ubl pp 60m60m *r 
d P f rho mix ubL cor 60m60 m 
 
P f rho mix ubl ppc 60m60 " 
1844 R b oLb oat ubt po 24.24 r 
 
1845 R b alb oat ubt pam 24.24 or 
 
1846 ft b aLb oot ubt pon 24m24 ofr 
 
NICKEL 
 
1847 R f Lob vat tba mix 43.43 o 
a R f ob wattb t t4343 o 
18 fR m Lob vat tba mix 37.37 o 
a R * Lob ttb maL 3m37o 
 
NICKEL (II) ACETATE 
 
1849 N f cdl wat tba mix 29m29 a 
1850 N f cdl vat Lun tum 33.33 a 
 
a N f cd1 wet tiv car 33m33 o 
b N f cdl wttb 1mix 33.33 o 
1851 N a cdl wat tba mix 32m32 * 
1852 N a cd1 vat lun tum 32.32 o 
 
a N a cdl t tba tum 32m32 a 
 
TD5O 2I'ilpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
tes 
 
iO0ng. . :._ug. :10. : .100.. : " g :100.... :1g. :.10 
 
+ . 17.4mg 
 
36.9mg 
63.0mg 
175.mg 
no dre 
20.5mg 
rv CO(a) 5.74mg 
rv 25.8mg 
rv 25.8mg 
rv 25.8mg 
rv 53.7mg 
rv 53.7mg 
 
no dro 
9.68mg 
r .> 35.4mg 
 
1O0ng..: ..ug. :10. :100. g :.g :10.. :100....10 
 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dro 
 
O0ng .: ..lug. :10. :100. g :1g :10.. :100.... g :.10 
 
29.0mg 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
 
NICKEL DISUTYLOITNIOCAMkATE 100ng ..:... .. l..ug . . . . . :g100. . g . 10 
 
1853 N f b6a orl lun ado 76v76 ovx .> 86.9ug 
a N f b6a orL liv hpt ?6v76 ovx no dro 
b N f b6a orL tba mix 76v76 ovx .185mg 
1854 N m b6a orl lun ado 76v76 ovx .> .153mg 
a N m b6a orL Liv hpt 76v76 *vx no dro 
b N a b6a orL tba mix 7676 ovx no dre 
1855 N f b6c orL tun ado 76v76 ovx .> .174.g 
a N f b6c ort liv hpt 76v76 ovx no dre 
b N f b6c ort tba mix 76v76 ovx .174.g 
1856 N m b6c orL Liv hpt 76v76 ovx . 50.9ug 
a N * b6c orL Lun o 76v76 ovx .163mg 
b N m b6c orL tbc six 76v76 evx 28.3ug 
 
NICOTINE bO0ng .. : lug. :10. :100. g : ..g :10. :100..g.10 
 
1857 R f ado ipJ tbo maL 24m24 es .> no dre 
1858 R m d. ipj Liv hoo 24.24 es .> no dro 
 
a Itm da ipJ tbcu mL 2424 es 6.38mg 
 
P<. 0005 
P<. 0005 
P<. 0005 
 
P<.04 + 
P-1. _ 
P<.002 + 
P<. 06 + 
P<.4 + 
P<.4 + 
P<.4 + 
P<.6 + 
P<.6 6 
P-1. 
P<. 2 
P<.4 
 
p. 1. 
P-I. 1 
 
p-I. _ 
P-1. _ 
 
P<.8 - 
Pal. _ 
P-1. _ 
Pal. _ 
P-1. _ 
P-1. _ 
P-1. _ 
 
P<.4 4 
 
P-1. _ 
P<.7 - 
P<.7 - 
P-1. _ 
P-1. _ 
P<.3 - 
P-I. 1 
 
P<.3 - 
P<. 04 - 
P<.3 - 
P<. 007 - 
 
P-1. _ 
p.1. 
 
P<.6 - 
 
NICOTINIC ACID HYDRAZIDE 
 
1859 N f vsa vat lun mix 24.24 o 
a N f vav wt tun d 2424 o 
b N f wsvavt lun cdc 2424 o 
c N f sv at Liv ang 2424 o 
d N f svav t Liv aou 2424 o 
1860 N m soa vat lun ad. 23.23 o 
a N v swav at tun six 23n23 o 
b N o sv vat Liv hpt 23.23 o 
c N m ova wvt Liv cng 23m23.o 
d N a ave t Liv o 23m23o 
 
NI6ROSINE 
 
1861 R f nsa oat liv tum 64v64 * 
a I f ns oattb tmix 64"64 o 
1862 f m nsa ost Liv tun 64v6 o 
a R a ns oat tb mix 64 
 
NIOSATE, SODIUN 
 
1863 N b cdl vat lun tum 31m31 o 
 
a N b cdl vat liv tur 31m31 o 
 
bN bcdl t tba tu 31m3l 
 
c N b cdl wttb tmL 3131 o 
 
NITHIAZIDE 
 
18" N f b6c oat TBA NXS 22.24 v 
 
a N f b6c oat Liv NXI 22m24 v 
b N f b6c oat lun NXB 22m24 v 
 
1O0ng. g. : .ug. :10.: 100.. :1_.:10. :100.. :I . :"10 
 
145 .mg 
181.Mg 
511 .mg 
no dre 
no dro 
,, . 428.mg 
 
528.mg 
1.419m 
no dre 
no dre 
 
bOOng..: ..ug. :10. :100. 1g : 1g :10. :100... . 1. 10 
 
no dro 
no dro 
no dre 
no dre 
 
b00ng..:..!ug. 10. 100.... :1m 10. :100...1 g : . 10 : 0 
 
.> ~~~~~~~no dro 
 
no dro 
no dre 
no dre 
 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
 
P-I. - 
P-I. - 
P<.004 
 
P<.05 + 
P<. 08 - 
Pal. - 
Pal. - 
 
P-1. - 
Pal. - 
P-I. - 
P-I. - 
 
P-1. - 
P-1. - 
P-I. - 
P-1. - 
 
lOOng. . 1ug. :10. :100.. : g .: 10. :100.. : :10 
 
:> 1.40gm * P<.2 - 
 
2.72gm * P<.3 
no dro P-1. 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl 
 
lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
2-NAPHTHYLANINE 91-59-8 
1841 1446 7.87mg 41.7mg 
 
a 1446 17.2mg 97.2mg 
b 1446 26.7mg 223.mg 
c 1446 52.6mg n.s.s. 
d 1446 174.mg n.s.s. 
1842 207 10.5mg 67.5mg 
1843 1470 2.42mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1470 6.34mg n.a.s. 
b 1470 6.34mg n.s.s. 
c 1470 6.34mg n.s.s. 
d 1470 8.74mg n.s.s. 
* 1470 8.74mg n.s.s. 
1844 207m 15.8mg n.s.s. 
1845 207n 2.90mg n.s.s. 
1846 207o 5.76mg n.s.s. 
NICKEL 7440-02-0 
 
1847 1464 1.29mg n.s.s. 
a 1464 2.83mg n.s.a. 
1848 1464 .919mg n.s.a. 
a 1464 1.10mg n.s.s. 
 
0/17 
0/17 
0/17 
0/17 
0/17 
0/7 
0/3 
0/3 
0/3 
0/3 
0/3 
 
0/3 
 
0/17 
0/5 
0/5 
 
189.m9 
189.mg 
189.g9 
189.mg 
189.mg 
50.1mg 
90.5mg 
90.5mg 
 
90.5mg 
90.5m9 
90.5mg 
90.5mg 
4. 50mg 
4.50mg 
4.50mg 
 
Yoshida;gsnn,70,645-652;1979 
 
Bonser;bjca,6,412-424;1952 
Conzetman;jnci,42,825-831;1969 
 
14/16 
10/16 
7/16 
3/16 
0/16 
13/21 
7/14 
2/14 
2/14 
2/14 
1/14 
1/14 
0/17 
3/11 
1/12 
 
Bons.r;bjca,6,412-424; 1952 
 
Schroeder; jnut, 104,239-243; 1974 
 
10/26 .286"9 9/27 
7/26 .286"mg 3/27 
9/23 .250mg 4/17 
4/23 .250mg 2/17 
 
NICKEL (II) ACETATE 373-02-4 
 
1849 1395 2.89mg n.s.s. 9/45 
1850 56 6.58mg n.s.s. 9/60 
 
a 56 12.7mg n.s.s. 1/60 
b 56 8.98mg n.s.s. 22/60 
1851 1395 5.82mg n.s.s. 10/43 
1852 56 4.94m9 n.s.s. 8/44 
a 56 4.36mg n.s.s. 11/44 
 
1. 00mg 
1.00mg 
1 .00mg 
1 . 00mg 
 
.833mg 
.833mg 
.833mg 
 
10/44 
3/33 
0/33 
3/33 
4/37 
5/41 
7/41 
 
Schroeder; jnut, 105,452-458;1975 
 
Schroeder; jnut,83,239-250; 1964 
 
Schroeder; jnut,105,452-458; 1975 
 
Schroeder; jnut,83,239-250; 1964 
 
NICKEL DIBUTYLDITHIOCARBANATE (Vanguard N) 13927-77-0 
1853 1357 19.Oug n.s.s. 1/17 28.9ug 3/18 
a 1357 57.3ug n.s.s. 0/17 28.9ug 0/18 
b 1357 20.8ug n.s.s. 2/17 28.9ug 3/18 
1854 1357 19.2ug n.s.s. 2/18 27.Oug 3/18 
a 1357 53.5ug n.s.s. 1/18 27.Oug 0/18 
b 1357 21.2ug n.s.s. 3/18 27.Oug 3/18 
1855 1357 28.4ug n.s.s. 0/16 28.9ug 1/17 
a 1357 54.1ug n.s.s. 0/16 28.9ug 0/17 
b 1357 28.4ug n.s.s. 0/16 28.9ug 1/17 
1856 1357 15.3ug n.s.s. 0/16 27.Oug 3/17 
a 1357 26.5ug n.s.s. 0/16 27.Oug 1/17 
b 1357 10.7ug .383mg 0/16 27.Oug 5/17 
 
Innes;ntis,1968/1969 
 
NICOTINE 54-11-5 
 
1857 1134 1.00mg n.s.s. 3/33 .286mg 2/32 
1858 1134 2.06mg n.s.s. 1/36 .286"mg 0/35 
a 1134 .898mg n.s.s. 1/36 .286"mg 2/35 
 
NICOTINIC ACID HYDRAZIDE (3-pyridoyl hydrazine) 553-53-7 
1859 1084 85.8mg 294.mo 25/98 250.mg 38/50 
a 1084 106.mg 376.mg 20/98 250.mg 34/50 
b 1084 259.mg 1.57gm 6/98 250.mg 16/50 
c 1084 1.41gm n.s.s. 3/71 250.mg 1/42 
d 1084 1.54gm n.s.s. 5/71 250.mg 1/42 
1860 1084 197.mg 3.49gm 16/99 208.mg 19/49 
a 1084 203.mg n.s.s. 26/99 208.mg 21/49 
b 1084 230.mg n.s.s. 0/43 208.mg 1/11 
c 1084 1.30gm n.s.s. 4/90 208.mg 0/32 
d 1084 1.01gm n.s.s. 8/80 208.mg 0/25 
 
Schmahl ;zkko,86,77-84; 1976 
 
Toth;onco,38, 106-109; 1981 
 
NIGROSINE -- 
 
1861 1372 89.3mg n.s.s. 0/7 
a 1372 586.g n.s.s. 1/7 
1862 1372 4.26mg n.s.s. 0/5 
a 1372 4.26mg n.s.s. 0/5 
NIOSATE, SODIUM 12034.09-2 
 
1863 1036 7.82mg n.s.s. 15/71 
 
a 1036 24.1mg n.s.a. 4/71 
b 1036 6.56mg n.s.s. 24/71 
c 1036 10.8mg n.s.a. 8/71 
 
150.mg 0/9 1.509m 0/5 
150.mg 1/9 1.50gm 0/5 
12.0mg 0/5 120.mg 0/5 
12.0mg 0/5 120.nm 0/5 
 
.877mg 11/79 
.877mg 0/79 
.877mg 18/79 
.877mg 5/79 
 
NITHIAZIDE 139-94-6 
 
1864 c03792 522.mg n.s.s. 6/20 294.mg 13/50 587.mg 23/50 
a c03792 924.mg n.s.s. 3/20 294.mg 4/50 587.mg 12/50 
b c03792 3.719g n.s.s. 3/20 294.mg 1/50 587.mg 2/50 
 
AL Lmark; jphp,9,622-628; 1957 
 
Kanisawa;canr,29,892-895; 1969 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
189 
 
Brkly Code 
 
190 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
1865 N * b6c *et Liv NXA 22.24 v 
 
a N * b6c met Liv hpc 22.24 v 
b N m b6c et TBA NXB 22m24 v 
c N m b6c *et Liv NXB 22.24 v 
d N m b6c et lun NX 22m24 v 
1866 R f 134 eat NXA NXA 22m24 v 
 
a R f f34 eat TBA X 22m24 v 
b R f f34 eat liv NXB 22m24 v 
1867 R * f34 eat TBA NXB 22.24 v 
 
a R m f34f at liv NX 22m24 v 
 
NITRATE, SODIUN 
 
1868 R f mrc wet pit tur 20.24 m 
 
a Rt f rc wat tba mix 20.24 m 
1869 R a Erc wet tbm mix 20.24 m 
 
NITRIC OXIDE 
 
1870 N f jic inh lun edo 29.29 
NITRILOTRIACETIC ACID 
 
1871 N f b6c met kid uac 77w91 
 
a N f b6c ot TBA NXB 77w9l 
b N f b6c eat Liv NXS 77w91 
c N f b6c met lun NXB 77w91 
1872 N m b6c met NXA NXA 77w91 
 
a N * b6c et TBA NXB 77w9I 
b N m b6c set Liv NXB 77w91 
c N * b6c oat lun NXB 77w91 
1873 R f f34 met Liv nnd 77w99 
a R f f34 eat NXA NXA 77w99 
b R f f34 t ubL NXA 77w"99 
c R f f34 et dr ph 77w99 
d R f f34 et Lun /c 77"99 
* R f f34 eat TBA NXB 77w"99 
f R f f34 set Liv NXB 77w"99 
1874 R * f34 oet NXA NXA 18.24 
 
* R * f34 set NXA NXA 18.24 
b R * f34 eat TBA NXB 18.24 
c R * f34 set liv NXS 18.24 
1875 R f mrc wet tbe mix 20.24 
1876 R m urc wet tbe mix 20.24 
 
TD50 2'Lilpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
758.mg * P<.05 c 
1.90g. * P<.2 c 
4.75gm * P<.9 
758.39 * P<.05 
no dre P-1. 
 
131.mg * P<.02 c 
175.mg * P<.6 
no dre P-1. 
 
no dre P-I. - 
508.mg * P<.3 
 
: A 
 
O0ng.. :. .ug. :10. :100... : g . :10. :100 . g.10 
 
103.mg P<.004 - 
86.9mg P<.004 - 
750.mg P<.8 - 
O0ng . :. .ug. :10. :100. g :.1g :10. :100 ... g :. 10 
 
no dre Pl.. 
lO0ng..: ..ug. :10. :100. g :. . :10. :100 ... g :. 10 
 
13.8gm * P<.06 c 
3.959m * P<.3 
no dri PaI. 
9.319m * P<.2 
 
1.479m / P<.0005c 
2.219m / P<.09 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
O810.Mg * P<.004 
 
1.459m * P<.002 c 
1.579m * P<.002 c 
1.71g / P<.005 
2.25gm * P<.03 
631.mg * P<.2 
 
810.mg * P<.004 
446.mg \ P<.05 
 
2.26gm * P<.02 c 
7.12g * P<.9 
no dre Pal. 
 
221.mg P<.2 - 
248..g P<.3 - 
 
NITRILOTRIACETIC ACID, TRISODIUN SALT, NONONYDRATE.: .........100. :. 19 : 100.. g . : 1. : 10 
 
1877 N f b6c mat TBA NXB 78w91 :> 5.31gm * P<.8 - 
 
a N f b6c mat Liv NXB 78w91 no dri P-1. 
b N f b6c mat Lun NXB 78w91 61.8gm * P<.9 
 
1878 N m b6c met ... NXA 78w91 #1.55gm * P<.02 - 
 
a N m b6c mat TBA NXB 78w91 no dre Pal. 
b N m b6c met Liv NXB 78w91 no dre P-1. 
c N * b6e sat Lun NXB 78w9 1.99" \ P<.6 
 
1879 R f f34 met NXA NXA 24.24 + : 783.mg * P<.0005c 
 
a R f f34 et ubL NXA 24m24 1.99"gm * P<.002 c 
b R f 1134 met uro tcc 24.24 2.28gm * P<.0005c 
c R f f34 met kid NXA 24m24 2.88gm * P<.002 c 
d R f f34 met TSA NXB 24m24 2.99"gm * P<.6 
* R f 1134 mat Liv NXB 24m24 no dri Pal. 
 
1880 R f f34 at TBA NXB 1825 :> no dri P-1. - 
e R f f34 mat Liv NXB 18.25 12.0gm * P<.5 
 
1881 R m 134 met NXA NXA 24.24 : * : 511.mg * P<.0005c 
 
a R a f34 mat kid NXA 24.24 826.mg * P<.0005c 
b R * f34 at uro tcc 2424 965.mg * P<.0005c 
c R * f34 met kid tcc 24.24 2.53gm * P<.002 c 
d R * 1`34 mat TBA NXS 24.24 329.mg Z P<.0005 
* R f f34 mat Liv NXS 24.24 2.20gm * P<.05 
 
1882 R m f34 mat TBA XB 18.25 :> 2.63gm * P<.7 - 
e R * f34 mt Liv NXS 18.25 no dre P.1. 
 
1883 R * cdr wet kid de 24m24 m . 320.mg P<.02 * 
e R m cdr wet tbe mix 24.24 * 88.4mg P<.07 
 
1884 R m cdr wet kid edo 24.24 * . * . 224.mg P<.0005+ 
a R m cdr wet tbe mix 24m24 m 105.mg P<.2 
 
NITRITE, SODIUN 
 
1885 N f cb6 met Liv hpc 52w69 e 
 
e N f cb6 eat Lun dm 52w69 e 
b N f cb6 attb mix 52w69 m 
186 N m cb6 eat Lun ed, 52w69 e 
e N m cb6 met Liv hpc 52w69 e 
b N m cb6 totba mix 52w69 e 
 
iO0ng .: ..ug. :10. :100. 1m :g .:10. :100. . : g :10 
 
.> no dri 
 
no dri 
no dri 
.> 1.61gm 
 
no dre 
 
1.21gm 
 
P-I. 
P-I. 
P-I. 
P<. 2 
PSI. 
P<.4 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
1865 c03792 349.mg n.s.s. 4/20 
a c03792 721.mg n.s.s. 2/20 
b c03792 415.mg n.s.s. 10/20 
c c03792 349.mg n.s.s. 4/20 
d c03792 874.mg n.s.s. 3/20 
1866 c03792 68.2mg n.s.s. 1/20 
 
a c03792 36.5mg n.s.s. 13/20 
b c03792 n.a.s. n.s.s. 0/20 
1867 c03792 48.5mg n.s.s. 11/20 
 
a c03792 154..g n.s.s. 0/20 
 
NITRATE, SODIUM 7631.99-4 
 
1868 213 42.8mg 764.mg 3/15 
 
a 213 35.3mg 665.mg 4/15 
1869 213 83.5mg n.s.s. 5/15 
NITRIC OXIDE 10102-43-9 
 
1870 1388 38.4mg n.s.s. 6/64 
NITRILOTRIACETIC ACID 139-13-9 
1871 c02766 4.77gm n.s.s. 0/20 
a c02766 1.33gm n.s.s. 4/20 
b c02766 9.719m n.s.s. 0/20 
c c02766 3.809m n.s.s. 0/20 
1872 c02766 1.04gm 2.17gm 0/20 
 
a c02766 1.06gm n.s.s. 10/20 
b c02766 9.66"gm n.s.s. 3/20 
c c02766 4.689m n.s.s. 4/20 
1873 c02766 508.mg 2.19gm 2/20 
 
a c02766 908.mg 2.729m 0/20 
b c02766 967.mg 3.08gm 0/20 
c c02766 984.g 4.86gm 1/20 
d c02766 1.28gm 10.1gm 0/20 
* c02766 278.mg n.s.s. 14/20 
f c02766 508.mg 2.19gm 2/20 
1874 c02766 234.mg 10.6gm 2/20 
 
a c02766 1.21gm 7.43gm 0/20 
b c02766 442.mg n.s.s. 8/20 
c c02766 3.30gm n.s.s. 3/20 
1875 213 67.2mg n.s.s. 5/15 
1876 213 64.2mg n.s.s. 4/15 
 
271.mg 
271. mg 
271 .mg 
271 mg 
271.mg 
28.2mg 
28.2mg 
28.2mg 
22.6mg 
22.6mg 
 
15/50 542.mg 25/50 
6/50 542.mg 12/50 
27/50 542.mg 28/50 
15/50 542.mg 25/50 
4/50 (542.mg 1/50) 
5/50 56.5mg 15/50 
28/50 56.5mg 38/50 
 
0/50 56.5mg 0/50 
25/50 45.2mg 24/50 
 
1/50 45.2mg 2/50 
 
165.mg 11/15 
165.mg 12/15 
115.mg 6/15 
 
5.19mg 5/65 
 
836.mg 
836.mg 
836.mg 
 
836.mg 
771m. g 
771.mg 
771m. mg 
771.mg 
281.mg 
281. mg 
281 mg 
281 .mg 
281.mg 
281. mg 
281.mg 
225.mg 
225 mg 
225 mg 
225 mg 
165. mg 
115.mg 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
Brkly Code 
l iv:hpa,hpc. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
*gL:cyn,fba; ski:fba; sub:fba. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
LiJ insky;jnci,50,1061-1063;1973 
 
Oda;envr,22,254-263; 1980 
 
0/50 1.67gm 4/50 
13/50 1.67gm 19/50 
 
1/50 1.67gm 0/50 
2/50 1.679m 4/50 
5/50 1.54gm 24/50 
14/50 1.54gm 31/50 
3/50 1.549m 2/50 
5/50 1.54gm 6/50 
8/50 562.mg 22/50 
2/50 562.mg 13/50 
2/50 562.mg 12/50 
0/50 562.mg 14/50 
3/50 562.mg 7/50 
33/50 562.mg 47/50 
8/50 562.mg 22/50 
16/50 (450.mg 8/50) 
 
1/50 450.mg 7/50 
26/50 450.mg 22/50 
 
5/50 450.mg 2/50 
9/15 
7/15 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Iun:a/a,a/c. 
k/p:pam; kid:tLa,uac. 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
S 
kid:tLa,tpp; ubL:sqc,tcc. 
 
ubL :sqc,tcc. 
 
S 
S 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
adr:phm; pit:bsa,cra; pni:isa; thy:fca,fcc. S 
 
kid:tLa,uac; ure:pa,ppa. 
 
Liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
LiJ insky;jnci,50,1061-1063;1973 
 
NITRILOTRIACETIC ACID, TRISODIUN SALT, NONOHYDRATE 18662-53-8 
 
1877 c01446 667.mg n.s.s. 6/20 279.mg 11/50 557.mg 16/50 
 
a c01446 2.31gm n.s.s. 2/20 279.mg 3/50 557.mg 2/50 
b c01446 2.729m n.s.s. 1/20 279.mg 0/50 557.mg 2/50 
1878 c01446 778.mg n.s.s. 0/20 257.mg 3/49 514.mg 8/50 
a c01446 730.mg n.s.s. 7/20 257.mg 17/49 514.mg 14/50 
b c01446 2.129m n.s.s. 4/20 257.mg 4/49 514.mg 3/50 
c c01446 409.mg n.s.s. 2/20 257.mg 7/49 (514.mg 0/50) 
 
1879 c01445 417.mg 1.73gm 0/24 10.0mg 0/24 100.mg 1/24 1.00gm 
 
a c01445 808.mg 10.99m 0/24 10.0mg 0/24 100.mg 1/24 1.00gm 
b c01445 919.mg 8.109m 0/24 10.0mg 0/24 100.mg 0/24 1.00gm 
 
c c01445 994.mg 17.1gm 0/24 10.0mg 0/24 100.mg 0/24 1.009m 
d c01445 481.mg n.s.s. 18/24 10.0mg 19/24 100.mg 17/24 1.00gm 
 
a c01445 2.37gm n.s.s. 1/24 10.0mg 3/24 100.mg 1/24 1.00gm 
1880 c01446 559.mg n.s.s. 13/20 276.mg 36/50 552.mg 26/49 
 
a c01446 2.96gm n.s.s. 0/20 276.mg 1/50 552.mg 1/49 
 
1881 c01445 261.mg 1.109m 0/24 8.00mg 0/24 80.0mg 0/24 800.mg 
 
a c01445 367.mg 2.139m 0/24 8.00mg 0/24 80.0mg 0/24 800.mg 
b c01445 412.mg 2.66gm 0/24 8.00mg 0/24 80.0mg 0/24 800.mg 
c c01445 830.mg 13.7gm 0/24 8.00mg 0/24 80.0mg 0/24 800.mg 
d c01445 157.mg 1.219g 8/24 8.00mg 15/24 80.0mg 10/24 800.mg 
 
a c01445 579.mg n.s.s. 2/24 8.00mg 0/24 80.0mg 1/24 800.mg 
1882 c01446 409.mg n.s.s. 10/20 221.mg 26/50 441.mg 24/50 
 
a c01446 3.59gm n.s.s. 1/20 221.mg 0/50 441.mg 1/50 
1883 1089m 139.mg n.s.s. 4/101 50.0mg 13/96 
 
a 1089m 35.5mg n.s.s. 61/101 50.0mg 70/96 
1884 1089n 113.mg 748.g 1/85 50.0mg 13/87 
a 1089n 37.9mg n.s.s. 50/85 50.0mg 61/87 
 
NITRITE, SODIUM 7632-00-0 
 
1885 1361 532.mg n.s.s. 1/92 
a 1361 532.mg n.s.s. 2/92 
b 1361 268.mg n.s.s. 17/92 
1886 1361 236.mg n.s.s. 1/95 
a 1361 451.mg n.s.s. 2/95 
b 1361 185.mg n.s.s. 8/95 
 
489.mg 
489.mg 
489.mg 
452.mg 
452.mg 
452.mg 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
--- :Lu,Lym. S 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
kid:tla,uac; ubl:pam,tcc; urm:tcc. 
 
ubl :pam, tcc. 
 
13/24 
 
5/24 
6/24 
4/24 
20/24 
 
1/24 
 
kid:tla,uac. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
kid:hom,tcc,tla,uac; ubl:tcc; ure:tcc. 
 
kid:hom,tcc,tla,usc. 
 
14/24 
9/24 
8/24 
4/24 
18/24 
3/24 
 
0/12 
0/12 
2/12 
1/11 
0/11 
2/11 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Goyr; Jnci ,66,869-880;1981/pmrs.com. 
 
Nurthy;i jcn,23,253-259;1979 
 
191 
 
192 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
1887 N f scd met Liv hct 8m29 s 
a 1f scd mt Lun tum 8m29 s 
1888 s c mcd wet Lun tun 8m27 a 
* N * sed wet Liv hct 8m27 a 
1889 R b cdr eat --- mLy 29m29 
* R b cdr set spL Lym 29m29 
b R b cdr eat Liv ang 29m29 
c R b cdr eat Liv mix 29m29 
 
1890 R f f34 Oat Liv tum 52w69 e 
a R f f34 et tb mix 52w69 
 
1891 R m f34 set Liv tum 52w69 e 
a R m f34 oat tbe mix 52w69 e 
1892 R f mrc eat Liv tum 16m28 e 
 
a R f mrc wat tba tum 16m28 c 
1893 R f mrc wet tba mix 20m24 e 
1894 R m mrc rat liv tum 16m28 c 
a R f mrc pttb tu 16m28 
 
1895 R m mrc wet tba mix 20m24 c 
1896 R * wis oat l iv mix 92w92 e 
 
3.NITfRO-p-ACETOPHENETIDE 1 Ong . . .:ug. :10. :100. g : ..g :10. :100.. : g :10 
 
1897 N f b6c *et TBA NXB 78w97 v :> no dre PI.. 
 
a f b6ce at liv NXB 78w97 v no dre P-1. 
b N f b6c et Lun NXB 78w97 v 30.8gm * P<.7 
 
1898 N m b6c eat liv NXA 78w98 v : 2.27gm * P<.03 c 
 
a N m b6c eat TBA NXB 78w98 v 3.49gm * P<.3 
 
b N * b6c eat Liv NX 78w98 v 2.279g * P<.03 
c N m b6c eat lun NXS 78w98 v no dre P-1. 
1899 R f f34 eat TBA NXS 18m25 v :> no dre P-1. 
 
* R f 134 eat liv NXB 18m25 v 6.24gm * P<.7 
1900 R m f34 eat TBA NXB 18m24 v :> no dre P.1. 
 
a R m f34 eat Liv NXB 18m24 v no dre P-1. 
5-NITRO.o-ANISIDINE bO0ng..: ..ug. :10. :100. g : . 1g :10. :100.... g :. 10 
 
1901 N f b6c eat ... NXA 78w96 v : 2.339m * P<.04 
 
a N f b6c eat Liv hpc 78w96 v 3.72gm/ P<.06 c 
b N f b6ce at TBAN XS 78w96 v 1.82gm * P<.2 
 
c N f b6c eat Liv NXB 78w96 v 3.729m / P<.06 
d N f b6c eat Lun NXB 78w96 v no dre P-1. 
 
1902 N m b6c eat Liv hpc 78w95 v #1.05gm \ P<.003 - 
 
a N m b6c eat liv NXA 78w95 v 1.129m \ P<.005 
b N m b6c eat TBA NXB 78w95 v 1.699m \ P<.2 
 
c N m b6c eat liv NXB 78w95 v 1.129m \ P<.005 
d N * b6c eat Lun NXB 78w95 v no dre P-1. 
 
1903 R f f34 eat NXB NXB 18m25 + 170.g * P<.0005 
 
a R f f34 eat mgL NXA 1825 222.mg \ P<.0005 
 
b R f f34 eat cli NXA 18m25 230.mg * P<.0005c 
c R f f34 eat mgL acn 18m25 254.mg \ P<.0005 
d R f f34 eat Lun NXA 18m25 280.mg \ P<.0005 
 
e R f f34 eat NXA NXA 18m25 602.mg * P<.0005c 
f R f 134 eat cLi NXA 18m25 966.mg * P<.0005c 
9 R f f34 eat cLi can 18m25 1.269m I P<.0005c 
h R f f34 eat TBA NXB 18m25 73.4mg * P<.0005 
i R f f34 eat liv NXB 18m25 3.209m * P<.2 
 
1904 R m f34 set NXB NXB 18m25 : 28.1mg * P<.0005 
 
a R m f34 set ski NXA 18m25 30.5mg * P<.0005c 
b R m f34 eat ski tri 18m25 43.7mg * P<.0005c 
c R m f34 eat ski bcc 18m25 52.0mg I P<.0005c 
d R m f34 eat ski NXA 18m25 66.0mg * P<.0005c 
e R m f34 eat NXA NXA 18m25 105.m9 I P<.0005c 
f R t f34 eat pit adn 18m25 115.mg * P<.0005 
 
g R f f34 eat ski sec 18m25 162.mg P<.0005c 
h R m f34 eat pro NXA 18m25 196.mg * P<.0005 
 
i R m 134 eat ski sqc 18m25 252.mg P<.0005c 
J R f f34 eat adr NXA 18m25 345.mg * P<.0005 
k R m f34 eat TBA NXB 18m25 12.8mg * P<.0005 
l R f f34 eat Liv NXB 18m25 194.mg P<.002 
5-NITRO.2-ftURALDEHYDE SENICARBtAZONE ..:. lug. 1 :10 : . 100. g : 1.. :10. :100... :10 :10 
 
1905 R f hza eat mgL fba 36w54 es . + . 6.52mg P<.006 + 
a R f hza eat liv tum 36w54 es no dre P-1. 
 
1906 R f hze eat mai tum 44w60 es <+ noTD50 P<.0005+ 
a R f hzs eat Liv tum 44w60 es no dre P-1. 
 
1907 R f sde eat mai tum 46w" er . + . 7.12mg P<.0005+ 
 
5-NITRO-2-FURANIDOXINE 100ng..: ..ug. :10. :100. g : .g :10.. :100.. : g :10 
 
1908 R f sda set Liv tum 46w66 .> no dre P-1. 
 
a R f sda eat tba mix 46w66 * 42.0mg P<.5 - 
 
TD5O 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
744.mg P<.7 - 
no dre P-I. - 
103.mg P<. 3 - 
no dre P-I. - 
539.mg P<. 03 + 
601. g P<. 04 
5.84gm P<. 3 
no dre P-I. 
 
no dre P-I. - 
no dre P-I. - 
no dre PaI. - 
no dre P-I. - 
no dre P-I. - 
no dre P-I. - 
57.3mg P<. 03 - 
no dre P-I. - 
no dre P-I. - 
61.9mg P<. 2 - 
155.mg * P<.007 + 
 
* + 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl IDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
1255 79.3mg n.s.s. 
1255 132.mg n.s.s. 
1255 25.7mg n.s.s. 
1255 52.8mg n.s.s. 
471 231.mg n.s.s. 
471 246.mg n.s.s. 
471 952.mg n.s.s. 
471 1.089m n.s.s. 
1361 273.mg n.s.s. 
1361 88.4mg n.s.s. 
1361 218.ig n.s.s. 
1361 58.8mg n.s.s. 
1189 41.3mg n.s.s. 
1189 6.48mg n.s.s. 
213 21.4mg n.s.s. 
1189 33.4mg n.s.s. 
1189 12.9mg n.s.s. 
213 18.8mg n.s.s. 
1352 63.2mg 2.04gm 
 
1/16 30.7mg 
3/16 30.7mg 
4/21 27.7mg 
5/21 27.7mg 
6/136 45.0mg 
6/136 45.0mg 
0/136 45.0mg 
1/136 45.0mg 
0/44 188.mg 
20/44 188.mg 
 
0/50 151.mg 
30/50 151.mg 
 
0/20 11.2mg 
14/20 1 1. 2mg 
4/15 65.9mg 
0/20 7.85mg 
7/20 7.85mg 
5/15 46.2mg 
0/19 32.0mg 
 
3-NITRO-p-ACETOPHENETIDE 1777-84-0 
 
1897 c01978 1.44g9 n.s.s. 22/50 763.mg 
a c01978 8.869g n.s.s. 4/50 763.mg 
b c01978 4.339g n.s.s. 1/50 763.mg 
1898 c01978 1.029m n.s.s. 10/50 697.mg 
a c01978 989.mg n.s.s. 21/50 697.mg 
b c01978 1.02gm n.s.s. 10/50 697.mg 
c c01978 5.73gm n.s.s. 11/50 697.mg 
1899 c01978 649.mg n.s.s. 45/50 66.0mg 
a c01978 692.mg n.s.s. 2/50 66.0mg 
1900 c01978 118.mg n.s.s. 26/50 52.8mg 
a c01978 1.389m n.s.s. 3/50 52.8mg 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
Brkly Code 
Anderson; ij cn,24,319-322; 1979 
 
2/20 
1/20 
6/17 
3/17 
16/136 
15/136 
 
1/136 
1/136 
0/16 
6/16 
0/16 
8/16 
0/13 
9/13 
10/15 
0/15 
4/15 
9/15 
 
1/22 64.0mg 5/19 
 
17/50 (1.539m 
3/50 1.539m 
4/50 1.539m 
13/49 1.399m 
20/49 1.399m 
13/49 1.399m 
2/49 1.399m 
12/50 130.mg 
0/50 130.-m 
19/50 (105.mg 
0/50 105.mg 
 
N.wberne;sc ie,204, 1079-1081; 1979 
 
Nurthy; ij cn,23,253-259; 1979 
 
Greenblatt; Jnci,50,799-802;1973 
Lij insky; Jnci ,50,1061-1063;1973 
GreenbLatt; Jnci, 50,799-802; 1973 
 
LiJ insky;Jnci,50,1061-1063;1973 
 
Aoyagi;jnci,65,411-414;1980 
 
15/50) 
 
1/50 
2/50 
23/50 
29/50 
23/50 
6/50 
15/50 
3/50 
13/50) 
0/50 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun: a/a,a/c. 
L iv:hpa,hpc. 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
5-NITRO-o-ANISIDINE 99-59-2 
 
1901 c01934 917.mg n.s.s. 9/100 
 
a c01934 1.329m n.s.s. 3/100 
b c01934 632.mg n.s.s. 29/100 
c c01934 1.32gm n.s.s. 3/100 
d c01934 3.879g n.s.s. 5/100 
1902 c01934 504.mg 6.199m 18/100 
a c01934 518.mg 11.3gm 20/100 
b c01934 516.mg n.s.s. 45/100 
c c01934 518.mg 11.3gm 20/100 
d c01934 2.539m n.s.s. 15/100 
1903 c01934 107.mg 292.mg 3/100 
a c01934 102.mg 642.mg 2/100 
b c01934 133.mg 454.mg 3/100 
c c01934 117.mg 609.mg 0/100 
d c01934 99.1g 1.63gm 1/100 
 
e c01934 306.mg 1.239m 0/100 
f c01934 458.mg 2.42gm 0/100 
9 c01934 529.mg 3.95gm 0/100 
h c01934 44.8mg 154.mg 83/100 
i c01934 589.mg n.s.s. 2/100 
1904 c01934 16.4mg 43.8mg 2/99 
a c01934 17.3mg 49.6mg 2/99 
b c01934 21.5mg 78.8mg 0/99 
c c01934 22.7mg 105.mg 1/99 
d c01934 27.1mg 113.mg 0/99 
 
e c01934 61.3mg 176.mg 1/99 
f c01934 38.0mg 528.mg 10/99 
g c01934 87.7mg 286.mg 0/99 
h c01934 45.7mg 1.17gm 2/99 
i c01934 107.mg 627.mg 1/99 
I c01934 55.5mg 2.47gm 1/99 
k c01934 7.94mg 21.3mg 58/99 
L c01934 49.9mg 1.68gm 4/99 
 
836.mg 5/50 666.mg 
836.mg 0/50 666.mg 
836.mg 9/50 666.mg 
836.mg 0/50 666.mg 
836.mg 0/50 666.mg 
780.mg 25/50 (615.mg 
780.mg 25/50 (615.mg 
780.mg 32/50 (615.mg 
780.mg 25/50 (615.mg 
780.mg 5/50 (615.mg 
147.mg 17/50 294.mg 
147.mg 11/50 (294.mg 
147.mg 12/50 294.mg 
147.mg 10/50 (294.mg 
147.mg 5/50 (294.mg 
147.mg 5/50 294.mg 
147.mg 1/50 294.sg 
147.mg 0/50 294.mg 
147.mg 45/50 294.mg 
147.mg 0/50 294.mg 
118.mg 36/50 235.mg 
118.mg 30/50 235.mg 
118.mg 20/50 235.mg 
118.mg 7/50 235.mg 
118.mg 14/50 235.mg 
118.mg 10/50 235.mg 
118.mg 8/50 235.mg 
118.mg 5/50 235.mg 
118.mg 2/50 235.mg 
118.mg 3/50 235.mg 
118.mg 1/50 235.mg 
118.mg 44/50 235.mg 
118.Mg 3/50 235.mg 
 
10/50 
8/50 
22/50 
 
8/50 
2/50 
3/50) 
3/50) 
17/50) 
3/50) 
2/50) 
22/50 
 
4/50) 
14/50 
4/50) 
1/50) 
10/50 
9/50 
7/50 
41/50 
 
2/50 
45/50 
42/50 
 
9/50 
30/50 
26/50 
29/50 
 
5/50 
21/50 
 
5/50 
12/50 
 
5/50 
48/50 
 
3/50 
 
---:Lou,Lym. S 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
S 
Liv:hpa,hpc. S 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
cLi:sdn,can,ppa,sqc; ski:sec,sqc; zym:sec,sqc. C 
 
mgL:scn,adn,pac. S 
cLi :adn,can,ppa,sqc. 
 
S 
lun:a/a,a/c. S 
ski:sec,sqc; zym:sec,sqc. 
 
cL i:can,sqc. 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
ski:bcc,cuc,se.,sec,sgc,sqc,tri; zym:cuc,sec,sqc. C 
 
ski :bcc,sec,sgc,sqc,tri. 
 
ski:ssa,sec. 
ski:cuc,sec,sqc; zym:cuc,sec,sqc. 
 
S 
 
pre:adn,can. S 
adr:cos,coc. S 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
5-NITRO-2-FURALDEHYDE SENICARBAZONE 59-87-0 
 
1905 1063m 3.15mg 54.3mg 0/5 33.3mg 11/18 
a 1063m 33.3mg n.s.s. 0/5 33.3mg 0/18 
1906 1063n n.s.s. 4.64mg 3/16 36.8mg 24/24 
a 1063n 60.5mg n.s.s. 0/16 36.8mg 0/24 
1907 1120 3.96mg 14.7mg 2/29 34.8mg 22/29 
5-NITRO-2-FURANIDOXIME 772-43-0 
 
1908 200a 18.5mg n.s.s. 0/39 6.97mg 0/32 
 
a 200a 6.78mg n.s.s. 2/39 6.97mg 3/32 
 
Morris;canr,29,2145-2156; 1969 
Erturk;canr,30, 1409-1412; 1970 
 
Cohen; Jnci,51,403-417;1973 
 
1887 
 
a 
 
1888 
a 
 
1889 
a 
 
b 
c 
 
1890 
 
a 
 
1891 
 
a 
 
1892 
 
a 
 
1893 
1894 
 
a 
 
1895 
1896 
 
193 
 
194 GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt TD50 2'Iai1pv1 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
5-NITRO.2-FURANNETHANEDIOL DIACETATE .. :. .-lug. 10. . 100.....eg . 10 ...:. 100....1 
 
1909 ft f hza eat Liv turn 36ma54 eas. no dre P-1. 
 
a ft f hz. eat marn turn 36ma54 em no dre P.1. - 
1910 ft I hza eat earn tuin 44ma60 ems. 105.mg P<.5 - 
 
a Rft hzam eat Liv turn 44ma60 es no dre Pn.1 
3-(5.NITRO-2-FURYL)-INIDAZO(1,2-aLpha)PYRIDINE . 10 .I ...:. 100. l.. g.. .10 ...:. 100... .Ig .:.10 
 
1911 N f ctn eat mix car 40ma79 em + 21.6mg Z Pcz.0005, 
 
a N f ctn eat mix pem 40ma79 em 117.mg Z P<.0005+ 
b N f ctn eat thy Lye 40ma79 es 781.mg * P<.0005 
 
c N f ctn eat Lun turn 40ma79 es no die P-I. - 
d N f ctn eat Liv hpt 40ma79 es no die Pal. - 
a N f ctn seat tba mix 40ma79 es noTDSO P<.0005+ 
1912 N m ctn eat mix car OMw7 es + .40.1mg Z P<.0005* 
a N m ctn eat mix pam OMa7 es 65.8mg Z P<.0005+ 
b N m ctn eat Lun tue OMa7 es 763.mg * P<.2 - 
c N m ctn eat Liv hpt OMa7 es no dre P-I. - 
d N m ctn eat tba mix OMa7 es 57.1mg * P<.002 . 
1913 Rft wim seat mix pam 40wa89 es + .27.5mg P<.0005. 
a ft f waim eat mae tue 40ma89 es 33.3mg P<.0005. 
b Rft wmim eat kid tue 40ma89 es 116.mg P<.0005. 
c ft f maim eat mix cmr 40ma89 es 443mog P<.04 . 
d Rft wmim eat Liv hpt 40ma89 es 644.mg P<.3 
 
a ft wmim eat tba mix 40ma89 em 15.8mg P<.0005+ 
1914 ft maim eat kid tue 40ma83 es + .21.4mg P<.0005+ 
 
a ft m wim eat mix pee 40ma83 em 43.7mg P<.0005+ 
b ft a maim eat mix car 40ma83 es 104.mg P<.0005+ 
c ft mn wis eat Liv hpt 40ma83 em 959.mg P'z.3 
 
d ft a wim seat tba mix 40ma83 em 11.9mg P<.0005+ 
5-5NTO2FRL-,,-XDAOE2O . .lug... .10 ...:. 100.. le:.Ig... .10 .... 100...I:.g .:10 
 
1915 Rft ada seat egL mix 46w"6 a + 8.61mg P<.0005 
a Rftlads eat egL mdc 46w"6 a 31.2mg P<.006 
b ft f sda eat Liv turn 46ma66 e no die Pal. 
 
c Rftfadseat tba mix 46ma66e 8.61mg P<.0005+ 
 
N-{ 13-(5.NITRtO.2-FURtYL).1,2,4.OXADIAZOLE.5-YLJ-NETHYL}ACETANIDE.100. le :.Ig. 1. :.0. 1..: 00... .Ig .:10 
 
1916 Rft ada eat egL mix 46wa" a + .6.35mg Pcz.0005 
a RftfadsaeatmgL adc 46wa66e 10.3mg P<.0005 
 
b Rftlads eat Lun aLc 46wa66e 59.6mg P<.2 . 
c Rftlsda eat k/p tcc 46wa6 a *historicaL P<.2 + 
d Rftlsdaeat Liv tum 46w"a66 no die P-1. 
 
a ftlads eat tba mix 46w"6 a 5.20mg P<.0005 
N-[5-C5.NITRtO.2-FURtYL).1,3,4-THIADIAZOL.2-YLIACETANIDE ...:.100.. le:.Ig... .10 .... 100... .Ig...:. 10 
 
1917 N f awi eat foi mix 46ma55 a + 6.74mg P<.0005. 
 
a Nlfmswi eat for map 46ma55 a 14.1mg P<.0005 
b N f swai eat foi mqc 46ma55 a 104.mg P<.008 
c N f swai eat Liv turn 46ma55 a no die P-I. 
d N fmswieat Lun tum 46ma55e no die Pal. 
 
a N f swi seat tba mix 46ma55 a 6.90mg P<.0005 
 
1918 ft f md seat foi mix 40ma59 myv + .8.84mg P<.0005+ 
 
a Rft a ds eat mix hems 40ma59 ev 10.6mg P<.0005+ 
b Rft o da eat for sap 40ma59 ev 11.6mg P'z.0005 
c Rft ads seat Lun aLc 40ma59 ev 15.3mg P<.0005* 
d ft f mda eat k/p tcc 40w59 ev *historicaL P<.0005. 
a ft a ds eat itn hem 40ma59 ev 18.6mg P<.0005. 
f ft ada eat Liv hem 40ma59 ev 22.9mg P<.0005. 
g ft s da eat mgL adc 40ma59 ev 37.7mg P<.002 
 
h Rft s da eat Lun hea 40ma59 ev 52.3mg P<.007 + 
i ft f ada eat mgL mix 40ma59 ev 43.3mg P<.05 
 
Rft s da eat pan hem 40ma59 ev 81.6mg P<.03 . 
k Rft oade eat --- LbL 4Oa59 ev 111.mg P<.06 + 
1 ft sda seat smii adc 40ma59 ev 111.mg P<.06 + 
m ft s da eat smii Lei 40ma59 ev 111.mg P<.06 + 
n ft o da eat tba mix 40ma59 ev noTDSO P<.0005 
N.14.(5.NITRtO.2.FURtYL)-2.THIAZOLYLIACETANIDE ... 10 ...:. 100... .leg... .10 .... 100.. g . 1 
 
1919 H m myg eat ubL mix 480a0 e + 8.91mg P<c.0005+ 
 
a H mmyg eat ubL sqc4OM 7 60.2mg P<.004 . 
b NHeayg eatfor sap 48ma70e 68.1mg P<.003 . 
c Hem yg eat Liv turn 480a0 a no die P-1. 
d Hem yg seat Lun turn 48ma70 a no die P-1. 
 
1920 Rft ada eat earn mix 46w"6 a + .10.5mg P<.0005+ 
 
a Rftladsoat mgL adc 46wa66e 36.2mg P<.0005+ 
b Rftmda eatmogLfbae46wa66e 56.9mg P<.0005 
c ft f ada eat Liv turn 46ma6 a no die P-I. 
 
d4 ftfAda eat+ tbmami 46A6A a 7.25mg PD._005r 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
5-NITRO-2-FURANNETHANEDIOL DIACETATE --- 
 
1909 1063. 18.5mg n.s.s. 0/5 66.7mg 0/5 
a 1063. 18.5mg n.s.s. 0/5 66.7mg 0/5 
 
1910 1063n 18.5mg n.s.s. 3/16 73.6mg 4/13 
a 1063n 65.6mg n.s.s. 0/16 73.6mg 0/13 
 
3-(5-NITRO-2-FURYL)-INIDAZO(1,2-aLpha)PYRIDINE (NFIP) 75198-31-1 
 
1911 1163 13.3mg 37.7mg 0/39 65.8mg 28/40 (160.mg 23/36 371.mg 35/44) 
a 1163 68.0mg 329.mg 2/39 65.8mg 12/40 160.mg 16/39 (371.mg 15/50) 
b 1163 412.mg 2.15gm 0/39 65.8mg 0/40 160.mg 5/40 371.mg 8/50 
c 1163 704.mg n.s.s. 6/39 65.8mg 6/40 160.mg 3/35 371.mg 6/43 
d 1163 138.mg n.s.s. 1/37 65.8mg 0/36 160.mg 0/23 371.mg 0/16 
* 1163 n.s.s. 20.3mg 28/39 65.8mg 40/40 160.mg 40/40 371.mg 50/50 
1912 1163 26.8mg 63.3mg 0/39 65.8mg 19/35 143.mg 20/33 (409.mg 18/30) 
a 1163 39.4mg 174.mg 3/39 65.8mg 19/38 143.mg 17/37 (409.mg 18/30) 
b 1163 248.mg n.s.s. 5/39 65.8mg 5/36 143.mg 8/35 409.mg 8/31 
c 1163 765.mg n.s.s. 7/37 65.8mg 1/33 143.mg 1/28 409.mg 1/15 
d 1163 26.0mg 338.mg 21/39 65.8mg 38/38 143.mg 37/37 409.mg 38/42 
1913 1163 15.9mg 50.7m9 0/32 89.9mg 25/31 
a 1163 17.5mg 85.0mg 8/32 89.9mg 25/31 
b 1163 56.1mg 304.mg 0/32 89.9mg 10/31 
c 1163 134.mg n.a.s. 0/32 89.9mg 3/31 
d 1163 145.mg n.s.s. 1/32 89.9mg 3/31 
* 1163 6.29mg 43.0mg 14/32 89.9mg 30/31 
1914 1163 12.1mg 40.4mg 0/31 77.1mg 23/29 
a 1163 23.4mg 101.mg 1/31 77.1mg 16/29 
b 1163 47.0mg 331.mg 0/31 77.1g 8/29 
c 1163 156.mg n.s.s. 0/31 77.1mg 1/29 
d 1163 4.72mg 32.9mg 13/31 77.1mg 28/29 
 
5-(5-NITRO-2-FURYL)-1,3,4.OXADIAZOLE-2-OL 2122-86-3 
1915 1126 4.53mg 22.7mg 2/39 17.4mg 16/35 
 
a 1126 11.8mg 302.mg 0/39 17.4mg 5/35 
b 1126 50.6mg n.s.s. 0/39 17.4mg 0/35 
c 1126 4.53mg 22.7mg 2/39 17.4mg 16/35 
 
N.{ [3-(5.NITRO-2-FURYL).1,2,4.OXADIAZOLE.5.YLJ-NETHYL}ACETANIDE 36133-88-7 
1916 1126 3.24mg 22.9mg 2/24 13.9mg 16/32 
a 1126 4.98mg 30.0mg 0/24 13.9mg 10/32 
b 1126 14.7mg n.s.s. 0/24 13.9mg 2/32 
c 1126 14.7mg n.s.s. 0/24 13.9mg 2/32 
d 1126 37.0mg n.s.s. 0/24 13.9mg 0/32 
* 1126 2.76mg 14.7m9 2/24 13.9mg 18/32 
 
N-[5-(5-NITRO-2-FURYL)-1,3,4-THIADIAZOL.2.YL]ACETANIDE 2578-75-8 
1917 1076 2.82mg 15.0mg 0/29 109.mg 21/22 
 
a 1076 7.41mg 29.6mg 0/29 109.mg 17/22 
b 1076 35.8mg 2.28gm 0/29 109.mg 4/22 
c 1076 138.mg n.a.s. 0/29 109.mg 0/22 
d 1076 138.mg n.a.s. 0/29 109.mg 0/22 
* 1076 2.85mg 15.9mg 2/29 109.mg 21/22 
1918 1126 5.08mg 16.7mg 0/24 53.0m9 22/30 
a 1126 6.06mg 20.6mg 0/24 53.0mg 20/30 
b 1126 6.59mg 22.9mg 0/24 53.0mg 19/30 
c 1126 8.40mg 31.9mg 0/24 53.0mg 16/30 
d 1126 9.10mg 36.0mg 0/24 53.0mg 15/30 
* 1126 9.87mg 40.9mg 0/24 53.0mg 14/30 
f 1126 11.7mg 55.1mg 0/24 53.0mg 12/30 
9 1126 17.0mg 145.mg 0/24 53.0mg 8/30 
h 1126 21.3mg 561.mg 0/24 53.0mg 6/30 
i 1126 16.9mg n.s.s. 2/24 53.0mg 9/30 
J 1126 28.2mg n.s.s. 0/24 53.0Omg 4/30 
k 1126 33.5m9 n.a.s. 0/24 53.0mg 3/30 
l 1126 33.5mg n.a.s. 0/24 53.0mg 3/30 
* 1126 33.5mg n.s.s. 0/24 53.0mg 3/30 
n 1126 n.s.s. 5.41mg 2/24 53.0mg 30/30 
 
N- [4.(5.NITRO.2.FURYL).2-THIAZOLYLJACETANIDE (NFTA) 531-82-8 
1919 1077 4.14mg 20.3mg 0/22 63.1mg 16/18 
 
a 1077 22.7mg 388.mg 0/22 63.1mg 5/18 
b 1077 27.6mg 372.mg 0/24 63.1mg 6/24 
c 1077 141.mg n.s.s. 0/24 63.1mg 0/24 
d 1077 141.mg n.s.a. 0/24 63.1mg 0/24 
1920 1122 6.89mg 16.4mg 0/28 69.3m9 47/56 
a 1122 21.9mg 66.4mg 0/28 69.3mg 23/56 
b 1122 31.7mg 132.mg 0/28 69.3mg 16/56 
c 1122 322.mg n.s.s. 0/28 69.3mg 0/56 
d 1122 4.51mg 11.6mg 0/28 69.3mg 52/56 
 
Brkly Code 
 
195 
 
Norris;canr,29,2145-2156;1969 
 
CabraL;tumo,66, 131144; 1980 
 
Cohon;jnci,54,841-850; 1975 
 
Cohn; Jnci ,54,841 850;1975 
Cohon;canr,33,1593-1597;1973 
 
Cohen; Jnci ,54,841-850; 1975 
 
Croft; jnci,51,941 -949; 1973 
Erturk;canr,30,936-941; 1970 
 
196 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
1921 R f sda set ugl fba 46w66 a 
a R f sda iat k/p tcc 46w"66 
 
b R f ada *at Liv tur 46w66 a 
c R f ada at tba mix 46w66 e 
1922 R f sda eat mgL fba 46w66 a 
a R f sda eat k/p tcc 46w66 a 
b R f sda sat Liv tus 46w66 a 
c R f sda oat tba mix 46w66 a 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
25.0go P<. 0005. 
316.mg P<. 09 
no dre P-1. 
 
22.8mg P<.0005 
 
30.2mg P<.0005+ 
660.mg P<.3 
no dre P-1. 
 
27.7mg P<.0005 
 
N-14-(5-NITRO-2-FURYL)-2-THIA;OLYLIFORfNAIDE . 10 . 100. : . :10 . 100. .19 10 
 
1923 H m syg eat ubL mix 48w70 * <+ noTD50 P<.0005+ 
a H m syg eat ubL sqc 48w70 a 54.0mg P<.003 + 
b H m syg eat for sqp 48w70 a 83.8mg P<.007 + 
c H m syg eat Liv tum 48w70 * no dre P-1. 
d H m xyg eat Lun tum 48w70 a no dre P-I. 
 
1924 N f awi *t ubl tum 46w53 + 18.2mg P<.0005+ 
 
a N f swi aat --- Lou 46w53 55.4mg P<.03 + 
b N f swi eat Lun car 46w53 163.mg P<.03 + 
1925 N f swl *t ubL tcc 46w66 * + 7.72mg P<.0005+ 
a N f swi a at Lun aLc 46w66 * 86.4mg P<.003 
 
b N f swi at ... ll46w66 * 78.3mg P<.02 + 
c N f swi at for sqp 46w66 * 235.mg P<.07 + 
d N f swi eat Liv tum 46w66 a no dre P-I. 
 
a N f swi eat tbi mix 46w"66 noTD50 P<.0005 
 
1926 N f swi eat ubL car 33w52 + 19.8mg P<.0005+ 
a N f swi sat --- Lou 33w52 47.6mg P<.08 
b N f swi eat Lun aLa 33w52 208.mg P<.3 
c N f swi eat Liv tum 33w52 no dre Pal. 
 
1927 R m f34 eat ubl mix 30w52 a . + . 1.31mg * P<.0005+ 
 
a R f f34 set ubl ppc 30w52 i 
 
b R m f34 *t Liv tum 30w52 a 
 
1928 R f Iad eat ubL mix 46w63 
 
1929 R f sda eat ubL mix 26w70 or 
a R f sda eat ubL tcc 26w70 ar 
b R f sda eat ubl ppc 26w70 or 
1930 R f sda eat ubL mix 46w70 or 
a R f Iad eat ubL tcc 46w70 ar 
b R f sda eat ubL ppc 46w70 or 
1931 R f sdm sat ubl tcc 26w52 ar 
1932 R m sda eat ubL tcc 46w52 ar 
1933 R f wis eat ubL tcc 34w52 ar 
 
5.92mg * P<.0005 
no dre P-1. 
 
5.07mg 
noTD50 
noTD50 
48.6mg 
noTD50 
noTD50 
82.7mg 
noTD50 
noTD50 
noTD50 
 
N,N.-16-(5.NITRO.2-FURYL)-s-TRIAZINE-2,4-DIYLJBISACETANIDE ..... ...... ......Io ..... : 100. . :1 g .10..100. :.g.10 
 
1934 R f sda *at mgL mix 46w66 a . + . 14.1mg 
a R f sdieat mgL dc 46w"66 29.0mg 
b R f sda eat Liv tum 46w"66 no dre 
c R f tda eat tba mix 46w"66 12.8mg 
 
3-NITRO-3-HEXENE 
 
1935 N b swi inh Lun adc 62w62 
 
1936 NI f sw inh Lun mdc 62w62 r 
a N f sww lnh Lun mix 62w62 r 
1937 N f sww inh Lun adc 62w62 r 
1938 R b cfn inh Lun uLc 37m37 a 
 
P<.0005+ 
P<. 0005. 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 003 + 
P<. 0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<. 003 + 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005 
P-I. 
 
P<. 0005 
 
ioong..: . .ug. :10. :100 . 1. g :. 1 : 10. 0. :Ig . :10 
 
.346mg P<.02 + 
A .363mg P<.09 
 
.687mg P<.6 
.> .768mg P<.3 
 
. + . 8.66mg * P<.0005+ 
 
NITRO-4-HYDROXYPHENYLARSONIC ACID lOOng ..:.: ug. :10. :100. 1g : . . :10. :100.. g :.:10 
 
1939 N f sow *at tba tum 24m24 a .> no dre P-I. 
 
a N f sow set tba meL 24m24 a 93.6mg * P<.8 
1940 N m asw *at Liv hpt 24m24 a .> 185.mg * P<.3 
 
a N saw *t tba aL 2424 * 85.6mg * P<.7 
b N m msw eat tba tum/24m24 a no dre P-I. 
1941 R f Isd eat tba tum 24m24 a .> no dre P-I. 
a R f sd eattb maL 2424 * no dre P-I. 
1942 R m aid eat tba tum 24m24 * .> no dri P-I. 
 
a R m sad *t tba meL 24m24 a 1.309m * P<1. 
 
2-NITRO-p-PHENYLENEDIANINE 
 
1943 N f b6c *t Liv NXA 78w90 
a N f b6c *t TBA NXB 78w90 
b N f b6c *t Liv NXB 78w90 
c N f b6c eat Lun NXS 78w90 
1944 N m b6c *t TBA NXB 78w90 
 
a N m b6c eat Liv NXB 78w90 
b N m b6c *t Lun NXB 78w90 
1945 R f f34 *t --- NXA 18m24 
 
1oong.. : ..ug. :10. :100. g :. . :10. :100.. : 9 :10 
 
: + : 614.mg * P<.006 c 
 
468.mg * P<.02 
 
614.mg * P<.006 
1.98gm * P<.3 
:> no dre P-I. 
 
no dre PaI. 
945.mg \ P<.3 
 
A ^ #892.mg * P<.05 - 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lIne 2Dose 2Inc 
 
1921 1126. 13.4mg 66.1mg 
 
a 1126. 77.6mg n.s.s. 
b 1126. 196.mg n.s.s. 
c 1126. 12.4mg 56.4mg 
1922 1126n 16.5mg 70.4mg 
 
a 1126n 108.mg n.s.s. 
b 1126n 201.mg n.s.s. 
c 1126n 15.3mg 61.8mg 
 
4/35 
0/35 
0/35 
4/35 
1/32 
0/32 
0/32 
1/32 
 
69.3mg 20/34 
69.3m9 2/34 
69.3mg 0/34 
69.3mg 21/34 
69.3mg 17/35 
69.3mg 1/35 
69.3mg 0/35 
69.3mg 18/35 
 
N-1 4-(5-NITRO-2-FURYL)-2-THIAZOLYLIFORMAMIDE (FANFT) 24554-26-5 
1923 1077 n.s.s. 9.77mg 0/20 63.1mg 23/23 
a 1077 23.2mg 238.mg 0/20 63.1mg 7/23 
b 1077 31.7mg 1.09gm 0/24 63.1mg 5/24 
c 1077 141.mg n.s.s. 0/24 63.1mg 0/24 
d 1077 141.mg n.s.s. 0/24 63.1mg 0/24 
1924 1068 11.5mg 30.6mg 0/56 106.mg 31/48 
 
a 1068 23.4mg n.s.s. 15/56 106.mg 23/48 
b 1068 60.3mg n.s.s. 1/56 106.mg 6/48 
1925 1076 3.21mg 17.4mg 0/28 85.2mg 20/21 
 
a 1076 32.7mg 508.mg 0/28 85.2mg 5/21 
b 1076 29.4mg n.s.s. 1/28 85.2mg 6/21 
c 1076 57.7mg n.s.s. 0/28 85.2mg 2/21 
d 1076 148.mg n.s.s. 0/28 85.2mg 0/21 
 
a 1076 n.s.s. 12.5mg 1/28 85.2mg 21/21 
1926 1118 9.28mg 57.1mg 0/30 41.3mg 9/30 
a 1118 15.6mg n.s.s. 1/30 41.3mg 5/30 
b 1118 33.9mg n.s.s. 0/30 41.3mg 1/30 
c 1118 63.8mg n.s.s. 0/30 41.3mg 0/30 
 
1927 727 .739mg 2.38mg 0/20 .115mg 0/16 .231mg 0/15 
 
23.1mg 16/16 
 
a 727 3.09mg 13.4mg 0/20 .115mg 0/16 .231mg 0/15 
 
23.1mg 9/16 
 
b 727 55.8ug n.s.s. 0/20 .115mg 0/16 .231mg 0/15 
 
23.1mg 0/16 
 
1928 1124 2.24mg 10.3mg 0/30 68.6mg 29/30 
1929 1125. n.s.s. 4.81mg 0/34 34.9mg 30/30 
 
a 1125. n.s.s. 5.30mg 0/27 34.9mg 24/24 
b 1125m 19.8mg 234.mg 0/34 34.9mg 6/30 
1930 1125n n.s.s. 8.63mg 0/34 61.8mg 29/29 
a 1125n n.s.s. 9.56mg 0/27 61.8mg 23/23 
b 1125n 33.6mg 383.mg 0/34 61.8mg 6/29 
1931 1125m n.s.s. 3.99mg 0/30 37.6mg 15/15 
1932 1125n n.s.s. 6.07mg 0/30 66.5mg 20/20 
1933 1123 n.s.s. 4.76mg 0/15 62.7mg 30/30 
 
N,N' -16-(5-NITRO-2-FURYL)-s-TRIAZINE-2,4-DIYL BISACETANIDE 51325-35-0 
1934 200 8.17mg 27.0mg 2/39 69.7mg 25/33 
a 200. 16.0mg 60.3mg 0/39 69.7mg 16/33 
b 200a 191.mg n.s.s. 0/39 69.7mg 0/33 
c 200a 7.44mg 24.3mg 2/39 69.7mg 26/33 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
Brkly Code 
Cohon; Jnci,54,841-850;1975 
 
Croft;3nci ,51,941-949;1973 
Erturk;canr,30,1309-1311;1970 
Cohen;ccnr,33,1593- 1597;1973 
Cohsn;canr,38, 1398-1405; 1978 
 
1.15mg 0/16 2.31mg 1/15 11.5mg 13/14 
 
Arai; Jnci ,62,1013-1016;1979 
1.15mg 0/16 2.31mg 0/15 11.5mg 4/14 
 
1.15mg 0/16 2.31mg 0/15 11.5mg 0/14 
 
Erturk;canr,27, 1998-2002; 1967 
Erturk;canr,29,2219-2228;1969 
 
Adolphs;urre,6, 19-27; 1978 
 
Cohen; Jnci ,51 ,403-417; 1973 
 
3-NITRO-3-HEXENE 4812-22-0 
 
1935 1360 .131mg n.s.s. 0/21 
1936 1366. 88.6ug n.s.s. 0/10 
a 1366. 97.1ug n.s.s. 1/10 
1937 1366n .125mg n.s.s. 0/10 
1938 1360 4.91mg 19.8m9 0/100 
NITRO-4- HYDROXYPHENYLARSONIC ACID 
1939 213b 6.88mg n.s.s. 14/16 
a 213b 10.9mg n.s.s. 6/16 
1940 213b 30.1mg n.s.s. 0/10 
 
a 213b 12.5mg n-.s.s. 1/10 
b 213b 12.6mg n.s.s. 4/10 
1941 213b 15.2mg n.s.s. 14/27 
a 213b 45.4mg n.s.s. 4/27 
1942 213b 21.7mg n.s.s. 4/24 
a 213b 22.9mg n.s.s. 1/24 
 
2-NITRO-p-PHENYLENEDIANINE 
1943 c02222 346.mg 6.17gm 
 
a cO2222 244.mg n.as. 
b c02222 346.mg 6.179m 
c c02222 898.mg n.s.s. 
1944 c02222 326.mg n.s.s. 
 
a c02222 1.609m n.s.s. 
b c02222 318.mg n.s.s. 
1945 c02222 308.mg n.s.s. 
 
.291mg 5/27 
.332mg 2/10 
.332mg 2/10 
.332mg 1/10 
 
D .326mg 6/100 .651mg 11/100 
 
121 -19-7 
 
6.50mg 20/30 13.0mg 27/33 
6.50mg 16/30 13.0mg 15/33 
6.00mg 0/22 12.0mg 1/12 
6.00mg 5/22 12.0mg 2/12 
6.00mg 6/22 12.0mg 4/12 
2.50mg 18/28 10.0mg 11/28 
2.50mg 2/28 10.0mg 1/28 
2.00mg 2/24 8.00mg 2/22 
2.00mg 1/24 8.00mg 1/22 
 
Deichmann; im.d,34,800-807; 1965 
D.ichmann;txap,5,445-456; 1963 
 
Deichmsnn; imd,34,800-807; 1965 
 
Prier;txap,5,526-542; 1963 
 
5307- 14-2 
 
1/20 248.mg 10/50 490.mg 17/50 
4/20 248.g 18/50 490.mg 27/50 
1/20 248.g 10/50 490.mg 17/50 
0/20 248.mg 5/50 490.mg 3/50 
9/20 229.mg 17/50 (457.mg 7/50) 
3/20 229.mg 7/50 457.mg 3/50 
1/20 229.mg 8/50 (457.mg 2/50) 
0/20 41.0mg 0/50 82.0mg 4/50 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc. 
l iv:hps,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,s/c. 
 
-- -:ILu,Lym. S 
 
197 
 
198 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
a R f f34 eat TIA NXB 18.24 
b R f f34 eat liv NXB 18.24 
1946 R * f34 set thy NXA 18624 
a R m f34 set TBA NXB 18624 
b R m f34 oat liv NXB 18624 
 
4-NITRO-o-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 
 
1947 N f b6c eat TSA NXB 24.24 
 
a N f b6c set liv NXB 24.24 
b N f b6c st Lun NXB 24.24 
1948 N * b6c eat TBA NXB 24.24 
a N m b6c eat Liv NXB 24.24 
b N o b6c eat Lun NXB 24.24 
1949 R f f34 eat TBA NXB 24.24 
a R f f34 eat Liv NXS 24.24 
1950 R a f34 eat TBA NXB 24.24 
 
a R o f34 eat Liv NXB 24.24 
 
5-NITRO-o-TOLUIDINE 
 
1951 N f b6c set NXB NXB 78w96 v 
a N f b6c oat Liv hpc 78w96 v 
b N f b6c eat -- hes 78w96 v 
c N f b6c eat TBA NXB 78w96 v 
d N f b6c eat liv NXB 78w96 v 
* N f b6c et lun NXB 78w96 v 
1952 N . b6c eat liv hpc 78w95 v 
a N o b6c at NXB NXB 78w95 v 
b N m b6c oat -.- NXA 78w95 v 
c N m b6c at TBA NXB 78w95 v 
d N a b6c set liv NXS 78w95 v 
* N o b6c eat Lun NXB 78w95 v 
1953 R f f34 cat TBA NXB 18625 v 
a R f f34 eat Liv NXB 18625 v 
1954 R o f34 eat liv hpc 18625 v 
a R m f34 eat TBA NXB I625 v 
b R . f34 eat Liv NXB 16825 v 
 
5- NITROACENAPHTHENE 
 
1955 H f syg set bil cho 26w71 
 
1956 N f b6c eat NXB NXB 78w96 *v 
 
a N f b6c eat liv hpc 78w96 *v 
b N f b6c eat ova NXA 78w96 *v 
c N f b6c eat ova tus 78w96 *v 
d N f b6c set TBA NXS 78w96 *v 
* N f b6c cat Liv NXB 78w96 *v 
f N f b6c cat Lun NXB 78.96 *v 
1957 N m b6c eat TBA NXB 78w95 es 
 
a N o b6c set Liv NXB 78w95 es 
b N m b6c set Lun NXB 78w95 es 
1958 R f f34 eat NXB NXB 18623 e 
 
a R f f34 eat Lun NXA l8623 c 
b R f f34 st ac NXA 18023 e 
c R f f34 oat ac cuc l8023 c 
d R f f34 eat cli can 1823 e 
* R f f34 oat gL NXA 1823 e 
f R f f34 t mgL cn l8 23 e 
g R f f34 et sac sqc 18o23 c 
h R f f34 et TBA NXB 1823 e 
i R f f34 et Liv NXB 1823 e 
 
1959 R e f34 cat NXB NXB 17.23 ae 
a R * f34 cat eac NXA 17.23 so 
b R * f34 cat e*c cuc 17.23 sc 
c R m f34 cat lun NXA 17.23 so 
d R m f34 cat Lun a/c 17.23 so 
c R f f34 cat thy NXA 17.23 *e 
f R t f34 cat kid NXA 17.23 so 
g R f f34 cat thy NXA 17.23 sc 
h R f f314 ct e*c sqc 17.23 as 
i R 1 f34 cat TBA NXS 17.23 so 
I R 1 f34 cat liv NXB 17.23 as 
4-NITROANTHRANILIC ACID 
 
1960 N f b6c cat TBA NXS 78w93 
a N f b6c cat Liv NXB 78w93 
b N f b6c cat lun NXB 78w93 
1961 N m b6c eat ... NXA 78v93 
 
a N m b6c cat TBA NXB 78w93 
b N m b6c eat Liv NXB 78w93 
c N m b6c eat lun NXB 78w93 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
#224.mg * P<.03 - 
 
no dre P.1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
1O0ng. ...ug . 10 . 100 .lg . 10 . 100 .I. 10 
 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
 
P-I. 
P-I. 
Pal. 
PoI. 
P-I. 
Pal. 
P-I. 
P-I. 
P-I. 
P-l. 
 
bOng. ...ug. 10 . 100 .lg. 10. 100 .Ig 10 
 
+ 242mg P<.0005 
 
288..g / P<.0005c 
*historical * P<.4 c 
 
989.mg P<.5 
 
288.mg P<.0005 
no dre P-I. 
 
266mg / P<.005 c 
269..g / P<.005 
 
+historical * P<.2 c 
 
431.mg * P<.2 
 
266.mg I P<.005 
no dre P-1. 
 
:> no dre P.1 - 
 
43.0mg * P<.3 
 
: * #27.7mg * P<.04 - 
 
43.7mg * P<.9 
no dre Pal. 
 
bO0ng .:. .:ug. :10. :100. :1g :10... :100.. : g :10 
 
+ . 354.mg P<.003 
: 45.3mg * P<.0005 
 
45.8g * P<.0005c 
217.mg * P<.0005c 
395.mg * P<.005 c 
90.4mg * P<.02 
 
45.8mg * P<.0005 
1.32m * P<.5 
:> no dre Pl.1 
 
no dre P-I. 
no dre P-I. 
 
: *+ : 5.98mg / P<.0005 
 
9.63mg * P<.0005c 
14.9mg I P<.0005c 
17.4mg * P<.0005c 
52.2mg * P<.0005c 
77.9mg * P<.0005c 
81.7mg * P<.0005c 
90.5mg I P<.0005c 
6.44mg I P<.0005 
no dre P-I. 
 
: + : 6.45mg I P<.0005 
 
7.88mg * P<.0005c 
8.92mg * P<.0005c 
29.9mg * P<.0005c 
35.1mg * P<.0005c 
37.7mg / P<.0005 
42.9mg * P<.0005 
58.5mg * P<.0005 
 
68.2mg * P<.0005c 
5.58mg I P<.0005 
71.4mg * P<.08 
 
lOOng .. : lug. :10. :100. g : ..g :10. :100.. : g :10 
 
:> no dre Pal. - 
 
no dre P-I. 
 
2.569m \ P<.05 
 
#12.6g * P<.02 - 
 
1.669m P<.4 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lIne 2Dose 2Inc 
 
a c02222 153.mg n.s.s. 
b c02222 666.mg n.s.s. 
1946 c02222 96.6mg n.s.a. 
 
a c02222 90.8mg n.s.s. 
b c02222 489.mg n.s.a. 
 
11/20 
 
1/20 
0/20 
9/20 
1/20 
 
41.0mg 12/50 82.0mg 
41.0mg 0/50 82.0mg 
 
16.0mg 1/50 32.8mg 
16.0mg 15/50 32.8mg 
16.0mg 0/50 32.8mg 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
17/50 
1/50 
6/50 
13/50 
0/50 
 
Brkly Code 
 
Liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
thy:cca,ccr. S 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
4-NITRO.o-PHENYLENEDIANINE 99-56-9 
 
1947 c03941 924.mg n.s.s. 
a c03941 2.64"gm n.s.s. 
b c03941 3.79gm n. .s. 
1948 c03941 539.mg n.s.s. 
a c03941 3.519m n.s.s. 
b c03941 1.969m n.s.s. 
1949 c03941 36.0mg n.s.s. 
 
a c03941 217.mg n.s.s. 
1950 c03941 47.2mg n.s.s. 
a c03941 147.mg n.s.s. 
 
8/20 
1/20 
3/20 
12/20 
4/20 
3/20 
15/20 
0/20 
9/20 
1/20 
 
478.mg 18/50 (956.mg 
478.mg 9/50 956.mg 
 
478.mg 5/50 956.mg 
441.mg 25/50 (883.mg 
441.mg 5/50 883mg 
441.mg 13/50 883mg 
18.4mg 31/50 36.8mg 
 
18.4mg 2/50 36.809 
14.7mg 26/50 29.4mg 
14.7mg 2/50 29.4mg 
 
11/50) 
3/50 
4/50 
12/50) 
4/50 
6/50 
33/50 
 
0/50 
19/50 
2/50 
 
Liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
5-NITRO-o-TOLUIDINE 99.55.8 
 
1951 cO1U43 142.mg 698.mg 3/50 
a c01U43 168.mg 787.mg 2/50 
b c01U43 529.mg n.s.s. 1/50 
c cO1843 205.mg n.s.s. 19/50 
d cO1U43 168.mg 787.mg 2/50 
 
a cO1U43 1.36gm n.s.s. 2/50 
1952 c01843 135.mg 2.35gm 12/50 
a c01U43 135.mg 2.90gm 13/50 
b c01843 718.mg n.s.s. 1/50 
c c01U43 146.mg n.s.s. 23/50 
d c01843 135.mg 2.359m 12/50 
 
a c01843 1.03gm n.s.s. 5/50 
1953 c01843 3.72mg n.s.s. 42/50 
 
a c01M3 13.0mg n.s.s. 0/50 
1954 c01843 8.39mg n.s.s. 0/50 
 
a c01U43 2.67mg n.s.s. 30/50 
b c01U43 9.23mg n.s.s. 5/50 
5-NITROACENAPHTHENE 602-87-9 
 
1955 1091 152.mg 1.66"gm 0/20 
1956 c01967 29.3mg 87.4mg 2/50 
 
a c01967 29.5mg 90.3mg 2/50 
b c01967 108.mg 623.mg 0/50 
c c01967 161.mg 3.08gm 0/50 
d c01967 40.3mg n.s.s. 19/50 
 
a c01967 29.5mg 90.3mg 2/50 
f c01967 232.mg n.s.s. 2/50 
1957 c01967 74.6mg n.s.s. 23/50 
 
a c01967 132.mg n.s.s. 12/50 
b c01967 152.mg n.s.s. 5/50 
 
1958 c01967 1.96mg 11.3mg 1/100 
 
a c01967 2.18mg 44.5mg 1/100 
b c01967 7.28mg 24.8mg 0/100 
c c01967 7.85mg 30.9mg 0/100 
d c01967 18.7mg 143.mg 0/100 
* c01967 31.5mg 198.mg 0/100 
f c01967 32.1mg 220.mg 0/100 
9 c01967 29.9mg 230.mg 0/100 
h c01967 3.78mg 10.5mg 83/100 
i c01967 n.s.s. n.s.s. 2/100 
1959 c01967 1.67mg 17.7mg 1/99 
 
a c01967 1.71mg 27.8mg 0/99 
b c01967 1.75m9 45.1mg 0/99 
c c01967 9.96mg 93.8m 1/99 
d c01967 10.4mg 171.mg 1/99 
* c01967 10.6mg 210.mg 0/99 
f c01967 13.5mg 204.mg 0/99 
9 c01967 15.4mg 323.mg 0/99 
h c01967 27.4mg 188.g 0/99 
i cO1967 2.91mg 10.1go 58/99 
J c01967 5.92mg n.s.s. 4/99 
 
125 .mg 
125 mg 
125 .mg 
125 .mg 
125.mg 
125.mg 
115.mg 
115 .mg 
115 .mg 
 
115 .m9 
115.g9 
115.mg 
1.80mg 
1 . 80mg 
1.40mg 
1.40mg 
 
1. 40mg 
 
382.mg 
53.3mg 
 
53.3mg 
53.3mg 
53.3mg 
 
53.3mg 
53.3mg 
 
53.3m9 
58.8mg 
58.8m 
 
58.8mg 
 
43.0mg 
43.0mg 
43.0mg 
43.0mg 
43.Omg 
43.0mg 
43.0mg 
43.0mg 
43.0 m 
43.0g 
34.4mg 
34.4mg 
34.4mg 
34.4mg 
34.4mg 
34.4mg 
34.4mg 
34.4mg 
34.4mg 
34.4mg 
34.4mg 
 
12/50 
7/50 
5/50 
19/50 
7/50 
3/50 
12/49 
12/49 
 
0/49 
20/49 
12/49 
3/49 
33/50 
 
2/50 
0/50 
20/50 
 
1/50 
 
240. mg 
240.mn 
240.mg 
240.mg 
240.mg 
240.mg 
224.mg 
224.mg 
224.mg 
224.mg 
224.mg 
224.mg 
3.60mg 
3.60m9 
2.90mg 
2.90mg 
2.90mg 
 
7/24 
 
23/50 127.mg 
23/50 127.mg 
 
4/50 127.mg 
2/50 127.mg 
29/50 127.mg 
23/50 127.mg 
3/50 127.mg 
15/50 140.mg 
7/50 140.mg 
4/50 140.mg 
37/50 87. 0mg 
 
8/50 87.0m" 
27/50 87.0mg 
25/50 87.0mg 
 
6/50 87.0mg 
6/50 87.0mg 
5/50 87. 0mg 
3/50 87.0mg 
46/50 87.0mg 
 
0/50 87.0mg 
25/50 62.4mg 
21/50 62.4mg 
14/50 62.4mg 
7/50 62.4mg 
5/50 62.4mg 
4/50 62.4mg 
4/50 62.4mg 
4/50 62.4mg 
7/50 62.4mg 
39/50 62.4mg 
 
1/50 62.4mg 
 
22/50 
20/50 
 
3/50 
25/50 
20/50 
0/50 
29/50 
30/50 
 
4/50 
31/50 
29/50 
 
2/50 
35/50 
 
1/50 
3/50 
27/50 
4/50 
 
-.--hes; Liv:hpc. C 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
--a- mhe,hes; Liv:hpc. C 
 
-- :heo,ahas. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
S 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Takemura;bJ ca,30,481-483; 1974 
 
liv:hpc; ova:gct,Lut,tua. C 
 
ovo:gct,Lut,tua. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,s/c. 
 
cli:can; aac:cas,cuc,sqc; Lun:a/a,a/c; *gl:acn,pcn. C 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
*ac:cas,cuc,sqc. 
 
*gl :acn,pcn. 
 
19/50 
18/50 
7/50 
4/50 
21/50 
18/50 
2/50 
1/50 
0/50 
0/50 
38/50 
3/50 
35/50 
26/50 
 
5/50 
5/50 
5/50 
9/50 
45/50 
 
0/50 
21/50 
20/50 
18/50 
3/50 
0/50 
1/50 
0/50 
0/50 
2/50 
30/50 
 
0/50 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
sac:cuc,sqc; Lun:a/a,a/c. C 
 
aac:cuc,sqc. 
 
6 
 
Iun:a/a,a/c. 
 
thy:fcc,pac. S 
kid:tla,uac. S 
thy:fca,ppa. S 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
4-NITROANTHRANILIC ACID 619-17-0 
 
1960 c01945 1.35gm n.s.s. 39/100 502.mg 
a c01945 6.86gm n.s.s. 8/100 502.mg 
b c01945 824.mg n.s.s. 2/100 502.mg 
1961 c01945 3.81gm n.s.s. 0/100 463.mg 
 
a c01945 381.mg n.s.s. 40/100 463.mg 
b c01945 2.25gm n.s.s. 22/100 463.mg 
c c01945 4.11gm n.s.s. 18/100 463.mg 
 
18/50 1.099g 
 
1/50 1.09gm 
 
5/50 (1.099g 
0/50 1.01gm 
 
30/50 (1.01gm 
16/50 1.01gM 
10/50 1.019g 
 
18/50 
 
1/50 
1/50) 
3/50 
15/50) 
9/50 
4/50 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,*/c. 
 
-:- :h",hes. S 
 
I iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
tun:a/a,a/c. 
 
199 
 
200 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
1962 R f f34 mat TBA NXB 1X824 v 
 
a R f f34 sat Liv NXB 1X824 v 
1963 R m f34 mat TBA NXB 1X824 v 
 
a R m f34 sat Liv NXB 18.24 v 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
no dre Po1. - 
11.8g * P<.6 
 
no drm P.1. - 
3.71g. * P<.09 
 
6-NITROBENZINIDAZOLE 1 Ong.. : .lug.0 :0 . lg. 10. :100... :19 :10 
 
1964 N f b6c eat liv NXA 78w95 v + 354.mg I P<.0005c 
 
a N f b6c sat liv hpc 78w95 v 762.mg * P<.002 c 
b N f b6c eat pit NXA 78w95 v 335.mg \ P<.03 
c N f b6c eat TBA NXB 78w95 v 429.mg * P<.05 
 
d N f b6c oat Liv NXB 78w95 v 354.mg I P<.0005 
* N f b6c oat Lun NXB 78w95 v no drm P-1. 
 
1965 N m b6c sat Liv NXA 78w95 v 392.mg * P<.02 c 
 
a N m b6c eat Liv hpc 78w95 v 423.mg * P<.02 
b N m b6c *at TBA NXB 78w95 v 1.98gm * P<.8 
c N m b6c *at liv NXS 78w95 v 392..g * P<.02 
d N m b6c eat lun NXB 78w95 v no dre P-1. 
 
1966 R f f34 oat TBA NXS 18.24 v :> no dre P.1. - 
 
a R f f34 oat liv NXB 18.24 v no drm P-1. 
 
1967 R u f34 oat TBA NXB 18.24 v :> no dre P-1. - 
 
a R m f34 eat Liv NXS 18.24 v 8.83g. * P<.7 
 
NITROFEN* lOng..:. .ug. :10. 100.. : . 100.. g . :910 
 
1968 N f b6c eat Liv NXA 78w91 : 406.mg * P<.0005c 
 
a N f b6c *at Liv hpc 78w91 1.20gm * P<.008 c 
b N f b6c sat TBA NXB 78w91 606.mg * P<.05 
 
c N f b6c eat liv NXB 78w91 406.mg * P<.0005 
d N f b6c eat Lun NXS 78w91 4.73gm * P<.3 
 
1969 N f b6c eat Liv hpc 78w92 v + 64.2mg \ P<.0005c 
a N f b6c oat TBA NXS 78w92 v 74.6mg \ P<.0005 
b N f b6c eat liv NXB 78w92 v 64.2mg \ P<.0005 
c N f b6c oat Lun NXB 78w92 v no dre P-1. 
 
1970 N f b6c eat liv hpc 78w90 v pooL : + 67.7mg \ P<.0005c 
 
a N f b6c eat --- hes 78w90 v 2.84gm * P<.02 a 
1971 N m b6c mat Liv NXA 78w91 + 204.mg * P<.0005c 
 
a N m b6c *at liv hpc 78w91 540.mg * P<.0005c 
b N m b6c mat TBA NXB 78w91 310.mg * P<.003 
c N m b6c mat liv NXB 78w91 204.mg * P<.0005 
d N m b6c mat Lun NXB 78w91 no dre P-1. 
 
1972 N m b6c mat Liv hpc 78w92 v + : 133.mg * P<.007 c 
 
a N m b6c at TBA NXS 78w92 v 167.mg * P<.04 
 
b N m b6c mat Liv NXB 78w92 v 133.mg * P<.007 
c N * b6c mat lun NXS 78w92 v no drm P.1. 
 
1973 N m b6c mat Liv hpc 78w90 v pool + 85.3mg * P<.0005c 
 
a N m b6c eat ... hs 78w90 v 1.499m * P<.005 c 
b N * b6c st sub NXA 78w90 v 481.mg \ P<.03 
 
1974 R f f34 mat TBA NXB 18.24 :> no dre PaI. - 
 
a R f f34 mat Liv NXB 18.24 no drm P-1. 
 
1975 R m f34 mat TBA NXB 18.24 :> no dre P-1. - 
 
a R m f34 mat Liv NXB 18.24 no drm P-1. 
 
1976 R f oso mat pan can 18.26 : #459.mg a P<.02 - 
 
a R f osm mat ova gct 18.26 827.mg * P<.04 
b R f oam at --- lym 18.26 934.mg * P<.05 
c R f osm mat TBA NXB 18.26 100.mg I P<.07 
d R f osm mat Liv NXB 18.26 no drm P-1. 
 
1977 R f osm mat pan can 18.24 pool + 420.mg * P<.0005c 
 
a R f oam mat ova NXA 18.24 820.mg a P<.03 
b R f oem mat ova gct 18.24 1.029m * P<.04 
c R f osm mat --- lyi 18.24 1.06gm a P<.04 
1978 R m osm mat TBA NXB 18.26 cv :> 202.mg P<.5 
 
a R * osa mat Liv NXB 18.26 sv no drm P-1. 
 
1-1(5-NITROFURFURYLIDENE)AhINOIHYDANTOIN.:..Iug.. :10. :100.0 : 1 :100.. g . :.I : 10 
 
1979 R f hza mat mgL fba 36w54 ms .> 120.mg 
 
a R f hza mat Liv tum 36w54 ms no dre 
1980 R f hza mat mai tum 44w60 ma .> 214.mg 
 
a R f ham mat Liv tum 44w60 ms no dre 
1981 R f sda mat Liv tum 75w80 my .> no dre 
 
a R f ada mat tba mix 75w80 mv 185.mg 
 
1-1(5-NITROFURFURYLIDENE)ANINOI-2-INIDAZOLIDINONE..:..O.. 100.. 1m :lg. :10. :100.. : :10 
 
1982 R f sda mat mgL mix 46w66 a <+ noTD50 
 
a R f sd at mgL adc 46w66 * 5.26mg 
b R f dad at --- LbL 46w66 +historicaL 
c R f ada at Liv tum 46w66 a no dre 
d R f ads at tba ix 46w"66 noTD50 
 
P<.3 - 
P-I. 
 
P<.6 - 
P-I. 
 
P<.7 - 
 
P<.0005 
 
P<.0005+ 
P<.02 + 
Pal. 
 
P<. 0005 
 
NITRO6EN NUSTARD bOng. ... : l1ug . 10 . : 10 0 1mg . : 10 : 100. : . :10 
 
1983 R m b46 ivj tba mix 12m24 ms . +I 11.4ug..:..0..I 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose llnc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
1962 c01945 411..g n.s.s. 57/75 170.mg 35/50 557.mg 22/50 
 
a c01945 1.319m n.s.s. 3/75 170.mg 0/50 557.mg 2/50 
1963 c01945 353.mg n.s.s. 40/75 136.mg 24/50 446.mg 15/50 
 
* c01945 911.mg n.s.s. 0/75 136.mg 1/50 446.mg 1/50 
6-NITROBENZIMIDAZOLE 94-52-0 
 
1964 c01912 206.mg 769.mg 3/100 127.mg 4/50 253.mg 20/50 
 
a c01912 359.mg 3.92gm 3/100 127.mg 2/50 253.mg 11/50 
 
b c01912 131.mg n.s.s. 8/100 127.mg 12/50 (253.mg 0/50) 
c c01912 176.mg n.s.s. 29/100 127.mg 22/50 253.mg 25/50 
d c01912 206.ug 769.mg 3/100 127.mg 4/50 253.mg 20/50 
* c01912 870.mg n.s.s. 5/100 127.mg 4/50 253.mg 2/50 
1965 c01912 180.mg n.s.s. 20/100 118.mg 19/50 234.mg 22/50 
a c01912 194.mg n.s.s. 18/100 118.mg 16/50 234.mg 21/50 
b c01912 229.mg n.s.s. 45/100 118.mg 29/50 234.mg 25/50 
c c01912 180.mg n.s.s. 20/100 118.mg 19/50 234.mg 22/50 
d c01912 901.mg n.s.s. 15/100 118.mg 8/50 234.mg 4/50 
 
1966 c01912 55.8mg n.s.s. 70/100 45.0mg 31/50 (182.mg 26/50) 
 
a c01912 1.92gm n.s.s. 2/100 45.0mg 0/50 182.mg 0/50 
1967 c01912 247.mg n.s.s. 54/102 36.0mg 22/50 146.mg 22/50 
 
a c01912 797.mg n.s.s. 1/102 36.0mg 0/50 146.mg 1/50 
 
NITROFEN* (c00420 is NCI TR# 184; c00421 is NCI TR* 26) 1836-75-5 
1968 c00420 282.mg 942.mg 0/20 334.mg 14/50 668.mg 30/50 
 
a c00420 692.mg 20.6gm 0/20 334.mg 5/50 668.mg 13/50 
b c00420 287.mg n.s.s. 3/20 334.mg 23/50 668.mg 33/50 
c c00420 282.mg 942.mg 0/20 334.mg 14/50 668.mg 30/50 
d c00420 1.80gm n.s.s. 0/20 334.mg 2/50 668.mg 3/50 
1969 c00421 42.8mg 102.mg 0/20 264.mg 42/50 (529.mg 44/50) 
 
a c00421 46.4mg 157.mg 3/20 264.mg 43/50 (529.mg 44/50) 
b c00421 42.8mg 102.mg 0/20 264.mg 42/50 (529.mg 44/50) 
c c00421 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/20 264.mg 1/50 529.mg 0/50 
1970 c00421 45.2mg 108.mg 1/80p 264.mg 42/50 (529.mg 44/50) 
 
a c00421 993.mg n.s.s. 1/80p 264.mg 0/50 529.mg 5/50 
1971 c00420 144.mg 401.mg 1/20 308.mg 31/50 617.mg 40/50 
 
a c00420 355.mg 1.20gm 0/20 308.mg 13/50 617.mg 20/50 
b c00420 175.mg 1.70gm 7/20 308.mg 31/50 617.mg 43/50 
c c00420 144.mg 401.mg 1/20 308.mg 31/50 617.mg 40/50 
d c00420 2.90gm n.s.s. 3/20 308.mg 0/50 617.mg 3/50 
1972 c00421 73.0mg 1.86gm 4/20 244.mg 38/50 488.g 46/50 
 
a c00421 78.7mg n.s.s. 6/20 244.mg 40/50 488.mg 46/50 
b c00421 73.0mg 1.86gm 4/20 244.mg 38/50 488.mg 46/50 
c c00421 1.40gm n.s.s. 1/20 244.mg 1/50 488.mg 1/50 
1973 c00421 60.9mg 129.mg 5/80p 244.mg 38/50 488.g 46/50 
 
a c00421 566.mg 13.6gm 0/80p 244.mg 1/50 488.g 4/50 
b c00421 193.mg n.s.s. 3/80p 244.mg 10/50 (488.mg 0/50) 
1974 c00420 206.mg n.s.s. 15/20 113.mg 21/50 (225.mg 15/50) 
 
a c00420 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/20 113.mg 0/50 225.mg 0/50 
1975 c00420 441.mg n.s.s. 10/20 90.4mg 20/50 180.mg 14/50 
 
a c00420 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/20 90.4mg 0/50 180.mg 0/50 
1976 c00421 215.mg n.s.s. 0/20 46.1mg 2/50 92.0mg 7/50 
 
a c00421 286.mg n.s.s. 0/20 46.1mg 0/50 92.0mg 4/50 
b c00421 320.mg n.s.s. 0/20 46.1mg 0/50 92.0mg 4/50 
c c00421 42.4mg n.s.s. 14/20 46.1mg 31/50 92.0mg 42/50 
d c00421 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/20 46.1mg 0/50 92.0mg 0/50 
1977 c00421 197.mg 1.179g 0/110p 46.1mg 2/50 92.0mg 7/50 
a c00421 281.mg n.s.s. 1/110p 46.1mg 1/50 92.0mg 4/50 
b c00421 321.mg n.s.s. 1/110p 46.1mg 0/50 92.0mg 4/50 
c c00421 333.mg n.s.s. 1/110p 46.1mg 0/50 92.0mg 4/50 
1978 c00421 45.9mg n.s.s. 10/20 65.3mg 30/50 136.mg 4/50 
a c00421 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/20 65.3mg 0/50 136.mg 0/50 
.1 [(5-NITROFURFURYLIDENE)ANINOIHYDANTOIN 67-20-9 
1979 1063. 19.4mg n.s.s. 0/5 100.mg 1/7 
 
a 1063m 38.9mg n.s.s. 0/5 100.mg 0/7 
 
1980 1063n 35.8mg n.s.s. 3/16 110.mg 5/18 
 
a 1063n 136.mg n.s.s. 0/16 110.mg 0/18 
1981 200a 244.mg n.s.s. 0/30 55.6mg 0/36 
 
a 200. 28.6mg n.s.s. 14/30 55.6mg 19/36 
 
1- (5-NITROFURFURYLIDENE)AMINOJ.2.INIDAZOLIDINONE 555-U4-0 
1982 200a n.s.s. 6.44mg 1/25 52.3mg 31/31 
a 200. 2.72mg 10.0mg 0/25 52.3mg 29/31 
b 200. 31.1mg n.s.s. 0/25 52.3mg 5/31 
c 200a 134.mg n.s.s. 0/25 52.3mg 0/31 
d 200. n.s.s. 6.44mg 1/25 52.3mg 31/31 
 
NITROGEN MUSTARD (2,2'-dichLoro-N-.mthyLdiethylamins) 51-75-2 
1983 1017 5.13ug 51.5ug 7/65 7.86ug 12/27 
 
Brkly Code 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc. 
 
pit:adn,cra. S 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun: a/a, a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc. 
 
S 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun: a/a, a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc. 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Iun:a/a,a/c. 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun: a/a, a/c. 
 
liv:hpa,hpc. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
sub:fbs,fib. S 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
S 
S 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
ova:gcc,gct. S 
 
S 
S 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Morris;canr,29,2145-2156; 1969 
 
Cohen; Jnci, 51,403-417; 1973 
 
Cohn; jnci,51,403-417;1973 
 
Schahl ;arzn,20,1461-1467;1970 
 
201 
 
202 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
a R * b46 ivj tba mal 12.24 es 
b R m b46 ivJ tba ben 12.24 es 
 
NITROGEN MUSTARD N-OXIDE 
 
1984 R * b46 ivJ ... mix 12.24 as 
 
a R * b46 ivJ tbc mix 12.24 es 
b R * b46 ivJ tba maL 12.24 es 
c R * b46 ivJ tba ben 12.24 es 
I -NITRONAPHTNALENE 
 
1985 N f b6c eat TBA MXB 78w96 
 
a N f b6c eat Liv NXB 78w96 
b N f b6c set Lun NXB 78w96 
1986 N m b6c eat TSA NXB 78w96 
 
a N . b6c eat Liv NXB 78w96 
b N * b6c eat Lun NXB 78w96 
 
1987 R f f34 eat TBA NXB 18r25 v 
 
a R f f34 eat Liv NXB 18.25 v 
1988 R * f34 eat TBA NXB 18.25 v 
a R m f34 set Liv NXS 18.25 v 
 
2- NITROPROPANE** 
 
1989 R f ada inh Liv tum 95w95 e 
 
a R f sd. inh tba bon 95w95 e 
b R f sd. inh tba mal 95w95 e 
 
1990 R f sda inh Liv tur 52w52 ek 
a R f ada inh tba ben 52w52 ek 
b R f sdi inh tba m&L 52w52 ek 
1991 R f sda inh Liv tum 52w95 ek 
a R f ada inh tba ben 52w95 ek 
b R f sda inh tba maL 52w95 ek 
1992 R m ada inh Liv age 95w95 e 
a R m sda inh tba ben 95w95 e 
b R * ada inh tba maL 95w95 e 
 
1993 R m sda inh Liv tum 52w52 ek 
 
a R m ada inh tba ben 52w52 ek 
b R sda inh tba meL 52w52 ek 
1994 R m sda inh Liv agm 52w95 ek 
 
a R m sda inh tba ben 52w95 *k 
b R m sda inh tba meL 52w95 ek 
3-NITROPROPIONIC ACID 
 
1995 N f b6c gav TBA NXB 24.24 
a N f b6c gav liv NXB 24.24 
b N f b6c gav Lun NXB 24.24 
1996 N m b6c gav TBA NXS 24.24 
a N m b6c gav Liv NXB 24.24 
b N . b6c gav Lun NXB 24.24 
1997 R f f34 gay TBA NXB 26.26 
a R f f34 gav Liv NXB 26.26 
1998 R m f34 gav NXB NXB 26.26 
a R m f34 gav Liv NXA 26.26 
b R m f34 gav Liv nnd 26.26 
c R f134 giv pni iss 26.26 
d R f134 gav TBA NXS 26.26 
* R m f34 gav Liv NXB 26.26 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
22 Sug P<. 02 + 
34.2ug P<.05 
 
lOOng .. :..ug. :10. :100.. :ng .:10. :100. :Ig .:10 
 
1.40mg 
.764mg 
.806.g 
no dre 
 
P<. 002 
 
P<.008 + 
P<.003 + 
P-I. 
 
1O0ng . . .:ug. :10. :100.. g :. . :10. :100.. g . 10 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
682.mg * P<.2 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P.1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre PaI. 
509.mg * P<.2 
 
bO0ng . . .:ug. :10. :100. g :. 1g :10. :100.. : g :10 
 
293.mg 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
9.06.g 
no dre 
no dre 
7.78.g 
23.6mg 
 
P<. 2 
P-I. 
P-I. 
PaI. 
P-I. 
P-I. 
P.1. 
P-I. 
P-I. 
P-I. 
P-I. 
P-I. 
P.1. 
P<.3 
P-I. 
P-I. 
P<.6 
P<. 4 
 
lOOng.. :. .ug. :10. :100. . : 1g. :10. :100.. : g :10 
 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
337.rg * P<.5 
499.mg * P<.8 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
:> 43.8.g * P<. - 
 
29.Org * P<.3 
 
+ 2.31mg * P<.003 
 
4.41mg * P<.004 a 
5.03mg * P<.008 a 
4.53mg * P<.06 a 
7.02mg * P<.7 
 
4.41mg * P<.004 
 
NITROSO-SAY6ON 1 0Ong. . .. : .ug.1.0. :100. :Ig . 1 :10 . :100.. : . :10 
 
1999 R m sda gav for tur 31w90 erv . + . .364mg P<.0005+ 
a R m sda gav for car 31w90 erv .434mg P<.0005+ 
 
I-NITROSO.5,6-DIHYDROURACIL 
 
2000 R f mrw wet Liv hpc 41w70 
 
a R f mrw wet Liv mix 41w70 
b R f mrw wat tba mix 41w70 
2001 R m mrw wet Liv hpc 41w70 
 
e R m mrw wat Liv mix 41w70 
b R m mrw wat tba mix 41w70 
 
boong .. : lug . : 10 : 100 . m :. g . : 10. :100 .. : 1 : 10 
 
+ . .104mg P<.0005+ 
 
.104mg P<.0005+ 
.130mg P<.0005 
 
+ . 93.2ug P<.0005+ 
 
93.2ug P<.0005+ 
.125mg P<.002 
 
NITROSO-2,6-.DINETHYLNORPHOLINE 1 0Ong : .. lug. :10. :100.. g : . . :10. 1 :100.. :19 :10 
 
2002 H f syg gav trh ppp 59w83 a . + . 6.40mg * P<.0005+ 
 
a H f syg gav mix mix 59w83 a 9.17mg * P<.0005 
b N f syg gav Liv mix 59w83 a 11.0mg * P<.0005 
c H f syg gav mix mix 59w83 a 16.9mg * P<.008 
 
d H f syg gav pan mix 59w83 a 5.75mg * P<.02 + 
e H f syg gav pdu ado 59w83 a 6.99mg * P<.02 
f H f syg giv for mix 59w83 i 9.45mg * P<.03 
9 H f syg gav gaL mix 59w83 a 12.9mg Z P<.04 
 
h H f syg gav pdu car 59w83 a 32.1mg * P<.3 + 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
a 1017 8.4lug n.s.a. 4/65 7.86ug 7/27 
b 1017 10.8ug n.s.s. 3/65 7.86ug 5/27 
 
NITROGEN MUSTARD N-OXIDE (mitomen) 126-85-2 
 
1984 1017 .571mg 5.62mg 0/65 
a 1017 .335mg 15.9mg 7/65 
b 1017 .364mg 5.46mg 4/65 
c 1017 1.36mg n.s.s. 3/65 
I -NITRONAPHTHALENE 86-57.7 
 
1985 c01956 230.mg n.s.s. 42/100 
a c01956 1.01gm n.s.s. 5/100 
b c01956 231.mg n.s.s. 5/100 
1986 c01956 168.mg n.s.s. 38/100 
a cO1956 323.mg n.s.s. 17/100 
b c01956 290.mg n.s.s. 17/100 
1987 cO1956 72.0mg n.s.s. 51/75 
 
a cO1956 346.mg n.s.s. 4/75 
1988 c01956 23.4mg n.s.s. 36/75 
 
a c01956 175.mg n.s.s. 0/75 
 
SchmahL ;*rzn,20, 1461-1467; 1970 
 
.300mg 6/44 
.300mg 14/44 
.300mg 12/44 
.300mg 2/44 
 
63.7mg 12/50 127.mg 20/50 
63.7mg 0/50 127.mg 1/50 
63.7mg 4/50 127.mg 7/50 
58.8mg 19/50 118.mg 21/50 
58.8mg 8/50 118.mg 8/50 
58.8mg 8/50 118.mg 9/50 
21.0mg 32/50 66.0mg 34/50 
21.0mg 0/50 66.0mg 2/50 
16.8mg 21/50 (52.8mg 19/50) 
16.8mg 2/50 52.8mg 2/50 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
2-NITROPROPANE** 79-46-9 
1989 1444 47.8mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1444 24.1mg n.s.s. 
b 1444 45.9mg n.s.s. 
1990 1444m 4.10mg n.s.s. 
a 1444m 2.38mg n.s.s. 
b 1444m 4.10mg n.s.s. 
1991 1444n 7.46mg n.a.s. 
a 1444n 1.43mg n.s.s. 
b 1444n 4.83mg n.s.s. 
1992 1444 62.2mg n.s.s. 
a 1444 12.2mg n.s.s. 
b 1444 21.1mg n.s.s. 
193 1444m 2.87mg n.s.s. 
a 1444m 1.47mg n.s.s. 
b 1444a 2.87mg n.s.s. 
1994 1444n 5.22mg n.a.s. 
a 1444n 1.02mg n.s.s. 
b 1444n 2.81og n.s.s. 
 
0/85 
66/85 
18/85 
0/10 
1/10 
0/10 
0/48 
36/48 
7/48 
1/85 
42/85 
11/85 
0/10 
0/10 
0/10 
1/64 
32/64 
2/64 
 
3 NITROPROPIONIC ACID 504-88-1 
 
1995 c03076 22.1mg n.s.s. 26/50 
* c03076 65.8mg n.s.s. 2/50 
b c03076 49.0mg n.s.s. 2/50 
196 c03076 17.9mg n.s.s. 39/50 
a c03076 39.7mg n.s.s. 20/50 
b c03076 49.1mg n.s.s. 14/50 
197 c03076 1.43mg n.s.s. 40/50 
a c03076 7.14mg n.s.s. 0/50 
1998 c03076 1.20mg 14.5mg 4/50 
a c03076 2.08mg 27.1mg 0/50 
b c03076 2.28mg 87.3mg 0/50 
c c03076 1.85mg n.s.s. 4/50 
d c03076 . "9m n.s.s. 36/50 
* c03076 2.08mg 27.1mg 0/50 
NITROSO-BAYGON 38777-13-8 
 
1999 1409 .173mg .891mg 0/40 
 
a 1409 .206mg 1.10mg 0/40 
 
7.96mg 1/65 
7.96mg 32/65 
7.96mg 6/65 
7.96mg 0/10 
7.96mg 1/10 
7.96mg 0/10 
4.34mg 0/10 
4.34mg 7/10 
4.34mg 1/10 
5.57mg 0/65 
5.57mg 26/65 
5.57mg 7/65 
5.57m9 0/10 
5.57mg 1/10 
5.57mg 0/10 
3.04mg 0/10 
3.04mg 6/10 
3.04mg 1/10 
 
8.80m9 32/50 
8. 80m9 1/50 
8.80m9 6/50 
8.80mg 28/50 
8.80mg 10/50 
8.80mg 8/50 
.850mg 30/50 
.850mg 1/50 
.600"mg 8/50 
.600mg 3/50 
.600mg 3/50 
.600mg 6/50 
.600mg 31/50 
.600mg 3/50 
 
Griffin;sas,5,194-201;1981 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Iun:a/a,a/c. 
Liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
t iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
liv:hpc,nnd; pni:isa. A 
 
Liv:hpc,nnd. 
 
17.7mg 26/50 
17.7mg 4/50 
17.7mg 3/50 
17.7mg 38/50 
17.7mg 16/50 
17.7mg 10/50 
1.70mg 39/50 
1.70mg 1/50 
1.20mg 17/50 
1. 20mg 6/50 
1.20g9 5/50 
1.20mg 11/50 
1.20mg 38/50 
1. 20mg 6/50 
 
.984mg 12/16 
.984mg 1 1/16 
 
1-NITROSO-5,6-DINYDROURACIL 16813-36-8 
 
2000 1246 44.5ug .222mg 0/25 1.08mg 24/25 
 
a 1246 44.Sug .222mg 0/25 1.08mg 24/25 
b 1246 48.6ug .458mg 12/25 1.08mg 24/25 
2001 1246 39.4ug .204mg 0/22 .941og 22/23 
 
a 124 39.4ug .204mg 0/22 .941mg 22/23 
b 1246 43.9ug .639mg 12/22 .941mg 22/23 
NITROSO-2,6-DINETHYLNORPHOLINE 1456-28-6 
 
2002 430 3.54mg 21.8mg 0/15 1.31mg 2/15 
 
a 430 4.70mg 27.7mg 0/15 1.31mg 0/15 
b 430 5.34mg 32.0mg 0/15 1.31mg 0/15 
c 430 7.29mg 279.mg 0/15 1.31mg 0/1S 
d 430 2.77mg n.s.s. 0/15 1.31mg 3/15 
 
a 430 3.39mg n.s.s. 0/15 1.31mg 2/15 
f 430 4.86mg n.s.s. 0/15 1.31mg 1/15 
a 430 6.07mg n.s.s. 0/15 1.31mg 0/15 
h 430 8.48mg n.s.s. 0/15 1.31mg 1/15 
 
2.63mg 
2.63mo 
2.63mg 
2.63mg 
2.63mg 
2.63mo 
2.63mg 
2.63mg 
2.63mg 
 
3/15 5.24mg 
1/15 5.24mg 
1/15 5.24mg 
0/15 S.24mg 
7/15 S.24mg 
6/15 5.24mg 
3/15 5.24mg 
5/15 5.24mg 
2/15 5.24mg 
 
3/15 
7/15 
3/15 
5/15 
6/15 
5/15 
5/15 
0/15 
1/15 
 
10.5m9 
10.5m9 
10.5m9 
10.5m9 
10.5mg 
10.5mg 
 
10. 5mO 
10.5mg 
10. 5m 
 
8/15 
4/15 
6/15 
2/15 
6/15 
5/15 
3/15 
4/15 
2/15 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Li linsky;saes,2,413-419; 1978 
 
Bulay; Jnci ,62,1523-1528;1979 
 
Reznik; Jnci ,60,371-378;1978 
 
203 
 
Brkly Code 
 
204 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
i H f syg gyv lun mix 59w83 a 
J H f syg gav lar sqp 59w83 a 
k H f syg gav tba mix 59w83 a 
2003 H a syg gav Lun mix 66"w87 a 
 
a H m syg gv pan mix 66"w87 a 
b H m syg gev for mix 66"w87 a 
c H syg ggv pdu car 66"w87 a 
d H m eyg gav liv mix 66"w87 a 
* H syg gav trh ppp 66w87 a 
f H * syg gav pdu ad 66"w87 a 
9 H m syg gv Lr sqp 66w87 a 
h H * syg gv tba mix 66"w87 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
34.6mg * P<.6 + 
no dre P.1. + 
1.55mg * P<.0005 
 
1.21mg Z P<.0005+ 
2.78mg Z P<.0005+ 
2.91mg Z P<.002 
 
6.67mg * P<.0005+ 
10.1mg * P<.002 
 
10.5mg * P<.03 + 
21.2mg Z P<.3 
 
27.3mg * P<.3 + 
1.68mg * P<.0005 
 
NITROSO-N-METHYLi-N(2-PHENYL)ETHYLANINE. . ......... 100.... :1mg :.10 . :100 .:10. : 1.0 : 10 
 
2004 R m f34 wet ugi mix 7m29 . + . 7.88ug Z P<.0005+ 
 
a R f34 wet *so ix 7W29 
 
b R * f34 wt for bcp 7m29 e 
c R m f34 et for bcc 7m29 c 
d R m f34 et Liv hnd 7m29 e 
* R f f34 wet uL L 7.29 . 
f R a f34 wet ton bcc 7m29 e 
2005 R m f34 wet ugi mix 24.29 e 
 
a R f34 wet for bcc 24m29 
 
b R m f34 wat oso mix 24m29 e 
c R * f34 wet muL mt 24m29 
 
d R f34 wet ton bcc 2429 c 
* R * f34 wet Liv hnd 2429 e 
 
N-NITROSO.N1 ETHYLUREA 
 
2006 P b cym set eso sqc 6366 eut 
 
a P b cy et opx sqc 63m"66 u 
b P b cyo *et Liv L 63m"66 u 
c P b cy- t tbe mL 63d6 out 
2007 P b rhe set @so sqc 1lyll out 
 
a P b rhe eat *th eqc lyll ou' 
b P b rho eat opx sqc llyll oub 
c P b rhe set ton sqc Ilyll out 
d P b rhe eat gnv sqc llyll eut 
e P b rhe eat pLc sqc Ilyll out 
f P b rhe eat liv meL 1lyll out 
9 P b rhe eat tbe meL Ilyll out 
 
40.1ug Z P<.0005+ 
2.21mg Z P<.4 + 
2.57mg Z P<.3 + 
no dre P-1. + 
no dre P-1. + 
no dre P-1. + 
13.6ug P<.0005+ 
42.2ug P<.02 + 
42.2ug P<.02 + 
98.9ug P<.8 + 
.184mg P<.3 + 
.184mg P<.3 + 
 
O0ng .. :. .ug. :10. : 100. g :..g :10. :100..g.10 
 
(a)O 3.49mg 
 
3 3.49mg 
no dre 
4.22mg 
+ . 3.00mg 
 
5.24mg 
11.8mg 
24.8mg 
24.8mg 
24.8mg 
no dre 
2 2.59mg 
 
P<. 06 + 
P<. 06 + 
P-I. 
P<.3 
 
P<.0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
P<.02 + 
P<.1 + 
P<.1 + 
P<.1 + 
P-I. 
 
P<. 0005 
 
N-NITROSO-N-METHYLURETHAN l1Ong .. : lug. :10. :100. 1g : .. : 10. :100 . g.10 
 
2008 H b syg gav for epc 27w73 cv <+ noTD50 P<.0005+ 
 
a H b syg gav *so *pc 27w73 cv .127mg P<.0005+ 
 
NITROSO- 1 ,2,3,6-TETRAHYDROPYRIDINE 
2009 R f f34 wet ugi mix 6.0 esy 
a R f f34 wet *o mix 6m30 esy 
 
...:.lug. :10. :100.. :1mg. :10. :100.. : . :10 
 
(+) . .142mg Z P<.0005+ 
 
.216mg Z P<.0005+ 
 
b R f f34 wet ugi cer 6m30 esy 
c R f f34 wat Liv hes 6.30 esy 
d R f f34 wet Liv hpc 6.30 esy 
 
.271mg Z P<.0005+ 
4.04mg * P<.0005+ 
no dre P-1. + 
 
no dre P-1. + 
 
e R f f34 wat stn bcp 6m30 *ey 
f R f 134 wet liv mix 6m30 esy 
2010 R f f34 wet ugi mix 16.23 *e 
 
e R f f34 wet ugi cer 16.23 es 
b R f f34 wet eso mix 16m23 es 
c R f f34 wet liv hnd 16.23 es 
2011 R f f34 wet ugi mix 23.30 e 
 
e R f f34 wet stn bcp 23m30 e 
b R f f34 at eso mix 23m30e 
c R f f34 wet ugi ear 23m30e 
d R f f34 wet liv mix 23m30 e 
e R f f34 wet *so sqc 23m30 , 
 
f R f f34 mt Liv hnd 23m30e 
 
no dre P-1. + 
 
noTD50 P<.0005+ 
96.6ug P<.0005+ 
.127mg P<.0005+ 
2.15mg P<.6 + 
37.4ug * P<.0005+ 
55.1ug \ P<.0005+ 
66.9ug / P<.0005+ 
85.6ug / P<.0005+ 
.132mg * P<.003 + 
.430mg * P<.005 + 
.284mg * P<.03 + 
 
N-NITROSO-2,2,4-TRINETHYL-1,2-DIHYDROQUINOLINE POLYMER ..... ..100. : g... :10. :100.. : . :10 
 
2012 R f cbr ipj pec eer 6.23 * . + . 3.31mg P<.003 + 
 
NITROSOANASSINE Ong..:. .ug. :10. :.1 mg..10.. 100.. . : . :10 
 
2013 R I cbt wet eso mix 73w73 * . + . 12.9mg P<.0005+ 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose llnc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
430 5.06mg n.s.s. 
430 16.5mg n.s.s. 
430 .987mg 4.99mg 
430 .659mg 2.72mg 
430 1.58mg 7.41mg 
430 1.31mg 10.6mg 
430 3.75mg 18.8mg 
430 5.16mg 38.4mg 
430 4.25mg n. .s. 
430 5.29mg n.s.s. 
430 7.74mg n. .s. 
430 1.07mg 2.90mg 
 
NITROSO-N-METHYL-N-(2-PHENYL)ETHYLANINE 13256-11-6 
 
2004 1374m 4.57ug 17.1ug 0/20 2.92ug 9/20 8.10ug 11/20 (44.6ug 
 
1374m 22.3ug 80.6ug 
1374m .424mg n. .s. 
1374m .666mg n. .s. 
1374m 4.94mg n.s.s. 
1374m 4.81mg n.s.s. 
1374m 3.60mg n.s.s. 
1374n 6.49ug 35.5ug 
1374n 14.Sug n. .s. 
1374n 14.5ug n.s.s. 
1374n 9.8lug n.s.s. 
1374n 29.9ug n.s.s. 
1374n 29.9ug n.s.s. 
 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
9/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
9/20 
0/20 
0/20 
 
2.92ug 
2.92ug 
2.92ug 
2.92ug 
2.92ug 
2.92ug 
9.22ug 
9.22ug 
9.22ug 
9.22ug 
9.22ug 
9.22ug 
 
1/20 8.10ug 2/20 44.6ug 
6/20 8.10ug 1/20 44.6ug 
4/20 8.10ug 7/20 44.6ug 
0/20 8.10ug 5/20 44.6ug 
16/20 8.10ug 13/20 44.6ug 
0/20 8.10ug 0/20 44.6ug 
10/20 
4/20 
4/20 
10/20 
 
1/20 
1/20 
 
16/20 .197mg 19/20 .600mg 19/20) Lij insky; 
 
fctx,20,393-399; 1982 
 
15/20 (.197mg 
 
1/20 .197mg 
15/20 .197mg 
0/20 .197mg 
9/20 .197mg 
6/20 .197mg 
 
13/20 .600mg 
4/20 (.600mg 
4/20 .600mg 
0/20 .600mg 
0/20 .600mg 
0/20 .600mg 
 
16/20) 
 
5/20) 
9/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
 
N-NITROSO-N-NETHYLUREA (NNU) 684-93-5 
 
2006 2000 .565mg n.s.s. 0/38 10.4mg 
 
a 2000 .565mg n.s.s. 0/38 10.4mg 
b 2000 1.13mg n.s.s. 0/38 10.4mg 
c 2000 .580mg n.s.s. 1/38 10.4mg 
2007 2000 1.18mg 10.9mg 0/32 10.6mg 
 
a 200Q 1.78mg 27.3mg 0/32 10.6mg 
b 2000 2.89mg n.s.s. 0/32 10.6mg 
c 2000 4.04mg n.s.s. 0/32 10.6mg 
d 2000 4.04mg n.s.s. 0/32 10.6mg 
 
a 2000 4.04mg n.s.s. 0/32 10.6mg 
f 2000 7.83mg n.s.s. 0/32 10.6mg 
9 2000 .991mg 13.5mg 3/32 10.6mg 
 
1/7 
1/7 
0/7 
1/7 
6/11 
4/11 
2/11 
1/11 
1/11 
1/11 
0/11 
7/11 
 
N-NITROSO-N-METHYLURETHAN 615-53-2 
 
2008 1181 n.s.s. .127mg 0/16 .629mg 16/16 
 
a 1181 59.7ug .305mg 0/16 .629mg 13/16 
 
NITROSO- 1,2,3,6-TETRAHYDROPYI 
2009 1375m 76.3ug .350mg 
 
a 
 
b 
 
c 
 
d 
 
2010 
 
b 
 
c 
 
2011 
 
b 
c 
d 
 
f 
 
1375m .129mg .378mg 
1375m .141mg .614mg 
1375m 2.14mg 8.91mg 
1375m 12.8mg n.s.s. 
1375m 14.4mg n.s.s. 
1375m 8.09mg n.s.s. 
 
1375n n..sa. 62.Oug 
1375n 49j3ug .217mg 
1375n 63.3ug .303mg 
1375n .298mg n.s.s. 
1375o 22.Oug 66.7ug 
1375o 25.6ug .156mg 
1375o 37.6ug .131mg 
1375o 47.9ug .171mg 
1375o 66.5ug .852mg 
1375o .163mg 3.43mg 
1375o .115mg n.s.s. 
 
RIDINE 55556-92-8 
 
0/20 7.94ug 6/20 20.6ug 
 
2.83mg 15/20) 
 
0/20 7.94ug 0/20 20.6ug 
(2.83mg 15/20) 
 
0/20 7.94ug 0/20 20.6ug 
 
2.83mg 8/20) 
 
0/20 7.94ug 0/20 20.6ug 
 
2.83mg 14/20 
 
0/20 7.94ug 2/20 20.6ug 
 
2.83mg 2/20 
 
0/20 7.94ug 6/20 20.6ug 
 
2.83mg 1/20 
 
1/20 7.94ug 4/20 20.6ug 
2.83mg 5/20 
 
0/20 .184mg 20/20 
0/20 .184mg 14/20 
0/20 .184mg 12/20 
1/20 .184mg 2/20 
 
0/20 31.8ug 10/20 82.6ug 
0/20 31.8ug 9/20 (82.6ug 
0/20 31.8ug 0/20 82.6ug 
0/20 31.8ug 2/20 82.6ug 
1/20 31.8ug 7/20 82.6ug 
0/20 31.8ug 0/20 82.6ug 
1/20 31.8ug 3/20 82.6ug 
 
1/20 50.8ug 
0/20 50.8ug 
0/20 50.Sug 
0/20 50.Sug 
6/20 50.8ug 
0/20 50.8ug 
9/20 50.8ug 
 
4/20 
1/20 
0/20 
0/20 
4/20 
2/20 
6/20 
 
Adamson;ossc,129-156;1982/Simber pers.com. 
 
HerroLd; Jnci ,37,389-394;1966 
 
.140mg 15/20 (.785mg 17/20 
 
Lij insky;aaos,6,513-527;1982/pera.com. 
.140mg 16/20 .785mg 19/20 
 
.140mg 13/20 (.785mg 10/20 
.140mg 0/20 .785mg 0/20 
.140mg 2/20 .785mg 0/20 
.140mg 4/20 .785mg 1/20 
.140mg 5/20 .785mg 0/20 
 
19/20 
3/20) 
20/20 
16/20 
9/20 
5/20 
6/20 
 
N-NITROSO-2,2,4-TRIMETHYL-1,2-DIHYDROQUINOLINE POLYMER 29929-77-9 
2012 1258 1.34m9 15.4mg 0/22 1.86mg 6/20 
 
NITROSOANASASINE 1133-64-8 
 
2013 1260 4.84mg 35.9mg 0/5 98.0mg 12/13 
 
BoyL&nd;*Jca,4,233-239; 1968 
 
Boyland;b jca, 18,265-270; 1964 
 
k 
 
2003 
 
a 
b 
c 
d 
 
0 
 
f 
9 
h 
 
0/15 
0/15 
0/15 
0/15 
0/15 
0/15 
0/15 
0/15 
0/15 
0/15 
0/15 
0/15 
 
205 
 
1.31mg 
1.31mg 
1. 31mg 
1. 31mg 
1. 31mg 
1.31mg 
1.31mg 
1.31mg 
1.31mg 
1.31mg 
1.31mg 
1.31mg 
 
3/15 2.63mg 
3/15 2.63mg 
8/15 2.63mg 
7/15 2.63mg 
2/15 2.63mg 
1/15 2.63mg 
0/15 2.63mg 
0/15 2.63mg 
4/15 2.63mg 
2/15 2.63mg 
2/15 2.63mg 
5/15 2.63mg 
 
Brkly Code 
 
5/15 5.24mg 
2/15 5.24mg 
12/15 5.24mg 
9/15 (5.24mg 
10/15 5.24mg 
7/15 (5.24mg 
5/15 5.24mg 
3/15 5.24mg 
3/15 5.24mg 
7/15 5.24mg 
1/15 5.24mg 
10/15 5.24mg 
 
5/15 10.5mg 
0/15 10.5mg 
14/15 10. 5mg 
5/15 10.5mg 
6/15 (10.5mg 
3/15 10.5mg 
6/15 10.5mg 
4/15 10.5mg 
3/15 10.5mg 
1/15 10.5mg 
3/15 10.5mg 
12/15 10. 5mg 
 
2/15 
1/15 
10/15 
5/15) 
9/15) 
4/15) 
6/15 
5/15 
6/15 
4/15 
2/15 
13/15 
 
a 
b 
C 
d 
f1 
 
2005 
 
b 
cb 
d 
a 
 
206 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
 
a R f 
b R f 
c R f 
2014 R U 
 
a R u 
b R f 
 
c R u 
 
cbt wet eso bon 73w73 o 
cbt wat eso sqc 73w73 o 
cbt wet Liv tum 73w73 a 
cbt wet *so mix 73w73 a 
cbt wet *so bon 73w73 a 
cbt wet soo sqc 73w73 a 
cbt wet Liv tum 73w73 a 
 
N -NITROSOBENZTHIAZURON 
 
2015 R b wis gav for mix 51w58 
 
a R b wis g9v for sqc 51w58 
b R b wis gav for pam 51w58 
c R b wis g9v liv mix 51w58 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
17.7mg 
413.mg 
no dre 
11M.0m 
28. log 
86.0m 
 
no dre 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<.5 + 
P-I. 
 
P<.002 + 
P<.03 + 
P<.2 + 
P-I. 
 
lOOng... :. lug. :10.:100. 1m :g .:10. :100 . g.10 
 
.+ . 1.13mg * P<.0005+ 
 
1.48mg * P<.0005+ 
3.75mg \ P<.0005 
11.3mg * P<.03 
 
N-NITROSOBIS(2-HYDROXYPROPYL)ANINE ..:. lug. :10. :100. g : . . :10. :100.. : . :10 
 
2016 R m wis wet Lun ado 45w52 as . + . .881g * P<.0005+ 
 
a R f wis wet Lun adc 45w52 as 3.36mg * P<.0005 
b R m wis wet Liv hem 45w52 es 4.55mg * P<.0005 
c R m wis wet Lun crt 45w52 es 9.48mg * P<.003 
d R m wis wet Liv hpc 45w52 es 2.40mg \ P<.03 
 
N-NITROSOBIS(2,2,2.TRIFLUOROETHYL)ANINE. . ... lug 10 . 100 . 1 10 . 100 .. 10 
 
2017 R f f34 wet liv mel 730 * .> 4.98mg 
2018 R m sda wet mix meL 7m26 e .> no dre 
 
a R f sdo wet liv tum 7m26 * no dre 
 
P<. 3 
P-I. 
P-l. 
 
NITROSOCHLORDIAZEPOXIDE 
 
2019 N f c7b wet Lun tum 
 
a N f c7b wet Liv tum 
b N f c7b wet tba mix 
2020 N m c7b wet Lun tum 
 
a N m c7b wat tbe mix 
 
17m25 
17m25 
17m25 
17m25 
17m25 
 
NITROSODIBUTYLANINE 
 
2021 N m icr eat for mix 52w65 
 
a N a icr eat for sqc 52w65 
b N m icr eat Liv mix 52w65 
c N m icr set Liv ada 52w65 
d N m icr eat for sqp 52w65 
a N m icr eat Lun ado 52w65 
f N a icr eat eso pam 52w65 
N NITROSODIETHYLANINE 
 
2022 N b bbb ipj nec moc 27m29 o 
 
a N b bbb ipj Liv car 27m29 o 
b N b bbb ipj tbameL 27m29 o 
 
2023 P b cym eat Liv hpc 1lyll eu% 
 
a P b cyo eat tbe meL 1lyll eu% 
2024 P b cym ipj Liv hpc 45m63 ew 
 
a P b cym ipJ tba meL 45m63 ew 
2025 P b rho eat Liv hpc 12y12 eu% 
 
a P b rho eat tba meL 12y12 eub 
2026 P b rho ipJ liv hpc 37m73 ew 
 
a P b rho ipj tba meL 37m73 *w 
2027 R f f 34 wat eso mix 7m30 
 
a R f f34 wet liv hpc 7m30 
b R f f34 wet ton bcc 7m30 
2028 R f f34 wet liv mix 130 
 
a R f f34 wet eso mix 14o30 
2029 R f f34 wet mix mix 24a30 
 
a R f f34 wet eso mix 24e30 
b R f f34 wet for bcp 2430 
c R f f34 wet liv mix 24m30 
 
2030 R f f34 wet mix mal 7.30 a 
2031 R f fi s wt liv hpt 86w86 o 
 
a R f fis wet tbe mix 86w86 o 
2032 R m fie wet liv hpt 86w86 a 
 
a R m fiew t tba tum 86w86 
2033 R m ada wet mix tum 27m27 
 
a R f sda wet liv tum 27m27 
b R m ada wet eso tum 27.27 
 
2034 R f wio wet liv hpt 60w63 a 
 
a R f wio wet tba mix 60w63 o 
2035 R m wio wet liv hpt 60w63 o 
 
a R m wio wettb emix 60w63o 
2036 R f wis gav mgL ldc 28m28 o 
 
a R f wis gev Liv hnd 28m28 a 
b R f wis gv tb ben 28m28 o 
 
bOng . . . . lug.10. 100.... :1mg. : 10. :100.... :Ig 10 
 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
 
lO0ng..:. .ug. :10. :100.. :_g. : 10. :100.. g. 10 
 
.686m9 
1.09mg 
2.65mg 
4.34mg 
7.69mg 
8.00mg 
11.9mg 
 
Pal. 1 
P-I. 1 
Pal. 1 
P-I. 1 
P-I. 1 
 
P<. 0005 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005 
P<. 008 
 
P<.1 + 
P<. 03 + 
 
bOng.. :..ug. :10 . 100. g. :10 . 100.. : 10 
 
noTD50 P<.0005+ 
.246mg P<.06 + 
noTD50 P<.0005 
 
* <. noTD50 P<.0005+ 
* noTD50 P<.0005 
 
(+) . 21.1ug * P<.0005+ 
 
21.4ug * P<.0005 
 
<+ noTD50 P<.0005+ 
* noTD50 P<.002 
 
(+) . 15.8ug * P<.0005+ 
 
16.6ug * P<.0005 
 
+ 25.5ug Z P<.0005+ 
 
no dre 
no dre 
 
7.87ug \ 
20.7ug I 
13. lug 
15 .Oug 
54.9ug 
41 .6ug 
 
30.8ug* 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
70.6ug 
.119m9 
.133mg 
49.3ug 
53.7ug 
.104mg 
.104mg 
.127mg 
31.3mg 
35. 5ug 
 
P-1. + 
P.1. + 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.007 + 
P<. 02 + 
P<.0005+ 
Pal. - 
P-1. - 
P-I. - 
P-1. - 
P<. 0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 002 
 
P<.02 + 
P<. 02 
 
P<.08 - 
P<1 . - 
P<.08 - 
 
I 
I 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
1260 7.54mg 53.0mg 
1260 67.2mg n.c.s. 
1260 129.mg n.s.a. 
1260 4.19mg 37.0mg 
1260 12.6mg n.s.a. 
1260 29.5mg n.s.a. 
1260 122.mg n.s.s. 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
Brkly Code 
 
0/5 98.0mg 11/13 
0/5 98.0mg 1/13 
0/5 98.0mg 0/13 
0/3 85.7mg 13/14 
0/3 85.7mg 9/14 
0/3 85.7mg 4/14 
0/3 85.7mg 0/14 
 
N*NITROSOBENZTHIAZURON (1(2'-bonzothiazolyL)-3-methyL-3-nitrosoures) 51542-33-7 
2015 1422 .746mg 1.74mg 0/22 7.14mg 27/30 14.3mg 25/30 
 
a 1422 .984mg 2.31mg 0/22 7.14mg 21/30 14.3mg 25/30 
b 1422 1.82mg 11.0mg 0/22 7.14mg 10/30 (14.3mg 4/30) 
c 1422 5.67mg n.s.s. 0/22 7.14mg 6/30 14.3mg 5/30 
 
Ungerer;zkko,81 ,217-224; 1974 
 
N-NITROSOIS(2 -HYDROXYPROPYL)ANINE 
2016 1191 .358mg 2.340g 0/12 
 
a 1191 1.51mg 12.6mg 0/12 
b 1191 1.88m 15.8mg 0/12 
c 1191 3.22mg 61.8mg 0/12 
d 1191 .718mg n.s.s. 0/12 
 
53609-64-6 
 
5.00mg 6/10 25.0mg 
5.00mg 3/10 25.0mg 
5.00mg 1/10 25.0mg 
5.00mg 0/10 25.0mg 
5.00mg 3/10 (25.0mg 
 
Konishi ;gann,69,573-577; 1978 
 
9/9 
6/9 
6/9 
4/9 
1/9) 
 
N-NITROSOSIS(2,2,2-TRIFLUOROETHYL)AMINE (6-F-DEN) --- 
2017 1342 .931mg n.s.s. 1/20 .610mg 2/12 
2018 1342 2.36mg n.s.a. 2/35 .561mg 2/35 
 
a 1342 4.86mg n.s.s. 0/35 .561mg 0/35 
 
NITROSOCHLORDIAZEPOXIDE ... 
 
2019 1257 5.85mg n.s.s. 14/43 
 
a 1257 18.1mg n.s.s. 0/43 
b 1257 8.43mg n.s.s. 24/43 
2020 1257 3.32mg n.s.s. 15/18 
 
a 1257 3.12mg n.s.s. 16/18 
NITROSODIBUTYLANINE 924- 16-3 
 
2021 1434 .416mg 1.18mg 0/30 
 
a 1434 .666mg 1.92mg 0/30 
b 1434 1.44mg 5.65mg 0/30 
c 1434 2.11mg 12.7mg 0/30 
d 1434 3.13mg 122.mg 0/30 
a 1434 2.82mg n.s.s. 2/30 
f 1434 4.10mg n.s.s. 0/30 
 
Proussmann;carc,2,753-756;1981 
Giner-SoroL l;fctx, 18,81-83;1980 
 
4.02mg 6/21 
4.02mg 0/21 
4.02mg 6/21 
3.35mg 14/23 
3.35mg 15/23 
 
Takayama;gann,60,353; 1969 
 
4.80mg 33/39 
4.80mg 27/39 
4.80mg 15/39 
4.80mg 10/39 
4.80mg 6/39 
4.8mg 8/39 
4.80mg 4/39 
 
N-NITROSODIETHYLANINE (DEN) 55-18-5 
 
2000n n.s.s. 43.5ug 
 
2000n 60.2ug n.s.a. 
2000n n.s.s. 43.Sug 
 
2000 n. .s. 4.05mg 
 
2000 n.s.s. 4.13mg 
 
2000o 5.95ug 81.Sug 
2000o 5.97ug 85.9ug 
2000 n.s.s. 5.20mg 
2000 n.s.s. 5.62mg 
 
2000o 6.02ug 41.4ug 
20000 6.15uo 46.Sug 
1173m 14.7ug 48.3ug 
 
1173m 1.53mg n.s.s. 
1173m 2.24mg n.s.s. 
1173n 3.92uo 20.Oug 
1173n 11.7ug 40.Sug 
1173o 6.70ug 29.5ug 
1173o 7.6lug 34.Sug 
1173o 20.7ug .633mg 
 
1173o 16.4ug n.s.s. 
 
1342 14.7uo 65.Oug 
 
1041 .109mg n.s.a. 
1041 .109mg n.s.a. 
1041 84.3ug n.s.s. 
1041 8.3ug n.s.a. 
1303 49.8ug .104mg 
1303 79.4ug .190"mg 
1303 87.4ug .217mg 
1041 23.5ug .131mg 
1041 24.3ug .262mg 
1041 35.9ug n.s.a. 
1041 35.9ug n.s.a. 
1399 41.5ug n.s.s. 
1399 98.7ug n.s.a. 
1399 13.6ug n.s.a. 
 
0/13 
0/13 
0/13 
0/38 
1/38 
0/38 
1/38 
0/32 
3/32 
0/32 
3/32 
0/20 
 
0/20 
0/20 
1/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
1/20 
1/20 
0/15 
3/15 
0/16 
0/16 
0/90 
0/90 
0/90 
0/18 
1/18 
0/17 
0/17 
1/59 
1/59 
18/59 
 
1.33mg 
1 .33mg 
 
1.33mg 
28.6mg 
28.6mg 
.714m9 
.714mg 
28.4mg 
28.4mg 
.357mg 
.357mg 
4.40ug 
4.40ug 
4.40ug 
8.48ug 
8.48ug 
14.Bug 
14.8ug 
14.8ug 
14.8ug 
65.9ug 
51 .6ug 
51 .6ug 
46.Oug 
46.Oug 
71.4ug 
71 .4ug 
71.4ug 
.136mg 
.136mg 
.104mg 
 
.104mg 
10. 2ug 
10. 2ug 
10. 2ug 
 
10/10 
2/10 
10/10 
14/14 
14/14 
 
4/5 2.65mg 
4/5 2.65mg 
12/12 
12/12 
 
4/6 .675mg 
4/6 .675mg 
0/20 10.4uo 
 
Adamson;ossc,129-156;1982/Si.ber pers.co_ . 
 
5/5 
5/5 
 
5/5 
5/5 
3/20 
 
1/20 10.4ug 5/20 
0/20 10.4uo 1/20 
14/20 (20.7ug 5/20) 
2/20 20.7ug 17/20 
14/20 
13/20 
5/20 
7/20 
 
18/20 .170mg 12/12 
0/15 
0/15 
0/13 
0/13 
52/90 
36/90 
33/90 
10/20 
10/20 
4/18 
4/18 
5/58 
1/58 
27/58 
 
1.33mg 6/6 2.56mg 5/5 
1.33mg 6/6 2.56mg 5/5 
 
26.4ug 18/19 (.119mg 13/20 .538mg 10/12) LiJinsky; 
 
conr,41, 4997-5003; 1981/pers.co_m. 
26.4ug 5/19 .119m9 1/20 .538mg 1/12 
26.4ug 6/19 .119m9 0/20 .538mg 0/12 
 
Prsussmann;carc,2,753-756;1981 
 
Nixon; Jnci ,53,453-458;1974 
 
Habs;onco,37,259-265; 1980 
Nixon; Jnci ,53,453-458;1974 
Kross;fctx, 12,671-679; 1974 
 
a 
b 
C 
 
2014 
 
a 
b 
C 
 
207 
 
2022 
 
a 
b 
 
2023 
 
a 
 
2024 
 
a 
 
2025 
 
a 
 
2026 
2027 
 
ba 
b 
 
2028 
 
a 
 
2029 
 
ba 
b 
 
c 
 
2030 
2031 
 
a 
 
2032 
 
a 
 
2033 
b 
 
2034 
 
a 
 
2035 
 
a 
 
2036 
ba 
 
208 GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Not 
c R f wia gav tba mal 28a28 e 
2037 R m wis gav liv tum 28.28 a 
 
a R m wis gav tba ma l28m28 e 
b R m wis gv tba ben 28m28 e 
N -NITROSODINETHYLANINE 
 
2038 N f bal wet lun ade 85w85 gs 
 
a N f beL wet tba mix 85w85 ga 
2039 R f por eat Liv tum 25m28 ar 
2040 R f por eat liv tuo 12m28 r 
2041 R m por set liv tur 28.28 r 
2042 R f wis eat Liv nod 96w96 
 
a R f fwis at -.-- lu 96w96 
b R f wis eat Liv has 96w96 
c R f wis eat liv hpc 96w96 
2043 R m wis eat liv nod 96w96 
 
* R m wis eat Liv hae 96w96 
b R m wis eat Liv hpc 96w96 
 
2044 R f wis aat toe Ldc 54w69 or 
 
a R f wis eat Liv car 54w69 or 
 
N NITROSODIPHENYLANINE 
 
2045 N f b6c eat TBA NXB 23.23 v 
 
a N f b6c set Liv NXB 23.23 v 
b N f b6c-eat Lun NXB 23m23 v 
 
2046 N f b6c orl liv hpt 76w76 ev 
 
a N f b6c orl lun ad. 76w76 evm 
b N f b6c orl tba mix 76w76 evx 
2047 N m b6c set TBA NXB 23.23 
 
a N m b6c eat liv NXB 23m23 
b N m b6c eat lun NXB 23.23 
 
2048 N m b6c orL liv hpt 76w76 evx 
 
a N m b6c orL Lun ado 76w76 evx 
b N m b6c orL tba mix 76w76 evm 
2049 N f b6a orL Lun ad. 76w76 *vx 
 
a N f b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx 
b N f b6a orL tba mix 76w76 *vx 
2050 N r b6a orL lun ad. 76w76 *vx 
 
a N m b6a orl Liv hpt 76w76 evx 
b N m b6a orL tba mix 76w76 evx 
2051 R f f34 eat ubl tcc 23.23 
 
a R f f34 eat TBA NXB 23.23 
b R f f34 eat Liv NXB 23.23 
2052 R m f34 eat ubl tcc 23m23 
 
a R m f34 st --- fib 23.23 
b R m f34 eat TBA NXB 23.23 
c R m f34 eat Liv NXB 23.23 
 
2053 R m cbr ipJ Liv hpt 6m23 a 
 
p-NITROSODIPHENYLANINE 
 
2054 N f b6c eat TBA NXB 53w92 asm 
 
a N f b6c eat Liv NXB 53w92 ast 
b N f b6c eat lun NXB 53w92 as% 
2055 N m b6c eat liv NXA 53w92 as% 
 
a N * b6c eat Liv hpc 53w92 asa 
 
b N m b6c eat TSA NXS 53w92 asN 
c N * b6c eat Liv NXB 53w92 asN 
d N o b6c eat Lun NXB 53w92 asm 
2056 R f f34 eat TSA NXB 18.24 
 
a R f f34 eat liv NXB 18.24 
2057 ft m f34 eat Liv NXA 18.24 
 
a R m f34 eat TBA NXS 18.24 
b R o f34 set liv NXB 18.24 
N -NITROSOEPHEDRINE 
 
2058 R m ada gav Liv mix 24.24 
 
a R f sdd gav liv hpc 24m24 
b R * sda gav Lun mix 24.24 
c R m ada gav for pam 24m24 
d R . ada gav for sqc 24.24 
 
a R f ada gay tba mix 24.24 
 
NITROSOHEPTANETHYLENEININE 
 
2059 R * f34 vat ugi car 6.27 es) 
 
a R * f34 wvt ugi mix 6.27 esa 
 
b R m f34 vat aso mix 6.27 es) 
c R m f34 wt Liv heo 6W27 s 
2060 R m f34 vat ugi mix 12m29 es 
 
tes 
10 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
4.01mg Pd. - 
no dre P-I. - 
77.4ug P<.4 - 
.257mg P<.9 - 
lOng. . ..ug. :10. : 100. :. g : 10. : 100.. g . : g10 
 
+ . .324mg P<.0005+ 
 
.396mg P<.3 
 
. + . 1.40mg * P<.0005+ 
 
*+ 
*+ 
 
.443.g P<. 01 
 
1.18mg * P<.2 + 
 
113mg Z P<.002 + 
1.46mg * P<.005 
 
1.83mg * Pc.03 + 
4.10mg * P<.4 + 
.782mg * P<.0005+ 
1.95mg * P<.007 + 
5.52mg * P<.4 + 
.136mg P<.0005+ 
no dre P-1. - 
 
*+ 
 
boong .. : lug.. : 10. :100.. :.l1g.. : 10. :100.. :1-.g :10 
 
:> no dre Pl.1 
 
no dre Pal. 
no dre P-1. 
 
x .> no dre P-1. 
x no dre P-l. 
x no dre P-1. 
 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
no dre P-I. 
no dre Pal. 
 
x A * 385.mg P<.02 
x 9.67gm P<.9 
x 897.m9 P<.6 
 
x A * 1.029m P<.04 
x no dre P-1. 
x 3.26gm P<.7 
x .> no dr. P-1. 
x no dre P-I. 
x no dre P-1. 
 
: + : 116.mg / P<.0005c 
 
159.mg / P<.008 
no dre Pal. 
 
: + : 299.mg / P<.0005c 
 
537.mg * P<.01 
136.gm * P<1. 
5.459m * P<.3 
 
18.9mg P<1. - 
 
bO0ng.. :. .ug.. : 10. :100.. :.1mg.. : 10. :100.. : g. : 10 
 
v :> 2.179m * P<.5 - 
v 2.25gm * P<.2 
v 5.41gm * P<.4 
 
v : * 340.mg \ P<.02 c 
v 661.mg\ P<.02 c 
v 260.mg \ P<.03 
v 340.mg \ P<.02 
v 3.52gm * P<.7 
 
:> no dre P-1. - 
 
1.21gm * P<.06 
 
+ . 201.mg * P<.0005c 
 
no dre P-I. 
 
201.mg * P<.0005 
 
100ng.. :. .ug.. : 10. :100.. :1.mg.. : 10. :100.. : g.19 :10 
 
+ . 95.2mg P<.0005+ 
 
138.mg P<.004 
 
217.mg P<.1 + 
239.mg P<.03 + 
740.mg P<.3 + 
40.0mg P<.0005 
 
100ng .:. .:ug.. : 10. :100.. :.1mg.. : 10. :100.. : g.19 :10 
 
* .(+) * 36.3ug Z P<.0005+ 
V 51.2ug Z P<.0005+ 
 
.118mg Z P<.0005+ 
Y no dre Pal. 
 
57.1ug * P<.0005+ 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lIne 2Dose 2Inc 
 
c 1399 47.3ug n.s.a. 7/59 10.2ug 7/58 
2037 1399 78.4ug n.s.s. 0/39 7.14ug 0/40 
 
a 1399 18.Aug n.s.s. 4/39 7.14ug 7/40 
b 1399 18.24g n.s.s. 8/39 7.14ug 9/40 
N-NITROSODINETHYLANINE (DNN) 62-75-9 
 
2038 88 .186mg .824mg 20/62 .600mg 44/62 
 
a 88 97.8ug n.s.a. 56/62 .600mg 59/62 
 
2039 122. .893qg 2.36mg 0/29 100.ug 0/18 .250mg 4/62 .500mg 
 
2040 
2041 
2042 
 
a 
 
b 
 
c 
 
2043 
 
b 
 
2044 
 
a 
 
122n 
122m 
1201 
1201 
1201 
1201 
1201 
1201 
1201 
707 
707 
 
.133qg 23.7mg 
.289qg n.s.s. 
46.Oug .439mg 
.546mg 16.3mg 
.631mg n.s.s. 
.666mg n.s.s. 
.337mg 3.05mg 
.591mg 32.7mg 
.780mg n.s.s. 
57.3ug .441mg 
.398mg n.s.s. 
 
0/29 
0/12 
0/18 
0/18 
0/18 
0/18 
0/18 
0/18 
0/18 
0/29 
0/29 
 
. 108mg 
80. Oug 
5. 0Oug 
5. 0Oug 
5 .0Oug 
5. 0Oug 
4. 00ug 
4. 00ug 
4. 00ug 
.313mg 
.313mg 
 
3/15 
 
1/19 .200mg 
0/24 50.Oug 
1/24 50.Oug 
0/24 50. Oug 
0/24 50. Oug 
0/24 40. Oug 
0/24 40. Oug 
0/24 40. Oug 
7/14 
0/14 
 
1/6 
 
6/24 (.500mg 
0/24 .500mg 
1/24 .500mg 
3/24 .500mg 
1/24 .400mg 
0/24 .400mg 
1/24 .400mg 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
Brkly Code 
 
Terracini; ijcn,11,747-764;1973 
 
2/5 1.00mg 15/23 2.50mg 10/12 Terracini; 
 
bjca,20,559-565; 1967 
 
4/24) 
5/24 
3/24 
2/24 
6/24 
3/24 
1/24 
 
N-NITROSODIPHENYLANINE (redax, diphenyLnitrosamine) 86-30-6 
 
2045 c02880 912.mg n.s.s. 9/20 322.mg 24/50 798.mg 15/50 
 
a c02880 1.899m n.s.s. 3/20 322.mg 7/50 798.mg 4/50 
b c02880 1.48gm n.s.s. 3/20 322.mg 11/50 798.mg 5/50 
2046 1094 842.mg n.s.s. 0/18 510.mg 0/15 
 
a 1094 842.mg n.s.s. 1/18 510.Mg 0/15 
b 1094 582.mg n.s.s. 3/18 510.mg 1/15 
 
2047 c02880 2.449m n.s.s. 10/20 1.209m 29/50 2.40gm 22/50 
 
a c02880 6.54gm n.s.s. 6/20 1.20gm 12/50 2.40gm 7/50 
b c02880 5.78gm n.s.s. 4/20 1.20gm 9/50 2.40gm 7/50 
2048 1094 142.mg n.s.s. 1/17 474.mg 6/15 
 
a 1094 356.mg n.s.s. 2/17 474.mg 2/15 
b 1094 154.mg n.s.s. 6/17 474.mg 7/15 
2049 1094 309.mg n.s.s. 0/17 510.mg 3/18 
 
a 1094 1.01gm n.s.s. 0/17 510.mg 0/18 
b 1094 366.mg n.s.s. 2/17 510.mg 3/18 
2050 1094 443.mg n.s.s. 2/18 474.mg 2/18 
 
a 1094 939.mg n.s.s. 3/18 474.mg 0/18 
b 1094 445.mg n.s.s. 5/18 474.mg 3/18 
 
2051 c02880 78.4mg 181.mg 0/20 50.0mg 0/50 200.mg 40/50 
 
a c02880 76.7mg 3.27gm 13/20 50.0mg 23/50 200.mg 43/50 
b c02880 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/20 50.0mg 0/50 200.mg 0/50 
2052 c02880 167.mg 616.mg 0/20 40.0mg 0/50 160.mg 16/50 
 
a c02880 242.mg 24.5gm 1/20 40.0mg 1/50 160.mg 10/50 
b c02880 137.mg n.s.s. 16/20 40.0mg 29/50 160.mg 33/50 
c c02880 887.mg n.s.s. 0/20 40.0mg 0/50 160.mg 1/50 
2053 1258 .441mg n.s.s. 1/24 .186mg 1/21 
 
Arai;gann,70,549-558;1979 
 
Terao;fctx, 16,591-596; 1978 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Inn.s;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
S 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
BoyLand;eJca,4,233-239; 1968 
 
p-NITROSODIPHENYLANINE 156-10-5 
2054 c02244 493.mg n.s.s. 4/20 
 
a c02244 974.mg n.s.s. 0/20 
b c02244 1.64gm n.s.s. 0/20 
2055 c02244 172.mg n.s.s. 2/20 
 
a c02244 323.mg n.s.s. 0/20 
b c02244 128.mg n.s.s. 4/20 
c c02244 172.mg n.s.s. 2/20 
d c02244 711.mg n.s.s. 1/20 
2056 c02244 195.mg n.s.s. 11/20 
 
a c02244 522.mg n.s.s. 0/20 
2057 c02244 129.mg 547.mg 0/20 
 
a c02244 129.mg n.s.s. 13/20 
b c02244 129.mg 547.mg 0/20 
 
343.mg 16/50 636.mg 9/50 
343.mg 5/50 636.mg 2/50 
343.mg 2/50 636.mg 1/50 
316.mg 22/50 (587.mg 12/50) 
316.-m 10/50 (587.mg 1/50) 
316.mg 30/50 (587.mg 17/50) 
316-mg 22/50 (587.mg 12/50) 
316.mg 10/50 587.mg 4/50 
92.9mg 36/50 186.mg 28/50 
92.9mg 2/50 186.mg 5/50 
74.3mg 10/50 149.mg 19/50 
74.3mg 34/50 149.mg 33/50 
74.3mg 10/50 149.mg 19/50 
 
Liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
Liv:hpa,hpc. 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
L iv:hpc,nnd. 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
N-NITROSOEPHEDRINE 17608-59-2 
 
2058 1259 41.0mg 332.mg 0/40 
 
a 1259 52.4mg 974.mg 0/40 
b 1259 64.1mg n.s.s. 1/40 
c 1259 72.2mg n.s.s. 0/40 
d 1259 120.mg n.s.s. 0/40 
* 1259 20.1mg 129.mg 4/40 
 
Eisenbrand;cLet,5, 103-106; 1978 
 
34.3mg 7/32 
34.3mg 5/32 
34.3mg 4/32 
34.3mg 3/32 
34.3mg 1/32 
34.3mg 16/32 
 
NITROSOHEPTANETHYLENEININE 
2059 1376. 18.1ug 86.7ug 
 
a 1376. 30.3ug 96.3ug 
b 1376. 66.9ug .233mg 
c 1376. .160mg n.s.s. 
2060 1376n 35.3ug 99.6ug 
 
20917-49-1 
 
0/20 39.8ug 12/20 (.197mg 11/20 .733mg 10/20) 
0/20 39.8ug 15/20 .197mg 17/20 (.733mg 15/20) 
0/20 39.8ug 5/20 .197mg 15/20 (.733mg 12/20) 
1/20 39.8ug 0/20 .197mg 0/20 .733mg 0/20 
0/20 11.4ug 2/20 31.5ug 13/20 .125mg 16/20 
 
Lijinsky;jnci,69,1127-1133;1982/pers.com. 
 
209 
 
210 
 
otes 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist N( 
a R * f34 wit mso bcc 12.29 es 
b R m f34 wat ton bcc 12.29 es 
c R * f34 wet Liv hpc 12.29 es 
2061 R m f34 wat ugi mix 23.27 * 
 
a R m f34 wt eso mix 23m27?e 
b R m f34 wat ton bcc 23.27 a 
c R m f34 wat Liv mix 23.27 a 
I -NITROSOHYDANTOIN 
 
2062 R f mrw wat Liv tum 12.26 
 
a R f mrw wet tbi mix 12.26 
2063 R m mrw wat for sqp 12.26 
 
a R * *rw wat phr sqc 12.26 
b R m mrw wat Liv tur 12.26 
c R m mrw wat tba mix 12.26 
 
NITROSOHYDROXYPROLINE 
 
2064 R f .rc wat Liv tum 17.24 
 
a R f mrc wat tba mix 17.24 
2065 R m .rc wet Liv tum 17.24 
 
* R m .rc wet tba mix 17.24 
NITROSOININODIACETIC ACID 
 
2066 R f mrc wet tba mix 17.24 * 
2067 R m .rc wet pit tur 17.24 a 
 
a R m .rc wat tba mix 17.24 * 
2-NITROSONETHYLANINOPYRIDINE 
 
2068 R f bdf g.v iso mix 72w72 * 
 
a R f bdf gv Liv mix 72w72 c 
b R f bdf gv tb mL 72w72 
c R f bdf gv tb mix 72w72 
 
d R f bdf gav tba ben 72w72 a 
 
3-NITROSONETHYLANINOPYRIDINE 
 
2069 R f bdf gav Liv mix 27.27 a 
 
a R f bdf gv tb mix 27m27 e 
b R f bdf gv tb aL 27.27 . 
c R f bdf gv tba ben 27m27 e 
4- NITROSONETHYLANINOPYRIDINE 
 
2070 R f bdf gav Liv mix 23.23 a 
 
a R f bdf gv tb mix 23m23 e 
b R f bdf gv tb ben 23m23 i 
c R f bdf gv tb aL 23m23 e 
 
NITROSONETHYLANILINE 
 
2071 R f cbt wet iso mix 67w67 *v 
 
a R f cbt wet *co sqc 67w67 *v 
b R f cbt wat *so ben 67w67 *v 
c R f cbt wet Liv tum 67w67 *v 
2072 R * cbt wat eso mix 60w60 *v 
 
a R m cbt wit cso sqc 60w60 *v 
b R m cbt wit cso ben 60w60 *v 
c R m cbt wit Liv tum 60w60 *v 
2073 R b ads wat *so mix 24.24 a 
NITROSONETHYLPHENIDATE 
 
2074 N f c7b wit Lun tur 17.25 
 
i N f c7b wit Liv tur 17.25 
b N f c7b wit tbi mix 17.25 
2075 N * c7b wat Lun tur 17.25 
 
a N * c7b wat tbi mix 17.25 
NITROSONETHYLUNDECYLANINE 
 
2076 R * f34 gyv Lun sqc 30w65 
 
a R * f34 giv Liv hpc 30w65 
b R m f34 giv Lun iLd 30w65 
c R m f34 giv Liv cLc 30w65 
d R * f34 giv Lun aLi 30w65 
* R m f34 gav cso sqc 30w65 
f R t f34 giv stn pa. 30w65 
 
NITROSOPIPECOLIC ACID 
 
2077 R f *rc wit Liv tur 17.24 * 
 
a R f .rc wit tbi mix 17.24 * 
2078 R * .rc wit Liv tun 17.24 * 
 
a R m .rc wit tbi mix 17.24 * 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
.159m9 * P<.0005+ 
.171mg * P<.0005+ 
no dre P.1. + 
29.2ug * P<.0005+ 
73.5ug * P<.0005+ 
.105mg * P<.004 + 
.198mg \ P<.1 + 
 
bOOng.. :. .ug.. :10.1. 1mg.1. : 100.. : 1ig ..... :..o10 
 
no dre 
19.6mg 
. 27.8mg 
 
43.8mg 
no dri 
7.31mg 
iOOng .. :. .ug. :10. :100. g :.g :10. :100. :Ig .:10 
 
no dre 
3.84mg 
no dre 
no dre 
bO0ng. ... :1ug.10. :100. 1m :g .:10. :100. : g. :10 
 
63.9mg 
+ . 66.9mg 
 
76.0mg 
bO0ng..:. .ug . : 10. :100 . 1m :.g .:10.: 100 .. :Ig .:10 
 
+ . .214mg 
 
no dre 
.668mg 
.280mg 
3.05mg 
bO0ng .. : lug.. : 10.: 100.. :1mg. : 10. :100.. : g. : 10 
 
no dre 
no dre 
6.09mg 
no dre 
bOng.. :. .ug.. : 10. :100.. :l1g. : 10. :100.. : Ig .:10 
 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
26.8mg 
bO0ng .. : lug. :10. :100. g :..g :10. :100..g.10 
 
<+ noTD50 
 
26.4mg 
32.0mg 
no dre 
5.27mg 
10.5mg 
70.4mg 
no dre 
 
+ 34.3ug \ 
bOOng.. :. .ug. :10. :100. g :..g :10. :100. . : g :10 
 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
bO0ng..: ..ug. :10. :100. g :.1g :10. :100..g.10 
 
2.37mg 
2.38mg 
2.41.g 
3.18mg 
4.99mg 
15.4mg 
15.4mg 
bOOng.. :. .ug. :10. :100. g :.1g :10. :100. . : :.10 
 
no dre 
4.99mg 
no dre 
3.82mg 
 
P-I. 
 
P<.2 + 
P<. 005 
 
P<.03 + 
P-I. 
 
P<. 03 
 
P-I. 
 
P<.03 - 
P-l. 
 
P-I. _ 
 
P<.07 - 
P<. 006 - 
P<.3 - 
 
P<.003 + 
P-1. 
 
P<. 08 
P<. 2 
P<.9 
 
P-1. _ 
P-1. _ 
P<.4 - 
P-I. . 
 
Po. 1. 
 
Pal. _ 
P-1. _ 
P<.5 - 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<.02 + 
P<.03 . 
P-1. - 
P<. 002 + 
P<.009 + 
P<.3 + 
P-I. - 
P<. 0005+ 
 
P-I. _ 
P-1. _ 
P-1. _ 
Po. 1. 
 
P-1. _ 
 
P<.0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.002 
P<. 002 
 
P-I. 
 
P<.07 - 
P-l. 
 
P<.07 - 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
a 1376n 85.8ug .340mg 0/20 
b 1376n 92.7ug .410mg 0/20 
c 1376n .729mg n.s.s. 0/20 
2061 1376o 17.4ug 52.1ug 0/20 
 
a 1376o 39.7ug .158mg 0/20 
b 1376o 53.7ug .736mg 0/20 
c 1376o 48.5ug n.s.s. 0/20 
I -NITROSOHYDANTOIN 42579-28*2 
 
2062 1246 63.0mg n.s.s. 0/25 
 
a 1246 5.90"mg n.s.s. 12/25 
2063 1246 11.3mg 198.mg 0/22 
 
a 1246 15.1mg n.s.s. 0/22 
b 1246 57.4mg n.s.s. 0/22 
c 1246 2.84mg n.s.s. 12/22 
 
11 .4ug 
11 .4ug 
11 .4ug 
24.Bug 
24.Bug 
24.Sug 
24.8ug 
 
I 1.4mg 
11.4mg 
9.96mg 
9.96mg 
9.96mg 
9.96mg 
 
0/20 31.5ug 
1/20 31.5ug 
5/20 31.5ug 
10/20 64.6ug 
3/20 64.6ug 
6/20 64.6ug 
2/20 (64.6ug 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
2/20 .125mg 13/20 
4/20 .125mg 10/20 
0/20 .125mg 0/20 
17/20 
12/20 
6/20 
0/20) 
 
0/24 
16/24 
6/25 
4/25 
0/25 
21/25 
 
Bulay; Jnci ,62,1523-1528; 1979 
 
NITROSOHYDROXYPROLINE 30310-80-6 
 
2064 216 13.6mg n.s.s. 0/15 4.42mg 0/15 
 
a 216 1.43mg n.s.s. 4/15 4.42mg 10/15 
2065 216 11.9mg n.s.s. 0/15 3.86mg 0/15 
 
a 216 3.47mg n.s.s. 5/15 3.86mg 5/15 
 
NITROSOININODIACETIC ACID 25081-31-6 
 
2066 213 22.0mg n.s.s. 4/15 56.5mg 
2067 213 25.1mg 631.mg 0/15 39.6mg 
 
a 213 19.4mg n.s.s. 5/15 39.6mg 
2-NITROSONETHYLANINOPYRIDINE 16219-98-0 
 
2068 1261 .118mg .826mg 0/5 .714mg 
 
a 1261 .964mg n.s.s. 1/5 .714mg 
b 1261 .301mg n.s.s. 0/5 .714mg 
c 1261 .112mg n.s.s. 2/5 .714mg 
d 1261 .263mg n.s.s. 2/5 .714mg 
 
9/15 
5/15 
8/15 
 
18/27 
2/27 
8/27 
20/27 
12/27 
 
3-NITROSONETHYLANINOPYRIDINE 69658-91 -0 
 
2069 1261 1.92mg n.s.s. 1/5 .571mg 2/26 
 
a 1261 1.10mg n.s.s. 2/5 .571mg 6/26 
b 1261 1.50mg n.s.s. 0/5 .571mg 2/26 
c 1261 1.51mg n.s.a. 2/5 .571mg 4/26 
4-NITROSONETHYLANINOPYRIDINE 16219-99-1 
 
2070 1261 8.33mg n.s.a. 1/5 2.86mg 0/15 
 
a 1261 2.85mg n.s.s. 2/5 2.86mg 4/15 
b 1261 3.56mg n.s.s. 2/5 2.86m 3/15 
c 1261 4.35mg n.s.s. 0/5 2.86mg 1/15 
 
Garcia;zkko,79,141-144;1973 
 
Lijinsky;jnci,50,1061-1063;1973 
 
Prsussmann; Jnci, 62,153-156; 1979 
Prsussmann; Jnci ,62,153-156;1979 
Proussmann; Jnci ,62,153-156; 1979 
 
NITROSONETHYLANILINE 614-00-6 
2071 1260 n.s.s. 12.4mg 0/5 
 
a 1260 11.6mg n.s.s. 0/5 
b 1260 13.5mg n.s.s. 0/5 
c 1260 90.7mg n.s.s. 0/5 
2072 1260 2.07mg 16.2mg 0/3 
 
a 1260 5.02mg 241.mg 0/3 
b 1260 21.2mg n.s.s. 0/3 
c 1260 70.4mg n.s.s. 0/3 
2073 1264 22.Oug 55.7ug 0/48 
 
NITROSONETHYLPHENIDATE 55557-03-4 
2074 1257 19.3mg n.s.s. 14/43 
 
a 1257 53.4mg n.s.s. 0/43 
b 1257 10.6mg n.s.s. 24/43 
2075 1257 4.69mg n.s.s. 15/18 
 
a 1257 3.59mg n.s.s. 16/18 
 
NITROSONETHYLUNDECYLANINE 
2076 1207 1.12mg 6.28mt 
 
a 1207 1.13mg 6.38mg 
b 1207 1.13mg 6.59mg 
 
c 1207 1.42mg 9.37mg 
d 1207 1.91mg 24.9mg 
 
a 1207 3.79mg 205.mg 
f 1207 3.79mg 205.mg 
 
68107-26 
 
2/260 
3/260 
5/260 
0/260 
8/260 
0/260 
0/260 
 
70.7mg 
70.7mg 
70.7m9 
70.7m9 
64. 1mg 
64. 1mg 
64. 1mg 
64. 1mg 
83.Sug 
 
8.05mg 
8.05mg 
8.05mg 
 
6.70m9 
6.70mg 
 
6-6 
 
6.07mg 
6.07mg 
6.07mg 
6.07mg 
6.07mg 
6.07mg 
6.07mg 
 
15/15 
8/15 
7/15 
0/15 
15/16 
12/16 
3/16 
0/16 
 
39/48 (.319mg 42/48) 
 
BoyLand;bj ca, 18,265-270;1964 
 
SchmahL ;cLt, 1,215-218;1976 
 
7/31 
0/31 
15/31 
17/24 
19/24 
 
10/20 
10/20 
10/20 
8/20 
6/20 
2/20 
2/20 
 
Ginar-Sorol La;fctx, 18,81-83;1980 
 
Lij insky;cLet,5,209-213;1978 
 
NITROSOPIPECOLIC ACID 4515-18-8 
 
2077 216 13.6mg n.s.s. 0/15 4.42mg 0/15 
 
a 216 1.72mg n.s.s. 4/1S 4.42mg 9/15 
2078 216 11.9mg n.s.s. 0/15 3.86mg 0/15 
 
a 216 1.30mg n.s.a. 5/15 3.86mg 10/15 
 
6arcia;zkko,79, 141-144; 1973 
 
211 
 
Brkly Code 
 
212 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
N-NITROSOPIPERAZINE 10 
2079 R f .rc wit Liv tur 14.29 o 
 
a R f .rc wat tba mix 14.29 o 
2080 R m .rc wat Liv hpt 14.29 o 
 
a R m mrc wet tba mix 14.29 o 
 
N-NITROSOPIPERIDINE 10 
2081 N m icm oat for sqc 52w52 
 
a N m icm oat Liv mix 52w52 
b N m icm oat Liv ado 52w52 
c N m icm oat Lun ado 52w52 
 
2082 P b cym oat Liv hpc 90.92 ow 
 
a P b cym oat tba maL 90.92 ow 
2083 P b rho oat Liv hpc 8y9 ow 
 
a P b rho oat tbo maL ,8y9 ow 
 
2084 P b rho ipJ Liv hpc 91.93 ouw 
 
a P b rho ipJ tba maL 91m93 ouw 
 
NITROSOPROLINE 10 
2085 R f .rc wit Liv tum 17m24 o 
 
a R f mrc wit tba mix 17m24 o 
2086 R m .rc wit Liv tum 17m24 o 
 
a R m mrc wat tba mix 17m24 o 
 
TD50 2iailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
Ong.. . .ug :10. :100. g :.lg :10. :100.. : :10 
 
.> n o dre P-1. 
 
5.51mg * P<.2 . 
A 6.52mg \ P<.05 
 
21.6mg * P<< 5 * 
 
)Ong. .:.. lug...:.10 ....100 . 1. :mg...:.10 ...:.100...:.Ig ...:.10 
 
. + . 1. 
 
C. 
 
(4 
 
.30mg 
 
2. 53mg 
5.12mg 
3. 52mg 
noTD50 
noTO50 
 
18. 7mg 
19.7mg 
.635mg 
.712mg 
 
)Ong. . ..ug :10. :100. g :. . :10. :100.. :19 :10 
 
.> no dre 
 
6.69mg 
.> no dro 
 
no dre 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 005 
P<.002 
 
P<.003 + 
P<. 02 
 
P<. 0005. 
P<. 0005 
 
P<. 0005+ 
Pcz. 02 
 
P<.2 - 
P-1. 
 
p-I. - 
 
N-NITROSOPYRROLIDINE lOOng ..:.: ug. :10. :100. 1g : . . :10. :100.. : 9 :10 
 
2087 R f .rc wat liv adc 16m28 o . + . 2.10mg P<.0005+ 
 
a R f mrc wat tbe tum 16m28 o 5.21mg P<.3 
 
2088 R f .rc wat Liv hpc 67w90 o <+ noTD50 P<.0005. 
 
i R f frc wit tbi mix 67w90 o noTD50 P<.07 
 
2089 R m .rc wat tba tum 16m28 * . + . 2.51mg P<.008 
2090 R m .rc wit Liv hpc 67w90 o <+ noTD50 P<.0005+ 
 
a R mrc wat tes pm 67w90 o 5.38mg P<.002 
b R m .rc wat tba mix 67w90 o noTD50 P<.008 
 
2091 R b sda wit Liv hpc 23m30 ii . a. 3.26mg Z P<.0005 
 
i R b sda wit Liv hpi 23m30 is 55.5mg * P<.005 
 
b R b sda wat tb maL 23m30 am 2.37mg Z P<.0005+ 
c R b ada wit tba ban 23m30 am 71.1Mg * P<.2 
N-NITROSOTHIONlORPHOLINE l1Ong. .... lug. 1 :10 . :100. g : . 1g. :10 . :100.. : . :10 
 
2092 R f mrc wat 0so mix 9m24 a . + . 7.69mg * P<.002 + 
 
a R f rc wat ton sqc 9m24 o 22.0mg * P<.3 + 
b R f .rc wat Liv tum 9.24 no dre P-1. 
c R f rc wet tba mix 9.24 a 7.38mg * P<.2 
 
2093 R * mrc wat iso mix 38w95 * . + . 4.15mg * P<.0005+ 
 
a R f * rc wat liv tum 38w95 o no dre P-1. 
 
b R m .rc wit tbi mix 38w95 o 2.29mg * P<.02 
 
NORETHYNODREL 100ng. ... lug. :10. :100. g : . 1g. :10 : . 100... :10 :10 
 
2094 N f c3h oat mam tu 24m24 or .> no dre Pal. - 
2095 N f cfL oat Liv hct 78w78 or . 49.1mg * P<.04 - 
2096 N m cfL oat Liv hct 78w78 or .> no dre P-1. - 
2097 N f crf oat moa tum 24m24 or pooL .> 2.13mg P<.6 - 
2098 N f r3m oat mai tum 24m24 or .> no dre P-1. - 
2099 N f sww gav Liv hct 65w80 or .> no dre P-1. - 
NORHARNAN 100ng. .. : ug. 1 :10 . :100. 1g : . . :10. .:100.1 :0 1 :10 
 
2100 R m wis oat for pam 80w80 .> 191.mg P<.3 - 
 
a R m wis oat ubL tum 80w80 no dre P-1. - 
 
NORLESTRIN 
 
2101 N f c7l gav pit tum 89w89 o 
 
2102 N f csc gav lun tum 69w69 *k 
 
a N f csc gav tba mix 69w69 ok 
2103 N f cic gav tba mix 69w82 *k 
2104 R b asd oat liv hnd 24m24 o 
 
a R b asd oat pit cra 24m24 o 
b R b asd oat mgL mix 24m24 o 
c R b sad eat mgL ado 24m24 o 
d R b asd eat uto sop 24m24 o 
* R b aid oat Liv hpa 24m24 o 
f R b asd oat .gL adc 24m24 o 
g R b sad oat .gL fop 24m24 o 
h R b aid oat tbe mix 24m24 a 
 
boong..: .. lug . 10 .I .... 100...:. 1mg ..:. 10 ...:. 100... Ig-.1...-10 
 
.> 1. 
 
nc 
nc 
 
.> n4 
 
. + .1. 
 
5. 
6. 
14 
27 
 
7. 
7d 
 
21 
14 
 
.34mg 0P<. 2 + 
o dre P-1. 
o dre P-1. 
o dre P.1. 
 
.94mg \ P<.0005+ 
.31mg / P<.0005+ 
.66mg P<.0005. 
4.8mg 0 P<.0005+ 
7.4mg * P<.002 + 
.59mg \ P<.02 + 
6.8mg * P<.05 + 
1.0mg * P<.2 + 
4.2mg 0 P<.6 
 
NOVADELOX 
 
2105 N b aLb oat Lun ado 80w80 a 
 
a N b aLb oat Lun mix 80w80 a 
b N b aLb oat Liv hpt 80W80 a 
 
100ng. . :lug. :10. :100. g :. 1g :10 .: 100.. : . :10 
 
.no dre P-1. 1 
no dro P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 21nc 
 
N-NITROSOPIPERAZINE 5632-47-3 
 
2079 229 2.48mg n.s.s. 0/13 .964mg 
 
a 229 1.55mg n.s.s. 4/13 .964mg 
2080 229 1.06mg n.s.s. 0/57 .672mg 
 
a 229 3.16mg n.s.s. 12/57 .672mg 
 
N-NITROSOPIPERIDINE (PIP) 100-75-4 
 
2081 225 .736mg 2.60mg 0/30 6.00mg 
 
a 225 1.26mg 6.36mg 0/30 6.00mg 
b 225 2.09mg 36.6mg 0/30 6.00mg 
c 225 1.49mg n.s.s. 2/30 6.00mg 
2082 2000 n.s.s. 39.3mg 0/38 279.mg 
 
a 2000 n.s.s. n.s.s. 1/38 279.mg 
2083 2000 5.89mg 74.6mg 0/32 280.mg 
 
a 2000 5.99mg 97.6mg 3/32 280.mg 
2084 2000m .177mg 4.69mg 0/32 5.59mg 
 
a 2000m .182mg n.s.s. 3/32 5.59mg 
NITROSOPROLINE 7519-36-0 
 
2085 216 13.6mg n.s.s. 0/15 4.42mg 
 
a 216 2.05mg n.s.s. 4/15 4.42mg 
2086 216 11.9mg n.s.s. 0/15 3.86mg 
 
a 216 4.39mg n.s.s. 5/15 3.86mg 
 
N-NITROSOPYRROLIDINE 930-55-2 
 
2087 1189 .932mg 5.18mg 0/20 4.48mg 
 
a 1189 1.23mg n.s.s. 14/20 4.48mg 
2088 228 n.s.s. 2.09mg 0/33 6.08mg 
 
a 228 n.s.s. n.s.s. 14/33 6.08mg 
2089 1189 .959mg 58.3mg 7/20 3.14mg 
2090 228 n.a.s. 1.54mg 0/34 4.25mg 
 
a 228 1.84mg 28.3mg 0/34 4.25mg 
b 228 n.s.s. 1.80mg 6/34 4.25mg 
2091 371 2.23mg 5.01mg 0/61 .300mg 
 
a 371 20.9mg 857.mg 0/61 .300mg 
b 371 1.60mg 3.90mg 6/61 .300mg 
c 371 20.9mg n.s.s. 5/61 .300mg 
 
N-NITROSOTHIONORPHOLINE 26541-51*5 
 
2092 229 3.11mg 34.4mg 0/13 .739mg 
 
a 229 5.31og n.s.s. 0/13 .739mg 
b 229 1.41mg n.s.s. 0/13 .739mg 
c 229 2.22mg n.s.s. 4/13 .739mg 
2093 229 1.42mg 21.5mg 0/57 .571mg 
 
a 229 .888mg n.s.s. 0/57 .571mg 
b 229 .794mg n.s.s. 12/57 .571mg 
 
NORETHYNOOREL 68-23-5 
 
2094 1175 2.48mg n.s.s. 54/92 1.76mg 
2095 1453m 12.1mg n.s.s. 0/39 .125mg 
2096 1453m 16.3mg n.s.s. 6/39 .125mg 
2097 1175 .243mg n.s.s. 161/167p 1.76mg 
2098 1175 1.86mg n.s.s. 50/73 1.76mg 
2099 1453 6.19mg n.s.s. 1/50 1.02mg 
 
0/10 4.90mg 
8/10 4.90mg 
1/10 (3.30mg 
4/10 3.30mg 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
0/10 
7/10 
0/10) 
3/10 
 
18/33 
11/33 
6/33 
10/33 
 
5/5 
5/5 
6/7 
6/7 
3/5 
3/5 
 
Brkly Code 
 
Garcia;zkko,74, 179-184; 1970 
 
Takayama;nawi,56, 142; 1969 
Adamson;ossc,129-156;1982/Sisber pers.com. 
 
Garcia;zkko,79, 141-144; 1973 
 
0/15 
8/15 
0/15 
4/15 
 
13/15 
13/15 
13/13 
13/13 
12/15 
12/12 
4/12 
12/12 
0/60 
3/60 
12/60 
7/60 
 
0/10 
1/10 
0/10 
3/10 
0/11 
0/11 
4/11 
 
45/77 
 
0/39 
7/40 
48/49 
19/31 
0/50 
 
Greenblatt; Jnc i,50,799-802;1973 
Greenblatt; Jnci ,48,1687-1696;1972 
 
Greenblatt; jnci,50,799-802; 1973 
Gre.nblatt; Jnci ,48, 1687-1696;1972 
 
1.00m9 
1.00mg 
1.00m9 
1 . 00M9 
 
4. 25mg 
4.25mg 
4.25mg 
4.25mg 
2.90mg 
2.90mg 
2.90mg 
 
13/62 3.00mg 30/38 (10.0mg 9/24) 
4/62 3.00mg 1/38 10.0mg 5/24 
20/62 3.00mg 32/38 (10.0mg 11/24) 
9/62 3.00mg 3/38 10.0mg 6/24 
 
6/17 
2/17 
0/17 
9/17 
4/10 
0/10 
6/10 
 
1.50mg 0/40 5.00mg 2/39 
1.50mg 1/40 5.00mg 3/40 
 
Proussuann;zkko,90, 161-166; 1977 
 
Garcia;zkko,74, 179-184; 1970 
 
Rudat i; Jnci ,49,813-819;1972 
Barrows; j txe,3,219-230; 1977 
 
RudaL i; Jnci ,49,813-819;1972 
Barrows; j txe,3,219-230; 1977 
 
NORHARNAN 244-63*3 
 
2100 1460 31.0mg n.s.s. 0/28 20.0mg 1/24 
 
a 1460 58.5mg n.s.s. 0/28 20.0mg 0/24 
 
NORLESTRIN 8015-12-1 
 
2101 230 .347mg n.s.s. 1/8 .200mg 
2102 585m .194mg n.s.s. 0/15 .143mg 
 
a 585m 83.4ug n.s.s. 4/15 .143mg 
2103 585n 57.2ug n.s.s. 8/15 .120mg 
2104 1403 .941mg 6.88mg 4/200 .338mg 
 
a 1403 3.07mg 13.3mg 64/200 .338mg 
b 1403 3.47mg 27.9mg 61/200 .338mg 
c 1403 7.91og 37.3mg 5/200 .338mg 
d 1403 12.0mg 164.mg 4/200 .338mg 
* 1403 2.30mg 37.2gm 0/200 .338mg 
f 1403 22.9mg n.s.s. 2/200 .338mg 
9 1403 6.38mg n.s.s. 58/200 .338mg 
h 1403 2.59mg n.s.s. 159/200 .338mg 
NOVADELOX *-- 
 
2105 1345 9.23gm n.s.s. 0/41 19.6mg 
 
a 1345 9.85gm n.s.s. 1/41 19.6mg 
b 1345 11.0gm n.s.s. 1/41 19.6mg 
 
7/15 2.00mg 5/8 
0/15 
3/15 
7/15 
 
13/100(3.38mg 10/100) 
19/100 3.38mg 55/100 
34/100 3.38mg 51/100 
 
2/100 3.38mg 17/100 
2/100 3.38mg 10/100 
3/100(3.38mg 4/100) 
0/100 3.38mg 4/100 
33/100 3.38mg 37/100 
82/100 3.38mg 83/100 
 
1/42 196.mg 1/42 1.96gm 0/42 
1/42 196.mg 1/42 1.969m 0/42 
1/42 196.mg 0/42 1.96gm 0/42 
 
Hagiwara;txLt,6,71 -75;1980 
 
PooL ;scis, 154,402-403; 1966 
 
Pool ;canr,28,845-859; 1968 
 
Schsrd.in;txap, 16,10-23; 1970 
 
Sherratt;fctx,2,527-538;1964 
 
213 
 
214 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
2106 R b sib eat Liv *hp 28.28 e 
 
a R beLb eattbe ben28MM8a 
b R b eLb eattbe eL28m28 e 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
TD50 2Thilpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
.>no dre P-I1. - 
 
6.48gm * P<.04 - 
15.6gm * P<.5 - 
 
OCHRATOXIN A I0ng..:. . lug ...:.10 .... 100...:.-log . 10 .. .... 100...:. Ig ...:. 10 
 
2107 R b wis gav Liv turn 12m26 e .> no dre P-I. 
 
a R b wisn gav tba turn 12.26 e no dre P-1. - 
 
OVULEN 
 
2108 N f crf eat mom turn 24u24 r 
2109 N m crf eat mem turn 24.24 r 
 
N- (9.OXO.2-FLUORENYL)ACETANIDE 
 
2110 R f buf eat mgl mdc 86w86 e 
 
a R fbufseatedu sqc 86w86eo 
b R fbufset Liv hpt 86w$6 
 
boong..:.. lug...:.10 ...:.100 ... lugm....10 ...:.100...:.Ig ...:.10 
 
.> ~~~~~~~~~~.858mg P.c.8- 
 
+ ..300mg P<.0005 
 
boong..:.. lug...:.10 ...:.100...:.lug...:.10 ...:.100...:.Ig...:.10 
 
* . 6.17mg 
 
32.0mg 
102.mg 
 
P<. 0005. 
P<. 04 + 
P<. 3 + 
 
1'-OXOSAFROLE iOOng..:..Iug...:.10 ...:.100...:.Iug...:.10.....100...:..ig .... 10 
 
2111 R m cdr seat liv car 73w95 e .> no dre P-1. - 
 
OXPRENOLOL.HNC I 
 
2112 N f cfl eat Liv car 78w91 e 
 
e N f cfl eat Lun ade, 78w91 e 
b N f cfl seat Lun nfs 78w91 e 
2113 N f cfl set Lun car 78w78 e, 
 
a N f cfl eat Liv tumn 78w78 a 
2114 N m cfl eat Liv pce 78w91 e 
 
a N m cfl seat Lun ads 78w91 e 
2115 N m cfl eat Liv car 78w78 e 
 
a N cfl seat Lun ad. 78w78 e 
b N m cfl seat Lun car 78w78 e 
2116 R f cdr seat Liv tumn 78w78 e 
2117 R m cdr seat Liv hpe 78w78 e 
 
lOOng. .:..lug... .10 ...:. 100.. 1m:.lg. 10 .I ...:. 100... .Ig. 10.:.I 
 
2.40gm *P<.2 
no dre P-I. 
no dre P.1. 
425.mg P<.2 
no dre PaI. 
2.12gm *P<.5 
no dre Pal. 
2.62gm P<.7 
no dre PaI. 
no dre P-I. 
no dre P-I. 
1.68gm * P<.3 
 
N-OXYDIETHYLENEBENZOTNIAZOLE-2-SULFENANIDE.. lug.....:.10 ...:. 100.. 1 :.mg... -10 ...:. 100...:.Ig ...:. 10 
 
2118 N f b6a orl Lun ads 76w76 evx .>no dre 
 
a N f b6e orl liv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b N f b6e orL tbe mix 76w76 evx 1.31gm 
2119 N m b6e orl Liv hpt 76w76 evx .>20.1gm 
 
a N m b6a orL tun ads 76w76 evx no dre 
b N m b6e orL tbe mix 76w76 evx no dre 
2120 N f b6c orl lun edo 76w76 evx A 598.mg 
 
a N f b6c orl Liv hpt 76w76 evx 1.23gm 
b N f b6c orl tbe mix 76w76 evx 386.mg 
2121 N m b6c orl liv hpt 76w76 evx & 359.mg 
 
a N m b6c orl Lun ads 76w76 evx 556.mg 
b N m b6c orl tba mix 76w76 evx 200.mg 
 
P-I.- 
P-I.- 
P<.7- 
P<1.- 
P-I.- 
P-I.- 
P<.1 I 
 
Pz. 3- 
P<. 04 - 
P<. 04 - 
P<.1 I 
 
P<. 007 - 
 
PARATHION boOng..:.. lug... .10 ...:. 100... 1m.jg...:. 10... ..100...I:.g .:10 
 
2122 N f b6c seat TBA NXB 80w89 :>no dre P-I. - 
 
a N f b6c eat Liv NXB 80w89 no dre P-I. 
b N f b6c seat Lun NXB MNw8 no dre P-I. 
 
2123 N m b6c seat TBA NXS 67w89 a :>75.1mg * P<.7 - 
 
a N mb6c seat Liv NXB 67w89 a 111.mg * P<.7 
b N mb6csetltun NXB 67w89ea 52.5mg * P<.2 
 
2124 R f os seat TBA NXB 19rn26 v :>no dre P-I. - 
 
a R f os seat Liv NXB 19.26 v 16.4mg * P<.2 
 
2125 R f osm set rngl Ibm 19.25 v pool . 2.07mg \P.c.004 
 
a R f osmeatadr NXA l9m25 v 3.93mg P<.0005e 
b Rlfosmmeat adr coa l9m25 v 5.31mg *P<.004 a 
2126 R a osm eat TBA NXS 19.26 v :> 3.65mg P<.4 - 
 
a R m osm eat Liv NXB 19.26 v 17.7mg *P<.09 
 
2127 R m osm eat mdr NXA 19.25 v pooL + 5.22mg *P<.005 a 
 
a R mosm eat edr coo 19.25 v 6.39mg *P<.007 a 
bV Rmooam eat pni isc 19.25 v 19.2mg *P<.03 
PATULIN lOOng..:. .lug... .10 ...:. 100.. 1m:.lg... -10 .... 100... .Ig .... 10 
 
2128 R f ada gay Liv ohs 17m37 v .>no dre P-I. - 
 
a R I sda gay tba mix 17m37 v no dre P-I. - 
b R f ads gay tba ben 17m37 v no dre P-I. - 
c R f sds gay tba meLl17m37 v no dre P-I. - 
 
PENTACHLORONITROBENZENE bOOng..:.. lug... .10 ...:. 100. 1m :.lg... -10 .... 100... Ig1 ...:. 10 
 
2129 N I b6c eat TBA NXB 78w91 v :>3.32gm P<.2 - 
 
a N f b6c eat Liv NXB 78w91 v 9.69gm * P<.09 
b NIfb6csat Lun NXB 7Sw9I v 30.7gm * P<.4 
 
2130 N f b6c orL Liv hpt 77w77 evx A 252.mg P<.02 
 
e N f b6c orL Lun eds 77w77 evx 1.11gm P<.3 
 
b N I b6c orL tbe mix 77w77 evx 195.mg P<.009 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lIne 2Dose 2Inc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
2106 1345 6.579m n.s.s. 0/46 7.07mg 0/47 70.7mg 1/47 707.mg 0/45 
 
a 1345 2.16gm n.s.s. 3/46 7.07mg 1/47 70.7mg 1/47 707.mg 6/45 
b 1345 2.84gm n.s.s. 6/46 7.07mg 2/47 70.7mg 1/47 707.mg 5/45 
OCHRATOXIN A 303-47-9 
 
2107 1365 .132mg n.s.s. 0/10 76.4ug 0/10 .229mg 0/10 
 
a 1365 .132mg n.s.s. 0/10 76.4ug 0/10 .229mg 0/10 
 
OVULEN (ethynodiol diacatate/ethinyL *stradioL [10:11) 8056-92-6 
2108 1463 57.Oug n.s.a. 161/167 .390"mg 37/38 
2109 1463 .158mg .664mg 0/76 .360mg 14/25 
 
N-(9-OXO-2*FLUORENYL)ACETAMIDE 3096-50-2 
 
2110 144 2.98mg 15.4mg 0/18 12.4mo 11/18 
 
a 144 9.65mg n.s.s. 0/18 12.4mg 3/18 
b 144 16.6mg n.s.s. 0/18 12.4mg 1/18 
1'-OXOSAFROLE ... 
 
2111 1035d 239.mg n.s.s. 0/18 77.3mg 0/18 
 
Brkly Code 
 
Purchase;fctx,9,681 -682; 1971 
 
RudaL i ;gmcr, 17,243-252;1975 
Norris; Jnci ,24, 149-180;1960 
WisLocki ;canr,37, 1883-1891; 1977 
 
OXPRENOLOL .HCl 6452*73-9 
2112 469m 391.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 469m 464.mg n.s.s. 
b 469m 529.mg n.a.s. 
2113 469n 143.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 469n 939.mg n.s.s. 
2114 469m 366.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 469m 453.mg n.s.s. 
2115 469n 279.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 469n 316.mg n.s.a. 
b 469n 291.mg n.s.s. 
2116 469m 37.3mg n.s.s. 
2117 469m 317.mg n.s.s. 
 
0/24 
5/49 
0/24 
1/25 
0/40 
0/49 
4/49 
1/29 
2/29 
9/44 
0/30 
1/29 
 
12.9mg 
12.9mg 
12.9mg 
150.mg 
150 .mg 
12.9mg 
12.9mg 
150 .Mg 
150.mg 
150.mg 
15.0m9 
15.0mg 
 
N-OXYDIETHYLENEBENZOTHIAZOLE -2-SULFENANIDE 
 
2118 1298 243.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1298 405.mg n..a.s 
 
b 1298 147.mg n.s.s. 
2119 1298 211.mg n..a.s 
 
a 1298 356.mg n.s.s. 
b 1298 250.mg n.s.a. 
2120 1298 147.mg n.s.a. 
 
a 1298 201.mg n.s.s. 
b 1298 116.mg n.s.a. 
2121 1298 108.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1298 137.mg n.s.s. 
b 1298 75.3mg 2.709m 
 
1/17 
0/17 
2/17 
1/18 
2/18 
3/18 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
 
205.mg 
205.mg 
205 mg 
190 .m 
 
190. mg 
190 .9 
205.mg 
205.mg 
205.mg 
190.mg 
190.m9 
190 .mg 
 
0/28 42.9mg 
6/49 42.9mg 
1/28 42.9mg 
6/37 
0/54 
 
4/49 42.9mg 
7/49 42.9mg 
2/36 
2/36 
7/48 
 
0/30 50.0mg 
0/30 50.0 mg 
 
0/28 129.mg 1/24 
4/49 129.mg 4/50 
0/28 129.mg 0/24 
 
Nswborne;txap,41 ,535-546; 1977 
 
1/49 129.mg 3/49 
3/49 129.mg 4/49 
 
0/30 150.mg 0/30 
0/30 150.mg 2/30 
 
(amax) 102-77-2 
1/18 
0/18 
3/18 
1/17 
0/17 
1/17 
2/17 
1/17 
3/17 
3/17 
2/17 
5/17 
 
Innss;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
PARATHION 56-38-2 
 
2122 c00226 33.0mg n..a.s 
 
a c00226 107.mg ns.a.s 
 
b c00226 94.0mg n.s.s. 
2123 c00226 12.6mg n.s.a. 
 
a c00226 19.6mg n.s.s. 
b c00226 23.8mg n.s.s. 
2124 c00226 1.57mg n.s.s. 
 
a c00226 5.67mg n.s.s. 
2125 c00226 .947mg 16.4mg 
 
a c00226 2.01mg 15.0mg 
b c00226 2.48mg 38.8mg 
 
2126 c00226 1.03mg n.s.s. 
 
a c00226 6.12mg n.s.s. 
2127 c00226 2.54mg 54.3mg 
 
a c00226 2.99mg 111.mg 
b c00226 6.62mg n.s.s. 
PATULIN 149-29-1 
 
2128 393 7. 80Mg n..a.s 
 
a 393 .809mg n..a.s 
 
b 393 1.23m9 n.s.a. 
c 393 1.80m n..a.s 
 
3/10 
1/10 
1/10 
2/10 
2/10 
0/10 
10/10 
0/10 
9/90p 
4/90p 
4/90p 
5/10 
0/10 
3/90p 
2/90p 
0/90p 
 
1/50 
42/50 
29/50 
13/50 
 
9.40mg 
9.40mg 
9.40mg 
7.70m9 
7.70mg 
7.70mg 
.820mg 
.820mg 
.820mg 
.820mg 
.820mg 
.900m9 
.900m9 
.900m9 
.900mg 
 
.900mg 
 
12/50 18.5mg 9/50 
 
1/50 18.5mg 1/50 
0/50 18.5mg 2/50 
14/50 13.2mg 12/50 
6/50 13.2mg 9/50 
3/50 13.2mg 5/50 
34/50 1.60mg 32/50 
 
1/50 1.60m9 3/50 
16/50 (1.60mg 8/50) 
6/50 1.60m9 13/50 
4/50 1.60m9 11/50 
25/50 1.80mg 35/50 
0/50 1.80mg 4/50 
7/50 1.80m9 11/50 
5/50 1.80mg 9/50 
1/50 1.80mg 3/50 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
S 
adr:coa,coc. 
 
l iv:hp.,hpc,nnd. 
 
adr:coa,coc. 
 
S 
 
.316mg 0/50 
.316mg 37/50 
.316mg 25/50 
.316mg 12/50 
 
OsswaLd;fctx, 16,243-247;1978 
 
PENTACHLORONITROBENZENE (PCNS) 82-68-8 
 
2129 c00419 1.22go n.s.s. 2/20 446.mg 
 
a c00419 2.93gm n.s.s. 0/20 446.mg 
b c00419 5.00go n..a.s 0/20 446.mg 
2130 1101 86.7mg ns.a.s 0/16 169.mg 
 
a 1101 180.mg n.s.s. 0/16 169.mg 
b 1101 73.4mg 4.27gm 0/16 169omg 
 
5/50 893.mg 10/50 
0/50 893.mg 3/50 
0/50 893.mg 1/50 
4/18 
1/18 
5/18 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
215 
 
216 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
 
2131 N m b6c mat TBA NXB 78w91 v 
 
a N m b6c mat liv NXB 78w91 v 
b N m b6c oat lun NXB 78w91 v 
 
2132 N m b6c orl Liv hpt 77w77 evx 
 
a N m b6c ort Lun ads 77w77 ov, 
b N m b6c orL tba mix 77w77 evi 
2133 N f b6a orl liv hpt 77w77 ov) 
 
a N f b6a orl lun ads 77w77 mv) 
b N f b6a orL tba mix 77w77 mv) 
2134 N m b6a orL liv hpt 77w77 mv) 
 
a N m b6a orL Lun ado 77w77 mv) 
b N m b6a orL tba mix 77w77 mv) 
2135 R f osm oat TBA NXB 18m26 dv 
 
a R f osm oat Liv NXB 18m26 dv 
2136 R m osm eat TBA NXB 18m26 dv 
 
a R m osm oat Liv NXB 18m26 dv 
 
2,3,4,5,6-PENTACHLOROPHENOL 
 
2137 N f b6a orL liv hpt 76w76 ov) 
 
a N f b6a orL Lun ado 76w76 mv) 
b N f b6a orL tba mix 76w76 mv) 
2138 N m b6a orl liv mix 76w76 mv) 
 
a N m b6a ort lun ado 76w76 mv) 
b N m b6a orL tba mix 76w76 ov) 
2139 N f b6c orL Lun ado 76w76 mvy 
 
a N f b6c orl liv hpt 76w76 mv: 
b N f b6c orL tba mix 76w76 mv: 
2140 N m b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 mv: 
 
a N m b6c orL Lun ado 76w76 mv: 
b N m b6c orL tba mix 76w76 mv: 
2141 R f sss mat tba tum 24m24 a 
2142 R m ssa eat tba tum 95w95 o 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
501.mg 
501.mg 
181 mg 
1. 05gm 
no dre 
no dre 
71. 1mg 
no dre 
68.7mg 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
 
*+ 
 
lOOng. .:..ug. 10 . 100 .lg. 10 .. 100 .Ig . 10 
 
x > no dre 
x no dre 
x no dre 
x > 90.4mg 
x no dre 
x 520..g 
x > 56.1mg 
x no dre 
x 26.3mg 
x > 108.mg 
x 108.3g 
x 33.7mg 
 
no dre 
no dre 
 
P-1. - 
P-I. 
P-I. 
P<. 2 
P<. 2 
 
P<. 009 
P<. 3 
P-I. 
P-I. 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P-I. 
 
P<. 004 
 
P-I. - 
P-I. 
 
p.1 - 
P-I. 
 
p-.1 - 
P-1. - 
P-1. - 
P<.6 - 
P-1. - 
P<1. - 
P<.2 - 
P-1. - 
P<. 02 - 
P<.3 - 
P<.3 - 
P<. 05 - 
P-1. _ 
P-I. 1 
 
N-PENTYL-N'- NITRO-N-NITROSOGUANIDINE ..:..lug. :10. :100. g :. . :10. :100. :.19 :10 
 
2143 R m wis wat stg tum 52w78 or .> no dre 
 
n-PENTYLHYDRAZINE .HCl 
 
2144 N f swe wat lun mix 94w94 
 
a N f swe wat lun ado 94w94 
b N f sma wet lun adc 94w94 
c N f swa wat blv mix 94w94 
d N f swa wat blv ago 94w94 
* N f swa wat blv ang 94w94 
f N f swe wat liv mix 94w94 
2145 N m saw wat lun ado 94w94 
 
a N m awa wat Lun mix 94w94 
b N m swa wat blv mix 94w94 
c N m swa wat Liv mix 94w94 
 
PEPPERNINT OIL 
 
2146 N i cfl gav lun tum 19m24 a 
 
a N m cfl gav liv tum 19m24 a 
b N m cfl gev tba mix 19m24 m 
c N i cfl gev tba mal 19m24 m 
 
PETASITENINE 
 
2147 R f eci wat liv his 68w68 or 
 
a R f eci wat liv mix 68w68 or 
b R f eci wat liv lca 68w68 or 
2148 R m aci wat liv mix 58w58 or 
 
a R m aci wat liv lca 58w58 or 
b R m eci wat liv hms 50w58 or 
PHENACETIN 
 
2149 N f cb6 mat liv tum 77w77 a 
2150 N i cb6 mat liv hnd 77w77 a 
 
2151 R f ade mat mgl edc 26m26 a 
 
a R f ade *at *du sqc 26m26 o 
2152 R f sda mat --- myL 18m24 
 
a R f ade mat mix mix 18m24 
b R f sda mat nas adc 18m24 
c R f sda mat ubl tcc 18m24 
d R f ade oat ubl pem 18m24 
* R f sda met nas tcc 18m24 
f R f sda mat nes sqc 18m24 
g R f ade mat liv tum 18m24 
h R f sda mat tba mix 18m24 
2153 R i sde met k/c rct 27m27 
 
a R m ade mat for sqp 27m27 
 
100ng.. : .ug . : 10. :100 . 1mg : .. : 10.: 100 . : g. : 10 
 
+ .5. 
 
.87mg 
 
7.95mg 
18. 7mg 
35. 5mg 
71.9mg 
82.2mg 
223. mg 
30.Omg 
46.9mg 
65.6mg 
271 mg 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005 
P<. 0005 
 
P<. 003 + 
P<. 04 
P. 04 
P<. 4 
 
P<. 04 
P<. 3 
P<. 2 
P<. 7 
 
lOOng. .ug 10 . 100 . 19 . 10 . 100 . Ig. 10 
 
.> no dre P-1. 
 
no dre P-I. 
no dre P-I. 
112.mg * P<.6 
 
bOOng..: .. ug. : 10. :100. g : 1.. :10. :100. :. :10 
 
+ +historical 
 
ehistoricaL 
+historical 
+ historicaL 
 
historicaL 
*historicaL 
 
P<. 003 + 
P<. 003 + 
P<. 05 + 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 005 + 
P<. 2 + 
 
lOOng.. :..ug. 10 . 100. 1g. 10 . 100. 19 .10 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
> 12.9gm * P<.2 - 
A 1.389m P<.08 + 
 
1.439m P<.02 + 
+ 2.56gm * P<.0005- 
 
2.73gm * P<.0005. 
 
7.73gm * P<.005 + 
11.7gm * P<.02 + 
23.8gm * P<.08 + 
23.8gm * P<.2 + 
48.0gm * P<.7 + 
no dre P-1. 
 
1.21gm * P<.0005 
* *historical P<.02 * 
 
*historicaL P<.1 + 
 
p-1. _ 
 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
2131 c00419 498.mg n.s.a. 
 
a c00419 669.mg n.s.s. 
b c00419 n.s.s. n.s.a. 
2132 1101 123.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1101 123.mg n.s.s. 
b 1101 68.4mg 3.989m 
2133 1101 170.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1101 324.mg n.s.a. 
b 1101 152.mg n.s.s. 
2134 1101 32.2mg 264.mg 
 
a 1101 198.ag n.s.s. 
b 1101 29.4mg 544.mg 
2135 c00419 322.mg n.s.a. 
 
a c00419 n.s.s. n.s.a. 
2136 c00419 409.mg n.s.a. 
 
a c00419 1.67gm n.s.s. 
 
2,3,4,5,6-PENTACHLOROPHENOL 
2137 1285 35.8mg n.s.a. 
 
a 1285 35.8mg n.s.s. 
b 1285 17.0mg n.s.s. 
2138 1285 13.2mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1285 20.7mg n. .s. 
b 1285 12.2mg n.s.s. 
2139 1285 13.8mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1285 35.8mg n.*.s. 
b 1285 9.04mg n.s.s. 
2140 1285 17.5mg n.s.a. 
 
a 1285 17.5mg n.s.s. 
b 1285 10.2mg n.s.s. 
2141 1401 10.0mg n.s.s. 
2142 1401 33.4mg n.s.a. 
 
6/20 
2/20 
0/20 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/17 
1/17 
2/17 
1/18 
2/18 
3/18 
14/20 
0/20 
8/20 
0/20 
 
265.mg 
265 .mg 
265.mg 
157.mg 
157.mg 
157.mg 
169.mg 
169.mg 
169. mg 
157.g9 
157.mg 
157.mg 
272.mg 
272.mg 
152.mg 
152.mg 
 
11/50 530.mg 12/50 
8/50 530.mg 4/50 
0/50 530.mg 0/50 
2/18 
2/18 
5/18 
1/17 
0/17 
2/17 
10/17 
 
1/17 
11/17 
 
34/50 (514.mg 20/50) 
 
0/50 514.mg 0/50 
20/50 280.mg 18/50 
 
1/50 280.mg 0/50 
 
(Dowicid.-7, PCP) 87-86-5 
0/17 18.1mg 0/18 
1/17 18.1mg 0/18 
2/17 18.1mg 2/18 
1/18 16.8mg 2/17 
2/18 16.8mg 1/17 
3/18 16.8mg 3/17 
0/16 18.1mg 2/18 
0/16 18.1mg 0/18 
0/16 18.1mg 4/18 
0/16 16.8mg 1/18 
0/16 16.8mg 1/18 
0/16 16.8mg 3/18 
 
27/27 1.00mg 26/27 3.00mg 25/27 10.0mg 25/27 30.0mg 25/27 
11/27 1.00mg 13/26 3.00mg 13/27 10.0mg 12/27 30.0mg 11/27 
 
N-PENTYL-N'-NITRO-N-NITROSOGUANIDINE 13010-10-1 
2143 1082 1.60m9 n.s.s. 0/9 2.30mg 0/6 
 
n-PENTYLHYDRAZINE.HCL 1119-68-2 
 
2144 36 3.54mg 11.2mg 21/100 
 
a 36 4.69mg 16.3mg 18/100 
b 36 10.0mg 45.4mg 4/100 
c 36 15.6mg 245.mg 5/100 
d 36 24.4mg n.s.s. 3/100 
 
a 36 26.9mg n.s.s. 2/100 
f 36 39.3mg n.s.s. 3/100 
2145 36 11.6mg n.s.s. 15/100 
 
a 36 12.8mg n.s.s. 23/100 
b 36 19.8mg n.s.s. 6/100 
c 36 31.1mg n.s.s. 6/100 
 
PEPPERNINT OIL 8006-90-4 
 
2146 710 21.1mg n.s.s. 102/240 
 
a 710 25.3mg n.s.s. 69/240 
b 710 11.0mg n.s.s. 170/240 
c 710 17.3mg n.s.s. 75/240 
 
PETASITENINE ... 
 
2147 427 .477mg 9.69mg 
 
a 427 .477mg 9.69mg 
b 427 .994mg n.s.s. 
2148 427 .183mg 3.71mg 
 
a 427 .324mg 13.1mg 
b 427 .770mg n. .s. 
 
PHENACETIN 62-44-2 
 
2149 1028 848.mg n.s.s. 
2150 1028 2.11gm n.s.s. 
2151 1449 451.mg n.s.a. 
 
a 1449 494.mg n.s.s. 
2152 708 1.45gm 5.32gm 
 
a 708 1.529g 5.79gm 
b 708 3.15gm 58.5gm 
c 708 4.059m n.s.s. 
d 708 5.85gm n.s.a. 
 
a 708 5.87gm n.s.a. 
f 708 7.82gm n.s.a. 
 
g 708 3.22gm n.s.s. 
h 708 728.mg 2.899m 
2153 1459 447.mg n.s.a. 
 
a 1459 661.mg n.s.s. 
 
0/9 
0/9 
0/9 
 
0/10 
0/10 
 
0/10 
 
0/36 
0/35 
1/30 
0/30 
0/65 
0/65 
0/65 
0/65 
0/65 
0/65 
0/65 
0/65 
6/65 
0/30 
0/30 
 
12.5mg 
12.5mg 
12.5mg 
12.5mg 
12.5mg 
12.5mg 
12.5mg 
10. 4mg 
10. 4mg 
10.4mg 
10. 4mg 
 
2.64mg 
2.64mg 
2.64mg 
2.64mg 
 
5.71mg 
5.71mg 
5.71mg 
5.00mg 
5.00mg 
5.00m0 
 
268.mg 
268.mg 
268.mg 
268.mg 
469.mg 
469"mg 
 
469.mg 
469.mg 
469.mg 
469.mg 
469.mg 
469.mg 
469.mg 
214.mg 
214.mg 
 
38/50 
33/50 
17/50 
11/50 
6/50 
5/50 
3/50 
15/50 
16/50 
7/50 
4/50 
 
Natsukura;gann,70, 181-185; 1979 
 
Shimizu;bjca,31,492-496;1975 
 
Roe; j.pt,2,799-819; 1979 
 
19/51 10.5mg 20/49 
13/51 10.5mg 14/49 
37/51 10.5mg 34/49 
20/51 10.5mg 17/49 
 
Hirono;Jnci,58,1155-1157;1977 
 
4/6 
4/6 
2/6 
4/5 
3/5 
1/5 
 
NackL in;dact,3,135-163;1980 
Johansson;apms,84,375-383;1976 
 
Isaka;gann,70,29-36; 1979 
 
0/37 754.mg 0/41 
0/40 754.mg 1/32 
5/30 
4/30 
 
6/50 938.mg 11/50 
5/50 938.mg 11/50 
1/50 938-mo 5/50 
0/50 938.09 4/50 
0/50 938.mg 2/50 
1/50 938.mg 1/50 
1/50 938.mg 0/50 
0/50 938.mg 0/50 
19/50 938.mo 21/50 
4/30 
2/30 
 
Johanason; iJcn,27,521-529; 1981 
 
217 
 
Brkly Code 
 
t iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
t iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
Schw.tz;pcpl ,301-309;1978 
 
218 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
b R m ads sat ubl tum 27.27 
c R m sda eat k/p tum 27.27 
d R m ada sat Liv hem 27.27 
2154 R m ada sat mix mix 18m24 
 
a R m ada at -- myL 18.24 
b R m ada sat nas adc 16.24 
c R f sdm a at ubl tcc 18.24 
d R m sda mat nas tcc 16824 
a R f ada mat nas sqc 18.24 
f R n ada mat k/p rcc 18.24 
9 R f sda mat Liv tum 18.24 
h R m mda mat tba mix 18.24 
 
PHENAZONE 
 
2155 R m ada mat k/p mix 26.26 
 
a R m sda mat Liv ccy 26.26 
b R m sda at ubL tum 26m2 
PHENAZOPYRfIDINE . HCL 
 
2156 N f b6c mat Liv NXA 19m24 
 
a N f b6c eat Liv hpc 19.24 
b N f b6c at TBA NXB 9m24 
c N f b6c mat Liv NXB 19.24 
d N f b6c mat Lun NXB 19.24 
2157 N m b6c mat TBA NXB 19.24 
 
a N m b6c mat Liv NXB 19.24 
b N m b6c mat Lun NXB 19.24 
2158 R f 1134 mat coL acn 18.24 
 
a R f f34 mat TBA NXB 18.24 
b R f f34 mat Liv NXB 18.24 
2159 R m f34 mat NXA NXA 18.24 
 
a R f f34 mat NXA NXA 18.24 
b R m f34 mat TBA NXB 18.24 
c R m f34 *at Liv NXI 18N24 
 
TD50 2Iailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
1.64gm P<.3 + 
 
ehistoricaL P<.3 + 
 
5.47gm P<.3 
 
741.mg * P<.0005+ 
2.389m * P<.0005- 
2.38g" * P<.0005+ 
2.71gm / P<.0005+ 
4.05g * P<.002 + 
 
7.53g * P<.06 + 
38.3m * P<.3 + 
no dre P-1. 
 
631.mg * P<.0005 
 
00nq. . .: 1u . :10. :100. 1m : g . :10 .: 100.. : :10 
 
A 1.23gm P<.02 + 
 
2.55gm P<.1 
 
1.55gm P<.3 + 
 
lO0ng.. :. .ug. :10. :100. g :.g :10. :100.. : . :10 
 
: + : 71.1mg * P<.007 c 
 
132.mg * P<.03 c 
89.7mg * P<.2 
 
71.1mg * P<.007 
4.65gm * P<.9 
 
:> 496.mg * P<.8 - 
 
811.mg * P<.9 
1.30gm * P<.8 
 
:> Ahistorical * P<.2 c 
 
no dre Pal. 
no dre P-I. 
 
A ^ 303.mg * P<.02 c 
 
333.mg * P<.02 c 
no drm P-1. 
2.17gm * P<.5 
 
PHENESTERIN l1Ong ..:. l ug. :10. :100.. : g . :10. :100.. g :.:10 
 
2160 N f b6c gav NXB NXB 7083 aMns + .211mg Z P<.0005 
 
a N f b6c gav Lun NXA 70M83 aea .416mg * P<.0005c 
b N f b6c gv ... NXA 7O83 as .652mg Z P<.0005c 
c N f b6c gav ova tus 7083 as .912mg * P<.0005 
d N f b6c gav myc arn 70w83 asm .951mg * P<.0005c 
a N f b6c gv --- hs70M83 ass 1.52mg * P<.0005 
f N f b6c gav TBA NXB 70w83 aes .183mg Z P<.0005 
g N f b6c gav Liv NXB 70w83 asm no drm P-1. 
 
h N f b6c gav Lun NXS 70w83 sma .416mg * P<.0005 
 
2161 N f b6c gav --- NXA 70w82 asm pooL + 2.07mg * P<.0005c 
2162 N m b6c gav NXS NXB 64w81 a + .757mg * P<.0005 
 
a N m b6c gv Lun NXA 64"w8 a 1.19.g * P<.0005c 
b N m b6c gv Lun a/c 64w81 a 2.05mg Z P<.0005c 
c N m b6c gv ...NXA 64"w8 a 2.13mg * P<.0005c 
d N * b6c gav myc srn 64w8l a 3.87mg * P<.0005c 
a N o b6c gav TBA NXB 64w8l a .728.g * P<.0005 
f N m b6c gav Liv NXS 64w8l a 32.9.g * P<.9 
 
g N m b6c gv Lun NXB 64w8 a 1.19.g * P<.0005 
2163 N m b6c gav NXA 64w81 a pooL + 1.89mg * P<.0005c 
 
a N m b6c g --v hs 64w8l a 6.15mg * P<.002 
 
b N m b6c gav myc arn 64w8l a 6.28.g * P<.003 c 
2164 R f ada gav TBA NXB 52w85 + : .271mg * P<.0005- 
 
a R f ada gay Liv NXB 52w85 no drm P-1. 
 
2165 R f ada gav mgL acn 52w85 pooL : + .523mg * P<.0005c 
2166 R m ada gav TBA NXB 52w84 : .481mg * P<.002 - 
 
a R f sda gay Liv NXB 52w84 no dre P.1. 
 
2167 R m ada gav --- NXA 52w84 pooL #2.73mg * P<.003 - 
 
PHENFORNIN. HCL 
 
2168 N f b6c mat TBA NXS 18.24 
 
a I f b6c mat Liv NXB 18.24 
b N f b6c at Lun NXB l124 
 
2169 N m b6c mat TBA NXB 18.24 s 
 
a N m b6c mat Liv NXB 18.24 s 
b N m b6c st Lun NXBI 1X24 s 
2170 R f f34 mat TBA NXB 18.24 
 
a R f f34 mat Liv NXB 1X824 
2171 R * f34 mat TBA NXB 18.24 
 
a R n f34 mat Liv NXS 18.24 
 
bOOng .. : lug. :10. :100. g :..g :10. :100.. :.g :10 
 
no drm P-I. 
no dre P-I. 
no dre P-I. 
no dre P.1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-I. 
no.dre P-1. 
no drm P-1. 
36.4mg / P<.2 
no dre P-I. 
 
PHENOBARBITAL 1 O0ng ..:. l ug. :10. :100 .. :g . 1 :10 ..:100 .. : . :10 
 
2172 N f c3L mat Liv tum 52w52 r <+ noTD50 P<.0005+ 
2173 N f c3L mat Liv tum 52w52 r . . 12.2mg P<.0005. 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl 
 
lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
b 
 
c 
 
d 
 
2154 
 
a 
 
b 
 
c 
d 
f 
9 
h 
 
1459 435.mg n.s.s. 
1459 891.mg n.s.s. 
1459 891.mg n.s.s. 
708 503.mg 1.15gm 
708 1.30gm 6.32gm 
 
708 1.30gm 6.32gm 
 
708 1.43gm 6.129g 
 
708 1.91gm 13.5gm 
708 2.869m n.m's. 
708 6.24gm n.m.s. 
708 2.58gm n.a.s. 
708 432.mg 990.m 
 
2/30 
0/30 
0/30 
0/65 
0/65 
0/65 
0/65 
0/65 
0/65 
0/65 
0/65 
1/65 
 
PHENAZONE 60-80-0 
 
2155 1459 425.mg n.m.s. 0/30 
 
a 1459 628.mg n.s.s. 0/30 
b 1459 413.mg n.s.s. 2/30 
 
PHENAZOPYRIDINE.HCL 136-40-3 
 
2156 c01672 38.0mg 991.mg 2/15 
 
a c01672 61.6mg n.s.s. 2/15 
b c01672 34.1mg n.s.s. 8/15 
c c01672 38.0mg 991.mg 2/15 
d c01672 252.mg n.s.s. 1/15 
2157 c01672 51.8mg n.s.s. 7/15 
 
a c01672 62.1mg n.s.s. 5/15 
b c01672 144.mg n.s.s. 1/15 
2158 c01672 311.mg n.s.s. 0/15 
 
a c01672 232.mg n.s.s. 5/15 
b c01672 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/15 
2159 c01672 160.mg 43.4gm 0/15 
 
a c01672 172.mg n.s.s. 0/15 
b c01672 210.mg n.s.s. 9/15 
c c01672 535.mg n.s.s. 0/15 
 
PHENESTERIN 
2160 cO1558 
 
a c01558 
b c01558 
c c01558 
d c01558 
* c01558 
f c01558 
g c01558 
h c01558 
2161 c01558 
2162 c01558 
 
* c01558 
b c01558 
c c01558 
d c01558 
 
a c01558 
f c01558 
9 c01558 
2163 c01558 
 
a c01558 
b c01558 
2164 c01558 
 
a c01558 
2165 c01558 
2166 c01558 
 
a c01558 
2167 c01558 
 
3456-10-9 
 
.103mg .440mg 
.152mg 1.25mg 
.288mg 1.65mg 
.273mg 3.43mg 
.288mg 2.78mg 
.465m9 6.27mg 
96.1ug .368mg 
n.s.s. n.s.s. 
.152mg 1.25mg 
.862mg 3.97mg 
.491mg 1.30mg 
.684mg 2.84mg 
1.08m9 5.57mg 
 
1.20mg 4.46mg 
1.85mg 11.2mg 
.446mg 1.43mg 
2.07mg n.s.s. 
.684m9 2.84mg 
.784mg 4.46mg 
1.99mg 36.3mg 
2.64mg 30.5mg 
.137mg .880mg 
n.s.s. n.s.s. 
.251m9 1.30mg 
.258mg 2.10mg 
n.s.s. n.s.a. 
1.07mo 8.49mg 
 
7/35 
2/35 
5/35 
0/35 
0/35 
0/35 
11/35 
3/35 
2/35 
 
0/31p 
3/35 
2/35 
0/35 
1/35 
0/35 
11/35 
7/35 
2/35 
 
0/29p 
0/29p 
0/29p 
7/10 
0/10 
1/20p 
1/10 
0/10 
0/20p 
 
214.mg 
214.mg 
214.mg 
375. mg 
375. mg 
375 .mg 
375. mg 
375 .mg 
375.mg 
375.mg 
375.mg 
375 mg 
 
5/30 
1/30 
1/30 
17/50 
8/50 
8/50 
1/50 
2/50 
3/50 
0/50 
0/50 
20/50 
 
750.m9 
750.m9 
750.mg 
750.mg 
750.mg 
750.mg 
750.mg 
750.mg 
750.mg 
 
Ilaka;gann,70,29-36; 1979 
 
23/50 
7/50 
7/50 
12/50 
7/50 
2/50 
1/50 
0/50 
26/50 
 
Johansson;I jcn,27,521-529;1981 
 
214.mg 4/30 
214.mg 2/30 
214.mg 5/30 
 
41.6mg 11/35 
41.6mg 6/35 
41.6mg 20/35 
41.6mg 11/35 
41.6mg 1/35 
39.6mg 17/35 
39.6mg 15/35 
39.6mg 4/35 
98.0mg 3/34 
98.0mg 10/34 
98.0mg 0/34 
78.4mg 4/35 
78.4mg 4/35 
78.4mg 19/35 
78.4mg 1/35 
 
3.00mg 30/40 
3.00mg 15/40 
3. 00mg 12/40 
3. 00mg 8/40 
3.00mg 8/40 
3.00mg 4/40 
3.00mg 33/40 
3.00mg 1/40 
3.00mg 15/40 
5.40mg 14/35 
3.00mg 25/40 
3. 00mg 18/40 
3. 00mg 14/40 
3.00mg 11/40 
3. 00mg 5/40 
3.00mg 29/40 
3. 00mg 10/40 
3.00mg 18/40 
4. 10mg 9/35 
4.10mg 1/35 
4. 10mg 7/35 
1.30mg 28/35 
1.30mg 0/35 
1.30mg 12/35 
1.30mg 18/35 
1.30mg 0/35 
1.30mg 2/35 
 
84.5mg 
84.5mg 
84.5mg 
84.5mg 
84.5mg 
78.0mg 
78.09g 
78.0m9 
199.mg 
199.mg 
 
19.mg 
161 .mg 
161.mg 
161.mg 
161.mg 
 
5.40mg 
5.40mg 
5.40mg 
5.40mg 
5.40mg 
5.40mg 
5.40mg 
5.40mg 
5.40mg 
10 .8m9 
4. 10mg 
4. 10g 
4. 10mg 
4. 10mg 
4. 10mg 
4. 10mg 
4. 10g 
4. 10mg 
9.00mg 
9. 00mg 
 
9.00m9 
2.60mg 
2.60mg 
2.60mg 
2.60mg 
2.60mg 
2.60mg 
 
PHENFORNIN.HCL (NCI uses CAS# 114-86-3) 834-28-6 
 
2168 c01741 203.mg n.s.s. 7/15 117.mg 13/35 (244.mg 
 
a c01741 701.mg n.s.s. 1/15 117..g 3/35 244.mg 
b c01741 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/15 117.mg 0/35 244.mg 
2169 c01741 266.mg n.s.s. 8/15 108.mg 10/35 226.mg 
 
a c01741 262.mg n.a.s. 1/15 108.mg 6/35 226.mg 
b c01741 376.mg n.s.s. 1/15 108.mg 4/35 226.mg 
2170 c01741 39.3mg n.s.s. 14/15 15.0mg 28/35 30.0mg 
 
a cO1741 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/15 15.0mg 0/35 30.0mg 
2171 c01741 13.0mg n.s.s. 7/15 12.0mg 14/35 24.0mg 
 
a c01741 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/15 12.0mg 0/35 24.0mg 
PHENOBARSITAL (phonobarbitons) 50-06-6 
 
2172 235. n.s.s. 5.36mg 5/39 65.0m9 29/29 
2173 235n 5.45mg 46.2mg 1/16 65.0Omg 10/16 
 
19/35 
14/35 
27/35 
19/35 
2/35 
20/35 
15/35 
4/35 
5/35 
13/35 
0/35 
9/35 
8/35 
14/35 
1/35 
 
16/35 
1/35 
14/35 
0/35 
2/35 
1/35 
17/35 
0/35 
1/35 
17/35 
19/35 
6/35 
0/35 
9/35 
7/35 
20/35 
 
2/35 
6/35 
11/35 
3/35 
2/35 
22/35 
0/35 
12/35 
11/35 
0/35 
5/35 
 
Liv:hpa,hpc. 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Liv:hp.,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpm,hpc,nnd. 
coL:acn,adn; rec:mcn. 
 
coL:acn; rec:acn. 
 
t iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
10.8"m 21/35 
10.Sg 1/35 
10.8mg 17/35 
10.Smg 0/35 
10.8 g 3/35 
10.89g 2/35 
10.8mg 21/35 
10.8 g 0/35 
10.8mg 1/35 
 
9.00mg 15/35 
9. 00mg 2/35 
9. 00mg 0/35 
9.00mg 11/35 
9.00mg 2/35 
9. 00mg 17/35 
9. 00mg 0/35 
9.00mg 2/35 
 
-- -:Leu,Lym; Lun:&/a,a/c; myc:srn. C 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
... :Lu,Lym. 
 
S 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
---:Lou,LyE. 
 
-- -:Leu,Lym; Lun:a/a,a/c; myc:srn. C 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
L--:lu,Lym. 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
---:Leu,Lym. 
 
S 
 
l iv:hpm,hpc,nnd. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
---:Leu,Lym. S 
 
9/35) 
2/35 
0/35 
11/35 
4/35 
1/35 
26/35 
0/35 
24/35 
0/35 
 
Liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
L iv:hps,hpc,nnd. 
 
Peraino; Jnci ,51,1349-1350;1973 
 
219 
 
Brkly Code 
 
220 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
2174 N m c3l sat liv tur 52w52 r 
2175 N m c3L eat Liv tur 52w52 r 
2176 R f sci eat Liv tur 67w67 
 
a R f aci eat tba mix 67w67 
2177 R m aci eat Liv tur 67w67 
 
r R m acci eat tba cix 67w67 
 
2178 R f sdr ipJ tba mal 24c24 es 
2179 R m ada ipj Liv hae 24c24 as 
 
a R r sda ipj tba maL 24c24 es 
 
PHENOBARBITAL, SOD IUM 
 
2180 N f cfi wat liv hpt 28.28 e 
 
a H f cfl wat lun ads 28r28 e 
b N f cfl wat tba ix 28r28 e 
2181 N f cfi eat Liv mix 26.26 a 
 
a N f cfl oat Liv lct 26.26 a 
b N f cfl set Lun tu 26c26 e 
2182 N r cfl wat Liv hpt 28.28 a 
 
a 14m cfl wat Lun ad. 28c28 e 
b N m cfl wat tba ix 28a28 e 
2183 N a cfl eat Liv cix 26.26 a 
 
a N m cfl eat Liv Lct 26.26 a 
b N m cfl oat Lun tue 26.26 a 
2184 R m cdr wat Liv sad 95w95 a 
 
2185 R flis eat Liv hnd 24c24 ev 
2186 R f wis wat Liv hpt 34.34 a 
 
a R f wis wat tba tum 34.34 a 
2187 R c wis wat liv hpt 34.34 a 
 
a R c wis wat tba tum 34.34 a 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
: + 
 
4.l18rg 
4. 46rg 
no dre 
81. 7cg 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
54.7rg 
 
lOOng . . .ug. :10. :100. : ng. : 10... : 100 :Ig . : 10 
 
95.Z2mg 
no dre 
no dre 
+ . 44.2mg 
 
128.rg 
no dre 
62. 2g 
no dre 
132 .mg 
+ . 34.6rg 
 
174 .rg 
no dre 
500.-mg 
67.3mg 
102.mg 
73.l1rg 
+ . 74.3mg 
 
206.mng 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
P-1. _ 
P<. 3 
 
p-1. _ 
P-1. 
 
P-1. _ 
P-I. 
 
P<1. - 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P-1. - 
P-I. 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
P-1. - 
P<. 0005+ 
P-1. _ 
P<. 4 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<.006 + 
P-1. _ 
P<. 3 
 
P<. 0005 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 2 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 6 
 
PHENOTHIAZINE 
 
2188 N f b6a orl Lun ad. 76w76 *v 
 
a N f b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 ev 
b N f b6a orl tba cix 76w76 cv 
2189 N c b6a orl liv hpt 76w76 cv 
 
a N c b6a orL lun ad. 76w76 cv 
b N c b6a orl tba mix 76w76 cv 
2190 N f b6c orl Liv hpt 76w76 cv 
 
a N f b6c orL Lun cix 76w76 ev 
b N f b6c orL tba tum 76w76 cv 
2191 N m b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 *v 
 
a N c b6c orl Lun mix 76w76 cv 
b N m b6c orL tba cix 76w76 cv 
 
PHENOXYBENZANINE . HCL 
 
2192 N f b6c ipJ abc srn 52w84 s 
 
a N f b6c ipj TBA NXB 52w84 s 
b N f b6c ipJ liv NXB 52w84 s 
c N f b6c ipJ lun NXB 52w84 s 
 
2193 N a b6c ipJ abc srn 51w83 as 
 
a N c b6c ipJ TBA MXB 51w83 as 
b N a b6c ipj Liv NXB 51w83 as 
c N c b6c ipJ Lun NXB 51w83 as 
2194 R f ada ipj per crn 52w83 
 
a R f sda ipJ TBA NXB 52w83 
b R f ada ipj liv NXB 52w83 
 
2195 R c ada ipJ per srn 52w83 a 
 
a R c ada ipj TBA NXB 52w83 a 
b R c ada ipJ liv NXB 52w83 s 
 
10Ong..: ..ug. :10. :100. g : ..g :10. :100.. : . :10 
 
tx .> no dre 
tx no dre 
rx no dre 
tx .> 393.cg 
tx no dre 
tx 311 .mg 
tx .> no dre 
tx no dre 
rx no dre 
Fx .> 414.cg 
rx no dre 
Fx 200. g 
 
P-i. 
P-1. 
P-i. 
P<. 6 
P-i. 
P<. 7 
P-1. 
P-1. 
P-1. 
P<. 3 
P-i. 
 
P<.09 
 
lOOng . . .ug. : 10. : 100. : g... :10. : 100.. : g : 10 
 
+ : 5.85mg / P<.0005c 
 
3.08mg / P<.0005 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
+ 4.95mg / P<.0005c 
 
2.17mg / P<.0005 
5.84mg * P<.2 
63.Omg * P<.9 
 
+ 2.36.g / P<.0005c 
 
1.34mg * P<.05 
no dre P-1. 
 
+ .710mg I P<.0005c 
 
.555mg I P<.0005 
no dre P-1. 
 
I-PHENYL-3,3-DINETHYLTRIAZENE lOOng .:. .lug. 1 :10 : . 100.. : g . 1 :10 : . 100.1 :0 1 :10 
 
2196 R b bdr gav bra mix 24.24 . + . 5.81ig * P<.0005+ 
 
a R b bdr gav tba cal 24.24 2.31mg * P<.0005+ 
 
PHENYL ISOTHIOCYANATE 1 O0ng..: ..lug.. 0 . : 100. lg : . 19 :10 ..: 100.. :19 : 10 
 
2197 N f b6a orL Liv he. 76w76 evx .> 138.cg 
 
a N f b6a orL Lun ada 76w76 evx no dre 
b N f b6a orL tba mix 76w76 evx 39.4mg 
2198 N m b6a orL Lun ade 76w76 evx .> no dre 
 
a N m b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b N c b6c orL tba mix 76w76 avx no dre 
2199 N f b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 avx .> no dre 
 
a N f b6c orL Lun mix 76w76 avx no dre 
b N f b6c orL tba tur 76w76 *vx no dre 
2200 Ne b6c orl Liv hpt 76w76 *vx .> 128.cg 
 
a N m b6c orl lun ado 76w76 evx 128.mg 
b N m b6c orL tba mix 76w76 evx 40.2mg 
 
P<.3 - 
P-1. _ 
P<.3 - 
P-1. _ 
P-1. - 
P-1. _ 
P-i. . 
 
P-1. _ 
P-1. _ 
P<.3 - 
P<.3 - 
P<.05 - 
 
1-PHENYL-3-NETHYL-5-PYRAZOLONE lOng ..:. l ug. :10. :100.i. : g . :10. :100. :Ig . :10 
 
2201 N f b6c eat TBA NXB 24.24 :> no dre P-1. 
 
I 
I 
I 
I 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lIne 2Dose 21nc 
 
235. 1.52mg 19.0mg 
235n 1.56mg 21.4mg 
1448 25.7mg n.s.s. 
1448 13.3mg n.s.a. 
1448 20.5mg n.a.s. 
1448 15.3mg n.s.s. 
1134 1.25mg n.s.s. 
1134 1.88mg n.s.s. 
1134 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
 
25/37 
 
7/17 
0/10 
0/10 
0/10 
4/10 
3/33 
1/36 
1/36 
 
60.0mg 
60 .0g 
25 .0mg 
25 .0mg 
20.0mg 
20. 0mg 
.286mg 
.286mg 
.286mg 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
35/36 
16/17 
0/12 
1/12 
0/12 
1/12 
1/30 
0/32 
1/32 
 
PHENOBARBITAL, SODIUM (phenobarbitone, sodium) 57-30-7 
2180 237 65.2mg 145.mg 0/47 100.mg 45/73 
 
a 237 338.mg n.s.s. 15/47 100.mg 21/73 
b 237 93.4mg n.s.s. 45/47 100.mg 65/73 
2181 89 22.5mg 122.mg 10/44 65.0mg 21/28 
 
a 89 60.1mg 352.mg 0/44 65.0mg 9/28 
b 89 175.mg n.s.s. 27/44 65.0mg 9/28 
2182 237 41.6mg 109.mg 12/44 83.3mg 77/98 
 
a 237 244.mg n.s.s. 20/44 83.3mg 40/98 
b 237 33.0mg n.s.s. 40/44 83.3mg 93/98 
2183 89 18.1mg 86.1mg 11/45 60.0mg 24/30 
 
a 89 70.9mg 2.469m 2/45 60.0mg 8/30 
b 89 86.7mg n.s.s. 27/45 60.0mg 15/30 
2184 1035 81.4mg n.s.s. 0/15 50.0mg 1/18 
2185 389 33.6mg 177.mg 0/25 39.8mg 11/33 
2186 85 48.0mg 287.mg 0/32 28.6mg 9/29 
 
a 85 22.5mg n.s.s. 19/32 28.6mg 22/29 
2187 85 38.9mg 168.mg 0/35 25.0mg 13/36 
 
a 85 35.8mg n.s.s. 19/35 25.0mg 22/36 
 
PHENOTHIAZINE 92-84-2 
 
2188 1254 87.3mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1254 147.mg n.s.s. 
b 1254 68.9mg n.s.s. 
2189 1254 57.3mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1254 89.8mg n.s.s. 
b 1254 41.9mg n.s.s. 
2190 1254 155.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1254 155.mg n.s.s. 
b 1254 155.mg n.s.s. 
2191 1254 67.4mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1254 129.mg n.s.s. 
b 1254 49.1mg n.s.s. 
 
1/17 
0/17 
2/17 
1/18 
2/18 
3/18 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
 
PHENOXYBENZAMINE .HC L 63-92-3 
 
2192 c01661 3.11mg 12.0mg 0/15 
 
a c01661 1.59mg 8.85mg 5/15 
b c01661 7.21mg n.a.s. 1/15 
c c01661 7.21mg n.s.s. 1/15 
2193 c01661 2.63mg 9.91mg 0/15 
 
a c01661 1.17mg 4.88mg 3/15 
b c01661 1.98mg n.s.s. 1/15 
c c01661 3.24mg n.s.s. 2/15 
2194 c01661 1.30mg 5.16mg 0/10 
 
a c01661 .610mg n.s.s. 5/10 
b c01661 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/10 
2195 c01661 .403mg 1.31mg 0/10 
 
a c01661 .303mg 1.35mg 3/10 
b c01661 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/10 
 
78.4mg 
78.4mg 
78.4mg 
73 .09g 
73. 0mg 
73. 0g 
78.4mg 
78.4mg 
78.4mg 
73. 0mg 
73. 0mg 
73. 0mg 
 
3.30mg 
3.30mg 
3.30mg 
3.30mg 
3.40mg 
3.40mg 
3.40mg 
3. 40mg 
1. 30mg 
1 . 30mg 
1.30mg 
1.30mg 
1.30mg 
1.30mg 
 
Brkly Code 
 
Uchida;zkko, 100,231-238;1981 
 
SchmahL ;zkko,86,77-84; 1976 
Ponomarkov;ctt, 1,165-172; 1976 
 
Thorp.;fctx, 11,433-442; 1973 
Ponomarkov;clet, 1,165-172; 1976 
 
Thorp.;fctx, 11,433-442; 1973 
 
Wislocki ;conr,37, 1883-1891;1977 
 
Butt.r;bjca,37,418-423;1978 
 
Rossi;i jcn,19,179-185;1977 
 
1/17 
0/17 
2/17 
2/17 
1/17 
4/17 
0/18 
0/18 
0/18 
1/16 
0/16 
2/16 
 
0/35 
7/35 
1/35 
1/35 
0/35 
7/35 
6/35 
3/35 
0/35 
20/35 
 
0/35 
11/35 
15/35 
0/35 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
l iv:hps,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,*/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
10.3mg 16/35 
10.3mg 16/35 
10. 3mg 0/35 
10. 3mg 0/35 
10. 7mg 17/35 
10.7mg 18/35 
10.7mg 0/35 
10.7mg 0/35 
2.70mg 16/35 
2.70mg 20/35 
2.70mg 0/35 
3.80mg 16/35 
3.80mg 16/35 
3.80mg 0/35 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
1PHENYL-3,3-DIMETHYLTRIAZENE 7227.91-0 
2196 1467 2.65mg 16.1mg 0/120 3.57mg 
 
a 1467 1.10mg 5.34mg 2/120 3.57mg 
 
1/7 7.14m9 8/12 
4/7 7.14mg 11/12 
 
Proussmsnn;zkko,81 ,285-310; 1974 
 
PHENYL ISOTHIOCYANATE 103.72-0 
2197 1304 22.5mg n.s.s. 0/17 
 
a 1304 25.6mg n.s.s. 1/17 
b 1304 10.3mg n.s.s. 2/17 
2198 1304 21.4mg n.s.s. 2/18 
 
a 1304 33.1mg n.s.s. 1/18 
b 1304 22.9mg n.s.s. 3/18 
2199 1304 42.7mg n.s.s. 0/16 
 
a 1304 42.7mg n.s.s. 0/16 
b 1304 42.7mg n.s.s. 0/16 
2200 1304 20.9mg n.s.s. 0/16 
 
a 1304 20.9mg n.s.s. 0/16 
b 1304 12.1mg n.s.s. 0/16 
 
21.6mg 
21.6mg 
21.6mg 
20 .0mg 
20 .0mg 
20 .0mg 
21.6mg 
21.6mg 
21.6mg 
20 .0mg 
20. 0mg 
20. 0mg 
 
I -PHENYL-3-METHYL-5PYRAZOLONE 89-25-8 
 
2201 c03952 2.859m n.s.s. 9/20 956.mg 
 
1/18 
1/18 
5/18 
1/15 
0/15 
1/15 
0/18 
0/18 
0/18 
1/18 
1/18 
3/18 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
19/50 1.91gm 15/50 
 
2174 
2175 
2176 
 
a 
 
2177 
 
a 
 
2178 
2179 
 
a 
 
221 
 
222 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
a N f b6c sat Liv NXB 24.24 
b N f b6c *at Lun NXB 24.24 
2202 N . b6c sat TBA NXB 24.24 
 
a N m b6c sat Liv NXB 24.24 
b N m b6c sat Lun NXB 24.24 
2203 R f f34 eat TBA NXB 24.24 
 
a R f f34 sat Liv NXB 24.24 
2204 R a f34 sat TBA NXB 24.24 
 
a R m f34 sat Liv NXB 24.24 
 
TD50 ZTailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
no dre P- 1. 
no dre P.1 
 
:> no dre P-I. - 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P 1. 
 
no dre P-I. - 
no dre P-1. 
 
no dre P-I. - 
3.70gm * P<.5 
 
PHENYL-beta-NAPHTHYLANINE 1OOng. .:..ug. 10 . 100. g. 10 . 100 . Ig .. 10 
 
2205 H f syg guv Liv tum 84w84 s > no dre 
 
a H f syg gav Lun tur 84w84 * no dre 
b H f syg gav tba mix 84w84 * no dre 
2206 H m syg gav Liv tum 84w84 a > no dre 
 
a H m syg gav Lun tum 84w84 s no dre 
b H m syg gav tba mix 84w84 s no dre 
2207 N f b6a orL Lun sds 76w76 svx > no dre 
 
s N f b6a or'L Liv hpt 76w76 svx no dre 
b N f b6a orL tba mix 76w76 *vx 1.08gm 
2208 N m b6s orL Lun ads 76w76 *vx > 431.mg 
 
a N m b6s orL Liv hpt 76w76 *vx 460mg 
b N m b6a orL tba mix 76w76 *vx 186mg 
2209 N f b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 *vx > 1.08gm 
 
a N f b6c orL Lun mix 76w76 evx no dre 
b N f b6c orL tba mix 76w76 svx 1.08gm 
2210 N m b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 svx . 165.mg 
 
a N m b6c orL Lun mix 76w76 svx no dre 
b N m b6c orL tba mix 76w76 svx 108.mg 
 
P-I. 
P-I. 
P-I. 
P-I. 
P-1. 
P-1. 
P-I. 
P-1. 
P<. 7 
P<. 4 
P<. 3 
P<. 2 
P<. 3 
P-1. 
P<. 3 
 
P<. 007 
P-1. 
 
P<. 002 
 
N-PHENYL-p-PHENYLENEDIANINE.HCl 1OOng. ...ug. 10 . 100. 1 mg. 10 . 100 . Ig . 10 
 
2211 N f b6c sat TBA NXB 48w91 sv > no dre P-I. 
 
a N f b6c sat Liv .NXB 48w91 sv no dre P-I. 
b N f b6c sst Lun NXB 48w91 sv no dre P-1. 
2212 N m b6c sat TBA NXB 48w91 sv > no dre P-I. 
 
a N m b6c sst liv NXB 48w91 cv 213.mg \ P<.06 
b N m b6c sat lun NXB 48w91 cv no dre P-I. 
2213 R f f34 sat TBA NXB 18.24 > no dre P-I. 
 
a R f f34 sat Liv NXB 18.24 no dre P-I. 
2214 R m f34 sat TBA NXB 18m24 > 161.mg P<.5 
 
a R m f34 sat Liv NXB 18.24 no dre P-1. 
 
I -PHENYL-2-THIOUREA 
 
2215 N f b6c sat TBA NXB 78w91 
 
a N f b6c sat liv NXB 78w91 
b N f b6c sat lun NXB 78w91 
2216 N a b6c sat TBA NXB 78w91 
 
a N m b6c sat liv NXB 78w91 
b N m b6c sat lun NXB 78w91 
2217 R f f34 sat TBA NXB 18m24 
 
a R f f34 sat liv NXB 18.24 
2218 R m f34 sat TBA NXB 18.24 
 
a R m f34 sat liv NXB 18.24 
 
I -PHENYLAZO-2-NAPHTHOL 
 
2219 N f cba sat liv hpt 12.24 
2220 N m cba sat liv hpt 12m24 
m-PHENYLENEDIANINE .2HCl 
 
2221 N f chi sat lun mix 64w77 a 
 
a N f chi sat liv mix 64w77 a 
b N f chi sat tba mix 64w77 a 
2222 N m chi sat lun mix 64w77 a 
 
a N m chi sat liv mix 64w77 a 
b N m chi sat tba mix 64w77 a 
2223 R m cdr sat liv mix 18.25 
 
a R m cdr sat tba mix 18.25 
o-PHENYLENEDIANINE .2HCl 
 
2224 N f chi sat liv mix 77w90 v 
 
a N f chi sat liv hpt 77w90 v 
b N f chi sat Lun mix 77w90 v 
c N f chi sat tba mix 77w90 v 
2225 N f chi sat Liv hpt 77w90 v 
2226 N m chi sat Liv hpt 77w86 v 
 
a N m chi sat Liv mix 77w86 v 
b N m chi sat Lun mix 77w86 v 
c N m chi sat tba mix 77w86 v 
2227 N m chi sat Liv hpt 77w86 v 
 
lOOng .:. .:ug. :10. :100. g :..g :10. :100. :Ig . :10 
 
:> 133.mg * P<.4 - 
 
268.mg * P<.06 
134.mg * P<.07 
:> no dre P-. 
 
no dre P-I. 
no dre P-I. 
:> no dre P-I. 
 
no dre P-I. 
:> no dre P-. 
 
no dre PaI. 
lOOng. . ..ug 10 . 100 . 1 10 . 100 . Ig. 10 
 
no dre P-. 
no dre P-I. 
lOOng..:. .ug . 10 . 100 . 1 10 . 100 .Ig. 10 
 
A 253.mg * P<.03 - 
 
1.17gm * P<.3 - 
370.mg * P<.3 - 
A 421.mg * P<.08 - 
 
889.mg * P<.3 - 
307.mg * P<.3 - 
:> 1.69gm * P<.9 - 
 
114.mg * P<.3 - 
1O0ng.. ..ug. 10 . 100. 1g. 10 . 100..Ig.. 10 
 
+ 507mg * P<.002 
 
611.mg * P<.002 + 
2.26gm * P<.3 - 
676.mg * P<.07 
 
pool + 611.mg * P<.0005+ 
 
A 921.mg * P<.04 + 
 
921.mg * P<.04 + 
3.21gm * P<.6 - 
1.97gm * P<.5 
 
pooL + 1.119m * P<.0005+ 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
a c03952 14.29m n.s.s. 
b c03952 8.439m n.s.s. 
2202 c03952 1.38gm n.s.s. 
 
a c03952 2.859g n.s.s. 
b c03952 3.629m n.s.s. 
2203 c03952 115.mg n.a.s. 
 
a c03952 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
2204 c03952 192.ag n.s.s. 
 
a c03952 907.mg n.s.s. 
 
PHENYL -bet. -NAPHTHYLANINE 
2205 1151 202.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1151 202.mg n.s.s. 
b 1151 72.3mg n.s.s. 
2206 1151 202.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1151 202.mg n.s.s. 
b 1151 84.5mg n.s.s. 
2207 1153 201.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1153 334.mg n.s.s. 
b 1153 121.mg n.s.s. 
2208 1153 90.1mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1153 103.mg n.s.s. 
b 1153 57.2mg n.s.s. 
2209 1153 176.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1153 334.mg n.s.s. 
b 1153 176.mg n.s.s. 
2210 1153 62.2mg 2.239m 
 
a 1153 294.mg n.s.s. 
b 1153 46.1mg 417.mg 
 
2/20 
1/20 
11/20 
8/20 
3/20 
12/20 
0/20 
14/20 
0/20 
 
956.mg 2/50 1.91gm 
 
956.mg 3/50 1.919m 
883.mg 20/50 (1.779m 
883.mg 8/50 (1.77gm 
883.mg 3/50 (1.77gm 
123.mg 36/50 (245.mg 
123.mg 0/50 245.mg 
98.1mg 32/49 196.mg 
98.1mg 1/49 196.mg 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
Brkly Code 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
0/50 
1/50 
14/50) 
6/50) 
0/50) 
25/50) 
0/50 
31/50 
 
1/50 
 
(Agerits powder) 135*88-6 
 
0/40 37.5mg 0/40 
0/40 37.5mg 0/40 
8/40 37.5mg 6/40 
0/40 37.5mg 0/40 
0/40 37.5mg 0/40 
3/40 37.5mg 3/40 
1/17 169.mg 1/18 
0/17 169.mg 0/18 
2/17 169.mg 3/18 
2/18 157.mg 4/18 
1/18 157.mg 3/18 
3/18 157.mg 7/18 
0/16 169.mg 1/18 
0/16 169.mg 0/18 
0/16 169.mg 1/18 
0/16 157.mg 5/17 
0/16 157.mg 0/17 
0/16 157.mg 7/17 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
Liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Green;zkko,95,51 -55; 1979 
 
Innes;nt is, 1968/1969 
 
N-PHENYL-p-PHENYLENEDIAMINE.HCL (NCI uses 
2211 c02233 648.mg n.s.s. 5/20 252.mg 
 
a c02233 1.53gm n.s.s. 1/20 252.mg 
b c02233 n.s.s. n.s.a. 0/20 252.mg 
2212 c02233 404.mg n.s.s. 10/20 131.mg 
 
a c02233 96.5mg n.s.s. 2/20 131.mg 
b c02233 818.mg n.s.s. 4/20 131.mg 
2213 c02233 68.6mg n.s.s. 13/20 22.5mg 
 
a c02233 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/20 22.5mg 
2214 c02233 40.5mg n.s.s. 6/20 18.0mg 
 
a c02233 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/20 18.0mg 
 
CAS# 101-54-2) 2198-59-6 
 
4/50 (478.mg 2/50) 
2/50 478.mg 1/50 
0/50 478.mg 0/50 
25/49 260.mg 15/50 
18/49 (260.mg 10/50) 
4/49 260.mg 5/50 
26/50 45.0mg 24/50 
 
0/50 45.0mg 0/50 
17/50 36.0mg 20/50 
0/50 36.0mg 0/50 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
Liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
Liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
1-PHENYL-2-THIOUREA 103-85-5 
 
2215 c02017 35.3mg n.s.s. 4/20 
 
a c02017 92.7mg n.s.s. 0/20 
b c02017 60.5mg n.s.s. 0/20 
2216 c02017 49.0mg n.s.s. 6/20 
 
a c02017 74.6mg n.s.s. 1/20 
b c02017 73.7mg n.s.s. 3/20 
2217 c02017 2.46mg n.s.s. 12/20 
 
a c02017 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/20 
2218 c02017 2.71mg n.a.s. 7/20 
 
a c02017 17.3mg n.s.s. 0/20 
 
16.9mg 
16.9mg 
16.9mg 
15.6mg 
15.6mg 
15.6mg 
2.30mg 
2.30mg 
1 .80mg 
1 .80mg 
 
11/50 33.8mg 
0/50 33.89g 
3/50 33.8mg 
16/50 31.2mg 
7/50 31.2mg 
6/50 31.2mg 
37/50 (4.50mg 
0/50 4.50mg 
22/50 (3.60mg 
 
2/50 3.60mg 
 
15/50 
4/50 
5/50 
12/50 
3/50 
6/50 
30/50) 
0/50 
22/50) 
 
1/50 
 
I *PHENYLAZO-2-NAPHTHOL 842-07-9 
 
2219 1165 348.mg n.s.s. 0/18 64.9mg 0/26 
2220 1165 150.mg n.s.s. 2/15 59.9mg 1/18 
 
m-PHENYLENEDIANINE.2HCL 541-69-5 
2221 381 87.6mg n.s.s. 3/13 
 
a 381 190.mg n.s.s. 0/13 
b 381 93.9mg n.s.s. 9/13 
2222 381 104.mg n.s.s. 2/16 
 
a 381 145.mg n.s.s. 2/16 
b 381 77.9mg n.s.s. 9/16 
2223 381 87.6mg n.a.s. 1/17 
 
a 381 31.5mg n.s.s. 13/17 
 
260.mg 
260.mg 
260.mg 
240.mg 
240. mg 
240. mg 
30. 0mg 
30 .09g 
 
o-PHENYLENEDIANINE.2HCL 615-28-1 
 
2224 381 236.mg 1.839m 1/15 806.mg 
 
a 381 276.mg 2.46gm 1/15 806.mg 
b 381 522.mg n.s.s. 5/15 806.mg 
c 381 233.mg n.s.s. 10/15 806.mg 
2225 381 276.mg 1.499m 1/102p 806.mg 
2226 381 406.mg n.s.s. 0/14 783.mg 
 
a 381 406.mg n.s.s. 1/14 783.mg 
b 381 643.mg n.s.s. 3/14 783.mg 
c 381 381.mg n.s.s. 7/14 783.mg 
2227 AR1 456.mg 4.819m 7/99p 783.mg 
 
4/13 520.mg 
1/13 520.mg 
5/13 520.mg 
2/15 480. mg 
1/15 480.mg 
5/15 480.mg 
1/17 60.Omg 
7/17 60. 0mg 
 
7/18 1.709m 
6/18 1.70gm 
3/18 1.709m 
13/18 1.709m 
6/18 1.70gm 
5/17 1.57gm 
5/17 1.57gm 
4/17 1.57gm 
10/17 1. 57gm 
5/17 1.57gm 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
CLayson;bjca,19,297-310;1965/WiLLiams 1962 
Weisburger;jept,2,325-356;1978/pers.comm./Russfield 1973 
 
Weisburger;jept,2,325-356;1978/pers.co_m./RussfieLd 1973 
 
0/16 
0/16 
1/16 
0/10 
0/10 
0/10 
1/15 
6/15 
 
6/15 
6/15 
4/15 
10/15 
6/15 
3/14 
3/14 
2/14 
6/14 
3/14 
 
223 
 
224 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
 
2228 R m cdr *at Liv hpt 18n25 
 
a R m cdr *at liv mix 18m25 
b R m cdr eat tba mix 18m25 
2229 R m cdr oat liv hpt 18m25 
 
p-PHENYLENEDIANINE. 2HCl 
 
2230 N f b6c sat TBA NXB 24m24 
 
a N f b6c *at liv NXB 24m24 
b N f b6c eat lun NXB 24m24 
2231 N m b6c oat TBA NXB 24m24 
 
a N m b6c oat liv NXB 24m24 
b N m b6c eat lun NXB 24m24 
2232 R f f 34 eat TBA NXB 24m27 
 
a R f f34 eat liv NXB 24m27 
2233 R a f 34 oat TBA NXB 24m27 
 
a R m f34 eat liv NXB 24m27 
 
PHENYLETHYLHYDRAZINE SULFATE 
 
2234 N f saa wat blv mix 93w93 a 
 
a N f saa wat sub ang 93v93 a 
b N f eva wat blv ang 93w93 a 
c N f sa wat mus ang 93v93 a 
d N f ewa wat fat ang 93v93 a 
a N f ewa vat Lun ada 93v93 a 
f N f saa wat lun mix 93v93 a 
g N f vsa wat Lun ang 93w93 a 
h N f ewa wat liv mix 93w93 a 
2235 N m saa wat lun ad. "wv99 
 
a N m swa wat lun mix 99w99 a 
b N m swa wat liv mix 99v99 a 
 
TD5O 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
248.mg * P<.02 + 
248 mg * P<. 02 + 
no dre P-1. 
 
315.mg * P<.02 + 
 
pooL 
 
loong.. :.Iug. : 10. : 100 g. : : 10: 100 . .g. :..o10 
 
1.50gm * P<.8 
1.37gm * P<.5 
1.39gm * P<.2 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-I. 
247.mg * P<.6 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
2.239m * P<.4 
 
bO0ng.. :. .ug . :10. :.1 .10.. 100 .. :1Ig . : 10 
 
. + . 14.6mg 
 
19.9mg 
20.4mg 
21.7mg 
23.7mg 
25.8mg 
27. 5mg 
123 .mg 
278.mg 
+ .30.0mg 
 
33.1mg 
no dre 
 
PHENYLHYDRAZINE lOOng. . .. : .ug.1.0. :100.. : g.1. :10 : . 100.1 :0 1 :10 
 
2236 N f avi gav Lun tum 39w55 v .> no dre 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005 
P<. 0005 
P<. 0005 
P<. 0005 
P<. 0005 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 006 
P<. 4 
 
P<. 0005- 
P<. 004 - 
P-1. - 
 
P-1. - 
 
PHEMYLHYDRAZINE . HC L 
 
2237 N f swa wat liv mix 26m26 a 
 
a N f ewa wat bLv mix 26m26 a 
b N f swea wat bLv agm 26m26 a 
c N f wsa wat Liv ago 26m26 a 
d N f swa wat bLv ang 26m26 a 
a N f swa wat Liv ang 26m26 a 
f N f swav t Lun mix 2626 e 
2238 N m sva wat bLv mix 26m26 a 
 
a N a sva vat Liv mix 26a26 a 
b N a swa wat Lun mix 26m26 e 
 
loong . . .:ug . : 10 : 100 .. m :. g . : 10. :100 . : g. : 10 
 
+ . 68.6mg 
 
72.1mg 
147.mg 
165 .mg 
165 .mg 
165.mg 
no dre 
A 70.6mg 
 
83.9mg 
no dre 
 
o-PHENYLPHENATE, SODIUN 00ng. . . ..ug. : 10 :..100. . : g.1g :10 :..100. :Ig :..10 
 
2239 R a f3d *at unt mix 91v91 or . + . 414.mg * P<.0005+ 
 
a R m f3d sat ubl mix 91w91 or 
 
470.mg Z P<.0005 
 
b R m f3d sat k/l tcc 91w91 ar 
 
2.42gm * P<.0005 
 
o-PHENYLPHENOL bO0ng. . ..1...lg . 10 100......g.....10 ..... :10100... : g :10 
 
2240 N f b6a orl Liv hpt 76v76 ovx .> no dre 
 
a N f b6a orL Lun ad. 76v76 avx no dre 
b N f b6a orL tba mix 76v76 avx no dre 
2241 N a b6a orl Liv hpt 76v76 *vx 1.809m 
 
a N m b6a orL Lun ada 76v76 *vx no dre 
b N a b6a orl tba mix 76v76 evx no dre 
2242 N f b6c orl Lun ads 76w76 evx .> 221.mg 
 
a N f b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b N f b6c orL tba mix 76v76 evx 107.mg 
2243 N m b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx . 46.1mg 
 
a N m b6c orL Lun ads 76v76 *vx 205.mg 
b N m b6c orl tba mix 76w76 avx 35.4mg 
p-PHENYLPHENOL tO0ng..: ..ug. :10. :100. g : .g :10. :100.. : g. :10 
 
2244 N f b6a orl lun ada 76v76 avx .> no dre 
 
a N f b6a orL Liv hpt 76v76 avx no dre 
b N f b6a orL tba mix 76v76 ovx no dre 
2245 N m b6a orl Liv hpt 76v76 *vx .> no dre 
 
a N m b6a orL Lun ada 76w76 *vx no dre 
b N m b6a orL tba mix 76v76 *vx 953.mg 
2246 N f b6c orL Liv hpt 76v76 avx .> no dre 
 
a N f b6c orL Lun mix 76v76 avx no dre 
b N f b6c orL tba tum 76v76 *vx no dre 
 
P<. 0005 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 02 
P<. 02 
P<. 02 
P<. 02 
 
P-1. - 
P<.02 + 
P<. 04 
 
P-I. - 
 
Pal. 1 
 
P-1. _ 
P-1. _ 
P<1. _ 
P-1. _ 
P-I. _ 
P<.3 - 
P-I. . 
 
P<.09 - 
P<.02 - 
P<.3 - 
P<. 006 - 
 
P-I. _ 
P-1. _ 
Pal. _ 
Pal. 1 
Pal. 1 
 
P<.7 - 
P-I. _ 
P-1. _ 
P-1. _ 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl IDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
2228 381 92.5mg n.s.s. 0/16 57.6mg 
 
a 381 92.5mg n.s.s. 0/16 57.6mg 
b 381 67.7mg n.s.s. 10/16 57.6mg 
2229 381 105.mg n.s.s. 2/11Ip 57.6mg 
 
p-PHENYLENEDIAMINE.2HCL 624-18-0 
2230 c03930 198.mg n.s.s. 8/20 
 
a c03930 325.mg n.a.s. 2/20 
b c03930 527.mg n.s.s. 0/20 
2231 c03930 167.mg n.s.s. 15/20 
 
a c03930 193.mg n.s.s. 9/20 
b c03930 346.mg n.s.s. 4/20 
2232 c03930 44.0mg n.s.s. 10/20 
 
a c03930 n.a.s. n.s.s. 0/20 
2233 c03930 65.7mg n.s.s. 14/20 
 
a c03930 364.mg n.s.s. 0/20 
 
80. 5mg 
80. 5mg 
80. 5mg 
74.3mg 
74.3mg 
74.3mg 
30.6mg 
30.6mg 
24.5mg 
24.5mg 
 
PHENYLETHYLHYDRAZINE SULFATE 156-51-4 
 
2234 239 8.37mg 28.7mg 2/52 30.0mg 
 
a 239 11.2mg 39.6mg 0/52 30.0mg 
b 239 11.3mg 42.2mg 1/52 30.0mg 
c 239 12.1mg 44.1mg 0/52 30.0mg 
d 239 13.0mg 49.3mg 0/52 30.0mg 
 
a 239 14.2mg 65.5mg 18/95 30.0mg 
f 239 14.7mg 80.1mg 21/95 30.0mg 
g 239 42.5mg 1.229m 0/52 30.0mg 
h 239 56.2mg n.s.s. 2/52 30.0mg 
2235 239 14.5mg 113.mg 15/93 25.0mg 
 
a 239 14.6mg 304.mg 23/93 25.0mg 
b 239 136.mg n.s.s. 6/88 25.0mg 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
Brkly Code 
 
0/14 115.mg 5/16 
0/14 115.mg 5/16 
9/14 115.mg 12/16 
0/14 115.mg 5/16 
 
17/50 
6/50 
2/50 
35/50 
18/50 
10/50 
37/50 
 
0/50 
34/50 
 
0/50 
 
161 .mg 
161 .mg 
161 .mg 
149. mg 
149.mg 
149. mg 
61.3mg 
61.3mg 
49. 0mg 
49.0mg 
 
21/49 
 
8/49 
3/49 
31/50 
21/50 
8/50 
36/50 
 
0/50 
29/50 
 
1/50 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Toth;canr,36,917-921; 1976 
 
22/32 
18/32 
18/32 
17/32 
16/32 
28/49 
28/49 
4/32 
3/32 
17/34 
18/34 
2/50 
 
PHENYLHYDRAZINE 100-63-0 
 
2236 1095 8.51mg n.s.s. 8/85 5.91m9 0/25 
 
PHENYLHYDRAZINE.HCI 59-88-1 
 
2237 1056 32.6mg 229.mg 2/90 
 
a 1056 33.3mg 301.mg 3/90 
b 1056 52.8mg n.s.s. 2/90 
c 1056 58.0mg n.s.a. 1/90 
d 1056 58.0mg n.s.s. 1/90 
a 1056 58.0mg n.s.s. 1/90 
f 1056 56.9mg n.s.s. 21/87 
2238 1056 27.8mg n.s.s. 6/81 
 
a 1056 30.7mg n.s.s. 6/81 
b 1056 94.2mg n.s.s. 23/87 
 
20. 0mg 
20. 0mg 
20. 0mg 
20. 0mg 
20. 0mg 
20. 0mg 
20 .0mg 
16.7mg 
16.7mg 
16.7mg 
 
Roe;natu,216,375-376; 1967 
 
Toth;zkko,87,267-273; 1976/1974 
 
11/49 
11/49 
6/49 
5/49 
5/49 
5/49 
8/38 
10/43 
9/43 
5/43 
 
o-PHENYLPHENATE, SODIUN 132-27-4 
 
2239 1378 279.mg 642.mg 0/20 50.0mg 0/20 
 
1.609m 17/20 
 
a 1378 287.mg 836.mg 0/20 50.0mg 0/20 
 
(1.609m 8/20) 
 
b 1378 1.249m 5.68gm 0/20 50.0mg 0/20 
 
1.609m 10/20 
 
100.mg 0/20 200.-m 1/21 400.mg 7/21 800.mg 20/21 
 
100.mg 
100.m9 
 
Hiraga;fctx, 19,303-310; 1981 
0/20 200.mg 0/21 400.mg 6/21 800.mg 19/21 
0/20 200.mg 1/21 400.mg 0/21 800.mg 1/21 
 
o-PHENYLPHENOL torthoxanoL, Dowicidm-1) 90-43-7 
2240 1310 64.2mg n.s.s. 0/17 38.9mg 0/15 
 
a 1310 64.2mg n.s.s. 1/17 38.9mg 0/15 
b 1310 41.7mg n.s.s. 2/17 38.9mg 1/15 
2241 1310 n.s.s. n.s.s. 1/18 36.2mg 1/16 
 
a 1310 41.5mg n.s.s. 2/18 36.2mg 1/16 
b 1310 32.3mg n.s.s. 3/18 36.2mg 2/16 
2242 1310 35.9mg n.s.s. 0/16 38.9mg 1/16 
 
a 1310 68.5mg n.s.s. 0/16 38.9mg 0/16 
b 1310 26.2mg n.s.s. 0/16 38.9mg 2/16 
2243 1310 15.8mg n.s.s. 0/16 36.2mg 4/16 
 
a 1310 33.4mg n.s.s. 0/16 36.2mg 1/16 
b 1310 13.3mg 350.mg 0/16 36.2mg 5/16 
 
p-PHENYLPHENOL (parax.noL) 92-69-3 
2244 1309 215.mg n.s.s. 1/17 
 
a 1309 361.mg n.s.s. 0/17 
b 1309 170.mg n.s.s. 2/17 
2245 1309 212.mg n.s.s. 1/18 
 
m 1309 356.mg n.s.s. 2/18 
b 1309 112.mg n.s.s. 3/18 
2246 1309 361.mg n.s.s. 0/16 
 
a 1309 361.mg n.s.s. 0/16 
b 1309 361.mg n.s.s. 0/16 
 
193.mg 
193.mg 
193.mg 
180 .mg 
180. mg 
180 .mg 
193.mg 
193.mg 
193. mg 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
1/17 
0/17 
2/17 
1/18 
0/18 
4/18 
0/17 
0/17 
0/17 
 
225 
 
226 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Not 
2247 N m b6c ort lun ado 76w76 ov) 
 
a N . b6c orl liv hpt 76w76 ov) 
b N * b6c orL tba mix 76w76 ov) 
PHORBOL 
 
2248 N f sks ipJ Lmr lyk 24.24 or 
2249 N . sks ipJ L(r lyk 24.24 or 
2250 N f bal ipJ Lmr tur 24.24 or 
2251 N a baL ipJ LEr tur 24.24 or 
2252 N f c3p ipJ Lir tur 24.24 or 
2253 N m c3p ipJ Lmr tum 24.24 or 
2254 N f c5L ipJ Lmr tum 24.24 or 
2255 N f sJs ipj Lmr rtb 24.24 or 
2256 N f swr ipJ Lmr Lyk 24.24 or 
 
PHOSPHANIDON* 
 
2257 N f b6c oat TBA MXB 80w90 
 
a N f b6c oat Liv NXB 80w90 
b N f b6c oat Lun NXB 80w90 
2258 N a b6c oat TBA NXB 66w90 
 
a N m b6c eat liv NXB 66w90 
b N m b6c oat Lun NXB 66w90 
2259 R f oem oat TBA NXB 19.26 
 
a R f osm oat Liv NXB 19.26 
2260 R f osm oat thy NXA 19.25 
2261 R m oas oat TBA NXB 19.26 
 
a R r osa oat Liv NXB 19.26 
2262 R . osr oat spL NXA 19.25 
 
tes 
 
lOOng. 
 
TD50 2Thilpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
426. mg P<. 08 - 
no dre P-1. - 
195.mg P<.01 - 
 
l..: 1ug . : 10. :100 . 1m : 1g .. :10. :100 .. :Ig . :10 
 
.> no dre 
.> 8.26ag 
 
.> no dre 
.> no dre 
 
.> no dre 
 
.> no dre 
.> no dre 
.> 92.6mg 
. + . 2.21mg 
 
P-I. _ 
P<.7 - 
P-I. _ 
P-1. _ 
P-1. _ 
P-1. _ 
P-1. - 
P<1. 
 
P<. 0005+ 
 
lOOng.. :. .ug. :10. : 100. g : ..g :10. : 100..g.10 
 
:> 215.mg * P<.8 - 
 
34.2mg \ P<.2 
no dre P-1. 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
pooL + #19.0mg * P<.008 
 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
185.mng P<.5 
 
pooL A #26.9mg * P<.02 
 
PHOSPHATED DISTARCH PHOSPHATE lOOng.. :.. ug. 1 :10 :..100.. : g . 1 :10 :. 100.1 :0 1 :10 
 
2263 R f wis oat liv tur 24.24 a no dre 
 
a R f wis oat tba mix 24.24 0 no dre 
2264 R a wis oat Liv tum 24.24 a no dre 
 
a R * wis oat tba mix 24.24 a 24.4g. 
 
PHTHALANIDE 
 
2265 N f b6c oat TBA NXB 24.24 as 
 
a N f b6c oat Liv NXB 24.24 as 
b N f b6c oat Lun NXB 24.24 as 
2266 N * b6c oat TBA NXB 24.24 
 
a N . b6c oat Liv NXB 24.24 
b N * b6c oat Lun NXB 24.24 
2267 R f f34 oat TBA NXB 25.25 
 
a R f f34 oat Liv NXB 25.25 
2268 R m f34 oat TSA NXB 25.25 
 
a R m f34 oat Liv NXB 25.25 
PHTHALIC ANHYDRIDE 
 
2269 N f b6c oat TBA NXB 24.24 v 
 
a N f b6c oat Liv NXB 24.24 v 
b N f b6c oat Lun NXB 24a24 v 
2270 N m b6c oat TBA NXB 24.24 v 
 
a N m b6c oat Liv NXB 24.24 v 
b N m b6c oat Lun NXB 24.24 v 
2271 R f 134 oat Lun a/a 24.24 
 
a R f f34 oat TBA NXB 24.24 
b R f f34 oat Liv MXB 24.24 
2272 R m f 34 oat TBA NXB 24.24 
 
a R m f34 oat Liv NXB 24.24 
PICLORAN 
 
2273 N f b6c oat TBA NXB 80w90 v 
 
a N f b6c oat Liv NXS 80W90 v 
b N f b6c oat lun NXB 80w90 v 
2274 N m b6c oat TBA NXS 80w90 v 
 
a N m b6c oat Liv NXB 80w90 v 
b N m b6c oat Lun NXB 8Ow9O v 
2275 R f osm oat TBA NXB 19.26 v 
 
a R f osm oat Liv NXB 19.26 v 
2276 R f osm oat Liv nnd 19.26 v 
2277 R m osm oat TBA NXB 19.26 v 
 
a R m osm oat Liv NXB 19.26 v 
 
PILOCARPINE 
 
2278 R f sda ipJ tba maL 24.24 a 
2279 R m ada ipJ Liv ho 24.24 a 
 
a R m sda ipJ tba maL 24.24 a 
PINARICIN 
 
2280 R f cfn oat Liv mhp 24.24 
 
lOOng . . .ug. :10. :100. g :. g. :10. :100.. :. :10 
 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
:> 1090.9g P<1. - 
 
no dre P-1. 
35.8gm * P<.5 
 
:> 722..g * P<.3 - 
 
5.399m * P<.5 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
16.6gm * P<.3 
lOOng..: ..ug. :10. :100. g :. .. :10. :100. : g. :10 
 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
:>no dre P-1. 
 
7.46gm \ P<.3 
no dre P-1. 
 
* #6.23g. P<.03 - 
 
4.50g. P<.8 
no dre P-1. 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
no dre P-1. 
1O0ng..: ..ug.. : 10. :100. 1g. :1-g.. :10. :100... :Ig . :10 
 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
20.1g.* P<.4 
no dre P.1. 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre Pal. 
:> no dro P.1. 
 
1.64g. * P<.09 
 
pooL + 1.70gm * P<.007 a 
 
:> 2.939g * P<.8 - 
 
1.32gm \ P<.3 
 
1oong .. :. ug. : 10. : 100. : . : 10 :. 100 : :g . 10 
 
98.4mg 
.> no dre 
 
1.759g 
 
P<.8 
P-I1. 
P<1. 
 
100n g .. : .ug . :10 .:100. m : g . : 10. :100. :Ig . :10 
 
.> no dre P-1. 
 
P-1. _ 
P-1. _ 
Pal. _ 
P<.6 - 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
2247 1309 105.mg n.s.s. 0/16 180.mg 2/14 
 
a 1309 277.mg n.s.s. 0/16 180.mg 0/14 
b 1309 66.9mg 13.2gm 0/16 180.mg 4/14 
 
PHORBOL 17673-25-5 
 
2248 1415 1.35mg n.s.s. 
2249 1415 1.01mg n.s.s. 
2250 1415 58.3mg n.s.a. 
2251 1415 29.3mg n.s.s. 
2252 1415 39.4mg n.s.a. 
2253 1415 42.2mg n.s.s. 
2254 1415 25.7mg n..s. 
2255 1415 1.95mg n.s.s. 
2256 1415 1.32mg 4.07mg 
PHOSPHANIDON* 13171-21-6 
2257 c00588 22.4mg n.s.s. 
 
a cOO588 14.0mg n.s.s. 
b c00588 81.7mg n. .s. 
2258 c00588 18.4mg n.s.s. 
 
a c00588 23.5mg n.s.s. 
b c00588 47.9mg n.s.s. 
2259 c00588 6.09mg n.s.s. 
 
a c00588 47.0mg n.s.s. 
2260 c00588 9.26mg 361.mg 
2261 c00588 5.55mg n. .s. 
 
a c00588 30.2mg n.s.s. 
2262 c00588 10.9mg n.s.s. 
 
15/15 
10/14 
0/53 
0/58 
0/61 
0/41 
0/20 
26/32 
 
3/45 
 
4. 16mg 
3.47mg 
4. 16mg 
3.47mg 
4. 16mg 
3.47mg 
4. 16mg 
4. 16mg 
4. 16mg 
 
1/10 9.10m9 
0/10 9.10mg 
1/10 9.10m9 
3/10 7.60mg 
2/10 7.60mg 
1/10 7.60mg 
7/10 2.90mg 
0/10 2.90mg 
2/95p 2.90mg 
4/10 2.30mg 
0/10 2.30mg 
1/95p 2.30mg 
 
PHOSPHATED DISTARCH PHOSPHATE --- 
2263 1407 89.6gm n.s.s. 0/29 
 
a 1407 10.4gm n.s.s. 25/29 
2264 1407 69.2gm n.s.s. 0/28 
 
a 1407 4.43gm n.s.s. 21/28 
 
Arouth;bj ca,34,516-522; 1976 
 
11/13 
11/14 
0/68 
0/41 
0/46 
0/59 
0/30 
27/33 
29/39 
 
11/50 18.3mg 
6/50 (18.3mg 
3/50 18.3mg 
14/50 13.2mg 
9/50 13.2mg 
3/50 13.2mg 
29/50 5.80mg 
 
1/50 5.80m9 
9/50 5.80m9 
26/50 4.60mg 
0/50 4.60mg 
3/50 4.60mg 
 
9/50 
1/50) 
1/50 
11/50 
7/50 
2/50 
26/50 
0/50 
8/50 
20/50 
 
1/50 
5/50 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:s/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
thy:cca,ccr. S 
 
Liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
spL:h.m,h.s. S 
 
de Groot;fctx,12,651-663;1974 
 
15.0gm 0/29 
15.0gm 22/29 
12.0gm 0/28 
12.0gm 23/28 
 
PHTHALAMIDE 88-96-0 
 
2265 c03612 3.079m n.s.s. 19/40 
 
a c03612 17.3gm n.s.s. 4/40 
b c03612 15.8gm n.s.s. 3/40 
2266 c03612 4.34gm n.s.s. 15/20 
 
a c03612 10.89m n.s.s. 9/20 
b c03612 9.099m n.s.s. 3/20 
2267 c03612 217.mg n.s.s. 14/20 
 
a c03612 1.25gm n.s.s. 2/20 
2268 c03612 1.069m n..s.. 17/20 
 
a c03612 5.029m n.s.s. 0/20 
PHTHALIC ANHYDRIDE 85-44-9 
 
2269 c03601 5.42gm n.s.s. 10/20 
 
a c03601 25.99m n.s.s. 1/20 
b c03601 10.7gm n.s.s. 1/20 
2270 c03601 7.769m n.s.s. 11/20 
 
a c03601 2.279m n.s.s. 3/20 
b c03601 13.39m n.s.s. 7/20 
2271 c03601 2.379m n.s.s. 0/20 
 
a c03601 511.mg n.s.s. 13/20 
b c03601 5.50gm n.s.s. 0/20 
2272 c03601 451.mg n.s.s. 15/20 
 
a c03601 4.79gm n.s.s. 1/20 
 
PICLORAN 1918-02-1 
 
2273 c00237 1.579m n. .s. 
 
a c00237 3.28gm n.a.s. 
b c00237 1.25gm n.s.s. 
2274 c00237 688.g n.s.s. 
 
a c00237 398.mg n.s.s. 
b c00237 1.33gm n. .s. 
2275 c00237 397.mg n.s.s. 
 
a c00237 864.mg n.s.s. 
2276 c00237 873.mg 23.49m 
2277 c00237 290.mg n.s.s. 
 
a c00237 456.mg n.s.a. 
 
1/10 
0/10 
1/10 
5/10 
5/10 
1/10 
7/10 
0/10 
 
0/4Op 
3/10 
0/10 
 
806.mg 
806.mg 
806.mg 
3.009m 
3.00gm 
3. 00g 
 
250.mg 
250.mg 
600.mg 
600.mg 
 
1. 56gm 
1. 56gm 
1. 569m 
1.969m 
1.96gm 
1.96gm 
375. mg 
375.mg 
375.mg 
300.mg 
300.mg 
 
29/50 1.629m 27/50 3.25gm 8/50 
 
2/50 1.62gm 2/50 3.25gm 0/50 
5/50 1.62gm 1/50 3.259m 0/50 
33/50 6.00gm 32/50 
17/50 6.00gm 13/50 
7/50 6.00gm 10/50 
39/50 500.mg 39/50 
2/50 500.mg 6/50 
43/50 1.20gm 34/50 
 
1/50 1.209m 2/50 
 
21/50 3.12gm 17/50 
0/50 3.12gm 1/50 
6/50 3.12gm 2/50 
22/50 3.92gm 18/50 
12/50 (3.929m 7/50) 
6/50 3.929m 9/50 
0/50 750.mg 5/50 
37/50 750.mg 36/50 
 
1/50 750.mg 0/50 
37/50 600.mg 36/50 
2/50 600.mg 0/50 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,s/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
Liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
I iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
292.mg 6/50 585.mg 3/50 
292.mg 0/50 585.mg 1/50 
292.mg 1/50 (585.mg 0/50) 
270.mg 18/50 540.mg 14/50 
270.mg 13/50 (540.mg 8/50) 
270.mg 5/50 540.mg 3/50 
263.mg 32/50 527.mg 33/50 
263.mg 5/50 527.mg 8/50 
263.mg 5/50 527.mg 7/50 
210.mg 28/50 422.mg 22/50 
210.mg 4/50 (422.mg 0/50) 
 
PILOCARPINE 92-13-7 
 
2278 1134 10.1mg n.s.s. 3/33 4.29mg 4/34 
2279 1134 30.0mg n.s.s. 1/36 4.29mg 0/34 
 
a 1134 18.1mg n.s.s. 1/36 4.29mg 1/34 
 
PINARICIN 7681-93-8 
 
2280 240 639.mg n.s.s. 1/40 
 
Schmahl ;zkko,86,77-84; 1976 
 
6.25mg 1/35 12.5mg 0/35 25.0mg 0/35 50.0mg 0/40 
 
227 
 
Brkly Code 
 
S 
 
Lovinskas;txap,8,97-109;19" 
 
228 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
2281 R * cfn set lun Lys 24.24 
 
a R m cfn sat thm tma 24.24 
 
PIPERAZINE 
 
2282 R f mrc wat Liv tur 17.24 * 
 
a R f .rc wat tba six 17.24 e 
2283 R m .rc wat Liv tun 17.24 e 
 
* R m mrc wet tbe mix 17m24 e 
PIPERIDINE 
 
2284 R f mrc wet Liv tum 17m24 * 
 
* R f mrc wet tbe mix 17.24 * 
2285 R m mrc wet Liv tum 17m24 * 
 
a R m mrc wet tbe mix 17.24 e 
PIPERONYL BUTOXIDE 
 
2286 N f b6c eat TBA NXB 26.26 v 
 
* N f b6c eat Liv NXB 26.26 v 
b N f b6c eat Lun NXB 26m26 v 
 
2287 N f b6c orl Liv hpt 76w76 ev) 
 
* N f b6c orl Lun mix 76w76 ev) 
b N f b6c orL tbr mix 76w76 *v) 
2288 N m b6c eat TBA NXS 26.26 v 
 
a N m b6c ot Liv NXB 26m26 v 
b N m b6c eat Lun NXB 26n26 v 
 
2289 N m b6c orl --- rts 76w76 ev) 
 
a N n b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 ev) 
b N m b6c orl Lun mix 76w76 ev) 
c N m b6c orL tba mix 76w76 ev) 
2290 N f b6a orl Lun ad. 76w76 ev) 
 
a N f b6a orl Liv hpt 76w76 *vi 
b N f b6. orL tbm mix 76w76 ev) 
2291 N m b6. orl Lun ado 76w76 mv) 
 
a N m b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 evy 
b N m b6a orl tba mix 76w76 evi 
2292 R f f34 eat --- Lyi 25.25 
 
a R f f34 oat TBA NXB 25m25 
b R f f34 oat Liv NXB 25.25 
2293 R m f 34 Oat TBA NXB 25m25 
 
* R * f34 eat Liv NXB 25.25 
 
2294 R b wis oat Liv hpt 22.24 sv 
 
* R b wis eat Liv hpc 22m24 cv 
 
I 
 
TD50 2TIilpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
1. 97gm * P<. 5 - 
no dre P-I. - 
 
lOOng..:. .ug. :10. :100. g :. . :10. :100. . : :10 
 
.> no dre 
 
11.2mg 
.> no dre 
 
no dre 
 
P-I. 
P<. 2 
P-I. 
P-I. 
 
Ong. . .: ug. : 10. :100. g :..g :10. :100.. : . :10 
 
no dre P-1. 
63.3mg P<.3 
no dre P.1. 
no dre P-1. 
l00ng..:..lug. 10. 100.... :1ug. : 10. :100.. . : . :10 
 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
3.26gm * P<.3 
no dre P-1. 
x .> no dre P-1. 
x no dre P-1. 
 
x 83.1mg P<.05 
 
:> no dre P.1. 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
x . + . 34.8mg P<.005 
x 98.5mg P<.09 
x no dre P.1. 
 
x 22.4mg P<.0005 
x .> 265.mg P<.6 
x no dro P.1. 
x 265.mg P<.7 
x .> no dre P-1. 
x no dre P-1. 
x no dre P-1. 
 
: + *#1 .18gm * P<.008 - 
 
7.829m * P<.9 
no dre P-1. 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
.> 22.5gm * P<.5 - 
 
26.1gm * P<.2 - 
 
PIPERONYL BUTOXIDE IN SOLVENT lOOng .. : lug. :10. :100. g : .1 :10. :100.. : . :10 
 
2295 N f b6a or1 lun ad. 76w76 *vx .> no dre 
 
a N f b6a or1 Liv hpt 76w76 ovx no dre 
b N f b6a or1 tba mix 76w76 *vx 1.01gm 
2296 N m b6a or1 liv hpt 76w76 *vx .> no dre 
 
a N * b6a or1 lun de 76w76 *vx no dre 
b N m b6a or1 tba mix 76w76 *vx no dre 
2297 N f b6c or1 liv hpt 76w76 *vx .> no dre 
 
a N f b6c or1 lun mix 76w76 .vx no dre 
b N f b6c or1 tba tum 76w76 *vx no dre 
2298 N m b6c or1 Liv hpt 76w76 *vx . 186.mg 
 
a N m b6c or1 lun mix 76w76 *vx no dre 
b N m b6c or1 tba mix 76w76 evx 93.1mg 
 
PIPERONYL SULFOXIDE 
 
2299 N f b6c sat TEA NXB 24m24 iv 
 
a N f b6c eat Liv NXB 24m24 v 
b N f b6c sat Lun NXB 24m24 cv 
2300 N f b6c orl Liv hpt 76w76 evx 
 
a N f b6c orl Lun mix 76w76 evx 
b N f b6c orl tbc mix 76w76 evx 
2301 N m b6c sat Liv hpc 24m24 a 
 
a N o b6c sat TBA NXB 24m24 a 
b N m b6c eat Liv NXB,-2424 a 
c N m b6c eat Lun NXB 24m24 a 
 
2302 N m b6c orl ... rts 76w76 evi 
 
a N m b6c orl Liv hpt 76w76 cvx 
b N m b6c orl Lun mix 76w76 evi 
c N m b6c orl tba mix 76w76 cvx 
2303 N f b6a orl Lun ad. 76w76 evx 
 
a N f b6a cr1 Liv hpt 76w76 evi 
b N f b6a orl tba mix 76w76 evx 
2304 N a b6a orl Liv hpt 76w76 evi 
 
a N m b6a orl Lun ad. 76w76 cvx 
b N m b6a orl tba mix 76w76 cvx 
 
100ng .: ..ug. :10. :100. g :..g :10. :100.... g :. 10 
 
:> no drc 
 
725.mg 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
100.m9 
 
A * 62.2mg * 
 
423.mg * 
62.2mg * 
no dre 
. + . 9.10mg 
 
45.4mg 
K no drc 
 
7.72mg 
K .> no dre 
 
no dre 
no dre 
88.2mg 
no dre 
K no dre 
 
P-1. _ 
P-I. 1 
P<.7 7 
 
PoI. _ 
P-1. _ 
P-1. _ 
P-o. _ 
P-I. _ 
P-I. _ 
P<.02 - 
P-1. _ 
P<.002 - 
 
P. 1. 
P<..3 
PaI. 
Pal. 
P-I. 
P<.3 
 
P<.02 c 
P<.8 
P<.02 
P-I. 
 
P<.0005 
P<. 2 
P-I. 
 
P<. 0005 
P.1. 
P-I. 
Pal. 
P<.6 
P-I. 
P-1. 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl 
 
2281 240 320..g n.s.s. 0/40 
 
a 240 350.mg n.s.s. 0/40 
PIPERAZINE 110-85-0 
 
2282 216 22.7mg n.s.s. 0/15 
 
a 216 3.42mg n.s.s. 4/15 
2283 216 19.9mg n.s.s. 0/15 
 
a 216 5.79mg n.s.s. 5/15 
PIPERIDINE 110-89-4 
 
228 216 91.0mg n.s.s. 0/15 
 
a 216 16.4mg n.s.s. 4/15 
2285 216 79.6mg n.s.s. 0/15 
 
a 216 29.2mg n.s.s. 5/15 
PIPERONYL BUTOXIDE 51-03-6 
 
2286 c02813 241.mg n.s.s. 15/20 
 
a c02813 929.mg n.s.s. 1/20 
b c02813 1.49gm n.s.s. 2/20 
2287 1096 82.0mg n.s.s. 0/16 
 
a 1096 82.0mg n.s.s. 0/16 
b 1096 25.1mg n.s.s. 0/16 
2288 c02813 406.ng n.s.s. 16/20 
 
a c02813 528.mg n.s.s. 10/20 
b c02813 998.mg n.s.s. 5/20 
2289 1096 13.1mg 274.mg 0/16 
 
a 1096 24.2mg n. s.. 0/16 
b 1096 63.6mg n.s.s. 0/16 
c 1096 9.48mg 78.6mg 0/16 
2290 1096 34.8mg n.s.s. 1/17 
 
a 1096 82.0mg n.s.s. 0/17 
b 1096 29.7mg n.s.s. 2/17 
2291 1096 50.5mg n.s.s. 2/18 
 
a 1096 76.3m9 n.s.s. 1/18 
b 1096 54.0mg n.s.s. 3/18 
2292 c02813 631.mg 27.1gm 1/20 
 
a c02813 422.mg n.s.s. 15/20 
b c02813 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/20 
2293 c02813 384.mg n.s.s. 14/20 
 
a c02813 5.20gm n.s.s. 2/20 
2294 241 3.48gm n.s.s. 1/24 
 
a 241 4.25gm n.s.s. 0/24 
 
IDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
Brkly Code 
 
5.00mg 0/35 10.0mg 0/35 20.0mg 1/35 40.0mg 0/40 
5.00mg 0/35 10.0mg 1/35 20.0mg 0/35 40.0mg 0/40 
 
7.36mg 0/15 
7.36mg 8/15 
6.44mg 0/15 
6.44mg 5/15 
 
29.4mg 0/15 
29.4mg 7/15 
25.8gg 0/15 
25.8mg 4/15 
 
135.mn 22/50 (364.mg 20/50) 
135.mg 2/50 364.mg 5/50 
135.mg 6/50 364.mg 2/50 
41.4mg 0/18 
41.4mg 0/18 
41.4mg 3/18 
 
124.mg 32/50 336.mg 31/50 
124.mg 17/50 336.mg 20/50 
124.mg 6/50 336.mg 8/50 
38.5mg 5/15 
38.5mg 2/15 
38.5mg 0/15 
38.5mg 7/15 
41.4mg 2/18 
41.4mg 0/18 
41.4mg 3/18 
38.5mg 1/18 
38.5mg 0/18 
38.5mg 1/18 
 
250.mg 7/50 500.mg 15/50 
250.mg 33/50 500.mg 33/50 
250.mg 0/50 500.mg 0/50 
200.mg 34/50 400.mg 32/50 
200.mg 0/50 400.mg 0/50 
 
4.50mg 0/24 45.0mg 0/24 450.mg 1/24 1.119m 1/24 
4.50mg 0/24 45.0mg 0/24 450.mg 0/24 1.11gm 1/24 
 
Garcia;zkko,79, 141-144; 197' 
 
Garcia;zkko,79, 141-144;1973 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Inn.s;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
S 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
SarLes;atmh, 1,862.883; 1952 
 
PIPERONYL BUTOXIDE IN SOLVENT (butacide) -- 
 
2295 1097 187.mn n.s.s. 1/17 157.mg 1/18 
 
a 1097 311.mg n.s.s. 0/17 157.mg 0/18 
b 1097 113.mg n.s.s. 2/17 157.mg 3/18 
2296 1097 173.mg n.s.s. 1/18 146.mg 1/18 
 
a 1097 192.n9 n.s.s. 2/18 146.mg 1/18 
b 1097 115.mg n.s.s. 3/18 146.mg 3/18 
2297 1097 311.mg n.s.s. 0/16 157.mg 0/18 
 
a 1097 311.mg n.s.s. 0/16 157.mg 0/18 
b 1097 311.mg n.s.s. 0/16 157.mg 0/18 
2298 1097 63.9mg n.s.s. 0/16 146m. 4/16 
 
a 1097 258.mg n.s.s. 0/16 146.mg 0/16 
b 1097 39.5mg 340.mg 0/16 146.mg 7/16 
 
Innes;ntis,1968/1969 
 
PIPERONYL SULFOXIDE 120.62-7 
 
2299 c02824 110.mg n.s.a. 
 
a c02824 215.mg n.s.a. 
b c02824 523.mg n.s.s. 
2300 1099 31.1mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1099 31.1mg n.s.s. 
b 1099 16.3mg n.s.a. 
2301 c02824 31.0mg n.s.s. 
 
a c02824 46.4mg n.s.a. 
b c02824 31.0mg n.s.s. 
c c02824 106.mg n.s.s. 
2302 1099 4.05mg 29.9mg 
 
a 1099 11.2mg n.s.a. 
b 1099 29.0mg n.s.s. 
c 1099 3.56mg 22.2mg 
2303 1099 17.5m9 n.s.s. 
 
a 1099 29.3mg n.s.s. 
b 1099 13.8mg n.s.a. 
2304 1099 12.3mg n.s.a. 
 
a 109 29.0mg n.s.a. 
b 1099 15.1mg n.s.s. 
 
10/20 
 
1/20 
2/20 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
6/20 
14/20 
6/20 
6/20 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
1/17 
0/17 
2/17 
1/18 
2/18 
3/18 
 
38.3mg 
38.3mg 
 
38.3m9 
15.7m9 
15.7mg 
 
15.7mg 
42.2mg 
42.2mg 
42.2mg 
 
42.2mg 
14.6mg 
14.6mg 
14.6mg 
14.6mg 
15.7mg 
 
15.7m9 
15.7mg 
14.6mg 
14.6mg 
14.6mg 
 
23/50 98.0mg 25/50 
 
3/50 98.0mg 6/50 
2/50 98.0mg 2/50 
0/18 
0/18 
1/18 
 
31/50 84.0mg 46/50 
39/50 84.0mg 47/50 
31/50 84.0mg 46/50 
10/50 (84.0mg 7/50) 
8/18 
2/18 
0/18 
9/18 
1/17 
0/17 
2/17 
2/18 
0/18 
2/18 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Innos;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
229 
 
230 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
2305 R 1 f34 sat TBA NXB 24.24 
 
a R f f34 eat Liv NXB 24.24 
2306 R f134 sat TBA NXB 24.24 
 
a R * f34 sat Liv NXB 24.24 
 
PIVALOLACTONE 
 
2307 N f b6c gav TBA NXB 24.24 
 
a N f b6c gav liv NXB 24.24 
b N 1 b6c gav Lun NXB 24.24 
2308 N . b6c gav TBA NXB 24.24 
 
a N * b6c gav Liv NXB 24.24 
b N * b6c gav Lun NXB 24.24 
2309 R f f34 gav sto NXA 24.24 
 
a R f f34 gav TBA NXB 24.24 
b R f f34 gav liv NXB 24.24 
2310 R . f34 gav *to NXA 24.24 
 
a R a f34 gav *to sqc 24.24 
b R * f34 gav TBA NXB 24.24 
c R . f34 gav liv NXB 24.24 
POLYBRONINATED BIPHENYLS 
 
2311 R f ssa oat Liv tus 57w57 
 
a R f ssa eat tba aix 57w57 
 
POLYVINYLPYRIDINE -N-OXIDE 
 
2312 N f ici ivJ lun ada 17.24 
 
a N f ici ivJ tba maL 17.24 
b N f ici ivJ tba ben 17.24 
2313 R f wis ivJ tba maL 17.24 
 
a R f wis ivJ tba ban 17.24 
 
PRENARIN 
 
2314 R f cdr oat liv tum 24a24 a 
2315 R m cdr set liv hpt 24m24 a 
PROCARBAZINE 
 
2316 R o b46 ivJ tba mix 12.24 
 
a R m b46 ivJ tba maL 12.24 
b R m b46 ivJ tba ban 12.24 
PROCARBAZINE . HCl 
 
2317 N f b6c ipJ NXB NXB 52w85 s 
 
a N f b6c ipJ ut. acn 52w85 s 
b N f b6c ipj --- NXA 52w85 s 
c N f b6c ipJ --- Ly 52w85 s 
d N f b6c ipJ Lun a/a 52w85 s 
a f b6c ipJ bra oLn 52w85 s 
f I f b6c ipJ TBA NXB 52w85 s 
g N f b6c ipJ Liv NXB 52w85 s 
h N f b6c ipJ lun NXB 52w85 s 
2318 N f b6c ipJ ute acn 52w80 s 
 
a f b6c ipj --- NXA 52w8O s 
b N f b6c ipJ --- Ly 52w80 s 
c N f b6c ipJ lun a/a 52w80 s 
d N f b6c ipJ bra oLn 52w80 s 
2319 N m b6c ipJ NXB NXS 52w85 s 
 
a N m b6c ipJ Lun NXA 52w85 s 
b N m b6c ipJ Lun a/a 52w85 s 
c N m b6c ipJ --- NXA 52w85 a 
d N . b6c ipJ bra NXA 52w85 s 
a N o b6c ipJ bra oLn 52w85 s 
f N * b6c ipJ TBA NXB 52w85 s 
g N o b6c ipJ liv NXB 52w85 s 
h N * b6c ipJ lun NXB 52w85 s 
2320 N . b6c ipj Lun NXA 52w85 s 
 
a N . b6c ipJ lun a/a 52w85 s 
b N * b6c ipJ -- NXA 52w85 s 
c N b6c ipJ bra NXA 52w85 s 
d N b6c ipJ bra oLn 52w85 s 
2321 N f awi ipJ Lun mix 26w76 a 
 
a N f swi ipJ -.- Lou 26w76 e 
b N f swi ipJ uto car 26w76 a 
c N f swi ipJ uta sar 26w76 o 
d N f swi ipJ --- Lys 26w76 e 
a N f swi ipJ Liv Lys 26w76 a 
f N f swi ipJ tba aix 26w76 a 
g N f swi ipJ tba oaL 26w76 o 
h N f swi ipJ tba ban 26w76 a 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
TD50 2Iilpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
2.30g. * P<.8 - 
no dre P-1. 
 
no dre P-I. - 
2.65g. * P<.6 
 
oong .. :..ug.. : 10. :100.. :.lag.. : 10. :100.. : g. : 10 
 
179.ag * P<.3 - 
no dre P-1. 
482.ag * P<.6 
no dra Pl.1 
no dre P-1. 
435.mg * P<.5 
 
+ 333.ag / P<.002 c 
 
200.ag * P<.3 
no dre Pal. 
 
+ 154.ag * P<.0005c 
 
532.mg * P<.009 c 
181.mg * P<.2 
850.ag * P<.3 
 
100ng ..: ..ug.. : 10. :100.. :la"g.. : 10. :100.. :I g. :10 
 
no dre P-I. - 
5.91ag P<.4 - 
 
boong . . .:ug . : 10 : 100 .. ag : .. : 10 .: 100 .g. :i ...10 
 
no dre 
no dre 
1.699g 
175.mg 
no dra 
 
P-I. 
P-I. 
P<1. 
P<.8 
P-I. 
 
100ong. . .. :1ug0. : 10. :100 ... g : .. : 10. :100 .. : 1g :10 
 
.> no dre P-I. 
 
.> no dre P-1. 
 
bOOng .:. . :1ug 10 . 10 . l : g . : 10 .: 100 .. :Ig . :10 
 
+ 4.01mg 
 
3.93mg 
no dre 
 
P<.002 + 
P<.0005 
Pal. 
 
1OOng . q. : 1u . :lg 10 . :100.. :.lag.. : 10 .: 100.. : g .9 : 10 
 
+ .194mg / P<.0005 
 
.253ag / P<.0005c 
.758mg * P<.0005c 
.908mg * P<.002 c 
3.83mg / P<.002 c 
6.34mg / P<.0005c 
.193mg / P<.0005 
no dre P-1. 
 
3.83mg / P<.002 
 
pool : .411mg / P<.0005c 
 
.690mg * P<.0005c 
.855mg * P<.0005c 
3.39mg / P<.0005c 
5.62mg / P<.0005c 
: + : .511mg / P<.0005 
 
.623mg / P<.0005c 
.721mg / P<.0005c 
3.34mg * P<.009 c 
4.51mg / P<.0005c 
5.19mg / P<.0005c 
.464mg / P<.0005 
3.28mg / P<.01 
 
.623mg / P<.0005 
 
pool + .623mg / P<.0005c 
 
.721mg / P<.0005c 
3.34mg * P<.002 c 
4.51mg I P<.0005c 
5.19mg I P<.0005c 
1.05mg P<.0005+ 
3.72mg P<.0005 
5.75mg P<.004 
6.11mg P<.03 
 
6.99mg P<.09 + 
no dre P-1. 
 
.244mg P<.0005 
.391mg P<.0005 
27.8mg P<.8 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
2305 c02824 283.mg n.s.s. 12/20 150.mg 24/50 300.mg 27/50 
 
a c02824 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/20 150.mg 0/50 300.mg 0/50 
2306 c02824 60.1mg n.s.s. 15/20 60.0mg 32/50 (120.mg 22/50) 
 
a c02824 651.mg n.s.s. 0/20 60.0mg 1/50 120.mg 1/50 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
Brkly Code 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
PIVALOLACTONE 1955-45-9 
 
2307 c04126 55.7mg n.s.s. 6/20 
 
a c04126 340.mg n.s.s. 0/20 
b c04126 161.mg n.s.s. 0/20 
2308 c04126 97.0mg n.s.s. 12/20 
 
a c04126 64.1mg n.s.s. 4/20 
b c04126 114.mg n.s.s. 2/20 
2309 c04126 175.mg 1.03gm 0/20 
 
a c04126 62.5mg n.s.s. 14/20 
b c04126 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/20 
2310 c04126 96.7mg 293.mg 0/20 
 
a c04126 241.mg 12.5gm 0/20 
b c04126 66.4Ag n.s.s. 11/20 
c c04126 323.mg n.s.s. 0/20 
 
31.8mg 20/50 63.7mg 22/50 
31.8mg 2/50 63.7mg 0/50 
31.8mg 4/50 63.7mg 2/50 
31.8mg 24/50 63.7mg 25/50 
31.8mg 10/50 (63.7mg /50) 
31.8mg 6/50 63.7mg 10/50 
63.1mg 2/50 126.mg 11/50 
63.1mg 35/50 126.mg 34/50 
63.1mg 0/50 126.mg 0/50 
63.1mg 6/50 126.mg 21/50 
63.1mg 1/50 126.mg 7/50 
63.1mg 29/50 126.mg 34/50 
63.1mg 3/50 126.mg 2/50 
 
l iv:hps,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
sto:sqc,sqp. 
Liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
sto:sqc,sqp. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
POLYBRO9IINATED BIPHENYLS 59536-61-1 
 
2311 1061 1.86mg n.s.s. 0/8 2.50mg 0/12 
 
a 1061 .962mg n.s.s. 0/8 2.50mg 1/12 
 
POLYVINYLPYRIDINE-N1OXIDE ... 
 
2312 1419 48.0mg n.s.s. 3/39 
 
a 1419 14.9mg n.s.s. 14/39 
b 1419 30.9mg n.s.s. 3/39 
2313 1419 18.2mg n.s.s. 4/48 
 
a 1419 21.8mg n.s.s. 4/48 
 
Schwartz; Jnci ,64,63-67; 1980 
 
Schahl ;arzn, 19,1313-1314;1969 
 
8.24mg 2/50 
8.24mg 17/50 
8.24mg 4/50 
5.89m9 5/48 
5.89mg 4/48 
 
PRENARIN (conjugatod equine estrogens) ... 
2314 108 .262mg n.s.s. 0/20 70.Oug 
2315 108 2.32mg n.s.s. 0/20 70.Oug 
 
PROCARBAZINE 671-16-9 
 
2316 1017 1.92mg 17.2mg 
 
a 1017 1.95mg 12.4mg 
b 1017 11.4mg n.s.s. 
 
Gibson;txap, 11,489-510; 1967 
 
0/20 .700mg 0/20 
1/20 .700mg 0/20 
 
Schmahl ;arzn,20, 1461-1467;1970 
 
7/89 1.71mg 15/48 
4/89 1.71mg 14/48 
3/89 1.71mg 1/48 
 
PROCARBAZINE.HCI 366-70-1 
2317 c01810 65.1ug .432mg 
 
a cOIS0 O 68.9ug .728mg 
b cOIS0 O .289mg 2.96mg 
c cOIS0 O .308mg 5.34mg 
d cO1I8O 1.05mg 19.5mg 
 
e cO1I8O 2.93mg 16.6mg 
f c01810 65.Oug .422mg 
g c01810 n.s.a. n.s.s. 
h c01810 1.05mg 19.5mg 
2318 c01810 .203mg .834mg 
 
a c01810 .258mg 2.69mg 
b cOI8O .283mg 4.57mg 
c cOIS0 O .927mg 13.6mg 
d c01810 2.60m9 13.2mg 
2319 c01810 .289mg .947mg 
 
a c01810 .323mg 1.39mg 
b c01810 .369mg 1.63mg 
c cOIS0 O 1.36mg 135.mg 
d c01810 2.07mg 13.1mg 
 
a c01810 2.28mg 17.1mg 
f cOIS0 O .271mg .821mg 
9 c01810 1.27mg 222.mg 
h c01810 .323mg 1.39mg 
2320 c01810 .323mg 1.31mg 
 
a cO1I8O .369mg 1.53mg 
 
b cOIS0 O 1.36mg 13.8mg 
c c01810 2.07mg 11.7mg 
d cOIS0 O 2.28mg 14.6mg 
2321 1336 .446mg 4.68mg 
 
a 1336 1.12mg 26.7mg 
b 1336 1.41mg 82.8mg 
c 1336 1.43mg n.s.s. 
d 1336 1.47mg n.s.a. 
 
a 1336 3.66mg n.s.s. 
f 1336 92.6ug .683mg 
9 1336 .181mg 1.03mg 
h 1336 1.74mg n.s.s. 
 
O/15 
 
0/15 
0/15 
0/15 
0/15 
0/15 
0/15 
0/15 
0/1S 
0/45p 
1/45p 
1/45p 
0/45p 
0/45p 
0/15 
0/15 
0/15 
0/15 
0/15 
0/15 
0/15 
0/15 
0/15 
 
O/45p 
0/45p 
0/45p 
0/45p 
0/45p 
20/154 
0/1S4 
0/154 
1/154 
3/154 
1/1S4 
42/154 
29/154 
13/154 
 
2.00mg 
2. 00mg 
2.00mg 
2. 00mg 
2.00mg 
2 .00mg 
2.00mg 
2.00mg 
2. 00mg 
2. 00mg 
2. 00mg 
2.00mg 
2. 00mg 
2. 00mg 
1.90mg 
1.90mg 
1.90mg 
1.90mg 
1.90mg 
1.90mg 
1.90mg 
1.90mg 
1.90mg 
1.90mg 
1.90mg 
1.90m9 
1.90m9 
1.90m9 
1.75mg 
1.75mg 
1.75m9 
1.75mg 
1.75mg 
1.75mg 
1.75mg 
1.75mg 
1.75mg 
 
19/35 
14/35 
8/35 
6/35 
1/35 
0/35 
19/35 
0/35 
1/35 
14/35 
8/35 
6/35 
1/35 
0/35 
14/35 
11/35 
10/35 
4/35 
0/35 
0/35 
18/35 
3/35 
11/35 
11/35 
10/35 
4/35 
0/35 
0/35 
10/19 
3/19 
2/19 
2/19 
2/19 
0/19 
18/19 
16/19 
2/19 
 
5.20mg 
5.20mg 
5.20mg 
5.20mg 
5.20mg 
5.20mg 
5.20mg 
5.20mg 
5.20mg 
5.20mg 
5.20mg 
5.20mg 
5.20mg 
5.20mg 
4.80mg 
4.80mg 
4.80mg 
4 .80mg 
4.80mg 
4.80mg 
4.80mg 
4.80mg 
4.80mg 
4.80mg 
4.80mg 
4.80mg 
4.80mg 
 
4.80mg 
 
18/35 
8/35 
2/35 
2/35 
6/35 
11/35 
20/35 
0/35 
6/35 
8/35 
2/35 
2/35 
6/35 
11/35 
19/35 
10/35 
10/35 
4/35 
10/35 
9/35 
20/35 
 
3/35 
10/35 
10/35 
10/35 
4/35 
10/35 
9/35 
 
---:Lou,Lym; bra:oln; Lun:a/a; ute:acn. C 
 
- -Leu,Lym. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
---:Ieu,lym. 
 
- -::Ieu,tym; bra:oLn,uLc; Lun:a/a,a/c. C 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
---:Leu,Lym. 
bra:oln,ulc. 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Iun:a/a,a/c. 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
- :Leu,Ilym. 
bra:oln,ulc. 
 
Skipper;srfr;1976/Weisburger 1977/Projean pers.com. 
 
231 
 
232 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
2322 N smwi ipi Lun mix 26w78 * 
 
a N m swi ipJ Liv mix 26w78 o 
b N m swi ipJ tba mix 26w78 o 
c N m swi ipJ tba maL 26w78 a 
d N m swi ipj tba bon 26w78 o 
 
2323 P b cym mix --- ost 12y13 muw 
 
a P b cym mix --- Lkm 12y13 emuw 
b P b cym mix --- mlk 12y13 emuw 
c P b cym mix --- icl 12y13 *muw 
d P b cym mix --- uLe 12y13 emuw 
a P b cym mix spL hec 12y13 omuw 
f P b cym mix hum ost 12y13 smuw 
g P b cym mix Jew ost 12y13 emuw 
h P b cym mix Liv mal 12y13 smuw 
i P b cym mix tba mal 12y13 smuw 
2324 P b rho mix --- lka 14y14 smuw 
 
a P b rho mix --- mlk 14y14 muw 
b P b rho mix --- oct 14y14 emuw 
c P b rho mix hum ost 14yl4 emuw 
d P b rho mix kid has 14y14 *muw 
* P b rho mix Liv mal 14y14 omuw 
f P b rho mix tba maL 14y14 *muw 
2325 R f sda ipJ NXB NXB 26w86 s 
 
a R f sda ipI NXA NXA 26w86 s 
b R f cda ipj bra oln 26w86 s 
c R f sdo ipj IgL NXA 2686 s 
d R f dcd ipj mgL acn 26w86 s 
* R f sda ipj --- lym 26w86 s 
f R f sda ipj TBA NXB 26w86 s 
g R f sda ipI Liv NXB 26w86 s 
 
2326 R f sda ipI NXA NXA 26w80 s p 
 
a R f sda ipj bra oLn 26w80 s 
b R f sde ipI mgL NXA 26w80 s 
c R f sde ipj mgL ecn 26w80 s 
d R f sd ipj --- Lym 26w8O s 
2327 R m sda ipj NXB NXB 26w61 s 
 
a R m sda ipj NXA NXA 26w61 s 
b R m sda ipj --- NXA 26w6I s 
c R m sde ipj mgL NXA 26w61 s 
d R m ade ipj mgL ccn 26w61 s 
o R m sde ipj TBA NXB 26w61 s 
f R m sde ipj Liv NXS 26w61 a 
 
2328 R m ode ipj NXA NXA 26w61 s p 
 
o R m sda ipj --- NXA 26w6I s 
b R o sda ip -- Lym 26w6l s 
c R m sda ipj mgL NXA 26w61 s 
d R m sda ipj olb mcn 26w61 s 
o R m oda ipJ mgl acn 26w61 s 
f Rm *do ipj --- Lou 26w6l a 
 
PROFLAVINE.HCL HENIHYDRATE* 
 
2329 N f b6c oat Liv NXA 24m24 
 
a N f b6c oat TBA NXB 24m24 
b N f b6c cat Liv NXB 24m24 
c N f b6c cat Lun NXB 24m24 
2330 N m b6c eat TBA NXB 24m24 
 
a N m b6c cat Liv NXB 24m24 
b N m b6c oat Lun NXB 24m24 
2331 R f f34 *et TBA NXB 25m25 
 
a R f f34 *et liv NXB 25m25 
2332 R m f34 *et NXA NXA 25m25 
 
a R m f34 emt Liv NXA 25m25 
b R m f34 *et TBA NXB 2Am25 
c R m f34 sat Liv NXB 25m25 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
*+ 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
1. 53mg P<. 0005+ 
no dre P.1 
 
1.15mg P<.004 
1.74mg P<.009 
9.84mg P<.4 
 
8.70mg P<.02 + 
8.70mg P<.02 + 
18.2mg P<.1 + 
18.2mg P<. 1 + 
18.2mg P<. 1 + 
18.2mg P<.1 + 
18. 2mg P<. 1 + 
18.2mg P<.1 + 
no dre P.1 
 
3.17mg P<.002 
 
9.50mg P<.002 + 
9.50mg P<.002 + 
53.3mg P<.2 + 
53.3mg P<.2 + 
53.3mg P<.2 + 
no dre Pal. 
 
5.35mg P<.0005 
.337mg / P<.0005 
.416mg * P<.0005c 
.418mg * P<.0005c 
.458mg / P<.0005c 
.459mg / P<.0005c 
5.18mg / P<.0005c 
.329mg / P<.0005 
no dre P-1. 
 
.360mg * P<.0005c 
.361mg * P<.0005c 
.396mg / P<.0005c 
.397mg / P<.0005c 
4.48mg / P<.0005c 
.284mg * P<.0005 
.343mg * P<.0005c 
2.10mg * P<.0005c 
4.50mg * P<.003 c 
4.85mg * P<.004 c 
.186mg I P<.0005 
no dre P-1. 
 
.343mg * P<.0005c 
2.10mg * P<.0005c 
2.51mg * P<.0005c 
4.50mg * P<.0005c 
4.67mg * P<.003 
 
4.85mg * P<.0005c 
13.3mg * P<.02 
 
)001 
 
iooL 
 
!oong . . .ug. : 10. :100. g : . 1g :10. : 100.. : . :10 
 
+ #26.4mg \ P<.0005 
 
86.2mg * P<.3 
 
26.4mg \ P<.0005 
487.mg * P<.5 
no dre P-1. 
248.mg P<.7 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
#213.mg * P<.02 
254.mg * P<.05 
no dre P-1. 
 
254.mg * P<.05 
 
PRONETHALOL 1 O0ng.. :. .ug. :10. :100. g :. . :10. :100. :g . :10 
 
2333 N f nss set thi tum 64w64 r .> 408.mg * P<.3 
2334 N m nss eat thi tum 64w64 r .> 1.93gm * P<.7 
 
PRONETHALOL . HCl 
 
2335 N f cfl *at Lun ode 78w78 c 
 
a N f cfl et Liv tu 78w78 a 
2336 N m cf1 oat Lun edo 78w78 o 
 
a N m cfl eat Liv ado 78w78 o 
b N m cfl *at Liv car 78w78 o 
 
PROPANE SULTONE 
 
2337 R f cdr gev crb meg 46w60 esi 
 
o R f cdr gav mgL *dc 46w60 sc 
 
ioong . .: ug. :10. :100. 1m :g .:10. :100. . : g :10 
 
.> 1.30gm P<.6 - 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
.> 931.mg P<.5 - 
 
1.82gm P<.3 - 
no dre P-1. 
 
1O0ng . :. .ug. :10. :100. g :.g .:10. :100. . : :10 
 
a . A 4.06mg * P<.1 + 
a 4. 13mg * P<.02 + 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lIne 2Dose 2Inc 
 
2322 1336 .683mg 6.43mg 
 
a 1336 5.35mg n.s.s. 
b 1336 .492mg 9.99"mg 
c 1336 .689mg 94.8mg 
d 1336 1.74mg n.s.s. 
2323 2000 2.13mg n.s.s. 
 
a 2000 2.13mg n.s.s. 
b 2000 2.95mg n.s.s. 
c 2000 2.95mg n.s.s. 
d 2000 2.95mg n.s.s. 
 
a 2000 2.95mg n.a.s. 
f 2000 2.95mg n.s.s. 
9 2000 2.95mg n.s.s. 
h 2000 5.68mg n.a.s. 
i 2000 1.14mg 21.2mg 
2324 2000 3.59mg 46.3mg 
 
a 2000 3.59mg 46.3mg 
b 2000 8.68mg n.a.s. 
c 2000 8.68mg n.s.s. 
d 2000 8.68mg n.s.s. 
 
a 2000 16.4mg n.s.s. 
f 2000 2.39mg 15.8mg 
2325 cOIS0 O .106m9 .701mg 
 
a cOIS0 O .112mg 1.47mg 
b cOIS0 O .112mg 1.51mg 
c c01810 .112mg 1.37mg 
d cOIS0 O .112mg 1.37mg 
 
a cOISO 2.79mg 9.68mg 
f cOIS0 O .105mg .668m9 
g cOIS0 O n.as.. n.s.s. 
 
2326 cOIS0 O 96.8ug 1.10mg 
 
a c01810 96.9ug 1.11mg 
b cOIS0 O 96.7ug 1.14mg 
c c01810 96.8ug 1.15mg 
d cO01IO 2.41mg 8.16mg 
2327 cOIS0 O .104mg .627mg 
 
a c01810 .110mg 1.13mg 
b cOIS0 O 1.00mg 5.59mg 
c c01810 1.93mg 20.1mg 
d c01810 2.00mg 29.1mg 
 
a cO01IO 84.2ug .361mg 
f cOIS0 O n.s.s. n.s.s. 
2328 cOIS0 O .110mg .885mg 
 
a cOI8O 1.00mg 4.63mg 
b cOIS0 O 1.10mg 6.37mg 
c c01810 1.93mg 12.8mg 
d cOIS0 O 1.22mg 50.7mg 
 
a cOIS0 O 2.00mg 15.3mg 
f cOIS0 O 3.78mg n.s.s. 
 
9/101 1.71mg 
2/101 1.71mg 
28/101 1.71mg 
19/101 1.71mg 
9/101 1.71mg 
0/38 4.68mg 
0/38 4.68mg 
0/38 4.68mg 
0/38 4.68mg 
0/38 4.68mg 
0/38 4.68mg 
0/38 4.68mg 
0/38 4.68mg 
0/38 4.68mg 
1/38 4.68mg 
0/32 8. 17mg 
0/32 8. 17mg 
0/32 8. 17mg 
0/32 8. 17mg 
0/32 8. 17mg 
0/32 8. 17mg 
0/32 8. 17mg 
0/10 3. 15mg 
0/10 3. 15mg 
0/10 3.15mg 
0/10 3.15mg 
 
0/10 3.15mg 
0/10 3.15mg 
4/10 3.15mg 
0/10 3. 15mg 
0/40p 3.15mg 
0/4Op 3.15mg 
3/40p 3.15mg 
2/40p 3.15mg 
0/4Op 3. 15mg 
1/10 2.20mg 
0/10 2.20mg 
 
1/10 2.20mg 
0/10 2.20mg 
0/10 2.20mg 
4/10 2.20mg 
0/10 2.20mg 
0/40p 2.20mg 
1/4Op 2.20mg 
1/40p 2.20mg 
1/40p 2.20mg 
0/40p 2.20mg 
1/40p 2.20mg 
0/40p 2.20mg 
 
11/27 
0/27 
16/27 
12/27 
4/27 
2/13 
2/13 
1/13 
1/13 
1/13 
1/13 
1/13 
1/13 
0/13 
5/13 
5/20 
5/20 
1/20 
1/20 
1/20 
0/20 
8/20 
25/36 
17/36 
17/36 
17/36 
16/36 
0/36 
27/36 
 
0/36 
17/36 
17/36 
17/36 
16/36 
0/36 
16/34 
12/34 
3/34 
1/34 
1/34 
19/34 
0/34 
12/34 
3/34 
3/34 
1/34 
0/34 
1/34 
0/34 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
Brkly Code 
 
Admason;ossc,129.156;1982/Si.ber pers.comm. 
 
10.8 g 30/35 
10.8 g 3/35 
10.8gg 2/35 
10.8m 25/35 
10.8 mg 25/35 
10.8m 20/35 
10.89g 30/35 
10.8 g 0/35 
10.8mg 3/35 
10.8 g 2/35 
10.8 g 25/35 
10.8 mg 25/35 
10.8m 20/35 
6.20mg 24/35 
6.20mg 9/35 
6.20mg 12/35 
6.20mg 8/35 
6.20mg 7/35 
6.20mg 30/35 
6.20mg 0/35 
6.20mg 9/35 
6.20mg 12/35 
6.20mg 9/35 
6.20mg 8/35 
6.20mg 3/35 
6.20mg 7/35 
6.20mg 3/35 
 
-- -:lym; bra:otn; crb:mua; mgl:acn,adn. C 
 
bra:oln; crb:mua. 
 
mgl :acn,adn. 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
bra:oln; crb:mua. 
 
mgl :acn,adn. 
 
:tLu,tym; bra:can,otn; mgl:acn,adn; olb:acn. C 
 
bra:can,oln; olb:acn. 
 
--- :lu,lym. 
 
mgl :acn,adn. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
bra:can,oLn; olb:scn. 
 
---:leu,Lym. 
 
mgl :acn,adn. 
 
S 
 
PROFLAVINE.HCL HENIHYDRATE' 
2329 c04137 13.6mg 89.3mg 
 
a c04137 26.0mg n.s.s. 
b c04137 13.6m9 89.3mg 
c c04137 107.mg n.s.s. 
2330 c04137 35.5mg n.s.s. 
 
a c04137 34.1mg n.a.s. 
b c04137 95.5mg n.s.s. 
2331 c04137 21.2mg n.a.s. 
 
a c04137 157.mg n.s.s. 
2332 c04137 80.8mg 25.0gm 
 
a c04137 87.8mg n.a.s. 
b c04137 35.6mg n.a.s. 
c c04137 87.8mg n.s.s. 
 
952-23-8 
 
5/49 26.0Om 20/50 (52.0mg 
36/49 26.0mg 37/50 52.0mg 
5/49 26.0mg 20/50 (52.0mg 
4/49 26.0mg 3/50 52.0mg 
39/50 24.0mg 38/50 48.0m9 
26/50 24.0mg 28/50 48.0mg 
9/50 24.0mg 11/50 48.0mg 
48/50 15.0mg 42/50 (30.0mg 
 
1/50 15.0mg 2/50 30.0mg 
0/50 12.0mg 0/50 24.0mg 
0/50 12.0mg 1/50 24.0mg 
36/50 12.0mg 30/50 24.0mg 
0/50 12.0mg 1/50 24.0mg 
 
22/50) 
41/50 
22/50) 
6/50 
39/50 
30/50 
8/50 
35/50) 
 
1/50 
5/50 
3/50 
32/50 
 
3/50 
 
Liv:hpa,hpc. S 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lgi:srn; ami:acn,Lei. S 
 
liv:hpc,nnd. S 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
PRONETHALOL (aLderLin) 54.80-8 
 
2333 20 147.mg n.s.s. 0/25 65.0mg 3/25 130.mg 
2334 20 266.mg n.s.s. 1/25 60.0mg 0/25 120.mg 
 
4/25 260.-mg 2/25 
3/25 240.mg 1/25 
 
Howe;natu,207, 594-595; 1965 
 
PRONETHALOL.HCl (alderlin.HCl) 51-02-5 
 
2335 469 239.mg n.a.s. 3/40 150.mg 6/52 
 
a 469 904.mg n.a.s. 0/40 150.mg 0/52 
2336 469 174.mg n.s.s. 2/29 150.mg 4/32 
 
a 469 297.mg n.s.s. 0/29 150.mg 1/32 
b 469 340.mg n.s.s. 1/29 150.mg 1/32 
 
PROPANE SULTONE 1120-71-4 
 
2337 1112 2.02mg n.a.s. 1/7 8.00mg 12/26 8.53mg 12/26 
 
a 1112 2.40mg n.s.s. 0/7 8.00mg 6/26 8.53mg 13/26 
 
N.mbern.;txap,41,535-546;1977 
 
Wmisburger; Jnci ,67,75-88;1981 
 
233 
 
234 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
TD50 2Tilpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
b R f cdt gay crt meg 46w60 sea 
c R f cdr gay --- grtL 46w60 acs 
d R f cdr gay smi mdc 46w60 mo* 
2338 R m cdr gav crb mug 46w60 mea 
 
a R m cdr gay crL meg 46w60 ses 
b R . cdt gayvmini mdc 46w60 aes 
c R mcdrtgev--- grt46w6O aes 
 
7.20mg 
.historicmL 
.historicaL 
 
3.64mg 
4.75mg 
*histoticmL 
*historicaL 
 
PROPAZINE boOng..:. .Iug... .10 ...:. 100.. 1 :-mg .: 10 .....100... I:-g .: 10 
 
2339 N f b6a otL Lun ad. 76w76 evx .>82.6mg 
 
a N f b6m otL Liv hpt 76u76 evx no dt. 
b N f b6m ott tbm mix 76u76 *vx 37.2mg 
2340 N m b6m ott Liv hpt 76w76 *vx .>73.1mg 
 
a N m b6s orL Lun ado 76w76 *vx 673.mg 
b N m b6s otL tbm mix 76w76 evx 57.8mg 
2341 N f b6c otL Liv hpt 76w76 *vx .>no dte 
 
a N f b6c orL Lun mix 76w76 *vx no dte 
b N f b6c otL tbm mix 76w76 avx 93.2mg 
2342 N m b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx A 39.7mg 
 
a N m b6c orL Lun mdo 76w76 evx 82.0mg 
b N m b6c otL tbm mix 76w76 avx 11.4mg 
betm.PROPIOLACTONE boOng. .:. .ug... .10 .... 100... 1m.lg...:. 10 ...:. 100...:. Ig ...:. 10 
 
2343 N f hic gav fat tum 77w77 + .1.33mg 
 
m N f hic gmv fot sqc 77w?? 1.47mg 
2344 N m hic gmv fot tum S3U3M. 1.16mg 
 
m N m hic gmv fot sqc 83w83 1.43mg 
2345 R f mmd gmv sto sqc 69w69 A 1.34mg 
 
* P<. 08 + 
 
P<. 3 , 
* P<.5 + 
* P<. 02 , 
* P<. 03 + 
* P<.3 + 
* P<.3 , 
 
P<.6- 
P-I.- 
P<. 4- 
P<. 6- 
P<1.- 
P<. 7- 
PI. -. 
P-I.- 
P<. 3- 
P<.1 I 
 
P<. 3- 
P<. 003 - 
 
P<. 0005. 
P<. 0005 
 
P<. 0005. 
P<. 0005 
 
P<. 02 + 
 
PROPYL N-ETHYL-N-BUTYLTHIOCARBANATE . .:. .lug... .10 .... 100.. 1 :.mg... .10 ...:. 100... .Ig .... 10 
 
2346 N f b6m ott tun mds 76w76 evx A 113.mg P<.09 - 
 
m N f b6m ott Liv hpt 76w76 evx no dta, P-1. - 
b N f b6m ott tbm mix 76w76 avx 219.mg P<.6 - 
2347 N m b6a ott Lun mds 76w76 avx .>no dte P-1. - 
 
m N m b6m ott Liv hpt 76w76 cvx no dte P-I. - 
b N m b6s ott tbm mix 76u76 cvx no dte PaI. - 
2348 N f b6c ott Lun mds 76w76 cvx .>267.mg P<.6 - 
 
m N f b6c ott Liv hpt 76w76 evx no dte P-I. - 
b N f b6c ott tbm mix 76w76 avx 251.mg P<.7 - 
2349 N m b6c ott Lun ads 76w76 cvx .>no dte P-1. - 
 
m N m b6c ott Liv hpt 76w76 evx no dte P-1. - 
b N m b6c ott tbm mix 76w76 evx no dte P-I. - 
N-N'.PROPYL-N-FORNYLHYDRAZINE boOng. .:..lug... .10 ...:. 100... 1:.lg... -10 .... 100... I:-g .... 10 
 
2350 N f awm wet Lun mix 75w79 so . 8.74mg \P<.0005. 
 
m N f awm uet Liv mix 75u79 ma, 215.mg *P<.0005. 
b N f swm wat gmL mix 75u79 mas 444.mg *P<.006 . 
c N f mum wat gmL mdc, 75u79 as 497.mg cP<.02 
 
2351 N m aum wat Lun mix 51u61 ass . 8.84mg \P<.0005. 
 
m N m mum uet pte mix 51w61 mcs 60.4mg \P<.0005. 
b N m mum uet pte sqc 51w61 msm 75.7mg \P<.002 
c N m aum uet Liv hpt 51u61 mom no dtc P.1. 
 
N-PROPYL ISONE boOng. .. . lug... .10 .... 100. 1.m:.lg.... 10 ...:. 100.... Ig9 .. ..10 
 
2352 N f b6m ott tun ads 76u76 avx .>4.69gm 
 
m N f b6m orttLiv hpt 76u76 evx no dte 
b N f b6m ott tbm mix 76u76 avx 4.39gm 
2353 N m b6m ott tun ado 76u76 avx .>no dte 
 
m N m b6m ott Liv hpt 76w76 cvx no dte 
b N a b6a ott tbm mix 76w76 cvx no dte 
2354 N f b6c ott Liv hpt 76w76 evx .> no dta 
 
m N f b6c ott tun mix 76w76 cvx no dte 
b N f b6c ott tbm tum 76w76 cvx no dte 
2355 N m b6c ott Liv hpt 76w76 cvx A 1.05gm 
 
m N m b6c ott tun ado 76w76 avx 4.65gm 
b N m b6c ott tbm mix 76w76 cvx 374.mg 
N-PROPYL-N'.NITRO.N.NITROSOGUANIDINE ..:..lug... .10 ...:. 100... .1mg.. . 10 ...:. 100... Ig1 ...:. 10 
 
2356 R m wis uet stg mdc, 34u65 atr 1.90mg 
2357 R m wim wet stg ado 52w65 at . .919mg 
 
m R m wis wet mtg mdc 52u65 at 2.85mg 
2358 R m wis uet stg mdc 52w78 at A 2.27mg 
 
m R m wis uet stg ado 52w78 at 2.27mg 
 
P<. 6- 
P-I.- 
P<. 7- 
PI. -. 
P-I.- 
P-I.- 
Pal.- 
P-I.- 
Pal.- 
P<. 02 - 
P<. 3- 
P<. 0005- 
 
P<. 04 
 
P<. 002 + 
P<. 05 . 
P<. 06 + 
P<. 06 
 
PROPYLENE GLYCOL bO0ng. .:..Iu lug . 10 ...:. 100 .. 1:.lg...:. 10 . 100 . ....g . 10 
 
2359 R f cdt cat Liv nod 24m24 a .no dte P-I. - 
2360 R m cdt sact Liv nod 24m24 a .no dte P-I. - 
PROPYLHYDRAZINE.HCL bOOng. .. . lug...:. 10 .... 100 .. 1:mg...:. 10 ...:. 100...:. Ig ...:. 10 
 
2361 N f mwm uat Lun mix 99u99 a . + . 41.4mg P<.0005. 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
b 
 
C 
 
d 
 
2338 
 
cb 
 
1112 3.70mg n.s.s. 
1112 7.07mg n.s.s. 
1112 9.60mg n.s.s. 
1112 2.16mg n.s.s. 
1112 2.68mg n.s.a. 
1112 6.27mg n.s.s. 
1112 8.12mg n.s.a. 
 
PROPAZINE (6SsailL) 139-40-2 
 
2339 1242 11.5mg n.s.s. 1/17 
 
a 1242 27.2mg n.s.s. 0/17 
b 1242 7.81mg n.s.s. 2/17 
2340 1242 10.7mg n.s.s. 1/18 
 
a 1242 11.8mg n.s.s. 2/18 
b 1242 7.80mg n.s.s. 3/18 
2341 1242 28.8mg n.s.s. 0/16 
 
a 1242 28.8mg n.s.s. 0/16 
b 1242 15.2mg n.s.s. 0/16 
2342 1242 9.75mg n.s.s. 0/16 
 
a 1242 13.3mg n.s.s. 0/16 
b 1242 4.61mg 61.9mg 0/16 
beta-PROPIOLACTONE 57-57-8 
 
2343 1011 .765mg 2.49mg 0/30 
 
a 1011 .848mg 2.77mo 0/30 
2344 1011 .660mg 2.16mg 0/30 
 
a 1011 .821mg 2.68mg 0/30 
2345 55 .374mg n.s.s. 0/5 
 
0/7 8.00mg 8/26 8.53mg 4/26 
0/7 8.00mg 2/26 8.53mg 3/26 
0/7 8.00mg 2/26 8.53mg 1/26 
0/6 8.00mg 10/26 8.53mg 11/26 
0/6 8.00mg 6/26 8.53mg 11/26 
0/6 8.00mg 3/26 8.53mg 3/26 
0/6 8.00mg 0/26 8.53mg 4/26 
 
14.6mg 
14.6mg 
 
14.6mg 
13.6mg 
 
13.6mg 
13.6mg 
14.6mg 
14.6mg 
 
14.6mg 
13.6mg 
13.6mg 
 
13.6mg 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
Brkly Code 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
2/17 
0/17 
4/17 
2/17 
2/17 
4/17 
0/18 
0/18 
1/18 
2/17 
1/17 
6/17 
 
5.71mg 24/30 
5.71mg 23/30 
4.76mg 25/30 
4.76mg 23/30 
4.08"m 3/5 
 
Van Duuren;jnci,63,1433-1439;1979 
 
Van Duuren;Jnci,37,825-838;1966 
 
PROPYL N-ETHYL-N-BUTYLTHIOCARBANATE (TiLLam-6-E) 1114-71-2 
2346 1223 27.8mg n.s.s. 0/15 44.3mg 2/15 
 
a 1223 73.1mg n.s.s. 0/15 44.3mg 0/15 
b 1223 30.5mg n.s.s. 1/15 44.3mg 2/15 
2347 1223 33.8mg n.s.s. 3/18 41.2mg 2/15 
 
a 1223 68.0mg n.s.s. 0/18 41.2mg 0/15 
b 1223 33.8mg n.s.s. 3/18 41.2mg 2/15 
2348 1223 37.1mg n.s.s. 1/18 44.3mg 2/18 
 
a 1223 87.7mg n.s.s. 0/18 44.3mg 0/18 
b 1223 31.5mg n.s.s. 2/18 44.3mg 3/18 
2349 1223 48.2mg n.s.s. 2/15 41.2mg 1/16 
 
a 1223 51.5mg n.s.s. 3/15 41.2mg 1/16 
b 1223 43.8mg n.s.s. 5/15 41.2mg 2/16 
N-N'-PROPYL.-NFORNYLHYDRAZINE 77337.54-3 
 
2350 1053 3.99mg 17.1mg 25/99 80.0mg 49/50 (160.mg 22/49) 
 
a 1053 108.mg 653.mg 0/38 80.0mg 6/45 160.mg 5/19 
b 1053 216.mg 3.77gm 0/54 80.0mg 5/50 160.mg 5/49 
c 1053 234.mg n.s.s. 0/54 80.0mg 5/50 160.mg 4/49 
2351 1053 5.21mg 16.5mg 26/100 66.7mg 42/48 (133.mg 6/37) 
 
a 1053 30.2mo 172.mg 0/33 66.7mg 11/48 (133.mg 1/37) 
b 1053 35.6mg 294.mg 0/33 66.7mg 9/48 (133.mg 1/37) 
c 1053 304.mg n.s.s. 0/28 66.7mg 2/50 133.mg 0/50 
 
N.PROPYL ISONE 83-590 
 
2352 1252 653.mg n.s.a. 
 
a 1252 1.55gm n.s.a. 
b 1252 553.mg n.s.s. 
2353 1252 720.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1252 1.53gm n.s.s. 
b 1252 797.mg n.s.a. 
2354 1252 1.64"gm n.s.a. 
 
a 1252 1.64gm n.s.a. 
b 1252 1.64gm n.s.s. 
2355 1252 361.mg n.s,s. 
 
a 1252 757.mg n.s.a. 
b 1252 172.mg 1.06gm 
 
1/17 
0/17 
2/17 
2/18 
1/18 
3/18 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
 
828.mg 
828.mg 
828.mg 
770.mg 
770.mg 
770.mg 
828.mg 
828.mg 
828.mg 
770.mg 
770.mg 
 
770.mg 
 
Innss;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
Toth;bjca,42,922-928;1980 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
2/17 
0/17 
3/17 
2/18 
0/18 
2/18 
0/18 
0/18 
0/18 
4/17 
1/17 
9/17 
 
N-PROPYL-N' -NITRO N-NITROSOGUANIDINE 13010.07-6 
2356 108Im .573mg n.s.s. 0/15 1.59m9 3/15 
2357 108In .338mg 4.24mg 0/15 2.38mg 5/10 
 
a 108In .696mg n.s.s. 0/15 2.38mg 2/10 
2358 1082 .551mg n.s.s. 0/9 1.98m 2/7 
 
a 1082 .551mg n.s.a. 0/9 1.98" 2/7 
 
PROPYLENE 6LYCOL 57-55-6 
 
2359 1351 8.74gm n.s.s. 4/28 313.mg 5/25 625.mg 2/27 1.25gm 4/28 2.50gm 2/27 
2360 1351 9.119g n.s.s. 2/26 250.mg 4/27 S00.mg 3/27 1.00gm 0/23 2.00gm 1/24 
 
PROPYLNYDRAZINE .NCL 56795-66-S 
 
2361 252 22.6mg 104.mg 21/99 50.0mg 27/43 
 
SasaJ im;zkko,94,201.206;1979 
Notsukura;gann,70, 181-185; 1979 
 
Saunt;fctx, 10,151-162; 1972 
 
NsqgL;jca,s11,473-478;1975/Toth 1974 
 
235 
 
236 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
a N f aw wat lun de 99w99 
b N f twowat tun adc 99w99 
 
c N f twe wet Liv mix 99w99 e 
2362 N * awe wet Lun ade 93w93 a 
 
a Num se wat Lun six 93w93 e 
b N . twe wet Liv Lcc 93w93 a 
c N o swa we t liv mix 93w93 a 
 
TD50 2Thilpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
42.7mg 
109.m9 
no dre 
41.3mg 
50.5mg 
102. mg 
80.8m9 
 
P<. 0005 
P<. 0005 
P-I. 
 
P<. 0005 
 
P<. 002 + 
P<. 006 - 
P<. 06 
 
PROPYLTHIOURACIL lOOng ... .lug. :10 :.100. . 10. 100... : . :10 
 
2363 N b c5l *at pit ado 73w73 *r . + . 409.mg * P<.0005+ 
2364 R lev *at thy ado 52w52 ors . + . 10.3mg P<.0005+ 
2365 R wel wat thy edo 78w78 *rv . + . 15.8mg P<.0005+ 
 
e R f wel wet thy car 78w78 erv 115.mg P<.04 + 
2366 R wel wet thy ado 78w78 *rv . . 17.2mg P<.002 . 
 
e R wae wet thy car 78w78 cry 79.3mg P<.03 + 
2367R f wis wet thy ado 6m24 rs noTD50 P<.2 - 
 
PRORESID bO0ng .. . :l1ug. :10. :100. g :..g :10. :100.... g :.10 
 
2368 R a b46 ivJ tbe mix 12m24 os .> no dre P-1. - 
 
SX PURPLE 
 
2369 R b non set liv tun 33m33 
 
a R b non eat tba mix 33m33 
 
2370 R f nss eat liv tum 64w64 o 
2371 R nsas oat liv tum 64w64 o 
 
e R a ns oat tb tum 64w64 o 
PYRAZINANIDE* 
 
2372 N f b6c set TBA NXB 18m24 s 
 
a N f b6c oat Liv NXB 18m24 s 
b N f b6c oat lun NXD 18m24 s 
2373 N a b6c oat TBA NXS 18m24 s 
 
e N m b6c *et liv NXB 18m24 s 
b N a b6c oat lun NXB 18m24 s 
2374 R f f34 oat pit NXA 18m24 
 
a R f f34 et TBA NXB 18m24 
b Rf f34 oat liv NXB 18m24 
2375 R a f34 oat TBA NXB 18m24 
 
a R a f34 oat liv NXB 18m24 
 
PYRINETHANINE* 
 
2376 N f b6c oat TBA NXB 18.24 
 
a N f b6c at Liv NXB 18m24 
b N f b6c st tun NXB S 8m24 
 
2377 N a b6c oat TBA NXB 18m24 s 
 
a N a b6c oat liv NXB 18m24 s 
b N a b6c at Lun NXB 18m24 a 
2378 R f f34 oat TBA NXB 18m24 
 
a R f f34 oat liv NXB 18m24 
2379 R a f34 oat TBA NXB 1824 
 
a R a f34 oat liv NXB 18m24 
QUERCETIN 
 
2380 N f ddy oat Lun mix 28M28 a 
 
a o f ddy oat Liv tuu 28m28 o 
2381 N a ddy eat liv mix 27n27 o 
 
a N ddy eat lun mix 27m27 o 
b N * ddy st hoeacs 27m27 o 
 
2382 R f nra oat ila mix 58w58 or 
 
a R f nra eat its odc 58w58 or 
b R f nra oat ubl mix 58w58 or 
2383 R a nra oet ila mix 58w58 or 
 
a R f nra oat ubL tcc 58w58 or 
QUERCETIN DIHYDRATE 
 
2384 ft f ci a et edr coo 77w77 
 
a R f sci eat pit ada 77w?7 
2385 R f sci oat thi ser 28.28 
 
a R f sci et adr co 2828 
b R f aci eat pit ode 28m28 
2386 Rf a sci oat tos ict 77w77 
 
a R * sci oat coc ade 77w77 
b f a aci oat *dr pho 77w77 
2387 ft a ci oat coc edc 28m28 
 
a R * aci oat coc ado 28m28 
b R a sci oat pan axe 28m28 
 
bOng .: .1.ug. :10. :100.l. :g .:10. :100. . : g :10 
 
no dre 
24. 59m 
.> no dre 
.> no dre 
 
no dro 
 
P-I. 
P<.1 
P-I1. 
P-I. 
Pal. 
 
+ 
 
100ng. . :lug. :10. :100. g :..g :10. :100.. : . :10 
 
:> 3.43gm * P<.7 
 
10.7gm * P<.5 
no dre P-1. 
:> 546.mg * P<.2 
 
5.189m * P<04 
no dro P-1. 
 
A #178.mg \ P<.03 - 
 
182.mg \ P<.4 
no dre P-1. 
,> 284.mg P<.4 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
1O0ng. . :.ug. :10. :100... g :.:10. :100.. : 9 : 10 
 
:> 315.mg * P<.8 
 
no dre P-I. 
405.mg * P<.4 
:> 419.mg * P<.9 
 
no dro P-1. 
no dro P.1. 
:> 27.8mg * P<. 5 
 
no dro P-1. 
:> no dro P-1. 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
1O0ng..:. .ug. :10. :100. : g... :10. :100 ... 10 
 
* 4.249g 
 
no dro 
15.1gm 
5.46gm 
73.4gm 
+ . 5.12mg 
 
15.4mg 
51.3mg 
<+ noTO50 
 
21.0mg 
 
P<.05 - 
P-I. _ 
P<. 09 - 
P<.2 - 
P<.4 4 
 
P<. 0005 
P<.003 
 
P<. 09 + 
P<.004 + 
P<. 06 + 
 
Ong..: ..ug. :10. :100. 1m : g :. 10. :100... g. 10 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
90.4gm P<.2 - 
226.9m P<.8 - 
461.gm P<1. - 
* 2.299m * P<.09 - 
 
7.139g * P<.08 - 
7. 13gm * P<.08 - 
.35.2gm P<.05 - 
72.39m P<.2 - 
72.39m P<.2 - 
 
QUILLAIA EXTRACT lO0ng.: .... ug.:10. :100. g :.g : 10. :100. . : g :10 
 
2388 N f tho *at lun ppa 84w84 a .> no dro P-1. 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
252 23.5mg 103..g 18/99 
252 51.8mg 367.mg 4/99 
252 18.7mg n.s.s. 2/43 
252 21.8mg 116.mg 15/99 
252 23.9mg 281.mg 23/99 
252 25.0mg 2.029m 0/56 
252 20.3mg n.s.s. 4/56 
 
PROPYLTHIOURACIL 51-52-5 
2363 257 266.g 663.mg 
2364 254 5.69m9 21.5mg 
 
2365 256 8.77mg 34.7mg 
 
a 256 39.8mg n.s.s. 
2366 256 7.77mg 73.3mg 
 
a 256 23.9mg n.s.s. 
2367 1273 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
 
0/28 
0/68 
1/20 
0/20 
2/20 
0/20 
3/8 
 
PRORESID 1508-45-8 
 
2368 1017 2.58mg n.s.s. 7/65 
 
SX PURPLE (ponc.au 4R) 2611-82.7 
2369 1429 15.09m n.s.s. 0/50 
 
a 1429 6.029m n.s.s. 0/50 
2370 1372 819.mg n.s.s. 0/7 
2371 1372 562.mg n.s.s. 0/5 
 
a 1372 562.mg n.s.s. 0/5 
 
PYRAZINAMIDE* 98-96-4 
 
2372 c01785 575.mg n.s.s. 
 
a c01785 1.759m n.s.a. 
b c01785 2.629m n.s.s. 
2373 c01785 105.mg n.s.s. 
 
a c01785 956.mg n.s.s. 
b c01785 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
2374 c01785 78.9mg n.s.s. 
 
a c01785 50.4mg n.s.s. 
b c01785 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
2375 c01785 79.4mg n.s.s. 
 
a c01785 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
 
1/15 
 
0/15 
 
1/15 
2/15 
1/15 
0/15 
2/15 
11/15 
0/15 
4/15 
0/15 
 
PYRINETHANINE* (Daraprin) 58-14-0 
2376 c01683 44.2mg n.s.s. 1/15 
 
a c01683 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/15 
b c01683 99.6mg n.s.s. 0/15 
2377 c01683 30.1mg n.s.s. 0/15 
 
a c01683 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/15 
b c01683 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/15 
2378 c01683 7.01mg n.s.s. 7/15 
 
a c01683 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/15 
2379 c01683 14.9mg n.s.s. 8/15 
 
a c01683 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/15 
 
QUERCETIN 117-39-5 
 
2380 1146 1.82gm n.s.s. 
 
a 1146 23.59m n.s.s. 
2381 1146 5.20gm n.s.s. 
 
a 1146 1.87gm n.s.s. 
b 1146 12.09m n.s.s. 
2382 1392 2.31mg 12.3mg 
 
a 1392 6.79mg 76.3mg 
b 1392 15.5mg n.s.s. 
2383 1392 n.s.s. 9.97mg 
 
a 1392 5.06mg n.s.a. 
 
4/15 
0/15 
0/14 
6/16 
0/16 
0/9 
0/9 
0/9 
0/8 
0/8 
 
QUERCETIN DIHYDRATE 5117-01-1 
 
2384 1145. 462.mg n.s.s. 0/22 
 
a 1145m 462.mg n.s.s. 0/22 
2385 1145n 14.7gm n.s.s. 0/33 
 
a 1145n 16.0gm n.s.s. 1/33 
b 1145n 13.29m n.s.s. 3/33 
2386 1145m 593.mg n.s.s. 3/30 
 
a 1145m 1.169m n.s.s. 0/30 
b 1145. 1.169m n.s.s. 0/30 
2387 1145n 8.65gm n.s.s. 0/33 
 
a 1145n 11.8gm n.s.s. 0/33 
b 1145n 11.8gm n.s.s. 0/33 
 
1. 25gm 
40.0mg 
42.9mg 
42.9mg 
37.5mg 
37.5mg 
7.50mg 
 
15/24 1.509m 21/29 
16/33 
20/30 
 
4/30 
11/18 
3/18 
5/5 
 
.714mg 1/24 
 
771 .mg 
771.g9 
1.509g 
 
1. 20m 
1. 209m 
 
348.mg 
348.mg 
348.mg 
322.mg 
322.mg 
322. mg 
134.mg 
134.mg 
134.mg 
107. mg 
107.mg 
 
34.7mg 
34.7mg 
34.7mg 
32. 0mg 
32. 0g 
32 .0g 
5.30mg 
5.30mg 
4.20mg 
4.20mg 
 
2.609m 
2.60gm 
 
2.40gm 
2.40gm 
 
2.409m 
50. 0mg 
 
50.0g 
50.0m9 
40 .0mg 
 
40.0mg 
 
500.mg 
500m.g 
5.009g 
 
5.00gm 
5.00g0 
400.mg 
400.m9 
400.mg 
 
4.00gm 
4.00gm 
4.00g0 
 
King;ps.b, 112,365-366; 1963 
Lindsay;arpa,81 ,308-316; 1966 
 
WiLl lis; jpat,82,23-27;1961 
 
StoL l ;bdca,50,389-398; 1963 
 
Schsahi ;arzn,20, 1461-1467;1970 
 
0/50 
2/50 
0/7 
0/6 
0/6 
 
5/35 697.mg 
0/35 697.mg 
0/35 697.mg 
5/35 726.mg 
0/35 726.mg 
0/35 726.mg 
14/35 (268.mg 
26/35 (268.mg 
0/35 268.mg 
17/35 (214.mg 
0/35 214.ng 
 
5/35 69.5mg 
0/35 69.5mg 
0/35 69.5mg 
1/35 64.2mg 
0/35 64.2mg 
0/35 64.2mg 
16/35 10.7mg 
0/35 10.7mg 
17/35 8.60mg 
0/35 8.60mg 
 
Andrianova;vpit,29,61 -65; 1970 
 
Al Lmark; jphp,9,622-628; 1957 
 
9/35 
1/35 
1/35 
6/35 
3/35 
0/35 
7/34) 
19/34) 
0/34 
8/36) 
0/36 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Iun:a/a,a/c. 
 
pit:cra,crc. S 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
9/35 
0/35 
2/35 
1/35 
0/35 
0/35 
26/35 
 
0/35 
11/35 
0/35 
 
18/31 
0/33 
4/32 
21/37 
 
1/37 
14/16 
8/16 
3/16 
6/6 
2/6 
 
0/10 2.509m 
0/10 2.50gm 
1/20 
1/20 
2/20 
 
1/10 2.009g 
 
0/10 2.009m 
0/10 2.00gm 
2/20 
1/20 
1/20 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun: a/a,a/c. 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Saito;tca, 1,213-221; 1980 
 
Pamukcu;canr,40,3468-3472; 1980 
 
Hirono;clt, 13,15-21; 1981 
 
0/9 
0/9 
 
3/8 
1/8 
1/8 
 
QUILLAIA EXTRACT (spray-dried aqueous extract of quillais bark) --- 
 
2388 1404 5.84gm n.s.s. 9/44 130.mg 5/43 650.mg 4/43 1.95gm 5/46 
 
Phi t lips;fctx, 17,23-27;1979 
 
a 
 
b 
 
c 
 
2362 
 
ba 
 
b 
 
c 
 
50. 0mg 
50. 0mg 
50.0m9 
41.7mg 
41.7mg 
41.7mg 
41.7mg 
 
26/43 
12/43 
0/2 
22/43 
22/43 
 
2/10 
3/10 
 
237 
 
Brkly Code 
 
238 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
* N f the eat Liv hnd 84w84 e 
2389 N m the eat Lun ppa 84w84 e 
 
a N * the eat Liv *hp 84w84 e 
b N m the eat Liv hnd 84w84 e 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
no dre P-1. - 
A 4.09g. * P<. 03 - 
 
no dre P.1. - 
no dre P-I. - 
 
p-QUINONE DIOXINE boOng. .:..lug... .10 ...:. 100... .leg... -10 .... 100...I:-g .:10 
 
2390 N f b6c eat TBA NXB 24.24 :>6.71g. * PdI. - 
 
a N f b6c sat Liv NXB 24.24 656.mg * P<.02 
b N f b6c eat Lun NXB 24.24 6.66gm * P<.8 
 
2391 N * b6c eat TBA NXB 24.24 :>936..g * P<.6 - 
 
a N m b6c eet Liv NXB 24.24 1230.ga PdI. 
b N m b6c eat Lun NXB 24.24 no dre P-I. 
 
2392 R f f34 eet ubL NXA 24.24 + .106.mg * P<.003 c 
 
a R f f34 eat ubL tcc 24.24 182..g * P<.02 c 
b R f 1 34 eat TBA NXB 24.24 no dre P-I. 
c R f f34 eat Liv NXB 24.24 no dre P-I. 
 
2393 R m 134 eat TBA NXB 24.24 :>349.mg * P<.9 - 
 
a R m 134 eat Liv NXB 24.24 1.13g. * P<.4 
C.I. FOOD RED 3 lOOng..:. .lug... .10 ...:. 100... .leg... .10.....100... g :. 10 
 
2394 N f sap eat Lun ppe 80w80 e . 32.9g. * P.c.9 - 
 
a N f casp eat Liv tue 80w80 e no die P-I. - 
2395 N casp eet Lun ppe 80w80 e . 12.3gm * P<.7 - 
 
a N aspesat Liv nod80Ow80e no dre P-I. - 
b N m cap eat Liv ade 80w80 e no dre P-I. - 
D a C RED NO. 5 iOOng..:..iug... .10 ...:. 100... lu.Ig... .10 .... 100.... g. .10 
 
2396 N f ddy eet Liv hpc 81w81 erv + . 784..g Z P<.0005+ 
 
a N f ddy eat Liv hpe 81w81 erv 21.5g. * P<.2 + 
2397 N e ddy eat Liv hpc 81w81 erv . + . 659.mg Z P<.0005+ 
 
a N m ddy eat Liv hpa 81w81 wrv 8.79g. * P<.06 + 
2398 R f cfe eat Liv nod 24e24 e + . 704.mg * P<.0005 
2399 R e cfe eat Liv nod 24e24 e . 2.91ge * P<.02 
 
2400 R e wis eat Liv Lce 65w65 es A 1.13ge * P<.06 . 
D a C RED NO. 9 boOng..: .. lug...:. 10 .... 100...:. leg...:. 10 ...:. 100 ... g ..10 
 
2401 R f ose eet pit ade 25e25 e . no dre P-I. - 
2402 R m ose eet tee ice 25e25 e . 28.6g. * P<.8 - 
 
a Reooeeeeat .. bsa25e25e no die P-I. - 
D a C RED NO. 10 iOOng..:..lug...:. 10 ...:. 100...:. leg...:. 10 ...:. 100...:. Ig .. ..10 
 
2403 R f ose eet pit ede 24.24 e . 3.56ge * P<.5 - 
 
a R f ose eet Liv ade 24e24 e no dre P-I. - 
2404 R m ose eat Liv hpe 24e24e . no dre P-I. - 
FD a C RED NO. I lOOng. .. . lug...:. 10 .... 100 .. ..leg ..10 .... 100...:. Ig ...:. 10 
 
2405 R b bbL eat Liv mix 24e24 + . 746.eg P<.0005 
 
a R b bbL eet Liv car 24e24 2.48g. P<.0005. 
b R b bbL eat Liv nod 24e24 3.04gm P<.003 
 
c R b bbL eat Liv bht 24.24 3.54ge P<.002 + 
2406 R f nes eat biL ade 65w65 r. + .1.57g. * P<.002 
 
a R f nec eat Liv car 65w65 r 1.99g. * P<.003 + 
2407 R e nsa eet biL ede 65w65 r .+ . 755.eg * P<.0005 
 
e R e nas eat Liv cer 65w65 r 1.24g. * P.c.0005+ 
2408 R b ose eat Liv nod 24e24 + .639.mg Z P<.0005 
 
a R b ose eat Liv bht 24.24 909..g Z P<.0005+ 
b R b os. eet Liv ccr 24.24 7.54gm * P<.0005. 
c R b ose eat tba meL 24e24 12.9g. * P<.2 
 
2409 R b wis eat Liv tue 65w65 ekr + .225..g P<.0005+ 
2410 R b wis eat Liv tue 65w65 ekr + . 394.mg P<.006 + 
2411 R b wis eat Liv tue 70w70 er . 314.mg P<.0005+ 
2412 R b wis eat Liv tue 70w70 eor + .420.mg P<.0005. 
FD a C RED NO. 2 bOOng..:..iug... .10 ...:. 100... .leg... .10 .... 100... .Ig .. ..10 
 
2413 R b .gr eat Liv tue 25e25 a . no die P-I. 
 
a R beagreat taelmx 25e25e9 632.eg P<.0005. 
2414 R b non eat Liv hpt 33.33 .49.5g. P<.3 
 
a R b non eat tba mix 33e33 3.32g. Pez.0005+ 
2415 R f nes eat Liv tue 64w64 a . no dre P-I. - 
 
a R fnassat tbamix 64w64e l .64ge P<.6 - 
2416 Reo nac eat Liv tue 64w64 a . no dre P-I. - 
 
a Remnsssat tbaemix64w64eo no dre P-I. - 
2417 R b wis eat cbd mLy 91w91 eor 6.13ge P<.04 . 
 
FD a C RED NO. 3 IOOng..:..lug... .10 ...:. 100. le :.jg .: 10 ...:. 100... g ..10 
 
2418 R b oa. gay --- Lye 20.24 a + .122.mg ZP<.004 - 
 
a R b osegcv Livtue 20e24e no dre P-I. - 
b R b ose gay tba eeL 20.24 a no dre P-I. - 
2419 R b ose eat Liv hpt 20e24 e 84.9ge * P<.4 - 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
a 1404 12.19m n.s.s. 1/44 130.mg 2/43 650.mg 
2389 1404 1.64gm n.s.s. 7/45 120.mg 3/42 600.mg 
 
a 1404 8.589m n.s.s. 5/45 120.mg 1/42 600.mg 
b 1404 3.93gm n.s.s. 8/45 120.mg 4/42 600.mg 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
1/43 1.95g. 0/46 
7/41 1.80g. 12/43 
2/41 1.80gO 1/43 
3/41 1.809m 6/43 
 
p-QUINONE DIOXINE 105-11-3 
 
2390 c03850 252.mg n.s.s. 7/20 
 
a c03850 329.mg n.s.s. 0/20 
b c03850 664..g n.s.s. 1/20 
2391 c03850 178.mg n.s.s. 5/18 
 
a c03850 398.mg n.s.s. 5/18 
b c03850 466.mg n.s.s. 2/18 
2392 c03850 57.2mg 514.mg 0/20 
 
a c03850 82.6mg n.s.s. 0/20 
b c03850 39.7mg n.s.s. 14/20 
c c03850 204.mg n.s.s. 0/20 
2393 c03850 31.3mg n.s.s. 11/20 
 
a c03850 184.mg n.s.s. 0/20 
 
96.6mg 14/50 193.mg 
96.6m9 3/50 193.mg 
96.6mg 2/50 193.mg 
 
89.2m9 20/50 178-mg 
89.2mg 6/50 178.mg 
89.2g9 7/50 178.mg 
18.6m9 3/49 37.1mo 
18.6mg 1/49 37-1mg 
 
18.6mg 30/49 37.1mg 
18.6mg 2/49 37.1mg 
14.9mg 21/50 29.7mg 
14.9mg 0/50 29.7mg 
 
17/50 
8/50 
3/50 
22/50 
12/50 
6/50 
11/50 
7/50 
28/50 
 
0/50 
24/50 
 
1/50 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
tun:a/a,a/c. 
ubl :sqc,tcc,tpp. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
C.I. FOOD RED 3 (cormoisine) 3567-69-9 
 
2394 1325 1.65gm n.s.s. 4/55 13.0mg 
 
a 1325 29.9mg n.s.s. 0/55 13.0mg 
 
2395 1325 1.33gm n.s.s. 13/48 12.0mg 
 
a 1325 3.17gm n.s.s. 6/48 12.0Omg 
b 1325 30.4mg n.s.s. 1/48 12.0mg 
 
D & C RED NO. 5 (poncsau NX) 3761-53-3 
 
2396 244 365.mg 2.43gm 0/34 260.mg 
 
a 244 4.19gm n.s.s. 1/34 260.-g 
2397 244 218.mg 3.459m 0/31 240.mg 
 
a 244 2.47gm n.s.s. 1/31 240.mg 
2398 242 414.mg 1.34gm 0/30 62.5mg 
2399 242 1.109m n.s.s. 0/30 50.0mg 
2400 243 368.mg n.s.s. 0/12 80.0m9 
 
2/23 65.0 m 
 
0/23 65.0 mg 
5/26 60.0mg 
1/26 60.0mg 
0/26 60.0mg 
 
4/27 1. 279m 
2/27 1. 279m 
0/8 1. 18" 
1/8 1. 18g 
 
1/30 125.mg 
0/30 100.mg 
 
4/15 400.mg 
 
D & C RED NO. 9 (brilliant red) 5160.02-1 
 
2401 262 998.mg n.s.s. 4/25 5.00mg 1/25 25.0mg 
2402 262. 1.659m n.s.s. 0/25 4.00mg 2/25 20.0mg 
 
a 262. 1.68gm n.s.s. 0/25 4.00mg 1/25 20.0mg 
 
D & C RED NO. 10 --- 
 
2403 263 666.mg n.s.s. 2/25 5.00mg 5/25 25.Omg 
 
a 263 21.0mg n.s.s. 0/25 5.00mg 0/25 25.0omg 
2404 263 2.70gm n.s.s. 1/25 4.00m9 1/25 20.0mg 
FD & C RED NO. I (ponceou 3R) 3564-09-8 
 
2405 246 460.mg 1.36gm 2/50 900.mg 29/50 
 
a 246 1.249m 6.19gm 0/50 900.mg 11/50 
b 246 1.409m 17.3gm 1/50 900.mg 10/50 
c 246 1.609m 12.0gm 0/50 900.mg 8/50 
 
2406 245 596.mg 8.32gm 0/45 150.mg 0/15 500.mg 
 
a 245 684.mg 13.2gm 0/45 150.mg 0/15 500.mg 
2407 245 340.mg 2.92gm 0/45 120.mg 1/15 400.mg 
 
a 245 468.mg 5.35go 0/45 120.mg 0/15 400.mg 
2408 246 411.mg 1.08g 0/49 225.mg 12/50 450.mg 
 
a 246 616.mg 1.699m 1/49 225.mg 12/50 450.mg 
b 246 4.21gm 19.9gm 0/49 225.mg 1/50 450.mg 
c 246 4.09gm n.s.s. 10/49 225.mg 8/50 450.mg 
2409 247m 88.2mg 785.mg 0/6 1.35gm 8/10 
2410 247n 153.mg 4.09gm 0/6 1.35gm 6/10 
2411 247o 158.mg 711.mg 0/23 1.35gm 14/19 
2412 247r 208.mg 1.00gm 0/24 1.35gm 12/19 
 
4/26 325.mg 
0/26 325.mg 
7/26 300.mg 
0/26 300.mg 
0/26 300.mg 
 
5/11 (6.22gm 
0/11 6.22gm 
4/6 (5.749m 
1/6 5.74gm 
 
0/29 250.mg 
1/29 200.mg 
4/12 2.009m 
 
4/27 1.63gm 2/19 
0/27 1.63gm 0/19 
4/24 1.50gm 8/28 
0/24 1.50gm 2/28 
0/24 1.50gm 0/28 
 
5/12) 
2/12 
6/12) 
3/12 
 
5/28 500.mg 14/25 
1/30 400.mg 3/29 
6/14 
 
9/25 125.mg 6/25 500.mg 4/25 
0/25 100.mg 0/25 400.mg 1/25 
1/25 100.mg 2/25 400.mg 0/25 
 
9/25 125.mg 3/25 500.mg 7/25 
0/25 125.mg 0/25 500.mg 0/25 
0/25 100.mg 0/25 400.mg 0/25 
 
Nason;fctx, 12,601-607; 1974 
 
lkeda;fctx,6,591 -598; 1968 
 
Gresso;fctx,7,425-442;1969 
 
Ik.da;fctx,4,485-492; 1966 
Davis;txap,4,200-205;1962 
Davis;txap,5,728-734;1963 
 
Hans.n;txap,5, 105-118;1963 
 
2/15 1.509m 
1/15 1.509m 
3/15 1.209m 
1/15 1.209m 
18/50 (900.mg 
17/50 900.mg 
2/50 900.mg 
7/50 900.mg 
 
3/15 
3/15 
4/15 
4/15 
 
9/50 2.25gm 4/49) 
22/50 (2.259m 25/49) 
 
4/50 2.259m 9/49 
7/50 2.259m 14/49 
 
Grico;txap,3,509-520;1961 
Hansan;txap,5, 105-118; 1963 
Mannel l;fctx,2, 169-174;1964 
 
FD & C RED NO. 2 (amaranth) 915-67-3 
 
2413 1427 3.03gm n.s.s. 0/35 758.mg 
 
a 1427 295.mg 1.879m 2/35 758.mg 
2414 1429 8.06gm n.s.s. 0/50 771.mg 
 
a 1429 1.75gm 7.50go 0/50 771.mg 
2415 1358 14.4mg n.s.s. 0/10 15.0mg 
 
a 1358 192.mg n.s.s. 2/10 15.0mg 
2416 1358 8.41mg n.s.s. 0/11 12.0mg 
 
a 1358 8.41mg n.s.s. 1/11 12.0mg 
2417 1136 993.mg n.s.s. 0/50 1.80gm 
 
0/18 
11/18 
 
1/50 
13/50 
 
0/14 150.mg 
1/14 150.mg 
0/10 120.mg 
 
0/10 120.mo 
1/7 
 
Baigush.va;vpit,27,46-50;1968 
Andrionova;vpit,29,61-65; 1970 
 
0/13 750-.m 
4/13 750.mg 
0/11 600.mg 
0/11 600.mg 
 
ManneL l; Jphp, 10,625-634;1958 
 
0/9 
2/9 
0/9 
0/9 
 
Wi lheim;gaga,23, 1-19;1953 
 
FD & C RED NO. 3 (srythrosine) 16423-68-0 
2418 130m 49.8m 759.mg 0/49 23.3ms 
 
a 130m 141.mo n.s.s. 0/49 23.3mg 
b 130m 1.36gm n.s.s. 5/49 23.3mg 
 
2419 130n 13.89m n.s.s. 0/89 185.mg 
 
6/49 (54.7mg 
0/49 54.7mg 
 
12/49 54.7mg 
0/48 371.mg 
 
3/47 175.mg 
 
0/47 175.mg 
6/47 175.mg 
0/41 742.mg 
 
2/46 349.mg 1/43) 
0/46 349.mg 0/43 
9/46 349.mg 4/43 
1/45 1.48om 0/45 
 
Hansen;fctx, 11,535-545;1973 
 
239 
 
Brkly Code 
 
240 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
a R b osm sat tba maL 20.24 a 
2420 R f osm sat Liv tur 24.24 
 
* R f osm eat tba mix 24.24 
2421 R f osm oat Liv tum 24m24 
 
a R m osm sat tba mix 24m24 
 
FD & C RED NO. 4 
 
2422 D f beg oat adr mdi 85m85 a 
 
a D f b6g *at mgl adc 85s85 o 
b D f beg *at liv noa 85.85 o 
c D f bo eattb aix SS5i 5 
 
2423 N b chi eat liv hpt 24a24 a 
 
a N b cho aat tba mix 24m24 a 
2424 N b chJ *at Liv hpt 24m24 a 
 
a N b chj oat tbe mix 2424 o 
2425 ft b non oat Liv hpt 33.3 
 
a A b neat to mix 333 
 
2426 t b 6mb at liv ao 24o24 a 
 
a ft b osa oat tba six 24m24 a 
2427 ft b osm oat --- fbs 24.24 a 
 
a R b o a ttb mix 2424 . 
242$ ft b Adoeat tba mix 24o24 a 
 
2429 ft b via oat abd oLy 91w91 or 
 
RESERPINE 
 
2430 N f b6c oat mgl --- 24m24 
 
a N f b6c oat TBA NXB 24i24 
b N f b6c oat liv NXB 24m24 
c N f b6e oat lun NXB 24m24 
2431 N m b6c oat sev ulc 24m24 
 
a N n b6c oat TSA NXB 24m24 
b N m b6c oat liv NXB 24m24 
c N m b6c oat Lun NXB 24m24 
2432 N f c3h oat agl car 24m24 
2433 R f f34 oat TSA NXB 24m24 
 
a ft f f34 oat liv NXB 24.24 
2434 ft m f34 eat adr NXA 24m24 
 
a R m f34 oat TBA NXB 24a24 
b R m f34 oat Liv NXB 24m24 
 
2435 ft f wis oat pit mix 75w75 a 
 
a k f wis oat mgL fba 75w75 o 
2436 t a wis oat pit ado 75w75 o 
 
RtIFANPICIN 
 
2437 N f baL wit lun tun 14m26 a 
 
a N f baL wit Liv hpt 14m26 o 
b N f baL wit tba mix 14m26 a 
 
2438 N m baL wat lun tum 14m26 es 
 
a N m baL wit Liv hpt 14m26 es 
b N m bat wit tba mix 14m26 as 
2439 N f c3d wit Liv hpt 14m25 o 
 
a N f c3d wat Lun tum 1425 o 
b A f c3d wt tbm ix 1425 o 
2440 N a c3d wit Lun tum 14m25 o 
 
a N n c3d wit Liv hpt 14m25 a 
b N a cSd wet tbe mix 1425 o 
2441 ft f vie wt Liv hpt 24m32 a 
 
a R f wis wit tba mix 24m32 a 
2442 ft a wit wit Liv hpt 24m32 o 
 
a R wt w1tetb t mix 2432 o 
ROSANILINE.NCL 
 
2443 H f syg gav liv tue 68w68 a 
 
a N f syg gv lun tum 6w68 c 
b H f syg gav tb mix 6w68 o 
2444 H a syg gav lun b/a 84w84 a 
 
a N a syg v Liv tum 4w84 o 
b H a sye gav tba mix 84w84 a 
 
p-NOSANILIAft.NCl 
 
2445 N f aty Civ liv tu6 64w84 a 
 
a N f cyg gov tun tun 84w84 a 
b N f syg gav tba six 84w84 a 
2446 N a cyg gay liv tua 84w84 a 
 
a N A syg gav Luh tum 84w$4 a 
b N a seygg v tb t6 84w 4o 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
TD50 21bilpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
14. 1g * P<.5 - 
no dre P- 1. 
 
no dre P-1. - 
no dre P-1. 
 
4.81gm * P<.2 - 
 
100ng..:. . ug.. : 10. :100.. :._mg . . :10. :100.. : Ig . :10 
 
316.mg P<.2 
 
316.mg P<.2 - 
no dre P-1. 
670.mg P<.9 
 
.>57.lgm * P<.7 - 
 
20.3gm * P<.3 - 
.>no dre P.1. 
 
no dre PI.. 
.49.5gm P<.3 
 
12.09m P<.02 + 
.59.8gm * P<.2 - 
no dre Pl.. 
 
20.39m * P<.006 - 
no dre P-1. 
.> no dre P-1. 
 
* 6.13gm P<.04 + 
 
bO0ng .. : lug.. : 10. :100.. :.l1g.. :.10 .... :100.. :I1g . :10 
 
+ : 3.58mg * P<.002 c 
 
6.42mg * P<.5 
no dre P-1. 
54.5mg * P<.9 
 
: + : 8.39mg * P<.01 c 
 
no dre P-1. 
5.46mg \ P<.6 
no dre P-1. 
 
34.2ug P<.6 + 
:> ..727mg * P<.3 - 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
+ : .306mg * P<.0005c 
 
no dro P-l. 
6.77mg * P<.4 
 
no dro P.1. - 
no dro P.1. - 
38.3mg * P<.8 - 
 
lOOng.. :. .ug.. : 10. :100.. :.1.g.. : 10. :100.. : Ig . :10 
 
1.01gm * P<.8 - 
3.18gm * P<.6 - 
no dre P-1. - 
320.mg * P<.3 - 
3.00gm * P<.6 - 
509.mg * P<.6 - 
.*+ . 33.6mg * P<.0005+ 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
39.3mg * P<.0005 
 
356.mg * P<. 2 - 
1.059m * P<.9 - 
474.mg * P<.9 - 
* 436.mg * P<.09 - 
 
no dre P-1. - 
no dre P-1. - 
1.389g * P<1. - 
 
boong .. : lug. : 10. :100. g : . . . :10 : 100.. : . :10 
 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
2.02gm 
no dre 
no dre 
 
1OOng..:. .ug. :10. :100.... :1g 10. :100. :19 : 10 
 
no dre 
no dre 
no dro 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
 
P-I. 
P-I. 
P-1. 
P<. 3 
P-I. 
P-I. 
 
Pal. 
Pal. 
Pal. 
P-I. 
P-I. 
P-I. 
 
ftOtINONE lOOng.. :. .ug. :10. :100.. :.g.. :10 : . 100 ... 10 
 
2447 N f b6a orl lun ado 76w76 ovx .> 2.65mg P<.6 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
a 130n 3.08gm n.s.s. 20/89 
2420 1371 334.mg n.s.s. 0/12 
 
a 1371 7.16gm n.s.s. 5/12 
2421 1371 267.mg n.s.s. 0/12 
 
a 1371 1.429m n.s.s. 2/12 
 
185 .mg 
250 mg 
250.mg 
200.mg 
200.mg 
 
6/48 
0/12 
4/12 
0/12 
0/12 
 
371.mg 8/41 742.mg 
500.mg 0/12 1.009g 
 
500.mg 1/12 1.00gm 
400.mg 0/12 800.mg 
400.mg 2/12 800.mg 
 
9/45 1. 489m 
0/12 2.509m 
2/12 2.50gm 
0/12 2.00g. 
5/12 2.00gm 
 
12/45 
0/12 
0/12 
0/12 
3/12 
 
Hansen;fctx,11,527-534;1973 
 
FD & C RED NO. 4 (poncaau SX) 4548-53-2 
 
2422 248. 51.0m9 n.s.s. 0/9 250.mg 
 
a 248. 51.0mg n.s.s. 0/9 250.mg 
b 248. 106.mg n.s.s. 1/9 250.mg 
c 248. 39.1mg n.s.s. 3/9 250.mg 
2423 248. 7.69gm n.s.s. 12/91 1.25gm 
 
a 248. 5.60gm n.s.s. 13/91 1.25gm 
 
2424 248. 6.80gm n.s.s. 0/66 1.25gm 
 
a 248. 6.809m n.s.s. 5/66 1.25gm 
 
2425 1429 8.06gm n.s.s. 0/50 771.m9 
 
a 1429 4.14gm n.s.s. 0/50 771.mg 
2426 248. 9.74gm n.s.s. 0/16 225.mg 
 
a 248. 5.14gm n.s.s. 7/16 225.mg 
2427 248n 7.00gm 239.gm 0/171 450.mg 
 
a 248n 3.48g n.s.s. 67/171 450.mg 
2428 248. 4.95gm n.s.s. 38/147 450.mg 
2429 1136 993.mg n.s.s. 0/50 1.80gm 
 
RESERPINE 50*55-5 
 
2430 c50157 1.92m9 12.2mg 
 
a c50157 1.44mg n.s.s. 
b c50157 10.1mg n.s.s. 
c c50157 4.03mg n.s.s. 
2431 c50157 3.42mg 947.mg 
 
a c50157 1.78mg n.s.s. 
b c50157 .868mg n.s.s. 
c c50157 3.89mg n.s.s. 
2432 1187 5.54ug n.s.s. 
2433 c50157 .216mg n.sa.s. 
 
a c50157 6.05mg n.s.s. 
2434 c50157 .181mg 1.01mg 
 
a c50157 .367mg n.s.s. 
b c50157 1.64mg n.s.s. 
2435 1008 5.14mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1008 7.52mg n.a.s. 
2436 1008 2.81mg n.s.s. 
RIFANPICIN 13292-46-1 
 
2437 400 115.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 400 518.mg n.s.s. 
b 400 84.1mg n.s.s. 
2438 400 88.4mg n.s.a. 
 
a 400 489.mg n.s.s. 
b 400 88.5mg n.s.s. 
2439 400 21.6mg 63.7mg 
 
a 400 244.mg n.s.s. 
b 400 21.0m9 148.mg 
 
2440 400 114.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 400 59.8mg n.s.s. 
b 400 38.5mg n.s.s. 
2441 400 107.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 400 22.0m9 n.s.s. 
2442 400 130.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 400 26.2mg n.s.s. 
 
0/50 
21/50 
 
2/50 
4/50 
0/50 
30/50 
12/50 
9/50 
12/22 
42/50 
 
1/50 
3/50 
43/50 
0/50 
1/22 
1/22 
1/22 
 
13/37 
0/37 
26/37 
 
6/42 
0/42 
11/42 
8/40 
3/40 
18/40 
3/30 
18/30 
20/30 
 
0/20 
17/20 
 
1/19 
12/19 
 
.650mg 
.650mg 
.650mg 
.650mg 
.600mg 
.600mg 
.600mg 
.600mg 
9.60ug 
.250mg 
.250mg 
.200mg 
.200mg 
.200mg 
 
1.50m9 
1.50m9 
1. 20mg 
 
10.7m9 
10.7mg 
10.7mg 
 
8.93mg 
8.93mg 
8.93mg 
I 1.3mg 
I 1.3mg 
11.3mg 
9.43mg 
9.43mg 
9.43mg 
12.9mg 
12.9mg 
11.3mg 
11.3mg 
 
1/5 
1/5 
0/5 
2/5 
6/47 
8/47 
0/50 
0/50 
1/50 
4/50 
0/19 
10/19 
0/89 
23/89 
16/83 
 
1/7 
 
Davis;txap,8,306-317; 1966 
 
2.50gm 9/56 
2. 50g 12/56 
2.50gm 0/28 
2.50gm 0/28 
 
Andrianova;vpit,29,61-65; 1970 
 
450.mg 0/23 900.mg 0/22 2.259m 1/24 
450.mg 8/23 900.mg 10/22 2.259m 5/24 
900.mg 4/89 
900.mg 32/89 
900.mg 14/74 
 
7/50 1.30mg 7/50 
19/50 1.30mg 23/50 
0/50 1.30mg 1/50 
4/50 1.30mg 4/50 
1/50 1.20mg 5/50 
34/50 1.20mg 25/50 
14/50 (1.20mg 4/50) 
9/50 1.20mg 6/50 
15/24 
 
45/50 .500mg 45/50 
 
0/50 .500mg 0/50 
18/50 .400mg 24/50 
42/50 .400mg 42/50 
 
1/50 .4000g 1/50 
1/18 3.0009 1/24 
1/18 3.00m9 0/24 
1/18 2.40mg 1/15 
 
10/36 32.1mg 10/37 64.3mg 14/38 
0/36 32.1mg 1/37 64.3mg 0/38 
30/36 32.1mg 25/37 64.3mg 25/38 
9/41 26.8mg 14/42 53.6mg 10/43 
0/41 26.8mg 1/42 53.6mg 0/43 
13/41 26.8m9 15/42 53.6mg 14/43 
16/40 34.0mg 27/44 67.9mg 29/36 
6/40 34.0mg 2/44 67.9mg 4/36 
27/40 34.0mg 30/44 67.9mg 31/36 
 
5/40 28.3mg 3/40 56.6mg 9/40 
20/40 28.3mg 21/40 56.6mg 23/40 
30/40 28.3mg 29/40 56.6mg 29/40 
 
0/20 25.8"m 2/19 
19/20 25.8m 14/19 
 
1/21 22.6mg 1/22 
12/21 22.6mg 14/22 
 
Davis;txap,8,306-317; 1966 
Vi l Lheim;gaga,23, 1-19;1953 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
tun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
tun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Lacassagn.;adsc,810-812; 1959 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
adrs:pha,phm. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Tatematsu;txtt, 1,201-205; 1978 
 
Della Porta;txap,43,293-302;1978 
 
ROSANILINE.HCL (magenta I) 632-99-5 
 
2443 1151 403.mg n.s.s. 0/40 114.mg 
 
a 1151 403.mg n.s.s. 0/40 114.mg 
b 1151 248.mg n.s.s. 5/40 114.mg 
2444 1151 329.mg n.s.s. 0/40 114.mg 
 
a 1151 615.mg n.s.s. 0/40 114.mg 
b 1151 331.mg n.s.s. 3/40 114.mg 
p-ROSANILINE.HCI (p-magenta) 569-61-9 
 
2445 1151 461.mg n.s.s. 0/40 85.7mg 
 
a 1151 461.mg n.s.s. 0/40 85.7mg 
b 1151 187.mg n.s.s. 5/40 85.7mg 
 
2446 1151 461.mg n.s.s. 0/40 85.7mg 
 
a 1151 461.mg n.s.s. 0/40 85.7mg 
b 1151 331.mg n.s.s. 3/40 85.7mg 
 
0/40 
0/40 
2/40 
1/40 
0/40 
2/40 
 
0/40 
0/40 
4/40 
0/40 
0/40 
1/40 
 
ROTENONE (tubatoxin) 83-79-4 
 
2447 1253 .348mo n.s.s. 1/17 .414mo 2/18 
 
6raen;zkko,95,51 -55; 1979 
 
Breen;zkko,95,51 -55; 1979 
 
Inns;ntls, 1968/1969 
 
241 
 
Brkly Code 
 
242 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
a N f b6a ort Liv hpt 76w76 *vx 
b N f b6a orL tba mix 76w76 *vx 
2448 N * b6a orL liv hpt 76w76 *vx 
 
a N m b6a orL Lun ade 76w76 *vx 
b N m b6a orL tba mix 76w76 evx 
2449 N f b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 *vx 
 
a N f b6c orl Lun car 76w76 evx 
b N f b6c orl tba mix 76w76 *vx 
2450 N m b6c orl Liv mix 76w76 *vx 
 
a N m b6c ort Lun ad. 76w76 *vx 
b N m b6c orL tba mix 76w76 *vx 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
TD50 2Thilpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
2 .65mg 
2 .65mg 
.831mg 
.773mg 
2.47mg 
.433mg 
 
p-1. - 
P-1. - 
P-1. _ 
P-1. _ 
P-1. _ 
P<.3 - 
P<.3 - 
P<.05 - 
P<.05 - 
P<.3 - 
P<. 009 - 
 
RUTIN TRIHYDRATE 
 
2451 R f sci sat pit ad. 77w77 
 
a R f aci eat ubt pam 77w77 
2452 R f aci eat adr ph. 28m28 
 
a R f aci eat hea sar 28m28 
2453 R m aci eat tea ict 77w77 
 
a R * aci eat adr cor 77w77 
2454 R m aci mat col ado 28m28 
 
a R m aci eat itm ado 28a28 
SACCHARIN 
 
2455 N f swa mat lun tum 76w76 a 
 
a N f swa eat Liv hpt 76w76 a 
 
2456 N f swi eat ubl apc 91w91 ag 
2457 N m swi eat ubl tcc 91w91 a 
 
SACCHARIN, SODIUN 
 
2458 N f chi eat Liv tum 24m24 a 
 
a N f chi eat lun tum 24m24 a 
b N f chi eat tba mix 24m24 a 
2459 N m chi eat lun tum 24m24 a 
 
a N m chi eat Liv hpt 24m24 a 
b N m chi eat tba mix 24m24 a 
2460 R f cdr eat Liv clc 26m26 a 
 
a R f cdr eat Liv nod 26m26 a 
 
2461 R f cdr eat Liv btc 33m33 ag 
 
a R f cdr eat Liv nnd 33m33 *g 
2462 R a cdr eat Liv hpc 26m26 a 
2463 R a cdr eat pty ado 33m33 a 
 
a R a cdr eat ubl tcc 33m33 a 
b R a cdr eat Liv btc 33m33 a 
c R a cdr eat ubl tpp 33m33 a 
2464 R a cdr eat tba mix 24m24 a 
2465 R b sda eat ubl tum 30m30 a 
 
a R b ada eat tba mal 30m30 a 
2466 R b wis wat ubl tum 24m24 ar 
2467 R b wis sat ubl tum 24m24 ar 
 
lOOng.. :. .ug. :10. :100. g :.g :10. :100.. : . :10 
 
.> 8.91gm 
 
8.91gm 
90.4gm 
90.4gm 
3.53gm 
5.71gm 
72.3gm 
72.3gm 
 
100ng . . .:ug. :10. :100. g :. 1g :10. :100.. :19 :10 
 
.>56.3gm 
 
no dre 
.> no dre 
 
.> no dre 
 
P<.2 - 
P<.2 - 
P<.2 - 
P<.2 - 
P<.2 - 
P<.3 - 
P<.2 - 
P<.2 - 
 
P<.7 - 
P-1. - 
P-1. _ 
P-1. - 
 
lOong .:. .lug. :10. :100. 1g :. . :10. :100. : .. :10 
 
.>no dre P-I. 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
26. 19m P<.7 - 
+ . 1.36g \ P<.002 - 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
881.mg \ P<.002 - 
78.29m P<.03 _ 
98.49m P<.2 - 
155.gm P<.6 
155.gm P<.3 
no dre P-1. 
 
.23.29m P<.008 
 
31.19m P<.05 + 
60.09m P<.1 
 
30.89m P<.2 . 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
4.109m a p<.4 _ 
no dre P-1. 
 
125.9m P<.08 
 
SAFROLE 100ng ..:. l ug. :10. :100. g : ..g :10. :100.... g :. 10 
 
2468 N f b6a orl Liv mix 81w81 avx . + . 23.5mg P<.0005 
 
a N f b6a orl Liv hpt 81w81 avx 31.4mg P<.0005+ 
b N f b6a orl Lun ada 81w81 avx no dre P-1. 
 
c N f b6a orl tba mix 81w81 avx 24.2mg P<.0005 
2469 N a b6a orl Liv hpt 81w81 avx . 312.mg P<.04 
 
a N a b6a orl Lun mix 81w81 avx no dre P-1. 
b N a b6a orl tba mix 81w81 avx 5.129m P<1. 
 
2470 N f b6c gav Liv mix 90w90 a . + . 27.0mg P<.0005+ 
 
a N f b6c gav liv hpc 90w90a 33.0mg P<.0005+ 
b N f b6c gav lun tum 90w90 a no dre P-1. 
 
2471 N f b6c orl Liv hpt 81w81 avx <+ noTD50 P<.0005 
 
* N f b6c orl Lun mix 81w81 avx no dre P-1. 
 
b N f b6c ort tba mix 81w81 avx noTD50 P<.0005 
 
2472 N a b6c gav Liv mix 90w90 a . 178.mg P<.07 - 
 
a N a b6c gav Liv hpc 90w90 a 281.mg P<.02 - 
b N a b6c gav lun mix 90w90 a no dre P.1. 
 
2473 N a b6c orl Liv hpt 81w81 avx . + . 61.7mg P<.0005+ 
 
a N m b6c orl lun ads 81w81 avx no dre P-1. 
b N m b6c orl tba mix 81w81 avx 119.mg P<.2 
 
2474 N f cdl aat Liv hpc 51w73 av . + . 125.mg P<.0005+ 
 
a N f cdl aat lun tue 51w73 av no dre P-1. 
 
2475 N a cdl aat Liv car 51w73 av . . 249.mg P<.0005+ 
 
a N a cdl sat lun tum 51w73 av no dre P-1. 
 
2476 N a cdl sat Liv hpc 56w69 . 731.mg * P<.03 
 
a N m cdl eat Lun ada 56w69 no dre P-1. 
2477 N a cdl sat Liv car 56w69 .> 3.71gm P<.7 
 
a N a cdl eat tba mix 56w69 3.71gm P<.7 
 
2478 R a cdr eat Liv hpc 73w95 a .> no dre P-1. - 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose 
 
lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
1253 .820mg n.s.s. 
1253 .391mg n.s.s. 
1253 .455mg n.s.s. 
1253 .505mg n.s.s. 
1253 .303mg n.s.s. 
1253 .431mg n.s.s. 
1253 .431m9 n.s.s. 
1253 .251mg n.s.s. 
1253 .233mg n.s.s. 
1253 .401mg n.s.s. 
1253 .163mg 9.50mg 
 
RUTIN TRIHYDRATE 153.18.4 
2451 1145. 1.45gm n.s.s. 
 
a 1145m 1.45g. n.s.s. 
2452 1145n 14.7gm n.s.s. 
 
a 1145n 14.7gm n.s.s. 
2453 1145m 777.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1145m 990.m n.s.s. 
2454 1145n 11.8gm n.s.s. 
 
a 1145n 11.8gm n.s.s. 
 
0/22 
0/22 
0/33 
0/33 
3/30 
2/30 
0/33 
0/33 
 
SACCHARIN 81-07-2 
 
2455 1090 7.21gm n.s.a. 7/45 
 
a 1090 21.4gm n.s.s. 3/45 
2456 1349 1.12gm n.s.s. 1/41 
2457 1349 3.40gm n.s.s. 0/40 
SACCHARIN, SODIUN 128-44-9 
 
2458 1450 6.49gm n.s.s. 0/17 
 
a 1450 18.9gm n.s.s. 4/17 
b 1450 4.12gm n.s.s. 11/17 
2459 1450 686.mg 4.99"gm 1/19 
 
a 1450 19.6gm n.s.s. 1/19 
b 1450 442.mg 3.799m 4/19 
2460 1114 19.2gm n.s.s. 0/56 
 
a 1114 20.1gm n.s.s. 1/56 
2461 1398 20.8gm n.s.s. 1/48 
 
a 1398 25.2gm n.s.s. 0/48 
2462 1114 31.5gm n.s.s. 0/57 
2463 1398 8.81gm 378.gm 0/49 
 
a 1398 9.40gm n.s.s. 0/36 
b 1398 14.8g n.s.s. 0/49 
c 1398 8.50gm n.s.s. 1/36 
2464 1450 1.96gm n.s.a. 11/16 
2465 1416 1.94gm n.s.s. 0/98 
 
a 1416 1.119m n.s.s. 13/98 
2466 1465 47.4gm n.s.s. 0/98 
2467 1465m 37.8gm n.s.s. 0/98 
 
SAFROLE 94-59-7 
 
2468 267 9.22mg 60.3mg 
 
a 267 14.1mg 79.3mg 
b 267 332.mg n.s.s. 
c 267 9.32mg 66.2mg 
2469 267 94.1mg n.a.s. 
 
a 267 310.mg n.s.a. 
b 267 120.mg n.s.s. 
2470 1039 16.2mg 49.9mg 
 
a 1039 19.1mg 64.0mg 
b 1039 243.mg n.s.s. 
2471 267 n.s.s. 38.8mg 
 
a 267 313.mg n.s.s. 
b 267 n.s.s. 40.5mg 
2472 1039 50.7mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1039 69.2mg n.s.s. 
b 1039 185.mg n.s.s. 
2473 267 28.6mg 202.mg 
 
a 267 310.mg n.s.s. 
b 267 35.3mg n.s.s. 
2474 1035. 74.9mg 225.mg 
 
a 1035. 2.23gm n.sa.s. 
2475 1035a 123.mg 612.mg 
 
a 1035a 1.07gm n.s.s. 
2476 1042. 335.mg n.x.s. 
 
a 1042a 786.mg n.s.s. 
2477 1042b 417.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1042b 417.mg n.s.s. 
2478 1035s 210.mg n.s.s. 
 
1/15 
1/15 
2/15 
2/15 
0/18 
3/18 
3/18 
0/98 
0/98 
0/98 
0/17 
0/17 
1/17 
3/100 
0/100 
3/100 
1/17 
1/17 
7/17 
0/53 
0/55 
0/44 
0/44 
4/50 
1/50 
3/35 
3/35 
0/18 
 
2.509m 
2.509m 
5.00gm 
5. 00m 
2.009m 
2. 009m 
4. 00gm 
4. 00gm 
 
6.509m 
6.509m 
260. mg 
240.mg 
 
1. 309m 
1.309g 
 
1.309m 
1. 20gm 
1. 209m 
1. 20gm 
90.0m9 
90.0mg 
 
2. 50m 
2. 509m 
90.0m9 
2.009m 
2.00gm 
 
2.00gm 
2.00gm 
400.mg 
90.0m9 
90.0g 
 
2. 00gm 
4. 00gm 
 
156.mg 
156.mg 
156.mg 
156. m 
146.mg 
146.mg 
146.mg 
34.3mg 
 
34.3mg 
34.3mg 
156.mg 
156.mg 
156.mg 
34.3mg 
34.3mg 
34.3mg 
146.mg 
146.mg 
146.mg 
439.mg 
439.mg 
405.mg 
405. mg 
390.mg 
390.mg 
390.mg 
390.mg 
68.0g 
 
1/10 
1/10 
1/20 
1/20 
3/11 
2/11 
1/20 
1/20 
 
8/42 
1/42 
 
0/37 650.mg 
1/39 600.mg 
 
Hirono;clet, 13,15-21; 1981 
 
Roe;fctx,8, 135-145; 1970 
Kroes; txcy,8,285-300; 1977 
 
0/42 
0/48 
 
0/28 6.509m 0/36 
6/28 6.50gm 5/36 
16/28 6.50gm 24/36 
14/29 (6.009m 9/34) 
5/29 6.00gm 2/34 
20/29 (6.00gm 21/34) 
 
0/56 270.mg 0/52 
0/56 270.mg 0/52 
2/49 
1/49 
 
0/51 270.mg 1/54 
5/48 
3/38 
2/48 
4/38 
 
21/28 2.009m 15/26 
 
0/94 225.mg 0/93 
11/94 225.mg 17/93 
0/115 
3/138 
 
810.mg 0/56 2.43gm 2/54 
810.mg 0/56 2.43gm 2/54 
 
810.mg 0/52 2.439m 0/54 
 
16/17 
15/17 
0/17 
16/17 
3/17 
0/17 
3/17 
22/46 
19/46 
0/46 
16/16 
0/16 
16/16 
4/33 
2/33 
0/35 
11/17 
0/17 
11/17 
25/36 
 
0/50 
11/26 
0/26 
 
11/40 488.m9 8/40 
0/40 488.mg 0/40 
4/35 
4/35 
0/18 
 
Homburger;ctxf,359-373; 1978 
 
Munro;txap,32,513-526; 1975 
ArnoLd;txap,52, 113-152; 1980 
 
Munro;txsp,32,513-526; 1975 
ArnoLd;txap,52, 113- 152;1980 
 
Ho.burger;ctxf,359-373;1978 
Schmhl ;arzn,23, 1466-1470;1973 
 
Hicks;carm,2,475-489; 1978 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
Vessel inovitch;canr,39,4378-4380; 1979 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
VesseL inovitch;canr,39,4378-4380; 1979 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
WisLocki ;canr,37, 1883-1891; 1977 
 
Borch.rt;csnr,33,590-600; 1973 
 
Wislocki ;csnr,37, 1883-1891; 1977 
 
a 
b 
 
2448 
 
ba 
 
2449 
 
ba 
b 
 
2450 
 
ba 
 
0/17 
2/17 
1/18 
2/18 
3/18 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
 
.414mg 
.414mg 
.385mg 
.385mg 
.385mg 
.414mg 
.414mg 
.414mg 
.385mg 
.385mg 
.385mg 
 
243 
 
0/18 
2/18 
1/18 
1/18 
3/18 
1/18 
1/18 
3/18 
3/18 
1/18 
5/18 
 
Brkly Code 
 
244 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
2479 R m cdr eat Liv hpc 95w95 a 
2480 R m cdr eat Liv tur 43w69 
 
a R m cdr oat tba tur 43w69 
2481 R m cdr oat Liv mix 47w69 
 
a R m cdr eat tba mix 47w69 
2482 R m cdr *at Liv car 36w52 
 
a R m cdr eat tba mix 36w52 
 
2483 R b osm eat Liv hpa 24.24 a 
 
a R b osm eat Liv mix 24.24 s 
b R b osm eat Liv maL 24.24 s 
c R b osm eat Liv hpc 24.24 s 
d R b osm eat Liv phc 24.24 s 
2484 R f osm eat Liv tur 24.24 s 
2485 R m osm eat Liv tum 24.24 s 
 
A4 
 
TD50 21'ailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
627. g P<. 05 + 
no dre P.1. 
no dre P-1. 
576.mg * P<.2 
1.32gm * P<.7 
 
425. mg P<. 3 + 
425m. g P<. 3 
 
250.mg Z P<.004 
 
340.mg * P<.0005+ 
624.mg * P<.0005+ 
921.mg * P<.0005 
1.96gm * P<.0005 
231.mg * P<.0005 
593.mg * P<.02 
 
SELENIUM 1Ong.. : .1ug. :10. :100.. :mg .:10. :100. :Ig . :10 
 
2486 N f c3s *at mgL adc 81w81 r .> no dre 
2487 N f c3s eat mgL adc 53w81 r .> no dre 
 
SELENIUM DIETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE 00ng . ..lug... :10. :100. m : g ..:10. :100. : :10 
 
2488 N f b6a orL lun ada 81w81 avx .> no dre 
 
a N f b6a orL Liv hpt 81w81 avx no dre 
b N f b6a orL tba mix 81w81 avx 10.5mg 
2489 M m b6a orL Liv hpt 81w81 avx .> 10.2mg 
 
a N m b6a orL Lun ad. 81w81 avx 18.4mg 
b N m b6a orL tba mix 81w81 *vx 8.45mg 
2490 N f b6c orL liv hpt 81w81 evx . 7.76mg 
 
a N f b6c orL Lun mix 81w81 *vx no dre 
b N f b6c orL tba mix 81w81 *vx 3.46mg 
2491 N m b6c orL Liv mix 81w81 evx . + . 1.28mg 
 
a N m b6c orL Liv hpt 81w81 avx 1.49mg 
b M m b6c orL Lun mix 81w81 avx no dre 
c N m b6c orl tba mix 81w81 *vx .638mg 
SELENIUM DINETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE lOOng ... : l1ug. 1 :10 : . 100. 1g : .1. :10 : . 100.. g . 10 
 
2492 N f b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx .> no dre 
 
a N f b6a orL Lun ada 76w76 avx no dre 
b N f b6a orL tba mix 76w76 avx no dre 
2493 N m b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 avx .> no dre 
 
a N m b6a orl Lun ado 76w76 *vx no dre 
b N m b6a orl tba mix 76w76 avx no dre 
2494 N f b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 mvx .> no dre 
 
a N f b6c orl Lun mix 76w76 *vx no dra 
b N f b6c orl tba tum 76w76 avx no dre 
2495 N m b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx .> 26.0mg 
 
a N m b6c orL lun mix 76w76 evx no dre 
b M m b6c orL tba mix 76w76 *vx 5.88mg 
 
SELENIUM SULFIDE 
 
2496 M f b6c gav MXB MXB 24m24 
 
a M f b6c gav liv MXA 24m24 
b M f b6c gav Liv hpc 24m24 
c M f b6c gav Lun MXA 24m24 
d M f b6c gav Lun a/c 24.24 
 
a M f b6c gav TBA XB 24m24 
f M f b6c gav liv MXB 24m24 
g M f b6c gay Lun MXB 24m24 
2497 M m b6c gav TBA MXB 24m24 
 
a M m b6c gav Liv MXB 24m24 
b M m b6c gav Lun MXB 24m24, 
2498 R f f34 gav Liv NXA 24m24 
 
a R f f34 gav Liv hpc 24m24 
b R f f 34 gav TBA NXB 24m24 
c R f f34 gav Liv NXB 24.24 
2499 R m f34 gav liv MXA 24m24 
 
a R m f34 gav Liv hpc 24m24 
b R m f34 gav TBA MXB 24m24 
c R a f34 gav liv MXB 24m24 
 
l00ng . . . . lug . 10 . 100. : g.. :1g.. :100.. g . : . 1. :.10:0: 
 
+ 46.8mg * P<.0005 
 
69.3mg * P<.0005c 
85.2mg * P<.0005c 
137.mg * P<.0005c 
433.mg * P<.02 c 
69.7mg * P<.02 
 
69.3mg * P<.0005 
137.mg * P<.0005 
 
735.mg * P<.9 - 
202.mg * P<.3 
 
183.mg * P<.07 
 
6.14mg / P<.0005c 
13.2mg / P<.0005c 
19.3mg a P<.3 
 
6.14mg I P<.0005 
 
+ 11.5mg I P<.0005c 
 
21.0mg * P<.0005c 
25.0mg P<.4 
 
11.5mg I P<.0005 
 
SENKIRKINE 100ng.... ....:..Io ... .. :10100. : g :.. . 100 .... :Ig. :10 
 
2500 R m mci ipj Liv Lca 56w92 v . + . 1.70mg P<.0005+ 
SINAZINE l1Ong. ... . :1ug . 10. :100. 1m : g . :10. :100. :Ig . :10 
 
2501 M f b6a orl Liv hpt 76w76 avx .> no dre P-1. - 
 
a M f b6a orL Lun ad 76w76 avx no dre P-1. - 
b M f b6a orL tba mix 76w76 avx no dre P-1. - 
2502 M a b6a orL Lun ada 76w76 avx .> 442.mg P<.7 - 
 
a m m b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 avx no dre P-1. - 
b M m b6a orL tba mix 76w76 *vx 19"9g P<.5 - 
 
Pal. - 
PMI. - 
 
P.1. 
P-I. 
P<. 4 
P<. 3 
P<.6 
P<. 4 
 
P<.04 
P-I. 
 
P<. 003 
 
P<. 0005 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P-I. 
 
P<. 0005 
 
P-1. - 
P-1. - 
P-I. - 
P-1. - 
P-1. - 
P-1. - 
Pal. - 
P-I. - 
P-1. - 
P<.3 - 
P-1. - 
P<.02 - 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
1035b 189.mg n.s.a. 
1042a 136.mg n.s.s. 
1042a 136.mg n.s.s. 
1042b 142.mg n.s.s. 
1042b 157.mg n.s.s. 
1042c 69.1mg n.s.s. 
1042c 69.1mg n.s.s. 
 
268 113.mg 1.90gm 
 
268 199.mg 736.mg 
268 331.mo 1.539m 
268 433.mg 3.239m 
268 743.mg 8.169g 
 
268 133.mg 457.mg 
268 221.mg n.s.s. 
 
0/15 
0/12 
0/12 
0/18 
1/18 
0/18 
0/18 
1/50 
3/50 
2/50 
2/50 
0/50 
0/25 
3/25 
 
200.mg 
125. mg 
125.mg 
82.5mg 
82.5mg 
142. mg 
142.mg 
4.50mg 
4. 50mg 
4.50mg 
4.50mg 
4.50mg 
5.00mg 
4.00mg 
 
3/18 
0/12 
0/12 
 
0/18 138.mg 
0/18 138.mg 
1/18 
1/18 
 
1/50 22.5mg 
1/50 22. 5mg 
0/50 22. 5mg 
0/50 22.5mg 
0/50 22. 5mg 
0/25 25.0mg 
1/25 20. 0mg 
 
Borchsrt;canr,33,590-600; 1973 
 
2/18 
2/18 
 
2/50 45.0mg 8/50 (225.mg 6/50) 
3/50 45.0mg 8/50 225.mg 19/50 
2/50 45.0mg 0/50 225.mg 14/50 
2/50 45.0mg 0/50 225.mg 10/50 
0/50 45.0mg 0/50 225.mg 5/50 
1/25 50.0mg 6/25 250.mg 12/25 
2/25 40.0mg 2/25 200.mg 7/25 
 
Long;arpa,75, 595-604;1963 
 
SELENIUM 7782.49-2 
 
2486 1431 .218mg n.s.s. 20/30 .111mg 7/30 
2487 1431m 40.4ug n.s.a. 20/30 72.1ug 18/30 
 
SELENIUM DIETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE (ethyL seLenac) 5456-28-0 
2488 1211 4.59mg n.s.s. 1/17 3.63mg 1/17 
 
a 1211 7.70mg n.s.s. 0/17 3.63mg 0/17 
b 1211 2.21mg n.s.s. 2/17 3.63mg 4/17 
2489 1211 2.34mg n.s.s. 1/18 3.37mg 3/17 
 
a 1211 2.54mg n.s.s. 2/18 3.37mg 3/17 
b 1211 1.80mg n.s.s. 3/18 3.37mg 5/17 
2490 1211 2.34mg n.s.s. 0/16 3.63mg 3/17 
 
a 1211 7.70mg n.s.s. 0/16 3.63mg 0/17 
b 1211 1.40mg 18.8mg 0/16 3.63mg 6/17 
2491 1211 .627mg 3.07mg 0/16 3.37mg 12/18 
 
a 1211 .718mg 3.71mg 0/16 3.37mg 11/18 
b 1211 7.59mg n.s.s. 0/16 3.37mg 0/18 
c 1211 .296mg 1.45mg 0/16 3.37mg 16/18 
 
SELENIUM DINETHYLDITHIOCARBANATE (methyl selenac) 144-34-3 
2492 1205 8.68mg n.s.s. 0/17 4.64mg 0/17 
 
a 1205 8.68mg n.s.s. 1/17 4.64mg 0/17 
b 1205 4.08mg n.s.s. 2/17 4.64mg 2/17 
2493 1205 8.54mg n.s.s. 1/18 4.31mg 0/18 
 
a 1205 8.54mg n.s.s. 2/18 4.31mg 0/18 
b 1205 6.05mg n.s.s. 3/18 4.31mg 1/18 
2494 1205 8.68mg n.s.s. 0/16 4.64mg 0/17 
 
a 1205 8.68mg n.s.s. 0/16 4.64mg 0/17 
b 1205 8.68mg n.s.s. 0/16 4.64mg 0/17 
2495 1205 4.24mg n.s.s. 0/16 4.31mg 1/17 
 
a 1205 8.07mg n.s.a. 0/16 4.31mg 0/17 
b 1205 2.02mg n.s.s. 0/16 4.31mg 4/17 
 
Schrauzer;csrc, 1,199-201; 1980 
 
Innes;ntis,a1968/1969 
 
Innes;ntis,1968/1969 
 
SELENIUN SULFIDE 7448-34-6 
 
2496 c50033 31.4mg 74.2mg 0/50 
 
a c50033 43.7mg 119.mg 0/50 
b c50033 51.8mg 154.mg 0/50 
c c50033 74.9m9 338.mg 0/50 
d c50033 1U.mg n.s.s. 0/50 
* c50033 31.5mg n.s.s. 24/50 
f c50033 43.7mg 119.mg 0/50 
9 c50033 74.9mg 338.mg 0/50 
2497 c50033 53.5mg n..sa. 29/50 
 
a c50033 59.9mg n.s.s. 15/50 
b c50033 68.1mg n.s.s. 4/50 
2498 c50033 4.08mg 10.1mg 1/50 
 
a c50033 7.90mg 24.7mg 0/50 
b c50033 5.48mg n.s.s. 38/50 
c c50033 4.08m9 10.1mg 1/50 
2499 c50033 6.96mg 22.1mg 1/50 
 
a c50033 11.3mg 45.8mg 0/50 
b c50033 6.01mg n.s.s. 33/50 
c c50033 6.96mg 22.1mg 1/50 
SENKIRKINE (renardine) 2318-18-5 
2500 1396 .784mg 4.77mg 0/19 
 
SIMAZINE (CDT) 122-34-9 
 
2501 1243 166.mg n.s.a. 
 
a 1243 166.mg n.s.s. 
b 1243 166.mg n.s.s. 
2502 1243 55.5mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1243 154.mg n.s.s. 
b 1243 39.7mg n.s.s. 
 
0/17 
1/17 
2/17 
2/18 
1/18 
3/18 
 
14. 1mg 
14. 1mg 
14. 1mg 
14. 1m9 
14. 1mg 
14. 1mg 
14. 1mg 
14. 1g 
14. 1mg 
14. 1mg 
14. 1m9 
2. 10mg 
2. 10g 
2. 10mg 
2.10 g 
2. 10mg 
2. 10g 
2. 109g 
2. 10 g 
 
5/50 70.7mg 32/50 
2/50 70.7mg 25/50 
1/50 70.7mg 22/50 
3/50 70.7mg 12/50 
1/50 70.7mg 4/50 
31/50 70.7mg 42/50 
2/50 70.7mg 25/50 
3/50 70.7mg 12/50 
35/50 70.7mg 36/50 
14/50 70.7mg 23/50 
10/50 70.7mg 14/50 
0/50 10.6m9 37/50 
0/50 10.6mg 21/50 
37/50 10.6mg 47/50 
0/50 10.6mg 37/50 
0/50 10.6mg 24/50 
0/50 10.6m9 14/50 
40/50 10.6m9 43/50 
0/50 10.6mg 24/50 
 
2.03m9 9/19 
 
83.8mg 
83.8mg 
83.8 m 
78.0 m 
78.09g 
78.0 O 
 
liv:hpa,hpc; lun:a/a,a/c. C 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
t iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
l lv:hpc,nnd. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Liv:hpc,nnd. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Hirono;jnci ,63,469-472;1979 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
0/18 
0/18 
0/18 
3/18 
0/18 
5/18 
 
2479 
2480 
 
2481 
2482 
2483 
 
b 
 
c 
 
d 
 
2484 
2485 
 
245 
 
Brkly Code 
 
246 
 
ites 
K 
K 
K 
K 
K 
K 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist No 
2503 N f b6c orl Lun ad. 76w76 *v, 
 
a N f b6c orl Liv hpt 76w76 evi 
b N f b6c orl tba mix 76w76 *v) 
2504 N * b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 *vi 
 
a N m b6c orL lun mix 76w76 ev; 
b N m b6c orl tba mix 76w76 *vi 
SODIUM SITHIONOLATE 
 
2505 N f b6a orl Liv hpt 76w76 *v. 
 
a N f b6a orl Lun ad. 76076 *v: 
b N f b6a orl tba mix 76w76 .v: 
2506 N m b6a orl Lun ads 76w76 *v: 
 
a N m b6a orl Liv hpt 76w76 *v) 
b N m b6a orl tba mix 76w76 ev) 
2507 N f b6c arl liv hpt 76w76 *v) 
 
a N f b6c orl lun mix 76w76 *v) 
b N f b6c ort tba tum 76w76 .v; 
2508 N * b6c orl Liv mix 76w76 *v) 
 
a N * b6c orl lun mix 76w76 ev) 
b N m b6c orl tba mix 76w76 *v) 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
536.mg P<.3 - 
no dre P.1. - 
260.mg P<. 2 - 
106. mg P<. 02 - 
no dre P-1. - 
65.5mg P<.003 - 
 
lOOng . .:. lug. : 10. :100. g : . 1g :10. : 100.... g :. 10 
 
x .> no dre 
x no dre 
x 5.08mg 
x .> no dre 
x no dre 
x no dre 
x .> no dre 
x no dre 
x no dre 
x . 2.28mg 
x no dre 
x .805m9 
 
Pal. _ 
Pal. _ 
P<.7 _ 
P-1. _ 
P-I. 1 
 
P-1. _ 
p-I. _ 
P-1. _ 
Pal. 1 
 
P<.09 - 
P-1. 
 
P<.005 - 
 
SODIUM DIETHYLDITHIOCARBANATE TRIHYDRATE .: .. ug.. 10 :. 10: 00.. g : .9 :10. 1 :100.. g . 10 
 
2509 N I b6c eat TBA NXB 25m25 a :> no dre Pal. 
 
a N f b6c eat Liv NXB 25m25 a 27.0gm * P<.8 
b N f b6c oat Lun NXB 25m25 a 4.76gm * P<.5 
2510 N f b6c orl Liv hpt 76w76 evx .> no dre P-1. 
 
a N f b6c orl lun ad 76w76 *vx no dre P-1. 
b N f b6c orl tba mix 76w76 *vx no dre P-l. 
2511 N m b6c eat TSA NXS 25m25 a :> no dre P-1. 
 
a N m b6c set Liv NXB 25m25 a no dre P-1. 
b N m b6c eat Lun NXB 25m25 a 10.3g * P<.9 
2512 N m b6c ort Liv hpt 76w76 evx . 68.7mg P<.02 
 
a N m b6c orl lun ad. 76w76 *vx 468.mg P<.7 
b N m b6c orl tba mix 76w76 *vx 71.4mg P<.2 
2513 N f b6a orl lun ad. 76w76 evx .> 607.mg P<.3 
 
a N f b6a orl Liv hpt 76w76 *vx no dre P-1. 
b N f b6a orl tba mix 76w76 *vx no dre P-1. 
2514 N m b6a orl lun ad. 76w76 *vx .> 155.mg P<.3 
 
a N m b6a orl Liv hpt 76w76 *vx no dre P-1. 
b N m b6a orl tba mix 76w76 *vx 403.mg P<.8 
2515 R f f34 eat TBA NXB 24m24 :> no dre Pal. 
 
a R f f34 eat Liv NXB 24.24 no dre P-1. 
2516 R * 134 eat TBA NXB 24.24 :> no dre Pal. 
 
a R m 134 eat Liv NXB 24.24 no dre P-1. 
 
SORBIC ACID 
 
2517 N f asp eat Liv hnd 80w80 a 
 
a N f asp eat lun ads 80w80 * 
2518 N m asp eat Liv hnd 80w80 a 
 
a N m asp eat lun ad. 80w80 a 
2519 R f wis eat liv hem 24.24 a 
 
a R f wis sat tba mal 24.24 a 
b R f wis eat tba mix 24.24 * 
2520 R * wis eat Liv hem 24.24 * 
 
a R * wis eat tba mix 24m24 a 
b R * wis eat tba .aL 24.24 a 
 
100ng . .: ug. :10. :100. g :..g :10. :100.. : g :10 
 
362.gm * P<.2 
no dre Pal. 
.> no dre P-1. 
 
no dre P-1. 
34.09m * P<.2 
no dre P.1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
33.9gm * P<.7 
51.49m * P<.5 
 
SOYBEAN LECITHIN 00ng ..: ..lu. :10. :100. g :. . :10. :100.. : . :10 
 
2521 R f wis *at Liv nod 24.24 * no dre P-1. 
2522 R * wis eat Liv cho 24.24 .>42.29m P<.3 
 
STARCH ACETATE 
 
2523 R f wis eat Liv tLm 24.24 o 
 
a R f via eat tba mix 24.24 e 
2524 R * wis eat Liv tum 24.24 a 
 
a R * wis eat tba mix 24.24 a 
 
STERIGNATOCYSTIN 
 
2525 R * sin set Liv mix 28.28 as 
 
a R m ain at liv hnd 2828 ae 
b R * ain at Liv has 28m28 a. 
c R * sin eat Liv hpc 28.28 as 
d R m in eat tba mix 28.28 as 
2526 R * don oat Liv mix 23.23 as 
 
a R f don set Liv ads 23.23 a. 
b R * don eat Liv hes 23.23 as 
2527 R b wis gav Liv hpc 12.29 
 
2528 R b wis eat Liv hpc 12.29 sv 
2529 R m wis eat Liv car 54w69 or 
 
100ng. . : ug . :10. :100. g : ..g :10. :100..g.10 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
100ng .: ..ug. :10. :100.. :1g. :10. :100.. : . :10 
 
+ . Ahistoricat * P<.003 + 
 
ehistoricaL * P<.008 + 
+historicaL * P<.03 + 
+historicaL * P<.2 + 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
+ . 82.5ug * P<.0005+ 
 
.727mg * P<.007 
1.57mg * P<.07 
 
* + . .322mg * P<.0005. 
+ . .124mg Z P<.0005+ 
+ . .111m9 P<.0005. 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
1243 87.3mg n.s.s. 
1243 166.mg n.s.s. 
1243 63.9mg n.s.s. 
1243 36.5mg n.s.s. 
1243 146.mg n.s.s. 
1243 26.4mg 355.mg 
 
SODIUM BITHIONOLATE (Vancide SN) 6385-58.6 
 
2505 1284 1.79mg n.s.s. 0/17 .959mg 0/17 
 
a 1284 1.79mg n.s.s. 1/17 .959mg 0/17 
b 1284 .641mg n.s.s. 2/17 .959mg 3/17 
2506 1284 .833mg n.s.s. 2/18 .891mg 2/18 
 
a 1284 1.77mg n.s.s. 1/18 .891mg 0/18 
b 1284 .922mg n.s.s. 3/18 .891mg 2/18 
2507 1284 1.90mg n.s.a. 0/16 .959mg 0/18 
 
a 1284 1.90mg n.s.s. 0/16 .959mg 0/18 
b 1284 1.90mg n.s.s. 0/16 .959mg 0/18 
2508 1284 .559mg n.s.s. 0/16 .891mg 2/15 
 
a 1284 1.47mg n.s.s. 0/16 .891mg 0/15 
b 1284 .302mg 6.34mg 0/16 .891m9 5/15 
 
SODIUM DIETHYLDITHIOCARBANATE TRIHYDRATE (SDDC) 148-18-5 
 
2509 c02835 774.mg n.s.s. 13/20 65.0mg 20/50 520.mg 26/50 
 
a c02835 1.98gm n.s.s. 0/20 65.0mg 2/50 520.mg 2/50 
b c02835 941.mg n.s.s. 0/20 65.0mg 7/50 520.mg 8/50 
2510 273 188.mg n.s.s. 0/18 94.9mg 0/18 
 
a 273 188.g n.s.s. 1/18 94.9mg 0/18 
b 273 133.mg n.s.s. 3/18 94.9mg 1/18 
 
2511 c02835 530.mg n.s.s. 13/20 60.0mg 37/50 480.mg 30/50 
 
a c02835 1.01gm n.s.s. 7/20 60.0mg 11/50 480.mg 11/50 
b c02835 742.mg n.s.s. 6/20 60.0m9 14/50 480.mg 14/50 
2512 273 27.0mg n.s.s. 1/17 U8.2mg 7/17 
 
a 273 58.9mg n.s.s. 2/17 88.2mg 3/17 
b 273 21.3mg n.s.s. 6/17 88.2mg 10/17 
2513 273 98.9mg n.s.s. 0/17 94.9mg 1/18 
 
a 273 188.g n.s.s. 0/17 94.9mg 0/18 
b 273 89.6mg n.s.s. 2/17 94.9mg 2/18 
2514 273 42.0mg n.s.s. 2/18 88.2mg 5/18 
 
a 273 175.mg n.s.s. 3/18 88.2mg 0/18 
b 273 43.4mg n.s.s. 5/18 88.2mg 6/18 
 
2515 c02835 146.mg n.s.s. 17/20 62.5mg 26/50 125.mg 34/50 
 
a c02835 1.799m n.s.s. 1/20 62.5mg 0/50 125.mg 0/50 
2516 c02835 88.9mg n.s.s. 14/16 50.0mg 38/50 100.mg 34/50 
 
a c02835 684.g n.s.s. 0/16 50.0mg 1/50 100.mg 0/50 
 
Inns;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun: a/a, a/c. 
 
Innos;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
SORBIC ACID 110-44-1 
 
2517 409 58.9gm n.s.s. 
 
a 409 32.3gm n.s.s. 
2518 409 5.10gm n.s.s. 
 
a 409 14.6gm n.s.s. 
2519 412 10.9gm n.s.s. 
 
a 412 44.7gm n.s.s. 
b 412 1.02gm n.s.s. 
2520 412 25.89m n.s.s. 
 
a 412 4.119m n.s.s. 
b 412 9.489m n.s.s. 
 
0/48 
14/48 
1/44 
19/44 
3/42 
3/42 
35/42 
0/43 
20/43 
5/43 
 
SOYBEAN LECITHIN 8002-43*5 
 
2521 1359 19.4gm n.s.s. 1/47 
2522 1359 6.87gm n.s.s. 0/41 
 
STARCH ACETATE ... 
 
2523 1407 92.79m n.s.s. 0/30 
 
a 1407 19.49m n.s.s. 23/30 
2524 1407 66.8gO n.s.s. 0/23 
 
a 1407 3.91gm n.s.s. 21/23 
STERIGNATOCYSTIN 10048-13-2 
 
2525 114 .679mg 10.4mg 0/11 
 
a 1184 1.05Sg 91.1mg 0/11 
b 1184 .898mg n.s.s. 0/11 
c 1184 1.76mg n.s.s. 0/11 
d 1184 .753mg n.s.s. 7/11 
2526 392 42.6ug .166mg 0/17 
 
a 392 .295mg 9.46mg 0/17 
b 392 .474mg n.s.s. 0/17 
2527 275m .165mg .982mg 0/10 
2528 275n 53.6ug .28"g 0/10 
2529 707 48.6ug .333mg 0/25 
 
1. 30gm 
1. 30gm 
1. 20gm 
1. 20g 
 
750.m9 
750.mg 
750.mg 
600.mg 
600.mg 
600.mg 
 
0/46 6.509m 0/43 13.09m 1/43 
5/46 6.509m 10/43 13.09m 5/43 
0/46 6.009m 0/43 12.0gm 0/43 
16/46 6.00gm 16/43 12.0gm 15/43 
2/45 5.009m 7/46 
3/45 5.00gm 0/46 
30/45 (5.009m 17/46) 
 
1/43 4.009m 0/41 
21/43 4.009m 21/41 
3/43 4.00gm 6/41 
 
2. 009g 0/47 
1.60gm 1/39 
 
15.0gm 0/30 
15.0gm 17/30 
12.0Og 0/27 
12.0gm 24/27 
 
4.O00ug 
4.OOug 
4.00ug 
4.00ug 
4 .OOug 
.200mg 
.200mg 
.200mg 
.107mg 
.239mg 
 
.313mg 
 
0/27 40.Oug 
0/27 40.Oug 
0/27 40.Oug 
0/27 40.Oug 
13/27 40. Oug 
11/13 .400mg 
2/13 .400mg 
1/13 .400mg 
4/10 .213mg 
8/10 .477mg 
8/14 
 
1/29 .400m9 5/26 
0/29 .400m9 3/26 
1/29 .400mg 3/26 
0/29 .400mg 1/26 
6/29 .400mg 10/26 
12/13 
4/13 
2/13 
 
5/10 1.07mg 9/10 
10/10 (2.39mg 3/10) 
 
Hendy;fctx, 14,181-186; 1976 
 
Gount;fctx, 13,31-45; 1975 
 
Brantom;fctx, 11,755-769; 1973 
de Groot;fctx,12,651-663;1974 
 
Maekawa;gann,70,777-781; 1979 
Ohtsubo;fctx, 16,143-149; 1978 
Purchase;fctx,8,289-295; 1970 
 
Terso;fctx, 16,591-596; 1978 
 
2503 
 
a 
 
b 
 
2504 
 
a 
 
b 
 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
 
83.8 g 
83.8 g 
83.8mg 
78.0mg 
78.0mg 
78.0mg 
 
1/18 
0/18 
2/18 
4/17 
0/17 
6/17 
 
247 
 
Brkly Code 
 
248 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist No 
STREPTOZOTOCIN 
 
2530 N f swi ipi lun mix 26w78 c 
 
m N f sei ipl kid mdc 26w78 c 
b N f swi ipl utc sar 26w78 m 
c N f swi ipI liv lye 26w78 m 
d N f swi ipJ tbe ben 26w78 c 
* N f swi ipj tbm mix 26w78 c 
f N f swi ipj tbe miL 26w78 m 
2531 N m swi ipj lun mix 26w72 c 
 
a N m swi ipj kid tlm 26w72 c 
b N m swi ipJ Liv mix 26w72 c 
c N m swi ipj tbm mix 26w72 c 
d N m swi ipj tbe bon 26w72 o 
* N m swi ipj tba maL 26w72 c 
2532 R f cdr ipJ kid mix 26w78 c 
 
m R f cdr ipJ mgl cmr 26w78 c 
b R f cdr ipj uto smr 26w78 c 
c R f cdr ipJ liv mix 26w78 c 
d R f cdr ipJ liv cvh 26W78 m 
* R f cdr ipj tbm maL 26w78 a 
f R f cdr ipj tba mix 26w78 o 
9 R f cdr ipj tbm bon 26w78 c 
2533 R m cdr ipj kid mix 26w78 c 
 
a R m cdr ipJ liv lcc 26w78 c 
b R m cdr ipJ tba mix 26w78 o 
c R m cdr ipJ tba met 26w78 o 
d R m cdr ipj tba bon 26w78 c 
 
STROBANE 
 
2534 N f b6e orl liv hpt 79w79 ov, 
 
a N f b6a ort lun mdo 79w79 ov: 
b N f b6a orl tbm mix 79w79 cv: 
2535 N m b6a orl Liv hpt 79w79 cv: 
 
a N m b6e orl lun ado 79w79 ov, 
b N m b6e ort tba mix 79w79 cv: 
2536 N f b6c orl lun ado 79w79 cvx 
 
m N f b6c orl liv hpt 79w79 cv: 
b N f b6c orl tba mix 79w79 cv, 
2537 N m b6c orl --- rts 79w79 ov, 
 
m N m b6c ort liv hpt 79w79 ov: 
b N m b6c orl lun ado 79w79 ov: 
c N m b6c orl tba mix 79w79 cvx 
 
STYRENE 
 
2538 N f b6c gev Liv hpe 78w91 
 
a N f b6c gav TBA NXB 78w91 
b N f b6c gav Liv NXB 78w91 
c N f b6c gav lun NXB 78w91 
2539 N m b6c gav lun NXA 78w91 
 
a N m b6c gav TBA NXB 78w91 
b N m b6c gav liv NXB 78w91 
c N m b6c gav lun NXB 78w91 
 
2540 R f f34 gav TIA NXB 90w97 as 
 
a R f f34 gav liv NXB 90w97 ms 
2541 R m f34 gav TBA NXB 90w97 es 
 
a R m f34 gav liv NXS 90w97 es 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
tes 
 
lOOng. :. .ug. :10. :100.. : g.. :10. :100..g.10 
 
+ . .193mg \ P<.0005+ 
 
1.39mg \ P<.0005+ 
13.9mg * P<.04 
no dre P-I. 
 
.188mg \ P<.0005 
.486mg * P<.0005 
6.32mg / P<.2 
 
* . .462mg \ P<.0005+ 
 
2.44mg \ P<.006 + 
27.3mg * P<.6 
 
.217mg \ P<.0005 
.698mg \ P<.003 
3.53mg * P<.3 
 
. + . 1.27g * P<.0005. 
 
1.41mg \ P<.009 
2.46mg \ P<.003 
4.43mg * P<.0005 
5.63mg * P<.0005 
.363mg \ P<.0005 
1.14mg * P<.06 
no dre P-1. 
 
. * . .776mg * P<.0005+ 
 
20.4mg *P<.2 
 
.751mg * P<.0005 
1.03mg ' P<.0005 
16.8mg * P<.7 
 
bO0ng. . :lug. :10. :100. g : g.. :10. :100..g.10 
 
x .> no dre 
x no dre 
x no dr. 
x . + . .644mg 
x no dre 
x .750mg 
x .> 10.7mg 
x no dre 
x 3.37mg 
x . + . 1.41mg 
x 4.00mg 
x 8.29mg 
x .750mg 
 
P-I. 
Pal. 
P-I. 
 
P<.0005+ 
P-I. 
 
P<. 006 
P<.3 
P-I. 
 
P<.05 
 
P<.005 + 
P<.09 
P<..3 
 
P<.0005 
 
lOOng..:. .ug. :10. :100. g :..g :10. :100. :ig . :10 
 
A * #905.mg * P<.04 - 
 
625.mg * P<.4 
 
905.mg * P<.04 
1.389m * P<.2 
 
+ 360.mg * P<.007 e 
 
659.mg * P<.5 
895.g9 * P<.5 
 
360.mg * P<.007 
:> no drt P-1. 
 
25.29m * P<.4 
 
:> 3.41gm Z P<.5 - 
 
no drt P-1. 
 
STYRENE AND bete-NITROSTYRENE NIXTURE ..:.. lug. :10. 1 :100. 1g :. 1. :10 : . 100.. :19 :10 
 
2542 N f b6c gmv TBA NXS 78w92 :> 216.mg * P<.3 - 
 
a m f b6c gv liv NXB 78w92 no dre P-1. 
b N f b6c gv lun NXB 78w92 no drt P-1. 
 
2543 N m b6c gav lun NXA 79w92 + #61.5m9 \ P<.007 - 
 
a N m b6c gev TBA NXB 79w92 no dre P-1. 
b N m b6c gv liv NXB 79w92 no dre Pal. 
 
c N m b6c gav lun NXB 79w92 61.5mg \ P<.007 
2544 R f f34 gav TBA NXB 18m25 :> no dre P-1. 
 
a R f f34 gev liv NXB 18m25 no drt Pal. 
2545 R m f34 gav TBA NXB 18m25 :> no dre P-1. 
 
e R f f34 gmv liv NXS 18m25 1.57gm * P<.4 
 
SUCROSE bO0ng .. : lug. :10. :100.. m : g . :10. :100 ... g :. 10 
 
2546 N f swa eat lun mix 76w76 c 129.9m P<.8 
 
e N f sew met liv hpt 76w76 c no dre P-1. 
 
SULFALLATE 1Ong. .. : ug.. :10. :100. : g . :10.. :100.. : g :10 
 
2547 N f b6c eat *gl NXA 78w90 dv : : 27.3mg * P<.0005c 
 
a N f b6c at mgl cn 78w90 dv 39.3mg * P<.OOOSc 
b N f b6c et lun N XA 78w9O dv 87.5mg * P<.007 
 
c N f b6c eat mgl sam 78w90 dv 98.3mg * P<.0005c 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
STREPTOZOTOCIN 18883-66-4 
 
2530 1336. 91.5ug .477mg 20/154 
 
a 1336" .480mg 7.18mg 0/154 
b 1336. 3.19mg n.s.s. 1/154 
c 1336. 1.44mg n.s.s. 1/154 
d 1336. 90.2ug .443mg 13/154 
* 1336. .263mg 1.09mg 42/154 
f 1336. 1.66mg n.s.a. 29/154 
2531 1336. .197mg 1.82mg 9/101 
 
a 1336. .599mg 47.1mg 0/101 
b 1336. 2.74mg n.s.s. 2/101 
c 1336m 92.5ug .761mg 28/101 
d 1336. .264"m 5.53mg 9/101 
 
a 1336m .890m9 n.s.s. 19/101 
2532 1336n .693mg 2.70mg 0/182 
 
a 1336n .487mg 65.7mg 12/182 
b 1336n .724mg 30.7mg 1/182 
c 1336n 1.68mg 18.4mg 0/182 
d 1336n 1.94mg 29.0mg 0/182 
 
a 1336n .169mg 1.22mg 44/182 
f 1336n .410mg n.s.s. 103/182 
9 1336n 2.05mg n.s.s. 59/182 
2533 1336n .446mg 1.51mg 0/177 
 
a 1336n 3.31mg n.s.s. 0/177 
b 1336n .365mg 2.94mg 59/177 
c 1336n .504mg 3.83m9 32/177 
d 1336n 1.86mg n.s.s. 27/177 
 
.855mg 
.855m9 
.855mg 
.855mg 
.855m9 
.855mg 
 
.855mg 
.930mg 
.930mg 
.930mg 
.930mg 
 
.930mg 
.930mg 
.859mg 
.859mg 
.859mg 
.859mg 
.859m9 
.859mg 
.859mg 
.859mg 
 
.859mg 
.859mg 
.859mg 
 
.859m9 
.859m9 
 
16/19 (2.50mg 
 
4/19 (2.50mg 
0/19 2.50mg 
0/19 2.50mg 
16/19 (2.50mg 
16/19 2.50mg 
0/19 2.50mg 
9/17 (2.08mg 
2/17 (2.08mg 
0/17 2.08mg 
14/17 (2.08mg 
 
7/17 (2.08mg 
7/17 2.08mg 
5/23 1.82mg 
6/23 (1.82mg 
3/23 (1.82mg 
1/23 1.82mg 
1/23 1.82mg 
16/23 (1.82m9 
21/23 1.82mg 
 
5/23 1.82mg 
7/22 1.72mg 
1/22 1.72mg 
15/22 1.72mg 
14/22 1.72mg 
 
1/22 1.72mg 
 
14/2 1) 
2/21) 
2/21 
0/21 
 
9/21) 
17/21 
8/21 
 
5/16) 
0/16) 
1/16 
6/16) 
2/16) 
4/16 
10/23 
 
1/23) 
0/23) 
4/23 
3/23 
8/23) 
15/23 
7/23 
12/20 
0/20 
13/20 
8/20 
5/20 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
Brkly Code 
 
Skipper;srfr;1976/Waisburger 1977/Projean psrs.com. 
 
STROBANE (dichloricid. mothproofsr) 8001-50-1 
 
2534 277 3.32mg n.s.s. 0/17 1.55mg 0/18 
 
a 277 3.32mg n.s.s. 1/17 1.55mg 0/18 
b 277 3.32mg n.s.s. 2/17 1.55mg 0/18 
2535 277 .300mg 2.14mg 1/18 1.45mg 11/18 
 
a 277 3.10m9 n.s.s. 2/18 1.45mg 0/18 
b 277 .319m9 9.63mg 3/18 1.45mg 11/18 
2536 277 1.75mg n.s.s. 0/16 1.55mg 1/18 
 
a 277 3.32mg n.s.s. 0/16 1.55mg 0/18 
b 277 1.02mg n.s.s. 0/16 1.55mg 3/18 
2537 277 .530mg 11.1mg 0/16 1.45mg 5/15 
 
a 277 .980mg n.s.s. 0/16 1.45mg 2/15 
b 277 1.35mg n.s.s. 0/16 1.45mg 1/15 
c 277 .330mg 2.28mg 0/16 1.45mg 8/15 
 
STYRENE 100-42-5 
 
2538 c02200 369.mg n.s.s. 
 
a c02200 188.og n.s.s. 
b c02200 369.mg n.s.s. 
c c02200 477.mg n.s.s. 
2539 c02200 198.mg 4.609m 
 
a c02200 154.mg n.s.s. 
b c02200 219.mg n.s.s. 
c c02200 198.mg 4.60gm 
 
2540 c02200 1.08gm n.s.s. 
 
a c02200 4.11gm n.s.a. 
2541 c02200 765.mg n.s.s. 
 
a c02200 6.85gm n.s.s. 
 
0/20 
2/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
9/20 
5/20 
0/20 
23/40 
0/40 
14/40 
1/40 
 
92.0mg 1/50 
92.0mg 11/50 
92.0mg 1/50 
92.0mg 1/50 
92. 0mg 6/49 
92.0mg 14/49 
92. 0mg 8/49 
92.0mg 6/49 
354.mg 25/50 
354.mg 0/50 
354.mg 14/50 
354.mg 0/50 
 
184.mg 5/50 
184.g 10/50 
184.mg 5/50 
184.mg 3/50 
184.g 9/50 
184.mg 21/50 
184.mg 13/50 
184.mg 9/50 
 
530.mg 17/50 1.06gm 3/50 
530.-m 1/50 1.069m 0/50 
530.mg 15/50 1.06gm 4/50 
530.mg 0/50 1.069m 0/50 
 
Innes;nt is,1968/1969 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun: /a,/*/c. 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
tun:a/a,a/c. 
Liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
t iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
STYRENE AND beta-NITROSTYRENE MIXTURE (CAS# 100-42-5 and 102-96-5) mixture 
2542 c02211 70.1mg n.s.s. 2/20 31.8mg 10/50 63.6mg 10/50 
 
a c02211 467.mg n.s.s. 1/20 31.8mg 1/50 63.6mg 0/50 
b c02211 288.g n.s.s. 0/20 31.8mg 2/50 63.6mg 0/50 
2543 c02211 30.8mg 556.mg 0/20 31.8mg 11/50 (63.6mg 2/50) 
 
a c02211 72.9mg n.s.s. 8/20 31.8mg 19/50 63.6mg 12/50 
b cO2211 118.mg n.s.s. 6/20 31.8mg 6/50 63.6mg 8/50 
c c02211 30.8mg 556.mg 0/20 31.8mg 11/50 (63.6mg 2/50) 
2544 c02211 34.7mg n.s.s. 12/20 23.5mg 34/50 47.0mg 30/50 
 
a c02211 270.mg n.s.s. 0/20 23.5mg 1/50 47.0mg 0/50 
2545 c02211 198.mg n.s.s. 10/20 47.0mg 18/50 94.0mg 11/50 
 
a c02211 387.mg n.s.s. 0/20 47.0mg 1/50 94.0mg 1/50 
 
SUCROSE 57-50-1 
 
2546 1090 14.9gm n.s.s. 7/45 13.09m 8/43 
 
a 1090 32.9gm n.s.s. 3/45 13.0gm 2/43 
 
SULFALLATE 95-06-7 
 
2547 c00453 18.4mg 41.6mg 0/20 73.1mg 33/50 146.mg 27/50 
 
a c00453 24.0mg 72.5mg 0/20 73.1mg 23/50 146.mg 11/50 
b c00453 42.8mg 1.169m 1/20 73.1mg 13/50 146.mg 4/50 
c c00453 57.4m9 190.mg 0/20 73.1mg 10/50 146.mg 16/50 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. S 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Roe;fctx,8, 135-145; 1970 
 
*gL :acn,asm. 
 
tun:a/a,a/c. S 
 
249 
 
250 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
d N f b6c set liv hpc 78w90 dv 
* N f b6c eat TBA NXB 78w90 dv 
f N f b6c eat liv NXB 78w90 dv 
g N f b6c oat Lun NXB 78w90 dv 
2548 N m b6c eat Lun NXA 78w91 dv 
 
m N m b6c sit Lun a/c 78w91 dv 
b N m b6c et --- hs 78w9l dv 
c N m b6c eat TBA NXB 78w91 dv 
d N m b6c eat Liv NXB 78w91 dv 
* N m b6c mit Lun NXB 78w91 dv 
2549 R f osm oat mgL acn 18m24 dv 
 
a R f osam at TBA NXB 18m24 dv 
b R f oam sat Liv NXB 18m24 dv 
2550 R m osm mat thy NXA 18m24 dv 
 
a R m oam eat sto NXA 18m24 dv 
b R m osm mat TBA NXB 18a24 dv 
c R m osm oat Liv NXB 18a24 dv 
 
TD50 ZIilpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
107.mg * P<.0005 
21.3mg * P<.0005 
107..g * P<.0005 
87.5mg * P<.007 
 
92.5mg * P<.0005c 
269.mg * P<.006 
539.mg * P<.03 
65.5mg * P<.03 
188.mg * P<.3 
 
92.5mg * P<.0005 
 
17.2mg * P<.0005c 
9.06mg * P<.03 
69.1mg * P<.2 
 
24.0mg * P<.007 
 
53.9mg / P<.007 c 
12.6mg P<.3 
no dre P-1. 
 
:+ 
 
SULFATE, SODIUN 1 O0ng ..:. lug. : 10. :100.1 :0 . : 100 .:1 .10 
 
2551 N f swl mat ... Lmu 32w52 v .> 3.96gm P<.6 
 
a N f swi mat Liv tum 32w52 v no dre P-1. 
b N f swi met Lun tum 32w52 v no dre P-1. 
 
SULFISOXAZOLE l00ng .. u. : ug . : 1 .0. :100. g : . . :10. :100 .. g. 10 
 
2552 N f b6c mat Liv hpc 24m24 + #2.659m \ P<.008 - 
 
a N f b6c mat Lun NXA 24m24 11.99m * P<.007 
b N f b6c mat TBA NXS 24m24 8.18gm * P<.5 
 
c N f b6c mat Liv NXB 24m24 2.659m \ P<.008 
d N f b6c mat Lun NXB 24m24 11.99m * P<.007 
2553 N a b6c mat TBA NXB 24m24 :> no dre Pl.. 
 
a N a b6c mat Liv NXB 24m24 6.919m * P<.3 
b N a b6c mat Lun NXB 24m24 49.59m \ P<. 
2554 R f f34 mat TBA NXB 24m25 :> no dre P-1. 
 
a R f f34 mat liv NXB 24m25 no dre P-1. 
 
2555 R a f34 mat TBA NXB 24m24 A 135.mg \ P<.09 - 
 
a R a f34 mat Liv NXS 24m24 26.39m * P<.9 
 
SULFITE, POTASSIUN NETABI- 00ng..:. .1ug. :10. :100. g : .1g :10. :100. : g. :10 
 
2556 N f icr wat Lun ada 24m24 .33.69m \ P<.1 
 
a N f icr wat Lun adc 24m24 100.9m * P<.4 
b N f icr wat Liv hms 24m24 204.9m * P<.3 
2557 N a icr wat Lun ad 24m24 84.89m * P<.3 
 
a N a icr wat Lun adc 24m24 84.89m * P<.3 
b N a icr wat Liv tum 24m24 no dre P-I. 
 
3-SULFOLENE 00ng ..u. l .ug. :10. :100. g :. 1g :10. :100. : g. :10 
 
2558 N f b6c gav TBA NXB 78w90 sv :> no dre P-I. 
 
a N f b6c gv Liv NXB 78w9O sv no dre P-1. 
b N f b6c gav Lun NXB 78w90 sv 1.949m * P<.4 
 
2559 N a b6c gav TBA NXB 78w90 sv :> 631.mg * P<.5 - 
 
a N m b6c gav Liv NXB 78w90 sv 415.mg * P<.09 
b N a b6c gav Lun NXB 78w90 av 882.mg * P<.2 
 
2560 R f osm gav TBA NXB 18a26 dv :> 5.37gm * P<. - 
 
a R f os gav Liv NXB 18m26 dv no dre P-1. 
 
2561 R a oca gav TBA NXB 16m26 adsv A 30.8mg * P<.04 - 
 
a R a osm gav Liv NXB 16m26 adav no dre P.1. 
 
4,4'-SULFONYLSISACETANILIDE 1 00ng..:..u ug. : 10. :100. g : . . : 10. :100 . . : 1g :. 10 
 
2562 R f buf mat mgL adc 43w92 a .> 55.6mg P<.3 + 
 
SYNPHYTINE 00ng .:.. l :ug. : 10. :100... : g . :10. :100 ... g :. 10 
 
2563 R a aci ipJ Liv mix 56w92 mv . 1.91*9 P<.02 + 
 
a R a aci ipj tba mix 56w92 mv 4.50mg P<.5 
TACE lOOng. .... l :ug . 10. :100. g : ..g :10. :100 ... g :. 10 
 
2564 R f cdr mat Liv tum 24m24 a .> no dra P-I. 
2565 R a cdr mat Liv tum 24m24 a .> no dre Pl.1 
 
TELODRIN 1Ong .. :. .ug. :10.. 10 . :lg 10 . .... :1100. :I g. :10 
 
2566 N f b6a orl lun ada 76w76 evx .> no dre 
 
a N f b6a orl Liv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b N f b6a orl tba mix 76w76 evx no dre 
2567 N a b6a orl lun ada 76w76 mvx .> .146"g 
 
a N o b6a orl Liv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b N a b6a orl tba mix 76w76 evx .136mg 
2568 N f b6c orl lun ada 76w76 evx .> .571mg 
 
a N f b6c orl Liv hpt 76w76 *vx no dre 
b N f b6c orl tba mix 76w76 *vx .277mg 
 
P-I. 
 
P.1 . 
P<.3 
 
P-I. 
P<..3 
P<.3 
P-I. 
P<. 2 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
d c00453 53.4mg 272.mg 
* c00453 13.7mg 39.2mg 
f c00453 53.4mg 272.mg 
g c00453 42.8mg 1.169m 
2548 c00453 59.6mg 276.mg 
 
a c00453 138.mg 2.29gm 
b cOO453 230.mg n.s.s. 
c c00453 31.1mg n.s.s. 
d c00453 62.4mg n.s.s. 
* cO0453 59.6mg 276.mg 
2549 c00453 9.63mg 34.8mg 
 
a c00453 4.01mg n.s.s. 
b c00453 21.4mg n.m.s. 
2550 c00453 9.75mg 321.mg 
 
a c00453 18.7mg 703.mg 
b c00453 3.94mg n.s.s. 
c c00453 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
 
0/20 
7/20 
0/20 
1/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
8/20 
7/20 
0/20 
0/50 
36/50 
 
1/50 
0/50 
0/50 
28/50 
 
0/50 
 
73.1mg 5/50 146.mg 8/50 
73.10g 42/50 146.-mg 37/50 
73.1mg 5/50 146.mg 8/50 
73.1mg 13/50 146.mg 4/50 
69.6mg 14/50 140.mg 17/50 
69.6mg 3/50 140.mg 9/50 
69.6mg 1/50 140.mg 6/50 
69.6mg 37/50 140.mg 39/50 
69.6mg 22/50 140.-mg 24/50 
69.6mg 14/50 140.mg 17/50 
6.70mg 7/50 10.8mg 11/50 
6.70mg 37/50 10.8mg 30/50 
6.70mg 3/50 10.8mg 2/50 
5.40mg 4/50 8.80mg 2/50 
5.40mg 0/50 8.80mg 5/50 
5.40mg 27/50 8.80mg 19/50 
5.40mg 0/50 8.80mg 0/50 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
S 
 
S 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
thy:cca,ccr. S 
sto:ppn,sqc,sqp. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
SULFATE, SODIUN (disodium suLfate) 7757-82-6 
 
2551 1118 544.mg n.m.s. 1/30 811.mg 2/30 
 
a 1118 1.25gm n.m.s. 0/30 811.mg 0/30 
b 1118 i .25gm n.s.s. 0/30 811.mg 0/30 
 
Coh.n;conr,38, 1398-1405; 1978 
 
SULFISOXAZOLE 127-69-5 
 
2552 c50022 1.019m 11.0gm 
 
a c50022 4.84gm 161.gm 
b c50022 1.71gm n.s.s. 
c c50022 1.019m 11.0gm 
d c50022 4.84gm 161.gm 
2553 c50022 2.17gm n.s.s. 
 
a c50022 1.87gm n.s.s. 
b c50022 1.30gm n.a.s. 
2554 c50022 470.mg n.s.s. 
 
a c50022 4.339m n.s.s. 
2555 c50022 50.6mg n.s.s. 
 
a c50022 1.109m n.a.s. 
 
0/50 
0/50 
24/50 
0/50 
0/50 
29/50 
15/50 
4/50 
38/50 
 
1/50 
28/50 
 
1/50 
 
490.mg 5/50 (1.96gm 
 
490.mg 1/50 1.96gm 
490.mg 29/50 1.96g 
 
490.mg 5/50 (1.969m 
490.mg 1/50 1.969m 
495.mg 31/50 1.98m 
495.m9 13/50 1.989g 
 
495.mg 5/50 (1.98m 
97.2mg 37/50 389.mg 
 
97.2mg 0/50 389.mg 
97.2mg 36/50 (392.mg 
97.2mg 4/50 392.mg 
 
2/50) 
5/50 
31/50 
 
2/50) 
5/50 
28/50 
21/50 
 
0/50) 
35/50 
 
0/50 
31/50) 
 
2/50 
 
S 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. S 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
SULFITE, POTASSIUM NETABI- 
2556 1391 8.269m n.a.s. 
 
a 1391 22.0gm n.a.s. 
b 1391 33.3gm n.s.s. 
2557 1391 20.99m n.s.s. 
 
a 1391 20.9gm n.s.s. 
b 1391 11.4gm n.s.s. 
 
3-SULFOLENE 77.79-2 
 
2558 c04557 426.mg n.s.s. 
 
a c04557 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
b c04557 480.mg n.s.s. 
2559 c04557 152.mg n.s.s. 
 
a c04557 179.mg n.s.s. 
b c04557 350.mg n.s.s. 
2560 c04557 60.1mg n.s.s. 
 
a c04557 n.a.s. n.a.s. 
2561 c04557 8.90mg n.s.s. 
 
a c04557 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
 
0/50 
1/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
 
4/20 
0/20 
1/20 
5/20 
1/20 
0/20 
14/20 
0/20 
9/20 
0/20 
 
2.00gm 
2.00gm 
2.009m 
1.67gm 
1.679m 
1.679m 
 
235 .mg 
235. mg 
235.mg 
190.-m 
 
190.mg 
190.m9 
52.5mg 
52.5mg 
88. 5mg 
88. 5mg 
 
2/50 (4.00gm 
0/50 4. 00gm 
0/50 4.00gm 
1/50 3.33gm 
1/50 3.33gm 
 
0/50 3.339m 
 
10/50 470.mg 
 
1/50 470.ms 
5/50 470.mg 
20/50 381 .mg 
11/50 381.ms 
4/50 381.mg 
39/50 105.mg 
 
2/50 105.mg 
13/50 249.mg 
 
1/50 249.mg 
 
4,4'-SULFONYLBISACETANILIDE 77-46-3 
 
2562 144 9.05mg n.s.s. 0/18 5.93mg 1/18 
 
Tanaka;oaes,3,451 -453; 1979 
 
0/50) 
3/50 
1/50 
1/50 
1/50 
0/50 
 
1/50 
0/50 
1/50 
8/50 
5/50 
2/50 
21/50 
 
0/50 
1/50 
0/50 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Morris;Jnci,24,149-180;1960 
 
Hirono; nci ,63,469-472;1979 
 
SYMPHYTINE 22571.95-5 
 
2563 1396 .655mg n.s.s. 0/13 1.20mg 4/14 
 
a 1396 .895mg n.s.s. 3/18 1.20mg 5/18 
 
TACE (chlorotrimnissno) 569-57-3 
 
2564 108 .162m9 n.s.s. 0/20 50.Oug 
2565 108 .162mg n.s.s. 0/20 50.Oug 
 
0/20 .200mg 0/20 2.00mg 0/20 
0/20 .200mg 0/20 2.00mg 0/20 
 
Sibson;txap, 11,489-510; 1967 
 
TELODRIN (isob.nzsn) 297-78.9 
 
2566 1249 .106mg n.s.s. 1/17 
 
a 1249 .177mg n.s.s. 0/17 
b 1249 84.1ug n.s.s. 2/17 
2567 1249 39.4ug n.s.s. 2/18 
 
a 1249 98.Oug n.s.s. 1/18 
b 1249 35.4ug n.s.s. 3/18 
2568 1249 92.9ug n.s.s. 0/16 
 
a 1249 .177mg n.s.s. 0/16 
b 1249 68.Oug n.a.s. 0/16 
 
89. lug 
89. lug 
89. lug 
82.9ug 
82.9ug 
82.9ug 
89. lug 
89. lug 
89. lug 
 
Innes;ntis,1968/1969 
 
1/18 
0/18 
2/18 
5/18 
1/18 
6/18 
1/18 
0/18 
2/18 
 
251 
 
Brkly Code 
 
252 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo +Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
2569MNm b6c ort Liv hpt 76w76 evx .>.500mg P<.3 - 
 
a N m b6c ott Lun ado 76w76 *vx .500mg P<.3 - 
b N m b6c ort tba mix 76w76 evx .242mg P<.1 - 
3,31,4,41-TETRAANINOBIPHENYL.4HCL lOOng..:..!ug... .10 ...:. 100. 1.m:Jg... .10 .... 100....1 
 
2570 N f chi mint Lun mix 77w98 A1.03gm * P<.07 - 
 
a NIf chi sat Liv mix 77w98 1.69gm * P<.03 - 
b N I chi oat tba mix 77w98 599.mg * P<.05 - 
2571 Nmo chi smt Lun mix 77w94 + 288.mg\P<.003 + 
 
m N m chi mint Liv mix 77w94 4. 17gm *P<.7 - 
b N m chi mat tba mix 77w94 224.mg \P<.003 
2572 ft m cdr mat Liv mix 18a25 A 259.mg aP<.02 
 
a ft m cdr mat tba mix 18m25 200.mg *P<.2 
 
2573 ft m cdr mat Liv hpt 18m25 pool A 395.mg aP<.02 . 
2,3,5,6-TETRACHLORO-4-NITROANISOLE . .: ..lug... .10 .... 100... 1m.jg .:10 ...:. 100... .Ig .:10 
 
2574 N I b6c mat TBA NXB 24m24 :>61.7mg * P<.6 - 
 
a N f b6c mat tiv NXS 24m24 no dre P-I. 
b N f b6c mat Lun NXB 24m24 1.77gm * P<1. 
 
2575 N a b6c mat TBA NXB 24m24 :>no dre P.1. - 
 
a N m b6c mat Liv NXB 24m24 no dre P.1. 
b N m b6c mat Lun NXB 24m24 215.mg * P<.8 
 
2576 ft f 134 mat utm map 24m24 A #19.1mg a P<.05 - 
 
a ft f 134 mat Liv NXA 24m24 45.8mg a <0 
b Rft f34 mat TBA NXB 24m24 106.mg * P<.9 
c Rft 1 34 mat Liv NXB 24m24 45.8mg * P<.02 
 
2577 ft m `34 mat Liv NXA 24m24 A #20.0mg aP<.03 - 
 
a ft m 134 mat TBA NXB 24m24 no drm P.1. 
 
b ft m 134 mat Liv NXB 24m24 20.0mg *P<.03 
2,21,5,51-TETRtACHLOftOSENZIDINE 100ng..:..lug... .10 ...:. 100. 1.m:.lg... .10.. 00... 1 
 
2578 Nf ddxmeat ...mty 24m24m . 109.mg P<.0005 
 
a N fddx mat tba mat 24a24 a 87.2mg P<.0005 
2579 Rft wis mat Liv hpt 24a24 a . 735.mg P<.2 
 
a Rftfwisset ubl tcc 24m24mo 2.31gm P<.4 
2580 ft m wis mat ubt tcc 24.24 a . 561.mg P<.2 
 
a ft m wia mat Liv tum 24.24 a no dra P-1. 
2,3,7,8.TETRtACHLORtOOIBENZO.p-DIOXIN . .:.. lug... .10 ...:. 100. 1.m:.lg... .10 .... 100.... g . 10 
 
2581 + .N I b6c gay NXB NXB 24.24 526.ng Z P<.002 
a ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~N f b6c gay --- thc 24.24 705.ng a P<c.008 
 
b N f b6c gay Liv NXA 24.24 756.ng * P'z.008 c 
C N I b6c gay --- tym 24.24 682.ng * P<.04 
d N I b6c gay --- NXA 24.24 709.ng * P<.05 
 
a1 N f b6c gay Liv hpc 24.24 1.30ug * P<.02 c 
f N f b6c gay thy fcm 24.24 1.59ug * P<.03 c 
g N f b6c gay aub fbm 24.24 1.72ug * P<.02 
h N 1 b6c gay TBA NXB 24.24 494.ng a P.'.06 
 
i ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~N f b6c gay tiv NXB 24.24 756.ng * P<.008 
 
N I b6c gay tun NXB 24.24 no dra P-I. 
 
2582 :+Nm b6c gay Liv NXA 24.24 86.Sng a P<.003 c 
 
a N m b6c gay Liv hpc 24m24 147.ng a P<.02 c 
b N m b6c gav tun NXA 24m24 198.ng a P<.02 
 
c N m b6c gay Lun a/a 24.24 219.ng * P<.02 
 
d N m b6c gay Liv hpa 24.24 271.ng * P<.07 c 
a1 N m b6c gay TBA NXS 24.24 141.ng * P. 
 
f N m b6c gayvAiv NXB 24.24 86.Sng * P<.003 
g N m b6c gay Lun NXB 24.24 198.ng a P<.02 
 
2583 .>N m ahr gay tun tum 12m24 a no dre P-1. - 
 
a N m ahr gav tiv mix 12m24 a no dra P-I. . 
b N m ahr gay tba mix 12m24 a no drm P-1. 
 
2584 ftR 1 omm gay liv NXA 24.24 127.ng a P<.0005c 
 
a Rft oam gay Liv nnd 24.24 154.ng a P<.003 c 
b Rft omm gay TBA NXB 24.24 1.5sug a PdI. 
 
c Rft omm gay Liv NXB 24m24 127.ng a P.c.0005 
 
2585 ftR m osm gay thy NXA 24.,24 101.ng a P<.002 c 
 
a ft m omm gay thy fca 24.24 113.ng a P<.003 c 
b ft m omm gay Liv NXA 24.24 391.ng a P<.004 
c ft m omm gay Liv nnd 24.24 391.ng a P<.004 
d ft m omm gay adr coa 24.24 12.lng Z P<.04 
a ft m omm gay aub fib 24.24 169.ng a P.c.02 
f ft m omm gav TBA NXB 24m24 133.ng a P<.3 
 
g ft m osm gav Liv NXB 24.24 391.ng a P<.004 
 
2586 + ft a ada mat tun sqa 78w95 79.6ng a P<.0005 
 
a ft~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ m ada mat liv six 78w95 83.lng a P<.0005 
 
2587 + Rft I da mat Liv hph 24.24 6.67ng Z P<.0005. 
 
a Rft Isda mat tiv hpc 24.24 65.lng a P<.0005+ 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
2569 1249 81.5ug n.s.a. 0/16 82.9ug 1/17 
 
a 1249 81.5ug n.s.s. 0/16 82.9ug 1/17 
b 1249 59.5ug n.s.a. 0/16 82.9ug 2/17 
 
3,3',4,4'-TETRAAMINOSIPHENYL.4HCl (3,3'-diminobsnzidine.4HCL) 7411-49-6 
2570 381 377.mg n.s.s. 4/17 468.mg 6/19 851.mg 4/17 
 
* 381 526.mg n.s.s. 0/17 48.mg 1/19 851.ng 3/17 
b 381 231.mg n.s.s. 11/17 48.mg 9/19 851.mg 11/17 
2571 381 117.mg 1.52gm 1/19 432.mg 6/18 (785.mg 7/22) 
 
a 381 321.mg n.s.s. 1/19 432.mg 1/18 785.mg 1/22 
b 381 95.1mg 1.50gm 4/19 432.mg 9/18 (785.mg 13/22) 
2572 381 89.7mg n.s.s. 0/16 120.mg 1/16 240..g 3/15 
 
* 381 63.4mg n.s.s. 11/16 120.mg 8/16 240.mg 12/15 
2573 381 115.mg n.s.s. 2/I1p 120.mg 1/16 240.mg 3/15 
 
Weisburger;j1pt,2,325-356;1978/pers.co m./RussfieLd 1973 
 
2,3,5,6.TETRACHLORO-4-1ITROANISOLE 
2574 c03032 11.8mg n.s.s. 34/55 
 
a c03032 83.1mg n.s.s. 11/55 
b c03032 43.3mg n.s.s. 4/55 
2575 c03032 16.9mg n.s.s. 43/55 
 
a c03032 17.9m9 n.s.s. 28/55 
b c03032 22.9mg n.s.s. 12/55 
2576 c03032 8.30mg n.s.s. 2/50 
 
a c03032 17.4mg n.s.s. 0/50 
b c03032 5.10mg n.s.s. 27/50 
c c03032 17.4mg n.s.s. 0/50 
2577 c03032 9.41mg n.s.s. 0/50 
 
a c03032 6.57mg n.s.s. 28/50 
b c03032 9.41mg n.s.s. 0/50 
 
2438-882 
 
7.70mg 37/55 15.5mg 38/55 
7.70mg 3/55 15.5mg 5/55 
7.70mg 8/55 15.5mg 4/55 
7.20m9 38/55 14.3mg 36/55 
 
7.20mg 16/55 (14.3mg 10/55) 
7.20mg 17/55 14.3mg 13/55 
3.00mg 9/50 5.90mg 8/50 
3.00mg 1/50 5.90mg 4/50 
3.00mg 34/50 5.90mg 28/50 
3.00mg 1/50 5.90mg 4/50 
 
2.40mg 5/50 4.70mg 1/25 4.60mg 3/24 
2.40mg 27/50 4.70mg 12/25 4.60mg 14/24 
2.40mg 5/50 4.70mg 1/25 4.60mg 3/24 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun: /a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
S 
Liv:hpc,nnd. S 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Liv:hpc,nnd. S 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
2,2' ,5,5' -TETRACHLOROBENZIDINE 15721-02-5 
 
2578 558 57.0mg 240.mg 0/20 130.mg 14/25 
 
a 558 47.0mg 184.mg 0/20 130.mg 16/25 
2579 558 222.mg n.s.s. 0/10 150.mg 3/23 
 
* 558 376.mg n.s.s. 0/10 150.mg 1/23 
2580 558 169.mg n.s.s. 0/11 120.mg 3/22 
 
a 558 544.mg n.s.s. 0/11 120.mg 0/22 
 
2,3,7,8-TETRACHLORODISENZO-p-DIOXIN (TCDD, dioxin) 1746-01-6 
 
2581 c03714 236.ng 2.99ug 3/75 5.SSng 9/50 27.8ng 7/ 
 
a c03714 294.ng 19.3ug 9/75 5.55ng 4/50 27.8ng S/ 
b c03714 303.ng 20.5ug 3/75 5.55ng 6/50 27.8ng 6/ 
c c03714 262.ng n.s.s. 18/75 5.55ng 11/50 27.8ng 13/ 
d c03714 266.ng n.s.s. 18/75 5.55ng 12/50 27.8ng 13/ 
* c03714 466.ng n.s.s. 1/75 5.55ng 2/50 27.8ng 2/ 
f c03714 523.ng n.s.s. 0/75 5.SSng 3/50 27.8ng 1/ 
9 c03714 594.ng n.s.s. 1/75 5.55ng 1/50 27.8ng 1/ 
h c03714 184.ng n.s.s. 36/75 5.55ng 25/50 27.8ng 28/ 
i c03714 303.ng 20.5ug 3/75 5.5Sng 6/50 27.8ng 6/ 
J c03714 956.ng n.s.s. 2/75 5.55ng 3/50 27.8ng 4/ 
2582 c03714 40.6ng 613.ng 15/75 1.39ng 12/50 6.94ng 13/ 
 
a c03714 59.8ng n.s.s. 8/75 1.39ng 9/50 6.94ng 8/ 
b c03714 78.4ng n.s.s. 10/75 1.39ng 2/50 6.94ng 4/ 
c c03714 84.Ing n.s.s. 7/75 1.39ng 2/50 6.94ng 4/ 
d c03714 90.3ng n.s.s. 7/75 1.39ng 3/50 6.94ng 5/ 
* c03714 43.3ng n.s.s. 40/75 1.39ng 25/50 6.94ng 27/ 
f c03714 40.6ng 613.ng 15/75 1.39ng 12/50 6.94ng 13/ 
9 c03714 78.4ng n.s.s. 10/75 1.39ng 2/50 6.94ng 4/ 
2583 383. 105.ng n.s.s. 15/38 .502ng 27/44 50.2ng 18/ 
 
a 383 890.ng n.s.s. 7/38 .502ng 13/44 50.2ng 21/ 
b 383a 899.ng n.s.s. 27/38 .502ng 39/44 50.2ng 36/ 
2584 c03714 60.Ing 520.ng 5/75 1.39ng 1/50 6.94ng 3/ 
 
a c03714 67.7ng 1.0Sug 5/75 1.39ng 1/50 6.94ng 3/ 
b c03714 52.1ng n.s.s. 54/75 1.39ng 40/50 6.94ng 36/ 
c c03714 60.Ing 520.ng 5/75 1.39ng 1/50 6.94ng 3/ 
2585 c03714 41.9ng 664.ng 1/75 1.39ng 5/50 6.94ng 6/ 
 
a c03714 45.9ng 875.ng 1/75 1.39ng 5/50 6.94ng 4/ 
b c03714 110.ng 3.83ug 0/75 1.39ng 0/50 6.94ng 0/ 
c c03714 110.ng 3.83ug 0/75 1.39ng 0/50 6.94ng 0/ 
d c03714 4.62ng n.s.a. 6/75 1.39ng 9/50 6.94ng 12/ 
* c03714 60.1ng n.s.a. 3/75 1.39ng 1/50 6.94ng 3/ 
f c03714 33.Sng n.s.s. 40/75 1.39ng 29/50 6.94ng 33/ 
9 c03714 110.ng 3.83ug 0/75 1.39ng 0/50 6.94ng 0/ 
2586 377 17.5ng 545.ng 0/9 .035ng 0/9 .117ng 0/ 
 
a 377 26.4ng 360.ng 
 
2587 366 3.26ng 22.Sng 
 
a 366 28.9ng 173.ng 
 
248.ng 4/10 
 
0/9 .03Sng 0/9 .117ng 
248.ng 4/10 
 
8/86 1.00ng 3/50 10.Ong 
1/86 1.00ng 0/50 10.0ng 
 
Yoshimoto; jknJ ,25,123-128;1978 
 
150 278.ng 15/50 Iiv:hpa,hpc; thy:fca. C 
 
'50 278.ng 14/50 S 
'50 278.ng 11/50 Liv:hpa,hpc. 
 
'50 278.ng 20/50 S 
'50 278.ng 20/50 - - Leu,ly. S 
'50 278.ng 6/50 
'50 278.ng 5/50 
 
'50 278.ng 5/50 S 
'50 278.ng 34/50 
 
'50 278.ng 11/50 liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
'S0 278.ng 2/50 Lun:a/a,a/c. 
'50 69.4ng 27/50 liv:hpa,hpc. 
'50 69.4ng 17/50 
 
'50 69.4ng 13/50 tun:a/a,a/c. S 
'50 69.4ng 11/50 S 
'50 69.4ng 10/50 
'50 69.4ng 37/50 
 
'50 69.4ng 27/50 liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
'50 69.4ng 13/50 Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
'44 (502.ng 11/43) Toth;natu,278,548-549;1979 
'44 502.ng 13/43 
144 502.ng 27/43 
 
'50 69.4ng 14/50 liv:hpc,nnd. 
'50 69.4ng 12/50 
/50 69.4ng 43/50 
 
'50 69.4ng 14/50 liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
'50 69.4ng 11/50 thy:fca,fcc. 
'50 69.4ng 10/50 
 
'50 69.4ng 3/50 liv:hpc,nnd. S 
'50 69.4ng 3/50 S 
'50 (69.4ng 9/50) S 
tS0 69.4ng 7/50 S 
 
'50 69.4ng 32/50 
 
'50 69.4ng 3/50 liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
'10 1.17ng 0/9 11.7ng 0/10 51.2ng 0/10 
 
Van NilLer;cmsp,10,625-632;1977/p.rs.com. 
'10 1.17ng 0/9 11.7ng 0/10 51.2ng 1/10 
 
'50 (100.ng 23/50) Kociba;txap,46,279-303;1978/p.rs.com. 
'50 100.ng 11/50 
 
253 
 
Brkly Code 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
 
R f sds *at lun sqk 24.24 
R f sds eat hnt sqs 24.24 
R m ads eat adr coo 24.24 
R m ads sat hnt sqs 24X24 
R . ads oat ton sqs 24X24 
 
TD50 2'Iilpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
192.ng * P<.0005+ 
205.ng * P<.0005+ 
217.ng * P<.002 
 
393.ng * P<.002 + 
628.ng * P<.04 + 
 
2,4,5,4'-TETRACNLOROOIPHENYL SULFONE ..:..lug. :10. :100.. g :. . :10. :100.. : .1 :10 
 
2589 N f b6s orl Liv hpt 76876 *vx .> 233.mg 
 
a N f b6a orl lun do 76w76 *vx no dre 
b N f b6c orl tbc mix 76w76 *vx 233.mg 
2590 N m b6a orl lun ad. 76w76 *vx .> no dre 
 
a N o b6a orl liv hpt 76876 evx no dre 
b N m b6c orl tbs mix 76w76 *vx no dre 
2591 N f b6c orl liv hpt 76876 *vx .> no dre 
 
c N f b6c orl lun mix 76w76 *vx no dre 
b N f b6c orl tbc mix 76w76 *vx 220.mg 
2592 N a b6c orl liv hpt 76w76 *vx . 46.2mg 
 
a N m b6c orl Lun ad. 76w76 *vx 205.39 
 
b N o b6c orl tbc mix 76876 evx 35.6mg 
 
P<.3 - 
P-1. - 
 
P<.7 
P-I. 1 
 
P-1. _ 
 
P-1. - 
 
P-1. _ 
Pal. 1 
 
P<.3 - 
P<.02 - 
P<.3 - 
P<.007 - 
 
1,1,2,2-TETRACHLOROETHANE O0ng.. :. .Iug. :10. :100.. mg :.j. :10. :100. :. 10 
 
2593 N f b6c gov liv hpc 78v92 v :+ : 35.4mg / P.0005c 
 
a N f b6c gov TEA NXB 78w92 v 37.2mg * P<.0005 
b N f b6c gov liv NX 78w92 v 35.4o / P<.0005 
c N f b6c gv lun NX7M92 v 1.91g m P<.3 
 
2594 N f b6c gav liv hpc 78w91 v pool :+ : 35.8mg * P<.0005c 
2595 N * b6c gov liv hpc 78w92 cv + 41.6mg I P<.0005c 
 
c N * b6c gov TA NXH 7892 cv 38.7mg I P<.0005 
b N * b6c gcv liv NXB 78w92 v 41.6mg / P<.0005 
c N * b6c gov lun NXB 78w92 v 895.mg P<.5 
 
2596 N m b6c gav liv hpc 78w91 cv pool + 45.4mg / P<.0005c 
2597 R f osm gov TEA NXB 18.26 cdv :> 4.2mg * P<.5 - 
 
c R f os ov liv NXB lm26 cdv no dre P-1. 
 
2598 R * om gov TEA NXB 18.26 cdv :> no dre PaI. - 
 
a R m o gov liv NXB 18.26 cdv 624.mg P<.2 
TETRACHLOROETHYLENE* 100ng..: ..ug. :10. :100.. mg :.j. :10. :100.. g :.:10 
 
2599 N f b6c gav liv hpc 7w90 v + 75.6mg * P<.OOOSc 
 
c N f b6c gcv TEA NXE 7890 v 98.1m9 * P<.0005 
b N f b6c gcv liv NXB7S9 v 75.6mg * P<.0005 
c N f b6c gov lun NX 7S9O v 2.95go * P<.2 
 
2600 N * b6c gcv liv hpc 7w90 v :+ 123.mg * P<.0005c 
 
a N m b6c gov TEA NX 790 v 160.mg * P<.002 
 
b N * b6c gcv liv NXBS 9 v 123.mg * P<.0005 
c N a b6c gov lunNX 78w9 v no dre PaI. 
2601 Rt f om goav TA NXB 1J826 dcv :> 1.71g0 * P<.7 
 
c R f om gav liv NXB llm26 dsv no dre P-1. 
2602 R a os goav TEA NXB 18.26 dsv :> 3.02gm * P<.9 
a R os. gov liv NXB 1J826 dcv no dre P-1. 
 
TETRACHLORVINPHOS 00ng. ... l ug. :10. :100.. g :. .. : 10. :100. :. 10 
 
2603 N f b6c eat liv NXA 8092 905.mg \ P<.02 a 
 
c N f b6c eat TBA NXB 8092 7.8Ug * k. 
 
b N f b6c t liv NXB 92 905.mg \ P<.02 
c N f b6c oat lun NXI 892 7.79g * P<.5 
 
2604 N f b6c *t liv NXA 8Ow"9 pool + 1.07gm \ P<.002 c 
 
a N f b6c ot liv nnd 80w90 1.38gm \ P<.0005c 
 
260S5 N b6c eat liv NX 8092 : + 228.mg \ P<.0005c 
 
a N * b6c et liv hpc 8 92 466.mg * P<.002 c 
b N m b6c ect TA NXE 92 m.mg \ P<.007 
c N m b6c eat liv NX 8092 228.mg \ P<.0005 
d N m b6c eat lun NXE 80v92 401.gm * P<1. 
 
2606 N m b6c eat liv XA 80w90 pool : 280.mg \ P<.0005c 
 
c N m b6c eat liv hpc 80w90 534.mg * P<.0005c 
b N n b6c et liv nnd SOw90 1.779m \ P<.02 a 
2607 f o eat pit cra 19.26 v : #1.58m * P<.03 - 
a R f o eat TBA NXB 19m26 v no dre Pal. 
b R f o eat liv S 19m26 v no drm P-1. 
 
260S R f os m t thy cc 19m25 v pool : t 1.929m * P<.05 a 
 
a R f am eat dr co 19m25 v 2.28m * P<.4 a 
2609 R o eat TEA NXB 19.26 v :> no dre Pal. - 
 
a R * om eat liv NXB 19m26 v no dre P-1. 
TETRAETHYLTNIURN DISULFIDE _ OOng..: ..ug. :10. :100. 1mg :_9. :10. :100. :. 10 
 
2610 N f b6c eat TBA NXB 25m25 no die P-1. - 
 
a N f b6c eat liv NX8 25.25 120.mg \ Pc.2 
b N f b6c eat lun NX 2Sm25 323.mg * P<.2 
2611 N f b6c orl lun mix 76876 evx .> 138.mg P<.2 
 
c N f b6c orl liv hpt 76476 evx 283.mg P<.3 
 
254 
 
b 
c 
 
2588 
 
a 
 
:+ 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
366 66.7ng 559.ng 
366 73.9ng 972.ng 
366 81.lng 1.27ug 
366 126.ng 2.05ug 
366 161.ng n.s.s. 
 
0/86 
0/86 
0/86 
0/86 
0/86 
 
I .OOng 
1. OOng 
I .OOng 
I .OOng 
I .OOng 
 
0/50 10.Ong 0/50 100.ng 
0/50 10.Ong 1/50 100.ng 
0/50 10.0ng 2/50 100.ng 
0/50 10.Ong 0/50 100.ng 
1/50 10.Ong 1/50 100.ng 
 
2,4,5,4'-TETRACHLORODIPHENYL SULFONE (tetrafidon) 116-29-0 
2589 1282 37.9mg n.s.s. 0/17 36.4mg 1/18 
 
a 1282 43.3mg n.s.s. 1/17 36.4mg 1/18 
b 1282 26.1mg n.s.s. 2/17 36.4mg 3/18 
2590 1282 31.7mg n.s.s. 2/18 33.9mg 2/18 
 
a 1282 67.2mg n.s.s. 1/18 33.9mg 0/18 
b 1282 35.1mg n.s.s. 3/18 33.9mg 2/18 
2591 1282 68.1mg n.s.s. 0/16 36.4mg 0/17 
 
a 1282 68.1mg n.s.s. 0/16 36.4mg 0/17 
b 1282 35.8mg n.s.s. 0/16 36.4mg 1/17 
2592 1282 15.9mg n.s.s. 0/16 33.9m9 4/17 
 
a 1282 33.3mg n.s.s. 0/16 33.9m9 1/17 
b 1282 13.4mg 481.mg 0/16 33.9mg 5/17 
 
1,1,2,2-TETRACHLOROETHANE 
 
2593 c03554 25.9mg 50.2mg 
 
a c03554 26.1mo 61.6mg 
 
b c03554 25.9mg 50.2mg 
c c03554 449.mg n.s.s. 
2594 c03554 26.2mg 50.3mg 
2595 c03554 27.4mg 66.8mg 
 
a cO3554 25.2mg 66.6mg 
b cO3554 27.4mg 66.8mg 
 
c cO3554 162.mg n.s.s. 
2596 cO3554 29.7mg 75.1mg 
 
2597 cO3554 20.7mg n.s.s. 
 
a cO3554 n.s.s. n.e.s. 
2598 c03554 60.2mg n.s.a. 
 
a c03554 185.mg n.s.s. 
 
79-34-5 
 
0/20 87.7mg 
2/20 87.7mg 
0/20 87.7mg 
0/20 87.7mg 
 
0/40p 87.7mg 
1/20 87.7mg 
4/20 87.7m9 
1/20 87.7mg 
 
1/20 87.7mg 
3/40p 87.7mg 
12/20 21.9mg 
0/20 21.9mg 
11/20 31.6mg 
 
0/20 31.6mg 
 
TETRACHLOROETHYLENE* 127-18-4 
 
2599 c04580 47.1mg 130.mg 0/20 
 
a c04580 54.1mg 259.mg 5/20 
b c04580 47.1mg 130.mg 0/20 
c c04580 480.mg n.s.s. 0/20 
2600 c04580 79.5mg 260.mg 2/20 
 
a c04580 90.1mg 622.mg 6/20 
b c04580 79.5mg 260.ng 2/20 
c c04580 n.s.s. n.s.a. 0/20 
2601 c04580 263.mg n.s.s. 7/20 
 
a c04580 n..s.. n.s.a. 0/20 
2602 c04580 239.mg n.e.a. 5/20 
 
a cO4580 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/20 
 
TETRACHLORVINPHOS 961-11-5 
 
2603 c00168 528.mg n.s.s. 0/9 
 
a c00168 1.049m n.s.s. 1/9 
b c00168 528.mg n.s.s. 0/9 
c cO0168 2.87gm n.s.s. 0/9 
 
2604 c00168 558.mg 4.20gm 3/49p 
 
* c00168 705.mg 4.79gm 1/49p 
2605 c00168 158.mg 432.mg 0/10 
 
a c00168 348.mg 1.93gm 0/10 
b c00168 175.mg 3.98g" 2/10 
c c00168 158.mg 432.mg 0/10 
d c00168 3.40gm n.s.s. 0/10 
 
2606 c00168 176.mg 541.mg 8/50p 
 
a c00168 371.mg 90M.g 5/SOp 
b c00168 737.mg n.s.s. 3/SOp 
2607 c00168 743.mg n.s.s. 0/10 
 
* c00168 454.mg n.s.a. 7/10 
b c00168 2.01gm n.s.s. 0/10 
 
2608 c00168 775.mg n.s.a. 1/55p 
 
a c00168 667.mg n.s.s. 2/55p 
2609 c00168 226.mg n.s.s. 6/10 
 
* cO0168 1.10gm n.s.a. 0/10 
 
240.mg 
240.mg 
240.mg 
240.mg 
332.mg 
332.mg 
332.mg 
332.mg 
240.mg 
240.mg 
238.mg 
238.mg 
 
904.mg 
904.m0 
904.mg 
904.mg 
904.m9 
904.m0 
835.mg 
 
835.mo 
835.mg 
835.mg 
835.mg 
 
835.mo 
835.mg 
835.mo 
153.mg 
153.mg 
153.mg 
153.mg 
153.mg 
 
122.mg 
122.mg 
 
30/50 175.mg 
33/50 175.mg 
30/50 175.9m 
 
1/50 175.mg 
30/50 175.mg 
13/50 175.mg 
17/50 175.mg 
13/50 175.mg 
2/50 175.mg 
13/50 175.mg 
28/50 39.0mg 
 
0/50 39.0mg 
17/50 55.2mg 
0/50 55.2mg 
 
19/50 478.mg 
19/50 478.mg 
19/50 478.mg 
0/50 478.mg 
32/50 663.m 
33/50 663.mg 
32/50 663.mg 
3/50 663.mg 
 
17/50 480.mg 
0/50 480.mg 
5/50 477.mg 
0/50 477-.m 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
Iliv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
43/50 
43/50 
43/50 
 
1/50 
43/50 
44/50 
45/50 
44/50 
 
2/50 
44/50 
23/50 
0/50 
20/50 
 
3/50 
 
l iv:hps,hpc,nnd. 
 
tun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
I iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
t iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
tun:a/a,a/c. 
 
19/50 
19/50 
19/50 
 
1/50 
27/50 
27/50 
27/50 
0/50 
15/50 
0/50 
5/50 
0/50 
 
19/50 (1.81gm 11/49) 
25/50 1.81gm 19/49 
19/50 (1.81gm 11/49) 
 
5/50 1.81gm 5/49 
19/50 (1.81gm 11/49) 
14/SO (1.81gm 9/49) 
47/50 (1.679m 42/50) 
36/50 1.67gm 40/SO 
47/50 (1.679m 42/50) 
47/50 (1.679m 42/50) 
 
4/50 1.67gm 2/50 
47/50 (1.679m 42/50) 
36/S0 1.679m 40/SO 
11/50 (1.67gm 2/50) 
 
1/50 306.mo 8/50 
23/S0 306.mg 25/50 
 
2/50 306.m0 0/50 
2/50 306.mg 7/50 
7/50 306.mg 6/50 
24/S0 245.mg 18/SO 
2/S0 245.mg 0/SO 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
tun:a/a,a/c. 
 
t iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
t iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
l iv:hpc,nnd. 
I iv:hps,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
I iv:hpc,nnd. 
 
t iv:hpc,nnd. 
 
t iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
tun:&/a,s/c. 
t iv:hpc,nnd. 
 
t iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
l iv:hps,hpc,nnd. 
 
TETRAETHYLTHIUEAN DISULFIDE 
2610 cO2959 99.5mo n.s.s. 
 
* cO2959 36.4mg n.s.s. 
b cO2959 111.mg n.s.s. 
2611 1100 33.8mo n.s.s. 
 
* 1100 46.1mg n.s.a. 
 
(ethyl 
8/20 
0/20 
1/20 
0/16 
0/16 
 
tuads) 97-77-8 
 
13.0mg 18/50 65.Omg 20/50 
 
13.0mg 3/SO (65.0mg 0/50) 
13.0mg 4/SO 65.Omg 9/50 
44.3mg 2/18 
 
4.3mo 1/18 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
tun:a/a,s/c. 
 
Inns;ntis,1968/1969 
 
b 
 
C 
 
2588 
ba 
 
255 
 
7/50 
4/50 
5/50 
4/50 
3/50 
 
Brkly Code 
 
256 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
b N f b6c orl lun car 76076 *vx 
c N f b6c orl lun ade 76076 evx 
d N f b6c orl tba mix 76w76 *vx 
2612 N m b6c set TBA NXS 25.25 
 
a N m b6c set liv NXB 25.25 
b N m b6c eat lun NXB 25.25 
 
2613 N m b6c orl Liv hpt 76w76 *vx 
 
a N m b6c orl lun ads 76w76 *vx 
b N m b6c orl tba mix 76w76 *vx 
2614 N f b6a orl lun ad. 76w76 *vx 
 
a N f b6a orl Liv hpt 76w76 *vx 
b N f b6e orl tba mix 76w76 *vx 
2615 N m b6s orl sub fbs 76w76 evx 
 
a N m b6a orl liv hpt 76w76 *vx 
b N m b6a orl lun ado 76w76 evx 
c N a b6a orl tba mix.76w76 *vx 
2616 R f f34 eat TSA NXB 25.25 
 
a R f f34 eat liv NXB 25.25 
2617 R m f34 eat TBA NXB 25.25 
 
a R m f34 eat liv NXB 25.25 
 
2618 R f cdr eat *gI mix 78078 o 
 
a R f cdr oat liv he 7878 e 
b R f cdr eat liv hct 78078 e 
c R f cdr eat tbe mix 78078 e 
2619 R m cdr set liv hct 78w78 e 
 
a R m cdr set tbe mix 78w78 a 
 
283.mg 
283.mg 
64.5mg 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
23.7mg 
43.2mg 
17.0mg 
4.14gm 
no dre 
1.94gm 
15.4mg 
197.mg 
no dre 
10. 1mg 
no dre 
1.43gm 
no dre 
no dre 
68.9m9 
no dre 
no dre 
193.mg 
366.mg 
no dre 
 
P<.3 
P<.3 
P<. 02 
Po. 1. 
P-I. 
P-I. 
 
P<.0005 
P<.007 
P<.0005 
P<1. 
P-1. 
P<1 . 
 
P<. 0005 
P<. 5 
P-I. 
 
P<.0005 
 
PI. 1.- 
 
* P<.4 
 
P-1. _ 
P<.04 
P-I. 
Pal. 
P<.6 
P<.3 
P-I. 
 
TETRAFLUORO-m-PHElEYLENEDIANINE.2HCl .. :. .lug. :10. :100.. g : . . :10. :100.. :19 :10 
 
2620 N f chi *at liv mix 77w94 :> 6.509m * P<1. - 
 
a N f chi *at lun mix 77w94 no dre P-1. 
b N f chi *at tbe mix 77w94 no dre P-1. 
 
2621 N m chi eat liv mix 77w94 : 78.3mg * P<.02 
 
a N * chi *at liv hpt 77w94 86.3mg * P<.02 + 
b N m chi *at lun mix 77w94 1.139m * P<.7 
c N m chi *at tbe mix 77w94 331.mg * P<.7 
 
2622 N m chi *at liv hpt 77w94 pool + 109.mg * P<.0005+ 
2623 R m cdr *at liv mix 77w98 v no dre P-1. - 
 
a R m cdr *at tba mix 77w98 v 14.6mg * P<.003 - 
 
TETRANYDRO-2-NITRtOSO-2H-1,2-OXAZINE ..: ..lug. :10. 1 :100. g : . . :10. :100.1 :0 1 :10 
 
2624 R b *di wet Lun mix 66"w82 . . 46.1mg 
 
a R b sda wit tba mix 66"w82 17.6ag 
b R b sda wet tba mel 66w82 24.3mg 
 
TETRAMETHYLTHIURAN DISULFIDE 10Ong.. .. ug. : 10 .100. :1g ..: 10 . 100. :19 . 10 
 
2625 N f b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx .> 159.mg 
 
a N f b6a orl liv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b N f b6a orl tbe mix 76w76 evx no dre 
2626 N a b6a orl lun ado 76w76 evx .> no dre 
 
a N m b6a orl liv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b N m b6a orl tba mix 76w76 evx no dre 
2627 N f b6c orl Liv hpt 76w76 evx .> no dre 
 
a N f b6c orl Lun mix 76w76 evx no dre 
b N f b6c orl tba mix 76w76 evx no dre 
2628 N m b6c orl liv hpt 76w76 evx . 9.91mg 
 
a N m b6c orl Lun mix 76w76 evx no dre 
b N m b6c orl tba mix 76w76 evx 6.39mg 
 
TETRANETHYLTHIURAN NONOSULFIDE l1Ong..:. .Iug. 1 :10 . :100. g : .g. :10. :100.1 :0 1 :10 
 
2629 N f b6i orl liv hpt 76w76 evx .> 327.mg 
 
a N f b6i orl Lun ade 76w76 evx no dre 
b N f b6i orl tba mix 76w76 evx 148.mg 
2630 N m b6i orl Lun ade 76w76 evx .> no dre 
 
a N m b6a orl liv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b N m b6a orl tbi mix 76w76 *vx no dre 
2631 N f b6c orl liv hpt 76w76 evx .> no dre 
 
a N f b6c orl lun mix 76w76 evx no dre 
b N f b6c orl tbe tum 76w76 evx no dre 
2632 N m b6c orl lun de 76w76 evx . 89.3mg 
 
a N m b6c orl Liv hpt 76w76 evx 139.mg 
b N m b6c orl tba mix 76w76 evx 49.8mg 
 
P<. 007 
P<. 004 
 
P<.003 + 
 
P<1. - 
 
P-1. - 
P-1. - 
P-1. - 
 
P<.1 I 
 
P-1. _ 
P<.04 - 
 
P<. - 
P<.5 - 
Po. 1. 
P-I. 1 
P-I. 1 
 
P-o. _ 
P-1. _ 
P-1. - 
P<.04 - 
P<.1 I 
 
P<. 007 - 
 
THIO-TEPA 10Ong. 
2633 N f b6c ipJ --- NXA 47w86 is 
 
a i f b6c ipj TBA NXB 47w86 s 
b N f b6c ipJ liv NXS 47w86 as 
c N f b6c ipj lun NXB 47w86 as 
 
2634 N f b6c ipJ ... NXA 47w86 as pool 
 
a N f b6c ipJ lun a/i 47w86 as 
 
l : 1ug . : 10. :100. :mg .: 10. . Ig. 1 
 
: + : 8' 
 
85 
1. 
.4 
* + * A. 
 
216mg / P<.0005c 
5.5ug / P<.0005 
.12mg * P<.2 
408mg * P<.02 
 
210mg / P<.0005c 
40i8 * P<.003 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl IDose lIne 2Dose 2Inc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
b 1100 46.1mg n.s.s. 
c 1100 46.1mg n.s.s. 
d 1100 22.2mg n.s.s. 
2612 c02959 110.mg n.s.s. 
 
a c02959 232.mg n.s.s. 
b c02959 127.mg n.s.s. 
2613 1100 10.5mg 75.4mg 
 
a 1100 16.3mg 585.mg 
b 1100 7.99mg 44.6mg 
2614 1100 46.0mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1100 77.9mg n.s.s. 
b 1100 36.1mg n.s.s. 
2615 1100 7.17mg 40.4mg 
 
a 1100 30.1mg n.s.s. 
b 1100 47.2mg n.s.s. 
c 1100 4.45mg 34.4mg 
2616 c02959 49.6mg n.s.s. 
 
a c02959 232.mg n.s.s. 
2617 c02959 13.2mg n.s.s. 
 
a c02959 164.mg n.s.a. 
2618 1032 26.1mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1032 139.mg n.s.s. 
b 1032 139.mg n.s.a. 
c 1032 30.7mg n.s.s. 
2619 1032 59.6mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1032 55.5mg n.s.s. 
 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
11/20 
5/20 
4/20 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
1/17 
0/17 
2/17 
0/18 
1/18 
2/18 
3/18 
19/20 
0/20 
15/20 
0/20 
2/48 
0/48 
0/48 
7/48 
0/48 
8/48 
 
44.3mg 1/18 
44.3mg 1/18 
44.3mg 4/18 
 
60.0mg 21/50 (240.mg 18/50) 
60.0mg 6/50 (240.mg 4/50) 
60.0mg 11/50 (240.mg 4/50) 
41.2mg 8/17 
41.2mg 5/17 
41.2mg 10/17 
44.3mg 1/16 
44.3mg 0/16 
44.3mg 2/16 
41.2mg 10/16 
41.2mg 2/16 
41.2mg 1/16 
41.2mg 13/16 
 
15.0mg 28/50 30.0mg 33/50 
15.0mg 0/50 30.0mg 1/50 
12.0mg 33/50 (24.0mg 24/50) 
12.0mg 1/50 24.0mg 0/50 
25.0mg 8/48 
25.0mg 0/48 
25.0mg 0/48 
25.0mg 9/48 
20.0mg 1/48 
20.0mg 4/48 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
tun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Wong;txap,63,155-165;1982/Plotnick pers.com. 
 
TETRAFLUORO-m-PHENYLENEDIAMINE.2HCL 63886-77-1 
 
2620 381 221.mg n.s.s. 1/15 106.mg 2/20 213.mg 
 
a 381 94.8mg n.s.s. 5/15 106.mg 5/20 (213.mg 
b 381 53.6mg n.s.s. 10/15 106.mg 14/20 (213.mg 
2621 381 42.7mg n.s.s. 1/14 103.mg 8/18 206.mg 
 
a 381 46.1mg n.s.s. 0/14 103.mg 7/18 206.mg 
b 381 160.mg n.s.s. 3/14 103.mg 2/18 206.mg 
c 381 51.1mg n.s.s. 7/14 103.mg 13/18 206.mg 
2622 381 53.0mg 324.mg 7/99p 103.mg 7/18 206.mg 
2623 381 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/16 19.1mg 0/16 38.2mg 
 
a 381 6.81mg 101.mg 10/16 19.1mg 8/16 38.2mg 
TETRAHYDRO-2-NITROSO-2HN1,2-OXAZINE 40548-68-3 
 
2624 1417 17.4mg 531.mg 0/20 31.1mg 5/20 
 
a 1417 7.81mg 123.mg 3/20 31.1mg 12/20 
b 1417 10.6mg 142.mg 1/20 31.1mg 9/20 
 
2/15 
1/15) 
7/15) 
7/16 
7/16 
4/16 
10/16 
7/16 
0/15 
12/15 
 
Wsisburger;j*pt,2,325-356;1978/pers.coam./Russfi*ld 1973 
 
WiessLer;zkko,79,114-117;1973 
 
TETRAMETHYLTHIURAM DISULFIDE (TMTD, thiram) 137-26-8 
2625 1194 3.52mg n.s.s. 1/17 3.64mg 1/15 
 
a 1194 6.01mg n.s.s. 0/17 3.64mg 0/15 
b 1194 3.90mg n.s.s. 2/17 3.64mg 1/15 
2626 1194 3.17mg n.s.s. 2/18 3.39mg 2/18 
 
a 1194 4.01mg n.s.s. 1/18 3.39mg 1/18 
b 1194 2.67mg n.s.s. 3/18 3.39mg 3/18 
2627 1194 7.21mg n.s.s. 0/16 3.64mg 0/18 
 
a ,1194 7.21mg n.s.s. 0/16 3.64mg 0/18 
b 1194 7.21mg n.s.s. 0/16 3.64mg 0/18 
2628 1194 2.43mg n.s.s. 0/16 3.39mg 2/17 
 
a 1194 6.34mg n.s.s. 0/16 3.39mg 0/17 
b 1194 1.93mg n.s.s. 0/16 3.39mg 3/17 
 
Innss;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
TETRANETHYLTHIURAN MONOSULFIDE (unads) 97-74-5 
 
2629 1199 53.2mg n.s.s. 0/17 51.0mg 1/18 
 
a 1199 101.mg n.s.s. 1/17 51.0mg 0/18 
b 1199 29.4mg n.s.s. 2/17 51.0mg 4/18 
2630 1199 58.3mg n.s.s. 2/18 47.4mg 1/17 
 
a 1199 8.7mg n.s.s. 1/18 47.4mg 0/17 
b 1199 62.3mg n.s.s. 3/18 47.4mg 1/17 
2631 1199 89.8mg n.s.s. 0/16 51.0mg 0/16 
 
a 1199 89.8mg n.s.s. 0/16 51.0mg 0/16 
b 1199 89.8mg n.s.s. 0/16 51.0mg 0/16 
2632 1199 26.9mg n.s.s. 0/16 47.4mg 3/17 
 
a 1199 34.0mg n.s.s. 0/16 47.4mg 2/17 
b 1199 18.8mg 673.mg 0/16 47.4mg 5/17 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
THIO-TEPA 52-24-4 
 
2633 c01649 .133mg .352mg 
 
a c01649 53.3ug .142mg 
b c01649 .277mg n. .s. 
c c01649 .155mg n.s.a. 
2634 c01649 .127mg .357m9 
 
a c01649 .155mg 2.35mg 
 
0/15 .300mg 5/35 
0/15 .300mg 17/35 
0/15 .300mg 2/35 
0/15 .300mg 5/35 
1/30p .300mg 5/35 
0/30p .300mg 5/35 
 
257 
 
Brkly Code 
 
1.00mg 32/35 
1.00mg 32/35 
1.0009 0/35 
1 . 00mg 0/35 
1.00mg 32/35 
1.00mg 0/35 
 
.- :lle,tym. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Iun:a/a,a/c. 
--- :le,lym. 
 
258 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
2635 N m b6c ipj - - sqc 52w83 s 
 
a N m b6c ipJ --- NXA 52w83 s 
b N m b6c ipj .-.. XB 52w83 s 
c N m b6c ipJ --- XA 52w83 s 
d N m b6c ipJ TBA MXS 52w83 s 
* N * b6c ipJ Liv NXB 52w83 s 
f N m b6c ipj Lun NXB 52w83 a 
 
2636 N * b6c ipJ -.. sqc 52w83 s pooL 
 
a N m b6c ipJ .-. XA 52w83 s 
b N m b6c ipJ --- NXA 52w83 s 
c N m b6c ipi ski sqc 52w83 s 
d N m b6c ipJ pro sqc 52w83 s 
 
-2637 R f sda ipJ NXB NXB 36w81 sos 
 
a R f sda ipJ NXA NXA 36w81 ass 
b R f ada ipJ ute acn 36w81 ses 
c R f sda ipi NXA NXA 36w81 ses 
d R f sda ipJ TBA NXB 36w81 ass 
* R f sda ipj Liv NXB 36w81 ses 
 
2638 R f sda ipJ mgL acn 36w79 as pooL 
 
a R f ada ipi NXA NXA 36w79 as 
b R f ada ipJ uto acn 36w79 as 
c R f sds ipJ sac sqc 36w79 as 
 
2639 R m ads ipJ NXB NXB 32w82 ass 
 
a R asda ipj - - Lou 32w82 as 
b R m sda ipJ NXA NXA 32w82 ass 
c R m sda ipJ TBA NXB 32w82 ass 
d R m ada ipi Liv NXB 32w82 aos 
 
2640 R m ads ipJ NXA NXA 32w79 aes pooL 
 
a R m sda ipJ ski sqc 32w79 a5s 
b R m sda ipJ sub srn 32079 sea 
c R m sda ipJ - . NXA 32w79 ass 
d R m sda ipj - - Lou 32w79 ses 
a R f sda ipJ - L-- Ll 32w79 aes 
2641 R m b46 ivJ tba mix 12.24 
 
a R f b46 vi tba meL 12.24 
b R m b46 ivJ tba ban 12.24 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
+ 
 
+ 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
.102mg / P<.0005 
.241mg / P<.0005c 
.241mg / P<.0005 
 
.265mg / P<.0005c 
69.Oug / P<.0005 
1.12mg * P<.6 
.584mg * P<.4 
 
.102mg / P<.0005 
.238mg / P<.0005c 
.262mg / P<.0005c 
.280mg * P<.003 c 
.300mg I P<.002 c 
.172mg I P<.0005 
.217mg I P<.0005c 
.243mg I P<.002 
 
+historicaL * P<.07 a 
 
40.4ug I P<.0005 
no dre P-1. 
 
.182mg * P<.0005 
.214mg / P<.0005c 
.236mg / P<.0005 
.327mg / P<.0005c 
.149mg * P<.0005 
.312mg * P<.002 c 
+historicaL * P<.03 a 
 
33.2ug I P<.0005 
no dre P-1. 
 
.122mg * P<.0005c 
.155mg * P<.0005c 
.220mg * P<.0005 
 
.224mg * P<.0005c 
.290mg * P<.0005c 
.374mg * P<.0005c 
.186mg P<.002 + 
.303mg P<.009 
.646mg P<.2 
 
* + 
 
*+ 
 
THIOACETANIDE l1Ong .:. .:ug. :10. :100. g : . :10.. :100.. :19 :10 
 
2642 N f swi oat Liv hpt 65w65 kr . + . 5.36mg P<.0005+ 
2643 N m swi oat Liv hpt 65w65 kr <+ noTD50 P<.005 + 
 
2,2-THIOBIS(4,6-DICHLOROPHENOL) lOOng..:. . ug.... :10. :100. : .g :10.. :100.. : g :10 
 
2644 N f b6a orl Lun ado 76w76 ovx .> 100.m9 
 
a N f b6a orl Liv hpt 76w76 ovx no dre 
b N f b6a orL tba mix 76w76 evx 28.7mg 
2645 N m b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx .> no dre 
 
a N m b6a orL lun ado 76w76 ovx no dre 
b N m b6a orl tba mix 76w76 ovx no dre 
2646 N f b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx .> no dre 
 
a N f b6c orl Lun mix 76w76 ovx no dre 
b N f b6c orL tba mix 76w76 ovx 43.0mg 
2647 N m b6c orl Liv 0gm 76w76 ovx .> 88.2mg 
 
a N m b6c orl Lun ado 76w76 ovx 88.2mg 
b N m b6c orL tba mix 76w76 evx 10.1mg 
 
P<.6 
P-1. 
P<. 3 
P-1. 
P-I. 
P-1. 
p.1. 
P-I. 
 
P<.09 
P<. 3 
P<. 3 
 
P<. 002 
 
4,4'1-THIODIANILINE 
 
2648 N f b6c oat NXB NXB 78w91 a 
 
a N f b6c oat liv hpc 78w91 a 
b N f b6c oat thy NXA 78w9l a 
c N f b6c oat thy fcc 78w9l a 
d N f b6c oat TBA NXB 78w9I a 
* N f b6c oat Liv NXB 78w91 a 
f N f b6c oat Lun NXB 78w91 a 
2649 N m b6c oat NXB NXB 78w91 a 
 
a N m b6c oat liv NXA 78w91 a 
b N m b6c oat Liv hpc 78w91 a 
c N m b6c oat thy NXA 78w91 a 
d N m b6c oat thy fcc 78w91 a 
 
o N m b6c oat TBA NXB 78w91 a 
f N m b6c oat Liv NXB 78w91 a 
9 N m b6c oat Lun NXB 78w91 a 
2650 R f f34 oat NXB NXB 16m24 s 
 
a R f f34 oat uto acn 16m24 s 
b R f f34 oat thy fcc 16u24 s 
c R f f34 oat sac NXA 16m24 s 
d R f f34 oat TBA NXB 16m24 s 
 
o R f f34 oat Liv NXB 16m24 s 
2651 R m f34 oat NXB NXB 16m24 
 
a R m f34 oat thy NXA 16m24 
 
loong.. : ..ug. :10. :100. g : g.. :10.. :100. :Ig . :10 
 
+ 33.2mg * P<.0005 
 
33.3mg * P<.0005c 
88.4mg * P<.0005c 
165.mg P<.0005c 
33.2mg * P<.0005 
33.3mg * P<.0005 
no dre P-1. 
 
32.7mg * P<.0005 
33.2mg * P<.0005c 
33.8mg * P<.0005c 
51.8mg I P<.0005c 
70.7mg / P<.0005c 
32.7mg * P<.0005 
33.2mg * P<.0005 
1.079m * P<.3 
 
8.53mg * P<.0005 
8.79mg * P<.0005c 
11.5mg I P<.0005c 
+historicaL * P<.006 c 
 
8.35mg * P<.0005 
42.0mg * P<.0005 
5.52mg \ P<.0005 
5.59mg \ P<. 0005c 
 
* 
 
* + 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntri lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
2635 c01649 55.1ug .281mg 
 
a c01649 .133mg .461mg 
b c01649 .133mg .461mg 
c c01649 .146mg .506mg 
d c01649 40.6ug .137mg 
* c01649 .187mo n.s.s. 
f c01649 .140mg n.s.s. 
2636 c01649 55.1ug .218mg 
 
* c01649 .134mg .441mg 
b c01649 .146mg .48mg 
c c01649 .119mg 1.28mg 
d c01649 .126mg 1.25mg 
2637 c01649 87.7ug .412m9 
 
* c01649 .101mg .666mg 
b c01649 .107mg .868mg 
c c01649 .260mg n.s.a. 
d c01649 24.2ug 88.2ug 
* c01649 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
2638 c01649 89.5ug .491mg 
 
a c01649 .101mg .537mg 
b c01649 .105mg .637mg 
c c01649 .138mg 1.05mg 
2639 c01649 57.9ug .412mg 
 
a c01649 .144mg 1.14mg 
b c01649 68.7ug n.s.s. 
c c01649 17.6ug 75.6ug 
d c01649 n.s.s. n.s.a. 
2640 c01649 52.4ug .317mg 
 
a c01649 59.Sug .482mg 
b c01649 68.9ug 1.07mg 
c c01649 91.Suo .674mg 
d c01649 .134mg .708mg 
 
o c01649 .153mg 1.15mg 
261 1017 86.1ug 1.02mg 
 
a 1017 .122mg 13.2mg 
b 1017 .188m n.s.a. 
THIOACETMINDE 62-55-5 
 
2642 282 1.69mg 22.6mg 
 
2643 282 n.s.s. 11.3mg 
 
0/15 
1/15 
1/15 
1/15 
4/15 
1/15 
1/15 
 
0/30p 
1/30p 
1/30p 
0/30p 
0/30p 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
8/20 
0/20 
2/60p 
0/60p 
0/60p 
0/60p 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
8/20 
0/20 
0/60p 
0/60p 
0/60p 
1/60p 
0/60p 
0/60p 
7/89 
4/89 
3/89 
 
.300mg 
.300mg 
.300mg 
 
.300mg 
.300mg 
.300m9 
.300mg 
.300m9 
.300mg 
.300m9 
.300mg 
.300mg 
.190mg 
.190mg 
.190m 
.190m 
 
.190mg 
 
.190mg 
.190m9 
.190m9 
.190mg 
.190mg 
 
.190m9 
.190mg 
 
.190m9 
.190mg 
.190mg 
.190mg 
. 190mg 
.190mg 
.190m9 
.190m9 
.190m 
 
71.4ug 
71 .4ug 
71.4ug 
 
15/34 
3/34 
3/34 
2/34 
19/34 
4/34 
5/34 
15/34 
3/34 
2/34 
7/34 
6/34 
4/31 
2/31 
2/31 
2/31 
26/31 
 
0/31 
7/31 
2/31 
2/31 
2/31 
8/39 
5/39 
3/39 
27/39 
 
0/39 
7/39 
5/39 
5/39 
6/39 
5/39 
3/39 
14/48 
9/48 
5/48 
 
.900mg 
 
.900-9 
.900-9 
.900mg 
.900m9 
.900mg 
 
.900m9 
 
.900mg 
 
.900m9 
.900m9 
.900mg 
.900mg 
.250mo 
.250mg 
.250mg 
.250mg 
.250mo 
.250mg 
.250mo 
.250mo 
.250mg 
 
.250mg 
.270mg 
.270mg 
.270mg 
.270mg 
.270mg 
.270mt 
.270mg 
 
.270mg 
.270mo 
.270mo 
.270m9 
 
1/35 
26/35 
26/35 
26/35 
27/35 
 
0/35 
0/35 
1/35 
26/35 
26/35 
 
0/35 
1/35 
10/35 
8/35 
7/35 
2/35 
26/35 
 
0/35 
8/35 
8/35 
7/35 
5/35 
6/35 
6/35 
0/35 
14/35 
0/35 
3/35 
3/35 
0/35 
6/35 
6/35 
5/35 
 
0/6 39.Og 6/7 
0/6 36.0mg 6/6 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
Brkly Code 
 
S 
 
--:Lou,Lys. 
 
---:Lou,LLe,Lym. C 
 
---:LLe,Lym. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
S 
--:lou,Lym. 
--- :lo,Lym. 
 
bra:oln; *ac:sqc; nas:can; ski:sqc. T 
 
*ac:sqc; ski:sqc. 
 
S 
bra:oLn; nas:can. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
S 
.ac:sqc; ski:sqc. 
 
S 
-L- :lou; bra:nou,oLn; nas:can. T 
 
bra:nou,oln; nas:can. 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
eac:sqc; ski:sqc. 
 
---:leu,Lym. 
 
SchmahL ;arzn,20, 1461.1467;1970 
 
Gothoskor;bjca,24,498-503;1970 
 
2,2-THIOBIS(4,6-DICHLOROPHENOL) (TSP, Vancid. BL) 97-18.7 
264 1283 13.2mg n.s.s. 1/17 15.7mo 2/18 
 
a 1283 31.1mg n.s.s. 0/17 15.7m9 0/18 
b 1283 7.51mg n.s.s. 2/17 15.7mo 5/18 
2645 1283 27.4mo n.s.s. 1/18 14.6mg 0/17 
 
a 1283 27.4mg n.s.s. 2/18 14.6mg 0/17 
b 1283 19.2mg n.s.s. 3/18 14.6mg 1/17 
2646 1283 27.6mg n.s.s. 0/16 15.7mg 0/16 
 
a 1283 27.6mg n.s.s. 0/16 15.7mg 0/16 
b 1283 10.6mg n.s.s. 0/16 15.7mg 2/16 
2647 1283 14.4mg n.s.s. 0/16 14.6mg 1/17 
 
a 1283 14.4mg n.s.s. 0/16 14.6mg 1/17 
b 1283 4.29mg 38.7mg 0/16 14.6mg 7/17 
 
Innss;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
4,4' THIODIANILINE 139-65-1 
 
2648 c01707 18.5mg 60.2mg 0/14 
 
a c01707 18.5 m 60.5 g 0/14 
b c01707 45.5mg 178.mg 0/14 
c c01707 72.9mg 386.mg 0/14 
d c01707 18.Smg 60.2mg 2/14 
* c01707 18.5mg 60.5mg 0/14 
f c01707 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/14 
2649 c01707 20.1mg 54.0mg 4/14 
 
* c01707 20.3mg 55.3mg 4/14 
b c01707 20.5mg 56.9mg 1/14 
c c01707 30.7mg 88.8mg 0/14 
d c01707 40.7mg 125.mg 0/14 
* c01707 20.1mg 54.0mg 4/14 
f c01707 20.3mg 55.3mg 4/14 
9 c01707 174.mg n.s.s. 0/14 
2650 c01707 4.53mg 15.2mg 0/15 
 
a c01707 4.61mg 16.0mg 0/15 
b c01707 6.13mg 20.2mg 0/15 
c cO1707 49.8mg 1.34gm 0/15 
d c01707 4.44mg 16.1mg 6/15 
* c01707 15.9mg 137.mg 0/15 
2651 c01707 2.00mg 11.7mg 0/15 
 
a c01707 2.01mg 12.2mg 0/15 
 
232.mg 33/35 464-mg 30/35 
232.mo 32/35 464.mg 30/35 
232.mg 11/35 464.mg 18/35 
232.mg 3/35 464.mg 15/35 
232.mg 33/35 464.mg 30/35 
232.mg 32/35 464.mg 30/35 
232.mg 0/35 464.mg 0/35 
214.mg 34/35 428.mg 24/35 
214.mg 33/35 428.mg 23/35 
214.mg 32/35 428.mg 22/35 
214.mg 22/35 428.mg 20/35 
214.mg 15/35 428.mg 20/35 
214.mg 34/35 428.mg 24/35 
214.mg 33/35 428.mg 23/35 
214.mg 1/35 428.mg 0/35 
53.5mg 32/35 107.mg 33/35 
53.5mg 31/35 107.mg 23/35 
53.5mg 24/35 107.mg 32/35 
53.5mg 6/35 107.mg 3/35 
53.5mg 32/35 107.mg 33/35 
53.5mg 6/35 107.mg 3/35 
42.8mg 32/35 (85.6mg 33/35) 
42.8" 30/35 (85.6mg 32/35) 
 
liv:hpc; thy:fca,fcc. C 
 
thy:f ca,f cc. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Liv:hpa,hpc; thy:fca,fcc. C 
 
liv:hpa,hpc. 
thy:fca,fcc. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
*ac:sqc,sqp; thy:fcc; utc:acn. C 
 
*ac:sqc,sqp. 
t iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
coL:acn; sac:sqc,sqp; Liv:hpa,hpc; thy:fca,fcc. C 
 
thy:fca,fcc. 
 
259 
 
260 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
b R * f34 eat thy fcc 16.24 
c R * f34 eat liv NXA 16.24 
d R . f34 eat liv hpc 16.24 
* R * f34 eat mac NXA 16.24 
f R . f34 oat col mcn 16.24 
g R . f34 oat TBA NXB 16.24 
h R * f34 eat liv NXB 16.24 
 
TD50 2'ailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
6.36mg \ P<.0005c 
7.18mg \ P<.0005c 
7.31mg \ P<.0005c 
20.3mg \ P<.0005c 
+historical \ P<.02 c 
 
5.96mg \ P<.0005 
7.18mg \ P<.0005 
 
beta-THIOGUANINE DEOXYRIBOSIDE* 1Ong. ...lug. 10 . 100. 1g.. 10 . 100 .Ig . 10 
 
2652 N f b6c ipJ TBA NXB 43w77 s > 4.48mg Z P<. 
 
a N f b6c ipJ liv NXB 43w77 as no dre P-1. 
b N f b6c ipJ lun NXB 43w77 as 6.87mg * P<.3 
2653 N m b6c ipj TBA NXB 38w77 as > no dre P-1. 
 
m N m b6c ipJ liv NXB 38w77 ms no dre P-I. 
b N m b6c ipJ Lun NXB 38w77 as no dre P-I. 
 
2654 R f adm ipJ sac NXA 52w78 as + 2.10mg I P<.005 c 
 
a R f sdm ipJ mac sqc 52w78 es 2.31mg P<.008 
b R f sda ipJ TBA NXS 52w78 es 4.11mg I P<.7 
c R f sda ipJ liv NXB 52w78 es no dre P-1. 
 
2655 R f sda ipJ mac NXA 52w78 ms pool + 2.10mg P<.0005c 
 
a R f sda ipJ mac sqc 52w78 ms 2.31mg I P<.002 
 
2656 R m sda ipJ mac NXA 52w78 es A 4.38mg * P<.08 a 
 
a R m sda ipJ TBA NXB 52w78 ms no dre P-I. 
b R m sda ipJ Liv NXB 52w78 ms no dre P-I. 
 
2657 R m sda ipJ mac NXA 52w78 as pooL A 4.38mg * P<.02 a 
 
a R m sda ipj --- Lym 52w78 s 5.75mg * P<.03 
 
THIOSENICARBAZIDE lOOng.. :. .ug. :10. :100. g : .g. :10. :100.. :1g :10 
 
2658 R f cdr eat mgl tum 18m24 a .> 3.07mg * P<.2 
 
THNIOURACIL 
 
2659 N f c3h mat liv hpt 73w73 r 
2660 N m c3h mat liv hpt 73w73 r 
2661 N f tmm mat liv hpt 73w73 r 
2662 N m tmm mat liv hpt 73w73 r 
THIOUREA 
 
2663 N f c3h wat lun tum 6m24 a 
 
2664 R m hmw mix aur opc 95w95 omm 
 
a R m haw mix *ld mpc 95w95 am' 
b R m hew mix tba mix 95w95 omm 
2665 R m hew wet aur mpc 26.26 a 
 
a R m how wat mld mpc 26m26 a 
b R m how wat tba mix 26m26 a 
2666 R f omm mat liv tum 26m26 
 
a R f o1 m mat tba mix 26.26 
2667 R f omm mat liv tum 24m24 
 
a R f osm mat tba ban 24m24 
b R f osm mat tba matl 24m24 
2668 R m osm mat liv tum 26m26 
 
a R m oem mat tba mix 26m26 
2669 R m osm mat liv tum 24m24 
 
a R m osm mat tba ban 24m24 
b R * oam mat tba mal 24m24 
 
TIN (II) CHLORIDE 
 
2670 N b cdl wat lun mix 24m24 a 
 
a N b cd1 wat lun ado 24m24 a 
b N b cd1 wat tba mix 24m24 a 
c N b cd1 wat tba mal 24m24 a 
d N b cdl wat tba ban 24m24 a 
2671 R b Lab wat liv tum 36.36 a 
 
a R b ltb wat tba tus 36.36 a 
 
b tblb wt tba ma l36.36 
 
TITANIUN DIOXIDE 
 
2672 N f b6c mat TBA NXB 24m24 
 
a N f b6c mat liv NXB 24m24 
b N f b6c mat lun NXB 24m24 
2673 N m b6c mat TBA NXB 24m24 
 
a N m b6c mat liv NXB 24m24 
b N m b6c mat lun NXB 24m24 
2674 R f f 34 mat thy NXA 24m24 
 
a R f f34 mat TBA NXB 24m24 
b R f f34 mat liv NXB 24m24 
2675 R * f34 mat --- ker 24m24 
 
a R m f 34 mat TBA NXB 24m24 
b R * f34 mat liv NXB 24m24 
 
bO0ng : . .ug. :10. :100. g :..g :10.. :.100. . :1g :10 
 
+ 63.3mg 
+ . 48.6mg 
 
no dre 
no dre 
 
bO0ng..: ..ug. :10. :100. g :..g :10. :100.. :. :10 
 
no dre 
v . + . 104.mg 
v 225.mg 
v 50.8mg 
 
+ . 93.5mg 
 
93.5mg 
27.5mg 
no dre 
16.2mg 
no dre 
15.0mg 
no dre 
no dre 
46. 1mg 
no dre 
64.7mg 
no dre 
 
100ng ..ug. :10. :100. g :.1g :10. :100....g :.10 
 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
 
100ng .. : ug. :10. :100. g :. g. :10. :100.. :. :10 
 
:>55.8ge * P<.8 - 
 
55.5gm * P<.2 
50.4gm * P<.1 
:no dre P-1. 
38.7gm * P<.4 
no dra P-1. 
 
#17.2gm P<.04 - 
 
5.01gm * P<.4 
no dro P-1. 
 
:#25.9g * P<.05 - 
 
23.09m * P<.9 
no dre P-1. 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
P-1. _ 
P-I. _ 
 
P-I. 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<.02 + 
P<. 0005 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005 
 
P-I. _ 
P<.7 - 
P-I. _ 
P<.3 - 
Pal. - 
P-I. - 
P<.6 - 
P-1. - 
P<.3 - 
P-1. - 
 
P-1. - 
P-1. - 
P-1. - 
P-1. _ 
P-1. _ 
P-1. _ 
P-1. _ 
P-1. _ 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
b c01707 2.08mg 15.3mg 
 
c c01707 2.15mg 18.5mg 
d c01707 2.16mg 19.3mg 
 
* c01707 6.42mg 57.0m9 
f c01707 38.5mg n.s.s. 
 
c01707 2.28m 13.6mg 
 
h c01707 2.15mg 18.5mg 
 
0/15 
0/15 
0/15 
0/15 
0/15 
4/15 
0/15 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
42.8mg 28/35 (85.6mg 32/35) 
42.8mg 23/35 (85.6mg 12/35) 
42.8mg 21/35 (85.6mg 10/35) 
42.mg 15/35 (85.6mg 8/35) 
42.8mg 6/35 (85.6mg 1/35) 
42.8" 32/35 (85.6mg 33/35) 
42.8m 23/35 (85.60g 12/35) 
 
beta-THIOSUANINE DEOXYRIBOSIDE* (b.ta-T6dR. NCI uses CAS# 789-61-7) 64039-27-6 
 
2652 cOIS81 .150mo n.a.s. 
 
a c01581 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
b c01581 1.12mg n.s.s. 
2653 c01581 .173mg n.s.s. 
 
a cOIS81 .421mg n.s.s. 
b c01581 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
2654 c01581 .938mg 14.3mg 
 
a c01S81 .990mg 44.0Omg 
b c01581 .572mg n.s.s. 
c c01581 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
2655 c01581 .938mg 6.68mg 
 
a c01581 .990m9 8.66mg 
2656 cOIS81 1.32mg n.s.s. 
 
a c01581 .839mg n.s.s. 
b c01581 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
2657 cOISSI 1.32mg n.s.s. 
 
a cOIS81 1.73mg n.s.s. 
 
THIOSENICARASZIDE 79-19-6 
2658 1112 1.11m9 n.s.s. 
THIOURACIL 141-90-2 
 
2659 284 28.6mg 152.mg 
2660 284 17.9mg 139.mg 
 
2661 284 871.mg n.s.a. 
2662 284 804.mg n.s.s. 
 
THIOUREA 62-56-6 
 
2663 1135 331.mg n.s.s. 
2664 288a 43.0mg 363.mg 
 
a 2U88 76.6mg n.s.s. 
b 2M 21.2mg 141.mg 
266S 2Ub 45.5mg 249.mg 
 
a 288b 45.5mg 249.ng 
b 2M8b 11.2mg 64.0g 
2666 21 18.2mg n.s.s. 
 
a 21 2.51mg n.s.s. 
2667 84. 24.7mg n.s.s. 
 
a 84U 4.19mg n.s.s. 
b 84a 19.7mg n.s.s. 
2668 21 14.6mg n.s.a. 
 
a 21 6.34mg n.s.s. 
2669 84a 19.8mg n.s.s. 
 
a 84. 10.5mg n.s.s. 
b 84. 19.8m n.s.s. 
 
21/30 
 
0/30 
0/30 
20/30 
 
2/30 
0/30 
0/10 
0/10 
9/10 
0/10 
0/30p 
0/30p 
0/10 
7/10 
0/10 
 
0/30p 
0/30p 
 
.300mg 
.300mg 
.300mg 
 
.300mg 
.300mg 
.300mg 
 
1.00m9 
1.00mg 
1 .00mg 
1.00mg 
 
1.00mg 
1.00m9 
1.00mg 
 
1.00mg 
1.00mg 
1.00 m 
 
1.00mg 
 
20/35 
 
0/35 
0/35 
19/35 
 
1/35 
0/35 
2/35 
2/35 
17/35 
0/35 
2/35 
2/35 
1/35 
9/35 
0/35 
1/35 
1/35 
 
.600mg 
.600mg 
.600mg 
.600mg 
.600mg 
.600mg 
2. 00mg 
2.00mg 
2.00mg 
2.00mg 
2.00mg 
2.00mg 
2.00mg 
2.00mg 
2.00mg 
2.00mg 
2.00mg 
 
Brkly Code 
l iv:hpa,hpc. 
sac: sqc,sqp. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
21/35 (1.70mg 1/35) 
0/35 1.70mg 0/35 
1/35 1.70mg 0/35 
19/35 1.70mg 0/35 
 
1/35 1.70mg 0/35 
0/35 1.70mg 0/35 
6/35 
5/35 
10/35 
0/35 
6/35 
5/35 
2/35 
5/35 
0/35 
2/35 
2/35 
 
3/10 1.41mg 19/26 2.81mg 16/26 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
.ac:can,sqc. 
 
S 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
eac:can,sqc. 
 
sac:can,sqc. 
t iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
*ac:csn,sqc. 
 
S 
 
Woisburger;jnci,67,75-88;1981 
 
Casas;ps.b, 113,493-494; 1963 
 
0/24 390.mg 14/16 
2/32 360.mo 12/13 
0/20 390.mg 0/22 
0/20 360.mg 0/22 
 
1/94 
0/12 
0/12 
0/12 
0/12 
0/12 
0/12 
0/30 
13/30 
 
1/30 
6/30 
6/30 
0/30 
1/30 
0/30 
0/30 
3/30 
 
25. 1mg 
159.mg 
159.mg 
159.mN 
100.mg 
100.mg 
100.mg 
 
2.50mg 
2.50mg 
 
4.00m9 
4.00m9 
4.00m9 
2.00mg 
 
2.00mg 
3.20mg 
3.20mg 
 
3.20mg 
 
0/64 
7/12 
4/12 
10/12 
11/19 
11/19 
18/19 
0/30 
15/30 
0/30 
10/30 
 
1/30 
0/30 
2/30 
0/30 
1/30 
0/30 
 
TIN (II) CHLORIDE (stannous chloride) m2-99-s 
2670 1512 5.26mg n.s.s. 26/170 .877mg 10/86 
 
a 1512 12.0mg n.s.s. 7/170 .877mg 1/86 
b 1512 3.83mg n.s.s. 55/170 .877mg 22/86 
c 1512 6.06mg n.s.s. 15/170 .877mg 6/86 
d 1512 6.42mg n.s.s. 29/170 .877m9 9/86 
2671 1036 11.5mg n.s.s. 1/82 .265mg 0/94 
 
a 1036 2.08m n.s.s. 31/82 .265mg 29/94 
b 1036 5.54mg n.s.s. 9/82 .265mg 5/94 
 
TITANIUM DIOXIDE 13463-67-7 
 
2672 c04240 6.649m n.s.s. 30/50 
 
a c04240 17.09m n.s.s. 1/50 
b c04240 16.9gm n.s.s. 1/50 
2673 cO4240 9.26gm n.s.s. 29/50 
 
a cO4240 9.45gm n.s.s. 8/50 
b cO4240 24.2gm n.s.s. 6/50 
2674 cO4240 6.25gm n.s.s. 1/50 
 
a cO4240 1.23gm n.s.s. 41/50 
b cO4240 28.2gm n.s.s. 1/50 
2675 cO4240 7.81gm n.s.s. 0/50 
 
a cO4240 1.54gm n.s.s. 32/50 
b c04240 16.79m n.s.s. 1/50 
 
3.229m 24/50 
3.22gm 3/50 
3.22gm 2/50 
2.97gm 25/50 
2.97gm 9/50 
2.979m 3/50 
1.24gm 0/50 
1.249m 43/50 
1.24gm 0/50 
990.mg 0/50 
990.mg 40/50 
990.mg 1/50 
 
Vazquez-Lopez;bjca,3,401-414; 1949 
 
Rosin;canr, 17,302-305;1957 
 
D.ichmann;txap,11,88-103;1967 
 
Redomaki ;txap,7,652-656; 1965 
Deichmann;txsp, 11,M- 103;1967 
 
Redomski ;txap,7,652-656; 1965 
 
Kanlsawa;canr,27,1192-1195;1967 
 
Kanisawa;canr,29,892-895; 1969 
 
6.44gm 26/50 
6.44gm 3/50 
6.44gm 4/50 
5.94gm 28/50 
5.94gm 14/50 
5.94gm 5/50 
2.48m 6/50 
2.48g 46/50 
2.48m 0/50 
1.98m 3/50 
1.98m 36/50 
1.98m 0/50 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:s/a,a/c. 
 
thy:cce,ccr. S 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
S 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
261 
 
262 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
 
TITANIUM OXALATE, POTASSIUM 
 
2676 N f cdl wat tbm mix 26.26 e 
2677 N f cd1 wat Lun tun 31.31 * 
 
a * f cd1 wat tba tun 3131 
 
2678 N a cd1 wet tbi mix 28.28 * 
2679 N a cdl wat Lun tur 25.25 . 
 
a N o cdl wet tb tun 25m25 o 
 
TOLAZANIDE 
 
2680 N f b6c oat TBA NXB 24.24 
 
a N f b6c oet Liv MXB 24.24 
b N f b6c sat Lun NXB 24.24 
2681 N m b6c sat TBA NXS 24.24 
 
a N m b6c sat liv NXB 24.24 
b N M b6c sat lun MXS 2424 
2682 R f f34 sat TBA MXB 24.24 
 
a R f f34 oat Liv NXB 24.24 
2683 R m f34 eat TSA MXS 24.24 
 
a R m f34 sat Liv NXS 24.24 
TOLBUTANIDE 
 
2684 N f b6c sit TSA MXB 18.24 
 
a N f b6c sat Liv NXS 18.24 
b N f b6c et Lun NXS 18.24 
2685 N n b6c oat TBA MXB 18.24 
 
a N o b6c mat Liv NXB 18.24 
b N * b6c sat Lun MXB 18.24 
2686 R f f34 sat TBA NXS 18.25 
 
a R f f34 sat Liv NXS 18.25 
2687 R m f34 sat TBA NXB 18.25 
 
a R n f34 sot Liv NXS 18.25 
 
o.TOLUENESULFONANIDE 
 
2688 R f cdr sit mgL odc 33m33 sg 
 
a R f cdr sot Liv kcs 33.33 *g 
b R f cdr sot Liv nnd 33.33 *g 
2689 R m cdr sot Liv ong 33.33 o 
 
a R m cdr at Liv nnd 33m33 o 
b R n cdr et Liv bLc 33m33 s 
2690 R b adi sit --- Lou 31.33 a 
 
m R b ads at ubt mix 31n33a 
b R b ads sot liv cir 31m33 a 
c R b sd *tetbs t tL 31n33 a 
2691 R f wim wit Liv hpc 24m24 o 
 
a-TOLUIDINE.HCL 
 
2692 N f chi sat Liv mix 77w90 v 
 
i N f chi sot Lun mix 77w90 v 
b N f chi sat tbo mix 77w90 v 
2693 N f chi sit Lun mix 77w61 v 
 
a N f chi sot liv mix 77w81 v 
b M f chi ottb mix 77w8l v 
2694 M m chi sit Liv mix 77w90 v 
 
i M n chi et lun mix 77w90 v 
b M a chi st tb mix 77w90 v 
2695 Mm chi est Liv hpt 77w90 v 
2696 R m cdr eat Liv mix 77w98 v 
 
a R * cdr ettb t mx 77w98 v 
 
o.TOLUIDINE.HCL 
 
2697 N f b6c sit Liv NXA 24.24 
 
a N f b6c sot Liv hpc 24.24 
b N f b6c sat TBA MXB 24m24 
c M f b6ceat tiv NXB 2424 
d f b6ceat Lun XB 24.24 
 
2698 N * b6c sit ... NXA 24m24 a 
 
i m b6c sat --- ho 24.24 
 
b M * b6c st TA A XB 24m24 a 
c M m b6c et liv NX 2424 a 
d M a b6c *et Lun NX5 2424 a 
 
2699 N f chi *st Liv mix 6w90 *v 
 
a N f chi sot Lun mix 68w90 iv 
b M f chi et tb mix 68w90 v 
2700 N f chi sot vsc 68w90 iv 
2701 N r chi sot - vc 68w90 iv 
 
a M m chi st Liv mix 6v90 v 
b M * chi st Lun mix 6w90 v 
c N m chi est tba mix 68"w90 v 
2702 N * chi st ... v.c 6w9 *v 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
TD50 2Tilpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
loong..: ..Iug. :10 . 100 .lg. 10. :100. : :10 
 
.> 3. 
 
66mg 
 
150.n9 
no drt 
3.62mg 
no dre 
no drt 
 
bOOng u.. : 1 . : l . 10. :100.. :mg. :10. :100.. : 1g . :10 
 
:> no dre 
 
no dre 
no drt 
:> no dre 
 
no dre 
 
24.69m * 
:> no dre 
 
no dre 
:> no dre 
 
no drt 
 
00ng..: ..ug. 10. :100..:. _ .10 . . 100.. g . 10 
 
:> 24.2gm \ 
 
no dre 
no dre 
:> no dre 
 
no dre 
no dre 
:> no drt 
 
no dre 
:> no dre 
 
no dre 
 
P<. 2 
P<1. 
 
P<. 2 
Pal. 
P-I. 
 
P-I. 
P<.9 
P-I. 
P-I. 
P-I. 
 
P<.9 
P-I. 
P-I. 
P-I. 
P-I. 
P-I. 
P-I. 
P-I. 
Pal. 
P-I. 
 
loong. .1..ug. 10 . 100. lg. 10 . 100. 19 :10 
 
A 12.2mg Z P<.02 
 
8.529m * P<.03 
21.7gr * P<.6 
> 17.29g * P<.2 
 
35.99m * P<.7 
no dre P-I. 
 
.375.mg \ P<.009 
 
3.969m * P<.06 + 
no dre Pal. 
13.39m * P<.9 
no drt PI. 
 
1O0ng. .1..ug. 10. 100. 1g :. 10 . 100.. g. : 10 
 
:> 9.99g" P<.6 - 
 
no dro P-1. 
no dro P-1. 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
no drt P-I. 
 
1.95gm P<.09 - 
:> 6.77gm * P<.7 
 
no dre P-I. 
no dre P-1. 
 
pool :> 1.44gm \ P<.2 + 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
98.4mg \ P<.2 - 
 
O0ng. .: ..ug. :10 . : 100. g :.. :10 . 100.. :g :10 
 
+ 754.mg * P<.002 c 
 
1.52gm P<.02 c 
1.35gm * P<.4 
 
754.mg P<.002 
no dre P-1. 
 
:+ :926.mg 5 P<.005 c 
 
1.229m / P<.01 c 
no drt P-1. 
12.7gm P<. 
no dre P-I. 
 
t : + 1.65gm * P<.008 - 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
699mg * P<.007 
 
pool : 1.249m * P<.0005+ 
 
+ 646mg I P<.0005. 
 
1.40gm * P<.005 - 
1.16gm * P<A1 - 
325.mg I P<.0005 
 
pool 660.mg I P<.0005+ 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
TITANIUM OXALATE, POTASSIUM ... 
2676 1395 1.24mg n.s.s. 9/45 
2677 56 3.59mg n.s.s. 9/60 
 
* 56 4.45mg n.s.s. 22/60 
2678 1395 1.23m9 n.s.s. 10/43 
2679 56 6.12mg n.s.s. 8/44 
 
a 56 4.09mg n.s.s. 11/44 
 
TOLAZAMIDE 1156-19-0 
 
2680 cO3327 867.mg n.s.s. 
 
a c03327 1.61gm n.s.s. 
b c03327 3.33gm n.a.s. 
2681 c03327 63.mg n.s.s. 
 
a c03327 2.87gm n.s.s. 
b c03327 2.07gm n.c.s. 
2682 c03327 214.mg n.a.s. 
 
a c03327 n.s.s. n.s.a. 
2683 c03327 277.mg n.s.a. 
 
* c03327 n.s.s. n.s.a. 
TOLBUTANIDE 64-77-7 
 
2684 c01763 1.63gm n.c.s. 
 
a c01763 10.6gm n.c.s. 
b c01763 10.3gm n.s.s. 
2685 c01763 1.16gm n.s.a. 
 
a c01763 1.969m n.c.s. 
b c01763 9.12gm n.s.s. 
2686 c01763 662.mg n.c.s. 
 
* c01763 n.s.s. n.c.s. 
2687 c01763 654.mg n.s.s. 
 
* c01763 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
 
8/15 
1/15 
1/15 
8/15 
3/15 
0/15 
13/15 
0/15 
9/15 
0/15 
 
3/15 
1/15 
0/15 
8/15 
3/15 
1/15 
13/15 
0/15 
8/15 
0/15 
 
1.00mg 
 
1.00g9 
1.00g9 
.833mg 
.833mg 
.833mg 
 
455.mg 
455.mg 
455.mg 
420.mg 
420.mg 
420.mg 
175.mg 
175.mg 
140.mg 
140.mg 
 
1. 76gm 
 
1. 769m 
1 . 769m 
1.62gm 
1.62gm 
 
1.629m 
315.mg 
315.mg 
252.mg 
252.mg 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
13/36 
5/32 
7/32 
17/45 
 
1/40 
4/40 
 
6/35 919.mg 
1/35 919. mg 
0/35 919.mg 
11/35 (848.mg 
2/35 848.mg 
2/35 88.mg 
23/35 354.mg 
 
1/35 354.mg 
19/35 283.mg 
0/35 283.mg 
 
11/35 (3.529m 
2/35 3.52gm 
 
2/35 3.52gm 
13/35 (3.28gm 
4/35 (3.28gm 
 
2/35 3.28gm 
15/35 631.mg 
0/35 631 .mg 
13/35 505.mg 
0/35 505.mg 
 
Brkly Code 
 
Schroeder; jnut,105,452-458;1975 
 
Schroeder; jnut,83,239-250; 1964 
Schroeder; Jnut, 105,452-458; 1975 
 
Schroeder; jnut,83,239-250;1964 
 
9/34 
1/34 
1/34 
5/35) 
3/35 
1/35 
20/35 
 
0/35 
20/35 
0/35 
 
3/35) 
1/35 
0/35 
2/35) 
 
1/35) 
 
0/35 
16/35 
0/35 
17/35 
0/35 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,e/c. 
Liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
liv:hpe,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,e/c. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
o-TOLUENESULFONAMIDE 88- 19-7 
 
2688 1398 5.34mg n.s.s. 6/48 
 
* 1398 2.10gm n.s.s. 0/48 
b 1398 2.01gm n.s.s. 0/48 
2689 1398 2.819m n.s.s. 0/49 
 
* 1398 4.05gm n.s.s. 0/49 
b 1398 5.049m n.s.s. 0/49 
2690 1397 143.mg 8.60gm 0/76 
 
a 1397 1.269m n.s.s. 0/76 
b 1397 531.mg n.s.s. 1/76 
c 1397 1.02gm n.s.s. 13/76 
2691 1433 544.mg n.s.s. 1/50 
 
*-TOLUIDINE.HCl 638-03-9 
2692 381 1.29gm n.s.s. 
 
* 381 1.04gm n.s.s. 
b 381 919.mg n.s.s. 
2693 381m 2.75gm n.s.a. 
 
a 381m n.s.s. n.s.s. 
b 381m 410.mg n.s.s. 
2694 381 1.06gm n. .s. 
 
a *381 1.45gm n.s.s. 
b 381 751.mg n.s.a. 
2695 381 368.mg n.s.s. 
2696 381 n.s.s. n.s.a. 
 
a 381 31.7mg n.s.s. 
o-TOLUIDINE.HCl 636-21-5 
2697 c02335 428.mg 2.86gm 
 
a c02335 716.mg n.s.a. 
b c02335 344.mg n.s.a. 
c c02335 428.mg 2.869m 
d c02335 1.669m n.s.s. 
2698 c02335 453.mg 8.19gm 
 
a c02335 554.mg 80.1gm 
b c02335 304.mg n.s.a. 
c c02335 404.mg n.s.a. 
d c02335 473.mg n.s.a. 
2699 381 544.mg 46.2gm 
 
a 381 1.18g n.s.a. 
b 381 283.mg 12.1gm 
2700 381 513.mg 3.75gm 
 
2701 381 300.mg 1.75gm 
 
* 381 474.mg 12.09m 
b 381 353.mg n.s.a. 
c 381 154.mg 1.13gm 
2702 381 301.mg 1.84gm 
 
2. 50mg 
2. 50mg 
2.50mg 
2. 50mg 
2.50mg 
2. 50mg 
20.0mg 
 
20.0mg 
20 .0mg 
 
20.0 g 
57. 1m9 
 
1/22 1. 149m 
5/22 1. 14gm 
18/22 1. 14gm 
 
8/15 2.66m 
0/15 2.66"m 
11/15 2.66gO 
 
1/18 754.mg 
8/18 754.mg 
 
13/18 754.mg 
7/99p 754.mg 
0/16 146.mg 
9/16 146.-m 
 
0/20 130-mg 
0/20 130.mg 
 
8/20 130.m9 
0/20 130.m9 
1/20 130.mg 
 
1/20 120.mg 
1/20 120.mg 
17/20 120.mg 
5/20 120.mg 
5/20 120.mg 
 
0/15 1.09gm 
 
8/15 1.099m 
11/15 1.09gm 
 
8/102p 1.09gm 
0/14 1.01gm 
1/14 1.01gm 
 
4/14 1.01gm 
8/14 1.01gm 
5/99p 1.01gm 
 
16/49 (25.0mg 
0/49 25.0mg 
0/49 25.0mg 
0/49 25.0mg 
1/49 25.0mg 
1/49 25.0mg 
5/76 (200.mg 
3/76 200.mg 
0/76 200.mg 
20/76 200.mg 
0/48 
 
2/18 
4/18 
10/18 
2/19 
0/19 
7/19 
 
4/16 1.51gm 
2/16 1.519m 
10/16 1.51gm 
4/16 (1.519m 
0/20 292.mg 
17/20 (292.mo 
 
4/50 390.mg 
2/50 390.mg 
19/50 390.mg 
4/50 390.mg 
2/50 390.mg 
2/50 360.mg 
1/50 360.mg 
28/50 360.mg 
19/50 360.mg 
5/50 (360.mg 
 
3/18 2.509m 
3/18 2.509g 
 
12/18 2.50gm 
4/18 2.50gm 
4/14 2.30gm 
 
2/14 2.30gm 
5/14 2.30gm 
10/14 2.30gm 
 
4/14 2.30gm 
 
6/49 250.mg 5/49) 
0/49 250.mg 2/49 
2/49 250.mg 1/49 
0/50 250.mg 1/49 
1/50 250.mg 1/49 
0/50 250.mg 0/49 
3/76) 
5/76 
0/76 
17/76 
 
Arnold;txsp,52, 113-152; 1980 
 
Schahi ;zkko,91, 19-22;1978 
Hooson;bjca,42, 129-147; 1980 
 
Weisburger; j*pt,2,325-356; 1978/pers.comm./Russf i*ld 1973 
 
2/16 
5/16 
10/16 
 
1/16) 
0/18 
9/18) 
 
13/50 
7/50 
26/50 
13/50 
2/50 
12/50 
10/50 
30/50 
14/50 
3/50) 
2/21 
0/21 
8/21 
8/21 
8/11 
4/11 
2/11 
11/11 
8/11 
 
liv:hps,hpc. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,,/c. 
- h- -:eh,hes. 
 
liv:hps,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Weisburger;J*pt,2,325-356; 1978/pors.co_ ./Russfa*ld 1973 
 
263 
 
264 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
 
2703 R f f34 mit NXS NXB 24m24 s 
 
a R f f34 eat *gL fbm 24m24 
b R f f34 et mgl NXA 24m24 
 
c R f f34 oat ubl NXA 24m24 s 
d R f f34 et ubL tcc 24m24 s 
* R f f34 eat muL NXA 24m24 s 
f R f f34 met spl NXA 24m24 s 
9 R f f34 eat uL ot 24m24 s 
h R f f34 et spl ang 24m24 
 
i R f f 34 met TBA NXB 24m24 a 
J R f f34 met Liv NXS 24m24 s 
 
2704 R m f34 mat NXB NXB 24m24 as 
 
a R m f34 mat sub fib 24m24 ms 
b R m f34 et mul NXA 24m24 as 
c R * f34 eat NXA NXA 24m24 s 
d R m f34 mat apL fib 24m24 as 
* R f34 eat muL fbs 24m24 s 
f R m f34 eat muL srn 24m24 s 
9 R m f 34 mat TBA NXB 24m24 es 
h R m f34 met Liv NXB 24m24 es 
2705 R m cdr met sub mix 64w68 v 
 
a R * cdr eat liv mix 64w68 v 
b R * cdr eat tbe mix 64w68 v 
2706 R m cdr mat sub mix 64w" v 
 
a R m cdr at ubl mix 64w68 v 
 
p-TOLUIDINE.HCL 
 
2707 N f chi mat liv mix 77w98 v 
 
a N f chi oat Lun mix 77w98 v 
b N f chi et tbe mix 77w98 v 
2708 N f chi met liv hpt 77w98 v 
2709 N m chi mat LJv hpt 77w98 v 
 
a N m chi met liv mix 77w98 v 
b N * chi eat lun mix 77w98 v 
c N m chi met tbe mix 77w98 v 
2710 N m chi met liv hpt 77w98 v 
2711 R m cdr met liv mix 77w98 
 
a R m cdr met tbe six 77w98 
p-TOLYLUREA 
 
2712 N f cb6 met liv hpc 52w69 e 
 
a N f cb6 oat lun a/ l52w69 a 
2713 N m cb6 mat --- mly 52w69 * 
 
a N * cb6 eat ... mlh 52w69 
 
b N a cb6 et muL lh 52w69 e 
 
c N * cb6 et *ln *lh 52w69 e 
d N m cb6 met liv hpc 52w69 e 
 
e N m cb6 et lun e/m 52w69 e 
 
2714 R f f34 met liv tue 52w69 e 
2715 R a f34 met liv hpc 52w69 * 
TOXAPHENE 
 
2716 N f b6c met Liv NXA 80w9" v 
 
a N f b6c et liv hpc 80w90 v 
b N f b6c et TBA NXS 80w9 v 
c N f b6c et liv NXB 80w90 v 
d N f b6c eat Lun NXB8Ow9O v 
2717 N f b6c met liv NXA 80w90 v 
 
a N f b6c eat liv hpc 0W90 v 
2718 N m b6c met liv hpc 80w90 v 
 
e N m b6c eat liv NXA 8Ow9O v 
b N m b6c set TBA NX 8Qw9O v 
c N * b6c eat liv NXB 8O9O v 
d N * b6c set lun NXB SSw9 v 
2719 N m b6c met liv NXA 80w"90 v 
 
a N m b6c mat liv hpc 80w90 v 
2720 R f oso mat TIA NXB 19m25 v 
 
a R f ose met liv NXS 19m25 v 
2721 R f osm mat thy fce 19m25 v 
2722 R m osm met TBA NXB 19m25 v 
 
a R m ose met liv NXB 19m25 v 
2723 R m osm met thy NXA 19m25 v 
 
e R f ose met liv nnd 19m25 v 
 
TRENINON 
 
2724 R m b46 lvJ Liv lcc 12m24 ms 
 
a R m b46 ivj tbe mix 12m24 ms 
b R b46 ivJ tbe maL 12m24 es 
c R * b46 ivj tbe ben 12m24 es 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
77.9mg / P<.0005 
115.mg / P<.0005c 
119.mg / P<.0005c 
175.mg / P<.0005c 
185.mg I P<.0005c 
332.mg / P<.0005c 
337.mg * P<.0005c 
423.mg / P<.0005c 
450.mg * P<.002 c 
75.8mg * P<.0005 
no dre P-1. 
 
23.3mg / P<.0005 
 
33.3mg / P<.0005c 
93.2mg / P<.0005c 
97.4mg * P<.0005c 
134.mg * P<.0005c 
184.g I P<.0005c 
394.mg I P<.0005c 
24.4mg I P<.0005 
645.mg / P<.06 
 
36.7mg * P<.0005. 
2.969m * P<.3 - 
36.1mg * P<.0005 
 
38.8mg * P<.0005. 
131.mg * P<.0005O 
 
pool 
 
Ong . :. .Iug. :10. :100. g :..g :10. :100. :Ig :. 10 
 
A s 256.mg * P<.06 
 
400.mg * P<.5 _ 
no dre P-1. 
 
pool + 278.mg * P<.01 + 
 
A 49.1mg \ P<.02 + 
 
49.1mg \ P<.02 + 
78.6mg \ P<.06 - 
49.4mg \ P<.06 
 
pool , 50.1mg \ P<.0005+ 
 
:> no dre P.1. - 
 
no dre P-1. - 
 
100ng .: .. ug. :10. :100.. : g . :10. :100.. :. :10 
 
pool .> no dre 
 
no dre 
pooL . + . 206.mg 
 
265m.g 
441 .mg 
626.mg 
722.mg 
no dre 
.> no dre 
.> 699.mg 
 
P-1. _ 
P-I. 1 
 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.002 
P<.009 
 
P<. 08 - 
 
P-I. - 
P-1. - 
 
P<.2 - 
 
100ng..:. . ug. :10. :100. g :. 1g :10. :100.. : g :10 
 
: + : 8.78mg P<.0005c 
 
15.2mg I P<.0005c 
9.19mg *P<.0005 
8.78mg I P<.0005 
no drm P-1. 
 
pool :+ 9.10mg I P<.0005c 
 
15.2mg I P<.0005c 
: +: 4.08mg * P<.0005c 
 
4.23mg * P<.OOOSc 
4.13mg *P<.0005 
4.23mg * P<.0005 
1.13gm * P<.9 
 
pool + 4.46mg * P<.0005c 
 
4.79mg * P<.0005c 
:> 596.mg * P<1. - 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
pool A 209.mg * P<.03 a 
 
:> 1.02gm * P<. - 
 
949.mg * P<d. 
 
pool + 58.9mg * P<.002 e 
 
92.1mg * P<.03 
 
lOOng . . .ug. :10. :100. g :..g :10. :100.. : . :10 
 
65.3ug P<.2 
 
5.O4ug P<.005 + 
6.77ug P<.007 + 
32.Oug P<.4 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl IDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
2703 c02335 
 
a c02335 
b c02335 
c c02335 
d c02335 
a c02335 
f c02335 
9 c02335 
h c02335 
i c02335 
J c02335 
2704 c02335 
 
a c02335 
b c02335 
c c02335 
d c02335 
* c02335 
f c02335 
9 c02335 
h c02335 
2705 381 
 
a 381 
b 381 
2706 381 
 
a 381 
 
51.9mg 141.mg 
72.0mg 244.mg 
73.4mg 268.mg 
111.mg 299.mg 
116.mg 318.mg 
199.m- 605m.g 
193.mg 810..g 
236.mg 844.mg 
239.mg 1.53gm 
47.1mg 174.mg 
n.s.s. n.s.s. 
15.5mg 35.3mg 
20.9mg 54.6mg 
59.7mg 140.mg 
53.3mg 189.mg 
64.1"m 355.mg 
99.1mg 336.mg 
192.mg 981.mg 
15.8mg 40.6mg 
169.mg n.s.a. 
22.4mg 62.5mg 
482.mg n.s.a. 
20.2mg 82.4mg 
23.6mg 65.9mg 
48.9mg 535.mg 
 
p-TOLUIDINE.HCl 540-23-8 
2707 381 93.6mg n.s.a. 
 
a 381 86.3mg n.s.a. 
b 381 97.1mg n.s.a. 
2708 381 94.7mg 29.2gm 
2709 381 19.3mg n.s.s. 
 
a 381 19.3mg n.s.s. 
b 381 26.8mg n.s.s. 
c 381 17.2m9 n.s.s. 
2710 381 20.2mg 212.mg 
2711 381 116.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 381 42.9mg n.s.s. 
 
7/20 150.mg 
6/20 150.mg 
7/20 150. mg 
0/20 150. mg 
0/20 150.mg 
0/20 150.mg 
0/20 150.mg 
0/20 150.mg 
0/20 150.mg 
13/20 150.mg 
0/20 150.mg 
0/20 120.mg 
0/20 120.mg 
0/20 120.mg 
0/20 120.mo 
0/20 120.mg 
0/20 120.mg 
0/20 120.mg 
10/20 120.mg 
 
1/20 120.mg 
0/16 192.mg 
0/16 192.mg 
9/16 192.mg 
18/1i1p 192.mg 
5/I1p 192.mg 
 
0/20 74.3mg 
6/20 74.3mg 
17/20 74.3mg 
 
1/102p 74.3mg 
3/18 68.6mg 
3/18 68.6mg 
5/18 68.6mg 
12/18 68.6mg 
7/99p 68.6mg 
1/22 31.3mg 
14/22 31.3mg 
 
32/50 
20/50 
20/50 
10/50 
9/50 
3/50 
9/50 
0/50 
7/50 
43/50 
 
2/50 
44/50 
28/50 
15/50 
17/50 
10/50 
8/50 
3/50 
50/50 
 
1/50 
18/23 
0/23 
19/23 
18/23 
3/23 
 
300.mg 
300.mg 
300.mg 
300.mg 
300.mg 
300.mg 
300.mg 
300.mg 
300.mg 
300.mg 
300.mg 
240.mg 
240.mg 
240.mg 
240.mg 
240.mg 
240.mg 
240.mg 
240.mg 
240.mg 
384.mg 
384.mg 
384 mg 
384.mg 
384.mg 
 
2/21 142.mg 
3/21 142.mg 
6/21 142.mg 
2/21 142.mg 
8/17 (131.mg 
8/17 (131.mg 
6/17 (131.mg 
12/17 (131.mg 
8/17 (131.mg 
1/22 62.6mg 
12/22 62.6mg 
 
48/50 
35/50 
35/50 
22/50 
22/50 
21/50 
12/50 
18/50 
9/50 
48/50 
 
0/50 
48/50 
27/50 
37/50 
9/50 
2/50 
20/50 
11/50 
48/50 
 
3/50 
21/24 
 
1/24 
23/24 
21/24 
 
4/24 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
Brkly Code 
 
mgL:adn,fba; uL:sang,fbs,ost,srn; spL:ang,ost,srn; ubl:tcc,tpp. C 
 
*gl:adn,fba. 
ubl :tcc,tpp. 
mul :sang,fbs,ost,srn. 
 
spL :sng,ost,srn. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
mul:ang,fbs,mso,ost,srn; spL:fib; sub:fib; tnv:mso. C 
 
mul :ang,fbs,ost,srn. 
 
mul :so; tnv:mso. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Weisburger; jept,2,325-356; 1978/p.rs.comm./Russfield 1973 
 
3/17 
7/17 
10/17 
3/17 
9/18) 
9/18) 
8/18) 
14/18) 
9/18) 
1/21 
12/21 
 
Weisburg.r; jept,2,325-356;1978/pers.co_ ./Russfi*ld 1973 
 
FLsischman; japt,3, 149-170;1980 
 
TOXAPHENE 8001-35-2 
 
2716 c00259 6.34mg 14.8mg 
 
a c00259 10.3mg 24.9mg 
b c00259 6.22mg 22.7m9 
c c00259 6.34mg 14.8mg 
d c00259 217.mg n.s.s. 
2717 c00259 6.48mg 13.9mg 
 
a c00259 10.3mg 23.7mg 
2718 c00259 3.04mg 6.21mg 
 
a c00259 2.88 g 9.30mg 
b c00259 2.79mg 9.59mg 
c c00259 2.88m 9.30mg 
d c00259 56.5mg n.s.s. 
2719 c00259 3.09mg 7.36mg 
 
a c00259 3.37mg 7.58mg 
2720 c00259 22.5mg n.s.s. 
 
a c00259 106.mg n.a.s. 
2721 c00259 84.2mg n.s.s. 
2722 c00259 17.2mg n.s.s. 
 
a c00259 46.9mg n.s.s. 
2723 c00259 29.3mg 298.mg 
 
a c00259 39.4mg n.s.s. 
 
0/10 
0/10 
1/10 
0/10 
1/10 
 
1/49p 
0/49p 
0/10 
2/10 
2/10 
2/10 
1/10 
9/MOp 
6/50p 
6/10 
1/10 
 
I /SSp 
7/10 
1/10 
 
2/SSp 
1/55p 
 
11.3mg 
11.3mg 
11. 3mg 
11.3mg 
11.3mg 
11.3mg 
11.3mg 
10.4mg 
10.4mg 
10.4mg 
10.4mg 
 
10. 4mg 
10. 4mg 
10. 4mg 
20.0 mo 
20. 0mg 
 
20.0 og 
16. 5mg 
16. 5mg 
16. Smg 
16. Smg 
 
18/50 
5/50 
22/50 
18/50 
0/50 
18/50 
 
5/50 
34/50 
40/50 
44/50 
40/50 
 
1/50 
40/50 
34/50 
31/50 
 
5/50 
1/50 
33/50 
 
6/50 
7/50 
6/50 
 
22.9mg 
22.9mg 
 
22.9mg 
22.9mg 
 
22.9mg 
22.9mg 
22.9mg 
21. 1mg 
21. 1mg 
21. 1mg 
21. 1mg 
21. 1og 
 
21. 1mg 
 
21. 1mg 
40.0g 
40. 0mg 
40.0mg 
 
33.0g 
33.0mg 
33.0mg 
33.0Og 
 
40/50 
34/50 
40/50 
40/50 
 
0/50 
40/50 
34/50 
45/50 
45/50 
45/50 
45/50 
 
2/50 
45/50 
45/50 
40/50 
 
4/50 
7/50 
24/50 
 
4/50 
9/50 
4/50 
 
l iv:hpc,nnd. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
Liv:hpc,nnd. 
 
l iv:hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpc,nnd. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
I iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
thy:fca,fcc. 
 
S 
 
TRENINON 68-76-8 
 
2724 1017 10.6uo n.s.a. 
 
a 1017 2.29ug 48.2uo 
b 1017 2.9lug .117mg 
c 1017 6.37ug n.s.s. 
 
0/65 2.14ug 1/45 
7/65 2.14ug 15/45 
4/65 2.14ug 11/45 
3/65 2.14uo 4/45 
 
Schmahl ;arzn,20, 1461-1467; 1970 
 
265 
 
p-TOLYLUREA 
2712 1343 
 
a 1343 
2713 1343 
 
a 1343 
b 1343 
c 1343 
d 1343 
a 1343 
2714 1343 
2715 1343 
 
622-51-5 
 
674.mg n.s.s. 
674.mg n.s.s. 
100.mg 529.mg 
120.mg 776.mg 
167.mg 1.93gm 
189.mg 17.3gm 
207.mg n.s.s. 
705.mg n.s.s. 
287.mg n.s.s. 
114.mg n.s.s. 
 
1 /89p 
2/89p 
0/95p 
0/95p 
0/91p 
0/79p 
2/91p 
1/87p 
0/49 
0/50 
 
196.mg 
196.9 
181.m9 
181 .mg 
181.mg 
181m.g 
181.mg 
181 .mg 
75.3mg 
60.2mg 
 
0/38 
0/38 
10/43 
8/43 
5/43 
3/36 
4/43 
0/43 
0/42 
1/39 
 
266 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt TD50 ZIailpvl 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
1,2,3-TRICHLORO-4,6-DINITROBENZENE . 1.:..ug. 10. :100 . lg. 10.. 100. 10 
 
2725 N f b6a orl lun ads 76w76 evx > 108mg P<.3 
 
a N f b6a orl liv hpt 76w76 *vx no dre P-I. 
 
b N f b6a orl tba mix 76w76 *vx 52.6mg P<.09 
2726 N m b6m orl lun ad. 76w76 *vx A 49.0mg P<.09 
 
* N m b6a orL liv hpt 76w76 *vx no dre PaI. 
b N m b6a orl tba mix 76w76 *vx no dre P-1. 
2727 N f b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx > no dre P-1. 
 
a N f b6c orl lun ads 76w76 *vx no dre P-1. 
b N f b6c orl tba mix 76w76 *vx no dre P-I. 
2728 N m b6c orl Liv hpt 76w76 *vx > no dre P-l. 
 
a N m b6c orl lun mix 76w76 evx no dre P-1. 
b N m b6c orl tba mix 76w76 evx 19.8mg P<.4 
 
2,4,6-TRICHLOROANILINE lOng... . lug. :10. :100. g : ..g :10. :100.. : . :10 
 
2729 N f chi eat liv mix 68"? a : A 927.mg * P<.02 - 
 
a N f chi et lun mix 68w77 a 1.37gm * P<.02 - 
b N f chi et tba ix 68w77 e 914.mg * P<.06 - 
2730 N m chi eat --- vac 68w77 a + 273.mg * P<.0005+ 
 
a N m chi eat lun mix 68w77 a 385.mg * P<.0005- 
b N m chi eat liv mix 68w?7 a 452.mg * P<.004 
c N m chi eat tb mix 68?7 a 206.mg * P<.0005 
 
2731 N m chi eat --- vsc 68w77 a pool + 259.mg * P<.0005+ 
 
a N m chi eat liv hpt 68w77 a 560.mg * P<.0005+ 
2732 R m cdr eat liv mix 18m27 v :> no dre P-1. - 
 
a R m cdr eat tb ix 18m27 v 45.9mg \ P<.01 - 
 
1,1,1-TRICHLOROETHANE* 1 00ng . . .:ug. :10. :100.. g : . . :10. :100.. :19 :10 
 
2733 N f b6c gav TBA NXB 78w90 sv :>no dre P-1. 
 
a N f b6c gav liv NXS 78w90 cv no dre P-1. 
b N f b6c gav lun NXB 78w90 cv 260.9m * P<.9 
2734 N m b6c gav TBA NXB 78w90 sv :> 30.5gm * P<.8 
 
a N * b6c gav liv NXB 78w9O sv 39.7gm / P<.8 
b N m b6c gav lun NXB 78w90 sv 5080.gm P<1. 
 
2735 R f ose gav TBA NXB 18m26 s + 226.mg * P<.0005 
 
a R f osm gay liv NXB 18a26 s no dre P-1. 
 
2736 R m ose gav TBA NXS 18a25 s + 950.mg \ P<.009 
 
a R * osm gav liv NXB 18.25 s no dre P-1. 
 
1,1,2-TRICHLOROETHANE 100ng.. : .ug. 1 :10 :..100. g : . 1g :10. 1 :100.1 :0 1 :10 
 
2737 N f b6c gav NXB NXB 78w90 v :+ 47.6mg * P<.0005 
 
a N f b6c gav liv hpc 78w90 v 47.6mg * P<.0005c 
b N f b6c gav adr phe 78w90 v 248.mg I P<.0005c 
c N f b6c gav TBA NXB 78w9O v 52.9mg * P<.0005 
d N f b6c gav liv NXB 78w9O v 47.6mg * P<.0005 
e N f b6c gav lun NXB 78w90 v 787.mg C P<.2 
 
2738 N * b6c gav NXB NXB 78w90 v + 65.0mg / P<.0005 
 
a N * b6c gav liv hpc 78w90 v 65.0mg / P<.0005c 
b N m b6c gav adr pho 78w9O v 588.mg P<.007 c 
c N m b6c gav TBA NXB 78w9O v 79.5mg * P<.006 
d N m b6c gav liv NXB 78w9O v 65.0mg I P<.0005 
e N m b6c gv lun NXB 78w9O v 1.56gm * P<.8 
 
2739 R f osm gav TBA NXB 18u26 v :> no dre P-1. - 
 
a R f os mgvl iv NXB 18m26 v 771.Mg * P<.7 
 
2740 R * osm gav TBA NXS 18.26 v :> no dre P-1. - 
 
a R * ose gavliv NXB 18m26 v no dre P-1. 
 
TRICHLOROETHYLENE 1 00ng.. :. .ug. :10. :100.. g : . . :10. :100... :1 :10 
 
2741 H f syg inh tba ml 18.30 e .> 9.229m * P<.8 - 
 
* H f syg inh tba ben 830 * no dre P-1. - 
2742 H m syg inh tba ml 1830 e .> no dre P-1. - 
 
a H * syg inh tb ben I8W30 5.649m * P<.4 - 
2743 N f b6c gav liv hpc 78w90 sv + :1.93gm * P<.004 c 
 
a N f b6c gav TBA NXB 78w9O sv 1.85gm * P<.2 
 
b N f b6c gav liv NXB 78w9Oc v 1.93gm * P<.004 
c N f b6c gav lun NXB 78w9 sv 4.359m * P<.2 
 
2744 N m b6c gav liv hpc 78w90 sv + : 421.mg * P<.0005c 
 
a N * b6c gav TBA NXB 78w90 sv 553.mg * P<.01 
 
b N * b6c gav liv NXB 78w90 sv 421.mg * P<.0005 
c N * b6c gay lun NXB 78w90 sv 7.16gm * P<.7 
 
2745 N f hic gav for tum 88w88 r .> 41.3mg P<.3 - 
2746 N * hic gav for tum 88w88 r . 16.9mg P<.I - 
2747 N f nrh inh ... ly I 30 . 8 46.mg * P<.03 
 
a f noh inh tba mal 1830e 573.mg * P<.03 - 
b N f nrh inh tba bn l830 * no dre P-I. - 
2748 N * nrh inh ... ly 18.30. .> no dre P-1. - 
 
a N nh inh tba mal 18.30 * no dre P-1. - 
b N * nmh inh tba ben 830 * no dre P-I. - 
2749 R f ose gyv TBA NXB 18.26 dsv :> 5.629m * P<.9 - 
 
a R f osm gav liv NXB 18.26 dcv no dre P-1. 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
1 ,2,3-TRICHLORO-4,6-DINITROBENZENE 
2725 1262 17.6mg n.s.s. 0/18 
 
a 1262 33.5mg n.s.s. 0/18 
b 1262 12.9mg n.s.s. 0/18 
2726 1262 12.0mg n.s.s. 0/18 
 
a 1262 31.2mg n.s.s. 1/18 
b 1262 14.7mg n.s.s. 2/18 
2727 1262 33.5mg n.s.s. 0/18 
 
a 1262 33.5mg n.s.s. 1/18 
b 1262 22.2mg n.s.s. 2/18 
2728 1262 18.5mg n.s.s. 3/14 
 
a 1262 26.0mg n.s.s. 0/14 
b 1262 4.75mg n.s.s. 4/14 
 
2,4,6-TRICHLOROANILINE 634-93-5 
2729 381 369.mg n.s.s. 0/13 
 
a 381 490.mg n.s.s. 3/13 
b 381 333.mg n.s.s. 9/13 
2730 381 140.mg 725.mg 2/16 
 
a 381 166.mg 1.45gm 2/16 
b 381 178.mg 3.14gm 2/16 
c 381 104.mg 590.mg 9/16 
2731 381 137.mg 537.mg 5/99p 
 
a 381 202.mg 2.72gm 7/99p 
2732 381 462.mg n.s.s. 1/17 
 
a 381 18.7mg 3.80gm 13/17 
1,1,1.TRICHLOROETHANE* 71-55-6 
 
2733 c04626 6.79gm n.s.s. 7/20 
 
a c04626 13.6go n.s.s. 1/20 
b c04626 7.97gm n.s.s. 1/20 
2734 c04626 3.09gm n.s.s. 5/20 
 
a c04626 4.18gm n.s.s. 3/20 
b c04626 5.52gm n..sa. 1/20 
2735 c04626 81.4mg 685.mg 10/20 
 
a c04626 n.s.s. n.s.s. 1/20 
2736 c04626 334.mg 22.2gm 7/20 
 
a c04626 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/20 
1,1,2-TRICHLOROETHANE 79-00-5 
 
2737 c04579 33.3mg 70.8mg 0/20 
 
a c04579 33.3mg 70.8mg 0/20 
b c04579 127.mg 611.mg 0/20 
c c04579 33.9mg 106.mg 5/20 
d c04579 33.3mg 70.8mg 0/20 
 
a c04579 287.mg n.s.s. 0/20 
2738 c04579 42.2mg 146.mg 2/20 
 
a c04579 42.2mg 146.mg 2/20 
b c04579 263.mg 6.05gm 0/20 
c c04579 42.3mg 872.mg 6/20 
d c04579 42.2mg 146.mg 2/20 
 
a cO4579 338.mg n.s.s. 0/20 
2739 c04579 31.0mg n.s.s. 4/20 
 
a c04579 182.mg n.s.s. 0/20 
2740 c04579 11.8mg n.s.s. 6/20 
 
a c04579 436.mg n.s.s. 1/20 
 
TRICHLOROETHYLENE 79-01-6 
 
2741 1010 821.mg n.s.s. 2/30 
 
a 1010 2.14gm n.s.s. 1/30 
2742 1010 863.mg n.s.s. 6/30 
 
a 1010 999.mg n.s.s. 1/30 
2743 c04546 1.06gm 9.81gm 0/20 
 
a c04546 716.mg n.s.s. 4/20 
b c04546 1.06gm 9.81gm 0/20 
c c04546 1.55gm n.s.s. 1/20 
2744 c04546 277.mg 1.139m 1/20 
 
a c04546 288.mg 28.9gm 5/20 
b c04546 277.mg 1.13gm 1/20 
c c04546 1.79gm n.s.s. 0/20 
2745 1011 6.73mg n.s.s. 0/30 
2746 1011 4.16mg n.s.s. 0/30 
2747 1010 339.mg n.s.s. 9/29 
 
a 1010 230.mg n.s.s. 13/29 
b 1010 2.03gm n.s.s. 6/29 
2748 1010 1.339m n.s.s. 7/30 
 
a 1010 1.12gm n.s.a. 11/30 
b 1010 2.37gm n.s.s. 8/30 
2749 c04546 302.mg n.s.s. 7/20 
 
a c04546 n.s.a. n.s.a. 0/20 
 
(Vancide PB) 6379-49-0 
16.9mg 1/18 
16.9mg 0/18 
16.9mg 2/18 
15.8mg 2/18 
15.8m9 0/18 
15.8mg 2/18 
16.9mg 0/18 
16.9mg 0/18 
16.9mg 1/18 
15.8mg 1/15 
15.8m9 0/15 
15.8mg 7/15 
 
780.mg 
 
780.mg 
780.mg 
720.mg 
720.mg 
720.mg 
720.mg 
720.mg 
720.mg 
57.5mg 
57.5mg 
 
1. 72gm 
 
1.729m 
1.729m 
1.74gm 
1.74gm 
 
1.749m 
380.mg 
380.mg 
380.mg 
380.mg 
 
1 19.mg 
119.mg 
119.mg 
119.m9 
119.mg 
119.mg 
121 .mg 
121.mg 
121.mg 
121.mg 
121 mg 
121.mg 
23.Omg 
23.Omg 
23.0mg 
 
23. 0mg 
 
46. 1mg 
46. 1mg 
40.5mg 
40.5mg 
538.mg 
538.mg 
538.mg 
538.mg 
724.mg 
724. mg 
724.mg 
724.mg 
2.86mg 
2.38mg 
102.mg 
102.mg 
102.mg 
84.80g 
 
84.8mg 
84.8mg 
242.mg 
242.mg 
 
5/21 1.569m 
3/21 1. 569m 
7/21 1.569m 
8/18 1. 449m 
6/18 1.44gm 
 
5/18 1.44gm 
12/18 1. 449m 
8/18 1.44gm 
5/18 1.449m 
0/18 102.mg 
 
13/18 (102.mg 
 
2/50 3.44gm 
 
0/50 3.449m 
0/50 3.449m 
2/50 3.48gm 
0/50 3.489m 
1/50 3.489m 
6/50 760.mg 
0/50 760.mg 
6/50 (760.mg 
0/50 760.mg 
 
16/50 239.mg 
16/50 239.mg 
0/50 239.mg 
 
20/50 239.mg 
16/50 239.mg 
 
3/50 239.mg 
18/50 239.mg 
18/50 239.mg 
0/50 239.mg 
28/50 239.mg 
18/50 239.mg 
 
3/50 239.mg 
34/50 45.5mg 
 
1/50 45.5mg 
21/50 (45.9mg 
 
0/50 45.9mg 
 
3/29 230.mg 
1/29 230.mg 
2/30 203.mg 
0/30 203.mg 
4/50 1.08m 
14/50 1.08g 
 
4/50 1.089m 
4/50 1.089m 
26/50 1.459m 
30/50 1.45gm 
26/50 1.45gm 
 
5/50 1.459m 
1/30 
2/30 
 
17/30 509.mg 
22/30 509.mg 
 
1/30 509.mg 
7/29 424.mg 
10/29 424.mg 
 
6/29 424.mg 
12/50 48.mg 
0/50 484.mg 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
Weisburger;jept,2,325-356;1978/pers.comm./Russfield 1973 
 
1/14 
2/14 
4/14 
12/16 
3/16 
1/16 
12/16 
12/16 
 
1/16 
0/16 
10/16) 
 
3/50 
0/50 
1/50 
6/50 
4/50 
1/50 
9/50 
1/50 
4/50) 
0/50 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
adr:pha; liv:hpc. C 
 
40/50 
40/50 
12/50 
41/50 
40/50 
 
2/50 
37/50 
37/50 
8/50 
38/50 
37/50 
 
1/50 
22/50 
 
1/50 
11/50) 
0/50 
 
3/30 
0/30 
4/30 
2/30 
11/50 
19/50 
11/50 
7/50 
30/50 
33/50 
30/50 
 
2/50 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
tun:a/a,a/c. 
 
adr:phe; liv:hpc. C 
 
Liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
Liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
HenschLer;artx,43,237-248;1980 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Iun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Van Duurn; Jnci ,63,1433-1439;1979 
 
Henschl*r;artx,43,237-248;1980 
 
18/28 
22/28 
4/28 
6/30 
9/30 
3/30 
12/50 
0/50 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
267 
 
Brkly Code 
 
268 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
2750 R m osm gav TBA NXB 18.26 dsv 
 
a R m osm gav Liv NXB 18.26 dav 
2751 R f wsh inh tba **L 18X36 X 
 
a R f wsh inh tba ben l8m36 
 
2752 R m wsh inh tba mat 18.36 a 
 
a R m wsh inh tb ben 18.36 0 
 
TRICHLOROFLUOROMETHANE* 
 
2753 N f b6c gav TBA NXB 78w91 mv 
 
a N f b6c gav liv NXB 78w91 mv 
b N f b6c gav lun NXB 78w91 mv 
2754 N * b6c gav TBA NXS 78w91 mv 
 
a N m b6c gav liv NXB 78w91 sv 
b N m b6c gav lun NXB 78w9l sv 
2755 R f osm gav TBA NXB 18.26 sv 
 
a R f osm gav liv NXB 18.26 sv 
2756 R m osm gav TBA NXB 1X826 sv 
 
a R a osm gav liv NXB 18.26 mv 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
16.09m * P<1. - 
no dre Po1. 
 
no dre PoI. - 
2.129m * P<.4 - 
351.mg * P<.03 - 
no dre P-1. - 
 
100ng..: ..ug. :10. :100.. g :1g. : 10. :100.. : . :10 
 
:> 11.5g * P<.6 
 
no dra Pa1. 
111.9g * P<.8 
:> 5.819g * P<.6 
 
15.0gm * P<.8 
no dre P-1. 
 
A z 326.mg * P<.09 
 
no dre P-1. 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
N-(TRICHLORONETHYLTHIO)PHTHALINIDE .. : 1.ug . . :100.. 10 :.lg. :10. :100.. : . :10 
 
2757 N I b6s orL Liv hpt 76w76 *vx .> no dre 
 
a N f b6a orL Lun ads 76w76 evx no dre 
b N f b6a orl tba mix 76w76 evx no dre 
2758 N m b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx .> 8.23gm 
 
a N m b6a orL Lun ado 76w76 evx no dre 
b N m b6a orL tba mix 76w76 *vx no dre 
2759 N f b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 *vx .> no dre 
 
a N f b6c orL Lun mix 76w76 *vx no dre 
b N f b6c orL tba mix 76w76 *vx 260.mg 
2760 N m b6c oril lun ad. 76w76 *vx . 156.mg 
 
a N m b6c orl Liv hpt 76w76 evx 242.mg 
b N m b6c orL tba mix 76w76 *vx 87.7mg 
 
P-I. 
 
P-. . 
P-I. 
 
P<. . 
P-. 
P-. 
 
P<.2 - 
P<.05 - 
 
P<.2 - 
P<. 009 - 
 
2,4,6-TRICHLOROPHENOL 1 0Ong .. : lug. :10. :100.. g :. . :10. :100.. : . :10 
 
2761 N f b6c *at liv NXA 24m24 v + 1.419m * P<.OOOSc 
 
a N f b6c *at TBA NXB 24m24 v 1.519m * P<.05 
 
b N f b6c eat liv NXB 24m24 v 1.419m * P<.0005 
c N f b6c eat lun NXB 24m24 v 114.9m * P<1. 
2762 N f b6c orl liv hpt 76w76 *vx .> 113.mg P<.2 
 
a N f b6c orl lun ad. 76w76 evx 113.mg P<.2 
 
b N f b6c orl tba mix 76w76 evx 27.0mg P<.002 
 
2763 N m b6c eat Liv NXA 24m24 + 856.mg * P<.01 c 
 
a N m b6c set TBA NXB 24m24 10.79m * P<.9 
b N m b6c eat Liv NXB 24.24 856.mg * P<.01 
c N m b6c eat lun NXB 24.24 no dre PaI. 
 
2764 N m b6c orl Liv hpt 76w76 *vx . 68.Oag P<.05 
 
a N m b6c orL lun ado 76w76 evx 105.mg P<.2 
 
b N m b6c orl tba mix 76w76 *vx 17.9mg P<.0005 
2765 N f b6a orl Liv hpt 76w76 evx .> 220.mg P<.3 
 
a N f b6a orl lun ad. 76w76 evx no dre P-1. 
b N f b6a orl tba mix 76w76 *vx no dre P-1. 
2766 N m b6a orl lun ad. 76w76 evx .> 1.68gm P<. 
 
a N m b6a orl liv hpt 76w76 evx 3.58gm P<1. 
b N m b6a orl tba mix 76w76 evx 1.059m P<1. 
 
2767 R f f34 eat TBA NXS 25m25 a :> no dre P-1. - 
 
a R f f34 set Liv NXB 25m25 a no dre P-1. 
 
2768 R m f34 eat ... mlo 25m25 + :405.mg * P<.008 c 
 
a R m f34 eat --- NXA 25m25 445.mg * P<.02 c 
b R a f34 eat --- NXB 25m2S 445.mg * P<.02 
c R m f34 eat TBA NXB 25m25 1.439m * P<.7 
d R m f34 eat liv NXB 25m25 no dre P-1. 
 
2-(2,4,5-TRICHLOROPHENOXY)PROPIONIC ACID.:.. ug.... 10 . 100. 1g. 10.. :100.. g 10 
 
2769 N f b6a orl liv hpt 76w76 evx > no dre 
 
a N f b6a orl lun ad. 76w76 evx no dre 
b N f b6a orL tba mix 76w76 *vx no dre 
2770 N a b6a orL Lun ada 76w76 evx > no dre 
 
a N m b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b N m b6a orL tba mix 76w76 evx no dre 
2771 N f b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx > no dre 
 
a N f b6c orL Lun mix 76w76 evx no dre 
b N f b6c orl tba mix 76w76 evx 52.6mg 
2772 N a b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx . 16.6mg 
 
a N m b6c orl Lun ada 76w76 evx 95.2mg 
b N a b6c orL tbm mix 76w76 evx 9.07mg 
 
P-I l- 
 
Po 1. 
 
P-I1. 
 
P-I1. 
P-I1. 
 
P-I1. 
 
P<.2 - 
P<. 007 - 
P<.3 - 
P<. 0005- 
 
2,4,5-TRICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ACID Ong ..:.. .............0....m.. ....1....... ::100.. : :10 
 
2773 N f b6a orl Liv hpt 76w76 evx .> no dre P-I. 
 
a N f b6a orl Lun de 76w76 evx no dre PI.1 
b N f b6s orL tba mix 76w76 *vx no dre P-I. 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
2750 c04546 305.mg n.sa.s. 
 
a c04546 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
2751 1010 277.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1010 448.mg n.s.s. 
2752 1010 141.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1010 385.mg n.s.s. 
 
5/20 
0/20 
16/28 
2/28 
4/29 
7/29 
 
242.mg 7/50 484.mg 
242..g 0/50 484.mg 
 
20.1mg 12/30 101.mg 
20.1mg 2/30 101 .mg 
14.1mg 5/30 70.4mg 
 
14.1mg 2/30 70.4mg 
 
5/50 
0/50 
14/30 
4/30 
11/30 
5/30 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
HenschL*r;artx,43,237-248;1980 
 
TRICHLOROFLUORONETHANE* 75-69.4 
2753 c04637 2.49gm n.s.s. 3/20 
 
a c04637 5.59gm n.s.s. 1/20 
b c04637 9.23gm n.s.a. 1/20 
2754 c04637 1.14gm n.s.s. 7/20 
 
a c04637 1.54gm n.s.s. 5/20 
b c04637 10.3gm n.s.s. 2/20 
2755 c04637 91.0mg n.s.s. 7/20 
 
a c04637 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/20 
2756 c04637 117.mg n.s.s. 5/20 
 
a c04637 n.s.s. n..sa. 0/20 
 
1. 20g 
 
1.20gm 
1.20gm 
1.20gm 
1. 20g 
1.20gm 
 
270.mg 
270.mg 
257.mg 
257.mg 
 
11/50 2.40gm 
4/50 2.40gm 
0/50 2.40gm 
22/50 2.40gm 
15/50 2.40gm 
0/50 2.40gm 
 
4/50 540.mg 
0/50 540.mg 
4/50 490.mg 
0/50 490.mg 
 
9/50 
2/50 
2/50 
16/49 
10/49 
 
1/49 
7/50 
0/50 
1/50 
0/50 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
t iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Iun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
t iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
N -(TRICHLORONETHYLTHIO)PHTHALINIDE 
2757 1239 138.mg n.s.s. 0/17 
 
a 1239 138.mg n.s.s. 1/17 
b 1239 89.8mg n.s.s. 2/17 
2758 1239 86.4mg n.s.s. 1/18 
 
a 1239 95.9mg n.s.s. 2/18 
b 1239 75.1mg n.s.s. 3/18 
2759 1239 166.mg n.s.s. 0/16 
 
a 1239 166.ng n.s.s. 0/16 
b 1239 63.9mg n.s.s. 0/16 
2760 1239 47.2mg n.s.s. 0/16 
 
a 1239 59.5mg n.s.s. 0/16 
b 1239 33.1mg 1.92gO 0/16 
 
(folpet) 133-07-3 
83.8mg 0/15 
83.8mg 0/15 
83.8mg 1/15 
78.0mg 1/17 
78.0mg 1/17 
78.0mg 2/17 
83.8mg 0/18 
83.8mg 0/18 
83.8mg 2/18 
78.0mg 3/18 
78.0mg 2/18 
78.0mg 5/18 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
2,4,6-TRICHLOROPHENOL (Dowicide-2S) 88-06-2 
 
2761 c02904 874.mg 4.56gm 1/20 678.mg 12/50 1.36gm 24/50 
 
a c02904 686.mg n.s.s. 6/20 678.mo 30/50 1.36gm 33/50 
b c02904 874.mg 4.56gm 1/20 678.mg 12/50 1.36gm 24/50 
c c02904 4.39gm n.s.s. 1/20 678.mg 4/50 1.36gm 3/50 
2762 292 27.8mg n.s.s. 0/16 36.4mg 2/18 
 
a 292 27.8mg n.s.s. 0/16 36.4mg 2/18 
b 292 11.5mg 110.mg 0/16 36.4mg 7/18 
 
2763 c02904 457.mg 66.3gm 4/20 600.mg 32/50 1.20gm 39/50 
 
a c02904 708.mg n.s.s. 14/20 600.mg 42/50 1.20gm 42/50 
b c02904 457.mg 66.3gm 4/20 600.mg 32/50 1.209m 39/50 
c c02904 2.89gm n.s.s. 3/20 600.mg 13/50 1.20gm 7/50 
2764 292 20.5mg n.s.s. 0/16 33.9mg 3/18 
 
a 292 25.9mg n.s.s. 0/16 33.9mg 2/18 
b 292 8.25mg 51.6mg 0/16 33.9mg 9/18 
2765 292 35.8mg n.s.s. 0/17 36.4mg 1/17 
 
a 292 68.1mg n.s.s. 1/17 36.4mg 0/17 
b 292 32.0mg n.s.s. 2/17 36.4mg 2/17 
2766 292 29.5mg n.s.s. 2/18 33.9mg 2/17 
 
a 292 37.6mg n.s.s. 1/18 33.9mg 1/17 
b 292 24.7mg n.s.s. 3/18 33.9mg 3/17 
 
2767 c02904 301.mg n.s.s. 16/20 250.mg 32/50 (500.mg 27/50) 
 
a c02904 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/20 250.mg 0/50 500.mg 0/50 
2768 c02904 222.mg 8.89gm 3/20 200.mg 23/50 400.mg 28/50 
 
a c02904 227.mg n.s.s. 4/20 200.mg 25/50 400.mg 29/50 
b c02904 227.mg n.s.s. 4/20 200.mg 25/50 400.mg 29/50 
c c02904 229.mg n.s.s. 16/20 200.mg 40/50 400.mg 41/50 
d c02904 3.93gm n.s.s. 1/20 200.mg 1/50 400.mg 0/50 
 
2-(2,4,5-TRICHLOROPHENOXY)PROPIONIC ACID 93-72-1 
2769 1234 29.8mg n.s.s. 0/17 16.9mg 0/16 
 
a 1234 29.8mg n.s.s. 1/17 16.9mg 0/16 
b 1234 19.6mg n.s.s. 2/17 16.9mg 1/16 
2770 1234 20.7mg n.s.s. 2/18 15.8mg 1/18 
 
a 1234 31.2mg n.s.s. 1/18 15.8mg 0/18 
b 1234 22.1mg n.s.s. 3/18 15.8mg 1/18 
2771 1234 33.5mg n.s.s. 0/16 16.9mg 0/18 
 
a 1234 33.5mg n.s.s. 0/16 16.9mg 0/18 
b 1234 12.9mg n.s.s. 0/16 16.9mg 2/18 
2772 1234 6.24mg 224.mg 0/16 15.8mg 5/17 
 
a 1234 15.5mg n.s.s. 0/16 15.8mg 1/17 
b 1234 4.03mg 28.9mg 0/16 15.8mg 8/17 
 
2,4,5-TRICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ACID (2,4,5-T) 93-76-5 
2773 1233 16.5mg n.s.s. 0/17 8.34mg 0/18 
 
a 1233 16.5mg n.s.s. 1/17 8.34mg 0/18 
b 1233 7.87mg n.s.s. 2/17 8.34mg 2/18 
 
liv:hpa,hpc. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Innss;nt 1s, 1968/1969 
 
Liv:hpa,hpc. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:o/a,a/c. 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
* :lou, lym. 
 
---:tLu,Lym,mtL. C 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Innss;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
269 
 
Brkly Code 
 
270 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
2774 N a b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 *vx 
 
a N * b6a orL Lun ads 76w76 *vx 
b N m b6a orL tba mix 76w76 evx 
2775 N f b6c orL Lun ads 76w76 *vx 
 
a N f b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 evx 
b N f b6c orL tba mix 76w76 *vx 
2776 N m b6c orL Liv hpt 76w76 *vx 
 
a N m b6c orL Lun ads 76w76 *vx 
b N m b6c orL tba mix 76w76 *vx 
2777 R f sda eat thy cca 24.24 a 
 
a R f sda eat Liv hnd 24.24 a 
b R f sda eat tba mix 24.24 a 
2778 R m sda eat Liv hpc 24m24 o 
 
a R m ada eat tba mix 24.24 a 
 
TR IETHANOLANINE 
 
2779 N f icr *at --- mix 25m25 e 
 
a N f icr eat Liv tum 25m25 e 
b N f icr eat Lun ade 25.25 a 
c N f icr eat tba mix 25m25 e 
d N f icr eat tba meL 25.25 a 
2780 N m icr eat Liv tum 26.27 e 
 
a N m icr *at Lun mix 26m27 e 
b N m icr eat tb maL 26m27 e 
c N m icr eat tba mix 26m27 e 
TR IETHYLENE GLYCOL 
 
2781 R m osm eat ubl tum 24m24 r 
 
TD50 ZITilpv1 
 
DR AuOp 
no dre PoI. - 
no dre P-I. - 
no dri P-I. - 
53.4mg P<.3 - 
no dre P-1. - 
53.4mg P<.3 - 
11. 3mg P<. 02 - 
49.7mg P<.3 - 
7.00mg P<. 004 - 
488mg Z P<.5 - 
no dre P-I. - 
10.6mg * P<.2 - 
no dre P-I. - 
no dre P-1. - 
 
ibOng..: . . ug. 10. :100.. :1mg. : 10. :100.. g ..:..10 
 
1.29g * P<.04 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
88.8 \ P<.002 
 
100.mg \ P<.003 . 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
no dre P-1. + 
no dre P-1. 
bO0ng. . : 1u . :10. :100. g :..g :10. :100.. : :10 
 
.> no dre P-1. 
 
2,2,2.TRIFLUORO-N-[4.(4-CNITfRO-2-FURYL)-2-THIAZOLYLJACETANIDE.:..100.. :. . : 10. :100... : :10 
 
2782 N I swi *at for mix 46w55 . + . 9.98mg 
 
a N f swi eat for sqc 46w55 * 38.6mg 
b N f awi oat for sqp 46w55 * 43.5mg 
c N f swi eat Liv tum 46w55 a no dre 
d N f swi eat Lun tum 46w55 no dre 
e N f swi eat tba mix 46w55 e 8.01mg 
2783 R f sde eat mgL mix 46w66 e . . 6.79mg 
 
a R f sd eat gL dc 46w66 7.27mg 
b R f sda eat Liv tum 46w66 e no dre 
c R f sda at tba mix 46w"66 5.58mg 
 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P-I. 
P-I. 
 
P<.0005 
 
P<. 0005+ 
P<.0005 
P-I. 
 
P<.0005 
 
TRIFLURALIN bOng..:..ug... :10. :100. :.g :10. :100.. :. :10 
 
2784 N f b6c eat Liv NXA 78w90 dv : 330.mg * P<.0005c 
 
a N f b6c eat Liv hpc 78w90 dv 368.mg * P<.0005c 
b N f b6c set TBA NXB 78w90 dv 263.mg * P<.0005 
c N f b6c eat Liv NXB 78w90 dv 330.mg * P<.0005 
d N f b6c eat Lun NXB 78w90 dv 1.36gm * P<.08 
 
2785 N f b6c eat Liv NXA 78w90 dv pooL 330.mg * P<.0005c 
 
a N f b6c set Liv hpc 78w90 dv 368.mg * P<.0005c 
b N f b6c eat Lun NXA 78w9O dv 1.36gm * P<.003 c 
c N f b6c eat Lun a/a 78w90 dv 1.52g * P<.003 c 
d N f b6c eat sto sqc 78w90 dv 3.09gm * P<.05 c 
2786 N m b6c eat TBA NXS 78w90 dv :> 1.50gm * P<.8 - 
 
a N m b6c eat Liv NXB 78w90 dv 1.50gm * P<.8 
b N m b6c set Lun NXS 78w9O dv 5.44gm * P<.4 
 
2787 R f osm set thy NXA 18.26 dv #663.mg \ P<.03 - 
 
a R f oam eat TBA NXB 18.26 dv 2.64gm \ P<1. 
b R f ose eat Liv NXB 18.26 dv no dre P-1. 
 
2788 R f ose eat TBA NXB 18.26 dv :> no dre P-1. - 
 
a R m osm eat Liv NXB 18.26 dv no dre P-1. 
2,4,5-TRINETHYLANILINE 100ng .. :. .ug. :10. :100. g :. 1g :10. :100.. : g :10 
 
2789 N f b6c eat Liv hpc 23.23 :+ 6.13m9 * P<.0005c 
 
a N f b6c eat TBA NXB 23.23 22.4mg * P<.4 
 
b N f b6c eat Liv NXB 23m23 6.13mg * P<.0005 
c N f b6c eat Lun NXB 23m23 47.6mg * P<.09 
 
2790 N m b6c set TBA NXB 23m23 :> 52.5mg * P<.7 - 
 
a N * b6c eat Liv NXB 23.23 14.4mg * P<.08 
b N * b6c eat lun NXB 23.23 no dre P-1. 
 
2791 R f f34 eat NXB NXB 23.23 + 20.4mg * P<.0005 
 
a R f f34 eat Liv NXA 23m23 27.2mg * P<.0005c 
b R f f34 eat Lun NXA 23.23 88.1mg * P<.003 c 
c R f f34 eat Liv hpc 23m23 142.mg * P<.002 c 
d R f f34 eat TBA NXB 23m23 396.mg * P<.9 
 
a R f f34 eat Liv NXB 23.23 27.2mg * P<.0005 
 
2792 R m f34 eat liv NXA 23m23 + 43.8mg * P<.002 c 
 
a R m f34 eat Liv hpc 23m23 71.8&M * P<.004 c 
b R m f34 eat lun NXA 23.23 180.Mg * P<.05 
c R m f34 eat Liv bdc 23m23 268.mg * P<.03 
d R * f34 set TBA NXB 23.23 138.mg * P<.7 
 
a R f f34 eat Liv NXB 23.23 43.8mg * P<.002 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
1233 9.17mg n.s.s. 
1233 15.4mg n.s.s. 
1233 6.10mg n.s.s. 
1233 8.69mg n.s.s. 
1233 16.5mg n.s.s. 
1233 8.69mg n.s.s. 
1233 3.89mg n.s.s. 
1233 8.09mg n.a.s. 
1233 2.83mg 42.8mg 
 
1353 87.9mg n.sa.s. 
1353 208.mg n.sa.s. 
1353 2.34mg n.s.s. 
1353 279.mg n.s.s. 
1353 17.5mg n.s.s. 
 
1/18 
2/18 
3/18 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
3/86 
4/86 
83/86 
 
3/86 
76/86 
 
7.76mg 
7.76mg 
7.76mg 
8.34mg 
8.34mg 
8.34mg 
7.76mg 
7.76mg 
7.76mg 
3.00mg 
3. 00mg 
3. 00mg 
3. 00mg 
3.00mg 
 
1/18 
0/18 
3/18 
1/18 
0/18 
1/18 
4/18 
1/18 
6/18 
 
10/50 10.0mg 
 
2/50 10.09g 
48/50 10.09g 
 
1/50 10.0m9 
44/50 10.0mg 
 
2/50 30.0mg 6/50 
3/50 30.0mg 1/50 
48/50 30.0mg 50/50 
 
0/50 30.0mg 1/50 
40/50 30.0mg 44/50 
 
Kociba;fctx, 17,205-221; 1979 
 
TRIETHANOLANINE 102-71-6 
2779 550 471.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 550 291.mg n.s.s. 
b 550 2.529m n.s.s. 
c 550 42.2mg 371.mg 
d 550 46.1mg 559.mg 
2780 550 277.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 550 2.38gm n.s.s. 
b 550 1.53gm n.s.s. 
c 550 1.709m n.s.s. 
 
1/36 
0/36 
0/36 
1/36 
1/36 
0/35 
1/35 
1/35 
2/35 
 
39.0mg 
39.0mg 
39.0mg 
39.0g 
39.09g 
36.09g 
36. 0mg 
36.0mg 
36.0go 
 
7/37 390.mg 
0/37 390.mg 
1/37 390.mg 
11/37 (390.mg 
10/37 (390.mg 
0/33 360.mg 
2/33 360.mg 
3/33 360.mg 
4/33 360.mg 
 
Hoshino;canr,38,3918-3921; 1978 
 
9/36 
0/36 
0/36 
13/36) 
13/36) 
0/28 
0/28 
1/28 
1/28 
 
TRIETHYLENE GLYCOL 112*27-6 
 
2781 105 565.mg n.s.s. 0/12 
 
400.m9 0/12 800.m9 0/12 1.60gm 0/12 
 
Fitzhugh;j iht,28,40-43;1946 
 
2,2,2-TRIFLUORO-N-[4-(S-NITRO-2-FURYL))-2-THIAZOLYLJACETAIDE 42011-48-3 
2782 1076 4.97mg 20.2mg 0/29 132.mg 23/25 
 
a 1076 19.5mg 91.1mg 0/29 132.mg 12/25 
b 1076 21.5mg 107.mg 0/29 132.mg 11/25 
c 1076 190.mg n.s.s. 0/29 132.mg 0/25 
d 1076 190.mg n.s.s. 0/29 132.mg 0/25 
 
a 1076 3.39mg 17.7mg 2/29 132.mg 24/25 
2783 1126 3.55mg 20.5mg 2/24 17.4mg 17/31 
 
a 1126 3.93mg 15.5mg 0/24 17.4mg 15/31 
b 1126 44.8mg n.s.s. 0/24 17.4mg 0/31 
c 1126 3.01m9 14.2mg 2/24 17.4mg 19/31 
 
Cohen;canr,33,1593-1597;1973 
 
Cohen; Jnci,54,841-850;1975 
 
TRIFLURALIN 1582-09-8 
 
2784 c00442 220.mg 577.mg 
 
a c00442 242.mg 648.mg 
b c00442 170.mg 639.mg 
c c00442 220.mg 577.mg 
d c00442 664.mg n.s.s. 
2785 c00442 220.mg 526.mg 
 
a c00442 242.mg 600.mg 
b c00442 664.mg 5.71gm 
c c0042 718.mg 7.469m 
d c00442 1.17gm n.s.s. 
2786 c00442 170.mg n.s.s. 
 
a c00442 195.mg n.s.s. 
b c00442 886.mg n.s.s. 
2787 c00442 255.mg n.a.s. 
 
a c00442 118.mg n.s.s. 
b c00442 3.399m n.s.s. 
2788 c00442 410.mg n.s.s. 
 
a c00442 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
 
0/20 309 mg 
0/20 309.mg 
2/20 309.mg 
0/20 309.mg 
0/20 309.so 
0/60p 309.mg 
0/60p 309.mg 
0/60p 309.mg 
0/60p 309.mg 
0/60p 309.mg 
9/20 208.mg 
4/20 208.mg 
0/20 208.mg 
1/50 145.mg 
36/50 145.mg 
 
1/50 145.mg 
28/50 116.mg 
 
0/50 116.mg 
 
15/50 585.mg 21/50 
12/50 585.mg 21/50 
24/50 585.mg 26/50 
15/50 585.mg 21/50 
7/50 585.mg 3/50 
15/50 585.mg 21/50 
12/50 585.mg 21/50 
7/50 585-mg 3/50 
6/50 585.mg 3/50 
4/50 585.mg 1/50 
20/50 389.mg 17/50 
14/50 389.mg 9/50 
0/50 389.mg 1/50 
7/50 (278.mg 0/50) 
39/50 (278.mg 22/50) 
 
0/50 278.mg 0/50 
22/50 225.mg 22/50 
 
0/50 225.mg 0/50 
 
liv:hpa,hpc. 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
Liv:hpa,hpc. 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
thy:fca,fcc. S 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
2,4,5-TRINETHYLANILINE 137-17-7 
2789 c02299 4.44mg 9.97m9 0/20 
 
a c02299 5.84mg n.s.s. 12/20 
b c02299 4.44mg 9.97mg 0/20 
c c02299 23.9mg n.s.s. 0/20 
2790 c02299 7.35mg n.s.s. 12/20 
 
a c02299 6.14mg n.s.s. 5/20 
b c02299 13.1mg n.s.s. 4/20 
2791 c02299 13.8mg 54.5mg 0/20 
 
a c02299 17.3mg 88.2mg 0/20 
b c02299 47.4mg 545.mg 0/20 
c c02299 67.0mg 388.mg 0/20 
d c02299 23.8g n.s.s. 17/20 
 
a c02299 17.3mg 8.2mg 0/20 
2792 c02299 23.9m9 205.mg 1/20 
 
a c02299 38.7mg 497.mg 0/20 
b c02299 68.2mg n..sa. 1/20 
c c02299 92.5mg n.s.s. 0/20 
d c02299 19.2mg n.s.s. 17/20 
* c02299 23.9mg 205.mg 1/20 
 
6.50mg 
6.50mg 
6. 50mg 
6. 50mg 
6.00mg 
6.00mg 
6.00mg 
10.0m9 
10.0mg 
 
10.0m9 
10.0mg 
 
10 .0mg 
10 .0mg 
 
8.00mg 
8.00mg 
8.00mg 
8.00mg 
8.00mg 
8.00mg 
 
18/50 13.0mg 40/50 
41/50 13.0mg 45/50 
18/50 13.0mg 40/50 
5/50 13.0mg 6/50 
34/50 12.0mg 32/50 
26/50 12.0mg 27/50 
9/50 (12.0mg 1/50) 
14/50 40.0mg 33/50 
12/50 40.0mg 27/50 
3/50 40.0m9 11/50 
0/50 40.0mg 9/50 
39/50 40.0mg 45/50 
12/50 40.0mg 27/50 
6/50 32.0mg 20/50 
3/50 32.0mg 11/50 
0/50 32.0mg 7/50 
0/50 32.0mg 4/50 
33/50 32.0mg 45/50 
6/50 32.0mg 20/50 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Liv:hpc,nnd; lun:a/a,a/c. C 
 
l iv:hpc,nnd. 
lun:a/&,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
L iv:hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. S 
 
S 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
2774 
 
ba 
b 
 
2775 
 
ba 
b 
 
2776 
 
ba 
b 
 
2777 
 
ba 
b 
 
2778 
 
a 
 
271 
 
Brkly Code 
 
272 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
 
2,4,5.TRINETHYLANILINE.HCl 
 
2793 N f chi mat lun mix 77w98 
 
a N f chi mat liv mix 77w98 
b N f chi met liv hpt 77w98 
c N f chi mat tbe mix 77w98 
2794 N f chi met liv hpt 77w98 
 
a N f chi met lun mix 77w98 
2795 N m chi mat liv mix 77w98 
 
a N * chi eat lun mix 77w98 
b N m chi mat liv hpt 77w98 
c N m chi met tbe mix 77w98 
2796 N m chi met liv hpt 77w98 
 
a N m chi met lun mix 77w98 
b N m chi mat --- vec 77w98 
2797 R m cdr mat liv mix 77w98 
 
a R * cdr eat liv hpt 7798 
b R m cdr set sub mix 77w98 
c R m cdr met tbe mix 77w98 
 
2,4,6-TRINETHYLANILINE.HCl 
 
2798 N f chi met liv hpt 77w94 v 
 
a N f chi met liv mix 77w94 v 
b N f chi met lun mix 77w94 v 
c N f chi ettbe * mix 77w94v 
2799 N f chi met liv hpt 77w94 v 
2800 N m chi mat liv mix 77w94 v 
 
e N m chi met liv hpt 77w94 v 
b N m chi met lun mix 77w94 v 
c N m chi met tba mix 77w94 v 
2801 N m chi mat liv hpt 77w94 v 
 
a N m chi mat --- vsc 77w94v 
2802 R m cdr mat lun mix 73w77 v 
 
a R m cdr met liv mix 73w77 v 
b R m cdr met liv hpt 73w77 v 
c R m cdr mat tba mix 73w7? v 
2803 R m cdr met lun mix 73w77 v 
 
a R m cdr met liv hpt 73w77 v 
b R m cdr mat sto mix 73w77 v 
TRINETHYLPHOSPHATE 
 
2804 N f b6c gev utm ecn 24m24 
 
a e f b6c gv TBA NXB 24m24 
b N f b6c gav liv NXB 24m24 
c N f b6c gev lun NXB 24m24 
2805 N m b6c gev TBA NXB 24m24 
 
e N m b6c gev liv NXB 24m24 
b N m b6c gev lun NXB 24m24 
2806 R f f34 gev TBA NXB 24m24 
 
a R f f34 gev liv NXB 24m24 
2807 R m f34 gev sub fib 24m24 
 
a R m f 34 gev TBA NXB 24m24 
b R m f34 gev liv NXB 24m24 
 
TRINETHYLTHIOUREA 
 
2808 N f b6c mat TBA NXB 77w91 
 
e N f b6c met liv NXB 77w91 
b N f b6c et lun NXB 77w9I 
2809 N m b6c mat TIA NXB 77w91 
 
e N * b6c set liv NXB 77w9I 
b N m b6c mat lun NXB 77w9I 
2810 R f f34 mat thy NXA 18m25 
 
a R f f34 met thy fcc 18m25 
b R f f34 met TBA NXB 18m25 
c R f f34 met liv NXB 18m25 
2811 R m f34 met TIA NXB 18m25 
 
a R m f34 mat liv NXB 18m25 
 
TRIPHENYLTIN ACETATE 
 
2812 N f b6e orl lun ads 76w76 mv 
 
e N f b6e orl liv hpt 76w76 mv 
b N f b6a orl tbe mix 76w76 *v 
2813 N m b6e orl liv hpt 76w76 mv 
 
e N m b6a orl lun ede 76w76 mv 
b N m b6e orl tbe mix 76w76 mv 
2814 N f b6c orl lun ade 76w76 mv 
 
e N f b6c orl liv hpt 76w76 mv 
b N f b6c orl tba mix 76w76 mv 
2815 N m b6c orl lun ado 76w76 mv 
 
a N m b6c orl liv hpt 76w76 my 
b N m b6c orl tbe mix 76w76 mv 
 
TD50 ZTailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
boong..:. .ug. : 10. :100.. g :. . :10. :100.. :19 :10 
 
: 4 : 52.8mg * P<.0005+ 
 
60.4mg / P<.0005 
 
62.9mg / P<.0005+ 
47.2mg / P<.002 
 
poot : 62.3mg I P<.0005+ 
 
64.7mg * P<.0005+ 
+ : 35.4mg / P<.0005 
 
40.0mg * P<.0005+ 
46.2mg I P<.0005+ 
40.3mg I P<.0005 
 
pool 4 44.2mg I P<.0005+ 
 
63.0mg * P<.0005+ 
260.mg * P<.02 + 
A 47.9mg * P<.08 
 
98.5mg * P<.2 + 
no dre P-1. + 
37.2mg * P<.3 
 
io0ng . . .:ug. :10. :100. g :.g. :10. :100.. : . :10 
 
+ 34.6mg / P<.0005+ 
 
34.6mg / P<.0005+ 
23.9mg * P<.04 - 
20.6mg * P<.02 
 
pool + 34.6mg / P<.0005+ 
 
+ : 18.2mg / P<.0005 
 
19.3mg * P<.0005+ 
38.2mg * P<.05 - 
18.4mg * P<.009 
 
pool : 22.7mg * P<.0005+ 
 
120.mg * P<.005 + 
+ 5.17mg * P<.002 + 
 
6.15mg * P<.002 + 
6.15mg * P<.002 + 
2.15mg * P<.0005 
 
pooL + 5.27mg * P<.0005+ 
 
6.22mg * P<.0005+ 
22.0mg * P<.002 + 
 
1O0ng . . .:ug. :10. :100.. g :. . :10. :100.. :19 :10 
 
: 335.mg * P<.002 c 
 
385.mg * P<.3 
6.39gm \ P<1. 
3.90gm / P<.7 
 
:> no dre P-I. - 
 
no drm P-1. 
61.39m * P<d. 
 
:> 73.0mg * P<.4 - 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
+ : 123.mg * P<.005 a 
 
54.5mg * P<.3 
485.mg * P<.5 
 
100ng .:. .:ug. :10. :100. g :. 1g :10. : 100.. :19 :10 
 
:> 1.97gm * P<.8 - 
 
no drm P-1. 
1.269m * P<.3 
 
:> no dre P-1. - 
 
no dre P-I. 
478.mg * P<.3 
 
+ 25.8mg / P<.0005c 
 
45.0mg / P<.0005c 
17.4mg * P<.005 
no drm P-I. 
 
:> no dre P-I. - 
 
no dre P-I. 
 
100ng.. :..ug. 10 . 100. 1m. 10 . 100.. 1g 10 
 
964.mg 
no dre 
437.mg 
241.mg 
K no dre 
 
307.mg 
 
K 440.mg 
 
909.m9 
284mg 
Ks A 262.mg 
 
407.mg 
117m9 
 
P<.6 - 
 
PI. 1. - 
 
P<.5 - 
P<.2 - 
P-I. 1 
 
P<.4 - 
P<.1 I 
 
P<.3 - 
P<. 04 - 
P<.04 - 
P<. I 
 
P<. 003 - 
 
?x 
?x 
rx 
?x 
?x 
?x 
?x 
?x 
?x 
rx 
?x 
?x 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
2,4,5-TRIMETHYLANILINE.HCI 
2793 381 24.8mg 182.mg 
 
a 381 31.9mg 123.mg 
b 381 32.6mg 131.mg 
c 381 21.2mg 255.mg 
2794 381 32.1mg 134.mg 
 
a 381 31.3mg 184.mg 
2795 381 19.1mg 83.5mg 
 
a 381 19.4mg 136.mg 
b 381 24.3mg 115.mg 
 
c 381 19.3mg 140.mg 
2796 381 24.4mg 91.2mg 
 
* 381 28.8mg 216.mg 
b 381 78.1mg n.s.s. 
2797 381 15.0mg n.s.s. 
 
a 381 23.5mg n.s.s. 
b 381 27.3mg n.s.s. 
c 381 9.25mg n.s.s. 
 
2,4,6-TRIMETHYLANILINE.HCL 
2798 381 15.9mg 107.mg 
 
a 381 15.9mg 107.mg 
 
b 381 7.63mg n.s.s. 
c 381 7.27mg n.s.s. 
2799 381 15.9mg 73.9mg 
2800 381 9.03mg 43.4mg 
 
a 381 9.31mg 51.4mg 
b 381 12.9mg n.s.s. 
c 381 7.34mg 966.mg 
2801 381 10.5mg 60.0Omg 
 
a 381 36.5mg 1.84gm 
 
2802 381 2.64mg 17.7mg 
 
a 381 3.07mg 21.1mg 
b 381 3.07mg 21.1mg 
c 381 1.21mg 6.38mg 
2803 381 2.65m9 12.9m9 
 
a 381 3.06mg 15.7mg 
b 381 6.57mg 159.mg 
 
21436-97-5 
 
6/20 106.mg 
0/20 106.mg 
0/20 106.mg 
17/20 106.mg 
1/102p 106.mg 
31/102p 106.mg 
 
3/18 98.2mg 
5/18 98.2mg 
3/18 98.2mg 
12/18 98.2mg 
7/99p 98.2mg 
23/99p 98.2mg 
 
5/99p 98.2mg 
1/22 31.3mg 
1/22 31.3mg 
4/22 31.3mg 
14/22 31.3mg 
 
6334-11-8 
 
1/15 37.1mg 
1/15 37.1mg 
5/15 37.1mg 
10/15 37. 1mg 
 
1/102p 37.1mg 
1/14 34.3mg 
0/14 34.3mg 
3/14 34.3mg 
7/14 34.3mg 
7/99p 34.3mg 
5/99p 34.3mg 
0/16 5.90mg 
 
0/16 5.90mg 
0/16 5.90mg 
10/16 5.90mg 
 
I/I1p 5.90mg 
2/I1p 5.90"mg 
2/I1p 5.90"mg 
 
11/15 246.mg 
6/15 246.mg 
6/15 246.mg 
15/15 246.mg 
6/15 246.mg 
11/15 246.mg 
11/14 227.mg 
11/14 227.mg 
9/14 227.mg 
13/14 227.mg 
9/14 227.mg 
11/14 227.mg 
3/14 227.mg 
5/17 68.6mg 
3/17 68.6mg 
7/17 68.6mg 
15/17 68.6mg 
 
1/12 78.0mg 
1/12 78.Omg 
7/12 78.0mg 
10/12 78.0Og 
 
1/12 78.0mg 
5/15 75.8m9 
5/15 75.8?g 
5/15 75.8mg 
11/15 75.8 mg 
5/15 75.8mg 
1/15 75.8mg 
5/20 11.8mg 
 
4/20 11.8mg 
4/20 11.8mg 
13/20 11.8mg 
5/20 11.8mg 
4/20 11.8mg 
0/20 11.8mg 
 
12/22 
15/22 
14/22 
19/22 
14/22 
12/22 
19/21 
10/21 
18/21 
19/21 
18/21 
10/21 
3/21 
2/25 
2/25 
1/25 
13/25 
 
12/16 
12/16 
7/16 
16/16 
12/16 
11/13 
9/13 
5/13 
12/13 
9/13 
4/13 
8/21 
8/21 
8/21 
18/21 
8/21 
8/21 
3/21 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
Brkly Code 
 
Weisburger; jept,2,325-356;1978/pers.comm./Russfi*Ld 1973 
Weisburger;jIpt,2,325-356;1978/pers.comm./Russfisld 1973 
 
TRINETHYLPHOSPHATE 512-56-1 
 
2804 c03781 197.og 995.mg 0/20 
 
a c03781 125.mg n.s.s. 11/20 
b c03781 258.mg n.s.s. 2/20 
c c03781 59.mg n.s.s. 3/20 
2805 c03781 227.mg n.s.s. 11/20 
 
a c03781 471.mg n.s.s. 4/20 
b c03781 381.mg n.s.s. 3/20 
2806 c03781 20.1mg n.s.s. 15/20 
 
a c03781 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/20 
2807 c03781 60.4mg 850.mg 0/20 
 
a c03781 16.4mg n.s.s. 12/20 
b c03781 119.mg n.s.s. 0/20 
TRINETHYLTHIOUREA 2489.77-2 
 
2808 c02186 274.mg n.s.s. 1/20 
 
a c02186 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/20 
b c02186 381.mg n.s.s. 0/20 
2809 c02186 174.mg n.s.s. 8/20 
 
a c02186 244.mg n.s.s. 6/20 
b c02186 165.mg n.s.s. 1/20 
2810 c02186 15.8mg 47.4m9 0/20 
 
a c02186 24.5mg 114.mg 0/20 
b c02186 9.35mg 169.mg 7/20 
c c02186 143.mg n.s.s. 2/20 
2811 c02186 33.7mg n.s.s. 9/20 
 
a c02186 128.mg n.s.s. 1/20 
TRIPHENYLTIN ACETATE 900-95-8 
 
2812 295 127.mg n.s.s. 1/17 
 
a 295 298.mg n.s.s. 0/17 
b 295 86.9mg n.s.s. 2/17 
2813 295 69.2mg n.s.s. 1/18,, 
 
a 295 171.mg n.s.s. 2/18 
b 295 65.4mg n.s.s. 3/18 
2814 295 108.mg n.s.s. 0/16 
 
* 295 148.mg n.s.s. 0/16 
b 295 85.6mg n.s.s. 0/16 
2815 295 79.1mg n.s.s. 0/16 
 
a 295 99.8mg n.s.s. 0/16 
b 295 47.2mg 634.mg 0/16 
 
107.mg 7/50 214.mg 
107.mg 29/50 214.mg 
107.mo 4/50 (214.mg 
107.mg 0/50 214.mg 
107.mg 26/50 214.mg 
107.mg 10/50 214.mg 
107.mg 11/50 214.mg 
21.2mg 40/50 42.5mg 
21.2mg 0/50 42.5mg 
21.2mg 2/50 42.5mg 
21.2mg 38/50 42.5mg 
21.2mg 1/50 42.5mg 
 
54.6mg 
54.6mg 
54.6mg 
50.4mg 
50.4mg 
50.4mg 
9. 10G 
9.10mg 
 
9. 10mg 
9.10m9 
7.30mg 
7.30mg 
 
151 mg 
151.g9 
151m.g 
 
139.mg 
139.mg 
139.mg 
151m.g 
151.m9 
151m.g 
 
139.mg 
139.mg 
139.mg 
 
3/50 1 10.mg 
0/50 110.mg 
1/50 1o0.mg 
11/50 102.mg 
2/50 (102.mg 
5/50 102.mg 
1/50 18.0Og 
 
1/50 18.0mg 
20/50 18. 0mg 
 
2/50 18. Og 
13/50 14.4mg 
0/50 14.4mg 
 
13/49 
30/49 
0/49) 
6/49 
26/49 
8/49 
9/49 
42/49 
0/49 
9/49 
38/49 
 
1/49 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
tun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
4/50 
0/50 
2/50 
15/50 
2/50) 
8/50 
23/50 
14/50 
37/50 
0/50 
16/50 
 
1/50 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
thy: fcm, fcc. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
Lliv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
2/18 
0/18 
4/18 
4/17 
1/17 
5/17 
2/17 
1/17 
3/17 
3/17 
2/17 
6/17 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
273 
 
274 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Nol 
TRIPHENYLTIN HYDROXIDE 
 
2816 N f b6c eat TBA NXB 18.24 
 
a N f b6c eat liv NXB 18.24 
b M f b6c eat lun NXB 18.24 
2817 N m b6c sat TBA NXB 18.24 
 
a N m b6c eat Liv NXB 18.24 
b N m b6c eat Lun NXB 18.24 
2818 R f f34 sat TBA NXB 18.24 
 
a R f f34 eat Liv NXB 18.24 
2819 R m f34 eat TBA NXB 18.24 
 
a R m f34 sat Liv NXB 18.24 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
tes 
 
l00ng..:..lug. 10. 100.... :l1ug. :10. :100... : g :10 
 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
136.mg * P<.7 
90.9mg * P<.3 
:> 31.1mg * P<.6 
 
112.mg * P<.8 
147.mg * P<.8 
:> 2.36mg \ P<.3 
 
no dre P-1. 
:> no dre P-1. 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
TRIS-1,2,3-(CHLORONETHOXY)PROPANE l1Ong. . .. : ug . :10 : . 100.. : g.. 1 :10 . :100.1 :0 1 :10 
 
2820 N f hic ipJ abd sar 76W76 . + . 3.44mg P<.008 + 
 
TRIS(2,3.DIBRONOPROPYL)PHOSPHATE 
2821 N f b6c eat NXB NXB 24.24 
 
a N f b6c eat liv NXA 24.24 
b N f b6c oat sto NXA 24.24 
c N f b6c oat liv hpc 24.24 
d N f b6c oat lun NXA 24.24 
a N f b6c eat ute esp 24.24 
f N f b6c eat sto sqc 24.24 
9 N f b6c eat TBA NXB 24.24 
h N f b6c eat liv NXB 24.24 
i I f b6c eat lun NXB 24.24 
2822 N m b6c eat NXB NXB 24.24 
 
a N m b6c eat sto NXA 24.24 
b N . b6c eat kid MXA 24.24 
c N m b6c eat kid uac 24.24 
d N m b6c eat lun NXA 24.24 
* N . b6c eat Lun a/c 24.24 
f N a b6c eat TSA NXB 24.24 
g N m b6c eat Liv NXB 24.24 
h N . b6c eat lun NXB 24.24 
2823 R f f34 eat kid tLa 24.24 
 
a R f f34 eat ova sct 24.24 
b R f f34 eat TBA NXB 24.24 
c R f f34 aet liv NXB 24.24 
2824 R m f34 oat kid tLa 24.24 
 
a R m f34 eat kid NXA 24.24 
b R m f34 eat pra NXA 24.24 
c R m f34 eat Liv NXA 24.24 
d R . f34 oat kid uac 24.24 
a R a f34 eat TBA NXB 24.24 
f R t f34 eat liv NXB 24.24 
 
L-TRYPTOPHAN 
 
2825 N f b6c eat TBA NXB 18.24 
 
a N f b6c eat Liv NXB 18.24 
b N f b6c eat Lun NXB 18.24 
2826 N m b6c oat TBA NXB 18.24 
 
a N m b6c aat liv NXB 18.24 
b N m b6c oat Lun NXB 18.24 
2827 R f f34 oat TBA NXB 18.24 
 
a R f f34 oat Liv NXB 18.24 
2828 R m f34 eat TBA NXB 18.24 
 
a R m f34 eat liv NXB 18.24 
 
TUNGSTATE, SODIUN 
 
2829 R f Lab wat tba mix 35m35 a 
 
a R f Lab wat tba maL 35.35 a 
 
2830 R m Lab wat tba mix 32m32 *as 
 
a R fm Lab wat tba maL 32m32 es 
 
lOOng . . .:ug. :10. :100. g : ..g :10. :100.. : g :10 
 
+ 80.1mg * P<.0005 
 
95.0mg * P<.0005c 
127.mg * P<.0005c 
221.mg * P<.005 c 
225.mg * P<.002 c 
264.mg \ P<.003 
 
611.mg * P<.02 c 
148.mg * P<.09 
 
95.0mg * P<.0005 
225.mg * P<.002 
 
: + : 103.mg * P<.0005 
 
197.mg * P<.0005c 
256.mg * P<.0005c 
822.mg * P<.009 c 
211.mg * P<.03 c 
449.mg * P<.1 c 
2.229m * P<1. 
172.mg \ P<.4 
211.mg * P<.03 
 
+ 13.8mg * P<.0005c 
 
66.4mg * P<.05 
23.0mg * P<.8 
2.82gm * P<. 
 
: + : 1.57mg \ P<.0005c 
 
1.57mg \ P<.0005c 
20.3mg * P<.03 
34.3mg * P<.02 
 
63.3mg * P<.05 c 
8.31mg P<a 4 
 
34.3mg * P<.02 
 
bO0ng..: ..ug. :10. :100. g :. 1g :10. :100. :Ig . :10 
 
:> no dre P-1. - 
 
30.2gm * P<.6 
no dre P-1. 
 
:> 1.47gm \ P<.2 - 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
:> no dre P-I. - 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
:> no dre P-1. - 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
100ng..:. .ug. :10. :100.. m : g . :10. :100 . g.10 
 
.> no dre P-1. 
 
no dre P-1. 
.> 40.1mg P<1. 
 
87.7mg P<1. 
 
UREA lOOng. .: . . lug. 10.1 :g10..100. g :.I :-10 :00 : 1 0 
 
2831 N f cb6 aat Liv mLh 52w69 a pooL .40.4g9 * P<.03 
 
a NIf cb6aat --mLy52w69a* 19.5gm a P<.5 
b N f cb6 gat -iv mix 52w69 a 50.19g * P<.2 
c N f cb6 sat Lun a/a 52w69 a no dra P-1. 
 
2832 N m cb6 oat Liv fbs 52w69 a pooL 70.8g * P<.2 - 
 
a N m cb6 eat Liv mix 52w69 a 275.9m * P<a 9 
b N m cb6 eat Lun /a 52w69 a no dre P-1. 
2833 R f f34 aat Liv tum 52w69 a .> no dre P-1. 
 
2834 R m f34 aat tes ica 52w69 a . + 684.mg * P<.009 
 
a R f f 34 eat Liv tum 52w69 a no dre P-I. 1 
 
URETHANE l1Ong .. : lug. 1 :10 :..100. g :..1 :10. 1 :100.1 :0 1 :10 
 
2835 H f syg wat for pam 90w90 a . + . 44.5mg P<.0005+ 
 
a H f syg wat der mLc 90w90 a 74.4mg P<.0005+ 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
TRIPHENYLTIN HYDROXIDE 76-87-9 
2816 c00260 12.9mg n.s.s. 10/20 
 
a c00260 22.4mg n.s.s. 1/20 
b c00260 27.5mg n.s.s. 0/20 
2817 c00260 6.34mg n.s.s. 10/20 
 
a c00260 12.9mg n.s.s. 5/20 
b c00260 14.3mg n.s.s. 3/20 
2818 c00260 .753mg n.s.s. 12/20 
 
a c00260 21.2mg n.s.s. 0/20 
2819 c00260 4.24mg n.s.s. 9/20 
 
a c00260 12.2mg n.s.s. 0/20 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
3.60mg 15/50 7.30mg 18/50 
3.60mg 2/50 7.30mg 4/50 
3.60mg 1/50 7.30mg 2/50 
3.40mg 19/50 6.70mg 22/50 
3.40mg 6/50 6.70mg 10/50 
3.40mg 5/50 6.70mg 6/50 
1.40mg 39/50 (2.80mg 31/50) 
1.40mg 1/50 2.80mg 0/50 
1.10mg 22/50 2.20mg 16/50 
1.10m9 2/50 2.20mg 0/50 
 
Brkly Code 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:m/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
TRIS-1,2,3-(CHLORONETHOXY)PROPANE 38571-73-2 
 
2820 582 1.30mg 51.1mg 0/30 1.71mg 5/30 
 
TRIS(2,3-DIBROWOPROPYL)PHOSPHATE (TRIS) 126-72-7 
 
2821 c03270 51.3mg 171.mg 16/55 64.3mg 34/50 129.mg 40/50 
 
a c03270 62.2mg 188.mg 11/55 64.3mg 23/50 129.mg 35/50 
b c03270 88.1mg 212.mg 2/55 64.3mg 14/50 129.mg 22/50 
c c03270 128.mg 692.mg 7/55 64.3mg 12/50 129.mg 20/50 
d c03270 135.mg 576.mg 4/55 64.3mg 9/50 129.mg 17/50 
 
a c03270 130.mg 682.mg 0/55 64.3mg 6/50 (129.mg 2/50) 
f c03270 328.mg 2.159m 0/55 64.3mg 4/50 129.mg 4/50 
g c03270 67.7mg n.s.s. 34/55 64.3mg 42/50 129.mg 44/50 
h c03270 55.7mg 268.mg 11/55 64.3mg 23/50 129.mg 35/50 
i c03270 119.mg 1.13gm 4/55 64.3mg 9/50 129.mg 17/50 
2822 c03270 58.7mg 336.mg 12/55 59.0mg 23/50 119.mg 37/50 
 
a c03270 120.mg 406.mg 0/55 59.0mg 10/50 119.mg 13/50 
b c03270 147.mg 531.mg 0/55 59.0mg 4/50 119.mg 14/50 
c c03270 335.mg 25.7gm 0/55 59.0mg 1/50 119.mg 5/50 
d c03270 95.1mg n.s.s. 12/55 59.0mg 18/50 119.mg 25/50 
 
a c03270 170.mg n.s.s. 6/55 59.0mg 8/50 119.mg 13/50 
f c03270 86.1mg n.s.s. 43/55 59.0mg 41/50 119.mg 43/50 
g c03270 43.2mg n.s.s. 28/55 59.0mg 31/50 (119.mg 23/50) 
h c03270 95.1mg n.s.s. 12/55 59.0mg 18/50 119.mg 25/50 
2823 c03270 7.41mg 35.7mg 0/55 2.50mg 4/55 4.95mg 10/55 
 
a c03270 20.1mg n.s.s. 0/55 2.50mg 0/55 4.95mg 3/55 
b c03270 2.88mg n.s.s. 52/55 2.50mg 47/55 4.95mg 54/55 
c c03270 29.8mg n.s.s. 1/55 2.50mg 1/55 4.95mg 1/55 
2824 c03270 .975mg 2.75mg 0/55 2.00mg 26/55 (4.00mg 26/55) 
 
a c03270 .975mg 2.75mg 0/55 2.00mg 26/55 (4.00mg 29/55) 
b c03270 8.69mg n.s.s. 1/55 2.00mg 3/55 4.00mg 7/55 
c c03270 13.0mg n.s.s. 0/55 2.00mg 1/55 4.00mg 4/55 
d c03270 18.9mg n.s.s. 0/55 2.00mg 0/55 4.00mg 3/55 
 
a c03270 2.31mg n.s.s. 39/55 2.00mg 44/55 4.00mg 48/55 
f c03270 13.0mg n.s.s. 0/55 2.00mg 1/55 4.00mg 4/55 
 
L-TRYPTOPHAN 73-22-3 
 
2825 c01729 5.55gm n.s.s. 
 
a c01729 7.40gm n.s.s. 
b c01729 11.99m n.s.s. 
2826 c01729 602.mg n.s.s. 
 
a c01729 3.33gm n.s.s. 
b c01729 4.66gm n.s.s. 
2827 c01729 1.53gm n.a.s. 
 
a c01729 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
2828 c01729 560.mg n.s.s. 
 
a c01729 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
 
3/15 
0/15 
1/15 
1/15 
1/15 
0/15 
11/15 
0/15 
11/15 
0/15 
 
TUNGSTATE, SODIUN 13472-45-2 
 
2829 1456 .380mg n.s.s. 17/24 
 
a 1456 .884mg n.s.s. 8/24 
2830 1456 .780mg n.s.s. 4/26 
 
a 1456 1.05mg n.s.s. 2/26 
 
UREA 57-13-6 
 
2831 
 
b 
 
c 
 
2832 
 
b 
 
2833 
2834 
 
a 
 
1343 9.95gm n.s.s. 
1343 3.90gm n.s.s. 
1343 10.4gm n.s.s. 
1343 646.mg n.s.s. 
1343 11.59m n.s.s. 
1343 12.9gm n.s.s. 
1343 8.009m n.s.s. 
1343 473.mg n.s.s. 
1343 305.mg 36.69m 
1343 369.mg n.s.a. 
 
1. 749m 
1. 749m 
1. 74gm 
1.61gm 
 
1.61gm 
1.61gm 
690 mg 
690 mg 
552 mg 
552 mg 
 
11/35 3.48gm 
 
1/35 3.489m 
0/35 3.48gm 
 
15/35 (3.219m 
5/35 3.219m 
4/35 3.219m 
24/35 1.33gm 
 
0/35 1.33gm 
 
21/35 (1.079m 
 
0/35 1.079m 
 
Van Duuren;canr, 35,2553-2557;1975 
 
Liv:hpa,hpc; Lun:a/a,a/c; sto:sqc,sqp. C 
 
Liv:hpa,hpc. 
sto:sqc,sqp. 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
S 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/&,a/c. 
 
kid:tla,uac; Lun:a/a,a/c; sto:sqc,sqp. C 
 
sto:sqc,sqp. 
kid: tla,uac. 
lun: a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Iun: a/a,a/c. 
 
S 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
kid:tla,uac. 
 
pre:acn,mdn,can. S 
 
liv:hpc,nnd. S 
 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
3/35 
1/35 
1/35 
12/33) 
7/33 
2/33 
19/35 
0/35 
14/35) 
0/35 
 
.286mg 13/20 
.286"mg 5/20 
.250mg 4/25 
.250mg 2/25 
 
0/89p 440.mg 
10/92p 440.mg 
 
1/89p 440.mg 
2/89p 440.mg 
0/91p 406.mg 
2/91p 406.mg 
1/87p 406.mg 
0/49 169. mg 
21/50 135.mg 
 
0/50 135.mg 
 
0/43 881.mg 
7/43 881.mg 
0/43 881.mg 
0/28 881.mg 
0/41 813.mg 
0/41 813.mg 
0/27 813.mg 
0/50 339.mg 
27/48 271.mg 
 
0/48 271 .mg 
 
0/38 4.409m 
10/38 4.40gm 
0/38 4.40gm 
0/23 4.40gm 
0/36 4.06gm 
 
0/36 4.069m 
1/21 4.069m 
0/48 1. 69gm 
25/47 1.35gm 
 
0/48 1. 35gm 
 
l iv:hps,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:&/a,a/c. 
l iv:hps,hpc,nnd. 
 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Schro.der;jnut, 105,421-427;1975 
 
Flsischman; jept,3, 149-170;1980 
 
2/50 
9/50 
2/50 
0/23 
1/47 
1/47 
0/24 
0/48 
35/50 
 
0/48 
 
URETHANE 51-79-6 
 
2835 170 27.9mg 74.7mg 1/67 136.mg 35/44 
 
a 170 45.2mg 133.mg 0/62 136.mg 25/41 
 
Toth;eJca,5, 165- 171;1969 
 
275 
 
276 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
b H f syg wat cec adp 90w90 a 
c H f syg wat vag car 90w90 a 
d H f syg wat adr mix 90w90 a 
* H f syg wat adr coc 90w90 a 
f H f syg wat for car 90w90 * 
g H f syg wat thy mix 90w90 a 
h H f syg wat gal pam 90w90 a 
i H f syg wit ova car 90w90 a 
j H f syg wit lun ad. 90w90 a 
k H f syg wat Liv tur 90w90 a 
2836 H f syg wat for pam 55w55 a 
 
a H f syg wat ski mLt 55w55 e 
2837 H a syg wat for pam 24.24 a 
 
a H m syg wat der mlc 24.24 a 
b H m syg wat f or car 24.24 a 
c H * syg wat coc adp 24.24 a 
d H * syg wat liv mix 24.24 a 
o H m syg wit adr coa 24.24 a 
f H a syg wat lun ado 24.24 a 
2838 H m syg wat ski ELt 76w76 a 
 
a H m syg wat for pa. 76w76 o 
 
2839 N f b6a orl Lun mix 73w73 ovx 
 
a N f b6a orL Lun ado 73w73 ovx 
b N f b6a ort --- agm 73w73 ovx 
c N f b6a orl hag ado 73w73 ovx 
d N I b6a ort Lun car 73w73 ovx 
o N f b6a ortl liv hpt 73w73 ovx 
f N f b6a orL tba mix 73w73 evx 
2840 N m b6a ort lun mix 72w72 ovx 
 
a N m b6a ort liv mix 72w72 evx 
b N m b6a orl tun ado 72w72 ovx 
c N m b6a ort hag ado 72w72 ovx 
d N m b6a ort liv hpt 72w72 ovx 
o N m b6a orl t .. rts 72w72 ovx 
f N a b6a ort tba mix 72w72 ovx 
2841 N f b6c orl Liv mix 68w68 ovx 
 
a N f b6c orl Liv hpt 68w68 evx 
b N f b6c orl lun mix 68w68 ovx 
c N f b6c ort lun ado 68w68 ovx 
d N f b6c ort tba mix 68w68 evx 
2842 N m b6c orl Liv mix 70w70 ovx 
 
a N m b6c ort lun mix 70w70 ovx 
b N m b6c orl lun ado 70w70 evx 
c N m b6c orl Liv hpt 70w70 ovx 
d N m b6c orl tba mix 70w70 ovx 
2843 N f cfl wit lun tum 31m31 og 
 
a N f cfl wiat Liv hpt 31m31 e9 
b N f cfl wit tba mix 31m31 e9 
2844 N a cfl wat lun tur 29m29 o 
 
a N m cfl wat Liv hpt 29m29 a 
b N cf wat tba mix 29m29 o 
 
2845 N b nor wat tba ban 23m24 ii 
 
a N b nor wat tba mat 23m24 as 
2846 N b swi oat tun ado 27m27 o 
 
a N b swi oat lun ado 27m27 o 
b N b swi oat lun adc 27m27 o 
c N b swi oat Liv tum 27.27 o 
 
2847 P b rho oat JaJ adc 5y19 ouw 
 
a P b rho oat liv hpc 5y19 ouw 
b P b rho oat tba mat 5y19 ouw 
2848 R b ada wit tba mat 23m24 ao 
 
a R b sda wit tba ben 23m24 as 
 
+ 
.4.. 
 
+ 
 
*+ 
 
*+ 
 
* + 
 
TD5O 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
294.mg P<.0005+ 
314.mg P<.002 
 
318.mg P<.003 + 
349.mg P<.0005 
 
374.mg P<.0005+ 
538.mg P<.003 + 
682.mg P<.007 
682.mg P<.007 
1.36gm P<.2 
no dro P-1. 
 
102.mg P<.005 + 
496.mg P<.2 
 
64.2mg P<.0005+ 
109.mg P<.0005+ 
135.mg P<.0005+ 
765.mg P<.009 + 
1.28gm P<.03 
564.mg P<.2 
927mg P<.2 
 
74.2mg P<.0005+ 
95.8mg P<.0005+ 
12.5mg P<.0005+ 
29.3mg P<.0005 
31.7mg P<.0005 
59.7mg P<.002 
89.9m9 P<.009 
89.9mg P<.009 
9.73mg P<.0005 
 
24.2mg P<.0005+ 
26.0mg P<.0005 
27.8mg P<.0005 
35.8mg P<.0005 
 
39.0mg P<.002 + 
77.9mg P<.006 + 
11.2mg P<.0005 
32.4mg P<.0005 
55.9mg P<.003 
 
79.0mg P<.009 + 
97.4mg P<.02 
 
13.7mg P<.0005 
46.0mg P<.002 
 
65.9mg P<.006 + 
81.7mg P<.02 
 
81.7mg P<.02 + 
22.4mg P<.0005 
 
23.8mg P<.0005+ 
no dre P-1. - 
23.3mg P<.09 
 
13.2mg P<.0005+ 
no dre P-I. - 
12.1mg P<.04 
 
.434mg Z P<.004 
 
14.7mg * P<.0005+ 
36.1mg P<.0005+ 
36.1mg P<.0005+ 
5.06gm P<.3 
no dre P-I. 
 
166mg P<.06 + 
166mg P<.06 + 
98.7mg P<.2 
 
41.3mg * P<.0005+ 
91.2mg * P<.02 
 
VANADYL SULFATE lOOng. ...lug.. 10 . 100. 1g. 10 . 100 . Ig 10 
 
2849 N b cdl wat tun mix 24m24 a > 29.2mg 
 
a N b cdi wat Liv ado 24m24 a no dre 
b N b cdl wat tba maL 24m24 a 5.00mg 
c N b cdl wat tba bon 24m24 a no dro 
d N b cdl wit tba mix 24m24 a no dre 
2850 N f cdl wit tba mix 33.33 a A 5.11mg 
2851 N m cdl wat tba mix 31m31 a .> no dre 
 
VANGUARD GF 1Ong..: ..lug. 10 . 100. 1 mg. 10 . 100. Ig 10 
 
2852 N f b6a ort lun ado 76w76 ovx > 170.mg 
 
a N f b6a ort liv hpt 76w76 ovx no dre 
b N f b6a ort tbi mix 76w76 ovx 150.mg 
2853 N m b6m ort Lun mix 76w76 ovx > 1.579m 
 
a N m b6a orl liv hpt 76w76 ovx no dre 
b N m b6a orl tbi mix 76w76 ovx no dre 
 
P<.8 - 
P-1. _ 
P<. 06 - 
P-1. _ 
P-I. 1 
 
P<.07 - 
p-I. _ 
 
P<.6 - 
P-1. _ 
P<.6 - 
P<1. _ 
P-1. _ 
P-1. _ 
 
* + 
 
* + 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl 
 
170 126.mg 949.mg 
170 108.mg 1.77gm 
170 130.mg 2.05gm 
 
170 142.mg 1.31gm 
 
170 161.mg 1.239m 
170 204.mg 2.94gm 
 
170 235.mg 8.99gm 
170 235.mg 8.99gm 
170 222.mg n.s.s. 
170 926.mg n.s.s. 
297a 34.6mg 965.mg 
297a 80.6mg n.s.s. 
 
170 40.5mg 110.mg 
 
170 66.7mg 197.mg 
170 76.8mg 267.mg 
170 264.mg 25.2gm 
 
170 386.mg n.s.s. 
170 114.mg n.s.s. 
170 151.mg n.s.s. 
297a 29.2m9 260.mg 
297a 37.1mg 352.mg 
 
297 5.80mg 29.5mg 
297 14.0mg 92.3mg 
297 15.4mg 79.1mg 
297 25.5mg 245.mg 
297 33.9mg 2.02gm 
 
297 33.9mg 2.02gm 
297 3.86mg 24.8mg 
297 11.9mg 76.3mg 
297 13.1mg 72.1mg 
297 13.4mg 103.mg 
297 17.6mg 90.2mg 
297 18.2mg 174.mg 
297 31.6mg 645.mg 
297 5.20mg 27.7mg 
297 16.3mg 79.2mg 
297 25.1mg 238.mg 
 
297 32.1mg 1.769m 
297 36.9m9 n.s.s. 
297 7.21mg 28.0mg 
297 20.6mg 165.mg 
297 26.7mg 555.mg 
297 30.8mg n.s.s. 
297 30.8mg n.s.s. 
297 11.3mg 51.7mg 
90 13.1mg 59.4mg 
90 175.mg n.s.s. 
90 7.51mg n.s.s. 
90 7.18mg 34.6mg 
90 78.0mg n.a.s. 
90 4.11mg n.s.s. 
298 .198mg 3.14mg 
298 8.61mg 32.7mg 
171. 19.3mg 66.9mg 
171. 19.3mg 66.9mg 
171a 824.mg n.s.s. 
171a 1.549m n.s.s. 
2000 26.9mg n.s.s. 
2000 26.9mg n.s.s. 
2000 19.0mg n.s.s. 
298 21.4mg 129.mg 
298 35.6mg n.s.s. 
 
0/55 
0/49 
1/55 
0/55 
0/62 
0/62 
0/62 
0/62 
0/49 
0/67 
0/14 
0/14 
6/88 
1/62 
0/53 
0/53 
0/62 
1/26 
0/26 
1/49 
0/49 
1/17 
1/17 
0/17 
0/17 
0/17 
0/17 
2/17 
2/18 
1/18 
2/18 
0/18 
1/18 
0/18 
3/18 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
O/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
13/56 
2/56 
45/56 
23/55 
12/55 
46/55 
 
2/74 
6/74 
10/49 
10/49 
0/49 
0/49 
0/32 
0/32 
3/32 
2/74 
1/74 
 
lDose lInc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
136.mg 7/33 
136.mg 4/20 
136.mg 7/33 
136.mg 6/33 
136.mg 7/41 
136.mg 5/41 
136.mg 4/41 
136.mg 4/41 
136.mg 1/20 
136.mg 0/44 
273.mg 4/10 
273.mg 1/10 
120.mg 36/49 
120. mg 26/49 
120.mg 18/40 
120.mg 4/40 
120.mg 3/49 
120.mg 2/12 
120.mg 1/12 
240.mg 7/10 
240. mg 6/10 
81.3mg 17/19 
81. 3mg 12/19 
81.3mg 11/19 
81.3mg 7/19 
81.3mg 5/19 
81.3mg 5/19 
81.3mg 18/19 
75.6mg 15/22 
75.6mg 14/22 
75.6mg 14/22 
75.6mg 11/22 
75.6mg 11/22 
75.6mg 6/22 
75.6mg 20/22 
81.5mg 12/23 
81.5mg 8/23 
81 .5mg 6/23 
81.5mg 5/23 
81.5mg 19/23 
75.7mg 8/20 
75.7mg 6/20 
75.7mg 5/20 
75.7mg 5/20 
75.7mg 13/20 
20.0mg 28/40 
20. 0mg 1/40 
20.0mg 37/40 
16.7mg 40/48 
16.7mg 8/48 
16.7mg 46/48 
 
100.ug 11/65 (.500mg 12/69 2.50mg 21/59 12.5mg 30/65) 
100.ug 11/65 .500mg 17/69 2.50mg 21/59 12.5mg 32/65 
125.mg 46/48 
125.mg 46/48 
125.mg 1/48 
125.mg 0/48 
 
46.6mg 1/6 Adamson; 
46.6mg 1/6 
46.6mg 2/6 
 
100.ug 2/70 .500mg 4/65 2.50mg 7/70 12.5mg 15/74 
100.ug 3/70 .500mg 2/65 2.50mg 5/70 12.5mg 8/74 
 
Brkly Code 
 
Pietra;jnci ,25,627-630;1960 
 
Toth;eJca,5,165-171;1969 
 
Pietra; jnci ,25,627-630;1960 
 
Innes;ntis,1968/1969 
 
Tomatis; i jcn, 10,489-506;1972 
 
SchmahL; i jcn, 19,77-80;1977 
Van Esch;fctx,10,373-381;1972 
 
;osac,129-156;1982/Sieber pers.com. 
 
Schmahl; i jcn, 19,77-80;1977 
 
VANADYL SULFATE 27774-13-6 
 
2849 1512 2.33mg n..s.. 26/170 
 
a 1512 6.00mg n.s.s. 7/170 
b 1512 1.65mg n.s.s. 15/170 
c 1512 4.10mg n.s.s. 29/170 
d 1512 1.79m9 n.s.s. 55/170 
2850 1395 2.01mg n.s.s. 9/45 
2851 1395 4.93mg n.s.s. 10/43 
 
.877mg 
.877mg 
.877mg 
.877mg 
.877mg 
1.00m9 
.833mg 
 
Kanisawa;canr,27, 1192-1195; 1967 
 
8/47 
1/47 
9/47 
5/47 
15/47 
19/51 
5/38 
 
Schroeder; Jnut, 105,452-458;1975 
 
VANGUARD 6F (ferric nitroaodimethyLdithiocarbamsto and totramethyLthiuram disulfide. CAS# *-- and 137-26-8) mixture 
 
2852 1356 24.9mg n.s.s. 1/17 33.9mg 2/16 Innes;ntis,1968/1969 
 
a 1356 59.7mg n.s.s. 0/17 33.9mg 0/16 
b 1356 21.0mg n.s.s. 2/17 33.9m9 3/16 
2853 1356 27.5mg n.s.s. 2/18 31.6mg 2/17 
 
a 1356 59.1mg n.s.s. 1/18 31.6mg 0/17 
b 1356 30.4mg n.s.s. 3/18 31.6mg 2/17 
 
277 
 
b 
 
c 
 
d 
 
. 
 
f 
9 
h 
I 
k 
 
2836 
 
a 
 
2837 
 
a 
b 
 
c 
 
d 
. 
f 
 
2838 
 
a 
 
2839 
 
a 
b 
 
c 
 
d 
. 
f 
 
2840 
b 
 
c 
 
d 
. 
f 
 
2841 
b 
 
c 
 
d 
 
2842 
 
b 
 
c 
 
d 
 
2843 
 
ba 
b 
 
2844 
 
a 
b 
 
2845 
 
a 
 
2848 
 
a 
 
278 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
2854 N f b6c orl lun ad. 76w76 *vx 
 
a N f b6c orl liv hpt 76w76 *vx 
b N f b6c orl tba mix 76w76 evx 
2855 N a b6c orl lun car 76w76 evx 
 
a N a b6c orL Lun ada 76w76 avx 
b N a b6c orL liv hpt 76w76 avx 
c N a b6c orL tba mix 76w76 avx 
 
TD50 2 Ililpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
99.1mg P<..1 - 
no dre P.1. - 
99.Img P<.1 - 
179.mg P<.3 - 
179.g9 P<.3 - 
no dre P.1. - 
40.2mg P<. 02 - 
 
* 
 
VINBLASTINE 00ng. .. . lug. :10. :100.. a : g . :10. :100.. : g :10 
 
2856 R a b46 ivJ tba mix 12m24 as .> no dre P-1. 
VINYL BRONIDE OOng .. : lug. :10. :0 .lg.10.. 100.. : g. :10 
 
2857 R f ada inh Liv nnd 19m24 aa . + . 18.9mg Z P<.003 
 
a R f sda inh mix ang 19m24 aes 19.2mg Z P<.0005+ 
b R f ada inh zym sqc 19m24 aas 2.249m * P<.0005 
 
c R f sda inh Liv mix 19a24 aes 433.mg Z P<.04 + 
d R f sda inh Liv hpc 19m24 aes 749.mg Z P<.04 + 
2858 R a sda inh mix ang 18a24 aes . + . 17.9mg Z P<.0005+ 
 
a R a ada inh zym sqc 18a24 ams 409.mg * P<.0005 
b R a sda inh zym pam 18.24 aes 2.769g * P<.004 
 
c R a sda inh Liv mix 18.24 a;m 303.mg Z P<.02 + 
d R a sda inh Liv hpc 18.24 ama 387.mg Z P<.02 + 
a R f sda inh Liv nnd 18.24 ses no dre P-1. 
 
VINYL CHLORIDE l1Ong..:..lug.... 10..10 ..... :0100. la : g . :10. :100 ... g 10 
 
2859 H a syg inh for mix 7m25 mz . + . 126.mg Z P<.0005+ 
 
3.429m Z P<.2 
 
a H a syg inh adu *po 7m25 az 
b H a syg inh ski *po 7m25 az 
c H a syg inh Liv ang 7m25 az 
 
15.4gm Z P<.7 
 
no dre P-i. + 
 
2860 N f cdl inh liv hbs 26w58 as 
 
a N f cdl inh Lun a/t 26w58 as 
b N f cdl inh mgl mix 26w58 as 
2861 N a cdl inh liv has 26w78 as 
 
a N a cdl inh lun a/t 26w78 as 
2862 N b swi inh lun tum 30w81 az 
 
a N b awi inh Liv ang 30m81 az 
 
b N b swi inh Liv ago 30w81 az 
c N b swi inh mgl car 30w81 az 
d N b swi inh ski apo 30w81 az 
a N b swi inh ahp agm 30w81 az 
f N b swi inh ahp ang 30w81 az 
2863 R f cdr inh liv mix 26w78 ms 
2864 R f cdr inh Liv hbs 43w95 ms 
2865 R a cdr inh Liv nnd 26w78 ms 
 
a R a cdr inh Liv hpc 26w78 ms 
2866 R a cdr inh Liv has 43w95 ms 
2867 R b sda inh Liv hpt 12m31 az 
 
a R b sda inh Liv ang 12m31 mz 
b R b sda inh zyi car 12m31 mz 
 
*+ 
 
98.9mg * P<.0005+ 
142.mg * P<.02 
142.mg * P<.02 
 
32.0mg Z P<.0005+ 
88.7mg * P<.004 
 
21.1mg Z P<.0005. 
 
59.4mg Z P<.0005+ 
99.8mg Z P<.0005 
 
5.049m Z P<.009 + 
 
- 5.99gm * P<.0005 
 
22.4gm * P<.3 + 
no dre P-1. + 
 
* 75.5mg * P<.04 
 
. + . 69.5mg * P<.0005 
 
11.5mg Z P<.02 
52.9mg * P<.04 
 
+ . 103.m * P<.002 
 
+ . *historical Z P<.003 + 
 
843.mg Z P<.0005+ 
1.709m Z P<.0005+ 
+historical * P<.0005+ 
 
c R b sda inh bra nou 12m31 mz 
d R b sda inh *hp ang 12m31 *z 
a R b ada inh kid nap 12m31 *z 
 
9.609m * P<.1 + 
 
+historicaL * P<.3 + 
 
2868 R b sda gav liv ang 12m32 *z 
 
a R b sda gav kid nap 12m32 mz 
b R b sda gav ehp ang 12m32 mz 
c R b ada gav zym car 12m32 az 
2869 R b da inh mgl adc 12m34 az 
 
a R b sda inh Liv ang 12m34 *z 
b R b sda inh zym car 12m34 mz 
c R b ada inh ehp ang 12m34 mz 
d R b sda inh kid nop 12m34 *z 
2870 R b ada inh kid nap 12m33 mz 
 
a R b da inh liv ang 12m33 az 
 
*.4.. 
 
54.1mg * P<.0005+ 
+historical * P<.05 + 
 
1.149g * P<.5 
1.979m * P<.8 
 
3.69mg Z P<.008 + 
+historicaL * P<.002 + 
 
64.5mg * P<.2 + 
124.mg * P<.4 + 
+historicaL * P<.2 + 
+historicaL * P<.0005+ 
 
136.mg * P<.0005+ 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 2Ine 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
2854 1356 24.3mg n.a.s. 
 
a 1356 63.4mg n.s.s. 
b 1356 24.3mg n.s.s. 
2855 1356 29.2mg n.a.s. 
 
a 1356 29.2mg n.s.s. 
b 1356 55.6mg n.s.s. 
c 1356 13.8mg n.s.a. 
 
VINBLASTINE 865-21-4 
 
2856 1017 37.8ug n.s.s. 
VINYL BROMIDE 593.60-2 
 
2857 1466 8.74mg 107.mg 
 
a 1466 13.9mg 27.9mg 
b 1466 1.129m 6.44gm 
c 1466 175.mg n.s.s. 
d 1466 282.mg n.s.s. 
2858 1466 12.3mg 27.2mg 
 
a 1466 281.mg 647.mg 
b 1466 1.14gm 27.3gm 
c 1466 129.mg n.s.s. 
d 1466 161.mg n.s.s. 
* 1466 2.91gm n.s.s. 
VINYL CHLORIDE 75-01-4 
 
2859 ISTS 72.9mg 274.mg 
 
a IBT8 872.mg n.s.s. 
b IBTS 1.73gm n.s.s. 
c IBT8 4.04gm n.s.s. 
 
2860 1113m 45.2mg 316.mg 
 
a 1113m 52.4mg n.s.s. 
b 1113m 52.4mg n.s.s. 
2861 1113. 13.4mg 104.mg 
 
a 1113. 37.3mg 927.mg 
2862 1BT4 15.6mg 29.5mg 
 
a IBT4 34.6mg 115.mg 
b IBT4 51.4mg 234.mg 
c IBT4 2.21gm 235.g 
d IBT4 2.91gm 25.3gm 
 
a IBT4 5.45gm n.s.s. 
f 1BT4 7.81gm n.s.s. 
 
2863 1113m 22.7mg n.s.s. 
2864 1113n 34.4mg 195.mg 
2865 1113. 3.43mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1113. 15.9mg n.s.s. 
2866 1113n 41.7mg 483.mg 
2867 IBTI 147.mg 1.82gm 
 
a IBTI 528.mg 1.94gm 
 
b IBTI 1.08gm 3.29gm 
c IBTI 1.989m 8.17gm 
 
d IBTI 3.07gm n.s.s. 
* IBTI 2.44gm n.s.s. 
 
2868 1BTII 34.2mg 93.0mg 
 
a IBTII 121.mg n.s.s. 
b 1BTII 177.mg n.s.s. 
c IBTII 192.mg n.s.s. 
2869 IBT15 1.79mg 83.2mg 
 
a IBT15 16.7mg 167.mg 
b IBT15 17.9mg n.s.s. 
c IBT15 30.6mg n.s.s. 
d IBT15 40.5mg n.s.s. 
2870 IBT2 58.3mg 170.mg 
 
a IBT2 79.2mg 264.mg 
 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
 
33.9mg 
33.9mg 
33.9mg 
31.6mg 
31 .6mg 
31.6mg 
31.6mg 
 
2/17 
0/17 
2/17 
1/16 
1/16 
0/16 
4/16 
 
7/65 10.Oug 1/25 
 
3/142 
1/144 
0/139 
7/142 
4/142 
0/144 
2/142 
0/142 
4/143 
3/143 
1/143 
 
2.95mg 
2.95mg 
2.95mg 
2.95mg 
2.95mg 
2. 11mg 
2. 11g 
2. 11g 
2. 11mg 
2.11g 
2.11g 
 
12/101(14.4mg 
10/120 14.4mg 
0/99 14.4mg 
18/101 14.4mg 
6/101 14.4mg 
7/120 8.88mg 
1/99 8.88mg 
0/99 8.88 g 
5/103 8.88mg 
1/103 8.88mg 
4/103 8.88mg 
 
3/60 2.95mg 3/30 14.7mg 
590.mg 10/30) 
 
0/60 2.95mg 0/30 14.7mg 
(590.m9 1/30) 
 
3/60 2.95mg 9/30 14.7mg 
590.mg 7/30 
 
0/60 2.95mg 0/30 14.7mg 
590.mg 0/30 
 
1/28 17.9mg 1/8 161.mg 
7/28 17.9mg 1/8 161.mg 
7/28 17.9mg 1/8 161.mg 
0/28 11.2mg 0/8 60.9mg 
4/28 11.2mg 2/8 60.9mg 
15/150 8.70mg 6/60 43.5mg 
 
1.74gm 46/56) 
 
0/150 8.70mg 1/60 43.5mg 
 
1.749m 10/56) 
 
0/150 8.70mg 1/60 43.5mg 
 
1.74gm 6/56) 
 
1/150 8.70mg 12/60 43.5mg 
 
1.74gm 13/56 
 
2/150 8.70mg 0/60 43.5mg 
 
1.74gm 4/56 
 
1/150 8.70mg 5/60 43.5mg 
1.74gm 4/56 
 
1/150 8.70mg 1/60 43.5mg 
1.749m 1/56 
 
0/8 3.19mg 0/8 15.9mg 
0/16 4.35mg 0/16 21.7mg 
0/8 2.23mg 0/8 11.2mg 
0/8 2.23mg 0/8 11.2mg 
0/16 3.04mg 0/10 15.2mg 
0/58 2.02mg 0/60 10.1mg 
405.mg 1/60) 
 
0/58 2.02mg 1/60 10.1mg 
(405.mg 7/60) 
 
0/58 2.02mg 0/60 10.1mg 
405.mg 16/60 
 
0/58 2.02mg 0/60 10.1mg 
405.mg 7/60 
 
0/58 2.02mg 1/60 10.1mg 
405.mg 3/60 
 
0/58 2.02mg 1/60 10.1mg 
 
405.mg 5/60 
 
0/80 .819mg 0/80 4.09mg 
0/80 .819mg 0/80 4.09mg 
0/80 .819mg 2/80 4.09mg 
1/80 .819mg 0/80 4.09mg 
7/120 37.2ug 15/118 .186mg 
0/120 37.2ug 0/118 .1mg 
2/120 37.2ug 1/118 .186mg 
0/120 37.2ug 0/118 .186m9 
0/120 37.2ug 0/118 .186mg 
0/185 3.82mg 10/120 5.73mg 
0/185 3.82mg 1/120 5.73mg 
 
9/113 63.5mg 
50/120(63.5mg 
3/113 63.5mg 
12/113 63.5mg 
3/113 63.5mg 
36/120(38.9mg 
 
1/112 38.9mg 
1/112 38.9mg 
10/119 38.9mg 
7/119 38.9mg 
3/119 38.9mg 
 
4/30 29.5mg 
0/30 29.5mg 
3/30 29.5mg 
0/30 29.5mg 
 
2/8 459.mg 
4/8 459.mg 
4/8 459.mg 
7/12 (244.mg 
8/12 244.mg 
41/60 87.0mg 
 
18/60 (87.0mg 
11/60 (87.0mg 
12/60 87.0mg 
 
1/60 87.0mg 
3/60 87.0mg 
3/60 87.0mg 
 
1/8 63.8mg 
4/12 87.0mg 
3/8 (44.6mg 
1/8 44.6mg 
1/16 60.9mg 
1/59 20.2mg 
3/59 20.2mg 
0/59 20.2mg 
0/59 20.2mg 
2/59 20.2mg 
5/59 20.2mg 
 
10/80 12.3mg 
3/80 12.3mg 
0/80 12.3mg 
2/80 12.3mg 
22/119 .372mg 
0/119 .372mg 
1/119 .372mg 
0/119 .372mg 
0/119 .372mg 
11/119 7.64mg 
6/119 7.64mg 
 
10/118 343.mg 5/112) 
61/120 343.mg 41/120) 
 
2/119 343.mg 11/114 
 
21/118(343.mg 9/112) 
11/118(343.mg 4/112) 
61/120 232.mg 43/120) 
13/114 232.mg 35/116 
3/114 232.mg 5/116 
13/120(232.mg 5/119) 
9/120(232.mg 3/119) 
4/120 232.mg 2/119 
 
Schmah l;arzn,20, 1461-1467; 1970 
 
Benja;txap,64,367-379; 1982 
 
9/30 147.mg 17/30 (354.mg 10/30 
 
Naltoni ;nhp,41,3-29;1981/1977a 
3/30 147.mg 1/30 354.mg 2/30 
7/30 147.mg 3/30 354.mg 1/30 
2/30 147.mg 0/30 354.mg 1/30 
 
8/12 Hong;jtxe,7,909-924;1981 
7/12 
7/12 
5/12) 
7/12 
 
50/60 (435.mg 40/59 1.04gm 47/60 
 
MaLtoni ;enhp,41,3-29;1981/1977a 
14/60 435.mg 16/59 1.04gm 13/60 
5/60 435.mg 5/59 1.04gm 7/60 
8/60 435.mg 8/59 1.04gm 8/60 
2/60 435.mg 4/59 1.049m 7/60 
3/60 435.mg 1/59 1.04gm 3/60 
7/60 435.mg 8/59 1.049m 1/60 
 
2/8 Hong;jtxe,7,909-924;1981 
7/16 
1/8) 
2/8 
5/16 
 
5/60 (101.mg 2/60 243.mg 1/59 
 
Maltoni ;enhp,41,3-29;1981/1977a 
6/60 101.mg 13/60 243.mg 13/59 
4/60 101.mg 2/60 243.mg 7/59 
0/60 101.mg 4/60 243.mg 3/59 
1/60 101.mg 3/60 243.mg 3/59 
6/60 101.mg 6/60 243.mg 5/59 
 
17/80 
2/80 
2/80 
1/80 
 
21/119(.929mg 17/120) 
 
1/119 .929mg 5/120 
2/119 .929mg 4/120 
2/119 .929mg 0/120 
0/119 .929mg 1/120 
7/120 
12/120 
 
279 
 
Brkly Code 
 
280 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
b R b sda inh mgL adc 12m33 *z 
c R b sda inh liv agm 12m33 *z 
d R b ada inh Liv hpt 12m33 *z 
* R b sda inh zym car 12m33 *z 
2871 R b sda gav zym car 14m32 *z 
 
a R b sda gav Liv ang 14m32 az 
b R b sda gav Liv hpt 14m32 az 
c R b ada gav ahp ang 14m32 *z 
2872 R b ada inh Liv ang 12m33 *z 
 
a R b ada inh mgL adc 12m33 az 
b R b ada inh *hp ago 12m33 az 
c R b sda inh *hp ang 12m33 *z 
d R b sda inh zym car 12m33 *z 
a R b sda inh liv agm 12m33 az 
f R b sda inh kid nap 12m33 *z 
 
2873 R b sda inh zym car 6m36 *yz 
 
a R b sda inh Liv ang 6b36 eyz 
b R b sda inh ehp ang 6m36 eyz 
2874 R b sda inh zym car 6m36 eyz 
 
a R b sda inh mn maL 6m36 eyz 
b R b sda inh kid nap 6m36 eyz 
c R b sda inh Liv ang 6m36 eyz 
d R b sda inh Liv hpt 6m36 *yz 
a R b ada inh bra nau 6m36 *yz 
f R b sda inh *hp ang 6m36 *yz 
2875 R f wis inh Liv ang 52w52 *k 
 
a R f wis inh nas oec 52w52 *k 
b R f wis inh zym sqc 52w52 *k 
c R f wis inh Lun ppa 52w52 *k 
d R f wis inh Liv nnd 52w52 *k 
* R f wis inh Liv hpc 52w52 *k 
2876 R m wis inh hp age 12m31 az 
 
a R m wis inh *hp ang 12m31 ez 
b R m wis inh Liv ago 12m31 az 
c R m wis inh Liv hpt 12m31 *z 
d R m wis inh zym car 12m31 0z 
* R m wis inh Liv ang 12m31 *z 
2877 R m wis inh Liv ang 12m38 0z 
 
a R m wis inh bra neu 12m38 0z 
 
b R a wis inh zym car 12m38 *z 
c R a wis inh liv hpt 12m38 6z 
d R m wis inh kid nap 12m38 az 
a R f wis inh *hp ang 12m38 *z 
2878 R m wis inh zym sqc 52w52 *k 
 
a R m wis inh Liv ang 52w52 *k 
b R m wis inh nas oec 52w52 *k 
c R m wis inh liv hpc 52w52 *k 
d R a wis inh lun ppa 52w52 *k 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
TD5O 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
216.mg * P<.02 + 
528mg * P<.02 
 
+historical * P<.05 + 
 
447.mg * P<.2 + 
14.2mg * P<.02 + 
+historical * P<.02 + 
+historical * P<.2 + 
 
64.5mg * P<.2 + 
+ 50.4mg P<.005 + 
 
19.0mg P<.02 + 
64.4mg P<.02 
 
79.0mg P<.03 + 
79.0mg P<.03 + 
89.1mg P<.04 
 
+historical P<.5 + 
(4.) . 672.mg * P<.0005 
 
2.419m * Pcz05 + 
4.859m * P<.3 
 
(4.) . 555.mg * P<.0005 
 
569.mg * P<.02 
4.87gm * P<.2 
 
4.87gm * P<.2 + 
4.88gm * P<.3 
9.76gm * P<.2 
9.77gm * P<.4 
 
+ 209.mg P<.002 + 
 
276.mg P<.004 + 
857.mg P<.09 + 
1.81gm P<.3 
 
1.819g P<.3 + 
1.81gm P<.3 + 
.761mg P<.01 
1.28mg P<.05 
3.88mg P<.3 
3.88mg P<.3 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
 
+ 1.55gm * P<.0005+ 
 
4.77gm * P<.003 
6.009m * P<.004 
 
8.149m * P<.07 
13.69m * P<.4 
no dre P-1. 
 
330. mg 
330 mg 
533. mg 
1. 149m 
no dre 
 
VINYLIDENE CHLORIDE 1 Ong.. :.. ug. : 10. : 100. g : ..g :10. :100. : Ig . : 10 
 
2879 N f cd1 inh lab tum 26w78 a .> no dre 
 
a N f cdl inh liv hct 26w78 a no dre 
b N f cdl inh Liv hbs 26w78 a no dre 
2880 N f cdl inh Liv has 52w52 * .> 170.mg 
 
a N f cd1 inh liv hpt 52w52 a 170.mg 
b N f cdl inh lun tum 52w52 a no dre 
2881 N m cdl inh lab tum 2A78 a .> no dre 
 
a N m cd1 inh Liv hct 26w78 a no dre 
2882 Nm swi inh kid adc 52w82 *u . . 23.6mg 
2883 R f cdr inh Liv mix 26w78 * .> no dre 
2884 R f cdr inh Liv mix 43w95 a .> no dre 
2885 R f cdr inh Liv has 52w52 a .> no dro 
2886 R m cdr inh liv mix 26w78 a .> no dre 
2U87 R m cdr inh liv mix 43w95 a .> no dre 
 
FD & C VIOLET NO. 1 
 
2888 N f asp *at Lun ad. 80w80 a 
 
a N f asp eat Liv tum 80w80 a 
 
2889 N m asp oat lun adc 80w80 a 
 
a N m asp eat Liv tum 80w80 a 
b N m asp sat Lun ado 80w80 a 
 
2890 R f aad oat mgL car 52w52 o 
 
a R f asd eat *du car 52w52 a 
 
P<. 03 + 
P<.03 + 
P<.08 + 
P<.3 + 
Pal. 
 
P-1. _ 
P-1. _ 
P-1. _ 
P<.3 + 
P<. 3 
P-I. 
 
Pal. _ 
P-1. _ 
P<. 0005+ 
P-1. - 
p-1. - 
p.1. 
 
P-1. - 
Pal. - 
 
lOOng. :. .ug. :10. :100... : g . :10. :100.. : g :10 
 
.> 1.919g * P<.3 - 
 
no dre P-I. 
 
.> 4.66"gm * P<.3 - 
 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P.I. 
 
A 1.14gm P<.02 + 
 
1.609m P<.05 
 
. + 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose llnc 2Dose 2Inc 
 
b IBT2 lO1.mg n.s.s. 
c IBT2 201.mg n.s.s. 
d IBT2 267.mg n.s.s. 
* IBT2 157.ag n.s.s. 
2871 1BT27 5.019g n.s.s. 
 
a 1BT27 5.54mg n.s.s. 
b 1BT27 7.93mg n.s.s. 
c 1BT27 10.5mg n.a.s. 
2872 IBT9 27.1mg 305.mg 
 
a IST9 10.2mg n.s.s. 
b IST9 32.4mg n.s.s. 
c 1BT9 37.2mg n.s.s. 
d IBT9 37.2mg n.s.s. 
 
a IBT9 40.3mg n.s.s. 
f 1BT9 117.mg n.s.s. 
2873 IBTIOm 362.mg 1.479m 
 
a ISTIOm 834.mg n.s.s. 
b IBTIOm 1.19gm n.s.s. 
2874 IBTIOn 315.mg 1.13gm 
 
a IBTIOn 261.mg n.s.s. 
b IBTIOn 1.209m n.s.s. 
c IBTIOn 1.209m n.s.s. 
d ISTIOn 1.209m n.s.s. 
 
a IBTIOn 1.599m n.s.s. 
f IBTIOn 1.599g n.s.s. 
2875 1170 80.8mg 884.mg 
 
a 1170 101.mg 1.939m 
b 1170 209.mg n.s.s. 
c 1170 295.mg n.s.s. 
d 1170 295.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1170 295.mg n.s.s. 
2876 IBT17 .289mg 48.8mg 
 
a IBT17 .388mg n.s.s. 
b 1BT17 .632mg n.s.s. 
c IBT17 .632mg n.s.s. 
d IST17 .647mg n.s.s. 
 
a IBT17 1.17mg n.s.s. 
2877 1BT7 762.mg 5.089g 
 
a 1ST7 1.81gm 27.09m 
b IBT7 2.07gm 43.5gm 
 
c IBT7 2.469m n.s.s. 
d 1BT7 2.46gm n.s.s. 
a IBT7 3.86gm n.s.s. 
2878 1170 98.3mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1170 98.3mg n.s.s. 
b 1170 130.mg n.s.s. 
c 1170 185.mg n.s.s. 
d 1170 362.mg n.s.s. 
 
2/185 3.82mg 
0/185 3.82mg 
0/185 3.82mg 
2/185 3.82mg 
 
1/150 8.37ug 
0/150 8.37ug 
0/150 8.37ug 
0/150 8.37ug 
0/98 1.92mg 
10/98 1.92mg 
0/98 1.92mg 
0/98 1.92mg 
0/98 1.92mg 
0/98 1.92mg 
0/98 1.92m9 
0/227 20.5m9 
0/227 20.5mg 
0/227 20.5mg 
0/227 20.5mg 
 
17/227 20.5mg 
0/227 20.5mg 
0/227 20.5mg 
0/227 20.5mg 
0/227 20.5mg 
0/227 20.5mg 
0/10 1.12gm 
0/10 1. 12gm 
0/10 1. 129m 
0/10 1. 12gm 
 
0/10 1.129m 
0/10 1. 12gm 
 
0/94 34.6ug 
0/94 34.6ug 
0/94 34.6ug 
0/94 34.6ug 
3/94 34.6ug 
0/94 34.6ug 
0/38 1.41mg 
 
281.mg 8/27 
0/38 1.41mg 
 
281.mg 3/27 
0/38 1.41mg 
 
281.mg 2/27 
0/38 1.41mg 
 
281.mg 0/27 
0/38 1.41mg 
 
281.mg 1/27 
1/38 1.41mg 
281.mg 0/27 
0/10 781.mg 
0/10 781.mg 
 
0/10 781.m9 
0/10 781.mg 
0/10 781 .mg 
 
4/120 5.73mg 
1/120 5.73mg 
0/120 5.73mg 
1/120 5.73mg 
0/150 83.7ug 
0/150 83.7ug 
0/150 83.7ug 
0/150 83.7ug 
14/294 
62/294 
11/294 
9/294 
9/294 
8/294 
1/294 
 
5/118 34.1mg 
3/118 34.1mg 
2/118 34.1mg 
9/120 34.1mg 
12/120 34.1mg 
 
1/120 34.1mg 
1/120 34.1mg 
2/120 34.1mg 
0/120 34.1mg 
1/120 34.1mg 
6/10 
5/10 
2/10 
1/10 
1/10 
1/10 
5/99 
3/99 
1/99 
1/99 
2/99 
0/99 
 
0/28 7.03mg 
 
0/28 7.03mg 
0/28 7.03mg 
0/28 7.03mg 
1/28 7.03mg 
0/28 7.03mg 
 
3/9 
3/9 
2/9 
1/9 
0/9 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
6/119 7.64mg 
0/119 7.64mg 
0/119 7.64mg 
4/119 7.64mg 
0/148 .279mg 
1/148 .279mg 
1/148 .279mg 
0/148 .279mg 
 
Brkly Code 
 
6/120 
4/120 
3/120 
4/120 
5/149 
3/149 
1/149 
1/149 
 
9/119 
1/119 
0/119 
8/119 
20/119 
 
1/119 
1/119 
0/119 
1/119 
0/119 
 
Foron;txcy, 13,131t 141;1979/1979a 
 
KaLtoni ;*nhp,41,3-29; 1981/1977a 
 
1/27 14. 1mg 
0/27 14. 1g 
0/27 14. 1mg 
0/27 14.1g 
0/27 14. 1g 
1/27 14. mg 
 
3/28 70.3mg 
0/28 70.3mg 
 
0/28 70.3mg 
0/28 70.3mg 
 
2/28 70.3mg 
0/28 70.3mg 
 
3/25 169.mg 3/26 
1/25 169.mg 1/26 
0/25 169.mg 2/26 
1/25 169.mg 2/26 
0/25 169.mg 2/26 
1/25 169.mg 1/26 
 
Firon;txcy, 13,131- 141;1979/1979s 
 
VINYLIDENE CHLORIDE 75-35-4 
 
2879 1113m 31.8mg n.s.s. 7/28 
 
a 1113m 31.8mg n.s.s. 1/28 
b 1113m 31.8m n.s.s. 1/28 
2880 357 27.7mg n.s.s. 0/16 
 
a 357 27.7mg n.s.s. 0/16 
b 357 53.0mg n.s.s. 0/16 
2881 1113m 17.5mg n.s.s. 4/28 
 
a 1113m 17.5mg n.s.s. 4/28 
2882 15T402 13.2mg 50.0mg 0/70 
2883 1113m 5.05mg n.s.s. 0/8 
2884 1113n 20.4mg n.s.s. 0/16 
2885 357 12.6mg n.s.s. 0/15 
2886 1113m 3.53mg n.s.s. 0/8 
2887 1113n 12.5mg n.s.s. 1/16 
 
22.9mg 
22.9mg 
 
22.9mg 
68.6mg 
68.6mg 
68.6mg 
19. 0mg 
19. 0mg 
9.88g 
5.44mg 
7.42mg 
16.3mg 
3.81-g 
5. 19mg 
 
0/12 
0/12 
0/12 
1/15 
1/15 
0/15 
1/12 
1/12 
16/98 
0/8 
0/16 
0/15 
0/8 
0/14 
 
Hong; j txa,7,909-924; 1981 
 
Lo; I txo,4, 15-30;1978 
Nong; Jtx,7,909-924; 1981 
Naltoni; lndl ,64,241-262; 1977/pera.com. 
 
Hong; j tx9,7,909-924; 1981 
 
L; J tx*,4, 15.30;1978 
Hong; Itxo,7,909-924; 1981 
 
FD ? C VIOLET IIO. 1 1964-09-3 
 
2888 1354 480.mg n.s.s. 8/42 
 
a 1354 42.6mg n.s.s. 0/42 
2889 1354 1.159m n.s.s. 0/42 
 
a 1354 40.9mg n.s.s. 0/42 
b 1354 519.mg n.s.s. 18/42 
2890 136 430.mg n.s.s. 0/10 
 
a 1364 549.mg n.s.s. 0/10 
 
9.10mg 
 
9.10mg 
8.40mg 
 
8.40mg 
8.40mg 
2. 50g 
 
2.50gm 
 
7/43 91.0mg 7/42 455.mg 12/48 
0/43 91.0m9 0/42 455.mg 0/48 
0/45 84.0mg 1/42 420.mg 1/46 
0/45 84.Omg 0/42 420.mg 0/46 
13/45 84.0mg 18/42 420.mg 15/46 
5/16 
4/17 
 
Grasso;fctx, 12,21-31; 1974 
U"atsu;Jnci,51,1337-1338;1973 
 
281 
 
282 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
b R f asd oat tba mat 52w52 a 
c R f asd oat tba mix 52w52 a 
2891 R m sad oat tba turn 52w52 
 
TD50 2Thilpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
568.mg P<.002 
660.mg P<. 02 
.> no dre PI. 1 
 
VITAMIN D2 lOOng. .:.. lug...:. 10 .... 100...:. lug...:. 10 ...:. 100 ... g1 ...:. 10 
 
2892 N f c3h eat mgL adc 24.24 r .> 39.6mg Z P<l. 
 
VITAMIN A ACID 
 
2893 ft f sda ipj tba maL 24.24 a 
2894 ft m sda ipj Liv has 24.24 a 
 
a ft a ada ipj tba maL 24.24 a 
 
2,4 -XYL ID INE.HNC L 
 
2895 N f chi aat Lun mix 77w90 
 
a N f chi aat Liv mix 77w90 
b N f chi oat tba mix 77w90 
2896 N f chi aat Lun mix 77w90 
2897 N m chi aat Liv mix 77w90 
 
a N m chi eat Lun mix 77w90 
b N m chi eat tba mix 77w90 
 
2898 ft m cdr eat Liv mix 77w98 v 
 
a ft m cdr aat tba mix 77w98 v 
 
2,5-XYLIDINE.HCL 
 
2899 N f chi eat Liv hpt 68w94 a 
 
a N f chi oat Liv mix 68w94 a 
b N f chi oat Lun mix 68w94 a 
c N f chi eat tba mix 68w94 a 
2900 N f chi oat Liv hpt 68w94 a 
2901 N m chi eat Lun mix 68w94 a 
 
a N a chi eat Liv mix 68w94 a 
b N m chi eat tba mix 68w94 a 
2902 N m chi aat --- vac 68w94 a 
2903 ft m cdr eat Liv mix 18a24 v 
 
a ft a cdr aat tba mix 18.24 v 
2904 ft m cdr eat sub mix 18.24 v 
 
C.I. PIGMENT YELLOW 12 
 
2905 N f b6c oat TBA MXB 78w96 
 
a N f b6c aat Liv MXB 78w96 
b N f b6c eat Lun MXB 78w96 
2906 N m b6c eat TBA MXB 78w96 
 
a N a b6c eat Liv MXB 78w96 
b N m b6c eat Lun MXB 78w96 
2907 N b nor eat tba tumn 24m24 
2908 ft f f 34 eat TBA MXB 18m25 
 
a ft f 134 eat Liv MXB 18m25 
2909 ft m f 34 aat TBA MXB 18.25 
 
a ft m 134 eat Liv MXB 18.25 
2910 ft b sda eat tba turn 24m24 
 
lOOng. .:.. lug...:. 10 .... 100...:. 1mg...:. 10 ...:. 100...:. Ig .... 10 
 
no dre P-I. - 
no dta P-1. 
 
188.mg P<1. - 
lOOng. .. . lug...:. 10 .... 100 . 1. : mg .. ..10 .... 100...:. Ig ...:. 10 
 
+ 12.4mg I P<.004 + 
 
no dre P-1. - 
12.2mg I P<.08 
 
pool. + 13.5mg I P<.002 + 
 
:> ~~~~~65.4mg * P<.5 - 
 
no dra P-1. - 
646.mg * Pd1.- 
:> ~~~260.mg * P<.4 - 
 
16.8mg \P<.02 - 
 
lOOng. .:. .ug... .10 .... 100... .1mg... .10 ...:. 100... .Ig ...:. 10 
 
+ 552.mg *P<.003 + 
 
552.mg *P<.003 + 
1.29gm *P<.006 - 
475.mg *P<.003 
 
pool + 552.mg * P<.0005+ 
 
+ 765.mg * P<.005 - 
 
805.mg * P<.01 
 
321.mg IP<.002 
 
POOL + 723.mg *P<.0005+ 
 
:> ~~3.26gm *P<.8 - 
 
67.2mg \P<.005 
 
POOL + 152.mg *P<.0005+ 
lOOng..: .. lug... .10 .... 100. la :.Ig... .10 .... 100... .Ig ...:. 10 
 
no dre P-1. - 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-I. 
 
:no dra P-1. - 
no dra P-1. 
no dre P-I. 
 
.> 9.11gm * P<.3 - 
:> 4.14gm * P'z.4 - 
 
71.9gm * P<.6 
 
:> no dre P-1. - 
 
no dre P-1. 
 
5.33gm Z P<.6 - 
 
C.I. PIGMENT YELLOW 16 lOOng. . :. .ug...:. 10 ...:. 100...:. lag.....10 ...:. 100...:. Ig... ..10 
 
2911 N b nmr eat tba tum 24m24 a .> 11.7gm * P<.5 - 
2912 ft b ada eat tba turn 24m24 a .> 13.7gm Z P<.8 - 
 
C.I. PIGMENT YELLOW 83 lOOng. . :..lug...:. 10 ...:. 100 . 1. : mg.....10 ...:. 100 ... Ig......10 
 
2913 N b nar aat tba tum 24m24 a .> no dra P-I. - 
2914 ft b ada aat tba turn 24.24 a .> 3.56gm Z P<.4 - 
 
C.I. VAT YELLOW 4 
 
2915 N f b6c aat TBA MXB 25.25 
 
a N f b6c aat Liv NXB 25m25 
b N f b6c aat Lun NXB 25.25 
2916 N a b6c aat --- Lym 25.25 
 
a N a b6c aat TBA MXB 25.25 
b N m b6c aat Liv MXB 25.25 
c N a b6c aat Lun MXB 25m25 
2917 Rft 1 34 eat TBA MXB 24m24 
 
a Rft f34 aat Liv NXB 24m24 
2918 ft a 134 aat TBA NXB 24.24 
 
a ft a 134 oat Liv MXB 24.24 
 
FD ? C YELLOW NO. 5 
 
2919 Rft nasa aat Liv turn 64w64 a 
 
a Rft nsa aat tba mix 64w64 a 
2920 ft a nasa aat Liv turn 64w64 a 
 
a ft a nss aat tba mix 64w64 a 
2921 ft b osm eat Liv ada, 24m24 a 
 
a ft b os. aat tba maL 24.24 a 
b ft b osm set tba mix 24m24 a 
 
lOOng. .. . lug. 10 .l ...:. 100.1. :.mg... .10 ...:. 100... Ig1 ...:. 10 
 
:> no dte P-1. - 
 
23.9gm * P<.5 
no dta P-I. 
 
10.9gm * Pcz.009 c 
4.41gm * P<.05 
8.61gm * P<.07 
19.1gm * P<.4 
 
:>no dta P-I. - 
 
no dta P-I. 
 
:> ~~787.mg * P<.5 - 
 
2.79gm * P<.2 
 
00ng. .: .. lug...:. 10 ...:. 100 . 1m:.lg...:. 10 ...:. 100...:. Ig . 10.:.i 
 
.> ~~~~~~no dta P-1. 
 
no dta P-I. 
.> 6~~~~~~o dta P-1. 
 
no dta P-I. 
.>231.gm * P<.9 
 
no dta P-I. 
no dre P-1. 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose lInc 2Dose 21nc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
b 1364 261.mg 2.03gm 0/10 2.50gm 9/17 
c 1364 274.mg n.s.s. 1/10 2.50g. 9/17 
2891 1364 2.06gm n.s.s. 0/10 2.009m 0/20 
 
VITAMIN D2 50-14-6 
 
2892 1131 .889mg n.s.s. 16/64 65.Oug 
VITAMIN A ACID 302-79-4 
 
2893 1134 2.80mg n.s.s. 3/33 .714mg 
2894 1134 4.86mg n..sa. 1/36 .714mg 
 
a 1134 2.91mg n.s.s. 1/36 .714mg 
2,4-XYLIDINE.HCL 21436-96-4 
 
2895 381 5.45mg 103.mg 5/22 13.9mg 
 
a 381 122.mg n.s.s. 1/22 13.9mg 
b 381 4.28mg n.s.s. 18/22 13.9mg 
2896 381 5.74mg 89.6mg 31/102p 13.9mg 
2897 381 9.11mg n.s.s. 1/18 12.9mg 
 
a 381 14.5mg n.s.s. 8/18 12.9mg 
b 381 8.40mg n.s.s. 13/18 12.9mg 
2898 381 63.9mg n.s.s. 0/16 23.6mg 
 
a 381 6.86mg n.s.s. 9/16 23.6mg 
 
2,5-XYLIDINE.HCl 51786-53-9 
 
2899 381 217.mg 3.209m 0/13 669.mg 
 
a 381 217.mg 3.209m 0/13 669.mg 
b 381 403.mg 15.3gm 3/13 669.mg 
c 381 196.mg 3.129m 9/13 669.mg 
2900 381 217.mg 2.01gm 1/102p 669.mg 
2901 381 294.mg 6.839m 2/16 617.mg 
 
a 381 299.mg 48.49m 2/16 617.mg 
b 381 149.mg 1.559m 9/16 617.mg 
2902 381 324.mg 2.119m 5/99p 617.mg 
2903 381 272.mg n.s.s. 1/17 120.mg 
 
m 381 19.1mg 747.mg 13/17 120.mg 
2904 381 69.6mg 475.mg 18/11Ip 120.mg 
 
18/68 .130mg 23/46 .260mg 17/66 .520mg 9/31 (1.04mg 0/7) Gass;obgy,5,477;1977 
 
2/35 SchmahL ;zkko,86,77-84; 1976 
0/33 
1/33 
 
5/18 29.3mg 11/19 Weisburger;jept,2,325-356;1978/pers.com./Russfield 1973 
0/18 29.3mg 0/19 
11/18 29.3mg 16/19 
5/18 29.3mg 11/19 
2/20 27.0mg 1/19 
2/20 27.0mg 3/19 
8/20 27.0mg 9/19 
1/20 47.3mg 1/24 
14/20 (47.3mg 15/24) 
 
5/16 1.56gm 2/20 Weisburger;jept,2,325-356;1978/pers.com./RussfieLd 1973 
 
5/16 1.56gm 
2/16 1.569m 
8/16 1.56gm 
5/16 1.56gm 
4/18 1.449m 
4/18 1.449m 
12/18 1.449m 
5/18 1.44gm 
1/17 240.mg 
12/17 (240.mg 
7/17 240.mg 
 
2/20 
4/20 
7/20 
2/20 
3/19 
2/19 
12/19 
7/19 
1/17 
12/17) 
9/17 
 
C.I. PIGMENT YELLOW 12 (dimryLtnilide yeLLow) 6358-85-6 
2905 c03269 10.19m n.s.s. 12/50 2.61gm 10/50 5.23gm 
 
a c03269 51.79m n.s.s. 2/50 2.619g 0/50 5.23gm 
b c03269 25.59m n.s.s. 4/50 2.61gm 3/50 5.239g 
2906 c03269 8.179m n.s.s. 20/50 2.44gm 21/50 4.82gm 
 
a c03269 5.419m n.s.s. 15/50 2.449m 11/50 (4.82gm 
b c03269 16.6gm n.s.s. 7/50 2.44gm 5/50 4.82gm 
2907 1021 2.46gm n.s.s. 33/100 125.mg 21/100 375.mg 
2908 c03269 1.139m n.s.s. 31/50 920.mg 40/50 1.84gm 
 
a c03269 10.4gm n.s.s. 1/50 920.mg 0/50 1.849m 
2909 c03269 2.649m n.s.s. 31/50 736.mg 25/50 1.479m 
 
a c03269 n.s.s. n..sa. 0/50 736.mg 1/50 1.47gm 
2910 1021 1.03gm n.s.s. 43/100 45.0mg 20/100 135.mg 
C.I. PIGMENT YELLOW 16 5979-28-2 
 
2911 1021 2.50gm n..sa. 33/100 125.mg 22/100 375.mg 
2912 1021 1.19gm n.s.s. 43/100 45.0mg 24/100 135.mg 
C.I. PIGMENT YELLOW 83 5567-15-7 
 
2913 1021 4.66"gm n.s.s. 33/100 125.mg 23/100 375.mg 
2914 1021 897.mg n.s.s. 43/100 45.0mg 23/100 135.mg 
 
9/50 
0/50 
1/50 
13/50 
4/50) 
4/50 
 
26/100 1.129m 34/100 
34/50 
 
2/50 
23/50 
0/50 
 
18/100 405.mg 37/100 
 
33/100 1.139m 33/100 
16/100 405.mg 36/100 
 
19/100 1.139m 26/100 
20/100 405.mg 40/100 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hps,hpc,nnd. 
 
tun:a/a,a/c. 
 
Leuschner;txLt,2,253-260; 1978 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Leuschner;txLt,2,253-260; 1978 
 
Lsuschner;txlt,2,253-260; 1978 
Louschner;txlt,2,253-260; 1978 
 
C.I. VAT YELLOW 4 128-66-5 
 
2915 c03565 3.779m n.s.s. 13/20 
 
a c03565 5.84gm n.s.s. 2/20 
b c03565 11.6gm n.s.s. 2/20 
2916 c03565 5.66gm 333.9m 3/20 
 
a c03565 1.94gm n.s.s. 12/20 
b c03565 3.879m n.s.s. 3/20 
c c03565 5.699m n.s.s. 4/20 
2917 c03565 474.mg n.s.s. 9/20 
 
a c03565 n. .s. n.s.s. 0/20 
2918 c03565 185.mg n.s.s. 11/20 
 
a c03565 963.mg n.s.s. 0/20 
 
1.62gm 29/50 3.25gm 
1.629m 6/50 3.259m 
1.629m 5/50 3.25gm 
3.00gm 7/50 6.00gm 
3.009m 42/50 6.00gm 
3.009m 22/50 6.009m 
3.009m 14/50 6.009g 
175.mg 26/50 350.mg 
175.mg 0/50 350.mg 
140.mg 32/50 280.mg 
140.mg 1/50 280.mg 
 
FD & C YELLOW NO. 5 (tartrazins) 1934-21-0 
 
2919 1358 13.6mg n.s.s. 0/10 15.0mg 0/13 150.mg 
 
a 1358 273.mg n.s.s. 2/10 15.0mg 4/13 150.mg 
2920 1358 11.4mg n.s.s. 0/11 12.0mg 0/14 120.mg 
 
a 1358 439.mg n.s.s. 1/11 12.0mg 2/14 120.mg 
2921 305. 7.869m n.s.s. 0/18 225.mg 2/22 450.mg 
 
a 305a 4.769m n.s.s. 6/18 225.mg 4/22 450.mg 
b 305a 5.139m n.s.s. 8/18 225.mg 9/22 450.mg 
 
0/14 750.mg 0/10 
5/14 750.mg 2/10 
0/12 600.mg 0/9 
1/12 600.mg 0/9 
 
0/21 900.mg 0/24 2.25gm 1/23 
6/21 900.mg 6/24 2.25gm 4/23 
9/21 900.mg 8/24 2.25gm 5/23 
 
ManneL I; jphp, 10,625-634;1958 
 
Davis;txap,6,621 -626; 1964 
 
283 
 
Brkly Code 
 
29/50 
9/50 
3/50 
22/50 
48/50 
21/50 
15/50 
23/50 
 
0/50 
31/50 
 
3/50 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
Lun: a/a,a/c. 
L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
 
284 
 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
 
Sex Route Hist Nol 
FO & C YELLOW NO. 6 
 
2922 N f cdr set liv tur SOwBO o 
 
a 1 f cdr eat tun de 6O8O c 
2923 N * cdr eat liv tur 80w80 a 
 
a N cdr eat lun ado 80we0 c 
2924 R f nsa eat Liv tur 64w64 a 
 
a R f nss eat tb ix w64 e 
2925 R * nsa eat Liv turn w64 a 
 
a R nss eat tb mix w64 c 
ZINC DIBUTYLDITHIOCARSANATE 
 
2926 N f b6a orl Lun ado 76w76 *vi 
 
a N f b6a orl liv hpt 76w76 *v; 
b N f b6a orL tba mix 76w76 *v: 
2927 N * b6a orl Lun ad. 76w76 mvy 
 
a N * b6a orL Liv hpt 76w76 *v: 
b N m b6a orl tba mix 76076 *v: 
2928 N f b6c orL Lun ad. 76w76 cv: 
 
a N f b6c orl Liv hpt 76w76 *v: 
b N f b6c orl tba mix 76w76 ev: 
2929 N a b6c orl Liv hpt 76w76 cv: 
 
a N m b6c ort lun ad. 76w76 *v: 
b N m b6c arl tba mix 76w76 cv: 
ZINC DIETHYLDITHIOCARBANATE 
 
2930 N f b6a ort Liv hpt 76w76 *v: 
 
a N f b6a orl Lun ado 76w76 *v: 
b N f b6a orl tba mix 76w76 *v: 
2931 N m b6a orl Liv hpt 76w76 *v: 
 
a N * b6a ort Lun ado 76w76 mvy 
b N m b6a orl tba mix 76w76 cv: 
2932 N f b6c orl Liv hpt 76w76 cv: 
 
a N f b6c orl lun six 76w76 ev) 
b N f b6c orl tba tur 76w76 ev) 
2933 N m b6c orl lun ad. 76w76 evy 
 
a N * b6c orl Liv hpt 76w76 *vi 
b N a b6c orl tba mix 76w76 *vi 
ZINC DINETHYLDITHIOCARBANATE 
 
2934 N f b6a orl Liv hpt 76w76 ev) 
 
a N f b6a orl tun ado 76w76 *vy 
b N f b6a orl tba mix-76w76 *vi 
2935 N m b6a orl lun ado 76w76 evi 
 
a N m b6a ort liv hot 76w76 *vi 
b N m b6a orl tb ux 76w76 *vj 
2936 N f b6c orl lun ado 76w76 ev) 
 
a N f b6c ort Liv hpt 76w76 *v) 
b N f b6c ort tba mix 76w76 *v) 
2937 N * b6c orl lun mix 76w76 *v) 
 
a N * b6c orl Liv hpt 76w76 *v) 
b N m b6c orl tba mix 76w76 ev) 
2938 R b mgr gav Liv *hp 22m24 a 
 
a R b gr gv tb mix 22m24 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
 
DR AuOp 
 
tes 
 
oong .. :l1ug.. : 10. :100.. :1.mg.. :_10 . 100.. :1g . 10 
 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
87.4mg 
no dre 
14. 0gm 
 
bOng.. :. .ug. :10. :100.. : mg. :10. :100.. : . :10 
 
x .> 1.099m 
x no dre 
x 2.339m 
x .> no dre 
x no dre 
x no dre 
A .> 2.33gm 
K no dre 
x 731.mg 
x . 680.mg 
x 1.05gm 
x 252.mg 
 
bOng..:..lug. 10. 100.... : 1mg :. 10.. :100... : . :10 
 
x .> no dre 
x no dra 
x no dre 
x .> 205.mg 
x no dre 
x 86.7mg 
x .> no dre 
x no dre 
x no drn 
x . 46.2mg 
x no dre 
x 28.5mg 
 
1O0ng .. : lug. :10. :100. m : ng. :10. :100.. : g :10 
 
x .> no dre 
x no dre 
x no dra 
x .> 9.15mg 
x 202.mg 
x 4.21mg 
x .> 13.1mg 
x no dre 
x 13.1mg 
x . 5.23mg 
x 10.8mg 
x 3.37mg 
 
56.5mg 
25.8mg 
 
ZINC ETHYLENESISTHIOCARBANATE bOng.: .... lug 10 .:100. : .o :10. :100. .19 10 
 
2939 N f b6a ort lun ada 76w76 *vx > 1.15gm 
 
a N f b6a ort Liv hpt 76w76 *vx no dre 
b N f b6a ort tba mix 76w76 *vx 1.159g 
2940 N m b6a ort Liv hpt 76w76 *vx > 903.mg 
 
a NM b6a ort tun ad 76w76 evx no dre 
b N a b6a ort tba mix 76w76 evx 715 .9 
2941 N f b6c ort tun ad. 76w76 evx > 1.15gm 
 
a N f b6c ort Liv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b N f b6c ort tba mix 76w76 *vx 1.15gm 
2942 N m b6c ort Liv hpt 76w76 *vx . 244.mg 
 
a N m b6c ort tun mix 76w76 *vx no dre 
b N m b6c ort tba mix 76w76 evx 189.m9 
2943 R b mgr gav liv tur 22m24 a > no dre 
 
a R b *gr gav tba mix 22m24 * 255.mg 
 
p-1. 
pal. 
p-1. 
 
Pal. - 
Pal. - 
Z P<.02 - 
 
P-I. - 
* P<1. _ 
 
P<.4 4 
P-I. 1 
 
P<.7 - 
PI. 1. - 
P-I. 1 
 
P-1. _ 
P<.3 - 
Pal. _ 
P<.05 - 
P<.05 - 
P<.2 - 
P<. 002 - 
 
P-1. _ 
P-I. 1 
P-I. 1 
 
P<.6 - 
P-1. _ 
P<.5 - 
P-o. _ 
P-1. _ 
P-I. _ 
P<.02 - 
P.I. - 
P<. 003 - 
 
P-1. _ 
P-1. _ 
P-I. 1 
 
P<.6 - 
P<1. _ 
P<.4 4 
 
P<.3 - 
P-1. _ 
P<.3 - 
P<.O9 - 
P<.3 - 
P<. 04 - 
P<.008 
 
P<.002 + 
 
P<.6 - 
P-1. _ 
P<.7 - 
P<.6 - 
P-I. _ 
P<.7 - 
P<.3 - 
Pal. 1 
 
P<.3 - 
P<.02 - 
P-1. _ 
P<. 009 - 
P-I. 
 
P<.06 + 
 
ZIRCONIUM (IV) SULFATE 
 
2944 N b cdl wat tun tur 32m32 a 
 
a N b cdl vat liv tun 32m32 a 
 
bN bcd1 wt tb tu 32m32 
 
c N b cdl wat tba maL 32m32 a 
 
100ng .. . :ug.10. :100. g :.g 10.:-100. . : :.10 
 
.> no dre 
 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
 
p-I. - 
P-I. 1 
 
P-1. _ 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl IDose lInc 2Dose 
 
FD ? C YELLOW NO. 6 (sunset yeLLow FCF) 2783-94-0 
 
2922 1355 476.mg n.s.a. 0/47 260.mg 0/29 520.mg 
 
a 1355 6.029m n.s.s. 12/47 260.mg 6/29 520.mg 
2923 1355 412.mg n.s.s. 0/50 240.mg 0/26 480.mg 
 
a 1355 2.349m n.s.s. 7/50 240.mg 2/26 480.mg 
2924 1358 15.3mg n.s.s. 0/10 15.0m9 0/15 150.mg 
 
a 1358 31.1mg n.s.s. 2/10 15.0mg 0/15 150.mg 
2925 1358 6.91mg n.s.s. 0/11 12.0mg 0/8 120.mg 
 
a 1358 264.mg n.s.s. 1/11 12.0mg 1/8 120.mg 
 
ZINC DIBUTYLDITHIOCARBANATE 
2926 1220 239.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1220 721.mg n.s.s. 
b 1220 261.mg n.s.s. 
2927 1220 317.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1220 672.mg n.s.s. 
b 1220 351.mg n.s.s. 
2928 1220 379.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1220 721.mg n.s.s. 
b 1220 220.mg n.s.s. 
2929 1220 205.mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1220 259.mg n.s.s. 
b 1220 107.mg 1.039m 
 
ZINC DIETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE 
2930 1210 68.1mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1210 68.1mg n.s.s. 
b 1210 32.0mg n.s.s. 
2931 1210 28.4mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1210 31.7mg n.s.s. 
b 1210 17.3mg n.s.s. 
2932 1210 68.1mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1210 68.1mg n.s.s. 
b 1210 68.1mg n.s.s. 
2933 1210 15.9mg n.s.s. 
 
a 1210 63.4mg n.s.s. 
b 1210 11.5mg 155.mg 
 
2Inc 
 
Citation or Pathology 
 
0/27 1.049m 
3/27 1.049m 
0/30 960.mg 
8/30 960.mg 
0/13 750.mg 
6/13 (750.mg 
0/12 600.mg 
1/12 600.mg 
 
0/27 2.089m 0/29 
2/27 2.08gm 3/29 
0/27 1.92gm 0/19 
2/27 1.92gm 3/19 
0/9 
2/9) 
0/9 
1/9 
 
(butyL zimate) 136-23-2 
1/17 364.mg 3/18 
0/17 364.mg 0/18 
2/17 364.mg 3/18 
2/18 339.mg 2/18 
1/18 339.mg 0/18 
3/18 339.mg 2/18 
0/16 364.mg 1/18 
0/16 364.mg 0/18 
0/16 364.mg 3/18 
0/16 339.mg 3/18 
0/16 339.mg 2/18 
0/16 339.mg 7/18 
 
(ethyl zimate) 14324-55-1 
0/17 36.4mg 0/17 
1/17 36.4mg 0/17 
2/17 36.4mg 2/17 
1/18 33.9mg 2/18 
2/18 33.9mg 2/18 
3/18 33.9mg 5/18 
0/16 36.4mg 0/17 
0/16 36.4mg 0/17 
0/16 36.4mg 0/17 
0/16 33.9mg 4/17 
0/16 33.9mg 0/17 
0/16 33.9mg 6/17 
 
ZINC DINETHYLDITHIOCARBANATE (methyL zimate) 137-30-4 
2934 1204 4.07mg n.s.s. 0/17 2.05mg 0/18 
 
a 1204 4.07mg n.s.s. 1/17 2.05mg 0/18 
b 1204 4.07mg n.s.s. 2/17 2.05mg 0/18 
2935 1204 1.27mg n.s.s. 2/18 1.91mg 3/17 
 
a 1204 2.12mg n.s.s. 1/18 1.91mg 1/17 
b 1204 .898mg n.s.s. 3/18 1.91mg 5/17 
2936 1204 2.14mg n.s.s. 0/16 2.05mg 1/18 
 
a 1204 4.07mg n.s.s. 0/16 2.05mg 0/18 
b 1204 2.14mg n.s.s. 0/16 2.05mg 1/18 
2937 1204 1.28mg n.s.s. 0/16 1.91mg 2/16 
 
a 1204 1.76mg n.s.s. 0/16 1.91mg 1/16 
b 1204 1.01mg n.s.s. 0/16 1.91mg 3/16 
2938 1426 13.8mg 1.94gm 0/46 18.4mg 2/10 
 
a 1426 8.47mg 198.mg 1/46 18.4mg 4/10 
ZINC ETHYLENEBISTHIOCARBANATE (zineb) 12122-67-7 
2939 1213 152.mg n.s.s. 1/17 180.mg 2/18 
 
a 1213 357.mg n.s.s. 0/17 180.mg 0/18 
b 1213 130.mg n.s.s. 2/17 180.mg 3/18 
2940 1213 132.mg n.s.s. 1/18 168.mg 2/17 
 
a 1213 206.mg n.s.s. 2/18 168.mg 1/17 
b 1213 96.4mg n.s.s. 3/18 168.mg 4/17 
2941 1213 188.g n.s.s. 0/16 180.mg 1/18 
 
a 1213 357.mg n.s.s. 0/16 180.mg 0/18 
b 1213 188.mg n.s.s. 0/16 180.mg 1/18 
2942 1213 84.0mg n.s.s. 0/16 168.mg 4/18 
 
a 1213 333.mg n.s.s. 0/16 168.mg 0/18 
b 1213 71.2mg 4.149m 0/16 168.mg 5/18 
2943 1426 154.mg n.s.s. 0/46 74.9mg 0/10 
 
a 1426 57.5mg n.s.s. 1/46 74.9mg 2/10 
 
ZIRCONIUM (IV) SULFATE 14644-61-2 
 
2944 1036 8.41mg n.s.s. 15/71 .877mg 
 
a 1036 10.4mg n.s.s. 4/71 .877mq 
b 1036 7.10mg n.s.s. 24/71 .877mg 
c 1036 9.64mg n.s.s. 8/71 .877m9 
 
Brkly Code 
 
Gaunt;fctx, 12,1-10; 1974 
Mannet l; jphp, 10,625-634;1958 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
 
Andrianova;vpit,29,71 .74; 1970 
 
Innes;ntis,1968/1969 
 
Andrianova;vpit,29,71 -74; 1970 
Kanisawa;canr,29,892-895; 1969 
 
9/72 
3/72 
15/72 
 
5/72 
 
285 
 
286 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
APPENDIX 1: CHEMICAL NAMES AND SYNONYMS 
 
ACETAMIDE 
 
ACETAMINOPHEN 
ACETOHEXAMIDE 
 
ACETON8q4-(5-NITRO-2-FURYL)-2-THIAZOLYLJHYDRAZONE 
1'-ACETOXYSAFROLE 
 
N'-ACETYL-4-(HYDROXYMETHYL)PHENYLHYDRAZINE 
1-ACETYL-2-ISONICOTINOYLHYDRAZINE 
3-ACETYL-6-METHYL-2,4-PYRANDIONE 
1-ACETYL-2-PHENYLHYDRAZINE 
4-ACETYLAMINOBIPHENYL 
1-ACETYLAMINOFLUORENE 
2-ACETYLAMINOFLUORENE 
4-ACETYLAMINOFLUORENE 
 
ACETYLATED DIAMYLOPECTIN PHOSPHATE 
ACETYLATED DISTARCH ADIPATE 
 
ACETYLATED DISTARCH GLYCEROL 
 
ACETYLATED DISTARCH PHOSPHATE 
ACRONYCINE 
 
ACRYLONITRILE 
ACTINOMYCIN C 
ACTINOMYCIN D 
ADIPAMIDE 
AF-2 
 
AFLATOXICOL 
AFLATOXIN B1 
 
AFLATOXIN, CRUDE 
 
AGERITE 150 (see p-ISOPROPOXYDIPHENYLAMINE) 
 
AGERITE ALBA (me HYDROQUINONE MONOBENZYL ETHER) 
AGERITE DPPD (me DIPHENYL-p-PHENYLENEDIAMINE) 
AGERrM POWDER (me PHENYL-beta-NAPHTHYLAMINE) 
AGERITE WHITE (see sym.-dibeta-NAPHTHYL-p- 
PHENYLENEDIAMINE) 
 
ALDERLIN (me PRONETHALOL) 
 
ALDERLIN.HCl (me PRONETHALOL.HCI) 
ALDICARB 
ALDRIN 
 
ALKYLBENZENESULFONATE, LINEAR 
ALLYL CHLORIDE 
 
ALLYLHYDRAZINE.HC1 
 
ALTAX (me BENZOTHIAZYL DISULFIDE) 
ALUMINUM POTASSIUM SULFATE 
AMARANTH (see FD & C RED NO. 2) 
 
AMAX (me N-OXYDIETHYLENEBENZOTHIAZOLE- 
 
2-SULFENAMIDE) 
 
2-AMINO-5-AZOTOLUENE (se o-AMINOAZOTOLUENE) 
 
3-AMINO-1,4-DIMEITHYL-5H-PYRIDO(4,3-bJlNDOLE ACETATE 
4-AMINO-2,3-DIMETHYLAZOBENZENE 
 
(me o-AMINOAZOTOLUENE) 
 
3-AMINO-4-ETHOXYACETANILIDE 
3-AMINO-9-ETHYLCARBAZOLE.HCI 
 
3-AMINO-9-ETHYLCARBAZOLE MIXTURE (3-amino-9-ethylcarbazole 
 
and 3-amino-9-ethylcarbazole.HCl. CAS NUMBER 132-32-1 
and 6109-97-3) 
 
4-AMINO-3-HYDROXYBIPHENYL (see 3-HYDROXY-4- 
AMINOBIPHENYL) 
 
4-AMINO-N1O-METHYL-PTEROYLGLUTAMIC ACID 
 
(me METHOTREXATE) 
 
3-AMINO-1-METHYL-5H-PYRID(14,3-bINDOLE ACETATE 
1-AMINO-2-METHYLANTHRAQUINONE 
 
2-AMINO-5-(5-NITRO-2-FURYL)-1,3,4-OXADIAZOLE 
2-AMINO-5-(5-NITRO-2-FURYL)-1,3,4-THLADIAZOLE 
2-AMINO-4-(5-NITRO-2-FURYL)THIAZOLE 
4-AMINO-2-NITROPHENOL 
 
2-AMINO-4-(p-NITROPHENYL)THIAZOLE 
2-AMINO-5-NITROTHIAZOLE 
 
2-AMINO-5-PHENYL-2-OXAZOLIN-4-ONE + Mg(OH)2 
2-AMINOANTHRAQUINONE 
o-AMINOAZOTOLUENE 
 
AMINOBENZOIC ACID (me ANTHRANILIC ACID) 
p-AMINOBIPHENYL (me 4-AMINODIPHENYL) 
4-AMINODIPHENYL 
 
2-AMINODIPHENYLENE OXIDE 
 
p-AMINONITROPHENOL (me 4-AMINO-2-NITROPHENOL) 
3-AMINOTRIAZOLE 
 
AMITROL (me 3-AMINOTRLAZOLE) 
AMMONIUM CHLORIDE 
AMMONIUM CITRATE 
 
CAS 
 
NUMBERa CHEMICAL NAME 
 
1336-21-6 AMMONIUM HYDROXIDE 
10589-74-9 1-AMYL-1-NITROSOUREA 
 
1119-68-2 n-AMYLHYDRAZINE.HCl (see n-PENTYLHYDRAZINE.HCI) 
15879-93-3 ANHYDROGLUCOCHLORAL 
 
101-05-3 ANILAINE 
62-53-3 ANILINE 
 
142-04-1 ANILINE.HCI 
 
134-29-2 o-ANISIDINE.HCI 
20265-97-8 p-ANISIDINE.HCI 
 
118-92-3 ANTHRANILIC ACID 
 
84-65-1 9,10-ANTHRAQUINONE 
 
28300-74-5 ANTIMONY POTASSIUM TARTRATE 
 
60-80-0 ANTIPYRINE (see PHENAZONE) 
 
86-88-4 ANTU (see 1-(l-NAPHTHYL)-2-THIOUREA) 
 
8003-03-0 APC (see ASPIRIN, PHENACETIN, AND CAFFEINE) 
 
140-57-8 ARAMITE 
 
27323-18-8 AROCLOR 1254 
11096-82-5 AROCLOR 1260 
 
7631-89-2 ARSENATE, SODIUM 
 
1327-53-3 ARSENIC TRIOXIDE (see ARSENIOUS OXIDE) 
1327-53-3 ARSENIOUS OXIDE 
7784-46-5 ARSENITE, SODIUM 
22839-47-0 ASPARTAME 
 
50-78-2 ASPIRIN 
 
8003-03-0 ASPIRIN, PHENACETIN, AND CAFFEINE 
1912-24-9 ATRAZINE 
 
51-55-8 ATROPINE 
 
2465-27-2 AURAMINE-O 
 
2303-16-4 AVADEX (see DIALLATE) 
320-67-2 5-AZACYTIDINE 
115-02-6 AZASERINE 
 
26628-22-8 AZIDE, SODIUM 
 
86-50-0 AZINPHOSMETHYL 
103-33-3 AZOBENZENE 
 
543-80-6 BARIUM ACETATE 
 
542-88-1 BCME (se BIS-(CHLOROMETHYL) ETHER) 
 
71-43-2 BENZENE 
 
319-84-6 alpha-BENZENE HEXACHLORIDE (see alpha- 
 
1,2,3,4,5,6-HEXACHLOROCYCLOHEXANE) 
5351-65-5 BENZENESULPHONOHYDRAZIDE 
 
613-94-5 BENZHYDRAZIDE (see BENZOYL HYDRAZINE) 
92-87-5 BENZIDINE 
 
50-32-8 BENZO(a)PYRENE 
 
532-32-1 BENZOATE, SODIUM 
91-76-9 BENZOGUANAMINE 
91-64-5 1,2-BENZOPYRONE 
 
51542-33-7 1-(2'-BENZOTHIAZOLYL)-3-METHYL-3-NITROSOUREA 
 
(me N-NITROSOBENZTHIAZURON) 
120-78-5 BENZOTHLAZYL DISULFIDE 
95-14-7 1H-BENZOTRIAZOLE 
 
613-94-5 BENZOYL HYDRAZINE 
 
50-32-8 BENZPYRENE (ae BENZO(a)PYRENE) 
 
50-32-8 3,4-BENZPYRENE (see BENZO(a)PYRENE) 
20570-96-1 BENZYLHYDRAZINE.2HC1 
13510-49-1 BERYLLIUM SULFATE 
 
64039-27-6 beta-TGdR (me beta-THIOGUANINE DEOXYRIBOSIDE) 
 
128-37-0 BHT (me BUTYLATED HYDROXYTOLUENE) 
92-52-4 BIPHENYL 
 
108-60-1 BIS(2-CHLORO-1-METHYLETHYL) ETHER 
111-44-4 BIS-2-CHLOROETHYLETHER 
 
--- BIS-1,4-(CHLOROMETHOXY)BUTANE 
13483-18-6 BIS-1,2-(CHLOROMETHOXY)ETHANE 
 
--- BIS-1,6-(CHLOROMETHOXY)HEXANE 
 
56894-91-8 BIS-1,4-(CHLOROMETHOXY)-p-XYLENE 
 
542-88-1 BIS-(CHLOROMETHYL) ETHER 
 
--- 4-BIS(2-HYDROXYETHYL)AMINO-2-(5-NITRO-2- 
 
THIENYL)QUINAZOLINE 
 
--- 4-BIS(2-HYDROXYETHYL)AMINO-2-(2-THIENYL)QUINAZOLINE 
23746-34-1 BIS-2-HYDROXYETHYLDITHIOCARBAMIC ACID, POTASSIUM 
53609-64-6 N-BIS(2-HYDROXYPROPYL)NITROSAMINE 
 
(me N-NITROSOBIS(2-HYDROXYPROPYL)AMINE) 
 
21260-46-8 BISMATE (me BISMUTH DEMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE) 
21260-46-8 BISMUTH DIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE 
 
7787-59-9 BISMUTH OXYCHLORIDE 
2519-30-4 BLACK PN 
 
1937-37-7 C.I. DIRECT BLACK 38 
2602-46-2 C.I. DIRECT BLUE 6 
 
CAS 
 
NUMBERa 
 
60-35-5 
103-90-2 
968-81-0 
18523-69-8 
34627-78-6 
65734-38-5 
 
1078-38-2 
520-46-5 
114-83-0 
4075-79-0 
28314-03-6 
 
53-96-3 
28322-02-3 
 
7008-42-6 
 
107-13-1 
8052-16-2 
 
50-76-0 
628-94-4 
3688-53-7 
29611-03-8 
 
1162-65-8 
 
101-73-5 
103-16-2 
74-31-7 
135-88-6 
93-46-9 
54-80-8 
51-02-5 
116-06-3 
309-00-2 
 
107-05-1 
52207-83-7 
 
120-78-5 
 
915-67-3 
102-77-2 
 
97-56-3 
75104-43-7 
 
97-56-3 
17026-81-2 
6109-97-3 
 
mixture 
 
4363-03-5 
 
59-05-2 
72254-58-1 
 
82-28-0 
3775-55-1 
 
712-68-5 
38514-71-5 
 
119-34-6 
2104-09-8 
 
121-66-4 
18968-99-5 
 
117-79-3 
97-56-3 
118-92-3 
92-67-1 
92-67-1 
3693-22-9 
 
119-34-6 
61-82-5 
61-82-5 
12125-02-9 
3012-65-5 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
CAS 
 
NUMBERa CHEMICAL NAME 
 
3844-45-9 FD & C BLUE NO. 1 
860-22-0 FD & C BLUE NO.2 
 
109-84-2 BOF (see 2-HYDROXYETHYLHYDRAZINE) 
 
99-30-9 BOTRAN (see 2,6-DICHLORO-4-NITROANILINE) 
2519-30-4 BRILLIANT BLACK BN (see BLACK PN) 
 
3844-45-9 BRILLIANT BLUE FCF (see FD & C BLUE NO. 1) 
5160-02-1 BRILLIANT RED (see D & C RED NO. 9) 
7758-01-2 BROMATE, POTASSIUM 
 
77-65-6 BROMODIETHYLACETYLUREA (see CARBROMAL) 
16071-86-6 C.I. DIRECT BROWN 95 
 
5351-65-5 BSH (see BENZENESULPHONOHYDRAZIDE) 
 
55-98-1 BUSULFAN (se MYLERAN) 
 
--- BUTACIDE (see PIPERONYL BUTOXIDE IN SOLVENT) 
3817-11-6 BUTYL-BUTANOL-NITROSAMINE (see N-BUTYL-N- 
 
(4-HYDROXYBUTYL)NITROSAMINE) 
88-85-7 2-sec-BUTYL-4,6-DINITROPHENOL 
 
--- N-N-BUTYL-N-FORMYLHYDRAZINE 
 
3817-11-6 N-BUTYL-N-(4-HYDROXYBUTYL)NITROSAMINE 
 
--- DI-tert-BUTYL-4-HYDROXYMETHYL PHENOL 
13010-08-7 N-BUTYL-N'-NITRO-N-NITROSOGUANIDINE 
 
136-23-2 BUTYL ZIMATE (see ZINC DIBUTYLDITHIOCARBAMATE) 
128-37-0 BUTYLATED HYDROXYTOLUENE 
 
--- 1,1-DI-n-BUTYLHYDRAZINE 
 
7422-80-2 1,2-DI-n-BUTYLHYDRAZINE.2HCI 
56795-65-4 n-BUTYLHYDRAZINE.HCI 
 
592-31-4 N-BUTYLUREA 
 
3068-88-0 beta-BUTYROLACTONE 
 
75-60-5 CACODYLIC ACID (see DIMETHYLARSINIC ACID) 
543-90-8 CADMIUM ACETATE 
 
35658-65-2 CADMIUM CHLORIDE MONOHYDRATE 
 
14239-68-0 CADMIUM DIETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE 
 
7790-84-3 CADMIUM SULPHATE 
 
58-08-2 CAFFEINE 
 
8003-03-0 CAFFEINE, ASPIRIN, AND PHENACETIN (see ASPIRIN, 
 
PHENACETIN, AND CAFFEINE) 
 
156-62-7 CALCIUM CYANAMIDE (see CYANAMIDE, CALCIUM) 
133-06-2 CAPTAN 
 
149-30-4 CAPTAX (see 2-MERCAPTOBENZOTHIAZOLE) 
563-41-7 CARBAMYL HYDRAZINE.HCI 
 
103-03-7 1-CARBAMYL-2-PHENYLHYDRAZINE 
121-59-5 CARBARSONE 
63-25-2 CARBARYL 
 
56-23-5 CARBON TETRACHLORIDE 
 
60391-92-6 CARBOXYMETHYLNITROSOUREA 
 
77-65-6 CARBROMAL 
 
3567-69-9 CARMOISINE (see C.I. FOOD RED 3) 
 
--- CARRAGEENAN, ACID-DEGRADED 
9000-07-1 CARRAGEENAN, NATIVE 
 
999-81-5 CCC (see (2-CHLOROETHYL)TRIMETHYLAMMONIUM 
 
CHLORIDE) 
 
122-34-9 CDT (see SIMAZINE) 
 
9004-32-4 CELLULOSE CARBOXYMETHYL ETHER, SODIUM 
 
(see EDIFAS B) 
 
474-25-9 CHENODEOXYCHOLIC ACID 
 
15879-93-3 alpha-CHLORALOSE (see ANHYDROGLUCOCHLORAL) 
 
133-90-4 CHLORAMBEN 
 
305-03-3 CHLORAMBUCIL 
 
56-75-7 CHLORAMPHENICOL 
118-75-2 CHLORANIL 
 
106-47-8 4-CHLORANILIC (see p-CHLOROANILINE) 
57-74-9 CHLORDANE 
 
143-50-0 CHLORDECONE (see KEPONE) 
 
80-33-1 CHLORFENSON (see p-CHLOROPHENYL-p-CHLOROBENZENE 
 
SULFONATE) 
7782-50-5 CHLORINE 
 
302-22-7 CHLORMADINONE ACETATE 
 
101-79-1 4-CHLORO-4'-AMINODIPHENYLETHER 
 
--- 2-CHLORO-5-(3,5-DIMETHYLPIPERIDINOSULPHONYL)BENZOIC 
 
ACID 
 
97-00-7 1-CHLORO-2,4-DINITROBENZENE 
88-73-3 1-CHLORO-2-NITROBENZENE 
100-00-5 1-CHLORO-4-NITROBENZENE 
 
5131-60-2 4-CHLORO-m-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 
 
95-83-0 4-CHLORO-o-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 
 
61702-44-1 2-CHLORO-p-PHENYLENEDLAMINE SULFATE 
 
95-74-9 3-CHLORO-p-TOLUIDINE 
95-79-4 5-CHLORO-o-TOLUIDINE 
 
3165-93-3 4-CHLORO-o-TOLUIDINE.HCI 
 
50892-23-4 [4-CHLORO-6-(2,3-XYLIDINO)-2-PYRIMIDINYLTHIOIACETIC 
 
ACID 
 
CAS 
 
NUMBER8 CHEMICAL NAME 
 
--- 4-CHLORO-6-(2,3-XYLIDINO)-2-PYRIMIDINYLTHIO(N-beta- 
 
HYDROXYETHYL) ACETAMIDE 
107-20-0 CHLOROACETALDEHYDE 
 
140-49-8 4'-(CHLOROACETYL)-ACETANILIDE 
106-47-8 p-CHLOROANILINE 
510-15-6 CHLOROBENZILATE 
 
54749-90-5 2-3-(2-CHLOROETHYL)-3-NITROSOUREIDO]-D- 
 
GLUCOPYRANOSE (see CHLOROZOTOCIN) 
 
999-81-5 (2-CHLOROETHYL)TRIMETHYLAMMONIUM CHLORIDE 
 
67-66-3 CHLOROFORM 
 
107-30-2 CHLOROMEITHYL METHYL ETHER 
6959-47-3 2-(CHLOROMETHYL)PYRIDINE.HCI 
6959-48-4 3-(CHLOROMETHYL)PYRIDINE.HCI 
 
56-75-7 CHLOROMYCETIN (am CHLORAMPHENICOL) 
 
100-00-5 p-CHLORONITROBENZENE (see 1-CHLORO-4-NITROBENZENE) 
80-33-1 p-CHLOROPHENYL-p-CHLOROBENZENE SULFONATE 
150-68-5 3-(p-CHLOROPHENYL)-1,1-DIMETHYLUREA 
 
10473-70-8 1-(4-CHLOROPHENYL)-1-PHENYL-2-PROPYNYL CARBAMATE 
2227-13-6 p-CHLOROPHENYL-2,4,5-TRICHLOROPHENYL SULFIDE 
 
94-20-2 1-(p-CHLOROPHENYLSULFONYL)-3-PROPYLUREA 
 
(see CHLORPROPAMIDE) 
76-06-2 CHLOROPICRIN 
 
683-50-1 2-CHLOROPROPANAL 
 
107-05-1 CHLOROPROPENE (see ALLYL CHLORIDE) 
590-21-6 1-CHLOROPROPENE 
1897-45-6 CHLOROTHALONIL 
54749-90-5 CHLOROZOTOCIN 
 
94-20-2 CHLORPROPAMIDE 
 
101-21-3 CHLORPROPHAM (see ISOPROPYL-N-(3- 
 
CHLOROPHENYL)CARBAMATE) 
 
2921-88-2 CHLORPYRIFOS (see O,O-DIETHYL-O-(3,5,6- 
 
TRCHLORO-2-PYRIDYL) PHOSPHOROTHIOATE) 
12236-46-3 C$OCOLATE BROWN FB 
4553-89-3 VHOCOLATE BROWN HT 
 
1308-39-9 CHROMIC OXIDE PIGMENT 
1066-30-4 CHROMIUM (III) ACETATE 
 
101-21-3 CIPC (se ISOPROPYL-N-(3-CHLOROPHENYL)CARBAMATE) 
 
--- CLIVORINE 
 
637-07-0 CLOFIBRATE 
 
43054-45-1 CLOMIPHENE CITRATE 
 
1420-04-8 CLONITRALID 
 
107-30-2 CMME (see CHLOROMETHYL METHYL ETHER) 
477-30-5 COLCEMID 
 
--- CONJUGATED EQUINE ESTROGENS (see PREMARIN) 
137-29-1 COPPER DIMHEHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE 
10380-28-6 COPPER-8-HYDROXYQUINOLINE 
 
56-72-4 COUMAPHOS 
 
91-64-5 COUMARIN (see 1,2-BENZOPYRONE) 
102-50-1 m-CRESIDINE 
120-71-8 p-CRESIDINE 
 
137-29-1 CUMATE (se COPPER DIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE) 
135-20-6 CUPFERRON 
 
156-62-7 CYANAMIDE, CALCIUM 
139-05-9 CYCLAMATE, SODIUM 
12663-46-6 CYCLOCHLOROTINE 
 
95-33-0 N-CYCLOHEXYL-2-BENZOTHIAZOLE SULFENAMIDE 
4998-76-9 CYCLOHEXYLAMINE.HC1 
 
19834-02-7 CYCLOHEXYLAMINE SULFATE 
 
50-18-0 CYCLOPHOSPHAMIDE 
 
60-11-7 DAB (ese N,N-DIMETHYL-4-AMINOAZOBENZENE) 
4342-03-4 DACARBAZINE 
 
1897-45-6 DACONIL (see CHLOROTHALONIL) 
1596-84-5 DAMINOZIDE 
 
80-08-0 DAPSONE 
 
58-14-0 DARAPRIN (se PYRIMETHAMINE) 
 
96-12-8 DBCP (see 1,2-DIBROMO-3-CHLOROPROPANE) 
488-41-5 DBM (se DIBROMOMANNITOL) 
 
91-94-1 DCB (see &,3'-DICHLOROBENZIDINE) 
 
33857-26-0 DCDD (see 2,7-DICHLORODIBENZO-p-DIOXIN) 
 
53-19-0 o,p'-DDD 
72-54-8 p,p'-DDD 
72-55-9 p,p'-DDE 
50-29-3 DDT 
 
62-73-7 DDVP (see DICHLORVOS) 
 
576-68-1 DEGRANOL (see MANNITOL NITROGEN MUSTARD) 
520-46-5 DEHYDROACETIC ACID (see 3-ACETYL-6-METHYL- 
 
2,4-PYRANDIONE) 
 
55-18-5 DEN (see N-NITROSODIETHYLAMINE) 
 
64039-27-6 beta-2'-DEOXY-6-THIOGUANOSINE MONOHYDRATE 
 
(see beta-THIOGUANINE DEOXYRIBOSIDE) 
 
287 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
CAS 
 
NUMBERa CHEMICAL NAME 
 
56-53-1 DES (se DIETHYLSTILBESTROL) 
131-01-1 DESERPIDINE 
 
--- N-1-DIACETAMIDOFLUORENE 
2303-16-4 DIALLATE 
 
720-69-4 4,6-DLAMINO-2-(5-NITRO-2-FURYL)-s-TRLAZINE 
39156-41-7 2,4-DIAMINOANISOLE SULFATE 
 
7411-49-6 3,3'-DIAMINOBENZIDINE.4HCI (see 3,3',4,4'- 
 
TETRAAMINOBIPHENYL.4HCO) 
 
2243-62-1 1,5-DIAMINONAPHTHALENE (see 1,5-NAPHTHALENEDIAMINE) 
 
95-80-7 2,4-DIAMINOTOLUENE 
 
636-23-7 2,4-DIAMINOTOLUENE.2HCI 
 
6369-59-1 2,5-DIAMINOTOLUENE SULFATE 
 
6358-85-6 DIARYLANILIDE YELLOW (see C.L PIGMENT YELLOW 12) 
333-41-5 DIAZINON 
 
53-70-3 DIBENZ(a,h)ANTHRACENE 
262-12-4 DIBENZO-p-DIOXIN 
 
4106-66-5 3-DIBENZOFURANAMINE 
 
96-12-8 1,2-DEBROMO-3-CHLOROPROPANE 
10318-26-0 DEBROMODULCITOL 
 
106-93-4 1,2-DIBROMOETHANE 
488-41-5 DIBROMOMANNITOL 
 
56654-52-5 1,3-DIBUTYL-1-NITROSOUREA 
 
924-16-3 DIBUTYLNITROSAMINE (see NITROSODIBUTYLAMINE) 
1067-33-0 DIBUTYLTIN DIACETATE 
4342-03-4 DIC (se DACARBAZINE) 
 
117-80-6 DICHLONE (see 2,3-DICHLORO-1,4-NAPHTHOQUINONE) 
51-75-2 DICHLOREN (see NITROGEN MUSTARD) 
 
8001-50-1 DICHLORICIDE MOTHPROOFER (see STROBANE) 
 
101-14-4 3,3'-DICHLORO-4,4'-DIAMINODIPHENYLMETHANE 
 
(see 4,4'-METHYLENE-BIS(2-CHLOROANILINE)) 
 
3883-43-0 
 
87-569 
2164-09-2 
 
51-75-2 
 
117-80-6 
99-30-9 
91-94-1 
110-57-6 
33857-26-0 
 
75-34-3 
107-06-2 
120-36-5 
 
120-36-5 
6965-71-5 
 
94-75-7 
94-80-4 
25168-26-7 
 
94-11-1 
330-54-1 
97-16-5 
62-73-7 
115-32-2 
2164-09-2 
1212-29-9 
 
81-21-0 
60-57-1 
13366-73-9 
 
298-18-0 
7316-37-2 
7347-49-1 
2921-88-2 
 
685-91-6 
148-18-5 
 
111-46-6 
617-84-5 
 
55-18-5 
55-18-5 
56-53-1 
105-55-5 
628-36-4 
33389-33-2 
 
3276-41-3 
 
123-33-1 
 
2,3-DICHLORO-p-DIOXANE 
 
slpha,beta-DICHLORO-beta-FORMYLACRYLIC ACID 
3,4'-DICHLORO-2-METHYLACRYLANILIDE 
2,2'-DICHLORO-N-METHYLETHYLAMINE 
 
(see NITROGEN MUSTARD) 
 
2,3-DICHLORO-1,4-NAPHTHOQUINONE 
2,6-DICHLORO-4-NITROANILINE 
3,3'-DICHLOROBENZIDINE 
 
trsns-1,4-DICHLOROBUTENE-2 
 
2,7-DICHLORODIBENZO-p-DIOXIN 
1,1-DICHLOROETHANE 
1,2-DICHLOROETHANE 
 
(see alpha-(2,4-DICHLOROPHENOXY)PROPIONIC ACID) 
alpha-(2,4-DICHLOROPHENOXY)PROPIONIC ACID 
alpha-(2,5-DICHLOROPHENOXY)PROPIONIC ACID 
2,4-DICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ACID 
 
2,4-DICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ACID, n-BUTYL ESTER 
 
2,4-DICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ACID, ISOOCTYL ESTER 
2,4-DICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ACID, ISOPROPYL ESTER 
3-(3,4-DICHLOROPHENYL)-1,1-DIMETHYLUREA 
2,4-DICHLOROPHENYLBENZENE SULFONATE 
DICHLORVOS 
DICOFOL 
 
DICRYL (see 3,4'-DICHLORO-2-METHYLACRYLANILIDE) 
N,N'-DICYCLOHEXYLTHIOUREA 
DICYCLOPENTADIENE DIOXIDE 
DIELDRIN 
 
DIELDRIN, PHOTO- 
 
D,L-DIEPOXYBUTANE 
 
DIETHYL-beta,gamma-EPOXYPROPYLPHOSPHONATE 
N,N-DIETHYL-4-(4'-[PYRIDYL-1'-OXIDEJAZO)ANILINE 
O,O-DIETHYL-O-(3,5,6-TRICHLORO-2-PYRIDYL) 
PHOSPHOROTHIOATE 
DIETHYLACETAMIDE 
 
DIETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE TRIHYDRATE, SODIUM 
 
(se SODIUM DIETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE TRIHYDRATE) 
DIETHYLENE GLYCOL 
DIETHYLFORMAMIDE 
 
DIETHYLNITROSAMINE (se N-NITROSODIETHYLAMINE) 
 
N,N-DIETHYLNITROSAMINE (se N-NITROSODIETHYLAMINE) 
DIETHYLSTILBESTROL 
 
N,N'-DIETHYLTHIOUREA 
1,2-DIFORMYLHYDRAZINE 
 
1,2-DIHYDRO-2-(5-NITRO-2-THIENYL)QUINAZOLIN- 
 
4(3H)-ONE 
 
3,6-DIHYDRO-2-NITROSO-2H-1,2-OXAZINE 
 
1,2-DIHYDRO-3,6-PYRIDAZINEDIONE (see MALEIC 
HYDRAZUDE) 
 
CAS 
 
NUMBERa CHEMICAL NAME 
 
94-58-6 DIHYDROSAFROLE 
60-51-5 DIMETHOATE 
 
828-00-2 DIMETHOXANE 
 
5803-51-0 2,5-DIMETHOXY-4'-AMINOSTILBENE 
54150-69-5 2,4-DIMETHOXYANILINE.HCI 
 
91-93-0 3,3'-DIMETHOXYBENZIDINE-4,4'-DISOCYANATE 
1146-71-0 5,7-DIMETHOXYCYCLOPENTENEcJCOUMARIN 
 
--- 5,7-DIMETHOXYCYCLOPENTENONE82,3-c)COUMARIN 
--- 5,7-DIMHOXYCYCLOPENTENONEI3,2-cJCOUMARIN 
60-11-7 N,N-DIMETHYL-4-AMINOAZOBENZENE 
 
57-97-6 9,10-DIMETHYL-1,2-BENZANTHRACENE (see 7,12- 
 
DIMETHYLBENZ(a)ANTHRACENE) 
 
3851-16-9 N,N'-DIMETHYL-N,N'-DINITROSOPHTHALAMIDE 
 
59-35-8 4,6-DIMETHYL-2-(5-NITRO-2-FURYL)PYRIMIDINE 
551-92-8 1,2-DIMETHYL-5-NITROIMIDAZOLE 
120-61-6 DIMETHYL TEREPHTHALATE 
 
55738-54-0 trns-2-(DIMETHYLAMINO)METHYLIMINOI-512-(5- 
 
NITRO-2-FURYL)VINYLI-1,3,4-OXADIAZOLE 
6120-10-1 4-DIMETHYLAMINO-3,5-XYLENOL 
 
75-60-5 DIMElHYLARSINIC ACID 
 
57-97-6 7,12-DIMETHYLBENZ(a)ANTHRACENE 
 
79-44-7 DIMETHYLCARBAMOYL CHLORIDE (see DIMETHYLCARBAMYL 
 
CHLORIDE) 
 
79-44-7 DIMETHYLCARBAMYL CHLORIDE 
 
598-64-1 DIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMIC ACID, DIMETHYLAMINE 
 
57-14-7 l,l-DIMETHYLHYDRAZINE 
 
306-37-6 1,2-DIMETHYLHYDRAZINE.2HCl 
 
26049-69-4 2-(2,2-DIMETHYLHYDRAZINO)-4-(5-NITRO-2- 
 
FURYL)THIAZOLE 
 
4164-28-7 DIMETHYLNITRAMINE 
 
62-75-9 DIMETHYLNITROSAMINE (see N-NITROSODIMETHYLAMINE) 
62-75-9 N,N-DIMETHYLNITROSAMINE 
 
(soe N-NITROSODIMETHYLAMINE) 
 
6119-92-2 DINITRO(1-METHYLHEPTYL)PHENYL CROTONATE 
 
51-28-5 2,4-DINITROPHENOL 
 
55557-00-1 DINITROSOHOMOPIPERAZINE 
 
101-25-7 N,N-DINITROSOPENTAMETHYLENETETRAMINE 
140-79-4 DINITROSOPIPERAZINE 
121-14-2 2,4-DINITROTOLUENE 
123-91-1 1,4-DIOXANE 
 
123-91-1 p-DIOXANE (see 1,4-DIOXANE) 
78-34-2 DIOXATHION 
 
1746-01-6 DIOXIN (sae 2,3,7,8-TETRACHLORODIBENZO-p-DIOXIN) 
 
--- DIPENTAMETHYLENETHIURAM HEXASULFIDE 
74-31-7 DIPHENYL-p-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 
86-29-3 DIPHENYLACETONITRILE 
102-09-0 DIPHENYLCARBONATE 
 
57-41-0 5,5-DIPHENYLHYDANTOIN 
 
86-30-6 DIPHENYLNITROSAMINE (see N-NITROSODIPHENYLAMINE) 
 
--- N,N-DIPROPYL-4-(4'-IPYRIDYL-l'-OXIDEIAZO)ANILINE 
142-59-6 DISODIUM ETHYLENEBISDITHIOCARBAMATE (see 
 
ETHYLENEBISDITHIOCARBAMATE, DISODIUM) 
7757-82-6 DISODIUM SULFATE (se SULFATE, SODIUM) 
 
97-77-8 DISULFIRAM (see TETRAETHYLTHIURAM DISULFIDE) 
 
142-59-6 DITHANE (see ETHYLENEBISDITHIOCARBAMATE, DISODIUM) 
142-46-1 2,5-DITHIOBIUREA 
79-40-3 DITHIOOXAMIDE 
 
330-54-1 DIURON (see 3-(3,4-DICHLOROPHENYL)- 
 
1,1-DIMETHYLUREA) 
 
1596-84-5 DMASA (see DAMINOZIDE) 
 
57-97-6 DMBA (see 7,12-DIMETHYLBENZ(s)ANTHRACENE) 
62-75-9 DMN (ee N-NITROSODIMETHYLAMINE) 
120-61-6 DMT (see DIMETHYL TEREPHTHALATE) 
2439-10-3 n-DODECYLGUANIDINE ACETATE 
 
2439-10-3 DODINE (see n-DODECYLGUANIDINE ACETATE) 
 
90-43-7 DOWICIDE-1 (see o-PHENYLPHENOL) 
 
88-06-2 DOWICIDE-2S (see 2,4,6-TRICHLOROPHENOL) 
 
87-86-5 DOWICIDE-7 (see 2,3,4,5,6-PENTACHLOROPHENOL) 
 
95-33-0 DURAX (se N-CYCLOHEXYL-2-BENZOTHIAZOLE SULFENAMIDE) 
106-93-4 EDB (see 1,2-DIBROMOETHANE) 
 
107-06-2 EDC (see 1,2-DICHLOROETHANE) 
9004-59-5 EDIFAS A 
9004-32-4 EDIFAS B 
 
150-38-9 EDTA (see EDTA, TRISODIUM SALT TRIHYDRATE) 
150-38-9 EDTA, TRISODIUM SALT TRIHYDRATE 
316-42-7 EMETINE.2HCl 
 
55965-13-4 EMULSIFIER YN 
 
115-29-7 ENDOSULFAN 
 
50-18-0 ENDOXAN (see CYCLOPHOSPHAMIDE) 
 
288 
 
I 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
CAS 
 
NUMBER" CHEMICAL NAME 
 
72-20-8 ENDRIN 
8015-30-3 ENOVID 
 
--- ENOVID-E 
 
106-89-8 EPICHLOROHYDRIN 
 
16423-68-0 ERYTHROSINE (se FD & C RED NO. 3) 
 
50-28-2 ESTRADIOL 
 
50-28-2 ESTRADIOL-17beta (see ESTRADIOL) 
22966-79-6 ESTRADIOL MUSTARD 
 
536-33-4 ETHIONAMIDE 
13073-35-3 ETHIONINE 
 
64-17-5 ETHYL ALCOHOL 
 
105-36-2 ETHYL BROMOACETATE 
 
14239-68-0 ETHYL CADMATE (see CADMIUM DiETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE) 
 
637-07-0 ETHYL-alpha-p-CHLOROPHENOXYISOBUTYRATE 
 
(ee CLOFIBRATE) 
 
2629-59-6 S-ETHYL-L-CYSTEINE 
 
72-56-0 p,p'-ETHYL-DDD 
 
74920-78-8 N-ETHYL-N-FORMYLHYDRAZINE 
 
--- N-ETHYL-N'-NITRO-N-NITROSOGUANIDINE 
 
5456-28-0 ETHYL SELENAC (see SELENIUM DIETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE) 
20941-65-5 ETHYL TELLURAC 
 
97-77-8 ETHYL TUADS (see TETRAETHYLTHIURAM DISULFIDE) 
14324-55-1 ETHYL ZIMATE (see ZINC DIETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE) 
 
106-93-4 ETHYLENE DIBROMIDE (see 1,2-DIBROMOETHANE) 
 
107-06-2 ETHYLENE DICHLORIDE (see 1,2-DICHLOROETHANE) 
1072-53-3 ETHYLENE GLYCOL 
 
151-56-4 ETHYLENE IMINE 
 
96-45-7 ETHYLENE THIOUREA 
120-93-4 ETHYLENE UREA 
 
142-59-6 ETHYLENEBISDITHIOCARBAMATE, DISODIUM 
106-87-6 1-ETHYLENEOXY-3,4-EPOXYCYCLOHEXANE 
18413-14-4 ETHYLHYDRAZINE.HCl 
 
38434-77-4 ETHYLNITROSOCYANAMIDE 
 
842-00-2 4-ETHYLSULPHONYLNAPHTHALENE-1-SULFONAMIDE 
297-76-7 ETHYNODIOL DIACETATE 
 
8056-92-6 ETHYNODIOL DIACETATE/ETHINYL ESTRADIOL 110:1] 
 
(see OVULEN) 
 
96-45-7 ETU (see ETHYLENE THIOUREA) 
470-82-6 EUCALYPTOL 
 
24554-26-5 FANFT (see N-14-(5-NITRO-2-FURYL)-2- 
 
THIAZOLYLIFORMAMIDE) 
 
2353-45-9 FAST GREEN FCF (see FD & C GREEN NO. 3) 
 
140-56-7 FENAMINOSULF, FORMULATED 
55-38-9 FENTHION 
 
14484-64-1 FERBAM (see FERRIC DIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE) 
14484-64-1 FERRIC DIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE 
 
mixture FERRIC NITROSODIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE AND 
 
TETRAMETHYLTHIURAM DISULFIDE (see VANGUARD GF) 
363-17-7 N-(2-FLUORENYL)-2,2,2-TRIFLUOROACETAMIDE 
 
53-96-3 FLUORENYLACETAMIDE (see 2-ACETYLAMINOFLUORENE) 
 
28314-03-6 N-1-FLUORENYLACETAMIDE (see 1-ACETYLAMINOFLUORENE) 
 
53-96-3 N-2-FLUORENYLACETAMIDE (see 2-ACETYLAMINOFLUORENE) 
28322-02-3 N-4-FLUORENYLACETAMIDE (see 4-ACETYLAMINOFLUORENE) 
 
--- N-1-FLUORENYLDIACETAMIDE (see N-1- 
 
DIACETAMIDOFLUORENE) 
7681-49-4 FLUORIDE, SODIUM 
 
324-93-6 4'-FLUORO-4-AMINODIPHENYL 
 
398-32-3 N-(4'-FLUORO-4-BIPHENYLYL)ACETAMIDE 
 
(see N-4-(4'-FLUOROBIPHENYL)ACETAMIDE) 
398-32-3 N-4-(4'-FLUOROBIPHENYL)ACETAMIDE 
51-21-8 5-FLUOROURACIL 
 
3570-75-0 FNT (see FORMIC ACID 2-[4-(5-NITRO-2-FURYL)-2- 
 
THIAZOLYL]HYDRAZIDE) 
 
133-07-3 FOLPET (se N-(TRICHLOROMETHYLTHIO)PHTHALIMIDE) 
31873-81-1 FORMIC ACID 2-14-(2-FURYL)-2-THLAZOLYL]HYDRAZIDE 
32852-21-4 FORMIC ACID 2-(4-METHYL-2-THIAZOLYL)HYDRAZIDE 
 
3570-75-0 FORMIC ACID 2-14-(5-NITRO-2-FURYL)-2- 
 
THIAZOLYL]HYDRAZIDE 
 
140-56-7 FORMULATED FENAMINOSULF (see FENAMINOSULF, 
 
FORMULATED) 
 
2302-84-3 1-FORMYL-3-THIOSEMICARBAZIDE 
624-84-0 FORMYLHYDRAZINE 
 
2411-74-7 2-FURALDEHYDE SEMICARBAZONE 
 
98-01-1 FURFURAL 
 
3688-53-7 2-(2-FURYL)-3-(5-NITRO-2-FURYL)ACRYLAMIDE (see AF-2) 
3688-53-7 FURYLFURAMIDE (see AF-2) 
 
97-16-5 GENITE-R99 (see 2,4-DICHLOROPHENYLBENZENE SULFONATE) 
 
--- GERMANATE, SODIUM 
 
139-40-2 GESAMIL (see PROPAZINE) 
 
CAS 
 
NUMBERa CHEMICAL NAME 
 
77-06-5 GIBBERELLIC ACID 
 
96-24-2 GLYCEROL alpha-MONOCHLOROHYDRIN 
765-34-4 GLYCIDALDEHYDE 
 
1072-53-3 GLYCOL SULFATE (see ETHYLENE GLYCOL) 
3741-38-6 GLYCOL SULFITE 
 
4680-78-8 FD & C GREEN NO. 1 
5141-20-8 FD & C GREEN NO. 2 
2353-45-9 FD & C GREEN NO. 3 
 
126-07-8 GRISEOFULVIN 
 
4680-78-8 GUINEA GREEN B (see FD & C GREEN NO. 1) 
 
86-50-0 GUSATHION (se AZINPHOSMETHYL) 
118-74-1 HCB (see HEXACHLOROBENZENE) 
 
mixture HCDD MIXTURE (1,2,3,7,8,9-hexachlorodibenzo-p-ioxin and 
 
1,2,3,6,7,8-isomer. CAS NUMBER 19408-74-3 and 57653-85-7) 
517-28-2 HEMATOXYLIN 
 
76-44-8 HEPTACHLOR 
 
1121-92-2 HEPTAMETHYLENEIMINE 
1241-27-6 HEPTYLAMINE 
 
2163-79-3 HERCULES-7531 (see 3-(HEXAHYDRO-4,7-METHANOINDAN- 
 
5-YL)-1,1-DIMETHYLUREA) 
 
87-51-4 HETEROAUXIN (see INDOLE-3-ACETIC ACID) 
118-74-1 HEXACHLOROBENZENE 
 
87-68-3 HEXACHLOROBUTADIENE 
 
319-84-6 alpha-1,2,3,4,5,6-HEXACHLOROCYCLOHEXANE 
319-85-7 beta-1,2,3,4,5,6-HEXACHLOROCYCLOHEXANE 
 
58-89-9 gamma-1,2,3,4,5,6-HEXACHLOROCYCLOHEXANE 
67-72-1 HEXACHLOROETHANE 
70-30-4 HEXACHLOROPHENE 
 
2163-79-3 3-(HEXAHYDRO-4,7-METHANOINDAN-5-YL)-1,1-DIMETHYLUREA 
 
100-97-0 HEXAMETHYLENETETRAMINE 
531-18-0 EEXAMELHYLMELAMINE 
628-02-4 HEXANAMIDE 
 
26049-68-3 HNT (see 2-HYDRAZINO-4-(5-NITRO-2-FURYL)THIAZOLE) 
 
302-01-2 HYDRAZINE 
 
10034-93-2 HYDRAZINE SULFATE 
 
26049-71-8 2-HYDRAZINO-4-(p-AMINOPHENYL)THIAZOLE 
26049-68-3 2-HYDRAZINO-4-(5-NITRO-2-FURYL)THIAZOLE 
26049-70-7 2-HYDRAZINO-4-(p-NITROPHENYL)THIAZOLE 
34176-52-8 2-HYDRAZINO-4-PHENYLTHIAZOLE 
 
619-67-0 p-HYDRAZINOBENZOIC ACID 
122-66-7 HYDRAZOBENZENE 
50-23-7 HYDROCORTISONE 
 
7722-84-1 HYDROGEN PEROXIDE 
 
103-16-2 HYDROQUINONE MONOBENZYL ETHER 
 
53-95-2 N-HYDROXY-N-ACETYL-2-AMINOFLUORENE (see N-HYDROXY-2- 
 
ACETYLAMINOFLUORENE) 
 
4463-22-3 3-HYDROXY-4-ACETYLAMINOBIPHENYL 
 
53-95-2 N-HYDROXY-2-ACETYLAMINOFLUORENE 
'4363-03-5 3-HYDROXY-4-AMINOBIPHENYL 
 
53-95-2 HYDROXY-N-2-FLUORENYLACETAMIDE (see N-HYDROXY-2- 
 
ACETYLAMINOFLUORENE) 
 
103-90-2 p-HYDROXYACETANILIDE (see ACETAMINOPHEN) 
 
5036-03-3 1-(2-HYDROXYETHYL)-3-](5-NITROFURFURYLIDENE) 
 
AMINO]-2-IMIDAZOLIDINONE 
 
13743-07-2 1-(2-HYDROXYETHYL)-1-NITROSOUREA 
 
33389-36-5 4-(2-HYDROXYETHYLAMINO)-2-(5-NITRO-2- 
 
THIENYL)QUINAZOLINE 
 
109-84-2 2-HYDROXYETHYLHYDRAZINE 
 
--- HYDROXYPROPYL DISTARdH GLYCEROL 
148-24-3 8-HYDROXYQUINOLINE 
5208-87-7 1'-HYDROXYSAFROLE 
21416-87-5 ICRF-159 
 
120-93-4 2-IMIDAZOLIDINONE (see ETHYLENE UREA) 
 
3458-22-8 3,3'-IMINOBIS-1-PROPANOL DIMETHANESULFONATE 
 
(ESTER).HCI (IPD) 
 
32607-00-4 IMINODIACETIC ACID, MONOSODIUM 
 
860-22-0 INDIGO CARMINE (see FD & C BLUE NO. 2) 
87-51-4 INDOLE-3-ACETIC ACID 
54-85-3 INH (see ISONIAZID) 
75-48-8 IODOFORM 
 
122-42-9 IPC (see ISOPROPYL-N-PHENYL CARBAMATE) 
3458-22-8 IPD (see 3,3'-IMINOBIS-1-PROPANOL 
 
DIMETHANESULFONATE (ESTER).HCI (IPD)) 
297-78-9 ISOBENZAN (see TELODRIN) 
 
5461-85-8 N-ISOBUTYL-N'-NITRO-N-NITROSOGUANIDINE 
 
119-38-0 ISOLAN (see 1-ISOPROPYL-3-METHYL-s- 
 
PYRAZOLYLDIMETHYL CARBAMATE) 
54-85-3 ISONIAZID 
 
55-22-1 ISONICOTINIC ACID 
 
289 
 
290 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
CAS 
 
NUMBERa CHEMICAL NAME 
 
54-85-3 ISONICOTINIC ACID HYDRAZIDE (see ISONIAZID) 
 
--- ISONICOTINIC ACID VANILLYLIDENEHYDRAZIDE 
3778-73-2 ISOPHOSPHAMIDE 
 
101-73-5 p-ISOPROPOXYDIPHENYLAMINE 
 
101-21-3 ISOPROPYL-N-(3-CHLOROPHENYL)CARBAMATE 
 
119-38-0 1-ISOPROPYL-3-METHYL-s-PYRAZOLYLDIMETHYL CARBAMATE 
122-42-9 ISOPROPYL-N-PHENYL CARBAMATE 
120-58-1 ISOSAFROLE 
 
6119-92-2 KARATHANE (see DINITRO(1-METHYLHEPTYL)PHENYL 
 
CROTONATE) 
 
330-54-1 KARMEX (see 3-(3,4-DICHLOROPHENYL)-1,1- 
 
DIMETHYLUREA) 
 
115-32-2 KELTHANE (see DICOFOL) 
143-50-0 KEPONE 
 
303-34-4 LASIOCARPINE 
301-04-2 LEAD ACETATE 
 
1335-32-6 LEAD ACETATE, BASIC 
 
19010-66-3 LEAD DIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE 
 
1335-32-6 LEAD SUBACETATE (see LEAD ACETATE, BASIC) 
 
19010-66-3 LEDATE (see LEAD DIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE) 
 
--- LEUPEPTIN 
 
5141-20-8 LIGHT GREEN SF YELLOWISH (see FD & C GREEN NO. 2) 
 
58-89-9 LINDANE (see Bamma-1,2,3,4,5,6-HEXACHLOROCYCLOHEXANE) 
434-13-9 LITHOCHOLIC ACID 
21884-44-6 LUTEOSKYRIN 
8065-91-6 LUTESTRAL 
 
632-99-5 MAGENTA I (see ROSANILINE.HCI) 
 
569-61-9 p-MAGENTA (see p-ROSANILINE.HCI) 
 
18968-99-5 MAGNESIUM PEMOLINE (see 2-AMINO-5-PHENYL-2- 
 
OXAZOLIN-4-ONE + Mg(OH)2) 
1634-78-2 MALAOXON 
 
121-75-5 MALATHION 
 
1634-78-2 MALATHION-O-ANALOG (see MALAOXON) 
 
123-33-1 MALEIC HYDRAZIDE 
 
mixture MAM ACETATE AND CYCASIN MIXTURE (sae 
 
METHYLAZOXYMETHANOL ACETATE AND CYCASIN MIXTURE) 
12427-38-2 MANEB (see MANGANESE ETHYLENEBISTHIOCARBAMATE) 
12427-38-2 MANGANESE ETHYLENEBISTHIOCARBAMATE 
 
576-68-1 MANNITOL NITROGEN MUSTARD 
148-82-3 MELPHALAN 
15356-70-4 dl-MENTHOL 
 
67-98-1 MER-25 
 
149-30-4 2-MERCAPTOBENZOTHIAZOLE 
 
155-04-4 2-MERCAPTOBENZOTHIAZOLE, ZINC 
50-44-2 6-MERCAPTOPURINE 
7487-94-7 MERCURIC CHLORIDE 
 
62-38-4 MERCURY (II) ACETATE 
 
115-09-3 MERCURYMETHYLCHLORIDE 
 
72-33-3 MESTRANOL 
57-39-6 METEPA 
 
60-56-0 METHIMAZOLE 
 
59-05-2 METHOTREXATE 
 
5834-17-3 2-METHOXY-3-AMINODIBENZOFURAN 
 
5834-17-3 2-METHOXY-3-DIBENZOFURANAMINE (see 2-METHOXY- 
 
3-AMINODIBENZOFURAN) 
72-43-5 METHOXYCHLOR 
 
1701-77-5 METHOXYPHENYLACETIC ACID 
6294-89-9 METHYL CARBAZATE 
 
--- 1-METHYL-1,4-DIHYDRO-7-12-(5-NITROFURYL)VINYLJ-4-OXO- 
 
1,8-NAPHTHYRIDINE-3-CARBOXYLATE, POTASSIUM 
99-80-9 N-METHYL-N,4-DINITROSOANILINE 
 
9004-59-5 METHYL ETHYL CELLULOSE (soe EDIFAS A) 
 
758-17-8 N-ME]THYL-N-FORMYLHYDRAZINE 
66-27-3 METHYL MErHANESULFONATE 
 
70-25-7 N-METHYL-N'-NITRO-N-NITROSOGUANIDINE 
129-15-7 2-METHYL-1-NITROANTHRAQUINONE 
 
21638-36-8 4-METHYL-1l(5-NITROFURFURYLIDENE)AMINOJ-2- 
 
IMIDAZOLIDINONE 
 
16699-10-8 4-(4-N-METHYL-N-NITROSAMINOSTYRYL)QUINOLINE 
63412-06-6 N-METHYL-N-NITROSOBENZAMIDE 
 
--- N-(N-METHYL-N-NITROSOCARBAMOYL)-L-ORNITHINE 
14026-03-0 R(-)-2-METHYL-N-NITROSOPIPERIDINE 
36702-44-0 S(+)-2-METHYL-N-NITROSOPIPERIDINE 
 
684-93-5 N-METHYL-N-NITROSOUREA (see N-NITROSO-N-METHYLUREA) 
140-56-7 METHYL ORANGE B (se FENAMINOSULF, FORMULATED) 
298-00-0 METHYL PARATHION 
 
614-00-6 METHYL-PHENYL-NITROSAMINE (see 
 
NITROSOMETHYLANILINE) 
 
144-34-3 METHYL SELENAC (see SELENIUM 
 
DIMErHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE) 
 
CAS 
 
NUMBER2 CHEMICAL NAME 
 
137-30-4 METHYL ZIMATE (see ZINC DIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE) 
 
--- (N-6)-METHYLADENINE 
 
--- (N-6)-METHYLADENOSINE 
 
mixture METHYLAZOXYMETHANOL ACETATE AND CYCASIN MIXTURE 
 
(CAS NUMBER 592-61-1 and 14901-08-7) 
 
56-49-5 METHYLCHOLANTHRENE (see 3-METHYLCHOLANTHRENE) 
56-49-5 3-METHYLCHOLANTHRENE 
 
101-14-4 4,4'-METHYLENE-BIS(2-CHLOROANILINE) 
 
64049-29-2 4,4'-METHYLENE-BIS(2-CHLOROANILINE).2HCI 
 
838-88-0 4,4'-METHYLENE-BIS(2-METHYLANILINE) 
 
101-61-1 4,4'-METHYLENEBIS(N,N-DIMETHYL)BENZENAMINE 
471-29-4 METHYLGUANIDINE 
578-76-7 7-METHYLGUANINE 
60-34-4 METHYLHYDRAZINE 
 
302-15-8 METHYLHYDRAZINE SULFATE 
 
115-09-3 METHYLMERCURIC ACETATE (see 
 
MERCURYMETHYLCHLORIDE) 
 
115-09-3 METHYLMERCURY CHLORIDE (see 
 
MERCURYMETHYLCHLORIDE) 
 
--- (N-6)-(METHYLNITROSO)ADENINE 
 
--- (N-6)-(METHYLNITROSO)ADENOSINE 
56-04-2 METHYLTHIOURACIL 
5800-19-1 METLAPINE 
 
443-48-1 METRONIDAZOLE 
315-18-4 MEXACARBATE 
 
90-94-8 MICHLER'S KETONE 
 
137-30-4 MILBAM (see ZINC DIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE) 
2385-85-5 MIREX 
 
39801-14-4 MIREX, PHOTO- 
 
126-85-2 MITOMEN (sae NITROGEN MUSTARD N-OXIDE) 
50-07-7 MITOMYCIN-C 
 
66-27-3 MMS (see METHYL METHANESULFONATE) 
 
70-25-7 MNNG (see N-METHYL-N'-NITRO-N-NITROSOGUANIDINE) 
684-93-5 MNU (see N-NITROSO-N-METHYLUREA) 
 
101-14-4 MOCA (see 4,4'-METHYLENE-BIS(2-CHLOROANILINE)) 
 
79-11-8 MONOCHLOROACETIC ACID 
 
32607-00-4 MONOSODIUM IMINODIACETIC ACID (see IMINODIACETIC 
 
ACID, MONOSODIUM) 
 
150-68-5 MONURON (see 3-(p-CHLOROPHENYL)-1,1-DIMETHYLUREA) 
58139-48-3 4-MORPHOLINO-2-(5-NITRO-2-THIENYL)QUINAZOLINE 
 
3031-51-4 1-5-MORPHOLINOMETHYL-3-[(5-NITROFURFURYLIDENE) 
 
AMINOI-2-OXAZOLIDINONE.HCI 
 
87-56-9 MUCOCHLORIC ACID (see alpha,beta-DICHLORO-beta- 
 
FORMYLACRYLIC ACID) 
55-98-1 MYLERAN 
 
142-59-6 NABAM (see ETHYLENEBISDITHIOCARBAMATE, DISODIUM) 
86-86-2 1-NAPHTHALENE ACETAMIDE 
86-87-3 1-NAPHTHALENE ACETIC ACID 
2243-62-1 1,5-NAPHTHALENEDLAMINE 
 
1465-25-4 N-(l-NAPHTHYL)ETHYLENEDIAMINE.2HCl 
 
93-46-9 sym.-dibeta-NAPHTHYL-p-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 
86-88-4 1-(1-NAPHTHYL)-2-THIOUREA 
91-59-8 2-NAPHTHYLAMINE 
 
91-59-8 beta-NAPHTHYLAMINE (see 2-NAPHTHYLAMINE) 
2611-82-7 NEW COCCINE (see SX PURPLE) 
 
531-82-8 NFTA (see N-14-(5-NITRO-2-FURYL)-2-THIAZOLYL] 
 
ACETAMIDE) 
7440-02-0 NICKEL 
 
373-02-4 NICKEL (II) ACETATE 
 
13927-77-0 NICKEL DIBUTYLDITHIOCARBAMATE 
 
1420-04-8 NICLOSAMIDE (see CLONITRALID) 
 
54-11-5 NICOTINE 
 
553-53-7 NICOTINIC ACID HYDRAZIDE 
 
--- NIGROSINE 
 
12034-09-2 NIOBATE, SODIUM 
 
139-94-6 NITHIAZIDE 
 
7631-99-4 N1TRATE, SODIUM 
10102-43-9 NITRIC OXIDE 
 
139-13-9 NITRILOTRIACETIC ACID 
 
18662-53-8 NITRILOTRIACETIC ACID, TRISODIUM SALT, MONOHYDRATE 
7632-00-0 NITRITE, SODIUM 
 
1777-84-0 3-NITRO-p-ACETOPHENETIDE 
 
99-59-2 5-NITRO-o-ANISIDINE 
 
59-87-0 5-NITRO-2-FURALDEHYDE SEMICARBAZONE 
772-43-0 5-NITRO-2-FURAMIDOXIME 
 
--- 5-NITRO-2-FURANMETHANEDIOL DIACETATE 
 
75198-31-1 3-(5-NITRO-2-FURYL)-IMIDAZO(1,2-alpha)PYRIDINE 
 
2122-86-3 5-(5-NITRO-2-FURYL)-1,3,4-OXADIAZOLE-2-OL 
 
36133-88-7 N-63-(5-NITRO-2-FURYL)-1,2,4-OXADIAZOLE-5-YLJ- 
 
METHYL}ACETAMIDE 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
CAS 
 
NUMBERa CHEMICAL NAME 
 
2578-75-8 
 
531-82-8 
24554-26-5 
51325-35-0 
 
4812-22-0 
 
121-19-7 
5307-14-2 
 
99-56-9 
99-55-8 
602-87-9 
619-17-0 
94-52-0 
1836-75-5 
 
67-20-9 
555-84-0 
51-75-2 
126-85-2 
86-57-7 
56-75-7 
79-46-9 
504-88-1 
38777-13-8 
3276-41-3 
16813-36-8 
1456-28-6 
13256-11-6 
 
684-93-5 
615-53-2 
55556-92-8 
29929-77-9 
 
1133-64-8 
51542-33-7 
53609-64-6 
 
924-16-3 
55-18-5 
62-75-9 
86-30-6 
156-10-5 
17608-59-2 
38434-77-4 
 
20917-49-1 
42579-28-2 
30310-80-6 
25081-31-6 
16219-98-0 
69658-91-0 
16219-99-1 
 
614-00-6 
55557-03-4 
68107-26-6 
 
684-93-5 
4515-18-8 
5632-47-3 
5632-47-3 
5632-47-3 
 
100-75-4 
7519-36-0 
930-55-2 
930-55-2 
26541-51-5 
 
mixture 
 
68-23-5 
 
8015-30-3 
 
244-63-3 
8015-12-1 
 
303-47-9 
 
50-28-2 
90-43-7 
80-33-1 
 
CAS 
 
NUMBERa CHEMICAL NAME 
 
N-[5-(5-NITRO-2-FURYL)-1,3,4-THIADIAZOL- 
 
2-YL]ACETAMIDE 
 
N-[4-(5-NITRO-2-FURYL)-2-THIAZOLYL]ACETAMIDE 
 
N-[4-(5-NITRO-2-FURYL)-2-THIAZOLYL]FORMAMIDE 
N,N'-[6-(5-NITRO-2-FURYL)-s-TRIAZINE-2,4- 
DIYLJBISACETAMIDE 
3-NITRO-3-HEXENE 
 
NITRO-4-HYDROXYPHENYLARSONIC ACID 
2-NITRO-p-PHENYLENEDLAMINE 
4-NITRO-o-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 
5-NITRO-o-TOLUIDINE 
 
5-NITROACENAPHTHENE 
 
4-NITROANTHRANILIC ACID 
6-NITROBENZIMIDAZOLE 
NITROFEN 
 
1-[(5-NITROFURFURYLIDENE)AMINO]HYDANTOIN 
 
1-[(5-NITROFURFURYLIDENE)AMINO]-2-IMIDAZOLIDINONE 
NITROGEN MUSTARD 
 
NITROGEN MUSTARD N-OXIDE 
1-NITRONAPHTHALENE 
 
D-(-)-threo-l-(p-NITROPHENYL)-2-DICHLOROACETAMIDO- 
 
1,3-PROPANEDIOL (see CHLORAMPHENICOL) 
2-NITROPROPANE 
 
3-NITROPROPIONIC ACID 
NITROSO-BAYGON 
 
N-NITROSO-3,6-DIHYDROOXAZINE-1,2 
 
(see 3,6-DIHYDRO-2-NITROSO-2H-1,2-OXAZINE) 
1-NITROSO-5,6-DIHYDROURACIL 
 
NITROSO-2,6-DIMETHYLMORPHOLINE 
 
NITROSO-N-METHYL-N-(2-PHENYL)ETHYLAMINE 
N-NITROSO-N-METHYLUREA 
 
N-NITROSO-N-METHYLURETHAN 
 
NITROSO-1,2,3,6-TETRAHYDROPYRIDINE 
 
N-NITROSO-2,2,4-TRIMETHYL-1,2-DIHYDROQUINOLINE 
POLYMER 
 
NITROSOANABASINE 
 
N-NITROSOBENZTHIAZURON 
 
N-NITROSOBIS(2-HYDROXYPROPYL)AMINE 
 
N-NITROSOBIS(2,2,2-TRIFLUOROETHYL)AMINE 
NITROSOCHLORDLAZEPOXIDE 
NITROSODIBUTYLAMINE 
 
N-NITROSODIETHYLAMINE 
 
N-NITROSODIMETHYLAMINE 
N-NITROSODIPHENYLAMINE 
p-NITROSODIPHENYLAMINE 
N-NITROSOEPHEDRINE 
 
NITROSOETHANECARBAMONITRILE 
 
(see ETHYLNITROSOCYANAMIDE) 
 
NITROSOHEPTAMETHYLENEIMINE 
1-NITROSOHYDANTOIN 
 
NITROSOHYDROXYPROLINE 
 
NITROSOIMINODIACETIC ACID 
 
2-NITROSOMETHYLAMINOPYRIDINE 
3-NITROSOMETHYLAMINOPYRIDINE 
4-NITROSOMETHYLAMINOPYRIDINE 
NITROSOMETHYLANILINE 
 
NITROSOMETHYLPHENIDATE 
 
NITROSObMEHYLUNDECYLAMINE 
 
NITROSOMETHYLUREA (see N-NITROSO-N-METHYLUREA) 
NITROSOPIPECOLIC ACID 
 
NITROSOPIPERAZINE (see N-NITROSOPIPERAZINE) 
 
1-NITROSOPIPERAZINE (see N-NITROSOPIPERAZINE) 
N-NITROSOPIPERAZINE 
N-NITROSOPIPERIDINE 
NITROSOPROLINE 
 
NITROSOPYRROLIDINE (see N-NITROSOPYRROLIDINE) 
N-NITROSOPYRROLIDINE 
 
N-NITROSOTHIOMORPHOLINE 
 
beta-NITROSTYRENE AND STYRENE MIXTURE (see STYRENE 
AND beta-NITROSTYRENE MIXTURE) 
NORETHYNODREL 
 
NORETHYNODREL/MESTRANOL 125:11 (see ENOVID-E) 
NORETHYNODREL/MESTRANOL 166:1] (see ENOVID) 
NORHARMAN 
NORLESTRIN 
NOVADELOX 
 
OCHRATOXIN A 
 
17beta-OESTRADIOL (see ESTRADIOL) 
 
ORTHOXENOL (see o-PHENYLPHENOL) 
 
OVEX (see p-CHLOROPHENYL-p-CHLOROBENZENE SULFONATE) 
 
8056-92-6 
3096-50-2 
6452-73-9 
 
102-77-2 
103-90-2 
56-38-2 
92-69-3 
149-29-1 
11096-82-5 
27323-18-8 
 
82-68-8 
87-86-5 
82-68-8 
87-86-5 
13010-10-1 
 
1119-68-2 
8006-90-4 
 
72-56-0 
 
62-44-2 
8003-03-0 
 
60-80-0 
136-40-3 
3456-10-9 
834-28-6 
50-06-6 
57-30-7 
50-06-6 
92-84-2 
63-92-3 
7227-91-0 
 
103-72-0 
89-25-8 
135-88-6 
2198-59-6 
 
103-85-5 
4075-79-0 
842-07-9 
541-69-5 
615-28-1 
624-18-0 
50-06-6 
156-51-4 
100-63-0 
59-88-1 
62-38-4 
132-27-4 
90-43-7 
92-69-3 
17673-25-5 
13171-21-6 
13366-73-9 
39801-14-4 
 
88-96-0 
85-44-9 
 
1918-02-1 
 
92-13-7 
7681-93-8 
 
100-75-4 
110-85-0 
110-89-4 
51-03-6 
120-62-7 
1955-45-9 
 
86-87-3 
59536-61-1 
 
3564-09-8 
2611-82-7 
3761-53-3 
4548-53-2 
7758-01-2 
 
OVULEN 
 
N-(9-OXO-2-FLUORENYL)ACETAMIDE 
1'-OXOSAFROLE 
 
OXPRENOLOL.HCI 
 
N-OXYDIETHYLENEBENZOTHIAZOLE-2-SULFENAMIDE 
PARACETAMOL (see ACETAMINOPHEN) 
PARATHION 
 
PARAXENOL (see p-PHENYLPHENOL) 
PATULIN 
 
PCB (see AROCLOR 1260) 
PCB (see AROCLOR 1254) 
 
PCNB (see PENTACHLORONITROBENZENE) 
PCP (see 2,3,4,5,6-PENTACHLOROPHENOL) 
PENTACHLORONITROBENZENE 
2,3,4,5,6-PENTACHLOROPHENOL 
 
N-PENTYL-N'-NITRO-N-NITROSOGUANIDINE 
n-PENTYLHYDRAZINE.HCI 
PEPPERMINT OIL 
 
PERTHANE (see p,p'-ETHYL-DDD) 
PETASMNINE 
PHENACETIN 
 
PHENACETIN, ASPIRIN, AND CAFFEINE (see ASPIRIN, 
PHENACETIN, AND CAFFEINE) 
PHENAZONE 
 
PHENAZOPYRIDINE.HCI 
PHENESTERIN 
 
PHENFORMIN.HCl 
PHENOBARBITAL 
 
PHENOBARBITAL, SODIUM 
 
PHENOBARBITONE (see PHENOBARBITAL) 
PHENOTHIAZINE 
 
PHENOXYBENZAMINE.HCI 
 
1-PHENYL-3,3-DIMETHYLTRIAZENE 
PHENYL ISOTHIOCYANATE 
 
1-PHENYL-3-METHYL-5-PYRAZOLONE 
PHENYL-beta-NAPHTHYLAMINE 
 
N-PHENYL-p-PHENYLENEDIAMINE.HCI 
1-PHENYL-2-THIOUREA 
 
4'-PHENYLACETANILIDE (see 4-ACETYLAMINOBIPHENYL) 
1-PHENYLAZO-2-NAPHTHOL 
 
m-PHENYLENEDLAMINE.2HCI 
o-PHENYLENEDIAMINE.2HCl 
p-PHENYLENEDIAMINE.2HCI 
 
PHENYLETHYLBARBITURIC ACID (see PHENOBARBITAL) 
PHENYLErHYLHYDRAZINE SULFATE 
PHENYLHYDRAZINE 
 
PHENYLHYDRAZINE.HCI 
 
PHENYLMERCURIC ACETATE (see MERCURY (II) ACETATE) 
o-PHENYLPHENATE, SODIUM 
o-PHENYLPHENOL 
p-PHENYLPHENOL 
PHORBOL 
 
PHOSPHAMIDON 
 
PHOSPHATED DISTARCH PHOSPHATE 
 
PHOTODIELDRIN (see DIELDRIN, PHOTO-) 
PHOTOMIREX (see MIREX, PHOTO-) 
PHTHALAMIDE 
 
PHTHALIC ANHYDRIDE 
 
PHTIVAZID (see ISONICOTINIC ACID 
VANILLYLIDENEHYDRAZIDE) 
PICLORAM 
 
PILOCARPINE 
PIMARICIN 
 
PIP (swe N-NITROSOPIPERIDINE) 
PIPERAZINE 
PIPERIDINE 
 
PIPERONYL BUTOXIDE 
 
PIPERONYL BUTOXIDE IN SOLVENT 
PIPERONYL SULFOXIDE 
PIVALOLACTONE 
 
PLANOFIX (see 1-NAPHTHALENE ACETIC ACID) 
POLYBROMINATED BIPHENYLS 
POLYVINYLPYRIDINE-N-OXIDE 
 
PONCEAU 3R (see FD & C RED NO. 1) 
PONCEAU 4R (see SX PURPLE) 
 
PONCEAU MX (see D & C RED NO. 5) 
PONCEAU SX (see FD & C RED NO. 4) 
 
POTASSIUM BROMATE (see BROMATE, POTASSIUM) 
POTASSIUM METABISULFITE (see SULFITE, 
 
POTASSIUM METABI-) 
 
291 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
CHEMICAL NAME 
PREMARIN 
 
PROCARBAZINE 
 
PROCARBAZINE.HCI 
 
PROFLAVINE.HCI HEMIHYDRATE 
PRONETHALOL 
 
PRONETHALOL.HCI 
PROPANE SULTONE 
PROPAZINE 
 
beta-PROPIOLACTONE 
 
PROPYL N-ETHYL-N-BUTYLTHIOCARBAMATE 
N-N'-PROPYL-N-FORMYLHYDRAZINE 
N-PROPYL ISOME 
 
N-PROPYL-N'-NITRO-N-NITROSOGUANIDINE 
PROPYLENE GLYCOL 
 
PROPYLHYDRAZINE.HCI 
PROPYLTHIOURACIL 
PRORESID 
SX PURPLE 
 
PYRAZINAMIDE 
 
3-PYRIDOYL HYDRAZINE (se NICOTINIC ACID HYDRAZIDE) 
PYRIMErHAMINE 
QUERCETIN 
 
QUERCETIN DIHYDRATE 
QUILLAIA EXTRACT 
p-QUINONE DIOXIME 
 
QUINTOZINE (se PENTACHLORONITROBENZENE) 
C.I. FOOD RED 3 
D & C RED NO.5 
D & C RED NO.9 
D & C RED NO. 10 
FD & C RED NO. 1 
FD & C RED NO. 2 
FD & C RED NO. 3 
FD & C RED NO. 4 
 
REDAX (see N-NITROSODIPHENYLAMINE) 
RENARDINE (see SENKIRKINE) 
RESERPINE 
RIFAMPICIN 
 
ROSANILINE.HCI 
 
p-ROSANILINE.HCI 
 
ROTAX (see 2-MERCAPTOBENZOTHIAZOLE) 
ROTENONE 
 
RUTIN (see RUTIN TRIHYDRATE) 
RUTIN TRIHYDRATE 
SACCHARIN 
 
SACCHARIN, SODIUM 
SAFROLE 
 
SANAMYCIN (see ACTINOMYCIN C) 
L-SARCOLYSIN (see MELPHALAN) 
 
SDDC (see SODIUM DIETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE TRIHYDRATE) 
SELENIUM 
 
SELENIUM DIETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE 
 
SELENIUM DlHETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE 
SELENIUM SULFIDE 
SENKIRKINE 
 
SEVIN (se CARBARYL) 
SIMAZINE 
 
SODIUM ARSENITE (see ARSENITE, SODIUM) 
SODIUM AZIDE (see AZIDE, SODIUM) 
 
SODIUM BENZOATE (see BENZOATE, SODIUM) 
SODIUM BITHIONOLATE 
 
SODIUM CYCLAMATE (see CYCLAMATE, SODIUM) 
 
SODIUM DIETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE TRIHYDRATE 
SODIUM FLUORIDE (se FLUORIDE, SODIUM) 
SODIUM NIOBATE (soe NIOBATE, SODIUM) 
 
SODIUM NITRATE (see NITRATE, SODIUM) 
SODIUM SULFATE (see SULFATE, SODIUM) 
 
SODIUM TUNGSTATE (see TUNGSTATE, SODIUM) 
SORBIC ACID 
 
SOYBEAN LECITHIN 
 
STANNOUS CHLORIDE (see TIN (II) CHLORIDE) 
STARCH ACETATE 
 
STERIGMATOCYSTIN 
STREPTOZOTOCIN 
STROBANE 
STYRENE 
 
STYRENE AND beta-NITROSTYRENE MIXTURE 
 
(CAS NUMBER 100-42-5 and 102-96-5) 
 
SUCCINIC ACID 2,2-DIMETHYLHYDRAZIDE 
 
(see DAMINOZIDE) 
 
CAS 
 
NUMBERa 
 
57-50-1 
95-06-7 
7757-82-6 
 
127-69-5 
77-79-2 
77-46-3 
2783-94-0 
22571-95-5 
 
569-57-3 
1934-21-0 
 
97-18-7 
1746-01-6 
 
72-54-8 
297-78-9 
150-68-5 
116-06-3 
7411-49-6 
 
118-75-2 
2438-88-2 
15721-02-5 
 
1746-01-6 
 
116-29-0 
79-34-5 
127-18-4 
961-11-5 
97-77-8 
116-29-0 
 
63886-77-1 
40548-68-3 
 
137-26-8 
mixture 
97-74-5 
2227-13-6 
 
52-24-4 
62-55-5 
97-18-7 
115-29-7 
139-65-1 
64039-27-6 
 
79-19-6 
141-90-2 
62-56-6 
137-26-8 
1114-71-2 
7772-99-8 
13463-67-7 
 
137-26-8 
1156-19-0 
 
64-77-7 
636-23-7 
 
6369-59-1 
 
88-19-7 
638-03-9 
636-21-5 
540-23-8 
622-51-5 
8001-35-2 
 
68-76-8 
6379-49-0 
634-93-5 
71-55-6 
79-00-5 
79-01-6 
75-69-4 
133-07-3 
88-06-2 
93-72-1 
93-76-5 
102-71-6 
112-27-6 
 
CHEMICAL NAME 
SUCROSE 
 
SULFADS (see DIPENTAMETHYLENETHIURAM HEXASULFIDE) 
SULFALLATE 
 
SULFATE, SODIUM 
SULFISOXAZOLE 
 
SULFITE, POTASSIUM METABI- 
3-SULFOLENE 
 
4,4'-SULFONYLBISACETANILIDE 
 
SUNSET YELLOW FCF (see FD & C YELLOW NO. 6) 
SYMPHYTINE 
TACE 
 
TARTRAZINE (see FD & C YELLOW NO. 5) 
 
TBP (se 2,2-THIOBIS(4,6-DICHLOROPHENOL)) 
 
TCDD (see 2,3,7,8-TETRACHLORODIBENZO-p-DIOXIN) 
TDE (sae p,p'-DDD) 
TELODRIN 
 
TELVAR (se 3-(p-CHLOROPHENYL)-1,1-DIMETHYLUREA) 
TEMIK (see ALDICARB) 
 
3,3',4,4'-TETRAAMINOBIPHENYL.4HCl 
 
TETRACHLORO-p-BENZOQUINONE (see CHLORANIL) 
2,3,5,6-TETRACHLORO-4-NITROANISOLE 
2,2',5,5'-TETRACHLOROBENZIDINE 
 
2,3,7,8-TETRACHLORODIBENZO-p-DIOXIN 
 
2,4,5,4'-TETRACHLORODIPHENYL SULFONE 
1,1,2,2-TETRACHLOROETHANE 
TETRACHLOROETHYLENE 
TETRACHLORVINPHOS 
 
TETRAETHYLTHIURAM DISULFIDE 
 
TETRAFIDON (se 2,4,5,4'-TETRACHLORODIPHENYL 
 
SULFONE) 
 
TETRAFLUORO-m-PHENYLENEDIAMINE.2HCl 
TETRAHYDRO-2-NITROSO-2H-1,2-OXAZINE 
TETRAMEIHYLTHIURAM DISULFIDE 
 
TETRAMETHYLTHIURAM DISULFIDE AND FERRIC 
 
NITROSODIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE (see VANGUARD GF) 
TETRAIETHYLTHIURAM MONOSULFIDE 
TETRASUL (se p-CHLOROPHENYL-2,4,5- 
TRICHLOROPHENYL SULFIDE) 
THIO-TEPA 
 
THIOACETAMIDE 
 
2,2-THIOBIS(4,6-DICHLOROPHENOL) 
THIODAN (se ENDOSULFAN) 
4,4'-THIODIANILINE 
 
beta-THIOGUANINE DEOXYRIBOSIDE (beta-TGdR. 
NCI uses CAS NUMBER 789-61-7) 
THIOSEMICARBAZIDE 
THIOURACIL 
THIOUREA 
 
THIRAM (see TETRAMETHYLTHIURAM DISULFIDE) 
TILLAM-6-E (se PROPYL N-ETHYL-N- 
BUTYLTHIOCARBAMATE) 
TIN (II) CHLORIDE 
 
TITANIUM DIOXIDE 
 
TITANIUM OXALATE, POTASSIUM 
 
TMTD (ee TEI RAMETHYLTHIURAM DISULFIDE) 
TOLAZAMIDE 
 
TOLBUTAMIDE 
 
2,4-TOLUENEDIAMINE.2HCI 
 
(see 2,4-DIAMINOTOLUENE.2HCI) 
2,5-TOLUENEDIAMINE SULFATE 
 
(see 2,5-DLAMINOTOLUENE SULFATE) 
o-TOLUENESULFONAMIDE 
m-TOLUIDINE.HCI 
o-TOLUIDINE.HCI 
p-TOLUIDINE.HCI 
p-TOLYLUREA 
TOXAPHENE 
TRENIMON 
 
1,2,3-TRICHLORO-4,6-DINITROBENZENE 
2,4,6-TRICHLOROANILINE 
1,1,1-TRICHLOROETHANE 
1,1,2-TRICHLOROETHANE 
TRICHLOROETHYLENE 
 
TRICHLOROFLUOROMETHANE 
 
N-(TRICHLOROMEITHYLTHIO)PHTHALIMIDE 
2,4,6-TRICHLOROPHENOL 
 
2-(2,4,5-TRICHLOROPHENOXY)PROPIONIC ACID 
2,4,5-TRICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ACID 
TRIETHANOLAMINE 
 
TR1ETHYLENE GLYCOL 
 
292 
 
CAS 
 
NUMBER" 
 
671-16-9 
366-70-1 
952-23-8 
54-80-8 
51-02-5 
1120-71-4 
 
139-40-2 
57-57-8 
1114-71-2 
77337-54-3 
 
83-59-0 
13010-07-6 
 
57-55-6 
56795-66-5 
 
51-52-5 
1508-45-8 
2611-82-7 
 
98-96-4 
553-53-7 
58-14-0 
117-39-5 
5117-01-1 
 
105-11-3 
82-68-8 
3567-69-9 
3761-53-3 
5160-02-1 
 
3564-09-8 
915-67-3 
16423-68-0 
4548-53-2 
 
86-30-6 
2318-18-5 
 
50-55-5 
13292-46-1 
 
632-99-5 
569-61-9 
149-30-4 
83-79-4 
153-18-4 
153-18-4 
81-07-2 
128-44-9 
94-59-7 
8052-16-2 
 
148-82-3 
148-18-5 
7782-49-2 
5456-28-0 
 
144-34-3 
7446-34-6 
2318-18-5 
 
63-25-2 
122-34-9 
7784-46-5 
26628-22-8 
 
532-32-1 
6385-58-6 
 
139-05-9 
148-18-5 
7681-49-4 
12034-09-2 
7631-99-4 
7757-82-6 
13472-45-2 
 
110-44-1 
8002-43-5 
7772-99-8 
 
10048-13-2 
1888346-4 
8001-50-1 
 
100-42-5 
mixture 
1596-84-5 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
CHEMICAL NAME 
 
2,2,2-TRIFLUORO-N-14-(5-NITRO-2-FURYL)-2- 
THIAZOLYLIACETAMIDE 
TRIFLURALIN 
 
TRIIODOMETHANE (see IODOFORM) 
2,4,5-TRIMETHYLANILINE 
 
2,4,5-TRIMETHYLANILINE.HCl 
2,4,6-TRIMETHYLANILINE.HCl 
TRIMETHYLPHOSPHATE 
TRIMETHYLTHIOUREA 
 
TRIPHENYLTIN ACETATE 
 
TRIPHENYLTIN HYDROXIDE 
 
TRIS (see TRIS(2,3-DIBROMOPROPYL)PHOSPHATE) 
TRIS-1,2,3-(CHLOROMETHOXY)PROPANE 
TRIS(2,3-DIBROMOPROPYL)PHOSPHATE 
 
TRISODIUM ETHYLENEDIAMINETETRAACETATE TRIHYDRATE 
 
(see EDTA, TRISODIUM SALT TRIHYDRATE) 
 
TRP-P-1 ACETATE (see 3-AMINO-1,4-DIMETHYL-5H- 
 
PYRIDO[4,3-b]INDOLE ACETATE) 
 
TRP-P-2 ACETATE (see 3-AMINO-1-METHYL-5H- 
 
PYRIDO[4,3-bJINDOLE ACETATE) 
L-TRYPTOPHAN 
 
TUBATOXIN (se ROTENONE) 
TUNGSTATE, SODIUM 
 
TYLENOL (see ACETAMINOPHEN) 
 
UNADS (see TETRAMETHYLTHIURAM MONOSULFIDE) 
UREA 
 
URETHANE 
 
VANADYL SULFATE 
 
VANCIDE BL (sae 2,2-THIOBIS(4,6-DICHLOROPHENOL)) 
VANCIDE BN (see SODIUM BITHIONOLATE) 
 
VANCIDE PB (see 1,2,3-TRICHLORO-4,6-DINITROBENZENE) 
 
CAS 
 
NUMBERa CHEMICAL NAME 
 
13927-77-0 VANGAURD N (see NICKEL DIBUTYLDITHIOCARBAMATE) 
 
mixture VANGUARD GF (ferric nitroeodimethyldithiocarbamate and 
 
tetramethylthiuram disulfide. CAS NUMBER --- and 137-26-8) 
62-73-7 VAPONA (see DICHLORVOS) 
865-21-4 VINBLASTINE 
 
593-60-2 VINYL BROMIDE 
 
75-01-4 VINYL CHLORIDE 
 
75-35-4 VINYLIDENE CHLORIDE 
1964-09-3 FD & C VIOLET NO. 1 
 
50-14-6 VITAMIN D2 
 
302-79-4 VITAMIN A ACID 
21436-96-4 2,4-XYLIDINE.HCI 
51786-53-9 2,5-XYLIDINE.HCI 
 
6358-85-6 C.I. PIGMENT YELLOW 12 
5979-28-2 C.I. PIGMENT YELLOW 16 
5567-15-7 C.I. PIGMENT YELLOW 83 
 
128-66-5 C.I. VAT YELLOW 4 
 
6358-85-6 DIARYLANILIDE YELLOW (see C.I. PIGMENT YELLOW 12) 
1934-21-0 FD & C YELLOW NO. 5 
2783-94-0 FD & C YELLOW NO. 6 
 
315-18-4 ZECTRAN (see MEXACARBATE) 
 
155-04-4 ZETAX (see 2-MERCAPTOBENZOTHIAZOLE, ZINC) 
136-23-2 ZINC DIBUTYLDITHIOCARBAMATE 
14324-55-1 ZINC DIETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE 
 
137-30-4 ZINC DIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE 
12122-67-7 ZINC ETHYLENEBISTHIOCARBAMATE 
 
12122-67-7 ZINEB (see ZINC ETHYLENEBISTHIOCARBAMATE) 
 
137-30-4 ZIRAM (see ZINC DIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE) 
14644-61-2 ZIRCONIUM (IV) SULFATE 
 
'CAS NUMBER - Chemical Abstracts Service registry number 
 
APPENDIX 2: CHEMICAL NAMES LISTED BY CAS NUMBER 
 
CAS 
 
NUMBERa CHEMICAL NAME 
 
mixtr 3-AMINO-9-ETHYLCARBAZOLE MIXTURE (3-amino-9- 
 
ethylcarbole and 3-amino-9-ethylcaobsl.HCI. 
CAS NUMBER 132-32-1 and 6109-97-3) 
 
mixture HCDD MIXTURE (1,2,3,7,8,9-hezoxacrodibsnzo-p-dio 
 
and 1,2,3,6,7,8-iaomer. CAS NUMBER 19408-74-3 aDd 67663-86-7) 
mixture STYRENE AND beta-NITROSTYRENE MIXTURE 
 
(CAS NUMBER 100-42-5 and 102-96-5) 
 
mixture VANGUARD GF (feric nitodimsthyld ibte and 
 
ttrmthylthiurm .diuld. CAS NUMER --- and 137-26-8) 
 
mixture MEHYLAZOXYMETHANOL ACETATE AND CYCASIN MIXTURE 
 
(CAS NUMBER 592-61-1 and 14901-7) 
60-06 PHENOBARBITAL (phenoberbitone) 
60-07-7 MITOMYCIN-C 
60-144 VITAMIN D2 
 
60-18-0 CYCLOPHOSPHAMIDE (Endosn) 
60-23-7 HYDROCORTISONE (cortisol) 
60-28-2 ESTRADIOL (stradiol-17bebt) 
60-29-3 DDT 
 
60-32-8 BENZO(a)PYRENE 
 
60-U-2 6-MERCAPTOPURINE 
60-66-6 RESERPINE 
 
60-76-0 ACTINOMYCIN D 
60-78-2 ASPIRIN 
 
61-02-5 PRONETHALOL.HCI (aldsrin.HCl) 
61-03-6 PIPERONYL BUTOXIDE 
61-21-8 6-FLUOROURACIL 
 
61-28-6 2,4-DINITROPHIENOL 
61-62-6 PROPYLTHIOURACIL 
61-66-8 ATROPINE 
 
61-76-2 NITROGEN MUSTARD (2,2-di ro-N-methyldisthyamlne) 
61-794 URETHANE 
62-24-4 THIO-TEPA 
63-19-0 o,p'-DDD 
 
63-70-3 DIBENZ(ah)ANTHRACENE 
 
63-96-2 N-HYDROXY-2-ACETYLANINOFLUORENE (hydroxy-N- 
 
2-lorenycentmids) 
 
63-96-3 2-ACETYLAMINOFLUORENE (N-2-fluorenykcetamide) 
64-11-6 NICOTINE 
 
64-80-8 PRONETHALOL (adaulin) 
64-86-3 ISONIAZID (INH) 
 
CAS 
 
NIJMBERa CHEMICAL NAME 
 
56-18-6 
66-22-1 
66-38-9 
66-98-1 
56-04-2 
56-23-6 
 
66-38-2 
56-49-6 
6-63-1 
56-724 
68-75-7 
57-134 
67-14-7 
67-30-7 
67-394 
67-41-0 
57-60-1 
67-664 
67-67-8 
67-74-9 
67-974 
584082 
68-14-0 
68-89-9 
59-06-2 
59-36-8 
59-87-0 
69-8-1 
OD-11-7 
60-344 
60-36-6 
6D-61-6 
60 86 
 
60-57-1 
60-8D-0 
61-824 
 
62-384 
62-4-2 
62-63-3 
62-66-6 
 
N-NITROSODITHYLAMINE (DEN) 
ISONICOTINIC ACID 
FENTHION 
 
MYLERAN CouKlfn) 
 
HETHYLTHIOURACIL 
 
CARBON TETRACHLORIDE 
PARATHION 
 
3-METHYLCHOLANTHRENE 
 
DIETHYLSTILBESTROL (DES) 
COUMAPHOS 
 
CHLORAMPHENICOL (Chloromycetin) 
UREA 
 
1,1-DIMETYLHYDRAZINE 
 
PHENOBARBITAL, SODIUM (phenobarbitone, sodium) 
METEPA 
 
6,6-DIPHENYLHYDANTOIN 
SUCROSE 
 
PROPYLENE GLYCOL 
beta-PROPIOLACTONE 
CHLORDANE 
 
7,12-DIMETHYLBENZ(a)ANTHRACENE 
CAFFEINE 
 
PYRDMEHAMIE (Daraprin) 
 
pmma-12,3,45,6-HEXCHLOROCYCLOHEXANE 
 
METHOTREXATE 
 
4,-DIMTIlHYL-2-(6-NITRO-2-FURYL)PYRIMIDINE 
6-NlTRO-2-FURALDEHYDE SEMICARBAZONE 
PHENYLHYDRAZINE.HCI 
 
N,N-DIMEITYL-4-AMINOAZOBENZENE (DAB) 
MTHYLHDRAZINE 
ACETAMDE 
 
DIMETHOATE 
MLETHMAZOLE 
 
DIELDRIN (HEOD) 
PHENAZONE 
 
3-AMINOTRIAZOLE (amitrol) 
 
MERCURY (HI) ACETATE (phanylmercuric acetate) 
PHENACETIN 
ANELINE 
 
THIOACETAMIDE 
 
(lindan) 
 
293 
 
CAS 
 
NUMBERa 
42011-48-3 
 
1582-09-8 
 
75-48-8 
137-17-7 
21436-97-5 
6334-11-8 
512-56-1 
2489-77-2 
900-95-8 
 
76-87-9 
126-72-7 
38571-73-2 
 
126-72-7 
150-38-9 
 
75104-43-7 
72254-58-1 
 
73-22-3 
83-79-4 
13472-45-2 
 
103-90-2 
97-74-5 
57-13-6 
51-79-6 
27774-13-6 
 
97-18-7 
6385-58-6 
6379-49-0 
 
CAS 
 
NUMBER 
 
62-56-6 
62-73-7 
62-75-9 
63-25-2 
63-92-3 
64-17-5 
64-77-7 
66-27-3 
67-20-9 
67-63 
67-72-1 
67-98-1 
68-23-5 
68-76-8 
70-25-7 
70-30-4 
71-43-2 
71-5564 
72-2D-8 
72-33-3 
72-43-6 
72-54-8 
72-65-9 
72-56-0 
73-22-3 
74-31-7 
75-01-4 
75-34-3 
75-35-4 
75-484 
 
76-60-6 
7549-4 
76-02 
76-"4-8 
76-87-9 
77406-5 
77-46-3 
77-654 
77-79-2 
78-34-2 
79400-5 
79-014 
79-11-8 
79-194 
79-34-5 
79-40-3 
79-44-7 
79-4-9 
80-06-0 
80-33-1 
81-07-2 
81-21-0 
82-28-0 
8248-8 
83-59-0 
83-79-4 
8446-1 
86-44-9 
86-29-3 
86-30-6 
86-0-0 
86-57-7 
 
86-86-2 
 
86-87-3 
86-88-4 
87-51-4 
87-56-9 
87-3 
87-6-5 
88-06-2 
88-19-7 
88-73-3 
88-86-7 
88-96-0 
89-25-8 
90-43-7 
90-94-8 
9149-8 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
ta CHEMICAL NAME 
 
THIOURRA 
 
DICHLORVOS (DDVP, Vapona) 
 
N-NITROSODIMETHYLAMINE (DMN) 
CARBARYL (Sevin) 
 
PHENOXYBENZAMINE.HCI 
ETHYL ALCOHOL 
TOLBUTAMIDE 
 
HETHYL METHANESULFONATE (MMS) 
 
11(-NITROFURF=RYL1DENE)AMINOIHYDANTOIN 
CHLOROFORM 
 
HEXACHLOROETHANE 
MER-25 
 
NORETHYNODREL 
TRENIMON 
 
N-METHYL-N'-NITRO-N-NITROSOGUANIDINE (MNNG) 
HEXACHLOROPHENE 
BENZENE 
 
1,1,1-TRICHLOROETHANE 
ENDRIN 
 
MESTRANOL 
 
METHOXYCHLOR 
p,p'-DDD (TDE) 
p,p'-DDE 
 
p,p'-ETHYL-DDD (Perthane) 
L-TRYPTOPHAN 
 
DIPHENYL-p-PHENYLENEDIAMINE (Agenite DPPD) 
VINYL CHLORIDE 
 
1,1-DICHLOROETHANE 
 
VINYLIDENE CHLORIDE 
 
IODOFORM (triiodomethne) 
 
DIMETHYLAINIC ACID (cacodylic acid) 
TRICHLOROFLUOROMEITHANE 
CHLOROPICRIN 
HEPTACHLOR 
 
TREPHENYLTIN HYDROXIDE 
GIBBERELLIC ACID 
 
4,4'-SULFONYLBISACETANLIDE 
 
CARBROMAL (bromodiethyacetylurea) 
3-SULFOLENE 
DIOXATHION 
 
1,1,2-TRICHLOROETHANE 
TRICHLOROETHYLENE 
 
MONOCHLOROACETIC ACID 
THIOSEMCARBAZIDE 
 
1,1,2,2-TETRACHLOROETHANE 
DITHIOOXAMIDE 
 
DIMETHYLCARBAMYL CHLORDE 
2-NITROPROPANE 
DAPSONE 
 
p-CHLOROPHENYL-p-CHLOROBENZENE SULFONATE (ovex) 
SACCHARIN 
 
DICYCLOPENTADIENE DIOXIDE 
 
1-AMINO-2-METHYLANTHRAQUINONE 
 
PENTACHLORONITROBENZENE (PCNB) 
N-PROPYL ISOME 
 
ROTENONE (tubetozin) 
9,10-ANTHRAQUINONE 
 
PHTHALIC ANHYDRIDE 
 
DIPHENYLACETONITRILE 
 
N-NITROSODIPHENYLALANE (rodex, diphenylnramine) 
AZINPHOSMETHYL (Guethion) 
1-NITRONAPHTHALENE 
 
1-NAPHTHALENE ACETAMIDE 
 
1-NAPHTHALENE ACETIC ACID (Plenofix) 
1-(1-NAPHTHYL)-2-THIOUREA (ANTU) 
INDOLE-3-ACETIC ACID (hetercuxin) 
 
alpha,bet-DICHLORO-bets-FORMYLACRYLIC ACID 
 
(mucochlonic acid) 
 
HEXACHLOROBUTADIENE 
 
2,3,4,5,6-PENTACHLOROPHENOL (Dowicide-7, PCP) 
2,4,6-TRICHLOROPHENOL (Dowickde-2S) 
o-TOLUENESULFONAMIDE 
 
1-CHLORO-2-NrTOBENZENE 
 
2-ec-BUTYL-4,6-DINITROPHENOL 
PHTHALAMIDE 
 
1-PHENYL-3-METHYL-6-PYRAZOLONE 
 
o-PHENYLPHENOL (orthoxenoL Dowiide-1) 
MICHLER'8 KETONE 
2-NAPHTHYLAMINE 
 
CAS 
 
NUMBERa CHEMICAL NAME 
 
91-64- 1,2-BENZOPYRONE (coumain) 
91-76-9 BENZOGUANAMINE 
 
91-93-0 3,3'-DIHETHOXYBENZIDINE-4,4'-DIHSOCYANATE 
91-94-1 3,3'-DICHLOROBENZIDINE (DCB) 
92-13-7 PILOCARPINE 
92-62-4 BIPHENYL 
 
9247-1 4-AMINODIPHENYL 
 
92-6-3 p-PHENYLPHENOL (peaxenol) 
92-84-2 PHENOTHIAZINE 
92-87-S BENZIDINE 
 
93-46-9 sym.-dlbet-NAPHTHYL-p-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 
 
(Agerite white) 
 
93-72-1 2-(2,4,6-TRICHLOROPHENOXY)PROPIONIC ACID 
 
93-76-S 2,4,5-TRICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ACID (2,4,5-T) 
 
94-11-1 2,4-DICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ACID, ISOPROPYL ESTER 
94-20-2 CHLORPROPAMIDE 
 
94-52-0 6-NITROBENZIMIDAZOLE 
94-658 DIHYDROSAFROLE 
94-89-7 SAFROLE 
 
94-76-7 2,4-DICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ACID (2,4-D) 
 
94-80-4 2,4-DICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ACID, n-BUTYL ESTER 
98-06-7 SULFALLATE 
 
98-14-7 1H-BENZOTRIAZOLE 
 
96-33-0 N-CYCLOHEXYL-2-BENZOTHIAZOLE SULFENAMIE (Durex) 
96-74-9 3-CHLORO-p-TOLUIDINE 
96-79-4 5-CHLORO-o-TOLUIDINE 
96-80-7 2,4-DIAMVINOTOLUENE 
 
96-83-0 4-CHLORO-o-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 
 
96-12-8 1,2-DIBROMO-3-CHLOROPROPANE (DBCP. NCI uwe 
 
CAS NUMBER 1836-76-6) 
 
986-24-2 GLYCEROL elpha-MONOCHLOROHYDRIN 
 
9-46-7 ElTYLENE THIOUREA (ETU) 
 
97-00-7 1-CHLORO-2,4-DINITROBENZENE 
 
97-16-S 2,4-DICHLOROPHENYLBENZENE SULFONATE (Genite-R99) 
97-18-7 2,2-THIOBIS(4,6-DICHLOROPHENOL) (TBP, Vancide BL) 
97-56-3 o-AMINOAZOTOLUENE 
 
97-74-S TETRAMETHYLTHIURAM MONOSULFIDE (unads) 
97-77-8 TETRAETHYLTHIURAM DISULFIDE (ethyl tuade) 
98-01-1 FURFURAL 
 
98-96-4 PYRAZINAMIDE 
 
89-30-9 2,6-DICHLORO-4-NITROANILINE (Botran) 
99-56-8 6-NITRO-o-TOLUIDINE 
 
99-56-9 4-NITRO-o-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 
99-89-2 5-NITRO-o-ANISIDINE 
 
9-80-9 N-METHYL-N,4-DINITROSOANILINE 
100-00- 1-CHLORO-4-NITROBENZENE 
100-42-S STYRENE 
 
10043-0 PHENYLHYDRAZINE 
 
100-76-4 N-NITROSOPIPERIDINE (PIP) 
 
100-97-0 I IEXAMETHYLENETETRAMINE 
101-06-3 ANILAZE 
 
101-14-4 4,4'-METHYLENE-BIS(2-CHLOROANINE) (3,- 
 
101-21-3 
101-25-7 
 
101-41-1 
 
101-73-S 
 
101-79-1 
102-09-0 
102-60-1 
102-714 
 
102-77-2 
103-03-7 
103-16-2 
103-33-3 
103-72-0 
103-S-5 
103-90-2 
106-11-3 
106-36-2 
106-66-S 
 
106-47-8 
 
106-87-4 
 
106-89-8 
 
106-93-4 
107-06-1 
107-02 
107-13-1 
 
dichloro-4,4'aminodipheylmeth, MOCA) 
 
ISOPROPYL-N-(3-CHLOROPHENYL)CARBAMATE (CIPC, 
 
chlorpropham) 
 
N,N-DENITRO8OPENTAMETHYLENETETRAMINE 
 
4,4'-MEHYLENEBIS(N,N-DIMETHYL)BENZENAMINE 
p-ISOPROPOXYDIPHENYLAMNE (Agente 150) 
4-CHLORO4'-AMINODIPHENYLETHER 
DIPHENYLCARBONATE 
m-CRESIDINE 
 
TRIETAOLANINE 
 
N-OXYDWIEHYLENEBENZOTHIAZOLE-2-SULFENAMIDE (amax) 
1-CARBAMYL-2-PHENYLHYDRAZINE 
 
HYDROQUINONE MONOBENZYL ETHER (Agent, elba) 
AZOBENZENE 
 
PHENYL ISOTHIOCYANATE 
1-PHENYL-2-THIOUREA 
 
ACETAMINOPHEN (Tylenol, pancetamol) 
p-QUINONE DIOXIME 
 
ETHYL BROMOACETATE 
N,N'-DIETHYLTHIOUREA 
p-CHLOROANILINE 
 
1-ETHYLENEXY-3,4-EPOXYCYCLOHEXANE 
EPICHLOROHYDRIN 
 
1,2-DIBROMOETHANE (ethyine dibromide, EDB) 
ALLYL CHLORIDE (chloropne) 
 
1,2-DICHLOROETHANE (ethylene dihloride, EDC) 
ACRYLONITRILE 
 
294 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
CAS 
 
NUMBERa CHEMICAL NAME 
 
107-20-0 CHLOROACETALDEHYDE 
 
107-30-2 CHLOROMETHYL METHYL ETHER (CMME) 
108-60-1 BIS(2-CHLORO-1-METHYLETHYL) ETHER 
109-84-2 2-HYDROXYETHYLHYDRAZINE (BOH) 
11044-1 SORBIC ACID 
 
110-57-6 trana-1,4-DICHLOROBUTENE-2 
110-86-0 PIPERAZINE 
110-89-4 PIPERDINE 
 
111-44 BIS-2-CHLOROETHYLETHER 
111.46-6 DEETHYLENE GLYCOL 
 
112-27-6 TRIETHYLENE GLYCOL 
 
114-83-0 1-ACETYL-2-PHENYLHYDRAZINE 
115-02-6 AZASERINE 
 
116-09-3 MERCURYMETHYLCHLORIDE (methylmercuric acetate) 
116-29-7 ENDOSULFAN (Thiodan) 
116-32-2 DICOFOL (Kethane) 
116-06-3 ALDICARB (Temik) 
 
116-29-0 2,4,6,4'-TETRACHLORODIPHENYL SULFONE (tetrafidon) 
117-39-6 QUERCETIN 
 
117-79-3 2-AMINOANTHRAQUINONE 
 
117-80-0 2,3-DICHLORO-1,4-NAPHTHOQUINONE (dichlone) 
118-74-1 HEXACHLOROBENZENE (HCB) 
 
118-76-2 CHLORANIL (tetrachloro-p-benzoquinone) 
118-92-3 ANTHRANILIC ACID 
 
119-34-6 4-AMINO-2-NITROPHENOL 
 
119-38-0 1-ISOPROPYL-3-METHYL-s-PYRAZOLYLDIMETHYL CARBAMATE 
 
(uolan) 
 
120-36-6 alpha-(2,4-DICHLOROPHENOXY)PROPIONIC ACID 
 
(2-(2,4-dichlorophenoxy) propionic acid) 
120-68-1 ISOSAFROLE 
 
12041-6 DIMETHYL TEREPHTHALATE (DMT) 
120-62-7 PIPERONYL SULFOXIDE 
120-71-8 p-CRESIDINE 
 
120-78-6 BENZOTHIAZYL DISULFIDE (Altax) 
120-93-4 ETHYLENE UREA (2-imidaolidinone) 
121-14-2 2,4-DINITROTOLUENE 
 
121-19-7 NITRO-4-HYDROXYPHENYLARSONIC ACID 
121-59-6 CARBARSONE 
 
121-66-4 2-AMINO-5-NITROTHIAZOLE 
121-76-6 MALATHION 
 
122-34-9 SIMAZINE (CDT) 
 
12242-9 ISOPROPYL-N-PHENYL CARBAMATE (IPC) 
 
122-06-7 HYDRAZOBENZENE (NCI ue CAS NUMBER 630-60-7) 
123-33-1 MALEIC HYDRAZIDE (1,2dihydro-3,8-pyridaanedione) 
123-91-1 1,4-DIOXANE (p-diozane) 
126-07-8 GRISEOFULVIN 
 
126-72-7 TRIS(2,3-DIBROMOPROPYL)PHOSPHATE (TRIS) 
126-86-2 NITROGEN MUSTARD N-OXIDE (mitomen) 
127-18-4 TETRACHLOROETHYLENE 
127-69- SULFISOXAZOLE 
 
128-37-0 BUTYLATED HYDROXYTOLUENE (BHT) 
128-44-9 SACCHARIN, SODIUM 
1286- C.I. VAT YELLOW 4 
 
129-16-7 2-METHYL-1-NITROANTHRAQUINONE 
131-01-1 DESERPIDINE 
 
132-27-4 o-PHENYLPHENATE, SODIUM 
133-06-2 CAPTAN 
 
133-07-3 N-(TRICHLOROMETHYLTHIO)PHTHALIMLDE (folpet) 
133-90-4 CHLORAMBEN 
 
134-29-2 o-ANISIDINE.HCI (NCI uwe CAS NUMBER 134-29-0) 
136-20-6 CUPFERRON 
 
136-88-6 PHENYL-beta-NAPHTHYLAMINE (Aerite powder) 
 
136-23-2 ZINC DIBUTYLDITHIOCARBAMATE (utyl zimate) 
136-40-3 PHENAZOPYRIDINE.HCI 
 
137-17-7 2,4,5-TRIMETHYlANILINE 
 
137-26-8 TETRAMETHYLTHIRRAM DISULFIDE (TMTD, thiram) 
137-29-1 COPPER DYMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE (cumate) 
 
137-30-4 ZINC DIMETHYLDrHIOCARBAMATE (methyl zimate) 
139-06-9 CYCLAMATE, SODIUM 
 
139-13-9 NITRELOTRIACETC ACID 
139-40-2 PROPAZINE (Gesamil) 
13946-1 4,4'-THIODIANILINE 
139-94-0 NITHIAZE 
 
140-49-8 4'-(CHLOROACETYL)-ACETANILIDE 
 
14046-7 FENAMINOSULF, FORMULATED (methyl orane B) 
140-57-8 ARAMITE 
 
140-79-4 DINITROSOPIPERAZINE 
141-90-2 THIOURACIL 
142-04-1 ANILINKHCl 
 
CAS 
 
NUMBERa CHEMICAL NAME 
 
142-46-1 2,6-DITHIOBIUREA 
 
142-594 ETiHYLENEBISDITHIOCARBAMATE, DISODIUM (Dithane, 
 
nabam) 
 
143-60-0 KEPONE (chlordecone) 
 
144-34-3 SELENIUM DIMETHYLDHIOCARBAMATE (methyl elenac) 
 
148-18-6 SODIUM DERTHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE TRIHYDRATE (SDDC) 
148-24-3 8-HYDROXYQUINOLINE 
 
148-82-3 MELPHALAN (L-earcolysin) 
146-29-1 PATULIN 
 
149-304 2-MERCAPTOBENZOTHIAZOLE (Captcx, rotax) 
 
160-38-9 EDTA, TRISODIUM SALT TRIHYDRATE (EDTA) 
 
160-68 3-(p-CHLOROPHENYL)-1,1-DIMETHYLUREA (Telvar, monuron) 
161-66-4 ETHYLENE IMINE 
 
153-18-4 RUTIN TRIHYDRATE 
 
165-04-4 2-MERCAPTOBENZOTHIAZOLE, ZINC (zetax) 
156-104 p-NITROSODEPHNYLAMNYI 
 
15661-4 PHENYLETHYLHYDRAZINE SULFATE 
156-62-7 CYANAMIDE, CALCIUM 
244-63-3 NORHARMAN 
 
262-12-4 DIBENZO-p-DIOXIN 
 
297-76-7 ETHYNODIOL DIACETATE 
297-78-9 TELODRIN (isobenzan) 
2980 MEHYL PARATHION 
298-18-0 D,L-DIEPOXYBUTANE 
301-04-2 LEAD ACETATE 
302-01-2 HYDRAZINE 
 
302-16-8 METHYLHYDRAZINE SULFATE 
302-22-7 CHLORMADINONE ACETATE 
302-79-4 VITAMIN A ACID 
303-34-4 LASIOCARPINE 
303-47-9 OCHRATOXIN A 
306-03-3 CHLORAMBUCIL 
 
306-37-6 1,2-DIMETHYLHYDRAZNE.2HCl 
309-00-2 ALDRIN 
 
315-18-4 MEXACARBATE (Zetran) 
 
318-42-7 EMETENK2HCI (NCI uee CAS NUMBER 483-18-1) 
 
319-84-6 alpha-1,2,3,4,6,6-HEXACHLOROCYCLOHEXANE (aipha-lindane) 
31948-7 beta-1,2,3,4,6,6-HEXACHLOROCYCLOHEXANE (beta-lindxne) 
320-67-2 6-AZACYTIDINE 
 
324-93-6 4'-FLUORO-4-AMINODIPHENYL 
 
330-54-1 3-(3,4-DICHLOROPHENYL)-1,1-DIMETHYLUREA (Karmex, diuron) 
33341-6 DIAZINON 
 
363-17-7 N-(2-FLUORENYL)-2,2,2-TRIFLUOROACETAMIDE 
366-70-1 PROCARBAZINE.HCI 
 
373-024 NICKEL (II) ACETATE 
 
398-32-3 N4-(4'-FLUOROBIPHENYL)ACETAMIDE 
434-13-9 LITHOCHOLIC ACID 
443-48-1 METRONIDAZOLE 
470-82-6 EUCALYPTOL 
 
471-294 MTIHYLGUANIDINE 
 
474-25-9 CHENODEOXYCHOLIC ACID 
477-30-5 COLCEMID 
 
488-41-6 DEBROMOMANNITOL (DBM) 
 
304-88-1 3-NITROPROPIONIC ACID 
610-164 CHLOROBENZLATE 
 
612-66-1 TRLMETHYLPHOSPHATE 
517-28-2 HEMATOXYLIN 
 
520-46-6 3-ACETYL-6-METHYL-2,4-PYRANDIONE (dehydroacetic acid) 
531-18-0 HEXaMEITYLMELAM 
 
531-82-8 NJ4-(6-NITRO-2-FURYL)-2-THIAZOLYLjACETAMIDE (NFTA) 
532-32-1 BENZOATE, SODIUM 
536-33-4 ETHIONAMIDE 
 
540-23-8 p-TOLUIDINKHCI 
 
54146-6 m-PHENYLENEDIAMINE.2HCl 
 
542-88-1 BIS-(CHLOROMETHYL) ETHER (BCME) 
643-80-6 BARIUM ACETATE 
 
643-908 CADMIUM ACETATE 
 
661-92-8 1,2-DIMETHYL-6-NITROIMIDAZOLE 
 
663-63-7 NICOTINIC ACID HYDRAZIDE (3-pyridoyl hydrine) 
 
656-6-0 1(6-NITROFURFURYLIDENE)AMINOI2-IMIDAZOLIDINONE 
66341-7 CARBAMYL HYDRAZINE.HCI 
 
669-67-3 TACE (chr ne) 
 
6641-9 p-ROSANIL.NEHCl (p-magenta) 
 
578-1 MANNITOL NITROGEN MUSTARD (Deanol) 
678-76-7 7-MERTHYLGUANINE 
 
890-21-6 1-CHLOROPROPENE 
892-31-4 N-BUTYLUREA 
 
593-2 VINYL BROMIDE 
 
698-6-1 DIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMIC ACID, DIME LAMINE 
 
295 
 
296 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
CAS 
 
NUMBERa CHEMICAL NAME 
 
602-87-9 6-NITROACENAPHTHENE 
613-94-5 BENZOYL HYDRAZINE 
 
614-00-6 NITROSOMlETHYLANILINE 
 
616-28-1 o-PHENYLENEDIAMINE.2HCI 
 
616-63-2 N-NITROSO-N-MHETHYLURETHAN 
617-84-6 DIETHYLFORMAMIDE 
 
619-17-0 4-NITROANTHRANILC ACID 
619-67-0 p-HYDRAZINOBENZOIC ACID 
622-61-5 p-TOLYLUREA 
 
624-18-0 p-PHENYLENEDlAMIN2HCl 
624-84-0 FORMYLHYDRAZINE 
628-02-4 HEXANAMIDE 
 
628-36-4 1,2-DIFORMYLMYDRAZINE 
628-94-4 ADIPAMIDE 
 
632-99-5 ROSANIUNKHCI (maenta I) 
634-93-6 2,4,6-TRICHLOROANLINE 
636-21-6 o-TOLUIDINE.HCI 
 
636-23-7 2,4-DlAMINOTOLUENE.2HCl (2,4-toluendiamine.2HCI) 
637-07-0 CLOFIBRATE 
 
638-03-9 m-TOLUIDINKHCI 
671-18-9 PROCARBAZINE 
 
683-60-1 2-CHLOROPROPANAL 
 
684-93-5 N-NITROSO-N-METHYLUREA (MNU) 
685-914 DIETHYLACETAMIDE 
 
712-68 2-AMINO-6-(6-NITRO-2-FURYL)-1,3A4-THIADIAZOLE 
720-694 4,6-DIAMINO-2-(6-NITRO-2-FURYL)-s-TRLAZINE 
768-17-8 N-METHYL-N-FORMYLHYDRAZINE 
766-34-4 GLYCIDALDEHYDE 
 
772-43-0 6-NITRO-2-FURAMIDOXIME 
828-00-2 DIMETHOXANE 
 
834-28-6 PHENFORMIN.HCI (NCI use CAS NUMBER 114-86-3) 
838-88-0 4,4'-METHYLENE-BIS(2-METHYLANILNE) 
 
842-00-2 4-ETHYLSULPHONYLNAPHTHALENE-1-SULFONAMI 
842-07-9 1-PHENYLAZO-2-NAPHTHOL 
 
860-22-0 FD & C BLUE NO. 2 (indigo camine) 
866-21-4 VINBLASTINE 
 
900-96-8 TRIPHENYLTIN ACETATE 
 
915-67-3 FD & C RED NO. 2 (amnanth) 
924-16-3 NITROSODEBUTYLAIBU 
 
930-66-2 N-NITROSOPYRROLIDINE 
 
962-23-8 PROFLAVINE.HC HEMIEHYDRATE 
961-11-6 TETRACHLORVINPHOS 
968-81-0 ACETOHEXAMIE 
 
999-81-5 (2-CHLOROETHYL)TRIEMTHYLAMMONIUM CHLORI 
1066-30-4 CHROMIUM (M) ACETATE 
1067-33-0 DIBUTYLTIN DIACETATE 
 
1072-63-3 EITHYLENE GLYCOL (glycol slate) 
 
1078-38-2 1-ACETYL-2-ISONICOTINOYLHYDRAZINE 
 
1114-71-2 PROPYL N-ETHYL-N-BUTYLTHIOCARBAMATE (Tilhi 
1119-68-2 n-PENTYLHYDRAZINEHCI 
1120-71-4 PROPANE SULTONE 
 
1121-92-2 HEPTAMETHYLENEIMINE 
1133-64-8 NITROSOANABASINE 
 
1146-71-0 6,7-DIMETHOXYCYCLOPENTENEc)COUMARIN 
1166-19-0 TOLAZAMIE 
 
1162-6-8 AFLATOXIN BI 
 
1212-29-9 N,N'-DICYCLOHEXYLTHIOUREA 
1241-27-6 HEPTYLAMNE 
 
1308-39-9 CHROMIC OXIDE PIGMENT 
1327-63-3 ARSENIOUS OXIDE 
 
1336-32-6 LEAD ACETATE, BASIC 
 
13321-6 AMMONIUM HYDROXIDE 
 
1420-04-8 CLONITRALD (nkic id) 
 
1466-28-6 NITROSO-2,6-DIMETHYLMORPHOLINE 
 
1466-26-4 N-(1-NAPHTHYL)ETHYLENEDIAMINE.2HCl 
1608-46-8 PRORESID 
 
1682-09-8 TR'iLURALIN 
 
1896-84-6 DAMINOZIDE (succinic acid 2,2-dimethyl hydraide, 
 
1634-78-2 
1701-77-6 
1746-01-6 
1777-84-0 
1836-76-6 
1897-464 
1912-24-9 
1918-02-1 
19834-21-0 
1937-37-7 
 
CAS 
 
NUMBER" 
 
1966-46-9 
19864-09-3 
2104-09-8 
2122-86-3 
2163-79-3 
 
2164-09-2 
2198-59-6 
2227-13-6 
 
2243-62-1 
2302-84-3 
2303-16-4 
2318-18-6 
236346-9 
2386-86- 
 
2411-74-7 
2438-88-2 
2439-10-3 
2466-27-2 
2489-77-2 
2519-30-4 
2578-76-8 
 
DE 
 
DE (CCC) 
lam-6-E) 
 
a CHEMICAL NAME 
 
PIVALOLACTONE 
 
FD & C VIOLET NO. 1 
 
2-AMlNO4-(p-NITROPHENYL)THlAZOLE 
 
6-(6-NITRO-2-FURYL)-1,3,4-OXADIAZOLE-2-OL 
 
3-(HEXAHYDRO-4,7-h&THANOINDAN-6-YL)-l,-DIMlETHYLUREA 
 
(Hercule-7631) 
 
3,4'-DICHLORO-2-METHYLACRYLANELIDE (dicl) 
 
N-PHENYL-p-PHENYLENEDIAMINEHCl (NCI use CAS 
NUMBER 101-64-2) 
 
p-CHLOROPHENYL-2,4,-TRICHLOROPHENYL SULFIDE 
1,6-NAPHTHALENEDAMNEM (1,d n ) 
1-FORMYL-3-THIOSEMICARBAZIDE 
DIALLATE (Avade) 
 
SENKIRKINE (renardin) 
 
FD & C GREEN NO. 3 (fat peen FCF) 
MICE 
 
2-FURALDEHYDE SEMICARBAZONE 
 
2,3,6,6-TETRACHLORO-4-NITROANISOLE 
n-DODECYLGUANIDINE ACETATE 
AURAMINE-O 
 
TRDMETHYLTHIOUREA 
 
BLACK PN (brilliant blck BN) 
 
2-YLIACETAMIDE 
2602-46-2 C.L DIRECT BLUE 6 
 
2611-82-7 SX PURPLE (poncesu 4R) 
229-9-6 S-ETHYL-L-CYSTEINE 
 
2783-94-0 FD & C YELLOW NO. 6 (sust yellow FCF) 
 
2921-88-2 O,O-DIETHYL-O-(3,6,6-TRICHLORO-2-PYRIDYL) 
 
PHOSPHOROTHIOATE 
3012-6-6 AMMONIUM CITRATE 
 
3031-61-4 1-6-MORPHOLINOMLEHYL-3q(6-NITROFURFURYLIDENE) 
 
AMINOY2-OXAZOLIDINONE.HCI 
 
306886 
 
30960-2 
3166-83-3 
3276-41-3 
 
3466-10-9 
3468-22-8 
3664-09-8 
3667-6-9 
3570-76-0 
 
3688-3-7 
3693-22-9 
3741-38-6 
3761-63-3 
3775-68-1 
3778-73-2 
3817-114 
384449 
3861-18-9 
3883-43-0 
4076-79-0 
4106-66-6 
 
4164-28-7 
4342-03-4 
4363-03-5 
4463-22-3 
4616-18-8 
4648-63-2 
466346-3 
4680-78-8 
4812-22-0 
4998-76-9 
5036-03-3 
6117-01-1 
613140-2 
6141-20-8 
6160-02-1 
6206-87-7 
6307-14-2 
6361-6-6 
646-28" 
 
DMASA) 
 
MALAOXON (mathion-O-snalog) 
 
METHOXYPHENYLACETIC ACID 
 
2,3,7,8-TETRACHLORODIBENEO-p-DIOXIN (TCDD, dioxin) 
3-NlTRO-p-ACETOPHIENETIDE 
NITROFEN 
 
CHLOROTHALONIL 
ATRAZINE 
PICLORAM 
 
FD & C YELLOW NO. 6 (tatse) 
C.I DIRECT BLACK 38 
 
bet&-BUTYROLACTONE 
 
N-(8-OXO-2-FLUORENYL)ACETAMIDE 
4-CHLORO-o-TOLUIDINE.HCI 
 
3,6-DIHYDRO-2-NITROSO-2H-1,2-OXAZNE (N-nitroo- 
 
3,6iydozazins-1,2) 
PHENETER8IN 
 
3,3'-IMINOBIS-1-PROPANOL DIMETHANESULFONATE 
 
(ESTER).HCl (IPD) 
 
FD & C RED NO. 1 (poncesu 3R) 
C.L FOOD RED 3 (carmoisine) 
 
FORMIC ACID 24-(6-N3TRO-2-FURYL)-2-THLAZOLYLI 
HYDRAZIDE (FNT) 
AF-2 (hrylurmide) 
 
2-AMINODIPHENYLENE OXIDE 
GLYCOL SULFITE 
 
D & C RED NO. 6 (ponceau MX) 
 
2-AMINO-(5-NlTRO-2-FURYL)-1,3,4-OXADIAZOLE 
ISOPHOSPHAMIDE 
 
N-BUTYL-N-(4-HYDROXYBUTYL)NITROSAMINE 
FD & C BLUE NO.1 (brilliant bhl FCF) 
 
N,N'-DIMETHYL-N,N'-DINITROSOPHTHALAME 
2,3-DICHLORO-p-DIOXANE 
 
4-ACETYLAMINOBIPHENYL (4'-psnylacetsnilide) 
3-DDBENZOFURANAMIN 
DIMETHYLNITRAWMNE 
DACARBAZNE (DIC) 
 
3-HYDROXY-4-AMINOBIPHENYL (4-amino-3- 
 
3-HYDROXY-4-ACETYLAMINOBIPHENYL 
NrTROSOPIPECOLIC ACID 
 
FD & C RED NO. 4 (poncsu SX) 
CHOCOLATE BROWN HT 
 
FD & C GREEN NO. 1 (guinea pen B) 
3-NITRO-3-HEXENE 
 
CYCLOHEXYLAMINEHCI 
 
1-(2-HYDROXYBETHYL)-3-{(8-NITROFURFURYLIDENE) 
AMINO}2-IMIDAZOLIDINONE 
QURCETIN DIHYDRATE 
 
4-CHLORO-m-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 
 
FD & C GREEN NO. 2 (light green SF yellowish) 
D & C RED NO. 9 (brilliant red) 
1'-HYDROXYSAFROLE 
 
2-NITRO-p-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 
 
BENZENESULPHONOHYDRAEIDE (BSH) 
 
SELENIUM DIMTHYLDMTHIOCARBAMATE: (ethyl selena) 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
CAS 
 
NUMBERa CHEMICAL NAME 
 
6461-85-8 N-ISOBUTYL-N'-NITRO-N-NITROSOGUANIDINE 
6567-16-7 C.I. PIGMENT YELLOW 83 
5632-47-3 N-NITROSOPIPERAZINE 
5800-19-1 METIAPINE 
 
6803-61-0 2,6-DIMETHOXY-4'-AMINOSTILBENE 
 
6834-17-3 2-METHOXY-3-AMINODIBENEOFURAN 
6979-28-2 C.I. PIGMENT YELLOW 16 
 
6109-97-3 3-AMINO-9-ETHYLCARBAZOLE.HCI 
 
6119-92-2 DINITRO(1-METHYLHEPTYL)PHENYL CROTONATE 
 
(Karthae) 
 
6120-10-1 4-DIMETHYLAMINO-3,6-XYLENOL 
6294-89-9 MEH CARBAZATE 
 
6334-11-8 2,4,6-TRMETHYLANILINE.HCI 
 
6368-86-6 C.I. PIGMENT YELLOW 12 (drlmnilide yellow) 
 
6369-69-1 2A-DIANINOTOLUENE SULFATE (2ou m 
 
sulfate) 
 
637949-0 1,2,3-TRICHLORO-4,6-DENTr BENZENE (Vancids PB) 
 
6386684 
8462-73-9 
S696-47-3 
696-46-4 
O6-71-5 
7008-42-6 
7227-91-0 
7316-37-2 
7347-49-1 
7411-49-6 
7422-80-2 
7440-02-0 
7446-34-6 
7487-94-7 
7619-36-0 
7631-8-2 
7631-99-4 
7632-00-0 
7681-49-4 
7681-93-8 
7722-84-1 
7767-82-6 
7768-01-2 
7772-99-8 
7782-49-2 
7782-50-6 
7784-46-6 
7787-69-9 
7790-84-3 
8001-36-2 
8001-601 
8002-43-6 
80-03-0 
80-90-4 
8016-12-1 
8016-30-3 
8062-16-2 
8066-92-6 
8066-91-6 
9000-07-1 
9004-32-4 
9004-69-6 
10034-93-2 
10048-13-2 
10102-43-9 
10318-26-0 
10380-28-6 
10473-70-8 
10689-74-9 
11096-82-6 
12034-09-2 
12122-67-7 
12126-02-9 
12236-463 
12427-38-2 
12663-4-6 
13010-07-6 
130104067 
13010-10-1 
13073-36-3 
13171-21-6 
 
SODIUM BITHIONOLATE (Vancide BN) 
OXPRENOLOLHCI 
 
2-(CHLOROMETHYL)PYRIDINE.HC1 
3-(CHLOROMETHYL)PYRIDINE.HCI 
 
alpha-(2,6-DICHLOROPHENOXY)PROPIONIC ACID 
ACRONYCINE 
 
1-PHENYL-3,3-DIMETHYLTRIAZENE 
 
DIETHYL-betaPmma-EPOXYPROPYLPHOSPHONATE 
N,N-DIETHYL-4-(4'-PYRIDYL-1'-OXIDEDZO)ANILNE 
3,3',4,4'-T`ERAAMINOBIPHENYL.4HCI 
 
(3,3 AH4CI) 
 
1,2-DI-n-BUTYLHYDRAZINE12HCl 
NICKEL 
 
SELENIUM SULFIE 
 
MERCURIC CHLORIDE 
NITROSOPROLINE 
 
ARSENATE, SODIUM 
NITRATE, SODIUM 
NIMTRE, SODIUM 
FLUORIDE, SODIUM 
PIMARICIN 
 
HYDROGEN PEROXIDE 
 
SULFATE, SODIUM (diodium slate) 
BROMATE, POTASSIUM 
 
TIN (O) CHLORIDE (stannotU chloride) 
SELENIUM 
CHLORINE 
 
ARSENrI SODIUM 
 
BISMUTH OXYCHLORIDE 
CADMIUM SULPHATE 
TOXAPHENE 
 
STROBANE (dkchoricids mothproofer) 
SOYBEAN LECITIN 
 
ASPIRIN, PHENACETIN, AND CAFFEINE (APC) 
PEPPERMINT OIL 
NORLESTRIN 
 
ENOVID (norethynode/mestranol 66:1p 
ACTINOMYCIN C (enamycin) 
 
OVULEN (ethynodiol disetat/ethinyl estradiol I10:1l 
LUTESTRAL 
 
CARRAGEENAN, NATIVE 
 
EDIFAS B (cellloe c s ether, sodium) 
EDIFAS A (methyl ethyl celblose) 
HYDRAZINE SULFATE 
STERIGMATOCYSTIN 
NITRIC OXIDE 
 
DIBROMODULCITOL 
 
COPPER+-HYDROXYQUINOLINE 
 
1-(4-CHLOROPHENYL)-1-PHENYL-2-PROPYNYL CARBAMATE 
1-AMYL-i-NrrROSOUREA 
AROCLOR 1260 (PCB) 
NIOBATE, SODIUM 
 
ZINC ETiHLENEBISTHIOCARBAMATE (zieb) 
AMMONIUM CHLORIDE 
CHOCOLATE BROWN FB 
 
MANGANESE ETHYLENEBITHIOCARBAMATE (nseb) 
CYCLOCHLOROTINE 
 
CAS 
 
NUMBER" CHEMICAL NAME 
 
13266-11-6 NITROSO-N-METHYL-N-(2-PHENYL)ETHYLAMINE 
1329246-1 RIFAMPICIN 
 
13366-73-9 DMDRIN, PHOTO- 
 
1363-67-7 TITANIUM DIOXIDE 
 
13472-4-2 TUNGSTATE, SODIUM 
 
13483-18-6 BIS-1,2-(CHLOROMETHOXY)ETHANE 
1361049-1 BERYLLIUM SULFATE 
 
13743-07-2 1-(2-HYDROXYETHYL)-L-N)ITOSOUREA 
 
13927-77-0 NICKEL DIBUTYITHIOCARBAMATE (Vangad N) 
14026-03-0 R(-)-2-METHYL-N-NlTROSOPIPERIDINE 
 
1423980 CADMIUM DETHYLDTHOCARBAMATE (ethyl cadmate) 
14334-65-1 ZINC DIETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE (ethyl zimte) 
144844-1 FERC DIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE (ferbm) 
1464-61-2 ZIRCONIUM (IV) SULFATE 
 
1636-70-4 di-MENTHOL (NCI um CAS NUMBER 89-78-1) 
15721-02-6 2Z,6,5'-TETRACHLOR0BENZID1NE 
 
16879-93-3 ANHYDROGLUCOCHLORAL (alpha-choralose) 
16071-86-6 C.I DIRECT BROWN 96 
 
16219-96-0 2-NrOS0METHYLAMINOPYRIDINE 
16219-99-1 4N1TR080METHYLAMINOPYRIDINE 
1642348- FD & C RED NO. 3 (eythie) 
 
166-10-8 4-(4-N-METHYL-N-NITOAMINOSTYRYL)QUINOLINE 
16813-36-8 1-NITROSO-6,-DIHYDROURACIL 
 
17026-81-2 3-AMIN04-EIHOXYACETANELDE 
1706-89-2 N-NrITOSOEPHEDRINE 
17673-26-6 PHORBOL 
 
18413-144 TH1YLHYDRAZENE.HCI 
 
1862398 ACETONE14-(6-NITRO-2-FURYL)-2-THIAZOLYLpHYDRAZONE 
 
18662-63-8 NIRELOTRIACETIC ACID, TRtSODIUM SALT, MONOHYDRATE 
18883-664 S IN 
 
189699-6 2-AMINO-6-PHENYL-2-OXAZOLIN4-ONE + Mg(OH)2 
19010-663 LEAD DIMETHYLDITHOCARBAMAT (le)dat) 
19834-02-7 CYCLOHEXYLAM SULFATE 
20266-97-8 p-ANISIDINE,HCI 
 
20670-96-1 BENZYLHYDRAZINE.2HCI 
 
20917-49-1 NITROSOHEPTAMETHYLENEIMINE 
20941-66-6 ETHYL TELLURAC 
 
2126046-8 BISMUTH DIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE (bismate) 
21416-87-5 ICRF-159 
 
21436-96-4 2,4-XYLIDINE.HC1 
 
21436-97-6 2,4,5-TREMETHYLANILHCI 
 
21636-36-8 4-MTHYL--(6-NITROFURFURYLIDENE)AMINOF2- 
 
IMIDAZOLIDINONE 
21884-44-6 LUTEOSKYRIN 
22571-96-6 SYMPHYTINE 
22839-47-0 ASPARTAME 
 
22966-79-6 ESTRADIOL MUSTARD 
 
23746-34-1 BIS-2-HYDROXYETHYLDITHIOCARBAMIC ACID, POTASSIUM 
24564-26-6 N*(5-NITRO-2-FURYL)-2-THIAZOLYLIFORMAMDE (FANFT) 
2506141-6 NITROSOIMINODIACEIIC ACID 
 
2616826-7 2,4-DICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ACID, ISOOCTYL ESTER 
28049-3 2-HYDRAZINO-4-(6-NITRO-2-FURYL)THIAZOLE (HNT) 
26049-64 2-(2,2-Dl ETHYLHYDRAZINO)4-(-NTRO-2- 
 
269-70-7 
2604-71-8 
26641-61-6 
28628-22-8 
27323-16-8 
27774-134 
28300-74-6 
28314-6 
 
28322-02-3 
29611-03-8 
299-77-9 
 
30310-80-6 
31873-81-1 
3260700-4 
 
FURYL)THIAZOLE 
 
2-HYDRAZINO-4-(p-NITROPHENYL)THIAZOLE 
2-HYDRAZIN04-(p-AMINOPHENYL)THIAZOLE 
N-NrTROSOTIOMORPHOLINE 
AZIDE, SODIUM 
 
AROCLOR 1264 (PCB) 
VANADYL SULFATE 
 
ANTIMONY POTASSIUM TARTRATE 
 
I-ACETYLAMINOFLUORENE (N-l-fuoylacetmide) 
4-ACETYLAINOFLUOREN (N4-u ti) 
AFLATOXICOL 
 
N-NITROSO-2,2,4-TRIMHYL-12-DIYDROQUINOLINE 
POLYME 
 
NITRO8OHYDROXYPROLINE 
 
FORMIC ACID 2q4-(2-FURYL)-2-THIAZOLYLJHYDRAZIDE 
EMINODIACETIC ACID, MONOSODIUM 
 
32862-214 FORMIC ACID 2-(4-METrHYL-2-THLAZOLYL)HYDRAZIDE 
33389-33-2 1,2-DIEIYDRO-2-(6-NITRO-2-THIENYL)QUINAZOLIN- 
 
4(3H)-ONE 
 
3336-6 4-(2-HYDROXYETHYLAMINO)-2-(6-NITRO-2- 
 
THIENYL)QUINAZOLINE 
 
33867-260 2,7-DICHLORODEBENZO-p-DIOXIN (DCDD) 
3417"62-8 2-HYDRAINO-4-PMENYLTIAZOLE 
34627-78-6 1'-ACETOXYSAFROLE 
 
38668-66-2 CADMAIUM CHLORIDE MONOHYDRATE 
 
297 
 
N-BUTYL-N'-NITRO-N-NrlPOSOGUANIDINE 
 
N-PENL-N'-NITRO-N-NITROSOGUANDINE 
ETHIONINE 
 
PHOSPHAMIDON 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
a CHEMICAL NAME 
 
N-43-(5-NITRO-2-FURYL)- 
 
-12,4-OXAD"LE-5-YLI 
 
MErHYL}ACETAMIDE 
 
S(+)-2-MTHYL-N-NITROSOPIPERIDINE 
 
ETlHYLNITSOCYANAMIDE (nitrosoethanecarbamonitrile) 
2-AMINO4-(6-NITR0-2-FURYL)THLAEOLE 
TRIS-1,2,3-(CHLOROMETHOXY)PROPANE 
NITROSO-BAYGON 
 
2,4-DIAMINOANISOLE SULFATE (NCI umes CAS 
NUMBER 616-06-4) 
MIREX, PHOTO- 
 
1TERAHYDRO-2-NITROSO-2H-1,2-OXAZINE 
2,2,2-TRIFLUORO-Nq4-(6-NITRO-2-FURYL)-2- 
 
THIAZOLYLIACETAMIDE 
1-NITROSOHYDANTOIN 
CLOMIPHENE CITRATE 
 
4-CHLORO-8-(2,3-.XYLIDINO)-2-PYRIMIDINYLTHIOjACETIC 
ACID 
 
N,N'*-(6-NITRO-2-FURYL)-s-TRIAZINE-2,4- 
DIYLBISACETAMIDE 
 
N-NITROSOBENZTHIAZURON (1-(2'-benmothiaolyl)- 
 
3-methyl-3-nitroiurta) 
2,6-XYLIDINE.HCI 
 
ALLYLHYDRAZINE.HCI 
 
N-NITROSOBIS(2-HYDROXYPROPYL)AMINE 
2,4-DIMETHOXYANILINE.HCI 
CHLOROZOTOCIN 
 
NITROSO-1,2,3,6-TETRAHYDROPYRIDINE 
DINITROSOHOMOPIIPERAZINE 
NITROSOMETrHYLPHENIDATE 
 
trans-2-1(DIMETHYLAMINO)MErHYLIMINOI-6-12-(6- 
 
NITRO-2-FURYL)VINYLI-1,3,4-OXADLAZOLE 
EMULIFIFER YN 
 
1,3-DIBUTYL-1-NITROSOUREA 
n-BUTYLHYDRAZINE.HCI 
PROPYLHYDRAZINE.HCI 
 
BIS-l,4-(CHLOROMETHOXY)-p-XYLENE 
 
4-MORPHOLINO-2-(6-NITRO-2-THlENYL)QUINAZOLINE 
POLYBROMINATED BIPHENYLS 
 
CARBOXYMETHYLNITROSOUREA (CMNU) 
 
2-CHLORO-p-PHENYLENEDIAMINE SULFATE 
N-METrHYL-N-NITROSOBENZAMIE 
 
TElTRFLUORO-m-PHENYLENEDIAMINE.2HCI 
 
beta-THIOGUANINE DEOXYRIBOSIDE (beta-TGdR. 
NCI us CAS NUMBER 788-81-7) 
 
66734-38-6 N'-ACETYL-4-(HYDROXYMECTHYL)PHENYLHYDRAZINE 
68107-26-6 NITROSOMEUHYLUNDECYLAMINE 
 
69668-91-0 3-NITROSOMETHYLAMINOPYRIDINE 
 
72264-68-1 3-AMINO-1-MEMTYL-6H-PYRED014,3-bINDOLE ACETATE 
 
(tip-P-2 acetate) 
 
74920-78-8 N-ETHYL-N-FORMYLHYDRAZINE 
 
76104-43-7 3-AMINO-1,4-DIMETHYL56H-PYRIDS4,3-bINDOLE ACETATE 
 
(trp-P-l acetate) 
 
76198-31-1 3-(6-NITRO-2-FURYL)-IMIDAZO(1,2-alpha)PYRIDINE 
 
(NFIP) 
 
77337-64-3 N-N'-PROPYL-N-FORMYLHYDRAZINE 
 
-- '-OXOSAFROLE 
 
CAS 
 
NUMBERS CHEMICAL NAME 
 
--- 1,l-DI-n-BUTYLHYDRAZINE 
 
--- l-METHYL-1,4-DIHYDRO-7-2-(6-NITROFURYL)VINY-OXO- 
 
18-NAPHTHYRIDINE-3-CARBOXYLATE, POTASSIUM 
 
.-- 2-CHLORO-6-(3,5-DIMETHYLPIPERIDINOSULPHONYL)BENZOIC 
 
ACID 
 
--- 4-BIS(2-HYDROXYETHYL)AMINO.2-(2-THENYL)QUINAZOLINE 
--- 4-BIS(2-HYDROXYETHYL)AMNO-2-(5-NTRO-2-THIENYL) 
 
QUINAZOLINE 
 
--- 4-CHLORO-6-(2,3-XYIDINO)-2-PYRINMEDNYLTHIO(N-bta- 
 
HYDROXYETHYL)ACETAMIDE 
 
--- 5,7-DIM FHOXYCYCLOPENTENONE2,3-1COUMARN 
--- 6,7-DIMETHOXYCYCLOPENTENONE(3,2-cCOUMARIN 
--- 6-NITRO-2-FURANMETHANEDIOL DIACETATE 
--- ACETYLATED DIAMYLOPECTIN PHOSPHATE 
--- ACETYLATED DISTARCH ADIPATE 
 
--- ACETYLATED DISTARCH GLYCEROL 
 
--- ACETYLATED DISTARCH PHOSPHATE 
-- AFLATOXIN, CRUDE 
 
--- ALKYLBENZENESULFONATE, LINEAR 
--- ALUMINUM POTASSIUM SULFATE 
--- CARRAGEENAN, ACID-DEGRADED 
--- CLIVORINE 
 
--- D&C RED NO. 10 
 
--- DI-t.rt-BUTYL-4-HYDROXYMETHYL PHENOL 
 
--- DIPENTAMETHYLENETHIURAM HEXASULFIE (eulfada) 
--- ENOVID-E (norethynodrel/nestanol 126:11) 
--- GERMANATE, SODIUM 
 
--- HYDROXYPROPYL DISTARCH GLYCEROL 
 
--- ISONICOTINIC ACID VANILLYLIDENEHYDRAZIDE (phthivazid) 
--- LEUPEPTIN 
 
--- N,N-DIPROPYL-4-(4'{PYREDYL-l'-OXIDE4ZO)ANLINE 
 
--- N-(N-METHYL-N-NITROSOCARBAMOYL)-L-ORNITHINE 
 
(nitroeourea amino acid) 
 
--- N-ETHYL-N'-NITRO-N-NITROSOGUANIDINE 
--- N-N-BUTYL-N-FORMYLHYDRAZINE 
 
--- N-NITROSOBIS(2,2,2-TRIFLUOROETHYL)AMINE (6-F-DEN) 
--- NIGROSINE 
 
--- NITROSOCHLORDLAZEPOXIDE 
--- NOVADELOX 
 
--- PETASrIENINE 
 
--- PHOSPHATED DISTARCH PHOSPHATE 
 
--- PIPERONYL BUTOXIDE IN SOLVENT (butacide) 
--- POLYVINYLPYRIDINE-N-OXIDE 
 
--- PREMARIN (conjupted equine atrogena) 
 
--- QUILLAIA EXTRACT (spray-dried aqueu extrct of quilah bark) 
--- STARCH ACETATE 
 
--- SULFITE, POTASSIUM METABI- 
 
- TITANIUM OXALATE, POTASSIUM 
 
--- BIS-1,4-(CHLOROMETHOXY)BUTANE 
--- BIS-1,6-(CHLOROMETHOXY)HEXANE 
--- N-1-DIACETAMDOFLUORENE 
 
(N-6)-(METHYLNIrTOSO)ADENINE 
 
(N-6)-(MEHYLNITROSO)ADENOSINE 
--- (N-6)-METHYLADENINE 
 
--- (N-6)-METHYLADENOSINE 
 
CAS NUMBER - Chemical Abtacts Service regstry number 
 
APPENDIX 3: STRAIN CODES AND DEFINITIONS 
 
Code Strain 
 
Code Strain 
 
A/He 
 
Ab X IF 
ACI 
 
African green (Cercopithecus aethiops) 
AGUS 
 
A X IF 
ACI/n 
 
A/JJms 
AKR 
 
AKR/J 
albino 
A 
 
Alderly Park 
 
Sprague-Dawley albino 
 
asp 
asw 
b46 
b6a 
b6c 
baj 
bal 
bbb 
bbl 
bce 
bcn 
bd2 
bdf 
bdr 
 
ASH-CS1 
 
Swiss-Webster albino 
BR 46 
 
B6AKF1 
B6C3F1 
BALB/cJ 
BALB/c 
 
Bush babies (Galago crassicaudatus) 
Bethesda black 
BALB/cHe 
 
BALB/c StCrlfC3Hf/Nctr 
BD II 
BD VI 
BD 
 
298 
 
CAS 
 
NUMBERa 
36133-88-7 
 
367024-0 
38434-77-4 
38614-71-6 
38671-73-2 
38777-13-8 
39166-41-7 
39801-14-4 
40548-83 
4201148-3 
 
42679-28-2 
43054-4-1 
50892-23-4 
61326-35-0 
51542-33-7 
 
51786-53-9 
52207-83-7 
53609-64-6 
54150-69-6 
54749-90-5 
66656-92-8 
65657-00-1 
66657-03-4 
65738-64-0 
 
66965-13-4 
666U-62-5 
66796-65-4 
56796-6-6 
66894-91-8 
68139-48-3 
6953641-1 
60391-92-6 
61702-44-1 
63412-06-6 
63886-77-1 
64039-27-6 
 
64049-29-2 
 
aah 
abi 
aci 
afr 
agu 
aif 
ain 
ajj 
 
akr 
aks 
alb 
 
amm 
aps 
asd 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
Code Strain 
 
beagle 
 
Buffalo-Mai 
Buffalo 
C17 
 
C3H/AnCum 
C3Hf/Dp 
 
C3HeB/Fe 
C3H 
 
C3H/HeJ 
 
C3H (C3H/Anl) (Anl 70) 
C3HeB 
C3H/St 
 
C57BL/6J 
C57BL 
 
(C57BL/6 X BALB/c)F1 
C57L 
 
C57BL/6 
CBA 
 
CBA/Cb/Se 
CBA/H-T6 
C3HeB/FeJ 
 
C.B. hooded 
CB 
 
Cb/Sc 
 
Chester Beatty albino 
Charles River CD1 
CDF1 
 
Charles River CD 
CF-1 
CFE 
CFLP 
CFN 
CF 
 
C57BL/He 
C3HfB 
C3H/He 
 
CD-1 HaM/ICR 
C3HeB/Jax 
 
Charles River 
(C57 x IF)F1 
 
(C3H x RIII)F1 
 
Charles River albino 
CSb 
 
C57L/He x 129/Rr x C3HeB/De x SWR/Ly (hybrid of 
 
these parent strains) 
CTM 
 
Carworth Farms 
CFW 
 
Cynomolgus (Macaca fascicularis) 
DBA/2 
ddNi 
dd 
 
DDY 
 
Donryu 
 
Eastern Sprague-Dawley 
Fischer 344 
F344/DuCrj 
FDRL 
 
Food and Drug Research Laboratories 
 
stock rats 
Fischer 
 
Hebrew University 
Ha/ICR 
Harlan 
 
Holtzman albino (Sprague-Dawley derived) 
ICRC x C3h (Jax) 
ICI 
ICR 
 
ICR/Jcl 
 
IF x C57 
IF 
 
Code Strain 
 
jic JCL: ICR 
 
leb Long-Evans BLU: (LE) 
lev Long-Evans 
mgr mongrel 
mrc MRC 
 
mrw MRC-Wistar 
nbr NBR 
 
nbw NZBW (hooded black and white strain) 
nmh Han: NMRI 
nmr NMRI 
 
non non-inbred 
 
nra Norwegian albino 
nss not specified 
nzd NZR/Gd 
 
ofs OFA (Sprague-Dawley derived) 
osm Osborne-Mendel 
 
por MRC Porton (Wistar derived) 
r3m RIII 
rfm RF 
 
rhe Rhesus (Macaca mulatta) 
scd Swiss CD-1 
 
sda Sprague-Dawley 
shc Sherman COBS 
she Sherman 
 
shr Swiss/H/Riop 
sjs SJL/J 
 
sls Slc-Wistar 
 
smw Sas: MRC(WI)BR 
 
sss Sprague-Dawley Spartan 
swa Swiss albino 
swi Swiss 
swr SWR 
 
sww Swiss Webster 
syg Syrian Golden 
tfl Tuck 
 
the Theiller's Original 
tmm TM 
 
tst Tree shrew (T7upaia glis) 
wag WAG 
 
wal Wistar albino 
wi2 Wistar II 
 
wid Wistar/FDRL 
wio Wistar-OSU 
wis Wistar 
 
wmf Wistar-Mai-Furth 
wsh Han: WIST 
 
wsr Wistar-random 
 
wsw Wilmslow Wistar 
wws Wistar W74 
xvi XVII/G 
 
APPENDIX 4: ROUTE OF ADMINISTRATION 
 
CODES AND DEFINITIONS 
 
Code Route of Administration 
cap gelatin capsule, p.o. 
eat diet 
 
gav gavage 
 
inh inhalation 
 
ipj intraperitoneal injection 
 
ivj intravenous injection 
 
mix multiple routes 
 
Used for two compounds: 1)thiourea (rats): intraperito- 
neal injection followed by water; 2) procarbazine HCl 
 
(monkeys): a variety of combinations of diet, subcu- 
taneous, intraperitoneal, and intravenous injection. 
orl gavage preweanling, followed by diet 
wat water 
 
beg 
bfm 
buf 
c17 
c3c 
c3d 
c3e 
c3h 
c3j 
c31 
c3p 
c3s 
c56 
c51 
c7b 
c71 
cb6 
cba 
cbc 
cbh 
cbj 
cbo 
cbr 
cbs 
cbt 
cdl 
cdf 
cdr 
cfl 
cfe 
cfl 
cfn 
cfr 
che 
chf 
chh 
chi 
chj 
 
chm 
cif 
crf 
csa 
csb 
csc 
ctn 
cwf 
cws 
cym 
dba 
ddn 
ddx 
ddy 
don 
esd 
f34 
f3d 
fdr 
fds 
 
fis 
 
hew 
hic 
hrl 
hza 
ic3 
ici 
 
icm 
icr 
ifc 
ifm 
 
299 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
APPENDIX 5: SITE CODES AND DEFINITIONS 
Code Site 
 
--- all target sites 
 
abc abdominal cavity 
abd abdomen 
 
adr adrenal gland 
adu acoustic duct 
 
auc external auditory canal 
aur auricular region 
b/l lung/bronchiole 
bem bucal mucosa 
bil bile duct 
 
blv blood vessels 
bod body cavities 
bom bone marrow 
bon bone 
bra brain 
 
brs brain stem 
 
ccx cerebral cortex 
cec cecum 
 
cli clitoral gland 
clr colorectum 
 
cns central nervous system 
col colon 
 
crb cerebrum 
crl cerebellum 
der dermis 
 
dgt digestive tract 
duo duodenum 
eac ear canal 
ear ear 
 
edu ear duct 
 
ehp extrahepatic tissue 
eld eyelid 
 
epi epidermis 
eso esophagus 
eye eye 
fat fat 
 
fhd forehead 
 
for forestomach 
 
g/b gall bladder/bile duct 
gal gall bladder 
gnv gingiva 
 
hag Harderian gland 
hea heart 
 
hnt hard palate/nasal turbinates 
hpl hypophysis 
hum humerus 
ilm ileum 
 
isp interscapulum 
itl intestinal tract 
itn intestine 
jaw jaw 
 
jej jejunum 
 
k/c kidney/cortex 
k/l kidney/papilla 
k/p kidney/pelvis 
kid kidney 
 
ktu kidney tubule 
1/b lung/bronchus 
 
lab lung/alveoli/bronchioles 
lar larynx 
 
lgi large intestine 
liv liver 
 
lmr lymphoreticular system 
lun lung 
 
lyd lymph node 
 
mam mammary tissue (other than or including more than 
 
mammary gland) 
mds mediastinum 
 
mei mesenteric intestine 
mey mesentery 
 
mgl mammary gland 
 
Code 
mix 
mln 
mth 
mul 
mus 
 
MXA 
MXB 
myc 
nac 
nap 
nas 
nol 
nse 
nsm 
nsp 
ntu 
oes 
olb 
opx 
ova 
pae 
pan 
pdu 
pec 
pep 
per 
phr 
pit 
pls 
pni 
pns 
pre 
prn 
pty 
rec 
rel 
rep 
res 
sev 
sft 
skb 
skf 
ski 
slg 
smi 
spc 
spd 
spl 
stg 
stn 
sto 
sub 
tba 
tes 
thi 
 
thm 
thy 
tnv 
ton 
trh 
tyf 
ubl 
ugi 
unt 
ure 
ute 
utm 
vag 
ver 
zym 
 
Site 
 
more than one site; sites specified in published paper 
mesenteric lymph node 
mouth 
 
multiple organs 
muscle 
 
more than one site, combined by NCI/NTP 
more than one site, combined by Berkeley 
myocardium 
nasal mucosa 
 
nasal passageway 
nasal cavity 
 
n. olfactorius 
nose 
 
nasal septum 
nasopharynx 
 
nasal turbinate 
oesophagus 
 
olfactory bulb 
oropharynx 
ovary 
 
pancreas, exocrine 
pancreas 
 
pancreatic duct 
 
peritoneal cavity 
 
paraepididymal tissue 
peritoneum 
pharynx 
 
pituitary gland 
palate, soft 
 
pancreatic islets 
 
peripheral nervous system 
preputial gland 
pararenal tissue 
parathyroid 
rectum 
 
reticuloendothelium 
reproductive tract 
respiratory system 
seminal vesicle 
 
skin of foot and toe 
skin of back 
skin of flank 
skin 
 
salivary gland 
small intestine 
splenic capsule 
spinal cord 
spleen 
 
stomach, glandular 
 
stomach, nonglandular 
stomach 
 
subcutaneous tissue 
 
all tumor bearing animals 
testis 
thigh 
 
thymus gland 
thyroid gland 
 
tunica vaginalis 
tongue 
trachea 
 
thyroid follicle 
 
urinary bladder 
 
upper gastrointestinal tract 
urinary tract 
ureter 
uterus 
 
uterus/endometrium 
vagina 
 
vertebra 
 
Zymbal's gland 
 
300 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
APPENDIX 6: 
 
HISTOPATHOLOGY CODES AND DEFINITIONS 
 
Histopathology 
all tumors 
 
alveolar/bronchiolar adenoma 
 
alveolar/bronchiolar carcinoma 
alveolar/bronchiolar tumor 
 
adenocarcinoma in adenomatous polyp 
acinar-cell carcinoma 
 
adenocarcinoma, NOS' 
acidophil adenoma 
adenocarcinoma 
adenoma 
 
adenofibroma 
 
adenomatous polyp, NOS or adenocarcinoma in 
 
adenomatous polyp 
adenoma, NOS 
 
adenomatous polyp 
 
adenomatous endometrial polyp 
adenofibromaJfibroadenoma 
angioma 
 
adenoma-like tumor 
 
alveolar-cell adenoma 
 
alveolar-cell carcinoma 
alveolar adenoma 
 
acute myeloblastic leukemia 
adenomyoma 
 
angio-endothelioma, malignant 
angiosarcoma 
 
anaplastic carcinoma 
 
adenomatous polyp, NOS 
 
adenocarcinoma with squamous metaplasia 
astrocytoma 
 
bronchiolar adenoma 
basal-cell carcinoma 
basal-cell papilloma 
basal-cell tumor 
 
bile duct adenoma 
 
bile duct carcinoma 
bile duct tumor 
benign tumor 
 
hepatoma, benign 
 
hepatocellular tumor, benign 
biliary cystadenoma 
 
bronchogenic carcinoma 
basophil adenoma 
 
cholangioadenocarcinoma 
carcinoma, NOS 
carcinoma 
 
carcinosarcoma 
c-cell adenoma 
 
cystadenocarcinoma, NOS 
c-cell carcinoma 
 
cholangioma, cystic 
cholangioma 
 
cholangiocarcinoma 
careinoid 
 
cortical adenoma 
 
cortical carcinoma 
 
chromophobe adenoma 
 
chromophobe carcinoma 
 
carcinoma, combined glandular and squamous type 
ceruminous carcinoma 
cavernous hemangioma 
cystadenoma 
 
cystadenoma, NOS 
leukemia, early 
 
esthesioneuroepithelioma 
epidermoid carcinoma 
ependymoblastoma 
epithelial neoplasm 
epithelioma 
 
Code Histopathology 
 
esp 
ess 
exa 
fba 
fbs 
fea 
fcc 
fdc 
fep 
fib 
fih 
foa 
gcc 
get 
gln 
grl 
gsa 
hae 
het 
 
hem 
hes 
hms 
hnd 
hpa 
hpc 
hph 
hpm 
hpn 
hpt 
ica 
ict 
ile 
isa 
isc 
ivC 
 
kes 
ker 
lbl 
lca 
 
1cc 
lel 
let 
ldc 
lei 
leu 
lhc 
lip 
lka 
lkm 
lle 
lpb 
lps 
lut 
lyk 
lym 
lys 
 
mag 
mal 
mda 
mec 
men 
mhc 
mhp 
mhs 
mht 
mix 
 
mlc 
mle 
 
endometrial stromal polyp 
 
endometrial stromal sarcoma 
exocrine adenoma 
fibroadenoma 
fibrosarcoma 
 
follicular-cell adenoma 
 
follicular-cell carcinoma 
 
follicular adenocarcinoma 
fibroepithelial tumor 
fibroma 
 
fibrous histiocytoma 
follicular adenoma 
 
granulosa-cell carcinoma 
granulosa-cell tumor 
glioma, NOS 
 
granulocytic leukemia 
granulocytic sarcoma 
 
hemangioendothelioma 
hepatocellular tumor 
hemangioma 
 
hemangiosarcoma 
 
hemangioendothelial sarcoma 
hyperplastic nodules 
 
hepatocellular adenoma 
 
hepatocellular carcinoma 
 
hepatocellular hyperplastic nodule 
hemangiopericytoma, malignant 
hepatocellular neoplastic nodule 
hepatoma 
 
interstitial-cell adenoma 
interstitial-cell tumor 
 
leukemia, indeterminate type 
islet-cell adenoma 
 
islet-cell carcinoma 
carcinoma, invasive 
 
Kuppfer-cell sarcoma 
keratoacanthoma 
 
lymphoblastic lymphoma 
liver-cell adenoma 
 
liver-cell carcinoma 
 
lymphocytic lymphoma 
liver-cell tumor 
 
Leydig-cell tumor 
leiomyosarcoma 
leukemia 
 
lymphoma, histiocytic type 
lipoma 
 
acute leukemia 
 
lymphoma/leukemia 
 
lymphocytic leukemia 
 
liver-cell tumor, type B 
liposarcoma 
luteoma 
 
lymphatic leukemia 
lymphoma 
 
lymphosarcoma 
 
malignant glioma 
malignant tumor 
 
medullary adenoma 
 
muco-epidermoid carcinoma 
mesothelioma, NOS 
 
mixed hepato/cholangio carcinoma 
malignant hepatoma 
 
histiocytoma, malignant 
 
hepatocellular tumor, malignant 
more than one tumor type; 
 
tumor types specified in published paper 
melanocytoma 
 
monocytic leukemia 
 
Code 
 
ala 
a/c 
a/t 
aca 
acc 
acn 
ace 
adc 
ade 
adf 
adm 
 
adn 
adp 
aep 
aff 
 
agm 
akt 
ala 
alc 
ald 
aml 
amy 
ane 
ang 
apc 
apn 
asm 
ast 
b/a 
bcc 
bcp 
bct 
bda 
bdc 
bdt 
ben 
bhp 
bht 
blc 
bro 
bsa 
cac 
can 
car 
cas 
cca 
ccn 
ccr 
ccy 
cho 
clc 
cnd 
coa 
coc 
cra 
crc 
crt 
cuc 
cvh 
cye 
cyn 
eal 
ene 
epc 
epd 
epn 
epo 
 
301 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Histopathology 
 
malignant lymphoma, histiocytic type 
myelogenous leukemia 
melanotic tumor 
 
malignant lymphoma 
meningioma 
 
malignant lymphoma, NOS 
mesenchymal neoplasm 
 
mesothelioma, malignant 
mesothelioma 
 
mucinous adenocarcinoma 
 
mucinous cystadenocarcinoma 
more than one tumor type, 
 
combined by NCI/NTP 
 
more than one tumor type, 
 
combined by Berkeley 
myelocytic lqukemia 
myeloid leukemia 
neoplasm, NOS 
neoplasm 
 
nephroblastoma 
neuroblastoma 
 
neurofibrosarcoma 
neoplastic nodule 
 
nodular hyperplasia 
 
neoplasm, NOS, malignant 
 
olfactory epithelial carcinoma 
olfactory carcinoma 
oligodendroglioma 
 
olfactory neuroblastoma 
osteosarcoma 
 
papillary adenocarcinoma 
papilloma 
 
papillomatosis 
 
parenchymal adenoma 
 
papillary cystadenocarcinoma, NOS 
papillary cystadenoma, NOS 
pheochromocytoma 
 
pheochromocytoma, malignant 
polypoid adenoma 
plasmacytoma 
 
papillary mesothelioma 
polyp 
 
papillary adenoma 
 
papillary carcinoma 
papilloma, NOS 
papillary polyp 
 
papillary transitional-cell carcinoma 
papillary tumor 
 
carcinoma, preinvasive 
renal-cell carcinoma 
renal-cell tumor 
 
reticulum-cell tumor 
rhabdomyosarcoma 
 
reticulum-cell neoplasm, type A 
respiratory epithelial carcinoma 
reticulum-cell sarcoma, type B 
reticulum-cell sarcoma 
 
scirrhous adenocarcinoma 
sarcoma 
 
solid-cell adenoma 
 
spindle-cell sarcoma 
Sertoli-cell tumor 
 
sebaceous adenoma 
 
sebaceous adenoma and adenocarcinoma 
sebaceous adenocarcinoma 
sweat gland carcinoma 
squamous-cell tumor 
 
squamous-cell carcinoma 
 
squamous-cell carcinoma, keratinized 
squamous-cell papilloma 
 
squamous-cell carcinoma, stratified 
 
Code Histopathology 
sin sarcoma, NOS 
 
ssc sebaceous squamous-cell carcinoma 
tcc transitional-cell carcinoma 
tla tubular-cell adenoma 
tma thymoma 
 
tpp transitional-cell papilloma 
tri trichoepithelioma 
tua tubular adenoma 
 
tum tumor or more than one tumor type; 
 
tumor types not specified in published paper 
uac tubular-cell adenocarcinoma 
ulc undifferentiated carcinoma 
ule undifferentiated leukemia 
vsc all vascular tumors 
 
'NOS = not otherwise specified. 
 
APPENDIX 7: NOTECODES AND DEFINITIONS 
 
Code Definition 
 
a The exposure time reported on the plot is an average of the 
 
different exposure times of the individual dose groups in the 
experiment. In addition, for NCI/NTP bioassays an "a"' may 
indicate that all animals in one group were dead long before those 
in another group, and therefore the experiment time on the plot 
is an average of experiment times for the different dose groups. 
(In the TD50 calculation for the NCI/NTP bioassays, full lifetable 
data have been used.) 
 
b Diet was specially prepared to be deficient in one or more 
 
vitamins. 
 
d A cyclic dosing schedule was followed for part of the exposure 
 
time, with at least one week between cycles, e.g., 3 weeks dosed, 
one week not dosed. 
 
e For the general literature we have used an effective number of 
 
animals in a group whenever possible. This effective number is 
either: (1) the number of animals examined, or (2) the number of 
animals alive at the time of appearance of the first tumor. For 
some NCI/NTP bioassays the Technical Report includes both 
time-adjusted and unadjusted statistical analyses. Effective 
number indicates that some sites in these experiments have been 
included in the plot on the basis of the time-adjusted analysis. 
f Diet was specially prepared to have a lower than average protein 
 
level. 
 
g Some or all of the animals were used as breeders during the 
 
course of the experiment. 
 
k For interim and serial sacrifice experiments, we have reported 
 
each sacrifice time as a separate experiment. The k notecode 
identifies these sacrificed groups. Unscheduled deaths have been 
included with the terminal sacrifice data, wherever possible and 
do not receive a notecode. 
 
m The calculated dose level for a group is an average of either (1) 
 
different doses administered to individual animals, or (2) the 
range of doses administered. 
 
r Authors either examined or chose to report data for only a few 
 
selected tissues. Therefore, this is a restricted site analysis. 
 
s Authors noted that survival was decreased due to toxicity or 
 
disease. 
 
u Tests in monkeys are still in progress. The vinylidene chloride 
 
experiment in mice has been completed, but the final report has 
not yet been published. 
 
v Variable or irregular dosing schedules have been used, e.g., dose 
 
level changed during the experiment. 
 
w Monkey control animals are from a colony which includes both 
 
vehicle and untreated controls. Some animals have been used as 
breeders. Seventy percent of the animals are born in the colony; 
thirty percent are brought in from the wild as adults. The age of 
controls ranges from neonate to greater than 16 years. Only 
controls which have died are included in the TD50 calculations. 
x Exposure began before the animals were weaned. 
 
Code 
mlh 
mlk 
mlt 
mly 
mng 
mno 
mnp 
msm 
mso 
mua 
muc 
 
MXA 
MXB 
mye 
myl 
nen 
neo 
nep 
neu 
nfs 
nnd 
nod 
npm 
oec 
olc 
oli 
oln 
ost 
pac 
pam 
pas 
pca 
pcn 
pcy 
phe 
phm 
pla 
plc 
 
pms 
pol 
ppa 
ppc 
ppn 
ppp 
ptc 
ptm 
pvc 
rec 
rct 
ret 
rhb 
rna 
rsc 
rtb 
rts 
sad 
sar 
sca 
scs 
sct 
sea 
seb 
sec 
sgc 
sqa 
sqc 
sqk 
sqp 
sqs 
 
302 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
Code Definition 
 
y In experiments from two papers, animals were dosed for only 25 
 
weeks; one week short of the standard criterion. Due to 
rounding, 6 months is reported as the exposure time on the plot. 
z In a report of these vinyl chloride experiments (20), the author 
 
notes 'All the animals exposed to the highest doses (30,000 and 
10,000 ppm for 52 weeks), with or without tumors, were 
examined radiologically during treatment and/or at death; 
moreover, radiologic examinations have also been made on 
several animals bearing tumors even though these animals had 
been exposed to the lower doses:" The experiment at the highest 
dose (30,000 ppm) is not included in the database. The reported 
data include the 10,000 ppm or lower doses. 
 
APPENDIX 8: DOSE-RESPONSE CURVE 
 
SYMBOLS AND DEFINITIONS 
Symbol Dose-Response Curve 
 
* consistent with linearity 
 
/ significant departure from linearity, upward curvature 
 
significant departure from linearity, downward curvature 
Z significant departure from linearity, more than three dose 
 
groups including controls 
 
blank either no dose-related effect, or only two dose groups 
 
including controls, so not enough information to deter- 
mine a curve shape 
 
APPENDIX 9: 
 
REFERENCE CODES AND DEFINITIONS 
 
Code Reference 
 
adsc Academie des Sciences, Memoires et Communications des 
 
Membres et des Correspondants de l'Academie 
 
aenh Archives of Environmental Health (formerly A.M.A. Ar- 
 
chives of Industrial Health, prior to July 1, 1960) 
 
agfc Agricultural and Food Chemistry: Past, Present, Future 
 
(R. Teranishi, Ed.), Avi Publishing Company, Inc., 
Westport, Conn., 1978 
 
ajpa American Journal of Pathology 
 
amih American Industrial Hygiene Association Journal (formerly 
 
American Industrial Hygiene Association Quarterly, prior 
to Feb. 1958) 
 
anoh The Annals of Occupational Hygiene 
 
apms Acta Patholologica et Microbiologica Scandinavica Section 
 
A. Pathology 
 
arpa Archives of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine (formerly 
 
Archives of Pathology, Mar. 1928-Sept. 1950; A.M.A. Ar- 
chives of Pathology, Oct. 1950- June 1960) 
artx Archives of Tbxicology 
arzn Arzneimittel-Forschung 
 
atmh American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 
 
(formerly American Journal of Tropical Medicine, 1921- 
1951) 
 
banb Banbury Report 5 Ethylene Dichloride: A Potential Health 
 
Risk? (B. Ames, P Infante and R. Reitz, Eds.), Cold 
Spring Harbor Laboratory, 1980. 
becr N.C.I. Brief Communication 
bdca Bulletin du Cancer 
 
bebm Byulleten' Eksperimental'noi Biologii i Meditsiny 
 
bect Bulletin of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology 
bjca British Journal of Cancer 
bmjl British Medical Journal 
 
bwho Bulletin WH.O. (World Health Organization) 
 
Code Reference 
canc Cancer 
 
canr Cancer Research 
carc Carcinogenesis 
 
carm Carcinogenesis, Vol. 2. Mechanisms of Tumor Promotion 
 
and Cocarcinogenesis (T. J. Slaga, A. Sivak, and R. K. 
Boutwell, Eds.), Raven Press, New York, 1978 
clet Cancer Letters 
cmsp Chemosphere 
 
ctxf Chemical Tbxicology of Food. Proceedings of the Interna- 
 
tional Symposium on Chemical Toxicology of Food, Milan, 
June 8-10, 1978 (C. L. Galli, R. Paoletti and G. Vettorazzi, 
Eds.), Elsevier/North-Holland Biomedical Press, New 
York, 1978 
 
dact Drug and Chemical Toxicology 
 
defr A Two-year Toxicity and Oncogenicity Study with Acryloni- 
 
trile Incorporated in the Drinking Water of Rats. (J. F 
Quast, C. E. Wade, C. G. Humiston, R. M. Carreon, E. A. 
Hermann, C. N. Park and B. A. Schwetz). Final Report. 
Dow Chemical U.S.A., Midland, MI, 1980 
 
dcrp A Two-year Toxicity and Oncogenicity Study with Acryloni- 
 
trile Following Inhalation Exposure of Rats (J. F Quast, D. 
J. Schuetz, M. F Balmer, T. S. Gushow, C. N. Park and M. 
J. McKenna). Final Report. Dow Chemical U.S.A., Midland, 
MI, 1980 
 
eaes Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety 
 
ejca European Journal of Cancer (European Journal of Cancer 
 
and Clinical Oncology since 1982) 
 
enhp Environmental Health Perspectives 
envr Environmental Research 
expa Experientia 
 
fctx Food and Cosmetics Tbxicology (Food and Chemical Toxi- 
 
cology since 1982) 
gaga Gastroenterology 
gann Gann 
 
gmcr Gann Monograph on Cancer Research 
 
ijen International Journal of Cancer (formerly International 
 
Union Against Cancer. Acta. Vols. 1-20, 1936-64) 
 
imed International Journal of Occupational Health and Safety 
 
(formerly Industrial Medicine and Surgery of Trauma, 
June-July 1949; Industrial Medicine and Surgery, Aug. 
1949-73) 
 
jept Journal of Environmental Pathology and Toxicology 
 
jiht Journal of Industrial Hygiene and Toxicology (formerly 
 
Journal of Industrial Hygiene, 1919-35) 
jkmj Jikeikai Medical Journal 
 
jnci Journal of the National Cancer Institute (U.S. National 
 
Cancer Institute. Journal) 
jnut Journal of Nutrition 
 
jpat Journal of Pathology (formerly Journal of Pathology and 
 
Bacteriology, prior to 1969) 
 
jphp Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology 
 
jtxe Journal of Toxicology and Environmental Health 
 
lapp Lavori dell Instituto di Anatomia e Istologia Patologica, 
 
Universita degli Studi, Perugia, Italy 
livt Laboratory Investigation 
lmdl La Medicina del Lavoro 
 
mpoc Morphological Precursors of Cancer (L. Severi, Ed.) Divison 
 
of Cancer Research, Perugia, Italy, 1962 
myco Mycopathologia 
natu Nature 
 
nawi Naturwissenschaften 
nplm Neoplasma 
 
ntis National Technical Information Service. Evaluation of 
 
Carcinogenic, Teratogenic, and Mutagenic Activities of 
Selected Pesticides and Industrial Chemicals. Vol. 1: 
Carcinogenic Study. NTIS, Springfield, VA, 1968 
obgy Obstetrics and Gynecology 
onco Oncology 
 
ossc Organ and Species Specificity in Chemical Carcinogenesis. 
 
(R. Langenbach, S. Nesnow, and J. M. Rice, Eds.), 
Plenum Press, New York, 1982 
 
303 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
Code Reference 
 
pcpl Pentachlorophenol (K. Ranga Rao, Ed.), Plenum Press, 
 
New York, 1978 
 
pseb Proceedings of the Society for Experimental Biology and 
 
Medicine (New York) 
 
reec Revue Europeen d'Etudes Cliniques et Biologiques 
sabo Sabouraudia 
scie Science 
 
srfr Booklet 1, 1976. Phase I Studies on the Carcinogenic 
 
Activity of Anticancer Drugs in Mice and Rats (H. E. 
Skipper) Final Report. Southern Research Institute. 
Birmingham, AL, 1976 
 
stev Science of the Total Environment 
 
tcam Teratogenesis, Carcinogenesis, and Mutagenesis 
tjem Tohoku Journal of Experimental Medicine 
tumo Thmori 
 
txap Tbxicology and Applied Pharmacology 
txcy Toxicology 
 
txlt Toxicology Letters 
 
txoc Toxicology and Occupational Medicine. Proceedings of the 
 
10th Inter-American Conference on Toxicology and Occupa- 
tional Medicine. Oct. 22nd-25th, 1978. Miami, FL (W 
Deichmann, Ed.), Developments in Toxicology and Environ- 
mental Science, Vol. 4. Elsevier/North-Holland, New York, 
1979 
 
urre Urological Research 
 
vopr Voprosy Onkologii (Problems in Oncology) 
vpit Voprosy Pitaniya (Problems in Nutrition) 
yjbm Yale Journal of Biology and Medicine 
 
zkko Journal of Cancer Research and Clinical Oncology (formerly 
 
Zeitschrift fur Krebsforschung und Klinische Onkologie, 
prior to Vol. 92, 1979) 
 
APPENDIX 10: NCI/NTP BIOASSAYS 
 
WITH COMBINED CONTROLS 
 
Chemical Name Experiments 
 
with Combined Controls 
ACRONYCINE rats, female mice 
3-AMINO-4-ETHOXYACETANILIDE rats, mice 
2-AMINOANTHRAQUINONE mice 
 
2,4-DIAMINOANISOLE SULFATE rats, mice 
2,5-DIAMINOTOLUENE SULFATE rats, mice 
2,4-DINITROTOLUENE rats, mice 
 
FENAMINOSULF, FORMULATED female mice 
HYDRAZOBENZENE rats, mice 
5-NITRO-o-ANISIDINE rats, mice 
5-NITROACENAPHTHENE rats 
 
4-NITROANTHRANILIC ACID rats, mice 
6-NITROBENZIMIDAZOLE rats, mice 
1-NITRONAPHTHALENE rats, mice 
PHENESTERIN mice 
STYRENE rats 
THIO-TEPA rats 
 
APPENDIX 11: NCI/NTP BIOASSAYS 
 
WITH REVISED DATA 
 
Chemical Name Experiments 
 
with Revised Data 
 
2-AMINOANTHRAQUINONE 
AZINPHOSMETHYL 
CAPTAN 
 
CHLORAMBEN 
 
rats, mice 
rats, mice 
rats 
rats 
 
Chemical Name Experiments 
 
with Revised Data 
1,2-DICHLOROETHANE rats 
DICOFOL mice 
DIELDRIN, PHOTO- rats 
1,4-DIOXANE mice 
 
DIOXATHION rats, mice 
ENDRIN rats, mice 
HYDRAZOBENZENE rats, mice 
2-METHYL-1-NITROANTHRAQUINONE mice 
 
5-NITRO-o-TOLUIDINE rats, mice 
PHOSPHAMIDON rats 
PICLORAM rats 
 
APPENDIX 12: NCI/NTP BIOASSAYS EVALUATED 
 
AS INADEQUATE IN TECHNICAL REPORTS 
 
Chemical Name Experiments Evaluated 
 
as Inadequate 
ACRONYCINE mice 
ALLYL CHLORIDE rats 
 
5-AZACYTIDINE rats, male mice 
CHLOROPICRIN rats 
 
CLONITRALID male mice 
m-CRESIDINE male mice 
 
DIBUTYLTIN DIACETATE female rats 
EMETINE 2HCl rats, mice 
 
ENDOSULFAN male rats, male mice 
 
NITROFEN male rats (C00421 only) 
PHOSPHAMIDON rats 
 
PROFLAVINE HCl HEMIHYDRATE rats, mice 
 
PYRAZINAMIDE female mice 
PYRIMETHAMINE male mice 
TETRACHLOROETHYLENE rats 
1-THIOGUANINE DEOXYRIBOSIDE mice 
 
1,1,1-TRICHLOROETHANE rats, mice 
TRICHLOROFLUOROMETHANE rats 
 
APPENDIX 13: NONHUMAN PRIMATES 
 
A special literature search was conducted for chemical carcinogene- 
sis experiments in nonhuman primates. While many research reports 
were identified, few fit the standard inclusion criteria used for the rest 
of the database. Most of the tests did not meet the inclusion rules for 
one of the following reasons: (1) fewer than five dosed animals; (2) no 
control group; or (3) short experiment time. 
 
We subsequently relaxed the standard criteria in order to include 
tests from which a reasonable estimate of TD50 could be made. The 
major change has been to reduce the required experiment length from 
half the standard lifespan to 3 years for monkeys and 2 years for bush 
babies, if the author evaluated the compound as carcinogenic in that 
short time. The TD50 values from these shorter tests have been 
calculated with an extrapolation factor greater than that for other 
tests in the database, and are therefore less reliable. These cases are 
flagged in the plot with parentheses around the TD50. 
 
Most of the experiments on nonhuman primates in the database are 
from the Laboratory of Chemical Pharmacology, National Cancer 
Institute (NCI). Several of these experiments are still in progress and 
have been included in the database only if the researchers have 
already reported that the test compound is carcinogenic. We have 
excluded experiments still in progress and without evidence of 
carcinogenicity because tumor induction may still occur. (For example, 
the test of saccharin is excluded.) The TD50 calculations for the 
experiments still in progress are based only on dosed and control 
animals which have already died. 
 
304 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 305 
 
Some special considerations about these tests from the Laboratory 
of Chemical Pharmacology, (NCI) are as follows: (1) Data for males 
and females have been combined because the results for both sexes of 
control animals were reported together. (2) Histopathology was 
reported only for malignant neoplasms. (3) The first dose was usually 
administered at birth; however, in some experiments, the age at first 
dose ranged from neonate to adult. (4) Dosing may have been as 
infrequent as one time per month. (5) Monkey control animals are 
from a colony which includes both vehicle and untreated controls. 
Some animals have been used as breeders. Seventy percent of the 
animals are born in the colony, 30% are brought in from the wild as 
adults. The age of controls ranges from neonate to greater than 16 
years. Only controls which have died are included in the TD50 
calculations. (6) For one compound, procarbazine HCl, we accepted 
subcutaneous injection as a route of administration when given in 
combination with either diet or intraperitoneal injection. 
 
APPENDIX 14 
 
Bibliography: General Literature 
 
1. Adamson, R. H., and Sieber, S. M. Chemical carcinogenesis 
 
studies in nonhuman primates. In: Organ and Species Specificity 
in Chemical Carcinogenesis. (R. Langenback and S. Newnow, 
Eds.), Plenum Press, New York and London, 1982 pp. 129-156. 
2. Adolphs, H. D., Thiele, J., Kiel, H., and Steffens, L. Induction 
 
of transitional cell carcinoma of the urinary bladder in rats by 
feeding N-[4-(5-nitro-2-furyl)-2-thiazolyl]formamide. Urol. Res. 
6: 19-27(1978). 
 
3. Agthe, C., Garcia, H., Shubik, R, Tomatis, L., and Wenyon, E. 
 
Study of the potential carcinogenicity of DDT in the Syrian 
golden hamster (34740). Proc. Soc. Exptl. Biol. Med. 134: 
113-116(1970). 
 
4. Allmark, M. G., Grice, H. C., and Mannell, W A. Chronic 
 
toxicity studies on food colours. Part II. Observations on the 
toxicity of FD&C Green No. 2 (light green SF yellowish), FD&C 
Orange No. 2 (orange SS) and FD&C Red No. 32 (oil red XO) in 
rats. J. Pharm. Pharmacol. 8: 417-424(1956). 
 
5. Allmark, M. G., Mannell, W A., and Grice, H. C. Chronic 
 
toxicity studies on food colours. Part III. Observations on the 
toxicity of malachite green, new coccine and nigrosine in rats. J. 
Pharm. Pharmacol. 9: 622-628(1957). 
 
6. Anderson, L. M., Giner-Sorolla, A., Greenbaum, J. H., Last- 
 
Barney, K., and Budinger, J. M. Induction of reproductive 
system tumors in mice by N6-(methylnitroso)-adenosine and a 
tumorigenic effect of its combined precursors. Int. J. Cancer 24: 
319-322(1979). 
 
7. Andrianova, M. M. Carcinogenic properties of red food pigments 
 
-amaranth, SX purple and ponceau 4R. Vopr. Pitan. 29: 
61-65(1970). 
 
8. Andrianova, M. M., and Alekscev, I. V On carcinogenic proper- 
 
ties of the pesticides Sevin, maneb, ziram and zineb. Vopr. Pitan. 
29: 71-74(1970). 
 
9. Angsubhakorn, S., Bhamarapravati, N., Romruen, K., Saha- 
 
phong, S., Thamavit, W, and Miyamoto, M. Further study of 
alpha benzene hexachloride inhibition of aflatoxin Bi hepatocar- 
cinogenesis in rats. Brit. J. Cancer 43: 881-883(1981). 
 
10. Aoyagi, M., Matsukura, N., Uchida, E., Kawachi, T., Sugimura, 
 
T., Takayama, S., and Matsui, M. Induction of liver tumors in 
Wistar rats by sodium nitrite given in pellet diet. J. Natl. 
Cancer Inst. 65: 411-414(1980). 
 
11. Arai, M., Aoki, Y, Nakanishi, K., Miyata, Y, Mori, T., and Ito, 
 
N. Long-term experiment of maximal non-carcinogenic dose of 
dimethylnitrosamine for carcinogenesis in rats. Gann 70: 549-558 
(1979). 
 
12. Arai, M., Cohen, S. M., Jacobs, J. B., and Friedell, G. H. Effect 
 
of dose on urinary bladder carcinogenesis induced in F344 rats 
by N-[4-(5-nitro-2-furyl)-2-thiazolyl]formamide. J. Natl. Cancer 
Inst. 62: 1013-1016(1979). 
 
13. Argus, M. F., Arcos, J. C., and Hoch-Ligeti, C. Studies on the 
 
carcinogenic activity of protein-denaturing agents: hepatocarci- 
nogenicity of dioxane. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 35: 949-958(1965). 
 
14. Argus, M. F., White, L. E., Bryant, G. M., Arcos, J. C., and 
 
Hoch-Ligeti, C. Molecular specificity of the tumorigenic action 
of ethionine: the inactivity of S-ethylcysteine. Action on respira- 
tory parameters. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 75: 201-208 (1971). 
15. Armuth, V Leukaemogenic action of phorbol in intact and 
 
thymectomized mice of different strains. Brit. J. Cancer 34: 
516-522(1976). 
 
16. Arnold, D. L., Moodie, C. A., Grice, H. C., Charbonneau, S. 
 
M., Stavric, B., Collins, B. T., McGuire, P F, Zawidzka, Z. Z., 
and Munro, I. C. Long-term toxicity of ortho-toluenesulfonamide 
and sodium saccharin in the rat. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 52: 
113-152 (1980). 
 
17. Baigusheva, M. M. Carcinogenic properties of the amaranth 
 
paste. Vopr. Pitan. 27: 46-50(1968). 
 
18. Barnes, J. M., Magee, P N., Boyland, E., Haddow, A., Passey, 
 
R. D., Bullough, W S., Cruickshank, C. N. D., Salaman, M. H., 
and Williams, R. T. The non-toxicity of maleic hydrazide for 
mammalian tissues. Nature 180: 62-64(1957). 
 
19. Barrows, G. H., Christopherson, W M., and Drill, V A. Liver 
 
lesions and oral contraceptive steroids. J. Toxicol. Environ. 
Health 3: 219-230(1977). 
 
20. Baroni, C., van Esch, G. J., and Saffiotti, U. Carcinogenesis 
 
tests of two inorganic arsenicals. Arch. Environ. Health 7: 
668-674(1963). 
 
21. Beal, D. D., Skibba, J. L., Croft, W A., Cohen, S. M., and 
 
Bryan, G. T. Carcinogenicity of the antineoplastic agent, 5- 
(3,3-dimethyl-1-triazeno)-imidazole-4-carboxamide, and its me- 
tabolites in rats. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 54: 951-957(1975). 
 
22. Benya, T. J., Busey, W M., Dorato, M. A., and Berteau, P E. 
 
Inhalation carcinogenicity of vinyl bromide in rats. Toxicol. 
Appl. Pharmacol. 64: 367-379(1982). 
 
23. Bhide, S. V, Maru, G. B., Sawai, M. M., and Ranadive, K. J. 
 
Isoniazid tumorigenicity in mice under different experimental 
conditions. Int. J. Cancer 21: 381-386(1978). 
 
24. Bhide, S. V, D'Souza, R. A., Sawai, M. M., and Ranadive, K. J. 
 
Lung tumour incidence in mice treated with hydrazine sulphate. 
Int. J. Cancer 18: 530-535(1976). 
 
25. Biancifiori, C., Bucciarelli, E., Clayson, D. B., and Santilli, F E. 
 
Induction of hepatomas in CBA/Cb/Se mice by hydrazine sul- 
phate and the lack of effect of croton oil on tumour induction in 
BALB/c/Cb/Se mice. Brit. J. Cancer 18: 543-550(1964). 
 
26. Biancifiori, C., Milia, U., and Di Leo, F P Tumori della tiroide 
 
indotti mediante etionamide (ET) in topi femmina vergini 
BALB/c/Cb/Se substrain. Lav. Inst. Anat. Istol. Patol. Univ. 
Studi Perugia. 24: 145-165(1964). 
 
27. Blair, D., Dix, K. M., Hunt, P F, Thorpe, E., Stevenson, D. E., 
 
and Walker, A. I. T. A 2-year inhalation carcinogenesis study in 
rats. Arch. Toxicol. 35: 281-294(1976). 
 
28. Bonser, G. M., Clayson, D. B., Jull, J. W, and Pyrah, L. N. The 
 
carcinogenic properties of 2-amino-1-naphthol hydrochloride and 
its parent amine 2-naphthylamine. Brit. J. Cancer 6: 412-424 
(1952). 
 
29. Borchert, R, Miller, J. A., Miller, E. C., and Shires, T. K. 
 
1'-Hydroxysafrole, a proximate carcinogenic metabolite of saf- 
role in the rat and mouse. Cancer Res. 33: 590-600(1973). 
 
30. Borzsonyi, M., Torok, G., Pinter, A., Surjan, A., Nadasdi, L., 
 
and Roller, P Carcinogenic effect of dinitrosopiperazine in adult 
Swiss mice and after transplacental or translactational exposure. 
Cancer Res. 40: 2925-2927(1980). 
 
31. Boyland, E., Carter, R. L., Gorrod, J. W, and Roe, F J. C. 
 
Carcinogenic properties of certain rubber additives. Eur. J. 
Cancer 4: 233-239(1968). 
 
32. Boyland, E., Roe, E J. C., Gorrod, J. W, and Mitchley, B. C. V 
 
The carcinogenicity of nitrosoanabasine a possible constituent of 
tobacco smoke. Brit. J. Cancer 18: 265-270(1964). 
 
33. Bralow, S. R, Gruenstein, M., and Meranze, D. R. Host 
 
resistance to gastric adenocarcinomatosis in three strains of rats 
ingesting N-methyl-N'-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine. Oncology 27: 
168-180(1973). 
 
34. Brantom, P G., Gaunt, I. F, and Grasso, P Long-term toxicity 
 
of sodium cyclamate in mice. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 11: 
735-746(1973). 
 
306 GOLD ET AL. 
 
35. Brantom, P G., Gaunt, I. F, Hardy, J., Grasso, P, and Gangolli, 
 
S. D. Long-term feeding and reproduction studies on emulsifier 
YN in rats. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 11: 755-769(1973). 
 
36. Brown, E. V, and Hamdan, A. A. Carcinogenic activity of 
 
analogues of p-dimethylaminoazobenzene. V Effect of added 
methyl groups in the pyridine series. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 37: 
365-367(1966). 
 
37. Bulay, O., Mirvish, S. S., Garcia, H., Pelfrene, A. F, Gold, B., 
 
and Eagen, M. Carcinogenicity test of six nitrosamides and a 
nitrosocyanamide administered orally to rats. J. Natl. Cancer 
Inst. 62: 1523-1528(1979). 
 
38. Burtin, C., Scheinmann, P, Salomon, J. C., Lespinats, G., 
 
Frayssinet, C., Lebel, B., and Canu, P Increased tissue 
histamine in tumour-bearing mice and rats. Brit. J. Cancer 43: 
684-688(1981). 
 
39. Butler, W H. Long-term effects of phenobarbitone-Na on male 
 
Fischer rats. Brit. J. Cancer 37: 418-423(1978). 
 
40. Butler, W H., and Barnes, J. M. Carcinogenic action of 
 
groundnut meal containing aflatoxin in rats. Food Cosmet. 
Toxicol. 6: 135-141 (1968). 
 
41. Byron, W R., Bierbower, G. W, Brower, J. B., and Hansen, W 
 
H. Pathologic changes in rats and dogs from two-year feeding of 
sodium arsenite or sodium arsenate. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 
10: 132-147 (1967) 
 
42. Cabral, J. R. R, Hall, R. K., Bronczyk, S. A., and Shubik, P 
 
A carcinogenicity study of the pesticide dieldrin in hamsters. 
Cancer Lett. 6: 241-246 (1979). 
 
43. Cabral, J. R. P, Hall, R. K., Bronczyk, S. A., and Shubik, P 
 
Lack of carcinogenicity of DDT in hamsters. Tumori 68: 5- 
10 (1982). 
 
44. Cabral, J. R. P, Hall, R. K., Rossi, L., Bronczyk, S. A., and 
 
Shubik, P Effects of long-term DDT intake on rats. Thmori 68: 
11-17 (1982). 
 
45. Cabral, J. R. P, Mollner, T., Raitano, F, and Shubik, P 
 
Carcinogenesis of hexachlorobenzene in mice. Int. J. Cancer 23: 
47-51 (1979). 
 
46. Cabral, J. R., Rossi, L., Dragani, T. A., and Della Porta, G. 
 
Carcinogenicity study of 3-(5-nitro-2-furyl)-imidazo(1,2-alpha) 
pyridine in mice and rats. Tumori 66: 131-144 (1980). 
 
47. Cabral, J. R. R, Shubik, P, Mollner, T., and Raitano, F 
 
Carcinogenic activity of hexachlorobenzene in hamsters. Nature 
265: 510-511 (1977). 
 
48. Cameron, G. R., and Cheng, K. K. Failure of oral D.D.T. to 
 
induce toxic changes in rats. Brit. Med. J. 2: 819-821 (1951). 
49. Casas, C. B. Induction of hepatomas by thiouracil in inbred 
 
strains of mice. Proc. Soc. Exptl. Biol. Med. 113: 493-494 (1963). 
50. Chouroulinkov, I., Gentil, A., and Guerin, M. Etude de l'activite 
 
carcinogene du 9,10-dimethyl-benzanthracene et du 3,4-benzo- 
pyrene administres par voie digestive. Bull. Cancer 54: 67-78 
(1967). 
 
51. Christov, K., and Raichev, R. Thyroid carcinogenesis in hamsters 
 
aftertreatmentwith 131-iodine and methylthiouracil. Cancer Res. 
Clin. Oncol. 77: 171-179(1972). 
 
52. Chu, I., Villeneuve, D. C., Valli, V E., Secours, V E., and 
 
Becking, G. C. Chronic toxicity of photomirex in the rat. Toxicol. 
Appl. Pharmacol. 59: 268-278(1981). 
 
53. Clapp, N. K., Craig, A. W, and Toya, R. E. Oncogenicity by 
 
methyl methanesulfonate in male RF mice. Science 161: 913-914 
(1968). 
 
54. Clapp, N. K., Tryndall, R. L., Cumming, R. B., and Otten, J. A. 
 
Effects of butylated hydroxytoluene alone or with diethylnitro- 
samine in mice. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 12: 367-371(1974). 
 
55. Clapp, N. K., Tyndall, R. L., Satterfield, L. C., Klima, W C., 
 
and Bowles, N. D. Selective sex-related modification of diethyl- 
nitrosamine-induced carcinogenesis in BALB/c mice by con- 
comitant administration of butylated hydroxytoluene. J. Natl. 
Cancer Inst. 61: 177-180(1978). 
 
56. Clayson, D. B., Lawson, T. A., and Pringle, J. A. S. The 
 
carcinogenic action of 2-aminodiphenylene oxide and 4-amino- 
diphenyl on the bladder and liver of the C57 x IF mouse. 
Brit. J. Cancer 21: 755-762(1967). 
 
57. Clayson, D. B., Lawson, T. A., Santana, S., and Bonser, G. M. 
 
Correlation between the chemical induction of hyperplasia and of 
 
malignancy in the bladder epithelium. Brit. J. Cancer 19: 
297-310 (1965). 
 
58. Cleveland, F P A summary of work on aldrin and dieldrin 
 
toxicity at the Kettering Laboratory. Arch. Environ. Health 13: 
195-198(1966). 
 
59. Cohen, S. M., and Bryan, G. T. Effect of p-hydroxyacetanilide, 
 
sodium sulfate, and L-methionine on the leukemogenicity of 
N-[4-(5-nitro-2-furyl)-2-thiazolyl]acetamide. Cancer Res. 38: 
1398-1405(1978). 
 
60. Cohen, S. M., Erturk, E., and Bryan, G. T. Comparative 
 
carcinogenicity of 5-nitrothiophenes and 5-nitrofurans in rats. J. 
Natl. Cancer Inst. 57: 277-282(1976). 
 
61. Cohen, S. M., Erturk, E., Price, J. M., and Bryan, G. T. 
 
Comparative carcinogenicity in the rat of 2-hydrazinothiazoles 
with nitrofuryl, nitrophenyl, or aminophenyl substituents in the 
4-position. Cancer Res. 30: 897-901(1970). 
 
62. Cohen, S. M., Erturk, E., Von Esch, A. M., Crovetti, A. J., and 
 
Bryan, G. T. Carcinogenicity of 5-nitrofurans, 5-nitroimidazoles, 
4-nitrobenzenes, and related compounds. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 
51: 403- 417(1973). 
 
63. Cohen, S. M., Erturk, E., Von Esch, A. M., Crovetti, A. J., and 
 
Bryan, G. T. Carcinogenicity of 5-nitrofurans and related com- 
pounds with amino-heterocyclic substituents. J. Natl. Cancer 
Inst. 54: 841-850(1975). 
 
64. Cohen, S. M., Ichikawa, M., and Bryan, G. T. Carcinogenicity of 
 
2-(2-furyl)-3-(5-nitro-2-furyl)acrylamide (AF-2) fed to female 
Sprague-Dawley rats. Gann 68: 473-476(1977). 
 
65. Cohen, S. M., Lower, G. M., Erturk, E., and Bryan, G. T. 
 
Comparative carcinogenicity in Swiss mice of N-[4-(5-nitro-2- 
furyl)-2-thiazolyl]acetamide and structurally related 5-nitro- 
furans and 4-nitrobenzenes. Cancer Res. 33: 1593-1597(1973). 
66. Conzelman, G. M., Moulton, J. E., Flanders, L. E., Springer, 
 
K., and Crout, D. W Induction of transitional cell carcinoma of 
the urinary bladder in monkeys fed 2-naphthylamine. J. Natl. 
Cancer Inst. 42: 825-831(1969). 
 
67. Cremlyn, R. J. W, and Roe, F J. C. A study of certain 
 
substituted sulphonohydrazides for carcinogenicity in mice. 
Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 9: 319-321(1971). 
 
68. Croft, W A., and Bryan, G. T. Production of urinary bladder 
 
carcinomas in male hamsters by N-[4-(5-nitro-2-furyl)-2-thia- 
zolyl]formamide, N-[4-(5-nitro-2-furyl)-2-thiazolyl]acetamide, 
or formic acid 2-[4-(5-nitro-2-furyl)-2-thiazolyl]hydrazide. J. 
Natl. Cancer Inst. 51: 941-949(1973). 
 
69. Dacre, J. C. Toxicologic studies with 2,6-di-tert-butyl-4-hydroxy- 
 
methylphenol in the rat. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 17: 669-678 
(1970). 
 
70. Davis, K. J., and Fitzhugh, 0. G. Pathologic changes noted in 
 
rats fed D&C Red No. 9 for two years. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 
4: 200-205(1962). 
 
71. Davis, K. J., and Fitzhugh, 0. G. Tumorigenic potential of aldrin 
 
and dieldrin for mice. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 4: 187-189(1962). 
72. Davis, K. J., and Fitzhugh, 0. G. Pathologic changes noted in 
 
rats fed D&C Red No. 10 [monosodium salt of 2-(2-hydroxy- 
1-naphthylazo)-1-naphthalenesulfonic acid] for two years. Toxicol. 
Appl. Pharmacol. 5: 728-734(1963). 
 
73. Davis, K. J., Fitzhugh, 0. G., and Nelson, A. A. Chronic rat and 
 
dog toxicity studies on tartrazine. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 6: 
621-626(1964). 
 
74. Davis, K. J., Nelson, A. A., Zwickey, R. E., Hansen, W H., and 
 
Fitzhugh, 0. G. Chronic toxicity of ponceau SX to rats, mice, 
and dogs. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 8: 306-317(1966). 
 
75. De Groot, A. R, Til, H. P, Feron, V J., Dreef-Van der Meulen, 
 
H. C., and Willems, M. I. Two-year feeding and multigeneration 
studies in rats on five chemically modified starches. Food 
Cosmet. Toxicol. 12: 651-663(1974). 
 
76. Deichmann, W B., Keplinger, M., Sala, F, and Glass, E. 
 
Synergism among oral carcinogens: IV The simultaneous feed- 
ing of four tumorigens to rats. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 11: 
88-103(1967). 
 
77. Deichmann, W B., MacDonald, W E., Anderson, W A. D., and 
 
Bernal, E. Adenocarcinoma in the lungs of mice exposed to 
vapors of 3-nitro-3-hexene. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 5: 445-456 
(1963). 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 307 
 
78. Deichmann, W B., MacDonald, W E., Blum, E., Bevilacqua, 
 
M., Radomski, J., Keplinger, M., and Balkus, M. Tumorigenicity 
of aldrin, dieldrin and endrin in the albino rat. Ind. Med. 39: 
426-434(1970). 
 
79. Deichmann, W B., MacDonald, W E., Lampe, K. F, Dressler, 
 
I., and Anderson, W A. D. Nitro-olefins as potential carcinogens 
in air pollution. Ind. Med. 34: 800-807(1965). 
 
80. Deichmann, W B., MacDonald, W E., and Lu, F C. Effects of 
 
chronic aldrin feeding in two strains of female rats and a 
discussion on the risks of carcinogens in man. In: Developments 
in Toxicology and Environmental Science, Vol. 4 (W Deichman, 
Ed.), Elsevier North Holland, Amsterdam, 1979, pp. 407-413. 
81. Della Porta, G., Cabral, J. R., and Rossi, L. Carcinogenicity 
 
study of rifampicin in mice and rats. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 
43: 293-302(1978). 
 
82. Della Porta, G., Colnaghi, M. I., and Parmiani, G. Non- 
 
carcinogenicity of hexamethylenetetramine in mice and rats. 
Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 6: 707-715(1968). 
 
83. Della Porta, G., Shubik, R, and Scortecci, V The action of 
 
N-2-fluorenylacetamide in the Syrian golden hamster. J. Natl. 
Cancer Inst. 22: 463-471(1959). 
 
84. Drake, J. J-P, Butterworth, K. R., Gaunt, I. F, and Grasso, P 
 
Long-term toxicity study of black PN in mice. Food Cosmet. 
Toxicol. 15: 503-508(1977). 
 
85. Drake, J. J-P, Butterworth, K. R., Gaunt, I. F, and Hardy, J. 
 
Long-term toxicity studies of chocolate brown HT in mice. 
Toxicology 10: 17-27(1978). 
 
86. Druckrey, H. Chloriertes Trinkwasser, Toxizitats-Prufungen an 
 
Ratten uber sieben Generationen. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 6: 
147-154 (1968). 
 
87. Dunn, T. B. Cancer of the uterine cervix in mice fed a liquid diet 
 
containing an antifertility drug. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 14: 
671-692 (1969). 
 
88. Eisenbrand, G., Preussmann, R., and Schmahl, D. Carcinogenic- 
 
ity of N-nitrosoephedrine in rats. Cancer Lett. 5: 103-106(1978). 
89. Epstein, S. S. The carcinogenicity of dieldrin. Part 1. (Review 
 
of: Davis, H.J., Hansen, W, and Fitzhugh, O.G., Pathology 
report on mice for aldrin, dieldrin, heptachlor or heptachlor 
epoxide for two years [ref. 2, p. 341].) Sci. Total Environ. 4: 
1-52(1975). 
 
90. Epstein, S. S. Carcinogenicity of heptachlor and chlordane. 
 
(Review of: Witherup, S., Cleveland, F P., Shaffer, F G., 
Schlecht, H., and Muser, L., The physiological effects of 
introduction of heptachlor into de [sic] diet of experimental 
animals in varying levels of concentration [ref. 1, p. 341].) Sci. 
Total Environ. 6: 103-154(1976). 
 
91. Epstein, S. S. Carcinogenicity of heptachlor and chlordane. 
 
(Review of: Eighteen month oral carcinogenic study in mice, 
report of the International Research and Development Corpora- 
tion (IRDC) to Velsicol Corporation [ref. 1, p. 127].) Sci. Total 
Environ. 6: 103-154 (1976). 
 
92. Erturk, E., Cohen, S. M., and Bryan, G. T. Carcinogenicity of 
 
N-[4-(5-nitro-2-fuiryl)-2-thiazolyl]acetamide in female rats. Can- 
cer Res. 30: 936-941(1970). 
 
93. Erturk, E., Cohen, S. M., and Bryan, G. T. Induction, histogenesis, 
 
and isotransplantability of renal tumors induced by formic acid 
2-[-4-(5-nitro-2-fturyl)-2-thiazolyl]hydrazide in rats. Cancer Res. 
30: 2098-2106(1970a). 
 
94. Erturk, E., Cohen, S. M., and Bryan, G. T. Urinary bladder 
 
carcinogenicity of N-[4-(5-nitro-2-furyl)-2-thiazolyl]formamide in 
female Swiss mice. Cancer Res. 30: 1309-1311(1970). 
 
95. Erturk, E., Cohen, S. M., Price, J. M., and Bryan, G. T. 
 
Pathogenesis, histology, and transplantability of urinary bladder 
carcinomas induced in albino rats by oral administration of 
N-[4-(5-nitro-2-furyl)-2-thiazolyl]formamide. Cancer Res. 29: 
2219-2228(1969). 
 
96. Erturk, E., Morris, J. E., Cohen, S. M., Price, J. M., and 
 
Bryan, G. T. Transplantable rat mammary tumors induced by 
5-nitro-2-furaldehyde semicarbazone and by formic acid 2-[4- 
(5-nitro-2-fuiryl)-2-thiazolyl]hydrazide. Cancer Res. 30: 1409- 
1412(1970). 
 
97. Erturk, E., Morris, J. E., Cohen, S. M., Von Esch, A. M., 
 
Crovetti, A. J., Price, J. M., and Bryan, G. T. Comparative 
 
carcinogenicity of formic acid 2-[4-(5-nitro-2-furyl)-2-thiazolyl]hy- 
drazide and related chemicals in the rat. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 
47: 437-445(1971). 
 
98. Erturk, E., Price, J. M., Morris, J. E., Cohen, S., Leith, R. S., 
 
Von Esch, A. M., and Crovetti, A. J. The production of 
carcinoma of the urinary bladder in rats by feeding N-[4-(5-nitro- 
2-fuiryl)-2-thiazolyl]formamide. Cancer Res. 27: 1998-2002(1967). 
99. Evarts, R. R, and Brown, C. A. 2,4-Diaminoanisole sulfate: 
 
early effect on thyroid gland morphology and late effect on 
glandular tissue of Fischer 344 rats. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 65: 
197-204(1980). 
 
100. Feron, V J., and Kroes, R. One-year time-sequence inhalation 
 
toxicity study of vinyl chloride in rats. II. Morphological changes 
in the respiratory tract, ceruminous glands, brain, kidneys, 
heart and spleen. Toxicology 13: 131-141(1979). 
 
101. Feron, V J., and Kruysse, A. Effects of exposure to furfural 
 
vapour in hamsters simultaneously treated with benzo[ a ]pyrene 
or diethylnitrosamine. Toxicology 11: 127-144(1978). 
 
102. Feron, V J., Spit, B. J., Immel, H. R., and Kroes, R. One-year 
 
time-sequence inhalation toxicity study of vinyl chloride in rats. 
III. Morphological changes in the livers. Toxicology 13: 
143-154(1979). 
 
103. Fitzhugh, 0. G., and Nelson, A. A. Comparison of the chronic 
 
toxicity of triethylene glycol with that of diethylene glycol. J. 
Ind. Hyg. Toxicol. 28: 40-43(1946). 
 
104. Fitzhugh, 0. G., Nelson, A. A., and Quaife, M. L. Chronic oral 
 
toxicity of aldrin and dieldrin in rats and dogs. Food Cosmet. 
Toxicol. 2: 551-562(1964). 
 
105. Flaks, A., and Clayson, D. B. The influence of ammonium 
 
chloride on the induction of bladder tumours by 4-ethylsul- 
phonylnaphthalene-1-sulphonamide. Brit. J. Cancer 31: 585- 
587(1975). 
 
106. Flaks, A., Hamilton, J. H., and Clayson, D. B. Effect of 
 
ammonium chloride on incidence of bladder tumors induced by 
4-ethylsulfonylnaphthalene-1-sulfonamide. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 
51: 2007-2008(1973). 
 
107. Flaks, A., Hamilton, J. M., Clayson, D. B., and Burch, P R. J. 
 
The combined effect of radiation and chemical carcinogens in 
female A x IF mice. Brit. J. Cancer 28: 227-231(1973). 
 
108. Fleischman, R. W, Baker, J. R., Hagopian, M., Wade, G. G., 
 
Hayden, D. W , Smith, E. R., Weisburger, J. H., and Weisburger, 
E. K. Carcinogenesis bioassay of acetamide, hexanamide, 
adipamide, urea and p-tolylurea in mice and rats. Environ. 
Pathol. Toxicol. 3: 149-170(1980). 
 
109. Fong, L. Y Y, and Chan, W C. Long-term effects of feeding 
 
aflatoxin-contaminated market peanut oil to Sprague-Dawley 
rats. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 19: 179-183(1981). 
 
110. Fujii, K., Nakadate, M., Ogiu, T., and Odashima, S. Induction of 
 
digestive tract tumors and leukemias in Donryu rats by admini- 
stration of 1-amyl-l-nitrosourea in drinking water. Gann 71: 
464-470(1980). 
 
111. Gaines, T. B., and Kimbrough, R. D. The sterilizing, carcino- 
 
genic and teratogenic effects of MeTEPA in rats. Bull. WH.O. 
34: 317-320 (1966). 
 
112. Garcia, H., Keefer, L., Lijinsky, W, and Wenyon, C. E. M. 
 
Carcinogenicity of nitrosothiomorpholine and 1-nitrosopipera- 
zine in rats. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 74: 179-184(1970). 
 
113. Garcia, H., and Lijinsky, W Studies of the tumorigenic effect in 
 
feeding of nitrosamino acids and of low doses of amines and 
nitrite to rats. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 79: 141-144(1973). 
 
114. Gass, G. H., and Allaben, W T. Preliminary report on the 
 
carcinogenic dose-response curve to oral vitamin D2. Obstet. 
Gynecol. 5: 477(1977). 
 
115. Gass, G. H., Coats, D., and Graham, N. Carcinogenic dose- 
 
response curve to oral diethylstilbestrol. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 
33: 971-977(1964). 
 
116. Gaunt, I. F, Brantom, P G., Grasso, P, Creasey, M., and 
 
Gangolli, S. D. Long-term feeding study on Chocolate Brown FB 
in rats. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 10: 3-15(1972). 
 
117. Gaunt, I. F, Brantom, R G., Grasso, F, and Kiss, I. S. 
 
Long-term toxicity studies of Chocolate Brown FB in mice. Food 
Cosmet. Toxicol. 11: 375-382(1973). 
 
118. Gaunt, I. F, Butterworth, K. R., Grasso, R, and Ginocchio, A. 
 
308 GOLD ET AL. 
 
V Long-term toxicity study of emulsifier YN in the mouse. Food 
Cosmet. Toxicol. 15: 1-5(1977). 
 
119. Gaunt, I. F, Butterworth, K. R., Hardy, J., and Gangolli, S. D. 
 
Long-term toxicity of sorbic acid in the rat. Food Cosmet. 
Toxicol. 13: 31-45(1975). 
 
120. Gaunt, I. F, Carpanini, F M. B., Grasso, R, Kiss, I. S., and 
 
Gangolli, S. D. Long-term feeding study on Black PN in rats. 
Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 10: 17-27(1972). 
 
121. Gaunt, I. F, Carpanini, F M. B., Grasso, R, and Lansdown, A. 
 
B. G. Long-term toxicity of propylene glycol in rats. Food 
Cosmet. Toxicol. 10,: 151-162(1972). 
 
122. Gaunt, I. F, Hardy, J., Grasso, P, Gangolli, S. D., and 
 
Butterworth, K. R. Long-term toxicity of cyclohexylamine 
hydrochloride in the rat. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 14: 255-267(1976). 
123. Gaunt, I. F, Mason, P L., Grasso, R, and Kiss, I. S. Long-term 
 
toxicity of Sunset Yellow FCF in mice. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 12: 
1-10(1974). 
 
124. Gibson, J. P, Newberne, J. W, Kuhn, W L., and Elsea, J. R. 
 
Comparative chronic toxicity of three oral estrogens in rats. 
Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 11: 489-510(1967). 
 
125. Gibson, J. P, Rohovsky, M. W, Newberne, J. W, and Larson, E. 
 
J. Toxicity studies with metiapine. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 25: 
220-229(1973). 
 
126. Giner-Sorolla, A., Greenbaum, J., Last-Barney, K., Anderson, 
 
L. M., and Budinger, J. M. Lack of carcinogenic effect of 
nitrosochlordiazepoxide and of nitrosomethylphenidate given 
orally to mice. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 18: 81-83(1980). 
 
127. Ginocchio, A. V, Waite, V, Hardy, J., Fisher, N., Hutchinson, J. 
 
B., and Berry, R. Long-term toxicity and carcinogenicity studies 
of the bread improver potassium bromate. 2. Studies in mice. 
Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 17: 41-47(1979). 
 
128. Goodall, C. M., and Kennedy, T. H. Carcinogenicity of dimethyl- 
 
nitramine in NZR rats and NZO mice. Cancer Lett. 1: 
295-298(1976). 
 
129. Gothoskar, S. V, Talwalkar, G. V, and Bhide, S. V Tumorigenic 
 
effect of thioacetamide in Swiss strain mice. Brit. J. Cancer 24: 
498-503(1970). 
 
130. Goyer, R. A., Falk, H. L., Hogan, M., Feldman, D. D., and 
 
Richter, W Renal tumors in rats given trisodium nitrilotriacetic 
acid in drinking water for 2 years. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 66: 
869-880(1981). 
 
131. Graham, S. L., Davis, K. J., Hansen, W H., and Graham, C. H. 
 
Effects of prolonged ethylene thiourea ingestion on the thyroid 
of the rat. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 13: 493-499(1975). 
 
132. Grasso, P, Hardy, J., Gaunt, I. F, Mason, R L., and Lloyd, A. 
 
G. Long-term toxicity of Violet 6B (FD & C Violet No. 1) in 
mice. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 12: 21-31(1974). 
 
133. Grasso, R, Lansdown, A. B. G., Kiss, I. S., Gaunt, I. F, and 
 
Gangolli, S. D. Nodular hyperplasia in the rat liver following 
prolonged feeding of Ponceau MX. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 7: 
425-442 (1969). 
 
134. Green, U., Holste, J., and Spikermann, A. R. A comparative 
 
study of the chronic effects of magenta, paramagenta, and 
phenyl-beta-naphthylamine in Syrian golden hamsters. Cancer 
Res. Clin. Oncol. 95: 51-55(1979). 
 
135. Greenblatt, M., Kommineni, V R. C., and Lijinsky, W Null 
 
effect of concurrent feeding of sodium nitrite and amino acids to 
MRC rats. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 50: 799-802(1973). 
 
136. Greenblatt, M., and Lijinsky, W Nitrosamine studies: neo- 
 
plasms of liver and genital mesothelium in nitrosopyrrolidine- 
treated MRC rats. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 48: 1687-1696(1972). 
 
137. Grice, H. C., Mannell, W A., and Allmark, M. G. Liver tumors 
 
in rats fed Ponceau 3R. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 3: 509-520 
(1961). 
 
138. Griffin, T. B., Stein, A. A., and Coulston, F Histologic study of 
 
tissues and organs from rats exposed to vapors of 2-nitropropane 
at 25 ppm. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 5: 194-201(1981). 
 
139. Gruenstein, M., Shay, H., and Shimkin, M. B. Lack of effect of 
 
norethynodrel (Enovid) on methylcholanthrene-induced mam- 
mary carcinogenesis in female rats. Cancer Res. 24: 1656-1658 
(1964). 
 
140. Grundmann, E., and Steinhoff, D. Leber- und Lungentumoren 
 
nach 3,3'-Dichlor-4,4'-diaminodiphenylmethan bei Ratten. Can- 
cer Res. Clin. Oncol. 74: 28-39(1970). 
 
141. Habs, M., Eisenbrand, G., and Schmahl, D. Carcinogenic 
 
activity in Sprague-Dawley rats of 2[3-(2-chloroethyl)-3-nitro- 
soureido]-D-glucopyranose (chlorozotocin). Cancer Lett. 8: 133- 
137(1979). 
 
142. Habs, M., and Schmahl, D. Synergistic effects of N-nitroso 
 
compounds in experimental long-term carcinogenesis studies. 
Oncology 37: 259-265(1980). 
 
143. Hackmann, C. Erzeugung von Blasencarcinomen und Tumoren 
 
verschiedener Lokalisation bei Ratten durch Verfutterung von 
2-Amino-3-methoxy-diphenylenoxyd und 2-Amino-diphenylenoxyd. 
Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 61: 45-54(1956). 
 
144. Hagan, E. C., Jenner, P M., Jones, W I., Fitzhugh, 0. G., 
 
Long, E. L., Brouwer, J. G., and Webb, W K. Toxic properties 
of compounds related to safrole. Ibxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 7: 
18-24(1965). 
 
145. Hagiwara, A., Arai, M., Hirose, M., Nakanowatari, J., Tsuda, 
 
H., and Ito, N. Chronic effects of norharman in rats treated with 
aniline. Toxicol. Lett. 6: 71-75(1980). 
 
146. Hansen, W H., Davis, K. J., Fitzhugh, 0. G., and Nelson, A. A. 
 
Chronic oral toxicity of Ponceau 3R. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 
5: 105-118(1963). 
 
147. Hansen, W H., Davis, K. J., Graham, S. L., Perry, C. H., and 
 
Jacobson, K. H. Long-term toxicity studies of erythrosine. II. 
Effects on haematology and thyroxine and protein-bound iodine 
in rats. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 11: 535-545(1973). 
 
148. Hansen, W H., Fitzhugh, 0. G., Nelson, A. A., and Davis, K. J. 
 
Chronic toxicity of two food colors, Brilliant Blue FCF and 
indigotine. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 8: 29-36(1966). 
 
149. Hansen, W H., Long, E. L., Davis, K. J., Nelson, A. A., and 
 
Fitzhugh, 0. G. Chronic toxicity of three food colourings: Guinea 
Green B, Light Green SF Yellowish and Fast Green FCF in rats, 
dogs and mice. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 4: 389-410(1966). 
 
150. Hansen, W H., Zwickey, R. E., Brouwer, J. B., and Fitzhugh, 
 
0. G. Long-term toxicity studies of erythrosine. I. Effects in 
rats and dogs. Food Cosmet. Ibxicol. 11: 527-534(1973). 
 
151. Hardy, J., Gaunt, I. F, Hooson, J., Hendy, R. J., and Butterworth, 
 
K. R. Long-term toxicity of cyclohexylamine hydrochloride in 
mice. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 14: 269-276(1976). 
 
152. Harris, P N., Gibson, W R., and Dillard, R. D. Oncogenicity of 
 
1-(4-chlorophenyl)-1-phenyl-2-propynyl carbamate for rats. Toxi- 
col. Appl. Pharmacol. 21: 414-418(1972). 
 
153. Hendy, R. J., Hardy, J., Gaunt, I. F., Kiss, I. S., and 
 
Butterworth, K. R. Long-term toxicity studies of sorbic acid in 
mice. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 14: 181-186(1976). 
 
154. Henschler, D., Romen, W, Elsasser, H. M., Reichert, D., Eder, 
 
E., and Radwan, Z. Carcinogenicity study of trichloroethylene 
by long-term inhalation in three animal species. Arch. Toxicol. 
43: 237-248(1980). 
 
155. Herbst, M., Weisse, I., and Koellmer, H. A contribution to the 
 
question of the possible hepatocarcinogenic effects of lindane. 
Toxicology 4: 91-96(1975). 
 
156. Herrold, K. M. Epidermoid carcinomas of esophagus and 
 
forestomach induced in Syrian hamsters by N-nitroso-N-methylure- 
than. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 37: 389-394(1966). 
 
157. Heston, W E., Vlahakis, G., and Desmukes, B. Effects of the 
 
antifertility drug Enovid in five strains of mice, with particular 
regard to carcinogenesis. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 51: 209-224(1973). 
158. Heywood, R., Sortwell, R. J., Noel, P R. B., Street, A. E., 
 
Prentice, D. E., Roe, F. J. C., Wadsworth, P F, and Worden, A. 
N. Safety evaluation of toothpaste containing chloroform. III. 
Long-term study in beagle dogs. Environ. Pathol. Toxicol. 2: 
835-851(1979). 
 
159. Hicks, R. M., Chowaniec, J., and StJ. Wakefield, J. Experimen- 
 
tal induction of bladder tumors by a two-stage system. In: 
Carcinogenesis: Mechanisms of Tumor Promotion and Cocarcino- 
genesis, Vol. 2, (T. J. Slaga, A. Sivak and R. K. Boutwell, Eds.), 
Raven Press, New York, 1978, pp. 475-489. 
 
160. Highman, B., Greenman, D. L., Norvell, M. J., Farmer, J., and 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 309 
 
Shellenberger, T. E. Neoplastic and preneoplastic lesions in- 
duced in female C3H mice by diets containing diethylstilbestrol 
or 17-beta-estradiol. Environ. Pathol. Toxicol. 4: 81-95(1980). 
 
161. Hinton, D. E., Lipsky, M. M., Heatfield, B. M., and Trump, B. 
 
F Opposite effects of lead on chemical carcinogenesis in kidney 
and liver of rats. Bull. Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 23: 464-469 
(1979). 
 
162. Hiraga, K. Tumors of the preputial gland in rats. Gann 68: 
 
369-370(1977). 
 
163. Hiraga, K., and Fujii, T. Induction of tumours of the urinary 
 
system in F344 rats by dietary administration of sodium 
o-phenylphenate. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 19: 303-310(1981). 
 
164. Hirono, I., Haga, M., Fujii, M., Matsuura, S., Matsubara, N., 
 
Nakayama, M., Furuya, T., Hikichi, M., Takanashi, H., Uchida, 
E., Hosaka, S., and Ueno, I. Induction of hepatic tumors in rats 
by senkirkine and symphytine. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 63: 
469-472(1979). 
 
165. Hirono, I., Mori, H., Yamada, K., Hirata, Y, Haga, M., 
 
Tatematsu, H., and Kanie, S. Carcinogenic activity of petasite- 
nine, a new pyrrolizidine alkaloid isolated from Petasitesjaponicus 
Maxim. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 58: 1155-1157(1977). 
 
166. Hirono, I., Ueno, I., Hosaka, S., Takanashi, H., Matsushima, 
 
T., Sugimura, T., and Natori, S. Carcinogenicity examination of 
quercetin and rutin in ACI rats. Cancer Lett. 13: 15-21(1981). 
167. Hirose, M., Shibata, M., Hagiwara, A., Imaida, K., and Ito, N. 
 
Chronic toxicity of butylated hydroxytoluene in Wistar rats. 
Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 19: 147-151(1981). 
 
168. Hoch-Ligeti, C., Argus, M. F, and Arcos, J. C. Induction of 
 
carcinomas in the nasal cavity of rats by dioxane. Brit. J. Cancer 
24: 164-167(1969). 
 
169. Hoch-Ligeti, C., Argus, M. F, and Arcos, J. C. Oncogenic 
 
activity of an m-dioxane derivative: 2,6-dimethyl-m-dioxan-4-ol 
acetate (dimethoxane). J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 53: 791-793(1974). 
170. Homburger, F Negative lifetime carcinogen studies in rats and 
 
mice fed 50,000 ppm saccharin. In: Chemical Toxicology of Food 
(C. L. Galli, R. Paoletti and G. Vettorazzi, Eds.), Elsevier/North- 
Holland Biomedical Press, 1978, pp. 359-373. 
 
171. Hong, C. B., Winston, J. M., Thornburg, L. P, Lee, C. C., and 
 
Woods, J. S. Follow-up study on the carcinogenicity of vinyl 
chloride and vinylidene chloride in rats and mice: tumor inci- 
dence and mortality subsequent to exposure. J. Toxicol. Environ. 
Health 7: 909-924(1981). 
 
172. Hooson, J., Gaunt, I. F, Kiss, I. S., Grasso, P, and Butterworth, 
 
K. R. Long-term toxicity of indigo carmine in mice. Food 
Cosmet. Toxicol. 13: 167-176(1975). 
 
173. Hooson, J., Hicks, R. M., Grasso, P, and Chowaniec, J. 
 
Ortho-toluene sulphonamide and saccharin in the promotion of 
bladder cancer in the rat. Brit. J. Cancer 42: 129-147(1980). 
 
174. Horie, A., Kohchi, S., and Kuratsune, M. Carcinogenesis in the 
 
esophagus. II. Experimental production of esophageal cancer by 
administration of ethanolic solution of carcinogens. Gann 56: 
429-441 (1965). 
 
175. Horn, H. J., Black, Bruce R., and Paynter, 0. E. Toxicology of 
 
chlorobenzilate. In: Agricultural and Food Chemistry: Past, 
Present, Future, Vol. 3 (R. Teranishi, Ed.), Avi Publishing 
Company, Inc., Westport, CT, 1955, pp. 752-756. 
 
176. Hosaka, S., and Hirono, I. Effect of leupeptin, a protease 
 
inhibitor, on the development of spontaneous tumors in strain A 
mice. Gann 71: 913-917(1980). 
 
177. Hosaka, S., Matsushima, T., Hirono, I., and Sugimura, T. 
 
Carcinogenicactivityof3-amino-1-methyl-5H-pyrido[4,3-b]indole 
(trp-P-2), a pyrolysis product of tryptophan. Cancer Lett. 13: 
23-28(1981). 
 
178. Hoshino, H., and Tanooka, H. Carcinogenicity of triethanolamine 
 
in mice and its mutagenicity after reaction with sodium nitrite in 
bacteria. Cancer Res. 38: 3918-3921(1978). 
 
179. Howe, R. Carcinogenicity of 'alderlin' (pronethalol) in mice. 
 
Nature 207: 594-595(1965). 
 
180. Hueper, W C., and Payne, W W Experimental studies in metal 
 
carcinogenesis. Chromium, nickel, iron, arsenic. Arch. Environ. 
Health 5: 445-462(1962). 
 
181. Ikeda, Y., Horiuchi, S., Furuya, T., and Omori, Y Chronic 
 
toxicity of ponceau MX in the rat. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 4: 
485-492(1966). 
 
182. Ikeda, Y, Horiuchi, S., Kobayashi, K., Furuja, T., and Kohgo, 
 
K. Carcinogenicity of ponceau MX in the mouse. Food Cosmet. 
Toxicol. 6: 591-598(1968). 
 
183. Innes, J. R. M. Evaluation of Carcinogenic, Teratogenic, and 
 
Mutagenic Activities of Selected Pesticides and Industrial 
Chemicals. Volume 1: Carcinogenic Study. Bionetics Research 
Laboratories, Inc. Distributed by National Technical Informa- 
tion Service, Springfield, VA, 1968. 
 
184. Innes, J. R. M., Ulland, B. M., Valerio, M. G., Petrucelli, L., 
 
Fishbein, L., Hart, E. R., Pallota, A. J., Bates, R. R., Falk, H. 
L., Gart, J. J., Klein, M., Mitchell I., and Peters, J. Bioassay of 
pesticides and industrial chemicals for tumorigenicity in mice: a 
preliminary note. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 42: 1101-1114(1969). 
 
185. Isaka, H., Yoshii, H., Otsuji, A., Koike, M., Nagai, Y, Koura, 
 
M., Sugiyasu, K., and Kanabayashi, T. Thmors of Sprague- 
Dawley rats induced by long-term feeding of phenacetin. Gann 
70: 29-36(1979). 
 
186. Ishii, H. Incidence of brain tumors in rats fed aspartame. 
 
Toxicol. Lett. 7: 433-437(1981). 
 
187. Ito, A., Watanabe, H., Naito, M., and Naito, Y. Induction of 
 
duodenal tumors in mice by oral administration of hydrogen 
peroxide. Gann 72: 174-175(1981). 
 
188. Ito, N., Hananouchi, M., Sugihara, S., Shirai, T., Tsuda, H., 
 
Fukushima, S., and Nagasaki, H. Reversibility and irreversibil- 
ity of liver tumors in mice induced by the alpha isomer of 
1,2,3,4,5,6-hexachlorocyclohexane. Cancer Res. 36: 2227-2234 
(1976). 
 
189. Ito, N., Nagasaki, H., Aoe, H., Sugihara, S., Miyata, Y, Arai, 
 
M., and Shirai, T. Development of hepatocellular carcinomas in 
rats treated with benzene hexachloride. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 54: 
801-804(1975). 
 
190. Ivankovic, S., and Preussmann, R. Absence of toxic and 
 
carcinogenic effects after administration of high doses of chromic 
oxide pigment in subacute and long-term feeding experiments in 
rats. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 13: 347-351(1975). 
 
191. Johansson, S. L. Carcinogenicity of analgesics: long-term treat- 
 
ment of Sprague-Dawley rats with phenacetin, phenazone, 
caffeine and paracetamol (acetamidophen). Int. J. Cancer 27: 
521-529(1981). 
 
192. Johansson, S., and Angervall, L. Urothelial changes of the renal 
 
papillae in Sprague-Dawley rats induced by long term feeding of 
phenacetin. Acta Pathol. Microbiol. Scand. Sect. A. Suppl. 84: 
375-383(1976). 
 
193. Jukes, T. H., and Shaffer, C. B. Antithyroid effects of aminotriazole. 
 
Science 132: 296-297(1960). 
 
194. Kanisawa, M., and Schroeder, H. A. Life term studies on the 
 
effects of arsenic, germanium, tin and vanadium on spontaneous 
tumors in mice. Cancer Res. 27: 1192-3195(1967). 
 
195. Kanisawa, M., and Schroeder, H. A. Life term studies on the 
 
effect of trace elements on spontaneous tumors in mice and rats. 
Cancer Res. 29: 892-895(1969). 
 
196. Kimbrough, R. D., and Linder, R. E. Induction of adenofibrosis 
 
and hepatomas of the liver in BALB/cJ mice by polychlorinated 
biphenyls (Aroclor 1254). J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 53: 547-549(1974). 
197. Kimbrough, R. D., Squire, R. A., Linder, R. E., Strandberg, J. 
 
D., Montali, R. J., and Burse, V W Induction of liver tumors in 
Sherman strain female rats by polychlorinated biphenyl Aroclor 
1260. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 55: 1453-1456(1975). 
 
198. Kinebuchi, M., Kawachi, T., Matsukura, N., and Sugimura, T. 
 
Further studies on the carcinogenicity of a food additive, AF-2, 
in hamsters. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 17: 339-341(1979). 
 
199. King, D. W, Bock, F. G., and Moore, G. E. Dinitrophenol 
 
inhibition of pituitary adenoma formation in mice fed propyl- 
thiouracil. Proc. Soc. Exptl. Biol. Med. 112: 365-366(1963). 
 
200. Kirby, A. H. M., and Peacock, P R. The induction of liver 
 
tumours by 4-aminoazobenzene and its N:N-dimethyl derivative 
in rats on a restricted diet. J. Pathol. 59: 1-18(1947). 
 
201. Kociba, R. J., Keyes, D. G., Beyer, J. E., Carreon, R. M., Wade, 
 
310 GOLD ET AL. 
 
C. E., Dittenber, D. A., Kalnins, R. P., Frauson, L. E., Park, C. 
N., Barnard, S. D., Hummel, R. A., and Humiston, C. G. 
Results of a two-year chronic toxicity and oncogenicity study 
of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin in rats. Toxicol. Appl. 
Pharmacol. 46: 279-303(1978). 
 
202. Kociba, R. J., Keyes, D. G., Jersey, G. C., Ballard, J. J., 
 
Dittenber, D. A., Quast, J. F., Wade, C. E., Humiston, C. G., 
and Schwetz, B. A. Results of a two year chronic toxicity study 
with hexachlorobutadiene in rats. Am. Ind. Hyg. Assoc. J. 38: 
589-602(1977). 
 
203. Kociba, R. J., Keyes, D. G., Lisowe, R. W, Kalnins, R. P, 
 
Dittenber, D. D., Wade, C. E., Gorzinski, S. J., Mahle, N. H., 
and Schwetz, B. A. Results of a two-year chronic toxicity and 
oncogenic study of rats ingesting diets containing 2,4,5-tri- 
chlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4,5-T). Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 17: 
205-221(1979). 
 
204. Kociba, R. J., McCollister, S. B., Park, C., Torkelson, T. R., 
 
and Gehring, P J. 1,4-Dioxane. I. Results of a 2-year ingestion 
study in rats. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 30: 275-286(1974). 
 
205. Kommineni, C., Groth, D. H., Frockt, I. J., Voelker, R. W, and 
 
Stanovick, R. P Determination of the tumorigenic potential of 
methylene-bis-orthochloroaniline. Environ. Pathol. Toxicol. 2: 
149-171 (1979). 
 
206. Konishi, Y., Kondo, H., Ikeda, T., Kawabata, A., Shoji, Y, and 
 
Denda, A. Effect of dose on the carcinogenic activity of orally 
administered N-bis(2-hydroxypropyl)nitrosamine in rats. Gann 
69: 573-577(1978). 
 
207. Kroes, R., Peters, P W J., Berkvens, J. M., Verschuuren, H. 
 
G., De Vries, T., and Van Esch, G. J. Long term toxicity and 
reproduction study (including a teratogenicity study) with 
cyclamate, saccharin and cyclohexylamine. Toxicology 8: 285-300 
(1977). 
 
208. Kroes, R., Van Logten, M. J., Berkvens, J. M., De Vries, T., 
 
and Van Esch, G. J. Study on the carcinogenicity of lead 
arsenate and sodium arsenate and on the possible synergistic 
effect of diethylnitrosamine. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 12: 671-679 
(1974). 
 
209. Kruger, F. W, and Schmahl, D. Fehlen einer carcinogenen 
 
Wirkung von 7-Methylguanin bei Ratten. Cancer Res. Clin. 
Oncol. 75: 253-254(1971). 
 
210. Kuhara, K., Takanashi, H., Hirono, I., Furuya, T., and Asada, 
 
Y. Carcinogenic activity of clivorine, a pyrrolizidine alkaloid 
isolated from Ligularia dentata. Cancer Lett. 10: 117-122(1980). 
211. Lacassagne, A., and Duplan, J. F. Cancerologie. Le mecanisme 
 
de la cancerisation de la mamelle chez la souris, considere 
d'apres les resultats d'experiences au moyen de la reserpine. 
Academie des Sciences. Memoires et Communications des Mem- 
bres et des Correspondants de l'Academie. 1959, pp. 810-812. 
212. Lalwani, N. D., Reddy, M. K., Qureshi, S. A., and Reddy, J. K. 
 
Development of hepatocellular carcinomas and increased peroxi- 
somal fatty acid beta-oxidation in rats fed [4-chloro-6-(2,3-xyli- 
dino)-2-pyrimidinylthio]acetic acid (WY-14,643) in the semipuri- 
fied diet. Carcinogenesis 2: 645-650(1981). 
 
213. Larson, P S., Crawford, E. M., Blackwell Smith, R., Hennigar, 
 
G. R., Haag, H. B., and Finnegan, J. K. Chronic toxicologic 
studies on isopropyl N-(3-chlorophenyl) carbamate (CIPC). Ibxicol. 
Appl. Pharmacol. 2: 659-673(1960). 
 
214. Laskin, S., Drew, R. T., Cappiello, V, Kuschner, M., and 
 
Nelson, N. Inhalation carcinogenicity of alpha halo ethers. II. 
Chronic inhalation studies with chloromethyl methyl ether. 
Arch. Environ. Health 30: 70-72(1975). 
 
215. Laskin, S., Sellakumar, A. R., Kuschner, M., Nelson, N., La 
 
Mendola, S., Rusch, G. M., Katz, G. V, Dulak, N. C., and 
Albert, R. E. Inhalation carcinogenicity of epichlorohydrin in 
noninbred Sprague-Dawley rats. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 65: 
751-757(1980). 
 
216. Lee, C. C., Bhandari, J. C., Winston, J. M., House, W B., 
 
Dixon, R. L. , and Woods, J. S. Carcinogenicity of vinyl chloride 
and vinylidene chloride. J. Toxicol. Environ. Health 4: 15-30 
(1978). 
 
217. Lee, D. J., Wales, J. H., and Sinnhuber, R. 0. Hepatoma and 
 
renal tubule adenoma in rats fed aflatoxin and cyclopropenoid 
fatty acids. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 43: 1037-1041(1969). 
 
218. Leong, B. K. J., Kociba, R. J., and Jersey, G. C. A lifetime 
 
study of rats and mice exposed to vapors of bis(chloromethyl) 
ether. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 58: 269-281(1981). 
 
219. Leuschner, F Carcinogenicity studies on different diarylide 
 
yellow pigments in mice and rats. Ibxicol. Lett. 2: 253-260(1978). 
220. Levinskas, G. J., Ribelin, W E., and Shaffer, C. B. Acute and 
 
chronic toxicity of pimaricin. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 8: 
97-109 (1966). 
 
221. Levy, L. S., and Clack, J. Further studies on the effect of 
 
cadmium on the prostate gland. I. Absence of prostatic changes 
in rats given oral cadmium sulphate for two years. Ann. Occup. 
Hyg. 17: 205-211(1975). 
 
222. Levy, L. S., Clack, J., and Roe, F J. C. Further studies on the 
 
effect of cadmium on the prostate gland. II. Absence of prostatic 
changes in mice given oral cadmium sulphate for eighteen 
months. Ann. Occup. Hyg. 17: 213-220(1975). 
 
223. Lijinsky, W, Greenblatt, M., and Kommineni, C. Feeding 
 
studies of nitrilotriacetic acid and derivatives in rats. J. Natl. 
Cancer Inst. 50: 1061-1063(1973). 
 
224. Lijinsky, W, Reuber, M. D., Davies, T. C., and Riggs, C. W 
 
Dose-response studies with nitroso-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine 
and dinitrosohomopiperazine in F344 rats. Ecotoxicol. Environ. 
Saf. 6: 513-527(1982). 
 
225. Lijinsky, W, Reuber, M. D., Davies, T. S., and Riggs, C. W 
 
Dose-response studies with nitrosoheptamethyleneimine and its 
alpha-deuterium-labeled derivative in F344 rats. J. Natl. Cancer 
Inst. 69: 1127-1133(1982). 
 
226. Lijinsky, W, Reuber, M. D., Davies, T. S., Saavedra, J. E., and 
 
Riggs, C. W Dose-response studies in carcinogenesis by nitroso- 
N-methyl-N-(2-phenyl)ethylamine in rats and the effects of 
deuterium substitution. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 20: 393-399 
(1982). 
 
227. Lijinsky, W, Reuber, M. D., and Riggs, C. W Dose response 
 
studies of carcinogenesis in rats by nitrosodiethylamine. Cancer 
Res. 41: 4997-5003(1981). 
 
228. Lijinsky, W, and Schmahl, D. Carcinogenicity of N-nitroso 
 
derivatives of N-methylcarbamate insecticides in rats. Ecotoxi- 
col. Environ. Saf. 2: 413-419(1978). 
 
229. Lijinsky, W, Taylor, H. W, Mangino, M., and Singer, G. M. 
 
Carcinogenesis of nitrosomethylundecylamine in Fischer rats. 
Cancer Lett. 5: 209-213(1978). 
 
230. Lindsay, S., Nichols, C. W, and Chaikoff, I. L. Induction of 
 
benign and malignant thyroid neoplasms in the rat. Induction of 
thyroid neoplasms by injection of 131-I with or without the 
feeding of diets containing propylthiouracil and/or dessicated 
thyroid. Arch. Pathol. 81: 308-316(1966). 
 
231. Littlefield, N. A., Farmer, J. H., Gaylor, D. W, and Sheldon, W 
 
G. Effects of dose and time in a long-term, low-dose carcinogenic 
study. Environ. Pathol. Toxicol. 3: 17-34(1980). 
 
232. Long, E. L., Nelson, A. A., Fitzhugh, 0. G., and Hansen, W H. 
 
Liver tumors produced in rats by feeding safrole. Arch. Pathol. 
75: 595-604(1963). 
 
233. Longnecker, D. S., Curphey, T. J., Lilja, H. S., French, J. I., 
 
and Daniel, D. S. Carcinogenicity in rats of the nitrosourea 
amino acid N-delta-(N-methyl-N-nitrosocarbamoyl)-L-ornithine. 
Environ. Pathol. Toxicol. 4: 117-129(1980). 
 
234. Longnecker, D. S., Roebuck, B. D., Yager, J. D., Lilja, H. S., 
 
and Siegmund, B. Pancreatic carcinoma in azaserine-treated 
rats: induction, classification and dietary modulation of incidence. 
Cancer 47: 1562-1572(1981). 
 
235. Loser, E. A 2 year oral carcinogenicity study with cadmium on 
 
rats. Cancer Lett. 9: 191-198(1980). 
 
236. Louria, D. B., Finkel, G., Smith, J. K., and Buse, M. Aflatoxin- 
 
induced tumors in mice. Sabouraudia 12: 371-375(1974). 
 
237. Macklin, A. W, and Szot, R. J. Eighteen month oral study of 
 
aspirin, phenacetin and caffeine in C57BL/6 mice. Drug Chem. 
Tbxicol. 3: 135-163(1980). 
 
238. Maekawa, A., Kajiwara, T., Odashima, S., and Kurata, H. 
 
Hepatic changes in male ACI/N rats on low dietary levels of 
sterigmatocystin. Gann 70: 777-781(1979). 
 
239. Maltoni, C. Vinyl chloride carcinogenicity: an experimental 
 
model for carcinogenesis studies. In: Origins of Human Cancer, 
Book A, Vol. 4 (H. H. Hiatt, J. D. Watson and J. A. Winsten, 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 311 
 
Eds.), Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, 
NY, 1977, pp. 119-146. 
 
240. Maltoni, C., Cotti, G., Morisi, L., and Chieco, P Carcinogenicity 
 
bioassays of vinylidene chloride. Research plans and early 
results. Med. Lavoro 64: 241-262(1977). 
 
241. Maltoni, C., Lefemine, G., Ciliberti, A., Cotti, G., and Carretti, 
 
D. Carcinogenicity bioassays of vinyl chloride monomer: a model 
of risk assessment on an experimental basis. Environ. Health 
Perspect. 41: 3-29(1981). 
 
242. Maltoni, C., and Scarnato, C. First experimental demonstration 
 
of the carcinogenic effects of benzene. Med. Lavoro 70: 
352-357(1979). 
 
243. Maltoni, C., Valgimigli, L., and Scarnato, C. Long-term carcino- 
 
genic bioassays on ethylene dichloride administered by inhala- 
tion to rats and mice. In: Banbury Report 5 Ethylene Dichloride: 
A Potential Health Risk? (B. Ames, P Infante and R. Reitz, 
Eds.), Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, 1980. 
 
244. Mannell, W A. Further investigations on production of liver 
 
tumours in rats by ponceau 3R. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 2: 
169-174 (1964). 
 
245. Mannell, W A., Grice, H. C., Lu, F C., and Allmark, M. G. 
 
Chronic toxicity studies on food colours. Part IV Observations 
on the toxicity of tartrazine, amaranth and sunset yellow in rats. 
J. Pharm. Pharmacol. 10: 625-634(1958). 
 
246. Martin, M. S., Justrabo, E., Jeannin, J. F, Leclerc, A., and 
 
Martin, F Effect of dietary chenodeoxycholic acid on intestinal 
carcinogenesis induced by 1.2 dimethylhydrazine in mice and 
hamsters. Brit. J. Cancer 43: 884-886(1981). 
 
247. Mason, P L., Gaunt, I. F, Butterworth, K. R., Hardy, J., Kiss, 
 
I. S., and Grasso, P Long-term toxicity studies of carmoisine in 
mice. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 12: 601-607(1974). 
 
248. Matsukura, N., Kawachi, T., Morino, K., Ohgaki, H., and 
 
Sugimura, T. Carcinogenicity in mice of mutagenic compounds 
from a tryptophan pyrolyzate. Science 213: 346-347(1981). 
 
249. Matsukura, N., Kawachi, T., Sasajima, K., Sano, T., Sugimura, 
 
T., and Hirota, T. Induction of intestinal metaplasia in the 
stomachs of rats by N-methyl-N'-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine. J. 
Natl. Cancer Inst. 61: 141-143(1978). 
 
250. Matsukura, N., Kawachi, T., Sasajima, K., Sano, T., Sugimura, 
 
T., and Ito, N. Induction of liver tumors in rats by sodium nitrite 
and methylguanidine. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 90: 87-94(1977). 
251. Matsukura, N., Kawachi, T., Sugimura, T., Nakadate, M., and 
 
Hirota, T. Induction of intestinal metaplasia and carcinoma in 
the glandular stomach of rats by N-alkyl-N'-nitro-N-nitrosoguan- 
idines. Gann 70: 181-185(1979). 
 
252. Matsuzaki, 0. Histogenesis and growing patterns of lung tumors 
 
induced by potassium 1-methyl-1,4-dihydro-7-[2-(5-nitrofuryl) 
vinyl] -4-oxo-1,8-naphthyridine-3-carboxylate in ICR mice. Gann 
66: 259-267(1975). 
 
253. McCollister, S. B., Kociba, R. J., Humiston, C. G., McCollister, 
 
D. D., and Gehring, P J. Studies of the acute and long-term oral 
toxicity of chlorpyrifos (O,O-diethyl-O-(3,5,6-trichloro-2-pyridyl) 
phosphorothioate). Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 12: 45-61(1974). 
 
254. McElligott, T. F, and Hurst, E. W Long-term feeding studies of 
 
methyl ethyl cellulose ('edifas' A) and sodium carboxymethyl 
cellulose ('edifas' B) in rats and mice. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 6: 
449-460(1968). 
 
255. Merkow, L. P, Epstein, S. M., Slifkin, M., and Pardo, M. The 
 
ultrastructure of renal neoplasms induced by aflatoxin Bi. 
Cancer Res. 33: 1608-1614(1973). 
 
256. Miller, E. C., and Miller, J. A. Biochemical investigations on 
 
hepatic carcinogenesis. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 15: 1571-1590(1955). 
257. Miller, E. C., Miller, J. A., and Enomoto, M. The comparative 
 
carcinogenicities of 2-acetylaminofluorene and its N-hydroxy 
metabolite in mice, hamsters, and guinea pigs. Cancer Res. 24: 
2018-2026 (1964). 
 
258. Miyaji, T. Acute and chronic toxicity of furylfuramide in rats and 
 
mice. Tohoku J. Exp. Med. 103: 331-369(1971). 
 
259. Morris, H. P, Velat, C. A., Wagner, B. P, Dahlgard, M., and 
 
Ray, F E. Studies of carcinogenicity in the rate of derivatives of 
aromatic amines related to N-2-fluorenylacetamide. J. Natl. 
Cancer Inst. 24: 149-180(1960). 
 
260. Morris, J. E., Price, J. M., Lalich, J. J., and Stein, R. J. The 
 
carcinogenic activity of some 5-nitrofuran derivatives in the rat. 
Cancer Res. 29: 2145-2156(1969). 
 
261. Munoz, M. Effect of herpes virus type 2 and hormonal imbalance 
 
on the uterine cervix of the mouse. Cancer Res. 33: 1504-1508 
(1973). 
 
262. Munro, I. C., Moodie, C. A., Krewski, D., and Grice, H. C. A. 
 
A carcinogenicity study of commercial saccharin in the rat. 
Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 32: 513-526(1975). 
 
263. Murthy, A. S. K., Baker, J. R., Smith, E. R., and Zepp, E. 
 
Neoplasms in rats and mice fed butylurea and sodium nitrite 
separately and in combination. Int. J. Cancer 23: 253-259(1979). 
264. Nagel, D., Shimizu, H., and Toth, B. Tumor induction studies 
 
with n-butyl-and n-propylhydrazine hydrochlorides in Swiss 
mice. Eur. J. Cancer 11: 473-478(1975). 
 
265. Nakamura, T., Matsuyama, M., and Kishimoto, H. Tumors of 
 
the esophagus and duodenum induced in mice by oral administra- 
tion of N-ethyl-N'-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine. J. Natl. Cancer 
Inst. 52: 519-522(1974). 
 
266. National Cancer Institute. Report on carcinogenesis bioassay of 
 
chloroform. N.C.I. Brief Communication. 1976. 
 
267. Newberne, J. W, Newberne, P M., Gibson, J. R, Huffman, K. 
 
W, and Palopoli, F P Lack of carcinogenicity of oxprenolol, a 
beta-adrenergic blocking agent. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 41: 
535-546(1977). 
 
268. Newberne, P M. Nitrite promotes lymphoma incidence in rats. 
 
Science 204: 1079-1081(1979). 
 
269. Newberne, P M., Harrington, D. H., and Wogan, G. N. Effects 
 
of cirrhosis and other liver insults on induction of liver tumors by 
aflatoxin in rats. Lab. Invest. 15: 962-969(1966). 
 
270. Newberne, P M., and Rogers, A. E. Rat colon carcinomas 
 
associated with aflatoxin and marginal vitamin A. J. Natl. 
Cancer Inst. 50: 439-444(1973). 
 
271. Newberne, P M., and Williams, G. Inhibition of aflatoxin 
 
carcinogenesis by diethylstilbestrol in male rats. Arch. Environ. 
Health 19: 489-498(1969). 
 
272. Nixon, J. E., Hendricks, J. D., Pawlowski, N. E., Loveland, P 
 
M., and Sinnhuber, R. 0. Carcinogenicity of aflatoxicol in 
Fischer 344 rats. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 66: 1159-1163(1981). 
 
273. Nixon, J. E., Sinnhuber, R. O., Lee, D. J., Landers, M. K., and 
 
Harr, J. R. Effect of cyclopropenoid compounds on the carcino- 
genic activity of diethylnitrosamine and aflatoxin Bi in rats. J. 
Natl. Cancer Inst. 53: 453-458(1974). 
 
274. Oda, H., Nogami, H., Kusumoto, S., Nakajima, T., and Kurata, 
 
A. Lifetime exposure to 2.4 ppm nitric oxide in mice. Environ. 
Res. 22: 254-263(1980). 
 
275. Ogiu, T., Kajiwara, T., Furuta, K., Takeuchi, M., Odashima, S., 
 
and Tada, K. Mammary tumorigenic effect of a new nitrosourea, 
1,3-dibutyl-1-nitrosourea (B-BNU), in female Donryu rats. Can- 
cer Res. Clin. Oncol. 96: 35-41(1980). 
 
276. Ohtsubo, K., Saito, M., Kimura, H., and Tsuruta, 0. High 
 
incidence of hepatic tumours in rats fed mouldy rice contami- 
nated with Aspergillus versicolor containing sterigmatocystin. 
Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 16: 143-149(1978). 
 
277. Okey, A. B., and Gass, G. H. Continuous versus cyclic estrogen 
 
administration: mammary carcinoma in C3H mice. J. Natl. 
Cancer Inst. 40: 225-230(1968). 
 
278. Oser, B. L., Carson, S., Cox, G. E., Vogin, E. E., and Stem- 
 
berg, S. S. Long-term and multigenetation toxicity studies with 
cyclohexylamine hydrochloride. Toxicology 6: 47-65(1976). 
 
279. Oser, B. L., Morgareidge, K., Weinberg, M. S., and Oser, M. 
 
Carcinogenicity study of carbarsone. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 
9: 528-535(1966). 
 
280. Oser, B. L., and Oser, M. 2-(p-tert-Butylphenoxy)isopropyl 
 
2-chloroethyl sulfite (Aramite). 1. Acute, subacute, and chronic 
oral toxicity. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 2: 441-457(1960). 
 
281. Osswald, H., Frank, H. K., Komitowski, D., and Winter, H. 
 
Long-term testing of patulin administered orally to Sprague- 
Dawley rats and Swiss mice. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 16: 
243-247(1978). 
 
282. Owen, N. V, Worth, H. M., and Kiplinger, G. F The effects of 
 
long-term ingestion of methimazole on the thyroids of rats. Food 
Cosmet. Toxicol. 11: 649-653(1973). 
 
283. Pai, S. R., Shirke, A. J., and Gothoskar, S. V Long-term feeding 
 
312 GOLD ET AL. 
 
study in C17 mice administered saccharin coated betel nut and 
1,4-dinitrosopiperazine in combination. Carcinogenesis 2: 175-177 
(1981). 
 
284. Palmer, A. K., Street, A. E., Roe, F J. C., Worden, A. N., and 
 
Van Abbe, N. J. Safety evaluation of toothpaste containing 
chloroform. II. Long term studies in rats. Environ. Pathol. 
Toxicol. 2: 821-833 (1979). 
 
285. Pamukcu, A. M., Yalciner, S., Hatcher, J. F, and Bryan, G. T. 
 
Quercetin, a rat intestinal and bladder carcinogen present in 
bracken fern (Pteridium aquilinum). Cancer Res. 40: 3468- 
3472(1980). 
 
286. Peraino, C., Fry, R. J. M., and Staffeldt, E. Enhancement of 
 
spontaneous hepatic tumorigenesis in C3H mice by dietary 
phenobarbital. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 51: 1349-1350(1973). 
 
287. Pershin, G. N., Makeeva, 0. O., Grushina, A. A., and Chernov, 
 
V A. An experimental study of the carcinogenic effect of tubazid 
(isoniazid) and phtivazid. Vopr. Onkol. 18: 50-53(1972). 
 
288. Phillips, J. C., Butterworth, K. R., Gaunt, I. F, Evans, J. G., 
 
and Grasso, P Long-term toxicity study of quillaia extract in 
mice. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 17: 23-27(1979). 
 
289. Pietra, G., and Shubik, P Induction of melanotic tumors in the 
 
Syrian golden hamster after administration of ethyl carbamate. 
J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 25: 627-630(1960). 
 
290. Poel, W E. Pituitary tumors in mice after prolonged feeding of 
 
synthetic progestins. Science 154: 402-403(1966). 
 
291. Poel, W E., Ciocco, A., and Doolittle, D. P Unusual neoplasms 
 
and hyperplastic lesions in "random-bred" mice derived from 
four-way crossed inbred lines. Cancer Res. 28: 845-859(1968). 
292. Ponomarkov, V, Tomatis, L., and Turusov, V The effect of 
 
long-term administration of phenobarbitone in CF-1 mice. Can- 
cer Lett. 1: 165-172(1976). 
 
293. Popper, H., Sternberg, S. S., Oser, B. L., and Oser, M. The 
 
carcinogenic effect of aramite in rats. A study of hepatic 
nodules. Cancer 13: 1035-1046(1960). 
 
294. Preussmann, R., Habs, M., and Pool, B. L. Carcinogenicity and 
 
mutagenicity testing of three isomeric N-nitroso-N-methylamino- 
pyridines in rats. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 62: 153-156(1979). 
 
295. Preussmann, R., Habs, M., Pool, B., Stummeyer, D., Lijinsky, 
 
W, and Reuber, M. D. Fluoro-substituted N-nitrosamines. 1. 
Inactivity of N-nitroso-bis(2,2,2-trifluoroethyl)amine in carcino- 
genicity and mutagenicity tests. Carcinogenesis 2: 753-756(1981). 
296. Preussmann, R., and Ivankovic, S. Absence of carcinogenic 
 
activity in BD rats after oral administration of high doses of 
bismuth oxychloride. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 13: 543-544(1975). 
297. Preussmann, R., Ivankovic, S., Landschutz, C., Gimmy, J., 
 
Flohr, E., and Griesbach, U. Carcinogene Wirkung von 13 
Aryldialkyltriazenen an BD-Ratten. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 
81: 285-310(1974). 
 
298. Preussmann, R., Schmahl, D., and Eisenbrand, G. Carcinogeni- 
 
city of N-nitosopyrrolidine: dose-response study in rats. Cancer 
Res. Clin. Oncol. 90: 161-166(1977). 
 
299. Price, J. M., Biava, C. G., Oser, B. L., Vogin, E. E., Steinfeld, 
 
J., and Ley, H. L. Bladder tumors in rats fed cyclohexylamine or 
high doses of a mixture of cyclamate and saccharin. Science 167: 
1131-1132(1970). 
 
300. Prier, R. F, Nees, P O., and Derse, P H. The toxicity of an 
 
organic arsenical, 3-nitro-4-hydroxyphenylarsonic acid. II. Chronic 
toxicity. Toxicol. Apjtl. Pharmacol. 5: 526-542(1963). 
 
301. Purchase, I. F H., and van der Watt, J. J. Carcinogenicity of 
 
sterigmatocystin. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 8: 289-295(1970). 
 
302. Purchase, I. F H., and van der Watt, J. J. The long-term 
 
toxicity of ochratoxin A to rats. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 9: 
681-682(1971). 
 
303. Quast, J. F, Schuetz, D. J., Balmer, M. F, Gushow, T. S., Park, 
 
C. N. , and McKenna, M. J. A Two-year Toxicity and Oncogenic- 
ity Study with Acrylonitrile Following Inhalation Exposure of 
Rats. Final Report. Dow Chemical U.S.A., Midland, MI, 1980. 
304. Quast, J. F, Wade, C. E., Humiston, C. G., Carreon, R. M., 
 
Hermann, E. A., Park, C. N., and Schwetz, B. A. A Two-year 
Toxicity and Oncogenicity Study with Acrylonitrile Incorpo- 
rated in the Drinking Water of Rats. Final Report. Dow 
Chemical U.S.A., Midland, MI, 1980. 
 
305. Radomski, J. L., Brill, E., and Glass, E. M. Induction of bladder 
 
tumors and other malignancies in rats with 2-methoxy-3-aminodi- 
benzofuran. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 39: 1069-1080(1967). 
 
306. Radomski, J. L., Deichmann, W B., Macdonald, W E., and 
 
Glass, E. M. Synergism among oral carcinogens: I. Results of 
the simultaneous feeding of four tumorigens to rats. Toxicol. 
Appl. Pharmacol. 7: 652-656(1965). 
 
307. Rao, M. S., and Reddy, J. K. Malignant neoplasms in rats fed 
 
lasiocarpine. Brit. J. Cancer 37: 289-293(1978). 
 
308. Reddy, J. K., Azarnoff, D. L., and Hignite, C. E. Hypolipidaemic 
 
hepatic peroxisome proliferators form a novel class of chemical 
carcinogens. Nature 283: 397-398(1980). 
 
309. Reddy, J. K., and Qureshi, S. A. Tumorigenicity of the 
 
hypolipidaemic peroxisome proliferator ethyl-alpha-p-chloro- 
phenoxyisobutyrate (clofibrate) in rats. Brit. J. Cancer 40: 
476-482(1979). 
 
310. Reddy, J. K., Svoboda, D. J., and Rao, M. S. Induction of liver 
 
tumors by aflatoxin Bi in the tree shrew (Thpaia glis) a 
nonhuman primate. Cancer Res. 36: 151-160(1976). 
 
311. Reznik, G., Mohr, U., and Lijinsky, W Carcinogenic effect of 
 
N-nitroso-2,6-dimethylmorpholine in Syrian golden hamsters. J. 
Natl. Cancer Inst. 60: 371-378(1978). 
 
312. Roe, F J. C., Grant, G. A., and Millican, D. M. Carcinogenicity 
 
of hydrazine and 1,1-dimethylhydrazine for mouse lung. Nature 
216: 375-376(1967). 
 
313. Roe, F J. C., Levy, L. S., and Carter, R. L. Feeding studies on 
 
sodium cyclamate, saccharin and sucrose for carcinogenic and 
tumour-promoting activity. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 8: 135-145 
(1970). 
 
314. Roe, F J. C., Palmer, A. K., Worden, A. N., and Van Abbe, N. J. 
 
Safety evaluation of toothpaste containing chloroform. I. Long- 
term studies in mice. Environ. Pathol. Toxicol. 2: 799-819(1979). 
315. Rosin, A., and Ungar, H. Malignant tumors in the eyelids and 
 
the auricular region of thiourea-treated rats. Cancer Res. 17: 
302-305 (1957). 
 
316. Rossi, L., Ravera, M., Repetti, G., and Santi, L. Long-term 
 
administration of DDT or phenobarbital-Na in Wistar rats. Int. 
J. Cancer 19: 179-185(1977). 
 
317. Rudali, G. Induction of tumors in mice with synthetic sex 
 
hormones. Gann Mono. Cancer Res. 17: 243-252(1975). 
 
318. Rudali, G., and Assa, R. Lifespan carcinogenicity studies with 
 
hexachlorophene in mice and rats. Cancer Lett. 5: 325-332(1978). 
319. Rudali, G., Coezy, E., and Chemama, R. Mammary carcinoge- 
 
nesis in female and male mice receiving contraceptives or 
gestagens. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 49: 813-819(1972). 
 
320. Rudali, G., Coezy, E., Frederic, F, and Apiou, F Susceptibility 
 
of mice of different strains to the mammary carcinogenic action 
of natural and synthetic oestrogens. Rev. Eur. Etud. Clin. Biol. 
16: 425-429(1971). 
 
321. Rudali, G., Coezy, E., and Muranyi-Kovacs, I. Cancerologie. 
 
-recherches sur l'action cancerigene du cyclamate de soude chez 
les souris. Academie des Sciences, Memoires et Communications 
des Membres et des Correspondants de l'Academie. 269: 
1910-1913(1969). 
 
322. Russfield, A. B., Homburger, F, Boger, E., Van Dongen, C. G., 
 
Weisburger, E. K., and Weisburger, J. H. Carcinogenicity of 
Chemicals in Man's Environment. Final Report, Contract No. 
NIH-NCI-E-68-1311. Bio-research Consultants, Inc., Cam- 
bridge, MA, 1973. 
 
323. Russfield, A. B., Homburger, F, Boger, E., Van Dongen, C. G., 
 
Weisburger, E. K., and Weisburger, J. H. The carcinogenic 
effect of 4,4'-methylene-bis-(2-chloroaniline) in mice and rats. 
Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 31: 47-54(1975). 
 
324. Rustia, M., and Shubik, P Induction of lung tumors and 
 
malignant lymphomas in mice by metronidazole. J. Natl. Cancer 
Inst. 48: 721-729(1972). 
 
325. Rustia, M., and Shubik, R Life-span carcinogenicity tests with 
 
4-amino-N-(10)-methylpteroylglutamic acid (methotrexate) in 
Swiss mice and Syrian golden hamsters. Toxicol. Appl. Pharma- 
col. 26: 329-338(1973). 
 
326. Rustia, M., and Shubik, P Thyroid tumours in rats and 
 
hepatomas in mice after griseofulvin treatment. Brit. J. Cancer 
38: 237-249(1978). 
 
327. Rustia, M., and Shubik, P Experimental induction of hepatomas, 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 313 
 
mammary tumors, and other tumors with metronidazole in 
noninbred Sas:MRC(WI)BR rats. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 63: 
863-868(1979). 
 
328. Rustia, M., Shubik, P, and Patil, K. Lifespan carcinogenicity 
 
tests with native carrageenan in rats and hamsters. Cancer 
Lett. 11: 1-10(1980). 
 
329. Saito, D., Shirai, A., Matsushima, T., Sugimura, T., and Hirono, 
 
I. Test of carcinogenicity of quercetin, a widely distributed 
mutagen in food. Teratog. Carcinog. Mutagen. 1: 213-221(1980). 
330. Sanderson, K. V Arsenic as a co-carcinogen in mice. British 
 
Empire Cancer Campaign, 39th Annual Report 39: 628-629 
(1961). 
 
331. Sano, T., Kawachi, T., Matsukura, N., Sasajima, K., and 
 
Sugimura, T. Carcinogenicity of a food additive, AF-2, in 
hamsters and mice. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 89: 61-68(1977). 
332. Sarles, M. P, and Vandegrift, W B. Chronic oral toxicity and 
 
related studies on animals with the insecticide and pyrethrum 
synergist, piperonyl butoxide. Am. J. TIop. Med. Hyg. 1: 
862-883 (1952). 
 
333. Sasajima, K., Kawachi, T., Matsukura, N., Sano, T., and 
 
Sugimura, T. Intestinal metaplasia and adenocarcinoma induced 
in the stomach of rats by N-propyl-N'-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine. 
Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 94: 201-206(1979). 
 
334. Schardein, J. L., Kaump, D. H., Woosley, E. T., and Jellema, M. 
 
M. Long-term toxicologic and tumorigenesis studies on an oral 
contraceptive agent in albino rats. Ibxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 
16: 10-23(1970). 
 
335. Schmahl, D. Prufung von Polyvinylpyridin-N-oxid (PVNO) auf 
 
carcinogeneWirkungbei Rattenund Mausen. Arzneim. -Forsch. 19: 
1313-1314(1969). 
 
336. Schmahl, D. Fehlen einer kanzerogenen Wirkung von Cyclamat, 
 
Cyclohexylamin und Saccharin bei Ratten. Arzneim. -Forsch. 23: 
1466-1470(1973). 
 
337. Schmahl, D. Investigations on esophageal carcinogenicity 
 
by methyl-phenyl-nitrosamine and ethyl alcohol in rats. 
Cancer Lett. 1: 215-218(1976). 
 
338. Schmahl, D. Experiments on the carcinogenic effect of ortho- 
 
toluol-sulfonamid (OTS). Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 91: 19-22 
(1978). 
 
339. Schmahl, D., and Habs, M. Life-span investigations for carcino- 
 
genicity of some immune-stimulating, immunodepressive and 
neurotropic substances in Sprague-Dawley-rats. Cancer Res. 
Clin. Oncol. 86: 77-84(1976). 
 
340. Schmahl, D., and Habs, M. Experiments on the influence of an 
 
aromatic retinoid on the chemical carcinogenesis in rats by 
butyl-butanol-nitrosamine and 1,2-dimethylhydrazine. Arzneim. 
-Forsch. 28: 49-51(1978). 
 
341. Schmahl, D., and Osswald, H. Experimentelle Untersuchungen 
 
uber carcinogene Wirkungen von Krebs-Chemotherapeutica und 
Immunosuppressiva. Arzneim.-Forsch. 20: 1461-1467(1970). 
 
342. Schmahl, D., Port, R., and Wahrendorf, J. A dose-response 
 
study on urethane carcinogenesis in rats and mice. Int. J. 
Cancer 19: 77-80(1977). 
 
343. Schrauzer, G. N., McGinness, J. E., and Kuehn, K. Effects of 
 
temporary selenium supplementation on the genesis of spontane- 
ous mammary tumors in inbred female C3H/St mice. Carcinogen- 
esis 1: 199-201(1980). 
 
344. Schroeder, H. A., Balassa, J. J., and Vinton, W H. Chromium, 
 
lead, cadmium, nickel and titanium in mice: effect on mortality, 
tumors and tissue levels. J. Nutr. 83: 239-250(1964). 
 
345. Schroeder, H. A., and Mitchener, M. Life-term effects of 
 
mercury, methyl mercury, and nine other trace metals on mice. 
J. Nutr. 105: 452-458(1975). 
 
346. Schroeder, H. A., and Mitchener, M. Life-term studies in rats: 
 
effects of aluminum, barium, beryllium, and tungsten. J. Nutr. 
105: 421-427(1975). 
 
347. Schroeder, H. A., Mitchener, M., and Nason, A. P Life-term 
 
effects of nickel in rats: survival, tumors, interactions with trace 
elements and tissue levels. J. Nutr. 104: 239-243(1974). 
 
348. Schwartz, E. L., Kluwe, W K., Sleight, S. D., Hook, J. B., and 
 
Goodman, J. I. Inhibition of N-2-fluorenylacetamide-induced 
mammary tumorigenesis in rats by dietary polybrominated 
biphenyls. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 64: 63-67(1980). 
 
349. Schwetz, B. A., Quast, J. F, Keeler, P A., Humiston, C. G., and 
 
Kociba, R. J. Results of two-year toxicity and reproduction 
studies on pentachlorophenol in rats. Pentachlorophenol (K. 
Ranga Rao, Ed.), Plenum Press, New York, 1978, pp. 301-309. 
350. Sellakumar, A. R., Laskin, S., Kuschner, M., Rusch, G., Katz, 
 
G. V, Snyder, C. A., and Albert, R. E. Inhalation carcinogenesis 
by dimethylcarbamoyl chloride in Syrian golden hamsters. 
Environ. Pathol. Toxicol. 4: 107-115(1980). 
 
351. Severi, L., and Biancifiori, C. Hepatic carcinogenesis in CBA/Cb/Se 
 
mice and Cb/Se rats by isonicotinic acid hydrazide and hydrazine 
sulfate. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 41: 331-349(1968). 
 
352. Sharratt, M., Frazer, A. C., and Forbes, 0. C. Study of the 
 
biological effects of benzoyl peroxide. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 2: 
527-538(1964). 
 
353. Shay, H., Gruenstein, M., and Kessler, W B. Experimental 
 
mammary adenocarcinoma of rats: some considerations of 
methylcholanthrene dosage and hormonal treatment. J. Natl. 
Cancer Inst. 27: 503-513(1961). 
 
354. Shay, H., Gruenstein, M., and Kessler, W B. Methylcholanthrene 
 
induced breast cancer in the rat: studies on mechanism of 
inhibition by large doses of estrogen. Morphological Precursors 
of Cancer, (L. Severi, Ed.), Div. Canc. Res., Perugia, 1962, pp. 
305-318. 
 
355. Shimizu, H., Nagel, D., and Toth, B. Ethylhydrazine hydrochlo- 
 
ride as a tumor inducer in mice. Int. J. Cancer 13: 500-505(1974). 
356. Shimizu, H., Nagel, D., and Toth, B. Tumour induction study 
 
with N-amylhydrazine hydrochloride in Swiss mice. Brit. J. 
Cancer 31: 492-496(1975). 
 
357. Shimizu, H., and Toth, B. Effect of lifetime administration of 
 
2-hydroxyethylhydrazine on tumorigenesis in hamsters and mice. 
J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 52: 903-906(1974). 
 
358. Skipper, H. E. Booklet 1, 1976. Phase I Studies on the 
 
Carcinogenic Activity of Anticancer Drugs in Mice and Rats. 
Final report. Southern Research Institute, Birmingham, AL, 
1976. 
 
359. Smith, A. G., and Cabral, J. R. Liver-cell tumours in rats fed 
 
hexachlorobenzene. Cancer Lett. 11: 169-172(1980). 
 
360. Snell, K. C., and Stewart, H. L. Pulmonary adenomatosis 
 
induced in DBA/2 mice by oral administration of dibenz[a,h]an- 
thracene. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 28: 1043-1051(1962). 
 
361. Snyder, C. A., Goldstein, B. D., Sellakumar, A. R., Bromberg, 
 
I., Laskin, S., and Albert, R. E. The inhalation toxicology of 
benzene: incidence of hematopoietic neoplasms and hematotoxi- 
city in AKR/J and C57BL/6J mice. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 54: 
323-331(1980). 
 
362. Snyder, C. A., Goldstein, B. D., Sellakumar, A., Wolman, S. R., 
 
Bromberg, I., Erlichman, M. N., and Laskin, S. Hematotoxicity 
of inhaled benzene to Sprague-Dawley rats and AKR mice at 300 
ppm. J. Toxicol. Environ. Health 4: 605-618(1978). 
 
363. Sodemoto, Y., and Enomoto, M. Report of carcinogenesis 
 
bioassay of sodium benzoate in rats: absence of carcinogenicity of 
sodium benzoate in rats. Environ. Pathol. Ibxicol. 4:87-95(1980). 
364. Stevenson, D. E., Thorpe, E., Hunt, P F., and Walker, A. I. T. 
 
The toxic effects of dieldrin in rats: a reevaluation of data 
obtained in a two-year feeding study. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 
36: 247-254(1976). 
 
365. Stoll, R., and Maraud, R. Sur l'induction de tumeurs thyroi- 
 
diennes chez le rat traite par le propylthiouracil et le radio-iode. 
Bull. Cancer 50: 389-398(1963). 
 
366. Stula, E. F, Barnes, J. R., Sherman, H., Reinhardt, C. F, and 
 
Zapp, J. A. Urinary bladder tumors in dogs from 4,4'-methylene- 
bis(2-chloroaniline) (MOCA). Environ. Pathol. Toxicol. 1: 
31-50(1977). 
 
367. Stula, E. F, Barnes, J. R., Sherman, H., Reinhardt, C. F, 
 
and Zapp, J. A. Liver and urinary bladder tumors in dogs 
from 3,3'-dichlorobenzidine. Environ. Pathol. Toxicol. 1: 475- 
490(1978). 
 
368. Stula, E. F, Sherman, H., Zapp, J. A., and Clayton, J. W 
 
Experimental neoplasia in rats from oral administration of 
3,3'-dichlorobenzidine, 4,4'-methylene-bis(2-chloroaniline), and 
4,4'-methylene-bis(2-methylaniline). Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 
31: 159-176 (1975). 
 
369. Sugimura, T., Fujimura, S., and Baba, T. Thmor production in 
 
314 GOLD ET AL. 
 
the glandular stomach and alimentary tract of the rat by 
N-methyl-N'-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine. Cancer Res. 30: 455- 
465(1970). 
 
370. Svoboda, D. J., and Reddy, J. K. Malignant tumors in rats given 
 
lasiocarpine. Cancer Res. 32: 908-911(1972). 
 
371. Tahara, E., Ito, H., Nakagami, K., and Shimamoto, F Induction 
 
of carcinoids in the glandular stomach of rats by N-methyl-N'- 
nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 100: 1-12 
(1981). 
 
372. Takayama, S. Induction of tumors in ICR mice with N-nitrosopi- 
 
peridine, especially, in forestomach. Naturwissenschaften 56: 
142 (1969). 
 
373. Takayama, S., and Imaizumi, T. Carcinogenic action of N-nitro- 
 
sodibutylamine in mice. Gann 60: 353(1969). 
 
374. Takayama, S., and Kuwabara, N. Carcinogenic activity of 
 
2-(2-furyl)-3-(5-nitro-2-furyl)acrylamide, a food additive, in mice 
and rats. Cancer Lett. 3: 115-120(1977). 
 
375. Takemura, N., Hashida, C., and Terasawa, M. Carcinogenic 
 
action of 5-nitroacenaphthene. Brit. J. Cancer 30: 481-483(1974). 
376. Tanaka, T., Fujii, M., Mori, H., and Hirono, I. Carcinogenicity 
 
test of potassium metabisulfite in mice. Ecotoxicol. Environ. 
Saf. 3: 451-453(1979). 
 
377. Thtematsu, M., Takahashi, M., Tsuda, H., Ogiso, T., and Ito, N. 
 
The administration of reserpine to rats for 75 weeks. Toxicol. 
Lett. 1: 201-205(1978). 
 
378. Terao, K., Aikawa, T., and Kera, K. A synergistic effect of 
 
nitrosodimethylamine on sterigmatocystin carcinogenesis in rats. 
Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 16: 591-596(1978). 
 
379. Terracini, B., Magee, P N., and Barnes, J. M. Hepatic pathology 
 
in rats on low dietary levels of dimethylnitrosamine. Brit. J. 
Cancer 20: 559-565(1967). 
 
380. Terracini, B., Testa, M. C., Cabral, J. R., and Day, N. The 
 
effects of long-term feeding of DDT to BALB/c mice. Int. J. 
Cancer 11: 747-764(1973). 
 
381. Thorpe, E., and Walker, A. I. T. The toxicology of dieldrin 
 
(HEOD). II. Comparative long-term oral toxicity studies in mice 
with dieldrin, DDT, phenobarbitone, beta-BHC and gamma- 
BHC. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 11: 433-442(1973). 
 
382. Tomatis, L., Thrusov, V, Charles, R. T., and Boicchi, M. Effect 
 
of long-term exposure to 1,1-dichloro-2,2-bis(p-chlorophenyl) 
ethylene, to 1,1-dichloro-2,2-bis(p-chlorophenyl)ethane, and to 
the two chemicals combined on CF-1 mice. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 
52: 883-891(1974). 
 
383. Tomatis, L., Turusov, V, Charles, R. T., Boiocchi, M., and Gati, 
 
E. Liver tumours in CF-1 mice exposed for limited periods to 
technical DDT. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 82: 25-35(1974). 
 
384. Tomatis, L., Turusov, V, Day, N., and Charles, R. T. The effect 
 
of long-term exposure to DDT on CF-1 mice. Int. J. Cancer 10: 
489-506(1972). 
 
385. Toth, B. Studies on the incidence, morphology, transplantation 
 
and cell-free filtration of malignant lymphomas in the Syrian 
golden hamster. Cancer Res. 27: 1430-1442(1967). 
 
386. Toth, B. Lung tumor induction and inhibition of breast adenocar- 
 
cinomas by hydrazine sulfate in mice. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 42: 
469-475(1969). 
 
387. Toth, B. Benzoylhydrazine carcinogenesis in lungs and lymphore- 
 
ticular tissues of Swiss mice. Eur. J. Cancer 8: 341-345(1972). 
388. Toth, B. Hydrazine, methylhydrazine and methylhydrazine sul- 
 
fate carcinogenesis in Swiss mice. Failure of ammonium hydrox- 
ide to interfere in the development of tumors. Int. J. Cancer 9: 
109-118(1972). 
 
389. Toth, B. Thmorigenesis studies with 1,2-dimethylhydrazine 
 
dihydrochloride, hydrazine sulfate, and isonicotinic acid in Golden 
hamsters. Cancer Res. 32: 804-807(1972). 
 
390. Toth, B. 1,1-Dimethylhydrazine (unsymmetrical) carcinogenesis 
 
in mice. Light microscopic and ultrastructural studies on neoplas- 
tic blood vessels. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 50: 181-194(1973). 
 
391. Toth, B. Tumorigenicity of beta-phenylethylhydrazine sulfate in 
 
mice. Cancer Res. 36: 917-921(1976). 
 
392. Toth, B. The large bowel carcinogenic effects of hydrazines and 
 
related compounds occurring in nature and in the environment. 
Cancer 40: 2427-2431(1977). 
 
393. Toth, B. Formylhydrazine carcinogenesis in mice. Brit. J. 
 
Cancer 37: 960-964(1978). 
 
394. Ibth, B. 1-Acetyl-2-phenylhydrazine carcinogenesis in mice. Brit. 
 
J. Cancer 39: 584-587(1979). 
 
395. Toth, B. Nicotinic acid hydrazide carcinogenesis in mice. Oncol- 
 
ogy 38: 106-109(1981). 
 
396. Toth, B., and Boreisha, I. Tumorigenesis with isonicotinic acid 
 
hydrazide and urethan in the Syrian golden hamsters. Eur. J. 
Cancer 5: 165-171(1969). 
 
397. Toth, B., and Erickson, J. Lung tumorigenesis by 1,2-diformyl- 
 
hydrazine in mice. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 92: 11-16(1978). 
 
398. Ibth, B., and Nagel, D. Tumour induction study with allyl- 
 
hydrazine HCl in Swiss mice. Brit. J. Cancer 34: 90-93(1976). 
399. Toth, B., and Nagel, D. Tumors induced in mice by N-methyl- 
 
N-formylhydrazine of the false morel Gyromitra esculenta. 
J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 60: 201-204(1978). 
 
400. Toth, B., and Nagel, D. N-Ethyl-N-formylhydrazine tumori- 
 
genesis in mice. Carcinogenesis 1: 61-65(1980). 
 
401. Toth, B., and Nagel, D. 1,2-Di-n-butylhydrazine dihydrochloride 
 
carcinogenesis in mice. Experientia 37: 773-775(1981). 
 
402. Toth, B., Nagel, D., and Patil, K. Tumorigenesis by N-N-propyl- 
 
N-formylhydrazine in mice. Brit. J. Cancer 42: 922-928(1980). 
403. Toth, B., Nagel, D., and Patil, K. Tumorigenic action of 
 
N-N-butyl-N-formylhydrazine in mice. Carcinogenesis 1: 589- 
593(1980). 
 
404. Toth, B., Nagel, D., and Patil, K. Carcinogenic effects of 
 
1,1-di-n-butylhydrazine in mice. Carcinogenesis 2: 651-654(1981). 
405. Toth, B., Nagel, D., Patil, K., Erickson, J., and Antonson, K. 
 
Tumor induction with the N'-acetyl derivative of 4-hydroxy- 
methylphenylhydrazine, a metabolite of agaritine of Agaricus 
bisporuns. Cancer Res. 38: 177-180(1978). 
 
406. Toth, B., and Patil, K. Carcinogenic effects in the Syrian golden 
 
hamster of N-methyl-N-formylhydrazine of the false morel 
mushroom Gyromitra esculenta. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 93: 
109-121(1979). 
 
407. Toth, B., and Patil, K. The tumorigenic effect of low dose levels 
 
of N-methyl-N-formylhydrazine in mice. Neoplasma 27: 25-31 
(1980). 
 
408. Toth, B., Patil, K., Erickson, J., and Kupper, R. False morel 
 
mushroom Gyromitra esculenta toxin: N-methyl-N-formylhydra- 
zine carcinogenesis in mice. Mycopathologia 68: 121-128(1979). 
409. Toth, B., and Rustja, M. The effect of isonicotinic acid hydrazide 
 
on the development of tumors. Int. J. Cancer 2: 413-420(1967). 
410. Toth, B., and Shimizu, H. Lung carcinogenesis with 1-acetyl- 
 
2-isonicotinoylhydrazine, the major metabolite of isoniazid. Eur. 
J. Cancer 9: 285-289(1973). 
 
411. Toth, B., and Shimizu, H. Methylhydrazine tumorigenesis in 
 
Syrian golden hamsters and the morphology of malignant 
histiocytomas. Cancer Res. 33: 2744-2753(1973). 
 
412. Toth, B., and Shimizu, H. 1-Carbamyl-2-phenylhydrazine tumori- 
 
genesis in Swiss mice. Morphology of lung adenomas. J. Natl. 
Cancer Inst. 52: 241-251(1974). 
 
413. Toth, B., and Shimizu, H. Tumorigenic effects of chronic 
 
administration of benzylhydrazine dihydrochloride and phenylhy- 
drazine hydrochloride in Swiss mice. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 
87: 267-273(1976). 
 
414. Toth, B., Shimizu, H., and Erickson, J. Carbamylhydrazine 
 
hydrochloride as a lung and blood vessel tumour inducer in Swiss 
mice. Eur. J. Cancer 11: 17-22(1975). 
 
415. Toth, B., and Shubik, P Carcinogenesis in Swiss mice by 
 
isonicotinic acid hydrazide. Cancer Res. 26: 1473-1475(1966). 
 
416. Toth, B., and Shubik, P Mammary tumor inhibition and lung 
 
adenoma induction by isonicotinic acid hydrazide. Science 152: 
1376-1377(1966). 
 
417. Toth, B., Wallcave, L., Patil, K., Schmeltz, I., and Hoffmann, D. 
 
Induction of tumors in mice with the herbicide succinic acid 
2,2-dimethylhydrazide. Cancer Res. 37: 3497-3500(1977). 
 
418. Toth, B., and Wilson, R. B. Blood vessel tumorigenesis by 
 
1,2-dimethylhydrazine dihydrochloride (symmetrical). Am. J. 
Pathol. 64: 585-600(1971). 
 
419 Toth, K., Somfai-Relle, S., Sugar, J., and Bence, J. Carcinogeni- 
 
city testing of herbicide 2,4,5-trichlorophenoxyethanol containing 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 315 
 
dioxin and of pure dioxin in Swiss mice. Nature 278: 548-549 
(1979). 
 
420. Tourkevitch, N. M., Gorevaia, A. N., Kounitsa, L. K., and Mao, 
 
L. S. Developpement des tumeurs des glandes mammaires chez 
les rats en cas de trouble de la regulation endocrine provoque par 
differentes actions. Int. J. Cancer 20: 1446-1449(1964). 
 
421. Truhaut, R., Coquet, B., Fouillet, X., Galland, D., Guyot, D., 
 
Long, D., and Rouaud, J. L. Two-year oral toxicity and multi- 
generation studies in rats on two chemically modified maize 
starches. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 17: 11-17(1979). 
 
422. Iruhaut, R., Ferrando, R., Faccini, J. M., and Monro, A. M. 
 
Negative results of carcinogenicity bioassay of methyl carbazate 
in rats: significance for the toxicological evaluation of carbadox. 
Toxicology 22: 219-221(1981). 
 
423. Tsuda, H., Hananouchi, M., Tatematsu, M., Hirose, M., Hirao, 
 
K., Takahashi, M., and Ito, N. Tumorigenic effect of 3-amino- 
1H-1,2,4- triazole on rat thyroid. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 57: 861- 
864(1976). 
 
424. Tuchmann-Duplessis, H., and Mercier-Parot, L. Cancerologie.- 
 
apparition de tumeurs malignes dans une lignee de rats "Wistar". 
Academie des Sciences, Memoires et Communications des 
Membres et des Correspondants de l'Academie. 254: 1535-1537 
(1962). 
 
425. Uchida, E., and Hirono, I. Effect of phenobarbital on the 
 
development of neoplastic lesions in the liver of cycasin-treated 
rats. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 100: 231-238(1981). 
 
426. Uematsu, K., and Miyaji, T. Induction of tumors in rats by oral 
 
administration of technical acid violet 6B. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 
51: 1337-1338(1973). 
 
427. Ueno, I., and Hirono, I. Non-carcinogenic response to coumarin 
 
in Syrian golden hamsters. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 19: 353-355 
(1981). 
 
428. Ulland, B. M., Weisburger, J. H., Weisburger, E. K., Rice, J. 
 
M., and Cypher, R. Brief communication: thyroid cancer in rats 
from ethylene thiourea intake. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 49: 
583-584(1972). 
 
429. Ungerer, O., Eisenbrand, G., and Preussmann, R. Zur Reaktion 
 
von Nitrit mit Pestiziden. Bildung, chemische Eigenschaften 
und cancerogene Wirkung der N-Nitrosoverbindung des Herbizids 
N-Methyl-N'-(2-benzothiazolyl-harnstoff(Benthiazuron). Cancer 
Res. Clin. Oncol. 81: 217-224(1974). 
 
430. Uraguchi, K., Saito, M., Noguchi, Y, Takahashi, K., Enomoto, 
 
M., and Tatsuno, T. Chronic toxicity and carcinogenicity in mice 
of the purified mycotoxins, luteoskyrin and cyclochlorotine. Food 
Cosmet. Toxicol. 10: 193-207(1972). 
 
431. Van Duuren, B. L., Goldschmidt, B. M., Katz, C., Seidman, I., 
 
and Paul, J. S. Carcinogenic activity of alkylating agents. J. 
Natl. Cancer Inst. 53: 695-700(1974). 
 
432. Van Duuren, B. L., Goldschmidt, B. M., Loewengart, G., Smith, 
 
A. C., Melchionne, S., Seidman, I., and Roth, D. Carcinogenic- 
ity of halogenated olefinic and aliphatic hydrocarbons in mice. J. 
Natl. Cancer Inst. 63: 1433-1439(1979). 
 
433. Van Duuren, B. L., Goldschmidt, B. M., and Seidman, I. 
 
Carcinogenic activity of di- and trifunctional alpha-chloro ethers 
and of 1,4-dichlorobutene-2 in ICR/Ha Swiss mice. Cancer Res. 
35: 2553-2557(1975). 
 
434. Van Duuren, B. L., Langseth, L., Orris, L., Teebor, G., Nelson, 
 
N., and Kuschner, M. Carcinogenicity of epoxides, lactones, and 
peroxy compounds. IV Thmor response in epithelial and connec- 
tive tissue in mice and rats. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 37: 825- 
838(1966). 
 
435. Van Esch, G. J., and Kroes, R. The induction of renal tumours 
 
by feeding basic lead acetate to mice and hamsters. Brit. J. 
Cancer 23: 765-771(1969). 
 
436. Van Esch, G. J., and Kroes, R. Long-term toxicity studies of 
 
chlorpropham and propham in mice and hamsters. Food Cosmet. 
Toxicol. 10: 373-381(1972). 
 
437. Van Esch, G. J., Van Genderen, H., and Vink, H. H. The 
 
induction of renal tumours by feeding of basic lead acetate to 
rats. Brit. J. Cancer 16: 289-297(1962). 
 
438. Van Miller, J. R, Lalich, J. J., and Allen, J. R. Increased 
 
incidence of neoplasms in rats exposed to low levels of 2,3,7,8- 
 
tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin. Chemosphere 10: 625-632(1977). 
 
439. Vazquez-Lopez, E. The effects of thiourea on the development of 
 
spontaneous tumours on mice. Brit. J. Cancer 3: 401-414(1949). 
440. Verschuuren, H. G., Kroes, R., and Van Esch, G. J. Toxicity 
 
studies on tetrasul. I. Acute, long-term and reproduction 
studies. Toxicology 1: 63-78(1973). 
 
441. Vesselinovitch, S. D., Rao, K. V N., and Mihailovich, N. 
 
Transplacental and lactational carcinogenesis by safrole. Cancer 
Res. 39: 4378-4380(1979). 
 
442. Wakabayashi, K., Inagaki, T., Fujimoto, Y, and Fukuda, Y. 
 
Induction by degraded carrageenan of colorectal tumors in rats. 
Cancer Lett. 4: 171-176(1978). 
 
443. Walker, A. I. T., Thorpe, E., and Stevenson, D. E. The 
 
toxicology of dieldrin (HEOD). I. Long-term oral toxicity 
studies in mice. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 11: 415-432(1973). 
 
444. Ward, J. M., Sontag, J. M., Weisburger, E. K., and Brown, C. 
 
A. Effect of lifetime exposure to aflatoxin Bi in rats. J. Natl. 
Cancer Inst. 55: 107-110(1975). 
 
445. Waters, L. L. o-Aminoazotoluene as a carcinogenic agent. Yale 
 
J. Biol. Med. 10: 179-184(1937). 
 
446. Weisburger, E. K. Bioassay program for carcinogenic hazards of 
 
cancer chemotherapeutic agents. Cancer 40: 1935-1949(1977). 
 
447. Weisburger, E. K., Russfield, A. B., Homburger, F, Weisburger, 
 
J. H., Boger, E., Van Dongen, C. G., and Chu, K. Testing of 
twenty-one aromatic amines or derivatives for long-term toxicity 
or carcinogenicity. J. Environ. Pathol. Toxicol. 2: 325-356(1978). 
448. Weisburger, E. K., Ulland, B. M., Nam, J., Gart, J. J., and 
 
Weisburger, J. H. Carcinogenicity tests of certain environmental 
and industrial chemicals. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 67: 75-88(1981). 
449. Weisburger, J. H., Yamamoto, R. S., Glass, R. M., and Frankel, 
 
H. H. Prevention by arginine glutamate of the carcinogenicity of 
acetamide in rats. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 14: 163-175(1969). 
450. Wiessler, M., and Schmahl, D. Zur carcinogenen Wirkung von 
 
N-Nitroso-Verbindungen. 1. Mitteilung: N-Nitroso-3,6-dihydroo- 
xazin-1,2 und N-Nitroso-tetrahydrooxazin-1,2. Cancer Res. Clin. 
Oncol. 79: 114-117 (1973). 
 
451. Wiessler, M., and Schmahl, D. Zur carcinogenen Wirkung von 
 
N-Nitroso-Verbindungen. 2. Mitteilung: S( + ) und R(-)-N-Nitroso- 
2-methyl-piperidin. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 79: 118-122 (1973). 
452. Willheim, R., and Ivy, A. C. A preliminary study concerning the 
 
possibility of dietary carcinogenesis. Gastroenterology 23: 
1-19(1953). 
 
453. Williams, M. H. C., and Bonser, G. M. Induction of hepatomas in 
 
rats and mice following the administration of auramine. Brit. J. 
Cancer 16: 87-91(1962). 
 
454. Willis, J. The induction of malignant neoplasms in the thyroid 
 
gland of the rat. J. Pathol. 82: 23-27(1961). 
 
455. Wislocki, P G., Miller, E. C., Miller, J. A., McCoy, E. C., and 
 
Rosenkranz, H. S. Carcinogenic and mutagenic activities of 
safrole, l'-hydroxysafrole, and some known or possible metabo- 
lites. Cancer Res. 37: 1883-1891(1977). 
 
456. Wogan, G. N., Edwards, G. S., and Newberne, P M. Structure- 
 
activity relationships in toxicity and carcinogenicity of aflatoxins 
and analogs. Cancer Res. 31: 1936-1942(1971). 
 
457. Wogan, G. N., Paglialunga, S., and Newberne, P M. Carcino- 
 
genic effects of low dietary levels of aflatoxin Bi in rats. Food 
Cosmet. Toxicol. 12: 681-685(1974). 
 
458. Wong, L. C. K., Winston, J. M., Hong, C. B., and Plotnick, H. 
 
Carcinogenicity and toxicity of 1,2-dibromoethane in the rat. 
Ibxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 63: 155-165(1982). 
 
459. Wood, M. Factors influencing the induction of tumours of the 
 
urinary bladder and liver by 2-acetylaminofluorene in the mouse. 
Eur. J. Cancer 5: 41-47(1969). 
 
460. Wood, M., Flaks, A., and Clayson, D. B. The carcinogenic 
 
activity of dibutylnitrosamine in IF X C57 mice. Eur. J. Cancer 
6: 433-440(1970). 
 
461. Yamamoto, R. S., Korzis, J., and Weisburger, J. H. Chronic 
 
ethanol ingestion and the hepatocarcinogenicity of N-hydroxy- 
N-2-fluorenylacetamide. Int. J. Cancer 2: 337-343(1967). 
 
462. Yamamoto, R. S., Richardson, H. L., Weisburger, E. K., 
 
Weisburger, J. H., Benjamin, T., and Bahner, C. T. Carcinogenic- 
ity of proposed cancer chemotherapeutic agents with stil- 
 
316 GOLD ET AL. 
 
benearylnitrosamine structures. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 51: 1313- 
1315(1973). 
 
463. Yamamoto, R. S., Williams, G. M., Frankel, H. H., and 
 
Weisburger, J. H. 8-Hydroxyquinoline: chronic toxicity and 
inhibitory effect on the carcinogenicity of N-2-fluorenylaceta- 
mide. Ibxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 19: 687-698(1971). 
 
464. Yokoro, K., Kajihara, H., Kodama, Y., Nagao, K., Hamada, K., 
 
and Kinomura, A. Chronic toxicity of 2-(2-furyl)-3-(5-nitro- 
2-furyl)acrylamide (AF-2) in mice with special reference to 
carcinogenicity in the forestomach. Gann 68: 825-828(1977). 
 
465. Yoshida, M., Numoto, S., and Otsuka, H. Histopathological 
 
changes induced in the urinary bladder and liver of female 
BALB/c mice treated simultaneously with 2-naphthylamine and 
cyclophosphamide. Gann 70: 645-652(1979). 
 
466. Yoshimoto, S. Carcinogenicity and mutagenicity of tetrachloro- 
 
benzidine. Jikeikai Med. J. 25: 123-128(1978). 
 
467. Zabezhinskii, M. A. Effectiveness of inhalation as a method of 
 
administration of atomized carcinogens. Byull. Eksp. Biol. Med. 
69: 72-74(1970). 
 
APPENDIX 15 
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 
National Cancer Institute/National 
 
Toxicology Program Technical Reports 
 
All Technical Reports are entitled "Bioassay of [Chemical Name] for Possible Carcinogenicity" 
 
TECHNICAL PUBLICATION 
CHEMICAL NAME REPORT NUMBER DATE 
ACETOHEXAMIDE 50 1978 
ACRONYCINE 49 1978 
ALDICARB 136 1979 
ALDRIN 21 1978 
ALLYL CHLORIDE 73 1978 
3-AMINO-4-ETHOXYACETANILIDE 112 1978 
3-AMINO-9-ETHYLCARBAZOLE HYDROCHLORIDE 93 1978 
1-AMINO-2-METHYLANTHRAQUINONE 111 1978 
4-AMINO-2-NITROPHENOL 94 1978 
2-AMINO-5-NITROTHIAZOLE 53 1978 
2-AMINOANTHRAQUINONE 144 1978 
ANILAZINE 104 1978 
ANILINE HYDROCHLORIDE 130 1978 
o-ANISIDINE HYDROCHLORIDE 89 1978 
p-ANISIDINE HYDROCHLORIDE 116 1978 
ANTHRANILIC ACID 36 1978 
AROCLOR 1254 38 1978 
5-AZACYTIDINE 42 1978 
AZINPHOSMETHYL 69 1978 
AZOBENZENE 154 1979 
1H-BENZOTRIAZOLE 88 1978 
beta-TGdR 57 1978 
BIS(2-CHLORO-1-METHYLETHYL) ETHER 191 1979 
BUTYLATED HYDROXYTOLUENE (BHT) 150 1979 
C.I. VAT YELLOW 4 134 1979 
CALCIUM CYANAMIDE 163 1979 
CAPTAN 15 1977 
CARBROMAL 173 1979 
CHLORAMBEN 25 1977 
CHLORDANE 8 1977 
4-CHLORO-m-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 85 1978 
4-CHLORO-o-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 63 1978 
2-CHLORO-p-PHENYLENEDIAMINE SULFATE 113 1978 
3-CHLORO-p-TOLUIDINE 145 1978 
5-CHLORO-o-TOLUIDINE 187 1979 
4-CHLORO-o-TOLUIDINE HYDROCHLORIDE 165 1979 
4'-(CHLOROACETYL)-ACETANILIDE 177 1979 
p-CHLOROANILINE 189 1979 
CHLOROBENZILATE 75 1978 
(2-CHLOROETHYL)TRIMETHYLAMMONIUM CHLORIDE (CCC) 158 1979 
CHLOROFORM A 1976 
2-(CHLOROMETHYL)PYRIDINE HYDROCHLORIDE 178 1979 
3-(CHLOROMETHYL)PYRIDINE HYDROCHLORIDE 95 1978 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
CHEMICAL NAME 
CHLOROPICRIN 
 
CHLOROTHALONIL 
CHLORPROPAMIDE 
CLONITRALID 
COUMAPHOS 
m-CRESIDINE 
p-CRESIDINE 
CUPFERRON 
DAMINOZIDE 
DAPSONE 
p,p'-DDE 
DDT 
 
2,4-DIAMINOANISOLE SULFATE 
2,4-DIAMINOTOLUENE 
 
2,5-DIAMINOTOLUENE SULFATE 
DIARYLANILIDE YELLOW 
DIAZINON 
 
DIBENZO-p-DIOXIN 
 
DIBROMOCHLOROPROPANE 
 
DIBROMOCHLOROPROPANE (INHALATION) 
1,2-DIBROMOETHANE 
 
1,2-DIBROMOETHANE (INHALATION) 
DIBUTYLTIN DIACETATE 
 
2,7-DICHLORODIBENZO-p-DIOXIN (DCDD) 
1,1-DICHLOROETHANE 
1,2-DICHLOROETHANE 
DICHLORVOS 
DICOFOL 
 
N,N'-DICYCLOHEXYLTHIOUREA 
DIELDRIN 
DIELDRIN 
 
N,N'-DIETHYLTHIOUREA 
DIMETHOATE 
 
2,4-DIMETHOXYANILINE HYDROCHLORIDE 
 
3,3'-DIMETHOXYBENZIDINE-4,4'-DIISOCYANATE 
DIMETHYL TEREPHTHALATE 
2,4-DINITROTOLUENE 
1,4-DIOXANE 
DIOXATHION 
 
DIRECT BLACK 38 
DIRECT BLUE 6 
 
DIRECT BROWN 95 
2,5-DITHIOBIUREA 
EMETINE 
 
ENDOSULFAN 
ENDRIN 
 
ESTRADIOL MUSTARD 
ETHIONAMIDE 
p,p'-ETHYL-DDD 
 
ETHYL TELLURAC 
FENTHION 
 
FORMULATED FENAMINOSULF 
HEPTACHLOR 
 
HEXACHLOROETHANE 
HEXACHLOROPHENE 
HYDRAZOBENZENE 
ICRF-159 
 
3,3'-IMINOBIS-1-PROPANOL DIMETHANESULFONATE (ESTER) 
 
HYDROCHLORIDE (IPD) 
IODOFORM 
 
ISOPHOSPHAMIDE 
KEPONE 
 
LASIOCARPINE 
 
LEAD DIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE 
 
'T'ECHNICAL 
 
REPORT NUMBER 
 
65 
41 
45 
91 
96 
105 
142 
100 
83 
20 
131 
131 
84 
162 
126 
30 
137 
122 
28 
206 
 
86 
210 
183 
123 
66 
55 
10 
90 
56 
21 
22 
149 
 
4 
171 
128 
121 
54 
80 
125 
108 
108 
108 
132 
43 
62 
12 
59 
46 
156 
152 
103 
101 
 
9 
68 
40 
92 
78 
18 
 
110 
 
32 
B 
39 
151 
 
PUBLLUA'T'IUN 
 
DATE 
 
1978 
1978 
1978 
1978 
1979 
1978 
1979 
1978 
1978 
1977 
1978 
1978 
1978 
1979 
1978 
1978 
1979 
1979 
1978 
1982 
1978 
1982 
1979 
1979 
1978 
1978 
1977 
1978 
1978 
1978 
1978 
1979 
1977 
1979 
1979 
1979 
1978 
1978 
1978 
1978 
1978 
1978 
1979 
1978 
1978 
1979 
1978 
1978 
1979 
1979 
1979 
1978 
1977 
1978 
1978 
1978 
1978 
1978 
1978 
1977 
1976 
1978 
1979 
 
317 
 
GOLD ET AL. 
 
TECHNICAL PUBLICATION 
CHEMICAL NAME REPORT NUMBER DATE 
LINDANE 14 1977 
LITHOCHOLIC ACID 175 1979 
MALAOXON 135 1979 
MALATHION 24 1979 
MALATHION 192 1979 
dl-MENTHOL 98 1979 
METHOXYCHLOR 35 1978 
2-METHYL-1-NITROANTHRAQUINONE 29 1978 
METHYL PARATHION 157 1979 
4,4'-METHYLENEBIS(N,N-DIMETHYL)BENZENAMINE 186 1979 
MEXACARBATE 147 1978 
MICHLER'S KETONE 181 1979 
A MIXTURE OF ASPIRIN, PHENACETIN, AND CAFFEINE 67 1978 
MIXTURE OF 1,2,3,6,7,8-HEXACHLORODIBENZO-p-DIOXIN AND 1, 198 1980 
 
2,3,7,8,9-HEXACHLORODIBENZO-p-DIOXIN (GAVAGE) 
 
1,5-NAPHTHALENEDIAMINE 143 1978 
N-(1-NAPHTHYL)ETHYLENEDIAMINE DIHYDROCHLORIDE 168 1979 
NITHIAZIDE 146 1979 
NITRILOTRIACETIC ACID (NTA) 6 1977 
NITRILOTRIACETIC ACID, TRISODIUM SALT, MONOHYDRATE 6 1977 
 
(Na NTA H 0) 
 
3-NITO-p-ACETOPHENETIDE 133 1979 
5-NITRO-o-ANISIDINE 127 1978 
2-NITRO-p-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 169 1979 
4-NITRO-o-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 180 1979 
5-NITRO-o-TOLUIDINE 107 1978 
5-NITROACENAPHTHENE 118 1978 
4-NITROANTHRANILIC ACID 109 1978 
6-NITROBENZIMIDAZOLE 117 1979 
NITROFEN 26 1979 
NITROFEN 184 1979 
1-NITRONAPHTHALENE 64 1978 
3-NITROPROPIONIC ACID 52 1978 
N-NITROSODIPHENYLAMINE 164 1979 
p-NITROSODIPHENYLAMINE 190 1979 
PARATHION 70 1979 
PENTACHLORONITROBENZENE 61 1978 
PHENAZOPYRIDINE HYDROCHLORIDE 99 1978 
PHENESTERIN 60 1978 
PHENFORMIN 7 1977 
PHENOXYBENZAMINE HYDROCHLORIDE 72 1978 
1-PHENYL-3-METHYL-5-PYRAZOLONE 141 1978 
N-PHENYL-p-PHENYLENEDIAMINE HYDROCHLORIDE 82 1978 
1-PHENYL-2-THIOUREA 148 1978 
p-PHENYLENEDIAMINE DIHYDROCHLORIDE 174 1979 
PHOSPHAMIDON 16 1979 
PHOTODIELDRIN 17 1977 
PHTHALAMIDE 161 1979 
PHTHALIC ANHYDRIDE 159 1979 
PICLORAM 23 1978 
PIPERONYL BUTOXIDE 120 1979 
PIPERONYL SULFOXIDE 124 1979 
PIVALOLACTONE 140 1978 
PROCARBAZINE 19 1979 
PROFLAVINE 5 1977 
PYRAZINAMIDE 48 1978 
PYRIMETHAMINE 77 1978 
p-QUINONE DIOXIME 179 1979 
RESERPINE 193 1980 
SELENIUM SULFIDE 194 1980 
SODIUM DIETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE 172 1979 
A SOLUTION OF beta-NITROSTYRENE AND STYRENE 170 1979 
STYRENE 185 1979 
 
318 
 
CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
 
TECHNICAL PUBLICATION 
CHEMICAL NAME REPORT NUMBER DATE 
SULFALLATE 115 1978 
SULFISOXAZOLE 138 1979 
3-SULFOLENE 102 1978 
TDE 131 1978 
2,3,5,6-TETRACHLORO-4-NITROANISOLE 114 1978 
2,3,7,8-TETRACHLORODIBENZO-p-DIOXIN IN OSBORNE-MENDEL 209 1982 
 
RATS AND B6C3F1 MICE (GAVAGE STUDY) 
 
1,1,2,2-TETRACHLOROETHANE 27 1978 
TETRACHLOROETHYLENE 13 1977 
TETRACHLORVINPHOS 33 1978 
TETRAETHYLTHIURAM DISULFIDE 166 1979 
THIO-TEPA 58 1978 
4,4'-THIODIANILINE 47 1978 
TITANIUM DIOXIDE 97 1979 
TOLAZAMIDE 51 1978 
TOLBUTAMIDE 31 1977 
o-TOLUIDINE HYDROCHLORIDE 153 1979 
TOXAPHENE 37 1977 
1,1,1-TRICHLOROETHANE 3 1977 
1,1,2-TRICHLOROETHANE 74 1978 
TRICHLOROETHYLENE 2 1976 
TRICHLOROFLUOROMETHANE 106 1978 
2,4,6-TRICHLOROPHENOL 155 1979 
TRIFLURALIN 34 1978 
2,4,5-TRIMETHYLANILINE 160 1979 
TRIMETHYLPHOSPHATE 81 1978 
TRIMETHYLTHIOUREA 129 1979 
TRIPHENYLTIN HYDROXIDE 139 1978 
TRIS(2,3-DIBROMOPROPYL)PHOSPHATE 76 1978 
TRISODIUM ETHYLENEDIAMINETETRAACETATE TRIHYDRATE (EDTA) 11 1977 
L-TRYPTOPHAN 71 1978 
 
A - No Technical Report number migned by NCI. 
B - NCI (brief communication). 
 
319