319nihpaCancer cellCancer CellPMC131981921319819213198192NIHMS21550584189528010.1016/j.ccell.2026.03.003Cancer type-specific variation in patterns of driver alterations across 50,000 tumors
BandlamudiChaitanya MuldoonDaniel de BruijnIno ZhangMingxuan GormallyMichael V HarroldEmily C NandakumarSubhiksha SmithShaleigh A JengMark Y WoodsSydney AroraKanika ChatilaWalid K NguyenBastien WalchHenry WooJun BielskiCraig M FongChristopher TranThinh N ZhaoGaofei MehineMiika PerryMaria A TischfieldSam E RichardsAllison L RajendranSuraj ZhangHongxin KreitzerChristoph K ShahRonak HuqRisha GalleJesse AlanoTina MadupuriRamyasree KundraRitika JeeJustin PichottaKarl WatersMichele HickmanRichard A DermawanJosephine K ChenJie-Fu SafonovAnton StopsackKonrad H KotechaRitesh R RizviHira A FriedmanClaire F RazaviPedram RosenEzra Murciano-GoroffYonina R MorrisLuc GT FaginJames A MellinghoffIngo K ChiPing ShuklaNeerav N SchoenfeldAdam J RielyGregory J RudinCharles M DrilonAlexander LeeJake June-Koo Al-AhmadieHikmat A IyerGopa VargheseAnna M O’ReillyEileen M StadlerZsofia K RobsonMark E ReznikEd GaoJianJiong MandelkerDiana OstrovnayaIrina RanaSatshil JayakumaranGowtham BowmanAnita MohantyAbhinita BalakrishnanAnoop Rema SyedAijazuddin PtashkinRyan N Casanova-MurphyJacklyn ChakravartyDebyani BenayedRyma ArcilaMaria E ChandarlapatySarat YuHelena A RosenNeal DonoghueMark TA KlebanoffChristopher A YaegerRona BrannonA Rose ZehirAhmet LadanyiMarc SchultzNikolaus SolitDavid B BergerMichael F 1Marie-Josée and Henry R. Kravis Center for Molecular Oncology2Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine3Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics4Department of Medicine5Research and Technology Management6Department of Nursing7Department of Surgery8Department of Neurology9Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program10Department of Pediatrics11Immuno-Oncology Program12Center for Cellular Immunotherapy, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA13Lead contactAUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceptualization, C.B. and M.F.B.; methodology, C.B., I.B., M.Z., S.N., S.A.S., W.K.C., M.A.P., and M.F.B.; software: C.B., I.B., M.Z., S.N., S.A.S., K.A., J.W., C.F., G.Z., H.Z., H.Z., R.M., R.K., K.P., M.W., J.G., and N.S.; formal analysis, C.B., D.M., I.B., M.Z., S.N., S.A.S., S.W., K.A., W.K.C., B.N., H.W., J.W., T.N.T, S.R., and I.O.; investigation, C.B., I.B., M.Z., M.V.G., S.N., S.A.S., M.Y.J., K.A., W.K.C., B.N., H.W., J.W., C.B., T.N.T, M.M., M.A.P., S.E.T., A.L.R, R.S., J.J., R.A.K., J.K.D., J.C., A.S., E.R., J.G., D.M., S.R., G.J., A.B., A.M., A.R.B., A.S., R.N.P, J.C., R.B., M.E.A., S.C., H.Y., N.R., M.T.A.D., C.A.K., R.Y., A.R.B., A.Z., M.L., N.S., D.B.S, and M.F.B.; resources: C.B., I.B., E.C.H, J.G., T.A., N.S., D.B.S, and M.F.B.; data curation: C.B., D.M, I.B., M.Z., S.N., S.A.S., M.A.P, S.E.T., R.H., R.K., J.J., A.S., K.H.S, R.R.K., H.A.R., C.F.F., P.R., E.R., Y.R.M., L.G.T.M., J.A.F., I.K.M., P.C., N.N.S., A.J.S., G.J.R., C.M.R., A.D., J.J.L., H.A.A., G.I., A.M.V., E.M.O., Z.K.S., M.E.R., D.C., R.Y., A.R.B., A.Z., and N.S.; writing – original draft: C.B. and M.F.B.; writing – review and editing: all authors; supervision: C.B., M.L., N.S., D.B.S., and M.F.B.; funding acquisition: C.B., D.B.S., and M.F.B.
*Correspondence: bandlamc@mskcc.org (C.B.), bergerm1@mskcc.org (M.F.B.)
263202644510451045–1062.e62452026This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).The publisher's version of this article is available at Cancer CellThis article has been corrected. See Cancer Cell. 2026 Apr 18.

## SUMMARY
The oncogenic impact of somatic driver alterations is shaped by tissue context. Classifying alterations by cancer type and evaluating their context-specific properties requires large cohorts of genomically profiled and clinically annotated tumors. Here, we define cancer type-specific patterns of driver alterations, including 164 newly identified hotspots, in 54,331 tumors from 48,179 patients spanning 448 histological cancer subtypes. One-third of all drivers arose in non-canonical contexts and exhibited distinct features, including increased subclonality, later emergence, and divergent biological properties. Within cancer types, gene fusions and other distinct patterns of co-occurring drivers are indicative of earlier age of disease onset. We also identify ancestry-specific differences in human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-restricted driver neoantigens affecting T cell receptor therapy eligibility, and demonstrate cancer-type-specific patterns of intrinsic resistance via somatic HLA loss. Our findings highlight that functional roles of driver alterations depend on the cancer types and clinical contexts in which they arise.

## In brief
Bandlamudi et al. analyze 54,331 tumors across 448 cancer subtypes to define cancer type-specific patterns of driver alterations. They identify 164 new cancer hotspots and show that driver clonality, zygosity, age of disease onset associations, and HLA-dependent immunogenicity vary by tissue context, refining biological interpretation and clinical actionability.

## Graphical Abstract

 

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptyesis-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednohas-published-versionnoIssue date 2026 May 11.

## INTRODUCTION
Cancer is a genetic disease defined by the serial acquisition of cell fitness-promoting mutations, referred to as “drivers.” Characterization of driver alterations is fundamental to understanding cancer pathogenesis, molecular classification of tumors, and identifying biomarkers for targeted therapies. Large-scale sequencing studies of tumor exomes and genomes have produced fundamental insights into the mutational processes inherent to cancer initiation and progression and have enabled the discovery of genes harboring recurrent oncogenic driver alterations such as BRAF, PIK3CA, IDH1/2, and TERT. – Notably, most cancer genes and pathways are mutated in a highly tissue-specific manner, indicating a dependency on specific oncogenic alterations for malignant transformation. – These dependencies are governed by the specific epigenetic, transcriptional, and tumor microenvironment constraints that are defined by the cell-of-origin. , While cancer gene discovery has relied primarily on the frequency of all nonsynonymous mutations above background mutation rates, , , the identification of canonical cancer type associations could be significantly enhanced by restricting to alterations with established evidence of oncogenicity. Furthermore, the cancer type-specific roles of these driver alterations can be further elucidated by examining their second-order properties such as clonality and zygosity, as well as their co-occurring molecular and clinical features. This requires large cohorts of deeply genomically characterized tumors from well-annotated patients, including sufficient representation of rare cancer subtypes as well as samples collected at tumor progression.
Large tumor profiling consortia such as The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), the International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC), and American Association for Cancer Research’s Genomics Evidence Neoplasia Information Exchange (GENIE) have been critical to accelerating precision oncology efforts, – yet each cohort has specific limitations. While the multi-omic tumor profiling in TCGA remains a bedrock resource for the discovery and validation of cancer-associated biological alterations, it is limited to primary tumors collected from patients with only the most common cancer types. Moreover, the relatively low sequencing depth of tumor-derived DNA by the TCGA precludes robust assessment of mutation clonality and allele-specific copy number needed to understand intratumor heterogeneity. The GENIE cohort encompasses the broadest spectrum of diseases. However, the substantial heterogeneity in tumor profiling assays and analysis methodologies employed across the participating institutions poses challenges for downstream biological analysis and interpretation. Moreover, the majority of the patients in GENIE were profiled using tumor-only sequencing, making it challenging to ascertain the somatic origin of mutations and to evaluate mutation clonality and allele-specific copy number. We posited that large uniformly analyzed matched tumor-normal sequencing cohorts that deeply profile known cancer genes can be uniquely powered to enable biological inquiry into patterns of driver alterations, intratumor heterogeneity, and disease progression across the multitude of cancer types.
Here, we present in-depth analyses of a prospective clinical sequencing cohort of 54,331 tumor and patient-matched normal samples spanning a broad spectrum of cancer types (the MSK-50K cohort) to characterize cancer type-specific differences in the prevalence, properties, and biological roles of driver alterations in human cancer. First, using an established framework for hotspot mutation discovery, , we expand our catalog of drivers and delineate their frequency and co-alteration patterns in different histological subtypes at unprecedented resolution. Second, we use an empirical approach to identify genes that are significantly associated with each cancer type – , , , and observe that the same drivers exhibit different properties and co-occurrence patterns in non-canonical cancer type contexts, suggestive of variable roles in promoting tumorigenesis and cancer progression. Finally, we show that even within the same canonical cancer types, drivers exhibit different properties in different clinical contexts, including early age of onset and different human leukocyte antigen (HLA) allele configurations, with important clinical implications. To catalyze further discovery, the full dataset has been made publicly available as a community resource via the cBioPortal for Cancer Genomics.

## RESULTS

## MSK-50K cohort
We analyzed prospectively acquired sequencing data for 54,331 tumor tissue and patient-matched blood specimens from 48,179 patients that were generated as part of routine clinical care using an FDA-authorized clinical sequencing assay (MSK-IMPACT), which profiles up to 505 cancer-associated genes ( ). After excluding tumors from patients with cancers of unknown primary (n = 1,546 patients) or those with only a high-level cancer type annotation without a specified detailed subtype (n = 3,148), the remaining 43,485 patients comprised 448 detailed histological subtypes, with 101 subtypes consisting of 50 or more patients (see , and ; ). 57% of tumors were collected from patients whose disease had metastasized, and the median estimated purity was 45% based on histopathological assessment. Somatic alterations, which comprise nonsynonymous substitutions, insertions, deletions, gene-level focal copy number amplifications, homozygous deletions, and fusion events (in select genes) were identified using a clinically validated pipeline. Quantitative estimates of tumor purity, mutation clonality, whole genome duplication, fraction of genome altered, and genetic ancestry were also computationally inferred (see ). Ancestry composition substantially varied across cancer types ( ), recapitulating trends observed in prior epidemiological cancer studies. , All somatic alterations were annotated as drivers if they were assessed to be “oncogenic” or “likely oncogenic” by OncoKB or were previously identified as a cancer hotspot. , 
Microsatellite instability (MSI) was observed in 2.7% (n = 1,278) of all patients. While MSI was most frequent in endometrial (15%, 349 of 2,348 patients), colorectal (10%, 508 of 4,950), and esophagogastric (6%, 93 of 1,657) cancers, overall, at least one MSI-positive tumor was observed in 97 of the 448 histological subtypes in our cohort ( ). Notably, no tumor with MSI was observed in cutaneous melanomas (n = 881) and breast invasive lobular carcinomas (n = 606) despite sufficiently large numbers of tumors profiled. , Nevertheless, these observations highlight the need for universal screening of all cancers for MSI, given its utility as a tumor-agnostic biomarker for immune checkpoint blockade response.
Fourteen percent (n = 6,701) of patients had tumors with high tumor mutational burden (TMB-H, defined as ≥10 nonsynonymous mutations per megabase). Expectedly, TMB-H tumors were most common (≥20% of all tumors) in bladder cancers, melanomas, lung and vaginal cancers while significantly rare (3% or less) in sarcomas, gliomas, and the adenocarcinomas of prostate and pancreas. Mutational signature decomposition analysis identified a dominant signature attributable to a known etiology in 80% of all evaluable TMB-H tumors including signatures attributable to mismatch repair deficiency (25%), APOBEC (22%), smoking (17%), ultraviolet light exposure (UV, 12%) and POLE (2.7%) (see , ). As expected, signatures associated with smoking, UV light exposure, and temozolomide treatment were enriched in cancers of the lung, skin, and brain, respectively, while APOBEC mutagenesis was most commonly observed in TMB-H tumors of breast, bladder, and cervical cancers. 

## Identification of rare cancer hotspots
Given the clinical and biological relevance of hotspots, defined as sites of recurrent codon-level alterations with oncogenic potential, we sought to leverage the large size of our cohort to identify new and potentially rare biologically significant single-codon substitutions. , After adjusting for gene, position, and sample-specific mutation rates, and accounting for various biological and technical sources of false positivity, we identified 164 unique, newly significant hotspots (see , and ; ). More than half (52%) of these were already annotated as having biological evidence for oncogenicity by OncoKB based on the literature curation of mutations. Nearly all hotspots (163/164) were found mutated in the non-MSK GENIE or TCGA cohorts ( and ). Mutations at newly identified hotspots exhibited clonality patterns indistinguishable from those of known hotspots while both were significantly more clonal than mutations classified as variants of unknown significance (VUS) ( ). Nearly all new hotspots (99%, 162 of 164) were mutated in 0.1% or fewer patients in the cohort demonstrating the utility of larger patient cohorts for elucidating the long tail of driver mutations ( ). While individually rare, mutations at the newly identified hotspots are collectively observed in 5% of all patients in the MSK-50K cohort.
 A majority of the newly identified cancer hotspots (70%, 114/164) fell in tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) and were collectively mutated in 3.4% of all patients ( and ). We also observed a significant enrichment in loss of heterozygosity (LOH) at TSG loci in tumors harboring mutations in newly identified hotspots, indicating their pathogenic role ( and ). The newly identified KEAP1 and STK11 hotspot mutations were identified predominantly in lung cancers, with significant co-occurrence between the new KEAP1 hotspot mutations and known drivers in STK11, and vice-versa ( , , and – ). Similar cancer type specificity was observed for 12 new hotspots in the TGF-β signaling pathway genes SMAD2/3/4 and six new hotspots in the WNT pathway gene TCF7L2, which were collectively mutated in 212 tumors, of which 87% were in cancers of gastrointestinal origin. 
Among oncogenes, the most common newly identified hotspots were observed in the KRAS homolog RRAS2. In addition to the previously reported RRAS2 Q72 hotspot (n = 49 mutated tumors), a paralog of K/H/NRAS Q61, we identified two other hotspot residues G23 (n = 65) and G24 (n = 33), which are paralogs of K/H/NRAS G12 and G13, respectively. , Mutations at the three RRAS2 hotspots were strongly restricted by cancer type, with 70% (104 of 147) observed in endometrial and germ cell tumors ( ). In germ cell tumors, all oncogenic mutations that arose in RRAS2 were observed at the newly identified G23 and G24 hotspots (n = 22). Moreover, at the pan-cancer level, hotspot mutations in RRAS2 were mutually exclusive with driver alterations in K/H/NRAS (p = 0.0016), suggesting that these mutations may have similar phenotypic effects ( ).
Mutations at many of the newly significant hotspots in oncogenes such as PIK3CA, KRAS, and EGFR appeared to arise in the presence of other more common hotspot mutations in the same gene. For example, the majority of tumors with newly identified hotspots in PIK3CA (51%, 54 of 105) were observed with a second PIK3CA hotspot mutation ( ). In contrast, only 9% of all tumors with common PIK3CA hotspot mutations were observed to have a second PIK3CA hotspot mutation (p = 5e-22). The newly identified hotspots in PIK3CA tended to be significantly more subclonal, suggesting that these mutations arose later in cancer progression (p = 0.02, ). Similarly, the newly identified KRAS V14 hotspot mutations often co-occurred with other common hotspot KRAS mutations ( ). When phaseable, all double mutations in KRAS V14 mutated tumors were noted to be present in cis. In EGFR, all lung adenocarcinomas with a newly identified hotspot mutation (n = 43) also harbored a tumor-initiating EGFR mutation such as L858 or exon 19/20 insertion or deletion ( – ). By leveraging patients who underwent longitudinal sequencing, we found evidence for the late emergence of the newly identified V834 mutation, similar to the known treatment resistance mutations T790 and C797 ( ). Interestingly, though, this occurred in a patient who did not receive any systemic or targeted treatment prior to mutation acquisition ( ). In the eight other patients harboring V834 mutations, all concurrent with L858, only two received any prior treatment, indicating that the EGFR V834 hotspot mutation can arise in both late and treatment-agnostic contexts. , 

## Cancer type-associated driver genes
Understanding cancer type-specific patterns of driver alterations can reveal key disease-specific biological mechanisms of tumor initiation and progression. Although prior studies have identified genes that are significantly mutated in various cancer types, they have often considered all mutations irrespective of their oncogenic potential. , , Here, we reasoned that significant enrichment for driver alterations is more indicative of a gene’s biological role in that disease. We therefore restricted our analysis to only oncogenic alterations (including mutations, focal amplifications, homozygous deletions, and fusions) as assessed by OncoKB (see ). To avoid spurious associations, we excluded tumors with high mutational or copy number burden. We then sought to identify cancer type-associated genes across 96 cancer types with ≥50 patients using two criteria: (1) enrichment for alterations in a given gene and cancer type compared to pan-cancer frequency, and (2) mutual exclusivity with alterations in other canonical driver genes of that cancer type (see , ). In all, we observed 1,141 significant gene and cancer type associations (adj. p-value <0.05, ; , , , and ). In addition, we identified 74 associations predominantly involving pan-cancer genes such as TP53, CDKN2A, and TERT that were commonly altered in a cancer type but lacked statistical power for significance due to small sample sizes (see , ). We hereafter refer to these 1,215 gene and cancer type pairs as “canonical” gene associations. Across all cancers, we find a median of four driver alterations per tumor, of which two were observed in genes canonical to the respective cancer type ( ).
 While canonical gene associations involving frequently altered genes are well recognized ( ), we found 153 associations involving rare alterations (<2% of tumors in that cancer type) that may represent less well characterized molecular drivers of the disease. These rare associations predominantly comprised two categories of genes. First, genes that are frequently altered in several cancers were significantly rare in specific contexts where they also exhibit characteristics of unique drivers. For example, activating ERBB2 alterations common in breast (15%) and gastric (18%) cancers were also detected in cutaneous melanomas (0.8%) and pancreatic adenocarcinomas (1.6%), where they were mutually exclusive with other canonical drivers in these cancer types ( and ). Similarly, NRAS-mutated pancreatic (0.3%) and lung (0.6%) adenocarcinomas were significantly depleted for other canonical drivers of the respective diseases. Second, genes that are almost never mutated in cancer were significant in certain cancer types. For example, oncogenic alterations in RRAS, CUL3, and ARAF were overall extremely rare (∼0.05%) in our cohort. But, in specific cancer type contexts such as RRAS in lung adenocarcinomas (0.2%), CUL3 in prostate (0.6%), and ARAF in cutaneous melanomas (0.5%) and intrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas (0.8%), while still rare, the mutated tumors were significantly depleted for other common canonical drivers of those cancers.
 

## Driver alterations in non-canonical contexts exhibit hallmarks of late emergence
Nearly a third (32%) of all driver alterations arose in non-canonical cancer type contexts, where the altered gene was not significantly associated with the corresponding cancer type. When compared to drivers in canonical cancer types, these alterations exhibited markedly different properties associated with their timing and biological significance. Notably, these drivers were significantly more subclonal, even mirroring the clonality patterns observed in VUSs ( ). Significant differences between drivers in associated and non-associated genes were also evident in the majority (67%) of all cancer types evaluated ( ; ). In patients whose tumors were longitudinally profiled, we further confirm that driver alterations in non-associated genes indeed tended to arise later in tumor evolution, further indicating the distinct timing of emergence and the potentially divergent roles of these classes of alterations in tumor initiation and progression ( ).
Even within the same gene, the mutations that arose in canonical cancer types tended to be significantly more clonal when compared to those mutations observed in non-canonical contexts ( ; ). For example, PIK3CA driver mutations were predominantly clonal in strongly associated cancer types such as breast, uterus, and bladder cancer ( ). In contrast, in non-canonical cancer types such as lung adenocarcinomas (LUAD; 5% PIK3CA alteration frequency), esophageal adenocarcinomas (8%), and glioblastomas (11%), the PIK3CA mutations tended to be significantly more subclonal and late arising ( and ). These differences in clonality are not dictated by different hotspot usage, as each of the common PIK3CA hotspot mutations in LUAD tended to be more subclonal than driver mutations in other canonical genes ( and ). These observations indicate potentially distinct biological roles, oncogenic potency, or therapeutic relevance of PIK3CA mutations in these non-canonical contexts when compared to established PIK3CA-associated cancers. However, clonality was not universal among all canonical cancer types, as PIK3CA mutations in colon (21%) and rectal (14%) cancers were more subclonal than when compared to other driver alterations likely reflecting their previously demonstrated emergence on treatment. Taken together, these findings underscore the need to interpret driver mutations in context of their association as well as clonality to understand tumor initiation and evolution.
Other biologically meaningful distinctions in properties of driver mutations were evident between canonical and non-canonical cancer types as well. Biallelic inactivation is a hallmark of TSG mutations and is considered obligate for their pathogenic role. In more than two-thirds of TSGs (32/47, 68%), the mutations that were observed in canonical contexts exhibited significantly higher rates of biallelic losses compared to the mutations in the same genes but arising in non-canonical cancer types ( ; ). This indicates that the same TSG may have distinct selection pressures for biallelic inactivation across cancer types and consequently distinct context-dependent roles in tumor evolution. Finally, we reasoned that tumors which harbor high-penetrance pathogenic germline variants require fewer somatic oncogenic dependencies and therefore, should be depleted for gain-of-function drivers. Consistent with this, patients with driver alterations only in the non-canonical contexts had a significantly higher burden of high-penetrance pathogenic germline variants compared to those in canonical cancer types (8% vs. 5%, p = 2e-31) ( ). Taken together, these differences reinforce the importance of cancer-type-specific classification of driver alterations to understand how tissue context shapes oncogenic pathways of disease initiation and progression.

## Divergent cancer type-specific patterns of BRAF functional classes of alterations
Widespread heterogeneity in frequencies of distinct oncogenic mutations and copy number alterations within the same genes was also evident across canonical and non-canonical cancer types ( ). This was particularly notable for BRAF, where oncogenic mutations can be grouped into three functional classes (classes I-III) distinguished by their RAS-dependence and dimerization properties that mediate MAPK activation – ( ). Overall, BRAF was mutated in 5% of all microsatellite-stable (MSS) tumors in cancer. Among these, we observed marked differences in cancer type-specific selection for different classes of BRAF alterations. In canonical BRAF-associated cancer types, more than two-thirds of BRAF alterations were Class I (V600E/K/R), compared to only 10% in non-canonical cancers ( and ). Instead, nearly half (49%) of all BRAF alterations in non-canonical cancers were Class II, which are RAS-independent kinase activators that act as dimers. Consistent with their potent MAPK activation potential, Class I alterations were significantly more clonal than other BRAF classes (p = 3e-4, ). In contrast, the clonality of non-Class I alterations was more variable. For example, the Class III alterations were notably more subclonal in non-canonical cancer types, suggesting that these mutations arise late in specific cellular contexts in the presence of other co-operating mutations ( ).
 We next performed a pan-cancer co-alteration analysis to identify genes enriched or depleted for alterations with each BRAF functional class ( ). Expectedly, Class I/II alterations were largely mutually exclusive with other RAS/RTK pathway activating alterations, while Class III mutated tumors were dependent on cooperating alterations in HRAS (adj. p-value = 4e-4) and NF1 (adj. p-value = 0.005) ( ). Class I tumors showed enrichment for alterations in genes involved in WNT (RNF43), PI3K (AKT1, MTOR), and TGF-β (SMAD4, TGFBR2) signaling pathways. Notably, SETD2 was significantly co-mutated in Class I tumors, especially in LUAD, where, despite the rarity of both SETD2 (3%) and BRAFV600 (1%) alterations, nearly half (47%) of BRAFV600 mutant LUADs harbored SETD2 alterations and likely constitute a clinically relevant molecular subtype ( ). RNF43 was the most significantly enriched gene in Class I tumors (adj. p-value = 1e-34), with 98% of these co-altered tumors arising in colorectal cancers (CRCs) ( ). This was particularly notable given the depletion of other WNT signaling pathway genes such as APC, AMER1, and TCF7L2 in BRAF Class I mutated CRCs ( ). Although RNF43 loss has been indicated to sensitize BRAFV600E CRCs to combined BRAF+EGFR inhibition, we did not observe any difference in outcomes between RNF43MUT and wild-type patients ( and ). Further studies are needed to establish the biological significance of RNF43 alterations in BRAF V600E-driven disease pathogenesis.

## Driver alterations in genes associated with the early age of onset
Given the different frequencies and properties of driver alterations in associated and non-associated cancer types, we reasoned that the presence of specific drivers might influence different clinical features even within the same cancer types. One such clinical feature was age of diagnosis, which varied substantially among subtypes for most cancer types in our cohort (14 of 22 cancer types, adj. p-value <0.05, ; ). Here, we sought to identify genes and driver alterations that were significantly associated with either early or later age of onset. In contrast to prior studies, we excluded germline pathogenic carriers and restricted our analysis to oncogenic alterations. Furthermore, we accounted for potentially spurious gene associations with later age of onset that resulted from mutual exclusivity with genes in the comparison group that are significantly associated with early onset. For example, in cutaneous melanomas, BRAFmut tumors were associated with early age onset, while NF1mut and NRASmut tumors, which tend to be strongly enriched for UV exposure, appeared to be associated with later onset due to their mutual exclusivity with BRAF ( ). However, after excluding BRAFmut tumors, the NF1 and NRAS associations were no longer significant ( ). We therefore re-evaluated each later onset association by excluding tumors with alterations in genes that were already associated with early onset (see ). In all, in a multivariable analysis of associations across 42 cancer types with 100 or more patients, we identified 22 significant gene associations enriched for early (n = 16) and later (n = 6) ages of disease diagnosis (q < 0.05, see , ; ), all of which occurred in canonical cancer type contexts.
 Several age of diagnosis associations were mediated by complex patterns of co-alterations. For example, early onset of brain tumors with alterations in H3F3A (median age of onset: 32 years) and ATRX (39 years) was expected as they are characteristic of adult onset diffuse midline gliomas (q < 0.05, ). , Interestingly, tumors with co-alterations in both H3F3A and ATRX exhibited a strikingly earlier median age of diagnosis (28 years), suggesting either a synergistic interaction between these two genes in accelerating tumor pathogenesis or a distinct molecular subtype ( ). In papillary thyroid carcinomas, we observed a complex interaction between early-onset associated RET and late-onset TERT mutations ( ). Tumors harboring co-mutations in both genes exhibited a significantly later age of onset, whereas only the RETmut tumors that were wild-type for TERT were associated with significantly earlier onset. Interestingly, though BRAF mutations overall were not associated with age of onset ( ), BRAF-mutated tumors that were wild-type for TERT exhibited a significantly earlier age of onset, indicating the role of TERT in modulating later onset ( ). This may be explained by the indolent nature of TERT-mutated and RAS/RTK wild-type tumors, which are often diagnosed as incidental findings. However, when these tumors later acquire RET or BRAF mutations, they progress to symptomatic tumors with aggressive phenotypes. These findings highlight the importance of accounting for histological and molecular subtypes as well as co-mutation contexts in interpreting genes associated with early disease onset.
More striking associations with early age of diagnosis were observed in tumors with activating fusions involving RTK pathway genes ( ; ). These included fusion genes in LUAD such as ALK, RET, and ROS1, as well as NTRK1/2/3 and FGFR2 fusions predominantly observed in non-lung cancer types. Additional associations emerged only at the individual cancer type level ( ; ). For example, tumors with FGFR3 fusions, but not hotspot mutations, were associated with early onset in bladder cancer ( ). Similarly, in cutaneous melanomas, although all BRAF-altered tumors were associated with early age of onset, those harboring BRAF fusions presented at a notably younger age than tumors with other BRAF alterations, indicating the potent oncogenic potential of fusion-driven activation. Interestingly, no category of BRAF alteration type was associated with age of onset in prostate cancer, which is a non-canonical context for BRAF ( ), likely indicating a distinct role of BRAF alterations in prostate disease biology. Together, these findings suggest that while RTK fusions are broadly associated with early disease onset across cancers, the degree of these associations varies by gene and cancer type.

## Clinical actionability of driver neoantigen-directed TCR therapies
We next assessed differences in driver mutation frequency across different HLA genotypes, as this has direct clinical implications for emerging T cell receptor (TCR) therapies. Neoantigen-directed TCR therapies have recently been shown to induce durable responses in some epithelial cancers. – These adoptive cell therapies either enrich or modify a patient’s own T cells with TCRs that recognize HLA-restricted peptides encompassing somatic alterations arising within their tumors. , TCR recognition of neoantigens is highly specific; it is codependent on a specific mutant peptide (“neopeptide”) presented in the context of a specific polymorphic HLA allele ( ). However, loss of antigen presentation via loss of the restricting HLA alleles can facilitate tumor immune escape and is a putative resistance mechanism to this class of immunotherapies. , Here, we resolved the HLA class I alleles for all patients in our cohort with the goal of studying ancestry-associated differences in HLA genotypes and cancer-type specificity of somatic HLA LOH ( ). We focused on empirically validated neopeptides generated from recurrent hotspots in KRAS (G12D/V) and TP53 (R175H, R248W, Y220C) together with their specific restricting HLA allele(s) ( ), , – as these comprise all currently active clinical trials involving driver neoantigen-directed TCR therapies (see ).
 Fourteen percent of patients had one of the indicated somatic driver alterations, and approximately one in five (22%) of these patients also harbored an HLA allele that would generate a potentially actionable neoantigen ( ). Widespread variation in HLA allele frequencies across populations was common, which may lead to differences in therapeutic eligibility , ( ; ). All five neoantigen-restricting HLA alleles showed ancestry-specific differences in prevalence. For example, individuals of East Asian ancestry had the highest frequencies of A*11:01 (44%) and C*01:02 (32%), whereas these alleles were rare in patients of African ancestry (1% each). Consequently, 0% of G12V and only 6% of patients with G12D of African ancestry would be eligible for current neoantigen-directed therapies, in contrast to a median of 26% of the patients with these mutations in other ancestries ( ). These observations highlight the need to expand the accessibility of precision immuno-genomic therapies to a broader spectrum of HLA alleles.
Overall, somatic LOH at HLA Class I loci was observed in one in four (25.4%) patients , (see , ; ). In patients harboring the select driver mutations, the rates of LOH at the loci of the restricting alleles were indistinguishable from those in tumors wild-type for the evaluated mutations ( ). However, in specific contexts, we observed a propensity for losing the restricting allele compared to the alternate allele ( ). For example, in tumors with the A*02:01 allele that harbored any LOH at the HLA-A locus, loss of the restricting allele was enriched in tumors with TP53 R175H mutation but not in tumors that were TP53 wild-type. Interestingly, while such enrichment was also evident in KRAS G12 mutant cancers, this preference was HLA allele-specific and only observed for G12V but not G12D, likely attributable to the weaker predicted binding affinity of the restricting A*11:01 allele for G12D relative to the G12V neopeptide ( ). Finally, selection for losing the restricting allele was also cancer type-specific. For example, preferential loss of the A*02:01 allele restricting the TP53 R175H mutation was evident only in colorectal but not lung or pancreatic cancers ( ). Taken together, our findings highlight two implications in assessing therapeutic responses to neoantigen-directed therapies. First, at least 15% of eligible patients have a somatic loss of the restricting HLA allele and are anticipated to be intrinsically resistant to direct tumor-targeting by these therapies, underscoring the importance of HLA-LOH screening prior to therapy selection. Second, elevated LOH and loss of the restricting allele suggest an immunologic pressure on the HLA-restricted mutations, leading to tumor immune escape that is driven by both HLA genotype and cancer type.

## DISCUSSION
In this study, we leveraged a cohort comprising 448 cancer subtypes to perform novel driver mutation discovery and characterize cancer type-specificity of driver alterations, patterns of co-alterations, and their associations with genomic and clinical features. By classifying whether a given alteration arises in a cancer type that is canonically associated with that gene or instead occurs in a non-canonical context, we uncover insights into the potentially divergent roles of the same oncogenic alterations across cancer types. We demonstrate the utility of large prospective sequencing cohorts for defining biological roles and dependencies of genomic alterations as well as understanding the clinical actionability and potential tumor-intrinsic resistance mechanisms to next generation TCR-based immunotherapies.
A key advance of our work is the systematic categorization of driver alterations based on their cancer type specificity. We show that driver alterations in canonical contexts, defined as cancer types where driver alterations in the respective gene are either enriched or mutually exclusive with other known drivers, exhibit hallmarks of early tumorigenic events. These include a greater degree of clonality, higher rates of biallelic inactivation of tumor suppressors, and mutual exclusivity with high-penetrance germline variants. , In contrast, the same alterations when observed in non-canonical contexts exhibit features consistent with co-operating drivers, such as late emergence with distinct patterns of zygosity and co-occurrence with other drivers. , These findings underscore that the biological significance and functional role of oncogenic alterations in a given gene are strongly dictated by tissue context. , This context-dependence also has important implications for clinical actionability. For example, PIK3CA hotspot mutations in non-canonical cancers such as glioblastomas and adenocarcinomas of lung and esophagus were significantly more subclonal and late-emerging, indicating distinct oncogenic roles and potentially depleted therapeutic sensitivity in these cancers. Our data therefore argue for a more nuanced classification of drivers to account for cancer type-specific differences in disease biology that could allow for more refined therapeutic recommendations.
The clarifying role of integrating both detailed cancer type and driver alteration contexts was particularly evident in explaining many significant associations between driver alterations and age of disease diagnosis. The overall sparsity of driver alterations associated with disease onset suggests that the factors mediating early-onset observed in many cancers may be driven by non-genomic factors, including epigenetics and tumor microenvironment factors that may themselves be mediated by extrinsic factors such as environmental exposures. , However, an exception to this is rare oncogenic gain-of-function fusion events involving MAPK pathway genes such as ALK, RET, FGFR2, and ROS1, which portend a strikingly early age of onset. It is notable that in some contexts, only the fusion events, but not other types of oncogenic alterations in the given gene, confer this early age of onset. It is intriguing to speculate if these fusion oncogenic alterations create constitutively active proteins that robustly dysregulate critical signaling pathways with minimal additional oncogenic hits, and thereby accelerate tumorigenesis and clinical presentation. Overall, our observations highlight the importance of classifying tumors by both histology and molecular subtype in enabling a more nuanced understanding of disease biology.
Our findings suggest that intrinsic resistance to neoantigen-directed TCR therapies mediated by somatic loss of the restricting HLA allele may occur in nearly one in six patients, and highlight the need for incorporating somatic HLA status into trial enrollment criteria. We also find evidence of preferential selection for loss of the restricting allele that is highly context-dependent and dictated by the driver alteration, the HLA genotype, and cancer type. This selection may reflect the differential immunogenicity of specific driver mutant peptides presented by the HLA proteins, which differ in relative binding stability and may inform responses to these therapies. Ubiquitous variation in allele frequencies of HLA class I alleles across populations manifested in substantial ancestry-dependent variation in clinical actionability. The significantly lower rates of patients with African ancestry being eligible for these ongoing trials could further exacerbate the inequities in clinical trial enrollments and access to care. , As current first-in-class therapies progress in trials, there is a growing need to expand TCR-discovery efforts and therapy development involving a broader spectrum of HLA alleles.
Finally, our cohort has several unique strengths that address the limitations of previous large-scale sequencing cohorts such as the TCGA and GENIE cohorts. These include clinical-grade real-world prospective genomic profiling of a large spectrum of cancer types, high-depth matched tumor-normal sequencing, accurate inference of allele-specific copy number and mutation clonality, and germline and somatic genotyping of HLA alleles. We envision that by making our dataset publicly accessible, we can catalyze future studies designed to understand cancer type-specific differences in cancer pathogenesis and disease progression, which would enable precision oncology efforts to advance clinical care.

## Limitations of the study
Due to the prospective nature of our study cohort, there were several limitations to our analysis that need to be accounted for when interpreting the results. First, patients included in our cohort were treated at a major referral center and, therefore, specimens collected at the point-of-care were heterogeneous in regard to the timing of tumor collection within the spectrum of disease progression and prior local and systemic treatment exposures. Second, variation in sample sizes for each disease reflects the varying incidence rates of different cancers but needs to be accounted for when comparing driver alteration frequencies across cohorts. Although we sought to account for this cohort imbalance in our study, our ability to make inferences in small disease cohorts remains limited. Third, our hotspot discovery approach prioritized specificity over sensitivity by design. We restricted this analysis to a single, uniformly processed clinical cohort and applied conservative filters to nominate high-confidence hotspots. We recognize that multi-cohort aggregation or using a consensus of hotspot discovery algorithms may reveal potentially rare but novel hotspots. Fourth, our analyses were restricted to identifying somatic and germline genomic alterations using an FDA-authorized cancer gene panel and therefore could not assess non-targeted genomic alterations, changes in RNA expression, or epigenetically mediated drivers of tumor initiation or cancer progression. As advances in sequencing technologies and informatics expand the scale and uptake of whole genome sequencing, including in the clinical setting, we anticipate the identification of recurrent non-coding alterations and rarer cancer type-specific drivers that may represent novel therapeutic targets. – 

## RESOURCE AVAILABILITY

## Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the , Michael F. Berger (bergerm1@mskcc.org).

## Materials availability
This study did not generate new unique reagents.

## Data and code availability
Our complete dataset, including genomic and clinical data, is publicly available through the cBioPortal for Cancer Genomics: https://www.cbioportal.org/study?id=msk_impact_50k_2026. All accompanying genomic and clinical data are also publicly deposited in the Zenodo digital library at https://zenodo.org/records/18445440. MSK-IMPACT clinical sequencing data are considered as protected patient information, and access to raw data is contingent on additional institutional approvals. Any additional data for analysis is available upon request.

## STAR★METHODS

## EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND STUDY PARTICIPANT DETAILS

## MSK-IMPACT study cohort
A total of 56,801 solid tumor biopsies from 49,929 patients were collected and sequenced as part of routine clinical care between January 2014 and September 2021 at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center (MSKCC). The study was approved by the MSKCC Institutional Review Board (IRB), and all patients provided written informed consent for tumor sequencing. Tumor and patient-matched blood normal sequencing was performed in a CLIA-certified laboratory using an FDA-authorized Memorial Sloan Kettering–Integrated Mutation Profiling of Actionable Cancer Targets (MSK-IMPACT) targeted sequencing panel that profiles up to 505 cancer genes. Four incremental versions of the panel were used: IM3 panel containing 341 genes (n=2,661 samples), IM5 – 410 genes (n=9,674 samples), IM6 – 468 genes (n=36,323 samples) and IM7 – 505 genes (n=8,143 samples) ( ). Tumor and normal samples were sequenced to a median coverage of 615x and 484x, respectively. Low quality samples were identified and excluded based on tumor purity and sequencing depth. All tumor specimens with less than 10% tumor content and a median variant allele frequency estimate among mutations that is less than 5% (estimated in tumors with at least 5 mutations, if present) were removed from the cohort. In addition, tumor specimens with purity less than 20% were required to have at least 200x coverage. Tumor purity is estimated using allele-specific copy number inference algorithm, FACETS. When FACETS derived purity estimate is not available, pathologist estimated purity was used. In all, 54,331 tumors from 48,179 patients were retained, and all somatic and clinical characteristics data were deposited in cBioPortal ( ). These include 5,070 patients with two or more sequenced specimens. Age of diagnosis and disease status (primary/metastatic) were inferred using methods using natural language processing (NLP) to perform automated chart review. NLP-derived age of diagnosis showed >90% concordance with manual review of a subset of cases (data not shown). Disease status (primary/metastatic) at the time of sample collection was inferred from automated curation of clinical records for 98% of the cohort. Tumors were identified as metastatic if the biopsy was taken from a metastatic site or if the patient had metastatic disease at the time of clinical sequencing. All other tumors in patients without a history of metastatic disease were identified as primary. Genetic ancestry from normal blood sequencing was inferred using methods described previously. 

## Cohort stratification for analysis
To study driver alteration patterns across cancers as well as their associations with various clinical attributes, we sought to construct a cohort with detailed histological subtype information and exclude tumors that may confound specific analyses (eg: high mutational or copy number burden). Histological subtype information was assigned by a board-certified pathologist at the time of MSK-IMPACT sequencing, prior to the review of results, and each tumor was assigned to one of the detailed histologies in the OncoTree cancer classification. For example, for tumor specimens presenting with the non-small cell lung cancer, we required that the tumor be assigned a detailed subtype such as lung adenocarcinoma, lung squamous cell carcinoma, lung adenosquamous carcinoma, pleomorphic carcinoma of the lung, etc, as defined in OncoTree. All glioblastomas that are IDH-mutant and also had 1p/19q co-deletion were defined as oligodendrogliomas, while those that were IDH-mutant but without 1p/19q co-deletion were identified as astrocytomas. For the nearly 17% of patients without detailed histological subtype classification, reasonable efforts were made to identify the detailed subtypes through chart review. In all, 5,363 tumors (10%) still retained a subtype that is not detailed enough. These include cancers of unknown primary (n=754) as well as major cancer types for which detailed subtype could not be assigned due to insufficient information and were labeled as not otherwise specified (NOS, n=1631) ( ).
Next, for specific analyses involving associations between driver alterations and other molecular and clinical features ( , , and ), to avoid confounders due to excessive mutational or copy number burden, we excluded tumors with a high number of somatic mutations (missense, indels, etc) or gene level amplifications/homozygous deletions ( ). More specifically, first, tumors with microsatellite instability (as determined by MSIsensor score of 10 or higher ) or POLE driven hypermutator phenotype (tumors with POLE exonuclease domain mutation and with 100 or more somatic mutations per megabase) were excluded. Next, to identify tumors with very high mutational burden compared to the rest of the tumors in that cancer type, we determined a 90th percentile TMB threshold for each cancer type. Then, tumors in that cancer type were considered as having a very high mutational burden if the TMB in the tumor was higher than both 20 non-synonymous mutations per megabase as well as the 90th percentile threshold. Similarly, we identified high copy number burden tumors as those have 20 or higher gene-level amplifications and homozygous deletions. In aggregate, 3,061 tumors (5.6%) were identified as having very high mutational burden (n=2,607) or high copy number burden (n=454) and were excluded from analyses in , , and .
Finally, for patients with multiple sequenced tumor specimens, we selected one tumor for each patient with priority given to the tumor that was sequenced on the largest version of the MSK-IMPACT panel and the latest sequenced biopsy. In all, tumors from 40,657 across 447 cancer histologies were used for all analyses in , , and of this study unless otherwise specified. These comprise 37,080 patients from 96 cancer histologies with 50 or more patients (96 cancer types shown in ).

## METHOD DETAILS

## Somatic alterations, driver annotation and mutational signatures
All somatic alterations such as nonsynonymous substitutions, small insertions/deletions, gene-level focal amplifications/homozygous deletions and fusions involving select genes were detected using a clinically validated pipeline. All somatic alterations were annotated for oncogenicity and clinical actionability using OncoKB (version 3.9, December 30, 2021). All somatic alterations (including mutations, CNAs and fusions) that were deemed ‘oncogenic’ or ‘likely oncogenic’ by OncoKB or were among the newly identified hotspots were considered as driver alterations.
COSMIC (version 2, 2015) mutational signatures (n=30) were inferred using all synonymous and nonsynonymous single-nucleotide mutations in tumors with tumor mutational burden (number of nonsynonymous mutations per megabase) of 10 or higher. Mutational signature decomposition was performed using the algorithm implemented in https://github.com/mskcc/mutation-signatures. All signatures with known etiology were grouped by their shared etiology and a single mutational signature fraction for each etiology is computed as the sum of mutational fractions for the individual signatures. These etiologies include: APOBEC induced: signatures 2 and 13; tobacco smoking associated: signature 4; mismatch repair deficiency: signatures 6, 15, 20, 21 and 26; ultraviolet light: signature 7; POLE hypermutation: signature 10; temozolomide: signature 11. We also determined the microsatellite instability status using the MSIsensor algorithm. Each sample in was assigned a dominant mutational signature using the following criteria. If a tumor presents with an MSI sensor score of 10 or higher, it is considered to have microsatellite instability (MSI). For all microsatellite stable (MSS) tumors, the etiology that is explained by the largest fraction of mutations (a minimum of 25%) was considered as the dominant mutational process in the tumor.

## New hotspots discovery
Discovery for new single-codon substitution hotspots was performed on a cohort comprising 45,492 tumors spanning 77 cancer types (all MSK-IMPACT samples accrued until September 2020) using a previously described algorithm. , Briefly, this approach uses a background model that accounts for gene- and position-specific mutation rates in addition to sample-level and cancer type level mutability at each position to compute statistical significance for each of the mutated codons. After adjusting for multiple hypothesis testing using Benjamini and Yekutieli method, we identified 313 new candidate hotspot codons with a Q < 0.01 that are observed in at least five tumors in our cohort. 86 out of 313 have already been independently expert reviewed and annotated as ‘oncogenic’ or ‘likely oncogenic’ in the FDA-recognized precision oncology knowledgebase, OncoKB (v3.14). The remaining 227 candidate hotspots were subject to additional technical and biologically informed criteria to eliminate putative false positives and identify high confidence hotspots ( ). First, we identified and excluded hotspots that did not pass technical filters such as: (i) a very high TMB (a median of 20 mutations per megabase or higher) (n=13 candidates excluded), (ii) those identified in regions of low sequence complexity such as those in tri-nucleotide repeats or those that are proximal to recurrent insertions/deletions (n=3), or, (iii) low mutation clonality (mutation is subclonal in >50% of samples harboring it) to exclude mutations that arise due to background mutational processes but may not necessarily have sufficient tumor promoting effect, and therefore are not strongly selected for during early tumor evolution (n=19).
To increase stringency, we applied additional filtering criteria to ensure that the newly identified hotspots mirror the cancer type specific mutation pattern observed among previously known hotspots in the same gene. For candidate hotspots in genes that are mutated in a cancer type agnostic manner (that is for 27 candidate hotspots in TP53 and CDKN2A) or those that were observed in genes without previously known hotspots (n=43 candidate hotspots), we required that each candidate hotspot to be observed in at least 15 tumors and also have a stringent statistical significance of Q < 10−10. In total, 12 new hotspots, all in TP53 and CDKN2A, remained significant ( ). For candidate hotspots in genes with previously reported hotspots (n=122), we reasoned that since most genes are mutated in a cancer type-specific manner, the newly identified hotspots should also be expected to be mutated among the specific spectrum of cancer types which are observed with previously known hotspots in the same gene. Thus, the newly identified candidate hotspots that do not show this cancer type concordance with previously known hotspots, and are mutated in unexpected cancer types may be putative false positives. To implement this filter, we adopted a heuristic approach that aims to check for the concordance in the mutated cancer type spectrum between newly identified and previously known hotspots. We aimed to check if each newly identified hotspot tended to arise in cancer types which also commonly harbored ‘previously known’ hotspots in the given gene. More specifically, for each gene: (i) We first determine the cancer types associated with ‘previously known’ hotspots. Here, we simply identify these cancer types as those in which the candidate gene mutation frequency (previously known hotspots only) is numerically greater than the pan-cancer (cohort-wide) mutation rate for the corresponding gene. (ii) We then calculate the fraction of all tumors with mutations in ‘previously known’ hotspots in a given gene that arise in these associated cancer types. (iii) Then, for each ‘newly identified’ hotspot, we calculate the fraction of all mutated tumors that arise in these specific cancer types with elevated rates of mutations in previously known hotspots. (iv) Finally, for each newly identified hotspot, if this fraction is numerically higher than the fraction calculated in (ii), we deem this newly identified hotspot having a cancer type specificity that is consistent with that of previously known hotspots. After applying this filter, 56 of 122 candidate hotspots arising in genes with previously known hotspots were excluded ( ).

## Allele-specific copy number inference
FACETS (v0.5.14) algorithm was used to infer allele-specific copy number and estimate tumor purity and ploidy. FACETS was run on each tumor sample in a two-step mode as described previously. In the first step, FACETS is run with the parameters (cval=100) configured to more accurately infer the log(tumor coverage / normal coverage) ratio corresponding to the diploid regions in the genome (dipLogR). In the second step, with the estimated dipLogR, FACETS is run again in a high sensitivity mode (cval=50) to identify focal gains and losses with high sensitivity. We next applied a series of criteria to identify putatively low quality fits (https://github.com/taylor-lab/facets-preview/). These included: (i) insufficient fraction of the genome supporting the diploid state of the genome, (ii) too high fraction of the genome inferred as homozygously deleted, (iii) too high estimate of ploidy (>7), (iv) integer copy number calls are discordant with the inferred allelic balance/imbalance state, (v) too high fraction of the genome estimated to be subclonal, (vi) genome is hyper segmented, and (vii) FACETS failed to estimate purity. For samples that failed the quality control steps above, alternate fits are generated by attempting to adjust for the individual QC criteria causing the failure. For samples failing QC steps (i-v) above, if FACETS was able to suggest an alternate dipLogR that passed all the above QC criteria, the copy number fit corresponding to this alternate diploid state was used. For fits failing due to hypersegmentation, FACETS is re-run at a higher cval=200 for the low sensitivity run and cval=100 for high sensitivity run.
Finally, if FACETS was unable to estimate purity, we estimated the purity from the variant allele frequencies (VAFs) of somatic mutations in balanced diploid regions (total copy number 2 and minor copy number of 1) of the genome. A minimum of five somatic mutations (synonymous or nonsynonymous) in these regions were required to estimate tumor purity from VAFs. We considered two different estimates of VAF-derived purity: (i) two times the median of VAF (referred to herein as median-vaf-purity), and, (ii) two times the third quartile of VAF (referred to herein as q3-vaf-purity). We evaluated both estimates by comparing them to FACETS-derived purity estimates in which FACETS was able to estimate purity and the tumor had a sufficient number of mutations (5 or more). We measured the concordance in tumors with available FACETS-derived purity by calculating the difference between the FACETS purity estimate and median-vaf-purity or q3-vaf-purity estimates. We observed that the q3-vaf-purity estimate was much strongly concordant with FACETS derived purity estimate (a difference of 0.6% between the medians of q3-vaf-purity and FACETS-derived estimates) when compared to that of median-vaf-purity (a difference of 3.8%). A similar pattern was evident when evaluating TCGA tumors where the absolute differences between FACETS-derived and q3-vaf and median-VAF derived purity estimates were 3.7% and 5.2%, respectively. We therefore considered the purity derived from mutations as two times the third quartile estimate of VAF of mutations. In all, purity was estimated from mutations for 13% of all tumors (6,894/54,331) ( ).

## Estimating measures of genomic instability and clonality of mutations
Whole genome doubling (WGD) status and fraction of genome altered (FGA) were inferred using facets-suite package v2.0.9 (https://github.com/mskcc/facets-suite/) and computed as described previously. Briefly, a tumor is considered to have undergone WGD if more than 50% of the autosomal genome has a minor copy number of two or more. FGA is calculated as the fraction of the evaluable genome that is not balanced (that is, total copy number : lower copy number is not 2:1 or 4:2). Clonality status (clonal vs. subclonal) of somatic mutations was inferred from cancer cell fraction (CCF) which represents the fraction of the tumor cells harboring the somatic mutation. CCF is estimated as described previously using the variant allele fraction of the somatic mutation, allele-specific copy number at the locus, read coverage and the tumor purity estimated from FACETS. A mutation is considered as clonal if either the CCF estimate is > 0.8, or if the CCF estimate is > 0.7 and the upper bound of the 95th-percentile confidence interval estimate of CCF is > 0.9 (https://github.com/mskcc/facets-suite/).

## Selected neoantigens, HLA genotyping and somatic loss of heterozygosity
We limited the evaluation of clinical actionability of neoantigen-directed TCR therapies to the five hotspot mutations and the cognate HLA alleles ( ) which have been empirically evaluated for immunogenicity and for which active clinical trials are accruing patients at the time of this study (NCT05194735, NCT05438667, NCT05933668, NCT06043713, NCT05877599, https://clinicaltrials.gov/). , – Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I genotypes were inferred using POLYSOLVER using default parameters. Genotyping accuracy is estimated to be >95% based on comparisons with CLIA lab-based assays as well as whole exome sequencing. Somatic HLA loss of heterozygosity was inferred using the LOHHLA algorithm. Of the 37,080 tumors in 96 cancer types (see ), only the tumors that passed all FACETS QC criteria (see above) and on which LOHHLA was successfully run were used for analysis (n=29,802 tumors) ( ). Loci that were homozygous for the HLA allele were not considered for LOH analysis. An LOH event at a locus is established if there was a significant difference in copy number ratio between the two alleles at locus (PVal_unique < 0.001) and the absolute copy number estimate for one of the alleles is determined to be less than 0.5.

## QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS

## Identifying canonical genes of a cancer type
To avoid confounding associations driven by high mutational burden, we performed canonical gene discovery on only the microsatellite stable tumors that did not exhibit very high mutational burden (as described above). After excluding these tumors, canonical gene discovery is limited to cancer types with 50 or more tumors (n=37,080 tumors and 96 cancer types, ). Genes canonical to a cancer type are identified using two criteria: (1) prevalence of driver alterations within a given cancer type compared to pan-cancer (‘common’ canonical genes), and (2) co-alteration patterns with other ‘common’ canonical genes of the cancer type ( ).
To identify common canonical genes of a cancer type, we first estimated the pan-cancer driver alteration rate in each gene. To account for the significant imbalance in the cohort sizes across the cancer types, we sought to infer the pan-cancer rate of a gene by constructing a downsampled pan-cancer cohort of 96 cancer types with up to 250 randomly sampled tumors per cancer type. We repeated this 1,000 times to generate a distribution of gene alteration rates. The mean of this distribution was used as the gene’s pan-cancer alteration rate. The observed gene alteration rate in a given cancer type is compared with the pan-cancer rate using a one-sided Fisher’s exact test. Of note, tumors from each evaluated cancer type were excluded when constructing the pan-cancer cohort for that specific comparison. All gene and cancer type associations evaluated were adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg method. In all, of the 38,400 gene and cancer type associations evaluated, 1,083 pairs remained statistically significant (adjusted p-value < 0.05) ( ).
To identify rare canonical genes, we evaluated their co-alteration patterns with common canonical genes of the cancer type. Specifically, we used two criteria in evaluating for rare canonical genes: significant mutual exclusivity in driver alterations with other common canonical genes of the cancer type, or, an overall depletion of the cumulative burden of the driver somatic alterations in common canonical genes ( ). In evaluating a gene for mutual exclusivity in driver alterations with common canonical genes, we restricted the comparison to common canonical genes with similar biological function (i.e., loss-of or gain-of-function). More specifically, if the evaluated gene is an oncogene, then tumors with driver alterations in this gene are expected to show collective mutual exclusivity with gain of function driver alterations in other common canonical genes in that cancer type. Similarly, tumor suppressor genes are evaluated for mutual exclusivity with loss-of-function alterations in common canonical genes. Statistical significance was evaluated using multivariable regression models. To evaluate mutual exclusivity, we used a multivariable logistic regression model that accounted for age of diagnosis, sex, ancestry and disease status (primary vs. metastatic). After adjusting for multiple hypothesis testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg method, 59 associations remained significant (adjusted p-value < 0.05) ( ). Similarly, to evaluate the depletion of the cumulative burden of driver alterations in canonical oncogenes we used a multivariable linear regression that also accounted for age of diagnosis, sex, ancestry and disease status (primary vs. metastatic). After adjusting for multiple hypothesis testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg method, 110 associations remained significant (adjusted p-value < 0.05) ( ). In all, after accounting for the 42 pairs that were significant by both approaches, 127 gene and cancer type pairs were identified as ‘rare’ canonical drivers. Of these, 69 were already identified as significant in the common canonical drivers analysis. In aggregate, after combining the ‘common’ and ‘rare’ driver pairs identified above, we identified 1,141 canonical gene and cancer type pairs ( ).
Our analytical approach is predicated on the hypothesis that most genes are somatically altered in a cancer type-specific manner and therefore, is underpowered to identify associations involving very frequently altered cancer genes. We therefore rescued any associations involving cancer genes with pan-cancer alteration frequency of 10% or higher (these comprise TP53, CDKN2A, TERT, KRAS and PIK3CA) and which were also altered in 10% or more in a given cancer type but did not reach statistical significance in our analysis. In all, 74 pairs involving TP53 (n=30 cancer types), CDKN2A (n=15), TERT (n=13), PIK3CA (n=8), KRAS (n=8) were rescued in cancer types in which the median cohort size was only 116 tumors. In all, 1,215 gene and cancer type pairs were identified as canonical drivers ( ).

## Identifying canonical driver alterations of a cancer type
To identify individual driver alterations (hotspots, insertions/deletions amplifications, homozygous deletions, fusions) that are canonical to each cancer type, we implemented methodology that is consistent with the canonical driver gene discovery analysis in ( , , , , and ). The driver alterations canonical to each cancer type were identified using two criteria: (1) the individual alterations that were significantly more prevalent in a given cancer type compared to pan-cancer (i.e., ‘common’ canonical driver alterations of the cancer type), and, (2) the driver alterations that are significantly mutually exclusive to other commonly observed canonical alterations within the cancer type (i.e., ‘rare’ canonical driver alterations of the cancer type).
To identify common canonical driver alterations of each cancer type, we first estimated the pan-cancer alteration rate of each individual driver alteration. As with canonical driver gene discovery, to account for bias in pan-cancer alteration rate that arises due to significant imbalance in cohort sizes across cancer types, we subsampled each of the 96 cancer types to consist of 250 randomly sampled tumors per cancer type. We then repeated this subsampling step 1,000 times to generate a distribution of pan-cancer alteration rates of each driver alteration. Of note, tumors from each evaluated cancer type were excluded when constructing the pan-cancer cohort for that specific comparison. The mean of this distribution was used as the individual driver alteration’s pan-cancer alteration rate. The observed alteration rate for each driver alteration in each cancer type is compared with the pan-cancer alteration rate using a one-sided Fisher’s exact test. All driver alteration and cancer type associations were adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg method. In all, of the 19,584 associations evaluated, 1,127 were significant (adjusted p-value < 0.05) ( ).
To identify rare canonical driver alterations, we evaluated their co-alteration patterns with other common canonical driver alterations of the cancer type. As with the ‘rare’ canonical driver gene discovery ( ), we used two criteria to identify rare canonical driver alterations: significant mutual exclusivity with other common canonical driver alterations of the cancer type, or, an overall depletion of the cumulative burden of common canonical driver alterations. Of note, when evaluating for mutual exclusivity or depletion for each driver alteration, tumors with other driver alterations in the same gene were excluded. Both mutual exclusivity and depletion were evaluated using a multivariable regression model that accounted for sex, ancestry and disease status (primary vs. metastatic). In all, 7,547 associations were evaluated for mutual exclusivity or depletion. After adjusting for multiple hypothesis testing the Benjamini-Hochberg method, 56 driver alterations were significant for mutual exclusivity with other common canonical driver alterations of the cancer type (adjusted p-value < 0.05) ( ). And, in 99 associations, the tumors with the specific rare driver alterations were depleted for other common canonical driver alterations (adjusted p-value < 0.05) ( ). In aggregate, combining the ‘common’ and ‘rare’ canonical driver alterations, 1,180 associations were statistically significantly identified as canonical driver alterations ( ).

## BRAF co-alterations and outcomes on targeted treatment
All BRAF oncogenic alterations were grouped into four classes as described previously. All BRAF V600 hotspot mutations were considered Class I. Class II alterations included: P367S, G464E/R/V, G469A/L/R/SV, L485W/F, L505H, L525R, E586K, F595L, L597P/Q/R/S/V, A598V, K601E/N/T, K602, small inframe insertions/deletions and fusions. And, Class III alterations: D287H, V459L, G466A/E/R/V, S467A/E/L, G469E, T470R, Q524L, N581I/S/T, D594A/E/G/H/N/V/L, G596R/V. All remaining oncogenic alterations were considered as ‘Other’. Co-alteration analysis with BRAF functional classes in was limited to microsatellite stable (MSS) tumors and restricted to cancer types with 10 or more BRAF driver alterations (n=18 cancer types). All genes that harbored driver alterations in 0.5% or more tumors in these cancers (n=148 genes) were evaluated for co-occurrence or mutual exclusivity with alterations in BRAF functional classes. In all, 592 associations were evaluated. Statistical significance was determined using a multivariable regression model that accounted for cancer type, disease status (primary/metastasis), ancestry and sex of the patient. After adjusting for multiple hypothesis testing correction using the Benjamini-Hochberg method, 49 associations between BRAF classes and the genes were found statistically significant (adjusted p-value < 0.05) ( ).
Prognostic effect of RNF43 alteration status among BRAF V600E mutated cancers is evaluated in a cohort of 73 MSS colorectal cancer patients treated with anti-EGFR/anti-BRAF targeted therapies at MSKCC. Progression free survival (PFS) is the time from treatment start to disease progression or death. OS is measured as the time from clinical sequencing of the tumor biopsy to date of last follow up or death. PFS and OS differences between RNF43MUT/BRAFV600E-MUT and RNF43WT/BRAFV600E-MUT are evaluated using a multivariable Cox proportional hazards model that accounted for the sex, number of metastatic sites, status of liver metastasis at the time of treatment initiation and the line of therapy in which the targeted therapy was given ( and ).

## Somatic molecular correlates of age of diagnosis
Age of diagnosis analysis was restricted to tumors without high mutational and copy number burden ( ), and cancer types with 100 or more patients. Patients with germline pathogenic variants in high and moderate penetrance genes were excluded. Germline variant calling and pathogenicity assessment was performed as described previously. All patients with age of disease diagnosis of 18 years or younger were excluded from this analysis. In all, somatic alterations associated with age of diagnosis was evaluated in 25,498 patients comprising 42 cancer types with 100 or more cancers (after all the previously described exclusions). All genes in each disease type that were somatically altered in at least 2% of patients as well as at least five patients were evaluated for association with disease diagnosis. Statistical significance for each association was evaluated using a multivariable regression model that accounted for disease status (primary vs. metastatic), ancestry, sex and FGA. Additional disease specific covariates were also included when available (smoking status in lung adenocarcinoma, and receptor status for breast cancers). False discovery rate was calculated using Q value. In all, of the 1,079 associations evaluated, 36 associations were significant ( ) including 17 that are associated with early diagnosis while 19 were more enriched in later onset disease. We reasoned that the tumors with alterations in genes associated with early onset may spuriously drive later onset associations with other genes in the same cancer type. Thus, this may potentially impact later onset associations in cancer types in which both early and later onset associations (n=17) were identified. We therefore re-evaluated these associations after excluding tumors that harbor alterations in genes associated with early onset. After adjusting for false discovery rate using Q value, only 4 of 17 later onset associations, in the cancer types in which both early and later onset associations were observed, remained significant (Q < 0.05, , ). Age of diagnosis association analyses with fusions at pan-cancer level and cancer type level were evaluated using a multivariable regression model that accounted for disease status, ancestry, sex and FGA ( and ).

## Supplementary Material
MMC6MMC5MMC7MMC8MMC10MMC11MMC12MMC14MMC13MMC15MMC9MMC17MMC19MMC16MMC20MMC21MMC23MMC24MMC25MMC22MMC18MMC2MMC1MMC3MMC26MMC4SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccell.2026.03.003.

 

## Highlights
An open real-world pan-cancer resource of 54,331 tumors across 448 cancer subtypes
Classification of drivers reveals that one-third arise in non-canonical cancer contexts
Non-canonical drivers exhibit distinct clonality, zygosity, and co-mutation patterns
Ancestry-associated HLA genotypes and somatic HLA LOH shape TCR therapy eligibility

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful to the members of the MSK Molecular Diagnostics Service who generated, analyzed, and interpreted clinical MSK-IMPACT data included in this study, particularly Tejus Bale, Jamal Benhamida, Laetitia Borsu, Jason Chang, Deborah DeLair, Snjezana Dogan, Benjamin Durham, Mark Ewalt, Jaclyn Hechtman, Caleb Ho, Amir Momeni Boroujeni, Christine Moung, Khedoudja Nafa, Kseniya Petrova-Drus, Meera Hameed, Dara Ross, Efsevia Vakiani, Chad Vanderbilt, Soo Ryum Yang, Jinjuan Yao, Menglei Zhu, Deepu Alex, Javier Arias-Stella, Caremon Beech, Ying-Hsia Chu, Paolo Cotzia, Patrice Desmeules, Kelly Devereaux, Tony El Jabbour, Donna Ferguson, Edwin Gandia, Nicolas Giraldo-Castillo, Juan Gomez Gelvez, Sounak Gupta, Huiya Huang, George Jour, Israel Kasago, Keith Killian, Melissa Krystel-Whittemore, Ying Liu, Douglas Mata, Carlos Pagan, Megan Parilla, Navid Sadri, Rohit Sharma, James Solomon, Ken Tian, Raghu Chandramohan, Donavan Cheng, Erika Gedvilaite, H. Ryan Kim, Yun-Te Lin, Sumit Middha, Yuhan Wang, Aqib Abass, Aaron Agarunov, Mohammad Haque, Jason Hwee, Yu Hu, Meera Prasad, Mustafa Syed, John Ziegler, Ruben Bacares, Tessa Baldi, Iwona Kiecka, Talia Mitchell, Hussein Mohamed, Kerry Mullaney, Anna Razumova, Justyna Sadowska, Cong Shen, Julie Son Garcia, Hun Jae Jung, Lisa Stewart, Jiajing Wang, Wei Wang, Nicole Degroat, and Christine England. C.B. acknowledges thoughtful and scientific discussions with Gowthami Are. C.B. was supported by a Druckenmiller Center for Lung Cancer Research Award, MSK Society Grant and Innovation in Cancer Informatics Grant. R.R.K. is supported, in part, by a Department of Defense Early Career Investigator award (KCRP-AKCI, W81XWH-21-1-0942) and a Focus Award in partnership with the Kidney Cancer Association and Joey’s Wings Foundation. Y.R. Murciano-Goroff acknowledges receipt of training through an institutional K30 grant from the NIH (CTSA UL1TR00457). She has received funding from a Kristina M. Day Young Investigator Award from Conquer Cancer, the ASCO Foundation, endowed by Dr. Charles M. Baum and Carol A. Baum. She is also funded by the Fiona and Stanley Druckenmiller Center for Lung Cancer Research, the Andrew Sabin Family Foundation, the Society of MSK, the Squeri Grant for Drug Development, and a Paul Calabresi Career Development Award for Clinical Oncology (NIH/NCI K12 CA184746) as well as through NIH/NCI R01 CA279264. C.M.R. is supported by NCI R35CA263816 and U24CA213274. E.O.R. is supported in part by NIH/NCI, Break Through Cancer, NCI/NIH P50 CA257881-01A1. S.C. is supported by the Breast Cancer Research Foundation and NCI R35CA305347. C.A.K. is supported in part by National Institutes of Health (NIH) grants R37 CA259177, R01 CA286507, and P50CA217694, the Mr. William H. Goodwin and Mrs. Alice Goodwin and the Commonwealth Foundation for Cancer Research, Cycle for Survival, the Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy, the Metropoulos Family Foundation, and the Samuel I. Newhouse Foundation. M.F.B. is supported by R01 CA227534, and R25 CA233208. This study was supported by National Institutes of Health awards P30 CA008748, Cycle for Survival, and the Marie-Josée and Henry R. Kravis Center for Molecular Oncology.

## DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
M.V.G. has a patent for TCR therapeutics licensed to Affini-T Therapeutics. M.A.P. holds Amgen stock. J.J. has a patent licensed by MDSeq. R.A.H. is an employee of Foundation Medicine, Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of Roche holdings, Inc. and Roche Finance Ltd., and has equity interest in an affiliate of these Roche holdings. A.S. reports travel, accommodation and expenses from Novartis. R.R.K. has provided consulting or advisory roles for Eisai and Merck, and has received institutional research funding from Pfizer, Takeda, Novartis, Exelixis, Xencor, Arsenal Bio, and Allogene Therapeutics. P.R. has institutional grant/funding from Grail, Novartis, AstraZeneca, EpicSciences, Invitae/ArcherDx, Biothernostics, Tempus, Neo-genomics, Biovica, Guardant, Personalis, Myriad and consultation/Ad board/Honoraria from Novartis, AstraZeneca, Pfizer, Lilly/Loxo, Prelude Therapeutics, Epic Sciences, Daiichi-Sankyo, Foundation Medicine, Inivata, Natera, Tempus, SAGA Diagnostics, Paige.ai, Guardant, Myriad, Foresight Diagnostics, Pathos AI and BioNTech. E.R. has served on advisory board (uncompensated) for Boundless Bio. Y.R.M. reports travel, accommodation, and expenses from AstraZeneca and Loxo Oncology/Eli Lilly; honoraria from Virology Education and Projects in Knowledge (for a CME program funded by an educational grant from Amgen); advisory board for Revolution Medicines; consulting for AbbVie; associated research funding to the institution from Mirati Therapeutics, Bristol Myers Squibb/E.R. Squibb & Sons, Loxo Oncology at Eli Lilly, Elucida Oncology, Taiho Oncology, Hengrui USA, Ltd/Jiangsu Hengrui Pharmaceuticals, Luzsana Biotechnology, Endeavor Biomedicines, AbbVie, Erasca, and Arvinas; institutional interest in Elucida; royalties from Rutgers University Press and Wolters Kluwer; food/beverages from Endeavor Biomedicines, AstraZeneca, and Eli Lilly; other services from Amgen, Loxo Oncology/Eli Lilly, AbbVie, Arvinas, and Taiho Oncology. L.G.T.M. is listed as an inventor on intellectual property owned by Memorial Sloan Kettering and licensed to Personal Genome Diagnostics, unrelated to this work. I.K.M. reports stock or ownership interest in Katmai; consulting or advisory role for Altido, Pathos, Servier, Tango, Tcelltech; research funding (including Principal Investigator, Site Principal Investigators, Member of Steering Committee Member) for Abbvie, Global Coalition for Adaptive Research (GCAR), Roche, Servier, General Electric, and Puma Biotechnology. G.J.R. received institutional research support from Lilly, Amgen, Mirati (BMS). C.M.R. reports a consulting or advisory role (Genentech/Roche, AstraZeneca, Amgen, Jazz Pharmaceuticals, Earli, AbbVie, Daiichi Sankyo/UCB Japan, Merck, Auron Therapeutics, DISCO); research funding (Merck (Inst), Roche/Genentech (Inst), Daiichi Sankyo (Inst)); royalties related to licensing of anti-DLL3 antibodies. A.D. reports honoraria (14ner/Elevation Oncology, Amgen, Abbvie, AnHeart Therapeutics, ArcherDX, AstraZeneca, Beigene, BergenBio, Blueprint Medicines, Bristol Myers Squibb, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chugai Pharmaceutical, EcoR1, EMD Serono, Entos, Exelixis, Helsinn, Hengrui Therapeutics, Ignyta/Genentech/Roche, Janssen, Loxo/Bayer/Lilly, Merus, Monopteros, MonteRosa, Novartis, Nuvalent, Pfizer, Prelude, Regeneron, Repare RX, Springer Healthcare, Takeda/Ariad/Millenium, Treeline Bio, TP Therapeutics, Tyra Biosciences, Verastem, Zymeworks); advisory boards (Bayer, MonteRosa, Abbvie, EcoR1 Capital, LLC, Amgen, Helsinn, Novartis, Loxo/Lilly, AnHeart Therapeutics, Bristol Myers Squibb, Nuvalent); consulting (MonteRosa, Innocare, Boundless Bio, Treeline Bio, Nuvalent, 14ner/Elevation Oncology, Entos, Prelude, Bayer, Applied Pharmaceutical Science, Bristol Myers Squibb, Enlaza, Pfizer, Roche/Genentech, Novartis, Two River, Lilly/Loxo); associated research paid to institution (Foundation Medicine, GlaxoSmithKline, Teva, Taiho, PharmaMar); equity (mBrace, Treeline); copyright (Selpercatinib-Osimertinib (US 18/041,617, pending)); royalties (Wolters Kluwer, UpToDate); other (Merck, Puma, Merus, Boehringer Ingelheim); CME honoraria (answers in CME, Applied Pharmaceutical Science, Inc, AXIS, Clinical Care Options, Doc Congress, EPG Health, Harborside Nexus, I3 Health, Imedex, Liberum, Medendi, Medscape, Med Learning, MedTalks, MJH Life Sciences, MORE Health, Ology, OncLive, Paradigm, Peerview Institute, PeerVoice, Physicians Education, Projects in Knowledge, Resources, Remedica Ltd, Research to Practice, RV More, Targeted Oncology, TouchIME, WebMD). H.A.A. provides consultation for AstraZeneca, Janssen, Pfizer and Novartis. E.O.R. reports research funding to institution (Arcus, Genentech/Roche, BioNTech, Incyte, AstraZeneca, Elicio Therapeutics, Digestive Care, Agenus, Amgen, Revolution Medicines, Tango Therapeutics); consulting/DSMB uncompensated (Arcus, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Alligator BioSciences, Pfizer, Agenus, BioNTech, Ipsen, Ikena, Merck, Immuneering, Moma Therapeutics, Novartis, Astellas, BMS, Revolution Medicines, Regeneron, Tango Therapeutics); travel (BioNTech, Arcus, Pfizer); other (American Association of Cancer Research (AACR), American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO), Imedex, Research To Practice, Stand Up To Cancer (SU2C)). Z.K.S. has intellectual property rights in SOPHiA Genetics and serves as an Editor-in-Chief for JCO Precision Oncology and as a Section Editor for UpToDate. Z.K.S.’s immediate family member is Co-Founder, CMO and President for Blue Gen Therapeutics Foundation, and serves as a consultant in Ophthalmology for Beacon Therapeutics and Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc. outside the submitted work. M.R. has received financial compensation for consulting from Optum Health; support for attending meetings from AstraZeneca; and receipt of equipment, materials, drugs, medical writing, gifts or other services from AstraZeneca and Pfizer. J.G. declares professional services and activities for Manifold AI. D.M. reports personal fees from AstraZeneca outside the submitted work. I.O. has received consulting fees from Ataraxis. S.C. has received institutional grant/funding from Daiichi-Sankyo, AstraZeneca, and Lilly and consultation/Ad board/Honoraria from AstraZeneca, Lilly, Novartis, Casdin Capital, Nuvalent, Daiichi-Sankyo, Pathos.ai, Revelio Tx, and HighTOP Tx. H.A.Y. reports honoraria from AstraZeneca, Blueprint Medicines, C4 Therapeutics, Daiichi-Sankyo, and Janssen; grants/funds from AstraZeneca, Cullinan, Daiichi-Sankyo, Lilly, Novartis, and Pfizer. C.A.K. is an inventor on patents related to TCR discovery and public neoantigen-specific TCRs; is the recipient of licensing revenue from Intima Bioscience and Affini-T Therapeutics shared according to Memorial Sloan Kettering institutional policies; has consulted for or is on the scientific advisory boards for Achilles Therapeutics, Affini-T Therapeutics, Aleta BioTherapeutics, Bellicum Pharmaceuticals, Bristol Myers Squibb, Catamaran Bio, Cell Design Labs, Chronara Biosciences, Decheng Capital, G1 Therapeutics, Genesis Molecular AI, Ipsen, Klus Pharma, Merck, Obsidian Therapeutics, PACT Pharma, Roche/Genentech, Royalty Pharma, Stereo Biotherapeutics, and T-knife; is a scientific co-founder and equity holder in Affini-T Therapeutics. R.Y. has served as an advisor for Mirati Therapeutics, Revolution Medicines, Loxo@Lilly, Erasca, Merck, Parabilis Medicines, Bayer, and Alterome; served as a Data and Safety Monitoring Board member for CytoDyn; and received research support to her institution from Pfizer, Mirati Therapeutics, Amgen, Daiichi Sankyo, Boundless Bio, Revolution Medicines, Parabilis Medicines, and Eli Lilly. A.R.B. has intellectual property rights with SOPHiA Genetics and stock in J&J. A.Z. is now employed by Natera following the completion of this study. M.L. declares royalty payments and reimbursed travel from SOPHiA Genetics related to licensing of MSK-IMPACT and MSK-ACCESS. N.S. declares professional services and activities (uncompensated) for Cambridge Innovation Institute and Innovation in Cancer Informatics, and professional services and activities for Novartis and OneOncology. D.B.S. has consulted/received honoraria from Pfizer, PaigeAI, BridgeBio, Scorpion Therapeutics, FORE Therapeutics, Meliora Therapeutics, Inc., and Elsie Biotechnologies, and has stock options in Scorpion Therapeutics, FORE Therapeutics, Pyramid, Elsie Biotechnologies, Inc., Anteres Therapeutics, and Virchow Medical, Inc. M.F.B. declares professional services and activities for AstraZeneca and Paige.AI and intellectual property rights with SOPHiA Genetics.

## REFERENCES
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
MMC6MMC5MMC7MMC8MMC10MMC11MMC12MMC14MMC13MMC15MMC9MMC17MMC19MMC16MMC20MMC21MMC23MMC24MMC25MMC22MMC18MMC2MMC1MMC3MMC26MMC4

## Data Availability Statement
Our complete dataset, including genomic and clinical data, is publicly available through the cBioPortal for Cancer Genomics: https://www.cbioportal.org/study?id=msk_impact_50k_2026. All accompanying genomic and clinical data are also publicly deposited in the Zenodo digital library at https://zenodo.org/records/18445440. MSK-IMPACT clinical sequencing data are considered as protected patient information, and access to raw data is contingent on additional institutional approvals. Any additional data for analysis is available upon request.