pmceLifeElife1894elifeeLifeeLife2050-084XeLife Sciences Publications, LtdPMC11060712PMC11060712.111060712110607123868767810.7554/eLife.89100891001Research ArticleCancer BiologyCell BiologyLoss of tumor suppressor TMEM127 drives RET-mediated transformation through disrupted membrane dynamics
WalkerTimothy Jhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-6146-3485 ). RTKs internalized by clathrin-mediated endocytosis (CME) transition through successive early and late endosomes for eventual degradation in lysosomes ( ). In cells where endocytosis or trafficking is impaired, RTKs may accumulate inappropriately at the cell surface or in aberrant subcellular compartments, contributing to cell transformation and oncogenic growth. Despite the importance of CME and RTK cargo transition through compartments, the trafficking proteins required for transitions and their roles in these processes remain poorly understood.
RET (rearranged during transfection) is an RTK required for the development of the kidneys, nerves, and neuroendocrine cell types ( ). Under normal conditions, RET is activated by binding of its glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) ligands and GPI-linked GDNF family receptor α (GFRα) coreceptors, which together recruit RET complexes to lipid rafts, leading to downstream signaling through multiple pathways ( ; ). Activated RET at the cell membrane is internalized via CME to early endosomes where signaling persists, and subsequently trafficked through the endolysosomal system for downregulation and degradation ( ; ). Activating mutations of RET or overexpression of the wildtype (WT) protein are established drivers in several cancers ( ). Constitutively active RET mutants give rise to the inherited cancer syndrome multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN2), which is characterized by the adrenal tumor pheochromocytoma (PCC), while activating mutations or increased RET expression are found in a subset of sporadic PCC ( ; ; ; ).
PCC has also been associated with inactivating mutations of TMEM127, a multipass integral membrane protein broadly expressed at low levels and localized to the plasma membrane, endosomes, and lysosomes in normal cells ( ; ; ). TMEM127 functions are poorly understood but it has been suggested to facilitate endosomal transition and cargo trafficking and has been shown to modulate endolysosomal function in renal cell carcinomas ( ; ). Loss-of-function mutations of TMEM127 have been identified in both familial and sporadic PCC, leading to loss of TMEM127 protein or mislocalization to the cytosol in tumor cells ( ; ). Interestingly, our recent data have demonstrated that RET expression is increased in TMEM127-mutant PCC ( ).
The presentation of RET-mutant or TMEM127-deficient PCC are not clinically distinct. Both RET and TMEM127 have been predicted to confer PCC susceptibility through altered kinase signaling ( ; ; ), however, their relationship has not been explored. The importance of endolysosomal trafficking in regulating the intensity and duration of RET pro-proliferative signals suggested that loss of TMEM127-mediated endosomal transition could alter RET trafficking, promoting accumulation or signaling from aberrant subcellular compartments and contributing to transformation. In this study, we have investigated the effects of TMEM127 depletion on RET regulation and function and more broadly on cellular processes that could contribute to PCC pathogenesis. Here, we show that loss of TMEM127 leads to cell surface accumulation and constitutive activation of RET and that this accumulation is due to alterations in membrane organization and composition that reduce efficiency of CME and decrease internalization of RET as well as other transmembrane proteins, suggesting a global impairment of membrane trafficking. As a result of changes in membrane dynamics, TMEM127 depletion increased RET half-life and led to constitutive RET-mediated signaling and cell proliferation that was blocked by RET inhibition. Our data further demonstrate that TMEM127 loss increases membrane protein diffusability and impairs normal membrane transitions and the stabilization and assembly of membrane protein complexes, allowing inappropriate accumulation of actively signaling RET molecules at the cell membrane, and that mislocalized RET is the pathogenic mechanism in TMEM127-mutant PCC.

## Results

## Loss-of-function mutations disrupt TMEM127 localization and reduce early endosome formation
WT-TMEM127 has previously been shown to localize to endosomal compartments, while loss-of-function PCC-TMEM127 mutants reduce protein expression or may be aberrantly localized in the cytosol ( ; ). Here, we assessed colocalization of transiently expressed TMEM127 with the early endosome marker EEA1 in human retinal pigment epithelial ARPE-19 cells by immunofluorescence microscopy. We showed that WT-TMEM127 localized robustly to EEA1-positive endosomes but that colocalization was significantly reduced for two transmembrane domain TMEM127 mutants (C140Y, S147del), which did not show appreciable localization to EEA1 puncta ( ). Interestingly, the total numbers of EEA1 puncta in cells were modestly reduced in the presence of TMEM127-S147del and significantly reduced for TMEM127-C140Y ( ), suggesting a systemic disruption of endosomal formation or stability in response to loss of TMEM127 function in these cells. In ARPE-19 cells transiently expressing RET and TMEM127, GDNF stimulation promoted colocalization of RET with WT but not mutant TMEM127 in EEA1-positive endosomes ( ). RET and EEA1 colocalization was reduced but not eliminated in the presence of TMEM127 mutants, suggesting TMEM127 loss may limit RET localization to early endosome compartments.
 

## TMEM127 depletion promotes cell surface RET accumulation
Human PCC cell lines and patient-derived organoid cultures have not been successfully generated to date. We therefore generated a CRISPR-Cas9 TMEM127-knockout (KO) and control (Mock-KO) in human neuroblastoma cell line SH-SY5Y, which endogenously expresses RET and TMEM127 ( ), to explore the effects of TMEM127 loss of function on RET localization and functions. We confirmed that these TMEM127-KO cells had similarly reduced EEA1-positive endosomes to our transient models, described above ( ). Interestingly, we observed notably increased levels of RET protein in TMEM127-KO compared to control Mock-KO cells ( ), which was consistent with accumulation of a fully mature glycosylated RET form that is found primarily on the cell surface ( ; ; ). This accumulation was not due to changes in RET gene transcription, since TMEM127-KO cells had significantly less RET mRNA in qRT-PCR assays ( ), suggesting a possible feedback loop modulating RET transcription. Transient re-expression of WT-TMEM127 in these cells reduced RET protein levels ( ). Using a surface protein biotinylation assay ( , , ) to specifically detect plasma membrane proteins, we showed that cell surface RET was significantly increased, by approximately fivefold, in TMEM127-KO compared to Mock-KO SH-SY5Y cells. We also saw similar plasma membrane accumulation of endogenous N-cadherin and transferrin receptor-1 proteins in HEK293 cells depleted for TMEM127, and reintroduction of flag-tagged TMEM127 significantly reduced membrane localization ( ). Taken together, the accumulation of RET on the cell surface and reduced RET in early endosomes suggested that TMEM127 loss might disrupt RET internalization.
 
 

## TMEM127 depletion promotes RET accumulation through impaired internalization
We assessed RET internalization in response to GDNF over time in TMEM127-KO and Mock-KO cells using a biotinylation internalization assay ( , , ). Consistent with our previous studies ( ; ), minimal RET internalization was detected by 5 min of GDNF treatment in Mock-KO cells and increased over time, with significantly greater internalization detected by 30 min ( ). In TMEM127-KO cells, RET internalization was similar at all timepoints and did not increase over time with longer GDNF treatments, with significantly less internalization observed after 30 min compared to Mock-KO controls ( ). Recycling of internalized RET to the cell surface in biotinylation assays was also reduced in TMEM127-KO compared to Mock-KO cells with a smaller proportion of the internalized RET being returned to the cell surface ( ), suggesting RET surface accumulation was not due to enhanced recycling. Our data show that RET internalization into TMEM127-KO cells is not GDNF responsive and remains at a low constitutive rate despite high levels of RET protein accumulating on the cell surface, suggesting that TMEM127 depletion may impair cellular internalization mechanisms, such as CME.

## RET localization with cell surface clathrin and internalization are reduced in TMEM127-depleted cells
Previous studies have shown that, in response to ligand, RET is recruited to clathrin clusters assembling on the plasma membrane and internalized into endosomal compartments via clathrin-coated pits (CCPs) ( ; ; ). To further explore the surface accumulation of RET and impairment of RET internalization in TMEM127-depleted cells, we assessed RET colocalization with cell surface clathrin by total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy (TIRFM), as previously described ( ; ; ; ). In Mock-KO cells, GDNF treatment significantly increased colocalization of RET and plasma membrane clathrin structures ( ) and caused a significant loss of cell surface RET intensity ( , ), suggesting activated RET is being recruited to CCPs and then moving out of the TIRF field as it is internalized into the cell. In contrast, when normalized for the increased total RET intensity on the cell surface, RET-clathrin colocalization in untreated TMEM127-KO cells was significantly less than in untreated Mock-KO cells and was not increased by GDNF treatment ( ), suggesting impaired recruitment of RET to cell surface clathrin irrespective of ligand stimulation. The overall intensity of cell surface clathrin puncta was not affected by GDNF treatment but was significantly less in TMEM127-KO cells compared to Mock-KO ( ). A decrease of clathrin fluorescence intensity in plasma membrane clathrin structures could suggest a decrease in the number of clathrin subunits incorporated per CCP, and thus reflect a change in clathrin assembly or size. Alternatively, as TIRF intensity decays exponentially with distance from the coverslip, a reduction of clathrin intensity in the TIRF image could also indicate an increase in membrane curvature. To distinguish between these possibilities, we used concomitant widefield epifluorescence microscopy to assess clathrin fluorescence intensity at puncta detected within the TIRF images above ( ), as this form of microscopy is not sensitive to changes in fluorescence intensity by the extent of CCP curvature generation. Clathrin fluorescence intensity in epifluorescence images was robustly reduced in clathrin puncta from TMEM127-KO cells, indicating less clathrin and smaller clusters, not more deeply invaginated structures.
 We further assessed numbers and sizes of CCPs in TMEM127 KO cells by imaging EGFP-tagged clathrin with structured illumination microscopy (SIM). Because over 60% of CCPs have been measured to be less than 200 μm in size ( ), the approximate diffraction limit of a light microscope, super-resolution techniques are needed to fully resolve these structures for accurate quantitation. Therefore, we used a technique called dual iterative SIM (diSIM, SIM2; ) that combines a lattice illumination pattern with deconvolution and standard SIM processing to resolve lateral structures as small as 60–100 nm in the ~525 nm emission range. Initial visual inspection of diSIM images of TMEM127-KO and Mock-KO cells expressing EGFP-tagged clathrin light chain (EGFP-CLC) suggested TMEM127-KO cells had fewer and smaller CCPs ( ). We further quantified the 2D area of over 6500 CCPs in and near the plasma membranes closest to the coverslip in TMEM127-KO and Mock-KO cells. Here, we found TMEM127-KO cells had a 2D CCP area approximately half of Mock-KO cells (0.008 µm2 vs. 0.016 µm2; ). An area of 0.008 µm2 corresponds to a diameter of approximately 90 nm, within the resolving power of the diSIM technique ( ). Finally, we also quantitated the number of CCPs per cell on a single plane near the lower membrane of TMEM127-KO and Mock-KO cells. The added resolving power of diSIM gave us confidence in reaching a more accurate count ( ). Here, we found a significant decrease in CCPs in TMEM127-KO cells relative to Mock-KO cells (213 vs 289). diSIM provides a clear indication that KO of TMEM127 alters the size and quantity of CCPs in a cell.
Together, our data indicate that TMEM127 depletion led to smaller clathrin clusters or CCPs, suggesting that TMEM127 regulates CCP formation, assembly, and/or turnover. In contrast, we observed a significant 1.3-fold increase in intensity of cell surface RET puncta in TMEM127-KO cells relative to Mock-KO cells ( ), consistent with the cell surface accumulation of RET, but did not observe a decrease in RET puncta in response to GDNF stimulation suggesting impaired internalization. As fewer CCPs are present in TMEM127-KO cells, some of these intense RET puncta are likely not in CCPs but may represent other organization of the receptor at the plasma membrane. Interestingly, we saw a similar increase in surface EGFR puncta intensity in TMEM127-KO cells, with a 1.4-fold increase over Mock-KO cells ( ), demonstrating that protein accumulation at the cell surface is not exclusive to RET in these cells. We extended this observation using surface biotinylation assays and showed that multiple classes of transmembrane proteins including RTKs (RET, EGFR), cell adhesion molecules (N-cadherin, integrin beta-3), and carrier proteins (transferrin receptor-1) accumulate on the cell membrane in TMEM127-KO compared to Mock-KO cells ( ), suggesting a global effect caused by impaired surface protein internalization. Together, these data suggest that loss of TMEM127 impairs normal membrane processes including formation of clathrin clusters or CCPs and recruitment of cargo, resulting in altered cell membrane composition and accumulation of multiple cell surface proteins.

## TMEM127 depletion impairs assembly and maturation of CCPs
To explore perturbations of the cell membrane in TMEM127-KO cells, we used live-cell time-lapse TIRF imaging of cells stably expressing EGFP-CLC ( , ). Consistent with our fixed-cell images, Mock-KO cells appeared to have more intense cell surface clathrin puncta, and these moved actively into and out of the TIRF field at the membrane consistent with rapid formation and maturation of CCPs. TMEM127-KO cells had less intense membrane clathrin puncta, which appeared less able to mature as CCPs and internalize into the cell, moving out of the TIRF field.
 CCPs undergo a multistage initiation, stabilization, and maturation process ( ; ). Clathrin assemblies must reach a minimum threshold for nucleation of CCPs to initiate. These assemblies can result in either small short-lived (<15 s) abortive CCPs that spontaneously disassemble without cargo uptake, or longer lived productive CCPs that effectively recruit cargo for internalization and delivery to the endolysosomal system ( ; ). We examined CCP dynamics over time in live cells using TIRFM and automated detection to identify diffraction-limited EGFP-CLC objects, and assessed the rates of assembly, initiation, and maturation of CCPs in Mock-KO and TMEM127-KO cells. Here, we show that TMEM127-KO cells have significantly increased stochastic assemblies of transient small subthreshold clathrin-labeled structures (sCLS) that are unable to recruit sufficient clathrin to form bona fide CCPs ( ). As a result of this increase in transient structures, we show a resultant decrease in the initiation of bona fide CCPs in TMEM127-KO cells compared to Mock-KO cells ( ). Further, as indicated by the reduced clathrin puncta intensity at the membrane and reduced area of CCPs detected by dSIM ( ), the CCPs that do form in TMEM127-KO cells are smaller, potentially limiting their ability to recruit cargo, such as RET, leading the cargo proteins to accumulate on the cell surface ( ). Interestingly, although there are relatively fewer CCPs formed in TMEM127-KO cells ( ), a smaller fraction of these had lifespans less than 15 s, suggesting CCPs that are able to overcome early assembly defects due to TMEM127 loss are able to mature to productive CCPs more efficiently ( ). The overall increase in sCLS and decrease in CCPs suggests that TMEM127 depletion may reduce the potential for clathrin to form or stabilize CCPs capable of internalization and compromise the maturation of productive CCPs, thereby leading to impaired internalization of RET and other cell surface proteins.
The defect in cargo recruitment to CCPs ( ) and CCP assembly ( – ) in TMEM127-KO cells could reflect changes specific to cargo engagement within CCPs or broader changes in membrane dynamics, such as protein and lipid mobility. To determine if loss of TMEM127 resulted in broader impacts on membrane dynamics, we examined the mobility of EGFR by single-particle tracking, using strategies we recently developed and characterized ( ). Importantly, labeling of EGFR with a Fab antibody fragment for single-particle tracking in the absence of ligand stimulation allows study of EGFR mobility that is largely clathrin independent ( ). TMEM127-KO cells exhibited a similar distribution of the population of EGFR in immobile, confined, and mobile cohorts ( ), suggesting that TMEM127 does not disrupt capture of a minor subset of EGFR within tetraspanin nanodomains that occurs in the absence of ligand ( ). However, consistent with broader disruption of membrane dynamics upon loss of TMEM127, we observed an increase in the diffusion coefficient of the confined and mobile fractions, in particular the latter ( ). This predicts that loss of TMEM127 may broadly impact membrane dynamics, suggesting that defects in receptor recruitment to CCPs and perturbations of CCP assembly that may lead to accumulation of membrane proteins at the cell surface in TMEM127-KO cells may result in part from broad alterations in membrane dynamics and/or receptor mobility that impact the formation of CCPs and their recruitment of diverse cargo.

## Clathrin adaptor recruitment is not TMEM127 dependent
Recruitment of RET to CCPs requires interaction with the clathrin adaptor AP2 ( ). We used proximity ligation assays (PLA) to identify and quantify direct protein interactions in situ to assess association of endogenous AP2 with RET and clathrin in SH-SY5Y cells. In untreated Mock-KO cells, RET-AP2 interaction was minimal but was significantly increased by GDNF treatment, as indicated by increased PLA puncta ( ), suggesting RET recruitment as cargo to CCPs. Association of RET and AP2 was significantly greater in TMEM127-KO cells, consistent with the higher RET protein levels at the cell membrane, and was further increased by GDNF treatment, suggesting that the RET-AP2 association was not TMEM127 dependent. We saw robust association of clathrin and AP2 in untreated Mock-KO cells ( ). GDNF treatment significantly reduced association, consistent with maturation of productive CCPs and subsequent uncoating of clathrin-coated vesicles and delivery of cargo to endosomes. In comparison, TMEM127-KO cells had significantly greater constitutive association of AP2 and clathrin and this was not affected by GDNF. We did not detect association of AP2 with TMEM127 under any condition using PLA (not shown), suggesting TMEM127 is not closely associated with clathrin-labeled structures. Together, our data suggest that, in TMEM127-KO cells, AP2-clathrin complexes accumulate but are unable to efficiently support the formation and/or assembly of CCPs to facilitate internalization of cargo proteins. This is consistent with the observation that TMEM127-KO cells have significantly higher sCLS nucleation rates, while exhibiting decreased formation of bona fide CCPs ( ). It follows that the increased proximity of RET and AP2 in TMEM127-KO cells may reflect increased cell surface levels of RET that may engage with endocytic adaptors, but that these interactions infrequently lead to formation or stabilization of bona fide CCPs. These data suggest that TMEM127 depletion does not directly affect ability of adaptors to associate with clathrin or cargo but may reflect an integral membrane defect that alters normal membrane protein movement and abilities to assemble or stabilize larger membrane protein complexes.
 

## TMEM127 depletion alters membrane microdomain organization
Given the results of the EGFR single-particle tracking experiments that suggest broader disruption of membrane dynamics upon loss of TMEM127 ( ), we investigated whether loss of TMEM127 could more broadly impact membrane organization by assessing distribution of lipid-rich membrane microdomains (membrane rafts). In Mock-KO cells stained for ganglioside GM1, which selectively partitions into membrane rafts ( ), stained lipid microdomains were large and continuous ( ). In TMEM127-KO cells, staining was fragmented and microdomains were significantly smaller, suggesting inability to assemble large lipid clusters and raft-associated proteins in the surface membrane. These data suggest that TMEM127-depletion alters membrane dynamics, limiting formation of multiple membrane structures.

## Decreased internalization reduces RET degradation, increasing RET half-life
Internalization of activated RET into the endolysosomal system is required for downregulation of RET signaling and eventual degradation ( ; ). As RET internalization was reduced in TMEM127-KO cells, we assessed whether this might impair RET degradation by examining RET protein expression levels over time following GDNF treatment in cells treated with cycloheximide (CHX) to inhibit new protein synthesis. In GDNF-treated Mock-KO cells, RET was rapidly degraded, with a half-life under 2 hr and less than 9% RET protein remaining after 12 hr ( ). In these cells, TMEM127 was shown to have a half-life of approximately 5 hr. In contrast, RET degradation was significantly slower in TMEM127-KO cells, with a half-life of approximately 6 hr and over 43% of RET remaining after 12 hr ( ). These data suggest that impaired RET internalization due to altered membrane dynamics significantly reduces RET degradation, contributing to RET accumulation on the cell surface.
 

## RET accumulation promotes increased downstream signaling
Overexpression or cell surface accumulation can frequently cause constitutive activation of growth factor receptors, conferring ligand insensitivity for modulating the intensity and duration of their downstream signals ( ). We assessed RET activation and signaling over time in Mock-KO and TMEM127-KO cells in response to GDNF. In Mock-KO cells, RET and its downstream signaling intermediates AKT, ERK, and the mTOR substrate S6 were minimally phosphorylated in the absence of GDNF and showed significantly increased phosphorylation over time in response to GDNF treatment ( ), consistent with our previous studies ( ; ). In contrast, RET, AKT, ERK, and S6 were constitutively phosphorylated in TMEM127-KO cells. GDNF enhanced RET phosphorylation after 5 min but, unlike Mock-KO cells, the effect was not further increased by prolonged treatment times. Phosphorylation of AKT, ERK, and S6 was not significantly increased by GDNF treatment in TMEM127-KO cells ( ). Further, we showed that the constitutive phosphorylation of RET, AKT, ERK, and S6 in TMEM127-KO cells could be blocked by RET inhibition using the multikinase inhibitor vandetanib, and selective RET inhibitors selpercatinib and pralsetinib ( ), which are clinically approved for the treatment of RET-associated cancers ( ). GDNF-mediated phosphorylation in Mock-KO cells was also blocked by RET inhibition ( ). Together, our data show that cell surface accumulation of RET can promote constitutive phosphorylation and activation of multiple downstream signaling pathways.
 
 
 

## RET drives proliferation in TMEM127-depleted cells
Oncogenic activating RET mutations are drivers of proliferation and tumor growth in PCC ( ; ; ). Here, we assessed whether RET constitutive activation caused by cell surface accumulation in response to TMEM127 loss could also promote these processes. We showed that GDNF treatment significantly increased proliferation of Mock-KO cells over a 3-day period ( ). TMEM127-KO cells proliferated significantly faster than Mock-KO cells, irrespective of GDNF treatment ( ), consistent with increased RET accumulation leading to ligand-independent RET activity and proliferation. To confirm that proliferation was RET-mediated and explore the impact of RET inhibition in TMEM127-KO cells, we assessed proliferation in the presence and absence of the selective RET inhibitor selpercatinib at a concentration sufficient to block RET phosphorylation (0.1 μM, ). Selpercatinib significantly reduced GDNF-dependent proliferation of Mock-KO cells. In TMEM127-KO cells, RET inhibition abrogated the increase in proliferation, seen above, and further significantly reduced viability (~20%) compared to Mock-KO cells ( ). Vehicle alone (DMSO) did not affect proliferation under any conditions ( ). Our data demonstrate that proliferation of TMEM127-KO cells was RET-dependent and suggest a previously unrecognized sensitivity of TMEM127-depleted cells to RET inhibition.

## Discussion
The RET receptor and the TMEM127 integral membrane protein are established PCC susceptibility genes ( ; ; ). RET oncogenic mutations give rise to PCC in patients with MEN2 and are found in up to 5% of sporadic PCC, where they promote constitutive RET activation and downstream signaling ( ; ; ; ; ). In contrast, TMEM127 acts as a tumor suppressor, and loss-of-function mutations have been linked primarily to increased mTOR signaling ( ). Although RET and WT-TMEM127 localize to similar endosomal compartments, we show that colocalization is lost in the presence of PCC-associated mutants that disrupt TMEM127 membrane insertion ( ). Endosomes are reduced in size and number in the absence of WT-TMEM127, suggesting defects in the processes required for vesicle formation and internalization and trafficking of proteins from the plasma membrane ( ).
 Using a CRISPR TMEM127-KO in the neuroblastoma cell line SH-SY5Y, we noted significantly increased levels of endogenously expressed RET protein, which appeared primarily as the higher molecular weight fully glycosylated form found at the cell surface ( ; ; ). Using surface biotin labeling and TIRFM in fixed and live cells, we showed that RET internalization was impaired, and that WT RET accumulated on the cell surface in the absence of TMEM127, escaping degradation ( ). Notably, accumulation of surface receptors was not unique to RET as we also saw increased intensity of EGFR puncta and increased membrane levels of other receptors and adhesion molecules in the absence of TMEM127 in both SH-SY5Y and HEK293 cells, consistent with a global defect of membrane dynamics that could also block internalization of membrane proteins. As a result of increased density in the plasma membrane in SH-SY5Y cells, RET is constitutively active, promoting stimulation of multiple downstream signaling pathways. Importantly, treatment with selective RET inhibitors abrogated these signals including mTOR signaling, suggesting that, in this model, the increase in mTOR signaling seen in response to TMEM127 loss is a direct response to RET activity.
As both RET and TMEM127 have been previously shown to internalize through CME ( ; ; ; ), we assessed the impact of TMEM127 depletion on membrane clathrin distribution and its effects on cargo internalization. Despite increased RET puncta intensity on the cell surface, RET localization to clathrin puncta was reduced and was not responsive to GDNF, consistent with impairment of clathrin-mediated internalization of RET ( ). The formation of CCPs is a multistep process involving recruitment of clathrin adaptors and stepwise assembly of clathrin-labeled structures at the cell membrane for recruitment of cargo proteins and assembly of productive CCPs ( ). Transient small subthreshold CLSs are unstable and may not recruit sufficient clathrin or cargo to achieve a threshold size and progress further to initiate bona fide CCPs ( ). Once sufficient clathrin is recruited for initiation, CCPs may mature to pinch off clathrin-coated vesicles from the membrane, but a subset fail to mature and are aborted ( ; ). Our single-particle tracking studies suggest that mobility of membrane cargo proteins like EGFR is enhanced in TMEM127 KO cells, which may decrease capture of cargo at stochastic clathrin assemblies and limit their progression to successful nucleation and initiation of bona fide CCPs. Consistent with this, our data indicate that TMEM127 depletion increased the frequency of the sCLSs but significantly reduced their ability to reach the clathrin threshold size and initiate bona fide CCPs. CCPs that did form were smaller, contained less clathrin, and were able to recruit less RET cargo than in Mock-KO cells. TMEM127 loss did not impair RET-AP2 or AP2-clathrin association, suggesting that key protein interactions required for internalization were largely intact ( ). However, we saw decreased capture of RET within bona fide CCPs, formation of CCPs was reduced, and those that formed smaller in TMEM127-deficient cells, suggesting that altered membrane dynamics, increasing the diffusability of membrane proteins and impairing capture of sufficient cargo-adaptor complexes into nascent CCPs, could be limiting the recruitment of sufficient cargo and coalescence of CCPs, consistent with previous studies that link membrane tension and CCP formation ( ; ). Together, our data suggest that accumulation of RET and other transmembrane proteins at the cell surface in the absence of functional TMEM127 is due to reduced efficiency of clathrin recruitment to CCP, limiting capacity for cargo internalization and reducing CME, and that this correlates with the global disruption of membrane protein composition, protein complex assembly, and organization in other domains, such as membrane rafts. Interestingly, our preliminary studies have suggested that one outcome of this may be impairment of the formation of other membrane-associated complexes and processes, such as recruitment of ubiquitination machinery ( ), contributing to the TMEM127 phenotype and highlighting the broader implications of altered membrane partitioning.
As a result of impaired internalization in TMEM127-deficient SH-SY5Y cells, RET protein accumulates on the cell surface and degradation is reduced, leading to sustained downstream pro-proliferative signals. We showed that these pathways can be blocked using selective RET inhibitors, suggesting that targeting RET may be a valuable therapeutic strategy in the subset of PCC tumors where RET mutations have not been recognized but RET expression is detected. In support of this, in recent preliminary studies, we have shown that xenografts of TMEM127 KO SH-SY5Y cells produce larger tumors in nude mice, but that growth is reduced by treatment with the RET inhibitor selpercatinib ( ). Interestingly, TMEM127 mutations have also been identified as drivers in other cancers, notably renal cell carcinoma, where RET is not highly expressed. In these cancers, we would predict that TMEM127 loss has similar effects on membrane dynamics, membrane protein accumulation, and CCP formation to those seen in our model and that accumulation of other growth factor receptors, such as MET, on the cell surface will lead to transformation ( ; ). Notably, TMEM127 mutations or reduced expression are also seen at low frequencies in a number of other tumor types (e.g. endometrial, liver, breast, kidney, ovarian cancers; ) where TMEM127 contributions have not yet been specifically recognized, suggesting that aberrant accumulation and activation of growth factor receptors could also impact these tumors. Together, our data suggest a novel paradigm for oncogenic transformation in TMEM127-mutant tumors. We predict that altered membrane dynamics blocks normal internalization and degradation of key WT growth-promoting receptors, which then act as oncogenes to drive tumorigenesis in a cell type-specific fashion. Further, we predict that these oncogenes will provide valuable alternative therapeutic targets that have not been previously explored in TMEM127-mutant cancers.
Importantly, the changes in membrane dynamics and aberrant accumulation of membrane proteins in response to TMEM127 depletion are not exclusively oncogenic but may have other pathological implications. Consistent with our data showing RET accumulation on the cell surface, TMEM127 KO mice have increased insulin sensitivity and upregulation of insulin-dependent AKT signaling ( ), which may suggest excess surface accumulation of insulin receptors and resulting enhanced signaling in the liver in this model. Notably, recent studies have suggested that TMEM127 may have immune modulatory roles. In Salmonella-infected but not normal antigen presenting cells, TMEM127 acts in recruitment of protein complexes that promote downregulation of MHC-II and suppression of T-cell activation, while depletion of TMEM127 in infected cells increases MHC-II surface expression and reduces innate immune responses ( ). Similarly, TMEM127 depletion leads to MHC-I accumulation on the cell membrane in AML cell models, promoting enhanced recruitment of CD8+ T cells ( ). Taken together, these data suggest that the outcomes of TMEM127 depletion may be cell type as well as tumor type and stage specific, depending on the cell membrane proteomic repertoire. Further, TMEM127 depletion may promote oncogenic signaling in tumor initiation and growth, as we observed in PCC, or potentially contribute to alterations in the tumor immune environment in progression of other cancer models. These observations suggest that TMEM127 may have broad cellular roles in maintaining balance in the membrane proteome and suggest a generalized role for TMEM127 as a facilitator of diverse membrane protein complexes regulating localized membrane diffusion and promoting stability of complex assemblies to regulate membrane organization.

## Materials and methods

## Cell culture
Human Retinal Pigment Epithelial ARPE-19 cells (CRL-2302, ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA, RRID:CVCL_0145) were cultured in Ham’s F-12 medium (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; Sigma-Aldrich, Oakville, ON, Canada). TMEM127-KO and Mock-KO were generated in SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells (CRL-2266, ATCC, RRID:CVCL_0019) and HEK293 (CRL-1573, ATCC, RRID:CVCL_0045) using CRISPR-Cas9 as previously described ( ). SH-SY5Y and HEK293 cells were maintained in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM; Sigma-Aldrich) with 10% and 5% FBS respectively, 10 µg/ml ciprofloxacin, and 2.5 µg/ml puromycin. Cell lines were authenticated by STR profiling (Centre for Applied Genomics, SickKids, Toronto, ON, Canada). EGFP-CLC expressing variants of these cells were generated through lentiviral transduction, as previously described ( ), and selected in 100 μg/ml Hygromycin B (BioShop, Burlington, ON, Canada). Prior to each experiment, endogenous RET expression in SH-SY5Y was stimulated with 5 μM retinoic acid (MilliporeSigma, Oakville, ON, Canada) for 12–18 hr. Where appropriate, RET activation was induced with 100 ng/ml GDNF (Alomone Labs, Israel) for the indicated times.

## Antibodies, stains, and inhibitors
Total RET (#14556, RRID:AB_2798509), pRET (#3221, RRID:AB_2179887), AKT (#9272, RRID:AB_329827), pAKT (#4058, RRID:AB_331168), S6 (#2317, RRID:AB_2238583), and pS6 (#2211, RRID:AB_331679) antibodies were from Cell Signaling Technologies (Beverly, MA, USA). Antibodies to RET51 (#sc-1290, RRID:AB_631316), β-actin (#sc-47778, RRID:AB_626632), EGFR (#sc-120, RRID:AB_627492), ERK1 (#sc-94, RRID:AB_2140110), pERK (#sc-7383, RRID:AB_627545), EGFP (#sc-9996, RRID:AB_627695), and EEA1 (#sc-137130, RRID:AB_2246349) were from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Dallas, TX, USA). The anti-γ-tubulin (#T6557, RRID:AB_477584) antibody was from Sigma-Aldrich. Clathrin Heavy Chain antibodies (#ab2731 [RRID:AB_303256] and #ab21679 [RRID:AB_2083165]), RET (# ab134100, RRID:AB_2920824), and alpha-adaptin (ab2730, RRID:AB_303255) were from Abcam (Cambridge, UK). The TMEM127 (#A303-450A, RRID:AB_10952702) antibody was from Bethyl Laboratories (Fortis Life Sciences, Waltham, MA, USA). Western blot IRDye secondary antibodies were from LI-COR Biosciences (Lincoln, NE, USA). Alexa Fluor-conjugated secondary antibodies (Alexa-488, -546, -594, and -647) and Phalloidin (Alexa-488) were from Thermo Fisher Scientific. Cyanine Cy3- and Cy5-conjugated AffiniPure fluorescent secondary antibodies were from Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories Inc (West Grove, PA, USA). Nuclear stains used include Hoechst 33342 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and DAPI 10236276001 (Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany). Kinase inhibitors used were vandetanib (AstraZeneca PLC, Mississauga, ON, Canada), selpercatinib, and pralsetinib (Selleckchem, Houston, TX, USA).

## Expression constructs and transfection
Expression constructs for WT RET51, GFRα1, and FLAG- or EGFP-tagged TMEM127 WT and mutants (C140Y and S147del) have been previously described ( ; ; ). EGFP-tagged rat clathrin light chain ( ) was cloned into pLenti CMV and sequence verified.
Cells were transiently transfected with the indicated constructs using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen, Burlington, ON, Canada), according to the manufacturer’s instructions ( ). For ARPE-19 cells, medium was changed 6 hr after transfection and cells were incubated at 37°C for 48 hr prior to fixation. For SH-SY5Y and HEK293 cells, medium was changed 5 hr after transfection and cells were incubated at 37°C overnight (16 hr) prior to harvesting.

## Protein isolation and immunoblotting
Cells were washed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and protein was harvested with lysing buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.8], 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 1% Igepal, 2 mM EDTA, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 10 µg/ml aprotinin, and 10 µg/ml leupeptin), as described ( ; ). Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes, as previously described ( ; ). Blots were probed with indicated primary (1:1000–1:5000 dilution) and secondary IRDye antibodies (1:20,000) and visualized using the Odyssey DLx Imaging System (LI-COR Biosciences). Immunoblot band intensity quantification was performed using ImageStudio Lite Ver 5.2 software (LI-COR Biosciences).

## Biotinylation assays
Biotinylation of cell surface protein was performed as described ( ; ). Briefly, cell surface proteins were labeled with biotin and either harvested immediately (simple cell surface biotinylation assay) or cells were treated with GDNF for the indicated times to induce RET internalization (biotinylation internalization assay). Following internalization, remaining biotin was removed from the cell surface using MeSNa stripping buffer. Cells were lysed and biotinylated proteins immunoprecipitated with streptavidin-conjugated agarose beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) overnight at 4°C with agitation. Biotin-labeled proteins were collected by centrifugation at 2000×g, washed four times with lysing buffer, and resuspended in Laemmli buffer prior to SDS-PAGE, as previously described ( ).

## Degradation assays
Serum-starved cells were treated with serum-free media containing GDNF and 100 μg/ml CHX for the indicated times. Proteins were collected for immunoblotting, as above.

## Proliferation assays
Cell proliferation was evaluated through a 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) reduction assay. Briefly, 1.5×104 cells/well were seeded in 96-well plates and allowed to proliferate for indicated times. MTT (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to a final concentration of 0.45 mg/ml for 16 hr. Acidified 20% SDS was added, and cells were incubated at room temperature for 4 hr with shaking. Formazan product was quantified by absorbance at 570 nm and normalized to blank wells lacking cells. Absorbance relative to the 0 hr timepoint for each condition indicated relative cell viability.

## Immunofluorescence and microscopy
ARPE-19 cells were seeded onto poly-L-lysine-coated coverslips for transfection. SH-SY5Y cells were seeded onto bovine collagen 1 (Corning, Oneonta, NY, USA) coated coverslips, or into ibiTreat µ-slide VI 0.4 channel slides (Ibidi, Munich, Germany). Cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde, permeabilized with 0.2% Triton X-100, and blocked in 3% BSA. Cells were incubated with the indicated primary antibodies (1:200–1:400) overnight at 4°C, followed by Alexa Fluor/Cyanine secondary antibodies (1:2000) and indicated stains, Phalloidin (1:40), DAPI/Hoechst 33342 (1:5000–1:10,000). Lipid Raft staining was performed with the Vybrant Alexa Fluor 488 Lipid Raft Labelling Kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Coverslips or channel slides were then mounted with MOWIOL-DABCO mounting media (Sigma-Aldrich) and stored at 4°C.
PLA was performed using the Duolink PLA reagents according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Sigma-Aldrich). An EVOS M7000 imaging system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 40× air objective was used to acquire immunofluorescent images of the PLA. Particles were analyzed using ImageJ software (US National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA, RRID:SCR_003070).
A Leica TCS SP8 confocal microscope system (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, HE, Germany) with a 63×/1.40 oil objective lens was used to acquire 0.9 μm optical sections. Images were deconvoluted and ImageJ software (US National Institutes of Health) was used to analyze colocalization and normalize channel intensities to generate the final images.
TIRFM was performed using a Quorum (Guelph, ON, Canada) Diskovery microscope, comprised of a Leica DMi8 microscope equipped with a 63×/1.49 NA TIRF objective with a 1.8× camera relay (total magnification ×108). Images were acquired using a Zyla 4.2-megapixel sCMOS camera (Oxford Instruments) with 488, 561, or 637 nm laser illumination and 527/30, 630/75, or 700/75 emission filters. Fixed-cell TIRFM imaging was performed at room temperature with samples mounted in PBS. Live-cell imaging experiments were performed with cells at constant 37°C during imaging, in phenol red-free, serum-free DMEM media (Gibco, Thermo Fisher Scientific) supplemented with 20 mM HEPES, with imaging at 1 frame-per-second for 5 min.

## Dual iterative SIM

## Imaging
TMEM127-KO or Mock-KO cells stably expressing EGFP-CLC were grown on #1.5 coverslips. Cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde and mounted in Prolong Glass mounting medium (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA). Cells were imaged with a Plan-Apochromat 63×/1.4 Oil immersion objective on an ELYRA7 microscope in lattice SIM mode (Carl Zeiss, White Plains, NY, USA). A 488 nm laser was passed through a 23 µm grating and used to excite EGFP. Fluorescence emission was collected on a sCMOS camera (PCO, Kelheim, Germany) through a 495–550 nm bandpass emission filter. 15 illumination phases were collected with an exposure time of 100 ms each. Voxel dimensions were 0.063, 0.063, and 0.110 nm (X, Y, Z), respectively. Z-stacks of approximately 750 nm were acquired for each field of view.

## Processing
3D diSIM processing was performed in ZEN Black 3.0 SR edition (Carl Zeiss White Plains, NY, USA) using the ‘Standard Fixed’ setting. For initial visual inspections, maximum intensity projections of ~740 nm Z-stacks were performed in ImageJ/Fiji. Z-stacks encompassing entire cells were segmented using the ‘Blobs Finder’ tool in Vision4D (Aviris; Rostock, Germany) and rendered in 3D. For quantitative analysis of CCP diameter and number, single Z-planes in or near the lower plasma membrane were selected and run through a custom ImageJ/Fiji macro that counted CCPs and determined their 2D area.

## TIRFM experiment analysis

## Fixed-cell analysis of RET colocalization with CLSs
Unbiased detection and analysis of clathrin diffraction-limited structures was performed using CME analysis software in Matlab (Mathworks Corporation, Natick, MA, USA, RRID:SCR_001622; https://github.com/Danuserlab/CMEAnalysis, ), as previously described ( ; ; ). Briefly, diffraction-limited clathrin structures were detected using a Gaussian-based model to approximate the point-spread function of CLSs (‘primary’ channel). RET proteins (TIRFM images) or clathrin (epifluorescence images) were detected in a ‘secondary’ channel and the intensity within the CLSs, beyond local background amounts, signified the level of colocalization of the proteins.

## Live-cell analysis of CCP dynamics
Automated detection, tracking, and analysis of CCPs following time-lapse TIRF microscopy of SH-SY5Y cells stably expressing EGFP-CLC was as previously described ( ; ; ). Diffraction-limited clathrin structures were detected using a Gaussian-based model method to approximate the point-spread function ( ), and trajectories were determined from clathrin structure detections using u-track ( ). sCLSs were distinguished from bona fide CCPs based on unbiased analysis of clathrin intensities in the early CCP stages ( ; ). Both sCLSs and CCPs represent nucleation events, but only bona fide CCPs undergo stabilization, maturation, and in some cases scission to produce vesicles ( ; ). We report the sCLS nucleation, CCP initiation, and the fraction of CCPs <15 s. Because CCPs are diffraction-limited objects, the amplitude of the Gaussian model of the fluorescence intensity of EGFP-CLC informs about CCP size ( ).

## Single-particle tracking
Single-particle tracking experiments were performed by labeling EGFR with a Cy3B-conjugated Fab fragment targeting the EGFR ectodomain, generated from mAb108 ( ). Previous characterization of this labeling strategy indicated that antibody labeling did not impact EGFR ligand binding or signaling ( ). Cells were labeled with 50 ng/ml Fab-Cy3B (to label and track total EGFR) for 10 min followed by washing to remove unbound antibodies, in media lacking EGF. Time-lapse TIRF imaging was performed using a Quorum (Guelph, ON, Canada) Diskovery system, comprised of a Leica DMi8 microscope with a 63×/1.49 NA TIRF objective with a 1.8× camera relay (total magnification ×108), using 561 nm laser illumination and a 620/60 nm emission filter. Images were acquired using an iXon Ultra 897 EM-CCD (Spectral Applied Research, Andor, Toronto, ON, Canada). All live-cell imaging was performed using cells incubated in serum-free DMEM/F-12 or DMEM without phenol red or P/S, with a frame rate of 20 Hz, for total length of time-lapse 250 frames. Single particles labeled with Cy3B were detected and tracked ( ), and the motion types and diffusion coefficients were determined using moment-scaling spectrum analysis ( ; ).

## Statistical analyses
A minimum of three independent replicates were performed for each experiment, except where indicated. Consistency between experimental replicates was assessed through two-tailed unpaired t-tests, and one- or two-way ANOVA with indicated multiple comparison tests using GraphPad Prism version 9 (GraphPad Prism Software, San Diego, CA, USA). Specific significance tests were selected using GraphPad Prism following residual testing for Gaussian distribution (normality tests of Anderson-Darling, D’Agostino, Shapiro-Wilk, Kolmogorov-Smirnov) and testing whether residuals are clustered or heteroscedastic (Brown-Forsyth and Bartlett’s tests). Bar and line graphs, used for immunoblots and time course experiments, were presented with means and standard deviation (± SD), while box plots with whiskers from minimum to maximum values were used for individual cell imaging. Graphs were produced using GraphPad Prism.

## Funding Information
This paper was supported by the following grants:

http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100009326Cancer Research Society

CRS-19439 to Lois M Mulligan.

http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100000024Canadian Institutes of Health Research

MOP-142303 to Lois M Mulligan.

http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100000024Canadian Institutes of Health Research

PJT-156355 to Costin N Antonescu.

http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100000002National Institutes of Health

GM114102 to Patricia LM Dahia.

http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100000024Canadian Institutes of Health Research

PJT-178274 to Lois M Mulligan.

http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100000002National Institutes of Health

CA264248 to Patricia LM Dahia.

## Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Juliana Shizas, Montdher Hussain, and Kasra Ranjbar for technical assistance. This work was supported by operating grants from the Cancer Research Society of Canada (CRS-19439), Canadian Institutes for Health Research (MOP-142303, PJT-178274, LMM) and (PJT-156355, CNA), and from NIH (GM114102 and CA264248), Neuroendocrine Tumor Research Foundation, VHL Alliance, and the UT System Star Awards (PLMD). PLMD holds the Robert Tucker Hayes Distinguished Chair in Oncology. LMM is the Bracken Chair in Genetics and Molecular Medicine at Queen’s University.

## Additional information

## Competing interests
No competing interests declared.

## Author contributions
Conceptualization, Data curation, Software, Formal analysis, Validation, Investigation, Visualization, Methodology, Writing – original draft, Project administration, Writing – review and editing.
Conceptualization, Software, Formal analysis, Investigation, Visualization, Methodology, Writing – review and editing.
Resources, Supervision, Validation, Investigation, Methodology, Writing – review and editing.
Data curation, Software, Formal analysis, Investigation, Visualization, Methodology, Writing – review and editing.
Data curation, Formal analysis, Validation, Investigation.
Conceptualization, Investigation.
Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing – review and editing.
Resources, Supervision.
Resources.
Resources.
Conceptualization, Resources, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Visualization, Methodology, Writing – review and editing.
Conceptualization, Resources, Software, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Methodology, Writing – review and editing.
Conceptualization, Resources, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Writing – original draft, Project administration, Writing – review and editing.

## Additional files
MDAR checklist

## Data availability
All data generated during this study are included in the manuscript and supporting files. Source data files have been provided.

 10.7554/eLife.89100.3.sa0eLife assessment
CooperJonathan AReviewing Editor
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center
United States
ConvincingValuableThis valuable paper provides convincing evidence that loss of the tumor suppressor TMEM127 causes disorganization of plasma membrane lipid domains, alters clathrin assembly, and inhibits endocytosis of a variety of cell surface receptors, leading to increased cell surface levels of signaling proteins including RET and other transmembrane receptor tyrosine kinases. The results are significant for understanding how RET127 loss contributes to pheochromocytoma, although the evidence is indirect owing to the lack of human pheochromocytoma cell lines. The results will be of interest for researchers studying pheochromocytoma and endocytosis mechanisms.
10.7554/eLife.89100.3.sa1Reviewer #4 (Public review):
ReviewerSummary:
Walker et al. investigated the function of TMEM127 on RET regulation and function that could contribute to the development of pheochromocytoma (PCC). The authors showed that deletion of TMEM127 causes RET protein accumulation on the cell surface and, thereby, increased its constitutive ligand-independent activity and downstream signaling. They also unveiled the mechanism of how TMEM127 regulates cell membrane dynamics, particularly focusing on clathrin distribution and its effects on cargo internalization.
Strengths:
They showed that the deletion of TMEM127 affected multiple classes of transmembrane proteins, including RTKs (RET, EGFR), cell adhesion molecules (N-Cadherin, Integrin Beta-3), and carrier proteins (Transferrin Receptor-1), suggesting a global effect on cell surface proteins. This, at least in part, may explain how TMEM127 mutations act as drivers in PCC as well as in other cancers, such as renal cell carcinoma, where RET is not highly expressed. Overall, these findings provide new insights into the understanding of pheochromocytoma pathogenesis and potentially other cancers.
Weaknesses:
The major weakness of this study is the lack of human PCC cell lines for evaluating the function of TMEM127. Currently, the cell line models for pheochromocytoma are unavailable, and manipulation of patient-derived organoids is challenging. To complement this weakness, they provided immunohistochemical data showing that RET protein is highly expressed in TMEM127-mutant PCC.
Furthermore, some of the authors in this manuscript recently published a paper titled 'TMEM127 suppresses tumor development by promoting RET ubiquitination, positioning, and degradation' (Guo et al. Cell Reports 42, 113070, 2023, which is also cited in the current manuscript). In this manuscript, they showed that TMEM127 binds to RET and recruits the NEDD4 E3 ubiquitin ligase for RET ubiquitination and degradation via TMEM127. In general, the ubiquitination of proteins is highly specific to each molecule. In the current version of the manuscript, there is no description of the relevance between these two potentially different mechanisms (clathrin-mediated or ubiquitin-mediated) of accumulating RET and/or other proteins mentioned in two separate papers. I believe the authors should at least discuss this.
10.7554/eLife.89100.3.sa2Reviewer #5 (Public review):
ReviewerSummary:
The manuscript by Walker et al., nicely demonstrated a role of TMEM127 in regulating membrane dynamics of RET, a receptor tyrosine kinase and oncogene for multiple cancers, particularly in pheochromocytoma (PCC). They provided compelling cellular and biochemical evidence on how TMEM127 deficiency reduces RET internalization and degradation in specific cancer cell lines, thus stabilizing cell surface RET and promoting its signaling related to cell proliferation. Moreover, TMEM127 may have a broad function beyond RET, and may affect other surface protein activity such as EGFR etc. These findings provided novel mechanisms and key insights to the field of cancer biology.
Strengths:
Very interesting findings that nicely explained the mechanistic link between TMEM127 and tumorigenesis by RET regulation...the biochemical analysis was quite thorough and impressive.... the general messages delivered by this study are considered as important to the field of TMEM127 biology and tumorigenesis.
Weaknesses:
As acknowledged by the authors, the role of TMEM127 can be conditional and beyond RET modulation, the authors may need to include more discussion that why the loss of TMEM127 is more linked to the development of PCC compared to other cancer types, and why TMEM127 can have such a broad effects in those membrane molecules...in addition, TMEM127 deficiency has been recently linked to enhanced MHC-I-mediated tumor immunity and tumor eradication, in some cancer types...it is then worthwhile to discuss the dual effects of TMEM127 in tumor control in the context of immunity...
Moreover, the authors may need to tune down their "ligand independent" claim on the loss of TMEM127 in driving RET signaling, which should be more related to the level of RET expression/strength of clustering...
10.7554/eLife.89100.3.sa3Author response
WalkerTimothy JosephAuthor
Ryerson University
Toronto
Canada
Reyes-AlvarezEduardoAuthor
Ryerson University
Toronto
Canada
HyndmanBrandy DAuthor
Ryerson University
Toronto
Canada
SugiyamaMichael GAuthorOliveiraLarissa CBAuthor
Ryerson University
Toronto
Canada
RekabAisha NAuthor
Ryerson University
Toronto
Canada
CrupiMathieu JFAuthor
Ryerson University
Toronto
Canada
Cabral-DiasRebeccaAuthor
https://ror.org/02y72wh86Queen's University
Kingston
Canada
GuoQianjinAuthor
University of Texas HSC San Antonio
San Antonio
United States
DahiaPatricia LAuthorRichardsonDouglas SAuthor
Harvard University
Cambridge
United States
AntonescuCostin NAuthor
https://ror.org/02y72wh86Queen's University
Kingston
Canada
MulliganLois MAuthor
Ryerson University
Toronto
Canada
The following is the authors’ response to the original reviews.
This study highlights new insights into the mechanism of pheochromocytoma pathogenesis that remains poorly understood. In the context of hereditary syndromes, such as multiple endocrine neoplasia 2 (MEN-2), where RET mutation is the major driver of thyroid, parathyroid, and adrenal pathologies, including pheochromocytoma, this mechanistic dissection of RET and TMEM127 is fundamentally sound. While the significance was deemed important, the strength of the evidence was found to be solid,
Recognizing the limitations of models available for study of neuroendocrine cancers, and specifically for pheochromocytomas, we have revised and clarified the text of the current manuscript version and provide specific responses to the additional comments provided below, highlighting changes and new data.

Reviewer #1 (Recommendations For The Authors):

A current lack of pheochromocytoma cell lines and the use of generated cell lines for mechanistic studies presents a significant challenge that may undermine the inferred value of these findings in mock in vitro systems and question reproducibility in pheochromocytoma. Consideration for 3-dimensional patient-derived pheochromocytoma organoid in vitro and patient-derived organoid xenograft in vivo models will enable confirmation or refute novel findings described by the authors.
We agree completely with Reviewer 1 that ideally, we should replicate these findings with PCC-derived cells in vitro and in organoids. Despite many attempts, PCC cell lines have proved a major challenge for the field of neuroendocrine cancers. Cell line models are not available and PDOs have proven poorly growing and resistant to manipulations, such as CRISPR KOs or siRNA KD. In studies completed since the submission and review of the present manuscript, and subsequently published elsewhere, we have shown that RET protein is highly expressed in TMEM127-mutant PCC by immunohistochemistry. We also showed that the TMEM127-KO SH-SY5Y cell model does grow more robustly than Mock-KO cells in nude mice and that RET inhibition (Selpercatinib) does lead to tumor regression (Guo et al., 2023), suggesting that our findings may be reproducible in vivo. These findings, and potential caveats of the cell models used have been further discussed in the text.

Reviewer #2 (Recommendations For The Authors):

Most notably, all experiments are conducted in an isogenic single-cell line. This exposes the whole story to be potentially confounded by unknown variables.
In addition, studies would benefit from the adding back of TMEM127, or other methods to modulate endosome and plasma membrane dynamics to mechanistically secure the cause of the findings.
As suggested by Reviewer 2, we have generated a TMEM127 KO in HEK293, an unrelated cell line which expressed low levels of TMEM127 but does not express RET. Consistent with our findings in SH-SY5Y, we saw increased membrane accumulation of endogenous membrane proteins N-cadherin and transferrin receptor-1 in these cells in the absence of TMEM127. Additionally, re-expression of a wildtype TMEM127 (FLAG-TMEM127) in these cells led to dramatic decreases in membrane localization of these proteins (Supplemental Figure 1D). These data suggest that membrane accumulation is indeed TMEM127 dependent, and that these processes are not directly dependent on RET expression.
References
Guo, Q., Z.M. Cheng, H. Gonzalez-Cantu, M. Rotondi, G. Huelgas-Morales, P. Ethiraj, Z. Qiu, J. Lefkowitz, W. Song, B.N. Landry, H. Lopez, C.M. Estrada-Zuniga, S. Goyal, M.A. Khan, T.J. Walker, E. Wang, F. Li, Y. Ding, L.M. Mulligan, R.C.T. Aguiar, and P.L.M. Dahia. 2023. TMEM127 suppresses tumor development by promoting RET ubiquitination, positioning, and degradation. Cell Rep. 42:113070.