3199moloncolMolecular OncologyMol OncolWileyPMC1306064413060644130606444119458710.1002/1878-0261.70155Dual targeting of RET and SRC synergizes in 
RET
 fusion‐positive cancer cells
SonJuhyeon Remsing RixLily L FangBin WelshEric A BremerNicole V FoglizzoValentina RoaPaola Sigcha‐CoelloNickole LiaoYi HauraEric B DrilonAlexander KoomenJohn M CoccoEmiliano RixUwe 
1
Department of Drug Discovery, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute, Tampa, FL, USA
2
Cancer Biology PhD Program, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, USA
3
Proteomics and Metabolomics Core, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute, Tampa, FL, USA
4
Biostatistics and Bioinformatics Shared Resource, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute, Tampa, FL, USA
5
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, FL, USA
6
Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center (SCCC), Miami, FL, USA
7
Department of Thoracic Oncology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute, Tampa, FL, USA
8
Thoracic Oncology Service, Division of Solid Tumor Oncology, Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY, USA
9
Department of Molecular Oncology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute, Tampa, FL, USA
10
Department of Oncologic Sciences, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, USA*

Correspondence
, 
E. Cocco, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Miami, Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA, 
E‐mail: exc2752@miami.edu
, 
and, 
U. Rix, Department of Drug Discovery, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute, Tampa, Florida 33612, USA, 
E‐mail: uwe.rix@moffitt.org

✉Corresponding author.
511202520410411041–1060942026© 2025 The Author(s). Molecular Oncology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Federation of European Biochemical Societies.This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

## Abstract
Rearranged during transfection (RET) fusions drive subsets of non‐small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC). Despite new selective RET tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), resistance usually occurs and is often driven by RET‐independent bypass mechanisms. Previous studies have implied crosstalk between RET and proto‐oncogene tyrosine‐protein kinase SRC, but the anticancer effects of targeting SRC combined with selective RET TKIs, and the underlying molecular mechanisms involved, are not fully understood. Our results show that the multitargeted SRC TKI dasatinib significantly enhanced the efficacy of RET TKIs in RET fusion‐positive (RET
+) NSCLC and PTC cells. Genetic rescue experiments validated that the combination effects between RET TKIs and dasatinib were indeed SRC‐dependent. Phosphoproteomics analysis and validation using selective inhibitors and small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) determined that synergy was primarily mediated by suppression of downstream serine/threonine‐protein kinase PAK signaling, with contributions from AKT and ribosomal protein S6. Importantly, synergy was also observed with eCF506 (NXP900), a next‐generation clinical SRC inhibitor. Finally, both SRC TKIs restored sensitivity in selpercatinib‐resistant RET
+ PTC cells. These results elucidate RET and SRC signaling crosstalk in RET
+ NSCLC and PTC, suggesting that co‐inhibiting SRC has clinical potential in TKI‐naïve and ‐resistant RET
+ cancers.
Keywords: lung cancer, phosphoproteomics, RET, signaling crosstalk, SRC, thyroid cancer

Despite the strong activity of selective RET tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), resistance of RET fusion‐positive (RET
+) lung cancer and thyroid cancer frequently occurs and is mainly driven by RET‐independent bypass mechanisms. Son et al. show that SRC TKIs significantly inhibit PAK and AKT survival signaling and enhance the efficacy of RET TKIs in naïve and resistant RET
+ cancer cells.
 
statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoRevised 2025 Sep 24; Received 2025 May 15; Accepted 2025 Oct 22; Collection date 2026 Apr.

## Abbreviations
GDNFglial cell line‐derived neurotrophic factor
MAPKmitogen‐activated protein kinase
mTORC1mTOR complex 1
NSCLCnon‐small cell lung cancer
PTCpapillary thyroid carcinoma
RETrearranged during transfection

RET
+

RET fusion‐positive
RTKreceptor tyrosine kinase
siRNAsmall interfering RNA
TKItyrosine kinase inhibitor
1.

## Introduction
Rearranged during transfection (RET) is a receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK), which is important for the development of normal enteric nervous systems and embryonic kidney, as well as spermatogenesis [ ]. RET is vulnerable to gene rearrangements driven by inversions of chromosome 10 or translocations with other chromosomes, and those events result in the fusion of the RET gene with partner genes, for example, KIF5B, CCDC6, and NCOA4 [ ]. In contrast to wild‐type RET, which is strictly regulated by extracellular ligands such as glial cell line‐derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF), RET fusions lose regulatory and transmembrane domains and are constitutively activated to promote downstream signaling pathways including mitogen‐activated protein kinase (MAPK), PI3K/AKT/mTOR, and JAK2/STAT3 pathways, which are involved in cellular growth, survival, and proliferation [ , ]. RET fusions affect 1–2% of non‐small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and 5–10% of papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) patients [ , , ]. Since RET fusion‐positive (RET
+) cancers are not very responsive to chemotherapy and immunotherapy, the first‐line treatment option for patients is targeted therapy using the RET‐selective tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) pralsetinib (BLU‐667) or selpercatinib (LOXO‐292) [ , , ]. Despite the improvement in clinical outcomes by targeted therapy, there are still reports of resistance including acquired RET mutations (e.g., V804M gatekeeper and G810R solvent front mutations) and adaptive signals (e.g., via MET or KRAS amplification) [ , , ]. Recently, the next‐generation RET TKI vepafestinib (TAS0953/HM06), which has antitumor activity against RET solvent front mutations both in vitro and in vivo, has entered a phase 1/2 clinical trial (NCT04683250) [ ]. However, concerns remain that many drug resistance mechanisms are RET‐independent [ ]. Thus, discovery and targeting of relevant proteins and mechanisms responsible for resistance are crucial to further improving the clinical benefits of RET TKIs by exerting combination effects.
SRC is a nonreceptor tyrosine kinase and has been studied for decades as a major target to treat cancer [ ]. SRC is involved in essential biological processes such as early embryonic development and immune cell signaling, and its activity in normal cells is tightly regulated by several mechanisms including phosphorylation of inhibitory Y530 by CSK and dephosphorylation of activating Y419 by, for example, phosphatase PTEN [ , , ]. Although the SRC gene is rarely amplified or mutated in cancers, SRC is frequently overexpressed in tumors and has been reported to contribute to the activation of multiple signaling and scaffold proteins such as RTKs (e.g., EGFR, FGFR, VEGFR, PDGFR, and IGF1R) and downstream effectors including MAPKs, FAK, paxillin, p130Cas, and RAC1 [ , ]. Molecular signals driven by SRC result in cell survival, proliferation, migration, stemness, and angiogenesis [ ]. Due to its involvement in several cellular functions and its ability to contribute to the activation of driver oncogenes, SRC has been proposed to facilitate tumor adaptation to therapeutic stress by promoting the activation of compensatory pathways.
Consistently, previous studies showed that inhibition of SRC can strengthen the efficacy of targeted therapies to treat NSCLCs harboring driver oncogenes such as mutant EGFR, ALK fusions, and ROS1 fusions [ , , , ]. This preclinical evidence is further supported by clinical studies using the EGFR inhibitor erlotinib and the SRC inhibitor dasatinib to treat patients with advanced NSCLC [ , ]. More specific to RET
+ cancer, a previous study found that CCDC6‐RET‐driven LC‐2/Ad NSCLC cells with acquired resistance to the unselective FGFR, VEGFR, and PDGFR inhibitor, dovitinib, which also has noncanonical activity against RET, were sensitive to SRC inhibition [ ]. In addition, various thyroid cancer cell lines including CCDC6‐RET‐driven TPC‐1 PTC cells were sensitive to single‐agent dasatinib resulting in their growth suppression [ ]. Other investigations reported that KIF5B‐RET fusions interact with SRC to induce invadopodia‐like processes including cell migration and invasion in Drosophila cells [ ]. Taken together, it is implied that SRC is a potential candidate accountable for the bypass mechanisms in RET
+ cancers. However, it is still not clearly understood whether targeting SRC sensitizes the RET
+ cancer cells to the selective RET TKIs selpercatinib and pralsetinib, which are current first‐line therapies. Furthermore, mechanistic studies are necessary to identify and validate the downstream signaling proteins and pathways targeted by cotreatment with RET and SRC inhibitors in RET
+ cancers. Thus, we investigated the drug combination effects of cotargeting RET and SRC to enhance drug response in RET
+ cancer cells and the related molecular mechanisms by conducting phosphoproteomics and functional validation assays.

2.

## Materials and methods
2.1.

## Cell lines and reagents
CUTO32 (RRID: CVCL_C5VS) and LC‐2/Ad (RRID: CVCL_1373) cell lines were obtained from Dr. Robert Doebele at the University of Colorado as described in a previous report [ ], while the TPC‐1 cell line (RRID: CVCL_6298) was obtained by Dr. Fagin at the Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center [ ]. Cell lines tested negative for mycoplasma and were authenticated with short tandem repeat (STR) analysis in the past 3 years. No STR reference profile was available for CUTO32 cells. All experiments were conducted with mycoplasma‐free cells. Cells were cultured in RPMI1640 (MT10040CV; Corning, NY, USA) media containing 10% fetal bovine serum (F2442; Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) and a humidified atmosphere with 5% CO2. Pralsetinib, selpercatinib, PF‐3758309, and eCF506 were obtained from MedChemExpress. GSK690693 was purchased from Selleckchem. Dasatinib was obtained from ChemieTek and rapamycin from LC Laboratories. All compounds were diluted with dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO, Acros Organics) to a final concentration of 10 mm and stored at −20 °C. For drug treatment experiments, DMSO was used as a vehicle control.

2.2.

## Cell viability
Cells were plated in 384‐well black plates with clear bottoms with a density of 1000 cells per well or in 96‐well plates. After 24 h, drugs diluted in media at the indicated concentrations were added to each well. After 3 days of drug treatment, CellTiter‐Glo (Promega) reagent was added according to the manufacturer's instructions. For the 3D viability assay, 2000 cells were plated in 384‐well ultra‐low attachment plates (Sigma) to form spheroids for 72 h (CUTO32) or 24 h (LC‐2/Ad). Cells were treated with drugs for an additional 96 h (CUTO32) or 24 h (LC‐2/Ad) and CellTiter‐Glo 3D (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) reagent was added as per the manufacturer's protocols. Luminescence that indicates cell viability was measured by Spectramax M5 plate reader (Molecular Devices, San Jose, CA, USA) connected with SoftMax Pro 7.1 at 500‐ms integration time. The synergistic effect was evaluated using the Bliss independence model. ΔBliss score greater than 0.05 was considered synergistic, less than −0.05 as antagonistic, and between −0.05 and 0.05 as indicative of an additive effect.

2.3.

## Clonogenicity
CUTO32 cells were plated at a density of 1 × 105 cells in six‐well plates or 4 × 104 cells in 12‐well plates. LC‐2/Ad cells were plated at a density of 2 × 104 cells in six‐well plates or 1 × 104 cells in 12‐well plates. TPC‐1 was seeded at a density of 4 × 103 cells in a 24‐well plate. Cells were treated with drugs at the indicated concentrations for 5–7 days, replacing with fresh media every 3–4 days. At the end point of treatment, cells were washed with phosphate‐buffered saline (PBS, D8537; Sigma) once, fixed for 30 min on ice with methanol, and stained with crystal violet solution (HT90132; Sigma) for 30 min at room temperature (RT). Crystal violet was extracted using 2 mL of methanol and transferred to a 96‐well plate with a clear bottom. Absorbance of extracted crystal violet was measured by Spectramax M5 plate reader at a 540‐nm wavelength. The synergistic effect was evaluated using the Bliss independence model.

2.4.

## Western blotting
Cells were harvested with ice‐cold PBS containing sodium vanadate, and lysed with a lysis buffer (100 mm NaCl, 1.5 mm MgCl2, 5% glycerol, 0.2% NP‐40, 50 mm Tris, pH7.5) mixed with phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 2 (P5726; Sigma), and cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail (11873580001; Roche, Indianapolis, IN, USA). Extracted proteins were separated by SDS/PAGE and transferred to PVDF membranes using the Trans‐Blot Turbo Transfer System (1704150EDU; BioRad, Hercules, CA, USA). Membranes were blocked with aqueous 5% nonfat dry milk in TBS‐T buffer and incubated with primary antibodies overnight at 4 °C. The next day, membranes were incubated with horseradish peroxidase (HRP)‐conjugated secondary antibodies for 1 h at room temperature. Clarity Western ECL Substrate (1705061; BioRad) or Clarity Max Western ECL Substrate (1705062; BioRad) was added to the membranes and images were visualized and quantified by the Odyssey Fc LI‐COR Dual‐Mode Imaging System and LI‐COR's Image Studio Lite (version 5.2) software. Primary antibodies against PARP1 (9542), cleaved Caspase‐3 (9661), p27 (2552), p21 (2947), p‐RET (Y905, 3221), RET (3223) p‐SRC (Y419, 2101), SRC (2108), p‐PAK1/2 (S144/S141, 2606), PAK1/2/3 (2604), p‐ERK1/2 (Y204/Y187, 4370), p‐AKT (S473, 9271), AKT (9272), p‐S6 (S235/S236, 4858), S6 (2217), and Vinculin (13901) were acquired from Cell Signaling Technology. Primary antibodies against ERK1/2 (M5670) and β‐actin (A5441) were obtained from Sigma. Anti‐rabbit (45000682) and anti‐mouse (45000679) secondary antibodies were purchased from Fisher Scientific.

2.5.

## Phospho‐ and expression proteomics
CUTO32 cells (1.8 × 106 cells per 100‐mm culture dish, 3 biological replicates) were treated with DMSO or drugs at indicated concentrations for 3 h. Drug‐treated cells were harvested with ice‐cold PBS and shock frozen with LN2. Cell lysis, peptide purification, and mass spectrometry analysis methods were performed as described earlier [ ]. Briefly, cells were lysed in denaturing lysis buffer containing aqueous 8 m urea, 20 mm HEPES (pH 8), 1 mm sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mm sodium pyrophosphate, and 1 mm β‐glycerophosphate. Bradford assays were carried out to determine the protein concentration in each sample. The disulfide bonds were reduced with 4.5 mm dithiothreitol (DTT), and the resulting cysteines were alkylated with 10 mm iodoacetamide. Trypsin digestion was carried out at room temperature overnight, and tryptic peptides were then acidified with aqueous 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and desalted with C18 Sep‐Pak cartridges according to the manufacturer's procedure. Peptides from each sample were labeled with TMTPro 18plex reagent to barcode them to sample of origin. Label incorporation was checked by LC–MS/MS and spectral counting for TMT‐labeled peptides; quality control passed when 95% or greater label incorporation was achieved for each channel. The 18 samples were then pooled using equal amounts of total protein digest and lyophilized. After lyophilization, the peptides were redissolved in 400 μL of aqueous 20 mm ammonium formate, (pH 10.0), basic pH reversed‐phase liquid chromatography (bRPLC) solvent A. The bRPLC separation was performed on an XBridge 4.6 mm ID × 100 mm length column packed with BEH C18 resin, 3.5 μm particle size, 130 Å pore size. (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) The peptides were eluted as follows: 5% bRPLC solvent B (aqueous 5 mm ammonium formate, 90% acetonitrile, pH 10.0) for 10 min, 5–15% B in 5 min, 15–40% B in 47 min, 40–100% B in 5 min, and 100% B held for 10 min, followed by re‐equilibration at 1% B. The flow rate was 0.6 mL·min−1, and 12 concatenated fractions were collected for phosphopeptide enrichment; 24 concatenated fractions were collected for protein expression. Vacuum centrifugation (Speedvac, Thermo, San Jose, CA, USA) was used to dry the peptide fractions. Peptides were redissolved in aqueous IMAC loading buffer containing 0.1% TFA and 85% acetonitrile (ACN). The phosphopeptides in each fraction were enriched using IMAC resin (#20432; Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA) using a KingFisher 96 (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA, USA). Briefly, the IMAC resin was washed once with loading buffer. The peptides were incubated with the IMAC resin for 30 min at room temperature with gentle agitation. Ten microliters magnetic bead IMAC resin was added per sample. After incubation, the IMAC resin was washed twice with loading buffer followed by one wash with wash buffer (aqueous 80% ACN containing 0.1% TFA). The phosphopeptides were eluted with elution buffer (aqueous 50% ACN containing 2.5% ammonia). The volume was reduced to 20 μL via vacuum centrifugation. A nanoflow ultra‐high‐performance liquid chromatograph (RSLCnano; Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) interfaced with an electrospray orbitrap mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Exploris 480; Thermo) was used for tandem mass spectrometry peptide sequencing experiments. The sample was first loaded onto a precolumn (C18 PepMap100, 100 μm ID × 2 cm length packed with C18 reversed‐phase resin, 5 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size) and washed for 8 min with aqueous 2% ACN and 0.04% TFA. The trapped peptides were eluted onto the analytical column, (C18 PepMap100, 75 μm ID x 25 cm length, 2 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, Thermo). The 120‐min gradient was programmed as follows: 95% solvent A (aqueous 2% ACN + 0.1% formic acid) for 8 min, solvent B (aqueous 90% ACN + 0.1% formic acid) from 5% to 38.5% in 90 min, then solvent B from 50% to 90% B in 7 min and held at 90% for 5 min, followed by solvent B from 90% to 5% in 1 min and re‐equilibration for 10 min. The flow rate on the analytical column was 300 nL·min−1. Cycle time was set at 3 s for data‐dependent acquisition. Spray voltage was 2100 V, and capillary temperature was 300 °C. The resolution for MS and MS/MS scans were set at 120 000 and 45 000, respectively. Dynamic exclusion was 15 s to prevent additional sequencing of previously sampled peptide peaks. MaxQuant (version 1.6.14.0) was used to identify peptides and quantify the TMT reporter ion intensities [ ]. The UniProt database was downloaded March 2023. Up to two missed trypsin cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as fixed modification. Phosphorylation on Serine/Threonine/Tyrosine and oxidation of Methionine were set as variable modifications. Both peptide spectral matching (PSM) and protein false discovery rate (FDR) were set at 0.05. The match between runs feature was activated to enable quantification across samples without requiring MS/MS identification in every analysis.

2.6.

## Processing and analysis of proteomic data
Samples within each multiplex were normalized with IRON (iron_generic ‐‐proteomics) against their respective median sample channels (total protein: 130C, pSTY run1: 130C, pSTY run2: 131C), selected as the channel least different from other channels (findmedian ‐‐spreadsheet ‐‐pearson) [ ]. In order to remove systematic differences in signal between pSTY multiplex replicates, normalized abundances within each pSTY multiplex were converted to ratios against their respective all‐channel computational pools (geometric mean abundance, per row, across all channels). The computational pools were normalized together using IRON against their median sample. For each row of data, the geometric mean of the normalized computational pool abundances was calculated and stored. Sample vs. computational pool ratios were then scaled back into abundance values using the stored pool row means. All abundances were then log2‐transformed prior to additional analyses. Injection replicates (pSTY: n = 2, total protein: n = 1) for each sample were averaged together, then average log2 abundances calculated from the biological replicates within each condition. Log2 ratios between conditions were calculated by subtracting average log2 abundances. Two‐group P‐values were calculated using two‐sided, unequal‐variance Welch's t‐tests from the individual averaged injection replicates within each condition. Scores were calculated as the geometric mean of the |log2 ratio| and −log10(P‐value), multiplied by the sign of the log2 ratio. Rows were sorted on the number of differentially expressed conditions, |Score|, and direction of change to bring the rows with the strongest potential biological signal to the top of the analysis spreadsheet. For the pSTY dataset, phosphosites were filtered by cutoffs with |log2 ratio| > 1 [log2(2‐fold)] and P‐value < 0.05 to identify differentially regulated phosphosites. For the expression dataset, proteins were filtered by cutoffs with |log2 ratio| > 0.585 [log2(1.5‐fold)] and P‐value < 0.05 to find out proteins of which expression levels were significantly affected. All proteins that passed cutoffs were selected, and pathway enrichment analysis was conducted by Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database [ , ]. Enriched pathways which had Benjamini‐adjusted P‐values less than 0.05 were selected for further analysis. Pathway map was created with Biorender.com based on the relevant KEGG pathway maps (hsa04810 and hsa04150). For the network analysis, STRING (version 12.0) was used to analyze protein–protein interactions, and minimum required interaction score was set as low confidence (0.15) [ ]. Protein networks were imported to and visualized by Cytoscape (version 3.10.2) and GLay was used for generating network clusters [ , ]. To identify targets with high priority, betweenness centrality and fold change of protein phosphorylation or expression was plotted using Excel and GraphPad Prism 10.

2.7.

## 
RNA interference
ON‐TARGETplus Human PAK1 siRNA (L‐003521‐00‐0005) and ON‐TARGETplus nontargeting (D‐001810‐10‐20) were obtained from Dharmacon. Reverse transfection was conducted according to the manufacturer's protocol. Briefly, each siRNA (20 nm as a final concentration) was mixed with Lipofectamine™ RNAiMAX Transfection Reagent (ThermoFisher) in Opti‐MEM (ThermoFisher). siRNA‐Lipofectamine complexes were added to each well of a six‐well plate, followed by the addition of 1 × 105 cells in resuspension. After 24 h, cells were treated with DMSO or pralsetinib at the indicated concentrations for an additional 3 days. Treated cells were harvested and 10% of the cell resuspension was used for the CellTiter‐Glo assay. The rest of the cell resuspension was used for western blot to validate knockdown.

2.8.

## Viral transductions
pLenti6/UbC/V5‐DEST Gateway Vector plasmids (V49910; Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) constructed with open reading frames of wild‐type and gatekeeper mutant SRC were kindly gifted by Drs. Jinyan Du and Todd R. Golub [ ]. Lentiviruses were generated by transfecting HEK293T cells with a 3rd Generation Packaging System Mix (LV053; Applied Biological Materials, Richmond, BC, Canada), construct plasmids and jetPRIME (89129‐922; VWR, Radnor, PA, USA) transfection reagent. Media containing viruses were collected and filtered with a Millex‐HV Filter Unit (SLHV033RS; Millipore, Burlington, MA, USA). CUTO32 and LC‐2/Ad cells were plated in six‐well plates (1.5 × 105 cells per well) and transduced with collected viruses and 8 μg·mL−1 of polybrene (TR‐1003‐G; Millipore). After 48 h, transduced cells were selected by adding 10 μg·mL−1 of blasticidin (J67216.XF; ThermoFisher) for 7 days.

2.9.

## Quantification and statistical analysis
Raw data were processed and analyzed by Excel and GraphPad Prism 10. Data presented in graphs are mean ± standard deviation, defining the values of DMSO‐treated cells as 100% or 1‐fold change. Statistical significance was determined by Welch's t‐test or one‐way ANOVA with Tukey's multiple comparisons, using a P‐value less than 0.05 to determine statistical significance.

3.

## Results
3.1.

## Dasatinib synergizes with RET TKIs in 
RET
 fusion‐positive cancer cells
To determine whether the dual targeting of RET and SRC exerts synergy to treat RET
+ cancer, we treated CUTO32 (KIF5B‐RET), LC‐2/Ad (CCDC6‐RET) NSCLC, and TPC‐1 PTC cell lines with a combination of RET TKIs (pralsetinib or selpercatinib) and dasatinib. In all three cell lines, combination with RET TKIs and dasatinib exerted synergistic effects compared to single drug treatment both in 2D and 3D culture conditions, the latter of which also showed stronger single agent RET TKI sensitivity (Fig.  and Fig.  ) [ ]. These results were also consistent with observations from long term clonogenicity assays (Fig.  and Fig.  ). To determine the role of cell cycle arrest in those anticancer effects, we performed western blotting for p27 and p21, widely used markers of G1/S and G2/M arrest. Although single agent dasatinib and pralsetinib both showed a similar trend, only combination treatment strongly increased p27 expression. In contrast, only single agent dasatinib significantly increased p21 expression (Fig.  ). To analyze whether apoptosis was also induced by drug combinations, we performed western blotting for cleaved PARP1 and cleaved caspase‐3, which are major apoptosis markers. While single agent dasatinib did not cause cell death compared to negative control in CUTO32 cells, it further promoted apoptosis induction when combined with pralsetinib compared to pralsetinib alone (Fig.  ). In summary, our results suggest that SRC inhibition may improve the sensitivity of naïve RET
+ cancer cells to RET‐targeted therapy.
 
3.2.

## Synergistic effects of dasatinib with RET TKIs are SRC‐dependent
Although dasatinib is a well‐known compound to strongly inhibit SRC, this drug is reported to have a broad range of off‐targets including other SRC family kinases (e.g., LYN, YES, and LCK), ABL, TEC, GAK, and p38α [ ]. Since the drug profile of dasatinib entails the possibility of polypharmacology in terms of treating RET
+ cancer cells, it is challenging to conclude that the synergy between RET TKIs and dasatinib is SRC‐dependent. As gene depletion methods, such as siRNA‐induced gene knockdown, have limited potential in the context of SRC biology due to the well‐established ability of other SRC family kinases to compensate for the single loss of SRC, genetic rescue experiments were performed instead [ , , , ]. To validate whether the effects of dasatinib in RET
+ NSCLC cells were driven indeed by SRC inhibition, the cells were therefore infected with lentivirus carrying wild‐type SRC or the constitutively active gatekeeper‐mutant SRC (T341I), which prevents dasatinib binding (Fig.  ) [ , ]. As expected, immunoblotting for SRC autophosphorylation indicated that the activity of gatekeeper SRC in both CUTO32 and LC‐2/Ad cells was not suppressed by dasatinib treatment compared to wild‐type SRC, while consistent with previous reports, protein turnover was increased (Fig.  and Fig.  ) [ , ]. Importantly, this difference was also reflected by the results from viability and clonogenicity assays, which showed much weaker effects of the combination treatment with RET TKIs and dasatinib in both cell lines expressing the SRC gatekeeper mutant compared to the cells expressing wild‐type SRC (Fig.  and Fig.  ). These results indicate that the synergy of dasatinib with RET TKIs in RET
+ NSCLC cells is mediated by inhibition of its canonical target SRC with little to no contribution from dasatinib off‐targets.
 
3.3.

## Proteomic analysis of signaling changes in 
RET

+
NSCLC by combined treatment with pralsetinib and dasatinib
To elucidate how SRC inhibition cooperates with RET inhibitors to suppress RET
+ cancer cell survival, we aimed to identify proteins, that are downstream of SRC and responsible for adaptive signaling to RET inhibition. For this purpose, we conducted quantitative global (pSTY) phosphoproteomics and expression proteomics analyses after treating CUTO32 cells with pralsetinib, dasatinib, or a combination thereof for 3 h. We detected close to 20 000 phosphosites from global phosphoproteomics data and over 6000 proteins from the expression proteomics data (Tables  and ). Using all phosphopeptides or expressed proteins, that have passed cutoffs of |Fold Change| > 2 (pSTY) or |Fold Change| > 1.5 (expression) and P‐value less than 0.05 (from both proteomics datasets), combination treatment significantly modulated 254 phosphosites and 58 proteins while single‐agent pralsetinib significantly modulated 158 phosphosites and 12 proteins (Fig.  ). Using all proteins, that have passed the specified cutoffs, we generated a protein network to query and visualize functional protein–protein interactions using STRING (Fig.  ). After plotting those proteins based on the log2 ratio of change in phosphorylation or expression levels and their betweenness centrality within the network, we identified ERK2, PAK1/2, PRAS40, and ribosomal protein S6 as high‐priority targets (Fig.  ). Also, we conducted pathway enrichment analyses using the DAVID database [ ]. Compared to single pralsetinib treatment, which enriched only three pathways, particularly MAPK signaling, that collectively represented RTK signaling in NSCLC, combination treatment additionally enriched various other pathways (Fig.  ), most prominently, regulation of the actin cytoskeleton, ERBB, and mTOR signaling pathways. Since the combination treatment did not significantly affect the phosphorylation of any ERBB family receptors directly, we focused on the regulation of the actin cytoskeleton and mTOR signaling pathways as signals potentially responsible for eliciting synergy between pralsetinib and dasatinib. Aggregating the KEGG pathway maps into one, we identified ERK2, PAK1, PRAS40, and S6 as potentially relevant downstream targets, consistent with the protein network analysis (Fig.  ). In particular, the activating phosphorylations of PAK1 (S141) and S6 (S235/S236) were further decreased by combination treatment compared to single pralsetinib treatment. PAKs are nonreceptor serine/threonine kinases downstream of RAC1 with biological functions in proliferation, metastasis, angiogenesis, and drug resistance [ ]. Although PAKs do not directly interact with SRC, they can be indirectly affected as part of the SRC/VAV/RAC1/PAK signaling axis [ ]. It is also notable that the inhibitory site of PRAS40 (T246) was downregulated more strongly by the drug combination, although its fold change (Log2 ratio of −0.97) narrowly missed the cutoff. As this protein is directly inhibited by AKT and negatively regulates mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1) upstream of S6, these results imply that cotargeting RET and SRC further inhibits AKT resulting in stronger suppression of downstream mTORC1 and S6 signals, which are critical for processes including mRNA translation, cell survival, and proliferation [ ]. Taken together, integrated proteomics analysis suggested that while RET targeting predominantly strongly reduced MAPK signaling, SRC TKI combination markedly enhanced inhibition of PAK and AKT/mTOR signaling.
 
3.4.

## 
SRC targeting enhances inhibition of PAK and AKT signaling by pralsetinib
To validate the functional proteomics data, we analyzed whether the combination of pralsetinib and dasatinib affects PAK, AKT, and S6 phosphorylation also by immunoblot analysis. CUTO32 cells were treated with pralsetinib, dasatinib, and their combination for 3 h and western blotting was conducted for the phosphorylation of RET, SRC, PAK, ERK, AKT, and S6. As expected, pralsetinib abrogated RET autophosphorylation, which resulted in strong inhibition of pERK. Dasatinib potently inhibited SRC autophosphorylation, but as a single agent predominantly reduced activity‐associated phosphorylation of PAK, and to some extent S6 phosphorylation, without significantly suppressing ERK and AKT. It is possible that inhibitory effects against these proteins could be sufficiently compensated by RET. However, combination treatment more strongly suppressed the phosphorylation of PAK, AKT, and S6 compared to single agent pralsetinib (Fig.  ). To determine, if these combined signaling effects were attributable to on‐target SRC inhibition by dasatinib rather than an off‐target, we examined the effects of dasatinib and combination treatment on these signaling pathways in CUTO32 cells expressing either wild‐type SRC or the dasatinib‐resistant SRC gatekeeper mutant. As observed in parental CUTO32 cells, activating phosphorylation of PAK, AKT, and S6 was further reduced by combination treatment in CUTO32 cells expressing wild‐type SRC. In contrast, dasatinib‐induced inhibition of these signals was completely rescued in cells expressing gatekeeper SRC (Fig.  ). Overall, while pralsetinib alone predominantly inhibited pERK as the most prominent RET downstream signal, additional targeting of SRC markedly improved the blockade of PAK and AKT, leading also to further attenuated activity of downstream S6.
 
3.5.

## Synergy is mediated by cooperative inhibition of PAK and AKT/mTOR signaling
To determine whether inhibition of PAK, AKT and S6 phosphorylation impacts the viability of RET
+ NSCLC cells, we treated CUTO32 and LC‐2/Ad cells with pralsetinib in combination with the selective AKT inhibitor GSK690693, mTORC1 inhibitor rapamycin or PAK inhibitor PF‐3758309. In CUTO32 cells, all three inhibitors enhanced the cellular activity of pralsetinib with the effect of PF‐3758309 being the strongest (Fig.  and Fig.  ). In LC‐2/Ad cells, only PF‐3758309 could significantly reduce cell viability compared to single pralsetinib treatment (Fig.  and Fig.  ). A previous study suggested that PAK1 activates AKT1 via its noncatalytic scaffold function in fibroblasts [ ]. To check whether pharmacological PAK inhibition affects AKT signaling in RET
+ NSCLC cells, we treated CUTO32 cells with up to 5 μm PF‐3758309 for 3 h. However, PAK inhibition did not decrease p‐AKT and p‐S6 in these cells, indicating that the observed dasatinib effects on AKT downstream of SRC are independent of PAK inhibition in these cells (Fig.  ). Since PAK inhibition showed the strongest and most consistent effects among the three inhibitors across both cell lines, we next asked whether genetic targeting of PAK1 also cooperates with RET TKI. CUTO32 and LC‐2/Ad cells were treated with siRNA pools targeting PAK1 and with pralsetinib. In CUTO32, the number of viable cells was not affected by PAK1 knockdown alone, but PAK1 silencing strongly synergized with pralsetinib treatment (Fig.  ). A similar trend was observed in LC‐2/Ad cells although it did not reach statistical significance (Fig.  ). It is possible that these cells may additionally depend on other PAK family kinases like PAK2 or PAK4, which are also targets of PF‐3758309 used in Fig.  . Furthermore, this could also be the result of weaker knockdown efficiency compared to CUTO32 cells (Fig.  and Fig.  ). In summary, while AKT and mTORC1 inhibition may moderately contribute to the observed overall cellular synergy between RET TKIs and dasatinib, the major contribution was made by inhibition of PAK.
 
3.6.

## The next‐generation selective SRC inhibitor eCF506 synergizes with RET TKIs in 
RET
 fusion‐positive cancer cells
Although dasatinib is an FDA‐approved SRC TKI, its extensive off‐target profile could cause unexpected adverse effects in clinical studies. In this regard, more selective SRC inhibitors may be more clinically beneficial options to combine with RET TKIs by minimizing off‐target effects and associated toxicities. eCF506 (NXP900) is a recently developed SRC TKI, which inhibits both kinase activity and scaffolding functions of SRC by locking it in its inactive conformation [ ]. This compound has high potency (IC50 less than 0.5 nm) comparable to dasatinib while displaying higher selectivity, and it is currently in early clinical trials for advanced cancers [ ]. Thus, we determined whether eCF506 also exhibits synergy with RET TKIs in RET
+ cancer cells. First, we analyzed signaling proteins, which we had observed to be downregulated by the combination of pralsetinib and dasatinib. This analysis showed that eCF506 also cooperated with pralsetinib to further inhibit the activity of PAK, AKT, and S6 in CUTO32 cells, similar to dasatinib (Fig.  ). Next, we explored cell viability, clonogenicity and induction of apoptosis upon cotreatment with RET TKIs and eCF506 in RET
+ NSCLC and PTC cell lines. In line with the observed signaling effects, eCF506 strongly synergized with RET TKIs to suppress the viability and clonogenicity of RET
+ cancer cells in an SRC‐dependent manner, as indicated by SRC gatekeeper rescue experiments (Fig.  and Fig.  ). Finally, similar to dasatinib, the addition of eCF506 strongly enhanced pralsetinib‐induced apoptosis as indicated by increased PARP1 and caspase‐3 cleavage (Fig.  ). In summary, the selective next‐generation clinical SRC TKI eCF506 strongly enhanced the activity of RET TKIs in RET
+ NSCLC.
 
3.7.

## 
SRC inhibitors re‐sensitize selpercatinib‐resistant cells to RET inhibition
To determine whether combination strategies with dual inhibition of RET and SRC also have effects in RET
+ cells harboring acquired drug resistance, we generated a selpercatinib‐resistant cell line following chronic exposure of RET
+ TPC‐1 cells to selpercatinib (2 μm) for 3 months. We then tested whether SRC inhibition was able to resensitize cells to selpercatinib. Viability and clonogenic assays showed that selpercatinib‐resistant TPC‐1 cells were much more resistant to single selpercatinib treatment compared to the parental cells although no point mutation or amplification of the RET gene was observed (unpublished data). Importantly, the combination of selpercatinib and the SRC TKIs dasatinib or eCF506 was significantly more effective than the single agents in inhibiting cell growth. (Fig.  ). Taken together, these results suggest that SRC inhibition can re‐sensitize TKI‐resistant RET
+ cells to selpercatinib.
 

4.

## Discussion
In this study, we found that SRC inhibitors sensitized RET
+ NSCLC and PTC cells to current first‐line selective RET TKIs (Fig.  ). Rescue experiments with the drug‐resistant SRC gatekeeper mutant furthermore validated that the drug combination effects were SRC‐dependent as compared to through dasatinib off‐targets. Phosphoproteomics analysis and subsequent functional validation identified that these synergistic effects were mediated by improved inhibition of PAK and AKT/mTORC1 signaling pathways downstream of SRC. Lastly, there may be an opportunity to use the next‐generation clinical SRC inhibitor, eCF506, which has similar effects and higher SRC selectivity compared to dasatinib, as an alternative drug for clinical translation in combination with currently approved RET TKIs. While we focused on RET‐independent signaling mechanisms in this study, this research does not include any on‐target resistance mechanisms, which can disrupt the activity of pralsetinib and selpercatinib. Both drugs are vulnerable to secondary RET solvent front and gatekeeper mutations, which sterically hinder the drug binding of RET due to substitution of valine at position 804 or glycine at position 810 with bulky, charged or polar residues [ ]. In this case, one may consider treating RET
+ cancers with the novel RET TKI, vepafestinib, which has activity against secondary RET mutants, and combining it with SRC inhibitors, such as eCF506 [ ].
Although previous studies from different groups have suggested the association between RET and SRC, the study here provides a unique insight into the biology of RET
+ cancers and outlines new opportunities for clinical translation. Kang et al. [ ] reported the role of SRC in acquired resistance to the multikinase inhibitor dovitinib, which inhibits RET in LC‐2/Ad cells. However, dovitinib is not an approved drug for RET
+ NSCLC and it has a large number of targets, including VEGFRs, PDGFRs, and FGFRs, which drastically increases the risk for toxic off‐target effects [ ]. Another study demonstrated the vulnerability of PTC cells to SRC TKIs; however, combination with RET TKIs was not investigated as these drugs were not yet available at that time [ ]. Thus, further cellular and mechanistic evidence was needed to validate the functions of SRC in RET
+ cancer cells in the context of pralsetinib and selpercatinib, which are current frontline therapies. Our results illustrate that RET
+ NSCLC and PTC cells, which were not completely responsive to these RET TKIs, became more sensitive when SRC inhibitors were added. Furthermore, this study is significant as the combination treatment was effective in parental RET
+ cancer cells, as well as PTC cells with acquired RET TKI resistance. While we identified SRC as a major protein accounting for bypass signaling mechanisms, alterations of other genes such as KEAP1 mutation, amplification of MET, KRAS, or CDK2N2A have also been reported [ ]. This implies that TKI resistance mechanisms can be context‐dependent and driven by proteins other than SRC, possibly necessitating adjustment of the therapeutic strategy in future research. For example, CUTO32 cells, which have KIF5B‐RET (K15;R12) with NF1 and TP53 mutations were also sensitive to PLK1 and AURKA inhibitors, while CUTO22 cells expressing KIF5B‐RET (K23;R12) with NF1 and APC mutations were not responsive to those drugs [ ]. Considering the heterogeneity of RET‐dependent and RET‐independent acquired resistance mechanisms it may be most beneficial to apply combinations of RET and SRC TKIs in the treatment‐naïve setting.
The present study identified PAKs as major SRC downstream target proteins, which mediate much of the bypass signaling mechanisms, in RET
+ NSCLC. Besides their role in cell survival and proliferation, PAKs regulate downstream effectors including LIMK1 and αvβ5 integrin to reorganize cytoskeleton structures, which are intimately related to cell motility, invasion, and eventually metastases [ ]. In addition, PAKs have been shown to inhibit Hippo signaling leading to downstream activation of the transcriptional coactivator YAP1, dysregulation of which is highly correlated with cancer progression [ ]. This is consistent with a recent study reporting that RET
+ cancer cells can acquire resistance to RET TKIs via YAP1‐mediated activation of ERBB3 signaling [ ]. Thus, PAK family kinases may be promising co‐targets, in addition to SRC, for RET
+ NSCLCs, which are often diagnosed at advanced stages with established metastases [ , ]. However, no PAK inhibitors are currently clinically available. A phase I clinical trial using PF‐3758309 to treat solid tumors was terminated early due to unexpected side effects, while another phase I clinical trial using KPT‐9274, which targets PAK4 and NAMPT, is in progress [ ]. Another option may be using the clinical‐stage compound MBQ‐167, which selectively inhibits RAC1/CDC42 upstream of PAK [ ]. More studies comparing the extent of drug efficacy shared between RAC1/PAK and SRC inhibitors would be required.

5.

## Conclusion
In conclusion, this study has revealed synergistic effects of RET and SRC TKIs in RET
+ cancer cells. The molecular mechanisms underlying these effects are mediated by on‐target SRC inhibition and suppression of downstream PAK and AKT/mTOR signaling. For improvements in clinical outcomes to treat patients with RET
+ cancers, the next‐generation SRC TKI eCF506 or, alternatively, RAC/PAK inhibitors may be promising options as these combination treatments, particularly in the upfront setting, may enhance the clinical efficacy of RET‐targeted therapies, thus overcoming or delaying RET‐independent acquired drug resistance mechanisms.

## Conflict of interest
E.B.H. serves in a consulting or advisory role to Amgen, Ellipses Pharma, Janssen Oncology, Janssen Research and Development and Revolution Medicines; reports research funding (paid to his institution) from AstraZeneca, Genentech, Incyte, Janssen, Novartis, Revolution Medicines and Spectrum Pharmaceuticals; and reports patents, royalties or other intellectual property from ProteinProtein Interactions as Biomarkers Patent. A.D. received honoraria from 14ner/Elevation Oncology, Amgen, Abbvie, AnHeart Therapeutics, ArcherDX, AstraZeneca, Beigene, BergenBio, Blueprint Medicines, Bristol Myers Squibb, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chugai Pharmaceutical, EcoR1, EMD Serono, Entos, Exelixis, Helsinn, Hengrui Therapeutics, Ignyta/Genentech/Roche, Janssen, Loxo/Bayer/Lilly, Merus, Monopteros, MonteRosa, Novartis, Nuvalent, Pfizer, Prelude, Regeneron, Repare RX, Springer Healthcare, Takeda/Ariad/Millenium, Treeline Bio, TP Therapeutics, Tyra Biosciences, Verastem, Zymeworks. A.D. also served as an Advisory Board member for Bayer, MonteRosa, Abbvie, EcoR1 Capital, LLC, Amgen, Helsinn, Novartis, Loxo/Lilly, AnHeart Therapeutics and as a consultant for MonteRosa, Innocare, Boundless Bio, Treeline Bio, Nuvalent, 14ner/Elevation Oncology, Entos, Prelude, Bayer, Applied Pharmaceutical Science, Bristol Myers Squibb, Enlaza, Pfizer, Roche/Genentech, Novartis, Two River, Lilly/Loxo. A.D. obtained research funds from Foundation Medicine, GlaxoSmithKline, Teva, Taiho, PharmaMar, equity funds from mBrace, Treeline, and royalties from Wolters Kluwer, UpToDate; Other (Food/Beverage): Merck, Puma, Boehringer Ingelheim; CME Honoraria: Answers in CME, Applied Pharmaceutical Science, Inc, AXIS, Clinical Care Options, Doc Congress, EPG Health, Harborside Nexus, I3 Health, Imedex, Liberum, Medendi, Medscape, Med Learning, MedTalks, MJH Life Sciences, MORE Health, Ology, OncLive, Paradigm, Peerview Institute, PeerVoice, Physicians Education, Projects in Knowledge Resources, Remedica Ltd, Research to Practice, RV More, Targeted Oncology, TouchIME, WebMD. A.D. has also filed a copyright for Selpercatinib‐Osimertinib (US 18/041617, pending). J.M.K. reports support from Bristol–Myers Squibb on an unrelated project. E.C. has acted as a consultant for ENTOS Inc., and has received research funds from ERASCA, InnoCare Pharma, and Prelude.

## Author contributions
Conception and design: J.S., E.B.H., A.D., J.M.K., E.C., and U.R. Development of methodology: J.S., L.L.R.R. Acquisition of data: J.S., B.F., N.V.B., V.F., P.R., N.S.‐C., and Y.L. Analysis and interpretation of data: J.S., L.L.R.R., B.F., E.A.W., and Y.L. Administrative, technical, or material support: E.B.H., and A.D. Funding acquisition: E.B.H., A.D., E.C. and U.R. Writing of the manuscript: J.S., E.C. and U.R. Study supervision: E.C. and U.R. All authors read, edited, and approved the final manuscript.

## Supporting information

Fig. S1. Combination effects of RET tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) with dasatinib in RET
+ cancer cells.

Fig. S2. SRC‐dependency of synergistic effects between RET tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) and dasatinib in LC‐2/Ad RET
+ non‐small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells.

Fig. S3. Protein–protein network analysis of proteomics data in RET
+ CUTO32 non‐small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells.

Fig. S4. Effects of selective inhibitions of AKT, mTOR and PAK.

Fig. S5. Silencing of PAK1 in RET
+ LC2/Ad non‐small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells.

Fig. S6. Combination effects of RET tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) with eCF506 in RET
+ cancer cells.

Table S1. Global phosphoproteomics (pSTY) data, related to Fig. 3.

Table S2. Expression proteomics data, related to Fig. 3.

## Acknowledgements
This work has been supported by the Department of Defense Lung Cancer Research Program W81XWH‐22‐1‐0607 (to U.R.), the H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute, the Moffitt Lung Cancer Center of Excellence. E.C. gratefully acknowledges support from the Lung Cancer Research Foundation (LCRF), the Madelon Ravlin Grant Memorial Award from the Woman's Cancer Association of the University of Miami, the Sylvester ACS Pilot Project, the 2025 Catalyst award from the Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center (SCCC), the Dwoskin family donation, and the Tumor Biology intra‐programmatic pilot award from the SCCC. E.C. also thanks the LCRF for the 2022 William C. Rippe Award. A.D. was supported by the National Cancer Institute/National Institutes of Health P30‐CA008748. We also wish to acknowledge the Proteomics and Metabolomics Core, Molecular Genomics Core, and Biostatistics and Bioinformatics Shared Resource at the H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute; Moffitt core facilities are supported by the National Cancer Institute Cancer Center Support grant (P30‐CA076292). We would also like to thank Dr. Robert Doebele for providing CUTO32 and LC‐2/Ad cell lines.

## Contributor Information
Emiliano Cocco, Email: exc2752@miami.edu.
Uwe Rix, Email: uwe.rix@moffitt.org.

## Data accessibility
All data reported in this paper will be shared by the lead contacts upon request. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE database (http://www.proteomexchange.org) with the dataset identifier PXD063113 and 10.6019/PXD063113, and are publicly available as of the date of publication.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

Fig. S1. Combination effects of RET tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) with dasatinib in RET
+ cancer cells.

Fig. S2. SRC‐dependency of synergistic effects between RET tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) and dasatinib in LC‐2/Ad RET
+ non‐small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells.

Fig. S3. Protein–protein network analysis of proteomics data in RET
+ CUTO32 non‐small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells.

Fig. S4. Effects of selective inhibitions of AKT, mTOR and PAK.

Fig. S5. Silencing of PAK1 in RET
+ LC2/Ad non‐small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells.

Fig. S6. Combination effects of RET tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) with eCF506 in RET
+ cancer cells.

Table S1. Global phosphoproteomics (pSTY) data, related to Fig. 3.

Table S2. Expression proteomics data, related to Fig. 3.

## Data Availability Statement
All data reported in this paper will be shared by the lead contacts upon request. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE database (http://www.proteomexchange.org) with the dataset identifier PXD063113 and 10.6019/PXD063113, and are publicly available as of the date of publication.