2992heliyonHeliyonHeliyonElsevierPMC1174285511742855117428553983440610.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e41457The role of cell cycle-related genes in the tumorigenesis of adrenal and thyroid neuroendocrine tumors
FilipovichEkaterina GorodkovaEkaterina ShcherbakovaAnastasia AsaadWalaa PopovSergey MelnichenkoGalina MokryshevaNatalya UtkinaMarina 1Laboratory of General, Molecular and Population Genetics, Endocrinology Research Center, Moscow, 117292, Russia⁎Corresponding author. mv.utkina@yandex.ru
25122024111e41457e414572012025© 2024 Published by Elsevier Ltd.This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
The molecular mechanisms underlying adrenal and thyroid neuroendocrine tumors, including their tumorigenesis, progression, and metastasis, involve unique pathways regulating cell cycle progression. To better understand these mechanisms and pathways, extensive in-depth research on cell cycle-related genes is necessary. This review aims to describe and interpret current single-cell RNA sequencing studies on neuroblastoma, medullary thyroid cancer, and pheochromocytoma tumors. Our review summarizes differentially expressed cell cycle-related genes with distinct functions, highlighting their potential as therapeutic targets and components of panels used to determine tumor type or aggressiveness. Although some insights have been gained, there is still limited information on these topics, and further research is required to explore the regulatory mechanisms of these tumors.
Keywords: Cell cycle-related genes, Neuroendocrine tumors, scRNA-seq, Adrenal gland, Thyroid gland, Neuroblastoma, Pheochromocytoma, Medullary thyroid cancer

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2024 Sep 25; Revised 2024 Dec 16; Accepted 2024 Dec 23; Collection date 2025 Jan 15.

1.

## Introduction
Neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) are complex and heterogeneous tumors that are believed to arise from specialized neuroendocrine (NE) cells. These cells contain secretion granules that release neuropeptides and hormones into the bloodstream in response to neuronal signals [ ]. NE chromaffin cells give rise to adrenal medullary tumors, such as pheochromocytomas or paragangliomas, and, like neuroblasts cells of neuroblastoma (NB), they share a neural crest origin [ ]. It was once thought that C cells in medullary thyroid cancer (MTC) also originated from the neural crest. However, recent reports suggest that C cells can be derived from endodermal origin, a theory that remains controversial [ ]. This debate can be related to the possibility that C cells underwent a significant lineage shift — between the endoderm and neural crest — during tetrapod evolution.
NETs are rare diseases with an incidence of only about 0.5% of all malignancies, accounting for approximately 2 cases per 100,000 individuals, with a higher prevalence in women under the age of 50 [ ]. NETs can occur in endocrine glands such as the thyroid, parathyroid, pituitary, and adrenal medulla or can be dispersed among exocrine cells in the gastrointestinal system, pancreas, lungs, skin, and other tissues [ ]. The most frequent locations of NETs are the gastrointestinal tract (62–67%) and the lung (22–27%) [ ]. NETs in the adrenal gland and thyroid are much rarer diseases. The incidence of NB is approximately 10.5 cases per million children [ ], MTC occurs in about 0.38 cases per million people [ ], and pheochromocytoma (PCC) and paraganglioma have an incidence of 2–8 cases per million people [ ].
Understanding the cellular mechanisms driving tumorigenesis of NETs is crucial for developing effective therapy. One key aspect of tumor cell plasticity and changes in cellular fate that impact tumor development is cell cycle regulation. The cell cycle is a fundamental process that involves DNA duplication and cell division in all mammalian organisms. It consists of four main phases: the first gap phase (G1), DNA synthesis (S), the second gap phase (G2), and mitosis (M). To proceed correctly, cells are equipped with various systems to check for unfavorable conditions, such as DNA damage or a lack of nutrients. Cell cycle checkpoints ensure that progression from one phase to the next occurs normally. There are four major checkpoints: the G1/S checkpoint (restriction checkpoint), the intra-S-phase checkpoint, the G2/M checkpoint, and the M checkpoint (metaphase-to-anaphase transition or spindle checkpoint) [ , ].
The retinoblastoma protein family (pRb), cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdk2, Cdk3, Cdk4, Cdk6), cyclins (cyclin A, cyclin E, D-type cyclins D1-D3), cyclin-kinase inhibitors (INK4 family) are examples of the proteins involved in the cell cycle regulation [ ]. DNA replication occurs during the S phase, where the Cyclin D-Cdk4/6 complex, formed in the G1 phase, is crucial for initiating the expression of genes required for S phase progression by phosphorylating Rb protein [ , ]. The Cyclin A-CDK2 complex, which is active during the S phase, drives DNA synthesis. In the G2 phase and at the G2/M transition, the ATR and ATM kinases regulate the activation of the Cyclin B/Cdk1 complex and initiate the repair of damaged DNA [ ]. The onset of mitosis, which includes nuclear division, requires the activation of the Cyclin B-CDK1 complex, involving p34 kinase of the CDC2 family, to facilitate progression through the M phase [ ].
Cell cycle-related genes play a crucial role in the development and pathogenesis of NETs, influencing tumor growth, differentiation, and response to therapy. Alterations in cell cycle-related gene expression levels and the corresponding inhibition of their encoded proteins can disrupt cell cycle checkpoints, resulting in uncontrolled cell division and promoting the malignant transformation of neuroendocrine cells [ ]. For example, deregulation of the cell cycle due to the inhibition of p18, p21, and p27 can be a vital reason for mutations of tumor suppressor gene MEN1, leading to the development of parathyroid adenomas, anterior pituitary adenomas, and enteropancreatic NETs [ , ]. However, the cellular diversity within NETs complicates efforts to understand the precise roles and regulatory mechanisms of these genes across cell types, making it harder to understand how cell cycle dysregulation drives NET progression.
Some cell cycle-related genes are overexpressed in cancer cells and promote their uncontrolled proliferation [ ], while others are inhibited. Cell cycle-dependent genes and their products could be potential therapeutic targets in the treatment of NETs and other tumors, either as single agents or combined with chemotherapy. Examples include CDK inhibitors, such as flavopiridol (a pan-CDK inhibitor), and selective PKC inhibitors, such as UCN-01 and bryostatin-1 [ , ]. Currently, flavopiridol is under clinical development for cancers such as non-Hodgkin lymphoma and ovarian cancer [ , , ], while bryostatin-1 is undergoing trials for pancreatic, lymphoma, and other cancers [ , , , ]. Approved drugs for NETs include RET inhibitors like selpercatinib and vandetanib for MTC [ , ], with abemaciclib and palbociclib (CDK 4/6 inhibitors) also in trials for NET and NB treatment [ , , ].
The advent of scRNA-seq technology has revolutionized our ability to study cellular heterogeneity and gene expression with exceptional precision. By profiling the transcriptomes of individual cells, scRNA-seq enables the identification of distinct cell clusters within cell types, revealing previously unappreciated heterogeneity in gene expression patterns. This technology allows for the detailed characterization of cell cycle-related gene expression patterns in various cellular contexts, providing valuable insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying NET development and progression.
To comprehensively review cell cycle-related genes identified through scRNA-seq studies, we conducted a systematic literature search using multiple databases, including Web of Science, Scopus, PubMed, and Google Scholar, focusing on all articles published up to August 2024. Our analysis included only those studies that provided clear graphical illustrations of gene expression or explicit mentions of relevant genes in the text. Each identified gene was then independently screened to confirm its connection to cell cycle processes, aiming to create a cohesive synthesis of cell cycle-related findings derived from scRNA-seq research.

2.

## The key cell cycle-related proteins in tumorigenesis
2.1.

## Cyclins
Cyclins are a critical family of proteins that function as key regulatory elements in the eukaryotic cell cycle. They are characterized by the presence of a cyclin box, a conserved domain that facilitates binding to CDKs and is essential for their enzymatic activity [ , ]. Cyclins play pivotal roles in regulating various phases of the cell cycle. Each cyclin-CDK complex is involved in specific transitions: the cyclin D-CDK4/6 complex is crucial for G1 progression, cyclin E-CDK2 facilitates the G1/S transition, and cyclin A-CDK2 promotes DNA synthesis during the S phase. Additionally, cyclin A/B-CDC2 is necessary for the entry into M-phase [ ].
The deregulation of cyclin expression is often implicated in cancer. For instance, cyclin D1 is frequently overexpressed in various human tumors, including solid tumors and lymphoid malignancies, due to chromosomal translocations and gene amplification. Cyclin D1 overexpression is linked to poor clinical outcomes, particularly in mantle cell lymphomas, where it is associated with specific chromosomal rearrangements [ ]. Similarly, cyclin E's aberrant expression has been connected to oncogenic processes, often resulting from gene amplification and impaired degradation mechanisms. Cyclin E overexpression can lead to decreased cell size and a shortened G1 phase, facilitating uncontrolled cell proliferation [ ].

2.2.

## Cyclin-dependent kinases
CDKs are a family of multifunctional enzymes that modify various protein substrates involved in cell cycle progression and are characterized by their dependence on a regulatory subunit called a cyclin. For their enzymatic activity, CDKs require specific post-translational modifications. Typically inactive on their own, CDKs become activated upon binding to cyclins, which is accompanied by phosphorylation of a specific threonine residue. This phosphorylation induces a conformational change that enhances the kinase's activity. Once activated, CDKs form cyclin-CDK complexes that phosphorylate specific substrates necessary for advancing the cell cycle. For example, Cdk1 is essential for processes such as centrosome maturation, chromosome condensation, and mitotic entry following nuclear envelope breakdown. The evolutionary expansion of the CDK family in mammals has resulted in the classification of CDKs into three main cell cycle-related subfamilies (Cdk1, Cdk4, and Cdk5) and five transcriptional subfamilies (Cdk7, Cdk8, Cdk9, Cdk11, and Cdk20) [ , ].
Given their central role in cell cycle regulation, CDKs are frequently mutated or deregulated in various diseases, particularly cancer. The CDK-cyclin-Rb pathway is often disrupted during malignant transformation, making CDKs attractive targets for therapeutic intervention. Inhibitors of CDK4 and CDK6, for example, have been designated as breakthrough therapies by the FDA for breast cancer treatment. Furthermore, other CDKs, such as Cdk5 and Cdk8, have been implicated in neurodegenerative diseases and certain cancers, further emphasizing the potential of CDKs as therapeutic targets in oncology and beyond [ , ].

2.3.

## Cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors
Cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors (CKIs) function primarily by interfering with the cyclin-CDK complexes that drive cell cycle progression. CKIs can be classified into several families, each with distinct mechanisms of action. The INK4 family consists of members like p16INK4A, p15INK4B, p18INK4C, and p19INK4D. These proteins specifically inhibit CDK4 and CDK6 by preventing their association with cyclin D, thereby disrupting the phosphorylation of the RB protein and blocking cell cycle progression from G1 to S phase. The CIP/KIP family of CDK inhibitors includes three key members: p21CIP1, p27KIP1, and p57KIP2. These proteins primarily inhibit CDKs in the G1 phase of the cell cycle by binding to cyclin–CDK complexes, including cyclin A–CDK2, cyclin E–CDK2, and cyclin D–CDK4/6. In addition to cell cycle regulation, p21CIP1 has been shown to perform other cellular functions such as regulating transcription and apoptosis [ , ].
The expression of CKIs is regulated at the transcriptional level by several factors, including oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes. For instance, p21 is transcriptionally activated by the tumor suppressor p53 in response to DNA damage, leading to cell cycle arrest and allowing for DNA repair [ ]. On the other hand, the downregulation of CKIs is often seen in various cancers, which contributes to uncontrolled cell cycle progression and tumorigenesis [ , ].

2.4.

## Checkpoint control proteins
By monitoring cellular conditions and DNA integrity, cell cycle checkpoints maintain genomic stability and prevent the propagation of damaged cells, which is essential for normal cellular function and development [ ]. Malfunctions in these regulatory mechanisms can lead to uncontrolled cell proliferation and genomic instability, which are hallmarks of cancer. The p53 protein is a vital tumor suppressor that controls the G1 and G2 checkpoints. It prevents the progression of genetically damaged cells through the cell cycle by binding to DNA and regulating target genes involved in cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Mutations in the TP53 gene are prevalent in various cancers, including lung, colon, and breast cancer. Another crucial regulator of the cell cycle is the retinoblastoma protein, which is encoded by the RB1 gene located on chromosome 13q. pRb regulates the transition from G1 to S phase by binding to E2F transcription factors, which are essential for the expression of genes required for DNA synthesis. When pRb is phosphorylated, it releases E2F, allowing the expression of genes necessary for S phase entry. In its hypophosphorylated state, pRb binds to E2F, inhibiting its activity and preventing the transcription of S phase. Inactivation of RB1, due to mutations or dysregulation, can lead to uncontrolled cell proliferation and is implicated in several cancers, such as retinoblastoma and breast cancer [ ].

2.5.

## Transcription factors
Many transcription factors are integral to cell cycle regulation, influencing when cells can grow and divide. For instance, the MycN oncogene is known for its significant roles in promoting cell growth and apoptosis, highlighting the connection between transcription factors and cancer progression [ ]. The importance of transcription factors extends into clinical domains, where mutations in these proteins are linked to various diseases, including cancers. Several transcription factors serve as either tumor suppressors or oncogenes, with notable families involved in cancer development including NF-kappaB, AP-1, and the STAT family. Their roles in promoting uncontrolled cell proliferation or inhibiting apoptosis make them critical targets for therapeutic intervention. Researchers are investigating specific inhibitors targeting these transcription factors to develop more effective cancer treatments, making them a focal point in cancer biology [ , ].

2.6.

## DNA repair proteins
DNA repair proteins are responsible for identifying and rectifying DNA damage, which can occur due to a variety of factors, including environmental stressors and normal metabolic processes. Key DNA repair mechanisms include mismatch repair (MMR), base excision repair (BER), nucleotide excision repair (NER), and homologous recombination (HR). While MMR corrects base mismatches and insertion-deletion loops, and BER addresses small base lesions, NER targets bulky, helix-distorting damage, such as that from UV radiation [ ]. Homologous recombination (HR) is particularly vital for repairing double-strand breaks (DSBs), which can be extremely detrimental if not addressed. HR operates mainly during the S and G2 phases of the cell cycle, using a sister chromatid as a template for accurate, error-free repair. This precision is crucial for maintaining genomic stability and preventing tumorigenesis [ , ].
The DNA damage response involves a complex network of proteins that recognize and repair DNA lesions. Key proteins include ATM and ATR kinases, which are responsible for mediating the repair of DSBs through HR. ATR is particularly crucial for cell survival, while ATM is involved in the phosphorylation of H2AX, facilitating the recruitment of additional repair factors to DSB sites. Failure in these pathways can lead to the accumulation of mutations, driving cancer progression and therapeutic resistance. BRCA1 and BRCA2 are critical tumor suppressor proteins that maintain genomic stability by participating in the homologous recombination repair of DSBs. BRCA2, for example, is essential for the recruitment of Rad51, a protein vital for homologous recombination. Mutations in BRCA genes impair DNA repair mechanisms, resulting in increased susceptibility to cancer, particularly breast and ovarian cancers [ , , ].

3.

## Cell cycle-related genes involved in the tumorigenesis of adrenal NETs: neuroblastoma and pheochromocytoma
The adrenal gland NETs are divided into two major types. The first type includes neuroblastic tumors, also named neuroblastoma and ganglioneuroblastoma, which occur in infants and children. The second type is the paraganglioma family, which includes PCC and occurs in adults [ ]. To delve deeper into the molecular characteristics of these tumors, scRNA-seq technology has proven invaluable. By profiling individual cells, scRNA-seq enables the identification of distinct cell populations and the analysis of gene expression patterns at unprecedented resolution. To ensure the reliability of scRNA-seq analysis, a sufficient number of cells is essential. 10x Genomics recommends targeting between 500 and 10,000 cells per sample [ ]. In our review, the minimum number of cells reported is 3,022 fixed for one sample from the study by Thirant C. et al. [ ]. This suggests that every dataset discussed in the review was sufficiently representative to identify key cell clusters.
3.1.

## Neuroblastoma
In this review, we analyzed four scRNA-seq studies on NB conducted by: Van Haver S. et al. (2023) [ ], Thirant C. et al. (2023) [ ], Liu Q. et al. (2021) [ ], and Dong R. et al. (2020) [ ]. A total of 65 tumor samples were collected from 52 patients, along with three samples of peritumoral tissue from three patients, resulting in the isolation of 354,412 cells. Differentially expressed cell cycle-related genes in NB cells are summarized in , along with their functions as reported in the literature. illustrates the impact of these genes on the phases of the cell cycle.
 3.1.1.

## The TOP2A gene expression is elevated in cycling neuroblasts
The TOP2A (DNA Topoisomerase II Alpha) gene is highly expressed during mitosis, reaching its peak in the G2-M phase. It plays a crucial role in chromosome condensation and segregation [ ]. Compared to normal cells, tumor cells typically have elevated levels of TOP2A expression, which aligns with its function in cell cycle progression [ ]. Analysis of NB malignant phenotypes using scRNA-seq revealed that TOP2A overexpression in NB correlated with the overexpression of PCNA and MKI67 — the well-known proliferation marker presented during all active phases of the cell cycle (G1, S, and M phase) [ , ]. The overexpression of TOP2A is tumor cell type-specific as shown by a scRNA-seq study conducted by Van Haver S. et al. In their research, the authors performed scRNA analysis on patient-specific induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from 14 samples from a child with familial NB [ ], totaling 49,217 cells. They were able to define five cell types in NB: Schwann cell precursors (SCPs), bridge cells, connecting progenitor cells (CPCs) and chromaffin cells (CHCs), neuroblasts, and proliferating neuroblasts, with a specific overexpression of TOP2A, noticed only in proliferating neuroblasts. SCPs, bridge cells, and CPCs are parts of the developmental pathway of chromaffin cells and neuroblasts, which share a common origin, both originating from SCPs [ ]. Chromaffin cells, in turn, go through a developmental pathway that includes two intermediate stages: bridge cells and CPCs [ ].
In another scRNA-seq study, Thirant C. et al. revealed reversible plasticity between noradrenergic and mesenchymal tumor identities in several NB cell lines and 18 patient biopsies, totaling 54,403 cells [ ]. High expression of the TOP2A gene was observed primarily in cycling neuroblasts and cycling SCPs, and less with CPCs, late chromaffin cells, chromaffin cells, and bridge cells. Taken together, the studies by Van Haver S. et al. and Thirant C. et al. suggest that TOP2A expression is elevated in cycling neuroblasts, indicating a stronger association of this gene with this cell type compared to chromaffin cells or their precursors.

3.1.2.

## The PCNA gene is involved in the regulation of proliferative activity in chromaffin cells and their precursors
The PCNA
(Proliferating Cell Nuclear Antigen) gene is necessary for DNA replication and is involved in the RAD6-dependent DNA repair pathway [ ]. scRNA-seq analysis showed overexpression of this gene in NB malignant phenotypes [ ] and in neuroblasts, CHCs, and CPCs by another study [ ], suggesting a role of this gene in the proliferative activity of neuroblastoma cells and cells with NE functions, such as CHCs and their precursors.

3.1.3.

## Cyclins, cyclin-dependent kinases, and CDK inhibitors: their potential roles in regulating cell fate and differentiation within the NB microenvironment
Cyclins, cyclin-dependent kinases, and CDK inhibitors are integral components of a complex mechanism that regulates cell cycle progression. Cyclins were named for their fluctuating concentrations throughout the various phases of the cell cycle, and numerous cyclin families and subtypes have been identified to date [ ]. Cyclins influence cell cycle progression by forming complexes with CDKs and activating the CDK active sites. The scRNA-seq studies highlighted the role of three cyclins: cyclin B1, the product of the CCNB1 gene, forms with Cdk1 a complex for cell cycle progression through the G2/M checkpoint [ ]; cyclin B2, which is involved in the Mad2-associated spindle checkpoint [ ]; and cyclin A2 encoded by CCNA2 gene, which activates Cdk2 during the S phase and Cdk1 during the G2/M transition [ ].
Liu Q. et al. performed a scRNA-seq analysis on primary tumors from 17 NB patients and three peritumoral adrenal gland tissues, analyzing a total of 89,882 cells [ ]. They identified nine cell types, including neuroendocrine cells, steroidogenic cells, Schwann cells, T cells, B cells, myeloid cells, fibroblasts, ECs, and pericytes. Copy number variation (CNV) analysis identified NE cells as the malignant cells in which 300 meta-genes were preferentially expressed, and data analysis demonstrated high expression of three cyclins, including CCNB1, CCNB2, and CCNA2. In another scRNA-seq study [ ] on mesenchymal and noradrenergic tumor identities, Thirant C. et al. found that CCNB1 overexpression was associated with cycling SCPs and cycling neuroblasts more than with chromaffin and late chromaffin cells. CDK4 was shown to be expressed in neuroblasts, CHCs, and CPCs in the NB tumor cells. In the same study, CDKN1C, a negative regulator of cell proliferation, exhibited high expression in CPCs. Moreover, CDK1 was shown to be inhibited in SCPs, bridge, CPCs, and chromaffin cells of NB, and overexpressed in proliferating neuroblasts according to scRNA-seq analysis on patient-derived iPSCs [ ].
These findings highlight the complex interplay of cyclins, cyclin-dependent kinases, and their inhibitors in NB development. The observed overexpression of CCNB1, CCNB2, and CCNA2 in NE malignant cells suggests a significant role for these genes in driving tumor cell proliferation. Additionally, the distinct expression patterns of CDK1, CDK4, and CDKN1C in quiescent and proliferating neuroblasts, chromaffin cells, and their precursors point to their potential roles in regulating cell fate and differentiation within the NB microenvironment.

3.1.4.

## The E2F family of transcription factors potentially influences the balance between proliferation and differentiation
The E2F family consists of cell cycle activators (E2F1, E2F2, and E2F3a) and DNA-binding repressors (E2F3b and E2F4-8). E2F transcription factors play a crucial role in cell cycle regulation, particularly during the G1/S transition [ ]. For example, E2F1 is a cell cycle activator that drives cells through the G1/S checkpoint [ ]. E2F7 expression levels increase as cells enter the S phase; however, when overexpressed, it inhibits S phase entry and cell proliferation [ ]. This gene is also involved in the regulation of DNA repair and genomic integrity [ ]. E2F8 exhibits a similar effect, as it inhibits E2F1, which promotes G1/S phase progression, and produces cell cycle effects in response to DNA damage [ ]. The roles of E2F1, E2F7, and E2F8 genes in the NB microenvironment were elucidated in two scRNA-seq studies.
In the study of Thirant et al., the E2F1 gene expression was found in the same NB cell clusters as the PCNA and CDK4 genes expression. It was primarily associated with neuroblasts, CHCs, and CPCs of NB [ ]. The second scRNA-seq study by Dong R. et al. characterized the malignant phenotypes and developmental trajectories of 16 NB patients, totaling 160,910 cells [ ]. A key finding was the high association of the E2F7 and E2F8 genes with undifferentiated chromaffin cells (UCHCs) in NB. The researchers of this study identified nine developing cell types and revealed their corresponding activity in each tumor. They linked 50 signature genes to the differentiation status of CHCs based on their correlation with CHC differentiated scores. The study also suggested that the cycling state of tumor cells upregulates cell cycle-related genes while downregulates genes that promote CHC differentiation, such as GATA2 and PHOX2A genes. These studies revealed that the E2F family members (E2F1, E2F7, E2F8) can play distinct roles in NB development, potentially influencing the balance between proliferation and differentiation.

3.1.5.

## Other transcription factors and their roles in proliferation and differentiation pathways
NB is a complex malignancy characterized by its heterogeneity and variable clinical outcomes, often linked to the expression of key oncogenes and transcription factors. The role of TF FOXD3 in cell cycle progression in stem cells was elucidated in 2023. Research by Gökbuget et al. demonstrated that the deletion of FOXD3 in mouse pluripotent stem cells leads to immediate replication stress, the G2/M phase arrest, genome instability, and p53-dependent apoptosis. Additionally, FOXD3 is known to cause transient inhibition of transcription during the S phase [ ], and recent studies have suggested that this gene functions as a tumor suppressor in various types of cancer.
The MycN protein, a product of the MYCN proto-oncogene, is involved in multiple signaling pathways that promote cell growth and proliferation in various progenitor cells. The MYCN oncogene is strongly linked to a poor prognosis in NB [ , ]. MycN plays a dual role in NB by promoting proliferation in MYCN-amplified (MNA) cells while facilitating apoptosis in non-amplified cells. It is known to play a role in the failure of G1 arrest after DNA damage in MNA NB cells, inhibiting p21 induction [ ]. Inhibition of MYCN in MNA NB cells results in decreased E2F2, Cdk6 mRNA, and ID2 levels while increasing the p27 level, ultimately reducing cells in the S-phase [ ]. Conversely, induction of MycN upregulates p53, p21, and Bax protein levels in non-MNA NB cells, pushing these cells toward apoptosis [ ].
The MYCN and FOXD3 genes were identified as markers of UCHCs and their precursors in two scRNA-seq studies. In the study by Dong et al., the expression of MYCN was closely associated with the undifferentiated proliferative status of tumor (chromaffin) cells in two out of three MNA samples of NB [ ]. FOXD3 was recognized as a marker of SCPs and was found to be overexpressed in the SCP population of NB cells in the iPSC modeling study by Van Haver S. et al. [ ].
HOXC9 and JUN are two transcription factors that can underscore the balance between differentiation and proliferation within NB. HOXC9 promotes differentiation and cell cycle arrest in DCHCs, whereas the proto-oncogene JUN drives proliferation in malignant tumor cells [ , , ]. In contrast with MYCN and FOXD3, HOXC9 and JUN were both highly expressed in differentiated cells within NB in two scRNA-studies. HOXC9 was highly associated with DCHCs in the study by Dong et al. [ ], while JUN was preferentially expressed in malignant NE cells in NB in the study by Liu Q. et al. [ ].
Known as the vein-specifying transcription factor, NR2F2 directly induces the cell cycle by upregulating various cell cycle-related genes [ ]. NR2F2 demonstrated inhibited expression both in differentiated CHCs, neuroblasts, and their precursors (CPCs and bridge cells) in the iPSC modeling study by Van Haver S. et al. Despite being used as a marker for SCPs, NR2F2 was not expressed in this cell type [ ]. In summary, NR2F2 was inhibited in all cell types of NB, despite its role in facilitating cell cycle progression. This suggests a potential unknown mechanism of NR2F2 that affects the cell cycle of NB cells.
The interplay of MYCN, HOXC9, JUN, FOXD3, and NR2F2 transcription factors, along with other cell cycle regulators, suggests a delicate balance between proliferation and differentiation pathways in this tumor type. While MYCN, JUN, and NR2F2 promote proliferation, HOXC9 and FOXD3 appear to favor differentiation and cell cycle arrest.

3.1.6.

## UBE2C is overexpressed in malignant NE cells
The UBE2C (Ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme E2) gene promotes the degradation of mitotic cyclins A and B, consequently leading to Cdc2 inactivation. This inactivation is essential to transition from mitosis into the G1 phase of the next cell cycle. Additionally, UBE2C aids in sister chromatid separation by degrading one or more proteins that play a role in chromatid cohesion [ ].
In the scRNA-seq study by Liu Q. et al., the UBE2C gene showed high expression in malignant NE cells of NB [ ]. Van Haver S. et al. also used UBE2C as a proliferation marker in NB cells in their scRNA-seq study. They found that UBE2C was inhibited in the SCPs, bridge cells, CPCs, and chromaffin cells of NB while overexpressed in proliferating neuroblasts [ ].

3.1.7.

## Other cell cycle-related genes overexpressed in undifferentiated cells
scRNA-seq studies, discussed in previous sections, have identified additional cell cycle-related genes that are overexpressed in UCHCs. Examples of these genes are EZH2, CTCF, and RAD21, which were highly associated with UCHCs in NB, as demonstrated in the scRNA-seq study by Dong et al. [ ]. Together, these genes regulate cell cycle progression and genomic stability in UCHCs, influencing their proliferative potential and overall tumor dynamics in NB. In addition to their role in regulating the cell cycle in different phases, the EZH2 gene is also overexpressed in various types of cancer [ , , , , ].
In the scRNA-seq study by Thirant C. et al. [ ], EGFR and TNFRSF1A, which are components of the EGF and TNFα cell signaling pathways, respectively, were found to be preferentially expressed in the mesenchymal and bridge cell populations within the NB IC-pPDXC-63 cell line with noradrenergic to mesenchymal plasticity. This association with mesenchymal tumor identity was also observed in 25 other NB cell lines in the same study. These findings align with the known functions of EGFR and TNFRSF1A in prompting G1/S phase progression and neural progenitor cell (NPC) proliferation [ , , ]. Interestingly, the mesenchymal subpopulation and bridge cells had a higher proportion of cells in the G1 phase, while the noradrenergic population showed a predominance of G2M and S phases.
S100B (S100 calcium-binding protein B), along with FOXD3, was identified as a marker of SCPs and was found to be overexpressed in the SCP population of NB cells in the iPSC modeling study by Van Haver S. et al. [ ]. Studies showed that S100B upregulates genes involved in cell cycle arrest (CDKN2A, RB1, and RBL2), DNA damage control (RAD17), and pro-apoptotic pathways (MOAP1) [ , , , , , , , , ].

3.1.8.

## Other cell cycle-related genes overexpressed in differentiated cells
The previously mentioned scRNA-seq study by Thirant C. et al. also revealed that the minichromosome maintenance complex component (MCM) 3 and TIMP3 genes were overexpressed preferentially in differentiated cells (neuroblasts, CHCs, and CPCs) of NBs [ ]. It is suggested that MCM3 can play a role in promoting tumor invasion and metastasis in NB since its overexpression is correlated with poor prognosis in various types of cancer [ , , ] and has also been associated with the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in human prostate cancer [ ]. The results of this study confirm previous findings [ ] about the higher expression level of TIMP3 in slowly dividing compared to rapidly dividing NPCs. The TIMP3 gene is suggested as a marker of quiescent differentiated noradrenergic cells in NB.
NUF2 and CKAP2 are examples of the preferentially expressed genes in malignant NE cells, as revealed by Liu Q et al. [ ]. Both genes have a role in the mitosis phase of the cell cycle.
Another scRNA-seq study by Van Haver S. et al. suggests that CENPF is inhibited in SCPs, bridge, CPCs, and chromaffin cells of NB, but is overexpressed in proliferating neuroblasts [ ]. This finding aligns with the known functions of CENP-F (Centromere protein-F), a well-characterized kinetochore protein of the nuclear matrix, that promotes G2/M phase transition through interaction with Cdk1 in HeLa cells [ ] and in adrenocortical carcinoma [ ].

3.2.

## Pheochromocytoma
We analyzed two scRNA-seq studies on PCC: Sen Qin et al. (2024) [ ] and Xuebin Zhang et al. (2021) [ ]. In the study by Sen Qin et al. [ ], 11 tissue samples from five patients with PCC were investigated. A total of 133,894 isolated cells were annotated and divided into 67 clusters and 13 cell types. In this review, we will focus on two clusters containing chromaffin cells (the “adrenal cell” cluster and the “proliferating cell” cluster). In the study by Xuebin Zhang et al. [ ] three PCCs, including one ectopic case were analyzed. Ectopic adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)- and corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH)-secreting PCCs are rare tumors that produce ACTH and CRH outside of their normal regulatory sites, resulting in excess cortisol production, and associated with Cushing's syndrome. In this study, the 44,511 cells were analyzed and grouped into four clusters: ACTH+&CRH+ pheochromocytes, pheochromocytes, adrenocorticals, and sustentacular (supporting) cells. A total of 17 tumor samples were collected from eight patients in these two studies, resulting in the isolation of 178,405 cells.
Differentially expressed cell cycle-related genes in PCC cells are summarized in , along with their functions as reported in the literature. illustrates the impact of these genes on cell cycle phases.
 3.2.1.

## The role of overexpressed genes in proliferation and differentiation of chromaffin cells
Both scRNA-seq studies demonstrated a strong association between DLK1 (Delta Like Non-Canonical Notch Ligand 1) gene expression and adrenal-derived neoplasm tumorigenesis. While the study by Xuebin Zhang et al. [ ] revealed a consistent DLK1 overexpression pattern across all PCC cell clusters, the study by Sen Qin et al. [ ] further validated it, along with revealing RBP1 (Retinol Binding Protein 1) accelerated cell cycle at the G1 phase, as a specific marker for adrenal cells. DLK1 is involved in cell differentiation and proliferation, especially in stem and progenitor cells and acts as a negative regulator of differentiation, maintaining an undifferentiated state of stem and progenitor cells [ ]. DLK1 knockout weakens Notch signaling, impairs stem cell function, increases mitochondrial activity, and triggers division in quiescent stem cells [ , , ]. RBP1, a gene essential for retinol homeostasis, was overexpressed in PCCs but downregulated in most cancers, including ovarian [ ] and breast cancer [ ]. It is suggested that RBP1 plays a crucial role in regulating cell growth and differentiation, inducing cell cycle arrest in the G1 phase [ ]. In breast cancer, lower RBP1 expression correlates with increased proliferation. Overexpressing RBP1 in PCC tumor cells can inhibit proliferation, suggesting its unique mechanism in PCC that affects the cell cycle.
The GNAS (Guanine Nucleotide binding protein, Alpha Stimulating activity polypeptide) gene encodes the alpha subunit of a G protein and was overexpressed in most chromaffin cells of PCC [ ]. A recent study investigated the impact of GNAS expression on the proliferation and migration of breast cancer cells. Elevated GNAS expression was associated with increased proliferative activity due to сyclin D1 and Cdk4 expression and G1/S checkpoint transition [ ].
The gene UCHL1 (Ubiquitin C-Terminal Hydrolase L1) was overexpressed in pheochromocytes and described as both an oncogene [ ] in multiple melanoma and a tumor suppressor [ ] in breast cancer. UCHL1 overexpression suppresses the growth of breast cancer tumor cells by inducing G0/G1 arrest and apoptosis via disruption of p53 signaling. On the other hand, UCHL1 can interact with the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway, which regulates cell proliferation, influencing cell growth and survival in multiple myeloma cells. The first insight is that the UCHL1 gene can promote cell cycle progression due to its overexpression in PCC, but more studies are needed to elucidate the distinct role of this gene in PCC.
RGS5 (Regulator of G Protein Signaling 5), a regulator of G-protein signaling, is overexpressed in various cancers [ , , ], including PCC [ ]. Studies have shown that RGS5 expression is correlated with cell proliferation in various cell types. For example, reducing RGS5 levels in ovarian carcinoma cells after mitogenic stimulation inhibited their growth by arresting the cell cycle at the G1 phase. Similarly, the reconstruction of RGS5 expression level in vascular smooth muscle cells (SMCs) led to the downregulation of сyclin D, Cdk1, and PCNA preventing cell G0/G1 transition in proliferating SMCs.

3.2.2.

## Overexpressed cell cycle-related genes in tumor-associated chromaffin cells
In the study by Sen Qin et al. [ ] the heterogeneity of PCC was examined, revealing two distinct clusters of chromaffin cells (A and B), each suggesting unique biological characteristics. Gene expression profiling differentiated these clusters based on their metabolic and NE phenotypes. Cluster A was characterized by an enrichment of genes related to energy metabolism such as RGS4, STC1, and PFKP. In contrast, cluster B exhibited an enrichment of genes involved in NE functions, including CALM2, EIF4A2, and STMN1.
The RGS4 gene, like RGS5, plays a role in regulating the cell cycle by negatively modulating G protein activity, promoting cell cycle arrest at the G2/M phase accompanied by increased phosphorylation of Cdc2 and Cdc25C in MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 cell lines of breast cancer [ ]. STC1 (Stanniocalcin 1) plays a dual role in cancer progression by promoting cell cycle transition and regulating apoptosis through various signaling pathways. Elevated STC1 expression has been linked to several cancers, including PCC, thyroid cancer, glioblastoma, prostate cancer, and cervical cancer [ , , , ]. STC1's modulation of key pathways, including TGF-β/SMAD4, NF-κB, and JNK/c-Jun, supports tumor growth, cell survival, and metastasis, making it an important factor in cancer progression [ ]. PFKP (Phosphofructokinase, Platelet) encodes phosphofructokinase, a key glycolytic enzyme. While the precise role of phosphofructokinase in cell cycle regulation is not fully elucidated, its enzymatic activity strongly correlates with cellular energy balance, which impacts cell cycle progression. Some studies have demonstrated that PFKP is overexpressed in PCC, colorectal [ ] and lung cancer [ ] and promotes G1, S, and G2/M phase progression.
As for the cluster B and its genes, CALM2 (Calmodulin 2) encodes the Calmodulin 2 binding protein, which interacts with Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinases and cyclins, playing key roles in cell proliferation, apoptosis, and tumor progression. Studies have consistently demonstrated the overexpression of CALM2 in various cancers, including PCC, hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) [ ], breast cancer [ ], and gastric cancer [ , ], highlighting its role in chemoresistance. In gastric cancer, CALM2 confers resistance to tyrosine kinase inhibitor afatinib by downregulating Akt signaling and activating the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway. Studies on HCC cells have identified E2F5 as a key downstream target of CALM2. STMN1 (Stathmin 1) is a gene encoding protein Stathmin 1, a cytosolic protein that plays a crucial role in regulating microtubule dynamics, which in turn directly influences the cell cycle progression. Overexpression of STMN1 has been frequently observed in various tumor types, including PCC, adrenocortical, lung, and esophageal carcinomas [ , ], promoting proliferation, invasion, and metastasis.

3.2.3.

## Genes overexpressed in chromaffin cells of ectopic ACTH and CRH-secreting PCC
The study by Xuebin Zhang et al. [ ] identified a multifunctional chromaffin-like cell type in ACTH/CRH-secreting pheochromocytomas characterized by high expression of both POMC (the precursor of ACTH) and CRH, termed ACTH+ and CRH+ pheochromocytes. Here, we will analyze the genes that were specifically overexpressed in this unique cell cluster.
Many PCCs arise from hereditary mutations in proto-oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes. The DIRAS3 (DIRAS Family GTPase 3) gene, also known as ARHI, encodes a tumor suppressor protein that inhibits the RAS oncogene. Increased expression of DIRAS3 has been observed in several types of tumors, including sporadic PCCs [ ]. It is noteworthy that DIRAS3 expression was detected exclusively in the ACTH+&CRH+ pheochromocyte cluster, suggesting a potential role for this gene in the pathogenesis of this specific tumor subtype. In primary human pheochromocytoma cells with DIRAS3 overexpression сyclin D1 and сyclin E were significantly reduced, confirming the cell cycle arrest at the G1/S stage [ ]. The mechanisms underlying this regulation of the cell cycle influence the expression of key regulatory proteins in the G1 phase, including Cdk2, Cdk4/6, p21WAF1, and p27Kip1, as well as cyclins E, A, and D1 [ , ].
Another gene that has been overexpressed only in ectopic PCCs chromaffin cells [ ] is POMC (Proopiomelanocortin). POMC encodes a preproprotein that is a precursor to ACTH and N-terminal peptides (N-POMC). The role of ACTH in the cell cycle is actively researched, as it is involved in G1 phase progression and the initiation of DNA synthesis. ACTH promotes proliferation by activating the ERK-MAPK pathway [ ]. Since tumor cells often exhibit disruption in the transition from G1 to S phase, studying the expression of the POMC gene, which can influence this process, is highly relevant [ ].
CRH was overexpressed only in a cluster of ACTH+&CRH+ pheochromocytes. While this gene is traditionally associated with the endocrine system and stress response, recent studies have implicated CRH in several carcinomas, including breast [ ], ovarian [ ], and endometrial [ ] carcinomas as well as in PCC tumorigenesis. CRH binds to specific receptors on PCC cells, activating intracellular signaling pathways that promote cell proliferation and inhibit apoptosis, thereby contributing to tumor growth.

3.2.4.

## Genes overexpressed in proliferating chromaffin cells
In the study by Sen Qin et al. [ ], it was demonstrated that the MKI67 and TOP2A genes were exclusively overexpressed in the chromaffin proliferating cell cluster. As mentioned earlier, the TOP2A gene encodes a DNA topoisomerase that regulates DNA topology during transcription and replication, playing a key role in chromosome aggregation. Overexpression of this gene has been found in various tumors, such as NB (see section ), and it correlates with enhanced metastasis and poor disease prognosis. In the study by Solhusløkk Höse et al. [ ], TOP2A overexpression in PCC was investigated as a marker of poor clinical outcomes, correlating with high metastasis potential and contributing to carcinogenesis.

4.

## Cell cycle-related genes influence the tumorigenesis of medullary thyroid cancer
Differentially expressed cell cycle-related genes in MTC cells are summarized in , along with their functions as reported in the literature. illustrates the impact of these genes on the phases of the cell cycle.
 Currently, only two scRNA-seq studies investigating the NET in the thyroid gland have been published and conducted by Chen D. et al. [ ] and Wang Lf. et al. [ ]. In the first study by Chen D. et al., the researchers performed single-cell transcriptome sequencing on two samples from the primary tumor and metastatic lymph nodes of one patient, totaling 12,830 cells. The researchers identified six main cell clusters: C cells, T cells, B cells, fibroblasts, endothelial cells, and myeloid cells. Notably, the C cell cluster was characterized as a malignant cell cluster. The results of the study by Chen D. et al. showed that six cell cycle-related genes were differentially expressed in the C cells of MTC. Three of these genes were overexpressed (AIMP1, CDH1, and GPI), while the other three were inhibited (HLA-E, ARF1, and COPA).
The second scRNA-seq study conducted by Wang Lf. et al. obtained a total of 32,544 cells from tumor samples of three patients with MTC. The researchers identified seven distinct cell types: thyroid parafollicular cells (C cells), smooth muscle cells, fibroblasts, endothelial cells, dendritic cells, T cells, and neutrophils. They further divided the C cell cluster into seven subclusters, labeled C0 through C6. Through CNV analysis, subclusters C2 and C4 were identified as non-tumor cells, while the other subclusters were classified as tumor cells. Additionally, using time-series trajectory analysis, the researchers proposed that the C2 subcluster represents an early phase of tumor transformation, which progresses to C3, an early cancerous cell population. The subsequent steps in the transformation involve malignant cell subpopulations C0, C1, C5, and C6.
4.1.

## Genes overexpressed in early- and late-developed C cells
The known role of AIMP1 in the cell cycle is to prevent G1 phase arrest and prompt cell growth via negative regulation of the TGF-β signaling pathway [ , , ]. This explains its overexpression in approximately 35% of the C cells in MTC in the study by Chen D. et al. Similarly, Glucose-6-phosphate isomerase (GPI), which is involved in the interconversion of glucose-6-phosphate and fructose-6-phosphate, was overexpressed in about 25% of C cells. This is expected due to its previously described role as a prognostic biomarker in various types of cancer and as a promoter of the cell cycle progression through the G2/M phase in lung adenocarcinoma [ , , , , , ]. The Succinate Dehydrogenase (SDHA) and Phosphoglycerate kinase 1 (PGK1) genes, which were differentially expressed in C cells according to the scRNA-seq study by Wang et al., are also significant for metabolic regulation, similar to GPI. These genes were inhibited in the early phase of tumor transformation but were overexpressed in late-developed malignant cell populations. This finding aligns with previous studies: PGK1 is known to promote tumor cell proliferation [ , ], while SDHA, although it acts as an inhibitor of cell proliferation, enhances the ability of cancer cells to survive and form colonies [ ].
Cadherin-1, also known as E-cadherin, is encoded by the CDH1 gene and is a member of the cadherin superfamily. The results showed that CDH1 was overexpressed in approximately 25% of the C cells in MTC in the study by Chen D. et al. E-cadherin leads to a significant reduction in DNA synthesis and blocks cell cycle progression in the G1 phase [ ]. Furthermore, a study by Gharbi S. et al. found that at least one miRNA targeting the CDH1 gene promotes cell cycle arrest at the G2/M phase and has a tumor suppressor effect due to the upregulation of PTEN [ ]. Thus, the role of CDH1 in MTC C cells remains unclear, given its tumor suppressor and cell cycle arrest effects on one hand, and its overexpression in the cluster of C cells on the other.
In the study by Wang Lf. et al., three genes were found to be overexpressed primarily in the early phase of C cell transformation, with their expression levels decreasing as the tumor progressed. The EPCAM and PROM1 genes are recognized as progenitor cell markers. The EPCAM gene encodes the Epithelial Cell Adhesion Molecule, which is frequently overexpressed in embryonic stem cells, cancer-initiating cells, and other progenitor populations [ ]. Prominin 1, the product of the PROM1 gene, serves as an upstream activator of the PI3K/Akt pathway and is associated with the proliferation of stem cells [ , ]. The MAP3K4 gene exhibits a dual role as both a tumor promoter and suppressor, depending on the tumor type and its various downstream pathways [ ]. In the study by Wang, Lf. et al., it appears that MAP3K4 also plays a significant role in cell cycle progression within tumor progenitor cells.
In the same study, the genes PPIH, RICTOR, BCL2, CEACAM5, and RET were found to be overexpressed in subclusters of late-developed tumor C cells. BCL2 is a well-known oncogene and regulator of apoptosis, and it also acts as an antiproliferative factor. It enhances the G0 phase and delays the transition from G0 to S phase by preventing the accumulation of E2F1 during the G1 phase. The genes PPIH, RICTOR, and CEACAM5 contribute to the proliferative potential of cells. For instance, PPIH (Peptidylprolyl Isomerase H) levels are markedly elevated in liver hepatocellular carcinoma, colon adenocarcinoma, and breast cancer, and this overexpression is associated with a poorer prognosis in these cancers [ ]. RICTOR is one of the core subunits of the mTORC2 complex [ ]; its knockdown has been shown to attenuate cell cycle progression and enhance apoptosis in various cancer types [ , , , ]. Carcinoembryonic antigen-related cell adhesion molecule 5 (CEACAM5), also known as CD66e, is a member of the carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) gene family. CEACAM5 plays a role in maintaining the proliferative potential of cells and is recognized as a biomarker for several malignancies, including melanoma, lung, colorectal, and pancreatic cancers [ , ]. Notably, in the study by Ma K. et al. [ ], CEACAM5 expression was also associated with the quiescence of hematopoietic stem cells, which aligns with the observed inhibited expression of this gene in the progenitor tumor cell subcluster in the scRNA-seq study by Wang Lf. et al.
The RET proto-oncogene is associated with the development of various types of cancer, including MTC and PCC, which can occur together in MEN2A or MEN2B syndromes [ ]. Disruption of RET signaling in MTC, as reported in the study by Drosten M. et al. [ ], led to reduced cell cycle progression and was associated with a loss of the neoplastic phenotype. This finding aligns with those of Wang Lf. et al., where RET gene expression was inhibited in normal C cells and during the early phase of C cell transformation, but was promoted in late-developed tumor C cells.

4.2.

## Genes with inhibited expression in C cells
HLA-E, which encodes a non-classical major histocompatibility complex class I antigen [ ], has been inhibited in approximately 50% of the tumor cells in MTC in the study by Chen D. et al. This finding is consistent with other previous studies of this gene. In the transcriptomic study of replicative senescent human fibroblasts by Lackner D. et al. in 2014 [ ], HLA-E was overexpressed more than twofold compared to proliferative cells. This observation was further supported by Pereira B. et al. in their 2019 study [ ], which revealed that HLA-E expression is increased in senescent cells. Moreover, despite the previously described overexpression of ARF1 in breast, ovarian, and prostate cancers [ , , ], it was inhibited in about 50% of the C cells in MTC, suggesting unique mechanisms of cell cycle regulation in this rare thyroid malignancy.
COPA is a coat subunit α of Golgi-derived non-clathrin-coated vesicles. It is a coatomer or coat protein complex I component [ , ]. Similar to its regulator ARF1,
COPA was inhibited in the C cells in the same study, although the percentage of expressing cells was lower, at around 15–20%. Song Y. et al. have reported that COPA can be differentially edited in HCC [ ]. One of the COPA variants (COPAI164V) appears to act as a tumor suppressor, while the wild-type form promotes cancer cell growth [ ]. While the exact functions of COPA in the cell cycle remain unknown, it is unclear whether its inhibition was connected to the inhibition of ARF1 or involved other mechanisms.

5.

## Limitations
Only a limited number of scRNA-seq studies have focused on NETs of the adrenal and thyroid glands. The limitations of this review stem from the rarity of these neoplasms and the novelty of the scRNA-seq technology. This need for more research can impede a comprehensive understanding of cell cycle dynamics and the associated pathways in these tumors. Nevertheless, this review aims to stimulate further investigations into the functions of cell cycle-related genes in NETs. A deeper understanding of these mechanisms is essential for elucidating the actual pathogenesis of these tumors.

6.

## Future prospect
Investigating cell cycle-related genes facilitates the identification of potential biomarkers for tumor aggressiveness and behavior. The development of a gene panel represents a significant outcome of this research, aimed at improving the diagnostic and prognostic capabilities for NETs in the adrenal and thyroid glands. Additionally, these molecular targets open new avenues for the development of targeted therapies, which is particularly relevant in the context of cancer resistance to traditional treatment methods.
In our review, we identified and categorized approved drugs targeting cell cycle-related proteins, which are encoded by genes highlighted above ( ). Additionally, we included drugs currently undergoing clinical research ( ). Some of these drugs are indicated for the types of cancer discussed in our review. For instance, Pralsetinib, Selpercatinib, and Vandetanib are approved therapies for MTC that target the RET protein. In the realm of clinical trials, promising candidates such as SY-5007, TY-1091, and LOXO-260 are also designed to target RET in patients diagnosed with MTC. Furthermore, the FDA-approved Sunitinib Malate and the investigational drug ADCT-701, both targeting DLK1, are applicable for NETs. Another noteworthy compounds, CID-078, which inhibits Cyclin B1 and Cyclin A, and the EZH2 inhibitors Igermetostat and Mevrometostat are currently in clinical trials for NET treatment. There are additional targets, such as MycN, CENPF, Ki-67, CDH1, ARF1, and PGK1, that are in preclinical stages. While we must await further results to assess their potential, there are promising developments in this area.
 illustrates the complex interplay between cell cycle-related genes and their influence on various signaling pathways in NETs, which are associated with the cell cycle. A deeper understanding of these intricate molecular networks may unveil novel therapeutic targets and strategies. By integrating transcriptomic and proteomic analyses with functional studies, researchers can identify key regulatory nodes and develop targeted interventions to disrupt NET tumorigenesis and progression.
 
7.

## Conclusion
The identification of numerous cell cycle-related genes that promote progression rather than inhibition has provided valuable insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying NB and PCC tumors. Notably, most genes influencing the G1/S phase transition were identified compared to those affecting other cell cycle phases. Among these, TOP2A emerged as a crucial marker, with overexpression observed in proliferating tumor cells in both NB and PCC. These findings, with the elevated MKI67 gene expression, suggest potential common patterns in adrenal gland NETs, including enhanced cell cycle progression in tumor cells that promotes tumor growth.
Given the established role of TOP2A as a therapeutic target in other cancers, exploring its potential in adrenal NETs warrants further investigation. Additionally, the overexpression of DLK1 in adult and hormone-producing CHCs, as evidenced by recent scRNA-seq studies, aligns with the availability of approved and investigational DLK1-targeted therapies for NETs. Moreover, the ongoing clinical evaluation of drugs targeting cyclins B1/A and EZH2, both implicated in NB tumorigenesis, underscores the importance of exploring these targets in NB.
Both approved and clinical-stage RET inhibitors are currently available for MTC treatment, which aligns with the recent scRNA-seq study demonstrating RET overexpression in adult malignant C cells of MTC. These findings strongly motivate further preclinical and clinical investigations into additional potential therapeutic targets. Several proteins encoded by the cell cycle-related genes discussed in this review are targets of drugs currently in preclinical development. Given the promising preclinical data, additional research is essential to evaluate the clinical efficacy and safety of these targets in NETs.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement
Ekaterina Filipovich: Writing – original draft, Visualization. Ekaterina Gorodkova: Writing – original draft, Visualization. Anastasia Shcherbakova: Writing – review & editing. Walaa Asaad: Writing – review & editing. Sergey Popov: Project administration. Galina Melnichenko: Funding acquisition. Natalya Mokrysheva: Funding acquisition. Marina Utkina: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Conceptualization.

## Data availability statement
Not applicable.

## Funding
This research received no specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing interests: Natalya Mokrysheva reports financial support was provided by Endocrinology Research Center. If there are other authors, they declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Data Availability Statement
Not applicable.