615transoncolTranslational OncologyTransl OncolNeoplasia PressPMC1268663712686637126866374128970110.1016/j.tranon.2025.102577Novel NOTCH2-NTRK1 fusion confers osimertinib resistance in EGFR-mutant non-small cell lung cancer by interacting with EGFR
LiHui WeiHuiting ZhenTiantian GaoHuabin LiuHuicong ZhengShuai ShiHuijuan LiangJiangtao ZhangFenfen YeJiecheng LinGengpeng HanAnjia aDepartment of Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510080, ChinabDepartment of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Institute of Pulmonary Diseases, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510080, China⁎Corresponding authors. yejch23@mail.sysu.edu.cnlingp6@mail.sysu.edu.cnhananjia@mail.sysu.edu.cn
1These three authors have contributed equally: Hui Li, Huiting Wei, Tiantian Zhen.
251120256310257710257710122025© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc.This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Highlights
•NOTCH2-NTRK1 transforms the human normal bronchial epithelial cell line BEAS-2B and promotes EGFR-mutated NSCLC cells proliferation both in vitro and in vivo.
•NOTCH2-NTRK1 induced osimertinib resistance in EGFR-mutated NSCLC cells by activating the MAPK and PI3K-AKT signaling pathways.
•NOTCH2-NTRK1 interacts with EGFR protein. In contrast, the NOTCH2-NTRK1 mutant fusion protein fails to interact with EGFR, thereby reversing resistance to osimertinib and significantly decreasing the expression of p-ERK, p-AKT.
•The interaction between NOTCH2-NTRK1 and EGFR persisted even with combined osimertinib and entrectinib treatment in NSCLC.
Keywords: NOTCH2-NTRK1, Osimertinib, EGFR, Non–small cell lung cancer

## Abstract

## Background
Overcoming osimertinib resistance in epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutant non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is challenging due to unclear mechanisms. We previously reported a NSCLC case with EGFR mutations progressed on osimertinib therapy, revealing a novel NOTCH2-NTRK1 fusion gene in the plasma and tumor tissue. Although the NTRK gene fusion has been identified in NSCLC and a range of tumor types, the role of NOTCH2-NTRK1 in osimertinib resistance is unclear.

## Methods
We utilized both in vitro and in vivo models exhibiting NOTCH2-NTRK1 fusion positivity to explore the biological function of NOTCH2-NTRK1, as well as its role and mechanism in osimertinib resistance.

## Results
The NOTCH2-NTRK1 fusion protein has been demonstrated to transform the human bronchial epithelial cell line BEAS-2B and promote the proliferation of NSCLC cells both in vitro and in vivo. It induces osimertinib resistance by activating MAPK and PI3K-AKT pathways. Phosphoproteomic analyses revealed a significant increase in the phosphorylation level of EGFR compared to the control group. Further investigations demonstrated that the NOTCH2-NTRK1 protein is capable of interacting with the EGFR protein. Protein molecular docking studies identified seven interacting sites between NOTCH2-NTRK1 and EGFR protein. Mutations within the region encompassing these seven interaction sites effectively reversed osimertinib resistance, leading to a significant reduction in the expression of key proteins within the MAPK and PI3K-AKT pathways. Notably, the interaction between NOTCH2-NTRK1 and EGFR was maintained even with combined osimertinib and entrectinib treatment.

## Conclusion
Our study reveals a novel mechanism by which the NOTCH2-NTRK1 fusion confers resistance to osimertinib through its interaction with EGFR in NSCLC.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2025 Jul 19; Revised 2025 Oct 4; Accepted 2025 Oct 14; Collection date 2026 Jan.

## Introduction
Globally, lung cancer remains the leading cause of cancer-related mortality and morbidity [ ]. Approximately 15 % of Caucasian and nearly 50 % of Asian patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) exhibit alterations in the tyrosine kinase domain of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) [ , ]. Osimertinib, a third-generation oral EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI), selectively inhibits EGFR-sensitizing mutations and T790M resistance mutations [ ]. Despite its initial efficacy, acquired resistance to osimertinib inevitably arises, with median progression-free survival (mPFS) reported at 19 months for first-line and 11 months for second-line treatment [ ]. Thus, the long-term benefits of osimertinib are limited by drug resistance, underscoring the need for further research into its resistance mechanisms and strategies to counteract them.
The neurotrophic tropomyosin receptor kinase (NTRK) genes belonging to the tyrosine receptor kinase family include NTRK1, NTRK2, and NTRK3, which encode the proteins TRKA, TRKB, and TRKC, respectively [ ]. NTRK genes are known to contribute to tumorigenesis through the formation of fusion genes, where the tyrosine kinase domains of NTRK1, NTRK2, or NTRK3 fuse with the N-terminus of various genes [ , , ]. The prevalence of NTRK fusions in NSCLC is relatively low [ , , ]. A study by Farago et al. analyzed 4872 NSCLC cases and found 11 cases with NTRK fusion mutations (7 with NTRK1 and 4 with NTRK3), corresponding to an incidence of approximately 0.23 % [ ]. Bang et al. conducted a retrospective analysis of 1113 solid tumors, including 510 NSCLCs, identifying NTRK fusions in two NSCLCs (0.4 %) [ ]. Another recent study of 7395 Chinese NSCLC patients found an NTRK rearrangement frequency of 0.59 % [ ].
Preliminary evidence suggests that NTRK fusions can emerge as acquired resistance mechanisms to EGFR-TKIs in NSCLC, though they occur rarely [ , , , ]. These fusions are thought to mediate osimertinib resistance by activating bypass signaling pathways, such as MAPK and PI3K-AKT [ , ]. The combination of EGFR TKIs and NTRK inhibitors may provide a novel approach to overcome drug resistance, but its effect may not last long [ ]. Additional or concurrent mechanisms of resistance associated with NTRK fusions remain unclear and warrant further investigation. In a previous report, we documented a case of a patient with lung adenocarcinoma harboring an EGFR mutation who exhibited disease progression while undergoing osimertinib therapy. During the treatment, a novel NOTCH2-NTRK1 fusion gene was identified in both the patient's plasma and tumor tissue [ ]. The biological function of the NOTCH2-NTRK1 fusion gene requires further experimental validation. Based on this case, we hypothesize that the NOTCH2-NTRK1 fusion may contribute to resistance against osimertinib. In this study, our experiments confirmed the function of NOTCH2-NTRK1 using normal human bronchial epithelial cell line and NSCLC cell lines. Subsequent investigations revealed that the NOTCH2-NTRK1 protein can interact with EGFR protein, thereby activating downstream MAPK and PI3K signaling pathways. Notably, this interaction remained unaffected despite the combination of osimertinib and entrectinib. In summary, this study elucidates a novel mechanism of osimertinib resistance, providing new insights for the development of targeted therapeutic strategies.

## Materials and methods

## Cell lines and reagents
The human bronchial epithelial cell line BEAS-2B, and human non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines H1650 (EGFR-19del) and H1975 (EGFR-T790M and L858R combined mutation) were obtained from the Chinese National Infrastructure of Cell Line Resource. BEAS-2B cells were grown in a DMEM medium, while H1650 and H1975 cells were cultured in an RPMI-1640 medium, plus with 10 %FBS, which were sourced from HyClone. Antibodies for total AKT (#4691), phosphorylated AKT (Ser473) (#4060), total ERK (#4695), phosphorylated ERK (Thr202/Tyr204) (#4370), HA (C29F4) (#3724), EGFR (D38B1) (#4267), phosphorylated EGFR (Thr669) (D2F1) (#8808), Met (D1C2) (#8198) and phosphorylated TRKA (Tyr490) (#4619) were purchased from Cell Signaling Technology. The anti-GAPDH antibody (#47724) was obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. Antibodies against pan-TRK (#RM423) were sourced from ZSGB Biotechnologies, China. The Cell Counting Kit-8 detection kit (#C0037) and blasticidin (#ST018) were acquired from Beyotime Biotechnology, China. Osimertinib (#S7297), Entrectinib (#S7998) and Trametinib (#S2673) were purchased from Selleck Chemicals LLC, Houston, TX, USA.

## Stable cell line generation
The NOTCH2-NTRK1 fusion gene and its variants were synthesized by GENEWIZ and subsequently subcloned into pLenti-MCS-P2A lentiviral expression plasmid, incorporating an HA tag. The lentivirus particles were produced in HEK293T cells utilizing the packaging plasmid-pMD2.G and psPAX2. To achieve stable expression of NOTCH2-NTRK1 and its variants, BEAS-2B, H1650, and H1975 cell lines were infected with the lentiviral particles for 48 h, followed by selection with blasticidin over a 10-day period.

## Western blotting (WB)
Cells were collected and lysed in RIPA buffer for 30 min at 4 °C. Protein concentration was measured using the BCA kit (Thermo-Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA). For each sample, 30 µg of protein was separated by 10 % SDS-PAGE and transferred to a PVDF membrane. The membranes were blocked with 5 % non-fat milk in 1 × TBST for 2 h at room temperature and then incubated overnight at 4 °C with primary antibodies for total AKT (1:1000), phosphorylated AKT (Ser473) (1:1000), total ERK (1:1000), phosphorylated ERK (Thr202/Tyr204) (1:1000), HA (1:1000), Met (1:1000), EGFR (1:1000), phosphorylated EGFR (Thr669) (1:1000), and phosphorylated TRKA (Tyr490) (1:1000). After washing with 1 × TBST, membranes were incubated with a secondary goat anti-rabbit IgG horseradish peroxidase antibody (1:4000) at room temperature for 1 h. GAPDH (1:2000) and β-actin (1:1000) were used as loading control. Protein bands were visualized using an ECL Plus detection system (Sinsage Tech, Beijing, China). Densitometric measurement of each band was performed by ImageJ v1.6 (RRID:SCR_003070).

## Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
Total RNA was extracted using the TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA), and complementary DNA (cDNA) was synthesized using the PrimeScript™ II 1st Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (#6210A, Takara, Dalian, China). PCR was performed with the following reaction conditions: an initial denaturation at 95 °C for 10 min, followed by 40 cycles of 95 °C for 15 s, 55 °C for 15 s, and 60 °C for 60 s. PCR products were separated on a 2 % agarose gel and visualized using ethidium bromide staining. GAPDH RNA served as the endogenous control. The PCR primers were as follows:
GAPDH (forward primer: 5′-AGAAGGCTGGGGCTCATTTG-3′; reverse primer: 5′- AGGGGCCATCCACAGTCTTC-3′); NOTCH2-NTRK1 (forward primer: 5′- TGCACCCTCACCTTGTGT-3′; reverse primer: 5′- CCACCGAGACCCCAAA-3′).

## Immunofluorescence (IF) staining
BEAS-2B, H1650, and H1975 cells (control and NOTCH2-NTRK1 expressing stable cell lines) were fixed with 4 % paraformaldehyde for 15 min and permeabilized with Triton X-100 for 10 min at room temperature. Following three washes with PBS, the cells were blocked with 10 % FBS overnight at 4 °C. The cells were then incubated with primary antibodies HA (1:1000), EGFR (1:1000) and Met (1:1000) overnight at 4 °C. After three additional PBS washes, cells were incubated with fluorescein-conjugated secondary antibodies including Alexa Fluor-488, Goat Anti-Mouse, #4408 (Cell Signaling Technology Cat# 4408) and Alexa Fluor-555, Goat Anti-Rabbit, #4413 (Cell Signaling Technology Cat# 4413) in the dark for 1 h at room temperature, followed by DAPI staining for 10 min. Finally, images were acquired using a fluorescence microscope (IX71, Olympus, Tokyo, Japan).

## Cell proliferation assay
After 24 h of culture, BEAS-2B, H1650, and H1975 cells (control and NOTCH2-NTRK1 expressing stable cell lines) were seeded into 96-well plates at a density of 2 × 103 cells per well. Once the cells fully adhered, 10 µL of CCK-8 solution was added to each well, followed by incubation at 37 °C for 2 h. Optical density (OD) at 450 nm was measured. Absorbance values were recorded in triplicate for each well at 24, 48, 72, and 96 h, and a growth curve was subsequently generated.
For the cell viability assay, H1650 and H1975 cells, along with their respective stable cell lines and variants, were seeded in 96-well plates at a density of 2 × 103 cells per well and cultured overnight to ensure cell adherence. Each group was then treated with a predetermined drug combination for an additional 96 h, followed by the CCK-8 assay. OD at 450 nm was then measured, the growth inhibition curve was plotted, and the IC50 values were calculated.

## Adhesion-dependent colony formation assay
BEAS-2B, H1650, and H1975 cells (control and NOTCH2-NTRK1 expressing stable cell lines) were seeded into 6-well plates at a density of 200 cells per well. The culture medium was replaced every 3 days for 2 weeks. For osimertinib treatment, the compounds were administered post-cell adhesion to ensure that each well reached the predetermined final drug concentration (100 nM). The culture medium was changed every 4 days. After 2 weeks, the initial culture medium was removed, and cells were washed twice with PBS, fixed with 4 % paraformaldehyde, and stained with 0.5 % crystal violet for 15 min. The number of colonies was then quantified and documented through imaging.

## Soft agar colony formation assay
About 2 × 104 BEAS-2B cells (control and NOTCH2-NTRK1 expressing stable cell lines) were placed in DMEM containing 0.4 % agar (Kasvi, Campina, Brazil) and plated over a layer of DMEM containing 0.6 % agar existing in 6-well tissue culture plates. The plates were incubated at 37 °C in a 5 % CO2 incubator for 3 weeks and the fresh medium was added to the top layer every 3 days. Similarly, about 1 × 104 H1650 and H1975 cells (control and NOTCH2-NTRK1 expressing stable cell lines) were placed in RPMI-1640 containing 0.4 % agar and plated over a layer of RPMI-1640 containing 0.6 % agar. The cultures were examined every 2 days for 2 weeks. At the end-point, the colony formation was observed under a bright-field microscope. Each treatment was performed in triplicate.

## Immunohistochemical (IHC) analyses
Immunohistochemical staining for NOTCH2-NTRK1 was conducted on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue sections derived from mouse xenograft tumors. The sections were deparaffinized and rehydrated using a graded ethanol series. Antigen retrieval was achieved by heating the sections in citric buffer (pH 6.0) for 3 min in a microwave oven. After rinsing with distilled water, the sections were blocked with 3 % hydrogen peroxide and incubated overnight at 4 °C with an anti-pan-TRK monoclonal antibody (1:500, #RM423, ZSGB Biotechnologies, China). The tissues were then stained with an EnVision-HRP secondary antibody for 30 min at room temperature, washed with PBS, stained with 0.5 % diaminobenzidine, counterstained with Mayer’s hematoxylin, air dried, and finally sealed with glycerol gelatin.

## Co-immunoprecipitation (CO-IP) assay
BEAS-2B, H1650, and H1975 cells, along with their respective stable cell lines, were washed with PBS and lysed in 1 % NP40 lysis buffer for 30 min on ice. The cell lysates were then collected and centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 15 min at 4 °C. The resulting supernatants were immunoprecipitated overnight at 4 °C using antibodies against EGFR (1:1000), and HA tag (1:1000). Prewashed protein A/G-agarose beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.) were then added to the supernatants and incubated for an additional 2 h at 4 °C. The immune complexes were washed three times with lysis buffer, resuspended in sample buffer, and analyzed via WB.

## Protein-protein docking
The 3D structure of the NOTCH2-NTRK1 fusion protein was built by Alphafold2, while the 3D structure of EGFR was downloaded from RCSB Protein Data Bank (http://www.rcsb.org/). Protein-protein docking between the NOTCH2-NTRK1 fusion protein and EGFR was performed using HDOCK, which predicts binding complexes between two molecules, such as proteins or protein-RNA complexes, through a hybrid docking strategy. Molecular graphics were generated by PyMOL (www.pymol.org).

## RNA sequencing
Total RNA from H1975 and H1975-NOTCH2-NTRK1 cells was extracted using the TRIzol Reagent/RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). RNA quality was assessed using an Agilent 2100/2200 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA, USA). For library preparation, 1 μg total RNA was used. Next-generation sequencing libraries were prepared according to the manufacturer’s protocol. PCR products were cleaned up with beads, validated using a Qsep100 (Bioptic, Taiwan, China), and quantified with a Qubit3.0 Fluorometer (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Sequencing was performed with a 2 × 150 paired-end (PE) configuration. Image analysis and base calling were conducted using the HiSeq Control Software (HCS) in conjunction with OLB and GAPipeline-1.6 (Illumina) on the HiSeq instrument. Genetic difference analysis was performed using DESeq2 (V1.6.3) of the Bioconductor software package according to the difference significance criteria (differential gene expression change was more than 2 times and q value (fdr, padj) ≤ 0.05). The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) is a collection of databases dealing with genomes, biological pathways, diseases, drugs, and chemical substances (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/KEGG). We used scripts in house to enrich significant differential expression gene in KEGG pathways.

## 4D-Label-free phosphoproteomics analyses
4D label-free quantitative proteomic analyses were performed by Shanghai Applied Protein Technology Co. Ltd. (Shanghai, China). Specifically, H1975 and H1975-NOTCH2-NTRK1 cells were lysed in SDT buffer (4 % SDS, 100 mM Tris–HCl, 1 mM DTT, pH 7.6), and protein concentrations were measured using the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo-Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA). Each sample was processed using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP Digestion) procedure. Peptides were desalted using a C18 cartridge and resuspended in 0.1 % formic acid. The enrichment of phosphopeptides was carried out using a High-SelectTM Fe-NTA Phosphopeptides Enrichment Kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Scientific). LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker), coupled with a NanoElute system (Bruker Daltonics). The MS raw data for each sample were processed and analyzed using MaxQuant software for both identification and quantitation. The global false discovery rate (FDR) cutoff for peptide and protein identification was set to 0.01. Proteins with a fold change greater than 2 or less than 0.5 and the p value below 0.05 were considered differentially expressed.

## Animal experiments
Four-week-old female BALB/c-nude mice were purchased from Beijing Vitalriver Experimental Animal Technology (Beijing, China). The mice were randomly assigned into six distinct groups, each comprising 4 mice (n = 24 in total). The groups included the BEAS-2B control group, the BEAS-2B-NOTCH2-NTRK1 group, the H1975 control group, the H1975-NOTCH2-NTRK1 group, the H1975 control + osimertinib group, and the H1975-NOTCH2-NTRK1 + osimertinib group. BEAS-2B and H1975 cells, as well as their corresponding stable cell lines (1 × 106 cells per mouse), were subcutaneously injected into one side of the back of the nude mice. Upon tumor palpation, the dimensions of the xenograft tumors were recorded at weekly intervals. The observation period for mice in the BEAS-2B group extended to 10 weeks, whereas mice in the H1975 group were monitored for 4 weeks. Osimertinib was given at 5 mg/kg daily for a week, starting the second week after tumor xenografts were established in the H1975 group. Tumor growth was tracked for two more weeks. The calculation of tumor volume was done using the formula L × W2 × 0.52, where L represents the length and W represents the width. After the experiment, mice were weighed, photographed, and their tumor tissues were analyzed by immunohistochemical analysis. The Animal Ethics Committee of the First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen University approved all procedures. The sanction number for the animal ethical clearance is No. [2023]024.

## Statistical analysis
GraphPad Prism 8 and SPSS 25.0 were employed for all statistical analyses. Comparisons between two groups were conducted using the Student’s t-test (two-tailed, unpaired). Data are presented as mean ± SD, and P < 0.05 was considered as statistically significant.

## Results

## NOTCH2-NTRK1 induces the transformation of the human bronchial epithelial cell line BEAS-2B and promotes the proliferation of NSCLC cells both in vitro and in vivo
In previous research, we identified a novel fusion gene, NOTCH2-NTRK1, in a patient with NSCLC [ ]. The cBioPortal for Cancer Genomics (cBioPortal, http://www.cbioportal.org) serves as an open-access online resource that consolidates raw data from extensive genomic projects, such as The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), MSK-IMPACT, and the International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC) [ ]. To date, there have been no reports of NOTCH2-NTRK1 fusions within the cBioPortal database. This finding reinforces the notion that the NOTCH2-NTRK1 fusion is an original discovery in gene fusion research. Nevertheless, the function of this fusion gene remain largely unexplored. The structure of the NOTCH2-NTRK1 fusion gene, illustrated in A, consists of exons 1–4 from the NOTCH2 gene and exons 9–19 from the NTRK1 gene. This fusion gene encodes a protein of 638 amino acids (aa), with the 1–225 aa segment derived from NOTCH2, including a calcium-binding EGF-like domain, and the 226–638 aa segment from NTRK1, encompassing a protein kinase domain. To determine the biological significance of the NOTCH2-NTRK1 fusion gene, we synthesized and subcloned it into the pLenti-MCS-P2A lentiviral expression plasmid, incorporating an HA tag. Successful expression of the fusion gene was confirmed using PCR (Supplementary Fig. 1A), and the protein was identified by Western blotting (WB) analysis through HA tag-specific antibody (Supplementary Fig. 1B). The NOTCH2-NTRK1 mRNA measured about 161 base pairs (bp), and the protein's molecular weight was approximately 70 kDa. The immunofluorescence analysis revealed cytoplasmic localization of the NOTCH2-NTRK1 protein ( B). Then, the human bronchial epithelial cell line BEAS-2B was selected for adhesion-dependent colony formation and soft agar colony formation assays. The results showed that the number of clones formed in the NOTCH2-NTRK1 group was higher ( C) and the diameter of the colony spheres was larger ( D). To further assess the impact of NOTCH2-NTRK1 on cellular proliferation in vivo, we conducted a tumorigenicity assay using nude mice. BEAS-2B-NOTCH2-NTRK1 cells and negative control cells, were subcutaneously injected into the one side of the back of the nude mice. By the 10th week post-injection, tumors were observed in the NOTCH2-NTRK1 group (3 out of 4 mice), whereas no tumors developed in the control group (0 out of 4 mice) ( E). Hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining of the tumor tissue showed that tumor cells were arranged in solid sheets with abundant cytoplasm and prominent nucleoli (Supplementary Fig. 1C). Additionally, pan-TRK immunohistochemistry of the tumor tissues revealed cytoplasmic diffuse strong positive staining (Supplementary Fig. 1C), consistent with the findings in B. Furthermore, H1650 and H1975 cell lines were chosen for in vitro and in vivo experiments. The CCK8 assay demonstrated that stable overexpression of NOTCH2-NTRK1 significantly enhanced cell proliferation compared to the control group ( F). Adhesion-dependent colony formation and soft agar colony formation assays produced similar results in H1650 and H1975 cells as observed in BEAS-2B cells ( G and Supplementary Fig. 1D). Finally, xenografts were established using H1975-NOTCH2-NTRK1 and negative control cells. The H1975-NOTCH2-NTRK1 group showed a notable increase in tumor volume and weight compared to the control after 4 weeks ( H). Hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining of H1975-NOTCH2-NTRK1 xenograft tumor tissue revealed pronounced atypia and avtive mitotic figures. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) results further indicated strong positive pan-TRK staining in the tumor cell membrane and cytoplasm (Supplementary Fig. 1E). Taken together, these findings imply that NOTCH2-NTRK1 possesses the capacity to transform the human bronchial epithelial cell line BEAS-2B and enhance the proliferation of NSCLC cells both in vitro and in vivo.
 

## NOTCH2-NTRK1 confers NSCLC cells resistance to osimertinib
The emergence of the NOTCH2-NTRK1 fusion gene during the NSCLC patient's osimertinib treatment, coinciding with disease progression, led us to hypothesize that this fusion gene may contribute to osimertinib resistance in NSCLC. To validate this, H1650 and H1975 cell lines were treated with varying concentration of osimertinib. In H1650 cells, the IC50 value rose from 267.3 nM in the control group to 7359 nM in the NOTCH2-NTRK1 group. Likewise, in H1975 cells, it increased from 108.1 nM to 2473 nM ( A and B). An adhesion-dependent colony formation assay on H1650 and H1975 cells treated with 100 nM osimertinib for 2 weeks revealed more and larger clones in the NOTCH2-NTRK1 group compared to the control ( C). In order to further evaluate this effect in vivo, we developed xenograft models in nude mice using H1975-NOTCH2-NTRK1 cells and negative control cells. After 2 weeks, tumor xenografts were successfully established and subsequently treated with osimertinib at a dosage of 5 mg/kg per day for one week. Tumor growth was monitored for an additional 2 weeks. The results indicated that tumors in the NOTCH2-NTRK1 group grew more rapidly than those in the control group ( D). Moreover, the tumors in the NOTCH2-NTRK1 group exhibited a significantly greater weight ( D). Collectively, these findings reveal that NOTCH2-NTRK1 confers NSCLC resistance to osimertinib both in vitro and in vivo.
 

## NOTCH2-NTRK1 exerts its oncogene function through the MAPK and PI3K-AKT signaling pathways
To investigate the underlying mechanisms of NOTCH2-NTRK1 in the progression of NSCLC, we extracted total RNA from H1975-NOTCH2-NTRK1 cells and control cells, followed by RNA sequencing. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified between the NOTCH2-NTRK1 and control groups. As illustrated in A and Supplementary Fig. 2A, a total of 3041 DEGs were detected, with 1195 genes up-regulated (indicated by red) and 1846 genes down-regulated (indicated by blue). Genes without statistically significant differences are represented by gray. Subsequently, the identified DEGs were subjected to KEGG pathway analysis. The KEGG terms were categorized into five distinct groups: organismal systems, metabolism, human diseases, environmental information processing, and cellular processes. Within the environmental information processing category, the PI3K-AKT signaling pathway and the MAPK signaling pathway emerged as the most significantly enriched terms ( B). In addition, the top 30 enriched KEGG terms were illustrated in Supplementary Fig. 2B. Furthermore, Western blot (WB) analysis was conducted to assess key protein expression in two pathways. The results indicated an upregulation of p-ERK1/2 and p-AKT in the NOTCH2-NTRK1 group relative to the control group ( C). To further validate these findings, H1650 and H1975 cells were treated with 100 nM osimertinib, and the temporal changes in the key proteins of these pathways were monitored at 0, 0.5, 1 and 4 h post-treatment using WB analysis. The findings indicated that both p-ERK1/2 and p-AKT increased significantly at different time points, with p-ERK1/2 reaching its peak at 4 h and p-AKT at 1 h ( D and E). Collectively, these findings suggest that NOTCH2-NTRK1 mediates its oncogenic function through the MAPK and PI3K-AKT signaling pathways.
 

## NOTCH2-NTRK1 interacts with EGFR protein
To elucidate how NOTCH2-NTRK1 causes NSCLC cells resistance to osimertinib, we performed quantitative phosphoproteomic analyses on H1975-NOTCH2-NTRK1 cells and corresponding negative control cells. This study identified a total of 3890 phosphoproteins, 8791 phosphopeptides, and 13,165 phosphosites. Among these, 2865 proteins were quantified, encompassing 5578 quantified phosphopeptides and 6524 quantified phosphosites (Supplementary Fig. 3A). To identify significantly altered peptides, two distinct categories were established: one characterized by significantly changing in abundance, where phosphorylated peptides exhibited differential expression based on screening fold and P value; and the other characterized by a consistent presence/absence expression profile, where two or more phosphorylated peptides were present in one group of samples while being entirely absent in the other group. In the previous category, we utilized criteria of a fold change (FC) greater than 2.0 (indicating up-regulation) or less than 0.5 (indicating down-regulation), along with a P value of less than 0.05, in comparison to the control group. Based on these parameters, we identified 183 up-regulated and 276 down-regulated phosphorylated peptides ( A). In the latter category, 584 phosphorylated peptides were up-regulated and 752 were down-regulated (Supplementary Fig. 3B). The subcellular localization of proteins associated with differentially expressed peptides was analyzed using the CELLO subcellular structure prediction software. The analysis revealed that 62.87 % of the differentially expressed phosphoproteins were localized in the nucleus, 19.62 % in the cytoplasm, 7.49 % in the plasma membrane, 5.18 % in the mitochondria, and 3.95 % in the extracellular space (Supplementary Fig. 3C). Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment was performed to predict the biological functions of proteins with differentially expressed peptides. GO functional annotations are divided into three main categories: Biological Process (BP), Molecular Function (MF), and Cellular Component (CC). As illustrated in Supplementary Fig. 3D, cellular process emerged as the most enriched term among the biological process GO category. In the molecular function category, binding was identified as the most enriched term. Cell was the most significantly enriched term in the cellular component category. Bubble diagram of enriched GO terms in the molecular function category further revealed significant alterations in protein binding, actin binding, and actin filament binding (Supplementary Fig. 3E). Protein domains are distinct regions within proteins that share similar sequences, structures, and functions across various proteins, acting as key units of protein evolution. Changes in amino acids or modifications in these domains can significantly impact a protein's primary function. Therefore, precise domain prediction is crucial for understanding a protein's essential functions and potential biological roles. This study used the domain prediction tool InterProScan to predict the domains of proteins with differentially expressed peptides. The findings demonstrated that the protein kinase domain represented the most significantly enriched term ( B).
 Subsequently, we focused on changes in protein tyrosine kinase phosphorylation and found that 16 protein tyrosine kinases were altered, with EGFR exhibiting the most significant change ( C and Supplementary Table 1). Notably, there are two significant phosphorylated sites for EGFR, specifically T693 and S991. However, due to variations in calculation methods, these sites corresponded to T669 and S967 after excluding 24 signal peptides. As antibodies against the EGFR S967 site were unavailable, subsequent WB analyses focused solely on detecting changes in the EGFR T669 protein. WB analysis further confirmed an increase in p-EGFR T669 expression in the NOTCH2-NTRK1 group compared to the control group ( D). The T669 site, located near the EGFR membrane domain, is phosphorylated by ERK from the MAPK pathway, not by EGFR itself. This phosphorylation acts as a negative feedback mechanism to curb excessive EGFR signaling and prevent over-proliferation [ , ]. Additionally, the administration of the MEK inhibitor trametinib to H1975 cells expressing NOTCH2-NTRK1 resulted in a decrease in T669 phosphorylation at 0.5, 1, and 4 h compared to the 0 h (Supplementary Fig. 4A). This suggests that the increased phosphorylation of EGFR-T669 may be associated with the activation of the MAPK pathway.
Since the phosphorylation changes of EGFR ranks the first, we focus on the relationship between NOTCH2-NTRK1 and EGFR. We firstly conducted an immunofluorescence-based co-localization experiment. Using an HA antibody to detect the NOTCH2-NTRK1 protein, we observed that the NOTCH2-NTRK1 co-localized with EGFR ( E). Subsequently, a Co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) assay was performed using BEAS-2B, H1650, and H1975 cells expressing NOTCH2-NTRK1. Following immunoprecipitation using either anti-HA or IgG control antibodies, proteins were resolved via SDS-PAGE and detected through immunoblotting with anti-EGFR or anti-HA antibodies. The findings demonstrated that the EGFR co-precipitated with HA, and consistent results were observed with anti-EGFR immunoprecipitation ( F). These data suggest that the NOTCH2-NTRK1 protein interacts with EGFR protein. Additionally, as illustrated in C, the phosphorylation levels of Met were significantly elevated in the NOTCH2-NTRK1 group compared to the control group. Interestingly, subsequent experiments revealed that the NOTCH2-NTRK1 protein is capable of interacting with the Met protein (Supplementary Fig. 4B and 4C).

## The mutant NOTCH2-NTRK1 protein, ΔY490, reverses NSCLC cells resistance to osimertinib
In order to further explore the interaction sites between NOTCH2-NTRK1 and EGFR protein, molecular docking was conducted using the HDOCK server. The three-dimensional (3D) structure of the NOTCH2-NTRK1 fusion protein was predicted using AlphaFold2 (Supplementary Fig. 5A). Ramachandran plots for the NOTCH2-NTRK1 fusion protein showed that over 98 % of the residues are located within allowed regions, confirming the reliability of the 3D structure model (Supplementary Fig. 5B). The surface model of EGFR with the NOTCH2-NTRK1 fusion protein was displayed in Supplementary Fig. 5C. The 3D binding model revealed interactions between the residues of these two proteins ( A). Specifically, the residues Ser335, Lys381, Glu376, Glu406, Glu409, Asn304, and Asp318 within the NOTCH2-NTRK1 fusion protein form hydrogen bonds with the residues Arg752, Ser971, Ser967, His781, Pro770, Ile994, and Asn792 in EGFR protein, with a detailed list shown in Supplementary Fig. 5D. The intact amino acid series of NOTCH2-NTRK1 protein was shown in B, and the predicted seven amino acid residues interacting with EGFR protein were colored in red. Then we developed a mutant version of the NOTCH2-NTRK1 fusion protein, termed variant 1 (ΔY490), with a truncation from Asn304 to Glu409. The truncated region was underlined ( B). The Y490 site of TRKA, located within this truncated region plays a pivotal role in various biological functions. Previous studies have indicated that it serves as a binding site for SHC [ , ]. Khamo et al. demonstrated that the tyrosine residue Y490 of TRKA contributes to PC12 cell differentiation [ ], and is essential for activating both the MAPK and PI3K-AKT signaling pathways [ , ]. Based on the findings, we generated a second mutant version of NOTCH2-NTRK1, denoted as Y490A, where tyrosine (Y) at position 490 was substituted with alanine (A). Tyrosine at position 490 in the intact NTRK1 protein (corresponding to position 329 in the NOTCH2-NTRK1 fusion protein) was marked in green ( B).
 Subsequently, stable cell lines expressing ΔY490 or Y490A variant were established using BEAS-2B and H1975 cell lines. Sanger sequencing confirmed the successful construction of these variants (Supplementary Fig. 5E and 5F), and mRNA of ΔY490 and Y490A were validated by PCR analysis (Supplementary Fig. 5 G). To investigate the potential interaction between the ΔY490 or Y490A variants and EGFR, we performed an immunofluorescence co-localization experiment. The HA antibody was employed to detect the presence of the proteins with ΔY490 or Y490A, and the results showed that the Y490A variant co-localized with EGFR, whereas the ΔY490 variant did not ( C). Furthermore, a co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) assay was performed using BEAS-2B and H1975 cell lines expressing either ΔY490 or Y490A variants. In cells expressing the Y490A variant, immunoprecipitation with anti-HA antibodies successfully co-precipitated EGFR, confirmed by immunoblotting, with consistent results obtained using anti-EGFR antibodies. Conversely, the Co-IP assay for the ΔY490 variant did not yield similar outcomes (The molecular weight of ΔY490 variant was approximately 58 kDa) ( D). These findings suggest that the ΔY490 variant loses the ability to interact with EGFR, highlighting the critical role of the truncated region in binding to EGFR.
In order to further investigate the response of NOTCH2-NTRK1 variants to osimertinib, we conducted osimertinib treatment experiments using H1975 cells. The results demonstrated a significant reduction in the mean IC50 concentration of osimertinib in the ΔY490 variant group (159.8 nM) compared to the wild-type NOTCH2-NTRK1 group (2480 nM) ( E). In adhesion-dependent colony formation assays, the ΔY490 variant group showed a decrease in both colony number and size compared to the wild-type NOTCH2-NTRK1 group, with no significant difference observed in the Y490A variant group ( F). Further WB analysis was conducted to examine changes in key proteins within the MAPK and PI3K-AKT signaling pathways at 0, 0.5, 1 and 4 h post-treatment. Compared to the wild-type NOTCH2-NTRK1 group, the ΔY490 variant group exhibited a significant reduction in the levels of p-ERK1/21/2 and p-AKT, whereas the Y490A variant did not demonstrate notable alterations in these phosphorylated proteins ( G). Furthermore, the expression levels of p-EGFR T669 were significantly diminished in the ΔY490 variant group. Conversely, p-TRKA Y490 was undetectable in both the ΔY490 and Y490A variant groups ( G). Taken together, these results suggest that the ΔY490 variant reverses NSCLC cells resistance to osimertinib by modulating the MAPK and PI3K-AKT pathways.
In addition, we examined the effects of various agents on H1975 cells harboring NOTCH2-NTRK1. The results revealed that while entrectinib alone was effective in suppressing cell proliferation, the concomitant administration of osimertinib and entrectinib resulted in a more substantial inhibitory effect ( A). Subsequent Western blot analysis indicated that treatment with 500 nM entrectinib led to a downregulation of p-ERK1/21/2 and p-AKT levels. This downregulation was significantly enhanced when 100 nM osimertinib was combined with 500 nM entrectinib, with a particularly pronounced decrease observed in p-ERK1/2 levels ( B). Interestingly, Co-IP results indicated that the NOTCH2-NTRK1 fusion protein was still able to interact with EGFR protein under this treatment ( C).
 In conclusion, our study elucidates the mechanism by which the NOTCH2-NTRK1 fusion protein interacts with EGFR, resulting in activation of the MAPK and AKT signaling pathways. This interaction promotes cellular proliferation and contributes to resistance against osimertinib ( D). Furthermore, this interaction may serve as a complementary mechanism to the classical osimertinib resistance pathway.

## Discussion
NTRK gene fusions have been documented across various tumors, including lung cancer [ , ]. Typically, the C-terminal region of the NTRK fusions retains an intact tyrosine kinase domain [ ]. In our previous study, we reported a novel fusion gene comprising NOTCH2 (Exons 1–4) and NTRK1 (Exons 9–19), which preserves the complete tyrosine kinase domains. Specifically, the tyrosine kinase region of NTRK1 is located within exons 11–16. In the field of fusion gene research, upstream gene partners frequently contain oligomerization domains such as zinc finger (ZF), coiled-coil (C—C), helix-loop-helix (HLH), Phox and Bem1p interaction domains, RNA recognition motifs (RRMs), and/or WD repeats, which are crucial for the full activation of the downstream kinase [ ]. However, the partner NOTCH2 lacks these domains and instead contains only the calcium-binding EGF-like region. Despite this, our findings indicate that the NOTCH2-NTRK1 fusion gene exhibits biological functionality.
Previous research has established that NTRK gene fusions lead to the dysregulated activation of signaling pathways, including MAPK, PI3K, and PLC-gamma, thereby enhancing cell survival [ , ]. Vaishnavi et al. demonstrated that MPRIP-NTRK1 and CD74-NTRK1 fusions induced IL-3-independent proliferation of Ba/F3 cells via the MAPK and PI3K-AKT pathways [ ]. Additionally, in breast cancer models, TRKA overexpression was found to enhance tumor cell aggressiveness through the activation of the MAPK and PI3K pathways [ ]. Our findings align with those documented in the existing literature. Furthermore, the KEGG enriched pathway also encompasses the TNF signaling pathway, the Wnt signaling pathway, and the FoxO signaling pathway. Additional experiments are required to verify these findings.
The mechanisms underlying osimertinib resistance can be broadly categorized into EGFR-dependent and EGFR-independent pathways. Research has indicated that oncogenic fusions contribute to osimertinib resistance through an EGFR-independent mechanism, occurring in 3–10 % of patients, particularly in those receiving osimertinib as a second-line treatment [ , ]. It is widely accepted that fusion genes contribute to osimertinib resistance by activating bypass signaling pathways. The fusion oncogene produces chimeric oncoproteins that form a homodimer, resulting in ligand-independent activation of the kinase domain, also known as constitutive activation. Consequently, this leads to sustained activation of downstream signaling pathways, which is crucial for tumor maintenance [ ]. However, beyond bypass signaling, additional mechanisms may underlie the carcinogenic effects of fusion proteins. Evidence suggests that fusion proteins can interact with other proteins or adaptor proteins, activating downstream signaling pathways that drive cellular transformation or confer drug resistance. For example, research has shown that TPR–NTRK1 and TPM3–NTRK1 fusion proteins interact with SHC and IRS, activating the MAPK and PI3K pathways [ , ]. Lannon et al. have reported that the ETV6-NTRK3 fusion protein interacts with IRS-1, initiating downstream signaling and promoting cellular transformation [ ]. The involvement of the EGFR protein in drug resistance mediated by fusion proteins has been examined in only a few studies. Miyawaki et al. have reported that activation of the wild-type EGFR signaling pathway can induce resistance to ceritinib in ALK-translocated lung cancer cells [ ]. However, their study did not investigate the relationship between the ALK fusion protein and the EGFR. Vaishnavi et al. have found that EGFR-mediated bypass signaling is activated following treatment with ALK or ROS1 inhibitors, enhancing downstream pathways such as MAPK. They also confirmed that fusion gene inhibitors shift adaptor protein GRB2 binding from the fusion oncoprotein to EGFR [ ]. The interaction between EGFR and other signaling pathways is exemplified in squamous cell carcinoma, where the MET proto-oncogene induces EGFR ligand release through Erk2-mediated transcriptional upregulation of amphiregulin. This crosstalk between MET and EGFR pathways highlights the role of Erk2 as a critical downstream signal transducer, further emphasizing the interconnectedness of these signaling networks in cancer progression [ ]. Our findings reveal that the NOTCH2-NTRK1 fusion protein is capable of interacting with EGFR, leading to osimertinib resistance, a mechanism not previously documented. Furthermore, our phosphoproteomic analysis revealed an increased phosphorylation level of EGFR and other receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs), including BRAF, ERBB3, and EPHA2. This raises the question of whether the NOTCH2-NTRK1 fusion protein interacts with these RTKs to mediate drug resistance, a hypothesis that warrants further investigation.
The integration of osimertinib with inhibitors targeting oncogenic fusions appears to be a viable strategy to overcome resistance induced by these fusions. Zeng et al. demonstrated that combining crizotinib with osimertinib effectively counteracted osimertinib resistance resulting from GOPC-ROS1 rearrangement [ ]. Additionally, EML4-ALK fusion can be managed effectively with a concomitant of osimertinib and alectinib (an ALK inhibitor) or crizotinib [ ]. An in vitro study found that the CCDC6-RET fusion caused resistance to osimertinib, which was reversed when combined with BLU-667 (a RET inhibitor) by inhibiting ERK and AKT phosphorylation [ ]. However, treatment strategies for NTRK fusion following osimertinib resistance are documented in only a few cases. Xia et al. reported an EGFR T790M mutation case where an LMNA-NTRK1 fusion was identified post-osimertinib treatment; the disease responded to a crizotinib and osimertinib combination [ ]. Similarly, Wang et al. described an NSCLC case with an EGFR exon 19 deletion where an LMNA-NTRK1 fusion emerged post-osimertinib treatment. The patient responded favorably to entrectinib (an NTRK inhibitor) combined with osimertinib, although pancreatic metastasis showed slow progression over five months [ ]. In a case previously reported by our team, a patient with a NOTCH2-NTRK1 fusion following osimertinib treatment showed improved clinical symptoms with larotrectinib and osimertinib. However, disease stability was maintained for only two months [ ]. Another patient harboring a TPR-NTRK1 fusion and an EGFR mutation was administered a combination therapy of osimertinib and ensartinib, achieving initial stability for two months, though the disease progressed after five months [ ]. During osimertinib treatment, MET gene amplification and BRAF V600E mutation are also recognized as significant acquired resistance mechanism. Combining MET inhibitors, such as crizotinib, with EGFR TKIs can enhance outcomes, achieving an 81.8 % ORR in one study, but with a median PFS of just 5.8 months [ ]. Another study showed a 50 % ORR with a median PFS of 3.5 months, underscoring the temporary nature of these responses [ ]. Evidence shows that combining BRAF inhibitors (such as dabrafenib) and MEK inhibitors (such as trametinib) with osimertinib is effective in some patients, though long-term effects need more study [ , , ]. These observations imply the existence of additional resistance mechanisms. The non-EGFR-dependent drug resistance and EGFR pathways do not operate independently. The protein-protein interactions identified in this study may contribute to the drug resistance mechanism, suggesting that targeting these interactions could represent a viable therapeutic strategy. According to the current NCCN guidelines for NSCLC, it is advised that all fundamental testing procedures be conducted at the time of initial diagnosis. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) is prioritized as the primary testing method, encompassing NTRK fusion testing, which aids in the prevention of missed detections of rare fusion genes.
Furthermore, NTRK fusions are prevalent in various tumor types, such as infantile fibrosarcomas, congenital mesoblastic nephroma, and secretory carcinoma, which typically do not exhibit EGFR mutations [ ]. It remains unclear whether this interaction occurs in these tumors. Additional experiments are required to ascertain whether this interaction is unique or common, thereby providing a novel theoretical foundation and strategic approach for the treatment of these tumors.
In conclusion, this study substantiates that the novel NOTCH2-NTRK1 fusion promotes the proliferation of NSCLC cells both in vitro and in vivo settings and confers resistance to osimertinib by activating MAPK and PI3K-AKT signaling pathways. Furthermore, the interaction between NOTCH2-NTRK1 and EGFR proteins is still observed despite treatment with osimertinib and entrectinib. This novel mechanism advance our comprehension of osimertinib resistance and suggest potential therapeutic strategies for overcoming this clinical challenge.
Supplementary Fig. 1. (A) The NOTCH2-NTRK1 fusion mRNA detected by PCR. (B) The expression of the NOTCH2-NTRK1 fusion protein detected by Western blotting using HA-tag specific antibody. (C) Hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining and immunohistochemistry detection of NOTCH2-NTRK1 protein using a pan-TRK antibody from BEAS-2B-NOTCH2-NTRK1 xenograft tumors. Original magnification: 200 ×, 400 × . (D) Soft agar colony formation assay of the H1650 and H1975 cells. **P < 0.01, and ***P < 0.001. Data were presented as means ± SD from two biological replicates. (E) HE staining and immunohistochemistry detection of NOTCH2-NTRK1 protein from H1975-NOTCH2-NTRK1 xenograft tumors. Original magnification: 200 ×, 400 ×
Supplementary Fig. 2. (A) The histogram of differential gene expression analysis. (B) Scatter diagram of the differentially expressed genes (DEGs), including the top 30 enriched KEGG terms.
Supplementary Fig. 3. (A) The histogram of quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis. (B) Statistical results of differentially expressed phosphorylated peptides. (C) The subcellular localization of the differentially expressed phosphoproteins. (D) GO enrichment analysis of proteins with differentially expressed peptides. (Biological Process, BP; Molecular Function, MF; Cellular Component, CC) (E) Bubble diagram of enriched GO terms in the molecular function category.
Supplementary Fig. 4. (A) Expression levels of p-EGFR T669 and p-ERK1/2 in H1975 cell lines expressing NOTCH2-NTRK1 at 0, 0.5, 1 and 4 h following treatment with 5 nM trametinib assessed by WB analysis. (B) Co-localization between NOTCH2-NTRK1 with Met by immunofluorescence staining. The HA (green) or the Met (red) antibody was used to detect NOTCH2-NTRK1 and Met protein, respectively. DAPI (blue) was used for nuclei staining. Images are shown at 200 × magnification. (C) Co-IP between NOTCH2-NTRK1 with Met in H1975 cell lines expressing NOTCH2-NTRK1. (IP: immunoprecipitation, IB: immunoblotting)
Supplementary Fig. 5. (A) The structure model of NOTCH2-NTRK1 fusion protein. NOTCH2 protein was denoted in magenta and NTRK1 protein was depicted in gray. (B) The Ramachandran plot of NOTCH2-NTRK1 fusion protein, with dark green dots representing the residues in favored regions, yellow dots representing the residues in allowed regions, and red representing the residues in irrational regions. (C) The surface binding model of EGFR with the NOTCH2-NTRK1. EGFR was colored in marine. NOTCH2 protein was denoted in magenta and NTRK1 protein was depicted in gray. (D) Interaction list between NOTCH2-NTRK1 fusion protein and EGFR protein. (E) Validation of variant ΔY490 by Sanger sequencing. (F) Validation of variant Y490A by Sanger sequencing. (G) Confirmation of successful construction of the ΔY490 and Y490A variants by PCR.

## Funding
This work was supported by Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong province (No. 2021A15–15012379; No. 2022A15–15012550) to Han A, Wu Jieping Medical Foundation (No. 320.6750.2024–13–54) to Lin G, the Young Scientists Fund of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 82303026) and GuangDong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (No. 2022A1515111210) to Ye J.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement
Hui Li: Writing – original draft, Investigation, Formal analysis. Huiting Wei: Formal analysis, Data curation. Tiantian Zhen: Investigation, Formal analysis. Huabin Gao: Methodology. Huicong Liu: Validation, Data curation. Shuai Zheng: Validation. Huijuan Shi: Resources. Jiangtao Liang: Methodology. Fenfen Zhang: Methodology. Jiecheng Ye: Writing – review & editing, Investigation, Supervision, Funding acquisition. Gengpeng Lin: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Conceptualization. Anjia Han: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Conceptualization.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

## Acknowledgments
We thank the team of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine of the First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University for the collection of specimen and data processing.

## Footnotes
Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.tranon.2025.102577.

## Contributor Information
Jiecheng Ye, Email: yejch23@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
Gengpeng Lin, Email: lingp6@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
Anjia Han, Email: hananjia@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

Appendix.

## Supplementary materials

Image, image 1
Image, image 2
Image, image 3
Image, application 4
Image, application 5
Image, image 6
Image, image 7

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
Image, image 1Image, image 2Image, image 3Image, application 4Image, application 5Image, image 6Image, image 7