pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLOS One1932-6203PLOSPMC12306784PMC12306784.112306784123067844072934610.1371/journal.pone.0324056PONE-D-24-217171Research ArticleMedicine and Health SciencesPharmacologyPharmacokineticsMedicine and Health SciencesOncologyCancers and NeoplasmsLung and Intrathoracic TumorsBiology and Life SciencesAnatomyRenal SystemMedicine and Health SciencesAnatomyRenal SystemMedicine and Health SciencesPharmacologyPharmacokineticsDrug MetabolismResearch and Analysis MethodsResearch AssessmentSystematic ReviewsMedicine and Health SciencesNephrologyRenal CancerMedicine and Health SciencesOncologyCancers and NeoplasmsLung and Intrathoracic TumorsNon-Small Cell Lung CancerMedicine and Health SciencesNephrologyMedical DialysisTailoring oral targeted therapies dosage in lung cancer: A systematic review of pharmacokinetics studies on renal and hepatic impairment
Tailoring oral targeted therapies dosage in lung cancerhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-8940-9907HardiHarriConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationResourcesSoftwareVisualizationWriting – original draft FitriantiZahraData curationFormal analysisInvestigationWriting – original draft UtamaKaren EllioraData curationFormal analysisInvestigation https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1732-5277VidyaAnanda PipphaliData curationFormal analysisInvestigation KhatimahNurul GustiData curationInvestigation AristyoKevinWriting – original draft https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4821-8634FaisalHana Khairina PutriConceptualizationFormal analysisMethodologySupervisionValidationWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2123-6448SoetiknoVivianConceptualizationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionMethodologyResourcesSupervisionValidationWriting – review & editing 1
Clinical Pharmacology Specialist Study Program, Faculty of Medicine, Universitas Indonesia, Jakarta, Indonesia2
Faculty of Medicine, Universitas Indonesia, Jakarta, Indonesia3
Doctoral Program in Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Universitas Indonesia, Jakarta, Indonesia4
International Ph.D. Program in Cell Therapy and Regenerative Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei City, Taiwan5
Department of Pulmonology and Respiratory Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Universitas Indonesia, Jakarta, Indonesia6
Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Faculty of Medicine, Universitas Indonesia, Jakarta, IndonesiaYuanZhengEditor files.

## Data Availability
All relevant data are within the paper and its files.

## Introduction
Lung cancer is the primary cause of cancer-related deaths globally, with over 2.0 million new cases and around 1.8 million deaths in 2020 [ ]. For patients with stage IV lung cancer, lung cancer cells will be tested for specific mutations, and targeted therapy will be used if any genes are found to be mutated [ , ]. Among patients with stage IV lung cancer, 3.2% of patients have mild liver disease and 5.7% have renal disease [ ]. Physiological changes in liver and renal disease can alter drug metabolism and elimination, necessitating dose reduction of drugs, including targeted therapy.
In addition to requiring dose reduction in cases of liver impairment, lung cancer frequently spreads to the liver. 17.5% of small cell lung cancer (SCLC) patients and 3.8% of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients have liver metastases when diagnosed [ ]. In liver metastasis, cytochrome P450 levels were reduced by up to 6.6 times compared to healthy controls, leading to a decreased ability to metabolize targeted therapy [ ]. Furthermore, targeted therapy often results in hepatotoxicity as a side effect. For instance, 5,5% of tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) users will develop high-grade hepatotoxicity [ ]. This hepatotoxicity occurrence also exacerbates liver function impairment.
Regarding renal impairment, the median overall survival (OS) for lung cancer patients was 11.1 months for stage 3 chronic kidney disease (CKD), 6.0 months for stage 4 CKD, and 4.7 months for stage 5 CKD [ ]. Adjusting drug dosages for patients with CKD may impact OS rates. Systematic reviews indicated that a range of 1% to 43% of drugs were not adjusted correctly for renal impairment in outpatient settings and 13.7% in inpatient settings [ , ]. Dose adjustment for drugs in cases of hepatic and renal impairment is usually detailed in their package insert. However, targeted therapy is a novel drug and pharmacokinetic research that supports reducing drug dosage in cases of hepatic and renal impairment are still limited, with the most recent recommendation review published in 2019 [ ]. To our knowledge, this is the first systematic review to evaluate targeted therapy pharmacokinetic studies in hepatic and kidney impairment.
This systematic review of pharmacokinetic studies aims to enhance the precision of treatment protocols and improve patient outcomes in vulnerable populations, particularly those with renal and liver failure. Our focus is to assess whether the existing dosages for targeted therapy, as indicated on the package insert, are appropriate based on available pharmacokinetic studies. Additionally, this research is intended to facilitate clinicians in establishing guidelines within their hospitals regarding the use of these medications in patients with liver or kidney disorders.

## Methods
The systematic review followed the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines [ ]. The adherence of this study to the PRISMA guideline can be seen in . The study protocol can be found on The International Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews (PROSPERO) database with the registration number CRD42024518123.

## Initial data extraction
Prior to initiating the systematic review, we identified targeted therapies indicated for lung cancer according to National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) latest guidelines for small cell and non-small cell lung carcinoma [ , ]. We followed with the current Food and Drug Administration (FDA) status of these drugs, excluding those that have not been utilized for lung cancer due to efficacy or safety concerns. We excluded immunotherapy and antibody monoclonals used in lung cancer targeted therapy because they are metabolized and eliminated without involving the liver and kidneys [ ], making a systematic review of their pharmacokinetic properties unnecessary. We subsequently investigated the dosage of all drugs, including dosages for renal dysfunction, hepatic dysfunction, hemodialysis (HD) and/or continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD), and considerations for hepatotoxicity from each drug package insert (https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/).

## Study eligibility criteria
This systematic review included four main types of studies: (1) Physiologically based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) modelling, which uses mathematical prediction to predict the drug’s pharmacokinetics based on physiological variables [ ]. This type of study is essential for generating predictive insights into how hepatic and renal impairment affect drug behavior, (2) Population pharmacokinetics (PopPK) studies, these studies involve analyzing data from all individuals in a population (based on clinical trial and cohort studies) simultaneously using a nonlinear mixed-effect model to study pharmacokinetics at the population level [ ], (3) pharmacokinetic (PK) studies, these studies are essential for analyzing drug levels in the blood over time using data from numerous patients with renal or hepatic impairment, comparing them to individuals with normal function. This method aids in comprehending the differences and trends in drug metabolism and excretion among this group of individuals, (4) Pharmacokinetic case reports or case series in hepatic or renal impairment, these studies provide valuable insights into the pharmacokinetic of targeted therapies in patients with renal or hepatic impairment, focusing on metabolism and elimination processes.
Studies evaluating renal impairment were included if they used the estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) calculated by the CKD-EPI. Studies evaluating liver impairment were included if they utilized the Child-Pugh score, which ranges from mild (CP A) to severe (CP C). Other methods to assess renal and liver impairment were also considered to be included, such as National Cancer Institute classification (NCIc). This study also investigated the use of targeted therapy in patients undergoing HD or CAPD. The primary objective of evaluating HD or CAPD is to determine the elimination in these modalities.
The primary outcome is the area under the curve (AUC) from time zero to infinity (AUC0-∞). This pharmacokinetic parameter was chosen because it offers a thorough assessment of the drug’s overall presence in the body throughout a period of time. We also evaluated the maximum concentration (Cmax) of the drug in the bloodstream, a critical factor associated with higher toxicity risks. Given that oral targeted therapy is administered in multiple doses, we considered a study to be more reliable when it evaluated pharmacokinetic parameters at various time intervals, particularly if the attainment of steady state for these drugs is estimated. We also evaluated the effectiveness and safety of these medications in individuals with hepatic and liver dysfunction. Studies were excluded if not assessing pharmacokinetic parameters.

## Search strategy and study selection
We searched articles systematically from inception until May 1, 2024, through PubMed, Scopus, and Web of Science based on PECO “patient receiving targeted therapy that is used in lung malignancy”, “patient with liver impairment, renal impairment, HD, or CAPD”, and “pharmacokinetic parameters”. No language restriction was applied to this systematic review. Comprehensive keyword usage is provided in .
 The results of our systematic search were gathered and organized using Mendeley Desktop (Glyph & Cog LLC, 2020). The software automatically eliminated duplicate studies. Subsequently, two independent authors (HH and ZF) manually removed any duplicated studies. Two authors (HH and ZF) independently evaluated all titles and abstracts based on inclusion and exclusion criteria; any disagreements were resolved through discussion with a third author (VS). We recorded all reasons for excluding articles. We acquired the complete texts of the studies that met our criteria through a search or by contacting the corresponding author for full text availability. In the case of missing data, we reached out to the corresponding author to inquire about data availability. The full-text screening method was conducted in the same manner as the title and abstract screening method.

## Data extraction and quality assessment
We systematically selected suitable articles and extracted data from all of them according to standard reporting in pharmacokinetic studies [ ]. We extracted data regarding ethical approval, study population, dosing, sampling schedule, analytical method, lower limit of quantification, and pharmacokinetic modelling strategies in the method. We obtained the results in the form of patient demographic data, concentration-time relationships, the process of model development, and the final model along with its evaluation plots. We utilized Web Plot Digitizer (https://apps.automeris.io/wpd/) to extract precise values from graphs that did not have exact data points.
Two authors, HH and ZF, independently extracted the data and any other relevant information pertaining to the results. We reached a consensus with the third author (VS) to resolve the disagreement. The consensus results were entered into a word processor, and another author (NGK) verified all data input. If modifications were made, the other three initial authors were consulted regarding their suitability.
We utilize the Risk of Bias (RoB) tool developed by Murad for case reports and case series [ ]. PK studies utilize the NOS (Newcastle–Ottawa Scale) RoB tool for case-control studies [ ]. The PROBAST (Prediction model Risk Of Bias ASsessment Tool) RoB tool was used for PopPK and PBPK studies [ ]. Two independent authors (KEU and APV) assessed the RoB, and any discrepancies were resolved by discussing with a third author (HKPF). We obtained participant and intervention characteristics, along with these publications’ funding sources, as a method of assessing RoB.

## Measures of treatment effect
This systematic review focuses on AUC0-∞ and Cmax parameters as indicators of treatment efficacy and safety. We also extracted other data that can support pharmacokinetic results, such as half-life and clearance, along with metabolite and unbound drug pharmacokinetic parameters. These results were displayed as a table with a comparison for drug label and pharmacokinetic studies. We chose not to conduct a meta-analysis due to the presence of significant heterogeneities among the studies, including variations in drugs, treatment effects, and study populations. Therefore, meta-analysis is considered inappropriate for the current study design. We presented all the results in a table, comparing them with the currently accepted dosage in renal and hepatic impairment. We utilized BioRender (https://www.biorender.com/) to create a visual representation of the key findings from our systematic review. All methods employed in this manuscript are elucidated in .
 We evaluated the level of certainty (LoC) for each new or revised recommendation from the package insert utilizing the GRADE (Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation) approach. Two independent authors (HH and ZF) evaluated the LoC independently; any disagreements were subsequently deliberated with the third author (VS). We employed GRADEpro GDT (Guideline Development Tool) to create the table concerning LoC from https://gdt.gradepro.org/.

## Results
We identified 502 articles by searching three databases, and the search results for each drug can be found in . We identified 44 studies that met our PECO criteria after eliminating duplicates and applying inclusion and exclusion criteria to the results. The reasons for excluding records can be seen in . We excluded mobocertinib from our search because this drug has been voluntarily withdrawn for EGFR Exon 20 insertion mutation-positive NSCLC due to its ineffectiveness. Furthermore, we identified study characteristics of each article, which are listed in S3 Table in . We assessed the bias in each study and found that most of them exhibit a low risk of bias. Case reports and case series studies are often biased due to inadequate causality assessment evaluation (3 out of 11) and patient data quality (2 out of 11), which can impact drug pharmacokinetics, such as hypoalbuminemia and concurrent drug use. Potential bias in PK studies is primarily due to a high rate of participants dropping out (8 out of 21) and inadequate sample size per group (5 out of 21). There is a single moderate risk of bias in the PopPK study attributed to the limited sample size. The RoB in case reports and case series was presented in S4 Table in , RoB in PK studies in S5 Table in , and RoB in PopPK and PBPK studies in S6 Table in .
 The drug dosing adjustments for hepatic and renal impairment are outlined in S7 Table in , based on drug labels and studies on impaired renal and hepatic function. In hepatic and renal impairment, we discovered several drug dosing modification techniques, such as lowering the dose and extending the interval. For example, in the general population, crizotinib is administered at 250 mg BID; however, in cases of significant hepatic impairment, this dosage should be lowered to 250 mg QD. Another example of lowering the dosage is the use of trametinib, which is recommended to be reduced to 1 mg QD in cases of significant hepatic impairment from its starting dose of 2 mg QD in the general population. For targeted therapy in liver and hepatic impairment, the maximum initial dosage reduction is 50%. A summary of this information can be found in .
The elucidation of the LoC for each new or revised recommendations is available in S8, S9, and S10 Tables in , which cover hepatic impairment, renal impairment, and the HD/CAPD population, respectively. The majority of the LoC is classified as low (9 recommendations), followed by extremely low (7 recommendations), and moderate (3 recommendations). The poor recommendation is due to the absence of assessments utilizing the ROBINS-I (Risk Of Bias In Non-randomised Studies – of Interventions) methodology across all studies. We recognized that this instrument may be unsuitable for our study inclusion due to the pharmacokinetic analysis, which could be challenging if evaluated by ROBINS-I. Moreover, we reduced the certainty if it does not utilize direct PK studies, as modeling could decrease the certainty of the evidence. We detailed the specific considerations for targeted therapy in patients with renal and hepatic impairment, including information on their metabolism and elimination, in the following section.

## EGFR (Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor) inhibitor
About 20% of patients with lung adenocarcinoma have EGFR mutations, which are oncogenic drivers [ ]. Erlotinib and Gefitinib, which bind to EGFR reversibly, are the first generation of EFGR inhibitors. Afatinib and dacomitinib, two second-generation EGFR inhibitors, have irreversible binding and may improve progression free survival (PFS) more than first-generation inhibitors, but they also have more adverse effects [ ]. Osmertinib, a third-generation EGFR inhibitor, has a higher FPS than first-generation because it can target and activate both EGFR-sensitive and T790M-resistant mutations [ ].

## Afatinib.
Afatinib has minimal metabolism, with the unchanged drug mainly excreted in the feces and around 5% excreted in urine [ ]. The PopPK studies demonstrated a correlation between elevated alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and aspartate transaminase (AST) levels and an increase in afatinib trough concentrations [ , ]. However, these results were not substantiated in a PK study of afatinib in CP A and B [ ]. Hence, the package insert indicated that no modification is required for CP A and B. No study is available in CP C. Using afatinib in CP C patients may exacerbate liver failure, as 9.7% of patients experienced liver test abnormalities and 0.2% of those cases were fatal in regular usage of afatinib. A multidisciplinary team needs to determine the utilization of afatinib in CP C.
The PopPK studies elucidate the contradictory findings regarding the variance in AUC due to renal impairment [ , ]. However, a PK study demonstrated a substantial rise in the AUC in patients with an eGFR of 15–29 compared to the control group (150%, 90% CI: 105–213%) [ ]. Given the significant variability of AUC, lowering the initial dosage to 30 mg once daily as advised in the package insert is a sensible decision with more careful monitoring. Renal failure with an eGFR < 15 has not been specifically researched, and other PopPK studies have not exclusively focused on this eGFR range. Therefore, we cannot determine the appropriate dosage for patients with an eGFR less than 15. The package insert for the dialysis patient has not been elucidated. However, case reports and case series studies showed that equivalent trough concentrations were attained with 30 mg of afatinib in NSCLC patients and 40 mg in those with normal renal function [ , ]. Hence, a starting dose of 30 mg is appropriate for initial administration in dialysis.
Given the significant range in AUC, it is prudent to reduce the initial dosage to 30 mg once daily, as recommended in the package insert, accompanied by more diligent monitoring.

## Erlotinib.
Erlotinib is primarily metabolized in the liver by the cytochrome P450 (CYP)3A4 (approximately 80%), CYP1A1, and CYP1A2 and eliminated through feces [ ]. High bilirubin and AST levels in patients are associated with reduced erlotinib clearance and prolonged erlotinib half-life [ ]. Nevertheless, erlotinib reached its peak concentration earlier in patients with CP B, resulting in a significantly lower Cmax and no differences in AUC [ ]. No reductions are required in CP A, B, or C, according to the package insert. However, our systematic review did not find any studies in CP C, so this statement may be overestimated. It is highly recommended to regularly monitor liver function in patients with pre-existing liver damage due to the elevated risk of hepatotoxicity, as indicated in the package insert. OSI-420, the primary metabolite of erlotinib, also shows no significant difference in CP B [ ]. However, a case report demonstrated a notable rise in OSI-420 concentration in individuals with hyperbilirubinemia [ ]. This case report analyzed a patient with pancreatic adenocarcinoma, which may result in variations in the metabolism and elimination of erlotinib.
A PK study in renal failure revealed no significant differences in half-life and clearance parameters compared to normal renal function [ ]. A PK study in HD patients showed no significant difference in AUC and Cmax, although there was a trend towards a decrease. [ ]. The high protein binding affinity of erlotinib (92–95%) may account for the elevated elimination in hypoalbuminemia, a condition frequently seen in HD patients [ ]. No recommendation is provided in the package insert regarding renal impairment; however, PK studies demonstrated that the normal dose of erlotinib can be administered in cases of renal impairment and HD [ , ].

## Dacomitinib.
Dacomitinib can be used with a normal dose for patients with liver impairment due to its lack of statistically significant AUC and Cmax differences in patients with mild to severe liver impairment [ , ]. These phase I studies are limited to patients classified as CYP2D6 extensive or intermediate metabolizers due to dacomitinib being a CYP2D6 substrate. Additional research on individuals classified as CYP2D6 poor metabolizers should be carried out to improve our comprehension across all demographics. No studies have been done on dacomitinib for renal failure, but it is deemed safe in this condition as only 3% of it is excreted in urine. Further research is needed for patients with an eGFR below 30 or undergoing dialysis, as the package insert does not provide recommendations for this group.

## Osimertinib.
Osimertinib and its metabolites are removed from the body through the liver and kidneys, with 68% excreted in feces and 14% in urine [ ]. Osimertinib shows reduced exposure in patients with mild and moderate hepatic impairment, with levels of osimertinib and its metabolite being around 30% to 50% lower based on a PK study [ ]. The decreased exposure could be a result of reduced bioavailability in hepatic impairment, as shown by the decrease in Cmax, but additional research is needed. While Cmax and AUC were decreased in the study, a PopPK analysis demonstrated that hepatic impairment did not affect the pharmacokinetics of osimertinib [ ]. Osimertinib can be administered with the standard dosage as indicated in the package insert while assessing the clinical effectiveness of osimertinib.
Severe renal impairment (eGFR < 30) caused a 26% increase in AUC. The increase was statistically significant but not clinically relevant due to osimertinib’s wide safety margin [ ]. A PK study demonstrated a notable decrease in both AUC and Cmax by 57% and 59%, respectively, when patients with an eGFR < 30 or undergoing HD were administered a reduced dose (40 mg) of osimertinib [ ]. Another case report demonstrated that patients undergoing HD can receive a full dose of osimertinib with pharmacokinetic properties similar to those with normal renal function [ ]. Another case report demonstrated that administering osimertinib at a daily dose of 80 mg led to a Cmax level exceedingly twice the standard amount, resulting in severe grade 3 general weakness. Reducing the dose to 240 mg per week decreased this side effect, and administering 480 mg per week did not increase the Cmax [ ]. Although the package insert does not have recommendations for individuals with an eGFR < 15 or undergoing HD, we can consider using a normal dose for this population with careful therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM).

## Gefitinib.
Gefitinib is extensively metabolized in the liver by CYP3A4 and CYP2D6. This leads to an elevation in AUC and a decrease in clearance in patients with cirrhosis following a single dose of gefitinib. Nevertheless, the AUC did not show a statistically significant increase after multiple administrations of gefitinib [ ]. Single-dose study involves patients with cirrhosis, while multiple-dose study involves patients with liver metastasis. This population disparity may impact the outcome. The package insert recommends monitoring for adverse reactions in cases of moderate and severe hepatic impairment. The lower dose is not available due to the single dosage preparation of 250 mg.
Gefitinib and its metabolites have a renal excretion rate of less than four percent, indicating their safety in cases of renal failure, as per the package insert. Two studies in HD and one study in CAPD have been conducted [ – ]. They all reported that the Cmax value was comparable to that of patients with normal renal function. HD removes 11.3% of gefitinib, while the concentration of gefitinib in CAPD fluid is 5.6% [ , ]. Therefore, gefitinib is considered safe in renal impairment.

## ALK (Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase) inhibitors
About 5% of individuals with NSCLC have an ALK gene rearrangement, which increases the risk of brain metastases. The first ALK inhibitor was crizotinib. When treating brain metastases, second-generation drugs (ceritinib, alectinib, and brigatinib) show stronger intracranial action compared to crizotinib [ ]. Compared to patients treated with crizotinib, those treated with lorlatinib, a third-generation ALK inhibitor, had a significantly longer PFS and a higher likelihood of an intracranial response. However, lorlatinib also has a higher incidence of grade 3 or 4 adverse events due to the altered lipid level [ ].

## Alectinib.
Alectinib is metabolized by the enzyme CYP3A4 into its primary active metabolite, M4. The metabolism of alectinib is influenced by variations in the CYP3A4 gene, as demonstrated in an in vivo study [ ]. Moderate and severe hepatic impairment resulted in a significant increase in unbound alectinib AUC by 86% and 185%, respectively, compared to the control group. It also led to a significant increase in total alectinib levels but did not significantly affect the Cmax. The pharmacokinetic parameter of M4 was not statistically significant in patients with CP B and CP C [ ]. An additional PBPK study confirmed this finding [ ]. We recommend increasing monitoring for patients with CP B who are using 600 mg alectinib due to the increased AUC parameters, despite the package insert suggesting only reducing the dose to 450 mg in severe hepatic impairment.
Renal failure is unlikely to affect the pharmacokinetic parameters of alectinib and M4, although no specific PK study has been conducted on this matter. A case report on HD patients receiving alectinib 600 mg twice daily demonstrated that the AUC and Cmax were similar to those of patients with normal renal function [ ]. Alectinib is considered safe for individuals with an eGFR below 30 or who are undergoing HD, even though the package insert does not specifically recommend its use for this population.

## Brigatinib.
During the drug development study, 65% of brigatinib was found to be excreted in feces and 25% was excreted in urine [ ]. Brigatinib drug development has involved patients with mild to moderate liver impairment and patients with eGFR greater than 30. The PopPK study demonstrated that there was no significant increase in AUCss in this population, indicating that the normal dose can be administered as recommended in the package insert [ ]. During severe hepatic failure, the unbound AUC of brigatinib was about 37% higher, according to a pharmacokinetic study [ ]. Thus, decreasing the dose by around 40% appears to be a reasonable course of action. Adjusting the dosage in cases of hepatic failure is advisable due to brigatinib being primarily metabolised by CYP3A. Therefore, coadministration with moderate or strong CYP3A4 inhibitors should be avoided [ ].
In renal failure, unbound brigatinib exposure was approximately 92% higher in patients with severe renal impairment compared with healthy volunteers with normal renal function. This pharmacokinetic study used patients with eGFR range 10–26 [ ]. Therefore, reducing the dose to 50% seems reasonable. Initial doses were lower to reduce the hepatotoxicity, which AST and alanine transaminase (ALT) increased can be 34–38% in brigatinib usage, as the package insert stated.

## Ceritinib.
Ceritinib did not have a clinically significant effect on the AUC at steady state (AUCss) in population pharmacokinetic studies that included patients with mild liver impairment and those with an eGFR greater than 30 [ ]. Mild renal impairment increases AUCss by 7%, while moderate renal impairment increases it by 15%. Mild hepatic impairment increases the AUCss by 3%, but the change is not statistically significant. Ceritinib has been identified as a potent inhibitor of CYP3A and a mild inhibitor of CYP2C9 in a phase I drug-drug interaction study; therefore, caution should be taken when using ceritinib alongside substances metabolized by these enzymes [ ]. We included the recommended drug dosage for individuals with mild and moderate renal impairment, as the package insert does not provide dosing instructions for this specific population.

## Crizotinib.
Approximately 53% of unchanged crizotinib is excreted in feces. Approximately 2% of the dose was crizotinib and 5% was O-desalkyl crizotinib lactam are found in the urine [ ]. A PopPK study on crizotinib revealed a 9% increase in AUC when comparing patients with total bilirubin levels of 2.1 versus 0.41. However, there were no significant AUC differences observed at different AST levels [ ]. A follow-up pharmacokinetic study demonstrated that the AUC and Cmax of a 250 mg dose twice daily in individuals with normal hepatic function are similar to those of a 250 mg dose twice daily in mild impairment patients, a 200 mg dose twice daily in moderate impairment patients, and a 250 mg dose once daily in severe impairment patients [ ]. Therefore, these crizotinib doses can serve as a reference for patients with liver failure.
The AUC of crizotinib was found to be 6% higher in patients with mild renal impairment and 18% higher in patients with moderate renal impairment based on a PopPK study [ ]. A PK study was conducted to follow up on patients with severe renal failure. The study showed an 80% increase in the AUC of crizotinib in a single-dose PK study, with subject eGFR ranging from 3.7 to 22.5, and a 54% increase in a multiple-dose PBPK study [ ]. Thus, decreasing the dosage of crizotinib by 50% is reasonable in severe renal impairment. There is no data regarding the usage of crizotinib in HD/CAPD.

## Lorlatinib.
Lorlatinib is mainly metabolized by cytochrome P450 (CYP) 3A and UGT1A4, with minimal excretion (<5%) through the kidneys [ ]. Currently, there is not enough data available to recommend reducing the dosage for individuals with liver impairment. A PopPK study revealed that individuals with mild impairment have a minimal difference in mean steady-state clearance compared to the normal population, with values of 13.87 L/h and 13.71 L/h, respectively [ ]. Thus, individuals with mild liver impairment can receive the standard dosage of lorlatinib.
Despite lorlatinib is only eliminated less than 5% in urine, renal impairment tends to increase clearance in the PopPK study [ ]. This finding is supported by a PK study that showed that AUC of lorlatinib increased by 4%, 19%, and 41% in cases of mild, moderate, and severe renal failure, respectively [ ]. Reducing the dose to 75% is a reasonable approach in cases of severe renal failure, even though it did not reach statistical significance. This may be due to the small sample size of only five patients, resulting in a wide confidence interval of 141.14% (95%CI = 97.82%, 203.66%).

## BRAF/MEK (v‑Raf Murine Sarcoma Viral Oncogene Homolog B/Mitogen-activated Protein Kinase Kinase) inhibitors
One to two percent of lung adenocarcinomas have a BRAF mutation, which is an oncogenic driver. When used to treat BRAF600-mutant metastatic non-small cell lung cancer, dabrafenib, an inhibitor of BRAF, and trametinib, an inhibitor of MEK, had an objective response rate (ORR) of 64% [ ]. Vemurafenib, a medication primarily used to treat melanoma, has also demonstrated effectiveness when administered alone to treat NSCLC with BRAF mutations [ ]. According to NSCLC guidelines, vemurafenib may be used as an option if a patient is unable to tolerate dabrafenib/trametinib [ ].

## Dabrafenib.
71% of dabrafenib is eliminated in feces, while 23% is eliminated in urine [ ]. A PopPK study demonstrated that mild to moderate hepatic impairment had no effect on the clearance divided by bioavailability (Cl/F), an apparent oral clearance parameter. However, this study did not specifically analyze moderate hepatic impairment due to a limited sample size of only three [ ]. Therefore, a recommendation for moderate hepatic impairment cannot be drawn from this data. Patients with mild hepatic impairment can safely take the standard dose of dabrafenib, as indicated in the package insert.
A PopPK study found that mild and moderate renal impairment did not significantly affect the Cl/F parameter, with geometric mean percentages of 95% and 92%, respectively [ ]. Using the standard dosage of dabrafenib is reasonable. In HD patients, administering dabrafenib at a reduced dose of 50% led to side effects, as demonstrated in a case study [ ]. Initiating dabrafenib at the lowest possible dose of 75 mg once daily appears justifiable, as HD did not alter dabrafenib plasma concentration, but thorough evaluation is necessary in this group. Of note, dabrafenib studies only included patients with melanoma, not NSCLC. Additional research is needed to investigate its application in NSCLC.

## Trametinib.
80% of a radiolabeled dose of trametinib was found in the feces, while less than 20% was found in the urine, with less than 0.1% remaining unchanged [ ]. PopPK and PK studies on mild hepatic impairment demonstrated that the standard dose of trametinib had similar pharmacokinetic characteristics and was well-tolerated; thus, it can be administered at the regular dose [ , ]. In cases of moderate and severe hepatic impairment, obtaining samples was challenging due to treatment-related adverse effects. The PK result was not representative of the actual situation due to the small sample size, even though it showed similar Cmax and AUC properties [ ]. No dose-limiting toxicities were observed with 1.5 mg of trametinib per day in patients with moderate hepatic impairment and 1 mg in patients with severe hepatic impairment, in a cohort of at least three patients [ ]. This dosage can serve as the starting dose prior to any dosage adjustments.
A PopPK study demonstrated that patients with mild and moderate renal impairment exhibited comparable clearance parameters, Cl/F [ ]. Hence, a standard dosage can be utilized. There is no information available on severe renal impairment. A case report demonstrated an adverse reaction to the combination of dabrafenib 75 mg twice daily and trametinib 1 mg once daily. Reducing the dose of trametinib to 0.5 mg once daily resulted in a clinically stable patient with a comparable Cmax parameter to that of a patient with normal renal function [ ]. Thus, commencing trametinib at a minimum dose of 0.5 mg once daily seems reasonable.

## Vemurafenib.
Vemurafenib is a substrate and inducer of CYP3A4, a moderate inhibitor of CYP1A2, and acts as both a substrate and inhibitor of the drug efflux P-glycoprotein (P-gp) and Breast Cancer Resistance Protein (BCRP) transporters [ ]. Vemurafenib is primarily eliminated from the body through feces, with less than 1% eliminated through the kidneys. The package insert stated that mild and moderate renal and hepatic impairment had no impact on vemurafenib pharmacokinetics, according to a PopPK study. However, we could not find a publication that supported this statement. The package insert stated that the clearance of vemurafenib was similar in individuals with mild and moderate hepatic impairment, with a total of 58 and 27 subjects, respectively. Clearance in renal impairment was similar among 94 subjects with mild impairment and 11 subjects with moderate impairment.

## NTRK (Neurotrophic Tyrosine Receptor Kinase) inhibitors
The NTRK gene fusion encodes the tropomyosin receptor kinase A (TrKA) protein, which serves as an oncogenic driver in 0.2–0.7% of patients with lung tumors [ ]. The NCCN has approved two NTRK inhibitors, larotrectinib and entrectinib, for NSCLC [ ]. Two trials demonstrated that the ORR for larotrectinib and entrectinib in solid tumor were 79% and 57%, respectively [ , ].

## Larotrectinib.
Mild liver damage raised Larotrectinib AUC by 1.3 times, while moderate and severe damage increased it by 2 and 3.2 times, respectively. Thus, decreasing the dosage by 50% on the medication label appears suitable. Take additional caution when combining with medications that inhibit organic anion transporting polypeptide (OATP)1A/1B, CYP3A, ATP-binding cassette (ABC)B1 and G2, as they can reduce oral absorption and limit brain accumulation [ ]. Avoid using larotrectinib with strong CYP3A4 inhibitors or inducers, as indicated in the package insert. Larotrectinib’s AUC and Cmax increased by 1.5- and 1.3-fold in dialysis compared to normal renal function. No study has been conducted on patients with moderate to severe renal impairment, as indicated in the package insert. However, we were unable to locate any publications that discuss the pharmacokinetic properties mentioned in the package insert statements.

## Entrectinib.
Entrectinib is primarily metabolized and excreted through feces, along with its metabolites. Only 3% of the dose was excreted in urine, indicating minimal renal excretion [ ]. The package insert indicated that there were no clinically significant pharmacokinetic parameters in cases of mild to moderate renal impairment and mild hepatic impairment. We were unable to find a specific publication related to this statement. Entrectinib is metabolized primarily by CYP3A4 [ ], so precaution is advised when giving entrectinib to patients with liver impairment.

## MET (Mesenchymal-epithelial Transition) inhibitors
MET is a receptor for hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) that plays a role in cellular survival and proliferation. Oncogenic mutations in MET result in suboptimal responses to immunotherapy, regardless of high PD-L1 expression [ ]. The ORR of capmatinib was 41% in patients who had undergone prior therapy and 68% in those who had not received previous treatment [ ]. The ORR for tepotinib in NSCLC is 57% [ ]. Several targeted therapies aimed at MET are currently under development, including glumetinib, Sym015 (a combination of humanized antibodies designed to degrade MET), APL-101, and REGN5093 [ ].

## Capmatinib.
Capmatinib is mainly metabolized in the liver, particularly by CYP3A4, and then excreted in feces [ ]. A PK study in patients with mild to severe hepatic impairment found no significant difference in AUC and Cmax of capmatinib compared to healthy subjects [ ]. Of note, this pharmacokinetic study used a 200 mg single dose of capmatinib, which is half of the recommended 400 mg dose. While the standard dose can be administered in cases of liver impairment, it is important to monitor the risk of toxicity associated with capmatinib. The package insert mentioned that mild to moderate renal impairment does not affect pharmacokinetic parameters, but we were unable to locate any publication that supports this claim.

## Tepotinib.
77.9% of tepotinib was eliminated through faeces, with only 13.6% being excreted through urine [ ]. In the PopPK study, individuals with moderate hepatic impairment exhibited a 13% reduction in AUCss compared to the control group. Furthermore, elevated bilirubin and alkaline phosphatase levels did not cause a clinically significant change in AUC [ ]. Therefore, tepotinib can be administered at the standard dosage in cases of mild and moderate hepatic impairment. Additional research is required to evaluate the suitability of tepotinib for individuals with severe hepatic impairment, as the PopPK study did not include this group.
A PopPK study in patients with renal failure found no significant difference in AUCss between those with eGFR 39.4 to 59 compared to the reference group with eGFR 99.8. The predicted tepotinib AUCss was measured at 102 (93–112) in this population [ ]. This outcome can be used as a reference for determining the appropriate dosage of tepotinib in cases of renal failure. Additional research is required in cases of severe renal failure and dialysis.

## RET (Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia Type 2) inhibitors
RET gene rearrangements occur in 1–2% of NSCLC and are mutually exclusive with mutations in EGFR, ALK, or RAS. NSCLC with RET fusion is linked to an elevated risk of cerebral metastasis [ ]. Cabozantinib is the first RET inhibitor approved by the FDA for NSCLC, yet it exhibits an ORR of only 28% [ ]. The recent RET inhibitors, selpercatinib and pralsetinib, exhibit higher ORR of 64% and 61%, respectively [ , ].

## Cabozantinib.
54% of cabozantinib was excreted in feces and 27% in urine [ ]. In a PBPK study, the AUC for mild and moderate hepatic impairments increased by 64% and 50%, respectively [ ]. In the PK study, these values rose by 81% and 63%, respectively [ ]. In a PopPK study, the Cl/F parameter increased by 12% in individuals with mild hepatic impairment, while moderate hepatic impairment did not affect the Cl/F parameter [ ]. In addition, the percentage of unbound drug in moderate hepatic impairment was slightly higher at 0.37% compared to 0.24% in mild hepatic impairment and 0.28% in the control group [ ]. Based on these results, it is reasonable to reduce the dose in cases of moderate hepatic impairment.
Cabozantinib shows similar pharmacokinetic parameters in individuals with renal impairment and eGFR of 30–89 compared to those with normal kidney function, as indicated by a PK study [ ]. Hence, standard dosage can be administered. A case report demonstrated that the AUC in HD was significantly lower compared to the control group (348 vs 1375 ng/mL) [ ]. Unfortunately, we cannot make a definitive conclusion about this case report because there is insufficient information regarding the patient’s clinical characteristics that may have influenced cabozantinib’s pharmacokinetics.

## Selpercatinib.
69% of selpercatinib was recovered in feces and 24% in urine, with 14% and 12% unchanged, respectively. Selpercatinib AUC increased by 7%, 32%, and 77% in subjects with mild, moderate, and severe impairment, respectively, as stated in the package insert. Therefore, a dose reduction to 80 mg is suitable for severe impairment due to the limited availability of capsules in 40 and 80 mg dosages. No significant differences were observed in selpercatinib pharmacokinetics in cases of renal impairment (eGFR 15–89 mL/min). However, we were unable to locate any publication related to these statements.

## Pralsetinib.
73% of pralsetinib was eliminated in feces, with 6% being eliminated in urine. A PK study demonstrated that AUC and Cmax of pralsetinib were similar in moderate and severe hepatic impairments for both total and unbound concentrations [ ]. This study observed a 32% decrease in Cmax in individuals with severe liver impairments, likely attributed to alterations in P-gp activity [ ], for which pralsetinib is a substrate. Nonetheless, pralsetinib can be administered at a standard dosage regardless of the severity of liver impairment.
According to the package insert, mild and moderate renal impairment did not affect the exposure of pralsetinib compared to normal renal function. Hence, the standard dosage can be administered to this population. Pralsetinib has not been researched in patients with severe renal impairment. No publication on the pharmacokinetics of praseltinib in patients with renal impairment was identified.

## KRAS (Kirsten Rat Sarcoma Viral) inhibitor
KRAS is the most mutated oncogene in human cancer, occurring in 13% of NSCLC, and it encodes guanosine triphosphatase, which regulates signal transduction. KRAS mutation is frequently linked to resistance against targeted therapies and unfavorable outcomes [ ]. The Sotorasib trial, in comparison to docetaxel, indicated that sotorasib can significantly prolong median progression-free survival by 1.1 months and possesses a more advantageous safety profile [ ].

## Sotorasib.
Sotorasib is predominantly metabolized by CYP3A4 and is primarily excreted through feces with minimal renal excretion [ ]. No significant pharmacokinetic parameters were observed in individuals with mild hepatic impairment or mild to moderate renal impairment, according to the package insert. Therefore, no modification to the dosage is necessary for this group. We were unable to find any publication related to this statement.

## Discussion
NCCN has published clinical practice guidelines for NSCLC and SCLC [ , ]. By combining these guidelines and the result of this study, we can give systemic therapy in the safest way possible for patients with liver impairment or renal impairment. For example, in NSCLC patients with EGFR S768I, L861Q, and/or G719X mutations, the preferred therapy is afatinib or osimertinib [ ]. For patients with severe liver impairment, neither afatinib nor osimertinib has been studied, so it is best to take caution when giving these drugs to such patients. In the presence of severe renal impairment, osimertinib can be given in a normal dose, while afatinib dose must be lowered to 30 mg QD in patients undergoing HD and patients with eGFR 15–29 [ , ].
Although the efficacy and safety of targeted therapy have been extensively researched, the pharmacokinetic parameter is more critical as it accurately represents the fate of drugs in the human body. Even minor alterations in factors that affect pharmacokinetic parameters, such as liver/renal function, can have severe consequences, including treatment failure or drug toxicity. Changes in plasma protein levels, CYP enzymes, and treatment adherence can cause variability in the drugs’ plasma levels. For instance, in patients with liver metastases, the decreased concentration of albumin can result in higher levels of unbound erlotinib, a pharmacologically active drug, leading to an increased rate of its removal from the body [ , ]. A lower concentration of erlotinib in the bloodstream (<1711 ng/mL) implied a reduced ORR in lung cancer (5% vs 38%; p = 0.058) [ ]. In addition, elevated alpha-1 acid glycoprotein (AGP) levels (2.3 vs. 1.45 g/L) demonstrated a 15.9% reduction in the clearance of erlotinib [ ].
The pathophysiological and biological alterations occurring in liver impairment can also influence the appropriate dosages of targeted therapy administered to the patient. Liver impairment alters the quantity and activity of liver enzymes and transporters, which in turn affects the metabolism of drugs, especially for compounds that necessitate metabolism to generate pharmacologically active metabolites, such as alectinib, a substrate of CYP3A4 [ , ].
Research on pharmacokinetics of targeted therapy in liver impairment commonly uses two primary classifications: Child-Pugh and NCIc. The FDA only explicitly mentions the use of the Child-Pugh criteria, while the European Medicines Agency (EMA) does not provide guidance on categorizing hepatic impairment [ ]. The Child-Pugh method is predominantly utilized in targeted therapy pharmacokinetic studies (72%), whereas studies involving cancer patients primarily rely on NCIc (69%) [ ]. Targeted therapies that utilize both Child-Pugh and NCIc sometimes have conflicting dosing recommendations because NCIc tends to categorize subjects as less impaired than Child-Pugh [ , ]. Hence, these two classifications should be utilized in exploratory pharmacokinetic analysis, and clinicians should use the classification employed in the pharmacokinetic study. Besides the method used to categorize liver impairment, the cause of liver impairment is an important factor to consider when determining drug dosing. For instance, gefitinib pharmacokinetic parameters were found to vary significantly in cirrhosis but not in liver metastasis [ ]. This event is hypothesized to be due to the liver’s substantial functional reserve, even when tumor metastasis is present [ , ].
Targeted therapy agents, such as TKIs, have also been associated with hepatotoxicity of different types and levels of severity [ ]. The recommendation to adjust dose in patients with liver impairment may differ from one targeted agent to another, as can be seen in . If liver injury occurs because of the hepatotoxicity of the targeted agents, it is necessary to reduce the dosage. If the injury continues to persist after reducing the dosage, the agent must be discontinued. Guidelines for reducing the dosage and discontinuing the medication were stated in the package insert for each drug.
According to the FDA’s guidance for the pharmaceutical industry on liver impairment, conducting a PK study may not be necessary in certain cases. These cases include when a drug is eliminated through the kidneys without any involvement of the liver, when less than 20 percent of the drug is metabolized in the liver and has a wide therapeutic range, or when the drug is in the form of a gas or volatile substance [ ]. Due to the high liver metabolism for most oral targeted therapy, PK studies in individuals with liver impairment should be conducted.
In renal impairment, the function of glomeruli and tubules is reduced, resulting in hypoalbuminemia due to loss of protein in the urine and accumulation of uremic toxins in the blood. The uremic toxins affect the drug’s distribution and metabolism by inhibiting renal organic anion transporters (OATs) and altering the CYP-mediated metabolism. The clearance of a targeted therapy that is eliminated by the kidney is reduced in renal impairment, prolonging the drug’s half-life and increasing the risk of toxicity [ ].
We have also discovered a unique result of the lorlatinib study regarding its renal dose. Despite the urinary excretion being less than 5%, lorlatinib AUC significantly rises in cases of renal failure [ ]. The cause of this event remains unclear due to the likelihood of renal impairment only affecting the AUC of drugs that undergo extensive metabolism in the liver and have a high hepatic extraction ratio, such as nicardipine [ ]. Uremia in renal impairment can disrupt hepatic blood flow, leading to a decrease in the capability of first-pass metabolism [ ]. However, lorlatinib has a low extraction ratio of approximately 12% [ ], suggesting that the hypothesis may be incorrect.
This lorlatinib result confirms the significance of studying renal impairment, even though renal elimination is low. For drugs that have low urinary excretion, such as lorlatinib, FDA recommend performing a reduced study design. This study design compares patients with severe renal impairment to those with normal renal function. If there are any discrepancies in the AUC, a full PK study incorporating mild and moderate renal impairment should be conducted [ , ]. Hence, it is important to conduct research on renal impairment in all oral targeted therapies for lung disease.
This systematic review also discovered that studies of HD and CAPD primarily consist of case reports and case series, except for one pharmacokinetic study involving three HD subjects [ ]. Drug clearance in HD is complicated because of the variability in drug dialyzability and the modified nonrenal drug clearance in dialysis patients [ ]. All studies included in this systematic review concluded that oral targeted therapies for lung cancer are not significantly eliminated by dialysis. However, altered nonrenal drug clearance should still be considered an important factor. End-stage renal disease (ESRD) can modify the absorption of oral cancer treatment by affecting paracellular leakage and reducing efflux transporter activity [ ]. Uremic toxin can also modify pH and reduce protein binding. Furthermore, changes in albumin levels in kidney disease and during dialysis can affect its protein-binding capacity [ ]. Metabolism in ESRD can decrease CYP expression, reducing the body’s ability to deactivate the drug [ ]. We are encouraging other researchers and drug manufacturers to conduct a PK study in dialysis patients to enhance the utilization in this population.
Evaluating pharmacokinetics in HD or CAPD patients is challenging due to the variability in frailty and comorbidities associated with chronic dialysis. A systematic review of targeted and immune therapies in metastatic renal carcinoma patients undergoing hemodialysis revealed that certain drugs (everolimus and sorafenib) exhibited higher-than-anticipated levels of toxicities in hemodialysis, despite no significant changes in their pharmacokinetic properties [ ]. Another retrospective study demonstrated that the use of TKIs in HD patients resulted in a significant increase in adverse events and blood pressure elevation compared to a control group consisting of HD patients who only underwent surgery [ ]. Hence, it is essential to closely monitor the administration of oral targeted therapy in patients undergoing dialysis.
A cohort study comparing patients with ESRD to those without ESRD receiving treatment for lung cancer reveals a significant difference in median survival rates: 5.98 months versus 14.13 months, respectively (p = 0.019). The 5.98-month outcome closely matches the median survival of 6.51 months observed in patients with ESRD receiving only supportive care [ ]. This outcome could originate from drug toxicity or diminished effectiveness due to sub-therapeutic dosing. A separate study indicated that 44% of patients with ESRD experienced iatrogenic toxicity because of chemotherapy or targeted therapy [ ].
According to our systematic review, hepatic and renal impairment should be considered when administering six and seven targeted therapies in lung cancer, respectively. However, ten medications still lacked adequate information on hepatic and renal impairment. provides a summary of these findings. Nevertheless, this recommendation only serves as an initial guiding dose for patients who have renal and hepatic impairment. It is important to regularly evaluate the effectiveness and safety of using oral targeted therapy in patients due to the significant impact of side effects on treatment adherence [ ]. Poor compliance with certain targeted agents, such as imatinib, can result in significantly low trough plasma concentration and a reduction in cytogenetic response [ ]. Therefore, implementing TDM is a potential strategy for several oral lung cancer therapies. According to a review by Mueller-Schoell et al. (2021), monitoring of drug levels is recommended for gefitinib and trametinib. This review also showed that TDM can also be beneficial for alectinib, crizotinib, erlotinib, and vemurafenib [ ]. A retrospective study evaluating TKI drug monitoring revealed significant inter-individual variability among several TKIs, supporting the potential utility of TDM [ ].
 Another common method for initial drug dosing is the use of pharmacogenetic approaches. Oral targeted therapy is primarily metabolized by CYP3A4 and is also a substrate of P-gp [ , ]. For instance, an elevated expression of P-gp can reduce oral absorption of larotrectinib [ ]. Another example is gefitinib, which is metabolized by CYP2D6. As a result, patients with a poor metabolizer phenotype metabolize gefitinib slower, resulting in a higher rate of hepatotoxicity. In such cases, erlotinib can be used as an alternative [ ]. However, pharmacogenetic guidelines for testing ABCB1, CYP3A4, or other metabolizing CYP genes do not exist because of conflicting data regarding the effects of CYP variations on the effectiveness and safety of oral targeted therapy [ ]. Pharmacogenetic testing for G6PD may be clinically important when using dabrafenib or trametinib due to their similar sulfonamide structure [ ]. However, the latest pharmacogenetic guideline does not recommend routine G6PD testing for these drugs [ ].
Thus far, the Clinical Pharmacogenetics Implementation Consortium (CPIC) has not released any guidelines concerning the application of pharmacogenetics in oral targeted therapy for lung cancer. However, while oral targeted therapy is a relatively novel pharmacological intervention, additional study may be beneficial for the development of guidelines and its integration into real-world settings. Conversely, the application of TDM in oral targeted therapy should be enhanced, given the large interindividual variability (IIV) in exposure at conventional doses, which predominantly ranges from 19% to 100% and can reach up to a 16-fold difference for gefitinib. Moreover, evaluating efficacy is a challenge, as OS and PFS assessments need long periods for examination; thus, TDM could serve as a viable proxy for attaining beneficial results [ ].
Regarding drug interaction, concurrent use of CYP3A4 and P-gp inhibitors or inducers can significantly affect some oral targeted therapy pharmacokinetic parameters [ ]. In cases of chronic renal failure, the expression of P-gp is notably elevated compared to individuals with normal renal function [ ]. Conversely, acute hepatic failure reduces the level of intestinal P-gp expression [ ]. Certain oral targeted therapies also function as inhibitors for specific enzymes in the CYP450 family. For example, gefitinib inhibits CYP2C19 and 2D6, vemurafenib inhibits CYP1A2 and 2D6, and crizotinib inhibits CYP3A4 [ ]. Therefore, it is important to use caution when using these medications in conjunction with other specific CYP450 substrates. Certain oral targeted therapies exhibit enhanced absorption when exposed to an acidic stomach environment. As can be seen in a nationwide cohort study, the simultaneous use of a proton pump inhibitor and gefitinib will significantly decrease OS of lung cancer patients [ ]. These factors should be taken into consideration when tailoring a dosing regimen for a patient.
Some studies in this systematic review focused on populations other than those with lung cancer, as certain drugs are primarily used in different types of cancer. A pharmacokinetic study on cabozantinib revealed that medullary thyroid carcinoma led to a 93% increase in apparent clearance compared to other types of cancer [ ]. Hypocalcemia in thyroid carcinoma is hypothesized to impact the clearance of cabozantinib. Another PopPK study on Avelumab found that metastatic Merkel cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma had reduced clearance rates of 32% and 25%, respectively, compared to other types of cancer [ ]. Some cancers may induce pharmacokinetic alterations that impact the metabolism and elimination of targeted therapy, so findings from studies in different cancer types should be interpreted with caution.
This study has several limitations. First, our focus was on studies that included pharmacokinetic analysis. Consequently, studies that solely investigated clinical effectiveness and side effects were deliberately excluded. Studies on the use of oral targeted therapy without pharmacokinetic analysis can be applicable in patients, albeit with less reliable evidence compared to studies that include pharmacokinetic analysis. Second, we encountered a lack of available publications related to package insert claims for some drugs. Third, we incorporated certain studies that were not conducted specifically in the lung cancer population, thereby augmenting the potential for bias in the results related to lung cancer. Fourth, certain studies exhibit a small number size, particularly in their dependence on small case series for dialysis data. Fifth, there may be a publication bias favoring positive pharmacokinetic study outcomes, as most of the included studies were conducted by researchers affiliated with the medication manufacturer. Finally, variability may arise from the utilization of distinct liver impairment classifications (Child-Pugh vs. NCIc).
Manufacturers can engage with consortia to conduct research that addresses a lack of publications regarding targeted therapy in lung cancer for patients with renal and hepatic impairment. Currently, there are 15 consortia engaged in early-phase oncology clinical trials [ ]. This collaboration may address the difficulties of enrolling appropriate patients and initiating the process. Collaboration may also be undertaken for the execution of case reports or case series pharmacokinetic studies. A case report may serve as a foundation for subsequent clinical pharmacokinetic studies concerning hepatic and renal dysfunction. Moreover, employing alternative methodologies through PopPK studies, if patients with hepatic impairment are not excluded from phase 2 and 3 trials and sufficient pharmacokinetic data is gathered, represents a viable way to enhance publication in this area [ ]. Finally, the application of PBPK modeling in drug development and dosing is recommended to improve research and publishing of drug dosage in cases of hepatic or renal impairment.
According to FDA guidance, PBPK can serve as an alternative for the preliminary characterization of drug dosing regimens. Subsequently, clinical trials may be conducted to validate the outcomes of PBPK [ ]. Currently, the application of PBPK in organ impairment remains small, constituting 8% of total PBPK utilization. PBPK modeling has been utilized to guide dosing in drug labels for at least 109 new drugs as of 2023, 54 of which correspond to the oncology field [ ]. The application of PBPK modeling in oncology is promising, as a systematic review indicated that the absolute average folding errors of AUC between predicted values from PBPK and observed values from clinical trials of organ impairment were within 1.15-fold of each other, which is a notably favorable result [ ].
To summarize, the dosage of some oral targeted therapy for lung cancer should be decreased in cases of hepatic or renal impairment. This systematic review has generated multiple new recommendations and revised existing recommendations regarding the adjustment of oral targeted therapy initial doses in the presence of hepatic and renal impairment. Additional factors that need to be considered include hypoalbuminemia, hepatotoxicity, and drug interactions. It is highly recommended to conduct additional pharmacokinetic research on the usage of this drug in populations that have not been studied before.

## Supporting information
S1 File

## Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) checklist.
(DOCX)
S2 File

## Supplementary materials.
(DOCX)

 10.1371/journal.pone.0324056.r001Decision Letter 0
KikiowoBabatomiwaAcademic Editor© 2025 Babatomiwa Kikiowo2025Babatomiwa Kikiowohttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0Dear Dr. Soetikno,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Oct 06 2024 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org . When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols . Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols .
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Babatomiwa Kikiowo
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal requirements:   
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

2. We note that your Data Availability Statement is currently as follows: [All relevant data are within the manuscript and its Supporting Information files.]
Please confirm at this time whether or not your submission contains all raw data required to replicate the results of your study. Authors must share the “minimal data set” for their submission. PLOS defines the minimal data set to consist of the data required to replicate all study findings reported in the article, as well as related metadata and methods (https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-minimal-data-set-definition).
For example, authors should submit the following data:
- The values behind the means, standard deviations and other measures reported;
- The values used to build graphs;
- The points extracted from images for analysis.
Authors do not need to submit their entire data set if only a portion of the data was used in the reported study.
If your submission does not contain these data, please either upload them as Supporting Information files or deposit them to a stable, public repository and provide us with the relevant URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers. For a list of recommended repositories, please see https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/recommended-repositories.
If there are ethical or legal restrictions on sharing a de-identified data set, please explain them in detail (e.g., data contain potentially sensitive information, data are owned by a third-party organization, etc.) and who has imposed them (e.g., an ethics committee). Please also provide contact information for a data access committee, ethics committee, or other institutional body to which data requests may be sent. If data are owned by a third party, please indicate how others may request data access.
2. Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
Additional Editor Comments (if provided):
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? -->?>
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: N/A
Reviewer #3: N/A
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available??>
The PLOS Data policy
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English??>
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
Reviewer #1: There are minor inconsistencies in the body as well as some experiments or conclusions not explained. Great work overall, but kindly ensure you explain some of the results in a more details fashion.
For example, 'A PK study in HD patients showed no significant difference in AUC and Cmax'. Why do you think this happened? Would like a more detailed discussion on this.
Work is also scientifically sound but can be made better when the explanations/discussions are clearly detailed out.
Lastly, a minor observation is some abbreviations were not defined in the body of work. Fixing this would be great.
Reviewer #2: Lung cancer, the foremost cause of cancer-related deaths globally, presents significant management challenges, especially in its advanced stage. This systematic review focuses on the dosage adjustments of targeted therapies for patients with concurrent renal and hepatic impairments, a frequent complication in cancer patients. By examining the package insert recommendations against the backdrop of available pharmacokinetic studies, the authors provide a comprehensive evaluation of the current practices. However, my only wish is that the authors had included a figure to summarize the work, which would have made it more appealing and accessible to the readers
Reviewer #3: The manuscript is well-prepared. However, I recommend the following revisions:
Expand the Methods section to provide more detailed information.
Ensure that the PRISMA guidelines are highlighted and adhered to within the Methods section.
Including the chemical structure of each drug in the Results section could enhance readers' understanding.
**********
what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/ . PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org
10.1371/journal.pone.0324056.r002Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version1
28 Aug 2024

Comments to the Author
Reviewer #1: There are minor inconsistencies in the body as well as some experiments or conclusions not explained. Great work overall, but kindly ensure you explain some of the results in a more details fashion.
For example, 'A PK study in HD patients showed no significant difference in AUC and Cmax'. Why do you think this happened? Would like a more detailed discussion on this.
This paragraph already contains an elucidation of this phenomenon. Initially, it appears that renal failure does not affect the elimination of erlotinib. Therefore, there is no change in the elimination of erlotinib in end stage renal disease patients, who are typically undergoing hemodialysis. Nevertheless, a study conducted on hemodialysis patients revealed a tendency towards a decrease in the area under the curve (AUC). This could be attributed to hypoalbuminemia, a condition commonly observed in patients undergoing hemodialysis, which leads to a decrease in the overall concentration of erlotinib in the body.
The explanation of hypoalbuminemia condition related to drug elimination also has been explained in discussion.
Work is also scientifically sound but can be made better when the explanations/discussions are clearly detailed out.
We have incorporated three key points into the discussion.
1. The FDA guidance on conducting drug studies for liver impairment and recommendations to manufacturers.
2. The FDA guidance on conducting drug studies for renal impairment and recommendations to manufacturers.
3. Factors to consider in patients with end-stage renal disease undergoing hemodialysis (HD) or continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD)
Presumably, this addition has ability to enhance the comprehensiveness of our study. If there are any discussions that you believe should be included, please inform us.
Lastly, a minor observation is some abbreviations were not defined in the body of work. Fixing this would be great.
We have added HD, CAPD, Cl/F, ALP, CYP, p-gp, BCRP, AUCss and PRISMA abbreviation in the manuscript. We have assessed all manuscript and have put all abbreviation definition in the first of this abbreviation exist
Reviewer #2: Lung cancer, the foremost cause of cancer-related deaths globally, presents significant management challenges, especially in its advanced stage. This systematic review focuses on the dosage adjustments of targeted therapies for patients with concurrent renal and hepatic impairments, a frequent complication in cancer patients. By examining the package insert recommendations against the backdrop of available pharmacokinetic studies, the authors provide a comprehensive evaluation of the current practices. However, my only wish is that the authors had included a figure to summarize the work, which would have made it more appealing and accessible to the readers
I greatly appreciate your review. Figure 2 and its corresponding explanation have been included in the manuscript, as shown below. In addition, we have incorporated the utilization of Biorender as our software for creating this Figure in the method section.
Reviewer #3: The manuscript is well-prepared. However, I recommend the following revisions:
Expand the Methods section to provide more detailed information.
We greatly appreciate your review. We have reviewed the Methods section and believe that it is adequately detailed to allow reproducibility by other researchers. Additionally, we have included information about the use of resources such as PubChem and BioRender in our systematic review, which can be found in the manuscript. We also have included more comprehensive inclusion and exclusion criteria and why we used these criteria. If there are any specific aspects of the Methods section that you feel require further elaboration, please let us know, and we will gladly address them.
Ensure that the PRISMA guidelines are highlighted and adhered to within the Methods section.
After conducting a thorough review of the PRISMA guideline, we have ensured that all applicable items have been completed in our systematic review. The only exception is the statistical analysis, which can only be performed in a meta-analysis. The comprehensive information regarding our PRISMA guideline adherence can be found in File S1.
Including the chemical structure of each drug in the Results section could enhance readers' understanding.
We have added the chemical structure and PubChem CID of each drug in Table 1.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers.docx
10.1371/journal.pone.0324056.r003Decision Letter 1
KikiowoBabatomiwaAcademic Editor© 2025 Babatomiwa Kikiowo2025Babatomiwa Kikiowohttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1Dear Dr. Soetikno,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Jan 11 2025 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org . When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols . Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols .
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Babatomiwa Kikiowo
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #3: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #4: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #5: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions??>
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
Reviewer #5: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? -->?>
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #3: I Don't Know
Reviewer #4: N/A
Reviewer #5: No
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available??>
The PLOS Data policy
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
Reviewer #5: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English??>
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
Reviewer #5: Yes
**********
Reviewer #1: Looks good now. The major points were raised and the tables also looked good. The work is also interesting and worthy of being showcased.
Reviewer #3: No comments, everything looks good.
Reviewer #4: The authors presented their findings on "Tailoring Oral Targeted Therapies Dosage in Lung Cancer: A Systematic Review of Pharmacokinetics Studies on Renal and Hepatic Impairment." While the work is scientifically sound, there are opportunities for enhancement.
To improve the manuscript, I recommend that the authors provide more detailed explanations and discussions throughout the text. Clarifying the implications of the findings, particularly regarding how renal and hepatic impairments influence drug dosing, will enrich the overall narrative. Additionally, including more context on the relevance of pharmacokinetics in tailoring therapies for lung cancer patients would strengthen the manuscript's impact. Overall, a more thorough discussion will make the work more accessible and informative for readers.
Reviewer #5: There are minor inconsistencies in your statistical analysis. Great work overall, but kindly ensure to include figures that explain your statistical analysis.
**********
what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #3: No
Reviewer #4: No
Reviewer #5: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/ . PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Comments.pdf
10.1371/journal.pone.0324056.r004Author response to Decision Letter 2
Submission Version2
3 Dec 2024

Comments to the Author
Reviewer #4: The authors presented their findings on "Tailoring Oral Targeted Therapies Dosage in Lung Cancer: A Systematic Review of Pharmacokinetics Studies on Renal and Hepatic Impairment." While the work is scientifically sound, there are opportunities for enhancement.
To improve the manuscript, I recommend that the authors provide more detailed explanations and discussions throughout the text. Clarifying the implications of the findings, particularly regarding how renal and hepatic impairments influence drug dosing, will enrich the overall narrative.
I greatly appreciate your insightful review. We have reviewed our manuscript and revised several typographical errors regarding the influence of renal impairment on drug dosing. Hopefully, it increases the understanding of drug dosing in renal impairment.
We have added an explanation regarding how liver impairment can influence drug dosing, with the aim of enhancing readability and comprehension.
Additionally, including more context on the relevance of pharmacokinetics in tailoring therapies for lung cancer patients would strengthen the manuscript's impact. Overall, a more thorough discussion will make the work more accessible and informative for readers.
We have included information regarding the necessity of personalizing targeted therapy dosages in lung cancer, exemplified by erlotinib, one of the most prevalent medications for this condition. Low blood levels of erlotinib markedly reduced the objective response rate (ORR), whereas excessive dosages substantially heightened its toxicity.
Consequently, certain targeted therapies have been recommended for regular monitoring through therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM) to mitigate side effects and enhance efficacy, as elucidated in the subsequent paragraph.
We have also included a discussion on the significance of drug dosing in end-stage renal disease. It is hoped that this will enhance the significance of our systematic review in the future development of targeted therapy research.
Reviewer #5: There are minor inconsistencies in your statistical analysis. Great work overall, but kindly ensure to include figures that explain your statistical analysis.
We sincerely appreciate your feedback on our manuscript. We acknowledge that our systematic review in pharmacokinetic research methods may be unfamiliar. Thus, we present a graph to illustrate research methodologies, as depicted in Figure 1. This manuscript is a systematic review, not a meta-analysis; therefore, we do not conduct statistical analysis. Consequently, we are unable to provide figures that elucidate our statistical analysis.
We sincerely appreciate your feedback on our manuscript. We acknowledge that our systematic review in pharmacokinetic research methods may be unfamiliar. Thus, we present a graph to illustrate research methodologies, as depicted in Figure 1. This manuscript is a systematic review, not a meta-analysis; therefore, we do not conduct statistical analysis. Consequently, we are unable to provide figures that elucidate our statistical analysis.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response_to_Reviewers_auresp_2.docx
10.1371/journal.pone.0324056.r005Decision Letter 2
YuanZhengAcademic Editor© 2025 Zheng Yuan2025Zheng Yuanhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2Dear Dr. Soetikno,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Jun 29 2025 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org . When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols . Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols .
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Zheng Yuan
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
Comments from PLOS Editorial Office: As your systematic review aims to inform clinical decision making, please include a certainty of evidence assessment (e.g.: GRADE) in your revised manuscript.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #5: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #6: (No Response)
Reviewer #7: (No Response)
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions??>
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #5: Yes
Reviewer #6: Yes
Reviewer #7: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? -->?>
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #5: Yes
Reviewer #6: Yes
Reviewer #7: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available??>
The PLOS Data policy
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #5: Yes
Reviewer #6: Yes
Reviewer #7: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English??>
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #5: Yes
Reviewer #6: Yes
Reviewer #7: Yes
**********
Reviewer #1: my concerns have been duly worked on. I recommend for publication. In addition to other reviewers comments, I believe the authors duly made their writing and communication much clearer, wit an added emphasis on proper data visualization.
Reviewer #5: The review is thorough, covering a broad range of oral targeted therapies for lung cancer in patients with hepatic and renal impairment.
Table 1, which talks about summary of dose adjustments, is critical but lacks an interpretation section.
Figure 3 could be referenced more explicitly in the discussion. (Instead of saying "Key findings are summarized in Fig. 3," specifying which insights the figure conveys makes more sense in my opinion.)
Reviewer #6: Great work overall, with succinct analysis. I have a few comments that would further enhance the flow and impact of the article.
1. In your work, you effectively categorized targeted therapies under various specific considerations, such as EGFR, ALK, BRAF/MEK, etc., and provided key conclusions for each therapy within these sections. To enhance the reader's comprehension, it would be immensely beneficial to include a brief explanation at the beginning of each section about these considerations. For example, a concise description of EGFR inhibitors (what they are and why they are important in targeted therapy) would provide essential context before delving into the analysis of specific therapies.
2. For Table 1, consider adding an additional column to include details on the inhibitory considerations (e.g., EGFR, ALK, etc.) for each therapy. While I understand that space limitations might make this challenging, it might be informative. This is a suggestion not a strict recommendation.
3. While one of the key challenges resulting to limited studies in the pharmacokinetic analysis of the drugs due to lack of available data from manufacturers was highlighted, your discussion would benefit from mentioning more key challenges for the limited studies. Additionally, providing recommendations for researchers and manufacturers on overcoming these challenges could enhance the practical value of your discussion. This would elevate your work beyond the already well-articulated dosage recommendations, giving it broader applicability and impact.
Reviewer #7: 1. Merits
Comprehensive Scope
The manuscript systematically surveys pharmacokinetic (PK) studies for 21 oral targeted therapies in lung cancer patients with renal and hepatic impairment, spanning PBPK, PopPK, PK, and case‐series designs. This breadth provides clinicians with a one‐stop reference for dose‐adjustment guidance.
Rigorous Methodology
Adherence to PRISMA guidelines and PROSPERO registration (CRD42024518123) underscore the authors’ commitment to transparency and reproducibility. Dual‐reviewer screening, standardized data extraction, and the use of established risk‐of‐bias tools strengthen the review’s credibility.
Novel Contribution
To our knowledge, this is the first systematic review focusing exclusively on PK–based dose recommendations for targeted lung cancer therapies in patients with organ impairment. The 16 new and 8 updated dosing recommendations add tangible value beyond existing package-insert guidance.
Clinical Relevance
By juxtaposing label recommendations against empirical PK data—including in hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis—this work has immediate applicability in oncology practice, aiding in precision dosing to maximize efficacy and safety.
2. Aspects for Improvement
Search Strategy Transparency
Detail the full search strings in the main Methods (or move from Table S1 into a Supplement with explicit Boolean operators and date ranges).
Clarify database coverage (e.g., specify date of last search for Web of Science, Scopus, PubMed).
Risk‐of‐Bias Synthesis
Summarize key findings of the bias assessment in the Results rather than relegating details to S4–S6 Tables. A brief paragraph quantifying how many studies were at low vs. moderate vs. high risk will help readers gauge confidence in the recommendations.
Results Presentation
Unify and simplify dosing tables. Currently, Table 1 and S7 appear to overlap. A consolidated main-text table with columns “Drug | Impairment Category | ΔAUC/Cmax | Dose Recommendation” would increase readability.
Include a PRISMA flow diagram as Figure 2 in the main text rather than only referencing it.
Discussion Depth & Limitations
Expand on clinical decision-making. For example, discuss how TDM or pharmacogenetic testing might integrate with these dosing recommendations in real‐world settings.
Explicitly state limitations. The manuscript currently truncates before a standalone “Limitations” subsection. Address heterogeneity in study designs, missing data for certain eGFR or Child–Pugh classes, and language/publication bias.
Manuscript Organization & Clarity
Remove embedded “Response to Reviewers” text from the manuscript draft. That content belongs in your cover letter or tracked-changes response, not the submitted article itself.
Proofread for redundancy and English usage. A few sections (e.g., Reviewer #5 responses) are duplicated verbatim. Consolidate and streamline to avoid reader confusion.
Figures & Visual Summary
Add a summary schematic (e.g., a heatmap or color-coded chart) showing which drugs require dose reduction by impairment severity.
Ensure all figures (including the Biorender diagram) are high resolution and clearly labelled.
**********
what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #5: Yes:  Stephen Adepoju
Reviewer #6: No
Reviewer #7: Yes:  Xiaoyi Zhang, MD.
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/ . PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org . Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Review_2.pdf
10.1371/journal.pone.0324056.r006Author response to Decision Letter 3
Submission Version3
26 May 2025

I greatly appreciate for your time and consideration to this manuscript. All of reviewer concern has been addressed in attachment "response to reviewer"
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to reviewer.docx
10.1371/journal.pone.0324056.r007Decision Letter 3
YuanZhengAcademic Editor© 2025 Zheng Yuan2025Zheng Yuanhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version3Dear Dr. Soetikno,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Jul 26 2025 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org . When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols . Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols .
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Zheng Yuan
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE

Journal office comment to authors: 

Thank you for submitting your revised manuscript. However, we note that our previous request "As your systematic review aims to inform clinical decision making, please include a certainty of evidence assessment (e.g.: GRADE) in your revised manuscript." has been overlooked. 
We do note that you included a quality assessment, but  a certainty of evidence assessment is also required for your study. Quality assessment focuses on evaluating the internal validity of individual studies included in a review, looking for biases and limitations in their design, execution, and reporting. Certainty of evidence, on the other hand, refers to the overall confidence in the findings of the review, considering the quality of the included studies, but also the consistency of results, and other factors that might impact the reliability of the findings. 
Given that your systematic review aims to inform clinical decision making, please also include a certainty of evidence assessment (e.g.: GRADE) in your revised manuscript.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

Reviewer #7: (No Response)
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions??>
Reviewer #7: Partly
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? -->?>
Reviewer #7: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available??>
The PLOS Data policy
Reviewer #7: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English??>
Reviewer #7: Yes
**********
Reviewer #7: Merits
1. Timely and clinically relevant topic
Addresses a growing need to optimize dosing of oral targeted agents in patients with liver and kidney dysfunction, a population often excluded from pivotal trials.
Provides practical guidance that could directly inform oncologists and clinical pharmacologists.
2. Comprehensive methodology
Protocol registered in PROSPERO (CRD42024518123) and adherence to PRISMA standards enhance transparency.
Multi‐database search (PubMed, Scopus, Web of Science) with no language restrictions ensures broad coverage.
3. Risk‐of‐bias assessment
Use of established tools (Murad’s RoB for case reports, NOS for PK studies, PROBAST for PopPK/PBPK) demonstrates rigor in evaluating study quality.
4. Structured presentation of findings
Results organized by drug class, with clear tables summarizing AUC/Cmax changes and recommended dosage modifications.
Inclusion of a visual schematic (Fig. 3) and BioRender diagrams aids reader comprehension.
5. Integration of package‐insert and literature data
Highlights discrepancies between label recommendations and published PK studies, and proposes updated dosing advice where evidence allows.
Aspects for Improvement
1. Search strategy transparency
The main text refers to “Comprehensive keyword usage” in Table S1 but does not detail full search strings.
Suggestion: Move critical elements of the search strategy (e.g., exact terms, date ranges) into the main Methods or an accessible appendix.
2. Handling of heterogeneity and narrative synthesis
While heterogeneity precludes meta‐analysis, the narrative discussion often lists findings without synthesizing overarching patterns.
Suggestion: Introduce summary tables or decision algorithms grouping drugs by degree of impairment (e.g., no adjustment vs. dose reduction vs. avoid) to guide clinicians.
3. Limitations section
A concise, dedicated Limitations paragraph is missing. Key issues include: publication bias toward positive PK results, reliance on small case series for dialysis data, and variability in impairment classification (Child–Pugh vs. NCIc).
Suggestion: Explicitly acknowledge these and discuss their impact on generalizability.
4. Evidence gaps and unsupported statements
Several package‐insert claims (e.g., for vemurafenib, entrectinib, selpercatinib) lack citable PK publications.
Suggestion: Either provide citations or rephrase these as “manufacturer‐reported” and flag the need for independent confirmation.
5. Clarity and conciseness of Discussion
The Discussion is lengthy and occasionally repetitive, particularly in describing pathophysiology.
Suggestion: Streamline by focusing on the most clinically actionable points and moving detailed mechanistic explanations to a separate subsection or supplemental material.
6. Formatting and adherence to journal guidelines
Financial disclosure and ethics statements appear as placeholders in the submission form but are not integrated into the manuscript text.
Suggestion: Ensure that all PLOS ONE submission requirements (funding sources, competing interests, data availability) are clearly stated in the manuscript.
7. Consistency in dosing recommendations
In some sections, you propose new recommendations that differ subtly from package insert guidance without clear rationale.
Suggestion: For each proposed change, briefly summarize the magnitude of PK alterations (e.g., “AUC↑50% in CP C, therefore reduce dose by 50%”) to justify the recommendation.
**********
what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy
Reviewer #7: Yes:  Xiaoyi Zhang, M.D.
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/ . PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org . Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0324056.r008Author response to Decision Letter 4
Submission Version4
30 Jun 2025

I greatly appreciated the time and your consideration for this manuscript. All of the concern has been addressed in the attachment. We hope that this revision is adequately PLoS one publication criteria
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Answer to reviewer.docx
10.1371/journal.pone.0324056.r009Decision Letter 4
YuanZhengAcademic Editor© 2025 Zheng Yuan2025Zheng Yuanhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version4Tailoring Oral Targeted Therapies Dosage in Lung Cancer: A Systematic Review of Pharmacokinetics Studies on Renal and Hepatic Impairment
PONE-D-24-21717R4
Dear Dr. Soetikno,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice will be generated when your article is formally accepted. Please note, if your institution has a publishing partnership with PLOS and your article meets the relevant criteria, all or part of your publication costs will be covered. Please make sure your user information is up-to-date by logging into Editorial Manager at Editorial Manager®  and clicking the ‘Update My Information' link at the top of the page. If you have any questions relating to publication charges, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Zheng Yuan
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

Reviewer #7: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions??>
Reviewer #7: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? -->?>
Reviewer #7: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available??>
The PLOS Data policy
Reviewer #7: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English??>
Reviewer #7: Yes
**********
Reviewer #7: (No Response)
**********
what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy
Reviewer #7: Yes:  Xiaoyi Zhang
**********
10.1371/journal.pone.0324056.r010Acceptance letter
YuanZhengAcademic Editor© 2025 Zheng Yuan2025Zheng Yuanhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.PONE-D-24-21717R4
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Soetikno,
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now being handed over to our production team.
At this stage, our production department will prepare your paper for publication. This includes ensuring the following:
* All references, tables, and figures are properly cited
* All relevant supporting information is included in the manuscript submission,
* There are no issues that prevent the paper from being properly typeset
You will receive further instructions from the production team, including instructions on how to review your proof when it is ready. Please keep in mind that we are working through a large volume of accepted articles, so please give us a few days to review your paper and let you know the next and final steps.
Lastly, if your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at customercare@plos.org.
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access.
Kind regards,
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Zheng Yuan
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE