pmcNucleic Acids ResNucleic Acids Res4narnarNucleic Acids Research0305-10481362-4962Oxford University PressPMC10767906PMC10767906.110767906107679063787047310.1093/nar/gkad920gkad9201AcademicSubjects/SCI00010Database IssueFusionPDB: a knowledgebase of human fusion proteins
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4335-4517KumarHimansu
Department of Bioinformatics and Systems Medicine, McWilliams School of Biomedical Informatics, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX 77030, USATangLin-Ya
Department of Bioinformatics and Systems Medicine, McWilliams School of Biomedical Informatics, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX 77030, USAYangChengyuan
School of Public Health, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX 77030, USAhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-8321-6864KimPora
Department of Bioinformatics and Systems Medicine, McWilliams School of Biomedical Informatics, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX 77030, USA , ). However, there are various mechanisms of human fusion proteins that have not been targeted by drugs ( ). In the era of the vast accumulated coding structural variants, to better understand these diverse mechanisms of actions of fusion genes and develop the targeted therapeutics, the 3D structures, protein-level functional annotation and 3D-level knowledge of the fusion proteins are needed. However, due to the current lack of fusion protein sequences and reliable protein structure prediction methods for complex protein structures, systematic analyses of the fusion proteins have been unavailable. This has resulted in a lack of systematic screening for small molecules that interact with active sites of fusion protein 3d structures, hindering the development of new therapeutic strategies in cancer ( ). In our recent study, FusionGDB2.0, we annotated all open reading frames of human fusion genes and made potentially translated fusion protein sequences as many as ∼43K. This is the first comprehensive resource of human fusion protein sequences, from which complete 3d protein structures can be predicted, thanks to the advancement of artificial intelligence programs in predicting novel protein structures (i.e. AlphaFold2 and RoseTTAfold) ( , ). Using these predicted fusion protein structures, we can further investigate their potential interactions with small molecules or innate compounds and conduct subsequent functional analyses.
We searched PubMed for 14 725 unique fusion genes that might produce fusion protein sequences from 16 725 in-frame fusion genes listed in FusionGDB2.0 ( ), using search terms such as ‘BCR and ABL1 and fusion and gene’ or ‘BCR and ABL1 and chimeric and gene’, we found that only 315 of these fusion genes had been previously reported in studies (Figure , ). 97.9% of 14 725 translated fusion genes were never studied because of the limitations of traditional tools and the high cost of experimental procedures. To fill these gaps, we provided diverse fusion protein information, including fusion protein functional annotation, fusion protein sequences, whole fusion protein 3D structures, potentially interacting FDA-approved drugs and manually curated known fusion targeting drugs and fusion-positive diseases.
 Information provided by the database is organized based on the assigned Levels of individual fusion proteins per importance (from Level 1 to 4, Figures and  ). We assigned ∼ 43K fusion proteins from FusionGDB 2.0 to Level 1. Among these, we assigned 2300 and 1267 fusion proteins of 2300 recurrent fusion genes and 266 manually curated fusion genes to Level 2. Then, out of these, we assigned 1267 fusion proteins of 266 manually curated fusion genes to Level 3. Lastly, we assigned 68 chosen fusion proteins from their pLDDT distribution out of 1267 fusion proteins to Level 4. In Level 1, we provide fusion protein annotation information and fusion amino acid sequences of ∼ 43K human fusion proteins. The functional annotation part investigates the loss or switch of the protein functional features in fusion proteins. These sequences were made by the translation of ∼ 82K full-length fusion transcripts, which were transcribed from the ∼14.7K in-frame human fusion genes available in FusionGDB2.0. In Level 2, we provide fusion protein annotation information, fusion amino acid sequences, and the whole fusion protein 3D structures of 2300 and 1267 fusion proteins. In FusionGDB2.0′s ∼14.7K in-frame translated fusion genes, there were 2300 recurrent fusion genes that were expressed in at least two patient samples or cell-lines. For these, we focused on the longest fusion isoform protein sequences and predicted their 3D structures. From 1.5K manually curated fusion genes from ChimerKB4 ( ), there were only 266 translated fusion genes that are possibly making 1267 fusion proteins considering multiple breakpoints and multiple gene isoforms. We predicted 3D structures of all of these 1267 fusion protein isoforms. So far, only a few cases of partial 3D structures of human fusion proteins are publicly available. Our predicted 3D structures are the only resource providing the whole 3D structures of human fusion proteins. In Level 3, we provide fusion protein annotation information, fusion amino acid sequences, fusion protein 3D structures, active site information based on those 3D structures, and pLDDT score distribution checked around the best active sites of 1267 fusion proteins of 266 manually curated fusion genes. In Level 4, we provide fusion protein annotation information, fusion amino acid sequences, the whole fusion protein 3D structures, active site information predicted based on the whole 3D structures of fusion proteins, and virtual screening results of 68 chosen fusion proteins out of 266 manually curated fusion genes. Additionally, we offer information related to small molecules, including their toxicity and the pharmacokinetics of their ADME (Absorption, Distribution, Metabolism and Excretion) properties. Lastly, we provide information about drugs that are currently used in treating cancer fusion gene-positive patients from the literature search.
Our research identified various aspects of fusion proteins and demonstrated the potential utility of FusionPDB. First, we discovered that only 315 out of 14 725 translated fusion genes had been previously reported. This means that the vast majority of fusion genes (97.9%) have never been documented. Secondly, we listed 964 5′- and 736 3′-possible effective genes in pan-cancer fusion genes based on our fusion gene assessment scoring out of 14.7K fusion genes. Third, we recognized the significance of the 3′-partner's functions. This was evident from the observation that while the fusion part protein sequence was shorter, it retained a larger number of functional protein domains compared to the 5′-partners. Fourth, we found that the fusion protein structures’ reliability score distributions were similar to combining the before and after breakpoints in two wild-type proteins. There would be some context for the protein structure prediction from the algorithm of AlphaFold2. Fifth, we observed that our predicted active sites, derived from the whole 3D structures of fusion proteins, interacted more effectively with cancer drugs compared to active sites identified in wild type protein functional domain. So far, there was no available resource to have the whole 3D structures of fusion proteins. Therefore, the identification of the best active sites was not possible. From our predicted whole 3D structures of human fusion proteins, we may have better insights into the fusion protein-small molecule interactions and may be able to find potential drug repurposing. Lasty, there were 77 fusion genes targeted by 62 drugs, and 155 fusion genes were reported in 107 diseases.
FusionPDB is the only resource that can be consulted for the annotation of the central dogma of the coding structural variants. FusionPDB will enhance our understanding of fusion protein mechanisms, thereby providing new therapeutic targets with the newfound knowledge. We believe that information regarding cancer fusion proteins will grow in both size and importance in the coming years. Accordingly, the impact of this work will be huge and broader than we think in the bio/health/drug scientific communities. It will be routinely used by diverse cancer and drug research communities.

## Materials and methods

## Fusion gene and fusion protein information
We obtained 16 146 unique in-frame fusion genes from FusionGDB2.0 ( ). For these fusion genes, we have the sample ID or expressed sequence tag (EST) ID, 5′-gene, chromosome, breakpoint, strand and 3′-gene, chromosome, breakpoint, strand information and full-length fusion transcript sequences. 14 725 in-frame fusion genes were able to produce as fusion amino acid sequences based on the GRCh37 human reference genome, as determined by ORFfinder. The methods of using the fusion protein sequences from multiple genomic breakpoints and multiple gene isoforms are described in the FusionGDB2.0 study as follows. Two different genes can form fusion genes with multiple breakpoints based on multiple gene isoforms. Therefore, we considered all gene isoforms at each breakpoint. To help identify and validate fusion genes, we focused on the in-frame fusion genes. For more reliable fusion genes, we checked the distance between the two breakpoints in case of intra-chromosomal rearrangements and created fusion sequences when those genes are apart >100 kb. We also selected fusion genes when both breakpoints aligned at the exon junction. To call each exon sequence of the given breakpoints, transcription start/end sites and CDS start/end sites, we used the nibFrag utility from UCSC Genome Browser ( ) based on GENCODE hg19 genome structure. Then, we made 83 290 full-length fusion transcript sequences of 16 146 in-frame fusion genes. For these fusion transcript sequences, if they had ORF annotation results from ORFfinder, we chose the longest amino acid sequence to represent the fusion transcript sequences. As a result, we were able to obtain 43K fusion protein sequences, which comprises the Level 1 data in FusionPDB. (https://compbio.uth.edu/FusionGDB2/combined_tables/combinedFGDB2genes_ORF_analyzed_gencode_h19v19_real_Inframe_only_transcript_seq_with_orffinder_result.txt).
Out of these 16K in-frame fusion genes, we decided to focus on the recurrent fusion genes, which were expressed in at least two patients or cell lines. Then, 2300 recurrently expressed fusion genes possibly make 12354 fusion proteins. Among these, we chose the longest isoform of each fusion gene. To select more reliable fusion genes, we used ChimerKB4.0, which is the integration of the manually curated fusion genes from Mitelman DB, COSMIC and GenBank as a subcategory of ChimerDB 4.0 fusion gene knowledgebase ( ). As shown in Figure , we obtained 1597 fusion genes with publication support and experimental evidence. Only 266 fusion genes were in-frame and could be expressed as 1267 potential fusion proteins. The ORF annotation of these manually curated fusion genes has followed the methodology described in our FusionGDB 2.0. For these manually curated fusion genes, we used all 1267 fusion protein isoforms ( ). For the Level 2 data sets (2300 fusion proteins from 2300 recurrently expressed fusion genes, ) and 1267 fusion proteins from 266 manually curated fusion genes), we predicted their whole 3D structures. For the Level 3 data set (1267 fusion proteins of 266 manually curated fusion genes), we checked the distribution of the pLDDT scores around the active sites. For the Level 4 data set (68 chosen fusion proteins out of 266 manually curated fusion genes), we performed the virtual screening between the active sites predicted based on the whole 3D structures of individual fusion proteins and FDA-approved drugs. All these fusion genes, transcripts, proteins and interaction information are available on the website of FusionPDB.

## Functional annotation of fusion proteins
To assign functional or gene categories, we integrated cancer genes, tumor suppressors, epigenetic regulators, DNA damage repair genes, human essential genes, kinases and transcription factors. In each gene group, we checked the retention and ORFs of the main protein functional features. There are 13 features belonging to the ‘region’ category, including ‘calcium binding’, ‘coiled coil’, ‘compositional bias’, ‘DNA binding’, ‘domain’, ‘intramembrane’, ‘motif’, ‘nucleotide binding’, ‘region’, ‘repeat’, ‘topological domain’, ‘transmembrane’ and ‘zinc finger’. To perform the protein functional feature retention search, we first downloaded the GFF (General Feature Format) format protein information of 10 651 UniProt accessions from UniProt for 10 619 genes involved in 15 030 fusion genes ( ). UniProt provides the loci information of 39 protein features, including six molecule processing features, 13 region features, four site features, six amino acid modification features, two natural variation features, five experimental info features and three secondary structure features. Since such feature loci information is based on amino acid sequences, the genomic breakpoint information was converted into the amino acid level while considering all UniProt protein accessions, ENST isoforms and multiple breakpoints for each partner. To map each feature to the human genome sequence, we used the GENCODE (v19) gene model of human reference genome ( ). For the 5′-partner gene, we considered the protein feature to be retained in the fusion gene if the breakpoints occurred on the 3′-end of the protein feature. On the contrary, if a protein domain was not entirely included in the fusion amino acid sequence, we reported such fusion genes as having not retained that protein feature. Similarly, for the 3′-partner gene, we considered the fusion gene to have retained the protein feature if the breakpoints occurred on the 5′-end of the protein feature region.

## Protein–protein interaction information
We integrated the interactor information from BIOGRID (v 3.4.260) and PPIs from the STRING to provide the PPI information to the wild-type protein of each fusion partner ( , ). The primary limitation of this dataset was that it provided the interactor name only. Since we need to know the loci information of each PPI to investigate the retention of the PPI at the fusion protein level, we recognized that the ‘Region’ feature, which is one of 39 protein features provided by UniProt, included the start and end information of interaction on each protein. Therefore, we followed the same protein feature retention screening method with this aim. During the process of protein feature retention search, we also checked whether these interaction loci are retained in fusion protein.

## 3D structure prediction of fusion proteins
We predicted the whole 3D structures of 2300 fusion proteins of 2300 recurrent fusion genes and 1267 fusion proteins of 266 manually curated fusion genes using AlphaFold2. We used the GPU-based Linux version AlphaFold2 following the step-by-step procedures in the GitHub repository of AlphaFold2 (https://github.com/google-deepmind/alphafold/tree/main). We input the fasta format files for all 1267 fusion protein's amino acids into AlphaFold2. For the alignment, we have downloaded the databases (size: 2.2 TB) such as uniref90, uniport, uniclust30, small_bfd, pdb_seqres, pdb_mmcif, pdb70, params, mgnify and bfd. The model parameters were made available by Alphafold2 for users. The output directory yielded predicted PDB structures based on model confidence, which were ranked from ranked_0.pdb to ranked_4.pdb.

## Preparation of protein and active site identification
The PDB structures of predicted proteins may contain missing atoms, missing connectivity information and water molecules, which need to be removed or preprocessed before using the 3D structure of the protein for virtual screening. All 1267 predicted protein structures were preprocessed using the protein preparation module of Schrödinger (Release 2022–2, LLC, New York, NY, 2021) ( ), by removing the water molecules, assigning the bond orders and adding the hydrogen bonds to the crystal structure of receptor molecule. Restrained minimization was done by the constraint of the RMSD and OPLS force field. To identify the active sites of all 1267 predicted proteins, we used the SiteMap of Schrödinger (release 2021–4).

## Receptor grid generation and Virtual screening
The grid size denotes the volume of the receptor's active sites, allowing the ligand to interact with the potential binding sites during the docking process. To generate a grid around the receptor, we employed the GLIDE module available within Schrödinger's Glide package. ( ). The dimensions of the grid were selected by considering the active sites predicted by SiteMap. Virtual screening is a computational technique used in the drug discovery process to identify small molecules that are most likely to bind to receptors or target molecules ( ). In this work, we considered all FDA-approved ligand libraries of the ZINC database accessed on 10th December 2022. These selected libraries were processed by the LigPrep of Schrödinger package and made available for virtual screening. In silico screening and docking analysis of 68 chosen fusion protein targets against the FDA-approved ligands were carried out using the Glide of Schrödinger package (release 2021–4) ( ).

## ADME, toxicity and accessibility studies
To calculate the ADME features of our ligand library, we used the QikProp of the Schrödinger package (release 2022–2). The predicted ADME properties of the screened ligands include the hydrophobic component of the SASA, dipole moment, solvent accessible surface area, total polar surface area, hydrophilic component of the SASA, molecular weight (MW), predicted polarizability, predicted octanol/water partition coefficient, predicted octanol/gas partition coefficient, predicted hexadecane/gas partition coefficient and predicted water/gas partition coefficient. To identify the undesirable effects of putative drugs on humans, animals, plants and the environment, we estimated the toxicity and accessibility of the ligand library using eToxPred.

## Drug and disease information
For all genes involved in these curated fusion genes, Drug-target interactions (DTIs) were extracted from DrugBank (January 2021, version 5.1.8) with the duplicated DTI pairs excluded ( ). All drugs were grouped using Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical (ATC) classification system codes. We also searched PubMed literature for evidence on the drugs that were reported as inhibiting or targeting individual fusion genes using this search expression, ‘((BCR [Title/Abstract]) AND ABL1 [Title/Abstract]) AND fusion [Title/Abstract]) AND drug [Title/Abstract]’. After a manual review of the abstracts, we found 45 fusion genes treated by 34 drugs in 36 types of diseases. We also searched the website My Cancer Genome (https://www.mycancergenome.org/) for individual 266 fusion genes, we found 34 fusion genes treated by 28 drugs. There were 149 fusion genes expressed in 108 types of diseases. In total, there were 77 fusion genes were targeted by 62 drugs (Table ), and 155 fusion genes were reported in 107 diseases ( ).

## Database architecture
The FusionPDB system is based on a three-tier architecture: client, server and database. It includes a user-friendly web interface, Perl's DBI module and MySQL database. This database was developed on MySQL 3.23 with the MyISAM storage engine.

## Results

## Overview of FusionPDB
Following the conceptual workflows of our analyses in Figure , FusionPDB provides 13 categories of annotations of fusion proteins (Figure ): fusion gene summary, fusion ORF analysis, fusion amino acid sequences, fusion protein functional features, fusion protein structure, Ramachandran plot of fusion protein structure, potential active site information, potentially interacting small molecules through virtual screening, biochemical features of small molecules with ADME, drug toxicity information, fusion protein-protein interaction, used drugs to treat fusion gene-positive patients, and fusion gene expressed disease information. The first four annotations (fusion gene summary, ORF analysis, fusion amino acid sequences and functional features) are provided for all ∼43K fusion proteins. For these fusion proteins, we provide functional annotation and fusion protein sequences (Level 1) (Figure ). For 2300 fusion proteins from the 2300 recurrent in-frame fusion genes in FusionGDB2.0 and 1267 fusion proteins from the 266 manually curated in-frame fusion genes in ChimerKB4, we provide functional annotation, fusion protein sequences and whole 3D protein structures (Level 2). For 1267 fusion proteins of 266 manually curated fusion genes, we provide functional annotation, fusion protein sequences, whole 3D protein structures, pLDDT score distribution checking around the best active sites, and manual curation of PubMed articles on their presentation of specific diseases and treated drugs (Level 3). For 68 fusion proteins chosen out of 1267 fusion proteins from 266 manually curated fusion genes of ChimerKB4, we provide functional annotation, fusion protein sequences, whole 3D protein structures, pLDDT score distribution checking around the best active sites, and virtual screening results with FDA-approved drugs (Level 4). All such information is included in the database with a user-friendly visualization. The main features of FusionPDB annotations are summarized below (Figure ).
The ‘Fusion gene summary category’ shows a basic fusion gene summary following multiple annotations for each fusion partner gene. It also provides the two gene assessment scores to demonstrate the impact of each gene across pan-cancer fusion genes. It provides the functional gene groups to assign potential loss-of-functional effects with ORF annotation and the loci of breakpoints on the gene structures of individual partners using the UCSC genome browser. We listed 964 5′- and 736 3′-possible effective genes in pan-cancer fusion genes based on our fusion gene assessment scoring.
The ‘Fusion Gene Sample Information’ category provides the detailed information of individual fusion genes including the breakpoint, cancer type and sample ID.
The ‘Fusion ORF analysis’ category provides the in-frame fusion gene information after ORF annotation.
In the ‘Fusion amino acid sequence’ category, we present the fusion amino acid sequences.
The ‘Fusion protein functional features’ category provides the retention information of 39 protein features due to the formation of fusion proteins with a link to an in-house visualization web tool for functional features of fusion genes, FGviewer.
The ‘Fusion protein structure and Ramachandran plot’ categories provide the 3D structure PDB files of individual fusion proteins predicted by AlphaFold2, 3D views of predicted structures with molstar, predicted Local Distance Difference Test (pLDDT) and Ramachandran plots.
The ‘Potential active site information’ category provides the active site information predicted from the whole 3D structures of the fusion proteins using SiteMap, including site score, size of the pocket, volume, hydrophobic, hydrophilic score and name of the residues involved in that particular active site.
The ‘Potentially interacting small molecules’ category provides the list of virtual screening results. The screening table will consist of the top 20 inhibitory molecules on the basis of docking and GLIDE score for each fusion protein target.
‘Biochemical features of small molecules and drug toxicity information’ categories provide multiple small molecule information such as absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion, drug toxicity score and synthetic accessibility score of each ligand using QikProp and eToxPred ( ).
The ‘Fusion Gene PPI analysis’ category provides the interactor information from BIOGRID (v 3.4.260) and PPIs from the STRING to provide the PPI information to the wild-type protein of each fusion partner. It also provides a link to ChiPPI ( ), the chimeric PPI site.
‘Related Drugs and Related Diseases’ categories provide manually curated information on drugs targeting 266 curated fusion genes and diseases associated with these fusion genes, as sourced from PubMed literature and MyCancerGenome. Out of these, 77 fusion genes are targeted by 62 drugs and 155 fusion genes have been linked to 107 diseases.
 

## FusionPDB provides the assessment of individual partner genes in pan-cancer in-frame fusion genes
Assessment of human coding genes out of all currently known ∼102K human fusion genes can provide genes of interest to be further studied for developing therapeutic targets and drugs. Out of 102 647 human fusion genes of FusionGDB2.0, there are ∼16K in-frame fusion genes. Out of these, 14.7K fusion genes generated around 43K potential fusion amino acid sequences. Among these ∼14.7K fusion genes, we attempted to assess individual partner genes in pan-cancer fusion genes using the gene assessment scoring scheme that was developed in our previous studies. For these translated fusion genes, we have information on cancer type, sample name, 5′-gene, 5′-chromosome, 5′-breakpoint, 5′-strand, 3′-gene, 3′-chromosome, 3′-breakpoint, 3′-strand. Based on this information, we calculated two assessment scores, which are the Degree of Frequency (DoF) score and the Major Active Isofusion Index (MAII) score ( , ). The DoF score is a product of the number of cancer types, partner genes and breakpoints per gene, while the MAII score is calculated as . Then, there were 964 5′-genes and 736 3′-genes with more than 8 DoF scores and more than five expressed patient samples or cells ( ). Figure shows 57 5′-genes and 34 3′-genes, which were sorted based on the MAII score with >8 DoF and more than 15 samples expressed. Individual genes in these lists can potentially be effective genes in pan-cancer fusion genes from the multiple expressed cancer types, multiple partner genes and multiple breakpoints inside its gene structure. Enrichment test results of all possible effective genes in pan-cancer fusion genes in the biological processes are shown in Figure . Overall, 964 5′-peGinPCFC were enriched in protein localization and RNA localization. On the other hand, 736 3′-peGinPCFG were enriched in positive regulation of cell projection organization and protein autophosphorylation ( ).
 From the website of FusionPDB, users can find diverse information on gene assessment and functional group annotations from the ‘Fusion Gene Summary’ category. The study context of a fusion gene shows the number of PubMed article citation results for the fusion genes present in at least five samples (or cell-lines). This category shows the most frequent breakpoint information per fusion gene by providing the most reliable and representative breakpoints. Furthermore, this category also lists the potentially affected major protein functional domains from specific gene groups. These groups encompass kinases, transcription factors, cancer gene census, tumor suppressors, IUPHAR drug targets, cell metabolism genes, human essential genes and epigenetic factors. This is determined by examining the retention and ORFs (distinguishing between in-frame and frame-shift) of 13 principal protein functional features from the 39 UniProt features. In addition, this category reveals the distribution of all breakpoints across two genes involved in the fusion gene with the UCSC genome browser. Based on this knowledge of the most frequent breakpoints, gene assessment scores in pan-cancer and functional working groups, one can highlight driver fusion genes for their patients.

## FusionPDB provides the retention information of fusion protein functional features of ∼43K fusion proteins suggesting potential mechanisms for fusion proteins
There are multiple representative functional mechanisms of fusion genes as shown in Figure . Suppose a partner gene, with the active promoter and dimerization functional domains, is fused with a kinase domain. This will constitutively drive the activated expression of the kinase, leading to uncontrolled cell proliferation ( ). If a partner gene with a proto-oncogene or transactivation domain is fused with a transcription factor with a DNA-binding domain, it will result in target gene activation ( ). Through fusion, one protein can lose its interactions with important cellular regulators (i.e. MLL fusion genes) ( ). If the 3′-UTR region of a fusion gene is truncated, such a fusion transcript can avoid the regulation by miRNAs ( ). Other mechanisms include the loss of function of tumor suppressors and DNA damage repairs through the deletion or frameshift open reading frame (ORF) of fusion transcripts ( , ). Targeting the downstream effectors of fusion genes is a noteworthy recent approach ( , ). Cellular essential complexes or machinery can lose their original function due to the formation of a fusion gene of one of their subunits ( ). Investigation of the retention of the fusion protein functional features can utilize diverse functional mechanisms in therapeutics for patients.
For this aim, we investigated domain retention at the given breakpoints of ∼43K fusion proteins from FusionGDB2.0 and 1267 fusion proteins of 266 manually curated fusion genes from ChimerKB4. In the ‘Fusion Protein Functional Features’ category, we provide a detailed annotation of fusion protein functions through the retention search of 39 protein features from UniProt based on the fusion protein sequence. In this category, we specifically provide the results of the retention studies of 13 features belonging to the ‘region’ subsection, including ‘calcium binding’, ‘coiled coil’, ‘compositional bias’, ‘DNA binding’, ‘domain’, ‘intramembrane’, ‘motif’, ‘nucleotide binding’, ‘region’, ‘repeat’, ‘topological domain’, ‘transmembrane’ and ‘zinc finger’, to focus on the major functional components. The distribution of the length of ∼43K fusion amino acid sequences is shown at the top of Figure . Overall, the average length of fusion protein sequences was 757.5, with an SD of 680.9. The following two histograms show the distribution of the length of the 5′- and 3′-part amino acid sequences in ∼43K fusion protein sequences, respectively. Relatively, the 3′-fusion parts’ protein sequence was shorter than the one of the 5′-fusion parts (Wilcoxon t-test P < 2.2e-16). However, 3′-partners have a large number of protein functional major domains per cellular important gene groups (Figure , see the ratio between # fusion genes in the 3′- and 5′-gene partners retaining individual gene groups’ major functional domains) and types of protein functional features (Figure , see the ratio between # fusion genes in the 3′- and 5′- gene partners retaining individual major protein functional features) even though 3′-partners have shorter protein sequence lengths than 5′-partners in fusion proteins. These ratios may imply the potential importance of the functions of 3′-partners for tumorigenesis. Of the 1267 fusion proteins from 266 manually curated fusion genes, 109 are related to kinase and 127 to transcription factor fusion genes, which include either a kinase or transcription factor as one of the partner genes. This proportion suggests the need for intensive study of transcription factor fusion genes as potential areas for new therapeutic targets and drug development.
 We also visualized the functional annotation in the four bio-levels (DNA/RNA/protein/pathological levels) in the FGviewer. The FGviewer takes the genomic coordinate of the fusion gene breakpoints as the input data. The same breakpoint lines across four tiers split these four levels of fusion structures as belonging to involved or deleted zones. Those features include fusion mRNA and amino acid sequences based on the user's breakpoint coordinates, swapped gene expression regulatory (i.e. transcription factor or miRNA binding sites), protein functional features (i.e. protein domains, protein–protein interactions, binding sites of all molecules, secondary structure level feature, etc.), clinically relevant variants. For example, Figure shows the FGviewer result of BCR-ABL1. There are multiple functional features of BCR-ABL1, such as retaining SH2, protein kinase domains, the compositional bias of Pro-rich, DNA-binding domain, ATP binding site, proton acceptor active site and eight ClinVar ( ) variant sites. Using FGviewer for novel fusion genes can visualize the landscape of the loss of function at a glance. All these annotations are helpful for the users to easily infer the possible roles of fusion genes in tumorigenesis.

## FusionPDB provides the whole 3D structures of the fusion proteins, the foundation of understanding the fusion proteins’ function
From the 16K in-frame fusion genes, 2300 of them were expressed in at least two patient samples or cell lines. These fusion genes could potentially translate into 9411 fusion amino acid sequences (Figure ). Out of 1597 fusion genes with publication support and experimental evidence from ChimerKB4, only 1007 fusion genes had the breakpoint information located at the exon junction position. Finally, following the same ORF annotation approach used in FusionGDB, 1267 fusion amino acid sequences were made by 3485 full-length fusion transcript sequences of 266 in-frame manually curated fusion genes from ChimerKB4. For 2300 of 2300 recurrent fusion genes and 1267 fusion proteins of 266 manually curated fusion genes, we predicted the whole 3D structures using AlphaFold2. For 2300 recurrent fusion genes, we chose the longest fusion protein sequence per fusion gene and predicted the 3D structures. For 266 manually curated fusion genes, we predicted all 3D structures of 1267 fusion protein sequences.
For example, the most frequently used breakpoints of the best well-known fusion gene BCR-ABL1 (chr22:23632600-chr9:133729451) can be transcribed into four different full-length transcript sequences based on the used gene isoform structures. There are four ENSTs in BCR’s aligned breakpoint (ENST00000305877, ENST00000359540, ENST00000398512 and ENST00000436990), and there is one ENST in ABL’s aligned breakpoint (ENST00000318560). However, only two of them were annotated to be in-frame transcripts, made by two combinations (ENST00000305877-ENST00000318560 and ENST00000359540-ENST00000318560) at the given breakpoint. For these two full-length transcript sequences, we run ORFfinder and choose the longest ORF amino acid sequence out of all predicted ORF lengths. In total, BCR-ABL1 has 139 genomic breakpoint pairs. Out of these, only 13 breakpoint pairs were involved in the ‘In-frame’ fusion transcripts. These 13 breakpoints of BCR-ABL1 were transcribed based on 10 different ENSTs in both genes and made 30 different full-length BCR-ABL1 fusion transcript sequences. From the result of ORFfinder of individual 30 BCR-ABL1 fusion transcript sequences, finally, we had 30 unique BCR-ABL1 fusion amino acid sequences. To ensure, we checked with the partially known BCR-ABL1 amino acid sequence around the breakpoint area. Out of these 30 unique BCR-ABL1 fusion amino acid sequences, for ten amino acid sequences, which were translated and made from the manually curated genomic breakpoints, we predicted the 3D structures.
Figure indicates the correlation between the running time and the length of input protein sequences. AlphaFold2’s output provides the 3D structure PDB file with the reliability scores of a per-residue confidence score (pLDDT scores) per run. Figure shows the distribution of the number of fusion proteins across the pLDDT averaged score range. Overall, the 3D structures of 2300 + 1267 fusion proteins have good pLDDT scores, which are larger than 50. The ‘Fusion Protein Structure’ category provides the PDB files of individual predicted 3D structures of fusion proteins with visualization of 3D structures with the molstar plugin, pLDDT score distribution plots and Ramachandran plots. Figure shows the distribution of pLDDT scores across protein sequence length of BCR wild-type protein, BCR-ABL1 fusion protein and ABL1 wild-type protein. Overall, the protein structures’ confidence scores in the fusion proteins were similar to the result of combining of the before and after breakpoints in two wild-type proteins. So, the low-scored residues from the wild-type proteins were still low in the fusion protein, and the high-scored residues in the wild-type proteins still had high scores in the fusion proteins. Figure also shows the superimposed structures of predicted BCR-ABL1 protein by AlphaFold2 and the known structure of ABL1 protein from PDB (5MO4: ABL1 kinase (T334I_D382N) in complex with asciminib and nilotinib) and the Ramachandran plot.
 Currently, only a few human fusion proteins have their 3D structures in the Protein Data Bank (PDB). Even for these few available fusion protein structures, those are only the partial structures of fusion proteins not rather than the whole 3D structures of fusion proteins. Having the full structures is crucial for accurately identifying the interacting active sites. In contrast with the other method that relied on known functional domain-based virtual screening, our approach, which uses the newly predicted active sites from whole 3D structure-based virtual screening, offers a more informed perspective for identifying interacting small molecules. Recently, the FDA approved drugs Entrectinib and Larotrectinib for targeting neurotrophic receptor tyrosine kinase (NTRK) fusion genes ( ). Within the NTRK gene family, there are NTRK1, NTRK2 and NTRK3, all of which can be targeted by these NTRK inhibitors. In 266 manually curated fusion genes, there were eight NTRK fusion genes. Selection of five fusion proteins from these considering 3′-kinase pairs, we have ETV6-NTRK3, NACC2-NTRK2, QKI-NTRK2, TFG-NTRK1 and TPM3-NTRK1. In Figure , we visualized the 3D structures of the longest fusion protein isoforms of these fusion proteins and the best active sites predicted based on the whole 3D structures.

## FusionPDB provides virtual screening results between the whole 3D structures of 68 chosen fusion proteins and FDA-approved drugs
Selection of the best active sites of individual fusion protein structures is a significant step of the drug-design process. We predicted the active sites based on the whole 3D structures of 1267 fusion proteins, which were not available until now. The ‘Potential Active Site Information’ category provides diverse active site information through the SiteMap tool, such as SiteScore, which provides size of the pocket, volume, hydrophobicity and hydrophilicity scores, and name of the residues involved in that particular active site. For example, SiteMap predicted six active site pockets in this BCR-ABL target fusion protein on the basis of SiteScore, pocket size, Dscore and volume. Among these, the best of the whole 3D structure-based predicted active sites of BCR-ABL1 protein (FusionPDB protein sequence ID 951 in BCR-ABL1 page) consist 41 amino acids residues (residues numbers: 648–654, 656, 669–671, 679, 682, 686, 690, 699, 713, 715–718, 721, 722, 762, 763, 767, 768, 770, 780, 781, 782, 784, 786, 793, 795, 796, 799, 800–802, 816) out of all 1530 AA sequences. We provided detailed information on the active site with the largest volume and the highest site score per fusion protein. On the other hand, the known kinase domain, named PTKc_Abl (the catalytic domain of the protein tyrosine kinase (conserved protein domain family accession (cd5052))) of ABL1 is located between 635 and 897 residues across the BCR-ABL1 protein sequence. Our whole structure based predicted active sites will be useful for a better understanding of the actionable pockets close to real.
To choose reliably predicted fusion proteins, we examined the pLDDT scores near their active site. The pLDDT score, ranging from 0 to 100, provides a measure of confidence for each residue in the predicted structure. Residues with higher pLDDT scores denote regions where the model has greater confidence in the structural prediction. By selecting the predicted best active sites using the SiteMap that have overall high pLDDT scores, we aimed to prioritize the fusion protein structure. As shown in Figure , we first checked the position of the best active sites across the fusion protein length and whether they are in the major high pLDDT regions. To investigate the statistical significance, we performed the Wilcoxon signed-rank sum test using the pLDDT scores between the active site residues and non-active site residues. We required the average of the pLDDT scores in the active sites at least 70 and the P-value of the Wilcoxon test at a maximum of 0.05. The best active sites should not position in the low pLDDT score region. Lastly, if the minimum pLDDT score of the active sites is larger than 70 or 50, then we consider it a clear or good candidate respectively, for further virtual screening. In this way, out of 1267 fusion protein structures of 266 manually curated fusion genes, we selected 68 fusion proteins of the same number of fusion genes. Table shows the list of these 68 fusion proteins. Figure shows six fusion proteins’ pLDDT and active site distribution across the fusion protein sequence length and differential pLDDT scores between the active sites and not (EWSR1-FLI1, EML4-ALK, MYB-NFIB, CD74-NRG1, CCDC6-RET and BCR-ABL1, sorted by the P-value of Wilcoxon test).
 For these 68 fusion proteins of 68 fusion genes, we performed the virtual screening across FDA-approved drugs using GLIDE (Grid-based Ligand Docking with Energetic) of the Schrodinger package. GLIDE generates the grid around the active sites of the target protein and subsequently facilitates the docking between the ligand and target molecule ( ). We made a small-molecule ligand library from the ZINC and DrugBank databases which consists of 1637 FDA-approved drugs ( ). All related information is available in the ‘Potentially Interacting Small Molecules through Virtual Screening’ category. The result table shows the top 20 interacting molecules based on the docking and GLIDE scores ( ). Lower docking scores of the small inhibitory molecules are considered as the potential compounds interacting with the fusion protein. In the case of the BCR-ABL1 fusion protein (FusionPDB protein sequence ID 951 in BCR-ABL1 page), we compared docking scores of the kinase inhibitors from the virtual screening between our predicted whole 3D structure-based active sites-based screening and known kinase domain active site-based screening is shown in Figure . We found that our predicted active site-based screening showed higher interaction than the known domain-based screening. This kind of new potential interaction prediction may provide new insight into the understanding of the active sites of the fusion proteins and potential drug repurposing.

## FusionPDB provides chemical properties of the screened drugs and manually curated drug and disease information of fusion proteins
Prediction of ADME properties of screened inhibitory molecules is an essential step of the drug development process. In the ‘Biochemical Features of Small Molecules with ADME’ category, we have provided the various ADME parameters for all FDA-approved ligand molecules by running QikProp (Schrödinger Release 2022–3: QikProp, Schrödinger, LLC, New York, NY, 2021) to show the pharmaceutically relevant properties of potential lead molecules. We provided the values of parameters such as octanol/water and water/gas log Ps, log S, log BB, overall CNS activity, Caco-2, MDCK cell permeabilities, log Khsa for human serum albumin binding and log IC50 for HERG K+-channel blockage. The acceptable range of a druggable molecule is MW <500, Dipole 1–12, % Human Oral Absorption >80. For example, in the case of the drug molecule ZINC000003810860, MW is 409, Dipole is 5.6, and Human oral absorption is 91%, indicating the acceptability of this drug molecule as a drug. Similarly, we have shown the biochemical features of all FDA-approved drugs in the database of biochemical descriptors panel. Moreover, we provided the drug toxicity score (Tox-score) and the synthetic accessibility score (SA score) of individual ligands in the ‘Drug Toxicity Information’ category’. This category provides information on the ZINC ID of the ligand molecules, smiles representation of molecules, Tox-score, and SA score. We used the eToxPred tool to estimate the synthetic accessibility of ligand molecules ( ). The eToxPred generates scores ranging from 1(for molecules easy to make) to 10 (for those compounds that are very difficult to synthesize). Likewise, Tox-score ranges from 0 (a low probability to be toxic) to 1 (a high probability to be toxic). Since our library is of FDA-approved drugs, all molecules showed good SA scores. Since our compound library contains all FDA-approved drugs, we did not consider the off-target effects, but all of this information will be helpful for the consideration of the next step. To present the protein-protein interaction information, we provided the links to the chimeric protein-protein interactions (ChiPPI), PPI interactors of individual fusion partner proteins from BIOGRID, and PPI interaction network from STRING ( ) in the ‘Fusion Protein-Protein Interaction’ category. In the categories of ‘Related Drugs’ and of ‘Related Diseases’, we provided the manually curated drug information that has records of the drugs targeting the specific fusion proteins through searching the PubMed and MyCancerGenome. We hope all this bio information would be helpful in the design of the fusion protein drug development.

## Discussion
So far, existing studies of fusion genes are mainly focused on lower level bio entities such as DNA breakage and fusion transcripts. There has been limited study on fusion proteins, largely due to a constrained understanding of their amino acid sequences and structures. To fulfill this need, our previous studies of FusionGDB ( ) and FusionGDB 2.0 ( ) have served as the unique systematic functional annotation of human fusion genes. About 10K human fusion genes out of ∼ 12K human fusion genes of FusionGDB 2.0 were successfully investigated in the open reading frames of∼ 12K fusion genes in FusionGDB2.0. Then, there were ∼ 16K in-frame fusion genes. Out of these, 14.7K fusion genes were transcribed into ∼84K full-length fusion transcript sequences after considering multiple fusion gene breakpoints and gene isoforms. Running ORFfinder and choosing the longest ORF generated ∼ 43K potential fusion amino acid sequences. Based on these predicted fusion protein sequences and recently available AI approaches to predict novel protein structures like AlphaFold2, we can now predict the protein structures of fusion proteins (or new proteins) and perform further analyses. In this study, we intended to build a reference resource of human fusion proteins that can provide unique knowledge on the role of human fusion proteins in cancer.
Using these ∼43K fusion protein sequences, biomedical researchers from diverse biological/clinical/pharmacological study fields of study can propose and validate their novel hypotheses, identify novel therapeutic targets, and perform their own studies with diverse aims. AlphaFold2 is a highly advanced and groundbreaking tool for protein structure prediction. However, we are aware that the AI-based AlphaFold2 does have certain limitations in predicting the 3D structure of fusion protein. AlphaFold2’s accuracy is based on a database of known protein structures. If a protein has a structure that is significantly different from any of the proteins in its training database, the prediction might be less accurate. Fusion proteins often contain distinct protein domains connected by linker regions. Accurate prediction of the interactions between different protein domains within a fusion protein can be challenging because the origin of two different partners is diverse in nature. Predictions at the junction points where different domains are fused together might vary, potentially affecting the overall quality of the predicted structure. While acknowledging its limitations, researchers can leverage these predicted fusion protein structures from AlphaFold2 to gain more insights into the structural landscapes of fusion proteins, supplementing experimental efforts and driving scientific progress forward. Utilizing AlphaFold2 for fusion protein structure prediction remains a prudent choice despite the challenges it faces.
Since knowledge of the post-translational modification of fusion proteins is not available, it is currently difficult to study its effects. We may have a chance to reach out to the post-translational modification level study in the future with the aid of FusionPDB as the initiating study platform. In FusionPDB, we aimed to provide the functional annotation of human fusion proteins, human fusion protein sequences, predicted 3D structures of human fusion proteins and the virtual screening. We screened with only FDA-approved drugs to have more reliable and confident results and avoid issues related to toxicity, ADME, and off-target effects. To provide more knowledge, we will increase the library size for both metabolites and natural products in the future. FusionPDB is the first resource providing the whole 3D structures of ∼3K fusion proteins. These 3D structures of new proteins will be the foundation of the functional mechanisms of actions of human cancer fusion genes and drug development. FusionPDB is the first resource of the systematic virtual screening of 68 fusion proteins. In sum, these DNA/transcript/ protein/interaction-level annotations of the coding structural variants following the central dogma were not available anywhere, but now it is available in FusionPDB.
The main aim of FusionPDB is to provide the whole 3D structures of fusion proteins as the reference, which can be helpful for a better understanding of the potential active sites. Also, from the whole structures of fusion proteins, the users can use their regions of interest. To have reliable fusion protein structures regarding filtering the low-scored regions, first, we checked the statistical significance of the larger pLDDT scores in our whole 3D structure-based predicted active sites versus non-active sites. We also made a new image pointing to the loci of our predicted active sites among the pLDDT distribution across the fusion protein sequence lengths. In this way, the users can check whether the active sites are having better pLDDT scores and their pLDDT score ranges. From this approach, we selected 68 fusion proteins worthy to perform the virtual screening from 68 fusion genes and provide the potentially interacting small molecule list based on the whole 3D structure. For the all-fusion isoform proteins of 266 manually curated in-frame fusion genes, we predicted the whole structures and provide multiple analyses images including pLDDT distribution along the fusion protein sequence length and active site marking, and differential pLDDT score test between active sites and non-active sites. From these results, the users can choose the reliable isoform structure and check the virtual screening results. Usually, the high-scored regions were aligned with the major protein domains.
Considering the keen interest of the biomedical research communities in understanding this distinct fusion protein information and addressing the essential gaps in functional annotation of expressed structural variants, we plan to persist in our research. Our focus will be on predicting 3D structures for the ∼43K human fusion proteins and exploring potential interactions with a non-redundant small molecule library. This library will comprise approved drugs and innate molecules, including ZINC FDA-approved drugs, natural products, metabolites and compounds currently in clinical trials. FusionPDB is the first knowledge base that systematically annotates the overall characters of the curated human fusion proteins. These candidates can be novel resources for new drug development in cancer. We believe FusionPDB will be routinely used in diverse research communities, including cancer research, genomic study, pharmacology study, etc. We will provide guidelines to improve the findability, accessibility, interoperability and reuse of digital assets (FAIR).

## Supplementary Material
gkad920_Supplemental_FilesClick here for additional data file.

## Acknowledgements
This work was partially supported by the National Institutes of Health grants [R35GM138184] to P. Kim. The funders had no role in study design, data collection, analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. Funding for open access charge: Startup Fund to Dr Kim from the University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston. We thank the users of FusionGDB, the reviewers of this study, and the members of the Center for Computational Systems Medicine for valuable questions, discussions, and suggestions. We also thank Grant W for his help in improving the English of the manuscript and website. The funders had no role in study design, data collection, analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.

## Data availability
All annotation results are available from the FusionPDB website (https://compbio.uth.edu/FusionPDB). Further information and requests should be directed to Dr. Pora Kim (Pora.kim@uth.tmc.edu).

## Supplementary data

Supplementary Data are available at NAR Online.

## Funding
University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston; National Institutes of Health [R35GM138184 to P.K.]. Funding for open access charge: Startup Fund to Dr Kim from the University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston.

Conflict of interest statement. None declared.