822acssdChemical Research in ToxicologyChem Res ToxicolPMC1125690011256900112569003891264810.1021/acs.chemrestox.4c00067Immunological
Drug–Drug Interactions Affect
the Efficacy and Safety of Immune Checkpoint Inhibitor Therapies
GriceSophie Olsson-BrownAnna NaisbittDean J HammondSean †Department
of Molecular and Clinical Pharmacology, Institute of Translational
Medicine, University of Liverpool, Liverpool L69 3GE, U.K.‡Sussex
Cancer Centre, University Hospitals Sussex, Brighton BN2 5BD, U.K.§ApconiX, Alderley Edge SK10 4TG, U.K.*Email: S.Grice@liverpool.ac.uk.
246202437710861086–11031972024© 2024 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

## Abstract
 With the rapid expansion in the development and clinical
utility
of immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) for oncology, the continual
evaluation of the safety profile of such agents is imperative. The
safety profile of ICIs as monotherapy is dominated by immune-related
adverse events, which can be considered as an extension of the mechanism
of action of these immunomodulatory drugs. Further to this, an emerging
theme is that ICI treatment can significantly impact upon the tolerability
of coadministered medications. Numerous reports in literature indicate
that ICIs may alter the immunological perception of coadministered
drugs, resulting in undesirable reactions to a variety of concomitant
medications. These reactions can be severe in manifestation, including
hepatotoxicity and Stevens-Johnson Syndrome (SJS)/toxic epidermal
necrolysis (TEN), but may also have detrimental impact on malignancy
control. To minimize the impact of such drug–drug interactions
on patients, it is imperative to identify medications that may cause
these reactions, understand the underlying mechanisms, consider the
timing and dosing of comedication, and explore alternative medications
with comparable efficacies. Improving our understanding of how concomitant
medications affect the safety and efficacy of ICIs can allow for potential
culprit drugs to be identified/removed/desensitized. This approach
will allow the continuation of ICI therapy that may have been discontinued
otherwise, thereby improving malignant control and patient and drug
development outcomes.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2024 Feb 20; Accepted 2024 Jun 7; Revised 2024 Jun 2; Collection date 2024 Jul 15.

## Introduction
T-cells are known to play a critically
important role in immunosurveillance
and clearance of tumors. Simply described,
the central dogma of αβ T-cell mediated immunity is a
three-signal model: Signal 1 is generated after antigens in the form
of peptides derived from an endogenously or exogenously sourced protein
are presented to the T-cell receptor via major histocompatibility
complexes (MHC). The interpretation of this signal and subsequent
downstream response of the T-cell is then determined by additional
signaling; signal 2: actions of costimulatory and immune checkpoint/coinhibitory
pathways; and signal 3: cytokine signaling. For over a decade, evasion
of immune detection and destruction has been recognized as one of
the hallmarks of cancer. Therefore, it
is no surprise that tumor cells regularly evolve to avoid their amenability
to immunosurveillance through subversion of all three of these signals. In particular, tumor cells often perturb signal
2 through the expression of ligands for immune checkpoints on their
cell surface, thereby disrupting antitumor T-cell responses. Immune checkpoints are involved in multiple immune
regulation pathways in multiple parts of the body.
The immune
checkpoint cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein-4
(CTLA-4) is expressed on CD4+ (activated/exhausted, Tregs), CD8+ (activated/exhausted),
and some tumor cells and competes with the costimulatory receptor
CD28 for binding to their ligands CD80 or CD86, which are found on
antigen presenting cells, thereby inhibiting T-cell activation. Programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1) is an
additional immune checkpoint expressed on CD4+ T-cells (activated/exhausted,
follicular), CD8+ T-cells (activated/exhausted), B cells, dendritic
cells, monocytes, mast cells, and Langerhans cells. , PD-1
inhibits T-cell activation by interacting with its ligands programmed
death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) or PD-L2 found on antigen presenting cells,
CD4+ T-cells, nonlymphoid tissues, and some tumor cells. , Lymphocyte activation gene-3 (LAG-3) expressed on CD4+ T-cells (Treg
and exhausted), CD8+ T-cells (exhausted), and natural killer cells
(NK) also plays a significant role in regulating T-cell activation
by binding to MHC class II molecules on antigen presenting cells,
liver cells, and some tumor cells. , The authors
refer readers to refs ( ), ( ), and ( ) for discussion of immune
regulation pathways. Therapeutic manipulation of signal 2 has been
exploited to great effect in recent years. The emergence of immune
checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) as a therapeutic option has dramatically
altered the landscape of oncological treatments, leading to the emergence
of long-term and enduring years-long malignant control for a variety
of cancer indications ( and ). The marketed
class of ICIs considered here are monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) which
target PD-1, CTLA-4, and LAG-3 coinhibitory pathways and are often
administered with great efficacy as monotherapy, as combinational
therapy, or in combination with other oncological agents. , 
 Unfortunately, the on-target pharmacology of these
agents is not
restricted to tumor tissue. Indeed, ICIs are known to work at multiple
sites (e.g., secondary lymphoid tissue and level of tumor). As such,
the systemic deregulation imposed by these agents is accompanied by
what is now a widely recognized toxicity profile of on-target off-tumor
pharmacology known as immune-related adverse events (irAEs). The etiology
of these toxicities is therefore the initiation and propagation of
aberrant immune responses to xenobiotics and self-antigens. , , Up until now, the elucidation
of a given patient’s propensity for irAEs, the identity of
the target antigens, and biomarkers for accurate prediction and detection
of such reactions remain key challenges in the clinical arena of immune-oncology
(IO) therapy. In recent times, it has become apparent that one class
of relevant xenobiotic agents (therapeutic drugs) may be responsible
for an underappreciated portion of such reactions. The principal focus
of this review is therefore to discuss the experimental and clinical
burden of proof for what appears to be a suboptimally managed class
of immunological drug–drug interactions that impact the safety
and efficacy profile of IO agents in real-world clinical practice.

## Mechanisms of irAEs and Overlap with Drug Hypersensitivity
Drug hypersensitivity classically refers to an adverse drug reaction
(ADR) of immune etiology, which occurs when an individual is exposed
to a drug generally tolerated by others. Mechanisms of antigenic stimulation of T-cells include the hapten
and prohapten mechanism, pharmacological interaction (PI) mechanism,
and altered peptide repertoire mechanism. The hapten and prohapten
concept proposes that drugs and metabolites can bind covalently to
proteins, forming hapten–protein complexes. These are then
processed by antigen presenting cells into drug or metabolite peptide
fragments which are presented on the cell surface by MHC to the T-cell
receptor. The PI mechanism does not require antigen processing, drugs
and metabolites can bind directly, noncovalently, and reversibly to
MHC proteins or peptides embedded in the MHC peptide binding cleft
resulting in T-cell activation. Finally, the altered peptide repertoire
mechanism occurs when a drug can bind within the MHC binding cleft
altering the repertoire of presented endogenous peptides, this has
only been described for abacavir to date. The authors refer readers
to the following reviews for further discussion on general mechanisms
of drug hypersensitivity. , 
As the IO field has developed, the frequency of
use of ICIs for
the treatment of numerous cancers is increasing; ICI treatments are
being used earlier in the oncology pathway as neoadjuvant and adjuvant
therapies. The mechanism of action of marketed ICIs is via blockade
of coinhibitory signaling pathways mediated by PD-1, CTLA-4, and LAG-3.
This leads to the enhancement of antitumor efficacy through the alleviation
of negative regulation. However, by the same token, this widespread
removal of the “immunological brakes” also results in
aberrant deployment of the adaptive immune system against nontumor
or nontumor specific antigens, sometimes with destructive consequences.
These adverse reactions known as irAEs are as heterogeneous in presentation
as the antigens they focalize on: they therefore have the potential
to affect all organ systems. Mechanistically,
irAEs can be the result of enhanced pre-existing responses, de novo adaptive responses, cross-reactivity of antigens,
depletion of tolerance, tissue microenvironment polarization, and
combinations thereof. Across all grades, irAEs occur in up to 80%
of ICI-treated patients manifesting as endocrine, gut, lung, neurological,
musculoskeletal, and skin toxicities; therefore, understanding the
mechanisms of these irAEs is crucial in optimizing ICI patient safety
profiles ( and ). For a detailed review of the heterogeneous
manifestations of irAEs following ICI administration, the authors
refer readers to several reviews. , , , 
 Over the past decade, several warnings from research
indicate that
the inhibition of immune regulation may exacerbate ADRs in
vitro and in vivo. Sulfamethoxazole is an
antibiotic that is metabolized to reactive oxidative metabolites nitroso-sulfamethoxazole
(SMX-NO) and sulfamethoxazole-hydroxylamine. Sulfamethoxazole is associated
with a high number of hypersensitivity reactions; research stipulates
that SMX-NO acts as a hapten, binding covalently to proteins before
being processed by antigen presenting cells where a peptide–MHC
complex is formed which is presented to the T-cell receptor. SMX-NO is now commonly used in T-cell-based
assays as a model antigen. During in vitro T-cell
priming experiments to SMX-NO and epigallocatechin gallate (catechin
of green tea), the blockade of immune checkpoints using anti-PD-1,
PD-L1, and CTLA-4 mAbs significantly lowered the threshold for the
priming of naïve T-cells. − In addition to influencing naïve T-cell priming,
there is evidence that the in vitro and in
vivo administration of ICIs also influences the threshold
at which previously suppressed memory T-cells expand and become effector
T-cells. Lymphocyte transformation tests (LTTs) were carried out using
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) from healthy donors and
ICI-treated patients before and 1 week after their ICI therapy; the in vitro (healthy donors) and in vivo (ICI
patients) administration of ICIs caused a significant increase in
PBMC proliferation in response to the re-exposure of Bandrowski’s
base (chemical found in hair dye). Additionally,
Sugita et al. reported a patient with suspected nickel contact dermatitis.
Their initial LTT was negative; however, with the addition of anti-CTLA-4
mAb in vitro, the patient LTT was positive to nickel
thereby improving the sensitivity of the LTT. These studies indicate that the addition of ICIs allows for an enhancement
of the expansion and functionality of memory T-cells.
In vivo studies also supported this risk.
In
2015, idiosyncratic drug-induced liver injury (DILI) was modeled using
the combination of PD-1 knockout mice treated with an anti-CTLA-4
antibody; this immune checkpoint combination was able to unmask liver
injury caused by amodiaquine. Similar
findings were described in this model with isoniazid and nevirapine. When mice were treated with drug alone, liver
injury was insignificant, yet with the inhibition of immune tolerance
mechanisms, the liver injury observed in the mice was significantly
increased, particularly when multiple methods of inhibition were carried
out. Similar enhancements in liver injury caused by epigallocatechin
gallate were seen in the model. These
studies provided proof of principle that the inhibition of immune
checkpoints could increase the potential for comedications to incite
irAEs such as DILI.
The concept of an immunological drug–drug
interaction is
not unprecedented. In fact, early clinical recognition of this type
of interaction can be found with an older form of cancer immunotherapy:
high-dose IL-2 therapy. The increased incidence of delayed hypersensitivity
reactions observed with patients treated with high-dose IL-2 who were
exposed to radiocontrast media in short succession was so prevalent
that it is cited on early and subsequent iterations of the FDA label
for PROLEUKlN. , Literature cited to support this
interaction originates ca. 1990s, , though the
nature of the reactions outlined may not always reflect true adaptive
hypersensitivity. Recently, a large prospective study has provided
a renewed and timely revistation of this interaction again; though not conclusive in mechanistic divulgence,
a clear impact on the safety profile of the contrast media by concomitant
IL-2 treatment is observed. As ICIs continue to take on and advance
the mantle once firmly held by immune-cytokine therapy, it is apparent
that they have brought about a renaissance of this particular toxicity.

## Medications to Ameliorate Immune-Related Adverse Events (irAEs)
The most reported ICI-induced irAEs include rash, fatigue, colitis,
muscle pain/weakness, and pneumonitis. ICIs can also cause cardiovascular adverse events, particularly
ICI-associated myocarditis, which can occur in ∼5% of the patient
population. This is a severe adverse
reaction, which is fatal for 27–60% of patients who have this
toxicity, with the fatality rate increasing with combinational ICI
therapy and ICI therapy in combination with tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs). , The CTLA-4 inhibitor ipilimumab tends to
cause a greater incidence of higher-grade adverse events than PD-1
or PD-L1 inhibitors; this may be due to its additional effect on the
depletion of Treg cells. Combinational
ICI therapy is often associated with better overall outcomes for a
variety of cancer indications; notably, in the landmark checkmate
067 study, previously untreated metastatic melanoma patients had a
higher progression free survival of 11.5 months when administered
nivolumab plus ipilimumab compared to 6.9 months with nivolumab monotherapy
and 2.8 months with ipilimumab monotherapy. , , , This may be
due to synergistic effects of relieving effector T-cells from PD-1/PD-L1
mediated anergy and the depletion of intratumoral Tregs. This is however accompanied by increased incidence
of irAEs. Larkin et al. reported treatment for grade 3 or 4 toxicity
occurred in 55.0% of those in the nivolumab plus ipilimumab group,
16.3% of the patients in the nivolumab monotherapy group, and 27.3%
of those in the ipilimumab monotherapy group. The incidence of irAEs provides evidence that immune dysregulation
has occurred in patients; however, it may not directly be representative
of efficacy. It must be noted that toxicity can occur without efficacy
and vice versa due to the malignant nonspecific nature of the mechanism
of action of ICIs. These irAEs can be managed therapeutically, typically
by the administration of corticosteroids and other immunosuppressive
agents. Given that irAEs often resemble autoimmune conditions, there
has been a clinical precedence that treatment algorithms for autoimmune
diseases be applied to corresponding tissue-specific irAEs. However,
given the mechanism of irAEs and the novel clinical manifestations,
these algorithms are not optimized for treatment of these toxicities,
so prospective, mechanistically focused trials are required. Some
novel alternative treatments including faecal microbiota transplantation
for the treatment of ICI-induced colitis are emerging, which has been
implemented with considerable success rates. Additionally, questions over the earlier use of T-cell and cytokine
directed therapies are arising, as the incidence of irAEs rises in
line with increased usage and more patients are requiring treatment.

## Corticosteroids
The most frequently administered pharmaceuticals
for the treatment of ICI-associated adverse events are glucocorticoid
steroids. It was reported that 38% of 412 advanced melanoma patients
who received ICI therapy required glucocorticoids to treat toxicities. Prolonged use of corticosteroids is associated
with adverse side effects such as insulin resistance, altered mental
health, osteoporosis, and increased risk of infections. Perhaps the most important consideration is
whether the immunosuppressive nature of corticosteroids counteracts
the antitumor effects of ICIs themselves. This is a contested subject,
and several analyses have investigated this topic, showing differing
results likely due to the highly biased, inconsistent nature of retrospective
data with differing real-world patient management. Interestingly,
in terms of irAEs closely related to efficacy, this will behave as
a confounding factor in broad analyses. Those treated with immunosuppressant
medication already exhibit one of the best correlations to efficacy.
Ultimately then, the question in these cases should not be if individuals
who experience irAEs and have steroids fair better than individuals
who do not have steroids, but rather, will the introduction of steroids
worsen an individual’s clinical course of tumor control? It
is notable that some treatment combinations with chemotherapy and
ICIs use corticosteroids as premedication within the treatment protocol
where therapeutic benefit is seen, but the question remains as to
whether it could be enhanced if steroids were to be avoided. Murine
studies (MC38 xenograft, anti-PD-1, and anti-CTLA-4-treated mice)
have indicated prednisolone does significantly diminish the antitumor
effect of anti-PD-1 and anti-CTLA-4-treated mice. Studies carried out in patients with advanced non-small-cell
lung carcinomas (NSCLC), melanoma, or urothelial carcinoma indicated
that it is likely that the administration of corticosteroids decreases
the efficacy of ICIs as oncological treatments. , Studies by Svaton et al. indicated that there is a significant increase
in disease progression in advanced NSCLC patients administered corticosteroids
at the time of nivolumab treatment; additionally, they concluded that
the administration of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
may improve outcomes for ICI patients. 

## Anticytokine Agents
Infliximab is an anti-TNFα
agent, which is commonly prescribed to treat autoimmune diseases such
as psoriasis and Crohn’s disease; it is now commonly prescribed
to treat irAEs following ICI therapy when patients are nonresponsive
to corticosteroid treatment. In vivo animal studies indicate that infliximab administration
in combination with ICIs increased the tumor response of ICIs and
improved symptoms of colitis. , Additionally, it was
reported that gastrointestinal inflammation was successfully treated
without recurrence in five patients with different primary malignancies
who were administered mono or combinational ICI therapy and also administered
infliximab, subsequently allowing their further ICI therapy to be
tolerated. Due to the fact that the mechanism
of irAEs is similar irrespective of tissue type, anti-TNFα therapies
have been shown to be effective in patients with multiple different
types of steroid refractory irAEs and are currently in trials outside
of the gastrointestinal setting, e.g., pneumonitis. Dimitriou et al.
retrospectively concluded that immunomodulatory drugs such as anti-TNFα
and anti-IL-6 agents had no effect on the efficacy of ICIs in melanoma
patients. There have been some cases
of hepatitis reported with infliximab, and it is therefore often avoided
in cases of hepatitis, though evolving evidence is suggestive of benefit
in certain cases, particularly in the treatment of refractory hepatitis
and sclerosing cholangitis. An individual case indicated that a prostate
adenocarcinoma patient administered infliximab to treat ICI-induced
colitis then subsequently developed hepatoxicity believed to be due
to the administration of infliximab. However,
Araujo et al. retrospectively investigated 56 ICI patients with various
malignancies who were also administered infliximab and observed that
there is no indication that the concurrent administration of infliximab
with ICIs increases ALT, AST, and total bilirubin levels. Infliximab should not necessarily be ruled out
for ICI patients with hepatotoxicity and instead used with caution
as it may in fact improve patient overall clinical outcomes by enabling
them to sustain their ICI therapy by improving/preventing other irAEs
such as colitis, which may have led to the discontinuation of their
therapy. Further investigation into whether
the risk of infliximab-induced liver injury outweighs the potential
improved overall clinical outcomes for ICI patients is needed. Vedolizumab
is a monoclonal antibody therapy that targets α4β7 in
the gut, and there is strong evidence that it is effective in the
treatment of ICI-induced enterocolitis. The impact on a patient’s
response to their ICI therapy is not well-defined, but given the gut
specific nature of its mechanism of action, it is less likely to cause
a decrease in efficacy in the majority of malignancies. , α4β7 expressing colorectal cancers and/or metastasis
may represent a distinct subset of cancers in this respect and may
need to be carefully considered. The role of IL-17 from Th17 cells
in terms of protumorigenic or antitumor effects in the tumor microenvironment
(TME) is complex and most likely context dependent. Liu et al. used murine models to propose that anti-IL-17
agents may enhance the tumor responses to PD-1 inhibitor therapy in
microsatellite stable colorectal cancer. In murine models, it has been proposed that anti-IL-17A antibodies
reduce thyroid irAEs in ICI-treated mice without negatively affecting
the antitumor efficacy of the ICI. Additionally,
a number of cases have now been reported where the IL-17A blocking
agents secukinumab and ixekuzumab have successfully treated psoriasis-like
dermatologic toxicity after pembrolizumab and atezolizumab therapy. − In noncancer patients treated with secukinumab for diseases such
as psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis, and ankylosing spondylitis, the
incidence of secukinumab-related colitis and irritable bowel disease
has been investigated. In a meta-analysis, new onset of colitis or
irritable bowel disease cases occurred in less than 1% of patients;
however, exacerbation of disease was found to occur at a much higher
rate with 11/48 patients with pre-existing irritable bowel disease. A similar rate (approximately 0.5%) was observed
in a 21 trial meta-analysis of ixekuzumab-treated individuals. There is evidence that IL-17A has an important
mechanistic role in the protection and maintenance of epithelial barriers
in the intestinal mucosa; therefore, there is concern as to whether
the risk of already common gastrointestinal irAEs may be exacerbated
after administration of anti-IL-17A therapies. 

## Sulfasalazine
As part of the irAE profile, ICI therapy
can induce arthritis as a de novo irAE and lead to
exacerbation of existing inflammatory arthritides. As with most irAEs, the clinical algorithm by which ICI-associated
arthritis is treated is effectively lifted from the parallel noniatrogenic
autoimmune disease. Indeed, ICI-associated arthritis is commonly successfully
treated with corticosteroids, NSAIDs, or disease-modifying antirheumatic
drugs. The prodrug sulfasalazine is classed
as a disease-modifying antirheumatic drug and is metabolized by colonic
bacteria to its constituents the sulfonamide antibiotic sulfapyridine
and the anti-inflammatory mesalazine. In 2018, Ford et al. presented
a case series detailing outcomes of four metastatic melanoma patients
receiving sulfasalazine for amelioration of ICI-induced (anti-PD-1
± prior anti-CTLA-4) arthritis. These patients then presented
with delayed adverse effects such as fever, maculopapular rash, nausea,
diarrhea, abnormal liver function tests, and elevated CRP. Resolution
of these ill effects was seen upon discontinuation of sulfasalazine,
indicating sulfasalazine was the causative agent for these secondary
irAEs and that they were not the direct effects of ICIs per
se. From subsequent ex vivo mechanistic
workup of these metastatic melanoma patients, it was determined that
all three patients exhibited positive lymphocyte responses against
active ingredients or downstream derivatives of sulfasalazine within in vitro diagnostic assays outlined in Hammond et al. indicating
the presence of an established type IV hypersensitivity reaction where
drug responsive CD4+ T-cells were generated. , Given the occurrence of hypersensitivity in sequential patients
treated in this cohort, there is a suggestion that the presence of
ICI reduces hypersensitivity tolerance when given concomitantly with
drugs known to have a hypersensitive propensity.

## Pre-Existing/Incidental Medications and Chemicals
Due
to the comorbidity burden of many of the cancer subtypes treated
with ICIs, a background of polypharmacy is common in patient populations
subject to IO therapy. Numerous medications have been surveyed for
associations with altered pharmacodynamic profiles in ICI treatment. Key classes of compounds that are administered
with prevalence in both general and specific oncology populations
are systemic NSAIDs, antibiotics, and gastric acid suppressants. Proton
pump inhibitors (PPIs) are a key component of the latter class, which
irreversibly inhibit stomach H+/K+ ATPase proton
pumps and are widely prescribed to treat gastric ulcers, gastroesophageal
reflux disease, and acid reflux. They are also commonly used to provide
“gastric protection” in patients treated with corticosteroids,
a drug class commonly used to treat irAEs. Associations have been
made between systemic antibiotics and PPIs and poor prognoses of patients,
with significantly worse outcomes, particularly in terms of overall
survival but also progression free survival and objective remission
rate. − The reason for this has not been mechanistically delineated to date;
however, it is suspected to be related to microbiota modifying the
qualities of these drugs. Indeed, the composition and status of the
gut microbiome and effects of ICIs have a complex but intimate relationship.
This was competently demonstrated in tumor bearing mice for anti-CTLA-4,
anti-PD-1, and anti-PD-L1 − with the transfer of favorable
faecal microbiome proving efficacious in all cases. Moreover, antibiotic
coadministration was detrimental to efficacy in several of these models. , The human picture is more complex, but there is great interest in
this area in terms of therapeutic exploitation and tolerability nevertheless. , Considerations in this area include the qualitative changes imposed
by medications, for example, broad or narrow spectrum of antibiotics,
as well as duration and timing of administration. Reports of generally
well-tolerated drugs eliciting adverse reactions of immune etiology
within patients following ICI therapy are notably accruing and may
offer explanation for a subset of organ specific irAEs.

## PPIs
In the wider population, PPIs are known to be
associated with kidney injury, where in a study of 10 000 patients
it was concluded that the administration of PPIs was independently
associated with a 20–50% higher risk of incident chronic kidney
disease. Acute kidney injury occurs in
2–5% of ICI-treated patients, often presenting as tubulointerstitial
nephritis. − In 2018, a case series outlined six lung cancer patients
previously treated with (and tolerant to) omeprazole, lansoprazole,
and NSAIDs (ibuprofen) who subsequently experienced acute interstitial
nephritis (AIN) following commencement of anti-PD-1 therapy. , Additional case studies on PPIs behaving in such a fashion have
emerged since; one particular case outlined the breakdown of tolerance
to lansoprazole after nivolumab administration, which had been safely
administered to a lung cancer patient for four years prior, subsequently
resulting in kidney injury. Manohar et
al. reported that 11/14 patients with either melanoma, breast cancer,
lung adenocarcinoma, or chronic lymphocytic leukemia treated with
ICIs suffered ICI-AIN but were also administered PPIs. Out of the 11 patients, 8 ceased PPI use, and
5/8 of these patients had kidney function returning back to normal
when PPIs were discontinued. This has
since become an area that has received attention, not least due to
the frequency of PPI administration in IO populations. Indeed, multiple
retrospective studies evaluating large patient cohorts have now identified
PPI administration as a significant risk factor for acute kidney injury
in ICI-treated patients for a range of malignancies. − Notably, Gupta et al. retrospectively investigated ICI-associated
acute kidney injury in 429 patients who received ICI treatment and
developed acute kidney injury and compared them to 429 patients who
received ICI therapy without kidney injury; from each patient group,
malignancies varied including melanoma, lung, and genitourinary. It was concluded that the administration of
PPIs was associated with an increased risk of acute kidney injury
in ICI therapy patients with 208/429 ICI-acute kidney injury patients
receiving PPIs at the time of injury. In many of these cases, PPIs were previously tolerated, and the
irAE in the form of AIN was observed once immunotherapy was initiated.
It is conceivable that this is due to the threshold for these concomitant
medications to cause AIN being lowered after the administration of
ICIs via either the activation and mobilization of a drug-specific
memory T-cell compartment or alternatively due to a lowered threshold
for elicitation of extensive de novo T-cell responses. , In addition to kidney injury, there have also been reports of skin
toxicities in the form of SJS events linked to the administration
of PPIs concomitantly during ICI therapy. Lin et al. reported a stage
IV lung adenocarcinoma patient diagnosed with SJS after nivolumab
and esomeprazole administration; esomeprazole was confirmed to be
the culprit medication for the reaction as after rechallenge with
esomeprazole 3 months post the initial SJS event, SJS recurred. 

## Antibiotics, NSAIDs, Paracetamol
Other concomitant
medications which historically cause kidney injury such as NSAIDs
and antibiotics were also investigated in the Gupta et al. study;
however, they reported no significant increases were found in ICI-treated
patients with kidney injury also treated with these medications. Martínez Valenzuela et al. reported two
cases of acute tubulointerstitial nephritis. The first patient diagnosed
with NSCLC was treated with carboplatin, paclitaxel, nivolumab, and
NSAIDs; 7 days after NSAID initiation they were admitted with high-grade
fever, and subsequent diagnostic testing concluded acute tubulointerstitial
nephritis. The second patient was treated
with nivolumab for stage IV clear cell renal carcinoma with lung and
liver metastases; they were admitted due to acute kidney injury 5
days after they concurrently took ibuprofen. Kawada et al. presented a case where TEN occurred in a stage IV
NSCLC patient who was administered pembrolizumab alongside sulbactam/ampicillin,
ceftriaxone, penicillin, metronidazole, and paracetamol. Positive LTTs were observed for pembrolizumab,
paracetamol, and metronidazole only; however, after rechallenge with
pembrolizumab due to cancer progression, no subsequent adverse cutaneous
reactions occurred. It was therefore inferred that the causative agents
may have been metronidazole and/or paracetamol. In 2020, Watanabe
et al. released a case report of an advanced oral melanoma patient
who was administered nivolumab one month prior to suffering TEN; the
causative agent of the reaction was deemed as paracetamol as positive
LTTs to this drug were observed. Lomax
et al. documented a melanoma patient who had a confirmed case of early
TEN after receiving cephalexin 12 days and throughout pembrolizumab
treatment. The patient was successfully
rechallenged with pembrolizumab without a repeated skin reaction,
indicating an immunological drug–drug interaction between the
coadministered cephalexin and pembrolizumab led to the TEN-like reaction
in this patient. Additionally, reports
of lung cancer patients suffering from hypersensitivity reactions
caused by trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole after ICI administration have
been reported. , Kimura et al. reported a lung
cancer patient suffering from interstitial pneumonitis caused by a
combination of anti-CTLA-4 and PD-1 therapy. This adverse reaction was subsequently treated with trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole
in combination with prednisolone; however, this caused a drug-induced
hypersensitivity reaction where the stimulation index (SI) was 13.6
for trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole in an LTT. Additionally, Urasaki et al. reported a metastatic kidney cancer
patient suffered grade 3 interstitial pneumonitis after anti-CTLA-4
and PD-1 therapy, who was subsequently also treated with trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole
in combination with prednisolone; this then induced hypotensive shock
accompanied with cytokine release and drug-induced hypersensitivity
syndrome. 

## Amidotrizoate (Iodinated Contrast Media)
A case study
outlined the observation of an immunologically driven adverse interaction
between atezolizumab with the iodinated contrast media amidotrizoate
in a patient treated for metastatic renal cell carcinoma. The introduction of atezolizumab in this clinical
case study appeared to shift the immunological perception of amidotrizoate
from tolerance/ignorance to a state of elicitation, resulting in a
severe, idiosyncratic, and cutaneous reaction. The immediacy of the
reaction (occurring within hours of exposure) does not correspond
with the time required for the initiation of a de novo priming response of T-cells; therefore, a logical deduction is that
the initial reaction represents the ICI-mediated transition to activation
of a senescent memory component accrued through repeated historical
exposure to amidotrizoate.

## Tattoos
There are several cases where IO patients with
tattoos have experienced cutaneous reactions following the initiation
of ICI therapy. − In one particularly striking case, a patient
treated with durvalumab for the treatment of adrenal and cerebral
metastatic lung cancer experienced sarcoidosis only on the black ink
parts of their tattoos, which was present prior to ICI therapy without
issue for over 40 years. Tattoos are
notoriously inconsistent mixtures of chemicals, so it is unlikely
that the causative chemical will be delineated. In these cases, the
reactions observed in the patients ceased after the discontinuation
of ICI therapy; therefore, this demonstrates the reversibility of
these specific reactions in patients where antigen presence is maintained.

## Combinational Oncological Therapy
In recent years,
combinational cancer therapy has been administered
to improve clinical outcomes for patients. Combinational therapy may
involve the administration of multiple anticancer agents including
combinations of ICIs or ICIs administered in combination with other
anticancer agents such as TKIs. Indeed,
the combination of ICI therapy and other oncological agents could
benefit cancer patients in terms of their overall survival; however,
the unknown drug–drug interactions with combinational therapy
may lead to an increased risk of irAEs. The risk-benefit ratio for
patients will certainly be important for future decision making in
the administration of combination oncological therapies.

## EGFR Inhibitors and VEGF Inhibitors
TKIs inhibit cancer
cell proliferation by their competition with adenosine triphosphate
(ATP) for the ATP binding site of protein tyrosine kinase and subsequent
reduction of tyrosine kinase phosphorylation. Clinical trial results indicate that TKIs and ICIs have
a synergistic antitumor effect with improvements in progression-free
survival in sarcoma patients treated with nivolumab and sunitinib
and improvements in progression free survival and overall survival
in renal cell carcinoma patients treated with nivolumab and cabozantinib. , Additionally, there is an increasing body of evidence suggesting
that antiangiogenic drugs such as anlotinib used in combination with
ICIs offer antitumor activity for patients with NSCLC. 
Osimertinib is a third-generation epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) TKI, which was first approved for the
treatment of EGFR T790M mutation positive NSCLC. Osimertinib forms
an irreversible covalent bond at the cysteine-797 residue in the ATP
binding site of mutant EGFR (Leonetti, Sharma, Minari, Perego, Giovannetti,
and Tiseo, 2019). After the sequential
dosing of osimertinib after ICI therapy, specifically anti-PD-1 and
anti-PD-L1 monoclonal antibody therapies, a range of irAEs have been
reported. These adverse side effects include interstitial lung disease
and hepatoxicity, which have been observed at high levels in patients
who received osimertinib immediately after nivolumab therapy. , , Oshima et al. retrospectively
concluded that the combination of the PD-1 inhibitor nivolumab and
EGFR TKIs in NSCLC patients significantly increased the risk of interstitial
pneumonitis. Gianni et al. reported
an NSCLC patient who suffered from grade 3 hepatoxicity after treatment
with chemotherapy and pembrolizumab followed by the administered osimertinib
10 days later; after recovery, the patient developed a subsequent
grade 3 hepatoxic reaction alongside SJS when osimertinib was restarted. In 2020, a phase Ib trial was reported on where
the combination of osimertinib with other agents such as selumetinib,
savolitinib, and durvalumab was assessed in patients with EGFR mutant
NSCLC and disease progression with previous EGFR-TKI administration. This study concluded that osimertinib in combination
with selumetinib or savolitinib was tolerable; however, when given
in combination with durvalumab, this led to interstitial lung disease
in 22% (5/23) of patients. Notably,
a case was reported where an NSCLC patient received chemotherapy in
combination with pembrolizumab where no irAEs were observed; however
when osimertinib was administered 3 weeks later, the patient developed
a range of irAEs including fatal TEN. An additional study stated that 24% of EGFR mutant NSCLC patients
who received osimertinib within 3 months after anti-PD-(L)1 therapy
suffered from severe irAEs. There were
no severe irAEs reported in EGFR mutant NSCLC patients who were administered
osimertinib followed by PD-(L)1 therapy or received other EGFR TKIs
such as afatinib or erlotinib after PD(L)1 therapy. 

## Dacarbazine
Other oncological agents which are used
in combination with ICIs include the alkylating agent dacarbazine,
which has been shown to increase overall survival in previously untreated
metastatic melanoma patients when treated with the CTLA-4 inhibitor
ipilimumab and dacarbazine when compared to patients treated with
dacarbazine alone. However, this is
accompanied by a high occurrence of dacarbazine-induced liver injury,
Robert et al. reported that 56.4% of metastatic melanoma patients
administered dacarbazine and ipilimumab suffered from grade 3 or 4
adverse events compared to 27.5% of patients treated with dacarbazine
and a placebo. A phase II study where
previously untreated, unresectable, or metastatic melanoma patients
were administered ipilimumab plus dacarbazine found that this combination
was intolerable due to high-grade liver toxicities. Yamazaki et al. reported that 93% of patients in the trial
had irAEs predominantly liver (80%) and skin (67%) toxicities. 

## Abemaciclib
Abemaciclib is a CDk4/6 inhibitor that
has been investigated clinically in combination with ICI therapy,
specifically anti-PD-1 therapy. A phase Ib trial where KRAS mutant
or squamous NSCLC patients received abemaciclib in combination with
pembrolizumab concluded that the combination had remarkable antitumor
activity; however, this was comparable to pembrolizumab monotherapy.
Additionally, the combination resulted in a higher rate of transaminase
elevations and pneumonitis. Additionally,
in a phase II trial of nivolumab in combination with abemaciclib plus
endocrine therapy in patients with hormone receptor-positive, human
epidermal growth factor receptor-2 negative metastatic breast cancer
resulted in severe and prolonged irAEs. This study was terminated early due to safety concerns; 10/17 patients
developed grade ≥3 liver-related adverse events. Additionally,
one treatment-related death from interstitial lung disease occurred. Masuda et al. concluded that their findings
suggested that the suppression of Treg proliferation and production
of proinflammatory cytokines (TNF and IL-11) as a result of the addition
of abemaciclib to nivolumab therapy were the cause of the irAEs. 

## Sotorasib
Sotorasib is a covalently binding KRAS inhibitor
that has been assessed for the treatment of NSCLC in conjunction with
ICIs. Begum et al. reported a case where a NSCLC patient suffered
severe hepatotoxicity after the administration of sotorasib after
prior treatment with carboplatin–pemetrexed–pembrolizumab. Two significantly striking retrospective case
studies assessed the safety of sequential ICI and sotorasib therapy.
Rakshit et al. determined that in NSCLC patients treated with sotorasib
with 28/32 patients receiving ICI therapy prior, of the 28 patients
grade 3 hepatoxicity was observed in 3/4 who received ICIs within
30 days, 7/11 who received ICIs within 31–90 days, and 0/13
in patients who received ICIs >90 days. Risk of hepatotoxicity was higher in patients who received sotorasib
within 90 days of ICI treatment, whereas none of the four patients
without prior ICI exposure developed any hepatotoxicity. Chour et
al. also retrospectively investigated sotorasib administration after
anti-PD-(L)1 treatment in NSCLC patients and concluded that severe
sotorasib-related adverse events including hepatotoxicity were significantly
more frequent in the patients who received sequential anti-PD-(L)1
and sotorasib therapy compared to patients who did not (control group),
with severe sotorasib-related hepatotoxicity being 3 times more frequent
in the sequence group compared with that in the control group (33
versus 11%, p = 0.006). These reports highlight the importance and implications for the
sequencing and timing of these oncological agents. In addition to
raising the question of importance of wash out periods, is it both
the presence of ICIs and also the timing from the last administration
that have an impact on the tolerability of sotorasib.

## BRAF Inhibitors
Due to ICIs and the BRAF inhibitor
vemurafenib improving overall survival for patients with advanced
melanoma independently, the benefit of the combination of the two
agents has been trialled also due to speculation of BRAF inhibitors
potentially enhancing antigen presentation and immune cell function. In 2013, it was first reported that patients
with metastatic melanoma with a BRAF V600 mutation in a phase I trial
treated with ipilimumab and vemurafenib suffered from hepatoxicity
where aminotransferase levels elevated to a grade 3 toxicity in the
majority of patients; additionally, a study conducted in 2018 evaluated
vemurafenib-treated Japanese patients with metastatic melanoma; 6/7
patients who suffered severe skin reactions received PD-1 inhibitor
therapy before vemurafenib. , Dabrafenib is also
a BRAF inhibitor; in phase I/II trials, BRAF V600E/K-mutated melanoma
patients received dabrafenib and ipilimumab double therapy or dabrafenib,
trametinib, and ipilimumab triple therapy. In 2/7 patients receiving the triple therapy, severe colon toxicity
was observed. 

## Antidrug Antibodies
An intriguing and perhaps less
obvious example of ICIs altering
the immunological perception of therapeutics is through the modulation
of antidrug antibody (ADA) formation. An excellent example of this
is the combination of anti-CTLA-4 and anti-PD-1 inhibitors; when these
agents have been used in combination, perturbation of pharmacokinetic
parameters has been reported, with a 24% increase in clearance of
nivolumab observed in combinatorial use with ipilimumab relative to
monotherapy. Initially, this was not
considered clinically relevant due to the lack of detection of a detriment
to efficacy. However, later speculation that the enhanced clearance
was attributable to the increase in antidrug antibodies indicates yet another immunologically driven
drug–drug interaction, this time with pharmacokinetic ramifications.
Theoretical effects on pharmacodynamics are obvious; if clearance
is adequately increased and/or neutralizing antibodies are formed,
then this will be to the detriment of the pharmacokinetic profile
and thus efficacy of the therapeutic. However, ADAs have not been
studied in enough depth within the IO field to say with vindication
if this theoretical concern is relevant in the clinic. Indeed, practical
clinical experience even with monotherapy does not yield clear signals,
in part due to a lack of comprehensive studies. , There are, however, a small number of reports that correlate ADA
formation to ICIs in monotherapy to poorer overall survival outcomes
with ipilimumab and atezolizumab. Finally,
an important caveat and major impediment in determining the effects
of ADAs on efficacy lies in the comparison of ADA positive vs non-ADA
positive individuals in terms of efficacy; the promotion of ADAs in
the first place could be interpreted as pharmacodynamic activity in
itself and so could be a surrogate of efficacy to some degree. The
true impact of ICI-induced ADA formation may therefore not be possible
to assess appropriately against another agent that has immune-modulatory
or even tumor function but may come to light when a biological therapeutic
with a distinct mechanism of action is investigated.
Even less
well-characterized is how a possible induction of ADAs
might lead to alterations of the toxicological profile. It is well-documented
that circulating immunoglobulins can contribute to hypersensitivity
reactions through various mechanisms, with the classic immediate/type I causing anaphylaxis often a key
concern with biologicals. The true effect of immunomodulatory qualities
on this aspect of immunogenicity is yet to be delineated. However,
logically, the immunomodulatory qualities of ICIs might promote such
issues with concomitant biologicals.

## Approaches to Address the Issue (Timing, Drug Choice, Patient
Stratification)
Given the emerging body of evidence for ICI-induced
drug hypersensitivity
reactions for drugs as a form of irAE, it is clear that these types
of reactions are a serious problem for IO patients. These reactions
may prevent patients from continuing their successful cancer treatment
due to discontinuation of therapy, which could be catastrophic for
patients with no alternative treatment options. Due consideration
must be given to whether this component of the safety profile could
be improved. Several time points in a patient’s journey do
appear tractable with regards to this ( ) as outlined and discussed in detail below.
 

## Detection and Management
Due to their idiosyncratic
nature, an undesirable truth of drug hypersensitivity reactions is
that the beginning of the journey to the understanding of how, when,
and who they occur in begins with the frontline clinical detection
of toxicity signals, often in late phase or postmarketing surveillance.
The suspicion of what is effectively an immunological drug–drug
interaction underlying a hypersensitivity reaction presents a nuanced
version of this same challenge. Indexed above ( ) are numerous examples where the coadministration
of ICI with a second medication results in an intolerable adverse
outcome. The examples outlined represent some of the best defined
cases of ICI-induced drug hypersensitivity to date, with the etiology
of the reaction supported by investigative work up or extensive clinical
evidence. It is noteworthy that several trials have been pivotal in
determining the tolerability of combination therapies in certain settings , , In real-world practice on a
background of heterogeneous polypharmacy in patient populations, it
is probable that this mode of toxicity is under-reported and somewhat
underappreciated at present. Part of the reason for this is the challenging
nature of irAEs in terms of prevalence and presentation. Indeed, several
high-profile instances of severe reactions outlined in ( ) were first attributed to the
direct irAE profile of the ICI itself, which following the readministration
of the true antigen, led to the patient experiencing a second bout
of severe adverse reaction before the true nature of the reaction
was recognized. , The initial steps toward mitigating
these reactions is therefore through diligent pharmacovigilance; identifying
reactions when they occur in the clinic and continual evaluation of
combinations of drugs, retrospective evaluation of patient cohorts
may also help to identify signals with compounds that have been missed,
especially as studies become large enough to adequately power such
observations. In the first instance, reviewing data on outcomes of
patients treated with historically relevant drugs with known liabilities
for hypersensitivity in indications might be productive in this regard.
With respect to new onset reactions, diagnostic procedures for hypersensitivity
tend to rely extensively on a robust clinical characterization and
work up, which can include in vivo evaluation such
as skin patch tests, rechallenge etc. where appropriate. Further to
this, as discussed in Hammond et al., various investigational tools
(LTTs, ELISpot etc.) are available for in vitro assessment
of reactions and have been employed effectively to aid determination
of causality in a safe and accurate manner in several reports to date. , , Where the ICI is not the culpable
agent, this may aid the successful reintroduction of the ICI in the
absence of the offending therapeutic.
 

## Derisking the Patient
Armed with knowledge acquired
from pharmacovigilance/clinical experience, as patterns of risk with
particular comedications begin to emerge, it may be possible to effectively
triage patients prior to treatment to identify potentially problematic
medications in terms of safety/efficacy. With sufficient evidence
to build a risk-benefit profile, it may be possible to contraindicate
some therapeutics at this stage or refer patients to alternative concomitant
medications that have precedence of a lower risk profile in terms
of inducing drug hypersensitivity reactions. Where such courses of
action are not possible/necessary, identification of potential hazards
at this stage may help inform patient and physicians alike and may
hasten/direct suspicion and decision making should a reaction be observed
later down the line. Whether derisking patients in this manner will
be effective remains to be addressed. Association of specific HLA
alleles with increased likelihood of drug hypersensitivity reactions
is reported for drugs such as abacavir (HLA-B*57:01) and carbamazepine
(HLA-B*15:02). Currently, it is unknown as to whether the coadministration
of these drugs with ICIs in patients who possess these HLA-risk alleles
will enhance the likelihood of irAEs to these coadministered drugs.
However, this is also an important concept that must be considered
and investigated further.

## Derisking the Treatment
The subsequent step in managing
these toxicities is to derisk the treatment itself by carefully considering
additional agents likely to be introduced during and in succession
to ICI treatment. The liabilities of monotherapy with the secondary
agent should be considered, especially if the toxicity profile might
induce lesions that could be exacerbated by the mechanism of action
of ICIs. Optimization of treatment algorithms for various commonly
used medications should be pursued here, reducing the risk of introducing
problematic agents during the course of treatment in terms of toxicity
and efficacy profile.
One of the most important aspects of this
is combinatorial or sequential oncology treatment. Where the adjunctive/additional
combinatorial agent is established, there is a benefit of understanding
the baseline toxicity profile, and it is sometimes possible to envisage
potential synergistic toxicity, e.g., GI toxicity with chemotherapy,
for example, with paclitaxel plus cisplatin, , and skin toxicity with TKIs, for example, afatinib, erlotinib, and
gefitinib, − may be exacerbated. However, a different challenge manifests for
a novel therapeutic in the early stages of clinical development. This
is particularly important when drugs are primarily intended to be
used alongside immunotherapy. Good laboratory practice toxicity studies
are not generally performed for combinations where one agent is clinically
established, and immune reactions of this type are often of limited
translational value in any case. In both scenarios, it is desirable
to optimize the safety profile as efficiently as possible. These combinatorial
approaches are often evaluated within well-monitored clinical trials
and have led to the identification of adjunctive therapies that are
not tolerated for example ipilimumab plus dacarbazine in melanoma
patients. 
Where the combination
is part of an intentional therapeutic regimen,
but rather incidental, the solution can extend to revised treatment
algorithms for agents to be introduced. A prime example of this is
sulfasalazine, which is not commonly administered for ICI-induced
rheumatoid events due to clinical and experimental evidence that indicated
the hypersensitivity issue. , 
Another key aspect
with regard to drugs introduced during treatment
is the temporal relationship of any ICI-imposed effects. A particularly
pertinent question is what the effective washout period of ICI modulation
is at what time does the risk of hypersensitivity with the introduction
of an additional agent return to approximately baseline for a given
patient? Certainly, the sequence of ICI administration appears to
affect the tolerability of given combinations; osimertinib before
ICI therapy is deemed safer than when given in combination or after
immunotherapy, which has evidence of causing severe and fatal irAEs. − , The long half-life of antibodies
(3–4 weeks) , raises the possibility that
the effect of IO agents on the immunological perception of compounds
for a given patient may extend long past the final administration,
and therefore, introduction of new agents following administration
of ICIs is likely to be less favorable for some time. As described
by Watanabe et al., the effects of ICI therapy have the potential
to lead to long-lasting lymphocyte activation and gradual and sustained
suppression of Tregs, which can subsequently lead to hypersensitivity
reactions to concomitant medications weeks after ICI therapy discontinuation. Additionally, this is consistent with reports
of various pharmaceuticals exhibiting poor tolerability when administered
in sequence with ICIs. , 
A further long-term goal
might even be the refinement of the IO
therapies. At present, the selection of blocking monoclonal antibodies
on the market for IO therapy represents the first generation of the
immune checkpoint blockade era. These antibodies systemically block
the target, and so, their extratumoral effects on immune regulation
are widespread, extensive, and of relevance in the context of adverse
effects. Multiple waves of newer therapeutic approaches are in development
now, with the total number of prospective IO therapeutics growing
exponentially; by 2020, both PD-1 and PD-L1 were the intended therapeutic
targets of over 100 distinct IO agents at various stages of development.
One of the key themes with the coming iterations may indeed be to
increase the efficacy or therapeutic index of such agents with respect
to on/off-tumor activity. Approaches to this pursued to date include
modifications to conventional antibody constructs (multivalency, prodrug-like
behavior, e.g., pacmilimab), and alternative platforms deliver the
intended disruption of the antibody (e.g., oligonucleotides selectively
delivered to tumor cells by advanced modality platforms or alternative
approaches). Just as such approaches may be intended to (or may coincidentally)
reduce the collateral irAE profile, so too may the liabilities as
outlined above be minimized. First in human studies in patients with
advanced solid tumors administered pacmilimab in combination with
ipilimumab provided evidence that toxicity profiles with this combination
were more favorable than standard ICI combinational therapies. 

## Clinical Management
The final step in mitigating these
toxicities is the acceptance that total avoidance of immunological
drug–drug interactions and indeed irAEs overall is not possible.
While steps can be taken as outlined above to minimize the impact,
mitigation is always subject to risk-benefit, and immunological enhancement
as currently clinically applied will always carry some risk. With
this duly noted, how patients are managed after identification of
irAE or ICI-drug interaction should be optimized as far as possible
to minimize toxicity and treatment downtime. As discussed above, irAEs
are typically treated with corticosteroids in a standardized fashion
which may decrease the clinical efficacy of ICIs. Therefore, newer management paradigms must be pursued that
offer amelioration without losing the antitumor efficacy of ICIs and
without the risk of additional ADRs. Alternative medications for the
treatment of irAEs that maintain antitumor efficacy when administered
in combination with ICIs should be considered and evaluated. Desensitization
protocols have the potential to be viable alternative methods for
clinical management. Examples of success of desensitization protocols
in the clinic are found in the treatment of cystic fibrosis (CF) patients
where their medications are essential and life changing. The risk
of adverse events outweighs the risk of their CF being left untreated;
therefore, desensitization to tazocin and tobramycin has been possible
in some cases where delayed type hypersensitivity reactions have occurred. Similarly, to the treatment of CF patients,
the treatment of oncology patients requires careful consideration
of the risk-benefit of adverse reactions occurring due to their therapy
but also the treatment of their cancer, attempts of desensitization
may be the most beneficial for patients when no other viable cancer
treatment option is available. A clinical example of a patient with
NSCLC with EGFR Thr790Met-mutation who presented with hepatotoxicity
caused by osimertinib as their sixth line of therapy was successfully
orally desensitized to osimertinib. Recently,
Lopez et al. reported a case where an NSCLC patient suffered an osimertinib-induced
SJS reaction after the administration of pembrolizumab (last cycle
2 weeks prior to osimertinib administration); four years later, osimertinib
desensitization was successfully carried out with no reoccurrence
of SJS after the rechallenge. This report
highlights the potential for patients to tolerate concomitant medications
after carefully carried out desensitization protocols and certain
time has elapsed after ICI administration.

## Discussion
IO patients represent a cohort of individuals
in which polypharmacy
is common; this is at least in part due to combinational approaches
taken within oncology and the increasing comorbidites of an increasingly
complex cancer population. , An important question
to address is to what extent the drug–drug interactions influence
the clinical outcome in terms of safety and efficacy. In light of
the burden of clinical evidence summarized herein, it appears that
administration of ICI agents may inadvertently push individuals toward
an immunological state in which hypersensitivity reactions are more
likely and that hypersensitivity to coadministered medications therefore
represents a subcomponent of the irAE profile.
Unfortunately,
irAEs at present are an inevitable feature across
the IO-treated population. The main aim should therefore be to learn
from them when they do occur; understanding the cause often leads
to understanding optimal clinical management and potentially reduces
the need for significant immunosuppression in cases where an extrinsic
propagator can be identified. From a drug development perspective,
the burgeoning field of IO is likely to offer hundreds of combinations.
At present, a major challenge is understanding what makes a combination
tolerable (or not). In many respects these challenges reflect those
of “conventional” hypersensitivity reactions, but the
margin of tolerance seems to be narrowed and often require immunosuppressive
treatment strategies once established; however, optimal management
strategies remain elusive, as do proactive, prospective concomitant
medication strategies aimed at reducing hypersensitivity reactions
in this patient cohort.

## Glossary

## Abbreviations
AINAcute
interstitial nephritis
ADRAdverse drug reaction
ADAAntidrug antibody
CTLA-4Cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated
protein-4
DILIDrug-induced
liver injury
DRESSDrug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms
EGFREpidermal growth factor
receptor
ICIImmune
checkpoint inhibitor
IOImmune-oncology
irAEsImmune-related adverse events
ILInterleukin
LAG-3Lymphocyte activation gene-3 protein
LTTsLymphocyte transformation
tests
mAbMonoclonal
antibody
MHCMajor
histocompatibility complexes
SMX-NONitroso-sulfamethoxazole
NSCLCNon-small-cell lung cancer
PD-1Programmed death protein 1
PD-L1Programmed death-ligand
1
PPIProton pump
inhibitor
SJSStevens-Johnson
syndrome
TregT-regulatory
TENToxic epidermal
necrolysis
TMETumor
microenvironment
TNF-αTumor necrosis factor-alpha
TKITyrosine kinase inhibitor

## Biographies
Sophie Grice joined the Centre for
Drug Safety Science
at the University of Liverpool in 2020 with her PhD studentship funded
by the integrative toxicology training partnership (ITTP). Her primary
area of research focuses on how alterations in immune regulation have
an impact on the immunogenicity of low-molecular-weight drugs. She
is currently working at the Centre of Drug safety Science at the University
of Liverpool as a research assistant focusing on improving the understanding
of advanced therapy medicinal products

Anna Olsson-Brown is a Consultant in Medical Oncology.
She is the Clinical Director for Clinical cancer care at University
Hospitals Sussex NHS Foundation Trust and an Honorary Senior Lecturer
at the University of Liverpool. She has a background in clinical pharmacology
and specializes in the management of immunotherapeutic toxicities,
melanoma, sarcoma, and early phase/translational clinical trials.
She is the current immunotherapy toxicity work stream lead for the
NIHR Oncology Translational Research Committee (O-TRC) and a board
member of UKASC. She is a founding member and current CEO of the National
Immunotherapy Clinical Network (IOCN) and sits on the UK Chemotherapy
Board within this role. She is a current Clinical Advisor to Health
Education England and the British Medical Journal, Oncology representative
of the Symposium Committee at the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh,
representative on the Association of Cancer Physicians and RCPE new
consultant committees and senior advisor to the National Oncology
Collaboration for Trainee Research (NOTCH).

Dean Naisbitt is a Professor of Drug Safety Science
at the Centre for Drug Safety Science, the University of Liverpool.
He has developed practical and conceptual means to combine aspects
of genetics, cell biology, and chemistry to study the fundamental
principles of immunological drug reactions. He has established sophisticated
immunological platforms to study emerging drug safety issues with
an immune pathogenesis using HLA-typed lymphocytes isolated from patients
and drug-naïve volunteers. Professor Naisbitt has been recognized
with several honors and awards including the ISSX New Investigator
Award, the British Pharmacological Society Novartis prize, and the
ACS Chemical Research in Toxicology Young Investigator award. He has
published over 140 research articles and has served on the Editorial
Advisory Board of Chemical Research in Toxicology.

Sean Hammond is the Immunotoxicology Lead
at ApconiX.
He is a specialist consultant on immune safety issues for pharmaceutical
industry at all stages of drug development and across multiple drug
modalities including small molecules, biologicals, and advanced therapies.
He is also an Honorary Senior Lecturer at the University of Liverpool
where he contributes to the conceptualization and supervision of research
in both mechanistic toxicology and the development of assays for preclinical
safety assessment of new drugs. He is also a member and ApconiX representative
on the Health and Environmental Sciences Institute (HESI) immune safety
technical committee.

## Author Contributions
The manuscript
was written through contributions of all authors. CRediT: Sophie
Grice conceptualization, data curation, investigation, project
administration, resources, validation, visualization, writing-original
draft, writing-review & editing; Anna Olsson-Brown conceptualization, supervision, validation, writing-review &
editing; Dean John Naisbitt conceptualization; Sean Hammond conceptualization, data curation, investigation,
resources, supervision, validation, writing-review & editing.

S.G. is a Ph.D. student funded by the MRC
ITTP Studentship.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

## Special Issue
Published
as part of Chemical Research in Toxicologyvirtual special issue “Women in Toxicology”.

## References