pmcLiver ResLiver Res4692livresLiver Research2096-28782542-5684Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen UniversityPMC11771259PMC11771259.111771259117712593995892110.1016/j.livres.2024.11.005S2542-5684(24)00066-71Practice GuidelineChinese expert consensus on the clinical application of molecular diagnostics in hepatobiliary cancers (2024 edition) 
AiniwaerAizier ChengJiamin LangRen PengTao BiXinyu LuYinyingluyinying1973@163.com Chinese Research Hospital Association Society for Molecular DiagnosisTranslational Medicine Branch, China Association of Gerontology and GeriatricsaComprehensive Liver Cancer Center, The Fifth Medical Center of PLA General Hospital, Beijing, ChinabDepartment of Hepatobiliary and Pancreaticosplenic Surgery, Beijing Chao-Yang Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, ChinacDepartment of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi, ChinadDepartment of Hepatobiliary Surgery, National Cancer Center/National Clinical Research Center for Cancer/Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China⁎Corresponding author. luyinying1973@163.com1These authors contributed equally to this work.
122024031220248448061519520612920242311202426112024031220241402202517022025© 2024 The Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University. Publishing services by Elsevier B. V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltdé.2024The Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen Universityhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and biliary tract cancer (BTC) are significant health challenges in China because of their high prevalence and mortality rates. Advances in molecular diagnostics have opened new avenues for personalized treatment strategies. This consensus provides a comprehensive update on the clinical applications of molecular diagnostics in HCC and BTC and addresses the urgent need for personalized treatment strategies tailored to the Chinese population, emphasizing the importance of molecular markers in guiding targeted therapies and immunotherapies. By employing the Delphi method and the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation system, the expert panel formulated evidence-based recommendations for the use of molecular diagnostics in the clinical management of HCC and BTC. Key molecular markers, such as isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) 1 and 2, fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2), BRAF V600E, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2), rearranged during transfection (RET), and neurotrophic tyrosine receptor kinase (NTRK), are highlighted for their roles in optimizing treatment regimens. The consensus also explores the significance of emerging biomarkers, such as tumor mutation burden and microsatellite instability, in predicting responses to immune checkpoint inhibitors. The recommendations aim to enhance precision medicine approaches, improve patient outcomes, and foster the integration of molecular diagnostics into routine clinical practice.

## Keywords
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)Biliary tract cancer (BTC)Targeted therapyImmunotherapyMolecular markersExpert consensuspmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND1

## Introduction
Hepatobiliary cancers are classified into primary liver cancer (PLC) and biliary tract cancer (BTC). Based on pathological criteria, PLC is further subdivided into hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (ICC), and combined hepatocellular-cholangiocarcinoma (cHCC-CCA). BTC is anatomically categorized into cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) and gallbladder cancer (GBC). However, the guidelines issued by the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) in 2023 have reclassified hepatobiliary cancers. This expert consensus aligns with the NCCN guidelines, categorizing hepatobiliary cancers into HCC, cHCC-CCA, and BTC, with BTC primarily including GBC, ICC, and extrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (ECC).
Molecular diagnostics has been widely accepted for the clinical diagnosis, protocol development, efficacy evaluation, and prognosis of hepatobiliary cancers. In China and worldwide, numerous clinical trials have focused on specific molecular targets or signaling pathways that yield promising results. Consequently, incorporating molecular tests into the clinical diagnosis and treatment of hepatobiliary cancers can offer superior therapeutic alternatives, potentially extending survival and improving patients’ quality of life.
Building on the first edition released in 2020, the panel of experts compiled a comprehensive update on advancements in molecular marker research, including protein and nucleic acid studies of hepatobiliary cancers. This update provides an in-depth overview of the clinical significance and updated guidelines on the application of these markers. The primary objective of this consensus is to establish a more standardized and enhanced clinical implementation of molecular diagnostic technologies for treating hepatobiliary cancers.

2

## Methods
The Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) system was employed as the standard methodology to appraise evidence and formulate recommendations. The GRADE system is widely recognized as the premier framework for evidence evaluation and recommendation grading and classifies the quality of evidence into high (level 1), moderate (level 2), low (level 3), and very low levels (level 4). Correspondingly, recommendations are categorized into strong (grade A), moderate (grade B), and weak (grade C). To address significant challenges in clinical practice, the Delphi method was used to determine the strength of the expert consensus, particularly in scenarios where existing clinical studies provide insufficient evidence. The Delphi method systematically solicits expert opinions on consensus-related issues through multiple rounds of anonymous written inquiries. This iterative process involves consultation, summarization, modification, and statistical analysis, culminating in the compilation of the results. A supplementary survey employing multiple-choice questions was also conducted to assess the preferences of experts in clinical practice. For clinical diagnosis and treatment guidelines, we referred to the National Health Commission Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Primary Liver Cancer (2024 Edition), Chinese Society of Clinical Oncology (CSCO) Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Primary Liver Cancer (2022 Edition), and CSCO Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Biliary Malignancies (2023 Edition). 

3

## Clinical application of molecular markers in targeted therapy for hepatobiliary cancers
3.1

## Isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) 1/2
The incidence of IDH1/2 mutations in ICC ranges from 10% to 23%. A significant correlation was found between IDH mutations and the prognosis of patients with ICC. Specifically, the 3-year survival rate of patients harboring IDH1/2 mutations is significantly lower than that of wild-type cases (33% vs. 81%, respectively, P = 0.0034). In 2021, the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved the use of ivosidenib in patients with locally advanced or metastatic CCA who previously received treatment and possess IDH1 mutations. Compared with placebo, ivosidenib significantly improved the median progression-free survival (mPFS) (2.7 vs. 1.4 months, P < 0.0001) and median overall survival (mOS) (10.3 vs. 7.5 months), with a cross-treatment-adjusted mOS of 5.1 months, demonstrating a favorable survival benefit. , 
Recommendation 1: Testing for IDH mutations in patients with unresectable or metastatic BTC is recommended. For second-line therapy, ivosidenib is recommended for patients with unresectable or metastatic BTC harboring IDH1-activating mutations (recommendation grade: 1A).

3.2

## Fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR)
The FGFR family comprises FGFR1–FGFR4, and their activation mutations, amplification, and fusion have been identified as critical factors in the pathogenesis of various tumors. FGFR1–FGFR3 variants are present in 11% of ICC and 3% of GBC cases. Furthermore, FGFR2 fusion is detected in 11%–45% of patients with CCA. The FIGHT202 study demonstrated the efficacy of pemigatinib as a second-line treatment in patients with FGFR2 fusion/rearrangement in advanced CCA, achieving an objective response rate (ORR) of 35.5%, disease control rate (DCR) of 82.2%, and mOS of 21.1 months. Other FGFR inhibitors such as futibatinib, erdafitinib, and derazantinib have shown promising results in clinical trials. , , 
Recommendation 2: Testing for FGFR2 fusion or rearrangement is recommended for patients with unresectable or metastatic BTC. In second-line therapy, pemigatinib (recommendation grade: 1A), futibatinib, derazantinib (recommendation grade: 2B), and erdafitinib (recommendation grade: 3B) are recommended for patients with unresectable or metastatic BTC positive for FGFR2 fusion or rearrangement.

3.3

## BRAF V600E
BRAF encodes threonine/serine protein kinases within the RAF family, and mutations at the V600E locus lead to the sustained activation of the RAS/RAF/MEK/ERK signaling pathways. The prevalence of BRAF V600E mutations in BTC is approximately 5%. In the ROAR study, 43 patients with BTC and BRAF V600E mutation received combination therapy with dabrafenib and trametinib, resulting in an ORR of 51%, mPFS of 9 months, and mOS of 14 months. , The Subprotocol-H clinical trial reported an ORR of 38% and mPFS of 11.4 months in 35 patients with solid tumors harboring BRAF V600E mutations treated with dabrafenib plus trametinib. In addition, three of the four patients with CCA exhibited a partial response (PR), with PFS durations of 12.8, 9.1, and 29.4 months. Based on these clinical outcomes, the FDA has approved the use of dabrafenib plus trametinib in patients with unresectable and metastatic solid tumors harboring BRAF V600E mutations, who have progressed despite treatment or who have no therapeutic options.
Recommendation 3: Testing for BRAF V600E mutation in patients with unresectable or metastatic BTC is recommended. For second-line therapy, dabrafenib combined with trametinib is recommended for patients with unresectable or metastatic BTC harboring BRAF V600E mutations (recommendation grade: 2B).

3.4

## Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)
HER2/neu (also known as ERBB2), a member of the epidermal growth factor receptor family, encodes a transmembrane receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK). HER2 mutations can activate downstream signaling pathways such as mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT/mammalian target of the rapamycin (mTOR), and Janus kinase (JAK)/signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT), leading to abnormal cell proliferation and resistance to apoptosis, thereby promoting tumorigenesis. 
HER2 mutations are present in 5%–20% of patients with BTC. A phase IIa basket study (MyPathway) targeting multiple HER2-positive solid tumors prospectively enrolled 39 patients with advanced BTC treated with pertuzumab and trastuzumab, achieving an ORR of 23%, mPFS of 4 months and mOS of 10.9 months. The heterogeneity of BTC at different anatomical sites resulted in varying response rates to anti-HER2 therapy: 0 in ICC, 29% in ECC, 31% in GBC, and 40% in ampullary carcinoma. The mechanisms underlying these differential responses require full elucidation. In the phase II single-arm HERB trial, 22 patients with HER2-positive BTC treated with trastuzumab deruxtecan after chemotherapy failure exhibited an ORR of 36.4%, a DCR of 81.8%, an mPFS of 5.1 months, and an mOS of 7.1 months. Notably, patients with low HER2 expression (immunohistochemistry (IHC) 1+ or 2+ but fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)-negative) demonstrated an ORR of 12.5%, a DCR of 75.0%, an mPFS of 3.9 months, and an mOS of 8.9 months. Zanidatamab, a bispecific antibody targeting two HER2 epitopes, has shown superior antitumor activity to trastuzumab alone or in combination with pertuzumab in preclinical studies. The global, multicenter HERIZON-BTC-01 study included 87 patients with BTC who failed systemic therapy. Of these, 80 patients with HER2-positive (IHC 2+ or 3+) tumors treated with zanidatamab monotherapy exhibited an ORR of 41.3%, a DCR of 68.8%, a median duration of response (mDOR) of 12.9 months, and an mPFS of 5.5 months. The safety profile of zanidatamab was deemed manageable and tolerable. The Drug Evaluation Center of the National Drug Administration has prioritized the review of zanidatamab for its use in patients with locally advanced or metastatic BTC having high HER2 expression who have previously received systemic treatment.
Recommendation 4: Testing for HER2 (ERBB2) overexpression or amplification is recommended for patients with unresectable or metastatic BTC. For second-line therapy, pertuzumab plus trastuzumab (recommendation grade: 2C), trastuzumab deruxtecan (recommendation grade: 2C), or zanidatamab (recommendation grade: 2B) are recommended for patients with unresectable or metastatic BTC with HER2 overexpression or amplification.

3.5

## Rearranged during transfection (RET)
RET encodes an RTK, and genetic alterations, such as rearrangements or activating point mutations, can activate critical signaling pathways, including MAPK and PI3K/AKT. According to the NCCN guidelines (version 3, 2024), the RET inhibitor selpercatinib is recommended for the treatment of advanced HCC and CCA with RET fusion-positive status in both subsequent-line treatment for HCC and first- or second-line therapy for CCA. The phase I/II LIBRETTO-001 study included 45 patients with RET fusion-positive solid tumors, among whom 2 had CCA. The study reported an ORR of 43.9%, mDOR of 24.5 months, and mPFS of 13.2 months. Based on these results, the FDA granted accelerated approval for selpercatinib in September 2022 for patients with locally advanced or metastatic solid tumors harboring RET fusions. Pralsetinib, the first RET inhibitor introduced in China, was evaluated in the ARROW study, which included 29 patients with RET fusion-positive solid tumors, 4 of whom had CCA. The study demonstrated an ORR of 57% across the overall population following pralsetinib treatment. 
Recommendation 5: Testing for RET fusion or rearrangement is recommended for patients with unresectable or metastatic BTC and HCC. For first- or second-line therapy in CCA, pralsetinib or selpercatinib is recommended for patients with unresectable or metastatic CCA harboring RET fusions (recommendation grade: 3C). In second-line therapy for HCC, selpercatinib is recommended for unresectable or metastatic HCC with RET fusions (recommendation grade: 3C).

3.6

## Neurotrophic tyrosine receptor kinase (NTRK)
NTRK mutations, particularly gene fusions, are found in various tumors, and therapeutic strategies include broad-spectrum receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) and specific inhibitors targeting the NTRK family. NTRK fusion is found in approximately 0.2% of BTC and HCC cases. The FDA has approved the pan-cancer targeted therapies larotrectinib and entrectinib for the treatment of locally advanced and metastatic solid tumors in both adults and children with NTRK fusions. In a clinical trial, larotrectinib demonstrated an ORR of 75% among 55 patients with NTRK fusion-positive solid tumors, including 2 CCA (4%) cases. Similarly, entrectinib showed promising results in a clinical trial involving 54 patients with NTRK fusion-positive solid tumors, including 1 CCA (2%) case, with an mPFS of 11.2 months, a complete response (CR) rate of 7% (4/54), and a PR rate of 50% (27/54). The National Medical Products Administration of China has granted marketing approval for both larotrectinib and entrectinib. NTRK1/2/3 fusions have not been reported in patients with HCC. However, given the high ORR (57%–75%) observed in NTRK fusion-positive cancers treated with larotrectinib and entrectinib, , these therapies should be considered as systemic treatment options for patients with HCC harboring NTRK fusions.
Recommendation 6: Testing for NTRK fusion is recommended for patients with unresectable or metastatic BTC and HCC. Larotrectinib and entrectinib are recommended for those with unresectable or metastatic BTC and HCC harboring NTRK fusions when first-line therapy fails (recommendation grade: 3C).

3.7

## Neuregulin 1 (NRG1)
NRG1, which encodes epidermal growth factor (EGF)-like domains, can interact with the ErbB/HER family. The activation of downstream signaling pathways mediated by ERBB, such as MAPK and mTOR, enhances cell proliferation and growth, resulting in tumorigenesis. The overall incidence of NRG1 fusion events is approximately 0.2%, reaching up to 0.5% in GBC cases. The phase II eNRGy study assessed the safety and efficacy of zenocutuzumab, a HER2/HER3 dual antibody, in advanced NRG1 fusion-positive solid tumors. The study revealed an ORR of 34% in 71 evaluable patients, with one in three patients with CCA exhibiting a PR. Grade ≥3 adverse events were observed in <5% of the patients. The FDA has granted the fast-track designation of zenocutuzumab as an orphan drug for the treatment of pancreatic cancer and metastatic solid tumors harboring NRG1 fusions.
Recommendation 7: Testing for NRG1 fusion is recommended for patients with unresectable or metastatic BTC. In second-line therapy, zenocutuzumab is recommended for patients with unresectable or metastatic BTC and HCC harboring NRG1 fusions (recommendation grade: 3C).

3.8

## Rat sarcoma virus (RAS)
RAS functions as a proto-oncogene, with its activated protein phosphorylating the downstream targets RAF, MEK, and ERK through a cascade of reactions, thereby regulating cell proliferation and differentiation. The RAS family includes HRAS, KRAS, and NRAS. Genetic variations are relatively rare in HCC, occurring in approximately 2% of cases. In CCA, the incidence of KRAS mutations ranges from 10% to 30%, with G12D being the most common mutation site. Patients with these mutations generally exhibit poor prognosis and shorter OS. , On May 28, 2021, the FDA approved sotorasib, a selective and irreversible small-molecule inhibitor targeting KRAS G12C, for the treatment of adult patients with locally advanced or metastatic non-small cell lung cancer harboring KRAS G12C mutations. Clinical trials for drugs targeting KRAS mutations in patients with advanced solid tumors are ongoing, including trials for sotorasib, MRTX1133 (targeting G12D), ASP3082, and HRS-4642. However, the efficacy of these agents in BTC remains uncertain and warrants further investigation.
Recommendation 8: For patients with HCC and BTC requiring systemic treatment, testing for KRAS hotspot mutations is recommended. If KRAS G12C or G12D mutations are detected after failure of conventional treatments, participation in relevant clinical trials, such as those involving sotorasib, is advisable based on available data and evidence (recommendation grade: 3C).

3.9

## Mesenchymal-epithelial transition factor (MET)
MET mutations or amplifications can cause persistent activation of c-MET signaling, resulting in uncontrolled cell proliferation and enhanced tumor metastasis. The incidence of MET mutations is approximately 1.89% in HCC and 1.44% in CCA. Cabozantinib effectively inhibits MET activity in HCC cells with high c-MET expression, thereby inhibiting angiogenesis, cell proliferation, migration, and invasion, and promoting apoptosis. A recent case report indicated favorable outcomes for patients with advanced HCC harboring c-MET amplifications who responded positively to cabozantinib as fifth-line therapy, achieving PR lasting up to 9 months. In a study involving 926 patients with BTC in China, MET mutations were detected in 4.1%, with amplification as the most common type (2.6%). A patient with MET amplification exhibited CR after first-line treatment with cabozantinib. In a patient with advanced HCC who underwent third-line therapy, crizotinib treatment resulted in tumor shrinkage within 1 month and sustained remission for >1 year. 
Recommendation 9: Testing for MET overexpression or amplification is recommended for patients with HCC and BTC requiring systemic treatment. If MET overexpression or amplification is identified in patients with HCC or BTC who have failed conventional systemic therapy, cabozantinib or crizotinib may be considered a potential treatment option for subsequent-line treatment strategies (recommendation grade: 3C).

3.10

## Tumor protein p53 (TP53)
Mutations in TP53, a crucial tumor suppressor, occur most frequently in human cancers and are strongly associated with advanced malignancies and poor prognoses. In advanced HCC, mutations in TP53 (35%) and the WNT/beta (β)-catenin signaling pathway (45%) have been identified as independent molecular subtypes. Significant differences in TP53 mutations have been observed in patients with early postoperative recurrence of HCC compared with those without recurrence. In addition, TP53, WNK2, RUNX1T1, CTNNB1, and TSC1 mutations are linked to early tumor recurrence after curative resection. In BTC, TP53 mutations are present in approximately 32% of cases and are associated with shorter OS and disease-free survival than wild-type cases. Patients with CDKN2A/MDM2/TP53 co-mutations exhibit even worse prognoses. Furthermore, KRAS and TP53 co-mutations are more prevalent in advanced CCA and show a better response to immunotherapy than patients with only KRAS mutations. Currently, there are no approved antitumor drugs specifically targeting TP53. However, several promising drugs targeting TP53, such as APR-246, PC14586, ATO, APG-115, and SGT-53, are undergoing clinical trials.

3.11

## PI3K/mTOR signaling pathway
The PI3K/mTOR signaling pathway is a critical pathway involved in hepatobiliary cancers, and the pathway includes PIK3CA, phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN), serine/threonine kinase 11 (STK11), tuberous sclerosis complex 1 (TSC1), TSC2, and mTOR. In HCC, the mutation frequency of PIK3CA is approximately 4%, whereas PTEN deletions occur in approximately 7% of cases. A phase II clinical study evaluating the efficacy and safety of the mTOR inhibitor sirolimus in combination with first-line treatment for patients with advanced HCC did not reach its primary endpoint, indicating that mutations in the mTOR signaling pathway genes did not significantly affect the time to progression or OS. The synergistic inhibitory effects of mTOR inhibitors and sorafenib on HCC require further validation. A preclinical study revealed that the combination of PI3K/mTOR inhibitors BEZ235 and BET exhibited significant therapeutic efficacy in vitro and in vivo models of ICC, demonstrating a novel therapeutic strategy for ICC. Other PI3K inhibitors, such as buparlisib, taselisib, and apitolisib, are currently being clinically evaluated for the treatment of hepatobiliary cancers harboring PIK3CA-activating and PTEN mutations.
Recommendation 10: Based on current clinical evidence, isolated testing for TP53 mutations and PI3K/mTOR signaling pathway genes is not currently recommended for patients with HCC and BTC undergoing systemic therapy (degree of expert consensus: 100%).

3.12

## Homologous recombination deficiency (HRD)
HR is a crucial mechanism for DNA damage repair, and HRD occurs when genes involved in HR repair are mutated. The genes implicated in the HR pathway include BRCA1/2, PALB2, ATM, ATR, CHEK1/2, BARD1, BRIP1, MRE11A, RAD51, and FANC. HRD accounts for 28.7% and 20.8% of HCC and CCA cases, respectively. Patients with HCC and BRCA2 or POLQ defects have shown potential sensitivity to poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitors (PARPi). A clinical study involving patients with BRCA1/2 mutations (7 ICC and 1 HCC) treated with the PARPi olaparib after multiple therapies failed to report PR in three patients and stable disease (SD) in two for 3–5 months. Additionally, Golan et al. found that patients with CCA having BRCA pathogenic variants (either somatic or germline) exhibited favorable disease response after PARPi treatment, either as first-line or subsequent therapy.
Recommendation 11: For patients with HCC and BTC scheduled to receive systemic therapy, validated next-generation sequencing (NGS) is recommended to detect HR repair gene mutation status, including both somatic and germline mutations. However, individual HRD defect status testing is not recommended. For patients with advanced metastatic HCC or BTC who have failed conventional treatment and possess pathogenic or suspected pathogenic HR repair gene mutations, particularly BRCA1 and BRCA2, PARPi therapy may be considered (recommendation grade: 3C).

3.13

## Vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGFA)
VEGFA, a member of the PDGF/VEGF family of growth factors, encodes a heparin-binding protein that induces the proliferation and migration of vascular endothelial cells, which are essential for angiogenesis. VEGFA expression is upregulated in numerous tumors and is correlated with tumor stage and progression. In patients with HCC, the incidence of VEGFA amplification ranges from 7% to 11%, and high VEGFA plasma levels are associated with poorer survival. In BTC, VEGFA expression is relatively low, accounting for 54% of ICC and 59% of ECC cases, and is often linked to intrahepatic metastasis. A meta-analysis indicated that high VEGFA expression is significantly associated with poorer prognosis in patients with ICC. However, evidence is insufficient to conclusively establish a correlation between VEGFA expression and the therapeutic efficacy of targeted therapies.

3.14

## Fibroblast growth factor 19 (FGF19)
FGF19 encodes a protein that is part of the FGF family, which is involved in numerous biological processes, including embryonic development, cell growth, morphogenesis, tissue repair, tumor growth, and invasion. Abnormal expression of FGF19 and CCND1 occurs in 5%–14% of HCC cases, and their high expression levels are associated with poor prognosis. The function of FGF19 relies on its specific receptors FGFR4 and KLB, suggesting that combining FGFR inhibitors or multitarget TKIs such as lenvatinib and ponatinib to inhibit both FGFR4 and VEGFR signaling pathways might be an effective therapeutic strategy for patients with FGF19/FGFR4-activated HCC. , , , Current clinical studies have shown varying levels of therapeutic effectiveness with FGFR4 inhibitors such as H3B-6527, FGF401, and BLU-554. In 2021, the American Society of Clinical Oncology reported that the highly selective covalent FGFR4 inhibitor H3B-6527 was well tolerated by patients with HCC, with an interim analysis showing mOS, mPFS, and ORR of 10.6 months, 4.1 months, and 16.7%, respectively. 
Recommendation 12: IHC detection, FISH, and NGS can be used to assess gene overexpression, determine gene fusion or rearrangement, and detect single nucleotide variants (SNVs), respectively. Combined testing of multiple genes is highly significant for guiding treatment. Therefore, NGS techniques are recommended for detecting the mutations listed in in liver and BTC tissue samples, particularly in cases where tissue samples are limited. 

4

## Molecular markers of immunotherapy for hepatobiliary cancers
Immunotherapy for hepatobiliary cancers has led to increasingly promising outcomes and clinical applications. The combination of immunotherapy and antiangiogenic agents represents first-line treatment for unresectable HCC, with regimens such as atezolizumab plus bevacizumab, sintilimab plus IBI305 (bevacizumab biosimilar), and camrelizumab plus apatinib. For patients with unresectable or metastatic HCC, first-line treatment options include immunotherapy agents such as tislelizumab. Alternative regimens include tremelimumab plus durvalumab and pembrolizumab plus lenvatinib. For patients with BTC, durvalumab or pembrolizumab plus gemcitabine and cisplatin is considered the standard first-line treatment. Additional therapeutic strategies include the use of camrelizumab combined with gemcitabine and oxaliplatin (GEMOX) in a phase II study and the combination of lenvatinib and toripalimab along with GEMOX in another phase II study. The application of various molecular markers in immunotherapy, such as programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) expression, microsatellite instability (MSI), mismatch repair deficiency (dMMR), and tumor mutation burden (TMB) has also been investigated ( ).
4.1

## PD-L1 and immunotherapy
PD-L1 is commonly expressed on the surface of tumor cells (TCs), macrophages, and dendritic cells and is crucial in inducing immune escape. In solid tumors, such as non-small cell lung cancer, melanoma, and urothelial carcinoma, PD-L1 expression levels serve as predictive biomarkers for immunotherapy and aid in clinical diagnosis. , , 
Research on PD-L1 expression in hepatobiliary cancers is limited, and the correlation between programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1)/PD-L1 expression and therapeutic efficacy remains controversial. A study on BTC reported that PD-L1 expression could be a potential predictive biomarker for advanced BTC treated with pembrolizumab, with higher ORR and DCR in the high PD-L1 expression group than in the low expression group. In a single-arm phase II clinical trial of camrelizumab plus GEMOX in patients with advanced BTC, those with PD-L1 tumor proportion score (TPS) ≥1% and <1% had ORRs of 80% and 53.8%, respectively. For HCC, some studies have indicated that PD-L1 expression in TCs ≥1% correlates with better OS in immunotherapy, as observed in the CheckMate 040 and IMbrave150 trials. , However, other studies found no significant predictive effect of PD-L1 TCs on OS, PFS (IMbrave150 and CheckMate 459), , and ORR (IMbrave150 and CheckMate 040). , Furthermore, in the KEYNOTE-224 study, the use of combined positive score (CPS) as an indicator of PD-L1 expression showed varying correlations with ORR and PFS compared with those of TPS. Overall, the predictive role of PD-L1 expression in BTC and HCC immunotherapy requires further clinical trials, given the practical challenges such as detection techniques and tissue availability.
Recommendation 13: Routine screening for PD-L1 expression to select the optimal population for PD-1/PD-L1 monoclonal antibody therapy in hepatobiliary cancers is not currently recommended. However, considering the role of PD-L1 as a predictive biomarker for immunotherapy in various solid tumors, its significance in hepatobiliary cancers should be further explored in combination with clinical practice and clinical trials (degree of expert consensus: 100%).

4.2

## MSI/dMMR and immunotherapy
dMMR arises from defects in proteins encoded by MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, and PMS2. These defects prevent corrective microsatellite replication errors, leading to genomic instability and MSI. MSI-high (MSI-H) and dMMR are relatively rare in hepatobiliary cancers. In a study exploring biomarkers for BTC immunotherapy, 125 (71.4%) patients had PD-L1-positive tumors, whereas only 2 (1.1%) had MSI-H with low PD-L1 expression. Notably, one patient exhibited disease progression after pembrolizumab therapy. Considering the low incidence of MSI-H in BTC, a comprehensive evaluation of both PD-L1 and MSI is recommended when considering immunotherapy. In the KEYNOTE-158 study, 233 patients with MSI-H or dMMR demonstrated a durable response to pembrolizumab, with BTC accounting for 6.3% (n = 22) and ORR of 40.9%. The NCCN guidelines recommend additional molecular testing, including dMMR testing, for patients with unresectable and metastatic CCA and pembrolizumab therapy for patients with ICC, ECC, and GBC with MSI-H/dMMR. The NCCN also recommends nivolumab and ipilimumab for first-line or previously treated patients with HCC or BTC having MSI-H (class 2B). In a non-endometrial solid tumor cohort of a phase I clinical trial of dostarlimab, 106 patients with MSI-H/dMMR showed an ORR of 38.7%, including 2 patients with HCC (1 PR and 1 progressive disease (PD)). The NCCN guidelines propose considering dostarlimab as a systemic therapy in patients with relapsed or advanced HCC who have MSI-H/dMMR (class 2B). 
Current methods for detecting MSI or dMMR include IHC, polymerase chain reaction-capillary electrophoresis (PCR-CE), and NGS. Although IHC and PCR-CE are commonly used, these methods may not definitively determine whether a patient harbors a pathogenic variant of Lynch syndrome genes. Given the difficulty of obtaining tissue samples, IHC and PCR-CE may not be able to assess the MSI status of patients with advanced diseases. NGS of circulating cell-free DNAs (cfDNAs) demonstrated high accuracy, detecting 86.7% (71/82) of MSI-H and 99.5% (863/867) of stable microsatellites in tissues, with an overall accuracy of 98.4% (934/949) and positive predictive value of 94.7% (71/75). The consistency of cfDNA MSI with tissue PCR-CE and NGS was significantly higher than that of IHC, and the incidence of cfDNA MSI in major cancer types was consistent with that of tissue reports. 
Recommendation 14: MSI-H and dMMR are critical biomarkers for predicting the therapeutic efficacy of immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) in solid tumors, including hepatobiliary cancers. MSI/dMMR testing is recommended for patients with inoperable or advanced disease. PCR-CE is recommended for microsatellite status testing and IHC for dMMR testing. In addition, MSI and MMR genes can be tested using a certified NGS panel in laboratories accredited by Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA), College of American Pathologists (CAP), and CNAS-CL02:2023 (equivalent to ISO 15189:2022) (degree of expert consensus: 100%).
Recommendation 15: Given the favorable efficacy of ICIs in patients with MSI-H, patients with advanced hepatobiliary cancers and MSI-H are recommended to initiate treatment with relevant ICIs as early as possible. For patients with a family history of tumors, particularly those with BTC, the genetic risk of Lynch syndrome must be excluded using NGS. In patients with unresectable or metastatic BTC having MSI-H/dMMR, pembrolizumab is recommended as first- or second-line treatment (recommendation grade: 2A), and dostarlimab is recommended as second-line treatment (recommendation grade: 2B). In patients with unresectable or metastatic HCC who have MSI-H/dMMR, dostarlimab is recommended as a second-line treatment (recommendation grade: 2B).

4.3

## TMB and immunotherapy
TMB refers to the number of somatic mutations, including single nucleotide variants (SNVs) and insertions/deletions (InDels), per megabase (Mb) of DNA in a specific genomic region. This measure reflects the capacity and extent of neoantigen production by tumors and predicts the therapeutic efficacy of ICIs for various tumors. Similar to PD-L1 testing, TMB evaluation is influenced by the choice of kits and methodologies, leading to the lack of standardized procedures. High TMB (TMB-H) accounts for approximately 4% of advanced BTC and 2% of advanced HCC. , , In the KEYNOTE-158 study, 12.9% (102/790) of the patients exhibited TMB-H (≥10 mutations/Mb), with a higher ORR in patients with TMB-H than in those without (29% vs. 6%). This study suggests that TMB may serve as a promising biomarker, indicating that relapsed or metastatic advanced solid tumors might benefit from PD-1 inhibitors. However, in BTC studies, TMB-H (threshold 7.1 mutations/Mb) was not significantly associated with OS in patients receiving ICIs plus chemotherapy. The NCCN and CSCO guidelines recommend testing for TMB and MSI/dMMR biomarkers in patients with advanced and inoperable hepatobiliary cancers to identify those who might benefit from PD-1 inhibitors such as pembrolizumab. Currently, clinical trials evaluating ICIs in advanced BTC and HCC have limited data on TMB; thus, further studies are needed to confirm the role of TMB in predicting responses to ICIs.

4.4

## Specific genetic variation and immunotherapy
Mutations in specific genes may affect the ability of tumor cells to evade immune surveillance. Specific immune-related gene variants in different tumors, such as activation mutations of STK11/LKB1 and POLE, and loss of heterozygosity in B2M, can predict the rates of immunotherapy response. Wnt/CTNNB1 mutations are characteristic of HCC immune rejection subtypes. HCC patients with Wnt-β-catenin pathway mutations are resistant to immune checkpoint suppression therapy and have poor median survival (9.1 months for mutated patients and 15.2 months for non-mutated patients). 
Recommendation 16: Although TMB is a biomarker used to predict the efficacy of ICIs in various solid tumors, no unified standard has been established for the TMB algorithm. Thus, patients with unresectable or metastatic hepatobiliary cancers are recommended to undergo TMB testing using NGS. In patients with unresectable or metastatic BTC with TMB-H, nivolumab plus ipilimumab for first-line or second-line treatment (recommendation grade: 2B) and pembrolizumab for second-line treatment (recommendation grade: 2B) should be considered. For patients with unresectable or metastatic HCC and TMB-H, nivolumab plus ipilimumab is recommended as the first- or second-line treatment (recommendation grade: 2B).
Recommendation 17: For BTC, IHC is recommended to detect HER2, MET, and MMR; FISH to detect FGFR2, RET, NTRK, and NRG1 fusions or rearrangements; and first-generation sequencing to detect IDH1/2, BRAF V600E, and KRAS hotspot mutations. NGS is recommended as a comprehensive test for TP53, HRD, TMB, and all other variants ( ) (degree of expert consensus: 100%). 

5

## Potential novel molecular markers for hepatobiliary cancers
The detection of novel molecular markers offers clinical insights for prognostic assessment, targeted therapy, and/or immunotherapy of hepatobiliary cancers. Given the complexity of gene heterogeneity, individual differences, and immune microenvironment in hepatobiliary cancers, multicenter, large-scale clinical studies are needed to elucidate the clinical utility of the following molecular markers.
5.1

## Liquid biopsy
cfDNAs refer to DNA molecules released into the bloodstream after apoptosis, necrosis, or active secretion by cells. Circulating tumor DNAs (ctDNAs) are a subset of cfDNAs derived from TCs, carrying tumor-specific genetic alterations. Because of the short half-life of ctDNA, its dynamic changes can provide real-time insights into tumor progression, aiding in the detection of postoperative minimal residual disease and guiding subsequent treatment. Additionally, ctDNA levels correlate with tumor burden, making it a valuable tool for recurrence monitoring. By identifying characteristic mutations in ctDNAs combined with serum markers, eight common tumors, including ovarian, liver, stomach, and pancreatic cancers, can be diagnosed, with a median positive rate of 70%. Notably, the positive rate for HCC is 96.1%. This method can detect 44% of HCC cases without relying on clinical information, and when combined with clinical data, the detection rate increases to 63%. An HCC screening system that integrates the detection of high-frequency mutations in cfDNAs with serum alpha-fetoprotein and des-gamma-carboxyprothrombin levels can identify patients with HCC among patients with asymptomatic hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg)-positive chronic hepatitis B, achieving a diagnostic sensitivity of 85% and specificity of 93%. 

5.2

## Telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT)
Mutations in the TERT promoter region are prevalent in many tumors. The frequencies of TERT promoter mutations in GBC, ECC, and HCC are 9.1%, 6.7%, and 0.5%–57.2%, respectively. These mutations are commonly observed in both low- and high-grade hepatic nodular hyperplasia and are considered early molecular events in HCC development. As such, TERT promoter mutations have potential utility as adjuvant markers for clinical diagnosis. 

5.3

## MicroRNAs (miRNAs)
miRNAs are small noncoding RNA molecules, comprising 21–25 nucleotides, that exhibit tissue- and tumor-specific characteristics. miRNAs are secreted into the bloodstream via the exosome pathway and possess remarkable stability. They are critical in the diagnosis and co-diagnosis of HCC. Circular RNAs (circRNAs) participate in activating the Wnt/β-catenin and Hippo/YAP pathways, enhancing the interaction between YAP1 and β-catenin. For example, circACTN4 is a novel signaling molecule that co-activates the Wnt and Hippo pathways, promoting ICC growth and metastasis in vitro and in vivo. Several inhibitors targeting the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway have emerged as potential cancer therapeutics. These inhibitors, currently in preclinical or clinical studies, are targeting various components of the classical Wnt signaling pathway, downregulating Wnt signal transduction, and inhibiting cancer progression. 

5.4

## DNA methylation analysis
DNA methylation is an epigenetic modification where DNA methyl-transferase catalyzes the transfer of a methyl group from S-adenosylmethionine to DNA CpG sites, primarily forming 5-methylcytosine. This modification often leads to gene silencing, rendering them nonfunctional. ctDNA methylation has shown potential as a reliable biomarker for HCC diagnosis, monitoring, and prognosis, making it a valuable tool for early detection.

5.5

## Immune microenvironment subtypes
Recent clinical practices demonstrate that combining immunotherapy, targeted therapy, and chemotherapy can significantly improve the prognosis of patients with hepatobiliary cancers. However, drug resistance and relapse remain challenges. The heterogeneity of the tumor immune microenvironment is a critical factor that contributes to drug resistance and tumor recurrence. Considering the characteristics of the tumor microenvironment, ICC can be categorized into immune classical, inflammatory stroma, hepatic stem-like, tumor classical, and desert-like classes. In 2019, through multiomics analysis, a study identified three unique HCC subtypes, namely, immunocompetent, immunodeficient, and immunosuppressive HCC. 
Recommendation 18: Relevant clinical studies must be actively pursued when conditions allow for elucidating the clinical value of novel molecular markers in the early diagnosis of hepatobiliary cancers, prognostic monitoring, therapeutic efficacy prediction, treatment optimization, and development of new immunotherapy targets.
In addition to the molecular markers currently used in clinical practice, numerous other markers warrant exploration in the context of novel treatment modalities for hepatobiliary cancers. These include cell reactivity biomarkers in chimeric antigen receptor T-cell therapy, expression of cytokines and chemokines in oncolytic virus treatments, and expression of bispecific antibodies targeting immune checkpoints such as cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen 4 (CTLA4)/lymphocyte activation gene 3 (LAG-3). Emerging and potentially applicable molecular markers, such as those related to the intestinal microbiome and metabolomics, also hold promise. Given the nascent stage of research and the limited scope of this report, a detailed discussion of these markers is not currently feasible. However, further studies are expected to provide deeper insights and broaden the application of these novel molecular markers in clinical practice.

6

## Molecular markers of combination therapy for hepatobiliary cancers
As medical technology continues to advance, combination therapy has emerged as a crucial approach for treating liver and biliary cancers. This method enhances treatment effectiveness by integrating various modalities, including immunotherapy, targeted therapy, and chemotherapy. At the molecular biomarker level, the success of combination therapy is linked to specific biomarkers.
6.1

## PD-1 and PD-L1
PD-1 is found on the surface of immune cells, whereas PD-L1 is present on tumor cell surfaces. When PD-1 and PD-L1 bind together, they trigger an inhibitory signal that deactivates T cells’ ability to detect and attack tumor cells, dampening the body’s anti-tumor response. Consequently, high levels of PD-1/PD-L1 expression often suggest that tumors can perform better and evade the immune system. Immune therapies that target PD-1 and PD-L1 can help restore T cells’ anti-tumor functions more effectively.

6.2

## VEGF and EGFR
VEGF is a key factor in the formation of blood vessels in tumors, while EGFR is crucial for the growth and division of tumor cells. When both of these targets are highly expressed, it often suggests that the tumor has significant growth and invasive potential. By using drugs to target these pathways, it is possible to slow down or stop tumor growth and spread. Additionally, when these treatments are combined with immunotherapy, their effectiveness can be further improved.

7

## Summary
With continuous advancements in molecular diagnostic technology and drug development, hepatobiliary cancers increasingly benefit from precision diagnosis and treatment. Molecular diagnostics are essential for prognosis assessment and central to precision medicine targeting mutations in genes, such as FGFR2, IDH1, HER2, RET, BRAF, and NTRK. These targeted therapies provide more personalized treatment options in clinical practice. ICIs targeting PD-1/PD-L1 are becoming more prevalent, and new drugs are continuously being developed and updated. Combination therapies based on ICIs may improve patient survival. In addition, genomic and transcriptomic analyses using organoids derived from patients with liver cancer are valuable for predicting and evaluating the sensitivity and resistance to targeted therapies, thereby promoting precision therapy and clinical translation in liver cancer. The exploration of molecular diagnostics to guide precision therapy is rapidly progressing, with emerging biomarkers continually being discovered for their clinical value and potential. These applications include identification and auxiliary diagnosis, drug selection, prognosis assessment, early relapse warning, and resistance monitoring. Further exploration and discovery in these areas are urgently needed to enhance the clinical management of hepatobiliary cancers.

## List of experts (arranged in alphabetical order by the last name)
Aizier Ainiwaer (Comprehensive Liver Cancer Center, The Fifth Medical Center of PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China), Xinyu Bi (Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, National Cancer Center/National Clinical Research Center for Cancer/Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China), Jianqiang Cai (Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, National Cancer Center/National Clinical Research Center for Cancer/Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China), Jing Chen (Liver Failure Treatment and Research Center, The Fifth Medical Center of PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China), Minshan Chen (Department of Liver Surgery, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China), Jiamin Cheng (Comprehensive Liver Cancer Center, The Fifth Medical Center of PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China), Jun Cheng (Institute of Infectious Diseases, Beijing Ditan Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China), Jiuwei Cui (Key Laboratory of Organ Regeneration and Transplantation of Ministry of Education, Cancer Center, First Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin, China), Yingrong Du (Department of Hepatology, The Third People's Hospital of Kunming, Kunming, Yunnan, China), Zhixian Hong (Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The Fifth Medical Center of PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China), Zhiyong Huang (Hepatic Surgery Center, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei China), Weidong Jia (Department of Hepatic Surgery, Anhui Provincial Hospital, The First Affiliated Hospital of USTC, Division of Life Science and Medicine, University of Science and Technology of China, Heifei, Anhui, China), Xiaodong Jia (Department of Oncology, The Fifth Medical Center of PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China), Ming Kuang (Center of Hepato-Pancreato-Biliary Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China), Ren Lang (Department of Hepatobiliary and Pancreaticosplenic Surgery, Beijing Chao-Yang Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China), Wei Li (No.2 People's Hospital of Fuyang City, Fuyang, Anhui, China), Xiufeng Liu (Department of Medical Oncology, Bayi Hospital Affiliated to Nanjing Chinese Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China), Zhenwen Liu (Liver Transplantation Center, The Fifth Medical Center of PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China), Shichun Lu (Faculty of Hepato-Pancreato-Biliary Surgery, Institute of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Key Laboratory of Digital Hepatobiliary Surgery, Chinese People's Liberation Army Medical School, Chinese People's Liberation Army General Hospital, Beijing, China), Yinying Lu (Comprehensive Liver Cancer Center, The Fifth Medical Center of PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China), Li Luo (Department of Oncology, Guihang Guiyang Hospital, Guiyang, Guizhou, China), Jie Pan (Department of Radiology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China), Tao Peng (Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi, China), Liyong Pu (Liver Cancer Research Institute, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China), Honggang Qian (Department of Hepato-Pancreato-Biliary Surgery, Peking University Cancer Hospital & Institute, Beijing, China), Tianqiang Song (Department of Hepatobiliary, Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and Hospital, Tianjin, China), Bin Sun (Center of Interventional Oncology and Liver Diseases, Beijing Youan Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China), Xiaodong Tan (Department of General Surgery, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning, China), Bo Tu (Treatment and Research Center for Infectious Diseases, The Fifth Medical Center of PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China), Hongguang Wang (Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, National Cancer Center/National Clinical Research Center for Cancer/Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China), Liming Wang (Department of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery, The Second Hospital of Dalian Medical University, Dalian, Liaoning, China), Lu Wang (Department of Hepatic Surgery, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center, Shanghai, China), Nanya Wang (Department of Cancer, Cancer Center, The First Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin, China), Qiong Wang (Department of Oncology, Jiangyin People's Hospital, Jiangyin, Jiangsu, China), Feng Xia (Institute of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Southwest Hospital, Army Medical University, Chongqing, China), Song Yang (Center of Hepatology, Beijing Ditan Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China), Hongfang Yin (Department of Pathology, Beijing Tsinghua Chang Gung Hospital, School of Clinical Medicine, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China), Chaohui Yu (Gastroenterology, The First Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China), Hongjiang Yu (Department of Medical Oncology, Tongliao City Hospital, Tongliao, Inner Mongolia, China), Lingxiang Yu (Comprehensive Liver Cancer Center, The Fifth Medical Center of PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China), Yilan Zeng (Department of Clinical Nutrition, Clinical Medical Center of Public Health of Chengdu, Chengdu, Sichuan, China), Zhen Zeng (Department of Liver Disease Medicine, The Fifth Medical Center of PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China), Haoran Zha (Department of Oncology, Rocket Force Medical Center of PLA, Beijing, China), Jialin Zhang (Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The First Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning, China), Meng Zhang (Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Fourth Hospital of Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang, Hebei, China), Ning Zhang (Translational Cancer Research Center, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing, China), Ning Zhang (Senior Department of Liver Disease, The Fifth Medical Center of PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China), Qiang Zhang (Department of Oncology, Fourth People's Hospital of Zibo, Zibo, Shandong, China), Haitao Zhao (Department of Liver Surgery, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Peking Union Medical College and Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, China), Jingmin Zhao (Department of Pathology and Hepatology, The Fifth Medical Center of PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China), Ming Zhao (Department of Minimally Invasive Interventional Therapy, Liver Cancer Study and Service Group, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China), Pan Zhao (Department of Infectious Diseases, The Fifth Medical Center of PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China), Qiwen Zhao (Department of Pathology, The Sixth Medical Center of PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China), Xueke Zhao (Department of Infectious Diseases, The Affiliated Hospital of Guizhou Medical University, Guiyang, Guizhou, China), Yiming Zhao (Department of Hepatic Surgery, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center, Shanghai, China), Xuting Zhi (Department of General Surgery, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, China), Guangde Zhou (Department of Pathology, The Fifth Medical Center of PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China), Zhenyu Zhu (Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The Fifth Medical Center of PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China), Shi Zuo (Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The Affiliated Hospital of Guizhou Medical University, Guiyang, Guizhou, China).

## Authors’ contributions
Aizier Ainiwaer and Jiamin Cheng contributed equally to the work. Aizier Ainiwaer: Writing – original draft, Visualization, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis. Jiamin Cheng: Writing – original draft, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Ren Lang: Formal analysis, Data curation. Tao Peng: Formal analysis, Data curation. Xinyu Bi: Methodology, Investigation. Yinying Lu: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Resources, Project administration, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization. Other experts participated in consensus discussion and suggestions. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that there is no conflicts of interest.

 

## Acknowledgements
This work was funded by the 10.13039/501100001809National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 82272956).
☆Full list of author information is available at the end of the article.