pmcCell RepCell Rep319nihpa101573691Cell reports2211-1247pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleNIHPA Author ManuscriptsPMC10637630PMC10637630.11063763010637630NIHMS19402483765907910.1016/j.celrep.2023.113070NIHMS1940248NIHPA19402481ArticleTMEM127 suppresses tumor development by promoting RET ubiquitination, positioning, and degradation
GuoQianjin ChengZi-Ming Gonzalez-CantúHector RotondiMatthew Huelgas-MoralesGabriela EthirajPurushoth QiuZhijun LefkowitzJonathan SongWan LandryBethany N. LopezHector Estrada-ZunigaCynthia M. GoyalShivi KhanMohammad Aasif WalkerTimothy J. WangExing LiFaqian DingYanli MulliganLois M. AguiarRicardo C.T. DahiaPatricia L.M. 1Division of Hematology/Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of Texas Health San Science Center at Antonio (UTHSCSA), San Antonio, TX, USA2Division of Cancer Biology and Genetics, Cancer Research Institute, Queen’s University, Kingston, ON, Canada3Department Cell Structure and Anatomy, UTHSCSA, San Antonio, TX, USA4Department of Pathology, UTHSCSA, San Antonio, TX, USA5Mays Cancer Center, UTHSCSA, San Antonio, TX, USA6South Texas Veterans Health Care System, Audie Murphy VA Hospital, San Antonio, TX 78229, USA7Lead contact*Correspondence: dahia@uthscsa.eduAUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceptualization, Q.G., P.L.M.D., and R.C.T.A.; snRNA-seq and bioinformatics, Q.G.; molecular studies, Q.G., Z.-M.C., M.R., H.G.C, M.A.K., W.S., B.N.L., C.E.Z., H.K., M.A.K., S.G., P.E., and Z.Q.; mouse models, Q.G., P.E., and Z.Q.; confocal microscopy, Q.G., G.H.-M., W.S., and E.W.; pathology, Y.D. and F.L.; resources, Q.G., H.C.G., H.L., S.G., R.C.T.A., T.J.W., L.M.M., and P.L.M.D.; writing, Q.G., R.C.T.A., and P.L.M.; supervision, P.L.M.D.; funding acquisition, R.C.T.A. and P.L.M.D.
2692023019202342944887811307011307003112023101120231011202322042025https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## SUMMARY
The TMEM127 gene encodes a transmembrane protein of poorly known function that is mutated in pheochromocytomas, neural crest-derived tumors of adrenomedullary cells. Here, we report that, at single-nucleus resolution, TMEM127-mutant tumors share precursor cells and transcription regulatory elements with pheochromocytomas carrying mutations of the tyrosine kinase receptor RET. Additionally, TMEM127-mutant pheochromocytomas, human cells, and mouse knockout models of TMEM127 accumulate RET and increase its signaling. TMEM127 contributes to RET cellular positioning, trafficking, and lysosome-mediated degradation. Mechanistically, TMEM127 binds to RET and recruits the NEDD4 E3 ubiquitin ligase for RET ubiquitination and degradation via TMEM127 C-terminal PxxY motifs. Lastly, increased cell proliferation and tumor burden after TMEM127 loss can be reversed by selective RET inhibitors in vitro and in vivo. Our results define TMEM127 as a component of the ubiquitin system and identify aberrant RET stabilization as a likely mechanism through which TMEM127 loss-of-function mutations cause pheochromocytoma.

## Graphical Abstract

 

## In brief
Guo et al. report that TMEM127 deficiency leads to pheochromocytoma by reducing NEDD4-mediated RET ubiquitination, positioning, and degradation and that the resulting cell proliferation is responsive to RET selective inhibition.

pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptyespmc-prop-open-manuscriptyespmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND

## INTRODUCTION
Pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas (PPGLs) are rare tumors derived from the neural crest that arise from chromaffin cells of the adrenal gland or extra-adrenal paraganglia, respectively. These tumors are known for their high heritability rates and for carrying single driver events that are mutually exclusive. 
TMEM127 is a tumor suppressor gene that we identified as a susceptibility gene to PPGLs through loss-of-function germline mutations. This gene is conserved in vertebrates and encodes a ubiquitously expressed transmembrane protein ; however, the mechanism of TMEM127 tumor suppression remains poorly defined.
Molecular classification of PPGLs has defined discrete clusters that are driven by the causative mutation. PPGLs carrying germline TMEM127 mutations belong to the kinase cluster (also known as “cluster 2”). , A prototypical member of the PPGL kinase cluster includes tumors with RET mutations, suggesting that these two genes might regulate congruent signals. 
We previously showed that TMEM127 loss leads to the activation of mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), a converging hub of various kinase signals, including those related to RET activation, strengthening potential links between TMEM127- and RET-related pathways. We also found that TMEM127 undergoes endocytosis and is associated with the plasma membrane, early endosomes, and lysosomes in response to nutrient challenges. , In contrast, tumor-derived mutations often lead to expression of a diffuse, unstable cytosolic TMEM127 or mutants that are retained on the plasma membrane, supporting its potential role in trafficking through the endomembrane system. Interestingly, TMEM127 was identified to facilitate bacterial infection by promoting the degradation of major histocompatibility complex class II (MHC-II) through ubiquitin-mediated pathways, suggesting a potential mechanism by which TMEM127 can relay extracellular signals.
The RET gene encodes a tyrosine kinase receptor that is expressed in neural crest-derived tissues and the developing kidney. This receptor is activated by a ligand/coreceptor complex, glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF)/GFRα1, which leads to RET dimerization, followed by autophosphorylation and activation of signaling through RAS/mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT, STAT, and PLC-γ pathways. , RET has a broad role in cancer: through germline gain-of-function mutations, it causes multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A (MEN 2A) or type 2B (MEN 2B), associated PPGLs, and medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC). Somatically, RET is mutated in PPGLs and MTCs or can be disrupted by gene fusions in lung and thyroid, and also in pheochromocytomas. , Additionally, overexpression of the wild-type (WT)-RET in breast and pancreatic cancers can result in its abnormal activation. 
Here, we show that TMEM127 deficiency leads to aberrant RET accumulation, activation, and surface expression associated with attenuated NEDD4-mediated RET ubiquitination and degradation. These findings define TMEM127 as a RET antagonist, explaining the similarities between pheochromocytomas driven by RET and TMEM127 mutations.

## RESULTS

## TMEM127-mutant tumors are closely related to RET-mutant tumors by molecular profiling
We reported earlier that PPGLs carrying either RET or TMEM127 mutation display overlapping features. , Clinically, tumors from these two genotypes are preferentially located in the adrenal (pheochromocytomas), as opposed to extra-adrenal paraganglia (i.e., paragangliomas), predominantly secrete epinephrine, the terminal catecholamine produced by chromaffin cells, can occur bilaterally, and rarely progress to metastases. - Transcriptionally, they share a profile related to kinase signaling. - , Thus, we hypothesized that these two genotypes potentially share mechanisms of tumorigenesis. Using gene expression profile on microarrays, we found that TMEM127-mutant pheochromocytomas show similar RET mRNA expression to tumors with RET mutations, in contrast with tumors belonging to the other main group, cluster 1 ( , left). Additionally, this result was independently validated in both our RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) cohort and a publicly available (The Cancer Genome Atlas [TCGA]) dataset ( , right; ). These cohorts lacked normal adrenal medulla; however, based on normal adrenals from a publicly available dataset, RET transcript is decreased in chromaffin cells of cluster 1 tumors, while expression in cluster 2 tumors is more variable and can be similar to normal adrenal medulla ( ), as previously suggested. - 

## TMEM127- and RET-mutant tumors share developmental trajectory and regulatory activation drivers at the single-nucleus level
To gain further insight into TMEM127- and RET-related tumors at single-cell resolution, we generated single-nucleus RNA-seq (snRNA-seq) data from pheochromocytomas carrying these mutations (n = 3 and n = 2, respectively) employing an optimized workflow ( ) and analyzed 35,752 nuclei ( ; ). Bioinformatics was performed as detailed in . , We first used a uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) plot , to visualize the transcriptomes and identified 11 clusters ( and ; ), spanning the range of cell types expected for adrenal glands , , and PPGLs. Expectedly, we found the most abundant cluster to contain chromaffin cells ( and ).
We verified the identity of the clusters containing tumor cells using the InferCNV algorithm to estimate copy number variations (CNVs). This approach revealed chromosome 1p (Chr1p) deletion in the chromaffin-related clusters of four of the five tumors ( , , and - ). Chr1p loss is a well-established structural CNV shared by ~80% of pheochromocytomas belonging to the kinase group. , , Reassuringly, the typical TMEM127 signature of Chr2q loss, encompassing the TMEM127 locus, , was detected in the TMEM127 mutant tumors and was absent from RET tumors ( , , and - ). Schwann cell precursors had been proposed as the originators of 80% of chromaffin cells during mouse adrenal development ; however, in our tumor samples, Schwann cell marker-positive (SCP) nuclei ( and ) did not share the CNVs found in the chromaffin clusters ( - ). These results agree with recent reports of postnatal human pheochromocytomas or lineage-related neuroblastomas tumors and suggest that SCPs may represent differentiated Schwann cells.
In our samples, the neoplastic clusters recognized by the expression of a panel of classic noradrenergic and adrenergic markers, including TH and CHGA, had noticeable substructure, suggesting heterogeneity of these cells ( ). Based on expanded analysis involving other markers of precursor chromaffin cells (for example, CARTPT, CHRNA3, CHRNA7, EIF4A3), , progenitor cells (RTTN, SOX10, ERBB3), neuroblasts (PTPRD, UNC5D), cell cycle genes (BUB1, MKI67, TOP2A), and others, four chromaffin cell (CC) subclusters, CC1 through CC4, were identified ( , and ; ). We found no genotype-exclusive cluster ( ); however, the proportions of cells (nuclei) varied between the RET and TMEM127-related tumor clusters: the TMEM127 tumors were more abundantly distributed in CC2 and the RET tumor nuclei were enriched in CC3, while both genotypes were more similarly represented in CC1 and in the cell cycle marker-enriched CC4 cluster ( and ). To gain insight into the attributes of these four chromaffin clusters, we applied several methods to infer their dynamic ordering. Using SLICE, cluster CC4 showed the highest instability and greater potential to differentiate ( ), supporting a role for this cluster as the “earliest” subpopulation along a hierarchical differentiation trajectory, while the SCP cluster showed the highest stability, consistent with a differentiated, nonneoplastic cell type ( ). Monocle estimated a pseudotime trajectory with CC4 also as the earliest chromaffin tumor cell subpopulation followed by CC1, and then branching into CC2 (enriched in TMEM127-derived tumor cells) or into CC3 (enriched with cells from RET-derived tumors; ). Cytotrace displayed a similar ordering inference, shown by each represented genotype ( ). These results support a similar developmental trajectory for TMEM127- and RET-mutant pheochromocytomas, as previously presumed by clinical observations , and by recent observations. We next explored the genes characteristic of the TMEM127 mutation profile by comparing the signature of CC2 and CC3. We found 127 gene sets differentially expressed between clusters CC2 and CC3 at false discovery rate (FDR) <25% ( ), with enrichment for plasma membrane and cell-cell signaling pathways in the TMEM127 group ( ; ).

## Single-nucleus signature of TMEM127 deficiency is conserved in mice and humans
To expand these observations to a separate in vivo model of TMEM127-associated signature, we generated snRNA-seq data from adrenals of mice lacking Tmem127. These mice are viable and do not develop spontaneous pheochromocytomas/paragangliomas, offering insight into the “preneoplastic” state of the Tmem127-deficient CCs. Using the same protocol of PPGLs ( ), we processed frozen adrenals from three knockout (KO) and three WT adult mice and analyzed 21,274 nuclei ( ), from which we recognized 19 distinct clusters ( and ; ). CCs were distributed into two clusters, one with low expression of Pnmt, the gene encoding phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase, the enzyme that converts norepinephrine into epinephrine and that we referred to as the “immature” chromaffin cluster (ICC–, Pnmt−), and another representing the more “mature” chromaffin markers (mature CCs [MCCs] or Pnmt+) - ). Like the pheochromocytoma snRNA-seq dataset, we did not find a genotype-exclusive cell cluster ( ) but noticed differential proportions between WT and KO samples ( ), with enrichment of MCC/Pnmt+ and stromal cell KO, compared to WT, nuclei ( ). This pattern aligns with the biochemical profile of TMEM127-mutant human pheochromocytomas, which express PNMT and are predominantly epinephrine-producing tumors. Analysis of cell cycle genes showed higher G2/M representation in MCC/Pnmt+, but not ICC(Pnmt−), of KO nuclei, suggesting an enhanced proliferative potential ( ; Chi-squared test, p = 0.012). We confirmed an enrichment for genes involved in proliferative pathways in the KO MCCs ( ; ), suggesting that these cells are primed for growth, while stromal ( ) or SCP ( ) cells did not show proliferative preference in KO cells. We next used SCENIC to identify potential regulatory networks that might characterize MCCs. The MCC regulon showed activation of various transcription factors, including those related to the immediate-early gene (IEG) response (e.g., Egr1) and, as expected, those associated with the neural crest, such as Phox2b ( ). The Egr1 regulatory profile was uniquely enriched in KO MCCs ( and ). We validated the Egr1 expression and location in the mouse adrenal medulla by confocal microscopy ( ). To relate this finding with human tumors, we examined the EGR1 expression in pheochromocytoma snRNA-seq. We found that EGR1 was highly expressed in the tumor clusters, especially the developmentally “precursor” clusters (CC4 and CC1; ). We extended this observation to a publicly available snRNA-seq cohort and found that pheochromocytomas belonging to the kinase/cluster 2 group, including TMEM127 and RET mutants, show a trend toward higher EGR1 transcript compared to those in cluster 1 ( ). Concordant results were seen in a separate cohort of primary tumors showing higher EGR1 protein levels in cluster 2 ( ) and agree with previous observations supporting the role of EGR1 in RET-related tumorigenesis. - Likewise, the “MCC signature” of the KO mice ( ) was also enriched in the CC4 and CC1 clusters of the human PPGL ( ) using AUCell. 
These results suggest conserved mechanisms between the signatures of Tmem127-KO mouse adrenals and human pheochromocytomas. Moreover, these analyses reveal shared early developmental tumor populations (CC4, CC1) and transcriptional regulators such as EGR1 in tumors carrying RET or TMEM127 mutations. Overall, our data indicate strong similarity between tumor cells with RET or TMEM127 mutations at the single-cell transcription level and, together with the enriched signatures of plasma membrane and cell-cell signaling in TMEM127 mutant pheochromocytomas, suggest that mechanistic distinctions between these two genotypes may occur predominantly at a post-transcriptional level.

## TMEM127 mutations or loss result in RET protein accumulation and signaling activation
To explore post-transcriptional features of TMEM127- and RET-related tumors, we examined protein extracts and found that samples from cluster 2 had higher RET protein levels than those from cluster 1 tumors ( and ). These findings were confirmed by RET immunohistochemistry (IHC) of archival PPGLs ( ). In our cohort, TMEM127-mutant tumors had generally higher RET levels than other cluster 2 samples ( and ).
To evaluate this observation, and in the absence of a well-established human pheochromocytoma cell line, we used CRISPR-Cas9 to create TMEM127 KO SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells, which are also adrenomedullary in origin and have been widely employed in studies of RET signaling. - We generated polyclonal TMEM127-KO SH-SY5Y cells with guide RNAs targeting TMEM127’s exons 2 (T2-KO) or exon 4 (T4-KO) that we validated previously in other cell lines. , , We found that both T2-KO and T4-KO cells had elevated RET levels ( ), replicating the findings of TMEM127-mutant pheochromocytomas.
Furthermore, adrenals from whole-body Tmem127-KO mice also showed higher Ret protein expression than WT counterparts ( ). In these adrenals, Ret expression remained restricted to the adrenomedullary cells ( ), as in previous reports. , In contrast, Ret transcript levels were not significantly different between Tmem127-KO and control adrenals ( ), nor between KO and WT SH-SY5Y cells ( ).
Reconstitution of KO SH-SY5Y cells with TMEM127-WT was sufficient to reverse RET accumulation, while expression of TMEM127-G37R, a patient-derived loss-of-function mutant, did not have the same effect ( ), in support of a requirement for functional TMEM127 for this effect. RET accumulation was associated with high RET autophosphorylation in TMEM127-mutant primary tumors ( ). Likewise, phosphorylation of RET and its downstream signaling effectors AKT and ERK/MAPK was also increased in TMEM127-KO cells exposed to the RET ligand GDNF ( ). These results suggested that RET signals are hyperactive after TMEM127 loss, possibly due to the higher abundance of RET in these cells.
Together, three independent models of TMEM127 deficiency (i.e., human pheochromocytomas, human cell lines, and mouse adrenals) support increased RET protein accumulation as a conserved feature associated with TMEM127 loss.

## TMEM127 affects RET turnover and degradation
To gain insights into the mechanisms through which WT TMEM127 might downregulate RET, we evaluated RET clearance after protein synthesis inhibition with cycloheximide (CHX). RET protein was undetectable 8 h after CHX exposure in TMEM127-WT cells but was clearly visible in cells lacking TMEM127 ( ), suggesting that TMEM127 acts at the level of RET degradation.
Additionally, while two RET bands of 175 and 155 kDa were detectable in control SH-SY5Y cells, TMEM127-KO cells showed higher levels of both, with predominance of the larger RET band ( , , and ). The 175-kDa band corresponds to mature, fully glycosylated RET, which is preferentially expressed at the cell surface, and the 155-kDa band represents immature, partially glycosylated RET located predominantly at the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and Golgi. , Primary tumors with TMEM127 mutant, like RET mutants, also expressed predominantly the larger RET band ( , longer exposure), suggesting that this was not a cell culture artifact. The higher abundance of 175-kDa RET might imply that TMEM127 functions at the maturation step of RET processing or RET localization. To examine these alternatives, we evaluated the ER to Golgi transition, the site of initial RET maturation, by exposing these cells to an inhibitor of this step, brefeldin A. Brefeldin A treatment led to induction of BiP, a resident ER protein that is activated by ER stress and ER-Golgi transport modifiers. Expectedly, control cells showed a shift toward the immature RET band after brefeldin A, while KO cells had virtually no change ( ), suggesting that the RET accumulation occurred at a post-Golgi level. We also established that the 175-kDa RET of KO cells corresponded to the fully glycosylated mature RET ( ) and not to a distinct, aberrant posttranslational modification by exposing cell lysates to peptide-N-glycosidase F (PnGase F), , which hydrolyzed N-glycosylation sites and recovered unglycosylated RET (120 kDa) in both control and TMEM127-KO cells.
RET glycosylation at the Golgi is pH sensitive, and we previously reported that vATPase-dependent acidification is required for TMEM127 association with lysosomal proteins. Therefore, we used the vATPase inhibitor bafilomycin to test if the RET accumulation in TMEM127-KO cells was dependent on pH-sensitive membrane vesicles such as the lysosome and Golgi. , Bafilomycin led to RET increase in control cells but had minimal impact in TMEM127-KO cells ( ). Similar results were obtained with the lysosome inhibitors chloroquine ( ) and leupeptin ( ). Addition of chloroquine to TMEM127-KO cells reconstituted with TMEM127 partially recovered RET accumulation ( ). Conversely, the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib did not lead to RET accumulation in control or KO cells ( ). These findings, together with the brefeldin experiments ( ), support a post-Golgi impact of TMEM127 toward RET and suggest that TMEM127 modifies RET lysosomal degradation.

## TMEM127 affects RET distribution to the cell surface
As both TMEM127 , - and RET undergo endocytosis and are detected at various endomembrane vesicles, we evaluated whether loss of TMEM127 might affect RET membrane association and detected no RET in soluble cell fractions of TMEM127-KO SH-SY5Y cells ( ). We next investigated if TMEM127 deficiency affected RET distribution within membrane domains using confocal microscopy. In SH-SY5Y-KO cells, endogenous RET showed higher colocalization with the cell surface marker CD56 than control cells ( ). This was confirmed by expression of a RET-mCherry construct, which showed significantly higher levels of cell surface association in TMEM127-deficient compared to control SH-SY5Y cells, as measured by colocalization with a different surface marker, wheat germ agglutinin (WGA) ( ).
These results were replicated in an independent cell line, HeLa, modified with the same TMEM127-KO guide RNA. HeLa cells have a larger cytoplasmic area, amenable to distinctive imaging and quantification of signals. Moreover, these cells showed the expected pattern of colocalization of RET and TMEM127 with early endosome and lysosomal vesicles , - , , ( ) and measurable modulation of RET levels by TMEM127 genotype modification, similar to SH-SY5Y cells ( ). In HeLaTMEM127-KO cells, RET-mCherry expression was also shifted to the surface, and this distribution was rescued by re-expression of WT-TMEM127, but not by a membrane-associated TMEM127 mutant derived from a patient with pheochromocytoma ( ). Additionally, cells lacking TMEM127 had significantly lower levels of endosomal and lysosomal RET compared to control cells, as measured by decreased association of RET with EEA1 ( ) and with LAMP1 ( ). These findings, in combination with our results above, are consistent with an effect of TMEM127 in modifying RET subcellular distribution and movement through the endosome and lysosome.

## TMEM127 and RET interact in a complex
To examine the generality of these findings, we also evaluated the expression of RET in HEK293FT cells genetically modified using the same TMEM127 guide RNA approach and tested whether TMEM127 re-expression was capable of downregulating functionally altered RET, using the variant forms listed in , which we validated by GDNF and GFRα1 exposure and measurement of phosphorylated ERK (p-ERK) ( ). We found that an oncogenic RET mutant that is constitutively active and capable of self-dimerizing, RET C634R, the most commonly mutated residue in pheochromocytomas, was as efficiently suppressed by TMEM127 as WT-RET ( ). Likewise, TMEM127 expression was capable of reducing the levels of a catalytically dead RET mutant, K758M ( ), and of a truncated construct encoding the first 1,013 amino acids of RET, which retained its catalytic domain but lacked key residues carrying the RET degron site and the docking site for adaptor proteins and downstream activation ( ). , , These experiments suggest that TMEM127 targets RET independently of its kinase activity or critical C-tail signaling domains.
These results with truncated RET might also suggest that TMEM127 affects the two main alternatively spliced isoforms, RET9 and RET51, as these forms differ only at the C-terminal amino acids, downstream of residue 1,013 ( ). Our experiments above were performed with a construct expressing RET51, so we next evaluated whether TMEM127 affected RET9. These two isoforms share many signaling properties but also have unique trafficking, turnover, response to ligand exposure, and distinct biological contexts: RET9 is relevant during development and RET51 is the main isoform expressed in oncogenic RET mutations. , , , , , We found that both RET9 and RET51 isoforms were modulated by TMEM127 ( ), consistent with the findings of RET 1–1,013 construct ( ).
We also examined these two isoforms in SH-SY5Y cells. In the absence of isoform-specific RET antibodies to evaluate endogenous levels of RET9 and RET51 proteins, we transduced the same constructs used in HEK293FT cells and detected each isoform with a tag antibody (myc). We found that, while both RET51 and RET9 accumulated in KO cells ( ), the increase in RET51 levels was more marked than that of RET9, and this was independent of the efficiency of delivery of these two ectopic constructs to cells ( ), or changes in isoform-specific RET transcript ( ). As RET51 is the most abundant isoform expressed at the cell surface, , this may account for the difference in accumulation between these two isoforms in TMEM127 deficiency. Our results suggest that TMEM127 downregulates both RET isoforms at the post-transcriptional level and these findings are conserved across different cell lineages.
Based on the broad effect of TMEM127 toward several RET forms, we considered whether TMEM127 and RET might interact. Using coimmunoprecipitation experiments in HEK293FT cells expressing both TMEM127 and RET, we found that FLAG-TMEM127 was detected in RET-myc pull-down lysates, along with GRB2, a known RET binding partner ( ). Reciprocally, GFP-TMEM127 immunoprecipitation (IP) ( ) recovered RET-myc. Of greater physiological relevance, IP of endogenous RET in SH-SY5Y cells recovered endogenous TMEM127 ( ). Additionally, we found that catalytically inactive RET (K758M)and RET 1–1,013 co-immunoprecipitated TMEM127 ( and ), suggesting that the interaction between TMEM127 and RET does not require its kinase activation or C-terminal domains.

## TMEM127 PxxY motifs are functionally relevant
Our earlier experiments identified functionally relevant domains for endocytosis and subcellular localization spanning amino acids 203–211 of the TMEM127 C terminus ( ). Closer inspection of downstream amino acids revealed two putative PxxY (also known as PPxY or PY) motifs ( ) involving amino acids 233–236, encoding the canonical PPAY, and a potential second motif spanning residues 221–224 (PAEY). PY motifs are recognition binding sites for WW domain-containing proteins, including prominently the HECT family of E3 ubiquitin ligases. - Recently, TMEM127 was identified in a screen of modifiers of Salmonella infection and its C-terminal domain contributed to TMEM127 association with the HECT-E3 ligase WWP2 to facilitate ubiquitin-mediated degradation of MHC-II, thus enabling cellular entry of the pathogen. We thus assessed the ability of the two putative C-terminal PY motifs of TMEM127 to reduce RET levels. Consistent with the functional relevance of these motifs, expression of TMEM127-Y236A, TMEM127-Y224A, and double (Y224A/Y236A) mutants in TMEM127-KO cells, while still capable of reducing RET levels relative to an empty vector control, were significantly less efficient in reversing RET accumulation compared to the expression of WT-TMEM127 ( and ). We confirmed the impact of the Y236A mutation on RET levels in SH-SY5Y-KO cells at baseline or after GDNF stimulation ( ). Additionally, we found that the TMEM127-Y236A mutant retained a punctate profile but had significantly higher expression at the cell surface than WT-TMEM127, and nearly as much as an endocytic-deficient TMEM127 mutant, M214fs, a plasma membrane-bound variant derived from a patient with germline TMEM127 mutation ( ), suggesting that the Y236A mutation impairs TMEM127 internalization. Notably, the Y236A mutant was deficient in reversing the RET cell surface profile observed in TMEM127-KO cells ( ), in further support of its functional relevance. Interestingly, neither Y236A nor the double PY mutant (Y224A/Y236A) prevented interaction between TMEM127 and RET ( and ), suggesting that these residues are not the main interacting site for RET-TMEM127 association. Together, these results point to the relevance of the TMEM127 PY motifs for regulation of RET abundance but not to its association with the receptor.

## TMEM127 recruits NEDD4 and targets RET for ubiquitination
In view of these findings, we hypothesized that TMEM127 might affect RET abundance through ubiquitination. To investigate this hypothesis, we performed ubiquitin IP in WT TMEM127 or KO HEK293FT cells ectopically expressing RET and the GFRα1 coreceptor, a model that recapitulates GDNF-mediated RET activation followed by its ubiquitination. In these experiments, RET ubiquitination levels were lower in TMEM127-KO cells than in WT ( ). Reconstitution of KO cells with WT TMEM127 increased RET ubiquitination, while this effect was blunted in KO cells expressing the TMEM127-Y236A mutant ( ). These findings suggested that TMEM127 alters RET ubiquitination.
We reasoned that NEDD4, the founder member of the HECT-E3 ligase family, active in neural tissue, , was a candidate to mediate this modification, since it had been previously reported to interact with, and ubiquitinate, RET9. We confirmed this earlier finding by recovering RET9 from NEDD4 IP in cells that expressed TMEM127 ( ) and discovered that RET51 also interacted with NEDD4 ( ). Furthermore, concordant with a potential role of NEDD4 on regulation of RET abundance, in cells rescued with TMEM127, co-expression of NEDD4-WT further downregulated RET levels, while co-expression of a dominant negative, catalytically inactive version of NEDD4 carrying a C867A mutation on the HECT domain, NEDD4-DD, did not ( ). Conversely, expression of either NEDD4-WT or NEDD4-DD had no significant impact on RET levels in cells lacking TMEM127 ( ). Next, we found that, in TMEM127-WT cells, expression of NEDD4, but not NEDD4-DD, increased RET51 ubiquitination levels, in support of RET51 acting as a NEDD4 substrate ( ). In contrast, in cells lacking TMEM127, expression of NEDD4-WT did not enhance RET ubiquitination and mimicked the effect of NEDD4-DD ( ). These results suggest that TMEM127 is required for NEDD4 to alter RET ubiquitination and abundance. Notably, although NEDD4 expression failed to increase RET ubiquitination in TMEM127-KO cells, induction of ubiquitination by GDNF was still observed in these cells ( ), suggesting that the effect of TMEM127 toward RET ubiquitination may be selective and implying that other E3 ligase(s) remain active. This is further suggested by the observation that NEDD4-DD did not completely recapitulate the effect of TMEM127 loss on RET abundance ( ) or ubiquitination ( ). However, we found no binding between TMEM127 and CBL ( ), which has been recognized to have ubiquitin activity toward RET. , 
We determined that NEDD4 was capable of co-immunoprecipitating TMEM127 regardless of the presence of RET ( ). In contrast, mutation of one (Y236) or both (Y224/Y236) PY motifs at the C terminus of TMEM127 disrupted its interaction with NEDD4, either in the presence ( ) or absence of RET ( ). Similar results were obtained with the reciprocal pull-down of GFP-TMEM127 and its mutant forms ( ), suggesting that the PY motifs are likely the binding sites between TMEM127 and NEDD4. In contrast, neither RET9 ( ) nor RET51 ( ) was capable of immunoprecipitating NEDD4 or its catalytically dead version in the absence of TMEM127, suggesting that TMEM127, through its PY sites, bridges the RET-NEDD4 interaction. Furthermore, the defective ability of TMEM127 Y236A to reverse the RET surface distribution of TMEM127-KO cells shown above ( ) supports NEDD4 as an effector of the actions of TMEM127 on RET subcellular positioning.
NEDD4 predominantly catalyzes K63-linkage polyubiquitination, and these modifications have been associated with endosomal trafficking and lysosomal degradation. To gain insight into the type of ubiquitin linkages associated with RET in these cells, we evaluated K63 and K48 polyubiquitination in these samples. We found that K63-linkage polyubiquitination followed a similar profile to that of TMEM127-KO before and after TMEM127 reconstitution, while K48 did not show TMEM127-dependent variation ( ). Consistent with a K63-mediated ubiquitination and its role on lysosomal degradation, TMEM127-KO cells had low lysosomal RET levels ( ), and this profile could not be rescued by cells expressing TMEM127-Y236A, which are incapable of NEDD4 association and are thus ubiquitination defective ( ). These results suggest that TMEM127 coordinates NEDD4-mediated RET ubiquitination and lysosomal degradation.

## Oncogenic effects of TMEM127 loss are RET dependent
To determine whether the tumorigenic phenotype derived from TMEM127 deficiency was related to excessive RET accumulation, we examined cell proliferation in SH-SY5Y cells and found that TMEM127-KO cells had higher proliferation rate ( ) and viability ( ) than control cells. Notably, treatment of TMEM127-KO cells with the clinical grade RET inhibitor selpercatinib led to significant growth suppression ( and ) and RET signaling inhibition ( ). To provide further confirmation of RET dependence, we knocked out TMEM127 in SH-SY5Y RET-KO cells using the same guides as in our original SH-SY5Y cells (KO-2 and KO-4; ). The viability of these cells was not modified by TMEM127-KO or selpercatinib treatment ( ), supporting RET as a critical TMEM127 target in this model.
Last, we performed in vivo experiments by generating SH-SY5Y-WT or TMEM127-KO xenografts in nude mice. Mice engrafted with TMEM127-KO SH-SY5Y cells developed larger tumors ( ) and, upon sacrificing, displayed larger tumor burden ( ) than those injected with TMEM127-WT control cells. Treatment with selpercatinib for 8 days caused significant regression of TMEM127-KO-derived tumors ( , , and ). These results suggest that TMEM127 deficiency leads to RET-dependent tumorigenesis.

## DISCUSSION
In this study, we show that TMEM127 acts as a tumor suppressor by antagonizing the RET kinase receptor signals. Our data indicate that TMEM127 loss phenocopies RET activation in CCs, providing a compelling mechanism for the clinical similarities and tight molecular association between pheochromocytomas with mutually exclusive mutations in these genes. - , , Our data suggest that TMEM127 antagonism of RET is a route through which TMEM127 suppresses pheochromocytoma development ( ).
Transcription similarities between PPGLs with mutually exclusive RET and TMEM127 mutations were recognized earlier. , Our results show that these similarities are evolutionarily conserved in mice and are reproduced at the single-cell resolution. The tumor cells from these two genotypes share similar transcription trajectory and common regulatory drivers, while preserving individual genomic properties such as chromosomal disruptions, as recently corroborated in pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas of various genotypes. Our findings point to posttranslational events as dominant drivers of the distinction between TMEM127- and RET-related tumorigenesis.
We discovered that TMEM127 controls RET degradation, predominantly of its mature form, which is preferentially located on the cell surface and is primed for activation. In our model, TMEM127 also remains capable of suppressing catalytically inactive RET, or RET lacking its degron sequence at the C terminus. This is distinct from other regulatory mechanisms that couple ligand-mediated RET engagement and activation to a termination signal through ubiquitination. , It remains to be determined whether TMEM127 may serve to regulate baseline levels of the receptor.
Our findings reveal that TMEM127 loss leads to increased surface localization and reduced lysosomal degradation of RET and that TMEM127 recruits NEDD4 to RET ( ). NEDD4-mediated ubiquitination has been associated preferentially with K63 linkage, a modification that is coupled with nonproteasomal outcomes, including trafficking and degradation by the lysosome. , , This is consistent with our observation that RET lysosomal localization is restored in TMEM127-KO cells reconstituted with WT-TMEM127 but not by a mutant that prevents TMEM127 recruitment of NEDD4 to RET. As RET ubiquitination is implicated in multiple signaling events, including internalization, sorting, and trafficking, , the specific step(s) in which TMEM127 is involved will require additional investigation.
Multiple E3 ligases can target the same substrate, , and CBL, a member of the RING-E3 ligases, has also been associated with RET ubiquitination. , However, we found no evidence of TMEM127 interaction with CBL, suggesting that the actions of TMEM127 toward RET ubiquitination may be selective. However, as NEDD4 catalytically inactive mutant does not fully recapitulate TMEM127 loss, other members of the HECT-E3 ligases, such as WWP2, may partner with TMEM127 to modulate target proteins. Besides the PY domains of TMEM127, the precise site(s) of association with RET and NEDD4 and specific determinants of how these interactions are regulated should be investigated in future studies.
While RET expression is tissue restricted, TMEM127 is ubiquitously expressed, , suggesting that it may have other partners in tissues that do not express RET, as exemplified by its role with WWP2, in the degradation of MHC-II in Salmonella-infected cells, and supportive of a broader role for TMEM127 in recruiting E3 ligases to distinct substrates in other cells. Of interest, this putative E3 ligase adaptor role might also be mechanistically involved in previously reported lysosomal and metabolic phenotypes that we reported in Tmem127-KO mice. , The nature of the target proteins and the specificities of the regulation of TMEM127-E3 ubiquitin ligase pairing in other tissues and cellular contexts remain to be investigated.
The role of E3 ubiquitin ligases in cancer has been previously recognized. In the context of pheochromocytomas, the VHL tumor suppressor gene functions as the substrate-recognition pocket for CRL2, a member of the Cullin RING-E3 ubiquitin ligase complex. CRL2VHL targets hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs) HIF1α and HIF2α for degradation by the proteosome. The HIF2α-encoding gene, EPAS1, is also mutated in pheochromocytomas, and loss-of-function mutations of VHL or gain-of-function mutations of EPAS1 confer a characteristic transcription profile of aberrant activation of HIF and its downstream signals, known as pseudohypoxic/cluster 1 pheochromocytomas. The molecular mechanisms of RET and TMEM127 reported in our study highlight the broader significance of the ubiquitin system in adrenomedullary cell tumorigenesis and extend it to the kinase group.
In summary, we have uncovered a relevant TMEM127 cellular target in pheochromocytomas and suggest that TMEM127-mutant tumors represent a previously unrecognized model of RET-related oncogenesis, which may be amenable to targeted therapy with clinical grade RET inhibitors. 

## Limitations of the study
The lack of human pheochromocytoma cell lines to evaluate loss of TMEM127 is a limitation of our study. This work did not address how the RET-TMEM127-NEDD4 axis is engaged or terminated under physiological conditions. It is possible that other E3 ubiquitin ligases also contribute to RET regulation besides NEDD4, thus explaining that functional forms of NEDD4 expression do not fully recapitulate the RET accumulation levels found in cells lacking TMEM127. Other cellular factors required to enable a more complete assessment of the regulation of the RET-TMEM127-NEDD4 axis may not have been present in our in vitro system. As effective commercial antibodies were not available to detect endogenous TMEM127 by confocal microscopy, we could not investigate its subcellular localization at the endogenous level.

## STAR★METHODS

## RESOURCE AVAILABILITY

## Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to the lead contact, Patricia L. Dahia, MD, PhD (dahia@uthscsa.edu).

## Materials availability
This study did not generate new unique reagents.

## Data and code availability
Bulk RNA-seq data and single nuclei RNAseq data from human tumors and mouse adrenals have been deposited at the Gene Expression Omnibus database and are available as of the date of publication. Accession numbers are listed in the . This paper does not report original code. Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request.

## EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT PARTICIPANT DETAILS

## Human samples
Samples from 70 pheochromocytomas or paragangliomas confirmed histologically, were obtained from discarded tumor material from surgery, and from blood or saliva from patients who provided informed consent to participate in our repository study (NCT03160274), approved by the University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio institutional review board (IRB). This repository is open for enrollment of patients with pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma regardless of age, gender, ethnicity, race, or genotype.
DNA from germline or frozen tumors was isolated using standard method by Qiagen Genomic-Tip (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). All samples underwent genetic screening for pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma susceptibility genes using standard protocols based on Sanger sequencing or multiparallel sequencing. - A summary of the general features of these samples is shown on .
Additionally, we included both genotype and expression data from publicly available datasets from normalized data from our earlier cohorts (GSE2841 and GSE19987), and from the TCGA cohort (RNA-seq values quantified using HTSEQ-count for the TCGA PCPG cohort 3were downloaded from the NCI Genomic Data Commons (GDC) Website.

## Animals
Animal studies were performed under a protocol approved by the University of Texas Health San Antonio (UTHSA) IACUC (Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee), and in compliance with all relevant ethical regulations for animal testing and research. Mice with recombinant Tmem127 allele (Tmem127 fix) were generated by crossing Tmem127 flx/+ mice with CMV-Cre transgenic mice of C57BL/6 J background (Tg(CMV-cre)1Cgn; Jackson Laboratory). 
Tmem127−/+ heterozygotes were mated to obtain WT and KO mice. Adrenal glands were obtained from adult WT and KO mice, 10–11 months of age. Tissue was frozen at −80C until processed for Western blot, embedded in OCT, and sectioned at 4μm in a cryostat to process for confocal microscopy, or the nuclei were processed for single nuclei RNAseq. Process for Western blot, confocal microscopy, and single nuclei RNAseq are described in the respective subsections below.

## Xenografts
SH-SY5Y-RET(WT)/CRISPR-control (TMEM127-WT) and SH-SY5Y-RET(WT)/CRISPR-TMEM127-T4 (TMEM127-KO) cells were diluted 1:1 into Geltrex (LDEV-Free RGF Basement Membrane Matrix, Gibco, A1413202) and inoculated subcutaneously (1 × 107 cells/0.2 mL/each) into the right flank of 5–7 week old nude mice (14 females and 13 males, Jackson Laboratories, #002019). Tumors were allowed to grow for 15 days, after which mice carrying TMEM127-KO cells were randomized into groups of 9 mice, each to receive vehicle or selpercatinib (30 mg/kg) intraperitoneally twice a day. Tumors were measured with a caliper every other day , and tumor volume was estimated using the formula , where is the tumor volume, is the tumor length, and is the tumor width. Mice were sacrificed after 8 days of treatment (24 days post inoculation), and tumors were dissected and weighed. Statistical analysis was performed using the two-sided Student’s t-test (tumor volume in vivo) or Mann–Whitney test (tumor weight).

## Cell lines
HEK-293FT cells (obtained from ThermoFisher/Invitrogen Cat#R70007) were cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin in a humidified 37°C incubator with 5% CO2. HEK-293FT TMEM127-KO cells were generated by using CRISPR/Cas9 lentiCRISPR v2, a gift from Feng Zhang (Addgene plasmid # 52961) using two separate guide RNAs targeting exons 2 (T2) and 4 (T4) of TMEM127, and stable polyclonal populations were selected with puromycin. , 
SH-SY5Y neural crest derived human cell line of neuroblastoma lineage, a gift from Dr. Lois Mulligan and her lab at Queens University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada, originally obtained from ATCC (Cat#CRL-2266) were cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin in a humidified 37°C incubator with 5% CO2. SH-SY5Y TMEM127-KO cells were also generated by using the same constructs as those applied to HEK293FT cells above. Stable polyclonal populations were selected with puromycin or by GFP sorting (MSCV or GFP-expressing constructs).
SH-SY5Y RET KO cells have been previously reported and were a gift from Dr. Lois Mulligan. TMEM127 guide RNAs targeting exons 2 and 4 were subcloned into pL-CRISPR.EFS.GFP, a gift from Benjamin Ebert (Addgene plasmid #57818) and sorted by GFP to establish stable polyclonal populations.
HeLa cells were obtained from ATCC (Cat# CCL-2) were genetically modified using the TMEM127 guides above, cells stably expressing empty lentiCRISPR v2 (WT) and TMEM127 ex4 guide (KO-T4) were used for confocal experiments.

## METHOD DETAILS

## RNA-seq analysis
Total RNA was isolated using TRIzol reagent kit following the manufacturer’s protocol (Invitrogen). Thirty samples were used for RNAseq processed at Novogene (Beijing, China). Sequencing libraries were generated using NEBNext Ultra TM RNA Library Prep Kit for Illumina (NEB, USA) using 1 μg of total RNA per tumor, following manufacturer’s recommendations at Novogene. Paired-end clean reads were aligned to the reference genome (hg38) using STAR, HTSeq v0.6.1 was used to count the read numbers mapped for each gene, and fusion detection was performed using the STAR-Fusion. Variant calling was performed with GATK HaplotypeCaller adjusted to a Phred-scaled confidence threshold of 20, as reported (https://github.com/gatk-workfiows/gatk3-4-rnaseq-germline-snps-indels). Summary information about the tumor samples is provided in .

## Preparation of single-nuclei suspensions
The ‘tween with salts and tris’ (TST) method was used to isolate nuclei. A fragment of approximately ~10-20mg of frozen pheochromocytoma tissue or a pair of mouse whole adrenals were placed into a well of a 6-well plate on ice with 1 mL of TST buffer (146 mM NaCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 21 mM MgCl2, 1 mM CaCl2, 0.03% Tween 20, 0.01% BSA in nuclease-free water). The tissue was then chopped using scissors for 10 min. The homogenized solution was then filtered through a 70 μm Falcon cell strainer, and additional 1 mL TST buffer was used to wash the cell strainer. Additional TST buffer was added to bring the total volume up to 5 mL. Sample was transferred into a 15 mL conical tube and centrifuged at 500g for 5 min at 4°C in a swinging bucket centrifuge, and the pellet was suspended in ST buffer (146 mM NaCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 21 mM MgCl2, 1 mM CaCl2 in nuclease-free water). The nuclei solution was filtered through a 35 μm Falcon cell strainer twice, stained with 4′9,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) and directly sorted using Flow Activated Nuclei/Cell Sorting with a FACSAriaII instrument. After sorting, the nuclei were suspended in NSB buffer (1XPBS without Mg2+ or Ca2+,1% BSA,0.2U/μL RNase Inhibitor) for immediate library construction using 10X Genomics.

## SnRNAseq library generation and data preprocessing
snRNA-seq was performed with the 10x Genomics Chromium Single Cell 3′ Kit (v.3.3) according to standard protocol. Libraries were sequenced on an Illumina NovaSeq 6000 or NextSeq 550 sequencing platform. Cell Ranger v.5.0.0 (10x Genomics) was used to align the sequencing reads to the hg38 human or mm10 mouse reference genome to build and distinguish cells from the background and generate count tables of unique molecular identifiers (UMIs) for each gene per cell, in which intronic counts were included.
For the human tumors, we captured a total of 40,645 single nuclei with high integrity, and a median of 2,044 genes was sequenced per nucleus ( ). An average of 49% of reads confidently mapped to introns and an average of 66% of reads mapped to a pre-mRNA reference transcriptome. Quality control parameters are displayed on .
For mouse adrenals we obtained a total of 21,274 nuclei ( nuclei per WT and 3,345 nuclei per KO sample. Other parameters are displayed on .

## snRNAseq data processing and quality control
The R package Seurat v.4.0.0 was used to calculate quality control metrics Nuclei were removed from the downstream analysis if fewer than 500 distinct genes, or more than 20% or 5% of reads mapping to mitochondrial genes and ribosome genes were detected. Genes that were expressed in fewer than three cells were removed.
The Seurat package was also used for dimensionality reduction, clustering, and visualization. The count matrix was log normalized and multiplied by the scale factor 10,000. The Seurat FindVariableGenes function was used to define highly variable genes that were used as input to principal component analysis in which the top 2000 variable genes were chosen. Normalized data were scaled, and elbow plots were generated to determine which principal components to be used in the downstream analysis. Uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) embeddings were calculated using these principal components as input and cells were clustered using the FindClusters function. Stable clusters were identified as clusters insensitive to small changes in the resolution parameter. Published postnatal human adrenal and neuroblastomas or pheochromocytomas were used as reference to classify cell types.

## snRNAseq cell cycle analysis
Data from the chromaffin, SCP, stromal nuclei of human tumors and mouse cells were scored according to the expression of G2/M and S phase markers provided by Seurat in which Seurat CellCycleScoring function was applied.

## snRNAseq gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA)
We used FindMarkers to find the genes that are different between WT and KO mouse clusters and TMEM127 and RET tumor clusters (Log2FC > 0.5, BH-adj. P-value<0.05). Differentially expressed genes were used to run the pre-ranked GSEA analysis on the GSEA v4.3.2 provided by Molecular Signature Database (MSigDB) gene ontology gene sets, and we considered significantly enriched those gene sets that met a threshold of normalized enrichment score (NES) > 1.5 or < −1.5 and Nominal p value <0.05.

## snRNAseq copy number inference
R package InferCNV v.1.3.3 (cutoff = 0.1, denoise = TRUE) was processed, all cell types, except for chromaffin cells and SCPs, were used as reference cells. (inferCNV of the Trinity CTAT Project. https://github.com/broadinstitute/inferCNV)

## Transcription factor activity analysis
The SCENIC analysis was run using default parameters on mouse single nuclei that passed the filtering, using the 24-thousand motifs database for RcisTarget from https://resources.aertslab.org/cistarget/motif2tf/motifs-v9-nr.mgi-m0.001-o0.0.tbl. The input matrix was the normalized expression matrix output from Seurat.

## SLICE analysis
Evaluation of differentiation potential (or entropy) of each nucleus from the chromaffin and SCP clusters was computed using the R package SLICE to order single nuclei by their differentiation potencies using default parameters. One hundred iterations were used to calculate the entropy.

## Cytotrace analysis
We used CytoTRACE (cellular trajectory reconstruction analysis using gene counts and expression) approach to recover the differentiation and maturation state of chromaffin cells and SCPs in our dataset. We further visualized the maturation state of chromaffin cells and SCPs on the UMAP embeddings generated previously in Seurat.

## Pseudotime trajectory analysis by Monocle3
The monocle3 R package was used to generate chromaffin cells pseudotime trajectories. Nuclei were ordered in pseudotime using the learn graph, followed by the ordered cells’ function. Based on the differentiation potential, the top 10 cells showing the highest entropy value in CC4 cluster were selected as the starting point for the trajectory.

## RNA isolation and real-time PCR
Total RNA from human tumors, cell lines or mouse adrenals was isolated using TRIzol reagent kit following the manufacturer’s protocol (Invitrogen). RNA was converted into cDNA using the High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription kit and random hexamers (ThermoFisher) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Primer pairs were designed for human and mouse RET isoforms (see for sequences), and reference gene accordingly. SYBRGreen (Bio-Rad) was used for quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) in a QuantStudio6 instrument (ThermoFisher). Expression levels were calculated using the delta-delta Ct method.

## Constructs, transfections, and transductions
The following constructs were purchased from VectorBuilder Inc (Illinois, USA) using a lentiviral backbone under a EF1A promoter (pLV): wild type RET 51 (NM_020975.6), RET 9 (NM_020630.6) carrying an MYC tag at the C terminus, wild type C-CBL open reading frame carrying a V5 tag at the N terminus. Wild-type NEDD4 (#27002) and dominant negative, catalytically dead NEDD4-DD (#26999) open reading frames carrying an HA tag at the N terminus were obtained from Addgene and were a gift from Joan Massague. 
The TMEM127 constructs included: pEGFP-TMEM127, MSCV-N-Flag-TMEM127, and their respective empty vector controls (pEGFP-C2 and MSCV-empty vector) or pHM6-HA-TMEM127, have been previously reported. , - , Additional mutations of the TMEM127 and RET constructs were introduced using site-directed mutagenesis with MilliPore Sigma primers and Phusion polymerase. A diagram depicting the various constructs is shown in and .
Transfections of HEK293FT and HeLa were performed with Transit2020 (Mirus BioResearch) following standard manufacturer’s protocols. For transient transfections, cells were harvested at 24h after transfection. Lentiviral particle generation was performed using standard procedures. In brief, HEK-293FT cells were co-transfected with the pLV constructs above and the packing and envelope plasmids PAX2 (Addgene # 12260) and pMD2.G (Addgene #12259), both gifts from Didier Trono. Supernatants were collected at 48h and 72h after transfection, centrifuged and strained. SH-SY5Y cells were transduced with viral particles and polybrene 8 μg/mL. Retroviral particles were generated by co-transfection of HEK293FT cells with retroviral constructs, along with PKAT (Addgene #1215 and pCMV-VSVG #8454), gifts from Susan Lindquist and Garry Nolan, respectively.

## Cell line treatment
SH-SY5Y cells were exposed to various drugs, as follows: 100 μg/mL cycloheximide, 5 μg/ml brefeldin A, 100 nM bafilomycin A, 100 μM leupeptin, 25 μM chloroquine, 100nM bortezomib, and 5 μM retinoic acid, added to the media. Time frames of drug exposures are indicated in the text and/or figures and figure legends. Selpercatinib was used at 100nM as indicated in the text and figures.
For GDNF treatment, SH-SY5Y or HEK293FT cells were starved in an FBSfree medium for 3 h and treated with 100 ng/mL GDNF for the indicated times (10–30 min, as listed in the figure legends).
Cell lysate digestion with PnGase F: SH-SY5Y cell lysates, prepared using NP40 buffer as in the section below, and were processed as follows: twenty μg of protein lysate (prepared as described in the section below) were first denatured by addition of 1 μL of 10X Glycoprotein Denaturing Buffer (0.5% SDS, 40 mM DTT) and heated at 100°C for 10 min. After placing the denatured lysate on ice, 2 μL of 10X GlycoBuffer 2 (50 mM Sodium Phosphate, pH 7.5), 2 μL 1% NP-40 and 1μL PnGase F (500 units/μL) were digested at 37°C for 1 h. A loading buffer was added to stop the digestion and lysates were run on Western blot.

## Immunoblot analysis
Lysates were obtained from frozen pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas, from frozen mouse adrenals and from the cell lines with a buffer containing 1% NP40, 50 mM Tris pH 8.0.150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 2 mM EDTA and Halt Protease and Phosphate Inhibitor (ThermoFisher) after mechanical disruption, incubated on ice for 15 min and centrifuged at 4C for recovery of supernatant. Whole protein lysates were boiled in denaturing loading buffer (8% SDS, 0.4 M DTT, 0.2 M Tris-HCl, 4.3 M glycerol, 6 mM bromophenol blue), separated by SDS/polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membrane at 110 V for 1–2 h at 4C. Membranes were blocked in 5% skim milk for 1 h, and then probed at 4°C overnight with the primary antibodies (see ). Blots were developed with chemiluminescent detection (Millipore Kit, cat WBKLS0500) on X-ray or captured on iBright imager CL1500 (Invitrogen/ThermoFisher). ImageJ (NIH) was used for quantification of the images.

## Immunoprecipitation
Transfected HEK293FT cells were lysed in ice-cold NP40 lysis buffer (1% NP40, 50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA and 10% Glycerol) with EDTA-free protease inhibitor (Roche #11836170001). Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4°C for 10 min. Cleared lysates were normalized for protein content by Bradford assay, and 2–3 mg of protein lysate were incubated with Dynabeads Protein G beads (Invitrogen cat 10003D) previously bound with the specific antibodies for 1h (GFP Santa Cruz Biotechnology cat #SC-9996; HA-tag Cell Signaling cat #3724S; HA-tag Bethyl Laboratories cat # A190-138A; RET Cell Signaling cat # 14698, or iso-species control IgG) at 4°C overnight on a rotator. The beads were washed three times with NP40 lysis buffer 15 min each at room temperature, eluted with 2 × Laemmli buffer by boiling at 100°C for 10 min and separated on SDS-PAGE, alongside corresponding whole cell lysates. Blots were probed with the relevant antibodies listed in the figure legends.
Endogenous IP was performed with SH-SY5Y WT or TMEM127- KO-T4 cells treated with 50μM chloroquine for 4h, and GDNF (100 ng/ml) for the last 15 min before harvesting; 1.5mg lysates were used for immunoprecipitation with 2μg RET antibody (Santa Cruz Technologies, cat # 101422) per 200μg lysates and processed as described above.

## Ubiquitination pull-down
Ubiquitination of RET was detected using a Signal-Seeker Ubiquitination Detection Kit (BK161-S, Cytoskeleton) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Transfected HEK293FT cells were washed in ice-cold PBS and collected in BlastR lysis buffer containing de-ubiquitination and SUMOylation inhibitor (N-ethylmaleimide and TPEN, NEM09BB) and protease inhibitor cocktail (PIC02). Cell lysates were collected using a BlastR filter and diluted with BlastR dilution buffer. One mg cell lysates were incubated with either control beads or ubiquitination affinity beads for 2 h at 4°C. Beads were washed with BlastR-2 wash buffer 3 times for 5 min each at 4°C, and then were centrifuged and incubated in bead elution buffer for exactly 5 min at room temperature. Eluates were collected in the spin columns, 2-mercaptoethanol (2 μL) was added to the samples, and then boiled for 5 min before running on SDS-PAGE.

## Membrane and soluble fraction enrichment
Cells were scraped in lysis buffer (5 mM Tris with 5 mM EGTA and EDTA, PH = 8.0) containing proteinase inhibitors. Cell suspension was homogenized by passing through a needle 20 times and centrifuged at 1000 rpm to collect the supernatant. The postnuclear supernatant was transferred into 1.5 mL tubes and centrifuged at 35,000 rpm for 45 min. The supernatant is the soluble fraction, and the pellet is the membrane-enriched fraction. Sample buffer was added to each fraction and samples were boiled prior to SDS-PAGE running.

## Immunofluorescence confocal microscopy
HeLa or SH-SY5Y cells were seeded onto coverslips and transfected or transduced accordingly, 24h or 48h later the cells were fixed using 4% formaldehyde for 10 min after media removal and two phosphate buffered saline (PBS) washes. The cells were permeabilized using 0.1% Triton X-100 (10 min, room temperature) and blocked with 2% bovine serum albumin (BSA) in 0.1% Triton X-100 for 1h at room temperature. The cells were then stained with appropriate primary antibodies overnight at 4°C, and washed in PBS, then incubated with secondary antibodies for 1 h at room temperature. For plasma membrane staining, 3ug/ml Wheat Germ Agglutinin (WGA, Cat#29026-1, Biotium) was used to stain the plasma membrane for 30 min at room temperature after fixation. The cells were washed with PBS and mounted on glass slides with 50% glycerol in PBS. Cells were imaged using a ZEISS LSM710 confocal microscope (×100, oil immersion objective).
Image analyses were performed with ImageJ software. Pearson’s correlation coefficient was used to quantify the colocalization. The extracellular background was subtracted from images using the Background Subtraction function in ImageJ. Pearson’s correlation coefficient values were obtained from individual cells expressing the relevant markers in each experiment using the Coloc 2 ImageJ plugin (http://imagej.net/Coloc_2).

## Immunohistochemistry
Briefly, tissue sections from pheochromocytoma or paraganglioma were processed on a Discovery Ultra Staining Module. Antigen retrieval was performed in Cell Conditioning 2 (citrate solution pH = 6.0) for 80 min and then incubated with Anti-Ret antibody [EPR2871] Abcam ab134100 at 1:400 dilution for 1h. Sections were then incubated with biotinylated anti-rabbit or anti-mouse antibody followed by streptavidin-peroxidase. Reaction was developed by 3,3′-diaminobenzidine (DAB) and counterstained with hematoxylin. Images were acquired under 200× magnification. H score was calculated by combining the signal intensity to the percentage of cells with positive signals as reported. Mouse adrenals were processed using a similar approach.

## Proliferation assays
Cell proliferation was evaluated through a [3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-5-(3-carboxymethoxyphenyl)-2-(4-sulfophenyl)-2H-tetrazolium, inner salt] (MTS) bio reduction assay. SH-SY5Y cells of the relevant genotypes were seeded at 3 × 104 cells/well in 96- well plates and allowed to proliferate for 24h and 48h. 20 μL MTS/PMS solution (Cell Titer Glo 2.0, Promega) was added to each well containing 100μL of cells in culture medium. Cells were incubated for 2 h at 37°C in a humidified, 5% CO2 atmosphere. Absorbance at 490nm was read at a plate reader and calculated relative to the 0 h timepoint to indicate relative cell-viability.

## QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Data analyses were performed with the GraphPad Prism software (version 9.2.0, GraphPad Software Inc), Python, and Excel (Microsoft), with Student’s two-tailed t test or one-way ANOVA. p < 0.05 was considered significant. Xenograft assessment was performed using unpaired Student’s t-test, unpaired Mann–Whitney test.

## Supplementary Material
SupplementaryData_Guo_et_al

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Jingruo Zhang for technical assistance and insightful discussions; Subramanyan Srikantan, Acacia Coker, Kizil Yusoof, and former lab members for their technical contributions; and the patients who have generously donated tissue samples. We also thank Richard Tothill and Aidan Flynn for sharing normalized data from the single-nucleus sequencing files reported in Zethoven et al. We acknowledge the UTHSCSA Genomics, Optical Imaging, and Flow Cytometry Core Facilities supported by NIH-P30-CA54174 and the South Texas Research Laboratory (STRL) Histology-Immunohistochemistry Laboratory at UTHSCSA. P.L.M.D. is a recipient of funds from the NIH (GM114102 and CA264248), the NETRF, VHL Alliance, and UT System Star Awards and is the holder of the Robert Tucker Hayes Distinguished Chair in Oncology. R.C.T.A. acknowledges funding support from NIH-R01ES031522, NIH-R01GM140456, and I01BX001882 (Veterans Administration Merit Award). L.M.M. is supported by the Cancer Research Society of Canada (19439) and the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (MOP-142303). The content of this manuscript is the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the NIH or other funding sponsors.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2023.113070.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.

## INCLUSION AND DIVERSITY
We support inclusive, diverse, and equitable conduct of research.
 

## Highlights
TMEM127 loss of function leads to increased RET surface expression and activation
TMEM127 recruits the NEDD4 E3 ligase to RET and promotes its ubiquitination
NEDD4-mediated RET ubiquitination involves the TMEM127 C terminus
Oncogenesis due to TMEM127 deficiency is responsive to RET inhibition