eLife1894elifeeLifeeLife2050-084XeLife Sciences Publications, LtdPMC4467164PMC4467164.1446716444671642607640910.7554/eLife.05061050611Research ArticleNeuroscienceDeletion of a kinesin I motor unmasks a mechanism of homeostatic branching control by neurotrophin-3
AuerThomas O ; ; ). Along the axonal microtubule cytoskeleton molecular motors of the kinesin and dynein superfamily act as main transport molecules ( ; ; ). Although it is well established that anterograde molecular motors are essential for synapse generation and function ( ), little is known about their exact role in neural circuit establishment in vivo.
Of the kinesin superfamily, which comprises 45 members in mammals ( ) and many more in zebrafish, the kinesin I subclass plays an especially prominent role in neuronal function. The kinesin motors mediate the plus end directed transport of cargo proteins along microtubules and are composed of two identical heavy chains and two identical light chains ( ). In the mammalian genome, three kinesin I heavy chain genes are present: Kif5A, Kif5B, and Kif5C. While Kif5B is ubiquitously expressed, Kif5A and Kif5C are neuron-specific ( ). Their cargoes include voltage-gated potassium channels, AMPA receptor GluR2, GABAA receptors, sodium channels, neurofilaments, and mitochondria ( ; ; ; ; ; ). In humans, Kif5A mutations have been implicated in a heterogenous group of neurodegenerative disorders, including a form of Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia characterized by slowly progressive lower limb paralysis ( ) and Charcot Marie Tooth Type 2, a peripheral axonal neuropathy ( ).
In this study, we have taken a combined genetic, molecular biological, and in vivo imaging approach in developing zebrafish larvae to investigate the role of anterograde intracellular transport in the development of connections between retina and tectum. By TALEN-mediated gene disruption, we generated a kif5aa loss-of-function allele and could show that kif5aa mutant fish display a de-synchronisation of retinal axon and tectal growth. A delay in tectal innervation by mutant retinal ganglion cell (RGC) axons is followed by a period of exuberant branching, resulting in enlarged axonal arbors. GCaMP imaging revealed that kif5aa mutant RGCs do not transmit signals from the retina to their postsynaptic partner cells. Utilizing two additional zebrafish mutant lines with defects in RGC formation or function, lakritz ( ) and blumenkohl ( ), or specific silencing of RGCs by expression of botulinum toxin light chain B (BoTxLCB), we show that in all four cases the reduction of presynaptic activity leads to increased expression of neurotrophic factor 3 (Ntf3). The overabundance of this neurotrophin causes excessive branching by RGC axons. Thus, a defect in Kif5aa-mediated axonal transport has unmasked a homeostatic mechanism that adjusts axon arbor growth to levels of synaptic activity and depends on Ntf3 signaling.

## Results

## Generation of Kif5aa loss-of-function alleles by TALEN mediated gene targeting
To investigate the role of axonal transport in visual-system development, we generated a series of insertion and deletion (indel) mutations in the open reading frame (ORF) of the zebrafish anterograde motor protein Kif5aa by targeted gene disruption using transcription activator like nucleases (TALENs). Subsequently, we isolated two alleles with a 10 base pair (bp) and 13 bp deletion, respectively ( ), both resulting in a frameshift in the ORF from amino acid (aa) 122 onwards. This frameshift leads to a premature stop codon at position 162 of 1033aa (kif5aa*162) of the wild-type full-length protein ( ). In situ hybridization showed a strong expression of kif5aa in RGCs. In contrast, kif5aa mutant mRNA is dramatically down regulated in embryos starting from 24 hours post fertilization (hpf) onwards, probably by nonsense-mediated decay ( ). By quantitative reverse transcription PCR (qRT-PCR) ( ), we could see a 47% decrease of kif5aa transcript levels in mutant embryos compared to controls. Both alleles were not complementing each other, and the mutant phenotype co-segregated with the TALEN-induced mutation over three consecutive generations. This indicates that the genomic targeting was specific and argues for the absence of off-target effects of the TALEN pair used. 

## Kif5aa mutant embryos lack visual responses and die at a larval stage
In a clutch of 5 day post-fertilization (dpf) zebrafish larvae, derived from a cross of two heterozygous carriers of the kif5aa*162 allele, 25% of the larvae exhibited a dark coloration in comparison to their wild-type siblings ( ), indicating that the mutation is recessive, completely penetrant and results in a failure to adapt to a light background by melanosome re-distribution. This phenotype is frequently observed in visually defective mutants, specifically in those with RGC impairments ( ; ). For example, the lakritz ( ) and the blumenkohl ( ) mutations affect both vision and are darkly pigmented ( ). The former represents a mutation in the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor atonal homolog 7 (atoh7), which is required for RGC fate specification ( ). Loss of Atoh7 in zebrafish leads to a complete absence of RGCs in the retina and consequently no functional connections between the retina and other brain areas are established. Nevertheless, as Atoh7 is solely expressed in the retina, no further developmental defects are described and lakritz mutant fish develop normally apart from their complete blindness ( ). Blumenkohl mutants fail to produce a functional vesicular glutamate transporter, vglut2a, the main vesicular glutamate transporter expressed in zebrafish RGCs. The lack of functional Vglut2a leads to reduced synaptic transmission between the retina and the optic tectum. Furthermore, it was described that RGC axons consequently develop increased axonal arbors and show aberrant branching upon innervation of the optic tectum ( ).
To test visual system function in kif5aa mutant larvae, we employed the optokinetic response (OKR) to a moving grating as a sensitive and quantifiable indicator of visual functions in zebrafish ( ). We found that the OKR was absent in kif5aa mutants (n = 6), while it was present in all wild-type fish examined (n = 6) ( ). This suggests that the disruption of kif5aa causes blindness. Unlike lakritz and blumenkohl, which are viable, kif5aa mutants fail to inflate their swim bladder ( ) and die around 10 days post fertilization (dpf).
As a dynamic interaction between actin- and tubulin-based motility controls melanosome transport within melanocytes ( ), we wanted to rule out the possibility that the dark pigmentation is caused by a melanophore-autonomous defect. Kif5aa mutant embryos were treated with norepinephrin resulting in aggregation of melanosomes and consecutive re-expansion upon washing out of the drug ([ ], ). Similar results were obtained for lakritz and blumenkohl ( ). This indicates that melanosome transport inside melanocytes in both antero- and retrograde direction is not affected in kif5aa mutant embryos.

## Patterning of the retina, formation of the optic chiasm, and retinotopic mapping appear normal in kif5aa mutant embryos
To examine if visual system defects were caused by retinal neurogenesis or patterning defects during development, we compared the expression of known marker genes between wild-type and kif5aa deficient embryos. In mutant embryos, we could not observe alterations neither in the onset of retinal neurogenesis (characterized by sonic hedgehog expression [ ]) nor in the later specification of RGCs or other retinal cell types ( ). Choroid fissure and optic stalk formation, as well as rostral-caudal patterning, were normal as revealed by the expression of pax2.1 and tag-1, respectively. Further, cell type specific marker analysis revealed that all major retinal cell types were present and the layering of the retina was not affected in kif5aa mutant retinae ( ).
As retinal morphology and cellular composition were not altered by the loss of kifaa function, we decided to analyze the outgrowth of RGC axons from the retina and their retinotopic mapping onto the optic tectum. To this purpose, we introduced the transgenic line Tg(pou4f3:mGFP) ( ), which labels a subpopulation of RGCs, into the kif5aa*162 mutant background and imaged optic nerve outgrowth and optic chiasm formation at 48 hpf. No misrouting of RGCs to the ipsilateral side could be observed, and the optic chiasm was correctly established at the right developmental time ( ). To confirm that pathfinding was unaffected, we used Zn5 antibody staining to bulk-label outgrowing RGC axons ( ) ( ). Axon tracing at later stages of development, following injection of the two lipophilic dyes DiO and DiI ( ) into opposite quadrants of the contralateral eye, revealed that the retinotectal projection was correctly patterned in mutant embryos ( ) and no misrouting to the ipsilateral hemisphere occurred. 

## Axons enter the tectum with a delay, reminiscent of the previously identified vertigo mutant
To gain deeper insights into the phenotype of single RGCs, we made use of the Tg(BGUG) transgenic line ( ). The BGUG (Brn3C [also known as pou4f3]:Gal4; UAS:mGFP) transgene marks RGCs projecting to the SO (stratum opticum) and SFGS (stratum fibrosum et griseum superficiale) layers of the optic tectum. Probably due to position-effect variegation of the transgene, a stochastic subset of one to ten RGCs per retina is labeled with membrane-bound GFP, which allows the imaging of RGC trajectories in the living or fixed fish brain. By in vivo imaging, we thus followed the growth behavior of single RGC axons over consecutive days. To guarantee comparability between RGC axons, we analyzed only RGC axons growing into the SFGC layer of the optic tectum at a central position on the rostral-caudal axis. While wild-type axons reach the tectal neuropil at 72 hpf and start forming a complex axonal arbor, axons of kif5aa mutant RGCs showed a delayed ingrowth into the target tissue ( ). This phenotype was confirmed by analyzing a larger RGC population, which was labeled by DiI injections into quadrants of the contralateral retina ( ). 

A strikingly similar phenotype was reported in a previously published forward genetic screen for defects in the visual system in the vertigos1614 mutant without further in-depth characterization of this mutant line nor identification of the causal gene ( ). Our genetic linkage analysis confirmed that the ethylnitrosourea-induced mutation of the vertigos1614 allele is located at linkage group 9 of the zebrafish genome ( ). Utilizing the newly generated kif5aa*162 allele we could confirm by complementation crosses that vertigos1614 represents a loss-of-function allele of kif5aa. Although sequencing of the genome has not identified a telltale mutation of kif5aa coding sequence or its flanking regulatory regions in vertigo mutants, judging by its penetrance and expressivity, we expect the kif5aas1614 mutation to be a strong hypomorph or null allele. Furthermore, our analysis did not reveal any phenotypic difference between the different alleles and for our subsequent analysis we used kif5aa*162.

## Axons of kif5aa mutants exhibit increased filopodial extensions and branch excessively
Wild-type axons continually expand their arbors during lifelong growth of the tectum. After 5 dpf, however, branching activity noticeably subsides, and axons maintain their complexity over the following days ( ) ( ). This phase of relative stability coincides with the consolidation of synaptic connections with tectal dendrites in the neuropil region ( ). In kif5aa mutant axons, the observed delay of ingrowth into the tectum is followed by a period of highly active growth of the axonal arbor after 5 dpf, at a stage when wild-type axons are comparatively stable. We investigated the underlying branching dynamics by multi-day single axon imaging. Between 5 and 7 dpf, mutant axons added branches at about double the wild-type rate ( ). Mutant axons also showed markedly increased numbers of active filopodia either being retracted or newly formed at any time point analyzed, as observed in 10 min timelapse movies ( ). Together, these findings suggest that, perhaps counterintuitively, absence of the motor protein Kif5aa stimulates growth of the axon arbor and maintains high filopodia activity.

## Calcium imaging reveals the disruption of presynaptic activity in kif5aa mutant RGCs
The loss of optokinetic response of kif5aa mutants raises the question on which level of the visual pathway the visual information processing is perturbed. To understand this better, we used genetically encoded Ca2+ sensors that were differentially expressed in two different neuronal types of the visual system, namely in RGCs and tectal periventricular neurons (PVNs) ( ; ; ). First, we probed the overall activity of the larva's visual system from 5 to 7 dpf in response to defined visual stimuli by using the Tg(HuC:GCaMP5G) transgenic line, in which among other neuron types, all RGCs and PVNs are labeled ( ) ( , left). We did observe clear stimulus-evoked Ca2+ transients in the wild-type PVN layer and the tectal neuropil (the later contains both PVNs dendritic and RGC axonal arbors) in response to a bar ( ) moving in a caudal-to-rostral direction ( , ) across the larva's visual field. This response was almost completely absent in kif5aa mutants at 5 dpf ( , , ). In addition, also no response was detected in older larvae (7 dpf), arguing against a delayed onset of activity in mutants, as could have been speculated based on the observed developmental delay of RGC ingrowth ( ). Besides bars running caudal-to-rostrally, we also tested bar stimuli running in the opposite direction, bars moving in different orientations of 45° steps across the visual field as well as looming stimuli. In neither of these, kif5aa mutants showed a response comparable to their wild-type siblings at any developmental stage between 5 dpf and 7 dpf (data not shown). We next investigated whether this loss of Ca2+ responses in the tectum was due to a presynaptic defect in RGC axons. For this, the same stimulation paradigms were employed in compound transgenic fish carrying Tg(Isl2b:Gal4) and Tg(UAS:GCAMP3), which express the Ca2+ sensor GCaMP3 in all or nearly all RGCs ( ; ). Mutant RGC axons in the tectal neuropil remained unresponsive to visual stimulation, whereas wild-type axons were robustly activated ( ). These data provide an explanation for the behavioral blindness of kif5aa mutant larvae and indicate that the Kif5aa motor is required for proper synaptic transmission from RGC axon terminals to tectal dendrites. 
 

## Kif5aa mutant RGCs form presynaptic sites but are depleted of mitochondria
As loss of synaptic activity in RGCs might be caused by a failure in synapse formation, we monitored synapse distribution and transport of synaptic vesicles in RGC axons in vivo. For this experiment, we made use of a Synaptophysin-GFP (Syp-GFP) fusion construct, a marker for stable presynaptic sites as well as for motile Synaptophysin-containing clusters ( ). When co-expressed with a membrane-localized red fluorescent protein (RFPCaax) in single RGCs in wild-type or kif5aa mutant embryos ( ), we observed no difference in distribution of stable presynaptic clusters at 5 and 7 dpf by in vivo imaging ( ). This indicates that the formation of stable presynaptic clusters is not affected by the loss of Kif5aa. Quantification of Synaptophysin-containing vesicle movements in axonal segments ( , ) did not show a difference in either anterograde or retrograde transport upon loss of kif5aa at 4, 5, and 7 dpf. This is consistent with previous studies showing that Synaptophysin containing vesicles are not transported by Kinesin I ( ) and furthermore argues against a general loss of vesicle movement in kif5aa mutant RGCs. To distinguish between different sized clusters, we divided vesicles into small (<0.4 μm) and middle-sized to large clusters (>0.4 μm) as defined previously for RGC axons in zebrafish ( ). Using these different categories, we detected a higher fraction of small, motile clusters in kif5aa mutant cells at 4 and 5 dpf, but not at 7 dpf, most probably reflecting their highly active growth behavior at that stage of development ( ). 
 
 
 
In vivo imaging of labeled mitochondria (mitoGFP) and membranes (RFPCaax) in single RGCs in contrast showed a reduction of mitochondria within the axon of mutant RGCs compared to wild-type cells ( ). This is consistent with previous reports showing that mitochondria are transported by Kif5a in other experimental systems ( ; ; ). We confirmed this result by quantification of the area covered by mitochondria per neuropil area in electron micrographs of transverse section of the tectal neuropil ( ). At 6 dpf, mutants show a significant depletion of mitochondria from their branched axons ( ). To test if this mitochondria depletion from the distal axon of RGCs is caused by transport defects of this known cargo of Kif5a, we quantified the transport dynamics of mitochondria within RGC axonal segments ( , ). We did not detect a difference in overall amount of mobile vs stable mitochondria. In mutant cells, though, mitochondria were transported significantly more often in a retrograde direction than in an anterograde direction ( ). This bias explains the depletion of mitochondria from the tips of kif5aa mutant RGCs. Mitochondria are preferentially localized at active synapses ( ) and are found in close proximity to stable Synaptophysin-containing clusters in RGC arbors ( ). By co-labeling mitochondria and presynaptic clusters in the same cells in vivo we showed that approximately 40% stable presynaptic sites are associated with mitochondria in wild-type and blu−/− RGC axons ( ). We extended and confirmed these data observing mitochondria distribution and presynaptic densities in trigeminal ganglion cell axons (TGCs) ( ). In contrast to wild-type cells, in TGCs in kif5aa−/− we observed a marked decrease of presynaptic densities located in close proximity of mitochondria. This observation is consistent with a recent study in zebrafish reporting a reduced number of mitochondria in peripheral cutaneous axon arbors in kif5aa mutant zebrafish embryos ( ) without affecting the distribution of presynaptic densities. 
Taken together, these experiments show that kif5aa mutant RGCs form presynaptic sites at the same density as wild-type cells and transport Synaptophysin-containing clusters at the same rate and direction as wild-type. A detectable reduction in the relative anterograde transport of mitochondria, however, results in a depletion of these organelles from synaptic terminals.

## Lack of synaptic input leads to an increased production of neurotrophic factor 3 (Ntf3) in the tectum
We aimed to identify the signal responsible for the observed increased growth of RGC arbors in kif5aa mutant tecta. As it was previously shown in the optic tectum of X. laevis that Brain-Derived Neurotrophic Factor (BDNF) can promote axonal arborization ( ), we decided to measure the expression levels of this neurotrophic factor in kif5aa mutant embryos. In parallel, we performed quantitative reverse transcription PCR of other known members of the neurotrophic factor family, namely neurotrophin 3 (ntf3), neurotrophin 4 (ntf4), neurotrophin 7 (ntf7), and nerve growth factor (ngf) present in the zebrafish genome ( ). Comparing 4 dpf old homozygous kif5aa mutants to their siblings, we detected a significant upregulation of ntf3 in mutants to up to 160% of its normal expression level in wild-type embryos, while the levels of bdnf, ngf, ntf4, and ntf7 were not significantly altered ( ). By in situ hybridization with an ntf3 antisense probe, we could furthermore see an increased staining intensity in mutant tecta compared to their siblings ( ). 

For further validation of these results, we performed Western blotting analysis using an antibody targeting the human orthologue of Ntf3. This antibody recognizes the zebrafish Ntf3 protein. We could demonstrate cross-reactivity by overexpressing a construct carrying the zebrafish ntf3 cDNA followed by an E2A sequence allowing multicistronic expression ( ) of ntf3 and a RFP reporter gene from the same cDNA ( ). This experiment showed that kif5aa mutant embryos produced significantly more Ntf3 protein than their siblings.
To see if Ntf3 upregulation was a common feature in mutants with defective retinotectal synaptic transmission, we investigated lakritz mutants, which lack all RGCs and blumenkohl, in which RGCs show impaired glutamate secretion into the synaptic cleft. Ntf3 protein was increased in the tecta of all three mutant lines in which presynaptic input to the tectum was abolished or highly reduced ( ). To directly test the causality link between the lack of presynaptic input and upregulation of Ntf3 in the optic tectum, we silenced the neuronal activity of RGCs by expressing a UAS:BoTxLCB-GFP construct in Islet2b:Gal4 zebrafish larvae. BoTx has been shown to specifically block synaptic vesicle release ( ) and its injection has been used successfully in zebrafish embryos to silence neuronal activity ( ). Similar to what previously observed in kif5aa, lak, and blu mutants, silencing of RGCs via BoTx expression leads to melanosomes expansion and failure to adapt to a light background ( ). Both, via qRT-PCR and Western blotting analysis we detected an upregulation of Ntf3 in these transgenic animals showing that, like in the previously described mutants, lack of RGCs presynaptic activity per se is sufficient to cause Ntf3 overexpression ( ). These results strongly suggest that lack of presynaptic activity and subsequent overexpression of Ntf3 in the tectum trigger the increased size of axonal branches of RGCs in kif5aa, blumenkohl, and lakritz mutants (see , [ ; ]).

## Neurotrophic factor 3 signaling acts on RGC axonal branching
To further test this hypothesis, we designed an experiment to interfere with Ntf3 signaling in RGCs. We generated a kinase-dead, GFP-tagged, dominant-negative version of the zebrafish ntrk3a gene orthologous to the gene encoding the TrkC receptor in mammals (ntrk3adN-GFP) ( ). A similar approach was previously shown to efficiently block Ntf3 function in mammalian cells ( ; ). In zebrafish two TrkC paralogues, ntrk3a and ntrk3b exist, which are both expressed in RGCs ( ). We decided to generate our dominant-negative construct based on the ntrk3a coding sequence, which shows a higher degree of conservation (based on amino acid identity and sequence similarity) to the rat TrkC receptor ( ). Both receptors are predicted to bind to Ntf3 based on binding motif analysis ( ). Upon overexpression of the truncated ntrk3adN-GFP construct in single wild-type RGCs by mosaic DNA expression, we observed a substantial reduction of axon branch length and number of branches at 5 dpf ( ), consistent with a role of Ntrk3 as a branch-promoting receptor. 

In addition, ntrk3adN-GFP overexpression in single kif5aa−/− and blu−/− RGCs could abolish the axonal overgrowth normally observed in these mutants as measured by total branch length ( ) and even reduce the number of branches compared to wild-type cells ( ).
To analyze the consequence of Ntf3 overexpression, we injected an UAS:Ntf3-E2A-RFP construct into the Tg(gSA2AzGFF49A) ( ) transgenic line, driving the expression of the transgene in tectal neurons and glia cells from 2 dpf onwards. Thereby, we generated larvae specifically overexpressing Ntf3 in the optic tectum just before innervation by RGC axons. Analyzing the morphology of single RGCs marked by membrane-bound eGFP and growing under these conditions, we confirmed that these cells formed larger axonal arbors than wild-type cells ( ) at 5 and 7 dpf. Taken together, these results strongly support the hypothesis that Ntf3 signaling is a signal promoting RGC arbor growth and branching and that Ntf3 upregulation is responsible for axonal arbor overgrowth when RGC presynaptic activity is impaired.
We next decided to test if the observed increased formation and retraction of filopodia in the axons of kif5aa mutant RGCs was directly caused by Ntf3 upregulation. Therefore, we analyzed filopodia dynamics via time-lapse imaging both in blu−/− RGCs and in axons growing when Ntf3 was overexpressed in the tectum via our transgenic construct. In both experimental conditions we did not observe any increase in the filopodia dynamics or RGC axons ( ), excluding the possibility that Ntf3 overexpression has a direct effect on this process. In addition, we observed that the distribution of mitochondria was not significantly altered in blu−/− RGC axons nor was the association with stable presynaptic sites ( ). Together these data suggest that Ntf3 upregulation does not per se affect mitochondria localization.

## Axons of wild-type RGCs transplanted into kif5aa mutant tecta show excessive branching
For the dissection of cell-autonomous vs non-cell autonomous effects of the loss of kif5aa, we generated mutant/wild-type chimeric embryos by blastomere transplantations at the 1000-cell stage ( ). Donor RGCs were derived from a Tg(Pou3f4:Gal4) × Tg(UAS:RFP) cross and visualized by the expression of a fluorescent membrane-targeted RFP. When cells were transplanted in low numbers from a transgenic donor into a host embryo, we could image single donor derived and fluorescently labeled RGCs, within a host environment. First, we could observe that the delayed ingrowth of kif5aa mutant RGC axons in the tectal neuropil is a cell-autonomous effect ( ). When growing in a wild-type environment, kif5aa mutant RGC axons invade the tectal neuropil 1 day later (4 dpf) than wild-type cells. Second, in contrast to what we observed in mutant larvae, arbor size was not increased at 5 or 7 dpf in mutant RGC axons that grow into a wild-type tectum ( ). Mutant RGC arbors are significantly smaller, similar to those that overexpress ntrk3adN-eGFP (see ). Wild-type cells growing in a kif5aa mutant background show the opposite behavior. No stalling at 3 dpf was detected ( ) and, at 5 and 7 dpf, they established a significantly increased axonal arbor ( ). To further demonstrate that the axonal arbor overgrowth observed both in kif5aa−/− and blu−/− was due to a common molecular mechanism, we transplanted single kif5aa−/− RFP labeled RGC into a blu mutant host. In these conditions, kif5aa mutant RGC axonal arbors were significantly larger than when transplanted into a wild-type host ( ). 
 

Taken together, these experiments support a homeostatic mechanism by which tectum-secreted Ntf3 directly promotes the growth of innervating RGC axons. Lack of retinal synaptic activity results in upregulation of Ntf3 and, consequently, in an enlargement of RGC axonal arbors.

## Discussion
Here, we report for the first time the role of the anterograde transport motor Kif5aa in the larval development of the zebrafish visual system. The loss-of-function kif5aa allele that we generated disrupts the open reading frame after 122 of 1033aa within the motor domain of the protein and results in mRNA degradation likely by nonsense-mediated decay. We therefore expect that no functional Kif5aa protein is produced.
Disruption of Kif5aa created a complex and dynamically changing retinotectal phenotype. At 3 to 4 dpf, RGC axons devoid of Kif5aa grew more slowly and reached their targets in the tectum with a delay of about 24 hr. Mutant retinotectal synapses did not transmit signals to tectal cells, but were apparently silent, resulting in a complete loss of visual responses. Both the stalled growth and the synaptic transmission defects were likely a direct consequence of the absence of Kif5aa. Some of the known cargoes of mammalian Kif5a are required for normal axon outgrowth ( ; ; ; ). In the zebrafish kif5aa mutant, mitochondria are significantly depleted from distal RGC axon terminals, as shown by in vivo imaging and transmission electron microscopy, suggesting that these organelles are Kif5a cargoes as in mammals. Furthermore, a recent report showed that Kif5aa has a similar role in the posterior lateral line nerve and peripheral cutaneous axonal arbors ( ). Mitochondrial ATP production is required for synapse assembly ( ), the generation of action potentials ( ) and synaptic transmission ( ). In addition, synaptic mitochondria maintain and regulate neurotransmission by buffering Ca2+ ( ; ). This deficit can therefore explain the impairment in transmitter release at the presynaptic terminals without, however, excluding the possibility that the impaired transport of other cargoes is also involved.
Interestingly, outgrowth of axons from the retina was not affected by loss of Kif5aa. Only after crossing the optic chiasm, at the entrance to the tectum, did RGC axons stall. Reduced axonal growth is caused by loss of kinesin-1 in other experimental systems or other axonal transport motors like Dynein/Dynactin ( ; ; ; ; ), but often the deficit is evident from the start. Early functions of kinesin I heavy chains are probably carried out by other members of this gene family in zebrafish, such as kif5ab, kif5b or kif5c. All isoforms homodimerize and may carry distinct sets of cargoes ( ). In mammalian neurons, KIF5C likely contributes to axon specification ( ). Similarly, the Drosophila KIF5 homolog kinesin heavy chain (KHC) drives axon initiation and transiently maintains axonal growth ( ). The zebrafish Kif5c orthologue is therefore the prime candidate to carry out this early kinesin motor function for RGCs.
Synapse assembly (as assayed by transport and distribution of Synaptophysin-containing clusters) was not detectably affected by the kif5aa mutation, in agreement with previous experiments in mouse KO cells ( ). The observed higher percentage of mobile vesicles likely reflects the highly active growth at days 4 and 5, as it was previously shown in RGCs that synaptic puncta stability increases with axon maturation ( ). Filopodial activity was previously described as a sign of immature, silent axons before the onset of presynaptic activity ( ). This is in line with the observed failure of kif5aa mutant axons to transmit neuronal signals.
As a secondary, non-cell autonomous consequence of kif5aa disruption, we observed that Ntf3 was upregulated by the tectum. Overexpression of Ntf3 in wild-type tectum and blockade of its receptor Ntrk3 (TrkC) in RGCs demonstrated that this neurotrophin is both sufficient and necessary to alter branch dynamics in RGC axon arbors. Classical work in the optic tectum of Xenopus laevis showed that overexposure to BDNF leads to enlarged and more complex axonal arbors ( ). Here, we identified the related Ntf3 as the intrinsic, growth-promoting signal for RGC axons in zebrafish.
Ntf3 upregulation was observed not only in kif5aa mutant larvae but also in two other previously characterized mutant lines, blumenkohl and lakritz, and when directly silencing RGCs via BoTx expression. In all cases, this upregulation was correlated with RGC absence or dysfunction. In lakritz zebrafish larvae, RGCs are absent; the functional connection between the retina and the tectum thus is eliminated ( ). In blumenkohl, transmitter release is diminished ( ). Similar to our results with kif5aa, blumenkohl RGC axons show an increased arbor size and complexity ( ). The same retrograde signal may underlie the enlargement of retinal arbors following treatment with MK-801, a blocker of glutamate receptors of the NMDA-subtype ( ), or in macho mutants, in which RGCs fail to generate action potentials ( ). In the case of lakritz, when single wild-type RGCs were transplanted into a lakritz host, their solitary axons formed larger and more complex arbors ( ). This result is reminiscent of the phenotype of wild-type RGCs growing in a kif5aa mutant larva, that is, when they are surrounded by inactive axons. Interestingly, Ntf3 upregulation alone as observed in blu mutants or in overexpression experiments had no significant effect on mitochondria distribution and short-lived filopodia dynamic. This suggests that these phenotypes are specific to kif5aa−/− RGCs and probably caused by direct axonal trafficking defects, and that they are not due to impaired synaptic activity.
Together, these data suggest a model in which a deficit in presynaptic activity enhances the production and release of Ntf3 by tectal neurons. Tectum-derived Ntf3, in turn, retrogradely stimulates axonal branching and, thus, the addition of presynaptic terminals ( ). Such a signal could be the core motif of a compensatory pathway that is triggered when synaptic drive deviates from some homeostatic setpoint ( ; ). Our analysis of a mutation in a motor protein has thus unmasked a potentially general structural plasticity mechanism that together with the well-known competition-based and Hebbian mechanisms shapes the retinotectal projection and determines the final axonal arbor size ( ; ; ; ; , ; ; ).

## Materials and methods

## Ethics statements
All fish are housed in the fish facility of our laboratory, which was built according to the local animal welfare standards. All animal procedures were performed in accordance with French and European Union animal welfare guidelines.

## Fish lines
The following transgenic fish lines were used or generated: Tg(UAS:RFP, cry:eGFP) ( ), Tg(UAS:SypGFP) ( ), Tg(HuC:GCaMP5) ( ), Tg(BGUG) ( ), Tg(Pou3f4:Gal4) ( ), Tg(gSA2AzGFF49A) ( ), Tg(Shh:eGFP) ( ), Tg(pou4f3:mGFP) ( ), Tg(Isl2b:Gal4, cmlc2:eGFP), Tg(UAS:BoTxLCB-GFP) (see ‘Materials and methods’). TALENs used to generate the kif5aa loss-of-function alleles were described previously ( ). All mutant and transgenic lines used in this study are described in .

## Genotyping of the kif5aa*162 mutant alleles
For genotyping the following primers were used (5′ to 3′): kif5aa_geno_fwd: GTTCACAGATTGTGATGTCTGTG, kif5aa_geno_rev: TGGAGGATGGAGAAATGATGACA. After PCR amplification from genomic DNA the 400 bp long amplicon was digested with NcoI. The wild-type allele is digested into two fragments of 240 bp and 160 bp length, respectively. The mutant alleles are not digested and show a band at 387 bp or 390 bp.

## Molecular cloning
The pIsl2b:Gal4, cmlc2:eGFP construct was generated by a Gateway reaction (MultiSite Gateway Three-Fragment Vector Construction Kit, ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) using the p5E-Isl2b ( ), pME-Gal4, p3E-pA and the pDest-Tol2;cmlc2:eGFP ( ) vectors. We generated a p5E-4nrUAS vector with four non repetitive UAS sequences by digestion of the 4Xnr UAS:GFP vector ( ) and insertion of the 4nrUAS fragment into the p5E-10UAS vector ( ) after HindIII and AleI digestion. To obtain constructs with multiple UAS sequences, we generated a p5E-4nrUAS-tagRFPCaax-pA-4nrUAS vector. The tagRFPCaax sequence was amplified with primers listed in and inserted into the pME-MCS vector ( ) after BamHI/NotI digestion resulting in pME-tagRFPCaax. After a Gateway reaction (MultiSite Gateway Three-Fragment Vector Construction Kit) using the p5E-4nrUAS, pME-tagRFPCaax, p3E-pA, and the pDest-Tol2; cmlc2:eGFP ( ) vectors, the p4nrUAS:tagRFPCaax-pA-Tol2;cmcl2:eGFP vector was digested with StuI and SnaBI. The 4nrUAS:tagRFPCaax-pA fragment was subsequentially inserted into the StuI digested and dephosphorylated p5E-4nrUAS vector to create a p5E-4nrUAS-tagRFPCaax-pA-4nrUAS vector. We generated a pME-SypGFP vector by digestion of 5× UAS:SypGFP ( ) with EcoRI and NotI and insertion into the pME-MCS plasmid. To obtain the p4nrUAS:tagRFPCaax-pA-4nrUAS:SypGFP-pA-Tol2;cmcl2:eGFP vector we performed a Gateway reaction using p5E-4nrUAS-tagRFPCaax-pA-4nrUAS, pME-SypGFP, p3E-pA and pDest-Tol2;cmlc2:eGFP. We generated a pME-PhbGFP and a pME-Phbmcherry vector by digestion of pClontecN1-PhbGFP and pClontecN1-Phbmcherry (a kind gift from Christian Wunder) ( ) with EcoRI and NotI and insertion into pME-MCS. To obtain the p4nrUAS:tagRFPCaax-pA-4nrUAS:PhbGFP-pA-Tol2;cmcl2:eGFP vector we performed a Gateway reaction using p5E-4nrUAS-tagRFPCaax-pA-4nrUAS, pME-PhbGFP, p3E-pA and pDest-Tol2;cmlc2:eGFP. We generated a p5E-4nrUAS-SypGFP-pA-4nrUAS vector by performing a Gateway reaction using p5E-4nrUAS, pME-SypGFP, p3E-pA and pDest-Tol2; cmlc2:eGFP. The resulting p4nrUAS:SypGFP-pA-Tol2;cmcl2:eGFP vector was digested with StuI and SnaBI to create a p5E-4nrUAS-SypGFP-pA-4nrUAS vector after insertion into the StuI digested and dephosphorylated p5E-4nrUAS vector fragment. To create a p4nrUAS:SypGFP-pA-4nrUAS:PhBmcherry-pA-Tol2;cmcl2:eGFP plasmid we performed a Gateway reaction using p5E-4nrUAS-SypGFP-pA-4nrUAS, pME-Phbmcherry, p3E-pA and pDest-Tol2;cmlc2:eGFP. To create a ntf3_E2A_tagRFP expression construct we amplified ntf3_E2A from wild-type zebrafish cDNA (3 dpf) and fused it to a tagRFP fragment. Primers used are listed in . After digestion and insertion into the pME-MCS vector with HindIII and NotI, we performed a Gateway reaction using p5E-10UAS ( ), pME-ntf3_E2A_tagRFP, p3E-pA and pDest-Tol2; cmlc2:eGFP to generate p10UAS-ntf3_E2A_tagRFP-pA-tol2, cmcl2 :eGFP. To create a dominant negative ntrk3A expression construct, we amplified a truncated fragment of ntrk3A from wild-type zebrafish cDNA (3 dpf) and fused it to the eGFP open reading frame. Primers used are listed in . After digestion and insertion into the pME-MCS vector with HindIII and NotI we performed a Gateway reaction using p5E-10UAS, pME-ntrk3AdNeGFP, p3E-pA and pDest-Tol2; cmlc2:eGFP to generate p10UAS:ntrk3adNeGFP-pA-Tol2;cmcl2:eGFP. To create a pIsl2b:eGFPCaax construct, we performed a Gateway reaction using p5E-Isl2b, pME-eGFPCaax ( ), p3E-pA and pDest-Tol2; cmlc2:eGFP. To generate a UAS:BoTxBLC-GFP construct, a codon-optimized cDNA encoding botulinum toxin light chain B serotype ( ; ) was fused in frame with GFP and cloned downstream of the 5× UAS sequence using gateway recombination ( ). Microinjection of the pT2UAS:BoTxBLC-GFP plasmid (50 ng/μl) was based on standard protocols with Tol2 mRNA (25 ng/μl). Over 50 founders were screened for the presence of a functional transgene using a combination of behavioral assays (touch-evoked swimming, escape response) and the level of expression of the BoTxBLC-GFP fusion protein (Suster et al., in preparation).

## Genetic linkage mapping of the vertigo mutation
The genomic locus of the vertigos1614 allele (vrt) was determined using a PCR based simple sequence length polymorphisms (SSLPs) marker strategy. Vrt carriers in the TL genomic background (in which the mutagenesis was carried out) were crossed to the WIK genomic background to generate mapping crosses. From 1800 meioses the two SSLP markers, fj61a10 and tsub1g3, located 0.1 cM apart were identified to flank the vrt locus. Both markers are placed on Contig 963 of the Sanger center BAC sequencing project built by two overlapped BACs with sequencing information and four genes, one of which is kif5aa, are predicted between the two mapping markers.

## Immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization
Retinal sections of 5 dpf old embryos and whole mount embryos were stained using standard protocols ( ). The full list of primary and secondary antibodies is given below. Whole-mount in situ hybridization was performed according to standard protocols ( ). Kif5aa, ntrk3a, ntrk3b, and ntf3 specific sense and antisense probes were amplified by PCR from cDNA and cloned into the pCRII-topo vector (ThermoFisher Scientific). All primers used are reported in . The tag-1 probe was synthesized from a 3.1 kb tag1 cDNA clone ( ) and the pax2.1 probe was synthesized using the complete pax2.1 cDNA ( ). Probes were hydrolyzed to 200 bp fragments prior to use.

## Antibodies
The following primary antibodies were used in the course of this study: anti-Parvalbumine (EMD Millipore, Billerica, MA, MAB1572, 1:500), anti-eGFP (Genetex, GXT13970, 1:500), anti-PKC (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, sc-209, 1:500), anti-humanNT3 (ThermoFisher Scientific, PA1-18385, 1:500), anti-alpha-tubulin (Genetex, Irvine, CA, GTX11304, 1:5000). The following secondary antibodies were used in the course of this study: anti-mouse-Alexa635 (ThermoFisher Scientific, A31574, 1:250), anti-rabbit-Alexa546 (ThermoFisher Scientific, A11081, 1:250), anti-chicken-Alexa488 (ThermoFisher Scientific, A11039, 1:250), anti-Rabbit IgG, HRP conjugated (Promega, W4011, 1:2000), anti-mouse IgG, HRP conjugated (Promega, Madison, WI, W4021, 1:2000).

## Optokinetic response
The behavioral test for the optokinetic response was performed as described previously ( ).

## Single cell labeling and filopodia analysis
The morphology of single RGCs was analyzed using the Tg(BGUG), kif5aa*162+/− transgenic line and single cells were imaged over consecutive days. To quantify filopodia dynamics, imaging was performed for 10 min at a rate of 1 frame/2 min. All branches not extending within this imaging period were assigned as stable branches and used for quantification of branch number and length. All branches extended or retracted within this imaging period were defined as filopodia. Single cell labeling to analyze synapse and mitochondria distribution was achieved by injection of 1 nl of naked plasmid DNA (25 ng/μl) into 1 cell stage embryos of the Tg(Isl2b:Gal4, cmlc2:eGFP), kif5aa*162+/− transgenic line. The following constructs were used: p4nrUAS:tagRFPCaax-pA-4nrUAS:PhBGFP-pA-Tol2; p4nrUAS:tagRFPCaax-pA-4nrUAS:SypGFP-pA-Tol2;cmcl2:eGFP; p4nrUAS:SypGFP-pA-4nrUAS:PhBmcherry-pA-Tol2;cmcl2:eGFP. To generate single RGCs expressing the dominant negative ntrk3a receptor, we injected 1 nl of naked p10UAS:ntrk3aDN-eGFP-pA-Tol2;cmcl2:eGFP plasmid DNA into 1 cell stage embryos of the Tg(Pou3f4:Gal4), nacre+/− transgenic line. To generate single eGFP expressing RGCs growing into a ntf3 overexpressing tectum, we performed injections of 0.1 ng/μl pIsl2b:eGFPCaax plasmid DNA, 15 ng/μl p10UAS:ntf3-E2A-tagRFP-pA-tol2, cmcl2:eGFP plasmid DNA and 50 ng/μl Tol2 transposase mRNA into 1 cell stage embryos of the Tg(gSA2AzGFF49A) ( ) transgenic line. In control injections, no p10UAS:ntf3-E2A-tagRFP-pA-tol2, cmcl2:eGFP plasmid DNA was injected.

## Confocal microscopy
Imaging was performed on a Roper confocal spinning disk head mounted on a Zeiss upright microscope, and acquisitions were done with a CoolSNAP HQ2 CDD camera (Photometrics, USA) through the MetaMorph software (Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, CA). Embryos were anaesthetized using 0.02% tricaine (MS-222, Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, MO) diluted in egg water and embedded in 1% low melting-point agarose in glass-bottom cell tissue culture dish (Fluorodish, World Precision Instruments, Sarasota, FL). Acquisitions were done using water immersion long working distance lenses, at 40× magnification (W DIC PL APO VIS-IR; 421462-9900) for z-stack images of the whole tectum and at 63× magnification (W PL APO VIS-IR; 421480-9900) for single plane time-lapse imaging of linear axonal segments. Images were assembled and analyzed in ImageJ (NIH). Z-stack images were manual edited to remove skin autofluorescence.

## Time-lapse imaging, kymogram production and analysis
Time-lapse parameters were determined similar to previous studies ( ; ) based on the speed of transport in the tectum and set at 5 s intervals for 15 min (SypGFP) and 20 min (mitoGFP) total duration. Time-lapse images were assembled and analyzed in ImageJ to determine the percentage of moving vs stable particles, as well as distribution/density and size of the organelles. Kymograms were extracted for each linear segment using the kymogram tool (Montpellier RIO Imaging, CNRS, France). Extraction of small structures of the kymograms was done using the rotational watershed algorithm of the KymoMaker program ( ) and trace detection was done manually in ImageJ.

## Calcium imaging
5- to 7-day-old nacre (mitfa−/−) or TL larvae were taken from a cross of kif5aa*162+/− Tg(HuC:GCaMP5G) or Tg(Isl2b:Gal4), Tg(UAS:GCaMP3) transgenic fish. They were immobilized in 2% low melting point agarose and mounted with the dorsal side up on a plexiglas platform. The platform was then placed in a custom-made chamber and immersed in E3 solution without methylene blue. The agarose around the eyes was cut away with a scalpel to allow for an unhindered view for the larvae. The larvae faced with one eye towards a glass cover slip in the chamber wall at a distance between 8 and 10 mm. Directly behind this glass cover slip and outside the chamber, a monochromatic OLED array (800 × 600 px, 13 × 9 mm, eMagin) for visual stimulus presentation covering approximately 70° by 50° of the larva's visual field was positioned. A colored filter (Kodak Wratten No. 32) was placed between glass cover slip and OLED to block green light emitted from the OLED thus allowing for simultaneous imaging and visual stimulation. Visual stimuli were synchronized to the acquisition and consisted of single black bars on a white background (or the inverse) running along the caudal rostral axis. The long axis of the bar was orthogonal to the direction of motion. Each bar was approximately 7° in width and moved at 16°/s. Visual stimuli were generated and controlled by custom scripts written in Matlab (MathWorks, for details see ) using the Psychophysics Toolbox extensions ( ; ). Confocal imaging of visually-evoked calcium responses in the tectum contralateral to the eye receiving the visual stimulus was performed using an upright microscope (Roper/Zeiss, Germany) equipped with a Spinning Disk head (CSU-X1, Yokogawa, Japan) and a 40×/1.0 NA water-immersion objective (Zeiss). Time-series streams of 5 min duration were acquired at 4 Hz with 0.323 × 0.323 μm spatial resolution (620 × 520 pixels). GCaMP3 or GCaMP5G were excited by a 491 nm laser and emitted light was bandpass-filtered (HQ 525/50). Images were taken with a CCD camera (CoolSnap HQ2 Photometrics, Tucson, AZ). We did not observe any differences in larvae from 5 dpf to 7 dpf. Therefore, the data sets were combined for analysis. Occasionally, a visual response at the onset of the laser illumination or the power-on of the OLED was observed that quickly returned to baseline, probably due to habituation of the fish. Therefore, we excluded the first few seconds from acquisition analysis. Each stimulus epoch was presented for 4.4 s to every animal with an inter-epoch interval of 5.6 or 10.6 s to allow for the GCaMP signal to return to baseline values. After the experiment, fish were genotyped. Confocal time-series were pre-processed by correcting for motion with a translation algorithm (Fiji [ ]). For each acquisition, ROIs for Neuropil and PVNs, respectively, were determined manually. Then the averaged ROI based time-series were smoothened by a low pass filter and the baseline signal was calculated by calculating the minimum in a time interval of 10 s before stimulus onset. The smoothened fluorescence signal and the baseline fluorescence were then used to calculate normalized signal intensity changes (% ΔF/F0). To identify pixels that were response locked to the stimulus, we performed linear regression on the Calcium evoked time-series ( ). For this, we convolved the stimulus time-series with an exponentially decaying kernel with half-decay times for GCaMP5G (667 ms) ( ) or GCaMP3 (597 ms) ( ). This predicted fluorescence trace for the bar stimulus was then compared with the measured calcium traces for each pixel using Pearson correlation.

## Transmission electron microscopy
6 dpf larvae were anaesthesized in 0.004% Tricaine in E3 solution and then fixed in 2% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate buffer, pH 7.2. Tails were severed to increase permeability of fixation. Four drops of 4% OsO4 were added to 1 ml of glutaraldehyde fixative, and samples were soaked for 15 min. After three washes in 0.1 M phosphate buffer, samples were stored in 2% glutaraldehyde solution. Prior to embedding, samples were washed three times with 0.1 M phosphate buffer for 2 min and dehydrated with graded acetone: 35% acetone, 50% acetone, 75% acetone, 80% acetone, 95% acetone, and 100% acetone (three times) for 10 min per solution while shaking. Samples were infiltrated with Epon resin/acetone mixtures: Epon resin: acetone (1:3), Epon resin: acetone (1:1) and Epon resin: acetone (3:1) followed by pure Epon resin containing the accelerant BDMA (three washes). Finally, embedded samples were cured in a vacuum oven and sectioned with a RMC MT6000 Microtome to 70 nm slices. Images were acquired with an FEI Tecnai 12 Transmission electron microscope.

## Quantitative RT-PCR
Total RNA was prepared from 4 or 5 dpf embryos with TRIzol reagent (ThermoFisher Scientific) and TURBO DNA-free reagents (ThermoFisher Scientific). RNA (1 μg) was retrotranscribed using random primers and the SuperScript III First-Strand Synthesis system (ThermoFisher Scientific). For q-RT-PCR, the SYBR Green PCR Master Mix (ThermoFisher Scientific) was used according to the manufacturers protocol and the PCR reaction was performed on an ABI PRISM 7900HT instrument. Ef1a and RPL13a were used as reference genes as reported previously ( ). All assays were performed in triplicate using 11.25 ng of cDNA per reaction. The mean values of triplicate experiments were calculated according to the deltaCT quantification method.

## Western blotting
Western blot analysis of embryo extracts was performed using standard techniques. Briefly, about 25 5 dpf larvae were homogenized in lysis buffer (20 μl/embryo) containing: 10 mM HEPES, 300 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 0.45% Triton, 0.05% Tween, Protease inhibitor-EDTA (Mini Complete, Roche, Switzerland). Protein extracts (about 20 μg/lane) were separated by SDS-PAGE and subsequently blotted onto a PVDF membrane. Secondary antibody couples with Horseradish peroxidase (1:2000) were used to detect the anti-NTF3 (1:500) and anti-alpha-Tubulin (1:5000) primary antibodies (see Antibody section above for details), and reveled using ECL Western Blotting Detection Reagents (GE Healthcare Life Sciences, Pittsburgh, PA). Western blot quantification was performed using a cheminoluminescence digital imaging system (ImageQuant Las-4000 Mini, GE Healthcare Life Sciences) and analyzed using ImageJ software.

## Funding Information
This paper was supported by the following grants:
ATIP/Avenir starting grant CNRS/INSERM
Starting Grant to Filippo Del Bene.
http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100000781European Research Council (ERC)
ERC-StG#311159 to Filippo Del Bene.
http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100001645Boehringer Ingelheim Fonds
Graduate Student Fellowship to Thomas O Auer.
http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100000156Fonds de Recherche du Québec - Santé
Graduate Student Fellowship to Valerie Bercier.
http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100002915Fondation pour la Recherche Médicale
Postdoctoral Fellowship to Christoph Gebhardt.
National Funding Agency for Research (ANR)
ANR-II-INBS-0014 to Jean-Paul Concordet.

## Acknowledgements
We want to thank F Engert for the Tg(HuC:GCaMP5) transgenic line and C Nuesslein-Vollhard for the Tg(shh:eGFP) transgenic line. Furthermore, we are grateful to M Meyer for sharing the 5xUAS:SypGFP construct and C Wunder for sharing the PhB:eGFP and PhB:mcherry constructs. We thank Manuela Portoso for helpful advice with the Western Blot analysis and all members of the Del Bene lab for fruitful discussions. We thank the Developmental Biology Curie imaging facility (PICT-IBiSA@BDD, Paris, France, UMR3215/U934) member of the France-BioImaging national research infrastructure for their help and advice with confocal microscopy. The Del Bene laboratory ‘Neural Circuits Development’ is part of the Laboratoire d'Excellence (LABEX) entitled DEEP (ANR-11-LABX-0044), and of the École des Neurosciences de Paris Ile-de-France network. TOA was supported by a Boehringer Ingelheim Fonds Ph.D. fellowship and VB by an FRSQ and CIHR Doctoral Award and is enrolled in the ENP Graduate Program. CG was supported by a FRM postdoctoral fellowship. This work has been supported by an ATIP/AVENIR program starting grant (FDB), ERC-StG #311159 (FDB), ANR-II-INBS-0014 (JPC), CNRS, INSERM and Institut Curie core funding.

## Additional information

## Competing interests
The authors declare that no competing interests exist.

## Author contributions
TOA, Conception and design, Acquisition of data, Analysis and interpretation of data, Drafting or revising the article.
TX, Conception and design, Acquisition of data, Analysis and interpretation of data.
VB, Acquisition of data, Analysis and interpretation of data.
CG, Acquisition of data, Analysis and interpretation of data.
KD, Acquisition of data, Analysis and interpretation of data.
J-PC, Drafting or revising the article, Contributed unpublished essential data or reagents.
MS, Drafting or revising the article, Contributed unpublished essential data or reagents.
KK, Drafting or revising the article, Contributed unpublished essential data or reagents.
CW, Conception and design, Contributed unpublished essential data or reagents.
JW, Conception and design, Drafting or revising the article.
HB, Conception and design, Analysis and interpretation of data, Drafting or revising the article.
FDB, Conception and design, Analysis and interpretation of data, Drafting or revising the article.

## Ethics
Animal experimentation: All fish are housed in the fish facility of our laboratory, which was built according to the local animal welfare standards. All animal procedures were performed in accordance with French and European Union animal welfare guidelines.

## Additional files
10.7554/eLife.05061.026Supplementary file 1.Description of zebrafish mutant and transgenic lines used in this study.
DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.05061.026
10.7554/eLife.05061.027Supplementary file 2.Primers used in this study.
DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.05061.027
10.7554/eLife.05061.028Source code 1.Source code for moving bar stimulus.
DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.05061.028

 10.7554/eLife.05061.029Decision letter
DavisGraeme WReviewing editorUniversity of California, San Francisco, United StateseLife posts the editorial decision letter and author response on a selection of the published articles (subject to the approval of the authors). An edited version of the letter sent to the authors after peer review is shown, indicating the substantive concerns or comments; minor concerns are not usually shown. Reviewers have the opportunity to discuss the decision before the letter is sent (see review process). Similarly, the author response typically shows only responses to the major concerns raised by the reviewers.
Thank you for sending your work entitled “Deletion of a kinesin I motor unmasks a mechanism of homeostatic branching control by neurotrophin-3” for consideration at eLife. Your article has been evaluated by a Senior editor, a Reviewing editor and two reviewers. The Reviewing editor and the reviewers discussed their comments before we reached this decision, and the Reviewing editor has assembled the following comments to help you prepare a revised submission.
In summary, there is high enthusiasm for both the subject matter and the potential nature of the advance. All agree that the manuscript would be of broad interest to the readership of eLife. However, there is consensus among the reviewers that some of the major conclusions of the work are not yet supported sufficiently. Please see the reviewer comments below, which have been organized into major issues that must be addressed and minor issues that can be addressed at your discretion.
In the present article, Auer et al. present a set of results suggesting that (1) the Kinesin 1-family anterograde microtubule-based motor Kif5 is required for proper axon morphogenesis, (2) in kif5aa mutant zebrafish, retino-tectal axons display delayed target invasion but ultimately increased axon branching and (3) reduced anterograde axonal transport of mitochondria resulting in depletion of mitochondria from the distal part of the axon and (4) upregulation of NT3 in the tectum of kif5aa mutants. The results corresponding to the first 3 parts are fairly convincing. The topic is interesting and the study could provide new insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying axon morphogenesis.
Major Criticisms:
1) The final part of the manuscript suggesting that NT3 upregulation in the tectum is responsible for the overgrowth of axons observed in the kif5aa mutant is not convincing and the lack of causality between the two phenotypes is weakening the main conclusions. Specifically, the authors do not provide any evidence for a causal relationship between depletion of mitochondria from distal axon and (1) delayed axon invasion and/or (2) increased axon branching. In fact, since the authors suggest later on in the article that the increased axon branching might be largely the results of cell non-autonomous effect of NT3 upregulation by tectal cells, it becomes important to test if the axon growth/branching phenotype is causally related with the mitochondria transport defect and/or the NT3 upregulation.
Could the authors also show the quantification of filopodia increase after neurotrophic Factor 3 overexpression? Is there an additional effect when Kif5aa is deleted and neurotrophic factor 3 is overexpressed, or is the branching/filopodia changed to a similar extend compared to either Kif5aa deletion in retinal neurons or overexpression of neurotrophic factor 3 in tectal/glial cells? Likewise, if the authors overexpressed the dominant negative ntrk3a (TrkC receptor homologue) kinase dead version in kif5aa mutant animals, would there be a reduction in branching? How is the branching compared to wildtype animals?
2) Please overexpress neurotrophic Factor 3 in the tectal/glial cells and express the dominant negative ntrk3a mutant in retinal cells.
3) The authors should provide other evidence besides loss of Kif5aa that loss of activity in these RGCs leads to increased Ntf3 expression the tectum, such as tetanus toxin expression in RGC to silence neuronal activity in a cell-autonomous manner.
4) Kif5aa mutant fish die at 10dpf (lack of swim bladder inflation) making it impossible to address the possibility that Ntf3 upregulation may eventually rescue the reduced mitochondrial anterograde transport phenotype. However, the blumenkohl mutant, which is viable and has increased axonal branching but decreased visual transmission, could be used to determine if at a later stage increased Ntf3 in the tectum leads to increased mitochondrial localization in the RGC axons.
5) The authors show/discuss that mitochondria are often associated with presynaptic boutons (Obashi and Okabe EJN 2013; Courchet, Lewis et al, Cell 2013). They demonstrate that they can perform dual channel imaging of mitochondria and stable presynaptic sites ( ). The authors should address if the fraction of mitochondria associated with presynaptic boutons is affected upon loss of Ki5aa and if Ntf3 overexpression can rescue/affect this localization to help link the two stories together.
6) Another way to potentially link the two parts of the paper would to test if reduction of NT3 expression in the tectum of kif5aa mutants normalizes the axon branching phenotype.
Minor comments:
The authors start out in the Abstract about how important microtubules are to regulate neuronal polarization also during, but then nothing about these aspects are found in the Introduction. Here, it would be worthwhile to spend a few additional words about how microtubules drive the development of neuronal polarization (e.g. Witte et al., JCB, 2008; Gomis-Rüth et al., Current Biology, 2008).
[Editors' note: further revisions were requested prior to acceptance, as described below.]
Thank you for resubmitting your work entitled “Deletion of a kinesin I motor unmasks a mechanism of homeostatic branching control by neurotrophin-3” for further consideration at eLife. Your revised article has been favorably evaluated by a Senior editor and a member of the Board of Reviewing Editors. The manuscript has been improved but there is one remaining issue that needs to be addressed before acceptance, as outlined below:
The additional work undertaken in this revised version of the paper utilises a new strain of fish: Tg(UAS:BoTxLCB-GFP). In order to provide as complete a picture as possible we ask that you please include details of the development of this reagent.
10.7554/eLife.05061.030Author response
1) The final part of the manuscript suggesting that NT3 upregulation in the tectum is responsible for the overgrowth of axons observed in the kif5aa mutant is not convincing and the lack of causality between the two phenotypes is weakening the main conclusions. Specifically, the authors do not provide any evidence for a causal relationship between depletion of mitochondria from distal axon and (1) delayed axon invasion and/or (2) increased axon branching. In fact, since the authors suggest later on in the article that the increased axon branching might be largely the results of cell non-autonomous effect of NT3 upregulation by tectal cells, it becomes important to test if the axon growth/branching phenotype is causally related with the mitochondria transport defect and/or the NT3 upregulation.
To determine if the observed increase in axon growth and branching was directly linked to the mitochondria transport defects, we analyzed mitochondria distribution in blu mutants, lacking synaptic transmission between RGCs and the tectum and showing upregulation of Ntf3. In these animals although RGCs show increased arbor size and we detect increased Ntf3 expression, no change in mitochondria localization was observed both by in vivo imaging and EM analysis. In contrast our data show that an upregulation of Ntf3 via overexpression in the tectum alone is sufficient to induce overgrowth in wildtype RGCs. These data are now presented in and discussed in the text, as follows:
“Mitochondria are preferentially localized at active synapses ( ) and are found in close proximity to stable Synaptophysin-containing clusters in RGC arbors ( ). By co-labelling mitochondria and presynaptic clusters in the same cells in vivo we showed that approximately 40% stable presynaptic sites are associated with mitochondria in wildtype and blu-/- RGC axons ( ).”
“In addition we observed that the distribution of mitochondria was not significantly altered in blu-/- RGC axons nor was the association with stable presynaptic sites ( ). Together these data suggest that Ntf3 upregulation does not per se affect mitochondria localization.”
“Interestingly, Ntf3 upregulation alone as observed in blu mutants or in overexpression experiments had no significant effect on mitochondria distribution and short-lived filopodia dynamic. This suggests that these phenotypes are specific to kif5aa-/- RGCs and probably caused by direct axonal trafficking defects, and that they are not due to impaired synaptic activity.”
Could the authors also show the quantification of filopodia increase after neurotrophic Factor 3 overexpression? Is there an additional effect when Kif5aa is deleted and neurotrophic factor 3 is overexpressed, or is the branching/filopodia changed to a similar extend compared to either Kif5aa deletion in retinal neurons or overexpression of neurotrophic factor 3 in tectal/glial cells? Likewise, if the authors overexpressed the dominant negative ntrk3a (TrkC receptor homologue) kinase dead version in kif5aa mutant animals, would there be a reduction in branching? How is the branching compared to wildtype animals?
We have now extended the analysis of filopodia dynamics via short term time lapse imaging, to blu-/- RGC axons and wildtype axons growing in tecta overexpressing Ntf3. In both cases filopodia dynamics were comparable to what is seen in wildtype cells and reduced when compared to kif5aa-/- mutant cells. These new data suggest that the overgrowth phenotype and the increased filopodia dynamics observed in kif5aa-/- are two independent phenotypes. Therefore Ntf3 upregulation can cause RGCs overgrowth without affecting filopodia dynamics. These new data are now presented in and in the main text:
“We next decided to test if the observed increased formation and retraction of filopodia in the axons of kif5aa mutant RGCs was directly caused by Ntf3 upregulation. Therefore we analyzed filopodia dynamics via time-lapse imaging both in blu-/- RGCs and in axons growing when Ntf3 was overexpressed in the tectum via our transgenic construct. In both experimental conditions we did not observe any increase in the filopodia dynamics or RGC axons ( ), excluding the possibility that Ntf3 overexpression has a direct effect on this process.”
“Interestingly, Ntf3 upregulation alone as observed in blu mutants […] not due to impaired synaptic activity.”
As the reviewers suggested we have analyzed axonal branching upon overexpression of the dominant negative ntrk3a in kif5aa-/- RGCs and observed a loss of the overgrowth phenotype at later stages and a reduced branch number when compared to wildtype RGCs. This reduced branching was also visible in wildtype RGCs overexpressing the dominant negative ntrk3a construct, suggesting a role for this receptor in branching behavior ( ). Therefore, the text now reads:
“Upon overexpression of the truncated ntrk3adN-GFP construct in single wildtype RGCs by mosaic DNA expression, we observed a substantial reduction of axon branch length and number of branches at 5dpf ( ), consistent with a role of Ntrk3 as a branch-promoting receptor.
In addition, ntrk3adN-GFP overexpression in single kif5aa-/- and blu-/- RGCs could abolish the axonal overgrowth normally observed in these mutants as measured by total branch length ( ) and even reduce the number of branches compared to wildtype cells ( ).”
2) Please overexpress neurotrophic Factor 3 in the tectal/glial cells and express the dominant negative ntrk3a mutant in retinal cells.
This is a great suggestion but unfortunately this experiment is currently technically not feasible. In our paper both Ntf3 and Ntrk3adN-GFP are overexpressed robustly using the Gal4/UAS system and different Gal4 lines specific for the tectum or the RGCs respectively. Combing them for the purpose of this experiment would result in an overexpression of both constructs, in both cell types. However, to try to circumvent this crossover, we generated a construct that drives the expression of Ntrk3adN-GFP directly under the control of the RGC specific promoter islet2b and injected it in embryos overexpressing Ntf3 in the tectum (with the GAL4/UAS system). Unfortunately the Ntrk3adN-GFP expression was not high enough to achieve a dominant negative effect per se and the fluorescence was so weak that it was not detectable anymore at 5dpf. We then tried to address this point indirectly by overexpressing Ntrk3adN-GFP in single RGCs of blu-/- mutants, where Ntf3 is also upregulated in the tectum. This experiment showed that interference with Ntf3 signaling was able to rescue RGC growth, and even produced arbors that were less complex, with reduced number of branches as compared to wildtype RGCs. These new data are now shown in and included in the text:
“In addition, ntrk3adN-GFP overexpression in single kif5aa-/- and blu-/- RGCs could abolish the axonal overgrowth normally observed in these mutants as measured by total branch length ( ) and even reduce the number of branches compared to wildtype cells ( ).”
3) The authors should provide other evidence besides loss of Kif5aa that loss of activity in these RGCs leads to increased Ntf3 expression the tectum, such as tetanus toxin expression in RGC to silence neuronal activity in a cell-autonomous manner.
We agree that this point is crucial for our manuscript. However, it is important to consider that the existing tetanus toxin transgenic lines in zebrafish are not expressed in a sufficiently strong way to address it. We therefore asked our collaborators Maximiliano Suster, Claire Wyart and Koichi Kawakami to share with us a new unpublished transgenic line expressing botulinum toxin light chain B under the control of the UAS promoter (they have been added as co-authors in this revised manuscript). Their experiments (soon to be published) have demonstrated the superior ability of this line to silence neuron activity when compared to TeTx. Using this tool we showed via qRT-PCR and Western blot analysis, that complete silencing of RGCs indeed cause Ntf3 overexpression. These data are shown in , and included in the main text:
“To directly test the causality link between the lack of presynaptic input and upregulation of Ntf3 in the optic tectum we silenced the neuronal activity of RGCs […]. These results strongly suggest that lack of presynaptic activity and subsequent overexpression of Ntf3 in the tectum trigger the increased size of axonal branches of RGCs in kif5aa, blumenkohl and lakritz mutants (see ; ; ).”
4) Kif5aa mutant fish die at 10dpf (lack of swim bladder inflation) making it impossible to address the possibility that Ntf3 upregulation may eventually rescue the reduced mitochondrial anterograde transport phenotype. However, the blumenkohl mutant, which is viable and has increased axonal branching but decreased visual transmission, could be used to determine if at a later stage increased Ntf3 in the tectum leads to increased mitochondrial localization in the RGC axons.
To address this possibility we have analyzed mitochondria distribution in blu mutant RGCs by in vivo imaging. No difference was observed at any stage as compared to the wildtype, although we could not extend our analysis after day 7 due to weak expression of the mito-GFP marker at later stages. Furthermore electron microscopy imaging showed no significant change in mitochondria density in blu-/- tecta. Interestingly in blu-/- mutant, where we observed Ntf3 overexpression and RCGs axons are expanded, the fraction of presynaptic clusters (visualized by synaptophysin-GFP) associated with mitochondria was unaffected, suggesting that Ntf3 does not have an impact on mitochondria association with synapses. These new data are now discussed in the Results and in the Discussion, and shown in , and :
“Mitochondria are preferentially localized at active synapses ( ) […]. 40% stable presynaptic sites are associated with mitochondria in wildtype and blu-/- RGC axons ( ).”
“In addition we observed that the distribution of mitochondria was not significantly altered in blu-/- RGC axons […]. Ntf3 upregulation does not per se affect mitochondria localization.”
“Interestingly, Ntf3 upregulation alone as observed in blu mutants […] not due to impaired synaptic activity.”
5) The authors show/discuss that mitochondria are often associated with presynaptic boutons (Obashi and Okabe EJN 2013; Courchet, Lewis et al, Cell 2013). They demonstrate that they can perform dual channel imaging of mitochondria and stable presynaptic sites ( ). The authors should address if the fraction of mitochondria associated with presynaptic boutons is affected upon loss of Ki5aa and if Ntf3 overexpression can rescue/affect this localization to help link the two stories together.
We carefully quantified the fraction of presynaptic puncta associated with mitochondria in wildtype RGCs and extended our analysis to trigeminal ganglion cells where the co-labeling of mitochondria and synaptic puncta is technically more feasible for later stages. In both cases we observed about 40% of presynaptic boutons associated with mitochondria. In kif5aa-/- trigeminal ganglion cells this fraction was significantly reduced to less than 20%. Unfortunately the mito-RFP transient labeling was not stable enough in kif5aa-/- RGCs to perform this analysis as we were afraid of not being able to distinguish between cells not expressing the RFP marker from cells depleted of mitochondria. Interestingly in blu-/- mutant, where we observe Ntf3 overexpression and RCGs axons are expanded, the fraction of presynaptic boutons associated with mitochondria was unaffected. This suggests that Ntf3 does not have a direct role in mitochondria localization. We have now added these results in the main text in the Results and Discussion and the corresponding images are shown in .
6) Another way to potentially link the two parts of the paper would to test if reduction of NT3 expression in the tectum of kif5aa mutants normalizes the axon branching phenotype.
This experiment is an excellent suggestion. Indeed we tried to interfere with Ntf3 activity using Ntf3 antibody (as described by Williams JA et al. Dev Biol 2000) and by vivo-morpholino injection in the tectum (Kizil C, Brand M. PlosONE 2011). Unfortunately neither approach gave conclusive results. The antibody injection were performed in the brain ventricle or in the tectal neuropil, but had no lasting effect in our experiments when analyzing cells two days after the injection. In contrast, the vivo morpholino injection seemed to trigger a general toxic effect reducing axonal growth in an unspecific manner, as shown by the injection of control vivo morpholino. The best way to address this question would be to use a genetic tool designed to delete Ntf3 gene in a tissue specific manner, targeting only the optic tectum, but to our best knowledge, such a tool is unfortunately not available at the moment.
Minor comments:
The authors start out in the Abstract about how important microtubules are to regulate neuronal polarization also during, but then nothing about these aspects are found in the Introduction. Here, it would be worthwhile to spend a few additional words about how microtubules drive the development of neuronal polarization (e.g. Witte et al., JCB, 2008; Gomis-Rüth et al., Current Biology, 2008).
Thanks for pointing out this inconsistency between our Abstract and Introduction. We have now expanded our Introduction adding the following sentences:
“Microtubules serve as main longitudinal cytoskeletal tracks in axons and it is well established that microtubule stabilization is a landmark of early axonal development that is sufficient to induce axon formation in vivo. Besides, microtubule stabilization alone can even lead to the transformation of mature dendrites into axons in differentiated neurons ( ; ; ).”
[Editors' note: further revisions were requested prior to acceptance, as described below.]
Thank you for resubmitting your work entitled “Deletion of a kinesin I motor unmasks a mechanism of homeostatic branching control by neurotrophin-3” for further consideration at eLife. Your revised article has been favorably evaluated by a Senior editor and a member of the Board of Reviewing Editors. The manuscript has been improved but there is one remaining issue that needs to be addressed before acceptance, as outlined below:
The additional work undertaken in this revised version of the paper utilises a new strain of fish: Tg(UAS:BoTxLCB-GFP). In order to provide as complete a picture as possible we ask that you please include details of the development of this reagent.
We have now added the following detailed description regarding the generation of this reagent in the Materials and methods section.
To generate a UAS:BoTxBLC-GFP construct, a codon-optimized cDNA encoding botulinum toxin light chain B serotype ( ; ) was fused in frame with GFP and cloned downstream of the 5x UAS sequence using gateway recombination ( ). Microinjection of the pT2UAS:BoTxBLC-GFP plasmid (50 ng/µl) was based on standard protocols with Tol2 mRNA (25 ng/µl). Over 50 founders were screened for the presence of a functional transgene using a combination of behavioral assays (touch-evoked swimming, escape response) and the level of expression of the BoTxBLC-GFP fusion protein.