OncologistOncologist1643oncologist9607837The OncologistThe Oncologist1083-71591549-490XOxford University PressPMC6849480PMC6849480.16849480684948010.1634/theoncologist.2019-MA-1ONCO131411Chabner Colloquium10th Chabner Colloquium: Answering the Big Questions in Cancer Research
1211201911201924Suppl 234551010.1002/onco.v24.S210th Chabner Colloquium: Answering the Big Questions in Cancer ResearchS1S4121120191311201914112019© AlphaMed Press 2019pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyesAbstract 1 – IDH Inhibition in Acute Myeloid Leukemia: Emergence of a New Therapeutic Era
FathiAmirMassachusetts General Hospital/Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USAGenomic characterization of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) has led to newly characterized alterations that can be responsive to targeted therapies. Approximately 20% of patients with AML harbor mutations in one of two isoforms of isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH1 or IDH2). These enzymes, in the normal setting, are mediators of cellular metabolism. Their mutated forms in cancer synthesize the overproduction of an onco‐metabolite, 2‐hydroxyglutarate (2HG). 2HG acts as a competitive inhibitor of multiple key regulatory proteins, including TET enzymes, leading to changes in genome structure and epigenetic activity and ultimately an arrest of myeloid differentiation. 2HG, elevated in patients with IDH mutations, can also be measured in the serum and urine of affected patients, where it can serve as a biomarker of disease activity and therapeutic response. These advances triggered development of a new class of small molecule inhibitors of mutant IDH enzymes. After demonstrating promising anti‐leukemic activity in animal models, phase I and II clinical trials of IDH inhibitors followed. Trials of the IDH1 inhibitor ivosidenib and the IDH2 inhibitor enasidenib demonstrated single agent activity, response rate, transfusion independence, and long‐term outcomes. Although generally well‐tolerated, some unique toxicities were associated with these novel therapies. These trials ultimately led to FDA approval for these agents, marking a significant therapeutic advance for AML. Ongoing trials are studying the efficacy of IDH inhibitors as monotherapy and in combination with other conventional AML therapies, both to evaluate potential synergistic combinations as well as to identify the appropriate place for IDH inhibitors within existing standard‐of‐care regimens.
Abstract 2 – Clonal Hematopoiesis
EbertBenjaminDana‐Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USAClonal hematopoiesis of indeterminate potential (CHIP) is a common age‐associated condition in individuals who do not have a hematologic malignancy or altered blood counts. CHIP is defined by the presence of clonal, somatic mutations that are found in hematologic malignancies, such as myelodysplastic syndrome, myeloproliferative neoplasms, and acute myeloid leukemia. Indeed, the mutations identified in CHIP, including mutations in DNMT3A, TET2, and ASXL1, are lesions that are commonly acquired early in the genetic ontogeny of hematologic malignancies, prior to the development of overt disease. Consistent with the concept that CHIP is a pre‐malignant state, CHIP is associated with a striking increased risk of hematologic malignancy. In addition, individuals with CHIP have increased overall mortality and an increased risk of cardiovascular disease. In murine models, TET2 inactivation in blood cells, transplanted into LDL receptor knockout mice, leads to accelerated atherosclerosis. Individuals with JAK2‐mutant CHIP have an elevated risk of venous thrombosis. Individuals with CHIP at the time of autologous stem cell transplant for lymphoma have an elevated risk of developing therapy‐related myeloid malignancies. CHIP is therefore a common condition, and clonal mutations in blood cells can contribute to diverse pathologic processes.
Abstract 3 – Epigenetic Reversal of Chemotherapy Resistance in Cancers
MotamediMoMassachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Boston, Massachusetts, USACancer recurrence and resistance to radiation and chemotherapy are two of the most vexing challenges in cancer treatment, resulting in burgeoning health care costs and, more problematically, fatalities every year. A contributing factor is the natural and stress‐induced emergence of a subpopulation of tumor cells that is resistant to treatment, often entering into a special cellular state called quiescence (G0). G0 cells have a distinct transcriptional program through which they acquire new properties, including long life, thrifty metabolism, and resistance to stress. None of the current therapies specifically target these tumor cells. To address this situation, my lab modeled G0 in fission yeast and showed that, as cells transition to G0, constitutive heterochromatin proteins are deployed to several euchromatic regions to regulate the expression of developmental, metabolic, and cell cycle genes. This work revealed a new function for constitutive heterochromatin proteins in establishing the global transcriptional program of cells in response to long‐term stress. Recent work has revealed that constitutive heterochromatin proteins play a conserved role in G0 and long‐term stress resistance in mammalian cells, where they also help establish their adaptive transcriptional program. Recently we tested whether constitutive heterochromatin proteins also are required for resistance in cancer cells. Strikingly, our unpublished work demonstrates a direct link between this pathway and cancer resistance. In this presentation, I report our latest data demonstrating that inhibition of constitutive heterochromatin factors sensitizes cancer cells to chemotherapy in an epigenetic manner.
Abstract 4 – ctDNA, a Biomarker of Residual Disease and Tumor Response in Gastrointestinal Cancers
ParikhAparna RajMassachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USACirculating tumor DNA (ctDNA) has been shown to identify patients at high risk for disease recurrence after colorectal cancer resection. ctDNA identifies patients with minimal or “molecular” residual disease (MRD) following therapy completion. Current ctDNA residual disease detection approaches only assess genomic alterations (alts), are limited by low levels of ctDNA, and rely on tumor tissue sequencing to differentiate tumor‐derived alts from confounding nontumor‐derived alts. We evaluated a plasma‐only ctDNA assay, which assesses genomic and epigenomic signals to identify patients with colorectal cancer at high risk of recurrence without requiring initial tumor tissue sequencing. We then looked at the impact of additional treatment on ctDNA. We demonstrated that patients with MRD may benefit from additional adjuvant therapy and/or close surveillance. In another cohort of patients, we explored whether the use of ctDNA can also be useful in the prediction of treatment response across gastrointestinal cancers and compared ctDNA to standardly used tumor markers. The standard circulating tumor markers that are currently available are limited by their sensitivity and specificity in detection of disease and do not offer tumor‐specific genetic information. Monitoring ctDNA is a promising new approach to personalized cancer medicine that may provide real‐time information about the evolution of tumors. We evaluated how changes in ctDNA predicted response to treatment across metastatic gastrointestinal cancer patients on treatment and compared ctDNA to standard tumor markers. Longitudinal ctDNA assessment both in the curative and metastatic settings may provide insight into the dynamic changes due to treatment.
Abstract 5 – Cross‐Resistance in Small Cell Lung Cancer
DrapkinBenjaminMassachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USASmall cell lung cancer (SCLC) afflicts more than 30,000 patients per year in the United States and is rapidly fatal in most cases, with median survival of less than 1 year for metastatic disease. Although untreated SCLC is highly responsive to first‐line chemotherapy, benefit is temporary, and following relapse, resistance often extends to a broad spectrum of DNA damaging agents. Cross‐resistance following relapse has been challenging to study experimentally, as it requires a model system that faithfully reproduces the molecular features and clinical outcomes of the disease, with sufficient power to capture inter‐tumoral heterogeneity. We have generated a panel of 66 patient‐derived xenograft models (PDXs) of SCLC from biopsy specimens and circulating tumor cells (CTCs). These models stably maintain somatic genomic alterations from patients and faithfully mirror their responses to DNA damaging therapies. However, unlike with the patient experience, multiple therapies can be compared within the same model. To identify cross‐resistance patterns, we compared transcriptional profiles in untreated tumors with responses to two DNA damaging regimens: cisplatin/etoposide (EP), standard first‐line therapy for SCLC, and olaparib/temozolomide (OT), a promising investigational regimen in the relapsed setting. The strongest correlate with sensitivity to both regimens was basal expression of interferon‐stimulated genes (ISGs), and cross‐resistance was marked by low basal ISG expression. This result was surprising, as xenografts were grown and tested in severely immunocompromised mice. Investigation of the ISG signature presents a novel opportunity to dissect the molecular underpinnings of cross‐resistance, a problem that has beleaguered management of SCLC for more than 3 decades.
Abstract 6 – RET as a Target in Lung Cancer
LinJessica J.Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USANovel targeted therapies continue to advance treatment options for patients with advanced non‐small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Chromosomal rearrangements have emerged as an important class of targetable oncogenic driver alterations in lung cancer, as exemplified by anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) and ROS1 rearrangements, both with FDA‐approved targeted agents available. Rearranged during transfection, proto‐oncogene (RET) rearrangements have been validated as an additional oncogenic driver that occurs in 1%–2% of NSCLC. Prior efforts to target RET in lung cancer patients were hampered by the lack of potent and selective RET tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), necessitating the repurposed use of multikinase inhibitors such as cabozantinib or vandetanib, which are encumbered by suboptimal efficacy and significant toxicities. Recently, novel, oral, highly potent and selective RET TKIs—BLU‐667 (pralsetinib) and LOXO‐292 (selpercatinib)—have entered the clinic. Both of these RET‐selective inhibitors are demonstrating promising preliminary efficacy and safety in patients with advanced RET‐rearranged lung cancer and in patients with other advanced solid tumors harboring oncogenic RET alterations. In this lecture, we will review the rationale of therapeutically targeting RET in NSCLC, focus on the more recent drug development and preliminary clinical data of the selective RET inhibitors, and discuss ongoing efforts to understand molecular mechanisms of resistance to the novel RET TKIs.
Abstract 7 – Targeting SWI/SNF‐Hippo Axis in Squamous Cancers
SaladiSrinivas VinodMassachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Broad Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USASquamous cell carcinoma (SCC) remains among the most treatment‐refractory of human cancers, reflecting in part a limited understanding of the key pathways and mechanisms that drive this disease. The p53‐related transcription factor p63 is a central tumor maintenance factor subject to overexpression and/or genomic amplification in the majority of SCCs. Loss‐of‐function mutations in SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling subunit genes are observed in many cancers, but an oncogenic role for SWI/SNF is not well established. We have identified ACTL6A, a subunit of SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling, as frequently co‐amplified and highly expressed together with p63 in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) and lung squamous cell carcinoma. ACTL6A was previously linked to regulation of stem and progenitor cell function in the epidermis. ACTL6A and p63 physically interact and cooperatively control a transcriptional program that promotes proliferation and suppresses differentiation, in part through activation of the Hippo‐YAP pathway. Consequently, loss of ACTL6A in tumor cells leads to YAP inactivation, associated with growth arrest and terminal differentiation. In vivo, ectopic ACTLC6A expression promotes tumorigenesis. ACTL6A overexpression and YAP activation are highly correlated in primary HNSCC and predict poor patient survival. Additionally, we show that the major cell‐autonomous pathway repressed in HNSCC is the interferon response in vitro, while we find that ACTL6A amplification in HNSCC is associated with immunologically “cold” tumors despite a high mutation burden in vivo. Genomic and epigenomic analysis revealed that YAP/Hippo transcriptional complex, through recruitment of histone modifiers, promotes a chromatin state involved in the aggressive state of HNSCC tumors. Collectively, these findings reveal that ACTL6A/YAP orchestrates a tumor cell‐intrinsic mechanism of immune evasion and define ACTL6A as a potent driver of human SCC.
Abstract 8 – Innovations in Cell Therapy
MausMarcelaMassachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Boston, Massachusetts, USAAutologous T cells that have been genetically redirected with chimeric antigen receptors (CARs) specific to the CD19 antigen have achieved remarkable success in inducing rapid and sometimes complete eradication of B cell leukemias and lymphomas. New forms of CARs, including those targeting new surface molecules alone and in combination with additional functionalities, are under intense investigation. We will discuss some of our innovations in cell therapies, including strategies designed to overcome tumor heterogeneity and the tumor microenvironment.