1560tamTherapeutic Advances in Medical OncologyTher Adv Med OncolSAGE PublicationsPMC7450456745045674504563292252210.1177/1758835920950207Pulmonary sarcomatoid carcinoma: progress, treatment and
expectations
LiXin WuDi LiuHongyu ChenJun 1Department of Lung Cancer Surgery, Tianjin Medical University General Hospital, Tianjin, China2Department of Lung Cancer Surgery, Tianjin Medical University General Hospital, Tianjin, China3Tianjin Key Laboratory of Lung Cancer Metastasis and Tumor Microenvironment, Tianjin Medical University General Hospital, Tianjin, China4Department of Lung Cancer Surgery, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Lung Cancer Metastasis and Tumor Microenvironment, Tianjin Lung Cancer Institute, Tianjin Medical University General Hospital, Anshan Road no.154, Heping District, Tianjin 300052, China✉Email: huntercj2004@yahoo.com
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
258202012175883592095020717588359209502071192020© The Author(s), 2020This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/) which
permits non-commercial use, reproduction and distribution of the work
without further permission provided the original work is attributed as
specified on the SAGE and Open Access pages (https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).

## Abstract
Pulmonary sarcomatoid carcinoma (PSC) is a unique, highly invasive pulmonary
malignancy with a poor prognosis, representing 0.1–0.4% of all malignant lung
tumors. Because of its highly aggressive character and propensity for frequent
metastasis, PSC shows low response rates to traditional treatments such as
chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and neoadjuvant therapy. In recent years,
considerable progress has been made in gene sequencing, targeted therapies, and
immunotherapies. One of the most promising treatment approaches is the selection
of mono-targeted or multi-targeted drugs according to tumor gene-mutation sites,
such as epidermal growth factor receptor or vascular endothelial growth factor
receptor 2 (EGFR/VEGFR2), anaplastic lymphoma kinase
(ALK), and others. Another approach is the activation of
therapeutic anti-tumor immunity via pathways including
programmed cell-death protein-1/programmed cell-death ligand-1
(PD-1/PD-L1), which has been used in individual cases. In
this review, we will introduce the clinicopathologic features, molecular typing,
and traditional treatments. We will also review the biological characteristics
and the latest therapies for PSC. These novel therapies show promise in the
management of PSC, and the outcomes of investigative trials will hopefully
reveal a variety of treatment options for patients with PSC.
Keywords: biological characteristics, clinicopathological characteristics, molecular typing, pulmonary sarcomatoid carcinoma (PSC), therapies

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2020 Jan 21; Accepted 2020 Jul 23; Collection date 2020.

## Introduction
Pulmonary sarcomatoid carcinoma (PSC) is a unique, highly invasive, biphasic type of
pulmonary cancer with a poor prognosis, it represents 0.1–0.4% of all malignant
tumors of the lung. – PSC may
represent an epithelial neoplasm derived from a single clonal tissue; other tumors
of this type include cancerous interstitial malignancy, malignant transformation of
epithelial and mesenchymal cells, hamartoma, tissues with carcinosarcomatoid
changes, and sarcoma carcinogenesis. The morphological changes of the primary tumor foci are reminiscent of the
phenomenon of epithelial–mesenchymal transition (EMT), and it is worth noting that
biphasic PSCs are potentially derived from EMT, particularly tumors composed of
spindle and giant cells, – which are
associated with highly aggressive and conventional treatment-refractory behavior. Arshi et al. reported a case of sarcomatoid transformation
in a moderately differentiated squamous-cell carcinoma, which verified the EMT process. To further explore this process, related
genes have been identified, including the Twist and
ZEB genes, and the membrane protein kinase
DDR2 gene. On the basis of the 2015 World Health Organization classification, PSC can be
divided into five subgroups: pleomorphic carcinoma (PC), spindle-cell carcinoma
(SCC), giant-cell carcinoma (GCC), carcinosarcoma, and pulmonary blastoma. In contrast to other types of lung cancers, recent retrospective studies
demonstrated that PSC shows frequent genetic mutations. Patients are almost always in the middle or advanced stages when they are
diagnosed; these patients often do not have the opportunity to undergo surgical treatment. Furthermore, PSC is highly resistant to first-line chemotherapy
drugs. , These features account for its poor overall survival (OS) of PSC, which is 20% lower than that of other types of non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC), whose OS is 45%. There is a lack of randomized controlled trials and long-term follow-up data
due to the rarity of PSC. The treatment of this rare cancer faces huge challenges, and it is difficult
to match the current standard research methods. Sufficient knowledge about this
tumor type is not available. Therefore, it is necessary to explore promising
treatments, so that patients with this rare malignancy can benefit from the current
scientific research advances in the treatment of common tumors and data from
retrospective studies. This review summarizes the current research on the clinicopathological
characteristics, genetic mutations, and comprehensive therapies for PSC.

## Clinicopathological characteristics

## Clinical features
Patients with PSC commonly present with symptoms of dyspnea, cough, hemoptysis,
bloody sputum, chest pain, and weight loss, often present after a median
duration of approximately 1 month for clinical evaluation and
diagnosis. , The median age of patients with PSC is 68 years and the
median tumor size is 5 cm. Patients are more commonly male (32/53) and smokers (51/53) with a history of moderate-to-heavy tobacco consumption, which may
promote the development of carcinoma, although smoking status has not been shown
to affect OS (p > 0.05). , , These demographic features
are the same for tumors of simple or mixed cell types. Clinically, patients are typically diagnosed at an advanced stage, with a
mean age of onset ranging from 59 to 61 years. Li et al. reported 38 patients with PSC, the median
survival was 21 months, while 1-year, 3-year, and 5-year survival rates were
68.4%, 31.6%, and 18.4%, respectively. Other studies reported similar overall 5-year survival rates, that is,
approximately 11–25%, , , the median reported OS of 148 patients was 22.5 months
(range from 0.9 months to 102.4 months). Some studies demonstrated a fairly low rate of 5-year survival in PSC
(pathological stage [pStage] I: 16.3%, n = 49) compared with
other NSCLCs (pStage I adenocarcinoma 81.8%, and pStage I squamous-cell
carcinoma 70.2%). 
In patients with advanced disease, OS has no correlation with race, age, sex,
smoking, tumor size, N stage, pleural invasion, or lymphatic
metastasis. , , Ung et al. showed that adjuvant
chemotherapy did not have a significant effect on prognosis. Other factors, such as the neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio (NLR) can also
be used in patient evaluations. Histologic type, time from symptom onset to diagnosis, tumor
invasiveness, tumor growth, distant metastases, P stage, extent of surgical
resection, vascular/lymphatic invasion, and gene mutations such as programmed
cell death ligand-1 (PD-L1), TLG-P, and
KRAS mutations are independent prognostic factors in
PSC. , , , , , – Patients
with pStage >II showed a lower survival probability compared with the
patients with lower-stage disease. Patients with pN0 disease had a high rate of vascular invasion (57.1%),
indicating that distant metastases may often occur in the early stage; this
phenomenon might explain why N stage does not affect prognosis. , , , The
presenting complications of PSC are similar to those of other lung cancers. In
addition, tumor metastasis often includes various involved organs, such as the
lung, adrenal glands, pleura, brain, bone, or liver, but may also include
unusual anatomic sites, such as subdiaphragmatic nodes, kidney, peritoneum,
pancreas, skin, and right ventricle. , Approximately 62% of
patients had more than two metastatic locations. , When there are rare
distant metastases, the survival rate is extremely low (survival time:
3–5 months for skin metastases), and only palliative treatments or the
experimental and targeted drugs can be used for patients. 

## Imaging characteristics
Computed tomography (CT) diagnosis of PSC by Qin et al. is
summarized as follows: 
(1) Peripheral tumors are more common than central ones, and lesions are
always confined to the upper lobe.
(2) Tumors are usually huge, with well-defined boundaries, and are round
or quasi-circular. However, lobulated tumor lesions may occur due to an
unbalanced tumor growth rate; burr sign is rare.
(3) Plain CT shows dense soft tissue in the tumor, which may be
accompanied by large areas of patchy necrosis. Due to uneven tumor
necrosis, irregular thick-walled cavities or multiple small, wall-less
cavities within the areas of necrosis can also occur.
(4) In enhanced CT, most masses show edge-ring-shape enhancement or
uneven patchy enhancement.
(5) Peritoneal masses with local or distant metastases are common, and
subpleural lesions tend to invade the chest wall or pleura.
(6) Intratumoral calcification is rare. Therefore, CT is useful only for
preliminary identification of tumors, and histopathology and
immunohistochemistry are the gold standards for diagnosis.
Positron emission tomography CT (PET-CT) examination can be performed if the
patient has multiple metastases or the indication for enhanced CT is unclear.
There is no statistically significant difference between the central and
peripheral maximal standard unit value (SUVmax) in patients with PSC. There is
no significant difference in SUVmax of I, II, and III in tumor–node–metastasis
staging either. In addition, there is no great correlation between SUVmax and
sex/age/smoking history/serum tumor markers/tumor size in PSC. 
Some studies indicate that SUVmax of PET-CT is strongly correlated with the level
of PD-L1 expression and KRAS mutation status
in PSC, indicating that SUVmax can be used to evaluate PD-L1
expression and KRAS mutation status. 
PD-L1 expression is detected in 21 patients, with a positive
rate of 87.5%, and the SUVmax in PET-CT of 17 samples with
PD-L1 expression levels is equal to or greater than 50%,
which is higher than that of tumors with expression levels less than 50%. Six patients with KRAS gene mutation showed a higher
SUVmax than that of patients without mutation. 

## Pathological classification
The biological behavior and clinicopathological characteristics of PSC are not
well documented. The diagnosis of PSC is only used for surgically removed specimens. According to early studies, PSC with mesenchymal differentiation shows
more aggressive clinical features of early local invasion and distant metastasis
compared with other NSCLCs, despite being diagnosed at early stages. , Most of
the genes involved in EMT, , such as vimentin, are
overexpressed in PSCs. However, immumohistochemical staining of tumors should
also include epithelial markers [epithelial membrane antigen
(EMA), cytokeratin], TTF-1,
P40, and negative markers (e.g. primary antibodies for mesenchymal
cells, melanocytes, and sarcomatous cells). , Other representative
markers for sarcomatous elements to assist in making a differential diagnosis,
include desmin and sarcomeric
actin/smooth muscle. , Based on the
Ackerman Surgical Pathology, chapter: Lung and pleural and Clinicopathological diagnosis and differential diagnosis of
tracheal, pulmonary, pleural and mediastinal diseases, chapter:
Trachea and lung tumors, the characteristics of each sarcomatoid carcinoma types are described
below.

## Pleomorphic carcinoma
Pleomorphic carcinoma is the most common type of PSC, accounting for more
than 50%. It accounts for 2–3% in all lung cancer specimens removed surgically. Two types of pleomorphic carcinoma exist, including a giant- and
spindle-cell type, which are named similarly to those of thyroid tumors. Pleomorphic carcinoma consists of epithelial carcinoma and
sarcomatoid elements. Epithelial carcinoma is composed of traditional NSCLCs
(squamous-cell carcinoma, adenocarcinoma, adenosquamous-cell carcinoma, and
large-cell undifferentiated carcinoma). , Sarcoma-like cells
usually account for at least 10% of the tumor tissue and consist of spindled
or giant cells, which can present as one or a mixture of the two cell
types. , Pleomorphic carcinomas can also be composed
entirely of spindled and giant tumor cells, without an epithelial component,
and contain similar cell types to those of malignant
fibrohistiocytomas. , The microscopic
characteristics of SCC are described in detail below. Immunohistochemistry
will make the expression of a certain component in PC more significant. If
the component of non-polymorphic cancer cells is obvious, the diagnosis can
be made even if spindle cells or giant cells do not express
CK. The polymorphic components express Vimentin and
actin cross-linking protein (fascin)
in addition to CK, and also express related markers
(Napsin A, TTF-1, P63 and desmoglycin)
in varying degrees. 

## Spindle-cell carcinoma
SCC is mainly composed of malignant spindle cells; however, epithelial features can still be identified through
morphologic, electron microscopic, and immunohistochemical methods. Spindle-cell elements consist of fusiform malignant cells that are
positive for epithelial antibody markers. For example, EMA,
cytokeratin 7 (CK7), cytokeratin (CK),
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), and other antibodies are
used. , The spindle cell consists of spindle cells, whose
cytoplasm is eosinophilic. Under the microscope, it can be seen that the
cells are mainly arranged in sheets, bundles, and spindles. The larger the
epithelial-like cells are, the larger the nucleoli are, and the chromatin is
often blistered or rough. Spindle-shaped tumor cells can be mixed with
mild-to-moderate lymphocytes as the main inflammatory cells. Malignant spindle cells are usually composed of spindle molecules and
eosinophilic cytoplasm and are arranged in bundles and sheets on
histopathology. However, morphologic variation can also be seen: long, thin
cells with a fibroblastic appearance can be seen admixed with epithelioid
components, and the cells have large nuclei with prominent nucleoli. Vascular infiltration is common in SCC, and vascular walls on
histopathologic tissue sections can be stained by
pan-cytokeratin, which is the key to making a diagnosis. 

## Giant-cell carcinoma
Similarly, GCCs are composed entirely of giant cells. GCC is a morphologic rather than a pathologic phenotype, can occur in
any lung lobe, and has a poor prognosis. The prevalence rates are the upper
lobe (52.7%) is greater than lower lobe (21.7%), which is greater than
middle lobe (4.9%), which is greater than main bronchus (4.3%), and which is
greater than overlapping lesions (1.1%). Cells are usually composed of highly pleomorphic giant tumor cells
arranged in a solid sarcoma-like pattern. Most tumors are located in the
periphery, and the lesions are usually widespread at diagnosis. Some cases
are associated with focal adenoid differentiation and mucous production,
indicating that some tumors are dedifferentiated adenocarcinoma. Giant cells are usually abundant, with eosinophilic cytoplasm, large
and irregular nuclei, lobed nuclei, or multiple nuclei, , and
rough or vesicular chromatin. Neutrophil infiltration, necrosis, bleeding,
and vascular infiltration are common. It is important that these tumors should be distinguished from benign
giant-cell tumors of bone. 

## Carcinosarcoma
Carcinosarcoma is mainly gray–white with hemorrhage and necrotic masses. Carcinosarcoma consists of traditional NSCLC and heterologous
sarcoma-like types. Traditional types are usually composed of squamous-cell
carcinoma, followed by adenocarcinoma; the others are adenosquamous
carcinoma and large-cell carcinoma. Sarcomas containing squamous-cell carcinoma components are often of a
central type, growing in the bronchi, and carcinosarcoma containing
adenocarcinoma components is often peripheral. , These tumors can also
have both giant osteoclast-like cells and a sarcomatous component with
separations that can be clear or indistinct, similar to what is observed on
histopathology of angiosarcomas, liposarcoma, osteosarcomas,
chondrosarcomas, and rhabdomyosarcomas, the first two kinds of sarcoma are relatively rare. , Cases
identified by morphologic, immune-histochemical, and molecular biologic
techniques have shown that these are different manifestations of the same
biologic phenomenon; tumor cells can lose some or all epithelial markers and
acquire mesenchymal tissue markers; thus, it is further confirmed that the tumor originated from EMT.
Immunohistochemical staining showed that TTF-1, Napsin A,
and CK labeled adenocarcinoma components. P63,
P40, and CK5/6 labeled squamous-cell carcinoma
components. S-100, desmin and myogenin
mark chondrosarcoma and rhabdomyosarcoma components. For carcinosarcoma with high-grade fetal adenocarcinoma,
β-catenin is expressed on the cell membrane. 

## Pulmonary blastoma
In a study of biphasic sarcomatoid carcinomas of the lung, Manzotti
et al. found that PSC could originate from EMT. Pulmonary blastomas are defined as biphasic tumors containing fetal
adenocarcinomatous tissues (poorly differentiated or highly differentiated)
with primitive mesenchymal stroma, and sometimes they also contain
differentiated sarcomatous tissues. The epithelial component is characterized by an irregularly branched
glandular structure lined with pseudostratified columnar cells, clear
cytoplasm, and minimal nuclear atypia. Microscopically, pulmonary blastomas are characterized by
well-differentiated fetal adenocarcinoma and abundant mesenchymal components
that are typically composed of undifferentiated small, oval, or spindle cells. This is similar to what is seen in pseudoglandular fetal lungs. In up
to one third of cases, cellular atypia consistent with fetal or conventional
adenocarcinoma can be found, although the appearance is generally
bland. , The overall appearance is similar to that of
10~16-week-old fetal lung tissue and is similar to Wilms’ tumors. Subnuclear
and supranuclear cytoplasmic vacuoles can be seen in many cells. Solidly
cellular masses (mulberries) are commonly rich in cells with eosinophilic
cytoplasm, accounting for about 50%. , Scattered
neuroendocrine cells occur in 67% of patients. However, the nuclei of these mulberries are often bright with a
frosted hyaline appearance caused by the accumulation of biotin, and the
epithelial cells are rich in glycogen. The stromal components can show
skeletal muscle, cartilage, and bone differentiation. Gastrointestinal and
yolk sac differentiation can be seen in individual cases, and occasionally
malignant melanomatous tissues can be found. Immunohistochemical staining showed that CK, CK7, CEA,
EMA and TTF-1 were diffusely positively
expressed, and β-catenin was expressed on the nucleus.
chromatin A, syn, vimentin and peptide
hormones were focal positive. Mesenchymal embryonic cells
express vimentin and specific actin, desmin,
myogenin and S-100 are expressed in
heterologous rhabdomyosarcoma and chondrosarcoma, respectively. Compared with females, carcinosarcomas are more common in males with
a history of smoking. , From 1995 to 2011,
only one review reported 42 cases of biphasic pulmonary blastoma (CBPC),
showing that it is extremely rare among lung carcinomas. 
 
summarizes the above characteristics of this tumor type, as what has been
previously reported by Yi and Zhang, Baldovini et al., Rossi et al., Rosai and Wang et al. In summary, the heterogeneity of PSC tissues determines the
complexity of differential diagnoses when dealing with these tumors. There
are also many genetic changes associated with the various tissue types.
 

## Genetic characteristics
Although gene sequencing has been reported in detail for an ever increasing number of
common lung cancers, the molecular typing and biological characteristics of lung
sarcomatoid carcinoma, and the presence or absence of targeted gene mutations remain
unclear. , Studies have shown that chromosomes of sarcomatoid carcinomas
(1q, 3q, 7, 8q, and 19), chromosomes of pleomorphic carcinomas and SCC (5p, 9q, 11q,
12p, 13q and 17q), and in giant-cell carcinomas, both chromosomes (13p and 15p) have changed. SCC and pleomorphic carcinoma have TP53, KRAS and
EGFR mutations, MET and FGFR2
amplification, EML4-ALK gene rearrangement, etc. The most common change of gene in carcinosarcoma is
TP53 mutation, while KRAS and
EGFR mutations are relatively rare. Both low-grade fetal lung adenocarcinoma and lung blastoma are associated
with missense mutations in exon 3 of the CTNNB1 gene, causing large
expression of β-catenin protein in the cytoplasm to enter the
nucleus to activate Wnt signaling pathway activity. 
Changzhou First People’s Hospital (Jiangsu province, China) enrolled 32 PSC patients
retrospectively and conducted a cohort study. Among these patients, EGFR, KRAS, and
MET mutation rates were 8%, 22%, and 16%, respectively, and the tumor suppressor
genes and the top two mutations were TP53 (69%) and RB1 (25%). About 40.6% (13/32)
of Chinese patients with PSC were shown to have high tumor mutational burdens (TMBs). Similarly, another study showed that the gene mutations rates of
TP53, KRAS, and MET were 70%, 30–40%, and
13–20%, respectively. In the research by Lococo et al., 49 PSC cases were studied
using next-generation sequencing (NGS) analysis of 26 potentially relevant genes in
surgically resected tumor samples. A total of 39 PSC cases (80%) showed at least one
mutation (with the highest mutation rates in TP53, KRAS, PTEN, KDR,
ERBB2 and PIK3CA), and 69% of variants were somatic mutations. Transversions accounted for 60%, followed by transitions (33%), the least
common gene mutation was indels, representing 7%. Frameshift variant accounted for 5.3%. In another experiment, 57 somatic mutation events were detected in the PSCs
with a total of 1167 mutations. In these 1167 mutations, missense variants, splice
variants and gain variants were accounted for 73.7%, 14% and 7%, respectively. TP53,
KRAS and PTEN were the top three mutated genes with mutation rates of 80%, 35% and
35%, respectively. In a cohort of PSC cases, 69% carried at least one mutation, representing a
higher rate of mutation compared with other NSCLCs. Two or more mutations have been
reported to co-exist (co-mutated tumors) in retrospective studies. In addition, a
large diversity of alterations has been reported, based on NGS, including mutations
in TP53, KRAS, PIK3CA, EGFR, NOTCH1, CDKN2A, CDKN2B, STK11, PTEN,
NF1, and BRAF. There are several novel mutated genes,
including LAMB4, CDH4, RASA1, CDK4, LMTK2, CDH7, BRCA1, BRCA2,
SCAF1 and SMARCA4), ALK
translocations, and MET alterations, have also been
described, , , , , , – along with EGFR, TP53,
PI3KCA, and other mutations. Patients with PSC showing a gene mutation
had a lower rate of survival than those without mutations; multi-gene mutations were associated with a higher mortality rate than
single-gene mutations. Based on Fallet et al.’s research,
KRAS mutations repel EGFR mutations, while
EGFR and NOTCH1 mutations tended to correlate. Compared with biphasic PSCs, pure tumors more commonly showed mutations of
APC and KRAS. TP53 showed the opposite trend,
with a higher rate of mutation in biphasic tumors. PTEN and
STK11 mutations occurred specifically in bipolar PSC. There were no EGFR, TP53, or KRAS mutations
in non-tumor areas. Vieira et al. reported that blood vessel invasion had no
correlation with PIK3CA, MET, or KRAS mutations. In Eastern Asian countries, some studies have demonstrated that EGFR,
KRAS, and EML4-ALK fusion genes play vital roles in
the nosogenesis of lung cancers. Therefore, we will describe several important gene mutations in detail.

## TP53 and P53R2
TP53 mutations are much more frequent in pure PSC than in mixed
type tumors, 
TP53 mutations were found in approximately three quarters of patients. 
P53R2 plays a dual role in the regulation of carcinoma,
including tumor suppression, such as promoting cell apoptosis and inhibiting
cell proliferation; these pathways rely on the P21 signal
pathway. A high rate of P53R2 protein was associated with poor OS; we can conclude that the presence of P53R2 is an
important factor associated with poor prognosis in patients with PSC, and P53R2 expression is closely associated with the
occurrence, development, and progression of PSC.

## KRAS
Surprisingly, the rate of KRAS mutation is higher in pure PSC,
occurring at a rate of 56% among 49 cases of PSC. Codon 12/13 mutation in KRAS was the second most common
mutation in the series by Mehrad et al. and it accounts for
43.4% of the entire cohort and representing a higher proportion of PSCs with
adenocarcinoma components (approximately 46.6%); this indicates that PSCs are genetically more closely related to
adenocarcinoma. In PSC cases, KRAS mutations seem to correlate
with more aggressive tumor behavior, and were identified only in smokers, KRAS transversion
mutations account for 79%. Chen et al. stated that KRAS mutations
would reduce the efficacy of chemotherapy drugs and oral targeted drugs in NSCLC. However, whether the KRAS mutation is related to poor
prognosis and drug resistance in PSC is still unclear. In the future, more
studies on KRAS mutation should be conducted to better define
its role in PSC. 

## MET
In NSCLC, MET exon-14 skipping accounts for approximately 1–3%
of cases, PSC shows a higher incidence (ranging from 9.5% to 22%). Activating MET signaling pathway participates in many oncogenic
processes, including invasion, metastasis, and EMT in PSC, especially when the
PSCs lack complete ALK and MET
co-amplification. , 
MET exon-14 skipping might be a driver of oncogenic mutation
and contribute to aggressive clinical behavior and drug-sensitive mutations.
Therefore, targeted therapy such as crizotinib, , , one type of
MET inhibitor, , may represent a positive
development for the treatment of PSC with a MET mutation. Small
interfering ribonucleic-acid silencing of MET or
MET inhibition, like crizotinib, reduced tumor
proliferation and viability. Furthermore, the drug can also reduce the
downstream activation of AKT and mitogen-activated
protein kinase in H596 cells and Hs746T. Though we predicted that it may be effectively targeted through specific
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), MET amplification remains an
‘Achilles heel’ in PSC. 

## EGFR
VEGF expression in early precancerous lung lesions could
facilitate tumor development. Previous cases have shown that EGFR mutations could be
detected in 8.8% of patients with lung sarcomatoid carcinoma. Adenocarcinomas with EGFR mutations are less likely to
have high-grade sarcomatoid transformation than those with KRAS
or ALK mutations, possibly because adenocarcinomas with
EGFR mutations typically have low-level properties, lepidic
growth areas, and a more indolent course than EGFR(–) tumors. 
EGFR mutation plays an important role in the poor prognosis of
NSCLC compared with classical NSCLC, which may explain the poorer outcome of PSC. However, the incidence of EGFR mutation in patients with
PSC in China is low. Moreover, due to the lack of clinical and cytological
studies to explore the significance of the mutation and the value of the
application of this targeted drug further, the efficacy of related drugs is
uncertain.

## PD-1/PD-L1
Retrospective studies reported a high incidence of PD-L1
expression in patients with PSC. Velchet et al. reported that 69.2% (9/13) of patients
were positive for PD-L1. Tobacco using, KRAS mutations, vascular invasion,
CD163 positive cell level, and TTF-1
positivity were independent factors correlating with PD-L1
expression in lung cancer. , A total of 54 patients
(36.5%) were positive for PD-L1 and 36 of 148 patients showed
CD47 and PD-L1 expression. Multivariate analysis showed that CD47 and
PD-L1 co-expression is an independent negative prognostic
factor for the assessment of OS. , There is a significant
correlation between PD-L1 expression and CD47
and PD-L1 co-expression, the density of
CD8(+) T lymphocytes
(p = 0.004, 0.012) and
CD68(+) macrophages
(p = 0.026, 0.034) is higher. Notably, in the sarcoma component, overexpression of
PD-L1 is correlated with the presence of tumor-infiltrating
macrophages and lymphocytes. In Vieira’s report, 25 out of 75 (27%) patients showed
PD-L1 expression in both sarcomatoid and epithelial areas.
The rate of expression in sarcomatous areas only is 13%
(n = 10/75), the rate for simple epithelial areas is similar. 
PD-L1 overexpression provides a biological basis for
immunotherapy in patients with PSC. However, due to the lack of relevant case
reports, we could not identify whether it is a potential therapeutic option for
this type of disease. Further in vitro and in
vivo research should be conducted to demonstrate whether
immunotherapy is efficient for treating PSC, with the aim of providing patients
with alternative treatments.

## Polygenic mutation or fusion
Previous case reports have reported the following combinations:
EGFR together with TP53 mutations;
EML4-ALK fusion with a TP53 mutation; a
positive EGFR mutation combined with PD-L1
overexpression; KRAS mutations in conjunction with
TP53 mutations; JAK3 variant with a
mutation in TP53; PIK3CA mutation plus KRAS
mutation; and PHF20-NTRK1 fusion. , , There also have case
report of KRAS/TP53/STK11 co-mutations. It’s worth noting that the combination of KRAS and
either TP53 or KRAS mutations independently
correlated with OS in multivariable models. Both the degree of mutation in
KRAS and the presence of TP53 or
KRAS mutations are associated with recurrence, especially
in the context of local metastasis at relapse. Some studies have suggested that substantial tumor angiogenesis may lead
to mutations in multiple genes, such as NF1, TP53, and others. Mutations in the above genes lead to overexpression of proto-oncogenes
and reduced expression of tumor-suppressor genes, which are involved in the
occurrence and development of tumors. For patients with multiple gene mutations
or gene fusion, it is necessary to explore the correlation between these genes
so that we can combine these findings and apply them to the development of
targeted drugs with multiple genes.
In this review, we described the characteristics of gene detection for PSCs and
confirmed the high TMB of these tumors. For the genetic changes mentioned above,
the therapeutic schedules, survival analyses, and prognoses of various targeted
drug therapies are described in detail below.

## Treatments
Because PSC is resistant to traditional chemotherapy and shows a low response to
radiotherapy, complete tumor resection is a key for patients with PSC, especially
those with localized tumors. Concerning comprehensive chemotherapy with radio- and neoadjuvant therapy,
further exploration and support from evidence-based medicine and clinical evidence
are needed. A low rate of mutations among Asians suggests that the clinical benefit from
anti-EGFR drugs in PSC could be limited. It seems that the
inhibition of ALK gene expression is an invalid strategy as well. However, biological targeted therapy may have broader potential application
than traditional therapy. 
KRAS gene mutation may be sensitive to CDK 4/6
inhibitor (Abemaciclib) or MEK inhibitors (trametinib). 
TP53 mutations may be associated with the sensitivity of
VEGF/VEGFR inhibitors. Immune-checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) can
also benefit patients with this disease. Antiangiogenic therapy is another critical therapy for PSC patients.

## Traditional treatments and neoadjuvant therapies
PSC is an unconventional lung carcinoma that is currently managed with standard
treatments used for conventional NSCLC (surgery, radiation therapy and chemotherapy), summarized as follows.
Patients with early-stage tumors should consider surgery first; tumor size is the most important prognostic factor. In one study, the median OS of the entire cohort
(n = 37) was 5.69 years and the median disease-free survival
(DFS) was 3.15 years; the rates for 5-year OS and DFS for the entire cohort were
50.3% and 45.2%, respectively. Early detection of tumors, combined with surgery and adjuvant treatment,
may extend the survival of patients with lung cancer. Complete tumor excision in the early stages with proper follow-up care
and perioperative chemotherapy are common therapies bringing satisfactory
results. , Compared with those treated with surgery, patients treated
without surgery show an obviously worse prognosis. A clinical study by Kaira et al. showed that none of the
patients enrolled in the study received adjuvant therapy; nine underwent
surgery, and six of them did not relapse, as of the data analysis, two patients
developed postoperative disease progression or recurrence and one patient died
of non-cancer-related disease (pneumonia) after surgery. In the study by Maneenil et al., 45 patients underwent
complete surgical resection and there was an exact recurrence; of the 45
patients, 33 developed disease recurrence. The median DFS of these patients was
approximately 8.19 months, whereas the 1-year, 2-year, and 5-year DSF was 32%,
27%, and 21%, respectively. When analyzing radiation therapy variables (n = 2060),
results showed that the median and 5-year OS of patients who had received
radiation therapy versus patients who had not received
radiation therapy (20.6%) were 5 months (8%) versus 6 months
(20.6%; p < 0.001). Among patients who did not undergo surgery, 1396 (48.8%) patients
received radiation therapy, and their median 5-year survival rate was 4 months
(3.4%), patients who did not receive radiation therapy had a 2-month shorter
survival time (4.8%). Liang et al. predicted the survival times of PSC
patients by using the nomogram model, proving that radiotherapy could achieve a
slightly better prognosis for patients with stage I–III disease who were not
suitable candidates for surgery and did have not obvious disease (4%). Stereotactic whole body radiotherapy for primary tumors can only provide
general control of local primary lesions but has no obvious advantages for
distant metastases and prognoses. However, there are no clear data on the efficacy of radiotherapy for the
treatment of PSC, the amount of clinical benefit of radiotherapy that can bring
to patients is not known either.
Generally speaking, even in early stages, PSC tends to have a worse prognosis,
and patients undergoing any currently known treatment options, such as
platinum-based chemotherapy and radiotherapy, seem to have a poor
prognosis. , Previous studies showed that patients with early-stage
disease (peripherally located tumors, without distant metastasis, with lower T
stage) had significantly better OS. , Unfortunately, due to the
highly aggressive peculiarity and propensity for metastasis, patients are often
in advanced disease stages when diagnosed with PSC, and surgery is not a viable
treatment option. Palliative anti-tumor therapy is often the best choice to
prolong OS. Drug resistance can occur with platinum plus pemetrexed chemotherapy in a
short time, resulting in tumor recurrence. The efficacy of combined adriamycin and ifosfamide chemotherapy to treat
patients with metastatic PSC has been limited. For PSC patients treated with chemotherapy, the median progression-free
survival (PFS) and OS were 2 months and 4–6 months, respectively. , Palliative
chemotherapy is considered for patients in poor physical condition; however,
this therapy has not shown satisfactory results. Moreover, unexpected benefits
can occur in patients with advanced disease, who use traditional Chinese
medicine during palliative treatment, such as a Ma-xing-shi-gan or Tianma
Gouteng Decoctions. In one case report, some symptoms were relieved, and a
better quality of life was obtained; however, the true effectiveness is questionable since there is only one
case reported in the literature to date.
For patients considering surgery, preoperative adjuvant therapy is often required
due to tumor size or other factors; the median OS and 5-year OS of patients
receiving neoadjuvant or both neoadjuvant and adjuvant radiotherapy was
11 months (28.6%, n = 43) and 9 months (15.1%,
n = 43), respectively. For patients with stage IIb–IIIa disease, DFS was significantly improved
in patients undergoing perioperative chemotherapy. In Maneenil et al.’s study, the authors showed that 24
patients with PSC receiving neoadjuvant and/or adjuvant chemotherapy had the
longest median survival time of 18.6 months. They stated that surgery and
neoadjuvant or adjuvant chemotherapy/radiotherapy were interrelated factors
influencing patient prognosis and survival. Thus, neoadjuvant or adjuvant chemotherapy may be beneficial for patients
with PSC who can undergo surgical resection. A total of 77 patients were studied in Vieira’s research: 20 of them
received neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Among them, 11 patients showed partial
response (PR), 8 patients were stable without progression, and 1 patient
deteriorated, but this proportion may be overestimated due to the small number
of cases and selection bias. According to Martinez et al.’s research, one patient
underwent neoadjuvant chemotherapy and one patient underwent radiotherapy and
chemotherapy: results showed that the goal of lowering tumor stage was not achieved. In Hou et al.’s investigation, for 45 of 114 patients
receiving neoadjuvant or adjuvant chemotherapy, the survival rate was
significantly improved compared with patients who did not receive neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Due to the small number of patients and individual differences, these
data do not fully prove that neoadjuvant chemotherapy is ineffective.
To our knowledge, first-line chemotherapy most commonly includes pemetrexed,
paclitaxel, docetaxel, gemcitabine, and vinorelbine. Age, sex, histological
subtypes, stage, and surgical therapies have not been shown to observably affect
the efficacy of chemotherapy. Retrospective studies have demonstrated that PSC is often refractory to
chemotherapy regimens because of the poor sensibility to these types of
tumors. , , However, compared with monotherapy without platinum-based
drugs, the use of platinum-based combination chemotherapy can significantly
improve OS, univariate analysis showed that median survival with platinum-based
combination therapy was 5.6 months, and that with monotherapy was only
0.4 months. , Patients treated with platinum based or platinum-free
chemotherapy had no significant statistical differences regarding the rate of
advanced disease. , Since there are no large sample statistics, only case
reports can be described. Xiong et al. reported that all of 32 patients with PSC received chemotherapy with
gemcitabine combined with cisplatin (GP) or paclitaxel combined with cisplatin
(TP). They had a median OS of 14 months and a PFS of 5 months. The remission
rate was 21.9%. Initial stage IV diagnosis and a tumor diameter larger than 6 cm
were independent factors associated with poor prognosis. In addition, patients
with platinum-based combination therapy had significantly better quality of life
than patients treated with monotherapy. Kong et al. reported three men with PSC: they were diagnosed with stage III–IV and
treated with carboplatin, albumin-bound paclitaxel, as well as apatinib,
together. Two of them achieved a PR, and the other man experienced disease
progression in the 7th month. Li et al. reported a male patient
with a histopathologic diagnosis of giant-cell carcinoma of the lung. He was
treated with combined chemotherapy (gemcitabine and cisplatin) every 3 weeks for
four cycles, starting 2 months after surgery, and was still alive and free from
disease progression at 7 years’ post-surgery. Tamura et al. also reported that patients’ disease was
well controlled and had no progression after receiving cisplatin plus gemcitabine. In other reports, the chemotherapy regimen of platinum combined with
gemcitabine or platinum plus paclitaxel has been found superior to other
combinations. No factors associated with good prognosis were found in
multivariate analysis. In Lin et al.’s study, 18 patients with
metastatic/recurrent disease received palliative chemotherapy. One of them was
diagnosed with PSC, fibrosarcoma, and adenocarcinoma: the chemotherapy regimen
for this patient was docetaxel plus cisplatin. Another patient was diagnosed
with SCC: the chemotherapy regimen for this patient was cisplatin plus
paclitaxel and doxorubicin. Both patients had a PR. The remaining patients
received doxorubicin, ifosfamide, MAID and CYVADTIC, they were also treated with
gemcitabine as salvage treatment weekly, but no objective effects were observed. A study showed that one patient was diagnosed with early metastatic
recurrence after 2 years of initial surgery. She received three rounds of
treatments with the combination therapy of cisplatin (or carboplatin) and
etoposide. Though she experienced alternating periods of disease control and
recurrence, she remains alive 7 years after her initial surgery. Therefore, cisplatin combined with gemcitabine chemotherapy can be an
effective choice for the treatment of pulmonary pleomorphic carcinoma. Maneenil et al. reported that docetaxel was initiated as
subsequent treatment for a patient with PSC, and disease progression was
demonstrated after four cycles. Comparatively, the use of platinum-based doublet chemotherapy has a
significant curative effect in patients with PSC.

## Targeted therapy
The inherent histological heterogeneity and low frequency of these tumors may be
responsible for the limited data on driving oncogenes. However, discovery of a
high proportion of mutant alleles in the same tumor leads to an expectation of
good efficacy with the usage of targeted therapy. In an earlier survey, the authors noted that one in five patients had
hemoptysis at the time of diagnosis of malignancy. Recently, TKI has been
recommended for the treatment of patients with EGFR mutations
in NSCLC. For patients with EGFR mutations who were initially
treated with EGFR TKI, the mean OS was longer than that with
platinum-based combination chemotherapy. Based on the highly aggressive peculiarity of these tumors,
antiangiogenic therapy is also a good choice. New ICIs have also been
recommended as first-line treatments in select patients.

## Tyrosine kinase inhibitors

## EGFR TKIs
Patients with PSC generally respond poorly to chemotherapy, and targeted drug
therapy efficacies appear to be largely unknown, as there are only a few
case reports that indicate a PR in patients receiving gefitinib. For
patients with EGFR-mutated tumors, the US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) has approved gefitinib, afatinib, and osimertinib for
clinical therapies. The benefits of successfully treating patients with mutations by
using first-generation TKI drugs, including gefitinib, erlotinib, icotinib,
are limited. The second- and third-generation TKIs, such as afatinib and
osimertinib, respectively, , , , provide better
benefits to patients with rare mutations compared with first-generation
TKIs. Research by He et al. showed that afatinib combined
with crizotinib could provide partial remission in patients with PSC. However, EGFR mutation rates in PSC patients are
different among countries, for example, based on race and ethnicity; the
rates of EGFR mutation can differ from patient to patient. TKIs can be used in patients with EGFR-mutated
tumors; however, the therapeutic effects are modest and controversial. Researchers, such as Hsieh et al., have used TKIs to
treat patients with EGFR mutations (with or without other
gene mutations) and found the MET copy numbers and gene
expression were increased. There might also have been MET
amplification before treatment, so perhaps, for these patients, the effect
of monotherapy is limited, which could be the reason for the resistance of
drugs mentioned above. 
In Lin et al.’s research, three patients received gefitinib
(one type of EGFR TKI) as a palliative rescue treatment,
and their condition was stable for 2 months, 3 months, and 5 months. From what Li et al. reported, one patient was
positive for EGFR mutation, and gefitinib could be used.
After treatment, the patient’s clinical symptoms disappeared and the tumor
stabilized for 4 months. Tamura et al. reported that one patient with PSC
underwent surgery, and postoperative genetic testing demonstrated the
absence of EGFR exon 19. The patient was treated with
gefitinib after recurrence, the complete remission period was approximately 35 months. Zou et al. also reported that following treatment
with 150 mg erlotinib once daily, disease progression with distant
metastasis occurred after 6 months. In Ikushima et al.’s report, an elderly woman was
diagnosed with SCC (stage IVb, T4N2M1) with an EGFR exon 19 deletion, and
gefitinib was administered; however, the patients responded poorly to this
EGFR TKI and progressed rapidly after a short-term response. In a retrospective study, it was found that most patients with PSC
were unlikely to benefit from anti-EGFR therapy due to low
EGFR mutation rates and high KRAS
mutation rates. The efficiency of EGFR TKIs varies from person to
person, but the overall effectiveness in patients with PSC is not as good as
those with adenocarcinoma. , Thus,
EGFR receptor antagonists are not necessarily
effective. It is speculated that the occurrence and development of SCC are
not completely dependent on the EGFR signaling pathway, and
other mechanisms could play a more important role in the development of
SCC. , 
Therefore, accurate gene detection and research concerning mechanism of
EGFR in PSC are necessary, and multi-gene-targeted
therapy may be able to solve the deficiencies associated with single-gene
targeted therapy.

## ALK TKIs
For the rearrangement of rare genes, such as those of the
ALK1 gene, patients can take a combination of
crizotinib and ceritinib. There are few case reports of patients with ALK
rearrangements with differing results, but most patients had invalid or
partial responses; however, there have been individual reports of patients with PRs. New ALK–TKI drugs, such as ceritinib, are more
effective in patients with crizotinib insensitivity or resistance. Another
potent and selective ALK inhibitor, aletinib, has a
significant effect in patients with ALK-positive advanced
lung cancer that is insensitive or resistant to crizotinib treatment. A new
generation of ALK tyrosine kinase inhibitors is currently
under clinical research and development. The FDA has approved the new ALK inhibitor,
brigatinib, which is effective in 55% of patients with lung cancer who have
mutations that are drug resistant to crizotinib, with a control rate of 86%.
The second part of the clinical trial showed good prospects for brigatinib.
However, the application of brigatinib in PSC has not yet been reported. In
Liu’s research, based on the presence of MET amplification,
crizotinib brought about rapid dramatic clinical improvement. Lin et al. showed a patient with
ALK-rearranged advanced PSC treated with crizotinib who
achieved PR for 7 months. Valter et al. presented a patient with
ALK-positive carcinosarcoma who showed a good response
to crizotinib, but there are little data provided in this report. It has been reported that when patients with PSC have mutation in
KRAS-ex2, as well as fusion in
EML4-ALK, chemotherapy and crizotinib are not effective. Crizotinib extends patient survival when tumors show isolated
ALK gene fusions. 
ALK-TKI may have more benefits compared with chemotherapy,
and applications in PSC warrant further exploration.

## MET TKIs
MET gene mutations include amplification, point-mutation
activation, and MET exon-14 skipping. The currently
targeted drugs for MET mutations are crizotinib,
capmatinib, tepotinib, and savolitinib (also known as AZD6094, HMPL-504, and
volitinib, respectively). Han et al. reported that an older
male patient with a MET exon-14-skipping mutation had a
mutant allele frequency of about 73.9%. The recommended therapy was to
administer 600 mg of savolitinib orally once per day, and the patient
obtained a PFS period of more than 8 months. As the patient’s condition progressed, the research team found
EGFR, fibroblast growth factor receptor 1
(FGFR1), and KRAS gene amplifications
in tumor biopsies, from which it was speculated that targeted drug
resistance could have been caused by the above genetic changes. 

## Antiangiogenic therapy
Multivariate analysis indicated that vascular invasion reduced the survival time
of patients with PSC. A high frequency of vascular invasion suggests that we need to be
cautious when using bevacizumab in these patients. Li et al.
reported one case of PSC treated with apatinib (VEGFR2 TKI).
Due to the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) score standard of 3, the
patient was precluded from chemotherapy and was prescribed apatinib (250 mg)
orally once per day. After 5 days of treatment, the symptoms of hemoptysis
disappeared, and the patient’s chest tightness was alleviated. At 10 days later,
the patient was able to breathe normally. Tumor regression was observed up to
14 months after targeted therapy. Surprisingly, there were no evident
complications associated with apatinib. Li et al. reported a case in which the patient was
administered apatinib (250 mg) orally once per day. Sustained tumor regression
was observed after treatment, and no severe complications were reported to be
associated with apatinib therapy. Apatinib may be another fruitful option for patients with conventional
chemotherapy-resistant PSC. Antiangiogenic therapy is also an alternative for
patients with advanced PSC.

## Immune-checkpoint inhibitors
Programmed cell-death protein-1 (PD-1)/PD-L1
inhibition significantly enhances CD4+ and
CD8+ T-lymphocyte cytokine secretion, cell
proliferation, cytotoxicity, antitumor activity, and improves the clinical
prognoses of patients with a variety of tumor types. It has been used as an
adjuvant treatment in patients with advanced lung cancer. In patients with NSCLC, immunotherapy targeting the
PD-1/PD-L1 pathway correlated with total mutations,
KRAS mutations, and the EMT process. , Patients
are often prescribed this therapy after failing in a chemotherapy/radiotherapy
regimen. Sarcomatoid differentiation with high expression of
PD-1/PD-L1 appears to be widespread; therefore, patients
with PSC can benefit greatly from ICI therapy. Patients with lung PSC had
significantly higher PD-L1 expression (9/13) than NSCLC
patients. Thus, PD-1/PD-L1 immunotherapy might be one of the
most effective ways to treat this disease. Some researchers believed that PSC patients had significant differential
expression of PD-L1 compared with that of NSCLC patients. When
PD-L1 is negative, immunotherapy can still be effective due
to the interaction between the immune system and the tumor. Since PD-L1 and PD-L2 are highly
expressed in patients with stage III PSC, pembrolizumab could be used as a
therapeutic option for patients with drug resistance after radiotherapy and chemotherapy. When PD-1 is highly expressed (more than 50%), nivolumab
or pembrolizumab provide an obvious treatment effect in the short term, and
patients can obtain a higher quality of life after pain relief. The patients
still recovered well after a year of follow up. , , However, another study
showed one patient with stage IV disease, who had received first-line and
second-line chemotherapy, gained no benefit after surgery. After treatment with
nivolumab, this patient’s symptoms improved, the brain damage resolved, and
reactions occurred at other metastatic sites. Rajdev et al. reported that a patient with PSC, who
lacked PD-L1 expression, was treated with nivolumab, and
although the patient did not quit smoking, a continued decrease in tumor size
was observed. Anti-PD1 can effectively control brain-tumor metastases. In a KEYNOTE-024 clinical trial, patients with PD-L1
tumor expression and a tumor proportion score (TPS) of >50% had higher
survival rates after receiving pembrolizumab therapy compared with after
receiving platinum-based dual chemotherapy. In another case report, half the tumor cells expressed
PD-L1. The patient was treated with pembrolizumab at the
time of relapse and PR was documented after six cycles of therapy. From what Sukrithan et al. reported in papers before,
several cases showed that pembrolizumab can have a positive effect (PR to
complete response) in PSC with high PD-L1 TPS. , Studies
have also shown that when the expression level of tumor PD-L1
is increased to more than 50%, the anti-tumor effect of the drug clone 22C3
(Merck Sharp & Dohme Ltd, UK) used in the phase I study of pembrolizumab is
significant. Tumor lymphocyte infiltration is associated with positive
PD-L1 expression and is a pre-existing immune response
marker that has been used as an important predictor of the efficacy of these drugs. Domblides et al. reported about 37 patients, who had
been treated with immunotherapy inhibitors (nivolumab) as the main drug. The
results showed that regardless of PD-L1 status, the overall
response rate (ORR) was 15/37 (40.5%) and the disease control rate was 24/37
(64.8%). The median OS was 12.7 months (range: 0.3–45.7), and the median
expression of PD-L1 was 70% (0–100). For PD-L1 positive
patients, the ORR was 58.8%, and for PD-L1 negative patients,
the ORR was 0% (p = 0.44). The median TMB was 18
mutations/megabase (MMb), accounting for 87.5% of cases with high TMB. However, some reports also documented disease progression with targeted
therapy, although the expression lever of PD-L1>50% and the
use of pembrolizumab can stabilize disease. Yang et al. believe that PD-L1
expression does not affect clinicopathologic characteristics (univariate
analysis), nor does it affect prognoses. Some clinical patients do not show an
effective anti-PD-1/PD-L1 monotherapeutic response. Although
the drugs could have significant positive effects, there are several adverse
reactions, including autoimmune hepatitis, diarrhea, interstitial pneumonia, and
thyroiditis, of which some could even be fatal. Recently, new targets have been discovered, such as
integrin-associated protein (IAP, also
known as CD47), and its expression was related to clinical stages. In addition, stage IV patients had higher CD47
expression (seven out of eight, 87.5%) compared with patients at lower stages of
the disease. Therefore, PD-L1/CD47 co-expression was shown to
be useful as a novel predictive marker, combined with dual-targeted immunotherapy. There is also evidence that when a MET gene-skipping
mutation on exon 14 is present, there can exist a PR of pembrolizumab therapy. 
Based on the data above, ICI therapy is a potentially effective targeted therapy.
Its therapeutic effect is far better than that of traditional chemoradiotherapy
when patients have indications for the drugs. However, no specific reports are
available regarding the treatment cycle, and determining whether a treatment
dose should be adjusted, when a patient can stop the drugs after complete
remission, and whether drug resistance exists or not. Due to the lack of large
clinical data analyses, the practical application of such drugs can only be
documented in case reports, with great heterogeneity. The OS rate and the
benefit to patients need to be demonstrated further in clinical trials.

## Others
As the most effective inhibitor of DDR2, saracatinib has been
used in lung cancer. It is a broad-spectrum TIK. Dasatinib inhibits
BCR-ABL kinases and SRC family kinases, as
well as many other selective oncogenic kinases, including
c-kit, ephrin (EPH) receptor kinases, and
PDGF receptors. Studies have shown that in alveolar
epithelial cells, this drug can inhibit TGFβ-mediated EMT,
thus, it can be used for the prevention of pulmonary fibrosis recurrence,
reversing EMT-mediated resistance to EGFR inhibitors in lung
cancer, and inhibition of s-like cell proliferation in PSC. For rare multi-loci genetic changes, Chen et al. believe
that when KRAS mutations and EML4-ALK
rearrangements co-exist, TKIs, and first-line chemotherapy can be very
beneficial in treating patients with PSC. Karim et al. reported an EML4-ALK
translocation in 2/25 patients; 1 patient received crizotinib and obtained ideal OS. Genetic testing has suggested that a new PHF20-NTRK1
fusion mutation could be a driver of sarcomatous proliferation in patients with
postoperative recurrences. Entrectinib/larotrectinib can be used to treat patients with this
NTRK fusion mutation in solid tumors. Cai et al. reported that patients with
TPM3-ROS1 fusion mutations could benefit for long periods
after crizotinib therapy. Targeted drugs for ROS gene therapy
include ceritinib, brigatinib, lorlatinib, cabozantinib, and entrectinib. For the patients with TP53/KRAS/STK11 co-mutations, the
focus on the targeted therapy against KRAS and
STK11 is used. STK11 is mutated in ‘cold
tumors,’ which can be manifested as cerebral ischemic resistance and reduced
CD8+ T cell infiltrations. For patients with low
PD-L1 expression (less than 50%), ICI as a first-line
therapy combined with other treatments needs to be further verified. At the 2019 American Society of Clinical Oncology annual meeting, AMG 510
was described as a new small-molecule inhibitor that targets KRAS
G12C mutations (13% of KRAS G12C mutations have
been observed in cases of advanced NSCLC). Abstracts published at the European
Society of Medical Oncology Immuno-Oncology Conference in Neva, Italy, on 12
December 2019, described first-line AMG 510 treatments that improved OS, PFS,
and ORRs in patients with metastatic non-squamous NSCLC. Recently, the FDA
granted priority review of a new drug, selpercatinib (loxo-292), an oral
RET kinase inhibitor for the treatment of advanced
RET fusion-positive NCSLC. No clinical trials have been
reported on these targeted drugs in the treatment of PSCs with the above, rare,
genetic mutations, and therefore, the therapeutic effect is unclear.
Additionally, whether drug combinations could improve responses is not known. Similarly, whether there is a difference in the responses of PSC patients
administered either PD-1 or PD-L1 inhibitors,
is unclear.

## Conclusion
The poor prognosis of PSC is primarily due to its biological characteristics and high
resistance to classical first-line chemotherapy. Based on a better understanding of
the carcinogenic mechanisms of this rare tumor, the development of innovative
therapeutic strategies is needed. Surgery is the key to OS. For patients with PSC, eligibility for surgical
treatment, neoadjuvant or adjuvant chemotherapy based on the patient’s ECOG score
assessment can also be applied, despite the fact that these tumors have high resistance to conventional
chemotherapy. However, platinum-based dual-drug chemotherapy can provide PR for
patients. Based on characteristics such as early-stage metastasis and chemotherapy
resistance, it is also important to detect molecular alterations that may improve
drug efficacy and prolong patient survival. Targeted therapy and immunotherapy are currently new research fields in PSC.
Further in vivo and in vitro experiments are
needed, as well as clinical trials. Patients with PSC should be treated with
appropriately targeted drugs and immunosuppressive agents on the basis of gene
detection and on the premise of meeting indications. Although the therapeutic options for these patients are limited, some
benefits from crizotinib therapy compared with conventional chemotherapy have been
observed. In the near future, second-generation ALK inhibitors,
such as serratinib, alectinib, and brigatinib, and third-generation
ALK inhibitors, such as laratinib, may prolong the survival
time of patients with PSC with ALK rearrangement compared with the
first-generation ALK inhibitors, such as crizotinib. For PSC patients, the early application of antiangiogenic therapy and ICIs
can maximize patient treatment responses, significantly improving the quality of
life of these patients, expanding the treatment regimens for PSC and other rare
diseases, and provide a lifeline for desperate patients. Antiangiogenic targeted
drugs like apatinib and monoclonal antibodies such as bevacizumab can be also used
for crizotinib-resistant patients. PD-L1/PD1 overexpression and a
high degree of vascular invasiveness provide rationales for the use of ICIs. 
MET can be targeted in PSC, which can guide the therapy of patients
with a MET mutation. Furthermore, targeted therapies, such as
TP53 mutation reversal drugs, CDK 4/6
inhibitor, and MEK inhibitor may become potent treatment options in
the future. 
 shows the flow
chart of treatment for patients with PSC, which is summarized based on various
articles and case analyses. Researchers in this field need to make joint efforts to
improve the diagnosis and treatment of PSC in order to identify therapies that can
bring maximal benefit to patients.
 

## Footnotes
Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest.
Funding: The authors disclose receipt of the following financial support for the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article: this work was supported by
grants from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (81773207), the
Natural Science Foundation of Tianjin (17YFZCSY00840, 18PTZWHZ00240,
19YFZCSY00040), and the Special Support Program for High Tech Leader and Team of
Tianjin (TJTZJH-GCCCXCYTD-2-6). Funding sources had no role in study design,
data collection, and analysis, in the decision to publish, or in the preparation
of the manuscript.

## Contributor Information
Xin Li, Department of Lung Cancer Surgery, Tianjin Medical University General Hospital, Tianjin, China.
Di Wu, Department of Lung Cancer Surgery, Tianjin Medical University General Hospital, Tianjin, China.
Hongyu Liu, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Lung Cancer Metastasis and Tumor Microenvironment, Tianjin Medical University General Hospital, Tianjin, China.
Jun Chen, Department of Lung Cancer Surgery, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Lung Cancer Metastasis and Tumor Microenvironment, Tianjin Lung Cancer Institute, Tianjin Medical University General Hospital, Anshan Road no.154, Heping District, Tianjin 300052, China.

## References