379blackwellopenChembiochemChembiochemPMC1326857613268576132685764229642110.1002/cbic.70419A Constellation of Fluorescent Biosensors to Illuminate the Galaxy of Protein Kinases
AbburaTimothe MorrisMay C 
1
Institut des Biomolécules Max Mousseron, University Montpellier, CNRS‐ UMR 5247, Montpellier, France*
May C. Morris (may.morris@umontpellier.fr)
✉Corresponding author.
15620262711e70419e704191662026© 2026 The Author(s). ChemBioChem published by Wiley‐VCH GmbHThis is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non‐commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made.

## Abstract
Protein kinases (PKs) are enzymes that catalyze phosphorylation of protein substrates involved in a wide variety of biological signalling pathways. PKs can be distinguished based on their mechanism of action and their regulation. They are associated with numerous pathologies, thereby constituting attractive biomarkers and targets for development of therapeutics. Given their importance, a wide variety of strategies and technologies have been devised for their detection, their quantification, and for studying their dynamic behavior, from radioactive and antibody‐based approaches to biochemical, kinomic, and biosensing technologies.
A wide variety of fluorescent biosensors have been tailored to report on PK activities in vitro and for imaging purposes. These tools allow researchers to monitor PK activities in a highly sensitive and dynamic fashion in complex samples, providing new avenues for investigating PK behavior in native conditions and following stimulation or inhibition with drugs, thereby providing functional information which complements genetic, transcriptomic, or proteomic approaches. This review focuses on the different families of PKs and on fluorescent biosensors and chemosensors available to report, profile and image PKs from the AGC, CMGC, CAMK, TK, and TKL kinases.
Keywords: activity reporter, fluorescent biosensor, protein kinase

Protein kinases (PKs) are enzymes that catalyze phosphorylation of protein substrates involved in a wide variety of biological signalling pathways. This review describes the different families and mechanisms of action and regulation of protein kinases, together with the different classes of fluorescent biosensors that have been engineered and implemented to report on PK activities in vitro and for imaging purposes.
 
statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoRevised 2026 May 20; Received 2026 Mar 16; Accepted 2026 May 26; Issue date 2026 Jun 15.

1.

## Introduction
The occurrence of proteins containing phosphate was discovered in the early 1900. The discovery by Levene and Alsberg of a vitellinic acid derived from vitellin containing a 1:3 ratio of phosphorus to nitrogen [ ] was observed by several other authors in the following years [ ,  ]. Although protein phosphorylation was readily approved, there was no evidence of a specific phosphorylation motif nor determination of the amino acids that were specifically involved. The existence of phosphoamino acids was proven for the first time in 1932 by Lipmann and Levene [ ] with the discovery of phosphoserine, but the role of protein phosphorylation remained mysterious. In 1954, the complete description of the enzymatic process of protein phosphorylation was provided thanks to studies of glycogen phosphorylase in rat liver mitochondria [ ]. In 1955, Krebbs and Fischer further discovered that ATP and divalent ions were linked to conversion of muscle glycogen phosphorylase b to phosphorylase a by a “PR” (prosthetic group‐removing) enzyme [ ,  ]. Protein phosphorylation results from the counteracting activities of protein kinases (PKs) and phosphatases, thereby modifying up to 30% of all cellular proteins, with important consequences on protein conformation, activity, and overall function [ , , , ].

PKs have been identified in most organisms, from prokaryotes (archaea and bacteria) to unicellular and multicellular eukaryotes (fungi, mammals, and plants) and more recently in viruses [ , , , , , ]. The large proportion of PKs encoded in the genome of higher eukaryotes (mammals, plants, invertebrates,…), reaching 2% of the human genome, that is, an estimated 514 genes [ ,  ], and their high degree of conservation reflect their functional importance [ ]. Indeed, PKs are involved in a wide variety of signalling pathways and play key roles in regulation of most biological processes, including cell growth, division, and survival, cell death, differentiation, metabolism, inflammation, and immune response [ , , ]. Moreover, PKs are often overexpressed and/or dysregulated in many human pathologies, most notoriously in cancer and inflammatory diseases, but also in diabetes and cardiovascular and neurodegenerative pathologies [ , , , , ]. As such, PKs constitute relevant disease biomarkers and attractive pharmacological targets, against which an arsenal of small molecule inhibitors has been developed, leading to therapeutics approved for clinical administration [ ,  , , , , , , , , , ].

2.

## Protein Kinase Families, Mechanisms of Action and Regulation
Although PKs have been conventionally categorized into subfamilies of serine/threonine kinases, tyrosine kinases, and dual specificity kinases [ ], nine different mechanisms of phosphorylation have been reported based on the amino acid acceptor onto which kinases can transfer a phosphate group [ ,  ]. (Figure  ). The most studied are serine and threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation [ ]. Histidine phosphorylation is less represented in the metazoan phosphoproteome, but widespread in bacteria and yeast [ , , ]. Finally, aspartate [ ], cysteine [ ,  ], glutamate, arginine [ ,  ] and lysine [ ] can be phosphorylated too, but due to the lability of the phosphate bond, they are harder to study. In this review, we will focus on serine, threonine, and tyrosine phosphorylation.
 2.1.

## Protein Kinase Structure, Activity, and Regulation
PKs are characterized by a highly conserved core structure and catalytic domain with several sub‐domains and features involved in catalytic activity and regulation (Figure  ). They all present a very similar structural fold, with distinct N‐ and C‐terminal lobes, separated by a catalytic cleft, yet a high degree of structural plasticity [ ,  ]. PKs undergo significant conformational transitions, which are associated with their functional state [ ,  , , , ]. The structural conformation of active kinases differs from that of inactive kinases, especially in sequences and regions that are involved in substrate recognition and in kinase regulation, whilst the catalytic domain of active kinases adopt a conserved fold [ ]. In the inactive conformation, the ATP pocket in the N‐terminal lobe is not aligned with the catalytic cleft and substrate binding domain, as exemplified in the monomeric form of CDK2 [ , , , , ]. Moreover, the T‐loop or activation loop does not allow the substrate to bind to the kinase in a stable fashion. Conformational activation of CDK2 involves the rotation of the N‐lobe thereby bringing the ATP pocket in close proximity with the catalytic cleft, together with isomerization of the C‐lobe, thereby stabilizing the T‐loop in a position which enables the substrate to gain access to the catalytic site [ ,  ].
 Despite this overall structural homology, the primary sequences and modes of regulation vary widely from one PK to another. Their specificity toward substrate recognition is equally very finally tuned, and many kinases use binding sites that are remote from the catalytic site to recruit substrates with higher affinity, thereby gaining in catalytic efficiency and specificity [ , , ].
PKs need a phospho‐donor, commonly ATP, and a phospho‐acceptor or substrate, the side chain of an amino acid. The phospho‐transfer step is catalyzed by a set of well‐conserved amino acids in the kinase domain. These amino acids coordinate the ATP‐2Mg2+ complex in the ATP pocket in order to position the γ‐phosphate toward the exterior, facing the hydroxyl group of the substrate (Figure  ) [ ]. These amino acids are principally aspartates from the well‐known and conserved DFG sequence (184–186, PKA) and HxD motifs (164–166, PKA) (D: aspartate, F: phenylalanine, G: glycine, H: histidine, x: any amino acid) [ ,  ]. Other less conserved amino acids may also play important roles, like PKA's K168 (lysine 168), which stabilizes the negative charges of ATP phosphates within the ATP‐pocket [ ].
PK activity is tightly controlled and finely regulated in a spatio‐temporal fashion. PKs may be held in check by endogenous inhibitors, such as p16 for CDK4 and p27 for CDK2, sequestered in an inactive conformation, and undergo posttranslational modifications that regulate their conformation and function (Figure  and  ), in response to different signals and mechanisms of action. Some PKs require a specific cofactor or partner for their activation. CDKs (Cyclin‐dependent kinases) for instance, PKs involved in regulation of cell cycle progression, depend on cyclin binding for their conformational activation (Figure  ) [ ,  ]. The N‐lobe of CDK2 undergoes a rotation which positions the ATP pocket near the catalytic groove, and the C‐lobe undergoes isomerization leading to a positional shift of the activation loop, enabling the substrate to gain access to the catalytic cleft (Figure  ) [ ,  ,  ]. Interaction between motifs other than the substrate sequence itself with the kinase can increase the phosphorylation rate [ ]. This is the case for ROCK‐I, involved in the regulation of actin stress fibre assembly, which requires interaction between its αG helix and the effector region of its substrate, RhoE, for phosphorylation of the latter [ ]. Other PKs are activated through homo‐ and/or hetero‐dimerization, mostly receptor tyrosine kinases (Figure  ) [ ]. The insulin receptor (INSR) dimerizes upon binding of its ligand (insulin or IGF‐1), leading to auto‐phosphorylation and PK activation [ ,  ]. Some PKs also undergo changes in their subcellular localization, shuttling between the cytoplasm and the nucleus for instance (Figure  ), such as ERK, activation of which is followed by the phosphorylation of an SPS motif, prompting interaction with Imp7 and translocation into the nucleus where it phosphorylates transcription factors involved in cell proliferation [ ,  ].
 PKs can be seen as elements of a network, interconnected by numerous interactions with other regulatory or scaffold proteins, that mediate transmission of inter‐/intra‐cellular signals and ensure appropriate cellular response [ ]. In turn, phosphorylated substrate proteins are recognized by interacting protein partners, thereby constituting a network of protein/protein interactions that effectively mediate signalling [ ,  ]. There are numerous examples of PKs involved in complex regulatory networks and feedback loops, such as INSR pathway. Insulin binding to INSR promotes its activation and consequent phosphorylation of its substrates, (IRS) transcription factors that become effectors themselves [ ]. One of their targets is phosphatidylinositol (3,4,5)‐triphosphate and phosphoinositide 3‐kinase (PI3K), which, upon activation, produces a second messenger phosphatidylinositol (3,4,5)‐triphosphate, recruiting and activating PDK1, which in turn activates PKB and PKC [ ]. The latter are involved in activation of signalling pathways, ultimately activating genes and proteins involved, nonexhaustively, in glucose metabolism, cell survival or lipid synthesis [ , , , , , ]. PKB is indirectly involved in the regulation of S6K, which phosphorylates IRS‐1 and IRS‐2 and promotes their degradation, thereby establishing a negative feedback loop [ ,  ].
Substrate recognition by a PK involves residues located at different spots throughout the kinase domain. Some serve as docking domains promoting recruitment of substrates while other residues are directly involved in binding of the substrate within the catalytic cleft [ ,  ]. From the substrate perspective, specificity is conferred from residues in the consensus sequence surrounding the phosphorylation site, for instance, acid amino acids for SYK tyrosine kinase, versus basic ones for the PAKs STE20 kinases [ ,  ]. Consensus substrate sequences are most often linear, but some substrates may exhibit structural consensus, as exemplified by α‐tubulin, phosphorylated on Thr253 by PKC. The 3D structure of α‐tubulin shows that the basic residues, lysines, that constitute PKC's consensus substrate are spatially adjacent to the phosphorylation site, thereby forming a structural consensus motif [ ]. The consensus substrate sequence alone does generally not ensure selective recognition. Docking domains provide additional selectivity [ ]. Mitogen‐activated protein kinases (MAPKs), which are involved in seven distinct pathways, share close substrate consensus sequences [ ,  ]. The specificity of each MAPK pathway is promoted by docking sites present on both the substrate and the kinase, allowing specific interactions beyond the catalytic groove [ ,  ].

2.2.

## Human Protein Kinases
Human PKs constitute some of the best‐characterized kinases. Almost all human PKs are related to the eukaryotic PK (ePK) superfamily [ ,  ,  ]. Together with these 473 PKs, that are subdivided into 7 families, an additional set of 45 atypical PKs accounts for the complete set of 518 PKs within the human kinome [ ].The 7 families of PKs are described in further detail below : AGC, CAMK, CKI, CMGC, STE, TK and TKL (Figure  ).
 
The AGC kinase family comprises 60 kinases [ ] subdivided into 14 groups and 21 subgroups, including two pseudo‐kinases. PDK1, PKA, PKC, or Akt are well‐known kinases from the AGC family. Their activation is mainly regulated by phosphorylation of two motifs: the first being the activation segment or T‐loop; and the second is the HM located outside the catalytic domain. Both mechanisms are highly conserved in AGC kinases. The regulation of activity by the HM is due to its interaction with a PIF‐pocket (PDKI‐Interacting Fragment), present between the αB and αC helix (see Figure  ) [ ]. The HM and PIF–pocket interaction affect both ATP and substrate binding, as well as kinase activity itself [ , , ]. The interaction between the HM and the PIF‐pocket can be either intra‐ or intermolecular, and in some AGCs, it can be stabilized by phosphorylation near the HM. PDK1 kinase contains the PIF‐pocket but not the complete and functional HM, which prevents their interaction [ ]. Nevertheless, several PDK1 substrates are AGCs too and require phosphorylation at their activation‐loop by PDK1 for activation, as S6K1 and SGK1, which possess a HM [ ,  ]. It has been shown that S6K1 and SGK1's HMs recruited and activated PDK1 by interacting with its PIF pocket, allowing phosphorylation of their activation‐loop and subsequent kinase activation [ ]. Moreover, most AGC kinases exhibit preference for basic residues at position −2, −3 and −5 from the phosphorylation site of the substrate [ ]. AGCs are involved in several diseases such as cancer, diabetes, cardiac pathologies, Alzheimer's disease, and schizophrenia [ ,  ].
One of the most studied AGCs is PKA (protein kinase A, or cAMP‐dependent kinase) an ubiquitously expressed kinase involved in the signalling pathway associated with responses to GPCRs and hormones as well as cancer [ ,  ,  ]. PKA activities have been reported at distinct subcellular localizations, including plasma membrane microdomains, the Golgi apparatus, and centrosomes. PKA localization and activity are controlled through association with AKAPs: A‐kinase anchoring proteins (Figure  ) [ ].
Highly homologous to PKA, PKB/Akt is involved in the regulation of glucose metabolism and cell survival [ ]. Akt is activated after translocation to the plasma membrane mediated by PDK1, which is anchored at the membrane, and targets GSK3 (see CMGCs), implicated in the activation of glycogen synthase, or the 6‐phosphofructo‐2‐kinase involved in glycolysis regulation [ ,  ]. Akt is involved in cancer and diabetes.
PKC is one of the largest AGCs subgroups, with 9 members [ ]. PKC targets proteins such as CD44, syndecan 4 or LGL, involved in cell migration and cell polarization [ ]. PKC is involved in cancer andcardiac diseases [ ].

CAMK ‐ calmodulin dependent kinases are known to be activated by the ubiquitous protein calmodulin in complex with Ca2+ (Figure  ). Nevertheless, some CAM kinases constitute exceptions that are not regulated by calmodulin [ ]. There are 74 human CAMK [ ], which have been mostly studied in the brain, where they can reach 2% of the total protein content [ ,  ]. CAMKII defective mice have issues in spatial learning and memory [ ]. Some representatives of this family, CAMKII, form holoenzymes of 12 subunits, that assemble into homo‐ or hetero‐meric complexes [ ]. Auto‐phosphorylation can occur on Thr286, between sub‐units, following Ca2+/calmodulin stimulation of kinase activity. Once the kinase is activated, it remains constitutively active without requiring Ca2+/calmodulin, which can be considered “molecular memory” [ ,  ]. It should nevertheless be noted that kinase activity induced through the molecular memory mechanims exhibits significantly lower kinase activity than by initial Ca2+/calmodulin stimulation.

Tyrosine Kinases (TKs)—the 90 human TKs are characterized by their ability to phosphorylate tyrosine rather than serine or threonine. They are separated in two different families: 58 Receptor Tyrosine Kinases (RTKs), such as INSR or ErbB receptors (EGFR and Erb2), and 32 non‐Receptor Tyrosine Kinases (NRTKs), including Abl kinase, Csk, Src, or JAK [ ,  ,  , , ]. TKs are involved in cell‐to‐cell signalling for growth, metabolism, immune response, differentiation, adhesion, motility, and cellular death. Many TKs are human oncogenes, known to be dysregulated in several cancers [ ,  ,  ]. Others are well known for their role in metabolic diseases, such as INSR in insulin resistance [ ], or in immune response, inflammation, growth factor signaling, and developmental processes [ ,  , , ].
RTKs possess a conserved serine‐threonine kinase domain differing only by few amino acids, for instance, the HRD motif (His, Arg, Asp) can be replaced by HFD (His, Phe, Asp) [ ]. RTKs possess an extracellular extension involved in recognition of extracellular signals, mainly peptide ligands and hormones, and an intracellular moiety or domain comprising the kinase domain [ ]. Ligand binding usually causes dimerization of RTKs and involves auto‐phosphorylation, enhancing kinase activity and enabling recruitment of downstream signaling proteins via their phospho‐tyrosine recognition domain (SH2 or PTB) (Figure  ) [ ]. The phosphorylated protein substrate becomes an effector of subsequent downstream pathways inside the cell. INSR is a representative RTK which dimerizes in the presence of insulin [ ,  ]. The conformational change induced by dimerization leads to activation of the cytoplasmic kinase domain, which auto‐phosphorylates (Figure  ). The phosphorylation sites are then recognized by the SH2 domain of the substrates, such as IRS1 to 6, and are in turn phosphorylated by INSR [ ,  ,  , , ].
EGFR is an RTK that requires binding of a ligand (EGF, epidermal growth factor) to induce oligomerization‐dependent activation. EGFR is implicated in the Ras/Raf/Mek/Erk pathway and is involved in cell growth and survival. EGFR signalling is amplified in a wide variety of cancers [ ].
NRTKs are mostly regulated by tyrosine phosphorylation in their activation loop. In the majority of the cases, phosphorylation increases kinase activity. Additional tyrosine phosphorylation beyond the activation loop can occur, which can regulate kinase activity positively or negatively [ ], as for S/T‐kinase.
NRTKs function similarly to RTKs, but the receptor and the kinase are two different proteins [ ]. As for RTKs, ligand binding causes dimerization of the receptor. The conformational change induced by ligand binding enables the recruitment and activation of the RTKs by auto‐phosphorylation. JAKs (Janus‐Activated Kinase) are NRTKs associated cytokine receptors, involved in hematopoiesis, inflammation and immune response [ ,  ]. As for RTKs, the binding of an interleukin causes receptors dimerization and recruitment and activation of Jak [ ]. Jak also phosphorylate the receptor, creating a docking site for Stats, which are transcription factors and substrates of Jak [ ,  ]. This proximity allows Jak to phosphorylate and activate Stats, which delocalize to the nucleus to promote a response [ ].
Abl is a ubiquitously expressed NRTK localized both in cytoplasmic and nuclear compartments [ ]. In the cytoplasm, Abl can bind actin, form bundles, and regulate the structure of the actin cytoskeleton [ ]. In the nucleus, Abl is involved in transcriptional regulation by phosphorylating the C‐terminal domain of RNA polymerase II [ ]. Abl is a well known oncogene, but the protein fusion due to a chromosomal translocation that yields Bcr‐Abl, exhibits more significant proto‐oncogenic functions [ ].
Src (or c‐Src) is a ubiquitously expressed NRTK that interacts with a wide variety of RTKs, including EGFR, INSR, but also the Fc‐coupled receptors and cytokine receptors. Src is involved in regulation of gap junctions, response to stress pathogens, and immunity. The particularity with Src is that it regulates its substrates as much as its substrates regulate Src [ ]. Moreover, Src dysregulation is associated with a broad range of cancers [ ].

Tyrosine Kinase‐Like Kinases (TKLs) comprise various kinases exhibiting Ser/Thr or Tyr kinase activity, involved in development, differentiation, and signalling and required for multicellular life [ ]. They display sequence similarity with the tyrosine kinase group [ ,  ]. There are 43 human TKLs, including the well‐known RAF kinases, involved in MAPK signaling in the RAS‐RAF‐MEK‐ERK pathway [ ], as well as the STKR (Serine/threonine Kinase Receptors for activin and TGFb ligands). Other kinase subgroups include mixed lineage kinases, LIM domain and testis‐specific Kinase (LISK), receptor interacting protein kinase and leucine rich repeat kinase.
The most studied TKLs are RAF kinases, that function as homo/hetero dimers of A‐, B‐, and/or C‐Raf, as represented in Figure   [ ]. A‐RAF, B‐, and C‐ essentially phosphorylate MEK1 and 2 [ ]. B‐RAF has the best increase in activity when activated by Ras, while it responds poorly when activated by Src [ ]. There are multiple phosphorylation sites on RAF involved in regulation of its kinase activity, promoting interactions with partners (notably with 14‐3‐3) or the relocalization from the membrane into the cytoplasm [ ]. TKL are linked with a wide variety of process, and their dysregulation, in particular RAF are known to lead to cancer [ ,  ,  ].

CMGC kinases, whose name is based on the initials of the four main subfamilies (CDKs, MAPKs, Glycogen Synthase Kinase [GSKs], and CLKs) are mostly serine/threonine kinases, with some dual‐specificity kinases. The CMGC family comprises 62 kinases, divided into 8 subfamilies (the four above‐mentioned plus DYRKs, RCKs, CDKLs, and SRPKs) [ ]. They are characterized by a conserved kinase domain and share a specific region called “CMGC insert”, located after the αG helix [ ], involved in interactions with protein partners. A LGS/TP (Leu, Gly, Ser, or Thr, Pro) consensus is observed within the CMGC‐insert, but the amino acids which follow this consensus are poorly conserved [ ,  ]. Another conserved feature among CMGC members is an arginine (sometimes a lysine) positioned just before the APE motif, called the CMGC‐arginine, which is required for recognition of a proline at position P + 1 relative to the phosphorylation site within the substrate (Figure  ) [ ]. Members of this family are key regulators of cell cycle progression, transcription, signal transduction, RNA splicing, and stress responses [ ,  , , ]. CMGC kinases often require association with regulatory partners and are often regulated by multisite phosphorylation.
Among CMGCs, the 20 cyclin‐dependent kinases (CDKs) form a subfamily of serine/threonine kinases that are regulated through cyclin binding [ ]. Initially identified for their functions in cell cycle progression and transcription, they are known to be involved in a wide variety of biological processes, including cell growth and division, cellular senescence, transcription and metabolic functions [ ]. CDK1 is the major regulator of the G2/M transition, Whilst CDK2 is essential for coordination of DNA replication, and CDK4/6 coordinate exit from quiescence and entry into G1 phase of the cell cycle. They are frequently hyperactivated in human cancers and constitute attractive pharmacological targets against which a large panel of drugs have been developed. In particular, several inhibitors of CDK4/6 have been approved by the FDA for clinical use in oncology [ ,  , , , ]. Cyclin binding promotes conformational activation of CDKs, which consists in a rotation of the kinase N‐lobe so as to position the ATP‐pocket facing the catalytic cleft and isomerization of the C‐lobe, which enables the substrate to access the catalytic cleft (Figure  ) [ , , ].
MAPKs kinases are involved in cell proliferation, differentiation, motility and apoptosis. They are usually at the end of a three‐component pathway, as exemplified by Erk in the Raf/Mek/Erk pathway [ ]. 14 human MAPKs have been identified, implicated in 7 pathways, respectively: ERK1−2, ERK3−4, ERK5, ERK7, JNK1−3, p38α, β, γ, and δ, and NLK [ ,  ]. Most effectors of the MAPK pathways are transcription factors like Jun, a substrate of JNKs, Ets phosphorylated by Erk, and MEF2C for p38 [ ,  , , ]. As regulators of cell proliferation, MAPKs (see Figure  ) are also widely involved in dysregulated pathways in cancers [ ,  ,  ,  ].
GSKs, or GSK‐3 comprises two kinases: GSK‐3α and GSK‐3β [ ]. GSKs dysregulation can lead to diverse disorders such as type II diabetes, cancer, and depression, schizophrenia, or Alzheimer's disease [ ]. These kinases were named according to their identification as the third class of enzyme phosphorylating glycogen synthase, GSK‐1 being PKA and GSK2 being a CAMK [ ,  ]. GSKs are involved in the β‐catenin dependent pathway of the WNT receptor, that forms the “destruction complex”, with adenomatosis polyposis coli, Axin and CKIα (Figure  ) [ ]. The destruction complex is involved in lysosomal targeting and degradation of β‐catenin mediated by GSK3 phosphorylation.
The four human Cdc2‐like Kinases (CLKs) are dual‐specificity protein kinases that auto‐phosphorylate both serine/threonine and tyrosine residues [ ,  ].
The five cyclin‐Dependent Kinase‐Like (CDKL) kinases are serine/threonine kinases which exhibit homology with CDKs and MAPKs. Only CDKL1 and CDKL5 have been studied extensively [ ]. CDKL5 is linked with neuronal disorders during development [ ] and CDKL1 seems to be involved in colorectal cancers [ ].
The dual‐specificity tyrosine‐phosphorylation‐regulated protein kinases (DYRKs) are atypical CMGCs that play multiple roles in cell cycle progression, such as regulation of the entry and duration of G1 phase, and also regulate apoptosis [ ]. The human kinome comprises two classes of DYRKs: class I are nuclear proteins, whilst class II are cytosolic [ ]. DYRKs phosphorylate tyrosine exclusively through intramolecular autophosphorylation of the catalytic loop but cannot phosphorylate any other tyrosine residues [ ] (see Figure  ).

STE kinases are named by homology with yeast's Sterile 20 Protein (Ste20p) [ ,  ]. This kinase family counts 28 kinases split into two groups that differ mainly by the position of the kinase domain in the sequence: The P‐21 activated kinase (PAK) and the GCK. The human genome contains 8 sub‐groups of GCK and 2 of PAK. GCKs have an N‐terminal kinase domain, while the kinase domain of PAKs is C‐terminal. Like AGC kinases, some STE kinases (PAK1 and PAK4) exhibit strong preference for Arg near the phosphorylation sites, especially when the Arg is at position −2 [ ]. PAK1 is a STE kinase which constitutively forms inactive homodimers that interact with each other through auto‐inhibitory domains [ ]. Activation occurs when a small GTPase binds the p21‐binding domain (a GTPase binding domain) of PAK1, causing conformational changes, dissociation of the auto‐inhibitory domains from both PAK, and dissociation of the dimer [ ]. Then, both active subunits phosphorylate the activation loop of the other kinase subunit, leading to complete activation of the PAK [ ] (Figure  ). STE kinases are involved in a wide variety of functions, comprising cell survival, apoptosis, memory, osmotic tolerance, and their dysregulation is associated with mental retardation, cancer hypertension, or hearing loss [ ].

CKI: Casein kinases form the smallest human kinase family, with only 12 kinases [ ], many of which are isoforms of CK1 protein (7 out of 12) as well as splicing isoforms [ ,  ,  ]. Nevertheless, these ubiquitously expressed kinases are involved in numerous cellular and physiological processes, such as cell proliferation, apoptosis, or circadian rhythms [ ]. CKIs are monomeric PKs that contain conventional conserved sequence motifs except for APE (Ala‐Pro‐Glu), which is replaced by SIN (Ser‐Ile‐Asn). Moreover, they do not require any phosphorylation of the activation‐loop and are constitutively active [ ]. CK1 kinase consensus substrate sequence is an acidic amino acid two positions before the phosphorylation site, with a preference for a phosphorylated Ser or Thr (Figure  ) [ ]. Due to this property, CK1 kinases are sometimes called “phosphate directed kinases”. CK1δ and ε are known to phosphorylate P53 (also known as “the guardian of the genome”) on threonine 18 in response to ionizing radiation. This phosphorylation destabilizes the interaction between p53 and Mdm2, leading to stabilization and activation of p53 [ ,  ]. This process is triggered by phosphorylation of serine 15 of p53 by DNA‐kinase, forming the CKI consensus sequence [ , , ].

Atypical protein kinases are a group of protein kinases which do not share similarities with bona fide kinases at the primary structure level (see Figure  ) [ ]. At the tertiary structure level, most atypical kinases whose structures have been solved exhibit a classical kinase fold, with a β‐sheet rich N‐lobe and an α‐helix rich C‐lobe [ ] and harbour DFG, HxD and APE motifs (with D : aspartate, F : phenylalanine, G : glycine, H : histidine, A : alanine, P : proline, E : glutamate, and x : any amino acid) found in conventional kinases [ ] (Figure  ).
 The human kinome comprises nine kinases that do not belong to any of the seven families: Alpha, ABC1, A6, BRD, PDHK, PIKK, and Rio [ ,  ]. Despite their sequence differences, atypical kinases are involved in the same kind of processes as conventional kinases, such as transcription/translation, cell division, metabolism and ion uptake regulation [ ,  ]. Moreover, RIO kinases play a role in rRNA processing [ ]. Some of the atypical kinases are implicated in cancer like BCR and BRD [ , , ].

The NME family is the only histidine kinase family documented in all metazoans, with 10 representative members in human [ ,  ,  ]. First described as nucleoside diphosphate kinases [ ], NMEs have been investigated for their anti‐metastatic functions, from which their name derives (nonmetastatic) [ ]. The histidine kinase activity of NMEs was first discovered in the late 60's [ ]. NMEs are known to exhibit nucleoside diphosphate kinase activity, histidine kinase activity, serine kinase activity, and aspartate kinase activity [ , , ]. NME kinases form hexamers composed of two trimers. The 3D structure of NME kinases exhibits little homology with serine/threonine and tyrosine kinases [ ]. In crystallographic structures of NMEs, phosphate groups from nucleotide phosphates are oriented inside the catalytic pocket contrary to serine/threonine and tyrosine kinases, (for structure, see PDB ID 1UCN for NME1 and 3BBB for NME2). This major difference explains why NME kinases undergo histidine auto‐phosphorylation within their catalytic pocket as an intermediate, forming 1‐p‐His (see Figure  ), and then transfer the phosphate to a substrate in a second step [ ,  ]. NMEs have a wide variety of substrates and are involved in different functions, such as K‐Raf suppressor, calcium channel TRPV5, or ATP‐citrate synthase [ ,  , , ].

3.

## Technologies for Detection, Profiling, and Imaging Protein Kinases
Given the central role of PKs in physiopathological processes, numerous strategies and technologies have been developed for their detection in vitro, in cultured cell lines, and in vivo essentially in cancer models.
3.1.

## Conventional Approaches for PK Detection: Radioactivity, Antibodies, and “Omics”
Historically, PKs were detected thanks to antibodies and PK activity was monitored either using antibodies directed against phospho‐amino acids in PK substrates or radioactive 32‐P ATP [ ,  ]. However such approaches are endpoint and limited to in vitro applications, calling for additional and alternative technologies.
Genetic analyses provide information relative to alterations in the genes encoding PKs, enabling identification of point mutations and splicing isoforms, as well as deletions or truncations. Genetic profiling of PKs proves very useful in clinical diagnostics when a PK of interest bears a specific mutation undergoes genetic amplification or chromosomal rearrangement associated with pathological conditions [ , , ].
Transcriptomic and proteomic approaches provide information relative to mRNA and protein abundance and have been extensively implemented for global analysis of transcription and proteomic profiles to assess up‐ or down‐regulation of groups of PKs associated with disease, in patient samples and in response to treatment with therapeutic drugs [ ,  ].

3.2.

## Kinome‐Wide and Fluorescence‐Based Approaches
Since the first biochemical PK activity assays relying on radioactive or antigenic components, numerous approaches have been developed to characterize PK activities based on inhibitors, antibodies, proteomics, and fluorescence/luminescence components [ ,  ].
Kinome‐wide global array‐based approaches for large‐scale profiling of the ensemble of PKs within the human kinome have been developed, including antibody arrays, the reverse phase protein array (RPPA) technology for profiling phosphoproteins [ ,  ], complemented by kinase inhibitor profiling assays such as KinomeScan [ ] and Kinobeads technology [ , , ], further extended to multilplexed inhibitor beads derived from Kinobeads and combined with mass spectrometry analysis to determine PK response to cell treatment with hormones, inhibitors, or acquired drug‐resistance [ , , ]. Several excellent reviews cover these approaches comprehensively. However, these approaches offer snapshots and are not adapted for studying the kinetics of kinase activity in real time.
In this review we will focus on fluorescent and luminescent approaches that have been developed to report on PK activities. These multicomponent assays rely on fluorescent ATP, fluorescently‐labelled peptide substrates, phospho‐antibodies or enzyme‐coupled assays to measure depletion or production of ATP [ ,  ].
Assays such as HTRF (homogeneous time resolved fluorescence), LANCE (lanthanide chelate excitation) and AlphaScreen (amplified luminescent proximity homogeneous assay) measure fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) between a PK substrate peptide typically labelled with a FRET acceptor and phospho‐specific antibodies conjugated with a donor. FRET occurs when the antibodies bind the phosphorylated substrate, thereby bringing donor and acceptor in close proximity. Assays based on fluorescence polarization allow to measure differences in anisotropy of a fluorescent substrate that forms a complex with a phospho‐specific antibodies upon phosphorylation. In contrast, fluorescence quenching assays based on metal ion coordination do not involve phospho‐specific antibodies. Instead, the fluorescence of a peptide substrate is quenched upon phosphorylation by coordination with a metal ion that is associated with a quencher.
Enzyme‐coupled assays do not rely on peptide substrates and instead measure PK activities based on depletion of ATP or production of ADP. They include ATP‐dependent assays that measure ATP depletion via luminescence, catalyzed by luciferase [ ] and ADP‐dependent assays that measure ADP production by pyruvate kinase and lactate dehydrogenase in a fluorescent/colorimetric assay [ ].

3.3.

## Fluorescent Biosensors(FBs)—Selective and Sensitive Reporters of PK Activities
FBs combine a biological receptor, either derived from a native protein receptor, a protein/protein interaction domain or a substrate, or a biomimetic material, responsible for sensing a specific analyte or target, with one or several fluorescent probes that serve as physiochemical transducers in converting recognition of the analyte into a detectable and measurable fluorescent signal – generally fluorescence emission, FRET or FLIM (fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy). FBs that report on protein kinases comprise a minima a substrate moiety and a fluorescent probe, fluorescence of which will undergo changes associated with phosphorylation. Several variations have been devised, and in particular integration of a phospho‐amino acid binding domain (PAABD) that will recognize the phosphorylated substrate. Several PAABDs have been employed for biosensor designs, derived from well characterized modular phospho‐binding domains, including Src‐homology 2/3, (SH2 SH3), phosphotyrosine‐binding (PTB) domains, 14‐3‐3 proteins, forkhead‐associated (FHA) domains, WW domains, WD40 domains, and the PBD of Plk1 [ ,  , , , , ].
FBs constitute potent tools for probing PK activity in complex samples such as plasma, urine, cell lysates, or biopsies, as well as in native environments, such as living cells, organoids and organisms. They constitute one of the classes of optical probes that has witnessed the greatest developments over the last two decades and have opened new avenues for investigating PK behavior and regulation in real time with high spatial and temporal resolution. They have been widely implemented for imaging applications and have therefore become known as “reporters” or “molecular spies” [ , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ]. FBs have also been implemented to the drug discovery pipeline for high‐throughput screening (for review [ ,  ]).
A broad diversity of FBs have been engineered, which may be distinguished by their biomolecular nature, design and mechanisms of action: genetically‐encoded biosensors and synthetic sensors, also known as chemosensors, as well as a growing class of fluorescent and luminescent biosensors based on nanomaterials, all of which have been described in detail in several comprehensive reviews [ , , , , ,  ,  ,  , , , , ,  , , , , ].
Genetically‐encoded FBs tailored to report on PK activities, also known as KARs for Kinase Activity Reporters, are generally expressed in eukaryotic cells for imaging purposes (or in bacteria to yield recombinant proteins which can be purified for in vitro applications). The vast majority of these biosensors comprise a PK substrate and a PAABD, sandwiched between a pair of fluorescent proteins (FPs) and rely on changes in FRET between the latter upon substrate phosphorylation (for review [ ,  ]). These genetic biosensors have been widely implemented to image PKs within signalling pathways that are dysregulated in disease [ ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ]. Since the first generations of genetic biosensors there have been numerous technological improvements to optimize their sensitivity and selectivity, thereby yielding highly sensitive and selective tools for high‐resolution spatio‐temporal imaging within a broad spectral range. These aspects will be covered in more detail below.
Synthetic fluorescent biosensors, which will hereafter be termed chemosensors, are most often engineered through incorporation of one or several small organic fluorophores with optical properties that are well suited for biosensing applications, such as environmentally‐sensitive fluorescent probes, onto a peptide substrate together with a PAABD [ ,  ,  ,  ,  , , ,  ,  ]. In these designs, fluorophores may either respond directly to proximal phosphorylation or undergo changes in fluorescence emission associated with intramolecular conformational changes of the peptide scaffold following phosphorylation. Moreover, several original strategies have been devised to design chemosensors with less conventional mechanisms of action than fluorescence response to PAABD/substrate binding, including chelation‐enhanced fluorescence, enhanced metal‐ion and lanthanide binding to phosphorylated peptides, quenching/unquenching and aggregation mechanisms, which will be described in more detail below (Figures  and  ). Peptide‐based chemosensors can be introduced into living cells for imaging purposes thanks to different cell delivery strategies such as microinjection, cell‐penetrating peptides (CPPs) or nanomaterials (nanoparticles, carbon nanotubes), but are more frequently employed for quantification of PK activities in vitro in complex samples such as cell extracts or patient biopsies, thereby constituting attractive and promising tools for diagnostic and point‐of‐care applications.
 Both genetically‐encoded KARS and synthetic sensors tailored to report on PK activities respond to phosphorylation by PKs through sensitive changes in fluorescence emission. The substrate moiety provides selectivity for the PK of interest, whilst the choice of fluorophores determines sensitivity and dynamic range of response. In order to increase PK recognition, several designs incorporate a docking domain, which affords for greater affinity for the PK of interest, therefore improving the efficiency of substrate phosphorylation and contributing to optimize response.This is well exemplified by MAPK protein kinases (ERK, p38, and JNK), which have very similar phosphorylation sites yet distinct docking domains that can be exploited to improve substrate targeting and selectivity [ ,  ].
Overall, both genetically encoded and synthetic sensors have been developed for most families of PKs, with a total of 6.4% PKs targeted by both genetic and chemosensors (i.e. 33/ 518). However, as shown in Figure  , a larger proportion of PKs can be detected by genetically‐encoded FBs with an additional 9.3% PKs (i.e. 48), against only 1.4% PKs targeted by synthetic chemosensors alone (i.e. 7). These will be described in more detail below.
 
3.4.

## Fluorescent Biosensors of AGC Kinases
A large number of genetically encoded FBs have been developed by different research groups and implemented for imaging PKA, AKT/PKB, PKC, or PKD activities in living cells (reviewed in [ ,  ,  ,  ,  ]).
Genetically encoded single‐chain FRET biosensors of PKA (cAMP‐dependent protein kinase) activity were amongst the first kinase reporters developed to image the dynamics of PKA activity in living cells, and over 80 genetic biosensors have been described so far [ , , , , ]. The first genetically encoded biosensor of PKA activity, known as ART (for cAMP‐responsive tracer) relied on the BGFP/RGFP FRET pair and the kinase‐inducible domain of the CREB transcription factor (cAMP‐responsive element‐binding protein), which undergoes a conformational change upon phosphorylation, disrupting FRET between FPs [ ].
AKAR (for cAMP‐dependent kinase activity reporter) biosensors developed by Zhang et al. comprise a substrate sequence and a PAABD sandwiched between two FPs, brought together following substrate phosphorylation and subsequent interaction with the PAABD (Figure  ). The AKAR toolbox now consists of six generations of FBs, including four CFP/YFP FRET‐based biosensors, two GFP/RFP FRET biosensors, and lifetime‐based FRET biosensors (for review [ ,  ,  ]).
 AKAR1 expresses an ECFP/YFP FRET pair together with a 14‐3‐3 phosphorecognition domain [ ]. However, this biosensor was not reversible, leading to engineering of AKAR2 in which an FHA domain replaced 14‐3‐3 and the FRET pair was ECFP/ citrine [ ]. AKAR3 was generated with an ECFP/cp172Venus pair and implemented to characterize subcellular dynamics of PKA activity [ ]. Depry et al. further developed AKAR4 comprising the Cerulean/cpVenus pair to image PKA activity in plasma membrane microdomains [ ] and aSR‐AKAR3 based on a CFP/YFP FRET pair was developed to monitor PKA activity specifically in the sarcoplasmic reticulum of cardiomyocytes [ ].
Komatsu et al. engineered an AKAR3 EV variant that exhibits 6fold greater gain over AKAR3 and AKAR4, with an optimized “Eevee” (for extension for enhanced visualization by evading extraFRET) backbone including a long and flexible EV linker ((SAGG)n with n = 13–61, optimal length 116aa) between the FHA1 domain and the substrate, thereby achieving complete distance‐dependency between the acceptor and the donor and reducing basal FRET noise [ ].
An AKAR5 variant comprising an EGFP‐sREACH FRET pair was further developed and employed for FRET/FLIM imaging [ ]. More recently the J.Zhang lab developed a highly sensitive CFP/YFP FRET‐based AKAR6 with improved selectivity that has been implemented to flow cytometry, FLIM‐FRET, and 2‐photon imaging in brain slices, affording for detection of highly compartmentalized PKA activity at the suborganelle (Golgi) level [ ].
In addition to FRET‐based AKARs bearing a pair of FPs, several excitation ratiometric kinase activity reporters (ExRai‐KAR) based on single FPs have been developed, which exhibit significantly greater dynamic range and performance compared to FRET AKARs AKAR4 and AKAR3ev. ExRai‐AKAR is based on a cpFP flanked by the substrate on one side and an FHA domain on the other, fluorescence of which is modulated following phosphorylation by PKA, which induces a conformational switch, bringing together the substrate with the FHA domain [ ] (Figure  ). It should be noted that the ExRai design has been generalized to develop biosensors for other PKs [ ]. Optimization of ExRai AKAR yielded an ultrasensitive second‐generation excitation‐ratiometric biosensor (ExRai‐AKAR2), which was implemented to high resolution imaging of PKA activity in awake mice [ ].
Further improvements have included the development of red‐shifted single FP biosensors, based on dimerization‐dependent of single RFPs (ddRFP), specifically RAB (for RFP‐A/B)‐AKAR [ ]. In this design, a dimly fluorescent FP and a nonfluorescent FP integrated in the same construct promote enhanced fluorescence emission of the former when both FPs dimerize, following phosphorylation of the biosensor, which is of particular interest for red‐shifted sensors (Figure  ).
Moreover, single FP biosensors have been employed for multiplexed detection of up to six distinct PK activities : for instance three parameter imaging of AKAR, EKARev and CKAR biosensors, or of ExRai‐AKAR, RAB‐EKARev and BCaMP [ ]. A smart strategy of particular interest for multiplexing with single FP biosensors based on homoFRET, a process through which identical fluorophores transfer energy from one to another, was devised to develop fLuorescence anisotropy REporters, in which reduced fluorescence polarization that occurs when FPs are brought in close proximity, following phosphorylation of the substrate sequence, serves as a readout of FRET between FPs, thereby enabling quantitative ratiometric imaging [ ,  ].
Aside from AKARs, a wide variety of PKA activity reporters have been developed including a biosensor derived from Renilla luciferase fragment [ ], a single GFP biosensor [ ] (Figure  ), a bimolecular kinase activity reporter, or BimKAR [ ] (Figure  ), as well as kinase translocation reporters (KTRs) that report on PK activity through changes in subcellular localization following phosphorylation of a nuclear export sequence (NES) and/or a nuclear localization sequence (NLS) sequence in the FB design [ ,  ] (Figure  ). Moreover, efforts and advances in imaging technologies have contributed to in‐depth understanding of PKA dynamics in living cells [ ,  ,  , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ]. A timeline depicting the technological improvements in PKA biosensors over the past 25 years is shown in Figure  .
Along the same lines as the AKARs, the first genetically‐encoded PKC reporter known as CKAR, based on ECFP/citrine and the FHA2 domain of Rad53 to recognize the consensus phosphorylation sequence, was developed and implemented to image the oscillatory activity of PKC [ ]. A derivative of CKAR was developed for specific measurement of PKC delta, revealing a unique spatio‐temporal regulation of this isozyme [ ].
An alternative design for monitoring PKC activity, known as the KCP‐1 biosensor, relies on GFP/EYFP FRET pair and a domain derived from pleckstrin, comprising a PH domain and a DEP domain flanking a loop that bears several phosphorylation sites [ ] (Figure  ). The same group developed a derivative of the pleckstrin‐based FB termed KPAC‐A that includes a PKA substrate sequence following the intermediate loop phosphorylated by PKC, yielding a dual‐parameter FRET biosensor that reports on both PKC and PKA activity, the former through increased FRET, the latter through decreased FRET [ ].
Isozyme‐specific PKC biosensors were engineered to investigate the spatiotemporal dynamics of these enzymes in synaptic plasticity [ ]. Moreover, highly sensitive ExRai CKAR biosensors were developed enabling fine studies of the subcellular regulation of PKC [ ].
Several FBs have been developed to monitor PKB/Akt signaling and study its dynamics in living cells, with designs similar to AKAR biosensors [ , , ]. Aktus reporters comprise CFP/YFP FRET pair, a PKB susbtrate sequence derived from Bad, and a PAABD derived from 14‐3‐3n and several variants included Golgi‐ or mitochondrial‐targeting sequences [ ] (Figure  ). BKAR biosensor was engineered according to the same design as CKAR with an ECFP/citrine FRET pair and implemented to image PKB activity in real time in the nucleus, cytoplasm, and at the cell membrane [ ]. AktAR, characterized by a Cerulean/cpVenus FRET pair, an FHA1 domain, and a FoXO1 substrate, was implemented to investigate Akt activity in membrane microdomains, revealing greater activity within lipid rafts [ ].
A GFP‐Akt‐YFP construct was engineered and implemented to monitor conformational changes associated with Akt activation by FLIM [ ,  ] (Figure  ). Along the same lines, a FRET reporter of Akt (ReAktion) was employed to investigate conformational changes of Akt, revealing a critical phosphorylation site within the activation loop [ ]. A highly specific FRET biosensor was developed to report on Akt based on the Eevee backbone [ ], called Eevee‐iAkt that was further targeted to the plasma membrane, mitochondria, and nucleus in HeLa and Cos7 cells, thereby revealing significant differences [ ]. A fluorescent KTR of Akt was engineered as a fusion between a modified FoXO1 transcription factor and clover, a green fluorescent protein, that rapidly translocates from the nucleus to the cytoplasm in response to Akt stimulation enabled visualization of differences between single cells [ ] (Figure  ).
A highly sensitive second generation Akt biosensor was developed and employed to image regulation of lipid second messengers together with Akt activity in lysosomes [ ].
One of the challenges in PK biosensing consists in monitoring several PKs of interest simultaneously. This has been achieved through imaging combinations of both genetically‐encoded FRET and single FP biosensors: FRET biosensors have been implemented for multiplexed imaging of PKA and ERK kinases [ ], of ERK and AKT [ ], and single FP biosensors have been combined to image PKA, PKC, and ERK [ ]. Herbst et al. developed a luminescent bimolecular biosensor derived from Renilla luciferase engineered to respond to PKA and PKC [ ]. Moreover, several technologies have been developed to enable, facilitate and optimize engineering of FRET biosensors with a optimal responses [ ,  ,  ].
Despite the wide panel of genetically‐encoded FBs available to date, tissue and in vivo imaging remains challenging, calling for development of new generations of FBs with red‐shifted FPs [ , , , ].
Moreover, since many genetically‐encoded FBs are limited with respect to spectral versatility, FRET‐based chemigenetic biosensors have been engineered in which FPs are replaced by genetically‐encodable self‐labelling tags, such as SNAP and HaloTag, combined with small organic dyes that offer a greater diversity of photophysical properties, thereby expanding the toolbox of FRET biosensors [ ,  , , ]. In particular, SNAP/HaloTag‐AKAR3EV chemigenetic FRET biosensors were engineered through integration of SNAP and HaloTag domains tagged with Janelia Farms dyes, replacing ECFP and YPet in the original AKAR3EV [ ]. In the same study, SNAP/HaloTag EKAR4 chemigenetic biosensors were also developed and further implemented to multiplex imaging of PKA and ERK activities with the above‐mentioned PKA chemigenetic bionsensors.
Further developments in chemigenetic PK biosensors include far‐red biosensors, such as the first single‐colour reporters that integrate HaloTag7 with far‐red emitting synthetic fluorophores, offering new opportunities for mulitplexed and super‐resolved imaging [ ]. He et al. recently developed highly sensitive chemigenetic FRET‐based biosensors for different kinases, GTPases and second messengers by combining FRET biosensors with far‐red synthetic fluorophores conjugated to the self‐labelling HaloTag, which not only enable shifting of the spectral range and increased dynamic range but also offer unprecedented perspectives for robust and quantitative multiplexed imaging in brain slices [ ].
A wide variety of fluorescent chemosensors have also been developed by different labs to report on AGC kinases (PKA, AKT/PKB, PKC, or PKD) (reviewed in [ ,  ,  ]). The vast majority are peptides conjugated to environmentally‐sensitive fluorophores that respond to phosphorylation through several mechanisms. In the simplest form, the fluorophore is conjugated directly at or proximal to the phosphorylation site and responds through changes in fluorescence emission upon phosphorylation of the peptide substrate, as developed by Yeh et al. to yield a peptide‐based PKC chemosensor [ ] (Figure  ). Specifically, a peptide library was engineered by conjugating a variety of fluorescent labels onto the serine of a PKC substrate peptide. The nitrobenzofuran‐peptide reporter responded best to PKC activity, with a 2.5‐fold increase in fluorescence emission, and was consequently implemented to monitor PKC activity in cell lysates, then microinjected into living cells to visualize PKC spatio‐temporal dynamics. A light‐activatable variant of this peptide‐based PKC chemosensor was further synthesized by caging the serine group in order to achieve precise control of biosensor response [ ].
D. Lawrence's group pioneered “self‐reporting” and “deep quench” strategies for Ser/Thr kinases [ , , ]. Self‐reporting peptide sensors (Figure  ) are based on the environmentally‐sensitivity organic fluorophores that respond to phosphorylation of a peptide substrate through binding of PAABDs, such as SH2 and 14‐3‐3 domains for tyrosine and serine/threonine kinases, respectively. The “deep‐quench” strategy (Figure  ) involves silencing of fluorophore emission by an interacting quencher in solution until phosphorylation disrupts this interaction, allowing a PAABD to interact with the phosphorylated peptide substrate instead, consequently promoting enhancement of fluorescence emission. A peptide‐based chemosensor of PKA bearing a pyrene probe, Rose Bengal as a quencher and a 14‐3‐3 phosphoserine‐binding domain yielded up to 64‐fold fluorescence enhancement in response to phosphorylation [ ]. Another peptide chemosensor of PKA labelled with Coumarin and Acid Green as a quencher yielded up to 150‐fold fluorescence enhancement [ ]. D. Lawrence and coworkers also developed a set of PKC chemosensors based on Ca2+‐chelating tetracarboxylate fluorophores, previously developed by Tsien et al.., that were directly incorporated into the N‐terminal phosphorylation site of a consensus PKC peptide substrate [ ]. Phosphorylation of the difluorofluorescein‐conjugated peptide by PKC creates a divalent metal‐ion‐binding site, which promotes coordination of Ca2+, and creates a twist in the fluorophore which results in significant fluorescence enhancement [ ] (Figure  ).
B. Imperiali's group developed a sensitive approach termed chelation‐enhanced fluorescence, that relies on a sulfonamido oxine (Sox) dye derived from 8‐hydroxyquinoline. Sox is a solvatochromic dye that chelates metal ions such as Ca2+, Mg2+, Zn2+ and that undergoes fluorescent enhancement upon simultaneous coordination of a proximal phosphate group. This strategy was employed to engineer peptide chemosensors that respond to phosphorylation through chelation of the Mg2+ ion involved in the reaction [ , , , ] (Figure  ). Imperiali et al. further developed a “versatile kinase activity scaffold” with a beta‐turn focused design between the Sox dye and the phosphorylation site, thereby structurally favouring simultaneous chelation of Mg2+ by the Sox dye upon substrate phosphorylation [ ]. Sox chemosensors were further optimized through addition of sequences that increase the specificity for the PK of interest, and therefore termed “recognition‐domain focused” chemosensors [ ]. These fluorescent peptide‐based chemosensors have been engineered for a wide variety of serine/threonine and tyrosine PKs including PKA, PKCs, Pim2, Akt1, MK2, IRK, Src, Abl which have further been implemented to multiplex kinase assays with cell extracts [ ,  ].
Kinase activity reporters based on the preferential chelation of lanthanides by phosphorylated peptides have been developed by several groups (Figure  ). Balakrishnan and Zondlo took advantage of a modified EF‐hand calcium‐binding loop that binds metals poorly but responds to phosphorylation by adopting a structure that complexes Tb3+. Association of this so‐called “kinase‐inducible motif” with recognition sequences for PKA, PKC, and ERK yielded biosensors that respond selectively to each of these kinases through emission of luminescence [ ,  ].
A completely different approach was devised by Sun et al. to develop fluorescent chemosensors for PKA, PKC, Akt, p38, MAPKAPK2, Erk1, and Src, based on fluorescent amphiphilic peptide substrates that naturally auto‐assemble, thereby quenching fluorescence emission [ ]. Phosphorylation of these peptides disrupts the micelle structure, releasing fluorescent peptides (Figure  ).
A timeline depicting the technological developments in PKA chemosensors over the past 25 years is shown in Figure  .

3.5.

## Fluorescent Biosensors of CAMK Kinases
In order to visualize the precise temporal and spatial regulation of CaMKII activity in living neurons, a genetically‐encoded FRET biosensor termed Camui alpha was engineered to detect calmodulin binding and kinase autophosphorylation [ ]. Erickson et al. developed a genetically‐encoded FB of CaMKII, termed Camui, that was implemented to image CamKII activation in cardiomyocytes [ ]. Camui expresses full‐length CaMKII flanked by CFP and YFP which undergo FRET in the autoinhibited state of CAMKII. CAMKII activation is associated with a conformational change, which results in FRET decrease (Figure  ). A FLIM version of Camui was engineered by fusing CaMKII with donor and acceptor FPs at its amino‐ and carboxyl‐termini [ ]. A dual FRET imaging platform was developed to monitor CaMKIIα and calcineurin activities in hippocampal neurons [ ].
Another FRET‐based sensor for CaMKII activity, FRESCA, based on an FHA2 and CaMKII substrate flanked by a CFP/YFP pair, which undergoes a FRET decrease upon phosphorylation, was used to monitor CaMKII activity in response to Ca2+ oscillations in live cells [ ] (Figure  ).
A genetic FB of myosin light chain kinase (MLCK) was developed by Chew et al., for spatio‐temporal imaging of MLCK activation [ ]. MLCK‐FIP is based on a calmodulin‐binding domain derived from MLCK and a BFP/GFP pair that undergoes FRET in the absence of Ca/calmodulin. However, upon activation of MLCK prompted through binding of Ca/calmodulin, the FRET signal decreases (Figure  ).
AMPKAR biosensor, was engineered to investigate the spatio‐temporal dynamics of AMPK activity in living cells upon cellular stress, based on a substrate sequence and an FHA1 domain, flanked by an ECFP/cpVenus FRET pair [ ]. In order to image AMPK activation dynamics in vivo, a highly sensitive FRET biosensor, AMPKAR‐EV, was expressed in transgenic mice [ ]. An ExRai AMPKAR biosensor with enhanced sensitivity was engineered and implemented to image spatial activation of AMPK [ ].
Peptide‐based chemosensors engineered to report on PKs of this family include MAPKAPK2 [ ,  ,  ,  ,  ] and PIM2 [ ,  ]. Imperiali's group developed Sox‐based chemosensors that report on both MAPKAPK2 and PIM2, using the same strategy and design as the chemosensors for PKA or Akt described above [ ,  ,  ,  ] (Figure  ). Sun et al. also implemented their auto‐assembling fluorescent peptide approach described above for AGC kinases to develop fluorescent peptides that respond to MAPKAPK2 [ ].

3.6.

## Fluorescent Biosensors of CMGC Kinases
One of the first reporters of PKs from the CMGC family was the histone phosphorylation reporter engineered by Lin and Tang by sandwiching a substrate sequence derived from histone H3 bearing a phosphorylatable serine residue to a PAABD derived from 14‐3‐3 between a YFP and CFP FRET pair [ ]. This FB was shown to respond to Msk1 [ ] in vitro and was further modified with an NLS to image histone H3 phosphorylation in living cells, with a peak just before nuclear membrane breakdown at mitosis.
Genetically‐encoded reporters of MAPKs have essentially been developed for ERK1/2 with numerous improvements since the first design. The first FRET biosensor of ERK, named Erkus, was designed to study the spatiotemporal dynamics of ERK1/2 activity. This FB encodes the CFP/YFP FRET pair together with the FHA2 domain of Rad53p, a substrate domain derived from EGFR and a short docking motif derived from p90 ribosomal S6 kinase [ ]. (Figure  ). Additional variants bearing either a NLS or a NES was engineered to study the cytosolic and nuclear activities of ERK in cultured cells.
Fujioka et al. developed a FRET biosensor for ERK named Miu2 (MAPK indicator unit ERK2) expressing a YFP/CFP pair together with Xenopus ERK2, which exhibits increased FRET efficiency upon MEK binding associated with a conformational change. Miu2 was employed to monitor phosphorylation by MEK and investigate the spatio‐temporal dynamics of the Ras/ERK/MAPK cascade together with Dronpa‐tagged probes for Raf, MEK and ERK [ ] (Figure  ).
Harvey et al. developed the EKAR biosensor, combining a substrate sequence derived from Cdc25C phosphatase, immediately flanked by an ERK‐specific docking domain, a 72‐glycine linker, a WW domain, and an mRFP/EGFP FRET pair [ ]. EKAR bears an ERK‐specific docking site, which differs from that of Erkus, that appears to contribute to the superior FRET signal of EKAR over Erkus. EKAR was successfully applied to measure the spatiotemporal signaling dynamics of this kinase in neurons from intact brain tissue by FLIM. Since EKAR biosensor was essentially nuclear; a cytoplasmic version was developed, EKARcyto, by appending an NES to the C‐terminus of the biosensor. Additional constructs that were developed to optimize EKAR performance are mostly based on the YFP/CFP pair [ ], but more recent FRET biosensors of ERK comprise FP pairs of longer wavelengths [ ,  ]. Several improved versions of EKAR were engineered, including EKAREV with the long and flexible EV linker [ ], as well as EKAR2G, EKAR TVV, EKAR3, and EKAR4 with optimized fluorescent proteins, resulting in greater dynamic ranges [ ,  , , ]. Another significant optimization of ERK FRET biosensors aimed at reducing non specific phosphorylation by CDK1 through mutagenesis of the substrate sequence, thereby yielding EKAREN4 and 5. These FBs differ in the length of the linker between substrate and PAABD, which increases flexibility and consequently affects the dynamic range. These new biosensors enabled imaging of single‐cell ERK dynamics in colorectal cancer organoids to investigate the interplay between EGF signalling and Erk activation [ ]. Depry et al. have also reported ERK biosensors based on intermolecular FRET [ ].
Nakamura et al. have provided an overview of FRET reporters of ERK and their applications in embryonic development [ ]. Fritz et al. engineered a library of optimized FRET biosensors that were employed to visualize ERK activity in zebrafish [ ]. Xu et al. developed a bioluminescence resonance energy transfer (BRET) biosensor of ERK derived from Renilla luciferase and Venus [ ]. Sparta et al. used a combination of FRET and translocation reporters of ERK to investigate the frequency‐modulated pulsatile activity of ERK following stimulation by EGF [ ]. Demeautis et al. developed a multiplex FLIM‐based imaging strategy to investigate crosstalk in the cAMP/PKA‐MAPK/ERK pathway thanks to FRET reporters of PKA and ERK that can be excited simultaneoulsy yet discriminated spectrally [ ]. As described above in the section on AGC biosensors, several multiplexing imaging studies have combined genetically‐encoded ERK FBs with FBs that report on PKA, PKB or PKC [ ,  ,  ].
Single FP biosensors have also been developed to monitor ERK activity, either through changes in subcellular localization or through changes in fluorescence intensity. Since ERK activation is associated with its nuclear accumulation, constructs expressing FP‐fused ERK were some of the first reporters of ERK activation in living cells [ ,  ]. More recently, ERK KTRs were engineered to monitor ERK activity, expressing an FP together with a substrate of ERK fused to a NLS and a NES (Figure  ); this construct undergoes nucleocytoplasmic shuttling in response upon phosphorylation by ERK, serving as a proxy of ERK activation [ ,  ]. ERK‐KTR sensitivity is comparable with that of FRET‐based ERK biosensors [ ,  ]. As such, single FP ERK‐KTRs have been implemented image ERK activity at the single‐cell level [ ,  ,  ].
A different strategy was devised to engineer the FIRE biosensor (Fra‐1‐based integrative reporter of ERK), which is subject to degradation unless phosphorylated by ERK [ ] (Figure  ).
Finally, a dimerization‐dependent single FP (ddFP)‐based ERK biosensor (RAB‐EKARev) was designed with a fluorogenic ddRFP‐A and a nonfluorescent ddRFP‐B, dimerization of which leads to an increase in ddRFP‐1 fluorescence emission [ ] (Figure  ).
A completely different strategy was devised to engineer a liquid–liquid phase separation‐based ERK biosensor called ERKSPARK (separation of phase‐based activity reporter of kinase), in which multivalent protein–protein interactions upon ERK activation are induced to form fluorescent droplets [ ] (Figure  ).
As described above for PKA, Sun et al. develop fluorescent chemosensors of p38 and Erk1 based on fluorescent amphiphilic, naturally auto‐assembling fluorescent peptides, fluorescence of which is quenched until they are phosphorylated [ ] (Figure  ).
A Tb3+ chemosensor based on an EF hand calcium‐binding loop as described for PKA and PKC was also designed for ERK, reporting selectively its activity through luminescence emission [ ,  ] (Figure  ).
Imperiali's group developed highly selective ERK chemosensors based on the chelation‐enhanced strategy with Sox dyes that respond to phosphorylation through chelation of Mg2+ [ , , , ] (Figure  ). A selective ERK1/2A Sox‐based peptide chemosensor biosensor was engineered through introduction of a docking domain derived from the Ets‐1 transcription factor that was implemented to report on ERK1/2 activity in cell extracts, with high selectivity relative to PKs from the JNK, p38, and CDK families [ ]. Likewise, a Sox‐based p38a‐selective peptide‐based sensor was engineered and implemented to probe p38a activity in cell lysates with high selectivity thanks to incorporation of a MEF2A docking peptide [ ]. These peptide chemosensors have been implemented to multiplex assays [ ,  ].
A timeline depicting the technological developments in genetic and synthetic sensors reporting on ERK activity over the past 25 years is shown in Figure  .
Several translocation‐based FBs have been developed to characterize cell cycle processes associated with CDK activities [ , , ]. Spencer et al. developed a translocation‐based FB to report on CDK2 activity, adapted from a previous reporter [ ], derived from human DNA helicase B fused to mVenus (DHB‐Ven), that harbours four CDK consensus phosphorylation sites, a NLS, and a NES [ ]. Likewise, a variety of FRET reporters of CDK activities have been engineered. The first genetically‐encoded FB reporting on CDK1 activity was designed with mCerulean/YPet sandwiching a peptide substrate derived from cyclin B1 together with a PAABD derived from the Polo‐Box domain of human Plk1 [ ] (Figure  ). This FB was implemented to image the dynamics of CDK1 activation just before nuclear envelope breakdown with high temporal resolution. A second generation FB reporter mTFP1‐YFP FRET FB with 4.5‐fold greater response [ ]. Maryu and Yang developed a CDK1 FB, CDK1‐EV YPet/SECFP derived from EKAREV [ ], a FRET biosensor for ERK MAP kinase activity [ ]. The substrate domain of the original EKAREV contains a peptide derived from Cdc25C, which is phosphorylated by both CDK1 and ERK, and the ERK binding sequence FQFP in order to make it more sensitive to ERK than CDK1 [ ,  ]. To obtain a FRET biosensor for CDK1 activity, the authors removed the ERK binding sequence FQFP and succeeded in visualizing the dynamics of CDK1 activity in Xenopus egg extract.
Our group has developed peptide‐based chemosensors to report on several CDK/Cyclins involved in cell cycle regulation which have been implemented in vitro, in cellulo and in vivo [ ,  , , , , , ]. We have established several proof‐of‐concepts with these tools to probe CDK/Cyclins, including CDKSENS, that reports on their relative abundance [ ] and CDKACT that report on CDK activities with applications in vitro, in cultured cells, and in vivo.

CDKACT chemosensors comprise a CDK‐specific substrate moiety onto which an environmentally‐sensitive dye is conjugated and a PAABD that recognizes phosphorylated Ser/Thr. Following phosphorylation by an active CDK, the PAABD interacts with the phosphorylated substrate moiety, thereby altering the local environment of the fluorescent probe, consequently promoting fluorescence enhancement (Figure  ). By tailoring the substrate moiety for specific recognition by different CDKs, we generated a highly selective panel of synthetic fluorescent peptides that report on the specific activity of CDK1, CDK2, CDK4, CDK5, and CDK6 and have established several proofs‐of‐concept in cancer cell lysates and tumor biopsies, as well as in living cells and in vivo.
The first CDKACT was engineered with a PAABD derived from Plk1 and a substrate sequence derived from Histone H1, so as to yield a « generic CDK sensor » commonly phosphorylated by most CDKs [ ]. This Cy3‐labelled peptide‐based chemosensor enabled comparison of activities from several recombinant CDKs and was further validated with lysates prepared from cell lines expressing different levels of active CDKs or treated with different kinase inhibitors. A derivative of CDKACT‐H1, RFP‐CDKACT‐Cy5, was engineered with an N‐terminal RFP so as to enable ratiometric quantification of changes in Cy5 fluorescence relative to RFP upon phosphorylation in a complex environment and internalized into cultured cells thanks to the CPP Pep1 to image oscillations of CDK activity throughout the cell cycle by time‐lapse fluorescence microscopy [ ,  ]. The second generation of CDKACT chemosensors comprises a PAABD derived from the WW domain of Pin1. In a third generation of CDKACTs, the native WW domain of Pin1 was replaced by a shorter sequence that comprises the residues directly involved in the interface with the phosphopeptide substrate moiety. These modular chemosensors report on individual cyclin‐dependent kinase activities in a selective, sensitive and quantitative fashion through changes in fluorescence emission. For live cell imaging purposes, CDKACTs can be internalized into living cells through complexation with CPPs or synthesized with the N‐terminal CPP Pep1 [ ].
TAMRA‐labelled CDKACTRb and its shorter derivative CDKACT4 were tailored to report on CDK4 activity thanks to a substrate sequence derived from p107Rb (Retinoblastoma protein). These fluorescent peptide chemosensors respond to recombinant CDK4 and report on differences in CDK4 activity between different cell lines, in particular to its hyperactivity in melanoma cell lines and to its inhibition by Palbociclib, Ribociclib and Abemaciclib. CDKACT4 was further implemented to measure differences in CDK activity in A375 xenografts implanted in mice and treated with Palbociclib or Roscovitine [ ]. Moreover, CDKACT4 allows to measure CDK4 activity in skin samples, revealing greater activity in epidermis, where cells are rapidly dividing, than in the dermis. It was further implemented to characterize differences in CDK4 activity in psoriasis [ ].
A fourth generation of CDKACTs was engineered through incorporation of a DOTA‐lanthanide to yield a sensitive bioluminescent derivative to report on CDK4 activity in vitro and in cell lysates [ ]. Specifically, a DOTA[Tb(III)] complex was conjugated onto the Rb substrate moiety of the CDKACT4 design, and the tryptophan group within the PAABD served as an antenna to sensitize the lanthanide (Figure  ). This luminescent derivative of CDKACT4 proved to be 3–4 times more sensitive to phosphorylation as compared to CDKACT4 labelled with a variety of other fluorophores. Moreover, we showed that Tb‐CDKACT4 could report on dose‐dependent inhibition of CDK4 activity by Abemaciclib in melanoma cell extracts.
A selective CDK6 peptide‐based chemosensor that does not respond to CDK4 was designed by exploiting the ability of CDK6 to phosphorylate phosphofructokinase in the glucose metabolism pathway, from which a substrate sequence was derived, labelled with TAMRA and combined with a PAABD derived from the WW of Pin1, as for CDKACT4 [ ], CDKACT6 and CDKACT4 were combined to profile CDK4 and CDK6 activities in cell lines derived from patients with mesothelioma, thereby allowing the identification of different groups of patients whose response to therapeutic drugs most likely differs based on CDK4/6 activities [ ].
A panel of CDK5 peptide chemosensors were engineered through conjugation of environmentally‐sensitive dyes onto substrates previously identified in phosphoproteomics studies and combined with a PAABD derived from the WW domain of Pin1 [ ]. Although all of these fluorescent chemosensors were phosphorylated by recombinant CDK5, only one was not phosphorylated by CDK2, the closest relative of CDK5. The CDK5‐selective FB was further characterized in glioblastoma cell extracts in which CDK5 was either stimulated or inhibited. In order to further implement this biosensor to image CDK5 activity in living cells, a self‐cell‐penetrating derivative of CDKACT5 was designed and combined with fluorescent calcium probes, thereby revealing parallel oscillations of calcium and CDK5 activity, first appearing at the cell membrane and then diffusing throughout the cytoplasm [ ].
A hybrid CDKACT1 nanobiosensor was engineered by immobilizing CDK1‐specific peptide biosensor onto the surface of multiwall carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) [ ]. This hybrid CNT‐peptide biosensor responds to recombinant CDK1 but not to CDK2 and displays much greater sensitivity to kinase activity in vitro than CDKACT1 peptide alone (Figure  ). Moreover, MWCNT‐CDKACT1 penetrates readily into living cells and was successfully implemented to quantify differences in cultured cells treated with CDK1 inhibitor, as well as to in vivo imaging in mouse models.
The peptide‐based chemosensors we have developed provide means of quantifying differences in CDK activities between healthy and cancer cells in a sensitive fashion and prove useful to monitor the selective inhibition by PK inhibitors ([ ,  ] and references therein). More recently, we have combined this ensemble of peptide chemosensors to profile several CDK activities simultaneously in lysates from cell lines and biopsies of patients with lung adenocarcinoma and lymphoma. Aside from the challenging aspects of this multiplex approach with a heterogeneous population of human samples, our study revealed unique CDK signatures and patterns that enabled stratification of patients into different groups, thereby providing functional information that could contribute to guide treatments [ ]. Last but not least, these fluorescent peptide‐based chemosensors have been combined with different platforms to yield hybrid systems with attractive features for biomedical applications, such as carbon nanotube‐peptide nanobiosensors and microneedle arrays integrating chemosensors for transdermal applications [ ,  ,  ].
A completely different strategy was developed based on the ability of Zn (II) dipicolylamine (Dpa) complexes to detect phosphate anion derivatives [ ]. Hamachi's group further combined a Zn (II)–dipicolylamine(DPA) complex with the phosphopeptide‐binding WWdomain of Pin1 to yield a hybrid biosensor that preferentially binds the multiphosphorylated C‐terminal domain of RNA polymerase 2. This design was implemented to monitor CDK9/Cyclin T1 activity [ ] (Figure  ).
A timeline depicting the technological improvements in development of genetically‐encoded biosensors and chemosensors that report on CDK activities is shown in Figure  .

3.7.

## Fluorescent Biosensors of TK and TKL Kinases
Several genetically encoded FRET‐based FBs have been developed to monitor the activities of TKs involved in major physiopathological pathways.
The first genetically‐encoded fluorescent reporters of TKs were single‐chain FRET biosensors encoding the CFP/YFP pair, an SH2 domain to recognize the tyrosine‐phosphorylated substrate, and substrate sequences phosphorylated by Abl, Src, and EGFR (Figure  ). In the case of Abl, the SH2 domain and the substrate sequence that undergoes phosphorylation by Abl that lies between two SH3 domains was directly derived from Crk protein [ ] (Figure  ). A very similar FRET sensor named Picchu (Phosphorylation indicator of the CrkII chimeric unit) was engineered to monitor kinase activities following EGFR stimulation and optimized to limit its diffusion throughout the cell by fusing a CAAX box of Ki6ras which restricts it to the plasma membrane [ ]. This smart design was further engineered to generate a FRET biosensor tethered to EGFR, through noncovalent binding of Picchu to its C‐terminus [ ]. A genetically‐encoded FRET‐based ECFP/Venus FB known as Pickles was developed to monitor hyperactivity of Bcr‐Abl in cells from patients with chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML), as well as to assess specific efficacy of kinase inhibitors directed against this kinase and drug resistance [ ,  ].
FLAME, a ratiometric sensor expressing ECFP‐tagged EGFR and EYFP‐phosphotyrosine binding domain in the same molecule, was engineered and implemented to image dynamic phosphorylation of EGFR at the membrane and throughout the cytoplasm [ ]. A genetic biosensor of EGFR was developed to characterize the intratumoral heterogeneity of its activity, pointing to regulation by the immune microenvironment‐mediated [ ].
Several genetically‐encoded FBs designed to report on Src have been developed, including a FRET biosensor encoding an ECFP/YFP pair, an SH2 domain, and a substrate peptide derived from the c‐Src substrate p130cas which proved useful to visualize the dynamics of Src activation following mechanical stimuli [ ]. A different variant, Srcus, was engineered with a nuclear export signal, which was employed to study Src activation by steroids in the cytosol and at the plasma membrane [ ]. A Src reporter with enhanced sensitivity, ECFP/YPet FRET enabled visualization of Src activation by PDGF with high spatio‐temporal sensitivity [ ]. This ECFP/YPet Src biosensor was implemented to study spatial control of Src in 3D organotypic cultures derived from a transgenic p53‐mutant mouse model of pancreatic cancer by intravital FLIM‐FRET imaging [ ,  ,  ]. In a more recent imaging study by Middle et al. several RTK reporters were combined to determine the metastatic potential of cancer cells [ ].
Sato et al. developed genetically encoded fluorescent indicators that they named « phocuses » that encode a CFP/YFP pair, a substrate sequence, and a phosphorylation recognition domain derived from SH2, PTB, or WW domains to visualize protein phosphorylation by INSR [ ]. In order to monitor activation and inhibition of INSR, a biosensor was engineered by fusing human INSR to Renilla luciferase or EYFP, and INSR activation, associated with a conformational change, was measured as BRET between Rluc and EYFP [ ]. A single color fluorescent indicator of INSR phosphorylation was engineered based on a circularly permuted fluorescent protein (cpFP) and a tandem fusion with a kinase substrate domain and a PAABD [ ].
Several Raf biosensors have also been designed and implemented to image the dynamics of the Ras/ERK MAPK cascade [ ,  ,  ].
Fluorescent and luminescent chemosensors of TKs and TKLs have been developed by several groups essentially for Src and Abl.
David Lawrence's group developed “self‐reporting” and “deep quench” strategies described above for AGC kinases (Figure  ) to engineer two orthogonal sensors of Lyn and Abl, labelled with Cascade Yellow and Oxazine respectively, which were combined to monitor PK activities in cell lines derived from patients with CML (chronic myelogenous leukemia) [ ].
Dalibor Sames group developed luminogenic peptide‐based chemosensors that respond to tyrosine kinases Abl and Src, with a 10‐fold increase in luminescence upon phosphorylation. In this design a carbostyril group serves as a luminescence sensitizer, and an iminodiacetate incorporated close to the phosphorylation site engages in chelation of a lanthanide ion together with the phosphorylated tyrosine [ ] (Figure  ).
Laurie Parker's group developed several Tb3+‐based tyrosine chemosensors for Syk, Alk, Abl and Src (Figure  ) and further established a pipeline dubbed KINATEST‐ID for phosphorylation‐ dependent terbium‐sensitizing kinase assays. A set of orthogonal chemosensors of Lyn and Syk was further engineered through conjugation of small fluorophores (fluorescein and Cy5) on the peptide substrates, which were excited by Tb3+ luminescence. In order to implement these chemosensors to live imaging and multiplex FLIM assays, they engineered self‐cell penetrating derivatives of these probes through conjugation to TAT [ , , , , ].
Neal J. Zondlo's group developed an encodable tyrosine kinase luminescent chemosensor based on an EF‐hand loop motif bearing a tyrosine group and a recognition sequence for Abl. Upon phosphorylation by Abl, this chemosensor folds into a conformation that complexes Tb3+and emits luminescence [ ,  ] (Figure  ).
A peptide‐based chemosensor FB of Src comprising an SH2 domain and a substrate sequence labeled with dapoxyl, NBD, or Cascade Yellow two residues away from the phosphorylation site yielded a fivefold increase in fluorescence upon phosphorylation [ ]. Self‐reporting peptide chemosensors of Src were developed in which the tyrosine group quenches the fluorescence of a proximal dye (pyrene) until tyrosine phosphorylation disrupts the stacking interaction, thereby enabling fluorescence enhancement [ ]. Further variants of this chemosensor were then successfully developed for applications in cellulo, through incorporation of Cascade Yellow, Cascade Blue, or Oregon Green [ ].
A very different kind of Src chemosensor, termed Src merobody, engineered from a fibronectin monobody labelled with merocyanin, that specifically recognizes the active conformation of Src kinases, was implemented to study the dynamics of Src activity in living cells undergoing membrane protrusion and retraction [ ].

4.

## Summary and Outlook
PKs are central to most biological processes and constitute established therapeutic targets yet underexploited biomarkers. While some families of PKs have been extensively studied, others remains less well characterized both structurally and functionally. While detecting PK activities in their intracellular environment is a feat that amounts to finding a needle in a haystack, this challenge can be addressed thanks to the development of both genetic and synthetic sensors. These reporters of kinase activities that come in all kinds of shapes, sizes, and colours have provided means of gaining insight into PK behavior and visualizing their spatio‐temporal dynamics. Achieving highly sensitive and selective fluorescent sensors is the result of several technological steps/improvements, from the choice of FPs or synthetic probes whose fluorescence emission exhibits the greatest signal‐to‐noise and dynamic range to optimization of the substrate and the cognate PAABD and incorporation of docking domains. Several smart features have further been incremented in chemosensor designs, such as phosphorylation‐dependent metal chelation or lanthanide binding. While genetically‐encoded FBs tailored to report on PK activities are best suited for imaging applications in cultured cells or in vivo, chemosensors have proven to be invaluable tools for quantitative detection of PK activities in vitro, in cell lysates, and in biopsies. Thanks to the technological developments that have yielded highly sensitive fluorescent biosensors, multiplexing studies have become possible, thereby enabling the simultaneous dynamic imaging of several signalling activities in cellular models and in vivo. Chemosensors are also adapted to multiplexing assays and are particularly well suited for comparative quantification of PK signatures ex vivo, thereby providing promises for diagnostics and point‐of‐care applications.
A wide variety of both genetically‐encoded biosensors and synthetic chemosensors have been developed, for the larger part for PKs from the AGC, CMGC, CAMK, and TK families. Few fluorescent kinase activity reporters have been designed for other families of kinases, which contributes to limiting our understanding of their function and our ability to quantify and monitor their overall activity within their native environment in space and in time in physiological conditions and in response to regulatory stimuli or in pathological settings.
Although still poorly developed to investigate PK activities in plants, bacteria, viruses, and FBs will undoubtedly prove useful to gain insight into new signalling pathways. The lag in PK biosensors in plants has been associated with the limited knowledge of phospho‐sites by different plant PKs and an unusual expansion and number of PK members in plant genomes makes it difficult to design isoform‐specific plant PK biosensors. However, genetically‐encoded fluorescent biosensors for visualizing PK dynamics in plant cells are emerging and are proving useful to investigate challenging questions involving signal transduction networks in distinct plant cell types and tissues and in response to stress [ ]. Implementation of eukaryotic FBs for cross‐species detection of PK activity may be possible to a certain extent. For instance, three eukaryotic PKB substrate peptide reporters were implemented for detection of PK activities in Dictyostellium discoideum and Tetrahymena thermophila [ ]. This study highlights a kind of “biosensor repositioning” in species in which PKs are conserved. The lack of FBs to cover the galaxy of PKs in eukaryotes and beyond calls for new methods and strategies to identify substrates and engineer FBs, expanding knowledge and technologies for detection, as exemplied by a recent study by Bogomolovas & Chen [ ].
Last but not least, profiling PK activities through multiplexing remains challenging, and more technological developments are required to overcome current limitations. Thus optimizing, and exploiting fluorescent or luminescent biosensors and chemosensors to profile PK signatures constitutes a promising avenue for predictive diagnostics.

## Author Contributions

Timothe Abbura: conceptualization, writing – original draft, writing – review and editing. May C. Morris: conceptualization, writing – original draft, funding acquisition, writing – review and editing, supervision, validation.

## Funding
This study was supported by Agence Nationale de la Recherche (ANR‐24‐CE11‐2791).

## Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

## Acknowledgments
T.A. is supported by a grant from the ANR (French National Research Agency) to M.C.M. (PhosphoGirus, ANR‐24‐CE11−2791). The authors have no conflict of interest to declare. The authors thank all members of the “Kinase Biosensors, Inhibitors and Organoid Models of Oncology” group for proof‐reading the manuscript.
Open access publication funding provided by COUPERIN CY26.

## Biographies

Timothe Abbura obtained his Bachelor (2022) and Master (2024) degrees in biotechnology at the Faculty of Science of Montpellier University. After several internships on quantitative analysis of enzymatic esterase activities, and on the development and implementation of analytical methods on storage cereal proteins, he is currently developing his PhD research project on fluorescent biosensors for detection of Pandoravirus kinases under the direction of Dr. M.C. Morris at the Max Mousseron Institute of Biomolecules, in Montpellier, France.
 

May C. Morris is a biochemist and CNRS Research Director at the Max Mousseron Institute of Biomolecules, in Montpellier, where she heads the Kinase Biosensors, Inhibitors and Organoid Models of Oncology group. Hired by the CNRS in 2000 in the section “Pharmacology, Bioengineering, Health Technologies and Biomedical Imaging”, her research interests involve development of innovative strategies for detection and therapeutic targeting of protein kinases involved in human disease, in particular fluorescent biosensors and allosteric modulators combined with nanotechnologies.
 

## Data Availability Statement
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Data Availability Statement
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.