567jbcThe Journal of Biological ChemistryJ Biol ChemAmerican Society for Biochemistry and Molecular BiologyPMC1213538212135382121353824020995210.1016/j.jbc.2025.108488Molecular interactions of glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid receptors define novel transcription and biological functions
SueyoshiTatsuya PetrilloMaria G JewellChristine M BortnerCarl D PereraLalith XuXiaojiang AguayoFelipe I Diaz-JimenezDavid RobinsonAnastasia G CookMolly E OakleyRobert H CidlowskiJohn A 1Molecular Endocrinology Group, Signal Transduction Laboratory, NIEHS, NIH, DHHS, Raleigh, North Carolina, USA2Flow Cytometry Center, NIEHS, NIH, DHHS, Raleigh, North Carolina, USA3Computational Chemistry & Molecular Modeling Support Group, Genomic Integrity & Structural Biology Laboratory, NIEHS, NIH, DHHS, Raleigh, North Carolina, USA4Integrative Bioinformatics Group, NIEHS, NIH, DHHS, Raleigh, North Carolina, USA5Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Tulane University School of Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA6Epigenomics and DNA Sequence Core Facility, NIEHS, NIH, DHHS, Raleigh, North Carolina, USA∗For correspondence: John A. Cidlowski cidlows1@niehs.nih.gov
8420253015108488108488462025This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
Glucocorticoids are primary stress hormones necessary for life that function to maintain homeostasis. These hormones and their synthetic derivatives are widely used in the clinic to combat disease but are limited by development of resistance and by severe side effects. Understanding how glucocorticoids signal is crucial for developing safer and more effective glucocorticoids. Mechanistically glucocorticoid ligands induce glucocorticoid receptor (GR) homodimerization and regulation of gene expression. Here, we show that GR and mineralocorticoid receptor (MR) form molecular complexes with distinct transcriptional responses that alter the biological roles of GR. MR inhibited GR interaction with genomic DNA and diminished glucocorticoid-regulated gene expression as well as suppressed cell apoptosis induced by GR signaling. Provocatively, multiple therapeutic glucocorticoids differentially induced the GR–MR interaction revealing unknown drug effects that are exploitable for fine-tuning glucocorticoid drug treatments. Molecular modeling of the GR–MR complex predicted an interaction interface residing in the LBD of both GR and MR. Mutation of a key amino acid in the interface of GR compromised GR–MR interaction without affecting GR activity in a gene reporter assay. Overall, our findings uncovered unique crosstalk mechanisms between distinct nuclear receptors providing a novel mechanism of diversity in the action of glucocorticoids that may contribute to context-dependent GR signaling in human health and disease.
Keywords: apoptosis, glucocorticoid receptor, mineralocorticoid receptor, protein–protein interaction, steroid hormone receptor, transcription regulation

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2024 Aug 23; Revised 2025 Mar 26; Collection date 2025 May.

Glucocorticoids are primary stress hormones necessary for life. Released in a circadian manner and in response to stress by activation of the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis, these hormones regulate numerous physiological processes including immune function, metabolism, cardiovascular function, behavior, and cognition in an effort to maintain homeostasis ( , , , , , , , , ). Glucocorticoids and their synthetic derivatives are widely used in the clinic for their immunosuppressive and anti-inflammatory actions. Unfortunately, the therapeutic benefit of glucocorticoids is limited by the development of tissue-specific resistance and adverse side effects such as osteoporosis, diabetes, growth inhibition in children, hypertension, anxiety, and depression. Understanding the mechanisms by which tissues and cells differentially respond to glucocorticoids is crucial for developing new glucocorticoids and treatment regimens with improved efficacy and specificity profiles.
The majority of the glucocorticoid action is known to occur through its direct binding with the glucocorticoid receptor (GR), a member of the nuclear receptor superfamily ( , , , ) which contains 48 distinct transcription factors. It is well known that GR and other nuclear receptor family members regulate their target genes by forming homodimers on regulatory DNA elements. This process in which a ligand activates a specific target nuclear receptor is unlikely to explain the wide range of biological processes regulated by GR. GR activation is well known to beget “context-dependent” consequences including sex, organ, developmental stage, hormonal environment, etc. affect the processes of gene regulation ( , , , , , , ). These observations raise the possibility of GR functional and physical interactions with other factors including other nuclear receptor family members in terms of gene regulation.
GR and MR are believed to have evolved from a common ancestor molecule based on the similarity of their molecular architectural and protein primary structures ( ). GR and MR are each known to form homodimers as active forms after binding with their ligands implying their common ancestor molecules also formed homodimers after the ligand binding. Therefore, we hypothesized that GR and MR may form a heterodimer as a possible signaling mechanism for generating greater diversity in glucocorticoid responses. More than 25 years ago, DNA binding–dependent heterodimer formation between GR and MR was observed based on in vitro experiments which showed that GR and MR could bind the same glucocorticoid regulatory elements ( , , , , ). Since then, several laboratories have also proposed that GR–MR heterodimer regulates genes in various cell systems and animal tissues ( , , , , , , ). However, none of these studies have provided direct evidence showing GR–MR molecular interaction in the glucocorticoid responsive cells and the functional and physiological roles of the heterodimers. Our recent findings in transgenic mice suggest GR and MR have functional interactions in vivo ( , , , ). Mice with cardiomyocyte-specific GR KO spontaneously developed cardiac hypertrophy and died prematurely from heart failure. In contrast, mice lacking both GR and MR in the heart did not. These findings suggest that signaling pathways through GR and MR that regulate heart physiology are functionally intertwined ( ). Furthermore, neurodegeneration of the hippocampus was observed in mice with conditional KO of both GR and MR but not in the GR or MR single KOs ( ). Synergistic increases in the number of dysregulated genes in the hippocampus were observed in double KO compared with single KO counterparts indicating that the functional interaction of these two receptors plays a critical role in the normal physiology of the hippocampus ( ).
Here, we identify novel biological functions that depend on the GR and MR interaction in cells using newly established human cell lines stably expressing both of these receptors. Our studies show that GR and MR interact in the cells, and details of their cooperative gene regulation were analyzed at the global level. The results indicate that MR suppresses GR’s ability to regulate genes including those related to apoptosis ( ). Apoptosis analyses revealed that MR expression attenuated dexamethasone (DEX)-induced apoptosis of GR-expressing cells. Furthermore, we show that GR and MR interact within a few minutes after the addition of selective GR or selective MR ligands using a newly developed method for monitoring the heterodimer formation in living cells. Based on the MR ligand-binding domain (LBD) dimer structure in the protein crystal ( ), we propose a model structure for GR-MR LBD heterodimers. We also demonstrate that therapeutic glucocorticoids induced the heterodimer to different degrees providing a mechanistic rationale for selectivity in their activities. Thus, we uncover for the first time that gene regulation activity of GR is modulated by MR through direct interaction which results in the alteration of biological responses of the cells. GR–MR heterodimers can coexist with their homodimer counterparts simultaneously and the ratio between homodimers and heterodimers may modulate a wide variety of biological responses in animal tissues resulting in “context-dependent” GR activation. Taken together, these discoveries provide a foundation for future research about biological functions played by heterodimers between GR and MR in mammalian physiology and contribute to developing new glucocorticoids for treating human inflammatory diseases.

## Results

## GR functionally interacts with MR for novel gene regulation in heart and hippocampus
We previously demonstrated that global gene expression in heart and hippocampus is highly dependent on the presence of both GR and MR ( , , ). Venn diagrams in A summarize our analysis of gene expression changes that occur by knocking out GR, MR, or both GR and MR in these organs. The numbers in the diagram indicate the number of genes with significant changes in their expressions in the gene array studies ( , ). We observed a total of 565, 449, and 856 differentially regulated genes (DEGs) in heart or 413, 1478, and 3637 DEGs in hippocampus in GR knockout mice, MR knockout mice, and GR and MR double KO, respectively. Comparison of the DEGs in the different mouse models suggests a major role for the cooperative actions of GR and MR since a large number of genes are uniquely altered only when both receptors are depleted in the heart (649 genes) and hippocampus (2438 genes). These findings prompted us to examine the potential molecular interaction of these receptors and other members of the nuclear receptor family.
 

## Establishing GR, MR, and MR/GR U-2OS cell lines
As the first step for elucidating the molecular mechanisms and potential biological functions of GR–MR interaction in mammalian cells, we developed cell lines that stably express GR (GR cell line), MR (MR cell line), or both (MR/GR cell line) using U-2OS, a human osteosarcoma–derived cell line, as the host employing the transfection and screening strategy described in the Experimental procedures and depicted in B. U-2OS has been used extensively to investigate glucocorticoid signaling mechanisms and has well-defined glucocorticoid responses ( ). Therefore, this human cell line can be utilized as a host for appropriate model systems for studying gene regulation and biological responses caused by the interaction of GR and MR. Protein and mRNA in these cell lines were analyzed and shown in , C and D. Western blotting analyses in D revealed that GR and MR protein expression levels correlated well with mRNA expression levels ( C). Compared to U-off cell line, GR protein levels were ≈9.5-fold higher in GR and MR/GR cell lines, whereas MR protein levels were ≈4.5-fold higher in MR and MR/GR cell lines ( D).
We examined the cellular localization of the GR and MR by confocal microscopy, 6 h after incubation with either vehicle, dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) or 1 nM of the DEX. As expected, GR and MR proteins resided in the cytoplasm of untreated cells and translocated into the nucleus upon the addition of DEX ( , E–G). Canonical GR target genes, FKBP5 and SGK1, were upregulated by DEX in GR and MR/GR cells but not in U-off or MR cells ( ). These genes were also upregulated by the selective MR ligand aldosterone in MR and MR/GR cells but not in U-off or GR cells. Consistent with previous reports ( , , ), the level of gene induction mediated by activated MR was weaker than that mediated by activated GR. These results demonstrate that we have established human cell lines that express functional GR, MR, or both GR and MR.

## GR and MR interaction in MR/GR cell line
To investigate whether GR and MR are associated in a complex in MR/GR cells or not, we performed a coimmunoprecipitation assay and in situ proximity ligation assay (PLA) ( ) as shown in , H and I. In the MR/GR cell line, we found that MR coimmunoprecipitated with GR in the absence of ligands, and the complex formation persisted even upon 6-h treatment with DEX ( H). We then performed a PLA to analyze MR and GR interaction. In untreated cells, the GR–MR interaction signals were detected within the cytoplasm as shown in red dots whereas, upon DEX exposure, fluorescent signals were observed within the nuclear compartment ( I). These results indicate that GR and MR are associated in the same protein complex that can be detectable in the cytoplasm prior to DEX treatment and in the nucleus after the ligand induced GR and MR translocation.

## RNA-seq analysis of DEX regulated genes in U-off, GR, MR, and MR/GR cells
To assess GR and MR interaction in gene regulation, we performed RNA-seq analyses on U-off, GR, MR, and MR/GR cells treated with 1 nM or 10 nM DEX for 6 h. Principal component analysis revealed little variation between untreated and DEX-treated U-off and MR cells. Conversely, we observed DEX-induced changes in gene expression in GR and MR/GR cells. However, the magnitude of the shift observed in GR cells was more pronounced compared to that in MR/GR cells ( A). The gene expression analyses confirmed 6632, 114, and 1115 genes were differentially regulated by 1 nM DEX in GR, MR, and MR/GR cells, respectively ( B). Similarly, with 10 nM DEX, we observed comparable changes in gene expression in GR, MR, and MR/GR cells, with 7291, 723, and 4776 genes being regulated, respectively. Only 1 and 106 DEGs (differentially regulated genes by DEX treatment) were found in the U-off cells by 1 nM and 10 nM DEX treatment, respectively. We excluded DEGs in U-off cells in the following discussion since this small number of DEGs did not affect our conclusions. The variation in the numbers of DEGs suggests that MR coexpression significantly mitigated the impact of DEX on gene expression in MR/GR cells compared to GR cells. Quantitative reverse transcription PCR was performed to validate the regulatory effects of DEX on gene expression for various genes identified from the list of DEGs in these three cell lines ( ). As shown in B pie chart, in GR cells treated with both DEX concentrations, an almost equal number of genes were upregulated or downregulated. In contrast, disproportionally more genes were upregulated than downregulated in MR cells with 1 nM or 10 nM DEX. The asymmetric gene regulations caused by MR may also affect gene regulation in MR/GR cells which also showed a greater proportion of upregulated genes.
 The Venn diagrams of DEGs in the cell lines are shown in C. These diagrams revealed a substantial number of DEGs in GR cells (5627 and 3123 genes in 1 nM and 10 nM treated GR cells, respectively) were not responsive to DEX in MR/GR cells or MR cells. The majority of DEGs in MR cells are commonly regulated in GR cells and MR/GR cells. A small number of DEGs in the MR/GR cells (113 and 596 genes for 1 nM and 10 nM DEX, respectively) were regulated by DEX only when both receptors were coexpressed ( and ). These findings indicate that the major effect of MR coexpression is to limit the ability of GR to regulate target genes, rather than inducing expression of new target genes. We further analyzed the roles of MR in DEX-induced gene regulations in cells expressing both MR and GR. For this purpose, we compared genes regulated in GR cells and MR/GR cells in Venn diagrams ( D). Almost 90% of DEGs in MR/GR cells are commonly regulated in GR cells (90% with 1 nM DEX and 87% with 10 nM DEX). In contrast, raising DEX concentration from 1 nM to 10 nM increased genes in the commonly regulated category from 15% to 57% of DEGs in GR cells. MR coexpression prevented 5630 genes and 3144 genes from responding to DEX at 1 nM and 10 nM concentrations, respectively. Furthermore, we compared induction levels of commonly regulated genes (1002 genes in 1 nM DEX-treated cells and 4147 genes in 10 nM treated cells) between these two cell lines ( D, bottom panels). With both DEX concentrations, the commonly regulated genes showed reduced sensitivity to DEX treatment in MR/GR cells compared to those in GR cells as the slopes of the plots have much smaller value than 1 (0.5503 in 1 nM DEX-treated cells and 0.6929 in 10 nM DEX-treated cells). Overall, MR coexpression blunted DEX-GR–dependent gene regulations in both DEX concentrations.
We also compared GR cell versus MR cell as well as MR cell versus MR/GR cell ( E). The first comparison revealed almost all MR-regulated DEGs were included in GR-regulated ones (99.1% of 1 nM and 94.3% of 10 nM regulated genes). Moreover, the commonly regulated DEGs responded to DEX less in MR cells compared with GR cells as indicated by the slope of each plot (slope for 1 nM DEX = 0.2427, for 10 nM DEX = 0.4444). For the MR cells versus MR/GR cells comparison, almost all MR-regulated DEGs are also regulated in MR/GR cells (96.5% of 1 nM and 91.7% of 10 nM DEGs in MR cells). Furthermore, responses of commonly regulated genes in MR/GR cells are higher than MR cells (slope for 1 nM DEX = 2.124, for 10 nM DEX = 1.19). These two comparisons indicated GR played dominant roles in DEX-induced gene expression modulations in these three cell lines. Thus, the comparisons in , D and E revealed that MR has minor roles for DEX-induced gene expression by itself but plays remarkable roles in blunting the dominant GR effects on gene transcription and strongly implies the functional cooperation of these two receptors.

## Gene expression profiling reveals that MR coexpression blunted GR-mediated alteration in pathways related to cell survival and apoptosis
Ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA; https://digitalinsights.qiagen.com/products-overview/discovery-insights-portfolio/analysis-and-visualization/qiagen-ipa/) software was used to uncover the molecular functional differences between GR cells and MR/GR cell’s gene regulation responses to DEX treatment. Canonical pathway analyses are summarized in A. We selected the top 20 canonical pathways based on absolute Z-scores in GR cells for further comparison among the three cell lines and treatments (1 nM and 10 nM DEX). IPA algorithm calculates Z-scores to predict the activation state of the signaling pathway. These pathways were plotted in the order of −log10 (p value) with color-coded Z-scores and size-coded gene numbers. Overall, these plots indicated a strong blunting effect of MR coexpression on the signal pathways regulated by GR in response to DEX treatments.
 Diseases and function analysis also revealed similar MR coexpression effects for GR-mediated DEX-induced gene regulation. For visualizing Z-score differences in cellular functions, we made the comparison to annotations exhibiting Z-scores larger than 2.0 or smaller than −2.0 in either one of the two cell lines ( B). Notably, these heat maps showed that several common pathways have Z-score differences between these cell lines at both concentrations of DEX. For instance, pathways related to cell survival have lower Z-scores, and those related to cell death or apoptosis have higher scores in GR cells. Thus, these heat maps show that DEX induces more cell death and apoptosis in GR cells than in MR/GR cells.

## MR coexpression suppresses DEX-induced apoptosis in GR cells, whereas MR knockdown restores DEX-induced apoptosis in MR/GR cells
Based on the IPA analysis, which indicated differential regulation of cell death and apoptosis by DEX in cells expressing GR and MR, we investigated the induction of apoptosis by DEX in GR and MR/GR cells. DEGs related to the apoptosis pathway in GR cells and MR/GR cells are presented in a heat map ( A). Most of the DEX responsive genes in this category exhibited diminished responses in MR/GR cells compared to GR cells. We then examined DEX-induced apoptosis among GR, MR, and MR/GR cell lines after the cells were treated with vehicle (DMSO) or DEX (100 nM) for 48 h. We employed a higher concentration of DEX in this apoptosis assay than those in the gene regulation study in and in order to observe clear biological effects and to be consistent with the DEX concentration used in previous reports evaluating glucocorticoid induced apoptosis in U2OS cells ( ). DNA content was evaluated by propidium iodide (PI) staining and showed that, when treated with DEX, GR cells underwent 30% apoptosis. In marked contrast, neither MR nor MR/GR cells undergo apoptosis induced by DEX ( , B and C). These results suggest that cell apoptosis induced by DEX-activated GR was suppressed by coexpression of MR. To determine whether MR knockdown can restore GR-mediated DEX-induced apoptosis in the MR/GR cells, we silenced MR expression by transfecting MR/GR cells with MR siRNA (MR/GR MR-knock down) ( , B and C). Forty-eight hours posttransfection, MR mRNA level was reduced by 80% compared with MR/GR cells transfected with nontargeting control siRNA (MR/GR P), and MR protein knockdown was also observed ( D). A variety of apoptotic endpoint assays including cell apoptosis ( , B and C), externalization of phosphatidyl serine ( E), and PARP cleavage ( , F and G) after treatment with DEX for 48 h confirmed that the knockdown of MR in MR/GR cells restores the ability of liganded GR to induce apoptosis. These findings confirm that MR coexpression inhibits the GR-mediated apoptosis induced by DEX in MR/GR cells.
 

## Nanobit assay revealed direct interaction of GR and MR in living cells
Our genomic and cell apoptosis analysis of the GR, MR, and MR/GR cells strongly indicated that GR and MR have functional interactions. To analyze the physical interaction of these two receptors in living cells, we have developed a method that can monitor GR–MR interaction in real time using “NanoBit” technology ( ). This method uses two protein/peptide tags named “small tag” and “large tag” which are derived from one luciferase enzyme. When these two peptides are in close proximity, they can reconstitute the luciferase activity. As shown in A, we have constructed a total of 8 fusion protein expression plasmids in which GR and MR have small tag or large tag at either their N-terminal or C-terminal side. We examined their reconstituted NanoBit luciferase activities by cotransfecting HEK293 cells with the GR and MR NanoBit fusion protein expression vectors ( A). Luciferase activity is indicative of GR–MR interaction and this luciferase activity was induced by ligands only when GR and MR have these tags at the C-terminal ends. We evaluated the ligand effects of cortisol, DEX, and aldosterone (100 nM each) for the interaction using GR-LgTag + MR-SmTag expression plasmids ( B). Our data show that the addition of the single ligand, cortisol, DEX, or aldosterone, induced these two receptors to interact almost immediately. Intriguingly, when DEX and aldosterone were added simultaneously, GR–MR interaction was enhanced synergistically compared with the single ligand effect. Similar GR–MR interaction profiles with lower luciferase activities were observed with 10 nM or 1 nM ligands ( ).
 

## GR DNA binding null mutation interfered with DEX-induced GR homodimer formation, but not GR–MR heterodimer formation induced by DEX and aldosterone
One of the key factors for the homodimer formation of GR or MR is their DNA binding. Early studies employing gel shift assays have indicated that the DNA binding is essential for GR–MR interaction. They observed the complex including these receptors on short double strands of glucocorticoid response elements ( , ). To examine the effect of GR DNA binding null mutations ( , C and D) on GR homodimer ( E) and GR–MR heterodimer ( F) formation, we employed GR-LgTag and GR-SmTag expression vectors for GR homodimer Nanobit assay detection. We introduced previously reported GR DNA null mutations ( ) into GR-SmTag expression vectors (C414Y, F444S, C463Y) completely abolished DEX-induced reporter gene activation in assays shown in D. The same GR-SmTag mutants were used in GR homodimer ( E) and GR–MR heterodimer ( F) detection. These mutations effectively prevented the formation of GR homodimer. In contrast, GR–MR heterodimer formation was only marginally compromised by the same mutations. Thus, these differential effects on GR homodimer and GR–MR heterodimer highlighted critical differences in molecular mechanisms dictating homodimer and heterodimer formation.

## Therapeutic glucocorticoids induced GR–MR heterodimers
Many therapeutic glucocorticoids targeting GR are currently prescribed for treating many types of diseases. To elucidate the specificity of ligand-dependent GR–MR heterodimer formation, we compared the effects of DEX, prednisolone, triamcinolone, and beclomethasone using NanoBit assay ( G). Provocatively, all three of these drugs can induce GR–MR heterodimer formation, but they did so to markedly different degrees. We observed prednisolone with the strongest activity followed by beclomethasone showing almost the same activity with DEX and weak triamcinolone activity. We then examined the combination of the drugs with either aldosterone or cortisol ( , H–J). As shown in , H and I, beclomethasone or triamcinolone synergistically induced GR–MR heterodimerization with aldosterone. In contrast, cortisol moderately suppressed prednisolone heterodimer-inducing activity. These findings collectively suggest that glucocorticoid drugs have diverse potencies for inducing GR–MR heterodimers and corticosteroid in the body may differentially affect the potencies.

## MR inhibits the ability of GR to interact with the genome
To investigate the GR cistrome in the presence or absence of MR, we performed chromatin immpunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq) analyses using anti-GR antibody and DEX-treated GR and MR/GR cell extracts. We employed a higher concentration of DEX (100 nM) than RNA-seq study in and to promote GR maximum occupancy on the genome since KD value of DEX to GR was 13.33 nM in GR cell ( ). Marked reduction in the amount of GR bound on the genome ( A) in MR/GR cell compared to GR cell. The Venn diagram shown in B summarizes the number of peaks observed for these cells and their relations. More than 32,000 peaks were observed for GR cells, whereas less than 7600 peaks were found for MR/GR cells, revealing a major inhibitory effect by MR on GR binding to the genome. Among these, 25,650 peaks were specific to GR cells, 6761 peaks were common, and 816 peaks were specific to MR/GR cells. Heat map presentation showing the size distribution of the peaks in each specific group are presented in C and no differences were observed among the cell lines. Examples of genes that gave unique peaks for GR cells (KCNA5) and a common peak (KLF5) in both GR and MR/GR cells are presented in D. mRNA for KCNA5 and KLF15 was quantified by qPCR in E. Consistent with ChIP-seq data, KCNA5 was induced only in GR cells by DEX, and KLF15 was induced in GR cells and showed only a trend for DEX regulation in MR/GR cells. Additional data for validating MR-suppressed GR interaction with genome are presented in .
 

## Molecular dynamics simulation of GR–MR LBD heterodimer
In a previous report, 4 GR-LBD and MR–LBD heterodimer model structures were suggested based on available GR or MR homodimer structures found in crystal 3D analyses ( ). However, we found only one of them based on reported MR crystal structure ( ) is permissive with our NanoBit assay results in . In this LBD configuration, C-terminal ends of the GR and MR LBDs are located close enough for NanoBit luciferase activity reconstitution. Therefore, we employed this model structure of GR/MR heterodimer as the starting structure of three independent molecular dynamics (MD) simulations ( A).
 The RMSDs calculated for each monomer exhibit fairly stable monomer conformations for all three trajectories ( B). In two trajectories, dimer conformations remained relatively close to the starting model while in the third trajectory, the two monomers adopted a slightly shifted orientation. The RMS fluctuations calculation suggested GR shows higher fluctuations ( C) in the residue regions of 540 to 560, 620 to 640, and around 680, 740 to 750. Meanwhile, the residue segment 700 to 728 is a loop and a part of a helix. The mobility here may be somewhat associated with the interfacial rearrangement due to protein–protein interactions. This region is in contact with the C-terminal region of MR which is highly mobile, likely due to the truncation in the simulated system. In MR molecule, the regions around residues 760 and 840 are in loop structures, and the large peak around residue 910 is due to the reconstruction of the missing loop in the X-ray crystal structure. The consorted motions of various segments are captured through the dynamic cross correlations shown in D. The blue regions represent the consorted motion while the other regions are more random in terms of their relative motion. Specifically, in the highlighted areas through vertical and horizontal lines in E, one can observe the conserved motion in segments of GR and MR. Our MD simulation results indicated that GR-LBD and MR-LBD contribute stable heterodimer formation between GR and MR molecules through the interfaced shown in A. Based on these model structures, we obtained free energy values of each residue for the LBD heterodimer stabilization as summarized in F and .
We mutated Trp 712 to Ala in GR, one of the residues with a high free energy contribution for the LBD heterodimer stabilization in our simulation as shown in F, then performed NanoBit analysis ( , G–J). This single mutation compromised GR–MR interaction in the assay and the reconstituted luciferase activity by MR and GR W712A was 32% of that produced by WT receptors. This observation strongly supports the existence of the proposed LBD heterodimer model structure. In contrast, the same mutation did not attenuate GR homodimer formation ( , I and J). Consistently, glucocorticoid response element (GRE) luciferase gene reporter shows that activation by GR was not affected by W712A mutation ( I).

## Discussion
Although mineralocorticoid and glucocorticoid are adrenal steroid hormones that have completely different physiological activities, their receptors, GR and MR, are highly homologous and bind to identical DNA regulatory elements ( , ). Ligand-dependent activation of these receptors drives both to form homodimers and to bind to DNA response elements on target genes. Because of their high homology and because each receptor forms a homodimer, it has also been hypothesized that GR–MR forms a heterodimer which was indeed found in vitro or cell line systems ( , , , , , ). These earlier studies were based on in vitro complex formation with DNA elements in gel shift and gene reporter assays. However, clear physiological functions for GR–MR heterodimer remain undefined, and GR–MR interactions at the molecular level are poorly understood.
Our recent results using gene KO mice provocatively suggested GR–MR functional interaction in the heart and hippocampus ( , , ). These observations urged us to focus on GR–MR interaction at the molecular level since such information could become a base for elucidating mechanisms behind the observed functional interactions of the receptors in mice. Furthermore, this information will be critically important for designing new ligands with distinct functions for disrupting the interaction of these two receptors. Thus, in this study, we have developed experimental cell systems for analyzing specifically gene regulation and biological functions attributed to the GR–MR interaction. To this end, we generated GR cells, MR cells, and MR/GR cells from human U2-OS cells, which have negligible expression of GR and MR. We compared responses to DEX treatment by analyzing changes in gene expression to assess the functional interaction of GR and MR.
The extensive genomics data about the transcriptome of GR cell and MR/GR cell revealed that MR functioned predominantly to limit the GR response to DEX. GR alone was hyperreactive to the glucocorticoid and regulated over 6600 genes with only 1 nM DEX stimulus. The coexistence of MR mitigated this hyperreactivity and limited regulated genes to around 1100. More than 83% of genes reactive to DEX were not responsive when MR was present with GR in the cell. Consistently, cistrome analysis revealed GR bindings on the genome were inhibited by the presence of MR ( ). The canonical pathway analysis of the genomics data indicates that the MR inhibited DEX-modulated pathways selectively ( A). For example, with 1 nM DEX treatment, MR coexpression effects on “erythropoietin signaling pathway,” “AMPK signaling,” and “oxytocin in brain signaling pathway” were modest compared with the other DEX-modulated pathways such as the “adrenomedullin signaling pathway” and “renin-angiotensin signaling.” Such MR selective effects on pathways were also observed in 10 nM DEX-treated cells ( A). Activation Z-scores found in “diseases and function analysis” in B revealed the scores for most pathways were changed from negative to positive in 1 nM DEX-treated cells, suggesting these pathways were inhibited by glucocorticoids in GR cells but activated in GR/MR cells. Therefore, the MR appears to globally repress GR transcription factor activity in order to specifically direct cell biological responses.
One of the major biological responses predicted by IPA to be inhibited by MR coexpression with GR was apoptosis ( ). Indeed, we observed that GR-dependent DEX-induced cell apoptosis was attenuated in GR/MR cells and this effect was reversed by knockdown of MR ( ). This result is consistent with a previous report showing that overexpression of the N-terminal domain (1–516) of MR blocked glucocorticoid induced apoptosis in a human B lymphoma-derived cell line ( ). Our study builds on this prior work by showing that the inhibitory activity of MR on GR-mediated cell death occurs with the full-length MR, in a different human cell type (osteosarcoma cells), and in response to a different glucocorticoid ligand (DEX). Moreover, our study captures the global gene changes associated with apoptosis that are altered by the presence of MR in the DEX-treated GR/MR cells. Notably, 10 of the 11 genes whose regulation by GR was suppressed by MR in quantitative PCR (qPCR) validation studies of our RNA-seq findings have roles in apoptosis ( ). Since glucocorticoids are known to induce the killing of some cell types (thymocytes, osteoblasts) but promote the survival of others (hepatocytes, cardiomyocytes) ( ), our data suggest the level of MR coexpression may contribute to the sensitivity of cells to glucocorticoid-induced apoptosis. Taken together, our results suggest that the ability of MR to interact with GR modulates the genetic and biological activity of GR to control cellular responsiveness to glucocorticoids.
The molecular mechanisms responsible for the reduced GR binding to the genome in the GR/MR cells are currently unknown and remain to be elucidated in future studies. GR/MR heterodimers may have reduced affinity for the genome and/or be less stable once bound compared to GR/GR homodimers. Protein factors including nuclear receptor coregulators that can specifically interact with GR–MR heterodimer may play critical roles modulating its DNA binding profile ( , , , , , ). This unidentified mechanism implies GR activity being regulated by MR in a tissue-specific manner since it is dependent on the concentration of MR. Our findings in this report are based on the model cell line system, and the GR–MR interaction may give different responses in other cell types. Thus, it remains to be tested whether similar MR blunting effects on GR-mediated gene regulations play any roles in the GR–MR functional interactions we discovered in mouse heart and hippocampus ( A).
We employed NanoBit technology for monitoring GR–MR interaction in living cells after the addition of ligands ( ). Since this method detects reconstituted luciferase enzyme activity produced by two peptides called large-bit and small-bit derived from NanoBit luciferase, positive activity detection indicates the direct interactions of the peptides. Thus, the attaching points in your target proteins (usually at N terminus or C terminus of the proteins) must be at a very close distance and strongly suggest direct interactions of the two partner proteins. Furthermore, the luciferase activity can be monitored in living cells in real-time and thus we can trace protein interaction and dissociation in a time-course manner. Indeed, time course changes of detected luciferase activity showed that the interaction between GR and MR occurred within a few minutes after the addition of ligands and persisted throughout the treatment ( ). Intriguingly, not only therapeutic glucocorticoids (prednisolone and beclomethasone) by themselves but also combinations of the drugs (beclomethasone and triamcinolone) with aldosterone show strong inductions of the heterodimer formation ( , G–J). The heterodimer inductions by these three drugs provide a possible underlying mechanism of unexpected side effects caused by the drugs in this class and the analyses of the detail of differential heterodimer induction by the drugs may be an exploitable target for fine-tuning glucocorticoid drug treatments.
In the last several years, groups have reported GR and MR functional and gene regulatory cooperation in multiple tissues and cell types. However, none of these results showed MR-suppressing effect on GR-dependent gene regulations. For example, in keratinocytes, GR and MR cooperatively regulate epidermal development and suppress skin inflammation ( ). The number of GR binding sequences by ChIP-seq analysis on immortalized MR knockout mice keratinocytes was reduced by 35% ( ) contrasting to our results showing MR coexpression decreased GR binding to GRE in GR/MR cells ( ). Moreover, the presence or absence of MR in the keratinocytes had only minor impacts on the DEX transcriptome. Other groups also reported GR–MR coactivation of target genes based on genome wide studies on rat hippocampus ( ) and N2A mouse neuroblastoma cells ( ) or PER1 gene study in a renal cell line expressing GFP-hGR ( ). Collectively, these findings suggest there is cell-type specificity in the gene regulatory and functional profiles of GR–MR heterodimers that may depend on the relative expression level of these two receptors in different cells and tissues. We observed strong Nanoluc luciferase activity when we used GR and MR with C-terminal NanoBit tag peptides ( ). Using available crystal structures of these receptors and Protein Interaction by Structural Matching tool, four configurations of the heterodimer have been proposed ( ). Among four configurations, only one allows C-terminal tag direct interaction for the luciferase activity reconstitution. The configuration that gives close C-terminal ends was based on MR LBD homodimer crystal structure ( ) and we utilized this configuration as the starting structure for MD simulation. The results indicated that GR and MR LBD interaction in this configuration is sufficiently stable. Furthermore, contributing amino acids for energy stabilization localized on helix 9, 10, and 11 plus a short segment near the C-terminal of these receptors were identified ( , ). None of these regions are known to be involved in direct ligand interactions. We mutated Trp 712, one of such amino acids in helix 10, and found the W712A mutant effectively compromised the GR–MR interaction ( , G and H). Since Trp 712 is one of the amino acid residues with substantial energy contribution to our model GR–MR heterodimer ( F), the results strongly support our proposed LBD heterodimer formed in the cells. By contrast, transcriptional activation of GRE reporter was not affected at all by the same mutation in GR molecule ( I) suggesting that GR potency as a transcriptional activator and its ability to form the heterodimer with MR are functionally independent. A similar conclusion was implied by our DNA binding null GR mutants shown in , C–F. Although the three mutants have no transactivation activity or the ability to form GR homodimers, they formed heterodimers with MR. Thus, GR's ability to form a homodimer for target gene activation is independent of its ability to form heterodimers with MR.
Overall, our findings provide strong evidence for a new nuclear receptor signaling paradigm where heterodimers of distinct nuclear receptors elicit genetic and biological signatures that differ from their respective homodimers. In the case of GR, its interaction with MR may contribute not only to the diverse actions of glucocorticoids but also to the development of tissue-specific glucocorticoid resistance and the adverse effects that arise from chronic glucocorticoid therapy. Genomics data in this article provides a reference for future analyses for defining GR–MR interaction in mammalian biology and is pivotal information for elucidating context-dependent GR activation mechanisms. Our NanoBit detections of GR and MR interactions will give us a powerful tool for detecting natural and synthetic ligands capable of inducing two receptor interactions. Furthermore, with the information on interacting amino acid residues in our model structure, the assay may be used to establish mutants completely lacking the interaction but retaining their activities as transcription factors for defining biological functions of such receptor interactions. Thus, overall, the data in this paper revealed unknown molecular functions and gene regulation mediated by GR–MR interactions and will contribute to defining such molecular interaction in signaling mechanisms of these medically important nuclear receptors in both health and disease.

## Experimental procedures

## Cell lines and their culture
The U-off cell line and GR cell were established as in a previous publication ( ). To generate the MR cells, the coding region of human mineralocorticoid receptor was cloned into pTRE2hyg vector and transfected into the U-off cells, and stably expressing clonal populations were selected using 500 μg/ml of Geneticin and 500 μg/ml of hygromycin. One clonal MR cell was chosen for transfection with pcDNA-hGR and selected using 500 μg/ml Geneticin, 500 μg/ml hygromycin, and 1 mg/ml Zeocin to generate a cell line expressing both GR and MR (MR/GR cell). The human U-2 OS stable cell lines, U-off, GR, MR, and MR/GR cells were maintained in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium/F-12 supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum and appropriate antibiotics (200 μg/ml Geneticin, 200 μg/ml hygromycin, and 400 μg/ml Zeocin). HEK-293 (American Type Culture Collection) cells were cultured in minimum essential media supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum. Cell cultures were tested for mycoplasma according to previously published methods ( ). All cell lines used in this study were authenticated using short tandem repeat profiling.

## RNA isolation and quantitative reverse transcription PCR
Total RNA was isolated using the RNeasy mini kit (Qiagen) and 100 ng of total RNA were used to perform the one-step quantitative real-time PCR using iTaq Universal Probes One-Step Kit (Bio-Rad). Expression of mRNAs was normalized to PPIB gene using the relative expression or ΔΔCt methods. Real time qPCRs were performed using the CFX96 detection system (Bio-Rad). The TaqMan real time PCR assay probes (Thermo Fisher Scientific) are listed in .

## RNA-seq analysis
All RNA-seq libraries (nonstrand-specific, paired-end) were prepared with the TruSeq RNA Sample Prep kit (Illumina). Poly(A) enrichment was conducted on the total RNA samples as outlined in the TruSeq protocol. The resulting mRNA samples were sequenced utilizing the paired-end 75 bp protocol on either the NextSeq 500 or NovaSeq 6000 platform from Illumina, following the manufacturer’s guidelines.
The raw reads underwent filtering based on a mean base quality score exceeding 20, and adapter trimming was executed using “Trim Galore” (version 0.4). The trimmed reads were aligned to the hg19 reference genome using STAR aligner (version 2.6) ( ). Gene quantification was conducted using Subread featureCounts (version 1.4.6) ( ) eight utilizing the UCSC hg19 RefSeq gene release (downloaded August 18th, 2017) as the reference. The quantification outcomes from featureCounts were subsequently subjected to analysis via the Bioconductor package DESeq2 (https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/DESeq2.html) ( ), which fits a negative binomial distribution to estimate technical and biological variability.
Comparisons between the vehicle and treatment samples were conducted to detect differentially expressed genes. To adjust the false discovery rate (FDR), the Benjamini and Hochberg method was employed. A gene was deemed significantly differentially expressed if the FDR-adjusted p value for differential expression was below 0.05.

## Pathway analysis
The significant genes underwent pathway and network analysis using the IPA tool (version 44691306) from Ingenuity Systems, based in Redwood City, CA.

## Western blotting
Proteins were separated on Tris-glycine gels (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes. Target proteins were detected with anti GR (clone D8H2, Cell Signaling Technology, 1:1000), anti-MR (clone ID5 from Dr Celso Gomez-Sanchez, 1:500) ( ), anti-actin (clone C4, MilliporeSigma, 1:10,000), anti-tubulin (clone DM1A, MilliporeSigma, 1:10,000), and anti-PARP(Cell Signaling Technologies, 1:1000). Anti-GR and anti-MR specificities were validated in the previous publication ( ). The secondary antibodies used were IRDye 800CW goat anti-mouse IgG (LI-COR Biosciences), and Alexa Fluor 680 goat anti-rabbit IgG (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Signals were quantified using the LI-COR Odyssey imaging system (LI-COR Biosciences).

## Immunoprecipitation assay
GR–MR protein complex immunoprecipitation assays were performed as in the previous report ( ). Cell lysates were incubated overnight at 4 °C with anti-GR (clone D8H2, Cell Signaling Technology), or rabbit IgG antibody (MilliporeSigma). Immunocomplex was precipitated with protein A/G agarose (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and analyzed by Western blotting analysis using anti-GR or anti-MR antibodies.

## Immunofluorescence stainin and in situ PLA
Cells grown in Nunc lab-tek chamber slides (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 20 min at room temperature and blocked with PBS containing 5% normal goat serum, and, 0.1% Triton-X-100 at room temperature for 1 h. The cell samples were incubated with rabbit anti-GR (clone D8H2, Cell Signaling technology 1:100) or anti-MR (clone ID5 from Gomez-Sanchez, 1:50) for overnight at 4 °C. Anti-GR and anti-MR specificities for immunofluorescence staining were validated in the previous publication ( ). The samples were then washed with 1X PBS containing 0.1% Tween, and incubated with Alexa Fluor 488 phalloidin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 1:100), and the secondary antibodies goat anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor 594, goat anti-mouse Alexa Fluor 594, or goat anti-mouse Alexa Fluor 647 ((Thermo Fisher Scientific, 1:500) for 1 h at room temperature. Samples were mounted with ProLong gold antifade with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A Zeiss laser scanning confocal microscope (LSM 880; Carl Zeiss) was used to analyze GR and MR cellular distribution.
In situ PLA detection of GR and MR interaction was performed using Duolink PLA kits (Duolink In Situ PLA Probe Anti-Rabbit PLUS and Duolink In Situ PLA Probe Anti-Mouse MINUS, MilliporeSigma) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. MR/GR cells were grown in 35 mm glass-bottom microwell culture dishes (MatTek corporation). Antibodies used were rabbit anti-GR antibody (clone D8H2, Cell Signaling technology 1:1000) and mouse anti-MR antibody (clone ID5 from Gomez-Sanchez, 1:500). A Zeiss laser scanning confocal microscope (LSM 880; Carl Zeiss) was used to analyze protein–protein interactions. To quantify the PLA signals (aka puncta), maximum intensity projections of the raw images were split into single channel images by MetaMorph software (Molecular devices; https://www.moleculardevices.com/products/cellular-imaging-systems/high-content-analysis/metamorph-microscopy).

## Analysis of plasma membrane integrity by flow cytometry
Plasma membrane integrity was measured by adding PI (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to live cells at a final concentration of 10 ug/ml immediately prior to flow cytometric analysis. Ten thousand single cells were analyzed using a BD LSRFortessa flow cytometer equipped with FACSDiva (https://www.bdbiosciences.com/en-us/products/software/instrument-software/bd-facsdiva-software) software. Cells were excited with a 561 nm laser and PI fluorescence was detected at 585 nm. A gate was drawn on a PI histogram for the control sample to determine the percent of viable and dead cells and projected onto a forward-scatter versus PI contour plot.

## Flow cytometric analysis of annexin-V binding
Changes in membrane phosphatidylserine symmetry were determined using TACS annexin V-FITC Apoptosis Detection Kit (R&D Systems, Inc) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, cells were washed in 1X PBS and then incubated with 2 ul annexin-V FITC and PI in annexin-V binding buffer for 15 min at room temperature. After this time, the samples were diluted binding buffer and examined immediately by flow cytometry. Ten thousand single cells were analyzed using a LSRFortessa flow cytometer (Benton Dickinson) equipped with FACSDiVa software. Annexin-V FITC and PI was excited using a 488 nm and 561 nm laser and detected using a 530/30 nm and 582/15 nm filter, respectively.

## siRNA experiments
siRNA knockdown of MR in MR/GR cells was performed according to previously published procedures ( , ). MR/GR cells were seeded 24 h prior to siRNA transfection. The cells were cultured in a serum-free medium and transfected with 30 nM nontarget control siRNA or MR siRNA (SMART pool, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using Lipofectamine RNAiMAX reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Twenty-four hours after transfection, cells were reseeded with complete medium for apoptosis flow cytometry analyses.

## NanoBit assay for GR–MR heterodimer formation
Full-length coding cDNA for GR and MR, were cloned into 4 kind of vectors (pBiT1.1-C[TK/LgBiT], pBiT2.1C[TK/SmBiT], pBiT1.1-N[TK/LgBiT], and pBiT2.1-N[TK/SmBiT]) for N-terminal and C-terminal small-bit and large-bit fusion protein expressions using In-Fusion Snap Assembly master mixes (Takara). In total eight fusion protein expression vectors were constructed ( A). HEK293 cells plated on white 96-well plates for luminescence detection were transfected with combinations of the constructed expression vectors. Forty-eight hours after the transfections, NanoBit luciferase activities were determined using Nano-Glo live-cell assay system (Promega) and GloMax Discover luminometer (Promega) for every minute in live cells. Ligands used for these assays (DEX, aldosterone, cortisol, and glucocorticoid drugs) were added after 25 min of starting luminescence detection. The final concentrations of ligands in the cell culture media were 100 nM.

## Gene reporter assay
GRE2-Luc reporter ( ) and phRL-tk (Promega) with pcDNA-hGR were cotransfected into HEK293 cells using Lipofectamine 3000 (Invitrogen). Twenty-four hours after the transfection, DEX (10 nM) was added to the culture media and continued culturing for the next 24 h. Luciferase activity was determined using Dual Luciferase Reporter Assay System (Promega) and relative luciferase activity in cell extracts was calculated by normalizing with Renilla luciferase activity.

## ChIP-seq analysis
To profile the chromatin landscape of GR and MR in established cell lines in this study, cells were treated with vehicle versus Dex, and a total of 1 × 107 cells underwent cross-linking, harvesting, and sonication. The resulting sonicated chromatin was subjected to immunoprecipitation with anti-GR (D6H2L, #12041, Cell Signaling), followed by elution and reverse cross-linking. The DNA fragments obtained from each sample were then analyzed using the paired-end 75 bp sequencing protocol on either the NextSeq 500 or NovaSeq 6000 platform (Illumina) according to the manufacturer’s guidelines.
For each sample, raw reads obtained from different sequencing runs were pooled together. These pooled raw reads underwent filtering based on a mean base quality score exceeding 20, and adapters were trimmed using “Trim Galore” (version 0.4, https://github.com/FelixKrueger/TrimGalore). The resulting trimmed reads were mapped to hg19 using Bowtie ( ) with the parameters “-m1, -v2 --best --strata -X 1500.” Afterward, aligned read files from replicate samples under each condition or treatment were merged using the “merge” function in Samtools (Version 1.3.1) ( ). Subsequently, duplicates in all merged files were eliminated using Picard (version 1.115, http://broadinstitute.github.io/picard/).
The analysis tool findPeaks from Homer (version 4.8.3) ( ) was utilized to detect ChIP-seq peaks. Its principle involves pinpointing genomic regions with a higher density of sequencing reads than anticipated randomly. The pooled input sample served as a control to account for background noise during peak identification. The findPeaks was executed with parameter “-F 2 -L 0 -C 1.5 -fdr 0.001.”
Upon completion of peak calling for individual samples, the combined set of identified peaks was derived by aggregating peaks called from all respective paired conditions, forming the regions eligible for quantitative comparison. The creation of a union peak list for each comparison involved two key steps: 1) consolidating two lists of peaks into a single file and organizing them in order of Chromosome coordinate and 2) merging adjacent and overlapping peaks within a 100-nt range using mergeBed, a function from bedTools (version 2.25.0) ( ). Following the creation of these union peak lists, the read count for each peak in each sample was computed using coverageBed, another tool within bedTools.
The quantification results from coverageBed were imported into the Bioconductor package DESeq2 for pairwise comparisons between DMSO and DEX treated samples. Benjamini and Hochberg method was employed to correct for FDR. A peak was deemed significantly differentially bound if the FDR-adjusted p value was below 0.05.
All significant peaks linked to genes underwent Gene Ontology and pathway analyses via GREAT (version 3.0.0) ( ). Additionally, motif analysis was performed using findMotifsGenome.pl from Homer, utilizing default parameters.
Heat map was created utilizing Deeptools (V2.4.2) ( ).

## ChIP-qPCR
ChIP experiments were performed according to previously published procedures ( ). Cells cultured on 150 mm dished were treated with DEX or vehicle for 2 h. Cross-linking of protein and DNA was achieved by 1% formaldehyde and terminated by the addition of glycine. Cells were lysed and ChIP procedures were performed using Magna ChIP kit (EMD Millipore). Isolated nuclei were subjected to sonication using a Diagenode Bioruptor (15 cycles on high setting, 30 s ON, 30 s OFF, twice). DNA shearing was evaluated on 1% agarose gels for the shear range from 200 to 1000 bp. Immunoprecipitated samples using anti-GR antibody or IgG control were isolated using the Magna ChIP kit and further purified with Qiaquick PCR purification kit (Qiagen). qPCR quantification of GR targeting area of genes identified by ChIP-seq analysis was performed using custom designed primer/probes shown in .

## MD simulation
The starting configurations of the LBDs of GR and the MR for the MD trajectories were from PDB IDs 1M2Z and 6UDA, respectively. In the X-ray structures, both GR (residues 512–777) and MR (residues 738–983) had DEX as the associated ligand. Missing residues 910 to 913 of MR were added using the program Modeller10.2 and its bound ligand (DEX) was replaced by aldosterone. The two monomers were aligned using the MR dimer template in PDB ID 2AB2. This was mainly due to the fact that the nanobit assay points to the C termini being in a close proximity. Using the Leap module of Amber.20, protons and missing side chains were introduced to the dimer system and then the dimer was solvated in a box of TIP3P water with the box boundary selected to be extended 20 Å from the nearest protein atom. All Lys, Arg, Glu, and Asp residues are in their charged states. Histidine residues were deemed ε-protonated. Seventy nine Na+ and seventy six Cl- ions randomly replaced some of the water molecules to provide the 100 mM effective ionic concentration, while maintaining the charge neutralization. The total number of water molecules in the system was 41,340, resulting a total of 132,508 atoms in the simulation box. Prior to equilibration, each solvated system was sequentially subjected to 1) 500 ps belly dynamics with fixed peptide, 2) minimization (5000 steps), 3) constant temperature (200 K), constant pressure (1 atm) dynamics (∼1 ns) at fixed protein to assure a reasonable starting density around 1 g/cc, 4) minimization (5000 steps), 5) step-wise heating MD at constant volume (to bring the temperature up to 300K in 3 ns), and 6) constant volume simulation for 10 ns with a constraint force constant of 10 kcal/mol applied only on backbone heavy atoms. After releasing all constraining forces within the next 20 ns of the equilibration period, sampling was increased by performing three independent, constant-temperature (Langevin thermostat) constant-volume MD simulations for 1.2 μs each. All trajectories were calculated using the PMEMD module of Amber.20 with 2 fs time step. Long range coulombic interactions were handled using the PME method with a 10 Å cutoff for the direct interactions. The amino acid parameters were selected from the FF14SB force field of Amber.20, and the parameters used for DEX and aldosterone were given in the and . At the salt concentration of 100 mM, the MMGBSA module with the standard parameters was used to estimate interaction energies of the residues from 1200 samples selected from MD simulations at each nanosecond interval. Only two trajectories with small total RMSDs (<5 Å) from the starting conformations were used in this analysis.

## Statistical analysis
Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism (version 8.3.0, GraphPad Software; https://www.graphpad.com/features). All data were presented as means ± SD. Student’s t test and one- and two-way ANOVA were employed according to the number of groups and comparisons. Significant differences between two groups by two-way ANOVA were indicated by asterisks and pound symbols (∗p < 0.05, ∗∗p < 0.01, ∗∗∗p < 0.001, ∗∗∗∗p < 0.0001, and ####p < 0.0001)) and by Student’s t test were indicated by pound symbols (#<0.05, ##p < 0.01, ###p < 0.001, and ####p < 0.0001).

## Data availability
RNA-seq data and ChIP-seq data in this study are available on GEO (GSE275128) and GEO (GSE274344), respectively.

## Supporting information
This article contains .

## Conflict of interest
The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.

## Acknowledgments
We thank Charles J. Tucker and Erica Scappini of the Fluorescence Microscopy and Imaging Center at NIEHS for assistance with microscopic image capturing, Jian-Liang Li and Sara Grimm at NIEHS for curating RNA-seq and ChIP-seq data, and members of Flow Cytometry Center at NIEHS. We would also like to show our gratitude to Dr Celso Gomez-Sanchez for providing us anti-MR monoclonal antibody.

## Author contributions
T. S., D. D.-J., R. H. O., and J. A. C. writing–review and editing; T. S., M. G. P., L. P., and J. A. C. writing–original draft; T. S., M. G. P., L. P., X. X., and F. I. A. visualization; T. S., M. G. P., C. M. J., C. D. B., X. X., and A. G. R. validation; T. S., C. D. B., R. H. O., and J. A. C. supervision; T. S., R. H. O., and J. A. C. project administration; T. S., M. G. P., C. M. J., L. P., and M. E. C. methodology; T. S., M. G. P., C. M. J., C. D. B., L. P., and A. G. R. investigation; T. S., M. G. P., and F. I. A. formal analysis; T. S., M. G. P., and X. X. data curation; T. S., M. G. P., R. H. O., and J. A. C. conceptualization; J. A. C. funding acquisition.

## Funding and additional information
This work was supported by the Intramural Research Program of the NIEHS, National Institute of Health, Grant 1ZIAES090057. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health.

Reviewed by members of the JBC Editorial Board. Edited by Brian D. Strahl

## Supporting information

## Supplemental Table Legends

## Table S1

## Table S2

## Supplement table 3

## Supplement table 4

## Supplement table 5

## Supplement table 6

 
 
 
 
 

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Supplemental Table Legends

## Table S1

## Table S2

## Supplement table 3

## Supplement table 4

## Supplement table 5

## Supplement table 6

## Data Availability Statement
RNA-seq data and ChIP-seq data in this study are available on GEO (GSE275128) and GEO (GSE274344), respectively.