4382cgenCell GenomicsCell GenomElsevierPMC1298536012985360129853604138622910.1016/j.xgen.2025.101101Transcript-guided targeted cell enrichment for scalable single-nucleus RNA sequencing
LiaoAndrew ZhangZehao SzirakiAndras AbdulraoufAbdulraouf RehmanAbid XuZihan LuZiyu JiangWeirong AryaAlia LeeJasper MaragkakisManolis ZhouWei CaoJunyue 1Laboratory of Single-Cell Genomics and Population Dynamics, the Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA2The Tri-Institutional MD-PhD Program, New York, NY, USA3The David Rockefeller Graduate Program in Bioscience, the Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA4Laboratory of Genetics and Genomics, National Institute on Aging, Intramural Research Program, National Institutes of Health, Baltimore, MD, USA5Bioinformatics and Systems Biology Program, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA∗Corresponding author wzhou@rockefeller.edu
∗∗Corresponding author jcao@rockefeller.edu
6Senior author
7Lead contact
11122025631011011011011432026© 2025 The AuthorsThis is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).Previous version available: This article is based on a previously available preprint posted on bioRxiv on May 8, 2025: "EnrichSci: Transcript-guided Targeted Cell Enrichment for Scalable Single-Cell RNA Sequencing".

## Summary
Large-scale single-cell atlases have revealed many aging- and disease-associated cell types, yet these populations are often underrepresented in heterogeneous tissues, limiting detailed molecular analyses. To address this, we developed EnrichSci—a scalable, microfluidics-free platform that combines hybridization chain reaction RNA fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) with combinatorial indexing to profile single-nucleus transcriptomes of target cell types with full gene-body coverage. Applied to oligodendrocytes in the aging mouse brain, EnrichSci uncovered aging-associated molecular dynamics across distinct oligodendrocyte subtypes, revealing both shared and subtype-specific gene expression changes. Additionally, we identified aging-associated exon-level signatures missed by conventional gene-level analyses, highlighting post-transcriptional regulation as a critical dimension of cell-state dynamics in aging. By coupling transcript-guided enrichment with a scalable sequencing workflow, EnrichSci provides a versatile approach to decode dynamic regulatory landscapes in diverse cell types from complex tissues.
Keywords: single-cell RNA sequencing, combinatorial indexing, hybridization chain reaction, cell type targeted, brain aging, oligodendrocytes, transcriptome dynamics, exon dynamics, isoform switching, splicing

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•EnrichSci enables antibody-free, targeted snRNA-seq of rare cell types
•Efficient profiling captured age-related shifts in rare oligodendrocyte subtypes
•EnrichSci detected gene- and exon-level expression changes in aged oligodendrocytes
•Exon dynamics are linked to isoform switching and splicing factor dysregulation

EnrichSci is an antibody-free, targeted single-nucleus RNA sequencing method that enables efficient profiling of rare cell types with full gene-body coverage. Applied to oligodendrocytes in the brain, it uncovers aging-associated gene expression changes as well as exon-level dynamics that are linked to isoform switching and splicing factor dysregulation.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2025 May 20; Revised 2025 Sep 29; Accepted 2025 Nov 11; Collection date 2026 Mar 11.

## Introduction
Mammalian organs are maintained through homeostasis of hundreds to thousands of distinct cell states, from common populations, such as hepatocytes (∼70% of liver cells), to rare types, such as pinealocytes (<0.01% of brain cells). , Although large-scale single-cell genomics studies have cataloged many such populations, rare cell types are left underrepresented, limiting detailed characterization of their molecular heterogeneity and dynamics and complicating the development of targeted therapeutic interventions.
Recently, several groups developed methods coupling transcript-based enrichment of rare cell types with downstream transcriptome analysis. , , These techniques bypass the cost and technical constraints of antibody-based enrichment, though each faces limitations. Probe-seq first integrated RNA fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) with downstream bulk RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) to enable antibody-free targeted profiling of specific cell types, inspiring the development of analogous approaches with single-cell resolution. FIND-seq achieved transcript-guided, cell-type-targeted single-cell RNA-seq (scRNA-seq) by coupling PCR-based transcript detection with microfluidic cytometry, but it has limited throughput (∼103 cells) and requires specialized equipment. Most recently, PERFF-seq effectively combined RNA FISH-based fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) with 10× Flex, a commercial scRNA-seq platform with higher throughput (∼105 cells). However, Flex utilizes pre-defined probe sets to capture a limited transcriptomic view, hindering the analysis of different species samples as well as the dynamics of genome-wide RNA elements (e.g., exons, introns, and many noncoding genes) crucial for cell-state regulation.
To overcome these limitations, we developed EnrichSci—a highly scalable single-cell combinatorial indexing (sci) approach designed for genome-wide analysis of gene and exon expression in enriched cell populations. EnrichSci combines our EasySci single-cell platform, which can process tens of millions of cells per study at <$0.001/cell and supports cellular and nuclear fixation, with a hybridization chain reaction (HCR) RNA FISH workflow. , This integration enables targeted enrichment and efficient deep sequencing of rare cell types from complex tissues, resulting in detailed analyses of subtype-specific transcriptional signatures and dynamics with exon-level resolution.

## Results
The EnrichSci workflow ( A) begins by analyzing existing single-nucleus RNA-seq (snRNA-seq) data to select a module of 5–10 genes specific to the target cell type. Next, nuclei are extracted from complex tissues or cell lines, fixed in formaldehyde, and fluorescently labeled using HCR RNA FISH , before enrichment via FACS and processing through a modified EasySci snRNA-seq workflow ( ). By employing both oligo-dT and random hexamer primers during reverse transcription, EnrichSci delivers full gene-body coverage, including introns and exons, which require deep sequencing for effective resolution. Our plate-based combinatorial indexing approach also avoids reliance on microfluidic systems required by other methods , and offers scalable parallel processing of many samples via unique first-round barcodes.
 

## Development and benchmarking of EnrichSci
Like previous sci-RNA-seq approaches, , EasySci is compatible with cell and nuclei fixation, a required step for HCR RNA FISH. In developing EnrichSci, we therefore anticipated that HCR labeling could be coupled with EasySci profiling and were pleasantly surprised to find the two protocols were readily compatible. To initially couple the workflows, we directly performed EasySci following HCR and FACS isolation of nuclei fixed under various conditions. The Molecular Instruments (MI) HCR protocol recommends whole-cell fixation in 4% formaldehyde for 1 h at room temperature; however, because our workflow applies HCR to nuclei, we also tested milder fixation conditions, as harsher crosslinking reduces unique molecular identifier (UMI) recovery via EasySci. We found that gentle fixation (0.4% formaldehyde for 15 min at 4°C) maximized UMI counts with a minimal impact on HCR signal to noise, whereas harsher fixation significantly reduced transcript capture ( A and S1B). Notably, we also compared unenriched EnrichSci libraries to EasySci libraries generated from the same fixed nuclei sample and observed comparable UMI yields ( B). This is expected, as sci-RNA-seq , has been shown to be readily compatible with formaldehyde fixation, which is commonly used in RNA FISH workflows. Additionally, we hypothesize that the formamide incubations during the HCR protocol may actually boost the RNA-seq signal recovered, as formamide has been shown to suppress RNase activity and denature RNA secondary structures. 
In addition to benchmarking fixation conditions, we performed several checks to ensure the robustness of EnrichSci data. First, we applied a DNase treatment following HCR and FACS, as described in the PERFF-seq protocol, which reported that the removal of the HCR polymer was necessary for UMI recovery via 10× Flex. In contrast, DNase treatment did not affect UMIs recovered via EnrichSci ( B), and we therefore excluded this step from our protocol. We also verified that expression of HCR-targeted genes in enriched samples profiled by EnrichSci was comparable to their expression in unenriched samples profiled by EasySci ( C), indicating that reverse transcription was not inhibited by the presence of HCR probes or polymers. We hypothesize that this robustness may reflect the strong strand displacement capabilities of commercial MMLV-derived RNase H Minus reverse transcriptase enzymes. Moreover, we used a relatively low number of ∼10 probe pairs per target gene ( ), further minimizing the potential for interference with cDNA synthesis.
To further improve EnrichSci’s performance, we optimized multiple steps across the nuclei extraction, HCR, and snRNA-seq library preparation protocols ( ). Extracting nuclei using a hypotonic lysis buffer with added sucrose resulted in cleaner nuclei extraction with less debris than the commercial EZ lysis buffer ( D), which was critical for downstream HCR, as incomplete lysis and debris led to severe nuclei clumping; extending the lysis time also improved the quality of the nuclei preparation. With this optimized nuclei extraction, we next refined the HCR protocol, which had not previously been applied to isolated nuclei until the development of PERFF-seq. First, we applied HCR using probes targeting a module of 5–10 genes, which improved labeling specificity over a traditional single-transcript approach ( E). Additionally, we found that HCR probe concentrations for nuclei were especially sensitive for optimal target enrichment, as increasing the individual probe concentration of an oligodendrocyte (OL)-specific gene module from 4 nM to even just 16 nM—within the range suggested by the MI whole-cell HCR protocol—caused off-target effects that obscured oligodendrocyte enrichment with noise from abundant cell types ( E). Next, because the HCR workflow loses substantial numbers of nuclei from extensive washing, we minimized wash steps while increasing wash volumes, which reduced nuclei loss and maintained HCR efficiency ( E). We also scaled the HCR hybridization reaction volume up to 10-fold to enable sufficient nuclei recovery for large-scale profiling and likewise observed no loss of HCR efficiency ( F). Finally, the EnrichSci snRNA-seq library preparation was largely unchanged from the EasySci protocol except that after FACS, we used the sorted nuclei suspension directly for reverse transcription. This avoided an additional spin down with supernatant removal, which we found to cause nuclei loss and inconsistent concentrations when working with small numbers of nuclei. For all major experiments in this study, reverse transcription through second-strand synthesis was performed immediately after FACS; however, as noted in the PERFF-seq protocol, we have found that samples can be stored at 4°C for up to 6 days post-FACS while still yielding usable data, demonstrating the robustness of the workflow to delayed processing ( G–S1I).

## In vitro validation of EnrichSci using mixed cell lines
As a proof of concept for enriched cell profiling, we extracted and fixed nuclei from mouse NIH/3T3 cells and human HeLa, HEK293T, and A375 cells, mixed them to simulate a heterogeneous population ( B), and performed HCR using probes against human-specific transcripts (SCHLAP1, LIMCH1, PTMS, PDE4D, CAST, PDE3A, TPM4, IQGAP1, AKT3, RBMS3, SERPINE2, WWTR1, and FTH1) ( ). In this first experiment, we separated the mixture by species into fluorescent-positive (human) and fluorescent-negative (mouse) nuclei ( B). EnrichSci profiling recapitulated the expected molecular states of each cell line ( C and ), with nearly all enriched nuclei correctly clustering with their expected species ( D). We also confirmed that HCR labeling did not compromise downstream single-cell purity or RNA capture efficiency ( ).
Next, we applied a more complex sorting strategy to the mixture, with the goal of separating all four cell lines individually. For this purpose, the aforementioned human-specific module was designed with differential, progressively increasing expression across NIH/3T3, HEK293T, A375, and HeLa nuclei ( E). The initial species-targeted experiment lacked sufficient signal to noise to achieve this resolution, but after optimizing the nuclei HCR workflow, labeling the mixture clearly separated four populations ( F). FACS isolation and profiling of these four populations again recapitulated the expected molecular states ( G and ), with each population accurately clustering with its corresponding cell line controls ( H).

## In vivo application of EnrichSci for targeted oligodendrocyte profiling
Building on our cell line validation, we next applied EnrichSci in vivo by targeting mouse brain oligodendrocytes—glial cells critically involved in myelination and vulnerable to age-related degeneration. We isolated brain nuclei from six male mice (three 2-month-old and three 25-month-old mice; A) and performed HCR, targeting five oligodendrocyte-specific transcripts (Mag, Galnt6, Opalin, Cyp2j12, and Tnni1; ; ). Following library preparation and sequencing of the oligodendrocyte-enriched samples, low-quality cells and doublets were removed ( ), yielding 19,492 high-quality nuclei with a median of 3,566 unique transcripts (1,184 genes) per nucleus ( B and ). Cell identities were first annotated using the Allen Brain Cell Atlas MapMyCells tool and confirmed by robust expression of oligodendrocyte markers Mag and Plp1 ( B). Compared with unbiased single-nucleus whole-brain analysis that identified ∼5.7% oligodendrocytes, our EnrichSci approach yielded ∼93% oligodendrocytes—a 16-fold enrichment ( C). An additional experiment profiling both HCR-positive and HCR-negative nuclei further validated the approach: oligodendrocytes comprised 96% and 0% of each fraction, respectively ( ).
 

## High-resolution profiling of oligodendrocyte subpopulations and their age-related dynamics
To characterize distinct oligodendrocyte subtypes, we subsetted 18,154 cells annotated as oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs) or oligodendrocytes and integrated data from different ages using Seurat ( ). Uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) visualization revealed cellular states spanning the full oligodendrogenesis spectrum—OPCs (Pdgfra+), committed oligodendrocyte precursors (COPs; Bmp4+), newly formed oligodendrocytes (NFOLs; Prom1+), myelin-forming oligodendrocytes (MFOLs; Slc9a3r2+), and mature oligodendrocytes (MOLs; Mog+) ( D and 2E). Within the MOLs, we identified two subtypes: MOL2, marked by Klk6 and Hopx, which was reported to be hindbrain specific, , and MOL5/6, which expresses Ptgds and Il33 and is found across broader brain regions. , Trajectory analysis showed that MFOLs preferentially transition to MOL5/6 versus MOL2, suggesting impeded oligodendrocyte differentiation in the hindbrain ( D and 2E). This finding aligns with human single-cell studies reporting reduced oligodendrocyte differentiation in the cerebellum. 
To evaluate aging effects on subpopulation dynamics, we used Milo to cluster cells into transcriptionally similar neighborhoods and conducted differential abundance testing between age groups. Across cell states, we observed heterogeneous aging dynamics. Intermediate precursors (COPs, NFOLs, and MFOLs) were depleted in aged brains ( F), reflecting impaired oligodendrocyte differentiation consistent with prior studies. , Meanwhile, we detected an aging-expanded MOL subpopulation marked by reactive genes (e.g., C4b and Serpina3n) ( F and 2G). These subpopulation shifts are supported by whole-brain single-cell analyses , , as well as MERFISH data that show Bmp4+ COP depletion and C4b+ reactive oligodendrocyte expansion in aged brains ( ), confirming that EnrichSci can effectively dissect cellular subtypes and cell-state transitions within targeted lineages.
Finally, we applied a complex sorting strategy within the oligodendrocyte gate, subdividing it into low- and high-signal nuclei ( A). Downstream profiling revealed distinct subtype compositions: MOL5/6 predominated in the low-signal population, whereas high-signal nuclei were enriched for subtypes (NFOLs, MFOLs, and MOL2) with higher expression of the oligodendrocyte-specific module ( B and S10C).

## Gene expression dynamics of MOLs subtypes in aging
Next, we examined how aging alters the transcriptomes of MOL subtypes. Differential expression (DE) analysis (false discovery rate [FDR] < 0.05, fold change > 1.5) identified 251 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in MOL2 and 294 in MOL5/6 ( A; ). Despite distinct molecular and spatial profiles, both subtypes showed remarkably concordant gene expression changes in aging; the 119 DEGs identified in both subtypes showed highly correlated expression shifts (Pearson r = 0.9, p = 5e−45; B), indicating a global transcriptional remodeling of aged MOLs. Shared upregulated genes were linked to apoptosis (e.g., Map3k5; Pik3r3 and Mapk10 in MOL2; and Itpr1 and Nfkb1 in MOL5/6) and Alzheimer’s disease (e.g., Apoe, Map3k5, Insr, and Plcb4), whereas genes involved in heat stress response (e.g., Hsph1, Hspa4l, Hsp90aa1, and Hsp90ab1) and oligodendrocyte cell fate commitment (e.g., Olig2) were downregulated ( C). , , We also observed reduced levels of mineralocorticoid targets Sgk1 and Sgk3—key regulators of calcium channel activity and glucose uptake—and downregulation of myelination genes (e.g., Mog and Plp1) ( ), matching reports of age-related myelin loss. Subtype-specific alterations included downregulation of cholesterol biosynthesis (e.g., Hmgcs1, Hmgcr, Cyp51, Msmo1, Sqle, Sc5d, Dhcr7, and Fdft1) and telomere maintenance (e.g., Zfp827) genes in aged MOL2, alongside upregulation of genes linked to oxidative damage response (e.g., Mapk10) and spliceosome-mediated alternative splicing (e.g., Nova1 and Celf2) ( C). , , Meanwhile, aged MOL5/6 selectively downregulated genes involved in energy homeostasis (e.g., Sorl1 and Ubb) and upregulated cellular senescence genes (e.g., Itpr1, Atr, Foxo1, and Nfkb1). , , 
 

## Exon-level dynamics of MOL subtypes in aging
Applying the same DE framework (FDR < 0.05, fold change > 1.5) to exons, we identified 261 and 254 differentially expressed exons (DEEs) in MOL2 and MOL5/6, respectively ( D; ). Of these, 103 were shared between both subtypes and exhibited tightly correlated aging dynamics (Pearson r = 0.89, p = 1.5e−142; E). Although most DEEs mirrored the dynamics of their parent genes, a substantial fraction (42.5% of DEEs in MOL2, 40.1% in MOL5/6, and 30.1% of shared DEEs) of them were non-DEG derived ( ), uncovering pathway perturbations invisible to gene-level analyses ( C). , , For instance, aged MOL5/6 showed enrichment of exons in genes involved in RNA splicing regulation (e.g., Pik3r1 and Srsf5) and cytokine production (e.g., Sptbn1 and Pik3r1), while aged MOL2 displayed increased exon usage in neuroinflammatory response genes (e.g., Zeb2) and downregulation of ERBB-signaling exons linked to oligodendrocyte differentiation ( F).
Further demonstrating exon-level complexity, some DEEs showed inverse trends from their parent genes. One striking example is Zbtb16, a transcription factor essential for oligodendrocyte maturation whose knockout impairs social cognition and prefrontal cortex myelination. Although Zbtb16 gene expression significantly declined with age, expression of exon 7 near its 3′ end increased in aged MOL2 and MOL5/6 ( F). Validating our findings, long-read scRNA-seq of the aging mouse brain found that in hippocampal oligodendrocytes, where Zbtb16 expression was detected, usage of the exon-7-containing isoform 201 increased with age, while the exon-7-lacking isoform 202 was more abundant in young mice ( ). DRIMSeq pairwise isoform usage analysis confirmed a statistically significant shift in Zbtb16 isoform usage between 4- and 31-month-old mice (p = 0.019). In our short-read data, we also observed an age-related shift in Zbtb16 splicing dynamics—young MOL2 and MOL5/6 showed high intronic read fractions for Zbtb16 (96.1% and 96.1%, respectively), which dropped to 77.1% and 77.3% in aged MOLs ( G). Together, these results highlight post-transcriptional regulation as a key layer of cell-state aging dynamics.

## Functional domain mapping of DEEs
We next mapped the DEEs to their associated coding sequences, enabling annotation of their corresponding Pfam domains ( ; ). In both MOL subtypes, we identified annotations including “myelin proteolipid protein” (e.g., Plp1) and “lipocalin-like domain” (e.g., Apod), suggesting direct roles in oligodendrocyte function. Many DEEs mapped to cellular-stress-associated protein families, including heat shock proteins (e.g., Hsp90aa1, Hsp90ab1, Hspa1b, and Cryab), apoptosis regulators (e.g., Faim2 and Bcl2l1), and ubiquitin machinery (e.g., Ubb and Usp54). Some DEEs across different genes mapped to common functional domains, including “homeodomain” (e.g., Hopx, Onecut2, Zhx3, and Pou3f1), “SH2 domain” (e.g., Grb14 and Pik3r1), “PNMA N-terminal RRM-like domain” (e.g., Pnmal2 and Gm42372), and “protein kinase domain” (e.g., Sgk3 and Pak5); conversely, multiple DEEs of certain genes (e.g., C4b) coded for different domains (e.g., exon 13, “alpha-2-macroglobulin bait region domain” and exon 41, “UNC-6/NTR/C345C module”). These results demonstrate that DEEs are not dominated by one protein family but code for diverse functional domains.

## Splicing factor abundance as a driver of exon-level dynamics
To explore mechanisms underlying exon-level alterations, we examined DEEs in relation to splicing factor expression. We first filtered the DEGs for known splicing factors and then mined public CLIP-seq data to identify transcripts bound by DE splicing factors. In MOL2, Nova1 and Celf2 gene expression increased with age ( H). Notably, MOL2 DEEs were significantly enriched for genes targeted by these splicing factors ( I), with 44 and 73 of 261 DEEs belonging to genes with Nova1- and Celf2-bound transcripts, respectively. This enrichment of DE splicing factor targets could indicate a mechanistic link between age-dependent splicing factor dysregulation and exon-level dynamics, where altered splicing factor abundance may drive changes in exon inclusion or exclusion.

## Discussion
Large-scale single-cell atlases have cataloged numerous aging- and disease-associated cell states, , , , but detailed molecular signatures for many rare populations remain poorly characterized. To address this, we introduce EnrichSci—an snRNA-seq method that leverages HCR RNA FISH for targeted cell profiling. This workflow enables flexible cell-type enrichment based on the expression of marker transcripts, including noncoding RNAs and RNAs coding for nuclear proteins. As many rare populations are distinguished by these antibody-inaccessible markers, transcript-based enrichment offers critical advantages over conventional antibody-based enrichment. Recent targeted profiling methods , , have also utilized transcript-based enrichment, but EnrichSci uniquely integrates this strategy with combinatorial indexing and offers several distinct features.
First, the combinatorial indexing workflow achieves markedly greater scalability and cost efficiency than other targeted methods, both in the number of nuclei profiled (up to 107 nuclei) , , , and samples processed in parallel via unique first-round barcodes. This design enables complex sorting experiments ( E–1H and ) that other single-cell platforms would struggle to scale. These experiments also demonstrate the potential of bespoke gene modules to distinguish many cell types. Previously, PERFF-seq showed that multi-gene panels can enhance the HCR signal for lowly expressed transcripts; here, we expanded the approach by designing a gene module that resolved four cell types in vitro ( E–1H). Our oligodendrocyte-targeting module showed similar potential in vivo, as complex-sorted oligodendrocyte populations displayed subtype compositions consistent with their module expression ( ). Further optimization of this approach, including multi-channel modules, could yield even greater ability to resolve distinct populations.
EnrichSci also uniquely offers transcriptome profiling with full gene-body coverage, capturing exon-level information critical for understanding isoform-specific and post-transcriptional regulatory events. Coupled with target enrichment, this capability is particularly powerful, as exon-level analyses necessitate deep sequencing to reliably measure such sparse data. EnrichSci thus maximizes the utility of full gene-body coverage to uncover exon-level dynamics unfeasible to interrogate via unbiased approaches.
Targeting oligodendrocytes in the aging brain, EnrichSci detected subtle age-related shifts in rare subtypes at a fraction of the cost of unbiased profiling and uncovered exon-level expression dynamics missed by traditional gene-level analyses. For example, Zbtb16 exon 7 expression increased in aged MOLs despite a gene-level decrease in expression ( D and 3F), reflecting an isoform switch confirmed by long-read scRNA-seq ( ). Meanwhile, our short-read data showed reduced intronic Zbtb16 reads in aged MOLs ( G), suggesting a shift in splicing dynamics. While these observations could be compatible with a model where altered splicing dynamics contribute to isoform switching, direct mechanistic tests (e.g., nascent RNA assays , with isoform resolution and perturbation of splicing factors) are needed to disentangle the contributions of splicing kinetics versus alternative splice-site selection in Zbtb16 isoform usage. Nonetheless, uncovering exon-level dynamics of Zbtb16 offers insights into this multifunctional transcription factor that regulates numerous processes (e.g., cell differentiation, immune regulation, and apoptosis) in diverse cell types and tissues , , and whose knockdown in mouse models of various diseases (e.g., Alzheimer’s and Muckle-Wells syndrome ) produces rescue phenotypes (e.g., improved cognitive behaviors and reduced inflammatory pathogenesis ).
More broadly, we investigated the relationship between splicing regulation and exon-level dynamics. Binding data for DE splicing factors revealed enrichment of their target genes among DEEs, suggesting that aging-associated changes in splicing factor levels may drive exon-level dysregulation. Although further validation is needed, such a model could provide new avenues to modulate age-related exon- and isoform-level changes. While many DEEs were linked to DE splicing factors, most DEEs were not identified among their targets, reflecting limitations in our analysis. Binding data were not available or sufficiently robust for all DE splicing factors, and our cutoffs may have excluded additional relevant regulators. Exon-level changes could also be driven by other RNA processing mechanisms, including alternative transcription start sites, alternative polyadenylation, or post-transcriptional regulation via RNA stability and degradation pathways. 
Altogether, these findings demonstrate the power of EnrichSci to flexibly target rare cell types and uncover molecular dynamics inaccessible to other methods. Looking ahead, we envision expanding EnrichSci to incorporate additional molecular layers (e.g., chromatin accessibility and DNA methylation ) and genetic perturbations (e.g., CRISPR ), providing a versatile platform to dissect molecular dynamics and identify genetic drivers in aging- and disease-associated cell populations.

## Limitations of the study
As EnrichSci utilizes prior snRNA-seq data to design cell-type-specific gene modules, its applicability in poorly characterized systems is limited. Like other HCR-based methods, EnrichSci also requires large nuclei inputs due to significant nuclei loss during HCR wash steps, and scaled-up reactions may be necessary to recover sufficient nuclei.
Our oligodendrocyte study only analyzed two ages (2 and 25 months) representing the extreme ends of the murine lifespan; consequently, some observations may reflect developmental rather than aging-related changes. Including intermediate ages would help clarify these changes. Finally, while we validated Zbtb16 exon 7 and mapped other DEEs to functional domains, further work is needed to confirm the biological relevance of individual exon-level findings.

## Resource availability

## Lead contact
Requests for further information should be directed to the lead contact, Junyue Cao (jcao@rockefeller.edu).

## Materials availability
This study did not generate new unique reagents.

## Data and code availability
Raw and processed data are available from GEO (GEO: GSE295135). Processed Monocle CellDataSet objects can be downloaded from Zenodo: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.15393823. The EasySci computational pipeline for processing EnrichSci data is available on Zenodo: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.8395492. Computational notebooks for analyses in this study are available at Github: https://github.com/andrewliao99/EnrichSci_analysis (https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.17497563).

## Acknowledgments
We thank all members of the Cao Lab for helpful discussions and feedback. We also thank members of the Rockefeller University Information Technology and High-Performance Computing team, especially J. Banfelder and B. Jayaraman, for their great support. This research was supported by the G. Harold and Leila Y. Mathers Charitable Foundation as well as the Stavros Niarchos Foundation (SNF) as part of its grant to the SNF Institute for Global Infectious Disease Research at the Rockefeller University. This work was funded by NIH grants (1DP2HG012522, 1R01AG076932, and RM1HG011014) and the Mathers Foundation to J.C. This work was also supported by the Hevolution Foundation/American Federation of Aging Research New Investigator Awards in Aging Biology and Geroscience Research to J.C. W.Z. was funded by the Kellen Women’s Entrepreneurship Fund and the Black Family Therapeutic Development Fund. A.L. was supported by a Medical Scientist Training Program grant from the National Institute of General Medical Sciences of the NIH (T32GM152349) to the Weill Cornell/Rockefeller/Sloan Kettering Tri-Institutional MD-PhD Program. This research was also supported in part by the Intramural Research Program of the NIH, grants ZIA AG000696 and ZIA AG000493, to M.M. The contributions of the NIH authors are considered works of the US government. The findings and conclusions presented in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the NIH or the US Department of Health and Human Services.

## Author contributions
J.C. and W.Z. conceptualized and supervised the project. A.L. performed all experiments, including technique development and optimization and computational analyses, with input from the other co-authors. J.C., W.Z., and A.L. wrote the manuscript with input and biological insight from all co-authors.

## Declaration of interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

## Declaration of generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the writing process
While preparing this manuscript, the authors used ChatGPT to improve clarity and refine phrasing. All generated content was subsequently reviewed and edited by the authors, who take full responsibility for the final text.

## STAR★Methods

## Key resources table

 

## Experimental model and study participant details

## Cell culture
HEK293T, A375, HeLa, and NIH/3T3 cell lines were cultured in 10 cm dishes at 37°C with 5% CO2 in high glucose DMEM (Gibco, 11965-118) supplemented with 10% Fetal Bovine Serum (Sigma-Aldrich, F4135) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin (Gibco, 15140-122). All cell lines were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection. Cell line authentication was not performed, but all lines exhibited expected growth characteristics and marker gene expression.

## Animals
C57BL/6 wild-type mice at 2 months (n = 3) and 25 months (n = 3) were obtained from The Jackson Laboratory. Mice were housed socially and maintained on a regular 12h/12h day/night cycle. Euthanization and tissue collection were performed on the same day within a 90-min window to control for circadian effects. Mice were euthanized using inhalation of carbon dioxide (CO2), followed by cervical dislocation, prior to tissue dissection. All animal procedures were in accordance with institutional, state, and government regulations and approved under the IACUC protocol 24012-H.

## Method details

## Cell line harvesting and nuclei isolation
At 80–90% confluency in a 10 cm dish, cell lines were harvested with 0.25% trypsin-EDTA, washed with PBS, and lysed in 2 mL of hypotonic lysis buffer with sucrose (7.68 mM Na2HPO4·2H2O, 4.49 mM NaH2PO4·H2O, 1.76 mM KH2PO4, 2.68 mM KCl, 10.27 mM NaCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 0.33 M sucrose, 0.025% IEGPAL, 1% DEPC). Lysis was performed in 5 mL tubes incubated on a rotator at 4°C for 20 min. After lysis, nuclei were pelleted for 5 min at 500g (4°C), resuspended in 2 mL of 0.4% formaldehyde in PBST, and fixed for 15 min on a rotator at 4°C. Nuclei were then pelleted for 5 min at 1,200g (4°C) and washed once with 2 mL of Nuclei Suspension Buffer (NSB) (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 (VWR, 97062-936), 10 mM NaCl (VWR, 97062-858), 3 mM MgCl2 (VWR, 97062-848), supplemented with 0.1% SUPERase⋅In RNase Inhibitor (Thermo Fisher Scientific, AM2696), 1% BSA (NEB, B9200S), and 0.1% Tween 20 (Sigma, P9416-100ML). After resuspension in NSB, nuclei were counted and used directly in the HCR protocol. For long-term storage, nuclei were diluted to ∼10 million nuclei/mL in NSB with 10% DMSO, cryopreserved at −80°C using a controlled-rate freezing container (Corning, 07-210-009), and kept at −80°C until usage.

## Mouse brain collection and nuclei isolation
After euthanization, whole brains were extracted from mice, immediately snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at −80°C until usage. To isolate nuclei, thawed brains were first diced into fine pieces (<1 mm3) using carbon steel razor blades (VWR, 100491-872) in a 6 cm dish containing 1 mL hypotonic lysis buffer with sucrose. All contents of the dish were transferred to a 15 mL tube containing 14 mL of hypotonic lysis buffer with sucrose for a 25 min incubation while rotating at 4°C, and then homogenized through 40 μm cell strainers (Ward’s Science, 470236-276). Extracted nuclei were then pelleted, fixed in 10 mL 0.4% formaldehyde in PBST while rotating for 15 min at 4°C, and washed with 10 mL of NSB. Nuclei were counted and resuspended at ∼10 million nuclei/mL in NSB with 10% DMSO, cryopreserved at −80°C using a controlled-rate freezing container, and stored at −80°C until usage. After extraction and fixation, nuclei yields ranged from ∼65 million in young brains to ∼110 million in larger aged brains.

## EnrichSci HCR protocol
HCR was performed largely according to the Molecular Instruments (MI) “HCR RNA flow cytometry protocol for mammalian cells in suspension” protocol (version dated 2023-02-13), with specific optimizations made for compatibility with nuclei, improved nuclei recovery, and optimal signal-to-noise. Of note, extracted nuclei were fixed with 0.4% formaldehyde, in contrast to 4% formaldehyde fixation and ethanol permeabilization for whole cells in the MI protocol, and stored at −80°C until usage. We have observed a slight reduction in HCR signal using frozen versus freshly extracted nuclei, although overall signal-to-noise is well-maintained. Decreased HCR efficiency was also noted with increased freeze–thaw cycles of HCR reagents; therefore, we recommend aliquoting all reagents for long-term storage. To minimize nuclei loss during the HCR workflow, the number of wash steps during the detection and amplification stages was significantly reduced by 7 washes from the original MI protocol. All centrifugation steps to pellet nuclei were performed at 1,200g (4°C) for 5 min unless otherwise specified. All incubations were performed using a rotating mixer (Miltenyi Biotec, 130-090-753). Finally, to ensure recovery of sufficient numbers of nuclei in the oligodendrocyte profiling experiment, we scaled up the probe hybridization reaction volumes from 1× as described in the MI protocol to 5×. At the pre-amplification step, the reaction was scaled back to the 1× reaction volume in the MI protocol.

## HCR oligonucleotide probe generation
HCR probes used in this study were designed using the custom probe generator developed by the Özpolat Lab (available at: https://github.com/rwnull/insitu_probe_generator). In brief, the mRNA sequence for each target gene was retrieved from the UCSC Genome Browser and provided as input to the pipeline. Standard parameters were used for most targets, including skipping the first 100 bp of the transcript (when transcript length permitted) and limiting homopolymer runs of polyA/T and polyC/G to a maximum of 5 and 4 bp, respectively. Candidate probes were then BLASTed against the mouse genome (mm39), and any probes with predicted off-target binding were removed by the pipeline. From the resulting list of probe pairs, we manually selected 5 to 11 pairs per gene, prioritizing probes with GC content between 45 and 60% and within 6% of one another and ensuring spacing across the transcript to maximize coverage. Individual oligonucleotide probes were ordered from Integrated DNA Technologies (IDT) in 96-well plates at 200 μM in IDTE and pooled into probe sets for downstream use.

## Cell line mixture HCR
Nuclei from NIH/3T3, HEK293T, A375, and HeLa cells were extracted and fixed as described above, and HCR was performed directly without nuclei freezing for the cell line mixture experiments. To generate the cell line mixture, 250,000 fixed nuclei from each cell line (or 1 million nuclei for individual controls) were combined in a 1.5 mL tube, pelleted, and resuspended in 400 μL of MI probe hybridization buffer pre-warmed to 37°C. After a 30-min pre-hybridization incubation at 37°C, 100 μL of probe solution (prepared by adding 2 μL of probe stock at 2 μM per probe to 96 μL of hybridization buffer) was added to each sample to achieve a final concentration of 8 nM per probe, and samples were incubated overnight at 37°C.
The following day, 850 μL of MI probe wash buffer, pre-warmed to 37°C, was added to each sample before pelleting at 1,700g (4°C) for 5 min. Supernatant was removed, and pellets were resuspended in 1 mL of probe wash buffer and incubated at 37°C for 10 min. Each sample was then pelleted at 1,600g (4°C) for 5 min, resuspended in 1 mL of 5× SSCT (5× saline sodium citrate, 0.1% Tween 20), and incubated at room temperature for 5 min. Samples were pelleted, resuspended in 150 μL of MI amplification buffer, and incubated at room temperature for 30 min in a pre-amplification step. After pre-amplification, 110 μL of amplifier solution (prepared by adding 5 μL each of MI amplifier h1 and h2 to 100 μL of amplification buffer) was added to each sample. Samples were incubated in the dark overnight at room temperature.
The following day, 1 mL of 5× SSCT was added to each sample before pelleting at 1,500g (4°C) for 5 min. Samples were then washed in 1 mL of 5× SSCT, resuspended in 400 μL NSB containing DAPI (Thermo Fisher Scientific, D1306) at a 1:100 dilution from a 0.25 mg/mL stock, and sonicated for 8 s at low power (Diagenode, B01020014) before proceeding to FACS.

## Oligodendrocyte-targeted HCR
Nuclei from young and aged mouse brains were extracted, fixed, and frozen as described above. 5 million frozen, fixed nuclei from each sample were thawed from −80°C in a 37°C water bath, pelleted, and resuspended in 2 mL of MI probe hybridization buffer pre-warmed to 37°C. After a 30-min pre-hybridization incubation at 37°C, 500 μL of probe solution (prepared by adding 5 μL of probe stock at 2 μM per probe to 495 μL of hybridization buffer) was added to each sample to achieve a final concentration of 4 nM per probe, and samples were incubated overnight at 37°C.
The following day, 2.5 mL of MI probe wash buffer, pre-warmed to 37°C, was added to each sample before pelleting at 1,700g (4°C) for 5 min. Supernatant was removed, and pellets were resuspended in 5 mL of probe wash buffer and incubated at 37°C for 10 min. Each sample was then pelleted at 1,600g (4°C) for 5 min, resuspended in 5 mL of 5× SSCT (5× saline sodium citrate, 0.1% Tween 20), and incubated at room temperature for 5 min. Samples were pelleted, resuspended in 150 μL of MI amplification buffer, transferred to a 1.5 mL tube, and incubated at room temperature for 30 min in a pre-amplification step. After pre-amplification, 110 μL of amplifier solution (prepared by adding 5 μL each of MI amplifier h1 and h2 to 100 μL of amplification buffer) was added to each sample. Samples were incubated in the dark overnight at room temperature.
The following day, 1 mL of 5× SSCT was added to each sample before pelleting at 1,500g (4°C) for 5 min. Samples were then washed in 1 mL of 5× SSCT, resuspended in 400 μL NSB containing DAPI at a 1:100 dilution from a 0.25 mg/mL stock, and sonicated for 8 s at low power before proceeding to FACS.

## FACS enrichment of target cell populations
FACS was performed using an SH800 Cell Sorter with a 100 μM sorting chip (Sony, #LE-C3210). Nuclei were first gated to select DAPI-positive singlets, followed by gating for populations of interest based on HCR fluorescent signal. Sorting was carried out into 1.5 mL tubes pre-coated with NSB. To coat tubes, 1 mL of NSB was added, vortexed, and removed, followed by brief centrifugation to collect and aspirate residual buffer. Minimizing residual buffer was critical to ensure the intended nuclei concentration in the sorted solution. The 100 μM chip sorts events in 3 nL droplets to yield a sorted solution concentrated at approximately 333 nuclei/μL. After sorting, tubes were pelleted to collect all solution from the walls, but the supernatant was not removed. Instead, the pelleted nuclei were gently resuspended in the solution, which was directly used at the sorted concentration for reverse transcription.

## HCR nuclei input numbers and reaction scaling
To account for nuclei loss during the HCR protocol as well as the downstream snRNA-seq library preparation steps, nuclei input numbers were scaled accordingly. For cell lines, we recovered ∼30% (300,000 nuclei) of the initial input number (1 million nuclei) as DAPI singlets during sorting. For mouse brain nuclei, singlet recovery was lower at ∼10% of the input. Thus, we scaled up the oligodendrocyte-targeting reaction volumes and inputs by 5× (5 million nuclei per sample), yielding ∼500,000 nuclei singlets during sorting. Roughly 2.6% (∼10,000 nuclei) of singlets were gated as oligodendrocytes and used as input for reverse transcription. After additional nuclei loss during library preparation and filtering of low-quality nuclei during data processing, ∼30% of the sorted input was ultimately recovered, ranging from 2,419 to 3,472 high-quality nuclei per sample.

## EnrichSci snRNA-seq protocol
Following HCR and FACS, sorted nuclei underwent combinatorial indexing-based sequencing library generation largely according to the EasySci protocol. For all major experiments described in this study, reverse transcription through second strand synthesis was performed immediately after FACS. However, as noted in the PERFF-seq protocol, we have found that samples stored at 4°C for up to 6 days post-FACS also produced usable data for test experiments, demonstrating robustness of the workflow to delayed processing ( G–S1I).

## Reverse transcripion (RT)
After measuring the volume of sorted nuclei solution, 1 μL of 10 mM dNTP was added into the same tube for every 8 μL of sorted nuclei solution. After gently mixing, 2.26 μL of nuclei + dNTP solution (∼666 nuclei) was added to each RT well in a 96-well plate on ice (Genesee Scientific, #24–302). 0.5 μL of 50 μM well-specific oligo-dT primers and 0.5 μL of 50 μM well-specific random hexamer primers were then added to provide the first round of indexing. The plate was incubated at 55°C for 5 min then placed back on ice. Next, 1.75 μL of RT master mix (for one plate, mix 110 μL of 5× Maxima RT buffer, 27.5 μL of Maxima H Minus Reverse Transcriptase, and 27.5 μL of SUPERase-ln RNase Inhibitor, and 27.5 μL of nuclease-free water) was added to each well. The plate was then incubated on a temperature gradient (4°C, 10°C, 20°C, 30°C, 40°C, and 50°C for 2 min each, followed by 55°C for 15 min) before being placed back on ice.

## Pooling, washing, and ligation
Following RT, 5 μL of NSB was added to each well, and all wells were pooled into a 1.5 mL tube. Pooled nuclei were pelleted and washed once with 1 mL of NSB, then resuspended in 260 μL of NSB. 2.5 μL of resuspended nuclei was added to each well in a new 96-well plate. 1 μL of 3.125 μM well-specific DNA ligation primer/adaptor complex was added each well. Finally, 1.5 μL of ligation master mix (for one plate, mix 55 μL of 10× T4 Ligation Buffer, 5.5 μL of SUPERase-ln RNase Inhibitor, 55 μL of T4 DNA Ligase, and 47.5 μL of nuclease-free water) was added to each well. The plate was then incubated at room temperature for 30 min on a Fisherbrand Nutating Mixer (Fisher Scientific, #88-861-043) at 50 rpm before being placed back on ice.

## Pooling, washing, and second strand synthesis (SSS)
Following ligation, 1 μL of 18 mM EDTA was added to each well, and all wells were pooled into a 1.5 mL tube. Pooled nuclei were pelleted and washed once with 1 mL of NSB, then resuspended to ∼250 nuclei/μL (the total nuclei recovered at this step should be roughly half of the total nuclei input for RT). 4 μL of resuspended nuclei were distributed into each well of 4 PCR strips (more strips or a plate can be used here if necessary). 1 μL of SSS master mix (for each well, mix 0.33 μL of NEBNext Ultra II Non-directional RNA SSS Enzyme Mix with 0.67 μL of SSS Reaction Buffer) was added to each well, and strips were incubated at 16°C for one hour. After SSS, samples were stored at −20°C overnight.

## 1× AMPure beads purification and tagmentation
Following SSS, 5 μL of DNA binding buffer was added to each well, mixed, and left to incubate for 5 min at room temperature. 10 μL of AMPure XP beads were then added to each well, mixed, and left to incubate for 5 min at room temperature. The strips were then placed on a magnetic rack for 5 min. The resulting supernatant was removed, and the beads were washed twice with 50 μL of freshly made 80% ethanol, briefly centrifuging and removing all residual ethanol after the second wash. Off the magnetic rack, 7 μL of elution buffer was added to each well, mixed, and left to incubate for 3 min at room temperature. The strips were then placed back on the magnetic rack and left to incubate for 3 min. Finally, 6.6 μL of solution was aspirated and transferred to new PCR strips. 6.6 μL of 1:100 Tagmentase:Tagmentation buffer mix was added to each well, and strips were incubated at 55°C for 5 min.

## SDS treatment and PCR
Following tagmentation, 2.8 μL of SDS/P5 primer master mix (for each well, mix 0.4 μL SDS, 0.4 μL of BSA, and 2 μL of universal P5 primer) was added to each well, and strips were incubated at 55°C for 15 min before being placed back on ice. To each well, 2 μL of 10% Tween 20 was added, followed by 2 μL of indexed P7 primer. Finally, 20 μL of NEBNext High-Fidelity 2× PCR Master Mix was added to each well. Strips were incubated at 72°C for 5 min, 98°C for 30 s, and 15 cycles of 98°C for 10 s, 66°C for 30 s, and 72°C for 30 s, followed by a final extension at 72°C for 5 min. After the reaction, strips were placed back on ice.

## Library purification and sequencing
All wells were pooled together following PCR, and 200 μL of pooled PCR product was used for a 0.8× AMPure beads purification. In a 1.5 mL tube, 160 μL of beads was added to 200 μL of pooled PCR product, mixed, and left to incubate at room temperature for 5 min. The tube was placed on a magnetic rack for 5 min, and the resulting supernatant was removed. The beads were washed twice with freshly made 80% ethanol, briefly centrifuging and removing all residual ethanol after the second wash. Off the magnetic rack, 105 μL of elution buffer was added, mixed, and left to incubate for 3 min at room temperature. The tube was placed back on the magnetic rack for 3 min, and 100 μL of solution was aspirated and transferred to a new tube. A final 0.9× AMPure beads purification was performed, eluting in a final volume of 20 μL. All libraries were visualized by gel electrophoresis, and concentrations were determined using a Qubit fluorometer (Invitrogen, Q33231). All libraries were sequenced on the NextSeq 1000 platform (Illumina) using a 100-cycle kit (Read 1: 58 cycles, Read 2: 60 cycles, Index 1: 10 cycles, Index 2: 10 cycles). The cell line library was sequenced to ∼13,000 reads per cell, and the mouse brain library was sequenced to ∼37,000 reads/cell.

## EnrichSci data processing
Raw sequencing data were processed using the previously developed EasySci1 pipeline for read alignment and generation of gene and exon count matrices for snRNA-seq libraries. In brief, base calls were converted to FASTQ format and demultiplexed using Illumina bcl2fastq (v2.19.0.316), allowing up to one mismatch in barcode sequences (edit distance<2). RT barcodes were corrected to their nearest valid barcode (edit distance<2), and reads with barcodes that could not be corrected (edit distance≥2) were excluded. Adaptors and barcodes were trimmed, and Trim Galore (v0.4.1) was used to additionally remove poly(A) sequences and low-quality base calls. Using STAR (v2.5.2b), trimmed reads were aligned to a chimeric human and mouse genome (hg27/mm10) for the cell line mixture experiment and the mouse genome (mm39) for mouse brain profiling. After removal of PCR duplicates, which share a unique molecular identifier (UMI) sequence, RT barcode, and tagmentation site, reads are split into SAM files per cell. A custom EasySci script was used to quantify gene and exon expression per cell. To assign reads to genes, a read was counted if its aligned coordinates overlapped with annotated gene regions. If a read derived from the oligo-dT RT primer was ambiguous between multiple genes, it was assigned to the gene with the closest 3′ end. If a read did not initially map to a gene, the script also searched for potential gene assignments up to 1,000 bp upstream or on the opposite strand. After these steps, reads without assigned genes were discarded. A similar approach was performed to generate the exon count matrix.

## Cell filtering, clustering, and annotation for EnrichSci
Gene and exon expression matrices were constructed from the raw sequencing data as described above. In the cell line mixture experiment, cells with less than 1000 UMIs and 100 unique genes were discarded. For mouse brain profiling, cells with less than 500 UMIs and 100 unique genes were discarded.
To identify doublets, Scrublet (v0.2.3) with Scanpy (v1.6.0) was applied to each gene count matrix using the following parameters: min_count = 3, min_cells = 3, vscore_percentile = 85, n_pc = 30, expected_doublet_rate = 0.06, sim_doublet_ratio = 2, n_neighbors = 30. Cells with doublet scores over 0.2 were annotated as doublets and discarded, along with any cells from doublet-derived sub-clusters. Finally, cells that passed initial filtering but appeared to be doublets, based on clustering results and expression of markers from multiple cell types, were also removed.
Using Seurat (v4.0.2), dimension reduction was performed on the data first by PCA using 30 components and then with UMAP before Louvain clustering. For the cell line mixture experiment, cluster identity was annotated using individual cell line spike-ins as a reference. For mouse brain profiling, we performed two independent experimental batches. Although both batches were integrated to define cell-state identities, downstream gene-expression analyses were restricted to the second batch—comprising three biological replicates per age group versus only two aged replicates in the first batch. Initial cell type annotations were generated using the Allen Institute for Brain Science MapMyCells tool. We then removed all cells that did not have the class_name ‘31 OPC-Oligo’ to filter for only oligodendrocyte lineage cells. For higher resolution clustering of these cells, we used Seurat to integrate oligodendrocyte lineage cells from the two independent experiment batches by regressing out the effect of experimental batch and age group. Following integration, we performed dimension reduction and clustering, revealing shared and divergent cell states between the two age groups. For downstream analyses, only the second batch with all three replicate samples per age group was used. Oligodendrocyte lineage subtypes were annotated based on the previous MapMyCells annotations along with expression of cell type-specific markers ( D).

## Cell population dynamics analysis
To assess the effects of aging on cell population dynamics within the oligodendrocyte lineage, we applied miloR (v1.3.1), a single-cell differential abundance testing framework that utilizes k-nearest neighbor (KNN) graphs. We first constructed a KNN graph on the UMAP space using the buildGraph() function with k = 60. Cell neighborhoods were defined with makeNhoods(), and cell counts per sample within each neighborhood were computed using countCells(). Differential abundance testing was performed using testNhoods(), with significance assessed at a spatial FDR threshold of 0.05. To visualize differential abundance neighborhoods, we initially tried the plotNhoodGraphDA() function, but it is sensitive to local noise and does not easily show the density of specific conditions. To better visualize age-related cell population shifts, we first expanded each neighborhood by including all cells within a fixed radius of its UMAP coordinates. We then calculated the proportion of young and aged cells in each neighborhood, labeling them as Young-enriched or Aged-enriched if one age group comprised more than 70.5% of the cells. These expanded neighborhoods were more robust to local variability and better captured broader population shifts. Finally, to visualize the distribution of age group-enriched neighborhoods, we used ggplot2 to overlay density contours on a UMAP plot of the cell neighborhoods.

## Differential expression analysis
To identify differentially expressed (DE) genes and exons between young and aged mice in each of the two mature oligodendrocyte subtypes, we employed the likelihood ratio test to identify genes and exons significantly associated with a specific population, using the differentialGeneTest() function in Monocle (v2.28.0). The test was applied to a combined object containing both gene- and exon-level features, which improved statistical power and reduced the false discovery rate (FDR). Filtering first for DE genes, we used the following cutoffs: FDR<0.05, fold change>1.5, and counts per million (CPM) in the maximum condition>25. To filter for DE exons, we used the same FDR and fold change cutoffs but lowered the CPM threshold (in the maximum condition) to >10, accounting for the lower expression levels of individual exons. To classify DE exons as either DEG-derived or non-DEG-derived, we re-filtered genes using the DE exon CPM cutoff (>10) instead of the DE gene cutoff (>25). Using the same cutoffs as DE exon filtering thus allowed us to determine that under the same criteria, the parent genes of non-DEG-derived DE exons were only detectable at the exonic and not the gene level.

## Gene set enrichment analysis
To identify enriched pathways associated with DE genes and exons, we used g:Profiler (version e112_e.g.,59_p19_25aa4782) with Benjamini-Hochberg FDR<0.05 applied. DE genes and non-DEG-derived DE exons for each mature oligodendrocyte subtype and age group were separately analyzed. DE gene inputs consisted of unranked mouse gene symbols, and DE exon inputs used the corresponding parent gene symbols. We queried the following pathway databases: GO Biological Process (2024-10-7 release), KEGG pathways (2024-01-22 release), Reactome pathways (2025-02-03 release), and WikiPathways (2025-01-10 release). For visualization, we manually selected biologically relevant pathways for DE genes and exons in each age group and mature oligodendrocyte subtype and plotted them using custom ggplot2-based scripts.

## Exon–domain mapping analysis
To assess whether DEEs were enriched in specific protein functional domains, we developed a custom pipeline that first mapped each DEE to the coding sequence(s) of its associated transcripts. Next, we converted the genomic coordinates of the mapped coding sequences to amino acid positions. Finally, we matched these positions to those of annotated Pfam domains for the associated transcripts, thus identifying protein families and domains coded for by the majority of DEEs.

## Splicing factor target enrichment analysis
To investigate whether dysregulation of splicing factors is linked to exon-level changes in their target transcripts, we performed enrichment analysis for targets of DE splicing factors among DEEs. We first filtered DEGs for known splicing factors using the Gene Ontology database , and then searched public CLIP-seq or comparable data to identify transcripts bound by DE splicing factors. Enrichment of DEG splicing factor targets among DEE parent genes was assessed relative to non-DEE parent genes using Fisher’s exact test, with significant enrichment indicating a potential link between age-dependent splicing factor dysregulation and exon-level expression dynamics.

Published: December 11, 2025

## Footnotes
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xgen.2025.101101.

## Contributor Information
Wei Zhou, Email: wzhou@rockefeller.edu.
Junyue Cao, Email: jcao@rockefeller.edu.

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S14

## Table S1. Probe and primer sequences used in EnrichSci experiments, related to Figures 1 and 2
Probe sequences are included for both the cell line mixture and the oligodendrocyte-enriched brain profiling experiments. Full primer sequences, well positions, and barcode sequences of the oligo-dT RT primers, random hexamer RT primers, ligation primers, and P5/P7 primers are also included.

## Table S2. Aging differentially expressed genes across mature oligodendrocyte subtypes, related to Figure 3
The gene name, gene ID, gene type, p-value, q-value, CPM, highest expressing age group, log2(fold change) in aged versus young mice, and MOL subtype are included.

## Table S3. Aging differentially expressed exons across mature oligodendrocyte subtypes, related to Figure 3
The gene name, exon ID, gene type, p-value, q-value, CPM, highest expressing age group, log2(fold change) in aged versus young mice of the exon, log2(fold change) of the parent gene, DE status of the parent gene, mapped Pfam ID(s) and annotation(s), and MOL subtype are included.

## Document S2. Article plus supplemental information

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Document S1. Figures S1–S14

## Table S1. Probe and primer sequences used in EnrichSci experiments, related to Figures 1 and 2
Probe sequences are included for both the cell line mixture and the oligodendrocyte-enriched brain profiling experiments. Full primer sequences, well positions, and barcode sequences of the oligo-dT RT primers, random hexamer RT primers, ligation primers, and P5/P7 primers are also included.

## Table S2. Aging differentially expressed genes across mature oligodendrocyte subtypes, related to Figure 3
The gene name, gene ID, gene type, p-value, q-value, CPM, highest expressing age group, log2(fold change) in aged versus young mice, and MOL subtype are included.

## Table S3. Aging differentially expressed exons across mature oligodendrocyte subtypes, related to Figure 3
The gene name, exon ID, gene type, p-value, q-value, CPM, highest expressing age group, log2(fold change) in aged versus young mice of the exon, log2(fold change) of the parent gene, DE status of the parent gene, mapped Pfam ID(s) and annotation(s), and MOL subtype are included.

## Document S2. Article plus supplemental information

## Data Availability Statement
Raw and processed data are available from GEO (GEO: GSE295135). Processed Monocle CellDataSet objects can be downloaded from Zenodo: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.15393823. The EasySci computational pipeline for processing EnrichSci data is available on Zenodo: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.8395492. Computational notebooks for analyses in this study are available at Github: https://github.com/andrewliao99/EnrichSci_analysis (https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.17497563).