379blackwellopenPigment Cell & Melanoma ResearchPigment Cell Melanoma ResPMC1245109812451098124510984097693010.1111/pcmr.70054The Roles of PTEN in Melanoma Suppression
ParkmanGennie L XuXiaonan HolmenSheri L KarrethFlorian A 
1
Department of Zoology, Weber State University, Ogden, Utah, USA
2
Department of Molecular Oncology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute, Tampa, Florida, USA
3
Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah Health Sciences Center, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA
4
Department of Oncological Sciences, University of Utah Health Sciences Center, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA
5
Department of Surgery, University of Utah Health Sciences Center, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA
6
Department of Cutaneous Oncology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute, Tampa, Florida, USA
7
Department of Oncologic Science, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida, USA*

Correspondence:
 
Gennie L. Parkman (gennieparkman@weber.edu), 
Xiaonan Xu (xiaonan.xu@moffitt.org), 
Sheri L. Holmen (sheri.holmen@hci.utah.edu) Florian A. Karreth (florian.karreth@moffitt.org)

✉Corresponding author.
2192025385e70054e700542392025© 2025 The Author(s). Pigment Cell & Melanoma Research published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non‐commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made.

## ABSTRACT
Since its discovery more than a quarter century ago, PTEN has emerged as one of the most potent tumor suppressors and its loss of function is common to numerous cancer types including glioblastoma, prostate cancer, small cell lung cancer, and melanoma. PTEN is a lipid and protein phosphatase that contributes to various cellular processes, primarily by regulating key signaling pathways. Extensive research over the past two decades has uncovered many aspects of PTEN regulation and function and highlighted the role of PTEN in tumor suppression. PTEN loss‐of‐function is associated with the progression of a substantial portion of melanoma cases, and while its role in melanoma suppression is often ascribed to its inhibition of the PI3K/AKT signaling pathway, recent studies may hint at a more complex role for PTEN in melanoma. In this review, we provide an overview of how PTEN suppresses melanomagenesis.
Keywords: lipid phosphatase, melanoma, protein phosphatase, PTEN, tumor suppressor

PTEN is a multifaceted tumor suppressor that opposes several aspects of melanomagenesis.
 
statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoRevised 2025 Jul 20; Received 2025 Jan 21; Accepted 2025 Sep 9; Issue date 2025 Sep.

Summary

PTEN inactivation occurs in ~15%–30% of cutaneous melanomas through diverse mechanisms including deletions, mutations, and epigenetic silencing, and cooperates with BRAF/NRAS mutations to drive tumor initiation and progression.
PTEN lipid phosphatase activity primarily suppresses melanoma through inhibition of AKT/mTOR signaling, while protein phosphatase and scaffolding functions contribute additional tumor suppressive mechanisms.
PTEN loss drives resistance to both targeted therapies and immunotherapy, making PTEN reactivation strategies and combination approaches promising therapeutic avenues.

1.

## 
PTEN Discovery and Characterization
The loss of chromosome 10q, a frequent occurrence in malignant cancers, led to the discovery of the gene encoding the Phosphatase and TENsin homolog deleted on chromosome 10 (PTEN) tumor suppressor (Ghalali et al.  ; Li et al.  ), which was first successfully mapped and characterized at the University of Utah in 1997 (Steck et al.  ; Teng et al.  ). The PTEN gene, located on chromosome 10q23.31, encompasses nine exons, as well as an additional exon (5b) that is not found in the major transcript (Myers et al.  ). PTEN encodes a 403‐amino acid protein containing five major domains: N‐terminal PIP2‐binding domain (PBD), catalytic phosphatase domain, carboxyl‐terminal (C‐tail) domain, calcium‐independent (C2) domain, and PDZ‐binding domain (PDZ/BD) (Figure  ). Initially discovered to be a protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTP) due to high sequence homology with other PTP members, such as tensin and auxillin phosphatases (Li et al.  ), PTEN was soon thereafter discovered to also have a role in the phosphatidylinositol‐3‐kinase (PI3K) pathway as a lipid phosphatase (Maehama and Dixon  ). A wealth of evidence has demonstrated its influence through intricate signaling pathways that govern cellular growth, survival, and migration.
 Inactivation of PTEN is a frequent event in multiple different malignancies, including glioblastoma, prostate cancer, breast cancer, and melanoma (Li et al.  ). PTEN function is altered and lost via multiple different mechanisms. Hypermethylation of the PTEN promoter region, which can lead to transcriptional silencing and reduced PTEN expression (Roh et al.  ), has been reported in approximately 62% of cervical cancers, 39% of gastric carcinomas, 24% of melanomas, and 7.6% of colorectal cancers overall, with a higher frequency of 19.1% in microsatellite instability‐high (MSI‐H) subtypes (de Unamuno Bustos et al.  ; Goel et al.  ; Kang et al.  ; Qi et al.  ). Deletion of one or both copies of the PTEN locus is also a common mechanism of inactivation in various cancers, resulting in reduced or absent PTEN expression. Hemizygous (hemdel) and homozygous (homdel) deletions have been reported at notable frequencies across several tumor types, including breast invasive carcinoma (25.3% hemdel, 5.1% homdel), brain tumors (35.3% hemdel, 3.3% homdel), ovarian serous cystadenocarcinoma (34.7% hemdel, 5.6% homdel), prostate adenocarcinoma (15% hemdel, 17.4% homdel), skin cutaneous melanoma (55.9% hemdel, 7.6% homdel), and esophageal carcinoma (33.7% hemdel, 3.9% homdel) (Vidotto et al.  ). Additionally, cancer‐associated missense mutations alter the amino acid sequence of the PTEN protein, affecting its enzymatic activity or stability, while nonsense mutations introduce premature stop codons, leading to the production of truncated non‐functional or unstable PTEN proteins (Bazzichetto et al.  ). Alterations to enzymes that mediate post‐translational modifications, such as acetylation, ubiquitination, or sumoylation, affect PTEN's stability, localization, or function and thereby impair its tumor‐suppressive activity (Gonzalez‐Garcia et al.  ). Several miRNAs, such as miR‐21, miR‐22, and miR‐200 (Bermudez Brito et al.  ; Cabrita et al.  ; Meng et al.  ; Stahl et al.  ), target the PTEN mRNA and upregulation of these miRNAs or downregulation of transcripts that sequester PTEN‐targeting miRNAs results in reduced PTEN expression in cancer (Karreth et al.  ; Khan et al.  ; Tay et al.  ). Interestingly, PTEN loss of expression and loss‐of‐function mutations are not synonymous. Heterodimerization of PTEN mutants with wildtype PTEN impairs phosphatase activity, and heterozygous PTEN mutation may thus elicit more severe phenotypes compared to heterozygous PTEN loss (Papa et al.  ). In summary, PTEN inactivation occurs through diverse mechanisms in cancer, including genetic deletions, promoter hypermethylation, and mutations that alter protein function or stability, contributing to diminished PTEN expression and impaired tumor‐suppressive activity.

2.

## The Dual Functions of PTEN

PTEN was initially described as a tyrosine phosphatase (Li et al.  ); however, it possesses dual‐specificity protein phosphatase activity, meaning it can dephosphorylate both phospho‐serine/threonine and phospho‐tyrosine residues on target proteins. PTEN directly interacts with many target substrates, including PTK6, AKT1, PLK1, RAB7, IRS1, and CREB1. Furthermore, PTEN dephosphorylates focal adhesion kinase (FAK) and Src, leading to inhibition of integrin‐mediated regulation of cell migration. Due to extensive crosstalk between FAK and PTEN, phosphorylation of PTEN by FAK at Tyr336 affects the stability, membrane localization, and phosphatase activity of PTEN (Bermudez Brito et al.  ; Tamura et al.  ). Although PTEN can dephosphorylate various cytoplasmic and nuclear proteins involved in cell cycle regulation, apoptosis, and cell migration (Liu, Wang, et al.  ), future work is needed to more thoroughly characterize PTEN protein phosphatase targets and their contribution to tumor suppression.
Although PTEN was first described as a protein phosphatase, this activity is relatively weak. The crystal structure of PTEN was elucidated in 1999, leading to the identification of a C2 domain that binds to membrane phospho‐lipids and a phosphatase domain having an enlarged active site that accommodates phospholipids (Lee et al.  ). These findings indicated a PTEN lipid phosphatase function in addition to its protein phosphatase function (Figure  ). Further in vitro studies revealed that PTEN is indeed capable of dephosphorylating phospho‐lipids and phospho‐peptides (Maehama and Dixon  ; Myers et al.  ). Lipid phosphatase activity, now considered the canonical function of PTEN, antagonizes PI3K activity by dephosphorylating phosphatidylinositol (3,4,5)‐trisphosphate (PIP3) to phosphatidylinositol (4,5)‐bisphosphate (PIP2). PTEN localizes to the plasma membrane to interact with phosphoinositides, targeting the same membrane microdomains as PI3K that are enriched with both PIP2 and PIP3. Full activation involves the C2 domain of PTEN colocalizing and binding with PIP3, leading to an open conformation and activation of the phosphatase C‐tail domain, which catalyzes the production of PIP2 through dephosphorylation of PIP3. Interestingly, due to its affinity for identical substrates as PI3K, PTEN negative regulation and PI3K positive regulation can potentially co‐occur at the membrane (Ross and Gericke  ). By counteracting the activity of PI3K, PTEN negatively regulates signaling pathways downstream of PI3K and PIP3. Specifically, by reducing the levels of PIP3, PTEN lipid phosphatase activity inhibits the recruitment of PH domain‐containing proteins like PDK1 and AKT to the cell membrane. PDK1 phosphorylates and activates the pleiotropic Ser/Thr kinase AKT, initiating a signaling cascade that promotes cell survival, growth, and proliferation that is frequently dysregulated in multiple cancers, including approximately 70%–90% of endometrial, 30%–50% of prostate, 30%–40% of breast, and 30%–45% of melanoma cases, through alterations such as PIK3CA mutations and PTEN loss (Figure  ) (N. Cancer Genome Atlas  ; Cerami et al.  ; Consortium I. T. P.‐C. A. o. W. G  ; Day et al.  ; Fusco and Malapelle  ; Jamaspishvili et al.  ; Kandoth et al.  ; Kita et al.  ; Parkman et al.  ; Shull et al.  ; Struzinska et al.  ). Additionally, PIP3 and PDK1 activate other AGC (protein kinase A, G, and C) family kinases such as the Serum and Glucocorticoid‐regulated Kinases (SGKs), which share similarities with AKT in regulating cell metabolism, ion transport, and survival, as well as small GTPases like RAC (Ras‐related C3 botulinum toxin substrate) and CDC42 (Cell Division Control Protein 42) (Lien et al.  ). By limiting the activation of signaling pathways downstream of PI3K, PTEN's lipid phosphatase activity functions as a key tumor suppressive mechanism that limits the activation of PI3K signaling, and loss of PTEN lipid phosphatase activity results in PI3K pathway hyperactivation, contributing to oncogenic transformation, tumor progression, and metastasis in melanoma and various other cancers (Parkman et al.  ).
 PTEN also exhibits phosphatase‐independent activity through scaffolding functions. Although PTEN is a predominantly cytoplasmic protein, it can translocate to the nucleus, and certain cancer‐associated mutations that impair ubiquitination lead to PTEN nuclear exclusion (Lee et al.  ). In the nucleus, PTEN interacts with histone modifiers and chromatin remodeling complexes to influence the maintenance of genomic stability as well as the regulation of transcription, epigenetics, and the cell‐cycle machinery (Misra et al.  ). For instance, nuclear PTEN directly interacts with the anaphase‐promoting complex (APC), an E3 ubiquitin ligase that regulates cell‐cycle progression by targeting mitotic cyclins for degradation, to enhance its activity (Song et al.  ). While roles for nuclear PTEN have been unequivocally demonstrated, the molecular mechanisms of these PTEN functions are incompletely understood. PTEN interacts with a wide array of proteins through its non‐catalytic domains, particularly its C‐terminal tail, which is crucial to its role as a scaffolding protein. The C‐terminal tail domain of PTEN is dispensable for its phosphatase activity but regulates the protein stability and function of PTEN through phosphorylation (Vazquez et al.  ). Indeed, PTEN inhibits the RAC‐GEF PREX2 (phosphatidylinositol‐3,4,5‐trisphosphate–dependent Rac exchange factor 2) protein independent of its phosphatase function but dependent on the PTEN tail, leading to inhibition of the RAC1 GTPase (Mense et al.  ).
PTEN‐Long (PTEN‐L), also known as PTENα, is an alternatively spliced isoform of PTEN. It differs from the canonical PTEN isoform primarily in its extended N‐terminal region, which includes 173 additional amino acids (Hopkins et al.  ). PTEN‐L is secreted from cells and appears to have distinct functions compared to canonical PTEN, for instance, by dephosphorylating ubiquitin to promote mitophagy (Wang et al.  ). It has been suggested to have different subcellular localization and unique interacting partners, such as Gab2, but these have not been extensively characterized (Jochner et al.  ). Collectively, by exerting these non‐canonical functions, PTEN exhibits additional layers of tumor suppression.

3.

## The Role of PTEN in Cutaneous Melanoma
Loss‐of‐function alterations of PTEN influence several hallmarks of cancer and are frequent genetic events in cutaneous melanoma. Melanoma is a highly aggressive form of skin cancer notorious for its propensity to metastasize. Despite comprising a relatively small fraction of skin cancers, this heterogeneous disease is responsible for a disproportionate number of skin cancer‐related deaths. PTEN inactivation is a vital component of melanoma pathogenesis, and in the past two decades, the frequency of PTEN alterations in melanoma has been investigated through multiple studies (Table  ). Over one hundred alterations in the gene have been reported, with sequencing identifying three common observations in both melanoma cell lines and tumor samples, including loss‐of‐function mutations, genomic deletions, and promoter hypermethylation. A compilation of 16 studies examining the extent of PTEN variants among melanoma cell lines and tumors found that PTEN alterations occurred in 27.6% of melanoma cell lines, 7.3% of primary melanoma tumor biopsies, and 15.2% of metastatic melanoma biopsies (Aguissa‐Toure and Li  ; Fusco et al.  ). The higher percentage of PTEN alterations in cell lines compared to tumor specimens may indicate that PTEN deficiency confers a selective advantage during the establishment or maintenance of cells in culture. This suggests that loss of PTEN may promote growth or survival under in vitro conditions, potentially making PTEN‐inactivated tumors more likely to yield successful cell lines. However, definitive data comparing PTEN status in matched patient tumors and derived cell lines are limited, making it difficult to distinguish whether this discrepancy is due to a true selection bias favoring PTEN‐deficient cells or the result of culture‐induced genetic or epigenetic alterations. This uncertainty underscores the importance of using sophisticated in vivo models to fully elucidate the functional consequences of PTEN loss in melanoma pathogenesis.
 In 2009, the first melanoma GEMM harboring a conditional knockout of PTEN was generated in the context of melanocyte‐specific inducible activation of endogenous BRAFV600E expression (Dankort et al.  ). This study demonstrated that while BRAFV600E initiates melanocyte transformation, homozygous loss of PTEN potently enhances melanoma formation, leading to a median overall survival of < 50 days. Additionally, the BRAFV600E; PTENFL/FL model readily developed lymph node metastasis and micro‐metastases to the lung. This confirmed the tumor suppressor function of PTEN in melanoma by showing that while PTEN deletion alone is insufficient to transform melanocytes, it potently promotes melanoma formation.
Hyperactivation of the MAPK pathway is a hallmark of melanoma and is thought to be critical for melanocyte transformation. Aberrant MAPK activation is predominantly achieved by mutations in BRAF or NRAS, which occur in approximately 50% and 20% of all melanomas, respectively. PTEN inactivation occurs frequently in BRAF‐mutant (~35%) (Qin et al.  ) and NRAS‐mutant human melanoma (~14%) (N. Cancer Genome Atlas  ; Nogueira et al.  ). While these rates reflect predominantly genetic alterations, PTEN expression can also be reduced through epigenetic mechanisms such as promoter hypermethylation, though the functional significance of partial downregulation remains difficult to define. As these mechanisms often result in partial rather than complete loss of expression, it remains unclear what threshold of PTEN downregulation is sufficient to promote melanomagenesis and whether this threshold depends on the BRAF and NRAS mutational status. Consequently, it is challenging to determine the frequency of bona fide pathogenic epigenetic PTEN silencing in BRAF‐ and NRAS‐mutant melanoma. Regardless, in melanoma GEMMs, homozygous deletion of PTEN potently cooperates with melanocyte‐specific activation of either mutant BRAF or NRAS (Bok et al.  ), demonstrating that these two initiating mutations sensitize melanomagenesis to PTEN loss.
As discussed above, a pan‐cancer genomic analysis showed that hemizygous PTEN deletions in melanoma are significantly more frequent than homozygous deletions, indicating that loss of one allele of PTEN may be sufficient to promote melanomagenesis in the context of MAPK activation (Vidotto et al.  ). Indeed, heterozygous PTEN inactivation in murine knock‐out models promotes neoplastic transformation in many tissues, such as lymph node hyperplasia and alterations of the skin and testes (Di Cristofano et al.  ; Podsypanina et al.  ). Moreover, PTEN tumor suppression is strongly influenced by gene dosage, and partial loss of PTEN function can result in activation of downstream pathways (Alimonti et al.  ; Trotman et al.  ). In melanoma GEMMs harboring a BRAF or NRAS mutation, heterozygous loss of PTEN promotes melanoma formation, albeit with longer latency and reduced tumor multiplicity compared with homozygous PTEN deletion (Bok et al.  ; Dankort et al.  ). There is anecdotal evidence for loss of heterozygosity resulting in deletion of the wildtype PTEN allele in melanomas from these GEMMs; however, this has not been formally reported. Thus, while it is probable that the loss of a single PTEN allele is sufficient to facilitate melanomagenesis, this has not been unequivocally determined.
The stages of melanomagenesis that are facilitated by inactivation of PTEN remain a critical outstanding question in the field. In human melanoma, PTEN loss is frequently observed during later stages of tumor progression. Yu et al. examined PTEN alterations in a cohort of melanoma patients and found that PTEN loss‐of‐function, including mutations and deletions, was more common in metastatic melanomas (62%–65%) compared with primary tumors (30%–50%) (Yu et al.  ). A comprehensive genomic profiling study of melanomas by Griewank et al. identified PTEN alterations as recurrent genetic events particularly in advanced melanomas (Griewank and Schilling  ). The results of these studies suggest that PTEN inactivation may be dispensable for the formation of primary human melanoma but may promote metastasis.
The results from GEMMs where PTEN is deleted concomitantly with the activation of the initiating oncogene demonstrated that PTEN deficiency during melanocyte transformation contributes to the initial burst of melanocyte expansion (Dankort et al.  ). Moreover, PTEN deletion during melanocyte transformation stochastically facilitates the prevention of or escape from senescence (Dankort et al.  ), a cellular response induced by activation of the initiating oncogene (Dhomen et al.  ; Michaloglou et al.  ) that prevents the progression of benign nevi to malignant melanoma. However, in human melanoma, these data are lacking, and while clinical studies have correlated PTEN loss or inactivation with advanced‐stage disease, direct evidence linking PTEN status to senescence escape in patient samples is incomplete. Indeed, PTEN inactivation is not typically observed in nevi (Colebatch et al.  ; Singh et al.  ; Tsao et al.  ), which is likely explained by PTEN loss occurring at later stages or by the immediate progression to melanoma when PTEN loss occurs in nevus cells. A BRAFV600E‐driven GEMM in which short hairpin RNA (shRNA) targeting PTEN was delivered to nevi‐bearing skin suggested that PTEN silencing in senescent nevi enables melanoma formation (Vredeveld et al.  ). While this model suggests a role for PTEN loss at the nevus‐to‐melanoma transition, technical limitations (i.e., sub‐lethal irradiation to prevent clearing of virus‐infected cells by the immune system, potential insertional mutagenesis by viral integration in the genome, and lack of knowledge as to whether PTEN was silenced in senescent or proliferating cells) may require the confirmation of these results with more sophisticated mouse models.
The discrepancy between human melanoma and mouse models regarding the timing of PTEN loss may be attributed to several factors. Firstly, human melanoma progression is influenced by various genetic and environmental factors, leading to heterogeneous tumor phenotypes and temporal patterns of genetic alterations. In contrast, GEMMs allow for controlled manipulation of specific genetic events, enabling the study of early‐stage melanomagenesis in a controlled setting. Further, while PTEN loss is more commonly observed in advanced‐stage melanomas, it is important to note that genetic heterogeneity and clonal evolution contribute to the temporal and spatial patterns of PTEN alterations within individual tumors, and the interplay between PTEN loss and other genetic events may modulate the timing and consequences of PTEN deficiency in this disease.

4.

## 
PTEN in Melanoma Metastasis
Alterations of PTEN are frequent in metastatic melanoma. One study of PTEN mutations in primary melanoma versus metastatic melanoma biopsies found that primary melanoma samples had a frequency of 7.3% versus 15.2% in metastatic samples (Aguissa‐Toure and Li  ). Deep deletions of PTEN are present in 8% of metastatic melanoma, while shallow deletions are detected in 56% of cases. Notably, PTEN mutations often co‐occur with PTEN shallow deletions, suggesting loss‐of‐heterozygosity (LOH) of PTEN in metastatic melanoma (Cerami et al.  ). Bezrookove et al. showed that loss of PTEN–defined broadly to include homozygous and heterozygous deletions, copy number alterations, etc.–increased from 17.7% in primary melanomas to 29.4% in lymph node metastases and 52.9% in distant metastases (Bezrookove et al.  ). These studies showed a strong correlation between loss of PTEN and melanoma metastasis in patients. Recent studies in mice have also indicated a functional role for PTEN inactivation in metastatic melanoma. As discussed earlier, Dankort et al. showed that homozygous loss of PTEN on a BRAFV600E‐mutant background not only accelerated melanoma formation but also promoted lymph node metastasis and micro‐metastasis in the lung (Dankort et al.  ). BRAFV600E‐mutant mice with heterozygous loss of PTEN developed primary melanomas with complete penetrance, albeit more slowly than with homozygous PTEN loss, but this model failed to develop widespread metastasis to lymph nodes or distal organs (Bok et al.  ; Dankort et al.  ). This indicates that complete loss of PTEN is required to stimulate the metastatic potency of melanoma cells. Yu et al. proposed that PTEN functions as a haploinsufficient metastasis repressor in human and mouse melanoma cells using tail vein injection transplant models (Yu et al.  ). However, whether PTEN suppresses melanoma metastasis in a dose‐dependent manner needs to be further analyzed in mice that develop metastasis spontaneously.
Brain metastasis is a common and devastating complication of advanced melanoma, and patients with BRAF‐mutant tumors are particularly prone to developing brain metastases. PTEN loss exacerbates this propensity: loss of PTEN protein expression correlates significantly with decreased overall survival and time to melanoma brain metastasis in stage IIIB/C BRAF‐mutant melanoma patients (Bucheit et al.  ; Giles et al.  ; Kircher et al.  ). Interestingly, a BrafV600E; Cdkn2aFL/FL; PtenFL/FL mouse model rarely developed lung metastasis and exhibited no brain metastasis, possibly because the rapid growth of the primary tumor required euthanasia before overt metastatic disease could develop (Cho et al.  ). Notably, however, activated AKT1 cooperated with PTEN loss, driving lung and brain metastasis in over 70% of the mice (Cho et al.  ). This suggests that strong activation of the AKT pathway downstream of inactivated PTEN is required for efficient metastatic spread of melanoma cells and could indicate additional, AKT pathway‐independent functions of PTEN in suppressing melanoma metastasis. Zhang et al. showed that both human and mouse PTEN positive melanoma cells lost PTEN expression after dissemination to the brain but not to other organs. This effect was mediated by exosomes that are released by astrocytes and that contain PTEN‐targeting miRNAs (Zhang et al.  ). Moreover, PTEN inactivation facilitated perivascular brain colonization and invasion of melanoma, partially due to hyperactivation of TGFβ‐AKT signaling (Wang et al.  ). In 2009, Davies et al. performed reverse phase protein arrays on clinical specimens and demonstrated that BRAF‐mutant melanoma brain metastases had higher levels of active AKT and decreased levels of PTEN compared with melanoma metastases in liver and lung (Davies et al. ).
While observations from melanoma patients and mouse models strongly suggest a metastasis suppressor function for PTEN, its exact role remains to be elucidated. This will require sophisticated genetically engineered mouse models that overcome some of the shortcomings of current models. While the widely used BRAFV600E; PTENFL/FL; Tyr::CreERT2 model confirmed the potent tumor suppressor role of PTEN in melanoma, its allele design limits the utility to interrogate PTEN functions specifically in metastasis. First, the melanocyte‐specific Tamoxifen‐inducible Cre allele (Tyr::CreERT2) is used to initiate melanomagenesis by recombining and activating the BRAFV600E allele. However, this results in concomitant deletion of PTEN, leading to cooperation of BRAFV600E activation and PTEN inactivation during melanoma initiation and thus failing to recapitulate the staggered, consecutive genetic events observed during human melanoma progression. Second, the Tyr::CreERT2 allele is sporadically activated in the absence of Tamoxifen administration, and in the context of BRAFV600E activation and homozygous PTEN loss, this “leakiness” promotes undesired tumor formation. Because of the rapid growth of primary melanomas in the BRAFV600E; PTENFL/FL; Tyr::CreERT2 model, one approach to study metastasis would be to induce a single, localized tumor, then surgically remove the primary tumor to allow for more time for the development of overt macro‐metastases. However, the leakiness of the model and the consequential development of undesired primary tumors render this approach not feasible. Thus, refined alleles are needed to develop improved mouse models to further explore the precise role of PTEN in melanoma metastasis.

5.

## 
PTEN Functions in Melanoma Suppression
PTEN inactivation in melanoma typically occurs through epigenetic or genomic abnormalities that result in abrogated PTEN expression. In contrast, cancer‐associated mutations that abolish specific PTEN functions, such as cytoplasmic‐nuclear shuttling (Trotman et al.  ) or lipid phosphatase activity (Papa et al.  ), are rare in melanoma. These observations from human melanoma genetics suggest that the loss of the PTEN protein, and thus abolishing all of its functions, elicits the strongest pro‐tumorigenic effect in melanoma. Indeed, activating mutations or amplifications of genes encoding PI3K components or the AKT family are rarely found in melanoma (Table  ). Thus, the loss of PTEN protein may promote melanoma progression because of the concerted dysregulation of the PI3K/AKT pathway and other PTEN‐regulated pathways and processes. However, if and how the different functions of PTEN contribute to the various aspects of PTEN‐mediated melanoma suppression is still largely unknown.
In a recent study aimed at elucidating the relative contributions of PTEN functions to melanoma suppression, we showed that the PTEN lipid phosphatase activity predominantly suppresses melanoma proliferation and migration/invasion in vitro, with minimal contributions from the protein phosphatase activity and no effect of the scaffold function (Xu et al.  ). In both xenograft tumor growth and melanoma initiation in genetically engineered mice, the lipid phosphatase activity appeared to predominantly underlie PTEN's melanoma suppressor function (Xu et al.  ). Moreover, we demonstrated that the AKT/mTORC1 pathway primarily mediates the oncogenic effects of PTEN loss in these contexts (Xu et al.  ). While these studies validated the importance of the PTEN lipid phosphatase function and the AKT/mTORC1 pathway, further work is needed to completely characterize the mechanisms of PTEN‐mediated tumor suppression in melanoma. For instance, our approach did not evaluate the role of PTEN functions in melanoma metastasis. PTEN protein phosphatase activity was discovered as a suppressor of migration in fibroblasts and glioblastoma cells (Tamura et al.  , ). While it remains possible that the role of the PTEN protein phosphatase activity is context‐ or cell type‐dependent, it is plausible that the loss of the protein phosphatase function contributes to melanoma metastasis. Indeed, a recent study proposed that the PTEN protein phosphatase function suppresses melanoma metastasis in immunocompromised transplant models through inhibition of Entpd5/IGF1R and ATF6 pathways (Yu et al.  ). We envision that next‐generation mouse models in which specific functions of PTEN are disabled and where tight temporal activation of such mutants is ensured will aid in further elucidating the relative contributions of the various PTEN functions to melanoma suppression.

6.

## Downstream Pathways Activated by PTEN Loss in Melanoma
While PTEN loss‐of‐function alterations are well‐established causal events in melanoma progression, the relative contribution of downstream pathways suppressed by PTEN's lipid and protein phosphatase activities remains incompletely understood. Interestingly, while there is a high prevalence of inactivating alterations in PTEN, activating mutations in AKT or the catalytic subunit of PI3K, PIK3CA, occur in < 5% of all melanomas (Table  ). In addition, AKT pharmacological inhibitors have been ineffective as monotherapies in melanoma patients (Parkman et al.  ). Thus, until recently, there was insufficient information supporting the notion that PTEN loss promotes melanoma by activating AKT signaling. Our recent work demonstrated that activated AKT alone was sufficient to counteract several of the suppressive effects of PTEN (Xu et al.  ), emphasizing the centrality of the AKT pathway in melanoma progression. Phosphoproteomics confirmed that the lipid phosphatase activity of PTEN led to direct inhibition of AKT and mTOR and identified FRA‐1, an AP‐1 transcription factor, as a downstream mediator of the effects of PTEN inactivation, specifically in the context of melanoma metastasis (Xu et al.  ). We further showed that while pharmacological inhibition of AKT had minimal effects on melanoma growth, genetic silencing of AKT resulted in marked melanoma cell apoptosis due to diminished downstream mTORC1/2 signaling (Parkman et al.  ). This is likely due to inhibition of negative feedback signaling that occurs when the pathway is inhibited upstream. In the case of genetic silencing, reactivation of the pathway due to relief of negative feedback is eliminated, ceasing downstream signaling.
Additional research illustrates PTEN's negative regulation of mTOR through its effects on AKT and GSK3β, thereby establishing mTOR as a significant downstream target in the context of PTEN signaling. The BrafV600E; PtenFL/FL melanoma mouse model developed by McMahon and Bosenberg displays increased activity of the DNA methyltransferase DNMT3B, which increases mTORC2 activation and melanoma formation (Micevic et al.  ). Despite the dependence on mTOR for full activation of the PI3K/AKT pathway secondary to PTEN loss, additional research has demonstrated that both mTORC1/2 complexes are necessary for melanomagenesis: mTORC1 activation was insufficient to overcome BRAF oncogene‐induced cellular senescence, but activation of both mTORC1/2 complexes led to rapid melanoma formation in mice (Damsky et al.  ). AKT, via GSK3β, can enhance the activity of β‐catenin, and PTEN loss may promote melanomagenesis by activating an AKT/β‐catenin axis. Indeed, a BrafV600E; PtenFL/FL melanoma mouse model harboring a conditional activated β‐catenin allele displayed increased metastatic burden without any effects on primary tumor growth (Damsky et al.  ). AKT is a well‐defined target of mTORC2; however, other mTORC2 targets, including the serum and glucocorticoid kinases, SGK1‐3, warrant future investigation. AKT and SGK share similar substrate specificities and can activate overlapping downstream targets, which allows them to functionally compensate for each other. Interestingly, in addition to mTORC2, the phosphoinositide‐dependent kinase 1, PDK1, phosphorylates both AKT and SGK, and inactivation of PDK1 delays melanomagenesis in BrafV600E; PtenFL/FL mice (Scortegagna et al.  ). SGK3 was identified as an important mediator of PDK1, regulating melanoma cell growth (Scortegagna et al.  ). Thus, parallel effector pathways are activated by, and mediate the effects of, PTEN loss.
There is also substantial evidence that loss of PTEN, in its role in later stages of melanoma, exhibits non‐overlapping functions with AKT. For instance, we added critical insight into the extent of the cooperation of the MAPK and PI3K/AKT pathways, showing that silencing of PTEN in BrafV600E; Cdkn2aFL/FL melanomas cooperates with activation of AKT1, one of the three paralogs of the AKT protein, resulting in decreased tumor latency and widespread development of lung and brain metastases compared with BrafV600E; Cdkn2aFL/FL; PtenFL/FL mice (Cho et al.  ). This study demonstrated that loss of PTEN and activation of AKT1 cooperate to further promote metastasis. Further research demonstrated that AKT paralogs (AKT1, 2, and 3) have distinct functions in promoting melanoma brain metastasis in the context of BrafV600E; Cdkn2aFL/FL; PtenFL/FL melanomas and, interestingly, mutational activation of AKT1 specifically led to the highest incidence of brain metastasis and decreased overall survival through activation of focal adhesion kinase (FAK) (Kircher et al.  ). Taken together, these studies demonstrated a critical role of a signaling pathway involving AKT and the mTORC1/2 complexes in PTEN‐deficient melanoma. However, the cooperation of PTEN loss with AKT1 activation suggests that either a gradual increase in AKT signaling or the induction of cooperating pathways activated by the loss of PTEN lipid or protein phosphatase activity promotes melanoma progression and metastasis.
PTEN suppresses cell migration and invasion through FAK and Src, which are key regulators of cytoskeletal dynamics and cell motility (Tamura et al.  ). Loss of PTEN protein phosphatase activity promotes FAK and Src hyperphosphorylation, facilitating tumor cell dissemination and metastasis. Interestingly, FAK and PTEN intersect at multiple points within signaling networks. PTEN has been shown to dephosphorylate FAK at Tyr397, a critical autophosphorylation site required for FAK activation and Src binding, thereby suppressing FAK activity (Alfieri et al.  ). Conversely, active FAK has been shown to phosphorylate PTEN on Tyr336, and this phosphorylation event increases PTEN phosphatase activity, membrane association, and protein stability (Tzenaki et al.  ). It is possible that this mechanism is part of a feedback loop to limit sustained FAK activity. Work by Vivanco et al. identified PTEN as a modulator of c‐Jun N‐terminal kinase (JNK), which regulates cytoskeletal dynamics and cell migration through its effects on actin polymerization and focal adhesion turnover (Vivanco et al.  ). PTEN's protein phosphatase activity has also been implicated in the regulation of cell cycle progression. PTEN dephosphorylates cyclin‐dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitors such as p27 and p21, promoting their stability and inhibitory function (Freeman et al.  ). Loss of PTEN's protein phosphatase activity leads to dysregulated CDK activity and aberrant cell cycle progression, contributing to tumorigenesis and cancer progression (Leslie and Downes  ).
Finally, the loss of PTEN, and thus the activation of its downstream effectors, is thought to cooperate with other genetic events in melanomagenesis. Several studies have demonstrated such cooperation by introducing additional genetic hits in the BrafV600E; PtenFlox mouse models. These models include alterations in β‐catenin (Damsky et al.  ), Atg7 (Xie et al.  ), Mitf (Bonet et al.  ), Fes (Olvedy et al.  ), Ptpn11 (Hill et al.  ), Rac1 (Lionarons et al.  ; Swaminathan et al.  ), Ambra1 (Di Leo et al.  ), Loxl3 (Vazquez‐Naharro et al.  ), Mlkl (Martens et al.  ), Phgdh (Jasani et al.  ), and miR‐29 (Vera et al.  ) (see Table  ). Taken together, PTEN suppresses melanoma through pleiotropic effects attributed to its various functions and diverse downstream mediators, and further work is needed to functionally associate the effects of PTEN loss to the different stages of melanomagenesis.
 
7.

## 
PTEN in Melanoma Drug Resistance and Therapy
Inhibition of the MAPK pathway using a combination of BRAF inhibitor plus MEK inhibitor is considered the standard‐of‐care targeted therapy for BRAF‐mutant cutaneous melanoma. Numerous alterations that render BRAF‐mutant melanoma resistant to this treatment have been observed in melanoma patients, and resistance has been induced experimentally. Chief among them is the hyperactivation of the PI3K/AKT pathway, which emerges through a variety of molecular mechanisms and which has been extensively reviewed elsewhere (Czarnecka et al.  ; Rossi et al.  ). In melanomas harboring wildtype PTEN, one mechanism of acquired resistance to MAPK pathway inhibition is the inactivation of PTEN. Acquired BRAF inhibitor resistance through inactivation of PTEN has been observed in human melanoma cell lines (Paraiso et al.  ), patient‐derived xenografts (Krepler et al.  ), and patient tumors, where it is negatively correlated with the duration of progression‐free survival (Nathanson et al.  ; Shi et al.  ). PTEN inactivation has also been observed as a mechanism of intrinsic resistance to BRAF inhibition in melanoma patients (Catalanotti et al.  ) and was reported to confer resistance to MEK inhibition (Byron et al.  ). Copy number losses and mutations leading to frameshifts or loss of critical amino acids in the phosphatase loop have been observed as mechanisms of PTEN inactivation in response to MAPK pathway inhibition (Shi et al.  ), although other mechanisms such as epigenetic silencing may also occur. Indeed, increased expression of an antisense RNA of the PTEN pseudogene (PTENP1‐AS) has been reported to provoke epigenetic alterations at the PTEN promoter to reduce transcription (Johnsson et al.  ; Lister et al.  ), which then promotes the resistance of melanoma to BRAF inhibitor treatment in patients (Vidarsdottir et al.  ). PTEN deficiency is associated with reduced induction of apoptosis upon treatment with the BRAF inhibitor Vemurafenib due to limited induction of BIM expression (Paraiso et al.  ), thereby promoting intrinsic resistance to BRAF inhibition.
Immune checkpoint blockade has transformed the clinical management of metastatic melanoma and, interestingly, PTEN has been implicated in modulating the response to immunotherapy. Loss of PTEN expression is associated with reduced immune cell infiltration in melanomas (Cabrita et al.  ; Lim et al.  ). This, in turn, appears to promote resistance to immune checkpoint blockade (Lim et al.  ) and has also been observed in a patient who developed immune therapy‐resistant metastases (Trujillo et al.  ). Mechanistically, loss of PTEN confers resistance to immunotherapy by enabling PI3Kβ‐mediated expression of immunosuppressive cytokines (Peng et al.  ), although additional mechanisms related to parallel downstream pathways or lipid phosphatase‐independent PTEN functions have not yet been investigated. Thus, PTEN inactivation appears to play a prominent role in intrinsic and acquired resistance to both MAPK pathway‐targeted therapies and immune checkpoint blockade.
PTEN loss or inactivation has been associated with immune evasion and resistance to immunotherapy in certain cancers, possibly by promoting an immune‐excluded tumor microenvironment. In a case of uterine leiomyosarcoma with initial sensitivity to anti‐PD‐1 therapy, the treatment‐resistant lesion harbored biallelic PTEN loss and exhibited reduced expression of neoantigens recognized by autologous T cells, as well as a marked decrease in PD‐1+ T cell infiltration (George et al.  ). Similarly, in a melanoma patient who developed resistance to combined anti‐CTLA‐4 and anti‐PD‐1 therapy, acquired PTEN loss was associated with the loss of T cell infiltration in the resistant tumor, highlighting PTEN inactivation as a potential driver of immune evasion through T cell exclusion (Trujillo et al.  ). Notably, this immune exclusion phenotype may be due to FAK activation, further supporting a mechanistic link between PTEN and FAK signaling that could impact T cell exclusion (Stanley  ). Additionally, strategies to enhance antitumor immune responses, such as combination therapies with immune checkpoint inhibitors or adoptive T cell therapy, hold promise for treating PTEN‐deficient tumors (Peng et al.  ; Vidotto et al.  ).
Reactivating PTEN expression represents a compelling strategy to restore the function of this pivotal tumor suppressor in PTEN‐deficient or mutated cancers. Recent advances have highlighted innovative therapeutic approaches, including gene editing, mRNA nanoparticle delivery, and metabolic modulators, each offering promising avenues for restoring PTEN activity. Gene therapy offers a promising strategy for restoring PTEN function in cancer cells. Viral vectors, such as adenovirus or adeno‐associated virus (AAV), can be engineered to deliver functional PTEN genes to tumor cells, thereby restoring PTEN expression and activity. Preclinical studies utilizing PTEN gene therapy have demonstrated tumor regression and prolonged survival in various cancer models (Dillon and Miller  ; Tanaka et al.  ). Moreover, advances in genome editing technologies, such as CRISPR/Cas9, provide opportunities for precise modulation of PTEN expression and function in cancer cells (Moses et al.  ). For instance, CRISPR/Cas9‐based gene editing has been utilized to reintroduce PTEN expression in triple‐negative breast cancer and melanoma cells lacking functional PTEN (Moses et al.  ). Specifically, a deactivated Cas9 (dCas9) protein fused with a transcriptional activator was employed to enhance the expression of silenced PTEN genes without altering the underlying DNA sequence, providing a highly targeted and precise method for reactivating PTEN's tumor‐suppressive function (Moses et al.  ).
Emerging research into advanced drug delivery platforms, such as Peptide‐Engineered Lipid Nanoparticles (PEP LNPs) and spherical zein nanoparticles, is further refining the bioavailability and targeting specificity of PTEN‐reactivating therapies (El Sharkawi et al.  ; Islam et al.  ; Kim et al.  ; Sam Lee et al.  ). These systems aim to maximize therapeutic efficacy while minimizing off‐target effects. mRNA nanoparticle‐based approaches have shown great promise, with in vitro studies demonstrating restored PTEN expression in PTEN‐mutated melanoma and PTEN‐null prostate cancer cells (Islam et al.  ; Lin et al.  ; Sam Lee et al.  ). Simultaneously delivering a PTEN plasmid and BRD4‐targeted Proteolysis‐Targeting Chimera was also demonstrated to successfully target the historically undruggable c‐Myc in BRAF inhibitor resistant melanoma by upregulating PTEN expression levels and degradation of BRD4 protein to ultimately downregulate c‐Myc levels (Saraswat et al.  ). Moreover, combining PTEN mRNA nanoparticles with anti‐PD‐1 immune checkpoint inhibitors has yielded potent antitumor effects in mouse models of PTEN‐deficient melanoma, underscoring the potential of synergistic therapies upon reactivation of PTEN (Lin et al.  ). Another innovative yet early‐stage approach involves leveraging active human serum albumin to facilitate PTEN protein delivery into tumor cells, presenting an additional intriguing strategy for reintroducing functional PTEN (Meng et al.  ).
PTEN activity is tightly regulated by various interacting proteins and post‐translational modifications. Targeting these regulatory proteins represents another avenue for PTEN‐based therapy. For instance, inhibitors of the oncoprotein WWP1, which competes with PTEN for binding to the plasma membrane, have been developed to enhance PTEN activity and suppress tumor growth. Functionally, this acts to “turn on” the PTEN tumor suppressor protein in cancer cells (Lee et al.  ). Additionally, strategies to inhibit kinases involved in PTEN phosphorylation, such as CK2 and GSK3β, have also shown efficacy in preclinical models (Buontempo et al.  ; Gao et al.  ; Silva et al.  ).
Targeting PTEN represents a promising, albeit challenging, therapeutic strategy for cancer treatment. Advances in understanding PTEN biology and the development of novel PTEN‐targeted agents have provided opportunities for innovative therapeutic approaches. However, historical obstacles such as drug resistance and tumor heterogeneity remain significant hurdles in the clinical translation of PTEN‐based therapies. Further research efforts aimed at elucidating the molecular mechanisms underlying PTEN dysregulation and identifying effective combination strategies are warranted to maximize the therapeutic potential of PTEN‐targeted therapies in cancer treatment.

8.

## The Role of PTEN in Rare Melanomas
While PTEN loss‐of‐function has been established as a key driver event in cutaneous melanoma, the role of PTEN in rarer melanoma subtypes is far less well understood. These rare melanoma subtypes include uveal, acral, and mucosal melanoma and account for 5%–10% of all melanoma cases. They are often associated with a poorer prognosis compared with cutaneous melanoma (CM) (Chacon et al.  ). Accordingly, the genetic landscapes of rare melanomas are different from cutaneous melanoma. Rare melanomas usually exhibit significantly lower somatic mutation burden, potentially due to a lack of UV exposure (Jager et al.  ). Accordingly, therapies that have proven effective in CM such as immunotherapy usually have suboptimal therapeutic effects in rare melanomas. Here we summarize the alterations of PTEN (see also Table  ) and the consequent activation of downstream signaling pathways in rare melanomas and encourage studies into PTEN functions for the development of novel rationally designed therapies for rare melanomas.
 Uveal melanoma (UM) is the most common primary intraocular malignancy in adults. Posterior uveal melanoma is the most common subtype of UM and has a high propensity for liver metastasis even upon successful treatment of the primary tumor. UM is typically initiated by mutations in GNAQ or GNA11, which are followed by a so‐called BSE event (BAP1 loss, SF3B1 mutation, or EIF1AX mutation) that promotes UM progression and metastasis (Jager et al.  ). Several recurrent genomic alterations are common in UM, including loss of chromosome 3 and gain of chromosome arms 6p and 8q (Seedor et al.  ). Notably, loss of chromosome 10, where PTEN is located, occurs in 27% of cases based on the karyotypic analysis of 244 UM samples (Newell et al.  ). Abdel‐Rahman et al. showed that PTEN protein levels are decreased in 62% of UM specimens based on immunohistochemical (IHC) staining of 75 tumors, and loss of PTEN expression was associated with shortened disease‐free survival (Abdel‐Rahman et al.  ). Moreover, loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of PTEN is evident in 76% of UM based on genotyping analysis of 38 tumors (Hoglund et al.  ). Although the relatively high frequency of PTEN loss suggests a tumor suppressive function for PTEN in UM, the exact roles of PTEN in the pathogenesis of UM are largely unknown. So far, there are only a few studies providing direct evidence for PTEN inactivation contributing to UM initiation and progression. However, recent studies highlighted that mTOR is critical for UM development and could act as a potential therapeutic target (Ding et al.  ; Han et al.  ; Liu et al.  ). Activation of the mTOR pathway is reported to enhance UM tumorigenesis via different mechanisms, including sustaining glucose metabolism (Han et al.  ) and inhibiting autophagy (Liu et al.  ), but whether mTOR activation is due to PTEN inactivation or other genetic events remains to be determined. PTEN alterations in metastatic UM are a complex and relatively infrequent event. In a pivotal study, Shain et al. found PTEN mutations or deletions exclusively in 4 out of 35 (11.4%) UM liver metastases, absent in the corresponding primary tumors, implicating PTEN loss as a tertiary driver acquired during metastasis (Shain et al.  ). In contrast, Hoefsmit et al. ( ) reported no PTEN mutations or protein loss in 16 UM liver metastases, while 11 out of 15 (73.3%) cutaneous melanoma metastases harbored PTEN mutations or deletions, highlighting a key molecular distinction.
Acral melanoma (AM) arises on the glabrous skin including palms, soles, and in the nail beds. Although acral melanoma comprises only 2%–3% of all melanomas, it is the most common subtype of melanoma in Asian, African, and Hispanic populations (Chen et al.  ). Compared to CM, AM has a lower frequency of BRAF, NRAS, and NF1 mutations (Chen et al.  ). However, TERT alterations, including translocation and copy number gains, were found in 35%–46% of AM cases (Carvalho et al.  ; Liang et al.  ). PTEN mutation or deletion was detected in 27% of AM cases from the TCGA dataset (Liang et al.  ). Whole genome sequencing of 87 AM specimens detected PTEN mutation or deletion in 10.3% of samples, and PTEN aberrations in primary tumors were associated with shortened survival (Newell et al.  ). In another study integrating the sequencing data of 154 AM cases, PTEN alterations were detected in 13.6% of samples (Wang et al.  ). The PI3K pathway is activated in 83% of AM cases (Abdel‐Rahman et al.  ). PI3K/AKT hyperactivity is correlated with faster relapse, and mTOR mutation is correlated with shortened overall survival (Kong et al.  ; Nojima et al.  ). However, it remains to be determined whether and how loss of PTEN function is involved in AM development, whether PTEN loss robustly activates AKT/mTOR signaling in AM, and whether AKT/mTOR signaling promotes AM progression through the same molecular mechanisms as in CM.
Mucosal melanoma (MM) originates from melanocytes within mucosal tissues lining the respiratory, gastrointestinal, and urogenital tracts. Although MM only comprises 1% of all melanoma cases, it has a significantly worse prognosis compared to CM, and the 5‐year survival rate is only 10%–20% (Ma et al.  ). Similar to AM, MM also harbors fewer BRAF, NRAS, and NF1 mutations compared to CM (Nassar and Tan  ; Newell et al.  ). In contrast, mutations and amplification of KIT and mutations in SF3B1 are common, occurring in 36% and 12% of MM cases, respectively (Newell et al.  ). PTEN mutation or deletion is detected in fewer than 10% of MM cases and thus is less frequent than in CM (Newell et al.  ; Wang et al.  ). Notably, gain of KIT and loss of PTEN are mutually exclusive in MM, suggesting that AKT/mTOR signaling may be induced either by KIT activation or PTEN inactivation (Newell et al.  ). Indeed, hyperactivity of the AKT/mTOR pathway is detected in MM cell lines and tissues (Kong et al.  ; Monti et al.  ), and an mTOR inhibitor showed therapeutic efficacy in a canine MM model when combined with a MEK inhibitor (Wei et al.  ).
In summary, the frequency of PTEN alterations in rare melanomas is equal to or even higher than in CM, indicating that PTEN may have prominent tumor suppressive functions in these melanoma subtypes. However, many unanswered questions regarding the role of PTEN and its downstream targets remain to be addressed in rare melanomas. For instance, there is a lack of direct evidence, especially in vivo, implicating PTEN functions in rare melanomas. Therefore, combining PTEN knockout alleles with other driver mutations (e.g., GNAQ, KIT) in novel GEMMs could be an effective approach to determine the contribution of PTEN loss to the initiation and progression of rare melanomas in vivo. Moreover, the downstream targets of PTEN in rare melanomas are largely unknown. Although many downstream effector pathways were shown to be regulated by lipid and/or protein phosphatase function of PTEN in other contexts, it is not clear if such mechanisms are also involved in rare melanomas. Multi‐omics integration will aid in comprehensively profiling the landscape of PTEN‐regulated pathways and identifying novel downstream targets of PTEN in rare melanomas. Finally, although many studies reported that AKT/mTOR signaling, the major pathway downstream of PTEN, is hyperactivated in rare melanomas, the therapeutic effect of targeting the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway in these contexts has not been systematically investigated. It is important to determine if mTOR inhibitors can synergize with targeted therapy and/or immunotherapy in rare melanomas in vivo.

9.

## Conclusions
PTEN is a potent tumor suppressor, and the past two decades have revealed several aspects of PTEN's role in the suppression of melanoma development. While the key role of PTEN in melanoma suppression appears to be the inhibition of PI3K/AKT signaling, emerging evidence suggests a multi‐faceted role in melanomagenesis. PTEN's different functions may contribute to melanoma suppression to varying extents, and the relative contributions may depend on the stage of melanomagenesis. For instance, the PTEN protein phosphatase function may be a more potent suppressor of melanoma metastasis than initiation and primary tumor growth. Future research will uncover the precise roles of each PTEN function in the stepwise progression of metastatic melanoma, and refined genetically engineered mouse models are expected to play a critical part in these investigations. Moreover, further research is needed to fully elucidate how the pathways and targets activated upon PTEN loss‐of‐function promote melanoma development and at which stage of melanomagenesis these downstream effectors play key roles. This work will uncover novel therapeutic targets and inform the development of mono‐ and combination therapy approaches to target PTEN‐deficient melanoma. Vast progress has been made in characterizing the role of PTEN in melanoma, and we foresee further advances in the next years that will enhance our functional understanding of PTEN and offer opportunities for therapies.

## Author Contributions

Gennie L. Parkman, Xiaonan Xu: writing – original draft. Sheri L. Holmen, Florian A. Karreth: writing – review and editing. Xiaonan Xu, Sheri L. Holmen, Florian A. Karreth: funding acquisition.

## Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

## Acknowledgments
We apologize to our colleagues whose work we were unable to cite due to space limits. This work was supported by a Career Development Award from the Melanoma Research Foundation to Xiaonan Xu, by grants from the NIH (R01CA121118 to Sheri L. Holmen, and R01CA259046 and R21CA256141 to Florian A. Karreth), and by grants from the DOD CDMRP (HT9425‐23‐1‐0513 and HT9425‐24‐1‐0402 to Florian A. Karreth).

Parkman, G. L.
, Xu X., Holmen S. L., and Karreth F. A.. 2025. “The Roles of PTEN in Melanoma Suppression.” Pigment Cell & Melanoma Research
38, no. 5: e70054. 10.1111/pcmr.70054.

Funding: This work was supported by a Career Development Award from the Melanoma Research Foundation (1068914) to Xiaonan Xu, by grants from the NIH (R01CA121118 to Sheri L. Holmen, and R01CA259046 and R21CA256141 to Florian A. Karreth), and by grants from the DOD CDMRP (HT9425‐23‐1‐0513 and HT9425‐24‐1‐0402 to Florian A. Karreth).

## Contributor Information
Gennie L. Parkman, Email: gennieparkman@weber.edu.
Xiaonan Xu, Email: xiaonan.xu@moffitt.org.
Sheri L. Holmen, Email: Sheri.Holmen@hci.utah.edu.
Florian A. Karreth, Email: florian.karreth@moffitt.org.

## Data Availability Statement
The authors have nothing to report.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Data Availability Statement
The authors have nothing to report.