pmcCell RepCell Rep319nihpa101573691Cell reports2211-1247pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleNIHPA Author ManuscriptsPMC8576737PMC8576737.185767378576737NIHMS17463093461030310.1016/j.celrep.2021.109785NIHMS1746309NIHPA17463091ArticleSerum- and glucocorticoid-induced kinase drives hepatic insulin resistance by directly inhibiting AMP-activated protein kinase
ZhouBen ZhangYuyao LiSainan WuLianfeng Fejes-TothGeza Naray-Fejes-TothAniko SoukasAlexander A. 1Department of Medicine, Diabetes Unit and Center for Genomic Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA2Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA3Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA4CAS Key Laboratory of Nutrition, Metabolism and Food Safety, Shanghai Institute of Nutrition and Health, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, 200031, China5Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Westlake Institute for Advanced Study, School of Life Sciences, Westlake University, Hangzhou, 310024, China6Department of Molecular and Systems Biology, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH, 03755, USA7Lead contactAUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceptualization, B.Z. and A.A.S.; Methodology, B.Z., L.W. Y.Z., S.L., and A.A.S.; Formal Analysis, B.Z. and A.A.S.; Investigation, B.Z., L.W., and A.A.S.; Resources, G.F.-T. and A.N.-F.-T.; Writing – Original Draft, B.Z. and A.A.S.; Writing – Review & Editing, B.Z. and A.A.S.; Visualization, B.Z. and A.A.S.; Supervision, A.A.S.; Funding Acquisition, A.A.S.
*Correspondence: benzhou@sibs.ac.cn (B.Z.), asoukas@mgh.harvard.edu (A.A.S.)0510202137139344410978510978518102021091120210911202111062024https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## SUMMARY
A hallmark of type 2 diabetes (T2D) is hepatic resistance to insulin’s glucose-lowering effects. The serum- and glucocorticoid-regulated family of protein kinases (SGK) is activated downstream of mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 2 (mTORC2) in response to insulin in parallel to AKT. Surprisingly, despite an identical substrate recognition motif to AKT, which drives insulin sensitivity, pathological accumulation of SGK1 drives insulin resistance. Liver-specific Sgk1-knockout (Sgk1Lko) mice display improved glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity and are protected from hepatic steatosis when fed a high-fat diet. Sgk1 promotes insulin resistance by inactivating AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) via phosphorylation on inhibitory site AMPKαSer485/491. We demonstrate that SGK1 is dominant among SGK family kinases in regulation of insulin sensitivity, as Sgk1, Sgk2, and Sgk3 triple-knockout mice have similar increases in hepatic insulin sensitivity. In aggregate, these data suggest that targeting hepatic SGK1 may have therapeutic potential in T2D.

## In brief
The insulin-activated serine/threonine kinase serum- and glucocorticoid-induced kinase 1 (SGK1) phosphorylates an identical substrate recognition motif to Akt. Here, Zhou et al. show that, in contrast to Akt, HFD-induced SGK1 overactivation promotes insulin resistance in liver by phosphorylating and inhibiting the activity of AMP-activated protein kinase.

## Graphical Abstract

 

pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptyespmc-prop-open-manuscriptyespmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND

## INTRODUCTION
A central feature of type 2 diabetes (T2D) is resistance to the antihyperglycemic properties of insulin ( ). This manifests as a reduction in phosphorylation of the insulin receptor substrates (IRS) and Akt in hepatocytes, resulting in less effective suppression of hepatic glucose output by insulin ( ). Emerging data support several hypotheses as to the mechanism of insulin resistance in T2D. One hypothesis is that phospholipases prompt accumulation of diacylglycerol, activating atypical protein kinase C (PKC) to phosphorylate and desensitize the insulin receptor ( ). A second hypothesis is that inflammation associated with accumulation of cellular lipids activates insulin resistance through pathways such as endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), and inhibitor of kappa B kinase-nuclear factor kappa B (IKK-NFκB) signaling ( ). Third, but by no means last, is the idea that nutrient (e.g., amino acids, glucose, fatty acids) and energy (ATP) excess activates mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) and the lipogenic transcription factors carbohydrate response element binding protein (ChREBP) and sterol response element binding protein 1c (SREBP-1c), concomitantly suppressing the catabolism-promoting energy sensor AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) ( ). The net consequence of these effects is negative feedback on proximal insulin signaling and further accumulation of metabolites that inhibit insulin signaling, such as triglycerides (TGs) and free fatty acids.
These mechanisms are indirect, mediated by accumulation of lipids or free or esterified fatty acids or by parallel activation of stress and inflammatory pathways. Alternatively, early insulin resistance may be promoted directly by events proximal to and directly affected by insulin signaling, for example, negative feedback on insulin signaling by mTORC1 mediated by phosphorylation of Grb10 by mTORC1 and of IRS1Ser302 by the mTORC1 effector S6 kinase (S6K) ( ; ; ). However, the importance of IRS1Ser302 phosphorylation by S6K has been called into question on the basis of normal glucose homeostasis in IRS1Ser302Ala-knockin mice ( ). Thus, additional IRS1 phosphorylation events or other activities of mTORC1 may be required for negative feedback on insulin signaling.
The heteromultimeric protein kinase mTORC2, which contains mTOR but is structurally and mechanistically distinct from mTORC1, is a critical component of insulin signaling in liver ( ; ; ). Insulin signaling activates mTORC2 through phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) ( ), and mTORC2 in turn phosphorylates and activates protein kinase A, protein kinase G, PKC (AGC) family kinases such as AKT ( ), and serum- and glucocorticoid-regulated kinase (SGK) ( ).
Mammalian genomes harbor three genes encoding SGK family members: Sgk1, Sgk2, and Sgk3 ( ). All mammalian SGK isoforms possess conserved activation loop and C-terminal hydrophobic motif sites that are phosphorylated by PDK1 and mTORC2, respectively, upon stimulation of insulin and PI3K signaling ( ; ). In vitro, SGK phosphorylates an identical substrate recognition motif to Akt (Arg-X-Arg-X-X-Ser/Thr, where X represents any amino acid and Ser/Thr the phosphorylated residue), including bona fide Akt targets in gain-of-function experiments such as FoxO ( ; ). However, emerging data suggest roles for SGK family kinases distinct from Akt.
AMPK is a heterotrimeric (consisting of catalytic α and regulatory β and γ subunits), a central regulator of anabolic and catabolic processes in response to cellular energy levels. Under low-energy states, such as fasting, activation of AMPK suppresses lipid and glycogen synthesis and enhances whole-body utilization of fat stores. Conversely, under energy-replete conditions, AMPK activity is reduced, stimulating anabolic and reducing catabolic processes ( ). These conclusions are supported by gain- and loss-of-function models in mice in vivo. Constitutive pharmacologic or genetic activation of hepatic AMPK leads to leanness, increases in long-chain fatty acid oxidation, increased ketogenesis, relative hypoglycemia, and improvement in insulin sensitivity ( ; ; ; ). Liver-specific AMPK activation reduces liver steatosis and decreases expression of inflammatory genes in the context of diet-induced obesity ( ; ). Conversely, liver-specific AMPKα2-knockout mice are hyperglycemic, hyperinsulinemic, and hypertriglyceridemic and have low fasting ketone levels, indicative of insulin resistance and defects in hepatic fatty acid oxidation and ketogenesis ( ). However, contrasting data in liver-specific AMPKα1α2-knockout mice, which demonstrate normal glucose homeostasis and insulin sensitivity, indicate that the regulation of energy homeostasis by AMPK is complex and context dependent ( ; ).
AMPK activity is regulated by phosphorylation at Thr172 on its catalytic α1/α2 subunits ( ). Conversely, phosphorylation of AMPKα1Ser485 or AMPKα2Ser491 has been shown to negatively regulate AMPK activity directly or by prompting ubiquitination and degradation of AMPKα ( ; ). Insulin is well known to decrease AMPK activity in hepatocytes ( ), but it remains unclear how insulin inhibits AMPK. A compelling possibility is that this occurs via phosphorylation of AMPKα1Ser485 and AMPKα2Ser491 by insulin-activated AGC family kinases. Three kinases, Akt, p70-S6K, and protein kinase A, have been reported to phosphorylate AMPKα subunits on these residues ( ).
Here, we report that SGK1 promotes insulin resistance by directly phosphorylating AMPKαSer485/491, thereby inhibiting AMPK. Conversely, liver-specific knockout of Sgk1 (Sgk1Lko) protects against high-fat diet (HFD)-induced fatty liver and insulin resistance. Mice entirely lacking all three Sgk genes in liver (liver-specific Sgk1 knockout in the background of whole-body Sgk2 and Sgk3 knockouts [SgkLtko]) do not exhibit further improvement in insulin sensitivity, suggesting that Sgk1 is dominant among the Sgk family members in governance of hepatic insulin action. Insulin sensitivity in Sgk1Lko mice is mimicked by liver-specific expression of mutant, non-phosphorylatable AMPKα1Ser485Ala
in vivo. In aggregate, these data indicate that SGK function promotes insulin resistance downstream of PI3K and mTORC2 signaling, predominantly by phosphorylating AMPKαSer485/491, mitigating its favorable effects on insulin sensitivity.

## RESULTS

## Insulin resistance is associated with increased SGK1 protein levels
In order to test whether Sgk1 associates with insulin resistance, we measured kinase levels in models of insulin resistance. First, in mice made insulin resistant by HFD feeding, hepatic SGK1 protein abundance is significantly higher after overnight fasting and refeeding compared with mice fed a normal chow diet ( ). Second, basal and insulin-stimulated SGK1 activity is elevated in insulin resistance induced by 12 weeks of HFD versus chow feeding, using the phosphorylation status of SGK1 substrate NDRG1T346 in liver as a proxy for kinase activity ( ). We validated this result in a second, distinct cohort of mice fed HFD for 20 weeks, finding that although insulin-stimulated phosphorylation of NDRG1T346 by SGK1 is preserved in HFD feeding, phosphorylation of AktS473 is attenuated ( ). Third, SGK1 protein increases significantly in mouse primary hepatocytes with palmitate treatment ( ), an in vitro model of insulin resistance ( ). Sgk1 mRNA levels in mice fed HFD and palmitate-treated hepatocytes are minimally elevated ( and ), suggesting that insulin resistance governs SGK1 levels posttranscriptionally. Taken together, these data suggest that SGK1 protein levels and activity positively correlate with hepatic insulin resistance.

## Sgk1Lko mice exhibit increased hepatic insulin sensitivity
To determine whether the increases in SGK1 activity are causal in insulin resistance (versus the downstream consequence of insulin resistance), we generated mice lacking Sgk1 exclusively in the liver. Liver-specific Sgk1-knockout mice (genotype Sgk1flox/flox; Alb-CreTg/0, hereafter referred to as Sgk1Lko) are viable, fertile, and born at expected Mendelian frequency. In all subsequent experiments, littermates without the albumin Cre transgene (genotype Sgk1flox/flox) are used as controls. Knockout of hepatic Sgk1 was confirmed by western blotting in isolated primary hepatocytes ( ). When fed normal chow, Sgk1Lko mice and control mice have equivalent body mass, fat mass, lean mass, liver weight, food intake, and fasting serum glucose and insulin levels at 18 weeks of age ( – ). There are no significant differences in glucose and insulin tolerance between control and Sgk1Lko mice ( and ).
Although Sgk1Lko mice demonstrate no differences in glucose tolerance, Sgk1Lko mice maintain euglycemia following a glucose challenge with significantly lower plasma insulin levels ( ), suggesting increased insulin sensitivity. Indeed, insulin-induced phosphorylation of AKT on both threonine 308 and serine 473 and FoxO1 on threonine 24 are all higher in the liver of Sgk1Lko mice in vivo versus controls ( ). Consistent with cell-autonomous action of SGK1, insulin-stimulated AKT phosphorylation is also higher in primary hepatocytes from Sgk1Lko mice ( ). Murine AML12 hepatocytes lacking functional SGK1 by CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing also show higher insulin-stimulated phosphorylation of AktThr308/Ser473 ( ). Finally, supporting the idea that activation of SGK can promote insulin resistance, expression of constitutively active SGK1Ser422Asp decreases insulin-stimulated Akt phosphorylation in primary hepatocytes ( ).

## Sgk1Lko mice are resistant to HFD-induced insulin resistance, glucose intolerance, and fatty liver
Given that hepatic insulin sensitivity is increased in Sgk1Lko mice, we hypothesized that these mice may be resistant to HFD-induced glucose intolerance. Although fasting glucose and insulin levels are not different between control and Sgk1Lko mice fed HFD ( and ), when challenged with an intraperitoneal (i.p.) glucose load, male and female Sgk1Lko mice demonstrate significant improvement in glucose tolerance ( , , and ). Similarly, lower blood glucose levels are found in Sgk1Lko mice challenged with i.p. pyruvate ( ). Confirming heightened insulin sensitivity, following an i.p. insulin tolerance test, glucose levels are significantly lower in Sgk1Lko mice versus controls (with and without accounting for differences in baseline glucose; , , , and ). In concert with these physiological results, insulin-stimulated AKTT308/S473 phosphorylation in liver in vivo is significantly increased in HFD-fed Sgk1Lko mice versus controls ( ).
Sgk1Lko mice are protected against HFD-induced adiposity and fatty liver, exhibiting significant decreases in body fat mass, liver weight, liver TG, liver cholesterol, and serum cholesterol compared with control mice ( – and ). There are no differences in lean mass, body weight, food intake, and serum TG level ( – ). In aggregate, these data substantiate two important conclusions: (1) loss of function in SGK1 selectively promotes insulin’s antihyperglycemic effects without promoting its lipogenic effects, and (2) because the insulin-sensitizing effects of Sgk1 loss of function are evident even on a chow diet ( ), on which differences in fat mass are not evident ( , , and ), the mechanism of insulin sensitization is likely to be distinct from a simple reduction in hepatic or whole-body lipid content.
As Sgk1Lko mice have improved glucose tolerance when fed HFD, we next compared expression of hepatic gluconeogenic genes in control versus Sgk1Lko mice. Expression of gluconeogenic glucose-6-phosphatase (G6pase) mRNA is decreased in Sgk1Lko liver in the fasted state ( ), and G6pase and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (Pepck), but not PPARγ coactivator 1α (Pgc-1α) mRNAs are decreased in Sgk1Lko primary hepatocytes ( ). In concert, basal and stimulated glucose output is significantly reduced in primary hepatocytes from Sgk1Lko versus control mice ( ).
We next used indirect calorimetry in order to determine the mechanism for reduced fat mass in Sgk1Lko mice fed HFD. Increased locomotory activity, oxygen consumption, CO2 production, and heat production are evident in Sgk1Lko mice ( – ), suggesting that, in the absence of differences in food intake, increased energy expenditure accounts for decreased fat mass in Sgk1Lko mice. Hepatic mRNAs Fasn (fatty acid synthase), Scd1 (stearoyl-CoA desaturase), and Srebp1c are all reduced in Sgk1Lko mice versus controls ( ), suggesting a parallel reduction in de novo lipogenesis. Mcad mRNA level is increased in Sgk1Lko mice, suggesting increased fatty acid oxidation ( ). A commensurate decrease in mTORC1 signaling, a driver both of hepatic lipogenesis and insulin resistance ( ), is evident in the liver of Sgk1Lko mice ( ). Taken together, loss of hepatic Sgk1 protects against HFD-induced steatosis and weight gain, likely through an increase in energy expenditure and fatty acid oxidation, and parallel decreases in lipogenic gene expression and pro-lipogenic mTORC1 signaling.

## SGK1 phosphorylates AMPKαSer485/491, inhibiting its activity
Hepatic insulin sensitivity, glucose metabolism, and lipid metabolism are regulated by nutrient-sensing pathways including opposing activities of AMPK and mTORC1. mTORC1 signaling is reduced in Sgk1Lko mice ( ). One potential explanation for this decrease could be an increase in AMPK activity. Phosphorylation of AMPKαThr172 and ACC1Ser79, a canonical AMPK substrate, is increased in the liver of Sgk1Lko mice compared with control mice under fasting conditions ( ) and in Sgk1Lko primary hepatocytes under serum starvation ( and ). These data suggest an inverse relationship between the activities of SGK1 and AMPK.
AMPKα associates with SGK1 by co-immunoprecipitation when co-expressed in 293T cells ( ). To ask whether SGK1 can directly phosphorylate AMPK, we carried out an in vitro kinase assay by incubating two different SGK1 isoforms with AMPKα1 purified from 293T cells. Following electrophoretic separation of reaction products on a Phos-Tag gel, an upward-shifted band is evident by western blotting with anti-total AMPKα antibody, indicative of direct phosphorylation by SGK1 ( ).
We next asked whether SGK1 can inhibit AMPK by phosphorylating AMPKαSer485/491 (S485 for AMPKα1 and S491 for AMPKα2), as has been reported for other AGC family kinases PKA, AKT and S6K ( ; ; ). We incubated two different SGK1 protein isoforms with recombinant, purified AMPK representing the most common heterotrimeric complex in liver, AMPKα2β1γ1, in an in vitro kinase assay. By western blotting with a phospho-specific antibody, we found that SGK1 directly and robustly phosphorylates AMPKα2Ser491
in vitro ( ).
We then determined whether SGK1 also phosphorylates AMPKα in vivo. In Sgk1Lko primary hepatocytes, levels of phospho-AMPKαSer485/491 are decreased ~50% under both vehicle and insulin treatment conditions, while the phosphorylation of AMPKαThr172, AKTThr308, and AKTSer473 as well as phosphorylation of the AMPK target ACC1Ser79 were all upregulated compared with control hepatocytes ( ). Conversely, expression of constitutively active SGK1Ser422Asp significantly increased levels of phosphor-AMPKαSer485/491, leading to a marked decrease in phosphorylated ACC1Ser79 ( ). Taken together, these data suggest that SGK1 acts as a major inhibitory kinase for AMPK by phosphorylating AMPKαSer485/491.

## Hepatic expression of AMPKαSer485Ala improves glucose homeostasis and insulin sensitivity
To investigate the consequences of AMPKαSer485/491 phosphorylation on hepatic insulin sensitivity and glucose homeostasis in vivo, we generated adeno-associated virus (AAV) serotype 2/9 expressing GFP (control) versus mutant AMPKα1Ser485Ala lacking the SGK1-targeted, negative regulation site under the liver-specific thyroid binding globulin (TBG) promoter ( , ; ; ). Mice were fed HFD for 8 weeks and then transduced with AAV-AMPKα1Ser485Ala or AAV-GFP by tail vein injection. There are no differences in body weight, lean mass, fat mass, serum cholesterol, and liver weight manifest after 8 weeks of AMPKα1Ser485Ala expression ( – ). However, glucose tolerance is improved and hepatic and serum TG levels are significantly reduced in AMPKα1Ser485Ala-transduced animals ( – ). Mice expressing AMPKα1Ser485 exhibit increased insulin-stimulated hepatic Akt phosphorylation and increased FoxO1 phosphorylation (required for the antihyperglycemic effects of insulin) but increased AMPK-mediated inhibitory phosphorylation of RaptorS792 and decreased overall mTORC1 activity (required for the lipogenic effects of insulin) ( and ). These data parallel our data in Sgk1Lko mice, which have increased Akt-FoxO phosphorylation ( , , and ) and decreased mTORC1 activity in liver in vivo ( ).

## Knockout of hepatic SGK1 improves glucose homeostasis through AMPK
To determine whether SGK1 regulates hepatic insulin sensitivity through AMPK, we treated both wild-type and Sgk1Lko primary hepatocytes with the AMPK inhibitor Compound C ( ). Inhibition of AMPK eliminates both the decreased glucose output and increased insulin-stimulated AKT phosphorylation evident in Sgk1Lko hepatocytes ( and ). Furthermore, wild-type primary hepatocytes expressing adenovirally delivered AMPKα2Ser491Ala, which lacks the putative AMPKα phosphorylation site, exhibit increased phosphorylation of AMPKαThr172 and AktThr308/Ser473 versus hepatocytes expressing control AMPKα2 ( ). In contrast, Sgk1Lko primary hepatocytes demonstrate a constitutive increase in phospho-AMPKαThr172 and AktThr308/Ser473 that is not further increased by expression of AMPKα2Ser491Ala ( ).
To investigate whether SGK1 also regulates hepatic glucose homeostasis and insulin sensitivity through AMPK in vivo, we injected male Sgk1Lko mice and control mice fed HFD for 8 weeks with AAV2/9 expressing GFP or AMPKα1Ser485Ala under the liver-specific TBG promoter. Glucose tolerance tests 8 weeks after transduction indicate that expression of AMPKα1Ser485Ala significantly improved glucose tolerance versus GFP expression in control mice, validating our earlier result ( and ). In contrast, glucose tolerance is improved in Sgk1Lko mice, and there is no significant difference between knockout mice expressing GFP and AMPKα1Ser485Ala ( ). Similar results are evident in an insulin tolerance test, in which expression of AMPKα1Ser485Ala significantly increases insulin sensitivity in control mice but does not additively augment the already increased insulin sensitivity evident in Sgk1Lko mice ( ). In keeping with the increase in in vivo insulin sensitivity, expression of AMPKα1Ser485Ala increases insulin-stimulated FoxO1 and AKT phosphorylation in control mice but does not further increase already elevated levels evident in Sgk1Lko mice ( ). At least one mechanism by which SGK1 deficiency may improve insulin sensitivity is by reducing mTORC1 activity, thereby lowering negative feedback on insulin signaling. This is most likely mediated by decreased AMPKαSer485/491 phosphorylation in Sgk1Lko mice, as expression of AMPKα1Ser485Ala decreases mTORC1 activity in the liver of control mice but does not further decrease the already reduced activity in Sgk1Lko mice ( ). In aggregate, these data indicate that hepatic knockout of Sgk1 improves insulin sensitivity and glucose tolerance in an AMPK-dependent manner.

## Regulation of glucose homeostasis by SGK family members
The three SGK family members have highly homologous kinase domains and share common substrates ( ). Similar to SGK1, we find increased SGK2 and SGK3 protein levels in the liver of mice fed HFD ( ). To study the function of all SGK family members in liver, we first generated Sgk2 and Sgk3 global knockout mice (Sgk2−/− and Sgk3−/−) using CRISPR-Cas9 zygotic injection in C57BL/6N embryos. After four backcrosses to C57BL/6J mice, glucose and insulin tolerance in male Sgk2−/− and Sgk3−/− mice fed a normal chow diet are not significantly different versus wild-type mice ( – ). On HFD, at 17 weeks of age, one cohort of Sgk2−/− knockout mice exhibited a slight but significant improvement of glucose tolerance but not insulin tolerance ( and ), whereas a second cohort at 26 weeks of age showed no difference ( and ). Two independent cohorts of Sgk3-knockout mice show mild improvement in HFD-induced insulin resistance but not glucose intolerance ( – ).
To investigate whether there is functional redundancy among SGK1, SGK2, and SGK3 in the liver, we crossed Sgk2−/−;Sgk3−/− global knockout mice with Sgk1Lko mice to generate mice lacking hepatic expression of all Sgk family members (SgkLtko), confirmed by western blotting in primary hepatocytes ( ). SgkLtko hepatocytes have significantly increased hepatic AKT phosphorylation levels versus control hepatocytes ( ), suggesting increased hepatic insulin sensitivity. Similar to single Sgk1Lko mice, no significant differences were found in glucose and insulin tolerance on a normal chow diet ( and ). Similar to single Sgk1Lko mice, SgkLtko mice are resistant to HFD-induced glucose intolerance but not insulin resistance ( and ).

## Regulation of AMPK by SGK1 is conserved from mammals to C. elegans and governs whole organism starvation survival
Genes encoding components of the mTOR, AMPK, and PI3K pathways, including SGK, are well conserved from invertebrates to mammals. CeAMPKαThr243 (AAK-1/2, corresponding to human AMPKαThr172) phosphorylation is elevated in sgk-1 (the sole worm ortholog of mammalian SGK) mutant C. elegans, indicative of a conserved, inverse relationship between the activities of SGK and AMPK ( ). AMPK activity is essential for starvation survival and dietary restriction (DR)-induced lifespan extension in C. elegans ( ; ). Indeed, increased AMPK activity in sgk-1 mutant C. elegans extends median (10%) and maximal (20%) survival under nutrient deprivation, an effect that is completely mitigated following RNAi to the AMPKα catalytic subunit aak-2. ( ).

## DISCUSSION
Here, we report that liver-specific Sgk1-knockout mice demonstrate improvement in insulin sensitivity and protection against HFD-induced fatty liver. These favorable metabolic effects are mediated by loss of SGK1-mediated, inhibitory phosphorylation of AMPKαSer485/491. Our data indicate that a major role of hepatic SGK1 is to negatively regulate insulin signaling by decreasing AMPK activity, resulting in a concomitant increase in mTORC1 activity. We suggest that this leads to increased negative feedback on insulin signaling, connecting SGK1 activation to promotion of hepatic insulin resistance. Our observation that SGK1 levels and activity are increased in the setting of insulin-resistant states further suggests that SGK1 directly links the PI3K-activated insulin signaling pathway to the development of insulin resistance. As expected, because loss of Sgk1 drives metabolic change principally by increasing AMPK activity, it leads to decreased gluconeogenesis, decreased lipogenesis, and decreased body fat accumulation and ameliorates insulin resistance induced by HFD. Thus, Sgk1 loss of function breaks the paradox in hepatic insulin resistance, improving sensitivity to insulin-driven suppression of hepatic glucose output without increasing hepatic lipogenesis.

## Regulation of systemic energy metabolism by SGK
A number of studies support our findings that SGK family kinases promote insulin resistance and obesity. The SGK1 inhibitor EMD638683 significantly decreases fasting blood glucose in db/db mice and diet-induced obesity in Akt3-knockout mice ( ; ). Conversely, transgenic expression of constitutively active SGK1 exacerbates diet-induced obesity and fatty liver ( ). Sgk1 mRNA is elevated in adipose tissue in obese mice and humans and is associated with inflammation ( ; ). Phosphorylation of SGK1Ser422 by mTORC2 is also increased in visceral fat of patients with T2D ( ). A common (5%) polymorphism in human SGK1 is associated with obesity and T2D ( ; ; ; ). In aggregate, these studies and data presented herein indicate that activation of SGK1 is mechanistically tied to the development of insulin resistance and obesity.
Our data suggest that of the SGK family members, SGK1 has the most prominent role in hepatic insulin action. Although knockdown of SGK2 in human hepatocytes ex vivo has been shown to attenuate pregnane X receptor-regulated induction of G6Pase as well as glucose production ( ), here we show that Sgk2−/− mice have very mild improvement in glucose tolerance that manifests only at a young age. Sgk3 deficiency mitigates HFD-induced insulin resistance but not glucose intolerance. However, as glucose tolerance is reflective of insulin production and insulin action, the lack of difference in glucose tolerance in Sgk3−/− mice could be due to the combined impact of a mild improvement in insulin sensitivity and a previously described defect in insulin secretion ( ). As Sgk triple-knockout mice (SgkLtko) do not demonstrate exaggerated insulin sensitivity, and primary hepatocytes from Sgk1−/− and SgkLtko demonstrate similar increases in insulin sensitivity, SGK1 is likely dominant among SGK family kinases in regulation of hepatic insulin action. Although unlikely to be evident in isolated hepatocytes, at the whole-animal level, it remains a distinct possibility that the global Sgk2 and Sgk3 knockouts used affect insulin sensitivity by action in other tissues. Definitive proof requires additional tissue-specific disruption of SGK kinases.
Our data conflict with data from a prior study demonstrating that SGK1 action increases insulin sensitivity in the liver by inhibiting ERK activity ( ). In this study, overexpression of Sgk1 was shown to ameliorate insulin resistance in both glucosamine-treated HepG2 cells and livers of db/db mice. We cannot explain the discordance between our finding that Sgk1Lko mice demonstrate increased insulin sensitivity versus this study demonstrating apparent insulin resistance. Our study uses the same Sgk1 conditional mice and the same albumin-Cre as the study of . However, that study predominantly used short hairpin RNA (shRNA) knockdown to reduce SGK1 levels rather than their conditional Sgk1 mice ( ). Importantly, consistent with our findings, observed that SGK1 protein levels are higher in insulin-resistant db/db mice. We have confidence in the rigor of results presented here, given that multiple, independent cohorts of mice, on multiple diets, and of both sexes demonstrate concordant findings. Differences in environment, such as those manifest as different microbiota, could contribute to discrepant data, and in fact this suggests compelling possibilities requiring further investigation. It is worth mentioning that SGK1 and Akt share an identical substrate recognition motif, and thus, as we and others have observed, overexpression of SGK1 can lead to non-physiological phosphorylation of Akt substrates including GSK3α/β and FoxO3. As note of proof that these substrates represent predominantly Akt substrates, GSK3α/β and FOXO3 phosphorylation levels are not changed in cells in which SGK1 cannot be activated ( ). Finally, in support of findings presented here, BAC transgenic mice bearing the entire Sgk1 gene with an activating point mutation develop obesity, glucose intolerance, and insulin resistance ( ). In aggregate, our data and these observations support the notion that SGK1 antagonizes rather than facilitates insulin signaling.

## Abnormal SGK1 accumulation promotes selective insulin resistance
Chronic overnutrition, including HFD feeding, causes hepatic-selective insulin resistance whereby there is resistance of the liver to the glucose-lowering properties of insulin but preservation of insulin-dependent lipogenesis ( ). On the basis of work presented here, we hypothesize that SGK1 contributes mechanistically to selective insulin resistance by phosphorylating and inhibiting AMPKαSer485/491. The decreased AMPK activity, along with a known activity of SGK1 to activate mTORC1 by phosphorylating and inhibiting TSC2 ( ), (1) increases negative feedback on insulin signaling, (2) reduces hepatic lipid oxidation, and (3) promotes lipogenesis through SREBP-1c ( ), thereby facilitating selective insulin resistance. Our findings are in keeping with the previously reported ability of increased AMPK activity to decrease hepatic glucose production and lipid synthesis and increase fatty acid oxidation ( ). These data are also in agreement with prior work demonstrating that decreases in hepatic mTORC1 activity protects mice from Western diet-induced hepatic steatosis ( ). Although the exact mechanism by which mTORC1 negatively feeds back on insulin signaling remains a subject of some debate, the aggregate decreased serine phosphorylation of Irs1 and loss of Grb10 phosphorylation likely both contribute to increased insulin signaling in Sgk1Lko mice ( ; ; ). Our results do not also rule out the distinct possibility that an additional means of improved insulin sensitivity in Sgk1Lko mice is directly related to AMPK-dependent reduction in body fat mass, possibly exaggerated by parallel reductions in mTORC1 activity and lipogenesis. However, this is unlikely to be the sole mechanism, as improved insulin sensitivity is evident in Sgk1Lko mice fed a chow diet, in which changes in hepatic lipid content and body fat mass are not evident. And finally, although not explicitly tested, it remains a distinct possibility that activation of hepatic AMPK in Sgk1Lko mice facilitates glucose disposal by insulin-independent mechanisms, as has been demonstrated in skeletal muscle ( ).
Our results draw a sharp distinction between the molecular function of two insulin- and mTORC2-activated protein kinases with identical substrate recognition motifs. Unlike knockout of hepatic Akt ( ), knockout of hepatic Sgk selectively improves insulin’s ability to lower blood glucose without promoting HFD-induced hepatic steatosis. Accumulating evidence indicates that insulin signaling suppresses gluconeogenesis mainly by the mTORC2/AKT/FoxO pathway but activates lipogenesis through activation of AKT and SGK and subsequent parallel activation of mTORC1 and inhibition of FoxO ( ; ; ). In the case of Sgk1Lko mice, our data support at least two potential means by which insulin sensitivity is improved: (1) AMPK activation reduces fatty acid synthesis and enhances oxidation (evident at the level of gene expression and whole-body energy expenditure), and (2) inhibition of mTORC1 in Sgk1Lko mice, as mTORC1 activity is necessary for stimulation of hepatic lipogenesis. We surmise that the concomitant enhanced activity of AMPK and reduced mTORC1 activity overcomes the increase in FoxO inhibition evident in Sgk1Lko mice, protecting these animals from hepatic steatosis in the face of enhanced insulin signaling through Akt and FoxO.

## Loss of hepatic SGK1 signaling mitigates selective hepatic insulin resistance through AMPK
AMPK is a central hub of metabolic regulation in liver, governing the balance of anabolic and catabolic metabolism of glucose and lipids. AMPK directly and indirectly reduces hepatic glucose production at the transcriptional level ( ) and post-translationally by reducing mTORC1 activity reducing negative feedback on insulin signaling ( ; ). AMPK also increases fatty acid oxidation and decreases lipogenesis by phosphorylating and inhibiting ACC and HMG-CoA reductase, inhibiting transcription of lipogenic transcription factors ChREBP and SREBP, and by increasing mitochondrial biogenesis ( ; ; ).
These activities perfectly poise activation of hepatic AMPK to break the paradox in insulin resistance, an observation borne out by our data in Sgk1Lko mice and in studies of AMPK. Broadly speaking, genetic or pharmacologic activation of AMPK reduces hepatic lipogenesis and reduces fatty liver disease, whereas genetic inactivation of AMPK promotes hyperglycemia and hepatic steatosis ( ; ; ; ; ; ). However, there are paradoxes in data investigating the role of hepatic AMPK in insulin sensitivity. Although deletion of hepatic Lkb1 in adult mice promotes marked hyperglycemia ( ), complete hepatic deficiency of AMPKα1/2 does not appear to alter glucose homeostasis or insulin sensitivity ( ). On the basis of our data, we suggest that in chowfed animals, impacts of SGK1 and AMPK on glucose homeostasis are subtle. Alternatively, in the setting of HFD consumption, augmented SGK1 signaling inhibiting AMPK clearly contributes to hyperglycemia, insulin resistance, weight gain, and hepatic steatosis. In aggregate, results from our studies and others imply that AMPK activity becomes particularly important during periods of nutrient excess.
It should be noted that overexpression of the active form of AMPKα1Ser485Ala does not completely recapitulate the effects of Sgk1Lko mice in our experiments, particularly with regard to reduction in fat mass. It is possible that a duration of AMPK activation longer than that provided in our AAV-mediated experiments are necessary to reduce fat mass, for example, that evident with near lifelong genetic deletion of Sgk1, or that SGK1 has effects beyond those on AMPK.
There is controversy on the precise role of AMPKαS485/491 phosphorylation on AMPK activity. Early studies principally examined the AMPKαS485/491 phosphorylation site for its role in full kinase activation, not inhibition; closer examination of those data indicate that phospho-mimic substitutions in AMPKα1S485 inhibit LKB1-mediated activation of AMPK by ~50% ( ). In mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) and immortalized cells, AMPKα1S485 phosphorylation is reciprocally associated with AMPK activity, and AMPKα1S485A substitution prevents inhibitory phosphorylation by cAMP-activated kinases ( ). In many instances the phosphorylation of AMPKα1S485 occurs concomitantly with AMPKα1T172
in vivo ( ; ), but whether this is part of negative feedback on AMPK activity remains unclear. Adding to this uncertainty, certain data suggest that AMPKα1S485/S491 may be an AMPK autophosphorylation site ( ). We propose, on the basis of evidence presented here, that in the context of hepatocytes in vivo, SGK1-mediated phosphorylation of AMPKα1S485/491 represents an inhibitory input into AMPK, contributing to insulin resistance in animals fed a HFD.
Our observation that SGK1 activity increases in insulin resistance suggests that the kinase represents a significant component of the machinery contributing to selective insulin resistance in T2D. Our work indicates that SGK represents an answer to the elusive question of how insulin inhibits hepatic AMPK (via phosphorylation of AMPKαSer485/491, which was postulated to be largely Akt independent) ( ; ; ; ). Loss of Sgk1 may also activate AMPK through modulation of the mitochondrial permeability and energetics, but this requires further testing ( ). Our observations that AMPKα1Ser485Ala expression in vivo improves hepatic insulin action and that this improvement phenocopies and is non-additive with hepatic Sgk1 knockout suggest that a major role of SGK1 in hepatic metabolism is to negatively feed back on insulin signaling through AMPK. We propose that this activity can be selectively leveraged in order to break the paradox in insulin resistance present in T2D.

## STAR⋆METHODS

## RESOURCE AVAILABILITY

## Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Alexander A. Soukas (asoukas@mgh.harvard.edu).

## Materials availability
Plasmids, cells, and mouse lines generated in this study will be made available upon request to the Lead Contact.

## Data and code availability
All data reported in this paper will be shared by the lead contact upon request.
This study did not generate original code.
Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request.

## EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS

## Mice
All mice were housed in a temperature-controlled room under a 12 hr light–dark cycle and under pathogen-free conditions. Sgk1[flox/flox] (RRID: MGI:5317851) mice were as we previously published ( ). Sgk1Lko mice were generated by crossing Albumin-Cre mice (The Jackson Laboratory, RRID: IMSR_JAX: 003574) with Sgk1[flox/flox] mice which were backcrossed with C57BL/6J mice for three times. Double Sgk2;Sgk3 global knockout mice were generated by C57BL/6N zygotic injection of small guide RNAs targeting Sgk2 and Sgk3 and S.p.Cas9 mRNA at the Genome Modification Facility, Harvard University. Mice were backcrossed four times prior to experimentation. SgkLtko mice were generated by crossing Sgk1Lko mice to Sgk2;Sgk3 global knockout mice. Male mice were used to conduct most of the experiments except where indicated. Seminal experiments were repeated in both sexes. All animal procedures were approved under protocol 2010N000186 by Massachusetts General Hospital Subcommittee on Research Animal Care. Guide RNA sequences used are as follows:
Sgk2: CGGAGCCTTCTACGCCGTGA;
Sgk3: CAAGGCACTGGCGATCTCCG.
The age of mice used in each experiment can be found in .

## Cell lines, culture conditions and transfection
AML12 hepatocytes (ATCC) were grown in a 1:1 mixture of DMEM and Ham’s F12 medium (Thermo Fisher) with 0.005 mg/ml insulin, 0.005 mg/ml transferrin, 5 ng/ml selenium, 40 ng/ml dexamethasone, 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Sigma) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin (PS, Life Technologies), in a 5% CO2 atmosphere at 37°C. Primary cultured mouse hepatocytes were prepared from C57BL/6J, liver-specific Sgk1 knockout mice (genotype Albumin-Cre;Sgk1[flox/flox]) and their wild-type littermate controls (genotype Sgk1 [flox/flox]) by collagenase perfusion method as described previously ( ), and were grown in Williams’ Medium E supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% PS. HEK293T cells (ATCC) were grown in high glucose DMEM (Thermo Fisher) supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% PS in a 5% CO2 atmosphere at 37°C. For transfection, Lipofectamine 3000 was used according to the instructions of manufacturer (Thermo Fisher). For Compound C treatment, cells were treated with vehicle or 5 μM Compound C for 18h and serum starved for 4h following insulin treatment.

## METHOD DETAILS

## Chemicals and antibodies
Compound C was obtained from Enzo Life Sciences. Sodium Palmitate is from NU-CHEK Prep Inc. For western blotting, anti-Flag M2 (RRID:AB_259529) antibody was purchased from Sigma, antibodies against SGK1 (RRID:AB_2687476), SGK2 (RRID:AB_10828732), SGK3 (RRID:AB_10949507), HSP90 (RRID:AB_2233307), Akt (RRID:AB_915783), p-Akt (Thr308) (RRID:AB_2255933), p-Akt (Ser473) (RRID:AB_2315049), NDRG1 (RRID: AB_11140640), p-NDRG1(Thr346) (RRID:AB_10693451), FoxO1 (RRID:AB_2106495), p-FoxO1/3 (Thr24/32) (RRID:AB_2106814), S6K (RRID:AB_390722), p-S6K (Thr389) (RRID:AB_2269803), S6 (RRID:AB_331355), p-S6 (S240/244) (RRID:AB_10694233), 4EBP1 (RRID:AB_2097841), p-4EBP1 (Thr37/46) (RRID:AB_560835), p-4EBP1 (Ser65) (RRID:AB_330947), AMPKα (RRID:AB_10624867), p-AMPKα (Thr172) (RRID:AB_331250), p-AMPKα(Ser485/491) (RRID:AB_331250), ACC1 (RRID:AB_2219397), p-ACC1 (Ser79) (RRID:AB_330337), Raptor (RRID:AB_561245)and p-Raptor (Ser792) (RRID:AB_2249475) were obtained from Cell Signaling Technology. Anti-actin (C4) was obtained from Abcam.

## Generation of Sgk1 knockout AML12 cells
Sgk1 knockout AML12 cells were generated using CRISPR/Cas9 with modifications as described ( ). Briefly, the px330 vector expressing Cas9 and guide RNA was electro-transfected into AML12 cells together with a plasmid conferring puromycin resistance. Forty-eight hours after transfection, puromycin was added to the cells at 5 μg/ml for 48 hours, then puromycin resistant cells were trypsinized, counted and diluted to 10 cells/ml, then 100 μL of the diluted cell mixture per well was seeded into a 96 well plate, and single-clones were expanded to generate stable cell lines. Sgk1 knockout was confirmed by western blotting. Primers for sgRNA expression are: sense, 5’- CACCGTAAGCAGCCGTATGACCGGA-3’, antisense, 5’-AAACTCCGGTCATACGGCTGCTTAC-3’.

## Generation of recombinant adenoviruses and AAV
To construct adenoviruses expressing LacZ, AMPKa2 and AMPKa2-S491A, cDNAs encoding LacZ, AMPKa2 and AMPKa2-S491A were recombined into the pAd-CMV backbone, transfected into 293A cells, and purified to high titer with cesium chloride gradients. Adenovirus expressing constitutively activated SGK1 is a gift from Dr. Anthony Rosenzweig’s lab at MGH. Primary hepatocytes were infected with adenovirus at M.O.I of 5 24h after plating the cells. To make AAV vectors expressing AMPKα1Ser485Ala and EGFP, three plasmids, pAd Delta F6, pAAV2/9 and pAAV.TBG.PI.eGFP.WPRE.bGH were purchased from the Penn vector core in University of Pennsylvania. cDNA encoding AMPKα1Ser485Ala was cloned in place of eGFP in pAAV.TBG.PI.eGFP.WPRE.bGH and virus packaging and high titer purification was done by Vigene Biosciences. Mice were injected 1×1011 purified viral particles per animal via tail vein, metabolic analysis were conducted at the indicated times.

## Western blotting and co-immunoprecipitation
For western blotting, cell or tissue lysates were prepared in RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4,150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton x-100, 1% Sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS,1 mM EDTA with 1x Complete protease inhibitor cocktail from Roche) unless otherwise indicated. Tissues were homogenized using a QIAGEN Tissue Lyser II. Lysates were cleared of insoluble material by centrifugation at 21,000g at 4°C and the supernatant was retained for western blotting. Protein concentration was determined using the Pierce BCA assay (Thermo Fisher). SDS-PAGE was conducted followed by electrophoretic transfer to nitrocellulose membrane at 100 V for 1 hour at 4°C. Immunoblots were performed according to primary antibody manufacturers’ protocols. For immunodetection of primary antibodies, goat-anti-rabbit-HRP conjugate or goat-anti-mouse-HRP conjugate (GE Healthcare) was used at 1:5,000 in 5% BSA dissolved in TBST, and HRP was detected using West-Pico chemiluminescence substrate (Thermo Pierce). The western blot results shown are representative of at least three independent experiments, and quantified results and statistics from biological replicates are shown wherever possible, as indicated in the figures and figure legends.
For the Co-IP assay, pCMV5-SGK1 and pcDNA3-AMPKα1 were co-transfected into HEK293T cells. Mouse Sgk1 was cloned into the pCMV5-Flag vector using the following primers:
Sgk1 forward, 5’- ATTTGCGGCCGCTGGAAGATGGTAAACAAAGACA -3’,
Sgk1 reverse, 5’- TAGGATCCTCAGAGGAAGGAATCCACAGGA -3’,
Forty-eight hours after transfection, cells were lysed using CHAPS lysis buffer (0.025 M Tris, 0.15 M NaCl, 0.5% CHAPS; pH 7.4), and lysate was incubated with anti-SGK1 antibody (Cell Signaling Technology) and protein A magnetic beads (New England Biolabs) following the manufacturer’s protocol. Western blot was used for detection of AMPKα.

## In vitro kinase assay
To purify mouse SGK1 protein, Flag-SGK1 was transfected into HEK293T cells for 48h, cells were then lysed using RIPA buffer, and lysate was incubated with M2-Flag magnetic beads from SIGMA following its IP protocol. 3XFlag peptide was used to elute Flag-SGK1 from the beads. To purify AMPKα1 protein, pcDNA3-AMPKα1 with His tag was transfected into HEK293T cells for 48h and purified using the Pierce HisPur Ni-NTA Purification Kit (Thermo Scientific, Prod# 88227). SGK1(0.5 μg) and AMPK α1 (1 μg) or AMPKα2β1γ1 (1 μg) complex were incubated in a 25ul reaction containing 5 μL 5x kinase buffer, 1 mM DTT, and 500 μM ATP for 15 min.

## Quantitative RT-PCR
Worms and mouse tissues were flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and kept in −80°C until RNA preparation. To quantify changes in mRNA abundance in nematode and mammalian cells, total RNA was extracted using RNAzol RT (Molecular Research Center) according to manufacturer instructions. RNA was treated with RNase free DNase prior to reverse transcription with the Quantitect reverse transcription kit (QIAGEN). Quantitative RT-PCR was conducted in triplicate using a Quantitect SYBR Green PCR reagent (QIAGEN) following manufacturer instructions on a Bio-Rad CFX96 Real-Time PCR system (Bio-Rad) (see for primer sequences). For mouse tissue samples, liver samples were homogenized in RNAzol using a TissuleLyser II (QIAGEN), centrifuged for 10 min at 12,000 g to pellet debris, and the supernatant was collected and subjected to RNA extraction per the manufacturer protocol. Expression levels of tested genes were presented as normalized fold changes to the mRNA abundance of control genes indicated in the figures by the δδCt method.

## Measurement of metabolic parameters
Mice were put on both standard chow diet (chow) (5008, Labdiets) or 60% kcal-fat high fat diet (HFD) (D12492, Research Diets) at weaning ~4 weeks of age. For glucose tolerance tests (GTT), mice were starved overnight (12 hours during the dark cycle) and I.P. injected with glucose at 2 g/kg body weight. For insulin tolerance test (ITT), mice were starved for 6h and I.P. injected at a concentration of 0.4 U/kg body weight of insulin for chow diet fed mice and 0.75 U/kg body weight for HFD fed mice. MRI for body composition analysis was conducted at indicated times using an EchoMRI-100H, and energy expenditure was measured by indirect calorimetry using metabolic cages housed in environmental chambers (Sable Systems Promethion).

## Biochemical and hormone assays
Glucose was measured with a glucometer specifically designed for mice (AlphaTrak2, Abbott Animal Health). Insulin, TG, total cholesterol, HDL, and ketones were measured according to manufacturer protocols (see for suppliers). Tissue cholesterol and triglyceride contents were measured enzymatically following Folch extraction and lipid mass was normalized to tissue weight and protein content.

## QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
All western blotting quantifications were conducted in ImageJ. Statistical analyses were performed using Prism (GraphPad Software). The statistical differences between control and experimental groups were determined by two-tailed Student’s t test (two groups), one-way ANOVA (more than two groups), two-way ANOVA (two independent experimental variables), or non-linear regression analysis as indicated in each figure legend, with numbers of samples indicated and corrected p values < 0.05 considered significant. Statistical details for each experiment can be found in each figure legend.

## Supplementary Material
12

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Joseph Avruch, Noriko Oshiro-Rapley, Ning Dai, and Laura Regue for discussions and reagents. Thanks to the Nutrition Obesity Research Center (NORC) at Harvard (P30DK040561) and the Boston Area Diabetes Endocrinology Research Center (DERC) (P30DK057521) for core services. This work was funded by NIH grants K08DK087941, R01DK101522, R56AG068999, and R01AG058256 (to A.A.S.), the Howard M. Goodman Fellowship (to A.A.S.), a Glenn Foundation Award for Research on the Biological Mechanisms of Aging (to A.A.S.), the Weissman Family Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH) Research Scholar Award (to A.A.S.), and an MGH Executive Committee on Research (ECOR) Postdoctoral Fellowship (to B.Z.).
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
INCLUSION AND DIVERSITY
We worked to ensure sex balance in the selection of non-human subjects. While citing references scientifically relevant for this work, we also actively worked to promote gender balance in our reference list.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109785.
 

## Highlights
SGK1 drives insulin resistance in liver in response to high-fat diet consumption
SGK1 promotes insulin resistance by phosphorylating and inhibiting AMPK
Expression of AMPK that cannot be acted upon by SGK1 promotes insulin sensitivity
SGK1 is dominant among SGK family kinases regulating insulin sensitivity in liver