Indian J Nucl MedIndian J Nucl Med1297ijnmIJNMIndian Journal of Nuclear Medicine : IJNM : The Official Journal of the Society of Nuclear Medicine, India0972-39190974-0244Wolters Kluwer -- Medknow PublicationsPMC4157205PMC4157205.1415720541572052521029710.4103/0972-3919.136605IJNM-29-1971Letters to EditorExtra-renal malignant rhabdoid tumor of head and neck region: Characteristics of tracer uptake on FDG PET/CT in tumor with rare histology
PuranikAmeya D. AgrawalArchi and - arrow]. It had a maximum Standardised Uptake value of 3.6. No discrete cervical adenopathy was noted. There was no evidence of distant metastases. Since the pattern of uptake was unlike myoepithelial tumors, which usually show intense FDG avidity, biopsy was repeated from the area with maximum SUV. Histopathology [H and E, ×40 - ] showed high grade malignant tumor with tumor cells arranged in sheets, and majority showing ‘rhabdoid’ morphology. On immunohistochemistry (2b), loss of staining was seen for IN1 antibody, which was confirmatory for diagnosis of extra-renal rhabdoid tumor. Malignant Rhabdoid Tumor (MRT) was first described as a rare sarcomatous variants of Wilms tumour,[ ] primarily because of its renal origin, in children. Though originally described as primary renal neoplasm, tumors with similar histological characteristics have been identified at extra-renal sites such as thymus, liver, central nervous system, heart, chest wall and extremities; these are termed as extra-renal malignant rhadboid tumors (ERRT).[ ] Given its aggressive nature, early diagnosis and treatment becomes important. Though the diagnosis is purely based on histology and immunochemistry, as seen in our case, at the same time, it is essential to know the uptake characteristics in these rare histological variants. Oda et al., have shown that the characteristic ‘rhabdoid’ cells of ERRTs are also seen in certain soft tissue sarcomas such as synovial sarcomas, extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma and leiomyosarcoma.[ ] As per the existing literature, ERRTs demonstrate intense FDG uptake at the primary and metastatic sites.[ ] However, our case is an exception wherein the tumor shows very low-grade tracer concentration. Also, the pattern of uptake is quite uniform, and cannot be appreciated on Maximum Intensity Projection (MIP) images. There are only two such reports in literature, especially in children, wherein low-grade FDG uptake is seen in ERRTs.[ ] Thus, ERRTs, which are rare, aggressive histological variants, are an addition to the list of tumors, which may show low grade metabolic activity on PET/CT imaging.