Asian Pac J Cancer PrevAsian Pac. J. Cancer Prev3174apjcpAsian Pacific Journal of Cancer Prevention : APJCP1513-73682476-762XShahid Beheshti University of Medical SciencesPMC5980837PMC5980837.1598083759808372958003510.22034/APJCP.2018.19.3.655APJCP-19-6551Research ArticleFluorescence in Situ Hybridization (FISH) for Differential Diagnosis of Soft Tissue Sarcomas
AsifAmna AkhtarNoreen . One case which did not show gene translocation was labeled as undifferentiated round cell sarcoma as it did not fit into any other category even after applying a large panel of immunohistochemical stains .
 There were 8 cases diagnosed as Synovial sarcoma on the basis of histology and immunohistochemical stains. These cases had shown focal positivity for CK, EMA and CD99 and negative expression for Desmin, S100 and CD34. About 7 patients were males and 1 was female. Age range was between 21 to 35 years (mean patient age 26.4 years). Most common site was lower limb (5 cases) followed by upper limb (3 cases). X:18 translocation was detected in 3 out of 8 cases . An extensive panel of immunohistochemical stains including SMA (smooth muscle actin), Caldesmon, High molecular weight cytokeratin (HMWCK), p16, CDK4, MUC4 was applied on the tumors which did not show gene translocation. All immunostains turned out to be negative and were reported as undifferentiated sarcomas .
 A total of 5 cases were diagnosed as lipomatous tumors with differential diagnoses of atypical lipomatous tumors and lipoma. Final diagnosis was deferred for FISH analysis for MDM2 amplifications. There were 2 male patients and 3 female patients. Age range was 30 to 44 years (mean patient age 34.8 years). Most common site was the lower limb (right thigh 1 case, left thigh 1 case), followed by pelvis (1 case), stomach and retroperitoneum (1 case each). The reason for performing FISH on these tumors was to differentiate atypical lipomatous tumors/well differentiated liposarcoma from lipomas including spindle cell or pleomorphic lipoma . MDM2 gene amplification was detected in only 1 case which presented as lipomatous mass in right thigh. Rest of the cases were labelled as lipomas .
 Two cases were suspected dedifferentiated liposarcomas on the basis of histology and immunohistochemical results as both of these cases had shown negative results for Desmin, SMA, CK, CD34, S100, HMB45, EMA and positive results for p16, CDK4 and MDM2. However one case showed strong and the other case showed focal positivities for p16, CDK4 and MDM2. Both patients were females. One patient was 45 and the other was 55 years old. Tumor sites were left scapular and left inguinal region respectively. Reason for performing FISH was to differentiate between undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma and dedifferentiated liposarcoma . 1 out of these 2 cases showed MDM2 gene amplification and was labeled as dedifferentiated liposarcoma (left scapular region) and the other case was diagnosed as undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma .
Out of the two cases which were diagnosed as rhabdomyosarcomas, one patient was 1 year female child and the other was a 9 years old boy. Tumor sites were upper arm and orbit respectively. Reason for performing FISH was to distinguish between embryonal and alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma. FOXO1 gene translocation was not detected in either of the two cases and they were labelled as embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma on the basis of histological features .

## Discussion
Soft tissue sarcomas are rare tumors comprising 1 percent of all solid malignancies. These tumors show variable biological behavior and therefore their correct diagnosis is essential for appropriate treatment and determination of prognosis. These tumors are sometimes difficult to diagnose due to overlap in histological and immunohistochemical features. FISH and other genetic techniques including PCR and next generation sequencing now play a very important role in final diagnosis. (Burningham et al., 2012).
These techniques are not easily available at routine laboratories. It is better to refer these cases to specialized labs which conduct these tests.
Fluorescent in situ hybridization is comparatively an easy and cheaper technique and not very difficult to develop in tertiary care hospital labs. Our institute has recently acquired this technique. Probes related to soft tissue sarcomas being used in our lab are EWSR1, MDM2, FOXO1 and X:18 (details of probes are given in materials and methods).
Many tumors come under the differential diagnosis of Ewing Sarcoma including small cell variant of osteosarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, lymphoma, neuroblastoma and desmoplastic small round cell tumor. Although immunohistochemical stains are helpful for final diagnosis, overlapping histological and immunohistochemical results make FISH for detection of EWSR1 translocation an important test for definitive diagnosis. (Machado et al., 2009).
EWSR1 gene rearrangement is most commonly observed in Ewing Sarcoma. However, other tumors such as clear cell sarcoma, desmoplastic small round cell tumor, extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma can also show this gene rearrangement. Therefore FISH probe for EWSR1 is useful if used in correct clinical context. (Burchill 2003 ; Balamuth and Womer 2010).
In our study, seven out of eight cases tested for EWSR1 re-arrangement showed break apart signals. One case which did not show EWSR1 gene rearrangement was diagnosed as undifferentiated round cell sarcoma. These results are consistent with a large study of 382 cases where 92% of the histologically diagnosed cases of Ewing sarcoma were confirmed by FISH (Machado et al., 2009).
Likewise many spindle cell tumors come under the differential diagnosis of synovial sarcoma like malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor, leiomyosarcoma, fibrosarcoma and solitary fibrous tumor. Therefore, FISH for detection of X:18 translocation is a valuable test to have in a lab. Synovial sarcoma shows a much better response to chemotherapy than other soft tissue sarcomas, therefore its detection is extremely important (Foo et al., 2011; Terry et al., 2005).
FISH for X:18 was applied on 8 cases which were histologically and immunohistochemically diagnosed as synovial sarcoma. These cases were positive for EMA, CD99 and TLE1. Three cases in our study showed break apart of SYT gene confirming the diagnosis of synovial sarcoma. The other five cases which showed negative results were further analyzed with further immunostains as explained in the results and were finally labelled as undifferentiated sarcomas. Terry et al found X:18 chromosomal translocation in 22 out of 23 synovial sarcomas diagnosed histologically, while none of the other sarcomas tested were positive for this translocation. (Terry et al., 2005). Therefore it is important to include FISH analysis as a part of diagnosis process before signing out of report. In our institute we ask the oncologists to wait for FISH results before start of treatment as this approach is very helpful for correct diagnosis and management.
Moving on to lipomatous tumors, sometimes it is very difficult to differentiate between atypical lipomatous tumor/well differentiated liposarcomas and lipomas especially when one is suspecting pleopmorphic and spindle cell lipoma at unusual locations. In our experience sometimes even after extensive sampling of well differentiated lipomatous tumors, it is very hard to find hallmark lipoblasts or it is very hard to differentiate between true lipoblasts and lipoblast like cells. In this situation, a panel of immunohistochemical stains p16, CDK4 and MDM2 is very helpful as atypical lipomatous tumors/well differentiated liposarcomas show good expression for these immunostains whereas lipomas are either negative or show focal expression. Even then there are times, when results are not unequivocal and one needs further testing. In this scenario, MDM2 amplification study by FISH is very helpful as it is very much specific for dedifferentiated and well differentiated liposarcoma/atypical lipomatous tumors (Mendoza et al., 2014). Its importance cannot be overemphasized because it is difficult to distinguish well differentiated liposarcoma from benign lipomatous tumors and dedifferentiated liposarcomas from other high grade sarcomas by using morphological criteria only (Kimura et al., 2013). Moreover dedifferentiated liposarcoma is associated with less aggressive clinical outcome as compared to other high grade pleomorphic sarcomas and therefore this distinction is of prognostic importance (Sirvent 2007).
We had this difficulty of differentiating between atypical lipomatous tumor/well differentiated liposarcomas in five cases as mentioned in the result. We had to apply FISH to detect MDM 2 amplification. Only 1 case turned out to be MDM2 amplified whereas rest of the 4 cases were negative and we called them lipomas. Similarly FISH for MDM2 amplification was used in 2 cases with the differential diagnoses of dedifferentiated liposarcoma and undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma. MDM2 amplification was detected in one case as mentioned in the results and this case was labelled as dedifferentiated liposarcoma and other case which turned out to be negative was called undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma. The latter is usually a diagnosis of exclusion when no specific lineage can be identified after application of an exhaustive panel of immunohistochemical markers and FISH techniques. In the study conducted by Takeshi et al 81 out of 178 lipomatous tumors and 18 out of 20 dedifferentiated liposarcoma showed MDM2 gene amplification (Takeshi et al., 2012).
FISH also has limited but important role in rhabdomyosarcomas when used in correct clinical context. Because of prognostic difference between different types of rhabdomyosarcomas we need to classify them correctly into embryonal, alveolar, spindle cell, sclerosing and pleomorphic rhabdomyosarcomas. Histology and immunohistochemical stains are usually enough for accurate classification but sometimes problem arises when rhabdomyosarcoma shows focal alveolar and nesting pattern making it difficult to differentiate alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma from embryonal and other rhabdomyosarcomas. Moreover the prognosis of alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma is worse than that of embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma (Fenghai et al., 2012). Detection of FOXO1 gene rearrangement by FISH is useful to differentiate between embryonal and alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma. We applied FOXO1 gene rearrangement FISH on 2 cases with borderline histological features between alveolar and embryonal rhabdomyosarcomas. Both cases did not show break apart signals for FOX O1 gene and hence they were labeled as embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma.
Therefore in our limited experience we consider FISH analysis useful especially in those cases where histological and immunohistochemical evaluation cannot accurately classify tumors. It is important to develop a uniform diagnostic algorithm in the departments through discussion with other fellow pathologists and oncologists. This is very helpful for accurate diagnosis and correct management of patients.
In conclusion, FISH is a useful adjunct in the diagnostic approach for various soft tissue sarcomas. It is easy to set up, is a cheaper technique and has the ability to diagnose sarcomas with great accuracy especially in those sarcoma cases which are not accurately classified even after thorough histological and immunohistochemical evaluation. It plays a very important role in the accurate diagnosis and correct management of patients.