440plosonePLoS ONEPLoS OnePLOSPMC7906477790647779064773363091810.1371/journal.pone.0246958Nationwide incidence of sarcomas and connective tissue tumors of intermediate malignancy over four years using an expert pathology review network
de PinieuxGonzagueConceptualization, Funding acquisition, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Supervision, Validation, Writing – review & editing KaranianMarieConceptualization, Data curation, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Supervision, Validation, Writing – review & editing Le LoarerFrancoisData curation, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Supervision, Writing – review & editing Le GuellecSophieData curation, Investigation, Resources, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing ChabaudSylvieData curation, Investigation, Resources, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing TerrierPhilippeData curation, Investigation, Resources, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing BouvierCorinneData curation, Investigation, Resources, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing BatistellaMaximeData curation, Investigation, Resources, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing NeuvilleAgnèsData curation, Investigation, Resources, Validation, Writing – review & editing RobinYves-MarieData curation, Investigation, Resources, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing EmileJean-FrancoisData curation, Investigation, Resources, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing MoreauAnneData curation, Investigation, Resources, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing LarousserieFrederiqueData curation, Investigation, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing LerouxAgnesData curation, Investigation, Resources, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing StockNathalieData curation, Investigation, Resources, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing LaeMarickData curation, Investigation, Resources, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing CollinFrancoiseData curation, Investigation, Resources, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing WeinbreckNicolasData curation, Investigation, Resources, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing AubertSebastienData curation, Investigation, Resources, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing MishellanyFlorenceData curation, Investigation, Resources, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing Charon-BarraCelineData curation, Investigation, Resources, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing CroceSabrinaData curation, Investigation, Resources, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing DoucetLaurentData curation, Investigation, Resources, Validation, Writing – review & editing Quintin-RouetIsabelleData curation, Investigation, Resources, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing ChateauMarie-ChristineData curation, Investigation, Resources, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing BazilleCelineData curation, Investigation, Resources, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing ValoIsabelleData curation, Investigation, Resources, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing ChetailleBrunoData curation, Investigation, Resources, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing OrtonneNicolasData curation, Investigation, Resources, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing BrouchetAnneData curation, Investigation, Resources, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing RochaixPhilippeData curation, Investigation, Resources, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing DemuretAnneData curation, Investigation, Resources, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing GhnassiaJean-PierreData curation, Investigation, Resources, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing MescamLenaigData curation, Investigation, Resources, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing MacagnoNicolasData curation, Investigation, Resources, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing Birtwisle-PeyrottesIsabelleData curation, Investigation, Resources, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing DelfourChristopheData curation, Investigation, Resources, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing AngotEmilieData curation, Investigation, Resources, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing PommepuyIsabelleData curation, Investigation, Resources, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing RanchereDominiqueData curation, Investigation, Resources, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing Chemin-AiriauClaireData curation, Methodology, Project administration, Resources, Supervision, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing Jean-DenisMyriamData curation, Methodology, Project administration, Resources, Software, Supervision, Validation, Writing – review & editing FayetYohanData curation, Investigation, Resources, Supervision, Visualization, Writing – review & editing CourrègesJean-BaptisteProject administration, Resources, Software, Supervision, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing MesliNouriaProject administration, Resources, Software, Supervision, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing BerchoudJulianeProject administration, Resources, Software, Supervision, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing ToulmondeMaudData curation, Funding acquisition, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Software, Validation, Writing – review & editing ItalianoAntoineData curation, Funding acquisition, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Supervision, Validation, Writing – review & editing Le CesneAxelConceptualization, Formal analysis, Funding acquisition, Methodology, Project administration, Supervision, Validation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing PenelNicolasConceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Funding acquisition, Methodology, Project administration, Supervision, Validation, Writing – review & editing DucimetiereFrancoiseConceptualization, Data curation, Funding acquisition, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Resources, Software, Supervision, Validation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing GouinFrancoisConceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Funding acquisition, Investigation, Project administration, Resources, Supervision, Validation, Writing – review & editing CoindreJean-MichelConceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Funding acquisition, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Resources, Software, Supervision, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing BlayJean-YvesConceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Funding acquisition, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Resources, Supervision, Validation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing on behalf of the NetSarc/RePPS/ResSos and French Sarcoma Group- Groupe d’Etude des Tumeurs Osseuses (GSF-GETO) networks PasqualiSandroEditor 1Department of pathology, CHU de Tours, Tours, France2Department of Biopathology, Centre Léon Bérard, Lyon, France3Department of Biopathology, Institut Bergonié, Bordeaux, France4Department of Biopathology, Institut Claudius Regaud et Institut Universitaire du Cancer de Toulouse—Oncopôle, Toulouse, France5Department of Biopathology, Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France6Department of pathology, La Timone University Hospital, Marseille, France7Pathology Department, Saint-Louis Hospital, AP-HP, Université de Paris, Paris, France8Pôle de Biologie-Pathologie-Génétique Centre Oscar Lambret, & Institut de Pathologie entre Oscar Lambret & CHU Lille, Lille, France9Department of Biopathology, Hopital Ambroise Paré, Boulogne, France10Department of Pathology, Department of Orthopedy CHU Nantes, Nantes, France11Department of Biopathology, Hôpital Cochin-Saint-Vincent de Paul, Paris, France12Department of Biopathology, Institut de Cancérologie de Lorraine—Alexis Vautrin, Vandoeuvre-lès-Nancy, France13Department of Biopathology, Eugene Marquis Comprehensive Cancer Center & CHU Rennes, Rennes, France14Department of Biopathology, Institut Curie, Paris, France15Department of Biopathology, Centre Georges François Leclerc, Dijon, France16Medipath, Frejus, France17Department of Biopathology, Centre Jean Perrin, Clermont-Ferrand, France18Department of pathology, CHRU Brest, Brest, France19Department of Biopathology, Institut de Cancérologie de Montpellier & CHU Montpellier, Montpellier, France20Department of Biopathology, Centre Francois Baclesse, Caen, France21Department of Pathology, Institut de Cancerologie de l’Ouest, Angers, France22Department of Biopathology, Hopital Henri Mondor, Creteil, France23Department of Biopathology, Centre Paul Strauss, Strasbourg, France24Department of Biopathology, Institut Paoli Calmettes, Marseille, France25Department of Biopathology, Centre Antoine-Lacassagne, Nice, France26Department of Biopathology, CHU Limoges, Limoges, France27Department of Medicine of Centre Leon Berard, University Claude Bernard Lyon I, Lyon, France28Headquarters, Unicancer, Paris, France29Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, ITALYCompeting Interests: No competing interests.
‡ These authors also contributed equally to this work.
¶ Membership of NetSarc/RePPS/ResSos and French Sarcoma Group- Groupe d’Etude des Tumeurs Osseuses (GSF-GETO) networks is provided in the .
✉* E-mail: jean-yves.blay@lyon.unicancer.fr
#Contributed equally.
2522021162e0246958e0246958332021© 2021 de Pinieux et alThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.

## Abstract

## Background
Since 2010, nationwide networks of reference centers for sarcomas (RREPS/NETSARC/RESOS) collected and prospectively reviewed all cases of sarcomas and connective tumors of intermediate malignancy (TIM) in France.

## Methods
The nationwide incidence of sarcoma or TIM (2013–2016) was measured using the 2013 WHO classification and confirmed by a second independent review by expert pathologists. Simple clinical characteristics, yearly variations and correlation of incidence with published clinical trials are presented and analyzed.

## Results
Over 150 different histological subtypes are reported from the 25172 patients with sarcomas (n = 18712, 74,3%) or TIM (n = 6460, 25.7%), with n = 5838, n = 6153, n = 6654, and n = 6527 yearly cases from 2013 to 2016. Over these 4 years, the yearly incidence of sarcomas and TIM was therefore 70.7 and 24.4 respectively, with a combined incidence of 95.1/106/year, higher than previously reported. GIST, liposarcoma, leiomyosarcomas, undifferentiated sarcomas represented 13%, 13%, 11% and 11% of tumors. Only GIST, as a single entity had a yearly incidence above 10/106/year. There were respectively 30, 64 and 66 different histological subtypes of sarcomas or TIM with an incidence ranging from 10 to 1/106, 1–0.1/106, or < 0.1/106/year respectively. The 2 latter incidence groups represented 21% of the patients with 130 histotypes. Published phase III and phase II clinical trials (p<10−6) are significantly higher with sarcomas subtypes with an incidence above 1/106 per.

## Conclusions
This nationwide registry of sarcoma patients, with exhaustive histology review by sarcoma experts, shows that the incidence of sarcoma and TIM is higher than reported, and that tumors with a very low incidence (1<106/year) are less likely to be included in clinical trials.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2020 Jun 20; Accepted 2021 Jan 28; Collection date 2021.

## Introduction
Sarcomas are a group of rare malignant diseases of the connective tissues, with heterogeneous clinical presentations and natural histories. The incidence of sarcoma was reported 15 years ago to be close to 2/105/year, but more recently, the global incidence was reported to be higher, ranging from 3 to 7 /105/year [ – ]. The incidence of sarcoma varies across countries and according to the date of the study [ – ] and is therefore not precisely known. Similarly, the incidence of each individual histological subtypes is unclear and sarcomas are misdiagnosed in up to 30% of cases [ , , , , ]. These patients with misdiagnosed sarcomas may not be treated according to clinical practice guidelines [ – ]. Clinical practice guidelines recommend that the diagnosis of sarcoma should be confirmed by an expert pathologist and that the management of sarcoma patients should be performed by a dedicated multidisciplinary team, including expert pathologists and surgeons, treating a minimal number of patients per year [ – ]. Central pathology review of sarcoma cases was shown to be cost effective, reducing both morbidity, mortality and cost of management [ , ].
Since 2010, the French National Cancer Institute (INCa) funded a pathology network (RRePS) and a clinical network (NETSARC) for sarcoma, to improve the quality of management of sarcoma patients. Subsequently, a dedicated bone sarcoma network named RESOS was created. Initially, the network composed of 23 expert reference centers for pathology (RRePS) was in charge of the histological review of each suspected case of sarcoma nationwide. Since 2019, all three networks have merged in a single network (acronym NETSARC+). The shared online database (see rreps.org and netsarc.org) gathers all cases of sarcoma reviewed by a multidisciplinary tumor board. It collects data related to diagnostic, therapeutic management, relapse and survival.
Since the January 1st 2010, this database prospectively has included over 60000 patients with sarcoma and connective tissue tumor of intermediate malignancy (TIM), as defined according to the WHO 2013 classification [ ]. Since 2013, the overall accrual in the database reached a plateau, providing a near exhaustive collection of cases in this country.
The global nationwide incidence of sarcoma has seldom been reported. Taking advantage of the organized reference center networks and expert pathology reviewing, we report here the incidence of the different histological subtypes of sarcomas and TIM from the NETSARC+ database from 2013 to 2016.

## Patient, material and methods

## The NETSARC+ network and the referral of the pathology samples to the network of experts
The RRePS (an acronym standing for Reseau de Relecture en Pathologie des Sarcomes, i.e. Network of Sarcoma Pathology Reviewing, gathering 23 centers), NetSarc (Network for Sarcoma, in charge of clinical management, gathering 26 centers), and ResOs (Network for Bone Sarcomas, dedicated to bone sarcoma pathology and clinical network) networks were merged into NETSARC+ (Network of Sarcomas Reference Centers) in 2019.
The organization of these networks has been previously reported [ , ]: each RRePS and NetSarc centers hold a multidisciplinary tumor board gathering sarcoma specialized pathologist(s) ( ), radiologist(s), surgeon(s), radiation oncologist(s), medical oncologist(s), molecular biologist(s), orthopedist(s) and pediatrician(s).
The missions given by the French National Cancer institute (INCa) funding the networks were, among others, to review all pathology samples and to collect a set of anonymized data to monitor patient outcome. Since 2010, it is mandatory for the primary pathologist to refer all suspected cases of sarcomas or TIM to one of these reference centers.

## The RRePS/NetSarc database
These databases have been approved by the French Ethic Committee and Agency in charge of non-interventional trials: Comité consultatif sur le traitement de l’information en matière de recherche dans le domaine de la Santé (CCTIRS: number of approval 09.594) and Commission Nationale Informatique et Liberté (CNIL: number of approval 909510). THe consent was obtained orally.
All sarcoma/TIM or suspected sarcoma/TIM patient cases discussed during the multidisciplinary tumor board (MDTB) of all 26 centers were recorded in the electronic online database, by a dedicated team of Clinical research assistant (CRAs), supervised by the Coordinating centers (Unicancer Comprehensive Cancer Centers: Centre Leon Bérard, Gustave Roussy, Institut Bergonié, as well as CHU Tours & CHU Nantes). Patients files may be presented at different stages of care process, before any diagnostic procedure, before initial biopsy, before primary surgery, after primary surgery, at relapse, and/or in case of a possible inclusion in a clinical trial as previously described [ , ]. All patients had the option to opt out the initiave, or could orally consent to the pathology review of their biopsy, the registry in the national network database according to the national laws at that time, as well as benefit from the recommendations of the French National Cancer Institute.
The databases were therefore not generated from clinical trial data, and we built to monitor and improve the management of patients with sarcomas in France. According to the national legislation, the activity of the three networks did not have to be reviewed by the national ethics committees, compared to clinical studies (the Comité de Protection des Personnes). However, each local hospitals (i.e. the reference centers) used their internal procedure (internal institutional review board) to approve participation to this work. This approval was mandatory for the participation of the given center to any of the 3 networks.
Oral consent is documented through a standard information sheet given to all patients in each institution in the welcome leaflet. Patients are able to opt out, and this information is taken into account during multidisciplinary tumor board discussions of the cases.
Patients and treatment data were prospectively collected and regularly updated by the dedicated study coordinators. The cases were obtained directly from the pathologist laboratories, or referred to the expert pathology laboratory for diagnosis confirmation for a fraction of the patients who were first seen by the clinical MDT. This double source of entry contributed to improve the exhaustiveness of the collection of cases. Of note, the database includes on purpose a limited set of data, describing for example patients and tumor characteristics, surgery, relapse and survival [ , ], centers performing the first resection, as well as potential secondary surgery types and sites, the final quality of resection.
The RRePS/NetSarc database may therefore give a nearly exhaustive representation of sarcoma cases to assess sarcoma incidence and prevalence in France.
The database is not systematically updated for follow-up by the CRA, as for clinical trial processes, but all baseline and first therapeutic information are completed until the end of the first line treatment. This includes all pathology reviews, which are therefore as presented, the final diagnoses, with a median follow-up of the series of 17 months in the recent publications of the same dataset (25). Importantly, since 2019, the data (survival and all treatments) from the nationwide database of the social security system (SNDS, https://www.snds.gouv.fr/SNDS/Accueil) is used to update the latest survival information of these patients as part of the Health DataHub Deepsarc project (https://www.health-data-hub.fr/outil-de-visualisation), now ensuring an exhaustive follow-up information.
Of note, the diagnosis of sarcomas of TIM (e.g. lipoma, carcinoma, lymphoma…) was not confirmed by the NetSarc MDTB for about 24% of the patients (not shown).
All data presented here were extracted from the common online database available online for a period of 4 years between 2013 and 2016. These 4 years were selected since: 1) the yearly incidence of sarcoma and TIM started to plateau since 2013, and 2) data monitoring and implementation is still ongoing since 2017.

## Presentation of the data
The 2013 WHO classification of sarcomas and connective tissue tumors was used from January 1st 2013 to describe the histological subtypes in the database, taking advantage of the contribution of the 2013 version (since April 2012) by one of the senior authors (JMC) of the current article, [ ]. Monthly physical meetings of the pathologist network to review complex cases have facilitated the homogeneity of data collection within this group. Both sarcomas and TIM were included in the database. Tumors of intermediate malignancy designates connective tissue tumors with the capacity to invade the surrounding tissues, with very rare metastases (1). These include for instance, aggressive fibromatosis, dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans, atypical lipomatous tumors …
The number of patients for each individual histological subtype of sarcoma or TIM per year, from 2013 to 2016, is therefore presented in the tables. To facilitate the comparison with other databases using previous classifications, the incidence of tumor groups (e.g. “uterine sarcomas”) are also presented in the tables. Each individual histotype, (e.g. WDLPS) and groups of histotypes are presented when clinically relevant (e.g. “WD and DDLPS”, or “liposarcoma”, “leiomyosarcomas”). Conversely, when a grouping did not exert relevance in clinical routine (e.g. “fibroblastic and myofibroblastic tumors” in ), no new entity was described.
 To estimate the incidence of these tumors, we used the official number of French citizens from 2013 to 2016, which were respectively 65.56, 66.13, 66.42 and 66.60 million inhabitants.

## Matching histotypes with published clinical trials
For each individual histotype, we searched Pubmed to identify published dedicated clinical trials. The name of the histological entity (e.g. angiosarcoma, pleomorphic liposarcoma…) was filtered for clinical trial, adding « phase III », « randomized phase II », or « phase II ». Pubmed was interrogated between January 15th 2020 and January 30th 2020. For the presentation of these data, all sarcoma histotypes or groups of histotypes, were ranked according to the order of decreasing incidence. When at least one phase II (light blue), one randomized phase II (dark blue), or one phase III (green) was published in the literature this was indicated in the line of the histotype using this colour code. It was also also used for the 3 columns of sarcoma/TIM with decreasing incidences to facilitate the visibility of the correlation between incidence of sarcoma and availability of clinical trials on the figure.

## Statistical analyses
The number of patients per year with the different histotypes is presented in tables. To analyze the variation of incidence over the 4 years, a Poisson Regression was used. Six histotypes with a significant variation in the period of observation are graphically detailed by overlaying the observed incidence, a linear regression over time and a spline. The comparison of the frequency of published clinical trials per histological subtypes or groups of subtypes was performed using the chi square or Fisher’s exact test with a threshold p value of p<0.05. All statistical tests were two-sided. All statistical analyses were performed using SPSS (v 23.0) (IBM, Paris, France).

## Results

## Incidence of sarcoma and TIM in NetSarc
Tables – present the incidence of the individual histological subtypes of soft tissue sarcomas/TIM ( ), visceral sarcomas/TIM (Tables and for uterine sarcoma), bone sarcomas/TIM (Tables and ) included in the database (gathering the RRePS, NetSarc, and ResOs) from 2013 to 2016, a period where the data are expected to be close to exhaustive nationwide.
 From 2013 to 2016, a total of 25172 patients were included in the database, with n = 5838, n = 6153, n = 6654, and n = 6527 of new patients each year. Of note, respectively N = 4435 N = 4977 and N = 5550 patients were included in each year from 2010 to 2012 (not shown). The NetSarc database contains over 150 individual histological subtypes (i.e. a single histological entity such as monophasic synovial sarcoma, low grade surface osteosarcoma, atypical lipomatous tumor) or groups of sarcomas (e.g. liposarcoma, leiomyosarcoma, osteosarcoma, where the grouping of individual histological entity when clinically relevant) (Tables –). The grouping are described in . Twelve additional histological subtypes of bone sarcomas (leiomyosarcomas, synovial etc) were also distinguished in this work and described in . These histotypes usually arising from soft tissue are also included in . Finally, also presents the incidence of sarcomas diagnosed in patients with reported genetic predispositions, such as Li Fraumeni syndrome.
The official numbers of the French population are 65.56, 66.13, 66.42 and 66.60 million inhabitants in respectively 2013, 2014, 2015, 2016. The estimated incidences of sarcomas and tumors of intermediate malignancy from 2013 to 2016 were 89.05, 93.04, 100.18, and 98.00 per million inhabitants respectively. Over these 4 years, the estimated yearly incidence of sarcomas and TIM was therefore 95,1/106/year. There were 18712 (74%) patients with sarcomas (incidence 70.7/10e/year) and 6460 (26%, 24.4/106/year) patients with TIM. The observed overall incidence of sarcoma and TIMs is therefore higher that previously reported [ – ].

## Over 100-fold difference in incidence in different sarcoma histotypes
To complete data, presents the individual histotypes and relevant groups of histotypes (e.g. liposarcoma, leiomyosarcoma, uterine sarcomas) by increasing incidence. GIST, liposarcoma, leiomyosarcomas, undifferentiated sarcomas represent 13%, 13%, 11% and 11% of all sarcomas (47% all together). Only gastrointestinal stromal tumors, if considered as a single entity, exceeded a yearly incidence above 10/106/ year ( ). The other histological types of sarcomas with a yearly incidence above 10/106/year are 1) all liposarcomas, 2) all smooth muscle tumors, 3) all undifferentiated sarcomas, and 4) all fibroblastic or myofibroblastic tumors lumped together. This latter group is not clinically homogenous and usually not considered as a specific entity in clinical trials or retrospective studies.
 presents the list of sarcomas or TIM with a decreasing incidence ranging from 10 to 1/106/year, 1–0.1/106 per year, or <0.1/106/year. The 3 groups include respectively 30, 64 and 66 different histological subtypes or groups of histological subtypes. The groups with an incidence from 1–0.1/106 per year, or <0.1/106/year included respectively 4766 (19%) and 568 (2%) of the 25172 patients.
 The mean age, sex ratio and sites for the different histotypes are presented in . It shows the large clinical heterogeneity of these tumors with a mean age ranging from 5 years (infantile fibrosarcoma) to 78 (atypical fibroxanthoma), and a sex ratio from 0 (for sexual organs) to 153 for adenosarcoma.
 

## Variable incidence of sarcoma histotypes over the 2013–2016 period
We investigated then the variability of the yearly incidence of these different tumors in the database. The analysis of variance of the observed incidence indicated a significant interaction between time and histology. presents the six histological subtypes with the mst significant variation between 2013 and 2016. Adenosarcoma, desmoid tumors, malignant pecoma, UPS, endometrial stromal sarcoma—high-grade increased over the 4-year period, while myoepithelioma showed a decrease of incidence ( ). The significance of these variations remains unclear and needs further investigation using comparable registries with a centralized review.

## Incidence of individual histotypes and published clinical trials
 and gives a graphic presentation in decreasing order of the incidence of the different histotypes and groups of histotypes. These were matched with published clinical trial data collected from Pubmed on a given histological group (e.g. liposarcoma) or specific histotype (e.g. pleomorphic liposarcoma). Phase III studies, randomized phase II studies and non-randomized phase II studies are indicated in green, dark blue and light blue respectively showing a variable access to clinical trial according to the incidence of the histotype. An histological subtype is considered “covered” by a trial only if the trial design contains a specific arm (phase II) or a specific strata (phase III) for a given histotype.
As expected, phase III trials are made available mostly for histotypes or groups of histotypes with an incidence >1/106 per year ( ). 14 of 35 (40%) histotypes and groups of histotypes with an incidence >1/106 had a dedicated phase III study vs 6 of 130 (4.6%) histotypes for sarcomas with an incidence <1/106 (p<10−6). 20100 (79,7%) patients of the database had a histotype for which no phase III trial had been reported. Twenty-one of 35 (60%) histotypes with an incidence >1/106 had a dedicated randomized phase II study vs 10 of 130 (7.7%) histotypes for sarcomas with a incidence <1/106 (p<10−10). 13154 (52.1%) patients of the database had a specific histotype for which no randomized phase II trial had been reported. Twenty-eight of 35 (80%) histotypes with an incidence >1/106 had a dedicated phase II study vs 36 of 130 (27.9%) histotypes for sarcomas with an incidence <1/106 (p<10−8). 6516 (25.8%) patients of the database had a specific histotype for which no phase II trial had been reported.

## Discussion
The objective of this work was to measure the incidence of individual histological subtypes of sarcomas and TIM according to the 2013 WHO classification. These cases were collected from the NETSARC+ database, combining the previous RRePS, ResOs and NetSarc databases. This work, supported by the French NCI, allowed to measure the incidence of sarcomas and TIM in a nationwide level. The mandatory central pathology review, in place since 2010, has facilitated the constitution of a close to exhaustive nationwide collection of patients with sarcoma and TIM. Since 2013, the number of patients included in the database per year is relatively stable suggesting that the database may indeed be close to exhaustiveness. We stopped the description in 2016, since the period spanning from 2017 to 2019 is still being monitored and updated by the CRAs of NETSARC+.
The first important observation is that the incidence of these tumors is higher than previously reported in each of these 4 years [ – ]. Recently published data from countries in 4 different continents reported an overall incidence ranging from 3 to 7.7/106/year. The results of these studies are heterogeneous in terms of proportion distribution of the histotypes, ranging from 4 to 20% for undifferentiated sarcomas for instance. These observations suggest that mandatory central pathology review, implemented during this period, enabled to collect exhaustive data to assess the incidence of almost all subtypes. In addition, it relied on expert reviewing and therefore a more accurate diagnosis.
Importantly, there are no national registries for any cancers, including sarcomas in France and there are several limitations for using regional registries for the model of rare cancers. These limitations are 1) the already mentioned importance of centralized expert pathology review in sarcoma, which corrects the first diagnosis in >20% of the cases [ – , ], and 2) the lack of exhaustiveness of these registries for sarcomas; an ongoing collaborative work between NetSarc and the network of Regional registries (unpublished) indicates that the incidence of sarcoma and TIM is less than 70% of that observed in the present report. An increased collaboration is strongly needed between these structures.
Mandatory central pathology review is essential for these rare cancers and it can be achieved through several pathways: 1) each pathology review report indicates the mandatory review process, the sites as well as the contact information of the expert pathologists; all French pathologists are addressed this report multiple times per year; 2) when missed, patients presented in clinical MDT without pathology review are immediately referred to the closest expert pathology center; 3) the patients themselves exerted on multiple occasions their request for a pathology review, asking for a wide dissemination on the internet of the existence of networks of excellence and the mandatory pathology and clinical review process.
While the incidence of sarcoma and TIM observed here is higher than previously reported [ – ], it is important to point out that comparison with historical series has important limitations: some individual entities described here may have been described only very recently (e.g. GIST before 1999, solitary fibrous tumors, etc…). The numbers presented are those measured with a more recent classification which has dramatically evolved in recent decades.
The present work also confirms that sarcoma and TIM are a highly fragmented group of diseases. Over 150 different histotypes or groups of histotypes relevant for clinical practice are listed. The precise definition of this number was somehow challenging, and in part subjective for the selection of a relevant group of histotypes treated homogenously in routine in clinical trials (e.g. “liposarcoma”). It must be noted also that the actual number of different disease entities may actually be larger. GIST, for instance, gathers tumors with completely different genetic somatic alterations (of KIT, PDGFRA, SDH, NF1, BRAF, NTRK3) each with different natural histories.
The individual incidence of different sarcoma histotypes ranged from 10/106 to less than 0.01/106, i.e. a >1000-fold difference in incidence. Altogether sarcomas are considered as rare cancer, but the majority of individual subtypes are actually extremely rare. This is of course challenging for the understanding of the natural history of each individual subtypes, for the development of clinical trials, new treatments as well as defining standards of care.
Sarcoma and TIM are also a highly heterogeneous group of disease for clinical presentations as shown by the diversity of sex ratio and mean age of diagnosis. Each of these entities should therefore benefit from a specific research program to describe their natural history as well as the impact of current treatment on their disease course. This requires a coordinated effort, worldwide, to achieve this goal given the rarity of certain histotypes. This is currently being conducted by intergroup studies, and international networks such as WSN or more recently EURACAN [ – ]. This work also confirms the importance of national registries to investigate these rare subtypes.
An intriguing observation is the variation of incidence for these tumors over time, and statistically significant for several histotypes. There is however no clear explanation for this observation. Given the stable position of pathology experts involved in the network, this may not likely result from the variable pathology review. Epidemiological studies in other countries may be useful to confirm these variations, which may guide research on etiology of these rare sarcomas and TIM.
Another observation, expected by clinicians, is the link between the incidence and the availability of published prospective clinical research work to guide the management of individual subtypes. For decades, the medical treatment of sarcomas used a one-size-fits-all approach for all histotypes from phase II to III clinical trials, in particular in adults. For 15 years, histotype specific randomized phase II, III and phase II studies were implemented, starting with GIST. This is more the exception of the rule though. The majority of histotypes described in this work, especially those with an incidence under 1/106/year have not had a dedicated phase II, randomized phase II or phase III clinical trial to adapt or guide clinical practice guidelines. This is graphically obvious, even though the mode of presentation of the figure amplified this phenomenon, since we presented both individual subtypes (e.g. monophasic synovial sarcoma, with no dedicated clinical trials to our knowledge) and pooled histotypes (e.g. all synovial sarcomas, where clinical trials were listed). It must be noted, however, that in the group with an incidence <0.1/106/year, some histotypes were included in dedicated clinical trials. Due to the rarity of these tumors, clinical trials are expected to only be feasible at a global worldwide level, and randomization will not be feasible.
Overall, this calls for a revision of the criteria to define standard treatment for such rare tumors where phase III are hardly or not feasible [ – ]. Health authorities and reimbursement bodies should adapt their decisions on approval and reimbursement on the feasible level of evidence which could be reached for tumors with and incidence <1/106 per year in order not to discriminate against patients with rare cancers. It is important to remember that altogether patients with rare cancers represent 22% of all patients with cancers, and about 30% of the mortality due to cancer [ ].
This study has many limitations. We cannot exclude that patients may not reach our network despite the administrative incentive. This is true in particular for bone sarcoma and TIM (e.g. chondroblastomas, osteoblastoma, aneurysmatic bone cyst, etc.) which were collected more recently.
The work must also adapt to the rapidly evolving classification of sarcomas, including new molecular sub-classifications, which are not described here (for instance GIST, the novel NTRK sarcoma subgroup, BCOR, CIC-DUX4 sarcomas). To further explore the exhaustivity of the NETSARC+ database, an ongoing project connects it to the social security data base (SNDS) (the Health DataHub Deepsarc project), the single payer in France covering all citizens, across all diseases. This should enable to enhance the accuracy of these numbers.
In conclusion, this nationwide registry reports a higher than previously reported incidence of sarcoma and TIM at a nationwide level, over a 4-year period, with a central sarcoma pathologist expertise review. Our data provide a benchmark to be compared with other worldwide registries and confirm the limitations of clinical research in sarcomas with an incidence inferior to 1/106 per year. The observation of variable incidence for specific histological subtypes is intriguing and requires further investigation by using data from other countries. Geographical research on the distribution of these cases over the national territory are currently ongoing.

## Supporting information
S1 Table

## Contributing pathologists of all centers RRePS & RESOS.
This table includes per alphabetical order of institutions, the different pathologists contributing to this work. Note that a single reference center from RREPS or now NETSARC+ may include more than one institution.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Table

## Codes of the histotypes according to WHO 2013.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 Table

## Grouping of histotypes presented in the tables.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Fig

## Published clinical trials in sarcoma and TIM histotypes.
Tabular presentation of different sarcoma histotypes and groups of histotypes by decreasing order together with the documented published clinical trials in Pubmed. If phase III clinical trials are published, the box is highlighted in light green, if randomized phase II trials are published the box is highlighted in dark blue, if uncontrolled phase II trials are published the box is highlighted in light blue. Histotypes were considered individually (e.g. monophasic synovial sarcoma) or globally (e.g. all synovial sarcoma).
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Fig

## Variable incidence of sarcoma subtypes from 2013 to 2016.
Presentation of the yearly variation of six different histotypes with significantly variable incidence in the period of observation.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.

## Acknowledgments
The authors thank Stephanie Cox and Muriel Rogasik for their review of the manuscript.

## Data Availability
All data is in the tables and supplemental documents.

## Funding Statement
This work was supported by Institut National Du Cancer (FR) NETSARC+, Institut National Du Cancer (FR) RREPS, Institut National Du Cancer (FR) RESOS, Institut National Du Cancer (FR) NETSARC, Institut National Du Cancer (FR) LYriCAN (INCa-DGOS-INSERM_12563), Agence Nationale de la Recherche (FR) Institut Convergence PLASCA, (17-CONV-0002), Agence Nationale de la Recherche (FR) LabEx DEvweCAN (ANR-10-LABX-0061), Agence Nationale de la Recherche (FR) RHU4 DEPGYN (ANR-18-RHUS-0009) Institut National Du Cancer (FR) INTERSARC, Fondation ARC pour la Recherche sur le Cancer Unicancer, Ligue Contre le Cancer (FR) Unicancer, Ligue Contre le Cancer Comité de l’Ain Canopee, and by EUROPEAN COMMISSION (EU) EURACAN (EC 739521). The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.

## References
 

PLoS ONEPLoS One10.1371/journal.pone.0246958.r001Decision Letter 0
PasqualiSandroAcademic Editor© 2021 Sandro PasqualiThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.

## Transfer Alert
This paper was transferred from another journal. As a result, its full editorial history (including decision letters, peer reviews and author responses) may not be present.

27 Jul 2020

PONE-D-20-18848
Nationwide incidence of sarcomas and connective tissue tumors of intermediate malignancy over four years using an expert pathology review network.
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Blay,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
The manuscript has been deemd of  high interest for the sarcoma and rare cancer community. However, several comments have been reported by reviewers and these should be thoroughly addressed.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Sep 10 2020 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Sandro Pasquali, M.D., Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf
2. In the Methods, please clarify that participants provided oral consent. Please also state in the Methods:
- Why written consent could not be obtained
- Whether the Institutional Review Board (IRB) approved use of oral consent
- How oral consent was documented
For more information, please see our guidelines for human subjects research: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-human-subjects-research
3.We noticed minor instances of text overlap with the following previous publication(s), which need to be addressed:
(1) https://www.journals.elsevier.com/annals-of-oncology
The text that needs to be addressed involves the Introduction section.
In your revision please ensure you cite all your sources (including your own works), and quote or rephrase any duplicated text outside the methods section. Further consideration is dependent on these concerns being addressed.
4. To comply with PLOS ONE submission guidelines, in your Methods section, please provide additional information regarding your statistical analyses, including the threshold set of statistical significance for your analyses. For more information on PLOS ONE's expectations for statistical reporting, please see https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines.#loc-statistical-reporting.
5. Please amend your list of authors on the manuscript to ensure that each author is linked to an affiliation. Authors’ affiliations should reflect the institution where the work was done (if authors moved subsequently, you can also list the new affiliation stating “current affiliation:….” as necessary).
6. Please include captions for your Supporting Information files at the end of your manuscript, and update any in-text citations to match accordingly. Please see our Supporting Information guidelines for more information: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/supporting-information.
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Partly
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: No
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: The authors provided for the first time incidence rate for specific sarcomas histology based on central pathology review. this is extremely important and useful since no high quality data on sarcoma specific histotype are available. However, the manuscript need extensive revision to be considered for publication. please refer to the specific comments below.
Introduction
Since 2013, the overall accrual in the database reached a plateau, suggesting that the closest to exhaustive collection of cases in this country was obtained. The authors should provide stronger evidence of the nationwide representativeness of the registry considering cases not accessing the network e.g. old sarcoma pts, sarcomas diagnosed only from autoptic cases etc. in France there are population based cancer registries. Although these registries are not national, comparison of data could be relevant to understand the completeness of case ascertained by NETSARC vs the population based one for malignant sarcomas only.
The RREPS/NETSARC Database
The authors should better describe the quality of the DB including the completeness of the follow-up information which are essential to define the prevalence.
Presentation of the data
The authors used the 2013 WHO classification. However the years used to estimate incidence are 2013-2016. to what extend the 2013 classification was used already in 2013 nationwide? could the author comment on any possible impact of the implementation of the 2013 during the years included in the study on the provided incidence? the authors should clarify which codes of the WHO were used to define the grouping and histological entities presented in the Tabes.
Incidence
“The NETSARC database includes 156 individual tumors or groups of sarcoma/TIM, 31 groups of sarcomas/TIM (e.g. « liposarcoma ») and 125 distinct individual histological subtypes of sarcomas or
TIM (Table 1-3)”. Can the authors better explain these different grouping reported in the results section?
Ti compare the incidence estimated in NETSARC with that of previous study, the authors should pay attention to the years included in the different study (e.g. those before 2000 may not include GIST) and the sarcomas included (e.g. population-based cancer registries study include only malignant thus TIM are excluded). The authors should re considering their comments about the comparison with previous study.
Finally, the results should separate sarcomas from TIM.
Over 100-fold difference in incidence in different sarcoma histotypes
Figure 1 presents the individual histotypes and relevant groups of histotypes (eg liposarcoma, leiomyosarcoma, unterine sarcomas) ordered by incidence. I think there is a mistake, the author mean Table 1.
The author should use coherent terms/label in the text and in Table 1.
There were respectively 35, 63 and 66 different histological subtypes or groups (e.g. MPNST, or
vascular sarcomas…) of sarcomas or TIM with an incidence ranging from 10 to 1/10 6 /year, 1-0.1/10 6
per year, or <0.1/10 6 /year respectively. Please, clarify how to find these numbers in Table 1.
the description of the results is very confusing and it does not provide a guideline to read Table 1. Please revise
Table 2, 3 and 4 are not presented in the results. Sex ratio and mean age for diagnosis should be commented in the results section.
Table 1
The author should clarify what it is included in table 1. number by year and incidence rate in the 4 years of the study? in red are marked ....? in black bold are marked....?
Table 2
The author should clarify what it is included in table 2. number by year and incidence rate in the 4 years of the study? in black bold are marked....?
Table 3
The author should clarify what it is included in table 3. number by year and incidence rate in the 4 years of the study? in red are marked ....? in black bold are marked....?
the authors should also consider to present the incidence rate by decreasing rate?
Figure 1
can the authors clarify the colours in figure 1?
the text needs English revision.
Reviewer #2: TITLE: Nationwide incidence of sarcomas and connective tissue tumors of intermediate malignancy over four years using an expert pathology review network.
MAIN CONCERN
(1)
Using a nationwide database, this important study aims to describe the incidence of fully malignant sarcomas and mesenchymal tumors of intermediate malignancy (TIM), all with expert confirmation of pathologic diagnosis. Although appearing in the title, the term “connective tissue tumors of intermediate malignancy” was never explained/clarified in the manuscript. The criteria for differential diagnosis were never reported.
TIM cases were 6460 as can be read on line 11 of Abstract. However, those reporting “intermediate” in the name of their histotype were only 63 cases (table 1). In particular they were: 5 cases of “Intermediate fibrohistiocytic tumors”; 6 cases of “Intermediate vascular tumors”; and 52 cases of “Sarcoma NOS Tumors of intermediate malignancy”. The difference between 6460 and 63 was never apprised in the article.
In the analysis, the tumors were broken down in two-way tables in which rows were always the histological subtypes and columns were time or person characteristics. There were no separate tables for fully malignant sarcomas and TIMs. They were reported as sum at each cell of row and column interception; the reader cannot know their frequency separately.
In my opinion, if the tables cannot be changed, the title should be rephrased.
(2)
The manuscript needs English editing. Moreover, I strongly suggest to also control all numbers appearing in the text. For example: “139 histological subtypes” (Abstract, line 10) should be “159 histological subtypes” that is the sum of “30, 63 and 66 different histological subtypes of sarcomas or TIM”, reported on line 15-16 of Abstract. Another example: the percentage of sarcomas (=18710/25172) is 74%, not 64%” as it appears in line 10 of Abstract. On line 11 the percentage of TIMs should be 26% rather that 36%.
MINOR CONCERN
(1)
In Table 4, the heading of the second column is “F/H” (Femmes/Hommes in French) rather than F/M (Females/Males).
Reviewer #3: No Major Critiques. The manuscript is largely clear, informative, and provides the most detailed breakdown of sarcoma type incidence in a population that I have seen to date.
Minor:
1. The authors should carefully check the manuscript for a few scattered English grammar issues and typos (both in text and tables), and use more consistent capitalization in the tables (some tumors have only the first word of the name capitalized, others have multiple words capitalized)
2. I would not necessarily consider adenosarcoma or phyllodes, much less UT resembling ovarian sex cord stromal tumor as proper sarcomas, though I do appreciate why they were included here. The authors may wish to clarify if the category in table 1 part 2 refers specifically to malignant phyllodes with sarcomatous overgrowth or all malignant phyllodes.
3. In table 2 does the “osteosarcoma” entry include the subtypes or is it separate – if separate how is it different than the NOS category. There are 2 entries for low grade central osteosarcoma with different numbers of cases. This table should be checked for accuracy and clarity
4. Figure 1 looks obviously pasted from a spreadsheet (including some cut off text visible in the top of the middle and right panels) and is hard to read as presented. Would consider removing tumors with no published clinical trials to a supplemental table. Or else presenting each subset broken down by incidence into individual figures for improved legibility. Why is synovial sarcoma NOS separated from monophasic SS and biphasic SS? Or MPNST usual type from MPNST? Or SFT (all) from SFT NOS? Consider combining or eliminating duplicate /redundant entries as these do not seem to add much to the table or understanding of trial availability. At a minimum trials involving specific variants of individual sarcoma types should be grouped together for clarity.
5. In the discussion specify the WHO classification used (obviously these had to have been done using the 2013 WHO given when the data was collected) but it is no longer “the most recent”.
Reviewer #4: General Comments
This work is an important report describing the sarcoma incidence in France, where an efficient system of cases centralization is in place. This work will be the benchmark for future epidemiological studies.
The manuscript however has two major critical points:
1) the data are displayed in long tables; If the presented data were displayed in a more graphically appealing way the work would gain a lot; after all the main point of the present manuscript is to convey the numbers, so the data visualization probably would represent the analytical part of the paper.
2) Statistical analysis de-trending the sarcoma count among different histotypes is arguable; however this do not diminish the value of this work, that relies in the numbers provided. see the specific comment for explanation.
Specific comments
Abstract
Many readers are probably not aware of what NETSARC and RREPS are; a more descriptive term could help the reader of the abstract and push him/her to see the paper.
Introduction
Data from years 2010-12 have been dropped from further analysis, probably a plot showing the total number of cases might help the reader to picture the story you are telling.
Materials and methods
how the central review is enforced?
Clinical trials
it is not clear to me how the data have been retrieved, and tabulated.
Statistics
The importance of the presented data is enough to do not require a statistical analysis. However I think that the proposed analysis of trend is not adequate: the analysis of variance should compare the variance of a variable among 2 or more groups; this variable should be normally distributed, but the variable of interest is a count and in this case normality is not a good assumption, since the numbers are really low given the rarity of sarcoma (a Poisson distribution might have the right characteristics). Moreover there is a single data point that cannot show "variance"; I would therefore take the statistical significance with a lots of doubts. On the other hand the figure shown in supplementals are linear models; probably better, they in fact treat time as a continuous variable, however they also expect negative count to be perfectly normal.
If the authors really think that de-trend a time series with 4 data point is an important aim for their work I suggest to use a statistical procedure that does the job (as a spline or a gaussian process), and – given the limited number of observation between the many different categories – a regularizing technique or a fully bayesian approach with multilevel models might help.
lastly the data shown in the table next to the supplementary figure has a error: the line copied for central chondrosarcoma is not correct neither would give the result reported ( I suspect the two categories of grading have been inverter).
Results
There are many typos; also tables need revision (commas instead of points, H = Homes ).
see statistics
Discussion
Also typos; "most recent WHO" is the 2020?
see statistics
Figure 1: is not actually a figure. the same general comment on data representation apply here
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes: Giuseppe Mastrangelo
Reviewer #3: No
Reviewer #4: Yes: Salvatore Lorenzo Renne
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
PLoS ONEPLoS One10.1371/journal.pone.0246958.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
2522021162e0246958e0246958Collection date 2021.

15 Sep 2020

JY Blay
Jean-yves.blay@lyon.unicancer.fr
to
Sandro Pasquali, M.D., Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
PONE-D-20-18848 Nationwide incidence of sarcomas and connective tissue tumors of intermediate malignancy over four years using an expert pathology review network.
Dear Dr. Pasquali,
Thank you for your recent e-mail regarding the above mentioned article submitted to PLOS ONE. 
We are now able to submit a revised version of this article taking into consideration all rthe requirements of the reviewers. 
Please find hereunder a point by point reply to the different comments. 
A revised version with visible marks in included as well as the revised version. 
We remain of course at your disposition for any further question you may have regarding the work
With kind regards
 JY Blay
 
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
This was done accordingly. We have inserted the table at the end though to facilitate legibility. As mentioned by one of the 4 reviewers, we could split the tables (e.g. Table 1 in Table 1A, 1B etc..) if preferred by the editorial board of PLoS One
2. In the Methods, please clarify that participants provided oral consent. Please also state in the Methods:
We confirm that all patients included in this work approved orally their participation to the pathology review, and the inscription in the national network database according to the national laws at that time, as well as the recommendations of the French National Cancer Institute (page 6 revised version).
- Why written consent could not be obtained.
The mission given by the French National Cancer institute (INCA)was actually to review all pathology samples and to collect a minimal set of anonymized data to be able to monitor patient outcome. These were not clinical trials therefore. It was a national mission given to the networks for the management of patients with sarcomas. However, as indicated in the document and in previous, not all patients did actually had their samples reviewed by reference centers immediately in the first years (p 6 of the revised Ms).
- Whether the Institutional Review Board (IRB) approved use of oral consent
The activity of the networks had not to be reviewed by the national ethics committees as done for clinical studies (the Comité de Protection des Personnes). The local hospitals (ie the reference centers) use their own internal procedure (internal institutional review board) for this approval, which was mandatory for the participation to the networks (p6 of the revised Ms).
- How oral consent was documented
Standard information sheet is given to all patients in each institution at first entry, with the opportunity for the patient to opt-out participation. In addition, review of the patient records in indicated in all multidisciplinary sarcoma boards reports. This is also indicated on p6 of the revised Ms.
For more information, please see our guidelines for human subjects research: https://smex-ctp.trendmicro.com:443/wis/clicktime/v1/query?url=https%3a%2f%2fjournals.plos.org%2fplosone%2fs%2fsubmission%2dguidelines%23loc%2dhuman%2dsubjects%2dresearch&umid=59435c4f-7e81-48ac-8a14-c7d99c29f380&auth=88b027512158546030ba1422e012c48ffde03353-fec0bc3097bbb29ab85c8bc38a232be8d0801f9tumor board 0
 3.We noticed minor instances of text overlap with the following previous publication(s), which need to be addressed:
(1) https://www.journals.elsevier.com/annals-of-oncology
Please accept our apologizes for this. We, as not native english speakers, often use similar sentences for the same topics, in particular when the same data set is used for different questions. We have modified the text in the revised accordingly (in particular in the introduction and discussion).
The text that needs to be addressed involves the Introduction section. 
The introduction was modified.as indicated in the above comment
 In your revision please ensure you cite all your sources (including your own works), and quote or rephrase any duplicated text outside the methods section. Further consideration is dependent on these concerns being addressed.
This was carefully reviewed and done the different sections of these aspects.
4. To comply with PLOS ONE submission guidelines, in your Methods section, please provide additional information regarding your statistical analyses, including the threshold set of statistical significance.
Thresholds for significance were added on p7 of the revised M/M section.
5. Please amend your list of authors on the manuscript to ensure that each author is linked to an affiliation. Authors’ affiliations should reflect the institution where the work was done (if authors moved subsequently, you can also list the new affiliation stating “current affiliation:….” as necessary).
This was done on the Ms and on the website. Please note that some of the reference centers include patients from more than one hospital, to match the organizational requests of the French INCA.
6. Please include captions for your Supporting Information files at the end of your manuscript, and update any in-text citations to match accordingly. Please see our Supporting Information guidelines for more information: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/supporting-information.
Captions for supplementary data were added.
 
Replies to reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
 Comments to the Author
1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
 Reviewer #1: Partly
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
________________________________________
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: No
________________________________________
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
________________________________________
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
________________________________________
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: The authors provided for the first time incidence rate for specific sarcomas histology based on central pathology review. this is extremely important and useful since no high quality data on sarcoma specific histotype are available. However, the manuscript need extensive revision to be considered for publication. please refer to the specific comments below.
Introduction
Since 2013, the overall accrual in the database reached a plateau, suggesting that the closest to exhaustive collection of cases in this country was obtained. The authors should provide stronger evidence of the nationwide representativeness of the registry considering cases not accessing the network e.g. old sarcoma pts, sarcomas diagnosed only from autoptic cases etc. in France there are population based cancer registries. Although these registries are not national, comparison of data could be relevant to understand the completeness of case ascertained by NETSARC vs the population based one for malignant sarcomas only.
This is indeed a very important question. As rightly pointed out by the reviewer, there are no national registries for any cancers in France. There are several limitations with the use of regional registries related to 1) the 20-30% rate of histotype modification after pathology review by expert centers in sarcoma (reported by several works, reference in tis article), and 2) the lack of exhaustivity of these regional registries for sarcomas. An ongoing work, yet unpublished, where NETSARC contributed indicates that 65-70% of incident cases as calculated in the work are declared in these registries, pointing to the need of an increased collaboration between these structures. This has been added in the discussion section of the revised Ms, p10. 
The RREPS/NETSARC Database
The authors should better describe the quality of the DB including the completeness of the follow-up information which are essential to define the prevalence.
This is again an important question. The database is completed and monitored by a group of dedicated CRAs (as for a clinical trial) for baseline information, clinical presentation; outcome… The majority of the cases are obtained directly from the pathologist laboratories, but a fraction of the patients are first seen by the clinical MDT, and then referred to the expert pathology laboratory for confirmation of the diagnosis. This double source of entry contributes to improve the exhaustivity of the collection of cases. This has been added in the Material and method section p7.
Presentation of the data
The authors used the 2013 WHO classification. However, the years used to estimate incidence are 2013-2016. to what extend the 2013 classification was used already in 2013 nationwide? could the author comment on any possible impact of the implementation of the 2013 during the years included in the study on the provided incidence? the authors should clarify which codes of the WHO were used to define the grouping and histological entities presented in the Tables.
The 2013 classification was used from the initiation of this work indeed, as added in the M/M section p7. Monthly physical meetings of the pathologists network for review of complex cases have facilitated the homogeneity of data collection within this group. The addition of the WHO codes is a challenge for the legibility of the tables already quite crowded. We respectfully suggest to keep this presentation on this simpler format.
Incidence
“The NETSARC database includes 156 individual tumors or groups of sarcoma/TIM, 31 groups of sarcomas/TIM (e.g. « liposarcoma ») and 125 distinct individual histological subtypes of sarcomas or
TIM (Table 1-3)”. Can the authors better explain these different grouping reported in the results section?
Indeed, this was an important difficulty of the presentation of this large and fragmented dataset. We considered that it was still useful to present each individual histotype, (e.g. WDLPS) and groups of histotypes when clinically relevant (e.g. WD and DDLPS, or even liposarcoma as a whole). Conversely, when a grouping was not clinically meaningful in clinical routine (e.g. “fibroblastic and myofibroblastic tumors” in table 1) we did not consider this a a distinct entity. This point was added in the M/M (p7) and in the Result section of the revised document (p8). We have reformulated these section and provide some examples to improve clarity. In order to avoid a debate on the exact number of histotypes which can be subjective, we chose to present tthat the total number of histotypes was above 150.
To compare the incidence estimated in NETSARC with that of previous study, the authors should pay attention to the years included in the different study (e.g. those before 2000 may not include GIST) and the sarcomas included (e.g. population-based cancer registries study include only malignant thus TIM are excluded). The authors should re considering their comments about the comparison with previous study.
We fully agree with this observation. A note of caution has been added in the discussion section (p10, “It is however important to point hat comparison with historical series have limitations also because individual entities may have only a recent “existence”, (e.g. GIST before 1999, solitary fibrous tumors , etc…). The numbers presented are those measured with a more recent classification which has evolved over the years”.
Finally, the results should separate sarcomas from TIM. Over 100-fold difference in incidence in different sarcoma histotypes Figure 1 presents the individual histotypes and relevant groups of histotypes (eg liposarcoma, leiomyosarcoma, unterine sarcomas) ordered by incidence. I think there is a mistake, the author mean Table 1. 
We actually meant both table 1 and Figure 1, where histotypes are presented ordered by incidence. This was corrected in the revised version (p9).
The author should use coherent terms/label in the text and in Table 1.
There were respectively 35, 63 and 66 different histological subtypes or groups (e.g. MPNST, or vascular sarcomas…) of sarcomas or TIM with an incidence ranging from 10 to 1/10 6 /year, 1-0.1/10 6 per year, or <0.1/10 6 /year respectively. Please, clarify how to find these numbers in Table 1. the description of the results is very confusing and it does not provide a guideline to read Table 1. Please revise
We agree that this presentation was too complicated. We removed this sentence to improve legibility on p8, and reformulated section 3 of the Revised Result section. Note that there are 5 groups of histotypes with an incidence >10/10 6, 30 with an incidence 1-10/10 6, 64 (not 63) with and incidence from 1 to 0.1/10 6, and 66 with an incidence <0.1/10 6.
Table 2, 3 and 4 are not presented in the results. Sex ratio and mean age for diagnosis should be commented in the results section.
We agree that the previous presentation was unclear (Table 1-3”). In the revised version we added more explicitly Table 1, 2 and 3 quote in the text (first paragraph), as well as Table 4 (last section) on p8 and p9.
Table 1
The author should clarify what it is included in table 1. number by year and incidence rate in the 4 years of the study? in red are marked ....? in black bold are marked....?
This was indeed not enough described. In red are indicated the groups of histological subtypes. In bold the subgroups of histological subtypes. We also added “Leiomyosarcoma (all)”, “MPNST (all)” in table 1, “Osteosarcoma (all)”, “Chondrosarcoma (all)” in Table 2. We made the color code and bold homogenous on the first three tables. We added this information in the revised results section.
Table 2
The author should clarify what it is included in table 2. number by year and incidence rate in the 4 years of the study? in black bold are marked....?
As mentioned above indeed : this was indeed not enough described. We added this information in the revised results section
Table 3
The author should clarify what it is included in table 3. number by year and incidence rate in the 4 years of the study? in red are marked ....? in black bold are marked....?
As mentioned above indeed : this was indeed not enough described. We added this information in the revised results section
the authors should also consider to present the incidence rate by decreasing rate?
It is our intent to present it this way in figure 1. We tried to clarify this is the revised version
Figure 1
can the authors clarify the colours in figure 1?
The colours were added to improve a global graphic legibility of the availability of published clinical trials according to the incidence of the histotype. But indeed, this was not clear enough. We added this in the revised version in the legend of the figure.
the text needs English revision.
We have had reviewed the text accordingly by an English native speaker.
Reviewer #2: TITLE: Nationwide incidence of sarcomas and connective tissue tumors of intermediate malignancy over four years using an expert pathology review network.
MAIN CONCERN
(1)
Using a nationwide database, this important study aims to describe the incidence of fully malignant sarcomas and mesenchymal tumors of intermediate malignancy (TIM), all with expert confirmation of pathologic diagnosis. Although appearing in the title, the term “connective tissue tumors of intermediate malignancy” was never explained/clarified in the manuscript. The criteria for differential diagnosis were never reported.
TIM cases were 6460 as can be read on line 11 of Abstract. However, those reporting “intermediate” in the name of their histotype were only 63 cases (table 1). In particular they were: 5 cases of “Intermediate fibrohistiocytic tumors”; 6 cases of “Intermediate vascular tumors”; and 52 cases of “Sarcoma NOS Tumors of intermediate malignancy”. The difference between 6460 and 63 was never apprised in the article.
We agree that this was not clear enough in the previous version. Tumor of intermediate malignancy (TIM) designation is attributed according to the WHO 2013 classification (ref 1 of the Ms), e.g. atypical lipomatous tumors, dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans, fibromatosis, hemangioendothelioma, giant cell tumor of the bone to quote a few (also summarized in (http://sarcomahelp.org/reviews/who-classification-sarcomas.html). The term intermediate is not necessarily including in the histological designation in many subtypes. This has been added in the material and method section of the revise Ms on p7.
In the analysis, the tumors were broken down in two-way tables in which rows were always the histological subtypes and columns were time or person characteristics. There were no separate tables for fully malignant sarcomas and TIMs. They were reported as sum at each cell of row and column interception; the reader cannot know their frequency separately.
In my opinion, if the tables cannot be changed, the title should be rephrased.
We agree with this recommendation and made the corrections in the titles and in the captions. As discussed before, we chose to present the rows according to the WHO classification which is based on histological differentiation mainly, adding few specific points on the primary site of the tumors. For this reason, we adapted and developed the titles and legend of Table 1, 2, 3 accordingly rather than to split TIM and Sarcomas in different tables. 
(2)
The manuscript needs English editing. Moreover, I strongly suggest to also control all numbers appearing in the text. For example: “139 histological subtypes” (Abstract, line 10) should be “159 histological subtypes” that is the sum of “30, 63 and 66 different histological subtypes of sarcomas or TIM”, reported on line 15-16 of Abstract. Another example: the percentage of sarcomas (=18710/25172) is 74%, not 64%” as it appears in line 10 of Abstract. On line 11 the percentage of TIMs should be 26% rather that 36%.
We have made corrections in the numbers indicated in the abstract which were indeed (for one) partly different from those shown in the figure. We also agree that the previous version was unclear for several of the numbers, mostly because groups of diseases (e.g. liposarcoma, notwithstanding molecular subtype) are frequently considered in publications e.g. for clinical trials (see above). One of the challenges of these numbers is that we are both indicating 1) individual histotypes, and 2) pooled histotypes in groups (e.g. liposarcomas). We have amended the text, abstract and discussion to make this important point clearer, and for instance changed the first sentence of the abstract results to be inclusive on the number of patients. We have been working with an english speaking person for the revised version. We have reviewed and homogenized the presentation of the numbers of histotypes in the revised version all along the text as suggested by this reviewer. 
MINOR CONCERN
(1)
In Table 4, the heading of the second column is “F/H” (Femmes/Hommes in French) rather than F/M (Females/Males).
We have corrected this typographic error.
Reviewer #3: No Major Critiques. The manuscript is largely clear, informative, and provides the most detailed breakdown of sarcoma type incidence in a population that I have seen to date.
Minor:
1. The authors should carefully check the manuscript for a few scattered English grammar issues and typos (both in text and tables), and use more consistent capitalization in the tables (some tumors have only the first word of the name capitalized, others have multiple words capitalized)
We have corrected the revised manuscript to be consistent on these aspects
2. I would not necessarily consider adenosarcoma or phyllodes, much less UT resembling ovarian sex cord stromal tumor as proper sarcomas, though I do appreciate why they were included here. The authors may wish to clarify if the category in table 1 part 2 refers specifically to malignant phyllodes with sarcomatous overgrowth or all malignant phyllodes.
We agree and have modified the tables and legends accordingly 
3. In table 2 does the “osteosarcoma” entry include the subtypes or is it separate – if separate how is it different than the NOS category. There are 2 entries for low grade central osteosarcoma with different numbers of cases. This table should be checked for accuracy and clarity
We have reviewed the number and confirmed the different numbers. In the case of osteosarcoma, indeed the reviewers indicated “Osteosarcoma” without further precision, or “Osteosarcoma NOS”. though we could have pooled them into “Osteosarcoma NOS” we decided not to do so to describe as accurately as possible what was added by the reviewers. However, for clarity we added a line summing all osteosarcomas to have a broader picture. We added this comment in the legend of the table (p14). 
4. Figure 1 looks obviously pasted from a spreadsheet (including some cut off text visible in the top of the middle and right panels) and is hard to read as presented. Would consider removing tumors with no published clinical trials to a supplemental table. Or else presenting each subset broken down by incidence into individual figures for improved legibility. Why is synovial sarcoma NOS separated from monophasic SS and biphasic SS? Or MPNST usual type from MPNST? Or SFT (all) from SFT NOS? Consider combining or eliminating duplicate /redundant entries as these do not seem to add much to the table or understanding of trial availability. At a minimum trials involving specific variants of individual sarcoma types should be grouped together for clarity.
It is indeed very challenging to present clinical trials in this section in a graphical and legible format. Our intent with the colour codes was to show that each individual subtype of sarcoma was not less likely associated with a clinical trial as they were rarer. Some very rare histotypes (infantile fibrosarcoma, or ESS for instance) are however specifically covered by a clinical trial. In the examples chosen by the reviewer, there are trials for synovial sarcomas, but not for biphasic or monophasic synovial sarcoma specifically. Respectfully, we suggest to develop these points in the legend of the table rather than to change the structure of the table. These changes were made in the result, and discussion section section (p11) and in the legend of the figure in the revised version (p14). If preferred by the editor, we of course would agree to put this figure in the supplemental figures.
5. In the discussion specify the WHO classification used (obviously these had to have been done using the 2013 WHO given when the data was collected) but it is no longer “the most recent”.
We agree we corrected this point in the different section of the document (M/M, discussion)
Reviewer #4: General Comments
This work is an important report describing the sarcoma incidence in France, where an efficient system of cases centralization is in place. This work will be the benchmark for future epidemiological studies.
The manuscript however has two major critical points:
1) the data are displayed in long tables; If the presented data were displayed in a more graphically appealing way the work would gain a lot; after all the main point of the present manuscript is to convey the numbers, so the data visualization probably would represent the analytical part of the paper.
We agree with this reviewer that this is indeed a challenge for the presentation. We would agree of course to split the tables, with e.g. Table 1A,1B etc for each individual group of disease if requested and approved by the editors of PLOS one. 
2) Statistical analysis de-trending the sarcoma count among different histotypes is arguable; however this do not diminish the value of this work, that relies in the numbers provided. see the specific comment for explanation.
We agree with this commentary. A note of caution was added in the discussion section of the revised version (see under).
Specific comments
Abstract
Many readers are probably not aware of what NETSARC and RREPS are; a more descriptive term could help the reader of the abstract and push him/her to see the paper.
We agree that a more precise description is needed this is added in the revised version in particular in the material and method section (p7).
Introduction
Data from years 2010-12 have been dropped from further analysis, probably a plot showing the total number of cases might help the reader to picture the story you are telling.
We have added the numbers of patients seen from 2010 to 2012 in the revised text, in the result section, briefly. We feared that presenting these data in table would increase the complexity of this presentation
Materials and methods
how the central review is enforced?
There are several mechanisms : 1) each pathology review report was and is indicating the mention of the mandatory review, the sites and contact of the expert pathologists and all french pathologist receive it multiple times per year; 2) when missed, patients presented in clinical MDT without pathology review are immediately referred to the closest expert pathology center ; 3) the patient themselves exerted on multiple occasion their request for a pathology review , with the dissemination on the internet of the existence of networks of excellence and the mandatory pathology and clinical review. These different points are added in the revised version of the Ms (p10).
Clinical trials
it is not clear to me how the data have been retrieved, and tabulated.
This came from an exhaustive review of published literature using Pubmed. This was further precised in the Revised Material and method section (p7)
Statistics
The importance of the presented data is enough to do not require a statistical analysis. However I think that the proposed analysis of trend is not adequate: the analysis of variance should compare the variance of a variable among 2 or more groups; this variable should be normally distributed, but the variable of interest is a count and in this case normality is not a good assumption, since the numbers are really low given the rarity of sarcoma (a Poisson distribution might have the right characteristics). Moreover there is a single data point that cannot show "variance"; I would therefore take the statistical significance with a lots of doubts. On the other hand the figure shown in supplementals are linear models; probably better, they in fact treat time as a continuous variable, however they also expect negative count to be perfectly normal.
If the authors really think that de-trend a time series with 4 data point is an important aim for their work I suggest to use a statistical procedure that does the job (as a spline or a gaussian process), and – given the limited number of observation between the many different categories – a regularizing technique or a fully bayesian approach with multilevel models might help.
We agree with these proposals and have proposed an amended presentation and statistical analysis in the revised version for this additional figure, with modifications in the material and method section, in the result section and in the supplementary figure. The p value was fitted by a Poisson regression in the revised version. The histological subtypes with a significant (p<0.01) variation are adenosarcoma, desmoid, UPS, high grade ESS, pecoma, and myoepithelioma
lastly the data shown in the table next to the supplementary figure has a error: the line copied for central chondrosarcoma is not correct neither would give the result reported ( I suspect the two categories of grading have been inverter).
This is indeed a mistake. This subset was not retained by the new analysis, with the threshold used. This has been corrected in the revised manuscript.
Results
There are many typos; also tables need revision (commas instead of points, H = Homes ).
see statistics
Discussion
Also typos; "most recent WHO" is the 2020?
see statistics
We made the correction requested in this section
Figure 1: is not actually a figure. the same general comment on data representation apply here
Indeed, Figure 1 is more a table with colors to show graphically the lower number of clinical trials in the three lists of sarcoma with different incidences (100-fold difference between the 3 columns). As mentioned above, it is indeed very challenging to present clinical trials in this section in a graphical and legible format. Our intent with the color codes was to show that each individual subtype of sarcoma was not less likely associated with a clinical trial as they were rarer. In addition, in the examples chosen by the reviewer, there are trials for synovial sarcomas, but not for biphasic or monophasic synovial sarcoma specifically. Respectfully, we suggest to develop these points in the legend of the table rather than to change the structure of the Figure. These changes were made in the result section and in the legend of the figure in the revised version.
________________________________________
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes: Giuseppe Mastrangelo
Reviewer #3: No
Reviewer #4: Yes: Salvatore Lorenzo Renne
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to reviewers.docx
Click here for additional data file.
PLoS ONEPLoS One10.1371/journal.pone.0246958.r003Decision Letter 1
PasqualiSandroAcademic Editor© 2021 Sandro PasqualiThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
28 Oct 2020

PONE-D-20-18848R1
Nationwide incidence of sarcomas and connective tissue tumors of intermediate malignancy over four years using an expert pathology review network.
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Blay,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
The manuscript has been clearly improved. However, please carefully address further comments from reviewer 1 and minor additional comments  from reviewer 2.
​
Please submit your revised manuscript by Dec 12 2020 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Sandro Pasquali, M.D., Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #2: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #4: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Partly
Reviewer #4: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #4: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #4: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: Thank you for the revised version of the paper which has greatly improved. However, some issues remain incomplete or to clarify.
Abstract
conclusion: ... and that tumors with an incidence<106 /year have a much lower access to clinical trials. I think you mean with an incidence <1/106
The RREPS/NETSARC Database
The authors should better describe the quality of the DB including the completeness of the follow-up information which are essential to define the prevalence. Could the authors expand how they ensure the completeness of the follow-up? how life status information are collected? is there any indicator of lost to follow-up or any other?
Presentation of the data
I do agree that the current table should not include the WHO codes. However, this is a key part of the material and methods selection since an article should include all the information to replicate the study. Please add the codes as supplementary Table.
“The number of patients for each individual histological subtype of sarcoma or TIM per year, from 2013 to 2016, is therefore presented in these tables. To facilitate the comparison with other databases using previous classifications, the incidence for groups of tumors are also presented in the tables, when they are clinically relevant (e.g. uterine sarcoma). We also considered that it was still useful to present each individual histotype, (e.g. WDLPS) and groups of histotypes when clinically relevant (e.g. WD and DDLPS, or even liposarcoma, leiomyosarcomas). Conversely, when a grouping was not clinically meaningful in clinical routine (e.g. “fibroblastic and myofibroblastic tumors” in table 1) we did not consider this a distinct entity.” This is still unclear. The authors should clarify what they count as a single entity. Please add a column on the left hand site of Table 1 and Table 2 indicating what was counted as single entity (N=150). It is not clear also why some grouping have the incidence and others not. it does not seem to depend on the clinical relevance because fibroblastic and myofibroblastic tumours have incidence data in Table 1. Kindly clarify.
Incidence
It is a pity not be able to separate TIM from malignant sarcomas. The authors used the WHO classifications which provides information about the sarcoma behaviour. Thus, the authors should clarify why it is not possible to distinguish TIM and malignant sarcomas. This goes back to the issues of understanding the codes used for the analyses.
Incidence of individual histotypes and published clinical trials.
“..... 14 of 35 (40%) histotypes with an incidence >1/10 6 had a dedicated phase III study vs 6 of 130 (4.6%) histotypes for sarcomas with a incidence <1/10 6 (p<10 -6 ). 20100 (79,7%) patients of the database had a specific histotype for which no phase III trial had been reported. 21 of 35 (60%) histotypes with an incidence >1/10 6 had a dedicated randomized phase II study vs 10 of 129 (7.7%) histotypes for sarcomas with a incidence <1/10 6 (p<10 -10 ))” The authors should clarify whether the histotypes for sarcomas with a incidence <1/106 are 129 or 130.
Table 1. please check the incidence for Embryonal RMS and Myoepithelioma, myoepithelial carcinoma, & mixed tumour. The incidence of the histotype sum up differently from the incidence reported.
Reviewer #2: Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters) (Limit 100 to 20000 Characters)
Please see my comments in the attached file
Reviewer #4: The revised version addressed the points risen.
This work will represent the benchmark for future epidemiological studies.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes: Giuseppe Mastrangelo
Reviewer #4: Yes: Salvatore Lorenzo Renne
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Round 2.docx
Click here for additional data file.
PLoS ONEPLoS One10.1371/journal.pone.0246958.r004Author response to Decision Letter 1
2522021162e0246958e0246958Collection date 2021.

6 Dec 2020

JY Blay
Jean-yves.blay@lyon.unicancer.fr
to
Sandro Pasquali, M.D., Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
PONE-D-20-18848R1 Nationwide incidence of sarcomas and connective tissue tumors of intermediate malignancy over four years using an expert pathology review network.
6 Dec 2020
Dear Dr. Pasquali,
Thank you for your recent e-mail regarding the above mentioned article submitted to PLOS ONE. 
We have carefully reviewed the comments of the reviewers and are now able to submit a revised version of this article taking into consideration the requirements of the reviewers. 
Please find hereunder a point by point reply to the different comments. 
A revised version with visible marks in included as well as the revised version. 
We remain of course at your disposition for any further question you may have regarding the work
With kind regards
 JY Blay
 
PONE-D-20-18848R1
Nationwide incidence of sarcomas and connective tissue tumors of intermediate malignancy over four years using an expert pathology review network.
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Blay,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
The manuscript has been clearly improved. However, please carefully address further comments from reviewer 1 and minor additional comments from reviewer 2.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Dec 12 2020 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
• A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
• A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
• An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Sandro Pasquali, M.D., Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
 Review Comments to the Author
Reviewer #1: Thank you for the revised version of the paper which has greatly improved. However, some issues remain incomplete or to clarify.
Abstract : Conclusion: ... and that tumors with an incidence<106 /year have a much lower access to clinical trials. I think you mean with an incidence <1/106
Answer The reviewer is absolutely right. We have made the appropriate modifications in the revised version
The RREPS/NETSARC Database
The authors should better describe the quality of the DB including the completeness of the follow-up information which are essential to define the prevalence. Could the authors expand how they ensure the completeness of the follow-up? how life status information are collected? is there any indicator of lost to follow-up or any other?
Answer : This is indeed an important point. The database is not systematically completed for follow-up by the CRA, as it would be in a clinical trial, but all baseline and first therapeutic informations are completed until the end of the first line treatment. This includes alll pathology reviews, which are therefore as presented , the final diagnoses. The median follow-up of the series was 17 months in the recent publications of the same dataset (25). Importantly, since 2019, the information (survival and all treatments) from the nationwide database of the social security system (SNDS, https://www.snds.gouv.fr/SNDS/Accueil ) is used to update the latest survival information of these patients as part of the Health datahub Deepsarc project (https://www.health-data-hub.fr/outil-de-visualisation), now ensuring a more exhaustive follow-up information. These points were added in the revised R2 version of the Ms.
Presentation of the data
I do agree that the current table should not include the WHO codes. However, this is a key part of the material and methods selection since an article should include all the information to replicate the study. Please add the codes as supplementary Table.
Answer : We added the WHO codes (2013, and whe relevant 2020) as a supplementary Table 2 in the revised R2 version.
“The number of patients for each individual histological subtype of sarcoma or TIM per year, from 2013 to 2016, is therefore presented in these tables. To facilitate the comparison with other databases using previous classifications, the incidence for groups of tumors are also presented in the tables, when they are clinically relevant (e.g. uterine sarcoma). We also considered that it was still useful to present each individual histotype, (e.g. WDLPS) and groups of histotypes when clinically relevant (e.g. WD and DDLPS, or even liposarcoma, leiomyosarcomas). Conversely, when a grouping was not clinically meaningful in clinical routine (e.g. “fibroblastic and myofibroblastic tumors” in table 1) we did not consider this a distinct entity.” 
This is still unclear. The authors should clarify what they count as a single entity. Please add a column on the left hand site of Table 1 and Table 2 indicating what was counted as single entity (N=150). It is not clear also why some grouping have the incidence and others not. it does not seem to depend on the clinical relevance because fibroblastic and myofibroblastic tumours have incidence data in Table 1. Kindly clarify.
Answer : We agree that it is important to clarify the grouping. We have therefore added a supplementary Table 2 indicating all the groups which were used in the present report to facilitate cthe comparision with subsequent data sets.
Incidence
It is a pity not be able to separate TIM from malignant sarcomas. The authors used the WHO classifications which provides information about the sarcoma behaviour. Thus, the authors should clarify why it is not possible to distinguish TIM and malignant sarcomas. This goes back to the issues of understanding the codes used for the analyses.
Answer : To distinguish better TIM from sarcomas, we have added a colour code (blue for TIM in table 4) in the revised version. We hope that this will facilitate the lecture. 
Incidence of individual histotypes and published clinical trials.
“..... 14 of 35 (40%) histotypes with an incidence >1/10 6 had a dedicated phase III study vs 6 of 130 (4.6%) histotypes for sarcomas with a incidence <1/10 6 (p<10 -6 ). 20100 (79,7%) patients of the database had a specific histotype for which no phase III trial had been reported. 21 of 35 (60%) histotypes with an incidence >1/10 6 had a dedicated randomized phase II study vs 10 of 129 (7.7%) histotypes for sarcomas with a incidence <1/10 6 (p<10 -10 ))” 
The authors should clarify whether the histotypes for sarcomas with a incidence <1/106 are 129 or 130.
Answer : We thank the reviewer for the careful lecture. This mistale was corrected , the right number is N=130. This has been modified accordingly in the revised version R2.
Table 1. please check the incidence for Embryonal RMS and Myoepithelioma, myoepithelial carcinoma, & mixed tumour. The incidence of the histotype sum up differently from the incidence reported.
Answer : the sums were wrong and were corrected in the R2 version. We thank the reviewer for a careful attention
Reviewer #2: Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters) (Limit 100 to 20000 Characters)
Please see my comments in the attached file
Answers : Copied hereunder with the answers.
Major point
Authors wrote: “We investigated then the variability of the yearly incidence of these different tumors in the database. The analysis of variance of the observed incidence indicated a significant interaction between time and histology”. 
However, the analysis of variance is not described in Statistical Analyses
Answer : Indeed, this was not enough described. The analysis of variance was added in the method section ?
Minor points
Where It is I would have written instead
Abstract The 2 later incidence groups The 2 latter incidence groups
Introduction INCa INCA
 … may not treated according to … may not be treated according to 
NETSARC+ network French National Cancer institute French National Cancer Institute
RREPS/NETSARC Database MDTB Acronym never defined
Results This later group a group is not This latter group is not
Anwers : we thank the reviewer for his careful attention. The different points were corrected in the revised version. 
Reviewer #4: The revised version addressed the points risen.
This work will represent the benchmark for future epidemiological studies.
Answer : We thank the reviewer for these kind words
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to reviewers.docx
Click here for additional data file.
PLoS ONEPLoS One10.1371/journal.pone.0246958.r005Decision Letter 2
PasqualiSandroAcademic Editor© 2021 Sandro PasqualiThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
6 Jan 2021

PONE-D-20-18848R2
Nationwide incidence of sarcomas and connective tissue tumors of intermediate malignancy over four years using an expert pathology review network.
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Blay,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript to improve Engliish writing as a reviewer pointed during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Feb 20 2021 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Sandro Pasquali, M.D., Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (if provided):
Following comments from reviewers and authors changes, the manuscript s to be considered accepted, although a revision of the English writing is needed before this manuscript can be considered fully accepted in PLOS ONE.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: thank you for the revised version of the paper. I would recommend an english revision of the text. the different revision improved the understanding but in some paragraphs need english edits.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
PLoS ONEPLoS One10.1371/journal.pone.0246958.r006Author response to Decision Letter 2
2522021162e0246958e0246958Collection date 2021.

13 Jan 2021

JY Blay
Jean-yves.blay@lyon.unicancer.fr
to
Sandro Pasquali, M.D., Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
PONE-D-20-18848R1 Nationwide incidence of sarcomas and connective tissue tumors of intermediate malignancy over four years using an expert pathology review network.
Dear Dr. Pasquali,
Thank you for your recent e-mail regarding the above mentioned article submitted to PLOS ONE. 
We are now able to submit a revised version of this article after a review by native English speakers we have included in the acknowledgement section. 
A revised version with visible marks in included as well as the revised version. 
We remain of course at your disposition for any further question you may have regarding the work
With kind regards
 JY Blay
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to reviewers R3.docx
Click here for additional data file.
PLoS ONEPLoS One10.1371/journal.pone.0246958.r007Decision Letter 3
PasqualiSandroAcademic Editor© 2021 Sandro PasqualiThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
29 Jan 2021

Nationwide incidence of sarcomas and connective tissue tumors of intermediate malignancy over four years using an expert pathology review network.
PONE-D-20-18848R3
Dear Dr. Blay,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript, after revision of the English writing, has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice for payment will follow shortly after the formal acceptance. To ensure an efficient process, please log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the 'Update My Information' link at the top of the page, and double check that your user information is up-to-date. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Sandro Pasquali, M.D., Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
PLoS ONEPLoS One10.1371/journal.pone.0246958.r008Acceptance letter
PasqualiSandroAcademic Editor© 2021 Sandro PasqualiThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
11 Feb 2021

PONE-D-20-18848R3 
Nationwide incidence of sarcomas and connective tissue tumors of intermediate malignancy over four years using an expert pathology review network. 
Dear Dr. Blay:
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now with our production department. 
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at plosone@plos.org. 
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Sandro Pasquali 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
S1 Table

## Contributing pathologists of all centers RRePS & RESOS.
This table includes per alphabetical order of institutions, the different pathologists contributing to this work. Note that a single reference center from RREPS or now NETSARC+ may include more than one institution.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Table

## Codes of the histotypes according to WHO 2013.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 Table

## Grouping of histotypes presented in the tables.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Fig

## Published clinical trials in sarcoma and TIM histotypes.
Tabular presentation of different sarcoma histotypes and groups of histotypes by decreasing order together with the documented published clinical trials in Pubmed. If phase III clinical trials are published, the box is highlighted in light green, if randomized phase II trials are published the box is highlighted in dark blue, if uncontrolled phase II trials are published the box is highlighted in light blue. Histotypes were considered individually (e.g. monophasic synovial sarcoma) or globally (e.g. all synovial sarcoma).
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Fig

## Variable incidence of sarcoma subtypes from 2013 to 2016.
Presentation of the yearly variation of six different histotypes with significantly variable incidence in the period of observation.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to reviewers.docx
Click here for additional data file.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Round 2.docx
Click here for additional data file.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to reviewers.docx
Click here for additional data file.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to reviewers R3.docx
Click here for additional data file.

## Data Availability Statement
All data is in the tables and supplemental documents.