SOURCE URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2405.13930v2
FINAL URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2405.13930v2
HTTP: 200
CONTENT-TYPE: application/pdf
======================================================================
AlabOS: A Python-based Reconfigurable Workflow
Management Framework for Autonomous Laboratories
Yuxing Fei1,2,5, Bernardus Rendy 1,2,5, Rishi Kumar 3,5, Olympia Dartsi 3, Hrushikesh
P. Sahasrabuddhe1,3, Matthew J. McDermott 2, Zheren Wang 1,2, Nathan J.
Szymanski1,2, Lauren N. Walters 2, David Milsted 2, Yan Zeng 2,†, Anubhav Jain 3,†,
and Gerbrand Ceder 1,2,†
1Department of Materials Science & Engineering, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
2Materials Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
3Energy Technologies Area, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
5Equal contribution
†Corresponding author: yanzeng@lbl.gov, ajain@lbl.gov and gceder@berkeley.edu
1
arXiv:2405.13930v2  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  30 Aug 2024

The recent advent of autonomous laboratories, coupled with algorithms for high-throughput
screening and active learning, promises to accelerate materials discovery and innovation.
As these autonomous systems grow in complexity, the demand for robust and efficient
workflow management software becomes increasingly critical. In this paper, we intro-
duce AlabOS, a general-purpose software framework for orchestrating experiments and
managing resources, with an emphasis on automated laboratories for materials synthe-
sis and characterization. AlabOS features a reconfigurable experiment workflow model
and a resource reservation mechanism, enabling the simultaneous execution of varied
workflows composed of modular tasks while eliminating conflicts between tasks. To
showcase its capability, we demonstrate the implementation of AlabOS in a prototype
autonomous materials laboratory, A-Lab, with around 3,500 samples synthesized over
1.5 years.
2

1 Introduction
Computational and data-driven approaches have shaped a new paradigm for materials discovery,
leveraging recent advances in high-performance computing and machine learning. 1–7 Despite these
advances, the experimental realization of computationally predicted compounds remains a slow,
yet essential step in materials discovery and development 8–10. Substantial progress has been made
to increase experimental throughput while reducing human involvement, as demonstrated by sev-
eral automated laboratories that utilize synthesis methods based on flow chemistry 11–14, thin-film
deposition 15,16, solution-based synthesis 17, and solid-state synthesis 18,19. These laboratories have
also been integrated with predictive computational tools such as high-throughput density func-
tional theory (DFT) calculations 1,20–22, machine learning algorithms for automated interpretation
of characterization data 23–27, and optimization algorithms that can perform decision making 28–32.
The integration of computational modeling and artificial intelligence into autonomous laboratories
gives rise to what is known as self-driving laboratories (SDLs), which can explore material spaces
with minimal human intervention33–35. The rising prominence of SDLs has elevated the significance
of robotics and machine learning for materials research. To accommodate this changing landscape
from the human-centric experimentation diagram, improved tools are needed to manage robotics
and the data they rapidly produce. 36–38
In designing management software, one can learn from the automated workflows developed for
high-throughput DFT calculations 39–41. These workflows provide a high-level user interface from
which materials and calculation types can be specified, abstracting the lower-level tasks required to
perform such calculations 42,43. These computational management software need to effectively orga-
nize large datasets, a task similarly required for experimental management. However, orchestrating
an autonomous laboratory creates additional challenges, in particular, requiring the seamless inte-
gration of tasks and data with physical hardware and experimental samples, which is crucial for
maintaining uninterrupted operation.
Several workflow management programs have previously been developed and implemented in
different autonomous laboratories with diverse applications. For example, ChemOS 2.0 44 proposes
an integral platform between DFT calculation, Bayesian optimization, and automated equipment
3

communicated through SiLA2 protocol 45. Helao 46 and Helao-async 47 present a highly modular-
ized design by implementing each component as a web server, enabling workflow management
across laboratories. Bluesky 48 has been applied to synchrotron facilities, with a strong emphasis
on controlling synchrotron characterization hardware, to improve data collection efficiency but not
targeted to materials synthesis. Additional software packages have supported laboratories involving
automated experiments, featured with expandability and reconfigurability across different experi-
ment stations 49, standardized data specification and storage 50, and seamless integration with other
science tools as a “science factory” 51. These software solutions have successfully orchestrated ex-
periment workflows in autonomous laboratories within their domains.
On the other hand, recent trends toward increased throughput and greater complexity in au-
tonomous laboratories necessitate workflow software to manage more diverse workflows with a
higher volume of autonomous devices. For instance, in our use case as well as others aiming to
boost overall throughput, a laboratory can feature multiple equivalent devices for a single task, such
as several furnaces for heating or two X-ray diffractometers for characterization. Due to the lack
of knowledge about the availability of devices during runtime, the workflow management system
must dynamically allocate the devices to each task based on their needs, thereby maximizing the
utilization rate of the autonomous laboratory. Moreover, as general-purpose research laboratories
often run different workflows with varied task sequences simultaneously, a reconfigurable workflow
model has become essential, with certain parts of the workflow being executed in parallel. For
example, after a sample is synthesized, multiple characterizations can be performed concurrently
while storage operation has to wait until all the characterizations are done. Depending on the needs
of the experiments, different experiment procedures need to be executed in the same laboratory
setting. Thus, an expressive workflow model is required to effectively encode such task order depen-
dencies while preserving flexibility when composing the workflow. Efforts have been made to handle
some of these challenges. For example, a scheduling strategy is developed to tackle the multi-device
problem, which requires an accurate time model for each task to ensure efficiency. 52 However, only
by addressing all of these practical needs, a workflow management software can fit better into an
autonomous laboratory with increased complexity and throughput and allow researchers greater
freedom to push the boundaries of autonomous experimentation.
4

Herein, we present AlabOS, a versatile and accessible workflow management framework for au-
tonomous laboratories. The system features a graph-based experimental workflow model with tasks
being the nodes and task dependencies being the edge. A central resource manager is built into the
system, to track the status of devices and allocate resources properly to each task, thus eliminating
possible conflicts between tasks running at the same time in the laboratory. Furthermore, AlabOS
proposes the concept of sample position, representing a position in the laboratory that can hold one
sample. By tracking the sample’s position, AlabOS makes it possible to track individual samples
in real time. This Python-based software is platform-independent and designed to be user-friendly,
requiring basic knowledge about database and parallel programming for community adoption. Con-
sidering the errors and maintenance demands in the daily operations of an autonomous laboratory,
a status monitoring and notification system is built into the software along with a browser-based
graphic user interface (GUI). AlabOS serves as a general framework for managing workflows, de-
signed to simplify the programming required to establish an autonomous laboratory. At the same
time, it maintains the flexibility to accommodate various workflows within the laboratory. Other
features of AlabOS include:
• Provide a solution for autonomous laboratory workflow management, with common function-
alities like resource management, and notification built in.
• Built with MongoDB (NoSQL) backend, supporting a flexible schema, and allowing standard-
ized continuous development of each task input, output, and data storage operations.
• A standard way to define devices and tasks with base classes when setting up a new lab with
AlabOS. A simulation mode is also built in, allowing quick debugging of the devices and tasks.
• Submission and status monitoring APIs with JSON format. The users can set up scripts for
job submission and queries on top of AlabOS. The input and output of the experiments can
be validated by Pydantic 53 before being stored in the database.
The AlabOS system is actively deployed in the A-Lab 18, an autonomous laboratory for inor-
ganic materials synthesis housed at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL). At the time
of writing, it has synthesized and characterized over 3,500 distinct samples under the control of
AlabOS.
5

2 Key Concepts and System Design
2.1 Status representations
In AlabOS, a laboratory is represented as a combination of samples, devices, tasks, and experiments
entities (Fig. 1). Each entity record is maintained in a separate collection in a MongoDB instance
and updated during runtime to synchronize with the autonomous laboratory.
A sample entity describes its name, position, and other metadata specified during submission
(e.g., the composition of the sample and the project that the sample belongs to). A sample position
is a space in the laboratory that can be occupied by one sample at a time. The sample positions
are defined by operators before the system is up. When robots (or humans) move a sample, the
positions of the samples in the database are updated to track its physical location throughout the
experiments. Every sample is assigned a human-readable name and a unique global ID for tracking
purposes. Within autonomous laboratories, transferring a sample from one container to another is
common. In this case, the old container will be disposed of in the physical laboratory while the
sample itself will be updated to the position of the new container. When a sample is completely
removed from the laboratory, its position will be set to null while the database entry describing its
position history is kept for future reference.
A device refers to a piece of hardware to process or collect data from sample(s). Each device
entity is linked to hardware in the lab that can send commands, perform physical operations, and
collect data. Some examples of these operations in materials synthesis include sample dispensing,
weighing, heating, and grinding. In AlabOS, a device is defined in Python code that provides the
methods to communicate with the data transfer protocols like MODBUS 54, TCP/IP, and serial.
Each device will have an entry in the database that indicates its status: whether it is occupied by
a task, or whether it is paused for maintenance.
A task entity contains the procedure to execute a sequence of operations on a set of samples
using the specified device. In a task, all relevant devices are orchestrated to achieve a high-level
objective. For instance, to carry out a heating task, the process begins by sending a request to
the furnace to open its door. Following this, a robotic arm moves the designated samples into the
6

Completed
Completed
Running ReadyWaiting Waiting
Running
(c) Tasks
(b) Devices
TypeTaskStatusName
FurnaceNoneIdlefurnace-1
FurnaceTa s k  1Reservedfurnace-2
ArmTa s k  2Reservedarm-1
BalanceNonePausedbalance
(a) Samples
Reserved 
position
Empty position
Reserved position
Occupied by 
sample 1
Empty position
(d) Experiments
Sample 1
Sample 2
Sample 3
Ta s k  1
Ta s k  2
Ta sk3
Ta s k  4
Figure 1 Schematic representation of lab states managed within the AlabOS system. The lab
status is divided into four collections: (a) The sample collection tracks the sample’s position and
identifies the task reserving that position; (b) the device collection records the status of the device
and the task assigned to it; (c) the task collection records the order of execution for different
experimental tasks. The order of tasks is encoded in a graph data structure to ensure sequential
execution is performed in the correct order; (d) the experiment collection records a batch of samples
and their associated tasks.
7

now-open furnace. After the samples are loaded, a program is activated to heat the furnace to a
temperature specified by the operator. Considering the parallel nature of an autonomous labora-
tory, where multiple samples may be processed simultaneously, a resource assignment mechanism
is used to avoid conflicts between tasks in resource assignment. Before initiating control over one
device or sample, each task has to request devices and sample positions. Once the resources are
assigned, the task runs the procedures. After completion, the associated resources are released,
allowing other tasks to request and use them. Apart from processing, a task could also be used for
data generation and analysis for characterization or decision-making. In this case, the output of
one task is directed as an input for another task by utilizing sample metadata as an information
proxy.
An experiment is composed of one or multiple series of tasks to obtain conclusions. When
submitting an experiment, the operator can specify a directed acyclic graph (DAG) of tasks to be
performed on each sample. The execution sequence is guaranteed by the directed edge in DAG,
where each node represents a task and each edge represents its order. A task can only be started
when it does not have any unfinished parent tasks, which are defined to happen before this task.
Relationships among tasks are stored in the task collection, where each task has a previous tasks
field and a next tasks field. Whenever a task is completed, the system will initiate, request resources,
and launch any descendent tasks when they are ready.
To maximize throughput, an autonomous laboratory often processes samples in batches. In
AlabOS, an experiment can contain multiple samples and tasks. A task can accept one or more
samples as input, depending on its predefined capacity. For example, if a furnace has a capacity
for up to eight samples at a time, the heating task will not accept more than eight samples.
2.2 AlabOS architecture
The AlabOS is designed to be a manager-worker architecture (Fig. 2). When a task is ready to
run within this architecture, a worker object (named task actor) is instantiated in a new process by
a task manager that executes the task logic. The managers monitor the status of the task actors
and respond to each actor’s requests for resources in the laboratory. Since the task actors only
communicate with the managers, the interaction between ongoing laboratory tasks is eliminated.
8

As a result, no conflicts between concurrent tasks (race conditions) need to be considered when
defining the tasks’ logic. The core services also run a dashboard server, which provides operators
with a browser-based GUI and a set of APIs. The lab operator can easily submit, view, and cancel
experiments in the autonomous laboratory using these interfaces.
There are four manager processes used to monitor and manipulate the status of the laboratory
at different levels: experiments, tasks, devices, and resources (the assignment of sample positions
and devices). In addition, a dashboard server is working as the manager process to receive com-
mands from the operators. All the managers communicate with one another through a database
instance that is hosted on either a local computer or a cloud-based server. The experiment man-
ager (Fig. 2d) receives experimental submissions from the dashboard server (Fig. 2c) and parses
them into task graphs. The task manager (Fig. 2e) verifies and launches these tasks ready in the
laboratory. It also monitors the status of each task as it is carried out. The task manager is alerted
when a task is completed, or an error is encountered. It then marks all subsequent tasks as being
ready or canceled accordingly. The resource manager (Fig. 2f) responds to the tasks’ requests to
occupy certain devices and sample positions in the lab. When a request is received, the manager
checks the availability of all requested devices and sample positions. If the request can be met,
the resource manager assigns the devices and sample positions to the task. The assignment will
be valid until the signal is received that the task’s resources are released. The device manager
(Fig. 2g) is the intermediate layer between each task and the physical lab device it affects. When
a task requests the device manager to send a command to some device, it first checks whether the
device is occupied before sending the commands required to complete the task.
To interface with the manager processes in a user-friendly way, a dashboard server (Fig. 2c)
with a GUI is provided. This allows the operator to control and monitor the progress of any exper-
iments running in the laboratory, while also showing the current states of all devices in the lab. In
addition to the GUI, this dashboard provides an API that can receive new experiment submissions
in a JSON format 55. Each experiment submission is validated using Pydantic 53 models to ensure
the correctness of all formats and values.
In the worker processes, many task actors (Fig. 2j) run simultaneously to execute different
9

Ta s k  
Manager
Resource
Manager
(e)
(f)
Device
Manager
(h) Logger
(g)
Experiment 
Manager
(d)
Dashboard 
Server
(c)
(j) T ask Actor
Request lab resources
Operate the devices
Send user request and log 
data
1. Launch 
task
2. Resources 
request
Python 
script
4. Log data 
and send 
user request
3. Send 
commands
Physical 
Laboratory
(b)
Operators
(a)
Manager 
Processes
Worker 
Processes
(i) User Request
Figure 2 An architecture diagram for AlabOS. (a) Human operators submit experiments, monitor
the laboratory state, and manage user requests. (b) The physical laboratory performs these tasks
via manager processes. These include (c) the dashboard server that hosts the user interface and
APIs for monitoring and controlling the experiment workflows; (d) the experiment manager that
transforms high-level requests into specific tasks; (e) the task manager that launches each task
and monitors its status; (f) the resource manager that assigns and tracks the status of available
lab devices and sample positions; (g) the device manager that directs traffic between task actors
and physical lab devices. Outside the manager processes, a logger module (h) logs the runtime
information and saves task results into a central database; a user request module (i) requests user
interventions and sends user responses back to the requester. In the worker processes, each task is
carried out within a task actor (j) that can request resources, send commands to devices, log data,
and initiate user requests.
10

tasks in the laboratory. In AlabOS, each task is configured in advance before the start of a new
experiment. All tasks are defined as Python objects inherited from the BaseTask class available
in the AlabOS package, providing universal methods for interacting with manager processes, the
logger, and the user request module. To execute lab operations, the task actor must first request
to occupy some devices and sample positions from the resource manager. When the request is
approved, it continues to send commands to devices via the device manager while also updating
each sample’s positions in the database. The data and device signal (e.g., the real-time temperature
in a furnace) generated during the task will be logged to the database by the logger module (Fig. 2h).
If the task requires any human intervention (for example, recovering a robot arm from error, or
replacing consumables), it will generate a notification via the user request module, which the human
operators can acknowledge once it is resolved.
11

3 Features and Implementations
Several features are incorporated into AlabOS for resource management, human-machine interac-
tion (HMI), lab device control, and data organization to ensure the autonomous laboratory runs
efficiently and smoothly. These are detailed in the next few sections.
3.1 Resource management
Unlike traditional materials research laboratories, where human experts perform various tasks (like
sample preparation, heating, and characterization) serially, autonomous laboratories usually take a
more distributed and parallelized approach. For example, a robot may dispense and weigh precursor
powders while an automated furnace is heating a separate batch of samples that have already been
weighed. There is typically a queue of pending tasks that the laboratory must plan and account for.
To ensure the lab’s continuous and successful operation without requiring human intervention, the
system should avoid any possible conflicts between these tasks while also maximizing the overall
throughput by organizing the distribution of tasks in a parallel fashion.
In AlabOS, resource management is carried out using a cooperative multitasking schema 56.
Before tasks perform any operations in the laboratory, it has to request the necessary resources
from AlabOS system. All the resource requests are handled by a module named resource manager,
which will parse each request and check if there are any idle devices and sample positions that can
fulfill the request. Once the request can be fulfilled, the resource manager will mark the assigned
devices and sample positions as occupied and let the task know which devices and sample positions
it can use. The task can then send commands to the assigned devices and move samples into
the assigned sample positions. Once those operations are finished, the associated resources are
released to be assigned to other tasks. To avoid the occurrence of “dead resources” where tasks
are completed without releasing their resources properly, the system introduces a with-statement
context for all requests, as shown in Fig. 3. Once resources are assigned to a task, they are recorded
in a resource request context. All operations involving these resources need to be performed within
this context to avoid a permission error. When the task is completed and exits the request context,
it will automatically release all the requested resources, regardless of the task’s success or failure.
A resource request can contain multiple devices and sample positions. In an autonomous lab-
12

Figure 3 A code example of the resource request in the task definition. In this example, the
heating task initiates three request resources with their contexts highlighted in different colors.
The requested resources are assigned by the resource manager when entering Python’s “with”
context. It will be automatically released when exiting the context.
13

oratory, it is sometimes common to have multiple devices operating with the same functions (e.g.,
multiple furnaces for heating) to increase the lab’s throughput. A task can operate on equivalent
devices to obtain the desired results. In the task definition, a request can either specify the name of
an exact device to use (e.g., Furnace A) or a type of device (e.g., muffle furnace). If a device type
is specified, the resource manager will find any available device(s) under that type. The sample
position request is then attached to the specific device. For example, one task may want to reserve
the sample positions inside one furnace chamber. In this case, the sample positions request will be
handled once the device request can be satisfied. When the resource manager finds an available
combination of devices that can satisfy the request, it will advance to solve the available sample po-
sitions based on the proposed devices. Once both the devices and sample positions requests can be
met, a request will be fulfilled and assigned to the corresponding tasks. With such a non-preemptive
resource allocation strategy, the resource request serves in a “first-come-first-serve” strategy with
the task priority taken into consideration. This does not need additional information like how long
the task will occupy these resources. However, it also assumes that all the tasks do not occupy
resources for an unreasonably long time which would lead to sample pileups in the lab. It is gen-
erally recommended for the laboratory developer to have a good knowledge of the bottlenecks and
throughput of the laboratory and set up the right amount of tools to avoid this. On the other hand,
it is always a good idea to break the resource request into many small pieces to avoid booking some
resources for too long a time. Before the task definition is deployed in the physical laboratory, the
lab developer should fully test the workflow definition in the simulation mode described in Section
3.3 to ensure the expected behavior of a task definition. More sophisticated scheduling of equipment
reservation techniques 52 could be integrated within AlabOS to further optimize the throughput.
When initiating a resource request, a priority can also be attached to determine the urgency
of the request. The resource request’s priority is kept the same as the priority of the task, which
is specified by the user during submission as a task parameter (default to “NORMAL” priority).
The resource requests’ priority can also be overridden by supplying a customized value when cre-
ating a resource request inside the task. It is sometimes useful to force a higher priority to the
post-processing operations in a task. For example, the sample must be unloaded from the X-ray
diffractometer before the next sample can be loaded. In this case, it is necessary to prioritize the
unload operation to avoid gridlock in the laboratory. The priority is encoded as an integer ranging
14

from 1 to 100. The default priority of all the tasks is 20, which indicates normal priority. When
the resource manager polls the pending requests, it will first rank them by their priority and then
by their submission time. The request that has a higher priority and was submitted earlier will
generally be handled first.
In an autonomous laboratory, many tasks can request resources at the same time. It is necessary
to handle the large amount of possible resources on time so that the task can be executed faster. To
understand the performance of the resource manager, a virtual lab with M devices, each of which
has 20 associated sample positions, is defined. At each step, there are N tasks that request one
device with one to twenty sample positions. Such configuration simulates the situation when the
laboratory has a heavy workload. At each step, the resource manager will try to assign resources to
each task. The CPU wall time is collected at different conditions. As shown in Figure. 4(a), when
the number of devices is fixed, the processing time for all the tasks’ requests scales linearly with
the task number at small task numbers ( ≤ 120). The average processing time for one task is 7.407
ms obtained from the slope of the fitted line. When the number of tasks continues to increase, the
processing time deviates down from the fitted line. This may be attributed to a saturation of the
resources. When there are way more tasks requesting resources compared to the available devices,
most tasks’ requests cannot be fulfilled in one step, leading to a processing time shorter than the
time predicted by the linear relationship. The performance of the resource manager on different
numbers of devices is shown in Figure. 4(b). Similar to the performance under varied task numbers,
with the number of devices increasing, the processing time first follows a linear relationship with
a slope of 14.073 ms/device and then becomes flat due to the saturation of the tasks. When the
devices are much more than the tasks, most devices remain idle and do not cost any time for
resource assignment.
Compared to the time required for completing a normal operation in the laboratory for solid-
state synthesis, which usually takes several minutes to hours, the time for assigning resources is
nearly negligible, thus ensuring a higher turnover rate in the laboratory. In some cases, multiple
operations can be short and complete in a few seconds, while requiring different resources to com-
plete. If that is the case, it is generally recommended to combine these short operations and request
the resources all at once to minimize the waiting time.
15

(a) (b)
Figure 4 The execution time of processing resource requests under different numbers of tasks,
devices, and sample positions. The time to process all the resource requests (a) with varied numbers
of tasks in a virtual lab with 50 devices and 1000 sample positions (20 sample positions per device),
(b) with fixed 200 tasks in a virtual lab with varied number of devices and sample positions (20
sample positions per device). The test is run on a Macbook Pro 2021 with M1 Pro CPU, 32 GB
RAM. Each point is run 10 times repeatedly to obtain the error bar. The top and bottom of the
error bar represent the 25 th and 75th quantile of all the runtime data.
3.2 User interaction
To better facilitate daily maintenance and monitoring of experimental progress, AlabOS interacts
with the operators through a web-based dashboard server (Fig. 5). In the dashboard, the operators
can check the real-time status of each sample, device, and task running or queued in the lab. It
also provides a variety of interfaces for human-machine interaction. These are detailed below.
3.2.1 Status monitoring
The dashboard shows the real-time status of all experiments, tasks, devices, and samples running or
queued in the lab (Fig. 5a). An experiment will appear in the dashboard as soon as it is submitted
to the system. The samples and tasks belonging to the experiment will also be shown in a scroll-
down table. The sample position will be displayed next to each sample’s name. Each task entry
has a name, status, and message that provides human-readable information about what the task is
currently doing. The message is designed by operators in the task definition with a set message
method in the base task class.
16

(b)
(a)
(c)
Figure 5 Images of three pages associated with different tabs in the dashboard. (a) The main tab
shows the status of ongoing experiments. Each experiment has a progress bar with different colors,
including blue (all tasks are running normally), green (all tasks are completed), and red (at least
one task encountered an error). (b) The notification page shows messages from the system and
its tasks. The operators can choose from the options provided and take action as instructed for
maintenance and error recovery. (c) The device page shows the status of each device. When the
operators wish to perform maintenance on a device, they can pause it from this page so that it will
no longer be assigned to any tasks.
17

In addition to monitoring the real-time status of the lab, the dashboard also provides a cancella-
tion button for each ongoing experiment and task, which can force the unfinished experiments/tasks
to stop running. When the task receives a cancellation signal but has not started, it will be canceled
directly. If the task is running, an error will be raised in the task process, where it is automat-
ically decided how to halt the process without causing a sudden interruption of the lab’s robotic
operation.
3.2.2 Notification
Human interaction in an autonomous laboratory is essential to maintain a smooth operation. When
something unexpected is detected in the laboratory (e.g., increased environment temperature, or
the robot arm failing to pick up a sample), the autonomous lab should notify the operators in time
to avoid further damage. Clear instructions should be given so that it requires minimal knowledge
to act according to the notification.
In AlabOS, the notification can be initiated by either the system (manager instances) or the task
processes. It can be used whenever a human action is needed. Each notification contains a prompt
field and a list of possible options for the operators to select. The notification requires a receipt
of acknowledgment from the operators with one option selected. Once that option is selected and
the operator has completed the necessary tasks, the program will be carried out according to the
selected actions. With clear notification messages designed when defining the tasks, the notification
can be handled by the users without much knowledge about the autonomous laboratory. Thus, the
maintenance jobs can be distributed among the lab developers and lab users.
Apart from the dashboard messages, notifications can also be configured to send over Slack bot
or email. Further extensions can be made to other notification platforms, such as IFTTT 57, with
minor programming efforts.
3.2.3 Exception handling
Because autonomous laboratories are generally used for research purposes, exceptions in hardware
and software are inevitable. For example, the robot arm encountering an unexpected object can lead
18

to a hardware exception, while the driver code failing to communicate with the robot arm would
be considered a software exception. In AlabOS, errors are raised as standard Python exceptions in
the task actor process. The exceptions are classified as recoverable or unrecoverable. Recoverable
exceptions refer to issues caught in the task process, usually in Python’s “try-except” block. The
raised error will not lead to the exiting of a program. Instead, there will be a handling routine
that either retries or notifies human operators to check and recover manually. In contrast, an
unrecoverable exception will lead to the failure of an entire task. These are not caught by the
“try-except” block. AlabOS provides a default handling routine to notify human operators of
all unrecoverable exceptions. They can then remove and replace any affected samples, reset the
occupied devices, and resume the system to complete any other remaining samples.
3.3 Device control
AlabOS system uses a centralized manager to monitor and control all devices in a laboratory. The
task actors do not communicate directly with the physical equipment to execute commands and
read data. Instead, they send all commands to the device manager through a remote procedure call
(RPC) 58. In each task, an identical RPC proxy class will be created as an in-place replacement for
the task to send commands. In this way, the RPC communication will not change the way driver
methods are called in the task definition, as opposed to directly calling the devices’ methods.
Instead of creating the device driver objects in the task process, the indirect method call ensures
the global singleton of each device. This helps to avoid the conflicts that can arise from multiple
commands. Furthermore, the device manager checks the ownership of the requested devices and
prevents them from being operated by tasks that do not reserve them. This minimizes the chance
of conflicts and accidents in the laboratory.
To facilitate the rapid integration of new workflows in the autonomous laboratories, each de-
vice can be switched to simulation mode to allow tasks to run without connecting to the actual
equipment. In the simulation mode, the operators can select to skip some methods (usually re-
lated to communication with the equipment) by applying a “mock” decorator to the method in
the device definition. A mocked object with certain attributes will be specified as the return value
in the “mock” decorator. In this way, the task can still proceed with the return values to test its
19

functionalities, without requiring to talk with the hardware and their corresponding device drivers.
3.4 Data storage
The system provides a logger object for tracking and storing data. Each piece of data is saved as a
document in MongoDB, with some metadata that includes information such as the data source and
its time of logging. The logged data is classified as device signal, sample amount, characterization
result, system log, and “other” which includes all the data that do not fall into the previous four
catalogs. The classification of logged data improves the organization of the database. Apart from
the classification, each logged data also has a level to indicate its importance, ranging from 10 to
50. In this scheme, level 10 is intended for debugging, while level 50 is intended for fatal errors.
In each task actor process, a logger object will be created at the beginning of the task. During
runtime, it can be called conveniently to log the data. For example, it can be used to record the
real-time temperature of the oven at a regular interval during the heating task, which can be read
afterward from the database for debugging and post-analysis.
Despite the logger’s ease of use, logged data can still become unstructured and scattered in the
database. For example, each point of the real-time temperature of the furnace can be a single log
document in the database. To make the data more accessible to researchers, we also provide a
“result” field for each task. At the end of each task, the task can gather data generated during the
run and return them as a Python dictionary. AlabOS stores all returned data in the result field.
For example, one can return the temperature-time curve at the end of the heating task, which is
especially useful when troubleshooting failed syntheses. If a large file needs to be stored in the
database, AlabOS also provides a “LargeResult” object to handle the large file with MongoDB
GridFS backend. The large file will be stored as chunks, with a reference ID generated and linked
to the result collection.
When an experiment is completed, all data involving sample information, task results, and
metadata can be copied to a backup database. This can be configured as a remote database on a
cloud server. After being copied, no change will be made to these data. The operators can later
query the data needed from this backup database. In this way, AlabOS ensures data safety and
alleviates concerns about any potential file loss in the local database.
20

3.5 Experiment Submission
In AlabOS, all the experiments are submitted through the dashboard server, where an API is ex-
posed to receive all the experiment submissions. The format of the experiment is first validated
to ensure the correct processing afterward. The validated experiment is then dumped into an ex-
periment collection, where the experiment manager instance keeps polling and builds samples and
task graphs according to the experiment specifications. The raw input format is in JSON format,
which includes the sample and task information. Although it is easy for the system to parse the
JSON format, it is usually not straightforward for the users to compose the input file directly. An
experiment builder class is introduced to help users to define experiments in a Python script. When
an experiment builder is created, the name and metadata of the experiment should be provided.
With an “add sample” method, the users can create and add samples to the experiments. Then
the tasks are created and attached to the samples. The experiment builder will record the sequence
of the tasks added to each sample and build the task graph with the dependency specified in the
sequence. Finally, the experiment can be converted to a JSON format string and submitted to
the submission API with a “submit” method. The users can also query the experiment status and
results from the experiment information API.
The submission API and the experiment builder serve as a high-level abstraction to the au-
tonomous laboratory. It resembles the queue management system in high-performance computing
(HPC) clusters. When submitting jobs to HPC, the users do not need to pay attention to how
and where their jobs are run. Similarly, when an experiment is submitted to AlabOS, the users
can focus on designing experiments with proper parameters without knowing the details of how the
experiment will be run.
The submission infrastructure of AlabOS opens up the possibility of conducting a close-loop
experiment campaign inside an autonomous laboratory, where AI agents analyze the results and
make plans for future experiments. With a structured input format that is sent to an API endpoint,
there is no distinction between experiments submitted by humans and by AI. When designing a
close-loop experiment campaign, the user can wrap the submission and result query script into
an objective function with the inputs and outputs to be explored. The objective function can be
directly used in various experiment planning software for self-driving laboratories like Chimera 59
21

and Altas 60.
4 AlabOS in practice: orchestrating an autonomous labora-
tory for solid-state synthesis
AlabOS is actively used to orchestrate the A-Lab 18, an autonomous synthesis platform for inor-
ganic material synthesis. The A-Lab focuses specifically on preparing samples in powder form
using solid-state synthesis and characterizes them using X-ray diffraction. A typical workflow of
the A-Lab’s operations is shown in Fig. 6a. The workflow is divided into several tasks, which
are the building blocks of each experiment in the A-Lab. A PowderDosing task weighs certain
amounts of precursor powders and mixes them using ball-milling. A Heating task sends the sam-
ples into a box furnace, which is heated according to a pre-defined temperature profile. Similarly,
the HeatingWithAtmosphere task uses tube furnaces to heat the samples under a controlled gas
flow atmosphere. After the samples are heated, they are sent to the RecoverPowder task to be
ground into fine powders. A small portion of the sample powder is extracted and sent to an X-
ray diffractometer to measure the powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectrum in the Diffraction
task. At the end of one experimental cycle, the Ending task notifies the operators to store each
completed sample in a designated position, and this position is updated in the database accordingly.
To set up the A-Lab workflows using AlabOS, a project folder is first created. A toml format
configuration file is made to store all the connection information to the database, the notification
service, and the message queue service. The devices’ driver codes are stored in a devices folder.
Each type of device is defined in a Python object class inherited from BaseDevice to include some
basic functions like connecting and status checking. Apart from these, we can define as many
methods as needed to operate the device. We also define the associated sample position names
in the device. They are read by AlabOS and recorded in the database when launching. To build
an automated lab for solid-state synthesis and powder XRD characterization, there are in total
16 types of devices with 28 device instances and 289 device-related sample positions. The full list
of defined devices, their communication protocols, the number of associated sample positions, and
numbers of handled exceptions are listed in Table .1. Most devices communicate with the control
PC through Ethernet, with various protocols including HTTP, MODBUS, XML-RPC, etc. Each
22

PowderDosing
Heating 
HeatingWith
Atmosphere
Recover
Powder Diffraction
(a)
Ending
(b) (c)
From March 2023
By the end of July 2024
Figure 6 The typical tasks and workflows and sample throughput in the A-Lab. (a) In a typical
workflow, one powder sample can be heated either in a box furnace ( Heating task) or in a tube
furnace where the atmosphere is controlled ( HeatingWithAtmosphere task). (b) A batched task
graph with 16 samples, including eight samples sent to the box furnace and eight to the tube
furnace. (c) The number of distinct samples processed by A-Lab by quarter between March 2023
and July 2024.
23

device (and control PC) is assigned to a unique IP within an intranet. The control PC can send
commands to the devices by specifying the IP addresses of the devices. The box furnaces, as an
exception, are connected directly to the control PC through its serial interfaces, with a COM port
assigned to each furnace.
24

Device Type Physical Device Communication Protocol Number of Devices Number of Associated Sample Positions Per Device
BallDispenser Arduino HTTP 1 1
BoxFurnace Thermo Scientific F4805560 MODBUS over Serial 4 8
CapDispenser Arduino HTTP 1 3
CappingGripper Arduino HTTP 1 1
Diffractometer Malvern Panalytical Aeris Mineral Edition Socket 1 1
LabmanQuadrant Labman Powder Dosing System HTTP 4 48
ManualFurnace N/A N/A 4 8
RobotArmCharacterization Universal Robot 5e Socket & SSH 1 1
RobotArmFurnaces Universal Robot 5e Socket & SSH 1 1
Scale OHAUS Scout HTTP 1 1
Shaker Arduino HTTP 1 1
TransferRack N/A N/A 1 6
TubeFurnace MTI OTF1200X5ASD XML-RPC 4 4
VialDispenserRack N/A N/A 1 0
VialLabeler Reiner jetStamp 1025 Serial 1 1
XRDDispenserRack N/A N/A 1 0
Table 1 All the devices implemented in A-Lab within AlabOS framework. Each device type represents a Python class definition using AlabOS APIs.
The physical devices used in A-Lab are listed. The communication protocol indicates how the device object communicates with the physical device in
A-Lab. If the protocol is N/A, it indicates the device is not linked to any physical devices and only exists in AlabOS system to manage some status
of the lab. For example, the XRDDispenserRack is used to monitor the number of clean XRD sample holders and will notify users when there are no
more clean XRD holders. The number of devices and the associated sample positions for each device are also listed.
25

Task name Capacity Number of tasks Error handling routines in definition % with exceptions % with unrecoverable exceptions
PowderDosing 16 333 1 1.20 1.20
Heating 8 403 2 4.96 4.22
ManualHeating 8 75 0 0 0
HeatingWithAtmosphere 4 27 0 22.22 7.41
RecoverPowder 1 2818 15 4.19 0.99
Diffraction 1 2658 11 4.74 1.20
Ending 1 2574 3 0.12 0.04
Table 2 The maximum capacity of each task and the number of tasks in A-Lab by the time of
writing. The number of handled errors in each task, indicated by the try/except blocks with user
inputs requested, is shown in the table. Among all the tasks, the ratios of tasks with exceptions
and with unrecoverable exceptions are also shown in the last two columns.
After the devices are set, another folder named tasks is created to store all the task procedures.
Each task inherits from BaseTask in AlabOS, which implements methods to report progress, reserve
resources, and get samples’ information. In each task, the device and sample position resources
are reserved before any actions are taken in A-Lab. A device handle is returned after the resource
is assigned in AlabOS. The task can call any method in the device class to perform operations.
Finally, the system can be launched via a terminal’s command line interface (CLI). If any changes
are made to the task definition, the system will need to be restarted to take the changes into effect.
To optimize throughput, several tasks in the A-Lab can handle multiple samples, with the capac-
ity of each task and the number of successfully completed tasks are shown in Table .2. For example,
samples are loaded into a ceramic rack with eight slots in the heating task. A robot arm then inserts
this entire ceramic rack into a box furnace. Such batch processing approach gives the heating task
a maximum capacity of eight. When submitting the experiment, one node in the task graph can
take multiple samples, which indicates that they are processed in the same batch. For example, an
experiment with sixteen samples has the task graph shown in Fig. 6b. All of the sixteen samples
are processed in one powder dosing task. The samples are then divided into three heating batches
with four, four, and eight samples, respectively. These are heated in different furnaces according to
the specified heating profiles. Samples with different heating profiles cannot share the same furnace.
While a common workflow of tasks is shown in Fig. 6a, many other workflows are possible in the
A-Lab. Several of these are shown in Table 3. For example, when the operators wish to heat samples
26

manually while still using the rest of the automated processes in the A-Lab, a ManualHeating task
can inform the operators (via the notification system) of the position of each sample after the powder
dosing task is completed. It will also notify the operators where to place the heated samples so
that any downstream tasks can process them. As another example, if the operators wish to obtain
the XRD pattern of precursors used in the A-Lab, they can skip the heating tasks and move the
sample (precursor powders) directly to the powder recovery and XRD tasks. Also, if the operators
would like to process a set of samples that are heated outside A-Lab, they can use a Starting task
to create the record of the sample in the database and specify the position of the sample so that
tasks can find the sample.
Workflow Note
1 PowderDosing - ManualHeating -
RecoverPowder - Diffraction - Ending
Heat the samples in the external
furnaces for higher throughput
2 PowderDosing - RecoverPowder -
Diffraction - Ending
Skip the heating to characterize
the precursors
3 Starting - RecoverPowder -
Diffraction - Ending
Process samples that are made
outside A-Lab
Table 3 Other frequently used workflows in A-Lab. The workflow column shows the sequence of
the tasks. The note column describes the use cases of each workflow.
By the time of writing, AlabOS has been driving A-Lab to synthesize and characterize over
3,500 distinct samples over a period of approximately one and half years, as shown in Fig .6c.
The maximum number of samples submitted in one single day was 149 samples on Feb 9, 2024.
The system is designed to be able to handle a large amount of sample submissions at a time. By
dividing the experiments composed of many samples into modular tasks, AlabOS is able to schedule
and manage experiments at a finer granularity, thus ensuring the high efficiency of completing the
complicated workflows.
To maintain smooth operation, A-Lab task definitions incorporate handling routines for common
exceptions. The number of exceptions in each A-Lab task is listed in Table. 2. Depending on the
complexity of the task, different exception-handling codes are inserted into task definitions. Among
them, RecoverPowder and Diffraction require the most exception handling as many steps are
27

involved in the operation. The number of exception-handling routines also aligns with the ratio
of recovered exceptions in all the exceptions raised, as shown in Table. 2. RecoverPowder and
Diffraction demonstrate a higher exception recovery rate of 76% and 75%, respectively. On
the contrary, Heating and PowderDosing have a lower recovery rate of 15% and 0% due to limited
exception handling. The lack of routines to address exceptions in these tasks can be attributed to the
fact that some are due to hardware that is worn out, or to newly emerged software communication
exceptions, which were not detected in the soak test. Over time, these tasks will suffer less from
unrecoverable errors in the future with more exception-handling routines included.
5 Conclusion and Outlook
We have outlined the development and application of AlabOS as an orchestration software for man-
aging workflows in autonomous laboratories. This package is designed to meet the fast-changing
requirements of a typical materials research program. With the graph-based experiment input
format, independent task actor design, and the resource occupation mechanism, human operators
can define and submit workflows in AlabOS without concerning themselves with possible conflicts
between concurrent tasks. The dashboard and notification system provide a general solution for
human-machine interaction in the laboratory, which becomes especially useful when performing
maintenance and error recovery jobs. With the public availability of AlabOS, we hope that re-
searchers will no longer need to write complex workflow management codes but instead focus their
time on developing high-level logic followed by autonomous laboratories for accelerated materials
discovery and optimization. Only in this way, the autonomous laboratory can be more accessible
to general researchers and become a more powerful tool for accelerating material discovery.
6 Code availability
The code for the AlabOS is available at https://github.com/CederGroupHub/alabos . The
version of the AlabOS code employed for this study is v1.0.1. The online document is hosted at
https://cedergrouphub.github.io/alabos/ . The implementation of device communication
driver is available at https://github.com/CederGroup/alab_control. The A-Lab-specific device
and task definitions are available at https://github.com/CederGroupHub/alabos/tree/main/
28

examples/alab_example.
7 Author Contributions
Y.F. and B.R.: conceptualization, software, writing - original draft, writing - review and editing.
R.K.: conceptualization, software, writing - review and editing. O.D., H.P.S., and M.J.M: software,
writing - review and editing. Z.W., N.J.S., L.N.W., and D.M: investigation, writing - review
and editing. Y.Z.: methodology, supervision, writing - review and editing. A.J.: methodology,
supervision, resources, writing - review and editing. G.C.: resources, supervision, methodology,
project administration, writing - review and editing.
8 Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
9 Acknowledgements
This work was primarily financed by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of
Basic Energy Sciences, Materials Sciences and Engineering Division under contract no. DE-AC02-
05-CH11231 (D2S2 programme, KCD2S2), the Laboratory Directed Research and Development
Program of Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, and Materials Project. Work done at UC
Berkeley was supported by Umicore Specialty Oxides and Chemicals.
References
[1] A. Jain, S. P. Ong, G. Hautier, W. Chen, W. D. Richards, S. Dacek, S. Cholia, D. Gunter,
D. Skinner, G. Ceder and K. A. Persson, APL Materials, 2013, 1, 011002.
[2] J. Schmidt, M. R. G. Marques, S. Botti and M. A. L. Marques, npj Computational Materials ,
2019, 5, 83.
[3] K. Choudhary, B. DeCost, C. Chen, A. Jain, F. Tavazza, R. Cohn, C. W. Park, A. Choudhary,
29

A. Agrawal, S. J. L. Billinge, E. Holm, S. P. Ong and C. Wolverton, npj Computational
Materials, 2022, 8, 59.
[4] K. T. Butler, D. W. Davies, H. Cartwright, O. Isayev and A. Walsh, Nature, 2018, 559,
547–555.
[5] G. R. Schleder, A. C. Padilha, C. M. Acosta, M. Costa and A. Fazzio, Journal of Physics:
Materials, 2019, 2, 032001.
[6] D. Morgan and R. Jacobs, Annual Review of Materials Research , 2020, 50, 71–103.
[7] S. Kirklin, J. E. Saal, B. Meredig, A. Thompson, J. W. Doak, M. Aykol, S. R¨ uhl and C. Wolver-
ton, npj Computational Materials , 2015, 1, 1–15.
[8] B. G. Sumpter, R. K. Vasudevan, T. Potok and S. V. Kalinin, npj Computational Materials ,
2015, 1, 15008.
[9] J. R. Chamorro and T. M. McQueen, Accounts of Chemical Research, 2018, 51, 2918–2925.
[10] Z. Wang, Y. Sun, K. Cruse, Y. Zeng, Y. Fei, Z. Liu, J. Shangguan, Y.-W. Byeon, K. Jun,
T. He, W. Sun and G. Ceder, Nature Synthesis, 2024.
[11] S. Steiner, J. Wolf, S. Glatzel, A. Andreou, J. M. Granda, G. Keenan, T. Hinkley, G. Aragon-
Camarasa, P. J. Kitson, D. Angelone and L. Cronin, Science, 2019, 363, eaav2211.
[12] N. Hartrampf, A. Saebi, M. Poskus, Z. P. Gates, A. J. Callahan, A. E. Cowfer, S. Hanna,
S. Antilla, C. K. Schissel, A. J. Quartararo et al. , Faculty Opinions – Post-Publication Peer
Review of the Biomedical Literature , 2020, 368, 980–987.
[13] J. S. Manzano, S. S. Hou, Wenduan a†d Zalesskiy, P. Frei, H. Wang, P. J. Kitson and L. Cronin,
Nature Chemistry, 2022, 14, 1311–1318.
[14] J. Bennett, N. Orouji, M. Khan, S. Sadeghi, J. Rodgers and M. Abolhasani, Nature Chemical
Engineering, 2024, 1–11.
[15] B. P. MacLeod, F. G. Parlane, T. D. Morrissey, F. H¨ ase, L. M. Roch, K. E. Dettelbach,
R. Moreira, L. P. Yunker, M. B. Rooney, J. R. Deeth et al., Chem, 2021, 7, 2541–2545.
30

[16] A. G. Kusne, H. Yu, C. Wu, H. Zhang, J. Hattrick-Simpers, B. DeCost, S. Sarker, C. Oses,
C. Toher, S. Curtarolo, A. V. Davydov, R. Agarwal, L. A. Bendersky, M. Li, A. Mehta and
I. Takeuchi, Nature Communications, 2020, 11, 5966.
[17] B. Burger, P. M. Maffettone, V. V. Gusev, C. M. Aitchison, Y. Bai, X. Wang, X. Li, B. M.
Alston, B. Li, R. Clowes et al., Nature, 2020, 583, 237–241.
[18] N. J. Szymanski, B. Rendy, Y. Fei, R. E. Kumar, T. He, D. Milsted, M. J. McDermott,
M. Gallant, E. D. Cubuk, A. Merchant, H. Kim, A. Jain, C. J. Bartel, K. Persson, Y. Zeng
and G. Ceder, Nature, 2023.
[19] J. Chen, S. R. Cross, L. J. Miara, J.-J. Cho, Y. Wang and W. Sun, Nature Synthesis, 2024,
1–9.
[20] J.-P. Correa-Baena, K. Hippalgaonkar, J. van Duren, S. Jaffer, V. R. Chandrasekhar, V. Ste-
vanovic, C. Wadia, S. Guha and T. Buonassisi, Joule, 2018, 2, 1410–1420.
[21] J. E. Saal, S. Kirklin, M. Aykol, B. Meredig and C. Wolverton, Jom, 2013, 65, 1501–1509.
[22] B. Liu, J. Zhao, Y. Liu, J. Xi, Q. Li, H. Xiang and Y. Zhou, Journal of Materials Science &
Technology, 2021, 88, 143–157.
[23] N. J. Szymanski, C. J. Bartel, Y. Zeng, Q. Tu and G. Ceder, Chemistry of Materials , 2021,
33, 4204–4215.
[24] V. Stanev, V. V. Vesselinov, A. G. Kusne, G. Antoszewski, I. Takeuchi and B. S. Alexandrov,
npj Computational Materials , 2018, 4, 43.
[25] D. Chen, Y. Bai, S. Ament, W. Zhao, D. Guevarra, L. Zhou, B. Selman, R. B. van Dover,
J. M. Gregoire and C. P. Gomes, Nature Machine Intelligence , 2021, 3, 812–822.
[26] J. Liu, M. Osadchy, L. Ashton, M. Foster, C. J. Solomon and S. J. Gibson, Analyst, 2017, 142,
4067–4074.
[27] F. Oviedo, Z. Ren, S. Sun, C. Settens, Z. Liu, N. T. P. Hartono, S. Ramasamy, B. L. DeCost,
S. I. Tian, G. Romano et al., npj Computational Materials , 2019, 5, 60.
31

[28] N. J. Szymanski, P. Nevatia, C. J. Bartel, Y. Zeng and G. Ceder, Nature Communications,
2023, 14, 6956.
[29] M. Aykol, J. H. Montoya and J. S. Hummelshøj, Journal of the American Chemical Society ,
2021, 143, 9244–9259.
[30] F. Strieth-Kalthoff, H. Hao, V. Rathore, J. Derasp, T. Gaudin, N. H. Angello, M. Seifrid,
E. Trushina, M. Guy, J. Liu, X. Tang, M. Mamada, W. Wang, T. Tsagaantsooj, C. Lavigne,
R. Pollice, T. C. Wu, K. Hotta, L. Bodo, S. Li, M. Haddadnia, A. Wolos, R. Roszak, C.-T.
Ser, C. Bozal-Ginesta, R. J. Hickman, J. Vestfrid, A. Aguilar-Gr´ anda, E. L. Klimareva, R. C.
Sigerson, W. Hou, D. Gahler, S. Lach, A. Warzybok, O. Borodin, S. Rohrbach, B. Sanchez-
Lengeling, C. Adachi, B. A. Grzybowski, L. Cronin, J. E. Hein, M. D. Burke and A. Aspuru-
Guzik, ChemRxiv, 2023.
[31] J. M. Granda, L. Donina, V. Dragone, D.-L. Long and L. Cronin, Nature, 2018, 559, 377–381.
[32] Y. Xie, K. Sattari, C. Zhang and J. Lin, Progress in Materials Science, 2023, 132, 101043.
[33] M. Abolhasani and E. Kumacheva, Nature Synthesis, 2023, 2, 483–492.
[34] H. G. Martin, T. Radivojevic, J. Zucker, K. Bouchard, J. Sustarich, S. Peisert, D. Arnold,
N. Hillson, G. Babnigg, J. M. Marti et al., Current Opinion in Biotechnology, 2023, 79, 102881.
[35] Y. Xie, K. Sattari, C. Zhang and J. Lin, Progress in Materials Science, 2023, 132, 101043.
[36] P. Raccuglia, K. C. Elbert, P. D. Adler, C. Falk, M. B. Wenny, A. Mollo, M. Zeller, S. A.
Friedler, J. Schrier and A. J. Norquist, Nature, 2016, 533, 73–76.
[37] M. D. Zimmerman, M. Grabowski, M. J. Domagalski, E. M. MacLean, M. Chruszcz and
W. Minor, Structural Genomics and Drug Discovery: Methods and Protocols , 2014, 1–25.
[38] L. Talirz, S. Kumbhar, E. Passaro, A. V. Yakutovich, V. Granata, F. Gargiulo, M. Borelli,
M. Uhrin, S. P. Huber, S. Zoupanos et al., Scientific data, 2020, 7, 299.
[39] A. Jain, S. P. Ong, W. Chen, B. Medasani, X. Qu, M. Kocher, M. Brafman, G. Petretto, G.-M.
Rignanese, G. Hautier et al., Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience , 2015,
27, 5037–5059.
32

[40] L. Himanen, A. Geurts, A. S. Foster and P. Rinke, Advanced Science, 2019, 6, 1900808.
[41] S. Curtarolo, W. Setyawan, G. L. Hart, M. Jahnatek, R. V. Chepulskii, R. H. Taylor, S. Wang,
J. Xue, K. Yang, O. Levy et al., Computational Materials Science , 2012, 58, 218–226.
[42] K. Mathew, J. H. Montoya, A. Faghaninia, S. Dwarakanath, M. Aykol, H. Tang, I.-h. Chu,
T. Smidt, B. Bocklund, M. Horton et al. , Computational Materials Science , 2017, 139, 140–
152.
[43] S. P. Huber, E. Bosoni, M. Bercx, J. Br¨ oder, A. Degomme, V. Dikan, K. Eimre, E. Flage-
Larsen, A. Garcia, L. Genovese et al., npj Computational Materials , 2021, 7, 136.
[44] M. Sim, M. G. Vakili, F. Strieth-Kalthoff, H. Hao, R. Hickman, S. Miret, S. Pablo-Garc´ ıa and
A. Aspuru-Guzik, ChemRxiv, 2023.
[45] D. Juchli, in SiLA 2: The Next Generation Lab Automation Standard , ed. S. Beutel and
F. Lenk, Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2022, pp. 147–174.
[46] F. Rahmanian, J. Flowers, D. Guevarra, M. Richter, M. Fichtner, P. Donnely, J. M. Gregoire
and H. S. Stein, Advanced Materials Interfaces, 2022, 9, 2101987.
[47] D. Guevarra, K. Kan, Y. Lai, R. J. Jones, L. Zhou, P. Donnelly, M. Richter, H. S. Stein and
J. M. Gregoire, Digital Discovery, 2023, 2, 1806–1812.
[48] D. Allan, T. Caswell, S. Campbell and M. Rakitin, Synchrotron Radiation News , 2019, 32,
19–22.
[49] H. Fakhruldeen, G. Pizzuto, J. Glowacki and A. I. Cooper, 2022 International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2022, pp. 6013–6019.
[50] I. M. Pendleton, G. Cattabriga, Z. Li, M. A. Najeeb, S. A. Friedler, A. J. Norquist, E. M.
Chan and J. Schrier, MRS Communications, 2019, 9, 846–859.
[51] R. Vescovi, T. Ginsburg, K. Hippe, D. Ozgulbas, C. Stone, A. Stroka, R. Butler, B. Blaiszik,
T. Brettin, K. Chard et al., Digital Discovery, 2023, 2, 1980–1998.
[52] J. Zhou, M. Luo, L. Chen, Q. Zhu, S. Jiang, F. Zhang, W. Shang and J. Jiang, ChemRxiv,
2024.
33

[53] The Pydantic development team, Pydantic, https://github.com/pydantic/pydantic, 2024,
Accessed: 2024-02-05.
[54] I. C. Bertolotti and T. Hu, Embedded Software Development, 2017, 29, 343–374.
[55] F. Pezoa, J. L. Reutter, F. Suarez, M. Ugarte and D. Vrgoˇ c, Proceedings of the 25th Interna-
tional Conference on World Wide Web, 2016, pp. 263–273.
[56] K. Jeffay, D. F. Stanat and C. U. Martel, IEEE real-time systems symposium, 1991, pp.
129–139.
[57] X. Mi, F. Qian, Y. Zhang and X. Wang, Proceedings of the 2017 Internet Measurement Con-
ference, 2017, pp. 398–404.
[58] R. Srinivasan, RFC1831: RPC: Remote Procedure Call Protocol Specification Version 2, 1995.
[59] F. H¨ ase, L. M. Roch and A. Aspuru-Guzik, Chemical science, 2018, 9, 7642–7655.
[60] R. Hickman, M. Sim, S. Pablo-Garc´ ıa, I. Woolhouse, H. Hao, Z. Bao, P. Bannigan, C. Allen,
M. Aldeghi and A. Aspuru-Guzik, Atlas: A Brain for Self-driving Laboratories , 2023.
34