SOURCE URL: https://www.gradeworkinggroup.org/
FINAL URL: https://www.gradeworkinggroup.org/
HTTP: 200
CONTENT-TYPE: text/html; charset=UTF-8
======================================================================
﻿ 

 GRADE home 

 -->

 GRADE 

 Home 

 Intro 

 Publications 

 Get involved 

 Organizations 

 Members 

 Contact 

 -->

 Welcome to the GRADE working group

 From evidence to recommendations – transparent and sensible 

 What is GRADE?

 The GRADE working group

 The Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (short GRADE) working group began
 in the year 2000 as an informal collaboration of people with an interest in addressing the shortcomings of
 grading systems in health care. The working group has developed a common, sensible and transparent
 approach to grading quality (or certainty) of evidence and strength of recommendations. Many international organizations
 have provided input into the development of the GRADE approach which is now considered the standard in guideline development.

 For more information, see the GRADE Book 

 GRADE Vision and Mission 

 Vision 

 A world where decisions across all sectors are consistently based on the best available 
 evidence and science, leading to better health outcomes, resilient healthcare systems, 
 and equitable access to effective interventions that account for context and values of 
 the affected populations. The GRADE Working Group envisions its products and methods to 
 be the global benchmark for transparent evidence assessment, empowering individuals, 
 organizations, and policymakers to make informed, values-based decisions.

 Mission 

 To advance evidence-based, contextualized decision-making by providing transparent, rigorous, 
 and accessible methods and tools for grading the certainty of evidence and the strength of 
 health decisions, including recommendations. The GRADE Working Group is committed to improving 
 decision-making by facilitating the interpretation of research findings to inform health guidelines, 
 systematic reviews, health technology assessment, research and health in all policies 
 (e.g., health, education, justice).

 For more information, see the GRADE Book 

 Why rate the certainty in the evidence and strength of recommendations?

 Judgments about evidence and recommendations in healthcare are complex.
 For example, those making recommendations about whether or not to recommend a new generation of blood thinners for patients
 with irregular heart beat (atrial fibrillation) must agree on which outcomes to consider,
 which evidence to include for each outcome, how to assess the quality of that evidence, and how to determine
 if blood thinners do more good than harm. Because resources are always limited and money that
 is allocated to treating atrial fibrillation cannot be spent on other worthwhile interventions, they may also need to
 decide whether any incremental health benefits are worth the additional costs.

 Systematic reviews of the effects of healthcare provide essential, but not sufficient information for making
 well informed decisions. Reviewers and people who use reviews draw conclusions about the quality of the evidence,
 either implicitly or explicitly. Such judgments guide subsequent decisions. For example, clinical actions are likely
 to differ depending on whether one concludes that the evidence that blood thinners reduces the risk of stroke in patients
 with atrial fibrillation is convincing (high quality) or that it is unconvincing (low quality).

 Similarly, practice guidelines and people who use them draw conclusions about the strength of recommendations,
 either implicitly or explicitly. Using the same example, a guideline that recommends that patients with atrial
 fibrillation should be treated may suggest that all patients definitely should be treated or that patients should
 probably be treated, implying that treatment may not be warranted in all patients.

 A systematic and explicit approach to making judgments such as these can help to prevent errors, facilitate critical
 appraisal of these judgments, and can help to improve communication of this information.

 Criteria for applying or using GRADE

 One of the aims of the GRADE Working Group was to reduce unnecessary confusion arising from multiple
 systems for grading evidence and recommendations. To avoid adding to this confusion by having multiple
 variations of the GRADE system we suggest that the criteria below should be met when stating that the
 GRADE approach was used to assess evidence or develop recommendations. Also, while users may believe
 there may be good reasons for modifying the GRADE system, we discourage the use of "modified GRADE
 approaches" that differ from the approach described by the GRADE Working Group.

 On the other hand, we encourage and welcome constructive criticism of the GRADE approach, suggestions
 for improvements, and involvement in the GRADE Working Group. As most scientific approaches to
 advancing healthcare, the GRADE approach will continue to evolve in response to new evidence and
 to meet the needs of systematic review authors, guideline developers and other users.

 Suggested minimal requirements for stating that the GRADE system or approach was used (updated 2023-05) 

 full pdf version with document history and references ): -->
 
 The certainty in the evidence (also known as quality of evidence or confidence in the estimates) 
 should be consistent with the operationalizations used by the GWG.[1, 9-11] 
 Conceptually, GRADE has provided the following definition “The certainty that the true effect, accuracy measure, 
 or association lies on one side of a particular threshold, or in a particular range.”[12, 13] 
 And for evidence from reviews of qualitative research: “an assessment of the extent to which the review 
 finding is a reasonable representation of the phenomenon of interest.”

 Explicit consideration should be given to each of the GRADE domains for assessing the certainty in the evidence 
 (i.e., risk of bias, imprecision, inconsistency, indirectness, publication bias, large effects, 
 dose response gradients, and residual plausible opposing bias), although different terminology may be used to 
 describe these domains (e.g., limitations in the detailed study design or execution instead of risk of bias).

 The certainty in the body of evidence should be assessed for each critical or important outcome for a decision 
 (also called main outcomes) using GRADE’s categories (e.g., high, moderate, low and/or very low), with definitions 
 for each category that are consistent with the definitions published by the GWG.[9] 
 These outcomes should describe both desirable and undesirable health effects (also called benefits and harms or 
 efficacy and safety outcomes).

 GRADE evidence tables (e.g., evidence profiles or summary of findings tables) should be used to present the 
 results of evidence synthesis and an assessment of certainty in evidence, and these should be based on systematic 
 reviews (we refer to systematic reviews as a methodology that is also used in health technology assessments 
 and other evidence synthesis following such methodology).[14] At a minimum, the evidence that was assessed and 
 the methods that were used to identify and appraise that evidence using GRADE should be clearly described.

 The next three requirements apply only to GRADE for making decisions or recommendations: 

 Explicit criteria (both health related and contextual), as described in the GRADE Evidence to Decision (EtD) frameworks, 
 should form the basis for recommendations or decisions. Explicit judgments should be made for each criterion that 
 is chosen, including those that may be added, and the evidence used to inform each of those judgments should be 
 provided. Additional considerations that influence the recommendation or decision should also be documented and 
 be accessible.[5]

 Guideline developers should describe the magnitude and balance of desirable and undesirable health effects of 
 the options that are considered, the value of each outcome, and the certainty of the evidence for the aforementioned 
 EtD criteria. Other EtD criteria, such as resources use, equity, acceptability, and feasibility that are used, 
 may vary, depending on the type of recommendation or decision[5, 15, 16], and the mandate of the group that is 
 making the recommendation or decision. 

 A recommendation should have one of two strengths (strong or conditional, also called weak) and one of two 
 directions (for or against). The definitions for each category should be consistent with the definitions used 
 by the GWG (although different terminology may be used, such as strong and discretionary).[17, 18]

 How to cite this GGG guidance: Schunemann HJ, Brennan S, Akl EA, Hultcrantz M, Alonso Coello P, Xia J, et al. 
 The development methods of official GRADE articles and requirements for claiming the use of GRADE - a statement by the 
 GRADE Guidance Group. J Clin Epidemiol. 2023 May 19;159:79-84. doi: 10.1016/j.jclinepi.2023.05.010. 

 Citations: 

 Atkins D, Best D, Briss PA, Eccles M, Falck-Ytter Y, Flottorp S, et al. 
 Grading quality of evidence and strength of recommendations. BMJ. 2004;328:1490. 

 Schunemann HJ, Best D, Vist G, Oxman AD, Group GW. Letters, numbers, symbols and words: 
 how to communicate grades of evidence and recommendations. CMAJ : Canadian Medical Association journal - 
 journal de l'Association medicale canadienne. 2003;169:677-80. 

 Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Vist GE, Kunz R, Falck-Ytter Y, Alonso-Coello P, et al. GRADE: an emerging consensus on 
 rating quality of evidence and strength of recommendations. BMJ. 2008;336:924-6.

 Guyatt G, Oxman AD, Akl EA, Kunz R, Vist G, Brozek J, et al. GRADE guidelines: 
 1. Introduction-GRADE evidence profiles and summary of findings tables. Journal of clinical epidemiology. 2011;64:383-94.

 Alonso-Coello P, Schunemann HJ, Moberg J, Brignardello-Petersen R, Akl EA, Davoli M, et al. 
 GRADE Evidence to Decision (EtD) frameworks: a systematic and transparent approach to making well informed 
 healthcare choices. 1: Introduction. BMJ. 2016;353:i2016.

 Zhang Y, Akl EA, Schunemann HJ. Using systematic reviews in guideline development: the GRADE approach. 
 Res Synth Methods. 2018

 Dixon C, Dixon PE, Sultan S, Mustafa R, Morgan RL, Murad MH, et al. Guideline developers in the United States 
 were inconsistent in applying criteria for appropriate Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development and 
 Evaluation use. Journal of clinical epidemiology. 2020;124:193-9.

 McGowan J, Akl EA, Coello PA, Brennan S, Dahm P, Davoli M, et al. Update on the JCE GRADE series and other GRADE 
 article types. Journal of clinical epidemiology. 2021;140:163-4.

 Hultcrantz M, Rind D, Akl EA, Treweek S, Mustafa RA, Iorio A, et al. The GRADE Working Group clarifies the construct 
 of certainty of evidence. J Clin Epidemiol. 2017;87:4-13.

 Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Kunz R, Vist GE, Falck-Ytter Y, Schunemann HJ. What is "quality of evidence" and why is it important 
 to clinicians? BMJ. 2008;336:995-8.

 Guyatt G, Oxman AD, Sultan S, Brozek J, Glasziou P, Alonso-Coello P, et al. GRADE guidelines 11-making an overall 
 rating of confidence in effect estimates for a single outcome and for all outcomes. Journal of clinical epidemiology. 2012.

 Schünemann HJ, Neumann I, Hultcrantz M, Brignardello-Petersen R, Zeng L, Murad MH, et al. GRADE Guidance article 35: 
 Update on rating imprecision for assessing contextualized certainty of evidence and making decisions. 
 Journal of clinical epidemiology. 2022.

 Schunemann HJ. Interpreting GRADE's levels of certainty or quality of the evidence: GRADE for statisticians, 
 considering review information size or less emphasis on imprecision? Journal of clinical epidemiology. 2016;75:6-15.

 Schunemann HJ, Reinap M, Piggott T, Laidmae E, Kohler K, Pold M, et al. The ecosystem of health decision making: 
 from fragmentation to synergy. Lancet Public Health. 2022;7:e378-e90.

 Alonso-Coello P, Oxman AD, Moberg J, Brignardello-Petersen R, Akl EA, Davoli M, et al. 
 GRADE Evidence to Decision (EtD) frameworks: a systematic and transparent approach to making well informed healthcare choices.
 2: Clinical practice guidelines. BMJ. 2016;353:i2089.

 Schunemann HJ, Mustafa R, Brozek J, Santesso N, Alonso-Coello P, Guyatt G, et al. GRADE Guidelines: 16. GRADE evidence to 
 decision frameworks for tests in clinical practice and public health. Journal of clinical epidemiology. 2016;76:89-98.

 Andrews JC, Schunemann HJ, Oxman AD, Pottie K, Meerpohl JJ, Coello PA, et al. GRADE guidelines: 15. Going from evidence 
 to recommendation-determinants of a recommendation's direction and strength. Journal of clinical epidemiology. 2013;66:726-35.

 Andrews J, Guyatt G, Oxman AD, Alderson P, Dahm P, Falck-Ytter Y, et al. GRADE guidelines: 14. Going from evidence to 
 recommendations: the significance and presentation of recommendations. Journal of clinical epidemiology. 2013;66:719-25. 

 The GRADE Guidance Group (G3)

 In order to more efficiently deal with administrative issues, the GRADE Guidance Group (G3) 
 was established in 2013 with a committee of up to 12 members (increased from 10 to 12 in 2020) 
 including the two co-chairs, with a rotating membership, meeting bimonthly. 

 Their role is to:

 Act as an executive committee for the GRADE Working Group (GWG)

 Provide guidance and ensure accountability of the GWG co-chairs

 Help set GRADE policies and directions 

 Report to GRADE working group at each GRADE meeting

 Members of the G3:
 
 Elie Akl, Sue Brennan, Philipp Dahm, Marina Davoli, Monica Hultcrantz, Miranda Langendam, 
 Joerg Meerpohl, Reem Mustafa, Ignacio Neumann, Holger Schünemann, Nicole Skoetz, Jun Xia (members)

 Getting started

 Browse our publications or learn hands-on. We'll get you started in no time.

 Read

 Clinicians and policy-making users and anyone new to GRADE may want to consider
 first reading the overview chapter of the GRADE handbook. 

 View

 Have Dr. Gordon Guyatt explain GRADE or
 watch introductory lectures by Dr. Holger Schünemann .

 Do

 GRADEpro (now also called GRADEpro GDT app) - can be found on the GRADEpro website .
 GRADEpro and GRADEpro Guideline Development Tool are easy to use all-in-one web solution for
 summarizing and presenting information for healthcare decision making. It also includes the GRADE handbook.
 Example evidence profiles can be accessed through the database of evidence profiles and recommendations. 

 GRADE events 

 Calendar

 Publications

 A selected list of GRADE publications to get you started or to provide a deep-dive.

 Quick

 Want to quickly find out what GRADE is all about? We suggest reading our BMJ series.
 Please note that the online text is the longer, full version of the submitted manuscript.
 The pdf's on BMJ's website are abbreviated print issues. Start with
 GRADE: an emerging consensus on rating quality of evidence and strength of recommendations , followed by
 What is "quality of evidence" and why is it important to clinicians? and
 Going from evidence to recommendations . You can also learn more about how
 diagnostic tests and strategies or
 resource use are considered in GRADE.

 Learn more 

 In-depth

 The JCE series and the GRADE handbook in GRADEpro provide a guide for systematic review and health technology assessment authors,
 guideline panelists and methodologists on how to apply the GRADE methodology framework in more detail:
 GRADE evidence profiles ,
 framing the question and deciding on important outcomes ,
 rating the quality of evidence ,
 risk of bias ,
 publication bias ,
 imprecision ,
 inconsistency ,
 indirectness ,
 rating up ,
 resource use ,
 overall rating ,
 Summary of Findings tables (binary) and
 (continues) ,
 presentation of recommendations , and
 recommendation's direction and strength .

 Learn more 

 Get involved

 A GRADE center or network serves as the primary hub within the region for
 GRADE related questions and for support and collaboration opportunities.
 The mission of GRADE centers/networks is to help the GRADE working group in the training,
 promotion, dissemination and implementation of GRADE. GRADE centers and networks
 develop effective actions to spread the use of GRADE methodology in health guidelines
 and systematic reviews through advocacy, training and support of guideline developers and review authors;
 provide methodological support to national, regional or professional organizations and guideline development programs;
 and conduct workshops and graduate courses on GRADE application, e.g., for health science students, trainees, and faculty members.
 The GRADE working group is open for membership to all those who are interested from different background. 
 Members who have conflict of interest are expected to declare their conflict during meetings and in email correspondence about publications.

 GRADE centers 

 GRADE centers
-->

 McMaster University GRADE Center, Canada 

 Lanzhou University GRADE Center, China 

 Barcelona GRADE Center, Spain 

 Freiburg GRADE Center, Germany 

 American University of Beirut GRADE Center, Lebanon 

 Lazio Region-ASL Rome GRADE Center, Italy

 Adelaide GRADE Centre, Australia 

 Melbourne GRADE Centre, Australia 

 Nottingham Ningbo GRADE Center, China 

 Krakow University GRADE Center, Poland 

 Minds Tokyo GRADE Center, Japan 

 Fudan University GRADE Center, China 

 Bejing GRADE Center, China 

 NECA GRADE Center, Korea 

 Humanitas University GRADE Centre, Milan, Italy 

 ACP GRADE Center, Philadelphia, PA, USA 

 Papageorgiou GRADE Center, Thessaloniki, Greece 

 GRADE networks 

 GRADE networks
-->

 U.S. GRADE Network 

 Dutch GRADE Network 

 UK GRADE Network 

 South African GRADE Network 

 Colombia GRADE Network 
 
 South Korea GRADE Network 
 
 Nordic GRADE Network 
 
 Czech GRADE Network 
 
 Italien GRADE Network 
 
 Portuguese GRADE Network 
 
 GRADE Southern Cone Network 
 
 Ireland GRADE Network 

 Groups and projects 

 DECIDE research project 

 Environmental health

 Prognosis

 Outcomes valuation

 GRADE-CERQual 

 Diagnosis

 Network meta-analysis

 Observational studies

 GRADE training and credentialing

 Public health

 Rare diseases

 Evidence to decision

 Equity

 Algorithms and pathways

 Modeling

 Biosimilars

 Animal studies

 Complex interventions

 GRADE NRS risk of bias integration

 Organizations

 More than 120 organizations from over 20 countries around the world have endorsed or are using GRADE.

 –New– 

 All 

 Asia 

 Europe 

 International 

 North America 

 Oceania 

 South America 

-->

 GRADE working group Newsletter Signup 

 Please sign up to receive news on activities of the GRADE working group 

 News

 Follow us on Facebook and X (formerly Twitter)

 New: 
 GRADE working group newsletter December 2024 
 Prior newsletters: 
 
 September 2024 

 -->

 GRADEWorkingGroup 

 -->

 Posts by GRADE_WG 
 
 -->

 Get in touch

 For inquiries, feel free to contact us through your preferred social media channel
 or through email.

 CONTACT

 mail@gradeworkinggroup.org

 About Us 

 © 2004-2026 - The GRADE Working Group 

 follow us

 Do you like cookies? 🍪 We use cookies to ensure you get the best experience on our website. 
 Learn more 
 I agree