SOURCE URL: https://gdt.gradepro.org/app/handbook/handbook.html
FINAL URL: https://gdt.gradepro.org/app/handbook/handbook.html
HTTP: 200
CONTENT-TYPE: text/html; charset=utf-8
======================================================================
GRADE handbook 

 GRADE Handbook 

 Introduction to GRADE
 Handbook 

 Handbook for grading the quality
 of evidence and the strength of recommendations using the GRADE
 approach. Updated October 2013. 

 Editors: Holger Schünemann ( schuneh@mcmaster.ca ),
 Jan Brożek ( brozekj@mcmaster.ca ),
 Gordon Guyatt ( guyatt@mcmaster.ca ),
 and Andrew Oxman ( oxman@online.no ) 

 1. Overview of the GRADE
 Approach 

 1.1 Purpose and advantages of the GRADE
 approach 

 1.2 Separation of confidence in effect
 estimates from strength of recommendations 

 1.3 Special challenges in applying the the
 GRADE approach 

 1.4 Modifications to the GRADE
 approach 

 2. Framing the health care
 question 

 2.1 Defining the patient population and
 intervention 

 2.2 Dealing with multiple
 comparators 

 2.3 Other considerations 

 2.4 Format of health care questions using the
 GRADE approach 

 3. Selecting and rating the importance of
 outcomes 

 3.1 Steps for considering the relative
 importance of outcomes 

 3.2 Influence of perspective 

 3.3 Using evidence in rating the importance of
 outcomes 

 3.4 Surrogate (substitute)
 outcomes 

 4. Summarizing the evidence 

 4.1 Evidence Tables 

 4.2 GRADE Evidence Profile 

 4.3 Summary of Findings table 

 5. Quality of evidence 

 5.1 Factors determining the quality of
 evidence 

 5.1.1 Study design 

 5.2 Factors that can reduce the quality of the
 evidence 

 5.2.1 Study limitations (Risk of
 Bias) 

 5.2.2 Inconsistency of results 

 5.2.2.1 Deciding whether to use estimates from
 a subgroup analysis 

 5.2.3 Indirectness of evidence 

 5.2.4 Imprecision 

 5.2.4.1 Imprecision in
 guidelines 

 5.2.4.2 Imprecision in in systematic
 reviews 

 5.2.4.3 Rating down two levels for
 imprecision 

 5.2.5 Publication bias 

 5.3. Factors that can increase the quality of
 the evidence 

 5.3.1 Large magnitude of an
 effect 

 5.3.2. Dose-response gradient 

 5.3.3. Effect of plausible residual
 confounding 

 5.4 Overall quality of evidence 

 6. Going from evidence to
 recommendations 

 6.1 Recommendations and their
 strength 

 6.1.1 Strong recommendation 

 6.1.2 Weak recommendation 

 6.1.3 Recommendations to use interventions only
 in research 

 6.1.4 No recommendation 

 6.2 Factors determining direction and strength
 of recommendations 

 6.2.1 Balance of desirable and undesirable
 consequences 

 6.2.1.1 Estimates of the magnitude of the
 desirable and undesirable effects 

 6.2.1.2 Best estimates of values and
 preferences 

 6.3.2 Confidence in best estimates of magnitude
 of effects (quality of evidence) 

 6.3.3 Confidence in values and
 preferences 

 6.3.4 Resource use (cost) 

 6.3.4.1 Differences between costs and other
 outcomes 

 6.3.4.2 Perspective 

 6.3.4.3 Resource implications
 considered 

 6.3.4.4 Confidence in the estimates of resource
 use (quality of the evidence about cost) 

 6.3.4.5 Presentation of resource
 use 

 6.3.4.6 Economic model 

 6.3.4.7 Consideration of resource use in
 recommendations 

 6.4 Presentation of
 recommendations 

 6.4.1 Wording of recommandations 

 6.3.2 Symbolic representation 

 6.4.3 Providing transparent statements about
 assumed values and preferences 

 6.5 The Evidence-to-Decision
 framework 

 7. The GRADE approach for diagnostic tests and
 strategies 

 7.1. Questions about diagnostic
 tests 

 7.1.1. Establishing the purpose of a
 test 

 7.1.2. Establishing the role of a
 test 

 7.1.3. Clear clinical questions 

 7.2. Gold standard and reference
 test 

 7.3. Estimating impact on
 patients 

 7.4. Indirect evidence and impact on
 patient-important outcomes 

 7.5. Judgment about the quality of the
 underlying evidence 

 7.5.1. Initial study design 

 7.5.2. Factors that determine and can decrease
 the quality of evidence 

 7.5.2.1. Risk of bias 

 7.5.2.2. Indirectness of the
 evidence 

 7.5.2.3. Inconsistency, imprecision,
 publication bias and upgrading for dose effect, large estimates
 of accuracy and residual plausible confounding 

 7.5.3. Overall confidence in estimates of
 effects 

 8. Criteria for determining whether the GRADE
 approach was used 

 9. Glossary of terms and
 concepts 

 10. Articles about GRADE 

 11. Additional resources 

 12. The GRADE Working Group 

 About the Handbook 

 Important disclaimer: Please note that this Handbook is being replaced by the GRADE Book, accessible since 2024 via book.gradepro.org . While this handbook has not been withdrawn as some sections have not appeared yet in the new GRADE Book, it will be phased out. Outdated sections in this handbook - that is sections that have been rewritten for the GRADE Book - are labelled accordingly at the beginning of each chapter with a link to the new GRADE Book chapter.

 The GRADE handbook describes the
 process of rating the quality of the best available evidence and
 developing health care recommendations following the approach
 proposed by the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment,
 Development and Evaluation (GRADE) Working Group
 ( www.gradeworkinggroup.org ).
 The Working Group is a collaboration of health care
 methodologists, guideline developers, clinicians, health services
 researchers, health economists, public health officers and other
 interested members. Beginning in the year 2000, the working group
 developed, evaluated and implemented a common, transparent and
 sensible approach to grading the quality of evidence and strength
 of recommendations in health care. The group interacts through
 meetings by producing methodological guidance, developing
 evidence syntheses and guidelines. Members collaborate on
 research projects, such as the DECIDE project
 ( www.decide-collaboration.eu )
 with other members and other scientists or organizations
 (e.g. 
 www.rarebestpractices.eu ). Membership
 is open and free. See 
 www.gradeworkinggroup.org and
 Chapter The GRADE working group in this handbook for more
 information about the Working Group and a list of the
 organizations that have endorsed and adopted the GRADE
 approach. 

 The handbook is intended to be
 used as a guide by those responsible for using the GRADE approach
 to produce GRADE's output, which includes evidence summaries and
 graded recommendations. Target users of the handbook are
 systematic review and health technology assessment (HTA) authors,
 guideline panelists and methodologists who provide support for
 guideline panels. While many of the examples offered in the
 handbook are clinical examples, we also aimed to include a
 broader range of examples from public health and health policy.
 Finally, specific sections refer to interpreting recommendations
 for users of recommendations. 

 Using the Handbook 

 The handbook is divided into
 chapters that correspond to the steps of applying the GRADE
 approach. The Chapter Overview of the GRADE approach provides
 a brief overview of guideline development processes and where the
 GRADE approach fits in. Chapters Framing the health care
 question and Selecting and rating the importance of
 outcomes provide guidance on formulating health care questions
 for guidelines and systematic reviews and for rating the
 importance of outcomes in guidelines. The Chapter Summarizing
 the evidence covers evidence summaries produced using the GRADE
 software. GRADE acknowledges that alternative terms or
 expressions to what GRADE called quality of evidence are often
 appropriate. Therefore, we interpret and will use the phrases
 quality of evidence, strength of evidence, certainty in evidence
 or confidence in estimates interchangeably. When GRADE uses
 the phrase “confidence in estimates” it does not refer to
 statistical confidence intervals, although the width of this
 interval is part of the considerations for judging the GRADE
 criterion imprecision . When GRADE refers to confidence in the
 estimates it refers to the how certain one can be that the effect
 estimates are adequate to support a recommendation (in the
 context of guideline development) or that the effect estimate is
 close to that of the true effect (in the context of evidence
 synthesis). Chapter Quality of evidence provides instructions
 for rating the evidence and addresses the five factors outlined
 in the GRADE approach that may result in rating down the quality
 of evidence and the three factors that may increase the quality
 of evidence. Chapter Going from evidence to recommendations 
 deals with moving from evidence to recommendations in guidelines
 and whether to classify recommendations as strong or weak
 according to the criteria outlined in the GRADE evidence to
 recommendation frameworks. The Chapte r The GRADE
 approach for diagnostic tests and strategies addresses how to
 use the GRADE approach specifically for questions about
 diagnostic tests and strategies. Finally, the Chapter Criteria
 for determining whether the GRADE approach was used provides
 the suggested criteria that shoul d be met
 in order to state that the GRADE approach was used. 

 Throughout the handbook certain
 terms and concepts are hyperlinked to access definitions and the
 specific sections elaborating on those concepts. The glossary of
 terms and concepts is provided in the Chapter Glossary of terms
 and concepts . Where applicable, the handbook highlights
 guidance that is specific to guideline developers or to
 systematic review authors as well as important notes pertaining
 to specific topics. HTA practitioners, depending on their
 mandate, can decide which approach is more suitable for their
 goals. Furthermore, examples demonstrating the application of the
 concepts are provided for each topic. The examples are cited if
 readers wish to learn more about them from the source
 documents. 

 Updating the
 Handbook 

 The handbook is updated to reflect
 advances in the GRADE approach and based on feedback from
 handbook users. It includes information from the published
 documents about the GRADE approach, which are listed in the
 Chapter Articles about GRADE , and links to resources in the
 Chapter Additional resources . 

 We encourage users of the handbook
 to provide feedback and corrections to the handbook editors via
 email. 

 Accompanying software:
 GRADEpro and the Guideline Development Tool (GDT) 

 This handbook is intended to
 accompany the GRADE profiler (GRADEpro) – software to facilitate
 development of evidence summaries and health care recommendations
 using the GRADE approach – integrated in the Guideline
 Development Tool (GDT) “Das tool”. Please refer to 
 
 www.guidelinedevelopment.org for
 more information. 

 Reproduction and
 translation 

 Permission to reproduce or
 translate the GRADE handbook for grading the quality of evidence
 and the strength of recommendation should be sought from the
 editors. 

 Acknowledgements 

 We would particularly like to
 acknowledge the contributions of Roman Jaeschke, Robin Harbour
 and Elie Akl to earlier versions of the handbook. 

 Major Contributors 

 Handbook Editors 

 Holger Schünemann, McMaster
 University, Hamilton, Canada 

 Jan Brożek, McMaster University,
 Hamilton, Canada 

 Gordon Guyatt, McMaster
 University, Hamilton, Canada 

 Andrew Oxman, Norwegian Knowledge
 Centre for the Health Services, Oslo, Norway 

 Chapter Authors and
 Editors 

 The following authors have made
 major contributions to the current version of the handbook: Elie
 Akl, Reem Mustafa, Nancy Santesso Wojtek Wiercioch, and. Many
 other members of the GRADE Working Group have also contributed to
 this handbook by providing feedback and through
 discussion. 

 1. Overview of the
 GRADE Approach 

 Disclaimer: Section 1 has been updated in the new GRADE Book and is available here: https://book.gradepro.org/guideline/overview-of-the-grade-approach 

 The GRADE approach is a system for
 rating the quality of a body of evidence in systematic reviews
 and other evidence syntheses, such as health technology
 assessments, and guidelines and grading recommendations in health
 care. GRADE offers a transparent and structured process for
 developing and presenting evidence summaries and for carrying out
 the steps involved in developing recommendations. It can be used
 to develop clinical practice guidelines (CPG) and other health
 care recommendations (e.g. in public health, health policy and
 systems and coverage decisions). 

 Figure 1 shows
 t he steps and involvement in a guideline
 development process (Schünemann H et al., CMAJ, 2013).

 Steps and processes are
 interrelated and not necessarily sequential. The guideline panel
 and supporting groups (e.g. methodologist, health economist,
 systematic review team, secretariat for administrative support)
 work collaboratively, informed through consumer and stakeholder
 involvement. They typically report to an oversight committee or
 board overseeing the process. For example, while deciding how to
 involve stakeholders early for priority setting and topic
 selection, the guideline group must also consider how developing
 formal relationships with the stakeholders will enable effective
 dissemination and implementation to support uptake of the
 guideline. Furthermore, considerations for organization, planning
 and training encompass the entire guideline development project,
 and steps such as documenting the methodology used and decisions
 made, as well as considering conflict-of-interest occur
 throughout the entire process. 

 The system is designed for reviews
 and guidelines that examine alternative management strategies or
 interventions, which may include no intervention or current best
 management as well as multiple comparisons. GRADE has considered
 a wide range of clinical questions, including diagnosis,
 screening, prevention, and therapy. Guidance specific to applying
 the GRADE approach to questions about diagnosis is offered in
 Chapter The GRADE approach for diagnostic tests
 and strategies 

 GRADE provides a framework for
 specifying health care questions, choosing outcomes of interest
 and rating their importance, evaluating the available evidence,
 and bringing together the evidence with considerations of values
 and preferences of patients and society to arrive at
 recommendations. Furthermore, the system provides clinicians and
 patients with a guide to using those recommendations in clinical
 practice and policy makers with a guide to their use in health
 policy. 

 Application of the GRADE approach
 begins by defining the health care question in terms of the
 population of interest, the alternative management strategies
 (intervention and comparator), and all patient-important
 outcomes. As a specific step for guideline developers, the
 outcomes are rated according to their importance, as either
 critical or important but not critical. A systematic search is
 preformed to identify all relevant studies and data from the
 individual included studies is used to generate an estimate of
 the effect for each patient-important outcome as well as a
 measure of the uncertainty associated with that estimate
 (typically a confidence interval). The quality of evidence for
 each outcome across all the studies (i.e. the body of evidence
 for an outcome) is rated according to the factors outlined in the
 GRADE approach, including five factors that may lead to rating
 down the quality of evidence and three factors that may lead to
 rating up. Authors of systematic reviews complete the process up
 to this step, while guideline developers continue with the
 subsequent steps. Health care related related tests and
 strategies are considered interventions (or comparators) as
 utilizing a test inevitably has consequences that can be
 considered outcomes (see Chapter The GRADE
 approach for diagnostic tests and strategies ). 

 Next, guideline developers review
 all the information from the systematic search and, if needed,
 reassess and make a final decision about which outcomes are
 critical and which are important given the recommendations that
 they aim to formulate. The overall quality of evidence across all
 outcomes is assigned based on this assessment. Guideline
 developers then formulate the recommendation(s) and consider the
 direction (for or against) and grade the strength (strong or
 weak) of the recommendation(s) based on the criteria outlined in
 the GRADE approach. Figure
 2 provides a schematic view of the
 GRADE approach. 

 Figure 2: A schematic view of the GRADE approach for
 synthesizing evidence and developing recommendations. The upper
 half describe steps in the process common to systematic reviews
 and making health care recommendations and the lower half
 describe steps that are specific to making recommendations (based
 on GRADE meeting, Edingburgh 2009). 

 For authors of systematic
 reviews: 

 Systematic reviews should provide
 a comprehensive summary of the evidence but they should typically
 not include health care recommendations. Therefore, use of the
 GRADE approach by systematic review authors terminates after
 rating the quality of evidence for outcomes and clearly
 presenting the results in an evidence table, i.e. an GRADE
 Evidence Profile or a Summary of Findings table . Those
 developing health care recommendations, e.g. a guideline panel,
 will have to complete the subsequent steps. 

 The following chapters will
 provide detailed guidance about the factors that influence the
 quality of evidence and strength of recommendations as well as
 instructions and examples for each step in the application of the
 GRADE approach. A detailed description of the GRADE approach for
 authors of systematic reviews and those making recommendations in
 health care is also available in a series of articles published
 in the Journal of Clinical Epidemiology. An additional overview
 of the GRADE approach as well as quality of evidence and strength
 of recommendations in guidelines is available in a previously
 published six-part series in the British Medical Journal. Briefer
 overviews have appeared in other journals, primarily with
 examples for relevant specialties. The articles are listed in
 Chapter 10. This handbook, however, as a resource that exists
 primarily in electronic format, will include GRADE’s innovations
 and be kept up to date as journal publications become
 outdated. 

 1.1 Purpose and advantages of the
 GRADE approach 

 Clinical practice
 guidelines offer recommendations for the management of
 typical patients. These management decisions involve balancing
 the desirable and undesirable consequences of a given course of
 action. In order to help clinicians make evidence-based medical
 decisions, guideline developers often grade the strength of their
 recommendations and rate the quality of the evidence informing
 those recommendations. 

 Prior grading systems had many
 disadvantages including the lack of separation between the
 quality of evidence and strength of recommendation, the lack of
 transparency about judgments, and the lack of explicit
 acknowledgment of values and preferences underlying the
 recommendations. In addition, the existence of many, often
 scientifically outdated, grading systems has created confusion
 among guideline developers and end users. 

 The GRADE approach was developed
 to overcome these shortcomings of previous grading systems.
 Advantages of GRADE over other grading systems
 include: 

 Developed by a widely
 representative group of international guideline
 developers 

 Clear separation between
 judging confidence in the effect estimates and strength of
 recommendations 

 Explicit evaluation of the
 importance of outcomes of alternative management
 strategies 

 Explicit, comprehensive
 criteria for downgrading and upgrading quality of evidence
 ratings 

 Transparent process of
 moving from evidence to recommendations 

 Explicit acknowledgment of
 values and preferences 

 Clear, pragmatic
 interpretation of strong versus weak recommendations for
 clinicians, patients, and policy makers 

 Useful for systematic
 reviews and health technology assessments, as well as
 guidelines 

 Note: 

 Although the GRADE approach makes
 judgments about quality of evidence, that is confidence in the
 effect estimates, and strength of recommendations in a systematic
 and transparent manner, it does
 not eliminate the need for
 judgments. Thus, applying the GRADE approach does not minimize
 the importance of judgment or as suggesting that quality can
 always be objectively determined. 

 Although evidence suggests that
 these judgments, after appropriate methodological training, lead
 to reliable assessment of the quality of evidence (Mustafa R et
 al., Journal of Clinical Epidemiology, 2013). There will be cases
 in which those making judgments will have legitimate disagreement
 about the interpretation of evidence. GRADE provides a framework
 guiding through the critical components of the assessment in a
 structured way. By allowing to make the judgments explicit rather
 than implicit it ensures transparency and a clear basis for
 discussion. 

 1.2 Separation of confidence in effect
 estimates from strength of recommendations 

 A number of criteria should be
 used when moving from evidence to recommendations (see Chapter on
 Going from evidence to recommendations ). During that process,
 separate judgements are required for each of these criteria. In
 particular, separating judgements about the confidence in
 estimates or quality of evidence from judgements about the
 strength of recommendations is important as high confidence in
 effect estimates does not necessarily imply strong
 recommendations, and strong recommendations can result from low
 or even very low confidence in effect estimates (insert link to
 paradigmatic situations for when strong recommendations are
 justified in the context of low or very low confidence in effect
 estimates). Grading systems that fail to separate these
 judgements create confusion, while it is the defining feature of
 GRADE. 

 The GRADE approach stresses the
 necessity to consider the balance between desirable and
 undesirable consequences and acknowledge other factors, for
 example the values and preferences underlying the
 recommendations. As patients with varying values and preferences
 for outcomes and interventions will make different choices,
 guideline panels facing important variability in patient values
 and preferences are likely to offer a weak recommendation despite
 high quality evidence. Considering importance of outcomes
 and interventions, values, preferences and utilities includes
 integrating in the process of developing a recommendation, how
 those affected by its recommendations assess the possible
 consequences. These include patient and carer knowledge,
 attitudes, expectations, moral and ethical values, and beliefs;
 patient goals for life and health; prior experience with the
 intervention and the condition; symptom experience (for example
 breathlessness, pain, dyspnoea, weight loss); preferences for and
 importance of desirable and undesirable health outcomes;
 perceived impact of the condition or interventions on quality of
 life, well-being or satisfaction and interactions between the
 work of implementing the intervention, the intervention itself,
 and other contexts the patient may be experiencing; preferences
 for alternative courses of action; and preferences relating to
 communication content and styles, information and
 involvement in decision-making and care. This can be related to
 what in the economic literature is considered utilities. An
 intervention itself can be considered a consequence of a
 recommendation (e.g. the burden of taking a medication or
 undergoing surgery) and a level of importance or value is
 associated with that. Both the direction and the strength of a
 recommendation may be modified after taking into account the
 implications for resource utilization, equity, acceptability and
 feasibility of alternative management strategies. 

 Therefore, unlike many other
 grading systems, the GRADE approach emphasizes that weak also
 known as conditional recommendations in the face of high
 confidence in effect estimates of an intervention are common
 because of these factors other than the quality of evidence
 influencing the strength of a recommendation. For the same reason
 it allows for strong recommendations on the basis of low or very
 confidence in effect estimates. 

 Example 1: Weak recommendation
 based on high quality evidence 

 Several RCTs compared the use of
 combination chemotherapy and radiotherapy versus radiotherapy
 alone in unresectable, locally advanced non-small cell lung
 cancer (Stage IIIA). The overall quality of evidence for the body
 of evidence was rated high. Compared with radiotherapy alone, the
 combination of chemotherapy and radiotherapy reduces the risk of
 death corresponding to a mean gain in life expectancy of a few
 months, but increases harm and burden related to chemotherapy.
 Thus, considering the values and preferences patients would place
 on the small survival benefit in view of the harms and burdens,
 guideline panels may offer a weak recommendation despite the high
 quality of the available evidence (Schünemann et al. AJRCCM
 2006). 

 Example 2: Weak recommendation
 based on high quality evidence 

 Patients who experience a first
 deep venous thrombosis with no obvious provoking factor must,
 after the first months of anticoagulation, decide whether to
 continue taking the anticoagulant warfarin long term. High
 quality randomized controlled trials show that continuing
 warfarin will decrease the risk of recurrent thrombosis but at
 the cost of increased risk of bleeding and inconvenience. Because
 patients with varying values and preferences will make different
 choices, guideline panels addressing whether patients should
 continue or terminate warfarin should, despite the high quality
 evidence, offer a weak recommendation. 

 Example 3: Strong recommendation
 based on low or very low quality evidence 

 The principle of administering
 appropriate antibiotics rapidly in the setting of severe
 infection or sepsis has not been tested against its alternative
 of no rush of delivering antibiotics in randomized controlled
 trials. Yet, guideline panels would be very likely to make a
 strong recommendation for the rapid use of antibiotics in this
 setting on the basis of available observational studies rated as
 low quality evidence because the benefits of antibiotic therapy
 clearly outweigh the downsides in most patients independent of
 the quality assessment (Schünemann et al. AJRCCM
 2006).. 

 1.3 Special challenges in applying the
 the GRADE approach 

 Those applying GRADE to questions
 about diagnostic tests, public health or health systems will face
 some special challenges. This handbook will address these
 challenges and undergo revisions when new developments prompt the
 GRADE working group to agree on changes to the approach.
 Moreover, there will be methodological advances and refinements
 in the future not only of innovations but also of the established
 concepts. 

 1.4 Modifications to the GRADE
 approach 

 GRADE recommends against making
 modifications to the approach because the elements of the GRADE
 process are interlinked, because modifications may confuse some
 users of evidence summaries and guidelines, and because such
 changes compromise the goal of a single system with which
 clinicians, policy makers, and patients can become familiar.
 However, the literature on different approaches to 
 applying GRADE
 is growing and are useful to determine when pragmatism is
 appropriate. 

 2. Framing the health care
 question 

 Disclaimer: Section 2 has been updated in the new GRADE Book and is available here: https://book.gradepro.org/guideline/questions-about-interventions-diagnostic-test-prognosis-and-exposures 

 A guideline panel should define
 the scope of the guideline and the planned recommendations. Each
 recommendation should answer a focused and sensible health care
 question that leads to an action. Similarly, authors of
 systematic reviews should formulate focused health care
 question(s) that the review will answer. A systematic review may
 answer one or more health care questions, depending on the scope
 of the review. 

 The PICO framework presents a
 well accepted methodology for framing health care questions. It
 mandates carefully specifying four components: 

 Patient : the patients or
 population to whom the recommendations are meant to
 apply 

 Intervention : the therapeutic,
 diagnostic, or other intervention under investigation (e.g. the
 experimental intervention, or in observational studies the
 exposure factor) 

 Comparison : the alternative
 intervention; intervention in the control group 

 Outcome : the outcome(s) of
 interest 

 A number of derivatives of this
 approach exist, for example adding a T for time or S for study
 design. These modifications are neither helpful nor necessary.
 The issue of time (e.g. duration of treatment, when an
 outcome should be assessed, etc) is covered in the elements by
 specifying the intervention(s) and outcome(s) appropriately (e.g.
 mortality at one year). In addition, the studies, and therefore
 the study design, that inform an answer are often not known when
 the question is asked. That is, observational studies may inform
 a question when randomized trials are no available or not
 associated with high confidence in the estimates. Thus, it is
 usually not sensible to define a study design beforehand. A
 guideline question often involves another specification:
 the setting in which the guideline will be implemented. For
 instance, guidelines intended for resource-rich environments will
 often be inapplicable to resource-poor environments. Even the
 setting, however, can be defined as part of the definition of the
 population (e.g. women in low income countries or man with
 myocardial infarction in a primary or rural health care
 setting). 

 Errors that are frequently made in
 formulating the health care question include failure to include
 all patient-important outcomes (e.g. adverse effects or
 toxicity), as well as failure to fully consider all relevant
 alternatives (this may be particularly problematic when
 guidelines target a global audience). 

 2.1 Defining the patient population
 and intervention 

 The most challenging decision in
 framing the question is how broadly the patients and intervention
 should be defined ( see Example
 1 ). For the patients and interventions
 defined, the underlying biology should suggest that across the
 range of patients and interventions it is plausible that the
 magnitude of effect on the key outcomes is more or less the same.
 If that is not the case the review or guideline will generate
 misleading estimates for at least some subpopulations of patients
 and interventions. For instance, based on the information
 presented in Example 1, if antiplatelet agents differ in
 effectiveness in those with peripheral vascular disease vs. those
 with myocardial infarction, a single estimate across the range of
 patients and interventions will not well serve the
 decision-making needs of patients and clinicians. These
 subpopulations should, therefore, be defined
 separately. 

 Often, systematic reviews deal
 with the question of what breadth of population or intervention
 to choose by starting with a broad question but including a
 priori specification of subgroup effects that may explain any
 heterogeneity they find. The a
 priori hypotheses may relate to
 differences in patients, interventions, the choice of comparator,
 the outcome(s), or factors related to bias (e.g. high risk of
 bias studies yield different effects than low risk of bias
 studies). 

 Example 1: Deciding how to broadly
 to define the patients and intervention 

 Addressing the effects of
 antiplatelet agents on vascular disease, one might include only
 patients with transient ischemic attacks, those with ischemic
 attacks and strokes, or those with any vascular disease
 (cerebro-, cardio-, or peripheral vascular disease). The
 intervention might be a relatively narrow range of doses of
 aspirin, all doses of aspirin, or all antiplatelet
 agents. 

 Because the relative risk
 associated with an intervention vs. a specific comparator is
 usually similar across a wide variety of baseline risks, it is
 usually appropriate for systematic reviews to generate single
 pooled estimates (i.e. meta-analysis) of relative effects across
 a wide range of patient subgroups. Recommendations,
 however, may differ across
 subgroups of patients at different
 baseline risk of an outcome, despite there being a single relative
 risk that applies to all of them.
 For instance, the case for warfarin therapy, associated with both
 inconvenience and a higher risk of serious bleeding, is much
 stronger in atrial fibrillation patients at substantial vs.
 minimal risk of stroke. Thus, guideline panels must often define
 separate questions (and produce separate evidence summaries) for
 high- and low-risk patients, and patients in whom quality of
 evidence differs. 

 2.2 Dealing with multiple
 comparators 

 Another important challenge arises
 when there are multiple comparators to an intervention. Clarity
 in choice of the comparator makes for interpretable guidelines,
 and lack of clarity can cause confusion. Sometimes, the
 comparator is obvious, but when it is not guideline panels should
 specify the comparator explicitly. In particular, when multiple
 agents are involved, they should specify whether the
 recommendation is suggesting that all agents are equally
 recommended or that some agents are recommended over others
 ( see Example 1 ). 

 Example 1: Clarity with multiple
 comparators 

 When making recommendations for
 use of anticoagulants in patients with non-ST elevation acute
 coronary syndromes receiving conservative (non-invasive)
 management, fondaparinux, heparin, and enoxaparin may be the
 agents being considered. Moreover, the estimate of effect for
 each agent may come from evidence of varying quality (e.g. high
 quality evidence for heparin, low quality of evidence for
 fondaparinux). Therefore, it must be made clear whether the
 recommendations formulated by the guideline panel will be for use
 of these agents vs. not using any anticoagulants, or also whether
 they will indicate a preference for one agent over the others or
 a gradient of preference. 

 2.3 Other considerations 

 GRADE has begun to tackle the
 question of determining the confidence in estimates for
 prognosis. They are often important for guideline development.
 For example, addressing interventions that may influence the
 outcome of influenza or multiple sclerosis will require
 establishing the natural history of the conditions. This will
 involve specifying the population (influenza or new-onset
 multiple sclerosis) and the outcome (mortality or relapse rate
 and progression). Such questions of prognosis may be refined to
 include multiple predictors, such as age, gender, or severity.
 The answers to these questions will be an important background
 for formulating recommendations and interpreting the evidence
 about the effects of treatments. In particular, guideline
 developers need to decide whether the prognosis of patients in
 the community is similar to those studied in the trials and
 whether there are important prognostic subgroups that they should
 consider in making recommendations. Judgments if the evidence is
 direct enough in terms of baseline risk affect the rating about
 indirectness of evidence . 

 2.4 Format of health care questions
 using the GRADE approach 

 Defining a health care question
 includes specifying all outcomes of interest. Those developing
 recommendations whether or not to use a given intervention
 (therapeutic or diagnostic) have to consider all relevant
 outcomes simultaneously. The Guideline Development Tool allows
 the selection of two different formats for questions about
 management: 

 Should [intervention] vs.
 [comparison] be used for [health problem]? 

 Should [intervention] vs.
 [comparison] be used in [population]? 

 As well as one format for
 questions about diagnosis: 

 Should [intervention] vs.
 [comparison] be used to diagnose [target condition] in [health
 problem and/or population]? 

 Example Questions 

 1. Should manual toothbrushes vs.
 powered toothbrushes be used for dental health? 

 2. Should topical nasal steroids
 be used in children with persistent allergic rhinitis? 

 3. Should oseltamivir versus no
 antiviral treatment be used to treat influenza? 

 4. Should troponin I followed by
 appropriate management strategies or troponin T followed by
 appropriate management strategies be used to manage acute
 myocardial infarction? 

 3. Selecting and rating the importance
 of outcomes 

 Disclaimer: Section 3 has been updated in the new GRADE Book and is available here: https://book.gradepro.org/guideline/outcomes 

 Training modules and
 courses: 
 http://cebgrade.mcmaster.ca/QuestionsAndOutcomes/index.html 

 Given that recommendations cannot
 be made on the basis of information about single outcomes and
 decision-making always involves a balance between health benefits
 and harms. Authors of systematic reviews will make their reviews
 more useful by looking at a comprehensive range of outcomes that
 allow decision making in health care. Many, if not most,
 systematic reviews fail to address some key outcomes,
 particularly harms, associated with an intervention. 

 On the contrary, to make sensible
 recommendations guideline panels must
 consider all
 outcomes that are important or
 critical to patients for decision making. In addition, they may
 require consideration of outcomes that are important to others,
 including the use of resources paid for by third parties, equity
 considerations, impacts on those who care for patients, and
 public health impacts (e.g. the spread of infections or
 antibiotic resistance). 

 Guideline developers
 must base the choice of outcomes
 on what is important, not on what outcomes are
 measured and for which evidence is
 available. If evidence is lacking for an important outcome, this
 should be acknowledged, rather than ignoring the outcome. Because
 most systematic reviews do not summarize the evidence for all
 important outcomes, guideline panels must often either use
 multiple systematic reviews from different sources, conduct their
 own systematic reviews or update existing reviews. 

 3.1 Steps for considering the relative
 importance of outcomes 

 Guideline developers must, and
 authors of systematic reviews are strongly encouraged to specify
 all potential patient-important outcomes as the first step in
 their endeavour. Guideline developers will also make a 
 preliminary
 classification of the importance of
 the outcomes. GRADE specifies three categories of outcomes
 according to their importance
 for decision-making : 

 critical 

 important but not
 critical 

 of limited
 importance. 

 Critical and important outcomes
 will bear on guideline recommendations, the third will in most
 situations not. Ranking outcomes by their relative importance can
 help to focus attention on those outcomes that are considered
 most important, and help to resolve or clarify
 disagreements. Table
 3.1 provides an overview of the
 steps for considering the relative importance of
 outcomes. 

 Guideline developers should first
 consider whether particular health benefits and harms of a
 therapy are important to the decision
 regarding the optimal management strategy, or whether they
 are of limited
 importance . If the guideline panel thinks
 that a particular outcome is important, then it should consider
 whether the outcome is critical to the decision, or only
 important, but not critical. 

 To facilitate ranking of outcomes
 according to their importance guideline developers may choose to
 rate outcomes numerically on a 1
 to 9 scale (7 to 9 – critical; 4 to
 6 – important; 1 to 3 – of limited importance) to distinguish
 between importance categories. 

 Practically, to generate a list
 of relevant outcomes, one can use the following type of
 scales. 

 rating scale: 

 1 

 2 

 3 

 4 

 5 

 6 

 7 

 8 

 9 

 of least importance 

 of most importance 

 of limited
 importance 

 for making a
 decision 

 (not included in evidence
 profile) 

 important, but not
 critical 

 for making a decision
 (included in evidence profile) 

 Critical 

 for making a
 decision 

 (included in evidence
 profile) 

 The first step of a classification
 of importance of outcomes should occur during protocol of a
 systematic review or when the panel agrees on the health care
 questions that should be addressed in a guideline. Thus, it
 should be done before a protocol is developed. When evidence
 becomes available a reassessment of importance may be necessary
 to ensure that important outcomes identified by reviews of the
 evidence that were not initially considered are included and to
 reconsider the relative importance of outcomes in light of the
 available evidence which will be influenced by the relative
 importance of the outcome. It is possible that there is no
 association between the outcome and the intervention of interest
 which supports to not consider that outcome further. 

 Guideline panels should be aware
 of the possibility that in some instances the importance of an
 outcome (e.g. a serious adverse effect) may only become known
 after the protocol is written, evidence is reviewed or the
 analyses were carried out, and should take appropriate actions to
 include these in the evidence tables. 

 Example 1: Hierarchy of outcomes
 according to their importance to assess the effect of oseltamivir
 in patients with H5N1 influenza. Mortality in patients
 affected with H5N1 is as high as 50%. Patient are usually
 affected by severe respiratory compromise and require ventilatory
 support. Complications of a potentially useful medication,
 oseltamivir, are suspected to be of temporary neurological
 nature, other adverse effects such as nausea also occur during
 treatment. 

 Example 2. Hierarchy of outcomes
 according to their importance to assess the effect of
 phosphate-lowering drugs in patients with renal failure and
 hyperphosphatemia 

 Example 3: Reassessment of the
 relative importance of outcomes 

 Consider, for instance, a
 screening intervention, such as screening for aortic abdominal
 aneurysm. Initially, a guideline panel is likely to consider the
 intervention’s impact on all-cause mortality as critical. Let us
 say, however, that the evidence summary establishes an important
 reduction in cause-specific mortality from abdominal aortic
 aneurysm but fails to definitively establish a reduction in
 all-cause mortality. The reduction in cause-specific mortality
 may be judged sufficiently compelling that, even in the absence
 of a demonstrated reduction in all-cause mortality (which may be
 undetected because of random error from other causes of death),
 the screening intervention is clearly worthwhile. All-cause
 mortality then becomes less relevant and ceases to be a critical
 outcome. 

 The relative importance of
 outcomes should be considered when determining the overall
 quality of evidence, which may depend on which outcomes are
 ranked as critical or important (see Chapter Quality of
 evidence ), and judging the balance between the health benefits
 and harms of an intervention when formulating the recommendations
 (see Chapter Going from evidence to
 recommendations ) 

 Only outcomes
 considered critical (rated 7-9) are
 the primary factors influencing a recommendation and will be used
 to determine the overall quality
 of evidence supporting a
 recommendation. 

 Table 3.1: Steps for
 considering the relative importance of
 outcomes 

 Step 

 What 

 Why 

 How 

 Evidence 

 1 

 Preliminary classification
 of outcomes as critical, important but not critical, or
 low importance, before reviewing the evidence 

 To focus attention on
 those outcomes that are considered most important when
 searching for and summarizing the evidence and to resolve
 or clarify disagreements. 

 Conducting a systematic
 review of the relevant literature. By asking panel
 members and possibly patients or members of the public to
 identify important outcomes, judging the relative
 importance of the outcomes and discussing
 disagreements. 

 These judgments are
 ideally informed by a systematic review of the literature
 focusing on what the target population considers as
 critical or important outcomes for decision making.
 Literature about values, preferences or utilities is
 often used in these reviews, that should be systematic in
 nature. Alternatively the collective experience of the
 panel members, patients, and members of the public can be
 used using transparent methods for documenting and
 considering them (see Santesso N et al, IJOBGYN 2012).
 Prior knowledge of the research evidence or, ideally, a
 systematic review of that evidence is likely to be
 helpful. 

 2 

 Reassessment of the
 relative importance of outcomes after reviewing the
 evidence 

 To ensure that important
 outcomes identified by reviews of the evidence that were
 not initially considered are included and to reconsider
 the relative importance of outcomes in light of the
 available evidence 

 By asking the panel
 members (and, if relevant, patients and members of the
 public) to reconsider the relative importance of the
 outcomes included in the first step and any additional
 outcomes identified by reviews of the evidence 

 Experience of the panel
 members and other informants and systematic reviews of
 the effects of the intervention 

 3 

 Judging the balance
 between the desirable and undesirable health outcomes of
 an intervention 

 To support making a
 recommendation and to determine the strength of the
 recommendation 

 By asking the panel
 members to balance the desirable and undesirable health
 outcomes using an evidence to recommendation framework
 that includes a summary of findings table or evidence
 profile and, if relevant, based on a decision
 analysis 

 Experience of the panel
 members and other informants, systematic reviews of the
 effects of the intervention, evidence of the value that
 the target population attach to key outcomes (if relevant
 and available) and decision analysis or economic analyses
 (if relevant and available) 

 3.2 Influence of
 perspective 

 The importance of outcomes
 is likely to
 vary within and across cultures or
 when considered from the perspective of the target
 population (e.g. patients or the public), clinicians or
 policy-makers. Cultural diversity will often influence the
 relative importance of outcomes, particularly when developing
 recommendations for an international audience. 

 Guideline panels must decide what
 perspective they are taking. Although different panels may elect
 to take different perspectives (e.g. that of individual patients
 or a health systems perspective), the relative importance given
 to health outcomes should reflect the perspective of those who
 are affected. When the target audiences for a guideline are
 clinicians and the patients they treat, the perspective would
 generally be that of the patient. (see Chapter Going from
 evidence to recommendations that addresses the issue of
 perspective from the point of view of resource use) 

 3.3 Using evidence in rating the
 importance of outcomes 

 Guideline developers will ideally
 review evidence, or conduct a systematic review of the evidence,
 relating to patients’ values and preferences about the
 intervention in question in order to inform the rating of the
 importance of outcomes. Reviewing the evidence may provide the
 panel with insight about the variability in patients’ values, the
 patient experience of burden or side effects, and the weighing of
 desirable versus undesirable outcomes. 

 In the absence of such evidence , panel
 members should use their prior experiences with the target
 population to assume the relevant values and
 preferences. 

 3.4 Surrogate (substitute)
 outcomes 

 Not infrequently, outcomes of most
 importance to patients remain unexplored. When important outcomes
 are relatively infrequent, or occur over long periods of time,
 investigators often choose to measure substitutes, or surrogates,
 for those outcomes. 

 Guideline developers
 should consider surrogate
 outcomes only when evidence about population-important outcomes
 is lacking . When this is the case, they
 should specify the population-important outcomes and, if
 necessary, the surrogates they are using to substitute for those
 important outcomes. Guideline developers should not list the
 surrogates themselves as their measures of outcome. The necessity
 to substitute the surrogate may ultimately lead to rating down
 the quality of the evidence because of the indirectness (see
 Chapter Quality of evidence ). 

 Outcomes selected by the guideline
 panel should be included in an
 evidence profile whether or not information about them is
 available (see Chapter Summarizing
 the evidence ), that is an empty row in an evidence profile can
 be informative in that it identifies research gaps. 

 4. Summarizing the
 evidence 

 A guideline panel should base its
 recommendation on the best available
 body of evidence related to the
 health care question. A guideline panel can use already existing
 high quality systematic
 reviews or conduct its own
 systematic review depending on the specific circumstances such as
 availability of high quality systematic reviews and resources,
 but GRADE recommends that systematic reviews should form the
 basis for making health care recommendations. One should seek
 evidence relating to all
 patient-important outcomes and for
 the values patients place on these outcomes as well as related
 management options. 

 The endpoint for systematic
 reviews and for HTA restricted to evidence reports is a summary
 of the evidence, the quality rating for each outcome and the
 estimate of effect. For guideline developers and HTA that provide
 advice to policymakers, a summary of the evidence represents a
 key milestone on the path to a recommendation. The evidence
 collected from systematic reviews is used to produce GRADE
 evidence profile and summary of findings table . 

 4.1 Evidence Tables 

 An evidence table is a key
 tool in the presentation of evidence and the corresponding
 results. Evidence tables are a method for presenting the quality
 of the available evidence, the judgments that bear on the quality
 rating, and the effects of alternative management strategies on
 the outcomes of interest. 

 Clinicians, patients, the public,
 guideline developers, and policy-makers require succinct and
 transparent evidence summaries to support their decisions. While
 an unambiguous health care question is key to evidence summaries,
 the requirements for specific users may differ in content and
 detail. Therefore, the format of each table may be different
 depending on user needs. 

 Two approaches (with iterations)
 for evidence tables are available, which serve different purposes
 and are intended for different audiences: 

 (GRADE) evidence
 profile 

 Summary of Findings (SoF)
 table 

 The Guideline Development Tool
 facilitates the production of both Evidence Profiles and SoF
 tables. After completing the information to populate the tables,
 the information will be stored and can be updated accordingly.
 Different formats for each aproach, chosen according to what the
 target audience may prefer, are available. 

 Outcomes
 considered important (rated 4-6)
 or critical (rated 7-9) for decision-making should be included in
 the evidence profile and SoF table. 

 4.2 GRADE Evidence Profile 

 See online tutorials at: 
 
 cebgrade.mcmaster. ca 

 The GRADE evidence profile contains detailed information about the quality of
 evidence assessment and the summary of findings for each of the
 included outcomes. It is intended for review authors, those
 preparing SoF tables and anyone who questions a quality
 assessment. It helps those preparing SoF tables to ensure that
 the judgments they make are systematic and transparent and it
 allows others to inspect those judgments. Guideline panels should
 use evidence profiles to ensure that they agree about the
 judgments underlying the quality assessments. 

 A GRADE evidence profile allows
 presentation of key information about all relevant outcomes for a
 given health care question. It presents information about the body of
 evidence (e.g. number of studies),
 the judgments about the underlying
 quality of evidence ,
 key statistical
 results , and the quality of evidence rating for each
 outcome . 

 A GRADE evidence profile is
 particularly useful for presentation of evidence supporting a
 recommendation in clinical practice guidelines but also as
 summary of evidence for other purposes where users need or want
 to understand the judgments about the quality of evidence in more
 detail. 

 The standard format for the
 evidence profile includes: 

 A list of
 the outcomes 

 The number of
 studies and study
 design(s) 

 Judgements about each of
 the quality of evidence
 factors assessed; risk of bias,
 inconsistency, indirectness, imprecision, other considerations
 (including publication bias and factors that increase the
 quality of evidence) 

 The assumed
 risk ; a measure of the typical burden
 of the outcomes, i.e. illustrative risk or also called baseline
 risk, baseline score, or control group risk 

 The corresponding
 risk; a measure of the burden of
 the outcomes after the intervention is applied, i.e. the risk
 of an outcome in treated/exposed people based on the relative
 magnitude of an effect and assumed (baseline) risk 

 The relative
 effect ; for dichotomous outcomes the
 table will usually provide risk ratio, odds ratio, or hazard
 ratio 

 The absolute
 effect ; for dichotomous outcomes the
 number of fewer or more events in treated/exposed group as
 compared to the control group 

 Rating of
 the overall quality of
 evidence for each outcome (which
 may vary by outcome) 

 Classification of
 the importance of each
 outcome 

 Footnotes , if needed, to
 provide explanations about information in the table such as
 elaboration on judgements about the quality of
 evidence 

 Example 1: GRADE Evidence
 Profile 

 [INSERT IMAGE] 

 4.3 Summary of Findings
 table 

 Summary of Findings tables provide
 a summary of findings for each of the included outcomes and the
 quality of evidence rating for each outcome in a quick and
 accessible format, without details of the judgements about the
 quality of evidence. They are intended for a broader audience,
 including end users of systematic reviews and guidelines. They
 provide a concise summary of the key information that is needed
 by someone making a decision and, in the context of a guideline,
 provide a summary of the key information underlying a
 recommendation 

 The format of SoF tables produced
 using the Guideline Development Tool has been refined over the
 past several years through wide consultation, user testing, and
 evaluation. It is designed to support the optimal presentation of
 the key findings of systematic reviews. The SoF table format has
 been developed with the aim of ensuring consistency and ease of
 use across reviews, inclusion of the most important information
 needed by decision makers, and optimal presentation of this
 information. However, there may be good reasons for modifying the
 format of a SoF table for some reviews. 

 The standard format for the SoF
 table includes: 

 A list of
 the outcomes 

 The assumed
 risk ; a measure of the typical burden
 of the outcomes, i.e. illustrative risk or also called baseline
 risk, baseline score, or control group risk 

 The corresponding
 risk; a measure of the burden of
 the outcomes after the intervention is applied, i.e. the risk
 of an outcome in treated/exposed people based on the relative
 magnitude of an effect and assumed (baseline) risk 

 The relative
 effect ; for dichotomous outcomes the
 table will usually provide risk ratio, odds ratio, or hazard
 ratio 

 The number of
 participants and
 the number of
 studies and
 their designs 

 Rating of
 the overall quality of
 evidence for each outcome (which
 may vary by outcome) 

 Footnotes or
 explanations , if needed, to provide
 explanations about information in the table 

 Comments (if
 needed) 

 Systematic reviews that address
 more than one main comparison (e.g. examining the effects of a
 number of interventions) will require separate SoF tables for
 each comparison. Moreover, for each comparison of
 alternative management strategies, all outcomes should be presented together in one evidence profile or SoF table. It is
 likely that all studies relevant to a health care question will
 not provide evidence regarding every outcome. Indeed, there may
 be no overlap between studies providing evidence for one outcome
 and those providing evidence for another. Because most existing
 systematic reviews do not adequately address all relevant
 outcomes, the GRADE process may require relying on more than one
 systematic review. 

 Example 2: GRADE Summary of
 Findings Table 

 [INSERT IMAGE] 

 5. Quality of evidence 

 Disclaimer: Section 5 has been updated in the new GRADE Book and is available here: https://book.gradepro.org/guideline/principles-for-assessing-the-certainty-of-interventions 

 GRADE provides a specific
 definition of the quality of evidence that is different in the
 context of making recommendations and in the context of
 summarizing the findings of a systematic review. 

 As GRADE suggests somewhat
 different approaches for rating the quality of evidence for
 systematic reviews and for guidelines, the handbook highlights
 guidance that is specific to each group. HTA practitioners,
 depending on their mandate, can decide which approach is more
 suitable for their goals. 

 For guideline
 panels: 

 The quality of
 evidence reflects the extent to
 which our confidence in an
 estimate of the effect is adequate
 to support a particular
 recommendation . 

 Guideline panels must make
 judgments about the quality of evidence relative to the specific
 context for which they are using the evidence. 

 The GRADE approach involves
 separate grading of quality of evidence for each
 patient-important outcome followed by determining an overall
 quality of evidence across outcomes. 

 For authors of systematic
 reviews: 

 The quality of
 evidence reflects the extent to
 which we are confident that an
 estimate of the effect is correct . 

 Because systematic reviews do not,
 or at least should not, make recommendations, they require a
 different definition. Authors of systematic reviews grade quality
 of a body of evidence separately for each patient-important
 outcome. 

 The quality of evidence is rated
 for each outcome across studies (i.e. for a body of evidence).
 This does not mean rating each study as a single unit. Rather,
 GRADE is “ outcome
 centric ”; rating is done for each outcome ,
 and quality may differ - indeed, is likely to differ - from one
 outcome to another within a single study and across a body of
 evidence. 

 Example 1: Quality of evidence may
 differ from one outcome to another within a single
 study 

 In a series of unblinded RCTs
 measuring both the occurrence of stroke and all-cause mortality,
 it is possible that stroke - much more vulnerable to biased
 judgments - will be rated down for risk of bias, whereas
 all-cause mortality will not. Similarly, a series of studies in
 which very few patients are lost to follow-up for the outcome of
 death, and very many for the outcome of quality of life, is
 likely to result in judgments of lower quality for the latter
 outcome. Problems with indirectness may lead to rating down
 quality for one outcome and not another within a study or studies
 if, for example, fracture rates are measured using a surrogate
 (e.g. bone mineral density) but side effects are measured
 directly. 

 Although the quality of evidence
 represents a continuum, the GRADE approach results in an
 assessment of the quality of a body of evidence in one
 of four
 grades : 

 Table 5.1: Quality of
 Evidence Grades 

 Grade 

 Definition 

 High 

 We are very confident that
 the true effect lies close to that of the estimate of the
 effect. 

 Moderate 

 We are moderately
 confident in the effect estimate: The true effect is
 likely to be close to the estimate of the effect, but
 there is a possibility that it is substantially
 different 

 Low 

 Our confidence in the
 effect estimate is limited: The true effect may be
 substantially different from the estimate of the
 effect. 

 Very Low 

 We have very little
 confidence in the effect estimate: The true effect is
 likely to be substantially different from the estimate of
 effect 

 Quality of evidence is a
 continuum; any discrete categorisation involves some degree of
 arbitrariness. Nevertheless, advantages of simplicity,
 transparency, and vividness outweigh these
 limitations. 

 5.1 Factors determining the quality of
 evidence 

 The GRADE approach to rating the
 quality of evidence begins with the study design (trials or
 observational studies) and then addresses five reasons to
 possibly rate down the quality of evidence and three to possibly
 rate up the quality. The subsequent sections of the handbook will
 address each of the factors in detail. 

 Table 5.2: Factors that can
 reduce the quality of the evidence 

 Factor 

 Consequence 

 Limitations in study
 design or execution (risk of bias) 

 ↓ 1 or 2
 levels 

 Inconsistency of
 results 

 ↓ 1 or 2
 levels 

 Indirectness of
 evidence 

 ↓ 1 or 2
 levels 

 Imprecision 

 ↓ 1 or 2
 levels 

 Publication
 bias 

 ↓ 1 or 2
 levels 

 Table 5.3: Factors that can
 increase the quality of the evidence 

 Factor 

 Consequence 

 Large magnitude of
 effect 

 ↑ 1 or 2 levels 

 All plausible confounding
 would reduce the demonstrated effect or increase the
 effect if no effect was observed 

 ↑ 1 level 

 Dose-response
 gradient 

 ↑ 1 level 

 While factors influencing the
 quality of evidence are additive – such that the
 reduction or increase in each individual factor is added together
 with the other factors to reduce or increase the quality of
 evidence for an outcome – grading the quality of evidence
 involves judgements which are not exclusive. Therefore, GRADE is
 not a quantitative system for grading the quality of evidence.
 Each factor for downgrading or upgrading
 reflects not discrete categories
 but a continuum within each category
 and among the categories. When the body of evidence is
 intermediate with respect to a particular factor, the decision
 about whether a study falls above or below the threshold for up-
 or downgrading the quality (by one or more factors) depends on
 judgment. 

 For example, if there was some
 uncertainty about the three factors: study limitations,
 inconsistency, and imprecision, but not serious enough to
 downgrade each of them, one could reasonably make the case for
 downgrading, or for not doing so. A reviewer might in each
 category give the studies the benefit of the doubt and would
 interpret the evidence as high quality. Another reviewer,
 deciding to rate down the evidence by one level, would judge the
 evidence as moderate quality. Reviewers should grade the quality
 of the evidence by considering both the individual factors in the
 context of other judgments they made about the quality of
 evidence for the same outcome. 

 In such a case, you should pick
 one or two categories of limitations which you would offer as
 reasons for downgrading and explain your choice in the footnote.
 You should also provide a footnote next to the other factor, you
 decided not to downgrade, explaining that there was some
 uncertainty, but you already downgraded for the other factor and
 further lowering the quality of evidence for this outcome would
 seem inappropriate. GRADE strongly encourages review and
 guideline authors to be explicit
 and transparent when they find
 themselves in these situations by acknowledging borderline decisions . 

 Despite the limitations of
 breaking continua into categories, treating each criterion for
 rating quality up or down as discrete categories enhances
 transparency. Indeed, the great
 merit of GRADE is not that it
 ensures reproducible judgments but that
 it requires explicit
 judgment that is
 made transparent to
 users . 

 5.1.1 Study design 

 Study
 design is critical to judgments
 about the quality of evidence. 

 For recommendations regarding
 management strategies – as opposed to establishing prognosis or
 the accuracy of diagnostic tests – randomized trials provide,
 in general, far stronger evidence than observational studies, and
 rigorous observational
 studies provide stronger evidence
 than uncontrolled case
 series . 

 In the GRADE approach to quality
 of evidence: 

 randomized
 trials without important
 limitations provide high
 quality evidence 

 observational
 studies without special strengths
 or important limitations provide low quality evidence 

 Limitations or special strengths
 can, however, modify the quality of the
 evidence of both randomized trials and observational
 studies. 

 Note: 

 Non-randomised experimental
 trials (quasi-RCT) without important
 limitations also provide high quality evidence, but will
 automatically be downgraded for limitations in design (risk of
 bias) – such as lack of concealment of allocation and tie with a
 provider (e.g. chart number). 

 Case series and case
 reports are observational studies
 that investigate only patients exposed to the intervention.
 Source of control group results is implicit or unclear, thus,
 they will usually warrant downgrading from low to very low
 quality evidence. 

 Expert
 opinion is not a category of quality
 of evidence. Expert opinion represents an interpretation of
 evidence in the context of experts' experiences and knowledge.
 Experts may have opinion about evidence that may be based on
 interpretation of studies ranging from uncontrolled case series
 (e.g. observations in expert’s own practice) to randomized trials
 and systematic reviews known to the expert. It is important to
 describe what type of evidence (whether published or unpublished)
 is being used as the basis for interpretation. 

 5.2 Factors that can reduce the
 quality of the evidence 

 Disclaimer: Section 5.2 has been updated in the new GRADE Book and is available here: https://book.gradepro.org/guideline/risk-of-bias-randomized-trials 

 The following sections discuss in
 detail the 5 factors that can result in rating down the quality
 of evidence for specific outcomes and, thereby, reduce confidence
 in the estimate of the effect. 

 5.2.1 Study limitations (Risk of
 Bias) 

 Limitations in the study design
 and execution may bias the estimates of the treatment effect. Our
 confidence in the estimate of the effect and in the following
 recommendation decreases if studies suffer from major
 limitations. The more serious the limitations are, the more
 likely it is that the quality of evidence will be downgraded.
 Numerous tools exist to evaluate the risk of bias in randomized
 trials and observational studies. This handbook describes the key
 criteria used in the GRADE approach. 

 Our confidence in an estimate of
 effect decreases if studies suffer from major limitations that
 are likely to result in a biased assessment of the intervention
 effect. For randomized trials, the limitations outlined
 in Table 5.4 are likely to result in biased result. 

 Table 5.4: Study limitations
 in randomized controlled trials 

 Explanation 

 Lack of allocation
 concealment 

 Those enrolling patients
 are aware of the group (or period in a crossover trial)
 to which the next enrolled patient will be allocated (a
 major problem in “pseudo” or “quasi” randomized trials
 with allocation by day of week, birth date, chart number,
 etc.). 

 Lack of
 blinding 

 Patient, caregivers, those
 recording outcomes, those adjudicating outcomes, or data
 analysts are aware of the arm to which patients are
 allocated (or the medication currently being received in
 a crossover trial). 

 Incomplete accounting of
 patients and outcome events 

 Loss to follow-up and
 failure to adhere to the intention-to-treat principle in
 superiority trials; or in noninferiority trials, loss to
 follow-up, and failure to conduct both analyses
 considering only those who adhered to treatment, and all
 patients for whom outcome data are available. 

 The significance of
 particular rates of loss to follow-up, however, varies
 widely and is dependent on the relation between loss to
 follow-up and number of events. The higher the proportion
 lost to follow-up in relation to intervention and control
 group event rates, and differences between intervention
 and control groups, the greater the threat of
 bias. 

 Selective outcome
 reporting 

 Incomplete or absent
 reporting of some outcomes and not others on the basis of
 the results. 

 Other
 limitations 

 Stopping trial
 early for benefit. Substantial overestimates are likely
 in trials with fewer than 500 events and that large
 overestimates are likely in trials with fewer than 200
 events. Empirical evidence suggests that formal
 stopping rules do not reduce this bias. 

 Use of unvalidated
 outcome measures (e.g. patient-reported
 outcomes) 

 Carryover effects
 in crossover trial 

 Recruitment bias in
 cluster-randomized trials 

 Systematic reviews of tools to
 assess the methodological quality of non-randomized studies have
 identified over 200 checklists and instruments. We summarize
 in Table
 5.5 the key criteria for observational
 studies that reflect the contents of these
 checklists. 

 Table 5.5: Study limitations
 in observational studies 

 Explanation 

 Failure to develop and
 apply appropriate eligibility criteria (inclusion of
 control population) 

 Under- or
 over-matching in case-control studies 

 Selection of
 exposed and unexposed in cohort studies from different
 populations 

 Flawed measurement of both
 exposure and outcome 

 Differences in
 measurement of exposure (e.g. recall bias in
 case-control studies) 

 Differential
 surveillance for outcome in exposed and unexposed in
 cohort studies 

 Failure to adequately
 control confounding 

 Failure of accurate
 measurement of all known prognostic factors 

 Failure to match
 for prognostic factors and/or adjustment in statistical
 analysis 

 Incomplete or inadequately
 short follow-up 

 Especially within
 prospective cohort studies, both groups should be
 followed for the same amount of time. 

 Depending on the context and study
 type, there can be additional limitations than those listed
 above. Guideline panels and authors of systematic reviews should
 consider all possible limitations. 

 Guideline panels or authors of
 systematic reviews should consider the extent to which study
 limitations may bias the results ( see
 Examples 1 to 7 ). If the limitations are
 serious they may downgrade the quality rating by one or even two
 levels. Moving from risk of bias criteria for each individual
 study to a judgment about rating down for quality of evidence for
 risk of bias across a group of studies addressing a particular
 outcome presents challenges. We suggest the following
 principles: 

 In deciding on the overall
 quality of evidence, one does not average across studies (for
 instance if some studies have no serious limitations, some
 serious limitations, and some very serious limitations, one
 does not automatically rate quality down by one level because
 of an average rating of serious limitations). Rather, judicious
 consideration of the contribution of each study, with a general
 guide to focus on the high-quality studies, is
 warranted. 

 The judicious consideration
 requires evaluating the extent to which each trial contributes
 toward the estimate of magnitude of effect. This contribution
 will usually reflect study sample size and number of outcome
 events – larger trials with many events will contribute more,
 much larger trials with many more events will contribute much
 more. 

 One should be conservative
 in the judgment of rating down. That is, one should be
 confident that there is substantial risk of bias across most of
 the body of available evidence before one rates down for risk
 of bias. 

 The risk of bias should be
 considered in the context of other limitations. If, for
 instance, reviewers find themselves in a close-call situation
 with respect to two quality issues (risk of bias and, say,
 precision), we suggest rating down for at least one of the
 two. 

 Reviewers will face
 close-call situations. They should both acknowledge that they
 are in such a situation, make it explicit why they think this
 is the case, and make the reasons for their ultimate judgment
 apparent. 

 For authors of systematic
 reviews: 

 Systematic reviewers working
 within the context of Cochrane Systematic Reviews, can use the
 following guidance to assess study limitations (risk of bias) in
 Cochrane Reviews. Chapter 8 of the Cochrane Handbook provides a
 detailed discussion of study-level assessments of risk of bias in
 the context of a Cochrane review, and proposes an approach to
 assessing the risk of bias for an outcome across studies as ‘low
 risk of bias’, ‘unclear risk of bias’ and ‘high risk of bias’
 (Cochrane Handbook Chapter 8, Section 8.7). These assessments
 should feed directly into the assessment of study limitations. In
 particular, ‘low risk of bias’ would indicate ‘no limitation’;
 ‘unclear risk of bias’ would indicate either ‘no limitation’ or
 ‘serious limitation’; and ‘high risk of bias’ would indicate
 either ‘serious limitation’ or ‘very serious limitation’ in the
 GRADE approach. Cochrane systematic review authors must use their
 judgment to decide between alternative categories, depending on
 the likely magnitude of the potential biases. 

 Every study addressing a
 particular outcome will differ, to some degree, in the risk of
 bias. Review authors must make an overall judgment on whether the
 quality of evidence for an outcome warrants downgrading on the
 basis of study limitations. The assessment of study limitations
 should apply to the studies contributing to the results in the
 Summary of Findings table, rather than to all studies that could
 potentially be included in the analysis. 

 Table 5.6: Guidance to
 assess study limitations (risk of bias) in Cochrane
 Reviews and corresponding GRADE assessment of quality of
 evidence 

 Risk of bias 

 Across studies 

 Interpretation 

 Considerations 

 GRADE assessment of study
 limitations 

 Low 

 Most information is from
 studies at low risk of bias. 

 Plausible bias unlikely to
 seriously alter the results. 

 No apparent
 limitations. 

 No serious limitations, do
 not downgrade 

 Unclear 

 Most information is from
 studies at low or unclear risk of bias. 

 Plausible bias that raises
 some doubt about the results. 

 Potential limitations are
 unlikely to lower confidence in the estimate of
 effect. 

 No serious limitations, do
 not downgrade 

 Potential limitations are
 likely to lower confidence in the estimate of
 effect. 

 Serious limitations,
 downgrade one level. 

 High 

 The proportion of
 information from studies at high risk of bias is
 sufficient to affect the interpretation of
 results. 

 Plausible bias that
 seriously weakens confidence in the results. 

 Crucial limitation for one
 criterion, or some limitations for multiple criteria,
 sufficient to lower confidence in the estimate of
 effect. 

 Serious limitations,
 downgrade one level 

 Crucial limitation for one
 or more criteria sufficient to substantially lower
 confidence in the estimate of effect. 

 Very serious limitations,
 downgrade two levels 

 Example 1: Unclear Risk of Bias
 (Not Downgraded) 

 A systematic review investigated
 whether fewer people with cancer died when given anti-coagulants
 compared to a placebo. There were 5 RCTs. Three studies had
 unclear sequence generation as it was not reported by authors and
 one study (contributing few patients to the meta-analysis) had
 unclear allocation concealment, and incomplete outcome data. In
 this case, the overall limitations were not serious and the
 evidence was not downgraded for risk of bias. 

 Example 2: Unclear Risk of Bias
 (Downgraded by One Level) 

 A systematic review of the effects
 of testosterone on erection satisfaction in men with low
 testosterone identified four RCTs. The largest trial’s results
 were reported only as “not significant” and could not, therefore,
 contribute to the meta-analysis. Data from the three smaller
 trials suggested a large treatment effect (1.3 standard
 deviations, 95% confidence interval 0.2, 2.3). The authors could
 not obtain the missing data, and could not be confident that the
 large treatment effect was certain, therefore, they rated down
 the body of evidence for selective reporting bias in the largest
 study. 

 In another scenario, the review
 authors did obtain the complete data from the larger trial. After
 including the less impressive results of the large trial, the
 magnitude of the effect was smaller and no longer statistically
 significant (0.8 standard deviations, 95% confidence interval
 0.05, 1.63). In that case, the evidence would not be
 downgraded. 

 Example 3: High Risk of Bias due
 to lack of blinding (Downgraded by One Level) 

 RCTs of the effects of
 Intervention A on acute spinal injury measured both all-cause
 mortality and, based on a detailed physical examination, motor
 function. The outcome assessors were not blinded for any
 outcomes. Blinding of outcome assessors is less important for the
 assessment of all-cause mortality, but crucial for motor
 function. The quality of the evidence for the mortality outcome
 may not be downgraded. However, the quality may be downgraded for
 the motor function outcome. 

 Example 4: High Risk of Bias due
 to lack of allocation concealment (Downgraded by One
 Level) 

 A systematic review of 2 RCTs
 showed that family therapy for children with asthma improved
 daytime wheeze. However, allocation was clearly not concealed in
 the two included trials. This limitation might warrant
 downgrading the quality of evidence by one level. 

 Example 5: High Risk of Bias
 (Downgraded by One Level) 

 A review was conducted to assess
 the effects of early versus late treatment of influenza with
 oseltamivir in observational studies. Researchers found 8
 observational studies which assessed the risk of mortality. The
 statistical analysis in all 8 studies did not adjust for
 potential confounding risk factors such as age, chronic lung
 conditions, vaccination or immune status. The quality of the
 evidence was therefore downgraded from low to very low for
 serious limitations in study design. 

 Example 6: High Risk of Bias
 (Downgraded by Two Levels) 

 Three RCTs of the effects of
 surgery on patients with lumbar disc prolapse measured symptoms
 after 1 year or longer. The RCTs suffered from inadequate
 concealment of allocation, and unblinded assessment of outcome by
 potentially biased raters (surgeons) using a non-validated rating
 instrument. The benefit of surgery is uncertain. The quality of
 the evidence was downgraded by two levels due to these study
 limitations quality. 

 Example 7: High Risk of Bias
 (Downgraded by Two Levels) 

 The evidence for the effect of
 sublingual immunotherapy in children with allergic rhinitis on
 the development of asthma comes from a single randomized trial
 with no description of randomization, concealment of allocation
 or type of analysis, there was no blinding and 21% of children
 were lost to follow-up. These very serious limitations would
 warrant downgrading the quality of evidence by two levels, from
 high to low. 

 5.2.2 Inconsistency of
 results 

 Disclaimer: Section 5.2 has been updated in the new GRADE Book and is available here: https://book.gradepro.org/guideline/inconsistency 

 Inconsistency refers to
 an unexplained
 heterogeneity of results. 

 True differences in the underlying
 treatment effect may be likely when there are widely differing
 estimates of the treatment effect (i.e. heterogeneity or
 variability in results) across studies. Investigators should
 explore explanations for heterogeneity, and if they cannot
 identify a plausible explanation, the quality of evidence should
 be downgraded. Whether it is downgraded by one or two levels will
 depend on the magnitude of the inconsistency in the
 results. 

 Patients vary widely in their
 pre-intervention or baseline risk of the adverse outcomes that
 health care interventions are designed to prevent (e.g. death,
 stroke, myocardial infarction). As a result, risk differences
 (absolute risk reductions) in subpopulations tend to vary widely.
 Relative risk (RR) reductions, on the other hand, tend to be
 similar across subgroups, even if subgroups have substantial
 differences in baseline risk. Therefore, when we refer
 to inconsistencies in effect
 size , we are referring we
 are referring to relative
 measures (risk ratios and hazard
 ratios, which are preferred, or odds ratios). 

 When easily identifiable patient
 characteristics confidently permit classifying patients into
 subpopulations at appreciably different risk, absolute
 differences in outcome between intervention and control groups
 will differ substantially between these subpopulations. This may
 well warrant differences in recommendations across
 subpopulations, rather than downgrading the quality evidence for
 inconsistency in effect size. 

 Although there are statistical
 methods to measure heterogeneity, there are a variety of other
 criteria to assess heterogeneity, which can also be used when
 results cannot be pooled statistically. Criteria to determine
 whether to downgrade for inconsistency can be applied when
 results are from more than one study and include: 

 Wide variance of point
 estimates across studies (note: direction of effect is not a
 criterion for inconsistency) 

 Minimal or no overlap of
 confidence intervals (CI), which suggests variation is more
 than what one would expect by chance alone 

 Statistical criteria,
 including tests of heterogeneity which test the null hypothesis
 that all studies have the same underlying magnitude of effect,
 have a low p-value (p <0.05), indicating to reject the null
 hypothesis 

 I 2 statistic, which
 quantifies the proportion of the variation in point estimates due
 to among-study differences, is large (see note below for
 decisions based on I 2 statistic) 

 Note: 

 While determining what constitutes
 a large I 2 value is subjective, the
 following rule-of thumb can be used: 

 < 40% may be
 low 

 30-60% may be
 moderate 

 50-90% may be
 substantial 

 75-100% may be
 considerable 

 Overlaps in these ranges, and use
 of “may be” as terminology, illustrate the uncertainty involved
 in making such judgments. It is also important to note the
 implicit limitations in this statistic. When individual study
 sample sizes are small, point estimates may vary substantially,
 but because variation can be explained by
 chance, I 2 may be low. Conversely,
 when study sample sizes are large, a relatively small difference
 in point estimates can yield a large I 2 . Another statistic, τ 2 (tau square) is a measure of the variability that has
 an advantage over other measures in that it is not dependent on
 sample size. 

 All statistical approaches have
 limitations, and their results should be seen in the context of a
 subjective examination of the variability in point estimates and
 the overlap in CIs. 

 Example 1: Differences in
 direction, but minimal heterogeneity 

 Consider the figure below; a
 forest plot with four studies, two on either side of the line of
 no effect. We would have no inclination to rate down for
 inconsistency. Differences in direction, in and of themselves, do
 not constitute a criterion for variability in effect if the
 magnitude of the differences in point estimates is
 small. 

 [INSERT IMAGE] 

 Example 2: When inconsistency is
 large, but differences are between small and large beneficial
 effects 

 As we define quality of
 evidence for a
 guideline , inconsistency is important
 only when it reduces confidence in
 results in relation to a
 particular decision . Even when
 inconsistency is large, it may not reduce confidence in results
 regarding a particular decision. Consider, the figure below in
 which variability is substantial, but the differences are between
 small and large treatment effects. 

 Guideline developers may or may
 not consider this degree of variability important. Systematic
 review authors, much less in a position to judge whether the
 apparent high heterogeneity can be dismissed on the grounds that
 it is unimportant, are more likely to rate down for
 inconsistency. 

 [INSERT IMAGE] 

 Example 3: Substantial
 heterogeneity, of unequivocal importance 

 Consider the figure below. The
 magnitude of the variability in results is identical to that of
 the figure presented in Example 2. However, because two studies
 suggest benefit and two suggest harm, we would unquestionably
 choose to rate down the quality of evidence as a result of
 inconsistency. 

 [INSERT IMAGE] 

 Example 4: Test a priori
 hypotheses about inconsistency even when inconsistency appears to
 be small 

 A meta-analysis of randomized
 trials of rofecoxib looking at the outcome of myocardial
 infarction found apparently consistent results
 (heterogeneity p =0.82, I 2 =0%). Yet, when the investigators examined the effect in
 trials that used an external endpoint committee (RR 3.88, 95% CI:
 1.88, 8.02) vs. trials that did not (RR 0.79, 95% CI: 0.29,
 2.13), they found differences that were large and unlikely to be
 explained by chance ( p =0.01). 

 Although the issue is
 controversial, we recommend that meta-analyses include formal
 tests of whether a priori hypotheses explain inconsistency
 between important subgroups even if the variability that exists
 appears to be explained by chance (e.g. high p-values in tests of
 heterogeneity, and low I 2 values). 

 If the effect size differs across
 studies, explanations for inconsistency may be due to differences
 in: 

 populations (e.g. drugs
 may have larger relative effects in sicker
 populations) 

 interventions (e.g.
 larger effects with higher drug doses) 

 outcomes (e.g. duration
 of follow-up) 

 study
 methods (e.g. RCTs with higher and
 lower risk of bias). 

 If inconsistency can be explained
 by differences in
 populations , interventions or outcomes , review authors should
 offer different estimates across patient groups, interventions,
 or outcomes. Guideline panelists are then likely to offer
 different recommendations for different patient groups and
 interventions. If study
 methods provide a compelling
 explanation for differences in results between studies, then
 authors should consider focusing on effect estimates from studies
 with a lower risk of bias. 

 If large variability in magnitude
 of effect remains unexplained and authors fail to attribute it to
 differences in one of these four variables, then the quality of
 evidence decreases. Review authors and guideline panels should
 also consider the
 extent to which they are uncertain
 about the underlying effect due to the inconsistency. Uncertainty
 relates to how important inconsistency is to the confidence in
 the result. The extent is used to decide whether to downgrade the
 quality rating by one or even two levels. 

 Example 5: Making separate
 recommendations for subpopulations 

 When the analysis for benefits of
 endarterectomy was pooled across patients with stenosis of the
 carotid artery, there was high heterogeneity. Heterogeneity was
 explored and was explained by separating out patients who were
 symptomatic with high degree stenosis (in which endarterectomy
 was beneficial), and patients who were asymptomatic with moderate
 degree stenosis (in which surgery was not beneficial). The
 authors presented and graded the evidence by patient group and
 did not downgrade the quality of the evidence for inconsistency.
 Two different recommendations were also made according to patient
 group by the guideline panel. 

 5.2.2.1 Deciding whether to use
 estimates from a subgroup analysis 

 Finding an explanation for
 inconsistency is preferable. An explanation can be based on
 differences in population, intervention, or outcomes which
 mandate two or more estimates of effect, possibly with separate
 recommendations. However, subgroups effects may prove spurious
 and may not explain all the variability in the extent of
 inconsistency. Indeed, most putative subgroup effects ultimately
 prove spurious. A cautionary note about subgroup analyses and
 their presentation is warranted; refer to Sun et al. 2010 and
 Guyatt et al. 2011 for further reading. 

 Review authors and guideline
 developers must exercise a high degree of skepticism regarding
 potential subgroup effect explanations, paying particular
 attention to criteria the following 7 criteria: 

 Is the subgroup variable a
 characteristic specified at baseline or after randomization?
 (subgroup hypotheses should be developed a priori) 

 Is the subgroup difference
 suggested by comparisons within rather than between
 studies? 

 Does statistical analysis
 suggest that chance is an unlikely explanation for the subgroup
 difference? 

 Did the hypothesis precede
 rather than follow the analysis and include a hypothesized
 direction that was subsequently confirmed? 

 Was the subgroup hypothesis
 one of a smaller number tested? 

 Is the subgroup difference
 consistent across studies and across important
 outcomes? 

 Does external evidence
 (biological or sociological rationale) support the hypothesized
 subgroup difference? 

 The credibility of subgroup
 effects is not a matter of yes or no, but
 a continuum . Judgement is required to determine how convincing a
 subgroup analysis is based on the above criteria. 

 Example 6: Subgroup analysis
 explaining inconsistency in results 

 A systematic review and individual
 patient data meta-analysis (IPDMA) addressed the impact of high
 vs. low positive end-expiratory pressures (PEEPs) in three
 randomized trials that enrolled 2,299 adult patients with severe
 acute lung injury requiring mechanical ventilation. 

 The results of this IPDMA
 suggested a possible reduction in deaths in hospital with the
 higher PEEP strategy, but the difference was not statistically
 significant (RR 0.94; 95% CI: 0.86, 1.04). In patients with
 severe disease (labeled acute respiratory distress syndrome), the
 effect more clearly favored the high PEEP strategy (RR 0.90; 95%
 CI: 0.81, 1.00; P50.049). In patients with mild disease, results
 suggested that the high PEEP strategy may be inferior (RR 1.37;
 95% CI: 0.98, 1.92). 

 Applying the seven criteria (see
 table below), we find that six are met fully, and the seventh,
 consistency across trials and outcomes, partially: the results of
 the subgroup analysis were consistent across the three studies,
 but other ways of measuring severity of lung injury (for
 instance, treating severity as a continuous variable) failed to
 show a statistically significant interaction between the severity
 and the magnitude of effect. In this case, the subgroup analysis
 is relatively convincing. 

 [INSERT IMAGE] 

 Example 7: Subgroup analysis not
 very likely to explain inconsistency in results 

 Three randomized trials have
 tested the effects of vasopressin vs. epinephrine on survival in
 patients with cardiac arrest. The results show appreciable
 differences in point estimates, widely overlapping CIs, a p-value
 for the test of heterogeneity of 0.21 and
 an I2 of 35%. 

 Two of the trials included both
 patients in whom asystole was responsible for the cardiac arrest
 and the patients in whom ventricular fibrillation was the
 offending rhythm. One of these two trials reported a borderline
 statistically significant benefit - our own analysis was
 borderline nonsignificant - of vasopressin over epinephrine
 restricted to patients with asystole (in contrast to patients
 whose cardiac arrest was induced by ventricular
 fibrillation). 

 It is not very likely that the
 subgroup analysis can explain the moderate inconsistency in the
 results. Chance can explain the putative subgroup effect and the
 hypothesis fails other criteria (including small number of a
 priori hypotheses and consistency of effect). Here, guideline
 developers should make recommendations on the basis of the pooled
 estimate of data from both the groups. Whether the quality of
 evidence should be rated down for inconsistency is another
 judgment call; we would argue for not rating down for
 inconsistency. 

 [INSERT IMAGE] 

 5.2.3 Indirectness of
 evidence 

 Disclaimer: Section 5.2 has been updated in the new GRADE Book and is available here: https://book.gradepro.org/guideline/indirectness 

 We are more confident in the
 results when we have direct evidence. Direct evidence consists of
 research that directly compares the interventions which we are
 interested in, delivered to the populations in which we are
 interested, and measures the outcomes important to
 patients. 

 Authors of systematic reviews and
 guideline panels making recommendations should consider the
 extent to which they are uncertain about the applicability of the
 evidence to their relevant question and downgrade the quality
 rating by one or even two levels. 

 For authors of systematic
 reviews: 

 Directness is judged by the users
 of evidence tables, depending on the target population,
 intervention, and outcomes of interest. Authors of systematic
 reviews should answer the health care question they asked and,
 thus, they will rate the directness of evidence they found. The
 considerations made by the authors of systematic reviews may be
 different than those of guideline panels that use the systematic
 reviews. The more clearly and explicitly the health care question
 was formulated the easier it will be for the users to understand
 systematic review authors' judgments. 

 There are four sources of
 indirectness: 

 1. Differences in population
 (applicability) 

 Differences between study
 populations within a systematic review are a common problem for
 systematic review authors and guideline panels. When this occurs
 evidence is indirect. The effect on overall quality of evidence
 will vary depending on how different the study populations are,
 as a result quality may not decrease, decrease by a one level or
 decrease by two levels in extreme cases. 

 The above discussion refers to
 different human populations, but sometimes the only evidence will
 be from animal studies, such as rats or primates. In general, we
 would rate such evidence down two levels for indirectness. Animal
 studies may, however, provide an important indication of drug
 toxicity. Although toxicity data from animals does not reliably
 predict toxicity in humans, evidence of animal toxicity should
 engender caution in recommendations. Other types of nonhuman
 studies (e.g. laboratory evidence) may generate high quality
 evidence 

 Example 1: Indirectness in
 Populations (Downgraded by Two Levels) 

 High-quality randomized trials
 have demonstrated the effectiveness of antiviral treatment for
 seasonal influenza. The panel judged that the biology of seasonal
 influenza was sufficiently different from that of avian influenza
 (avian influenza organism may be far less responsive to antiviral
 agents than seasonal influenza) that the evidence required rating
 down quality by two levels, from high to low, due to
 indirectness. 

 Example 2: Non-human studies
 providing high quality evidence (Not Downgraded) 

 Consider laboratory evidence of
 change in resistance patterns of bacteria to antimicrobial agents
 (e.g. the emergence of methicillin-resistant staphylococcus
 aureus - MRSA). These laboratory findings may constitute high
 quality evidence for the superiority of antibiotics to which MRSA
 is sensitive vs. methicillin as the initial treatment of
 suspected staphylococcus sepsis in settings in which MRSA is
 highly prevalent. 

 2. Differences in
 interventions (applicability) 

 Systematic reviewers will make a
 concerted effort to ensure that only studies with directly
 relevant interventions are included in their review. However,
 exceptions may still occur. Generally, when interventions that
 are indirectly related to the study are included in systematic
 review, evidence quality will be decreased. In some instances the
 intervention used will be the same, but may be delivered in
 differently depending on the setting. 

 Example 3: Interventions delivered
 differently in different settings (Downgraded by One
 Level) 

 A systematic review of music
 therapies for autism found that trials tested structured
 approaches that are used more commonly in North America than in
 Europe. Because the interventions differ, the results from
 structured approaches are more applicable to North America and
 the results of less structured approaches are more applicable in
 Europe. 

 Guideline panelists should
 consider rating down the quality of the evidence if the
 intervention cannot be implemented with the same rigor or
 technical sophistication in their setting as in the RCTs from
 which the data come. 

 Example 4: Trials of related
 interventions (Downgraded by One or Two Levels) 

 Guideline developers may often
 find the best evidence addressing their question in trials of
 related, but different, interventions. A guideline addressing the
 value of colonoscopic screening for colon cancer will find the
 randomized control trials (RCTs) of fecal occult blood screening
 that showed a decrease in colon cancer mortality. Whether to rate
 down quality by one or two levels due to indirectness in this
 context is a matter of judgment. 

 Example 5: Indirectness in
 Interventions (Not Downgraded) 

 Older trials show a high efficacy
 of intramuscular penicillin for gonococcal infection, but
 guidelines might reasonably recommend alternative antibiotic
 regimes based on current local in vitro resistance patterns,
 which would not warrant downgrading the quality of evidence for
 indirectness. 

 Example 6: Interventions not
 sufficiently different (Not Downgraded) 

 Trials of simvastatin show
 cardiovascular mortality reduction. Suggesting night rather than
 morning dosing (because of greater cholesterol reduction) would
 not warrant rating down quality for differences in the
 intervention. 

 3. Differences in outcomes
 measures (surrogate outcomes) 

 GRADE specifies that both those
 conducting systematic reviews and those developing practice
 guidelines should begin by specifying every important outcome of
 interest. The available studies may have measured the impact of
 the intervention of interest on outcomes related to, but
 different from, those of primary importance to
 patients. 

 The difference between desired and
 measured outcomes may relate to time frame (e.g. outcome measured
 at 3-months vs. at 12-months). Another source of indirectness
 related to measurement of outcomes is the use of substitute or
 surrogate endpoints in place of the patient-important outcome of
 interest. 

 Table 5.7: Common surrogate
 measures and corresponding patient-important
 outcomes 

 Condition 

 Patient-important
 outcome(s) 

 Surrogate
 outcome(s) 

 Diabetes
 mellitus 

 Diabetic symptoms,
 hospital admission, complications (cardiovascular, eye,
 renal, neuropathic) 

 Blood glucose,
 A1C 

 Hypertension 

 Cardiovascular death,
 myocardial infarction, stroke 

 Blood pressure 

 Dementia 

 Patient function,
 behavior, caregiver burden 

 Cognitive
 function 

 Osteoporosis 

 Fractures 

 Bone density 

 Adult Respiratory Distress
 Syndrome 

 Mortality 

 Oxygenation 

 End-stage renal
 disease 

 Quality of life, morbidity
 (such as shunt thrombosis or heart failure),
 mortality 

 Hemoglobin 

 Venous
 thrombosis 

 Symptomatic venous
 thrombosis 

 Asymptomatic venous
 thrombosis 

 Chronic respiratory
 disease 

 Quality of life,
 exacerbations, mortality 

 Pulmonary function,
 exercise capacity 

 Cardiovascular
 disease 

 Myocardial infarction,
 vascular events, mortality 

 Serum lipids, coronary
 calcification, calcium/phosphate metabolism 

 In general, the use of a surrogate
 outcome requires rating down the quality of evidence by one, or
 even two, levels. Consideration of the biology, mechanism, and
 natural history of the disease can be helpful in making a
 decision about indirectness. For surrogates that are far removed
 in the putative causal pathway from the patient-important
 endpoints, we would rate down the quality of evidence with
 respect to this outcome by two levels. Surrogates that are closer
 in the putative causal pathway to the outcomes warrant rating
 down by only one level for indirectness. 

 Example 7: Time differences in
 outcomes (Downgraded by One Level) 

 A systematic review of behavioral
 and cognitive-behavioral interventions for outwardly directed
 aggressive behavior in people with learning disabilities showed
 that a program of 3-week relaxation training significantly
 reduced disruptive behaviors at 3 months. Unfortunately, no
 eligible trial assessed the review authors’ predefined outcome of
 interest, the long-term impact defined as effect at 9 months or
 greater. The argument for rating down quality for indirectness
 becomes stronger when one considers that other types of
 behavioral interventions have shown an early beneficial effect
 that was not sustained at 6 months follow-up. 

 Example 8: Surrogate outcomes
 (Downgraded by One or Two Levels) 

 Calcium and phosphate metabolism
 are far removed in the causal pathway from patient-important
 outcomes such as myocardial infarction, and warrant rating down
 the quality of evidence by two levels. Surrogate outcomes that
 are closer in the causal pathway to the patient-important
 outcomes such as coronary calcification for myocardial
 infarction, bone density for fractures, and soft-tissue
 calcification for pain, warrant rating down quality by one level
 for indirectness. 

 Example 9: Uncertainty in the
 relationship between surrogate and Surrogate outcomes (Downgraded
 by One or Two Levels) 

 Investigators examined the
 “validity” of progression-free survival as a surrogate for
 overall survival for anthracycline- and taxine-based chemotherapy
 in advanced breast cancer. They found a statistically significant
 association between progression-free and overall survival in the
 randomized trials they analyzed, but predicting overall survival
 using progression-free survival remained uncertain. Rating down
 quality by one level for indirectness would be appropriate in
 this situation. 

 4. Indirect
 Comparisons) 

 Occurs when a comparison of
 intervention A versus B is not available, but A was compared with
 C and B was compared with C. Such studies allow indirect
 comparisons of the magnitude of effect of A versus B. As a result
 of the indirect comparison, this evidence is of lower quality
 than head-to-head comparisons of A and B would
 provide. 

 The validity of the indirect
 comparison rests on the assumption that factors in the design of
 the trial (the patients, co-interventions, measurement of
 outcomes) and the methodological quality are not sufficiently
 different to result in different effects (in other words, true
 differences in effect explain all apparent differences). Some
 authors refer to this as the “similarity assumption”. Because
 this assumption is always in some doubt, indirect comparisons
 always warrant rating down by one level in quality of evidence.
 Whether to rate down two levels depends on the plausibility that
 alternative factors (population, interventions, co-interventions,
 outcomes, and study methods) explain or obscure differences in
 effect. 

 Example 10: Indirect comparison of
 low- vs. medium-dose aspirin (Downgraded by One Level) 

 A systematic review considered the
 relative merits of low dose vs. medium dose of aspirin to prevent
 graft occlusion after coronary artery bypass surgery. Authors
 found five relevant trials that compared aspirin with placebo, of
 which two tested medium dose and three low-dose aspirin. The
 pooled relative risk of the likelihood of a graft occlusion was
 0.74 (95% CI: 0.60, 0.91) in the low-dose trial and 0.55 (95% CI:
 0.28, 0.82) in the medium-dose trials. The RR of medium vs. low
 dose was 0.74 (95% CI: 0.52, 1.06; P = 0.10) suggesting the
 possibility of a larger effect with the medium-dose regimens.
 This comparison is weaker than if the randomized trials had
 compared the two aspirin dose regimens directly because there are
 other study characteristics that might be responsible for any
 differences found. 

 Example 11: Network meta-analysis
 (Downgraded by Two Levels) 

 Investigators conducted a
 simultaneous treatment comparison of 12 new generation
 antidepressants. The authors evaluated 117 randomized trials
 involving over 25,000 patients; their article provides no
 information about the similarity of the patients, or about
 co-intervention. In correspondence with the authors, however,
 they indicated that they excluded trials with treatment-resistant
 depression, argued that different types of depression have
 similar treatment responses, and that it is very likely that
 patients did not receive important co-intervention. With respect
 to risk of bias, the authors tell us, using the Cochrane
 collaboration approach to assessing risk of bias that risk of
 bias in most studies was “unclear”, and 12 were at low risk of
 bias; presumably a small number was at high risk of bias. This is
 helpful, although “unclear” represents a wide range of risk of
 bias. All studies involved head-to-head comparisons between at
 least two of the 12 drugs; the 117 trials involved 70 individual
 comparisons (e.g., two comparisons between fluoxetine and
 fluvoxamine). The authors reported statistically significant
 differences between direct and indirect comparisons in only three
 of 70 comparisons of drug response. The power of such tests was,
 however, not likely high. Overall, we would be inclined to take a
 cautious approach to this network meta-analysis and rate down two
 levels for indirectness. 

 5.2.4 Imprecision 

 Disclaimer: Section 5.2 has been updated in the new GRADE Book and is available here: https://book.gradepro.org/guideline/imprecision 

 In general, results are imprecise
 when studies include relatively few patients and few events and
 thus have a wide confidence interval (CI) around the estimate of
 the effect. In this case, one may judge the quality of the
 evidence lower than it otherwise would be considered because of
 resulting uncertainty about the
 results . 

 In addition to describing how the
 95% confidence interval should be used as the primary criterion
 to make judgements about imprecision, we introduce theoptimal
 information size (OIS) as a second, necessary criterion for
 determining adequate precision. 

 Because
 GRADE defines the quality of
 evidence differently for systematic
 reviews and for guidelines, the criteria for downgrading for
 imprecision differ in that guideline panels need to consider the
 context of a recommendation and other outcomes, whereas judgments
 about specific outcomes in a systematic review are free of that
 context. The GRADE approach, therefore, suggests separate
 guidance for determining imprecision as is described in the
 following sections. 

 5.2.4.1 Imprecision in
 guidelines 

 For guideline
 panels: 

 Quality of evidence refers to the
 extent to which our confidence
 in the estimate of an effect is adequate to support a particular
 decision . In
 guidelines all outcomes are
 considered together , with attention to
 whether they are critical, or important but not
 critical. 

 For guideline panels, the decision
 to rate down the quality of evidence for imprecision is dependent
 on the threshold that represents the basis for a management
 decision and consideration of the trade-off between desirable and
 undesirable consequences. Determining the acceptable threshold
 inevitably involves judgement that must be made
 explicit. 

 For dichotomous
 outcomes 

 Guideline developers must consider
 the context of the particular recommendation to determine whether
 the results of a dichotomous (binary) outcome are sufficiently
 precise to support that recommendation. Setting a specific
 threshold for an acceptable estimate of treatment effect will
 involve judgement in the context of factors such as side effects,
 drug toxicity, and cost ( see Example
 1 ). Examining the lower and upper
 boundaries of the CI in relation to the threshold set by the
 guideline panel, then determining whether criteria for the
 optimal information size are met, will help in deciding whether
 to rate down for imprecision. 

 We suggest that guideline
 developers consider the following steps in deciding whether to
 rate down the quality of evidence for imprecision in
 guidelines: 

 First consider whether the
 boundaries of the CI are on the same side of their
 decision-making threshold. Does the CI cross the clinical decision threshold
 between recommending and not recommending
 treatment ? If the answer
 is yes (i.e. the CI crosses the
 threshold), rate
 down for imprecision irrespective
 of where the point estimate and CI lie. ( see Example 1 ) 

 If the threshold
 is not
 crossed , are criteria for
 an optimal information
 size met? ( see note on OIS and Example 3 ) 

 Or, 

 Is the event rate very low
 and the sample size very large (at least 2000, and perhaps 4000
 patients)? ( see Exception
 note ) 

 If neither criterion is met , rate
 down for imprecision. 

 While confidence intervals mostly
 capture the extent of imprecision, they can be misleading in
 certain circumstances because of fragility. Specifically, CIs may
 appear robust, but small numbers of events may render the results
 fragile. Confidence intervals assume all patients are at the same
 risk (i.e. there is prognostic balance), an assumption that is
 false. Randomization will ameliorate the problem by balancing
 prognostic factors between intervention and control groups, but
 we can be confident that a prognostic balance has been achieved
 only if sample sizes are large. Large treatment effects in the
 presence of small sample sizes, even in RCTs, may be because of
 prognostic imbalance and warrant caution. 

 Early trials addressing a
 particular question will, particularly if small, substantially
 overestimate the treatment effect. A systematic review of these
 trials will subsequently also generate an overestimated treatment
 effect. Examples of meta-analyses generating apparent beneficial
 or harmful effects refuted by subsequent larger trials include
 magnesium for mortality reduction after myocardial infarction,
 angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors for reducing the
 incidence of diabetes, nitrates for mortality reduction in
 myocardial infarction, and aspirin for reduction of
 pregnancy-induced hypertension. A similar circumstance occurs
 when trials are stopped early for benefit (i.e. prior to reaching
 the total number of events, or the sample size, needed as was
 calculated for an adequately powered trial). Simulation studies
 and empirical evidence suggest that trials stopped early
 overestimate treatment effects ( see
 Example 4 ). When a treatment effect is
 overestimated, the CI around the effect may falsely appear
 suitable to meet the clinical decision threshold criterion by
 indicating adequate precision. 

 Therefore, the clinical decision
 threshold criterion is not completely sufficient to deal with
 issues of precision, and the second OIS criterion is
 required. 

 Note: The Optimal Information
 Size (OIS) 

 In order to address the
 vulnerability of confidence intervals as a criterion for adequate
 precision, we suggest the “optimal information size” as
 a second, necessary
 criterion to consider. The OIS is
 applied as a rule according to the following: 

 If
 the total number of
 patients included in a systematic
 review is less
 than the number of patients
 generated by a conventional
 sample size calculation for a
 single adequately powered trial,
 consider rating
 down for imprecision. 

 Many online calculators for sample
 size calculation are available. A simple one can be found
 at http://www.stat.ubc.ca/rollin/stats/ssize/b2.html .
 As an alternative to calculating the OIS, guideline developers
 can also consult figures that show the relationship between
 sample size required, or number of events needed, and effect
 size. See Example
 2 demonstrating how these figures
 can be used. 

 Exception: Low event rates
 with large sample size, an exception to the need for
 OIS 

 When event rates are low , CIs around
 relative effects may be wide, but if sample sizes are
 sufficiently large, it is likely that prognostic balance has
 indeed been achieved and CIs around absolute effects may be narrow .
 Under such circumstances, judgment about precision may be based
 on the CI around the absolute effect and one
 may not
 downgrade the quality of evidence
 for imprecision. ( see Examples 5 and
 6 ) 

 Example 1: Setting clinical
 decision thresholds to determine imprecision in
 guidelines 

 Refer to the figure below. A
 hypothetical systematic review of randomized control trials of an
 intervention to prevent major strokes yields a point estimate of
 the absolute reduction in strokes of 1.3%, with a 95% CI of 0.6%
 to 2.0%. This translates to a number needed to treat (NNT) of 77
 (100÷1.3) patients for a year to prevent a single stroke. The 95%
 CI around the NNT is 50 to 167. Therefore, while 77 is our best
 estimate, we may need to treat as few as 50 or as many as 167
 people to prevent a single stroke. 

 [INSERT IMAGE] 

 If we consider that the
 intervention is a drug with no serious adverse effects, minimal
 inconvenience, and modest cost, we may set a threshold for an
 absolute reduction in strokes of 0.5%, or NNT=200 (green line in
 the figure above), as even this small effect would warrant a
 recommendation. The entire CI (0.6% to 2.0%) lies to the left of
 the 0.5% threshold and, therefore, excludes any benefit smaller
 than the threshold. We can conclude that the precision of the
 evidence is sufficient to support a recommendation and do not
 rate down the quality of evidence for imprecision. 

 On the other hand, if the drug is
 associated with serious toxicity, we may be reluctant to make a
 recommendation unless the absolute stroke reduction is at least
 1%, or NNT=100 (red line in the figure above). Under these
 circumstances, the precision is insufficient as the CI
 encompasses treatment effects smaller than this threshold (i.e.
 as small as 0.6%). A recommendation in favour of the intervention
 would still be appropriate as the point estimate of 1.3% meets
 the threshold, but we would rate down the quality of evidence
 supporting the recommendation by one level for imprecision (e.g.
 from high to moderate). 

 Example 2: Using figures to
 determine Optimal Information Size 

 As an alternative to calculating
 the OIS, review and guideline authors can also consult a figure
 to determine the OIS. The figure below presents the required
 sample size (assuming α of 0.05, and β of 0.2) for RRR of 20%,
 25%, and 30% across varying control group risks. For example, if
 the best estimate of control group risk was 0.2 and one specifies
 an RRR of 25%, the OIS is approximately 2000 patients. 

 [INSERT IMAGE] 

 Power is, however, more closely
 related to number of events than to sample size. The figure below
 presents the same relationships using total number of events
 across all studies in both treatment and control groups instead
 of total number of patients. Using the same choices of a control
 group risk of 0.2 and RRR 25%, one requires approximately 325
 events to meet OIS criteria. 

 [INSERT IMAGE] 

 Note: Choice of Relative Risk
 Reduction 

 We have suggested using RRRs of
 20% to 30% for calculating OIS. The choice of RRR is a matter of
 judgment, and there may be instances in which compelling prior
 information would suggest choosing a smaller or larger value for
 the RRR for the OIS calculation. 

 Example 3: Applying the OIS
 Criterion 

 A systematic review of flavonoids
 for treatment of hemorrhoids examined the outcome of failure to
 achieve an important symptom reduction. In calculating the OIS,
 the authors chose a conservative α of 0.01 and RRR of 20%, a β of
 0.2, and a control group risk of 50%. The calculated OIS was
 marginally larger than the total sample size included (1194 vs.
 1102 patients). 

 A more dramatic example comes from
 a systematic review and meta-analysis of fluoroquinolone
 prophylaxis for patients with neutropenia. Only one of eight
 studies that contributed to the meta-analysis met conventional
 criteria for statistical significance, but the pooled estimate
 suggested an impressive and robust reduction in infection-related
 mortality with prophylaxis (RR: 0.38; 95% CI: 0.21, 0.69). The
 total number of events was only 69 and the total number of
 patients 1022. Considering the control group risk of 6.9% and
 setting α of 0.05, β of 0.02, and RRR of 25% results in an OIS of
 6400 patients. This meta-analysis fails to meet OIS criteria, and
 rating down for imprecision may be warranted. 

 Example 4: Stopping trials early
 may result in overestimated treatment effects and incorrect
 judgements about precision 

 Consider a randomized trial of β
 blockers in 112 patients undergoing surgery for peripheral
 vascular diseases that fulfilled preplanned O’Briene-Fleming
 criteria for early stopping. Of 59 patients given bisoprolol, 2
 suffered a death or nonfatal myocardial infarction, as did 18 of
 53 control patients. Despite a total of only 20 events, the 95%
 CI around the RR (0.02 to 0.41) excludes all but a large
 treatment effect. The CI suggests that the smallest plausible
 effect is a 59% RRR. A recommendation to administer treatment
 based on this result would be deemed to have adequate
 precision. 

 However, there are reasons to
 doubt the estimate of the magnitude of effect from this trial.
 First, it is much larger than what we might expect on the basis
 of β blockers effects in a wide variety of other situations.
 Second, the study was terminated early on the basis of the large
 effect. Third, we have a sense of the fragility of these results
 as concluding that an RRR less than 59% is implausible on the
 basis of only 20 events violates common sense. If one moves just
 five events from the control to the intervention group, the
 results lose their statistical significance, and the new point
 estimate (an RRR of 52%) is outside of the original
 CI. 

 Example 5: Focusing on absolute
 effects when event rates are low and sample size is
 large 

 A systematic review of seven
 randomized trials of angioplasty versus carotid endarterectomy
 for cerebrovascular disease found that a total of 16 of 1482
 (1.1%) patients receiving angioplasty died, as did 19 of 1465
 (1.3%) undergoing endarterectomy. Looking at the 95% CI (0.43,
 1.66) around the point estimate of the RR (0.85), the results are
 consistent with substantial benefit and substantial harm,
 suggesting the need to rate down for imprecision. 

 The absolute difference, however,
 suggests a different conclusion. The absolute difference in death
 rates between the two procedures is very small (absolute
 difference of 0.2% with a 95% CI ranging from -0.5% to 1.0%).
 Setting a clinical decision threshold boundary of 1% absolute
 difference (the smallest difference important to patients), the
 results of the systematic review exclude a difference favoring
 either procedure. If one accepted this clinical decision
 threshold as appropriate, one would not rate down for
 imprecision. One could argue that a difference of less than 1%
 could be important to patients: if so, one would rate down for
 imprecision, even after considering the CI around the absolute
 difference, as the CI would cross that threshold. 

 Example 6: No need to rate down
 for imprecision when sample sizes are very large 

 A meta-analysis of randomized
 trials of β blockade for preventing cardiovascular events in
 patients undergoing non-cardiac surgery suggested a doubling of
 the risk of strokes with β blockers (RR: 2.22; 95% CI: 1.39,
 3.56). Most trials in this meta-analysis do not suffer from
 important limitations, the evidence is direct and consistent, and
 publication bias is undetected. Given the lower boundary of the
 CI (an increase in RR of 39%), the threshold for adequate
 precision would not be crossed if one believed that most patients
 would be reluctant to use β blockers with an increase in RR of
 stroke of 39%. 

 The total number of events (75),
 however, appears insufficient, an inference that is confirmed
 with an OIS calculation (α 0.05, β 0.20, using the β-blocker
 group’s 1% event rate as the control, and Δ 0.25, total sample
 size 43586 in comparison to the 10889 patients actually
 enrolled). The guidelines for calculating precision we have
 suggested would, therefore, mandate rating down quality for
 imprecision. 

 With a sample size of over 5000
 patients per group, however, it is very likely that randomization
 has succeeded in creating prognostic balance. If that is true, β
 blockers really do increase the risk of stroke. Not rating down
 for imprecision in this situation is therefore appropriate.
 Preliminary information suggests that for low baseline risk
 (<5%) one will be safe with regard to prognostic balance with
 a total of 4000 patients (2000 patients per group). Availability
 of this number of patients would mandate not rating down for
 imprecision despite not meeting the OIS criterion. 

 For continuous
 outcomes 

 Considerations of rating down
 quality because of imprecision for continuous variables follow
 the same logic as for binary
 variables . The process begins by rating
 down the quality for imprecision if a recommendation would be
 altered if the lower versus the upper boundary of the CI
 represented the true underlying effect. If the CI does not cross
 this threshold, but the evidence fails to meet the OIS criterion,
 guideline authors should consider rating down the quality of
 evidence for imprecision. In this instance, judging the OIS
 criterion will require a sample size calculation for the
 continuous variable. 

 In the context of a guideline, the
 decision-making threshold for an acceptable estimate of treatment
 requires consideration of the full context of the recommendation,
 including other outcomes such as all potential benefits and
 important adverse effects ( see
 Example 7 ). 

 Example 7: Considering the full
 context of a recommendation 

 A systematic review suggests that
 corticosteroid administration decreases the length of hospital
 stay in patients with exacerbations of chronic obstructive
 pulmonary disease (COPD) by 1.42 days (95% CI: 0.65, 2.2). The
 lower boundary of the CI is 0.65 days, a rather small effect size
 that may not be considered important to patients. 

 As it turns out, steroids also
 reduce the likelihood of treatment failure (variably defined)
 during inpatient or outpatient follow-up (RR: 0.54; 95% CI: 0.41,
 0.71). The best estimate of likelihood of symptomatic
 deterioration in those not treated with steroids is approximately
 30%. By administering steroids to these patients, the risk is
 reduced from 30% to 16% (30-[0.54x30]), a difference of 14%, and
 the effect is unlikely to be less than 9%
 (30-[0.71x30]). 

 Adverse effects were poorly
 reported in the studies. The only consistently reported problem
 was hyperglycemia, which was increased almost sixfold,
 representing an absolute increase of 15% to 20%. The extent to
 which this hyperglycemia had consequences important to patients
 is uncertain. One possible conclusion from this information is
 that, given the magnitude of reduction in deterioration and lack
 of evidence suggesting important adverse effects, a benefit of
 even 0.65 days of reduced average hospitalization would warrant
 steroid administration. If this were the conclusion, the CI
 (0.65, 2.2) would not cross the decision-making threshold and the
 guideline panel would proceed to consider whether the evidence
 meets the OIS criterion. 

 5.2.4.2 Imprecision in in systematic
 reviews 

 For authors of systematic
 reviews: 

 Quality of evidence refers to
 one's confidence in the
 estimates of effect . In systematic
 reviews each outcome is
 considered separately . 

 Authors of systematic reviews
 should not rate down quality due to imprecision on the basis of
 the trade-off between desirable and undesirable consequences; it
 is not their job to make value and preference judgments.
 Therefore, in judging precision, they should not focus on the
 threshold that represents the basis for a management decision.
 Rather, they should consider the optimal information size to make
 judgements. 

 For dichotomous
 outcomes 

 We suggest that authors of
 systematic reviews consider the following steps in deciding
 whether to rate down the quality of evidence for
 imprecision: 

 If the optimal information
 size criterion is not
 met , rate down for
 imprecision, unless the sample size is very large (at least
 2000, and perhaps 4000 patients). 

 If the OIS criterion is met
 and the 95% CI excludes no
 effect (i.e. CI around RR excludes
 1.0), do not rate
 down for imprecision. 

 If OIS criterion is met,
 and the 95% CI overlaps no
 effect (i.e. CI includes RR of
 1.0) rate down for
 imprecision if the
 CI fails to exclude important
 benefit or important harm .
 ( see Example 8 ) 

 Note: 

 To be of optimal use to guideline
 developers, a systematic review may still point out what
 thresholds of benefit would mandate rating down for
 imprecision. 

 Example 8: Meeting threshold OIS
 may not ensure precision 

 Although satisfying the OIS
 threshold in the presence of a CI excluding no effect indicates
 adequate precision, the same is not true when the point estimate
 fails to exclude no effect. 

 Consider the systematic review of
 β blockers in non-cardiac surgery previously introduced in
 Example 6 above. For total mortality, with 295 deaths and a total
 sample size of over 10000, the point estimate and 95% CI for the
 RR with β blockers were 1.24 (95% CI: 0.99, 1.56). Despite the
 large sample size and number of events, one might be reluctant to
 conclude precision is adequate when a small reduction in
 mortality with β blockers, as well as an increase of 56%, remain
 plausible. This suggests that when the OIS criteria are met, and
 the CI includes the null effect, systematic review authors should
 consider whether CIs include appreciable benefit or
 harm. 

 Authors should use their judgment
 in deciding what constitutes
 appreciable benefit and harm and
 provide a rationale for their choice. If reviewers fail to find a
 compelling rationale for a threshold, our suggested default
 threshold for appreciable benefit and harm that warrants rating
 down is an RRR or RR increase of 25% or more. 

 For continuous
 outcomes 

 Review authors can calculate the
 OIS for continuous variables in exactly the same way they can for
 binary variables by specifying the α and β error thresholds (we
 have suggested 0.05 and 0.2) and the Δ, and choosing an
 appropriate population standard deviation based on one of the
 relevant studies. 

 Whether you will rate down for
 imprecision is dependent on the
 choice of the difference (Δ) you
 wish to detect and the resulting sample size required. Again, the
 merit of the GRADE approach is not that it ensures agreement
 between reasonable individuals, but that the judgements being
 made are explicit. 

 Example 9: Judgements about
 imprecision depend on the choice of difference to
 detect 

 Consider the systematic review
 previously introduced in Example 7 above, which suggests that
 corticosteroid administration decreases the length of hospital
 stay in patients with exacerbations of chronic obstructive
 pulmonary disease (COPD) by 1.42 days (95% CI: 0.65,
 2.2). 

 Choosing a Δ of 1.0 (implying a
 judgment that reductions in stay of more than a day are
 important) and using the standard deviation associated with
 hospital stay in the four relevant studies (3.4, 4.5, and 4.9)
 yields corresponding required total sample sizes of 364, 636, and
 754. The 602 patients available for this analysis do not
 therefore meet the OIS criterion, and one would consider rating
 down for imprecision. 

 Had we chosen a smaller difference
 (e.g. 0.5 days) that we wished to detect, the sample size of the
 studies would have been unequivocally insufficient. Had we chosen
 a larger value (e.g. 1.5 days) the sample size of 602 would have
 met the OIS criterion. 

 Note: Outcomes reported as a
 standardized mean difference 

 A particular challenge in
 calculating the OIS for continuous variables arises when studies
 have used different instruments to measure a construct, and the
 pooled estimate is calculated using a standardized mean
 difference. Systematic review and guideline authors will most
 often face this situation when dealing with patient-reported
 outcomes, such as quality of life. In this context, we suggest
 authors choose one of the available instruments (ideally, one in
 which an estimate of the minimally important difference is
 available) and calculate an OIS using that instrument. 

 Because it may give false
 reassurance, we hesitate to offer a rule-of-thumb threshold for
 the absolute number of patients required for adequate precision
 for continuous variables. For example, using the usual standards
 of α (0.05) and β (0.20), and an effect size of 0.2 standard
 deviations, representing a small effect, requires a total sample
 size of approximately 400 (200 per group), sample size that may
 not be sufficient to ensure prognostic balance. 

 Nonetheless, whenever there are
 sample sizes that are less than 400, review authors and guideline
 developers should certainly consider rating down for imprecision.
 In future, statistical simulations may provide the basis for a
 robust rule of thumb for continuous outcomes. The limitations of
 an arbitrary threshold sample size suggest the advisability of
 addressing precision by calculation of the relevant OIS for each
 continuous variable. 

 5.2.4.3 Rating down two levels for
 imprecision 

 When there are very few events and
 CIs around both relative and absolute estimates of effect, that
 include both appreciable benefit and appreciable harm, systematic
 reviewers and guideline developers should consider rating down
 the quality of evidence by two levels. 

 Example 10: Rating down for
 imprecision by two levels 

 A systematic review of the use of
 probiotics for induction of remission in Crohn’s disease found a
 single randomized trial that included 11 patients. Four of five
 patients in the treatment group achieved remission, and five of
 six patients in the control group achieved remission. The point
 estimate of the risk ratio (0.96) suggests no difference, but the
 CI includes a reduction in likelihood of remission of almost
 half, or an increase in the likelihood of over 50% (95% CI: 0.56,
 1.69). As there are few events and the CI includes appreciable
 benefit and harm, one would rate down quality of evidence by two
 levels for imprecision. 

 5.2.5 Publication bias 

 Disclaimer: Section 5.2 has been updated in the new GRADE Book and is available here: https://book.gradepro.org/guideline/dissemination-bias 

 Publication
 bias is a systematic
 under-estimation or an over-estimation of the underlying
 beneficial or harmful effect due to the selective publication of studies . Confidence in the combined estimates of effects from a
 systematic review can be reduced when publication bias is
 suspected, even when the included studies themselves have a low
 risk of bias. 

 Note: 

 Some systems for assessing the
 quality of the body of evidence use the term “reporting bias”
 with 2 subcategories: selective outcome reporting and publication
 bias. However, GRADE considers selective outcome reporting under risk of
 bias (study limitations) since it
 can be addressed in single studies. In contrast, when an entire
 study remains unpublished (unreported), one can assess the
 likelihood of publication
 bias only by looking at a group of
 studies. Currently, GRADE follows the Cochrane Collaboration’s
 approach and consider selective
 outcome reporting as an issue in
 risk of bias in individual studies (Cochrane Handbook. Chapter
 8.5 The Cochrane Collaboration’s tool for assessing
 risk of bias). 

 Empirical evidence suggests that
 studies reporting statistically significant findings are more
 likely to be accepted for publication than those reporting
 statistically insignificant findings (“negative studies”).
 Publication bias arises when entire studies go unreported. Lack
 of success to identify studies is typically a result of studies
 either remaining unpublished or obscurely published (e.g. in
 journals with limited circulation not indexed by major databases,
 as conference abstracts or theses), thus, methodologists have
 labeled the phenomenon “publication bias.” Authors of systematic
 reviews may fail to identify studies that are unpublished or that
 have been published in a non-indexed, limited-circulation journal
 or in the grey literature even if they employ most rigorous
 search techniques. If rigorous search techniques are not
 implemented it is difficult to make the judgement about
 publication bias since studies might remain unidentified both
 because of publication bias or because of insufficient effort to
 identify them. 

 The risk of publication bias may
 be higher for systematic reviews of observational
 studies than for reviews of RCTs. This can occur, especially
 if observational studies are conducted automatically from patient
 registries or medical records. In these instances, it is
 difficult for the reviewer to know if the observational studies
 that appear in the literature represent all or a fraction
 (usually those that showed “interesting” results) of the studies
 conducted. 

 Table 5.8: Possible sources
 of publication bias throughout the publication
 process 

 Phases of research
 publication 

 Actions contributing to or
 resulting in bias. 

 Preliminary and pilot
 studies 

 Small studies more likely
 to be “negative” (e.g. those with discarded or failed
 hypotheses) remain unpublished; companies classify some
 as proprietary information. 

 Report
 completion 

 Authors decide that
 reporting a “negative” study is uninteresting; and do not
 invest the time and effort required for
 submission. 

 Journal
 selection 

 Authors decide to submit
 the “negative” report to a nonindexed, non-English, or
 limited-circulation journal. 

 Editorial
 consideration 

 Editor decides that the
 “negative” study does not warrant peer review and rejects
 manuscript. 

 Peer review 

 Peer reviewers conclude
 that the “negative” study does not contribute to the
 field and recommend rejecting the manuscript. Author
 gives up or moves to lower impact journal. Publication
 delayed. 

 Author revision and
 resubmission 

 Author of rejected
 manuscript decides to forgo the submission of the
 “negative” study or to submit it again at a later time to
 another journal (see “journal selection”
 above). 

 Report
 publication 

 Journal delays the
 publication of the “negative” study. 

 Proprietary interests lead
 to report getting submitted to, and accepted by,
 different journals. 

 Studies
 with small sample
 sizes are more likely to remain
 unpublished or ignored. Discrepancies between results of
 meta-analyses of small studies and subsequent large trials may
 occur as often as 20% of the time, and publication bias may be a
 major contributor to such discrepancies. Therefore, one should
 suspect publication bias when published evidence is limited to a
 small number of small trials. This is especially true if many of
 these small studies show benefits of certain
 intervention. 

 Methods to detect the possibility
 of publication bias in systematic reviews include visual
 inspection and tests for asymmetry of funnel plots (Cochrane
 Handbook. Chapter 10.4 Detecting reporting biases).
 Empirical examination of patterns of results may suggest
 publication bias if results are asymmetrical about the summary
 estimate of effect. This can be determined either through visual
 inspection of a funnel plot (shown below) or from a positive
 result for a statistical test for asymmetry. As a rule-of-thumb,
 funnel plot and statistical tests for asymmetry should be used to
 detect publication bias if there are at least 10 studies included
 in the meta-analysis (some say at lest 5 studies). 

 Another test used to detect
 publication bias is referred to as the “trim and fill” method is
 an extension of the funnel plot. This trim and fill technique
 begins by removing small “positive” studies that do not have a
 negative counterpart, leaving a symmetrical funnel plot. The new
 supposed true effect is then calculated using the effects of the
 studies included in the new funnel plot. The next step is to add
 hypothetical studies which mirror the results of the positive
 studies, but still retains the new pooled effect estimate. It is
 important to note that even if asymmetry is detected, it may not
 be the result of publication bias. For example, in smaller
 studies, over-estimates of effect may yield an asymmetric funnel
 plot that could be explained by limitations other than
 publication bias such as a restrictive study population. To
 strengthen conclusions regarding publication bias it is
 recommended that multiple tests be used. 

 Recursive cumulative
 meta-analysis, used to detect lag time bias, performs a
 meta-analysis at the end of each year, noting changes in effect
 estimates for each progressing year. If effects of an
 intervention continuously decrease, there is a strong indication
 of lag time bias. 

 Regardless of the test used,
 review authors and guideline developers should be aware such
 tests can be prone to error and their results should be
 interpreted with caution. It is extremely difficult to be
 confident that publication bias is absent and almost as difficult
 to place a threshold on when to rate down quality of evidence due
 to the strong suspicion of publication bias. For this reason
 GRADE suggests rating down quality of evidence for publication
 bias by a maximum of one level. 

 Example 1: Trials with
 positive findings (i.e. statistically significant differences)
 are more likely to be published than trials with negative or null
 findings 

 A systematic review assessed the
 extent to which publication of a cohort of clinical trials is
 influenced by the statistical significance, perceived importance,
 or direction of their results. It found five studies that
 investigated these associations in a cohort of registered
 clinical trials. Trials with positive findings were more likely
 to be published than trials with negative or null findings (odds
 ratio: 3.9; 95% CI: 2.7 to 5.7). This corresponds to a risk ratio
 of 1.8 (95% CI: 1.6 to 2.0), assuming that 41% of negative trials
 are published (the median among the included studies, range = 11%
 to 85%). In absolute terms, this means that if 41% of negative
 trials are published, we would expect that 73% of positive trials
 would be published. Two studies assessed time to publication and
 showed that trials with positive findings tended to be published
 after 4 to 5 years compared with those with negative findings,
 which were published after 6 to 8 years. Three studies found no
 statistically significant association between sample size and
 publication. One study found no statistically significant
 association between either funding mechanism, investigator rank,
 or sex and publication. 

 Systematic
 reviews performed
 early in the development of a body
 of research may be biased due to the tendency for positive
 results to be published sooner and for negative results to be
 published later or withheld. This is referred to as “lag bias”
 and especially true of industry funded studies. 

 Example 3: Reduced effect
 estimate in a systematic review as a result of negative studies
 not being published 

 An investigation of 74
 antidepressant trials with a mean sample size of fewer than 200
 patients was submitted to the FDA. Of the 38 studies viewed as
 positive by the FDA, 37 were published. Of the 36 studies viewed
 as negative by the FDA, only 14 were published. Publication bias
 of this magnitude can seriously bias effect estimates. 

 Example 5: Funnel plots to
 detect publication bias 

 In A, the circles represent the
 point estimates of the trials. The pattern of distribution
 resembles an inverted funnel. Larger studies tend to be closer to
 the pooled estimate (the dashed line). In this case, the effect
 sizes of the smaller studies are more or less symmetrically
 distributed around the pooled estimate. 

 In B, publication bias is
 detected. This funnel plot shows that the smaller studies are not
 symmetrically distributed around either the point estimate
 (dominated by the larger trials) or the results of the larger
 trials themselves. The trials expected in the bottom right
 quadrant are missing. One possible explanation for this set of
 results is publication bias - an overestimate of the treatment
 effect relative to the underlying truth. 

 Example 6: Publication bias
 detected 

 A number of small trials from a
 systematic review of oxygen therapy in patients with chronic
 obstructive pulmonary disease showed that the intervention
 improved exercise capacity, but evaluation of the data suggested
 publication bias. 

 The funnel plot of exercise
 distance shows distance on the x-axis and variance on the y-axis.
 The red dots represent the mean differences of individual trial
 estimates and the dotted line the point estimate of the mean
 effect indicating benefit from oxygen treatment. The distribution
 of these dots to the right of the dotted line suggests that there
 may be the equivalent number of ’negative’ trials that have not
 been included in this analysis. Thus, one may downgrade the
 quality of evidence in this case due to uncertainty resulting
 from asymmetry in the pattern of results. 

 Example 8: Publication bias
 undetected 

 A systematic review of parenteral
 anticoagulation for prolonged survival in patients with cancer
 who had no other indication for anticoagulation shows five RCTs
 which are symmetrically distributed around the best estimate of
 effect. Publication bias is undetected in this scenario and thus
 the evidence should not be downgraded. 

 When to downgrade the quality
 of evidence because of suspicion of publication
 bias 

 Guideline panels and authors of
 systematic reviews should consider the extent to which they
 are uncertain about the magnitude of the effect due to selective
 publication of studies and they may downgrade the quality of
 evidence by one level. Consider: 

 study design (experimental
 vs. observational) 

 study size (small studies
 vs. large studies) 

 lag bias (early publication
 of positive results) 

 search strategy (was it
 comprehensive?) 

 asymmetry in funnel
 plot. 

 5.3. Factors that can increase the
 quality of the evidence 

 Consideration of factors reducing
 quality of evidence must precede consideration of reasons for rating it up. Thus,
 consideration of all our previously presented criteria for rating down certainty of evidence (risk of bias, imprecision, inconsistency, indirectness, and publication bias)
must precede
 consideration of reasons for rating it up. The decision to rate up should only rarely be made if serious limitations are present in any of these areas. In particular, decisions to rate up because of large or very large effects should consider not only the
 point estimate but also the width of the CI around that estimate of an effect: one should rarely rate up for large effects if the CI overlaps substantially with effects smaller than the chosen threshold.

 The following sections discuss in detail the 3 factors
 that permit rating up the quality of evidence, i.e. increase confidence in an estimate of an effect. Using the GRADE framework, body of evidence from observational studies is initially classified as low quality evidence (i.e. permitting low confidence in the
 estimated effect). There are times, however, when we have high confidence in the estimate of effect from observational studies (including cohort, case-control, before-after, time series studies, etc.) and to non-randomized experimental studies (e.g. quasi-randomized
 and non-randomized controlled trials). The circumstances under which the body of evidence from observational studies may provide higher than low confidence in the estimated effects will likely occur infrequently.

 Note: Although
 it is theoretically possible to rate up results from randomized control trials, we have yet to find a compelling example of such an instance. 

 5.3.1 Large magnitude of an
 effect 

 When body of evidence from
 observational studies not downgraded for any of the 5 factors
 yield large or very large estimates of the magnitude of an
 intervention effect, then we may be more confident about the
 results. In those situations, even though observational studies
 are likely to provide an overestimate of the true effect, the
 study design that is more prone to bias is unlikely to explain
 all of the apparent benefit (or harm). Decisions to rate up
 quality of evidence because of large or very large effects (Table
 5.9) should consider not only the point estimate but also the
 precision (width of the CI) around that effect: one should rarely
 and very cautiously rate up quality of evidence because of
 apparent large effects, if the CI overlaps substantially with
 effects smaller than the chosen threshold of clinical
 importance. 

 Table 5.9.
 Definitions of large and very large effect 

 Magnitude of
 Effect 

 Definition 

 Quality of
 Evidence 

 Large 

 RR* >2 or
 <0.5 

 (based on direct evidence,
 with no plausible confounders) 

 may increase 1
 level 

 Very large 

 RR* >5 or
 <0.2 

 (based on direct evidence
 with no serious problems with risk of bias or precision,
 i.e. with (sufficiently narrow confidence
 intervals) 

 may increase 2
 levels 

 * Note: these rules apply
 when effect measure is expressed as relative risk (RR) or
 hazard ratio (HR). They cannot always be applied when the
 effect measure is expressed as odds ratio (OR). We
 suggest converting OR to RR and only then assessing the
 magnitude of an effect. 

 One may be more likely to rate up
 the quality of evidence because of large or very large magnitude
 of an effect, when: 

 effect is rapid 

 effect is consistent across
 subjects 

 previous trajectory of
 disease is reversed 

 large magnitude of an
 effect is supported by indirect evidence 

 Note: When outcomes are subjective it is important to be
 cautious when considering upgrading because of observed large
 effects. This is especially true when outcome assessors were
 aware which group study subjects belonged to (i.e. were not
 blinded). 

 Examples 

 A systematic review of
 observational studies examining the relationship between infant
 sleeping position and sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) found
 an odds ratio of 4.1 (95% CI: 3.1, 5.5) of SIDS occurring with
 front vs. back sleeping positions. Furthermore, “back to sleep”
 campaigns that were started in the 1980s to encourage back
 sleeping position were associated with a relative decline in the
 incidence of SIDS by 50-70% in numerous countries. 

 5.3.2. Dose-response
 gradient 

 The presence of a dose-response
 gradient has long been recognized as an important criterion for
 believing a putative cause-effect relationship. The presence of
 a dose-response
 gradient may increase our confidence
 in the findings of observational studies and thereby increase the
 quality of evidence. 

 Example 1: Dose-response gradient
 (Upgraded by One Level) 

 The observation that, in patients
 receiving anticoagulation with warfarin, there is a dose response
 gradient between higher levels of the international normalized
 ratio (INR), an indicator of the degree of anticoagulation, and
 an increased risk of bleeding increases our confidence that
 supratherapeutic anticoagulation levels increase bleeding
 risk. 

 Example 2: Dose-response gradient
 (Upgraded by One Level) 

 The dose-response gradient
 associated with the rapidity of antibiotic administration in
 patients presenting with sepsis and hypotension may also be a
 reason to upgrade the quality of evidence for such a study. There
 is a large absolute increase in mortality with each hour’s delay
 of antibiotic administration. This dose-response relationship
 increases our confidence that the effect on mortality is real and
 substantial leading to upgrading the quality of the
 evidence. 

 5.3.3. Effect of plausible residual
 confounding 

 On
 occasion, all plausible residual
 confounding from observational
 studies may be working to reduce
 the demonstrated effect or increase the
 effect, if no effect was observed . 

 Rigorous observational studies
 will accurately measure prognostic factors associated with the
 outcome of interest and will conduct an adjusted analysis that
 accounts for differences in the distribution of these factors
 between intervention and control groups. The reason that in most
 instances we consider observational studies as providing only
 low-quality evidence is that unmeasured or unknown determinants of outcome 
 unaccounted for in the adjusted analysis
 are likely to be distributed
 unequally between intervention and
 control groups, referred to as “residual confounding” or
 “residual biases.” 

 On occasion, all plausible
 confounders (biases) from observational studies unaccounted for
 in the adjusted analysis (i.e. residual confounders) of a
 rigorous observational study would result in an underestimate of
 an apparent treatment effect. If, for instance, only sicker
 patients receive an experimental intervention or exposure, yet
 they still fare better, it is likely that the actual intervention
 or exposure effect is even larger than the data suggest. A
 parallel situation exists when observational studies have failed
 to demonstrate an association. 

 Example 1: When confounding is
 expected to reduce a demonstrated effect (Upgraded by One
 Level) 

 A rigorous systematic review of
 observational studies including a total of 38 million patients
 demonstrated higher death rates in private for-profit versus
 private not-for-profit hospitals. It is likely, however, that
 patients in the not-for-profit hospitals were sicker than those
 in the for-profit hospitals. This would bias results against the
 not-for-profit hospitals. The second likely bias was the
 possibility that higher numbers of patients with excellent
 private insurance coverage could lead to a hospital having more
 resources and a spill-over effect that would benefit those
 without such coverage. Since for-profit hospitals are likely to
 admit a larger proportion of such well-insured patients than
 not-for-profit hospitals, the bias is once again against the
 not-for-profit hospitals. Because the plausible biases would all
 diminish the demonstrated intervention effect, one might consider
 the evidence from these observational studies as moderate rather
 than low quality. 

 Example 2: When confounding is
 expected to reduce a demonstrated effect (Upgraded by One
 Level) 

 In a systematic review
 investigating the use of condoms in homosexual male relationships
 as a way of preventing the spread of HIV, five observational
 studies were identified. The pooled estimate was a relative risk
 of 0.34 (95%, 0.21 – 0.54) in favour of condom use. The authors
 failed to adjust in the analysis for the fact that condom users
 are more likely to have more partners than non-condom users. One
 would expect that more partners would have increased the risk of
 acquiring HIV and therefore reduced the resulting relative risk
 of HIV infection. Therefore, the confidence in this effect, which
 is still large, would lead to upgrading by one level. 

 Example 3: When confounding is
 expected to increase the effect but no effect was observed
 (Upgraded by One Level) 

 The hypoglycaemic drug phenformin
 causes lactic acidosis, and the related agent metformin is under
 suspicion for the same toxicity. Very large observational studies
 have failed to demonstrate an association between metformin and
 lactic acidosis. Given the likelihood that clinicians would have
 been more alert to lactic acidosis with metformin and would have
 therefore over-reported its occurrence, and that no association
 was found, one could upgrade this evidence. 

 Example 4: When confounding is
 expected to increase the effect but no effect was observed
 (Upgraded by One Level) 

 Consider the early reports
 associating MMR vaccination with autism. One would think that
 there would be over-reporting of autism in children given MMR
 vaccines. However, systematic reviews failed to prove any
 association between the two. Due to the negative results, despite
 the potential presence of confounders which would increase the
 likelihood of reporting of autism, no association was found.
 Therefore, we may upgrade the level of evidence by one
 level. 

 5.4 Overall quality of
 evidence 

 The overall quality of
 evidence is a combined rating of the
 quality of evidence across all outcomes considered critical for
 answering a health care question (i.e. making a decision or a
 recommendation). 

 We caution against a mechanistic
 approach toward the application of the criteria for rating the
 quality of the evidence up or down. Although GRADE suggests the
 initial separate consideration of five categories of reasons for
 rating down the quality of evidence, and three categories for
 rating it up, with a yes/no decision regarding rating up or down
 in each case, the final rating of overall evidence quality occurs
 in a continuum of confidence in the estimates of
 effects. 

 For authors of systematic
 reviews: 

 Authors of systematic
 reviews do not grade the overall
 quality of evidence across outcomes.
 Because systematic reviews do not – or at least should not – make
 recommendations, authors of systematic reviews rate the quality
 of evidence only for each outcome separately. 

 For guideline panels and
 others making recommendations: 

 Guideline
 panels have to determine the
 overall quality of evidence across
 all the critical outcomes essential to a recommendation they
 make. Guideline panels provide a single grade of quality of
 evidence for every recommendation, but the strength of a
 recommendation usually depends on evidence regarding not just
 one, but a number of patient-important outcomes and on the
 quality of evidence for each of these outcomes. 

 Because the GRADE approach rates
 quality of evidence separately for each outcome, it is frequently
 the case that quality differs across outcomes. When determining
 the overall quality of evidence across outcomes: 

 Consider only those outcomes that
 have been deemed critical . 

 If the quality od evidence
 is the same for all critical outcomes, then this becomes the
 overall quality of the evidence supporting the answer to the
 question. 

 If the quality of
 evidence differs across critical outcomes, it is logical that the
 overall confidence in effect estimates cannot be higher than
 the lowest confidence in effect estimates for any outcome that
 is critical for a decision. Therefore,
 the lowest quality of
 evidence for any of the critical
 outcomes determines the overall quality of
 evidence. 

 Example 1: Rating overall quality
 of evidence based on the importance of outcomes 

 Several systematic reviews of
 high-quality randomised trials suggest a decrease in the
 incidence of infections and, likely, the mortality of ventilated
 patients in intensive care units receiving selective digestive
 decontamination (SDD). The quality of evidence on the effect of
 SDD on the emergence of bacterial antibiotic resistance and its
 clinical relevance is much less clear. One might reasonably grade
 the evidence about this feared potential adverse effect as low
 quality. If those making a recommendation felt that these
 downsides of therapy were critical, the overall grade of the
 quality of evidence for SDD would be low. If guideline panel felt
 that the emergence of bacterial antibiotic resistance was
 important but not critical, the grade for an overall quality of
 evidence would be high. 

 However, which outcomes are
 critical may depend on the evidence. On occasion, the overall
 confidence in effect estimates may not come from the outcomes
 judged critical at the beginning of the guideline development
 process – judgments about which outcomes are critical to the
 decision (recommendation) may change when considering the
 results. Note that such judgments require careful consideration
 and are probably rare. 

 There are 2 prototypical
 situations in which an outcome initially considered critical may
 cease to be critical once the evidence is summarized: 

 An outcome turns out to
 be not relevant (e.g. a particular adverse event may be considered
 critical at the outset of the guideline process but, if it
 turns out that the event occurs very infrequently, the final
 decision may be that this adverse effect is important but not
 critical to the recommendation). 

 An outcome turns out to
 be not necessary if, across the range of possible effects of the
 intervention on that outcome, the recommendation and its
 strength would remain unchanged. If there is higher quality of
 evidence for some critical outcomes to support a decision, then
 one need not rate down quality of evidence because of lower
 confidence in estimates of effects on other critical outcomes
 that support the same recommendation. 

 For instance, consider the
 following question: should statins vs. no statins be used in
 individuals without documented coronary heart disease but at high
 risk of cardiovascular events? Guideline developers are likely to
 start the process by considering outcomes: death from
 cardiovascular causes, myocardial infarction, stroke, and adverse
 effects, as critical to the decision. 

 A systematic review or
 randomized trials demonstrated consistent reductions in
 myocardial infarctions and stroke but nonsignificant reductions
 in coronary deaths. Serious adverse effects were unusual and
 readily reversible with drug discontinuation. The guideline
 authors found that for three of the four outcomes (myocardial
 infarction, stroke, and adverse effects) there was high quality
 evidence. For coronary deaths evidence was of moderate quality
 because of imprecision. 

 Should the overall quality of
 evidence across outcomes be high or moderate? The judgments made
 at the beginning of the process suggest that the answer is
 "moderate". However, once it is established that the risk of
 myocardial infarction and stroke decreases with statins, most
 people would find compelling reason to use statins. Knowing
 whether coronary mortality also decreases is no longer necessary
 for the decision (as long as it is very unlikely that it
 increases). Considering this, the overall rating of quality of
 evidence is most appropriately designated as "high". 

 6. Going from evidence
 to recommendation 

 6.1 Recommendations and their
 strength 

 The strength of a recommendation reflects the extent to which a guideline panel
 is confident that desirable
 effects of an intervention outweigh undesirable
 effects , or vice versa, across the range
 of patients for whom the recommendation is intended. 

 GRADE
 specifies two
 categories of the strength of a
 recommendation. While GRADE suggests using the
 terms strong and weak recommendations, those
 making recommendations may choose different wording to
 characterize the two categories of strength. 

 In special cases, guideline panels
 may recommend an intervention be used only in research until more data
 is generated, which would allow for a more comprehensive
 recommendation, or not make a recommendation at all. 

 There are limitations to formal
 grading of recommendations. Like the quality of evidence, the
 balance between desirable and undesirable effects reflects a
 continuum. Some arbitrariness will therefore be associated with
 placing particular recommendations in categories such as “strong”
 and “weak.” Most organisations producing guidelines have decided
 that the merits of an explicit grade of recommendation outweigh
 the disadvantages. 

 For a guideline panel or others
 making recommendations to offer a strong recommendation they have
 to be certain about the various factors that influence the strength
 of a recommendation. The panel also should have the relevant
 information at hand that supports a clear balance towards either
 the desirable effects of an intervention (to recommend an action)
 or undesirable effects (to recommend against an
 action). 

 When a guideline panel
 is uncertain whether the balance is clear or when the relevant
 information about the various factors that influence the strength
 of a recommendation is not available, a guideline panel should be
 more cautious and in most instances it would opt to make a weak
 recommendation. 

 Figure 3: Balance scales to depict strong vs. weak
 recommendations. 

 To aid interpretation GRADE
 suggests implications of strong or weak recommendations that
 follow from the recommendations. The advantage of two categories
 of strength of recommendations is that they provide clear
 direction to patients, clinicians, and policy-makers. 

 Table 6.1.
 Implications of strong and weak recommendations for
 different users of guidelines 

 Strong
 Recommendation 

 Weak
 Recommendation 

 For
 patients 

 Most individuals in this
 situation would want the recommended course of action and
 only a small proportion would not. 

 The majority of
 individuals in this situation would want the suggested
 course of action, but many would not. 

 For
 clinicians 

 Most individuals should
 receive the recommended course of action. Adherence to
 this recommendation according to the guideline could be
 used as a quality criterion or performance indicator.
 Formal decision aids are not likely to be needed to help
 individuals make decisions consistent with their values
 and preferences. 

 Recognize that different
 choices will be appropriate for different patients, and
 that you must help each patient arrive at a management
 decision consistent with her or his values and
 preferences. Decision aids may well be useful helping
 individuals making decisions consistent with their values
 and preferences. Clinicians should expect to spend more
 time with patients when working towards a
 decision. 

 For policy
 makers 

 The recommendation can be
 adapted as policy in most situations including for the
 use as performance indicators. 

 Policy making will require
 substantial debates and involvement of many stakeholders.
 Policies are also more likely to vary between regions.
 Performance indicators would have to focus on the fact
 that adequate deliberation about the management options
 has taken place. 

 Individualization of clinical
 decision-making in weak recommendations remains a challenge.
 Although clinicians always should consider patients’ preferences
 and values, when they face weak recommendations they may have
 more detailed conversations with patients than for strong
 recommendations to ensure that the ultimate decision is
 consistent with the patient’s preferences and values. 

 Important Note: 

 Clinicians, patients, third-party
 payers, institutional review committees, other stakeholders, or
 the courts should never view
 recommendations as dictates . Even strong
 recommendations based on high-quality evidence will not apply to
 all circumstances and all patients. 

 Users of guidelines may reasonably
 conclude that following some strong recommendations based on the
 high quality evidence will be a mistake for some patients. No
 clinical practice guideline or recommendation can take into
 account all of the often compelling unique features of individual
 patients and clinical circumstances. Thus, nobody charged with
 evaluating clinician’s actions, should attempt to apply
 recommendations by rote or in a blanket fashion. 

 6.1.1 Strong
 recommendation 

 A strong recommendation is one for
 which guideline panel is confident that the desirable effects of
 an intervention outweigh its undesirable effects (strong
 recommendation for an intervention) or that the undesirable
 effects of an intervention outweigh its desirable effects (strong
 recommendation against an intervention). 

 Note: Strong recommendations are
 not necessarily high priority recommendations. 

 A strong recommendation implies
 that most or all individuals will be best served by the
 recommended course of action. 

 Example 1: Sample strong
 recommendations 

 Early anticoagulation in
 patients with deep venous thrombosis for the prevention of
 pulmonary embolism; 

 Antibiotics for the
 treatment of community acquired pneumonia; 

 Quitting smoking to prevent
 adverse consequences of tobacco smoke exposure; 

 Use of bronchodilators in
 patients with known COPD 

 6.1.2 Weak recommendation 

 A weak recommendation is one for
 which the desirable effects probably outweigh the undesirable
 effects (weak recommendation for an intervention) or undesirable
 effects probably outweigh the desirable effects (weak
 recommendation against an intervention) but appreciable
 uncertainty exists. 

 A weak recommendation implies that
 not all individuals will be best served by the recommended course
 of action. There is a need to consider more carefully than usual
 the individual patient’s circumstances, preferences, and values.
 When there are weak recommendations caregivers need to allocate
 more time to shared decision making, making sure that they
 clearly and comprehensively explain the potential benefits and
 harms to a patient. 

 Alternative names for weak
 recommendations 

 Some have been concerned with the
 term “weak recommendation” experiencing an unintended negative
 connotation with the word “weak”, often also confusing it with
 “weak” evidence. To avoid confusion, weak recommendations can
 instead be described using the terms: 

 conditional (depending on
 patient values, resources available or setting) 

 discretionary (based on
 opinion of patient or practitioner) 

 qualified (by an
 explanation regarding the issues which would lead to different
 decisions). 

 If any variations are used it is
 essential that authors exercise consistency across all
 recommendation in a guideline and across all guidelines they
 produce. 

 6.1.3 Recommendations to use
 interventions only in research 

 Promising interventions (usually
 new ones) with thus far insufficient evidence of benefit to
 support their use may be associated with appreciable harms or
 costs. Decision makers may worry about providing premature
 favorable recommendations for their use, encouraging the rapid
 diffusion of potentially ineffective or harmful interventions,
 and preventing recruitment to research already under way. They
 may be equally reluctant to recommend against such interventions
 out of fear that they will inhibit further investigation. By
 making recommendations for use of an intervention only in the
 context of research they may provide an important stimulus to
 efforts to answer important research questions, thus resolving
 uncertainty about optimal management. 

 Recommendations for using
 interventions only in research are appropriate when three
 conditions are met: 

 There is thus far
 insufficient evidence to support a decision for or against an
 intervention 

 Further research has large
 potential for reducing uncertainty about the effects of the
 intervention 

 Further research is thought
 to be of good value for the anticipated costs. 

 Recommendations for using
 interventions only in research should be accompanied by detailed
 suggestions about the specific research questions that should be
 addressed, particularly which patient-important outcomes they
 should measure. The recommendation for research may be
 accompanied by an explicit strong recommendation not to use the
 experimental intervention outside of the research
 context. 

 6.1.4 No recommendation 

 There are 3 reasons for which
 those making recommendations may be reluctant to make a
 recommendation for or against a particular management strategy,
 and also conclude that a recommendation to use the intervention
 only in research is not appropriate. 

 The confidence in effect
 estimates is so low that the panels feel a recommendation is
 too speculative (see the US Preventative Services Task Force
 discussion on the topic [Petitti 2009; PMID:
 19189910]. 

 Irrespective of the
 confidence in effect estimates, the trade-offs are so closely
 balanced, and the values and preferences and resource
 implications not known or too variable, that the panel has
 great difficulty deciding on the direction of a
 recommendation. 

 Two management options have
 very different undesirable consequences, and individual
 patients’ reactions to these consequences are likely to be so
 different that it makes little sense to think about typical
 values and preferences. 

 The third reason requires an
 explanation. Consider adult patients with thalassemia major
 considering hematopoietic cell transplantation (possibility of
 cure but an early mortality risk of 33%) vs. continued medical
 treatment with transfusion and iron chelation (continued
 morbidity and an uncertain prognosis). A guideline panel may
 consider that in such situations the only sensible recommendation
 is a discussion between patient and physician to ascertain the
 patient’s preferences. 

 Users of guidelines, however, may
 be frustrated with the lack of guidance when the guideline panel
 fails to make a recommendation. The USPSTF states: "Decision
 makers do not have the luxury of waiting for certain evidence.
 Even though evidence is insufficient, the clinician must still
 provide advice, patients must make choices, and policy makers
 must establish policies" [Petitti 2009; PMID:
 19189910]. 

 Clinicians themselves will rarely
 explore the evidence as thoroughly as a guideline panel, nor will
 they devote as much thought to the trade-offs, or the possible
 underlying values and preferences in the population. GRADE
 encourages panels to deal with their discomfort and to make
 recommendations even when confidence in effect estimate is low
 and/or desirable and undesirable consequences are closely
 balanced. Such recommendations will inevitably be weak, and may
 be accompanied by qualifications. 

 In the unusual circumstances in
 which panels may choose not to make a recommendation, they should
 specify the reason for this decision (see above). 

 6.2 Factors determining direction and
 strength of recommendations 

 Four key factors influence the
 direction and the strength of a recommendation (Table
 6.2) 

 Table 6.2.
 Domains that contribute to the strength of a
 recommendation 

 Domain 

 Comment 

 Balance between desirable
 and undesirable outcomes (trade-offs) taking into
 account: 

 - best estimates of the
 magnitude of effects on desirable and undesirable
 outcomes 

 - importance of outcomes
 (estimated typical values and preferences) 

 The larger the differences
 between the desirable and undesirable consequences, the
 more likely a strong recommendation is warranted. The
 smaller the net benefit and the lower certainty for that
 benefit, the more likely a weak recommendation is
 warranted 

 Confidence in the
 magnitude of estimates of effect of the interventions on
 important outcomes (overall quality of evidence for
 outcomes) 

 The higher the quality of
 evidence, the more likely a strong recommendation is
 warranted 

 Confidence in values and
 preferences and their variability 

 The greater the
 variability in values and preferences, or uncertainty
 about typical values and preferences, the more likely a
 weak recommendation is warranted 

 Resource use 

 The higher the costs of an
 intervention (the more resources consumed), the less
 likely a strong recommendation is warranted 

 6.2.1 Balance of desirable and
 undesirable consequences 

 Deciding about the balance between
 desirable and undesirable outcomes ("trade-offs") one considers
 two domains: 

 1. best estimates of the magnitude
 of desirable effects and the undesirable effects (summarized in
 evidence profiles) 

 2. importance of outcomes –
 typical values that patients or a population apply to those
 outcomes (“weight” of outcomes). 

 6.2.1.1 Estimates of the magnitude of
 the desirable and undesirable effects 

 Large relative effects of an
 intervention consistently pointing in
 the same
 direction - towards desirable or
 towards undesirable effects are more likely to warrant
 a strong recommendation.
 Conversely, large relative effects of an intervention pointing
 in opposite
 directions - large desirable effects
 accompanied by large undesirable ones will lead
 to weak recommendations. 

 Large absolute effects are also
 more likely to lead to a strong recommendation, than small
 absolute effects. Baseline risk (control event rate) can
 influence the balance of desirable and undesirable outcomes.
 Large baseline risk differences will result in large
 differences in absolute effects of interventions. The strength of
 recommendations and its direction, therefore, will likely differ
 in high- and low-risk groups. 

 Examples 

 Large gradient between the
 desirable and undesirable effects (higher likelihood of a strong
 recommendation) 

 1. The very large gradient between
 the benefits of low dose aspirin on reductions in death and
 recurrent myocardial infarction and the undesirable consequences
 of minimal side effects and costs make a strong recommendation
 very likely. 

 Small gradient between the
 desirable and undesirable effects (higher likelihood of a weak
 recommendation) 

 1. Consider the choice of
 immunomodulating agents, namely cyclosporine or tacrolimus, in
 kidney transplant recipients. Tacrolimus results in better graft
 survival (a highly valued outcome), but at the important cost of
 a higher incidence of diabetes (the long-term complications of
 which can be devastating). 

 2. Patients with atrial
 fibrillation typically are more stroke averse than bleeding
 averse. If, however, the risk of stroke is sufficiently low, the
 trade-off between stroke reduction and increase in bleeding risk
 with anticoagulants is closely balanced. 

 6.2.1.2 Best estimates of values and
 preferences 

 Without considering the associated
 values and preferences, assessing large vs. small magnitude of
 effects may be misleading. Balancing the magnitude of desirable
 and undesirable outcomes requires considering weight (importance)
 of those outcomes that is determined by values and
 preferences. 

 Ideally, to inform estimates of
 typical patient values and preferences, guideline panels will
 conduct or identify systematic reviews of relevant studies of
 patient values and preferences. There is, however, paucity of
 empirical examinations of patients’ values and
 preferences. 

 Well resourced guideline panels
 will usually complement such studies with consultation with
 individual patients and patients’ groups. The panel should
 discuss whose values these people represent, namely
 representative patients, a defined subset of patients, or
 representatives of the general population. 

 Less well-resourced panels,
 without systematic reviews of values and preferences or
 consultation with patients and patient groups, must rely on
 unsystematic reviews of the available literature and their
 experience of interactions with patients. How well such estimates
 correspond to true typical values and preferences is likely to be
 uncertain. 

 Whatever the source of estimates
 of typical values and preferences, explicit, transparent
 statements of the panel’s choices are imperative (see 6.3.3
 Providing transparent statements about assumed values and
 preferences). 

 6.3.2 Confidence in best estimates of
 magnitude of effects (quality of evidence) 

 For all outcomes considered, the
 GRADE process requires a rating describing the quality of
 evidence. Ultimately, guideline authors will form their
 recommendations based on their confidence in all effect estimates
 for each outcome considered critical to their recommendation and
 the quality of evidence. Quality of evidence ratings are
 determined by the eight already discussed; the five criteria that
 result in rating down the quality of evidence (study limitations,
 inconsistency, indirectness, imprecision, and publication bias
 result in rating down the quality of evidence whereas the
 remaining three criteria, lead to an increase in evidence
 quality; large magnitude of effect, dose-response gradient and
 when all plausible biases or confounders increase our confidence
 in the estimated effect. 

 Typically, a strong recommendation
 is associated with high, or at least moderate, confidence in the
 effect estimates for critical outcomes. If one has high
 confidence in effects on some critical outcomes (typically
 benefits), but low confidence in effects on other outcomes
 considered critical (often long-term harms), then a weak
 recommendation is likely warranted. Even when an apparently large
 gradient exists in the balance of desirable vs. undesirable
 outcomes, panels will be appropriately reluctant to offer a
 strong recommendation if their confidence in effect estimates for
 some critical outcomes is low. 

 For some questions, direct
 evidence about the effects on some critical outcomes may be
 lacking (e.g. quality of life has not been measured in any
 study). In such instances, even if well measured 
 surrogates are
 available, confidence in estimates of effects on
 patient-important outcomes is very likely to be low. 

 Low confidence in effect estimates
 may, rarely, be tied to strong recommendations. In
 general, GRADE discourages guideline
 panels from making strong recommendations when their confidence
 in estimates of effect for critical outcomes is low or very
 low . GRADE has identified five
 paradigmatic situations in which strong recommendations may be
 warranted despite low or very low quality of evidence (Table 6.3).
 These situations can be conceptualized as ones in which a panel
 would have a low level of regret if subsequent evidence showed
 that their recommendation was misguided. 

 Table 6.3.
 Paradigmatic situations in which a strong recommendation
 may be warranted despite low or very low confidence in
 effect estimates 

 Condition 

 Example 

 1 

 When low quality evidence
 suggests benefit in a life threatening situation
 (evidence regarding harms can be low or high) 

 1. Fresh frozen plasma or
 vitamin K in a patient receiving warfarin with elevated
 INR and an intracranial bleed. Only low quality evidence
 supports the benefits of limiting the extent of the
 bleeding. 

 2. Amphotericin B vs.
 itraconazole in life threatening disseminated
 blastomycosis. High quality evidence suggests that
 amphotericin B is more toxic than itraconazole, and low
 quality evidence suggests that it reduces mortality in
 this context. 

 2 

 When low quality evidence
 suggests benefit and high quality evidence suggests harm
 or a very high cost 

 Head-to-toe CT/MRI
 screening for cancer. Low quality evidence of benefit of
 early detection but high quality evidence of possible
 harm and/or high cost (strong recommendation against this
 strategy) 

 3 

 When low quality evidence
 suggests equivalence of two alternatives, but high
 quality evidence of less harm for one of the competing
 alternatives 

 Helicobacter pylori
 eradication in patients with early stage gastric MALT
 lymphoma with H. pylori positive. Low quality evidence
 suggests that initial H. pylori eradication results in
 similar rates of complete response in comparison with the
 alternatives of radiation therapy or gastrectomy; high
 quality evidence suggests less harm/morbidity 

 4 

 When high quality
 evidence suggests equivalence of two alternatives and low
 quality evidence suggests harm in one
 alternative 

 Hypertension in women
 planning conception and in pregnancy. Strong
 recommendations for labetalol and nifedipine and strong
 recommendations against angiotensin converting enzyme
 (ACE) inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers (ARB)
 all agents have high quality evidence of equivalent
 beneficial outcomes, with low quality evidence for
 greater adverse effects with ACE inhibitors and
 ARBs 

 5 

 When high quality
 evidence suggests modest benefits and low/very low
 quality evidence suggests possibility of catastrophic
 harm 

 Testosterone in males
 with or at risk of prostate cancer. High quality evidence
 for moderate benefits of testosterone treatment in men
 with symptomatic androgen deficiency to improve bone
 mineral density and muscle strength. Low quality evidence
 for harm in patients with or at risk of prostate
 cancer 

 INR – international
 normalized ratio; CT – computed tomography; MRI –
 magnetic resonance imaging; MALT – mucosa-associated
 lymphoid tissue. 

 6.3.3 Confidence in values and
 preferences 

 Uncertainty concerning values and preferences or
 their variability among patients
 may lower the strength of a recommendation. 

 As noted above, systematic study
 of patients’ values and preferences are very limited. Thus,
 panels will often be uncertain about typical values and
 preferences. The greater is the uncertainty, the more likely they
 will make a weak recommendation. Given the sparse systematic
 study of patients’ values and preferences, one could argue that
 large uncertainty always exists about the patients’ perspective.
 On the other hand, clinicians’ experience with patients may
 provide considerable additional insight. Indeed, on occasion,
 panels will, on the basis of clinical experience, be confident
 regarding typical patient’s values and preferences. Pregnant
 women’s strong aversion to even a small risk of important fetal
 abnormalities may be one such situation. 

 Large variability in values and
 preferences may also make a weak recommendation more likely. In
 such situations, it is less likely that a single recommendation
 would apply uniformly across all patients, and the right course
 of action is likely to differ between patients. Again, systematic
 research about variability in values and preferences is sparse.
 On the other hand, clinical experience may leave a panel
 confident that values and preferences differ widely among
 patients. 

 Example 

 1. A hopeful patient may place
 more emphasis on a small chance of benefit, whereas a
 pessimistic, risk-averse patient may place more emphasis on
 avoiding the risks associated with a potentially beneficial
 therapy. Some patients may have a belief that even if the risk of
 an adverse event is low, they will be the person who will suffer
 such an adverse effect. For instance, in patients with idiopathic
 pulmonary fibrosis, evidence for the benefit of steroids warrants
 only low confidence, whereas we can be very confident of a wide
 range of adverse effects associated with steroids. The hopeful
 patient with pulmonary fibrosis may be enthusiastic about use of
 steroids, whereas the risk-averse patient is likely to
 decline. 

 2. Thromboprophylaxis reduces the
 incidence of venous thromboembolism in immobile, hospitalized
 severely ill medical patients. Careful thromboprophylaxis has
 minimal side effects and relatively low cost while being very
 effective at preventing deep venous thrombosis and its sequelae.
 Peoples’ values and preferences are such that virtually all
 patients admitted to a hospital would, if they understood the
 choice they were making, opt to receive some form of
 thromboprophylaxis. Those making recommendations can thus offer a
 strong recommendation for thromboprophylaxis for patients in this
 setting. 

 3. A systematic review and
 meta-analysis describes a relative risk reduction (RRR) of
 approximately 80% in recurrent DVT for prophylaxis beyond 3
 months up to one year. This large effect supports a strong
 recommendation for warfarin. Furthermore, the relatively narrow
 95% confidence interval (approximately 74 to 88%) suggests that
 warfarin provides a RRR of at least 74%, and further supports a
 strong recommendation. At the same time, warfarin is associated
 with an inevitable burden of keeping dietary intake of vitamin K
 relatively constant, monitoring the intensity of anticoagulation
 with blood tests, and living with the increased risk of both
 minor and major bleeding. It is likely, however, that most
 patients would prefer avoiding another DVT and accept the risk of
 a bleeding episode. As a result, almost all patients with high
 risk of recurrent DVT would choose taking warfarin for 3 to 12
 months, suggesting the appropriateness of a strong
 recommendation. Thereafter, there may be an appreciable number of
 patients who would reject life-long anticoagulation. 

 6.3.4 Resource use (cost) 

 Panels may or may not consider
 resource use in their judgments about the direction and strength
 of recommendations. Reasons for not considering resource use
 include a lack of reliable data, the intervention is not useful
 and the effort of calculating resource use can be spared, the
 desirable effects so greatly outweigh any undesirable effects
 that resource considerations would not alter the final judgment,
 or they have elected (or been instructed) to leave resource
 considerations up to other decision makers. Panels should be
 explicit about the decision they made not to consider resource
 utilization and the reason for their decision. 

 If they elect to include resource
 utilization when making a recommendation, but have not included
 resource use as a consequence when preparing an evidence profile,
 they should be explicit about what types of resource use they
 considered when making the recommendation and whatever logic or
 evidence was used in their judgments. 

 Cost may be considered just
 another potentially important outcome – like mortality,
 morbidity, and quality of life – associated with alternative ways
 of managing patient problems. In addition to these clinical
 outcomes, however, an intervention may increase costs or decrease
 costs. The GRADE approach recommends that important or critical
 resource use be considered alongside other relevant outcomes in
 evidence profiles and summary of findings tables. It is important
 to use natural units when presenting resource use data as these
 can be applied in any setting. 

 Special considerations when
 incorporating resources use (cost) in recommendations: 

 What are the differences
 between costs and other outcomes? 

 Which perspective to
 take? 

 Which resource implications
 to include? 

 How to make judgments about
 the quality of the evidence? 

 How to present these
 implications? 

 What is potential
 usefulness of a formal economic model? 

 How to consider resource
 use in formulating recommendations? 

 6.3.4.1 Differences between costs and
 other outcomes 

 There are several differences
 between costs and other outcomes: 

 With costs the issue of who
 pays and who gains is most prominent. 

 Attitudes about the extent
 to which costs should influence the decision differ depending
 on who bears the cost. 

 Costs tend to vary widely
 across jurisdictions and over time. 

 People have different
 perspectives on the envelope in which they are considering
 opportunity costs. 

 Resource allocation is a
 far more political issue than consideration of other
 outcomes. 

 1. With costs the issue of who pays and who gains is most
 prominent. 

 For most outcomes other than
 costs, it is clear that the patient and, secondarily, the
 patient’s family gains the advantages, and has to live with the
 disadvantages (this is not true of all outcomes – with
 vaccinations the entire community benefits from the herd effect,
 or widespread use of antibiotics may have down-stream adverse
 consequences of drug resistance). Health care costs are often
 borne by the society as a whole. Even within a society, who bears
 the cost may differ depending on the patient’s age or
 situation. 

 2. Attitudes about the extent to which costs should
 influence the decision differ depending on who bears the
 cost. 

 If costs are borne by the
 government, or a third party payer, some would argue that the
 physician’s responsibility to the patient means that costs should
 not influence the decision. On the other hand, a clinicians’
 responsibility when caring for a patient is discharged in a
 broader context: resources that are used for an intervention
 cannot be used for something else and can affect the ability of
 the health system to best meet the needs of those it
 serves. 

 3. Costs tend to vary widely across jurisdictions or even
 within jurisdictions, and over time. 

 Costs of drugs are largely
 unrelated to the costs of production of those drugs, and more to
 marketing decisions and national policies. Hospitals or health
 maintenance organizations may, for instance, negotiate special
 arrangements with pharmaceutical companies for prices
 substantially lower than are available to patients or other
 providers. Even when resource use remains the same, the resource
 implications may vary widely across jurisdictions. Costs can also
 vary widely over time (e.g. when a drug comes off patent or a
 new, cheaper technology becomes available). The large variability
 in costs over time and jurisdictions requires that guideline
 panels formulate health care questions as specific as possible
 when bringing cost into the equation. The choice of comparator
 can be a particular problem in economic analyses. If the choice
 of the comparator is inappropriate (for instance, no treatment
 rather than an alternative though less effective intervention)
 conclusions may be misleading. Even when resource use remains the
 same, the resource implications may vary widely across
 jurisdictions. A year’s supply of a very expensive drug may pay a
 nurse’s salary in the United States, six nurses’ salaries in
 Poland, and 30 nurses’ salaries in China. Thus, what one can buy
 with the resources saved if one foregoes purchase of the drug
 (the “opportunity cost”) – and the health benefits achieved with
 those expenditures - will differ to a large extent. 

 4. People have different perspectives on the envelope in
 which they are considering opportunity costs. 

 A hospital pharmacy with a fixed
 budget considering purchase of an expensive new drug will have a
 clear idea of what that purchase will mean in terms of other
 medications the pharmacy cannot afford. People often assume the
 envelope is public health spending – funding a new drug or
 program will constrain resources for other public health
 expenditures. However, one may not be sure that refraining from
 that purchase really means that equivalent resources will be
 available for the health care system. Further, one may ask if the
 public health care is spending the correct envelope. 

 5. Resource allocation is a far more political issue than
 consideration of other outcomes. 

 Whether the guideline panel does
 or does not explicitly consider resource allocation issues, those
 politics may bear on a guideline panel’s function through
 conflict of interest. 

 Despite these differences,
 approaches to cost (resource use) are similar to other
 outcomes: 

 guideline panels need to
 consider only important resource implications 

 decision makers require an
 estimate of the difference between treatment and
 control 

 guideline panels must make
 explicit judgments about the quality of evidence regarding
 incremental resource use. 

 6.3.4.2 Perspective 

 GRADE suggests that a broad
 perspective is desirable. 

 A recommendation could be intended
 for a very narrow audience, such as a single hospital pharmacy,
 an individual hospital or a health maintenance organization.
 Alternatively it could be intended for a health region, a country
 or an international audience. 

 Regardless of how narrow or broad
 the intended audience, guideline groups that choose to
 incorporate resource implications must be explicit about the
 perspective they are taking. 

 Alternatively a guideline may
 choose to take a societal perspective, and include all important
 resource implications, regardless of who bears the
 costs. 

 In a publicly funded health system
 the patient perspective would consider only resource implications
 that directly affect individual patients (e.g. out of pocket
 costs) and would ignore most of the costs generated (e.g. costs
 borne by the government). In European health care systems in
 which, for the most part, governments bear the cost of health
 care, expenses borne directly by patients will be minimal. A
 pharmacy perspective would ignore down-stream cost savings
 resulting for adverse events (e.g. stroke or myocardial
 infarction) prevented by a drug. A hospital perspective would
 ignore out-patient costs either incurred, or prevented. In the
 private sector, where disenrollment and loss of insurance can
 shift the burden of costs from one system to another, estimates
 of resource use should include the down-stream costs of all
 treated patients, not just those who remain in a particular
 health plan. 

 An even broader perspective, that
 of society, would include indirect costs or savings (e.g. lost
 wages). These are difficult to estimate and controversial because
 they assume that lost productivity will not be replaced by an
 individual who otherwise would be unemployed or underemployed,
 and implicitly place lower value on individuals not working (e.g.
 the retired). Taking a health systems perspective has another
 advantage. A comprehensive display of the resource use associated
 with alternative management strategies allows an individual or
 group – a patient, a pharmacy, or a hospital – to examine the
 relative merits of the alternatives from their particular
 perspective. 

 Clinicians seeing patients who are
 uncovered by either public or private insurance may need to help
 these individuals to make decisions taking into account their out
 of pocket costs. This is particularly true when clinical
 advantages and disadvantages are closely balanced, and there are
 substantial out of pocket costs. In these circumstances, if a
 guideline panel has used the GRADE approach and made evidence
 profiles available to the guideline users, clinicians can review
 evidence summaries and ensure that the patients’ decision to
 accept the recommended management strategy is consistent with
 their values and preferences – either though communicating the
 information directly to the patient, or by finding out what the
 patients’ situation and values and preferences are. 

 6.3.4.3 Resource implications
 considered 

 Evidence profiles and summary of
 findings tables should always present resource use, not just
 monetary values as monetary values for the same resource will
 vary depending on setting. 

 We suggest that guideline
 developers document best estimates of resource use, not best
 estimate of costs. Costs are a function of resources expended and
 the cost per unit of resource. Given the wide variability in
 costs per unit, reporting only total costs across broad
 categories of resource expenditure leaves users without the
 information required to judge whether estimates of unit costs
 apply to their setting. It is therefore recommended that natural
 units be used to estimate resource use. For example, required
 number of days stayed in hospital, the cost per night will vary
 depending on the setting. 

 Users of guidelines will be best
 informed if the guideline developers specify resources consumed
 by alternate management strategies, because they can: 

 judge whether the resource
 use reflects practice patterns in their setting 

 focus on the items of most
 relevance to them 

 ascertain whether the unit
 costs apply in their setting. 

 Unless resource use is specified,
 users in settings other than that on which the analysts focus
 cannot estimate the associated incremental costs of the
 intervention. 

 6.3.4.4 Confidence in the estimates of
 resource use (quality of the evidence about cost) 

 Evidence of resource use may come
 from different sources than evidence of health benefits. This may
 be the case both because trials of interventions do not fully
 report resource use, because the trial situation may not fully
 reflect the circumstances (thus the resource use) that we would
 expect in clinical practice, because the relevant resource use
 may extend beyond the duration of trial, and because resource use
 may vary substantially across settings. 

 For resource use that is reported
 in the context of trials, criteria for quality assessment are
 identical to that of other outcomes. Just as for other outcomes
 of a trial, the quality of evidence may differ across different
 resources. For example, drug use may be relatively easy to
 estimate, whereas use of health professionals’ time may be more
 difficult, and the estimate of drug use may therefore be of
 higher quality. 

 6.3.4.5 Presentation of resource
 use 

 A balance sheet (e.g. evidence
 profile) should inform judgments about whether the net benefits
 are worth the incremental costs. Balance sheets efficiently
 present the raw information required to make informed explicit
 judgments concerning resource use in guideline
 recommendations. However, when complex trade-off decisions
 involving several outcomes need to be made judgments may remain
 implicit or qualitatively described. 

 Pooling resource estimates from
 different studies is seldom as it can be quite controversial and
 should be carefully considered. However, authors can
 consider presenting pooled estimates of resource use when they
 are confident that the outcome in question has a common meaning
 (i.e. number of nights stayed in hospital) across the studies
 involved in analysis. Even in this case, it is recommended that
 authors adjust for geographical and temporal differences in
 cost. 

 6.3.4.6 Economic model 

 Formal economic modeling may –
 or may not - be helpful. 

 Formal economic modeling results
 in cost per unit benefit achieved: cost per natural unit, such as
 cost per stroke prevented (cost-effectiveness analysis) cost per
 quality-adjusted life year gained (cost-utility analysis) cost
 and benefits valued in monetary values (cost-benefit analysis).
 These summaries can be helpful for informing judgments.
 Unfortunately, many published cost-effectiveness analyses have a
 high probability of being flawed or biased, and are
 setting-specific. When estimates of harms, benefits and resources
 used are based on low quality evidence, transparency of the
 economic model will be reduced and the model may be
 misleading. 

 Should guideline panels
 consider developing their own formal economic model? 

 Creating an economic model may be
 advisable if: 

 guideline groups have the
 necessary expertise and resources 

 difference in resources
 consumed by the alternative management strategies is large and
 therefore there is substantial uncertainty about whether the
 net benefits of an intervention are worth the incremental
 costs 

 quality of available
 evidence regarding resource consumption is high and it is
 likely that a full economic model would help inform a
 decision 

 implementing an
 intervention requires large capital investments, such as
 building new facilities or purchasing new, expensive
 equipment. 

 Modeling – while necessary for
 taking into account complexities and uncertainties in calculating
 cost per unit benefit – reduces transparency. Any model is only
 as good as the data on which it is based. When estimates of
 benefits, harms, or resources used come from low quality
 evidence, results of any economic modeling will be highly
 speculative. 

 Although criteria to assess the
 credence to give to results from statistical models of
 cost-effectiveness or cost-utility are available, these models
 generally include a large number of assumptions and varying
 quality evidence for the estimates that are included in the
 model. For these reasons, GRADE working group recommends not
 including cost-effectiveness or cost-utility models in evidence
 profiles. These models may, however, inform judgments of a
 guideline panel, or those of governments, or third part payers
 considering whether to include an intervention among their
 programs’ benefits. 

 6.3.4.7 Consideration of resource use
 in recommendations 

 Guideline panel may choose to
 explicitly consider or not to consider resource use in
 recommendations. 

 A guideline panel may legitimately
 choose to leave considerations of resource use aside, and offer a
 recommendation solely on the basis of other advantages and
 disadvantages of the alternatives being considered. Resource
 allocation must then be considered at the level of the ultimate
 decision-maker – be it the patient and healthcare professional,
 an organization (e.g. hospital pharmacy or a health maintenance
 organization), a third party payer, or a government. Guideline
 panels should be explicit about the decision to consider or not
 to consider resource utilization. 

 If guideline panel considers
 resource use it should, prior to bringing cost into the equation,
 first decide on the quality of evidence regarding other outcomes,
 and weigh up the advantages and disadvantages. Decisions
 regarding the importance of resource use issues will flow from
 this first step. For example, resource implications may be
 irrelevant if evidence of net health benefits is lacking. If
 advantages of an intervention far outweigh disadvantages,
 resource use is less likely to be important. Resource use usually
 becomes important when advantages and disadvantages are closely
 balanced. 

 GRADE approach suggests that
 panels considering resource use should offer only a single
 recommendation taking resource use into account. Panels should
 refrain from issuing two recommendations – one not taking
 resource use into account and a second doing so. Although this
 would have the advantage of explicitness on which GRADE places a
 very high value, GRADE working group is concerned that those with
 interests in dissemination of an intervention would effectively
 use only the recommendation ignoring resource implications as a
 weapon in their battle for funds (public funds, in
 particular). 

 6.4 Presentation of
 recommendations 

 6.4.1 Wording of
 recommandations 

 Wording of a recommendation should
 offer clinicians as many indicators as possible
 for understanding and
 interpretation . 

 Recommendations should always
 answer the initial clinical question. Therefore, they should
 specify patients or
 population (characterized by the
 disease and other identifying factors) for whom the
 recommendation is intended and a
 recommended intervention as
 specifically and detailed as needed. Unless it is obvious, they
 should also specify the comparator. Sometimes, the recommendation
 may include a reference to the setting (e.g. primary or tertiary
 care, high- or low-income countries, etc.). 

 In general, it seems preferable to
 present recommendations in favor of a particular management
 approach rather than against an alternative. For instance, in
 considering the addition of aspirin to clopidogrel in patients
 who have had a stroke, it would be preferable to state: "In
 patients who have had a stroke, we suggest clopidogrel alone vs.
 adding aspirin to clopidogrel" rather than: "In patients who have
 had a stroke and are using clopidogrel, we suggest not adding
 aspirin". However, when a useless or harmful therapy is in wide
 use, recommendations against a management approach are
 appropriate. For instance, "In patients undergoing cardiac
 surgery who were not previously receiving beta blockers, we
 suggest not initiating perioperative beta blocker
 therapy". 

 Recommendations in the passive
 voice may lack clarity, therefore, GRADE suggest that guideline
 developers present recommendations in the active
 voice. 

 For strong recommendations , the
 GRADE working group has suggested adopting terminology, such as
 " we recommend ..." or " clinicians
 should ...", “clinicians should not…” or
 “Do…”, “Don’t…” 

 For weak recommendations , the GRADE
 working group has suggested less definitive wording, such as
 " we suggest ..." or " clinicians
 might ..." or “We conditionally
 recommend…” or “We make a qualified recommendation
 that…”. 

 Wording strong and weak
 recommendations is particularly important when guidelines are
 developed by international organizations and/or are intended for
 patients and clinicians in different regions, cultures,
 traditions, and usage of language. It is also crucial to
 explicitly and precisely consider wording when translating
 recommendations into different languages. Whatever terminology
 guideline panels choose to use to communicate the dichotomous
 nature of a recommendation, it is essential that they inform
 their users what the terms imply by providing the explanations as
 in Table 5.9 . 

 Misinterpretation is possible
 however strength of recommendations is expressed. We suggest
 guideline developers consider using both words and symbols (which
 may be less confusing than numbers or letters) to express
 strength of recommendations. 

 6.3.2 Symbolic
 representation 

 A variety of presentations of
 quality of evidence and strength of recommendations may be
 appropriate. Most guideline panels have used letters and numbers
 to summarize their recommendations. Because of highly variable
 use of numbers and letters by different organizations this
 presentation may be confusing. Symbolic representations of
 the quality of evidence and strength of recommendations are
 appealing in that they are not burdened with this historical
 confusion. On the other hand, clinicians seem to be very
 comfortable with numbers and letters, which are particularly
 suitable for verbal communication, so there may be good reasons
 why organizations have chosen to use them. 

 The GRADE working group has
 decided to offer preferred symbolic representations, but users of
 guidelines based on the GRADE approach will often see numbers and
 letters being used to express the quality of evidence and
 strength of a recommendation. 

 Table 6.4.
 Suggested representations of quality of evidence and
 strength of recommendations 

 Quality of
 Evidence 

 Symbol 

 Letter (varies) 

 High 

 ⨁⨁⨁⨁ 

 A 

 Moderate 

 ⨁⨁⨁ ◯ 

 B 

 Low 

 ⨁⨁ ◯◯ 

 C 

 Very low 

 ⨁ ◯◯◯ 

 D 

 Strength of
 Recommendation 

 Symbol 

 Number 

 Strong for an
 intervention 

 ↑↑ 

 1 

 Weak for an
 intervention 

 ↑? 

 2 

 Weak against an
 intervention 

 ↓? 

 2 

 Strong against an
 intervention 

 ↓↓ 

 1 

 6.4.3 Providing transparent statements
 about assumed values and preferences 

 Ideally, recommendations should be accompanied by a statement
 presenting assumptions about the values and preferences 
 that underlie recommendations. For instance, a
 guideline addressing issues of thrombosis prevention and
 treatment in pregnancy noted: "Our recommendations reflect a
 belief that most women will place a low value on avoiding the
 pain, cost, and inconvenience of heparin therapy to avoid the
 small risk of even a minor abnormality in their child associated
 with warfarin prophylaxis". 

 In addition to, or in place of,
 making such general statements, guideline panels may
 provide statements associated with
 individual recommendations , especially
 those that are particularly sensitive to values and preferences.
 In such cases authors should place statements about underlying
 values and preferences with the recommendation statement rather
 than in the accompanying text. This prominent positioning of the
 statements will make it less likely that users of guidelines miss
 the importance of the values and preference judgments. 

 Consider, for instance, two groups
 that were part of a broader guideline effort made apparently
 contradictory recommendations regarding aspirin vs. clopidogrel
 in patients with atherosclerotic vascular disease, despite using
 the same underlying evidence from a trial that enrolled both
 patients with threatened stroke and those with peripheral
 vascular disease. One group focusing on stroke prevention
 recommended clopidogrel over aspirin stating: "This
 recommendation places a relatively high value on a small absolute
 risk reduction in stroke rates, and a relatively low value on
 minimizing drug expenditures". The other group focusing on the
 peripheral vascular disease recommended aspirin over clopidogrel,
 stating: "This recommendation places a relatively high value on
 avoiding large resource expenditures to achieve small reductions
 in vascular events". These recommendations suggest opposite
 courses of action. Both are appropriate given the stated values
 and preferences, which were made explicit in qualifying
 statements accompanying each recommendation. 

 Another way to frame values and
 preferences statements that panels may want to consider is in
 terms of patients who do not share the values and preferences
 underlying the recommendation. For instance, one may say: "For
 most healthy patients with achalasia undergoing an invasive
 procedure, we suggest minimally invasive surgical myotomy rather
 than pneumatic dilatation. Patients who prefer to avoid surgery
 and the high rates of gastroesophageal reflux disease seen after
 surgery, and who are willing to accept a higher initial failure
 rate and long-term recurrence rate, can reasonably choose
 pneumatic dilatation". 

 6.5 The Evidence-to-Decision
 framework 

 Ultimately, guideline panels must
 integrate these determinants of direction and strength to make a
 strong or weak recommendation for or against an intervention.
 Table 6.2 presents the generic Evidence-to-Decision (EtD) table
 that groups making recommendations may use to facilitate decision
 making, record judgements, and document the process of going from
 evidence to the decision. Table 6.3 presents an example of EtD
 framework used in development of recommendations about the use of
 ASA in patients with atrial fibrillation ( PDF version ).

 Table 6.5. The Evidence-to-Decision
 framework 

 Criteria 

 Judgements 

 Research
 evidence 

 Additional
 considerations 

 Problem 

 Is there a problem
 priority? 

 ○ No
 ○ Probably
 no
 ○ Uncertain
 ○ Probably
 yes
 ○ Yes
 ○ Varies

 Benefits & harms of
 the options 

 What is the overall
 certainty of this evidence? 

 ○ No included studies
 ○ Very
 low
 ○ Low
 ○ Moderate
 ○ High

 The relative
 importance or values of the main outcomes of
 interest: 

 Outcome 

 Relative
 importance 

 Certainty of
 the evidence (GRADE) 

 Outcome
 1 

 CRITICAL 

 ⨁⨁⨁⨁ 

 HIGH 

 Outcome
 2 

 CRITICAL 

 ⨁⨁⨁ ◯ 

 MODERATE 

 Summary of
 findings : intervention
 C 

 Outcome 

 Without
 intervention I 

 With intervention
 I 

 Difference
 (95% CI) 

 Relative
 effect (RR) (95% CI) 

 Outcome
 1 

 61 per
 1000 

 37 per
 1000

 (25 to 49) 

 25 fewer per
 1000(from 12 fewer to 37 fewer) 

 RR
 0.6 

 (0.4 to 0.8) 

 Outcome
 2 

 108 per
 1000 

 99 per
 1000

 (80 to 134) 

 9 fewer per
 1000(from 26 more to 28 fewer) 

 RR
 0.92 

 (0.74 to 1.24) 

 Is there important
 uncertainty about how much people value the main
 outcomes? 

 ○ Important uncertainty or
 variability
 ○ Possibly important
 uncertainty or variability
 ○ Probably no
 important uncertainty of
 variability
 ○ No important
 uncertainty of variability
 ○ No known
 undesirable

 Are the desirable
 anticipated effects large? 

 ○ No
 ○ Probably
 no
 ○ Uncertain
 ○ Probably
 yes
 ○ Yes
 ○ Varies

 Are the undesirable
 anticipated effects small? 

 ○ No
 ○ Probably
 no
 ○ Uncertain
 ○ Probably
 yes
 ○ Yes
 ○ Varies

 Are the desirable
 effects large relative to undesirable effects? 

 ○ No
 ○ Probably
 no
 ○ Uncertain
 ○ Probably
 yes
 ○ Yes
 ○ Varies

 Resource use 

 Are the resources
 required small? 

 ○ No
 ○ Probably
 no
 ○ Uncertain
 ○ Probably
 yes
 ○ Yes
 ○ Varies

 Is the incremental
 cost small relative to the net benefits? 

 ○ No
 ○ Probably
 no
 ○ Uncertain
 ○ Probably
 yes
 ○ Yes
 ○ Varies

 Equity 

 What would be the
 impact on health inequities? 

 ○ Increased
 ○ Probably
 increased
 ○ Uncertain
 ○ Probably
 reduced
 ○ Reduced
 ○ Varies

 Acceptability 

 Is the option
 acceptable to key stakeholders? 

 ○ No
 ○ Probably
 no
 ○ Uncertain
 ○ Probably
 yes
 ○ Yes
 ○ Varies

 Feasibility 

 Is the option
 feasible to implement? 

 ○ No
 ○ Probably
 no
 ○ Uncertain
 ○ Probably
 yes
 ○ Yes
 ○ Varies

 Evidence to Decisions
 Framework: explanations 

 Purpose of the
 framework 

 The purpose of this framework is
 to help panels developing guidelines move from evidence to
 recommendations. It is intended to: 

 Inform panel members’
 judgements about the pros and cons of each option
 (intervention) that is considered 

 Ensure that important
 factors that determine a recommendation (criteria) are
 considered 

 Provide a concise summary
 of the best available research evidence to inform judgements
 about each criterion 

 Help structure discussion
 and identify reasons for disagreements 

 Make the basis for
 recommendations transparent to guideline users 

 Development of the
 framework 

 The framework is being developed
 as part of the 
 DECIDE project using an
 iterative process informed by the 
 GRADE approach for going from
 evidence to clinical recommendations, a review of relevant
 literature, brainstorming, feedback from stakeholders,
 application of the framework to examples, a survey of
 policymakers, user testing, and trials. DECIDE (Developing
 and Evaluating Communication Strategies to Support Informed
 Decisions and Practice Based on Evidence) is a 5-year project
 (running from January 2011 to 2015) co-funded by the European
 Commission under the Seventh Framework Programme. DECIDE’s
 primary objective is to improve the dissemination of
 evidence-based recommendations by building on the work of the
 GRADE Working Group to develop and evaluate methods that address
 the targeted dissemination of guidelines. 

 Description of the
 framework 

 The framework includes a 
 table with the
 following columns: 

 Criteria (factors that
 should be considered) for health system or public health
 recommendations 

 Judgements that the panel
 members must make in relation to each criterion, which may
 include draft judgements suggested by the people who have
 prepared the framework 

 Research
 evidence to inform each of those
 judgements, which may include links to more detailed summaries
 of the evidence 

 Additional
 considerations to inform or
 justify each judgement 

 The framework also includes the
 following conclusions that the panel
 members must reach, which may include draft conclusions suggested
 by the people who have prepared the framework: 

 The balance of consequences of
 the option being considered in relation to the alternative
 (comparison) 

 The type of recommendation (against the option, for considering the option
 under specified conditions, or for the option) 

 The recommendation in concise,
 clear and actionable text 

 The justification for the
 recommendation, flowing from the judgements in relation to the
 criteria 

 Any important 
 subgroups considerations that may be relevant to guideline users 

 Key implementation considerations (in addition to any that are specified in the
 recommendation), including strategies to address any concerns
 about the acceptability and feasibility of the
 option 

 Suggestions for 
 monitoring and
 evaluation if the option is implemented, including any important
 indicators that should be monitored and any needs for a pilot
 study or impact evaluation 

 Any key research
 priorities to address important
 uncertainties in relation to any of the criteria 

 Flexibility 

 The framework is flexible.
 Organisations may elect to modify the terminology (and language)
 that is used, the criteria, the response options and guidance for
 using the framework to ensure that the framework is fit for
 purpose. 

 Use of the
 framework 

 Suggestions for how to use the
 framework are provided in: Framework for going from evidence to a
 recommendation – Guidance for health system and public health
 recommendations, including
 suggestions for preparing frameworks, supporting use of the
 framework by guideline panels, and using the framework to support
 well-informed decisions by guideline users. 

 The final recommendation made by
 the guideline panel is a consensus based on the judgements of the
 panel members, informed by the evidence presented in the
 framework and the panel members’ expertise and
 experience. 

 Explanations of the criteria
 in the framework 

 Why these criteria? 

 The criteria included in the
 framework are ones that have emerged from our literature review,
 brainstorming, feedback from stakeholders, application of the
 framework to examples, a survey of policymakers and user testing.
 It is possible that we will make further modifications based on
 continuing feedback, applications of the framework and user
 testing. Guideline developers may also want to make
 modifications, such as adding or removing criteria that are or
 are not important for them to consider. However, there is clear
 and consistent support for routinely including all of these
 criteria and, up to now, a lack of clear and consistent support
 for including other potential criteria . 

 Detailed judgements 

 The judgements that need to be
 made are sometimes complex. Guideline panels are likely to find
 it helpful to make and record detailed judgements for some
 criteria using tables for detailed
 judgements . This includes, for example,
 detailed judgements about the size of the effect for each
 outcome, the certainty of the evidence of the relative importance
 of the outcomes and resource use, and important subgroup
 considerations. Some criteria could be split into two or more
 separate criteria and some panels may elect to do this in order
 to highlight key considerations that are of particular importance
 for their guidelines. For example, there are several reasons why
 an option may not be acceptable to key stakeholders and these
 could potentially be considered as separate criteria. 

 From whose
 perspective? 

 Guideline panels should
 explicitly state the perspective that they are taking when making
 recommendations. This is especially important for determining
 which costs (resource use) to consider. It can also influence
 which outcomes and whose values are considered. For example,
 out-of-pocket costs are important from the perspective of an
 individual patient, whereas costs to the government are important
 from the perspective of the government. Health system and public
 health decisions are made on behalf of a population and a broad
 perspective is required. However, because of their mandate, some
 panels might take the perspective of the ministry of health or
 health department, whereas other panels might take a societal
 perspective (including all costs, regardless of who pays). Other
 perspectives (the distribution of the benefits, harms and costs)
 should be taken when considering the acceptability of the option
 to key stakeholders. 

 Large or small compared to
 what? 

 Some of the criteria imply a
 comparison; for example, the size of effects or resource
 requirements compared to
 what ? The comparisons or standards that
 are used are likely to be different for different organisations,
 guideline panels and jurisdictions. Some organisations or
 guideline panels may elect to specify the comparisons or
 standards that they will use. In the absence of such specified
 comparisons, guideline panel members should consider what their
 comparisons or standards are when they disagree, for example,
 about whether resource requirements are large. When the
 comparison being used is the source of their disagreement, they
 should agree on an appropriate comparison and include this as an
 additional consideration in the framework when it is
 relevant. 

 Guidance for making
 judgements 

 Suggestions for how to make
 judgements in relation to each criterion are provided in 
 Framework for going
 from evidence to a recommendation – Guidance for health system
 and public health recommendations. 

 For each criterion there are four
 or five response options, from those that favour a recommendation
 against the option on the left to ones that favour a
 recommendation for the option on the right. In addition, most of
 the options include varies as a response option
 for situations when there is important variation across different
 settings for which the guidelines are intended and those
 differences are substantial enough
 that they might lead to different recommendations for different
 settings. 

 Questions to consider for each
 criterion and their relationship to a recommendation 

 For each criterion we suggest one
 or more detailed questions to consider when making a judgement
 and explain the relationship between the criterion and the
 recommendation. 

 Criteria 

 Questions 

 Explanations 

 Is the problem a
 priority? 

 Are the consequences of
 the problem serious (i.e. severe or important in terms of
 the potential benefits or savings)? Is the problem
 urgent? Is it a recognised priority (e.g. based on a
 national health plan)? Are a large number of people
 affected by the problem? 

 The more serious a
 problem is, the more likely it is that an option that
 addresses the problem should be a priority (e.g.,
 diseases that are fatal or disabling are likely to be a
 higher priority than diseases that only cause minor
 distress). The more people who are affected, the more
 likely it is that an option that addresses the problem
 should be a priority. 

 Is there important
 uncertainty about how much people value the main
 outcomes? 

 How much do those
 affected by the option value each of the outcomes in
 relation to the other outcomes (i.e. what is the relative
 importance of the outcomes)? Is there evidence to support
 those value judgements, or is there evidence of
 variability in those values that is large enough to lead
 to different decisions? 

 The more likely it is
 that differences in values would lead to different
 decisions, the less likely it is that there will be a
 consensus that an option is a priority (or the more
 important it is likely to be to obtain evidence of the
 values of those affected by the option). Values in this
 context refer to the relative importance of the outcomes
 of interest (how much people value each of those
 outcomes). These values are sometimes called ‘utility
 values’. 

 What is the overall
 certainty 1 of the
 evidence of
 effectiveness? 

 What is the overall
 certainty of this evidence of effects, across all of the
 outcomes that are critical to making a
 decision? 

 The less certain the
 evidence is for critical outcomes (those that are driving
 a recommendation), the less likely that an option should
 be recommended (or the more important it is likely to be
 to conduct a pilot study or impact evaluation, if it is
 recommended). 

 How substantial are
 the desirable anticipated effects? 

 How substantial
 (large)are the desirable anticipated effects (including
 health and other benefits) of the option (taking into
 account the severity or importance of the desirable
 consequences and the number of people
 affected)? 

 The larger the benefit,
 the more likely it is that an option should be
 recommended. 

 How substantial are
 the undesirable anticipated effects? 

 How substantial (large)
 are the undesirable anticipated effects (including harms
 to health and other harms) of the option (taking into
 account the severity or importance of the adverse effects
 and the number of people affected)? 

 The greater the harm,
 the less likely it is that an option should be
 recommended. 

 Do the desirable
 effects outweigh the undesirable effects? 

 Are the desirable effects
 large relative to the undesirable effects? 

 The larger the desirable
 effects in relation to the undesirable effects, taking
 into account the values of those affected (i.e. the
 relative value they attach to the desirable and
 undesirable outcomes) the more likely it is that an
 option should be recommended. 

 How large are the
 resource requirements? 

 How large an investment
 of resources would the option require or save? 

 The greater the cost,
 the less likely it is that an option should be a
 priority. Conversely, the greater the savings, the more
 likely it is that an option should be a
 priority. 

 How large is the
 incremental cost relative to the net benefit? 

 Is the cost small
 relative to the net benefits (benefits minus
 harms)? 

 The greater the cost
 per unit of benefit, the less likely it is that an option
 should be a priority. 

 What would be the
 impact on health inequities? 

 Would the option reduce
 or increase health inequities? 

 Policies or programmes
 that reduce inequities are more likely to be a priority
 than ones that do not (or ones that increase
 inequities). 

 Is the option
 acceptable to key stakeholders? 

 Are key stakeholders
 likely to find the option acceptable (given the relative
 importance they attach to the desirable and undesirable
 consequences of the option; the timing of the benefits,
 harms and costs; and their moral values)? 

 The less acceptable an
 option is to key stakeholders, the less likely it is that
 it should be recommended, or if it is recommended, the
 more likely it is that the recommendation should include
 an implementation strategy to address concerns about
 acceptability. Acceptability might reflect who benefits
 (or is harmed) and who pays (or saves); and when the
 benefits, adverse effects, and costs occur (and the
 discount rates of key stakeholders; e.g. politicians may
 have a high discount rate for anything that occurs beyond
 the next election). Unacceptability may be due to some
 stakeholders: 

 Not accepting the
 distribution of the benefits, harms and
 costs 

 Not accepting
 costs or undesirable effects in the short term for
 desirable effects (benefits) in the future 

 Attaching more
 value (relative importance) to the undesirable
 consequences than to the desirable consequences or
 costs of an option (because of how they might be
 affected personally or because of their perceptions of
 the relative importance of consequences for
 others) 

 Morally
 disapproving (i.e. in relationship to ethical
 principles such as autonomy, nonmaleficence,
 beneficence or justice) 

 Is the option
 feasible to implement? 

 Can the option be
 accomplished or brought about? 

 The less feasible
 (capable of being accomplished or brought about) an
 option is, the less likely it is that it should be
 recommended (i.e. the more barriers there are that would
 be difficult to overcome). 

 1 The “certainty of the evidence” is an assessment the
 likelihood that the effect will be substantially different from
 what the research found. 

 Explanations of the
 conclusions in the framework 

 Suggestions for how to make
 judgements in relation to each conclusion are provided in: 
 Framework for going from evidence to a
 recommendation – Guidance for health system and public health
 recommendations . For each conclusion, we
 suggest one or more questions to consider when making a judgement
 and explain what is needed. 

 Term 

 Question 

 Explanation 

 Overall judgement
 across all criteria 

 What is the overall
 balance between all the desirable and undesirable
 consequences? 

 An overall judgement
 whether the desirable consequences outweigh the
 undesirable consequences, or vice versa (based on all the
 research evidence and additional information considered
 in relation to all the criteria). Consequences include
 health and other benefits, adverse effects and other
 harms, resource use, and impacts on equity 

 Type of
 recommendation 

 Based on the balance of
 the consequences in relation to all of the criteria in
 the framework, what is your recommendation? 

 A recommendation based
 on the balance of consequences and your judgements
 in relation to all of the criteria, for
 example: 

 Not to implement
 the option 

 To consider the
 option only in the context of rigorous
 research 

 To consider the
 option only with specified monitoring and
 evaluation 

 To consider the
 option only in specified contexts 

 To implement the
 option 

 Recommendation
 (text) 

 What is your
 recommendation in plain language? 

 A concise, clear and
 actionable recommendation 

 Justification 

 What is the
 justification for the recommendation, based on the
 criteria in the framework that drove the
 recommendation? 

 A concise summary of the
 reasoning underlying the recommendation 

 Subgroup
 considerations 

 What, if any, subgroups
 were considered and what, if any, specific factors (based
 on the criteria in the framework) should be considered in
 relation to those subgroups when implementing the
 option? 

 A concise summary of the
 subgroups that were considered and any modifications of
 the recommendation in relation to any of those
 subgroups 

 Implementation 

 considerations 

 What should be considered
 when implementing the option, including strategies to
 address concerns about acceptability and
 feasibility? 

 Key considerations,
 including strategies to address concerns about
 acceptability and feasibility, when implementing the
 option 

 Monitoring and
 evaluation considerations 

 What indicators should be
 monitored? Is there a need to evaluate the impacts of the
 option, either in a pilot study or an impact evaluation
 carried out alongside or before full implementation of
 the option? 

 Any important indicators
 that should be monitored if the option is
 implemented 

 Research
 priorities 

 Are there any important
 uncertainties in relation to any of the criteria that are
 a priority for further research? 

 Any research
 priorities 

 Explanations of terms used in
 summaries of findings 

 Term 

 Explanation 

 Outcomes 

 These are all the 
 outcomes (potential benefits or harms) that are
 considered to be important to those
 affected by the intervention, and which are important to
 making a recommendation or decision. Consultation with
 those affected by an intervention (such as patients and
 their carers) or other members of the public may be used
 to select the important
 outcomes . A review of the
 literature may also be carried out to inform the
 selection of the important outcomes. The importance
 (or value) of each outcome in relation to the other
 outcomes should also be considered. This is the 
 relative importance of the
 outcome. 

 95% Confidence
 Interval (CI) 

 A confidence interval is a range around an estimate that conveys
 how precise the estimate is. The confidence interval is a
 guide to how sure we can be about the quantity we are
 interested in. The narrower the range between the two
 numbers, the more confident we can be about what the true
 value is; the wider the range, the less sure we can be.
 The width of the confidence interval reflects the extent
 to which chance may be responsible for the observed
 estimate (with a wider interval reflecting more
 chance). 95% Confidence
 Interval (CI) means that we can be
 95 percent confident that the true size of effect is
 between the lower and upper confidence limit. Conversely,
 there is a 5 percent chance that the true effect is
 outside of this range. 

 Relative Effect or
 RR (Risk Ratio) 

 Here the 
 relative effect is expressed as a risk ratio (RR). Risk is the probability of an outcome
 occurring. A risk
 ratio is the 
 ratio between the risk in the intervention group
 and the risk in the control group. For example, if the
 risk in the intervention group is 1% (10 per 1000) and
 the risk in the control group is 10% (100 per 1000), the
 relative effect is 10/100 or 0.10. If the RR is exactly
 1.0, this means that there is no difference between the
 occurrence of the outcome in the intervention and the
 control group. If the RR is greater than 1.0, the
 intervention increases the risk of the outcome. If it is
 a good outcome (for example, the birth of a healthy
 baby), a RR greater than 1.0 indicates a desirable effect
 for the intervention. Whereas, if the outcome is bad (for
 example, death) a RR greater than 1.0 would indicate an
 undesirable effect. If the RR is less than 1.0, the
 intervention decreases the risk of the outcome. This
 indicates a desirable effect, if it is a bad outcome (for
 example, death) and an undesirable effect if it is a good
 outcome (for example, birth of a healthy
 baby). 

 Certainty of the
 evidence (GRADE)2 

 The certainty of the evidence is an assessment of how good an indication
 the research provides of the likely effect; i.e. the
 likelihood that the effect will be substantially
 different from what the research found. By 
 substantially
 different we mean a large
 enough difference that it might affect a decision. This
 assessment is based on an overall assessment of reasons
 for there being more or less certainty using the 
 GRADE approach. In the context of decisions, these
 considerations include the applicability of the evidence
 in a specific context. Other terms may be used
 synonymously with certainty of
 the evidence , including 
 quality of the
 evidence , confidence in the estimate , and strength of the
 evidence . Definitions of the
 categories used to rate the certainty of the evidence
 ( high , moderate , 
 low ,
 and very
 low ) are provided in the table
 below. 

 Definitions for ratings of
 the certainty of the evidence 

 Ratings 

 Definitions 

 High 

 This research provides a
 very good indication of the likely effect. The likelihood
 that the effect will be substantially different is
 low. 

 Moderate 

 This research provides a
 good indication of the likely effect. The likelihood that
 the effect will be substantially
 different is
 moderate. 

 Low 

 This research provides
 some indication of the likely effect. However, the
 likelihood that it will be substantially different (a
 large enough difference that it might have an effect on a
 decision) is high. 

 Very Low 

 This research does not
 provide a reliable indication of the likely effect. The
 likelihood that the effect will be substantially
 different (a large enough difference that it might have
 an effect on a decision) is very
 high. 

 7. The GRADE approach
 for diagnostic tests and strategies 

 Recommendations concerning
 diagnostic testing share the fundamental logic of recommendations
 for therapeutic and other interventions, such as screening.
 However, diagnostic questions also present unique
 challenges. 

 While some tests naturally report
 positive and negative results (e.g., pregnancy, HIV infection),
 other tests report their results as ordinal (e.g., Glasgow coma
 scale or mini-mental status examination) or continuous variable
 (e.g., metabolic measures), usually with increasing likelihood of
 disease or adverse events as the test results become more
 extreme. For simplicity, in this discussion we generally assume a
 diagnostic approach that ultimately categorizes test results as
 positive or negative. This also recognizes that many tests
 ultimately lead to dichotomized decisions to treat or not to
 treat. 

 Clinicians and researchers often
 administer diagnostic tests as a package or strategy composed of
 several tests. Thus, one can often think of evaluating or
 recommending a diagnostic strategy rather than a single
 test. 

 Examples 

 1. In managing patients with a
 diagnosis of cervical intraepithelial neoplasia, a precursor of
 prevent cervical cancer, based on visual inspection with acetic
 acid (VIA) clinicians may proceed to treatment directly or apply
 a strategy of testing for human papilloma virus and
 VIA. 

 2. Testing strategy may use an
 initial sensitive but non-specific test which, if positive, is
 followed by a more specific test (e.g., testing for HIV includes
 the use of an ELISA test followed by quantitative HIV RNA
 determination for those with positive results of the ELISA test;
 but one could ask the question why quantitative HIV RNA
 determination alone would not be appropriate). 

 7.1. Questions about diagnostic
 tests 

 The format of the question asked
 by authors of systematic reviews or guideline developers follows
 the same principles as the format for management
 questions: 

 - Should TEST A
 vs. TEST B be used in SOME PATIENTS/POPULATION? 

 - Should TEST A
 vs. TEST B be used for SOME PURPOSE? 

 7.1.1. Establishing the purpose of a
 test 

 Guideline panels should be
 explicit about the purpose of the test in question. Researchers
 and clinicians apply medical tests that are usually referred to
 as “diagnostic” – including signs and symptoms, imaging,
 biochemistry, pathology, and psychological
 testing – for a number of purposes. These applications include
 identifying physiological derangements, establishing prognosis,
 monitoring illness and treatment response, screening and
 diagnosis. 

 7.1.2. Establishing the role of a
 test 

 Guideline panels and authors of
 systematic reviews should also clearly establish the role of a
 diagnostic test or strategy. This process should begin with
 determining the standard diagnostic pathway – or pathways – for
 the target patient presentation and identify the associated
 limitations. Knowing those limitations one can identify
 particular shortcomings for which the alternative diagnostic test
 or strategy offers a putative remedy. The purpose of a test under
 consideration may be for (i) replacement (e.g., of tests
 with greater burden, invasiveness, cost, or inferior accuracy),
 (ii), triage (e.g., to minimize use of an invasive or expensive
 test) or (iii) add-on (e.g., to further
 enhance diagnostic accuracy beyond the existing diagnostic
 pathway) (Table 7.1) [Bossuyt 2006; PMID: 16675820]. 

 Table 7.1. Possible roles of
 new diagnostic tests 

 Replacement 

 A new test might
 substitute an old one, because it is more accurate, less
 invasive, less risky or uncomfortable for patients,
 organizationally or technically less challenging, quicker
 to yield results or more easily interpreted, or less
 costly. 

 Triage 

 A new test is added
 before the existing diagnostic pathway and only patients
 with a particular result on the triage test continue the
 testing pathway; triage tests are not necessarily more
 accurate but usually simpler and less costly. 

 Add-on 

 A new test is added after
 the existing diagnostic pathway and may be used to limit
 the number of either false positive or false negative
 results after the existing diagnostic pathway; add-on
 tests are usually more accurate but otherwise less
 attractive than existing tests. 

 7.1.3. Clear clinical
 questions 

 Clearly establishing the role or
 purpose of a test or test strategy will lead to the
 identification of sensible clinical questions that, similar to
 other management problems, have four components: patients,
 diagnostic intervention (strategy), comparison diagnostic
 intervention (strategy), and the outcomes of interest. 

 Examples 

 1: In patients suspected of
 coronary artery disease (patients) should multi-slice spiral
 computed tomography (CT) of coronary arteries (intervention) be
 used as replacement for conventional invasive coronary
 angiography (comparison) to lower complications with acceptable
 rates of false negatives associated with coronary events and
 false positives leading to unnecessary treatment and
 complications (outcomes)? 

 This example illustrates one
 common rationale for a new test – test replacement (coronary CT
 instead of conventional angiography) to avoid complications
 associated with a more invasive and expensive alternative for a
 condition that can effectively be treated. In this situation, the
 new test would only need to replicate the results of the existing
 test to demonstrate greater patient net benefit. This assumes
 that the new test similarly categorizes patients at the same
 stage of the disease and that the consequences of the test
 result, i.e. management decisions and outcomes, are
 similar. 

 2: In patients suspected of cow’s
 milk allergy (CMA), should skin prick tests rather than an oral
 food challenge with cow’s milk be used for the diagnosis and
 management of IgE-mediated CMA. 

 3: In adults cared for in a
 non-specialized clinical setting, should serum or plasma cystatin
 C rather than serum creatinine concentration be used for the
 diagnosis and management of renal impairment. 

 7.2. Gold standard and reference
 test 

 The concept of diagnostic
 accuracy relies on the presence of a so-called 
 “gold standard” ,
 i.e. a clearly stated definition of the target disease (i.e.
 construct of a disease). However, the term “gold standard” is
 ambiguous and not consistently defined. Moreover, constructs of
 diseases are constantly changing with progress in understanding
 biology (e.g. in oncology, with a more molecular understanding of
 the underlying pathologies or Alzheimer’s dementia). We will use
 the term “gold standard” here as representing the “perfect”
 approach to defining or diagnosing the disease or condition of
 interest, even if the approach is theoretical and based on
 convention. Following from this definition, diagnostic test
 accuracy (e.g. sensitivity and specificity) as a measurement
 property is not associated with a “gold standard”. We will use
 the term “reference
 standard” or reference test for the
 test or test strategy that is the current best and accepted
 approach to making a diagnosis against which a comparison (with
 an index test) may be made. 

 7.3. Estimating impact on
 patients 

 It follows that recommendations
 regarding the use of medical tests require inferences about
 the consequences of falsely identifying patients as having or not
 having the disease. If a test fails to improve patient-important
 outcomes there is no reason to use it, whatever its accuracy.
 Given the uncertainties about both reference and gold standards
 and the relation between diagnosis and patient or population
 consequences, the best way to assess a diagnostic test or
 strategy would be a test-treat randomized controlled trial in
 which investigators allocate patients to experimental or control
 diagnostic approaches and measure patient-important outcomes
 (mortality, morbidity, symptoms, quality of life and resource
 use). 

 Figure 1. Generic
 study designs that guideline developers can use to
 evaluate the impact of testing. 

 Example 

 Randomized controlled
 trials (RCTs) that explored a diagnostic strategy guided
 by the use of B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) – designed
 to aid diagnosis of heart failure – compared with no use
 of BNP in patients presenting to the emergency department
 with acute dyspnea. As it turned
 out, the group randomized to receive BNP spent a shorter
 time in the hospital at lower cost with no increased
 mortality or morbidity. 

 Example 

 Consistent evidence from
 well designed studies demonstrates fewer false negative
 results with non-contrast helical CT than with
 intravenous pyelography (IVP) in the diagnosis of
 suspected acute urolithiasis. However, the
 stones in the ureter that CT detects but IVP “misses” are
 smaller, and hence are likely to pass more easily.
 Since RCTs evaluating the outcomes in patients
 treated for smaller stones are not available, the extent
 to which reduction in cases that are missed (false
 negatives) and follow-up of incidental findings unrelated
 to renal calculi with CT have important health benefits
 remains uncertain. 

 Two generic ways in
 which one can evaluate a test or diagnostic strategy: a)
 Patients are randomized to a new test or strategy or,
 alternatively, to an old test or strategy. Those with a
 positive test (cases detected) are randomized (or were
 previously randomized) to receive the best available
 management (second step of randomization for management
 not shown in this figure). Investigators evaluate and
 compare patient-important outcomes in all patients in
 both groups. b) Patients
 receive both a new test
 and a reference test (it often, however, is the old or
 comparator test or strategy). Investigators can then
 calculate the accuracy of the test compared to the
 reference test (first step). To make judgments about
 patient-importance of this information, patients with a
 positive test (or strategy) in either group are (or have
 been in previous studies) submitted to treatment or no
 treatment; investigators then evaluate and compare
 patient-important outcomes in all patients in both groups
 (second step). 

 When diagnostic intervention
 studies (RCTs or observational studies) comparing alternative
 diagnostic strategies with assessment of direct patient-important
 outcomes are available, guideline panels can use the GRADE
 approach for other interventions. 

 If studies measuring the impact
 of testing on patient-important or population-important outcomes
 are not available, guideline panels must focus on other studies,
 such as diagnostic test accuracy studies, and make inferences
 about the likely impact of using alternative tests on
 patient-important outcomes. In the latter situation, diagnostic
 accuracy can be considered a surrogate outcome for
 patient-important benefits and harms. 

 Key questions when using test
 accuracy as a surrogate are: 

 what outcomes can those
 labeled as cases and those labeled as not having a disease
 expect based on the knowledge about the best available
 management? 

 will there be a reduction
 in false negatives (cases missed) or false positives and
 corresponding increases in true positives and true
 negatives? 

 how similar (or different)
 are people to whom the test is applied and classified
 accurately by the alternative testing strategies to those
 evaluated in studies? 

 7.4. Indirect evidence and impact on
 patient-important outcomes 

 A recommendation associated with
 a diagnostic question follows from an evaluation of the balance
 between the desirable and undesirable consequences of the
 diagnostic test or strategy. It should be based on a systematic
 review addressing the clinical question as well as information
 about management after applying the diagnostic test. 

 Inferring from accuracy data that
 a diagnostic test or strategy improves patient-important outcome
 usually requires access to effective management. Alternatively,
 even with no effective treatment being available, using an
 accurate test may be beneficial, if it reduces adverse effects,
 cost or the anxiety through excluding an ominous diagnosis, or if
 confirming a diagnosis improves patient well-being from the
 prognostic information it imparts. Before drawing such inferences
 judgments about the confidence in diagnostic accuracy information
 is required. 

 7.5. Judgment about the quality of the
 underlying evidence 

 As described above, when studies
 as described in Figure 1a are available, the approach to
 assessing the confidence in effect estimates (quality of
 evidence) described for other interventions in prior articles in
 this series should be used. The rest of the
 current article focuses on the situation when such direct data on
 patient-important outcomes are lacking and the body of evidence
 is derived from DTA studies. Thus, in this article, we will
 provide guidance for assessing the confidence in estimates for
 those synthesizing information from DTA studies, e.g. authors of
 systematic reviews. Summary of findings (SoF) tables and GRADE
 evidence profiles provide transparent accounts of this
 information by summarizing numerical information and ratings of
 the confidence in these estimates. 

 7.5.1. Initial study
 design 

 In a typical test accuracy study,
 a consecutive series of patients suspected for a particular
 condition are subjected to the index test (the test being
 evaluated) and then all patients receive a reference or gold
 standard (the best available method to establish the presence of
 the target condition). While in the GRADE approach appropriate
 accuracy studies (see below) start as high quality evidence about
 diagnostic accuracy, these studies are vulnerable to limitations
 and often lead to low quality evidence to support guideline
 recommendations, mostly owing to indirectness of evidence
 associated with diagnostic accuracy being only a surrogate for
 patient outcomes. 

 7.5.2. Factors that determine and can
 decrease the quality of evidence 

 Table 7.2.
 Factors that decrease
 the quality of evidence for studies of diagnostic
 accuracy and how they differ from evidence for other
 interventions 

 Factors that
 determine and can decrease the quality of
 evidence 

 Explanations and how
 the factor may differ from the quality of evidence for
 other interventions 

 Study
 design 

 Different criteria
 for accuracy studies 

 Cross-sectional or cohort
 studies in patients with diagnostic uncertainty and
 direct comparison of test results with an appropriate
 reference standard (best possible alternative test
 strategy) are considered high quality and can move to
 moderate, low or very low depending on other
 factors. 

 Risk of
 bias (limitations in study
 design and execution) 

 Different criteria
 for accuracy studies 

 Representativeness
 of the population that was intended to be
 sampled. 

 Independent
 comparison with the best alternative test
 strategy. 

 All enrolled
 patients should receive the new test and the best
 alternative test strategy. 

 Diagnostic
 uncertainty should be given. 

 Is the reference
 standard likely to correctly classify the target
 condition? 

 Indirectness 

 Patient population,
 diagnostic test, comparison test and indirect comparisons
 of tests 

 Similar
 criteria 

 The quality of evidence
 can be lowered if there are important differences between
 the populations studied and those for whom the
 recommendation is intended (in prior testing, the
 spectrum of disease or co-morbidity); if there are
 important differences in the tests studied and the
 diagnostic expertise of those applying them in the
 studies compared to the settings for which the
 recommendations are intended; or if the tests being
 compared are each compared to a reference (gold) standard
 in different studies and not directly compared in the
 same studies. 

 Similar
 criteria 

 Panels assessing
 diagnostic tests often face an absence of direct evidence
 about impact on patient-important outcomes. They must
 make deductions from diagnostic test studies about the
 balance between the presumed influences on
 patient-important outcomes of any differences in true and
 false positives and true and false negatives in
 relationship to test complications and costs. Therefore,
 accuracy studies typically provide low quality evidence
 for making recommendations due to indirectness of the
 outcomes, similar to surrogate outcomes for
 treatments. 

 Important 
 Inconsistency in study results 

 Similar
 criteria 

 For accuracy
 studies unexplained inconsistency in sensitivity, specificity or
 likelihood ratios (rather than relative risks or mean
 differences) can lower the quality of
 evidence. 

 Imprecise evidence 

 Similar
 criteria 

 For accuracy studies wide
 confidence intervals for estimates of test accuracy, or
 true and false positive and negative rates can lower the
 quality of evidence. 

 High probability
 of Publication
 bias 

 Similar
 criteria 

 A high risk of
 publication bias (e.g., evidence only from small studies
 supporting a new test, or asymmetry in a funnel plot) can
 lower the quality of evidence. 

 Upgrading for dose
 effect, large effects residual plausible bias and
 confounding 

 Similar
 criteria 

 For all of these factors,
 methods have not been properly developed. However,
 determining a dose effect (e.g., increasing levels of
 anticoagulation measured by INR increase the likelihood
 for vitamin K deficiency or vitamin K antagonists). A
 very large likelihood of disease (not of
 patient-important outcomes) associated with test results
 may increase the quality evidence. However, there is some
 disagreement if and how dose effects play a role in
 assessing the quality of evidence in DTA
 studies. 

 7.5.2.1. Risk of bias 

 Several instruments for the
 evaluation of risk of bias in DTA studies are available. Cochrane
 Collaboration suggests a selection of the items from the QUADAS
 [Whiting 2003; PMID 14606960] and QUADAS-2 [Whiting 2011; PMID
 22007046] instruments. Authors of systematic reviews and
 guideline panels can use the criteria from the QUADAS list (Table
 7.3) to assess the risk of bias within and across
 studies. 

 Serious limitations in a body of
 evidence that indicate risk of bias, if found, will likely lead
 to downgrading the quality of evidence by one or two
 levels. 

 Table 7.3.
 Quality criteria of diagnostic accuracy studies derived
 from QUADAS (Reitsma
 2009; 
 http://srdta.cochrane.org/ ) 

 1. 

 Was the spectrum of
 patients representative of the patients who will receive
 the test in practice? (representative
 spectrum) 

 2. 

 Is the reference
 standard likely to classify the target condition
 correctly? (acceptable reference standard) 

 3. 

 Is the time period
 between reference standard and index test short enough to
 be reasonably sure that the target condition did not
 change between the two tests? (acceptable delay between
 tests) 

 4. 

 Did the whole sample or
 a random selection of the sample, receive verification
 using the intended reference standard? (partial
 verification avoided) 

 5. 

 Did patients receive the
 same reference standard irrespective of the index test
 result? (differential verification avoided) 

 6. 

 Was the reference
 standard independent of the index test (i.e. the index
 test did not form part of the reference standard)?
 (incorporation avoided) 

 7. 

 Were the reference
 standard results interpreted without knowledge of the
 results of the index test? (index test results
 blinded) 

 8. 

 Were the index test
 results interpreted without knowledge of the results of
 the reference standard? (reference standard results
 blinded) 

 9. 

 Were the same clinical
 data available when test results were interpreted as
 would be available when the test is used in practice?
 (relevant clinical information) 

 10. 

 Were
 uninterpretable/intermediate test results reported?
 (uninterpretable results reported) 

 11. 

 Were withdrawals from
 the study explained? (withdrawals explained) 

 Table 7.4.
 Quality criteria of diagnostic accuracy studies derived
 from QUADAS-2 

 Domain 

 Patient
 Selection 

 Index
 Test 

 Reference
 Standard 

 Flow and
 Timing 

 Description 

 Describe methods of
 patient 

 selection 

 Describe included
 patients 

 (previous testing,
 presentation, intended use of index test, and
 setting) 

 Describe the index test
 and how it was conducted and 

 interpreted 

 Describe the reference
 standard and how it was conducted and
 interpreted 

 Describe any patients
 who did not receive the index tests or reference standard
 or who were excluded from the 2 X 2 table (refer to
 flow diagram) 

 Describe the interval
 and any interventions between index tests and the
 reference standard 

 Signaling questions
 (yes, no, or unclear) 

 Was a consecutive or
 random sample of patients enrolled? 

 Was a case–control
 design avoided? 

 Did the study avoid
 inappropriate exclusions? 

 Were the index test
 results interpreted without know- ledge of the results of
 the reference standard? 

 If a threshold was used,
 was it pre-specified? 

 Is the reference
 standard likely to correctly classify the target
 condition? 

 Were the reference
 standard results interpreted without knowledge of the
 results of the index test? 

 Was there an appropriate
 interval between index tests and reference
 standard? 

 Did all patients receive
 a reference standard? 

 Did all patients receive
 the same reference standard? 

 Were all patients
 included in the analysis? 

 Risk of bias (high,
 low, or unclear) 

 Could the selection of
 patients have introduced bias? 

 Could the conduct or
 interpretation of the index test have introduced
 bias? 

 Could the reference
 standard, its conduct, or its interpretation have
 introduced bias? 

 Could the patient
 flow have introduced bias? 

 7.5.2.2. Indirectness of the
 evidence 

 Judging indirectness of the
 evidence presents additional and probably greater challenges for
 authors of systematic reviews of diagnostic test accuracy and for
 guideline panels making recommendations about diagnostic tests.
 First, as with therapeutic interventions, indirectness must be
 assessed in relation to the population, setting, the intervention
 (the new or index test) and the comparator (another investigated
 test or the reference standard). For instance, a judgment of
 indirectness of the population can result from using a different
 test setting such as the patients seen in an emergency department
 may differ from patients seen in a general practitioner office,
 the patients included in the studies of interest may differ or
 the target condition of the population is not the same in the
 studies compared to the question asked. 

 If the clinical question is about
 the choice between two tests, neither of which is a reference
 standard, one needs to assess whether the two tests were compared
 directly against each other and the reference test in the same
 study, or in separate studies in which each test was compared
 separately against the reference standard. For example, a
 systematic review comparing the diagnostic accuracy of two tests
 for renal insufficiency – serum creatinine and serum cystatin C –
 identified a number of studies that performed serum tests for
 both creatinine and cystatin C and the reference standard in the
 same patients (Table 7.5). 

 Table 7.5. Diagnostic accuracy SoF table:
 cystatin vs. creatinine in diagnosis of renal failure 

 Unlike for management
 questions, if only diagnostic
 accuracy information is available, the assessment of indirectness
 requires additional judgments about how the correct and incorrect
 classification of subjects as having or not having a target
 condition relates to patient important
 outcomes. While authors of
 systematic reviews will frequently skip this assessment because
 their interest may relate only to the review of the diagnostic
 accuracy, guideline panels must always make this judgment –
 either implicitly or, better, explicitly and
 transparently. 

 7.5.2.3. Inconsistency, imprecision,
 publication bias and upgrading for dose effect, large estimates
 of accuracy and residual plausible confounding 

 Although these criteria are
 applicable to a body of evidence from studies of diagnostic test
 accuracy, the methods to determine whether a particular criterion
 is met are less well established compared with the evidence about
 the effects of therapeutic interventions. Further theoretical and
 empirical work is required to provide guidance how to assess
 those criteria. 

 7.5.3. Overall confidence in estimates
 of effects 

 Tables 7.6 and 7.7 
 show the assessment of the
 confidence in the estimates and the SoF table of all critical
 outcomes for the comparison of computed tomography (CT)
 angiography with an invasive angiography (the reference standard)
 in patients suspected of coronary artery disease. 

 Table 7.6. 
 . Quality assessment of
 diagnostic accuracy studies – example: should multi-slice spiral
 computed tomography instead of conventional coronary angiography
 be used for diagnosis of coronary artery disease? 

 Table 7.7. 
 . Summary of findings of all
 critical outcomes for the comparison of computed tomography (CT)
 angiography with an invasive angiography (the reference standard)
 in patients suspected of coronary artery disease. 

 The original accuracy studies
 were well planned and executed, the results are precise, and one
 does not suspect relevant publication bias. However, there are
 problems with inconsistency. Reviewers addressing the
 relative merits of CT versus invasive angiography for diagnosis
 of coronary disease found important heterogeneity in the results
 for the proportion of invasive angiography-negative patients with
 a positive CT test result (specificity) and in the results for
 the proportion of angiography-positive patients with a negative
 CT test result (sensitivity) that they could not explain
 (Figure 2 ). This
 heterogeneity was also present for other measures of diagnostic
 test accuracy (i.e. positive and negative likelihood ratios and
 diagnostic odds ratios). Unexplained heterogeneity in the results
 across studies reduced the quality of evidence for all
 outcomes. 

 Figure 
 2 . Example for
 heterogeneity in diagnostic test results 

 Sensitivity and specificity of
 multi-slice coronary CT compared with coronary angiogram
 (from reference 4). This heterogeneity also existed
 for likelihood ratios and diagnostic odds
 ratios. 

 One of the aims of the GRADE
 Working Group is to reduce unnecessary confusion arising from
 multiple systems for grading quality of evidence and strength of
 recommendations. To avoid adding to this confusion by having
 multiple variations of the GRADE system we suggest that the
 criteria below should be met when saying that the GRADE approach
 was used. Also, while users may believe there are good reasons
 for modifying the GRADE system, we discourage the use of
 “modified” GRADE approaches that differ substantially from the
 approach described by the GRADE Working Group. 

 However, we encourage and welcome
 constructive criticism of the GRADE approach, suggestions for
 improvements, and involvement in the GRADE Working Group. As most
 scientific approaches to advancing healthcare, the GRADE approach
 will continue to evolve in response to new research and to meet
 the needs of authors of systematic reviews, guideline developers
 and other users. 

 Checklist : Suggested criteria for stating that the GRADE system was
 used 

 Definition of quality
 of evidence: The quality of
 evidence (confidence in the estimated effects) should be
 defined consistently with the definitions (for guidelines or
 for systematic reviews) used by the GRADE Working
 Group. 

 Criteria for assessing
 the quality of evidence: Explicit
 consideration should be given to each of the eight GRADE
 criteria for assessing the quality of evidence (risk of bias,
 directness of evidence, consistency and precision of results,
 risk of publication bias, magnitude of the effect,
 dose-response gradient, and influence of residual plausible
 confounding) although different terminology may be
 used. 

 Quality of evidence for
 each outcome: The quality of
 evidence (confidence in the estimated effects) should be
 assessed for each important outcome and expressed using four
 categories (e.g. high,
 moderate, low, very low ) or, if
 justified, three categories (e.g. high, moderate, and low [ low and very
 low being reduced to one
 category]) based on consideration of the above factors (see
 point 2) with suggested interpretation of each category that is
 consistent with the interpretation used by the GRADE Working
 Group. 

 Summaries of
 evidence: Evidence tables or
 detailed narrative summaries of evidence, transparently
 describing judgements about the factors in point 2 above,
 should be used as the basis for judgements about the quality of
 evidence and the strength of recommendations. Ideally, full
 evidence profiles suggested by the GRADE Working Group should
 be used and these should be based on systematic reviews. At a
 minimum, the evidence that was assessed and the methods that
 were used to identify and appraise that evidence should be
 clearly described. In particular, reasons for downgrading and
 upgrading the quality of evidence should be described
 transparently. 

 Criteria for
 determining the strength of a
 recommendation: Explicit
 consideration should be given to each of the four GRADE
 criteria for determining the strength of a recommendation (the
 balance of desirable and undesirable consequences, quality of
 evidence, values and preferences of those affected, and
 resource use) and a general approach should be reported (e.g.
 if and how costs were considered, whose values and preferences
 were assumed, etc.). 

 Strength of
 recommendation terminology: The strength of recommendation for or against a specific
 management option should be expressed using two categories
 ( weak and strong ) and the
 definitions/interpretation for each category should be
 consistent with those used by the GRADE Working Group.
 Different terminology to express weak and strong recommendations
 may be used (e.g. alternative wording
 for weak recommendations
 is conditional ), although the
 interpretation and implications should be
 preserved. 

 Reporting of
 judgements: Ideally, decisions
 about the strength of the recommendations should be
 transparently reported. 

 8. Criteria for
 determining whether the GRADE approach was used 

 Disclaimer: Section 8 has been updated in the new GRADE Book and is available here: https://book.gradepro.org/guideline/requirements-for-claiming-the-use-of-grade 

 One of the aims of the GRADE Working Group
 is to reduce unnecessary confusion arising from multiple systems
 for grading quality of evidence and strength of recommendations.
 To avoid adding to this confusion by having multiple variations
 of the GRADE system we suggest that the criteria below should be
 met when saying that the GRADE approach was used. Also, while
 users may believe there are good reasons for modifying the GRADE
 system, we discourage the use of “modified” GRADE approaches that
 differ substantially from the approach described by the GRADE
 Working Group. 

 However, we encourage and welcome
 constructive criticism of the GRADE approach, suggestions for
 improvements, and involvement in the GRADE Working Group. As most
 scientific approaches to advancing healthcare, the GRADE approach
 will continue to evolve in response to new research and to meet
 the needs of authors of systematic reviews, guideline developers
 and other users. 

 Checklist :
 Suggested criteria for stating that the GRADE system was
 used 

 Definition of quality of
 evidence: The quality of evidence (confidence in
 the estimated effects) should be defined consistently with the
 definitions (for guidelines or for systematic reviews) used by
 the GRADE Working Group. 

 Criteria for assessing
 the quality of evidence: Explicit
 consideration should be given to each of the eight GRADE
 criteria for assessing the quality of evidence (risk of bias,
 directness of evidence, consistency and precision of results,
 risk of publication bias, magnitude of the effect,
 dose-response gradient, and influence of residual plausible
 confounding) although different terminology may be
 used. 

 Quality of evidence for
 each outcome: The quality of evidence
 (confidence in the estimated effects) should be assessed for
 each important outcome and expressed using four categories
 (e.g. high, moderate, low, very
 low ) or, if justified, three categories
 (e.g. high, moderate, and
 low [ low and very
 low being reduced to one category]) based on
 consideration of the above factors (see point 2) with suggested
 interpretation of each category that is consistent with the
 interpretation used by the GRADE Working Group. 

 Summaries of
 evidence: Evidence tables or detailed
 narrative summaries of evidence, transparently describing
 judgements about the factors in point 2 above, should be used
 as the basis for judgements about the quality of evidence and
 the strength of recommendations. Ideally, full evidence
 profiles suggested by the GRADE Working Group should be used
 and these should be based on systematic reviews. At a minimum,
 the evidence that was assessed and the methods that were used
 to identify and appraise that evidence should be clearly
 described. In particular, reasons for downgrading and upgrading
 the quality of evidence should be described
 transparently. 

 Criteria for determining
 the strength of a recommendation: Explicit
 consideration should be given to each of the four GRADE
 criteria for determining the strength of a recommendation (the
 balance of desirable and undesirable consequences, quality of
 evidence, values and preferences of those affected, and
 resource use) and a general approach should be reported (e.g.
 if and how costs were considered, whose values and preferences
 were assumed, etc.). 

 Strength of
 recommendation terminology: The strength of
 recommendation for or against a specific management option
 should be expressed using two categories ( weak and strong ) and the definitions/interpretation
 for each category should be consistent with those used by the
 GRADE Working Group. Different terminology to express 
 weak and strong recommendations may be used
 (e.g. alternative wording for weak recommendations is conditional ), although the interpretation
 and implications should be preserved. 

 Reporting of
 judgements: Ideally, decisions about the
 strength of the recommendations should be transparently
 reported. 

 9. Glossary of terms and
 concepts 

 This glossary is partially
 based on the glossary of the Cochrane Collaboration and the
 Users' Guides to the Medical Literature with
 permission . 

 Absolute risk reduction
 (ARR): Synonym of
 the risk
 difference (RD). The difference in
 the risk between two groups. For example, if one group has a 15%
 risk of contracting a particular disease, and the other has a 10%
 risk of getting the disease, the risk difference is 5 percentage
 points. 

 Baseline
 risk: synonym of control group
 risk. 

 Bias: A systematic error or deviation in results or
 inferences from the truth. In studies of the effects of health
 care, the main types of bias arise from systematic differences in
 the groups that are compared ( selection bias ), the care that
 is provided, exposure to other factors apart from the
 intervention of interest ( performance
 bias ), withdrawals or exclusions of
 people entered into a study ( attrition bias ) or how outcomes
 are assessed ( detection
 bias ). Systematic reviews of studies may
 also be particularly affected by reporting bias , where a biased
 subset of all the relevant data is available. 

 Burden: ;Burdens are the demands that patients or caregivers
 (e.g. family) may dislike, such as having to take medication or
 the inconvenience of going to the doctor’s office. 

 Case
 series: A study reporting
 observations on a series of individuals, usually all receiving
 the same intervention, with no control group. 

 Case
 report: A study reporting
 observations on a single individual. Also called: anecdote, case
 history, or case study. 

 Case-control
 study: An observational study that
 compares people with a specific disease or outcome of interest
 (cases) to people from the same population without that disease
 or outcome (controls), and which seeks to find associations
 between the outcome and prior exposure to particular risk
 factors. This design is particularly useful where the outcome is
 rare and past exposure can be reliably measured. Case-control
 studies are usually retrospective, but not always. 

 Categorical
 data: Data that are classified into
 two or more non-overlapping categories. Gender and type of drug
 (aspirin, paracetamol, etc.) are examples of categorical
 variables. 

 Clinical practice guideline
 (CPG): A systematically developed
 statement to assist practitioner and patient decisions about
 appropriate health care for specific clinical
 circumstances. 

 Cohort
 study: An observational study in
 which a defined group of people (the cohort) is followed over
 time. The outcomes of people in subsets of this cohort are
 compared, to examine people who were exposed or not exposed (or
 exposed at different levels) to a particular intervention or
 other factor of interest. A prospective cohort study
 assembles participants and follows them into the future.
 A retrospective (or
 historical) cohort study identifies subjects from past records
 and follows them from the time of those records to the
 present. 

 Comparison: intervention against which new intervention is
 compared, control group. 

 Confidence interval
 (CI): A measure of the uncertainty
 around the main finding of a statistical analysis. Estimates of
 unknown quantities, such as the RR comparing an experimental
 intervention with a control, are usually presented as a point
 estimate and a 95% confidence interval. This means that if
 someone were to keep repeating a study in other samples from the
 same population, 95% of the calculated confidence intervals from
 those studies would include the true underlying value.
 Conceptually easier than this definition is to think of the CI as
 the range in which the truth plausibly lies. Wider intervals
 indicate less precision; narrow intervals, greater precision.
 Alternatives to 95%, such as 90% and 99% confidence intervals,
 are sometimes used. 

 Confounder: A factor that is associated with both an intervention
 (or exposure) and the outcome of interest. For example, if people
 in the experimental group of a controlled trial are younger than
 those in the control group, it will be difficult to decide
 whether a lower risk of death in one group is due to the
 intervention or the difference in ages. Age is then said to be a
 confounder, or a confounding variable. Randomisation is used to
 minimise imbalances in confounding variables between experimental
 and control groups. Confounding is a major concern in
 non-randomised studies. 

 Consumer (healthcare
 consumer): Someone who uses, is
 affected by, or who is entitled to use a health related
 service. 

 Context: The conditions and circumstances that are relevant to
 the application of an intervention, for example the setting (in
 hospital, at home, in the air); the time (working day, holiday,
 night-time); type of practice (primary, secondary, tertiary care;
 private practice, insurance practice, charity); whether routine
 or emergency. Also called clinical situation . 

 Continuous
 data: Data with a potentially
 infinite number of possible values within a given range. Height,
 weight and blood pressure are examples of continuous
 variables. 

 Control: In a controlled trial a control is a participant in
 the arm that acts as a comparator for one or more experimental
 interventions. Controls may receive placebo, no treatment,
 standard treatment, or an active intervention, such as a standard
 drug. In an observational study a control is a person in the
 group without the disease or outcome of interest. 

 Control Group
 Risk: observed risk of the event in
 the control group. Synonym of baseline risk. The control group
 risk for an outcome is calculated by dividing the number of
 people with an outcome in control group by the total number of
 participants in the control group. 

 Critical
 appraisal: The process of assessing
 and interpreting evidence by systematically considering its
 validity, results, and relevance. 

 Desirable
 effect: A desirable effect of
 adherence to a recommendation can include beneficial health
 outcomes, less burden and savings. 

 Dose response
 gradient: The relationship between
 the quantity of treatment given and its effect on
 outcome. 

 Effect size
 (ES): A generic term for the
 estimate of effect of treatment for a study. Sometimes the term
 is used to refer to the standardized mean difference. 

 To facilitate understanding we
 suggest interpretation of the effect size offered by Cohen (Cohen
 J. Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences. 2nd
 ed; 1988). According to this interpretation, an effect size or
 standardized mean difference of around: 

 0.2 is considered a small effect 

 0.5 is considered a moderate effect 

 0.8 or higher is considered a large effect. 

 Effectiveness: The extent
 to which an intervention produces a beneficial result under ideal
 conditions. Clinical trials that assess effectiveness are
 sometimes called pragmatic or management trials. 

 Efficacy: The extent to which an intervention produces a
 beneficial result under ideal conditions. Clinical trials that
 assess efficacy are sometimes called explanatory
 trials. 

 Estimate of
 effect: The observed relationship
 between an intervention and an outcome expressed as, for example,
 a number needed to treat, odds ratio, risk difference, risk
 ratio, relative risk reduction, standardised mean difference, or
 weighted mean difference. 

 External
 validity: The extent to which
 results provide a correct basis for generalisations to other
 circumstances. For instance, a meta-analysis of trials of elderly
 patients may not be generalizable to children. Also
 called generalizability or applicability . 

 Follow-up: The observation over a period of time of study/trial
 participants to measure outcomes under investigation. 

 Hazard ratio
 (HR): A measure of effect produced
 by a survival analysis and representing the increased risk with
 which one group is likely to experience the outcome of interest.
 For example, if the hazard ratio for death for a treatment is
 0.5, then we can say that treated patients are likely to die at
 half the rate of untreated patients. 

 Intention to treat analysis
 (ITT): A strategy for analysing data
 from a randomised controlled trial. All participants are included
 in the arm to which they were allocated, whether or not they
 received (or completed) the intervention given to that arm.
 Intention-to-treat analysis prevents bias caused by the loss of
 participants, which may disrupt the baseline equivalence
 established by randomisation and which may reflect non-adherence
 to the protocol. The term is often misused in trial publications
 when some participants were excluded. 

 Internal
 validity: The extent to which the
 design and conduct of a study are likely to have prevented bias.
 Variation in methodological quality can explain variation in the
 results of studies. More rigorously designed (better quality)
 trials are more likely to yield results that are closer to the
 truth. 

 Intervention: The process
 of intervening on people, groups, entities, or objects in an
 experimental study. In controlled trials, the word is sometimes
 used to describe the regimens in all comparison groups, including
 placebo and no-treatment arms. 

 Mean difference
 (MD): the ‘difference in means’ is a
 standard statistic that measures the absolute difference between
 the mean value in the two groups in a clinical trial. It
 estimates the amount by which the treatment changes the outcome
 on average. It can be used as a summary statistic in
 meta-analysis when outcome measurements in all trials are made on
 the same scale. Previously referred to as weighted mean
 difference (WMD). 

 Meta-analysis: The
 statistical combination of results from two or more separate
 studies. 

 Minimally important difference
 (MID): The smallest difference in
 score in the outcome of interest that informed patients or
 informed proxies perceive as important, either beneficial or
 harmful, and that would lead the patient or clinician to consider
 a change in the management. 

 Number needed to treat
 (NNT): An estimate of how many
 people need to receive a treatment before one person would
 experience a beneficial outcome. For example, if you need to give
 a stroke prevention drug to 20 people before one stroke is
 prevented, then the number needed to treat to benefit for that
 stroke prevention drug is 20. It is estimated as the reciprocal
 of the risk difference. 

 Number needed to harm
 (NNH): A number needed to treat to
 benefit associated with a harmful effect. It is an estimate of
 how many people need to receive a treatment before one more
 person would experience a harmful outcome or one fewer person
 would experience a beneficial outcome. 

 Observational
 study: A study in which the
 investigators do not seek to intervene, and simply observe the
 course of events. Changes or differences in one characteristic
 (e.g. whether or not people received the intervention of
 interest) are studied in relation to changes or differences in
 other characteristic(s) (e.g. whether or not they died), without
 action by the investigator. There is a greater risk of selection
 bias than in experimental studies. 

 Odds ratio
 (OR): The ratio of the odds of an
 event in one group to the odds of an event in another group. In
 studies of treatment effect, the odds in the treatment group are
 usually divided by the odds in the control group. An odds ratio
 of one indicates no difference between comparison groups. For
 undesirable outcomes an OR that is less than one indicates that
 the intervention was effective in reducing the risk of that
 outcome. When the risk is small, the value of odds ratio is
 similar to risk ratio. When the events in the control group are
 not frequent, OR and HR can be assumed to be equal to the RR for
 the application of this criterion. 

 Optimal information size
 (OIS): number of patients generated
 by a conventional sample size calculation for a single
 trial. 

 Outcome: A component of a participant's clinical and functional
 status after an intervention has been applied, that is used to
 assess the effectiveness of an intervention. 

 Point
 estimate: The results (e.g. mean,
 weighted mean difference, odds ratio, risk ratio or risk
 difference) obtained in a sample (a study or a meta-analysis)
 which are used as the best estimate of what is true for the
 relevant population from which the sample is taken. 

 Population: The group of people being studied, usually by taking
 samples from that population. Populations may be defined by any
 characteristics e.g. geography, age group, certain
 diseases. 

 Precision: A measure of the likelihood of random errors in the
 results of a study, meta-analysis or measurement. The less random
 error the greater the precision. Confidence intervals around the
 estimate of effect from each study are one way of expressing
 precision, with a narrower confidence interval meaning more
 precision. 

 Quality of
 evidence: The extent to which one
 can be confident that an estimate of effect is
 correct. 

 Randomised controlled trial
 (RCT): An experimental study in
 which two or more interventions are compared by being randomly
 allocated to participants. In most trials one intervention is
 assigned to each individual but sometimes assignment is to
 defined groups of individuals (for example, in a household) or
 interventions are assigned within individuals (for example, in
 different orders or to different parts of the body). 

 Relative risk
 (RR): Synonym of risk ratio. The
 ratio of risks in two groups. In intervention studies, it is the
 ratio of the risk in the intervention group to the risk in the
 control group. A risk ratio of one indicates no difference
 between comparison groups. For undesirable outcomes, a risk ratio
 that is less than one indicates that the intervention was
 effective in reducing the risk of that outcome. 

 Relative risk reduction
 (RRR): The proportional reduction in
 risk in one treatment group compared to another. It is one minus
 the risk ratio. If the risk ratio is 0.25, then the relative risk
 reduction is 1-0.25=0.75, or 75%. 

 Review Manager
 (RevMan): Software used for
 preparing and maintaining Cochrane systematic reviews. RevMan
 allows you to write ad manage systematic review protocols, as
 well as complete reviews, including text, tables, and study data.
 It can perform meta-analysis of the data entered, and present the
 results graphically. 

 Risk: The proportion of participants experiencing the event
 of interest. Thus, if out of 100 participants the event (e.g. a
 stroke) is observed in 32, the risk is 0.32. The control group
 risk is the risk amongst the control group. The risk may
 sometimes be referred to as the event rate. 

 Standardised mean difference
 (SMD): The difference between two
 estimated means divided by an estimate of the standard deviation.
 It is used to combine results from studies using different ways
 of measuring the same continuous variable, e.g. pain. By
 expressing the effects as a standardised value, the results can
 be combined since they have no units. Standardised mean
 differences are sometimes referred to as a d index. 

 Statistically
 significant: A result that is
 unlikely to have happened by chance. The usual threshold for this
 judgement is that the results, or more extreme results, would
 occur by chance with a probability of less than 0.05 if the null
 hypothesis was true. Statistical tests produce a p-value used to
 assess this. 

 Strength of a
 recommendation: The degree of
 confidence that the desirable effects of adherence to a
 recommendation outweigh the undesirable effects. 

 Surrogate
 outcome: Outcome measure that is not
 of direct practical importance but is believed to reflect an
 outcome that is important; for example, blood pressure is not
 directly important to patients but it is often used as an outcome
 in clinical trials because it is a risk factor for stroke and
 heart attacks. Surrogate outcomes are often physiological or
 biochemical markers that can be relatively quickly and easily
 measured, and that are taken as being predictive of important
 clinical outcomes. They are often used when observation of
 clinical outcomes requires long follow-up. Also called:
 intermediary outcomes or surrogate endpoints. 

 Systematic
 review: A review of a clearly
 formulated question that uses systematic and explicit methods to
 identify, select, and critically appraise relevant research, and
 to collect and analyse data from the studies that are included in
 the review. Statistical methods (meta-analysis) may or may not be
 used to analyse and summarise the results of the included
 studies. 

 Undesirable
 effect: An undesirable effect of
 adherence to a recommendation can include harms, more burden, and
 costs. 

 10. Articles about GRADE 

 The following is a collection of
 published documents about the GRADE approach. 

 Introductory series
 published in the BMJ (2008) 

 GRADE: an emerging
 consensus | LINK | PDF |
 PubMed 

 What is “quality of
 evidence” and why is it important to clinicians?
 | LINK | PDF |
 PubMed 

 Going from evidence to
 recommendations | LINK | PDF |
 PubMed 

 Grading quality of
 evidence and strength of recommendations for diagnostic tests
 and strategies | LINK | PDF |
 PubMed 

 Incorporating
 considerations of resources use into grading
 recommendations | LINK | PDF |
 PubMed 

 Use of GRADE grid to
 reach decisions when consensus is
 elusive | LINK | PDF |
 PubMed 

 Series of articles with
 examples from the field of allergy published in Allergy
 (2010) 

 Overview of the GRADE
 approach and grading quality of evidence about
 interventions | LINK | PDF |
 PubMed 

 GRADE approach to grading
 quality of evidence about diagnostic tests and
 strategies | LINK | PDF |
 PubMed 

 GRADE approach to
 developing recommendations | LINK
 | PDF |
 PubMed 

 Series of detailed articles
 for authors of guidelines and systematic reviews published in JCE
 (2011-2014) 

 Introduction: GRADE
 evidence profiles and summary of findings tables | LINK
 | PDF |
 PubMed 

 Framing the question and
 deciding on important outcomes | LINK
 | PDF |
 PubMed 

 Rating the quality of
 evidence | LINK | PDF |
 PubMed 

 Rating the quality of
 evidence: study limitations (risk of bias) | LINK
 | PDF |
 PubMed 

 Rating the quality of
 evidence: publication bias | LINK
 | PDF |
 PubMed 

 Rating the quality of
 evidence: imprecision | LINK | PDF |
 PubMed 

 Rating the quality of
 evidence: inconsistency | LINK | PDF |
 PubMed 

 Rating the quality of
 evidence: indirectness | LINK | PDF |
 PubMed 

 Rating up the quality of
 evidence | LINK | PDF |
 PubMed 

 Considering resource use
 and rating the quality of economic evidence | LINK
 | PDF |
 PubMed 

 Making an overall rating
 of confidence in effect estimates for a single outcome and for
 all outcomes | LINK | PDF |
 PubMed 

 Preparing Summary of
 Findings tables for binary outcomes | LINK
 | PDF |
 PubMed 

 Preparing Summary of
 Findings tables for continuous outcomes | LINK
 | PDF |
 PubMed 

 Going from evidence to
 recommendations: the significance and presentation of
 recommendations | LINK | PDF |
 PubMed 

 Going from evidence to
 recommendations: determinants of a
 recommendation’s direction and strength | LINK
 | PDF |
 PubMed 

 Reproducibility of the
 GRADE approach (2013) 

 The GRADE approach is
 reproducible in assessing the quality of evidence of
 quantitative evidence syntheses | PDF | PubMed 

 GRADE Repository 

 The collection and map of current, up-to-date sources of GRADE guidance and concepts. It is intended to support ongoing research, evidence synthesis, and teaching activities related to the GRADE approach. https://book.gradepro.org/map/grade-repository 
 | LINK |

 11. Additional resources 

 Resources for authors of
 systematic reviews 

 The Cochrane
 Handbook 

 The Cochrane Handbook includes
 two principle chapters which provide information on how to create
 Summary of Findings tables using the information from Cochrane
 systematic reviews and GRADEing the evidence. 

 Part 2 Chapter 11: Presenting
 results and ‘Summary of findings’ tables 

 Part 2 Chapter 12: Interpreting
 results and drawing conclusions 

 General evidence-based
 medicine resources 

 The Cochrane
 Library 

 The Cochrane Library contains
 high-quality, independent evidence to inform healthcare
 decision-making. It includes reliable evidence from Cochrane and
 other systematic reviews, clinical trials, and more. Cochrane
 reviews bring you the combined results of the world’s best
 medical research studies, and are recognised as the gold standard
 in evidence-based health care. 

 The Cochrane
 Handbook 

 The Cochrane Handbook for
 Systematic Reviews of Interventions (the Handbook) provides
 guidance to authors for the preparation of Cochrane Intervention
 reviews (including Cochrane Overviews of reviews). The Handbook
 is updated regularly to reflect advances in systematic review
 methodology and in response to feedback from users. 

 Users' Guides to the Medical
 Literature 

 A complete set
 of Users'
 Guides to find, evaluate and use
 medical literature which were originally published as a series in
 the Journal of the American Medical Association
 (JAMA). 

 Users' Guides to the Medical Literature: A Manual for
 Evidence-Based Clinical Practice
 (Interactive) presents the
 sophisticated concepts of evidence-based medicine (EBM) in unique
 ways that can be used to determine diagnosis, decide optimal
 therapy, and predict prognosis. It also offers in-depth expansion
 of methodology, statistics, and cost issues that emerge in
 medical research. 

 Guideline specific
 resources 

 Improving the use of research
 evidence in guideline development (SERIES) 

 A series
 of 16 papers published in Health Research Policy and
 Systems in 2006, Volume 4,
 Issues 12 to 28 about guideline development. Topics are
 Guidelines for guidelines, Priority setting, Group composition
 and consultation process, Managing conflicts of interest, Group
 processes, Determining which outcomes are important, Deciding
 what evidence to include, Synthesis and presentation of evidence,
 Grading evidence and recommendations, Integrating values and
 consumer involvement, Incorporating considerations of
 cost-effectiveness, affordability and resource implications,
 Incorporating considerations of equity, Adaptation, applicability
 and transferability, Reporting guidelines, Disseminating and
 implementing guidelines, and Evaluation. 

 The AGREE
 instrument 

 The purpose of
 the Appraisal
 of Guidelines Research & Evaluation (AGREE)
 Instrument is to provide a
 framework for assessing the quality of clinical practice
 guidelines. 

 GRADE Working Group 

 The Grading
 of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (short
 GRADE) Working Group began in
 the year 2000 as an informal collaboration of people with an
 interest in addressing the shortcomings of present grading
 systems in health care. Our aim is to develop a common, sensible
 approach to grading quality of evidence and strength of
 recommendation. 

 Guidelines Advisory
 Committee 

 The Guidelines
 Advisory Committee (GAC) is an
 independent partnership of the Ontario Medical Association and
 the Ontario Ministry of Health and Long Term Care (MOHLTC). The
 GACs mission is to promote better health for the people of
 Ontario by encouraging physicians and other practitioners to use
 evidence-based clinical practice guidelines and clinical
 practices based on best available evidence. We identify,
 evaluate, endorse and summarize guidelines for use in
 Ontario. 

 National Guideline Clearing
 House 

 The National
 Guideline Clearinghouse (NGC) is
 a comprehensive database of evidence-based clinical practice
 guidelines and related documents. NGC is an initiative of the
 Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ), U.S.
 Department of Health and Human Services. 

 National Library of
 Guidelines 

 The National
 Library of Guidelines is a
 collection of guidelines for the NHS. It is based on the
 guidelines produced by NICE and other national agencies. The main
 focus of the Library is on guidelines produced in the UK, but
 where no UK guideline is available, guidelines from other
 countries are included in the collection. 

 12. The GRADE Working
 Group 

 The Grading of Recommendations
 Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) Working Group
 began in the year 2000 as an informal collaboration of more than
 60 methodologists, clinicians, systematic reviewers, and
 guideline developers representing various organizations with the
 goal to address shortcomings of present grading systems in health
 care. The aim was to develop a common, sensible approach to
 grading quality of evidence and strength of recommendations.
 Based on shared experience, a critical review of other systems,
 and working through examples and applying the system in
 guidelines, the Working Group has developed the GRADE approach as
 a common, transparent and sensible method to grading quality of
 evidence and strength of recommendations. 

 Several organizations that are now
 using or endorsing the GRADE approach in its original format or
 with minor modifications: 

 [INSERT LIST OF
 ORGANIZATIONS] 

 [1]